CERN-TH-2016-043

Massive and modiﬁed gravity

as self-gravitating media

Guillermo Ballesterosa,b, Denis Comellic, Luigi Pilod,e

a Institut de Physique Th´eorique, Universit´e Paris Saclay, CEA, CNRS

91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France

bCERN, Theory Division, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland
cINFN, Sezione di Ferrara, I-35131 Ferrara, Italy

dDipartimento di Scienze Fisiche e Chimiche, Universit`a di L’Aquila, I-67010 L’Aquila, Italy

eINFN, Laboratori Nazionali del Gran Sasso, I-67010 Assergi, Italy

guillermo.ballesteros@cea.fr, comelli@fe.infn.it, luigi.pilo@aquila.infn.it

March 10, 2016

Abstract

We study the eﬀective ﬁeld theory that describes the low-energy physics of self-gravitating media.
The ﬁeld content consists of four derivatively coupled scalar ﬁelds that can be identiﬁed with the
internal comoving coordinates of the medium. Imposing SO(3) internal spatial invariance, the theory
describes supersolids. Stronger symmetry requirements lead to superﬂuids, solids and perfect ﬂuids,
at lowest order in derivatives. In the unitary gauge, massive gravity emerges, being thus the result
of a continuous medium propagating in spacetime. Our results can be used to explore systematically
the eﬀects and signatures of modifying gravity consistently at large distances. The dark sector is
then described as a self-gravitating medium with dynamical and thermodynamic properties dictated
by internal symmetries. These results indicate that the divide between dark energy and modiﬁed
gravity, at large distance scales, is simply a gauge choice.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
9

 

 
 
]
h
t
-
p
e
h
[
 
 

1
v
6
5
9
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Contents

1 Introduction and outline

2 Derivatively coupled scalar ﬁelds and diﬀeomorphism invariance

3 Self-gravitating media

4 Spatial SO(3) invariance and additional symmetries

4.1 Additional symmetries at LO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5 Lagrangians for self-gravitating media at LO

5.1 Media with reduced internal dimensionality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.1.1 U (τ1, τ2, τ3): solid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.1.2 U (b): perfect ﬂuid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.1.3 U (X): perfect ﬂuid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2 Four-dimensional media . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2.1 U (X , Y , τn , yn): supersolid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2.2 U (X, Y, b): superﬂuid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2.3
Special supersolids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6 SO(3) spatially symmetric massive gravity

7 Degrees of freedom in FLRW

8 Conclusions and outlook

A Conserved currents and charges

A.1 General volume currents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.2 Noether currents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.2.1 Four-dimensional media . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.2.2 Media with reduced internal dimensionality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

B A shortcut to count degrees of freedom

1 Introduction and outline

1

3

5

7
8

10
12
12
14
15
16
17
17
18

19

22

25

27
28
28
28
30

30

The cosmological data show that the Universe is undergoing a phase of accelerated expansion. See [1]
for the ﬁrst conclusive evidence. Although a simple model of the Universe based on a Friedmann-
Lemaˆıtre-Robertson-Walker (FLRW) metric in General Relativity (GR) supplemented by a cosmo-
logical constant ﬁts well all the observations [2, 3], the actual nature of the driving force behind the
acceleration remains still unclear. Upcoming probes of the dynamics of the universe [4] will be crucial
to shed light on this dark energy (DE). A good deal of theoretical eﬀort has been aimed in the last
twenty years to build consistent and compelling models of DE; see [5] for reviews.1 What the vast
majority of them have in common is the addition of some new degrees of freedom to the dynamics of
the universe. On the one hand, these hypothetical degrees of freedom have often been interpreted as

1However, it is worth stressing that no such model solves the problem of the smallness of the cosmological constant [6].

1

extra components of the universe beyond baryonic and dark matter, photons and neutrinos. On the
other hand, they have also been commonly regarded as part of gravity itself, modifying the behaviour
of GR at large distances, in a way that is compatible with the current acceleration of the Universe.
In this work we propose a symmetry-driven approach to DE. By working with an action of four
derivatively coupled scalar ﬁelds, we show that DE can originate from a medium with concrete me-
chanical and thermodynamic properties. These four scalars are interpreted as comoving coordinates
of the medium and, moreover, they are the degrees of freedom required to describe its low energy
physics. At the core of this description of DE lie the symmetries of the medium. They rule the
mutual interactions of the four scalars and determine whether the medium behaves as a perfect ﬂuid,
a superﬂuid, an elastic solid or a supersolid.

The four scalars can also be viewed as St¨uckelberg ﬁelds that allow to restore broken diﬀeomor-
phisms in models of so-called massive gravity [7,8]. Following common usage, we use the term massive
gravity (MG) to refer to any model of gravity for which non-derivative metric perturbations appear
squared. We recall, however, that many such models do not contain a massive graviton (of spin two).
The introduction of these ﬁelds is the key for interpreting massive (and general classes of modiﬁed)
gravity models as a self-gravitating media. Thanks to diﬀeomorphism invariance, an adequate choice
of the space-time coordinates (called unitary gauge) renders trivial the dynamics of the St¨uckelberg
ﬁelds, allowing to draw a direct connection between the theory of self-gravitating media and MG.2
In particular, we describe in this work the matching to the general Hamiltonian construction of MG
models that was studied in [11–13].

Most of such MG models are Lorentz breaking in the sense that, around Minkowski spacetime,
the metric perturbations are just rotationally invariant in three dimensions. From the point of view
of the self-gravitating medium interpretation of MG that we explore in this work, Lorentz breaking is
simply triggered by the presence of the medium itself, which generically deﬁnes at least one preferred
four-vector.

By construction, the general description of self-gravitating media in terms of four derivatively
coupled scalars is a well-deﬁned eﬀective ﬁeld theory (EFT). This allows a systematic exploration of
DE in terms of symmetries, with a uniﬁed and suggestive interpretation of modiﬁed and MG models.
This is the take-home message of this paper.

The outline is the following. In Section 2 we start introducing the EFT of self-gravitating media,
emphasizing the role of diﬀeomorphism invariance. In Section 3 we continue the presentation of the
EFT by building the intuition that allows to interpret the low-energy degrees of freedom as comoving
coordinates.
In Section 4 we write the lowest order scalars of the EFT according to the possible
symmetries. In Section 5 we provide a discussion of the diﬀerent kinds of media according to their
symmetries and their ﬁeld content. In Section 6 the unitary gauge is employed to show how the EFT
of self-gravitating media can be put in correspondence with a broad class of MG models. In Section
7 we set the basis for a systematic study of the cosmology of these models by determining, for each
kind of medium, the number of propagating degrees of freedom in a FLRW background. We present
our conclusions in Section 8. Two appendices are also included. In Appendix A we discuss brieﬂy the
conserved currents that appear in the theory. Finally, in Appendix B we give an alternative, shortcut
derivation of the number of propagating degrees of freedom.

Through the paper we will use the signature convention (−, +, +, +) and units such that  = c = 1.
2An example of such media is the the case of the perfect ﬂuids that can be described with three St¨uckelberg ﬁelds,
for which the invariance under internal volume preserving diﬀeomorphisms forbids a mass term for gravitons (SO(3)
spatial tensor modes), see e.g. [9, 10].

2

2 Derivatively coupled scalar ﬁelds and diﬀeomorphism invariance

Let us consider the action for a set of four scalar ﬁelds under diﬀeomorphisms: ΦA(xµ), A = 0, 1, 2, 3 ,
whose mutual interactions obey shift symmetries:

At lowest order in derivatives, the action for these ﬁelds depends on the kinetic blocks

ΦA → ΦA + cA ,

∂µcA = 0 .

C AB = gµν ∂µΦA∂ν ΦB ,

(2.1)

(2.2)

where gµν is the (four-dimensional) spacetime metric. Including the usual Einstein-Hilbert term the
general form of the action at lowest order in derivatives is then given by

S =Z d4x√−g(cid:2)M 2

pl R + U(cid:0)C AB(cid:1) + Lm(cid:3) ,

(2.3)

where we deﬁne M 2
pl = 1/(16πG), being G Newton’s constant; U is a smooth master function of the
4×4 matrix C AB and Lm is the part of the Lagrangian describing matter ﬁelds (e.g. baryonic matter).
The expression (2.3) is the leading contribution to the action of an EFT where shift symmetries enforce
the ﬁelds ΦA to be derivatively coupled.3 The scalars C AB are the only independent ones that can
be built out of the four ΦA at leading order (LO) in derivatives, i.e. with a single derivative acting on
each ΦA. The next-to-leading order in derivatives (NLO) corresponds to operators that enter in the
action with exactly two additional derivatives.4 These operators must then appear suppressed with
respect to the LO ones by some energy scale Λ squared. In principle, one would expect Λ ∼ U 1/4,
because this is the only scale of (2.3) other than Mpl (and any masses coming from Lm).
At LO, we are also allowed to multiply the curvature scalar R by an arbitrary function of C AB.
However, this function can always be eliminated through a conformal transformation of the metric,5
see [15]. After such a transformation, we obtain an action with the same structure of (2.3) plus some
extra terms which can be disregarded at LO because they are of higher order in derivatives. Similarly,
the Lagrangian Lm can be multiplied by an arbitrary function of C AB. In fact, denoting by ψm the
matter ﬁelds contained in Lm, according to the power-counting this part of the action should actually
be written as f (C AB)Lm[h(C AB)gµν , ψm], where f and h denote a set of arbitrary functions [15] . In
this paper we will not study the eﬀect of these couplings to matter ﬁelds, since our emphasis is on
the interactions between the ﬁelds ΦA and the metric gµν . Therefore, in what follows we set Lm to
zero, postponing its study for future work.

Under these assumptions, the LO gravitational energy-momentum tensor (EMT) associated to

the scalar ﬁelds ΦA, deﬁned via the variation √−g Tµν δgµν = −2δR d4x√−g U , is given by

Tµν = U gµν − 2

∂U
∂C AB ∂µΦA∂νΦB ,

where sums over the repeated indices A and B are implicit. Varying the action (2.3), the equations
of motion (EOMs) of the scalars ΦA read

3See [9] for a general discussion of this type of EFT with an arbitrary number of scalar ﬁelds.
4See [14, 15] for the NLO of a simpler case containing just three scalar ﬁelds.
5We follow here the nomenclature of [16], but the reader must be aware that this is often called a Weyl transformation.

∇µ(cid:0)∇µΦB ∂U /∂C AB(cid:1) = 0 ,

(2.4)

(2.5)

3

where ∇µ is the covariant derivative deﬁned with the Levi-Civita connection of gµν . Taking the
covariant divergence of (2.4), and using that the Levi-Civita connection is torsionless, we obtain

∇µTµν = ∇νΦA ∇µ(cid:0)∇µΦB ∂U /∂C AB(cid:1) .

(2.6)

Therefore, the covariant conservation of the EMT (∇µT µν = 0) can be inferred from the scalar’s
EOMs (2.5). Clearly, this result would also hold if, N , the total number of scalars ΦA were diﬀerent
from 4.

Generically, given some model of scalar ﬁelds coupled to gravity, the converse of the previous
result is not true: the conservation of the EMT does not imply the EOMs of the scalars. However,
in our case the two are equivalent under a speciﬁc condition. Let us consider (2.3) with Lm = 0 and
assume (as we will do in most of this paper) that we have four scalars ΦA. If det(∂µΦA) 6= 0, it is
possible to choose a system of coordinates such that

∂µΦA = δA
µ .

(2.7)

ν δB

µ ∇µ(cid:0)∂U /∂C AB(cid:1), which is nothing but (2.5) and
Then, the equation (2.6) becomes ∇µTµν = δA
shows that the EOMs of the scalars now follow from the conservation of the EMT. Since ∇µTµν =
0 is ultimately due to diﬀeomorphism invariance, we can say that the equations of motion are a
consequence of it, provided that det(∂µΦA) 6= 0.6 A more direct way of proving it uses that (2.6) can
be expressed as the product Q · q, where Q is a 4 × 4 matrix of components ∇νΦA and q is a 4 × 1
matrix. Then, if detQ 6= 0, the only solution of Q · q = 0 is q = 0, which is (2.5).
It is well-known that diﬀeomorphism invariance can be restored for any action of metric perturba-
tions around some background. In four dimensions this can be done by introducing four scalars that
are called St¨uckelberg ﬁelds.7 By construction, these scalar ﬁelds are coupled among themselves only
derivatively. From this point of view, the action (2.3) with Lm = 0 is a good candidate for an EFT
description of massive (and modiﬁed) gravity. The choice of N = 4 scalar ﬁelds ΦA is then motivated
by the number of spacetime dimensions we assume. As the St¨uckelberg ﬁelds acquire a non trivial
background conﬁguration, such as e.g. (2.7), diﬀeomorphism invariance appears to be broken.

MG models (like the archetypical one of Fierz and Pauli [19]) are often presented in a way in
which general covariance is explicitly broken (and in some cases Lorentz invariance too).
In this
work we exploit the fact that these models can generically be embedded in a covariant (and Lorentz
invariant) action by the introduction of four scalar St¨uckelberg ﬁelds. As we have just explained,
the apparent breaking of diﬀeomorphism invariance is just a consequence of choosing a background
solution of the equations of motion for these ﬁelds. From this perspective, the action (2.3), together
with a background satisfying (2.7), is an appropriate tool for the description of MG models, as we
will discuss later in more detail.

The structure of (2.3) makes it convenient to assign dimensions of length to the ﬁelds ΦA. With
this convention, the LO operators are dimensionless and the NLO ones have dimension of energy
squared, which makes explicit the fact that they must appear suppressed by Λ2. We can always

6An analogous argument can be applied if the number of scalar ﬁelds, N , is smaller than the number of spacetime
dimensions, D. However, if N > D there would not be enough freedom to eliminate all the scalars from the dynamics
through (2.7) and so the EOMs cannot be equivalent the conservation of the EMT in that case.

7The term St¨uckelberg ﬁeld is commonly used for a ﬁeld that allows to make explicit a (spontaneously broken) gauge
symmetry. These ﬁelds and the associated mechanism (or “trick”), which we will use later on, are named after E.C.G.
St¨uckelberg, who showed how a (complex) scalar ﬁeld can make an Abelian vector ﬁeld massive while preserving gauge
invariance [17]. See [18] for a review with various applications.

4

express the St¨uckelberg ﬁelds ΦA introducing new ﬁelds πA as follows:

ΦA(xµ) = xA + πA(xµ) .

(2.8)

By construction, the ﬁelds πA inherit the power-counting deﬁned for the St¨uckelberg ﬁelds ΦA.
Inserting (2.8) in the action (2.3), assuming that we can neglect NLO and higher order operators,
and imposing that |∂µπA| ≪ 1, we get an action for the πA that we can expand in powers of ∂µ or,
equivalently, in powers of πA. With the condition |∂µπA| ≪ 1, the ﬁeld redeﬁnition (2.8) suggests
that the ﬁelds πA parametrize the deviation of the ﬁelds ΦA from their background location xA.
Therefore, after the interpretation of ΦA as coordinates in a medium, the equation (2.8) tells us
that πA may be understood as the degrees of freedom responsible for carrying sound waves in the
medium itself, i.e. phonons which can be understood as the Goldstone bosons of broken translations,
see e.g. [20, 21]. We emphasize that these ﬁelds need not be small; it is only their derivatives that
have to be under control for the validity of the derivative expansion. The ﬁelds πA are the four-
dimensional generalization of the standard displacement ﬁeld used in ﬂuid dynamics, elasticity and
strain theory. In the next section we start exploiting this connection, which we will phrase directly
using the St¨uckelberg ﬁelds, using the language of the EFTs of solids, ﬂuids and superﬂuids; diﬀerent
aspects of which have been studied in [9,10,14,15,22–32]. As a matter of fact, the basic idea of using
three comoving coordinates to describe ﬂuid dynamics is nothing but the earlier pull-back formalism,
which had already been used to describe the dynamics of continuous media, see e.g. [33–38].

3 Self-gravitating media

We split the scalars ΦA into two distinct sets: {Φ0} and {Φ1, Φ2, Φ3}, which are characterized as
follows. The elements of {Φ1, Φ2, Φ3}, will be referred to as spatial St¨uckelberg ﬁelds, and we will use
small latin letters a, b,··· to index them. We require the 3 × 3 submatrix of (2.2) whose components
are
(3.1)

Bab ≡ C ab

to be positive-deﬁnite, so that its three eigenvalues are positive. As we will soon see, the reason for
this condition is allowing the inverse of Bab to deﬁne an Euclidean metric in IR3. As anticipated in the
previous sections, we can interpret the ﬁelds Φa as the (spatial) comoving coordinates of an internal
space F that describes a continuum medium whose topology we assume to be IR3. This picture –that
has been known for a long time, see e.g. [34]– allows to write an unconstrained variation principle for
a ﬂuid. A pedagogical review of this pull-back formalism is provided in [35] and various applications
speciﬁc to cosmology can be found in [10, 15, 27, 30, 39–44]. Here, we will follow [10] to describe the
basics of this construction.

We exploit the fact that, given a slicing and a threading of the spacetime (Lorentzian) manifold
M, we can formally write M = MT × MS , where MT and MS are respectively the sets of time,
{x0}, and space, {x1, x2, x3}, coordinates on M. By choice, MS is endowed with a Riemannian
metric. Provided that at any given time x0, the condition det(∂iΦa) 6= 0 is satisﬁed, there exists
an invertible map of MS into the medium F, which we assume to be smooth: xi → Φa(x0, xj).
Conversely, F can be immersed in MS via the inverse map: Φa → xi(x0, Φa). While the ﬁrst of these
maps identiﬁes the ﬂuid (or in general, medium) element (labelled by Φa) that sits at time x0 at the
point xi; the second map describes the trajectory of the medium element Φa in spacetime [10]. This
is nothing but the dual description of a continuum in terms of Lagrangian (Φa) and Eulerian (xi)
coordinates.

5

The spacetime metric gµν induces a three-dimensional metric on F, which is given by the matrix

Bab deﬁned as follows:

ds2

F = gµν

∂xµ
∂Φa

∂xν
∂Φb dΦadΦb ≡ Bab dΦadΦb .

(3.2)

The induced metric Bab is the inverse matrix of Bab deﬁned in (3.1), i.e. BabBbc = δa
c . The condition
that Bab is positive deﬁnite ensures that the induced spatial metric on the medium F is Riemannian.
Since the ﬁelds Φa can be interpreted as comoving coordinates, they must remain unchanged along
the ﬂuid ﬂow. This allows to deﬁne a (unique) four-velocity uµ, through the conditions

whose only solution is

where

uµ ∂µΦa = 0 ,

uµuνgµν = −1 ,

uµ = −

ǫµναβ

6 b√−g

ǫabc ∂ν Φa ∂αΦb ∂βΦc ,

(3.3)

(3.4)

√det BBB ,

(3.5)
and BBB denotes the 3× 3 matrix whose components are given by (3.1). In what follows, we will always
use boldface capital letters for three-dimensional spatial matrices.
When pulled-back into the spacetime manifold M, the induced metric Bab becomes a projector

b ≡

Hµν on the embedding of F in M:

Hµν = Bab∂µΦa ∂ν Φb ≡ gµν + uµ uν ,

Hµν uν = 0 .

(3.6)

Only if u[α∇µuν] = 0 (where the brackets indicate full antisymetrization of the three indices), Frobe-
nius theorem guarantees that uµ is hypersurface orthogonal. In that case there is a one-parameter
family of hypersurfaces that are orthogonal (everywhere) to the four-velocity uµ, which thus deﬁnes
a slicing of the spacetime manifold M.
So far we have only dealt with the spatial St¨uckelberg ﬁelds, describing the structure that was
used, e.g. in [10] to study (a certain class of) perfect ﬂuids. We will now deal as well, with the
temporal St¨uckelberg, Φ0, for which we impose the condition

X ≡ C 00 < 0 .

(3.7)

This condition allows to deﬁne another four-velocity by means of the derivative ∂µΦ0, which is thus
constrained to be time-like:

V µ = −

,

V µV νgµν = −1 .

(3.8)

∂µΦ0

√−X

This deﬁnes a hypersurface at each point that is orthogonal to V µ and has an induced metric

pµν = gµν + Vµ Vν ,

pµνV ν = 0 .
Since Vµ is the gradient of a scalar, its covariant vorticity ωµν = pα
ν ∇αVβ vanishes. In Minkowski
and FLRW spacetimes, the four-vectors uµ and V µ coincide, up to a sign. However, if these spaces
are slightly distorted, the two velocities generically diﬀer from each other. Given the four scalar ﬁelds
ΦA, the four-vectors V µ and uµ are the only independent four-vectors that are invariant under the
group SO(3)s of internal spatial rotations and under the shift symmetries (2.1).
The condition (3.7) also allows an interesting extension of the maps between MS and F that we

µ pβ

(3.9)

6

mentioned earlier. In particular we can extend the medium space F, spanned by the three spatial
St¨uckelberg ﬁelds Φa, to a space F4 spanned by the full set {Φ0 , Φa}. By construction, and in analogy
to (3.2), the matrix CAB, deﬁned through

CAB ≡ gµν

∂xµ
∂ΦA

∂xν
∂ΦB ,

(3.10)

is a Lorentzian metric in the extended medium space F4; and is the inverse of the 4 × 4 matrix of
kinetic blocks introduced in (2.2). Hence, the map

M → F4 : xµ → ΦA(xµ)

(3.11)

carries the spacetime manifold onto the extended (self-gravitating) medium space, whereas the inverse

F4 → M : ΦA → xµ(ΦA)

(3.12)

gives the location of each element of the extended medium (labelled by ΦA) on spacetime, as described
by the coordinates xµ. In other words, the second of these two maps describes the world hyper-volume
of the extended medium F4 as it propagates on the spacetime M.
The role of the temporal St¨uckelberg Φ0 is therefore two-fold. First, allows to deﬁne an indepen-
dent time-like four-vector via (3.8). As we will later see, this will give us the possibility of deﬁning
two-constituent ﬂuids, as required to describe superﬂuids (provided that the appropriate symmetries
are satisﬁed) [25]. And second, as we have just described, Φ0 can also be naturally interpreted as a
comoving time coordinate in the medium space, which allows to conceive the self-gravitating media
described by (2.3) as four-dimensional objects propagating in spacetime, extending the pull-back for-
malism to include the temporal dimension as well. Both pictures play important roles in the novel
interpretation of MG and DE as self-gravitating media that we explore in this work.

In the next section we focus on the operators that can appear in the action (2.3) at LO in

derivatives, and in Section 5 we will classify the diﬀerent media that arise combining them.

4 Spatial SO(3) invariance and additional symmetries

For simplicity, we will always impose a global internal spatial SO(3) symmetry in the medium space,
that we denote by SO(3)s, so that all the operators in the action are invariant under

Φa → Rab Φb

with

RRR ∈ SO(3) ,

∂µRRR = 0 .

(4.1)

This basic symmetry will also allow us to make direct contact with the general models of massive
gravity classiﬁed in [13], as we will discuss in Section 6.

To construct a LO complete set of independent SO(3)s-invariant scalars we start with the traces

(4.2)
We recall that the SO(3)s-invariant determinant b = √det BBB, deﬁned already in (3.5), is not inde-
pendent of these traces because it can be written as b2 = (τ 3

τn = Tr(BBBn) , n = 1, 2, 3 .

Introducing the 3 × 3 matrix ZZZ of components

1 − 3 τ1 τ2 + 2 τ3)/6.

Z ab = C 0aC 0b ,

(4.3)

7

we can deﬁne the scalars

yn = Tr (BBBn · ZZZ) , n = 0, 1, 2, 3 ,

(4.4)

which are also invariant under SO(3)s. The traces of ZZZ2 and ZZZ3 (and higher powers) do not need to
be considered once y0 is included because they can be written as powers of the latter.

Besides, since the four-vectors ∂µΦ0 and uµ are invariant under SO(3)s, there are two other scalars
at LO that are invariant under this group. One of them is X = C 00, which we already introduced in
(3.7), and the other is

Y ≡ uµ∂µ Φ0 .

(4.5)

This closes the set of independent LO SO(3)s-invariant operators, which is therefore composed of
nine elements and reads:

OLO = {X , Y , τ1 , τ2 , τ3 , y0 , y1 , y2 , y3} .

(4.6)

We point out that the determinant of the 4 × 4 matrix of components C AB, deﬁned in (2.2), is

also invariant under SO(3)s, but it is not independent of this set because it can be expressed as

q| det(C AB)| = Y b ,

d4Φ = √−g b Y d4x .

(4.7)

(4.8)

What is interesting of this operator is that is closely related to the pull-back of the medium volume
element in spacetime. Indeed

This expression allows to pass from Eulerian to Lagrangian coordinates (and viceversa) in four di-
mensions, extending the three-dimensional treatment of these coordinates that was discussed in [10].

4.1 Additional symmetries at LO

We can further constrain the form of the action (2.3) by requiring additional symmetries, leading to
diﬀerent types of self-gravitating media. Two examples are elastic solids and perfect ﬂuids, which
are derived from symmetries imposed on the spatial sector of the St¨uckelberg ﬁelds. We will see in
Section 5 that by imposing symmetries that mix the spatial and temporal St¨uckelberg ﬁelds, new
kinds of materials arise. For reference, we summarize in Table 1 the notation for the operators that
we use in this paper. Let us now make a list of the additional symmetries of interest for us:

• Imposing volume-preserving diﬀeomorphism invariance of the spatial sector:

VsDiﬀ : Φa → Ψa(Φb) ,

det(cid:18)∂Ψa

∂Φb(cid:19) = 1 ,

(4.9)

the scalars τn have to combine in the action into the determinant operator b and, in addition,
the scalars yn are automatically forbidden. Therefore b, X and Y are the only operators allowed
at LO. This symmetry was identiﬁed in [9] in the context of the EFT formulation of perfect
ﬂuids containing only b.

We will also consider a series of symmetries that were proposed in [7]:

8

Operator

Deﬁnition

C AB

Bab

Z ab

X

W ab

b

Y

yn

τn

wn
Oαβn
Oα

gµν ∂µΦA ∂νΦB , A, B = 0, 1, 2, 3

gµν ∂µΦa ∂µΦb ,

a, b = 1, 2, 3

C a0 C b0

C 00

Bab − Z ab/X

√det BBB
uµ∂µΦ0

Tr (BBBn · ZZZ) ,
Tr (BBBn) ,

n = 0, 1, 2, 3

n = 1, 2, 3

Tr (WWW n) ,

n = 0, 1, 2, 3

, α , β ∈ IR

(cid:0)X/Y 2(cid:1)α (cid:0)yn/Y 2(cid:1)β

(cid:0)X/Y 2(cid:1)α

, α ∈ IR

Table 1: Summary of the various LO scalar operators appearing in this paper. Unless it is explicitly
indicated otherwise, we use Greek letters for spacetime indices, capital Latin letters (A, B, . . . = 0, 1, 2, 3)
for indices in the internal spacetime of the medium and small Latin letters (a, b, . . . = 1, 2, 3) for spatial
indices of the medium. Boldface Latin capital letters, such as BBB, represent 3 × 3 matrices.

• If we impose that the action has to be invariant under the transformations

Φa → Φa + f a(Φ0) ,

(4.10)

for arbitrary f a, we ﬁnd that at LO the action will generically depend only on X and on the
matrix of components

W ab ≡ Bab −

Z ab
X

.

(4.11)

Then, the invariance under SO(3)s further enforces W ab to appear in the action only through
the traces

wn ≡ Tr(Wn) ,

which are non-linear combinations of the scalars X, τn and yn:

w1 = τ1 −

y0
X

, w2 = τ2 − 2

y1
X

+

y2
0
X 2 , w3 = τ3 − 3

y2
X

+ 3

y0 y1
X 2 −

y3
0
X 3 .

(4.12)

(4.13)

Under the transformation (4.10), uµ∂µΦa → uµ∂µΦa + Y df a/dΦ0, because uµ is invariant.
Therefore, the operator Y measures the failure of Φa to remain comoving along uµ when such
a transformation is applied. Besides, as in the case of VsDiﬀ, at NLO the same operators with
derivatives of uµ are also allowed under (4.10).

9

• If the action is invariant under

Φ0 → Φ0 + f (Φa) ,

(4.14)

the only LO operators that are allowed are Y and the traces τn. Clearly, uµ is invariant under
this transformation and therefore all the NLO operators mentioned above constructed from
derivatives fo uµ also respect this transformation.

If we combine the symmetries (4.14) and (4.9) the master function U can only depend on Y
and b and the resulting medium has the EMT of a perfect ﬂuid, as we will later see.

• Finally, if the action is invariant under

Φ0 → Φ0 + f (Φ0) ,

it is constrained at LO to be a function of the traces τn, wn and the scalars

Y 2(cid:19)α
Oαβn =(cid:18) X

(cid:16) yn
Y 2(cid:17)β

.

(4.15)

(4.16)

The operators Oαβn present some peculiarities with respect to the ones that we have encountered
so far. From the point of view of the symmetries, α, β ∈ IR, which implies that there must be
an inﬁnite (and uncountable) amount of these operators. However, since all yn vanish at zero
order for diagonal metric backgrounds, a well deﬁned perturbative expansion seems to require
β to be a positive integer. Even then, there is still an inﬁnite number of these operators at LO,
which means that the master function U cannot be arbitrary if the action is to be ﬁnite. The
same diﬃculty is also manifest on the associated Noether currents, see Appendix A.2.

If in addition to (4.15), we impose also (4.9), the operators (4.16) get restricted to the subset
with β = 0. For later convenience we will denote them as follows:

Y 2(cid:19)α
Oα =(cid:18) X

.

(4.17)

If instead we combine (4.15) and (4.10), the operators wn get selected.

In Table 2 we summarize the diﬀerent LO scalar operator content according to the internal
symmetries of the action and the physical interpretation of the resulting system, which we discuss in
the next section. In addition, media with reduced internal dimensionality are possible as well; see
Table 3. For instance, if the spatial St¨uckelberg ﬁelds Φa are not present in the LO action, the only
operator at that order would be X.

5 Lagrangians for self-gravitating media at LO

Given the ﬁeld content: the metric gµν and the scalar ﬁelds ΦA, it is possible to study in a systematic
way the models resulting from imposing certain symmetries in addition to SO(3)s and internal shifts.
Each class of symmetries corresponds to a medium with speciﬁc mechanical and thermodynamic
properties, which can be obtained from the EMT. For all the media we consider we require spacetime
diﬀeomorphism invariance. Then, the most general action at LO for a medium described by the four

10

Symmetries of the action

LO scalar operators

Type of medium

Four-dimensional media

SO(3)s & ΦA → ΦA + f A , ∂µf A = 0

Φa → Φa + f a(Φ0)
Φ0 → Φ0 + f (Φa)
Φ0 → Φ0 + f (Φ0)

Φa → Φa + f a(Φ0) & Φ0 → Φ0 + f (Φ0)
VsDiﬀ: Φa → Ψa(Φb) , det|∂Ψa/∂Φb| = 1

Φ0 → Φ0 + f (Φ0) & VsDiﬀ
Φ0 → Φ0 + f (Φa) & VsDiﬀ

ΦA → ΨA(ΦB) , det |∂ΨA/∂ΦB| = 1

X, Y , τn, yn

X, wn

Y , τn

τn, wn, Oαβn

wn

b, Y , X
b, Oα
b, Y

b Y

supersolids

superﬂuids

perfect ﬂuid

perfect ﬂuid with ρ + p = 0

Table 2: Summary of local symmetries in material spacetime and the corresponding invariant scalar
operators. Invariance under SO(3)s and shift symmetries are assumed by default in all cases.

Media with reduced internal dimensionality

Symmetries of the action

LO scalar operators Type of medium

SO(3)s & Φa → Φa + ca , ∂µca = 0

VsDiﬀ

Φ0 → Φ0 + c0 , ∂µc0 = 0

τn

b

X

solid

perfect ﬂuid

Table 3: Summary of self-gravitating media with reduced dimensionality, i.e. with less than four
St¨uckelberg ﬁelds.

St¨uckelberg ﬁelds ΦA can be constructed in terms of the scalar invariants X, Y , τn and yn:

S = MplZ d4x√−g R +Z d4x√−g U (X, Y, τn, yn)

and the corresponding EMT is given by

Tµν = U gµν − 2

∂U

∂C AB ∂µΦA ∂ν ΦB = U gµν − 2 Xk

UOk

∂Ok
∂gµν ,

(5.1)

(5.2)

where Ok are the nine scalar LO operators appearing in (5.1) and we use the notation UOk = ∂U/∂Ok.
Their partial derivatives with respect to the inverse spacetime metric are

∂Y
∂gµν = −

Y
2

uµ uν ,

∂yn
∂gµν =

n

Xm=1

∂X
∂gµν = −X VµVν ,
∂µΦ · Bn−m · Z · Bm−1 · ∂νΦ − 2√−X (C · Bn · ∂µΦ) Vν ,

∂τn
∂gµν = n ∂µΦ · Bn−1 · ∂νΦ ,

∂b
∂gµν =

b
2

Hµν ,

(5.3)

11

where we have also included b, that can be written as a combination of the three τn, for later
convenience. The dot (·) represents the standard three-dimensional matrix product and we have
introduced the notation

In the expressions (5.3), C and ∂µΦ have to be understood as a 1 × 3 matrices of components Ci and
∂µΦi, respectively. It is also useful to note that

Ci = C 0i.

(5.4)

∂uα
∂gµν = −

uα
2

uµ uν ,

∂V µ
∂gαβ = −V µ

2 VαVβ .

(5.5)

In what follows we list the media that arise according to the symmetries that we have discussed
and, also, according to the assumptions on the low-energy ﬁeld content. We focus ﬁrst on the systems
that contain only a partial subset of the St¨uckelberg ﬁelds, which we call temporal or spatial media.
These are the solids U (τn), and two diﬀerent types of perfect ﬂuids: U (b) and U (X); the ﬁrst of which
is a special case of the solids. Then we will move on to the media that at low-energy require all the
St¨uckelberg ﬁelds. As discussed below, the properties of the most generic class of them have been
argued to deﬁne (non-relativistic) supersolids [45]. A subclass of these (with an enhanced symmetry
group:
internal three-volume preserving diﬀeomorphisms VsDiﬀ) would then describe superﬂuids.
Other media, deﬁned by speciﬁc additional symmetries, will also be mentioned, see Table 2. The
connection with modiﬁed and, specially, massive gravity models will be studied in Section 6. Then,
in Section 7 we will discuss the number of propagating degrees of freedom in FLRW, which strongly
depends on the symmetries beyond (2.1) and (4.1) that are imposed.

5.1 Media with reduced internal dimensionality

We start by describing three special cases for which some of the four St¨uckelberg ﬁelds are missing
from the LO action, while the shifts symmetries (and eventually while SO(3)s) are respected. We
refer to these media as temporal or spatial depending on whether the missing ﬁelds are the spatial
or temporal St¨uckelbergs, respectively. Concretely, we will discuss two kinds of spatial media (solids
and perfect ﬂuids) and the only kind of temporal medium (an irrotational perfect ﬂuid) that exists at
LO with our symmetry assumptions. A peculiarity of the spatial and temporal media is that there is
no symmetry that forbids one subset of St¨uckelberg ﬁelds at LO, but allows them at a higher order in
derivatives. This means that the deﬁning restriction on the low-energy ﬁeld content of these models
must be taken as an assumption, which in principle cannot be justiﬁed from the point of view of the
symmetries.

5.1.1 U (τ1, τ2, τ3): solid

Let us ﬁrst consider the possibility that the only operators relevant at LO are the traces τn. Then,
the action contains only the three spatial St¨uckelberg ﬁelds Φa. This necessarily assumes that no
other ﬁelds are needed to describe the system at suﬃciently low energies. As we just mentioned,
there is no symmetry that forbids Φ0 at LO but allows it at some higher order in derivatives. Notice
that by looking at Table 2, it would seem that combining Φ0 → Φ0 + f (Φ0) and Φ0 → Φ0 + f (Φa),
the operators τn are selected. However, it is clear that this cannot be considered a true symmetry of
an action based on U (τn) since Φ0 is not part of τn.

12

In addition, given that the general action (5.1) lacks potential terms and it generically mixes all
ﬁelds in a democratic way, it is diﬃcult to imagine how Φ0 could be (on average) frozen at some
constant value only at LO, if it is not neglected also at higher orders. Therefore, it seems that if Φ0
does not appear at LO, it should be completely absent from the action and this must be imposed as
an assumption on the physical nature of the system.

The solid is thus the most general medium that we can construct at LO with only the three spatial
St¨uckelberg ﬁelds, respecting the basic symmetries that we assumed (SO(3)s and shift invariance).
The corresponding EMT can be written as

Tµν = U gµν − 2(cid:16)Uτ1 δab + 2 Uτ2 Bab + 3 Uτ3 Bac Bcb(cid:17) ∂µΦa∂νΦb .

(5.6)

Such a medium can be interpreted as the relativistic generalization of an elastic material, in the sense
that this kind of media can support compressing pressures; see e.g. [46]. In standard elasticity theory
in a ﬂat space spacetime [47], the stress state is described by the spatial internal inverse metric Bab,
so that the medium is relaxed (not stressed) if Bab = δab.

The object Bab is the covariant generalization of the standard three-dimensional left Cauchy-
Green deformation tensor; and thus ∂Φa/∂xi is the deformation gradient tensor, see e.g. [48]. This
type of medium, which has been commonly called solid –see e.g. [20]– or elastic solid –to distinguish
it from a perfect ﬂuid– has been applied in astrophysics and cosmology for the description of the
dynamics of the interior of neutron stars [49], in a proposal for a dark matter model [50] and also for
constructing a model of primordial inﬂation [27, 39].

Solids posses two features, due to the independent operators τn, that make them diﬀerent from
perfect ﬂuids –which we discuss below– and interesting for certain applications in the context of
cosmology. First, they exhibits anisotropic stress, due to the pressure perturbations being in general
dependent on the spatial direction. And second, the spatial trace operators τn are the only ones
among the nine LO scalars operators (4.6) that generate a mass for the (spin two) graviton, as we
will see in Section 6. Clearly, these two properties are not exclusive of the solids with EMT (5.6) –see
Table 2– but these are the simplest systems that display them.

Although it is not immediate to identify a four-velocity from the EMT (5.6), the natural choice
is uµ, deﬁned in (3.4), since this is the only SO(3)s-invariant four-vector that is available when only
the three spatial St¨uckelberg ﬁelds are present. With this choice of frame, the energy density and
the pressure of the solid, deﬁned as usual through the projections ρ = T µνuµuν and 3p = T µνHµν =
T µν(gµν + uµuν), are given by

ρ = −U ,

p = U − 2

n Uτnτn .

3

Xn=1

(5.7)

The four-velocity uµ corresponds to the energy frame –sometimes called rest frame– of the solid, which
for an arbitrary EMT is deﬁned (if it exists) as the four-vector U µ
0, see e.g. [10]. Then, the EMT (5.6) can be written as follows:

(r) that solves(cid:16)gµν + U µ

(r)Tνγ =

(r)U ν

(r)(cid:17) U γ

Tµν = p gµν + (ρ + p) uµ uν + πµν ,

(5.8)

where the non-zero anisotropic stress πµν can be obtained, for instance, from the diﬀerence of (5.8)
and (5.6). The expression (5.8) is what in cosmology is usually referred to as an imperfect ﬂuid.

The symmetric matrix Bab can be decomposed in terms of its eigenvectors ζ a

(n) and (real) eigen-

13

(n) ζ b
values λn, n = 1, 2, 3 as Bab = Pn λn ζ a
(n)
satisfying P (n) · P (m) = δmn P (n). The eigenvectors are mutually orthogonal with respect the the
three-dimensional metric δab, i.e. δmn = ζ a
(n) δab. By inspection, Uab is also diagonalized by ζ a
as follows:

(n). Then, we can deﬁne the projectors P ab

(n) = ζ a

(m) ζ b

(n) ζ b

(m)

3

where ˜λn = Uτ1 + 2 Uτ2 λn + 3 Uτ3 λ2
form

2

Tµν = U gµν − 2

Notice that uµ ζ (n)
The elastic solid has principal pressures given by

µ = 0 and gµν ζ (m)

µ

Uab = δac δbd

˜λn P cd

(n) ,

Xn=1

(5.9)

n. Therefore, the EMT (5.6) can then be cast in the following

,

ν

ζ (n)
µ = ∂µΦa ζ b

˜λn ζ (n)

µ ζ (n)

Xn=1
ζ (n)
ν = δmn and thus, {uµ, ζ (m)

(n) δab .

(5.10)

ν

} form an orthonormal tetrad.

pn ≡ Tαβ ζ (n)α

ζ (n)β

= U − 2˜λn , n = 1, 2, 3 .

(5.11)

The thermodynamics of solids can be studied following analogous lines to those given below for the
special case of perfect ﬂuids.

5.1.2 U (b): perfect ﬂuid

If the SO(3)s symmetry of the solid is enlarged to the invariance under volume preserving spatial
diﬀeomorphisms VsDiﬀ, see (4.9), the trace operators τn must combine into the determinant b2 deﬁned
in (3.5), constraining further the properties of the medium. Indeed, we recall that b2 can be expressed
as a function of τn using b2 = (τ 3
1 − 3 τ1 τ2 + 2 τ3)/6. Then, under the assumption that only the
spatial St¨uckelberg ﬁelds are present and imposing VsDiﬀ, the master function U that determines the
Lagrangian of the system depends only on b at LO. However, if the restriction on the ﬁeld content is
relaxed, allowing also for the presence of the temporal St¨uckelberg Φ0, the operators Y and X should
be included as well under at lowest order in derivatives, see Table 2. In this section we will focus on
the special case U (b) and we will later move progressively to the general structure of the media that
respect VsDiﬀ.

In the case U (b) the EMT reads

Tµν = p gµν + (ρ + p) uµ uν ,

ρ = −U ,

p = U − b Ub ,

(5.12)

with uµ being deﬁned in (3.4). In comparison to the general solid (5.8), the symmetry VsDiﬀ removes
the anisotropic stress πµν, thus restricting the medium to be a perfect ﬂuid. In addition, it also sets
to zero the (spin two) graviton mass.

The application of this type of systems for describing cosmological perfect ﬂuids (and speciﬁcally
their perturbations) was studied in [10]. For instance, if the ﬂuid has a barotropic equation of state
of the form p = wρ, with constant w, the master function is of the form

Hence, the dynamics of the ΛCDM universe can be modelled with

U ∝ b1+w .

U ∝ (Ωr (b4/3 − 1) + Ωm (b − 1) + 1) ,

14

(5.13)

(5.14)

with Ωr ∼ 10−4 and Ωm ∼ 0.26, to satisfy the current constraints on the radiation and (cold dark)
matter densities [3].
In general, the perturbations of a U (b) perfect ﬂuid can be studied decomposing the spatial phonon
ﬁelds πi, i = 1, 2, 3 –introduced in (2.8) for the general four-dimensional case– into longitudinal and
transverse polarizations:

πi = πi

L + πi

T ,

∂iπi

T = 0 ,

ǫijk∂jπk

L = 0 ,

(5.15)

where the transverse ﬁelds πi
T couple to vector metric perturbations and their evolution is dictated
by the conservation of vorticity [10], which is a consequence of the symmetry VsDiﬀ. As we discuss
in Appendix A, this can be easily obtained applying Noether’s theorem, which implies and inﬁnite
set of covariantly conserved currents [9, 10].

A peculiar property of the perfect ﬂuids of the kind U (b) is that the transverse modes πi

T , which
are interpreted as vortices, do not propagate in ﬂat space since the symmetry VsDiﬀ forbids spatial
derivatives in their action. Their time evolution is simply given by the equation ¨πi
T = 0. This has lead
to the suggestion that these ﬂuids may be strongly coupled at all scales [22]. However, it has been
argued that the issues associated to the evolution of these modes (e.g. the appearance of divergences
in the scattering of phonons in ﬂat spacetime) can be resolved with a careful choice of the appropriate
(physical) observables [31].

It can be easily checked, using a ﬁeld redeﬁnition, that the inclusion of the NLO operators re-
specting VsDiﬀ and containing only the three spatial St¨uckelberg ﬁelds does not modify the evolution
equation of πi
T in Minkowski (with respect to the one at LO) [10]. There are ﬁve independent op-
erators at NLO: ∂µb ∂µb, H µν∇µuα∇νuα, (uµ∂µb)2, ∇µuν∇νuµ and ǫαβµν∇µuα∇νuβ, see [10]. Once
these operators are are included, the EMT of the system is no longer that of a perfect ﬂuid.
The relativistic formulation of self-gravitating media that we are exploring in this paper allows a
straightforward connection to the thermodynamic theory of continuous media. This can be done by
constructing a dictionary between two EFT pictures: the action (5.1) and the fundamental equations
of thermodynamics, see e.g [23]. A more detailed discussion of this dictionary is beyond the scope of
this work and we will provide it elsewhere [51]. For the purpose of illustration we use here the perfect
ﬂuid U (b). Essentially, we need to match the operator b with an intensive thermodynamic variable
(or a combination of them). Choosing the particle number density n and the entropy density s as
independent variables, we write b = b(n, s). Then, the chemical potential µ and the temperature are
obtained from the ﬁrst principle of thermodynamics as µ = ∂ρ/∂n and T = ∂ρ/∂s. The pressure
enters through the Euler relation

µ s + n T = ρ + p ,

(5.16)

which must be valid for any U (b). This can be achieved, for instance, with the identiﬁcation b = n
(and then T = 0), which implies µ = −Ub, and is in principle suitable for a degenerate system (i.e.
in the limit T → 0). A diﬀerent option is b = s (with µ = 0) and T = −Ub, as for a gas of photons.
This second choice is the one that was advocated e.g. in [10, 22, 23].

5.1.3 U (X): perfect ﬂuid

At the opposite side of the spectrum from solids and perfect ﬂuids lie the self-gravitating media that
can be described at LO by introducing only the temporal St¨uckelberg ﬁeld Φ0. We have not found
a symmetry that forbids the spatial St¨uckelberg ﬁelds at LO but reintroduces them at NLO or at
higher orders in derivatives. This is analogous to what happens for the solids and perfect ﬂuids

15

studied above, but exchanging the roles of the temporal and spatial ﬁelds. By looking at Table 2, it
seems that VsDiﬀ and Φa → Φa + f a(Φ0) select X, but this combination of transformations is not a
symmetry of an action based on U (X), simply because Φa are not in X. Therefore, the absence of
these ﬁelds must be assumed.

Clearly, with such an assumption, the function U (X) is the only shift-symmetric possibility that
exists at LO (with a single scalar ﬁeld). Further restrictions involve necessarily discrete symmetries
such as e.g. X → −X.

Then for a generic U (X), The EMT is given by

Tµν = p gµν + (ρ + p)VµVν ,

ρ = −U + 2 X UX ,

p = U .

(5.17)

This type of perfect ﬂuid is fundamentally diﬀerent from the case U (b) because its four-velocity, V µ,
is the derivative of a scalar and thus it has zero vorticity. This is due to the fact that for U (X)
the transverse phonons πi
T are entirely absent by construction. Actually, since both U (X) and U (b)
describe perfect ﬂuids, their phonon expansions (2.8) can be matched setting to zero the transverse
modes of the latter and identifying through an equation the divergence of πi with the time derivative of
π0. This matching generically involves as well a linear combination of the scalar metric perturbation.
The correspondence can also be easily established at the level of the background. For instance, a
constant barotropic equation of state is obtained choosing U ∝ X (1+w)/(2w), to be compared with
(5.13). For an early study of irrotational perfect ﬂuids where longitudinal ﬂuctuations were already
interpreted as phonons and a thermodynamic dictionary was provided, see [52].

In order to extend beyond LO the medium that can be constructed using only the temporal
St¨uckelberg, we must linearly add to the action the operators (∇µV µ)2 and ∇µV ν∇µVν at NLO.
Clearly, the operator ∇2Φ0 ∼ ∇µV µ can be omitted assuming appropriate boundary conditions, since
it is a total derivative. Besides, the NLO operators ǫµναβ∇αV µ∇βV ν and V µV ν∇µVα∇νV α need not
be included thanks to the fact that V µ is hypersurface orthogonal. The ﬁrst of the two vanishes and
the second one can be written as a combination of (∇µV µ)2 and ∇µV ν∇µVν.
If we assume that the operator X is absent, and we work only at NLO, the resulting model is a
special case of the “Einstein-aether” model [53], see e.g. [54].

Notice that the extension to all orders of U (X) is not a generalization of the ghost condensate [55],
but instead the most general modiﬁed gravity model based on a single scalar derivatively coupled.
Actually, including all the orders in the derivative expansion corresponds to a large class of models
contained in the EFT of inﬂation [56] (or dark energy [57]) for which the (soft) breaking of the
temporal shift symmetry Φ0 → Φ0 + c0 (with constant c0) due to a potential term for the inﬂation
(or, generically, the extra scalar mode) is entirely neglected.

5.2 Four-dimensional media

We will now move on to describe the media of Table 2, which pertain to a diﬀerent class than the cases
we have studied so far, because all of them contain the four St¨uckelberg ﬁelds ΦA, which motivates
the name we give them. As we will now see, the most general of these media (whose action is invariant
under shifts and internal spatial rotations) is the covariant generalization of a non-relativistic model
used in [45] to introduce supersolids. If we further constrain these systems by requiring invariance
under internal spatial diﬀeomorphisms that preserve the volume, we get superﬂuids [23]. Symmetries
that mix the temporal and spatial St¨uckelberg ﬁelds –see Table (2)– lead to a set of particular subcases
of the general supersolid.

16

5.2.1 U (X , Y , τn , yn): supersolid

Let us start with the most general media that our symmetries allow. The less symmetric self-
gravitating media that we can construct with our assumptions respect only the internal shifts (2.1)
and the spatial rotations SO(3)s of (4.1). Therefore, their LO master function U contains all the
operators of the set (4.6), that we identiﬁed in Section 4, and thus their diﬀeomorphism invariant
action is precisely (5.1). A non-relativistic description of systems characterized precisely by these
symmetries was given in [45], where they were interpreted as zero-temperature supersolids. According
to [45], the three spatial Φa would correspond to the comoving coordinates of the medium (as we
have been interpreting them), whereas Φ0 would be the (shift-symmetric) phase ﬁeld related to a
U (1) symmetry associated to particle number conservation.

In spite of some claims, see e.g. [58], whether actual supersolids exist in nature is still unclear.
For the purpose of this work we will simply use the term to refer to a continuous medium amenable
to a coarse grained description with four degrees of freedom and based on the shift and rotational
symmetries (2.1) and (4.1). For a review on supersolids we point the reader to [59].

The same set of symmetries, equations (2.1) and (4.1), was later considered in [29], where the
CCWZ method [60] was applied to derive (for Minkowski spacetime) a relativistic version of the LO
action given in [45]. However, the action written in [29] for these symmetries depends on a generic
function of all our kinetic blocks C AB except X, which is an independent invariant operator under
internal translations and SO(3)s rotations. Besides, the concrete operators yn, deﬁned in (4.4) were
not given in [29].

Phenomenologically, the media of this kind posses many interesting properties. First of all, they
share with the solids U (τn) the fact that the graviton acquires a non-vanishing mass that is related
to the presence of anisotropic stress and to the speed of propagation of transverse modes. We refer
to the group velocity dω/dk, which given e.g. a dispersion relation of the form ω2 = k2 + m2, clearly
In addition, given that Φ0 and Φa lead to two diﬀerent four-vectors in the
involves the mass m.
medium, the four-velocities (3.4) and (3.8), the energy momentum exhibits a non-zero “heat-ﬂux”.

We point out that the object C AB, deﬁned in (2.2), is the four-dimensional generalization of
the left Cauchy-Green tensor, see Section 5.1.1. This agrees with the picture in which the general
media described by the EFT (5.1) can be interpreted as four-dimensional media (or hyper-volumes)
propagating in spacetime. In Section 6 we will make the connection between these media and massive
(and modiﬁed) gravity, using the unitary gauge as tool to simplify the matching.

5.2.2 U (X, Y, b): superﬂuid

Imposing that the action (5.1) has to be invariant under VsDiﬀ, the internal volume preserving
diﬀeomorphisms (4.9), the only invariant LO operators that appear in the master function are X, Y
and b. The corresponding EMT is given by

Tµν = (U − b Ub) gµν + (Y UY − b Ub) uµ uν + 2X UX Vµ Vν .

(5.18)

In general this is not a perfect ﬂuid, due to the four-velocities V µ and uµ not being parallel. The fact
that V µ has zero vorticity has motivated interpreting these media as relativistic superﬂuids [23, 25],
following earlier ideas for (non-relativistic) supersolids [45] and superﬂuids [61]. The key idea of this
picture is that the EMT (5.18) can be seen as a two-component ﬂuid whose admixture allows to de-
scribe the various phases of a superﬂuid. For instance, it is straightforward to show that the phonon
expansion of the action leads to two kinds of longitudinal waves (propagating with diﬀerent speeds

17

of sound), which suggests interpreting them as the ﬁrst and second sound in superﬂuids [25].

It is worth highlighting some special cases of the general superﬂuid:

• If in addition to the symmetry VsDiﬀ we impose also invariance under Φ0 → Φ0 + f (Φ0), the
master function has to be a function of the operators Oα, which we deﬁned in (4.17), and b.
The operators O−1 and b, together with the NLO operators that can be constructed from V µ,
were used in [40] to model Lorentz breaking in dark matter.

• The master function U (Y, b) describes a perfect ﬂuid with four-velocity uµ and energy density

and pressure

ρ = Y UY − U ,

p = U − b Ub .

(5.19)

This case is interesting because it comes from imposing not only the symmetry VsDiﬀ but also
requiring invariance under Φ0 → Φ0 + f (Φa), see Table 2. This feature makes it qualitatively
diﬀerent from the other perfect ﬂuids that we have encountered: U (X) and U (b), whose LO
structure does not derive from symmetries acting on the four St¨uckelberg ﬁelds. One can obtain
a constant barotropic equation of state for U (Y, b) choosing

U ∝ b1+w U ( b−w Y ) ,

(5.20)

where U is an arbitrary function. Another choice of master function which also leads to a
constant barotropic equation of state is U ∝ (b1+w + Y 1+1/w).

• An equation of state w = −1 can be obtained from (5.20) by choosing

which interestingly corresponds to the enhanced symmetry

U = U (b Y ),

ΦA → ΨA(ΦB) ,

det|∂ΨA/∂ΦB| = 1 .

(5.21)

(5.22)

By looking at equation (4.8), it is now clear why b Y is the operator that allows to switch from
Eulerian to Lagrangian coordinates.

5.2.3 Special supersolids

These media are the subclasses of the general action (5.1) listed in Table 2.

• For instance, imposing the symmetry Φ0 → Φ0 + f (Φa), the leading invariant operators are τn

and Y and the EMT is

Tµν = U gµν − 2 Uab ∂µΦa∂ν Φb + Y UY uµ uν .

(5.23)

Given what we have seen so far, a natural interpretation of (5.23) seems to be that it describes
a solid coupled to a perfect ﬂuid. An analysis of the thermodynamics of perfect ﬂuids [51]
suggests that Y can be interpreted as the temperature so that U (τn, Y ) may be a possible
description for a solid at ﬁnite temperature. We leave for future work a detailed analysis of the
thermodynamic properties of these systems and those of the general supersolids (5.23).

18

• The symmetry Φa → Φa +f a(Φ0) enforces the master function to be of the form U = U (wn, X).
If in addition we impose the symmetry Φ0 → Φ0 + f (Φ0), the operators wn are selected. We
will comment on these cases in the next section, where we build the connection between massive
gravity and self-gravitating media.

6 SO(3) spatially symmetric massive gravity

The main motivation for massive and modiﬁed gravity in the context of cosmology is the possibility
that the observed acceleration of the Universe could be due to a modiﬁcation of GR that weakens
gravity at large distances.
In this respect, the idea of massive gravity (MG) is appealing, since
endowing the graviton with a mass could eﬀectively make gravity a short range interaction (on
cosmological scales).

The ﬁrst attempt to provide a mass to the graviton dates back to 1939; when Fierz and Pauli [19]
studied the most general Lorentz invariant mass term for metric perturbations around Minkowski
space. It was thought for a long time that any extension of the Fierz-Pauli Lagrangian beyond the
the quadratic level was pathological. Indeed, Boulware and Deser argued that at the non-linear level
a ghost mode would have necessarily be present [63]. The problem was solved in [64] by ﬁnding a
ghost free extension of the Fierz-Pauli Lagrangian at the non-linear level [64, 65]. This model, which
exhibits Lorentz symmetry when expanded around Minkowski, solves the ghost issue at the (heavy)
price of lacking spatially ﬂat homogenous FLRW solutions [66]. As shown in [67] the Fierz-Pauli
model as an eﬀective theory (and also [64]) has a (very low) cut-oﬀ Λ3 = (m2 Mpl)1/3, where m sets
the scale of the graviton mass mass scale. A recent proposal to improve this cut-oﬀ has been given
in [68, 69].

Fierz-Pauli MG fails to reproduce the correct light bending around heavy and dense objects, in
sharp contrast with standard GR. This also happens in the limit of vanishing graviton mass, an
issue that is known as the vDVZ discontinuity [70]. A possible way out was proposed by Vainshtein
in [71], by arguing that non-linear eﬀects restore the correct GR behaviour at short distances from a
gravitational source. Whereas this mechanism has been studied for various models [72], it is important
to stress that it relies on strong non-linearities; even at the macroscopic scales of the Solar System
where the value of the gravitational potential is small.

A possible way out of this last diﬃculty is to abandon Lorentz invariance in the gravitational
sector8 in favour of a simpler symmetry group;
in practice, by requiring only spatial rotational
invariance [7, 74]. All Lorentz-breaking MG models with ﬁve DoF having (at least) spatial rotational
invariance are free of ghost instabilities and can be classiﬁed [11,12]. In addition, they have no vDVZ
discontinuity and FLRW solutions do exist for these models [75]. Their range of validity is given
by an ultraviolet cut-oﬀ Λ, which is dictated by the symmetries that deﬁne the EFT. Typically, for
Lorentz-breaking MG the cut-oﬀ is Λ2 = (m Mpl)1/2 ≫ Λ3 [7, 8, 74, 75]. In order to have any impact
on the current acceleration of the Universe, the scale m should thus be of the order of today’s Hubble
scale, giving Λ−1

The EFT of four derivatively coupled scalar ﬁelds with internal spatial SO(3)s invariance allows
to re-interpret Lorentz-breaking MG models as self-gravitating media. From the perspective of this
EFT, the breaking of Lorentz symmetry is simply a consequence of a background choice. MG is then
a class of models within a broad framework. In other words, the EFT of self-gravitating media leads
to a systematic construction of models for the acceleration of the Universe, including MG.

2 ∼ 0.1mm.

8Bounds on Lorentz violation in the gravitational sector are rather mild assuming the equivalence principle and come

from post-Newtonian preferred frame eﬀects, see e.g. [73], and gravitational waves emission.

19

LO self-gravitating media

Map

Massive gravity

L(C AB, gµν )

Unitary gauge −→

OLO : X, Y, τn, yn
Table 4: Relationship between material Lagrangians and massive gravity models.

←− St¨uckelberg “trick” SO(3) invariants of ADM’s N, N i, γij

L(hµν , gµν)

The basic idea that helps to build this connection is the St¨uckelberg mechanism or trick, which
we already mentioned in Section 2. The application of the St¨uckelberg mechanism for Fierz-Pauli
MG was already given in [76] and was later generalized to other models of MG in [67] and [7]. If
hµν is a metric perturbation around a (reference) background metric, ¯gµν , such that the full metric
is gµν = ¯gµν + hµν , a generic (Lorentz invariant) MG potential may be expressed as function of the

perturbation hµν with indices raised using gµν , i.e. √−g V (hµν , gµν ). Given such a potential, added to
the Einstein-Hilbert Lagrangian, the St¨uckelberg trick can be implemented replacing the background
metric ¯gµν with a tensor ﬁeld made out of four scalars: Gµν ≡ ∂µΦA∂νΦB ¯gAB[ΦC(xα)], so that the
metric perturbation hµν is replaced with gµν −Gµν , see e.g. [77]. Using these replacements to express
the action in terms of the spacetime metric gµν and the tensor Gµν we obtain a covariant embedding
of any Lorentz invariant MG model originally deﬁned with a reference metric ¯gµν . This procedure
can be adapted to deal also with Lorentz breaking models, as described in [7].

In this work, we started our analysis directly with an explicitly diﬀeomorphism invariant action
(2.3) in a “top-down” approach [8]. This automatically implements the St¨uckelberg mechanism for
the actions obtained imposing the background ΦA = δA
Indeed, assuming that the condition
det(∂µΦA) 6= 0 holds, it is possible to ﬁnd a local set of coordinates (unitary gauge) such that

µ xµ.

∂µΦA = δA
µ .

(6.1)

Notice that, deﬁned in this way, the unitary gauge is actually a collection of gauges, which are
equivalent modulo constant shifts, i.e. ΦA = xA + cA with ∂cA/∂xµ = 0, where for simplicity we
do not distinguish between spacetime and internal manifold indices. These gauges are all equivalent
since the action is, by assumption, shift invariant in the St¨uckelberg ﬁelds.

The unitary gauge reﬂects the fact that since we have four scalars ΦA and four spacetime co-
ordinates, we can use the diﬀeomorphism invariance of the action (5.1) to absorb the dynamics of
the scalar ﬁelds into the degrees of freedom of the metric. By using the ADM splitting of spacetime
to describe the metric gµν and its perturbations [78], it is then straightforward to make a connec-
tion with MG in the so-called broken phase. Therefore, this phase (of broken diﬀeomorphisms) can
be simply understood as a way of expressing the dynamics of the comoving coordinates of the self-
gravitating medium through their eﬀect on the metric perturbations. The correspondence between
self-gravitating media and massive and modiﬁed gravity models written explicitly in terms of metric
perturbations is depicted in Table 4, where the arrows indicate how to move from one picture to the
other.

In the ADM formalism the metric can be written in terms of the lapse N , the shifts N i and the

spatial metric γij, namely

gµν =(cid:18)−N 2 + N i N j γij γij N j
γij (cid:19) ,

γij N j

gµν =(cid:18)−1/N 2

N j/N 2 γij − N i N j/N 2(cid:19) ,

N i/N 2

(6.2)

where γimγmj = δi

j. In the unitary gauge (6.1), the matrix C AB deﬁned in (2.2) coincides with inverse

20

of the spacetime metric:

Deﬁning

C AB = gµν δA

µ δB
ν .

ξi ≡ N i/N ,

for convenience, we decompose C AB in the unitary gauge as follows:

X = C 00 = −1/N 2 ,

Ci = C i0 = ξi/N , Bij = C ij = γij − ξi ξj .

(6.3)

(6.4)

(6.5)

Then, we can write the building blocks of LO self gravitating media –see (4.6) and Table 1– in terms
of the ADM variables:

X = −1/N 2 ,

Y =

,

τn = Tr [(γ − ξ ⊗ ξ)n] ,

yn =

ξ · (γ − ξ ⊗ ξ)n · ξ

N 2

,

(6.6)

where γ is the 3×3 matrix of components γij. In these expressions the dot (·) represents the standard
matrix product and we use the following notation: ξ2 ≡ ξi γij ξj and (ξ ⊗ ξ)ij ≡ ξiξj. Therefore,
the master function U of the action (5.1) becomes an algebraic function of the ADM variables in the
unitary gauge:

1

Np1 − ξ2

S = M 2

plZ d4x√−g R +Z d4x√−g U(cid:0)N, ξi, γij(cid:1) .

Special cases –see Tables 2 and 3– can be obtained from the remaining SO(3)s invariant scalar
operators of Table 1, which are combinations of X, Y , τn and yn:

b =p(1 − ξ2) det γ , wn = Tr (γn) , Oαβn = (−1)α(cid:0)1 − ξ2(cid:1)α+β
Notice also that the four-velocities V µ and uµ become in the unitary gauge:

(ξ · (γ − ξ ⊗ ξ)n · ξ)β .

(6.7)

(6.8)

(6.9)

uµ =

δµ
0

Np1 − ξ2

,

V µ = (−1/N, ξi) .

If the the shifts are zero, e.g. as in Minkowski and FLRW spacetimes, uµ and V µ coincide, up to a
sign; see also Section 3.
The action (6.7) was the starting point in [11–13] where a large class of non-derivative9 massive and
modiﬁed gravity models –those with spatial SO(3) invariance– was studied by means of a Hamiltonian
analysis. Models with 6, 5, 3 and 2 degrees of freedom (DoF) were thus found. The condition of SO(3)
spatial invariance turns to be important to avoid ghost instabilities. If this restriction is relaxed, 6
DoF generically propagate and one of them (a scalar mode with respect to spatial rotations) is a
ghost around ﬂat space, which corresponds to the infamous Boulware-Deser ghost [63].

For example, a SO(3) invariant master function U of the form

U = U (τn) + √−X E(wn)

(6.10)

propagates precisely 5 DoF [12] (provided that U is not a constant). As a matter of fact, this not
9By “non-derivative” we refer to the actions for which the master function U contains only non-derivative combina-

tions of the ADM variables, precisely as in (6.7).

21

the most general U that propagates 5 DoF, see [12]. We leave open a detailed exploration of the
structure of the most general case, which is anyway contained in our formalism, for a possible future
investigation. The functions U and E of (6.10) are generic and thus there exist inﬁnitely many U with
5 DoF. Therefore, according to the discussion in the previous section ghost-free massive gravity can
be identiﬁed with a speciﬁc kind of supersolid. Moreover, setting E = 0 there are still 5 DoF and the
medium is a solid. Thus, the construction of ghost-free massive gravity with ﬁve DoF needs at least
the three spatial St¨uckelberg ﬁelds Φa.

Cases where only 3 or 2 DoF occur also exist [13]. In particular, exactly 3 DoF are present if U

has the structure

U = U (wn, X) .

(6.11)
We recall that the above form for U is protected by the symmetry: Φa → Φa + f a(Φ0), see Table 2.
It should be stressed that although 3 DoF are present at the non-perturbative level for (6.11), only
two DoF are found expanding around ﬂat space [13]. A proposal for a UV completion, where the LO
order part of the action is built out of the scalar operators w1 and w2, was put forward in [79] adding
the symmetry Φ0 → Φ0 + f (Φ0), see Table 2. In that model the ﬁelds Φa are further coupled with a
triplet of purely spatial vector ﬁelds, whereas the dynamics Φ0 is dictated by NLO operators.

A particular case of (6.11) is given by the Lagrangian

U = √

−X E(wn) + λ ,

(6.12)

where only 2 non-perturbative DoF are found. In this expression λ is a (dimensionless) cosmological
constant. This last case is rather interesting since it gives an example of a model of gravity with 2
DoF that is diﬀerent from GR.

7 Degrees of freedom in FLRW

In this section we discuss a basic aspect of cosmological perturbation theory for self-gravitating media.
In particular, we are interested in determining the number of degrees of freedom that propagate in a
FLRW background for the diﬀerent kinds of self-gravitating media that we have considered. A more
detailed account of the cosmology of these media will be given elsewhere [80].

Let us consider a spatially ﬂat10 FLRW metric written in the following way:

ds2 = −N (t)2 dt2 + a(t)2 δijdxidxj ,

(7.1)

where we denote x0 = t. The derivatives with respect to t will be indicated by primes. For instance,
by deﬁnition H = a′/a is the Hubble function in these coordinates. With this choice of metric, the
following ﬁeld conﬁguration:
(7.2)

Φ0 = φ(t) , Φi = xi

is compatible with the equations of motion for the St¨uckelberg ﬁelds derived from the action (5.1),
giving a spatially homogeneous and isotropic EMT. In what follows we will work in the unitary gauge,
setting φ(t) = t. It is important to stress that in general it is not possible to choose N (t) = a(t) or
N (t) = 1 at the same time that φ(t) = t. Therefore, N (t) has to be determined using the (background)
equations of motion.

Let us now consider perturbations around the FLRW metric (7.1). Having chosen the unitary
gauge, the dynamics of perturbations for the whole system (metric and St¨uckelberg ﬁelds) is encoded

10Spatial curvature can be introduced without altering the conclusions. For simplicity we set it to zero.

22

in the metric.11 Denoting the metric perturbations by hµν and decomposing them into scalars, vectors
and tensors with respect to spatial rotations, a general perturbation of (7.1) can be written as:

where

with

ds2 = −N (t)2dt2 + a(t)2 δijdxidxj + a(t)2hµν (xα) dxµdxν ,

h00 = ψ ,

hij = χij + ∂isj + ∂jsi + δij τ + ∂i∂jσ,

h0i = Ai + ∂iv ;

∂iAi = ∂jχij = ∂isi = 0 ,

δijχij = 0 .

(7.3)

(7.4)

(7.5)

The master function U of the action (5.1) can be expanded up to second order in hµν as follows:

√−g U = tµν hµν +

M 2
pl

4 (cid:0)m2

0 h2

00 + 2 m2

1 h0ih0i − 2 m2

4 h00 hii + m2

3 h2

ii − m2

2 hij hij(cid:1) ,

(7.6)

where tµν and the masses m2

i depend on U and its derivatives.

Although the operator b is redundant once the τn are included, it is convenient to single out its
eﬀect, since it plays a special role for some symmetry choices. Hence, we write the LO action (5.1) as

S = MplZ d4x√−g R +Z d4x√−g U (X, Y, τn, yn, b) .

Then the masses of (7.6) are given by:

m2

0 = −

m2

1 =

m2

2 =

m2

3 =

a

N M 2

N
M 2

N
M 2

a7

3

N 2

2 N 3 M 2

UY
N

−

3

Xn=0

4 UXX
N 4 −

(UY Y − 4 UX )

2n a2−2n Uyn − 2

a4−2 n Uτn# ,

+ U(cid:21) ,
Xn=1

pl (cid:20) 4 UXY
N 3 −
pl "a4 U +
2 a4
N 2 UX − a Ub +
pl "a3 U − Ub − 4
pl" 1
2(cid:0)a3 U + a−3 Ubb − Ub(cid:1) + 8 a−3 Uτ1τ2 + 12 a−5 Uτ1τ3 + 24 a−7 Uτ2τ3
Xn=1(cid:0)n a−2 n Ubτn − n a3−2 n Uτn + n2 a3−4 n Uτnτn(cid:1)# ,

(n + 1) a3−2 n Uτn# ,

3

Xn=1

3

a2

pl"(cid:0)a3 N 2 U − a3 N UY + 2 a3 UX − N 2 Ub − 2 UbX + N UbY(cid:1)
n a3−2 n(cid:0)N UY τn − N 2 Uτn − 2 UXτn(cid:1)# .

+ 2

+ 2

3

Xn=1

m2

4 =

2 N 3 M 2

(7.7)

(7.8)

(7.9)

(7.10)

(7.11)

(7.12)

These masses can be simpliﬁed (on a case by case basis) taking into account the background
equations of motion. Concretely, the condition tµν = 0 is required for consistency with the background

11In the unitary gauge, the “phonons” πA of (2.8) are set to zero. We could as well choose to trade some degrees of

freedom of the metric (7.4) by the πA.

23

equations of motion for the metric. This gives two equations:

N 3U + 2 M 2

pl N (cid:0)2H′ + 3H2(cid:1) − 4 M 2

pl H N ′ − 2N 3

6 M 2

3

pl H2 + N 2 U − N UY + 2 UX = 0 ,
Xn=1
n a−2 n Uτn − a−3 N 3 Ub = 0 .

(7.13)

These equations are equivalent to the conservation of the medium’s ETM on the background or,
equivalently, to the equations of motion of the St¨uckelberg ﬁelds (in the background), see Section 2.
Eliminating H′ from the second of them we obtain the condition

where

F1(U, N, a) N ′ + H F2 (U, N, a) = 0 ,

a3

F1 = −
3

F2 =

2 N 4 H(cid:0)N 2 (UY Y − 2 UX ) − 4 N UXY + 4 UXX(cid:1) ,
2  a3 UY − UbY − 2

n a3−2 n Uτn! +

N  UbX − a UX + 2

3

3

Xn=1

(7.14)

(7.15)

(7.16)

n a3−2 n UX τn! .

3

Xn=1

Therefore, we have the following possibilities:

• F1 6= 0 and therefore it is possible to solve for N ′. As a result, N is dynamical.
• F1 is identically zero. Therefore, (7.14) is an algebraic equation for N , i.e. F2(U, N, a) = 0,

except if H = 0.

• Both F1 and F2 are identically zero. In this case N is not ﬁxed by the background (so there

exists a residual gauge freedom). We can ﬁx N , for instance, to be equal to a.

Let us now consider separately the scalar, vector and tensor modes in Fourier space, denoting by
k the wavenumber of the modes. In the scalar sector, one can integrate out the ﬁelds u and ψ of
(7.4), arriving to the following canonical form for the eﬀective quadratic Lagrangian

L(s)

(2) =

1
2

ϕ′t K ϕ′ + ϕ′t Dϕ −

1
2

ϕt Amass ϕ ,

ϕt = (τ ,−∆σ) ,

(7.17)

where the 2× 2 matrices K, D and Amass satisfy Dt = −D, K t = K and At
mass = Amass, respectively.
The propagation of modes is related to the determinant of the matrix K: if Det(K) = 0 there can be
at most one propagating scalar DoF. We have that

Deﬁning the eﬀective masses

det(K) =(cid:0)6 a5 H2 + m2

M 2

0 = m2

0 N 5 − 3 a7H2 , M 2

0 N 5(cid:1) .

1 N 3(cid:1)(cid:0)3 a7 H2 − m2
1 = 6 a5 H2 + m2

1 N 3 ,

(7.18)

(7.19)

0 = 0 or M 2
we see that if M 2
no scalar mode propagates.

1 = 0, there is a single propagating scalar mode; whereas if M 2

1 = M 2

0 = 0

24

Media

perfect ﬂuids

superﬂuids

solid

special supersolid

special supersolid

Operators Det(K) M 2

0 M 2

1 M 2

2 DoF

b

X

Y

b, Y

b, X

b, X, Y

τn

τn, Y

wn, X

0

0
6= 0
6= 0
6= 0
6= 0
0
6= 0
0

0
6= 0
6= 0
6= 0
6= 0
6= 0
0
6= 0
6= 0

6= 0
0
6= 0
6= 0
6= 0
6= 0
6= 0
6= 0
0

0

0

0

0

0

0
6= 0
6= 0
6= 0

5

3

6

6

6

6

5

6

2

Table 5: Counting of degrees of freedom (DoF) for various LO self-gravitating media in FLRW.

In the tensor sector there are always two propagating DoF, with quadratic Lagrangian

L(t)

(2) =

1

N a(cid:20) a2
N 2 χ′

ijχ′

ij +

where

3

1

2 (cid:0)2 M 2

2 − k2(cid:1) χij χij(cid:21) ;

Finally, in the vector sector the quadratic Lagrangian reads

M 2

2 M 2

pl =

n2 a−2(n−1) Uτn .

Xn=1

L(v)

(2) =

a3 k2
2 N

(ui − s′

i)(ui − s′

i) +

N 3
2

M 2

1 uiui −

a k2
2N 2 M 2

2 si si .

The ﬁelds ui have a purely algebraic equation of motion and thus can be integrated out, giving the
Lagrangian

(7.20)

(7.21)

(7.22)

(7.23)

˜L(v)

(2) =

a3 k2 N 3 M 2
1

is′
s′
i −

a k2
2N 2 M 2

2 si si .

2 a3 k2 + 2 N 4 M 2
1
1 6= 0. The dispersion relation is not trivial only when M 2

The vectors si propagate only if M 2
2 6= 0.
Thus, M 2
2 , besides controlling the dispersion relation of tensors, also determines the dynamics of the
vectors. The fact that M 2
2 6= 0 in the unitary gauge is equivalent to the presence of an anisotropic
stress in the EMT of the St¨uckelberg ﬁelds. As we mentioned above, a complete study of the cosmology
of these media will be given in a separate publication [80]. We just summarize in Table 5 the DoF
counting for various examples of sets of operators that may appear inside the LO master function.

8 Conclusions and outlook

The main result of this work is that a vast class of modiﬁed gravity models, including massive gravity
(MG), can be interpreted as self-gravitating continuous media. The low-energy dynamics of these
systems is described by the EFT of four scalar ﬁelds ΦA that respect shift symmetries. Due to these
symmetries, the ﬁelds are derivatively coupled between them and are minimally coupled to gravity

25

at leading order in derivatives. At this order, the action is a functional of ten independent scalars
encoded in the induced four-dimensional (inverse) metric C AB = gµν ∂µΦA∂νΦB.

The four scalar ﬁelds can be interpreted as the (comoving) coordinates of the medium. They
can be conveniently split into three spatial coordinates Φa, a = 1, 2, 3, and a temporal coordinate
Φ0. Using diﬀeomorphism (diﬀ) invariance, the EFT can be examined in the unitary gauge, where
the scalar ﬁelds are “frozen” to be coincident with the spacetime coordinates. With this choice of
spacetime coordinates, the induced metric is C AB = gAB. This sends all the dynamics of the medium
into the gravitational metric and allows to make direct contact with the traditional framework of MG.
The inverse path (going from MG to continuous media) can be travelled by using the well-known
St¨uckelberg “trick”, which allows to write in a diﬀ invariant way any theory in which diﬀs appear
to be broken. Indeed, the four scalar ﬁelds ΦA of our EFT can also be seen as the four St¨uckelberg
ﬁelds of a diﬀ invariant formulation of MG. We have discussed in Section 6 how to move from one
picture to the other.

The mechanical and thermodynamic properties of these continuous media (or modiﬁed/massive
gravity) models depend crucially on extra symmetries that can be imposed on the scalar sector and
may restrict drastically the number of allowed operators. The minimal assumption we have used in
this work is that the action is invariant under (spatial) SO(3) rotations of the ﬁelds Φa, a = 1, 2, 3.
This reduces the number of allowed operators from ten to nine at leading order in derivatives; see
Table 1.
Imposing further assumptions, such as symmetries that relate the spatial and temporal
St¨uckelberg sectors –see Table 2–, the number of independent operators can be decreased even down
to a single one. For instance, volume preserving internal spatial diﬀs selects just three operators and
the resulting action describes superﬂuids.

Another way to simplify the action is to make it depend (by assumption) only on either the spatial
or temporal St¨uckelberg ﬁelds; see Table 3. The models that are allowed in those cases can describe
self-gravitating solids, perfect ﬂuids and superﬂuids. In the general SO(3) spatially symmetric case,
which contains the four scalars ΦA, the medium shares some of its properties with both superﬂuids
and solids, and therefore is called a supersolid. Therefore, a general MG model is interpreted a
supersolid propagating in spacetime.

Working in the unitary gauge and expanding a generic example of our EFT around Minkowski
spacetime, it is straightforward to see that the resulting action for the metric ﬂuctuations will not
respect Lorentz symmetry. This is simply a natural consequence of the presence of the medium and
the fact that we have assumed the operator content to be dictated by a broad symmetry: internal
spatial SO(3) rotations. Nevertheless, it is possible to choose a combination of operators such that
the resulting action for metric perturbations is Lorentz invariant, if one wishes to do so [13].

The correspondence between self-gravitating media and massive/modiﬁed gravity is intriguing and
deserves further study. In the context of cosmology, it can be relevant for a deeper understanding of
the properties of dark matter and dark energy. Moreover, the systematic EFT framework presented
in this work can aid to devise a program for the interpretation of the data coming from future
probes. From this perspective, the key idea is that the symmetry properties of a (coarse-grained)
cosmological medium could be imprinted in the the large scale structure of the Universe, including
the cosmic microwave background.

We plan to analyze the thermodynamics and the cosmology (and the relation between the two)
of these models in future publications [51, 80].
In the present work, we have initiated this study
by determining (in Section 7) the number of propagating degrees of freedom in FLRW for various
representative examples of continuous media (or models of massive/modiﬁed gravity), as summarized
in Table 5. Other avenues, that are also worthwhile exploring, can be opened if diﬀerent internal

26

symmetries –such as supersymmetry [26] or galileon symmetry [81]– are assumed instead of spatial
SO(3).

Acknowledgements

We thank B. Bellazzini and A. Ramos for discussions. We thank D. Blas for useful comments on the
draft. D.C. and L.P. would also like to thank F. Nesti for enlightening discussions during previous
works. The work of G.B. is funded by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation
programme under the Marie Sk lodowska-Curie grant agreement number 656794. G.B. thanks the
DESY theory group for hospitality while part of this work was developed and the German Science
Foundation (DFG) for funding through the Collaborative Research Center (SFB) 676 “Particles,
Strings and the Early Universe”. G.B. thanks as well the CERN Theoretical Physics Department for
hospitality while this work was completed. G.B. and L.P. would like to thank Nordita (Nordic Institute
for Theoretical Physics) for hosting them during a fruitful workshop. L.P. thanks the Institute de
Physique Th´eorique IPhT CEA-Saclay for hospitality during the preparation of this work.

A Conserved currents and charges

Each of the systems we consider in this paper is characterized by some conserved currents and their
associated charges. These currents and charges have special signiﬁcance for the thermodynamic and
dynamical interpretation of the diﬀerent media. Generically, the currents can be broadly classiﬁed
in two diﬀerent types. First, we have those currents which, by virtue of Noether’s theorem, are due
to the symmetries that deﬁne the Lagrangians of the diﬀerent models. These currents are grouped
in sets of inﬁnite dimension because the deﬁning symmetries are (inﬁnite) subgroups of the internal
diﬀeomorphisms ΦA → ΨA(ΦB). Then, we also have currents that are conserved irrespectively of the
equations of motion. An example of the latter is

where uµ was deﬁned in (3.4). This current is covariantly conserved oﬀ-shell and exists for all the
models we consider (regardless of their symmetries) that involve the spatial St¨uckelberg ﬁelds Φa. It

J µ = −b uµ ,

(A.1)

has often been interpreted as the entropy current for ﬂuid actions of the form S = R d4x U (b), see

e.g. [10, 23], although this is not the only possible interpretation, see e.g. [82].

Independently of whether a current is conserved due to a symmetry of the action or for another
reason, an associated charge that is conserved in time can be deﬁned. In general, given a current J µ
that satisﬁes

the corresponding time-conserved charge is

∇µJ µ = 0 ,

Q =Z d3x√−g J 0 =Z d3Φ

J 0
b u0 ,

(A.2)

(A.3)

which can be proven using the divergence theorem and assuming that the ﬁelds fall of quickly enough

27

at inﬁnity. For instance, in the particular case of the current (A.1), the charge is

V3 = −Z d3Φ ∝ ǫijk ǫ0αβγZ d3x ∂αΦi∂βΦj∂γΦk

(A.4)

˙V3 = 0 due to the antisymmetric character of ǫµαβγ. The physical interpretation of this
and, clearly,
result is that the ﬂux lines of the medium are neither created nor destroyed, which is a topological
statment. In other words, the conservation of V3 means that these continuous media do not have ﬂux
sources nor sinks.

A.1 General volume currents

Let us ﬁrst consider conserved currents that are independent of the internal symmetries. We just
encountered one example of them in (A.1). This type of current can be generalized in a simple way
with a permutation of the ﬁelds ΦA. Concretely, the four currents

ǫµαβγ

J µ
D =

6√−g
are covariantly conserved, and J µ
0 is precisely (A.1). In fact, any four-vector of the form

ǫABCD ∂αΦA∂βΦB∂γΦC , D = 0, 1, 2, 3

where h is an arbitrary function of the ﬁelds ΦA, satisﬁes

D[h(ΦA)] = h(ΦA) J µ
D ,

J µ

∇µJ µ

D[h(ΦA)] = 4

∂h(ΦA)

∂ΦD det(cid:18) ∂ΦB
∂xν (cid:19) .

(A.5)

(A.6)

(A.7)

This allows to construct further conserved currents by simply multiplying any of the currents J µ
D with
a function h that does not depend on the ﬁeld ΦD. The relation (A.7) can be easily proven using the
identity √−g ∇µU µ = ∂µ (√−g U µ), valid for any vector U µ, and the antisymmetry of J µ
D under the

permutation of two ﬁelds ΦA.

A.2 Noether currents

Let us now consider the currents coming from the diﬀerent symmetries that we have considered in
the paper. First of all, we have SO(3)s and the internal shifts (2.1). The ﬁrst one of these two
symmetries leads to the conservation of angular momentum in the internal spatial manifold. The
conservation of the currents associated to the shift symmetries is nothing but the equations of motion
of the St¨uckelber ﬁelds, see (2.5). We will now enumerate the conserved currents due to the additional
symmetries of Section 4.1.

A.2.1 Four-dimensional media

• If the action is invariant under VsDiﬀ, the volume-preserving spatial diﬀeomorphisms in the
space of St¨uckelberg ﬁelds, the operators b, Y and X are selected and the resulting LO medium
is a superﬂuid. The currents associated to this symmetry are known to be related to vorticity

28

conservation, see for instance [9, 10]. These currents are of the form:

J µ
(ε) = −b Ub(B−1)cd∂µΦdεc(Φj) ,

(A.8)

where εa(Φj) satisﬁes ∂εa/∂Φa = 0 . A basis of vorticity charges (in which any other vorticity
charge can be expressed) is constructed choosing εa = ǫabc αb ∂δ3(Φ − ˜Φ)/∂ ˜Φc, with constant
αb, see e.g. [10].

• The covariantly conserved Noether currents associated to the symmetry Φa → Φa + f a(Φ0),

which selects the operators X and wn, are:

J µ
f =

3

Xa=1

f a (Φ0)

3

Xn=1

n Uwn(cid:2)W n−1 · j(cid:3)µ

a ,

where we deﬁne

(A.9)

(A.10)

jµ

a =(cid:0)∂µΦa − CaX −1∂µΦ0(cid:1) .

Each set of three functions {f 1, f 2, f 3} of the temporal St¨uckelberg ﬁeld deﬁnes a diﬀerent
current. By using the unitary gauge expressions (6.5) we interpret Φa → Φa + f a(Φ0) as a
transformation that does not change the slicing of spacetime but modiﬁes the threading with a
time-dependent shift: N → N , N i → N i + N −1∂f i/∂Φ0. Notice the spatial part of the metric,
γij, is invariant under Φa → Φa + f a(Φ0).

• In the case of the symmetry Φ0 → Φ0 + f (Φa), the symmetric LO scalar operators are Y and

τn, and the covariantly conserved currents are:

J µ
f = f (Φa) Y UY uµ .

(A.11)

It seems natural to interpret this set of currents –recall that there is a current for each choice
of the function f – as transporting charges of the ﬂuid in the direction of the four-velocity uµ.
Notice that these currents are parallel to the current (A.1). Therefore, if (A.1) is interpreted
as the entropy current, the currents (A.11) carry charges that ﬂow with the entropy.

• If the symmetry Φ0 → Φ0 + f (Φ0) is imposed, the LO action depends on the operators τn and
Oαβn. The operators τn do not contribute to the conserved currents, since they do not contain
Φ0. The currents in this case are

Y 2 Xα, β, n
where the sums extend over all the Oαβn operators and

J µ
f =

UOαβn

f (Φ0)

(A.12)

jµ
α β γ = α O(α−1)βn ∂µφ0 − (α + β) Y Oαβnuµ + β Oα(β−1)n (Bn)ab C 0a∂µΦb .

(A.13)

As we discussed in Section (4.1), the symmetry Φ0 → Φ0 + f (Φ0) allows at LO an inﬁnite
number of diﬀerent scalars Oαβn. This is because the exponents α and β appearing in the
deﬁnition of Oαβn are arbitrary real numbers (whereas n can take the values 1, 2 or 3). In
consequence the summatoryPα, β, n has to be understood to extend over all the possible values

29

of these parameters, unless some restriction is enforced on them.

A.2.2 Media with reduced internal dimensionality

• We can also consider the case in which the Lagrangian depends only on the temporal St¨uckelberg
ﬁeld, although, as we explained is Section (5.1.3), we do not know of any symmetry that forbids
the spatial St¨uckelberg ﬁelds at LO (and allows them at higher orders). In this case the master
function U depends exclusively on X at LO and the relevant symmetry is the invariance under
Φ0 → Φ0 + c0, with ∂µc0 = 0. This simply tells us that the current

X µ = √

−X UXV µ

(A.14)

is covariantly conserved. The conservation of X µ is precisely the equation of motion for Φ0,
given the master function U (X).

• Analogously, we can consider the case in which only the spatial St¨uckelberg ﬁelds are present.
Since we are assuming always an SO(3)s symmetry this corresponds to the standard solid
U (τn). Notice, again, that we know of no symmetry that prevents the appearance of Φ0 at LO
but reintroduces this ﬁeld at higher orders. Aside from the conservation of internal angular
momentum, due to SO(3)s, there are also the currents associated to the internal translational
invariance Φa → Φa + ca, with ∂µca = 0. This symmetry generates in this case the set of
covariantly conserved currents

tµ = ca

3

Xn=1

n Uτn(cid:0)Bn−1(cid:1)ab

∂µΦb ,

(A.15)

a base of which is obtained by setting, alternatively, ca to 0 or 1 for a = 1, 2 or 3.

The currents associated to SO(3)s invariance have a similar structure. In fact, they can be
formally obtained from the previous ones simply replacing ca by rabΦb, where rab belongs to the
Lie algebra of SO(3)s, and so is antisymmetric. These are just the generators of the angular
momentum in the internal spatial manifold. Therefore, the currents

J µ
r = rabΦb

3

Xn=1

n Uτn(cid:0)Bn−1(cid:1)ab

∂µΦb ,

(A.16)

are also conserved in this case. A basis for this currents can be obtained choosing the matrices
rab as the standard Lx, Ly, Lz generators. The conservation of the currents of this basis are the
equations of motion for the spatial St¨uckelberg ﬁelds.

B A shortcut to count degrees of freedom

We can determine the number of DoF by studying directly to the equations of motion of the
St¨uckelberg ﬁelds (2.5). From the action (2.3) we know that there are at most six DoF, that is:
two from the metric plus those coming from the scalar ﬁelds (≤ 4). The equation (2.5) can be
rewritten in the following form (using the notation UAB = ∂U/∂C AB):

LA =(cid:2)UAB gµν + (UAD,CB + UAD,BC)∇µ ΦC ∇ν ΦD(cid:3) ∇µ∇ν ΦB ≡ Kµν

AB ∇µ∇ν ΦB = 0,

(B.1)

30

where Kµν
order time derivatives of ΦA are always proportional to the matrix kernel K00
St¨uckelberg propagating DoF is

AB contains only ﬁrst derivatives of the ﬁelds. From this expression we see that the second
AB, thus the number of

∆ = Rank[K00

AB] .

(B.2)

To simplify the analysis it is convenient to use the phonons (2.8) and study the system perturbatively.
The coeﬃcient of second order time derivatives of the perturbations are determined by ¯K00
AB ≡
AB |ΦA=xA. From (B.1) we have that ( ¯K00
K00

AB + O(∂π))¨πB = 0 where

AB = ¯LAB g00 + ( ¯LAD,CB + ¯LAD,BC) g0C g0D ,
¯K00

(B.3)

where the overbars mean that the corresponding quantities are evaluated on ΦA = xA. It is easy to
see that ¯K00
AB gives the number of DoF also at the non perturbative level. Indeed, by going to the
unitary gauge we have that Rank[K00
AB] = ∆ and so the counting of DoF is background-independent.
For SO(3)s invariant Lagrangians one ﬁnds the same results obtained applying the Hamiltonian
formalism [11–13], that is:

− for U = L(gAB) we get 4 scalar DoF
− for U = L(gab) +p−g00 ˜L( γab) we get 3 scalar DoF
− for L1 = L(g00, γab) we get 1 scalar DoF
− for L0 =p−g00 ˜L( γab) we get 0 scalar DoF

The Hamiltonian analysis applied to ﬁeld theories allows for a non-integer number of DoF (see [11,13])
while the prescription of (B.2) seems to evade such a problems. For example the naive Hamiltonian

counting of DoF for a master function of the form U = Pa C 0aC 0a/C 00 gives 3+1/2 DoF in the

Hamiltonian formalism and 3 DoF when computed following (B.2). This mismatch is being studied.

References

[1] A. G. Riess et al. [Supernova Search Team Collaboration], Astron. J. 116, 1009 (1998)

S. Perlmutter et al. [Supernova Cosmology Project Collaboration], Astrophys. J. 517, 565 (1999)

[2] P. A. R. Ade et al. [Planck Collaboration], arXiv:1502.01590

[3] P. A. R. Ade et al. [Planck Collaboration], arXiv:1502.01589

[4] R. Laureijs et al. [Euclid Collaboration], arXiv:1110.3193

L. Amendola et al. [Euclid Theory Working Group Collaboration], Living Rev. Rel. 16 (2013) 6
J. Green et al. [WFIRST], arXiv:1208.4012
M. Levi et al. [DESI Collaboration], arXiv:1308.0847
A. Abate et al. [LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration], arXiv:1211.0310

[5] L. Amendola and S. Tsujikawa, Cambridge University Press 2010

E. J. Copeland, M. Sami and S. Tsujikawa, Int. J. Mod. Phys. D 15 (2006) 1753
T. Clifton, P. G. Ferreira, A. Padilla and C. Skordis, Phys. Rept. 513 (2012) 1

[6] S. Weinberg, Rev. Mod. Phys. 61 (1989) 1

31

[7] S. L. Dubovsky, JHEP 0410 (2004) 076

[8] V. A. Rubakov and P. G. Tinyakov, Phys. Usp. 51 (2008) 759

[9] S. Dubovsky, T. Gregoire, A. Nicolis and R. Rattazzi, JHEP 0603, 025 (2006)

[10] G. Ballesteros and B. Bellazzini, JCAP 1304, 001 (2013)

[11] D. Comelli, M. Crisostomi, F. Nesti and L. Pilo, Phys. Rev. D 86, 101502 (2012)

[12] D. Comelli, F. Nesti and L. Pilo, JHEP 1307, 161 (2013)

[13] D. Comelli, F. Nesti and L. Pilo, JCAP 1411, no. 11, 018 (2014)

[14] J. Bhattacharya, S. Bhattacharyya and M. Rangamani, JHEP 1302 (2013) 153

[15] G. Ballesteros, JCAP 1503 (2015) 03, 001

[16] R. M. Wald, General Relativity. University Of Chicago Press (1984)

[17] E. C. G. St¨uckelberg, Helv. Phys. Acta 11 (1938) 225
E. C. G. St¨uckelberg, Helv. Phys. Acta 11 (1938) 299
E. C. G. St¨uckelberg, Helv. Phys. Acta 11 (1938) 312

[18] H. Ruegg and M. Ruiz-Altaba, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 19 (2004) 3265

[19] M. Fierz and W. Pauli, Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A 173, 211 (1939)

[20] H. Leutwyler, Helv. Phys. Acta 70 (1997) 275

[21] H. Leutwyler, Phys. Rev. D 49 (1994) 3033

[22] S. Endlich, A. Nicolis, R. Rattazzi and J. Wang, JHEP 1104, 102 (2011)

[23] S. Dubovsky, L. Hui, A. Nicolis and D. T. Son, Phys. Rev. D 85 (2012) 085029

[24] S. Dubovsky, L. Hui and A. Nicolis, Phys. Rev. D 89 (2014) 4, 045016

[25] A. Nicolis, arXiv:1108.2513

[26] C. Hoyos, B. Keren-Zur and Y. Oz, JHEP 1211 (2012) 152

[27] S. Endlich, A. Nicolis and J. Wang, JCAP 1310 (2013) 011

[28] S. Endlich, A. Nicolis, R. A. Porto and J. Wang, Phys. Rev. D 88 (2013) 105001

[29] A. Nicolis, R. Penco and R. A. Rosen, Phys. Rev. D 89 (2014) 4, 045002

[30] G. Ballesteros, B. Bellazzini and L. Mercolli, JCAP 1405 (2014) 007

[31] B. Gripaios and D. Sutherland, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114 (2015) 7, 071601

[32] L. V. Delacr´etaz, A. Nicolis, R. Penco and R. A. Rosen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114 (2015) 9, 091601

[33] B. Carter and H. Quintana, P. Roy. Soc. Lon. A Mat. 331, 57 (1972).

32

[34] B. Carter, Relativistic ﬂuid dynamics, Springer (1989), pages: 1–64

[35] N. Andersson and G. L. Comer, Living Rev. Rel. 10, 1 (2007)

[36] J. D. Brown, Class. Quant. Grav. 10 (1993) 1579

[37] G. L. Comer and D. Langlois, Class. Quant. Grav. 10 (1993) 2317

[38] G. L. Comer and D. Langlois, Class. Quant. Grav. 11 (1994) 709

[39] A. Gruzinov, Phys. Rev. D 70 (2004) 063518

[40] D. Blas, M. M. Ivanov and S. Sibiryakov, JCAP 1210 (2012) 057

[41] C. Skordis, A. Pourtsidou and E. J. Copeland, Phys. Rev. D 91 (2015) 8, 083537

[42] L. Berezhiani and J. Khoury, Phys. Rev. D 92 (2015) 103510

[43] N. Bartolo, S. Matarrese, M. Peloso and A. Ricciardone, JCAP 1308 (2013) 022

[44] S. Endlich, B. Horn, A. Nicolis and J. Wang, Phys. Rev. D 90 (2014) 6, 063506

[45] D. T. Son, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94 (2005) 175301

[46] B. Carter and H. Quintana, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A. 331, 57 (1972)

J. Kijowski and G. Magli, Joumal of Geometry and Physics 9 207 (1992)
J. Kijowski and G. Magli arXiv: hep-th/9411212.

[47] L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Elasticity Theory: Course of Theoretical Physics, Volume 7

Pergamon Press 1970.

[48] A. F. Bower, Applied mechanics of solids, CRC press 2009

[49] B. Carter, Comm. Math. Phys. 30, 261 (1973)

[50] M. Bucher and D. N. Spergel, Phys. Rev. D 60, 043505 (1999)

[51] G. Ballesteros, D. Comelli, L. Pilo. To appear

[52] S. Matarrese, Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A 401, 53 (1985)

[53] T. Jacobson and D. Mattingly, Phys. Rev. D 64 (2001) 024028

[54] D. Blas, O. Pujolas and S. Sibiryakov, JHEP 1104 (2011) 018

[55] N. Arkani-Hamed, H. C. Cheng, M. A. Luty and S. Mukohyama, JHEP 0405, 074 (2004)

[56] C. Cheung, P. Creminelli, A. L. Fitzpatrick, J. Kaplan and L. Senatore, JHEP 0803 (2008) 014

[57] G. Gubitosi, F. Piazza and F. Vernizzi, JCAP 1302 (2013) 032

[58] E. Kim and M. H. W. Chan, Nature, 427, 225 (2004).

[59] M. Boninsegni and N. V. Prokof’ev, Rev. Mod. Phys. 84 759-776 (2012)

[60] C. G. Callan, Jr., S. R. Coleman, J. Wess and B. Zumino, Phys. Rev. 177 (1969) 2247

33

[61] D. T. Son, hep-ph/0204199

[62] P. Horava, Phys. Rev. D 79 (2009) 084008

[63] D. G. Boulware and S. Deser, Phys. Lett. B 40, 227 (1972).

[64] C. de Rham, G. Gabadadze, A. J. Tolley, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 231101 (2011)

[65] S. F. Hassan and R. A. Rosen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108 (2012) 041101.

[66] G. D’Amico, C. de Rham, S. Dubovsky, G. Gabadadze, D. Pirtskhalava and A. J. Tolley, Phys.

Rev. D 84 (2011) 124046.

[67] N. Arkani-Hamed, H. Georgi and M. D. Schwartz, Annals Phys. 305, 96 (2003)

[68] C. de Rham, A. J. Tolley and S. Y. Zhou, arXiv:1602.03721 [hep-th].

[69] C. de Rham, A. J. Tolley and S. Y. Zhou, arXiv:1512.06838 [hep-th].

[70] H. van Dam and M. J. G. Veltman, Nucl. Phys. B 22 (1970) 397

Y. Iwasaki, Phys. Rev. D 2 (1970) 2255
V. I. Zakharov, JETP Lett. 12 (1971) 198

[71] A. I. Vainshtein, Phys. Lett. B 39, 393 (1972)

[72] E. Babichev, C. Deﬀayet and R. Ziour, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 201102 (2009)

N. Kaloper, A. Padilla and N. Tanahashi, JHEP 1110, 148 (2011)
G. Chkareuli and D. Pirtskhalava, Phys. Lett. B 713, 99 (2012)

[73] D. Blas and E. Lim, Int. J. Mod. Phys. D 23, 1443009 (2015)

[74] V.A. Rubakov, arXiv:hep-th/0407104.

[75] D. Comelli, F. Nesti and L. Pilo, JCAP 1405 (2014) 036

[76] W. Siegel, Phys. Rev. D 49 (1994) 4144

[77] K. Hinterbichler, Rev. Mod. Phys. 84 (2012) 671

[78] R. L. Arnowitt, S. Deser and C. W. Misner, Gen. Rel. Grav. 40 (2008) 1997

[79] D. Blas and S. Sibiryakov, Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 147 (2015) 578

[80] G. Ballesteros, D. Comelli, L. Pilo. To appear

[81] A. Nicolis, R. Penco, F. Piazza and R. Rattazzi, JHEP 1506 (2015) 155

[82] B. F. Schutz, Phys. Rev. D 2 (1970) 2762

34

