6
1
0
2

 

b
e
F
2
2

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
0
5
9
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Helping science and engineering majors to reﬂect upon

teaching and learning issues

Chandralekha Singh, Laura Moin and Christian Schunn

Department of Physics and Astronomy,

Department of Psychology and Learning Research and Development Center

University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, 15260

Abstract

Recruiting and retaining highly qualiﬁed physics and physical science teachers is critical
for maintaining America’s global competitiveness. Unfortunately, only one third of the high
school teachers in physics have a degree in physics and an even smaller number of physi-
cal science teachers in middle school have a good grasp of the scientiﬁc content they teach.
Moreover, teachers often lack adequate pedagogical content knowledge to teach science ef-
fectively. Here, we discuss the development, implementation, and assessment of a course for
science and engineering undergraduates designed to increase awareness and help them de-
velop an interest and a deeper appreciation of the intellectual demands of physics teaching.
The course focused on increasing student enthusiasm and conﬁdence in teaching by provid-
ing well supported teaching opportunities and exposure to physics education research. The
course assessment methods include 1) pre/post-test measures of attitude and expectations
about science teaching, 2) self and peer evaluation of student teaching, 3) content-based
pre/post-tests given to students who received instruction from the student teachers, and 4)
audio-taped focus group discussions in the absence of the instructor and TA to evaluate
student perspective on diﬀerent aspects of the course and its impact.

1 Background

In the recent report “Rising above the gathering storm: energizing and employing America for
a brighter economic future”, a panel of experts convened by the National Academies calls for
immediate eﬀort to strengthen our scientiﬁc competitiveness. [1] Indeed, educating students who
are well-versed in science is critical for preserving our economic competitiveness and leadership.
Physical science lays the foundation for later high school science courses and an understanding of
physics helps students make sense of topics in other science ﬁelds. Therefore, many scientists have
proposed a K-12 science curriculum with “Physics First”. [2, 3, 4, 5]. If the “Physics First” idea
is increasingly adopted in school districts nationwide, the need to recruit and retain well-qualiﬁed
physics and physical science teachers will increase further.

Recent data from American Institute of Physics (AIP) Research Center [6] shows that there are
approximately 23,000 high school physics teachers nationwide. Approximately 1200 new teachers
teach physics each year out of which approximately 400 have a major or minor in physics. [6] The
AIP Statistical Research Center 2000-2001 High School Physics Survey shows that 32% of high

1

school physics teachers are “Specialists” in that they have a physics degree and also have physics
teaching experience, 40% are “Career” physics teachers in that they do not have a physics degree
but have extensive experience in teaching physics, and 28% are “Occasional” physics teachers in
that they neither have a degree nor experience in teaching physics. [6] What is even more troubling
is that the teachers often lack adequate pedagogical content knowledge to teach science. [7, 8] It
is vital to enhance eﬀort to recruit highly qualiﬁed physics and physical science teachers and to
carry out appropriate professional development and mentoring activities for in-service teachers in
high schools and middle schools to ensure that the students they teach develop an appreciation
and deep understanding of science and scientiﬁc method and are well-prepared for a high tech
workplace.

Several programs have been highly successful in providing professional development activities
for in-service physics teachers. Since scientiﬁc inquiry is a sense-making endeavor, these approaches
typically employ a research-based pedagogy in which students learn both science and scientiﬁc
method simultaneously and are constantly engaged in the learning process. These successful
approaches attempt to bridge the gap between the abstract nature of the laws of physics and the
concrete physical situations in which they are applicable. Hands-on and minds-on investigations
are combined with appropriate use of technology and mathematical modeling to enhance student
learning. Students work with their peers and the instructor acts as their guide to ensure that
students build on their prior knowledge and get an opportunity to construct a robust knowledge
structure.

For example, the Physics Teaching Resource Agents (PTRA) program [9] initiated by the
American Association of Physics Teachers (AAPT) in 1985 with support from the National Sci-
ence Foundation and the American Physical Society (APS) is a leading in-service physics profes-
sional development program. A professional development approach that has been used nationwide
to train approximately 2500 physics and physical science teachers is based upon the Modeling
Instruction. [10] Modeling Instruction is a research-based approach for teaching science that was
designated one of the seven best K-12 educational technology programs out of 134 programs in
2000 by the US Department of Education. The Modeling Instruction in Physics was designated
in 2001 by the US Department of Education as one of two exemplary programs in K-12 Science
Education out of 27 programs evaluated. Another research-based approach that has been eﬀec-
tive in preparing both the in-service and the pre-service teachers is based upon the Physics by
Inquiry curriculum developed by the University of Washington Physics Education group. [12] The
Activities Based Physics group has conducted very successful joint professional development work-
shops for K-12 and college faculty members for more than a decade on a variety of pedagogical
approaches related to physics teaching. [13]

Numerous remedies have been attempted to alleviate the shortage of well-trained physics
and physical science teachers. Remedies range from national to local policies and programs and
include such approaches as emergency certiﬁcation and out-of-ﬁeld assignment to ﬁll vacancies;
alternative certiﬁcation programs to hasten licensing requirements and job placement; tapping
nontraditional candidate pools such as paraprofessionals, retired military, or career changers;
providing scholarships, signing bonuses, or student loan forgiveness; and establishing partner-
ships between school districts and teacher preparation institutions to meet staﬃng needs cooper-
atively [11, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20]. Each remedy has certain costs and some degree of success.
However, many remedies must resort to back pedaling to meet content knowledge qualiﬁcations,
calling back to the educational fold those who have already left, or investing in populations who
fail to complete licensing requirements.

2

One of the most accessible potential recruits are science and engineering undergraduates who
have not yet completed their degree. According to a longitudinal research study conducted by
Seymore and Hewitt [22], 20% of science, engineering and mathematics undergraduates at one time
consider careers in math or science teaching, although less than 8% of them hold to the career
interest. One strategy to get more undergraduates interested in majoring in physics and in careers
in physics teaching is revamping of the introductory physics courses. [21] These courses are taken
by most undergraduates interested in majoring in science and engineering and can provide an
opportunity to recruit more physics majors and more undergraduates with an interest in teaching
physics. If these courses are not taught eﬀectively, we are unlikely to produce a higher percentage
of undergraduates with interest in majoring in physics and in a career in physics teaching. [21]

In order to get the undergraduates excited about K-12 teaching, colleges and Universities
must take responsibility for providing the undergraduate students appropriate opportunity, guid-
ance and support. A solid partnership between science and science education departments is a
positive move in this direction. Physics departments in some Universities have taken a lead role
in working with their Schools of Education to provide such opportunities to their undergraduates.
For example, the UTeach program at The University of Texas at Austin has been successful in
forging a partnership with the School of Education to provide a degree in science and a teaching
certiﬁcation simultaneously. [23] Some member institutions of the PhysTEC program, which is a
joint program of APS and AAPT, have been successful in increasing the number of undergraduates
who go into K-12 teaching after graduation. [24] One feature of the PhysTEC program that has
been promising is the Teacher In Residence (TIR) program in which a well-trained teacher acts
as a Liasion between the University and the partnering school district. Some of the PhysTEC
institutions have a Learning Assistants program [25] that provides undergraduate students oppor-
tunities as teaching assistants in college courses to cultivate their interest in teaching. Recently,
a partnership of a large number of institutions called “PTEC” has been formed which provides
a forum for exchanging ideas about physics and physical science teacher preparation via a yearly
conference and a website. [26] Other novel approaches such as involving science undergraduates
as discussion leaders in museums is also being piloted to increase their interest in teaching and to
recruit them as K-12 teachers. [27]

2

Introduction

Here, we discuss the development, implementation and assessment of a course called “Introduction
to physics teaching” for science and engineering undergraduates so that they would consider K-12
teaching as a potential career choice. The course was designed to increase awareness and develop
a deeper appreciation about the intellectual demands of physics teaching. The course attempted
to increase student enthusiasm and conﬁdence in teaching by giving them opportunity to design
instructional modules in pairs and teach in authentic college recitation classes two times during
the semester. We provided signiﬁcant scaﬀolding support and guidance during the development of
the modules but gradually decreased the guidance to ensure that students develop conﬁdence and
self-reliance. The course strived to improve students’ knowledge of pedagogical issues, familiarize
them with cognitive research and its implication for teaching physics, and included extensive
discussions of physics education research including topics related to active engagement, eﬀective
curricula, student diﬃculties in learning diﬀerent physics content, epistemological and aﬀective
issues. Special attention was paid to helping students see the relevance of these discussions to
actual classroom teaching and learning.

3

3 Course Details

The course has been taught twice with a total of 12 students. A majority of students were science
and engineering undergraduates (sophomores-seniors) with two masters students from the school
of education. The cumulative grade point average for the students was between 2.5 to 3.5. At
least a B grade average in introductory physics I and II was mandatory to enroll which was a
requirement imposed by the department of physics because each student pair was required to
conduct two college recitations.

An initial survey in the ﬁrst class period to the students enrolled in the class suggests that a
majority of students had some kind of teaching experience. The most common teaching experience
was tutoring in high school. The survey responses suggest that students felt conﬁdent in teaching
the subject matter they tutored earlier. When asked to rank-order the main reasons for having
taught in the past, the students cited “curiosity” followed by “a sense of being good at it”, followed
by “a desire to work with children”, and “giving back to the community”.

The class met for three hours per week for a semester and students obtained three credits
for it. Students were assigned readings of one or two journal articles about teaching and learning
each week. They submitted answers to the questions assigned about the readings and discussed
the articles in class each week.

We used a ﬁeld-tested “Cognitive Apprenticeship Model” [28] of teaching and learning which
has three major components: modeling, coaching, and fading. Modeling in this context refers to
the instructor demonstrating and exemplifying the criteria of good performance. Coaching refers
to giving students opportunity to practice the desired skills while providing guidance and support
and fading refers to weaning the support gradually so that students develop self-reliance. In the
modeling phase, students worked through and discussed modules from an exemplary curriculum,
Physics by Inquiry [29], in pairs. There was extensive discussion of the aspects of the modules that
make them eﬀective and the goals, objectives, and performance targets that must have lead to the
development of those modules. In the coaching and fading phases, the student pairs developed,
implemented and assessed two introductory physics tutorials and related pre-/post-tests with
scaﬀolding support from the instructor, teaching assistant (TA) and peers.

Students were allowed to choose their partner and they stayed with the same partner for both
tutorials. All student pairs designed the two tutorials on the same broad topics: DC circuits and
electromagnetic induction. Although all student pairs employed the tutorial approach to teaching,
there was ﬂexibility in how to design the tutorial. For example, one group successfully employed
cartoons in their tutorials. Also, students were free to choose the focus of their 25 minute long
tutorial (10+15 minutes were spent on the pre-test and post-test respectively). Each student
group determined the goals and performance targets for their tutorial which was then discussed
during the class. This class discussion was very useful in helping students realize that they needed
to sharpen their focus for a 25 minute tutorial instead of covering every concept in DC circuits
or electromagnetic induction. A majority of the preliminary development of the tutorials and the
accompanying pre-/post-tests took place outside of the class and students iterated versions of the
tutorials with the instructor and TA. Then, each pair tested their pre-/post-tests and tutorials
on fellow classmates and used the discussion and feedback to modify their tutorial. The peers
were very conscientious about providing comments on both the strengths and weaknesses of the
tutorials.

4

4 Course Evaluation

4.1 Evaluating Tutor Eﬀectiveness

The content-based pre-/post-tests accompanying the tutorials were given to the introductory
physics students during the recitation. The typical pre-/post-test scores were 40% and 90% re-
spectively with a Hake normalized gain of 0.8 [30]. We note that the pre-test refers to the test
given after traditional classroom instruction but before the tutorials.

4.2 Evaluating Impact on Tutors

We developed a teaching evaluation protocol based upon an existing protocol (RTOP) [31] which
includes 15 questions on a Likert scale designed to evaluate diﬀerent aspects of teaching. The 15
questions in the protocol were further divided into two parts: the ﬁrst 7 questions were related to
content/lesson plans/class design and the other 8 questions dealt with the class activities during
instruction. The following are some items:

• Class content was designed to elicit students’ prior knowledge and preconceptions and build

new concepts from there.

• The lesson was designed to engage students as members of a learning community: engaged
in talk that builds on each other’s ideas, that is based on evidence and responds to logical
thinking.

• Instructional strategy included useful representational tools (for example, symbols, charts,

tables, and diagrams).

• The activity actively engaged and motivated students rather than having them be passive

receivers.

Each student was required to observe and critique the instruction of at least one other pair in each
of the two rounds in addition to evaluating their own performance. All of the classroom teaching
by the students were videotaped. After each round, we discussed the teaching evaluations of each
group in class to stress the aspects of teaching that were good and those in need of improvement.
We found that the student evaluation of other pairs were quite reliable and consistent with the
instructor and TA evaluation. Students did a good job evaluating the positive and negative
aspects of other group’s instruction. However, self-evaluations were not reliable and students
always rated themselves highly. Students were told that their grades will depend only on the
evaluation conducted by the instructor and the TA and not on the self and peer evaluations and
that the self and peer evaluations were to help them learn to critique various aspects of instruction.
The fact that students rated themselves higher than others may be because they were worried that
the evaluation may factor into their course grade.

There was a clear diﬀerence between diﬀerent student pairs in terms of how eﬀectively they
helped the introductory physics students work on the tutorials in groups. There was a strong cor-
relation between the extent to which group work was motivated and emphasized at the beginning
of the recitation and its beneﬁts explained and whether introductory students worked eﬀectively in
groups. These issues were discussed with the student pairs, and each student pair obtained a copy
of all of their evaluations. They were asked to pay attention to the instructor/TA/peer critiques
of their performance. However, the second performance of each pair was not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent

5

from the ﬁrst. For example, pairs good at employing group work eﬀectively the ﬁrst time did it
well the second time and those who had diﬃculty the ﬁrst time had similar diﬃculties the second
time. More detailed guidance is needed for improving students’ classroom delivery methods.

We also conducted an anonymous survey in the absence of the course instructor at the end of
the course. One of the questions on the survey asked students to rate how the course aﬀected their
interest in becoming a teacher. 56% reported a signiﬁcant positive impact, 34% a positive impact
and 10% no impact. Students noted that they learned about the intellectual rigor of instructional
design from moderate to great extent. On a scale of 1 to 5, students were asked to rate diﬀerent
elements that contributed to learning. They provided the following responses:

• Preparing tutorials and presentations: 4.8/5

• Instructor’s feedback on these: 4.5/5

• Class discussions: 4.3/5

• Rehearsals for their presentation: 4.0/5

• Instructor’s presentations: 4.0/5

• Readings: 3.9/5

We also conducted an audio-taped focus group discussion to obtain useful feedback to evaluate
and improve next oﬀering of the course. The focus group was conducted on the last day of class
in the absence of the instructor and the TA. The facilitator asked students pre-planned questions
for one hour. The questions and some typical responses are presented below:

Question 1: What is the take home message of this course?

• S1: Teaching is more than teacher’s perception. How much of a two way relation is necessary

to teach students.

• S2: Helped me understand that teachers have to learn from students.

• S3: Instruction is more students. There are methods available to make instruction more
suited to students. There is a mountain of cognitive research that is being developed as a
resource for me as a future teacher...that was my biggest fear when we started talking about
bringing instruction to student’s level.

• S4: Increased enthusiasm. You have to take into account student’s level.

• S5:

Increased appreciation of teaching. Opened my eyes to the diﬃculty and diﬀerent

techniques for teaching students with diﬀerent prior knowledge.

• S6: Figuring out diﬀerent ways of making students active and structuring the lessons so that

there is a lot of activity by students to learn on a regular basis.

Question 2: Do you take a diﬀerent perspective during your own classes after you learned something
about how to teach?

• S1: I think now that teachers who don’t teach well could be trained but before the course I

just took it for granted that there are good and there are bad teachers and that’s all.

6

• S2: My college instructors ignore the work being done in how people learn.

• S3: Slightly, because I know how diﬃcult it is. I give more respect to good teachers.

• S4: It gives you an idea about how a teacher cares about the students.

Question 3: What did you learn from your K-12 teaching? How do you compare that to teaching
at the college level?
A common response was that the students had not thought about teaching issues in high school
or till they took this course.

• S1: When I was a student I just took teaching for granted and did what they told me to.

• S2: I never thought about teaching when I was in high school.

• S3: At school most were educators in college not.

Question 4: How did this course aﬀect your interest in teaching? What about your plans for
pursuing teaching?
All students except two said they will teach. A majority explicitly said they plan to teach in high
school.

• S1: Reinforces my interest. Made me realize that I don’t want to teach college because of
the structure of college-lots of material, little support, under-appreciated...I want to have
more time to engage students in the method learned in this course.

• S2: It helped me decide I want to go on to teaching right after college.

• S3: I want to be a teacher. This course aﬀected me positively.

• S4: K-12. Good physics teacher in high school to give good base at young age...early

Question 5: How could this course be improved to enthuse more people to teaching?
One common discouraging response was that students felt they did not really get an opportunity
to teach where the word ”teaching” referred to frontal teaching. Despite the fact that the course
attempted to bridge the gap between teaching and learning, students felt that moving around
the classroom helping students while they worked on the tutorials was not teaching. Common
suggestions included a follow-up class with the following features:

• Observing, critiquing & delivering frontal teaching

• Observing and critiquing K-12 teaching

• Amount of reading per week can be reduced although students appreciated the readings

7

5 Summary

To prepare future scientists and engineers for the demands of a high tech workplace, preparation
of highly qualiﬁed K-12 science teachers is critica [32, 33, 34, 35, 36]. The physics departments
in colleges and Universities must take responsibility to accomplish this important task. We have
developed, implemented and assessed a course for science undergraduates to increase their interest
and awareness about teaching issues. In addition to extensive discussions about issues related to
teaching and learning, student pairs designed and implemented two tutorials in college recitation
classes. Assessment methods include pre-/post-tests of expectation and attitude about teaching,
content-based pre-/post-tests before and after tutorials designed by students, critiquing peers and
self-evaluation of teaching and focus group discussions.

References

[1] Rising above the gathering storm: Energizing and employing America for a bright economic

future, The National Academies Press, 2005.
Available online at http://www.nap.edu/books/0309100399/html

[2] L. M. Lederman, “Physics First?” The Phys. Teacher 43, 6, (2005).

[3] A. Hobson, “Considering Physics First” The Phys. Teacher 43, 485 (2005).

[4] O. Dreon Jr., “A Study of Physics First Curricula in Pennsylvania” The Phys. Teacher 44,

521, (2006).

[5] B. Bessin, “Why Physics First?” The Phys. Teacher, 45, 134, (2007).

[6] http://www.aip.org/statistics/

[7] L. S. Shulman, Those Who Understand: Knowledge Growth in Teaching. Educational Re-

searcher, 15(2), 4-14, (1986).

[8] L. S. Shulman, Knowledge and Teaching: Foundations of the New Reform. Harvard Educa-

tional Review, 57(1), 1-22, (1987).

[9] http://www.aapt.org/Programs/projects/PTRA/

[10] http://modeling.asu.edu/

[11] National Science Teachers Association, NSTA releases nationwide survey of science teacher
credentials, assignments, and job satisfaction. Arlington, VA, 2000: N.S.T.A. Retrieved from
http://www.nsta.org/survey3/

[12] Physics by Inquiry, L.C. McDermott and the Physics Education Group at the University of

Washington, Volumes I and II, Wiley, NY, 1996.

[13] For example, see

[14] American Association for Employment in Education, Inc., Educator Supply and Demand
from

in
www.rnt.org/channels/clearinghouse/becometeacher/121 − teachershort.htm

Columbus,

OH:

AAEE,

2000.

Retrieved

the

United

States.

8

[15] L. Gafney and M. Weiner, Finding future teachers from among undergraduate science and

mathematics majors. Phi Delta Kappa, 76, 637-641, 1995.

[16] S. Shugart and P. Houshell, Subject matter competence and the recruitment and retention of

secondary science teachers. J. Research Science Teach., 32, 63-70, 1995.

[17] B. C. Clewell, and L.B. Forcier, Increasing the number of math and science teachers: A review

of teacher recruitment programs. Teaching and Change, 8(4), 331-361, 2001.

[18] B. C. Clewell, and A.M. Villegas, Absence unexcused: Ending teacher shortages in high-
need areas. Washington, DC: Urban Institute. Retrieved from www.urgan.org/url.cf m?ID =
310379, 2001.

[19] U.S. Department of Education, America’s teachers: Proﬁle of a profession, 1993-94. NCES
97-460, 1997. Washington, DC: National Center for Education Statistics. Retrieved from http :
//nces.ed.gov/pubsearch/pubsinf o.asp?pubid = 97460

[20] U.S. Department of Education, Teacher recruitment programs: Planning and Evaluation

Service. Oﬃce of the Under Secretary. Washington, DC: The Urban Institute, 2000.

[21] L.C. McDermott, Guest Editorial, Preparing K-12 teachers in physics: Insights from history,

experience, and research, Am. J. Phys. 74 (9) 758-762 (2006).

[22] E. Seymore and N. Hewitt, Talking about leaving: Why undergraduates leave the sciences.

Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1997.

[23] For example see http://uteach.utexas.edu/

[24] For example see http://www.phystec.org/

[25] V. Otero, N. Finkelstein, R. McCray and S. Pollock, Who is responsible for preparing science

teachers?, Science, 313, 445-446, (2006).

[26] For example, see http://www.compadre.org/ptec/

[27] For example, see information about CLUSTER (Collaboration for leadership in urban science

teaching) at http://www.sci.ccny.cuny.edu/ rstein/Cluster/cluster.html

[28] A. Collins, J. S. Brown, and S. E. Newman, Cognitive Apprenticeship: Teaching the crafts of
reading, writing and mathematics, in L. B. Resnick (Ed.), Knowing, learning, and instruction:
Essays in honor of Robert Glaser, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum., 453-494, 1989.

[29] L. McDermott and PER group at university of Washington, Physics by Inquiry Vol I and II,

Wiley 1996.

[30] R. R. Hake, Interactive-engagement versus traditional methods, Am. J. Phys. 66, 64 (1998).

[31] http://physicsed.buﬀalostate.edu/AZTEC/RTOP/RTOP-full/index.htm

[32] S. Shugart and P. Houshell, (2001). Subject matter competence and the recruitment and

retention of secondary science teachers. J. Research Science Teach., 32, 63-70.

[33] L. S. Shulman, (1986). Those who understand: Knowledge growth in teaching. Educational

Researcher, 15(2), 4-14.

9

[34] L. S. Shulman, (1987). Knowledge and teaching: Foundations of the new reform. Harvard

Educational Review, 57(1), 1-22.

[35] C. Singh and C. D. Schunn (2009). Connecting three pivotal concepts in K-12 science state
standards and maps of conceptual growth to research in physics education, J. Phys. Tchr.
Educ. Online, 5(2), 16-42.

[36] C. J. Wenning (2009), The new Aristotelianism?, Editorial, J. Phys. Tchr. Educ. Online, 5(2),

1-2.

10

