6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
2

.

 
 
]
E
H
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

2
v
2
6
9
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Which Epeak? – The Characteristic Energy of Gamma-Ray Burst

Spectra

Robert Preece

Space Science Department, The University of Alabama in Huntsville, Huntsville, AL 35809

Space Science Oﬃce, VP62, NASA/Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, AL 35812

Adam Goldstein

Center for Space Plasma and Aeronomic Research, The University of Alabama in Huntsville, Huntsville,

Narayana Bhat and Matthew Stanbro

AL 35809

Jon Hakkila

The University of Charleston, SC at the College of Charleston 29424

and

Dylan Blalock

Physics Department, The University of Alabama in Huntsville, Huntsville, AL 35809

ABSTRACT

A characteristic energy of individual gamma-ray burst (GRB) spectra can in most cases be
determined from the peak energy of the energy density spectra (νFν), called ‘Epeak’. Distributions
of Epeak have been compiled for time-resolved spectra from bright GRBs, and also time-averaged
spectra and peak ﬂux spectra for nearly every burst observed by CGRO-BATSE and Fermi-GBM.
Even when determined by an instrument with a broad energy band, such as GBM (8 keV to 40
MeV), the distributions themselves peak at around 240 keV in the observer’s frame, with a spread
of roughly a decade in energy. Epeak can have considerable evolution (sometimes greater than
one decade) within any given burst, as amply demonstrated by single pulses in GRB110721A and
GRB130427A. Meanwhile, several luminosity or energy relations have been proposed to correlate
with either the time-integrated or peak ﬂux Epeak. Thus, when discussing correlations with
Epeak, the question arises, “Which Epeak?”. A single burst may be characterized by any one of
a number of values for Epeak that are associated with it. Using a single pulse simulation model
with spectral evolution as a proxy for the type of spectral evolution observed in many bursts,
we investigate how the time-averaged Epeak emerges from the spectral evolution within a single
pulse, how this average naturally correlates with the peak ﬂux derived Epeak in a burst and how
the distribution in Epeak values from many bursts derives its surprisingly narrow width.

Subject headings: (stars:) gamma-ray burst: general — methods: data analysis

1

1.

Introduction

Unquestionably, a characteristic energy can be
an important diagnostic feature of the spectra
of cosmological sources.
If the sources are stan-
dard in some way, with identiﬁable atomic or
nuclear lines, for example, the energy measure-
ment could then directly correspond with dis-
tance via the cosmological redshift. From early
on, analyses of the prompt emission of gamma-ray
bursts (GRBs) revealed that a spectral break typ-
ically occurred within the instrumental pass band
of scintillator-based detectors – between approx-
imately 20 keV to 1 MeV (Mazets & Golenet-
skii 1995; Metzger et al. 1974; Harris & Share
1998). The spectral break can take on the form of
an exponentially-attenuated power-law; in which
case, it had been associated with an optically-thin
thermal bremsstrahlung temperature. However,
many burst spectra are typically harder than ther-
mal, with a high-energy tail that may be charac-
terized by a power law. This led Band et al. (1993)
to propose an entirely phenomenological spectral
form that is the unique function joining two power
laws that is continuous and smooth to ﬁrst order:
the ‘Band’ GRB function. This function ﬁnds its
most familiar form in equation 1, in a parametriza-
tion where the break energy is cast as the peak in
the spectral energy distribution (E2fBand(E) or
νFν): Epeak.

exp

− E (2 + α)

Epeak

≡ Ebreak,

if E <

(cid:19)α

100 keV
(α − β) Epeak

(cid:18) E
(cid:20) (α − β) Epeak
(cid:18) E
exp (β − α)
if E ≥ (α − β) Epeak

(2 + α)

(2 + α) 100 keV

(2 + α)

.

100 keV

(cid:18)
(cid:21)(α−β) ×
(cid:19)β

fBand(E) = A

fBand(E) = A

From the form of the function, both α and β are
power law indices in photon number. Because of
the pre-factor E2 in the deﬁnition of νFν, Epeak
is only deﬁned for values of β less than −2 (as
is typical). For large negative values of β, we re-
cover thermal-like spectra, guaranteed to yield a
value for Epeak as long as α > −2. With three
shape parameters, the Band function is ﬂexible

enough to stand in for a number of physical pro-
cesses likely to occur in GRBs, including black-
body emission, synchrotron emission by thermal
or power law electrons, as well as Compton scat-
tering in any of its various guises. However, the
Band function has a speciﬁc constant curvature
that does not match any of these in detail, es-
pecially in the region where the two power law
segments join (e.g.: see ﬁgure 8 in Burgess et al.
(2014)).

For the purposes of the current work, it is more
convenient to use a cut-oﬀ model power-law (the
so-called COMP function in the spectral ﬁtting
package RMFIT1), which is identical to the Band
function in the limit β → −∞. The COMP func-
tional form can also be cast in terms of Epeak, as
shown in equation 2.

(cid:18) E

(cid:19)α

100 keV

(cid:18)

exp

− E (2 + α)

Epeak

(cid:19)

.

fCOMP(E) = A

(2)
There are several reasons that drive our choice of
this function for the simulations described below.
First, for most bursts where the spectral evolution
can be determined as a function of time, it is pos-
sible to create time slices that can track the evo-
lution of Epeak (and α) with good precision, while
for the same temporal accumulations, β can not
be determined with any precision. The reason for
this is that both the eﬀective area and the ﬂux fall
rapidly with increasing energy, resulting in too few
counts above Epeak to determine the spectrum. In-
deed, one of the results from the Compton Obser-
vatory’s Burst And Transient Source Experiment
(BATSE) Catalog of time-resolved spectroscopy of
bright bursts (Kaneko et al. 2006) was that the
COMP function was preferred over the Band func-
tion in a majority of the spectra ﬁt (34.9% vs.
33.7% for the BEST model; see Table 8 in the Cat-
alog). It is possible that some GRB spectra arise
from synchrotron emission from thermal electrons,
especially just after the photosphere has become
optically thin. In that case, the emission should re-
semble the COMP function with α ∼ −2/3. Even
when a Band function ﬁt is preferred, for exam-
ple, as in the spectral analysis of the ﬁrst pulse of
the bright GRB 130427A (Preece et al. 2014), the

1RMFIT version 4.4.2 was used throughout this work. RM-
FIT is publicly available at NASA’s HEASARC website:
http://Fermi.gsfc.nasa.gov/ssc/data/analysis/rmﬁt.

(cid:19)

(1)

2

Band β parameter was required to be held ﬁxed
for each 0.1 s accumulation; otherwise, the extra
free parameter creates instabilities in the ﬁts to
the other parameters, due to their high degree of
cross-correlation (as noted in, e.g., Kaneko et al.
(2006)). Finally, the sum of several exponentials
evolving under under certain conditions can ap-
proximate a power law, as we shall show below.
Conversely, the sum of many power laws with dif-
ferent spectral indicies is guaranteed not to result
in a power law. It is one of the outstanding ques-
tions of GRB spectroscopy why the data should
ever be consistent with the Band function.

As mentioned above, assuming it represents a
characteristic energy, Epeak is the unique spectral
parameter that encodes relative motion between
the source and the observer. Given that GRB
redshifts have been measured for many events,
the distribution of these currently falls between
z ≈ 0.01 (Galama et al. 1998) and z ≈ 9.4 (Cuc-
chiara et al. 2011), with a peak between z = 1 and
2. Without any other consideration, we might ex-
pect the distribution of Epeak to follow the red-
shift distribution, with the smallest values cor-
responding with the largest redshifts. However,
there is good reason to suspect that the GRB emis-
sion arises within a relativistic blast wave (Rees
& M´esz´aros 1994). Any characteristic energy, as
seen in the observer’s frame, should thus also be
multiplied by the bulk Lorentz factor Γ:

Eobs = EsrcΓ/(z + 1),

(3)

where the characteristic energy at the source is
Esrc. Under the most common assumptions, a
limit on the bulk Lorentz factor can be deter-
mined as follows: the blast wave must be optically
thin to its own photons, otherwise it would still
be a ﬁreball, due to photon-photon pair produc-
tion. The emission from a relativistic blast wave is
highly beamed, raising the pair-production energy
threshold to 1 MeV Γ/γ > 1, for photons with en-
ergies of γ, in units of the electron’s rest energy. A
more careful treatment would have to include de-
tails of the spectrum against which the highest en-
ergy photon is scattering (Baring & Harding 1997;
Baring 2006). Thus, in the simplest case, if a pho-
ton with energy γ is observed, it puts a limit on
the bulk Lorentz factor Γ > γ. Thus, Γ, as deter-
mined by the maximum observed photon energy,
is found to vary from burst to burst. The intrinsic

3

variability of the central engine or the possibility
that relativistic shock collisions accelerate parti-
cles at the expense of Γ (Rees & M´esz´aros 1994),
make it very likely that Γ is expected to vary dur-
ing a burst. All of these factors are reﬂected in
the observed values and evolution of Epeak.

However, it is clearly true that Epeak arises from
some physical emission process, so on top of the
known sources of potential variation on the ob-
served quantity, there is an unknown intrinsic dis-
tribution in Epeak that is related to the underlying
physical processes. This intrinsic distribution may
be quite wide, as can be seen in the time-resolved
spectra of single-pulse bursts where the redshift is
known, like GRB110721A (Axelsson et al. 2012)
and the ﬁrst pulse of GRB130427A (Preece et
al. 2014). In each of these, hard-to-soft spectral
evolution was observed, with Epeak varying over
considerably greater than one decade in energy.
Despite the supposition that each of the contri-
butions to the variation in Epeak should operate
completely independently, the overall distribution
of ﬁtted values of Epeak is less than a decade in
width (e.g.: Figure 1, discussed below), whether
the distribution is drawn from the average spectra
of a large sample of bursts (Goldstein et al. 2013;
Nava et al. 2012; Gruber et al. 2014) or from sta-
tistically independent time-resolved spectra from
bright bursts (Kaneko et al. 2006). Much has
been made of broad correlations between Epeak
and other measured quantities, such as the total
(isotropic) energy, as in the relation of Amati et
al. (2002). Such relations could be useful for ob-
taining red-shifts directly from spectral measure-
ments, for example. However, several groups have
analyzed such relations and claim that they are
artifacts of selection eﬀects (Nakar & Piran 2005;
Band & Preece 2005; Schaefer & Collazzi 2007).

For those spectra where Epeak values could be
determined reliably, the distribution roughly re-
sembles a log-normal function of approximately a
decade in width (e.g.: the ’GOOD’ set as seen
in Figure 11 from Kaneko et al. (2006)). The
speciﬁc shape of the distribution is not speciﬁed
by any theory; so the paucity of low- and high-
energy Epeak values has widely been attributed to
detector selection eﬀects. Still, it is not known
why Epeak should not be evenly distributed be-
tween the lowest and highest energy bounds of
the detector.
It was speculated that once the

amine herein various factors that can aﬀect the
observed values of Epeak. First of all, in section 2,
we examine the limits of detectability of a single
value for Epeak from simulations of spectra of in-
creasingly diminished intensity. Next, in section 3,
we look at simulations of hard-to-soft pulses and
the role of spectral evolution in the determination
of average values of Epeak. In section 4, we look at
simulations of multiple, overlapping hard-to-soft
pulses. Finally, we examine some intrinsic corre-
lations that arise naturally in pulses with spectral
evolution.

2. Limits on Epeak Detectability

By simulating ∼ 15000 diﬀerent spectra via
varying all Band function parameters on a spec-
tral grid using GBM responses, we can study the
eﬃciency of recovering Epeak. Figure 2 shows the
fraction of Band function ﬁts that include the sim-
ulated true value of Epeak within the 1σ uncer-
tainty, marginalizing over all inputs of the ampli-
tude, alpha, and beta. We ﬁnd that Epeak can
be reliably recovered between ∼ 20 keV–40 MeV.
Considering that the GBM bandpass is 8 keV–40
MeV, nearly all Epeak values that exist within the
GBM band can be reliably recovered via spectral
ﬁtting. The low point at 600 keV represents a
roughly 1 – 2 σ ﬂuctuation. Because the estima-
tion and constraint of the Band function curvature
is dependent on the low-energy index, Epeak val-
ues < 20 keV observed by GBM are unlikely to be
constrained because there is insuﬃcient data to
constrain the low-energy index. In this case, the
spectrum would appear similar to a simple power
law with an index similar to the index of the Band
high-energy index. Figure 27b in Goldstein et al.
(2013) presents a similar set of simulations with
BATSE with similar ﬁndings. Due to the nar-
rower energy band of BATSE (20-2000 keV) with
respect to GBM, there was also an apparent de-
crease in accuracy if Epeak existed above the de-
tector band, although the loss of accuracy was not
as dramatic compared to the low-Epeak case. The
interpretation for the high-Epeak case is that as
long as the low-energy index is reasonably con-
strained and some curvature is measurable within
the detector band, then it is possible to estimate
Epeak, albeit with less accuracy and constraint. It
is in part to avoid the issue of the interplay be-
tween ﬁtting Epeak and β in the Band function

Fig. 1.— Histograms of the Epeak values derived
from ﬂuence-averaged spectra, comprised of 1297
BATSE bursts (grey - Goldstein et al. (2013)) and
680 GBM bursts (red - Gruber et al. (2014)). The
extended spectral coverage of GBM clearly shows
up in the enhancement of bursts found in the low-
and high-energy wings. The widths of the two
distributions are qualitatively similar.

Fermi Gamma-ray Burst Monitor (GBM) ﬂew, the
question of the reality of the high-energy cutoﬀ of
this distribution would be settled (Piran, Sari &
Mochkovitch 2012).
It has; the Epeak distribu-
tion cutoﬀ for GBM, relative to BATSE, does not
change all that much, even though GBM has the
medium-energy (200 keV to 40 MeV) range of the
BGO detectors to contribute to the spectral ﬁt-
ting. Figure 1 shows a comparison between the
ﬂuence (average spectrum) Epeak values between
the BATSE and GBM data sets (Goldstein et al.
2013; Gruber et al. 2014), indicating that GBM
extends the distribution by including more lower
and higher energy values. That is not to say that
there are no spectra with large values of Epeak,
just that the majority of ﬁtted Epeak values clus-
ter around a 200 keV value. Certainly, there is no
‘undiscovered country’ of Epeakvalues clustering in
the MeV range. We will explore why this might
be in this paper.

In order to facilitate understanding of the im-
portant role Epeak plays in the various observed
correlations with other burst observables, we ex-

4

energy range) with good correlation. Hakkila &
Preece (2011) and Lu et al. (2010) have both sug-
gested that the tracking behavior may arise when
several pulses are run together, so that they many
not be clearly distinguished. We will also ad-
dress this below.
In many cases, the rising por-
tion may be too short, compared with the de-
cay, to be able to determine any trend in Epeak;
this is common with weaker events, especially if
there is only a single spectrum in the rising por-
tion before the peak that is signiﬁcant enough
to obtain a ﬁt. We take this as a motivation
for our hypothesis: that signal-to-noise sampling
under-emphasizes the lowest and highest energies,
which are found preferentially on the rise and de-
cay portions of pulses (true for both HTS and HIT
pulses), resulting in the observed narrow distribu-
tions.

In this section, we will concentrate on bright,
single pulses with HTS behavior. There is ample
motivation for this: several very bright bursts are
either composed of single pulses or have at least
one well-separated pulse with clear HTS evolution.
In several of these cases, the temporal evolution
of Epeak is that of a −1 power law throughout.
Since the picture becomes more complicated when
physical processes are used to model the emission
(in the case of Burgess et al. (2014); Preece et al.
(2014), the sum of blackbody and synchrotron was
used and the resulting temporal evolution of the
characteristic energy was more consistent with a
broken power law), we will restrict ourselves here
to the evolution of the COMP function parame-
ters.

3.1. A Model Pulse with Spectral Evolu-

tion

We start out with a simple simulation of a sin-
gle pulse with HTS spectral evolution. Following
Norris et al. (2005) and Hakkila & Preece (2011),
we adopt a parameterized pulse proﬁle:

p(t) = exp (−τ1/(t − tstart) − (t − tstart)/τ2) ,

(4)
where τ1 and τ2 are the rise and decay times of the
pulse and the onset of the pulse is at time tstart.
In terms of these parameters, the duration of the
pulse is approximately

(cid:113)

9 + 12(cid:112)τ1/τ2.

tdur = τ2

5

(5)

Fig. 2.— Plot of the fraction of Band function
ﬁts that contain the simulated input Epeak en-
ergy within the 1σ conﬁdence interval of the ﬁts.
The simulations were performed over a grid of am-
plitude, alpha, beta, and Epeak values and the
plot marginalizes over all parameters except Epeak.
The orange region denotes the GBM energy range.

that we choose to perform our pulse spectral evo-
lution simulations with the COMP function, as
discussed above.

3. Hard-to-soft Epeak Evolution in Pulses

Recent work has ﬁrmly established that pulses,
deﬁned as an emission episode with a rise in
brightness to a peak followed by a decay, are the
prime building blocks that make up the prompt
emission light curve in GRBs (Hakkila & Cum-
bee 2009). One piece of evidence supporting this
conclusion is the observation of temporal evolu-
tion of Epeak throughout many bright,
isolated
pulses.
In the hard-to-soft (HTS) case, Epeak
evolves smoothly (in many cases as a power law)
from an initial high value at the onset of the pulse,
through the rising portion, the peak and the de-
caying portion to a ﬁnal low energy when the pulse
can no longer be detected (Lu et al. 2010; Norris
et al. 1996; Axelsson et al. 2012; Preece et al. 2014;
Burgess et al. 2014). Another behavior, called
hardness-intensity ‘tracking’ (HIT), is where the
ﬁtted value of Epeak follows the pulse intensity
(expressed as integrated counts over a standard

110100100010000Input Epeak (keV)0.00.20.40.60.81.0Fraction within 1 (cid:109)Next, we can specify a power-law temporal evo-
lution for Epeak from Ehi to Elo over the pulse
duration tdur by the power-law index:

i = ln(Ehi/Elo)/ ln(tdur + 1).

(6)

Finally, the power-law behavior of Epeak is ex-
pressed as:

Epeak(t) = Ehi (t − tstart + 1)

−i .

(7)

All of these quantities are so far continuous; we
must discretize the time t into ﬁnite width time
bins. To simulate a pulse, we then evaluate a pho-
ton function for the changing value of Epeak in
each of the time bins. In the following, we use the
exponentially-attenuated cut-oﬀ power law form
of Eq. 2. This simpliﬁes the analysis for the rea-
sons discussed above: excluding the possible evo-
lution of β, which could lead to complications in
the analysis. The photon function is converted
to counts data by multiplication by a detector re-
sponse matrix (DRM). For this to work, the energy
bins of the photon function must match those of
the speciﬁc DRM chosen. Diﬀerent instruments
will have diﬀerent numbers of ‘input’ photon en-
ergy bins, as well as ‘output’ energy-loss bins on
the counts side that match a speciﬁc instrument’s
data types. For this study, we use GBM DRMs
from a triggered burst that have 128 output en-
ergy bins, corresponding to the CSPEC or TTE
data types (Meegan et al. 2009). The result is a
realization of a single pulse that consists of a 2D
set of numbers that represents count rates in time
and energy.

To simulate the correct counts statistics of an
observed burst, we ﬁrst scale the rates to produce
some desired peak intensity. This peak count rate
is multiplied into the entire 2D pulse model. We
then add the background rate (as described below)
to obtain a total model rate. Finally, we simulate
the observed counts statistics by multiplying the
total rates by the bin width in time to get to-
tal model counts for each time and energy bin.
The counts are resampled randomly according to
the Poisson distribution to obtain simulated ob-
served counts. The total number of counts in each
time bin determines the deadtime according to
the GBM electronics model (Meegan et al. 2009).
Together with the pulse model and background
counts, these are saved in a FITS ﬁle that mimics

6

actual GBM data. Note that Basak & Rao (2012)
have a similar procedure of pulse spectral evolu-
tion simulation, used for ﬁtting burst lightcurves
and spectra simultaneously. They used the Epeak
evolution model of Liang & Kargatis (1996).

In real data, there is a certain level of back-
ground noise rate in each energy channel, usually
changing (hopefully slowly) as a function of time.
Modeling the background is important as it sets
the scale of the signal versus noise for the entire
simulation. Since our pulse model has an exponen-
tial rise and decay in time, it will be important
to determine which spectra from our simulation
have enough total counts to be usable for spec-
troscopy and which spectra may have to be added
together (binned) with others in order to meet a
preferred level of signiﬁcance. In order to reduce
the variance (especially important for low count
spectral bins at higher energies), we start with a
long background accumulation from actual burst
data. Following our procedure for the BATSE and
GBM spectroscopy catalogs (Kaneko et al. 2006;
Goldstein et al. 2013; Gruber et al. 2014) we ﬁt a
low-order (≤ 4) polynomial to the temporal varia-
tions of the background and interpolate the ﬁtted
model during the burst interval. Usually, we se-
lect regions for background ﬁtting both before and
after the burst, to avoid the need to extrapolate
the background model. Since the background is
ﬁt to a polynomial in time in each energy bin, the
variance associated with each bin is governed by
the Gaussian statistics of the background tempo-
ral model parameters (the ﬁtted polynomial coef-
ﬁcients). This variance is recovered in our simula-
tions by resampling the background counts from a
normal distribution, given the background model
error for that bin.

The resulting simulated pulse is remarkably
simple, yet it reproduces a number of characteris-
tics of observed single pulses. First of all, the light
curve clearly mimics the observations, as expected,
given that the Norris pulse model was designed
for this purpose (e.g. Figure 3). We should men-
tion that a pulse stacking analysis by Hakkila &
Preece (2014) has shown that signiﬁcant residuals
exist on top of the Norris pulse shape that do not
represent separate pulses; for example, there is a
shoulder after the peak in Figure 3 at T+3 s as well
as in the published GBM NaI light curve for GRB
130427A at roughly T+1.2 s. To keep the analysis

simple, we do not include this eﬀect here. Upon
performing spectral ﬁtting of each time bin, the
simulated power-law Epeak evolution from hard to
soft (Ehi = 1500 keV and Elo = 100 keV) is recov-
ered from the simulation, as can be seen in Figure
4.
In this simulation, the peak count rate was
chosen to be extremely high, 40,000 count/s, even
so, during the rise and decay portion of the pulse
some low-count time bins had to be combined to
achieve a minimum signal to noise threshold of 45.
This threshold ensures that there are enough to-
tal counts in the binned spectra to do useful spec-
troscopy, as described in the BATSE and GBM
Spectroscopy Catalogs.

We have checked the eﬀect of the spectral pa-
rameter α by performing three identical simula-
tions, varying only the α value in three steps be-
tween −0.66 and −1.2, bracketing the most likely
ﬁtted value of −1 from the distributions reported
in the various spectroscopy catalogs. For the three
values simulated, there was no change in the mean
value of Epeak for the resulting distributions to
well within the uncertainty on the mean: 177 ± 2
keV (these and following simulations are based on
Ehi = 3000 keV and Elo = 50 keV). This is ex-
pected, as Epeak does not formally depend upon
α (nor does it depend upon the Band parameter
β, as long as β < −2). As discussed above, we do
not present any simulations of Band functions, so
the evolution of β is not considered here.

3.2. Spectral Lag and Pulse Width Evolu-

tion

This simulation of the temporal evolution of
spectral parameters allows us to compare it with
certain other properties of observed pulses, such
as the spectral lag and pulse-width evolution as a
function of energy, as characterized in the initial
pulse of GRB 130427A (Preece et al. 2014). Be-
cause the simulations and the spectral ﬁts share
the same power law evolution model, the sim-
ulation reproduces the lag-width relation of the
real data, when the lag is taken with respect to
a ﬁxed low energy channel. That is: the spec-
tral lag increases as a function of increasing en-
ergy (Kocevski & Liang (2003); see Figure 5). In
addition, the pulse width decreases with increas-
ing energy (Richardson et al. (1996); see Figure
6). Except for the factor of ten increase in the
timescales associated with the simulations, these

Fig. 4.— Fitted Epeak values from an example
pulse simulation shows that the input −1 power
law spectral evolution is recovered after signal-to-
noise temporal binning and forward-folding with
the detector response. In this case, the pulse pa-
rameters were 3 s rise time, 11 s decay time, scaled
to 40,000 count/s at the peak. Epeak evolves from
1500 keV to 100 keV over the nominal duration of
the pulse.

results are qualitatively consistent with the results
presented in Figure 1 in Preece et al. (2014). One
can visualize how this behavior arises by examin-
ing the joint temporal-spectral model as a contour
plot. In Figure 7, we compare the ﬁtted data from
GRB130427A with the ﬁtted data from our simu-
lated pulse. Log energy is on the horizontal axis,
while time is along the vertical. The energy of the
peak in νFν (i.e.: Epeak) is traced over time by the
dashed red line and can clearly be seen to exhibit
a hard-to-soft trend, as indicated by movement to-
ward the left in the plot. A vertical cut or band
corresponds to a speciﬁc energy. The pulse peaks
appear later in the lower energy bands, which is
the source of the spectral lag. At the same time,
the temporal power-law nature of Epeak ensures
that an increasing number of spectra with similar
Epeak values are found in a given accumulation
time with respect to similar accumulations at the
start of the pulse, where the spectra are varying
more rapidly. This is the source of the increase in
pulse temporal width with lower energy. It is in-
teresting to speculate how this might be extended
in the opposite direction in time with respect to
the highest peak energies. The observed trend is

7

Fig. 3.— The GRB 110721A lightcurve from GBM NaI detector 9 at 256 ms time resolution shows some
deviation from a simple pulse proﬁle at the peak (left). Compare with a simulation derived from the Norris
pulse model, with 3 s rise and 5 s decay time constants and 3000 count/s peak count rate scaling above
background (right). The two ﬁgures are presented with the same x-axis limits; however no attempt was
made to optimise the pulse parameters to make the simulated pulse proﬁle match with the GBM data.

that the pulse width becomes increasingly narrow
with higher energies at the same time that the
pulse peak lag gets shorter, so that the temporal
width approaches zero. The limiting result is that
the highest energy photons are all conﬁned to a
very short time window very close to the GBM
trigger time. Of course, real detectors are limited
to counting photons, where the continuum model
must break down. We note that there is a cluster
of 3 Fermi LAT high-energy (> 100 MeV) photons
in a 0.1 s window at or just before the GBM trig-
ger time of GRB130427A, followed by a gap of 5
s.

The high intensity of this initial simulation al-
lows us to examine the results with high tempo-
ral resolution.
In particular, we can bin the ﬁt-
ted Epeak values according to number of occur-
rences in log energy, the result is shown in Figure
8. We have simulated a larger sample of spec-
tra by using the time-resolved spectral ﬁts from
ﬁfty simulations of bursts of varying brightness
and diﬀerent rise and decay parameters (Figure
9). The spectra were drawn from the set of simu-
lations described below in Section 3.5, all binned
to the same signal-to-noise criterion. Thus, the
brightest simulated bursts contributed the most
spectra at the highest temporal resolutions, while
the dimmest bursts contributed few spectra, taken
with relatively coarser binning. Clearly, as with
the dimmer bursts from the actual observations,

the longer temporal accumulations can average
over signiﬁcant spectral evolution in a single spec-
trum.

The pulse histogram in Figure 8 clearly has
the largest contribution from the portion in the
lightcurve that is the most densely sampled; that
is: from the region around the peak in the light
curve, where Epeak doesn’t change much. This is a
sampling bias that can be seen even more dramat-
ically in a histogram of the photon ﬂux (Figure
10), which is sharply concentrated at the ﬂux val-
ues near the peak of the lightcurves. Where Epeak
is highest and lowest, the lightcurve is rapidly
changing during the rise and decay portions, re-
spectively, and thus the sampling of Epeak val-
ues is relatively sparser than at the peak of the
lightcurve.

3.3. The Eﬀect of Evolution in Ehi

So far, the simulations have only modeled one
speciﬁc case of spectral evolution: they were all
based upon the ﬁxed values Ehi = 1500 keV and
Elo = 100 keV, resulting in the same value for the
temporal decay index i ≈ −1 (Eq. 6). Either one
or both of these may naturally be considered to
be drawn from a fairly large set of values, due to
the spread in redshift and bulk Lorentz factors, as
discussed in the Introduction (Eq. 3). We next in-
vestigate how these parameters inﬂuence the Epeak

8

Fig. 5.— The spectral lag in seconds for the sim-
ulated pulse in Figure 4 is plotted against the av-
erage energy of 9 spectral data bins of roughly
equal width in log energy. Some of the BGO de-
tector bins overlap in energy with those of the NaI,
which accounts for the odd spacing. The binning
is the same as can be seen in Figure 6. The lowest
energy bin serves as the reference against which
the lag of the higher energy bins is calculated and
thus has zero lag by deﬁnition.

distributions.

First, we generated pulse simulations by vary-
ing both Ehi and Elo by the same factors of two:
(1/4, 1/2, 1, 2, 4). This has the eﬀect of keeping
the value of the temporal decay index i the same.
The result could be predicted:
the mean value
for the resulting Epeak histograms for each pulse
also change by the same factors of two. This be-
havior holds over the entire range of the inputs
Ehi = (750; 1, 500; 3, 000; 6, 000; 12, 000) keV (5
data points). This range was determined mainly
by its eﬀect on Elo = (12.5; 25; 50; 100; 200) keV:
anything below 12.5 keV is not recoverable and
anything above 200 keV is already too high to
be very common, based upon the observed behav-
ior that bursts with average or peak Epeak values
greater than 1 MeV are rare.
In any case, the
linearity in the peak Epeak from this simulation
suggests that one could build up any Epeak dis-
tribution whatsoever by weighting pulses with ap-
propriate energy limit parameters. The most nat-
ural distribution prior for both Ehi and Elo may
be uniform, in which case, we should expect that
the Epeak distributions be more ﬂat-topped than
they appear to be.

Fig. 6.— The pulse widths in diﬀerent energy
bands in seconds for the simulated pulse in Fig-
ure 4 is plotted against the average energy of each
of the 9 spectral data bins of roughly equal width
in log energy. The trend of wider pulse width for
lower energy is ﬁtted with a power law, as sug-
gested by Norris et al. (2005).

Fig. 7.— The spectral evolution of ﬁtted Epeak
values during the ﬁrst 3 s of GRB130427A is pre-
sented as the ‘continental divide’ (dashed line) on
top of a νFν contour plot. Because Epeak repre-
sents the peak of each νFν spectrum (arranged in
time from bottom to top), the levels of increasing
intensity form closed contours. The peak intensity
clearly comes later than the highest Epeak, which
is found at the start of the burst.

Next, we varied only Ehi by factors of two and
kept Elo constant. The corresponding change in
the temporal decay index can be seen in Table 1.
Here, we created 6 individual bright pulses with

9

Fig. 8.— The distribution of ﬁtted Epeak values
for a simulation of a single, bright GRB pulse
that has strong spectral evolution is shown as a
histogram. Although the pulse is well sampled
throughout its time history, the predominance of
samples occurs at the peak of the pulse, heav-
ily weighting the average spectrum with medium-
energy Epeak spectra.

parameter values from Ehi = 12, 000 to 375 keV.
The mean Epeak values of the distributions do not
change much: 270 to 93 keV, which is roughly a
factor of 3 for a change by a factor of 32 in Ehi.
Apparently, a large change in Ehi leads to only
a modest shift in the Epeak distribution; the be-
havior of log(Ehi) versus log((cid:104)Epeak(cid:105)) is deﬁnitely
linear. As an aside, we could change the pulse pa-
rameters in each case to achieve a constant i = −1
decay index, but as these bright pulses are quite
well sampled, it would make little to no diﬀer-
ence in the results. A histogram of all the ﬁt-
ted Epeak values from these 6 simulated pulses
is slightly skewed toward the low energy side, as
seen in Figure 11. This arises because the dis-
tributions with lower Ehi are narrower, while they
have roughly the same number of spectra. Despite
this unbalanced weighting, the overall distribution
still peaks at a median value, and is no more ﬂat

Fig.
9.— The distribution of ﬁtted Epeak val-
ues is plotted as a histogram for ﬁfty simulated
single-pulse GRBs of ten diﬀerent brightnesses and
ﬁve diﬀerent pulse asymmetries. Each simulated
lightcurve has been binned to the same signal to
noise ratio, resulting in diﬀerent binning for each,
while retaining similar statistics for the spectral
ﬁtting. The histogram represents the ensemble of
all time-resolved spectra, similar to the BATSE
or GBM Spectral Catalogs of Bright bursts, to be
compared with Figure 1.

Fig. 10.— The distribution of photon ﬂux values
is displayed as a histogram for the bright single-
pulse simulation shown in Figure 8. The single
most populated bin corresponds with the peak
in the lightcurve, which, by having the highest
SNR, is the most frequently sampled portion of
the lightcurve.

10

Ehi
keV
12, 000
6, 000
3, 000
1, 500
750
375

(cid:104)Epeak(cid:105)
keV
272 ± 3
218 ± 2
177 ± 2
143 ± 2
115 ± 2
93 ± 1

i

Decay Index

-1.45
-1.16
-1.08
-0.9
-0.71
-0.53

Table 1: Results of simulations of bright,
long
pulses with diﬀerent Ehi, but holding Elo = 50
keV constant. The mean value of Epeak for each
simulated time sequence is given by (cid:104)Epeak(cid:105). The
temporal decay index is calculated from Eq. 6.

Fig. 11.— The distribution of ﬁtted Epeak values
is plotted as a histogram for six simulated single-
pulse GRBs only diﬀering in their values of Ehi.

topped than Catalog-derived distributions.

Which scenario may be preferred here depends
upon what one expects as being more reasonable:
is the temporal decay index of i = −1 a physical
value, so we should scale both Ehi and Elo by the
same factor? We dont have a justiﬁcation for this,
but we have two examples of observed bursts with
roughly this same temporal index (GRB110721A
and GRB130427A): the durations scale in just
such a manner to make this work. On the other
hand, in the previous section, we put forth the hy-
pothesis that pulses are initiated by an impulsive
energization event that loses energy over time. In
which case, only the initial Ehi value is important.
Certainly, the maximum ﬁtted Epeak values for the

11

two events are diﬀerent by a factor of three or so.
The value of Elo would then be determined by the
last point at which spectral ﬁtting can be done
on the decaying portion of the burst, not by any
physical constraint. At the same time, a physical
argument may support the concept of a conserved
temporal decay index for this scenario as well: in
order to maintain this index, the duration would
certainly have to be coupled to the energy loss
mechanism.

3.4. Spectral Characteristics of the Pulse-

Averaged Spectrum

There are two things to note concerning the
spectral ﬁt to the average spectrum obtained by
summing all the individual spectra in the simu-
lated pulse. The ﬁrst is that although the simu-
lation was constructed with the cut-oﬀ power law
function, the spectral evolution imposed through-
out the pulse conspires to deform the average spec-
trum signiﬁcantly. In fact, the pure cut-oﬀ power
law function does not result in an acceptable ﬁt, as
evidenced by the signiﬁcant runs of residuals to the
spectral model, as seen in Figure 12 (left). As it
happens, a ﬁt to the same average spectrum using
the Band function is much improved (CSTAT =
160, compared with CSTAT = 351, which is a con-
siderable improvement for one degree of freedom;
see Figure 12, right). Thus, at least for the HTS
spectral evolution we have simulated, the sum of
exponentially cut-oﬀ spectra can result in an av-
erage spectrum that is consistent with the Band
function, which incorporates a high-energy power-
law.

The other point is that the sampling bias shown
in Figure 10 implies that values for Epeak derived
from a ﬁt to the average spectrum of a single-pulse
burst should be very well correlated with that of
the peak spectrum. The results for 11 single-pulse
GRBs are shown in Table 2. The Pearson’s rank
correlation between the average and peak Epeak
values is 0.77, which has a chance probability of
0.005. The ‘peak’ Epeak is given by Ep,p and the
average spectrum (or ‘ﬂuence’) Epeak is Ep,f ; both
are in keV. In the last column in the Table, the
diﬀerence between the peak and average spectra
Epeak values is expressed in units of the r.m.s. er-
rors of the two values. Not only are the peak val-
ues always greater than the average, but nearly
every pair diﬀer by less than three standard devi-

Fig. 12.— Time averaged spectral ﬁts to the simulation of a very bright single-pulse GRB with strong
spectral evolution (as described in Figure 4). The average spectrum is ﬁtted with the input spectral function
(cut-oﬀ model power law – COMP, left) as well as the Band function (right). The residuals plots at the
bottom of the left-hand ﬁgure reveals strong discrepancies with the assumed COMP model that are largely
absent in the Band function ﬁt. The change in C-STAT between the two ﬁts is 191 for one additional degree
of freedom, suggesting that the sum of several COMP functions with strong evolution in Epeak and intensity
do not preserve the COMP shape.

ations. For asymmetric pulses that peak early, the
number of spectra after the peak in the lightcurve
outnumber those before it, so a ﬂuence-weighted
spectrum will be dominated by lower Epeak spec-
tra, compared with that of the peak spectrum it-
self, as discussed below. This accounts for the
peak Epeak being greater than the ﬂuence Epeak.
In GRB pulses, at least, it appears that there
is a good correlation between the values of Epeak
derived from ﬁts to the peak and ﬂuence spec-
tra. Not all bursts are so strongly dominated by a
single pulse in the light curve, yet we have made
the case above that the spectral characteristics are

dominated by the sampling bias at the peak of the
pulse. If bursts are typically made up of any num-
ber of discrete and overlapping pulses, the peaks
of these pulses should still dominate their ﬂuence
spectra. We have tested this with ﬁts to 1188
BATSE GRBs from the complete spectral cata-
log (Goldstein et al. 2013), as shown in Figure 13.
The peak ﬂux and ﬂuence values are clearly cor-
related, with the best ﬁt power law trend shown
in red, along with the error bounds of the ﬁt. The
ﬁtted power law function is Ep,p = 1.41 × E0.96
,
which also indicates the trend where the peak
Epeak is larger than the ﬂuence Epeak. The Pear-
son correlation coeﬃcient (linearity in log-space)

p,f

12

GRB
081110601
081224887
090719063
090809978
100612726
100707032
110407998
110721200
110817191
110920546
130427324

Ep,p

192 ± 49
934 ± 217
361 ± 39
227 ± 40
143 ± 10
597 ± 63
779 ± 309
1506 ± 756
345 ± 40
902 ± 279
812 ± 19

Ep,f
46 ± 12
361 ± 30
207 ± 8
158 ± 10
111 ± 4
239 ± 10
543 ± 106
237 ± 32
207 ± 16
215 ± 5
784 ± 9

Sigma Dev.

2.8
2.6
3.8
1.6
2.7
5.6
0.6
1.7
3.2
2.5
1.3

Table 2: Comparison between Peak and Fluence
Epeak. Column 1 lists the burst name in the
GBM convention (yymmddﬀf: see Paciesas et al.
(2012)). Columns 2 and 3 show the ﬁtted Epeak
value in keV for the peak ﬂux and the ﬂuence spec-
tra, respectively. The last column shows the dif-
ference between the two Epeak values in units of
the root mean square of the two error values.

is 0.895±0.003, and the Spearman rank coeﬃcient
(monotonicity) is 0.892 ± 0.003. The uncertainty
assumes the Epeak errors are (log-)normally dis-
tributed. One possible consequence of this correla-
tion is the correspondence between Amati-like re-
lations that use the ﬂuence-based Epeak (Amati et
al. 2002) and the Yonetoku-like relations that use
the peak Epeak (Yonetoku et al. 2004; Ghirlanda,
Ghisellini & Lazzati 2004): they are basically the
same value. In our picture of strong spectral evo-
lution within pulses, the Epeak value for the ﬂu-
ence spectrum is dominated by the heavy weight-
ing by the spectra close to peak of the pulse, as
they contain the majority fraction of the counts in
the ﬂuence.

3.5. The Role of Pulse Asymmetry

We have shown above that the peak spectra
dominate the ﬂuence-derived Epeak value for a
pulse with strong spectral evolution. Clearly,
there should be an eﬀect on this derived value that
depends upon where in the pulse history the peak
lies: early or late. If the pulse rises quickly, the
peak spectra will sample the earlier values of the
Epeak evolution trend and thus should be higher
on average. The opposite case holds for pulses
that peak later relative to the overall pulse dura-

Fig. 13.— The values of ﬁtted Epeak for time-
averaged (’ﬂuence’) spectra are plotted against the
ﬁtted Epeak values from the peak ﬂux spectrum
for the same burst. The 1188 GRBs are from
the BATSE Spectroscopy Catalog (Goldstein et
al. 2013), where the best ﬁts were either COMP
or BAND and the Epeak values were constrained.

tion. Hakkila & Preece (2011) have shown that
the majority of bright pulses in their catalog are
asymmetric and that the asymmetry is generally
correlated with spectral hardness (Hakkila et al.
2015).

Following the sources cited above, we deﬁne the
pulse asymmetry at the level of e−3 of the peak
intensity as:

(cid:113)

κ =

1 + 4(cid:112)τ1/τ2/3

1

.

(8)

This quantity ranges from κ = 1, for an early-
peaking asymmetric pulse, to κ = 0, for a symmet-
ric pulse (the peak divides the duration in two).
Note that the two pulse shape parameters of the
Norris pulse model (τ1 & τ2) do not directly map
into the rise time or decay time of the pulse. For-
mally, the rise and decay times may be determined
from the shape constants by the expressions

(cid:20)(cid:113)
(cid:21)
1 + 4(cid:112)τ1/τ2/n − 1
(cid:20)(cid:113)
(cid:21)
1 + 4(cid:112)τ1/τ2/n + 1

,

, (9)

τrise = nτ2
2

and τdecay = nτ2
2

where, as above, we take n = 3. Indeed, the shape

13

parameters from the last line in the Table, τ1 =
150 s and τ2 = 1 s, produce an approximately
symmetric pulse, while the values from the ﬁrst
line, τ1 = 6 s and τ2 = 5 s, result in a very fast
rise, slower decay pulse with high early-peaking
asymmetry. Pulses with late-peaking asymmetry
can not be modeled (because of the constraint κ ≥
0). Late-peaking pulses are rare in the published
literature of GRB pulse modeling.

We constructed ﬁve separate sets of synthetic
GRB spectral histories, each with diﬀerent values
for τ1 and τ2, resulting in ﬁve diﬀerent values for
κ. In each set, we created 10 bursts with diﬀer-
ent peak count rates: 10,000, 9,000, 8,000, 7,000,
6,000, 5,000, 4,000, 3,000, 2,000 and 500 count/s.
Averaging the spectral ﬁts over each set should
smooth out diﬃculties that arise with the pulse
model: for instance, the pulse width (tdur) is de-
ﬁned with respect to the 3 e-folding decrease on
either side of the pulse peak. Depending on the
overall intensity of the pulse, this value may diﬀer
signiﬁcantly from the duration, either derived for-
mally (e.g.: as T90, the duration of 90% of the ﬂux
(Koshut et al. 1996)) or determined by eye. When
the exponential rise begins and the tail ends de-
pends upon the signal to noise of each spectrum
in the sequence.

The results of this analysis, as presented in Ta-
ble 3, show that there is a trend toward higher
Epeak values for higher values of asymmetry (κ in
the Table). This trend is seen both for the high-
est count-rate simulation (‘10k Epeak’ column), as
well as the for the average over the ensemble of
weak to bright pulses. The relation between the
pulse parameters, especially the position (in time)
of the peak, and the derived duration, are compli-
cated by the deﬁnition of pulse duration in terms
of number of e-foldings of the rise and decay ex-
ponentials. As seen in the last row of the table,
the peak time seems to be equal to the duration;
in such cases, the start time of the duration is de-
layed. Accordingly, we include the rise and decay
times (τrise and τdecay), as calculated by Equation
9, in columns 6 and 7. Still, the general trend
may be described as correlation between asymme-
try and Epeak: the later the pulse peaks, the lower
the ﬂuence-averaged Epeak value that will be ob-
tained for the same power-law spectral evolution
in a pulse.

4. More Complicated Lightcurves

Most GRB lightcurves are not as simple as our
single-pulse model. Some consist of well-separated
(or, at least: clearly overlapping) single pulses,
such that the pulses can be individually ﬁtted
(see, for example, the pulse catalogs in Ford et al.
(1995); Hakkila & Preece (2011); Lu et al. (2010)).
A main result of these eﬀorts was that individual
pulses within bursts could be categorized into two
broad classes based upon their spectral evolution:
hard-to-soft (HTS) and hardness-intensity track-
ing (HIT), as discussed above. So far, we have fo-
cused on HTS pulses. As long as separable pulses
can be identiﬁed within a complex light curve, the
results we have identiﬁed so far should hold for
more complex bursts, as long as each pulse be-
longs in the HTS category. The existence of the
HIT category raises several issues, then: can we
determine the relationship between the peak ﬂux
and ﬂuence values for Epeak; and, can we account
for HIT evolution within the context of HST evo-
lution pulses?

As Figure 10 demonstrates, burst lightcurves
are the most heavily sampled at the peak. The
result is that the time-averaged (‘ﬂuence’) spec-
trum is heavily weighted by those spectra, result-
ing in an average ﬁtted Epeak value that repre-
sents them. This should be true of pulses with
HIT spectral evolution as well: the softer spectra
at the rise and tail of the pulse are underrepre-
sented in the average, just as they are in HTS
pulses. In this case, instead of very hard spectra
being under-sampled during the rising portion of
the pulse, the rising portion of the HIT spectral
evolution mirrors the decay in time, so no spec-
tra are harder than those at the peak of the pulse.
Thus, regardless of whether the pulse is HTS or
HIT, the ﬂuence Epeak should correlate well with
that of the peak ﬂux spectrum within a burst. HIT
pulses should not destroy the correlation found in
Figure 13.

More interesting is the question of generat-
ing HIT pulses within the HTS pulse paradigm.
Where two HTS pulses overlap, the combined
spectra are likely to be dominated by the more
intense of the two, especially when signal-to-noise
binning is taken into account. Thus, we should
expect that the least intense, very hard spectra at
the rise portion of a later pulse to be completely

14

τ1
(s)
6
3
6
20
150

τ2
(s)
5
5
3
3
1

κ

0.64
0.70
0.59
0.47
0.24

τpeak
(s)
5.5
3.9
4.2
7.7
12.2

τdur
(s)
23.5
21.4
15.3
19.0
12.5

τrise
(s)
4.3
3.2
3.1
5.0
4.7

τdecay

(s)
19.3
18.2
12.1
14.0
7.7

10k Epeak Ave. Epeak
(keV)
(keV)
303 ± 29
297 ± 9
262 ± 54
241 ± 5
224 ± 43
200 ± 5
153 ± 3
155 ± 9
83 ± 6
79.5 ± 1

Table 3: Fluence Epeak and Pulse Asymmetry. A series of simulations were performed to demonstrate the
eﬀect of pulse asymmetry for a standard spectral evolution model during each pulse. Columns 1 and 2
contain the pulse rise and decay parameters (τ1 & τ2); ten simulations were created for each of these pulse
shape values, where the pulse peaks were scaled as described in the text. The derived asymmetry (κ), the
peak time (τpeak), duration (τdur) and the rise and decay times of the pulse (τrise and τdecay) follow in columns
3 – 7. Column 8 gives the Epeak value for the single 10,000 count/s run (the brightest in each set of ten),
while the last column gives the average of the ﬁtted Epeak values for the ten runs in each set.

dominated by softer spectra on the decay tail of
the preceding pulse. This will continue until the
spectra from the following pulse start to domi-
nate the spectral ﬁts, which should occur near the
peak intensity of the later pulse, if it rises suﬃ-
ciently rapidly. In order to determine what hap-
pens in the transition region where the intensities
are roughly equal but the individual pulses con-
tribute Epeak values that are considerably diﬀer-
ent, we turn back to simulations. Figure 14 shows
the result of several overlapping pulses, each with
the the same rise and decay times (3.0 and 11.0
s), the same intensities (10000 count/s), the same
Epeak evolution parameters (1500. to 100. keV),
but increasing start times: 0, 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, and
32 s. There is no physical motivation for this time
series. The ﬁrst four pulses blend together into
one relatively intense pulse, which has not lost the
overall HTS spectral evolution of its constituents.
The last two pulses however, demonstrate classic
HIT behavior. The possibility that isolated pulses
may actually be comprised of a train of subpulses
was raised by Hakkila & Preece (2014), who dis-
covered a conserved pattern of residuals after sub-
tracting the Norris pulse model ﬁt from observed
pulses and stacking the residuals. There is an in-
dication for a hardening in each of the sub-pulses,
as observed in Figure 14. A full treatment of this
question is somewhat outside of the main scope
of the present work; we hope to address it more
completely in a later paper.

5. Discussion

Out of the many Epeak values that can be found
in any given burst, the question of which Epeak
can represent the burst to the extent that it can
be an accurate cosmological indicator has at least
two robust answers: both the time-averaged and
peak ﬂux-derived values, due to their correlation.
The details of spectral evolution, pulse asymmetry
and pulse shape apparently conspire with signal-
to-noise temporal binning to pick out a medium
energy value from a span that can cover at least a
decade.

We have constructed a simulation that repro-
duces the time history and spectral evolution
found in detail for at least two bright pulses in
observed GRBs, as well as qualitatively in sev-
eral other observed single-pulse bursts. Using this
pulse simulation, we are also able to determine
why the ﬁtted values of Epeak are so highly cor-
related between the time averaged and peak ﬂux
spectra in GRBs: a signal-to-noise temporal bin-
ning of spectra within a burst proﬁle strongly bi-
ases the number of spectra at the peak of pulses.
This has the eﬀect of creating a large number of
spectra during a relatively narrow time window,
where Epeak doesn’t change much and is mid-way
through its evolution from hard to soft. The peak
ﬂux spectrum picks out an Epeak value that is far
from the extremes of its evolution, while the ﬂu-
ence spectrum has the spectral characteristics near
the peak of the pulse as the overwhelming contrib-
utor to the average. A more subtle consequence of

15

data (Scargle et al. 2013). For example, a Poisson-
dominated time series that is constant within a
predeﬁned measure of probability would be rep-
resented by a single bin in the Bayesian Block
scheme. This has the advantage of capturing qui-
escent periods between pulses in a single time bin
that can be omitted from further analysis. For the
same time series, a signal-to-noise binning might
extend an incomplete time bin at the trailing edge
of one pulse through a quiescent period into the
rising portion of the next pulse before suﬃcient
counts above background have been accumulated
to ﬁll out the bin. Thus, one scheme creates a
good representation of the peaks and valleys of a
complex light curve (BB), while the other accumu-
lates bins of equal statistical weights (SNR). For
time-resolved spectroscopy, the SNR representa-
tion gives binning of equal statistics, so that the
spectra can be compared within single bursts and
between diﬀerent bursts. The BB binning would
tend to assign the peak into a single bin, which is
approximately constant, while breaking up a fast
rising (or falling) portion into many bins, some of
which may be sub-optimal for spectral ﬁtting. Of
course, the BB binning criteria can be adjusted
until every bin has at least the minimum SNR for
spectral ﬁtting, perhaps at the expense of allow-
ing some bins to have much higher weighting. So
far, no comprehensive time-resolved spectroscopy
catalog has used this method, although it was a
feature of the analysis of a selection of single-pulse
bursts by Burgess et al. (2014). This approach al-
lowed for excellent determination of the spectral
parameters of their model.

The HTS spectral evolution we have considered
here as an archetype for the GRB pulse proﬁle has
quite profound physical implications. In particu-
lar, the higher energies are concentrated (by the
dual action of narrowing pulse widths and decreas-
ing spectral lags) into shorter intervals of time
occurring earlier in the pulse. This is borne out
in the case of extremely high energies in the ﬁrst
pulse of GRB 130427A, where three LAT photons
(> 100 MeV) are observed within 0.1 s either way
around the GBM trigger time, followed by a gap of
roughly 5 s., during which only one other photon
above 100 MeV is observed (Preece et al. 2014).
There is a wider distribution of LAT LLE photons
(30 – 100 MeV), with a FWHM of roughly 0.4 s
surrounding the higher energy LAT photons (Ack-

Fig. 14.— The spectral evolution of one simu-
lation of a complex lightcurve shows both hard-
to-soft and hardness-intensity-tracking behavior in
Epeak. The left and right axes correspond to Epeak
(in keV) and photon ﬂux, respectively. The pa-
rameters of the simulation are detailed in the text,
but can be described as seven identical pulses with
an overlap in time that is spaced in a geometric
progression series with a common ratio of 2.

the predominance of peak spectra sampling comes
in the interpretation of the Epeak distributions
as presented in time-resolved spectral catalogs of
GRBs (e.g. Kaneko et al. (2006)). GRB spectra
clearly can have very high and very low Epeak
values and we have shown that the ﬁtting process
does not add very much dispersion to the distribu-
tion. So, how does the observed distribution with
a FWHM of approximately a decade in energy
arise? Our pulse simulations have shown that:
either the limiting energy parameter priors are
such that there are no constraints, in which case
some unknown mechanism is at work to create
the shape of observed distribution. Or else pulses
act like our impulsive model, deﬁned by the high-
est energy at the pulse leading edge, which does
have the eﬀect of selecting out the median energies
for peak ﬂux and ﬂuence spectra, resulting in the
observed narrow distributions.

It is reasonable to ask whether the use of a
temporal binning scheme other than signal-to-
noise might have an impact on our results. The
Bayesian Block (BB) histogram representation of
time series data is a method that can optimally
capture the statistically important features of the

16

ermann et al. 2014). Clearly, bursts are capable of
producing the highest energy photons impulsively.
That being the case, questions arise concerning the
nature of the pulse as seen in lower energies, as
covered by BATSE or GRB NaI detectors. Per-
haps the entire evolution of the pulse driven by
an impulsive event that somehow rapidly ﬁlls up
a reservoir of energy that is released over time, as
proposed by Liang & Kargatis (1996), Kocevski &
Liang (2003) and Basak & Rao (2012). In account-
ing for the spectral lag evolution in GRB pulses as
a function of the running integrated photon ﬂu-
ence,

Epeak = E0e−Φ(t)/Φ0,

(10)

these authors do not address the pulse ﬂux evo-
lution that drives the running ﬂuence Φ(t). Left
unanswered is why there should be a rising edge
to the pulse, rather than, say, an abrupt turn-on
or even a simple decaying exponential shape, nei-
ther of which is commonly observed in GRBs, if
at all. In our impulsive model, the pulse rise oc-
curs as the bulk of the cooling photons enter into
the detector passband from above, until the peak,
when all the higher energy photons have been de-
graded. The rest of the lightcurve is then seen as
a cooling curve, with some photons moving into
the X-ray band and dropping out of view. A im-
pulsively illuminated, thin-shell, relativistic ﬂow
exhibits rise, decay and asymmetric pulse behav-
ior simply due to curvature eﬀects, as described
by Dermer (2004). In addition, a kinematic treat-
ment predicts that the instantaneous νFν ﬂux
should behave as E3
peak during the pulse decay
phase. This seems to be at odds with some of
the observed pulse spectral evolution (Borgonovo
& Ryde 2001). Preece et al. (2014) have addressed
this by invoking magnetic reconnection or mini-
jets as the impulsive event, followed by magnetic
ﬂux freezing in the expanding ﬂuid element.

The less intense a pulse is (as in dimmer GRBs),
the more bins around the pulse peak must be
included to maintain a constant SNR for spec-
troscopy; however, given the nearly constant spec-
tral evolution at the peak, the larger number of
bins included in the ﬁt does not aﬀect the mean
Epeak. With HTS spectral evolution, we expect
the peak Epeak to be robust with respect to in-
tensity for even the broadest binning required for
the dimmest bursts. We have done an analysis
of the peak ﬂux spectra from the 50 simulated

17

Fig. 15.— The average peak νFν energies as a
function of intensity for ﬁve groups of peak ﬂux
spectra from 1421 BATSE GRBs. The horizontal
error bars indicate the intensity bin widths, while
the vertical error bars represent the the 1σ errors
in the mean, where the Epeak distributions were
assumed to be approximately Gaussian in log en-
ergy.

pulses described in Table 3 (which divides into ten
peak ﬂux groups) that shows no change in aver-
age Epeak values from dimmest to brightest: the
slope in average Epeak as a function of peak ﬂux is
only 0.1σ diﬀerent from 0, with 99.99% conﬁdence.
Thus, in the model where bursts are composed en-
tirely from separable pulses (even if they can not
be separated formally), observed correlations be-
tween peak ﬂux Epeak and peak intensity are al-
most certainly intrinsic in nature. With 399 bursts
from an early version of the BATSE Spectroscopy
Catalog, Mallozzi et al. (1995) demonstrated that
there is a signiﬁcant correlation between the peak
intensity and mean Epeak for ﬁve intensity groups.
We have repeated this analysis using the complete
catalog with 1421 bursts (Goldstein et al. (2013),
or 3.5 times as many bursts as in the Mallozzi data
set), as shown in Figure 15. The strong shift in
mean Epeak as a function of intensity that is repli-
cated here must be intrinsic, and follows the trend
expected from standard cosmology, as was pointed
out by Mallozzi et al. (1995).

6. Conclusions

Given that pulse peaks of GRBs pick out a rep-
resentative value of Epeak, the answer to the ques-

tion posed in the Abstract, “Which Epeak?” is:
“The peak ﬂux Epeak”. We have shown that a
simple pulse model with HTS spectral evolution
can account for several observables:

• the narrow Epeak distributions found in sev-

eral spectral catalogs;

• the ﬂuence and peak ﬂux Epeak correlation;
• the role of pulse asymmetry on the average

Epeak;

• the constraint of the temporal decay index to
observed values for widely diﬀerent values of
Ehi;

• the impulsive nature of pulse energization;

and

• the frequent observation that the ﬁrst spec-

trum in a burst is the hardest.

In addition, these results are robust, even to the
point that we need only assume that a pulse has
some type of spectral evolution, either HTS or
HIT. The latter may be gotten by layering HTS
pulses on top of each other. Finally, bursts with
multiple pulses can be thought of a collection of
average spectra for the individual pulses, each of
which is represented by the average Epeak at the
peak. We don’t yet have a theory for the spectral
evolution of pulses; however, to the extent that
bursts are generally HTS, the peak Epeak of this
distribution, as observed in the spectral window
of the detector, should dominate the burst itself.

Acknowledgements

We are grateful for the comments on the ﬁrst
draft of this manuscript made by the anonymous
referee. We had overlooked a crucial aspect of the
analysis and the paper is much improved as a re-
sult.

REFERENCES

Ackermann, M., Ajello, M., Asano, K., et al. 2014,

Science 343, 42

Amati, L., Frontera, F., Tavani, M., et al. 2002,

A&A, 390, 81

Axelsson, M., Baldini, L., Barbiellini, G., et al.

2012, ApJL, 757, L31

Band, D. L. & Preece, R. D. 2005, ApJ, 627, 319

Band, D., Matteson, J., Ford, L., et al. 1993, ApJ,

413, 281

Baring, M. G. 2006, ApJ, 650, 1004

Baring, M. G., & Harding, A. K. 1997, ApJ, 491,

663

Basak, Rupal & Rao, A. R., 2012, ApJ 749, 132

Borgonovo, L., & Ryde, F. 2001, ApJ, 548, 770

Burgess, J. M., Preece, R. D., Connaughton, V.,

et al. 2014, ApJ, 784, 17

Cucchiara, A., Levan, A. J., Fox, D. B., et al. 2011,

ApJ, 736, 7

Dermer, C. D. 2004, ApJ, 614, 284

Ford, L. A., Band, D. L., Matteson, J. L., et al.

1995, ApJ, 439, 307

Galama, T. J., Vreeswijk, P. M., van Paradijs, J.,

et al. 1998, Nature, 395, 670

Ghirlanda, G., Ghisellini, G., & Lazzati, D. 2004,

ApJ, 616, 331

Goldstein, A., Preece, R. D., Mallozzi, R. S., et al.

2013, ApJS, 208, 21

Gruber, D., Goldstein, A., Weller von Ahlefeld,

V., et al. 2014, ApJS, 211, 12

Hakkila, J., & Cumbee, R. S. 2009, American In-
stitute of Physics Conference Series, 1133, 379

Hakkila, J., Lien, A., Sakamoto, T., et al. 2015,

ApJ, 815, 134

Hakkila, Jon & Preece, Robert D., 2011, ApJ 740,

104

Hakkila, Jon & Preece, Robert D., 2014, ApJ 783,

88

Harris, M.J. & Share, G.H., 1998, ApJ, 494, 724

Kaneko, Y., Preece, R. D., Paciesas, W. S., Mee-
gan, C. A., & Band, D. L. 2006, ApJS, 166,
298

Kocevski, Dan & Liang, Edison, 2003, ApJ 594,

385

18

Koshut, T. M., Paciesas, W. S., Kouveliotou, C.,

Yonetoku, D., Murakami, T., Nakamura, T., et al.

et al. 1996, ApJ, 463, 570

2004, ApJ, 609, 935

Liang, Edison & Kargatis, Vincent, 1996, Nature

381, 49

Lu, R.-J., Hou, S.-J., & Liang, En-Wei, 2010, ApJ

720, 1146

Mallozzi, R. S., Paciesas, W. S., Pendleton, G. N.,

et al. 1995, ApJ, 454, 597

Mazets, E.P. & Golenetskii, S.V., 1981, ApSS, 75,

47

Meegan, C., Lichti, G., Bhat, P. N., et al. 2009,

ApJ, 702, 791

Metzger, A. E., Parker, R. H., Gilman, D., Peter-
son, L. E., & Trombka, J. I. 1974, ApJ, 194,
L19

Nakar, E., & Piran, T. 2005, MNRAS, 360, L73

Nava, L., Salvaterra, R., Ghirlanda, G., et al.

2012, MNRAS, 421, 1256

Norris, J. P., Nemiroﬀ, R. J., Bonnell, J. T., et al.

1996, ApJ, 459, 393

Norris, J. P., Bonnell, J. T., Kazanas, D., et al.

2005, ApJ, 627, 324

Paciesas, W. S., Meegan, C. A., von Kienlin, A.,

et al. 2012, ApJS, 199, 18

Piran, T., Sari, R. & Mochkovitch, D., 2012, in
Gamma Ray Bursts, ed. Kouveliotou, Wijers
& Woosley (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ.
Press), 121

Preece, R., Burgess, J. M., von Kienlin, A., et al.

2014, Science, 343, 51

Rees, M. J., & M´esz´aros, P. 1994, ApJ, 430, L93

Richardson, G., Koshut, T., Paciesas, W., & Kou-
veliotou, C. 1996, American Institute of Physics
Conference Series, 384, 87

Scargle, J. D., Norris, J. P., Jackson, B., & Chiang,

J. 2013, ApJ, 764, 167

Schaefer, Bradley E. & Collazzi, Andrew C., 2007,

ApJ 656, L53

This 2-column preprint was prepared with the AAS LATEX
macros v5.2.

19

