6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
9

 

 
 
]

.

A
G
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
3
7
9
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

MNRAS 000, 1–25 (2015)

Preprint 10 March 2016

Compiled using MNRAS LATEX style ﬁle v3.0

Magnetized galactic halos and velocity lags

R. N. Henriksen1⋆ and J. A. Irwin1†

1Dept. of Physics, Engineering Physics & Astronomy, Queen’s University, Kingston, Ontario, K7L 3N6, Canada

Accepted XXX. Received YYY; in original form ZZZ

ABSTRACT

We present an analytic model of a magnetized galactic halo surrounding a

Mestel gravitating disc. The magnetic ﬁeld is taken to be in energy equiparti-

tion with the pressure dominant rotating halo gas (not with the cosmic rays) ,

and the whole system is in a steady state. A more ﬂexible ‘anisotropic equipar-

tition’ model is also explored. A deﬁnite pressure law is required to maintain

the equilibrium, but the halo density is constant. The velocity/magnetic sys-

tem is scale-free. The objective is to ﬁnd the rotational velocity lag in such

a halo. The magnetic ﬁeld is not force-free so that angular momentum may

be transported from the halo to the intergalactic medium. We ﬁnd that the

‘X’-shaped structure observed for halo magnetic ﬁelds can be obtained to-

gether with a simple analytic formula for the rate of decline of the velocity

with height z.The formula also predicts the change in lag with radius, r.

Key words: galaxies:general, galaxies:haloes, galaxies:kinematics and dy-

namics, galaxies:magnetic ﬁelds

1

INTRODUCTION

For some time (Rand 2000; T¨ullman et al. 2000; Heald et al. 2007; Kamphuis et al. 2007;

Kennedy 2009; Carollo et al. 2010; Zschaechner & Rand 2015b), there has been mounting

evidence that galactic halo gas lags behind the rotation of the galactic disc. This is mainly

found from observations of neutral gas in HI, but not exclusively so (Carollo et al. 2010).

Recently a decrease in the lag with radius has also been detected (Zschaechner & Rand

⋆ henriksn@astro.queensu.ca
† irwin@astro.queensu.ca

c(cid:13) 2015 The Authors

2

R.N. Henriksen & J.A. Irwin

2015a,b). Earlier work (Sofue et al. 1992, and references therein) found a similar phenomenon

in molecular gas above the disc of M82. However these authors conclude that this lag is best

explained by violent ejection of the gas from the starburst nucleus, and thus is a diﬀerent

phenomenon from that discussed here.

Many models have been suggested to explain this phenomenon, for example, see Marinacci et al.

(2011) for references, and Benjamin (2012). However until now the organized magnetic ﬁeld

that is known to be present in the halos (Wiegert et al. 2015; Krause 2015) has not been

included. If such a ﬁeld is connected to the intergalactic medium and has suﬃcient strength,

then it is able to transport angular momentum away from the halo gas to intergalactic space.

The full magnetohydrodynamic equations describing such a coupling are complicated nu-

merically and analytically. In this note we simplify these equations by assuming equipartition

between the energy of the magnetic ﬁeld and the kinetic energy of a dominant component of

the halo gas (although not with the underlying disc that is rather a ‘boundary condition’ on

the halo).

Normally ‘equipartition’ refers to energy equilibrium between the magnetic ﬁeld energy

and that of the cosmic rays. However the model that we propose here requires equipartition

with the kinetic energy of at least the pressure dominant component of the gas above the

disc. This kinetic energy includes the contribution of the disc rotation velocity near the disc.

Moreover this assumption requires that the magnetic and velocity ﬁelds be aligned. See

equation (1) below for a succinct deﬁnition of this ‘isotropic’ equipartition, but it essentially

means that B and V are aligned (or anti-aligned) in each coordinate direction, r, φ, and z.

Realizing such equipartition may require that the dynamical formation or subsequent

growth of the galaxy should act to amplify the initial magnetic ﬁeld. Kinematic disturbances

in the (co-rotating) near-disc halo (e.g. from supernovae and star formation) are likely to

establish equipartition of the magnetic ﬁeld only with the cosmic rays or the corresponding

turbulence (Hanasz et al. 2009). Recently (Pakmor, Marinacci & Springel 2014), a numerical

study of the MHD formation of a milky-way type galaxy has in fact been conducted.

The authors of this latter study ﬁnd that the ﬁeld grows early in cosmological history
and reaches values in the range 6−10 µG relatively independently of the seed magnetic ﬁeld,
due to galactic formation gas dynamics. The total ﬁeld energy rarely exceeds 10 − 20 % of
the total kinetic energy, but these relative magnitudes seem uncertain in the halo once the

disc forms. More pertinently for the equipartition assumption (1), these authors ﬁnd that a

large fraction of the volume of the galaxy contains aligned magnetic and velocity ﬁelds. This

MNRAS 000, 1–25 (2015)

Magnetized galactic halos and velocity lags

3

aligment extends at least up to 2 kpc above the nascent disc, which is the observed region

of the halo lag of the milky way galaxy (Carollo et al. 2010).

Galactic disc ‘magnetization’ due to diﬀerential rotation of a random ensemble of super-

novae induced dipoles (Hanasz et al. 2009) has also been simulated. This work shows that

magnetic ﬁelds of the form to be deduced here (nearly parallel in the plane and X type above

the plane) do develop. However these authors do not discuss the lagging halo phenomenon.

Their magnetic ﬁeld growth stops when equipartition with the cosmic rays is achieved. If

these are indentiﬁed with the hot X-ray halo, then this condition may suﬃce for our purposes

(see below). A similar structure (their model Dd) has also been found to display polarization

structure similar to the observations by Ferri`ere & Terral (2014).

A relevant study of the magnetic ﬁelds of the Milky Way has been summarized in spectac-

ular visual format in ﬁgure 1 of Farrar (2015) for their JF12 ﬁeld model. The ﬁeld structure

near the disc and especially in the halo is much as we envisage in this note. In particular

the structure helically wound on cones that extends into the intergalactic space is just what

is required here. Moreover the structure projects in 2d into the observed ‘X’ structure. One

can not attest to equipartition with a dominant halo component with these observations,

but the winding does suggest dynamic coupling between the ﬁeld and the halo gas.

The energy balance implied by equipartition is numerically feasible. Anisotropic magnetic

ﬁeld near the disc of say 10 µG together with a total gas density of 0.01 H cm−3 yields an
Alfv´en speed of ∼ 220 kms−1. The Alfv´en speed ought to be comparable to the rotation
speed of the disc/near-halo, as this value is, in order to transport angular momentum from

the disc to the halo gas in a steady state. The limited ability of this transport to oppose the

extra-galactic drag, is the mechanism for the halo lag in the isotropic equipartition model

(section 3) .

If it is only the hot component of the halo that is in dynamical equipartion with the ﬁeld,

then we require it to be pressure dominant. Such equipartition would be compatible with

a smaller magnetic ﬁeld (say 5 µG) and a density of 0.003 cm−3, characteristic of the hot
halo component near the disc. If the temperature is ≥ 106 K and the gas is mainly ionized
hydrogen, then the pressure of the gas is ∼ B2/(8π) with B ∼ 5 µG. The rotation of the
hot gas will be sub-sonic if the actual temperature is as high as 2 × 106 K, and the pressure
balance continues to hold very nearly. The interaction of this lagging component with HI

clouds would then be much as described in Marinacci et al. (2011). In the event that the

MNRAS 000, 1–25 (2015)

4

R.N. Henriksen & J.A. Irwin

hot halo gas is pressure dominant, we simply assume here that its lag is communicated to

all halo components.

There is evidence for an extended hot halo of the Milky Way (Gupta et al. 2012) of this

kind, and indeed for a variety of galaxies (Li & Wang 2013). This includes the galaxy NGC

891 that we use below as an example of a well-studied lagging halo. It is possible that this gas

extends into the intergalactic medium (IGM) with the magnetic ﬁeld, and helps to anchor

the ﬁeld there. Indeed in quiescent galaxies it may have been accreted from the IGM and

subsequently shock-heated (Li & Wang 2013).

The prize for investing in a maximally simple dynamical assumption is an explicit, pa-

rameter free, formula for the halo lag in both vertical and radial directions. The parameters

reappear ultimately in the pressure gradient that is necessary to balance gravitational and

magnetic forces in the average steady state. Magnetic tension balances the inertial forces

due to our assumption of dynamical equipartition. A disadvantage of the assumed steady

state is that causality is diﬃcult to establish unambiguously. We do not know how it came

to be the way it is assumed to be.

In this latter connection we note that It is the boundary conditions that impose disc

rotation at the plane and zero rotation at large distances, which establish our predicted lag.

The large distance condition is somewhat arbitrary. However we know that at least in the

case of NGC 5775, the decline to systemic velocity at large z has been clearly observed (e.g.

Rand 2000; T¨ullman et al. 2000), and we can not avoid halo corotation at the disc. It is

the pressure gradient that is required for the average equilibrium lag to hold that must be

physically realistic.

We explore also a variant of dynamical equipartition (the energy balance is the same) in

which the poloidal magnetic and velocity ﬁelds are aligned (and equal in suitable Units) while

the toroidal ﬁelds are anti-aligned (but equal in magnitude in suitable Units) (section 4).

We refer to this form as ‘anisotropic’ equipartition as opposed to ‘isotropic’ (same aligment

in all directions) equipartition for the usual case. The anisotropic conﬁguration follows from

a slightly more physically motivated set of assumptions, but leads to a very similar lagging

behaviour. The possibility encourages the following nuance in the physical interpretation of

the mechanism for the halo lag.

In the isotropic equipartition case, positive magnetic coupling (the magnetic stress, BφBz

in cylindrical polar coordinates, has positive sign) to the galactic disc leads to a gradual spin-

down if disc gas moves up (and possibly out, following the magnetic ﬁeld). The magnetic

MNRAS 000, 1–25 (2015)

Magnetized galactic halos and velocity lags

5

transfer of angular momentum from the disc then modulates the descent to systemic velocity

at inﬁnity, as imposed by the boundary condition. In this sense the inter-galactic medium is

ultimately the source of the drag on the halo gas. Should Bz < 0, implying vz < 0, accreting

material is being rotationally accelerated by the disc against drag imposed by the inter-

galactic medium. Any eﬀect on the disc itself is avoided by maintaining the ﬁxed boundary

condition vφ = V at the disc. This behaviour is very similar to that of Hartmann ﬂow (e.g.

Landau & Lifshitz 1960) when one boundary tends to inﬁnity.

In the anisotropic case, negative magnetic coupling to the intergalactic medium at inﬁnity

(drag) gradually slows down the halo gas as it rises (Bφ < 0 Bz > 0) from the disc. Should

the signs be reversed (Bφ > 0, Bz < 0) and the gas still rising, it is the poloidal velocity and

magnetic ﬁelds that are anti-aligned. We have not discussed this possibility explicitly here,

but the symmetry of a global, dipole-like, galactic magnetic ﬁeld (Farrar 2015) implies its

existence on at least one side of the galactic disc. This assumes that the gas is ejected from

the disc on each side. Finally if the gas is accreting with Bz < 0 and Bφ > 0, we return

to the isotropic limit because vφ > 0 by deﬁnition of the axes. We will ﬁnd it diﬃcult to

distinguish observationally the form of the lag established by these diﬀerent arrangements.

We proceed to summarize the structure of this paper. In section 2 we describe the ba-

sic magnetohydrodynamic equations under the equipartition assumption, together with the

gravitational ﬁeld of the underlying Mestel disc. Following this in section 3 we ﬁnd an analytic

scale-free solution of these equations, which includes the gravitational ﬁeld. In particular the

velocities of the halo gas and the pressure law necessary for equilibrium are given. Section

4 investigates the implications of the anisotropic equipartition, which involves the viscosity

explicitly. We ﬁnd that there is a regime of eﬀective overlap with the simpler isotropic model,

and continue subsequently in this paper with the simpler case. In section 5 we isolate the

relevant formulae for the vertical and radial lagging velocities. Section 6 provides ﬁgures

that represent the spatial structure of the velocity/ magnetic ﬁelds. These images are useful

for making qualitative comparison with observations. Section 7 compares our prediction for

the vertical rotational velocity (and lag-rate) to relevant observations of the edge-on spiral

galaxy NGC 891. A ﬁnal section 8 restates our conclusions and re-emphasizes our physical

assumptions.

MNRAS 000, 1–25 (2015)

6

R.N. Henriksen & J.A. Irwin

2 MODEL EQUATIONS: ISOTROPIC EQUIPARTITION

The isotropic equipartition assumption (equivalent in magnitude to the magnetic Alfv´en

number being equal to one) takes the form

B =p4πρv,

where ρ is the (constant) gas density above the disc, v is the vector velocity relative to

(1)

the centre of the galaxy, and B is the vector magnetic ﬁeld. We work in Gaussian electro-

magnetic units. We will ﬁnd therefore the velocity ﬁeld and the magnetic ﬁeld together, once

the halo density is chosen. The disc is not a continuous extention of the halo, but rather

appears as a razor thin discontinuity with its own surface mass density. The equations are

similar when a minus sign is taken in equation (1), but we do not consider that case further

in this paper, except (partially) in what we call the anisotropic case in section 4.

We emphasize that, for gas rising from the disc, the magnetic stress component BzBφ/4π >

0 in the halo, whatever the sign in equation (1). This implies that angular momentum is

transferred from the galactic disc to the halo gas as it ejects from the disc. The lag calculated

under this assumption is thus a consequence of magnetic coupling to the rotating disc, given

the inter-galactic drag imposed by the systemic boundary condition. For gas accreting onto

the disc (BφBz < 0), drag from the intergalactic medium is slowing its approach to the disc

velocity. Either the speciﬁc angular momentum of the ejected gas is partially maintained

above the systemic value starting from the disc value, or it is gradually increased from the

systemic value to the disc value for infalling gas.

Proceeding with assumption (1) the Navier-Stokes equation reduces to (we do not apply

the steady state assumption immediately)

p
ρ

+

B2
8πρ

−∇(
Here, the notations are standard except that g is the gravitational ﬁeld due to disc and

) + ν∇2(v) + g = ∂tv.

(2)

collisionless halo, and ν is the kinematic viscosity.

In addition, because of the incompressibility assumption for the halo gas, we must have

∇ · v = ∇ · B = 0.
The combined Amp`ere, Faraday and Ohm equation becomes under isotropic equipartition

(3)

∂tB = η∇2B,
where the resistivity is η = c2/(4πσ) and σ is the conductivity of the halo gas. Evidently, in

(4)

MNRAS 000, 1–25 (2015)

Magnetized galactic halos and velocity lags

7

an equipartition steady state, this reduces to (provided η 6= 0)
∇2B = ∇2v = 0.

(5)

Equation (5) seems to render the resistivity irrelevant. However there is an argument,
found by comparing the equation (4) to the equation for the vorticity (ω ≡ ∇ × v)
in an incompressible ﬂuid (found from the curl of equation 2) which suggests that (e.g.

Landau & Lifshitz 1960)

B ∝ ω
iﬀ ν = η.

(6)

In fact the time-dependent equipartition equations are only self-consistent when this

equality of the diﬀusion coeﬃcients holds, because the curl of equation (4) and that of

equation (2) would otherwise not agree. Equation (5) avoids the inconsistency in the steady

state, but the relation (6) might still apply (the vorticity and the magnetic ﬁeld both satisfy

the vector Laplace equation). We must avoid the relation (6) because then we would have
∇ ∧ v ∝ v, which implies a similar relation for B. This would be Beltrami ﬂow for the
velocity ﬁeld and the force-free condition for the magnetic ﬁeld.

Because we wish the magnetic ﬁeld to exert a torque on the halo, the force-free condition

must be avoided. Thus we insist that ν > η, which inequality aids turbulent preservation

of the magnetic ﬁeld (Landau & Lifshitz 1960). This is a kind of ‘phantom’ assumption as

the viscosity does not appear subsequently in isotropic equipartition, although it does in the

anisotropic case. Even in the event that ν = η, Beltrami or force-free ﬂow is not the only
possible conclusion depending on boundary conditions, but we will assume that ν 6= η.

The disc of the galaxy will be taken as a ‘razor thin’ Mestel disc rotating with uniform

velocity Vbeφ. Such a disc has a scale-free surface density in terms of its cylindrical radius r

σ(r) =

(7)

Σ
δr

,

Where Σ is a constant and δ is a convenient reciprocal scale that is arbitrary. We will

introduce this more precisely below. The gravitational potential of the Mestel disc is given

by

Φd =

2πGΣ

δ

sinh−1(ξ) +

2πGΣ

δ

ln (δr),

(8)

where G is Newton’s constant and ξ ≡ z/r in cylindrical coordinates {r, φ, z} relative to
the polar axis of the galaxy. The constant rotational velocity is related to the constant Σ

MNRAS 000, 1–25 (2015)

8

R.N. Henriksen & J.A. Irwin

through

V 2 =

2πGΣ

δ

.

(9)

The reciprocal scale δ may be taken so that δro = 1 at some ﬁducial radius ro, if this radius

is a convenient disc radius. If the density is also known at ro, then Σ is ﬁxed by equation (7).

Should ro be small compared to the observable disc, as for example if it is made to represent

a turbulent, viscous scale, then δr >> 1, but a measurement of the disc density at r would

still determine Σ, given δ.

The Mestel disc is actually an example of an isothermal or homothetic self-similarity

in terms of the invariant ξ (e.g. Henriksen 2012, 2015), because the existence of the multi-

plicative constant V 2 renders a Dimensionless logarithmic potential compatible with isother-

mal/homothetic Self-Similarity. Because of this latter freedom a spherically symmetric, grav-

itating, dark or stellar halo may be added to the source of the halo gravitational ﬁeld in the

form (subscript c for ‘collisionless’)

Φc = λV 2 ln (δrp1 + ξ2),

collisionless halo gravitational ﬁelds.

where λ is an Dimensionless constant, which gives the relative importance of the disc and

(10)

(11)

The gravitational ﬁeld due to the disc is found from gd = −∇Φd, which yields

gd =

V 2

r  

ξ

p1 + ξ2 − 1!ber − V 2
1 + ξ2bez.
1 + ξ2ber −

V 2
r

λξ

1

rp1 + ξ2 bez.

The ﬁeld due to the collisionless spherical halo is gc = −∇Φc or
gc = −
We assume equilibrium of the halo gas under the sum of these two ﬁelds, namely g, plus

V 2
r

(12)

λ

magnetic stresses.

3

SCALE-FREE SOLUTION

In the steady state equation (5) applies, so that in cylindrical coordinates with axial sym-

metry and a steady state, equation (2) yields

− ∂r(

−∂z(

p
ρ
p
ρ

) − ∂r(

) − ∂z(

v2
2
v2
2

) + gr = 0,

) + gz = 0,

(13)

MNRAS 000, 1–25 (2015)

Magnetized galactic halos and velocity lags

9

where g = gd + gc and the disc and collisionless halo components are given in the previous

section. In order to ﬁnd a scale-free solution it suﬃces to require

v = V w(ξ),

(14)

which implies by equation (1) a similar form for B. Proceeding with this assumption in

equations (13), remembering the form of ξ, and then adding the equations yields

r∂r(

p
ρ

) + z∂z(

p
ρ

) = −V 2(λ + 1),

(15)

which has the general solution in terms of an arbitrary function P (ξ)
p
ρ

= −V 2(λ + 1) ln δr + V 2P (ξ).
If we substitute this last expression into either one of equations (13) we obtain an ex-

(16)

pression for the pressure function in terms of the velocity as
d
dξ

λξ
1 + ξ2 .

) = −

(P (ξ) +

w2
2

1

p1 + ξ2 −

To complete the solution we must ﬁnd the velocity ﬁeld compatible with equations (3) and

(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

(5).

Applying axial symmetry the divergence condition (3) yields, where ()′ ≡ d()/dξ,
r − wr − w′

z = 0.

ξw′

Equation (5) becomes explicitly assuming axial symmetry

(1 + ξ2)w′′

r + ξw′

(1 + ξ2)w′′

φ + ξw′

(1 + ξ2)w′′

r − wr = 0,
φ − wφ = 0,
z + ξw′
z = 0,

These equations for the velocity are over determined, but one can ﬁnd a self-consistent

solution.

The z component of equations (19) integrates to give generally

wz = c1 ln (ξ +p1 + ξ2) + c2 ≡ c1sinh−1(ξ) + c2,

so that unless c1 = 0 there is a logarithmic divergence at large ξ ≡ z/r. Nevertheless wz is
constant on cones ξ = const., and when ξ is large the cone collapses onto the axis of the

galaxy. This is similar (although less violent) to the behaviour of the radial velocity found

below. We can avoid this divergence by taking c1 = 0 and wz = c2. This would describe

constant mass ejection into the halo from the disc (or constant infall). Allowing the divergent

behaviour at large ξ would correspond to a central AGN behaviour.
r−wr = w′

The incompressible condition (18) generally requires ξw′

z, which may be solved

MNRAS 000, 1–25 (2015)

10

R.N. Henriksen & J.A. Irwin

for wr as

wr = c3 ξ − c1p1 + ξ2,

where c3 is a new constant. This solution also satisﬁes the radial component of equations

(19). The strong divergence at large ξ appears unacceptable, so that we might set c3 = c1.

However if we wish the Mestel disc at ξ = 0 to be in equilibrium with wr = 0, we must set

c1 = 0. This renders wz = c2 constant and wr = c3ξ, which diverges at large ξ. We proceed

with this special case in all of our ﬁgures.

The unique dependence on ξ of wr implies that the radial velocity takes ﬁnite values on

cones centered on the nucleus of the galaxy and wrapped around its axis. The velocity is

inﬁnite on the galactic axis and it is zero on the galactic disc. Despite the inﬁnite radial

velocity on the axis, the radial mass ﬂux is ﬁnite there. Near the disc the presence of vr

allows the total velocity ﬁeld and magnetic ﬁeld to take on an ‘X-shape’ above the plane,
which is desirable (Krause 2009, 2015). We will therefore proceed with c3 6= 0, but we do
not expect to apply this solution to the axis of the galaxy. In fact, our ﬁgures show that the

region of interest above the disc never approaches the axial region.

The azimuthal velocity component of equations (19) is of most interest to us as it de-

scribes any velocity lag in the halo. Its form depends only indirectly on the pressure and

gravity ﬁelds through equation (17). By constraining the solution for the halo rotation to

show a lag, we are constraining the pressure ﬁeld through the function P (ξ), given the

gravitation of the Mestel disc and of the collisionless halo.

The formal solution of the azimuthal member of equations (19) is

wφ = c4 ξ + c5p1 + ξ2.

We have the boundary condition at the disc as wφ(0) = 1, and hence c5 = 1. In order that
the velocity vanish as ξ → ∞ we must choose c4 = −1. This is the ‘systemic’ boundary
condition, which implies a strong frictional interaction with the intergalactic medium. With

these boundary conditions the constraint solution for the halo lag in isotropic equipartition

is

(21)

(22)

(23)

wφ =p1 + ξ2 − ξ,

which is parameter free, but assumes the necessary equilibrium. We observe that this form
also goes to 1 (vφ → V ) at a ﬁxed height above the disc (ﬁxed z) at large radius where ξ → 0.
This means that the galactic disc is surrounded by a cylinder rotating with the velocity V !

This represents an asymptotic Taylor-Proudman column (e.g. Greenspan 1980). It leads to

MNRAS 000, 1–25 (2015)

Magnetized galactic halos and velocity lags

11

an observable increase in the halo rotation with radius, which we shall discuss again in an

observational context. We have thus determined both the velocity and magnetic ﬁelds in the

lagging halo in (isotropic) equipartition.

The pressure function P (ξ) follows now from equation (17) in the form

w2

z + w2
r + w2
φ
2

λ
2

P (ξ) = c6 − (
where c6 is a constant to be determined from c6 = P (0) + (w(0)2)/2. Here w2

φ follows from
equation (23) while wr and wz are given generally by equations (21) and (20) respectively,

ln (1 + ξ2) − sinh−1(ξ),

) −

(24)

but the simplest solution has c1 = 0.

The total halo pressure is given by equation (16) so that

P (0) =

1
V 2 (

)(r) + (1 + λ) ln δr = c6 −

(1 + c2
2)

2

.

(25)

We have already discussed the behaviour of the radial and vertical velocities in equation

p

ρ(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)o

(24). The apparent logarithmic potential divergence with ξ in that equation is due to the

collisionless halo that was taken inﬁnite in extent. This term is constant on cones just as are

the radial and vertical velocities.

Model parameters must exist such that the pressure from equation (16) is positive over

some reasonable vertical extent for the gaseous halo. There is always a limit for the physical

plausibility of wr at large enough ξ. At any radius this occurs where a vertical cylinder of

this radius intersects a cone of unreasonably small opening angle and it is usually so large

as to be unphysical. More directly, the condition for zero pressure becomes by equation (16)

P (ξ) = (λ + 1) ln δr. We proceed by eliminating c6 from equation (24) using equation (25).

Subsequently we insert wz = c2 and the forms of wr and wφ as functions of ξ into equation

(24). This equation may be manipulated until the zero pressure condition is on one side of

the equation. The other side then yields a condition on ξm where the pressure tends to zero

in the form

(26)

a2

s0(r) + ξm(p1 + ξ2

m − ξm) =

c2
3ξ2
m
2

+ ln (1 + ξ2

m)λ/2(ξm +p1 + ξ2

m).

We have set a2
s0 ≡ (p/ρ)0V −2. For the parameters of ﬁgure (3) (that is λ = 1, c3 = 0.1,
a2
s0 = 4) this formula gives ξm ≈ 6.05 in agreement with the illustration. Equation (26) is
readily solved numerically for any particular choice of parameters. If a2
s0 is converted to a

temperature, it lies in the x-ray range. This suggests once again that we are dealing with a

dominant hot halo component.

We have found in this section the complete behaviour of an equipartition, steady, axially-

symmetric, model. Magnetically and kinematically the solution is scale-invariant on cones.

MNRAS 000, 1–25 (2015)

12

R.N. Henriksen & J.A. Irwin

The magnetic ﬁeld and the velocity ﬁeld are helical ( wound on cones when vr 6= 0), becoming
straight (ultimately radial) at large distances. The magnetic ﬁeld is thus tightly wound at the

galactic disc and anchored in the inter-galactic medium . This conﬁguration allows angular

momentum to be transferred from the halo to the inter-galactic medium. For accreting halo

material (and the positive sign in equation 1) this gives BφBz < 0 and the drag is explicit. For

gas rising from the disc (so that Bz > 0) BφBz > 0 and the disc is moderating the imposed

descent to the systemic velocity. However one would expect on the basis of causality (not

included in the steady state) that we require BφBz < 0 also in this conﬁguration. This

requires anisotropic equipartition that we consider in the next section.

4 ANISOTROPIC EQUIPARTITION HALO

We turn to the anisotropic possibility wherein the rising halo gas is directly dragged by the

intergalactic medium. In this case angular momentum of the halo can be transferred to inter-

galactic space. We require BzBφ/4π < 0 everywhere, which is achieved by the anisotropic

version of equipartition for rising gas. This conﬁguration oﬀers an intriguing magnetic link

between the ejection activity of the disc and the inter-galactic medium. The predicted lag

can nevertheless be similar to that found above for isotropic equipartition.

We proceed with the same form of the scale-free solution as in the previous section.

However in place of equation (1) we require only

∇ × (v × B) = 0,
which follows from the steady MHD equation when the resistivity is zero. The radial com-

(27)

=

wz
bz

(= 1),

ponent of this equation gives
wr
br
which ratio we set equal to one to enforce poloidal equipartition (it might also be −1, but
then bφ = vφ for anisotropy). The z component of this equation reduces to an identity, while

(28)

the azimuthal component can be written after some manipulation as
d
dξ
We have used equation (28) to replace poloidal ﬁeld components with poloidal velocity

(wφ − bφ)(wz − ξwφ) = wr(wφ − bφ).

(29)

components in this relation, and subsequently used the divergence condition (18), in order

to obtain this form.

The azimuthal component of the Navier-Stokes equation no longer reduces to equation

MNRAS 000, 1–25 (2015)

(5). In fact it becomes

Magnetized galactic halos and velocity lags

13

(wz − ξwr)
We have extended the Self-Similar symmetry to include the viscosity according to Dimen-

(wφ − bφ) + wr(wφ − bφ) =

φ(1 + ξ2) + ξw′

(30)

φ − wφ(cid:1) .

νδ

V (cid:0)w′′

d
dξ

sional analysis as dictated by the constant velocity of the underlying Mestel disc. That is,
the compatible kinematic viscosity is ∝ V r. Hence
ν = νeδR ≡ νδr,
where ν is a constant. The general theory of such analysis has recently been discussed (e.g.

(31)

Henriksen (2015)) and is summarized in the footnote. 1 If we combine equation (29) with

equation (31), and use the anisotropic condition

bφ = −wφ,
we obtain the important relation

4wrwφ =

φ(1 + ξ2) + ξw′

νδ

V (cid:0)w′′

φ − wφ(cid:1) .

This is the equation for the halo lag with the assumption of anisotropic equipartition. If

(32)

(33)

wr = 0, we return to the lag of the isotropic model that is given by setting the RHS equal to

zero. In that case the ﬁelds are wrapped on cylinders with no ‘X structure’. In the anisotropic

model we must ﬁnd equations for both wr and wz.

The ﬁnal form of the Self-Similar symmetry is the expression for the pressure. Equation

(16) does not follow in such a compelling way from the radial and vertical dynamical equa-

tions in this case, because the radial component has the extra inertial term w2

φ − b2

φ on the

RHS. We can still assume that
p
ρ
on physical grounds because it is the most general form in isothermal Self-Similarity. The

= V 2P (ξ) − V 2(λ + 1) ln δr,

(34)

radial and vertical dynamical equations now become after the usual substitutions
r − wr) + (λ + 1) + rgr

r (1 + ξ2) + ξw′

z+w2
r +w2
φ
2

ξ d
dξ (P +

w2

) + (w2
w2

φ − b2

φ) + νδ
φ+w2
r +w2
2

V (w′′
) + νδ

φ

− d
dξ (P +

v (w′′

z (1 + ξ2) + ξw′

z) + rgz

V 2 = 0

V 2 = 0, (35)

(36)

To proceed we need a small lemma. Diﬀerentiating the divergence condition (18) yields

ξw′′

r = w′′

z and this together with the divergence condition shows that

(1 + ξ2)w′′

r + ξw′

r − wr ≡

1
ξ

(w′′

z (1 + ξ2) + ξw′

z).

(37)

1 The Dimensional co-vectors are dν = (−1, 2, 0) and α = δ so that ﬁnally dν = (0, 1, 0).

MNRAS 000, 1–25 (2015)

14

R.N. Henriksen & J.A. Irwin

This lemma allows us to eliminate these two expressions, ﬁrst by multiplying equation (35)

by ξ and then subtracting equation (36) to obtain

(1 + ξ2)

d
dξ

(P +

z + b2
φ

w2

r + w2
2

) + (λ + 1)ξ +p1 + ξ2 − ξ = 0.

(38)

We have put in the components of the gravitational ﬁeld explicitly and used again the

anisotropic condition. Our actual working equation follows by using equation (38) in equation

(36) to eliminate the gradient term. We use the anisotropic condition and the explicit form

of gz to ﬁnd once again that in fact

(1 + ξ2)w′′

z + ξw′

z = 0.

(39)

Hence by the lemma, wr and wz are given by the general solutions (21) and (20) respectively.

We need now only to solve equation (33) for wφ after which equation (38) yields the pressure

function P (ξ). The latter is identical to equation (17) but for the more general solution for

wφ that follows from equation (33). In particular equations (24) and (25) continue to apply.

In ﬁgure (1) we compare two anisotropic equipartition cases to the isotropic case.

We recall that δ is an arbitrary reciprocal scale and may be chosen so as to resolve

the scale deemed physically important. In this way its choice permits a kind of adjustable

‘magniﬁcation’ by which to view the system. Only Σ/δ plus some characteristic radius need

be given to ﬁx the physical disc surface density everywhere. The quantity ξ is scale invariant

so that only the ratio δr (with r a ﬁducial or characteristic radius) varies.

If for example we suppose 1/δ to be on the scale of the turbulence creating the viscos-
ity, then k ≡ V /(νδ) = 1. This increases the value of 1/δ relative to the reciprocal of a
characteristic disc radius. Consequently the disc surface density constant Σ would be re-

duced proportionately in order to keep the physical surface density the same, according to
equation (7). This choice renders δr ∼ 10, given a characteristic disc radius r. Taking in
addition c1 = 0, c3 = 0, we obtain the upper pair of curves in ﬁgure 1. The diﬀerence with

the isotropic solution is probably too small to be of observational consequence although the

descent to systemic velocity is steeper.

This trend to an increasingly rapid descent is accentuated in the lower pair of ﬁgures

where k = 10 since we have now chosen 1/δ such that δr = 1 for a characteristic disc radius

r. The decline to systemic velocity is seen to be much steeper than in the isotropic case. Such

lag behaviour may still be acceptable at say r = 2 kpc, where systemic velocity is reached
only at z = 6 − 8 kpc. In any case one can always reduce the diﬀerence with the isotropic
lag by reducing the radial velocity. For this reason we study preferentially the isotropic case

MNRAS 000, 1–25 (2015)

Magnetized galactic halos and velocity lags

15

Figure 1. At upper left we compare the anisotropic lag velocity (dashed line) to the isotropic velocity lag (solid line), both as
functions of ξ = z/r. Here c1 = 0, c3 = 0.1 and k ≡ V /(νδ) = 1. On the upper right ﬁgure we plot the actual slope in units of
δV for the anisotropic (dashed) and isotropic cases (solid). The lower half of the ﬁgure shows the same two quantities with the
same constants except that k = 10.

below. Nevertheless the anisotropic model best describes a halo lag due to gas rising from

the galaxy, if the intuitive convective causal mechanism for the steady state magnetic ﬁeld

(twisting the inter-galactic ﬁeld) is invoked.

MNRAS 000, 1–25 (2015)

16

R.N. Henriksen & J.A. Irwin

5 HALO LAG, VERTICALLY AND RADIALLY

Recently (Zschaechner & Rand 2015a,b), a radial dependence on the vertical lag rate has

been detected. We show in this section how this is contained in the expression (23).

In cylindrical coordinates at rest in the galactic centre, equation (23) implies that the

halo azimuthal velocity (and corresponding azimuthal magnetic ﬁeld) is

Bφ√4πρ

V
r

(√r2 + z2 − z).

=

vφ ≡
which reduces to the boundary conditions, vφ = V at z = 0 and vφ → 0 as z → ∞. If, for
example, V = 220 km/sec and r = z = 8 kpc, then vφ = 0.4V = 88 km/sec.

(40)

The parameter free version of this curve is plotted in ﬁgure (2). One should remember
that ξ = z/r is constant on cones (θ = π/2 − tan−1(ξ) is the opening angle). The rotational
velocity becomes small on a cone whose opening angle approaches 0◦. The lag-rate (see

equation (41) is also small there. At any r this cone will be intercepted at suﬃciently high

z, while at any z it will be intercepted at suﬃciently small r. Such locations may well be

unobservable in practice.

The vertical lag-rate is given from equation (40) by

∂zvφ =

V

√r2 + z2 ! ,
r   z − √r2 + z2

(41)

which declines with increasing r and with increasing z. For example, at the disc z = 0 so
that ∂zvφ|o = −V /r. If V = 220 km/sec and r = 8 kpc, then the maximum lag rate at this
radius is ∼ 27.5 km/sec/kpc. In ﬁgure (2) we show this variation at r = 1/δ, where 1/δ is a
ﬁducial length scale. The lag-rate is in units of δV . We also show in the ﬁgure the variation
with r of the vertical lag-rate at a height z = 2/δ. There is a radius (∼ 2.5/δ) at which the
halo has a maximum vertical lag-rate, although this is not so evident at smaller z.

6 SPATIAL STRUCTURE OF THE ISOTROPIC SOLUTION

In ﬁgure (3) we show some examples of the spatial structure of the velocity/magnetic ﬁeld

(we do not distinguish between parallel and antiparallel magnetic ﬁeld). At upper left we
show two ﬁeld lines wrapping around the axis of the galaxy, starting at azimuth ±0.5 radians.
The parameters c3 = 0.1 and c2 = 0.05, both in Units of V . The ﬁgure at upper right is a

more nearly side-on image of the same system. The ‘zig-zag’ projected shape of the ﬁeld line

is characteristic. One must imagine the ﬁeld lines at diﬀerent azimuths.

The global ﬁeld plot at lower left is made for c3 = 0.1 but c2 = 0.2. The image is for the

MNRAS 000, 1–25 (2015)

Magnetized galactic halos and velocity lags

17

Figure 2. The ﬁgure shows at upper left the rotational velocity in the gaseous halo as s function of ξ = z/r in units of V . As r
increases z ∝ r for the same fractional decrease in velocity. Hence the lag rate declines with radius. At ﬁxed r the curve shows
the decline with z. At ﬁxed z the curve gives the dependence on r when read from right to left. At upper right the actual lag
rate is shown as a function of z when r = 1. Both scales are in Units of a ﬁducial scale 1/δ. The lag-rate is in Units of δV . At
lower left the dashed curve shows the variation of the vertical lag-rate with radius at z = 2/δ. The Units are the same as at
upper right.

upper half plane only. The angle extending to about 0.25 radians from the axis has been cut

out. We see the ﬁeld parallel to the disc at the equator, subsequently rising to circulate on

diﬀerent conical structures. This conﬁguration yields an ‘X-type’ transverse ﬁeld near the

disc, which declines in z. Such a conﬁguration predicts that there should be a reversal in the

sign of the Faraday rotation across the axis of the galaxy. This has been detected for the

Milky Way (Farrar 2015).

The pressure in Units of ρV 2 is shown at lower right for the same parameters as for

MNRAS 000, 1–25 (2015)

18

R.N. Henriksen & J.A. Irwin

Figure 3. At upper left we show ﬁeld lines that start in the plane at azimuths ±0.5 radians. The parameters are c3 = 0.1
and c2 = 0.05 in Units of the disc rotational velocity V . At upper right there is a slightly rotated view of the same ﬁeld lines.
At lower left we show a global velocity ﬁeld line plot of the solution for the same c3 but c2 = 0.2. It is in the upper half plane
with the polar angle ≤ 0.25 radians removed for clarity. The projected magnetic ﬁeld (either parallel or anti-parallel to the
velocity) shows an ‘X-type’ ﬁeld between the equatorial disc and the polar region. Faraday rotation due to the ﬁeld along the
line of sight will change sign across the axis. The pressure in Units of ρV 2 is shown at lower right for the same parameters as
in the upper ﬁgures plus λ = 1, δr = 1 and p/(ρV 2) = 4 at the equator. Since the radius is ﬁxed in the plot, ξ = z/r = zδ.

the ﬁeld/stream lines, but λ = 1 = δr and (p/ρV 2)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)o

= 4. The pressure becomes negative

under these conditions at ξ = 6.05 (as per equation 26), that is z = 6.05/δ where δr = 1.

Beyond this point the required equilibrium can not be maintained. If 1/δ = 2 kpc, then

this may well continue into the inter-galactic medium before becoming time dependent. The

time dependence is likely the manifestation of Alfv´en waves carrying the necessary ﬂux of

angular momentum before the steady state is reached.

The required temperature of the halo gas just above the equatorial disc is ∼ 1 − 2 keV .

MNRAS 000, 1–25 (2015)

Magnetized galactic halos and velocity lags

19

This may be reduced if the halo at this radius is not of equal gravitational importance to

the disc (λ < 1). To a lesser extent this value can also be reduced by reducing the radial

velocity at the disc, but this would also minimize the ‘X structure’ of the ﬁelds.

We have not used an equation of state in our discussions. This is normal for incompressible

gas ﬂows. However the pressure inferred is ‘dynamic’ and need not be due only to hot gas. In

particular, there may be a contribution from inhomogeneous sub-scale turbulence. However

to make a signiﬁcant contribution to the pressure, the turbulent velocities would need to be

comparable to the mean ﬂow. A constant pressure produced externally is possible, but in a

realistic case such as that provided by ’ram pressure’ axial symmetry would be broken at

large scales.

7 REAL GALAXIES

In this section, we wish to compare our results, speciﬁcally, Eqns. 40 and 41, with mea-

surements of real galaxies. Such measurements are observationally challenging, given the

faintness of halos in comparison to disks and also the spatial resolution that is required to

resolve such halos in the z direction. Nevertheless a growing number of galaxies are showing

such eﬀects (e.g. see references in the Introduction).

In Fig. 4a, we show Vφ as a function of radius for NGC 891. The data, kindly supplied

by Dr. Filippo Fraternali (Oosterloo et al. 2007, see their Fig. 15), provided the best model

ﬁt to the HI observations in this galaxy. They are shown as the curves with points for the

midplane and for three heights, z, above the major axis. The solid curves (blue, green and

red) show our values using Eqn. 40, where V is the underlying measured in-disk rotational

velocity (curve at z = 0). Since our coherent model assumes a constant midplane rotational

velocity, we show an additional curve at z=4.5 kpc over the region from 4 to 18 kpc which

corresponds to a constant midplane value of V =220 km/s (the average of the measured

points). These curves are reasonable representations of the data, given the simplicity of

our model. Moreover the data were extracted after modeling the observations by various

empirical velocity components (Oosterloo et al. 2007), of which ours was not one.

One should emphasize here that our model applies to the pressure dominant component of

the halo gas, which may be a very hot component (see the discussion concerning the criterion

26). This is not seen directly in the HI observations employed here. In fact in the event that

a hot halo gas does dominate, then this paper only describes a magnetically mediated lag

MNRAS 000, 1–25 (2015)

20

R.N. Henriksen & J.A. Irwin

200

z=0

)
s
/

m
k
(
 
V

150

100

z=1.5

z=3.0

50

z=4.5

0

5

10

r (kpc)

15

z=4.5 kpc

z=3.0 kpc

0

−10

)
c
p
k
/
s
/

m
k
(
 
z
d
/
V
d

−20

−30

NGC 891

−40

z=1.5 kpc

(a)

20

−50

0

NGC 891

(b)

20

5

10

r (kpc)

15

Figure 4. (a) Azimuthal velocity as a function of radius for the midplane (black curve) as well as three diﬀerent heights above
the midplane (z = 1.5 kpc: blue, z = 3.0 kpc: green, and z = 4.5 kpc: red). The data are shown with curves and points (see
Oosterloo et al. 2007) and our results, from Eqn. 40, are shown as solid curves without points in matching colours. The extra
solid curve, shown in magenta, represents the z=4.5 kpc curve for which the rotation curve is taken to be completely ﬂat with
V =220 km/s. (b) Lag as a function of radius (black curve with points from Oosterloo et al. 2007). The three curves without
points, from Eqn. 41, are shown for three diﬀerent values of z with colour coding as above.

of that component. Its transmission to the HI gas (perhaps clouds) would then have to

be by way of the coupling mechanism explored in the series of papers Fraternali & Binney

(2008),Marinacci et al. (2010),Marinacci et al. (2011) and references therein. A synthesis

between this work and those must be left to future work.

Lag rates as a function of radius for various galaxies have been nicely summarized in

Fig. 11 of Zschaechner & Rand (2015b). They show a wide range of values and tend to

be crude, given measurement limitations, but the trend to lower lag rates with increasing

r is quite clear. The most extreme example belongs to NGC 4565, which shows a lag of

-40 km/s/kpc at r=0.5R25 to 0 km/s/kpc by r=R25. In NGC 891, as illustrated by the

black curve with points in Fig. 4b, the gradient is steep (-43 km/s/kpc) at small radii, and
decreases to -14 km/s/kpc at r ≈ 12 kpc after which it is approximately constant with
radius. For NGC 891, as with other galaxies, only a single lag rate can be measured at any

given radius so no measurements of the variation of the lag rate with z are available.

Superimposed on Fig. 4b are three curves depicting the lag rate for three diﬀerent values

of z, as calculated from Eqn. 41. The z=1.5 kpc curve matches quite well but at higher value

of z, there are signiﬁcant departures at low r. If existing lag rate data are more applicable

to lower values of z, as might be expected from measurements which are weighted towards

brighter emission, then the agreement is very good. As data improve in the future, so that

MNRAS 000, 1–25 (2015)

variations in lag rate with z become available, then such curves may provide a way of testing

Magnetized galactic halos and velocity lags

21

this simple model.

Finally, we show in Fig. 5, the ﬁeld structure derived from Fig. 3 (lower left), shown here

in simple single plane-views. Since the B ﬁeld and velocity ﬁeld are in equipartition in the

halo, the vectors represent either B or v.

The left image shows the X-type ﬁeld structure that results when observing the galaxy

edge-on. This image shows a single slice parallel to the sky plane. In reality, to obtain an

exact comparison between a real galaxy and our model requires an integration of all vectors

along the line of sight weighted by emissivity. This is beyond the scope of our model but

the structure clearly shows the X-type behaviour that is observed in many edge-on systems.

We note that the ﬁeld vectors are vertical at the disc, then pass through an ‘X-type’ region.

Ultimately, as ξ continues to increase vertically, the ﬁeld will be dominated by the radial

component and become parallel to the plane. The intermediate region is roughly where
ξ ∼ c2/c3, that is ξ = 2 for the case shown.

On the right of ﬁgure 5 is a ‘top-down’ view of the halo velocity/magnetic ﬁeld. The

ﬁgure is really an axi-symmetric projection of the left hand ﬁgure onto a plane parallel

to the equatorial plane at a vertical height of 5 kpc. Assuming that one observes close to

this plane as is the case for edge-on galaxies, the ﬁgure illustrates how the direction of the

magnetic ﬁeld would reverse depending on which side of the galaxy center is being observed.

Such a reversal is a prediction of this model and should be observable in Faraday Rotation.

The ﬁgure also illustrates the initial decrease with radius of the circular velocity, and the

subsequent increase to form the Taylor-Proudman column at large radii.

8 DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

Our basic conclusion is that the halo lag phenomenon may indicate a magnetic coupling

between the halo gas and the inter-galactic medium. The evidence is summarized in ﬁgures

(4) and (5a). Ultimately the coupling is between the disc of the galaxy and the distant

environment, because we require the magnetic ﬁeld to be ‘anchored’ in both locations. This

explanation requires a large scale magnetic ﬁeld, such as might be produced by dynamo

action during the formation of the galaxy. Such dynamo action has not been included here,

however.

We have explored this possibility using a simple, scale-invariant, analytic, model that

MNRAS 000, 1–25 (2015)

22

R.N. Henriksen & J.A. Irwin

Figure 5. (a) A vector ﬁeld in the r-z plane showing the X-type structure of either the magnetic ﬁeld lines, B, or velocity, v,
in the halo. The model is scale-free, but in this view, r and z can be thought of as being in units of kpc. A single plane parallel
to the sky is shown for c3 = 0.1 and c2 = 0.2 so that vz /vr = 2. (b) A view of the same ﬁeld looking from above (i.e. observing
a plane parallel to the galaxy disk) for a height of 5 kpc.

assumes a steady state. Equipartition between the kinetic energy density of the halo gas

and the magnetic energy density there is also part of the model. The gravitational ﬁelds

of a Mestel disc and of an isothermal collisionless halo are included. The disc has a strictly

constant rotational velocity V and all gravitational, magnetic, and velocity ﬁelds incorporate

this constant. Hence the model can not be applied to central regions of the galaxy. This also

implies a height limit in z, because ultimately an unreasonable radial velocity associated

with the central region of the galaxy is encountered. Fortunately this is normally beyond

the observable region.

The scale-invariance requires the viscosity of the constant density halo gas to be pro-

portional to the radius. A consequence of this assumption together with that of constant

density is the development at large radius of a Taylor-Proudman column. This is uniform

in z and rotates with the speed V . It is likely that the assumptions break down before this

column is fully established, but it does aﬀect our predicted kinetic behaviour (see ﬁgures (4)

and (5).

The equipartition assumption allows us to infer the required magnetic ﬁeld strength from

equation (1), given the density and velocity of the relevant component. As estimated in the

introduction, the ﬁeld at the disc would need be as high as 10 µG if a gas of total gas density

0.01 cm−3 is rotating at the full disc velocity. This is rather higher than observed in most
galaxies Beck (2016), but we have seen that it is rather less (∼ 5 µG) for a more rareﬁed
hot component. In any case the main reason for the equipartition assumption is analytic

simplicity. There is no reason to believe that a magnetic ﬁeld less than the equipartition

value would not have a similar eﬀect over a longer time. In fact in view of the discussion

MNRAS 000, 1–25 (2015)

in the next paragraph, a weaker magnetic ﬁeld may even be more favourable to the basic

Magnetized galactic halos and velocity lags

23

mechanism.

The steady state assumption removes the causal path to equilibrium. The required cou-

pling and energy equipartition may originate in the formation stage of the galaxy

(Pakmor, Marinacci & Springel 2014). However for our mechanism to be plausible, the drag

on the gaseous galactic disc should not succeed in destabilizing it for a long period extending

backwards from the present epoch. This can require the time of magnetic disc-environment

coupling to occur at an epoch later than that of actual galaxy formation. A crude estimate
for a milky-way type galaxy suggests that this may be as late as red-shift ∼ 1, depending
principally on the mass of the gaseous disc and the strength of the magnetic stress. The

simulation in Pakmor, Marinacci & Springel (2014) concludes that the epoch of developed
galactic magnetic ﬁeld is at redshift ≤∼ 2, but we would probably need the coupling invoked
here to arise later than this.

Intuitively the coupling development admits two forms of the equipartition assumption,

which we refer to as ‘isotropic’ and ‘anisotropic’. The ﬁrst form intuitively conforms best to

coupling involving lagging accreting gas in the halo,because descending magnetic and velocity

ﬁelds are naturally held behind the disc rotation by the inter-galactic drag. The second form

with Bφ parallel to vφ while Bz is anti-parallel to vz establishes the same intuitive coupling

for lagging gas ejected from the disc.

The behaviour vertically ‘across’ (e.g. north/south) the disc depends on whether the

global magnetic ﬁeld is mainly dipolar or perhaps more nearly quadrupolar. However for

a largely dipolar ﬁeld, the two forms of equipartition apply in the same manner. That is

the isotropic case is intuitively appropriate for lagging gas descending to the disc, while the

anisotropic case describes intuitively lagging ejected gas.

The principal results that we have tested are those of equations (40) and (41). These are

displayed against the data for NGC891 in ﬁgure (4).There are some slight deviations only at

small r, using the underlying rotation curve for V (r) We have also indicated the prediction

at a height of 4.5 kpc if the rotation curve is ﬂat. The agreement seems satisfactory except

at large disc radii. This might be expected from our remarks regarding model limitations

previously in this section.

On the right of the ﬁgure we show the actual lag rate from equation (41). The observed

lag is one point at each radius that we have ﬁtted with our formula at a height of 1.5 kpc.

MNRAS 000, 1–25 (2015)

24

R.N. Henriksen & J.A. Irwin

The expected deviations at large and small radii become much more pronounced at larger

heights. Observations with improved resolution may detect these deviations.

Our ﬁnal ﬁgure (5) emphasizes on the left the ‘X-type’ magnetic ﬁeld (and velocity ﬁeld)
conﬁguration. We show simply an r − z plane without taking into account an integration
along the line of sight. This is left for more detailed modeling elsewhere. The angle of the

ﬁeld lines in the ﬁgure depends on the ratio of the vertical to radial velocities. We see that

the X conﬁguration is predicted to be an intermediate phenomenon, lying between vertical

ﬁelds near the disc and more radial ﬁelds at high z.

Figure (3) displays the ﬁeld structure in three dimensions, as well as a typical halo

pressure curve that is required to maintain the equilibrium. The upper ﬁgures require adding

ﬁeld lines in azimuth to form a complete picture. The 3d ﬁeld is illustrated at lower left,

but is more diﬃcult to interpret. The important prediction is that the sign of the Faraday

rotation should reverse across the axis of the galaxy.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We are grateful to Fillipo Fraternali for making available the data in Fig. 4. Also, many

thanks to R. Beck, R. Walterbos, Q. D. Wang, and M. Krause for helpful comments. JI

would like to thank the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada for

a Discovery Grant.

REFERENCES

Beck, R. 2016,A&AReview, 24,#4

Benjamin, R. A. 2012, EDP Sciences, EAS. 56, 299

Carollo, D., Beers, T., Chiba, M., Norris, J., Freeman, K., Lee, Y., Ivezi, Z., Rockosi, C. & Yanny, B. 2010, ApJ, 712, 692

de Vaucouleurs, G., et al. 1991, Third Reference Catalogues of Bright Galaxies, Version 3.9, Springer-Verlag: New York

Farrar, G. 2015, Astronomy in Focus, vol. 1, XXIXth IAU General Assembly, Ed. Piero Benvenuti

Ferri`ere, K., & Terral, P. 2014, A&A, 561, 100

Fraternali, F. & Binney, J. 2008,MNRAS,386,935

Greenspan, H. P. 1980, The theory of rotating ﬂuids, paperback ed., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K.

Gupta, A., Mathur, S., Krongold, K., Nicastro, F. & Galeazzi, M. 2012, ApJ, 756, L8

Hanasz, M., Woltanski, D., & Kowalik, K. 2009, ApJ, 706, L155

Heald, G., Rand, R., Benjamin, R., & Bershady, M. 2007, ApJ, 663, 933

Henriksen, R. N. 2012, arxiv:1207.5430

Henriksen, R. N. 2015, Scale Invariance: Self-Similarity of the Physical World, Wiley-VCH, 69469 Weinheim,Germany

Kamphuis, P., Peletier, R., Dettmar, R.-J., van der Hulst, J., van der Kruit, P., & Allen, R. 2007, A&A, 468, 951

Kennedy, H. 2009, MSc Thesis, Queen’s U. at Kingston, Ontario, Canada (http://hdl.handle.net/1974/5134)

MNRAS 000, 1–25 (2015)

Magnetized galactic halos and velocity lags

25

Krause, M. 2009, Rev. Mex. AA, 36, 25

Krause, M. 2015, Highlights of Astronomy, 16, 399

Landau, L., & Lifshitz, E, 1960, Electrodynamics of Continuous Media, Pergamon Press, Oxford

Li, J.-T., & Wang, Q. D. 2013, MNRAS, 428, 2085

Marinacci, F., Binney, J., Fraternali, F., Nipoti, C., Ciotti, L. & Londrillo, P. 2010, MNRAS, 404, 1464

Marinacci, F., Fraternali, F., Nipoti, C., Binney, J., Ciotti, L. & Londrillo, P. 2011, MNRAS, 415, 1534

Oosterloo, T., Fraternali, F., & Sancisi, R. 2007, AJ, 134, 1019

Pakmor, R., Marinacci, F., & Springel, V. 2014, ApJ, 783, L20

Rand, R. 2000, ApJ, 537, L13

Sofue, Y., Reuter, H.-P., Krause, M., Wielebinski, R. & Nakai, N. 1992, ApJ, 395, 126

T¨ullmann, R., Dettmar, R.-J., Soida, M., Urbanik, M. & Rossa, J. 2000, A&A, 364,36

Wiegert, T., Irwin, J. A., Miskolczi, A., Schmidt, P., Mora, S. C., Damas-Segovia, A., Stein, Y., English, J., Rand, R. J.,

Santistevan, I., plus 14 co-authors 2015, AJ, 150, 81

Zschaechner, L., Rand, R., & Walterbos, R. 2015a, ApJ, 799, 61

Zschaechner, L. & Rand, R. 2015b, ApJ, 808, 153

This paper has been typeset from a TEX/LATEX ﬁle prepared by the author.

MNRAS 000, 1–25 (2015)

