6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
0
1

 
 
]

.

A
G
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
2
3
3
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 000, 1–22 (2015)

Printed 11 March 2016

(MN LATEX style ﬁle v2.2)

Testing the eﬀect of galactic feedback on the IGM at z ∼ 6
with metal-line absorbers

Laura C. Keating1,2⋆, Ewald Puchwein1,2, Martin G. Haehnelt1,2, Simeon Bird3 and
James S. Bolton4
1Institute of Astronomy, University of Cambridge, Madingley Road, Cambridge, CB3 0HA, UK
2Kavli Institute for Cosmology, University of Cambridge, Madingley Road, Cambridge, CB3 0HA, UK
3Department of Physics and Astronomy, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
4School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Nottingham, University Park, Nottingham, NG7 2RD, UK

11 March 2016

ABSTRACT
We present models of low- and high-ionization metal-line absorbers (O i, C ii, C iv and
Mg ii) during the end of the reionization epoch, at z ∼ 6. Using four cosmological hy-
drodynamical simulations with diﬀerent feedback schemes (including the Illustris and
Sherwood simulations) and two diﬀerent choices of hydro-solver, we investigate how
the overall incidence rate and equivalent width distribution of metal-line absorbers
varies with the galactic wind prescription. We ﬁnd that the O i and C ii absorbers
are reasonably insensitive to the feedback scheme. All models, however, struggle to
reproduce the observations of C iv and Mg ii, which are probing down to lower over-
densities than O i and C ii at z ∼ 6, suggesting that the metals in the simulations are
not being transported out into the IGM eﬃciently enough. The situation is improved
but not resolved if we choose a harder (but still reasonable) and/or (locally) increased
UV background at z ∼ 6.

Key words: galaxies: high-redshift – quasars: absorption lines – intergalactic medium
– methods: numerical – dark ages, reionization, ﬁrst stars

1

INTRODUCTION

Observations of metal absorption lines in the spectra
of QSOs out to z & 6 (e.g., Ryan-Weber et al. 2009;
Becker et al. 2011; Simcoe et al. 2011; D’Odorico et al.
2013) are providing an important probe into the enrich-
ment and ionization state of the high-redshift intergalactic
medium (IGM). Ions with atomic transitions redward of Lyα
(Lyα) provide the opportunity to study the metal-enriched
IGM in absorption, even after the saturation of the Lyα for-
est at z ∼ 6 (see Becker, Bolton & Lidz 2015, for a recent
review on quasar absorption lines during the reionization
epoch). Detections of diﬀerent ions can provide complemen-
tary information, as high- and low-ionization lines tend to
trace gas at diﬀerent densities and temperatures. In this
work, we focus our eﬀorts on modelling four ions: O i, C ii,
C iv and Mg ii as Becker et al. (2011), Matejek & Simcoe
(2012) and D’Odorico et al. (2013) have published equiva-
lent widths for absorption systems containing these ions out
to z ∼ 6. Understanding detections of O i is particularly
useful for observations pushing into the reionization epoch,
as O i can provide an important analogue for the presence

⋆ E-mail: lck35@ast.cam.ac.uk

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS

of neutral hydrogen due to their similar ionization energies
(Oh 2002).

Modelling these absorption systems is a non-trivial
task, however, due to the uncertainties in the shape and
amplitude of the UV background at z ∼ 6 as well
as to which density the IGM is enriched with metals
(Oppenheimer, Dav´e & Finlator 2009). High-resolution sim-
ulations are also required to accurately resolve the small
self-shielded systems responsible for hosting the neutral gas
(Bolton & Haehnelt 2013). Previous works have also ex-
plored the eﬀect of varying models of galactic outﬂows
(Oppenheimer & Dav´e 2006), changing the initial mass
function for Population III stars (Pallottini et al. 2014) and
self-consistently simulating the hydrodynamics and ioniza-
tion state of the gas (Finlator et al. 2013, 2015).

At intermediate redshifts (z = 2 − 4), there have
been a number of eﬀorts to test the sensitivity of metal-
line absorbers (mostly C iv) to the feedback prescription.
Oppenheimer & Dav´e (2006, 2008) and Oppenheimer et al.
(2012) have had success matching observations of the mass
density of C iv across cosmic time using a model where the
velocity and mass-loading of the winds scales with properties
of the host galaxy. Tescari et al. (2011) compared a range
of feedback models to C iv absorbers from D’Odorico et al.

2

L.C. Keating et al.

(2010) and showed that, while properties of H i are robust to
the choice of feedback prescription, models of C iv are much
more sensitive to the feedback scheme. Suresh et al. (2015)
and Bird et al. (2015b) explored the eﬀect of varying the
feedback prescription on the circumgalactic medium (CGM)
and properties of C iv absorption systems, conﬁrming that
metal-line absorbers are very constraining on feedback im-
plementations. Rahmati et al. (2016) have also explored the
evolution of high-ionization metal absorbers in the EAGLE
simulation (Schaye et al. 2015) from z = 0−6, ﬁnding gener-
ally good agreement but with a suggestion that their models
are failing to reproduce the abundances of the high-redshift
absorbers.

The choice of feedback model is clearly critical in deter-
mining the enrichment level and temperature of the z ∼ 6
IGM and CGM. Many feedback models are chosen so as
to reproduce properties of z = 0 galaxies, such as the
galaxy stellar mass function, and it is therefore interest-
ing to test them against statistics they were not tuned to
match over a range of redshifts. Metal-line absorbers pro-
vide an interesting constraint on the eﬃciency of galactic
winds in transporting metals and allow us to test these
models using some of the highest redshift observations avail-
able. These high-redshift tests are extremely important, as
models that fail to reproduce observations at z ∼ 6 will
also be incorrect at lower redshifts and may match lower
redshift observations for the wrong reasons. In this paper
we use a range of simulations, using both diﬀerent hydro-
dynamical codes and diﬀerent feedback schemes to explore
the enrichment of the z ∼ 6 IGM and investigate how this
changes with diﬀerent models of galactic winds. These in-
clude the publicly available Illustris simulation (Genel et al.
2014; Vogelsberger et al. 2014a,b; Nelson et al. 2015) run
with the moving mesh code arepo Springel (2010), as well
as some simulations containing variants on Illustris physics
previously described in Bird et al. (2014, 2015a,b). We also
use a run containing supernova feedback from the Sherwood
Simulation Suite (Sherwood), designed for high-resolution
studies of the Lyα forest in large volumes (Bolton et al., in
prep). This project aims to bridge the important gap be-
tween small and large scales with a suite of some of the
highest resolution Lyα forest simulations performed to date
within large volumes.

The structure of this paper is as follows. In the second
section, we discuss our diﬀerent simulations and the eﬀect
of changing the feedback on the distribution of the met-
als. In the third section, we describe our ionization models
and synthetic spectra we generate. In the fourth section, we
make a comparison between our models and the observa-
tions and present some investigations into what may need
to be changed in future work. We also make some predic-
tions for what may be observed at z > 6. Finally, in the last
section we present our conclusions.

2 MODELS OF METAL ABSORPTION LINES

2.1 Hydrodynamical simulations

As we wish to explore the eﬀect that feedback models have
on the abundances of metal
line absorbers, we use out-
puts from several diﬀerent simulations, described below and

summarised in Tables 1 and 2. We use here output from
the highest-resolution run of the Illustris simulation suite,
Illustris-1, which we refer to as Illustris throughout. We also
use simulations with variants of the Illustris feedback model,
previously described in Bird et al. (2014, 2015a,b), where
they were used to test the eﬀect of feedback on DLAs and
to look at C iv absorbers at z = 2 − 4. We also analyse a run
using gadget-3 from the Sherwood Simulation Suite that
contains supernova feedback only. Unless otherwise stated,
we use snapshots at z = 5.85 for the arepo runs and at
z = 6 for the gadget-3. This is to ensure that reionization
is complete for both codes, as they were run with diﬀerent
UV backgrounds, and therefore that the gas temperatures
are similar in both cases. We investigate the eﬀect of chang-
ing the resolution of these simulations in Appendix A.

2.1.1 Codes

The Illustris simulation was run using the moving mesh
code arepo (Springel 2010). The Sherwood Simulation Suite
(Bolton et al., in prep) was run using the SPH code gadget-
3, last described in Springel (2005). Both codes use a gravity
solver based on the tree-pm scheme. For the purposes of
this work, perhaps the most important diﬀerence between
the two hydrodynamic solvers will be whether or not there
is a possibility for gas of diﬀerent metallicity to mix. In SPH
codes, metals are assigned to a certain particle and cannot
be transferred to other resolution elements. In mesh codes
like arepo, however, metals can be advected from cell to
cell. arepo also better resolves ﬂuid instabilities that pro-
mote mixing. The result is that simulations run with SPH
can predict higher metallicities in dense regions. As the C iv
fraction especially is expected to be largest in overdensities
close to the mean at z ∼ 6, this could be important for our
results.

2.1.2 Galactic Winds and AGN Feedback

of

of

these models make use

variable wind
All
(e.g., Oppenheimer & Dav´e 2006;
speed prescriptions
Puchwein & Springel 2013; Vogelsberger et al. 2014a) that
scale with some property of the galaxy or dark matter halo.
This approach has been shown to reproduce the shape
of the galaxy stellar mass function at z = 0. Since the
mass-loading factor ηwind scales like v−1
wind (de-
pending on if the outﬂow is momentum- or energy-driven),
this model suppresses star-formation most eﬃciently in
low-mass galaxies.

wind or v−2

The physics of the Illustris feedback model

is de-
scribed and tested in detail in Vogelsberger et al. (2013) and
Torrey et al. (2014). In this model, the galactic winds scale
with the one-dimensional dark matter velocity dispersion:
vwind ∼ σ1D
DM and have a dimensionless mass-loading factor
given by

ηwind = 2 ×(cid:18) 974 km s−1

vwind

(cid:19)2

.

(1)

We also look at two simulations with variations of the Il-
lustris wind physics. The HVEL model uses the same wind
prescription as Illustris, but imposes a minimum wind speed
of 600 km s−1. The FAST model has winds with velocities a

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–22

z ∼ 6 metal-line absorbers

3

Name

Code

Box Size (cMpc) mdm(M⊙) mgas(M⊙)

UV Background

(H0, Ωm, ΩΛ)

Illustris
Sherwood

arepo

p-gadget3

FAST & HVEL

arepo

106.5
59.0
35.5

6.3 × 106
7.9 × 105
1.0 × 107

1.3 × 106
1.5 × 105
2.1 × 106

Faucher-Gigu`ere et al. (2009)

Haardt & Madau (2012)

Faucher-Gigu`ere et al. (2009)

(0.704, 0.273, 0.727)
(0.678, 0.308, 0.692)
(0.704, 0.273, 0.727)

Table 1. Parameters of the simulations we use in this work: code that was used to run the simulation, the mass of the dark matter
particle (mdm), the mass of the gas particle/resolution element (mgas), the UV background used and the cosmology used. In the case of
the arepo simulations, we quote the mean gas mass of all resolution elements in the snapshot when we reference mgas.

Name

Wind model

AGN Self-shielding

Notes

Illustris
Sherwood

Vogelsberger et al. (2013)

Puchwein & Springel (2013)

HVEL
FAST

Vogelsberger et al. (2013)
Vogelsberger et al. (2013)

Yes
No
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
Yes
Yes

-
-

vwind,min = 600 km s−1
1.5 × Illustris wind vel

Table 2. Further parameters of simulations: reference to the wind model used, whether AGN are included, whether the UV background
is attenuated due to self-shielding during the hydrodynamical simulation and additional notes on the feedback schemes.

factor of 1.5 times the wind speeds in the Illustris feedback
model. This is achieved by changing the scaling factor be-
tween the wind velocity and dark matter velocity dispersion.
We do not consider here the WARM winds model, which
Bird et al. (2015b) found to match well the properties of
z = 2 − 4 C iv absorbers, as it gave similar results to the
FAST model at higher redshifts.

The Sherwood simulation uses the variable wind speeds
model from Puchwein & Springel (2013). In this model, the
wind velocities scale with the escape velocity of the galaxy:
vwind ∼ vesc. The mass-loading is also determined by assum-
ing the winds are energy-driven, and is set to

ηwind = 2 ×(cid:18) 958 km s−1

vwind

(cid:19)2

.

(2)

The Illustris, HVEL and FAST simulations all include
AGN feedback, but the Sherwood simulation does not in-
clude black holes. We do not however expect this to change
our results signiﬁcantly (see,
for example, Tescari et al.
(2011) and Suresh et al. (2015), who ﬁnd that AGN are not
very important for metal enrichment at high redshift).

2.1.3 UV Background

Illustris, HVEL and FAST were all
run using the
Faucher-Gigu`ere et al. (2009) model of the UV background.
A correction for the self-shielding of gas from the UV back-
ground is also incorporated into these simulations, based
on the Rahmati et al. (2013) model, however this is only in-
cluded below z = 6. The Sherwood simulation was run using
the Haardt & Madau (2012) UV background, which turns
on at z = 15. Note that throughout this work, unless speci-
ﬁed, we used the Haardt & Madau (2012) model of the UV
background for computing the ionization state of the gas.
The original UV background of the simulations will still be
important when considering, for example, the temperature
of the gas in the simulations. We do investigate the eﬀect
of changing the shape and amplitude UV background on
the metal-line absorbers we model in Section 4.2. Ideally we
would use a more realistic inhomogeneous UV background,
such as in Finlator et al. (2015), but it is reassuring in that
work they ﬁnd that there is only a factor of ∼ 2 diﬀerence
between the neutral fractions calculated using their model
and the Haardt & Madau (2012) background.

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–22

Name

ρmet(1010M⊙/cMpc3)

ρ∗(1010M⊙/cMpc3)

Illustris
Sherwood

HVEL
FAST

9.8 × 10−6
1.5 × 10−5
1.9 × 10−5
9.2 × 10−6

3.6 × 10−4
7.9 × 10−4
5.9 × 10−4
3.1 × 10−4

Table 3. Total mass density of metal-enriched gas (ρmet) and
total stellar mass density (ρ∗) in the four simulations.

2.2 Feedback and the High-z IGM/CGM

Galactic feedback is generally invoked to reconcile the
shapes of the dark matter halo mass function and galactic
stellar mass function (e.g., White & Frenk 1991). For our
purposes, the feedback is important both as a means of reg-
ulating the number of stars produced (and hence the amount
of metals) and also for distributing these metals throughout
the IGM. In the left panel of Figure 1, we show the galaxy
stellar mass function of the diﬀerent simulations at z = 6 for
haloes resolved by at least 100 dark matter particles. Here
we compare to observations of the stellar mass functions at
z ∼ 6 (Stark et al. 2009; Gonz´alez et al. 2011) but note that
the Illustris run has already been compared with observa-
tions across a wide range of redshifts z = 0−7 in Genel et al.
(2014). The HVEL model shows an increase in galaxies with
low stellar masses, as the constant fast winds provide a mass-
loading factor that is too low to eﬀectively ﬂatten the lower
end of the stellar mass function. It is also interesting to note
that the Puchwein & Springel (2013) model produces more
stars than the Vogelsberger et al. (2013) model at z = 6, the
opposite to what is seen at z = 0 (Schaye et al. 2015). We
also ﬁnd that the mass density of metals produced varies by
about a factor of two among the four simulations, increas-
ing in proportion with the total stellar mass (the values are
given in Table 3).

In the middle panel of Figure 1, we show the outﬂow
velocity (positive radial velocity), voutﬂow,r200, of particles
in a shell placed at the virial radius (at 0.9 < r/rvir < 1.1).
We show the frequency of particles in each velocity bin for
the four simulations and for two halo mass bins. The out-
ﬂow velocity appears to increase with increasing halo mass,
as expected from the wind scaling, with the more massive
haloes displaying larger maximum velocities and a larger
fraction of particles with voutﬂow,r200 > 100 km s−1. In both

4

L.C. Keating et al.

Figure 1. Left: The stellar mass function at z ∼ 6, compared with measurements from Stark et al. (2009) and Gonz´alez et al. (2011).
Middle: Particles in a shell at the virial radius binned by their radial velocity. We show two mass bins, 9.5 < log(Mhalo/M⊙) < 10 and
log(Mhalo/M⊙) < 10.5, with 100 haloes in each bin. Right: The baryon fraction, normalised by the cosmic baryon fraction, as a function
of halo mass, which we take to be the total mass of the FoF group.

mass bins, the HVEL model shows more high-velocity par-
ticles. Despite having similar wind prescriptions, the Sher-
wood simulation has more particles with a higher radial
velocity than the Illustris simulation in the low-mass bin.
However, the simulations are more similar for haloes with
log(Mhalo/M⊙) < 10.5.

The baryon fraction inside the haloes varies quite con-
siderably (right panel of Figure 1), with the models that
contain faster winds generally having lower baryon fractions.
There also seems to be a diﬀerence between the shape of
the baryon fraction-halo mass relation between the simu-
lations run with arepo and gadget. The baryon fraction
increases as a function of halo mass in the Sherwood simula-
tion, and is rather ﬂat across all halo masses in Illustris and
the FAST simulations. This is in part due to the choice of
UV background. The Sherwood simulation was run with a
UV background that turns on at z = 15 and results in hot-
ter gas and therefore photoevaporation of some haloes with
log(Mhalo/M⊙) < 10. We note also that these lines are only
the mean baryon fractions and that there is scatter among
the baryon fractions of individual haloes for a given mass.

The mean mass-weighted temperature of the gas as
a function of overdensity in the simulations is similar in
all cases, considering the diﬀerences in the hydrodynamic
solvers and the diﬀerent UV backgrounds used (left panel of
Figure 2). The most notable feature is the sharp upturn in
the temperature at the lowest overdensities (log ∆ ∼ −1),
which may correspond to hot gas being pushed out into
voids. Alternatively, it may be a hot bubble of gas in pressure
equilibrium with colder gas in a higher density environment.
The full temperature-overdensity phase diagram for Illustris
is also plotted in grey, and it shows that there is a large scat-
ter in the temperature in each overdensity bin. Gas as hot
as T ∼ 107K is seen, produced by the supernova/AGN feed-
back and shock heating, but note that this only constitutes
a small fraction of all gas.

As one would expect, by increasing the velocity of galac-
tic winds, metals are pushed out to lower density gas (mid-
dle panel of Figure 2). This mass-weighted mean also agrees
surprisingly well with the estimate of the metallicity of the

z ∼ 6 CGM by Keating et al. (2014), where the metals
were simply added “by hand” using a simple metallicity-
overdensity relation. The more realistic simulations, how-
ever, also predict a large scatter which was neglected in that
work. This is shown for Illustris (shaded grey region) and
Sherwood (grey outline) which show the scatter in metallic-
ity for each overdensity bin. In the arepo runs, the mixing
allows for a large scatter in metallicities, that extends be-
yond the range shown in the middle panel of Figure 2. The
scatter in metallicity is much smaller in the Sherwood sim-
ulations but still spans ∼ 5 dex for log ∆ > 0.

We also calculate the ﬁlling factor of metals in the sim-
ulations using an approach similar to Booth et al. (2012),
such that the volume ﬁlling factor (fV ) and the mass ﬁlling
factor (fm) are deﬁned as

fV = Pi
Pi

mi(>Z)
ρi(>Z)

mi
ρi

Pi mi

and fm = Pi mi(> Z)

,

(3)

where i is summed over the resolution elements and Z is
some threshold metallicity. Depending on the choice of code
and feedback model, the volume ﬁlling factor of metals can
vary by over an order of magnitude (right panel of Figure
2). Even in the HVEL simulation, only ∼ 3 per cent of the
volume is enriched to a metallicity log(Z/Z⊙) > −6. In all of
the arepo simulations, we ﬁnd an (albeit slowly) increasing
ﬁlling factor over the metallicity range we investigate. If we
look down to far lower metallicities, we see ﬁlling factors
∼ 1 due to the possibility for metals to mix. In contrast,
the lack of mixing in the SPH simulation is evident from the
ﬂattening of both the mass and volume metal ﬁlling factors
below log(Z/Z⊙) ∼ −3.

Following the approach of Wiersma, Schaye & Theuns
(2011) and Suresh et al. (2015), we also investigate the
metallicity in diﬀerent gas phases in the simulations. We
separate the gas into ﬁve categories, based on simple cuts in
star-formation, overdensity and temperature:

- Star-forming gas
- Cold dense gas, with ∆ > 100 and T < 105 K
- Warm dense gas, with ∆ > 100 and T > 105 K
- Cold diﬀuse gas, with ∆ < 100 and T < 105 K

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–22

z ∼ 6 metal-line absorbers

5

Figure 2. Left: mean mass-weighted temperature in the four simulations as a function of gas overdensity. The grey shaded region shows
the full temperature-density phase diagram for Illustris. Middle: mean mass-weighted metallicity in the four simulations as a function
of gas overdensity. The grey shaded region shows the full metallicity-density phase diagram for Illustris. The region enclosed by the
grey solid line is the metallicity-density space occupied by the gas particles in the Sherwood simulation. The dashed black line is the
metallicity-overdensity relation from Keating et al. (2014). Right: mass (dashed) and volume (solid) metallicity ﬁlling factors in the four
simulations.

Figure 3. Left: The fraction of gas mass in diﬀerent phases, with cuts made on temperature, overdensity and star-formation rate (the
colour scheme is indicated in middle panel) for four diﬀerent simulations. Middle: The fraction of metal-enriched gas in diﬀerent phases.
Right: The mass-weighted mean metallicity of the gas in each phase.

- Warm diﬀuse gas, with ∆ < 100 and T > 105 K

The left panel of Figure 3 shows the fraction of mass of gas
in each of these gas phases. The proportion of the gas in
each phase is similar across all simulations. The Sherwood
and HVEL simulations show slightly more star-forming gas
and the HVEL simulation contains the most diﬀuse gas.

In the middle panel of Figure 3, we plot the fraction
of mass of the metals in gas in each of these phases. Note
that the total mass of metals produced diﬀers only by about
a factor of 1.5 across the diﬀerent simulations. The loca-
tion of these metals, however, can vary quite considerably.
In Sherwood and Illustris, most of the metals (more than
80 per cent) are found in cold dense gas or star-forming gas
which, by design, will also be cold and dense. The HVEL and
FAST models are successful in pushing a greater proportion
of their metals out into lower density gas, as is also shown
in the middle panel of Figure 2. There are some metals in
the warm dense gas phase of the Sherwood simulation, but

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–22

the fraction is very small and is not visible on this plot. The
mean mass-weighted metallicity of the gas in each phase is
shown in the right panel of Figure 3. This shows less varia-
tion than the fraction of the metals in each phase. The cold
diﬀuse gas in the HVEL simulation has the highest metal-
licity compared to the other simulations and it is likely this,
together with the fact that the majority of its metals are in
diﬀuse gas, that explains the sharp upturn in metallicity at
low gas overdensities in the HVEL simulation seen in the
middle panel of Figure 2.

2.3 Feedback and Halo Metallicity Proﬁles

We have also investigated how the metallicity proﬁle around
haloes changes in the diﬀerent simulations and as a function
of halo mass (shown in Figure 4). We consider the proﬁles in
three diﬀerent mass bins and include 100 haloes in each bin.
All models are reasonably similar inside 0.5 Rvir. Beyond

6

L.C. Keating et al.

Figure 4. The median mass-weighted metallicity around haloes in three diﬀerent mass bins (left: 9.5 < log(Mhalo/M⊙) < 10, middle:
10 < log(Mhalo/M⊙) < 10.5, right: log(Mhalo/M⊙) > 10.5) for the four simulations. There are 100 haloes taken from each simulation in
every mass bin. The grey lines are the 25th/75th percentile scatter in the Illustris simulation.

that, the models with higher wind speeds transport metals
more eﬃciently away from the hosts. The exception to this
is the Sherwood simulation which is surprisingly ﬂat up to
3 Rvir in all mass bins. This could be a result of using an
SPH code that does not allow for mixing of metals. When
we take the median metallicity in each bin over our sample
of 100 haloes, we end up with something that looks very
ﬂat. It is also worth noting that if our metallicity proﬁles
continued out to larger distances, we would also see the mean
metallicity drop to zero at some point as there are many
particles in the Sherwood simulation that contain no metals,
unlike in the simulations run with arepo (also evident in
right panel of Figure 2).

The trends in the other three runs follow a similar pat-
tern to what is seen in the baryon fractions (right panel
of Figure 1), with the simulations where the metals are
pushed out to larger radii corresponding to the ones with
lower baryon fractions. The HVEL simulation shows a re-
markably ﬂat metallicity across the three bins of halo mass,
showing a metallicity log(Z/Z⊙) ∼ −2 even at a distance
of 3 Rvir from the halo. This highlights the eﬀectiveness of
this model at enriching the IGM and echoes the ﬂatness of
the metallicity-overdensity relation. The Illustris and FAST
models also show a shallow metallicity gradient for haloes
with log(Mhalo/M⊙) > 10.5, but the metallicity falls oﬀ
more steeply as the halo masses decrease (and the wind ve-
locities decrease). Again, these trends reiterate what was
already shown in the middle panel of Figure 3 where we
considered the fraction of metals in diﬀuse gas.

There is substantial scatter in the metallicity proﬁles
around haloes in the bins with log(Mhalo/M⊙) < 10.5
(shown here for the Illustris simulation). This is smaller (∼ 1
dex) for the haloes with log(Mhalo/M⊙) > 10.5 but increases
hugely beyond the virial radius for less massive haloes. The
scatter is most likely driven by other nearby galaxies (also
evident in the bumps present in the median value). For the
larger galaxies, the metal enrichment will be mostly driven
by the strong winds of the massive galaxy and the satellites
should not contribute as much.

3 METAL ABSORPTION LINES

To make a link between these simulations and observations
of metal absorption lines in the spectra of high-redshift
QSOs, it is necessary to estimate the fraction of the element
in observable ions. Here, we look at three elements (oxygen,
carbon and magnesium) and four ions (O i, C ii, C iv and
Mg ii).

3.1 Ionization States of Metals

To estimate the ionic fraction of the metals at a given den-
sity and temperature, we used the photo-ionization code
cloudy (Ferland et al. 2013). Following the method out-
lined in Bird et al. (2015a), we included a frequency-based
attenuation of the UV background in self-shielded regions.
We use the overdensity at which an absorber becomes self-
shielded (e.g. Schaye 2001)

∆ss = 54 Γ2/3

−12 T 2/15

4

(cid:18) 1 + z

7 (cid:19)−3

,

(4)

which we include in the self-shielding prescription from
Rahmati et al. (2013)

ΓPhot
ΓHI

= 0.98(cid:20)1 +(cid:18) nH,eﬀ

nH,ss (cid:19)1.64(cid:21)−2.28
nH,ss (cid:21)−0.84

nH,eﬀ

.

+ 0.02(cid:20)1 +

(5)

where nH,eﬀ(E) = nH σ(1 Ryd)/σ(E). As σ(E) goes like
E−3, this eﬀect is strongest for the low-energy part of the
spectrum and should not aﬀect high-ionization lines like
C iv.

As expected, we ﬁnd that the low-ionization ions are
associated with dense (log ∆ > 1.5), cold (log(T /K) < 4.5),
self-shielded regions (as shown in Figure 5). The C ii fraction
falls oﬀ more slowly with decreasing overdensity than O i,
which should result in a larger C ii covering fraction of haloes
and therefore a higher incidence rate than O i (although
this will also depend on the relative abundances of these
elements). Mg ii is found over a similar temperature range
to O i, but extends to lower overdensities. C iv can be split

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–22

z ∼ 6 metal-line absorbers

7

Figure 5. The ionic fraction as a function of temperature and density for O i, Mg ii, C ii, C iii, C iv and C v that we calculate from our
cloudy models (although note that our models extend beyond the temperature-density range shown here) using the Haardt & Madau
(2012) model of the UV background. Overplotted is the mass-weighted temperature-density distribution in the Sherwood simulation.

into two cases: the photoionized C iv, which peaks at low
overdensities (log ∆ < 0) and the collisionally ionized C iv
which peaks at log(T /K) = 5.1 and is constant across the
overdensity range shown here. Part of this is also seen in
C ii, which has an increased ionic fraction at low density
gas just above log(T /K) = 4.5, but the two cases are not
as clearly separated as for C iv. The fraction of collisionally
ionized C iv is at most 30 per cent, with the remainder of
the carbon found in C iii or C v. Rahmati et al. (2016) and
Bird et al. (2015a) have both shown that, at lower redshifts,
C iv is predominantly photoionized. At z = 6 however, using
the Haardt & Madau (2012) UV background, most of the
photoionized low density gas in the simulations (0 < log ∆ <
1) where C iv is thought to be found is in the form of C iii.
We discuss how this changes for diﬀerent UV backgrounds
in Section 4.2.

We next used these models to assign ionic fractions to
the particles/resolution elements in our simulations. Exam-
ples of what this looks like for a 1010 M⊙ halo in the Sher-
wood and Illustris simulations are shown in Figures 6 and 7.
We have tried to select two haloes whose density ﬁelds look
similar, however keep in mind that these haloes are diﬀerent
and therefore we will only make a qualitative comparison.
In both cases, the size of the metallicity bubble (where the

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–22

metallicity is log(Z/Z⊙) > −4) is comparable to the region
occupied by hot gas. In the arepo simulations, the metallic-
ity continues to fall oﬀ slowly but it becomes so small that
it will not produce observable absorbers and is therefore not
plotted here. The distribution of the metals appears some-
what clumpier in the Sherwood simulation, possibly because
the metals are not able to mix in this case.

In the bottom panel of both ﬁgures, we plot the column
densities for three of the ions we are interested in: O i, C ii
and C iv. The low-ionization absorbers ﬁll only a small part
of the metallicity bubble and are split into small clumps,
which track the position of the cold, metal-enriched gas. The
size of the clumps seems to be larger in Illustris, maybe be-
cause the gas density is higher and the metallicity is higher,
but it is not clear if this is because we are looking at two
diﬀerent haloes or because of diﬀerences in hydro-solvers in
gadget-3 vs. arepo. In both cases, the C iv extends over
a larger area than the low-ionization absorbers. The larger
covering fraction is in agreement with the higher incidence
rate observed for C iv absorbers by D’Odorico et al. (2013)
than for the incidence rate of low-ionization absorbers by
Becker et al. (2011). The strongest column density C iv ab-
sorbers are still found in the centre of the halo, however, as
this is where the metallicity is highest.

8

L.C. Keating et al.

Figure 6. Slices around a halo with Mhalo = 1010 M⊙ from the Sherwood simulation. The top panel shows the overdensity (left), the
temperature (middle) and the metallicity (right). The bottom panel shows the column densities of O i (left), C ii (middle) and C iv
(right). The thickness of the slice is 4.9 ckpc h−1.

Figure 7. Slices around a halo with Mhalo = 1010 M⊙ from the Illustris simulation. The top panel shows the overdensity (left), the
temperature (middle) and the metallicity (right). The bottom panel shows the column densities of O i (left), C ii (middle) and C iv
(right). The thickness of the slice is 5.7 ckpc h−1.

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–22

z ∼ 6 metal-line absorbers

9

Figure 8. Left: the Haardt & Madau (2012) model for the UV background at z = 6, shown in black. The shaded region shows the
eﬀect of the frequency based self-shielding, with the lowest intensity corresponding to a model with T = 103 K and nH = 104 cm−3.
Middle: distribution of O i equivalent widths, assuming no self-shielding, a model based on the Rahmati et al. (2013) prescription and
with a simple threshold self-shielding model. Shown in grey are the observational data from Becker et al. (2011). The solid lines are
the completeness-corrected distributions and the dashed line is the full distribution we model. Right: The percentage completeness of
equivalent width (solid lines) we assume for O i, C ii and C iv. The open diamonds are the estimate for the C iv completeness from
D’Odorico et al. (2013). The dashed lines show the relation we assume between column density and equivalent width.

Ion

λ (˚A)

f

∆E (eV)

log Z⊙

O i
C ii
C iv
Mg ii

1302.2
1334.5
1548.2
2796.4

0.05
0.13
0.19
0.63

< 13.62

11.26 – 24.38
47.89 – 64.49
7.64 – 15.03

-3.31
-3.57
-3.57
-4.40

Table 4. Atomic parameters of the ions we focus on in this paper:
O i, C ii, C iv and Mg ii. Shown are the wavelength (λ), the
oscillator strength (f ), the energy required to bring the element
into this ionic state and the energy that will further ionize it
(∆E) and the metal abundances we assume (log Z⊙), taken from
Asplund et al. (2009).

3.2 Synthetic Spectra

We construct artiﬁcial spectra along random sightlines
through the simulation volume using the ionic density to-
gether with the ion-weighted temperature and peculiar ve-
locity at each pixel. The relevant atomic parameters are
summarised in Table 4. For C iv and Mg ii, we only use
the lines at 1548 ˚A and 2796 ˚A respectively, neglecting the
other half of the doublets. Figure 9 shows examples of spec-
tra along three of our sightlines. The ﬁrst sightline displays
an absorption feature that is generally the same shape for
all three ions. The depth of the absorption varies however,
due to diﬀerences in the oscillator strength of that ion and
also in the fraction of that element that is in this state. The
second sightline now shows how diﬀerent ions can trace dif-
ferent kinematic features - there is a velocity oﬀset between
the O i and the C iv, while the C ii traces both components.
Finally, in the third sightline, we see a C ii line only, per-
haps because the gas is too dense to see C iv and the weak
oscillator strength of O i prevents a clear absorption feature.
From these spectra, we measure the equivalent width
of the absorption systems and then apply a completeness
correction to make a comparison with observations. In the
case where there are two or more absorption features within
50 km s−1 of each other, then we treat these as one system

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–22

with multiple components. However, our results were not
very sensitive to this number and we also produced similar
equivalent width distributions assuming absorption features
within 200 km s−1 of each other were one system. For O i
and C ii, we use an estimate for completeness taken from
Becker et al. (2011). For C iv, we ﬁt a curve of the form

f (x) =

L

1 + e−k(x−x0) ,

(6)

to the estimates for completeness from D’Odorico et al.
(2013), i.e. that the data are (60,70,85) per cent complete for
column densities log(NC iv/cm−2) = (13.3, 13.4, 13.5). We
take (L, k, x0) = (88.1, 9.1, 13.2). These completeness esti-
mates are shown in the middle pane of Figure 8. We also
plot the analytic relation between equivalent width (EW)
and column density (N ) in the regime where optical depths
are small:

EW = N

πq2
e λ2f
mec2 ,

(7)

where qe is the electron charge, λ is the transition wave-
length, f is the oscillator strength and me is the electron
mass.

To determine the frequency of our simulated absorbers,
we normalise the total number of absorbers by the path-
length ∆X corresponding to the number of sightlines times
the size of our box, where X is deﬁned as

X(z) = Z z

0

H0

H(z′)

(1 + z′)2 dz′.

(8)

We show the cumulative distribution of O i absorbers we
obtain in the middle panel of Figure 8 for the Sherwood
simulation. We show here three diﬀerent cases - one where
we include no self-shielding, one with the Rahmati et al.
(2013) self-shielding prescription and ﬁnally one with a sim-
ple threshold self-shielding model, where all gas above a
self-shielding overdensity is considered to be neutral. The ef-
fect of including the Rahmati et al. (2013) self-shielding pre-
scription on the shape of the UV background is shown in the

10

L.C. Keating et al.

Figure 9. Mock spectra generated along three sightlines (shown in the left, middle and right columns) taken from the Sherwood
simulation. The ﬁrst row shows the O i spectra, the middle shows C ii and the bottom row shows C iv. We deﬁne v = 0 km s−1 by the
deepest part of the O i absorption for each sightline.

left panel of Figure 8, where the most extreme attenuation
shown corresponds to T = 103 K and nH = 104 cm−3. As ex-
pected, the models without self-shielding under-predict the
incidence rate of absorbers, especially the weaker ones. Us-
ing the threshold self-shielding model leads to an incidence
rate that is far in excess of observations. The Rahmati et al.
(2013) model seems to agree reasonably well with observa-
tions (a more detailed comparison with the data is made in
Section 4), and this is the approach we take in all the work
that follows. The dashed line shows the absorber distribu-
tion we would obtain without applying a completeness cor-
rection. As expected from the right panel of Figure 8, this
makes little diﬀerence to absorbers with equivalent width
greater than 0.1 ˚A. Below this, we see a rapid increase in
the incidence rate of absorbers that are generally below the
detection limit of current observations.

4 COMPARISON WITH OBSERVATIONS

We choose to compare our mock spectra with the real obser-
vations by looking at the distribution of equivalent widths of
our absorbers. Although this can introduce some uncertainty
due to the line shapes induced by kinematics of the gas, us-
ing the equivalent widths allows us access to a slightly larger
sample of low-ionization absorbers as Becker et al. (2011)
only compute column densities for their high-resolution sam-
ple of spectra (seven out of ten absorbers).

4.1 Feedback Models and Metal Line Absorbers

In Figure 10, we show the cumulative distribution functions
of the equivalent width observations of high-redshift O i,
C ii and C iv absorbers. All our models of O i absorbers
have incidence rates below the Becker et al. (2011) line-of-
sight number density, but almost match the lower 95 percent
conﬁdence interval (which is based on Poisson errors only).
We under predict the abundance of weak O i absorbers, but
this could be explained by uncertainty in the completeness
of the data, in the metal yields or in the treatment of self-
shielding. Increasing the resolution of the simulations also

increases the number of weak absorbers produced. This is
discussed further in Appendix A. Alternatively, it may also
be indicative of a lower background photoionization rate at
z = 6. We also plot the Haardt & Madau (2012) UV back-
ground rescaled to give a background photoionization rate
log(ΓH i/s−1) = −12.8, motivated by Calverley et al. (2011)
and Wyithe & Bolton (2011). This is equivalent to rescaling
the amplitude of the UV background to 0.6 of the origi-
nal amplitude. This results in an increased number of weak
absorbers (EWO i < 0.2 ˚A), while not adding many strong
ones. We also match the velocity width distribution of the
absorbers quite well, which is discussed in more detail in
Appendix B.

The general agreement between the four models can be
explained by the similar mean metallicity at the overden-
sities ∆ & 100 where a signiﬁcant fraction of O i is found
(see middle panel of Figure 2 and Figure 5). The story is
similar for C ii, with three of our models providing a de-
cent match to the observations. However, the HVEL model
hugely over-predicts the number of weak absorbers, as the
fall-oﬀ in the metallicity-overdensity relationship is much
shallower for this model and C ii probes out to lower over-
densities than O i. The temperature of these absorbers is
also higher (∼ 104.5 K), which allows for higher C ii fractions
at lower overdensities (Figure 5). It is also worth noting that
the simulations run with arepo generally predict a larger
number of weak absorbers (Figure 12), due to the mixing of
metals down to lower density gas. For the purposes of this
work, this is inconsequential as they lie below the detection
threshold of current instruments. It may however become
more important in the future, when making predictions for
next-generation telescopes. We also note that although we
ﬁnd a higher incidence rate of C ii here compared with O i,
which is in line with what is expected from the ionization
fractions calculated in our cloudy models, this will be de-
pendent on the relative abundances of carbon and oxygen.
Here, we assume solar abundances but the value at high-
redshift may be lower (Becker et al. 2012), which would per-
haps result in a similar incidence rate for detectable C ii and
O i absorbers.

We ﬁnd that matching the observations of C iv and

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–22

z ∼ 6 metal-line absorbers

11

Figure 10. Cumulative distribution of equivalent widths for O i (left), C ii (middle) and C iv (right) in diﬀerent simulations. The grey
lines are the data from Becker et al. (2011) and D’Odorico et al. (2013). A correction to match the completeness of the observations
has been applied to the simulated absorbers, which has the eﬀect of removing some weak absorbers that may not be detected in the
observations. The solid line is for ion densities calculated using the Haardt & Madau (2012) UV background and the dashed line shows the
a UV background with the same shape but with its amplitude rescaled to give a background photoionization rate log(ΓH i/s−1) = −12.8,
in line with observations at z ∼ 6.

Figure 11. The Mg ii incidence rate in three separate equivalent width bins: 0.3 < EWMg ii [˚A] < 0.6 (left panel), 0.6 < EWMg ii [˚A] <1.0
(middle panel) and EWMg ii [˚A] > 1.0 (right panel), using the Haardt & Madau (2012) UV background. The observed data is taken from
Chen et al (in prep) and is based on work by Matejek & Simcoe (2012). No completeness correction was applied here. Note that there
were no absorbers with EWMg ii [˚A] > 1.0 in the FAST model. We have adjusted the redshifts slightly so that all points are visible.

Mg ii absorbers, however, is much more challenging. The
Sherwood, Illustris and FAST models under-predict the ob-
served incidence rate of C iv absorbers by a factor of 5–
10. The HVEL model manages to reproduce the total in-
cidence rate, but the shape of the cumulative distribution
function does not match the data, with not enough strong
absorbers (EWC iv & 0.2 ˚A) seen. Using the model with a
lower background photoionization rate reduces the incidence
rate of weak C iv absorbers further. For Mg ii, we match
observations of absorbers with 0.3 < EWMg ii [˚A] < 0.6 (left
and middle panels of Figure 11) reasonably well. However,
we have not applied a completeness correction here so the
agreement would become more tenuous if this were taken
into account. We also struggle to match the incidence rate
for absorbers with EWMg ii [˚A] > 1.0, falling far short of the
observations at z = 6 and with the FAST simulation failing
to produce any absorbers of this strength at all. The main

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–22

diﬀerence between the low- and high-ionization absorbers is
the overdensity at which the ionic fraction peaks. Therefore,
the issues with modelling the C iv and Mg ii absorbers are
most likely related to how eﬃciently the low overdensities
are enriched with metals. For the rest of this paper, we fo-
cus on why we struggle to match the observations of C iv
absorbers but note that reproducing the incidence rate of
Mg ii absorbers is most likely a related problem.

In Figure 12, we show how the equivalent width cor-
relates with the temperature and overdensity of these ab-
sorbers in each of our simulations. Plotted also are contours
showing where the fraction of that ion is 10, 30 or 50 per
cent. We ﬁnd that the strongest absorbers (EW & 0.1 ˚A)
tend to be found at overdensities log ∆ > 1.5 as this is where
the metallicity is highest. More low-density absorbers are
seen in the FAST and HVEL models, due to the increase
in the amount of metal-enriched, low-density gas in these

12

L.C. Keating et al.

Figure 12. Ion-weighted temperature-overdensity plots for the O i, C ii and C iv absorbers we measure in the four simulations. The
colour of the points corresponds to the equivalent width and the black contours enclose the regions where the ionic fraction is 10, 30 and
50 per cent.

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–22

simulations. The C iv absorbers tend to be found over a
wider temperature range (T = 103.5−5.5 K) than the low-
ionization absorbers and also probe out to lower densities
log ∆ ∼ 0. However, the peak of the photoionized C iv
fraction occurs below the overdensities probed here which
may prevent us from seeing stronger C iv absorbers. In-
deed, most of the strong C iv absorbers we see tend to be
collisionally ionized. This is discussed further in Section 4.2.
D’Odorico et al. (2013) used cloudy models to suggest that
their C iv absorbers were found in gas with δ ∼ 10 (where
δ = ∆ − 1), but only the HVEL and FAST models have
enough metals at this overdensity to produce any strong ab-
sorbers at δ ∼ 10.

At this point, the main diﬃculty with modelling metal-
line absorbers becomes clear: is the lack of C iv absorbers a
problem with the enrichment model or with the ionization
state of our simulations? We try to understand this further
in Figure 13. Here we look at the C iv absorption we would
see if instead of taking the fraction of carbon in C iv, we take
the fraction in C iii or C v. We ﬁnd that a lot of the carbon
that could produce the weak absorption systems (EWC iv .
0.2 ˚A) is in the form of C iii. This could potentially be moved
into C iv with a harder UV background. We also ﬁnd that
the HVEL model would overproduce the incidence rate of
C iv absorbers if the gas that was in C v was instead found
in C iv (perhaps if it was not shock-heated by the fast winds,
for example). The Sherwood, Illustris and FAST simulations
still fail to produce many C iv absorbers suggesting that
shock-heated gas is not an issue for these models. We also
check how our distribution of C iv absorbers would look
if all the gas was at T = 105.1 K, where the collisionally
ionized C iv fraction peaks. The Sherwood, Illustris and
FAST models still fail to reproduce the observed incidence
rate however and the HVEL model results in far too many
weak absorbers. This result can be understood by looking
at Figure 5. Even at T = 105.1 K, C iv makes up only 30
per cent of all the carbon, with most of the carbon is found
in C iii and C v.

As a simple test, we also tried assuming that all car-
bon below the threshold overdensity where self-shielding be-
comes important was C iv (right panel of Figure 13). We
take this threshold overdensity from the relation in Equa-
tion 4, which gives ∆ss = 21.7 at T = 104 K. This scenario
is obviously somewhat unrealistic, as from Figure 5 we see
that even if the gas was all at T = 105.1 K, only about 30 per
cent would be collisionally ionized into C iv. Even in this
toy model, however, the Sherwood, Illustris and FAST sim-
ulations only just about reach the observed incidence rate
of C iv absorbers. This suggests that the metals are not
being pushed out to low enough densities in these models,
and we will always ﬁnd it hard to match the z ∼ 6 C iv
incidence rate, regardless of the choice of UV background or
the temperature of the gas. In this case, the HVEL model
does seem to enrich the IGM suﬃciently, however this model
is disfavoured by models of DLAs at z = 2 − 4 (Bird et al.
2014, 2015a) and would almost certainly fail to reproduce
the shape of the galactic stellar mass function at z = 0.

4.2 Shape of the UV Background

Even though Section 4.1 leads us to conclude that it is the
metal enrichment rather than the ionization model that re-

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–22

z ∼ 6 metal-line absorbers

13

sults in our dearth of C iv absorbers, it is still worth inves-
tigating how the uncertainty in the shape and amplitude of
the UV background at z ∼ 6 would aﬀect our results. We
note also that, although we do not consider it here, looking
at the ratio of column densities of diﬀerent ions in absorbers
(e.g. log NC iv vs. log NS iv) is a powerful way of placing con-
straints on the shape of the UV background. We explore the
eﬀect of changing the UV background using the Sherwood
simulation in the right panel of Figure 14. We ﬁrst conﬁrm
that our self-shielding prescription does not have a signiﬁ-
cant eﬀect on the C iv absorption, as one would expect for
a high-ionization ion.

We next investigate how the C iv absorbers are aﬀected
by changing the shape of our input UV background. This is
somewhat motivated by observations of hard spectra in some
high-redshift galaxies, such as Stark et al. (2015) who found
C iv emission in a z ∼ 7 Lyα emitter which was comparable
to that of an AGN. There has also been recent discussion on
the contribution of quasars at z ∼ 6 (Chardin et al. 2015;
Haardt & Salvaterra 2015; Madau & Haardt 2015), driven
by updated quasar luminosity functions (Giallongo et al.
2015) and new constraints on the optical depth to reion-
ization (Planck Collaboration et al. 2015). We explore the
eﬀect of using two other commonly implemented UV back-
grounds: Haardt & Madau (2001) and the 2011 update of
Faucher-Gigu`ere et al. (2009), as well as increasing the am-
plitude of the Haardt & Madau (2012) background by a
factor of six to mimic a locally enhanced amplitude due
to nearby star-formation and/or spatial UV ﬂuctuations at
the tail-end of reionization. We show the H i photoioniza-
tion rates predicted by these models as a function of red-
shift in the right panel of Figure 14. For comparison we
also show measurements of the photo-ionization rate out
to z ∼ 6, which shows that all of the models are at the
high end of the error range given by the Wyithe & Bolton
(2011) result. This also suggests that increasing the ampli-
tude of the Haardt & Madau (2012) model by a factor of
six would be incompatible with observations, however in re-
ality there will be ﬂuctuations in the photoionization rate
depending on proximity to galaxies, etc. (e.g., Becker et al.
2015; Chardin et al. 2015; Finlator et al. 2015). We show the
intensity as a function of energy for the diﬀerent models in
the middle panels of Figure 14. The ionization energies for
the diﬀerent states of carbon (up to C v) are also shown. In
the energy range where C iv is dominant, the three mod-
els have very diﬀerent shapes due to the treatment of the
sources and the absorbers (here, most importantly the he-
lium absorbers). Examples of the fraction of each ion seen
at diﬀerent densities and temperatures at each of these UV
backgrounds are shown in Appendix C.

ﬁnd

that

We

the Haardt & Madau

(2001),
Faucher-Gigu`ere et al. (2009) and 6× Haardt & Madau
(2012) models all result in an enhancement in the C iv
absorbers with EWC iv . 0.4 ˚A (right panel of Figure 14).
The diﬀerent models still (unsurprisingly) fall short of our
toy model where all the carbon is C iv and we still fail
to produce the strongest observed C iv absorbers, but it
is evident that changing the UV background does push
things in the right direction. This is further shown in
Figure 15, where the temperature and overdensity of the
C iv absorbers is plotted together with the C iv fraction
from our cloudy models. The three models allow for

14

L.C. Keating et al.

Figure 13. Left: Cumulative distribution of equivalent widths of C iv absorbers in diﬀerent simulations, checking what happens if we
take the C iii (solid line) or C v (dashed line) fraction instead of C iv. The grey lines are the data from D’Odorico et al. (2013). Middle:
distribution of C iv absorbers if the gas is all at 105.1 K. In these cases we start to ﬁnd some stronger absorbers. Right: Cumulative
distribution of C iv equivalent widths, now assuming that all of the carbon is C iv (unless the gas is self-shielded). Even for this somewhat
unrealistic assumption, the Sherwood, Illustris and FAST models only just about reach the incidence rate of C iv absorbers. A correction
to match the completeness of the observations has been applied to the simulated absorbers.

Figure 14. Left: Evolution of the background photoionization rate ΓH i with redshift in the Haardt & Madau (2012), the 2011 update of
Faucher-Gigu`ere et al. (2009) and Haardt & Madau (2001) models. The colour scheme is the same as the middle panel. For comparison we
show observations from Bolton & Haehnelt (2007), Dall’Aglio, Wisotzki & Worseck (2008), Faucher-Gigu`ere et al. (2008), Calverley et al.
(2011), Wyithe & Bolton (2011) and Becker & Bolton (2013). Middle: Shape of the UV background as a function of energy for three
diﬀerent models at z = 6. Also shown are the relevant carbon ionization energies. Right: Cumulative distribution of C iv equivalent
widths for the Sherwood simulation, for UV backgrounds with diﬀerent shapes and amplitudes, a model without self-shielding and a
model assuming all the non-self-shielded carbon was C iv. Changing the UV background increases the number of weak absorbers but
fails to produce many stronger ones.

higher C iv fractions at higher overdensities than with the
Haardt & Madau (2012) UV background. The result of this
is an overall increase in the total number of absorbers, more
absorbers at high overdensities (log ∆ > 2) and stronger
absorbers at moderate overdensities (0.5 < log ∆ < 1.5)
than when compared with the top right panel of Figure
13. Most of the strong C iv absorbers, however, still occur
at temperatures T > 105 K,
indicating that they are
collisionally ionized.

4.3 Absorber-Galaxy Connection

It is also interesting to look into the connection between
metal-line absorbers and galaxies. These were selected by
making an association between the absorber with the largest
equivalent width along a sightline and the nearest halo.
The position of the absorber was determined by taking the
pixel with the maximum ion number density, weighted by
the total ion number density along the sightline. We con-
strained the halo to have a non-zero stellar mass and a total
mass log(Mhalo/M⊙) > 8.5 to avoid selecting small satel-
lite haloes. The results are shown in Figure 16. We ﬁnd that
the strongest absorbers are located closest to the host haloes
and the haloes tend to have masses log(Mhalo/M⊙) & 10. As

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–22

z ∼ 6 metal-line absorbers

15

Figure 15. C iv-weighted temperature-overdensity plots for the C iv absorbers we measure in the Sherwood simulation using three
diﬀerent UV backgrounds. Left: Haardt & Madau (2012) a factor six higher in amplitude, middle: Haardt & Madau (2001), right: the
2011 version of Faucher-Gigu`ere et al. (2009). The colour of the points corresponds to the equivalent width, with the colour bar in the
left panel showing the values for all three plots. The black contours enclose the temperatures and densities for which the fraction of
carbon in C iv is 10, 30 and 50 per cent.

the mass of the host halo increases, strong absorbers can be
found at increasing distances from the halo. Occasionally we
ﬁnd strong absorbers linked to haloes below 1010 M⊙, but
this may be due to an absorber be linked to a satellite halo
of a nearby, more massive halo. Across all the simulations,
the low-ionization lines tend to be strongest when the ab-
sorbers are found in close proximity to a halo. In the HVEL
simulation, strong C iv absorbers tend to be found closer to
haloes than in Illustris and FAST. This is likely due to the
increased amount of shock-heated gas around these haloes,
due to the strong winds, that allows for collisionally ionized
C iv to be present.

Our results are generally in good agreement with those
of Oppenheimer, Dav´e & Finlator (2009), in the case where
they use a uniform UV background. Our haloes span a sim-
ilar range of stellar masses in the range 6 < log(M∗/M⊙) <
9.5, apart from in the Sherwood simulation which contains
haloes with lower stellar masses due to its higher resolu-
tion. The absorbers associated with these low stellar mass
haloes are all very weak though (EW . 0.05 ˚A, suggest-
ing that increased resolution will only produce more weak
absorbers. The HVEL simulation is the one most like the
Oppenheimer, Dav´e & Finlator (2009) constant UV back-
ground model in terms of the maximum distance we ﬁnd
absorbers at. However, they ﬁnd some strong C iv absorbers
at log(d/pkpc) > 1.5, which we do not see here.

Also marked on the right column of Figure 16 is the
measurement of the distance between a z ∼ 5.7 C iv ab-
sorption system and a Lyα emitter by D´ıaz et al. (2015).
This absorber, ﬁrst discovered by Ryan-Weber et al. (2009)
was also part of the D’Odorico et al. (2013) sample who
measured an rest-frame equivalent width of 0.75 ˚A. They
measure that C iv absorber is 212.8 h−1 pkpc from the Lyα
emitter. This is further than any of the distances we measure
between absorbers and haloes in our simulations. They sug-
gest it is also possible that an undetected dwarf galaxy may
be responsible for the metal enrichment, but we ﬁnd that ab-
sorbers with large equivalent widths are generally hosted by
haloes with log(Mhalo/M⊙) & 10. However, as none of our

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–22

models can reproduce the observed incidence rate of C iv
absorbers, it is diﬃcult to say more about this.

4.4 Evolution of the Mass Density with Redshift

Finally we look at how the mass density of O i, C ii and
C iv absorbers evolve towards z = 7. Since we do not have
a model that reproduces the observations of C iv at z ∼ 6,
we do not intend to make predictions for the exact values
of ΩC iv that may be observed, but instead just explore the
general trends we ﬁnd. The mass density of an ion is given
by

Ωion =

H0mion

cρcrit Z Nmax

Nmin

Nionf (Nion, z)dNion,

(9)

where Ωion is the mass density of a given ion, mion is the
mass of the ion, c is the speed of light, ρcrit is the critical
density at z = 0 and Nion is the column density of the ab-
sorber. f is the column density distribution function deﬁned
as

f (Nion, z) =

d2n

dXdNion

,

(10)

where n is the number of absorbers and X is the pathlength
deﬁned in Equation 8. This can be reduced to

Ωion =

H0mion

cρcrit P Nion

∆X

,

(11)

where the sum is across the detected absorbers. We measure
the column density across the absorber by summing the cal-
culated column density at each pixel from its optical depth,
using the apparent optical depth method as in Becker et al.
(2011), where

Nion =

3.768 × 1014

f λ Xi

τiδvi cm−2.

(12)

Here τ is the optical depth, δv is the width of the pixel in km
s−1 and i sums over the pixels associated with the absorber.
We checked that assigning a maximum value to the optical

16

L.C. Keating et al.

Figure 16. The mass of the halo associated with a metal-line absorber against the distance from that absorber in the four simulations.
The points are coloured by the equivalent width of the absorber and the colour scheme is the same across all panels. Also shown is the
distance between a z ∼ 5.7 C iv absorber and the nearest spectroscopically conﬁrmed Lyα emitter (D´ıaz et al. 2014, 2015).

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–22

z ∼ 6 metal-line absorbers

17

Figure 17. Evolution of the mass density of O i (left), C ii (middle) and C iv (right) with redshift. Plotted for comparison are mass
densities calculated from observed absorption systems. For O i we show an estimate for ΩO i at z ∼ 5, taken from Becker, Bolton & Lidz
(2015) and calculated from measurements of ΩH i in DLAs (Crighton et al. 2015) and the mean metallicity of DLAs at that red-
shift (Rafelski et al. 2014). The other points are taken from observations by Becker et al. (2011), Becker, Rauch & Sargent (2009),
Ryan-Weber et al. (2009), Simcoe et al. (2011) and D’Odorico et al. (2013). We also show a point showing only the z > 5.5 absorbers in
the D’Odorico et al. (2013) sample. We also compare with calculated mass densities from simulations by Finlator et al. (2015) and the
EAGLE simulation (Rahmati et al. 2016).

depth of τ = 5 made no diﬀerence to our results. The mass
densities we obtained are presented in Figure 17 and are
shown for the Haardt & Madau (2012) UV background.

To try and make a fair comparison with observations, we
restrict our measurement of Ωion to include only absorbers
with column densities in the range 13 < log(Nion/cm−2) <
15 which is in reasonable agreement with the column density
range probed by observations. We do not apply a complete-
ness correction on top of this cut, to make comparison with
published results from other simulations. Note that this may
result in a misleading comparison with observed estimates,
which use only the observed (incomplete) set of column den-
sities. The mass density of the low-ionization absorbers are
quite sensitive to the range of column densities considered,
with the mass density of O i and C ii increasing by a factor
of a few if we include all absorbers. It is the contribution of
the strongest absorbers that matters for this, with the in-
clusion of absorbers with low column densities having little
eﬀect. Although these high-column density systems are rare,
they contain a lot of mass which can alter the result signiﬁ-
cantly. This is also the reason that the C iv is insensitive to
the range of column densities included: our models do not
produce the strong absorbers in this case.

The evolution of O i and C ii is reasonably ﬂat be-
tween z = 6 and 7. Our simulated O i absorbers fall some-
what short of the measurement of Becker et al. (2011), but
again this could be adjusted by assuming a UV background
corresponding to a lower photoionization rate or a slightly
higher metallicity in the simulations. The C ii absorbers just
about match the lower limit provided by the observations of
Becker et al. (2011). We do not ﬁnd the increase in the in-
cidence rate of O i absorbers from z = 6 − 7 predicted by
Keating et al. (2014), due to the inhomogeneous distribu-
tion of metals occupying only a small ﬁlling factor of the
box in the simulations considered here.

As with the equivalent width distributions, our mod-
els of C iv again struggle to match the measurements of

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–22

the C iv mass density calculated from observations. Simi-
lar to what Bird et al. (2015b) found at z = 4, the C iv
mass density calculated from Illustris falls short of that
calculated from observations, but the increased velocity
FAST model improves things somewhat. However, at z = 6,
this improvement is not enough to provide a convincing
match to the observed data. Although the HVEL model ap-
pears to come close to matching the observed quantities,
it is important to note that it does not reproduce the ob-
served distribution of column densities, with most of the
absorbers in the HVEL model having column densities less
than log(NC iv/cm−2) ∼ 14. We also emphasise that we are
not applying a completeness correction here, only a cut in
column density, which would reduce the mass density in the
HVEL model as the observations are only ∼ 20 per cent
complete at log(NC iv/cm−2) = 13.

4.5 Comparison with Other Work and Discussion

Finlator et al. (2015) have modelled the abundance of C ii
and C iv absorbers during the reionization epoch, at z > 5.
They use a “hybrid” wind model, energy-driven for galaxy
velocity dispersions σ < 75 km s−1 and momentum-driven
otherwise. A variation of this model, which was momentum-
driven only, was shown in Oppenheimer & Dav´e (2006) to
reproduce ΩC iv over the redshift range 2 < z < 6. The
novel aspect of Finlator et al. (2015) was to use a coupled
radiative transfer and hydrodynamic code, which is certainly
a more realistic approach than using a uniform UV back-
ground. The downside to this, however, is that the simula-
tions become very expensive and therefore only a 6 h−1 Mpc
volume was simulated. They ﬁnd that their simulated UVB
results in a C ii (C iv) fraction a factor of two lower (higher)
from 5 < z < 10 than the ion fractions calculated with a uni-
form UV background. This would improve our results but, as
shown in the left panel of Figure 14, we would probably still
not have enough C iv to match the observations. The middle

18

L.C. Keating et al.

and right panels of Figure 17 show that we indeed produce
more C ii and less C iv, which is in agreement with what is
predicted by their simulated UVB but may also point to a
diﬀerence between the wind models. It seems that the wind
model used in Finlator et al. (2015) and associated works
is very eﬃcient at enriching the IGM with metals, but it is
not entirely clear why. Comparing their wind prescription
with the Illustris wind physics suggests that, for haloes of
the same mass, their winds should have lower velocities and
lower mass-loading factors. There is, however, a diﬀerence
in the density threshold for star formation. Compared to
the Sherwood simulation, where the hydrodynamics should
be similar, they use a lower threshold density (nH = 0.13
cm−3 vs. nH = 0.33 cm−3). Note that in both simulations
wind particles are decoupled from the hydrodynamics when
they enter the wind and are recoupled when the ambient
density falls below 10 per cent of the star formation thresh-
old. Thus, the recoupling happens at lower density in their
runs, which will most likely facilitate the escape of winds to
large radii. Further diﬀerences could be due the metallicity
of the winds (the metallicity in the Illustris winds is only
40 per cent of the ISM metallicity) and our inclusion of a
completeness correction.

Rahmati et al. (2016) have looked at the mass density
of C iv in the EAGLE simulation at z ∼ 6, which uses a
feedback scheme in which no velocity or mass-loading factor
is explicitly speciﬁed for the galactic winds. Although the
main focus of the paper is on highly-ionized metals at lower
redshifts, it seems from their mass density of C iv that they
are also struggling to match the observed C iv abundance
at z ∼ 6 (right panel of Figure 17). Note that their models
were run using the Haardt & Madau (2001) model for the
UV background, which we ﬁnd produces more C iv than the
Haardt & Madau (2012) model at z ∼ 6 (Section 4.2).

Our results suggest that a high wind velocity is needed
to pollute the low-density regions which are probed by
C iv with metals. Given constraints on the available en-
ergy and momentum for driving the winds, this translates to
low wind mass-loading factors. However, models with such
low mass-loadings typically overpredict the high-redshift
star formation rate density as well as the faint end of the
galaxy luminosity function (e.g. Oppenheimer & Dav´e 2006;
Puchwein & Springel 2013). It is, thus, not obvious how to
resolve both problems at the same time. Improved agree-
ment with the data could probably be achieved by more
optimistic assumptions about the available energy and mo-
mentum for driving winds, which would allow higher mass
loading factors for fast winds. Another route might be to
facilitate the escape of the winds from galaxies. For the sim-
ple wind models considered here, this could in principle be
achieved by increasing the period for which the wind par-
ticles are decoupled from the hydrodynamics after entering
the wind, which is supposed to mimic the formation of chim-
neys of relatively low resistance where outﬂows might escape
more easily. Admittedly, increasing the domain of applica-
tion of what is essentially a sub-resolution treatment of the
outﬂow physics in such a way is not entirely satisfactory.
A more gratifying approach might be to follow the physics
of outﬂows in more detail, i.e. at higher resolution and in-
cluding more of the relevant physics, like cosmic rays that
might continue to accelerate the winds on their way out.
In addition to changes in the wind physics, UV ﬂuctuations

would certainly contribute to bridging the gap between the
simulations and the C iv data.

5 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

We have modelled metal-line absorbers at z ∼ 6 using four
diﬀerent simulations (including the Illustris and Sherwood
simulations) run with diﬀerent feedback schemes and with
two diﬀerent hydrodynamic codes, with which we compared
observations of metal lines in the spectra of high-redshift
QSOs. We ﬁnd that both the overall incidence rate and
equivalent width distribution of low-ionization absorbers is
reasonably robust to the feedback prescription and to the
hydrodynamic solver used in running the simulation. For
low-ionization absorption, it is important to take the self-
shielding of the gas into account, with models neglecting this
eﬀect falling far short of the observations. We ﬁnd a better
match to observed incidence rates to O i absorbers when we
rescale the Haardt & Madau (2012) background to a level
in line with observations of the background photoionization
rate.

We run into diﬃculty modelling the C iv and Mg ii ab-
sorbers, however, with all of our models under-predicting the
total incidence rate and failing to reproduce observations of
the strongest absorbers. This result seems to be due to the
enrichment of the IGM, rather than due to the temperature
of the gas or the hardness of the z = 6 UV background (al-
though changing both of these certainly helps), and may be-
come even worse if the [C/O] abundance in these absorbers
is indeed sub-solar. We ﬁnd that C iv is an excellent tracer of
the ﬁlling factor of metals in the IGM, although interpreting
the current observations of C iv absorbers is theoretically
very challenging and is very sensitive to both the galactic
wind implementation and choice of UV background. Testing
future feedback models against the observed distribution of
C iv absorbers is therefore an interesting way to learn about
the impact of galactic feedback on the IGM at high redshift.
Modelling observations of O i and C ii at z & 6, however,
seems to have a weaker dependence on the feedback model
and may therefore be a more robust probe of (neutral, high-
density) gas in the metal-enriched CGM and IGM moving
further into the reionization epoch.

comes

after

several

recent

This work

2015; Rahmati et al.

papers
(Suresh et al.
2016; Bird et al.
2015a) that have shown that some current feedback models
are somewhat struggling to produce strong C iv absorbers,
both in the CGM and IGM, at lower redshifts. We show
here that this problem is already in place at z ∼ 6 for
the models analysed in this paper. We emphasise that
testing feedback models at the highest possible redshift is
important. Models that are already failing to reproduce
observations at z ∼ 6 are obviously a cause for concern,
as if these simulations show agreement with lower redshift
data then it may be for the wrong reasons. Models of
high-redshift metal-line absorbers are very constraining
on the metal enrichment of the CGM/IGM, and hence
on the star-formation and galactic wind models assumed
in the simulation. The current and next generation of
near-infrared spectrographs will provide excellent data on
metal absorption lines in z > 6 quasars, which should be

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–22

an invaluable resource against which we can test future
simulations.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank Kristian Finlator, George Becker and Max Pet-
tini for their helpful comments on a draft of this paper.
We also thank Debora Sijacki for carefully reading a draft
of this paper and for helpful discussions throughout the
project. We thank the Illustris team for making their sim-
ulation publicly available. We thank Volker Springel for
making gadget-3 available. LCK acknowledges the sup-
port of an Isaac Newton Studentship, the Cambridge Trust
and STFC. Support by the FP7 ERC Advanced Grant
Emergence-320596 is gratefully acknowledged. EP acknowl-
edges support from the Kavli Foundation. SB was sup-
ported by the National Aeronautics and Space Adminis-
tration through Einstein Postdoctoral Fellowship Award
Number PF5-160133 issued by the Chandra X-ray Obser-
vatory Center, which is operated by the Smithsonian As-
trophysical Observatory for and on behalf of the National
Aeronautics Space Administration under contract NAS8-
03060. JSB acknowledges the support of a Royal Soci-
ety University Research Fellowship. This work used the
DIRAC Shared Memory Processing system at the Uni-
versity of Cambridge, operated by the COSMOS Project
at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoret-
ical Physics on behalf of the STFC DiRAC HPC Facility
(www.dirac.ac.uk). This equipment was funded by BIS Na-
tional E-infrastructure capital grant ST/J005673/1, STFC
capital grant ST/H008586/1, and STFC DiRAC Operations
grant ST/K00333X/1. This work also used the DiRAC Data
Analytic system at the University of Cambridge, operated
by the University of Cambridge High Performance Com-
puting Service on behalf of the STFC DiRAC HPC Facil-
ity (www.dirac.ac.uk). This equipment was funded by BIS
National E-infrastructure capital grant (ST/K001590/1),
STFC capital grants ST/H008861/1 and ST/H00887X/1,
and STFC DiRAC Operations grant ST/K00333X/1.
DiRAC is part of the National E-Infrastructure. We ac-
knowledge PRACE for awarding us access to the Curie su-
percomputer, based in France at the Tres Grand Centre de
Calcul (TGCC), through the 8th regular call.

REFERENCES

Asplund M., Grevesse N., Sauval A. J., Scott P., 2009,

ARA&A, 47, 481

Becker G. D., Bolton J. S., 2013, MNRAS, 436, 1023
Becker G. D., Bolton J. S., Lidz A., 2015, PASA, 32, 45
Becker G. D., Bolton J. S., Madau P., Pettini M., Ryan-
Weber E. V., Venemans B. P., 2015, MNRAS, 447, 3402
Becker G. D., Rauch M., Sargent W. L. W., 2009, ApJ,

698, 1010

z ∼ 6 metal-line absorbers

19

Bird S., Rubin K. H. R., Suresh J., Hernquist L., 2015b,

ArXiv e-prints: 1512.02221

Bird S., Vogelsberger M., Haehnelt M., Sijacki D., Genel
S., Torrey P., Springel V., Hernquist L., 2014, MNRAS,
445, 2313

Bolton J. S., Haehnelt M. G., 2007, MNRAS, 382, 325
Bolton J. S., Haehnelt M. G., 2013, MNRAS, 429, 1695
Booth C. M., Schaye J., Delgado J. D., Dalla Vecchia C.,

2012, MNRAS, 420, 1053

Calverley A. P., Becker G. D., Haehnelt M. G., Bolton J. S.,

2011, MNRAS, 412, 2543

Chardin J., Haehnelt M. G., Aubert D., Puchwein E., 2015,

MNRAS, 453, 2943

Crighton N. H. M. et al., 2015, MNRAS, 452, 217
Dall’Aglio A., Wisotzki L., Worseck G., 2008, A&A, 491,

465

D´ıaz C. G., Koyama Y., Ryan-Weber E. V., Cooke J.,
Ouchi M., Shimasaku K., Nakata F., 2014, MNRAS, 442,
946

D´ıaz C. G., Ryan-Weber E. V., Cooke J., Koyama Y.,

Ouchi M., 2015, MNRAS, 448, 1240

D’Odorico V., Calura F., Cristiani S., Viel M., 2010, MN-

RAS, 401, 2715

D’Odorico V. et al., 2013, MNRAS, 435, 1198
Faucher-Gigu`ere C.-A., Lidz A., Hernquist L., Zaldarriaga

M., 2008, ApJ, 688, 85

Faucher-Gigu`ere C.-A., Lidz A., Zaldarriaga M., Hernquist

L., 2009, ApJ, 703, 1416

Ferland G. J. et al., 2013, RMXAA, 49, 137
Finlator K., Mu˜noz J. A., Oppenheimer B. D., Oh S. P.,
¨Ozel F., Dav´e R., 2013, MNRAS, 436, 1818
Finlator K., Thompson R., Huang S., Dav´e R., Zackrisson

E., Oppenheimer B. D., 2015, MNRAS, 447, 2526

Genel S. et al., 2014, MNRAS, 445, 175
Giallongo E. et al., 2015, A&A, 578, A83
Gonz´alez V., Labb´e I., Bouwens R. J., Illingworth G., Franx

M., Kriek M., 2011, ApJ, 735, L34

Haardt F., Madau P., 2001, in Clusters of Galaxies and
the High Redshift Universe Observed in X-rays, Neumann
D. M., Tran J. T. V., eds., p. 64

Haardt F., Madau P., 2012, ApJ, 746, 125
Haardt F., Salvaterra R., 2015, A&A, 575, L16
Keating L. C., Haehnelt M. G., Becker G. D., Bolton J. S.,

2014, MNRAS, 438, 1820

Madau P., Haardt F., 2015, ApJ, 813, L8
Matejek M. S., Simcoe R. A., 2012, ApJ, 761, 112
Nelson D. et al., 2015, Astronomy and Computing, 13, 12
Oh S. P., 2002, MNRAS, 336, 1021
Oppenheimer B. D., Dav´e R., 2006, MNRAS, 373, 1265
Oppenheimer B. D., Dav´e R., 2008, MNRAS, 387, 577
Oppenheimer B. D., Dav´e R., Finlator K., 2009, MNRAS,

396, 729

Oppenheimer B. D., Dav´e R., Katz N., Kollmeier J. A.,

Weinberg D. H., 2012, MNRAS, 420, 829

Pallottini A., Ferrara A., Gallerani S., Salvadori S.,

Becker G. D., Sargent W. L. W., Rauch M., Calverley A. P.,

D’Odorico V., 2014, MNRAS, 440, 2498

2011, ApJ, 735, 93

Planck Collaboration et al., 2015, ArXiv e-prints:

Becker G. D., Sargent W. L. W., Rauch M., Carswell R. F.,

1502.01589

2012, ApJ, 744, 91

Bird S., Haehnelt M., Neeleman M., Genel S., Vogelsberger

Puchwein E., Springel V., 2013, MNRAS, 428, 2966
Rafelski M., Neeleman M., Fumagalli M., Wolfe A. M.,

M., Hernquist L., 2015a, MNRAS, 447, 1834

Prochaska J. X., 2014, ApJ, 782, L29

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–22

20

L.C. Keating et al.

Rahmati A., Pawlik A. H., Raiˇcevi`c M., Schaye J., 2013,

Name

Box Size (cMpc) mdm(M⊙) mgas(M⊙)

MNRAS, 430, 2427

Rahmati A., Schaye J., Crain R. A., Oppenheimer B. D.,

Schaller M., Theuns T., 2016, MNRAS

Ryan-Weber E. V., Pettini M., Madau P., Zych B. J., 2009,

MNRAS, 395, 1476

Schaye J., 2001, ApJ, 559, 507
Schaye J. et al., 2015, MNRAS, 446, 521
Simcoe R. A. et al., 2011, ApJ, 743, 21
Springel V., 2005, MNRAS, 364, 1105
Springel V., 2010, MNRAS, 401, 791
Stark D. P., Ellis R. S., Bunker A., Bundy K., Targett T.,

Benson A., Lacy M., 2009, ApJ, 697, 1493
Stark D. P. et al., 2015, MNRAS, 454, 1393
Suresh J., Bird S., Vogelsberger M., Genel S., Torrey P.,
Sijacki D., Springel V., Hernquist L., 2015, MNRAS, 448,
895

Tescari E., Viel M., D’Odorico V., Cristiani S., Calura F.,

Borgani S., Tornatore L., 2011, MNRAS, 411, 826

Torrey P., Vogelsberger M., Genel S., Sijacki D., Springel

V., Hernquist L., 2014, MNRAS, 438, 1985

Vogelsberger M., Genel S., Sijacki D., Torrey P., Springel

V., Hernquist L., 2013, MNRAS, 436, 3031

Vogelsberger M. et al., 2014a, Nature, 509, 177
Vogelsberger M. et al., 2014b, MNRAS, 444, 1518
White S. D. M., Frenk C. S., 1991, ApJ, 379, 52
Wiersma R. P. C., Schaye J., Theuns T., 2011, MNRAS,

415, 353

Wyithe J. S. B., Bolton J. S., 2011, MNRAS, 412, 1926

This paper has been typeset from a TEX/ LATEX ﬁle prepared
by the author.

APPENDIX A: RESOLUTION TESTS

We have investigated the eﬀect of changing the resolution
on our metal-line absorbers. The simulations we use in
the tests are summarised in Table A1. We look at two p-
gadget3 runs (Sherwood and Sherwood-low), both with
the Puchwein & Springel (2013) galactic wind model. We
also use two arepo runs using the Illustris sub-grid physics
with a UV background a factor of two higher [previously
described in Bird et al. (2014, 2015a)], one at the same res-
olution as the HVEL and FAST simulations (2×UV) and
one with a factor 4 higher spatial resolution (2×UV-high).
The 2×UV run was not considered further in this paper as
it uses the same wind implementation as the Illustris simu-
lation.

The stellar mass function appears to be reasonably well
converged (left panel of Figure A1), with the Sherwood and
Sherwood-low runs agreeing well from 7 < log(M∗/M⊙) <
10.5. There is some divergence at lower stellar masses, where
the eﬀect of lower resolution becomes evident. Likewise, the
2×UV and 2×UV-high stellar mass functions agree well in
the region where they overlap, with 2×UV extending to
more massive stellar masses due to the larger volume and
2×UV-high continuing to lower stellar masses due to the
higher resolution. Both of these runs also agree well with
the stellar mass function of the Illustris simulation.

The metallicity-overdensity relation is very well con-
verged in the Sherwood and Sherwood-low simulations, with

Illustris
Sherwood

Sherwood-low

2×UV

2×UV-high

106.5
59.0
59.0
35.5
10.7

6.3 × 106
7.9 × 105
6.3 × 106
1.0 × 107
2.8 × 105

1.3 × 106
1.5 × 105
1.2 × 106
2.1 × 106
5.8 × 104

Table A1. Parameters of the simulations we use in the resolution
tests. In the case of the arepo simulations, we quote the mean gas
mass of all resolution elements in the snapshot when we reference
mgas.

the lines lying almost on top of each other (middle panel
of Figure A1) and the two runs also show similar metal-
licity proﬁles around haloes with 9.5 < log(Mhalo/M⊙) <
10 (right panel of Figure A1). This is only shown for
haloes in this low mass range due to the small boxsize of
2×UV-high, which contains only a handful of haloes with
log(Mhalo/M⊙) > 10 at z = 6. The 2×UV and 2×UV-high
runs show some signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the metallicity of
the gas, however, with their metallicity-overdensity relations
agreeing well at the highest overdensities (log ∆ > 3) but
diﬀering by more than 1 dex in metallicity at overdensities
less than 10. The metallicity proﬁles of the two runs are rea-
sonably similar within the virial radius and the 2×UV-high
run ﬂattens in the range 1.5 − 3 virial radii, rather than
falling below log(Z/Z⊙) ∼ −5 like the 2×UV simulation.
The ﬂattening is most likely due to a population of satel-
lites with low stellar masses, unresolved in the 2×UV run.
This perhaps suggests that the diﬀerence in the metallicity-
overdensity relation is due to the boxsize rather than the
resolution, with galaxies in haloes log(Mhalo/M⊙) > 10 re-
quired to enrich the IGM out to densities close to the mean.
Again, the Illustris simulation agrees well with the 2×UV
simulation in both the metallicity-overdensity relation and
the radial metallicity proﬁle.

We also checked how the incidence rate of the O i, C ii
and C iv absorbers change with resolution (Figure A2). The
Sherwood and Sherwood-low incidence rates are very well
converged, with excellent agreement for absorbers with EW
> 0.2 ˚A and a slight increase in the number of weak ab-
sorbers in the higher resolution simulation. We again see dis-
agreement between the results from the 2×UV and 2×UV-
high runs, ﬁnding more weak absorbers and far less strong
absorbers in the 2×UV-high run. This lack of strong ab-
sorbers is likely due to the boxsize rather than the reso-
lution, with Figure 16 suggesting that these absorbers are
hosted by haloes with log(Mhalo/M⊙) & 10 that are rare
in this small volume. The C iv absorbers have a lower in-
cidence rate at all equivalent widths in the 2×UV-high run
compared with 2×UV. This is probably again related to the
boxsize and the lower metallicity at the overdensities probed
by C iv compared to the 2×UV simulation.

APPENDIX B: VELOCITY WIDTHS OF
LOW-IONIZATION ABSORBERS

Another important test of our simulated absorbers are
whether the models can also produce a range of velocity
widths that agree with observations. Note however that only
seven of the Becker et al. (2011) sample of low-ionization ab-

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–22

z ∼ 6 metal-line absorbers

21

Figure A1. Left: The stellar mass function at z ∼ 6. Middle: Mean mass-weighted metallicity as a function of overdensity. Right: Median
mass-weighted radial metallicity proﬁle in a sample of 100 haloes.

Figure A2. Cumulative distribution of equivalent widths for O i (left), C ii (middle) and C iv (right) in simulations with diﬀerent
resolutions.

Figure B1. Left: Distribution of O i velocity widths (red line) compared with the Becker et al. (2011) sample shown in grey. The
normalisation of the distribution of the simulated absorbers has been scaled to match the peak of the Becker et al. (2011) sample.
Middle: As in the left panel, but for C ii absorbers (blue line). Right: Equivalent widths of O i absorbers as a function of their velocity
widths.

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–22

22

L.C. Keating et al.

sorbers at z ∼ 6 have published velocity widths. We focus
here on the velocity widths of our simulated low-ionization
absorbers O i and C ii, which have incidence rates in reason-
able agreement with observations. We calculated the velocity
widths of the low-ionization absorbers in the Sherwood sim-
ulation using the Haardt & Madau (2012) UV background.
Following Becker et al. (2011), we take ∆v90 as the veloc-
ity interval containing 90 per cent of the optical depth. We
considered only absorbers with rest-frame equivalent width
> 0.01 ˚A to make fair comparison with the observations.
The distribution of our simulated velocity widths spans a
similar range in velocity widths to the Becker et al. (2011)
sample and also scales in a similar way with the absorber
equivalent width (Figure B1). We do not ﬁnd a preference
for narrow velocity widths, but rather a distribution that
peaks at ∆v90 ∼ 30 − 50 km s−1 and gradually tails oﬀ to
smaller/larger velocity widths. The distribution of the ve-
locity widths in the O i and C ii absorbers in the Sherwood
simulations span a similar range of velocity widths and both
peak at at a similar ∆v90. A Kolmogorov-Smirnov test gives
a ∼ 30 per cent probability (for both O i and C ii) that
our simulated absorbers are drawn from the same distribu-
tion as the observed ones. The velocity width distributions
also do not change signiﬁcantly when we instead look at our
other feedback schemes, which is perhaps to be expected
as they produce comparable equivalent width distributions.
We do not reproduce the widest velocity width in the sample
(∆v90 = 223 km s−1). We checked whether our results were
aﬀected by large optical depths in some pixels by setting a
maximum value for the optical depth we used to calculate
∆v90, τion = 5. This did result in several more absorbers
with ∆v90 > 100 km s−1, but was not a large eﬀect.

APPENDIX C: IONIZATION STATES IN
DIFFERENT UVBS

In Figure C1, we show the ionic fraction of O i, C ii, C iv
and Mg ii that comes out of our cloudy models for the UV
backgrounds considered in this paper.

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–22

z ∼ 6 metal-line absorbers

23

Figure C1. The ionic fraction as a function of temperature and density for O i, C ii, C iv and Mg ii that we calculate from our cloudy
models (although note that our models extend beyond the temperature-density range shown here) for diﬀerent Haardt & Madau (2012)
models of the UV background. Overplotted is the mass-weighted temperature-density distribution in the Sherwood simulation.

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–22

