Personalized Persuasion for Social Interactions

in Nursing Homes

Marcos Baez, Chiara Dalpiaz, Fatbardha Hoxha, Alessia Tovo,

Valentina Caforio, and Fabio Casati

Dipartimento di Ingegneria e Scienza dellInformazione,

University of Trento, Italy

{marcos.baezgonzalez,chiara.dalpiaz,fatbardha.hoxha,alessia.tovo,

valentina.caforio,fabio.casati}@unitn.it

Abstract. This paper presents our preliminary investigation and ap-
proach towards a mixed physical-virtual technology for stimulating social
interactions among and with older adults in nursing homes. We report
on set of surveys, apps and focus groups aiming at understanding the
diﬀerent motivations and obstacles in promoting social interactions in
institutionalised care. We then present our approach to address some of
the key themes found, e.g., the technological disparity, lack of conversa-
tion topics and opportunities to interact.

Keywords: social interactions, older adults, nursing homes, persuasion
strategies

1

Introduction

The transition to residential care is one of the most diﬃcult experiences in the
life of elderly and the family, requiring the adaptation to a completely new
personal and social context [6]. Family involvement, and especially maintaining
an emotional bond through visits and family updates, is important to preserve
the residents sense of stability and connectedness along this process [5]. Social
integration with peers is also largely regarded as beneﬁcial. Connecting to others
helps in the adaptation, can foster friendships and sense of belonging, and has
been found to be one of the key elements contributing to the quality of life
in residential care [1]. In contrast, failing to keep socially active contributes
to feelings of loneliness, boredom, and helplessness, regarded as the plagues of
nursing home life [12, 7].

Diﬀerent physical, psychological and contextual factors inﬂuence the oppor-
tunities and motivations of older adults to interact with others. Poor physical

This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon
2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Skodowska-Curie
grant agreement No 690962.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
9

 

 
 
]

Y
C
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
9
4
3
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

2

Personalized Persuasion for Social Interactions in Nursing Homes

health and mental illness can pose a barrier to participating in social activities
thus contributing to social isolation [3]. People with poor psychological resources,
socially intimidated, or with fear of intimacy might also ﬁnd diﬃculties develop-
ing relationships and feeling connected [13, 11]. Other factors such as kinship and
social network closeness have also been found to be related to level of visits and
calls by family [10]. All these factors explain the eﬀectiveness of interventions
aiming at reducing social isolation targeting speciﬁc groups [2].

Technology supporting social interactions in this context has largely focused
on enabling social interactions, exploring technologies ranging from email and
video calls to social networks [4], without considering the personal traits and the
context that determine the user intentions, abilities and motivations to interact.
In this research project we aim at addressing the above scenario by providing
the technology that can enable and motivate social interaction of the nursing
home residents with peers and family. We recognize the potential of persuasion
technologies [8] as an instrument to empower social interactions by creating
sustainable and more meaningful conversations. However, for the same reasons
explained before, we believe that the vision that one-design-ﬁts-all would not
be feasible [9], and thus, we set to explore the tailoring of tools and persuasion
strategies to the intentions, motivations, preferences and needs of the various
actors.

In what follows we report on the early steps towards this idea, with the design
of a tailored newspaper, where the content is generated semi-automatically with
contributions from older adults and family members, and that serves as a tool for
creating meaningful conversations and ultimately increasing the wellbeing of the
older adults and their interactions with children and grandchildren. The design
incorporates ideas from the reminiscence therapy and crowdsourcing, with tasks
that are sensitive to the motivations of the various actors. The project is in
collaboration with the leading technology provider for nursing homes in Italy
and with the nursing homes of the Trentino province in Italy.

2 Problem exploration

To gain a deeper understanding of the problem we developed and run a set of
surveys, apps and focus groups to get qualitative and quantitative information
on intergenerational interactions, with particular attention (for the focus groups
in particular) to interactions in institutionalized care. A ﬁrst survey aimed at
understanding interactions (and, speciﬁcally, the reasons for non-interaction)
among young adults and their grandparents. We collected 100 responses from a
convenience sample of university students in Trento, Italy. The results show that

1. The majority of young adults have rather infrequent contact with some
grandparents (82% report physical and phone contacts of less than once
a week, 52% reports no contact at all in the last month)

2. The reasons for infrequent phone contact are lack of time (55%) and lack
of common topics of conversation (also 55%). 23% of respondents also cite

Personalized Persuasion for Social Interactions in Nursing Homes

3

cognitive diﬃculties as a limiting factor as well as pain in thinking at the
relative in a physically or cognitively challenged condition.

A second survey focused on those cases where interactions with grandparents
was more frequent, to understand which are the activities they do together (in
case of F2F meetings) or which are the common topics of conversation. A similar
convenience sample also of 100 respondents, suggested that the most common
activities are eating and watching TV (69 and 43% respectively) followed by
reading about recent news, home activities (cleaning) and watching pictures.
Common topics of conversations includes progress in school (70%), family news
(68%), health condition of the grandparent (55%), and food (41%).

An additional broader set of surveys asked young adults to look at their
Facebook posts and state for each of them if they would share them with their
grandparents if it was easy to do so, or if not, why. We collected results for
over 2000 posts with respondents from around the world, and the result we got
quite consistently is that younger adults would feel comfortable in sharing their
picture-based posts (over 75% of them) with grandparents. Only for less than
25% of the picture-based posts do people feel that they prefer not to share for
privacy reasons, that grandparents would not understand them, or that would
not be interested in them. The intention to share went signiﬁcantly down (to
less than 50%) for posts related to link or status updates.

Given that interactions with grandchildren is a major source of joy for older
adults, this picture points to the need for stimulating interactions, and it suggests
that the key to doing so lies in i) creating common topics of conversation (with
speciﬁc ideas on which ones these may be, such as family news, photos, or food)
and ii) trying to initiate a conversation by making it, at least at ﬁrst, almost
quick and eﬀortless for young adults to interact.

Focus groups conducted in three nursing homes in the Trentino province with
staﬀ and relatives helped understand more about the interactions among nursing
home residents as well as between residents and their children, who are often
their primary caretakers. What we learned is that:

1. Friendship relations are diﬃcult in a nursing homes: people are not there by
choice and do not see things in common with the other residents, besides the
fact that they all need assistance and are in the same nursing home.

2. The primary caretaker spends a lot of time in the nursing home and visit
very frequently often they do so daily. However, many members of the
immediate family (brothers or other children of the resident) are more absent
and this causes frustration and even anger in both the resident and the
primary caretaker.

3. Grandchildren rarely visit. This does not cause anger in the primary care-
taker, but the caretaker tries to involve them and make them interested often
failing to do so.

The take-home message from the focus group is that an opportunity to im-
prove the social interactions and quality of relations for people in nursing homes
and their families is to persuade other family members to visit. In addition, the

4

Personalized Persuasion for Social Interactions in Nursing Homes

Table 1. Messages coding scheme

Residents

Children

Target behavior
Physical
peers

interaction with

Virtual interactions with par-
ents Physical interactions with
parents (visits)

Grandchildren

Virtual interactions with the
grandparents

Constraints
Physical, mental or psychological fac-
tors, lack of opportunities, lack of con-
versation topics, perceived lack of com-
mon history and topics of conversations
Distance, lack of time, suﬀering result-
ing from seeing parents in diﬃcult con-
dition, disinformation, delegation of re-
sponsibilities
Lack of time, lack of conversation top-
ics, lack of awareness of the positive im-
pact

large amount of time spent by the primary caretaker in the nursing homes means
that we have the opportunity to leverage their presence there to facilitate IT-
mediated interaction with other family members even in the (quite common) case
that the resident lacks the cognitive ability to carry out the virtual interaction.

3 Users, groups, and objectives

From our survey and analysis of the literature we identiﬁed groups of users, the
behaviors that we need to motivate and the potential barriers that they face.
These aspects are summarized in Table 1.

For each group, diﬀerent characteristics deﬁne their ability and willingness

to interact, which we take as the starting point:

– For residents in the nursing homes we are collaborating with, distinction is
made based on the type of care, deﬁning subgroups such as intensive care,
Alzheimer and (semi)independent;

– Children behavior seems to be related to being the main caretaker in the

family, and

– Grandchildren, behavior seems to be related to previous living arrangements,

i.e., whether it was living with the grandparents, and distance.

All the above actors are clearly deﬁned by particular interests (topics), which

also deﬁne the level of aﬃnity.

4 Approach and work in progress

In this project we enable and stimulate interaction by combining:

1. Technologies for semi-automatically building a physical newspaper that in-
cludes family news by enhancing and curating information available from
social networks

Personalized Persuasion for Social Interactions in Nursing Homes

5

Fig. 1. Technological scenario of the approach

2. Reminiscence techniques that, in addition to the intrinsic beneﬁts of remi-
niscence, give us a way to collect information helpful to ﬁnd common stories
among residents

3. Middleware technologies to simplify and mediate interaction among ad hoc
applications to be used in nursing homes with social network commonly used
by children and most of all by grand children.

The basic idea and usage patterns consist of collecting information (pictures,
life stories, etc) from older adults with the help of the visiting children (the
primary caretaker) or volunteers, through an application designed for this pur-
pose. This information is processed to ﬁnd common aspects with the life of other
residents (people who lived the same experiences, or in the same city), thereby
providing the opportunity for creating a bonding and initiating therefore a con-
versation. Information semi-automatically obtained from social networks (typi-
cally from Instagram accounts) of children and grandchildren can also be used
to derive common topics of conversation (through common aspects of the life of
the children or grandchildren). The usage scenario is illustrated in Figure 1.

The newspaper is the primary interface towards the resident and is provided
in both physical and virtual form. It contains snippets of the life of relatives of
residents as well as reports on life in nursing homes and, weekly, feature stories
about one resident. All news items are related to one or more residents and, where
possible, point to possible commonalities among residents. The newspaper is also
meant as an instrument that makes visit more fun and as a way to bond children
(as commonalities are also through children) so that they also are enticed to visit
more often especially children besides the primary caretaker.

Finally, collecting pictures about life stories, and also enabling residents to
view and talk about what they see about grandchildren in the newspaper is also
an opportunity to involve grandchildren in a conversation, by probing them with
snippets of information or feedback through a channel they already use (chat

Collecting life storiesBrowsing life storiesIntergenerational communicationscollecting life memories togetherbrowsing life stories togetherﬁnding similar people in the nursing homePHYSICALVIRTUALmotivating ofﬂine interactionsbrowsing life stories togethermotivating ofﬂine interactionsCollaboration: -suggestions, opinions -entering parts of the story -suggesting topics.Acknowledgement (like / reactions) Opinions and feedback “I was there”Flooding in Trentovirtual / printed newspaperINTERACTIONSBACKEND SERVICESGrandchildren can easily share from the various social networks. Tailored feedback aiming at increasing number and quality of interactions (e.g., via a Telegram Bot)Newspaper adapted to the users browsing, in terms of content and activities when used in share mode. Newspaper highlighting similarities among people, seeking to create awareness about connections (virtual / printed)ﬁnding similaritiesuser classiﬁcationpers. strategies poolChildrenResidentsPeersGrandchildren6

Personalized Persuasion for Social Interactions in Nursing Homes

software or Instagram/Facebook), without the need of a new app on their side
that they would need to install and open.

In general, what we are aiming at is the creation of topics of conversations,
the creation of awareness of common history and common aspects in life, and
the reduction of barriers to interaction. These aspects play out diﬀerently for
the three target groups, with common history being instrumental to persuasion
to make friends among residents and to make visits more fun for children, and
reduction of barriers more oriented towards resident-grandchildren interaction.
We believe this technological support provides the environment that will en-
able the diﬀerent actors to develop stronger and more meaningful conversations.
The personalization we are aiming at, however, is not limited to content and ac-
tivities, but extends to the strategies that will enable sustainable contributions
and interactions. Our hypothesis based on our preliminary work that includes a
literature review, surveys and focus groups, is that the support will range from
simple enabler to coaching mechanisms sensitive to the characteristics of the
peers in a conversation. Further studies will help us identify the subgroups of
users, select the persuasion strategies to use in the personalisation, and under-
stand what strategies work and for whom.

Acknowledgment. This project has received funding from the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Skodowska-
Curie grant agreement No 690962. This work was also supported by the project
“Evaluation and enhancement of social, economic and emotional wellbeing of
older adults” under the agreement no. 14.Z50.310029, Tomsk Polytechnic Uni-
versity” and by the Trentino project “Collegamenti”.

References

[1] Bradshaw, S.A., Playford, E.D., Riazi, A.: Living well in care homes: a systematic

review of qualitative studies. Age and ageing p. afs069 (2012)

[2] Cattan, M., White, M., Bond, J., Learmouth, A.: Preventing social isolation and
loneliness among older people: a systematic review of health promotion interven-
tions. Ageing and society 25(01), 41–67 (2005)

[3] Edelbrock, D., Buys, L., Creasey, H., Broe, G.: Social support social networks and
social isolation: the sydney older persons study. Australasian Journal on Ageing
20(3), 2–34 (2001)

[4] Findlay, R.A.: Interventions to reduce social isolation amongst older people: where

is the evidence? Ageing and Society 23(05), 647–658 (2003)

[5] Friedemann, M.L., Montgomery, R.J., Maiberger, B., Smith, A.A.: Family involve-
ment in the nursing home: Family-oriented practices and staﬀ-family relationships.
Research in Nursing & Health 20(6), 527–537 (1997)

[6] Lee, D.T., Woo, J., Mackenzie, A.E.: A review of older peoples experiences with

residential care placement. Journal of advanced nursing 37(1), 19–27 (2002)

[7] Lindley, S., Wallace, J.: Placing in age: Transitioning to a new home in later life.
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 22(4), 20 (2015)
[8] Oinas-Kukkonen, H., Harjumaa, M.: Persuasive systems design: Key issues, pro-
cess model, and system features. Communications of the Association for Informa-
tion Systems 24(1), 28 (2009)

Personalized Persuasion for Social Interactions in Nursing Homes

7

[9] ORJI, R.: Design for behaviour change: A model-driven approach for tailoring

persuasive technologies (2014)

[10] Port, C.L., Gruber-Baldini, A.L., Burton, L., Baumgarten, M., Hebel, J.R., Zim-
merman, S.I., Magaziner, J.: Resident contact with family and friends following
nursing home admission. The Gerontologist 41(5), 589–596 (2001)

[11] Rokach, A., Brock, H.: The causes of loneliness. Psychology: A Journal of Human

Behavior (1996)

[12] Thomas, W.H.: Life worth living: How someone you love can still enjoy life in a
nursing home: The Eden Alternative in action. Publisher: VanderWyk&Burnham
(1996)

[13] Windle, G., Woods, R.T.: Variations in subjective wellbeing: The mediating role

of a psychological resource. Ageing and Society 24(04), 583–602 (2004)

