Astronomy&Astrophysicsmanuscript no. accepted_citations
March 22, 2016

c(cid:13)ESO 2016

On the reliability of observational measurements of column

density probability distribution functions

V. Ossenkopf1, T. Csengeri2, N. Schneider1, C. Federrath3, and R.S. Klessen4

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
2

 
 
]

M

I
.

h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

2
v
4
4
3
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

1 I. Physikalisches Institut, Universität zu Köln, Zülpicher Straße 77, 50937 Köln, Germany

e-mail: ossk@ph1.uni-koeln.de

2 Max-Planck Institut für Radioastronomie, Auf dem Hügel 69, Bonn, Germany
3 Research School of Astronomy and Astrophysics, Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 2611, Australia
4 Universität Heidelberg, Zentrum für Astronomie, Institut für Theoretische Astrophysik, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany

Received ; accepted

ABSTRACT

Context. Probability distribution functions (PDFs) of column densities are an established tool to characterize the evolutionary state of
interstellar clouds.
Aims.Using simulations, we show to what degree their determination is aﬀected by noise, line-of-sight contamination, ﬁeld selection,
and the incomplete sampling in interferometric measurements.
Methods. We solve the integrals that describe the convolution of a cloud PDF with contaminating sources such as noise and line-of-
sight emission and study the impact of missing information on the measured column density PDF. In this way we can quantify the
eﬀect of the diﬀerent processes and propose ways to correct for their impact in order to recover the intrinsic PDF of the observed
cloud.
Results. The eﬀect of observational noise can be easily estimated and corrected for if the root mean square (rms) of the noise is
known. For σnoise values below 40 % of the typical cloud column density, Npeak, this involves almost no degradation of the accuracy
of the PDF parameters. For higher noise levels and narrow cloud PDFs the width of the PDF becomes increasingly uncertain. A
contamination by turbulent foreground or background clouds can be removed as a constant shield if the PDF of the contamination
peaks at a lower column or is narrower than that of the observed cloud. Uncertainties in the deﬁnition of the cloud boundaries mainly
aﬀect the low-column density part of the PDF and the mean density. As long as more than 50 % of a cloud are covered, the impact
on the PDF parameters is negligible. In contrast, the incomplete sampling of the uv plane in interferometric observations leads to
uncorrectable distortions of the PDF of the produced maps. An extension of ALMA’s capabilities would allow us to recover the high-
column density tail of the PDF but we found no way to measure the intermediate and low column density part of the underlying cloud
PDF in interferometric observations.

Key words. ISM: clouds – ISM: structure – ISM: dust, extinction – Methods: data analysis Methods: statistical – Instrumentation:
interferometers

1. Introduction

(2012,

(2011); Schneider et al.

Probability distribution functions (PDFs) of column density
maps of interstellar clouds have been proven to be a valuable tool
to characterize the properties and evolutionary state of the clouds
(see e.g. Berkhuijsen & Fletcher
(2008); Kainulainen et al.
(2009); Froebrich & Rowles (2010); Lombardi et al. (2011);
Kainulainen et al.
2013);
Russeil et al. (2013); Kainulainen & Tan (2013); Hughes et al.
(2013); Alves et al. (2014); Druard et al. (2014); Schneider et al.
(2015a,b,c); Berkhuijsen & Fletcher (2015) for the observa-
tional side and Klessen (2000); Federrath et al. (2008, 2010);
Kritsuk et al. (2011); Molina et al. (2012); Konstandin et al.
(2012); Federrath & Klessen (2013); Girichidis et al. (2014)
for
the theoretical side). Column density maps of dense
clouds typically show a log-normal PDF at low column den-
sities, produced by interstellar turbulence (Vazquez-Semadeni
1994; Padoan et al. 1997; Passot & Vázquez-Semadeni 1998;
Federrath et al. 2008; Price et al. 2011; Federrath & Banerjee
2015; Nolan et al. 2015), and a power-law tail in the PDF at
high densities due to gravitational collapse (Klessen 2000;
Kritsuk et al. 2011; Federrath & Klessen 2013; Girichidis et al.

2014). The PDFs seen in 2-D projection allow to estimate
the underlying 3-D volume density PDFs when assuming
global
isotropy (Brunt et al. 2010a,b; Ginsburg et al. 2013;
Kainulainen et al. 2014). The width of the log-normal part al-
lows to quantify the turbulent driving of the interstellar medium
(Nordlund & Padoan 1999; Federrath et al. 2008, 2010).
If
the driving is known, PDF width and Mach number can be
used to constrain the magnetic pressure (Padoan & Nordlund
2011; Molina et al. 2012). The slope of the PDF power-law
tail can be translated into radial proﬁles of collapsing clouds
when assuming a spherical or cylindrical density distribution
(Kritsuk et al. 2011; Federrath & Klessen 2013).

PDFs can be determined from any mapped quantity, not
only column densities. For instance, Schneider et al. (2015b)
combined PDFs of dust temperatures with the column-density
PDFs, Burkhart et al. (2013) compared PDFs of molecular
lines with diﬀerent optical depths, and Miesch & Scalo (1995);
Miesch et al. (1999); Hily-Blant et al. (2008); Federrath et al.
(2010); Toﬄemire et al. (2011) studied PDFs of centroid veloci-
ties and velocity increments. Our analysis does not make any as-
sumption on the quantity that is actually analyzed. As a pure sta-
tistical analysis, it can be applied to any kind of map. However,

Article number, page 1 of 17

A&Aproofs:manuscript no. accepted_citations

directly measured quantities have the advantage that the impact
of observational noise is easier to quantify. This favors e.g. in-
tensities over velocity centroids or temperatures. For the sake of
convenience in naming the quantities and in the direct compar-
ison to the frequent computation of PDFs from column density
maps, we focus on to the column density as measured quantity,
characterized either in terms of gas columns, visual extinction,
or submm-emission from dust with constant temperature. There-
fore, we use column density N and AV synonymously.

Lombardi et al. (2015) discussed the impact of statistical
noise, contamination with fore- and background material, and
boundary biases on the PDFs of their near-infrared extinction
maps and concluded that it is impossible to reliably deter-
mine the lower column-density tail of the observed molecu-
lar cloud PDFs, leaving only the high-column density power-
law tail as signiﬁcant structure. For column density maps ob-
tained from Herschel PACS and SPIRE continuum observations,
Schneider et al. (2015a) showed in contrast that 1) the fore-
ground contamination can be corrected for by assuming a con-
stant screen of material, 2) the selection of the map boundaries
only aﬀects column densities well below the column density
peak, and 3) the observational noise in the Herschel maps was
an order of magnitude lower allowing to fully resolve the log-
normal part of the turbulent column-density PDF. A recent com-
prehensive study by Brunt (2015) showed that the neglection of
noise and line-of-sight contamination can lead to an erroneous
interpretation of power-law tails.

In order to provide a general framework to assess the relia-
bility of column density PDFs obtained in observations, we per-
form here a parameter study where we simulate diﬀerent obser-
vational biases and limitations with a variable strength to show
under which conditions interstellar cloud PDFs can be reliably
measured, when they can be recovered using parametric correc-
tions, and when the observational limitations dominate the result.
In Sect. 2, we introduce the formalism and the simulated data
used here. In Sect. 3, we study the impact of observational noise,
Sect. 4 deals with line-of-sight contamination, Sect. 5 with the
selection of map boundaries, and Sect. 6 with the limitations in
interferometric observations. Sect. 7 summarizes our ﬁndings.

2. Mathematical description

2.1. PDFs

PDFs of column densities p(N) are deﬁned as the probability of
the column density in a map to fall in the interval N, N + dN. As
probabilities they are normalized to unity, i.e.R ∞
0 p(N)dN = 1. If
we discuss noisy quantities or other physical quantities that can
become negative, the integral should start at −∞. Due to the huge
range of densities and resulting column densities in the interstel-
lar medium, it is more appropriate to use logarithmic bins, i.e. we
switch to a logarithmic scale η = ln(N/Npeak), where Npeak is the
most probable column density in logarithmic bins, i.e. the peak
of the distribution on a logarithmic column density scale. The
translation between the PDFs on the linear and the logarithmic
scale can be easily computed by

pη(η)dη = pN(N)

∂N
∂η

dη = N pN(N)dη .

having typical widths on the logarithmic scale σcloud between
0.2 and 0.5 (see e.g. Kainulainen et al. 2009; Hughes et al. 2013;
Schneider et al. 2015a), and a power-law tail at higher densities

p(η)dη = η−sdη ,

(3)

where the exponent s varies in observations between about
s = 1 . . . 4 (see e.g. Schneider et al. 2015b; Stutz & Kainulainen
2015). For a free-fall gravitational collapse creating the tail,
we expect values s = 2 . . . 3, depending on the geometry
of the collapse (Kritsuk et al. 2011; Federrath & Klessen 2013;
Girichidis et al. 2014).

All eﬀects of noise, contamination, and edge selection
mainly change the low-density regime, so that it is suﬃcient to
concentrate on the log-normal part here. The measurement of
the power-law tail can be aﬀected by the impact of insuﬃcient
spatial resolution and binning. That was already studied in de-
tail by Lombardi et al. (2010) and Schneider et al. (2015a). For
our semi-analytic studies, focusing on low-density eﬀects, we
will therefore represent molecular clouds by a log-normal PDF,
fully described by the two parameters Npeak and σcloud, here. A
power-law tail is only added for the full cloud simulations (see
Sect. 2.3).

The normalization of the density to the peak of the distribu-
tion on a logarithmic scale Npeak(η), deviates from the normal-
ization by hNi that is often employed in the literature and that
we also used in Schneider et al. (2015a). In principle, the choice
of the normalization constant does not aﬀect any of our out-
comes. Taking the logarithmic peak is simply more convenient
for log-normal distributions centering them at η = 0. For a log-
normal distribution we ﬁnd a ﬁxed relation between the possible
normalization constants. The average column density is hNi =
Npeak(η) exp(σ2
η,cloud/2) and the peak of the probability distribu-
tion in linear units falls at Npeak(N) = Npeak(η) exp(−σ2
η,cloud).
However, we will show in Sect. 5 that a normalization by the
PDF peak is much more stable against selection eﬀects than the
mean column density. Therefore, we generally recommend the
choice of Npeak for the column density normalization.

2.2. Contamination

All eﬀects of contamination by observational noise or other line-
of-sight material will be linear in column density N, but not in
η. At every point in the map we measure a column density that
is given by Ntot = Ncloud + Ncontam, i.e. on a logarithmic scale we
ﬁnd ηtot = ln(Ncloud + Ncontam) − ln(Npeak). The resulting PDF of
a contaminated map then results from the convolution integral of
both distributions on the linear scale

pη(ηtot) = NtotR ∞

−∞

pN,contam(N)
pη,cloud[ln(Ntot − N) − ln(Npeak)]

(4)

dN .

×

N

We can assume a normal distribution for the contamination with
direct measurement noise1

pN,contam(N) =

(1)

1

√2πσnoise

exp−

N2
2σ2

noise

(5)

Most molecular cloud observations are characterized by a

log-normal part for the high probability of low densities

For derived quantities or measurements in particular observing
modes the errors can be correlated or non-Gaussian requiring
the convolution with a diﬀerent noise distribution pN,contam(N).

pη(η) =

1

√2πση,cloud

Article number, page 2 of 17

−

exp

η2
2σ2

η,cloud

,



(2)

1 An equivalent approach, deﬁned on the linear scale, was recently in-
troduced by Brunt (2015).

V. Ossenkopf et al.: Observational measurements of column density PDFs

ify a fractional Brownian motion (fBm, see e.g. Stutzki et al.
1998) image to approximate the PDF seen in molecular clouds.
The original fBm image is constructed by inverse transform of
a Fourier spectrum that has a given power spectral index β and
random phases. For the spectral index we use a value of β = 2.8,
measured in many molecular clouds (see e.g. Bensch et al. 2001;
Falgarone et al. 2004) and consistent with numerical simulations
(Kowal et al. 2007; Federrath et al. 2009). The fBm structure re-
ﬂects the typical spatial correlations in interstellar cloud maps.
The resulting image always has a Gaussian PDF (pN,fBm(N)
given by Eq. 5). To obtain the desired log-normal plus power-
law column density PDF with a minimum distortion of the spa-
tial structure we translate the fBm values into cloud column den-
sities by

Ncloud = Π−1

cloud [ΠfBm(N)]

where Π denotes the integral over the normalized PDF

Π(N) = Z N

−∞

pN(N′)dN′ ,

(8)

(9)

varying between zero and unity. The inversion of the function
Π−1 can only be computed numerically.

For the parameters of the PDF we use values measured by
Schneider et al. (2015a) and Schneider et al. (2015c) in several
star-forming clouds, e.g. Auriga, Orion B, and Cygnus X. The
peak of the PDF Npeak is located at AV = 5 and the width of the
log-normal part of the PDF in units of the natural logarithm of
the column density is ση,cloud = 0.45. The transition to the power-
law tail occurs at AV = 11 and the tail has an exponent of s = 1.9.
The PDFs in regions with somewhat lower star-forming activity
are shifted towards smaller column densities. Kainulainen et al.
(2009); Schneider et al. (2015a) ﬁnd PDF peaks at AV ≈ 2 and
deviation points to the power law tail at AV = 4 . . . 5. On the η
scale, used in all simulations here, this is identical to the PDF
of our test data, pη(η). Only when translating the results back to
an absolute column density scale, the diﬀerent PDF peak density
Npeak needs to be applied. We selected a random seed for the
fBm that results in a cloud well centered in the map, similar to
what an observer might choose.

The resulting map is shown in Fig. 1, where we arbitrarily
placed the map on the Southern sky and assigned spatial dimen-
sions in such a way, that it would make sense to observe the
cloud with ALMA as simulated in Sect. 6. The PDF of the cloud
is shown in Fig. 2.

3. Noise
3.1. Mainimpact

In a ﬁrst step we study how the PDF is modiﬁed by observational
noise, simulated as the superposition of normally distributed ran-
dom numbers to the map. The result is shown in Fig. 2 where we
varied the noise amplitude, i.e. the root-mean-square (rms) of the
noise distribution between 10 % and 100 % of the peak density,
Npeak, of the cloud PDF. We see three eﬀects:
i) An increasing noise level produces a low-density excess in
the PDF, i.e. the log-normal part of the PDF is widened towards
lower densities. If the low densities are completely dominated
by noise, like in the case of noise amplitudes of 50 % or more of
the peak column density, we ﬁnd a linear behavior of the PDF
at low densities p(η) ∝ η due to the factor N in Eq. 1 applied
to the Gaussian noise contribution (Eq. 5) when computing the
convolution integral (Eq. 4).

Article number, page 3 of 17

Fig. 1. Test data set representing a fractal cloud with an ideal column
density PDF consisting of a log-normal part and a power-law high-
density tail. Coordinates are invented to allow for an easy comparison
with real observations and to perform simulated ALMA observations in
Sect. 6. Contours and colors visualize the same data. The contour lev-
els are indicated in the color bar. Column densities above AV = 80 are
saturated in the plot to make the turbulent cloud part better visible. The
actual maximum column density is three times larger. As the peak of
the log-normal PDF is located at AV = 5, the contours almost cover ma-
terial in the PDF power-law tail only. According to the low probabilities
in the tail, the fraction of green pixels is already small and that of pixels
with yellow and red colors is tiny. The four colored squares indicate the
subregions discussed in Sect. 5.

For the contamination by a turbulent foreground or background
cloud we can use a second log-normal distribution

pN,contam(N) =

1

√2πσcontam × N

exp −

(ln N − ln Ncontam)2

2σ2

contam

!

(6)

where Ncontam denotes the most probable column density of the
contamination on a logarithmic scale. We assume that the con-
taminating structures are turbulence-dominated so that they do
not show any self-gravitating cores yet and can be described by
a pure log-normal distribution without power-law tail. Collaps-
ing parts that produce a power-law tail are easily identiﬁed in
the maps as small structures so that they can be separated from
large-scale contaminations.

In principle, it is possible to compute the original cloud dis-
tribution pN,cloud(N) from the measured distribution pN(Ntot) by
inverting the convolution in Fourier space if the contamination
PDF, pN,contam(N), is known

F[pN,contam(N)]!

pN,cloud(N) = F−1  F[pN(N)]
where F and F−1 denote the normal and inverse Fourier trans-
form. However, this operation is inherently unstable. It ampliﬁes
noise, gridding eﬀects and numerical uncertainties, so that it only
works with very well behaving denominators. As Gaussian noise
is mathematically well characterized we will test this method in
Sect. 3.

(7)

2.3. Testdata

For a realistic data set that has all properties of a molecular cloud
column density map, but no observational limitations we mod-

A&Aproofs:manuscript no. accepted_citations

Fig. 2. Impact of observational noise on the PDF measured for the cloud
from Fig. 1. The red solid curve shows the analytic description of the in-
put PDF, the blue dotted line is the actually measured PDF of the fractal
map with a ﬁnite pixel number. The other broken lines show the column
density PDF that is measured if the map is aﬀected by diﬀerent lev-
els of observational noise, characterized by a normal distribution with a
standard deviation from 10 % to 100 % of the peak column density.

ii) For high noise levels, the additional “signal” from the noise
also shifts the peak of the distribution towards higher column
densities, i.e. may aﬀect the measurement of Npeak.
iii) For the power-law tail towards high column densities, how-
ever, we ﬁnd no signiﬁcant impact. This conﬁrms our earlier
ﬁndings (Schneider et al. 2015a) and the ones of Lombardi et al.
(2015) that the log-normal part of the PDF is easily aﬀected by
noise, but that the power-law tail is stable.

3.2. Parametriccorrections

A correction of the noise eﬀect for the log-normal part of the
PDF is, however, possible if the amplitude of the noise contam-
ination is known. To obtain such a correction, we perform a pa-
rameter study based on the analytic description of the PDFs in
Eqs. (2-5), ignoring the power-law tail that is anyway not sen-
sitive to the noise contamination. Figure 3 shows a ﬁrst step in
such a parameter scan for the noise amplitude. Here, we display
all PDFs for the diﬀerent noise levels in a color-contour plot. To
represent the PDFs in the two-dimensional plot equivalent to the
curves in Fig. 2 we show the decadic logarithm of pη(η) in colors
and contour levels. The PDFs are computed from the convolution
integral (Eq. 4) using a log-normal cloud PDF with ση,cloud = 0.5
and Gaussian noise (Eq. 5) with a varying amplitude. The left
edge of the ﬁgure represents the original log-normal PDF. With
increasing noise level σnoise towards the right part of the plot,
we see the increasing distortion of each part of the PDF. This al-
lows us to quantify and correct the distortions based on the noise
level. Even for low noise levels there is a low-column-density
excess leading to a widening of the PDF. It stays relatively con-
stant for noise levels ση,cloud >∼ 0.5Npeak. For noise amplitudes of
>∼ 0.2Npeak the PDF peak is also shifted towards higher column
densities.
As the noisy PDFs are no longer log-normal they are no
longer characterized by two parameters only. We have to dis-
criminate between diﬀerent methods that can be used for mea-
suring width and peak position in PDFs. The problem is similar

Article number, page 4 of 17

Fig. 3. Distributions obtained from the convolution of a log-normal
cloud PDF (Eq. 2 with ση,cloud = 0.5) with a Gaussian noise PDF (Eq. 5)
as a function of the noise amplitude (σnoise) relative to the peak of the
log-normal distribution (Npeak). Contours and colors visualize the same
data, given on a logarithmic scale. The individual contour levels are
marked in the color bar. The left edge of the ﬁgure represents the origi-
nal log-normal PDF. When increasing the noise level σnoise in the right
direction, we see the distortion of the PDF mainly at low column densi-
ties η. To better follow the shift of the PDF maximum to larger column
densities with increasing noise level, the dashed line indicates the peak
of the distribution.

to the measurement of the position and width of individual lines
measured in a spectroscopic observation. The use of the absolute
peak for the position is sensitive to the details of the binning. It
can be aﬀected by ﬂuctuations due to the low-number sampling
in individual bins for a ﬁnite map size. This becomes signiﬁ-
cant for the submaps that we consider in Sect. 5. In contrast, the
moments of the distribution, being independent of the selected
binning, are strongly aﬀected by the structure of the wings. This
would prevent us from applying the numbers determined here,
for the contamination of a purely log-normal distribution, to a
molecular cloud structure that shows an additional power-law
tail. The compromise, that is often used in the case of spectro-
scopic observations, is a Gaussian ﬁt to the distribution, i.e. a
log-normal ﬁt on our logarithmic η scale. For a log-normal dis-
tribution, all three approaches provide the same numbers, but for
the noise-contaminated distributions they can deviate from each
other.

Figure 4 shows the PDF parameters determined in three dif-
ferent ways as a function of the amplitude of the noise con-
tamination. The upper plot gives the center position measured
through the maximum, the ﬁrst moment, and as the center of a
log-normal ﬁt. They agree at zero noise contamination. The po-
sition of the peak probability gives the highest column density
values for the PDF center, matching the dashed line in Fig. 3.
When considering the dotted curve for the PDF centroid, we
ﬁnd a decrease for the center of the distribution at low noise
levels compared to the noise-free case due to the widening of
the distribution towards small column densities. The center of a
log-normal ﬁt shows an intermediate behavior.

The lower plot shows the measured widths of the distribu-
tion together with the next higher moments2. The width of a log-

2 The third moment of a distribution is the skewness deﬁned as S =

1/N ×P(η−hηi)3/σ3, the fourth moment the kurtosis K = 1/N ×P(η−
hηi)4/σ4 where the sums run over all N pixels of a map and σ denotes
the standard deviation of the distribution in η.

V. Ossenkopf et al.: Observational measurements of column density PDFs

Fig. 4. Change of the measured PDF parameters as a function of the
noise amplitude. The upper plot shows the measured center position
using three diﬀerent measures for the position. The red solid line shows
the position of the maximum probability, the blue dotted line shows the
ﬁrst moment of the distribution, and the green dashed line gives the
center of a Gaussian ﬁt (in η). The lower plot compares the standard
deviation with the width of the Gaussian ﬁt, also showing the higher
moments.

normal ﬁt to the distribution is very stable. It increases by 10 %
only. The standard deviation σ grows much more, by almost a
factor of 2. With the formation of the low-density tail due to
the noise contamination, the skewness of the distribution quickly
drops to about −1.5 and the kurtosis grows. Once the linear de-
pendence seen in Fig. 2 is reached, the skewness remains almost
constant and only the steepening of the high-density tail with the
shift of the PDF peak is traced through a reduction of the kurto-
sis. As the Gaussian ﬁt is least aﬀected by the formation of the
noise tail and it is also applicable for distributions with a power-
law high-density tail, we will continue with this log-normal ﬁt
characterization for more extended parameter scans.

When assuming a log-normal cloud PDF, the noise contami-
nation problem is fully described by two parameters, the width of
the cloud PDF and the amplitude of the noise distribution relative
to the peak of the cloud PDF. Linear scaling to any cloud obser-
vation is straightforward. This allows us to provide a complete
picture for the correction of noise eﬀects. Figure 5 shows the new
PDF peak position and the change of the PDF width, determined
through the log-normal ﬁt, as a function of the noise contamina-

Fig. 5. Variation of the parameters of a log-normal ﬁt to the PDFs of
noise-contaminated maps as a function of noise amplitude and the width
of the original cloud PDF. The upper plot shows the measured location
of the PDF center, the lower plot the width of the log-normal ﬁt. Without
noise contamination ηcenter = ηpeak = 0 and the measured width matches
the PDF width of the cloud, σlog−normal = σcloud.

tion amplitude and the width of the original cloud PDF. By deﬁ-
nition the input cloud always has ηcenter = ηpeak = 0. For all cloud
distributions we ﬁnd an almost linear increase of the observed
peak column density with noise amplitude. The highest shift of
the peak position occurs for broad cloud distributions. The ﬁtted
PDF width reﬂects the properties of the underlying cloud only
for noise amplitudes below about 0.4-0.5 Npeak. We ﬁnd two op-
posite cases for the measured PDF width. For σcloud < 0.6 the
broadening from the low column-density wing dominates so that
the noisy PDF is broader than the underlying cloud PDF. For
wider cloud distributions, the steepening at large column densi-
ties, visible in Fig. 2, dominates so that the measured PDF width
becomes narrower than the cloud PDF. At large noise ampli-
tudes, the measured width becomes almost independent of the
input cloud properties, saturating at σlog−normal = 0.5 . . . 0.7.
Figure 5 contains all information that is needed to deduce
the cloud properties Npeak and σcloud from a measured noisy
PDF when knowing the noise amplitude. For any value of
σnoise/Npeak in the plot, we can transform the measured peak col-
umn density Ncenter into the corresponding logarithmic parame-
ter ηcenter = ln(Ncenter/σnoise × σnoise/Npeak) and compare it with
the values given in the the upper plot in Fig. 5. The measured

Article number, page 5 of 17

A&Aproofs:manuscript no. accepted_citations

the ﬁt of

Fig. 6. pχ2 surfaces for
the measurable parameters
σnoise/Ncenter and σlog−normal through the cloud parameters σnoise/Npeak
and ση,cloud for 4 diﬀerent noise-contaminated clouds with log-normal
column-density PDFs. Blue contours stand for a cloud with σcloud = 0.8
and σnoise = 0.2Npeak; green contours for σcloud = 0.2, σnoise = 0.6Npeak;
yellow contours for σcloud = 0.8, σnoise = 1.0Npeak; and purple contours
for σcloud = 0.2, σnoise = 1.4Npeak. They show the square root of the sum
of the quadratic deviations of both observables from the measured val-

ues (see Eq. 10) at levels pχ2 = 0.01, 0.02, 0.03, and 0.04.The asterisks

mark the minima.

width σlog−normal can be directly looked up in the lower plot.
Hence, we can deduce the input parameters characterizing the
cloud PDF σnoise/Npeak and σcloud from a ﬁt to the measured pa-
rameters σnoise/Ncenter and σlog−normal. The quality of the ﬁt can
be quantiﬁed in terms of the quadratic deviations of both param-
eters

χ2 =   σnoise

σnoise

Ncenter,Fig.5!2

Ncenter,meas −
+(cid:16)σlog−normal,meas − σlog−normal,Fig.5(cid:17)2

where we assume the same relative accuracy for both parame-
ters.

(10)

For

any measured

and
σlog−normal,meas we obtain the cloud parameters from the lo-
cation of the χ2 minimum in the σnoise/Npeak – σcloud parameter
space3. This is visualized in Fig. 6. To save space, we combined

of σnoise/Ncenter,meas

pair

the pχ2 plots for four diﬀerent models in one ﬁgure. To cover

a wide parameter range, we selected two log-normal cloud
distributions with σcloud = 0.8 and 0.2 and contaminated the ﬁrst
one with noise levels of 0.2Npeak (blue) and 1.0Npeak (yellow)
and the latter one with noise of 0.6Npeak (green) and 1.4Npeak

0.04.

(red). The contours show levels of pχ2 surfaces from 0.01 to
As we ﬁt the observational parameters σnoise/Ncenter,meas and
σlog−normal,meas in the space of the cloud parameters σnoise/Npeak
and σcloud, having the same units, we can directly read the accu-
racy of the parameter determination from the topology of the

(σnoise = 0.2 Npeak) and broad cloud distributions (ση,cloud =

pχ2 surfaces. For the example of a low noise contamination
0.8), the contours are quite round and the pχ2 = 0.04 con-

tour has a diameter of about 0.08 in terms of the cloud pa-
rameters showing that the cloud parameters are recovered with

3 At
http://www.astro.uni-koeln.de/ftpspace/ossk/
noisecorrectpdf we provide an IDL program that uses the precom-
puted surfaces from Fig. 5 to provide such a ﬁt for any input map and
given noise rms. There the Gaussian ﬁt is only performed down to 1/2
of the peak to minimize the eﬀect of distortions by PDF tails and wings.

Article number, page 6 of 17

Fig. 7. pχ2 surfaces for
the measurable parameters
σnoise/Ncenter and σlog−normal through the cloud parameters σnoise/Npeak
and ση,cloud for the example cloud from Fig. 1 contaminated with noise
levels of 0.2, 0.6, 1.0, and 1.4 Npeak (blue, green, yellow, and purple

the ﬁt of

contours). The contours are drawn at pχ2 = 0.01, 0.02, 0.03, and 0.04.

The asterisks mark the minima.

almost the same accuracy to which the observational parame-
ters could be measured. If we increase the noise contamina-
tion instead to σnoise = 1.0 Npeak the accuracy of the parame-
ter recovery drops by a factor of three, seen by the three times
bigger diameter of the contours. For the model with the nar-
row cloud distribution, ση,cloud = 0.2, the parameter retrieval
is limited by the degeneracy of the measured cloud width,
σlog−normal, seen as extended green plateau in the lower right cor-
ner of Fig. 5. For noise amplitudes σnoise >∼ 0.4 Npeak the so-
lution in terms of the cloud widths, ση,cloud, spans a very wide
range while the peak position is still well constrained. Unfor-
tunately, this applies to many interstellar clouds having narrow
widths 0.19 ≤ ση,cloud ≤ 0.53 (Berkhuijsen & Fletcher 2008;
Hughes et al. 2013; Schneider et al. 2015a)4. In contrast, for val-
ues of ση,cloud > 0.5 we rather ﬁnd a gradual decrease of the
accuracy of the ﬁt of both parameters.

Figure 7 shows the result for our example cloud from Fig. 1
with ση,cloud = 0.45 and the additional power-law tail. We show

again four diﬀerent ﬁts in one ﬁgure providing the pχ2 surfaces

for models with a noise contamination amplitude of 0.2, 0.6, 1.0,
and 1.4 Npeak, shown as blue, green, yellow, and red contours,
respectively.

Here, we are at the edge of the parameter range dominated
by the cloud width degeneracy. For a low noise contamination
(σnoise < 0.3 Npeak) the input parameters are accurately recov-
ered. At a noise level of σnoise = 0.6 Npeak the accuracy of the
parameter determination drops by about a factor of two, but at
higher noise levels, the cloud-width degeneracy of the observed
PDF also produces an elongated parameter space for the solu-
tion, strongly reducing the accuracy of the recovery of the actual
cloud PDF width, σcloud.

For noise contamination levels σnoise > Npeak the determi-
nation of the cloud parameters becomes very uncertain. An un-
certainty of 0.05 in the PDF center position of log-normal width
translates into a ten times larger uncertainty of the ﬁtted cloud
parameters. Altogether, we can reliably determine Npeak from
the map and a given noise amplitude if the noise rms is smaller
than the PDF peak column density; for a reliable determination

4 Berkhuijsen & Fletcher (2008) provided PDFs of volume densities.
The corresponding column density PDF widths can be derived follow-
ing Brunt & Mac Low (2004) and Brunt et al. (2010a)

V. Ossenkopf et al.: Observational measurements of column density PDFs

Fig. 9. Result of the numerical deconvolution of a log-normal PDF con-
taminated by Gaussian noise with 0.5Npeak amplitude. The red solid line
shows the input PDF before the noise contamination, the blue dotted
line the contaminated PDFs, and the green dashed line the result of the
deconvolution. The deconvolution artifacts at large column densities can
be ignored as the measured noisy PDF already reﬂects the cloud PDF
there.

Fig. 8. Values of the linear column density PDF pN at zero column
densities as a function of the observational noise level and the cloud
PDF width. The PDF values pN(0) are given in units of 1/Npeak.

of the PDF width, the noise amplitude has to fall below about
0.4 × Npeak.

3.3. Thezero-column-densityPDF

The situation is diﬀerent if the noise level of the observations
is a priori not known, e.g. in continuum data with unknown re-
ceiver sensitivity. In this case, the PDF may ﬁrst be used to es-
timate the noise in the observational data, using the probabil-
ity of zero intensities/column densities. As any log-normal PDF
(Eq. 2) has a zero probability of zero column densities, due to
the scaling with N (Eq. 1), one can attribute all measured val-
ues of zero column density to the observational noise. Thus we
can measure the noise amplitude through inspecting the linear-
scale PDF, pN(0). Establishing the relation between the noise
amplitude σnoise/Npeak and the zero-column PDF, pN(0), is also
required for using pN(0) in a second step to measure the line-of-
sight contamination in Sect. 4.

Figure 8 shows the value of the linear column density PDF
for N = 0 from the convolution of log-normal cloud PDFs with
a normal noise PDF as a function of the noise amplitude and
the cloud PDF width, ση,cloud. For very small noise amplitudes
and narrow cloud PDFs, pN(0) still vanishes, but there is a sys-
tematic increase when increasing noise amplitude or cloud PDF
width. For narrow cloud PDFs, the zero column density PDF
peaks when the noise amplitude matches the typical cloud den-
sity; for wider cloud PDFs, the peak is shifted to lower noise
amplitudes. Once the combination of noise amplitude and cloud
width exceeds some threshold, we ﬁnd only a small residual vari-
ation of the zero-column PDF between values by a factor of less
than two.

Closer inspection shows that the noise dependence of pN(0)
can be approximated by another log-normal function. In Appx. A
we demonstrate how this approximation can be used to express
the surface in Fig. 8 in terms of the ση,cloud dependence of three
parameters only.

Instead of using Fig. 8 to read the zero-column PDF as a
function of noise level and cloud PDF width we can use it in-
versely to look up the noise level for any measured pN(0) when
knowing ση,cloud. From the ﬁgure it is clear that this works only
reliably for low noise levels providing a steep pN(0) dependence
on the noise amplitude. For large noise levels, pN(0) does not
vary much exhibiting even an ambiguity at the largest levels.

Fig. 10. Result of the numerical deconvolution of a noise-contaminated
log-normal PDF for diﬀerent noise levels. The red solid line shows the
input PDF before the noise contamination. The contaminated PDFs are
not shown here, but their shape can be taken from Fig. 3.

When using the zero-column PDF to determine σnoise one may
need an iteration with the ﬁtting program described in the previ-
ous section to correct for the deviation of the actual cloud PDF
width ση,cloud from the measured width σlog−normal.

Overall we can provide a strategy for determining the pa-
rameters of a cloud PDF from a noisy measurement. Power-law
tails do not need any correction as they are unaﬀected by obser-
vational noise. If the noise level of the observation is known,
the cloud parameters can be ﬁtted from the measured values
of σnoise/Ncenter,meas and σlog−normal,meas using the procedure de-
scribed in Sect. 3.2. If the noise of the observations is not known,
it can be determined ﬁrst from the zero-column PDF pN(0) de-
scribed by log-normal distributions having the parameters given
in Fig. A.2.

Article number, page 7 of 17

A&Aproofs:manuscript no. accepted_citations

Fig. 11. Result of the numerical deconvolution of the cloud PDF from
Fig. 2 for a noise level of AV = 1, i.e. 0.2 Npeak. The red solid line shows
the input PDF before the noise contamination.

3.4. Deconvolution

As discussed in Sect. 2.2 it is in principle also possible to re-
cover the full original PDF from the measured PDF when know-
ing the noise contamination distribution. This would also allow
to recover the shape of more complex PDFs than the simple
log-normal PDF (with power-law tail) used in the computations
above5. Gaussian noise is the ideal case with an analytic distribu-
tion that is well conﬁned in Fourier space allowing to minimize
the fundamental instability of the deconvolution process. Fig-
ure 9 shows one example for the numerical deconvolution of a
noise-convolved PDF for a cloud with ση,cloud = 0.5 and a noise
amplitude of σnoise = 0.5Npeak sampled in bins of 0.01Npeak.
As discussed before, the noise contamination shifts the peak of
the distribution and creates a wide low column-density tail, but
leaves the high column-density part unchanged. The deconvo-
lution through Eq. (7) perfectly recovers the central part of the
PDF, but creates artifacts at low and high column densities. They
result from numerical noise in sampling the wings of the Gaus-
sian in the denominator of Eq. 7, i.e. the fundamental instabil-
ity in the the division of two very small numbers. To see how
the artifacts change with contamination we show the result of
the numerical deconvolution of noise-convolved PDFs for three
diﬀerent noise amplitudes in Fig. 10 (see Fig. 3 for the noise-
contaminated PDFs).

As the deconvolution has to be performed on a linear scale,
the approach always suﬀers from a low sampling at small col-
umn densities. There the original PDF is well recovered for noise
amplitudes smaller than the peak column density. We even have
a dynamic range of almost two orders of magnitude over which
the PDF can be reliably measured. Only when increasing the
noise amplitude to the PDF peak column density, the deconvo-
lution results in a too broad PDF after the deconvolution. In all
cases there is, however, a ﬂoor of deconvolution artifact values
at high column densities. Practically, those artifacts at large col-
umn densities are not relevant as we can always return to the
measured PDF where the noise contamination only changed the
PDF at low column densities. At large column densities the mea-
sured PDF still reﬂects the true cloud PDF (see Fig. 2).

5 Russeil et al. (2013) and Schneider et al. (2015b) show some PDFs
with small double-humps.

Article number, page 8 of 17

Fig. 12. Distributions obtained from the convolution of a log-normal
cloud PDF (Eq. 2, ση,cloud = 0.5) with a second log-normal PDF (Eq. 6,
σcontam = 0.5) as a function of the typical density of the contaminating
structure, Ncontam, relative to the peak of the log-normal cloud distribu-
tion, Npeak. The left edge of the ﬁgure represents the original cloud PDF
shown in colors of the logarithm of pη. When increasing the contami-
nation level Ncontam in the right direction, we see the shift of the PDF
towards higher logarithmic column densities, η.

As a more practical example, Fig. 11 shows the result of the
numerical deconvolution for the full PDF from the map in Fig. 1.
The noise amplitude of AV=1 corresponds to 0.2Npeak, i.e. the
blue dotted curve in Fig. 10. We ﬁnd a very similar behavior to
the semi-analytic case. The dynamic range of the recovered PDF
is a factor ten smaller than in the case of the ideal log-normal
cloud representation at the same noise level, but still a factor of
almost 100.

The direct deconvolution needs an accurate knowledge of
noise distribution, i.e. works only for perfectly Gaussian noise.
If the noise properties are well known, the approach may allow
us to recover small distortions and deviations of the PDF from
the log-normal shape, but to recover the four main parameters
for a log-normal PDF with power-law tail the iterative approach
described in Sect. 3.2 is suﬃcient and more stable.

4. Line-of-sight contamination

Schneider et al. (2015a) simulated the eﬀect of a foreground
contamination of a cloud PDF by a constant “screen”. In a more
realistic scenario, however, the contaminating structure also has
turbulent properties leading to a similar PDF as that of the
cloud to be observed. We assume that the contaminating cloud
is also characterized by a log-normal distribution. This excludes
star-forming clouds with a signiﬁcant gravitationally dominated
power-law tail but should represent the typical case where the
contaminating structure is more transparent than the main cloud
of interest, i.e. the line-of-sight emission is dominated by the
studied cloud. The resulting PDF can be computed from the
same convolution integral (Eq. 4) as used in the previous sec-
tion6.

Figure 12 shows the distribution of PDFs obtained from the
convolution when using log-normal distributions for the cloud

6 Correcting for the distortions introduced by material with other
PDFs, e.g. a constant gradient can be done in an equivalent way. It re-
quires the convolution with a diﬀerent shape of the contaminating PDF,
pcontam(N), in Eq. 4, repeating our quantitative analysis for the new con-
volution integral.

V. Ossenkopf et al.: Observational measurements of column density PDFs

Fig. 13. PDFs of contaminated clouds corrected for the contamination
by the subtraction of a constant oﬀset of the peak of the contaminating
structure PDF. The PDFs are plotted as a function of the density of the
contamination, Ncontam, using a ﬁxed width of the contamination PDF of
σcontam = 0.5 matching the width of the main cloud PDF. The corrected
distributions are represented through colors showing the logarithm of
the PDF.

PDF and the contamination as a function of the contamination
level. In this example both distributions have the same width
of the log-normal PDF σ = 0.5. The main eﬀect is the same
as from the contamination with a constant foreground. With in-
creasing contamination level, the peak of the PDF is shifted to-
wards higher column densities and the width of the PDF be-
comes narrower. In contrast to some statements in the literature,
line-of-sight contamination of multiple log-normal PDFs does
not create multiple peaks, but the convolution integral only cre-
ates a broader distribution on the linear scale.The broader PDFs
from multiple clouds along the line of sight have been observed
e.g. by Berkhuijsen & Fletcher (2015). One should note that the
systematic eﬀect on the PDF peak has the same direction for
noise and foreground contamination, i.e., both shift the peak ar-
tiﬁcially to higher column densities, but that the opposite can
be true for the standard deviation of the PDF on the logarithmic
scale, where noise increases the measured standard deviation for
all narrow cloud distributions, while foreground contamination
tends to decrease it. The shift of the PDF peak by the line-of-
sight contamination is approximately proportional to the con-
tamination level Ncontam.

This suggests that a correction by a constant oﬀset, as ap-
plied for the foreground “screen” by Schneider et al. (2015a),
may also work for the contamination with a wider distribution.
Figure 13 shows the result after subtracting the column density
of the peak of the log-normal contamination. Overall we ﬁnd a
quite good reproduction of the central part of the original PDF
even for contaminations that have the same amplitude as the
cloud structure itself. The PDF peak position is recovered within
∆η = 0.2. There is, however, a residual broadening of the distri-
bution, in particular towards lower column densities, due to the
“overcompensation” of contamination contributions with lower
than typical column densities. The low column density wing of
the corrected PDF appears too shallow relative to the original
cloud PDF. One has to take into account, however, that the plot
is given in logarithmic units, i.e. the deviations occur at levels of
less than 1 % of the PDF peak.

To systematically quantify the residual eﬀects after the cor-
rection, we run a parameter scan over the full range of free pa-

Fig. 14. Parameters of the PDFs of contaminated clouds corrected for
the contamination through the subtraction of a constant oﬀset given by
the peak of the PDF of the contaminating structure. The upper plot
shows the position of the PDF peak on the logarithmic η scale, i.e. a
value of 0 represents the correct peak position and a value of 0.3 stands
for a 35 % overestimate of the peak density. The lower plot shows the
width of the corrected cloud PDF relative to the original cloud PDF. In
both plots we varied the amplitude of the contamination in horizontal
direction and the width of the contaminating PDF in vertical direction.

rameters covering the relative amplitude of the contamination
relative to the cloud investigated, i.e. the relative distance of the
two log-normals on the η scale, and the relative width of the PDF
of the contaminating structure compared to the one of the cloud
studied. This provides two dimensional plots that are shown in
Fig. 14. The upper plot quantiﬁes the accuracy of the recovery
of the PDF peak, the lower plot shows the width of the corrected
cloud PDF relative to the original cloud PDF. Both quantities are
computed from a Gaussian ﬁt to the corrected PDFs. The ﬁgure
shows that the cloud PDF is accurately recovered when the width
of the contaminating PDF is narrow (σcontamin <∼ 0.5ση,cloud) or
its column density is small (Ncontamin <∼ 0.2Npeak). Fortunately,
the ﬁrst condition is usually met if the contamination stems from
diﬀuse H i clouds in the Milky Way, having typical PDF widths
σcontam ≈ 0.1 − 0.2 (Berkhuijsen & Fletcher 2008, assuming a
typical σ2D ≈ 0.2 − 0.4σ3D). Signiﬁcant deviations occur if the
properties of the contaminating structure are similar to those of
the observed cloud. Then the peak column density is overesti-
mated by 35 % and the width by a factor 1.7. If the width of
the contamination PDF gets even wider, this propagates directly

Article number, page 9 of 17

A&Aproofs:manuscript no. accepted_citations

into the width of the corrected PDF, i.e. the recovered PDF can
be more than twice as wide as the original PDF.

When knowing the properties of the contamination, we can
use Fig. 14 to correct this eﬀect in a parametric way as demon-
strated above for the noise contamination. The typical level of
the contamination usually can be measured by inspecting pixels
at the boundaries of the cloud that are representative of the con-
tamination only. However, one has hardly ever the same statistics
for the contamination as for the whole map so that already the
width of the contaminating PDF may not be known with suﬃ-
cient accuracy. One last resort to infer the width is the inspection
of the zero-column-density of the oﬀset-corrected PDF, equiva-
lent to our approach of measuring the noise in Sect. 3.3. As both
eﬀects are usually superimposed onto each other, we ﬁrst have to
subtract the noise contribution to the linear PDF at zero column
densities using the parameters from Fig. A.2 to derive the width
of the contaminating PDF in a second step.

The procedure for this derivation is discussed in detail in
Appx. B. It shows, however, that small errors in the determina-
tion of the amplitude of the contamination lead to large errors in
the measured contamination PDF width. Hence, it is practically
very diﬃcult to use the zero-column PDF after the line-of-sight
correction to estimate the width of the PDF of the contaminat-
ing structure. A direct measurement from a ﬁeld tracing only the
contamination seems to be always preferable if such a region can
be observed.

The direct deconvolution of the contamination from the mea-
sured PDF is practically irrelevant as we can never know the
properties of the contamination accurately enough to allow for
the computation of the deconvolution integral (Eq. 7) without
signiﬁcant errors. Altogether, we ﬁnd that the correction of line-
of-sight contamination from a turbulent cloud can be easily cor-
rected in terms of subtracting a constant screen if the width of
the PDF of the contaminating cloud is at most half of the width
of the cloud PDF to be investigated or if its column density is
lower by a factor of 4-5. If both conditions are not met we can
still measure the PDF peak column density with an accuracy bet-
ter than 35 %, but have no good handle on the PDF width of the
main cloud.

5. Boundary effects

A typical limitation of interstellar cloud observations is given
by the ﬁnite map size. From multi-wavelength observations it
is known since long that there is no absolute deﬁnition of an
interstellar cloud boundary. Depending on tracer and observa-
tional sensitivity, i.e. molecular lines, extinction, or dust con-
tinuum, the extent of a cloud appears diﬀerent and can just be
approximated by the lowest closed contour. For convenience -
and to restrict the clouds e.g. to their molecular gas content -
certain thresholds in extinction are proposed, such as AV = 1 or
2 (Lada et al. 2010; Heiderman et al. 2010). However, in most
cases maps are anyway only centered on prominent peaks and
the total area that is mapped is limited due to observational con-
strains. These ﬁnite size maps obviously truncate the statistics
of the cloud PDF. Schneider et al. (2015a,b) discussed the im-
pact of incomplete sampling of the PDF by considering a trun-
cation of the statistics at various contour levels. This only mod-
iﬁes the normalization of the PDF but has no eﬀect on the mea-
sured shape. As an extreme example for this selection eﬀect, they
showed that the PDFs of Infrared Dark Clouds only consist of
a power-law tail. Lombardi et al. (2015) showed that the PDF
width is reduced when mapping smaller areas. In real observa-

Article number, page 10 of 17

Fig. 15. Result of partial observations focusing on the center of the
cloud. PDFs are measured for the four submaps of diﬀerent size in-
dicated in Fig. 1. Up to a map size of 300× 300 pixels, all high-column-
density spots are included in the map. A smaller map truncates some
parts of the high-density center of the map leading to a noticeable dis-
tortion of the power-law tail. The submap sizes correspond to 69 %,
44 %, 25 %, and 11 % of the original map area.

tions, however, there is often no information about the structure
outside of the mapped area.

In contrast such a truncation can also be intended. Study-
ing PDFs of selected subregions within an interstellar cloud can
be a valuable tool to diﬀerentiate between the physical pro-
cesses determining the column density structure. In this way
Schneider et al. (2012); Russeil et al. (2013); Tremblin et al.
(2014) showed that in the same cloud the PDFs of quiescent
subregions have a log-normal shape, denser cloud parts ex-
hibit a power-law tail at high column densities, and compressed
shells at the interface to Hii-regions provoke a second PDF peak.
Sadavoy et al. (2014) and Stutz & Kainulainen (2015) linked
diﬀerent PDF slopes seen in diﬀerent subregions of the Perseus
and Orion A clouds to the content of young stellar objects and
proposed an evolutionary sequence within the cloud. Hence, it
is important to statistically quantify the impact of the ﬁnite size
maps on the properties of the measured cloud PDF following the
typical observer’s approaches.

This is simulated in Fig. 15 where we study submaps of
Fig. 1 with diﬀerent size, placed around the central column den-
sity peak. In this simulation the spatial structure of the cloud
starts to become relevant while in the previous sections the con-
volution integrals were actually independent of the cloud shape.
Details of the resulting PDFs may depend on the exact shape
of the mapped structure, but the general behavior is the same
for all cases if we follow a typical observational approach. Our
submaps try to mimic the observational strategy for mapping an
interstellar cloud structure around the central density peaks with
a ﬁnite array in a limited observing time.

As long as a suﬃciently large part of the cloud is covered,
the truncation at the boundaries only removes low column den-
sity gas from the statistics, leaving the power-law tail unchanged
– except for the modiﬁed normalization. The removal of low-
density pixels also shifts the peak of the log-normal part to larger
column densities. The eﬀect is small as long as less than half of
the pixels are removed, but already when going from 600 × 600
pixels to 400 × 400 pixels (44 % of the area) the truncation of
the low-density statistics becomes signiﬁcant so that we signif-

V. Ossenkopf et al.: Observational measurements of column density PDFs

Fig. 16. Parameters of the column density distribution of randomly se-
lected submaps of the map from Fig. 1 as a function of their size. The
symbols show the mean from an ensemble of 50 submaps and the error
bars represent the standard deviation. Red diamonds show the average
map density, blue crosses give the PDF peak on the logarithmic scale,
and green triangles the peak on the linear density scale. The symbols
and error bars for the two PDF peaks are displaced by ±5 pixels relative
to the actual submap size for a better visibility in the plot.

icantly overestimate the peak position. In that step one can also
notice a measurable reduction of the PDF width that continues
when going to smaller submap sizes. At a submap size of 11 % of
the original map, we also start to loose some of the high-density
structures. In this case, even the power-law tail is aﬀected.

The impact is much stronger when considering mean quanti-
ties. This is a well know eﬀect to most observers: increasing the
mapping size around the main emission peaks tends to drasti-
cally lower the average column density as more “empty” regions
are added to the statistics. For our example in Fig. 15 we ﬁnd that
the measured peak of the PDF in logarithmic bins Ncenter changes
by a factor of 1.6 when reducing the ﬁeld size from 600 × 600
to 200 × 200 pixels (11 % of the area), the same factor applies
for the peak in linear units, but that the average column density
increases by a factor of 2.3 when reducing the map size7.

To statistically quantify this selection eﬀect we investigate
ensembles of 50 randomly selected submaps of diﬀerent size and
measure their average and most probable column densities. Fig-
ure 16 shows the ensemble mean and standard deviation for the
average column density in the submaps and the PDF peak po-
sition Ncenter(η) on the logarithmic scale. For completeness, we
also computed the center of a Gaussian PDF on the linear col-
umn density scale Ncenter(N). In contrast to the submap selec-
tion centered on the main peak in Fig. 15, the random selection
provides for all three parameters a mean ensemble density that
does not depend on the map size. The mean average density and
PDF peak positions of the input map are recovered, but we ﬁnd
that the uncertainty of the parameters grows drastically towards
smaller submap sizes. While the uncertainty of the PDF peak
positions grows up to 25 % for 200 × 200 pixel submaps, the
uncertainty of the average column density grows to 45 %.
This bigger uncertainty of the average density is to be ex-
pected as the average is more easily aﬀected by low-probability

7 As our test cloud also includes a power-law tail of high densities, the
average column density is not only 10 % higher than Npeak as expected
for a log-normal distribution (see Sect. 2.1), but 44 % higher for the
original map.

Fig. 17. Result of a simulated 2h ALMA observation of the cloud shown
in Fig. 1 where we translated the optical depth AV into an equivalent
230 GHz intensity. The upper plot shows the map obtained when using
the 12m array without short-spacing correction. The lower plot is the
map obtained after combining the 12m array data with the data from
the compact array and single-dish zero spacing. The intermediate map
obtained from combining only the ALMA 12m and ACA results is vi-
sually hardly distinguishable from the map in the lower plot so that it is
not shown here.

outliers and they are more easily missed or hit in a random se-
lection than values with high probabilities. This explains why the
use of the PDF peaks for normalization purposes (see Sect. 2.1)
always provides more stable results than the use of the average
density.

6. Interferometric observations

A special source of observational uncertainty results from the
incomplete sampling of the uv plane that is unavoidable in in-
terferometric observations. Rathborne et al. (2014) discussed the
shape of the low-column density tail of a PDF obtained from
combining ALMA observations with Herschel data, but they did
not quantify to what degree that tail is determined by the obser-
vational limitations of the interferometric observations.

Article number, page 11 of 17

A&Aproofs:manuscript no. accepted_citations

Fig. 18. Comparison of the original cloud PDF with the PDFs of the
maps obtained from the 2h ALMA observations (Fig. 17).

6.1. ALMA

ALMA provides a better instantaneous uv coverage than any
other observatory available before, based on the unprecedent-
edly large number of dishes and baselines available. However,
any incomplete information in the Fourier domain may still
have signiﬁcant eﬀects on the measured intensity PDF. We sim-
ulate the behavior using the ALMA simulator in CASA 4.48
with a conﬁguration providing a resolution of 0.6”. We used
the default pipeline setup based on the standard CLEAN algo-
rithm (Högbom 1974) that would be used by most observers. To
convert our column density map into observable quantities we
treated the input map as Jy/pixel units, used 230 GHz as cen-
ter frequency, and a 7.5 GHz bandwidth corresponding to stan-
dard continuum observations. We used the mosaicking mode to
map the total ﬁeld of view of (2′)2, and combined the 12m ar-
ray and ACA observations matching what ALMA provides for
continuum observations (ALMA+ACA). The choice of these pa-
rameters should not have any major impact on our results as we
were not limited by sensitivity or resolution as discussed later. To
obtain a complete picture for the capabilities and limitations of
the approach, we also performed the step of the single-dish total
power correction (ALMA+ACA+TP). Total power zero spac-
ing is not provided for continuum observations at ALMA, only
for line observations, but including this step provides us with a
more complete picture in terms of the fundamental capabilities
of interferometric observations. In a separate test, we added ther-
mal noise to the simulations but found that it does not have any
signiﬁcant impact, indicating that the results are not limited by
sensitivity but, as intended, by uv coverage.

Figure 17 shows the maps and Fig. 18 contains the corre-
sponding PDFs from an observation that can be executed in a 2h
observing block (2h for 12m array, 4h for ACA, 8h for TP).

The simulated observations with the 12m array only provide
a reasonable reproduction of the position and shape of the high-
intensity contours, but we recover basically no information about
structures with an intensity below 20 Jy/pixel, i.e. only the high
end of the PDF power-law tail (η > 3) is retained. After com-
bining the data with the short-spacing information, some low-
intensity structure is recovered appearing in spiral shapes, prob-

8 Spot tests with CASA 3.3 and CASA 4.5 showed no signiﬁcant dif-
ferences.

Article number, page 12 of 17

Fig. 19. Result of a simulated 8h ALMA observation of the cloud shown
in Fig. 1. The map shows the ﬁnal product from combining the 12m
array data with the data from the compact array and single-dish zero
spacing.

Fig. 20. PDFs of the maps obtained from the 8h ALMA observations
(Fig. 19).

ably produced by the shape of the uv tracks. But the shape of the
high-intensity peaks is more heavily distorted than in the pure
12m array data. The intermediate map obtained when combin-
ing the data from the 12m array with the ACA data is very sim-
ilar to the map obtained when including all short-spacing infor-
mation. The visual impressions from the interferometric maps
are conﬁrmed by the PDFs of the maps. When sticking to the
pure interferometric data, the CLEAN algorithm manages to re-
produce the high-intensity peaks above η = 3 so that the high-
intensity end of the power-law tail of the PDF is recovered. At
lower intensities, however, there is hardly any correspondence of
the map PDF to the underlying cloud PDF. The typical values of
AV ≡ 5 Jy/pixel are strongly under-abundant and the PDF peak
falls at a ﬁve times lower value. All curves show an extreme ex-
cess of low intensity contributions, similar to the observational
noise eﬀect shown in Fig. 2. When combining the interferomet-
ric data with the short-spacing information, the high-density tail
is even more distorted, but the location of the peak of the PDF is
reasonably recovered. The excess at low intensities is still high
but ﬁve times lower compared to the 12m array data.

V. Ossenkopf et al.: Observational measurements of column density PDFs

the cloud PDF is still signiﬁcant. One can only conclude that
there must be a power-law tail. Measuring its parameters is still
unreliable. To see whether one can better recover the cloud PDF
based on the data provided by ALMA, we performed some addi-
tional tests varying the parameters of the CLEAN algorithm. The
results are shown in Fig. 21. In two of the curves we modiﬁed
the robustness parameter of the “Briggs” weighting (see CASA
User Reference & Cookbook9). A value of −2 corresponds to
uniform weighting, cleaning with a weighting robustness of +2
corresponds to natural weighting. The ﬁgure shows that natu-
ral weighting clearly deteriorates the recovery of the map PDF,
there is no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the standard weighting
(robustness of 0) and the uniform weighting. In a second test we
used a mask to help the convergence of the CLEAN algorithm.
This should provide a better data reduction strategy. However,
we found no signiﬁcant diﬀerence to the outcome using the de-
fault parameters so that the corresponding curve is not added in
the plot, being almost identical to the brown curve. Finally, we
tested the impact of the map size by changing the pixel size of
our test data set by a factor of 0.5 resulting in a map size of 1′2.
In this way we should quantify the pure resolution eﬀect. The
blue curve in Fig. 21 shows, that this has also no signiﬁcant im-
pact on the recovery of the cloud PDF. As long as we avoid the
natural “Briggs” weighting, the combined ALMA+ACA maps
are equally good or bad for measuring the cloud PDF.

A reliable partial recovery of the cloud PDF is only possible
when combining single dish information with integrations cov-
ering a long time span to provide a very wide uv coverage. This
asks for an extension of the current capabilities of ALMA.

6.2. Fundamentallimitations

To test whether the ALMA results are due to some limitation
of the CLEAN algorithm combined with the continuous tracks
given by the telescope baselines or whether they rather reﬂect the
general problem of lacking information in uv space, we added
some numerical tests with a more controlled random coverage
of the uv plane. We transformed the cloud from Fig. 1 into the
Fourier domain and randomly removed a number of the points in
Fourier space. The zero-spacing point, characterizing the mean
intensity in the map, is always preserved.

Figure 22 shows the resulting PDFs after the inverse trans-
form when removing the information for half of the points. The
brown dashed-dotted line is computed by replacing the missing
information by zeros. The green dashed curve is obtained by in-
terpolating the missing points in Fourier space, and the blue dot-
ted curve uses interpolated amplitudes but random phases. All
curves show an excess of low intensity contributions, like the
ALMA maps, and a shift of the PDF peak to higher intensi-
ties compared to the input map. The highest intensity fraction
is suppressed. Part of those pixels are transformed to lower val-
ues resulting in a steepening of the power-law tail. The worst
reproduction of the cloud PDF is obtained when interpolating in
the uv plane. The interpolation acts like a low pass-ﬁltering that
suppresses sharp structures, therefore washing out some of the
high-intensity peaks. For a fractal cloud one expects in principle
a smooth change of the Fourier amplitudes while the phases rep-
resent the details of the realization, but the experiment with ran-
dom phases does not provide any improvement compared to the
test with the simple zero replacement. Other tests with constant
phases, systematic phase changes or conjugate complex numbers
also did not provide any improvement. A recovery of the under-

9 http://casa.nrao.edu/docs/cookbook/

Article number, page 13 of 17

Fig. 21. Impact of diﬀerent parameters on the PDFs from the
ALMA+ACA maps obtained in the simulated 8h ALMA observations.

An obvious approach to improve the mapping results is the
use of longer integration times, automatically providing a better
uv plane coverage due to the rotation of the earth. Figures 19
and 20 show the results when quadrupling the observing time.
Here, the simulations used a total continuous observing time of
8h with the 12m array. This corresponds to 40h of total obser-
vatory time (8h for 12m array, 2 × 8h for ACA, and 4 × 8h for
TP), an amount that rarely would be granted. It is, moreover, an
idealized case because usually 2h observing blocks are executed
randomly by the observatory, potentially leading to overlaps in
the uv coverage.

When considering the map from the 12m array we do not
ﬁnd a big improvement compared to the shorter integration time.
Again only the high intensity end (η > 3) of the cloud PDF is re-
covered. More low-intensity material is detected leading to an
additional shift of the PDF maximum to even lower intensities.
Adding short-spacing information does no longer provide the
correct PDF peak position, but when including the single-dish
zero-spacing, we fully recover the high-intensity PDF power-
law tail. This is also visible in the map in Fig. 19 which shows a
much better resemblance to the input map (Fig. 1), reproducing
all bright structures. The combination of a very long integration
time with all zero-spacing information allows to actually recover
a signiﬁcant part of the underlying cloud PDF. Unfortunately,
this is currently not possible in real observations as ALMA does
not provide the single-dish total power information for contin-
uum data yet. Moreover, we can conclude that the need for a
wide uv coverage is not well satisﬁed by single observing blocks
of 2h. For the cloud statistics, it would be better to distribute the
same observing time in smaller chunks over the whole visibil-
ity window of a celestial object, at least if one is not limited by
sensitivity as in our example.

Even in this case the PDF still does not contain any reliable
information on the log-normal part. It shows the same large ex-
cess of low intensities as in the case of the shorter integration
time. The excess appears very similar to the low-intensity PDF
wing reported by Rathborne et al. (2014) for their interferomet-
ric data.

In the combination of the data from the 12m array and ACA
only, the longer integration time already leads to an improve-
ment in the recovery of the high-intensity tail compared to the 2h
ALMA observation, but the deviation of the measured PDF from

A&Aproofs:manuscript no. accepted_citations

Fig. 22. Result of incomplete sampling in the uv plane. The PDFs are
obtained after removing the information for half of the points randomly
selected in the uv plane. We either replaced the Fourier coeﬃcients by
zeros, by values interpolated between the retained neighboring points
or by interpolated amplitudes and random phases.

Fig. 24. PDFs from an incomplete sampling of the uv plane depend-
ing on the wavenumber. The brown dashed-dotted line shows the re-
sult when randomly replacing 50 % of the uv plane by zeros, as shown
already in Fig. 22. The other two PDFs are computed when only re-
moving those points inside or outside of a circle of 20 wavenumbers,
respectively.

age in Fig. 24. We again randomly remove 50 % of the points in
the uv plane, like in Fig. 22, but also restrict the removal to the
areas of small and large wavenumbers, k ≶ 20, respectively. Due
to the small area of k < 20 in the uv plane, only 0.15 % of the
points are removed in this case, while for k ≥ 20, 49.85 % of the
points are removed. We see that the main distortion of the PDF
power law tail and the PDF peak stems from the missing infor-
mation at small wave numbers. If we have a complete coverage
of the wave numbers k < 20 we recover the PDF over a dynamic
range also covering a factor of 20. Lack of short-spacing infor-
mation has a much worse eﬀect on the PDF than lack of high
frequency information. Any incomplete uv coverage, however,
creates a signiﬁcant excess of low-intensity noise.

Combining the picture with the information from Fig. 22
suggests that it is almost impossible to obtain any reliable infor-
mation on the low-intensity statistics from interferometric obser-
vations. To get a measurement of the high intensity tail and the
PDF peak, a good coverage of the low wavenumber, i.e. short-
spacing range of the uv plane is needed. The similarity in the
PDF recovery shown in Fig. 20 for the long ALMA observa-
tions and in Fig. 24 suggests that there is no fundamental diﬀer-
ence between the map reconstruction by the CLEAN algorithm
and by the direct Fourier transform. The critical point is a suf-
ﬁciently dense sampling of the uv plane in particular for low
wave numbers. Only with that dense sampling one can recover
the upper part of the PDF. However, any sparse sampling of the
uv plane unavoidably leads to severe distortions of the overall
PDF shape. None of our experiments simulating interferomet-
ric observations allowed to recover the low-intensity part of the
PDF including the log-normal distribution. Therefore, the inter-
pretation of PDFs from interferometric data should be done with
extreme care.

7. Conclusions

When measuring interstellar cloud column density PDFs, the ob-
servational eﬀects have to be carefully treated. Otherwise, all
conclusions on the PDF parameters can be wrong by large fac-
tors. We provide tools to derive the cloud parameters from the

Fig. 23. PDFs from a variable sampling in the uv plane. Diﬀerent frac-
tions of randomly selected points in the uv plane were replaced by zeros.

lying cloud PDF seems to be impossible. Removing half of the
points in the uv plane has a much stronger impact on the deter-
mination of the PDF than removing half of the points in normal
space as demonstrated in Sect. 5. As the removal of information
in Fourier space aﬀects every single pixel of a map, the impact
on the real-space statistics is always worse compared to remov-
ing the information for the same number of pixels in the map.

To get an idea about the minimum coverage of the uv plane
needed to obtain a reliable PDF measurement we repeated the
test above, but removed diﬀerent fractions of the points in the
Fourier space. Figure 23 shows the PDFs obtained when ran-
domly replacing 1 %, 10 %, and 80 % of the points by zeros.
Even when only 10 % of the uv plane are not covered, we ﬁnd
a signiﬁcant low intensity excess. In this case PDF peak and the
high-intensity tail are still well recovered. The 80 % case shows
hardly any similarity with the input PDF.

To better understand the reason for this eﬀect, we ﬁnally
show the dependence of the PDFs on the wavenumber cover-

Article number, page 14 of 17

V. Ossenkopf et al.: Observational measurements of column density PDFs

measured PDFs. Our focus lies on on the log-normal part of the
PDF because this part is most strongly aﬀected by observational
noise, contamination by fore- or background material, and the
selection of the map boundaries. In single-dish observations the
power-law tail in the PDF of self-gravitating clouds is typically
only marginally inﬂuenced by the eﬀects discussed here (see also
Lombardi et al. 2015). This is diﬀerent for interferometric obser-
vations.

Noise can be treated mathematically as a convolution inte-
gral. If the noise distribution is perfectly Gaussian the original
PDF can be recovered through direct deconvolution. For general
single-dish data, the PDF parameters can be computed from the
measured PDF and a known noise level using the algorithm dis-
cussed in Sect. 3. This allows for an accurate measurement of all
parameters of the log-normal part if the noise level falls below
40 % of the typical column density in the map. It even works for
noise levels up to the typical column density in the map in case
of clouds with a broad PDF (ση,cloud > 0.3). For clouds with nar-
rower PDFs and high noise contaminations, we can only retrieve
the position of the PDF peak, but no longer its width. If the noise
level in a map is a priori not known it can be deduced from the
zero-column PDF.

Line-of-sight contamination does not create multiple peaks
in the column-density PDF, but a broader distribution on the lin-
ear scale. It can be corrected by subtracting a constant “screen”
with the typical column density of the contamination from the
measurement. This works well if the PDF of the contamination
is either a factor of two narrower or a factor of four to ﬁve weaker
than that of the cloud to be characterized. If width and strength
of the contamination are well known, one can also retrieve the
parameters of the cloud PDF through a ﬁt to the measured pa-
rameters, similar to the noise correction. However, in the general
case of an unknown broad contamination with a column density
comparable to that of the cloud studied, we ﬁnd a strong ambi-
guity between the impacts of the two PDF widths so that it turns
out to be impossible to reliably derive the cloud PDF width from
the measurement. We can only recover the PDF peak position of
the studied cloud with an accuracy of about 35 %.

The eﬀect of a limited ﬁeld of view due to map boundaries
cannot be easily corrected as we cannot “invent” information
that was not measured. We found, however, that the eﬀect is
small if the observations cover at least 50 % of the structure to
be measured. Smaller maps will underestimate the PDF width
and overestimate the peak position. The width is slightly more
stable against selection eﬀects than the position. The sensitivity
to boundary selection eﬀects clearly discourages from the use
of mean quantities to characterize the properties of a map. The
characterization in terms of the PDF peak is more stable.

The situation is very diﬀerent for interferometric observa-
tions with a sparse sampling in the uv plane. We found no way
to reliably measure the statistics for the majority of the pixels
in the map forming the center and low-density wing of the PDF.
The removal of information in the uv plane has a much stronger
impact than the direct removal of pixels in the map. An interfer-
ometric determination of the high-density PDF tail is possible,
but asks for an approach that goes beyond the current capabili-
ties of ALMA. Combining single-dish zero spacing with a very
long integration time or with many small chunks of 12m array
observations over a long period, that widely populate in partic-
ular the short-spacing area of the uv plane in principle allow to
retrieve the high-density wing of a cloud PDF.

Acknowledgements. We thank the referee Mark Heyer for very constructive sug-
gestions that helped to improve the paper. This work was supported by the
German Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, DFG via the SPP (priority pro-

gramme) 1573 ’Physics of the ISM’. V.O. and N.S. acknowledge supported
by the DFG project number OS 177/2-2. C.F. acknowledges funding provided
by the Australian Research Council’s Discovery Projects (grants DP130102078
and DP150104329). RSK acknowledges support from the DFG via projects KL
1358/18-1 and KL 1358/19-2 and via the SFB 881 “The Milky Way System”
(sub-projects B1, B2 and B8). In addition, RSK thanks for funding from the Eu-
ropean Research Council under the European Community’s Seventh Framework
Programme (FP7/2007-2013) via the ERC Advanced Grant “STARLIGHT”
(project number 339177).

References
Alves, J., Lombardi, M., & Lada, C. J. 2014, A&A, 565, A18
Bensch, F., Stutzki, J., & Ossenkopf, V. 2001, A&A, 366, 636
Berkhuijsen, E. M. & Fletcher, A. 2008, MNRAS, 390, L19
Berkhuijsen, E. M. & Fletcher, A. 2015, MNRAS, 448, 2469
Brunt, C. M. 2015, MNRAS, 449, 4465
Brunt, C. M., Federrath, C., & Price, D. J. 2010a, MNRAS, 403, 1507
Brunt, C. M., Federrath, C., & Price, D. J. 2010b, MNRAS, 405, L56
Brunt, C. M. & Mac Low, M.-M. 2004, ApJ, 604, 196
Burkhart, B., Ossenkopf, V., Lazarian, A., & Stutzki, J. 2013, ApJ, 771, 122
Druard, C., Braine, J., Schuster, K. F., et al. 2014, A&A, 567, A118
Falgarone, E., Hily-Blant, P., & Levrier, F. 2004, Ap&SS, 292, 89
Federrath, C. & Banerjee, S. 2015, MNRAS, 448, 3297
Federrath, C. & Klessen, R. S. 2013, ApJ, 763, 51
Federrath, C., Klessen, R. S., & Schmidt, W. 2008, ApJ, 688, L79
Federrath, C., Klessen, R. S., & Schmidt, W. 2009, ApJ, 692, 364
Federrath, C., Roman-Duval, J., Klessen, R. S., Schmidt, W., & Mac Low, M.-M.

2010, A&A, 512, A81

Froebrich, D. & Rowles, J. 2010, MNRAS, 406, 1350
Ginsburg, A., Federrath, C., & Darling, J. 2013, ApJ, 779, 50
Girichidis, P., Konstandin, L., Whitworth, A. P., & Klessen, R. S. 2014, ApJ,

781, 91

Heiderman, A., Evans, II, N. J., Allen, L. E., Huard, T., & Heyer, M. 2010, ApJ,

723, 1019

Hily-Blant, P., Falgarone, E., & Pety, J. 2008, A&A, 481, 367
Högbom, J. A. 1974, A&AS, 15, 417
Hughes, A., Meidt, S. E., Schinnerer, E., et al. 2013, ApJ, 779, 44
Kainulainen, J., Beuther, H., Banerjee, R., Federrath, C., & Henning, T. 2011,

A&A, 530, A64

Kainulainen, J., Beuther, H., Henning, T., & Plume, R. 2009, A&A, 508, L35
Kainulainen, J., Federrath, C., & Henning, T. 2014, Science, 344, 183
Kainulainen, J. & Tan, J. C. 2013, A&A, 549, A53
Klessen, R. S. 2000, The Astrophysical Journal, 535, 869
Konstandin, L., Girichidis, P., Federrath, C., & Klessen, R. S. 2012, ApJ, 761,

149

Kowal, G., Lazarian, A., & Beresnyak, A. 2007, ApJ, 658, 423
Kritsuk, A. G., Norman, M. L., & Wagner, R. 2011, ApJ, 727, L20
Lada, C. J., Lombardi, M., & Alves, J. F. 2010, ApJ, 724, 687
Lombardi, M., Alves, J., & Lada, C. J. 2011, A&A, 535, A16
Lombardi, M., Alves, J., & Lada, C. J. 2015, A&A, 576, L1
Lombardi, M., Lada, C. J., & Alves, J. 2010, A&A, 512, A67
Miesch, M. S., Scalo, J., & Bally, J. 1999, ApJ, 524, 895
Miesch, M. S. & Scalo, J. M. 1995, ApJ, 450, L27
Molina, F. Z., Glover, S. C. O., Federrath, C., & Klessen, R. S. 2012, MNRAS,

423, 2680

Nolan, C. A., Federrath, C., & Sutherland, R. S. 2015, MNRAS, 451, 1380
Nordlund, Å. K. & Padoan, P. 1999, in Interstellar Turbulence, ed. J. Franco &

A. Carraminana, 218

Padoan, P., Jones, B. J. T., & Nordlund, Å. P. 1997, ApJ, 474, 730
Padoan, P. & Nordlund, Å. 2011, ApJ, 730, 40
Passot, T. & Vázquez-Semadeni, E. 1998, Phys. Rev. E, 58, 4501
Price, D. J., Federrath, C., & Brunt, C. M. 2011, ApJ, 727, L21
Rathborne, J. M., Longmore, S. N., Jackson, J. M., et al. 2014, ApJ, 795, L25
Russeil, D., Schneider, N., Anderson, L. D., et al. 2013, A&A, 554, A42
Sadavoy, S. I., Di Francesco, J., André, P., et al. 2014, ApJ, 787, L18
Schneider, N., Csengeri, T., Hennemann, M., et al. 2012, A&A, 540, L11
Schneider, N., André, P., Könyves, V., et al. 2013, ApJ, 766, L17
Schneider, N., Ossenkopf, V., Csengeri, T., et al. 2015a, A&A, 575, A79
Schneider, N., Csengeri, T., Klessen, R. S., et al. 2015b, A&A, 578, A29
Schneider, N., Bontemps, S., Motte, F., et al. 2015c, ArXiv e-prints

[arXiv:1509.01082]

Stutz, A. M. & Kainulainen, J. 2015, A&A, 577, L6
Stutzki, J., Bensch, F., Heithausen, A., Ossenkopf, V., & Zielinsky, M. 1998,

A&A, 336, 697

Toﬄemire, B. M., Burkhart, B., & Lazarian, A. 2011, ApJ, 736, 60
Tremblin, P., Schneider, N., Minier, V., et al. 2014, A&A, 564, A106
Vazquez-Semadeni, E. 1994, ApJ, 423, 681

Article number, page 15 of 17

A&Aproofs:manuscript no. accepted_citations

Fig. A.1. Demonstration of the log-normal behavior of the linear zero
column density PDF pN(0) as a function of the observational noise
level. The three colored curves represent horizontal cuts through the
surface shown in Fig. 8 for diﬀerent values of the cloud PDF width.
The brown dashed-dotted lines show the corresponding log-normal ﬁts
to the curves.

Fig. A.2. Parameters of the log-normal noise-amplitude dependence of
the zero-column density PDF (pN(0), Eq. A.1) shown as a function of
the cloud PDF width. The values give the center, a1, amplitude, a0, and
width, a2, of the Gaussian on a logarithmic noise-amplitude scale in
units of the cloud PDF peak Npeak.

Appendix A: Parameterization of the noisy

zero-column-density PDF

Closer inspection of the linear column density PDFs at N = 0
for noise-aﬀected cloud observations displayed in Fig. 8 shows
that the noise dependence of pN(0) can also be approximated by
some log-normal function. For every width of the original cloud
PDF, ση,cloud, we can ﬁt the zero column PDF as a function of
the noise level by

pN(0) =

a0
Npeak

exp−

[ln(σnoise/Npeak) − ln(a1)]2

2a2
2



(A.1)

in the range up to σnoise/Npeak = 1. To avoid confusion with the
log-normal cloud column density PDFs, we use the less intuitive
parameter names, a0, a1, and a2 here.10.

The log-normal character is demonstrated in Fig. A.1 show-
ing three cuts through Fig. 8 in the σnoise/Npeak direction and
the corresponding log-normal ﬁts using Eq. A.1. All curves in
the plot show a clear parabola shape. Except for narrow cloud
widths, ση,cloud <∼ 0.2, the representation of the curves by log-
normals is very good. This allows us to condense the information
contained in the surface in Fig. 8 into the ση,cloud dependence of
the three parameters a0, a1, and a2 only.

Figure A.2 shows the parameters of

the log-normals,
a0, a1, a2, for all horizontal cuts in Fig. 8 as functions of the cloud
PDF width. As visible in Fig. A.1, the parabolas describing the
zero-column density PDF become wider with increasing cloud
PDF width, the peak position moves to smaller columns, but the
peak amplitude does not change signiﬁcantly.
log-normal

parameters,
a0(ση,cloud), a1(ση,cloud), a2(ση,cloud), plotted in Fig. A.2, we
thus have a condensed description of the zero-column PDF as
a function of noise level and cloud PDF width from Fig. 8 that
can be used to look up the noise level for any measured pN(0)
and ση,cloud.

three

Using

the

10 The log-normal function for the noisy zero column PDF as a func-
tion of the noise level must not be confused with any of the log-normal
functions discussed in the main text of the paper. Those describe prob-
abilities as a function of the (observed) column density.

Article number, page 16 of 17

Fig. B.1. Linear column density PDF after oﬀset correction at zero col-
umn, pN(0), as a function of the amplitude of the contamination and
the width of the contaminating PDF. Colors and contours are given on
a logarithmic scale.

Appendix B: Recovering the PDF width of the

contaminating cloud

The typical level of the contamination usually can be measured
by inspecting pixels at the boundaries of the cloud that are rep-
resentative of the contamination only. However, the number of
those pixels will be small compared to the whole map so that
higher moments and even the width of the contaminating PDF
may not be known with suﬃcient accuracy. However, in prin-
ciple one can infer the width by inspecting the zero-column-
density of the oﬀset-corrected PDF, equivalent to our approach
of measuring the noise in Sect. 3.3. The colors at the lower edge
of Fig. 13 demonstrate that for high contamination levels, i.e.
when the reconstructed PDF is too wide compared to the cloud
PDF, it extends to low column densities including pN(0). A rela-
tion between contamination width, σcontam/ση,cloud and the zero-
column PDF pN(0) then could be used to deduce the unknown
contamination width.

V. Ossenkopf et al.: Observational measurements of column density PDFs

taminating PDF. Hence, it is practically very diﬃcult to use the
zero-column PDF after the line-of-sight correction to estimate
the width of the PDF of the contaminating structure. A direct
measurement from a ﬁeld tracing only the contamination is al-
ways preferable.

Fig. B.2. Same as Fig. B.1 but using an imperfect subtraction of the
typical contamination level. In the upper plot we assume that the con-
tamination level is underestimated by 20 %, in the lower plot that it is
overestimated by 20 %.

In Fig. B.1 we show the linear column density pN(0) mea-
sured after the subtraction of the typical contamination level as a
function of the relative amplitude and width of the contaminat-
ing PDF. We can accurately measure the width of the contami-
nating PDF from the plot if it shows a steep gradient of pN(0)
in the direction of the contamination width, i.e. in the vertical
cut through the plot given by the known contamination ampli-
tude Ncontam. Unfortunately, we ﬁnd such a steep gradient only in
case of relatively narrow PDFs of the contaminating structure of
less than σcontam < 0.5ση,cloud, i.e. in a regime where the recov-
ery of the cloud PDF by the constant oﬀset correction anyway
does not need any correction, but a relatively shallow behavior
for broader contaminations.

Moreover, this approach depends on the accurate knowl-
edge of the contamination level, Ncontam. Any “overcorrection”
of the contamination will shift the PDF towards lower densi-
ties, strongly increasing the zero column density level. A small
shift can lead to a signiﬁcant change of the measured probabil-
ity pN(0). In Fig. B.2 we show the resulting zero-column PDF
when assuming a 20 % error in the amplitude of the contamina-
tion correction. When comparing the two plots in Fig. B.2 we
see that the zero-column PDF can change by a factor of 100 in
the sensitive range, while it still changes by a factor of ﬁve in
the range of the weak dependence from the width of the con-

Article number, page 17 of 17

