6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
 
0
1

.

 
 
]
P
E
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
3
8
3
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Draft version March 11, 2016
Preprint typeset using LATEX style emulateapj v. 01/23/15

SPITZER IRAC SPARSELY SAMPLED PHASE CURVE OF THE EXOPLANET WASP-14B

J.E. Krick1, J. Ingalls1, S. Carey1, K. von Braun2 , S.R. Kane3, D. Ciardi1, P. Plavchan4, I. Wong5,

P. Lowrance1

Draft version March 11, 2016

ABSTRACT

Motivated by a high Spitzer IRAC oversubscription rate, we present a new technique of randomly
and sparsely sampling phase curves of hot Jupiters. Snapshot phase curves are enabled by technical
advances in precision pointing as well as careful characterization of a portion of the central pixel on
the array. This method allows for observations which are a factor of roughly two more eﬃcient than
full phase curve observations, and are furthermore easier to insert into the Spitzer observing schedule.
We present our pilot study from this program using the exoplanet WASP-14b. Data of this system
were taken both as a sparsely sampled phase curve as well as a staring mode phase curve. Both
datasets as well as snapshot style observations of a calibration star are used to validate this technique.
By ﬁtting our WASP-14b phase snapshot dataset, we successfully recover physical parameters for the
transit and eclipse depths as well as amplitude and maximum and minimum of the phase curve shape
of this slightly eccentric hot Jupiter. We place a limit on the potential phase to phase variation of
these parameters since our data are taken over many phases over the course of a year. We see no
evidence for eclipse depth variations compared to other published WASP-14b eclipse depths over a
3.5 year baseline.
Keywords:

stars:individual(WASP-14, HD 158460) – planetary systems – planets and satel-
lites:atmospheres – methods:data analysis – instrumentation:detectors

1.

INTRODUCTION

The study and characterization of exoplanetary atmo-
spheres has been, and continues to be, one of the great-
est legacies of the Spitzer Space Telescope (Fazio et al.
2004; Werner et al. 2004). The unique capabilities of
Spitzer, coupled with the favorable planet-to-star con-
trast ratio in the infrared (Burrows et al. 2006a), has
allowed numerous achievements to date. For the ﬁrst
time, photons from a planet outside our solar system
were directly detected through observations of a planet’s
secondary eclipse which gave us the ﬁrst insights into
the temperatures of the planet’s synchronously rotating
dayside (e.g., Charbonneau et al. 2005a; Deming et al.
2005). Emission spectrophotometry produced the ﬁrst
evidence of water molecules in the dense exoplanetary
atmospheres (e.g., Grillmair et al. 2008). The Infrared
Array Camera (IRAC) high precision photometry pro-
duced pioneering characterization of the atmospheres of
extrasolar planets (e.g., Knutson et al. 2007a). While
observations of secondary eclipses have been performed
using ground-based facilities (e.g., Sing & L´opez-Morales
2009; Zhao et al. 2012), the study of phase curves and
the dynamics of exoplanetary atmospheres has only been
achieved from space.

Coupled with theoretical modeling (e.g., Cooper &
Showman 2005; Burrows et al. 2006b, 2008; Cowan &
Agol 2008; Lewis et al. 2010; Burrows et al. 2010; Menou
& Rauscher 2010; Thrastarson & Cho 2010; Cowan

jkrick@caltech.edu

1 Spitzer Science Center, MS 314–6, California Institute of
Technology, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA 91125,
USA

2 Lowell Observatory Flagstaﬀ, AZ, USA
3 San Francisco State University San Francisco, CA, USA
4 Missouri State University Springﬁeld, MO, USA
5 California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA

& Agol 2011) and Spitzer observations of secondary
eclipses, phase curves can be used to put constraints on
various parameters of the exoplanet atmosphere such as
the atmospheric pressure structure, chemical composi-
tion, and the combination of albedo, diﬀerent opacities,
and existence of a temperature inversion in the upper
layers of the atmosphere.

A signiﬁcant fraction of extrasolar planets whose at-
mospheres have been characterized to date are ’hot
Jupiters’, i.e., planets approximately the size and mass of
Jupiter that orbit their respective parent star once every
few days. Their rotation rate is consequently believed to
be synchronized with their orbital period, such that the
same side of the planet always faces the star. These ex-
oplanets receive approximately 10,000 to 100,000 times
the ﬂux received by Jupiter which means their dayside
temperatures reach values as high as several thousand
Kelvin, while the nightside temperatures can be hun-
dreds to thousands of Kelvin cooler. Additionally, hot
Jupiters represent a simpler picture for circulation mod-
els in that they are in chemical equilibrium, largely cloud
free, and there is not expected to be convection in their
atmospheres (Fortney et al. 2006). Understanding a sam-
ple of hot Jupiters is a vital stepping stone on the path to
future characterization of cooler planets, including those
in the habitable zones, by future NASA space missions
such as JWST.

(see

About a dozen infrared phase curves have been
published to date
review in Wong et al.
(2015b)(Harrington et al. 2006; Crossﬁeld et al. 2010;
Knutson et al. 2007a, 2009c, 2012, 2009b; Laughlin et al.
2009; Demory et al. 2013; Cowan et al. 2012; Cross-
ﬁeld et al. 2012a; Maxted et al. 2013; Lewis et al. 2013;
Cowan et al. 2007a; Crossﬁeld et al. 2012b; Zellem et al.
2014; Wong et al. 2015b,a). The next scientiﬁc break-

2

Krick et al.

through in this ﬁeld will come from exploring a large
sample of extrasolar planets and determining how their
atmospheric properties depend on physical conditions:
comparative atmospheric sciences. The shape of the in-
frared phase curve can be interpreted as a longitudi-
nal brightness temperature distribution across the planet
and provides the best measurement of the eﬃciency of
the energy transport in the atmosphere. There are many
factors involved in understanding the energy redistribu-
tion from the day- to nightside (Burrows et al. 2006b,
2008; Cowan & Agol 2011). The measured energy emit-
ted by the planet should equal the energy received by
the planet from the star, modulo non-zero Bond albedo
values and assuming no residual energy from planet for-
mation (Knutson et al. 2009a). The longitudinal tem-
perature distribution is driven by three eﬀects: (1) the
time it takes to absorb and reemit ﬂux in the planet’s at-
mosphere (radiative timescale), (2) the time it takes to
transport a parcel of heated gas to the planet’s nightside
(advective timescale), and (3) chemistry which can eﬀect
the pressure level of the atmosphere probed at any wave-
length. Any potential shift in time between the bright-
ness maximum of the phase curve and the time of sec-
ondary eclipse (ie., when the substellar spot is visible) is
an indicator of the relative strength of radiative (heat-
ing/cooling) and advective(wind) processes. In addition,
there are deviations in the planetary emission from a
blackbody spectrum, such as inversion layers at the ob-
served (wavelength-dependent) height in the atmosphere,
which may aﬀect the longitudinal temperature distribu-
tion.

The interpretation of published phase curves (e.g..
Cowan & Agol 2011; Perez-Becker & Showman 2013;
Schwartz & Cowan 2015; Wong et al. 2015b) has clearly
illustrated a diversity in atmospheric circulation patterns
within the exoplanet population studied thus far. The
reasons for this are not clear, principally due to a lack
of data. We hope to add data to this eﬀort, starting
with this ﬁrst paper in a series to study phase curves of
hot Jupiters through a novel snapshot technique which
will help us compile a large sample with less observing
time invested on the highly oversubscribed Spitzer Space
Telescope.

There are two new techniques presented in this paper,
1) using a gain map dataset to remove intrapixel gain
eﬀect in the data and 2) sparsely sampled phase curves.
The advent of precision pointing and characterization of
the intrapixel sensitivity of the central pixel in the IRAC
subarray make this sort of project possible. Phase curve
observations do not have to be conducted in the time-
consuming manner of multiple-day, consecutive observa-
tions.
Instead, given that we know the periods of the
planets, it is more eﬃcient to build up phase curves over
time from many, randomly spaced, short duration obser-
vations (see Section 2 for a more detailed description).
The slew time of the Spitzer space telescope is relatively
fast, so there is no large penalty to observing targets with
multiple epochs.

Something similar to our snapshot technique was used
in Cowan et al. (2007a). However, those observations
nodded back and forth between the science target and
a ﬂux calibration star. This prevented them from mak-
ing a correction for the intrapixel gain eﬀect because the
nods end up on diﬀerent positions on the pixel. We have

developed novel approaches, described below, in both
observation planning and data reduction to correct for
the intrapixel gain eﬀect and other instrumental noise
sources.

We present our pilot study with these new techniques
of the hot Jupiter WASP-14b, a 7.3 Jupiter mass planet
with eccentricity of 0.083 (Wong et al. 2015b) orbiting
an F5V star at a radius of 0.036 AU with a 2.24 day
period (Blecic et al. 2013; Ehrenreich & D´esert 2011).
The star has a brightness of K=8.6 with Tef f = 6480 ±
140K and solar metallicity (Joshi et al. 2009). The above
properties make this planet a prototype of hot Jupiters.
Joshi et al. (2009) note a relatively high density for this
planet of 4.6 g cm−3 given that its radius is 1.26RJupiter
radii. WASP-14b is known to have a signiﬁcant spin-
orbit misalignment, which, coupled with its eccentricity,
is indicative of the orbital evolution of this massive planet
(Johnson et al. 2009).

WASP-14b is predicted to have a thermal inversion
based on its high level of irradiation and the activity of
its parent star (Fortney et al. 2008; Knutson et al. 2010),
however Blecic et al. (2013) ﬁnd that eclipse spectroscopy
at 3.6, 4.5, and 8.0µm are well ﬁt with no thermal inver-
sion. Madhusudhan (2012) attribute the shape of the
broad-band eclipse spectrum to possible condensation
and gravitational settling of the TiO and VO (Spiegel
et al. 2009) or a carbon-rich atmosphere with naturally
low TiO and VO. Blecic et al. (2013) ﬁnd evidence for
a relatively low (< 30%) day-night energy redistribution
and that the dayside spectrum of WASP-14b is consis-
tent with both carbon-rich and oxygen-rich chemistry,
with the latter being a marginally better ﬁt.

This paper is structured in the following manner. Sec-
tion 2 describes our strategy for snapshot observations
including a discussion of stellar variability. Section 3
discusses systematic eﬀects in IRAC data and our miti-
gation techniques. Data are described in Section 4 and
data reduction methods are explained in Section 5. Re-
sults and Discussion are in Section 6 and the paper con-
cludes in Section 7. Throughout the paper we will refer
interchangeably to ’Ch1’ or 3.6µm and ’Ch2’ or 4.5µm.

2. SNAPSHOT STRATEGY

“Snapshot Phase Curves” is a program to observe a
planet-hosting star for one epoch, and then later re-point
to that star and observe it for another epoch, repeated at
random intervals determined by brief holes in the Spitzer
observing schedule, until we have built up a well sampled
phase curve. Building phase curves in this way keeps
data volumes low and does not require the observatory
to be taken over for days at a time, as for traditional
Spitzer exoplanet phase curve measurements. Snapshots
are more eﬃcient by a factor of two to three than long
continuous staring mode observations, depending on the
period, and are easier to schedule, which is especially
important as the mission goes forward.

We set the duration of a single epoch snapshot at 30
minutes. This timescale is chosen for two reasons; (1)
to stay within the roughly 30 - 40 minute pointing wob-
ble (see Krick et al. (2015) for a discussion of spacecraft
motions), and (2) it allows us to build up enough signal
when binning to reach our signal to noise ratio (SNR)
goals (described below).

We investigate the number of snapshot-style observa-

WASP-14b Snapshots

3

tions required to adequately sample a phase curve. We
constructed a Monte- Carlo simulation of phase curves
and simulated datasets that assume a random distribu-
tion of 30-min long snapshots (termed Astronomical Ob-
servation Requests (AORs) by Spitzer) in orbital phase-
space. These simulated datasets are very simple approxi-
mations of IRAC photometry with a noise level commen-
surate with expected IRAC noise for a speciﬁc brightness
star (this simulation was made prior to the more detailed
IRAC data simulator(Ingalls et al. 2012)). The success
of a simulation is judged by how well the phase ampli-
tude measured on the simulated dataset matches the real
(input) amplitude. Assumptions which go into this in-
clude (1) an expected phase curve amplitude of 0.06%
(the smallest amplitude predicted for known hot Jupiters
at the time of observation planning in 2011), (2) a pho-
tometric uncertainty per datapoint of 0.02% in relative
ﬂux, (3) a sinusoidal shape of the phase curve (Cowan
et al. 2007b), and (4) that the combined data for a given
target cover a time-span much longer than the period of
the exoplanet. Assumption (4), combined with a short
AOR duration, ensures that the simulation results are in-
dependent of the planetary orbital duration. Assumption
(2) of photometric uncertainty is based on signal-to-noise
calculations for 30-min on a 25 mJy source, which is a
factor of three fainter than WASP-14b to accommodate
all possible targets in our extended program.

In our simulation, the number of snapshot-style AORs
was incremented from 1 to 60. The top range of the
number of simulated AORs represents a rough boundary
where it might not be worth using this technique because
the overall time required for snapshots would be similar
to a continuous phase curve (depending on the period of
the planet). We generated the Monte-Carlo simulation
with 5000 datasets, or sets of AORs, for each number
of snapshot-style AORs bin. A χ2 ﬁt was performed
for each dataset and the result was compared to the in-
put parameters. We show the results in Figure 1. The
left panel illustrates an example simulated dataset of 35
measurements, where the solid line is the model used to
generate the data and the dashed line is the best-ﬁt to
these data. The right panel summarizes all of the simula-
tions. The dashed line is for those simulations where χ2
ﬁts produced an amplitude within 40% of the actual am-
plitude, constituting a marginal detection, but neverthe-
less providing a quantitative upper limit on exoplanetary
day/night contrast. The solid line indicates the percent-
age of datasets for which a measured amplitude within
20% of the actual amplitude was recovered. At this level
of precision, much more quantitative constraints can be
imposed on atmospheric properties. Thus, for 35 mea-
surements per target, we can recover the amplitude of
the phase curve to within 20% of its input value 77% of
the time and to within 40% of the input value 99% of the
time.

After observing 35 WASP-14b AORs in September
2012, we noticed that the assumed randomness of the
observations was not achieved, and thus scheduled an-
other 11 AORs in the hopes of ﬁlling in phase regions
which were not covered in the original 35 AORs. 46 to-
tal snapshots provide a well-sampled phase curve with
fortuitous observations of one AOR during transit and
two AORs during eclipse.

2.1. Stellar Variability

If the star varies, then a snapshot light curve might
just be capturing stellar variation instead of planet phase
variations. The planetary variations are temporally well
separated from stellar variations because the timescales
of planetary orbits or rarely similar to the timescales of
stellar rotations. The concern is that because we ob-
serve over many months and many phases, we may see
an oﬀset in ﬂuxes from one snapshot to the next due
to stellar variability. We chose WASP-14b because sta-
tistically it’s spectral type (F5V) indicates it should be
relatively quiescent based on average variability of stars
in the Kepler input catalog, the periodogram of the orig-
inal survey data, and the measured radial velocity (RV)
residuals.

Looking at a sample of F stars in the Kepler Input
Catalog, Ciardi et al. (2011) ﬁnd an average dispersion
in 30 minute bins over 33 days of 0.1 mmag in the optical
for F stars with Kepler mags in the range of WASP-14b
(Kp estimated to be 9.7). We expect the IR variation to
be smaller than these average optical variations. Also,
based on an emission spectrum, Knutson et al. (2010)
ﬁnd that WASP-14 is inactive.

Blecic et al. (2013) examine the periodogram of the
original WASP light curve data to search for periodic
signals as evidence of stellar activity. They ﬁnd no signif-
icant (false alarm probability of less than 0.05) periodic
signals in that dataset, implying no measurable stellar
variability.

Lastly, stellar activity in the form of non-radial pulsa-
tions, or inhomogeneous convection or spots can cause
RV variations which might show up in RV surveys pub-
lished to date (Santos et al. 2000). Joshi et al. (2009),
in the original discovery paper, quote RV residuals of
10.1m/s . Wong et al. (2015b) ﬁnd a residual of 12.3
m/s based partially on data from Knutson et al. (2014).
This is in the expected range for this type of star, and is
not high enough to suggest stellar activity (> 40ms−1)
(Paulson et al. 2004).

3.

IRAC SOURCES OF NOISE

Data reduction for high precision photometry is chal-
lenging due to both instrumental and astrophysical ef-
fects. Instrumental eﬀects are discussed below and their
relative strengths are shown in Figure 2. This ﬁgure in-
cludes the Poisson contribution from an assumed source
at half-full well and the background along with the read-
noise. The intrapixel gain eﬀect for each channel is shown
as a grey line and discussed in section §3.1. Because this
is such a strong eﬀect, it must be removed from the data
before we can detect phase variations.

Estimates of the strength of the eﬀect on photometry
of latent images and a detector bias pattern are shown as
dashed gray lines. Low level persistent images exist after
a bright star has been observed, and can last for many
hours. These are discussed in §3.3. Changing bias pat-
terns can be generated by a diﬀerence in the delay times
before images are recorded from the darks to the science
frames. The bias pattern eﬀect has not been fully char-
acterized and cannot be derived from this dataset. The
estimates of the bias eﬀect used in this plot are deter-
mined from a set of ﬁve 5 - 10 hour continuous staring
mode archival observations of a blank ﬁeld (no star tar-

4

Krick et al.

geted). The level of this bias eﬀect is uncertain and will
vary as a function of time over the days to months be-
tween observations presented here.

As examples of the rough level of the signals relevant to
exoplanet studies with IRAC, we also show the relative
levels of a 1% transit depth, a 0.1% eclipse depth, and a
70 ppm postulated Super-Earth secondary eclipse depth.

3.1. Intrapixel Sensitivity

Due to the under-sampled nature of the PSF, the
warm IRAC arrays show variations of as much as 8%
in sensitivity as the center of the PSF moves across a
pixel due to normal spacecraft motions (Ingalls et al.
2012). These intra-pixel gain variations are the largest
source of correlated noise in IRAC photometry (see ﬁgure
2). Many data reduction techniques rely on the science
data themselves to remove the gain variations as a func-
tion of position(Charbonneau et al. 2005b; Ballard et al.
2010; Stevenson et al. 2012; Knutson et al. 2012; Lewis
et al. 2013; Deming et al. 2015). The limitation of self-
calibration techniques is that it does not work well for
sparsely sampled dataset (many full phase curves). The
SSC has generated a high-resolution gain map from stan-
dard star data (Ingalls et al. 2012), which can be used as
an alternative when reducing data.

The use of the gain map reduction technique is re-
liant on PCRS Peak-Up. PCRS Peak-Up uses the Spitzer
Pointing Calibration Reference Sensor (PCRS) to repeat-
edly position a target to within 0.25 IRAC pixels of an
area of minimal gain variation. It is important to land
on this ’sweet spot’ ([15.120,15.085] in ch2) because it a)
minimizes the eﬀect on the photometry of standard tele-
scope motions, b) it is the most well-calibrated position
on the detector, and c) it enhances measurement repeata-
bility from one epoch to the next. The minimization of
the intra-pixel gain eﬀect happens both because that re-
gion is well calibrated, and because the slope of the gain
map is shallowest at this position. The change in gain
as a function of position is minimized to ∼ 0.2% across
the sweet spot, which is smaller than at other positions
on the pixel.

Most staring mode exoplanet observations employ the
SSC recommended practice of observing a 30 min. pre-
AOR to allow the telescope to settle.
In the interest
of time, we do not observe this pre-AOR, and instead
peak-up directly to our target and start the snapshot
observations.

The gain map (“pmap”) dataset uses the IRAC calibra-
tion stars KF09T1 in ch1 and BD+67 1044 in ch2 taken
with subarray 0.4 and 0.1s frame times respectively. The
Feb 26 2015 version of the 4.5µm pmap dataset used
in this reduction includes a total of 409,539 photometry
points, 90% of which are within the sweet spot. Initial
mapping of the central pixel deliberately included the
whole pixel as work was beginning to deﬁne the sweet
spot. In general PCRS Peak-Up places a target within
the sweet spot 98% of the time (Ingalls et al. 2012). This
paper only uses ch2. All gain map data are reduced in
the same manner as the science observations.

The limitation of using a gain map for removing gain
variations from the data is that it cannot be applied to
data with positions oﬀ the sweet spot. This is more often
the case for targets which are faint or extremely bright,
and high proper motion stars. We leave a comparison of

the various data reduction and analysis techniques for a
future study.

3.2. Photometric Stability

The snapshot technique only works if aperture pho-
tometry is stable as a function of time, on year-long
timescales. This is because both the gain map calibration
dataset and the observations of WASP-14b were taken
over many years. The gain map calibration dataset (see
§3.1)was observed starting in 2011, with additional data
taken as recently as winter 2014 and the data on WASP-
14b was taken over a 1.5 year baseline (see §4.) The cali-
bration dataset needs to be both consistent over the years
it was observed and capable of correcting data taken at
any time during the mission.

To understand the photometric stability of the IRAC
detectors as a function of time, we examined the existing
calibration data taken over the course of the entire 11
year mission to date. Figure 3 shows aperture photom-
etry of seven IRAC primary calibration stars binned to-
gether on two week timescales. Primary calibrators are
described in detail in Reach et al. (2005). Their main
function is to determine the absolute calibration of the
instrument.

There is a statistically signiﬁcant decrease in sensitiv-
ity of both ch1 and ch2 over the course of the mission.
The degradation is extremely small, of order 0.1% per
year in ch1 and 0.05% per year in ch2. The decrease in
sensitivity is potentially caused by radiation damage to
the optics. Individual light curves for each of the cali-
bration stars used in this analysis were checked to rule
out the hypothesis that one or two of the stars varied in
a way as to be the sole cause of the measured decrease.
While the slope for each individual star is not as well
measured as for the ensemble of stars, it is apparent that
the decreasing trend is not caused by outliers. We also
rule out the solar cycle as the cause of ﬂux degradation
by examining the cosmic ray rate as a function of time
throughout the mission.

In light of this very small ﬂux degradation, we have
corrected the photometry of both the gain map dataset
and the exoplanet host stars by a linear function in time
which decreases at 0.05% per year.

3.3. Persistent Images

Both IRAC channels sometimes show residual images
of a source after it has been moved oﬀ a pixel. When
a pixel is illuminated, a small fraction of the photoelec-
trons are trapped. The traps have characteristic decay
rates, and can release a hole or electron that accumu-
lates on the integrating node long after the illumination
has ceased. Persistent images on the IRAC array start
out as positive ﬂux remaining after a bright source has
been observed. At some time later the residual images
turn from positive to negative, so that they are actually
below the background level (trapping a hole instead of
trapping an electron). Positive and negative persistent
images in either the aperture or background annulus in
either the dark frame or the science frames can lead to
artiﬁcial increases or decreases in aperture photometry
ﬂuxes. We will use the terms persistent images and la-
tents interchangeably throughout the discussion.

We have learned from this work that persistent im-
ages are pervasive. Short term persistent images start at

WASP-14b Snapshots

5

about 1% of the source ﬂux and can be seen to decay over
the course of minutes to hours. We look for long term
latents by median combining all warm mission darks at
the 2s frame time into a “superdark”. We also make
yearly and seasonal superdarks which are a median com-
bine of a single year’s worth of darks or a single seasons
(e.g.. Jan - Mar) worth of darks throughout the mis-
sion. Diﬀerencing the mission long superdark from the
yearly and seasonal darks reveals low-level long term la-
tent patterns which change from year to year and season
to season. These residual latent images are either caused
by observing cadence (coincidentally Spitzer uses more
subarray in the fall season) or by long-lasting, low-level,
persistent images. Beyond knowing of their existence, it
is very diﬃcult to track these low level latent images post
facto, especially since we know that the latents are both
growing with new observations dependent on the speciﬁc
observing history, and shrinking over time as they dissi-
pate.

Long term latents are signiﬁcant for this work because
they change on timescales over which our observations
are made. The eﬀect on snapshot photometry will have
a random component, as the scheduling of the snapshots
was random. Our superdark analysis shows that persis-
tent images can eﬀect the photometry of snapshots at the
0.1% level (see Figure 2. In order to remove this eﬀect
for future snapshot phase curve observations, we recom-
mend observing a dither pattern on a blank region before
and/or after each snapshot. This will ultimately provide
a dark observation which is speciﬁc for each snapshot ob-
servation. The choice of observing the dither before and
after will depend on weather or not the persistent image
is stable on 30 min. timescales, of which we don’t have a
good understanding. Adding these dithered observations
will increase the time required for these types of sparsely
sampled phase curves. If the persistent image level were
changing signiﬁcantly on the 30 min. timescale of the
snapshots, we might expect to see its signature in the
RMS vs. Binning plots, which instead show only Pois-
son noise, see §6.3.1
This latent in the darks is not seen in the instrument
stability section (§3.2) where tests were done on photom-
etry of calibration stars because those observations are
dithered around in position, as opposed to holding the
observatory in one single position.

4. SPITZER WARM IRAC OBSERVATIONS

We present here snapshot observations of a pilot set
of observations of WASP-14b, which can be extended to
more exoplanetary systems.
In addition, we also dis-
cuss archival continuous staring mode observations of
WASP-14 and snapshot observations of the calibration
star HD 158460 for veriﬁcation of the observing strategy.
Observing parameters are listed in Table 1. All obser-
vations discussed in this paper were taken with Warm
IRAC in staring mode at 4.5µm with the target observed
as close as possible to the sweet spot of the central pixel
of the sub-array.

We choose Ch2, and not Ch1, for both scientiﬁc and
technical reasons. First, the predicted planet-to-star ﬂux
ratio values are larger at 4.5µm (by tens of percent),
which increases the planetary contribution to the pho-
tometry. Second, Ch2 is overall a better behaved instru-
ment in the warm mission (see Figure 2). In particular,

the pixel phase eﬀect is a smaller eﬀect in Ch2 than Ch1
(Ingalls et al. 2012). The only minor disadvantage to
choosing Ch2 that we are aware of is that the stars are
fainter.

In Staring mode, no dithering or mapping is used; the
telescope is not intentionally moved after it arrives on
target. The sub-array is a 32x32 pixel portion of the
full detector array. Images are stored in sets of 64 sub-
frames, tied together into one FITS ﬁle. Data described
in this paper are from all archival data on Program IDs
(PIDs) 80016, 80073, and calibration PIDs 1320, 1326,
1328,1331, 1333, 1336, 1338, 1346, 1658, 1659, 1669.

PCRS peak-up on the target was used prior to all
AORs to reliably put the target star onto the sweet spot,
which is necessary for our reduction technique. We have
only mapped the gain variations to suﬃcient precision
for this work over the single sweet spot of the central
subarray pixel in both channels (see §3.1). If the target
does not land on the sweet spot where the existing gain
map dataset can provide calibration of the intrapixel gain
eﬀect, then this technique is not possible, and snapshots
can not be used to build phase curves.

For WASP-14b, a two second frame time was chosen
from among the ﬁxed set available to observe this 68mJy
star at ∼ 38% of full well, where the IRAC detectors have
the least non-linearity (see §5.4). In total, 46 snapshot
visits were observed randomly throughout two visibility
windows separated by one year. The ﬁrst 35 observations
were taken from 2012-09-07 to 2012-09-27 UTC. A fur-
ther 11 snapshots were observed from 2013-08-24 to 2013-
09-16 UTC. Each snapshot’s AOR produced 14 subarray
FITS ﬁles containing 896 individual images. Continuous
staring mode observations were made as 5 roughly 12
hour long, consecutive AORs from 2012-04-24 to 2012-
04-26 UTC.
For HD 158460, a 0.1s frame time was chosen to ob-
serve this 1187 mJy calibration star at ∼ 32% of full well,
where the IRAC detectors have the least non-linearities.
In total, 18 snapshot observations were taken randomly
from 2012-01-13 though 2012-01-20 UTC. Each snapshot
AOR produced 210 subarray FITS ﬁles containing 13,440
individual photometry measurements.

We do not use the standard 30-min pre-AOR as that
would remove the eﬃciency gain provided by using snap-
shots over continuous stares. The goal of that pre-AOR
is to allow the telescope motion to settle upon ﬁrst arriv-
ing on target so that the target does not drift oﬀ of the
sweet spot. Since our observations are only 30 minutes
long, as opposed to the many hour continuous stares,
the drift in position that occurs within the observations
keeps the majority of the snapshots within the calibrated
region of the pixel, so the pre-AOR is not necessary for
this particular application.

Four of the 51 AORs did not end up with at least 20%
of their datapoints on the sweet spot. This includes one
continuous staring mode AOR (containing the second ob-
servation of the secondary eclipse) and three of the snap-
shot AORs. These non-sweet-spot AORs are ignored in
the following analysis.

5. DATA REDUCTION

Data reduction is exactly the same for all snapshot
and continuous staring mode datasets. We start our
data reduction from the Basic Calibrated Data (BCD)

6

Krick et al.

ﬁles provided by the SSC data pipeline, software ver-
sion S19.1.0. The pipeline applies a dark subtraction,
linearization, ﬂat-ﬁeld correction, and conversion to ﬂux
units. The ﬁrst subframe of each 64-frame BCD is re-
moved from this analysis due to its higher bias level.
The higher bias level is caused by the larger elapsed
time between BCDs as opposed to consecutive sub-
frames within a single BCD. This eﬀect is referred to
as the “ﬁrst frame eﬀect” in the IRAC documenta-
tion (http://irsa.ipac.caltech.edu/data/SPITZER/
docs/irac/iracinstrumenthandbook/).

5.1. Superdark

Dark current in all IRAC frames is measured with
a shutterless system designed by the IRAC instrument
team (described in detail in Krick et al. 2009). In sum-
mary, weekly observations at each frame time for both
sub- and full-array are made of a low background ﬁeld
at the north ecliptic pole. These images are then vet-
ted for obvious persistent images (latents), and median
combined to make a weekly dark. For each data frame,
the nearest-in-time dark is used by the pipeline to cor-
rect that frame. This means that for our datasets which
span multiple weeks/years, diﬀerent dark frames are sub-
tracted from diﬀerent AORs. For our science goals, we
need to put aperture photometry from the whole set of
snapshot observations on a single ﬂux level. To deter-
mine how best to do this, we examine the eﬀect of using
weekly darks in comparison to a mission-long superdark.
The reason for concern is that a latent image in the dark
frame near the center of the frame (either in the aper-
ture or the background annulus) will cause changes in
the aperture photometry of the target from one AOR to
the next.

Because the latent population changes on day to week
long timescales, the advantage of weekly darks is that
they potentially have the same latent in them that the
science data has, allowing us to remove latents from
the science frames. However it is also possible that the
weekly darks have latents in them which have faded by
the time the science data are observed, thereby adding
a source of noise to the science data.
It is possible to
generate a superdark from archival data by median com-
bining all dark images taken during the entire duration
of the warm mission to date. Each frame time gets its
own superdark. The advantage of superdarks is that they
have no latent structure in them. The disadvantage of
superdarks is that they cannot remove latents which are
present in the science data.

When making both the weekly and superdarks, the me-
dian combine will reject all astronomical sources. Aside
from latent images, we expect that the only other dif-
ference between the superdark and weekly dark to be
a change in the background level because the zodiacal
light component varies as a function of time (Krick et al.
2012). However, since we are doing aperture photometry,
we do not care that the mean level of the dark is incorrect
by the amount that the zodiacal light ﬂuctuates over a
one-year baseline. Throughout the warm mission we do
not see evidence of a change in the background pattern in
the darks. The superdark is applied to each data frame
by ﬁrst backing out the pipeline calibrations already ap-
plied to the BCD including the weekly dark, and then
calibrating those images with our superdark. All of the

calibration ﬁles required to do this are provided by the
SSC in the Spitzer Heritage Archive.

Without the luxury of darks taken directly adjacent to
the snapshots, we are forced to choose between using the
weekly darks and the superdarks. We use the standard
deviation within datasets as the metric for the decision
of weekly darks versus superdarks. We ﬁnd the lowest
scatter photometry using weekly darks for the gain map
calibration dataset and superdarks for the WASP-14b
dataset. This is probably due to the persistent images
we see in the snapshot dataset (see §6.1.1), whereas the
gain map dataset is so much larger that the individual
frames have not been studied in such detail.

5.2. Centroiding and Aperture Photometry

The centers of the star on each subframe are deter-
mined using the SSC provided box centroider.pro (http:
//irachpp.spitzer.caltech.edu/page/contrib).
This code uses an iterative process with the ﬁrst mo-
ment of light to ﬁnd the star centers. We choose this
technique because it is simple, robust, repeatable, and
easy to code for comparison with other groups using
diﬀerent methods. We have not tested other centroiding
methods on this dataset. For WASP-14b, there is a faint
star ∼ 11.4 arcseconds from the center of WASP-14
(not cataloged in Simbad so we don’t have literature
ﬂuxes for it). A 6 × 6 arcsecond region around the right
ascension (RA) and declination (dec) of that star is
masked in all images to block the light coming from that
star before centroiding and performing photometry. The
masked region is well outside of photometric aperture,
but does cover part of the background annulus.

Aperture size is chosen for this dataset by ﬁnding that
aperture radius which maximizes the SNR of the ﬁnal re-
duced dataset. We test eight apertures in 0.25 pixel bins
from 1.5 to 3.25 pixels. For WASP-14b, a 2.25 pixel aper-
ture minimizes the contribution from background noise,
while including enough of the star’s ﬂux to maximize
the SNR. Since the calibration star HD 158460 is a test
dataset, we hold the aperture size constant at 2.25 pixels
for that dataset as well. We use this same aperture size
on the gain map dataset for consistency.
A background annulus of 3 - 7 pixels (3.6 - 8.4 (cid:48)(cid:48)) is
used. We choose this annulus size for WASP-14b because
there is a neighboring object in the images at about 10
pixels from the center of WASP-14, and since we have no
information on the variability of that source, we would
like to exclude it from our background region as much
as possible. Also, since we need to use a single, uniform
method for ﬁnding the background on our target as well
as on the very large gain map dataset, we have chosen to
stick with the 3-7 pixel annulus for the entire paper.

Along with centers and aperture ﬂuxes, we calcu-
late the number of noise pixels for each subframe
as well as the individual components of noise pixel
in the X and Y direction, calculated using the SSC
provided box centroider.pro. The noise pixel parameter
gives an indication of apparent size of the target star
and is deﬁned in the IRAC Instrument Handbook
(http://irsa.ipac.caltech.edu/data/SPITZER/
docs/irac/iracinstrumenthandbook/5/)
in
and
Mighell (2005)Lewis et al. (2013). Speciﬁcally it is the
equivalent number of pixels whose noise contributes
to the ﬂux of a point source. There is no evidence

WASP-14b Snapshots

7

that the PSF itself is changing with time. However, at
frequencies higher than the observation rate, oscillations
of the spacecraft will have the eﬀect of smearing out the
image, thereby increasing noise pixel, without changing
the centroids signiﬁcantly.

To bin, we remove both position and ﬂux outliers. We
ﬁrst remove points from our dataset that are three stan-
dard deviations away from the global mean Y position
or 2.5 standard deviations away from the global mean
X position. The larger tolerance in the Y direction is
due to more native spacecraft motion in the Y direction.
We have checked individually many of these position out-
liers, and every one we have followed up is caused by a
cosmic ray near to the star which corrupts the measured
positions. For both the snapshot and continuous staring
datasets we reject on average ∼ 1% of the data as posi-
tion outliers. Flux outliers are removed using a running
three sigma mean.

Figure 4 shows the raw values of X centroid, Y cen-
troid, X & Y FWHM (second moment of intensity distri-
bution), noise pixels, normalized background value, and
normalized raw ﬂux, as a function of both orbital phase
and time. The time plot includes a discontinuity of about
a year between sets of observations. We also show a zoom
in for a few AORs on Figure 5. Figure 6 shows all the
snapshot AOR centroid positions over-plotted on an im-
age of the intrapixel gain map to give a sense of how ac-
curate and precise the pointing is for this program. The
color coding of the AORs remains consistent throughout
all ﬁgures for this paper.

5.3. Kernel Regression Gain Map Correction

Data for both the snaps and stares were reduced us-
ing a Nadaraya-Watson type kernel regression technique
(Nadaraya 2006; Watson 1964). Kernel regression has
been used extensively in the literature as a way of correct-
ing for the IRAC intrapixel gain eﬀect based on neigh-
boring photometry points in the dataset itself (often re-
ferred to as pixel mapping) (Ballard et al. 2010; Knutson
et al. 2012; Lewis et al. 2013; Zellem et al. 2014; Wong
et al. 2015b). Diﬀerent from the literature methods, how-
ever, we use the photometry of a separate calibration star
BD+67 1044, which is not known to vary. As mentioned
earlier, the Spitzer Science Center has accumulated ap-
proximately 400,000 measurements of this gain map cal-
ibration star, positioned all within 0.3 arcseconds of the
“sweet spot” (peak of response) of the ch2 subarray cen-
tral pixel.

Kernel regression correction of science data begins by
ﬁnding the N nearest neighbors to a given target data
point in the gain map calibration dataset, based on the
Euclidean distance in X and Y centroid and noise pix-
els. The N gain map points are weighted by a kernel
which is a Gaussian function of the distance to the sci-
ence data point. The width of the Gaussian kernels are
computed on the ﬂy as the coordinate standard devia-
tions (in x,y,NP, etc) of the 50 neighbors in the pmap
dataset. The weighted kernels are then summed and
normalized by the calibration star ﬂux. The result is a
prediction of the relative strength of the intrapixel gain
map at the location of the science data point. To correct
for the intrapixel gain we divided the science ﬂux by this
prediction.

The technique includes tunable parameters for the

number of nearest neighbors N , the maximum distance
from the science data point, and the minimum “occupa-
tion” number, a kernel-weighted measure of how many of
the nearest neighbor gain map data points contributed to
the result (see Ingalls et al. (2012) for details on the occu-
pation). For the current program, we set the number of
nearest neighbors to 50 (Lewis et al. 2013), the minimum
distance to 0.0025 pixels, and the occupation number to
20. This tight requirement on the proximity and quan-
tity of gain map data helps to minimize the eﬀects of
persistent images that may exist in the pmap dataset.
As mentioned above, we did not include three AORs in
our ﬁnal analysis that have less than twenty percent of
their photometry points within the sweet spot. One im-
portant diﬀerence between this method and literature
kernel regression techniques for exoplanet reduction is
that we did not build a correction from the science mea-
surements themselves, and therefore minimize the risk of
removing astrophysical signal.

An earlier version of this technique contained an in-
termediate step of computing the gain map on a regu-
lar grid in X and Y centroid, and then interpolating to
the science data positions (Ingalls et al. 2012). We ﬁnd
the direct nearest neighbors approach to be more eﬀec-
tive (albeit more CPU-intensive), because working from
an intermediately gridded map introduces additional un-
certainties inherent to grid-ding and interpolation. The
current method will be described more fully in a future
paper (Ingalls et al, in preparation).

Figure 7 shows the ﬁnal reduction of WASP-14b snap-
shots and continuous staring mode AORs phased to the
literature period of 2.24376507 days (Wong et al. 2015b)
. Figure 8 shows the same data as a function of time
instead of phase. Since there is about one year between
each set of observations, we show this in two frames with
the ﬁrst set of 35 AORs in one frame, followed by the
second set of 11 AORs in the other.

5.4. Nonlinearity

The IRAC detectors have a known nonlinearity such
that a linear increase in the number of incoming photons
does not lead to a linear increase in the ﬂux measured on
the detectors. The pipeline corrects for this nonlinearity
to an accuracy of about 1%. High precision photome-
try studies which want to use the gain map taken at one
ﬂux level to correct science data taken potentially at an-
other ﬂux level are sensitive to a ’residual nonlinearity’
(< 1%). We have examined this residual nonlinearity
in detail (Krick et al. 2015) and conclude that it does
not eﬀect ﬂux as a function of position on the pixel for
observations with peak pixel counts between 1,000 and
15,000 DN in ch2, which is the case for all observations
here. WASP-14b has between nine and ten thousand DN
in the peak pixel depending on the position.

5.5. Electronic Ramp

Some authors report an electronic ramp in ﬂux mea-
surements as a function of time in their warm IRAC
datasets (Campo et al. 2011; Deming et al. 2011; Todorov
et al. 2012, 2013). Ramps seen in the 5.8 and 8.0µm
cryogenic data are probably not relevant because those
are Si:As detectors whereas the ch1 & 2 detectors
are InSb (see http://irsa.ipac.caltech.edu/data/

8

Krick et al.

SPITZER/docs/files/spitzer/preflash.txt for a dis-
cussion of the 8µm ramp). We see no evidence for a con-
sistent ramp in our 30 minute AORs. Figure 10 shows
normalized corrected ﬂux as a function of time for all 46
snapshot AORs binned together into 4 bins as a function
of time. There is no systematic trend from the beginning
to the end of the observations within 0.005%, which is
well below the noise level of our phase curve measured
amplitude.

6. RESULTS & DISCUSSION

We ﬁrst examine persistent images as a remaining noise
source after the above reduction. We then ﬁt a model to
our reduction of both the snapshot and continuous star-
ing mode WASP-14b data. Next, we consider three inde-
pendent metrics for judging the success of the snapshot
technique. Finally we look at the astrophysical implica-
tions of the WASP-14b dataset.

6.1. Residual Persistent images
6.1.1. Outliers in Snapshot Data

The existence of persistent images under the snapshots
is likely the largest uncorrected source of scatter in our
snapshot dataset. We examine the eﬀect of persistent im-
ages on the snapshot observations (see §3.3). Our only
metric for determining which of the AORs are eﬀected
by stronger latent signals is to reduce the data in two
ways and then compare; ﬁrst using a superdark (theoret-
ically no latents) and secondly using weekly darks. Out
of 46 AORs we ﬁnd only three AORs whose ﬂux densi-
ties change by more than 0.05%: the two AORs directly
after the ﬁrst secondary eclipse (purple and dark blue)
and the AOR during transit(light purple). These three
AORs were taken consecutively in time, implying that
latents are the likely source of scatter in those AORs.
Conversely we can say that the remaining 43 snapshots
are not aﬀected by an amount greater than 0.05% by la-
tent images. This is conﬁrmed both by the small amount
of scatter in the residuals (see Section §6.3.1) and in the
diﬀerence between reductions with and without the su-
perdark.

To further test if AORs with the largest delta ﬂux den-
sity from superdark to weekly dark are indeed aﬀected by
latents, we ﬁrst looked for a source of persistent images
observed directly prior to the candidate high latent snap-
shot AORs. Approximately 2.5 hours prior to the start of
the snapshot observations, IRAC mapped the Chameleon
region, using a dithering and mapping strategy and not
staring. This region includes some bright stars with K =
3-5 that could cause low level persistent images. Further-
more, we examined an AOR taken directly after the three
snapshot AORs to look for residual persistent images.
This AOR is fortunately 80 BCDs that dither around
a relatively dark portion of the sky. Median combining
these images together removes all sources, and leaves us
with an image of the background pattern which may have
been present underneath our snapshot observation ( see
left side of Figure 9). Indeed there are persistent images
present in the median combine both from column pull-
down, and potentially from other bright targets all over
the full array, including in the subarray region (small
box in upper corner). The subarray persistent image is
potentially the source of the diﬀerent ﬂux in the three
snapshot observations examined here.

For comparison, we also look at median stacks of AORs
observed directly after two other random snapshots (ﬁrst,
and 27th snapshots), and these show a smooth back-
ground in the subarray region, albeit with lower SNR
in the background due to less total exposure time in the
median stack (see right side of Figure 9).

Not only are there long term persistent images, as seen
in the superdark analysis, but there are also short-term
persistent images which decay much faster (minutes)
which can aﬀect the photometry at the 0.1% level. Ad-
ditionally it is possible that the exoplanet targets them-
selves are also generating persistent images, but we can-
not disentangle this eﬀect in the source photometry. Our
suggestion above of dithered observations before and af-
ter each snapshot will allow us to study these types of
latents and improve future observations. For the three
AORs that are aﬀected by latents, we have added 0.1%
to their error bars to more accurately represent the un-
certainty in ﬂux due to persistent images.

6.1.2. Level Oﬀset

One side-eﬀect of the persistent images underneath all
of our observations is that the continuous staring mode
data and the snapshot data have diﬀerent normaliza-
tions. We can not know exactly what the latent behavior
under these observations is, but we know that the latent
behavior is diﬀerent from season to season and year to
year. Because this is an additive eﬀect, we correct it
by adding an oﬀset of 0.2% uniformly to all snapshot
data to equalize the snapshot mean ﬂux with the contin-
uous staring mode data (judging by eye since both sets of
observations have scatter and phase curve shape). Since
we are not doing absolute photometry, the additional ﬂux
oﬀset that we manually add will make minimal diﬀerence
in the conclusions of the paper.

6.2. Phase Curve Fitting

To test the usefulness of snapshot data sets for deriving
physical parameters, we ﬁt the Lewis et al. (2013) phase
curve model to the observed phase curve of WASP-14b.
This model is based on a ﬁt of sines and cosines for cir-
cular orbits presented in Cowan & Agol (2008) but has
been adjusted to accommodate systems with eccentric-
ity. Given a full, continuous, phase curve, there would
be up to 16 ﬁtted parameters: orbital period, inclination,
a/R∗, two components of eccentricity, transit mid-point,
Rp/R∗, depth of both secondary eclipses, four phase
curve parameters, and two ramp parameters. However,
since the snapshot style observations were not designed
to measure information about transits and eclipses, and
in fact those are not guaranteed to be observed in any
given set of snapshots, we ﬁx 12 of those parameters and
allow only the four phase curve shape parameters to vary.
The 12 ﬁxed parameters are ﬁxed to the values presented
in Wong et al. (2015b), listed in Table 2. The phase curve
shape is deﬁned by the following equation:

F (θ) = F0 + c1cos(θ) + c2sin(θ) + c3cos(2θ) + c4sin(2θ)

where c1-c4 are the free parameters, F is ﬂux and θ is
the phase which, in the case of an eccentric orbit, is a
function of the true anomaly (Lewis et al. 2013).

Figure 11 shows the snapshots and the best ﬁts for both
the continuous staring mode and snapshot data which

WASP-14b Snapshots

9

are both reduced in exactly the same manner using the
gain map. Additionally, we over-plot the ﬁt from Wong
et al. (2015b) to their reduction of the continuous staring
mode dataset. Data are shown binned at the same level
at which the ﬁtting is performed. We found the best chi-
squared values for binning at roughly the level of a set
of 64 photometry points (equivalent to one ﬁts ﬁle).

After ﬁtting, values of phase curve amplitude and
phase shift are derived. Uncertainties on these values
are calculated by running a set of 1000 ﬁts on a dataset
where the ﬁtted parameters are randomly varied within
their 1σ error bars. The distribution of resulting ampli-
tudes and phase shifts is then ﬁt with a gaussian and the
uncertainties are obtained from that gaussian ﬁt. Error
bars in the pmap ﬁts are likely underestimates.

Maximum ﬂux occurs prior to phase = 0.5 and likewise
minimum ﬂux occurs prior to phase = 0. This is fully
consistent with Wong et al. (2015b) for their continu-
ous staring mode analysis. It implies that the hot spot is
shifted eastward from substellar point, which is found for
other hot Jupiters as well (eg. Knutson et al. 2007b, 2012;
Zellem et al. 2014; Stevenson et al. 2014). General circu-
lation models predict that the eastward hot spot implies
an eastward super-rotating equatorial jet stream caused
by the day to night temperature diﬀerential (Showman
et al. 2015, and references therein.).

6.2.1. Comparison with Continuous Staring Mode Data

We compare our best ﬁt model for the snapshot data
with two models from the continuous staring mode data.
Those two models are 1) our own reduction and ﬁt of
the continuous staring mode data and 2) the indepen-
dent Wong et al. (2015b) model ﬁt to their reduction.
Figure 11 shows all models, Wong et al. (2015b) in yel-
low, this paper’s continuous staring mode model in red,
and the snapshot model in light blue. Our model ﬁt to
our own reduction of the continuous data and the Wong
et al. (2015b) ﬁt to their reduction are extremely sim-
ilar, validating this ﬁtting technique. All three models
ﬁnd similar values of phase shift within the uncertainties.
The derived value of amplitude is statistically diﬀer-
ent (∼ 5σ) between the snapshot ﬁt and the continuous
data ﬁts. Our ﬁtting routine does ﬁnd a slightly higher
amplitude than that published in Wong et al. (2015b),
but it is consistent with their value. We test if this is a
function of the sampling into snapshots by subsampling
the continuous data into snapshot style observations, and
ﬁtting those observations. We do this 100 times, and ﬁnd
a distribution of amplitudes that is consistent with our
ﬁtting of the continuous data. Therefore, we conclude
that the sampling of the phase curve into snapshots is
not the cause of the diﬀerence in amplitudes.

Rather than assume there is an astrophysical source of
this discrepancy, we assume instead that the uncertain-
ties on our photometry points are underestimated be-
cause they do not include a contribution from the persis-
tent images. Persistent images varying between snapshot
observations (see §6.1.1) will cause the snapshot observa-
tions to vary from one epoch to another, which can cause
changes to the measured amplitude of the phase curve.
Increasing the uncertainties on the snapshot photome-
try by 0.0001 brings the measure of phase amplitude in
the snapshot to within the uncertainties of those mea-
sured for the continuous dataset. This is consistent with

the level as estimated above in our search for persistent
images in some of the observations after our snapshots.

6.3. Do Snapcurves Work?

We present two additional lines of evidence that the
snapshot strategy can successfully obtain phase curves.
First, we look for residual time correlated noise in our
snapshot observations. Second, we look at snapshot ob-
servations of a calibration star which should recover a
ﬂat light curve.

6.3.1. Time Correlated Noise

To test how well our reduction technique removes
sources of correlated noise, we compare the rate at which
binning reduces the noise to the expected rate of square
root of the number of data points for strictly poisson
noise. Figure 12 shows this comparison for each of the
snapshot AORs. To generate the Y-axis, we subtract the
(fully independent) Wong et al. (2015b) model from each
of our snapshot data, and measure the RMS of the resid-
uals. We then bin the data on increasingly large scales
and plot the results as a function of number of frames
per bin. Because we only have 30 minute long AORs,
these plots show signiﬁcant scatter as the total number
of bins per AOR gets small. The solid black line is the
expected binning relation for poisson noise. The dashed
grey line comes from the Wong et al. (2015b) reduction
of the WASP-14b continuous staring mode dataset. This
continuous dataset has a much longer duration and is
therefore able to probe larger binning scales. The median
of all snapshot AORs is shown with the black squiggly
line, and similar to the Wong et al. (2015b) reduction,
is within about 10% of Poisson noise. For reference, our
own reduction of the continuous staring mode data also
follows the Wong et al. (2015b) slope.

The bright pink points at phase -0.4 in the light curve
plots which appear more extended in corrected ﬂux as
a function of phase and time also diverge strongly from
poisson slope in this plot (ﬂatten out to a normalized
residual RMS of 0.2 by 20 binned frames). The cause
for the increased scatter is unknown. The observations
taken after this particular AOR are too short, and in-
clude bright stars, to determine if there could be an un-
derlying rapidly-varying latent. There is nothing obvi-
ously unusual about the position, noise pixel or back-
ground level in that AOR as seen in Figures 4 and 6, so
we do not suspect the gain map correction.

Figure 12 shows that the nearest neighbor gain map
method presented in this paper is 1) consistent with other
reduction methods in that we have adequately removed
the intrapixel gain eﬀect, 2) multi-epoch data has not
added new sources of correlated noise, and 3) that it is
able to nearly reach the poisson noise limit for our 30
minute AORs. The heater cycling timescale for these
datasets is of order 30 - 40 minutes.

6.3.2. Snapshots of HD 158460

Our second line of evidence in favor of the snapshot
technique comes from a secondary dataset where we ob-
served one of the IRAC calibration stars, HD 158460,
with a set of 18 snapshot observations. HD 158460 was
vetted by the IRAC project to be a non-variable source,
and is therefore used as part of the ongoing IRAC ﬂux

10

Krick et al.

calibration eﬀort (Reach et al. 2005).
It has a spec-
tral type of A1Vn C. The goal of this experiment is to
see if our snapshot technique could recover the ’truth’
light curve of this non-variable calibration star, ie., a
ﬂat line as a function of time. This test can’t be per-
formed on any of the planet hosting stars because they
have astrophysical variability in their light curves (tran-
sits/eclipses/phase variations) whereas the IRAC cali-
brators have been vetted by the IRAC team to not have
variations (Reach et al. 2005). Any variations from ﬂat
will indicate inconsistencies in the snapshot technique.
These 18 snapshot observations were observed and re-
duced in exactly the same way as those of WASP-14b.
The left side of ﬁgure 13 shows the corrected ﬂuxes of
HD 158460 as a function of time over the ∼ 200 hours
baseline of observations. Each colored data point repre-
sents an unbinned ﬂux measurement. Black boxes show
all the data from one AOR binned together. The dashed
black line is the result of a chi-squared linear ﬁt to the
binned datapoints.

To test the level to which this light curve is ﬂat, we
performed a Monte Carlo simulation using 1000 instances
of a Fischer-Yates shuﬄe to randomly switch the time-
stamps associated with each ﬂux measurement, and then
re-measure the slope. This shuﬄing must be done on
the binned data points, otherwise points from one AOR
would get shuﬄed into another AOR. The right side of
ﬁgure 13 shows a histogram of the slopes of resulting
light curves from the simulation. The slope of the chi-
squared ﬁtted linear ﬁt to the snapshot dataset is shown
with a dashed line. The histogram color changes from
gray to blue inside of 1 FWHM. The slope of the mea-
sured ﬁt to the snapshot dataset is within one sigma of
zero, demonstrating that the snapshot technique recov-
ers a light curve within one sigma of the ’truth’ light
curve, which is a successful validation of the snapshot
technique.

6.4. Phase Curve Repeatability

Because the snapshot dataset covers multiple orbits,
any variation from one phase to the next can be seen in
the variation between snapshots that randomly landed at
similar phase in Figure 7. Astrophysical variation from
phase to phase would imply we had observed exoplanet
weather across multiple periods. We ﬁnd that the maxi-
mum variation between measurements (diﬀerence in av-
erage ﬂux) at a single phase is 0.1%. This implies that
the maximum variation from one phase to the next is less
than or equal to 0.1%. The likely cause for the 0.1% vari-
ation in the residuals is the persistent images as discussed
in section 3.3, and therefore we likely have detected no
signiﬁcant astrophysical variation from one phase to the
next. To date there are no other descriptions of mea-
sured phase to phase variations in the literature as it
is extremely diﬃcult to disentangle the instrumental ef-
fects from astrophysical eﬀects at such low levels. There
is some discussion in theoretical works of orbit to orbit
variability, predicted to be less than of order 1% (Lewis
et al. 2010; Kataria et al. 2013; Heng & Showman 2015)

data during transit and eclipse, so we explore this topic
brieﬂy with the goal of seeing if we ﬁnd eclipse depth
variation as a function of time in the 3.5 year baseline
between the ﬁrst literature measurements and this paper.
Figure 14 shows a zoom-in for comparison of our snap-
shot and continuous staring mode data at both transit
(left) and eclipse(right). Our snapshot transit point is
one of those eﬀected by the latent as noted in the super-
dark analysis, so while our value is consistent with that
in the literature, we make no comment on the change in
transit depth as a function of time.
We measure an eclipse depth (with two snapshots
in eclipse) to be 0.222 ± 0.07%. The continuous star-
ing mode data includes two secondary eclipses, Wong
et al. (2015b) measure depths to be 0.2115+.0135
−.0114% and
0.2367+0.0096
−0.0142%. From a secondary eclipse observation
in March 2009 (3 - 3.5 years prior to the observations
presented here), Blecic et al. (2013) measure the depth
of the secondary to be 0.224 ± 0.018%. Our measured
eclipse depth is consistent with the range presented in
those papers, and so we see no evidence for an eclipse
depth change as a function of time for WASP-14b.

7. CONCLUSION

In summary, we describe Spitzer IRAC snapshot high
precision photometry of WASP-14b. We describe a new
reduction technique which is now provided for public use
on the Spitzer Science Center website in which we cali-
brate out the shape of the intrapixel gain using a well-
studied ﬂat light curve star. We show three lines of evi-
dence that this technique is eﬀective in measuring phase
curves in a more eﬃcient manner than with continuous
staring mode data. Conclusions speciﬁc to WASP-14b
are that we conﬁrm an eastward hot spot with an am-
plitude of the phase curve between 0.00078 and 0.00098.
We put limits on the phase to phase astrophysical vari-
ation of the system at less than 0.1%, although that is
probably an overestimate and due mainly to instrumen-
tal systematics. Lastly, we see no evidence for a change
in eclipse depth over a 3.5 year baseline from archival
observations to our most recent observations.

The largest limitation of this new technique is the ef-
fect of latent images caused by previous observations on
the stability of the photometry. For future snapshot ob-
servations we recommend observing a dither pattern of a
blank ﬁeld after each snapshot to check for the existence
of persistent images and hopefully to remove that “dark
pattern” from the data. To be even more safe, it may be
advantageous to observe all snapshots in the same visi-
bility window so we are not dealing with very diﬀerent
low level latents. Of course, there can always be local in
time latents, but the ﬁrst recommendation should help
with understanding those patterns.

It was useful to this paper to have a snapshot obser-
vation in transit and in eclipse, mostly as checks on the
phase curve shape. For this dataset it happened ran-
domly but fortuitously. In the future, it might therefore
be useful to speciﬁcally schedule an observation both at
transit and eclipse.

6.5. Transit and Secondary Eclipse Depth

This project was not speciﬁcally designed to measure
transit or eclipse depths, however we do have snapshot

We thank the referee Nikole Lewis for useful sugges-
tions which have greatly improved the manuscript. This
research has made use of data from the Infrared Process-

WASP-14b Snapshots

11

ing and Analysis Center/California Institute of Technol-
ogy, funded by the National Aeronautics and Space Ad-
ministration and the National Science Foundation. This
work was based on observations obtained with the Spitzer
Space Telescope, which is operated by the Jet Propulsion
Laboratory, California Institute of Technology under a
contract with NASA. This research has made use of the
NASA Exoplanet Archive, which is operated by the Cal-
ifornia Institute of Technology, under contract with the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration under
the Exoplanet Exploration Program. This research has
made use of the NASA/ IPAC Infrared Science Archive,
which is operated by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Cal-
ifornia Institute of Technology, under contract with the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration. This
research has made use of the SIMBAD database, op-
erated at CDS, Strasbourg, France. This research has
made use of exoplanet.eu. Facilities: Spitzer (IRAC)

REFERENCES

Ballard, S., Charbonneau, D., Deming, D., et al. 2010, PASP,

122, 1341

Blecic, J., Harrington, J., Madhusudhan, N., et al. 2013, ApJ,

779, 5

Burrows, A., Budaj, J., & Hubeny, I. 2008, ApJ, 678, 1436
Burrows, A., Rauscher, E., Spiegel, D. S., & Menou, K. 2010,

ApJ, 719, 341

Burrows, A., Sudarsky, D., & Hubeny, I. 2006a, ApJ, 650, 1140
—. 2006b, ApJ, 650, 1140
Campo, C. J., Harrington, J., Hardy, R. A., et al. 2011, ApJ, 727,

125

Charbonneau, D., Allen, L. E., Megeath, S. T., et al. 2005a, ApJ,

626, 523

—. 2005b, ApJ, 626, 523
Ciardi, D. R., von Braun, K., Bryden, G., et al. 2011, AJ, 141, 108
Cooper, C. S., & Showman, A. P. 2005, ApJL, 629, L45
Cowan, N. B., & Agol, E. 2008, ApJL, 678, L129
—. 2011, ApJ, 726, 82
Cowan, N. B., Agol, E., & Charbonneau, D. 2007a, MNRAS, 379,

641

—. 2007b, MNRAS, 379, 641
Cowan, N. B., Machalek, P., Croll, B., et al. 2012, ApJ, 747, 82
Crossﬁeld, I. J. M., Barman, T., Hansen, B. M. S., Tanaka, I., &

Kodama, T. 2012a, ApJ, 760, 140

Crossﬁeld, I. J. M., Hansen, B. M. S., Harrington, J., et al. 2010,

ApJ, 723, 1436

Crossﬁeld, I. J. M., Knutson, H., Fortney, J., et al. 2012b, ApJ,

752, 81

Deming, D., Seager, S., Richardson, L. J., & Harrington, J. 2005,

Nature, 434, 740

Deming, D., Knutson, H., Agol, E., et al. 2011, ApJ, 726, 95
Deming, D., Knutson, H., Kammer, J., et al. 2015, ApJ, 805, 132
Demory, B.-O., de Wit, J., Lewis, N., et al. 2013, ApJL, 776, L25
Ehrenreich, D., & D´esert, J.-M. 2011, A&A, 529, A136
Fazio, G. G., Hora, J. L., Allen, L. E., et al. 2004, ApJS, 154, 10
Fortney, J. J., Cooper, C. S., Showman, A. P., Marley, M. S., &

Freedman, R. S. 2006, ApJ, 652, 746

Fortney, J. J., Lodders, K., Marley, M. S., & Freedman, R. S.

2008, ApJ, 678, 1419

Grillmair, C. J., Burrows, A., Charbonneau, D., et al. 2008,

Nature, 456, 767

Harrington, J., Hansen, B. M., Luszcz, S. H., et al. 2006, Science,

314, 623

Heng, K., & Showman, A. P. 2015, Annual Review of Earth and

Planetary Sciences, 43, 509

Ingalls, J. G., Krick, J. E., Carey, S. J., et al. 2012, in Society of

Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference
Series, Vol. 8442, Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation
Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series

Johnson, J. A., Winn, J. N., Albrecht, S., et al. 2009, PASP, 121,

1104

Joshi, Y. C., Pollacco, D., Collier Cameron, A., et al. 2009,

MNRAS, 392, 1532

Kataria, T., Showman, A. P., Lewis, N. K., et al. 2013, ApJ, 767,

76

Knutson, H. A., Charbonneau, D., Burrows, A., O’Donovan,

F. T., & Mandushev, G. 2009a, ApJ, 691, 866

Knutson, H. A., Charbonneau, D., Cowan, N. B., et al. 2009b,

ApJ, 703, 769

Knutson, H. A., Howard, A. W., & Isaacson, H. 2010, ApJ, 720,

1569

Knutson, H. A., Charbonneau, D., Allen, L. E., et al. 2007a,

Nature, 447, 183

—. 2007b, Nature, 447, 183
Knutson, H. A., Charbonneau, D., Cowan, N. B., et al. 2009c,

ApJ, 690, 822

Knutson, H. A., Lewis, N., Fortney, J. J., et al. 2012, ApJ, 754, 22
Knutson, H. A., Fulton, B. J., Montet, B. T., et al. 2014, ApJ,

785, 126

Krick, J., Ingalls, J., Carey, S., et al. 2015, IRAC High Precision

Photometry Website, http://irachpp.spitzer.caltech.edu

Krick, J. E., Glaccum, W. J., Carey, S. J., et al. 2012, ApJ, 754,

53

Krick, J. E., Surace, J. A., Thompson, D., et al. 2009, ApJS, 185,

85

Laughlin, G., Deming, D., Langton, J., et al. 2009, Nature, 457,

562

Lewis, N. K., Showman, A. P., Fortney, J. J., et al. 2010, ApJ,

720, 344

Lewis, N. K., Knutson, H. A., Showman, A. P., et al. 2013, ApJ,

766, 95

Madhusudhan, N. 2012, ApJ, 758, 36
Maxted, P. F. L., Anderson, D. R., Doyle, A. P., et al. 2013,

MNRAS, 428, 2645

Menou, K., & Rauscher, E. 2010, ApJ, 713, 1174
Mighell, K. J. 2005, MNRAS, 361, 861
Nadaraya, E. A. 2006, Theory of Probability & Its Applications,

9, 141

Paulson, D. B., Cochran, W. D., & Hatzes, A. P. 2004, AJ, 127,

3579

Perez-Becker, D., & Showman, A. P. 2013, ApJ, 776, 134
Reach, W. T., Megeath, S. T., Cohen, M., et al. 2005, PASP, 117,

978

Santos, N. C., Mayor, M., Naef, D., et al. 2000, A&A, 361, 265
Schwartz, J. C., & Cowan, N. B. 2015, MNRAS, 449, 4192
Showman, A. P., Lewis, N. K., & Fortney, J. J. 2015, ApJ, 801, 95
Sing, D. K., & L´opez-Morales, M. 2009, A&A, 493, L31
Spiegel, D. S., Silverio, K., & Burrows, A. 2009, ApJ, 699, 1487
Stevenson, K. B., Harrington, J., Fortney, J. J., et al. 2012, ApJ,

754, 136

Stevenson, K. B., D´esert, J.-M., Line, M. R., et al. 2014, Science,

346, 838

Thrastarson, H. T., & Cho, J. Y. 2010, ApJ, 716, 144
Todorov, K. O., Deming, D., Knutson, H. A., et al. 2012, ApJ,

746, 111

—. 2013, ApJ, 770, 102
Watson, G. S. 1964, Sankhy¯a: The Indian Journal of Statistics,

Series A (1961-2002), 26, 359

Werner, M. W., Roellig, T. L., Low, F. J., et al. 2004, ApJS, 154,

1

Wong, I., Knutson, H. A., Kataria, T., et al. 2015a, ArXiv

e-prints, arXiv:1512.09342

Wong, I., Knutson, H. A., Lewis, N. K., et al. 2015b, ApJ, 811,

122

Zellem, R. T., Lewis, N. K., Knutson, H. A., et al. 2014, ApJ,

790, 53

Zhao, M., Monnier, J. D., Swain, M. R., Barman, T., & Hinkley,

S. 2012, ApJ, 744, 122

12

Krick et al.

Table 1

Summary of Observations

star

RA , DEC 4.5 ﬂux

J2000

mJy

Dates

Observed

Exptime # of
AORs

(s)

PIDs

80016

80073

1331

46

5

18

332

manya

WASP-14b snaps

WASP-14b stares

HD 158460 calstar

BD+67 1044 pmap

14:33:06.0
+21:53:41
14:33:06.0
+21:53:41
17:25:41.3
+60:05:23.8
17:58:54.7
+67:47:36.9

58

58

965

642

2012 Sep 07
2013 Sep 16
2012 Apr 24
2012 Apr 26
2012 Jan 13
2012 Jan 20

2011 Mar
2012 Sep

2

2

0.1

0.1

a 1320, 1326, 1328,1331, 1333, 1336, 1338, 1346, 1658, 1659, 1669

Summary of Phase Curve Fitting Results

Table 2

Parameters

Wong et al.

pmap-continuous

pmap-snapshots

Period(days)

2.2437651

Inclination(degrees)

a/R∗

k = ecos(ω)
h = esin(ω)

T0

Rp/R∗

depth of 1 eclipse
depth of 2 eclipse

c1
c2
c3
c4

ramp1
ramp2

phase amplitude

phase shift

84.63
5.98

-0.0247
-0.0792

56042.687

0.09421
0.002115
0.002367

8.06e-04±1.3e-05
1.30e-04±1.7e-05
5.23e-05±1.5e-05
4.51e-05±1.6e-05

0

7.86e-04±2.4E-5

0.07
9.4±2.5

· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·

· · ·
· · ·

· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·

· · ·
· · ·

7.43e-04±1.0e-06
2.17e-04±1.4e-06
2.73e-05±1.2e-06
8.97e-05±1.3e-06

9.45e-04±2.9e-05
1.19e-04±3.9e-05
-2.09e-04±3.7e-05
-1.21e-04±3.5e-05

7.85e-04±1E-6

16.15±2.5

9.8e-04±2.85E-5

11.0±2.5

Note. — Empty values in the table indicate those values are ﬁxed to the Wong

et al. (2015b) values. We list them here for completeness.

WASP-14b Snapshots

13

Figure 1. Number of Required Observations: Left panel: Exam-
ple of simulation: shown are the ’true’ phase curve (solid line), 35
randomly simulated, phased data points (30-min long per point)
with estimated error bars (based on a source which is one third
as bright as our target), and the corresponding ﬁt to these data
points (dashed line) where the ﬁtted amplitude diﬀers from the
input by 20%. Right panel: Results of the simulations: number of
data points necessary to recover the amplitude of the input phase
curve to within 20% (solid line) and 40% (dashed line). The small
tick at the beginning of the curves is due to the fact that the χ2 ﬁt
is unreliable for low data numbers. This simulation ﬁnds that 35
epochs of observations per target can achieve 20% (40%) precision
in characterizing the phase curve at the 77% (99%) conﬁdence level
for these faintest targets, and will do much better for brighter ones
such as WASP-14b. See §2 for more details.

14

Krick et al.

Figure 2. Noise sources in IRAC high precision photometry.
Black diagonal line shows the poisson noise due to a half-full well
source. Noise due to that source’s background and readnoise are
shown in gray diagonal and are negligible for this work. The
strength of the intrapixel gain eﬀect is shown for both channels
as horizontal light gray lines. Note that we choose to observe in
Ch2 in large part because its intrapixel gain eﬀect is lower than
Ch1. Horizontal lines for 1%, 0.1%, and 70 ppm eﬀects are shown
for reference. Also noted as dashed lines are estimates for where
latent and bias pattern noise will eﬀect the photometry. See §3 for
more details.

Source PoissonReadnoiseBkgd PoissonLatent & Bias Patternch2 Pixphasech1 Pixphase1% TransitEclipse0.1% Phase,70 ppm Superearth1101001000Binning Scale (N frames)110100100010000Noise (Electrons)0.11.010.0Binning Scale (Min.)WASP-14b Snapshots

15

Figure 3. Photometric Stability as a Function of Time: 3.6µm
on the top, and 4.5µm on the bottom. This plot shows aperture
photometry of the ensemble of calibration stars over the entire
mission to date. There is a slight degradation as a function of
time which is possibly due to radiation damage to the optics. The
gap around six years is the transition from cryo to warm where for
a short time we used a diﬀerent calibration which will eﬀect the
aperture ﬂuxes. See §3.2 for more details.

16

Krick et al.

Figure 4. WASP-14b raw data as a function of phase on the left and time in days on the right. Each AOR is color coded with the
exception of X and Y FWHM where XFWHM is shown in blue and YFWHM is shown in black. All the data are in reasonable ranges of
the important variables shown. The time plot has a discontinuity of about a year between the ﬁrst 35 and the last 11 AORs shown by the
diagonal dot-dashed lines. See §5.2 for more details.

15.015.3X position15.015.3Y position-0.4-0.20.00.20.4Phase0.991.001.01Norm. Flux4.05.06.07.0Noise Pixel0.801.001.20Norm. Bkgd2.002.10X & Y FWHM15.015.3X position15.015.3Y position05101520350355Time(Days)0.991.001.01Norm. Flux4.05.06.07.0Noise Pixel0.801.001.20Norm. Bkgd2.002.10X & Y FWHMWASP-14b Snapshots

17

Figure 5. A zoom in on WASP-14b raw data as a function of time for four random AORs spread throughout the set of observations.
Each AOR is color coded with the exception of X and Y FWHM where XFWHM is shown in blue and YFWHM is shown in black. . See
§5.2 for more details.

14.9015.0015.1015.2015.30X position14.9015.0015.1015.2015.30Y position1.902.002.102.20X & Y FWHM4.05.06.07.0Noise Pixel0.801.001.20Norm. Bkgd0.00.10.20.30.4Time(hours)0.991.001.01Norm. Flux18

Krick et al.

Figure 6. Greyscale image of the gain variations within a sin-
gle pixel at the center of the subarray. The centroid positions of
WASP-14b snapshot AORs are shown in the same color as the
other WASP-14b ﬁgures. See §5.2 for more details.

WASP-14b Snapshots

19

Figure 7. Final Photometry of WASP-14b. Gray points show
our reduction of the continuous staring mode data. Colored points
show the snapshot data. All have been binned on the same
timescale and normalized to the level in secondary eclipse. Zoom-
ins on the transit and eclipse are shown in Figure 14. See §5.3 for
more details.

20

Krick et al.

Figure 8. Flux vs. Time over the 1 year of snapshot observations. The x-axis is in number of periods since the ﬁrst snapshot observation.
Gray points are phased continuous staring mode observations repeated over many periods. Colored points are the snapshot data. Binning
is the same for all data. See §5.3 for more details.

0246810Number of Periods0.9900.9951.000Normalized Corrected Flux158160162164166168Number of Periods0.9900.9951.000Normalized Corrected FluxWASP-14b Snapshots

21

Figure 9. Left: Median Stack of 80 images taken after a set of snapshot observations with full array frame time of 6s. Right: Median stack
of 10 images taken after a diﬀerent snapshot with full array frame time of 0.4s. The green squares show the location of the subarray ﬁeld
of view. There are clearly negative (more darkly colored) persistent images in the subarray ﬁeld of view in one of these median stacks and
not obviously in the other. The darkly colored vertical stripes are persistent images from a column-wise eﬀect known as column pull-down.
The diagonal latent in the right side of the ﬁgure is a slew latent where the telescope must have slewed across a bright star at some time
prior to these observations. See §6.1.1 for more details.

22

Krick et al.

Figure 10. Corrected ﬂux as a function of time. Fluxes for all 46
snapshot AORs have been binned together. Time is binned into 4
sections to look for trends as a function of time. Y-scale range is
0.02%. There is no electronic ramp from the beginning to the end
of the snapshot observations to within 50-100ppm, which is well
below our phase curve amplitude signal. See §5.5 for more details.

01234bins0.999900.999951.000001.000051.00010Normalized Corrected FluxWASP-14b Snapshots

23

Figure 11. Fits to the snapshot and continuous staring mode
datasets. Data are binned roughly by 64 photometry points. The
red line is the ﬁt from this paper to the pmap reduction of the con-
tinuous staring mode data, the cyan line is the ﬁt to the snapshot
data, and the yellow line is the Wong et al. (2015b) ﬁt to their
reduction of the continuous staring mode data(practically indistin-
guishable from the red line). The cyan line ﬁt to the snapshot data
is slightly irregular at transit and eclipse because there isn’t enough
data in ingress and egress to provide a smooth ﬁt. An extra 0.01%
has been added to the error bars of all data in the AORs which we
know are eﬀected by latent images(most notably those in transit).
See §6.2 for more details.

5.60412×1045.60421×1045.60431×1045.60440×104BJD0.9900.9951.0001.005Relative Flux24

Krick et al.

Figure 12.
Normalized Residual RMS versus binning size in
number of frames on the bottom and minutes on the top. Each
colored line represents a single AOR. Because our observations are
only 30 min long, the RMS measurement has a lot of scatter in it at
binning scales greater than a few minutes. The straight solid black
line is poisson noise. The gray dashed line is the same measure-
ment for the continuous staring mode data taken from Wong et al.
(2015b). The squiggly black line is the median over all snapshots.
See §6.3.1 for more details.

110100Number of frames0.010.101.00Normalized Residual RMSWASP-14b Snapshots

25

Figure 13. Snapshots of a calibration star. Left: Light curve of a calibration star where each AOR is shown both unbinned with colored
points and as a single binned black square. Right: A monte carlo simulation of possible slopes of ﬁtted lines to this data set. The dashed
line shows the chi-squared ﬁt to the actual snapshot observations from the left plot. FWHM of a gaussian ﬁt to the histogram is indicated
by a change in color from gray to blue. Snapshot observations are within one sigma of a ﬂat light curve. See §6.3.2 for more details.

26

Krick et al.

Figure 14. Comparison of the the transit (left) and secondary eclipse (right) depths between snapshot and continuous staring mode data
reduced in the same way. Gray points are the continuous staring mode data, colored points are the snapshot data. Both plots have been
normalized to the eclipse level. See §6.5 for more details.

−0.10−0.050.000.050.10Orbital Phase0.9951.0001.005Normalized Corrected Flux0.400.450.500.550.60Orbital Phase0.9951.0001.005Normalized Corrected Flux