IEEE Int. Conf. Computer Vision & Pattern Recognition (CVPR) as Oral presentation, 2016

Temporally coherent 4D reconstruction of complex dynamic scenes

Armin Mustafa

Hansung Kim

Jean-Yves Guillemaut

CVSSP, University of Surrey, Guildford, United Kingdom

Adrian Hilton

a.mustafa@surrey.ac.uk

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
8
2

 
 
]

V
C
.
s
c
[
 
 

2
v
1
8
3
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

This paper presents an approach for reconstruction of
4D temporally coherent models of complex dynamic scenes.
No prior knowledge is required of scene structure or camera
calibration allowing reconstruction from multiple moving
cameras. Sparse-to-dense temporal correspondence is inte-
grated with joint multi-view segmentation and reconstruc-
tion to obtain a complete 4D representation of static and
dynamic objects. Temporal coherence is exploited to over-
come visual ambiguities resulting in improved reconstruc-
tion of complex scenes. Robust joint segmentation and re-
construction of dynamic objects is achieved by introducing
a geodesic star convexity constraint. Comparative evalua-
tion is performed on a variety of unstructured indoor and
outdoor dynamic scenes with hand-held cameras and mul-
tiple people. This demonstrates reconstruction of complete
temporally coherent 4D scene models with improved non-
rigid object segmentation and shape reconstruction.
1. Introduction

Existing reconstruction frameworks for general dynamic
scenes commonly operate on a frame-by-frame basis [14,
32] or are limited to simple scenes [15]. Previous work
on indoor and outdoor dynamic scene reconstruction has
shown that joint segmentation and reconstruction across
multiple views gives improved reconstruction [17]. In this
work we build on this concept exploiting temporal coher-
ence of the scene to overcome visual ambiguities inherent in
single frame reconstruction and multiple view segmentation
methods for general scenes. This is illustrated in Figure 1
where the resulting 4D scene reconstruction has temporally
coherent labels and surface correspondence for each object.
We present a sparse-to-dense approach to estimate dense
temporal correspondence and surface reconstruction for
non-rigid objects. Initially sparse 3D feature points are ro-
bustly tracked from wide-baseline image correspondence
using spatio-temporal information to obtain sparse tempo-
ral correspondence and reconstruction. Sparse 3D feature
correspondences are used to constrain optical ﬂow estima-
tion to obtain an initial dense temporally consistent model
of dynamic regions. The initial model is then reﬁned using

Figure 1. Temporally consistent scene reconstruction for Odzemok
dataset colour-coded to show the obtained scene segmentation.
a novel optimisation framework using a geodesic star con-
vexity constraint for simultaneous multi-view segmentation
and reconstruction of non-rigid shape. The proposed ap-
proach overcomes limitations of existing methods allowing
an unsupervised temporally coherent 4D reconstruction of
complete models for general scenes. The scene is automat-
ically decomposed into a set of spatio-temporally coherent
objects as shown in Figure 1. The contributions are as fol-
lows:
• Temporally coherent reconstruction of complex dy-
• A framework for space-time sparse-to-dense segmen-
• Optimisation of dense reconstruction and segmenta-
• Robust and computationally efﬁcient reconstruction of

tion using geodesic star convexity.

tation and reconstruction.

namic scenes.

dynamic scenes by exploiting temporal coherence.

2. Related work
2.1. Temporal multi-view reconstruction

Extensive research has been performed in multi-view re-
construction of dynamic scenes. Most existing approaches
process each time frame independently due to the difﬁculty
of simultaneously estimating temporal correspondence for
non-rigid objects.
Independent per-frame reconstruction
can result in errors due to the inherent visual ambiguity

1

IEEE Int. Conf. Computer Vision & Pattern Recognition (CVPR) as Oral presentation, 2016

caused by occlusion and similar object appearance for gen-
eral scenes. Quantitative evaluation of state-of-the-art tech-
niques for static object reconstruction from multiple views
was presented [39]. Research investigating spatio-temporal
reconstruction across multiple frames [15, 18] requires ac-
curate initialisation, is limited to simple scenes and does
not produce temporally coherent 4D models. A number
of approaches that use temporal information [2, 30, 28] ei-
ther require a large number of closely spaced cameras or
bi-layer segmentation [46, 25] as a constraint for complete
reconstruction. Other approaches for reconstruction of gen-
eral scenes from multiple handheld wide-baseline cameras
[3, 41] exploit prior reconstruction of the background scene
to allow dynamic foreground segmentation and reconstruc-
tion. Recent approaches for spatio-temporal reconstruction
of multi-view data either work on indoor studio data [35] or
for dynamic reconstruction of crowd sourced data [24].
Methods to estimate 3D scene ﬂow have been reported in
the literature [31]. However existing approaches are lim-
ited to narrow baseline correspondence for dynamic scenes.
Scene ﬂow approaches dependent on optical ﬂow [42, 4]
require an accurate estimate for most of the pixels which
fails in the case of large motion. The approach presented in
this paper is for general dynamic indoor or outdoor scenes
with large non-rigid motions and no prior knowledge of
scene structure. Temporal correspondence and reconstruc-
tion are simultaneously estimated to produce a 4D model of
the complete scene with both static and dynamic objects.
2.2. Multi-view video segmentation

In the ﬁeld of image segmentation, approaches have been
proposed to provide impressive temporally consistent video
segmentation [16, 37, 34, 45]. Hierarchical segmentation
based on graphs was proposed in [16], directed acyclic
graph were used to propose an object followed by segmen-
tation in [45] and [37, 34] used optical ﬂow. All of these
methods work only for monocular videos. Recently a num-
ber of approaches have been proposed for multi-view fore-
ground object segmentation by exploiting appearance sim-
ilarity [12, 11, 27, 29, 44] . These approaches assume a
static background and different colour distributions for the
foreground and background which limits applicability for
general complex scenes and non-rigid objects.
To address this issue we introduce a novel method
for spatio-temporal multi-view segmentation of dynamic
scenes using shape constraints. Single image segmenta-
tion techniques using shape constraints provide good re-
sults for complex scene segmentation [19](convex and con-
cave shapes), but requires manual interaction. The pro-
posed approach performs multi-view video segmentation
by initializing the foreground object model using spatio-
temporal information from wide-baseline feature corre-
spondence followed by a multi-layer optimization frame-
work using geodesic star convexity to constrain the segmen-

tation. Our multi-view formulation naturally enforces co-
herent segmentation between views and also resolves ambi-
guities such as the similarity of background and foreground.
2.3. Joint segmentation and reconstruction

Joint segmentation and reconstruction methods simulta-
neously estimate multi-view segmentation or matting with
reconstruction and have been shown to given improved per-
formance for complex scenes. A number of approaches
have been introduced for joint optimization. However, these
are either limited to static scenes [43, 20] or process each
frame independently thereby failing to enforce temporal
consistency [8, 32, 17]. A joint formulation for multi-view
video was proposed for sports data and indoor sequences
in [17] and for challenging outdoor scenes in [32]. Re-
cent work proposed joint reconstruction and segmentation
on monocular video achieving semantic segmentation of
static scenes. Other joint segmentation and reconstruction
approaches that use temporal information based on patch re-
ﬁnement [40, 36] work only for rigid objects. An approach
based on optical ﬂow and graph cuts was shown to work
well for non-rigid objects in indoor settings but requires
silhouettes and is computationally expensive [18]. Practi-
cal application of temporally coherent joint estimation re-
quires approaches that work on non-rigid objects for general
scenes in uncontrolled environments.

The proposed approach overcomes the limitations of
previous methods enabling robust wide-baseline spatio-
temporal
reconstruction and segmentation of general
scenes. Temporal correspondence is exploited to overcome
visual ambiguities giving improved reconstruction together
with temporally coherent 4D scene models.
3. Methodology

This work is motivated by the limitations of existing
multiple view reconstruction methods which either work in-
dependently at each frame resulting in errors due to visual
ambiguity and occlusion [14, 17, 32], or commonly require
restrictive assumptions on scene complexity and structure
[41, 18]. We address these issues by introducing tempo-
ral coherence in the reconstruction to reduce ambiguity, en-
sure consistent non-rigid structure initialisation at succes-
sive frames and improve reconstruction quality.
3.1. Overview

A novel automatic multi-object dynamic segmentation
and reconstruction method based on the geodesic star-
convexity shape constraint is proposed to obtain a 4D model
of the scene including both dynamic and static objects. An
overview of the framework is presented in Figure 2 :
Sparse reconstruction: The input to the system is mul-
tiple view wide-baseline video with known camera in-
trinsics.
Extrinsic parameters are calibrated automati-
cally [21, 23] using sparse wide-baseline feature matching.
Segmentation-based feature detection (SFD) [33] is used to

2

IEEE Int. Conf. Computer Vision & Pattern Recognition (CVPR) as Oral presentation, 2016

Figure 2. Temporally consistent scene reconstruction framework

obtain a relatively large number of sparse features suitable
for wide-baseline matching which are distributed through-
out the scene including on dynamic objects such as people.
SFD features are matched between views using a SIFT de-
scriptor giving a sparse 3D point-cloud and camera extrin-
sics for each time instant. The sparse point cloud is clus-
tered in 3D [38] with each cluster representing a unique
foreground object. Objects with insufﬁcient detected fea-
tures are reconstructed as part of the scene background.
Initial dense complete scene reconstruction: Sparse re-
construction at each time instant is clustered in 3D[38] to
obtain an initial coarse object segmentation. Delaunay tri-
angulation [13] is performed on the set of back projected
sparse features for each object in the camera image plane
with best visibility. This is propagated to the other views
using the sparse feature matching to obtain an initial ob-
ject reconstruction. This reconstruction is reﬁned using the
framework explained in Section 3.3 to obtain segmentation
and dense reconstruction of each object.
Accurate reconstruction of the background object is often
challenging due to the lack of features, repetitive texture,
occlusion, textureless regions and relatively narrow base-
line for distant objects. Hence we create a rough geometric
proxy of the background by computing the minimum ori-
ented bounding box for the sparse 3D point cloud using
principal component analysis (PCA) [10]. The dense re-
construction of the foreground objects and background are
combined to obtain a full scene reconstruction at the ﬁrst
time instant. For consecutive time instants only dynamic
objects are reconstructed with the segmentation and recon-
struction of static objects retained which reduces computa-
tional complexity.
Temporally coherent reconstruction of dynamic objects:
Dynamic object regions are detected at each time instant by
sparse temporal correspondence of SFD features at succes-
sive frames. Sparse temporal feature correspondence allows
propagation of the dense reconstruction for each dynamic
object to obtain an initial approximation (Section 3.2). The

initial estimate is reﬁned using a joint optimisation of seg-
mentation and reconstruction based on geodesic star con-
vexity (Section 3.3). A single 3D model for each dynamic
object is obtained by fusion of the view-dependent depth
maps using Poisson surface reconstruction [26].
Subsequent sections present the novel contributions of this
work in identifying the dynamic points, initialisation using
space-time information and reﬁnement using geodesic star
convexity to obtain a dense reconstruction. The approach is
demonstrated to outperform state-of-the-art dynamic scene
reconstruction and gives a temporally coherent 4D model.
3.2. Initial temporally coherent reconstruction

Once the static scene reconstruction is obtained for the
ﬁrst frame, we perform temporally coherent dynamic scene
reconstruction at successive time instants. Dynamic regions
are identiﬁed using temporal correspondence of sparse 3D
features. These points are used to obtain an initial dense
model for the dynamic objects using optical ﬂow. The initial
coarse reconstruction for each dynamic region is reﬁned in
the subsequent optimization step with respect to each cam-
era view. Dynamic scene objects are identiﬁed from the
temporal correspondence of sparse feature points. Sparse
correspondence is then used to propagate an initial model
of the moving object for reﬁnement. Figure 3 presents the
sparse reconstruction and temporal correspondence.

Sparse temporal dynamic feature tracking: Numer-
ous approaches have been proposed to track moving objects
in 2D using either features or optical ﬂow. However these
methods may fail in the case of occlusion, movement par-
allel to the view direction, large motions and moving cam-
eras. To overcome these limitations we match the sparse
3D feature points obtained using SFD from multiple wide-
baseline views at each time instant. The use of sparse 3D
features is robust to large non-rigid motion, occlusions and
camera movement. SFD [33] detects sparse features which
are stable across wide-baseline views and consecutive time
instants for a moving camera and dynamic scene. Sparse
3D feature matches between consecutive time instants are

3

IEEE Int. Conf. Computer Vision & Pattern Recognition (CVPR) as Oral presentation, 2016

Sparse-to-dense model reconstruction: Dynamic 3D fea-
ture points are used to initialize the segmentation and recon-
struction of the initial model. This avoids the assumption of
static backgrounds and prior scene segmentation commonly
used to initialise multiple view reconstruction with a coarse
visual-hull approximation [17]. Temporal coherence also
provides a more accurate initialisation to overcome visual
ambiguities at individual frames. Figure 6 illustrates the
use of temporal coherence for reconstruction initialisation
and reﬁnement. Dynamic feature correspondence is used to
identify the mesh for each dynamic object. This mesh is
back projected on each view to obtain the region of interest.
Optical ﬂow [5] is performed on the projected mask for each
view in the temporal domain using the dynamic feature cor-
respondences over time as initialization. Dense multi-view
wide-baseline correspondences from the previous frame are
propagated to the current frame using the information from
the ﬂow vectors to obtain dense multi-view matches in the
current frame. The matches are triangulated in 3D to obtain
a reﬁned 3D dense model of the dynamic object for the cur-
rent frame.
For dynamic scenes, a new object may enter the scene or
a new part may appear as the object moves. To allow the
introduction of new objects and object parts we also use in-
formation from the cluster of sparse points for each dynamic
object. The cluster corresponding to the dynamic features
is identiﬁed and static points are removed. This ensures that
the set of new points not only contain the dynamic features
but also the unprocessed points which represent new parts
of the object. These points are added to the reﬁned sparse
model of the dynamic object. To handle the new objects we
detect new clusters at each time instant and consider them
as dynamic regions.
Once we have a set of dense 3D points for each dynamic
object, Poisson surface reconstruction is performed on the
set of sparse points to obtain an initial coarse model of each
dynamic region R, which is subsequently reﬁned using the
optimization framework (Section 3.3).

3.3. Temporally coherent dense reconstruction

The initial reconstruction and segmentation from dense
temporal feature correspondence is reﬁned using a joint op-
timization framework. A novel shape constraint is intro-
duced based on geodesic star convexity which has previ-

Figure 6. Initial sparse-to-dense model reconstruction workﬂow

4

Figure 3. Sparse temporal dynamic feature tracking algorithm: Re-
sults on two datasets; Min and Max is the minimum and maximum
movement in the 3D points respectively.

Figure 4. Spatio-temporal consistency check for 3D tracking

Figure 5. Sparse dynamic feature tracking for Juggler dataset.
back-projected to each view. These features are matched
temporally using a SIFT descriptor to identify the moving
points. Robust matching is achieved by enforcing multiple
view consistency for the temporal feature correspondence
in each view as illustrated in Figure 4. Each match must
satisfy the constraint:

(cid:107)dt,v(p) + ut,v+1(p + dt,v(p)) − ut,v(p)−
dt,v+1(p + ut,v(p))(cid:107) < 

where p is the feature image point in view v at frame t,
dt,v(p) is the disparity at frame t from view v to v + 1,
ut,v(p) is the temporal correspondence from frames t to
t + 1 for view v. The multi-view consistency check ensures
that correspondences between any two views remain tem-
porally consistent for successive frames. Matches in the 2D
domain are sensitive to camera movement and occlusion,
hence we map the set of reﬁned matches into 3D to make
the system robust to camera motion. The Frobenius norm is
applied on the 3D point gradients in all directions [45] to ob-
tain the ‘net’ motion at each sparse point. The ‘net’ motion
between pairs of 3D points for consecutive time instants are
ranked, and the top and bottom 5 percentile values removed.
Median ﬁltering is then applied to identify the dynamic fea-
tures. Figure 5 shows an example with moving cameras.

IEEE Int. Conf. Computer Vision & Pattern Recognition (CVPR) as Oral presentation, 2016

ously been shown to give improved performance in inter-
active image segmentation for structures with ﬁne details
(for example a persons ﬁngers or hair)[19]. In this work the
shape constraint is automatically initialised for each view
from the initial segmentation. The geodesic star-convexity
is integrated as a constraint on the energy minimisation for
joint multi-view reconstruction and segmentation [17]. The
shape constraint is based on the geodesic distance with fore-
ground object initialisation (seeds) as star centres to which
the object shape is restricted. The union formed by multi-
ple object seeds form a geodesic forest. This allows com-
plex shapes to be segmented.
In this work to automati-
cally initialize the segmentation we use the sparse tempo-
ral feature correspondence as star centers (seeds) to build a
geodesic forest automatically. The region outside the ini-
tial coarse reconstruction of all dynamic objects is initial-
ized as the background seed for segmentation as shown in
in Figure 7. The shape of the dynamic object is restricted
by this geodesic distance constraint that depends on the im-
age gradient. Comparison with existing methods for multi-
view segmentation demonstrates improvements in recovery
of ﬁne detail structure as illustrated in Figure 7.

3.3.1 Optimization based on geodesic star convexity
The depth of the initial coarse reconstruction estimate is re-
ﬁned for each dynamic object at a per pixel level. Our goal
is to assign an accurate depth value from a set of depth val-

ues D =(cid:8)d1, ..., d|D|−1, U(cid:9) and assign a layer label from
a set of label values L =(cid:8)l1, ..., l|L |(cid:9) to each pixel p for

the region R of each dynamic object. Each di is obtained by
sampling the optical ray from the camera and U is an un-
known depth value to handle occlusions. This is achieved
by optimisation of a joint cost function [17] for label (seg-
mentation) and depth (reconstruction):
E(l, d) = λdataEdata(d) + λcontrastEcontrast(l)+
(1)
λsmoothEsmooth(l, d) + λcolorEcolor(l)
where, d is the depth at each pixel, l is the layer label for
multiple objects and the cost function terms are deﬁned
in section 3.3.2. This is solved subject to a geodesic star-
convexity constraint on the labels l. A label l is star convex
with respect to center ci, if every point p ∈ l is visible to a
star center ci in set C = {c1, ..., cn} via l in the image x,
where n is the number of star centers[19]. This is expressed
as an energy cost:

E(cid:63)(l|x, C ) =

(2)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)
(cid:26)∞ if lp (cid:54)= lq

E(cid:63)

p,q(lp, lq)

p∈R

q∈Γc,p

∀q ∈ Γc,p, E(cid:63)

(3)
where ∀p ∈ R : p ∈ l ⇔ lp = 1 and Γc,p is the geodesic
path joining p to any star center in set C given by:

0 otherwise

p,q =

Γc,p = arg min
Γ∈Pc,p

L (Γ)

(4)

5

Figure 7. Geodesic star convexity: A region R with star centers C
connected with geodesic distance Γc,p. Segmentation results with
and without geodesic star convexity based optimization are shown
on the right for the Juggler dataset.
where Pc,p denotes the set of all discrete paths between
c and p and L (Γ) is the length of discrete geodesic path
as deﬁned in [19].
In our case we deﬁne the temporal
sparse feature correspondences as star centers, hence the
segmentation will include all the points which are visible
to these sparse features via geodesic distances in the region
R, thereby employing the shape constraint. Since the star
centers are selected automatically, the method is unsuper-
vised. The energy in the Eq. 1 is minimized as follows:
(5)

E(l, d) + E(cid:63)(l|x, C )

⇔ min

min(l,d)

E(l, d)
lS(cid:63)(C )

s.t.

(l,d)

where S(cid:63)(C ) is the set of all shapes which lie within the
geodesic distances wrt to the centers in C . Optimization
of eq. 5, subject to each pixel p in the region R being at
a geodesic distance from the star centers in the set C , is
performed using the α-expansion algorithm for a pixel p by
iterating through the set of labels in L × D [7]. Graph-cut
is used to obtain a local optimum [6].
3.3.2 Energy cost function
For completeness in this section we deﬁne each of the terms
in eq. 1, these are based on previous terms used for joint
optimisation over depth for each pixel introduced in [32],
with modiﬁcation of the color matching term to improve
robustness and extension to multiple labels.
Matching term: The data term for matching between views
is speciﬁed as a measure of photo-consistency as follows:

Edata(d) =(cid:80)

M (p, q) =(cid:80)

(cid:40)

MU ,

p∈P edata(p, dp) =
m(p, q),

i∈Ok

if dp (cid:54)= U
if dp = U

(6)

where P is the 4-connected neighbourhood of pixel p, MU
is the ﬁxed cost of labelling a pixel unknown and q denotes
the projection of the hypothesised point P in an auxiliary
camera where P is a 3D point along the optical ray passing
through pixel p located at a distance dp from the reference
camera. Ok is the set of k most photo-consistent pairs with
reference camera and m(p, q) is inspired from [22].
Contrast term: The contrast term is as follows:

Econtrast(l) =

econtrast(p, q, lp, lq)

(7)

(cid:88)

p,q∈N

IEEE Int. Conf. Computer Vision & Pattern Recognition (CVPR) as Oral presentation, 2016

Figure 8. Comparison of segmentation on benchmark static
datasets using geodesic star-convexity.

Figure 9. Comparison of segmentation with Kowdle.

(cid:40)

econtrast(p, q, lp, lq) =

Smoothness term: This term is deﬁned as:

if (lp = lq)
0,
1+ ( + exp−C(p,q)), otherwise
1
(cid:88)
(8)
(cid:40)min(|dp − dq| , dmax),

esmooth(lp, dp, lq, dq) =

esmooth(lp, dp, lq, dq)

Esmooth(l, d) =

(p,q)∈N

(9)

if lp = lq and dp, dq (cid:54)= U
if lp = lq and dp, dq = U
otherwise

0,
dmax,

(10)
dmax is set to 50 times the size of the depth sampling step
deﬁned in Section 3.3.1 for all datasets.
Color term: This term is computed using the negative log
likelihood [6] of the color models learned from the fore-
ground and background markers. The star centers obtained
from the sparse 3D features are foreground markers and for
background markers we consider the region outside the pro-
jected initial coarse reconstruction for each view. The color
models use GMMs with 5 components each for FG/BG
mixed with uniform color models [9] as the markers are
sparse.
(11)
where P (Ip|lp = li) denotes the probability at pixel p in the
reference image belonging to layer li.

−logP (Ip|lp)

(cid:88)

Ecolor(l) =

p∈P

Magician/Dance2
Juggler
Odzemok/Dance1/Ofﬁce

λdata
0.4
0.5
0.4

λc
5.0
5.0
3.0

λsmooth
.0005
.0005
.001

λcolor
0.6
0.4
0.6

Table 2. Parameters used for all datasets: λc represents λcontrast
4. Results and Performance Evaluation

The proposed system is tested on publicly available
multi-view research datasets of indoor and outdoor scenes:

6

Figure 10. Segmentation results for dynamic scenes (Error against
ground-truth is highlighted in red).
static data for segmentation comparison Couch, Chair and
Car[27]; and dynamic data for full evaluation Dance2[1],
Ofﬁce1, Dance11, Odzemok1, Magician and Juggler [3].
Dance1, Dance2 and Ofﬁce are captured from 8 static cam-
eras, Odzemok from 6 static and 2 moving cameras and Ma-
gician and Juggler from 6 moving handheld cameras. More
information is available on the website2.
4.1. Multi-view segmentation evaluation

Segmentation is evaluated against the state-of-the-art
methods for multi-view segmentation Kowdle[27] and
Djelouah[11] for static scenes and joint segmentation recon-
struction per frame Mustafa[32] and using temporal infor-
mation Guillemaut[18] for both static and dynamic scenes.
For static multi-view data the segmentation is initialised as
detailed in Section 3.1 followed by reﬁnement using the
constrained optimisation Section 3.3. For dynamic scenes
the full pipeline with temporal coherence is used as detailed
in 3. Ground-truth is obtained by manually labelling the
foreground for Ofﬁce, Dance1 and Odzemok dataset, and
for other datasets ground-truth is available online. We ini-
tialize all approaches by the same proposed initial coarse
reconstruction for fair comparison.
To evaluate the segmentation we measure completeness as
the ratio of intersection to union with ground-truth[27].
Comparisons are shown in Table 1 and Figure 8 and 9 for
static benchmark datasets and in Table 3 and Figure 10 and
11 for dynamic scenes. Results for multi-view segmentation
of static scenes are more accurate than Djelouah, Mustafa
and Guillemaut and comparable to Kowdle with improved
segmentation of some detail such as the back of the chair.
For dynamic scenes the geodesic star convexity based op-
timization together with temporal consistency gives im-
proved segmentation of ﬁne detail such as the legs of the
table in the Ofﬁce dataset and limbs of the person in the
Juggler, Magician and Dance2 datasets in Figure 10 and
11. This overcomes limitations of previous multi-view per-
frame segmentation.
1http://cvssp.org/data/
2http://cvssp.org/projects/4d/4DRecon/

IEEE Int. Conf. Computer Vision & Pattern Recognition (CVPR) as Oral presentation, 2016

Figure 11. Segmentation results for dynamic scenes on sequence of frames (Error against ground-truth is highlighted in red).

Figure 12. Reconstruction result mesh comparison

Proposed
Dataset
91.2 ± 0.2
Magician
93.3 ± 0.2
Juggler
91.8 ± 0.2
Odzemok
99.5 ± 0.2
Dance1
99.4 ± 0.2
Ofﬁce
99.0 ± 0.2
Dance2
Table 3. Dynamic scene segmentation completeness in %

Guillemaut Mustafa
68.0 ± 0.7
88.7 ± 0.5
84.6 ± 0.6
87.9 ± 0.6
90.1 ± 0.3
89.9 ± 0.3
99.4 ± 0.2
99.2 ± 0.5
99.3 ± 0.4
99.0 ± 0.3
98.6 ± 0.3
99.0 ± 0.2

4.2. Reconstruction evaluation

Reconstruction results obtained using the proposed
method with parameters deﬁned in Table 2 are compared

against Mustafa[32], Guillemaut[18], and Furukawa [14]
for dynamic sequences. Furukawa [14] is a per-frame multi-
view wide-baseline stereo approach which ranks highly on
the middlebury benchmark [39] but does not reﬁne the seg-
mentation.Figure 12 and 13 present qualitative and quan-
titative comparison of our method with the state-of-the-art
approaches. Comparison of reconstructions demonstrates
that the proposed method gives consistently more complete
and accurate models. The colour maps highlight the quanti-
tative differences in reconstruction. As far as we are aware
no ground-truth data exist for dynamic scene reconstruc-

7

IEEE Int. Conf. Computer Vision & Pattern Recognition (CVPR) as Oral presentation, 2016

Dataset Number of Views
Couch
Chair
Car
Table 1. Static segmentation completeness comparison with existing methods on benchmark datasets

Guillemaut Mustafa
98.5 ± 0.2
97.0 ± 0.3
97.9 ± 0.5
98.0 ± 0.5
95.0 ± 0.7
97.6 ± 0.3

Kowdle
99.6 ± 0.1
99.2 ± 0.4
98.0 ± 0.7

Djelouah
99.0 ± 0.2
98.6 ± 0.3
97.0 ± 0.8

Proposed
99.7 ± 0.3
99.1 ± 0.3
98.6 ± 0.4

11
18
44

Figure 13. Reconstruction result comparison with reference mesh and proposed for Dance2 benchmark dataset

Figure 14. Complete scene reconstruction with 4D mesh sequence.

Ofﬁce
Juggler
Dance2

326 s
311 s
381 s
339 s
394 s
312 s

493 s
608 s
598 s
533 s
634 s
432 s

295 s
377 s
394 s
347 s
411 s
323 s

Dataset
Dance1
Magician
Odzemok

Furukawa Guillemaut Mustafa Ours
254 s
325 s
363 s
291 s
378 s
278 s
Table 4. Comparison of computational efﬁciency for dynamic
datasets (time in seconds (s))
tion from real multi-view video. In Figure 13 we present
a comparison with the reference mesh available with the
Dance2 dataset reconstructed using a visual-hull approach.
This comparison demonstrates improved reconstruction of
ﬁne detail with the proposed technique.
In contrast to all previous approaches the proposed method
gives temporally coherent 4D model reconstructions with
dense surface correspondence over time. The introduction
of temporal coherence constrains the reconstruction in re-
gions which are ambiguous on a particular frame such as
the right leg of the juggler in Figure 12 resulting in more
complete shape. Figure 14 shows three complete scene re-
constructions with 4D models of multiple objects. The Jug-
gler and Magician sequences are reconstructed from mov-
ing hand-held cameras.
Computation times for the proposed approach vs other
methods are presented in Table 4. The proposed approach
to reconstruct temporally coherent 4D models is compa-

rable in computation time to per-frame multiple view re-
construction and gives a ∼50% reduction in computation
cost compared to previous joint segmentation and recon-
struction approaches using a known background. This ef-
ﬁciency is achieved through improved per-frame initialisa-
tion based on temporal propagation and the introduction of
the geodesic star constraint in joint optimisation. Further
results can be found in the supplementary material.
5. Conclusion

This paper present a framework for temporally coher-
ent 4D model reconstruction of dynamic scenes from a set
of wide-baseline moving cameras. The approach gives a
complete model of all static and dynamic non-rigid ob-
jects in the scene. Temporal coherence for dynamic objects
addresses limitations of previous per-frame reconstruction
giving improved reconstruction and segmentation together
with dense temporal surface correspondence for dynamic
objects. A sparse-to-dense approach is introduced to es-
tablish temporal correspondence for non-rigid objects us-
ing robust sparse feature matching to initialise dense opti-
cal ﬂow providing an initial segmentation and reconstruc-
tion. Joint reﬁnement of object reconstruction and segmen-
tation is then performed using a multiple view optimisation
with a novel geodesic star convexity constraint that gives
improved shape estimation and is computationally efﬁcient.
Comparison against state-of-the-art techniques for multiple
view segmentation and reconstruction demonstrates signiﬁ-
cant improvement in performance for complex scenes. The
approach enables reconstruction of 4D models for complex
scenes which has not been demonstrated previously.
Limitations: As with previous dynamic scene reconstruc-
tion methods the proposed approach has a number of lim-
itations: persistent ambiguities in appearance between ob-
jects will degrade the improvement achieved with temporal
coherence; scenes with a large number of inter-occluding
dynamic objects will degrade performance; the approach
requires sufﬁcient wide-baseline views to cover the scene.
Acknowledgements:
This research was supported by the European Com-
mission, FP7 Intelligent Management Platform for Ad-
vanced Real-time Media Processes project (grant 316564).

8

IEEE Int. Conf. Computer Vision & Pattern Recognition (CVPR) as Oral presentation, 2016

References
[1] 4d repository, http://4drepository.inrialpes.fr/. In Institut na-
tional de recherche en informatique et en automatique (IN-
RIA) Rhone Alpes. 6

[2] C. Bailer, B. Taetz, and D. Stricker. Flow ﬁelds: Dense corre-
spondence ﬁelds for highly accurate large displacement op-
tical ﬂow estimation. In ICCV, 2015. 2

[3] L. Ballan, G. J. Brostow, J. Puwein, and M. Pollefeys. Un-
structured video-based rendering: Interactive exploration of
casually captured videos. ACM Trans. on Graph., pages 1–
11, 2010. 2, 6

[4] T. Basha, Y. Moses, and N. Kiryati. Multi-view scene ﬂow
estimation: A view centered variational approach. In CVPR,
pages 1506–1513, 2010. 2

[5] J. Bouguet. Pyramidal implementation of the lucas kanade
feature tracker. Intel Corporation, Microprocessor Research
Labs, 2000. 4

[6] Y. Boykov and V. Kolmogorov. An experimental comparison
of min-cut/max- ﬂow algorithms for energy minimization in
vision. PAMI, 26:1124–1137, 2004. 5, 6

[7] Y. Boykov, O. Veksler, and R. Zabih. Fast approximate en-
ergy minimization via graph cuts. PAMI, 23:1222–1239,
2001. 5

[8] N. Campbell, G. Vogiatzis, C. Hernndez, and R. Cipolla. Au-
tomatic 3d object segmentation in multiple views using vol-
umetric graph-cuts. Image and Vision Computing, 28:14 –
25, 2010. 2

[9] P. Das, O. Veksler, V. Zavadsky, and Y. Boykov. Semiau-
tomatic segmentation with compact shape prior. Image and
Vision Computing, 27:206–219, 2009. 6

[10] D. Dimitrov, C. Knauer, K. Kriegel, and G. Rote. On the
bounding boxes obtained by principal component analysis,
2006. 3

[11] A. Djelouah, J.-S. Franco, E. Boyer, F. Le Clerc, and
P. Perez. Multi-view object segmentation in space and time.
In ICCV, pages 2640–2647, 2013. 2, 6

[12] A. Djelouah, J.-S. Franco, E. Boyer, F. Le Clerc, and
P. Perez. Sparse multi-view consistency for object segmen-
tation. PAMI, pages 1–1, 2015. 2

[13] S. Fortune. Handbook of discrete and computational geome-
try. chapter Voronoi Diagrams and Delaunay Triangulations,
pages 377–388. 1997. 3

[14] Y. Furukawa and J. Ponce. Accurate, dense, and robust mul-

tiview stereopsis. PAMI, 32:1362–1376, 2010. 1, 2, 7

[15] B. Goldluecke and M. Magnor. Space-time isosurface evo-
lution for temporally coherent 3d reconstruction. In CVPR,
pages 350–355, 2004. 1, 2

[16] M. Grundmann, V. Kwatra, M. Han, and I. Essa. Efﬁcient
hierarchical graph based video segmentation. CVPR, 2010.
2

[17] J. Y. Guillemaut and A. Hilton. Joint Multi-Layer Segmen-
tation and Reconstruction for Free-Viewpoint Video Appli-
cations. IJCV, 93:73–100, 2010. 1, 2, 4, 5

[18] J.-Y. Guillemaut and A. Hilton. Space-time joint multi-layer
In 3DIMPVT, pages

segmentation and depth estimation.
440–447, 2012. 2, 6, 7

9

[19] V. Gulshan, C. Rother, A. Criminisi, A. Blake, and A. Zis-
serman. Geodesic star convexity for interactive image seg-
mentation. In CVPR, pages 3129–3136, 2010. 2, 5

[20] C. Hane, C. Zach, A. Cohen, R. Angst, and M. Pollefeys.
In

Joint 3d scene reconstruction and class segmentation.
CVPR, pages 97–104, 2013. 2

[21] R. Hartley and A. Zisserman. Multiple View Geometry in

Computer Vision. 2 edition, 2003. 2

[22] X. Hu and P. Mordohai. A quantitative evaluation of conﬁ-
dence measures for stereo vision. PAMI, pages 2121–2133,
2012. 5

[23] E. Imre, J. Y. Guillemaut, and A. Hilton. Calibration of
nodal and free-moving cameras in dynamic scenes for post-
production. In 3DIMPVT, pages 260–267, 2011. 2

[24] D. Ji, E. Dunn, and J. M. Frahm. 3d reconstruction of dy-
In ECCV, volume

namic textures in crowd sourced data.
8689, pages 143–158. 2014. 2

[25] H. Jiang, H. Liu, P. Tan, G. Zhang, and H. Bao. 3d recon-
struction of dynamic scenes with multiple handheld cameras.
In ECCV, pages 601–615. 2012. 2

[26] M. Kazhdan, M. Bolitho, and H. Hoppe. Poisson surface
In Eurographics Symposium on Geometry

reconstruction.
Processing, pages 61–70, 2006. 3

[27] A. Kowdle, S. Sinha, and R. Szeliski. Multiple view object
cosegmentation using appearance and stereo cues. In ECCV,
pages 789–803. 2012. 2, 6

[28] E. Larsen, P. Mordohai, M. Pollefeys, and H. Fuchs. Tempo-
rally consistent reconstruction from multiple video streams
In ICCV, pages 1–8,
using enhanced belief propagation.
2007. 2

[29] W. Lee, W. Woo, and E. Boyer. Silhouette segmentation in

multiple views. PAMI, pages 1429–1441, 2011. 2

[30] C. Lei, X. D. Chen, and Y. H. Yang. A new multi-
view spacetime-consistent depth recovery framework for
free viewpoint video rendering. In ICCV, pages 1570–1577,
2009. 2

[31] M. Menze and A. Geiger. Object scene ﬂow for autonomous

vehicles. In CVPR, 2015. 2

[32] A. Mustafa, H. Kim, J. Guillemaut, and A. Hilton. General
dynamic scene reconstruction from wide-baseline views. In
ICCV, 2015. 1, 2, 5, 6, 7

[33] A. Mustafa, H. Kim, E. Imre, and A. Hilton. Segmentation
based features for wide-baseline multi-view reconstruction.
In 3DV, 2015. 2, 3

[34] M. Narayana, A. Hanson, and E. Learned-Miller. Coherent
motion segmentation in moving camera videos using optical
ﬂow orientations. In ICCV, pages 1577–1584, 2013. 2

[35] M. Oswald, J. Sthmer, and D. Cremers. Generalized connec-
In

tivity constraints for spatio-temporal 3d reconstruction.
ECCV 2014, pages 32–46. 2014. 2

[36] K. Ozden, K. Schindler, and L. Van Gool. Simultaneous
segmentation and 3d reconstruction of monocular image se-
quences. In ICCV, pages 1–8, 2007. 2

[37] A. Papazoglou and V. Ferrari. Fast object segmentation in

unconstrained video. In ICCV, pages 1777–1784, 2013. 2

IEEE Int. Conf. Computer Vision & Pattern Recognition (CVPR) as Oral presentation, 2016

[38] R. B. Rusu.

Semantic 3D Object Maps for Everyday
Manipulation in Human Living Environments. PhD the-
sis, Computer Science department, Technische Universitaet
Muenchen, Germany, 2009. 3

[39] S. Seitz, B. Curless, J. Diebel, D. Scharstein, and R. Szeliski.
A comparison and evaluation of multi-view stereo recon-
In CVPR, pages 519–528, 2006. 2,
struction algorithms.
7

[40] Y. M. Shin, M. Cho, and K. M. Lee. Multi-object reconstruc-
tion from dynamic scenes: An object-centered approach.
CVIU, 117:1575 – 1588, 2013. 2

[41] A. Taneja, L. Ballan, and M. Pollefeys. Modeling dynamic
In ACCV,

scenes recorded with freely moving cameras.
pages 613–626. 2011. 2

[42] A. Wedel, T. Brox, T. Vaudrey, C. Rabe, U. Franke, and
D. Cremers. Stereoscopic scene ﬂow computation for 3d mo-
tion understanding. IJCV, 95:29–51, 2011. 2

[43] C. Zach, A. Cohen, and M. Pollefeys. Joint 3d scene recon-

struction and class segmentation. In CVPR, 2013. 2

[44] G. Zeng and L. Quan. Silhouette extraction from multiple

images of an unknown background. In ACCV, 2004. 2

[45] D. Zhang, O. Javed, and M. Shah. Video object segmentation
through spatially accurate and temporally dense extraction of
primary object regions. In CVPR, 2013. 2, 4

[46] G. Zhang, J. Jia, W. Hua, and H. Bao. Robust bilayer
segmentation and motion/depth estimation with a handheld
camera. PAMI, 2011. 2

10

