6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
 
0
1

 
 
]
T
G
h
t
a
m

.

[
 
 

1
v
7
8
3
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

ACTIONS OF THE ABSOLUTE GALOIS GROUP

NORBERT A’CAMPO, LIZHEN JI

AND ATHANASE PAPADOPOULOS

Abstract. We review some ideas of Grothendieck and others on actions of
the absolute Galois group ΓQ of Q (the automorphism group of the tower
of ﬁnite extensions of Q), related to the geometry and topology of surfaces
(mapping class groups, Teichm¨uller spaces and moduli spaces of Riemann sur-
faces). Grothendieck’s motivation came in part from his desire to understand
the absolute Galois group. But he was also interested in Thurston’s work on
surfaces, and he expressed this in his Esquisse d’un programme, his R´ecoltes et
semailles and on other occasions. He introduced the notions of dessin d’enfant,
Teichm¨uller tower, and other related objects, he considered the actions of ΓQ on
them or on their ´etale fundamental groups, and he made conjectures on some
natural homomorphisms between the absolute Galois group and the automor-
phism groups (or outer automorphism groups) of these objects. We mention
several ramiﬁcations of these ideas, due to various authors. We also report on
the works of Sullivan and others on nonlinear actions of ΓQ, in particular in
homotopy theory.

AMS Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation: 32G13, 32G15, 14H15, 14C05, 18A22.

Keywords: Teichm¨uller tower, proﬁnite group, ansolute Galois group, dessin
d’enfant, Grothendieck-Teichm¨uller group, two-level principle, reconstruction
principle, cartographic group, actions of the Galois group, Postnikov tower,
stable compactiﬁcation.

The ﬁnal version of this paper will appear as a chapter in Volume VI of the
Handbook of Teichm¨uller theory. This volume is dedicated to the memory of
Alexander Grothendieck.

Contents

Introduction

1.
2. Proﬁnite groups, proﬁnite completions and the absolute Galois group
3. Some non-linear actions of the absolute Galois groups
4. A glimpse into some sections of the Esquisse
5. The Teichm¨uller tower and the Grothendieck-Teichm¨uller group
6. The action of the absolute Galois group on dessins d’enfants
7. The reconstruction principle
8. The cartographic group
9. By way of conclusion
References

1
6
9
13
19
21
25
28
29
29

1. Introduction

This survey on the work of Grothendieck is a sequel to our survey [3], in which
we presented Grothendieck’s approach to Teichm¨uller’s result on the existence of a
natural complex analytic structure on Teichm¨uller space (cf.
[83] and [1]), which

Date: March 11, 2016.

1

2

N. A’CAMPO, L. JI AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

he developed in a series of ten lectures at Cartan’s seminar for the year 1960-
1961 (cf.
[29]). Several years after he gave these lectures, and after he oﬃcially
put an end to his remarkable position in the mathematical research community
(1970), Grothendieck came back to the forefront of the mathematical scene with
ideas related to Teichm¨uller theory and surface topology. He circulated two very
dense manuscripts, the Longue marche `a travers la th´eorie de Galois (1981) [31]
and the Esquisse d’un programme (1984) [32], which he never published, and which
are largely motivated by the question of understanding the absolute Galois group
ΓQ = Gal(Q/Q), where Q is the ﬁeld of rationals, Q its algebraic closure, i.e. the
ﬁeld of algebraic numbers, and where Gal(Q/Q) denotes the ﬁeld automorphisms
of Q that ﬁx every element of Q.

The motivation for Grothendieck was his desire to understand the group ΓQ
through its actions on geometric objects, on algebraic and ´etale fundamental groups
of algebraic varieties and on those of other spaces stemming from geometry, in
particular towers of moduli spaces. It is especially in reference to the Esquisse that
the name “Grothendieck-Teichm¨uller” was given to the theory that Grothendieck
introduced, but in fact, together with anabelian algebraic geometry, this theory is
a major theme of the Long March, written before the Esquisse.

Gorthendieck’s idea of making the absolute Galois group act on geometrically
deﬁned objects is motivated by the fact that the automorphisms of these objects
are in principle tractable, therefore giving rise to the hope that an injective homo-
morphism (ideally, an isomorphism) between the absolute Galois group and such an
automorphism group will open a path for understanding the absolute Galois group.
Among the geometric objects that appear in this theory, we shall review in some

detail the following two:

(1) the algebraic (or ´etale) fundamental group of the tower of moduli space
Mg,n of algebraic curves of genus g with n punctures (in particular alge-
braic curves with nodes)1 and their stable compactiﬁcations, equipped with
the natural morphisms that relate them (morphisms induced by inclusions
between surfaces, erasing distinguished points, inclusions of surfaces in the
stable compactiﬁcations of other surfaces, etc.);

(2) dessins d’enfants.

Let us say a few words about these objects.
One reason for which moduli spaces with their deﬁnition as algebraic varieties
deﬁned over Q are important in this theory is that these objects are in some sense
universal objects which contain all the arithmetic information on curves deﬁned
over Q. One should note in this respect that there is another wealth of ideas
on another point of view on the Galois group, namely, the so-called theory of
“Galois representations,” that is, the study of linear actions of this group.2 This
was developed by Serre, Tate, Deligne, Mazur, and others. The linear actions and
their deformation theory were crucial in the proof of the Taniyama conjecture and
the Fermat last theorem by A. Wiles [91].

The Teichm¨uller tower can be thought of as the set of all algebraic fundamental
groups of moduli spaces organized in a coherent way as ﬁnite covers of each other.

1A nodal curve is a connected projective singular curve whose singularities, called nodes, that
is, they are isolated with local formal model the two coordinate axes in the aﬃne space A2 in a
neighborhood of the origin. For stable nodal curves, it is also required that the Euler characteristic
of each of the curves which are connected components of the complement of the nodes in such
a surface is negative. There is a deformation theory of nodal curves which is analogous to the
deformation theory of nonsingular surfaces.

2Just to get a ﬁrst feeling of the diﬀerence between the “non-linear” and “linear” worlds, one
may recall that the topological or algebraic fundamental groups are non-linear objects whereas
cohomology is linear.

ACTIONS OF THE ABSOLUTE GALOIS GROUP

3

This tower was considered as an object which is both suﬃciently rich and reasonably
accessible for the study of the group ΓQ. Furthermore, the study of that tower is
linked in a very natural way to several mathematical ﬁelds, we shall mention some
of these links in the sequel. Grothendieck introduced the name Teichm¨uller tower
because of the obvious connection with the study of the mapping class groups
Γg,n (which he called since his 1960-1961 lectures [29] the “Teichm¨uller modular
groups”). Indeed we have, for every g and n,

Grothendieck used another equation,(cid:100)πorb

1

πorb
1

(Mg,n) = Γg,n.

(Mg,n) = (cid:100)Γg,n,

where on the left hand side we have the proﬁnite completion of the algebraic orbifold
fundamental group, and on the right hand side the proﬁnite completion of the
mapping class group. We shall say below more about the objects that appear in
these equations. Towers of ﬁnite covers of spaces play an essential role. Let us
recall in this respect that in algebraic geometry (as opposed to analytic geometry),
ﬁnite covers appear more naturally than inﬁnite ones. For instance, ﬁnite covers of
an algebraic variety over Q are deﬁned over a ﬁnite extension of Q. Taking inﬁnite
covers forces one to deal with schemes which are not of ﬁnite type.3 Let us also note
by the way that the notion of “tower” is dear to the twentieth century algebraic
geometers, and several towers existed before Grothendieck introduced some very
important ones. We shall review for instance the Postnikov tower in Section 3 of
this paper, a tower which is also related to the actions of the absolute Galois group.
A second important element that Grothendieck introduced in his study of the
Galois group is the notion of dessin d’enfant (child’s drawing). This is (the isotopy
class of) a graph on a closed surface obtained as the inverse image of the interval
[0, 1] by a holomorphic map onto the Riemann sphere ramiﬁed over the three points
0, 1,∞. We recall that the absolute Galois group acts on the set of nonsingular al-
gebraic curves deﬁned over number ﬁelds via its action on the polynomials deﬁning
these curves. (The Galois group acts on Q, therefore on the coeﬃcients of polyno-
mials deﬁned over Q.) A natural and fundamental question is then to understand
when an algebraic curve is deﬁned over Q. A result of G. V. Belyi (1978) says
that a nonsingular algebraic curve is deﬁnable over Q if and only if as a Riemann
surface it admits a holomorphic map onto the Riemann sphere which is ramiﬁed
over exactly three points (and it is convenient to assume that these three points
are 0, 1,∞). Thus, there is a relation with dessins d’enfants. Such a map from the
algebraic curve onto the Riemann sphere is now called a Belyi map. Belyi’s result
establishes a one-to-one correspondence between the absolute Galois group action
on the set of nonsingular algebraic curves deﬁned over number ﬁelds and its action
on dessins d’enfants, and it shows that this action is faithful.

There are also relations between dessins d’enfants and the Teichm¨uller tower.
From the one-to-one correspondence between dessins d’enfants and covers of the
Riemann sphere S2 with ramiﬁcation points at {0, 1,∞}, we get an action of ΓQ
on the algebraic fundamental group of S2 − {0, 1,∞}. But this fundamental group
is the ﬁrst level of the Teichm¨uller tower, since it is the fundamental group of the

3In the paper [88], it is shown that inﬁnite coverings, although no more algebraic, do convey
essential arithmetic information. What is studied in that paper is a version of the “annular
uniformization” of the thrice-punctured sphere that is developed in Strebel’s book on quadratic
diﬀerentials [78]. What is ignored by the “proﬁnite culture” is that the thrice punctured sphere
possesses, along with its ﬁnite coverings, a whole system of inﬁnite coverings of ﬁnite topological
type (i.e. with ﬁnitely generated fundamental group) which are of arithmetic interest. See also
Chapter 15 of the present volume [87].

4

N. A’CAMPO, L. JI AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

moduli space M0,4 of the sphere with four punctures. One important question
which arises here is that of determining the image of the map from ΓQ into the
automorphism group of this algebraic fundamental group. We shall say more about
that below.

In the rest of this survey, we shall review these and some other ideas introduced
by Grothendieck. We have tried to present these ideas in a language which is
familiar to low-dimensional topologists and geometers, to which the present volume
is addressed. Needless to say, it is not possible to report in a few pages on the many
ideas related to surfaces, their moduli and Teichm¨uller spaces that Grothendieck
had. It is also even less reasonable to expect a report on all the developments of
these ideas by the many authors who worked on them after Grothendieck made
available his Esquisse. Our purpose is modest: we chose some of these ideas, in
order to give to the reader of this Handbook a feeling of what the Grothendieck-
Teichm¨uller theory is about. Furthermore, we have tried to avoid the specialized
language of algebraic geometry, and this makes our scope even more limited.

In the rest of this introduction, we comment on the status of these ideas in

Grothendieck’s other works.

In his Esquisse d’un programme [32], Grothendieck mentions at several places
that he considers his ideas on the action of the absolute Galois group on dessins
d’enfants and on the Teichm¨uller tower as being among the most important ones
that he ever had (see also our review in § 4 of the present chapter). In his personal
and mathematical autobiography R´ecoltes et semailles 4 ([33] § 2.8), in the section
called La vision – ou douze th`emes pour une harmonie (“The vision – or twelve
themes for a harmony”), Grothendieck singles out twelve themes that he introduced
in his previous works and which he describes as “great ideas” (grandes id´ees).
Among these is the so-called Galois-Teichm¨uller theory. It is interesting to recall
these themes, which he gives in chronological order:

(1) Topological tensor products and nuclear spaces.
(2) “Continuous” and “discrete” dualities (derived categories, the “six opera-

tions”).

(3) The Riemann-Roch-Grothendieck yoga (K-theory, relation to intersection

theory).
(4) Schemes.
(5) Toposes.
(6) ´Etale and (cid:96)-adic cohomology.
(7) Motives and the motivic Galois group (Grothendieck ⊗-category).
(8) Crystals and crystalline cohomology, “De Rham coeﬃcients” yoga, “Hodge
(9) “Topological algebra”: ∞-stacks, derivators; cohomological topos formal-

coeﬃcients,” etc.

ism, as an inspiration for a new homotopical algebra.

(10) Tame topology.
(11) The anabelian algebraic geometry yoga, Galois-Teichm¨uller theory.
(12) Scheme- and arithmetic-point of views on regular polyhedra and regular

conﬁgurations of all sorts.

4This is a long manuscript in which Grothendieck meditates on his life and the mathematics
he discovered, and exposes without deference his vision of the mathematical milieu in which
he evolved. He comments in particular on the decline in morals, for what concerns intellectual
honesty, which, he says, gradually gained the group of mathematicians that formed the microcosm
that surrounded him. These 1500 pages constitute a sincere reﬂection of Grothendieck on his past,
driven by a desire to explain his point of view on mathematical doscovery and the reason of his
disengagement from the mathematical community.

ACTIONS OF THE ABSOLUTE GALOIS GROUP

5

In a footnote in the same section of R´ecoltes et semailles (Note 23), Grothendieck
writes: “The most profound (in my opinion) among these twelve themes are those
of motives, and the closely related one of anabelian algebraic geometry and of
Galois-Teichm¨uller yoga.”5

Tame topology (Item (10) in this list) is reviewed in Chapter 16 of the present

volume [4].

One should also mention, in relation with this list, that Grothendieck was inter-
ested in very diﬀerent subjects (although, as he liked to say, all these topics were
interrelated and united). The fact is that Grothendieck was able to work on many
subjects in mathematics, and it seems that the reason for his various apparent shifts
in interest depended only on the people he met and on the problems that naturally
presented themselves to him through these encounters. We recall for instance that
Grothendieck, while he was an undergraduate student in Montpellier (he was 17)
developed a complete theory of integration, which turned out to be equivalent to
Lebesgue’s theory. This came out of a natural problem which he had formulated
himself, namely, to develop a rigorous theory of length, area and volume.6 Let us
recall another episode. After his undergraduate studies, Grothendieck arrived (in
1950) in Nancy, for a PhD, on the advice of Weil (see [33] §6.8). He met there a
group of mathematicians that included Dieudonn´e, Delsarte, Godement, Malgrange
and Schwartz. The major ﬁeld developed there was functional analysis. He enquired
about that ﬁeld and they showed him a list of open problems. It is reported that in
a short period of time Grothendieck solved several of them. In fact, Grothendieck
wrote several texts, each single one constituting an impressive doctoral dissertation.
Besides solving these problems, he formulated new ones and created new directions
of research. He introduced in this ﬁeld new important notions, including nuclear
spaces and tensor products of locally convex spaces.7 Grothendieck continued to
work on functional analysis between the years 1950 and 1957. Some of his impor-
tant papers on the subject are [27] and [28]. His work in functional analysis still
attracts attention today; cf. the report [70] by Pisier.

5[Les plus profonds (`a mes yeux) parmi ces douze th`emes, sont celui des motifs, et celui
´etroitement li´e de g´eom´etrie alg´ebrique anab´elienne et du yoga de Galois-Teichm¨uller.] A similar
statement is made in Footnote 55, § 2.16 of R´ecoltes et semailles.
6The episode is told in R´ecoles et semailles § 2.2 and § 6.5. In § 2.2, Grothendieck writes (The
translation from R´ecoltes et semailles is ours): “When I eventually contacted the mathematical
world in Paris, one or two years later, I ended up learning, among many other things, that the work
I did on my own with the means available was (more or less) what was known ‘to everybody’ under
the name of ‘measure theory and Lebesgue integral.’ For the two or three elders to whom I talked
about that work (and even, showed the manuscript), it was like if I had simply wasted my time, in
redoing ‘something known.’ As a matter of fact, I don’t remember having been disappointed. At
that moment, the idea of gaining some ‘credit’, or even the approval, or simply an interest from
somebody else for the work I was doing was still foreign to my mind. Not forgetting that my energy
was well captured by familiarizing myself with a completely diﬀerent environment, and above all,
to learn what in Paris they considered as the fundamentals of the mathematician.” [Quand j’ai
ﬁnalement pris contact avec le monde math´ematique `a Paris, un ou deux ans plus tard, j’ai ﬁni
par y apprendre, entre beaucoup d’autres choses, que le travail que j’avais fait dans mon coin avec
les moyens du bord, ´etait (`a peu de choses pr`es) ce qui ´etait bien connu de “tout le monde,” sous
le nom de “th´eorie de la mesure et de l’int´egrale de Lebesgue.” Aux yeux des deux ou trois aˆın´es
`a qui j’ai parl´e de ce travail (voire mˆeme, montr´e un manuscrit), c’´etait un peu comme si j’avais
simplement perdu mon temps, `a refaire du “d´ej`a connu.” Je ne me rappelle pas avoir ´et´e d´e¸cu,
d’ailleurs. A ce moment-l`a, l’id´ee de recueillir un “cr´edit,” ou ne serait-ce qu’une approbation
ou simplement l’int´erˆet d’autrui, pour le travail que je faisais, devait ˆetre encore ´etrang`ere `a mon
esprit. Sans compter que mon ´energie ´etait bien assez accapar´ee `a me familiariser avec un milieu
compl`etement diﬀ´erent, et surtout, `a apprendre ce qui ´etait consid´er´e `a Paris comme le B. A. BA
du math´ematicien].

7See Dieudonn´e’s comments on that work in his Moscow 1966 ICM presentation of

Grothendieck [20], and his paper [21]. See also [19] and [18].

6

N. A’CAMPO, L. JI AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

After he obtained his PhD and after a short stay at the university of Kansas
where he developed the axiomatic theory of abelian categories, Grothendieck came
back to France. He settled in Paris, where Cartan was running a seminar dedicated
to homological algebra and algebraic geometry. Grothendieck worked on both ﬁelds
(and on others), from 1956 until 1970, the date at which he quit the mathemat-
ical community, at the age of 42, and founded the ecological group “Survivre et
vivre.” Among his early works during that period is his construction of Teichm¨uller
space [29] on which we report in Chapter 2 of the present volume [3]. Another
work on algebraic geometry from that early period which is directly interesting for
Teichm¨uller theorists is the classiﬁcation of holomorphic vector bundles over the
Riemann sphere, after which he was led naturally to the problem of moduli of ﬁbre
bundles over Riemann surfaces and to several other problems in analytic geometry,
some of which are also mentioned in Chapter 2 of this volume [3].

There are several mathematical biographies of Grothendieck, see e.g. [14], [15],

[20], [21], [69], [72] and [73] and in Chapter 1 of the present volume [71].

The plan of the rest of this chapter is the following.
In Section 2 we present some basic material on proﬁnite groups, proﬁnite com-
pletions, and the absolute Galois group, which are useful in the rest of the chapter.
In Section 3, we mention some work done on non-linear actions of the absolute
Galois group. This may help in situating Grothendieck’s work in a larger perspec-
tive.

Section 4 is the heart of the chapter. It contains a review of part of Grothendieck’s
Esquisse d’un programme, where he presents all the ideas that we mention in the
other sections. We shall review part of that paper, namely, the ﬁrst two sections.
They contain material on the following subjects:

(1) the tower of moduli space, more precisely, its algebraic fundamental group

equipped with the action of the absolute Galois group;

(2) dessins d’enfants, equipped with the action of the same group;
(3) the cartographic group;
(4) the reconstruction principle.

The four topics are interrelated, and some relations between them are mentioned
in the rest of the present chapter.

The last four sections of the chapter concern the four topics mentioned above.
We refer the reader to the chapter by Pierre Guillot in this volume [35] for more de-
tails on dessins d’enfants, the Grothendieck-Teichm¨uller group and the cartographic
group. There are many surveys on Grothendieck’s works, and some of them are
listed in the bibliography.

Acknowledgements.– We would like to thank Pierre Deligne, H´el`ene Esnault, Hi-
roaki Nakamura, Dennis Sullivan and Muhammed Uluda˘g for sharing with us their
insight on the subject, and Pierre Guillot and Fran¸cois Laudenbach who made
corrections on early versions.

The third author is supported by the French ANR projects FINSLER and Mod-
group. Part of this work was done during a stay of the three authors at the Erwin
Schr¨odinger Institute (Vienna).

2. Profinite groups, profinite completions and the absolute Galois

group

In this section, we review some basic facts on proﬁnite groups, group completions
and Galois groups, and how they appear in the Grothendieck-Teichm¨uller theory.
A proﬁnite group is an inverse limit of a system of ﬁnite groups, the ﬁnite groups
being equipped with the discrete topology. In this sense, a proﬁnite group is a kind

ACTIONS OF THE ABSOLUTE GALOIS GROUP

7

of “asymptotic group” with respect to ﬁnite groups. From the topological point
of view, a proﬁnite group is a Hausdorﬀ compact totally disconnected topological
group.

Proﬁnite groups appear naturally in the Galois theory of ﬁeld extensions. We
wish to point out how they appear in the Grothendieck-Teichm¨uller theory. Before
that, we recall some basic facts on these groups. We start with some examples.

Finite groups and their products are examples of proﬁnite groups. More gener-
ally, a countable product of proﬁnite groups is proﬁnite, like the product over the
primes of the p-adics is the Galois group of the algebraic closure of any ﬁnite ﬁeld.
In fact, the basic example of a proﬁnite group is the group Zp of p-adic integers
under addition, where p is a natural integer. This group is the inverse limit of
the ﬁnite groups Z/pnZ where n ranges over the natural integers, with the natural
maps Z/pnZ → Z/pmZ for n ≥ m being the quotient maps. (Note that for m < n,
we have a natural inclusion pnZ ⊂ pmZ, therefore Z/pmZ is a natural quotient of
Z/pnZ.) In diagrams, Zp is the inverse limit of the system
Z/pZ ← Z/p2Z ← Z/p3Z ← . . .

A p-adic integer may also be considered as a formal power series of the form

∞(cid:88)

cjpj

j=0

with cj ∈ {0, 1, . . . , p − 1}.
Other examples of proﬁnite groups are obtained by taking matrix groups over Zp,
or over the group Fq[[t]] of formal power series over a ﬁnite ﬁeld F, etc. Examples
are the groups SL(n, Zp) and SL(n, Fq[[t]]).

If K is a ﬁeld and L/K a Galois ﬁnite extension, then the Galois group Gal(L/K)
is the group of ﬁeld automorphisms of L that ﬁx every element of K. For instance,
in the case where K = R and L = C, then Gal(L/K) is the group with two elements,
the non-trivial element being complex conjugation. In the general case, Gal(L/K)
is the inverse limit of the system of ﬁnite groups Gal(F/K) where F ranges over
all the intermediate ﬁelds such that F/K is a ﬁnite Galois extension. (We recall
that a ﬁeld extension F/K is said to be a Galois extension if it is algebraic – that
is, if every element of F is a root of some non-zero polynomial with coeﬃcients in
K, and if the ﬁeld ﬁxed by the automorphism group Aut(F/K) is exactly the ﬁeld
K.) In this deﬁnition, the projection maps used in the inverse limit are induced
by the natural inclusions of ﬁelds. The topology on Gal(L/K) is known as the
Krull topology. One form of the inverse Galois problem for a given ﬁeld K is to
characterize the ﬁnite groups that occur as Galois groups over K.8

For topologists, an appealing example of a proﬁnite group is the isometry group
of a locally ﬁnite rooted tree (that is, the isometries preserve the root, i.e. a chosen
vertex of the tree). Here, we use the path metric on the tree and the compact-open
topology on the set of isometries. It is possible to give a quite explicit description
of elements of this proﬁnite group as “twists” or “shuﬄes,” cf.
[89], a paper we
recommend for a glimpse into a non-abelian inﬁnite proﬁnite group.

by (cid:98)G, deﬁned as the inverse limit of the system of groups G/N where N runs

To any arbitrary (discrete) group G is associated its proﬁnite completion, denoted

over the normal subgroups of ﬁnite index of G. Since normal subgroups of ﬁnite
index are in one-to-one correspondence with ﬁnite regular covering spaces (of some
adequate space), this gives a geometric representation of the operation of proﬁnite
completion. Like in the deﬁnition of the group of p-adic integers, the partial order

8The original conjecture, made by Hilbert and still unproved, is that every ﬁnite group occurs

as a Galois group over Q of an algebraic number ﬁeld.

8

N. A’CAMPO, L. JI AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

deﬁned by inclusion between subgroups induces a system of natural homomorphisms
between the corresponding quotients, which makes the set of groups G/N an inverse
system. In symbols,

For any group G, there is a natural homomorphism G → (cid:98)G. The image of G by
this homomorphism is dense in (cid:98)G. This homomorphism is injective if and only if

(cid:98)G = lim←− G/N.

G is residually ﬁnite, that is, if for every element g in G which is not the identity,
we can ﬁnd a homomorphism h from G to a ﬁnite group satisfying h(g) (cid:54)= Id.
Thus, residual ﬁniteness of a group is a condition for that group to be considered
in the realm of proﬁnite groups. Residually ﬁnite groups are also called ﬁnitely
approximable. We note by the way that Toledo gave the ﬁrst examples of smooth
projective varieties whose fundamental group is not residually ﬁnite [84], answering
a question attributed to Serre. It is also known that the mapping class group is
residually ﬁnite [26].

Other examples of proﬁnite groups that are of interest for geometers are the
algebraic fundamental groups of algebraic varieties. The usual fundamental groups
(those of algebraic topology) are generally not proﬁnite. Given a complex alge-

braic variety X, its algebraic, – or ´etale – fundamental group9(cid:98)π1(X) is the proﬁ-

nite completion of the usual topological fundamental group π1(X) (which we shall
sometimes denote by πtop
(X) in order to stress that this is not the algebraic funda-
mental group) of the complex space XC.10 In this respect, we recall that an aﬃne
algebraic variety is a subspace of Cn deﬁned by a collection of polynomials, that
a projective variety is a subspace of CPn deﬁned by a collection of homogeneous
polynomials, and that a quasi-projective variety is the complement of a projective
variety in a bigger projective variety. Aﬃne varieties are quasi-projective varieties,
but the converse is not true. The moduli spaces Mg,n discussed in this paper are
quasi-projective varieties and they are not projective nor (in general) aﬃne vari-
eties. (Note that the M0,n are aﬃne.)

1

An important topologically inﬁnitely generated proﬁnite group is the absolute
Galois group ΓQ = Gal(Q/Q). It is the inverse limit of the system of discrete groups
Gal(K/Q) where K runs over the set of Galois extensions of Q/Q. It is important
to know that ΓQ is equipped with a natural structure of topological group with basis
for the open neighborhoods of the identity element the set of subgroups Gal(Q/K)
where K is a ﬁnite Galois extension of Q. A fundamental problem in number theory
is to understand non-abelian extensions of Q and number ﬁelds. A major part of
the celebrated Langlands program aims to do this. One may recall in this respect
that the Kronecker Jugendtraum (his youth dream),11 which is also Hilbert’s 12th

9The notion of ´etale fundamental group is due to Grothendieck. In fact, Grothendieck intro-

duced several notions of fundamental group, adapted to schemes, toposes, and other settings.

10This deﬁnition is valid in characteristic zero, which is our setting here. We note however that
Grothendieck’s fundamental construction in this context is his theory of the fundamental group
in positive characteristic, a theory which was completely inaccessible using the classical methods.
See the survey [63].
11The expression is from a letter Kronecker wrote to Dedekind on March 15, 1880; cf. volume V
of Kronecker’s Collected works, p. 455. Grothendieck, in R´ecoltes et semailles (§ 2.10), talks, in a
footnote, about Kronecker’s dream, and it is interesting to quote him: “I know Kronecker’s dream
only through hearsay, when somebody (may be it was John Tate) told me that I was realizing that
dream. In the teaching I received from my elders, historical references were extremely rare, and I
was nurtured, not by reading of authors which were slightly ancient, nor even contemporary, but
only through communication, face to face or through correspondence with others mathematicians,
and starting with those who were older than me. The main (and may be the only) external
inspiration for the sudden and robust start of the theory of schemes in 1958 was Serre’s article,
known under the logo FAC (‘Faisceaux alg´ebriques coh´erents’), published a few years before.
Apart from that article, my main inspiration in the later development of the theory happened to

ACTIONS OF THE ABSOLUTE GALOIS GROUP

9

problem, deals with the explicit descriptions of abelian extensions of number ﬁelds.
The dream was formulated after a major result of Kronecker-Weber on abelian
extensions of Q.

3. Some non-linear actions of the absolute Galois groups

In number theory, the classical approaches to study Galois groups are through
their linear actions. A linear action is usually called a representation. The most
natural representations of the absolute Galois group ΓQ are the representations

ΓQ → GL(n, C)

with ﬁnite image known as Artin representations. Next, there are the representa-
tions

ΓQ → GL(n, Q
l)

which are continuous with respect to the l-adic topology on GL(n, Q
the reader to [82] for a survey on this subject.

l). We refer

Some of the important non-linear approaches were conducted by Grothendieck,
Sullivan, Ihara and others. A typical non-linear action of the absolute Galois group
ΓQ is the one on ´etale fundamental groups of algebraic varieties: Let X be a normal
Q-algebraic variety X such that X = XQ is irreducible. Then ΓQ has an outer action

on(cid:98)π1(X), that is, there is a homomorphism

ΓQ → Out((cid:98)π1(X)),

(1)

arising from the homotopy exact sequence (see [30]). We shall talk later on about
this important homomorphism.12 We now mention a few other actions.

An interesting feature of the absolute Galois group is that it acts on sets which
a priori are not connected to number theory. For instance, it acts in the realms of
knot theory, quantum algebra, topological K-theory, etc. Several such actions were

derive from itself, and to renew itself throughout the years, with the only requirement of simplicity
and of internal coherence, in an eﬀort to give an account in that new context of what was ‘well
known’ in algebraic geometry (and which I digested while it was being transformed by my own
hands) and of what that ‘known’ made me feel.” [Je ne connais ce “rˆeve de Kronecker” que par
ou¨ıe dire, quand quelqu’un (peut-ˆetre bien que c’´etait John Tate) m’a dit que j’´etais en train
de r´ealiser ce rˆeve-l`a. Dans l’enseignement que j’ai re¸cu de mes aˆın´es, les r´ef´erences historiques
´etaient rarissimes, et j’ai ´et´e nourri, non par la lecture d’auteurs tant soit peu anciens ni mˆeme
contemporains, mais surtout par la communication, de vive voix ou par lettres interpos´ees, avec
d’autres math´ematiciens, `a commencer par mes aˆın´es. La principale, peut-ˆetre mˆeme la seule
inspiration ext´erieure pour le soudain et vigoureux d´emarrage de la th´eorie des sch´emas en 1958,
a ´et´e l’article de Serre bien connu sous le sigle FAC (“Faisceaux alg´ebriques coh´erents”), paru
quelques ann´ees plus tˆot. Celui-ci mis `a part, ma principale inspiration dans le d´eveloppement
ult´erieur de la th´eorie s’est trouv´ee d´ecouler d’elle-mˆeme, et se renouveler au ﬁl des ans, par les
seules exigences de simplicit´e et de coh´erence internes, dans un eﬀort pour rendre compte dans ce
nouveau contexte, de ce qui ´etait “bien connu” en g´eom´etrie alg´ebrique (et que j’assimilais au fur
et `a mesure qu’il se transformait entre mes mains), et de que ce “connu” me faisait pressentir.]
Grothendieck refers here to Serre’s paper Faisceaux alg´ebriques coh´erents, Ann. Math. (2) (1955)
61, 197-278, a paper where Serre developed the cohomological approach to problems of algebraic
geometry. The results in that paper were already presented at the talk Serre delivered at the 1954
Amsterdam ICM.

12We introduced (cid:98)π1(X) as the proﬁnite completion of the topological fundamental group
(cid:98)π1(XQ). Like the ´etale fundamental group, this group is not always a proﬁnite completion of some

π1(X). The reader should be aware of the fact that there are several kinds of fundamental
groups: To an algebraic variety X deﬁned over Q is associated an arithmetic fundamental group

non-proﬁnite group. The arithmetic and the ´etale fundamental groups are related via the short
exact sequence we mention later in this chapter (cf. (7)):

1 →(cid:98)π1(XQ) →(cid:98)π1(XQ) → ΓQ → 1.

10

N. A’CAMPO, L. JI AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

discovered by Sullivan,13 who also did extensive work on actions of the absolute
Galois group in homotopy theory. Sullivan’s ideas constitute a new vision in this
ﬁeld, and they gave rise to strong relations between number theory and homotopy
theory. One of these ideas was to explore the extra symmetries of proﬁnite comple-
tions which arise from actions of the absolute Galois group, in order to provide new
examples of proﬁnitely isomorphic vector bundles and to build a new approach to
the celebrated Adams conjecture concerning real vector bundles. This conjecture
concerns the passage from vector bundles to their sphere bundles up to ﬁberwise
homotopy equivalence. (Here, sphere bundles are deﬁned without using a metric,
but by taking the oriented directions.) We note that the classiﬁcation of sphere
bundles is diﬀerent from that of vector bundles since the structure group is not
the same. Basically, the Adams conjecture concerns the diﬀerence between the two
theories.14 A summary of Sullivan’s work on this subject is contained in his ICM
1970 address [80], and in his MIT lectures [81]. We now brieﬂy report on this work.
We ﬁrst observe that most classifying spaces in algebraic topology have the
structure of real algebraic varieties. Examples include Grassmannians (which are
also spaces representing functors of vector bundles), the circle S1 (which represents
the ﬁrst cohomology group), inﬁnite-dimensional complex projective spaces (which
represent second cohomology groups and which play an important role for Chern
classes), and there are others. In fact Totaro showed that the classifying space of
any algebraic group can be approximated by suitable algebraic varieties, cf. [85].

Most of the varieties mentioned above are deﬁned over the rationals, and there-
fore the absolute Galois group ΓQ = Gal(Q/Q) acts on the equations deﬁning them.
Sullivan considered the action of ΓQ in homotopy theory via classifying spaces and
Postnikov towers. We recall that a Postnikov tower is a homotopy construction
which is associated to a homotopy type. It provides a tower of spaces whose suc-
cessive ﬁbers are the Eilenberg-MacLane spaces with only one nontrivial homotopy
group. The groups themselves are the homotopy groups of the homotopy type.
Postnikov towers are a main tool for describing homotopy types algebraically. In
good cases associated to a Postnikov tower is another Postnikov tower in which the
groups are the proﬁnite completions of the groups that appear in the initial tower,
and the ﬁbrations are obtained by completing the cohomological information in the
original ﬁbrations. Thus, we get a new homotopy type from the new Postnikov
tower, which is a computation in these good cases of the general proﬁnite comple-
tion of a homotopy type constructed in Sullivan [79]. A non good but fascinating
case is provided by a theorem of Priddy that implies the homotopy groups of the

13For the history, we note that Sullivan joined IH´ES after Grothendieck left. We learned the
following chronology from Sullivan: Grothendieck left IH´ES around 1970. Quillen visited IH´ES
from MIT during the year 1972-1973. Sullivan visited IH´ES and Orsay from MIT during the year
1973-1974. Sullivan writes: “It was a splendid place to do Math.” He then adds: “IH´ES oﬀered
Grothendieck’s vacated position to Quillen who declined. IH´ES oﬀered it to me and I grabbed
it.”

14Cf. Adams’ three papers [5] [6] [7]. There were eventually three proofs of that conjecture, one
due to Sullivan, one due to Quillen, related to algebraic K-theory, and a later and simpler purely
topological one due to J. Becker and D. Gottlieb. Sullivan’s proof for the complex case, which,
as he reports, was discovered one day in August 1967, is based on the construction of a functor
from abstract algebraic varieties into [proﬁnite] homotopy theory. The existence of this functor
and its Galois invariance gave directly the proof of the Adams conjecture; cf. Sullivan’s ICM Nice
1970 address [80] for a survey and an extension to the passage from manifolds up to isomorphism
to their underlying proﬁnite homotopy types. The reader is also referred to Sullivan’s recent
postscript to his MIT lectures [81] in which he describes his (still open) unrequited Jugendtraum.
Sullivan found beautiful instances where the Galois group permutes the possible geometries (e.g.
manifold realizations) of algebraic structure, in this instance homotopy theoretical information.

ACTIONS OF THE ABSOLUTE GALOIS GROUP

11

proﬁnite completion of the inﬁnite union of the classifying spaces of the ﬁnite sym-
metric groups can be identiﬁed with the stable homotopy groups of spheres. These
homotopy groups are non zero in inﬁnitely many dimensions and are themselves
ﬁnite groups; [79].

A main point of the proﬁnite completion construction is that it packages the
information in the Artin-Mazur ´etale site of an algebraic variety. One then ﬁnds
the proﬁnite homotopy type of a complex algebraic variety has more symmetries
than is evident from its topology or its geometry. The fact becomes concrete in the
case where the homotopy types are Grassmannians. Hence, Sullivan ˜Os proﬁnite
construction has an impact on the theory of vector bundles. This impact, whose
possibility was ﬁrst suggested by Quillen in terms of the Frobenius symmetry in pos-
itive characteristic, occurs already in characteristic zero because classifying spaces
for rank n vector bundles can be built from the ﬁnite Grassmannians G(k, n) letting
k go to inﬁnity. The action of the Galois group here provides symmetries not acces-
sible by other means. If n also goes to inﬁnity one obtains the classifying space for
K-theory and the Galois symmetry factors through the abelianized Galois group.
These abelianized symmetries are the isomorphic parts of operations constructed
by Adams. This picture explains why virtual vector bundles are also related by
ﬁber homotopy equivalences of vector bundle representatives – these ﬁber homo-
topy equivalences are the Galois symmetries on the ﬁnite Grassmannians. This
picture for vector bundles implies a similar picture for manifolds. Now Galois sym-
metries permute the diﬀerentiable, then topological information of manifolds while
preserving their homotopy types proﬁnitely completed. An unresolved question
is to give a geometric or combinatorial explanation of this phenomenon, which is
another manifestation of the main question discussed in this survey.

Let us now mention other examples of non-linear actions of the absolute Galois

group.

Some moduli spaces (coarse or ﬁne, depending on the situation) obtained as
solutions of some moduli problems in algebraic geometry and number theory are
isomorphic as algebraic varieties to arithmetic Hermitian locally symmetric spaces.
A good example to keep in mind is based on the fact that SL(2, Z)\H2 is the
moduli space of algebraic curves (or compact Riemann surfaces) of genus one. This
is a quasi-projective variety deﬁned over Q. The points in Q of this variety are
permuted by the action of the absolute Galois group. Note that SL(2, Z)\H2 is also
the moduli space of pointed elliptic curves. Thus, each point in this space has a
meaning.

We take this opportunity to mention a conjecture of Uluda˘g which stands some-
where in between the preceding and the following paragraphs. It is related to the
Deligne-Mostow theory of ball quotients. It is based on the following theorem of
Thurston (1987), which also provides a link with dessins d’enfants. In this setting,
a triangulation is said to be non-negatively curved (in the combinatorial sense) if
at any vertex, there are no more than six triangles meeting at a vertex.

Theorem (Thurston: Polyhedra are lattice points) There is a lattice L in the
complex Lorentz space C(1,9) and a group ΓDM of automorphisms, such that sphere
triangulations (which are naturally dessins) of non-negative combinatorial curvature
with 12 points of positive curvature corresponds to orbits in L+/ΓDM, where L+
is the set of lattice points of positive square-norm. Under this correspondence, the
square of the nom of a lattice point is the number of triangles in the triangulation.
The quotient of the projective action of ΓDM on the complex projective hyperbolic
space CH9 (the unit ball in C9 ⊂ CP9) has ﬁnite volume. The square of the norm
of a lattice point is the number of triangles in the triangulation.

12

N. A’CAMPO, L. JI AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

Let MDM be the ball-quotient space CH9/ΓDM. In fact, MDM is the moduli space
of unordered 12-tuples of points in P1. Thurston also describes a very explicit
method to construct these triangulations. Every triangulation determines naturally
a dual graph which is a dessin, and the above classiﬁcation of triangulations may be
viewed as a classiﬁcation of the three-point ramiﬁed coverings of P1 with a certain
restriction on the ramiﬁcation. Equivalently, this result classiﬁes the subgroups of
the modular group with certain properties. The conjecture is as follows:
Conjecture. The set of “shapes” of triangulations L+/ΓDM ⊂ MDM is deﬁned
over Q, and the Galois actions on the shapes and the triangulations of the same
shape, viewed as dessins, are compatible.

If the conjecture is true, then the following problem arises: study the Galois action
on this set of “hypergeometric points.” The hope is that this action will be interest-
ing. Note that MDM admits a compactiﬁcation MDM such that all other classes of
triangulations of non-negative curvature appear as degenerations of triangulations
represented in MDM. Hence this is a sort of “small” Teichm¨uller tower.

One may understand this attempt as follows: dessins are quite general objects
and to be able to say something about them, it is necessary to construct them in a
systematic manner. The graphs dual to the triangulations classiﬁed by Thurston’s
theorem give us one special class of dessins. This association of a dessin to a
triangulation is very natural. For more details the reader is referred to Chapter 15
of the present volume [87].

If Γ\X is an arithmetic Hermitian locally symmetric space, then by results of
Baily-Borel [9], reﬁned by Shimura [75], this space is an algebraic variety deﬁned
over some speciﬁc number ﬁeld. Now the Galois group acts on the equations deﬁn-
ing the variety, and we get a new variety which, surprisingly, turns out to be another
arithmetic Hermitian locally symmetric space. This result settled positively a con-
jecture by Kazhdan which says that the image of an arithmetic Hermitian locally
symmetric space under any element of the absolute Galois group is another arith-
metic Hermitian locally symmetric space, cf. [50] [51].

As a ﬁnal example, let us consider a projective variety V deﬁned by equations
whose coeﬃcients belong to a number ﬁeld K (and which are not rational), and let
us change the equation by applying to the coeﬃcients an element σ of Gal(K/Q).
Let V σ be the resulting variety. Let VC and V σC be the respective varieties of their
(VC) (cid:54)(cid:39)
complex points. Serre gave examples of such a pair (V, V σ) satisfying πtop
πtop
(V σC ). Kazhdan proved his own conjecture, and the conjecture was later reﬁned
1
by Langlands [56] by enriching arithmetic Hermitian locally symmetric spaces to
Shimura varieties and considering the images of Shimura varieties under the Galois
action (see also [13], p. 784.) One reason for which this action is important for
our subject is that many of these arithmetic Hermitian locally symmetric spaces
are moduli spaces. Thus, the absolute Galois group acts on a collection of moduli
spaces.

1

A positive solution of the Kazhdan conjecture allows one to build a tower of
arithmetic locally symmetric spaces. The absolute Galois group acts on this tower,
preserving natural homomorphisms between the various layers (induced by inclu-
sions, etc.) It seems that the Galois action on this tower and the associated tower
of ´etale fundamental groups has not been studied. This tower probably imposes less
conditions on the Galois group than the tower of moduli spaces Mg,n of Riemann
surfaces. The reason is that each such space is usually a moduli space of abelian
varieties with some additional structure. This is related to the conjecture that the
absolute Galois group is the automorphism group of the modular tower. We note

ACTIONS OF THE ABSOLUTE GALOIS GROUP

13

that it is reasonable to consider abelian varieties as linear objects. A supporting ev-
idence may be found in the paper [46] by Ihara and Nakamura that illustrates why
the moduli spaces of abelian varieties of dim > 1 can can hardly be “anabelian”,
mainly due to the congruence subgroup property of lattices in Lie groups. In some
sense, this shows the importance of considering moduli spaces of nonlinear objects
such as the moduli spaces Mg,n, an insight of Grothendieck.

Now we arrive at the work of Belyi.15
After several ideas and attempts on the study of non-linear actions of the Galois
group, one can understand that it was a big surprise to see that the absolute Galois
group acts on the simple combinatorial objects which Grothendieck called “dessins
d’enfants,” and furthermore that this action is faithful. The contrast between
the simplicity of Belyi’s examples and the output (e.g. the Galois action changes
the combinatorial objects) was unexpected. We shall mention again Belyi’s result
several times in this chapter, in particular in § 6. Before that, we make a short
review of the part of Grothendieck’s Esquisse d’un programme which is relevant to
the ideas we are surveying here.

4. A glimpse into some sections of the Esquisse

The manuscript Esquisse d’un programme consists of 10 sections, starting with
a Preface (§ 1) and ending with an Epilogue (§ 10). It is accompanied by footnotes,
and there are other notes collected at the end of the paper. The sections from
the Esquisse on which we report here are essentially those which are related to the
subject of the present chapter. They are the following:16

• § 2. A game of “Lego-Teichm¨uller” and the Galois group Q over Q.
• § 3. Number ﬁelds associated to dessins d’enfants.

There is an important part of the Esquisse in which Grothendieck talks about
the necessity of developing a new ﬁeld of topology, motivated by the structure of the
Riemann moduli spaces, which he calls “multiplicities.” The mean feature of this
space that he point out is the stratiﬁcation of this space. We shall not comment on
this in the present chapter, but we do so in Chapter 16 of the present volume [4].
We shall also not comment on the many personal remarks made by Grothendieck
in that manuscript, even though they are interesting, since from them we can see
his motivation and his sources of inspiration. They also provide a picture of the
mathematical and intellectual French society at that time as well as of the status
of this program in the entire work of Grothendieck. These remarks are spread at
various places in the Esquisse. Rather, we shall concentrate on the topics that
concerns the actions of the absolute Galois group.

15Sullivan, in a correspondence, points out examples of Thurston from the 1980s, before the
theory of dessins d’enfants. The examples concern the regular pentagon in the hyperbolic plane,
and the regular ﬁve-pointed star on the round two-sphere. On the one hand, we can reﬂect the ﬁrst
ﬁgure to get a tiling of the non-Euclidean plane with four pentagons meeting at each point. On
the other hand, we can reﬂect the star around to generate a non tiling inﬁnite group of rotations
of the sphere. The two groups obtained are isomorphic (they have the same generators and
relations) and inﬁnite. This example explains how Galois action changes geometry by switching
from hyperbolic to spherical. The two groups are subgroups of orthogonal groups and are related
by a Galois symmetry which must be computed, and the situation is analogous to the symmetry
of real quadratic ﬁelds. (Note that one considers the groups of integers in the ﬁeld matrices that
preserve respectively the quadratic forms xx + yy − azz in the ﬁrst case and xx + yy + azz in
the second case.) This gives a concrete example of Galois symmetry changing geometry while
preserving algebraic topology (the groups are the same). Note that in the ﬁrst example, the
quotient is a manifold, while in the second it is not. (We have an action of the inﬁnite group on
the 2-sphere.)

16The English translation that we use of Esquisse d’un programme is that of Pierre Lochak

and Leila Schneps in [32].

14

N. A’CAMPO, L. JI AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

For the mathematical objects which we refer to, we use Grothendieck’s nota-

tion.17

It is interesting (but not surprising) that the ﬁrst examples of geometric objects
which Grotendieck mentions in his Esquisse are the moduli spaces Mg,ν of Riemann

surfaces and their Mumford-Deligne compactiﬁcations (cid:98)Mg,ν. The ´etale fundamen-

tal groups of this collection of spaces, when they are considered for various g and ν,
constitute what he calls the Teichm¨uller tower. In Grothendieck’s words, this tower
represents “the structure at inﬁnity” of the set of all mapping class groups. In the
Esquisse, he declares that the structure of this tower appears as the ﬁrst important
example, in dimension > 1, of what might be called an “anabelian variety.” He de-
clares that with this tower he can foresee the emergence of a new theory that might
be called “Galois-Teichm¨uller theory.” We quote a passage from the introduction:

Whereas in my research before 1970, my attention was systematically
directed towards objects of maximal generality, in order to uncover a
general language which is adequate for the world of algebraic geometry,
and I never restricted myself to algebraic curves except when strictly
necessary (notably in ´etale cohomology), preferring to develop “pass-
key” techniques and statements valid in all dimensions and in every place
(I mean, over all base schemes, or even base ringed topoi...), here I was
brought back, via objects so simple that a child learns them while playing,
to the beginnings and origins of algebraic geometry, familiar to Riemann
and his followers!

Since around 1975, it is thus the geometry of (real) surfaces, and
starting in 1977 the links between questions of geometry of surfaces and
the algebraic geometry of algebraic curves deﬁned over ﬁelds such as
C, R or extensions of Q of ﬁnite type, which were my principal source
of inspiration and my constant guiding thread. It is with surprise and
wonderment that over the years I discovered (or rather, doubtless, re-
discovered) the prodigious, truly inexhaustible richness, the unsuspected
depth of this theme, apparently so anodyne. I believe I feel a central
sensitive point there, a privileged point of convergence of the principal
currents of mathematical ideas, and also of the principal structures and
visions of things which they express, from the most speciﬁc (such as the
rings Z, Q, Q, R, C or the group Sl(2) over one of these rings, or general
reductive algebraic groups) to the most “abstract,” such as the algebraic
“multiplicities,” complex analytic or real analytic. (These are naturally
introduced when systematically studying “moduli varieties” for the geo-
metric objects considered, if we want to go farther than the notoriously
insuﬃcient point of view of “coarse moduli” which comes down to most
unfortunately killing the automorphism groups of these objects.) Among
these modular multiplicities, it is those of Mumford-Deligne for “stable”
algebraic curves of genus g with ν marked points, which I denote by

(cid:99)Mg,ν (compactiﬁcation of the “open” multiplicity Mg,ν corresponding to

non-singular curves) which for the last two or three years have exercised
a particular fascination over me, perhaps even stronger than any other
mathematical object to this day.

In § 5, Grothendieck returns to these multiplicities, in relation with the theory

of stratiﬁed structures, which was part of his foundational project on topology:

I would like to say a few words now about some topological considerations
which made me understand the necessity of new foundations for “geo-
metric” topology, in a direction quite diﬀerent from the notion of topos,
and actually independent of the needs of so-called “abstract” algebraic
geometry (over general base ﬁelds and rings). The problem I started

17Grothendieck’s notation in this manuscript is reduced to a minimum, especially if we compare

it with the commentaries on the Esquisse that appeared in the literature that followed.

ACTIONS OF THE ABSOLUTE GALOIS GROUP

15

from, which already began to intrigue me some ﬁfteen years ago, was
that of deﬁning a theory of “d´evissage” for stratiﬁed structures, in order
to rebuild them, via a canonical process, out of “building blocks” canon-
ically deduced from the original structure. Probably the main example
which led me to that question was that of the canonical stratiﬁcation of
a singular algebraic variety (or a complex or real singular space) through
the decreasing sequence of its successive singular loci. But I probably
had the premonition of the ubiquity of stratiﬁed structures in practically
all domains of geometry (which surely others had seen clearly a long time
ago). Since then, I have seen such a structure appear, in particular, in
any situation where “moduli” are involved for geometric objects which
may undergo not only continuous variations, but also “degeneration” (or
“specialization”) phenomena – the strata corresponding then to the var-
ious “levels of singularity” (or to the associated combinatorial types) for

the objects in question. The compactiﬁed modular multiplicities (cid:98)Mg,n

of Mumford-Deligne for the stable algebraic curves of type (g, n) provide
a typical and particularly inspiring example, which played an important
motivating role when I returned my reﬂection about stratiﬁed structures,
from December 1981 to January 1982. Two-dimensional geometry pro-
vides many other examples of such modular stratiﬁed structures, which
all (if not using rigidiﬁcation) appear as “multiplicities” other than as
spaces or manifolds in the usual sense (as the points of these multiplic-
ities may have non-trivial automorphism groups). Among the objects
of two-dimensional geometry which give rise to such modular stratiﬁed
structures in arbitrary dimensions, or even inﬁnite dimensions, I would
list polygons (Euclidean, spherical or hyperbolic), systems of straight
lines in a plane (say projective), systems of “pseudo-straight lines” in
a projective topological plane, or more general immersed curves with
normal crossings, in a given (say compact) surface.

We discuss some of Grothendieck’s ideas on his project on recasting topology, in-
spired by the properties of these multiplicities, in Chapter 16 of the present volume
[4].
Concerning the Deligne-Mumford modular multiplicities, Grothendieck adds (§ 2):
“[these objects] for the last two or three years have exercised a particular fascination
over me, perhaps even stronger than any other mathematical object to this day.”
He then introduces the Teichm¨uller groupoids, which are the algebraic fundamental
groupoids of these spaces:18

Doubtless the principal reason of this fascination is that this very rich
geometric structure on the system of “open” modular multiplicities Mg,ν
is reﬂected in an analogous structure on the corresponding fundamental

groupoids, the “Teichm¨uller groupoids” (cid:98)Tg,ν , and that these operations
on the level of the(cid:98)Tg,ν are suﬃciently intrinsic for the Galois group Γ of

Q/Q to act on this whole “tower” of Teichm¨uller groupoids, respecting
all these structures.

He then notes the “even more extraordinary” fact that the action of the Galois group

on the ﬁrst non-trivial level of the tower (that is, on (cid:98)T0,4) is faithful, therefore,
group.” This proﬁnite group is the algebraic fundamental group(cid:98)π0,3 of the standard

that “the Galois group Γ can be realized as an automorphism group of a very
concrete proﬁnite group, and moreover respects certain essential structures of this

18Grothendieck prefers to talk about fundamental groupoids rather than fundamental groups
because in the former there is no need to choose a basepoint, which makes the construction more
natural. He notes in the Esquisse that some of the diﬃculties in this theory are “particularly
linked to the fact that people still obstinately persist, when calculating with fundamental groups,
in ﬁxing a single base point, instead of cleverly choosing a whole packet of points which is invariant
under the symmetries of the situation, which thus get lost on the way.”

16

N. A’CAMPO, L. JI AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

projective line over Q with the three points 0, 1,∞ removed.
(This is the free
proﬁnite group on two generators.) Let us also quote Deligne on this subject, from
the beginning of his paper [17]: “The present article owes a lot to A. Grothendieck.
He invented the philosophy of motives, which is our guiding principle. About ﬁve
fundamental group of X = P1(C)−{0, 1,∞}, with its action of Q/Q is a remarkable
object, and that it should be studied.”

years ago, he also told me, with emphasis, that the proﬁnite completion (cid:98)π1 of the

Thus, the ﬁrst concrete question in this program, which Grothendieck describes
as “one of the most fascinating tasks” is to ﬁnd necessary and suﬃcient conditions

so that an outer automorphism of the proﬁnite group (cid:98)π0,3 is in the image of the

Galois group. He writes that this “would give a ‘purely algebraic’ description, in
terms of proﬁnite groups and with no reference to the Galois theory of number ﬁelds,
to the Galois group Γ = Gal(Q/Q).” He adds that he has no conjecture concerning
the characterization of the image of Γ in the outer automorphism group of group

(cid:98)π0,3, but that an immediately accessible task would be to describe the action of Γ

on all the Teichm¨uller tower in terms of its action on the ﬁrst level. This, he says,
is “linked to a representation of the Teichm¨uller tower (considered as a groupoid
equipped with an operation of ‘gluing’) by generators and relations, which will give
in particular a presentation by generators and relations in the usual sense of each

of the(cid:98)Tg,ν (as a proﬁnite groupoid).” This is the famous “reconstruction principle”

on which we shall comment at several places in the present chapter. This principle
is present in various forms in Grothendieck’s work.
Talking about the Teichm¨uller tower, Grothendieck writes, in the Esquisse (§ 2):

The a priori interest of a complete knowledge of the two ﬁrst levels of the
tower (i.e. the case where the modular dimension 3g − 3 + n ≤ 2) is to
be found in the principle that the entire tower can be reconstructed from
these two ﬁrst levels, in the sense that via the fundamental operation of
‘gluing’, level-1 gives the complete system of generators, and level-2 a
complete system of relations.

This says that the action of the Galois group on the tower should be completely
determined by the action on levels one and two, namely, the action on the proﬁnite

groups(cid:98)Γ0,4,(cid:98)Γ0,5,(cid:98)Γ1,1 and(cid:98)Γ1,2. Concerning the proof, Grothendieck writes:
quence (via a theory of d´evissage of stratiﬁed structures – here the (cid:98)Mg,n –

The principle of construction of the Teichm¨uller tower is not proved at
this time – but I have no doubt that it is valid. It would be a conse-

which remains to be written, cf. par. 5) of an extremely plausible prop-
erty of the open modular multiplicities Mg,n in the complex analytic
context, namely that for modular dimension N ≥ 3, the fundamental
group of Mg,n (i.e. the usual Teichm¨uller group Tg,n) is isomorphic to
the ‘fundamental group at inﬁnity’, i.e. that of a ‘tubular neighborhood
at inﬁnity.’ This is a very familiar thing (essentially due to Lefschetz)
for a non-singular aﬃne variety of dimension N ≥ 3.

Grothendieck makes an analogy with an idea in the theory of reductive algebraic

groups (Esquisse d’un programme, § 2):

There is a striking analogy, and I am certain it is not merely formal,
between this principle and the analogous principle of Demazure for the
structure of reductive algebraic groups, if we replace the term “level” or
“modular dimension” with “semi-simple rank of the reductive group.”
The link becomes even more striking, if we recall that the Teichm¨uller
group T1,1 (in the discrete, transcendental context now, and not in the
proﬁnite algebraic context, where we ﬁnd the proﬁnite completion of the
former) is no other than Sl(2, Z), i.e. the group of integral points of the
simple group scheme of “absolute” rank 1 Sl(2)Z. Thus, the fundamental

ACTIONS OF THE ABSOLUTE GALOIS GROUP

17

building block for the Teichm¨uller tower is essentially the same as for
the “tower” of reductive groups of all ranks – a group which, moreover,
we may say that it is doubtless present in all the essential disciplines of
mathematics.

In § 5 of the Esquisse, Grothendieck addresses the question of the reconstruction
of the modular tower in the discrete (and not only the proﬁnite) setting. This
involves decompositions of the surfaces with pairs of pants and analyzing the struc-
tures on each pair of pant.

Section 3 of the Esquisse is devoted to dessins d’enfants. According to Grothendieck’s

Esquisse, his interest in these objects manifested itself in some problems he gave to
students at Montpellier, namely, providing an algebraic description of embeddings
of graphs in surfaces, especially in the case where these embeddings are “maps,”
that is, where the connected components of the complement of the graphs are open
cells. An important aspect in this theory is that one can associate to such a map
a group. Grothendieck calls this group a “cartographic group.”

Let us recall more precisely the setting. One starts with a pair (S, C) where S
is a compact surface and C a graph embedded in S, such that the components of
S \ C are open 2-cells. Grothendieck writes (§ 3):

[these objects] progressively attracted my attention over the following
years. The isotopic category of these maps admits a particularly simple
algebraic description via the set of “markers” (or “ﬂags,” or “biarcs”)
associated to the map, which is naturally equipped with the structure of
a set with a group of operators, under the group

1 = σ2

2 = (σ0σ2)1 = 1 >,

C 2 =< σ0, σ1, σ2|σ2

0 = σ2

which I call the (non-oriented) cartographic group of dimension 2. It ad-
mits as a subgroup of index 2 the oriented cartographic group, generated
by the products of an even number of generators, which can be described
by

2 =< ρs, ρf σ|ρsρf = σ, σ2 = 1 >,
C +

with

ρs = σ2σ1, ρf = σ1σ0, σ = σ0σ2 = σ2σ0,

operations of elementary rotation of a ﬂag around a vertex, a face and an
edge respectively. There is a perfect dictionary between the topological
situation of compact maps, resp. oriented compact maps, on the one
hand, and ﬁnite sets with group of operations C 2 resp. C +
2 on the other,
a dictionary whose existence was actually more or less known, but never
stated with the necessary precision, nor developed at all.

It turns out that this cartographic group is a quotient of the fundamental group of
a sphere with three points deleted. There are relations with ramiﬁed ﬁnite coverings
of the sphere, and thus, the question of classifying such coverings is raised. Using
the fact that any ﬁnite ramiﬁed covering of a complex algebraic curve is itself a
complex algebraic curve, Grothendieck is led to the fact that every ﬁnite oriented
map is canonically realized on a complex algebraic curve. The relation with number
theory arises when one considers the complex projective line deﬁned over Q, and
the ramiﬁcation points in that ﬁeld. Then the algebraic curves obtained are deﬁned
over Q. The map, on the covering surface (the algebraic curve) is the preimage of
the segment [0, 1] by the covering map. Grothendieck writes (§ 3):

This discovery, which is technically so simple, made a very strong im-
pression on me. It represents a decisive turning point in the course of
my reﬂections, a shift in particular of my centre of interest in mathe-
matics, which suddenly found itself strongly focused. I do not believe
that a mathematical fact has ever struck me so strongly as this one, or
had a comparable psychological impact. This is surely because of the

18

N. A’CAMPO, L. JI AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

very familiar, non-technical nature of the objects considered, of which
any child’s drawing scrawled on a bit of paper (at least if the drawing is
made without lifting the pencil) gives a perfectly explicit example.

In the general case, we have coverings over Q on which the Galois group Γ acts
in a natural way (through its action on the coeﬃcients of the polynomials deﬁning
the coverings). Grothendieck writes (§ 3):

Here, then, is that mysterious group Γ intervening as a transforming
agent on topologico-combinatorial forms of the most elementary possible
nature, leading us to ask questions like: are such and such oriented maps
“conjugate” or: exactly which are the conjugates of a given oriented
map? (Visibly, there is only a ﬁnite number of these).

The proﬁnite completion of the oriented cartographic group in turn leads to an

action on the proﬁnite fundamental group(cid:98)π0,3. Grothendieck declares that this is

how his attention was drawn to the study of anabelian algebraic geometry. He also
mentions the proﬁnite compactiﬁcation of the group SL(2, Z), of which he gives an
interpretation as an oriented cartographic group.

The question of what algebraic curves over Q are obtained through dessins
d’enfants is again addressed, in more “erudite terms” (the expression is Grothen-
dieck’s); he asks: “Could it be true that every projective non-singular algebraic
curve deﬁned over a number ﬁeld occurs as a possible ‘modular curve’ parametriz-
ing elliptic curves equipped with a suitable rigidiﬁcation?” He recalls that although
a “yes” answer seemed unlikely (and Deligne, which he consulted, found the possi-
bility of such an answer crazy), less than a year after he formulated that conjecture,
at the Helsinki ICM (1978), Belyi announced a proof of that same result. It is in-
teresting to recall how Grothendieck talks about this result in his Esquisse (§ 3):

In the form in which Belyi states it, his result essentially says that every
algebraic curve deﬁned over a number ﬁeld can be obtained as a covering
of the projective line ramiﬁed over the points 0, 1 and ∞. This result
seems to have remained more or less unobserved. Yet it appears to me
to have considerable importance. To me, its essential message is that
there is a profound identity between the combinatorics of ﬁnite maps on
the one hand, and the geometry of algebraic curves over number ﬁelds
on the other. This deep result, together with the algebraic-geometric
interpretation of maps, opens the door onto a new, unexplored world –
within reach of all, who pass by without seeing it.

putational formulation” of the action of the absolute Galois group Γ on (cid:98)π0,3, and

We also learn from Grothendieck’s Esquisse that it is after three years has passed,
during which Grothendieck realized that none of his students or colleagues with
whom he shared these ideas foresaw their importance, that he decided to write
his Longue marche `a travers la th´eorie de Galois (The long march through Galois
theory), a 1600-page manuscript completed in 1981 [31]. The goal, as he states it,
is clear: “An attempt at understanding the relations between ‘arithmetic’ Galois
groups and proﬁnite ‘geometric’ fundamental groups.” The details include a “com-
at a later stage, on the somewhat larger group (cid:92)SL(2, Z). The goal of anabelian al-
gebraic geometry is to reconstitute certain so-called ‘anabelian’ varieties X over an
absolute ﬁeld K from their mixed fundamental group, the extension of Gal(K/K)
by π1(XK). This also led Grothendieck to formulate what he called the “fundamen-
tal conjecture of anabelian algebraic geometry,” which is close to the conjectures
of Mordell and Tate that were proved by Faltings. Grothendieck writes: “Towards
the end of this period of reﬂection, it appeared to me as a fundamental reﬂection
on a theory still completely up in the air, for which the name ‘Galois-Teichm¨uller
theory’ seems to me more appropriate than the name ‘Galois Theory’ which I had
at ﬁrst given to my notes.”

ACTIONS OF THE ABSOLUTE GALOIS GROUP

19

Section 3 of the Esquisse ends with :

There are people who, faced with this, are content to shrug their shoul-
ders with a disillusioned air and to bet that all this will give rise to
nothing, except dreams. They forget, or ignore, that our science, and
every science, would amount to little if since its very origins it were not
nourished with the dreams and visions of those who devoted themselves
to it.

5. The Teichm¨uller tower and the Grothendieck-Teichm¨uller group

As we already mentioned, it turns out that the action of ΓQ on one single object
may be not enough to understand this group, and this is why in the theory developed
by Grothendieck, the group ΓQ is studied through its action on the Teichm¨uller
tower. We shall explain this setting in more detail.

The relation between the absolute Galois group ΓQ and algebraic fundamental
groups is studied by Grothendieck in his Longue marche `a travers la th´eorie de
Galois. This relation is exempliﬁed by the action of ΓQ on the algebraic fundamental
group of the tower of moduli spaces Mg,n. In some sense, these are the most natural
varieties deﬁned over Q. They are orbifolds with respect to several structures. We
are particularly interested here in their orbifold structure in the algebraic sense. In
particular, when we talk about their fundamental group, we mean their orbifold
fundamental group. We have, for every pair (g, n), a homomorphism

fg,n : ΓQ → Out((cid:98)π1(Mg,n)).

(2)

Grothendieck deﬁned the Teichm¨uller tower using the homomorphisms between
the group completions of the fundamental groups of moduli spaces that arise from
the natural maps between the underlying surfaces. These group completions are
deﬁned over Q and the inclusion maps are compatible with the absolute Galois
actions on them. Thus, the absolute Galois group acts on the tower.

There is a case of particular interest.

the proﬁnite completion of the free group on two generators. Therefore, ΓQ can be

It is a consequence of Belyi’s theorem
that for g = 0, n = 4, the homomorphism f0,4 in (2) is injective. We have M0,4 =

CP1 − {0, 1,∞} and the algebraic fundamental group (cid:99)π1(CP1 − {0, 1,∞}) is (cid:98)F2,
considered as a subgroup of the group Out((cid:98)F2). Thus, in principle, to study the
group Out((cid:98)F2). Grothendieck knew that this homomorphism f0,4 cannot be an

absolute Galois group ΓQ, it suﬃces to study its image in the outer automorphism

isomorphism, and he addressed the problem of giving a complete description of the
image of ΓQ under f0,4. He realized that the image satisﬁes a certain number of
simple equations, although he did not write them up. Drinfel’d wrote explicitly
in [22] a set of such equations, and he called the image group the Grothendieck-

construction of quasi-Hopf algebras. We now recall these equations. Let us recall
right away that it is unknown whether they are enough to characterize the image
of ΓQ.

Teichm¨uller group, denoted by (cid:100)GT. Drinfel’d, in this work, was motivated by the
Let (cid:98)Z be the proﬁnite completion of Z, that is, the inverse limit of the rings
prime numbers p.) As before, (cid:98)F2 is the proﬁnite completion of the free group
2 be the derived subgroup of (cid:98)F2.
F2 =< x, y > on the two generators x, y. We let (cid:98)F (cid:48)
Given an element f in (cid:98)F (cid:48)
the image of f by the homomorphism (cid:98)F (cid:48)
We consider the following equations on pairs (λ, f ) ∈(cid:98)Z∗ × (cid:98)F (cid:48)

Z/nZ. (This group is isomorphic to the product of the p-adic integers Zp for all

2 and a, b in a proﬁnite group G, we denote by f (a, b)

2 → G sending x to a and y to b.

2:

(3)

f (y, x)f (x, y) = 1,

20

(4)

N. A’CAMPO, L. JI AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

f (x, y)zmf (x, y)ymf (x, y)xm = 1,

(5)

the mapping class group Γ0,5.

f (x12, x23)f (x34, x45)f (x51, x12)f (x23, x34)f (x45, x51) = 1.

The ﬁrst two equations take place in the free proﬁnite group (cid:98)F2 =< x, y, z|xyz =
1 > with m = (λ − 1)/2 and the third equation in the proﬁnite completion (cid:98)Γ0,5 of
The Grothendieck-Teichm¨uller group(cid:100)GT is then the set of pairs (λ, f ) satisfying
these three equations such that the pair (λ, f ) induces an automorphism F on (cid:98)F2
The group ΓQ injects in the Grothendieck-Teichm¨uller group (cid:100)GT. One of the

via x (cid:55)→ xλ and y (cid:55)→ f−1yλf .

main conjectures, in the Grothendieck-Teichm¨uller theory, is that the map

(6)

is an isomorphism, cf. [45].

The three equations (3) (4) (5) show that there is a homomorphism (cid:100)GT →
Out((cid:98)Γ0,n) for n = 4 and 5, and in fact, there is such a homomorphism for each

n ≥ 0. The existence of homomorphism for n = 4 and 5 ensures the existence of
homomorphisms for all n ≥ 4. This is a consequence of the so-called “reconstruction
principle” or the “two-level principle,” which we already mentioned and which we
discuss again in § 7; cf. [44] and the references there. There are also some results
concerning the homomorphism

ΓQ →(cid:100)GT

fg,n : ΓQ → Out((cid:98)π1(Mg,n))

for other values of g and related to the two-level principle, and we discuss them in
§ 7.

We already mentioned that there is also a (non-proﬁnite) Grothendieck-Teichm¨uller

group, denoted by GT, which we shall not talk about it here.

We now mention another way of obtaining geometric actions of the Galois group,
following the description in [59]. Let C be the category of all regular quasi-projective
varieties X deﬁned over Q with Q-morphisms between them. The algebraic fun-

damental group (cid:98)π1 deﬁnes a functor from C to the category of proﬁnite groups.
The outer automorphism group of this functor, Out((cid:98)π1(C)), consists of collections
φX ∈ Out((cid:98)π1(X)), X ∈ C, which are compatible with morphisms between the

varieties X in C. As in the case of one single variety deﬁned over Q, there is a
homomorphism, analogous to (1)

ΓQ → Out((cid:98)π1(C)).

It was announced by Florian Pop in 2002 that this homomorphism is bijective.
Injectivity is rather a direct consequence of Belyi’s theorem, and it is the surjectivity
that is surprising in this statement.19

The category C may be thought of as a tower of algebraic varieties. Since all
regular quasi-projective varieties over Q and all Q-morphisms are allowed, the cat-

egory C appears as too large, and Out((cid:98)π1(C)) too complicated to be of any use.

For example, there are inﬁnitely many compatibility conditions to be satisﬁed. It
was Grothendieck’s idea that it is more natural (and may be suﬃcient) to consider
the tower M of the moduli spaces Mg,n with morphisms between them given by
coverings (including automorphisms of each moduli space) and of gluing the simple

curves into more complicated ones. We then obtain a group Out((cid:98)π1(M)) and a

natural morphism

ΓQ → Out((cid:98)π1(M)).

19The proof announced by Pop is diﬃcult to read and the paper is still unpublished.

ACTIONS OF THE ABSOLUTE GALOIS GROUP

21

One important point is that these morphisms between moduli spaces are natural,
whereas for general varieties, it is diﬃcult to ﬁnd natural morphisms.

One way of obtaining geometric representations of the absolute Galois group ΓQ
is through the theory of the ´etale fundamental group of moduli spaces Mg,n. To
give the precise setting that was introduced by Grothendieck, one would need to
use the notion of ´etale fundamental group of a scheme.

For any algebraic variety X deﬁned over Q, there is a short exact sequence

1 →(cid:98)π1(XQ) →(cid:98)π1(XQ) → ΓQ → 1.

(7)

Here, the fundamental distinction is between the variety X, considered as over

Q or over Q. The ´etale fundamental group (cid:98)π1(XQ) is the algebraic fundamental
sequence leads to an action of ΓQ on (cid:98)π1(X). See [77] for more details.

group when one considers the coverings of XQ which are unramiﬁed over the ra-
tional points. Thus, we consider unramiﬁed coverings of XQ, see [30]. The exact
In the
case of the moduli spaces Mg,n deﬁned over Q, there is a splitting of the surjective
homomorphism

(cid:98)π1(Mg,n(Q)) → ΓQ

which follows from the existence of Q-points, i.e., nonsingular curves deﬁned over
Q. In the case n = 1, Nakamura in [64] constructed an explicit splitting so that the
absolute Galois group acts on the Dehn twist generators (of Lickorish-Humphries
type) on explicit Grothendieck-Teichm¨uller parameters. This work has been gener-
alized to a general type (g, n) in Nakamura’s later paper [66].

To conclude this section, we mention that there are relations between the Grothendieck-

Teichm¨uller theory and theoretical physics. Indeed, the Teichm¨uller tower is also
an important concept in conformal ﬁeld theories (see the papers by Bakalov and
Kirillov [10] and [11]). The Lego-Teichm¨uller game can be seen as a collection of
generators and compatibility conditions for representations of mapping class groups.
More details on the Grothendieck-Teichm¨uller group are contained in Chapter

13 of the present volume [35].

6. The action of the absolute Galois group on dessins d’enfants

A dessin d’enfant is a ﬁnite connected graph G embedded in a connected ori-

entable closed surface S such that:

(1) S \ G is a union of open cells;
(2) the vertices of G can be colored black and white so that no two vertices
(We say that the graph is

connected by an edge have the same color.
bicolorable.)

A dessin d’enfant G, or (S, G), is a combinatorial object deﬁned up to isotopy.
Such objects make important connections between topology, Riemann surface the-
ory, number theory and algebraic geometry. The initial goal of the theory was to
get a list of combinatorial invariants of dessins in order to characterize the Galois
group orbits. We are still very far from this goal.
From a Belyi morphism f : X → S2 one gets a dessin d’enfant as the inverse
image f−1([0, 1]). The black vertices are the points over 0 and the white vertices
are the points over 1.
Conversely, given a dessin, one can triangulate the underlying surface by putting
vertices marked ∗ in each cell, and joining this new vertex to the actual vertices of
the dessin. The dual cells deﬁne a paving of the surface, where the boundary of
each dual cell has 4 edges, two going from a ∗ to a black vertex and two going from
a ∗ to a white vertex. Taking the quotient of this surface by identifying pairwise
the two kinds of edges in each dual cell, we get a covering of the sphere unramiﬁed

22

N. A’CAMPO, L. JI AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

outside three points. Dessin d’enfants can also be described in terms of ribbon
graphs, see [43].

Examples of dessins d’enfants associated to some speciﬁc Belyi morphisms are
contained in [43]. We also refer the reader to the survey [40] in volume I of this
Handbook and to the surveys by L. Schneps, in particular [76].

One of the major ideas of Grothendieck in the theory that we are concerned with
in this chapter is the correspondence between the action of the absolute Galois group
ΓQ on polynomials with coeﬃcients in Q and its action on dessins d’enfants as com-
binatorial objects. The action of ΓQ on the latter is faithful (a non-identity element
of ΓQ sends at least one dessin to a non-isomorphic dessin). This observation is at
the basis of the combinatorial approach to the study of the absolute Galois group.
In this section, we give a brief summary of some basic facts in this theory.
Chapter 13 of the present volume, by P. Guillot [35], contains a comprehensive
exposition.

It was known to Riemann that every compact Riemann surface may be bira-
tionally immersed20 in a projective space as an algebraic curve deﬁned by some
polynomial f (x, y) with coeﬃcients in C. The question of when one can choose the
coeﬃcients in a number ﬁeld, that is, when such a curve is deﬁned over the ﬁeld
Q of algebraic numbers, is of fundamental importance in number theory. We recall
that an algebraic curve is said to be deﬁned over Q when it can be represented as
the zero set of a polynomial (or a system of polynomials) F . The curve is the set
of solutions in CP2.

The following theorem gives a characterization of such curves.

Theorem 1. A compact Riemann surface X is an algebraic curve deﬁned over Q
if and only if it is a ramiﬁed covering β : X → CP1 of the Riemann sphere with
ramiﬁcation set contained in the set {0, 1,∞}.

Furthermore, this characterization leads to an outer representation

ΓQ → Out((cid:99)π1(CP1 − {0, 1,∞}))

which is injective

The “only if” direction of the ﬁrst statement in Theorem 1 is the theorem of Belyi
which we mentioned already [12], and the “if” direction is a direct consequence of
a theorem of Weil concerning the ﬁeld of deﬁnition of an algebraic variety [90].
Making this result eﬀective is not an easy matter. See Wolfart’s paper on the
“obvious part” of Belyi’s theorem [93]. The map β that appears in this statement
is called a Belyi map for X and the pair (X, β) is called a Belyi pair for X (or a
Belyi map).
There is a natural equivalence relation on the set of Belyi pairs: (X, β) and
(X(cid:48), β(cid:48)) are equivalent if there is a biholomorphic map f : X → X(cid:48) between the
two underlying Riemann surfaces such that β(cid:48) ◦ f = β. This equivalence relation
makes the correspondence between the algebraic curves with coeﬃcients in number
ﬁelds and dessins d’enfants.

There are bijections between the following sets :

(1) The set of isomorphism classes of dessins d’enfants;
(2) The set of isomorphism classes of Belyi morphisms;
(3) The set of isomorphism classes of ﬁnite topological coverings of CP1 −
(4) The set of ﬁnite coverings of CP1 branched at most at {0, 1,∞};
(5) The set of conjugacy classes of subgroups of ﬁnite index in the fundamental

{0, 1,∞}.

group π1 of CP1 − {0, 1,∞};

20The immersion is in CP2 if we allow ordinary double points.

ACTIONS OF THE ABSOLUTE GALOIS GROUP

23

(6) The set of conjugacy classes of transitive subgroups of the permutation

group Sn (for all n) generated by two elements.

(7) The set of polygonal decompositions of topological surfaces (the graph dual

to the polygonal decomposition is the corresponding dessin).

These equivalences can be stated in terms of category equivalence, see [36] and

[35].

There is a relation with the algebraic fundamental group, which follows from
Item (5) in the above list. The system of ﬁnite index normal subgroups forms an
injective system, and the system of ﬁnite quotients forms a dual projective system,
whose limit is by deﬁnition the proﬁnite completion of the fundamental group of
F2.

For any algebraic variety X deﬁned over Q, if π1(X) denotes its algebraic fun-

damental group and (cid:98)π1(X) the proﬁnite completion of that group, then there is a

canonical outer action of ΓQ on π1(X/Q). That is, there exists a homomorphism

ΓQ → Out(π1(X/Q))

(see Equation (1) above). In the particular case where X = P1Q − {0, 1,∞}, which
is also the moduli space of the sphere with four ordered marked points and whose
topological fundamental group is the free group F2, we get a canonical homomor-
phism

ΓQ → Out((cid:99)F2).

(8)

Here, the proﬁnite group on two generators(cid:99)F2 is identiﬁed (in a non-canonical way)

with the algebraic fundamental group of π1(X/Q). The absolute Galois group ΓQ
acts on this group. The homomorphism is injective, see [44] [45] and [23].
Thus, the space P1Q − {0, 1,∞}, equipped with the action of the Galois group,
occurs both in the theory of dessins d’enfants, and in the Teichm¨uller tower. It
is natural then to try to classify isomorphism classes of ﬁnite coverings X → CP1
whose critical values are in {0, 1,∞}. These isomorphism classes are in one-to-one
correspondence with conjugacy classes of subgroups of ﬁnite index of the funda-
mental group of CP1 − {0, 1,∞}.
We already noted in § 4 that to a dessin d’enfant (and to more general graphs on
surfaces) is associated a group. This group is naturally deﬁned by permutations.
The cyclic ordering at each vertex induced from the orientation of the surface
determines two permutations g0 and g1 of the set E of edges. The group < g0, g1 >
generated by these permutations is a subgroup of the symmetric group on the set
of edges; it is also called the monodromy group of the dessin. The topological
assumptions in the deﬁnition of the dessin imply that the monodromy group acts
transitively on the set of edges. It is interesting to know that a slightly modiﬁed
deﬁnition of a group deﬁned by permutations associated to a graph on a surface
can be traced back to the work of Hamilton on the construction of the so-called
Hamiltonian cycles in the icosahedron; cf.
[38] (1856). We learned this from a
paper of G. A. Jones [49], which contains an interesting survey on the subject of
graphs on surfaces, groups and Galois actions. See also [48]. The notion of dessin
d’enfant is also latent in Klein’s work (1879) [54], and these objects are called there
“Linienzuges.” See L. le Bruyn’s blog [57]. The drawing in Figure 1 is extracted
from Klein’s paper. It is the pre-image of the interval [0, 1] by a degree-11 covering
of the Riemann sphere ramiﬁed over the three points 0, 1,∞. Klein labels the
preimage of 0 by • and those of 1 by +. He identiﬁes the monodromy group of
this covering as the group PSL(2, 11). This work is in the lineage of his famous
Lectures on the icosahedron [53] (1884). We mention by the way that the study of

24

N. A’CAMPO, L. JI AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

Figure 1. The picture is from Klein’s paper [54]. Grothendieck
writes in the introduction of the Esquisse: “I was brought back,
via objects so simple that a child learns them while playing, to the
beginnings and origins of algebraic geometry, familiar to Riemann
and his followers!” Klein was probably the most faithful follower
of Riemann.

regular polyhedra is part of Grothendieck’s program.21 § 4 of [32] is titled Regular
polyhedra over ﬁnite ﬁelds.

The paper [74] by Shabat and Voevodskij made the work of Belyi known among
physicists; see also [16] for a relation with Fuchsian triangle groups. There are
several papers and books on dessins d’enfants, see e.g. [25] and [94].

We owe the next remark to M. Uluda˘g. More details on this are given in Chapter

15 of the present volume [87].

Remark 6.1. Today we understand that this result is better expressed in terms
of the modular group: The automorphism group of the space CP1 − {0, 1,∞} is
the symmetric group Σ3, and the quotient M = CP1 − {0, 1,∞}/Σ3 is the modular
curve (in fact an orbifold) H/PSL(2, Z). Hence the fundamental group π1(M) is
the modular group PSL(2, Z), and the group π1(CP1−{0, 1,∞} (cid:39) F2 is a subgroup

21 On p. 19 of [32], Grothendieck writes: In 1977 and 1978, in parallel with two C4 courses on
the geometry of the cube and that of the icosahedron, I started being interested in regular polyhe-
dra, which then appeared to me as particularly concrete “geometric realizations” of combinatorial
maps, the vertices, edges and faces being realized as points, lines and planes respectively in a
suitable 3-dimensional aﬃne space and respecting incidence relations. This notion of a geometric
realization of a combinatorial map keeps its meaning over an arbitrary base ﬁeld, and even over
an arbitrary base ring.

ACTIONS OF THE ABSOLUTE GALOIS GROUP

25

of index 6 in this group. This gives rise to a more fundamental outer representation

ΓQ → Out((cid:99)π1(M)) = Out( (cid:92)PSL(2, Z)).

If we join by an arc the two elliptic points of the modular curve M and lift it to ﬁnite
orbifold coverings of M, then we obtain what must be called “modular graphs,”
which is a special case of a dessin but in fact of equal power in description. Modular
graphs are the same thing as the trivalent ribbon graphs and their universal cover
is the trivalent planar tree. These graphs (or trees) classify the conjugacy classes of
subgroups of the modular group. Modular graphs are dual graphs to triangulations
of topological surfaces.
In this sense, a triangulated surface is nothing but the
conjugacy class of a subgroup of the modular group. As such, it endows the ambient
topological surface with the structure of an arithmetic Riemann surface, and every
such surface can be obtained in this way.

In conclusion, the free group F2 appears twice as a subgroup in PSL(2, Z) : ﬁrst
as an index-6 subgroup of π1(M), and a second time as its derived subgroup. The
corresponding cover of M is a once-punctured torus. Coverings of the latter surface
have been studied (with the extra structure of the lift of a ﬂat metric on the torus)
under the name origamis, cf. [43].

7. The reconstruction principle

One deep insight of Grothendieck which we already mentioned in § 4 is a gen-
eral principle, called the “reconstruction principle,” or the “two-level principle.”
This principle may be applied in various situations in algebra, Lie groups, topol-
ogy, geometry, and probably others ﬁelds. Roughly speaking, it says that some
construction involving several layers (may be inﬁnitely many) may be reduced in
practice to understanding its ﬁrst two layers. Grothendieck alluded to several cases
where this principle holds, and the details of some of them were worked out later on
by other authors. In some sense, the two-level principle makes a system to which it
is applied close to a ﬁnitely presented group, which may be constructed (say, as a
Cayley graph of the group) from its ﬁrst level (the generators) and the second level
(the relations).

Grothendieck made a clear relation between this principle and the action of the
Galois group on the Teichm¨uller tower, his aim being to narrow down the range of
the relations, or of the action, in order to characterize the image of the group. We
shall say more about this below.

An elementary example of the reconstruction principle occurs in the construction
of hyperbolic n-manifolds by gluing convex polyhedra with totally geodesic bound-
aries in the hyperbolic space Hn. The gluing data consist of pairwise identiﬁcations
by isometries of the codimension-1 boundary faces. The important fact here is that
in order to get a Riemannian metric on the resulting manifold, one has to impose
conditions only at the codimension-2 faces, namely, that the dihedral angles add
up to 2π. No further conditions are required.

This principle also reminds us of a basic principle in the theory of root systems
of semisimple Lie algebras, which is based on the notion of reﬂection (or Coxeter)
group. Let us start with a reﬂection group in Rn. This is a group W generated by a
system of reﬂections ri with respect to hyperplanes Hi in Rn. Given two reﬂections
ri, rj, suppose that the angle between any two hyperplanes Hi, Hj is equal to π/cij,
where cij is an integer (this holds automatically when the reﬂection group is ﬁnite).
Then the only relation between ri and rj is

These “order-two” relations give a presentation of the group W .

(rirj)cij = 1.

26

N. A’CAMPO, L. JI AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

Now we consider the notion of root system. This is a conﬁguration of spanning
vectors in some vector space that satisfy some other conditions (invariance by some
associated geometric transformations). This concept was introduced by W. Killing
in the nineteenth century, in his work on the classiﬁcation of semisimple Lie alge-
bras over C. Today, root systems are usually classiﬁed using Dynkin diagrams. The
important fact here is that in the description of the structure of a semisimple Lie
algebra g, it is the interaction between pairs of root spaces gα and gβ which deter-
mines the Lie algebra. More precisely, for any pair of roots α and β of a semisimple
Lie algebra g, the associated root spaces generate a Lie algebra isomorphic to the
basic simple Lie algebra sl(2). The bracketing of the two root spaces gα and gβ
amounts to the bracketing of two copies of these rank-one sub-Lie algebras sl(2).

One way of formulating this uses Dynkin diagrams. These are graphs22 that
are especially used in the classiﬁcation of semi-simple Lie algebras. The graphs
are decorated (they may be oriented, and with some edges doubled or tripled)
with vertices corresponding to the separable subalgebras. The edges describe the
interaction between the algebras attached to their vertices. The Dynkin diagrams
represent the root systems of Lie algebras. The interesting fact for us here is
that this is also an instance where the ﬁnal object is determined by the ﬁrst two
levels. Non-oriented Dynkin diagrams are also Coxeter diagrams, and they describe
the ﬁnite reﬂection groups associated with the root system instead of the root
system itself. In summary, the objects at the ﬁrst level generate the group and the
compatibility conditions are determined at level 2. For more details about the brief
statements made here, see [52, Chapter II].

There are other instances of the reconstruction principle in mathematics, and
Grothendieck mentions a few of them. In category theory, there is a similar principle
referred to as a coherence theorem. Typically, it says that in order to show that
a certain property involving an inﬁnite number of conditions is satisﬁed, it suﬃces
to check a small number of conditions. One famous such coherence property in
category theory is called the Mac Lane23 coherence theorem, cf.
[62]. A special
case says that a certain condition in a monoidal category requiring an inﬁnite
number of equalities involving compositions of associators (morphisms of the form
(A ⊗ B) ⊗ C → A ⊗ (B ⊗ C) where A, B, C are triples of objects in the category)
is satisﬁed provided certain diagrams between four objects commute.

Grothendieck formulated the reconstruction principle for the Teichm¨uller tower.
In that situation the result is also referred to as the Lego-Teichm¨uller game. A
more precise form of the principle in this setting is that every element of the outer

automorphism group of the Teichm¨uller tower Out((cid:98)π1(M)) is determined by its
conditions satisﬁed by the elements of Out((cid:98)π1(M)) with respect to morphisms at

action on moduli spaces at level 1, and that for what concerns the compatibility

the various levels, it is suﬃcient to check the compatibility at level 2. Thus in
this particular case, there are only ﬁnitely many “generators” and ﬁnitely many
“relations” (using Grothendieck’s analogy with the language of ﬁnitely presented
groups). This principle also shows that in the study of the absolute Galois group
on the Teichm¨uller tower, it is suﬃcient to study the action on the ﬁrst two levels.
In the genus-0 case, the proof of the reconstruction principle for the Teichm¨uller
tower was established by Drinfel’d [22] in the sense that the three relations that we
mentioned from M0,5 in §,5, work for all M0,n. This genus-0 case was in a sense
completed by Harbater and Schneps in [39]. The papers [41] by Hatcher, Lochak
and Schneps and [67] by Nakamura and Schneps concern the higher genus case. It

22Named after Eugene Dynkin (1924-2014).
23We mentioned above the Eilenberg-MacLane places. S. MacLane and S. Mac Lane are the

same person; Mac Lane used in his publications two diﬀerent spellings of his name.

ACTIONS OF THE ABSOLUTE GALOIS GROUP

27

is shown there that an additional relation found by Nakamura (cf. his paper [65],
Theorem 4.16) on M1,2, together with Drinfeld’s relations, deﬁne a subgroup of the
Grothendieck-Teichm¨uller group that acts on the proﬁnite mapping class groups of
marked Riemann surfaces of all types (g, n) given with pants decompositions.

The reconstruction principle can appear in many other diﬀerent forms. In the
context of low-dimensional topology, the principle is used in the construction of
hyperbolic surfaces and other kinds of geometric structures out of constructions
on pairs of pants, and the compatibility conditions are determined by conditions
on the spheres with four holes and the tori with two holes that are the unions of
two adjacent pairs of pants (or of one pair of pants with two boundary components
glued together). To say things more formally, we let S be a surface of ﬁnite type.
An essential subsurface S(cid:48) of S is a surface with boundary which is embedded in
S in such a way that no complementary component of S(cid:48) is a disk or an annulus
having a boundary component which is also a boundary component of S. There is
a hierarchy on the set of isotopy classes of essential subsurfaces, which is roughly
determined by their Euler characteristic. In this hierarchy, the level 0 subsurfaces
are the pairs of pants, the level 1 surfaces are the spheres with four holes and the
tori with one hole (obtained, as we already said, by gluing two distinct pairs of
pants along a boundary component or a single pair of pants to itself along two
boundary component respectively ), the level 2 surfaces are the tori with 2 holes
and the spheres with 5 holes (obtained by gluing three surfaces of level 1 along
boundary components) and so on. One can also think of the complexity of a (sub)-
surface as the number of pairs of pants in a pants decomposition. Grothendieck’s
reconstruction principle in this special case asserts that a “geometric structure” (in
a very broad sense) on a surface is completely determined by its restriction to level
1 and level 2 essential subsurfaces.

The idea of the reconstruction principle in Teichm¨uller theory was developed by
Feng Luo in the survey [61] in Volume II of the present Handbook. Luo worked
out several interesting instances of that principle, besides the familiar example of
the construction of hyperbolic surfaces, involving a large variety of geometric and
algebraic constructions including mapping class groups (using the presentation by
Gervais [24]), Teichm¨uller spaces, measured foliations, geometric intersection func-
tions, representations of the fundamental group of the surface in SL(2, C), the con-
struction of n-sided convex polygons where to construct the moduli space of convex
n-polygons it suﬃces to understand the moduli spaces of quadrilaterals), and there
are others examples. One has also to recall that Luo’s proof given in [60] of the fact
that the simplcial automorphism group of the curve complex coincides (up to the
usual exceptions) with the image of the extended mapping class group of the surface
in that group is a proof by induction which is based on Grothendieck’s reconstruc-
tion principle. Luo, in his work on Grothendieck’s reconstruction principle, uses
the notion of modular structure, which originates from Grothendieck’s ideas. We
recall the deﬁnition. Consider the projective space P 1Q equipped with its PSL(2, Z)
action. A modular structure on a discrete set X is a maximal atlas {(Ui, φi), i ∈ I}
where each φi : Ui → P 1Q is injective, such that ∪i∈I Ui = X and the transition
functions φiφ−1
are restrictions of elements of PSL(2, Z). An example of a space
equipped with a modular structure is the set of homotopy classes of essential (that
is, not homotopic to a point or to a boundary component) simple closed curves on
a surface. Luo proves that this set is equipped with a modular structure which is
invariant by the action of the mapping class group (see [60], Lemma 3.4). He then
shows that the automorphism group of this modular structure is the mapping class
group of the surface. Such a structure plays an important role in conformal ﬁeld
theories.

j

28

N. A’CAMPO, L. JI AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

We note that the reconstruction principle is also used (without the name) in the
paper [42] by Hatcher and Thurston on the presentation of the mapping class group.
Indeed, the relations that these authors ﬁnd in that group, corresponding to moves
in the pants decomposition complex, are supported on the level-two surfaces of the
given topological surface. In the same paper, the study of the singularities in the
space of smooth functions on the surface is also limited to the level-two subsurfaces.
Finally, we note that there is a relation between the reconstruction principle
and Thom’s classiﬁcation of singularities, and the famous result in catastrophe
theory asserting that there are only seven possible forms generic bifurcations (or
catastrophes).

8. The cartographic group

We already mentioned that gaphs embedded in compact oriented surfaces satis-
fying certain properties (their complement is a union of polygons, and some other
mild properties) give rise to groups. Grothendieck called such a group a cartographic
group. Such graphs and groups were studied by various authors, with slightly dif-
ferent deﬁnitions (see e.g. the book by Lando, and Zvonkin [55], the papers [55],
[16], [95] and the survey article by Bauer and Itzykson [8]). There are several open
questions concerning these objects.

Grothendieck introduced the following terminology. An arc is an edge of the
graph C equipped with an orientation. A bi-arc is an arc equipped with an orien-
tation and a transverse orientation. Thus, each edge gives rise to four bi-arcs.
Let BA(S, C) be the set of bi-arcs of (S, C). There are four natural mappings
BA(S, C) → BA(S, C), called K, H, T, G. The mapping K reverses the orientation,
the mapping H reverses the transverse orientation. The mapping T is a “turning
mapping” deﬁned as follows. Each bi-arc a, equipped with its orientation, has
an initial vertex p(a) and a ﬁnal vertex q(a). We turn around p(a) in the sense
of the normal orientation, until it coincides with another bi-arc b. We then set
T (a) = b. The mapping G is a “sliding mapping.” The transverse orientation of
a bi-arc a points towards a complementary component D(a) of S \ C. Let b be
the bi-arc in the boundary of D(a) satisfying p(b) = q(a) and whose transverse
orientation points towards D(a). We set G(a) = b. These operations satisfy the
relations K 2 = H 2 = Id and KH = HK = KHT G = Id. The cartographic
group U is the group generated by the four operations K, H, T, G and presented
by this set of relations. For every pair (S, C), the associated group U acts tran-
sitively on the set BA(S, C) of bi-arcs. The pair (S, C) is therefore characterized
by the stabilizers of this action. In fact, choosing one stabilizer characterizes the
surface. To any graph (also called map, or “carte,” from where the name carto-
graphic group arises) is associated a subgroup of this group. Subgroups of ﬁnite
index correspond to compact surfaces. Surfaces with ﬁnite geometry can also be
characterized, etc. In fact, Grothendieck considered this construction as a universal
construction which is a combinatorial version of Teichm¨uller space. He conjectured
that it is a tool for approaching Nielsen’s realization problem. Motivated by this
problem, Grothendieck gave his students in Montpellier the task of classifying iso-
topy and homeomorphism classes of various objects (graphs, systems of curves,
subsurfaces, and mixtures of them). The cartographic group is related to classes of
cell decompositions. Grothendieck also introduced another group, the “universal
cartographic group,” as a kind of combinatorial Teichm¨uller theory. Amid this full
activity in Montpellier, the news that the Nielsen realization problem was settled
by S. Kerckhoﬀ reached Grothendieck, who asked N. A’Campo (the ﬁrst author of
the present chapter) to come to Montpellier and explain the proof. At the same

ACTIONS OF THE ABSOLUTE GALOIS GROUP

29

occasion, A’Campo ended up being the thesis advisor of Pierre Damphousse, a stu-
dent of Grothendieck who was working on the cartographic group; cf. the obituary
[37].

There is a relation between the cartographic group and dessins d’enfants. A
more detailed exposition of the theory of the cartographic group is contained in
Chapter 13 of the present volume [35].

9. By way of conclusion

Most of the conjectures made by Grothendieck in the area we survey in this
chapter still inspire further research. In particular, the conjecture saying that the
homomorphism from the absolute Galois group to the (proﬁnite version)24 of the
Grothendieck-Teichm¨uller group (cf. (6)) is an isomorphism is still open. Further-
more, the status of a few results in the so-called Grothendieck-Teichm¨uller theory
is rather unclear, because proofs have been given in papers which are unreadable.
In a recent correspondence, Deligne summarized the situation as follows: “The
(proﬁnite) fundamental groupoids of the M0,n (or of the Mg,n), with various base
points at inﬁnity (deﬁned over Z) are related by various maps, coming from the fact
that strata at inﬁnity (for the Deligne-Mumford compactiﬁcations) are expressed
by smaller M0,m. Gal(Q/Q) acts faithfully (by Belyi) on this, and the hope could
be that it is the full automorphism group. We have no direct description of any au-
tomorphism of this structure, except for the one induced by complex conjugation.
There is no evidence for the hope, and it is unclear how useful it would be. Indeed,
a basic building block for the structure is the free proﬁnite group in 2 generators,
and this being shorthand for ‘all the ways to generate a ﬁnite group by 2 elements,’
is diﬃcult to handle. Even the fact that the center of this free proﬁnite group is
trivial is not so obvious! I think Grothendieck was fascinated by the ease with which
one could describe a ﬁnite covering of P1 ramiﬁed only at 0, 1, and inﬁnity (“dessins
d’enfants”). Gal(Q/Q) transforms one such covering into another. Unfortunately,
the language of ‘dessins d’enfants’ has been of no help in understanding this ac-
tion.” This is more or less the same view that Deligne expressed some 30 years ago
in his paper [17]. In contrast with this pessimistic view, let us say that the topic
of dessins has reached a certain maturity in the last few years, and that surveys
and books on this subject were recently published, with some speciﬁc results and
questions that ornament the subject, see e.g. [25], [36] and Chapter 13 by Guillot
[35] in the present volume. Chapters 14 [86], by Uluda˘g and Sa˘glam, and 15 [87],
by Uluda˘g and A. Zeytin, bring a fresh point of view on this theory that is more
related to low-dimensional topology and Teichm¨uller theory.

Our conclusion is that it is the combination of number theory, topology, and
geometry that is really the key to the essential piece of mathematics that is sketched
in Grothendieck’s Esquisse.

References

[1] A. A’Campo-Neuen, N. A’Campo, L. Ji and A. Papadopoulos, A commentary on Te-
ichm¨uller’s paper Ver¨anderliche Riemannsche Fl¨achen. In Handbook of Teichm¨uller the-
ory, Vol. IV (A. Papadopoulos, ed.), Z¨urich, 2014, 805-814.

[2] N. A’Campo, L. Ji and A. Papadopoulos, On the early history of moduli and Teichm¨uller
spaces, In Lipman Bers, a Life in Mathematics (L. Keen, I. Kra and R. E. Rodriguez,
ed.) American Math. Society, 2015, 175-262.

24There are at least three versions of the Grothendieck-Teichm¨uller group: a proﬁnite version,
a pro-l version, and a pro-unipotent version. The proﬁnite version is the version we consider in this
chapter, and it is the version which Grothendieck introduced. The other versions are variations
on this one.

30

N. A’CAMPO, L. JI AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

[3] N. A’Campo, L. Ji and A. Papadopoulos, On Grothendieck’s construction of Teichm¨uller
space, In Handbook of Teichm¨uller theory (A. Papadopoulos, ed.), Volume VI, EMS
Publishing House, Z¨urich, 2016, ???-???.

[4] N. A’Campo, L. Ji and A. Papadopoulos, On Grothendieck’s tame topology, In Hand-
book of Teichm¨uller theory (A. Papadopoulos, ed.), Volume VI, EMS Publishing House,
Z¨urich, 2016, 35-69.

[5] J. F. Adams, On the groups J(X). Diﬀerential and Combinatorial Topology, A Sympo-

sion in honor of Marston Morse, Princeton, 1965, 121-143.

[6] J. F. Adams, On the groups J(X). II. Topology 3, (1965), 137-171
[7] J. F. Adams, On the groups J(X). III. Topology 3, 193-222 (1965).
[8] M. Bauer and C. Itzykson, Triangulations. In The Grothendieck theory of dessins
d’enfants (L. Schneps, ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Lond. Math. Soc.
Lect. Note Ser. 200, 1994, 179-236.

[9] W. L. Baily and A. Borel, Compactiﬁcation of arithmetic quotients of bounded symmetric

domains. Ann. of Math. (2) 84 (1966), 442¯D528.

[10] B. Bakalov and A. Kirillov, Lectures on tensor categories and modular functors, Univer-

sity Lecture Series 21, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2001.

[11] B. Bakalov and A. Kirillov, On the Lego-Teichm¨uller game, Transformation Groups 5

(2000) No. 3, 207-244.

[12] G. V. Belyi, On Galois extensions of a maximal cyclotomic ﬁeld, Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR
Ser. Mat. 43 (1979), No. 2, 267-276. English translation: Math. USSR-Izv. 14 (1980),
247¯D256.

[13] M. V. Borovoi, Conjugation of Shimura varieties. In Proceedings of the International
Congress of Mathematicians, Vol. 1 (Berkeley, Calif., 1986), Amer. Math. Soc., Provi-
dence, RI, 1987, 783¯D790.

[14] P. Cartier, A mad day’s work: from Grothendieck to Connes and Kontsevich; The evo-

lution of concepts of space and symmetry. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 38 (2001), 389-408.

[15] P. Cartier, A country of which nothing is known but the name: Grothendieck and “mo-
tives.” In Alexander Grothendieck: A mathematical portrait (L. Schneps, ed.) Interna-
tional Press, Sommerville, 2014, 268-298.

[16] P. Cohen, C. Itzykson and J. Wolfart, Fuchsian triangle groups and Grothendieck dessins.

Variations on a theme of Belyi. Commun. Math. Phys. 163 (1994), No.3, 605-627.

[17] P. Deligne, Le groupe fondamental de la droite projective moins trois points, In Galois

groups over Q, Publ. MSRI 16 (1989), 79-298.

[18] J. Diestel, Grothendieck and Banach space theory. In Alexander Grothendieck: A math-

ematical portrait (L. Schneps, ed.) International Press, Sommerville, 2014, 1-12.

[19] J. Diestel, J. H. Fourie and J. Swart, The metric theory of tensor products.
Grothendieck’s r´esum´e revisited. Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society 278 p.
(2008).

[20] J. Dieudonn´e, les travaux de Alexander Grothendieck, In Proceedings of the International

Congress of Mathematicians (Moscow, 1966) Izdat. “Mir,” Moscow, 1968, 21-24.

[21] J. Dieudonn´e, A. Grothendieck’s early work (1950-1960). K-Theory 3 (1989), No.4, 299-

306.

[22] V. G. Drinfel’d, On quasitriangular quasi-Hopf algebras and on a group that is closely
connected with Gal(Q/Q), Rossijskaya Akademiya Nauk. Algebra i Analiz 2 (4): 149:
181, English translation in Leningrad Math. J. Vol. 2 (1991), No. 4, 829-860.

[23] M. Emsalem and P. Lochak, The action of the absolute Galois group on the moduli
space of spheres with four marked points, Appendix to [45]. In The Grothendieck theory
of dessins d’enfants. (L. Schneps, ed.), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Lond.
Math. Soc. Lect. Note Ser. 200, 1994, 307-321.

[24] S. Gervais, Presentation and central extensions of mapping class groups. Trans. Amer.

Math. Soc. 348 (1966) No. 8, 3097-3132.

[25] E. Girondo and G. Gonz`alez-Diez, Introduction to Compact Riemann Surfaces and

Dessins d’Enfants, London Mathematical Society Student Texts Paperback, 2012.

[26] E. Grossman, On the residual ﬁniteness of certain mapping class groups. J. London

Math. Soc. (2) 9 (1974/75), 160-164.

[27] A. Grothendieck, Produits tensoriels topologiques et espaces nucl´eaires. Mem. Am. Math.

Soc. 16, 1955.

[28] A. Grothendieck, Resum´e de la th´eorie m´etrique des produits tensoriels topologiques.

Bol. Soc. Mat. Sao Paulo 8 (1956) 1-79.

[29] A. Grothendieck, Techniques de construction en g´eom´etrie analytique. I-X. S´eminaire

Henri Cartan, tome 13, no. 1 (1960-1961).

ACTIONS OF THE ABSOLUTE GALOIS GROUP

31

[30] A. Grothendieck, Revˆetements ´etales et groupe fondamental (SGA1), S´eminaire de
g´eom´etrie alg´ebrique du Bois Marie (1960-61), Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 224,
Springer Verlag, 1971.

[31] A. Grothendieck, La longue marche `a travers la th´eorie de Galois, written in 1981,
manuscript, 1600 pages. Part of the manuscript was typeset annd edited with a foreword
by Jean Malgoire, Universit´e Montpellier II, D´epartement des Sciences Math´ematiques,
1995.

[32] A. Grothendieck, Esquisse d’un programme (Sketch of a program), unpublished man-
uscript (1984), English translation by P. Lochak and L. Schneps, In Geometric Galois
actions, Vol. 1, “Around Grothendieck’s Esquisse d’un Programme” (L. Schneps and
P. Lochak, ed.) London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser. Vol. 242, Cambridge Univ. Press,
Cambridge, 1997, 5-48,

[33] A. Grothendieck, R´ecoles et semailles : R´eﬂexions et t´emoignage sur un pass´e de
math´ematicien (Harvesting and Sowing : Reﬂections and testimony on a mathemati-
cian’s past), manuscript, 1983-1986, to appear as a book.

[34] A. Grothendieck, Letter to G. Faltings (Brief an G. Faltings.), In Geometric Galois
actions, Vol.1, “Around Grothendieck’s Esquisse d’un Programme” (L. Schneps and P.
Lochak, ed.) London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser. Vol. 242, Cambridge Univ. Press,
Cambridge, 1997, 285-293.

[35] P. Guillot, A primer on dessins, In Handbook of Teichm¨uller theory (A. Papadopoulos,

ed.), Volume VI, EMS Publishing House, Z¨urich, 2016, 437-466.

[36] P. Guillot, An elementary approach to dessins d’enfants and the Grothendieck-

Teichm¨uller group. L’Ens. Math. 60 (2014), Vol. 3/4, 293-375.

[37] R. Guitart, Pierre Damphousse, math´ematicien (1947–2012). Cahiers de Topologie et de

G´eom´etrie Diﬀ´erentielle Cat´egorique. 54 (2013), 233–239.

[38] W. R. Hamilton, Letter to John T. Graves “On the Icosian” (17th October 1856), in
Mathematical papers, Vol. III, Algebra (eds. H. Halberstam and R. E. Ingram), Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge, 1967, 612-625.

[39] D. Harbater and L. Schneps, Fundamental groups of moduli and the Grothendieck-

Teichm¨uller group, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 352 (2000), 3117-3148.

[40] W. J. Harvey, Teichm¨uller spaces, triangle groups and Grothendieck dessins. In Handbook
of Teichm¨uller theory (A. Papadopoulos (ed.) Volume I, EMS Publishing House, Z¨urich
2007, 249-292.

[41] A. Hatcher, P. Lochak and L. Schneps, On the Teichm¨uller tower of mapping class groups.

J. Reine Angew. Math. 521 (2000), 1-24

[42] A. Hatcher, and W. P. Thurston, A presentation for the mapping class group of a closed

orientable surface. Topology 19 (1980), 221-237.

[43] F. Herrlich and G. Schmith¨usen, Dessins d’enfants and origami curves. In Handbook of
Teichm¨uller theory (A. Papadopoulos (ed.) Volume II, EMS Publishing House, Z¨urich
2007, 767-809.

[44] Y. Ihara, Braids, Galois groups, and some arithmetic functions. In Proceedings of the
International Congress of Mathematicians, Vol. I (Kyoto, 1990), 99-120, Math. Soc.
Japan, Tokyo, 1991.

[45] Y. Ihara, On the embedding of Gal(Q/Q) into(cid:100)GT. In The Grothendieck theory of dessins

d’enfants (L. Schneps, ed.). Cambridge, Cambridge University Press. Lond. Math. Soc.
Lect. Note Ser. 200, 1994, 289-321.

[46] Y. Ihara and H. Nakamura, Some illustrative examples for anabelian geometry in high
dimensions, In Geometric Galois actions “Around Grothendieck’s Esquisse d’un Pro-
gramme” Vol. 1, (L. Schneps and P. Lochak, ed.) London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser.
Vol. 242, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1997, 127-138.

[47] L. Ji, S. Wolpert, A coﬁnite universal space for proper actions for mapping class groups.
In the tradition of Ahlfors-Bers. V, 151–163, Contemp. Math., 510, Amer. Math. Soc.,
Providence, RI, 2010.

[48] G. A. Jones, Dessins d’enfants: bipartite maps and Galois groups. S´emin. Lothar. Comb.

35, B35d (1995), 4p.

[49] G. A. Jones, Maps on surfaces and Galois groups. Math. Slovaca 47 (1997), No.1, 1-33.
[50] D. A. Kazhdan, On arithmetic varieties. In Lie groups and their representations (Proc.
Summer School, Bolyai J´anos Math. Soc., Budapest, 1971), Halsted, New York, 1975,
151¯D217.

[51] D. A. Kazhdan, On arithmetic varieties. II. Israel J. Math. 44 (1983), no. 2, 139¯D159.
[52] A. Knapp, Lie groups beyond an introduction. Second edition. Progress in Mathematics,

140, Birkh¨auser Boston, Inc., Boston, MA, 2002.

32

N. A’CAMPO, L. JI AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

[53] F. Klein, Vorlesungen ¨uber das Ikosaeder und die Auﬂ¨osung der Gleichungen vom f¨unften
Grade. Hrsg. mit einer Einf¨uhrung und mit Kommentaren von Peter Slodowy. (Lectures
on the icosahedron and the solution of the 5th degree equations). Reprogr. Nachdr. d.
Ausg. Leipzig 1884, Teubner. English translation by G. M. Morrice: Lectures on the
icosahedron and the solution of equations of the ﬁfth degree. 2nd. and rev. ed. New
York: Dover Publications, 1956.

[54] F. Klein, ´Uber die Transformationen elfter Ordnung der elliptischen Funktionen, Math.

Annalen 15 (1879), 533-555.

[55] S. K. Lando and A. K. Zvonkin Graphs on surfaces and their applications. Appendix by

Don B. Zagier. Encyclopaedia of Mathematical Sciences 141(II).

[56] R. P. Langlands, Automorphic representations, Shimura varieties, and motives.
Ein¨archen. Automorphic forms, representations and L-functions (Proc. Sympos. Pure
Math., Oregon State Univ., Corvallis, Ore., 1977), Part 2, pp. 205¯D246, Proc. Sympos.
Pure Math., XXXIII, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, R.I., 1979.

[57] L. le Bruyn, blog at www.math.ua.ac.be/?lebruyn.
[58] P. Lochak, The fundamental groups at inﬁnity of the moduli spaces of curves. In Geo-
metric Galois actions, Vol. 1, “Around Grothendieck’s Esquisse d’un Programme” (L.
Schneps and P. Lochak, ed.) London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser. Vol. 242, Cambridge
Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1997, 139-158.

[59] P. Lochak, L. Schneps, Open problems in Grothendieck-Teichm¨uller theory. Problems on
mapping class groups and related topics, Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., 74, Amer. Math.
Soc., Providence, RI, 2006, 165-186.

[60] F. Luo, Automorphisms of the complex of curves, Topology 39 no. 2, (2000), 283-298.
[61] F. Luo, Grothendieck’s reconstruction principle and 2-dimensional topology and geom-
etry, In Handbook of Teichm¨uller theory (A. Papadopoulos (ed.) Volume II, EMS Pub-
lishing House, Z¨urich 2009, 733-765.

[62] S. Mac Lane, Categories for the working mathematician. Graduate texts in mathematics

Springer-Verlag, 1971.

[63] J. P. Murre, On Grothendieck’s work on the fundamental group,

In Alexander
Grothendieck: A mathematical portrait (L. Schneps, ed.) International Press, Som-
merville, 2014, 143-167.

[64] H. Nakamura, Galois representations in the proﬁnite Teichm¨uller modular groups.In Geo-
metric Galois actions, Vol. 1, “Around Grothendieck’s Esquisse d’un Programme” (L.
Schneps and P. Lochak, ed.) London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser. Vol. 242, Cambridge
Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1997, 159-173,

[65] H. Nakamura, Limits of Galois representations in fundamental groups along maximal

degeneration of marked curves I, Amer. J. Math., 121 (1999), 315-358.

[66] H. Nakamura, Limits of Galois representations in fundamental groups along maximal

degeneration of marked curves II, Proc. Symp. Pure Math., 70 (2002), 43-78.

[67] H. Nakamura, L. Schneps, On a subgroup of the Grothendieck-Teichm¨uller group acting
on the tower of proﬁnite Teichm¨uller modular groups. Invent. Math. 141 (2000), Vol. 3,
503-560.

[68] K. Ohshika, The origin of the notion of manifold, In From Riemann to diﬀerential
geometry and relativity, (L. Ji, A. Papadopoulos and S. Yamada, ed.) Springer Verlag,
to appear in 2017.

[69] F. Oort, Dis ealier thoughts inspire Grothendieck? In Alexander Grothendieck: A math-

ematical portrait (L. Schneps, ed.) International Press, Sommerville, 2014, 231-268.

[70] G. Pisier, Grothendieck’s theorem, past and present. Bull. Am. Math. Soc., New Ser. 49

(2012) No. 2, 237-323 .

[71] V. Poenaru, Alexander Grothendieck, In Handbook of Teichm¨uller theory (A. Pa-

padopoulos, ed.), Volume VI, EMS Publishing House, Z¨urich, 2016, 31-32.

[72] P. Pragacz, The life and work of Alexander Grothendieck, American Mathematical

Monthly, Vol. 113, No. 9 (Nov. 2006), 831-846.

[73] M. Raynaud, Grothendieck et la th´eorie des sch´emas, In Alexander Grothendieck: A

mathematical portrait (L. Schneps, ed.) International Press, Sommerville, 2014, 25-34.

[74] G. B. Shabat and V. A. Voevodskij, Drawing curves over number ﬁelds. In The
in Honor of the 60th Birthday of A.

Grothendieck Festschrift, Collect. Artic.
Grothendieck. Vol. III, Prog. Math. 88, 1990, 199-227.

[75] G. Shimura, On some problems of algebraicity. Proceedings of the International Congress

of Mathematicians (Helsinki, 1978), pp. 373-379, Acad. Sci. Fennica, Helsinki, 1980.

[76] L. Schneps, Dessins d’enfants on the Riemann sphere, In The Grothendieck theory of
dessins d’enfants (L. Schneps, ed.), Lond. Math. Soc. Lect. Note Ser. Vol. 200, Cambridge
Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1994, 47-77.

ACTIONS OF THE ABSOLUTE GALOIS GROUP

33

[77] L. Schneps, Grothendieck’s “Long march through Galois theory.” In Geometric Galois
actions, Vol. 1, “Around Grothendieck’s Esquisse d’un Programme” (L. Schneps and P.
Lochak, ed.), London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser. Vol. 242, Cambridge Univ. Press,
Cambridge, 1997, 59-66.

[78] K. Strebel, Quadratic Diﬀerentials, Springer Verlag, Ergebnisse der Mathematik und

ihrer Grenzgebiete (3), 5. Berlin-Heidelberg-New York-Tokyo, 1984.

[79] D. P. Sullivan, Genetics of homotopy theory and the Adams conjecture. Ann. Math. (2)

100 (1974), 1-79.

[80] D. P. Sullivan, Galois symmetry in manifold theory at the primes. In Actes Congr`es

international des Math´ematiciens 1970, 2, 169-175 (1971).

[81] D. P. Sullivan, Geometric topology. Localization, periodicity and Galois symmetry.
The 1970 MIT Notes. Edited by A. Ranicki. Monographs in Mathematics 8. Dordrecht,
Springer, 2005.

[82] R. Taylor, Galois representations. Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathe-

maticians, Vol. I (Beijing, 2002), 449-474, Higher Ed. Press, Beijing, 2002.

[83] O. Teichm¨uller, Ver¨anderliche Riemannsche Fl¨achen. Deutsche Math. 7, 344-359 (1944).
English translation by A. A’Campo Neuen, Variable Riemann surfaces, In: Handbook
of Teichm¨uller theory, Vol. IV (A. Papadopoulos, ed.), Z¨urich, 2014, 787-803.

[84] D. Toledo, Projective varieties with non-residually ﬁnite fundamental group. Publ. Math.

Inst. Hautes ´Etudes Sci. 77 (1993), 103-119.

[85] B. Totaro, The Chow ring of a classifying space. In Algebraic K-theory (W. Raskind et
al., ed.). Proceedings of an AMS-IMS-SIAM summer research conference, Seattle, WA,
USA, July 13-24, 1997. Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society. Proc. Symp.
Pure Math. 67(1999), 249-281.

[86] A. M. Uluda˘g and ˙Ismail Sa˘glam, Hypergeometric Galois Actions, In Handbook of Te-
ichm¨uller theory (A. Papadopoulos, ed.), Volume VI, EMS Publishing House, Z¨urich,
2016, 467-500.

[87] A. M. Uluda˘g and A. Zeytin, A panaroma of the fundamental group of the modular
orbifold, In Handbook of Teichm¨uller theory (A. Papadopoulos, ed.), Volume VI, EMS
Publishing House, Z¨urich, 2016, 501-519.

[88] A. M. Uluda˘g, A. Zeytin and M. Durmu¸s, Binary quadratic forms as dessins, preprint,

2012.

[89] A. M. Uluda˘g and H. Ayral, Jimm, a fundamental involution, preprint, 2015.
[90] A. Weil, The ﬁeld of deﬁnition of a variety. Amer. J. Math. 78 (1956), 509-524.
[91] A. Wiles, Modular elliptic curves and Fermat’s Last Theorem. Ann. Math. 141 (1995),

443-551.

[92] J. Wolfart, ABC for polynomials, dessins d’enfants, and uniformization – a survey. In
Elementare und analytische Zahlentheorie (Schwarz, Wolfgang et al., ed.), Tagungsband.
Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag. Schriften der Wissenschaftlichen Gesellschaft an der
Johann-Wolfgang-Goethe-Universit¨at Frankfurt am Main 20, 2006, 313-345 .

[93] J. Wolfart, The “obvious” part of Belyi’s theorem and Riemann surfaces with many
automorphisms, In Geometric Galois actions, “Around Grothendieck’s Esquisse d’un
Programme” Vol. 1 (L. Schneps and P. Lochak, ed.) London Math. Soc. Lecture Note
Ser. Vol. 242, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1997, 97-112.

[94] F. Ya¸sar, Grothendieck’s Dessin Theory, Master thesis, 2014, Ko¸s University.
[95] A. Zvonkin, How to draw a group? Discrete Math. 180 (1998), No.1-3, 403-413.

N. A’Campo: Universit¨at Basel, Mathematisches Institut,, Spiegelgasse 1, 4051 Basel,
Switzerland, and Erwin Schr¨odinger International Institute of Mathematical Physics,,
Boltzmanngasse 9, 1090, Wien, Austria, email: norbert.acampo@gmail.com

L. Ji: Department of Mathematics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109,
USA, and Erwin Schr¨odinger International Institute of Mathematical Physics,, Boltz-
manngasse 9, 1090, Wien, Austria, email: lji@umich.edu

A. Papadopoulos: Institut de Recherche Math´ematique Avanc´ee, UMR 7501, Univer-
sit´e de Strasbourg and CNRS,, 7 rue Ren´e Descartes, 67084 Strasbourg Cedex, France,
and Erwin Schr¨odinger International Institute of Mathematical Physics,, Boltzman-
ngasse 9, 1090, Wien, Austria, email: papadop@math.unistra.fr

