6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
0
1

 
 
]
t
f
o
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
8
0
4
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Assembly of nothing: Equilibrium ﬂuids with designed structured porosity

Beth A. Lindquist, Ryan B. Jadrich, and Thomas M. Truskett∗

McKetta Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712, USA

(Dated: March 11, 2016)

Controlled micro- to meso-scale porosity is a common materials design goal with possible applications
ranging from molecular gas adsorption to particle size selective permeability or solubility. Here, we
use inverse methods of statistical mechanics to design an isotropic pair interaction that, in the
absence of an external ﬁeld, assembles particles into an inhomogeneous ﬂuid matrix surrounding
pores of prescribed size ordered in a lattice morphology. The pore size can be tuned via modiﬁcation
of temperature or particle concentration. Moreover, modulating density reveals a rich series of
microphase-separated morphologies including pore- or particle-based lattices, pore- or particle-based
columns, and bicontinuous or lamellar structures. Sensitivity of pore assembly to the form of the
designed interaction potential is explored.

Synthesis of materials with controlled micro- to meso-
scale porosity is a design challenge ripe for new, inno-
vative approaches. For example, ordered porous zeolite
solids–commonplace for their use as molecular sponges
to absorb gases–have recently inspired an extension to
the liquid state via molecular cages dispersed in a sol-
vent of larger excluded molecules to form an absorb-
ing “pore ﬂuid” [1]. At the colloidal level, control over
the eﬀective particle interactions can lead to equilib-
rium structures with large percolating voids (i.e., con-
nected regions of solvent-occupied, but particle-free,
space), as was recently highlighted via a computa-
tional study of indented particles with depletion attrac-
tions [2]. Prior theoretical work [3–6] suggests that even
a single-component system interacting via an isotropic
pair potential comprising competitive attractive and re-
pulsive components can form an equilibrium ﬂuid with
a porous structure. Such systems also appear to have
modiﬁed vapor-liquid phase behavior leading to coex-
istence involving modulated phases [6]. Even a simple
two-dimensional lattice model with competing interac-
tions was shown to assemble into a ﬂuid phase with
“bubbles” or pores, among other microphases [7]; a
two-dimensional continuum theory yields similar predic-
tions [8]. Such results are reminiscent of experimentally
observed interfacial structures of colloids with compet-
ing interactions [9]. Here, we explore the prospect of us-
ing inverse methods of statistical mechanics to discover
which (if any) isotropic pairwise interactions sponta-
neously assemble particles into an inhomogeneous three-
dimensional ﬂuid matrix surrounding ordered, monodis-
perse spherical pores of prescribed size. We further
study how the microphase structure of such a model
material would respond to changes in temperature and
particle concentration or depend on the speciﬁc form
of the interaction. The ability to control the size
and spatial organization of pore structures in ﬂuids,
via interactions and thermodynamic parameters, could
help pave the way for novel colloidally assembled struc-
tures with programmable particle-size-selective perme-
ability/solubility similar to materials templated via
block-copolymer assembly [10] (with selective etching

∗ truskett@che.utexas.edu

of one block component to create void space).

Modern computational coarse-graining [11, 12] and
inverse design strategies are ideally suited for the opti-
mization of pair interactions to realize complex, self-
assembled material architectures. Previously, inverse
design has led to the discovery of isotropic, convex-
repulsive pair interactions that stabilize exotic, open
crystalline arrangements (e.g., honeycomb and diamond
lattices) [13, 14]. Another example is the design of pair
interactions that promote the formation of a ﬂuid of
well-deﬁned equilibrium particle clusters (i.e., micro-
scopic liquid droplets) [15]. Here, we use iterative Boltz-
mann inversion (IBI) [11, 15] to ﬁnd the dimensionless,
isotropic pair potential βuIBI(r) [where β = (kBT )−1,
kB is the Boltzmann constant, and T is temperature]
which best reproduces, at equilibrium, the radial distri-
bution function (RDF), gtgt(r), of our target structure:
a ﬂuid matrix of particles surrounding a lattice of pores
or voids with prescribed size.

The conﬁgurational ensemble of the target structure
is generated from a molecular simulation of an inho-
mogeneous ﬂuid of eﬀective hard-core Weeks-Chandler-
Andersen (WCA) particles of diameter σ embedded in
the interstitial space of a lattice of larger WCA par-
ticles of diameter 4σ; the latter enforces the ordered
pore structure by excluding the target ﬂuid particles.
The large particles were ﬁxed on an FCC lattice with a
nearest-neighbor distance of 7.4σ. This choice was mo-
tivated to balance two competing eﬀects: (1) to maxi-
mize the pore signature in gtgt(r) while (2) furnishing
pore “walls” formed by the ﬂuid matrix with a thickness
comparable to the pore size (i.e., a pore center-to-center
distance of approximately two times the pore diameter).
The latter consideration was inspired by preliminary op-
timizations for several target simulations, which showed
that the potential developed a repulsive hump centered
near the pore size (irrespective of whether that potential
successfully formed pores). This occurs so that a par-
ticle bordering a pore will impede other particles from
entering the pore on the opposite side, as shown on the
leftmost pore in the scheme in Fig. 1a, where the re-
pulsive hump for a selected particle is highlighted in
green and the schematic is appropriately scaled. A sys-
tem where the pore wall width and pore diameter are
matched is optimal for description with a pair potential

2

FIG. 2. Pore size probability distribution function P (deﬀ)
for diﬀerent choices of the temperature rescale parameter
λ corresponding to the change T → λT or equivalently
βuIBI(r) → βuIBI(r)/λ. (inset) Total volume of the pores
as a function of λ.

isotropic pair potential that forms pores is useful be-
cause it 1) guarantees that many-body potentials ex-
ist that will also generate pores, and 2) reveals what
those many-body interactions must map onto if they
are projected into a pair interaction form. From prior
work on microphase-separated states, it is not surprising
that βuIBI(r) possesses competitive attractions and re-
pulsions. The general form of the potential is similar in
spirit to the cluster ﬂuid-forming potentials that we re-
ported in previous work [15], though here the attractive
well is generally narrower and deeper and the repulsive
hump is broader but shorter when compared to clusters
of similar size to the pores studied here. Common to
both potentials is that the relevant lengthscales of the
microphase-separated objects are directly encoded by
the potential: for clusters, the position of the repulsive
hump was directly related to cluster size, and here the
repulsive hump is maximal at the prescribed pore size.
Also similarly to our previous cluster work, we ob-
served good convergence in the IBI scheme. As can
be seen in Fig. 1c, βuIBI(r) is indeed able to closely
reproduce the equilibrium RDF of the inhomogeneous,
target matrix of ﬂuid particles at a packing fraction,
η = πσ3N/6V = 0.31 where N is the number of
particles and V is the volume. For comparison, the
RDF of an isotropic, single-component WCA ﬂuid with
the same isothermal compressibility (η = 0.42) is also
shown.
Interestingly, the RDF of a dense ﬂuid ma-
trix surrounding pores (whether from the target or IBI
model structure) is only subtly diﬀerent from that of
the equi-compressible isotropic WCA ﬂuid, with the for-
mer being distinguished from the latter by its relatively
suppressed correlations on the scale of the pore size, as
highlighted in the inset. However, despite its success
at reproducing the pair correlations of the target struc-
ture, it is not obvious that a system of particles interact-
ing via βuIBI(r) will also necessarily capture the desired
pore structure of the target ensemble, which depends on
many-particle static correlations.

Nonetheless, we do ﬁnd that pore structures very sim-
ilar to those templated by the ordered lattice of large

FIG. 1. Design of a pair potential, βuIBI(r), that assem-
bles particles into a ﬂuid matrix surrounding a lattice of
pores. (a) Schematic for a system with matching pore di-
ameter and pore wall thickness, where the repulsive hump
in βuIBI(r) is shown in green for the highlighted particle.
(b) The optimized pair potential, βuIBI(r). (c) Radial dis-
tribution functions for the targeted conﬁgurational ensemble
of the ﬂuid matrix particles (η = 0.31), a system of parti-
cles with the IBI-optimized pair potential (η = 0.31), and
an isotropic, single-component WCA ﬂuid with the same
isothermal compressibility (η = 0.42). (inset) Zoomed view
of main frame. (d) Image of a 3σ thick slab extracted from
an equilibrium simulation conﬁguration of particles with the
IBI-optimized pair potential, illustrating pores.
(e) Dark
green regions show a three-dimensional visualization of the
assembled BCC pore structure and represent the union vol-
ume of all 2σ diameter test spheres that could be successfully
accommodated into the conﬁguration without overlapping
lighter green ﬂuid particles interacting via the IBI-optimized
pair potential.

so that the highlighted particle can also contribute to
the repulsive barrier at the edge of an adjacent pore,
as shown for the rightmost pore in Fig.
1a. Addi-
tional details regarding the construction of the target
system, including the eﬀect of varying the large particle
template, can be found in the Simulation and Analysis
Details Section of the Appendix.

The IBI-optimized pair potential βuIBI(r) is shown in
Fig. 1b. Even though there may be non-trivial many-
body eﬀects in an actual pore-forming system that are
not captured by this strategy, an understanding of an

3

FIG. 3. Microphase diagram of the IBI-designed model as a function of η, with representative snapshots of each phase.
Particles are depicted on the top row, and the inserted void particles are shown on the bottom row.

WCA spheres of the target system emerge with the IBI-
optimized interaction, βuIBI(r). Hints of the pore mor-
phology can be seen in Fig. 1d from a visual representa-
tion of the particles within a 3σ thick slab obtained from
an equilibrium conﬁguration. However, for a more quan-
titative characterization, ‘pores’ deﬁned via a clustering
analysis [16] as union volumes of all 2σ diameter test
spheres that could be successfully accommodated into
the conﬁguration without overlapping the ﬂuid matrix
particles were also examined. As described in the Ap-
pendix, the size of an individual pore in a conﬁguration
is computed from its volume, obtained by Monte Carlo
integration of overlapping inserted test particles, and
is reported here as the diameter deﬀ of an equivolume
spherical pore. Fig. 1e shows that the pores (compact,
dark green entities embedded in the lighter green ma-
trix of ﬂuid particles) actually form a BCC lattice with a
lattice constant of 8.8σ (i.e., nearest neighbor distance
of 7.6σ). As can be seen from the solid green line in
Fig. 2, the most likely eﬀective diameter (deﬀ) of an in-
dividual pore is 3.97σ, very close to desired 4σ pore size
of the target ensemble.
In other words, the IBI pair
potential optimized to precisely match the RDF of the
target ensemble also faithfully reproduces the ordered
pore morphology of the target structure.

We next evaluate the sensitivity of the pore morphol-
ogy of the system with the IBI-optimized pair potential
to rescaling the temperature by a factor λ as T → λT
[equivalent to rescaling βuIBI(r) → βuIBI(r)/λ]. Fig. 2
shows the pore size distribution function for equilibrium
simulations with both mild cooling (λ = 0.9) and heat-
ing (λ = 1.05). With increasing temperature, we note
the pores monotonically shrink and have larger size ﬂuc-
tuations, with no evident porosity accessible to the 2σ

test particles by λ = 1.1. The inset in Fig. 2 shows
that the total volume of the simulation box taken up
by the pores correspondingly decreases with increasing
temperature. The opposite trends occur with cooling–
pores grow and become more uniform in size–until even-
tually the pores condense into “columns” of void space
(by λ = 0.8). Nonetheless, bracketed by these two ex-
tremes, there is a range of temperature where approxi-
mately spherical pores form in a BCC lattice, and their
size can be tuned via modiﬁcation of the temperature.
Although small changes in packing fraction (η) also
allow for tuning the pore size, we ﬁnd that larger
changes in η give rise to a rich diagram of microphase-
separated void-particle morphologies. Fig. 3 shows con-
ﬁguration snapshots of the various microphases associ-
ated with βuIBI(r) (highlighting particle and void struc-
tures, respectively) along with the corresponding den-
sity range for each phase. Densities of intermediate
character are assigned to the phase that they most
greatly resemble, with some buckling and/or defects
present away from the optimal density for each phase.
Upon reducing particle concentration from the opti-
mized pore lattice structure, the pores ﬁrst coalesce into
void columns. Eventually the porous columns give way
to a bicontinuous phase, where the void space and par-
ticles are interpenetrating. This gyroid-like phase then
ﬂattens out into lamellar sheets of alternating parti-
cles and voids. Lamellar sheets have been predicted for
a single-component model with competing attractions
and repulsions that also displays clustering behavior,
but the possibility of pore lattices was not explored [17].
In two dimensions, an analogous striped phase has been
observed in addition to a clustered phase for various
models [7].

The above phase progression of the void space has
been seen in diblock copolymers as the relative amount
of each block is tuned [18]. Here, η controls the ra-
tio of void and particle-ﬁlled space. Upon further ex-
pansion from the lamellar phase, columns of particles
are then formed, followed by clusters of particles as
shown on the right hand side of Fig. 3. The particle
clusters form with a preferred size, with radii of gy-
ration ranging from Rg = 2.00σ to 2.19σ as particle
concentration is decreased; see the Appendix. The low-
density region of the microphase diagram illustrates a
symmetry between clusters and pores ﬁrst postulated
by Sear and Gelbart [3] and later predicted from the-
oretical calculations [4, 5].
Intriguingly, microphases
containing a single cluster and a single pore were ob-
served from Grand Canonical Monte Carlo calculations
of an SALR potential at diﬀerent densities by Archer
and Wilding [6]. This potential also showed a similar
progression of phase behavior between these two state
points, though the assembled structures had features on
the order the size of the simulation box such that only
a single column or sheet could form. As a result, it is
unclear to what extent ﬁnite size eﬀects impacted the
characteristics of these phases. Here, we circumvent this
diﬃculty by leveraging inverse design to systematically
imbue a prescribed length scale to the features arising
from microphase separation.

Finally, we explored the sensitivity of pore formation
to the details of the interactions. Speciﬁcally, we per-
formed new optimizations of the target ensemble using
the relative entropy approach [11, 12], restricting the de-
signed pair potential to a variety of functional forms, all
containing a single attractive well plus a longer-ranged
repulsive hump controlled by four scalar parameters
(two energies and two length scales). The analytic forms
of the optimized potentials are given in the Appendix.
Fig. 4a compares βuIBI(r) to three such optimized po-
tentials, and Fig. 4b shows the resulting pore-size PDFs.
All potentials form pore lattices, albeit with somewhat
reduced pore sizes relative to βuIBI(r)–though, as we
showed above, the pore size can also be modulated via
temperature. See the Appendix for corresponding sim-
ulation snapshots, where the discrete character of the
pores is visually evident.

The variation in the potentials indicates that there
are many ways to balance attractions and repulsions in
order to achieve a porous microphase separated state,
though the repulsive hump tends to be centered near the
targeted pore size. Generally, we ﬁnd that longer-ranged
attractions than are traditionally found in microphase-
separated models are preferred for forming size-speciﬁc
pores. Although it might be diﬃcult to realize such ef-
fective interactions for micron-sized colloidal particles,
it should be possible for nanoscale particles. As an
example, potentials of mean force observed in simula-
tions of ligand-coated, charge-stabilized gold nanoparti-
cles display a similar qualitative form [19]. Moreover, in
future work, a similar relative entropy approach could
be used to limit the range of the attraction for appli-
cation to colloids as well as to explore the range of pa-
rameters that can be employed in the target simulation

4

FIG. 4.
Inverse designed pair potentials that form pores.
(a) Potentials optimized with IBI and relative entropy ap-
proaches, where the latter are constrained to have a speciﬁc
functional form (given in the Appendix). (b) Pore-size PDFs
of the optimized potentials in (a).

to successfully make pores, particularly with respect to
pore size and pore density.

In conclusion, we have used inverse design to discover
a pair potential that assembles particles into a ﬂuid
matrix surrounding a lattice of pores with prescribed
size, in addition to other complex ﬂuid-pore microphases
analogous to those seen in diblock copolymer systems
(clusters, columns, lamellar sheets, and a bicontinuous
phase). We have further demonstrated that the assem-
bly of such microphases can be achieved via a variety
of diﬀerent interaction potentials displaying competitive
attractive and repulsive interactions.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was partially supported by the National
Science Foundation (1247945) and the Welch Founda-
tion (F-1696). We acknowledge the Texas Advanced
Computing Center (TACC) at The University of Texas
at Austin for providing HPC resources.

APPENDIX

Simulation and Analysis Details

To calculate gtgt(r), we simulated N = 5475 small
(S) particles in a frozen matrix of 32 large (L) template
spheres to create pores. Small particles are excluded
from one another and from large particles via eﬀective
hard core repulsions of diameter σ and cross diameter
2.5σ, respectively. The packing fraction η = πσ3N/6V
of the small spheres in volume V is 0.31. Simulations
were performed using the GROMACS 4.6.5 molecu-
lar dynamics package [20, 21] with the 50-25 Weeks-
Chandler-Andersen (WCA) eﬀective hardcore poten-

tial [22]

(cid:32)
(cid:19)25(cid:21)
WCA(r) ≡ H(21/25σi,j − r)
u(i,j)
×

(cid:19)50 −

(cid:20)(cid:18) σi,j

(cid:18) σi,j

r

4

r

(cid:33)

+ 

(A1)

where σS,S = σ, σS,L = 2.5σ and H(x) is the Heavi-
side step function. In standard GROMACS units (see
GROMACS manual) we set σ = 1,  = 1.0, m = 30
(mass), dt = 0.001 (time step) and T = 300 via velocity-
rescale thermostating with characteristic time constant
τ = 100dt and rescaling every 10dt. These conditions
yield the dimensionless relations β ≈ 0.4 for the WCA

potential and dt/t0 ≈ 0.0003 where t0 ≡(cid:112)σ2m/(kBT )

is the elementary ballistic time of the molecular dynam-
ics simulation. The choice β is not unique; it served
only to furnish a steep repulsion mimicking a hardcore–
even a totally diﬀerent functional form that is suﬃ-
ciently steep would suﬃce. With this, a target RDF
with pores of a prescribed size was generated for the in-
verse design (ID) step. (Note: in practice, the ID step
employs a ﬁxed simulation temperature; however, this
is totally arbitrary, and variation would lead to trivial
rescaling of the optimized potential such that its ther-
mally non-dimensionalized form is unique).

To check for ﬁnite size eﬀects, simulations of all op-
timized potentials were performed with 18478 particles,
which corresponds to increasing the box size used in
the ID optimization by a factor of 1.5. Starting from
a disordered conﬁguration, a lattice of pores is typi-
cally formed within ≈ 1, 000, 000dt/t0 = 300 short time
non-dimensionalized units–a relatively short timescale
for molecular dynamics simulations. As a zeroth order
comparison to a system with solvent, we assume our
molecular dynamics ballistic short time unit can be re-
placed by a short time diﬀusion scale in a solvent based
system. (This also neglects possible complications from
hydrodynamic eﬀects.) For 25nm, 100nm and 2µm
particles in common solvents, the estimates for t0 are
0.15ms, 0.01s and 30s, respectively [23]. Thus, the cor-
responding times to assembly under our very simpliﬁed
assumptions are 0.045s, 3s and 150min. While these
estimates may seem rather fast, they provide a rough
estimate of the expected order for the time to assembly.
As described in the main text, pores were charac-
terized via insertion of spheres with a diameter of 2σ
such that they did not overlap with the system par-
ticles. The pore volumes were determined via Monte
Carlo integration of the inserted void particles, where
the inserted spheres were assigned to a given pore based
on a clustering analysis, where overlapping spheres are
taken to be neighbors [16]. The resulting volume is then
converted to the diameter of a sphere of equal volume.
This strategy allows for an evaluation of moderately as-
pherical pores. Though visual inspection reveals that
the pores are relatively spherical, instantaneous ﬂuc-
tuations of the pore walls as well as infrequent parti-
cle motions through the pores render the assumption of
perfectly spherical pores (often employed in the calcula-
tion of pore size distributions) inaccurate for this case,
under-predicting the pore size.

5

As discussed in the main text, the target simulation
was chosen such that the pore diameter was similar to
the thickness of pore “walls” to ﬁnd a target well suited
to a description with a pair potential: the large parti-
cles were ﬁxed on an FCC lattice with a nearest neighbor
distance of 7.4σ. We also tried an optimization with a
template composed of frozen disordered large particles,
the positions of which were generated from a simula-
tion of only the large particles with eﬀective hard core
repulsions of diameter 6σ. All other parameters were
identical to those described above. (In the binary tar-
get simulation, the large particles still interacted with
the small particles via a 4σ eﬀective hard core.) We
performed 10 target simulations, each using a diﬀerent
simulation snapshot for the template, and found that
gtgt(r) was essentially invariant with respect to the dif-
ferent frozen templates. We then performed the IBI op-
timization with the gtgt(r) that was averaged over the
diﬀerent frozen templates. Despite the larger mismatch
between pore diameter and pore wall size, this poten-
tial still yielded discrete pores, positioned on a defec-
tive FCC lattice where the pores have signiﬁcantly more
translational motion about their lattice sites. However,
the pores are somewhat smaller and thus do not repro-
duce the targeted pore size as well (the maximum in
the pore size distribution function is ≈ 3.6σ). There-
fore, while there is a range of acceptable templates that
can form pores, a target system with a matching pore
wall thickness and pore diameter seems to be more ac-
curately reproduced by a pair potential.

Inverse Design Methodology

Unconstrained potential optimizations were per-
formed using iterative Boltzmann inversion (IBI), a
powerful
inverse statistical mechanics tool from the
coarse-graining community [11].
IBI assumes nothing
about the functional form of the potential and seeks
to exactly replicate gtgt(r).
In practice, the potential
is ﬁnely discretized, cut and shifted at a ﬁnite cutoﬀ
distance (RC), and spline ﬁtted. In a preliminary IBI
optimization, RC was set equal to one-half of the box
length (10.5σ). This potential, shown in Fig. A1, formed
pores on an FCC lattice; however, when the potential
was simulated in a larger box, the system phase sep-
arated into a liquid and a gas (though a metastable
porous phase was observed en route to macrophase sep-
aration). Suspecting that the long-range attraction was
responsible for these ﬁnite-size eﬀects, and noting from
our earlier work that only a single attractive well and
repulsive hump were needed to form clusters [15], we
cut and shifted the potential at the minimum at 7.3σ.
We then re-optimized the potential with RC = 7.3σ
to yield the ﬁnal IBI potential. The behavior of the
resulting potential was robust with respect to increas-
ing the box size. IBI calculations were performed using
the the Versatile Object-oriented Toolkit for Coarse-
graining Applications (VOTCA) [24, 25], which inter-
faces with the GROMACS 4.6.5 molecular dynamics

6

FIG. A1.
7.3σ.

IBI-optimized potentials with RC = 10.5σ and

(MD) package [20, 21].

FIG. A2. CSDs for η = 0.052 to 0.082 in increments of 0.006.

cutoﬀ, RCSD, used to determine whether particles are
neighbors, though the overall trends remain the same
regardless of RCSD. The relatively broad attractive well
in the potential (Fig. A1) makes determination of RCSD
non-unique; therefore, a value of RCSD = 1.33σ was cho-
sen such that two discrete clusters were assigned to a
single cluster over an order of magnitude less frequently
than a single cluster was identiﬁed; these dimers are
not shown in Fig. A2 for clarity. Fig. A2 indicates that,
while there is a signiﬁcant fraction of monomer present,
the clusters are reasonably size speciﬁc, particularly at
the higher densities where there is essentially perfect
separation of monomer/small aggregates and clusters.
As η is further decreased, the clusters break up and be-
come less size speciﬁc, until at approximately η < 0.04
there is no shoulder in the CSD, indicating no preferred
size scale for clustering.

In our prior work [15], we used IBI to discover po-
tentials which generated a dilute ﬂuid of clusters. By
contrast, the clusters in the present study appear on lat-
tice positions as can be seen in Fig. 3 of the main text.
Moreover, we visually observe greater particle exchange
among the clusters in the current work, as well as a
greater fraction of monomer in the CSDs. Both of these
observations are in keeping with the shorter (though
broader) repulsive hump seen in the pore-forming po-
tentials.
In prior work, due to the additive eﬀects of
the relatively sharp and tall repulsive humps of the con-
stituent particles, each cluster acted essentially as a re-
normalized object, and so the CSDs were only subtly
sensitive to changes in density. Here however, the clus-
ter size is much more responsive to changes in overall
density.

For optimizing constrained analytical forms, we uti-
lized Relative Entropy (RE) optimization [11, 12, 26].
Two functional forms (denoted by the roman numeral
indices I and II) for the interactions external to the
WCA core are considered

RE(r) ≡ −1exp
u(i)

−

+ 2qi(α1, α2)exp

where

qi(α1, α2) ≡ δi,I + δi,II

(cid:20)
(cid:20)

−

α1/2

(cid:19)n1(cid:21)
(cid:18) r − d − α1/2
(cid:18) r − d − α2/2 − α1
(cid:20)−r + d + α1 + α2

α2/2

α2

(cid:19)n2(cid:21) (A2)
(cid:21)

(A3)

δi,j is the Kronecker delta, [1, 2] are the [attractive,
repulsive] strengths, and [α1, α2] are the corresponding
ranges. The term for the type II potential eﬀectively
changes the symmetric repulsive hump to a linear ramp.
Two exponents also appear, [n1, n2] which we set to var-
ious numbers to test the ﬂexibility of such potentials to
make pores. We use the compact notation, iAn1Rn2, to
denote the type and the exponents as in Figure 4a of the
main text. Attraction strengths and ranges are then op-
timized within the relative entropy framework by max-
imizing the log-likelihood of sampling the target con-
ﬁgurations using a simple gradient descent scheme [27].
Optimized parameters are provided in Table S1.

Type

I
I
II

n1
4
8
6

n2
2
8
6

β1
0.215
0.187
0.353

α1
1.46
1.46
1.54

β2
0.218
0.183
0.322

α2
2.55
2.56
2.72

TABLE A1. Optimal parameters for the constrained poten-
tials.

Cluster Size Distributions

Cluster size distributions (CSDs) [16] for the clustered
phase as a function of density are shown in Fig. A2. The
CSDs are somewhat sensitive to the choice of distance

Visualization of the Relative Entropy Potential

Simulations

FIG. A3. A visualization of the particles and void space as
in Fig. 1c of the main text, where the former are lighter
green and transparent and the latter is darker and opaque.
Ordered, discrete pores are observed in all cases.

7

[1] N. Giri, M. G. Del P´opolo, G. Melaugh, R. L. Green-
away, K. R¨atzke, T. Koschine, L. Pison, M. F. C.
Gomes, A. I. Cooper, and S. L. James, Nature 527,
216 (2015).

9, 6301 (2013).

[5] H. Shin, G. M. Grason, and C. D. Santangelo, Soft

Matter 5, 3629 (2009).

[6] A. J. Archer and N. B. Wilding, Phys. Rev. E: Stat.,

[2] D. J. Ashton, R. L. Jack, and N. B. Wilding, Phys.

Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys. 76, 031501 (2007).

Rev. Lett. 114, 237801 (2015).

[7] N. G. Almarza, J. Pekalski, and A. Ciach, J. Chem.

[3] R. P. Sear and W. M. Gelbart, J. Chem. Phys. 110,

Phys 140, 164708 (2014).

4582-4588 (1999).

[8] A. J. Archer, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Mat-

[4] A. Ciach, J. Pekalski, and W. T. Gozdz, Soft Matter

ter Phys. 78, 031402 (2008).

[9] J. Ruiz-Garc´ıa, R. G´amez-Corrales, and B. I. Ivlev,
Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys. 58,
660 (1998).

[10] E. A.

Nano
http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/nn1014006.

(2010),

3548

Jackson
4,

and M. A. Hillmyer, ACS
20695511,

pMID:

[11] W. G. Noid, J. Chem. Phys. 139, 090901 (2013).
[12] A. Chaimovich and M. S. Shell, J. Chem. Phys. 134,

094112 (2011).

8

[19] R. C. Van Lehn and A. Alexander-Katz, Langmuir 29,

8788 (2013).

[20] D. Van Der Spoel, E. Lindahl, B. Hess, G. Groenhof,
A. E. Mark, and H. J. C. Berendsen, J. Comput. Chem.
26, 1701 (2005).

[21] S. Plimpton, J. Comput. Phys. 117, 1 (1995).
[22] J.-P. Hansen and I. R. McDonald, Theory of Simple Liq-
uids, 3rd ed. (Academic Press, New York, NY, USA,
2006).

[13] E. Marcotte, F. H. Stillinger, and S. Torquato, Soft

[23] R. Jadrich and K. S. Schweizer, The Journal of Chemical

Matter 7, 2332 (2011).

Physics 135, 234902 (2011).

[14] A. Jain, J. R. Errington,

and T. M. Truskett, Soft

Matter 9, 3866 (2013).

[15] R. B. Jadrich, J. A. Bollinger, B. A. Lindquist, and

T. M. Truskett, Soft Matter , 9342 (2015).

[16] P. D. Godfrin, N. E. Valadez-Perez, R. Castaneda-
and Y. Liu, Soft Matter 10,

Priego, N. J. Wagner,
5061 (2014).

[24] V. R¨uhle, C. Junghans, A. Lukyanov, K. Kremer,
and D. Andrienko, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 5, 3211
(2009), http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/ct900369w.

[25] S. Y. Mashayak, M. N. Jochum, K. Koschke, N. R.
Aluru, V. R¨uhle, and C. Junghans, PLoS ONE 10,
e0131754 (2015).

[26] C.-C. Fu, P. M. Kulkarni, M. S. Shell, and L. Gary Leal,

[17] T. Jiang and J. Wu, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft

J. Chem. Phys. 137, 164106 (2012).

Matter Phys. 80, 021401 (2009).

[27] D. Barber, Bayesian Reasoning and Machine Learning

[18] Y. Mai and A. Eisenberg, Chem. Soc. Rev. 41, 5969

(Cambridge University Press, 2012).

(2012).

