The super-indeterminism in orthodox quantum mechanics does

not implicate the reality of experimenter free will

Jan Walleczek∗

Phenoscience Laboratories, Novalisstrasse 11, 10115 Berlin, Germany

Abstract

The concept of ‘super-indeterminism’ captures the notion that the free choice assumption of

orthodox quantum mechanics necessitates only the following requirement: an agent’s free-choice

performance in the selection of measurement settings must not represent an exception to the rule of

irreducible quantum indeterminism in the physical universe (i.e, “universal indeterminism”). Any

additional metaphysical speculation, such as to whether quantum indeterminism, i.e., intrinsic

randomness, implicates the reality of experimenter “freedom”, “free will”, or “free choice”, is

redundant in relation to the predictive success of orthodox quantum mechanics. Accordingly,

super-indeterminism views as redundant also, from a technical standpoint, whether an aﬃrmative

or a negative answer is claimed in reference to universal indeterminism as a necessary precondition

for experimenter freedom. Super-indeterminism accounts, for example, for the circular reasoning

which is implicit in the free will theorem by Conway and Kochen [1, 2]. The concept of super-

indeterminism is of great assistance in clarifying the often misunderstood meaning of the concept of

“free variables” as used by John Bell [3]. The present work argues that Bell sought an operational,

eﬀective free will theorem, one based upon the notion of “determinism without predetermination”,

i.e., one wherein “free variables” represent universally uncomputable variables. In conclusion, the

standard interpretation of quantum theory does not answer, and does not need to answer in order

to ensure the predictive success of orthodox theory, the question of whether either incompatibilism

or compatibilism is valid in relation to free-will metaphysics and to the free-will phenomenology of

experimenter agents in quantum mechanics.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
2

 
 
]
h
p
-
t
n
a
u
q
[
 
 

2
v
0
0
4
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗ Corresponding author: walleczek@phenoscience.com

1

1.

INTRODUCTION

The question concerning the reality of experimenter free will in science in general, and

in quantum mechanics in particular, has a long and controversial history. As is well-known,

the concept of free will, as such, has eluded universal deﬁnition, no less in the context of

quantum theory and quantum indeterminism (e.g., Kane [4, 5]). The present analysis will

limit itself to the introduction – into the larger discussion on “quantum free will” – of the

concept of “super-indeterminism”. Its chief purpose is to draw attention to the fact that

neither the metaphysical position of ‘determinism’ nor of ‘indeterminism’ is capable of oﬀer-

ing any decisive answers towards the reality of experimenter free will in quantum mechanics;

both, the compatibilist, and incompatibilist, interpretation of free will ﬁnds strong support

in the community of free-will philosophers (Kane [4, 5]). For explanation, compatibilism is

the position that determinism and free will are compatible, whereas incompatibilism states

that they cannot be. Again, the critical question of determinism versus indeterminism in

quantum theory, such as, for example, in the evaluation of the possibility of de Broglie–Bohm

theory (Bohm [6, 7]) need not be conﬂated with the additional question of whether determ-

inism or indeterminism is consistent with, or even indicative of, the reality of experimenter

freedom. Fig. 1.1 illustrates the metaphysical position of ‘super-indeterminism’.

1.1. Physical deﬁnitions of experimenter free will: indeterminism versus determ-

inism

Regarding the free choice assumption, physical deﬁnitions in the literature on quantum

foundations typically invoke concepts such as the complete independence from, or complete

lack of correlation with, any past physical events in nature. A recent example of a concise

deﬁnition of free choice in the context of orthodox quantum mechanics is the one by Colbeck

and Renner [8]. They suggest that a choice called ”. . . A is free if the only variables it

is correlated with are those it could have caused.” By that deﬁnition, it is apparent that

a free choice action A is one that (i) must be “uncaused” itself, and (ii) sets in motion an

entirely new causal chain, literally from “nothing”, or at least starting from an assumption

of “intrinsic randomness” (compare Fig. 1.1). The strict co-dependence of (non-causal)

‘intrinsic randomness’ and (uncaused) ‘experimenter freedom’ in the deﬁnition oﬀered by

2

Figure 1.1. Super-indeterminism in the orthodox interpretation of quantum mechanics. Illustrated

is the standard assumption that experimenter free choice depends on the existence of a process

demonstrating intrinsic randomness and vice versa. Again, the reality of universal indeterminism

depends equally – in turn – on experimenter free will being undetermined . For example, the

concept of ‘super-indeterminism’ accounts for the much-cited, yet controversial, interpretation of

experimenter free will in orthodox quantum mechanics by Conway and Kochen [1] who famously

argued that “if indeed we humans have free will, then [so do] elementary particles.”

Colbeck and Renner [8] is matched, for example, by the metaphysical assumptions also

underlying the free will theorem by Conway and Kochen [1, 2]. These latter authors summed

up the metaphysical import of their (free will) theorem by claiming that “if indeed we humans

have free will, then [so do] elementary particles” (see Fig. 1.1).

It is signiﬁcant for the

present work that Colbeck and Renner [8] conclude their own eﬀorts at deﬁning physically

a free-will concept by referring to the authority of John Bell. They refer to Bell’s well-

known, but often misinterpreted, statement concerning the meaning of “free variables” in

the context of quantum-mechanical predictions (Bell [3]): “For me this means that the values

of such variables have implications only in their future light cones.” In particular, Colbeck

and Renner [8] have implicated a correspondence between Bell’s position on experimenter

freedom and their own incompatibilist (e.g., super-indeterministic) position on free choice.

In the following, the incongruence, however, of these separate views will be demonstrated.

The subsequent analysis will demonstrate that John Bell did not anticipate, and in fact

denied, any conﬂict between experimenter freedom and an entirely deterministic world view

(Bell [3, 9, 10]).

3

2. JOHN BELL’S OWN “FREE WILL THEOREM” IN QUANTUM MECHANICS

IS COMPATIBILIST

In contrast to both Conway and Kochen [1] and Colbeck and Renner [8], John Bell did not

adopt an incompatibilist approach to the problem of free will in quantum mechanics, e.g.,

the super-indeterministic approach illustrated in Fig. 1.1. Instead, Bell was a compatibilist

when it came to the free choice assumption and the notion of freedom in general. He argued

consistently in the tradition of compatibilism starting in 1976 (Bell [3, 9, 10]). Although

Bell never presented his position on free will as a theorem in name, he discussed in explicit

terms the conceptual foundations, including key metaphysical assumptions, which led him

to propose a free choice concept on an operational basis, a position which might be called

“eﬀective indeterminism”, or “determinism without predetermination”. Speciﬁcally, Bell

proposed that an experimenter agent serves in quantum correlation experiments as a source

of eﬀectively free variables, i.e., of variables that are, according to Bell, “. . . eﬀectively free

for the purposes at hand” (Bell [3]). “For me this means”, Bell explained, “that the values

of such variables have implications only in their future light cones. They are in no sense a

record of, and do not give information about, what has gone before. In particular they have

no implications for the hidden variables v in the overlap of the backward light cones. . . ”

(Bell [3]). Contrary to the free choice concept proposed by Colbeck and Renner [8], Bell’s

own approach to the free choice assumption is not founded upon intrinsic randomness or

fundamental quantum indeterminism, i.e., his approach does not reﬂect super-indeterminism

(see Fig. 1.1).

2.1. John Bell’s concept of “free variables” contradicts “super-indeterminism”

The fact that Bell was a compatibilist and that he thought of ‘freedom’ as a concept

that was not in opposition to ‘determinism’ is amply evident from his explanation in 1977

(Bell [3]). Then, Bell admitted making an error in his original presentation of 1976 when

he had wrongly proposed that ‘free’ variables are “. . . not determined in the overlap of the

backward light cones” (Bell [9]). “Here I must concede at once”, Bell [3] admitted “that the

hypothesis becomes quite inadequate when weakened in this way. The theorem no longer

follows. I was mistaken.” Following this admission, Bell aﬃrmed that ‘free variables’ are

4

variables that are neither ‘not determined’ nor ‘uncaused’ therefore, contradicting the or-

thodox concept of super-indeterminism described in Fig. 1.1. Instead, Bell’s free variables

are deﬁned operationally, as was mentioned already, as those that are “. . . eﬀectively free

for the purposes at hand” (Bell [3]). Bell’s crucial insight was this: a concept of eﬀective

experimenter free will must account for the fact that choices (actions) of the experimenter

agent are not pre-determined by the past history of the universe. In particular, the variables

associated with the choices by the epistemic agent must not be pre-determined, although

they will be unpredictably determined, by “the hidden variables v in the overlap of the back-

ward light cones. . . ” (Bell [3]). For the technical meaning of the notion of “unpredictably

determined” variables, in terms of ‘universally uncomputable’ variables, consult Sect. 4.

2.2. John Bell’s concept of “free variables” contradicts “super-determinism”

That Bell was well aware of the crucial distinction between, on the one hand, “pre-

determinism”, such as in the form of “super -determinism”, and, on the other hand, standard

“determinism”, is clearly evident from his ﬁnal statements on the free will problem (Bell [10]).

“One can envisage theories”, Bell noted, “in which there just are no free variables. . . In such

‘super-deterministic’ theories the apparent free will of experimenters, and any other apparent

randomness, would be illusory.” Here, Bell notes that in theories with unfree variables, which

he calls “super-deterministic theories”, experimenter free will is absent. Unfree variables

are those whose values are fully pre-determined, e.g., predictably determined, by the past

information in the universe. The fact that Bell was a compatibilist and that he argued for

the possibility of eﬀective experimenter free will in relation to a deterministic world view,

is apparent from his clear rejection of the super-deterministic approach. “I do not expect

to see a serious theory of this kind”, Bell [10] explained further. Instead, he proposed that

“I would expect a serious theory to permit ‘deterministic chaos’ or ‘pseudorandomness’, for

complicated subsystems (e.g., computers) which would provide variables suﬃciently free for

the purpose at hand.”

5

2.3. John Bell’s concept of “free variables” implies emergent unpredictability

The chief characteristic of “deterministic chaos”, i.e., of the strictly nonlinear, emergent

phenomenon that is accounted for by self-organization or complexity theory, is the uncer-

tainty, or unpredictability, of observable outcomes. This is despite the fact that the chaotic

behavior is entirely governed by deterministic relations. In principle, this essential feature of

deterministic chaos, holds true for physical, chemical, biological, and even psycho-physical,

systems, including in neurophysiological brain states potentially associated with the free-

choice performance by an experimenter agent (for an overview, e.g., Walleczek [11]).

In

short, the image used by Bell of “deterministic chaos” represents well the notion of “ef-

fective indeterminism” or “determinism without predeterminism”. At the same time, Bell’s

reference to deterministic chaos and pseudorandomness is, of course, wholly incompatible

with the intrinsic randomness assumption of orthodox quantum mechanics shown in Fig. 1.1.

Consequently, it is misleading to characterize John Bell’s own, well-documented views on free

will (Bell [3]) as being consistent with – metaphysically and physically – the incompatibilist

free-choice concept described by Colbeck and Renner [8].

Finally, while the “super-indeterminism” in orthodox quantum mechanics has been con-

sidered before, although not as a general metaphysical position (e.g., Hossenfelder [12]), it

was nevertheless argued by many others that a compatibilist free will concept, i.e., determ-

inism, must be in violation of the non-signalling constraint (e.g., Barrett et al. [13]; Koﬂer

et al. [14]). The non-signalling constraint mediates the apparent conﬂict between quantum

theory and the theory of special relativity (e.g., Eberhard [15]), and its role in deciding the

viability of compatibilist free-will concepts in quantum mechanics is reviewed next.

3. THE NON-SIGNALLING THEOREM IN THE DECISION WHETHER ONLY

AN INCOMPATIBILIST FREE WILL CONCEPT IS VIABLE FOR QUANTUM

MECHANICS

A standard view holds that only quantum theories invoking universal or fundamental

indeterminism could successfully reproduce the predictions that are yielded by orthodox

quantum mechanics. Speciﬁcally when negating the involvement of “cosmic conspiracy”

theories, such as super-determinism (e.g., Bell [10]), in the interpretation of measurement

6

outcomes, this view is widely thought to hold true. One major reason is the suggested

violation of the standard, i.e., axiomatic, non-signalling constraint in any possible ontological

quantum theory (e.g., Colbeck and Renner [16, 17]; Gallego et al. [18]). Axiomatic non-

signalling, which was presumed in Bell’s original interpretation of his theorem (Bell [19]),

is often considered mandatory, therefore, from the mainstream perspective (see Fig. 3.1).

However, as was argued recently, and is illustrated in Fig. 3.1, the case for, or against,

an axiomatic non-signalling assumption is undecidable on logical grounds alone (Walleczek

and Gr¨ossing [20, 21]). The reason is the non-reducible, relational interdependence of the

metaphysical assumptions that underlie such considerations (see legend to Fig. 3.1).

Figure 3.1. An axiomatic non-signalling assumption does not represent a conclusive argument for or

against determinism and nonlocal hidden-variables theories in quantum mechanics (from Walleczek

and Gr¨ossing [21]). As illustrated in Fig. 1.1 also, there exists – in orthodox quantum mechanics –

an interdependence of free-choice (A) and intrinsic randomness (B) assumptions. The validity of an

axiomatic non-signalling assumption (C), a standard assumption in orthodox quantum mechanics,

depends in turn on the independent validity of assumptions A and B. Importantly, the concept of

super-indeterminism (Fig. 1.1) demonstrates that an independent validation is out of reach however.

This implies that the validity of the axiomatic interpretation of the non-signalling theorem cannot

be proven based on present knowledge (for more details see Walleczek and Gr¨ossing [21]).

7

3.1. The two interpretations by John Bell of the non-signalling theorem

As was reviewed recently, John Bell shifted his interest – after 1976 – from an “axiomatic

non-signalling” assumption (Figs. 3.1 and 3.2) towards an assumption of “eﬀective non-

signalling” (Fig. 3.2), which is the non-signalling assumption that is compatible with de

Broglie–Bohm theory (Walleczek and Gr¨ossing [21]). In the context of the present analysis,

an eﬀective non-signalling theorem only, but not an axiomatic one, is compatible also with

Bell’s notion of “free variables” as described in Sect. 2. That is, an eﬀective non-signalling

theorem allows for nonlocal quantum information transfers while – at the same time – it

prohibits superluminal signalling and communication. Fig. 3.2 provides a summary (i) of

the two contrasting interpretations by John Bell of the non-signalling theorem and (ii) of the

communication-theoretic criterion which was shown to account for the diﬀerence between

Bell’s original position of 1964 (Bell [19]) and his later position which he ﬁrst introduced in

Figure 3.2. The two diﬀerent interpretations by John Bell of the non-signalling theorem (from

Walleczek and Gr¨ossing [21]). Bell’s ﬁrst interpretation (Bell [19]), here called “axiomatic non-

signalling”, rejects any form of deterministic quantum mechanics, upon assuming experimenter

freedom in the incompatibilist, super-indeterministic sense (Fig. 1.1). The second, subsequent

interpretation (Bell [9]), here called “eﬀective non-signalling”, is compatible with ontological, de-

terministic quantum approaches, including of the nonlocal type.

Importantly, unlike axiomatic

non-signalling, an eﬀective non-signalling theorem does not prohibit the nonlocal transfer of un-

controllable, i.e., non-Shannon, signals. For deﬁnitions of Shannon and non-Shannon signals in

the context of Shannon’s mathematical theory of communication see Walleczek and Gr¨ossing [21].

Eﬀective non-signalling ensures the possibility of de Broglie–Bohm theory, under an eﬀective free

choice assumption, in agreement with Bell’s compatibilist notion of “free variables” (Bell [3]).

8

1976 (Bell [9]).

For the current analysis of the free will concept, the critical reason for introducing an

eﬀective, instead of an axiomatic, non-signalling condition is the following: an eﬀective non-

signalling concept eliminates the danger of contradiction between the free choice assumption

and the non-signalling principle, for example, in the context of de Broglie–Bohm theory

(Walleczek and Gr¨ossing [21]). Next, given the diﬀerent options for interpreting the notion

of experimenter freedom – compatibilism versus incompatibilism, Sect. 4 will oﬀer an outlook

towards the possible future of the free will concept in quantum mechanics and beyond.

4. THE FUTURE OF FREE WILL IN QUANTUM MECHANICS AND BEYOND:

HOW IS FREEDOM POSSIBLE?

What is meant by the reality of experimenter free will? This work deﬁned the reality

of freedom – until now – simply as the negation of the statement that free will is an illu-

sion. This preliminary (circular) deﬁnition drew on the earlier statement by John Bell [10]

who had explained that in “. . .

‘super-deterministic theories’ the apparent free will of ex-

perimenters, and any other apparent randomness, would be illusory.” Thus, Bell’s concept

of super-determinism, as in “super-pre-determinism”, implicates the complete absence of

experimenter free will (see Sect. 2.2). However, for those theories that do not implicate

super-determinism, how could experimenter free will be possible?

An informal, intuitive understanding of free will assumes that the free-willed agent is

“free to choose” among diﬀerent options or alternatives. Also known as the principle of

alternative possibilities (e.g., Kane [5]), the intuitive understanding instantly raises the

problem of “control” in free-willed choices: Who or what is in charge when is performed the

“intentional” selection of one option from a set of many alternative options? The concept

of ‘experimenter freedom’ cannot, therefore, be reasonably discussed without considering

also the concept of ‘experimenter control ’. Indeed, generations of free-will philosophers have

pointed out the close connection between freedom and control (for reviews see Kane [5]). For

example, free will would be an illusion if an experimenter agent lacks (operational) control

over his or her performance, such as in setting up a certain experimental conﬁguration for

the purpose of “asking speciﬁc questions of nature”. An agent who can serve as a “source of

operational control” was previously deﬁned as a type-1 agent, whereas a “source of random

9

variables” – without the element of control – was characterized as a type-2 source. For

explanation, a ‘random event generator ’ represents a type-2 source, but it does not possess

type-1 agency, according to these deﬁnitions (Walleczek and Gr¨ossing [21]).

4.1. Quo Vadis quantum mechanics? Dualism or monism?

Again, since “randomness” is usually viewed as the opposite of “control” it is hard to

comprehend how ‘universal indeterminism’ – by itself – could provide a realistic basis for

the free-willed actions of (type-1) agents. Similarly, “non-randomness”, in the form of

(pre)determinism, is equally unable to provide for the capacity of controlling physical events

by an agent’s own free will. Consensus appears to be building towards the view that neither

determinism nor indeterminism provides an obvious pathway towards freedom and control

(e.g., Kane [4, 5]). Regarding the free-willed control by an agent of physical events in

nature, only an “extra-physical factor ” might advance the possibility of genuine freedom

in the strong sense of manifesting agent control. It certainly appears to be impossible to

conceive of a scenario in which this extra-physical “causal power” (e.g., a concept of “free

mental causation” by an agent) would not be in violation of the central tenet of modern

science: the rejection of dualism in the form of the Cartesian separation of agent “mind”

from “matter” (e.g., compare Cartesian ‘Res Cogitans’ versus ‘Res Extensae’). Quo Vadis

quantum mechanics? Un-physical dualism or physical monism? The ﬁnal Fig. 4.1 illustrates

a comparison of the two competing metaphysical frameworks that underlie the available

options – universal indeterminism and determinism. What do these options mean for the

future of quantum mechanics, e.g., regarding the pressing issue of operationalism versus

realism in quantum theory?

Modern science rejects the Cartesian split, i.e., metaphysical dualism, between agents

and world. Instead, modern science posits that experimenter agents are integral elements

(of reality) of the physical universe, i.e., agents and universe – together – constitute a

relational physical continuum. This non-dual continuum principle is indicated by the open

line in Fig. 4.1 which encloses the (operational) presence of the experimenter agent as an

intrinsic element of the universe. Importantly, natural science posits that the behavior of

both experimenter agent and the rest of the physical universe is constrained by the same

Laws of Nature, e.g., quantum theory and relativity theory. This reﬂects the (monistic)

10

Figure 4.1. Illustrating (A) universal indeterminism and (B) universal determinism. (A) In ‘uni-

versal indeterminism’, agents and the physical universe are subject to the same fundamental inde-

terminism. Here, the in-principle unpredictability of physical observables is a function of “intrinsic

randomness”. Note that – by itself – indeterminism neither rejects nor aﬃrms the reality of

“free will” or “free choice” as a result of super -indeterminism (see Fig. 1.1). (B) In ‘universal

determinism’, agents and the physical universe are subject to the same fundamental determinism.

Here, the in-principle unpredictability of physical observables is a function of “intrinsic complex-

ity”. Note that determinism need not be identiﬁed with super-determinism in the form of super-

predeterminism (see Sect. 2.2). This unnecessary, even false, identiﬁcation of determinism with

pre-determinism would render any notions of “free will” or “free choice” obsolete as part of scenario

(B).

position of scientiﬁc physicalism. Must the physicalist position be radically revised in light

of orthodox quantum mechanics and of the concept of super-indeterminism in Fig. 1.1?

4.2. Sources of unpredictability in universal indeterminism and determinism

The above analysis suggests that the relationship between experimenter freedom and

experimenter control is neither addressed by universal indeterminism (Fig. 4.1a) nor by

universal determinism (Fig. 4.1b). To repeat, the notion of ‘control’ is usually identiﬁed with

determination, whereas the notion of ‘freedom’ with indetermination. In any case, essential

to any minimal conception of experimenter freedom, as deﬁned in the beginning of Sect. 4,

appears to be the in-principle unpredictability of individual events in the universe. Naturally,

11

this must include also an agent’s free-choice performance in the selection of measurement

settings as an entirely unpredictable event itself (compare Fig. 4.1). On the one hand,

orthodox quantum mechanics oﬀers the traditional metaphysical position in regards to the

source of in-principle unpredictability: “intrinsic randomness” (Fig. 4.1a). On the other

hand, concepts such as Bell’s notion of “free variables”, for example, oﬀer an alternative

metaphysical position: “intrinsic complexity”. This alternative position is consistent with a

universally deterministic universe (see Fig. 4.1b). Finally, Bell’s free-variables concept will

be brieﬂy discussed against the background of self-organization, complexity, or emergence,

theory which advances the notion of observables in nature that are universally uncomputable.

4.3. John Bell’s “free variables” as universally uncomputable variables

Free variables are those that are “. . . eﬀectively free for the purposes at hand” (Bell [3]).

As was reviewed in Sect. 2, in reference to “free variables”, John Bell raised the similarity to

phenomena from nonlinear dynamics such as ‘deterministic chaos’, e.g., ‘pseudorandomness’.

The present work suggests that Bell’s concept of free variables can be justiﬁably deﬁned as

variables that emerge as a function of the intrinsic complexity of universally deterministic

processes (compare Fig. 4.1b). These complex and self-referential processes may generate

physical observables whose values are universally uncomputable, i.e., their computation

would require an inﬁnite amount of computational resources. In this scenario, even Laplace’s

demon, and “the universe itself ”, would be incapable of predicting with absolute certainty

the future outcome of individual microscopic events in nature. The concept of universal

uncomputability, which is inherent in self-referential systems dynamics, plausibly oﬀers the

kind of eﬀective unpredictability which John Bell sought. For example, see also the notions

of “eﬀective indeterminism” and “determination without predetermination” in Sect. 2.

5. CONCLUSIONS

The here introduced concept of super-indeterminism for orthodox quantum mechanics,

which was shown to underlie the free will theorem by Conway and Kochen [1, 2], is con-

sistent only with the metaphysical position shown in Fig. 4.1a: intrinsic randomness. By

contrast, John Bell’s search for an eﬀective free will concept was shown to be consistent

12

only with the position shown in Fig. 4.1b:

intrinsic complexity. It is likely that signiﬁc-

ant advances towards a realist quantum mechanics will depend on new insights into what

might be called also “quantum complexity”, i.e., complexity at the smallest dimensions of

reality. Summarizing, this work has identiﬁed two distinct routes towards avoiding the “cos-

mic pre-determination” of the free-choice performance by an experimenter agent: intrinsic

randomness and intrinsic complexity (Fig. 4.1).

Importantly, neither route was found to

address the problem of the “free-willed control” – by an agent – of any physical events in

nature. Importantly, both routes were argued to satisfy the minimal requirement of unpre-

dictability, i.e., lack of pre-determination, of an agent’s choices based upon past information

about the universe. Finally, a better understanding of the limits and possibilities of the

alternative position of quantum complexity – as a source of unpredictability – will require

the development of a deeper understanding of the relationship between quantum theory and

the theory of complexity, self-organization, and emergence. The prospects for the possibility

of an emergent quantum mechanics critically depends on fashioning a deeper understanding

also – in agreement with Bell’s eﬀective free will concept – of the relational nature of an

emergent universe, including of emergent space and time.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Work by Jan Walleczek at Phenoscience Laboratories (Berlin) is partially funded by the

Fetzer Franklin Fund of the John E. Fetzer Memorial Trust. The author wishes to thank

Gerhard Gr¨ossing and the research group at the Austrian Institute for Nonlinear Studies,

as well as Nikolaus von Stillfried, for invaluable insights during many excellent discussions.

[1] J. Conway and S. Kochen, “The free will theorem,” Found. Phys. 36 (2006) 1441–1473,

arXiv:quant-ph/0604079.

[2] J. Conway and S. Kochen, “The strong free will theorem,” Notices of the AMS 56 (2009)

226–232.

[3] J. S. Bell, “Free variables and local causality,” Epistemol. Lett. 15 (2) (1977) . Repr. in

Dialectica 39 (1985) 103-106.

13

[4] R. Kane, A Contemporary Introduction to Free Will. Oxford University Press, New York,

NY, 2005.

[5] R. Kane, ed., The Oxford Handbook of Free Will. Oxford University Press, UK, 2 ed., 2011.

[6] D. Bohm, “A suggested interpretation of the quantum theory in terms of ”hidden” variables.

I,” Phys. Rev. 85 (1952) 166–179.

[7] D. Bohm, “A suggested interpretation of the quantum theory in terms of ”hidden” variables.

II,” Phys. Rev. 85 (1952) 180–193.

[8] R. Colbeck and R. Renner, “A short note on the concept of free choice,” pre-print (2013) ,

arXiv:1302.4446 [quant-ph].

[9] J. S. Bell, “The theory of local beables,” Epistemol. Lett. 9 (3) (1976) . Repr. in Dialectica

39 (1985) 85-96.

[10] J. S. Bell, “La nouvelle cuisine,” in Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics,

pp. 232–248. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, revised ed., 2004.

[11] J. Walleczek, ed., Self-Organized Biological Dynamics and Nonlinear Control. Cambridge

University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2000.

[12] S. Hossenfelder, “The free will function,” pre-print (2012) , arXiv:1202.0720

[physics.hist-ph].

[13] J. Barrett, L. Hardy, and A. Kent, “No signaling and quantum key distribution,” Phys. Rev.

Lett. 95 (2005) 010503.

[14] J. Koﬂer, T. Paterek, and C. Brukner, “Experimenter’s freedom in Bell’s theorem and

quantum cryptography,” Phys. Rev. A 73 (2006) 022104, arXiv:quant-ph/0510167.

[15] P. H. Eberhard, “Bell’s theorem and the diﬀerent concepts of locality,” Nuov. Cim. B 46

(1978) 392–419.

[16] R. Colbeck and R. Renner, “No extension of quantum theory can have improved predictive

power,” Nature Commun. 2 (2011) 411–415.

[17] R. Colbeck and R. Renner, “Free randomness can be ampliﬁed,” Nature Phys. 8 (2012)

450–454, arXiv:1105.3195 [quant-ph].

[18] R. Gallego, L. Masanes, G. De La Torre, C. Dhara, L. Aolita, and A. Ac´ın, “Full

randomness from arbitrarily deterministic events,” Nature Commun. 4 (2013) 2654,

arXiv:1210.6514 [quant-ph].

[19] J. S. Bell, “On the Einstein Podolsky Rosen paradox,” Physics 1 (1964) 195–200.

14

[20] J. Walleczek and G. Gr¨ossing, “The non-signalling theorem in generalizations of Bell’s

theorem,” J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 504 (2014) 012001, arXiv:1403.3588 [quant-ph].

[21] J. Walleczek and G. Gr¨ossing, “Nonlocal quantum information transfer without

superluminal signalling and communication,” Found. Phys. (2016) , arXiv:1501.07177

[quant-ph]. in press.

15

