6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
0
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
2
1
4
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Electromagnetic Induction Imaging with a Radio-Frequency Atomic
Magnetometer

Cameron Deans, Luca Marmugi,a) Sarah Hussain, and Ferruccio Renzoni
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT,
United Kingdom

(Dated: 11 March 2016)

We report on a compact, tunable and scalable to large arrays imaging device, based on a radio-frequency
optically-pumped atomic magnetometer operating in magnetic induction tomography modality. Imaging of
conductive objects is performed at room temperature, in an unshielded environment and without background
subtraction. Conductivity maps of target objects exhibit not only excellent performance in terms of shape
reconstruction, but also demonstrate detection of sub-millimetric cracks and penetration of conductive bar-
riers. The results presented here demonstrate the potential of a future generation of imaging instruments,
which combine magnetic induction tomography and the un-matched performance of atomic magnetometers.

Imaging the properties of an object is a fundamen-
tal asset in many ﬁelds, ranging from materials’ evalua-
tion to security, and bio-medicine. Although a number
of imaging techniques and devices have been developed,
there are no universal imaging systems. Diﬀerent sys-
tems create images based on diﬀerent properties of the
object of interest which, combined with practical issues
such as cost-eﬀectiveness or invasiveness, can narrow the
range of possible applications.

Electromagnetic induction imaging, often referred to
as Magnetic Induction Tomography (MIT)1, due to the
possibility of producing tomographic images, is one of
the best candidates for a tunable, cost-eﬀective and non-
invasive imaging tool.
Indeed, its suitability to many
diﬀerent applications is being investigated2–6. MIT non-
invasively maps the conductivity, permeability and per-
mittivity of an object of interest, by measuring the “sec-
ondary ﬁeld” (BEC) produced by eddy currents induced
by an applied oscillating magnetic ﬁeld. The system re-
lies on the inductive coupling between this AC magnetic
ﬁeld, the “primary ﬁeld”, with the sample under investi-
gation.

In order to overcome the limitations of current conven-
tional MIT instrumentation, in terms of sensitivity and
bandwidth, a proof-of-concept was recently realized with
a self-oscillating Optical Atomic Magnetometer (OAM)7.
However, the relative complexity of the apparatus, its
low suitability for scalability and its reduced ﬂexibility
in terms of working frequency, make the instrument not
well-suited for practical applications.

Here, we present an alternative approach for opti-
cal MIT imaging, based on a Radio-Frequency optically
pumped OAM (RF OAM)8–10. This combines the ad-
vantages in terms of sensitivity of OAMs, up to orders of
magnitudes larger than that of a pick-up coil of the same
volume11, with the simplicity, robustness and scalability
of RF OAMs.

We report on the implementation of an electromag-

a)Electronic mail: l.marmugi@ucl.ac.uk

netic induction imaging system based on a RF OAM
and on the demonstration of OAM-based electromagnetic
imaging in conditions similar to those of materials’ non-
destructive evaluation and security screening.
In par-
ticular, we demonstrate imaging of conductive objects,
crack detection and conductive barrier penetration at
room temperature, in an unshielded environment.

(cid:48)

The apparatus is sketched in Fig. 1(a). The funda-
mental sensing unit (Fig. 1(b)) is an 87Rb vapor, spin-
polarized by optical pumping via a σ+ laser beam tuned
to the D2 line F = 2 → F
= 3 transition (Fig. 1(c)).
Tuning is stabilized by means of an independent Dichroic
Atomic Vapor Laser Lock (DAVLL). As in conventional
RF OAMs, a perpendicular AC magnetic ﬁeld (BRF) ex-
cites spin-coherences and produces a transverse atomic
polarization. Under the action of a magnetic ﬁeld to
be measured, the Faraday eﬀect rotates the plane of
polarization of a π-polarized probe beam, providing in-
formation about the Larmor precession and, therefore,
about the magnitude of the total magnetic ﬁeld12.
In
the present work, the probe beam is detuned by +425
MHz by a double-pass acousto-optic modulator. The ef-
fects of Faraday rotation are detected by a polarimeter,
constituted of a balanced photodiode and a polarizing
beam splitter. Typically, the OAM’s resonance has a
FWHM∼ 2 × 10−7 T.
In order to reduce the system’s footprint and complex-
ity, a single ferrite-core coil (7.8 mm × 9.5 mm, L=680
µH at 1 kHz) generates both BRF and the MIT primary
ﬁeld. A dual-phase lock-in ampliﬁer, referenced to the
RF supply driving the coil, allows the measurement of
the amplitude (“radius”, R) and the phase lag (“phase”,
φ) of the magnetic ﬁeld signal. This includes the eddy
currents’ contribution which is directly related to the di-
electric properties of the object of interest13.

The frequency of the oscillating magnetic ﬁeld (ωRF )
is chosen on the basis of the required skin depth δ. Tun-
ing of the RF OAM is achieved by suitably adjusting
the DC ﬁeld used for optical pumping, BDC (Fig. 1(b)).
Thus, the range and penetration of the system can be
easily adapted to the required task and current condi-
tions. Position-resolved measurements are obtained by

2

FIG. 1. Compact RF OAM for MIT. Pump (exactly resonant, σ+ polarized, propagating along ˆz, 7.9 mW/cm2) and probe
(∆pr=+425 MHz, π polarized along ˆy, propagating along ˆx, 0.9 mW/cm2) are tuned to the 87Rb F = 2 → F (cid:48) = 3 hyperﬁne
transition. They are crossed at the center of a 25 mm cubic glass cell containing 20 Torr of N2 as buﬀer gas and a naturally
occurring Rb vapor, kept at room temperature (298 K). A uniform DC magnetic ﬁeld (BDC = BDC ˆz) allows optical pumping
to the |F = 2, mF = +2(cid:105) Zeeman state and thus the spin-polarization of 87Rb along ˆz. An AC magnetic ﬁeld (BRF) coherently
drives the ground-state polarization. Unlike in conventional RF OAMs, BRF also acts as the primary ﬁeld for MIT, thus
generating eddy currents in the object of interest. Under the inﬂuence of the total magnetic ﬁeld BTot = BRF + BEC, the
polarization of the probe beam is periodically rotated and measured by projecting the resulting polarization onto ˆz and ˆy. In
order to obtain position-resolved measurements, a CCD camera detects the position of the object, while a laptop records the
averages (103 samples/point). (a) Experimental setup. DBR: distributed Bragg-reﬂector; DAVLL: dichroic atomic vapor laser
lock; HWP: λ/2 waveplate; QWP: λ/4 waveplate; NPBS: non-polarizing beam-splitter; PBS: polarizing beam-splitter; LIA:
lock-in ampliﬁer; DAQ: data acquisition board. (b) Detail (to scale) of the MIT OAM unit, with an Al disk as an example
of a typical target. Eddy currents are depicted as a white loop. (c) 87Rb F = 2 → F (cid:48) = 3 transitions involved in the OAM
operation. The π-polarized probe beam does not match the center of the |F (cid:48) = 3, mF (cid:48)(cid:105) levels because of its detuning.

moving the samples with a translational stage.

The present set-up represents an important develop-
ment in terms of a reduction of complexity with respect
to the proof-of-concept7. The MIT information is now di-
rectly encoded at ωRF . Therefore, no down-mixing is re-
quired. Moreover, the re-designed OAM does not require
phase-locked loops and feedback-controlled acousto-optic
modulation for synchronous optical pumping. Further-
more, the crossed beams conﬁguration adopted here
(Fig. 1) allows more precise control of the sensing region,
thus potentially improving either the spatial resolution,
the sensors’ density, or both.

The instrument’s imaging capabilities at room temper-
ature in an unshielded environment are demonstrated by
imaging several conductive objects, as shown, for exam-
ple, in Fig. 2. We did not observe any noticeable eﬀects
during the MIT operation due to random varying stray
magnetic ﬁelds. In the case of metallic and non-magnetic
objects, conductivity is the largest contributor to the sec-
ondary ﬁeld. The maps shown in this work can therefore
be considered exclusively as plots of conductivity.

In Fig. 2, ωRF /2π=1 kHz, with the driving coil cen-
tered on the sensor, 63 mm above the pump and probe
beams. The local maximum ﬁeld at the object’s level is
estimated, by means of ﬁnite-element simulations, to be
of the order of 2 × 10−3 T, and of 6 × 10−5 T at the sen-
sor’s level, when the object is not present. The peak of
eddy currents’ surface density is estimated ∼ 106 A/m2

FIG. 2. Electromagnetic induction imaging with a RF OAM:
normalized conductivity maps of Al objects at 1 kHz. (a) R
map of an Al disk, diameter 37 mm (2 mm thick). C ≈ 3.5,
as deﬁned in Eq. 1. (b) φ map of a 31 mm × 38 mm × 50 mm
Al triangle (3 mm thick). C ≈ 3.9. Maximum phase change is
∆φmax = 41.3◦, the color bar maps an interval ∆φcol = 38.4◦.

in the case of Fig. 2(a).

The objects of interest, a disk and a triangle of Al, of
2 mm and 3 mm thickness respectively, are moved with
a translational stage with respect to the RF OAM. At
each position, 103 averages are performed. Matrices of
position-dependent data D = {dzx} are acquired by a
laptop, displayed in real time and recorded. Contrary to
the previous implementation7, no background subtrac-
tion is required. In other words, only one image is re-
quired for reproducing objects such as those in Fig. 2.
This is of great importance in view of practical applica-

tions.

3

zx

z ˜x

Each matrix D is normalized and then ﬁltered with
a nearest-neighbor averaging ﬁlter, with 2 pxl radius
(d(norm)
) . This takes into account possible ﬂuctuations
in positioning and eases shapes’ recognition. Data are
then plotted in color-coded 2D plots. The dark level for
color coding is taken as the average of the normalized val-
ues plus their standard deviation along a column ˜x, where
the object is not present: dark ≡ (cid:104)d(norm)
(cid:105).
In this way, with a conﬁdence of 64%, each value larger
than dark is a contribution generated by the object and
not by ﬂuctuations in the background, which are still
present. This simple criterion can be adapted in view of
the desired application. It is also partially responsible for
a possible lack of “sharpness” at the boundaries of the
objects. Suitable edge detection algorithms could limit
its impact. It is noteworthy that this procedure does not
modify data, only their display.

+stdev(norm)

z ˜x

Finally, as a ﬁgure of merit for direct comparison of

diﬀerent images, we introduce the contrast C:

C =

max(d(norm)
dark

zx

) − dark

.

(1)

Non-Destructive Evaluation (NDE) is one of the main
applications of electromagnetic induction imaging. In or-
der to demonstrate the suitability of our instrument for
such a task, a sub-mm crack is created in an Al ring. As
shown in Fig. 3(a), the cut goes through the full radial
extension (6 mm) and the full thickness (2 mm) of the ob-
ject. This causes an interruption in the ﬂow of the eddy
currents excited by the MIT primary ﬁeld, and hence a
decrease of the local BEC measured by our instrument.
In terms of conductivity mapping, this will create a local
minimum.

Figs. 3(b) and 3(c), which present the φ and the R
maps of the ring at 10 kHz, conﬁrm this: at the position
of the sub-mm crack, a decrease in the level of the signal
is observed. Hence, our RF OAM-based MIT system is
capable of imaging conductive objects and is also able
to detect and locate tiny features, such as a structural
anomalies. This is of fundamental importance for NDE,
for example in industrial quality processes and structure
monitoring.

Fig. 3(d) shows a plot of normalized R data, along
selected columns of the radius map 3(c). The blue circles
correspond to a region where the object is not present.
The red squares are the cross section at the center of the
crack: the trace exhibits a decrease in the conductivity at
x =20 mm, where the fracture is located. This decrease is
signiﬁcant in comparison to the standard deviation bars.
The yellow crosses label the cross section towards the
center of the ring; as expected, a large value is read for
x ∼0 mm and x ∼38 mm, whereas values consistent with
the background are obtained around x ∼20 mm.

Incidentally, Fig. 3 also demonstrates the capability
of the system to work at diﬀerent frequencies, only by
tuning the BDC ﬁeld.

FIG. 3. Crack detection: normalized conductivity maps of an
Al ring with a sub-mm crack at 10 kHz (δAl ≈ 0.82 mm). (a)
Photo of the sample: thickness is 2 mm, the radial extension
is 6 mm. The width of the crack is < 1 mm. (b) φ map; C ≈
1.1. In this case, ∆φmax = 9.9◦, ∆φcol = 6.0◦. (c) R map;
C ≈ 1.8. (d) Cross-sections of the R map at z = 3.2 mm (blue
circles), z = 15.2 mm (red squares) and z = 22.4 mm (yellow
crosses). Error bars are standard deviations automatically
computed after 103 averages.

Fig. 4 further demonstrates the suitability of the sys-
tem for NDE: the crack in the ring is here imaged with
a higher spatial resolution. The crack is clearly visible,
and is displayed in a 3D surface plot obtained from the
normalized R (Fig. 4(c)). As in the case of Fig. 3, the im-
age of the fracture is somehow smoother than expected.
On the one hand, this is an obvious consequence of the
nearest-neighbor averaging. On the other hand, however,
this is due to the relatively large spread of the primary
ﬁeld at the object’s surface. According to ﬁnite-element
simulations, the actual distribution of BRF on the ob-
ject’s plane is broader than the crack itself (FWHM∼6
mm). This could be improved by using more local-
ized driving ﬁelds, or introducing image processing which
takes into account the distribution of the driving ﬁeld
over the spatial extension of the object.

Another fundamental capability for applications is
penetrating shieldings or surrounding spurious objects.
This would be of major importance for security screen-
ing and also for the monitoring or evaluation of complex
structures.

The capability of our device in shield penetration is
explored by considering a Cu square (side-length 25 mm,
thickness 1 mm) concealed behind an Al barrier of thick-
ness 1 mm and extended all over the sensing region
(> 100 mm). The objects are in electrical contact: eddy
currents can, in principle, ﬂow from one surface to the
other. The driving coil is lifted by 3 mm, thus leading to
a center-to-center separation with respect to the sensor

4

FIG. 4. Crack detection: high-resolution normalized conductivity map of a sub-mm crack in an Al ring at 10 kHz (δAl ≈ 0.82
mm). (a) R map, C ≈ 1.8; (b) Corresponding contour plot. (c) Detail of a 3D surface plot (R) of the crack.

better results than the R map, thanks to the diﬀerent
conductivities between the Al shield and the Cu square.
This produces a larger phase lag in the case of the more
conductive copper.

In conclusion, a compact, robust and scalable imaging
instrument based on RF OAM operating in MIT modal-
ity is realized and tested in view of diﬀerent applications.
Sensitivity and ﬂexibility of the system are provided by
the RF OAM, which can be easily tuned in order to
match the required working conditions. Imaging of con-
ductive objects is demonstrated with such a device and
without any image reconstruction or background subtrac-
tion. With respect to the proof-of-concept of MIT with
OAMs7, the current system allows for improved perfor-
mances in terms of spatial resolution, while reducing the
complexity and the cost of the apparatus. The present
work, therefore, demonstrates practical applications of
MIT with RF OAMs in unscreened everyday conditions,
from security screening to non-destructive evaluation.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by a Marie Curie Inter-
national Research Staﬀ Exchange Scheme Fellowship
“COSMA” (PIRSES-GA-2012-295264). C. D. is sup-
ported by the EPSRC Centre for Doctoral Training in
Delivering Quantum Technologies. L. M. acknowledges
the support by Innovate UK within the project “AM-
MIT” (Project No. 131885). S. H. is supported by DSTL
- Defence and Security PhD - Sensing and Navigation us-
ing Quantum 2.0 technology.

1H. Griﬃths, Measurement Science and Technology 12, 1126
(2001).
2L. Perez, J. Le Hir, C. Dolabdjian, and L. Butin, Journal of
Electrical Engineering 55, 73 (2004).
3M. Zolgharni, H. Griﬃths, and P. D. Ledger, Physiological Mea-
surement 31, S111 (2010).
4B. J. Darrer, J. C. Watson, P. Bartlett, and F. Renzoni, Sci.
Rep. 5 (2015).
5L. Ma, A. Hunt, and M. Soleimani, International Journal of
Multiphase Flow 72, 198 (2015).
6B. J. Darrer, J. C. Watson, P. A. Bartlett, and F. Renzoni, AIP
Advances 5, 087143 (2015).

FIG. 5. Penetration of conductive barriers: φ map of a
Cu square (side-length=25 mm, thickness=1 mm) at 500
Hz through an Al barrier 1 mm thick (δAl ≈ 3.7 mm,
σAl ≈ 0.38 × 108 S/m; δCu ≈ 2.9 mm, σCu ≈ 0.60 × 108
S/m). C ≈ 1.1. Here, ∆φmax = 33.4◦, ∆φcol = 25.3◦. The
object of interest and the barrier are in electrical contact.

of 66 mm.

For similar conﬁgurations, it was found that the main
problems for imaging are i) to penetrate the Al screen and
ii) to eliminate its spurious contribution. The ﬁrst issue
can be solved by choosing a suitable frequency which al-
lows a skin depth larger than the thickness of the screen.
In this case ωRF /2π = 500 Hz, which ensures penetration
of the Al barrier.

The second problem has been solved by subtracting im-
ages obtained at diﬀerent frequencies4,6. However, this
may be impractical for certain applications as it would re-
quire diﬀerent measurements in stable conditions. Here,
thanks to our RF OAM, the Cu square concealed by an
Al barrier is imaged with a single measurement at 500
Hz, without the need of any background subtraction, or
image reconstruction (Fig. 5).

The agreement with the position, the shape and the
size of the object is satisfactory. Nevertheless, the edges
of the square appear particularly blurred. This may be
ascribed to edge eﬀects at the boundaries between the ob-
ject of interest and the screen, where further noise due to
mutual induction and ﬂow of eddy currents is expected.
This is reﬂected in the fact that, the φ map provides

7A. Wickenbrock, S. Jurgilas, A. Dow, L. Marmugi, and F. Ren-
zoni, Opt. Lett. 39, 6367 (2014).
8I. M. Savukov, S. J. Seltzer, M. V. Romalis, and K. L. Sauer,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 063004 (2005).
9M. P. Ledbetter, V. M. Acosta, S. M. Rochester, D. Budker,
S. Pustelny,
and V. V. Yashchuk, Phys. Rev. A 75, 023405
(2007).

10D. A. Keder, D. W. Prescott, A. W. Conovaloﬀ, and K. L. Sauer,

AIP Advances 4, 127159 (2014).

11I. M. Savukov, S. J. Seltzer, and M. V. Romalis, Journal of

Magnetic Resonance 185, 214 (2007).

12D. Budker and D. F. J. Kimball, Optical Magnetometry, Optical

Magnetometry (Cambridge University Press, 2013).

13H. Griﬃths, W. R. Stewart, and W. Gough, Annals of the New

York Academy of Sciences 873, 335 (1999).

5

