6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
0
1

 
 
]

.

R
S
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
9
1
4
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

MNRAS 000, 1–15 (2015)

Preprint 11 March 2016

Compiled using MNRAS LATEX style ﬁle v3.0

Stellar Coronal Response to Diﬀerential Rotation and Flux
Emergence

G. P. S. Gibb1⋆, D. H. Mackay1, M. M. Jardine2, A. R. Yeates3
1School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, KY16 9SS
2School of Physics and Astronomy, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, KY16 9SS
3Department of Mathematical Sciences, Durham University, Durham, DH1 3LE

Accepted ?. Received ?; in original form ?

ABSTRACT
We perform a numerical parameter study to determine what eﬀect varying diﬀerential
rotation and ﬂux emergence has on a star’s non-potential coronal magnetic ﬁeld. In
particular we consider the eﬀects on the star’s surface magnetic ﬂux, open magnetic
ﬂux, mean azimuthal ﬁeld strength, coronal free magnetic energy, coronal heating and
ﬂux rope eruptions. To do this, we apply a magnetic ﬂux transport model to describe
the photospheric evolution, and couple this to the non-potential coronal evolution
using a magnetofrictional technique. A ﬂux emergence model is applied to add new
magnetic ﬂux onto the photosphere and into the corona. The parameters of this ﬂux
emergence model are derived from the solar ﬂux emergence proﬁle, however the rate of
emergence can be increased to represent higher ﬂux emergence rates than the Sun’s.
Overall we ﬁnd that ﬂux emergence has a greater eﬀect on the non-potential coronal
properties compared to diﬀerential rotation, with all the aforementioned properties
increasing with increasing ﬂux emergence rate. Although diﬀerential rotation has a
lesser eﬀect on the overall coronal properties compared to ﬂux emergence, varying
diﬀerential rotation does alter the coronal structure. As the diﬀerential rotation rate
increases, the corona becomes more open, and more non-potential.

Key words: stars: activity–stars: coronae–stars: magnetic ﬁelds–stars: rotation.

1 INTRODUCTION

Virtually all cool, partially-convective main sequence stars
display evidence of hot, magnetically conﬁned coronae. Ev-
idence of hot coronae mainly consists of X-ray emission
(Vaiana et al. 1981; Schmitt 1997; Feigelson & Montmerle
1999). In addition to this, evidence of magnetic ﬁelds on
such stars include: the presence of dark spots (interpreted
to be analogous to sunspots) found through tomograph-
ical techniques (Vogt & Penrod 1983; Strassmeier 1996;
Berdyugina 2005), rotational modulation (Radick et al.
1982, 1983) and even exoplanetary transits (Rabus et al.
2009; Pont et al. 2007; Sanchis-Ojeda et al. 2011). Addition-
ally, through the Zeeman eﬀect, direct measurements of pho-
tospheric magnetic ﬁelds have been made (Robinson et al.
1980), and using Zeeman Doppler Imaging (ZDI), maps
of the photospheric magnetic ﬁelds of stars can be con-
structed (Semel 1989; Brown et al. 1991; Donati et al. 1997;
Donati & Collier Cameron 1997). Periodic variability of the
chromospheric emission of stars over timescales of years
(Wilson 1978) and long term variability in X-ray emission

⋆ E-mail: gpsg@st-andrews.ac.uk

c(cid:13) 2015 The Authors

(Favata et al. 2008; Ayres 2009) are interpreted to be due
to magnetic cycles analogous to the Sun’s eleven year cycle.
These observations add further evidence to the argument
that the coronae are magnetically driven.

A number of studies have been conducted that have de-
termined the response of the coronae to various stellar pa-
rameters. The X-ray luminosity is found to increase with
increasing stellar rotation period (Pallavicini et al. 1981;
Walter & Bowyer 1981), as do chromospheric emission prox-
ies (Middelkoop 1981; Mekkaden 1985). Similarly, the mean
surface ﬁeld strength, hBi, is found to increase with decreas-
ing rotation period (Vidotto et al. 2014). In addition to the
activity-rotation relation, the activity of stars is also depen-
dent upon stellar mass. For a set of stars with similar ro-
tation periods, the activity of stars increases with decreas-
ing mass (e.g. Donati & Landstreet (2009), Marsden et al.
(2014)).

On the Sun, the corona may largely be considered to
be in equilibrium, save for impulsive events such as ﬂares
and coronal mass ejections (CMEs) (Priest 1982). The large-
scale coronal evolution is thus predominantly driven through
the evolution of the photospheric magnetic ﬁeld, in which
the coronal ﬁeld is anchored. The photospheric magnetic

2 G. P. S. Gibb, D. H. Mackay, M. M. Jardine, A. R. Yeates

ﬁeld evolves in response to large-scale surface ﬂows (such
as diﬀerential rotation and meridional ﬂow) and small-scale
convective ﬂows (granulation and supergranulation). Diﬀer-
ential rotation is the tendency for a star’s equator to ro-
tate faster than its poles. This has the eﬀect of stretch-
ing magnetic features out in the east-west direction, and
builds up shear in the corona (van Ballegooijen et al. 2000;
Mackay & van Ballegooijen 2006). Meridional ﬂow is a pole-
wards ﬂow which acts to migrate magnetic features towards
higher latitudes (Babcock 1961; DeVore et al. 1985). Gran-
ulation and supergranulation act to jostle small-scale mag-
netic elements about, and break up large magnetic ﬁeld dis-
tributions. The large-scale eﬀect of granulation on the mag-
netic ﬁeld can be treated as a diﬀusion process (Leighton
1964). For a review on the understanding of surface mag-
netic ﬂux transport processes on the Sun, please see Sheeley
(2005) or Mackay & Yeates (2012).

In addition to surface ﬂows, the coronal ﬁeld is also
altered through the addition of new magnetic ﬂux, which
emerges through the photosphere from the solar interior.
Flux emergence is thought to be due to magnetically buoy-
ant ﬂux tubes rising up through the convective zone (e.g.
Fan (2001)), and typically results in bipolar active regions
at the photosphere. Flux emergence rejuvenates the corona,
by adding new ﬂux into the corona, and altering its struc-
ture. On the Sun, active regions preferentially emerge be-
tween ±35◦ latitude (Priest 1982), are predominantly tilted
such that the leading polarity (in the direction of rotation)
is closer to the equator (Hale et al. 1919), and the sign of
the leading polarity in one hemisphere is opposite to the sign
of the leading polarity in the other hemisphere (Hale et al.
1919).

On stars, diﬀerential rotation may be estimated by con-
sidering the rotational modulation of chromospheric emis-
sion lines over a stellar activity cycle (Donahue et al. 1996).
More recently, Doppler Imaging and ZDI have been able
to better measure diﬀerential rotation (Donati et al. 1997;
Petit et al. 2002; Donati et al. 2000; Marsden et al. 2006;
Waite et al. 2011). Such studies have found diﬀerential ro-
tation rates of up to eight times the solar value (e.g.
Marsden et al. (2011)), and it is in general
found that
the diﬀerential rotation rates of stars increase with in-
creasing stellar eﬀective temperature (Barnes et al. 2005;
Collier Cameron 2007; K¨uker & R¨udiger 2011). At present,
ﬂux emergence rates cannot be measured for stars other than
the Sun.

In our previous paper (Gibb et al. 2014a) we investi-
gated the eﬀects of diﬀerential rotation and supergranula-
tion (parameterised through a surface diﬀusion) on coronal
timescales. To do this we modelled the coronal evolution of
a single isolated bipolar active region on a portion of a star.
The diﬀerential rotation facilitated the shearing of the coro-
nal ﬁeld, and the surface diﬀusion allowed ﬂux cancellation,
resulting in the transformation of sheared ﬁeld into a ﬂux
rope. The diﬀerential rotation eventually initiated the erup-
tion of the ﬂux rope. We found that the formation times
and lifetimes of the ﬂux ropes decreased with increasing dif-
ferential rotation rate. We interpreted this to mean that the
coronal timescales on stars decrease with increasing diﬀeren-
tial rotation, and postulated that high diﬀerential rotation
stars may have more frequent eruptions and ﬂares compared
to low diﬀerential rotation stars. We also discussed that the

timescales deduced from the work may not be reﬂected in
more complicated circumstances, as active regions are un-
likely to be isolated, but rather are likely to be in proximity
to other active regions. The proximity to other active re-
gions may aﬀect the timescales through mutual interactions
between neighbouring active regions’ coronal ﬁelds.

In this paper we carry out a numerical parameter study
to investigate the eﬀects of varying the diﬀerential rotation
and ﬂux emergence rates on a number of global coronal and
photospheric properties. In Section 2 we describe the pho-
tospheric and non-potential coronal evolution model we em-
ploy. Section 3 describes the construction of our ﬂux emer-
gence model. Our results are presented in Section 4 and ﬁ-
nally we summarise our results and discuss them in Section
5.

2 NUMERICAL MODEL

In this study we simulate the evolution of stars’ non-
potential coronal magnetic ﬁelds in response to the evolu-
tion of their surface magnetic ﬁelds. The surface evolution
is driven by a surface ﬂux transport model, which includes
the eﬀects of diﬀerential rotation, meridional ﬂow and sur-
face diﬀusion (see Section 2.1). The non-potential coronal
evolution is achieved through a magnetofrictional technique
(Section 2.2) which produces a series of non-linear force free
ﬁelds. In addition to these, we also include ﬂux emergence
into the model to account for the addition of new magnetic
ﬂux onto the photosphere and into the corona over the du-
ration of the simulations (Section 2.3). The photospheric
and coronal evolution are treated in the same manner as
Gibb et al. (2014a), with the exception of the ﬂux emergence
model, which uses the method of Yeates et al. (2008).

We employ a numerical grid using the variables (x, y, z),
related to (r, θ, φ), the radius, co-latitude (related to the
latitude, λ, by θ◦ = 90◦ − λ) and longitude by:
x =

(1)

,

φ
∆

y = −

z =

ln(cid:0)tan θ
2(cid:1)∆
R∗(cid:17)
ln(cid:16) r

,

∆

,

(2)

(3)

where ∆ is the grid spacing. This choice of variables ensures
that the horizontal cell size is hφ = hθ = r∆ sin θ and the
vertical cell size is hz = r∆. A variable resolution grid is
employed in order to prevent the cell sizes from becoming
too small towards the poles. At the equator the grid spac-
ing is 0.9375◦ whilst at the poles the grid spacing is 30◦.
For more details on the variable-resolution grid employed,
please refer to Yeates (2014). A staggered grid is applied in
order to achieve second order accuracy for the computation
of derivatives. The corona is simulated at all longitudes, be-
tween ±89.5◦ latitude and between the stellar surface and
2.5R∗. We apply closed boundary conditions on the latitu-
dinal boundaries, and periodic boundary conditions on the
longitudinal boundaries. At the upper (r = 2.5R∗) bound-
ary we apply an open boundary condition, and the lower
(r = R∗) boundary is speciﬁed by the radial photospheric
magnetic ﬁeld as deduced from the ﬂux transport model de-
scribed below.

MNRAS 000, 1–15 (2015)

2.1 Surface Flux Transport Model

In order to model the evolution of the non-potential coronal
magnetic ﬁeld with the magnetofrictional method, we re-
quire a description of the evolution of the photospheric mag-
netic ﬁeld. The photospheric evolution is determined using
the ﬂux transport model described in Gibb et al. (2014a).
This model assumes the radial photospheric magnetic ﬁeld,
Br, is inﬂuenced through the eﬀects of diﬀerential rotation,
meridional ﬂows and surface diﬀusion. We express the radial
magnetic ﬁeld at the photosphere by the vector magnetic
potentials Aθ and Aφ through

Stellar Coronal Response to Flux Transport

3

where B = ∇ × A and the velocity contains contributions
from the magnetofrictional velocity (vMF) and an outﬂow
velocity (vout), both of which are described below. We em-
ploy the magnetic vector potential, A, as the primary vari-
able in this study as its use in conjunction with a staggered
grid ensures the solenoidal constraint is met. It should be
noted that in this study we do not explicitly include diﬀu-
sion in our simulations. Whilst this is the case, numerical
diﬀusion allows processes such as reconnection to occur.

In the magnetofrictional approach (Yang et al. 1986)

the velocity in the induction equation is set to be

vMF =

1
ν

j × B
B 2

,

(4)

(11)

Br =

1

r sin θ (cid:20) ∂

∂θ

(sin θAφ) −

∂Aθ

∂φ (cid:21) .

The radial photospheric ﬁeld is evolved by solving the two
dimensional ﬂux transport equation:

∂Aθ
∂t
∂Aφ
∂t

= uφBr −

D

r sin θ

∂Br
∂φ

,

= −uθBr +

D
r

∂Br
∂θ

,

(5)

(6)

where uφ is the azimuthal velocity, uθ is the meridional
ﬂow velocity and D is the photospheric diﬀusion constant,
taken in this study to be 450 km2s−1. It should be noted
that although in this study we employ the magnetic vec-
tor potential, A, it is also possible to use a ‘superpoten-
tial’ for the poloidal ﬁeld, akin to the methods used in dy-
namo models (e.g. Moﬀatt (1978); Krause & Raedler (1980);
Bigazzi & Ruzmaikin (2004)).

We take the azimuthal velocity to be

(7)

(8)

uφ = Ω(θ)r sin θ,

where

Ω(θ) = K (cid:0)Ω0 − dΩ⊙ cos2 θ(cid:1) deg day−1.

The term Ω(θ) is the angular velocity of rotation relative
to the rotation at 30◦ latitude (60◦ co-latitude). We choose
Ω0 = 0.9215 deg day−1 and dΩ⊙ = 3.65 deg day−1 to rep-
resent the solar diﬀerential rotation proﬁle. The constant,
K scales the diﬀerential rotation to that of other stars. For
example, if K = 2 the diﬀerential rotation rate will be twice
that of the solar rate.

The meridional velocity is prescribed by

uθ = C

16
110

sin(2λ) exp(π − 2 |λ|),

(9)

where λ = π/2 − θ is the latitude and C = 11 ms−1 is the
solar peak meridional ﬂow speed. It is important to note that
although we have prescribed the solar meridional ﬂow speed,
a study by Mackay et al. (2004) suggested that some stars
may have meridional ﬂow speeds on the order of ten times
the solar value. In this work the eﬀect of the meridional ﬂow
speed on the coronal response is not investigated, however
this will be considered in future work.

2.2 Coronal Evolution Model

We evolve the coronal magnetic ﬁeld using the ideal induc-
tion equation,

∂A
∂t

= v × B,

MNRAS 000, 1–15 (2015)

(10)

B0 =

Φ

√πeρ2 .

such that it is parallel to the Lorentz force. The changing
photospheric magnetic ﬁeld – as speciﬁed by the ﬂux trans-
port model – induces a Lorentz force above the photosphere.
The magnetofrictional velocity, which is aligned in the direc-
tion of this Lorentz force, acts to advect the coronal ﬁeld to-
wards a new non-linear force-free equilibrium. The changing
photospheric ﬁeld thus drives the evolution of the coronal
ﬁeld through a series of force-free equilibria based upon the
evolution of the photospheric ﬁeld.

We apply a radial outﬂow velocity to ensure that the
coronal magnetic ﬁeld at the upper boundary is radial, and
also to allow any ﬂux ropes that have lifted oﬀ from the
photosphere to leave the computational box. The outﬂow
velocity is taken to be

vout = v0 exp(cid:18) r − 2.5R∗

rw

(cid:19) ˆr,

(12)

where v0 = 100 km s−1 and rw is the width over which the
radial velocity falls oﬀ at the outer boundary. Once the ﬁeld
lines become radial (B = Br ˆr) near the outer boundary
the outﬂow velocity has no eﬀect on the evolution of the
magnetic ﬁeld as vout × B = 0.

2.3 Flux Emergence

We treat the mechanism of ﬂux emergence by inserting ide-
alised bipoles which represent active regions at the times and
locations as speciﬁed by our bipole emergence model (see
Section 3). The bipole emergence is achieved in the same
way as that used by Yeates et al. (2008), and will now be
summarised. The inserted bipole’s vector potentials take on
the following form:
Ax =βB0e0.5z exp(−2ξ)
Ay =B0e0.5ρ exp(−ξ)
Az = − βB0e0.5x′ exp(−2ξ)
where

(14)

(15)

(13)

ξ =

(x′2 + z2)/2 + y′2

ρ2

,

x′ = x cos(−γ) + y sin(−γ)
y′ = y cos(−γ) − x sin(−γ),

(16)

(17)

(18)

(19)

4 G. P. S. Gibb, D. H. Mackay, M. M. Jardine, A. R. Yeates

The term ρ is the bipole’s half separation, Φ is the bipole’s
ﬂux and γ is the bipole’s tilt angle. The parameter β
describes the amount of twist the emerged bipole’s ﬁeld
contains (see Yeates & Mackay (2009) for further details).
Please note that the sign of B0 (and thus the ﬂux) may be
positive or negative, and speciﬁes the sign of the trailing
polarity in the bipole. Also note that the above equations
produce a bipole at the equator. This bipole is then rotated
to the correct position (x0, y0) on the sphere.

Before the bipole is inserted any pre-existing coronal
(and photospheric) magnetic ﬁeld within the volume to be
occupied by the bipole must be swept away. This is to en-
sure that the addition of the new ﬁeld does not lead to
any disconnected ﬂux in the corona. It also mimics the dis-
tortion of pre-existing coronal ﬁeld by the newly emerging
ﬂux, as has been observed in simulations of ﬂux emergence
(Yokoyama & Shibata 1996; Krall et al. 1998). In order to
carry out the bipole insertion, the following steps are car-
ried out:

(i) The simulation’s time is ‘frozen’ by switching oﬀ the
surface ﬂows, surface diﬀusivity and the magntofrictional
and outﬂow velocities.

(ii) An outward velocity is applied in a dome centred
upon the new bipole’s position to sweep the pre-existing
coronal/photospheric ﬁeld away.

(iii) The bipole is inserted into the corona by adding the
bipole’s vector potential (Equations 13 to 15) to the pre-
existing coronal vector potentials.

(iv) The magnetofrictional and radial outﬂow velocities
are switched on, and the new bipole is allowed to reach an
equilibrium with its surroundings for 50 timesteps.

(v) Time is restarted by turning on the photospheric ﬂows

and diﬀusion.

For further details of the ﬂux emergence method applied,
please see Yeates et al. (2008).

3 BIPOLE EMERGENCE MODEL

At the present time stellar ﬂux emergence proﬁles are not
known, however, the nature of stellar emergence proﬁles
has been speculated (Mackay et al. 2004) and methods have
been developed that may in the future be able to constrain
them (e.g. Llama et al. (2012), and see (Berdyugina 2005)
for a review). As there is very little information available
on the ﬂux emergence proﬁles on stars, we base our stellar
ﬂux emergence proﬁle on the well known solar ﬂux emer-
gence proﬁle. On the Sun, the ﬂux emergence proﬁle is
time dependent. The butterﬂy diagram is an illustration of
this time dependence. Although activity and magnetic cy-
cles have been observed (e.g. Wilson (1978); Donati et al.
(2008); Fares et al. (2009)), in this work we are interested
in the steady state corona, and so we wish to construct a ﬂux
emergence proﬁle whose parameters do not vary signiﬁcantly
in time. In other words, we wish to simulate a time period
suﬃciently shorter than the stellar cycle’s period so that the
emergence proﬁle’s parameters are nearly independent with
time. Doing so allows us to more clearly identify how vary-
ing the diﬀerential rotation and ﬂux emergence rates eﬀect
the coronal ﬁeld.

To construct our ﬂux emergence proﬁle, we consider the

emergence of ﬂux on the Sun between January 2000 and Jan-
uary 2001. During this time the distribution of the proper-
ties of emerged ﬂux is approximately time-independent, and
this time range approximately coincides with solar maxi-
mum. We use the properties of the ﬂux that was determined
to have emerged during this time period by Yeates (2014).
The properties are derived from synoptic magnetograms of
the Sun, and determine the locations of newly emerged ﬂux.
The newly emerged ﬂux regions were approximated to be
bipoles, whose ﬂuxes, latitudes, longitudes, tilt angles, emer-
gence times and half separations were chosen to best repre-
sent the observed emerged ﬂux. For further details on how
these values were obtained, see Yeates et al. (2007). In the
year between January 2000 and January 2001, Yeates (2014)
determined that 227 bipoles had emerged. In this section, we
describe a bipole emergence model that is able to reproduce
the distribution of the bipoles as found by Yeates (2014). We
chose to develop a model rather than just reuse the values
obtained by Yeates (2014) so that we can vary the parame-
ters of the model to change the ﬂux emergence rate.

3.1 Observed Solar Proﬁle

We now describe the set of empirical relations obtained from
the properties of emerged bipoles on the Sun between Jan-
uary 2000 and January 2001. Over this time period, 227
bipoles emerged, and the time interval between individual
emergences was found to follow an exponential distribution,

P (t) =

1
τ

exp(cid:18)−t
τ (cid:19)

(20)

Next, we determined the empirical scalings for the tilt

with a mean interval, τ , of 1.61 days. This corresponds to an
emergence rate of 0.62 bipoles per day. Similarly, the bipole
ﬂuxes were found to follow an exponential distribution with
a mean ﬂux of 8.40 × 1021 Mx.
angle with latitude. We found that
γ ◦ ∝ 0.32λ◦ ± 15◦,
where the quantity after the ‘±’ denotes the standard devi-
ation from the relation. Similarly, the relationship between
the tilt angle and ﬂux was found to be:
γ ◦ ∝ −0.32Φ(×1021 Mx) ± 15◦,

(21)

(22)

We ﬁnd the relationship between the separation and the
ﬂux to be approximately described by the piecewise function
below:

ρ = (cid:26) 1.24 + 0.272Φ ± 0.5

4.51 ± 1

0 < Φ ≤ 12 × 1021 Mx
Φ > 12 × 1021 Mx

(23)

The separations and tilt angles and the separations and lati-
tudes showed no correlation. In the date range, it was found
that 97% of the bipoles obeyed Hale’s law, whilst 3% did
not. We take the relationship between the beta and latitude
to be
β ∝ −0.016λ◦ ± 0.4
to be consistent with the prescription of Yeates et al. (2010).
Lastly, the distribution of latitudes of emergence is plotted
in Figure 1.

(24)

MNRAS 000, 1–15 (2015)

Stellar Coronal Response to Flux Transport

5

(viii) Set β to be −0.016λ + N [0, 0.4]. Once again, the
purpose of the normally distributed term is to add scatter
to β.

(ix) If the ﬂux is less than 12 × 1020 Mx then set the
separation to be 1.24 + 0.272Φ + U [−0.5, 0.5], else set the
separation to be 4.51 + N [0, 1]. As above, the uniform and
normally distributed random numbers are included to add
scatter to the separations.

(x) Repeat the procedure until t ≥ 365 days.

Although in the above model we did not specify the
relations between ρ and λ, ρ and γ and γ and Φ, the rela-
tions (or lack thereof) between these parameters as derived
from our model match those of the Sun’s in the sample we
used to construct the model. This demonstrates that our
simple empirical bipole emergence model is able to repro-
duce a solar-like emergence proﬁle with a minimal number
of explicitly speciﬁed parameters.

4 RESULTS

In this section we describe the results from simulations run
where we have varied both the ﬂux emergence rate (i.e. the
number of bipoles emerging per day) and the diﬀerential ro-
tation rate (i.e. the equator-pole lap time). We investigate
various combinations of D = 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 times the solar
ﬂux emergence rate of 0.62 bipoles per day, and K = 1, 2, 3,
4 and 5 times the solar diﬀerential rotation rate of 3.65◦ per
day. The simulations consider the star’s surface and coronal
evolution over a period of one year. In particular we inves-
tigate the eﬀects that the ﬂux emergence and diﬀerential
rotation have on ‘global’ quantities, such as the open and
surface ﬂux, magnetic energy and electric currents. We also
investigate the numbers of ﬂux ropes formed in the simu-
lations, and present j2 emission proxy images of the stellar
coronae, comparing them to ﬁeld line plots.

4.1 Simulation Set-Up

Rather than emerging the bipoles into an initially empty
corona, we use a smoothed synoptic magnetogram of the
solar photospheric ﬁeld to construct a potential ﬁeld ini-
tial condition for the coronal ﬁeld. The synoptic magne-
togram is from Carrington Rotation 1970, corresponding to
the date range 24th Nov 2000 to 21st Dec 2000. This date
range is from within the range of dates used to construct the
bipole emergence model. The magnetogram’s photospheric
ﬁeld distribution therefore has a spatial distribution of ﬁeld
consistent with our empirical ﬂux emergence proﬁle, albeit
with the solar ﬂux emergence rate. In Figure 2 the synoptic
magnetogram from Carrington rotation 1970, used to con-
struct the initial potential coronal ﬁeld, is displayed.

4.2 Simulation Behaviour

We will now brieﬂy describe the general behaviour of each
simulation. Over the course of any given simulation, the
global quantities (e.g. ﬂux, magnetic energy etc...) evolve
in response to the surface ﬂux transport and the addition of
new ﬂux. For the ﬁrst 100–200 days the quantities either in-
crease or decrease until they reach a near steady state. Once

Figure 1. Normalised histogram of the observed distribution of
the unsigned latitudes of emergence. Also shown is the smoothed
normalised histogram which has been resampled to a higher res-
olution (crosses and solid line) for use in constructing a synthetic
distribution of latitudes based on the observed solar distribution.

3.2 Model

In the previous section we determined a series of relation-
ships between the various bipole properties. With this infor-
mation, we can now construct a bipole emergence model to
represent the observed solar ﬂux emergence proﬁle between
the years 2000 and 2001. This model can be used to consider
stars with diﬀerent ﬂux emergence rates to the that of the
Sun, by altering the mean time between emergences in the
model. Below we outline the procedure used to obtain the
bipole properties from the bipole emergence model. The pro-
cedure uses a random number generator where we use the
shorthand U [a, b] for a number drawn from the uniform dis-
tribution between a and b, N [µ, σ] for a number drawn from
a normal distribution with mean, µ, and standard deviation,
σ. Finally, we use E[τ ] to denote a number drawn from an
exponential distribution with expected value, τ . Starting at
t = 0 days, the following procedure is carried out:

(i) Determine the time for the next emergence, δt from
E[1.61/D days], where D is a scaling parameter to scale the
ﬂux emergence rate to be lower or higher than the Sun’s.
Set the time, t, to t + δt.

(ii) Fix the longitude of emergence from U [0◦, 360◦].
(iii) Select the latitude of emergence from the distribution

shown in Figure 1.

(iv) With a 50% probability, choose the sign of the lati-
tude to be negative to allow an approximately equal number
of emergences in the northern and southern hemispheres of
the star.

(v) Determine the bipole ﬂux from E[8.40 × 1020 Mx].
(vi) With a probability of 97%, set the ﬂux to have the
opposite sign as the latitude. Otherwise set the ﬂux to have
the same sign. This ensures that 97% of the bipoles obey
Hale’s law, and the remainder do not.

(vii) Set the tilt angle to be 0.32λ + N [0, 14.93◦]. The
purpose of the normally distributed term is to add scatter
to the tilt angles.

MNRAS 000, 1–15 (2015)

6 G. P. S. Gibb, D. H. Mackay, M. M. Jardine, A. R. Yeates

Figure 2. The synoptic magnetogram used to construct the po-
tential initial condition used in the simulations. The image is sat-
urated at ±50 G.

Figure 4. The steady state surface ﬂuxes for each simulation.
Also displayed are the mean surface magnetic ﬁeld strength.
White squares with crosses contain no data (e.g. no simulation
was run for that combination of (D, K)).

the steady state surface ﬂux for each simulation run. Also
displayed is the mean surface magnetic ﬁeld strength, h|B|i,
calculated from

Figure 3. The evolution of the surface ﬂux for the simulations
with (D, K) = (1, 1)–black, (5, 1)–red, (1, 5)–green, (5, 5)–blue
and (3, 3)–purple. Note that after 100-200 days the ﬂux in each
simulation reaches a steady state.

this steady state has been achieved, the quantities then vary
by a certain amount around a mean value. To demonstrate
this, Figure 3 displays the evolution of the surface ﬂux with
time for ﬁve of the simulations. In the sections below, when
we refer to a quantity we refer to the mean, steady state
value determined after t = 200 days.

When a steady state has been achieved, the rate of in-
put of that quantity into the simulation is approximately
equal to the rate of dissipation of that quantity. For exam-
ple, if the quantity in question was the magnetic energy, then
the Poynting ﬂux (input of energy) would be approximately
equal to the losses due to magnetofrictional dissipation in
the volume and energy leaving through the top boundary.
As such, the initial increase/decrease in a given quantity is
due to an imbalance in the injection/dissipation rates of the
quantity.

4.3 Magnetic Flux

To begin with, we will consider the magnetic ﬂux, both the
surface ﬂux (Φs), and the open ﬂux (Φo). Figure 4 displays

Φs

,

(25)

H dS

h|B|i =
where dS is an inﬁnitesimal element of the stellar surface.
At a glance it can be seen that the surface ﬂux and mean
ﬁeld increase with increasing ﬂux emergence rate, and de-
crease with increasing diﬀerential rotation rate. The increase
in ﬂux with increasing ﬂux emergence rate is due to the in-
creased ﬂux emergence rate adding more ﬂux – on average –
through the photosphere per unit time. The decrease in the
ﬂux with increasing the diﬀerential rotation rate is due to
the diﬀerential rotation lengthening polarity inversion lines
in the east-west direction. The lengthened polarity inversion
lines provide more locations where ﬂux cancellation can oc-
cur, hence increasing the ﬂux cancellation rates, and thus
decreasing the overall ﬂux on the surface of the star. No-
tably, the ﬂux emergence rate has a greater eﬀect on the
surface ﬂux than the diﬀerential rotation rate. This is evi-
dent when considering the diagonal in Figure 4 where it can
be seen that the surface ﬂux has a net increase when both
the ﬂux emergence rates and diﬀerential rotation rates are
increased by the same amount.

Figure 5 displays the open ﬂux for each simulation.
From this ﬁgure it can be seen that increasing the ﬂux emer-
gence rate increases the open ﬂux, however increasing the
diﬀerential rotation rate has little eﬀect on the open ﬂux.
This is in contrast with the surface ﬂux, where increasing
the diﬀerential rotation rate decreases the ﬂux. It is useful
to consider the ratio of open ﬂux to surface ﬂux, which is dis-
played in Figure 6 for each simulation. This shows that the
ratio of ﬂuxes is reasonably insensitive to the ﬂux emergence
rate, yet generally increases with increasing diﬀerential ro-
tation rate. This can be interpreted as the ﬂux emergence
rate having little eﬀect on the overall distribution of ﬂux in
the corona (e.g. the total ﬂux may increase, but the parti-
tion of open to closed ﬂux does not). The diﬀerential rota-

MNRAS 000, 1–15 (2015)

Stellar Coronal Response to Flux Transport

7

with enhanced diﬀerential rotation (top row) appear to be
slightly less ﬁlled with active regions than the simulations
with solar diﬀerential rotation (bottom row). Also, the active
regions in the simulations with enhanced diﬀerential rotation
are elongated in the east-west direction compared to those
in the simulations with solar diﬀerential rotation. As men-
tioned in the previous section, this is due to the diﬀerential
rotation elongating features in the east-west direction. This
lengthens the polarity inversion lines, allowing ﬂux cancella-
tion to occur more eﬃciently. As a result active regions have
a shorter lifetime on high diﬀerential rotation stars, and thus
at any given time these stars have fewer active regions than
a star with an equivalent ﬂux emergence rate, but a lower
diﬀerential rotation rate.

Figure 8 displays the fraction of the active latitude
bands (±40◦ latitude) covered with ﬁeld stronger than 10
G for each simulation. From the ﬁgure it can be seen that
stars with a greater diﬀerential rotation rate have a lower
fractional coverage of ﬁeld. For every diﬀerential rotation
rate investigated, it can also be seen that the coverage in-
creases with increasing ﬂux emergence rate, and seems to
be saturating at around 80% coverage. Whilst the coverage
seems to saturate with increasing ﬂux emergence rate, the
surface ﬂux (Figure 4) does not saturate. This suggests that
whilst further increasing the ﬂux emergence rate continues to
add new ﬂux into the photosphere, this new ﬂux is emerged
through existing ﬂux rather than into ‘empty’ regions of the
photosphere. As such, the photosphere is saturated with ac-
tive regions.

With a number of ZDI studies showing strong rings
of azimuthal ﬁeld (e.g. Marsden et al. (2006); Donati et al.
(1997); Donati & Landstreet (2009)), we consider the mean
azimuthal ﬁeld present on the stars. To do this we calculate
the mean photospheric azimuthal ﬁeld (Bφ) in each hemi-
sphere. This is displayed in Figure 9. It shows an increase of
the azimuthal ﬁeld with increasing ﬂux emergence rate and
possibly a slight decrease with increasing diﬀerential rota-
tion rate. The increase with increasing ﬂux emergence rate
can be explained as follows. Each active region is emerged
with an approximate east-west orientation. The horizontal
ﬁeld present in the active region is therefore predominantly
aligned in the east-west, azimuthal direction. According to
Hale’s law (Hale et al. 1919), the leading polarity of each
bipole in a given hemisphere tends to be the same sign over
a given cycle, however the leading polarity is a diﬀerent sign
in each hemisphere. Therefore the majority of bipoles in a
given hemisphere are aligned in the same direction, and so
the horizontal ﬁelds of each bipole produce a net horizon-
tal ﬁeld in that hemisphere. Increasing the ﬂux emergence
rate increases the number of bipoles in each hemisphere, and
thus increases the total horizontal ﬁeld in the hemisphere.
The slight decrease in mean azimuthal ﬁeld strength with in-
creasing diﬀerential rotation rate may be due to diﬀerential
rotation taking an east-west aligned bipole and rotating it
so the ﬁeld is more north-south aligned, transforming some
of the azimuthal ﬁeld into poloidal ﬁeld.

4.5 Coronal Energetics

The photospheric evolution injects magnetic energy into the
corona through a Poynting ﬂux. The eﬀects of ﬂux emer-
gence and diﬀerential rotation on the degree of energy injec-

Figure 5. The steady state open ﬂux for each simulation.

Figure 6. The ratio of the open ﬂux to the surface ﬂux for each
simulation

tion rate, however, does have a marked eﬀect on the coronal
structure. Increasing the diﬀerential rotation rate has the
eﬀect of opening up the corona – increasing the ratio of
open to closed ﬁeld. This opening up of the coronal ﬁeld can
be attributed to the diﬀerential rotation acting to convert
the predominantly east-west aligned ﬁeld of newly emerged
bipoles to a more north-south alignment. This adds to the
dipole moment of the star’s global magnetic ﬁeld, resulting
in more open ﬁeld.

4.4 Distribution of Surface Field

We now consider the distribution of magnetic ﬂux on the
stellar surface. Figure 7 displays synthetic magnetograms of
the stellar surface for a range of diﬀerent ﬂux emergence and
diﬀerential rotation rates. It is immediately apparent upon
inspection that the stellar surface has become ﬁlled with ac-
tive regions in the simulations with high ﬂux emergence rates
(right column of Figure 7), compared to the simulations with
the solar ﬂux emergence rate (left column). The simulations

MNRAS 000, 1–15 (2015)

8 G. P. S. Gibb, D. H. Mackay, M. M. Jardine, A. R. Yeates

Figure 7. Synthetic surface maps of the photospheric ﬁeld on day 200 for the stars with (D, K) = (1, 5)– top left, (5, 5)–top right,
(1, 1)–bottom left and (5, 1)–bottom right. The images saturate at ±50 G.

Figure 8. Fraction of the photosphere at active latitudes cov-
ered with ﬁeld stronger than 10 G for each simulation. For all
diﬀerential rotation rates investigated the coverage increases with
increasing ﬂux emergence rates, and appears to be saturating at
around 80%.

tion is investigated in this section. Firstly, we consider the
free magnetic energy, deﬁned as

Ef =

1

8π Z (cid:0)B 2 − B 2

p(cid:1) dV,

(26)

where B is the magnetic ﬂux density of the non-potential
ﬁeld and Bp is the magnetic ﬂux density for a potential
ﬁeld with the same photospheric ﬂux distribution as B. The
free magnetic energy represents the maximum amount of
magnetic energy that can be liberated, and thus represents
the upper limit of energy available to drive ﬂares and coro-
nal mass ejections. Figure 10 displays the steady state free
magnetic energy for each simulation. It shows that the free
magnetic energy increases with increasing ﬂux emergence

Figure 9. Mean azimuthal ﬁeld strength (Bφ) for each simula-
tion. .

rate, yet seems to be reasonably insensitive to the diﬀer-
ential rotation rate. It is also useful to consider the ratio
of the free magnetic energy to the total magnetic energy.
This measures how much the ﬁeld deviates from a poten-
tial ﬁeld. This quantity is displayed in Figure 11 and shows
that the energy ratio increases with increasing diﬀerential
rotation, but is insensitive to the ﬂux emergence rate. This
implies that whilst the diﬀerential rotation has little eﬀect
on the amount of free magnetic energy in the corona, it
does result in a more non-potential corona. This increase
in non-potentiality with increasing diﬀerential rotation rate
is likely due to the increased diﬀerential rotation producing
more shear in the corona, making it less potential.

One of the sources of heating in the solar corona is
Ohmic heating, which is proportional to j2. Although in our
simulations we do not explicitly have any Ohmic diﬀusion,

MNRAS 000, 1–15 (2015)

Stellar Coronal Response to Flux Transport

9

Figure 10. Free magnetic energy for each simulation. The free
magnetic energy increases with increasing ﬂux emergence rate,
however is insensitive to the diﬀerential rotation rate.

Figure 12. Heating proxy for each simulation. The heating proxy
increases with increasing ﬂux emergence rate, and decreases with
increasing diﬀerential rotation rate.

the Lorentz force in the corona. At the axis of a ﬂux rope,
the magnetic pressure force is directed radially out away
from the axis, whilst the magnetic tension force is directed
radially inwards towards the axis. Flux ropes can thus be lo-
cated by considering locations where these force criteria are
met. The second method we use, hereafter the ‘PIL’ method,
considers the angle of the horizontal ﬁeld component across
a polarity inversion line (PIL) at the photosphere. If the an-
gle between the normal to the PIL and the horizontal ﬁeld
component (shear angle) is greater than 90◦ then this is in-
dicative of a ﬂux rope lying above the PIL. These two ﬂux
rope detection methods are described in detail in Gibb et al.
(2014a).

4.6.1 Non-erupting ﬂux ropes

First, we consider the number of non-erupting ﬂux ropes
present. In Gibb et al. (2014a) it was found that a proxy
for the onset of a ﬂux rope eruption was the sudden disap-
pearance of the length along a PIL where the shear angle is
greater than 90◦. Due to the magnetofrictional method an
erupting ﬂux rope rises slowly through the corona until it
leaves the simulation though the upper boundary. The time
between the onset of the eruption and the ﬂux rope exiting
the computational domain can be several days. During this
time, although the erupting ﬂux rope cannot be detected
by the PIL method (as it is no longer in contact with the
photosphere) it can still be detected by the forces method.
Therefore, if we were to use the forces method to count the
ﬂux ropes in the corona, we would obtain the total number
of erupting and non-erupting ﬂux ropes. We thus use the
PIL method to count the non-erupting ﬂux ropes, as this
method is unable to detect erupting ﬂux ropes.

Figure 13 displays the ﬂux rope locations determined
by the PIL method for the simulation with the solar ﬂux
emergence rate on day 193 of the simulations. As can be
seen, there are many points belonging to ﬂux ropes present.
In order to count the number of ﬂux ropes, we apply the
following algorithm:

Figure 11. Ratio of free magnetic energy to total magnetic en-
ergy for each simulation. The ratio is insensitive to the ﬂux emer-
gence rate, however increases with increasing diﬀerential rotation
rate.

by calculating the volume integrated j2 we may obtain a
proxy for the heating present in the corona. Figure 12 dis-
plays the volume integrated j2 in the simulations. Similar
to the ﬂux, the heating proxy increases with increasing ﬂux
emergence rate, and decreases with increasing diﬀerential
rotation rate. The ﬂux emergence rate has a greater eﬀect
on this proxy than the diﬀerential rotation rate, however,
as increasing both the ﬂux emergence rates and diﬀerential
rotation rates results in an increase in the heating proxy.

4.6 Flux Ropes

We now investigate the ﬂux ropes in the stellar coronae.
There are two methods that we use to detect ﬂux ropes, de-
veloped in Yeates & Mackay (2009) and Gibb et al. (2014a).
The ﬁrst method, hereafter the ‘forces’ method, considers

MNRAS 000, 1–15 (2015)

10 G. P. S. Gibb, D. H. Mackay, M. M. Jardine, A. R. Yeates

Figure 13. Flux rope locations (blue crosses) as determined by
the PIL method for the simulation with (D, K) = (1, 1) on day
193. The green and red contours denote negative and positive
magnetic ﬂux respectively. The grey lines denote the polarity in-
version lines.

(i) Flux rope points with fewer than 2 neighbours within
a 5 grid cell radius are discarded. This is to remove small
regions which could either be false positives or the residual
areas of shear angle greater than 90◦ which can occur just
after a ﬂux rope has erupted.

(ii) We then construct a 2-dimensional array with one el-
ement per grid cell (in the x and y directions). For grid cells
with ﬂux ropes present, the corresponding elements in the
array are set to one. Elements corresponding to grid cells
without ﬂux ropes are set to zero.

(iii) We then smooth this array with a smoothing width of
5 grid cells. This acts to smear out and ‘join up’ the discrete
ﬂux rope points to make one continuous region. Points in
the array that are non-zero are set to 1.

(iv) The array is then contoured, and the number of ﬂux
ropes is taken to be the number of closed contoured regions.

This method, though generally good at determining the
number of ﬂux ropes has some shortcomings. Firstly, if the
region of shear angle greater than 90◦ along the length of
a ﬂux rope has a gap of more than 5 grid cells, then the
algorithm counts two ﬂux ropes instead of one, thus over-
estimating the number of ﬂux ropes. An example of this is
visible in Figure 13 where the two northern-most ﬂux ropes
in fact belong to the same ﬂux rope (according to ﬁeld line
plots). Another shortcoming is that if two distinct ﬂux ropes
are in close proximity to each other, the smoothing pro-
cess may merge the two ﬂux ropes into one object, thereby
causing the algorithm to underestimate the number of ﬂux
ropes. Although these shortcomings exist, upon comparing
the number of ﬂux ropes as determined by the algorithm
with the number of ﬂux ropes counted by eye for several
randomly chosen times, the two numbers were in agreement
to within an error of 10%.

As with the ﬂux, free magnetic energy, heating proxy
etc, the number of ﬂux ropes present reaches a steady state.
In Figure 14 the steady state number of ﬂux ropes present on
the stars at any one time is plotted for each simulation. The
ﬁgure shows that the number of ﬂux ropes present generally
increases with increasing ﬂux emergence rate and decreases

Figure 14. The steady state number of ﬂux ropes present on the
stars in each simulation.

with increasing diﬀerential rotation rate. The increase in the
number of ﬂux ropes with increasing ﬂux emergence rate can
be attributed to there being more active regions present, and
so more polarity inversion lines where ﬂux ropes may form.
Considering the simulations with solar diﬀerential rotation,
the number of ﬂux ropes peaks at four times the solar ﬂux
emergence rate, then decreases. This could be due to the
increasing ﬂux emergence rate reducing the longevity of the
ﬂux ropes due to ﬂux emergence events triggering ﬂux rope
eruptions. From Figure 8 it is clear that the photosphere
is saturated with active regions’ ﬁeld, so new active regions
have to emerge into pre-existing active regions. These emer-
gences can disrupt the formation of ﬂux ropes in the pre-
existing active region, thereby also decreasing the number of
ﬂux ropes present. The decrease in ﬂux rope numbers with
increasing diﬀerential rotation rates may be attributed to
the lifetimes of ﬂux ropes decreasing with increasing diﬀer-
ential rotation rate, as found in Gibb et al. (2014a). In the
following section we will estimate the ﬂux rope lifetimes. It
should be noted that in each simulation, ﬂux ropes only be-
gin to be counted in each simulation a number of days after
the simulation had started. The number of days taken for
the ﬁrst ﬂux ropes to be counted was equal to the ﬂux rope
formation timescales found in Gibb et al. (2014a).

4.6.2 Erupting ﬂux ropes

We now consider the rate of ﬂux rope eruptions in each
simulation. Since the number of ﬂux ropes in the corona
per day reaches a steady state, the number of ﬂux ropes
that form per day must be roughly equal to the number
of ﬂux ropes that erupt per day. Therefore, by determin-
ing the average eruption rate, we also determine the aver-
age formation rate. Considering that the mean number of
ﬂux ropes present per day on the star varies between 35
and 60 (depending upon the ﬂux emergence and diﬀerential
rotation rate), keeping count of the appearance and disap-
pearance of ﬂux ropes as determined by the PIL method is
diﬃcult. We therefore instead use the forces method to lo-
cate ﬂux rope eruptions. To do this, we use a method based

MNRAS 000, 1–15 (2015)

Stellar Coronal Response to Flux Transport

11

Figure 15. The mean eruption rates for the simulations investi-
gated.

Figure 16. The mean lifetimes of ﬂux ropes in the simulations.

upon that developed by Yeates & Mackay (2009), which in-
volves looking for ﬂux ropes that are moving upwards with
vz ≥ 0.5 km s−1. As previously stated, ﬂux ropes may take
several days to completely leave the computational box once
they have ‘erupted.’ On any two consecutive days, the force
method may thus identify the same erupting ﬂux rope. We
therefore are interested in the number of ‘new’ erupting ﬂux
ropes on each day. As with the PIL method to count ﬂux
ropes described above, the method to count erupting ﬂux
ropes has some shortfalls. Firstly, two ﬂux ropes that erupt
close to each other (spatially and temporally) may be con-
sidered to be the same ﬂux rope. Secondly, if one ﬂux rope
fragments into two distinct structures when erupting it may
be counted as two ﬂux ropes.

For a 60 day period (days 200–260) in a selection of
the simulations we count the number of erupting ﬂux ropes,
and the eruption rate for each simulation is taken to be the
mean number of eruptions per day. Figure 15 displays the
determined rates. The eruption rates increase slightly with
increasing diﬀerential rotation rate. This ﬁnding agrees with
the speculations of Gibb et al. (2014a), who postulated that
the ﬂux rope eruption rates may increase with increasing
diﬀerential rotation rate. This increase is small, however.
The eruption rates are also found to generally increase with
increasing ﬂux emergence rate.

We may also crudely estimate the mean lifetime of ﬂux
ropes. We know that the mean formation rate is roughly
equal to the mean eruption rate. So in any one day, on aver-
age nf ﬂux ropes form, and ne = nf erupt, keeping the total
number of ﬂux ropes in the corona, N , constant. If each ﬂux
rope has a mean lifetime of l days, and every day nf ﬂux
ropes form, then the total number of ﬂux ropes in the corona
at any one time is approximately

N ≈ nf l
and therefore the lifetime, l, can be approximated by N/nf .
It is important to compare these results with the ﬁndings
of Gibb et al. (2014a), who found that the lifetimes of ﬂux
ropes on stars with 1, 3 and 5 times the solar diﬀerential
rotation rate were 16, 6 and 4 days respectively. Figure 16

(27)

MNRAS 000, 1–15 (2015)

displays the lifetimes for the simulations where we calcu-
lated the eruption rates. The lifetimes determined vary be-
tween 5.6 and 9.34 days. This range is much smaller than
the range found by Gibb et al. (2014a). The lifetimes vary
with ﬂux emergence rate, however a general trend cannot
be seen. The lifetimes are found to decrease with increas-
ing diﬀerential rotation rate, which is in agreement with
Gibb et al. (2014a). The range of 5.6–9.34 days found in
the present study is lower than the range of 4–16 days found
in Gibb et al. (2014a), implying that the addition of exter-
nal coronal ﬁeld weakens diﬀerential rotation’s eﬀect on the
longevity of ﬂux ropes.

4.7 Emission Proxy Images of the Stellar Corona

We now present emission proxy images of the stellar corona.
This is achieved in a manner similar to that used in
Gibb et al. (2014b). In order to construct these, we con-
struct a simple atmospheric model where we assume that
the emission at each point in the corona is proportional to
the ohmic heating (j2) and include a simple description of
the plasma density. This density dependence is motivated by
the fact that a portion of the corona with a higher density
will emit more radiation as there are more particles present
to emit photons. It is very important to note that our sim-
ulations do not include any plasma, so the density proﬁle
we use is unrelated to the coronal model and is only used
to construct the emission proxy. By assuming an isothermal
corona, we may obtain a crude description of the density as
a function of height as

h

(28)

Λ(cid:19) ,

ρ(h) ∝ exp(cid:18)−
where h = r − R∗ is the height above the photosphere and
Λ is the pressure scale height, given by

Λ =

kBT
¯µg

,

(29)

where g is the surface gravity of the star (taken to be equal
to the surface gravity of the Sun), choosing T = 2 MK and
¯µ = 0.5mp (where mp is the proton mass) we ﬁnd Λ = 120
Mm.

12 G. P. S. Gibb, D. H. Mackay, M. M. Jardine, A. R. Yeates

Figure 17. Synthetic emission proxy images on day 200 of the simulations with (D, K) = (1, 5)–top left, (5, 5)–top right, (1, 1)–bottom
left and (5, 1)–bottom right. The emission proxy images display the natural logarithm of the line-of-sight integrated emission proxy, and
the colour scalings are identical in each image.

Figure 18. Field line plots corresponding to the emission proxy images shown in Figure 17. Red and blue contours denote positive and
negative magnetic ﬁeld respectively, and the black lines are ﬁeld lines.

MNRAS 000, 1–15 (2015)

To construct our emission proxy images, we calculate
ρ2(h)j2 within the coronal volume, and then integrate it
along a line of sight to produce the image, using the as-
sumption of optically thin radiation. This method does not
represent the physical processes of radiative transfer, which
must include the temperature of the plasma and its compo-
sition. As we do not have any information on the coronal
plasma from the simulations, we cannot address the emis-
sion problem properly, and must instead use a proxy such
as the one described above.

Figure 17 displays our emission proxy images on day 200
for stars with the solar ﬂux emergence rate (left column),
ﬁve-times the solar ﬂux emergence rate (right column), ﬁve
times solar diﬀerential rotation (top row) and solar diﬀer-
ential rotation (bottom row). The images look remarkably
similar to X-ray/EUV images of the hot solar corona taken
by observatories such as SOHO/EIT, SDO/AIA and Hin-
ode/XRT. In particular, active regions appear as bright loop
structures, and unipolar regions (coronal holes) appear dark.
The simulations with increased ﬂux emergence rates (right
column) appear brighter as they have many more active re-
gions than the simulations with the solar ﬂux emergence
rate. On the simulations with high diﬀerential rotation (top
row) the emission is mostly constrained to lower latitudes,
with little emission at the poles. This is in contrast to the
simulations with solar diﬀerential rotation (bottom row)
which have sources of emission at much higher latitudes.
This is due to the enhanced diﬀerential rotation increasing
the dipole moment of the global magnetic ﬁeld, resulting in
more open polar regions. Figure 18 displays ﬁeld line plots
for the same simulations and times as Figure 17.

5 DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

In this paper we have investigated the coronal response to
varying the ﬂux emergence and diﬀerential rotation rates.
In order to do this we used a surface ﬂux transport model
to determine the evolution of the photospheric ﬁeld, and
used this to drive a non-potential coronal evolution via the
magnetofrictional method. We use a ﬂux emergence model
that emerges simpliﬁed bipolar active regions onto the pho-
tosphere and into the corona. The bipole emergence model is
based upon observations of the emergence of bipolar active
regions on the Sun, however through varying a single param-
eter we could have the rate of emergences per day increased
to simulate higher ﬂux emergence rates. We carried out sim-
ulations with various values of the ﬂux emergence and diﬀer-
ential rates so that a parameter study could be carried out.
The ﬂux emergence rates were varied between one and ﬁve
times the solar ﬂux emergence rate of 0.62 bipoles per day,
and similarly the diﬀerential rotation rates were varied be-
tween one and ﬁve times the solar diﬀerential rotation rate
of 3.65◦ per day.

Firstly we considered the eﬀects of the ﬂux emergence
and diﬀerential rotation rates on the surface ﬂux and open
ﬂux. It was found that the surface ﬂux (and mean surface
ﬁeld strength, hBi) increased with increasing ﬂux emergence
rate. Increasing the diﬀerential rotation rate had the eﬀect
of slightly decreasing the amount of surface ﬂux. This was
attributed to the increased diﬀerential rotation lengthening
polarity inversion lines, allowing ﬂux cancellation to occur

MNRAS 000, 1–15 (2015)

Stellar Coronal Response to Flux Transport

13

more rapidly. Overall the ﬂux emergence rate had a greater
eﬀect on the ﬂux than the diﬀerential rotation rate. The
open ﬂux was found to increase with increasing ﬂux emer-
gence rate, however no trend was found between diﬀerential
rotation rate and the open ﬂux. In contrast, the ratio of open
to surface ﬂux was found to be independent of the ﬂux emer-
gence rate, but increased with increasing diﬀerential rotation
rate. This means that increasing diﬀerential rotation alters
the structure of the corona (opening it up) whilst though
the ﬂux emergence adds more ﬂux to the corona, it does not
alter the global coronal structure. This opening up of the
corona with increasing diﬀerential rotation is due to the dif-
ferential rotation converting east-west ﬁeld into north-south
ﬁeld, adding to the star’s overall dipole moment.

We next considered the response of the surface ﬁelds
to ﬂux emergence and diﬀerential rotation, namely the pro-
portion of the photosphere covered with ﬂux, and the mean
azimuthal surface ﬁeld strength. For all diﬀerential rotation
rates investigated, it was found that the proportion of the ac-
tive latitude bands (±40◦ latitude) covered in ﬁeld stronger
than 10 G increased with increasing ﬂux emergence rate, and
seemed to be saturating at around 80% for high ﬂux emer-
gence rates. This implies that the surface becomes saturated
with active regions for ﬂux emergence rates of four to ﬁve
times the solar rate. As the diﬀerential rotation rate was in-
creased the fractional coverage slightly decreased, due to the
lengthening of polarity inversion lines and more eﬃcient ﬂux
cancellation as mentioned above. We also investigated the
mean azimuthal ﬁeld strength (per hemisphere) as a func-
tion of diﬀerential rotation rate and ﬂux emergence rate.
This is of interest observationally as a number of ZDI stud-
ies of stars have found rings of azimuthal ﬁeld (Donati et al.
1997; Marsden et al. 2006; Donati & Landstreet 2009). We
ﬁnd that the mean azimuthal ﬁeld increases with increasing
ﬂux emergence rate and decreases with increasing diﬀeren-
tial rotation rate. As with the surface ﬂux, the ﬂux emer-
gence rate has a greater eﬀect on the azimuthal ﬁeld com-
pared to the diﬀerential rotation rate. The increase of the
azimuthal ﬁeld with increasing ﬂux emergence rate is due to
the increased number of east-west aligned bipoles contribut-
ing to the azimuthal ﬁeld. The decrease in azimuthal ﬁeld
with increasing diﬀerential rotation rate is due to the diﬀer-
ential rotation converting some of the azimuthal ﬁeld into
poloidal ﬁeld by eﬀectively rotating the bipoles to a more
north-south alignment. Azimuthal rings of ﬁeld seen in ZDI
studies may be the result of a ring of densely packed active
regions, whose combined azimuthal ﬁeld appears as a ring
in ZDI maps.

The eﬀects of the ﬂux emergence rate and diﬀerential
rotation rate on the coronal energetics were also studied.
We considered the free magnetic energy, the ratio of free
magnetic energy to total magnetic energy, and the global
currents. The amount of free magnetic energy was found to
increase with increasing ﬂux emergence rate, but is insensi-
tive to diﬀerential rotation rate. The total energy available
to power phenomena such as CMEs and ﬂares is therefore
aﬀected by the ﬂux emergence rate. The ratio of the free
magnetic energy to the total magnetic energy, which is a
measure of how much the ﬁeld deviates from a potential
ﬁeld, shows the opposite behaviour. It was found to be in-
sensitive to the ﬂux emergence rate, but increase with diﬀer-
ential rotation rate. Although diﬀerential rotation does not

14 G. P. S. Gibb, D. H. Mackay, M. M. Jardine, A. R. Yeates

have an eﬀect on the total amount of free magnetic energy
in the corona, it does have an eﬀect on the non-potentiality
of the corona. This is likely due to the diﬀerential rotation
adding more shear into the corona. Given that the degree of
non-potentiality increases with increasing diﬀerential rota-
tion rate, potential ﬁeld extrapolations are likely to be most
accurate for stars with low diﬀerential rotation.

We then considered the volume-integrated square of the
current. This may be considered a proxy for the amount of
heating in the corona, as Ohmic heating is proportional to
j2. This was found to increase with increasing ﬂux emergence
rate, and decrease with increasing diﬀerential rotation rate.
As is the case with many of the quantities described above,
this is more sensitive to the ﬂux emergence rate than the
diﬀerential rotation rate. Assuming a link between heating
proxy and X-ray emission, the X-ray luminosities of stars are
more aﬀected by their ﬂux emergence rates than their diﬀer-
ential rotation rates, and stars with higher ﬂux emergence
rates may have higher X-ray luminosities.

In Gibb et al. (2014a) the timescales of formation and
eruption of ﬂux ropes were determined as a function of dif-
ferential rotation. It was postulated that stars with higher
diﬀerential rotation rates may have more frequent ﬂux rope
eruptions, and thus may produce more CMEs. In order
to address this hypothesis, we investigated the ﬂux ropes
formed in our simulations. Firstly, we determined the mean
number of stable (non-erupting) ﬂux ropes in the corona.
This was found to increase with increasing ﬂux emergence
rate, and decrease with increasing diﬀerential rotation rate,
but with a higher sensitivity to ﬂux emergence rate than dif-
ferential rotation rate. We then counted the mean number of
ﬂux ropes erupting per day for a number of the simulations.
This eruption rate was found to increase with increasing ﬂux
emergence rate and with increasing diﬀerential rotation rate.
We postulate that planets orbiting stars with diﬀerential ro-
tation rates and/or ﬂux emergence rates greater than those
of the Sun may experience more frequent coronal mass ejec-
tions. Finally, we estimated the mean lifetimes of ﬂux ropes.
The lifetimes were found to decrease with both increasing
ﬂux emergence rate and increasing diﬀerential rotation rate.
This decrease, however, was not as marked as was found in
Gibb et al. (2014a).

A simple method to produce X-ray emission proxy im-
ages of the stellar corona was developed. This method, based
upon the one employed by Gibb et al. (2014b), sets the emis-
sion per unit volume to be proportional to the square of
the current density, with a weighting according to height
above the photosphere – motivated by the decreasing coro-
nal density with height. The images produced look remark-
ably similar to X-ray/EUV images of the solar corona, dis-
playing coronal holes and bright active regions. At present
these images are only used as a way to visualise the coronae
of the stars and are not used for any qualitative analysis,
however in future it would be interesting to compare emis-
sion proxy images produced from global solar non-potential
coronal ﬁeld simulations (for example the ﬁelds of Yeates
(2014)) with actual X-ray/EUV observations of the Sun to
determine their eﬀectiveness.

In this study we used a ﬂux emergence model based
upon the observed solar ﬂux emergences over a time period
of a year. The ﬂux emergence proﬁles on other stars may
be diﬀerent to the solar ﬂux emergence proﬁle. For example,

the latitudinal distribution of emergences may be diﬀerent,
as may the tilt angles, or the mean ﬂux per bipole. Although
using a diﬀerent ﬂux emergence proﬁle may provide diﬀerent
coronal properties, we feel that the trends with increasing
ﬂux emergence/diﬀerential rotation rates found in this paper
will be roughly the same.

In addition to ﬂux emergence and diﬀerential rotation,
the coronal evolution is also inﬂuenced by surface diﬀusion
and meridional ﬂow. The coronal response to these eﬀects
have not been studied in this paper, however the eﬀect of
the surface diﬀusion on coronal timescales was investigated
in Gibb et al. (2014a). Such a parameter study involving
meridional ﬂow and surface diﬀusion will be carried out in
the future. One other eﬀect which could be investigated is
the height at which the coronal ﬁeld is prescribed to be radial
(in this work it is 2.5R∗). This may have an eﬀect on the
value of the open ﬂux in the simulations, however we expect
the trends displayed in Figures 5 and 6 would remain roughly
the same.

In summary, we ﬁnd that the ﬂux emergence rate has
a greater eﬀect on a star’s coronal properties than the dif-
ferential rotation rate. The total surface ﬂux, the total open
ﬂux, the mean surface ﬁeld (both radial and azimuthal) the
free magnetic energy and the heating all increased with in-
creasing ﬂux emergence rate. Each of these properties only
showed a slight decrease with increasing diﬀerential rota-
tion rate. Due to this it is extremely important that future
observational studies aim to determine the rates and prop-
erties of (or suitable proxies for) ﬂux emergence on other
stars. Flux rope ejection rates increased with increasing ﬂux
emergence and diﬀerential rotation rates, which implies that
planets orbiting such stars may be exposed to more frequent
CMEs. This is important for the longevities of planetary at-
mospheres. Whilst ﬂux emergence has a stronger eﬀect on
the coronal properties than the diﬀerential rotation, it was
found that the diﬀerential rotation altered the coronal struc-
ture. As the diﬀerential rotation rate increases the corona
becomes more open and non-potential.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

G.P.S.G. would like to thank the STFC for ﬁnancial support.
D.H.M. would like to thank the STFC and the Leverhulme
Trust for ﬁnancial support. Simulations were carried out on
a STFC/SRIF funded UKMHD cluster at St Andrews.

REFERENCES

Ayres T. R., 2009, ApJ, 696, 1931
Babcock H. W., 1961, ApJ, 133, 572
Barnes J. R., Collier Cameron A., Donati J.-F., James D. J.,

Marsden S. C., Petit P., 2005, MNRAS, 357, L1

Berdyugina S. V., 2005, Living Reviews in Solar Physics, 2, 8
Bigazzi A., Ruzmaikin A., 2004, ApJ, 604, 944
Brown S. F., Donati J.-F., Rees D. E., Semel M., 1991, A&A,

250, 463

Collier Cameron A., 2007, Astronomische Nachrichten, 328, 1030
DeVore C. R., Sheeley Jr. N. R., Boris J. P., Young Jr. T. R.,

Harvey K. L., 1985, Sol. Phys., 102, 41

Donahue R. A., Saar S. H., Baliunas S. L., 1996, ApJ, 466, 384
Donati J.-F., Collier Cameron A., 1997, MNRAS, 291, 1
Donati J.-F., Landstreet J. D., 2009, ARA&A, 47, 333

MNRAS 000, 1–15 (2015)

Donati J.-F., Semel M., Carter B. D., Rees D. E., Collier Cameron

Yeates A. R., Mackay D. H., van Ballegooijen A. A., 2008,

A., 1997, MNRAS, 291, 658

Sol. Phys., 247, 103

Donati J.-F., Mengel M., Carter B. D., Marsden S., Collier

Yeates A. R., Constable J. A., Martens P. C. H., 2010, Sol. Phys.,

Cameron A., Wichmann R., 2000, MNRAS, 316, 699

263, 121

Stellar Coronal Response to Flux Transport

15

Yokoyama T., Shibata K., 1996, PASJ, 48, 353
van Ballegooijen A. A., Priest E. R., Mackay D. H., 2000, ApJ,

539, 983

This paper has been typeset from a TEX/LATEX ﬁle prepared by
the author.

Donati J.-F., et al., 2008, MNRAS, 385, 1179
Fan Y., 2001, ApJ, 554, L111
Fares R., et al., 2009, MNRAS, 398, 1383
Favata F., Micela G., Orlando S., Schmitt J. H. M. M., Sciortino

S., Hall J., 2008, A&A, 490, 1121

Feigelson E. D., Montmerle T., 1999, ARA&A, 37, 363
Gibb G. P. S., Jardine M. M., Mackay D. H., 2014a, MNRAS,

443, 3251

Gibb G. P. S., Mackay D. H., Green L. M., Meyer K. A., 2014b,

ApJ, 782, 71

Hale G. E., Ellerman F., Nicholson S. B., Joy A. H., 1919, ApJ,

49, 153

Krall J., Chen J., Santoro R., Spicer D. S., Zalesak S. T., Cargill

P. J., 1998, ApJ, 500, 992

Krause F., Raedler K. H., 1980, Mean-ﬁeld magnetohydrodynam-

ics and dynamo theory

K¨uker M., R¨udiger G., 2011, Astronomische Nachrichten,

332, 933

Leighton R. B., 1964, ApJ, 140, 1547
Llama J., Jardine M., Mackay D. H., Fares R., 2012, MNRAS,

422, L72

Mackay D., Yeates A., 2012, Living Reviews in Solar Physics, 9, 6
Mackay D. H., van Ballegooijen A. A., 2006, ApJ, 641, 577
Mackay D. H., Jardine M., Collier Cameron A., Donati J.-F.,

Hussain G. A. J., 2004, MNRAS, 354, 737

Marsden S. C., Donati J.-F., Semel M., Petit P., Carter B. D.,

2006, MNRAS, 370, 468

Marsden S. C., et al., 2011, MNRAS, 413, 1939
Marsden S. C., et al., 2014, MNRAS, 444, 3517
Mekkaden M. V., 1985, Ap&SS, 117, 381
Middelkoop F., 1981, A&A, 101, 295
Moﬀatt H. K., 1978, Magnetic ﬁeld generation in electrically con-

ducting ﬂuids

Pallavicini R., Golub L., Rosner R., Vaiana G. S., Ayres T., Lin-

sky J. L., 1981, ApJ, 248, 279

Petit P., Donati J.-F., Collier Cameron A., 2002, MNRAS,

334, 374

Pont F., et al., 2007, A&A, 476, 1347
Priest E. R., 1982, Solar Magneto-Hydrodynamics. Springer
Rabus M., et al., 2009, A&A, 494, 391
Radick R. R., Mihalas D., Hartmann L., Worden S. P., Africano

J. L., Klimke A., Tyson E. T., 1982, PASP, 94, 934

Radick R. R., et al., 1983, PASP, 95, 300
Robinson R. D., Worden S. P., Harvey J. W., 1980, ApJ,

236, L155

Sanchis-Ojeda R., Winn J. N., Holman M. J., Carter J. A., Osip

D. J., Fuentes C. I., 2011, ApJ, 733, 127

Schmitt J. H. M. M., 1997, A&A, 318, 215
Semel M., 1989, A&A, 225, 456
Sheeley Jr. N. R., 2005, Living Reviews in Solar Physics, 2, 5
Strassmeier K. G., 1996, A&A, 314, 558
Vaiana G. S., et al., 1981, ApJ, 245, 163
Vidotto A. A., et al., 2014, MNRAS, 441, 2361
Vogt S. S., Penrod G. D., 1983, PASP, 95, 565
Waite I. A., Marsden S. C., Carter B. D., Hart R., Donati J.-F.,
Ram´ırez V´elez J. C., Semel M., Dunstone N., 2011, MNRAS,
413, 1949

Walter F. M., Bowyer S., 1981, ApJ, 245, 671
Wilson O. C., 1978, ApJ, 226, 379
Yang W. H., Sturrock P. A., Antiochos S. K., 1986, ApJ, 309, 383
Yeates A. R., 2014, Sol. Phys., 289, 631
Yeates A. R., Mackay D. H., 2009, ApJ, 699, 1024
Yeates A. R., Mackay D. H., van Ballegooijen A. A., 2007,

Sol. Phys., 245, 87

MNRAS 000, 1–15 (2015)

