6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
0
1

 
 
]
h
t
-
p
e
h
[
 
 

1
v
3
2
4
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Self-accelerating Massive Gravity:

Hidden Constraints and Characteristics

Pavel Motloch,1 Wayne Hu,2 and Hayato Motohashi2

1Kavli Institute for Cosmological Physics, Department of Physics,

University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, U.S.A

2Kavli Institute for Cosmological Physics, Department of Astronomy & Astrophysics,

Enrico Fermi Institute, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, U.S.A

Self-accelerating backgrounds in massive gravity provide an arena to explore the Cauchy problem
for derivatively coupled ﬁelds that obey complex constraints which reduce the phase space degrees
of freedom. We present here an algorithm based on the Kronecker form of a matrix pencil that ﬁnds
all hidden constraints, for example those associated with derivatives of the equations of motion, and
characteristic curves for any 1+1 dimensional system of linear partial diﬀerential equations. With
the Regge-Wheeler-Zerilli decomposition of metric perturbations into angular momentum and parity
states, this technique applies to fully 3+1 dimensional perturbations of massive gravity around any
isotropic self-accelerating background. Five spin modes of the massive graviton propagate once
the constraints are imposed: two spin-2 modes with luminal characteristics present in the massless
theory as well as two spin-1 modes and one spin-0 mode. Although the new modes all possess the
same — typically spacelike — characteristic curves, the spin-1 modes are parabolic while the spin-0
modes are hyperbolic. The joint system, which remains coupled by non-derivative terms, cannot
be solved as a simple Cauchy problem from a single non-characteristic surface. We also illustrate
the generality of the algorithm with other cases where derivative constraints reduce the number of
propagating degrees of freedom or order of the equations.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Using an auxiliary ﬂat ﬁducial metric, de Rham,
Gabadadze and Tolley (dRGT) ﬁrst constructed a con-
sistent interacting theory of a massive spin-2 graviton [1].
This theory possesses a class of self-accelerating cosmo-
logical solutions where the massive graviton potential
plays the role of a cosmological constant [2–14].

The behavior of perturbations around these cosmolog-
ical solutions is not fully understood. Initially, there ap-
peared to be several inconsistencies like coordinate de-
pendence of the number of propagating degrees of free-
dom [15] and related claims of existence of strong cou-
pling around particular solutions [16]. These were shown
to be related to the existence of superluminally propa-
gating modes [17], which are a typical feature of isotropic
perturbations around these cosmological solutions. For
a particular solution where both the spacetime and ﬁdu-
cial metric are manifestly homogeneous [16], anisotropic
modes are superluminal as well. The Hamiltonian for
the isotropic modes around any self-accelerating cosmo-
logical solution is also unbounded from below [15]. Fi-
nally, on speciﬁcally constructed alternate backgrounds,
perturbation characteristics have also been shown to be
superluminal [18–22].

In this paper we investigate the behavior of all linear
metric perturbations around a general self-accelerating
vacuum dRGT solution completing the analysis of
Ref. [17]. As a typical solution lacks translation invari-
ance, it is not possible to employ the standard scalar-
vector-tensor decomposition. However, thanks to the ro-
tational invariance of the background and parity invari-
ance of the theory, it is possible to decouple the sys-
tem into angular momentum and parity states using the

Regge, Wheeler [23], and Zerilli [24] formalism. This for-
malism was originally developed to study perturbations
around the Schwarzchild metric in general relativity (see
[25–30] for extensions in modiﬁed gravity theories).

For a given angular momentum and parity, the vari-
ous components of the metric perturbations are deriva-
tively and non-derivatively coupled in a complicated con-
strained structure that reﬂects the fact that only 5 spin
modes of the massive graviton propagate. We present
here an algorithm capable of ﬁnding hidden constraints
and characteristic curves for any set of linear partial dif-
ferential equations in 1+1 dimensions, which has applica-
tion beyond dRGT. Using this algorithm, we determine
the characteristic curves for all dRGT modes and iden-
tify their hyperbolic, parabolic or elliptic nature for their
potential joint solution from initial data.
The paper is organized as follows. In §II we review the
construction of self-accelerated background solutions [9],
perturbation Lagrangian around them [31] and example
vacuum solutions. In §III we review the Regge-Wheeler-
Zerilli analysis, and provide an summary of the algorithm
we use for ﬁnding the characteristics. The Appendices
contain a full explanation of the algorithm (§A), decom-
position techniques (§B) and crosscheck using an alter-
nate method of auxiliary variables (§C). In §IV and §V
we then investigate odd and even parity perturbations
around dRGT cosmological solutions. We discuss these
results in §VI.

Fk (γ)

,

(1)

g(t, r) = x0a(t, r)r.

2

with the graviton potential in Eq. (1) behaves as a cos-
mological constant.

Given an isotropic line element,

ds2 = −b2(t, r)dt2 + a2(t, r)(cid:0)dr2 + r2dΩ2

(cid:1),

2

(6)

where dΩ2
St¨uckelberg ﬁelds,

2 is the line element on a 2-sphere, and isotropic

φ0 = f (t, r),

φi = g(t, r)

xi
r

,

this class of self-accelerating solutions requires

The constant x0 solves the polynomial equation P1(x0) =
0 with
P1(x) ≡ 2(3−2x)+6(x−1)(x−3)α3 +24(x−1)2α4. (9)

Distinct self-accelerating St¨uckelberg backgrounds repre-
sent diﬀerent solutions of

√

X =

W
x0

+ x0,

X ≡(cid:16) ˙f

b
W ≡ µ
ab

(cid:17)2 −(cid:16) ˙g
(cid:16) ˙f g(cid:48) − ˙gf(cid:48)(cid:17)

g(cid:48)
a

+ µ

b

,

(cid:17)2

,

f(cid:48)
a

+ µ

(7)

(8)

(10)

(11)

II. SELF-ACCELERATING SOLUTIONS IN

MASSIVE GRAVITY

In this section we provide a concise review of the dRGT
theory (§II A), its self-accelerating isotopic background
solutions (§II B), perturbations in unitary gauge (§II C),
and speciﬁc vacuum background solutions (§II D).

A. dRGT theory

The Lagrangian density for the dRGT [1] nonlinear

theory of a massive spin-2 graviton is given by:

√−g

L =

M 2
Pl
2

R − m2

(cid:34)

(cid:35)

4(cid:88)

k=0

βk
k!

where M 2

Pl = (8πG)−1 is the reduced Planck mass,

F0(γ) = 1,
F1(γ) = [γ],
F2(γ) = [γ]2 − [γ2],
F3(γ) = [γ]3 − 3[γ][γ2] + 2[γ3],
F4(γ) = [γ]4 − 6[γ]2[γ2] + 3[γ2]2 + 8[γ][γ3] − 6[γ4],

(2)

γµ

αγα

ν = gµαΣαν.

(3)

Σ is itself related to the standard Minkowski metric η via
a coordinate transformation using St¨uckelberg scalars φA

Σµν = ηAB∂µφA∂νφB,

(4)

which restores diﬀeomorphism invariance to the theory.
Where this transformation is not invertible the dRGT
degrees of freedom encounter a determinant singularity
[32]. Smooth continuation of solutions on the other side
of a determinant singularity is sometimes but not always
possible [17].
The parameters of the dRGT theory are {α3, α4},

which control the βk through

β0 = −12(1 + 2α3 + 2α4),
β1 = 6(1 + 3α3 + 4α4),
β2 = −2(1 + 6α3 + 12α4),
β3 = 6(α3 + 4α4),
β4 = −24α4,

and the graviton mass m.

B.

Isotropic background solutions

and [ ] denotes the trace of the enclosed matrix. The
matrix γ is the square root of the product of the inverse
spacetime metric g−1 and a ﬂat ﬁducial metric Σ

where

with branches due to the matrix square root γ deﬁned
in Eq. (3) allowing µ ≡ ±1. Here and throughout, we
choose µ = 1 and overdots denote derivatives with re-
spect to t whereas primes denote derivatives with respect
to r. Where W = ±∞, 0 or is undeﬁned because either
f or g are not continuously diﬀerentiable, there exists a
determinant singularity [32].

For any such solution the eﬀective stress tensor due to
the presence of the non-derivative graviton interactions
takes the form of an eﬀective cosmological constant

Tµν = −ΛM 2

Plgµν,

Λ =

1
2

m2P0(x0),

(5)

where

with

P0(x) = −12 − 2x(x − 6) − 12(x − 1)(x − 2)α3

− 24(x − 1)2α4,

(12)

(13)

(14)

The dRGT theory possesses solutions for any isotropic
spacetime metric [9] where the stress-energy associated

deﬁning its dependence on dRGT parameters.

δφA =

∂ ¯φA
∂xµ ξµ.

(16)

From the background equations of motion (EOMs) it can
be shown that they satisfy

3

Here ¯Rµν is the usual Ricci tensor built out of the back-
ground metric, ¯R is its trace, and

¯χµν =

¯γµν − ¯gµν,

1
x0

(23)

¯χ11 =

whose only nonzero components are
0b2 − ˙f 2 + ˙g2
x2
x2
0 + W
( ˙gg(cid:48) − ˙f f(cid:48))
x2
0 + W
0a2 + f(cid:48)2 − g(cid:48)2
¯χ22 = − x2

¯χ12 =

,

,

x2
0 + W

.

(24)

¯χ11 ¯χ22 = ¯χ2

12.

(25)

To quadratic order, all covariant derivatives can be taken
with respect to the background metric.

D. Vacuum solutions

In the absence of matter, the eﬀective cosmological
constant for the background solution leads a de Sitter

spacetime with an expansion rate H = (cid:112)Λ/3. Closed

isotropic coordinates

ds2 = −dt2 +

(cid:20) cosh (Ht)

1 + (Hr)2/4

(cid:21)2(cid:0)dr2 + r2dΩ2

(cid:1) ,

2

(26)

chart the entire spacetime, where t ∈ (−∞,∞) and
r ∈ [0,∞). For the purposes of illuminating the causal
structure of solutions using conformal diagrams, it is also
useful to introduce conformal coordinates

(cid:19)2(cid:0)−dη2 + dχ2 + sin2 χdΩ2

(cid:1) ,

(cid:18) 1

ds2 =

(27)

2

H sin η

Hr = 2 tan(χ/2),

(28)

restricts η ∈ (0, π) and χ ∈ [0, π].

Speciﬁc solutions are deﬁned by the background tem-
poral St¨uckelberg ﬁeld f . Although our treatment is fully
general, we will illustrate our results using two classes of
solutions, the so-called “open solution” of [4]

and the family of solutions from Ref. [5]

x0
H

f = fo(η, χ) =

cot η,

(29)

(cid:18)

ln

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) C 2(cos χ + cos η)

sin η(1 − y)

(cid:19)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) − y

,

1 + C 2(sin2 χ/ sin2 η − 1),

(30)

x0
CH

(cid:113)

hµν

;νh;µ,

where

sinh(Ht) = − cot η,

C. Perturbation Lagrangian

Ref. [31] derived the covariant form for the quadratic
Lagrangian for perturbations around the isotropic self-
accelerating solutions of the previous section. Here we
consider a speciﬁc gauge for the perturbations, called
unitary gauge, in which the St¨uckelberg perturbations
vanish

φA = ¯φA,

(15)

where bar denotes the background quantity. This can al-
ways be accomplished by an inﬁnitesimal transformation
xµ → xµ + ξµ which changes these scalar ﬁelds by

Inverting this relation, a St¨uckelberg ﬂuctuation δφA
can always be gauged away ﬁxing ξµ entirely as long as
∂ ¯φA/∂xµ is not singular, i.e. away from a determinant
singularity.
If the background solution can be contin-
ued on the other side of a determinant singularity, a new
unitary gauge can be established there as well.

Notice the background St¨uckelberg ﬁelds are in general
nonzero and so this unitary condition refers to the fact
that the perturbed degrees of freedom propagating on
the background come only from the metric

gµν = ¯gµν + hµν.

(17)

The quadratic Lagrangian for the metric ﬂuctuations hµν
is then [31]

L2 = L(EH)

hh + L(Λ)

hh + A

PlBµναβhµνhαβ, (18)

where the Einstein-Hilbert piece

√−¯gM 2
(cid:19)
(cid:19)

hhµν

hµνhµν

(cid:18) 1
(cid:18) 1

2

+

16

hµαh ν

α − 1
4
h2 − 1
8

+

1
4

hµν;αhνα;µ +

¯R − 1
8
h;αh;α − 1
4

1
8

(cid:18) 1

(cid:19)

¯Rµν

(19)

hµν;αhµν;α

the eﬀective background cosmological constant piece

and the dRGT potential piece

Bµναβ =

(20)

4

Pl

=

Λ,

h2

hµνhµν − 1
8

L(Λ)
hh√−¯gM 2
(cid:18)
(cid:0)¯gµα ¯χνβ + ¯gνβ ¯χµα + ¯gµβ ¯χνα + ¯gνα ¯χµβ(cid:1)
(cid:0)¯gµν ¯χαβ + ¯gαβ ¯χµν(cid:1) ,

¯gµν ¯gαβ − 1
2

¯gµβ ¯gνα − 1
2

¯gµα¯gνβ

(cid:19)

[ ¯χ]
8

(21)

1
+
16
− 1
8

L(EH)
hh√−¯gM 2

Pl

=

with the normalization

A =

0P (cid:48)
x2
1(x0)
4

m2.

f = fC(η, χ) =

(22)

y =

where C ∈ (0, 1] is a free parameter and y ∈ [0,∞).
Properties of these background solutions including their
determinant singularities were extensively discussed in
Ref. [17].

III. METHODOLOGY

Here we present our main analysis techniques.

In
§III A, we decompose metric ﬂuctuations into parity, an-
gular momentum and spin components using the har-
monic functions for tensors on the 2-sphere reviewed in
§B 2. Parity and angular momentum states obey decou-
pled EOMs as discussed in §III B. In §III C, we show how
to resolve hidden constraints and determine the charac-
teristics and appropriate boundary conditions for deriva-
tively coupled systems like the metric modes of dRGT.
Details of this general algorithm, which uses the Kro-
necker decomposition of a matrix pencil reviewed in §B 1,
are given with pedagogical examples in Appendix A.

A. Regge-Wheeler-Zerilli decomposition

The analysis of metric perturbations around isotropic
dRGT vacuum solutions is more complicated than stan-
dard cosmological perturbation theory due to the back-
ground St¨uckelberg ﬁelds or more speciﬁcally the pres-
ence of a new background tensor ¯χµν in addition to the
homogeneous and isotropic metric ¯gµν. In this case the
normal modes of ﬂuctuations are no longer eigenfunctions
of three dimensional Laplacian and the usual decoupling
of scalar, vector and tensor ﬂuctuations does not apply.
While the dRGT background is generally no longer
translationally invariant, it remains rotationally invari-
ant and so the normal modes are characterized by their
angular momentum.
In addition, the quadratic La-
grangian is parity invariant and so the even and odd
parity modes are decoupled. The analysis of metric
perturbations under these conditions follows the Regge-
Wheeler-Zerilli (RWZ) analysis [23, 24] originally in-
troduced for the similarly inhomogeneous Schwarzschild
metric.
Here the 10 metric ﬂuctuations of the symmetric hµν
are decomposed in spherical coordinates {t, r, θ, φ} and
classiﬁed according to their transformation properties un-
der rotation and parity. This classiﬁcation is reviewed
in §B 2 and implies the presence of conserved quantum
numbers for the total angular momentum (cid:96), azimuthal
angular momentum m, and parity E for even and B for
odd, as well as the spin s of the various components:

htt = H (cid:96)m
hta = h(cid:96)m
hra = h(cid:96)m
hab = h(cid:96)m

0 Y(cid:96)m,
0 Y B
1 Y B
2 Y B

1 Y(cid:96)m,

htr = H (cid:96)m
(cid:96)m,a,
(cid:96)m,a,
(cid:96)m,ab + K (cid:96)mY(cid:96)mσab,

(cid:96)m,a + β(cid:96)mY E
(cid:96)m,a + α(cid:96)mY E
(cid:96)m,ab + G(cid:96)mY E

hrr = H (cid:96)m

2 Y(cid:96)m,

TABLE I. Metric Modes. Here a, b ∈ {θ, φ}.

4

“E” even H0 H1 H2 K β α G
0
0 1 1 2
tr rr ab ta ra ab

spin
µν

0
tt

0

“B” odd

spin
µν

–
–
–

–
–
–

–
–
–

– h0 h1 h2
– 1 1 2
– ta ra ab

where a, b ∈ {θ, φ}, σab is the metric of the 2 sphere and
(cid:96)m with X ∈
the summation over (cid:96), m is implicit. Here YX
{E, B} are the tensor spherical harmonics and depend on
{θ, φ} whereas the ﬁelds or coeﬃcients whose spin and
parity are summarized in Table I are functions of {t, r}.
Note that the angular momentum states for a given spin
s are restricted to (cid:96) ≥ s. We diﬀer slightly from the
original RWZ analysis by removing the spin-0 or trace
piece of the rank-2 angular tensors which better isolates
their rotational properties.

The symmetries of the background imply that groups
of (X, (cid:96), m) modes decouple and can be analyzed in-
dependently. More speciﬁcally given the quadratic La-
grangian density, we can immediately integrate over an-
gles to decouple the Lagrangian density in {t, r} into a
sum over independent terms

(cid:90)

(cid:88)

dθdφL2 ≡ M 2

Pl

LX,(cid:96)m

(31)

X(cid:96)m

with the help of the orthogonality relations in Eqs. (B18)
and (B23). Note that L2 involves covariant derivatives
on the 2 sphere and so diﬀerent spin states of a given
(X, (cid:96), m) are coupled.

B. Equations of motion and singular points

From the quadratic Lagrangian for each set of (X, (cid:96), m)
modes, we can derive the coupled EOMs as usual.
Isotropy of the background requires that the EOMs for
all m modes of a given (cid:96) and X are the same. The ﬁelds
for m (cid:54)= 0 are complex, but we will use as the short-
1 for |h1|2, etc and suppress subscripts
hand convention h2
(cid:96) and m on the E and B Lagrangian densities and ﬁeld
variables from here on.

The spin components of a given angular momentum
and parity obey a rather complicated set of coupled
EOMs. Although kinetic terms for these modes come
from the Einstein-Hilbert term, not the dRGT poten-
tial term, the nature of the constraints diﬀers crucially
from general relativity. The lapse and shift perturba-
tions H0, H1, β, h0 are still non-dynamical but their elim-
ination becomes more complicated. Furthermore, there

is no remaining gauge freedom in dRGT which in gen-
eral relativity eliminates 4 more variables. Naively, this
would leave the dRGT modes with 6 remaining degrees
of freedom rather than the 2 of general relativity. How-
ever the special Boulware-Deser ghost-free structure of
the dRGT Lagrangian eliminates the 6th mode leaving 5
remaining degrees of freedom to represent the spin states
of the massive graviton. In the usual convention for the
polarization states these would be spin 2: even G and
odd h2; spin-1: even α and odd h1; spin-0: even K (with
H2 present but obeying a constraint).

We can make one further simpliﬁcation to the EOMs
by using the property of the background solution (25) to
eliminate

¯χ22 =

¯χ2
12
¯χ11

.

(32)

The disadvantage of this approach is that it cannot be
applied at points where ¯χ11 = 0. However if we encounter
such a point, it is generally possible to switch the chart
of the background to pass through it as ¯χ11 is a compo-
nent of a tensor not a scalar. Since our conclusions will
be about coordinate invariant quantities such as charac-
teristic curves, they are then valid at all such spacetime
points. It suﬃces to show that we can ﬁnd a chart where
¯χ12 (cid:54)= 0 since this implies ¯χ11 (cid:54)= 0 through Eq. (32). We
checked that it is not possible to have ¯χ12 = 0 in both
closed isotropic slicing (26) and ﬂat isotropic slicing any-
where besides η = −π/2, χ = π/2. In closed slicing at
this point ˙g = g(cid:48) = 0 and is thus a coordinate-invariant
determinant singularity. Here the background solution
itself is undeﬁned. At each point where the background
solution is deﬁned, our analysis as presented thus works
in at least one background coordinate frame. At points
where ¯χ11 = 0, it is actually still possible to implement
our analysis directly, but the details would diﬀer from
those presented below (see §IV C).

C. Constraints and characteristics

As discussed in the previous section, the derivatively
coupled EOMs for the spin states of a given angular mo-
mentum and parity obey a complicated constraint struc-
ture. These take the form of diﬀerential equations and
not algebraic relations with which the variables involved
may be simply eliminated. In some cases it is still pos-
sible to employ techniques involving auxiliary variables,
but these must be introduced on a case by case basis and
do not form a systematic means of proceeding.

For the purposes of counting degrees of freedom and
investigating the characteristics along which ﬁeld infor-
mation propagates, we use a systematic method intro-
duced in the Appendix A based on augmented ﬁrst order
EOMs. A summary of the method is as follows:

1. Reduce all EOMs to ﬁrst order form by introduc-
ing auxiliary variables, e.g. ut = ∂u/∂t along with

5

these deﬁning equations as additional EOMs. Cast
the EOMs in a matrix form as

A ˙u + Bu(cid:48) + Cu = 0.

(33)

2. Identify and complete the “regular blocks” of
these equations, which evolve u uniquely and con-
sistently, by incorporating hidden algebraic and
derivative constraints.
(a) If A+λB is invertible for some choice of λ then
Eq. (33) speciﬁes the evolution of u in some
suitable temporal coordinate. A + λB deﬁnes
a regular pencil or block. Proceed to step 3.

(b) If A + λB is singular,
in addition to regu-
lar µ × µ blocks Rµ,
it contains overdeter-
mined (µ+1)×µ blocks LP
µ , underdetermined
µ × (µ + 1) blocks Lµ or both in its Kro-
necker decomposition (see §B 1). Eliminate
redundancies and add all missing algebraic
and derivative constraints from the overdeter-
mined blocks to the EOMs. If constraints turn
all underdetermined blocks to regular blocks,
proceed to step 3.

(c) If underdetermined blocks remain then solu-
tions are not unique, often due to gauge free-
dom which can be ﬁxed by addition of gauge
constraints. Add these as EOMs and repeat
the previous step.

3. Cast the regular blocks in Weierstrass form Rµ(Ω)
and read oﬀ characteristics from their eigenvalues
Ω. Derivative blocks operate on some linear combi-
nation of original ﬁelds v = Q−1u. If a character-
istic is real and the degeneracy or dimension of a
block is 1, the block is hyperbolic; if higher than 1,
parabolic. If a characteristic is complex, the block
is elliptic.
If all blocks are hyperbolic, then the
whole system is hyperbolic.

The

the

classiﬁcation of

system as hyperbolic,
parabolic or elliptic has direct implications for the type
of initial or boundary data required.
In a hyperbolic
system, ﬁelds are uniquely speciﬁed by the EOMs along
characteristics, given data on a surface that intersects
the characteristics. If this surface is spacelike, then one
solves a Cauchy problem for the evolution of ﬁelds from
initial conditions. For a coupled system, a well-posed
Cauchy problem requires a joint surface that intersects
all characteristics. The slope of the characteristic deﬁnes
the analog of lightcones, i.e. the domain of dependence
and inﬂuence. Characteristics of a hyperbolic system also
deﬁne curves across which the EOMs do not specify the
ﬁeld evolution. Hence ﬁeld discontinuities can occur on
characteristics, if they occur in the initial data, and their
speed of propagation is given by the slope. We will call
characteristics “superluminal” whenever they are space-
like. Of course actual discontinuities would be beyond the

regime of validity of dRGT as an eﬀective theory. For an
alternative discussion of related issues, see [21, 33].

In a parabolic system, the EOMs contain derivatives
in the direction orthogonal to the characteristics which
carries information across them. The prototypical exam-
ple is the heat diﬀusion equation where the character-
istics are constant time surfaces. Since the domain of
dependence then involves all of the characteristics “up-
stream” from a given characteristic, usually one speciﬁes
consistent ﬁeld data on a given “initial” characteristic
and marches forward across the “downstream” charac-
teristics or domain of inﬂuence. The domain of depen-
dence also spans the extent of the characteristic, which
is typically spacelike, and so requires spatial boundary
conditions as well.

In an elliptic system, no real characteristics exist and
so the domain of dependence is the entire spacetime. El-
liptic systems cannot be solved by marching initial data
forward with the EOMs.

The characteristic analysis is therefore a tool to study
the nature of the boundary value problem in the classi-
cal theory. It is a precursor to solving for ﬁeld conﬁg-
urations either analytically or numerically. If and only
if all subsystems are hyperbolic and share a joint non-
characteristic surface, can the Cauchy problem for the
system as a whole be solved from data on this surface.

IV. ODD “B” MODES

We begin the analysis of the propagating degrees of
freedom, constraints and characteristics of metric ﬂuctu-
ations around vacuum self-accelerating dRGT solutions
with the odd parity modes. Odd parity modes are sim-
pler due to the smaller number of degrees of freedom
associated with them. They also provide a useful cross
check on our general EOM-based technique since there is
an alternate approach of introducing auxiliary ﬁelds into
the Lagrangian, which we explain in Appendix C.
We ﬁrst present the quadratic Lagrangian in §IV A and
explain how the method works for the special case of
(cid:96) = 1 where only a single spin 1 mode propagates in
§IV B. We study the general case (cid:96) ≥ 2 where there is an
additional spin 2 mode in §IV C. We compare this analy-
sis to the alternate approach of §C in §IV D. A summary
of the regular blocks and characteristics of both the odd
and even modes is given in Table II.

A. Lagrangian

As discussed in §III A, the normal mode decomposition
of metric ﬂuctuations decouples the Lagrangian density
into independent pieces for a given angular momentum
{(cid:96), m} and parity state. For each odd or B set, the La-

grangian density in {t, r} can be schematically written

6

13(cid:88)

LB =

Di(t, r, (cid:96))Bi(hai, hbi),

(34)

i=1

where the Di coeﬃcients depend on the background and
the total angular momentum (cid:96) but not m. Bi represents
a bilinear operator with at most one derivative in t or r
on each of the ﬁelds hai , hbi ∈ {h0, h1, h2}. Explicit ex-
pressions for these terms are provided in Eqs. (C1) and
(C2). For example B13 = h0
˙h2 and comes from the term
hµν;αhνα;µ of Eq. (19) with α = t and µ, ν angular co-
ordinates or µ = t and α, ν angular. Focusing on the
former case, hµν;α contains ˙h2Y B
(cid:96)m,ab and hνα;µ contains
h0∇aY B
(cid:96)m,b. Since the covariant derivative on the sphere
∇a raises and lowers the spin weight, the orthogonality
of angular integrals (B23) produces the coupling.

It is clear from the number of terms in Eq. (34) and
the explicit form (C2) for their coeﬃcients that just ex-
tracting the expected spin 1 and 2 degrees of freedom is
diﬃcult and ﬁnding their characteristics even more so.
Unlike in general relativity, no further simpliﬁcations are
possible since we cannot eliminate coupled modes utiliz-
ing gauge freedom of the theory (see §A 5 d).

B.

(cid:96) = 1

Since only s ≤ (cid:96) ﬁelds exist at a given (cid:96), the odd (cid:96) = 1
case is special in that the spin-2 ﬁeld h2 is not present
and we expect only one of the remaining ﬁelds h0, h1
to propagate after applying all the constraints. Follow-
ing our algorithm outlined in §III A and detailed in §A,
we ﬁrst rewrite the two EOMs into a ﬁrst order system
by introducing four additional ﬁelds h0t, h0r, h1t, and h1r
corresponding to derivatives indicated by the second sub-
script and add their deﬁnitions to the EOMs, e.g.

˙h0 − h0t = 0,

0 − h0r = 0.
h(cid:48)

(35)

We then arrive at a set of six ﬁrst order diﬀerential equa-
tions which can be captured in the form (33).

Instead of proceeding directly to the full Kronecker de-
composition, we can ﬁrst look for all LP
1 overdetermined
blocks by noticing combinations of equations without
temporal or spatial derivatives and matching these to-
gether (see §A). In fact just by inspection we know that
the Kronecker structure of the equations contains at least
two LP
1 overdetermined blocks corresponding to Eq. (35)
and its h1 counterpart. In general, each LP
1 block hides
one constraint. Here these are the consistency relations

˙h0r − h(cid:48)
˙h1r − h(cid:48)

0t = 0,
1t = 0,

(36)

which we add to the EOMs.
leading to an 8× 6 matrix pencil (33). The LP

At this point we have eight EOMs for six ﬁeld variables,
1 discovery

7

in Ref [17], as will be shown with the current method in
§V, the boundary value problem here is very diﬀerent.
For this odd (cid:96) = 1 mode, R2 indicates that the associ-
ated degree of freedom is parabolic not hyperbolic.
In
this sense the boundary problem is similar to the heat
equation where one speciﬁes ﬁeld data on a spacelike
characteristic surface and uses the EOMs to march for-
ward in time given spatial boundary conditions at the
ends of characteristics. Note though that parabolic char-
acteristics need not be spacelike. For example in the fo
solution, these characteristics are timelike in the inner
diamond (Fig. 1, left panel).

We shall see that in the even (cid:96) = 0 case, the system
contains two hyperbolic phase space degrees of freedom
that propagate on the same curves.
In this case, the
EOMs do not evolve ﬁelds oﬀ the characteristics and so
ﬁeld data must be speciﬁed on a noncharacteristic sur-
face.

Although the parabolic nature of the system is robust
to ﬁeld redeﬁnitions, the ﬁeld content of the overdeter-
mined and regular blocks is not. In particular, we can
mix ﬁelds from overdetermined blocks to regular blocks
since they are non-dynamical. We can also mix vari-
ables between regular blocks of the same characteristic,
but not of diﬀerent characteristics, as detailed in §A 4.
For example, in the discussion above, we are led to the
assignment

v =

h0, h1, ψ, h0r− ¯χ11

¯χ12

h1r,− ¯χ2

11
¯χ2
12

h1r

(43)

(cid:16)

(cid:16)

process also identiﬁes a block associated with

˙ψ − ω1 = 0,
ψ(cid:48) − ω2 = 0,

related to the overdetermined variable

ψ = h1t − h0r.

(37)

(38)

In the formula above, ωi are two linear combinations of
the ﬁelds without any derivatives; their particular form
is not important. The block of equations (37) contains a
hidden constraint in a form of the ﬁrst order diﬀerential
equation

1 − ˙ω2 = 0.
ω(cid:48)

(39)

This equation is added to the investigated system, which
is now described by a 9 × 6 pencil. Its Kronecker form
now contains

{L2, LP

0 , 3 × LP
1 }.

(40)

In general, LP
0 structures represent algebraic constraints
that contain no derivative terms. Assuming that ¯χ12 (cid:54)= 0,
we can use the constraint to integrate out h1t completely
and at the same time remove one of the nine EOMs which
is due to the redundancy caused now by the removal of
h1t. This operation turns the underdetermined L2 block
into a regular block R2 and the Kronecker form into the
8 × 5 system

(cid:0) ¯χ12

¯χ11

(cid:1)}

{3 × LP

1 , R2

which contains no underdetermined blocks. Furthermore
it contains no hidden constraints since we have extracted
one hidden relation from each of the three over deter-
mined LP
Using the third step of the algorithm, we identify from
R2 a single characteristic of degeneracy 2 that is deﬁned
as integral curve t(r) of

1 blocks.

dt
dr

= − ¯χ12
¯χ11

.

(42)

We interpret this as one physical degree of freedom (two
pieces of initial data or phase space degrees of freedom)
corresponding to the odd parity of the spin-1 mode of the
massive graviton.

Spacetime diagrams of the characteristic curves in the
(η, χ) coordinates for the background solutions (29) and
(30) for ¯χµν are plotted in Figure 1 (thick blue lines).
Regions of the de Sitter space are divided into separate
copies of the background solutions at the determinant
singularity (red thick lines). The fC=1 case is the unique
background solution where the characteristics are every-
where luminal; it can be shown [17] that all other back-
ground solutions show regions of spacelike characteristic
curves around the poles χ = 0, π.

Although the curves themselves coincide with that for
isotropic or even (cid:96) = 0 perturbations obtained previously

(cid:17)T

,

(cid:17)T

.

(41)

where the ﬁrst three variables correspond to the 3 overde-
termined blocks,
leaving the last two as the nominal
“propagating” degrees of freedom. However, an equally
valid representation with the same Kronecker structure
is for example

v =

h0, h1, ψ, h0r− ¯χ11
¯χ12

h1r− b(cid:48)

b h0, − ¯χ11

¯χ12

h0r +ψ

(44)

More usefully, it is possible to show that for a partic-
ular choice of P, Q the ﬁeld variable v4 corresponding to
the ﬁrst ﬁeld in the parabolic block completely decouples
from the remaining four ﬁelds, forming an autonomous
equation

− ¯χ12
¯χ11

˙v4 + v(cid:48)

4 + Cv4 = 0

(45)

for some C(t, r) which will not be given here. This is in
full agreement with the alternative analysis of §C, which
also ﬁnds that one of the ﬁelds obeys an autonomous
equation (C16) with the same characteristic. In this spe-
cial case, explicit solutions for v4 may be obtained by
integrating data from a non-characteristic curve as (45)
is itself a decoupled hyperbolic equation. Note that the
EOM associated with v5 still remains coupled to ˙v4 so its
initial or boundary data cannot be given independently
of this solution.

8

FIG. 1. Conformal diagrams of the characteristic curves for the fo background solution and two members of the fC family of
solutions. Thick blue lines correspond to the new spin-0 and spin-1 modes introduced in dRGT whereas thin solid and dashed
lines represent the luminal characteristics of the spin-2 modes. dRGT modes all share the same repeated characteristics but
come from both hyperbolic and parabolic blocks. Except in special cases, all modes of the same parity and angular momentum
are coupled by non-derivative terms. Thick red lines represent determinant singularities.

TABLE II. Characteristics and multiplicity of regular blocks.

(cid:0) ¯χ12

(cid:1) R2

(cid:0) ¯χ12

(cid:1) R1

(cid:1) R1

(cid:0)− a

b

(cid:1)

R1

X

(cid:96)

B
0
B
1
B ≥ 2
0
E
E
1
E ≥ 2

¯χ11
0
0
0
2
2
2

¯χ11
0
1
1
0
1
1

(cid:0) a

b

0
0
1
0
0
1

0
0
1
0
0
1

C.

(cid:96) ≥ 2

Although we have all three ﬁelds present at (cid:96) ≥ 2, the
analysis is basically the same as for (cid:96) = 1. The diﬀerence
is that we add three additional ﬁelds h2, h2t, h2r, and four
equations: the EOM for h2, the deﬁnitions of h2t, h2r and
the constraint associated with this new LP

1 block

˙h2r − h(cid:48)

2t = 0.

(46)

The other structures in the system are the same as with
1 block related to ψ reveals a LP
(cid:96) = 1 treatment. The LP
0
block which allows us to integrate out h1t. With these
constraints, the system is described by a 12×8 Kronecker
form

(cid:0) ¯χ12

¯χ11

(cid:1), R1

(cid:0)− a

b

(cid:1), R1

(cid:0) a

b

(cid:1)}.

{4 × LP

1 , R2

(47)

The ﬁrst regular block is parabolic and already present at
(cid:96) = 1; we associate it with the odd parity spin-1 mode of
the graviton. The other two regular blocks are hyperbolic

with characteristic curves

dt
dr

= ± a
b

,

(48)

which are luminal and directed radially inward or out-
ward. These modes correspond to the spin-2 graviton
mode and necessarily contain the combination of ﬁelds

h2r ± a
b

h2t,

(hyperbolic, luminal).

(49)

Luminality of these curves is expected as this mode is in-
herited from general relativity which has the same kinetic
structure as dRGT.

This association with the spin-2 mode (49) cannot
be removed using the freedom in performing the Kro-
necker decomposition, since ﬁelds in the other regular
blocks have diﬀerent characteristics and the overdeter-
mined blocks do not contain either h2t or h2r. Moreover
there are non-derivative couplings of these modes to the
other modes through C that also cannot in general be
removed.

Open solution.— It is instructive to examine the case of
the fo background solution in detail since its homogeneity
in open slicing permits a traditional scalar-vector-tensor
(SVT) analysis there [16]. In this slicing, the constant
time surfaces coincide with the ¯χ12/ ¯χ11 characteristics.
In fact, our result seems paradoxical in that SVT normal
modes of the Laplace operator should fully decouple from
each other in linear theory.

To directly compare these results, we reperform our
analysis in open frame where ¯χ22 = 0, a case that was
excluded in our primary analysis but allowed by the tech-
nique itself (see §III B). This analysis therefore applies

0Π2Π0(cid:30)Π2(cid:30)ΠΧΗfo0Π2ΠΧfC:C(cid:27)0.50Π2ΠΧfC:C(cid:27)1speciﬁcally to the open wedge of de Sitter (upper right
triangle of Fig. 1, left panel) and matches the domain
investigated in Ref. [16]. We will skip the details, as all
proceeds similarly to our main analysis; as was argued
before the structure of the regular blocks is coordinate
invariant and thus the same in the two analyses.

Using the freedom in the Kronecker form, we can in
this particular case choose v such that the ﬁelds of a
parabolic block R2 and one of the LP
1 blocks completely
decouple from the ﬁelds of the remaining ﬁve blocks. The
EOMs which govern the corresponding ﬁelds can then
be solved independently. In this sense the spin-1 vector
mode does decouple from the spin-2 tensor mode. How-
ever these ﬁelds then source those in the remaining ﬁve
blocks, in particular the spin-2 mode. The resolution to
the paradox is that solutions to the EOMs of the decou-
pled blocks diverge at either origin or the spatial inﬁnity
in ways that cannot be represented by the vector normal
modes of the Laplace operator. In other words, the usual
SVT normal mode analysis sets these modes to zero by
boundary conditions, eliminating the source to the tensor
modes.
This one-way decoupling of the (cid:96) ≥ 2 odd parabolic
block is not a general
feature of the dRGT self-
accelerating solutions. More typically, the spin-1 and
spin-2 variables mutually source each other and no sim-
pliﬁcation of the full system of EOMs is possible. Fur-
thermore decoupling within the parabolic block that is
possible for (cid:96) = 1 odd modes for all background solution
(see Eqs. (45) or (C16)) is typically not possible for (cid:96) ≥ 2
odd modes.

D. Comparison with alternative analysis

In Appendix C, we present an alternative analysis of
Introducing auxiliary ﬁelds, we recast
the odd modes.
the odd Lagrangian as a second order system for a new
variable q and h2, with h0, h1 integrated out for (cid:96) ≥ 2.
As such, there are no hidden constraints between the new
variables and the system can be investigated by standard
methods.

In particular, given the second order system EOMs, we
perform a characteristic analysis by searching for curves
where discontinuities in the highest derivatives can oc-
cur. This analysis agrees on the spacetime trajectories
and total multiplicities of the characteristics. For (cid:96) = 1,
integrating out h0 leaves EOMs for q and h1 that again
conﬁrm our main analysis.

These alternate analyses however fail to automati-
cally ﬁnd the distinction between parabolic blocks and
repeated hyperbolic blocks of the same characteristics
which requires retention of the ﬁrst order derivative
structure. Moreover a drawback of modifying the La-
grangian to resolve constraints is that diﬀerent types of
constraints require diﬀerent methods. In fact as we shall
see in the next section, the even modes present such a
complex constrained system that it is unclear how to pro-

9

ceed at the Lagrangian level. Our method provides an
algorithmic method of resolving hidden algebraic or dif-
ferential constraints for arbitrarily complex systems at
the EOM level.
On the other hand, the alternative analysis allows us
to perform a Hamiltonian analysis of the system, see §C 3
for the particular case of (cid:96) = 1.

V. EVEN “E” MODES

In this section we ﬁnish our analysis of the perturba-
tions around vacuum cosmological solutions of dRGT by
ﬁnding characteristic curves for the even parity or “E”
modes. We start with the special cases (cid:96) = 0 and (cid:96) = 1,
the former of which was previously investigated in [17]
by the St¨uckelberg method [34], and then proceed to the
general case with (cid:96) ≥ 2.

A. Lagrangian

The even mode Lagrangian is of the form

55(cid:88)

LE =

Ei(t, r, (cid:96))Ei(eai, ebi),

(50)

i=1

where like the odd modes Ei are the coeﬃcients of Ei, a
bilinear operator on pairs of the seven E modes

eai, ebi ∈ {H0, H1, H2, α, β, K, G}

(51)

that contains at most one derivative on each ﬁeld with
respect to t or r. Given that there are 55 distinct terms,
they will not be presented explicitly here.

B.

(cid:96) = 0

For the isotropic modes, only the spin 0 ﬁelds, K and
Hi where i = 0, 1, 2, remain in the Lagrangian. We then
introduce eight ﬁrst derivative ﬁelds Hit, Hir, Kt and Kr,
along with their deﬁning equations to have all EOMs
manifestly ﬁrst order. The deﬁning equations naturally
pair themselves into LP
1 blocks in the Kronecker decom-
position just like for the odd modes. We can therefore
automatically add the hidden constraints corresponding
to these four LP
1 blocks; these take form of consistency
equations such as

˙H0r − H(cid:48)

0t = 0.

(52)

After taking them into account, the Kronecker decom-
position of the resulting 16 × 12 pencil reveals two ad-
ditional LP
1 blocks related to Kr, Kt. These two blocks
hide two additional equations, which are then included
In the resulting 18 × 12 structure,
into the analysis.
there are two algebraic LP
0 constraints. We can use these
two constraints to integrate out Kr and H0 completely

and at the same time remove two redundant equations.
Four of the remaining 16 equations turn into algebraic
LP
0 constraints, allowing us to remove H1t, H2t, H0r and
H0t together with four equations. Of the remaining 12
EOMs two are redundant, allowing us to reduce the num-
ber of EOMs for the remaining six ﬁelds down to 10. The

ﬁnal system is (cid:110)

(cid:1)(cid:111)

(cid:0) ¯χ12

¯χ11

4 × LP

1 , 2 × R1

.

(53)

All hidden constraints which can be derived from the
four overdetermined blocks are included and our analysis
is thus ﬁnished.

The characteristic curves corresponding to the two reg-

ular blocks are described by the same slope,

dt
dr

= − ¯χ12
¯χ11

,

(54)

that was associated with the spin-1 odd modes. How-
ever, unlike the odd modes both regular blocks are hy-
perbolic, allowing for solutions based on a set of initial
data given on a non-characteristic surface. Thanks to
the large ﬁeld transformation group associated with the
Kronecker decomposition, one of the hyperbolic blocks
can be completely decoupled from the remainder of the
blocks to describe a ﬁeld governed by an autonomous
equation similar to Eq. (45).

This conclusion is in complete agreement with previous
investigations of the isotropic modes [17, 34]. The anal-
yses there relied on solving for St¨uckelberg and metric
perturbations in isotropic gauge. There the special com-
bination δΓ = δg−x0rδa obeys the same autonomous R1
hyperbolic form. The remaining isotropic St¨uckelberg
perturbation δf (t, r) also satisﬁes a ﬁrst order diﬀer-
ential equation while the remaining metric ﬂuctuations
are governed by constraints. Characteristic curves corre-
sponding to both propagating variables are exactly (54).
The isotropic gauge analysis is thus completely consistent
with our unitary gauge analysis.
As with the alternative (cid:96) = 1 odd mode analysis of
§C, in the variables of the isotropic gauge analysis, a
Hamiltonian analysis is tractable. Ref. [15] found that
the Hamiltonian of this (cid:96) = 0 mode is unbounded from
below. A Hamiltonian analysis for our unitary gauge
system is intractable but from these two examples we can
at least conclude that there is no direct relation between
the existence of an R1 or R2 block and an unbounded
Hamiltonian.

C.

(cid:96) = 1

10
In this 24 × 18 system, we then ﬁnd three new LP
blocks whose hidden constraints then reveal three LP
0
blocks. The latter allow us to integrate out Kr, αr and
H0 which then further reveals four algebraic constraints
among the ﬁelds which we use to remove βt, H2t, H0t and
H0r. As before, two of the remaining EOMs turn out to
be redundant and can be dropped. The ﬁnal Kronecker
decomposition for the 18 × 11 system becomes

1

(cid:110)

7 × LP

1 , 2 × R1

(cid:0) ¯χ12

¯χ11

(cid:1), R2

(cid:0) ¯χ12

¯χ11

(cid:1)(cid:111)

.

(55)

There are no additional hidden constraints as all seven
LP
1 constraints are already included.
On top of the blocks already present at (cid:96) = 0 there
is an R2 block that we also found in the analysis of the
(cid:96) = 1 odd modes. This agrees with our interpretation
that they together represent the two parity states of the
spin-1 polarization of the massive graviton.

D.

(cid:96) ≥ 2

For (cid:96) ≥ 2 there is an additional spin-2 ﬁeld G but the
analysis is basically the same as for (cid:96) = 1. We ﬁrst add
three more ﬁelds G, Gt, Gr, two more deﬁning conditions
and the hidden consistency relation

˙Gr − G(cid:48)

t = 0.

(56)

From there on the analysis follows exactly the same steps
as the (cid:96) = 1 analysis with the removal of ﬁrst Kr, αr, H0
and then βt, H2t, H0t, H0r with constraints and ﬁnally
the dropping of two redundant EOMs. The ﬁnal Kro-
necker structure
1 , 2 × R1

(cid:1)(cid:9) (57)

(cid:8)8 × LP

(cid:1), R2

(cid:1), R1

(cid:1), R1

(cid:0) ¯χ12

(cid:0)− a

b

(cid:0) ¯χ12

¯χ11

(cid:0) a

¯χ11

b

contains the same regular components as (cid:96) = 1 corre-
sponding to the spin-0 and spin-1 modes.
In addition
there are two new regular blocks with luminal character-
istic curves

dt
dr

= ± a
b

.

(58)

This completely mirrors the odd modes, where the dif-
ference between (cid:96) ≥ 2 and (cid:96) = 1 also consists of a new
luminally propagating mode (48). As we mentioned ear-
lier, luminality of the mode agrees with our expectations.
The ﬁelds associated with these luminal blocks are

Gt ± b
a

Gr,

(hyperbolic, luminal).

(59)

The analysis is very similar to the (cid:96) = 0 one but with
the addition of the spin-1 ﬁelds α, β. As before, we in-
troduce the 12 additional ﬁrst derivative ﬁelds and their
deﬁning equations. We again directly add the six con-
sistency conditions which correspond to the LP
1 blocks
related to the deﬁning relations.

and these blocks are thus unambiguously related to the
spin-2 ﬁeld. Notice that in the fo solution there are no
spacelike curves that intersect the hyperbolic characteris-
tics of all types whereas in the fC solutions there are (see
Fig. 1). Nonetheless the joint degrees of freedom in the
fC case are not hyperbolic due to the parabolic blocks.

For the even modes it is possible to perform a similar
decoupling analysis as we performed for the odd modes.
Again, for particular solutions such as fo it is possible
to completely decouple the parabolic block R2 and one
overdetermined block LP
1 from the rest. The parabolic
modes diverge at either origin or spatial inﬁnity and if
not set to zero [16] will act as sources to the luminal
modes. Again the parabolic decoupling does not happen
for more general background solutions and the spin-1 and
spin-2 modes remain mutually coupled.

VI. DISCUSSION

The dRGT theory of massive gravity presents in-
teresting challenges for the study of metric perturba-
tions around its vacuum self-accelerating backgrounds.
Although the background spacetime remains homoge-
neous and isotropic, the presence of a second metric can
break translational invariance and invalidate the stan-
dard scalar-vector-tensor decomposition. Furthermore,
the 10 metric variables are derivatively coupled and hide
both diﬀerential and algebraic constraints that permit
just 5 independently propagating modes. In this paper
we have developed and employed techniques to surmount
these challenges.

Given the isotropy of the background and the parity
invariance of the theory, we use the Regge-Wheeler-Zerilli
decomposition to decouple modes of diﬀerent angular
momentum and parity. The equations of motion describe
the propagation of the coupled spin states of the massive
graviton in the remaining radial dimension.

These equations of motion hide algebraic and diﬀeren-
tial constraints from the lapse, shift and ghost-free con-
struction of dRGT. In Appendix A we develop an al-
gorithm to ﬁnd its hidden constraints and characteristic
curves. Using this technique, we ﬁnd the new spin-0 as
well as even and odd spin-1 degrees of freedom all possess
the same characteristic curve

dt
dr

= − ¯χ12
¯χ11

,

(60)

that depends only on the background solution not on
angular momentum or parity. These characteristics al-
ways run tangent to determinant singularities. On the
other hand the two spin-2 degrees of freedom propagate
on luminal characteristics. This behavior of the tensor
modes is expected, because dRGT and general relativity
share the same kinetic structure while they diﬀer in their
constraint structure.

Diﬀerent spin states require diﬀerent initial and bound-
ary conditions. The scalar mode is hyperbolic and re-
quires data on a surface that intersects all of its char-
acteristics. For solutions like fo where there are no such
surfaces that are spacelike, the initial value problem is ill-
posed. Moreover, the spin-2 modes are hyperbolic and a
joint solution requires a common surface that intersects
all characteristics.

11

The two spin-1 modes propagate along the same char-
acteristic but each form a parabolic system, much like
the heat equation. To specify their evolution, we need to
provide initial data on a characteristic surface and sup-
plement it with two boundary conditions.

These conclusions agree with a previous analysis of the
isotropic modes (cid:96) = 0 using a diﬀerent method [15, 17]
as well as a diﬀerent analysis of the (cid:96) = 1 odd modes
presented in §C. In both of these cases, the Hamiltonian
is unbounded from below.

Finally within a given angular momentum and parity
set, various spin modes are still coupled by non-derivative
terms in ways that cannot be removed by ﬁeld redeﬁni-
tions except in special cases. The presence of coupled de-
grees of freedom that are both hyperbolic and parabolic
in nature and propagate on diﬀerent characteristics im-
plies that the metric modes of dRGT cannot be evolved
as a simple Cauchy problem.

Central to these analyses is the algorithmic method,
presented with numerous examples in Appendix A, to
ﬁnd hidden constraints and characteristic curves of an
arbitrary system of linear partial diﬀerential equations
in 1+1 dimensions. This method has a wide range of
uses beyond the dRGT theory.

The logic of the method is ﬁrst to rewrite all the equa-
tions of motion into a ﬁrst order system of diﬀerential
equations. The Kronecker decomposition of the resulting
matrix pencil provides a systematic means of extracting
hidden constraints and identifying residual gauge free-
dom for the purpose of identifying the regular system
that deﬁnes the unique, consistent evolution of ﬁelds.
The generalized eigenvalues of the regular block deﬁne
characteristics. Their degeneracy and reality determines
the hyperbolic, parabolic and elliptic nature of the ﬁelds.
By identifying constraints hidden in derivatives of the
original equations of motion, these techniques should be
useful in other systems where the phase space degrees of
freedom are reduced by constraints.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Austin Joyce, Teruaki Suyama, Robert Wald
and the organizers and participants of JGRG25 for use-
ful discussions. This work was supported by U.S. Dept.
of Energy contract DE-FG02-13ER41958. WH was addi-
tionally supported by the Kavli Institute for Cosmologi-
cal Physics at the University of Chicago through grants
NSF PHY-0114422 and NSF PHY-0551142 and NASA
ATP NNX15AK22G. PM was additionally supported by
grants NSF PHY-1125897 and NSF PHY-1412261 and
thanks the Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics
where part of this work was performed. Research at
Perimeter Institute is supported by the Government of
Canada through Industry Canada and by the Province
of Ontario through the Ministry of Economic Develop-
ment & Innovation.

Appendix A: Hidden constraints and characteristics

2. Hidden constraints and Kronecker form

12

We present here an algorithm which we use in reveal-
ing hidden algebraic and diﬀerential constraints as well as
determining the characteristic curves. These are curves
along which the equations of motion specify unique solu-
tions for the ﬁelds given their values at initial or bound-
ary points. In principle, our technique can be used for
any set of linear partial diﬀerential algebraic equations
(PDAEs) in 1+1 dimensions.

Analogously to the well-studied case of ordinary dif-
ferential algebraic equations (DAEs), PDAEs are partial
diﬀerential equations where some of the equations repre-
sent constraints. Unlike DAEs, where the constraints are
purely algebraic, for PDAEs they can be algebraic in one
of the dimensions and diﬀerential in the other dimension.
Our method is thus well suited to analyze perturbations
around spherically symmetric solutions with complicated
derivative couplings and nonalgebraic constraints, such
as dRGT. Despite its generality and applicability to a
wide range of problems, we are not aware of its publica-
tion before in the entire form (see [35] for discussion of
PDAEs with algebraic constraints, which provides pieces
of our construction).
In §III A, we provided an executive summary of the
three step technique which we elaborate on here with
a discussion of ﬁelds propagating in regular blocks and
illustrative examples.

1. First order reduction

The ﬁrst step is to rewrite all equations of motion as
ﬁrst order partial diﬀerential equations by introducing
additional ﬁeld variables corresponding to ﬁeld deriva-
tives of the next to highest order. With each new ﬁeld,
we add into the investigated system an equation which
deﬁnes this variable. For example, if any of the equations
of motion contains ¨u, we introduce an additional ﬁeld ut
and supplement the equations of motion with

ut = ˙u.

(A1)

We can choose to introduce ﬁelds in a symmetric fash-
ion regardless of whether they are required for the initial
reduction, i.e. introduce both ut and

ur = u(cid:48).

(A2)

(A3)

This implies a “hidden” consistency relation

t − ˙ur = 0,
u(cid:48)

but we shall see that even if we do not add this con-
sistency relation to the EOMs at the outset, it will be
discovered in the analysis. We organize these equations
into matrix form as

A ˙u + Bu(cid:48) + Cu = 0.

(A4)

The second step is to determine the independent prop-
agating degrees of freedom and form a set of equations
specifying the unique evolution of a well formed system.
If after ﬁnding all algebraic and hidden constraints, the
system remains underdetermined then the system is ill-
formed.

Suppose A is invertible. Then we know that time evo-
lution of the ﬁelds can be speciﬁed by their values on
spatial surfaces. The generalization of this concept for
singular A is that if A + λB is invertible for some choice
of λ then there is some suitable temporal coordinate, e.g.
t(cid:48) = t + λr, where evolution is again deﬁned.
In this
case, A, B are said to form a regular pencil and A + λB
is composed entirely by regular blocks. In such case, we
can proceed directly to the next step to ﬁnd the charac-
teristics or the preferred temporal coordinates associated
with the diﬀerent ﬁelds in the regular block.

If A + λB is singular for any λ, then the evolution
naively looks ill-deﬁned along any curve. In general, a
pencil can be singular because the matrix system contains
either over- or underdetermined blocks or both. For un-
derdetermined blocks, solutions naively are not unique.
For overdetermined blocks, solutions from arbitrary ini-
tial data can in principle be inconsistent. Overdeter-
mined blocks thus hide consistency relations which once
exposed can convert underdetermined blocks into regular
blocks that yield a unique and consistent solution.

We therefore look for consistency relations associated
with the overdetermined blocks to augment the EOMs.
Before turning to the systematic approach, it is worth-
while to discuss why constraints can be hidden in the
overdetermined block. First recall the case of a ﬁrst or-
der ODE. If some linear combination of EOMs contains
no time derivatives, then the remaining structure is ei-
ther 0 = 0 or there is an algebraic relationship between
the ﬁelds. In the former case, the system is trivially over-
constrained indicating that an equation is redundant and
can be removed. In the latter case, one can solve for one
of the ﬁelds and eliminate it from the system or keep all
the ﬁelds but add the derivative of the constraint equa-
tion to the EOMs. Note that the choice of which ﬁeld to
eliminate is somewhat arbitrary and this will be related
to a similar choice for the PDAE system.

In the case of a PDAE, the generalization is that there
can also be equations that lack either temporal or spatial
derivatives but not both.
In this case, the “algebraic”
constraint is really diﬀerential in the other dimension.
It is then not straightforward to eliminate or “integrate
out” a ﬁeld associated with the constraint. On the other
hand, derivatives of the constraint can still add an in-
dependent EOM that evolves the constraint consistently.
This is similar to the presence of secondary constraints
in a Hamiltonian analysis or the diﬀerentiation index of
a DAE.

This notation should not be confused with vectors and
tensors in the spacetime or on the 2 sphere.

The algorithmic way of proceeding is to utilize the
Kronecker decomposition of the singular pencil (see Ap-

pendix B 1 for deﬁnitions and notation).
In terms of
our PDAE, this amounts to choosing a particular lin-
ear combination of ﬁelds v or ﬁeld redeﬁnition and linear
combination of EOMs that exposes the regular, over and
underdetermined blocks. More speciﬁcally given appro-
priate invertible matrices P, Q

v = Q−1u,
˜A = P A Q,
˜B = P B Q,
˜C = P C Q + P A ˙Q + P B Q(cid:48),

(A5)

we can rewrite Eq. (A4) as

˜A ˙v + ˜B v(cid:48) + ˜C v = 0,

(A6)
with the matrix pencil ˜A + λ˜B in the Kronecker form.
Notice that P describes particular linear combinations of
the equations of motion while Q performs linear ﬁeld re-
deﬁnitions. Because in general Q is a function of {t, r}
the linear combinations of the ﬁelds and equations corre-
sponding to the individual Kronecker blocks depend on
the position in the spacetime.
In Kronecker form, the matrix pencil is composed of
blocks. Each LP
µ block is overdetermined — there are
µ ﬁelds and µ + 1 equations. Conversely, each Lµ block
is underdetermined — there are µ + 1 ﬁelds and only µ
equations of motion.

Each overdetermined block hides one constraint and if
it is not already included in the EOMs, we add it. In the
special case that µ = 0, corresponding to a row of zeros
in the Kronecker form, the constraint is algebraic as it
would be for an ODE. In that case, we either eliminate a
ﬁeld or eliminate a redundant equation. If that resolves
the only singular block, we repeat this step and form the
new regular pencil.
The more novel cases are where there are µ ≥ 1 overde-
termined blocks. The case of µ = 1 is instructive and is
the only relevant one for dRGT given its particular sec-
ond order structure. Here the equations in the block take
the form

˙vi + cjvj = 0,
v(cid:48)
i + djvj = 0,

(A7)

for some coeﬃcients cj, dj where summation over re-
peated indices is implicit. We can subtract the time
derivative of the second equation from the spatial deriva-
tive of the ﬁrst equation, again forming an equation
which is ﬁrst order in the derivatives

cjv(cid:48)

j − dj ˙vj + (cj(cid:48) − ˙dj)vj = 0.

(A8)

If this new EOM for the ﬁelds vj is not a linear com-
bination of the existing ones, we add it to the list. For
systems where only µ = 1 overdetermined blocks exist,
these constraints can be found by inspection rather than
by formal Kronecker decomposition. They correspond to
a linear combination of ﬁelds vi which obeys one equa-
tion with no time derivatives and another equation with

no spatial derivatives. In practice to discover such com-
binations it suﬃces to ﬁnd all linear combinations of the
equations of motion which do not contain any spatial or
temporal derivatives siEOMi and tiEOMi respectively.
After we discover all such combinations we can try to
pair them in a way that

13

(A9)

(cid:0)siEOMi

(cid:1) − ∂

∂
∂r

(cid:0)tiEOMi

(cid:1)

∂t

contains no second order derivatives. This is then a valid
ﬁrst order EOM that can be added to the system.

A similar but more involved procedure applies to
overdetermined blocks with µ > 1.
Such structures
hide constraints between ﬁelds at higher order in deriva-
tives and present opportunities to eliminate higher order
terms.
In this case the combination of ﬁelds vi which
appears in the EOMs with no temporal derivatives is not
the same as the combination vj which appears in the
EOMs with no spatial derivatives. Instead the two are
connected by a derivative chain through the LP
µ system
In this case by taking µ − k + 1
of µ + 1 equations.
spatial derivatives and k − 1 temporal derivatives of the
kth equation, one can construct a combination with no
(µ + 1)th order derivatives. Like the µ = 1 system, this
combination involves a constraint on the system with µ
derivatives. The complication is that to cast the system
in ﬁrst order form, auxiliary ﬁelds with µ − 1 derivatives
must be introduced into the system. Nonetheless, since
this introduction amounts to ﬁelds with no extra free-
dom associated with them, the constraint represents a
new equation which if not already in the EOM system
µ block is a (µ + 1) × µ
is added to them. Since each LP
matrix system, once this constraint is found it exhausts
the extra information in the overdetermined block.

After including the new information from all overde-
termined blocks, we place the augmented system in its
ﬁnal Kronecker form. If there are no longer any under-
determined blocks, we proceed to the next step with just
the regular blocks. Overdetermined blocks remain but
consistent evolution of their ﬁelds is now enforced in the
regular block.

If underdetermined blocks still remain, then the EOMs
have no unique solution. In physical systems this is of-
ten due to gauge freedom which has to be ﬁxed. In these
cases, gauge ﬁxing provides new constraints. If adding
them to the EOMs and repeating this step produces a
Kronecker decomposition with only regular and overde-
termined blocks then we can again proceed to the next
step (see §A 5 d for an example).

3. Characteristics

The regular blocks in the ﬁnal Kronecker decomposi-
tion determine the characteristic curves of the system.
Consider the simplest regular block R1(Ω). It describes
the dynamics of a single degree of freedom vi, described

14

that just happen to be the same and degenerate char-
acteristics of a single R2(Ω) regular block. For example,
the former could represent two decoupled wave equations
with luminal characteristics which is clearly a hyperbolic
system as a whole. In the literature, based on the asso-
ciation with a single second order system repeated char-
acteristics themselves are often used as the deﬁnition of
a parabolic system (see e.g. [36]) but this deﬁnition can
not fully distinguish all the possibilities.

4. Field assignment

While the Kronecker decomposition of the matrix pen-
cil is uniquely determined, the matrices P, Q themselves
are not. Since v = Q−1u determines a speciﬁc linear
combination of the original variables u that can be as-
sociated with the various blocks, ﬁeld assignment is not
unique and so is not formally a step in our technique.
On the other hand these transformations are useful for
ﬁnding ﬁeld combinations where ˜C is as block diagonal
as possible so that v is as decoupled as possible. For-
mally there are further transformations ˜P, ˜Q that obey
the group multiplication property

˜PP(A + λB)Q ˜Q = ˜P( ˜A + λ˜B) ˜Q = ˜A + λ˜B,

(A13)

or symmetry that leaves the Kronecker form invariant.
There are two useful transformations ˜Q that are worth
noting. First, ˜Q can be chosen to add linear combinations
of ﬁelds in an overdetermined block to those in a regular
block. For example, given a matrix pencil in Kronecker
form

by the equation

i − Ω ˙vi + cjvj = 0.
v(cid:48)

(A10)

If Ω is real, this equation speciﬁes derivative of vi along
the direction

= −Ω,

dt
dr

(A11)

and so evolves the ﬁeld along this direction. For this
reason the curve deﬁned by Eq. (A11) is a characteristic
curve. When the characteristic curve is aligned with the
time coordinate, formally we would have to set Ω = ∞.
Instead, the Kronecker decomposition of such a regu-
lar block R1(∞) is deﬁned to be of the nilpotent form
through Eq. (B3).

Regular blocks that are of dimension 1 and produce
real characteristics are hyperbolic. Data on a non-
characteristic surface that intersects these curves deﬁnes
a unique solution by integrating their values along the
characteristic curves. If this surface is spacelike then the
subsystem has a well-posed initial value or Cauchy prob-
lem. If all hyperbolic blocks share a common spacelike
non-characteristic surface then their joint Cauchy prob-
lem is well-posed.
If the Ω is complex, then the block
is elliptic and requires solution by relaxation from values
on all boundaries.
If the regular block is higher than dimension 1, then it
is parabolic. The triangular form of Ri produces a chain
of equations

1 − Ω ˙v1 + ··· = 0,
v(cid:48)
2 − Ω ˙v2 − ˙v1 + ··· = 0,
v(cid:48)

i − Ω ˙vi − ˙vi−1 + ··· = 0,
v(cid:48)

...

where the dots in the equations stand for nonderivative
terms. The ﬁrst equation determines the v1 characteris-
tic through Ω just like the hyperbolic counterpart. The
next variable inherits the same characteristic but now
supplies an evolution equation for v1 oﬀ of the character-
istic. This pattern continues through the chain. Unlike
the hyperbolic system we can deﬁne data for the ﬁelds on
a given characteristic and march forwards across charac-
teristics. On each characteristic, which is typically space-
like, information is communicated from one boundary to
the other “instantaneously” with respect to the march-
ing direction. Thus conditions must typically be speciﬁed
at both boundaries. In this sense, a parabolic system is
similar to an elliptic equation along the direction of the
characteristic while sharing the hyperbolic property of
marching data but instead from one characteristic to an-
other. The nilpotent case where Ω = ∞ takes the same
form but with time and space switched. The system as
a whole is hyperbolic if and only if all regular blocks are
hyperbolic.
Note that our analysis distinguishes between character-
istics of two independent regular blocks {R1(Ω), R1(Ω)}

(A12)

˜A + λ˜B = {LP

1 , R1(Ω)} =

we have ˜P( ˜A + λ˜B) ˜Q = ˜A + λ˜B for all

 1

0

˜P =

0 0
1 0
−CΩ C 1

 ,

1

0
0

λ
0 λ − Ω

(cid:32)

˜Q =

1
0
−C 1

 ,
(cid:33)

(A14)

,

(A15)

where C(t, r) is an arbitrary real function. Given that the
two columns correspond to v1, v2 for C = 0 we now ﬁnd
that the regular block can correspond to any ﬁeld com-
bination ˜v2 = v2 + Cv1. In general variables in overde-
termined blocks may always be added to regular blocks.
When there are two regular blocks with the same Ω
or characteristic curve, we can perform an additional
transformation which keeps the Kronecker form invari-
ant. Let us assume the Kronecker decomposition reveals
two regular blocks {Ri(Ω), Rj(Ω)}. Each block repre-
sents a derivative chain of the form (A12). For clarity,
let us assign the v variables associated with the ﬁrst as
x1, ... , xi and to the second as y1, ... , yj. Starting from
y1 and combining it with xk+1, oﬀset in its own chain by

any max(0, i − j) ≤ k < i, we can take sequential linear
combinations

The equations of motion for the given Lagrangian

(A19) read

15

˜xk+1 = xk+1 + Cy1,

...

˜xi = xi + Cyi−k,

(A16)

where again C(t, r) is an arbitrary real function. The
evolution equations for ˜xi are still of the form (A12). The
Kronecker structure is thus unchanged by this operation
despite the ﬁeld redeﬁnition. The corresponding ˜P, ˜Q can
easily be derived using these linear combinations.

Notice that we can have i = j and k = 0, where we
take linear combinations of the whole blocks, and also
x = y, in which case we perform ﬁeld redeﬁnitions within
a single regular block by sequentially adding lower ﬁelds
in the chain to higher ﬁelds. Conversely, ﬁelds in regular
blocks with diﬀerent characteristics Ωi (cid:54)= Ωj cannot in
general be mixed.

5. Examples

We now illustrate the procedure with several illus-
trative examples. We begin with the canonical exam-
ples from second order linear PDEs: the wave, heat and
Laplace equations. We then give an example of an under-
determined system: gravitational waves in general rela-
tivity where the gauge is left unspeciﬁed. Finally we
provide examples where hidden constraints reduce the
number of propagating degrees of freedom or the order
of derivatives in a coupled set of EOMs by eliminating
phase space degrees of freedom.

a. Wave equation

equation

¨f − f(cid:48)(cid:48) = 0,

whose Lagrangian is in the simplest form by

L = ˙f 2 − f(cid:48)2.

(A17)

(A18)

Since complicated Lagrangians often hide simpler ones
due to the presence of constraints, let us illustrate our
algorithm with an alternate form

L = ˙f 2 − 4f(cid:48)h + 4h2.

(A19)

Obviously, in this case we can directly read oﬀ the EOM
for h

h =

f(cid:48)
2

,

(A20)

integrate h out of the Lagrangian, and recover the stan-
dard form of (A18). Our analysis below basically does
the same, but through the algorithm above.

First, let us apply the above algorithm to the wave

pencil is

¨f − 2h(cid:48) = 0,
−f(cid:48) + 2h = 0.

(A21)

We can reduce this system to ﬁrst order form by intro-
ducing ft, fr through

which we append to the EOMs written in terms of these
ﬁelds

˙f − ft = 0,
f(cid:48) − fr = 0,

˙ft − 2h(cid:48) = 0,
−fr + 2h = 0.

 1 0 0

0
λ 0 0
0
0 1 0 −2λ
0
0 0 0

 .

A + λB =

(A22)

(A23)

(A24)

The matrix pencil for the ﬁelds u = (f, ft, fr, h)T is

The presence of a row of zeros indicates an LP
0 overdeter-
mined structure and hence a constraint. In this case it is
a simple algebraic constraint h = fr/2, consistent with
our earlier discussion. Eliminating h with the constraint
we are left with

˙f − ft = 0,
EOM1 :
EOM2 : f(cid:48) − fr = 0,
r = 0.
EOM3 :

˙ft − f(cid:48)

(A25)

If we started with the usual form of the wave equa-
tion (A17), we would arrive directly to this set of equa-
tions after step 1.

Now for the ﬁeld vector u = (f, ft, fr)T the matrix

 1 0

0
λ 0
0
0 1 −λ

 .

A + λB =

(A26)

This is a singular pencil representing the fact that there
is no explicit evolution equation for fr. However in ad-
dition to the one underdetermined block represented by
the third row there is one overdetermined block speciﬁed
by the ﬁrst column.
A simple rearrangement of rows, vectors and sign con-
ventions would place this in Kronecker form with one L1
and one LP
1 block, but is not necessary to see that there is
a hidden constraint. There is only one linear combination
of these EOMs which has no spatial derivatives, EOM2
itself and one which has no temporal derivatives, EOM3
itself. Matching these two together is straightforward
and is accomplished by diﬀerencing the complementary
derivatives, generating a consistency constraint
EOM4 : ∂r(EOM1) − ∂t(EOM2) = ˙fr − f(cid:48)

t = 0. (A27)

Given that there is only one LP
1 block the addition of this
independent equation completes the system and supplies
the missing evolution equation for fr.

Adding the constraint to the EOMs, we now have the

pencil

This pencil has the original LP
1 block in the ﬁrst column
but instead of an underdetermined L1 block we now have
a 2 × 2 block that contains only regular pieces. With

 , (A29)

A + λB =

1 0

0
0 1
0
0 0 − 1
0 0 − 1

2

2 − 1

2

P =

 .

0
0
λ 0
0
1 −λ
0
0 −λ 1

 1
 , Q =
1

λ
0 λ − 1
0

0
0

0
0

1
2

0

0 1 −1
0 1 1

1 0 0
 .

0
0
0

λ + 1

we can put the pencil into its Kronecker form

˜A + λ˜B = {LP

1 , R1(1), R1(−1)}

=

(A30)

In agreement with the expectations, the regular blocks

possess two luminal characteristics

= ±1,

dt
dr

(A31)
with ﬁeld content v = [f, (fr + ft)/2, (fr − ft)/2]T . Each
block is hyperbolic in the sense that we can propagate
one boundary condition along the characteristic curve.
In the overdetermined block we have equations for ˙f
and f(cid:48) that can be integrated self-consistently on any
curve given fr±ft. In fact, the appearance of the ﬁelds in
the regular block is not unique. Since we have implicitly
integrated out f , we could add an arbitrary mixture of
it back into the dynamical ﬁelds fr ± ft + c±f which
mathematically does not change the Kronecker structure
or the characteristics. This illustrates the fact that P, Q,
and v are not unique even though counting of the degrees
of freedom and the identiﬁcation of their characteristics
is.

b. Heat equation

As the next example, consider the heat equation

˙f − f(cid:48)(cid:48) = 0,

(A32)

where f is usually associated with temperature. Step 1
is the reduction to a ﬁrst order system. We can either

16

choose to just introduce fr = f(cid:48) or also introduce ft = ˙f
to obtain a symmetric set.

Let us start with the ﬁrst case. Here the ﬁeld vector is

u = (f, fr)T , the EOMs are

(A28)

and the corresponding matrix pencil is already in Kro-
necker form

EOM1 : f(cid:48) − fr = 0,
r − ˙f = 0,
EOM2 : f(cid:48)
(cid:32)

(cid:33)

(A33)

A + λB = R2(0) =

λ 0
−1 λ

,

(A34)

with a single characteristic curve

dt
dr

= 0.

(A35)

The repeated characteristics in the block also represent
the well-known fact that the heat equation is parabolic.
Characteristics are constant time slices and instead of
deﬁning initial conditions on a non-characteristic surface,
one speciﬁes them on an initial time slice. The second
equation, which is the original EOM, then propagates
this information forward in time. To fully deﬁne the
system, we also require two spatial boundary conditions
since information propagates instantaneously across the
time slice.

Now consider the second case where we introduced ft

as a second auxiliary ﬁeld. In that case the EOMs are

˙f − ft = 0,
EOM1 :
EOM2 : f(cid:48) − fr = 0,
EOM3 : ft − f(cid:48)
r = 0.

(A36)

With the ﬁeld vector u = (f, ft, fr)T , the matrix pencil
is

 1 0

0
λ 0
0
0 0 −λ

 .

A + λB =

(A37)

This corresponds to an overdetermined block in the ﬁrst
1 , an underdetermined L0 block in the second
column LP
column and a regular block in the third.

Again the overdetermined block hides the same consis-

tency constraint as the wave equation
t − ˙fr = 0

EOM4 : f(cid:48)

(A38)

and completes the underdetermined block to a larger reg-
ular block

 1 0

0
λ 0
0
0 0 −λ
0 λ −1

 .

A + λB =

(A39)

The Kronecker form for this pencil is achieved by choos-
ing

The associated Weierstrass form has the identity I2 for
the ˜B2 matrix so we switch the rows by multiplying on
the left with

(cid:32)

(cid:32)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

0 −1
1 0

Since

S2A2 =

S2 =

0 1
1 0

.

(A46)

is diagonalizable, it can be placed into Jordan form with
its eigenvectors. We can immediately see that the eigen-
values of Eq. (A47) are imaginary and the eigenvector
matrix Q2 is complex. Explicitly the 2 × 2 block comes
into canonical form with

˜A2 = Q−1
˜B2 = Q−1

2

S2A2Q2 = P2A2Q2,
S2B2Q2 = Q−1

I2Q2 = I2,
so that putting the blocks together, we have

2

2

1 0 0 0

0 1 0 0
0 0 1 i
0 0 1 −i

P =

and

 , Q =
 1

=

 1

0 0

0 − i
0

2

1
2

1
2

i
2

 ,
 .

0
λ
0
0 λ − i
0
0

0
0
0

λ + i

˜A + λ˜B = {LP

1 , R1(i), R1(−i)}

17

(A47)

(A48)

(A49)

(A50)

1 0 0 0

0 1 0 0
0 0 −1 0
0 0 0 1

P =

and reads

0 0 1
0 1 0

 , Q =
 ,
1 0 0
 .
1

0
0
λ 0
0
0 λ 0
0 −1 λ

(A40)

(A41)

˜A + λ˜B = {LP

1 , R2(0)} =

In this method we recover the same regular block and
characteristic curves as before but now associated with
(fr, ft).

c. Laplace equation

The Laplace equation

¨f + f(cid:48)(cid:48) = 0,

(A42)

is the canonical example of a system where there are no
real characteristics in the regular block. For consistency
of our notation we keep labeling the coordinates (t, r)
though as we shall see such a case does not have an initial
value formulation and hence physically is associated with
problems with two spatial dimensions.
Since the only diﬀerence with the wave equation is a
change in sign of f(cid:48)(cid:48), we skip directly to step 2 with the
hidden constraint added

˙f − ft = 0,
EOM1 :
EOM2 : f(cid:48) − fr = 0,
˙ft + f(cid:48)
r = 0,
EOM3 :
t − ˙fr = 0,
EOM4 : f(cid:48)
which has the pencil for u = (f, ft, fr)T

1 0

0
λ 0
0
0 1 λ
0 λ −1

 .

A + λB =

Notice the absence of real characteristic curves, which
is a well-known feature of the Laplace equation. There
are no preferred paths of information propagation and so
solution at each spacetime point inﬂuences the solution
at all other points. Thus the Laplace equation cannot be
solved by integrating initial data along characteristics as
information from all boundaries determines the solution.
An attempt to solve the system as a Cauchy problem
is ill-posed since the normal modes grow exponentially;
typical initial data will blow up at the future time inﬁnity
unless boundary conditions are enforced there.

(A43)

(A44)

In this case, we explicitly show how to construct P and
Q to highlight how a set of real but coupled ﬁrst order
PDEs can lack real characteristics. Since the ﬁrst two
rows are already in the correct form, we can focus our
attention to the 2 × 2 lower right subblock

(cid:32)

(cid:33)

(cid:32)

(cid:33)

d. GR and gauge freedom

Next we investigate gravitational waves in general rel-
ativity around a Minkowski background in spherical co-
ordinates

ds2 = −dt2 +(cid:0)dr2 + r2dΩ2

(cid:1) .

(A51)

2

A2 + λB2 =

1 0
0 −1

+ λ

0 1
1 0

.

(A45)

The expansion of the Einstein-Hilbert action is given by
(19). Therefore our RWZ analysis for dRGT also applies

to this case if we set A = Λ = 0 and a = b = 1.
particular Eq. (34) for the odd modes reduces to

In

LGR
B =

h0

˙h1 +

1
r

1
4

( ˙h1 − h(cid:48)
0)2 +
− ((cid:96) − 1)((cid:96) + 2)
(cid:112)((cid:96) − 1)((cid:96) + 2)

4r2

h2
1 +

(cid:18)

+

4r2

(cid:96)((cid:96) + 1)

(cid:18)

0

4r2 h2
2 − h(cid:48)2
˙h2

1

2 +

16r2
˙h2 − h1h(cid:48)

h0

(A52)

(cid:19)

2
r2 h2

2

(cid:19)

2 +

h1h2

.

2
r

The three equations of motion can be written as ﬁrst
order diﬀerential equations if we introduce six additional
ﬁelds hit, hir, i ∈ {0, 1, 2}, and their deﬁning equations

˙hi − hit = 0,
i − hir = 0.
h(cid:48)
Each of these is an LP
1 overdetermined block and they
together contain three hidden consistency equations

(A53)

˙hir − h(cid:48)

it = 0.

(A54)

There is an additional LP
1 block in the Kronecker de-
composition, however the additional constraint is a tau-
tology. We have thus incorporated all of the additional
constraints.

The Kronecker decomposition then reads
1 , R1(1), R1(−1)}.

˜A + λ˜B = {L2, 4 × LP

(A55)
The presence of the underdetermined L2 block shows
the equations of motion are not suﬃcient to determine
uniquely the evolution of all ﬁelds. This is not surprising
as the general relativity Lagrangian (A52) is diﬀeomor-
phism invariant and contains a gauge symmetry

h0(t, r) → h0(t, r) + ˙Λ(t, r),
h1(t, r) → h1(t, r) + Λ(cid:48)(t, r) − 2
r
h2(t, r) → h2(t, r) + 2Λ(t, r),

Λ(t, r),

(A56)

where Λ(t, r) is an arbitrary function. Because in our
analysis we did not ﬁx this gauge freedom, the redundant
modes appear in the ﬁnal Kronecker decomposition.

The next step is to remove this gauge freedom. As
an example, we choose h2 = 0. This gauge constraint
when added to the system as an EOM is formally an
LP
0 overdetermined block. Following our algorithm and
eliminating h2 from the system reveals two additional
algebraic constraints

h2t = h2r = 0,
(A57)
coming from one LP
1 block which turned into two LP
0
blocks upon integrating h2 out. Eliminating these con-
straints is the same as erasing h2 from the original higher
order EOM system at the outset. Notice that gauge ﬁx-
ing after obtaining the EOMs still retains an equation

18

of motion associated with h2; we comment on this sub-
tlety below. After eliminating these three variables, the
Kronecker system is

˜A + λ˜B = {L2, 2 × LP

0 , 3 × LP
1 }.

(A58)

The LP
0 blocks represent algebraic constraints that can be
used to complete the underdetermined block to a regular
block.
In the previous Kronecker decomposition these
equations correspond to the R1(±1) blocks which now
both turn into the same algebraic constraint LP

0

h0t − h1r = 0,

(A59)

which means one of them is redundant. Elimination of
h0t and the redundancy turns a previously underdeter-
mined L2 block into two regular 1 × 1 blocks. At this
point, no underdetermined blocks remain, all the infor-
mation in the overdetermined blocks is extracted and the
analysis is ﬁnished; the ﬁnal decomposition reads

˜A + λ˜B = {3 × LP

1 , R1(1), R1(−1)}.

(A60)

The two regular blocks have luminal characteristics, as
expected.

Finally, this example also illustrates a subtlety about
gauge ﬁxing. Gauge ﬁxing can always be safely per-
formed at the equations of motion level. Notice though
that if the h2 = 0 gauge were ﬁxed directly at the La-
grangian level, we would never vary with respect to it and
would lose an equation of motion. Gauge ﬁxing directly
in the Lagrangian should only be performed if the equa-
tion of motion that is lost is redundant. In cases where it
is not, the system of remaining EOMs is incomplete and
does not fully describe the physical system (see §III C of
[31] for examples).
In the case considered here, we arrive at correct answer
even when we ﬁx the gauge through setting h2 → 0 in the
Lagrangian. This is because the information contained
in the gauge-ﬁxed h2 EOM is exactly Eq. (A59). The
h2 EOM is in fact responsible for the redundancy of the
identical LP
0 blocks in Eq. (A58). More generally, one
can set a ﬁeld to zero by using gauge freedom if its gauge
transformation does not involve derivatives of the gauge
function.*1 For this reason, the gauge ﬁxing to unitary
gauge in the dRGT quadratic Lagrangian using Eq. (16)
is a valid procedure which does not lose information in
the St¨uckelberg EOMs.

e. Propagating vs derivatively-constrained ﬁelds

A general quadratic Lagrangian for two ﬁelds with
maximally two derivatives typically propagates two de-
grees of freedom. However, as we show with the following

*1 We thank Teruaki Suyama for discussion on this point.

example, this counting can be mistaken due to hidden
derivative constraints. The Lagrangian for dRGT de-
scribed in the main text is a more advanced case of the
same phenomenon.

Let us investigate the Lagrangian
1 + ˙q0)2 − 2q2

L = (q(cid:48)

0 + q(cid:48)

0 + 8q2
1.

(A61)

The two equations of motion contain second deriva-
tives,
therefore we introduce four additional ﬁelds
q0r, q0t, q1r, q1t, where as before subscript determines
which derivative is taken, as well as the deﬁnitional
EOMs

EOM1 : ˙q0 − q0t = 0,
0 − q0r = 0,
EOM2 : q(cid:48)
EOM3 : ˙q1 − q1t = 0,
1 − q1r = 0,
EOM4 : q(cid:48)

(A62)

associated with them. As usual these deﬁnitions provide
2 × LP

1 blocks that hide the consistency constraints

EOM5 : q(cid:48)
EOM6 : q(cid:48)

0t − ˙q0r = 0,
1t − ˙q1r = 0.

(A63)

Finally the original equations of motion in the ﬁrst order
variables can be written as
0r + q(cid:48)
0r − q(cid:48)

1r + 2 ˙q0r + ˙q0t + ˙q1r = 0,
1r − ˙q0r = 0.

EOM7 : 2q0 + q(cid:48)
EOM8 : 8q1 − q(cid:48)

(A64)

This system of equations has the structure

˜A + λ˜B = {L2, 3 × LP
1 }

(A65)

and so hides an additional LP

1 constraint associated with

It is useful to recall for the comparison that follows that
the full EOMs can be constructed as ˜A ˙v + ˜Bv(cid:48) + ˜Cv = 0,
where here

19



3 −1
6 − 1

2
3

3

2

1

0 −1
0
0 − 2
0
0
0 − 1
0
0
0
0
0
2
8
0
0 −8
0
0 −12 0
0
0

1
3
0
0
0
0

4

1
3
0
0
0
0



˜C =

.

(A70)

This example also illustrates the alternative analysis in
Appendix C in a simpler setting. The Lagrangian (A61)
is equivalent to

L = −Q2 + 2Q (q(cid:48)

0 + q(cid:48)

1 + ˙q0) − 2q2

0 + 8q2
1,

(A71)

as we can recover (A61) by plugging in the EOM for Q,
i.e. Eq. (A66). After integration by parts, the q0 and q1
EOMs become constraints
q0 = − 1
(Q(cid:48) + ˙Q),
2
Q(cid:48),
1
8

(A72)

q1 =

which are themselves linear combinations of the overde-
termined EOMs for Q associated with the LP
1 block given
by the 5th and 6th rows of Eq. (A70). We can then
rewrite (A71) as
L =

˙Q2 + ˙QQ(cid:48) +

Q(cid:48)2 − Q2,

(A73)

1
2

3
8

Q = q0r + q1r + q0t,

(A66)

which gives an EOM

exactly the combination that appears in the term in
brackets of Eq. (A61). Equating its mixed derivatives
gives

∂t (EOM8 − EOM5) + ∂r (EOM7 + EOM8) =

2 (q0r + 4q1r + 4q1t) = 0.

(A67)

This algebraic constraint allows us to integrate out q1t
and convert the L2 block into regular blocks. The ﬁnal
Kronecker decomposition of the 8 equations and 5 vari-
ables reads

˜A + λ˜B = {3 × LP

1 , R1(−2), R1

(A68)

(cid:0)− 2

3

(cid:1)}.

Notice that the system contains two regular blocks indi-
cating just a single propagating degree of freedom. Two
initial conditions on a joint noncharacteristic surface sup-
plies suﬃcient information to determine uniquely the evo-
lution of the system, despite the form of the Lagrangian
(A61) which contains two ﬁelds with second derivatives.
The speciﬁc construction above leads to the ﬁeld combi-
nations in the various blocks

v = {q0, q1, Q, 3

4 q0r − 3

2 q1r,− 3

4 q0r − 3

2 q1r}T .

(A69)

¨Q + 2 ˙Q(cid:48) +

3
4

Q(cid:48)(cid:48) + 2Q = 0,

(A74)

that is of course compatible with the original form (A66)
once Eq. (A72) is backsubstituted. The two methods are
thus equivalent despite the fact that Q is considered an
overdetermined variable in one and a propagating vari-
able in the other.
Combining the EOM (A74) with two consistency con-
ditions d ˙Q = ¨Qdt + Q(cid:48)(cid:48)dr and dQ(cid:48) = ˙Q(cid:48)dt + Q(cid:48)(cid:48)dr, we

obtain  1

2

3
4
dt dr 0
0 dt dr



 ¨Q

˙Q(cid:48)
Q(cid:48)(cid:48)

 =

 .
−2Q

d ˙Q
dQ(cid:48)

(A75)

The dt/dr values for which the matrix on the left hand
side cannot be inverted deﬁne the characteristic curves:

dt
dr

= 2,

2
3

,

(A76)

which are consistent with those from the Kronecker form
(A68).

f. Constrained higher order systems

Our Kronecker analysis also assists in identifying cases
where the EOMs appear to be of higher order and require
extra initial data or degrees of freedom but due to hid-
den constraints are really of a lower order [37, 38]. For
example, Ref. [39] illustrate this phenomenon with the
coupled higher order DAE system for the ﬁelds {φ, q}

20
The special case is when b2 − ak1 = 0. The system
is singular since there is no evolution equation for u3.
This represents a column of zeros in the A matrix or
equivalently an L0 underdetermined structure, but at the
same time we gain a constraint from EOM6. So the 6× 6
system is

{L0, LP

0 , 5 × R1(∞)}.

(A83)

a

....
φ − k0

q − c¨q − vφ = 0,
...
¨φ + b
...
φ + c ¨φ + wq = 0,
k1 ¨q + b
where {a, b, c, k0, k1, v, w} are constants.
Since these
equations are ODEs in time our “matrix pencil” A+λB =
A. Kronecker blocks in this case can have no λ and thus
0 and R1(∞). Note that the Kro-
only contain L0, LP
necker decomposition of A + λC is sometimes also used
to decouple, solve or study the stability of ﬁelds in blocks
in the DAE but we will not address that use here.

(A77)

We perform our ﬁrst order reduction

u1 ≡ q,

EOM1 : u2 = ˙u1(= ˙q),
EOM2 : u3 = ˙u2(= ¨q),

u4 ≡ φ,

EOM3 : u5 = ˙u4(= ˙φ),
EOM4 : u6 = ˙u5(= ¨φ),
...
EOM5 : u7 = ˙u6(=
φ ),

We can resolve the constraint by solving for the next
highest derivative if k0k1 − c2 (cid:54)= 0

u6 =

cwu1 − bwu2 − k1vu4

k0k1 − c2

,

(A84)

which brings EOM4 to

EOM4 : ˙u5 =

cwu1 − bwu2 − k1vu4

k0k1 − c2

.

(A85)

The constraint (A84) also gives ˙u6 which converts EOM5
to another constraint

u3 = k1

cvu4 + bvu5 − k0wu1
1 − c2k1 − b2w
k0k2

.

(A86)

Eliminating u3 by assuming the denominator does not
vanish brings EOM2 to

cvu4 + bvu5 − k0wu1
1 − c2k1 − b2w
k0k2

.

(A87)

EOM2 : ˙u2 = k1

(A78)

The system is now a

so that the original EOMs (A77) are

EOM6 : a ˙u7 − k0u6 + b ˙u3 − cu3 − vu4 = 0,
EOM7 : k1u3 + bu7 + cu6 + wu1 = 0.

(A79)
We therefore start with a 7 × 7 system with 5 deﬁning
equations and 2 original EOMs.

{LP

The original Kronecker structure is
0 , 6 × R1(∞)}.
We can see immediately that the LP
0 block is associated
with EOM7 which contains no derivatives. We use this to
eliminate the highest order derivative term u7 assuming
b (cid:54)= 0

(A80)

u7 = − k1
b

u3 − c
b

u6 − w
b

(cid:16)

which turns EOM6 into
˙u3 − c
b

(b2 − ak1)

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

u3

=

u1,

c2(cid:17)

(A81)

u6 + bvu4

bk0 − a
b
− a
b

cwu1 + awu2,

(A82)

{4 × R1(∞)}

(A88)

regular system of EOM1−4 containing 4 hyperbolic
blocks. All of the highest derivative ﬁeld have been elim-
inated by constraints hidden in the original EOMs. We
can of course also rewrite this as two coupled second or-
der diﬀerential equations for u1 and u4, i.e. the original φ
and q. The utility of this approach for higher order sys-
tems is the algorithmic method of discovering constraints
which in this case could have been done by inspection.

Appendix B: Decomposition techniques

Here we review the decomposition techniques for reg-
ular or singular matrix pencils in §B 1 and for tensors on
the 2-sphere in §B 2. In the main text and Appendix A,
the former is used to block diagonalize and character-
ize the derivative structure of a set of partial diﬀerential
equations of motion. The latter is used to decouple the
parity and angular momentum modes of metric ﬂuctua-
tions.

after using the deﬁnitional EOMs (A78). For generic
parameters, the resulting 6×6 system is regular since this
supplies the evolution equation for ˙u3. As a whole, the
evolution of 6 ﬁelds (3 phase space DOFs) are uniquely
speciﬁed by initial values.

1. Kronecker decomposition of matrix pencil

Given two matrices A, B of the same dimensions, their
linear combination A + λB is called a matrix pencil. If

21

2. Angular harmonics

The normal modes or harmonic functions for tensorial
ﬁelds on the 2-sphere are classiﬁed by their transforma-
tion properties under a general rotation deﬁned by Euler
angles. Following Ref. [42] (see also [43]), we can decom-
pose any trace free totally symmetric tensor of rank s on
the 2 sphere into its spin ±s components ±sf ( ˆn) as

Ta1...as = (sf ) ¯ma1 ... ¯mas + (−sf )ma1 ... mas ,

(B8)

where the covariant complex unit vectors on the sphere

(cid:32)

(cid:33)

(cid:32)

(cid:33)

ma =

1√
2

1

i sin θ

,

¯ma =

1√
2

1

−i sin θ

,

(B9)

obey the conjugate orthonormality property

(B2)

mama = ¯ma ¯ma = 0,

ma ¯ma = 1.

(B10)

Angular indices are raised and lowered by the metric σab
on the 2-sphere and the antisymmetric Levi-Civita tensor
ab converts the real and imaginary parts

Explicitly,

(cid:32)

σab =

0

1
0 sin2 θ

 b
a mb = ima,
a ¯mb = −i ¯ma.
 b
(cid:32)

(cid:33)

,

ab =

0

− sin θ

(B11)

.

(B12)

(cid:33)

sin θ

0

Note that ma ¯mb + ¯mamb = σab. In this Appendix, we
employ ˆn to denote the radial unit vector speciﬁed by
the angular coordinates {θ, φ} and integrals over d ˆn as
integrals over angles on the 2-sphere. A right handed
rotation of the coordinate axis around ˆn by ψ changes
the spin functions by a phase e−isψ. These deﬁnitions
apply to s = 0 scalar functions as well but note that
Eq. (B8) implies the convention T = 0f + −0f = 20f . In
this case the complete set of modes for T are the spherical
harmonics Y(cid:96)m.

The spin-s functions can likewise be decomposed into
multipole moments based on their transformation prop-
erties under the remaining Euler angles, i.e. a rotation
of the pole of the spherical coordinates. The normal
modes are generalizations of spherical harmonics called
spin spherical harmonics [42] that obey the orthonormal-

d ˆn(sY ∗

(cid:96)(cid:48)m(cid:48))(sY(cid:96)m) = δ(cid:96)(cid:96)(cid:48)δmm(cid:48),

(B13)

there exists a λ for which A + λB is invertible then it
is called a regular pencil and can be placed into a block
diagonal Weierstrass form [40] of r regular subblocks with
invertible matrices P and Q

P(A + λB)Q ={Rµ1 , ... , Rµr} .

As a shorthand convention, we denote a block diagonal
concatenation of matrices diag{A1, ... , An} as just the list
of its subblocks {A1, ... , An}. Here each regular subblock
Rµ is a µ × µ matrix pencil deﬁned by the generalized
eigenvalue Ω. For ﬁnite Ω

Rµ(Ω) ≡ λIµ − Jµ(Ω),

(B1)
where Iµ is a µ × µ identity matrix and Jµ(Ω) is a µ × µ
lower Jordan block of the form



Ω
1 Ω
. . .

. . .
1 Ω

 ,

Jµ(Ω) =

whereas for the special case Ω = ∞

Rµ(∞) ≡ λNµ − Iµ.

(B3)
Here Nµ = Jµ(0) is a nilpotent lower Jordan matrix with
Ω = 0.
Kronecker form [41] with invertible matrices P and Q

If the matrix pencil is singular, it can still be cast into

, ... , LP

µo

,

µ1

(B4)
where u is the number of “underdetermined” µ × (µ + 1)
pencils of the form

Rµ1, ... , Rµr

P(A + λB)Q =(cid:8)Lµ1, ... , Lµu , LP
(cid:9),
 ,
 .

λ 1


. . .
λ 1

Lµ =

. . .

1

and o is the number of “overdetermined” (µ + 1) × µ
pencils of the pertransposed Lµ form,

(B5)

λ

LP
µ =

. . .
. . . 1
λ
0 are formally 0 × 1
The degenerate cases of L0 and LP
and 1 × 0 matrices which stand for a column or row of
zeros in the block diagonal form respectively.

(B6)

ity property(cid:90)

the conjugation property

Finally as a short hand convention, we denote for ex-

ample

sY ∗

(cid:96)m = (−1)m+s−sY(cid:96)(−m),

{4 × L1} = {L1, L1, L1, L1},

(B7)

and the parity property

if there are repeated identical block structures.

sY(cid:96)m( ˆn) = (−1)(cid:96)−sY(cid:96)m(− ˆn)

(B14)

(B15)

where (cid:96) ≥ s and −(cid:96) ≤ m ≤ (cid:96). Rotation of the coor-
dinate origin mixes the m moments of a given angular
momentum (cid:96).
Thus the s ≥ 1 tensor eigenstates of a given angu-
lar momentum ((cid:96), m) with even parity X = E and odd
parity X = B are given by

Y X
(cid:96)m,a1...as

= sf X

(cid:96)m ¯ma1 ... ¯mas + −sf X

(cid:96)mma1 ... mas , (B16)

where the spin functions are

(cid:96)m = −i(sf B
sf E

(−1)s,

(cid:96)m) = sY(cid:96)m√
2
−sY(cid:96)m√
2

(cid:96)m) =

−sf E

(cid:96)m = i(−sf B

.

(B17)

By virtue of the analogous spin relations above, the ten-
sors satisfy the orthonormality relation

d ˆnY X∗

(cid:96)m,a1...as

Y X(cid:48),a1...as
(cid:96)(cid:48)m(cid:48)

= δ(cid:96)(cid:96)(cid:48)δmm(cid:48)δXX(cid:48) (B18)

(cid:90)

and the conjugation relation

Y X∗
where X ∈ E, B.

(cid:96)m,a1...as

= (−1)mY X

(cid:96)(−m),a1...as

,

(B19)

Covariant diﬀerentiation on these tensors raise and
lower the spin weights according to the ladder operators
(cid:48)
∂,

(cid:48)
∂ [42]

∇bTa1...as = − ¯ma1 ··· ¯mas

¯mb

−ma1 ··· mas

¯mb

(cid:48)
√
∂ + mb
(cid:48)
√
∂ + mb

2

2

(cid:48)
∂

(cid:48)
∂

sf

−sf. (B20)

In particular, their action on the spin harmonics gives

∂sY(cid:96)m =(cid:112)((cid:96) − s)((cid:96) + s + 1) s+1Y(cid:96)m,
∂sY(cid:96)m = −(cid:112)((cid:96) + s)((cid:96) − s + 1) s−1Y(cid:96)m.

(cid:48)
(cid:48)

22

To make a connection with the RWZ literature, we
can use Eq. (B20) to relate the covariant derivative of
the scalar harmonics to the vector harmonics

Y E
(cid:96)m,a =

,

Y B
(cid:96)m,a =

, (B22)

and likewise the second derivative to the rank-2 tensor
harmonics [44]

ba∇bY(cid:96)m

(cid:112)(cid:96)((cid:96) + 1)
(cid:19)

∇aY(cid:96)m(cid:112)(cid:96)((cid:96) + 1)
(cid:18)

((cid:96) − 2)!
((cid:96) + 2)!
((cid:96) − 2)!
((cid:96) + 2)!

1
2

2

(cid:115)
(cid:115)

Y E
(cid:96)m,ab =

Y B
(cid:96)m,ab =

∇a∇b − 1
2

σab∇c∇c

Y(cid:96)m,

(c

b∇a∇c + c

a∇b∇c) Y(cid:96)m.

Eq. (B20) also provides identities for integrals of scalar
contractions of covariant derivatives of tensors over the

2-sphere(cid:90)
(cid:90)
(cid:90)
(cid:90)

(cid:96)(cid:48)m(cid:48)

(cid:96)m,a1...as

)(∇bY X(cid:48),a1...as
d ˆn(∇bY X∗
)
= δ(cid:96)(cid:96)(cid:48)δmm(cid:48)δXX(cid:48)[(cid:96)((cid:96) + 1) − s2],
)Y X(cid:48),a1...as
d ˆn(∇as Y X∗
(cid:96)(cid:48)m(cid:48)
((cid:96) − s + 1)((cid:96) + s)

(cid:96)m,a1...as−1

(cid:114)

= δ(cid:96)(cid:96)(cid:48)δmm(cid:48)δXX(cid:48)
d ˆn(∇bY X∗

(cid:96)m,a1...as

= δ(cid:96)(cid:96)(cid:48)δmm(cid:48)δXX(cid:48)
d ˆn(∇bY X∗

(cid:96)m,a1...as

2

,

)(∇as Y X(cid:48),a1...as−1b
)
((cid:96) − s)((cid:96) + s + 1)

(cid:96)(cid:48)m(cid:48)

,

2

(cid:114)

)(∇cY X(cid:48),a1...asbc

)

(cid:96)(cid:48)m(cid:48)
((cid:96) − s)((cid:96) + s + 1)

= −δ(cid:96)(cid:96)(cid:48)δmm(cid:48)δXX(cid:48)

(cid:114)

×

((cid:96) + s + 2)((cid:96) − s − 1)

2

2

,

(B23)

which are used in the main text to determine how the
various spin components are coupled through the equa-
tions of motion.

(B21)

Appendix C: Alternative odd analysis

In this appendix we highlight the diﬀerence between the odd mode analysis in §IV C and an alternative analysis
employing a technique of auxiliary ﬁelds, which is commonly used in the literature [25–28, 30]. See also Appendix A 5 e
for a simpler example of the general technique.

The general B mode Lagrangian (34) is given explicitly by

LB = D1h2

0 + D2h2

1 + D3h2
0 + D11h1h(cid:48)

+D10h1h(cid:48)

2 + D4h0h1 + D5h0h2 + D6h1h2 + D7( ˙h1 − h(cid:48)
2 + D12h0

˙h1 + D13h0

˙h2,

0)2 + D8

2 + D9h(cid:48)2
˙h2

2

(C1)

where the Di coeﬃcients in terms of the background metric and St¨uckelberg ﬁelds are

D1 =

D2 =

D3 =

a2(cid:2)3r2 ˙a2 − 2rb(cid:48)b + Ar2b2 ¯χ22 + (cid:96)((cid:96) + 1)b2 (cid:3) + 2ra(cid:48)ab (b − rb(cid:48)) + r2a(cid:48)2b2 − Λr2a4b2
−a2(cid:2)r2 ˙a2 − 2rb(cid:48)b + ((cid:96) − 1)((cid:96) + 2)b2(cid:3) + 2ra(cid:48)ab (rb(cid:48) + b) + r2a(cid:48)2b2 + r2a4(cid:0)Λb2 + A ¯χ11
(cid:1)
−a2(cid:2)4r2 ˙a2 + b2(cid:0)Ar2 ¯χ22 − 2(cid:1)(cid:3) + 4r2a(cid:48)2b2 + 8ra(cid:48)ab2 + r2a4(cid:0)2Λb2 + A ¯χ11
(cid:112)((cid:96) − 1)((cid:96) + 2) (ra(cid:48) + a) b
(cid:112)((cid:96) − 1)((cid:96) + 2)b

(cid:112)((cid:96) − 1)((cid:96) + 2) ˙a

16r4a5b

4r2a3b3

4r2a5b

2r2a2b

2ra3b

2r3a4

(cid:1)

,

,

,

, D5 = −
, D9 = − b

, D6 =
, D11 = −

16r2a3 , D10 =

˙a
a2b

4r2a3

,

, D12 =

D4 = − 4 ˙a(ra(cid:48) + a) + Ara2 ¯χ12

D7 =

D13 =

1
4ab

, D8 =

(cid:112)((cid:96) − 1)((cid:96) + 2)

16r2ab

1

.

4r2ab

23

(ra(cid:48) + a)

ra2b

,

(C2)

Parts proportional to A are contributions from the dRGT potential term in the quadratic Lagrangian (18). Naturally,
this potential term aﬀects only the coeﬃcients of nonderivative terms D1, D2, D3, and D4. The remaining parts of
the coeﬃcients Di are inherited from the Einstein-Hilbert Lagrangian and the eﬀective cosmological constant Λ.
0 − ˙h1)2
enables us to introduce an auxiliary ﬁeld and obtain a dynamically equivalent unconstrained Lagrangian with only
two dynamical ﬁeld variables. The ﬁrst step is to complete the square of derivative terms of h0 and h1 in Eq. (34) as

While we cannot integrate out either h0 or h1 from the Lagrangian (34) directly, the peculiar structure (h(cid:48)

Next introduce an auxiliary ﬁeld q deﬁned to be

LB = D7

˙h1 − h(cid:48)

0 +

D12
2D7

h0 − D10
2D7

h1

+ ··· .

LB = − q2
D7

+ 2q

˙h1 − h(cid:48)

0 +

(cid:19)

+ ··· .

D12
2D7

h0 − D10
2D7

h1

Clearly, the equation of motion for q is given by

q = D7

˙h1 − h(cid:48)

0 +

D12
2D7

h0 − D10
2D7

1 − ˙h0)2 term
and we recover Eq. (C3) by plugging Eq. (C5) back into Eq. (C4). In this way, the problematic (h(cid:48)
in Eq. (34) can be eﬀectively hidden inside the terms of Eq. (C4), while the remaining derivatives on h0, h1 can be
moved onto q through integration by parts. After all the algebra, we get a Lagrangian without derivatives on h0, h1

0 + ˆD2h2

2 + ˆD4h0h1 + D5h0h2 + D6h1h2 + D8

2 + D9h(cid:48)2
˙h2

2 + D11h1h(cid:48)

2 + D13h0

˙h2

(C6)

LB = ˆD1h2
− 1
D7

1 + D3h2
D12
D7

qh0 − D10
D7

q2 +

qh1 − 2 ˙qh1 + 2q(cid:48)h0,

where the equal sign should be interpreted as the same up to boundary terms from integrating the respective La-
grangians by parts. Due to the integrations by parts

((cid:96) − 1)((cid:96) + 2) + Ar2 ¯χ22

,

4r2ab

−((cid:96) − 1)((cid:96) + 2)b2 + Ar2a2 ¯χ11

ˆD1 = D1 − D2
12
4D7
ˆD2 = D2 − D2
10
4D7

ˆD4 = D4 +

D12D10

2D7

=

− D(cid:48)
12
2
− ˙D10
2
= − A ¯χ12
2ab

=

4r2a3b

.

,

(C7)

Notice that the case of (cid:96) = 1 is special; for this reason, we consider (cid:96) = 1 and (cid:96) ≥ 2 separately.

(cid:18)

(cid:18)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)2

(cid:19)

h1

,

(C3)

(C4)

(C5)

For modes with (cid:96) ≥ 2, we can integrate h0, h1 out by using their equations of motion. The end result reads

ˆD4[−2 ˙q + D6h2 + D11h(cid:48)

h0 = −
h1 = − 2 ˆD1[2 ˙q − D6h2 − D11h(cid:48)

1. Odd (cid:96) ≥ 2 EOMs

(cid:104)
q] − 2 ˆD2
2 − D10
(cid:104)
D7
4 − 4 ˆD1 ˆD2
ˆD2
q] + ˆD4
2 + D10
D7
4 − 4 ˆD1 ˆD2
ˆD2

2q(cid:48) + D13

˙h2 + D5h2 + D12
D7

q

2q(cid:48) + D13

˙h2 + D5h2 + D12
D7

q

(cid:105)

(cid:105)

,

.

24

(C8)

The coeﬃcient in the denominator is

4 − 4 ˆD1 ˆD2 =
ˆD2

((cid:96) − 1)((cid:96) + 2)

(cid:2)((cid:96) − 1)((cid:96) + 2) + Ar2a2 Tr ¯χ(cid:3) ,

4r4a4

(C9)
and is typically nonzero for (cid:96) ≥ 2. However, there are positions in spacetime where (C9) vanishes and we cannot
solve for h0, h1 through Eq. (C8). Because Tr ¯χ is an invariant quantity, we cannot avoid this problem by going into
another slicing of the background spacetime as we did in our main analysis. Outside of these problematic points, by
plugging solutions (C8) into the Lagrangian (C6) it is possible to obtain an unconstrained Lagrangian with only two
degrees of freedom q, h2 and with no more than second derivatives. This Lagrangian then leads to two second order
equations of motion for q, h2. Characteristic curves for these EOMs can be then found in a standard way [36] by
focusing only on the second derivative terms in the two equations of motion and determining where the EOMs fail to
determine their values given the lower derivatives. Similarly to (A75), requiring four consistency conditions such as

d(q(cid:48)) = q(cid:48)(cid:48)dr + ˙q(cid:48)dt,

(C10)

2 , ˙h(cid:48)

where the left hand side is assumed to be continuous, leads to a linear system of six equations for the six unknown
second derivatives q(cid:48)(cid:48), ˙q(cid:48), ¨q, h(cid:48)(cid:48)
2, ¨h2. For general values of the inﬁnitesimal displacement vectors dt, dr this system
has a unique solution. For special ratios dt/dr which correspond to the characteristic curves the system allows for
multiple solutions and the highest derivatives are not uniquely deﬁned. Characteristic curves obtained this way agree
with the curves obtained by our main analysis. Note that this alternate procedure does not on its own distinguish
between two R1 subsystems which share characteristics and the R2 system identiﬁed in our main analysis. Likewise
since the discontinuity identiﬁed here is only in the highest derivatives, the analysis does not address the chained
derivatives in the R2 block that link characteristics.

For (cid:96) = 1, there is no spin-2 h2 mode so that Eq. (C6) becomes

2. Odd (cid:96) = 1 EOMs

LB,(cid:96)=1 = ˆD1h2

0 + ˆD2h2

1 + ˆD4h0h1 − q2
D7

+

D12
D7

qh0 − D10
D7

qh1 − 2 ˙qh1 + 2q(cid:48)h0.

(C11)

Note that the coeﬃcients ˆD1, ˆD2, ˆD4 in Eq. (C7) are proportional to m2 for (cid:96) = 1, which makes the following analysis
diﬀerent from general relativity. Variation of Eq. (C11) with respect to h0, h1, q yields

(C14)
4 − 4 ˆD1 ˆD2 = 0 for (cid:96) = 1 from Eq. (C9), we cannot solve Eqs. (C12) and (C13) for h0 and h1. Instead we ﬁrst

0 = 0.

Since ˆD2
solve (C12) for h0:

.

(C15)

D12
2 ˆD1h0 + ˆD4h1 +
D7
ˆD4h0 + 2 ˆD2h1 − D10
D7
˙h1 − 2D7h(cid:48)

q + 2q(cid:48) = 0,
q − 2 ˙q = 0,

−2q + D12h0 − D10h1 + 2D7

(cid:18)

q + 2q(cid:48)(cid:19)

h0 = − 1
2 ˆD1

ˆD4h1 +

D12
D7

(C12)

(C13)

Plugging Eq. (C15) into Eq. (C13), we obtain an autonomous equation

˙q +

ˆD4
2 ˆD1

q(cid:48) +

1

2D7

D10 +

q = 0.

(cid:32)

(cid:33)

ˆD4D12
2 ˆD1

(cid:18) q(cid:48)

(cid:19)(cid:48)

ˆD1

25

(C16)

(cid:19)(cid:48)(cid:35)

q.

(C17)

Here, by the virtue of ˆD2

(cid:34)(cid:32) ˆD4

2 ˆD1

˙h1 +

ˆD4
2 ˆD1

h(cid:48)
1 +

4 − 4 ˆD1 ˆD2 = 0, the h1 term drops out. Finally, from Eq. (C14) we obtain
(cid:33)(cid:48)

(cid:33)(cid:35)

(cid:32)

(cid:34)

− 1
2D7

D10 +

ˆD4D12
2 ˆD1

h1 = −

+

1
D7

+

D2
12

4D1D2
7

−

(cid:18) D12

2D1D7

Note that the source term in the right-hand side is written in terms of q. Therefore, given background evolution, we
can ﬁrst solve Eq. (C16) for q(t, r), plug it into Eq. (C17) to solve for h1(t, r), and then Eq. (C15) gives h0(t, r). As we
have two ﬁrst-order diﬀerential equations, we require two initial conditions to solve the system. It is straightforward
from Eq. (C16) and (C17) to check that the characteristic curves corresponding to these two equations are the same
as those uncovered in our main analysis.

A structurally similar set of equations was uncovered for the two (cid:96) = 0 modes in isotropic gauge [17, 34]. There
one of the isotropic modes δΓ formed an autonomous equation; this mode then sourced the second isotropic mode
δf . Unlike here, both these equations were manifestly ﬁrst order, with δΓ sourcing δf through a term without any
derivatives. In the present analysis we see h1 sourced by up to second derivatives of q. Because of this derivative
sourcing, this system is an R2 parabolic block whereas (cid:96) = 0 is a 2 × R1 pair of hyperbolic blocks.

3. Odd (cid:96) = 1 Hamiltonian analysis

The (cid:96) = 1 odd Lagrangian is simple enough to also perform the Hamiltonian analysis. From (C11), the canonical

momenta for q, h0, h1 are given by

and yield three primary constraints:

pq = −2h1,

p0 = 0,

p1 = 0,

φq = pq + 2h1, φ0 = p0, φ1 = p1.

The only nonvanishing Poisson bracket between them is

{φq, φ1} = 2.

The total Hamiltonian density is given by

(C18)

(C19)

(C20)

HT = ˙qpq + ˙h0p0 + ˙h1p1 − LB,(cid:96)=1 + µqφq + µ0φ0 + µ1φ1,
D10
D7

1 − ˆD4h0h1 +

q2 − D12
D7

= − ˆD1h2

0 − ˆD2h2

1
D7

qh0 +

qh1 − 2q(cid:48)h0 + µqφq + µ0φ0 + µ1φ1,

(C21)

where µq, µ0, µ1 are Lagrange multipliers. The consistency conditions are then given by

q +

D12
D7

0 ≈ ˙φq = {φq,HT} = − 2
h0 − D10
D7
D7
0 ≈ ˙φ0 = {φ0,HT} = 2 ˆD1h0 + ˆD4h1 +
D12
D7
0 ≈ ˙φ1 = {φ1,HT} = 2 ˆD2h1 + ˆD4h0 − D10
D7

h1 + 2µ1,
q + 2q(cid:48),
q − 2µq.

From ˙φq ≈ 0 and ˙φ1 ≈ 0 we can solve for µ1 and µq, while from ˙φ0 ≈ 0 we obtain a secondary constraint

φ2 = 2 ˆD1h0 + ˆD4h1 +

q + 2q(cid:48).

D12
D7

(C22)

(C23)

Poisson brackets of φ2 with the remaining constraints are

+ 2{q(cid:48), pq},

{φ2, φq} =
D12
D7
{φ2, φ0} = 2 ˆD1,
{φ2, φ1} = ˆD4.

26

(C24)

Therefore, the consistency condition of φ2 gives a relation between µq, µ0, µ1 and does not generate a further
constraint. The determinant of the Poisson brackets between constraints is given by

(C25)
So long as ˆD1 = A ¯χ22/(4ab) (cid:54)= 0, all four constraints are second class. Therefore, the number of initial conditions we
need is 3 × 2 − 4 = 2, which is consistent with two ﬁrst-order EOMs for q and h1 obtained above.

det{φi, φj} = 16 ˆD2
1.

Finally by using the constraints φi = 0, we can express

h1 = − pq
2

,

h0 =

ˆD4pq/2 − D12q/D7 − 2q(cid:48)

2 ˆD1

,

and rewrite the Hamiltonian on the constrained surface in terms of q, pq

HT = − (2 ˆD1D10 + ˆD4D12)q + 2 ˆD4D7q(cid:48)

4 ˆD1D7

pq +

D2

12 + 4 ˆD1D7
4 ˆD1D2
7

q2 +

qq(cid:48) +

D12
ˆD1D7

q(cid:48)2.

1
ˆD1

(C26)

(C27)

The quadratic term p2
from below.

q vanishes because of ˆD2

4 − 4 ˆD1 ˆD2 = 0. This Hamiltonian is linear in pq and thus unbounded

[1] C. de Rham, G. Gabadadze,

and A. J. Tolley,
Phys.Rev.Lett. 106, 231101 (2011), arXiv:1011.1232
[hep-th].

[2] C. de Rham, G. Gabadadze, L. Heisenberg,

D. Pirtskhalava, Phys.Rev. D83,
arXiv:1010.1780 [hep-th].

103516

and
(2011),

[13] H. Motohashi and T. Suyama, Phys.Rev. D86, 081502

(2012), arXiv:1208.3019 [hep-th].

[14] P. Gratia, W. Hu,

and M. Wyman, Phys.Rev. D89,

027502 (2014), arXiv:1309.5947 [hep-th].

[15] N. Khosravi, G. Niz, K. Koyama, and G. Tasinato, JCAP

1308, 044 (2013), arXiv:1305.4950 [hep-th].

[3] K. Koyama, G. Niz, and G. Tasinato, Phys.Rev.Lett.

[16] A. E. Gumrukcuoglu, C. Lin, and S. Mukohyama, JCAP

107, 131101 (2011), arXiv:1103.4708 [hep-th].

1203, 006 (2012), arXiv:1111.4107 [hep-th].

[4] A. E. Gumrukcuoglu, C. Lin, and S. Mukohyama, JCAP

[17] P. Motloch, W. Hu, A. Joyce, and H. Motohashi, Phys.

1111, 030 (2011), arXiv:1109.3845 [hep-th].

Rev. D92, 044024 (2015), arXiv:1505.03518 [hep-th].

[5] K. Koyama, G. Niz, and G. Tasinato, Phys.Rev. D84,

[18] S. Deser and A. Waldron, Phys.Rev.Lett. 110, 111101

064033 (2011), arXiv:1104.2143 [hep-th].

(2013), arXiv:1212.5835 [hep-th].

[6] T. Nieuwenhuizen, Phys.Rev. D84, 024038 (2011),

[19] S. Deser, K. Izumi, Y. Ong, and A. Waldron, Phys.Lett.

arXiv:1103.5912 [gr-qc].

B726, 544 (2013), arXiv:1306.5457 [hep-th].

[7] L. Berezhiani, G. Chkareuli, C. de Rham, G. Gabadadze,
(2012),

and A. Tolley, Phys.Rev. D85,
arXiv:1111.3613 [hep-th].

044024

[8] G. D’Amico, C. de Rham, S. Dubovsky, G. Gabadadze,
D. Pirtskhalava, et al., Phys.Rev. D84, 124046 (2011),
arXiv:1108.5231 [hep-th].

[21] S. Deser, K.

[20] S. Deser, M. Sandora, A. Waldron, and G. Zahariade,
Phys.Rev. D90, 104043 (2014), arXiv:1408.0561 [hep-th].
and A. Waldron,
Mod.Phys.Lett. A30, 1540006 (2015), arXiv:1410.2289
[hep-th].

Izumi, Y. Ong,

[22] S. Deser, A. Waldron, and G. Zahariade, Phys. Lett.

[9] P. Gratia, W. Hu,

and M. Wyman, Phys.Rev. D86,

B749, 144 (2015), arXiv:1504.02919 [hep-th].

061504 (2012), arXiv:1205.4241 [hep-th].

[10] T. Kobayashi, M. Siino, M. Yamaguchi, and D. Yoshida,
Phys.Rev. D86, 061505 (2012), arXiv:1205.4938 [hep-th].
(2012),

[11] M. S. Volkov, Phys.Rev. D86,

061502

arXiv:1205.5713 [hep-th].

[23] T. Regge and J. A. Wheeler, Phys. Rev. 108, 1063 (1957).
[24] F. J. Zerilli, Phys. Rev. Lett. 24, 737 (1970).
[25] A. De Felice, T. Suyama, and T. Tanaka, Phys. Rev.

D83, 104035 (2011), arXiv:1102.1521 [gr-qc].

[26] H. Motohashi and T. Suyama, Phys. Rev. D84, 084041

[12] M. S. Volkov, Phys.Rev. D86,

104022

(2012),

(2011), arXiv:1107.3705 [gr-qc].

arXiv:1207.3723 [hep-th].

[27] H. Motohashi and T. Suyama, Phys. Rev. D85, 044054

27

(2012), arXiv:1110.6241 [gr-qc].

[28] T. Kobayashi, H. Motohashi, and T. Suyama, Phys. Rev.

neers and Scientists, Second Edition, (Taylor & Francis,
2001).

D85, 084025 (2012), arXiv:1202.4893 [gr-qc].

[37] T.-j. Chen, M. Fasiello, E. A. Lim, and A. J. Tolley,

[29] T. Kobayashi, H. Motohashi, and T. Suyama, Phys. Rev.

JCAP 1302, 042 (2013), arXiv:1209.0583 [hep-th].

D89, 084042 (2014), arXiv:1402.6740 [gr-qc].

[38] M. Zumalacrregui and J. Garca-Bellido, Phys. Rev. D89,

[30] H. Ogawa, T. Kobayashi,

and T. Suyama,

(2015),

064046 (2014), arXiv:1308.4685 [gr-qc].

arXiv:1510.07400 [gr-qc].

[39] D. Langlois and K. Noui, JCAP 1602, 034 (2016),

[31] P. Motloch and W. Hu, Phys.Rev. D90, 104027 (2014),

arXiv:1510.06930 [gr-qc].

arXiv:1409.2204 [hep-th].

[40] B. Kagstrom, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 973, 30

[32] P. Gratia, W. Hu, and M. Wyman, Class.Quant.Grav.

(1983).

30, 184007 (2013), arXiv:1305.2916 [hep-th].

[41] P. V. Dooren, Linear Algebra and its Applications 27,

[33] E. Babichev, (2016), arXiv:1602.00735 [hep-th].
[34] M. Wyman, W. Hu,

and P. Gratia, Phys.Rev. D87,

084046 (2013), arXiv:1211.4576 [hep-th].

[35] W. Martinson, Index and Characteristic Analysis of Par-
tial Diﬀerential Equations, Ph.D. thesis, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (1999).

[36] J. Hoﬀman and S. Frankel, Numerical Methods for Engi-

103 (1979).

[42] J. Goldberg, A. Macfarlane, E. Newman, F. Rohrlich,

and C. Sudarshan, J. Math. Phys. 8, 2155 (1967).

[43] T. Okamoto and W. Hu, Phys. Rev. D67, 083002 (2003),

arXiv:astro-ph/0301031 [astro-ph].

[44] M. Kamionkowski, A. Kosowsky, and A. Stebbins, Phys.
Rev. D55, 7368 (1997), arXiv:astro-ph/9611125 [astro-
ph].

