Draft version March 14, 2016
Preprint typeset using LATEX style emulateapj v. 11/26/03

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
0
1

 
 
]

.

A
G
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
2
3
4
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

KMOS3D: DYNAMICAL CONSTRAINTS ON THE MASS BUDGET IN EARLY STAR-FORMING DISKS∗
Stijn Wuyts1, Natascha M. F¨orster Schreiber2, Emily Wisnioski2, Reinhard Genzel2,3,4, Andreas Burkert5,

Kaushala Bandara2, Alessandra Beifiori2,5, Sirio Belli2, Ralf Bender2,5, Gabriel B. Brammer6, Jeffrey Chan2,

Ric Davies2, Matteo Fossati5,2, Audrey Galametz2, Sandesh K. Kulkarni2, Philipp Lang2, Dieter Lutz2, J.

Trevor Mendel2, Ivelina G. Momcheva6, Thorsten Naab7, Erica J. Nelson8, Roberto P. Saglia2,5, Stella Seitz5,
Linda J. Tacconi2, Ken-ichi Tadaki2, Hannah ¨Ubler2, Pieter G. van Dokkum8, David J. Wilman5,2, Eva Wuyts2

Draft version March 14, 2016

ABSTRACT

We exploit deep integral-ﬁeld spectroscopic observations with KMOS/VLT of 240 star-forming disks
at 0.6 < z < 2.6 to dynamically constrain their mass budget. Our sample consists of massive (&
109.8 M⊙) galaxies with sizes Re & 2 kpc. By contrasting the observed velocity and dispersion
proﬁles to dynamical models, we ﬁnd that on average the stellar content contributes 31% of the total
dynamical mass, with a signiﬁcant spread among galaxies (68th percentile range fstar ∼ 16 − 60%).
Including molecular gas as inferred from CO- and dust-based scaling relations, the estimated baryonic
mass adds up to 63% of total for the typical galaxy in our sample. We conclude that baryons make up
most of the mass within the disk regions of high-redshift star-forming galaxies, with nearly all disks
at z > 2 being strongly baryon-dominated within Re. Substantial object-to-object variations in both
stellar and baryonic mass fractions are observed among the galaxies in our sample, larger than what
can be accounted for by the formal uncertainties in their respective measurements. In both cases, the
mass fractions correlate most strongly with measures of surface density. High Σstar galaxies feature
stellar mass fractions closer to unity, and systems with high inferred gas or baryonic surface densities
leave less room for additional mass components other than stars and molecular gas. Our ﬁndings
can be interpreted as more extended disks probing further (and more compact disks probing less far)
into the dark matter halos that host them. However, a non-negligible tail of the derived baryonic
mass fraction distribution reaching into the unphysical fbar > 1 regime may in addition hint at more
eﬃcient star formation in high surface density disks than adopted in our methodology.
Subject headings: galaxies: evolution - galaxies: high-redshift - galaxies: kinematics and dynamics

1. INTRODUCTION

Measurements of mass and mass growth with cosmic
time are key ingredients to any theory of galaxy for-
mation and evolution.
In the local universe, decades
of intensive studies have culminated in a census of the
stellar, molecular gas and atomic gas content of galax-
ies (e.g., Cole et al. 2001; Keres et al. 2003; Martin et
al. 2010), as well as their respective spatial distributions
on subgalactic scales (e.g., Zibetti et al. 2009; Leroy et
al. 2009; Walter et al. 2008). Likewise, constraints on
the total dynamical mass budget of galaxies from kine-
matic and/or lensing studies have come a long way since
the pioneering work on rotation curves by Rubin et al.

1 Department of Physics, University of Bath, Claverton Down,

Bath, BA2 7AY, UK

2 Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur extraterrestrische Physik, Postfach

1312, Giessenbachstr., D-85741 Garching, Germany

3 Department of Physics, Le Conte Hall, University of Califor-

nia, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA

4 Department of Astronomy, Hearst Field Annex, University of

California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA

5 Universit¨ats-Sternwarte M¨unchen, Scheinerstr. 1, M¨unchen,

D-81679, Germany

6 Space Telescope Science Institute, 3700 San Martin Drive, Bal-

timore, MD 21218, USA

7 Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Astrophysik, Karl Schwarzschildstr.

1, D-85748 Garching, Germany

8 Astronomy Department, Yale University, New Haven, CT

06511, USA

* Based on observations collected at the European Organisation
for Astronomical Research in the Southern Hemisphere under ESO
programmes 092.A-0091, 093.A-0079, 094.A-0217, 095.A-0047, and
096.A-0025.

(1978) and Bosma (1978), placing constraints on central
dark matter fractions and/or stellar mass-to-light ratios
of both spiral and elliptical galaxies (see, e.g., Courteau
& Dutton 2015 and references therein; notably Bershady
et al. 2011; Martinsson 2013a,b; Barnab`e et al. 2011,
2012; Brewer et al. 2012; Thomas et al. 2011; Cappellari
et al. 2012, 2013, 2016). Indications from the above stud-
ies are that nearby spiral disks are baryon-dominated at
the center and dark-matter dominated in their outskirts,
with the baryonic mass fraction at a given radius being
larger for more massive systems. The stellar initial mass
function (IMF) may vary from a Chabrier (2003) IMF
in spiral disks to a more bottom-heavy, Salpeter (1955)
IMF in the central regions of massive ellipticals (see also
van Dokkum & Conroy 2010).

In comparison, eﬀorts to establish a census of the mass
budget in (and the spatial distribution of its respective
components within) galaxies at higher lookback times are
still in their infancy. Among the various baryonic con-
stituents, estimates of the stellar mass content have prob-
ably matured most. Extensive multi-wavelength imag-
ing data sets such as provided by the UltraVISTA (Mc-
Cracken et al. 2012) and CANDELS (Grogin et al. 2011;
Koekemoer et al. 2011) surveys have yielded a mass-
complete census of galaxy-integrated stellar masses out
to the peak of cosmic star formation more than 10 bil-
lion years ago (e.g., Ilbert et al. 2013; Muzzin et al.
2013), and even shed light on the spatial distribution
of stellar mass within those early galaxies (Wuyts et al.
2012; Lang et al. 2014). Nevertheless, the same caveats

2

as present locally, regarding systematic uncertainties in
the derived stellar masses, apply to all lookback studies.
These include, but are not limited to, the adopted IMF,
assumptions regarding star formation histories and dust
attenuation, and calibrations of the input stellar popula-
tion synthesis (SPS) models.

Progress in understanding the molecular gas content of
distant galaxies has come more recently, with the focus
of the sub-mm community shifting gradually from rare,
exceptionally luminous infrared galaxies to samples that
are inherently fainter but more representative of the gen-
eral underlying population. While direct measurements
of the molecular gas mass function remain a challenge,
impressive leaps forward have been made in establish-
ing cold gas scaling relations based on CO and dust ob-
servations that can be used to ‘populate’ the complete
underlying galaxy population with molecular gas masses
(Genzel et al. 2015; see also Tacconi et al. 2010, 2013;
Daddi et al. 2010a,b; Carilli & Walter 2013). These ob-
servations showed that molecular gas is an increasingly
important contributor to the total mass budget within
galaxies at higher lookback times (see also Berta et al.
2013), with gas mass fractions of ∼ 0.33 at z ∼ 1.2 and
∼ 0.47 at z ∼ 2.2 (e.g., Tacconi et al. 2013). Here,
too, certain caveats apply, such as the calibration of the
CO-to-H2 conversion factor (e.g., Wolﬁre et al. 2010;
Krumholz et al. 2011; Genzel et al. 2012; Magnelli et
al. 2012; Bolatto et al. 2013) and the excitation correc-
tion (e.g., Narayanan & Krumholz 2014) on the CO side,
and the dust-to-gas ratio for inferences based on the far-
infrared continuum (e.g., Leroy et al. 2011; R´emy-Ruyer
et al. 2014; Groves et al. 2015). On a spatially resolved
level, the ﬁrst attempts to map the molecular gas mass
distribution within distant galaxies have recently been
presented (Tacconi et al. 2013; Genzel et al. 2013; Fre-
undlich et al. 2013), with more to come from ALMA.

While due to the high pressure of the interstellar
medium (ISM) atomic gas is believed to be a relatively
minor ingredient within the visible extent of the high-
surface density galaxies observed at redshifts z ∼ 1 to 2,
a direct conﬁrmation of this expectation has to await the
Square Kilometer Array (and out to z ∼ 1 its pathﬁnders
MEERKAT and ASKAP).

In light of the potential systematics involved in esti-
mating both the stellar and gaseous components (and
their spatial distribution), independent dynamical mea-
surements provide a welcome ’reality check’. Conversely,
given suﬃcient precision (or trust) in the baryonic mea-
surements, kinematic constraints on the enclosed mass
may reveal the presence of hidden mass such as dark mat-
ter, and provide a test of the stellar initial mass function.
At the minimum, baryonic masses should not grossly ex-
ceed the total amount of mass inferred dynamically to
be present within a given radius.

For quiescent galaxies, such tests have recently been
carried out out to z ∼ 2, suggesting stellar mass frac-
tions of order 50% (modulo IMF uncertainties), with
a substantial object-to-object scatter (van de Sande et
al. 2013; Bezanson et al. 2013). Here, the typical ap-
proach is to assume spherical symmetry, and adopt a ge-
ometric factor linking the direct observables (galaxy size
and velocity dispersion) to the dynamical mass (Mdyn).
Possible rotational components (Newman et al. 2015)
and velocity dispersion anisotropies (van der Marel 1991)

may in reality complicate the interpretation of quiescent
galaxy kinematics, but are by lack of constraints rarely
incorporated in high-redshift studies.

An additional factor of consideration in the case of
star-forming galaxies, is that their mass budget has a sig-
niﬁcant contribution by a gaseous component, negligible
in quiescent systems. Moreover, star-forming galaxies
(SFGs) are not spherical systems dominated by random
motions, but generally show patterns of ordered disk ro-
tation, albeit at high redshift with a signiﬁcant dispersion
and hence non-negligible pressure support component
(F¨orster Schreiber et al. 2009; Wisnioski et al. 2015),
making the translation between the observed line-of-sight
velocity and the enclosed dynamical mass sensitive to in-
clination. Precise determinations of the inclination can
furthermore be complicated by the often clumpy morpho-
logical appearance of high-redshift galaxies, even when
they exhibit ordered disk rotation (F¨orster Schreiber et
al. 2011).

As we will argue in this paper, the degeneracy between
mass and inclination impacting observed radial veloci-
ties can in part be addressed by analyzing the kinematic
properties of large samples of homogeneously selected
distant galaxies. The advent of KMOS, a new multi-
object near-infrared integral-ﬁeld spectrograph on the
VLT, makes such an approach uniquely possible (see also
Stott et al. 2016). Multi-object slit-based spectroscopy
with MOSFIRE provides an alternative means to inves-
tigating the mass budget in distant galaxies (Price et
al. 2016), and complementary VLT/MUSE observations
have shed light on the lower mass counterparts (Con-
tini et al. 2015). Here, we exploit deep KMOS imag-
ing spectroscopy obtained during the ﬁrst 5 semesters
of the KMOS3D program (PI N. M. F¨orster Schreiber;
Wisnioski et al. 2015) to contrast the observed Hα kine-
matics of 240 star-forming disks at 0.6 < z < 2.6 to dy-
namical models based on their stellar mass and gas con-
tent, informed by high-resolution HST CANDELS obser-
vations of their structure.

The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we
brieﬂy describe the observations and lay out the selec-
tion of our sample.
In Section 3, we give an overview
of the methodologies used to construct velocity and dis-
persion proﬁles, model the dynamics, and estimate the
baryonic mass content. We present distributions of stel-
lar and baryonic mass fractions, as well as relations be-
tween dynamical and stellar/baryonic masses in Section
4.1. Section 4.2 addresses whether uncertainties and po-
tential biases in inclination can account for the inferred
missing mass, and Section 4.3 discusses the relation be-
tween mass fractions and other galaxy properties such as
redshift and surface density. After considering system-
atic uncertainties (Section 4.4), we view our ﬁndings in
the light of expectations from the cosmological hydrody-
namical simulation Illustris (Section 5), and summarize
our ﬁndings on the mass budget in early star-forming
disks in Section 6.

Throughout this paper, we assume a Chabrier (2003) ini-
tial mass function (IMF) and adopt the following cosmo-
logical parameters: (ΩM , ΩΛ, h) = (0.3, 0.7, 0.7).

3

Fig. 1.— Our kinematic sample of SFGs at z ∼ 0.9 (blue ﬁlled circles), z ∼ 1.5 (green ﬁlled circles) and z ∼ 2.3 (red ﬁlled circles) in
diagrams of SFR, redshift, and size as a function of stellar mass. For reference, open circles mark the remaining KMOS3D galaxies with
Hα detections observed between October 2013 and January 2016, and dots represent the underlying galaxy population in the same mass
and redshift range. Our galaxies span the entire ’main sequence’ of star formation.

2. OBSERVATIONS AND SAMPLE

2.1. KMOS3D

The central

ingredient of our analysis is the kine-
matic information, using Hα as a tracer, provided by
the KMOS3D survey (PI N. M. F¨orster Schreiber). For
an in depth description of the survey strategy, data qual-
ity and handling, we refer the reader to Wisnioski et al.
(2015). Here, we brieﬂy summarize some of its key fea-
tures. KMOS3D targets spanning a wide dynamic range
in mass, star formation rate (SFR) and color were se-
lected from the three CANDELS/3D-HST ﬁelds within
reach from the VLT: GOODS-South, COSMOS, and
UDS. High-quality grism redshifts by 3D-HST (Bram-
mer et al. 2012; Momcheva et al. 2015) guarantee the
Hα emission line to be free of OH sky line contamina-
tion. We target z ∼ 0.9 galaxies using the Y J grating,
z ∼ 1.5 galaxies in H, and z ∼ 2.3 galaxies in K. The
observations are deep, ranging from 3 to 20 hours on
source, with median exposure times of 4.7 hours in Y J,
7.8 hours in H, and 8.3 hours in K. Typical seeing con-
ditions varied from 0.′′4 to 0.′′8 in the near infrared, with
a median for the data set explored here of 0.′′5, as moni-
tored real time by PSF stars positioned on three of the 24
IFU arms. The data reduction was carried out using the
standard software package for KMOS: SPARK (Davies
et al. 2013), complemented with in-house custom IDL
codes.

2.2. Ancillary Data

In addition to the KMOS3D observations, our analysis
fundamentally relies on the wealth of multi-wavelength
data already available in the CANDELS/3D-HST ﬁelds.
We make use of the multi-wavelength optical-to-8µm
photometric catalogs by the 3D-HST team (Skelton et
al. 2014), extended with the Spitzer/MIPS and Her-
schel/PACS photometry at longer wavelengths provided
by Whitaker et al. (2014) and PEP + GOODS-Herschel
(Lutz et al. 2011; Magnelli et al. 2013). Stellar masses,
SFRs and other galaxy properties based thereupon were
derived following identical procedures as outlined by
Wuyts et al.
(2011b). A ﬁnal key ingredient to our
analysis is the WFC3 data obtained by the CANDELS
multi-cycle program (Grogin et al. 2011; Koekemoer et

al. 2011), providing a high-resolution view on the rest-
frame optical structure of our galaxies.

2.3. Sample deﬁnition

From the total sample of 407 targets for which Hα
emission was detected during our 10/2013 - 01/2016 ob-
servations (a success rate of > 75%), we conservatively
selected a sample of 240 galaxies with clear velocity gra-
dients and suﬃcient signal-to-noise and spatial extent in
Hα to merit a detailed kinematic analysis including ﬁt-
ting of disk dynamical models. 106 of these reside in
the redshift range 0.6 < z < 1.1. The 1.3 < z < 1.7
bin counts 42 galaxies (as H band observations started
later in our program). The remaining 92 sources span
the range 2.0 < z < 2.6.

Figure 1 showcases some of their key properties. The
galaxies we analyze sample the SFR - mass ‘main se-
quence’ relation (Noeske et al. 2007; Daddi et al. 2007;
Elbaz et al. 2007) at their respective redshifts (SSF R &
0.7/tHubble), and are broadly conﬁned to stellar masses
above ∼ 109.8 M⊙ and sizes (major axis eﬀective radii in
the H band) larger than ∼ 2 kpc. Within this region of
parameter space, the KMOS3D success rate in obtaining
Hα detections is 92%.

A further 89 KMOS3D galaxies in the same region of
SFR - mass and size - mass parameter space were de-
tected in Hα, but excluded from our sample. In roughly
equal numbers, the reason for these conservative cuts
were insuﬃcient signal-to-noise, the absence of a clean
rotational pattern with unambiguous kinematic axis, and
oﬀsets between kinematic and morphological position an-
gles exceeding 40◦. The latter often coincide with orien-
tations that are too face-on to be constraining in terms of
disk dynamical modeling (see also Wisnioski et al. 2015).
The axial ratio distribution of excluded objects in the
same region of SFR-size-mass parameter space as our
core sample of 240 galaxies spans a large range from 0.2
to 1.0. It is slightly skewed toward rounder shapes for
the aforementioned reason. Six objects were weeded out
on the basis of a clear merger morphology for which no
meaningful axial ratio (and hence inclination) could be
measured, and in which case the framework of disk ro-
tation probing the potential well depth may in any case
not be appropriate.

4

3. METHODOLOGY

The approach we take in this paper is not to ﬁt a
full-ﬂedged dynamical model to the observed kinemat-
ics, leaving free a large number of parameters (e.g., to-
tal mass, inclination, spatial mass and light distribution)
and possibly degeneracies between them.
Instead, we
construct dynamical models based on the inclination and
size of the galaxies, known from rest-optical HST im-
agery. We ﬁt those to the observed kinematics, leaving
just two parameters free: the (dynamical) mass Mdyn,
and an intrinsic velocity dispersion σ0 representing the
ﬂoor of the radial dispersion proﬁle and associated de-
gree of pressure support (see 3.2.3). In the following, we
ﬁrst outline the kinematic extraction (Section 3.1), then
describe in more detail how we computed the dynamical
masses (Section 3.2), and brieﬂy summarize the method-
ology used to infer the stellar and gas masses that enter
the assessment of the baryonic mass fractions10 (Sections
3.3 and 3.4).

3.1. Velocity and Dispersion Proﬁles along the

Kinematic Major Axis

We construct radial velocity and dispersion proﬁles by
running LINEFIT on a series of spectra extracted from
the 3D data cube within circular apertures of 0.′′8 in
diameter that were placed along the kinematic major
axis. The LINEFIT code (Davies et al. 2009; F¨orster
Schreiber et al. 2009) ﬁts a line proﬁle to the continuum-
subtracted spectral proﬁle, implicitly accounting for the
spectral resolution. The uncertainties are boot-strapped
using Monte Carlo techniques. Examples of extracted
rotation and dispersion proﬁles are presented in Figure
2.

While employing a pseudo-slit extraction, as is custom
in the literature (e.g., Genzel et al. 2014a; Wisnioski et
al. 2015), we stress that the analysis presented in this
paper beneﬁts critically from the integral-ﬁeld nature of
our data set. Multi-object slit spectrographs generally do
not allow for alignment of slits along the galaxies’ major
axis, even if a priori known.

3.2. Dynamical Mass Modeling

We carry out a forward modeling procedure, ﬁtting
the velocity and velocity dispersion proﬁles extracted
along the major kinematic axis simultaneously in ob-
served space, through standard least squares minimiza-
tion. In each iteration, the two free parameters Mdyn and
σ0 are varied and an expected observed rotation curve
and dispersion proﬁle is computed, using the same circu-
lar aperture extraction technique as described in Section
3.1, and accounting for beam smearing with a PSF appro-
priate for the observations of the galaxy in question. To
this end, we use an updated version of DYSMAL (Davies
et al. 2011; see also Cresci et al. 2009), a code that quan-
tiﬁes the impact of spectral and spatial beam smearing on
a rotating disk given a speciﬁed intrinsic mass model, a
spatial distribution of the light emitter tracing the gravi-

10 Note that throughout this paper, what we consider is the
mass fraction within the disk. For a detailed analysis of the mass
fractions with respect to the total, larger scale dark matter halo in
which the galaxies are embedded, see Burkert et al. (2015). We
also assume the baryonic mass to equal the sum of stellar mass and
molecular gas mass (see also Section 4.4).

tational potential, and an inclination with respect to the
observer.

3.2.1. Mass Distribution

As spatial distribution of both mass and light we adopt
an exponential disk with an eﬀective radius as measured
with GALFIT (Peng et al. 2010) on the CANDELS H-
band image (van der Wel et al. 2012). The median
H-band Sersic index of the galaxies in our sample is
n = 1.1, and the characteristic Hα surface brightness dis-
tributions of high-redshift SFGs are also well described
by exponential disk proﬁles (Nelson et al. 2013, 2015;
F¨orster Schreiber et al. 2016). We tested that adopting
the measured H-band Sersic indices (not necessarily a
better proxy for the total mass distribution as often half
of the baryonic mass is in molecular gas) does not alter
our conclusions. Changes in Mdyn for individual objects
remain within ±0.05 dex in 84% of the cases, and the
median mass fraction in any redshift bin changes by no
more than 0.01 dex.

In reality, there may be subtle diﬀerences between the
proﬁle shape and extent of the H-band light, Hα emis-
sion, the stellar mass and molecular gas mass distribution
(see, e.g., Wuyts et al. 2012; Nelson et al. 2015; Tadaki
et al. in prep), but observational constraints on the com-
bination of these eﬀects on an individual galaxy basis are
to date either missing or lacking suﬃcient robustness to
merit a further reﬁnement of our default modeling.

As a sanity check, we repeated our ﬁtting adopting a
more extended mass distribution following the Nelson et
al. (2015) scaling Re,Hα = 1.1Re,H (M/1010M⊙), based
on high-resolution HST grism observations. As a result,
the inferred total dynamical mass increases by 0.08±0.13
dex (median and scatter among galaxies in our sample).
However, the mass enclosed within the H-band half-light
radius Re,H remains robust to 0.01 ± 0.03 dex. We also
tested the robustness of our results against ﬁtting a su-
perposition of an exponential disk and a NFW halo, leav-
ing Mdisk, σ0 and Mhalo as free parameters. Here, we
ﬁxed the halo concentration to 4, and let the halo’s virial
radius scale with Mhalo as in Mo et al. (1998). Doing so,
we again ﬁnd that, while the total mass of the best-ﬁt
model integrated to inﬁnity can be substantially larger
than what is obtained in our default modeling, the in-
ferred dynamical mass enclosed within Re,H is robust:
∆ log Mdyn(< Re,H ) = 0.01 ± 0.02 dex.

Finally, we tested how deviations from our default
assumption, that half of Mstar and Mgas is contained
within Re,H would impact the inferred baryonic mass
fraction within this radius. Adopting the Nelson et al.
(2015) scaling as a description for how the gaseous extent
compares to the H-band size, we ﬁnd median baryonic
mass fractions to decrease by -0.02, -0.04, and -0.05 dex
at z ∼ 0.9, 1.5, and 2.3 respectively. Folding in the pres-
ence of stellar M/LH ratio gradients as derived by Lang
et al. (2014; i.e., stars being more centrally concentrated
than the H-band light) would lead to compensating oﬀ-
sets, by +0.07, +0.05, and +0.04 dex at z ∼ 0.9, 1.5, and
2.3 respectively. We conclude that the net eﬀect of the
two combined is not expected to signiﬁcantly aﬀect the
results presented in this paper.

5

Fig. 2.— Case examples of high-redshift galaxies showing ordered disk rotation. From left to right: surface brightness distribution in the
WFC3 H and ACS I band, with blue ellipses indicating the GALFIT eﬀective radius; Hα velocity ﬁeld with circles marking the extracted
pseudo-slit; the observed and modeled 1D velocity and velocity dispersion proﬁle along the major axis.

6

Fig. 2.— Case examples, continued.

7

Fig. 2.— Case examples, continued.

8

Fig. 2.— Case examples, continued.

3.2.2. Inclination

We infer the inclination i from the axial ratio b/a of

the WFC3 H-band image:

cos i = r (b/a)2 − thick2

1 − thick2

,

(1)

where we assumed a ratio of scale height to scale length
of thick = 0.25. The latter thickness is consistent with
the fall-oﬀ at small b/a of the axial ratio distribution
constructed for large samples of SFGs at the nominal
redshift considered here (van der Wel et al. 2014). For
the 5% of objects for which the H-band axial ratio is
marginally smaller than 0.25, we assigned an edge-on in-
clination. We tested that inclinations derived from the
ACS I-band imaging yield similar results, with shifts in
the median stellar or baryonic mass fractions limited to
∼ 0.02 dex.

3.2.3. Coupling between v(r) and σ(r)

In computing the intrinsic rotation curve, we account
for a ﬁnite ﬂattening of the mass distribution following
Noordermeer (2008) (i.e., the same thick = 0.25 adopted
in equation 1). We furthermore account for the fact that
the shape of the velocity and velocity dispersion proﬁles
are coupled in two ways: through beam smearing and
pressure support (see Burkert et al. 2015 for a detailed
discussion). The ﬁrst is a purely observational eﬀect of
ﬁnite resolution in which the observed velocity gradient
is reduced with respect to the intrinsic one, with beam-
smeared velocities giving rise to a central peak in disper-
sion superposed on a dispersion ﬂoor σ0. As illustrated
by Burkert et al. (2015), its impact is a steep function
of the ratio between beam size and galaxy size. In the
extreme case of an unresolved observation, it implies a
velocity gradient is no longer observable and all informa-
tion on the enclosed dynamical mass is embedded in the
velocity dispersion measurement.

The second eﬀect is intrinsic. Early star-forming disks
are more turbulent and kinematically thicker than nearby
spirals (see, e.g., F¨orster Schreiber et al. 2009; Kassin et
al. 2012; Wisnioski et al. 2015). This implies that their
dynamical support has a non-negligible pressure com-
ponent, which has the eﬀect of reducing the rotational
velocity vrot compared to the circular velocity vcirc of a
thin disk in the absence of pressure support, particularly
at large radii:

rot = v2
v2

circ − 2σ2

0 (cid:18) R

Rd(cid:19) ,

(2)

where Rd is the disk scale length (Burkert et al. 2010;

see also Lang et al., in prep).

Taking into account the v(r) and σ(r) constraints si-
multaneously in a self-consistent manner enhances the
robustness of the best-ﬁt dynamical mass within Re,
also in cases where a turnover in velocity is not or only
marginally detected. Given that we keep the shape of the
mass distribution ﬁxed, higher Mdyn than those result-
ing from the ﬁt would lead to velocity gradients that are
too steep and, to the degree this is washed out by beam
smearing, a central peak in velocity dispersion that is
higher than observed. Robustness against diﬀerent as-
sumptions on the shape of the mass distribution are ad-
dressed in Section 3.2.1.

9

Fig. 3.— Top: Model-to-observed velocity ratio squared as a
function of galactocentric radius. The model assumes an expo-
nential disk mass distribution. All extracted apertures for the full
sample of 240 objects are shown in gray. Black ﬁlled circles in-
dicate the running median, with dashed lines marking the central
68th percentile of the distribution. The hashed region marks radii
that for a typical galaxy lie less than 1 FWHM away from the cen-
ter. Median and median absolute statistics when including (left
number) or excluding (right number) those apertures within ±1
FWHM from the center are listed. Bottom: Idem, for the squared
ratio of model to observed velocity dispersions as a function of
radius. No strong radial dependence of the residuals is observed.

3.2.4. Fits and Residuals

A gallery with WFC3 H-band and ACS I-band postage
stamps of a subset of the galaxies in our sample are
presented in Figure 2, alongside their two-dimensional
velocity ﬁelds, and one-dimensional velocity and veloc-
ity dispersion proﬁles. Circular apertures overplotted on
the velocity ﬁelds mark the extraction regions for the 1D
proﬁles. They often extend beyond the region for which
pixel-by-pixel velocities are plotted. This simply reﬂects
the fact that by binning the spectra of neighboring pix-
els, the line emission can be traced reliably out to larger
distances from the galaxy center. In the 1D proﬁle dia-
grams (two right-most panels), we also show the best-ﬁt
dynamical model.

Figure 3 compiles the residuals between observed and
modeled velocities, and between observed and modeled
velocity dispersions for all 240 galaxies. Each gray point
corresponds to a radial aperture for one of the galaxies,
placed at its respective galactocentric radius. Black cir-
cles mark the running median, with error bars accounting
for the oversampling that is also illustrated by the circu-
lar apertures in the middle panels of Figure 2. Dashed
black lines mark the central 68th percentile. The larger
velocity residuals for the most central apertures natu-
rally stem from the ratio of two near-zero numbers, and

10

is restricted to the regime less than a half-light radius of
the PSF away from the galaxy center. Figure 3 clearly
demonstrates that, while we did not leave freedom in the
spatial extent, inclination, or proﬁle shape of the mass
or light distribution in constructing and ﬁtting the disk
models, the resulting residuals reassuringly do not show
strong trends with radial distance.

3.3. Stellar Mass

Stellar masses were computed by ﬁtting stellar pop-
ulation synthesis (SPS) models to the spectral energy
distributions of the galaxies, sampling observed-frame U
to 8 µm wavelengths with 16 to 43 broad and medium
bands. We used the SPS models by Bruzual & Charlot
(2003; BC03) assuming a Chabrier (2003) IMF, and fol-
lowed standard procedures in the ﬁeld. Speciﬁcally, we
adopted identical assumptions regarding extinction, star
formation history, and metallicity as described by Wuyts
et al. (2011b). We furthermore note that, as in all our
previous work, our deﬁnition of stellar mass refers to the
mass in stars present at the epoch of observation (i.e.,
including stellar remnants, but excluding mass returned
to the ISM due to stellar mass loss).

3.4. Gas Mass

State-of-the-art studies of the global as well as resolved
Kennicutt-Schmidt relation (Kennicutt 1998) for normal
main sequence SFGs at high redshift are consistent with
a linear slope. This implies that at any given time the
cold gas mass and SFR are simply linked by a constant:
the depletion time tdep. Using a combination of CO
line and far-infrared continuum observations of normal
SFGs over a wide redshift range (0 < z < 3; i.e., in-
cluding the epoch of interest in this paper), Genzel et
al. (2015) derived a scaling relation that describes how
tdep depends on redshift, main sequence oﬀset, and (to
a negligible degree) stellar mass, or eﬀectively a func-
tional form tdep(z, SF R, Mstar). Their tdep scaling is a
weak function of redshift and a strong function of oﬀset
from the main sequence. By lack of individual CO mea-
surements or fully sampled far-infrared SEDs for every
galaxy in our sample, it such a scaling11 that we adopt
to compute

Mgas = tdep(z, SF R, Mstar) × SF R.

(3)
Here, the SFR itself is derived from the ladder of SFR
indicators introduced by Wuyts et al. (2011a). For our
speciﬁc sample, 98 galaxies have their SFR derived from
the combination of rest-UV and Herschel/PACS photom-
etry, 104 from rest-UV and Spitzer/MIPS photometry,
and the remaining 38 galaxies from stellar population
synthesis modeling. The inferred molecular gas mass
fractions, computed relative to the total amount of mass
, amount to ∼ 41% for
in baryons as fgas,b =
the z ∼ 0.9 sample, ∼ 52% for the z ∼ 1.5 sample, and
∼ 65% for the z ∼ 2.3 sample.

Mgas

Mstar +Mgas

11 We here make use of an updated version of the Genzel et al.
(2015) scaling relation, which incorporates additional data from the
PHIBSS2 survey, as well as dust data by Bethermin et al. (2015).
log tdep = a+b log(1+z)+c log(sSF R/sSF Rms,z)+d(log(Mstar)−
10.5)), where the speciﬁc SFR of the main sequence at a given
redshift sSF Rms,z is taken from Whitaker et al. (2014), and the
coeﬃcients are a = 0.17±0.01, b = −0.43±0.05, c = −0.46±0.013,
and d = 0.06 ± 0.02.

3.5. Uncertainties

Uncertainties on the derived stellar and baryonic mass
fractions were computed using 100 Monte Carlo realiza-
tions. To this end, we perturbed the input observables
(multi-wavelength photometry, size, axial ratio, velocity
and dispersion measurements) and repeated the subse-
quent steps in our analysis for each Monte Carlo real-
ization: deriving the stellar mass and SFR, from it the
gas mass, and ﬁtting DYSMAL models to obtain a mea-
sure of dynamical mass. With this approach, correlated
errors are naturally taken into account. The formal un-
certainties on photometry and axial ratio of the surface
brightness distribution account only for a minor contri-
bution to the error budget.
In addition, we fold in an
uncertainty associated with each of the relevant conver-
sion steps: 0.15 dex for the SED modeling of stellar mass
(characteristic for changes in adopted assumptions re-
garding star formation history and extinction; see, e.g.,
Wuyts et al. 2009), 0.25 dex for SFRs inferred from
SED modeling or UV + MIPS 24µm photometry, and
0.1 dex for SFRs inferred from UV + Herschel photom-
etry (Wuyts et al. 2011a). On top of uncertainties in
SFR and Mstar, we include a 0.15 dex scatter in the
tdep(z, SF R, Mstar) scaling (Genzel et al. 2015), and
a ±10◦ error in the inclination (see, e.g., Cresci et al.
2009), even if the axial ratio of the light distribution is
known to a much higher precision.

Systematic uncertainties in the IMF are not included
in the error bars, and neither are potential contributions
by other baryonic components such as atomic gas. We
discuss the latter two in Section 6.

4. RESULTS

4.1. The Mass Budget in Early Star-forming Disks
We consider the distribution of stellar (fstar =
Mstar/Mdyn) and baryonic mass fractions (fbar =
Mbar/Mdyn) in Figure 4. Clearly, not all galaxies ex-
hibit the same breakdown in their mass budget. The cen-
tral 68th percentile intervals of the respective distribu-
tions are log(fstar)68 ∼ [−0.78; −0.23] and log(fbar)68 ∼
[−0.48; 0.16]. The total range exceeds an order of magni-
tude when including the extremes. This observed range
cannot be accounted for by our formal uncertainty esti-
mates solely, and hence has to reﬂect variations in the
intrinsic physical properties among galaxies. While on
average stars only account for about a third of the total
mass (median fstar = 0.31 ± 0.02), the mass budget after
adding the substantial gas reservoirs implied by CO and
dust scaling relations is typically baryon-dominated (me-
dian fbar = 0.63+0.05
−0.02, where the errors reﬂect the error
in the median rather than the width of the overall fbar
distribution).

Cases with fstar > 1 are rare, amounting to 5% of the
total sample. None of these objects have Mstar exceed-
ing Mdyn by more than 3σ. The same is not true when
evaluating fbar. Baryonic mass fractions in the unphysi-
cal regime (i.e., fbar > 1) are found for a quarter of the
galaxies in our sample, although this fraction reduces to
16/8/3% when requiring a deviation from the physical
limit of unity at the 1/2/3σ level.

We conclude from the comparison of stellar and dy-
namical masses that, reassuringly, there is signiﬁcant
room for other mass components than stars. Adding

11

Fig. 4.— Top: Distribution of stellar and baryonic mass fractions for the galaxies in our sample. Bottom: Dynamical mass contrasted
to the stellar mass (left) and baryonic mass (right) components. The median error bar is indicated in the lower right corner. The
typical galaxy leaves considerable room for other mass components than stars (median Mstar/Mdyn = 0.31). Once accounting for the
substantial gas reservoirs in high-redshift galaxies, we ﬁnd the majority of disks to be baryon-dominated within their visible extent (median
Mbar/Mdyn = 0.63).

molecular gas reveals the baryon-dominated nature of
most galaxies, although at face value indications of miss-
ing mass remain in three quarters of the sample. This
ﬁnding is consistent with and improves on recent re-
sults on high-z SFGs showing they are baryon-dominated
within Re (F¨orster schreiber et al. 2009; Burkert et al.
2015; Price et al. 2016; Stott et al. 2016).

The bottom left panel of Figure 4 illustrates that our
independent measurements of stellar and dynamical mass
show a highly signiﬁcant correlation. The same is true
for the relation between dynamical and baryonic mass.
Taking out the overall trend that more massive SFGs
contain more mass in all mass components, we ﬁnd evi-

dence for systematic dependencies of fstar and fbar on
various, often interconnected, galaxy properties, most
notably surface density. We discuss these in Section 4.3,
but ﬁrst demonstrate that inclination uncertainties can-
not account for the aforementioned missing mass.

4.2. A Statistical Perspective on the Inclination

Distribution of the Galaxy Ensemble

Thus far, we chose to ﬁx the disk inclination to the
value informed by HST imagery when ﬁtting for Mdyn.
Rather than leaving both mass and inclination free in
the ﬁt, and opening ourselves to well-known degenera-
cies that are hard to break with KMOS data alone (for

12

Fig. 5.— Inclination distribution of our KMOS3D sample (black)
and the complete underlying 3D-HST population matched in mass,
redshift, size and star formation activity (green), contrasted to
the expectation for random viewing angles (dashed red line). Top
panel: Inclinations as inferred from the axial ratio b/a measured
with GALFIT (equation 1). Middle panel: Distribution of inclina-
tions that yield the best ﬁt of the DYSMAL stellar mass models
to the observed kinematics. Bottom panel: Distribution of incli-
nations that yield the best ﬁt of the DYSMAL stellar + gas mass
models to the observed kinematics. Our KMOS sample shows a
similarly ﬂat distribution of inclinations as the underlying matched
population, with only a slight paucity of very edge- or face-on sys-
tems compared to the expectation for random viewing angles. In
contrast, an implausibly large number of edge-on inclinations would
be required to optimally reproduce the observed kinematics when
ﬁxing the total mass to our best estimates of the stellar or baryonic
mass present.

more discussion in the context of high-z galaxies, see,
e.g., Cresci et al. 2009; Bouch´e et al. 2015), we now
take the reverse approach of ﬁxing the mass to Mstar or
Mbar and ﬁtting for the inclination that best describes
the observed kinematics. This allows us to address the
following question: could it be that in reality stars (or
baryons, as gas is undoubtedly present) make up all of
the mass, but that inclination uncertainties mistakenly
led us to infer the presence of ’missing mass’ ?

On an individual object basis, we ﬁnd that in the ma-
jority of cases (but not all) an acceptable ﬁt to the ob-
served kinematics can be obtained when ﬁxing Mdyn ≡
Mbar and relaxing all constraints on inclination. For the
exceptions, amounting to 18% of the sample, even a dy-
namical mass estimate based on the assumption of an
edge-on viewing angle yields Mbar < Mdyn at the 3σ
level.

However, the large size of our sample allows us to go
beyond considerations at the individual object level, and
carry out an investigation for the galaxy ensemble as a
whole. Namely, whether the distribution of inclinations
that, given our baryonic mass models, yield the best ﬁt
to the observed rotation curves is consistent with the
statistical expectation for random viewing angles. For
an ensemble of galaxies with random orientations with
respect to an observer, cos(i) is uniformly distributed

between 0 and 1 (Rix et al. 1997). Before assessing
whether this is the case for the inclination values that
yield the best possible ﬁts to the observed velocity and
dispersion proﬁles, it is worth testing that the assump-
tion of random viewing angles is at all applicable to our
sample. After all, disk galaxies contain dust, and their
emission may be attenuated by a thicker column of ob-
scuring material when seen edge-on. This could reduce
the Hα signal-to-noise ratio, and potentially cause them
to drop out of our sample more easily. On the other
hand, as reported in Section 2.3, some galaxies, while
Hα detected, did not pass our sample selection because
their face-on view prevented meaningful constraints on
the enclosed dynamical mass. The top panel of Figure 5
illustrates that nevertheless the inclination distribution
of our sample as inferred from axial ratio measurements
on the HST imaging is relatively ﬂat, mimicking that of
the underlying matched 3D-HST population (normalized
distribution shown in green). Modulo a minor dearth of
very edge-on and face-on systems the distributions are in
line with the expectation for random viewing angles.

The middle and bottom panel of Figure 5 convincingly
demonstrate that this is no longer the case when con-
sidering the best-ﬁt inclinations from kinematic models
where we ﬁxed the mass to the stellar or baryonic mass,
respectively. Leaving no freedom to Mdyn, very extreme
inclinations frequently need to be invoked to yield the
best possible description of the observed kinematics. The
distributions particularly show a strong peak in the high-
est inclination (near edge-on) bin. Clearly, these orienta-
tions are overrepresented when attempting to reproduce
the amplitude of velocity gradients without additional
mass components.

We conclude that, while inclination uncertainties un-
doubtedly aﬀect the assessment of the mass budget
breakdown in individual galaxies, they cannot account
for the observed missing mass in the ensemble of galax-
ies (i.e., the fact that on average Mdyn > Mbar and
Mdyn ≫ Mstar).

4.3. Trends with Other Galaxy Properties

In Section 4.1, we found that distant galaxies feature
a broad range of stellar-to-dynamical and baryonic-to-
dynamical mass fractions. Here, we investigate whether
the observed variations in mass fraction correlate with
other galaxy properties.

4.3.1. Redshift Dependence

Combining Y J, H and Ks observations, our sample
spans a wide dynamic range in redshift (0.6 < z < 2.6),
sampling as much as 40% of the history of the universe.
It is thus natural to consider whether the breakdown of
the mass budget evolves over the diﬀerent epochs probed.
We investigate this in Figure 6, with Table 1 summarising
the median mass fractions and scatter in diﬀerent red-
shift intervals. A modest increase in the median stellar
mass fraction by a factor 1.4 is noted between the lowest
(z ∼ 0.9) and highest (z ∼ 2.3) redshift bins, an amount
that is smaller than the typical 0.3 dex scatter observed
within each bin. At face value, the sign of this oﬀset
(fstar increasing with redshift) is somewhat counterintu-
itive, given studies of molecular gas reservoirs and their

Table 1. Stellar and baryonic mass fractions of KMOS3D SFGs

Redshift

log(Mstar/Mdyn)a

log(Mbar/Mdyn)a

log(Mbar,K98/Mdyn)a,b

0.6 < z < 1.1 −0.54 ± 0.03 [-0.80; -0.31] −0.32 ± 0.03 [-0.57; -0.10] −0.36 ± 0.03 [-0.59; -0.14]
1.3 < z < 1.7 −0.64 ± 0.05 [-0.96; -0.39] −0.31 ± 0.05 [-0.61; -0.09] −0.46 ± 0.04 [-0.68; -0.22]
2.0 < z < 2.6 −0.39 ± 0.04 [-0.70; -0.11]
0.08 ± 0.03 [-0.20; 0.36] −0.01 ± 0.03 [-0.28; 0.29]
1.3 < z < 2.6 −0.48 ± 0.03 [-0.77; -0.16] −0.05 ± 0.03 [-0.38; 0.30] −0.12 ± 0.04 [-0.52; 0.22]
All
−0.51 ± 0.02 [-0.78; -0.23] −0.20 ± 0.03 [-0.48; 0.16] −0.25 ± 0.03 [-0.56; 0.16]

aMedian, formal error on the median, and between brackets the associated central 68th percentile range.
bBaryonic mass fraction based on gas masses computed following the inverse Kennicutt (1998) relation.

13

ies on average feature lower fstar, but no such trend is
signiﬁcantly present at higher redshifts, or when consid-
ering the full sample. If galaxies in our low-redshift bin
on average feature higher dark matter fractions within
Re than those in the high-redshift bin, this could explain
the observed trend. We return to this interpretation in
Section 4.3.2, and within the context of cosmological sim-
ulations in Section 5.

The empirical gas scaling relations we adopt suggest
a decline in gas fractions for the galaxies in our sample
from ∼ 65% for the highest redshift bin to ∼ 41% for the
lowest redshift bin. Consequently, the modest trend of
increasing mass fraction with redshift is enhanced when
adding the gas reservoirs and considering the full contri-
bution by baryons to the mass budget (Figure 6, lower
panel). It is evident that galaxies above z ∼ 2 are heavily
baryon dominated, in agreement with slit-based spectro-
scopic measurements by Price et al. (2016), and unlike
local disk galaxies which feature dark matter fractions of
around ∼ 50% within 2.2 disk scale lengths (Courteau &
Dutton 2015). Adopting a Salpeter (1955) rather than
Chabrier (2003) IMF enhances the tension with dynam-
ical constraints slightly (see also Price et al. 2016), al-
though it should be noted that the impact of this as-
sumption on the inferred baryonic mass fraction is re-
duced for galaxies where molecular gas contributes most
of the baryons.

Analyzing KMOS observations of z = 0.8 − 1 galax-
ies spanning a similar radial range as available for
our sample (typically out to 9-10 kpc), Stott et al.
(2016; KROSS) recently reported stellar mass fractions
of log(Mstar/Mdyn) ≈ −0.66 and baryonic mass frac-
tions of log(Mbar/Mdyn) ≈ −0.40. At higher redshifts
(1.4 ≤ z ≤ 2.6), Price et al. (2016; MOSDEF) modeled
slit-based observations with MOSFIRE, ﬁnding the mass
budget within Re to break down as log(Mstar/Mdyn) ≈
−0.36 and log(Mbar/Mdyn) ≈ −0.04. While showing a
decent overall agreement with the values tabulated in
Table 1, the precise numerical comparison between these
survey results should not be overinterpreted, for three
reasons. First, both the KROSS and MOSDEF samples
extend down to lower masses than considered here, with
a median stellar mass of hlog(Mstar)i = 10 compared to
hlog(Mstar)i = 10.5 for our sample. Second, method-
ologies diﬀer. Stott et al. (2016), for example, assume a
spheroidal mass distribution and do not account for a de-
gree of pressure support in deriving Mdyn. While, judg-
ing from their analysis, imposing a higher stellar mass
cut would increase the characteristic fstar of the sam-
ple, including a contribution of pressure support in the

Fig. 6.— Stellar mass fraction (top row) and baryonic mass frac-
tion (bottom row) as a function of redshift. Large circles mark the
median for each redshift bin. Filled circles represent results as-
suming the default Chabrier (2003) IMF, while large empty circles
indicate the shift if a Salpeter (1955) IMF were adopted instead.
Galaxies in our highest redshift bin (z ∼ 2.3) are entirely baryon
dominated within Re.

evolution over cosmic time (e.g., Genzel et al. 2015 and
references therein). In the absence of other mass compo-
nents, or if enclosed dark matter fractions remain con-
stant over time, declining baryonic gas fractions would
lead to rising fstar as time proceeds. Clearly, this is not
observed. Within the z ∼ 0.9 bin, more gas-rich galax-

14

Fig. 7.— Dependence of stellar mass fraction (top row) and baryonic mass fraction (bottom row) on surface density of stars (left panels),
gas (middle panels), and the sum of both baryonic components (right panels). Characteristic error ellipses, correlation coeﬃcients and p
values are marked in each panel. The derived mass fractions correlate signiﬁcantly with surface density, increasing from the most extended
to the more compact systems.

dynamical modeling would have the compensating eﬀect
of increasing Mdyn and hence yielding a lower fstar. Fi-
nally, both studies employ the (inverse) Kennicutt (1998)
relation to translate the observed surface density of star
formation to a gas surface density and subsequently in-
tegrated Mgas. To illustrate the impact of the latter
assumption relative to the Genzel et al. (2015) gas scal-
ing relations adopted thus far, we include for reference
in Table 1 baryonic mass fractions computed under the
assumption of the Kennicutt (1998) relation.

Aside from redshift, we explored correlations of the
stellar and baryonic mass fractions with various other pa-
rameters, including diﬀerent mass components, gas frac-
tions, speciﬁc star formation rates, and galaxy sizes. By
far the strongest correlations are found with measures of
surface density. Given the size evolution of galaxies with
cosmic time (e.g., van der Wel et al. 2014), it is entirely
plausible that the redshift trends described in this Sec-
tion arise at least in part as an indirect imprint of such
an underlying relation with surface density.

4.3.2. Surface Density Dependence

Figure 7 contrasts the stellar and baryonic mass frac-
tions to the surface density of diﬀerent mass components.
The strongest correlations (R > 0.68) are observed be-
tween fstar and Σstar on the one hand, and fbar and Σgas
(or Σbar) on the other hand:

log(fstar) = (−4.29 ± 0.09) + (0.44 ± 0.03) log(Σstar) (4)
log(fbar) = (−4.04 ± 0.08) + (0.45 ± 0.03) log(Σgas) (5)
log(fbar) = (−4.49 ± 0.09) + (0.49 ± 0.03) log(Σbar) (6)

As the error ellipses illustrate, uncertainties along both
axes are not independent given shared information, but
the dynamic range of the observed correlations signiﬁ-
cantly exceeds what is expected from correlated uncer-
tainties, boosting conﬁdence in the physical reality of the
observed trends. It is noteworthy that the correlations
with surface density are stronger than if one considers
the total mass of the respective components12.

At

stellar

surface densities of around Σstar ∼
109 M⊙/kpc2, most of the dynamical mass can be ac-
counted for by stars. This reduces to of order 10% when
considering the subset of galaxies with the most diﬀuse
stellar distributions (Σstar < 108 M⊙/kpc2). The ob-
served trend echos ﬁndings by Barro et al. (2014), who
reported higher stellar mass fractions for their sample of
13 compact SFGs than present in a non-compact SFG
reference sample. Burkert et al. (2015) studied the an-
gular momentum parameter distribution in high-redshift
galaxies, and also found the most signiﬁcant (negative)
correlation to be with stellar surface density (computed
within the half-light radius, as we do here).

Similar to the fstar−Σstar relation, our analysis implies
that baryons contribute a progressively larger fraction of
the total mass budget as gas and/or baryonic surface
densities increase. If we were to adopt the inverted Ken-

12 If the same relations described by equation 4 are obeyed by
KMOS3D SFGs that did not enter our sample selection for reasons
explained in Section 2.3 (e.g., because they are not suﬃciently
resolved), this would further strengthen the conclusion that early
disks are typically baryon-dominated, boosting median stellar mass
fractions by 0.04/0.13/0.08 dex and median baryonic mass fractions
by 0.05/0.08/0.04 dex for the z ∼ 0.9, 1.5, and 2.3 bins, respec-
tively.

nicutt (1998) relation to derive gas masses, a signiﬁcant
positive correlation between fbar and Σgas/bar remains,
albeit with a slightly reduced Pearson correlation coef-
ﬁcient (R = 0.66). The fstar − Σstar relation obviously
remains unaﬀected.

A plausible interpretation of the observed relations is
that for high surface density systems, the visible extent
of the galaxy traced by the Hα and H-band emission
probes mostly the inner, baryon-dominated part of the
halo. More diﬀuse, lower surface density systems will
probe further into the halo, where dark matter makes up
a larger fraction of the mass budget.

4.4. Systematic uncertainties

In the previous Section, we described a picture of bary-
onic distributions of varying size embedded in larger scale
dark matter halos. While this can at least in qualitative
terms explain the presence of a relation between the sur-
face density and the baryonic mass fraction within the
visible extent of our galaxies, it can by itself not be re-
sponsible for the fbar > 1 values seen at inferred gas
surface densities of Σgas & 109 M⊙/kpc2. Those are by
deﬁnition unphysical. Here, we brieﬂy expand on the po-
tential origin of this tension with dynamical constraints.

4.4.1. Stellar masses

Stellar masses computed through SED modeling are
subject to several potential systematic uncertainties (see,
e.g., Wuyts et al. 2009). However, most of these have the
tendency to lead to underestimates rather than overesti-
mates of the true mass present. E.g., if the true IMF fol-
lows a Salpeter (1955) rather than the adopted Chabrier
(2003) IMF, if the true star formation history features
bursts on top of an underlying older stellar population,
or if the dust distribution is such that the total amount
of attenuation could not be recovered. In these scenarios,
the tension with dynamical constraints would be ampli-
ﬁed instead of remedied. Some IMF studies of nearby
early-type galaxies with σ > 200 km/s favor an even
more bottom-heavy IMF than Salpeter, with mass-to-
light ratios being larger by up to a factor of 2 (Spiniello
et al. 2012; Conroy & van Dokkum 2012; Ferreras et
al. 2013).
If the stars in those galaxies were formed
at the redshifts and in the type of galaxies contained
within our KMOS3D sample, this would naturally en-
hance tensions with dynamical constraints further. SPS
models by Maraston (2005) instead of BC03 would re-
duce the stellar masses of the galaxies in our sample by
a factor 1.4. We note, however, that recent spectroscopic
(Zibetti et al. 2013) and spectro-photometric (Kriek et
al. 2010) studies of post-starburst galaxies seem to favor
BC03 models, in that they exhibit relatively low rest-
frame near-infrared luminosities and lack the prominent
CO bandheads characteristic for the M05 models in that
wavelength regime (although see also Capozzi et al. 2016
for an opposing view).

4.4.2. Gas masses

Turning to the gaseous mass component, we remind
the reader that we only accounted for gas in the molec-
ular phase. Atomic (HI) gas columns in nearby galaxies
have been shown to saturate at around ∼ 10 M⊙ pc−2
(Bigiel & Blitz 2012), corresponding to the threshold for

15

Fig. 8.— Kennicutt-Schmidt relation of SFGs in our KMOS3D
sample. Black symbols indicate the location of SFGs in the KS
diagram when gas masses are inferred from the galaxies’ redshift,
stellar mass and SFR, following our default CO- and dust-based
gas scaling relations, with empty black circles marking objects for
which Mbar > Mdyn. Red circles represent the location of the lat-
ter subset if adopting the diﬀerence between dynamical and stellar
mass as estimate of the gas content instead. The majority of these
predominantly high surface density systems then occupy star for-
mation eﬃciencies ranging from the ’normal SFG’ (black dashed
line) to ULIRG/SMG (red dashed line) regime, as identiﬁed by
Genzel et al. (2010). Cases for which Mstar > Mdyn are posi-
tioned on the far left of the diagram.

the atomic to molecular gas transition (Krumholz et al.
2009; Sternberg et al. 2014). High-redshift galaxies sig-
niﬁcantly exceed this threshold surface density, and are
therefore expected to be entirely dominated by gas in
the molecular phase within their visible region (see also
Bauermeister et al. 2010). Including a radially ﬂat HI
distribution at the threshold surface density for all of our
galaxies would increase the baryonic mass within 10 kpc
by 3 × 109 M⊙. The baryonic mass would consequently
rise by a factor of 1.05 in the median, and a maximum
increase of ∼ 30% for the least massive galaxies in our
sample. We conclude that contributions from atomic gas
may have a minor, but not dominant impact on the as-
sessment of the mass budget within the central few scale
lengths of early disks. Moreover, the eﬀect would again
be to increase the overall baryonic mass, as would also
be the case if a substantial fraction of the molecular hy-
drogen is not traced by CO (or dust) (see Bolatto et al.
2013 and references therein). Wolﬁre et al. (2010) esti-
mate that for solar metallicity, and for the typical UV
ﬁelds, densities and column densities in high-z SFGs, the
mass fraction of this ’CO-dark’ gas may be between 20
and 30%.

In contrast to the above eﬀects, a bias yielding over-
rather than underestimated Mgas would have to be in-
voked to explain the presence of fbar > 1 galaxies. The
gas scaling relations we adopted were parameterized in
terms of redshift, stellar mass and star formation rate,
without further regard to galaxy size. For the dust-based
method it relied on stacked far-infrared SEDs in bins
of (z, SFR, Mstar). While galaxy size itself shows sys-
tematic variations depending on these three parameters
(Wuyts et al. 2011b), signiﬁcant scatter in size remains

16

within each (z, SFR, Mstar) bin. The most compact and
therefore highest surface density ones within each bin
necessarily have the shortest dynamical time, and may
therefore be expected to have a higher star formation
eﬃciency than average (Genzel et al. 2010). Likewise,
they may feature a higher dust temperature than the
average Herschel stacked SED, and potentially a higher
excitation and/or lower conversion factor in the case of
the CO-based gas method. A higher star formation ef-
ﬁciency for such dense systems would translate to lower
gas reservoirs and hence a reduced tension with dynam-
ical constraints.

In Figure 8, we brieﬂy explore what star formation ef-
ﬁciencies would have to be invoked in order to bring the
baryonic mass budget into agreement with the dynamical
constraints. That is, we contrast the location of fbar > 1
galaxies on the Kennicutt-Schmidt (KS) diagram for gas
reservoirs inferred from the CO- and dust-based scaling
relations (empty black circles), to an alternative realiza-
tion where we neglect for simplicity the presence of dark
matter, and equate Mgas = Mdyn − Mstar (red ﬁlled cir-
cles). This exercise is akin to Downes & Solomon (1998)
who used dynamical mass estimates to constrain gas
masses and star formation eﬃciencies in nearby Ultra-
Luminous Infra-Red Galaxies. Naturally, any presence
of dark matter within the inner regions of the galaxy
would boost the star formation eﬃciency implied by the
latter method.

With the exception of a handful of outliers at implausi-
bly high star formation eﬃciencies, most of which already
have Mstar > Mdyn, the majority of fbar > 1 objects
now range from the KS relation for ’normal SFGs’ de-
ﬁned by Genzel et al. (2010; dashed black line) to the
KS relation for the ’ULIRG/SMG regime’ (dashed red
line). This thought experiment encourages the explo-
ration of size dependence in future studies of gas scaling
relations through cosmic time, especially now that far in-
frared sizes (rather than the H-band sizes adopted here)
are within reach with the high-resolution capabilities of
ALMA and PdBI/NOEMA.

5. DISCUSSION

We now place our observational census of the mass
budget in early disks in context, by contrasting our ﬁnd-
ings to expectations from a state-of-the-art simulation of
galaxy formation in a ΛCDM cosmology, and to measure-
ments of baryonic fractions within galaxies in the local
universe.

To this end, we make use of the public data release
of the Illustris Simulation (Vogelsberger 2014a,b; Nel-
son, D. et al. 2015). Illustris is a large volume (106.5
Mpc3) cosmological hydrodynamical simulation run with
the moving-mesh code Arepo (Springel 2010). Through a
set of physical models it follows self-consistently the evo-
lution of galaxies from z = 127 to the present day (Genel
et al. 2014), and the interplay between their dark mat-
ter, gas, and stellar components. We refer the reader to
Genel et al. (2015) and Pillepich et al. (2014) for a more
in depth discussion of the relation between baryons and
the dark matter halos that host them in Illustris, and to
Schaller et al. (2015) and Zavala et al. (2015) for a dis-
cussion on the topic based on an alternative cosmological
hydrodynamical simulation EAGLE (Schaye et al. 2015;
Crain et al. 2015).

Fig. 9.— Top: Stellar mass fractions within the stellar half-mass
radius as a function of redshift as simulated in Illustris. Boxes
indicate the central 68th percentiles for star-forming (SSF R >
0.7/tHubble; solid) and quiescent (SSF R < 0.7/tHubble; dashed)
galaxies. Central 68th and 90th percentiles for a simulated galaxy
sample matched to the star formation rate and stellar mass distri-
bution of our KMOS3D sample are marked in color. Also shown
are their descendant population at z = 0. KMOS3D observations
are overplotted with grey dots for reference. Bottom: Idem, but
showing the baryonic mass fractions within the stellar half-mass
radius.

Figure 9 illustrates the distribution of stellar and bary-
onic mass fractions within Re (deﬁned as the stellar
half-mass radius) for snapshots of the Illustris simula-
tion corresponding to redshifts 0, 0.9, 1.5, and 2.3. Con-
sidering the simulated galaxy population more massive
than 109.8 M⊙, no signiﬁcant dependence of the stel-
lar and baryonic mass fractions on redshift is found for
SFGs (deﬁned as SSF R > 0.7/tHubble). At all redshifts,
the mass fractions in quiescent galaxies, and particu-
larly the contribution of the stellar component, is ele-
vated with respect to that of the star-forming popula-
tion. Since our KMOS3D sample does not represent a
random drawing from the galaxy stellar mass function,
but features SFGs with a relatively ﬂat mass distribution,
we carry out a more consistent comparison by creating
a (SF R, Mstar)-matched sample containing 10 Illustris
galaxies for each observed KMOS3D galaxy. Their dis-

17

Fig. 10.— Stellar (Left) and baryonic (right) mass fractions
within the stellar half-mass radius as a function of stellar and
baryonic surface mass density, as simulated in Illustris. KMOS3D
observations are overplotted with grey dots for reference. Both
observations and simulations show a strong relation between mass
fractions and surface densities.

tribution of stellar and baryonic mass fractions is illus-
trated in blue, green and red colors, for the three high
redshift bins. At z ∼ 0.9 and z ∼ 1.5, we ﬁnd fstar
and fbar distributions that are consistent with our ob-
servations. At z ∼ 2.3, the KMOS3D-matched Illustris
sample overlaps with the lower tail of the observed dis-
tribution. If we were to use galaxy size as an additional
parameter (together with SF R and Mstar) in construct-
ing a KMOS3D-matched Illustris sample, no noticeable
diﬀerence is found at z ∼ 2.3, whereas simulated mass
fractions for the matched sample at z ∼ 0.9 and z ∼ 1.5
increase by ∼ 0.1 dex in the median, with a modest re-
duction in scatter. This reﬂects the fact that at these
redshifts the distribution of SFG sizes in Illustris extends
to larger systems than observed in the real universe.

Using the SubLink merger trees provided in the Illus-
tris public data release (Rodriguez-Gomez et al. 2015),
we trace the z = 0 descendants of the KMOS3D-matched
sample and ﬁnd the breakdown of their mass budget
within Re to be more akin to that of the quiescent z = 0

Fig. 11.— Top: Stellar mass fractions in the SFR-Mass diagram.
Color bins represent the Illustris galaxy population extracted from
snapshots corresponding to redshifts z = 0.9, 1.5, and 2.3. Sys-
tematic variations in the median fstar(< Re) of simulated galaxies
are present across the diagram. Qualitatively similar trends are
notable for the observed KMOS3D sample at 0.6 < z < 2.6. Bot-
tom: Idem for baryonic mass fractions, where we capped the color
scheme at the physical limit log(fbar) = 0.

population than the star-forming one13. In this light, it
is also interesting to look at observational measurements
of the baryonic mass fraction within nearby galaxies, as
compiled by Courteau & Dutton (2015)14. These include
disk galaxies of the DiskMass survey (Martinsson et al.
2013a,b; M13a,b), studies of Tully-Fisher residuals by
Courteau et al. (2007; C07) and Dutton et al. (2007;
D07), an analysis of Milky Way kinematics by Bovy
& Rix (2013; BR13), the SWELLS sample of massive
gravitationally lensed spirals (Barnab`e et al. 2012, B12;
Dutton et al. 2013, D13), and the ATLAS3D early-type
galaxy sample (Cappellari et al. 2013; C13). While the

13 No appreciable change in descendant mass fractions is noted

when adopting galaxy size as an additional matching parameter.

14 Courteau & Dutton (2015) evaluate the mass fraction at 2.2

Rd ∼ 1.3Re.

18

baryonic mass fractions observed at z > 2 in KMOS3D
tend to exceed those of intermediate mass nearby disks
(M13a,b; C07; D07), they are in the range of what is
observed in the most massive nearby spirals (SWELLS)
and the local early-type galaxy population (ATLAS3D).
The latter are the more likely descendants of our high-
z SFGs, according to the Illustris simulation, but also
based on simpler co-moving number density arguments
(van Dokkum et al. 2010; Muzzin et al. 2013).

In Figure 10, we contrast one of our main ﬁndings,
namely that the mass fractions correlate strongly with
measures of surface density, to the equivalent relations
for the Illustris simulated galaxy population over the
same redshift range. Clearly, correlations of fstar with
Σstar and fbar with Σbar as discussed for our observa-
tions in Section 4.3.2 are also inherently present in hy-
drodynamical simulations that model the assembly of gas
and build up of stars within dark matter halos formed
according to a ΛCDM cosmology. Quantitatively, there
are some diﬀerences notable, most prominently and triv-
ially the absence of unphysical (> 1) mass fractions in
the simulation.

Finally, we consider in Figure 11 how the observed and
simulated galaxies vary in fstar and fbar depending on
their position in the SFR - stellar mass plane. As is the
case for many other galaxy properties related to struc-
ture, mode of star formation, gas and dust properties
(e.g., Wuyts et al. 2011b; Magnelli et al. 2014; Gen-
zel et al. 2015), systematic variations are notable.
In
part, these reﬂect the above-described correlations with
surface density. For example, the iso-fstar contours of
simulated galaxies in the top panel of Figure 11 coin-
cide more or less with lines of constant stellar surface
mass density (see also Brennan et al. 2016 for a com-
parison of observed Σstar in the SFR-Mass plane versus
the equivalent behavior in semi-analytic models of galaxy
formation).

We conclude that overall, galaxies as simulated in
state-of-the-art cosmological hydrodynamical simula-
tions share many similarities with their counterparts in
the real universe, in terms of their mass budget break-
down and relation to other galaxy parameters.

6. SUMMARY

Multi-object spectrographs such as the 24-IFU KMOS
instrument on the VLT are opening a window on the
dynamical mass budget of distant galaxies for samples
of increasing statistical signiﬁcance.
In this paper, we
carried out detailed dynamical modeling of 240 massive
(log(Mstar) & 9.8) star-forming disks from the KMOS3D
survey, spanning a wide redshift range of 0.6 < z < 2.6
and extending in the median out to ∼ 9.5 kpc. Our main

conclusions are the following:

• Over the full redshift range, distant SFGs leave signif-
icant room for other mass components than stars within
their visible extent. Adopting a Chabrier (2003) IMF,
stars on average account for a third of the total mass
budget.

• Folding in molecular gas masses derived from CO-
and dust-based gas scaling relations, we ﬁnd baryons
(i.e., gas plus stars) to account for typically two thirds of
the total mass budget, increasing with redshift such that
z > 2 SFGs are fully baryon-dominated, with formally
no room for signiﬁcant dark matter contributions within
their inner regions.

• The inference of missing mass components (partic-
ularly if only the stellar mass is contrasted to the dy-
namical constraints) cannot be attributed to systemat-
ics in the galaxy inclinations, estimated from axial ratio
measurements. An implausibly large number of edge-on
systems, inconsistent with axial ratios and statistical ex-
pectations from random viewing angles, would have to
be invoked to reproduce the observed range in rotational
velocities.

• A large (∼ 0.3 dex) galaxy-to-galaxy scatter is noted
in the stellar and baryonic mass fractions. These varia-
tions are not random, but correlate with galaxy proper-
ties, most strongly so with measures of surface density.
Systems with compact stellar distributions feature the
largest stellar mass fractions. The highest baryonic mass
fractions occur for galaxies with the highest inferred gas
(and baryonic) surface densities. The observed trends
are in line with a scenario in which our kinematic tracer
probes further into the dark matter halo in which the
galaxy is embedded if the galaxy’s stellar and baryonic
distributions are extended, whereas in the case of com-
pact and high surface density systems it is the heavily
baryon-dominated inner region that is probed. Similarly
strong correlations between mass fractions within Re
and surface density also follow naturally from the phys-
ical models with which baryons are traced in a ΛCDM
context within the cosmological hydrodynamical simula-
tion Illustris. The presence of a signiﬁcant population
of observed SFGs which formally lie in the unphysical
(fbar > 1) regime suggests that in addition, an enhanced
star formation eﬃciency may apply to more compact
SFGs.

We thank the staﬀ at Paranal Observatory for their ex-
cellent support during numerous observing runs. MF and
DW acknowledge the support of the Deutsche Forschungs
Gemeinschaft (DFG) via Project WI 3871/1-1.

REFERENCES

Barnab`e, M., Dutton, A. A., Marhsall, P. J., et al. 2012, MNRAS,

423, 1073

Barnab`e, M., Czoske, O., Koopmans, L. V. E., Treu, T.,& Bolton,

A. S. 2011, MNRAS, 415, 2215

Barro, G., Trump, J. R., Koo, D. C., et al. 2014, ApJ, 795, 145
Bauermeister, A., Blitz, L.,& Ma, C.-P. 2010, ApJ, 717, 323
Bershady, M. A., Martinsson, T. P. K., Verheijen, M. A. W., et al.

2011, ApJ, 739, L47

Berta, S., Lutz, D., Nordon, R., et al. 2013, A&A, 555, 8
B´ethermin, M., Daddi, E., Magdis, G., et al. 2015, A&A, 573, 113
Bezanson, R., van Dokkum, P. G., van de Sande, J., Franx, M.,

Leja, J.,& Kriek, M. 2013, ApJ, 779, 21

Bigiel, F.,& Blitz, L. 2012, ApJ, 756, 183
Bolatto, A. D., Wolﬁre, M.,& Leroy, A. K. 2013, ARA&A, 51, 207
Bosma, A. 1978, Ph.D. Thesis, Groningen Univ.
Bovy, J.,& Rix, H.-W. 2013, ApJ, 779, 115
Bouch´e, N., Carfantan, H., Schroetter, I., Michel-Dansac, L.,&

Contini, T. 2015, AJ, 150, 92

Brammer, G. B., van Dokkum, P. G., Franx, M., et al. 2012, ApJS,

200, 13

Brewer, B. J., Dutton, A. A., Treu, T., et al. 2012, MNRAS, 422,

3574

Bruzual, G,& Charlot, S. 2003, MNRAS, 344, 1000

19

Burkert, A., F¨orster Schreiber, N. M., Genzel, R., et al. 2015, ApJ,

submitted (arXiv1510.03262)

Burkert, A., Genzel, R., Bouch´e, N., et al. 2010, ApJ, 725, 2324
Capozzi, D., Maraston, C., Daddi, E., Renzini, A., Strazzullo, V.,&

Gobat, R. 2016, MNRAS, 456, 790

Cappellari, M. 2016, ARA&A, 54 (arXiv1602.04267)
Cappellari, M., Scott, N., Alatalo, K., et al. 2013, MNRAS, 432,

1709

Martinsson, T. P. K., Verheijen, M. A. W., Westfall, K. B.,
Bershady, M. A., Andersen, D. R.,& Swaters, R. A. 2013b, A&A,
557, 131

Maraston, C. 2005, MNRAS, 362, 799
McCracken, H. J., Milvang-Jensen, B., Dunlop, J., et al. 2012,

A&A, 544, 156

Mo, H. J., Mao, S.,& White, S. D. M. 1998, MNRAS, 295, 319
Momcheva, I. G., Brammer, G. B., van Dokkum, P. G., et al. 2015,

Cappellari, M., McDermid, R. M., Alatalo, K., et al. 2012, Nature,

ApJS, submitted (arXiv1510.02106)

484, 485

Carilli, C. L.,& Walter, F. 2013, ARA&A, 51, 105
Chabrier, G. 2003, PASP, 115, 763
Cole, S., Norberg, P., Baugh, C. M., et al. 2001, MNRAS, 326, 255
Conroy, C.,& van Dokkum, P. G., 2012, ApJ, 760, 71
Contini, T., Epinat, B., Bouch´e, N. et al. 2015, A&A, submitted

(arXiv1512.00246)

Muzzin, A., Marchesini, D., Stefanon, M., et al. 2013, ApJ, 777, 18
Narayanan, D.,& Krumholz, M. 2014, MNRAS, 442, 1411
Nelson, D., Pillepich, A., Genel, S., et al. 2015, A&C, 13, 12
Nelson, E. J., van Dokkum, P. G., F¨orster Schreiber, N. M., et al.

2015, ApJ, submitted (arXiv1507.03999)

Nelson, E. J., van Dokkum, P. G., Momcheva, I., et al. 2013, ApJ,

763, 16

Courteau, S.,& Dutton, A. A. 2015, ApJ, 801, 20
Courteau, S., Dutton, A. A., van den Bosch, F. C., et al. 2007,

Newman, A. B., Belli, S.,& Ellis, R. S. 2015, ApJL, 813, 7
Noeske, K. G., Weiner, B. J., Faber, S. M., et al. 2007, ApJ, 660,

ApJ, 671, 203

Crain, R. A., Schaye, J., Bower, R. G., et al. 2015, MNRAS, 450,

1937

Cresci, G., Hicks, E. K. S., Genzel, R., et al. 2009, ApJ, 697, 115
Daddi, E., Elbaz, D., Walter, F., et al. 2010b, ApJ, 714, 118
Daddi, E., Bournaud, F., Walter, F., et al. 2010a, ApJ, 713, 686
Daddi, E., Dickinson, M., Morrison, G., et al. 2007, ApJ, 670, 156
Davies, R. I., Agudo Berbel, A., Wiezorrek, E., et al. 2013, A&A,

558, 56

43

Noordermeer, E. 2008, MNRAS, 385, 1359
Peng, C. Y., Ho, L. C., Impey, C. D.,& Rix, H.-W. 2010, AJ, 139,

2097

Pillepich, A., Vogelsberger, M., Deason, A., et al. 2014, MNRAS,

444, 237

Price, S. H., Kriek, M., Shapley, A. E., et al. 2016, ApJ, 819, 80
R´emy-Ruyer, A., et al. 2014, A&A, 563, 31
Rix, H.-W., Guhathakurta, P., Colless, M.,& Ing, K. 1997,

Davies, R. I., F¨orster Schreiber, N. M., Cresci, G., et al. 2011, ApJ,

MNRAS, 285, 779

741, 69

Rodriguez-Gomez, V., Genel, S., Vogelsberger, M., et al. 2015,

Davies, R. I., Maciejewski, W., Hicks, E. K. S., Tacconi, L. J.,

MNRAS, 449, 49

Genzel, R.,& Engel, H. 2009, ApJ, 702, 114

Downes, D.,& Solomon, P. M. 1998, ApJ, 507, 615
Dutton, A. A., Treu, T., Brewer, B. J., et al. 2013, MNRAS, 428,

3183

Elbaz, D., Daddi, E., Le Borgne, D., et al. 2007, A&A, 468, 33
Ferreras, I., La Barbera, F., de la Rosa, I. G., et al. 2013, MNRAS,

429, 15

Rubin, V. C., Thonnard, N.,& Ford, W. K., Jr. 1978, ApJ, 225,

L107

Salpeter, E. E. 1955, ApJ, 121, 161
Schaller, M., Frenk, C. S., Bower, R. G., et al. 2015, MNRAS, 452,

343

Schaye, J., Crain, R. A., Bower, R. G., et al. 2015, MNRAS, 446,

521

F¨orster Schreiber, N. M., Shapley, A. E., Erb, D. K., Genzel, R.,
Steidel, C. C., Bouch´e, N., Cresci, G.,& Davies, R. 2011, ApJ,
731, 65

F¨orster Schreiber, N. M., Genzel, R., Bouch´e, N., et al. 2009, ApJ,

706, 1364

Freundlich, J., Combes, F., Tacconi, L. J., et al. 2013, A&A, 553,

Skelton, R. E., Whitaker, K. E., Momcheva, I. G., et al. 2014,

ApJS, 214, 24

Spiniello, C., Trager, S. C., Koopmans, L. V. E.,& Chen, Y. P.

2012, ApJ, 753, 32

Springel, V. 2010, MNRAS, 401, 791
Sternberg, A., Le Petit, F., Roueﬀ, E.,& Le Bourlot, J. 2014, ApJ,

130

Genel, S., Fall, S. M., Hernquist, L., et al. 2015, ApJ, 804, 40
Genel, S., Vogelsberger, M., Springel, V., et al. 2014, MNRAS, 445,

175

Genzel, R., Tacconi, L. J., Lutz, D., et al. 2015, ApJ, 800, 20
Genzel, R., F¨orster Schreiber, N. M., Lang, P., et al. 2014, ApJ,

785, 75

790, 10

Stott, J. P., Swinbank, A. M., Johnson, H. L., et al. 2016, MNRAS,

457, 1888

Tacconi, L. J., Neri, R., Genzel, R., et al. 2013, ApJ, 768, 74
Tacconi, L. J., Genzel, R., Neri, R., et al. 2010, Nature, 463, 781
Thomas, J., Saglia, R. P., Bender, R., et al. 2011, MNRAS, 415,

545

Genzel, R., Tacconi, L. J., Kurk, J., et al. 2013, ApJ, 773, 68
Genzel, R., Tacconi, L. J., Combes, F., et al. 2012, ApJ, 746, 69
Genzel, R., Tacconi, L. J., Gracia-Carpio, J., et al. 2010, MNRAS,

van der Marel, R. P. 1991, MNRAS, 253, 710
van der Wel, A., Chang, Y.-Y., Bell, E. F., et al. 2014, ApJ, 792, 6
van der Wel, A., Bell, E. F., H¨aussler, B., et al. 2012, ApJS, 203,

407, 2091

Grogin, N. A., Kocevski, D. D., Faber, S. M., et al. 2011, ApJS,

197, 35

Groves, B. A., Schinnerer, E., Leroy, A., et al. 2015, ApJ, 799, 96
Ilbert, O., McCracken, H. J., Le F`evre, O., et al. 2013, A&A, 556,

55

24

van de Sande, J., Kriek, M., Franx, M., et al. 2013, ApJ, 771, 85
van Dokkum, P. G.,& Conroy, C. 2010, Nature, 468, 940
van Dokkum, P. G., Whitaker, K. E., Brammer, G., et al. 2010,

ApJ, 709, 1018

Vogelsberger, M., Genel, S., Springel, V., et al. 2014a, Nature, 509,

Kassin, S. A., Weiner, B. J., Faber, S. M., et al. 2012, ApJ, 758,

177

106

Kennicutt, R. C., Jr. 1998, ApJ, 498, 541
Keres, D., Yun, M. S.,& Young, J. S. 2003, ApJ, 582, 659
Koekemoer, A. M., Faber, S. M., Ferguson, H. C., 2011, ApJS, 197,

36

Kriek, M., Labb´e, I., Conroy, C., et al. 2010, ApJ, 722, 64
Krumholz, M. R., Leroy, A. K.,& McKee, C. F. 2011, ApJ, 731, 25
Krumholz, M. R., McKee, C. F.,& Tumlinson, J. 2009, ApJ, 693,

216

Lang, P., Wuyts, S., Somerville, R. S., et al. 2014, ApJ, 788, 11
Leroy, A. K., Bolatto, A., Gordon, K., et al. 2011, ApJ, 737, 12
Leroy, A. K., Walter, F., Bigiel, F., et al. 2009, AJ, 137, 4670
Lutz, D., Poglitsch, A., Altieri, B., et al. 2011, A&A, 532, 90
Magnelli, B., Lutz, D., Saintonge, A., et al. 2014, A&A, 561, 86
Magnelli, B., Popesso, P., Berta, S., et al. 2013, A&A, 553, 132
Magnelli, B., Saintonge, A., Lutz, D., et al. 2012, A&A, 548, 22
Martin, A. M., Papastergis, E., Giovanelli, R., Haynes, M. P.,

Springob, C. M.,& Stierwalt, S. 2010, ApJ, 723, 1359

Martinsson, T. P. K., Verheijen, M. A. W., Westfall, K. B.,
Bershady, M. A., Andersen, D. R.,& Swaters, R. A. 2013a, A&A,
557, 130

Vogelsberger, M., Genel, S., Springel, V., et al. 2014b, MNRAS,

444, 1518

Walter, F., Brinks, E., de Blok, W. J. G., Bigiel, F., Kennicutt, R.

C., Jr., Thornley, M. D.,& Leroy, A. 2008, AJ, 136, 2563

Whitaker, K. E., Franx, M., Leja, J., et al. 2014, ApJ, 795, 104
Wisnioski, E., F¨orster Schreiber, N. M., Wuyts, S., et al. 2015, ApJ,

799, 209

Wolﬁre, M. G., Hollenbach, D., McKee, C. F. 2010, ApJ, 716, 1191
Wuyts, S., F¨orster Schreiber, N. M., Genzel, R., et al. 2012, ApJ,

753, 114

Wuyts, S., F¨orster Schreiber, N. M., van der Wel, A., et al. 2011b,

ApJ, 742, 96

Wuyts, S., F¨orster Schreiber, N. M., Lutz, D., et al. 2011a, ApJ,

738, 106

Wuyts, S., Franx, M., Cox, T. J., et al. 2009, ApJ, 696, 348
Zavala, J., Frenk, C. S., Bower, R., et al. 2015, MNRAS, submitted

(arXiv1512.02636)

Zibetti, S., Gallazzi, A., Charlot, S., Pierini, D.,& Pasquali, A.

2013, MNRAS, 428, 1479

Zibetti, S., Charlot, S.,& Rix, H.-W. 2009, MNRAS, 400, 1181

