6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
6
1

 
 
]
T
G
h
t
a
m

.

[
 
 

2
v
6
5
4
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

A representation theoretic characterization of simple closed curves on a

surface

THOMAS KOBERDA AND RAMANUJAN SANTHAROUBANE

Abstract. We produce a sequence of ﬁnite dimensional representations of the
fundamental group π1(S ) of a closed surface where all simple closed curves act
with ﬁnite order, but where each non–simple closed curve eventually acts with
inﬁnite order. As a consequence, we obtain a representation theoretic algorithm
which decides whether or not a given element of π1(S ) is freely homotopic to a
simple closed curve. The construction of these representations combines ideas
from TQFT representations of mapping class groups with eﬀective versions of
LERF for surface groups.

1. Introduction

Let S = S g be a closed and orientable surface of genus g ≥ 2. A simple closed
curve on S is a homotopically essential embedding of the circle S 1 into S . Fixing a
basepoint in the interior of S , an element 1 , γ ∈ π1(S ) is called simple if it is freely
homotopic to a simple closed curve, and non–simple otherwise. A homotopy class
of loops γ : S 1 → S is called an proper power if there is a loop γ0 : S 1 → S and an
n > 1 such that γ = γn
0, i.e. γ0 concatenated with itself n times. In this article, we
propose a representation theoretic characterization of the simple elements in π1(S ),
which thus relates a topological property of a conjugacy class in π1(S ) with the
representation theory of π1(S ). Precisely:
Theorem 1.1. Let X be a ﬁxed ﬁnite generating set for π1(S ), and let ℓX be the
corresponding word metric on π1(S ). There exists an explicit sequence of ﬁnite
dimensional complex representations {ρi}i≥1 and a computable function f depending
only on X such that:

(1) For each simple element 1 , γ ∈ π1(S ) and each i, the linear map ρi(γ) has

ﬁnite order bounded by a constant which depends only on i;

(2) An element 1 , γ ∈ π1(S ) which is not a proper power is non–simple if and

only if ρi(γ) has inﬁnite order for all i ≥ f (ℓX(γ)).

Date: March 18, 2016.

1

2

THOMAS KOBERDA AND RAMANUJAN SANTHAROUBANE

Corollary 1.2. Let γ ∈ π1(S ) be non–simple and not a proper power. Then there is a
ﬁnite dimensional linear representation ρ of π1(S ) under which all simple elements
have ﬁnite order, but where ρ(γ) has inﬁnite order.

Algebraic and algorithmic characterizations of simple closed curves on surfaces
have been studied by many authors for quite some time. The ﬁrst group–theoretic
characterization of simplicity of elements in π1(S ) was given by Zieschang (see
[22], [23]). Algorithms, among them ones of both algebraic and geometric nature,
were given by Chillingworth in [11] and [12], Turaev–Viro [21], Birman–Series [3]
with extensions by Cohen–Lustig [10], Hass–Scott [14], Arettines [2], Cahn [5],
and Chas–Krongold in [6] and [7]. A homological characterization using ﬁnite cov-
ering spaces was given by Boggi [4]. The foundational work of Goldman [13] has
guided much of the progress in the study of algebraic characterizations of simple
closed curves (see also [20]).

Corollary 1.3. There exists an algorithm which, by computing a certain represen-
tation of π1(S ), decides whether or not an element 1 , γ ∈ π1(S ) is simple.

The representations in Theorem 1.1 and Corollary 1.2 come from TQFT repre-
sentations of mapping class groups, combined with certain canonical representation
theoretic constructions. To the authors’ knowledge, Corollary 1.3 gives the ﬁrst
representation theoretic and the ﬁrst topological quantum ﬁeld theoretic characteri-
zation of simple closed curves on a surface.

We remark that Theorem 1.1 and its corollaries all hold for compact orientable
surfaces with boundary. We have limited our discussion to closed surfaces in order
to make some of the statements cleaner, but the arguments work for surfaces with
boundary in a manner which is essentially unchanged.

2. Acknowledgements

The authors thank J. Aramayona, V. Krushkal, G. Masbaum, and H. Parlier for

helpful discussions.

3. Background

3.1. Hyperbolic geodesics. Let S be a closed, orientable surface with a ﬁxed com-
plete hyperbolic metric. It is a standard fact that in every free homotopy class of
closed curves on S there is a unique hyperbolic geodesic. Whereas we think of ho-
motopy classes of loops as maps S 1 → S , we think of closed geodesics as subsets
γ ⊂ S . Thus, when speaking of geodesics, we do not distinguish between the geo-
desic representative of a homotopy class γ : S 1 → S and any of its nonzero powers
γn : S 1 → S .

3

3.2. Eﬀective LERF. Let G be a group. We say that G is locally extended residu-
ally ﬁnite or LERF if every ﬁnitely generated subgroup G is closed in the proﬁnite
topology on G. The topological meaning of LERF is given by the following well–
known fact:
Lemma 3.1. Let X be a simplicial complex such that π1(X) is LERF, let K be a
ﬁnite simplicial complex, and let f : K → X be a simplicial map such that some lift

of f to the universal covers of K and X respectively is an embedding. Then there
exists a ﬁnite cover X′ → X and a lift f ′ : K → X′ of f such that f ′ is an embedding.

˜f : eK → eX

We recall a proof for the convenience of the reader.

Proof of Lemma 3.1. The failure of the embedding of K via f can be quantiﬁed by
a ﬁnite collection of simplices KX ⊂ X, i.e. the simplices σ ⊂ K for which there
exists another simplex τ ⊂ K such that f (σ) = f (τ). Note that if X′ → X is a cover
and if f ′ : K → X′ is a lift of f then KX′ ⊂ KX, though KX′ may depend on the
choice of lift f ′ if the cover X′ → X is not regular.

We can proceed by induction on |KX|.

If |KX| = 0 then f is an embedding.
Otherwise, choose a non–closed simplicial path γ ⊂ K such that f (γ) is a closed
loop. By deﬁnition, both endpoints of γ lie in simplices in KX. Note that, after
choosing a basepoint for π1(X), the loop f (γ) is homotopic to an element in π1(X) \
f∗(π1(K)). Since π1(X) is LERF, there is a ﬁnite cover X′ → X and a lift f ′ of f such
that K lifts to X′ but the loop f (γ) does not lift to a closed loop in X′. It follows
that the simplices containing the endpoints of γ no longer lie in KX′, completing the
inductive step.

(cid:3)

A famous result of P. Scott [19] says that closed surface groups are LERF. We
will require an eﬀective version of Scott’s theorem, which was obtained by P. Pa-
tel [18]. To state the eﬀective version, let S be a compact surface of negative Eu-
ler characteristic. Following Patel, we give S the standard hyperbolic metric, one
which comes from a tiling by right-angled hyperbolic pentagons. If H < π1(S ) is
an inﬁnite index, ﬁnitely generated subgroup, we let X → S be the corresponding
cover and C(X) the convex core of X. That is to say, C(X) is the smallest, closed,
convex subsurface of X with geodesic boundary for which the inclusion into X is a
homotopy equivalence. Note that H is a ﬁnitely generated free group of rank n. Let
β be the total length of the geodesic boundary of C(X), which is ﬁnite since H has
ﬁnite rank.
Theorem 3.2 ([18], Theorem 7.1). Suppose n ≥ 2, let γ ∈ π1(S ) \ H, and let ℓγ be
the length of the geodesic representative of γ. There exists a ﬁnite index subgroup

4

THOMAS KOBERDA AND RAMANUJAN SANTHAROUBANE

K < π1(S ) containing H but not γ such that

[π1(S ) : K] < 4n − 4 +

2 sinh[d · (ℓγ/e + 2)]

π

· β,

where d and e are ﬁxed positive constants.
3.3. Word metrics and quasi–isometry. Recall that a map f : X → Y between
two metric spaces is a quasi–isometry if there exist constants λ ≥ 1 and C, D ≥ 0
such that for all a, b ∈ X we have

1
λ

· dX(a, b) − C ≤ dY( f (a), f (b)) ≤ λ · dX(a, b) + C,

and if for each y ∈ Y there is an x ∈ X such that dY( f (x), y) ≤ D. The classical
Milnor–Schwarz Lemma says that if a ﬁnitely generated group G acts properly and
cocompactly by isometries on a proper geodesic metric space X then the Cayley
graph for G with respect to any ﬁnite generating set is quasi–isometric to X. It
follows that the word metric on any closed surface group is quasi–isometric to the
hyperbolic metric on H2.

Fix a ﬁnite generating set X for π1(S ). Note that if 1 , γ ∈ π1(S ) then ℓX(γ) ≥ 1.
The following is an immediate consequence of the deﬁnition of a quasi–isometry:
Lemma 3.3. Let γ ∈ π1(S ), and assume that γ is not a proper power. Let ℓγ denote
the length of a geodesic representative for γ, and let ℓX(γ) denote the length of γ in
the generating set X. Then for some λ = λ(X, S ), we have ℓγ ≤ λ · ℓX(γ).

In Lemma 3.3, we are justiﬁed in deleting the additive constant C on the right
because ℓX only takes positive integer values on nontrivial elements of π1(S ) and
because we are free to replace the multiplicative constant λ by λ + C.

Recall that a collection {αi}i∈I of curves is called ﬁlling if

S \[

αi

i

is a union of disks.
Lemma 3.4. Let X be a ﬁnite generating set for π1(S ) and let γ ∈ π1(S ). Then there
is a constant C = C(X, S ) such that the geodesic representative for γ has at most
C · (ℓX(γ))2 self–intersections.

Lemma 3.4 is proved in a slightly diﬀerent form and by diﬀerent methods by
Malestein–Putman (See [17], Lemma 3.1). More precise self–intersection bounds
are also studied in [10], [8], and [9].

If δ and α are two closed (though not necessarily simple nor essential) curves on
S which intersect transversely, we will write i(α, δ) for the geometric intersection
number of α and δ, counted will multiplicity. That is to say, if we view δ as a map

δ: S 1 → S ,

5

then

i(α, δ) = |δ−1(δ ∩ α)|.

Observe that with this deﬁnition the function i is not symmetric in its arguments,
though it is symmetric if both δ and α are simple.
Proof of Lemma 3.4. Without loss of generality, we may assume that γ is not a
proper power. Writing γ as a product of elements of X and ℓ for ℓX(γ), we have
that the geodesic representative for γ has length at most λ · ℓ for some appropriately
chosen constant λ, by Lemma 3.3. We will abuse notation and refer to the geodesic
representative for γ by γ as well.

We ﬁx A = {αi}i∈I a ﬁnite ﬁlling collection of simple closed geodesic curves with
no triple intersections of curves. Let N be the minimal width of a collar neighbor-
hood of any αi, chosen thinly enough so that no point on S lies in three collars.
Evidently, N can be chosen in a way which depends only on S . If δ is any closed
geodesic on S with

i(A, δ) := X

i(αi, δ),

we have the a priori estimate

i

N
2

· i(A, δ) ≤ ℓδ.

It follows that

i(A, γ) ≤

2λ · ℓ

.

N

Note that the self–intersections of γ must occur either on α or in the interior of
S \A. If D is a component of S \A then any two arcs in γ∩D intersect at most once,
since D is contractible and since γ is a geodesic. Thus, we see that the number of
self–intersections of γ in the interior of D is bounded by the number of components
of γ ∩ D choose two, which is a quadratic function in i(∂D, γ). The lemma now
follows easily.
3.4. Finding roots of elements in π1(S ). Let 1 , γ ∈ π1(S ) be an element, written
as a word in the generating set X. We can algorithmically determine whether or not
γ is a proper power.
Lemma 3.5. There is an algorithm which decides if γ ∈ π1(S ) is a proper power,
which has exponential complexity in ℓX(γ).
Proof. We have that for some λ > 0, the geodesic representative for γ has length at
most λℓX(γ). We have that γ is a proper power if and only if the map S 1 → S whose
image is the geodesic in the free homotopy class of γ wraps around the geodesic at
least twice. If Y ⊂ π1(S ) is the set of (exponentially many in ℓX(γ)) elements whose
geodesic representatives have length at most λℓX(γ), we have that γ is a proper

(cid:3)

6

THOMAS KOBERDA AND RAMANUJAN SANTHAROUBANE

power if and only if some γ′ ∈ Y with γ′ , γ commutes with γ in π1(S ). To check
whether or not a given γ′ commutes with γ has linear complexity in ℓX(γ) + ℓX(γ′),
since π1(S ) is hyperbolic and thus has a linear Dehn function.
3.5. Embedded ﬁgure eight loops. Let γ ⊂ S be closed geodesic with exactly one
self–intersection, so that γ can be termed a ﬁgure eight loop. Fixing a basepoint
for S on γ (say the self–intersection point), we can orient γ and identify it with
an element of π1(S ). Note that the requirement that γ be geodesic automatically
guarantees that this ﬁgure eight loop is essential, i.e. that the two simple subloops of
γ generate a copy of the free group F2 < π1(S ). The following is a straightforward
consequence of the main technical result of the authors [16]:
Lemma 3.6. Let S g = S a closed surface of genus g. There is a linear representa-
tion ρ : π1(S ) → GLn(C) such that:

(cid:3)

(1) If γ ∈ π1(S ) has an embedded essential ﬁgure eight loop as its geodesic

representative, then ρ(γ) has inﬁnite order;

(2) The image of each simple element in π1(S ) under ρ has ﬁnite order bounded

by k, where k depends only on ρ;

(3) We have n ≤ Kg, where K is a constant independent of g.

In the interest of brevity, we will not describe the representation ρ in any detail.

However, ρ can be written down explicitly and is thus computable.
Proof of Lemma 3.6. In [16], we considered a sequence of representations

ρp : π1(S g) → PGLd(p,g)(C)

indexed by odd integers p ≥ 3.

It is straightforward to adjust the proof of Theorem 1.1 of [16] to establish the
following: if γ is an arbitrary ﬁgure eight loop then there exists p0(γ) such that for
p ≥ p0(γ) we have ρp(γ) has inﬁnite order.

These representations were obtained from restrictions of quantum SO(3) repre-
sentations of mapping class groups. This clearly implies that if ρp(γ) has inﬁnite
order for some p, then ρp(γ′) has inﬁnite order for all γ′ in the mapping class group
orbit of γ.

Now since there are only ﬁnitely many ﬁgure eight loops in π1(S g) up to the
action of the mapping class group, we can choose one p0 such that if γ is an arbitrary
ﬁgure eight loop then ρp0(γ) is an inﬁnite order element.

Following the discussion in Section 4.4 of [16], we can choose p0 independently
of g, and we have d(g, p0) ≤ Kg for some constant K which is also independent of
g. Finally, the image of any simple element in π1(S g) under ρp0 has order at most
2p0.

(cid:3)

3.6. Induced representations. We will require some well–known fact from rep-
resentation theory, which we gather here for the convenience of the reader. We will
restrict to complex representations, though the discussion works over any ﬁeld of
characteristic zero.

7

Let G be a group, let H be a ﬁnite index subgroup of G, and let V be a ﬁnite
dimensional complex representation of H. The induced representation of G is a
canonical way to turn V into a ﬁnite dimensional representation of G. Precisely, we
take

IndG

H V := C[G] ⊗C[H] V.

It is standard that the complex dimension of IndG
H V is given by [G : H] · dim V.
Frobenius reciprocity, suitably generalized to inﬁnite groups, guarantees that if h ∈
H acts with inﬁnite order on V then h also acts with inﬁnite order on IndG
Lemma 3.7. Let H < π1(S ) be a ﬁnite index subgroup, classifying a ﬁnite cover
S ′ → S . Let V be a ﬁnite dimensional representation of H such that each simple
element of H = π1(S ′) acts with ﬁnite order. Then if 1 , γ ∈ π1(S ) is simple, we
have that γ acts with ﬁnite order on IndG

H V.

H V.

Proof. Let γ ∈ π1(S ) be a given simple element. Since H classiﬁes a ﬁnite cover
S ′ → S , there is a smallest positive integer N such that γN lies in every conjugate
of H, so that each conjugate of γN is freely homotopic to a power of a simple closed
curve on S ′.

If {t1, . . . , tk} are coset representatives for H in G, we have that

IndG

H V (cid:27)

kM

i=1

ti ⊗ V.

We then have for each i,

γN · (ti ⊗ V) = ti ⊗ ((t−1

i γNti) · V).

Since γN is a power of a lift of a simple element of π1(S ), it acts with ﬁnite order
on V. Since conjugating γN is simply a diﬀerent choice of lift, we have that t−1
i γNti
also acts with ﬁnite order on V.

(cid:3)

4. Immersed figure eight loops

Let E (cid:27) S 1 ∨ S 1 be a ﬁgure eight. Though E is not a manifold, it will be useful
for our purposes to speak of a smooth structure on E. Away from the wedge point
w, we will think of E as a smooth one–manifold. The smooth structure at w will
simply be this: a chart deﬁned on the neighborhood of w maps to the intersection of
the x–axis and y–axis in a neighborhood of the origin in R2, which we will think of
as inheriting a smooth structure from R2. Thus, the tangent space at w consists of
the union T1 ∪T2 of two one–dimensional spaces. A smooth path in a neighborhood

8

THOMAS KOBERDA AND RAMANUJAN SANTHAROUBANE

of w thus has a unique (unoriented) direction of travel through w. It is convenient
for us to think of the neighborhood of w as a union of two smooth intervals c1 and c2
which meet at w, and whose tangent spaces at w are T1 and T2 respectively. A map
f : E → M, where M is a smooth manifold, is called smooth at w if it is smooth
when restricted to c1 and c2 separately.
Lemma 4.1. Let γ ⊂ S be a closed geodesic with at least one self–intersection.
Then γ is the image of a smooth immersion f : E → S .

Proof. Choose an arbitrary orientation on γ and an arbitrary self–intersection point
p ∈ γ. In a small neighborhood U of p, we have that γ ∩ U is a pair of transversely
intersecting oriented arcs α and β. We start at p and travel along α in the direction
of the orientation. We follow γ until we return to p for the ﬁrst time. Note that this
will happen along the arc β, since geodesics are uniquely determined by a point and
a direction. We denote the resulting loop on S by γ1. Continuing from p along β,
we eventually return to p for a second time along α, tracing another closed loop γ2.
We have thus decomposed γ as a union of two distinct closed curves on S which
meet at p. Therefore, γ1 ∪ γ2 is the image of a smooth immersion E → S sending
the wedge point w ∈ E to p.

(cid:3)

Note that since γ is itself a geodesic, it is shortest within its homotopy class. This
immediately implies that the subloops γ1 and γ2 are homotopically essential and not
homotopic to each other, even after reversing one of their orientations. Viewing γ1
and γ2 as oriented homotopy classes of loops based at p, we see that they generate
a copy of the free group F2 < π1(S ).
Lemma 4.2. Let γ ⊂ S be a closed geodesic with at least one self–intersection, and
let f : E → S be an immersion with image γ. Then there is a ﬁnite cover S ′ → S
and a lift f ′ : E → S ′ of f which is an embedding. In particular, γ lifts to a ﬁgure
eight loop in S ′.

Proof. Let p be a self–intersection of γ, which we use as a basepoint for π1(S ). We
have that π1(E) (cid:27) F2, and f∗(π1(E)) is a copy of F2 < π1(S ). The claim of the
lemma follows from Scott’s Theorem that surface groups are LERF.

(cid:3)

Let X → S be the cover of S corresponding to the subgroup f∗(π1(E)) < π1(S ).
We have that X is homeomorphic to a thrice punctured sphere, though from a geo-
metric point of view we have that X has a compact core (cf. Subsection 3.2) which
is homeomorphic to a pair of pants, together with three ﬂaring ends. The boundary
curves (i.e. cuﬀs) of the compact core C(X) (cid:27) P are closed geodesics. Observe that
if f ′ : E → S ′ is a lift of f which is an embedding, then the natural extension of
f ′ to P will also be an embedding, since the cuﬀs of P have simple and pairwise
disjoint representatives inside of a tubular neighborhood of f ′(E).

9

Lemma 4.3. Let f : E → S be an immersion with geodesic image γ, let X → S be
the cover of S corresponding to the subgroup f∗(π1(E)), and let P = C(X) be the
core of X. Write {ℓi | 1 ≤ i ≤ 3} for the lengths of the geodesic cuﬀs of P. Then for
each i, we have ℓi ≤ ℓγ.
Proof. Writing E as a wedge of two circles, these two circles trace out two subloops
γ1 and γ2 of γ, the sum of whose lengths is ℓγ. Orienting these loops appropriately
and thinking of γ1 and γ2 as homotopy classes of loops based at p, the homotopy
classes of the cuﬀs of P are {γ1, γ2, γ1γ2}. Since the geodesic representative of a
curve is the shortest curve in its free homotopy class, we see that the cuﬀ lengths of
P are each at most ℓγ, the desired conclusion.
Lemma 4.4. Let γ′ be a geodesic on S which is freely homotopic to a simple
subloop of γ. Then ℓγ′ ≤ ℓγ.
Proof. This is almost clear. Performing a homotopy of γ′ into a subloop in γ, we
have that γ′ traverses no subarc of γ more than once, so the length estimate is
immediate.

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

As before, we use the self–intersection point p of γ as a basepoint for π1(S ), so
that f∗(π1(E)) is unambiguously identiﬁed with a rank two free subgroup of π1(S ).
Recall that we have chosen a ﬁnite generating set X for π1(S ).
Lemma 4.5. If γ has at least two self–intersections then there is an element γ′ ∈
π1(S ) \ f∗(π1(E)) such that γ′ is freely homotopic into f (P) and such that ℓX(γ′) ≤
3λ · ℓγ.
Proof. Let γ′ ⊂ γ be an arbitrary essential subloop. By passing to a shorter essential
subloop if necessary, we assume that aside from the self–intersection points of γ,
the subloop γ′ traverses each subarc of γ at most once, which immediately implies
that γ′ is not a proper power. Choose a minimal length path δ ⊂ γ from p to γ′.
Note that the total length of the loop δ−1 ◦ γ′ ◦ δ is at most 3ℓγ, so that by Lemma
3.3, we have that ℓX(δ−1 ◦ γ′ ◦ δ) ≤ 3λ · ℓγ.

We claim that the homotopy class at least one such loop δ−1 ◦ γ′ ◦ δ does not lie in
f∗(π1(E)), which will establish the lemma. Note that if the homotopy class of each
such element δ−1 ◦ γ′ ◦ δ was in f∗(π1(E)) then the immersion f : P → X would in
fact be an embedding, since every essential loop in f (P) would lift to the cover of
X corresponding to f∗(π1(E)) = f∗(π1(P)). Since E is the core of the pair of pants P
and therefore has one self–intersection, we see that then γ would have exactly one
self–intersection, a contradiction.

(cid:3)

5. Identifying non–simple curves

In this section, we prove Theorem 1.1 and Corollary 1.3. The representation ρi in
the statement of Theorem 1.1 will be as follows: let {S k → S }k∈N be a computable

10

THOMAS KOBERDA AND RAMANUJAN SANTHAROUBANE

enumeration of the ﬁnite covers of S , arranged so that if
deg{S j → S } < deg{S k → S }

then j < k. We let ω j be the representation ρ in Lemma 3.6, corresponding to
the surface S j, and let σ j be then the induced representation of ω j given by the
inclusion π1(S j) < π1(S ). We then set

ρi = Y

j≤i

σ j.

It is clear from the construction that for each i, the representation ρi is ﬁnite dimen-
sional, and of a dimension which is a computable function of i.

The following is straightforward, but we record it for completeness:

Lemma 5.1. Let G be a ﬁnitely generated group, and let νG(n) be the number of
ﬁnite index subgroups of index at most n. Then νG is a computable function of n.
Proof of Theorem 1.1. We will assume that, applying Lemma 3.5 and replacing γ
by a word of comparable or shorter length if necessary, that γ is not a proper power.
Note that if γ is a simple element of S then ρi(γ) will have ﬁnite order for each i,
by Lemma 3.7. Note furthermore that the order of ρi(γ) depends only on i and not
on γ.

If the geodesic representative for γ has exactly one self–intersection then γ is a
ﬁgure eight loop. We then have that ρ1(γ) has inﬁnite order. If γ has more than one
self–intersection then it suﬃces to show that γ can be lifted to a ﬁgure eight loop on
a cover S ′ → S , where the degree of this cover is a computable function of ℓX(γ),
by Lemma 5.1.

Let γ ∈ π1(S ), let ℓX(γ) be its length as a word in the generating set X, and let
ℓγ be the length of the geodesic representative of γ. We will abuse notation and
write γ for the geodesic representative. By Lemma 3.4, we have that γ has at most
C · (ℓX(γ))2 self–intersections.

Since now γ has at least two self–intersections by assumption, we think of a
regular neighborhood of γ as an immersion f : P → S of a geodesic pair of pants
which is not an embedding. By Lemma 4.3, we have that the sum of the lengths of
the boundary curves of P is at most 3ℓγ.

Since f is not an embedding, there is an essential closed curve γ′ ⊂ f (P) which
does not lie in f∗(π1(P)), by Lemma 4.5. Moreover, we may assume that the geo-
desic representative for γ′ has length at most 3ℓγ. We can thus apply Theorem 3.2
to get control over the index of a ﬁnite cover of S ′ → S to which γ′ does not lift.
Observe that any lift of γ to S ′ has smaller self–intersection number than γ ⊂ S ,
but the geodesic length of the lift is unchanged. Therefore, we may repeatedly
apply Theorem 3.2 until γ becomes a ﬁgure eight loop. We thus obtain a cover

11

S ′ → S and a lift of γ to a ﬁgure eight loop on S ′, where the degree of S ′ → S is a
computable function of ℓX(γ). This completes the proof.
Proof of Corollary 1.3. Let 1 , γ ∈ π1(S ) be given as a word in X. We use Lemma
3.5 to replace γ by a word which is not a proper power, if necessary. We apply
the ﬁnitely many representations {ρ1, . . . , ρ f (ℓX(γ))} to γ, where f is the computable
function furnished by Theorem 1.1. It is computable whether or not ρi(γ) has ﬁnite
order for each of these representations. Theorem 1.1 implies that if γ is not a simple
element of π1(S ) then ρi(γ) will have inﬁnite order for some i ≤ f (ℓX(γ)). If ρi(γ)
has ﬁnite order for each i ≤ f (ℓX(γ)) then γ is a simple element of π1(S ).

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

6. Theoretical complexity estimates

In this short section, we estimate an upper bound on the theoretical complexity

of the algorithm given by Corollary 1.3.

Corollary 6.1. The complexity of the algorithm given by Corollary 1.3 is super-
exponential.

We will not give a detailed proof of Corollary 6.1, and instead we will note
complexity estimates for each step of the algorithm. We start with a ﬁnite generating
set X for π1(S ) and γ ∈ π1(S ) with ℓX(γ) = N. We argued in Lemma 3.5 that
deciding if γ is a proper power has at most exponential complexity, so that we will
assume from the beginning that γ is not a proper power.

(1) The geodesic representative for γ (also called γ) has length O(N).
(2) The bound on the number of self–intersections of γ is O(N2).
(3) To lift γ to a ﬁgure eight loop, we need to resolve O(N2) loops of length

O(N).

(4) A loop of length O(N) can be resolved on a cover of degree O(eN) by The-

(5) A bound on the degree of a cover which resolves O(N2) loops of length

orem 3.2.

O(N) is O(eN3).

(6) The number of subgroups of index k in π1(S ) grows faster than k!.
Thus, we see that the most straightforward implementation of the algorithm re-
quires, for γ of length N, a number of computations which is super-exponential in
N. In practice, many of the steps above can be made more eﬃcient, so that the
“practical” complexity of this algorithm may be somewhat better.

7. Remarks on the AMU Conjecture for surface groups

In this short section, we explain the motivation behind the work in this paper.
The starting point is to use certain representations of surface groups under which
ﬁgure eight loops have inﬁnite order, and under which simple loops have ﬁnite

12

THOMAS KOBERDA AND RAMANUJAN SANTHAROUBANE

order. In order to prove the results of this paper, we only need the existence of one
such representation. However, each representation used here is part of an inﬁnite
sequence of representations

ρp : π1(S ) → PGLdp(C)

indexed by odd integers p, as considered in [16]. For the present algorithm, we only
need the following : if γ is geodesic ﬁgure eight loop, then ρp(γ) has inﬁnite order
for p big enough (cf. Lemma 3.6). In general, it is expected that any non–simple
element of π1(S ) which is not a proper power will have inﬁnite order under ρp for
all but ﬁnitely many values of p. More precisely :
Conjecture 7.1 (AMU Conjecture for surface groups). If 1 , γ ∈ π1(S ) is a non–
simple element which is not a proper power then ρp(γ) has inﬁnite order for p ≫ 0.
This conjecture is implied by the AMU Conjecture as stated by Andersen, Mas-

baum, and Ueno [1]. We will brieﬂy explain how this works.

Let x0 ∈ S be a ﬁxed marked point and let Mod1(S ) be the mapping class group
of S ﬁxing the marked point x0. The Witten–Reshetikhin–Turaev SO(3) topological
quantum ﬁeld theory gives a representation

˜ρp : Mod1(S ) → PGLdp(C)

for each odd integer p ≥ 3. Using the Birman exact sequence, we can view π1(S ) as
a subgroup of Mod1(S ). This allows us to deﬁne a representation ρp by restricting
˜ρp to π1(S ). The AMU conjecture as stated in [1] reads as follows:
Conjecture 7.2. If φ ∈ Mod1(S ) has a pseudo-Anosov piece then ˜ρp(φ) has inﬁnite
order for p ≫ 0.

To see how Conjecture 7.2 implies Conjecture 7.1, we use a result of Kra (see
Theorem 1.1 of [15]): if 1 , γ ∈ π1(S ) is non–simple and not a proper power then
the corresponding mapping class in Mod1(S ) is pseudo-Anosov on the subsurface
of S ﬁlled by γ. It is now clear that Conjecture 7.2 implies Conjecture 7.1.

References

[1] J.E. Andersen, G. Masbaum, K. Ueno. Topological quantum ﬁeld theory and the Nielsen-

Thurston classiﬁcation of M(0, 4). Math. Proc. Cam. Phil. Soc. 141(2006) 447–488.

[2] C. Arettines. A combinatorial algorithm for visualizing representatives with minimal self-

intersection. J. Knot Theory Ramiﬁcations 24 (2015), no. 11, in press.

[3] J. Birman and C. Series. An algorithm for simple curves on surfaces. J. London Math. Soc. (2)

29 (1984), no. 2, 331–342.

[4] M. Boggi, with an appendix by Pavel Zalesskii. Characterizing closed curves on Riemann

surfaces via homology groups of coverings. To appear in Int. Math. Res. Not. IMRN, 2016.

[5] P. Cahn. A generalization of the Turaev cobracket and the minimal self-intersection number of

a curve on a surface. New York J. Math. 19 (2013), 253–283.

13

[6] M. Chas and F. Krongold. An algebraic characterization of simple closed curves on surfaces

with boundary. J. Topol. Anal. 2 (2010), no. 3, 395–417.

[7] M. Chas and F. Krongold. Algebraic characterization of simple closed curves via Turaev’s

cobracket. J. Topology (2015), in press.

[8] M. Chas and A. Phillips. Self-intersection numbers of curves on the punctured torus. Experi-

ment. Math. 19 (2010), no. 2, 129–148.

[9] M. Chas and A. Phillips. Self-intersection numbers of curves in the doubly punctured plane.

Exp. Math. 21 (2012), no. 1, 26–37.

[10] M. Cohen and M. Lustig. Paths of geodesics and geometric intersection numbers. I. Combi-
natorial Group Theory and Topology, Alta, Utah, 1984. Ann. of Math. Studies 111, Princeton
University Press, Princeton, NJ, (1987), 479–500.

[11] D. Chillingworth. Winding numbers on surfaces. I. Math. Ann. 196 (1972), 218–249.
[12] D. Chillingworth. Winding numbers on surfaces. II. Math. Ann. 199 (1972), 131–153.
[13] W. Goldman. The symplectic nature of fundamental groups of surfaces. Adv. in Math. 54

(1984), no. 2, 200–225.

[14] J. Hass and P. Scott. Intersections of curves on surfaces. Israel J. Math. 51 (1985), no. 1–2,

90–120.

[15] I. Kra. On the Nielsen-Thurston-Bers type of some self maps of Riemann surfaces. Acta Math.

134 (1981), no. 3–4, 231–270.

[16] T. Koberda and R. Santharoubane. Quotients of surface groups and homology of ﬁnite covers

via quantum representations. Invent. Math., in press.

[17] J. Malestein and A. Putman. On the self-intersections of curves deep in the lower central series

of a surface group. Geom. Dedicata 149 (2010), 73–84.

[18] P. Patel. On a theorem of Peter Scott. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 142 (2014), no. 8, 2891–2906.
[19] P. Scott. Subgroups of surface groups are almost geometric. J. London Math. Soc. (2) 17 (1978),

no. 3, 555–565.

[20] V. Turaev. Algebras of loops on surfaces, algebras of knots, and quantization. Braid group, knot
theory and statistical mechanics, 59–95, Adv. Ser. Math. Phys., 9, World Sci. Publ., Teaneck,
NJ, 1989.

[21] V. Turaev and O. Viro. Intersection of loops in two–dimensional manifolds. II. Free loops. Mat.

Sbornik 121(163) (1983), no. 3, 359–369.

[22] H. Zieschang. Algorithmen f¨ur einfache Kurven auf Fl¨achen. Math. Scand. 17 (1965), 17–40.
[23] H. Zieschang. Algorithmen f¨ur einfache Kurven auf Fl¨achen. II. Math. Scand. 25 (1969), 49–

58.

Department of Mathematics, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904-4137, USA
E-mail address: thomas.koberda@gmail.com

Institut de Math´ematiques de Jussieu (UMR 7586 du CNRS), Equipe Topologie et G´eom´etrie

Alg´ebriques, Case 247, 4 pl. Jussieu, 75252 Paris Cedex 5, France

E-mail address: ramanujan.santharoubane@imj-prg.fr

