6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
9

 

 
 
]
t
f
o
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
5
5
4
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

The eﬀect of the underlying mathematical model on particle size
estimates by the laser diﬀraction method of needle-like particles

Okpeafoh S. Agimelena,∗, Jan Sefcika, Anthony J. Mulhollandb,∗

aEPSRC Centre for Innovative Manufacturing in Continuous Manufacturing and Crystallisation,
Department of Chemical and Process Engineering, University of Strathclyde, James Weir Building,

bDepartment of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Strathclyde, Livingstone Tower, 26

75 Montrose Street, Glasgow, G1 1XJ, United Kingdom.

Richmond Street, Glasgow G1 1XH, United Kingdom.

Abstract

Many industrial processes for the production of particulate products rely on the
accurate measurement of the sizes of these particles during the production process.
One particle sizing technique which is implemented in commercial instruments due to its
wide use in the manufacturing (of particulate products) industry is the laser diﬀraction
method. The estimation of particle sizes by this method requires the solution of an
inverse problem using a suitable model which incorporates the size, shape and optical
properties of the particles. However, the commercial instruments which implement
this laser diﬀraction method typically employ a model designed for spherical particles
to solve this inverse problem even though a signiﬁcant number of materials occur as
elongated particles in industrial processes.

As the inverse problem is ill-posed, then the use of a spherical model could lead
to very misleading results. In this work, we demonstrate that the use of this spherical
model for the estimation of sizes of these elongated particles could lead to over estima-
tion of the proportion of the small particles in the population. This eﬀect could lead
to an under estimation of the mean particle size by as much as a factor of 50%.

Keywords: Particle size distribution, Particle shape, Laser diﬀraction.

1. Introduction

Particle characterisation is one of the core tasks performed in the particle analysis
community [1]. This activity involves the identiﬁcation of the distribution of particle
sizes1 in a given powder sample which had been prepared by a suitable crystallisation
technique. In some cases, the particle size distribution (PSD) of the crystals in a slurry

∗Corresponding authors
Email addresses: okpeafoh.agimelen@strath.ac.uk (Okpeafoh S. Agimelen),

anthony.mulholland@strath.ac.uk (Anthony J. Mulholland)

1The particle size in this work is taken to be the diameter of a sphere for the case of spherical
particles. Here, needle-like particles will be represented by inﬁnite cylinders. In that case, the particle

Preprint submitted to Chemical Engineering Science

March 14, 2016

could be directly estimated before the powder is produced. To achieve this task of PSD
estimation (whether in situ or oﬀ-line), various techniques or equipment are utilised [1].
The laser diﬀraction method has become very popular in the particle analysis com-
munity, and for this reason diﬀerent manufacturers have developed instruments which
implement this technique [2]. This laser diﬀraction method involves the collection of
scattered light from a dilute slurry of particles by an array of detectors placed at diﬀer-
ent spatial locations so that they cover a certain span of angles θ. Since the intensity
of scattered light at (diﬀerent angular positions) by each particle is a function of the
size (and shape) of the particle, then the size distribution of the original population of
particles that produced a particular scattering intensity (the intensity of scattered light
as a function of angular position) can be inferred from the scattering intensity. How-
ever, as there is typically a distribution of particle sizes in a slurry, then the intensity
pattern measured by the detectors will be a convolution of the intensity patterns from
all the particles (of diﬀerent sizes) in the slurry.

The estimation of the PSD from the measured scattering intensity involves solving
an inverse problem using a suitable forward model. This forward model describes
the scattering intensity to be expected from a particle of a given shape and size. This
inversion process is typically implemented in the software of commercial laser diﬀraction
instruments. However, these instruments typically implement (for solving the inverse
problem) the Mie scattering model [3] for spherical particles regardless of the shape of
the particles in the slurry. This has led to some inexplicable peaks and discrepancies
[4, 5] in the PSD estimates with these instruments when the shape of the particles in
the slurry deviate signiﬁcantly from spherical. This could give misleading information
regarding the distribution of particles sizes in a slurry. The consequences could be
severe in applications where the process is very sensitive to the distribution of particle
sizes. This is particularly important in the pharmaceutical industry where many of the
active pharmaceutical ingredients are crystalline with needle-like shapes.

In this paper, we demonstrate some of the eﬀects of using a spherical model to solve
the inverse problem associated with laser diﬀraction for needle-like particles. Rather
than using experimental data we deliberately use simulated data so that all of the
observed eﬀects are solely due to the inversion process and not other compounding issues
that experimental data exhibit. We use three simulated monodispersed population of
needle-like particles corresponding to particles in size ranges typically encountered in
crystallisation processes, we show where the eﬀect of solving the inverse problem with
a spherical model could be more severe and where the eﬀect is less severe.

2. Method

In this work, the scattering intensity for needle-like particles will be simulated using
the scattering theory for inﬁnitely long cylinders [3]. The cylindrical shape is a good

size will be the diameter of the circular cross section of the cylinder. The length of the cylinders cannot
be speciﬁed as the cylinders have inﬁnite length.

2

approximation for needle-like particles which are thin and elongated like cylinders. For
example the cases of cellobiose octaacetate (COA), benzoic acid (BA) and metformin
(MFM) are shown in Figs. 1(a), 1(b) and 1(c) respectively. Even though the cylindrical
model is developed for inﬁnitely long cylinders2, the theory is applicable for needle-like
particles whose lengths are four times or more [7] their radii (assuming a circular cross
section for each particle). This requirement is easily satisﬁed by typical needle-like
particles as seen in Fig. 1.

Figure 1: Sample images for typical needle-like particles for (a) COA, (b) BA and (c) MM crystals.

Simulated scattering intensity (as opposed to using experimentally measured scat-
tering intensity for needle-like particles) will be used here so as to isolate the eﬀect that
the spherical model assumption has on the estimated PSD as experimental data would
contain noise3 which would complicate the analysis. This is because inverse problems of
this nature are not well posed [8, 9] such that the estimated PSD is heavily inﬂuenced

2A cylinder whose length is much larger than its diameter [6].
3The noise would be from various eﬀects such as background noise from the measuring instrument,

agglomeration of particles, distribution of the shape of the particles under consideration and so on.

3

(c)(a)(b)by the noise from experiments. The simulated scattering intensity will not be contami-
nated by experimental noise, hence the eﬀect can be ignored in the analysis. However,
there will still be noise in the system due to errors from using the spherical model. The
approach that will be adopted in this work will be to compute the scattering intensity
for needle-like particles (of speciﬁed optical properties) using the model for inﬁnitely
long cylinders, and then solve the inverse problem using the Mie model for spherical
particles. Since the PSD of the needle-like particles will be speciﬁed, then the estimated
PSD obtained using the spherical model can be compared with the known PSD to check
the level of agreement with the known PSD.

3. Calculating scattering intensity

Consider a detector system (sketched in Fig. 2(a)) in which a monochromatic light
with wave vector ki is incident on a particle of arbitrary size and shape. The scat-
tered light with wave vector ks is then collected at diﬀerent angles θ to the direction
of propagation of the incident light by an array of detectors as depicted in Fig. 2.
Both the incident and scattered light have components parallel and perpendicular to
the scattering plane (the plane containing the incident and scattered light) [3]. The
scattering wave vector q is the diﬀerence between the incident and scattered wave vec-
tors as sketched in Fig. 2(b). The magnitude of the scattering wave vector is a function
of the scattering angle θ, and it is given by [10]

Figure 2: (a) Schematic of the setup of typical laser diﬀraction instruments. (b) Illustration of the
scattering wave vector.

4

where λ is the wavelength of the incident light.

q =

4π
λ

sin(θ/2),

(1)

The general information concerning the intensity and state of polarisation of both
the incident and scattered light is contained in the Stokes parameters I, Q, U, V [3, 11].
The Stokes parameter I is the light ﬂux or intensity. The Stokes parameters Q and U
describe the state of linear polarisation and V describes the state of circular polarisation.
The Stokes parameters of the incident light are related to those of the scattered light
by means of the scattering matrix or phase matrix Z as [3, 11]

 =

 Is

Qs
Us
Vs

 Z11 Z12 Z13 Z14

Z21 Z22 Z23 Z24
Z31 Z32 Z33 Z34
Z41 Z42 Z43 Z44



 Ii

Qi
Ui
Vi

 ,

1

k2r2

(2)

where k = 2π/λ is the wave number and r is distance in the radial direction. The Stokes
parameters of the scattered light are indicated by the subscript s, while those of the
incident wave are indicated by the subscript i in Eq. (2). The elements Zij, ij = 1, 2, 3, 4
of the phase matrix Z are related to the elements of the amplitude matrix S. The
amplitude matrix relates the incident electric ﬁeld Ei to the scattered electric ﬁeld Es
as [3, 11]

(cid:19)

(cid:18) E(cid:107)s

E⊥s

eik(r−z)
−ikr

=

(cid:18) S2 S3

S4 S1

(cid:19)(cid:18) E(cid:107)i

E⊥i

(cid:19)

,

(3)

where the incident light is taken to propagate in the z direction. The elements Si, i =
1, 2, 3, 4 of the amplitude matrix are functions of the scattering angle θ, the size of the
particle D and the refractive index NR of the particle.

Most commercial laser diﬀraction instruments only measure the intensity of scat-
tered light from an incident unpolarised light. Hence it is assumed in this work
that there is no polarisation of the scattered light so that the Stokes parameters
Q = U = V = 0. Thus Eq. (2) reduces to

where Z11 is given by [3]

Z11 =

1
2

Is =

Z11
k2r2 Ii,

(cid:0)|S1|2 + |S2|2 + |S3|2 + |S4|2(cid:1) .

(4)

(5)

In a population of particles of diﬀerent sizes and shapes, the phase matrix for the
population will be the sum of the phase matrices of the individual particles in the
population. Then the phase matrix for the population is given as [3, 11]

Z =

Zk,

(6)

N(cid:88)

k=1

5

where N is the number of particles in the population. The sum in Eq.
(6) holds
provided that the particles are randomly positioned and oriented, and that the particles
are suﬃciently spaced such that there is no multiple scattering. Hence the intensity of
scattered light from the population of particles will be given as

N(cid:88)

k=1

I =

I0
k2r2

Z11,k,

(7)

where I0 and I are the intensities of the incident and scattered light respectively and
Z11,k is the contribution to the Z11 component of the phase matrix from particle k. The
conditions required for Eq. (6) to hold are easily met in commercial laser diﬀraction
instruments, hence the conditions will be assumed to apply in this work.

Here, the polydispersed population of particles shall be assumed to consist of par-
ticles of the same shape and refractive index but diﬀerent sizes. The distribution of
particle sizes is characterised by a probability density function n(D) such that n(D)dD
is the probability of ﬁnding particles with diameters between D and D + dD. If the
diameters of the particles are discretised and grouped into N geometrically spaced size
classes such that the characteristic diameter of particles whose diameters lie between
Di and Di+1 (i = 1, 2, . . . , N ) is given by Di =
DiDi+1, then a discretised particle size
distribution (PSD) X(Di) can be deﬁned such that X(Di) is the number of particles
whose diameters lie between Di and Di+1.

Then the number of particles Ni with characteristic diameter Di is given by Ni =

√

X(Di). Then Eq. (7) can be rewritten as

N(cid:88)

i=1

N(cid:88)

i=1

I(θj) =

I0
k2r2

NiZ11(θj, Di) =

I0
k2r2

Z11(θj, Di)X(Di),

(8)

where the scattering angle θ has been discretised into j = 1, 2 . . . , M angular positions
and Z11(θj, Di) is the averaged phase matrix component for particles whose sizes lie
between Di and Di+1. Since the magnitude of the scattering wave vector q is a function
of angle (as deﬁned in Eq. (1)), then the scattering intensity and component Z11 of the
phase matrix in Eq. (8) can be rewritten as functions of q (discretised) as

I(qj) =

I0
k2r2

Z11(qj, Di)X(Di).

(9)

Writing I(qj) as Ij, Z11(qj, Di) as ˜Zj,i and X(Di) as Xi, then Eq. (9) can be written
as a matrix equation as

Ij = I =

I0
k2r2

˜Zj,iXi =

I0
k2r2

˜ZX.

(10)

The scaling factor in Eq. (10) can be removed if the scattering intensity is rescaled
by the scattering intensity I1 measured at an angular position close to zero. That is,

6

N(cid:88)

i=1

N(cid:88)

i=1

i=1

N(cid:88)
(cid:80)N
(cid:80)N

I1 =

I0
k2r2

˜Z1,iXi.

˜Ij =

Ij
I1

=

˜Zj,iXi
˜Z1,iXi

.

i=1

i=1

(11)

(12)

the zero q limit of the scattering intensity. The choice of I1 for rescaling the scattering
intensity is reasonable since the quantity Z11 assumes a ﬂat proﬁle at the zero q limit
for particles of diﬀerent shapes and sizes and refractive indices [3]. If the ﬁrst detector
in the array of detectors (sketched in Fig. 1) is placed at an angular position suﬃciently
close to zero, then the scattering intensity at the zero q limit for the particles in the N
size classes can be constructed from the ﬁrst row of matrix ˜Z as

Then the rescaled scattering intensity ˜Ij can be constructed as

The rescaled scattering intensity in Eq. (12) is the form in which the scattering intensity
data is reported in typical commercial laser diﬀraction instruments. Hence this form of
the scattering intensity will be used in subsequent analysis in this work.

3.1. Population of spherical particles

The components S3 = S4 = 0 in the amplitude matrix deﬁned in Eq. (3) in the case

of spherical particles [3]. The components S1 and S2 are deﬁned as [3]

(cid:88)
(cid:88)

n

n

S1 =

S2 =

2n + 1
n(n + 1)

2n + 1
n(n + 1)

(anπn + bnτn)

(anτn + bnπn),

(13a)

(13b)

where the quantities πn and τn are functions of the scattering angle θ. They can be
obtained by the following recurrence formulas [3]

2n − 1
n − 1

µπn−1 − n
n − 1
πn =
τn =nµπn − (n + 1)πn−1,

πn−2

(14a)

(14b)

where µ = cos(θ), π0 = 0 and π1 = 1. The series in Eqs. (13) and (14) are truncated
after nc terms; the value of which is related to the size of the particle [3]. The scattering
coeﬃcients an and bn are functions of the particle size and refractive index. They are
obtained by solving the Maxwell equations for a spherical particle with appropriate
boundary conditions4. Using Eq. (5), then the Z11 component of the phase matrix can
be calculated and subsequently the rescaled scattering intensity of the population can
be calculated using Eq. (12).

4See [3] for details of the calculations of the scattering coeﬃcients. The numerical calculations of
these scattering coeﬃcients (for spherical particles) has been implemented in various programming
languages. The Matlab implementation by [12] is used in this work.

7

3.2. Population of needle-like particles

Figure 3: A schematic for light scattering by an inﬁnitely long cylinder.

As discussed in section 2, the scattering intensity of needle-like particles will be
approximated with that for inﬁnitely long cylinders. The sketch of such an inﬁnitely
long cylinder is shown in Fig. 3. The axis of the cylinder lies along the z-axis. The
incident light (with wave vector ki) which is contained in the x−z plane makes an angle
ζ with the cylinder axis, while the scattered light (with wave vector ks) is contained in
the x − y plane and makes an angle θ with the negative x-axis. The scattered light is
measured in the x− y plane by an array of detectors as shown in Fig. 3. The scattering
plane contains the cylinder axis and scattered light [3].

The amplitude matrix relates the incident electric ﬁeld Ei to the scattered electric

ﬁeld Es as [3]

(cid:19)

(cid:18) E(cid:107)s

E⊥s

(cid:115)

= ei3π/4

2

πkr sin(ζ)

eik(r sin(ζ)−z cos(ζ))

(cid:18) T1 −T3

T3

T2

(cid:19)(cid:18) E(cid:107)i

E⊥i

(cid:19)

,

(15)

The quantities Ti, i = 1, 2, 3 in Eq. (15) correspond to the quantities Si, i = 1, 2, 3, 4 in
Eq. (3) for the general case. The quantities Ti, i = 1, 2, 3 are given as [3]

∞(cid:88)
∞(cid:88)
∞(cid:88)

n=1

n=1

T1 =ˆb0I + 2

ˆbnI cos (nθ)

T2 =ˆa0II + 2

ˆanII cos (nθ)

T3 = − 2i

ˆanI sin (nθ).

(16a)

(16b)

(16c)

The scattering coeﬃcients ˆb0I, ˆbnI, ˆa0II, ˆanII, ˆanI (similar to the case of an and bn in
Eq. (13)) are functions of particle size (the diameter of the inﬁnitely long cylinder) and

n=1

8

refractive index. They are obtained by solving the Maxwell equations for the cylindrical
geometry with appropriate boundary conditions5.

Using the components Ti, i = 1, 2, 3 of the amplitude matrix for the inﬁnitely long

cylinder, then the Z11 component of the phase matrix can be calculated as

(cid:0)|T1|2 + |T2|2 + 2|T3|2(cid:1) .

Z11 =

1
2

(17)

Subsequently the rescaled scattering intensity in Eq. (12) can be calculated for the
inﬁnitely long cylinders that are used to represent needle-like particles in this work.

4. Forward and inverse problem

In a slurry of particles of diﬀerent sizes, the scattering intensity measured ˜I∗ with a
suitable instrument will be a convolution of the scattering intensities of the individual
particles in the slurry and the PSD X as discussed in section 3.
If the PSD X of
the particles in the slurry is given, then the scattering intensity of the population can
be calculated by solving the forward problem in Eq. (12). This calculated scattering
intensity ˜I can then be compared with the measured scattering intensity.

In reality the PSD X of the particles in a slurry will not be known. Instead the
situation will be to estimate the PSD corresponding to a measured scattering intensity.
This situation will involve solving an inverse problem. As mentioned earlier, the purpose
of this work is to examine the eﬀect of the model employed in solving the inverse problem
on the solutions obtained. To achieve this objective, then the experimentally measured
scattering intensity ˜I∗ will be simulated with the model for inﬁnitely long cylinders by
means of Eq. (17). Then a diﬀerent scattering intensity ˜I will be calculated using the
Mie model for spherical particles. This calculated scattering intensity ˜I will then be
used to solve the inverse problem for a given ˜I∗.

In this work, the inversion to obtain the PSD X will be carried out by solving the

weighted least square problem given as

min f =

M(cid:88)

j=1

wj

(cid:104) ˜I∗

j − ˜Ij

(cid:105)2

,

(18)

which is an unconstrained optimisation problem [13]. The weight function wj is given
as

1

wj =

1 + |C1| ˜Ij + |C2| ˜I 2

j

,

(19)

where the quantities C1 and C2 are optimisation parameters with initial values C1 =
C2 = 0. The weighting function in the objective function in Eq. (18) is necessary as

5See [3] for a detailed discussion of the calculation of these coeﬃcients. The numerical computations

of these coeﬃcients were carried out in Matlab in this work.

9

the values of the scattering intensity cover several orders of magnitude over the entire q
range of interest. A similar weighting function was employed in [14] for the calculation
of intensity for anti-Stokes Raman scattering but with ﬁxed values of C1 and C2.

4.1. Number and volume based PSD

The PSD deﬁned in Eq. (8) which is calculated by solving the least square problem
in Eq. (18) is number based. The number based PSD Xi is deﬁned as an exponential
function of the parameter γi as

Xi = eγi, i = 1, 2, . . . , N.

(20)

Then the optimisation problem given in Eq. (18) is solved by searching for γi (using
the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm as implemented in Matlab) which minimises the
objective function f given in Eq. (18). As the Levenberg-Marquardt method is gradient
based and the objective function in Eq. (18) contains local minima, then a multi-start
strategy [15] is used to search for a global minimum. This involves using diﬀerent
random starting solutions for γi, then the solution for which the L2 norm given as

(cid:118)(cid:117)(cid:117)(cid:116) M(cid:88)

(cid:104) ˜I∗

j − ˜Ij

(cid:105)2

(cid:107)˜I∗ − ˜I(cid:107)2 =

is minimum is then chosen as the optimum. Subsequently the number based PSD Xi
in Eq. (20) is calculated from this optimum solution for γi.

j=1

However, as commercial laser diﬀraction instruments typically report a volume based
PSD, then it is necessary to calculate a corresponding volume based PSD. This can be
achieved as follows. Consider the scattering intensity I j (obtained in a manner similar
to the case of Ij in Eq. (10)) given as

(21)

(22)

(23)

(24)

I j = α

˜Zji

ˆXi,

where

and

α =

I0
k2r2

Xi(cid:80)N

.

i=1 Xi

ˆXi =

The scattering intensity I j is associated with the number based PSD Xi by means
of Eq. (22). However, the scattering intensity I j can also be associated with the volume
based PSD X v
i (the total volume of particles of sizes between Di and Di+1) by writing

I j = α

Z jiX

v
i ,

(25)

N(cid:88)

i=1

N(cid:88)

i=1

10

where

and

X

v

i = ˆX v

i

ˆXiD3

i

ˆX v

i =

.

ˆXiD3

i

Z ji =

˜Zji
D3
i

,

i=1

N(cid:88)
i(cid:80)N
(cid:80)N
(cid:80)N

ˆXiD3

i=1

(26)

(27)

(28)

Then the scattering intensity I can be normalised to remove the scaling factor α (as

in the case of Eq. (12)) as

ˆIj =

i=1 Z jiX
i=1 Z 1iX

v
i
v
i

.

(29)

Hence Eq. (29) becomes the forward problem for the volume based PSD6 similar to the
case of Eq. (12) for the number based PSD.

The volume based PSD X v

i can then be calculated by solving a weighted least square
problem similar to the case given in Eq. (18). A similar approach has previously been
implemented for diﬀerent sensor data [8, 9].

The method of computing the volume based PSD X v
i

is carried out as follows.
Obtain the number based PSD Xi whose corresponding scattering intensity ˜Ij gives
the best ﬁt to the scattering intensity ˜I∗
j of the needle-like particles as judged by the
L2 norm in Eq. (21) . Then using this optimum number based PSD, construct the
scattering intensity I j given in Eq. (22). Then normalise the scattering intensity I j to
obtain the scattering intensity ˆIj in Eq. (29) as ˆIj = I j/I 1, where I 1 is the zero q limit
of I j. This scattering intensity ˆIj is associated with the volume based PSD X v
i deﬁned
in Eq. (29). When ˆIj is computed for needle-like particles, then it is written as ˆI∗
j .

To obtain the volume based PSD, search for values of the parameters γv

i for which

the volume based PSD X

v
i which is deﬁned as

X

v

i = eγv

i , i = 1, 2, . . . , N

(30)

gives a scattering intensity (by means of the normalised matrix multiplication in Eq.
(29)) ˆIj which is closest to ˆI∗
j . The search for the parameters γv
is done by solving a
i
weighted least square problem similar to that in Eq. (18) given as

min fv =

,

(31)

j=1

6The association of the scattering intensity I j to the volume based PSD given in Eq. (25) can only
be made for particles with deﬁned volume, for example spherical particles. However, as the sizes of
the inﬁnitely long cylinders used in this work are monodispersed, then the number based PSDs will
coincide with the corresponding volume based PSDs of the inﬁnitely long cylinders even though the
volume of an inﬁnitely long cylinder is not deﬁned.

11

M(cid:88)

(cid:104) ˆI∗

wv
j

j − ˆIj

(cid:105)2

where wv
PSD.

j is a weight function similar to the case of Eq. (19) for the number based

The optimisation problem in Eq.

(18), then an initial estimate X v0

(31) is solved using the Levenberg-Marquardt
algorithm as implemented in Matlab. Since the scattering intensity I j in Eq.
(22)
was constructed from a number based PSD obtained at the global minimum of the
of the volume based
objective function f in Eq.
PSD which is close to the global minimum of the objective function fv in Eq. (31) can
be constructed by the method of truncated singular value decomposition (TSVD) [15]
using the scattering intensity ˆIj in Eq. (29). This initially estimated volume based PSD
X v0 can then be used to obtain an initial starting solution for γv
i and passed on to the
Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm to solve the optimisation problem in Eq. (31). The
TSVD method can only be used to generate an initial estimate for γv
i as it predicts PSDs
with negative values because of the ill-posed nature of the inverse problem. However,
the formulation of the volume based PSD X
(30) guarantees non-negative
values.

in Eq.

v
i

i

Finally, the volume based PSD is normalised as

ˆX v

i =

4.2. Mean particle size

.

v
i

(32)

The mean size of the particles in a population can be represented by various metrics
depending on the application [16]. The volume weighted mean diameter D43 is com-
monly reported by commercial laser diﬀraction instruments. The D43 value is deﬁned
as [16]

D43 =

i=1 XiD
i=1 XiD

4
i
3
i

,

(33)

i = Xivi (where vi is the volume of the spherical

which upon using the substitution X v
particle with diameter Di) becomes

where

D43 =

ˆX v

i =

v

i(cid:80)N

X
i X

(cid:80)N
(cid:80)N

ˆX v

i Di,

N(cid:88)
i(cid:80)N

i=1

X v
i=1 X v
i

(34)

(35)

is the volume fraction of spherical particles of size Di. This D43 value will coincide with
the size of spherical particles in a monodispersed population. Otherwise, it will give an
estimate of the mean size of the spherical particles in a polydispersed population.

12

5. Results and Discussion

Needle-like particles in a slurry will experience diﬀerent kinds of hydrodynamic
conditions depending on the vessel type, the stirrer type and speed, restrictions to
ﬂow, the size and suspension density of particles and so on. Based on these diﬀerent
conditions, the particles may be able to perform completely random rotations or they
could become aligned with the ﬂow ﬁeld. When the particles perform diﬀerent random
rotations, then the incoming monochromatic light will hit the needle-like particles at
diﬀerent angles to their axes. However, when the needle-like particles are aligned with
the ﬂow ﬁeld, then the incoming monochromatic light will hit the particles within
some restricted angles to their axes. This is because the ﬂow cells typically used in
the measurements have limited space for particle rotations, and the source of light
illuminates the ﬂow cell within some restricted angles depending on the design of the
instrument [17]. Hence when the particles are aligned with the ﬂow ﬁeld (and hence
the ﬂow cell), then the incident angle of the incoming light to the particles will also be
limited. Motivated by this, we consider the two special situations where the incoming
light is normally incident to the axes of the particles on one hand and when the incoming
light hits the particles at diﬀerent angles to their axes on the other hand.

These two extremes will be examined in this work. When the particles are free to
perform diﬀerent random rotations, then the incident angle ζ (see Fig. 3) of the incom-
ing monochromatic light will take all possible values from ζ ≈ 0◦ (grazing incidence)
to ζ = 90◦ (normal incidence). However, when the particles are aligned with the ﬂow
ﬁeld, then the incoming monochromatic light will be normally incident on the particles
and hence the incident angle ζ is ﬁxed at 90◦.

The refractive indices of materials typically encountered in pharmaceutical crystalli-
sation processes are of order Nr = 1.50 with zero absorption. For example, the COA,
BA and MM crystals shown in Fig. 1 have refractive indices of Nr = 1.51, 1.50 and
1.58 respectively. The three materials have poor solubility in methanol which has a
refractive index Nr = 1.33. Hence the refractive index of Nr = 1.50 was used in the
simulation of the scattering intensities of the needle-like particles (modelled as inﬁnitely
long cylinders), and the particles were assumed to be suspended in a medium with re-
fractive index Nr = 1.33. For the inverse problem, the spherical particles were assumed
to have the same refractive index of Nr = 1.50 and also suspended in a medium with
a refractive index of Nr = 1.33. Hence any discrepancy between the scattering inten-
sities from the needle-like particles and the spherical particles will only be due to the
diﬀerence in shape and not the optical properties.

5.1. Case I: restricted rotations

The black diamonds in Fig. 4(a) show the scattering intensity from needle-like
particles (simulated with the model for inﬁnitely long cylinders7) with a monodispersed

7In this case, the scattering coeﬃcients in Eq. (17) are computed at a single angle ζ = 90◦ which
are then used to calculate the scattering matrix components T1, T2 and T3 to obtain the scattering

13

Figure 4: Black diamonds: scattering intensities for needle-like particles with monodispersed sizes of
(a) D = 1µm, (b) D = 10µm and (c) D = 100µm for Case I. Green crosses: estimated scattering
intensities (by solving the optimisation problem in Eq. (19)) using the spherical model corresponding
to the scattering intensities from the needle-like particles in (a), (b) and (c). The blue circles in (a),
(b) and (c) are the scattering intensities for spherical particles (by solving the forward problem in Eq.
(12)) of monodispersed sizes of (a) D = 1µm, (b) D = 10µm and (c) D = 100µm. (d) The zero q limits
of the scattering intensities for spherical particles of the sizes shown.

distribution of particle size (diameter of circular cross section of the cylinders) of D =
1µm as shown by the black diamonds in Fig. 5(a). The green crosses show the estimated
scattering intensity by using the spherical model in solving the optimisation problem
in Eq. (31). The estimated scattering intensity with the spherical model shows a good
ﬁt with the original scattering intensity for the needle-like particles. The corresponding
estimated PSD with the spherical model is shown by the green crosses in Fig. 5(a).
The estimated PSD obtained using the spherical model shows a peak at a particle size
slightly larger than D = 1µm as shown by the green crosses in Fig. 5(a). It also shows
a peak at a particle size close to 0.2µm. This can be understood by applying a simple
scaling law analysis.
This scaling law approach predicts a scattering intensity which is independent of q
[10] for qR (cid:46) 1 (where R is the radius of the particle) after which it transits into the

intensity.

14

10-210-1100101q(µm)−110-410-310-210-1100˜I10-210-1100101q(µm)−110-410-310-210-1100˜I10-210-1100101q(µm)−110-810-610-410-2100˜I100101102D(µm)1021041061081010I1(b)(c)(d)Case IP(a)GFigure 5: Black diamonds: monodispersed distribution of sizes for needle-like particles of sizes (a) D =
1µm, (b) D = 10µm and (c) D = 100µm for Case I. Green crosses: estimated PSD using the spherical
model to solve the optimisation problem in Eq. (31) for the scattering intensities of the needle-like
particles whose PSDs are shown by the black diamonds. (d) The D43 values estimated from the PSDs
obtained with the spherical model.

power law regime where it decays with a q scaling depending on the type of particle
[10]. This q independent regime or Guinier regime is indicated as G in Fig. 4(a) while
the power law regime is indicated as P in the same Fig. The transition from the Guinier
to the power law regime occurs at qR ≈ 1.

The blue circles in Fig. 4(a) represent the scattering intensity for a spherical particle
of diameter 1µm. This scattering intensity has a slightly longer Guinier regime when
compared with the scattering intensity of a needle-like particle (simulated with the
model for inﬁnitely long cylinders) with circular cross sectional diameter 1µm. Hence
in order for the spherical model to ﬁt the Guinier regime of the needle-like particles,
it overestimates the diameter of the needle-like particle8. This leads to the prediction
of particles with sizes slightly larger than 1µm by the spherical model as shown by the
green crosses in Fig. 5(a).

8Note that the Guinier regime of spherical particles become shorter (that is, the transition from

the Guinier to the power law regime shifts to the left) as the size of the particle increases.

15

10-210-1100101102103D(µm)00.20.40.60.81ˆXv10-210-1100101102103D(µm)00.20.40.60.81ˆXv10-210-1100101102103D(µm)00.20.40.60.81ˆXv100101102D(µm)100101102D43(µm)(d)(b)(a)(c)Case IThe power law regime of the scattering intensity for spherical particles slightly falls
below that of the needle-like particles in the high q (q (cid:38) 5µm in Fig. 4(a)) region. Hence
the spherical model introduces particles of size D ≈ 0.2µm and weights the fraction
of these particles appropriately in order for it to ﬁt the high q region of the power
law regime of the needle-like particles. This is the reason for the peak at D ≈ 0.2µm
in Fig. 5(a) (green crosses) in the estimated PSD using the spherical model. This is
because the smaller spherical particles have a slightly longer Guinier regime so that
their introduction and appropriate weighting leads to a better ﬁt of the power law
regime (in the high q region) of the needle-like particles by the spherical model.

A similar situation holds for needle-like particles of sizes D = 10µm and D = 100µm.
The Guinier regime of the scattering intensities corresponding to needle-like particles
of these sizes (D = 10µm and D = 100µm) are slightly shorter (black diamonds in
Figs. 4(b) and (c)) than the Guinier regime of monodispersed spherical particles of
corresponding sizes (blue circles in Fig. 4(b) and (c)). Hence in order for the spherical
model to ﬁt the Guinier regime of the needle-like particles (green crosses in Figs. 4(b)
and (c)), the spherical model predicts PSDs which contain peaks at locations slightly
larger than 10µm and 100µm respectively as seen by the peaks in Figs. 5(b) and (c).

Furthermore, the PSDs predicted by the spherical model contains peaks at particles
sizes < 10µm (for the case of needle-like particles of size D = 10µm) as seen by the green
crosses in Fig. 5(b) and at particles sizes < 100µm (for the case of needle-like particles
of size 100µm) as shown by the green crosses in Fig. 5(c). This is because the power
law regime of the scattering intensities of spherical particles of sizes D = 10µm and
D = 100µm (blue circles in Figs. 4(b) and (c) respectively) decays faster than the power
law regime of the scattering intensities of needle-like particles with corresponding sizes
(black diamonds in Figs. 4(b) and (c) respectively). This faster decay of the scattering
intensities of the spherical particles leads to the introduction of smaller particles (than
the actual sizes of the needle-like particles) by the spherical model in order for the
spherical model to ﬁt the power law regime of the needle-like particles.

The spherical model weights the peaks of the smaller particles appropriately in
order to ﬁt the power law regime of the needle-like particles. The volume fraction of
the small particles introduced by the spherical model to ﬁt the power law regime of
the needle-like particles could be substantial as seen in the case of D = 10µm in Fig.
5(b). This is because the plateau value of the Guinier regime (the zero q limit of the
scattering intensity deﬁned as I1 in Eq. (11)) varies by orders of magnitude for particles
of diﬀerent sizes as shown in Fig. 4(d).

Due to the introduction of smaller particles (than the sizes of the corresponding
needle-like particles), the D43 values calculated with the estimated volume based PSDs
from the spherical model are signiﬁcantly smaller than the sizes of the needle-like par-
ticles as seen in Fig. 5(d). This shows that the spherical model will predict a mean
particle size which is less than the true mean size of the needle-like particles when
these needle-like particles are aligned with the ﬂow and the incoming light is incident
normally to the axes of the particles.

16

5.2. Case II: random rotations

Figure 6: Similar to Figs. 4 (a), (b) and (c) but for Case II.

The other extreme where the needle-like particles are able to make random rotations
is analysed in this section. As in Case I, the scattering intensity of the needle-like
particles will be simulated9 with the model for inﬁnitely long cylinders, while the inverse
problem will be solved with the Mie model for spherical particles.

Unlike in Case I, the Guinier regime of the scattering intensity (blue circles in Fig.
6(a)) for spherical particles of size D = 1µm is slightly shorter than that of needle-
like particles (black diamonds in Fig. 6(a)) of the same size. This leads the spherical
model to predict the largest particle size to be less than 1µm (the size of the needle-like
particles) as shown by the green crosses in Fig. 7(a). However, as the power law regime
of the scattering intensity (blue circles in Fig. 6(a)) of the spherical particles of size
D = 1µm decays faster than that (black diamonds in Fig. 6(a)) of needle-like particles,
then the spherical model introduces smaller particles (as shown by the peaks in the

9In this case, the scattering coeﬃcients in Eq. (17) are computed for values of ζ = 1◦, 2◦, . . . , 90◦,
and then averaged over ζ. The averaged scattering coeﬃcients are then used to calculate the compo-
nents T1, T2 and T3 in order to compute the scattering intensity.

17

10-210-1100101q(µm)−110-410-310-210-1100˜I10-210-1100101q(µm)−110-510-410-310-210-1100˜I10-210-1100101q(µm)−110-810-610-410-2100˜ICase II(c)(a)(b)Figure 7: Similar to Fig. 5 but for Case II.

green crosses) at sizes < 1µm in Fig. 7(a) in order to ﬁt the power law regime of the
needle-like particles in Fig. 6(a).

As the size of the needle-like particles increases, then the scattering intensity begins
to develop strong oscillations, for example the troughs in the black diamonds close
to q = 1µm−1 and q = 0.4µm−1 in Figs. 6(b) and (c) respectively. The oscillations
are suﬃciently strong such that the scattering intensities of the needle-like particles
of sizes D = 10µm and D = 100µm intersect those of the spherical particles of the
corresponding sizes in the power law regime (in Figs. 6(b) and (c)). This is unlike in
Case I where the scattering intensities of the needle-like particles of sizes D = 10µm
and D = 100µm (in Figs. 4(b) and (c)) were consistently higher (in the power law
regime) than those of spherical particles of corresponding sizes.

The nature of the scattering intensities for these needle-like particles of sizes D =
10µm and D = 100µm in Figs. 6(b) and (c) causes the spherical model to ﬁnd a
compromise between ﬁtting the troughs and peaks of the oscillations in the scattering
intensities for these needle-like particles of sizes D = 10µm and D = 100µm. Hence the
ﬁtted curve (green crosses in Figs. 6(b) and (c)) nearly collapses onto the scattering
intensities of spherical particles of sizes D = 10µm and D = 100µm shown by the blue
circles in Figs. 6(b) and (c). This compromise situation is also due to the weighting
function (Eq. (19)) used in the optimisation. A diﬀerent weighting function could be

18

10-210-1100101102103D(µm)00.20.40.60.81ˆXv10-210-1100101102103D(µm)00.20.40.60.81ˆXv10-210-1100101102103D(µm)00.20.40.60.81ˆXv100101102D(µm)100102D43(µm)(a)(b)Case II(c)(d)chosen which is optimised for the peaks in the scattering intensities but this will not
be the best choice in a general situation.

This compromise situation leads to the prediction of PSDs (green crosses) by the
spherical model which contain peaks close to 10µm in Fig. 7(b) (for needle-like particles
of size 10µm shown by the black diamonds) and 100µm in Fig. 7(c) (for needle-like
particles of size 100µm shown by the black diamonds). As the PSDs predicted by
the spherical model do not deviate too much from the true PSDs of the needle-like
particles in this case, then the estimated D43 values by the spherical model also show
less deviation from the sizes of the needle-like particles as shown in Fig. 7(d). However,
this is just because the spherical model could not ﬁnd a good ﬁt to the power law regime
of the scattering intensities of needle-like particles in this case.

6. Conclusions

We have demonstrated some of the undesired eﬀects of applying a model for scat-
tering by spherical particles to solve the inverse problem for laser diﬀraction when the
scattering intensity comes from a population of needle-like particles. As only simulated
data has been used in this work, then the deviations of the estimated PSDs with the
spherical model from the PSDs of the needle-like particles are solely the result of using
an inappropriate model to ﬁt the data from the needle-like particles.

We have used monodispersed population of needle-like particles in this work to sim-
plify the analysis. However, the spherical model predicts a polydispersed distribution
of particle sizes even though the needle-like particles have a monodispersed distribution
of sizes. This is because the spherical model tries to ﬁt the scattering intensity as best
as it can. Unfortunately, this is the situation with real experimental data. As the PSD
is not known, and the inverse problem is not well posed, then a PSD which gives a good
ﬁt to the experimental data is chosen as a possible candidate for the true PSD of the
population of particles.

This approach is used in commercial laser diﬀraction instruments, and it can lead
to misleading estimates of the PSD of the population of particles under analysis. This
is exempliﬁed by the solutions obtained in Case II where the poorer ﬁts to the needle-
like particles yielded PSDs which were closer to the true PSDs. However, with real
experimental data, these solutions could have been rejected. The estimated PSDs
where which yielded better ﬁts to the scattering intensities of the needle-like particles
could have been considered more favourably. This approach of relying solely on the
goodness of ﬁt of the estimated scattering intensity to the experimentally measured
scattering intensity (even though the underlying model for the scattering intensity may
not be appropriate) could lead to a gross under estimation of the mean particle size as
exempliﬁed by Case I where the estimated D43 value for the needle-like particles of size
D = 10µm was more than 50% less than this value. Therefore, the best way to reduce
the risk of predicting misleading PSDs is to apply models that describe the shape of
the particles as closely as possible.

19

Acknowledgement

This work was performed within the UK EPSRC funded project

(EP/K014250/1) ‘Intelligent Decision Support and Control Technologies for Continu-
ous Manufacturing and Crystallisation of Pharmaceuticals and Fine Chemicals’ (ICT-
CMAC). The authors would like to acknowledge ﬁnancial support from EPSRC, As-
traZeneca and GSK. The authors are also grateful for useful discussions with industrial
partners from AstraZeneca, GSK, Mettler-Toledo, Perceptive Engineering and Process
Systems Enterprise. The authors also wish to thank Thomas McGlone and Vaclav
Svoboda for providing the images in Fig.1.

References

[1] C. Washington, Particle size analysis in pharmaceutics and other industries, Ellis

Horwood Limited, Chichester, England, 1992.

[2] D. L. Black, M. Q. McQuay, M. P. Bonin, Laser-based techniques for particle-size
measurement: a review of sizing methods and their industrial applications, Prog.
Energy Combust. Sci. 22 (1996) 267–306.

[3] C. F. Bohren, D. R. Huﬀman, Absorption and scattering of light by small particles,

John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New Jersey, United States, 1983.

[4] P. Hamilton, D. Littlejohn, A. Nordon, J. Sefcik, P. Slavin, Validity of particle size
analysis techniques for measurement of the attrition that occurs during vacuum
agitated powder drying of needle-shaped particles, Analyst 137 (2012) 118–125.

[5] C. Polakowski, A. Sochan, A. Bieganowski, M. Ry˙zak, R. F¨old´enyi, J. T´oth, In-
ﬂuence of the sand particle shape on particle size distribution measured by laser
diﬀraction method, International Agrophysics 28 (2014) 195–200.

[6] E. Lee, L. Pilon, Absorption and scattering by long and randomly oriented linear
chains of spheres, Journal of the Optical Society of America A 30 (2013) 1892–1900.

[7] N. C. Wickramasinghe, Light scattering functions for small particles with applica-

tions in astronomy, Adam Hilger Ltd., London, United Kingdom, 1973.

[8] O. S. Agimelen, P. Hamilton, I. Haley, A. Nordon, M. Vasile, J. Sefcik, A. J. Mul-
holland, Estimation of particle size distribution and aspect ratio of non-spherical
particles from chord length distribution, Chemical Engineering Science 123 (2015)
629–640.

[9] O. S. Agimelen, A. Jawor-Baczynska, J. McGinty, J. Dziewierz, C. Tachtatzis,
A. Cleary, I. Haley, C. Michie, I. Andonovic, J. Sefcik, A. J. Mulholland, Integration
of in situ imaging and chord length distribution measurements for estimation of
particle size and shape, Chemical Engineering Science 144 (2016) 87–100.

20

[10] C. M. Sorensen, Light scattering by fractal aggregates: A review, Aerosol Science

and Technology 35 (2) (2001) 648–687.

[11] M. I. Mishchenko, J. W. Hovenier, L. D. Travis, Concepts, terms, notation, in: M. I.
Mishchenko, J. W. Hovenier, L. D. Travis (Eds.), Light scattering by nonspherical
particles: theory, measurements and applications, Academic Press, London, United
Kingdom, 2000, Ch. 1, pp. 1–28.

[12] C. Maetzler, the Matlab code developed by Christian Maetzler for computing the
scattering coeﬃcients based on the Mie model can be found in: http://omlc.
org/software/mie/. Accessed on 23 February 2016.

[13] S. Boyd, L. Vandenberghe, Convex optimization, Cambridge University Press,

Cambridge, UK, 2004.

[14] M. Schenk, A. Thumann, T. Seeger, A. Leipertz, Pure rotational coherent anti-
Stokes Raman scattering: comparison of evaluation techniques for determining
single-shot simultaneous temperature and relative N2-O2 concentration, Applied
Optics 37 (24) (1998) 5659–5671.

[15] R. C. Aster, B. Borchers, C. H. Thurber, Parameter estimation and inverse prob-

lems, Elsevier Inc., Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2013.

[16] H. G. Merkus, Particle size measurements fundamentals, practice, quality, Springer

Science & Business Media B.V., Nertherlands, 2009.

I. Corp., A primer on particle sizing by static laser

scatter-
[17] M.
ing,
http://www.particletesting.com/Repository/Files/A_Primer_on_
Particle_Sizing_by_Static_Laser_Light_Scattering.pdf, accessed on 23
February 2016 (January 2000).

light

21

