6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
9

 

 
 
]

.

M
R
n
i
f
-
q
[
 
 

1
v
8
5
4
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Financial Contagion in Investment Funds

LEONARDO DOS SANTOS PINHEIRO
FL ´AVIO CODEC¸ O COELHO
Getulio Vargas Foundation
March 14, 2016

Abstract

Many new models for measuring ﬁnancial contagion have been
presented recently. While these models have not been speciﬁed for
investment funds directly, there are many similarities that could be
explored to extend the models. In this work we explore ideas devel-
oped about ﬁnancial contagion to create a network of investment funds
using both cross-holding of quotas and a bipartite network of funds
and assets. Using data from the Brazilian asset management market
we analyze not only the contagion pattern but also the structure of this
network and how this model can be used to assess the stability of the
market.

Keywords: ﬁnancial networks , asset management , contagion

1

1

Introduction

In recent years the use of network representations for the study of economic

systems has become ubiquitous, with many applications in the study of

labor markets, micro-ﬁnance and production chains Allen and Babus (2008).

A special subject in these topics is the study of ﬁnancial systems. Since

the global ﬁnancial crisis that hit the world in 2007-08 the interest in the

intricate ways in which ﬁnancial institutions are intertwined has soared,

with studies showing the several facets of the interconnections of ﬁnancial

systems, specially in the way these connections affect global stability.

The 2007-08 crisis, which started in the US sub-prime mortgage mar-

ket, rapidly spilled over to debt markets in a process of ﬁnancial contagion

that ultimately led to the demise of major American and European banks

and triggered a world recession that spanned years. Interconnection is also

a cause of major concern in the ongoing European debt crisis, with worries

that the interconnection in the European bank system may cause a serious

crisis if one nation defaults on its sovereign debt or enters into recession

putting some of the external private debt at risk.

Due to the aforementioned events, much of the studies on the con-

nectedness of ﬁnancial institutions is focused on the mutual exposures

between banks, specially the ones acquired on the interbank market (see

Cocco et al. (2009), Mistrulli (2011) and Iori et al. (2006)). But more recently

some attention has been devoted to non-bank ﬁnancial intermediaries, such

as the studies being conducted by the Financial Stability Board to address

what in being called the ”Shadow Banking System” (Board (2011a) and

Board (2011b)). In this work, we aim to explore one of these elements of

ﬁnancial systems, the asset management industry.

2

In the Brazilian market, in 2014, asset management ﬁrms oversaw

the allocation of approximately U$ 1T in ﬁnancial assets, consisting of a

substantial part of the Brazilian ﬁnancial system. Not only is the industry

signiﬁcant in size, but these ﬁrms and the funds they manage transact with

other institutions in the ﬁnancial system, and within themselves, in a variety

of ways. As a consequence, this industry is heavily interconnected with

the bank and insurance markets, augmenting greatly the effects it could

potentially have if the industry were hit by a major ﬁnancial shock.

While it is still highly debatable whether asset management in fact

poses systemic risk, the industry has a number of factors that make it suscep-

tible to ﬁnancial shocks. Behaviors such as reaching for yield and herding,

redemption risks associated to liquidity mismatch, high leverage and even

behaviors of the asset managers can represent sources of risk (for a deeper

discussion of the risks of asset management see the recent report of the

Ofﬁce of Financial Research, U.S. Department of the Treasury (2013)). These

are factors that have the potential to amplify ﬁnancial shocks over the funds

and, if the system is heavily interconnected, cause cascading failures and

heavy losses to the entire ﬁnancial system.

In this paper we develop a network model to assess the inter-connectivity

and how cascading failures can occur among investment funds. We also

take a empirical approach to study the asset management market through

simulations with data from the Brazilian Market.

In a simple deﬁnition, networks can be described as collections of

objects in which some objects can be connected forming a set of links. By

this generic deﬁnition, many types of connections can be used to compose

the edge’s set (Easley and Kleinberg (2010)).

The literature on ﬁnancial networks contains many proposed metrics

3

which can be used to deﬁne the connections between ﬁrms. For instance,

Huang et al. (2013) propose the use of a bipartite network between ﬁrms

and assets where a link represents a ownership relation between ﬁrm and

asset, Diebold and Yılmaz (2014) propose connectedness measures built

from pieces of variance decompositions and Billio et al. (2012) proposes a

set of econometric measures based on principal-components analysis and

Granger-causality networks. In this regards we follow closely the approach

adopted by Elliott et al. (2014), in which cross-holdings of organizations

shares form the edges, taken together with the approach from Huang et al.

(2013), to better explain the effects of the contagion over common asset

holdings as well.

By forming networks considering cross-holdings and common asset

holdings we can analyze the structure of an investment fund network and

look for potential impacts of ﬁnancial shocks using contagion and diffusion

models. While our model uses the ideas from the aforementioned works, this

approach is not exhaustive, there are many other contagion and diffusion

models in the ﬁnance literature which could have been explored (see Gai

and Kapadia (2010) and Allen and Gale (2000)).

The structure of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we

provide a background and basic terminology on graphs and networks that

will be used throughout the analysis. In Section 3 we present the contagion

model using the frameworks developed by Elliott et al. (2014) and Huang

et al. (2013). Section 4 describes the data used and give a brief overview

of asset management in Brazil. Section 5 presents the ﬁndings about the

network structure and the results of simulations over the data. Finally, in

Section 6 we discuss future research directions and present a summary and

ﬁnal remarks on the work.

4

2 Graph Theory and Network Science

In this section we provide some basic terminology about the concepts used

along this paper. Its comprises concepts from graph theory for the repre-

sentation of networks and from Social / Economic Network Analysis for

understanding network structure and stability.

2.1 Graph Theory

A graph is a mathematical construct of a set of objects, called nodes or

vertices, connected by a set of links, called edges. More formally a graph
G = (V, E) is an ordered pair consisting of a set of nodes V and a set of
edges E where E ⊆ V × V. The order of the graph is the number of nodes
n = |V| and its size is the number of vertices m = |E|.

A graph may be directed or undirected. A directed graph (or digraph)
is a ordered pair D = (V, E) consisting of a set of nodes V and a set of edges
E where E ⊆ V × V and where, for every edge (u, v) ∈ E, there is a link that
leaves u and enters v. We say that u is the tail and v is the head.

An import metric of networks is their degree distribution. The degree
of a node di is the number of connections it has. For a digraph we deﬁne in-
degree as the number of connections incoming to a node and the out-degree

as the number of connections leaving the node.

Graph labeling is the assignment of labels to edges and/or nodes of

a graph. These labels often represent attributes of the graph. In a labeled
graph we deﬁne the set of edges E ⊆ V × L × V where L is the set of
labels. A weighted graph is a labeled graph where edge labels are members

of an ordered set, usually of integers or real numbers, which represent the

5

Figure 1: A weighted directed graph

”strength” of the connections. We deﬁne wij as the weigh between nodes i
and j.

There are many ways to represent graphs. In this work, they are
usually represented by their adjacency matrix. An adjacency matrix M, is a
matrix whose entry Mij = wij. In an unweighed graph we use wij = 1 by
deﬁnition.

2.2 Centrality Measures

Graphs are a natural way to represent networks, but social economic net-

works usually exhibit some properties better analyzed through speciﬁc

metrics. As was found by Albert and Barab´asi (2002), many real networks

exhibit a property that their degree distributions are scale-free. In social and

economic networks, this property can create a structure where a few mem-

bers of the network can gather most of the connections, thus, controlling

the ﬂow of information in the network. This brings up the importance of

analyzing the inﬂuence of members in a network. One way to analyze this

importance is through centrality measures.

Centrality measures aim to describe how a given node relate to the

network in some aspect of its structure, such as node position in the network.

6

Four types of centrality measures are usually described in the network

literature (Jackson et al. (2008)), each one aiming to describe an different

aspect of node importance in the network. These are:

1. Degree Centrality: How many connections a node has;

2. Closeness Centrality: How easily a node can reach other nodes;

3. Betweenness Centrality: How central the node is in creating paths

between other nodes;

4. Eigenvector Centrality: How important (well connected) the node’s

neighbors are.

Degree Centrality is considered the most classical measure of cen-

trality and it measures how import a node is by the number of connections

it has (Freeman et al. (1980)). The degree centrality is simply measured by
Cd(u) = di(u). While it is a relevant measure, it is considered limited for
analyzing node inﬂuence. It’s main ﬂaw is that it misses the location of the

node in the network while for some applications, like spread of processes,

the position of the node in the network is a fundamental aspect.

Closeness Centrality measures a node importance by how close it

is to any other node in the network (Freeman et al. (1980)) . One way to

measure closeness is:

Cc(u) =

n − 1
∑n−1
v=1 d(v, u)

,

(1)

where d(v, u) is is the shortest-path distance between v and u, and
n is the number of nodes in the graph. In a diffusion process, the nodes

with highest closeness centrality are likely to be affect by the process more

rapidly than others.

7

Betweenness Centrality captures how well situated a node is in

terms of the paths (Freeman et al. (1980)) in the network. The betweenness
centrality of a node u is the sum of the fraction of all-pairs shortest paths

that pass through it. Mathematically we measure betweenness as::

Cb(u) = ∑
s,t∈V

σ(s, t|u)
σ(s, t)

,

(2)

where σ(s, t|u) is the number of shortest (s, t)-paths and σ(s, t) is the
number of those paths passing through u. In a diffusion process, a node that

has high betweenness can control the ﬂow of information in the network.

Eigenvector Centrality is based on the premise that a node’s impor-

tance is measured by how important it’s connections are (Bonacich (1972)).
The eigenvector centrality for node u is xi where i is the index of node u and
xi is the principal eigenvector in:

Ax = λx

(3)

where A is the adjacency matrix of the network. In diffusion process,

an node who is high on eigenvector centrality is connected to many nodes

which themselves are connected to many nodes, thus multiplying their

probability of contagion.

2.3 Homophily and Assortativity

Social and Economic networks sometimes exhibit a property that entities are

more prone to establish connections with similar entities. This property was

8

named homophily by Kandel (1978). Homophily may play an important role

in economic networks, since it can mean a network can be largely segregated

(Jackson et al. (2008)).

One way to measure homophily among labeled nodes is by assorta-

tivity. Assortativity measures the similarity of connections in a network with

relation to some attribute or label. We deﬁne the assortativity coefﬁcient as:

r =

∑i mii − ∑i aibi
1 − ∑i aibi

,

(4)

where mij is the fraction of edges in the network that connect a type i
node to a type j and mij = aibj. The matrix M is the joint probability distribu-
tion (mixing matrix) of the speciﬁed attribute Newman (2003). Assortativity

may play an important whole in ﬁnancial networks as segregated ﬁnancial

ﬁrms may form regions of closure for the spreading of losses.

2.4 Dynamic Networks

Some networks vary over time. The ﬁeld that studies how networks change

over time is known as network dynamics or dynamic network analysis

(DNA). The main aspects of DNA is the analysis of the statistical properties

of time varying networks and the simulation of network changes over time.

DNA is a broad ﬁeld and we refer to the work of Carley (2003) for those

interested in it. For the purpose of ﬁnancial networks and contagion we

focus on the stability of ﬁnancial networks over time.

One way to measure network stability over time is to check the

Jaccard similarity of nodes and/or edges between pairs of successive time

spans (Masys (2014)). This is a indication of how much nodes and/or edges

9

are formed or removed from the network between small time steps. The

Jaccard similarity coefﬁcient is a measure of similarity between sets. The
coefﬁcient of a set S and a set T is |S ∩ T|/|S ∪ T|, that is, the ratio of the
size of the intersection of S and T to the size of their union (Rajaraman et al.

(2012)).

3 The Cross-Holdings Contagion Model

In determining interconnectivity between investment funds we follow closely

the model developed by Elliott et al. (2014) for ﬁnancial ﬁrms in which cross-

holdings of shares among organizations may lead to cascading failures. In

the context of investment funds, we measure cross-holdings of fund’s quotas.

We differ from the model when common assets holdings are considered in

the process and in this regard we use the framework developed by Huang

et al. (2013).

3.1 Primitive Assets and Cross-Holdings

In the original model developed by Elliott et al. (2014) the value of organi-

zations are determined by factors of production ( represented by the assets

the organizations own)and the shares of the other organizations which they
hold. There are n organizations making up a set N = 1, 2, ..., n. There is

also a group of assets in the economy that may be owned by ﬁrms and
these assets compose another set M = 1, 2, ..., m. For investment funds as

organizations, the primitive assets are formed by assets not issued by other

investment funds and legally permitted to be bought by funds, these may

be shares of companies, corporate bonds, government bonds, derivatives,

among others. Funds can also hold shares of other funds, which creates

10

the cross-holdings among organizations. As the funds are the only orga-

nizations in our system we shall use the terms interchangeably from this

point.

The base value of a fund is determined by the value of it’s assets.
The value of an asset k is denoted by pk and we call p the vector containing
the values of the assets in M. We also call D the matrix which entry Dik
is the share of the value of asset k held by organization i. Complementary
to D we have the matrix C in which, for each, i, j ∈ N, Cij ≥ 0 is the
fraction of organization i owned by organization j. The matrix C can be

seen as a network of direct links between the organizations. There is also
the share ˆCii := 1 − ∑i∈N Cij of organization i which is not owned by other
organizations in the system. This forms the matrix ˆC.

To determine the fair value of organizations, Elliott et al. (2014) used

a framework developed by Fedenia et al. (1994) and Brioschi et al. (1989).
The value vi of organization i is determined by the value of it’s assets plus
the value of it’s applications on other organizations:

vi = ∑

k

Dik pk + ∑

j

Cijvj

(5)

This equation can be expressed in matrix form by V = Dp + CV and

is solved to yield:

V = (I − C)−1Dp

(6)

Brioschi et al. (1989) and Fedenia et al. (1994) argue that the true value
of an organization is better captured by what is held by outside investors.
This value is equal to ˙vi = ˆCiivi, leading to:

11

˙V = ˆC(I − C)−1Dp = ADp

(7)

We also call A = ˆC(I − C)−1 the dependency matrix. It captures the
true value of the cross-holdings of quotas in the market and allow us to

measure the true value of the funds and how changes in one organization’s

value shall affect any other.

3.2 Firm Susceptibility to Financial Shocks

Organizations can lose value in discontinuous ways under certain situations.

We call these losses failure costs. Failure costs are assumed if an organization

falls bellow some value threshold, in which case we can interpret that it has

transitioned from a ﬁnancially stable situation to an unstable one (Elliott
et al. (2014)). So, if organization i value’s fall below some threshold ¯vi, it
incurs in failure costs βi(p).

In a more general setting there are many possible explanations for

failure costs. The main assumption in investment funds is that under certain

situations there main occur a run on the fund, forcing it to sell assets at inop-

portune times at a discount rate, leading to the discontinuous losses. There

may be many situations causing this run on the fund, such as reputation risk

generated by the asset manager, performance risk caused by risky strategies

and leverage, or economic risks such as ﬁnancial bubbles and idiosyncratic

shocks.

When funds are directly connected by cross holdings the spread of a

discontinuous loss is straightforward. Nevertheless, failure costs incurred

by one organization may ”affect” other organizations even if they are not

directly connected in the network. The main way in which it can happen is

12

common asset holdings. Since many assets are held simultaneously by many

ﬁrms, the way one ﬁrm incurs in failure costs can force it to ﬁre sale it’s

assets and force the price of the asset down in a way that other organizations

holding the same assets may also face difﬁculties.

To correctly address the effect of common asset holdings we use the

framework developed by Huang et al. (2013). In addition to the network of

cross-holdings described in Equation 6 we use a ancillary network formed

by organizations as one type of node and assets as the other.

In this network a link between a fund and an asset exists if the fund

has the asset on its portfolio. It is a bipartite weighted graph where the

weights on the links represent the gross value of the portfolio position in

the asset.

Let B be the bipartite network between the organizations in N and

the assets in M. We have that

B =

 ,

0n,n W

WT 0m,m

where W is a n × m sub-matrix where wij is the value of the position of
fund i in asset j. We can rewrite the term Dp in 7 in terms of W. Let
(cid:126)1 = [1, 1, 1, ..., 1]T

n. We write:

Dp = W(cid:126)1.

And Eq. 6 leading to:

V = AW(cid:126)1

(8)

In the presence of ﬁnancial instability for an organization i, not only

13

failure costs βi are incurred but also every asset j owned by i suffer a pressure
to go down, becoming: pj =

∑i wij − ωwik

∑i wij

.

3.3 The Contagion Model

Financial contagion can occur when one organization fails and it’s losses

spread to other organizations causing them to fail as well. This can have the

potential to generate a cascade of failures, potentially breaking the ﬁnancial

system as a whole.

The ﬁnancial contagion process can be described as a diffusion pro-

cess where losses spread in the network of interconnections. Through both

the cross-holdings connections and common asset holdings funds can be

affected by this diffusion process.

If funds are directly connected, discontinuities will propagate in the

cross-holdings network, affecting the ﬁnal value of other funds invested in

the broken ﬁrms in the path of connections. These affected funds, in turn,

may start to face difﬁculties and cause new failures and discontinuous losses.

At the same time, these funds may be forced to sell their assets, causing

drops in asset prices which may also cause new failures and discontinuous

losses. These losses shall propagate until a new equilibrium is reached.

But prior to contagion we must have a shock over the system. This

shock can be of any kind, but for the contagion to be triggered at least one

fund must lose value until it fall bellow the critical value to move the system

from equilibrium.

Bellow we describe an algorithm containing the step-by-step process

to simulate the cascading failure process.

14

1. Let Zt be the set of failed organizations at step t. We initialize Z0 = ∅,

indicating a starting state of equilibrium.

2. At the initial moment we shock a market asset mi or a set of assets
M = {m1, m2, ..., mk} to be affected by the ﬁrst shock (Affected assets
depend on the nature of the shock). Each asset is reduced to a fraction
of its original value ηpi, where η < 1 is determined by the strength of
the shock.

3. After the initial shock, the loss spreads in the network of cross-holdings

and we recalculate the value of each fund in the system using Equa-
tion8, checking which of them have fallen bellow a critical value vcrit.
Each fund i in which vi < vcrit(i) is added to Z.

4. We start the iterative process. At step t, Let ˜bt−1 be a vector with
element ˜bi = βi if i ∈ Zt−1 and 0 otherwise, where βi is the loss
in value due to failure. Also, for each asset mj connected with each
fund i in Zt−1, its overall market value is reduced as the market’s
reaction to the fund failure. The price of asset mj owned by i becomes
pi =
, where ω is a parameter that measures the strength
of the ﬁre sales over the market price of the asset .

∑i wij − ωwij

∑i wij

5. The new set Zt is formed by the funds which have negative values in:

(cid:104)

(cid:105) − vcrit.

W(cid:126)1 − ˜bt−1

A

6. We terminate if Zt = Zt−1. Otherwise, we go back to step 4.

This algorithm provides a framework to understand how damages

spread to both other funds and to assets until the cascading failure stops. It

also describes a hierarchy of vulnerability under a speciﬁc crisis which is

determined by the initial shock.

Many parameters can affect the results of the algorithm. The strength

15

of the initial shock, the assets affected by the shock, the critical value of the

funds, the strength of the discontinuous losses and of the ﬁre sales are all
inputs of the algorithm and must be determined ex-ante.

Next we will present data taken from the Brazilian asset management

industry and exemplify the results of the algorithm with simulations.

4 The Data

Investment funds , sometimes referred to as collective investment vehicles,

are ﬁnancial intermediaries that collect ﬁnancial resources from a pool of

investors, both individuals and companies, and apply these resources into a

pool of assets (Bodie et al. (2009)).

In Brazil, investment funds are regulated by the Securities and Ex-

change Comission of Brazil (CVM) through CVM Instruction 555 (ICVM
555) 1 2. Investment funds are devoid from legal personality, despite that,
they are capable of acquiring and transferring assets and rights, always

represented by their administrators and managers (Fortuna (2008)).

Traditionally, funds are classiﬁed as ﬁxed income and variable income

to discriminate the level of risk of their strategies. Fixed income funds invest

in assets with a ﬁxed return rate, such as government bonds and private

credit, and variable income funds investing in assets with returns that vary

with the market, such as shares of companies. This classiﬁcation can be

1ICVM 555 is the current legal diploma for the regulation of investment funds, but many
of the classiﬁcations used in this paper are based on the deﬁnitions of CVM Instruction 409,
which was the legal diploma in the period of the analysis.

2ICVM 555 regulate both mutual funds and hedge funds, but not Brazilian structured
funds (REITs and Receivable funds). Brazilian structured funds are not included in our
simulations.

16

reﬁned to better represent investment strategies, two common classiﬁcations

are provided by the Brazilian Financial and Capital Markets Association

(Anbima) and by CVM. In this work we will adopt the classiﬁcation used by

CVM.

According to CVM’s classiﬁcation, funds are organized in 7 classes

which reﬂect their investment strategies and proﬁle of risk according to

the assets they can buy. Fixed-income funds are the most representative

class in terms of total assets and Multimarket funds comprise the class with

biggest number of funds. Multimarket funds are the class with most diverse

strategies and portfolios, as can be seen in ﬁgure 2.

Another broadly used classiﬁcation is for open-ended, which are

funds open to redemption at any time after a determined grace period, and

closed-ended funds, for funds with strict restrictions or even completely
unavailable for redemption. 3. Open-ended funds are the majority both in
number of funds and in number of assets under management. Close-ended

funds are excluded in simulations, since they are much less susceptible to

events that could trigger failure costs, as modeled in this work, such as a

run on the fund.

For this study we used data of investment funds from the CVM

database. To analyze the network structure we used data from January 2012

up to December 2014 and for the simulations we used data from December

2014.

3For a full description of classiﬁcations of investment funds in Brazil see CVM Instruction
555 and for a broader description of the Brazilian Capital Market see Fortuna (2008) and
Assaf Neto (2001)

17

Figure 2: Portfolio composition by fund class. Fixed income funds represent most of the total
asset in the industry. Fund quotas is by far the most owned asset, representing a potential
source of contagion. Brazilian government bonds follow as second most owned asset.

18

Figure 3: Number of funds by fund class. Multimarket funds represent the largest class in
number of funds, followed by ﬁxed-income and equity funds. Funds with more risk appetite
are more numerous but smaller in total assets.

5 Results and Discussion

5.1 Network Topology

To better understand how the market is organized we take a brief look at

some key features of the network topology. We then proceed to present the

results of the simulation experiments and discuss the role of the topology in

the system’s dynamics.

19

Figure 4: Stability of the Investment Fund network. The table shows Jaccard coefﬁents
of edges and nodes for the network in pairs of months over the period from Jan/2012 to
Dec/2014.

5.1.1 Stability

The structure of the network and it’s stability over time reﬂect investment

decisions from asset managers. As in Masys (2014) Jaccard similarity co-

efﬁcients are used to measure the structural stability of the network over

pairs of successive periods. Figure 5 shows the network growth over time

and Figure 4 reports a summary of the Jaccard coefﬁcients. The network

exhibit considerable stability between successive months, the number of

nodes exhibit growth at a steady rate while the number of connections seems

to ﬂuctuate more, exhibiting a hump. This ﬂuctuation may indicate some

relationship between the edge count and economic variables which could be

further investigated. On average, more then 90% of connections are stable

between periods, which support running dynamic models (Snijders et al.

(2010)) such as the cascading failures model.

20

Figure 5: Number of nodes and connections on the network over time. The number over
funds grows slowly but steadily over time. The number of edges ﬂuctuates.

5.1.2 Network Metrics

The cross-holdings network has very low connectivity with an average
degree of davg = 4.34. The degree histogram shows a typical scale free
distribution but in-degree and out-degree curves have very different shapes

as can be seen in Figure 6. The highest in-degree is 889 and highest out-

degree is 70. The in-degree is the most interesting metric since it is the one

that shows how many other funds are directly affected by the spreading of

losses in the cross-holdings network.

The fund-asset network, on the order hand, has an average degree of
davg = 20.23. If we disregard cash, which is connected to almost all funds,
the highest asset in-degree of 4838. The degree distribution in Figure 7

shows that a few assets are present in many portfolios displaying a high

level of concentration.

21

(a) In degree histogram

(b) Out degree histogram

Figure 6: The directionality of the edges indicates the investor fund as the tail and the
invested fund as the head. (a) In degree histogram for the cross-holdings network. The
histogram exhibit typical power law (b) Out degree histogram for the cross-holdings network.
The steepness of the curve is much lower in the out-degree distribution.

Comparing the two networks we can observe that the fund-asset

network is much more dense, with values of 0.001070 for the fund-asset

network and 0.00034 for the cross-holdings network. In Table 1 we can see

that in the fund-asset network there are some very central nodes while in the

cross-holding network this metric is much weaker. While assortativity is not

a relevant metric in the fund-asset network, in the cross-holding network

we can observe some level of segregation. Most notably, funds from same

Administrators show assortativity of 0.502 and funds from the same class

exhibit assortativity of 0.217. While the segregation of funds of the same

class is not high enough to indicate regions of conﬁnement for the spread of

risk, the segregation among administrators may be an issue of attention.

The nature of the spreading process in this model is very different

in the cross-holding network and in the bipartite network of funds and

assets. The results above indicate that we could observe a faster spreading

of contagion caused by asset connections than by cross-holding connections,

this is due to the fact that the network is more dense and central assets play

22

Table 1: Maximum centrality observed in both networks. The Fund-Asset network has nodes
with much stronger presence as hubs.

Cross-Holdings Network Fund-Asset Network

Max. Degree Centrality

Max. Closeness Centrality

Max. Betweenness Centrality

Max. Eigenvector Centrality

0.069

0.006

5.98e-05

0.788

0.256

0.437

0.035

0.670

a stronger whole as hubs.

(a) Degree histogram for fund nodes.

(b) Degree histogram for asset nodes.

Figure 7: Degree histograms for both types of nodes in the bipartite fund-asset network.
While both distributions exhibit characteristic power law shapes, the hubs are much more
prominent among assets than funds.

5.2 Simulations

In this section we illustrate how the use of some network metrics combined

with the contagion model can be used to monitor the stability of the ﬁnancial

system and to identify institutions and assets that could rapidly trigger a

contagion process. We build our illustration with a ﬁnancial shock related

to the ongoing Brazilian debt crisis, stressing the system to a sovereign debt

default.

23

Sovereign debt default can occur in many forms. A sovereign debt

is a contractual obligation and the most clear-cut example of default is the

failure to meet these obligations to pay interest or principal on the due

date. Another example is the failure by the government to honor debt it

has guaranteed where there are clear provisions for the guarantor to make

timely payment.

But sovereign defaults are often not so explicit. Government re-

sponses to ﬁnancial distress can take many forms. In some cases, it can be

inferred that, even in the absence of an interruption of debt payments, a

default has occurred because actions by the government result in economic

losses by creditors,which can vary widely (Beers et al. (2014)).

In our network of funds and assets Federal Government Bonds oc-

cupy a very central position. It has a total market cap of 35.12% of the total

assets and it also has a degree centrality of 4838, the biggest among all assets

except for Cash. It’s average path length 2.19, showing that losses can affect

almost any other asset price in the ﬁrst time step of the algorithm.

In our experimental design we vary the main inputs of the cascading

algorithm to test the susceptibility of the network in diverse settings. The

most important parameters are the rate of discontinuous loss suffered by

funds whenever they fail, the asset prices factor ω, which affects assets

of failed funds, the critical value under which the funds will fail and the

size of the initial shock.Three results are evaluated: the number of ﬁrms

failed by the ﬁnancial shock, the number of total failures caused by the

cascading process and the number of iterations before the system reaches a

new equilibrium.

Figure 8a shows the number of initial failures caused by the initial

shock as we vary the size of the shock and the critical value of organizations.

24

The number of failures is small when the values are close but escalates

quickly as the shock becomes much stronger than what investors would

tolerate. Figure 8b shows the number of ﬁnal failures as we vary the dis-

continuous loss rate and the asset pressure rate at a ﬁxed initial shock rate

of 30% and critical value rate of 70%. The asset pressure rate have a much

bigger effect on the number of failures , at a rate of 30% it leads to a total

meltdown of the system independently of the discontinuous loss rate. The

discontinuous loss rate does not show the potential to break the whole

system on it’s own.

These results support our initial hypothesis that the asset network

could have a much bigger inﬂuence in the ﬁnal outcome of the contagion

due to the network structure and the nature of hubs. We emphasize that we

do not see these results as robust, but merely as illustrative of the dynamic

of the process.

6 Final Remarks

Financial contagion is a complex phenomena with possibly devastating

consequences to ﬁnancial systems. Here, extending on previous work from

Elliott et al. (2014) and Huang et al. (2013), we have developed a model that

accounts for both cross-holdings among organizations and pressure over

asset prices using two complementary networks.

The approach we have developed can be a valuable tool for ﬁnancial

supervisors and asset managers. For instance, the algorithm can be used

with scenario testing to understand the impact of possible ﬁnancial crisis to

guide supervision and investment decisions. And, while we do not know

if the topological assumptions of the model hold for other ﬁnancial ﬁrms,

25

(a) Number of failures after the initial shock.

(b) Number of failures at new equilibrium.

Figure 8: (a) Number of failures are we vary both the critical vlaue rate and the shock rate.
(b) Number of ﬁnal failures at a ﬁxed initial shock rate of 15% and critical value rate of 85%.

26

we do believe the framework is still valuable for the study of contagion

processes over other ﬁnancial intermediaries such as banks and insurance

companies.

Although we believe these results are of great value for building a

theoretical understanding of ﬁnancial contagion, the results obtained in

this model would hardly be reproducible in a real economy since it doesn’t

consider interaction with other ﬁnancial intermediaries, existing regula-

tory measures and the direct intervention of ﬁnancial regulators and/or

government bailout.

Several improvements to the modeling process are possible to make

it more realistic and closer to the observable reality. To advance this line

of research: (1) More work is required to understand critical values under

which discontinuities occur and the value of the loss caused by these dis-

continuities, (2) the effect of bankruptcy over asset prices needs to be better

determined, (3) a better model of ﬁnancial shocks should be explored, (4)

the interaction with other ﬁnancial intermediaries should be included and,

(5) The effects of regulation should be considered.

References

Albert, R. and Barab´asi, A.-L. (2002). Statistical mechanics of complex

networks. Reviews of modern physics, 74(1):47.

Allen, F. and Babus, A. (2008). Networks in ﬁnance.

Allen, F. and Gale, D. (2000). Financial contagion. Journal of political economy,

108(1):1–33.

Assaf Neto, A. (2001). Mercado ﬁnanceiro.

27

Beers, D., Nadeau, J.-S., et al. (2014). Introducing a new database of sovereign

defaults. Technical report, Bank of Canada.

Billio, M., Getmansky, M., Lo, A. W., and Pelizzon, L. (2012). Econometric

measures of connectedness and systemic risk in the ﬁnance and insurance
sectors. Journal of Financial Economics, 104(3):535–559.

Board, F. S. (2011a). Shadow banking: Scoping the issues. A Background Note

of the Financial Stability Board (Basel.

Board, F. S. (2011b). Shadow Banking: Strengthening Oversight and Regulation;
Recommendations of the Financial Stability Board. Financial Stability Board.

Bodie, Z. et al. (2009). Investments. Tata McGraw-Hill Education.

Bonacich, P. (1972). Factoring and weighting approaches to status scores
and clique identiﬁcation. Journal of Mathematical Sociology, 2(1):113–120.

Brioschi, F., Buzzacchi, L., and Colombo, M. G. (1989). Risk capital ﬁnancing
and the separation of ownership and control in business groups. Journal
of Banking & Finance, 13(4):747–772.

Carley, K. M. (2003). Dynamic network analysis. Citeseer.

Cocco, J. F., Gomes, F. J., and Martins, N. C. (2009). Lending relationships in

the interbank market. Journal of Financial Intermediation, 18(1):24–48.

Diebold, F. X. and Yılmaz, K. (2014). On the network topology of variance
decompositions: Measuring the connectedness of ﬁnancial ﬁrms. Journal
of Econometrics, 182(1):119–134.

Easley, D. and Kleinberg, J. (2010). Networks, crowds, and markets: Reasoning

about a highly connected world. Cambridge University Press.

Elliott, M., Golub, B., and Jackson, M. O. (2014). Financial networks and

contagion. Available at SSRN 2175056.

28

Fedenia, M., Hodder, J. E., and Triantis, A. J. (1994). Cross-holdings: estima-
tion issues, biases, and distortions. Review of Financial Studies, 7(1):61–96.

Fortuna, E. (2008). Mercado ﬁnanceiro: produtos e servi¸cos. Qualitymark

Editora Ltda.

Freeman, L. C., Roeder, D., and Mulholland, R. R. (1980). Centrality in social

networks: Ii. experimental results. Social networks, 2(2):119–141.

Gai, P. and Kapadia, S. (2010). Contagion in ﬁnancial networks. In Proceed-
ings of the Royal Society of London A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering
Sciences, page rspa20090410. The Royal Society.

Huang, X., Vodenska, I., Havlin, S., and Stanley, H. E. (2013). Cascading
failures in bi-partite graphs: model for systemic risk propagation. Scientiﬁc
reports, 3.

Iori, G., Jafarey, S., and Padilla, F. G. (2006). Systemic risk on the interbank

market. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 61(4):525–542.

Jackson, M. O. et al. (2008). Social and economic networks, volume 3. Princeton

University Press Princeton.

Kandel, D. B. (1978). Homophily, selection, and socialization in adolescent

friendships. American journal of Sociology, pages 427–436.

Masys, A. J. (2014). Networks and network analysis for defence and security.

Springer Science & Business Media.

Mistrulli, P. E. (2011). Assessing ﬁnancial contagion in the interbank market:
Maximum entropy versus observed interbank lending patterns. Journal of
Banking & Finance, 35(5):1114–1127.

Newman, M. E. (2003). Mixing patterns in networks. Physical Review E,

67(2):026126.

29

Ofﬁce of Financial Research, U.S. Department of the Treasury (2013). Asset

management and ﬁnancial stability. Technical report.

Rajaraman, A., Ullman, J. D., Ullman, J. D., and Ullman, J. D. (2012). Mining
of massive datasets, volume 77. Cambridge University Press Cambridge.

Snijders, T. A., Van de Bunt, G. G., and Steglich, C. E. (2010). Introduction
to stochastic actor-based models for network dynamics. Social networks,

32(1):44–60.

30

