6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
0
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
8
7
4
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Surveying Graduate Students’ Attitudes and Approaches to

Problem Solving

Andrew Mason and Chandralekha Singh

Department of Physics, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, 15213

Abstract. Students’ attitudes and approaches to problem solving in physics can profoundly inﬂuence their motivation to
learn and development of expertise. We developed and validated an Attitudes and Approaches to Problem Solving survey by
expanding the Attitudes towards Problem Solving survey of Marx and Cummings [7] and administered it to physics graduate
students. Comparison of their responses to the survey questions about problem solving in their own graduate level courses vs.
problem solving in the introductory physics courses provides insight into their expertise in introductory and graduate level
physics. The physics graduate students’ responses to the survey questions were also compared with those of introductory
physics and astronomy students and physics faculty. We ﬁnd that, even for problem solving in introductory physics, graduate
students’ responses to some survey questions are less expert-like than those of the physics faculty. Comparison of survey
responses of graduate students and introductory students for problem solving in introductory physics suggests that graduate
students’ responses are in general more expert-like than those of introductory students. However, survey responses suggest that
graduate-level problem solving by graduate students on several measures has remarkably similar trends to introductory-level
problem solving by introductory students.
Keywords: physics education research
PACS: 01.40Fk,01.40.gb,01.40G-,1.30.Rr

INTRODUCTION

Students’ attitudes and approaches towards learning can
have a signiﬁcant
impact on what students actually
learn. [1–6] Mastering physics amounts to not only de-
veloping a robust knowledge structure of physics con-
cepts but also developing productive attitudes about the
knowledge and learning in physics. In essence, it is im-
possible to become a true physics expert without a si-
multaneous evolution of expert-like attitudes about the
knowledge and learning in physics. If students think that
physics is a collection of disconnected facts and formu-
las rather than seeing the coherent structure of the knowl-
edge in physics, they are unlikely to see the need for or-
ganizing their knowledge hierarchically. Similarly, if stu-
dents believe that only a few smart people can do physics,
the teacher is the authority and the students’ task in a
physics course is to take notes, memorize the content and
reproduce it on the exam and then forget it, they are un-
likely to make an effort to synthesize and analyze what
is taught, ask questions about how concepts ﬁt together
or how they can extend their knowledge beyond what is
taught. Similarly, if students believe that if they cannot
solve a problem within 10 minutes, they should give up,
they are unlikely to persevere and make an effort to ex-
plore strategies for solving challenging problems.

The Maryland Physics Expectation Survey (MPEX)
was developed to explore students’ attitudes and expec-
tations related to physics. [4] When the survey was ad-
ministered before and after instruction in various intro-

ductory physics courses, it was found that students’ atti-
tudes about physics after instruction deteriorated com-
pared to their expectations before taking introductory
physics. Very few carefully designed courses and curric-
ula have shown major improvements in students’ expec-
tations after an introductory physics course. [7–9]

Colorado Attitudes about Science Survey (CLASS)
is another survey which is similar to the MPEX survey
and explores students’ attitudes about physics. [5, 6] The
analysis of CLASS data yields qualitatively similar re-
sults to those obtained using the MPEX survey. More-
over, when introductory physics students were asked to
answer the survey questions twice, once providing the
answers from their perspective and then from the per-
spective of their professors, introductory students’ re-
sponses to many questions were very different from their
perspective compared to what they claimed would be
their professors’ perspective. [6] Thus, introductory stu-
dents maintained their views although they knew that
the physics professors would have different views about
some of the survey questions.

Cummings et al. [7, 10] developed an Attitudes to-
wards Problem Solving Survey (APSS) which is partially
based upon the Maryland Physics Expectations Survey
(MPEX). The original APSS survey has 20 questions
and examines students’ attitudes towards physics prob-
lem solving. [10] The survey was given to students be-
fore and after instruction at three types of institutions:
a large university, a smaller university and a college. It
was found that students’ attitudes about problem solving

did not improve after instruction (deteriorated slightly) at
the large University and the attitudes were least expert-
like (least favorable) at the large University with a large
class size.

Students’ attitudes and approaches to learning and
problem solving can affect how they learn and how much
time they spend repairing, extending and organizing their
knowledge structure. If instructors are aware of students
attitudes and approaches to problem solving, they can
explicitly exploit strategies to improve them. For exam-
ple, knowing students’ beliefs about mathematics learn-
ing (which is similar to students’ beliefs about physics
learning in many aspects) motivated Schoenfeld to de-
velop a curriculum to improve students’ attitude. [11–
14] In particular, based on the knowledge that students
in the introductory mathematics courses often start look-
ing for formulas right away while solving a mathematics
problem instead of performing a careful conceptual anal-
ysis and planning, Schoenfeld used an explicit strategy
to change students’ approach. He routinely placed stu-
dents in small groups and asked them to solve problems.
He would move around and ask them questions such as
“What are you doing? Why are you doing it? How does it
take you closer to your goals?" Very soon, students who
were used to immediately looking for formulas were em-
barrassed and realized that they should ﬁrst perform con-
ceptual analysis and planning before jumping into the
implementation of the problem solution. Schoenfeld’s
strategy helped most students adopt an effective problem
solving approach within a few weeks and they started to
devote time to qualitative analysis and decision making
before looking for equations. [11]

Another unfavorable attitude about mathematical
problem solving that Schoenfeld wanted students to
give up was that students often felt that if they could
not solve a problem within 5-10 minutes, they should
give up. [11–14] Schoenfeld realized that one reason
students had such an attitude was because they saw their
instructor solving problems during the lectures without
faltering or spending too much time thinking. To bust
this myth about problem solving, Schoenfeld began
each of his geometry classes with the ﬁrst 10 minutes
devoted to taking students’ questions about challenging
geometry problems (often from the end of the chapter
excercises) and thus attempting to solve them without
prior preparation. Students discovered that Schoenfeld
often struggled with the problems and was unable to
solve them in the ﬁrst 10 minutes and asked students to
continue to think about the problems until one of them
had solved it and shared it with others. This approach
improved students’ attitude and their self-conﬁdence in
solving mathematics problems.

Here, we brieﬂy discuss the development, validation
and administration of the Attitudes and Approaches to
Problem Solving (AAPS) survey, a modiﬁed version of

APSS survey [10], that includes additional questions re-
lated to approaches to problem solving and we focus on
the responses of physics graduate students. [15] We ex-
plore how graduate students differ in their attitudes and
approaches while they solve graduate level problems ver-
sus introductory level problems. The survey questions
were administered in the form of statements that one
could agree or disagree with on a scale of 1 (strongly
agree) to 5 (strongly disagree) with 3 signifying a neu-
tral response. We do not differentiate between “agree"
and “strongly agree" in interpreting the data (both are
coded as +1). Similarly, “disagree" and “strongly dis-
agree" were combined (both are coded as -1) for stream-
lining the data and their interpretation. A favorable re-
sponse refers to either “agree" or “disagree" based upon
which one was favored by a majority of physics fac-
ulty. We ﬁnd that, on some measures, graduate students
have very different attitudes and approaches about solv-
ing introductory physics problems compared to their own
graduate level problems. The attitudes and approaches
of graduate students on the AAPS survey was also com-
pared to those of introductory physics and astronomy stu-
dents and to physics faculty. We ﬁnd that the attitudes
and approaches of graduate students differ signiﬁcantly
from introductory students and physics faculty on several
measures.

THE GROUPS THAT WERE

ADMINISTERED THE AAPS SURVEY

The ﬁnal version of the AAPS survey was ﬁrst adminis-
tered anonymously to 16 physics graduate students en-
rolled in a graduate level TA training course at the end
of the one-semester course. The expert (favorable) re-
sponses are given in the Appendix along with the survey.
Discussions with the graduate students after they took
the survey showed that all of them interpreted that the
survey was asking about problem solving in their own
graduate courses and that they would have answered the
questions differently if they were asked about their at-
titudes and approaches to solving introductory physics
problems. Then, we administered the survey to 24 grad-
uate students (there was overlap between the ﬁrst co-
hort of 16 graduate students and this cohort) with the
questions explicitly asking them to answer each ques-
tion about their attitudes and approaches to introductory
physics problem solving. Due to lack of class time, this
second round of survey was administered online. We had
individual discussions with 4 graduate students about the
reasoning for their AAPS survey responses and invited
all 24 graduate students who had answered the questions
online to write a few sentences explaining their reasoning
for selected survey questions online. We explicitly asked

them to explain their reasoning when they answered the
survey questions about problem solving in the graduate
level courses and separately for introductory physics. Ten
graduate students (out of 24 who took the survey online)
provided written reasonings for their responses. The fol-
lowing year, the survey was administered to 18 gradu-
ate students at the end of a graduate level TA training
course in which the graduate students were ﬁrst asked
to respond to the survey questions for problem solving
in their own graduate courses and then for introductory
physics problem solving (after they had submitted their
survey responses to the graduate-level problem solving).
We also administered the AAPS survey to several hun-
dred introductory students in two different ﬁrst-semester
and second-semester algebra-based physics courses and
to students in the ﬁrst and second-semester calculus-
based courses. In particular, there were two sections of
the ﬁrst-semester algebra-based physics course with 209
students, two sections of the second-semester algebra-
based physics course with 188 students, one ﬁrst-
semester calculus-based course section with 100 stu-
dents and a second-semester calculus-based course sec-
tion with 44 students. In all of these courses, students
were given small amounts of bonus points for taking
the survey. In addition, the survey was given to 31 stu-
dents in an astronomy course which is the ﬁrst astronomy
course taken by students who plan to major in Physics
and Astronomy (but less than 20% of the students in
this course actually end up majoring in Physics and As-
tronomy). None of the students in the astronomy course,
who did not want to major in physics and astronomy,
were required to take that course unlike the students in
the introductory physics courses (the calculus-based in-
troductory courses are dominated by engineering majors
and algebra-based courses by those interested in health
related professions who must take two physics courses
to fulﬁll their requirements). For the astronomy course,
the word “physics" in the survey everywhere was re-
placed by “astronomy", e.g., “in solving astronomy prob-
lems...". Also, the contexts (which were not related to
astronomy) were removed from the last two questions
(32) and (33) of the survey for astronomy students. Fi-
nally, the survey was given to 12 physics faculty who
had taught introductory physics recently. Half of the
faculty members were those who also gave the survey
to their introductory students. The faculty member an-
swered the survey questions for both introductory-level
and graduate-level problem solving. We also discussed
faculty responses to selected questions individually with
some of them.

VALIDITY AND RELIABILITY OF THE

SURVEY

We now address issues related to validity and reliabil-
ity of the survey. Reliability refers to the relative de-
gree of consistency between the survey scores, e.g., if
an individual repeats the procedures. [16] One measure
of reliability of a survey is the Cronbach’s alpha (αc)
which establishes the survey’s reliability via internal con-
sistency check. The Cronbach’s alpha (αc) test was ap-
plied over all 33 questions for all groups (N=672) and the
αc = 0.82 which is reasonable from the standards of test-
design. [16] As noted later, there is very little variability
in the responses for some of the groups (e.g., faculty) so
it does not make sense to calculate αc separately for the
various groups.

Validity refers to the appropriateness of interpreting
the survey scores. [16] In order to develop the AAPS sur-
vey, we selected 16 questions from the APSS survey [10]
and tweaked some of the questions for clarity based upon
in-depth interviews with ﬁve introductory physics stu-
dents and three physics faculty members. These 16 ques-
tions constitute the ﬁrst 14 questions and the last two
questions of the AAPS survey, provided in the Appendix.
We also developed 17 additional questions which were
based upon discussions with the faculty members about
productive approaches to problem solving, and modiﬁed
them based upon the feedback from introductory stu-
dents during interviews and discussions with some grad-
uate students and three physics faculty members.

Content validity refers to the degree to which the sur-
vey items reﬂect the domain of interest (in our case, atti-
tudes and approaches to problem solving). [16] As noted
earlier, we discussed with some faculty members their
opinions about productive approaches to problem solv-
ing and took their opinions into account while develop-
ing the additional survey questions. We further addressed
the issue of content validity by taking measures to en-
sure that the respondents interpret the survey questions
as was intended. To this end we interviewed sample re-
spondents from the introductory course, physics graduate
students (mostly those enrolled in a TA training course)
and faculty members. During the interviews and discus-
sions, we paid attention to respondents ˘A ´Z interpretations
of questions and modiﬁed the questions accordingly in
order to make clear the actual intent of the questions.
While the interviews with the introductory students were
formal and tape-recorded, the discussions with the fac-
ulty members and graduate students were informal and
were not tape-recorded. The reason introductory physics
students and faculty were sought for this purpose (in ad-
dition to the graduate students) is that we hypothesized
that the responses of these two groups would be the most
disparate and would provide the most diverse set of feed-

back for improving the preliminary survey. Some of the
themes in the additional questions are related to the use
of diagrams and scratch work in problem solving, use of
“gut" feeling vs. using physics principles to answer con-
ceptual questions, reﬂection on one’s solution after solv-
ing a problem to learn from it, giving up on a problem
after 10 minutes, preference for numerical vs. symbolic
problems and enjoying solving challenging physics prob-
lems. The in-depth interviews with ﬁve students from a
ﬁrst-semester algebra-based class, and discussions with
the graduate students and three physics faculty members
helped modify the survey and were helpful in ensuring
that the questions were interpreted clearly by both the
experts and students at various anticipated levels of ex-
pertise.

Of approximately 40 introductory students respond-
ing to the invitation for paid interviews from an intro-
ductory physics course, ﬁve were selected. Since we
wanted all students to be able to interpret the problems,
two students were randomly chosen for interview from
those who scored above 70% and three students were
chosen who obtained below 70% on their ﬁrst midterm
exam. The survey questions were administered to all in-
terviewed students in the form of statements that they
could agree or disagree with on a scale of 1 (strongly
agree) to 5 (strongly disagree) with 3 signifying a neu-
tral response. During the individual interviews, students
were also asked to solve some physics problems using
a think-aloud protocol to gauge whether what they an-
swered in the survey questions about their attitudes and
approaches to problem solving were consistent with the
attitudes and approaches actually displayed during prob-
lem solving. Within this protocol, we asked individuals
to talk aloud while answering the questions. We did not
disturb them while they were talking and only asked for
clariﬁcations of the points they did not make clear on
their own later. While it is impossible to grasp all facets
of problem solving fully by having students solve a few
problems, a qualitative comparison of their answers to
the survey questions and their actual approaches to solv-
ing problems was done after the interviews using the
think aloud protocol. This comparison suggests that stu-
dents were consistent in their survey responses in many
cases but in some instances they selected more favor-
able (expert-like) responses to the survey questions than
the expertise that was explicitly visible from their actual
problem solving. In this sense, the favorable responses
(at least for the introductory students) should be taken as
the upper limit of the actual favorable attitudes and ap-
proaches to problem solving.

We also tested validity of the survey by comparing ac-
tual survey data with those predicted according to the
assumption of expert-novice behaviors, pre-deﬁning the
majority faculty response for each question as the “ex-
pert" response. [16] In Table 1, we display data for in-

dividual questions for each statistical group as well as
the average response for all 33 questions for each of the
groups in the “Avg." column. In the data reported in Ta-
ble 1, the average score is as deﬁned by Cummings et
al. [10] To calculate the average score for a question,
a +1 is assigned to each favorable response, a -1 is as-
signed to each unfavorable response, and a 0 is assigned
to neutral responses. We then average these values for ev-
erybody in a particular group (e.g., faculty) to obtain an
average score for that group. Thus, the average score on
each question for a group indicates how expert-like the
survey response of the group is on each survey question.
Table 1 shows that the faculty had unanimous or close
to unanimous agreement on most of the survey ques-
tions. These results support content validity of the sur-
vey. Table 1 also shows that faculty members answered
the questions in a more expert-like fashion than grad-
uate students, who in turn were more expert-like than
introductory-level students. The difference between fac-
ulty and graduate students holds both for problem solv-
ing in graduate-level problems as well as problem solv-
ing in introductory-level problems. Similarly, the gradu-
ate students’ responses are more expert-like for graduate-
level problems than introductory students’ responses are
about problem solving at the introductory-level. While
these differences cannot be quantiﬁed apriori, such dif-
ferences can be expected based upon the known expertise
of each of these groups in physics. All these differences
are statistically signiﬁcant (p < 0.05). These consisten-
cies further provide validity to the survey.

To determine whether the differences between the
groups are statistically signiﬁcant and there is an ap-
preciable effect size, we examined the groups as fol-
lows: all introductory physics students (we combined
these classes since we did not ﬁnd statistical differences
between different introductory physics classes); the as-
tronomy group; all graduate students for introductory
problems; all graduate students for graduate-level prob-
lems; all faculty for introductory problems; and all fac-
ulty for graduate-level problems. The effect sizes be-
tween groups over all 33 questions were calculated in the
form of Cohen’s means difference (= (µ1− µ2)/σpooled),
calculating individual group means (on a scale of -1 to
+1) and standard deviations. Table 2 shows that the ef-
fect sizes between groups of different levels of exper-
tise have a large to very large effect size (1 < d < 2.5),
in favor of the more assumed expert-like group. [16] In-
dividual p-values for pairwise t-tests [16] between each
group shows that all differences are statistically signif-
icant except for the difference between the two faculty
groups. Again these effect sizes are qualitatively consis-
tent with the expected trends based upon the expertise of
each group and provides validity to the survey.

RESULTS

As noted earlier, the survey questions are designed in a
“agree" or “disagree" format (see the Appendix). There
is leeway to agree or disagree “somewhat" or “strongly"
(although we did not distinguish between these in our
analysis presented here), and one may also select a
neutral response. The favorable (expert) responses for
each question based upon the responses chosen by most
physics faculty are also given in the Appendix. Table 1
shows the net average responses for all groups for each
individual question and averaged over all questions (see
the last entry in Table 1). In Table 1, the introductory
physics students from both semesters of algebra-based
and calculus-based courses were lumped into one group
because there was no signiﬁcant difference between the
“net" average survey responses of these groups.

In Table 1, we followed the method for reporting data
used by Cummings et. al [10]. A second method for rep-
resenting data separately shows the average percentage
of favorable and unfavorable responses for each question
for each group (the neutral responses are 100% minus
the percentage of favorable and unfavorable responses).
We will use this second method of data representation for
all of our graphical representations of data below using
histograms. Moreover, since there are no signiﬁcant dif-
ferences between faculty responses for problem solving
at the introductory and graduate levels except for a cou-
ple of questions (see Table 1), the histograms will only
display one of the two sets (faculty responses for intro-
ductory level problem solving).

We now examine graduate students’ survey responses
to individual questions (recall that the effect size be-
tween them and faculty in Table 2 appears to be similar to
the effect size between them and introductory students).
Comparison of the graduate students’ problem solving
attitudes and approaches for introductory and graduate
level problems in Table 2 shows that there is small to
moderate effect size (0.4 < d < 0.6). However, if prob-
lem solving attitudes and approaches of a given group
(e.g., graduate students) did not depend at all on how dif-
ﬁcult the problem was (e.g., whether it was introductory
or graduate level problem), there would be a very small
effect size (d < 0.2). This moderate effect size suggests
a difference in attitudes and approaches for a group with
different levels of problems (introductory vs. graduate
level), and is discussed in the following sections.

Comparison of graduate students’ survey

responses for graduate level vs.

introductory level problem solving

Figure 1 compares the AAPS survey responses of
graduate students to selected questions for which dif-
ferences were observed when they answered the ques-
tions about problem solving in their graduate courses
and problem solving in introductory physics. The error
bars on the histograms (and in all the other ﬁgures in
this paper) show the standard error. One typical differ-
ence between introductory and graduate level problem
solving is that the graduate students display more expert-
like (favorable) attitudes and approaches while solving
introductory level problems than while solving graduate
level problems. For example, in response to question (1)
for problem solving in their graduate level courses, ap-
proximately 40% of the graduate students felt that if they
were not sure about the right way to start a problem, they
would be stuck unless they got help but only 20% felt
this way when solving introductory physics problems.
Also, they were more likely to reﬂect upon physics prin-
ciples that may apply and see if they yield a reasonable
solution when not sure about the approach while solv-
ing introductory problems than while solving graduate
level problems (see response to question (10) in Figure
1). They were also more likely to be able to tell that their
answer was wrong without external input while solving
introductory problems than graduate level problems (see
response to question (6) in Figure 1). Graduate students
were approximately 20% more likely to claim that they
routinely use equations to calculate answers even if they
are non-intuitive while solving graduate level problems
than while solving introductory level problems (see re-
sponse to question (11) in Figure 1).

While none of the graduate students claimed they
would give up solving an introductory physics problem
if they could not solve it within 10 minutes, approxi-
mately 15% claimed they would give up after 10 min-
utes while solving a graduate level problem (see response
to question (23) in Figure 1). Moreover, while approxi-
mately 80% of the graduate students claimed they enjoy
solving introductory physics problems even though it can
be challenging at times, less than 70% of them said the
same about the graduate level problems (see response
to question (27) in Figure 1). Also, more graduate stu-
dents claimed that it is useful for them to solve a few
difﬁcult problems using a systematic approach and learn
from them rather than solving many similar easy prob-
lems one after another when solving introductory level
problems than for graduate level problems (see response
to question (26) in Figure 1).

As shown in Table 1, the introductory physics stu-
dents noted that they enjoyed solving challenging prob-

lems even less than the graduate students and were also
less likely to ﬁnd solving a few difﬁcult problems more
useful than solving many easy problems based upon the
same principle (see introductory students’ responses to
question (26) and (27) in Table 1). One introductory stu-
dent stated in an interview that he feels frustrated with
his incorrect problem solution and feels satisﬁed when
he gets a problem right, which motivates him to continue
to do problem solving. Therefore, he likes easier prob-
lems.

In response to survey question (33), close to 90%
of the graduate students agreed that two introductory
level problems, both of which involve conservation of
energy, can be solved using similar methods whereas
only approximately 55% of them agreed that both prob-
lems can be solved using similar methods when solving
graduate level conservation of energy problems (see Fig-
ure 1). Individual discussions with a subset of graduate
students suggest that they felt that since air-resistance
and friction were involved, they may have to use dif-
ferent methods to solve the problems. In particular, they
noted that they often use different methods involving La-
grangians and Hamiltonians to solve complicated prob-
lems in graduate level courses and they were not sure if
the same technique will be useful in problems involving
friction and air-resistance. In response to survey ques-
tion (33), all of the physics faculty noted that both prob-
lems can be solved using similar methods (see Table 1).
The responses of many graduate students to question (33)
points to the fact that graduate students who are taking
graduate level physics courses are immersed in learn-
ing complicated mathematical techniques and they are
evaluating their survey responses in light of their expe-
riences with mathematical tools. When a physics fac-
ulty member, who had taught several “core" graduate
courses routinely, was shown the responses of graduate
students to question (33), he commented that he has ob-
served that, sometimes the graduate students are so fo-
cused on mathematical manipulations in the graduate-
level courses, they tend to use unnecessarily complicated
techniques even when they are asked questions which
can be solved using introductory level techniques, e.g.,
for problems related to Gauss’s law or Ampere’s law.

Comparison of graduate students’ survey

responses with those of other groups

Next, we compare graduate students’ responses on
selected questions on the AAPS survey with those of the
physics faculty and introductory physics and astronomy
students.

Graduate Students are still developing expertise in

graduate level problem solving

In the previous section, we discussed that the average
responses of graduate students to graduate-level problem
solving was less expert-like than their responses to intro-
ductory level problem solving. Comparison of average
graduate students’ responses for graduate level problem
solving with those of physics faculty also suggests that
graduate students are still developing expertise in prob-
lem solving at the graduate level. For example, Figure 2
shows that, in response to question (6), all of the physics
faculty noted that while solving physics problems they
could often tell when their work and/or answer is wrong
even without external resources but only approximately
50% of the graduate students could do so while solving
graduate level problems and approximately 80% of the
graduate students could do so for introductory level prob-
lem solving. Moreover, the survey response of the grad-
uate students to this question for graduate level problems
is similar to that of the introductory physics students
for introductory level problems. Such similarity suggests
that while graduate students may be experts in solving
introductory problems, they are still developing expertise
in solving graduate level problems.

Figure 3 shows that, in response to question (11)
about whether equations need not be intuitive in order to
be used and whether they routinely use equations even
if they are non-intuitive, graduate students’ responses
while solving introductory physics problems were sim-
ilar to those of faculty and approximately 75% disagreed
with the statements (favorable response). However, when
answering graduate level problems, only slightly more
than 50% of the graduate students noted that equations
must be understood in an intuitive sense before being
used. Individual discussions suggest that the graduate
students felt that sometimes the equations encountered in
the graduate courses are too abstract and they do not have
sufﬁcient time to make sense of them and ensure that they
have built an intuition about them. The following sample
responses from some graduate students reﬂect their sen-
timents:

• “...you just cannot understand everything. So it’s ok
to deal with the homework ﬁrst. But I really feel bad
when I do plug and chuck [sic]."

• “I am often still presented with equations to calcu-
late something without enough motivation to under-
stand the process, even at the graduate level, and
being able to use the equation and accept that you’ll
understand it later is often necessary. For students’
ﬁrst course in physics, this is more the rule than the
exception at some level..."

• “I remember physics via the equations, so I try my
best to always understand the meaning. But if I

can’t, I fall back on “this is the equation, use it"."

• “As an introductory student I had the point of view
that the equations are right so my intuition must be
wrong. I used equations to get the answer whether
it made sense at ﬁrst or not, but I trained my intu-
ition with every such result. I had more faith in the
physics that is taught to me than the physics intu-
ition I acquired just by observation. As a graduate
student, one is already used to the unintuitive results
being the correct one, they have by then become in-
tuitive."

The last graduate student quoted above expresses an in-
teresting view that by the time one becomes a graduate
student in physics, one may have learned to accept non-
intuitive results and such results start appearing intuitive.
The responses of the introductory physics students sug-
gest that they are even more likely than graduate stu-
dents to use equations to calculate answers even if they
are non-intuitive (see Figure 3). This ﬁnding is consistent
with the prior results that suggest that many introductory
students view problem solving in physics as an exercise
in ﬁnding the relevant equations rather than focusing on
why a particular physics principle may be applicable and
building an intuition about a certain type of physics prob-
lems. [4, 5]

In response to question (25) about whether individu-
als make sure they learn from their mistakes and do not
make the same mistakes again, all but one physics fac-
ulty agreed with the statement (favorable) and one was
neutral. On the other hand, only slightly more than 60%
and 70% of the graduate students agreed with the state-
ment when pertaining to solving graduate level problems
and introductory level problems, respectively. Graduate
students’s net favorable scores for question (25) in Table
1 suggests that many graduate students had unfavorable
response to this question especially for graduate-level
problem solving.

The response of introductory physics students to ques-
tion (25) was comparable to that of graduate students
for introductory physics problem solving but it is less
expert-like than the physics faculty. One introductory
student said he did not review errors on the midterm
exam as much as he would on homework, partly because
the homework problems may show up on a future test
but partly because he didn’t like staring at his bad exam
grade. The reluctance to reﬂect upon tests is consistent
with our earlier ﬁndings for an upper-level undergradu-
ate quantum mechanics course which demonstrated that
many students did not reﬂect automatically on their mis-
takes in the midterm exams for similar reasons. [17]

Unexpected Trends require Careful Analysis

The average responses to some survey questions for
various groups are counter-intuitive and require careful
analysis. Figure 4 shows that on question (5) of the sur-
vey, while no faculty agreed with the statement (no un-
favorable response) that problem solving in physics ba-
sically means matching problems with the correct equa-
tions and then substituting values to get a number, more
than 30% of the graduate students agreed with the state-
ment (unfavorable) in the context of introductory level
problem solving and approximately 20% agreed with
the statement for graduate level problem solving. How-
ever, Figure 4 also shows the counter-intuitive trend that
the average responses of introductory physics students
to question (5) were indistinguishable from those of the
graduate students for introductory physics problem solv-
ing. Individual discussions and written explanations sug-
gest that the reasoning of many graduate students dif-
fers from the reasoning of a typical introductory physics
student although the average responses of these groups
are superﬁcially the same. In particular, for introduc-
tory level problem solving, many graduate students felt
so comfortable with the applications of basic principles
that not much explicit thought was involved in solving
introductory level problems. For example, in response to
question (5), one graduate student noted

• “Well for introductory physics this is true. But, in
more advanced problems you kind of have to setup
the equations."

On the other hand, prior research suggests that many in-
troductory physics students think that physics is a collec-
tion of disconnected facts and formulas and use a “plug
and chug" approach to problem solving without thinking
if a principle is applicable in a particular context. [4, 5]
Some graduate students reﬂected explicitly on their in-
troductory physics experiences and compared it to the
graduate level experiences in problem solving. The fol-
lowing is a reﬂective response of one graduate student

• “you can get an expression from two others with-
out understanding how or why. As an introductory
student I probably did this more because the expres-
sions were simpler and easier to manipulate without
a 100% understanding. My motives were also more
to get the work done than to learn every detail."

Figure 5 shows that, in response to question (14) re-
garding whether they always explicitly think about con-
cepts that underlie the problems when solving physics
problems, close to 90% of the graduate students agreed
(favorable) that they do so both in the context of intro-
ductory and graduate level problem solving. However,
only approximately 65% and 55% of the physics fac-
ulty and introductory physics students agreed, respec-

tively. The trend in Figure 5 going from the introductory
students to faculty is not consistent with expectations at
ﬁrst, but individual discussions suggest that some fac-
ulty do not always explicitly think about the concepts
that underlie the problem because the concepts have be-
come obvious to them due to their vast experience. They
are able to invoke the relevant physics principles, e.g.,
conservation of mechanical energy or conservation of
momentum, automatically when solving an introductory
problem without making a conscious effort. In fact, ques-
tion (14) is one of those rare questions on the survey
for which the faculty responses were different for intro-
ductory and graduate-level problem solving (in particu-
lar, more than 90% noted that they explicitly think about
concepts that underlie the problems for graduate-level
problems). In contrast, prior research suggests that in-
troductory physics students often do not explicitly think
about the relevant concepts because they often consider
physics as consisting of disconnected facts and formulas
and associate physics problem solving as a task requir-
ing hunting for the relevant formulas without perform-
ing a conceptual analysis and planning of the problem
solution. [4, 5] Thus, the reasoning behind the less fa-
vorable responses of faculty to question (14) is generally
very different from the reasonings behind the introduc-
tory physics students’ responses.

Introductory physics students are not on par with

physics graduate students and faculty

Survey responses to some questions suggest that the
introductory physics students’ attitudes and approaches
to solving introductory physics problems are not as
expert-like as physics graduate students and faculty. For
example, survey responses suggest that manipulation of
symbols rather than numbers increases the difﬁculty of a
problem for many introductory physics students. Ques-
tion (30) asked whether symbolic problems were more
difﬁcult than identical problems with numerical answers
and question (31) asked if individuals preferred to solve
a problem with a numerical answer symbolically ﬁrst
and only plug in the numbers at the very end. Figures
(6) and (7) show that the responses of graduate students
for both introductory and graduate level problem solving
are comparable to physics faculty but introductory stu-
dents’ responses are very different. In response to ques-
tion (30), only approximately 35% of the introductory
physics students disagreed with the statement (favorable
response) that it is more difﬁcult to solve a problem sym-
bolically, and in response to question (31), only 45%
agreed with the statement (favorable response) that they
prefer to solve the problem symbolically ﬁrst and only
plug in the numbers at the very end.

Individual discussions with some introductory physics
students suggest that they have difﬁculty keeping track
of the variables they are solving for if they have several
symbols ﬂoating around, which motivates them to sub-
stitute numbers at the beginning of the solutions. [18]
Some introductory students noted that they did not like
carrying expressions involving symbols from one equa-
tion to another because they were afraid that they will
make mistakes in simplifying the expressions.

Graduate student attitudes and approaches about

introductory physics problem solving is not always as

expert-like as physics faculty

The responses to some survey questions suggest that
the attitudes and approaches of graduate students regard-
ing solving introductory level problems is not as expert-
like as physics faculty. For example, Figure 8 shows
that, in response to question (2) about whether they of-
ten make approximations about the physical world when
solving physics problems, all faculty noted that they do
so. However, only approximately 75% and 65% of grad-
uate students noted they do so for graduate level problem
solving and introductory level problem solving, respec-
tively. Individual discussions and written explanations
suggest that the graduate students have different views
about making approximations about the physical world
as illustrated by the sample comments below:

• “I don’t connect the physics problems to real world

very much."

• “it’s stat mech, in which I do whatever I have to [in-
cluding approximations], to make the answer come
out (and usually that is correct)."

• “Solving physics problems as an introductory
physics student I was perhaps more prone to this,
thinking about how a block would slide down an
incline. As I became more familiar with the extent
of “non-physical" approximations we made such as
a frictionless world, I learned to separate problem
solving space and real life space. I ﬁnd that this
is one aspect of physics problem solving that is
harder for introductory level courses than graduate
courses, the problems we solve [in introductory
physics] are farther away from the physical world
than graduate level problems. It keeps the math
manageable and the physics concepts manageable
but it makes them less intuitive."

• “Many introductory-level problems are well deﬁned

and ideal, which doesn’t require approx."

In contrast to the last graduate student’s comment, in-
dividual discussions with some faculty suggest that they
considered idealization of the problem in introductory

and graduate level physics, e.g., framing problems with-
out friction or air resistance, considering spherical cows
or point masses, the inﬁnite square well or Hydrogen
atom with only the Coulomb force, etc. as making ap-
proximations about the physical world and they felt that
such approximations were helpful for getting an analyti-
cal answer and for building intuition about physical phe-
nomena. It is possible that approximately 25% of the
graduate students who noted that they don’t make ap-
proximations while solving introductory physics prob-
lems have not carefully thought about the role of approxi-
mations about the physical world in introductory physics
problem solving.

Figure 9 shows that, in response to question (12) re-
garding whether physics involves many equations each
of which applies primarily to a speciﬁc situation, all but
one physics faculty members disagreed with the state-
ment (favorable) but less than 70% of the graduate stu-
dents disagreed with it when solving graduate level prob-
lems. The percentage of introductory physics students
who disagreed with the statement was slightly more than
35% and slightly more than 40% for the astronomy stu-
dents. These responses are commensurate with the exper-
tise of each group and points to the fact that experts are
more likely to discern the coherence of the knowledge in
physics and appreciate how very few laws of physics are
applicable in diverse situations and can explain different
physical phenomena.

Some questions do not have a clear-cut expert-like

response

If faculty are taken as experts, their responses to the
survey questions indicate that there are some questions
whose answers may not necessarily represent clear-cut
favorable/unfavorable traits without disagreement from
several faculty. For example, for question (24), there are
differences in faculty responses for introductory-level vs
graduate-level problem solving. For example, less than
70% of the faculty (and an even smaller percentage of
graduate students) noted that they liked to think through
a difﬁcult physics problem with a peer when solving in-
troductory physics problem but 83% of the faculty liked
to work with a peer for difﬁcult graduate level problems.
Individual discussions with some of the faculty members
suggests that whether one continues to persevere individ-
ually or works with a peer to solve a challenging intro-
ductory or graduate-level problem depends on an indi-
vidual’s personality. The graduate student reasonings for
wanting to work with a peer or not were varied as illus-
trated by the following examples:

• “This is not true (usefulness of talking to peers) for
introductory-level problems because, typically these

types of problems are quite direct. Thinking about
them for a little while always produces some result.
For graduate-level problems, it is almost essential
to work with others because of the complex line of
thought it takes to solve some problems."

• “Bouncing ideas with someone gives me sort of a
chance to see the problem from the outside. You
somehow see another point of attack. If you are
stuck on a problem, usually the reason is that the ap-
proach is a dead end or too complex. Having some-
one to talk to forces you to think with a different
perspective."

• “I would like to think out by myself."
• “As an introductory student it (working with peers)
can make things more complicated, I would rather
ask the TA. Other students have the same miscon-
ceptions as I do so they aren’t a good source. As
a graduate student, I saw that everyone was ben-
eﬁting from collaboration. I know I would too. I
just don’t like to do anything with a peer but that’s
purely a social issue, I believe it is useful to work
with peers."

Thus, while many graduate students agree that talking to
peers is helpful (at least for challenging problems) some
of them are inherently more averse to discussions with
peers than others.

Figure 10 shows that in response to question (3), re-
garding whether being able to handle the mathematics
is the most important part of the process in solving a
physics problem, less than 60% of the physics faculty
disagreed with the statement (favorable response) and
approximately 35% were neutral. Amongst graduate stu-
dents, less than 40% of the students disagreed with the
statement (favorable response) both for problem solving
at the introductory and graduate levels. Roughly 50% of
the graduate students agreed (unfavorable response) that
mathematics is the most important part of the process
in problem solving at the graduate level and more than
40% agreed (unfavorable response) with it for introduc-
tory level problem solving. Individual discussions with
the graduate students suggest that, in response to ques-
tion (3), some students felt that facility with high level
mathematics is the most important skill for excelling in
their graduate courses. Some graduate students felt that
basic mathematics is very important for doing well in in-
troductory problem solving as well, whereas others did
not think mathematics was as important, especially for
the algebra-based courses. The following are examples
of responses from the graduate students that convey the
sentiments:

• “if I was teaching a class of med. students, the
concepts are certainly most important... However,
a class of engineers really need to know how to get

the right answer so the things that they build, func-
tion as they are supposed to. I would say in this case
that math and concepts are equally important. For
graduate-level problems, I believe mathematics be-
comes more essential over introductory-level prob-
lems."

• “From my point of view, the introductory physics
concepts are very easy to understand. It’s in the
details of problem solving that you could get stuck
like encountering a difﬁcult integration for example
or some tricky algebra."

• “In introductory physics, this was not at all the
case, the math was easy enough, I needed little
more than high school calculus, so it was getting
the physics down and understanding the language
of physics, the new jargon, new concepts etc. Once
the concepts became familiar enough and I moved
on to graduate school, math became my biggest
problem. From vector calculus to advanced linear
algebra to special functions to group theory, the
math is often harder. I ﬁnd it a lot easier to think
about physics and the universe conceptually (now
that I am armed with such intuition and interest) but
trying to actually ‘solve’ a physics problem comes
down to the math, which I ﬁnd hard."

Individual discussions with some physics faculty about
question (3) suggests that they believed that conceptual
knowledge in physics was the central aspect of physics
problem solving in both introductory and graduate level
problem solving. But some faculty who were neutral in
response to question (3) emphasized that the students
may not excel in physics without a good grasp of math-
ematics even though concepts are central to learning
physics. The views of more graduate students (compared
to faculty) about mathematics being the most important
aspect of physics problem solving may stem from the fact
that graduate students have recently taken graduate and
undergraduate level courses in which their grades often
depend not as much on their conceptual knowledge but
on their mathematical facility. However, question (3) is
one of the survey questions for which there isn’t a strong
agreement on favorable response amongst the faculty ei-
ther (see Figure 10).

Similarly, in response to question (16), only 75% of
faculty for introductory level and a somewhat higher
percentage for graduate level (and a much smaller per-
centage of graduate students in each case) noted that,
while answering conceptual physics questions, they use
the physics principles they usually think about when
solving quantitative problems rather than mostly using
their “gut" feeling. Discussions elucidated that the fac-
ulty members’ use of their “gut" feeling to answer con-
ceptual questions (rather than explicitly invoking physics
principles) was often due to the fact that they had de-

veloped good intuition about the problems based upon
their vast experience. Thus, they did not need to explic-
itly think about the physical principles involved.

Incidentally, in response to question (16), 50% of
the introductory physics students claimed that they use
their “gut" feeling to answer conceptual questions rather
than invoking physics principles. Our earlier research
and those of others suggest that introductory students
often view conceptual questions as guessing tasks and
use their “gut" feeling rather than explicitly consider-
ing how the physical principles apply in those situa-
tions. [4, 19, 20] One interviewed introductory student
stated that he would not consider principles when an-
swering a conceptual question because over-analyzing
the problem is more likely to make his answer wrong.
When Mazur from Harvard University gave the Force
Concept Inventory Conceptual standardized test [21] to
his introductory students, a student asked if he should
do it the way he really thinks about it or the way he has
been taught to think about it in the class. [19] It appears
that students sometimes hold two views simultaneously,
where one is based upon their gut feeling and another is
based upon what they learned in the physics class, and
these views coexist and are difﬁcult to merge.

Why don’t faculty and graduate students reﬂect after

solving a problem?

Problem solving is often a missed learning opportu-
nity because, in order to learn from problem solving,
one must reﬂect upon the problem solution. [17, 22–26]
For example, one must ask questions such as “what did
I learn from solving this problem?", “why did the use
of one principle work and not the other one?" or “how
will I know that the same principle should be applica-
ble when I see another problem with a different physical
situation?". Unfortunately, the survey results suggest a
general lack of reﬂection by individuals in each group
after solving problems. Figure 11 shows that in response
to question (20), only approximately 55% of the graduate
students (for both introductory and advanced level prob-
lems) noted that, after they solve homework problems,
they take the time to reﬂect and learn from the solution.
The percentage of faculty members who noted that they
take the time to reﬂect is close to 75% (for both intro-
ductory and graduate-level problem solving) which ap-
pears to be lower than expected. Individual discussions
suggest that physics faculty felt that they monitor their
thought processes while solving the problems. Therefore,
reﬂection at the end of problem solving is not required.
In contrast, while solving graduate level homework prob-
lems, some graduate students pointed to the lack of time
for why they do not take the time to reﬂect after solving
problems. Following are some explanations from gradu-

ate students for their responses:

• “If I have enough time, then I would like to reﬂect
and learn from the problem solution after I struggle
with it for a long time and then ﬁnally solve it
successfully."

• “If the solution or the problem is interesting, then
I would take time to reﬂect and learn from it. This
usually happens in more challenging problems."

• “To be honest, I didn’t do this when I was in college.

But now I realized it’s helpful."

Only approximately 25% of introductory physics stu-
dents noted that they reﬂect and learn from problem
solutions. Since reﬂection is so important for learning
and building a robust knowledge structure, these ﬁndings
suggest that instructors should consider giving students
explicit incentive to reﬂect after they solve physics prob-
lems. [17, 22–26]

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

We developed and validated the “Attitudes and Ap-
proaches to Problem Solving" (AAPS) survey based
upon an earlier Attitudes towards problem solving sur-
vey by Cummings et. al. The survey was administered
to physics graduate students, who answered the sur-
vey questions about problem solving in their graduate
courses and in introductory physics. Their survey re-
sponses were compared with those of introductory stu-
dents in physics and astronomy courses and physics fac-
ulty. We discussed the responses individually with some
students and faculty and obtained written explanations
from some graduate students on selected questions.

There were major differences on some measures in
graduate students’ responses about problem solving in
the graduate courses compared to problem solving in
introductory physics. In general, graduate students’ re-
sponses about problem solving in the graduate courses
were less favorable (less expert-like) than their responses
about solving introductory physics problems. For exam-
ple, graduate students were more likely to feel stuck
unless they got help while solving graduate level prob-
lems than on introductory level problems. Similarly, for
problem solving in their graduate level courses, fewer
graduate students could tell when their work and/or an-
swer was wrong without talking to someone else but
many more could tell when their solution was not correct
when solving introductory physics problems. Also, more
graduate students noted that they routinely use equations
even if they are non-intuitive while solving graduate level
problems than while solving introductory physics prob-
lems. In addition, fewer graduate students noted that they
enjoy solving challenging graduate level physics prob-

lems than solving challenging introductory physics prob-
lems (perhaps because introductory physics problems are
still easier for them).

Comparison of graduate students’ responses with fac-
ulty responses suggests that, on several measures, gradu-
ate students’ responses to AAPS survey are less expert-
like than faculty responses. For example, unlike the grad-
uate students, all physics faculty noted that they enjoy
solving challenging physics problems. The less favor-
able response of graduate students while solving grad-
uate level problems is partly due to the fact that the
graduate students are not yet experts, especially in their
own graduate course content. Due to lower expertise in
solving graduate level problems, graduate students are
more likely to feel stuck unless they get help, not know
whether their solution is right or wrong, use equations
that are not intuitive and not enjoy solving challenging
graduate level problems on which their grade depends
and for which they have a limited time to solve.

We ﬁnd that, on some survey questions, graduate stu-
dents’ and faculty responses to the survey questions must
be interpreted carefully. For example, only two thirds of
the faculty noted that they always think about the con-
cepts that underlie the problem explicitly while solv-
ing introductory-level problems, which is lower than the
fraction of graduate students who noted that they do so
while solving both introductory level and graduate level
problems. Individual discussions with faculty members
suggests that they felt that, after years of teaching ex-
perience, the concepts that underlie many of the intro-
ductory physics problems have become “automatic" for
them and they do not need to explicitly think about them.
The fact that in contrast to most faculty, many graduate
students always think explicitly about the concepts that
underlie the problems both while solving introductory
and graduate level problems, suggests that the graduate
students have not developed the same level of expertise
and automaticity in solving introductory level problems
as physics faculty have. In fact, question (14) related to
this issue is one of those rare questions on the survey
for which the faculty responses were signiﬁcantly dif-
ferent for introductory and graduate-level problem solv-
ing (in particular, more than 90% of the faculty noted
that they explicitly think about concepts that underlie the
graduate-level problems while solving them).

Comparison of graduate students’ AAPS responses
with introductory physics students’ responses suggests
that, on some measures, graduate students have more fa-
vorable attitudes and approaches to solving introductory
physics problems due to their higher level of expertise
than the introductory students. However, on other ques-
tions, the responses must be interpreted carefully in light
of the explanations provided by the graduate students.
For example, in response to whether the problem solving
in physics is essentially “plug and chug", the response of

the graduate students while solving introductory physics
problems and those of introductory physics students is
indistinguishable. But discussions and written explana-
tions of graduate students suggest that they have devel-
oped sufﬁcient expertise in introductory physics so that
solving such problems does not require much explicit
thought and they can often immediately tell which prin-
ciple of physics is applicable in a particular situation.
On the other hand, prior research suggests that many in-
troductory physics students jump into implementation of
problem solution and immediately look for the formulas
without performing a conceptual analysis and planning
of the problem solution. [27–29]

Also, due to their higher level of expertise, graduate
students ﬁnd introductory physics equations more intu-
itive and are better able to discern the applicability of a
physics principle epitomized in the form of a mathemat-
ical equation to diverse situations than the introductory
students. In solving both introductory and graduate level
problems, the fraction of graduate students who noted
that they reﬂect and learn from the problem solution after
solving a problem is larger than the fraction of introduc-
tory physics students who noted doing so in their courses.
While we may desire an even higher percentage of grad-
uate students to reﬂect and learn from their problem solv-
ing, written explanations suggest that, in the graduate
courses, some students felt they did not have the time
to reﬂect. Also, they often did not reﬂect on the exam
solutions even after they received the solutions because
they did not expect those problems to show up again on
another exam. Some graduate students explained that the
reason they do not reﬂect after solving an introductory
physics problem is that the solutions to those problems
are obvious to them and do not require reﬂection.

There was a large difference between the introduc-
tory physics students’ and graduate students’ responses
in their facility to manipulate symbols (vs. numbers)
with introductory physics students ﬁnding it more dif-
ﬁcult to solve problems given in symbolic form. In prob-
lems where numbers were provided, many introductory
students noted that they prefer to plug numbers at the
beginning rather than waiting till the end to do so. One
suggested strategy to help introductory physics students
feel more conﬁdent about using symbols is to ask them to
underline the variable they are solving for so as to keep
it from getting mixed up with the other variables. [30]
Developing mathematical facility can also help students
develop the conﬁdence to solve the problems symboli-
cally ﬁrst before substituting values. In addition, instruc-
tors can emphasize why it is useful to keep the symbols
till the end, including the fact that it can allow them to
check the correctness of the solution, e.g., by checking
the dimension, and it can also allow them to check the
limiting cases which is important for developing conﬁ-
dence in one’s solution. [30]

In general, the more favorable responses of graduate
students on the AAPS survey towards attitudes and ap-
proaches to introductory problem solving compared to
those of the introductory physics students and less fa-
vorable responses compared to the faculty imply that
graduate students have a higher level of expertise in in-
troductory physics but less expertise than physics fac-
ulty. Moreover, graduate students’ responses to graduate
level problem solving in many instances are compara-
ble to introductory students’ responses to introductory
level problem solving, implying that the graduate stu-
dents are still developing expertise in their own gradu-
ate level courses just like introductory students are still
developing expertise in introductory physics.

As noted earlier, the survey results also suggest that
many graduate students are more likely to enjoy solv-
ing difﬁcult introductory physics problems than gradu-
ate level problems, they are more likely to feel stuck
while solving graduate level problems, less likely to ﬁnd
graduate level equations intuitive (but they still use them
freely to solve problems), less likely to predict whether
their problem solution is correct and to not give a high
priority to reﬂecting and learning after solving a prob-
lem. While one can rationalize these less expert-like re-
sponses of graduate students to graduate level problem
solving by claiming that these are reﬂections of the fact
that they are not “experts" in graduate level courses, they
force us to think about whether we are achieving the
goals of the graduate courses and giving graduate stu-
dents an opportunity to learn effective approaches and
attitudes to problem solving. Graduate instructors should
consider whether assessment in those courses should in-
clude both quantitative and conceptual questions to mo-
tivate students to reﬂect on problem solving and give ex-
plicit incentive for reﬂection and for development of in-
tuition about the equations underlying the problems.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank F. Reif, R. Glaser, R. P. Devaty and J. Levy for
very useful discussions. We thank Dr. Clement Stone for
help with statistical analysis. We are grateful to all the
faculty who administered the survey to their class and
took the survey for their help.

REFERENCES

1. D. Hammer, Student resources for learning introductory

physics, Am. J. Phys., 68(7), S52-S59 (2000).

2. M. Schommer, “Effects of beliefs about the nature of
knowledge on comprehension," J. Ed. Psych. 82(3),
406-411 (1990).

goes with the book.

20. C. Singh, “Assessing student expertise in introductory

physics with isomorphic problems, Part II: Examining the
effect of some potential factors on problem solving and
transfer", Phys. Rev. ST Phys. Educ. Res. 4, 010105(1-10),
(2008).

21. D. Hestenes, M. Wells, and G. Swackhamer, “Force

Concept Inventory" , Phys. Teach. 30, 141, 1992.

22. P. Black and D. Wiliam, “Inside the black box: Raising

standards through classroom assessment", Phi Delta
Kappan, 80(2), 139-148, (1998).

23. P. Black and D. Wiliam, “Assessment and classroom
learning", Assessment in Education, 5 (1), 7-74, (1998).

24. E. Yerushalmi, C. Singh, and B. Eylon, “Physics Learning

in the context of scaffolded diagnostic tasks (I): The
experimental setup", in Proceedings of the Phys. Ed.
Res. Conference, Greensboro, NC, edited by L. Hsu, L.
McCullough, and C. Henderson, AIP Conf. Proc. 951,
27-30, (2007).

25. C. Singh, E. Yerushalmi, and Bat Sheva Eylon, “Physics
Learning in the context of scaffolded diagnostic tasks (II):
The preliminary results,” in Proceedings of the Phys. Educ.
Res. Conference, Greensboro, NC, edited by L. Hsu, L.
McCullough, and C. Henderson, AIP Conf. Proc. 951,
31–34 (2007).

26. A. Mason and C. Singh, “Helping students learn effective
problem solving strategies by reﬂecting with peers", Am. J.
Phys., 78(7), 748-754, (2010).

27. F. Reif, ‘Scientiﬁc approaches to science education,” Phys.

Today 39 (11), 48–54 (1986).

28. F. Reif, “Millikan Lecture 1994: Understanding and

teaching important scientiﬁc thought processes,” Am. J.
Phys. 63, 17 (1995).

29. J. H. Larkin, and F. Reif, “Understanding and teaching

problem solving in physics,” Eur. J. Sci. Educ. 1(2),
191–203 (1979).

30. F. Reif, Understanding Basic Mechanics, ISBN 978-0-

471-11624-0, Wily, NY 1995.

3. I. Halloun in Proceedings of the International Conference
on Undergraduate physics education, College Park, MD,
1996. available at http://www.eric.ed.gov

4. E. F. Redish, J. M. Saul, and R. N. Steinberg, “Student
Expectations in Introductory Physics", Am. J. Phys. 66,
212-224, (1998).

5. W. Adams, K. Perkins, N. Podolefsky, M. Dubson,
N. Finkelstein and C. Wieman, “New instrument for
measuring student beliefs about physics and learning
physics: The Colorado Learning Attitudes about Science
Survey", Phys. Rev. ST Phys. Educ. Res. 2, 010101 (2006).
6. K. Gray, W. Adams, C. Wieman and K. Perkins, “Students
know what physicists believe, but they don’t agree: A study
using CLASS survey", Phys. Rev. St. Phys. Educ. Res. 4,
020106 (2008).

7. J. Marx and K. Cummings, “What factors really inﬂuence

shifts in students’ attitudes and expectations in an
introductory physics course?" in 2006 Physics Education
Research Conference Proceedings, Syracuse, N.Y., edited
by L. McCullough, L. Hsu, and P. Heron, AIP Conf. Proc.
883, 101-104, (2007).

8. E. Elby, “Helping physics students learn how to learn",

Am. J. Phys. 69, S54-S64 (2001).

9. P. Laws, Workshop Physics, Wiley (1999).
10. K. Cummings, S. Lockwood, and J. D. Marx, “Attitudes

Toward Problem Solving as Predictors of Student
Success" in 2003 Physics Education Research Conference
Proceedings, edited by J. Marx, S. Franklin, and K.
Cummings, AIP Conf. Proc. 720, 133-136, (2004).

11. A. Collins, J. S. Brown, and S. E. Newman, Cognitive

Apprenticeship: Teaching the crafts of reading, writing and
mathematics, In L. B. Resnick (Ed.), Knowing, learning,
and instruction: Essays in honor of Robert Glaser, Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum., 453-494, 1989.

12. A. Schoenfeld, Mathematical Problem Solving (Academic

Press, NY, 1985).

13. A. Schoenfeld, “Learning to think mathematically:
Problem solving, metacognition, and sense-making in
mathematics,” in Handbook for Research on Mathematics
Teaching and Learning, edited by D. Grouws (McMillan,
NY, 1992), Chap. 15, pp. 334–370.

14. A. Schoenfeld, “Teaching mathematical thinking and
problem solving,” in Toward the Thinking Curriculum:
Current Cognitive Research, edited by L. B. Resnick and
B. L. Klopfer (ASCD, Washington, DC, 1989), pp. 83–103.
15. Physics Graduate Students’ Attitudes and Approaches to
Problem Solving", C. Singh and A. Mason, Proceedings
of the Phys. Ed. Res. Conference, Ann Arbor, MI, (M.
Sabella, C. Henderson, C. Singh Eds.), AIP Conf. Proc.
1179, 273-276 (2009).

16. A. J. Nitko, Educational assessments of students (2nd

ed.), Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall/Merrill, (1996);
J. C. Nunnally, Psychometric Theory (2nd Ed.), New York:
McGraw-Hill, (1978).

17. A. Mason and C. Singh, “Do advanced students learn from

their mistakes without explicit intervention?", submitted.
18. E. Torigoe, “What kind of math matters? A study of the

relationship between mathematical ability and success
in physics", University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign,
2008.

19. E. Mazur, Peer Intruction: A User’s Manual, Series

title: Prentice Hall series in educational innovation. Upper
Saddle River, Prentice Hall, N.J., (1997) and video that

Appendix: AAPS Survey Questionnaire and

favorable (expert) responses

To what extent do you agree with each of the following
statements when you solve physics problems? Answer
with a single letter as follows:
A) Strongly Agree
B) Agree Somewhat
C) Neutral or Don’t Know
D) Disagree Somewhat
E) Strongly Disagree

1. If I’m not sure about the right way to start a problem,
I’m stuck unless I go see the teacher/TA or someone else
for help. (D/E)
2. When solving physics problems, I often make approx-
imations about the physical world. (A/B)
3. In solving problems in physics, being able to handle
the mathematics is the most important part of the process.
(D/E)
4. In solving problems in physics, I always identify the
physics principles involved in the problem ﬁrst before
looking for corresponding equations. (A/B)
5. "Problem solving" in physics basically means match-
ing problems with the correct equations and then substi-
tuting values to get a number. (D/E)
6. In solving problems in physics, I can often tell when
my work and/or answer is wrong, even without looking at
the answer in the back of the book or talking to someone
else about it. (A/B)
7. To be able to use an equation to solve a problem
(particularly in a problem that I haven’t seen before), I
think about what each term in the equation represents
and how it matches the problem situation. (A/B)
8. There is usually only one correct way to solve a given
problem in physics. (D/E)
9. I use a similar approach to solving all problems involv-
ing conservation of linear momentum even if the physical
situations given in the problems are very different. (A/B)
10. If I am not sure about the correct approach to solving
a problem, I will reﬂect upon physics principles that may
apply and see if they yield a reasonable solution. (A/B)
11. Equations are not things that one needs to understand
in an intuitive sense; I routinely use equations to cal-
culate numerical answers even if they are non-intuitive.
(D/E)
12. Physics involves many equations each of which ap-
plies primarily to a speciﬁc situation. (D/E)
13. If I used two different approaches to solve a physics
problem and they gave different answers, I would spend
considerable time thinking about which approach is more
reasonable. (A/B)
14. When I solve physics problems, I always explicitly
think about the concepts that underlie the problem. (A/B)

15. When solving physics problems, I often ﬁnd it useful
to ﬁrst draw a picture or a diagram of the situations
described in the problems. (A/B)
16. When answering conceptual physics questions, I
mostly use my “gut" feeling rather than using the physics
principles I usually think about when solving quantitative
problems. (D/E)
17. I am equally likely to draw pictures and/or diagrams
when answering a multiple-choice question or a corre-
sponding free-response (essay) question. (A/B)
18. I usually draw pictures and/or diagrams even if there
is no partial credit for drawing them. (A/B)
19. I am equally likely to do scratch work when answer-
ing a multiple-choice question or a corresponding free-
response (essay) question. (A/B)
20. After I solve each physics homework problem, I take
the time to reﬂect and learn from the problem solution.
(A/B)
21. After I have solved several physics problems in which
the same principle is applied in different contexts, I
should be able to apply the same principle in other sit-
uations. (A/B)
22. If I obtain an answer to a physics problem that does
not seem reasonable, I spend considerable time thinking
about what may be wrong with the problem solution.
(A/B)
23. If I cannot solve a physics problem in 10 minutes, I
give up on that problem. (D/E)
24. When I have difﬁculty solving a physics homework
problem, I like to think through the problem with a peer.
(A/B)
25. When I do not get a question correct on a test or
homework, I always make sure I learn from my mistakes
and do not make the same mistakes again. (A/B)
26. It is more useful for me to solve a few difﬁcult
problems using a systematic approach and learn from
them rather than solving many similar easy problems one
after another. (A/B)
27. I enjoy solving physics problems even though it can
be challenging at times. (A/B)
28. I try different approaches if one approach does not
work. (A/B)
29. If I realize that my answer to a physics problem is not
reasonable, I trace back my solution to see where I went
wrong. (A/B)
30. It is much more difﬁcult to solve a physics problem
with symbols than solving an identical problem with a
numerical answer. (D/E)
31. While solving a physics problem with a numerical
answer, I prefer to solve the problem symbolically ﬁrst
and only plug in the numbers at the very end. (A/B)
32. Suppose you are given two problems. One problem
is about a block sliding down an inclined plane with
no friction present. The other problem is about a person
swinging on a rope. Air resistance is negligible. You are

told that both problems can be solved using the concept
of conservation of mechanical energy of the system.
Which one of the following statements do you MOST
agree with? (Choose only one answer.) (A/B)
A) The two problems can be solved using very similar
methods.
B) The two problems can be solved using somewhat
similar methods.
C) The two problems must be solved using somewhat
different methods.
D) The two problems must be solved using very different
methods.
E) There is not enough information given to know how
the problems will be solved.
33. Suppose you are given two problems. One problem
is about a block sliding down an inclined plane. There
is friction between the block and the incline. The other
problem is about a person swinging on a rope. There
is air resistance between the person and air molecules.
You are told that both problems can be solved using the
concept of conservation of total (not just mechanical)
energy. Which one of the following statements do you
MOST agree with? (Choose only one answer.) A/B
A) The two problems can be solved using very similar
methods.
B) The two problems can be solved using somewhat
similar methods.
C) The two problems must be solved using somewhat
different methods.
D) The two problems must be solved using very different
methods.
E) There is not enough information given to know how
the problems will be solved.

FIGURE 1. Comparison of graduate students’ survey responses to 12 selected questions when considering introductory-level
problem solving and graduate-level problem solving. The order of the questions in the histogram is such that the difference between
the introductory-level problem solving (“Intro" in the ﬁgure) and graduate-level problem solving (“Graduate" in the ﬁgure) is largest
for the ﬁrst question (question (33)) and second largest for the second question (question (6)) etc. Error bars shown here (and in all
other ﬁgures) are the standard errors. The responses to these questions are more favorable for introductory level problem solving
than for graduate-level problem solving. The neutral percent responses can be found by subtracting from 100, the percentage of
favorable and unfavorable responses.

FIGURE 2. Histogram showing favorable (agree) and unfavorable (disagree) responses for survey question (6). The histogram
shows that faculty were always aware of when they were wrong in problem solving but other respondents were less certain. Only
about 50% of graduate students could tell that their answers were wrong in graduate level problem solving. Graduate students-self
and Graduate Students-intro refer to Graduate students’ response for graduate level problem solving and introductory level problem
solving, respectively.

TABLE 1. Average scores for each group of students and faculty on each of the
individual questions and averaged over all survey questions (see last entry). To calculate
the average score for a question, a +1 is assigned to each favorable response, a -1 is
assigned to each unfavorable response, and a 0 is assigned to neutral responses. One then
averages these values for everybody in a particular group (e.g., faculty-Intro) to obtain an
average score for that group. “Intro" and “Self" with Graduate students implies problem
solving in “introductory physics" and “graduate-level physics courses" respectively.
7

Problem number

3

1

2

4

5

6

0.83

1.00

0.83

0.88

0.84

0.61

14

0.50

0.92

0.88

0.81

0.77

0.32

21

1.00

1.00

0.92

0.94

0.90

0.71

28

1.00

1.00

0.96

0.88

0.87

0.75

Faculty-Intro

Faculty-Grad

Graduate Students-Intro

Graduate Students-Self

Astronomy Students

All Introductory Students

Problem number

Faculty-Intro

Faculty-Grad

Graduate Students-Intro

Graduate Students-Self

Astronomy Students

All Introductory Students

Problem number

Faculty-Intro

Faculty-Grad

Graduate Students-Intro

Graduate Students-Self

Astronomy Students

All Introductory Students

Problem number

Faculty-Intro

Faculty-Grad

Graduate Students-Intro

Graduate Students-Self

Astronomy Students

All Introductory Students

Problem number

Faculty-Intro

Faculty-Grad

Graduate students-Intro

Graduate students-Self

Astronomy Students

All Introductory Students

0.83

1.00

0.71

0.40

0.45

0.14

8

0.92

1.00

0.83

1.00

0.77

0.67

15

1.00

0.92

0.96

0.94

0.29

0.74

22

1.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

0.77

0.52

29

1.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

0.68

0.74

1.00

0.92

0.42

0.63

0.48

0.19

9

0.58

0.92

0.46

0.31

0.35

0.24

16

0.67

0.75

0.50

0.31

0.52

0.23

23

0.92

1.00

1.00

0.75

0.74

0.40

30

0.93

1.00

0.92

0.69

0.50

0.36

-0.04

-0.13

-0.16

0.15

10

0.92

1.00

0.88

0.69

0.94

0.58

17

1.00

0.92

0.79

0.50

0.06

0.55

24

0.42

0.67

0.21

0.19

0.06

0.43

31

1.00

1.00

0.92

1.00

-0.19

-0.04

-0.13

0.08

0.92

1.00

0.83

0.75

0.58

0.41

11

0.67

0.75

0.67

0.33

0.23

0.92

1.00

0.17

0.63

0.13

0.16

12

0.83

1.00

0.54

0.44

0.10

-0.03

-0.06

18

0.92

0.92

0.96

0.88

0.19

0.69

25

0.92

1.00

0.54

0.38

0.68

0.56

32

1.00

1.00

1.00

0.88

0.68

0.70

19

1.00

1.00

0.88

0.56

0.84

0.77

26

1.00

0.92

0.71

0.50

0.55

0.37

33

1.00

1.00

0.83

0.19

0.50

0.46

1.00

1.00

0.75

0.25

0.71

0.24

13

1.00

0.92

0.88

0.94

0.74

0.56

20

0.75

0.75

0.38

0.25

0.32

-0.19

27

0.92

1.00

0.67

0.63

0.74

0.03

Avg.

0.88

0.92

0.73

0.62

0.49

0.33

TABLE 2. Effect sizes between two groups. The number of people in each group is given in the parenthesis. All
effect sizes are positive because they are always taken such that µ2 < µ1 in the calculations (i.e. subtracting the
higher mean from the lower mean; see Table 1). ANOVA using Pairwise t-test shows that the differences between
all the groups is signiﬁcant except that between faculty members for introductory-level and graduate-level problem
solving (p=0.269 for that case).

Cohen’s d

Intro physics Astronomy Grad-intro Grad-self

Faculty-intro

Faculty-grad

Intro physics (541)

Astronomy (31)

Grad-intro (42)

Grad-self (34)

Faculty-intro (12)

Faculty-grad (12)

0.62

1.60

1.42

1.30

0.90

0.46

2.18

2.19

1.19

1.43

2.36

2.43

1.53

1.71

0.48

FIGURE 3. Histogram showing favorable (disagree) and unfavorable (agree) responses for survey question (11). The histogram
shows that many more graduate students disagreed that they routinely use equations to calculate answers even if they are non-
intuitive for introductory level problem solving than graduate level problem solving. Almost equal percentage of introductory
physics students agreed and disagreed with the statement.

FIGURE 4. Histogram showing favorable (disagree) and unfavorable (agree) responses for survey question (5) about whether
problem solving in physics is mainly an exercise in ﬁnding the right formula. The histogram shows that a large percentage of
non-faculty respondents from all groups agreed with the statement or were neutral.

FIGURE 5. Histogram showing favorable (agree) and unfavorable (disagree) responses for survey question (14). While the trend
in the ﬁgure from introductory students to faculty may appear to be inconsistent with expectations, some faculty in individual
discussions noted that they do not explicitly think about concepts that underlie the problem “while" solving problems because the
concepts have become obvious to them. The introductory students often do not think about concepts because they believe in a plug
and chug approach to problem solving in physics.

FIGURE 6. Histogram showing favorable (disagree) and unfavorable (agree) responses for survey question (30). The histogram
shows that faculty and graduate students did not believe that it is more difﬁcult to solve a physics problem with symbols than
solving an identical problem with numerical answer but introductory physics and astronomy students often did.

FIGURE 7. Histogram showing favorable (agree) and unfavorable (disagree) responses for survey question (31). The histogram
shows that faculty and graduate students preferred to solve a problem symbolically ﬁrst and only plug in the numbers at the very
end but less than half of the introductory physics and astronomy students agreed with them.

FIGURE 8. Histogram showing favorable (agree) and unfavorable (disagree) responses for survey question (2). The histogram
shows that all faculty agreed that they often make approximations about the physical world but other respondents, including physics
graduate students, were not always in agreement.

FIGURE 9. Histogram showing favorable (disagree) and unfavorable (agree) responses for survey question (12) about whether
physics involves many equations each of which applies primarily to a speciﬁc situation. As we go from the introductory physics
and astronomy students to faculty, the disagreement with the statement (favorable response) increases.

FIGURE 10. Histogram showing favorable (disagree) and unfavorable (agree) responses for survey question (3) about whether
mathematics is the most important part of the problem solving process. The histogram shows that a large percentage of non-faculty
respondents from all groups agreed with the statement (unfavorable).

FIGURE 11. Histogram showing favorable (agree) and unfavorable (disagree) responses for survey question (20). The histogram
shows that none of the groups had 80% individuals who agreed that they take the time to reﬂect and learn from the problem solutions
after solving problems but the reasons for the lack of reﬂection varied across different groups.

