6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
1

 
 
]

.

R
S
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
0
0
5
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

DRAFT VERSION MARCH 14, 2016
Preprint typeset using LATEX style emulateapj v. 5/2/11

DEGENERACY BETWEEN LENSING AND OCCULTATION IN THE ANALYSIS OF SELF-LENSING PHENOMENA

Department of Physics, Institute for Astrophysics, Chungbuk National University, 371-763 Cheongju, Republic of Korea

CHEONGHO HAN

Draft version March 14, 2016

ABSTRACT

More than 40 years after the ﬁrst discussion, it was recently reported the detection of a self-lensing phe-
nomenon within a binary system where the brightness of a background star is magniﬁed by its foreground
companion. It is expected that the number of self-lensing binary detections will be increased in a wealth of
data from current and future survey experiments. In this paper, we introduce a degeneracy in the interpretation
of self-lensing light curves. The degeneracy is intrinsic to self-lensing binaries for which both magniﬁcation
by lensing and de-magniﬁcation by occultation occur simultaneously and is caused by the difﬁculty in separat-
ing the contribution of the lensing-induced magniﬁcation from the observed light curve. We demonstrate the
severity of the degeneracy by presenting example self-lensing light curves suffering from the degeneracy. We
also present the relation between the lensing parameters of the degenerate solutions. The degeneracy would
pose as an important obstacle in accurately determine self-lensing parameters and thus to characterize binaries.
Subject headings: gravitational lensing: micro – binaries: general

1. INTRODUCTION

Self lensing refers to the gravitational lensing phenomenon
that occurs within a binary system where the brightness of
a background star (source) is magniﬁed by its foreground
companion (lens). This concept was ﬁrst mentioned by
Trimble & Thorne (1969). Leibovitz & Hube (1971) and
Maeder (1973) later pointed out that binary systems in which
one member is a degenerate, compact object – a white dwarf
(WD), neutron star (NS), or black hole (BH) – could cause
repeated magniﬁcation of its companion star if the orbit hap-
pened to be viewed edge-on. The magniﬁcation of these self-
lensing binary systems is very tiny, typically a part in one
thousand or less for a Sun-like source star, and thus it was
considered to be very difﬁcult to detect such a phenomenon.
The concept of self lensing, which had been dormant for
more than two decades, resurrected with the advent of new
types of experiments that are equipped with instruments with
greatly enhanced photometric precision and survey capabil-
ity. With the start of Galactic microlensing surveys, Gould
(1995) and later Rahvar et al. (2011) revisited self lensing and
estimated the possibility of detecting self-lensing binaries in
the data acquired from lensing surveys. Beskin & Tuntsov
(2002) evaluated the prospect of detecting self-lensing bi-
naries in the data obtained from Sloan Digital Sky Survey
(SDSS). Kasuya et al. (2011) investigated lensing effects of
a planet transiting its host star. Sahu & Gilliland (2003) and
Farmer & Agol (2003) pointed out that space-based instru-
ments such as Kepler and Eddington would be sensitive to
compact objects in binaries through their microlensing signa-
tures. Finally, by using Kepler data, Kruse & Agol (2014)
reported the ﬁrst discovery of a self-lensing binary system
(KOI-3278) that is composed of a WD stellar remnant and
a Sun-like companion. The number of self-lensing binary de-
tections is expected to be increased in a wealth of data from
current and future survey experiments.

Occultation and lensing are different limits of the same phe-
nomena occurring when one body passes in front of another
body (Agol 2002). Under some circumstances, both magni-
ﬁcation of the source ﬂux by lensing and de-magniﬁcation
by occultation can simultaneously occur. This happens to bi-

naries composed of WD-star pairs for which the size of the
lens (WD) is equivalent to the Einstein radius (Agol 2002;
Marsh 2001). For example, the radius of the WD companion
of KOI-3278 is ∼ 70% of the estimated Einstein radius. Con-
sidering that WD-star pairs are important targets to observe
self-lensing phenomena, there will be more self-lensing cases
where both lensing and occultation are important.

In this paper, we introduce a degeneracy between lensing
and occultation in the analysis of self-lensing phenomena. We
demonstrate that this degeneracy is intrinsic and thus very se-
vere, making it difﬁcult to accurately characterize self-lensing
binary systems.

The paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we describe
basic physics of self lensing, including various effects that de-
termines self-lensing light curves. In section 3, we introduce
the degeneracy between lensing and occultation and demon-
strate the severity of the degeneracy by presenting example
self-lensing light curves suffering from the degeneracy. We
summarize results and conclude in section 4.

2. BASIC PHYSICS OF SELF-LENSING

The basic difference between self-lensing and regular mi-
crolensing phenomena comes from the fact that the Einstein
radius of the self-lensing phenomenon is much smaller than
that of the regular lensing phenomenon. The Einstein radius
is related to the mass of the lens, ML, the distances to the lens,
DL, and source, DS, by

(cid:21)1/2

.

(1)

rE =(cid:18) 4GML

c2 (cid:19)1/2(cid:20) DL(DS - DL)

DS

For self-lensing phenomena, DS ∼ DL ≫ DS - DL ∼ a and thus
the second term within the brackets on the right side of equa-
tion (1) becomes DL(DS - DL)/DS ∼ a, where a is the semi-
major axis of the binary orbit. This term is much smaller than
the factor ∼ DL/2 of the regular lensing phenomenon that
occur by a lensing object located roughly halfway between
the source and observer and thus Einstein radii of self-lensing
phenomena are very small. To be also noted is that the Ein-
stein radius of the self-lensing phenomenon does not depend

2

SELF-LENSING DEGENERACY

FIG. 1.— Einstein radii of self-lensing phenomena as a function of the

semi-major axis of the binary and the mass of the lensing object.
on the distance to the binary (Maeder 1973), i.e.

rE =(cid:18) 4GMLa

c2 (cid:19)1/2

.

(2)

Measuring the Einstein radius is important because it en-
ables one to determine the physical parameters of the lens. In
addition to the relation in equation (2), the mass and semi-
major axis are related to each other by the Kepler’s law

P2
a3 =

4π2

G(MS + ML)

.

(3)

Since the orbital period P and the mass of the lensed star MS
can be determined from follow-up photometric and spectro-
scopic observation, Kepler’s law provides another relation be-
tween ML and a. With the two unknowns and two relations,
therefore, it is possible to determine the physical parameters
of self-lensing binary systems.

In Figure 1, we present the Einstein radii of self-lensing
phenomena as a function of the semi-major axis and the mass
of a lensing object. For stellar-mass lensing objects with
masses in the range 0.1 . M/M⊙ . 10, the expected Einstein
radii of self-lensing effects are in the range 0.01 . rE/R⊙ .
0.1 for binaries with semi-major axes 0.1 . a/AU . 5. These
Einstein radii are ∼ 103 – 104 times smaller than the Ein-
stein radii of Galactic microlensing events with typical radii
of rE ∼ (O) AU.

2.1. Magniﬁcation by Lensing

The most important consequence of very small Einstein
radii of self-lensing phenomena is that lensing magniﬁcations
are affected by severe ﬁnite-source effects. Finite size of
a source affects lensing magniﬁcations due to a differential
magniﬁcation, where different parts of the source surface are
magniﬁed by different amounts (Witt & Mao 1994). Finite-
source effects are described by the ratio of the source radius
r∗ to the Einstein radius. For regular microlensing events, the
ratio is r∗/rE ∼ 10- 3 - 10- 2 and thus ﬁnite-source effects be-
come important either for very rare cases of extremely high-
magniﬁcation events, where the lens traverses or approaches

FIG. 2.— Variation of self-lensed images of a source with the change of the
relative lens-source position. The orange circle and the grey shaded region
represent the source and its lensed image, respectively. The lens is marked by
a circle shaded by slanted lines and the “+” mark represents the center of the
lens. The red circle around the lens represents the Einstein ring. The top and
bottom panels show the images when the lens is out of and within the source
surface, respectively. The middle panel shows the image at the moment of
the lens entrance into the source surface.

very close to the source, or for events associated with ex-
tremely large source stars. On the other hand, the ratio is
r∗/rE ∼ 101 – 102 for self-lensing phenomena that occur on
typical main-sequence stars. As a result, self-lensing phenom-
ena are always affected by severe ﬁnite-source effects and ex-
hibit light curves that are very different from those of regular
lensing events.

Under the assumption of a uniform disk, the lensing magni-
ﬁcation of a ﬁnite source is computed as the area ratio of the
lensed image to the source star. The image position, z, for a
given position of a source with respect to a lens, u, is obtained
by solving the lens equation

u = z - z- 1,

(4)

where all
lengths are normalized to the Einstein radius
(Paczy´nski 1986; Witt & Mao 1994). Solving the equation
with respect to z yields two solutions of the image positions

z± =

1

2hu ± (u2 + 4)1/2i u

.

(5)

u

Figure 2 shows the variation of self-lensing images (grey
shaded region) with the change of the lens (circle shaded by
slanted lines) location with respect to the source (orange cir-
cle). We note that the positions of the image envelope are
obtained by solving equation (5) for the positions along the
envelope of the source. The center of the lens is marked by the
“+” symbol and the Einstein radius around the lens is marked
by a red circle. We note that a similar plot was presented in
Figure 2 of Maeder (1973). When the lens is out of the source
star surface (u > r∗/rE), there exist two separate images: one
big image located out of the Einstein ring (major image) and
the other small image within the Einstein ring (minor image).
On the other hand, when the lens is within the source star sur-
face (u < r∗/rE), there exists a single image with a small hole
inside. The positions of the hole corresponds to those of the

HAN

3

FIG. 3.— Geometry of a self-lensing system. The green annulus represents
the image of a source when the source (yellow circle) is gravitational lensed
by a lens (grey circle) that is exactly aligned with the source. The dashed
circle is the Einstein ring.
minor image, i.e. z-
of a uniform, ﬁnite source is expressed as

in equation (5). Then, the magniﬁcation

A =

ΣI
ΣS

=(cid:26)(ΣI,+ + ΣI,- )/ΣS when u > r∗/rE,

(ΣI,+ - ΣI,- )/ΣS when u < r∗/rE,

(6)

where ΣS = πr2
the areas of the major and minor images, respectively.

∗ is the area of the source, and ΣI,+ and ΣI,- are

Under the assumption that the disk of a source is uniform,
ﬁnite-source magniﬁcations during very close lens-source ap-
proaches can be expressed in an analytic form. For the deriva-
tion of the analytic expression, we present the geometry of a
self-lensing system in Figure 3. In the ﬁgure, the green annu-
lus represents the image of a source when the source (yellow
circle) is gravitational lensed by a lens (grey circle) that is ex-
actly aligned with the source. The positions of the inner and
outer circles of the image are the major- and minor-image lo-
cations corresponding to the envelope of the source, and thus
the radii of the inner and outer circles are

rin =

rout =

1

∗

1

2h(cid:0)r2
2h(cid:0)r2

∗

+ 4r2
E(cid:1)
+ 4r2
E(cid:1)

1/2 - r∗i ,
1/2 + r∗i ,

(7)

respectively. Then, the lensing magniﬁcation, which corre-
sponds to area ratio of the image to the source, is expressed as
(Maeder 1973; Riffeser et al. 2006)

A =

r2
out

- r2
in
r2
∗

="1 + 4(cid:18)rE

r∗(cid:19)2#1/2

.

(8)

In the limiting case where r∗ ≫ rE, equation (8) is approxi-
mated as1 (Agol 2003)

(9)
1 In other limiting cases, the ﬁnite magniﬁcation becomes A = √5 when

r∗(cid:19)2
A ∼ 1 + 2(cid:18)rE

.

r∗ = rE and A ∼ 2rE/r∗ when r∗ ≪ rE.

FIG. 4.— Variation of self-lensing light curves caused by limb-darkening
effects. The adopted radii of the source and Einstein ring are r∗ = 1.0 R⊙ and
rE = 0.03 R⊙, respectively. The deﬁnition of the limb-darkening coefﬁcient
Γ is provided in equation (10). The lens-source impact parameter is 0.6 r∗.
The notation t∗ represents the time scale for the lens to cross the source radius
and tc represents the time of the lens approach to the center of the source.

This approximation is useful in estimating the peak magniﬁ-
cations of self-lensing events. For example, the peak magni-
ﬁcations with rE/r∗ = 0.01, 0.05, and 0.1 are Amax = 1.0002,
1.005, and 1.02, respectively.

Stellar disks are not uniform in brightness. Instead, cen-
tral part of a stellar disk appears brighter than the edge due to
limb-darkening. Then, when ﬁnite-source effects are impor-
tant in lensing magniﬁcations, limb-darkening effects come
along (Witt & Mao 1994). In Figure 4, we present the vari-
ation of lensing magniﬁcations caused by limb-darkening ef-
fects. We model the surface brightness proﬁle as (Yoo et al.
2004; Lee et al. 2009)

Sλ ∝ 1 - Γλ(cid:18)1 - 3

2

cos φ(cid:19) ,

(10)

where Γλ is the linear limb-darkening coefﬁcient and φ is
the angle between the line of sight toward the center of the
source star and the normal to the source surface. We note
that Γλ depends not only on the stellar type of the source
but also on the observed passband. We accommodate the
limb-darkening effect on lensing light curves by dividing the
source into multiple annuli and giving a weight of the sur-
face brightness to each annulus in the computation of ﬁnite-
source magniﬁcations. We note that ﬁnite-source magniﬁca-
tions including limb darkening can also be computed by us-
ing analytic expressions derived by Witt & Mao (1994) for
circular sources and Heyrovský & Loeb (1997) for elliptical
sources. From the pattern of the variation, it is found that
the limb-darkened magniﬁcation is higher than the magniﬁca-
tion of a uniform disk when the lens is located at the center
of the source star disk, where the surface brightness is high.
In contrast, the magniﬁcation when the source is located at
the edge, where the surface brightness is low, is lower than
uniform-disk magniﬁcation.
It is also found that the limb-
darkening effect causes the ﬂat top part of the light curve to
appear rounder. These tendencies become more important as
the limb-darkening coefﬁcient increases.

2.2. De-magniﬁcation by Occultation

4

SELF-LENSING DEGENERACY

FIG. 5.— Variation of self-lensing light curves caused by occultation ef-
fects, which depend on ratios of the lens radius to the Einstein radius, rL/rE.
The adopted source radius and the limb-darkening coefﬁcient are r∗ = 1 R⊙
and Γ = 0.4, respectively. The lens-source impact parameter is 0.6r∗. Nota-
tions are same as those in Figure 4.

Very small Einstein radii of self-lensing phenomena some-
times require to consider ﬁnite sizes of lenses. The effect of a
ﬁnite lens on lensing magniﬁcation is caused because a lensed
image can be partly blocked by the lens (Bromley 1996). The
occultation of an image is illustrated in Figure 2. Since the
blocked part of the image cannot be seen, ﬁnite-lens effects
cause the lensing magniﬁcation to appear lower than the mag-
niﬁcation of a point lens.

Occultation effects occur when the lens radius is greater
than the inner radius of the image, i.e. rL > rin. Under this
condition, lensing magniﬁcations become (Agol 2003)

A =

- r2
r2
out
L
r2
∗

r∗(cid:19)2
∼ 1 + 2(cid:18)rE

r∗(cid:19)2
- (cid:18) rL

,

(11)

where the second term on the right side is the magniﬁca-
tion term induced by lensing while the last term is the de-
magniﬁcation term induced by ﬁnite-lens effects. Agol (2003)
showed that the analytic expression holds when the lens is
well inside the source. Then, the lensing magniﬁcation when
the lens is located over the source star surface is expressed as

A ∼(1 + 2(rE/r∗)2

1 + 2(rE/r∗)2 -
0

when rL < rin,

(rL/r∗)2 when rin < rL ≤ rout,

when rL ≥ rout,

which is known as the “inverse-transit approximation” (Agol
2003; Marsh 2001). Note that A = 0 implies that the image
is completely blocked out by the lens. We also note that the
expression for exact lensing magniﬁcations considering ﬁnite
source and lens is provided by Lee et al. (2009).

De-magniﬁcation by occultation is important for self-
lensing phenomenon where the radius of the lens is compa-
rable to the Einstein radius, i.e. rE ∼ rL (Lee et al. 2009). For
WD lenses, which are roughly the same size as the Earth, i.e.
rL ∼ 0.01 R⊙, the size of the lens can be a signiﬁcant fraction
of the Einstein radius and thus ﬁnite-lens effects can be im-
portant. For stellar lenses, on the other hand, the lens is much
bigger than the Einstein radius, i.e. rL ≫ rE. In this case, the

(12)

r2
E =

1

L

2(cid:2)r2

+ (A - 1)r2
∗(cid:3) .

(13)

FIG. 6.— Self-lensing light curves with similar peak magniﬁcations result-
ing from different combinations of the Einstein ring radius rE and lens radius
rL. The lower panel shows the residual from the point-lens light curve. The
shaded regions with different grey tones represent the 1σ, 2σ, and 3σ pho-
tometric precisions of Kepler observation achieved in 15 min sampling for a
V = 12 star.
resulting light curve of the background star is simply that of an
eclipsing binary where lensing signatures cannot be detected.
In Figure 5, we present light curves of self-lensing events
with different ratios of the lens radius to the Einstein radius.
From the comparison of the light curves, it is found that mag-
nifying lensing effects and de-magnifying occultation effects
compete each other depending on the ratio rL/rE. For small
rL/rE ratios, lensing effects dominate and the source ﬂux is
magniﬁed. As the ratio increases, occultation effects become
more important.

3. DEGENERACY

The simultaneous occurrence of magniﬁcation by lensing
and de-magniﬁcation by occultation provokes a question on
whether the contribution of the lensing-induced magniﬁcation
can be separated from observed light curves in order to accu-
rately determine the Einstein radius and thus to characterize
binary systems. To answer the question, we compare self-
lensing light curves with similar peak magniﬁcations but with
different combinations of the Einstein ring and the lens radii.
For a given magniﬁcation and a source radius, the relation
between rE and rL of degenerate solutions are obtained from
equation (12), i.e.

We note that this expression is valid for rin < rL ≤ rout.

Figure 6 shows example degenerate light curves resulting
from 5 different combinations of rE and rL. The lensing pa-
rameters are chosen so that the individual light curves can
explain the observed light curve of the self-lensing binary
KOI-3278. We note that the model parameters presented
by Kruse & Agol (2014) are r∗ = 0.96 R⊙, rL = 0.012 R⊙,
and rE = 0.024 R⊙ and the lens-source impact parameter is
0.706 r∗. The lower panel shows the residuals from the point-
lens case, i.e. rL = 0. We note that for all degenerate cases,
the lens radius is signiﬁcantly larger than the inner radius of
the image rin. In Figure 7, we also present the distribution
of the fractional deviation of the peak magniﬁcation Amax,FL

HAN

5

events with rL . rE. The photometric precision of Kepler
is ∼ 100 µmag, 1σ error achieved in 15 min sampling for
a V = 12 star (Argabright et al. 2008; Van Cleve & Caldwell
2009), which corresponds to ∆A/A ∼ 10- 4. Then, although
self-lensing itself, with ∆A/A ∼ 20 × 10- 4, can be detected
with a signiﬁcant statistical conﬁdence, it will be difﬁcult to
distinguish degenerate light curves suffering from the lens-
ing/occultation degeneracy.

With the increase of rL/rE ratio, the deviation from the
point-lens light curve increases.
It is found that the major
deviations occur during the ingress and egress of the lens over
the source surface. Considering the photometric precision of
Kepler, however, it is expected that resolving the degeneracy
will be possible for only events that experience severe occul-
tation effects.

4. SUMMARY

We introduced a degeneracy that would happen in inter-
preting light curves of self-lensing phenomena. We found
that the degeneracy was intrinsic to self-lensing binaries for
which both magniﬁcation by lensing and de-magniﬁcation by
occultation occur simultaneously. We found that the degener-
acy was severe and would be difﬁcult to resolve by the pre-
cision of Kepler data. Therefore, the degeneracy would pose
as an important obstacle in accurately determine self-lensing
parameters and thus to characterize binaries.

This Work was supported by Creative Research Initiative
Program (2009-0081561) of National Research Foundation of
Korea. We thank A. Gould for making useful comments.

FIG. 7.— Fractional deviation of the peak magniﬁcation affected by ﬁnite
lens effects, Amax,FL, from the point-lens magniﬁcation, Amax,PL, as a function
of the lens to Einstein radius ratio, rL/rE.

from the point-lens magniﬁcation Amax,PL as a function of the
lens to Einstein radius ratio, rL/rE.

From the comparison of the light curves, it is found that
the light curves are similar each other despite the large dif-
ferences in the values of rE and rL. The degeneracy between
light curves is especially severe when the lens is smaller than
the Einstein ring. It is found that the difference in the frac-
tional magniﬁcation is ∆A/A . 0.5 × 10- 4 for self-lensing

REFERENCES

Agol, E. 2002, ApJ, 579, 430
Agol, E. 2003, ApJ, 594, 449
Argabright, V. S., VanCleve, J. E., Bachtell, E. E., et al. 2008, Proc. SPIE,

7010, 70102L

Beskin, G. M., & Tuntsov, A. V. 2002, A&A, 394, 489
Bromley, B. C. 1996, ApJ, 467, 537
Dominik, M. 1998, A&A, 333, L79
Gould, A. 1995, ApJ, 441, 77
Gould, A., & Gaucherel, ´C. 1997, ApJ, 477, 580
Farmer, A. J., & Agol, E. 2003, ApJ, 592, 1151
Hambly, N. C., Smartt, S. J., & Hodgkin, S. T. 1997, ApJ, 489, L157
Heyrovský, D., & Loeb, A. 1997, ApJ, 490, 38
Kasuya, S., Honda, M., & Mishima, R. 2011, MNRAS, 411, 1863
Kruse, E., & Agol, E. 2014, Science, 344, 275
Leibovitz, C., & Hube, D. P. 1971, A&A, 15, 251
Lee, C.-H., Riffeser, A., Seitz, S., & Bender, R. 2009, ApJ, 695, L200

McCook, G. P., & Sion, E. M. 1999, ApJS, 121, 1
Maeder, A. 1973, A&A, 26, 215
Marsh, T. R. 2001, MNRAS, 324, 547
Paczy´nski, B. 1986, ApJ, 304, 1
Rahvar, S., Mehrabi, A., & Dominik, M. 2011, MNRAS, 410, 912
Riffeser, A., Fliri, J., Seitz, S., & Bender, R. 2006, ApJS, 163, 225
Sahu, K. C., & Gilliland, R. 2003, ApJ, 584, 1042
Trimble, V. L., & Thorne, K. S. 1969, ApJ, 156, 1013
Van Cleve, J., & Caldwell, D. A. 2009, Kepler Instrument Handbook, KSCI

19033-001 (Moffett Field, CA: NASA Ames Research Center),
http://archive.stsci.edu/kepler/

Witt, H. J., & Mao, S. 1994, ApJ, 430, 505
Yoo, J., DePoy, D. L., Gal-Yam, A., et al. 2004, ApJ, 603, 139

