6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
1

 
 
]
l
e
-
r
t
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
7
3
5
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Measurement of the B1g and B2g components of the elastoresistivity tensor for

tetragonal materials via transverse resistivity conﬁgurations

M. C. Shapiro,1, 2, ∗ A. T. Hristov,1, 3 J. C. Palmstrom,1, 2 Jiun-Haw Chu,1, 2 and I. R. Fisher1, 2

1Stanford Institute for Materials and Energy Sciences, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory,

2575 Sand Hill Road, Menlo Park, California 94025, USA

2Geballe Laboratory for Advanced Materials and Department of Applied Physics,

Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA

3Geballe Laboratory for Advanced Materials and Department of Physics,

Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA

The elastoresistivity tensor mij,kl relates changes in resistivity to strains experienced by a ma-
terial. As a fourth-rank tensor, it contains considerably more information about the material than
the simpler (second-rank) resistivity tensor; in particular, for a tetragonal material, the B1g and
B2g components of the elastoresistivity tensor (mxx,xx − mxx,yy and 2mxy,xy, respectively) can
be related to its nematic susceptibility.1,2 Previous experimental probes of this quantity have fo-
cused exclusively on diﬀerential longitudinal elastoresistance measurements,1,3–5 which determine
the induced resistivity anisotropy arising from anisotropic in-plane strain based on the diﬀerence
of two longitudinal resistivity measurements. Here we describe a complementary technique based
on transverse elastoresistance measurements. This new approach is advantageous because it di-
rectly determines the strain-induced resistivity anisotropy from a single transverse measurement.
To demonstrate the eﬃcacy of this new experimental protocol, we present transverse elastoresistance
measurements of the 2mxy,xy elastoresistivity coeﬃcient of BaFe2As2, a representative iron-pnictide
that has previously been characterized via diﬀerential longitudinal elastoresistance measurements.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Resistivity measurements are employed extensively in
the ﬁeld of strongly correlated electron systems (SCES).
Since transport properties are determined by the elec-
tronic dynamics at the Fermi
level, resistivity is of-
ten extremely sensitive to Fermi surface changes and
electronically-driven phase transitions; however, since re-
sistivity is a second-rank tensor, transport measurements
are generically limited in their ability to identify the
symmetry properties of the underlying order.
In con-
trast, the elastoresistivity (a fourth-rank tensor deﬁned
as the strain derivative of the resistivity) can convey ad-
ditional information about directional anisotropies and
broken point group symmetries which might more sub-
tly manifest in the resistivity itself.2,6 Furthermore, since
electron-lattice coupling in SCES is often large, the order
parameter characterizing an electronically-driven phase
transition in these materials is often strongly tuned by
strain and strongly reﬂected in transport; the coeﬃcients
in the elastoresistivity tensor are then likely to be large,
making elastoresistivity very promising from an experi-
mental perspective. Although elastoresistance measure-
ments have been applied to semiconductors,7 this phys-
ical quantity has only recently been measured in the
context of SCES;1–5,8–10 in both cases, however, mea-
surements have been conﬁned to longitudinal geometries
(Figure 1 (a) and (b)), and the wider class of transverse
(Figure 1 (c)) measurements (which are the subject of
this paper) have not been investigated.

For a tetragonal material, the B1g and B2g components
of the elastoresistivity tensor characterize the material’s
linear response to the anisotropic strains ǫxx − ǫyy and
ǫxy, respectively. These two components of the elastore-

sistivity tensor directly connect to the nematic suscep-
and
tibility for the same two symmetry channels, χB1g
.1,2 We have recently shown how these coeﬃcients
χB2g
can be determined from diﬀerential longitudinal elastore-
sistance measurements and have used this technique to
investigate a series of materials which exhibit electronic
nematic instabilities.1,3–5,9

Anisotropic strain can be achieved by gluing crystals
to the side surface of a piezoelectric lead zirconate ti-
tanate (PZT) stack with a strain-transmitting epoxy. In
this implementation, the crystals are mechanically cou-
pled to and hence deform with the PZT, which expands
(contracts) along its poling direction (perpendicular to
its poling direction) upon application of a positive ex-
ternal voltage. Longitudinal resistances are then mea-
sured while the strain is varied and the diﬀerential lon-
gitudinal elastoresistance determined from the diﬀerence
of the two measurements. In the original realization of
this experiment, two separate transport bars were used
in order to separately determine the longitudinal elas-
toresistivities (∆ρ/ρ)xx and (∆ρ/ρ)yy (illustrated schemat-
ically in Figure 1 (a)). While these measurements unam-
biguously identiﬁed a divergence of the nematic suscep-
tibility in the B2g symmetry channel for the iron-based
superconductors,1 nevertheless this speciﬁc experimental
conﬁguration leads to several experimental concerns. In
particular, the technique relies upon equal strain trans-
mission for the two samples used in the diﬀerential mea-
surement (which might be diﬃcult to realize in practice,
in part due to geometric factors and in part due to dif-
ferences in the adhesion of the two samples to the PZT
stack). Expressed in the context of group theory, such
nonidealities (which we describe in greater detail in Sec-

a)

¶yy

b)

¶yy

iV

V

i

¶xx

i

V

¶xx

i

V

¶yy

i

¶xx

c)

V

FIG. 1: Schematic diagrams illustrating three diﬀerent meth-
ods that can be used to measure the B1g or B2g elastoresis-
tivity coeﬃcients of a tetragonal material. The appropriate
orientation of the principal crystal axes with respect to the
current i and the strains ǫxx (horizontal black arrows) and
ǫyy (vertical gray arrows) for the two irreducible components
is discussed in Sections III and IV of the main text. Gray
bars represent single crystal samples and yellow regions de-
pict electrical contacts used for the transport measurements;
current paths and schematic voltmeters are also indicated.
The samples are caused to experience an induced anisotropic
strain by some external means and the strains ǫxx and ǫyy
are separately determined.
In the conﬁguration shown in
panel (a), a standard four-point contact geometry is used
to measure the diﬀerential longitudinal elastoresistivity (i.e.,
(∆ρ/ρ)xx
In panel (b), a modiﬁed Montgomery
geometry is used to measure the same quantities with a sin-
gle sample; however, two measurement conﬁgurations are still
required to extract (∆ρ/ρ)xx and (∆ρ/ρ)yy, as illustrated by the
two schematic diagrams. In both cases, the relevant elastore-
sistivity coeﬃcients are determined from the diﬀerence of the
two longitudinal measurements. As described in the main
text, these conﬁgurations have some practical drawbacks; in
particular, one infers a (potentially small) resistive anisotropy
from the diﬀerence of two (potentially larger) longitudinal re-
sistivity measurements. In this paper we describe an alterna-
tive transverse (i.e., (∆ρ/ρ)xy) measurement that can be per-
formed on one single crystal (depicted in panel (c)) that yields
the same elastoresistivity coeﬃcients by directly determining
the resistivity anisotropy from a single measurement.

− (∆ρ/ρ)yy).

tion III) admix elastoresistivity coeﬃcients with an A1g
character (i.e., isotropic in-plane, or symmetric with re-
spect to rotation about the c-axis), potentially aﬀecting
the determination of the associated elastoresistivity co-
eﬃcients in other symmetry channels.

2

To avoid the possible contamination of isotropic strain
that can manifest in a diﬀerential longitudinal elastore-
sistivity measurement, it is preferable to extract the dif-
ferential elastoresistivity from a measurement performed
on just one single crystal sample that is held under con-
ditions of anisotropic strain. One such method is to
use the modiﬁed Montgomery technique to measure the
induced anisotropy in the longitudinal resistivity of a
square shape sample (Figure 1 (b)). We recently applied
such a technique to measure the diﬀerential elastoresis-
tance of several families of iron-based superconductors.11
While this technique obviates concerns over strain trans-
mission to the sample, nevertheless it still requires sepa-
rate measurement of two (potentially large) longitudinal
resistivities as a function of strain, the (potentially small)
diﬀerence of which yields the desired B1g or B2g compo-
nents of the elastoresistivity tensor. Ideally, one would
determine this diﬀerence directly.

We note that it is indeed possible to measure the in-
duced resistivity anisotropy (and hence the B1g and B2g
components of the elastoresistivity tensor) from a single
measurement. In particular, we note that a tetragonal
material which undergoes an orthorhombic distortion by
breaking symmetry about its σx and σy mirror planes
(i.e., undergoes a B2g distortion in which the in-plane
square lattice deforms into a parallelogram) acquires ﬁ-
nite oﬀ-diagonal terms in the resistivity tensor (ρxy and
ρyx) which are proportional to the amount of orthorhom-
bicity. Hence, one can obtain the same information from
a single measurement of the transverse elastoresistivity
(Figure 1 (c)). The primary advantage of the transverse
method is that it directly measures the associated re-
sistive anisotropy from a single measurement of a single
sample. Furthermore, by symmetry, the measured quan-
tity cannot be aﬀected by isotropic strain in the linear
regime.

In this manuscript, we propose and demonstrate a new
method for probing the nematic susceptibility in the B2g
based on measuring the transverse elastore-
channel χB2g
sistivity (∆ρ/ρ)xy. One common problem that can arise
with measurements of a transverse resistivity is ρxx con-
tamination in a nominal ρxy measurement due to con-
tact misalignment, and so we also provide a practical
means for subtracting such contamination. Since trans-
verse elastoresistivity measurements have to date neither
been discussed nor measured, we provide here a detailed
description of the relevant tensor quantities and a suit-
able technique that enables such a measurement.

We proceed by ﬁrst describing appropriate coordi-
nate frames and associated transformations of the ela-
storesistivity tensor, necessary for the subsequent dis-
cussion. We then explain the various conﬁgurations
for measuring the corresponding elastoresistivity coeﬃ-
cients, along the way characterizing certain forms of ex-
perimental error. We conclude by presenting 2mxy,xy
data acquired via the new method for the representative
iron-pnictide BaFe2As2, which was chosen since it has
previously been well-characterized by diﬀerential longi-

tudinal measurements1,3,4 and has a large elastoresistive
response. The temperature dependence of the elastoresis-
tivity coeﬃcients as observed by the transverse method
agree with the earlier diﬀerential measurements, reveal-
ing a nematic instability in the B2g symmetry channel.
Similar to our earlier diﬀerential longitudinal measure-
ments, anisotropic strain for the transverse elastoresis-
tance measurements was achieved by gluing the sample
to the surface of a piezoelectric PZT stack; however, we
note that the proposed technique does not rely on this
speciﬁc realization, and alternative methods to strain the
sample can be readily envisioned.

II. COORDINATE FRAMES AND THE

ELASTORESISTIVITY TENSOR

As a consequence of strains experienced by a material,
terms in the resistivity tensor ρij acquire a strain-induced
change

∆ρij(H) ≡ ρij(H, ˆǫ) − ρij (H, ˆǫ = ˆ0).

(1)

The elastoresistivity mij,kl(H) is a fourth-rank tensor
that linearly relates the (normalized) strain-induced re-
sistivity change (∆ρ/ρ)ij (H) and the strain ǫkl according
to

(∆ρ/ρ)ij (H) ≡ mij,kl(H)ǫkl,

(2)

where we choose to represent the second-rank tensors
(∆ρ/ρ)ij (H) and ǫkl as the column vectors

(∆ρ/ρ)ij (H) =





(∆ρ/ρ)xx (H)
(∆ρ/ρ)yy (H)
(∆ρ/ρ)zz (H)
(∆ρ/ρ)yz (H)
(∆ρ/ρ)zy (H)
(∆ρ/ρ)zx (H)
(∆ρ/ρ)xz (H)
(∆ρ/ρ)xy (H)
(∆ρ/ρ)yx (H)





and ǫkl =

ǫxx
ǫyy
ǫzz
ǫyz
ǫzy
ǫzx
ǫxz
ǫxy
ǫyx









(3)

in order to represent mij,kl(H) as a 9 × 9 matrix. The
appropriate normalization scheme is given by2

(∆ρ/ρ)ij (H) ≡ (∆ρij (H)/√ρii(H)√ρjj (H)).

(4)

Because of Onsager’s relation,12 the resistivity tensor is
not in general symmetric in the presence of a magnetic
ﬁeld and so we avoid usage of the compactiﬁed Voigt
notation in order to present a generalized description ap-
propriate for ﬁnite H. The point group symmetry of
the crystal lattice constrains the number of independent

3

nonzero coeﬃcients in the elastoresistivity tensor; for ex-
ample, the elastoresistivity tensor for the speciﬁc case
of the D4h point group (appropriate for BaFe2As2 and
derived elsewhere2) is given in Appendix A.

In labeling the elastoresistivity coeﬃcients by spatial
coordinates, we have implicitly assumed a Cartesian sys-
tem referenced to the crystal itself and deﬁned by its
primitive lattice vectors. We refer to this reference frame
as the “crystal frame” and denote it by unprimed x,
y, and z axes.
In order to extract symmetry informa-
tion about the crystal, one is generally concerned with
measured quantities in the crystal frame. We consider
an experiment in which the crystal experiences a purely
normal (i.e., shear-free) homogeneous strain in a given
Cartesian frame of reference deﬁned by x′, y ′, and z ′ basis
vectors. For example, this could be realized with a piezo-
electric PZT stack, where the basis vectors are deﬁned by
the lateral dimensions of the stack. We refer to this ref-
erence frame as the “normal strain frame”, which (by
choice) shares a mutual z/z ′ axis with the crystal frame
but is oriented at an in-plane angle φ relative to the prim-
itive axes of the crystal frame (i.e., ˆx · ˆx′ = ˆy · ˆy ′ = cos φ,
where φ is positive when the crystal frame is oriented
counterclockwise relative to the normal strain frame).
The relative angle φ reﬂects our freedom to strain the
crystal along arbitrary directions relative to the primi-
tive crystal cell.

Additionally, when we perform an in-plane resistivity
measurement, we have the freedom to direct the cur-
rent along an arbitrary in-plane direction with respect
to the crystal axes. We deﬁne this “transport frame” by
double-primed Cartesian vectors x′′, y ′′, and z ′′; x′′ is
the direction in which the current is sourced, y ′′ is the
in-plane direction perpendicular to x′′, and z ′′ is the out-
of-plane direction perpendicular to x′′. The transport
frame shares a mutual z/z ′′ axis with the crystal frame
but is oriented at an in-plane angle θ relative to it (i.e.,
ˆx· ˆx′′ = ˆy· ˆy ′′ = cos θ, where θ is positive when the crystal
frame is oriented counterclockwise relative to the current
frame). The relative orientation of the three coordinate
frames is depicted in Figure 2.

When

an

in-plane

performing

elastoresistivity
measurement,
the normalized changes in resistivity
(∆ρ/ρ)(xx)′′ (Hz), (∆ρ/ρ)(yy)′′ (Hz), (∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′ (Hz), and
(∆ρ/ρ)(yx)′′ (Hz) are measured in the transport frame
(which is rotated relative to the crystal frame by an
angle θ), while the strains ǫ(xx)′, ǫ(yy)′ and ǫ(zz)′ are
measured in the normal strain frame (which is rotated
relative to the crystal frame by an angle −φ); they
are related by means of appropriately transformed
elastoresistivity coeﬃcients according to

(∆ρ/ρ)(ij)′′ = ˆαθ(∆ρ/ρ)ij = ˆαθmij,klǫkl

(5)

= ˆαθmij,kl ˆαφǫ(kl)′
≡ m(ij)′′ ,(kl)′ ǫ(kl)′ ,

where the ˆαφ, ˆαθ are suitable transformation matrices

¶ yy'

y"

x"

y

x

™
i

y'

y"

x'

¶ xx'

y'

y

z / z' / z"

x"

Θ

Φ

x
x'

FIG. 2: Schematic diagram illustrating the relative orienta-
tions of the crystal (unprimed), normal strain (primed), and
transport (double primed) coordinate frames. The crystal and
normal strain frames are related by a relative angle φ about
their mutual z/z ′ axis, while the crystal and transport frames
are related by a relative angle θ about their mutual z/z ′′ axis.

given in Appendix A and the subscripts in the elastore-
sistivity coeﬃcients denote that the strains are measured
in the normal strain frame (primes) while the normal-
ized changes in resistivity are measured in the transport
frame (double primes).

4

a)

B1g

b)

¶ yy'

B2g

¶ yy'

y

y

x

x

¶ xx'

y x

y

x

¶ xx'

y  y'  y''

Θ = 0
Φ = 0

x  x'  x''

y'  y"

y

x

Θ = -Π  4
Φ = Π  4
x'  x''

FIG. 3: Longitudinal elastoresistivity conﬁgurations for ex-
tracting (a) mxx,xx − mxx,yy (with (θ, φ) = (0, 0)) and (b)
2mxy,xy (with (θ, φ) = (−π/4, π/4)), which characterize the
B1g and B2g irreducible representations of mij,kl in D4h. In
(a), one measures the diﬀerential longitudinal resistive re-
sponse to strain (∆ρ/ρ)(xx)′′ − (∆ρ/ρ)(yy)′′ to a strain ǫ(xx)′ −
ǫ(yy)′ with the transport, crystal, and normal strain frames all
coincident; the diﬀerential longitudinal elastoresistivity then
yields the elastoresistivity coeﬃcients mxx,xx − mxx,yy.
In
(b), one measures the diﬀerential resistive response to strain
(∆ρ/ρ)(xx)′′ −(∆ρ/ρ)(yy)′′ to a strain ǫ(xx)′ −ǫ(yy)′ with the crys-
tal frame oriented at the angles (θ, φ) = (−π/4, π/4) relative
to the transport and normal strain frames; the diﬀerential
longitudinal elastoresistivity then yields the elastoresistivity
coeﬃcient 2mxy,xy.

III. DIFFERENTIAL LONGITUDINAL

CONFIGURATION FOR PROBING NEMATIC

SUSCEPTIBILITY IN D4h

pressing it in terms of the elastoresistivity coeﬃcients in
the crystal frame (Appendix A), we ﬁnd that

A.

Ideal Conﬁguration

The elastoresistivity tensor takes a particularly sim-
ple form when decomposed in terms of its irreducible
representations (as determined by the point group sym-
metry of the crystal lattice). Such a decomposition mo-
tivates making speciﬁc combinations of elastoresistance
measurements in order to isolate particular elastoresis-
tivity coeﬃcients in the same symmetry class. For exam-
ple, for the D4h point group, the normalized resistivity
changes in the B1g and B2g irreducible representations
are proportional to the corresponding elastoresistivity co-
eﬃcients (mxx,xx − mxx,yy and 2mxy,xy, respectively) in
the same symmetry channel and are related to the ne-
in those irreps.1,2,5
matic susceptibilities χB1g
There are, however, diﬀerent experimental geometries
that can be used to extract these combinations of co-
eﬃcients. Previously, we have shown how a diﬀerential
longitudinal elastoresistance measurement can be used to
measure mxx,xx−mxx,yy and 2mxy,xy, which is illustrated
schematically in Figure 3. By taking the symmetry-
motivated combination (∆ρ/ρ)(xx)′′ − (∆ρ/ρ)(yy)′′ and ex-

and χB2g

hǫ(xx)′ − ǫ(yy)′i ·h(mxx,xx − mxx,yy) cos(2θ) cos(2φ)

− 2mxy,xy sin(2θ) sin(2φ)i.

(∆ρ/ρ)(xx)′′ (Hz) − (∆ρ/ρ)(yy)′′ (Hz) =

(6)

Unsurprisingly, despite the fact that each crystal ex-
periences ǫ(zz)′ strain (and so the individual transport
measurements experience the eﬀects of strain in the A1g
symmetry channel in addition to the B1g or B2g chan-
nels), the quantity (∆ρ/ρ)(xx)′′ − (∆ρ/ρ)(yy)′′ is unaﬀected
by such strains since they are of a diﬀerent symmetry
class. Equivalently, the eﬀects of rotationally invariant
strains are subtracted out in taking the B1g or B2g com-
bination, as we originally noted.1 However, arbitrary in-
plane rotations are not symmetry elements of D4h (only
the discrete π/2 rotations about the mutual z/z ′/z ′′ axis
are symmetries of the point group), and so rotating the
crystal frame by an arbitrary angle θ relative to the
transport frame and/or by an arbitrary angle φ rela-
tive to the strain frame can mix B1g (mxx,xx − mxx,yy)
and B2g (2mxy,xy) quantities (measured in the crystal

frame) into each other. For certain high symmetry di-
rections of the current and normal strains relative to
the crystal axes, though, one can isolate the B1g and
B2g coeﬃcients and hence infer the behavior of the cor-
responding susceptibilities in those symmetry channels.
The high symmetry conﬁguration for mxx,xx − mxx,yy
) is (θ, φ) = (0, 0) (i.e., the transport, current,
(∝ χB1g
and normal strain frames are all coincident), while the
) is
high symmetry conﬁguration for 2mxy,xy (∝ χB2g
(θ, φ) = (−π/4, π/4) (i.e., the crystal frame is oriented at
π/4 radians relative to the transport and normal strain
frames); these arrangements are depicted in Figure 3 and
can be conﬁrmed with (6). This was precisely the con-
ﬁguration used in our initial measurements of the elas-
toresistance of iron-based1,3 and heavy fermion5 super-
conductors. The same information can also be extracted
from a modiﬁed Montgomery geometry.11

B. Sources of Error

There are several sources of systematic errors in the
diﬀerential longitudinal measurement conﬁguration, all
of which merit a brief comment. The primary reason
for doing so in the context of this paper is then to mo-
tivate the alternative transverse measurement conﬁgura-
tion which does not suﬀer some of these drawbacks. Here
we focus speciﬁcally on errors associated with the stan-
dard four-contact geometry (Figure 1 (a)), but a similar
analysis could be applied to the modiﬁed Montgomery
technique.

(a) Angular misalignment:
In order to measure
mxx,xx − mxx,yy or 2mxy,xy, crystals should be oriented
such that (θ, φ) = (0, 0) and (θ, φ) = (−π/4, π/4), respec-
tively.
In practice, misalignment will occur which will
aﬀect the measured elastoresistivity coeﬃcients. Within
the present formalism, we can propagate this error to
leading order; in this section, we quote the main results,
referring the reader to Appendix B for the full derivation.
Suppose that in attempting to measure (∆ρ/ρ)(xx)′′ , we
intended to orient the crystal in a high-symmetry con-
ﬁguration characterized by the angles (θ, φ) but actually
did so in a conﬁguration given by (θ + δθxx, φ + δφxx).
To probe nematic susceptibility, we subtract (∆ρ/ρ)(yy)′′
from (∆ρ/ρ)(xx)′′, which we also intend to be measured in
a conﬁguration (θ, φ) but which may also be misaligned
according to (θ + δθyy, φ + δφyy). For full generality, we
assume δθxx 6= δθyy and δφxx 6= δφyy. Expanding these
errors to leading order about the high symmetry con-
ﬁgurations (θ, φ) = (0, 0) and (θ, φ) = (−π/4, π/4), the
elastoresistivity coeﬃcients mxx,xx − mxx,yy (in the ﬁrst
conﬁguration) and 2mxy,xy (in the second conﬁguration)
are misestimated by a factor

1 −(cid:20)δθ2

xx + δθ2

yy + δφ2

xx + δφ2

yy(cid:21).

5

(7)

The angular alignment errors systematically induce an
underestimate of the true elastoresistivity coeﬃcients and
come in at second order in the misalignment; even if all
angles were oﬀ by as much as 5◦ (a typical experimental
uncertainty), the total error would only be ∼ 3%, and so
the high symmetry conﬁgurations are relatively insensi-
tive to minor angular oﬀsets.

Additionally, misalignment with respect to the high
symmetry conﬁgurations also mixes B1g coeﬃcients into
a nominal measurement of the B2g symmetry channel
and vice versa. The amount of mixing from the other
symmetry channel is proportional to

− 2(cid:20)δθxxδφxx + δθyyδφyy(cid:21),

(8)

which again is at second order in the misalignment.
This mixing due to misalignment could be signiﬁcant
if the relative diﬀerence in the magnitudes of the ela-
storesistivity coeﬃcients in the two symmetry channels
is large. For example, for the speciﬁc case of the iron-
diverges, measure-
based superconductors in which χB2g
ment of mxx,xx − mxx,yy is aﬀected by admixture of the
much larger 2mxy,xy coeﬃcient, whereas measurement of
2mxy,xy is essentially unaﬀected by admixture of a small
amount of the much smaller mxx,xx − mxx,yy.1

(b) Unequal strain experienced by the two samp-
les: The diﬀerential longitudinal technique relies on both
samples experiencing the same homogeneous strain.
If
the samples experience a diﬀerent strain due to exper-
imental nonidealities (see next section for a discussion
relevant to the speciﬁc technique we have employed), this
will also aﬀect the deduced elastoresistivity coeﬃcients.
Relative strain errors are of potentially greater concern
than misalignment errors since any strain oﬀset error oc-
curs at ﬁrst order. Strain oﬀsets also erroneously mix
in A1g-like coeﬃcients and hence contaminate a nominal
nematic susceptibility measurement with the eﬀects of
isotropic strain (see discussion in Appendix C).13 Com-
parison of nominal B1g and B2g coeﬃcients can help
bound the amount of A1g contamination (since such rota-
tionally invariant contamination would manifest equally
in both B1g and B2g measurements). Hence, it is still
possible to classify which symmetries are broken at the
phase transition (i.e., assigning the order parameter to a
particular irreducible representation of the space group);
however, these concerns motivate development of a tech-
nique that does not rely on separate measurements of
diﬀerent samples but which is based instead on measure-
ment of a single sample. This is the primary motivation
for adopting either the modiﬁed Montgomery technique

(Figure 1 (b)) or the transverse elastoresistance technique
(Figure 1 (c)) that we introduce in Section IV.

a)

(c) Systematic errors originating with the specif-
ic technique: In addition to the sources of systematic
error discussed above, additional errors can be introduced
which are speciﬁc to the particular technique that is used
to strain the samples. For our experimental realization
in which single crystals are glued to the side surface of
a PZT stack, these errors are related to diﬀerential ther-
mal contraction and strain homogeneity. We emphasize,
however, that strain homogeneity and diﬀerential ther-
mal contraction are not necessarily generic to elastoresis-
tivity measurements; alternative methodologies may be
able to mitigate or circumvent these particular sources of
error while potentially incurring others.

Diﬀerential thermal contraction between the sample
and the PZT stack on which it is mounted implies that
the sample is strained even when no voltage is applied to
the piezoelectric. At high temperatures, this is a small
eﬀect since the dynamic range over which the sample
can be strained exceeds the “bias” strain due to such
thermal eﬀects.14 However, the situation is reversed at
cryogenic temperatures. Upon cooling to 100 K, the
crystal experiences a large, anisotropic strain (of about
∼ 0.1%)18 solely from the PZT due to an expansion along
its poling direction; depending on the voltage range that
is applied to the PZT stack, this can be much larger
than the dynamic strain that the PZT can apply due
to an applied voltage at this temperature (∼ 0.01% at
150 V),1,19 which means that the strain experienced by
the crystal may not be able to be tuned through zero.
So long as the material is still in the regime of linear
response, which can be checked, the elastoresistivity co-
eﬃcients can still be faithfully measured; however, al-
ternative methodologies18 can also be employed which
mitigate such eﬀects and more closely yield zero strain
conditions.

So far, our analysis has assumed no relaxation of the
strain through the thickness of the crystal. In practice,
the strain will relax towards its unstrained edges on a cer-
tain length scale determined by the elastic stiﬀness of the
sample and the extent to which the sides of the crystal are
“clamped” by the epoxy. To mitigate such eﬀects, sam-
ples to be measured must have a thickness that is much
smaller than the in-plane dimensions. Concerns about
strain relaxation in the narrow in-plane direction relative
to the long in-plane direction can be completely allayed
by using a modiﬁed Montgomery technique for crystals
with a square shape (Figure 1 (b)).11 Strain transmis-
sion has been veriﬁed for larger crystals with a similar
aspect ratio to those used for the present elastoresistiv-
ity measurements by gluing strain gauges directly on the
top surface of the crystal.3,9

6

B1 g

b)

¶ yy'

B2 g

y

x

¶ xx'

¶ xx'

¶ yy'

y

x

y

x

y  y'

x''

y"

Θ = Π / 4

Φ = 0

x  x'

y"

y

y

y'

x

xx''

x'

Θ = 0
Φ = Π  4

FIG. 4: Schematic diagrams illustrating transverse elastore-
sistivity conﬁgurations for extracting (a) mxx,xx − mxx,yy
(with (θ, φ) = (π/4, 0)) and (b) 2mxy,xy (right, with (θ, φ) =
(0, π/4)). In (a), one measures the sum of the transverse re-
sistive response to strain (∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′ + (∆ρ/ρ)(yx)′′ to a strain
ǫ(xx)′ − ǫ(yy)′ with the transport frame rotated by π/4 ra-
dians relative to the crystal and normal strain frames; the
summed elastoresistivity then yields the elastoresistivity co-
eﬃcients mxx,xx −mxx,yy. In (b), one measures the sum of the
transverse resistive response to strain (∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′ +(∆ρ/ρ)(yx)′′
to a strain ǫ(xx)′ − ǫ(yy)′ with the normal strain frame rotated
by π/4 radians relative to the crystal and transport frames;
the summed transverse elastoresistivity then yields the elas-
toresistivity coeﬃcient 2mxy,xy.

layer junction, the strain that the crystal experiences can
vary with position on the PZT surface. The PZT stacks
that we have employed have been stacked along their pol-
ing direction with an individual layer thickness of ∼ 200
If a
µm and a separation between layers of ∼ 50 µm.
crystal with a width roughly equal to these thicknesses is
adhered along the multilayer interface (as is required in
a diﬀerential longitudinal elastoresistance measurement)
and inauspiciously placed in the interfacial separation re-
gion, the crystal will experience little strain even with a
voltage applied to the piezo. This sort of inhomogeneity
can be ameliorated by spreading the strain transmitting
epoxy to encompass more area than just the interface re-
gion, attention to placement on the PZT substrate, and
use of larger crystals. Modiﬁed techniques can also be
readily envisaged that yield a more homogeneous strain.

IV. TRANSVERSE CONFIGURATION FOR

PROBING NEMATIC SUSCEPTIBILITY IN D4h

A.

Ideal Conﬁguration

Finally, for crystals with dimensions comparable to the
separation distance between two PZT layers, and depend-
ing on where the crystal is mounted relative to a PZT

An alternative method for obtaining the same sym-
metry information involves transverse elastoresistance
measurements, as depicted in Figure 4. The underly-

ing intuition is that by appropriately rotating the crys-
tal frame relative to the transport and normal strain
frames, the quantity (∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′ + (∆ρ/ρ)(yx)′′ can mix
into (∆ρ/ρ)(xx)′′ − (∆ρ/ρ)(yy)′′ and hence probe the same
B1g and B2g susceptibilities. Expressing (∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′ +
(∆ρ/ρ)(yx)′′ in terms of strains in the normal strain frame
and elastoresistivity coeﬃcients in the crystal frame (Ap-
pendix A), we ﬁnd that

(∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′(Hz) + (∆ρ/ρ)(yx)′′ (Hz) =

(9)

−hǫ(xx)′ − ǫ(yy)′i ·h2mxy,xy cos(2θ) sin(2φ)
+ (mxx,xx − mxx,yy) sin(2θ) cos(2φ)i,

and so the elastoresistivity coeﬃcients corresponding to
the B1g and the B2g irreducible representations can
be isolated for appropriate high-symmetry conﬁgura-
tions. As depicted in Figure 4 (which can be corrob-
orated with (9)), the appropriate conﬁguration to ex-
) via such transverse mea-
tract mxx,xx − mxx,yy (∝ χB1g
surements is to measure the transverse elastoresistiv-
ity with currents and transverse voltages directed along
the [110] and [1¯10] crystallographic directions and with
strains oriented along the crystalline axes (mathemati-
cally, (θ, φ) = (π/4, 0)); conversely, extracting 2mxy,xy
) requires measuring the superposed transverse
(∝ χB2g
elastoresistivity with currents and transverse voltages
directed along the principal crystalline axes and with
strains directed along the [110] and [1¯10] crystallographic
directions (mathematically, (θ, φ) = (0, π/4)).

The previous discussion was framed in a manner that
emphasized the essential similarity between the longi-
tudinal and transverse conﬁgurations; however, there is
an additional simpliﬁcation in the transverse conﬁgura-
tion that essentially halves the experimentalist’s work-
load. Since (∆ρ/ρ)(yx)′′ (Hz) = (∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′ (−Hz) from
Onsager’s relation,2 one can measure the same elastore-
sistivity coeﬃcients in the transverse conﬁguration by
performing the measurements (∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′ (±Hz) and tak-
ing the sum. An illustration of this elastoresistivity con-
ﬁguration is given in Figure 5 and expressed mathemat-
ically as

(∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′(Hz) + (∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′ (−Hz) =

(10)

−hǫ(xx)′ − ǫ(yy)′i ·h2mxy,xy cos(2θ) sin(2φ)
+ (mxx,xx − mxx,yy) sin(2θ) cos(2φ)i.

Instead of dismounting the same crystal and re-
mounting in a new conﬁguration, as is required for the
diﬀerential longitudinal conﬁguration, one need only re-
verse the orientation of the magnetic ﬁeld, which is usu-
ally simply accomplished in situ. We emphasize that the
appropriate elastoresistivity coeﬃcients are given by the

7

a)

¶ yy'

B1 g

b)

¶ yy'

B2 g

y

x

¶ xx'

Θ = Π / 4

Φ = 0

y

x

¶ xx'

Θ = 0
Φ = Π  4

y  y'

y"

x''

x  x'

y'

yy"

xx''
x'

FIG. 5: Transverse elastoresistivity conﬁgurations for ex-
tracting (a) mxx,xx − mxx,yy (with (θ, φ) = (π/4, 0)) and
(b) 2mxy,xy (with (θ, φ) = (0, π/4)). Mounted in these
conﬁgurations and in the presence of a ﬁnite ﬁeld, the ap-
propriate elastoresistivity coeﬃcients can be measured from
(∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′ (Hz) + (∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′ (−Hz); in zero ﬁeld, the same
coeﬃcients can be extracted with a single measurement
(∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′ (Hz = 0). The primary advantage of the trans-
verse technique is that one can measure the same elastore-
sistivity coeﬃcients from a single mounting without A1g con-
tamination.

symmetric combination (i.e., sum) of transverse voltages,
in constrast to Hall coeﬃcient measurements, which are
given by the anti-symmetric (i.e., diﬀerence) combination
in magnetic ﬁeld. A ﬁnal comment is that in zero mag-
netic ﬁeld, (∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′ = (∆ρ/ρ)(yx)′′, and so only a single
measurement is required:

(∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′(Hz = 0) = (∆ρ/ρ)(yx)′′ (Hz = 0) =

(11)

2hǫ(xx)′ − ǫ(yy)′i ·h2mxy,xy cos(2θ) sin(2φ)
− 1
+ (mxx,xx − mxx,yy) sin(2θ) cos(2φ)i.

B. Sources of Error

As for the diﬀerential longitudinal conﬁguration, an-
gular misalignment and strain magnitude errors can also
manifest in the transverse method.
In addition, mis-
alignment of the contacts used to measure the transverse
voltages can lead to some amount of longitudinal resis-
tivity ρxx seeping into an intended measurement of ρxy,
in which case it is necessary to determine an appropriate
method to correctly subtract such longitudinal contami-
nation. In this section, we address each of these concerns,
quoting a few main results (whose full derivation appears
in Appendices B, C, and D) and emphasizing the advan-
tages of the transverse setup. In particular we note the
principal advantage of the transverse technique is that
the measurement does not suﬀer from A1g contamina-
tion.

(a) Angular misalignment: Alignment errors propa-
gate in analogous ways as for the diﬀerential longitudi-
nal case (Section III B). Assuming that we intended to
measure (∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′ (Hz) and (∆ρ/ρ)(yx)′′ (Hz) in a (θ, φ)
conﬁguration but actually mounted at (θ+δθxy, φ+δφxy)
and (θ+δθyx, φ+δφyx) (respectively), we obtain the ana-
log of (7) for the propagated error and (8) for the contam-
ination from the other symmetry channel (one need only
interchange subscripts xx ↔ xy and yy ↔ yx; see Ap-
pendix B); again, in the high symmetry conﬁgurations,
the leading errors are at second order in the angular mis-
alignment and consequently lead to negligibly small sys-
tematic errors.

(b) Unequal strain experienced by the two samp-
les: Strain oﬀset errors are fundamentally diﬀerent than
in the diﬀerential longitudinal conﬁguration, which is the
primary advantage of the transverse geometry. In zero
magnetic ﬁeld, the quantity (∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′ is fundamentally
immune to strain oﬀset errors (indeed, there is no oﬀset
since only a single sample is needed,
in contrast to
the diﬀerential technique). Furthermore, the isotropic
strains that are experienced by the crystal cannot gen-
erate a transverse voltage: that is, rotationally invariant
(A1g) strains cannot produce directionally oriented (B1g
or B2g) resistivity changes (see Appendix (C6), with
mxy,xx = mxy,zz = 0 in vanishing ﬁeld). In a ﬁnite ﬁeld,
a second measurement is needed, but since Onsager gives
(∆ρ/ρ)(yx)′′ (Hz) = (∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′ (−Hz), one can measure
the induced resistivity changes without re-gluing the
crystal; therefore, one can be sure that the strain oﬀset
errors in the (∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′ (±Hz) measurements are exactly
zero. This is the primary advantage of the transverse
technique.

(c) Subtracting ρxx contamination from a transv-
erse measurement: One additional complication in
measuring (∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′ (Hz), however, is subtracting out
any unwanted contributions from ρxx in a putative ρxy
measurement due to unintentional contact misalignment.
In a typical Hall measurement of ρxy, one can use
the fact that the transverse force on the electrons is
odd in the magnetic ﬁeld and hence anti-symmetrize
the data in ﬁeld to subtract out ρxx. This approach
does not work for transverse elastoresistivity, where the
symmetry-motivated elastoresistivity coeﬃcients of inter-
est are themselves even in the magnetic ﬁeld (despite
coming from a measurement of (∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′ (Hz)).
In-
stead, one needs to characterize the amount of longi-
tudinal ρxx contamination in terms of the geometry of
the electrical contacts themselves. Parametrizing this
geometrical misalignment by a parameter ∆ℓ, one ac-
counts for such contamination by simultaneously mea-

8

¶ xx'

i

2

 l12  l13

1

¶ yy'

3

V xx "

V xy "

FIG. 6: Schematic diagram showing contact geometry for
a practical transverse elastoresistance measurement. Con-
tacts 1 and 2 are used to measure R(xy)′′ ; however, partial
misalignment can lead to R(xx)′′ contamination in a nom-
inal R(xy)′′ measurement. This contamination can be ac-
counted for by subtracting out a down-weighted longitudi-
nal contribution, with the down-weighting given by the fac-
tor ∆ℓ. ∆ℓ is deﬁned as the ratio of the misalignment dis-
tance l12 to the distance between longitudinal contacts l13,
which is related to the ratio of the transverse and longitu-
dinal voltages on a free-standing crystal: ∆ℓ ≡ l12/l13 =
V(xy)′′ (H=0,free-standing)/V(xx)′′ (H=0,free-standing) (see Appendix
D). This subtraction procedure is analogous to the anti-
symmetrization procedure that is used for Hall eﬀect mea-
re-
surements. To use this geometry to probe χB1g
quires mounting the crystal such that (θ, φ) = (π/4, 0) or
(θ, φ) = (0, π/4), respectively, as described in the main text.

or χB2g

suring the longitudinal elastoresistance (∆ρ/ρ)(xx)′′ (Hz)
from a second pair of contacts (Figure 6) and pre-
cisely subtracting out the down-weighted contribution

∆ℓh(∆ρ/ρ)(xx)′′ (Hz)i from (∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′ (Hz). The full

subtraction procedure is derived and outlined in Ap-
pendix D.

V. TRANSVERSE ELASTORESISTIVITY

MEASUREMENTS OF BAFE2AS2

In order to demonstrate the eﬃcacy of the new trans-
verse conﬁguration, we chose to measure the 2mxy,xy
elastoresistivity coeﬃcient of the representative iron-
pnictide BaFe2As2. Since we have already extracted this
coeﬃcient using the diﬀerential longitudinal method,9
this allows for a direct comparison between the two con-
ﬁgurations. As we demonstrate below, values of 2mxy,xy
extracted from the two techniques agree in their temper-
ature dependence, revealing a nematic instability in the
B2g symmetry channel.

A. Experimental Methods

Single crystals of BaFe2As2 were grown from a self-ﬂux
method as described elsewhere.20,21 The crystals grow as
thin plates, with the c-axis perpendicular to the plane of
the plates and natural facets along the in-plane principal
tetragonal axes. A representative, as-grown, rectangu-
lar (1.6 mm× 0.67 mm× 0.029 mm) crystal was selected
for the transport measurements. X-ray diﬀraction was
used to conﬁrm that the crystallographic [100] and [010]
axes were oriented along the length/width of the sample.
Electrical contacts (with current sourced along the [100]
tetragonal direction) were aﬃxed to gold-sputtered pads
with Dupont 4929N silver paste.

Prior to gluing the sample to the PZT stack, the tem-
perature dependence of the resistances R(xx)′′ and R(xy)′′
were measured for the free-standing, unstrained crystal in
order to pre-characterize the contact geometry. The un-
strained R(xx)′′ is also used for normalizing the elastore-
sistance data. The samples were then glued to the top
surface of a PZT piezoelectric stack (Part Number PSt
150/5×5/7 cryo 1, from Piezomechanik GmbH) using
ITW Devcon ﬁve minute epoxy spread uniformly across
the bottom of the crystal (Figure 7). The orientation of
the crystal axes of the sample with respect to the prin-
cipal axes of the PZT stack was initially determined by
eye, such that the long axis of the transport bar was at
an angle φ of approximately 45◦ with respect to the PZT
stack. The angle was subsequently determined more pre-
cisely from measurements of the photograph shown in
Figure 7 to be 45.4◦ ± 0.2◦. Mutually transverse strain
gauges (Part Number WK-05-062TT-350, from Vishay
Precision Group) were glued to the other side of the PZT
stack in order to measure the strains ǫ(xx)′ and ǫ(yy)′ in
situ.

The PZT stack was mounted on the coldhead of a spe-
cially adapted probe and cooled in exchange gas in a
Janis ﬂow cryostat. Temperature was controlled with
a Lake Shore 340 temperature controller, with a stabil-
ity of ±50 mK.22 The resistances of both the sample and
the strain gauges were measured using Stanford Research
Systems SR830 lock-in ampliﬁers; for the sample, Stan-
ford Research Systems Model SR560 preampliﬁers were
also used. AC excitation currents of 1 mA and 0.1 mA
were used for the sample and strain gauges, respectively.
Elastoresistance data at a ﬁxed temperature were ac-
quired from changes in the resistances of the sample
(R(xx)′′ and R(xy)′′ ) and of both strain gauges while
sweeping the voltage applied to the PZT between −50
V and +150 V. The voltage was swept stepwise in 4 V
increments with a delay of 0.25 s between steps; the mea-
sured elastoresistance did not depend on this sweep rate
scheme, nor were there any observed heating eﬀects.5
Three full voltage loops were taken for each tempera-
ture setpoint; after completing these loops, the temper-
ature was then stepped to a new setpoint and allowed
to stabilize before performing the next elastoresistance
measurement.

9

FIG. 7: Photograph showing a BaFe2As2 crystal aﬃxed to
the surface of a PZT stack and mounted in the transverse
elastoresistivity conﬁguration (θ, φ) = (0, π/4), appropriate
for measuring 2mxy,xy (∝ χB2g
). Contacts 1, 2, and 3 are
labeled with reference to Figure 6. The twisted pairs used for
performing the voltage measurements are evident.

B. Results

The temperature dependence of the longitudinal and
transverse resistances for the free-standing (unstrained)
sample are shown in Figure 8. The longitudinal re-
sistance Rxx follows the usual temperature dependence
for this material, exhibiting a downturn at the coupled
structural-magnetic phase transition at TS,N = 134 K.
A ﬁnite Rxy is measured even for the unstrained sample
(middle panel of Figure 8) due to misalignment of the
contacts used for the transverse voltage measurement.
As can be seen, for temperatures above TS,N , the ra-
tio Rxy/Rxx = ∆ℓ is temperature-independent, with a
value of ∼ 0.041 ± 0.01. A small deviation from this
constant value can be discerned for temperatures just
above TS,N , presumably due to residual strains in the
sample.23 The subsequent discussion and analysis refers
solely to temperatures above TS,N , for which the ma-
terial is tetragonal; below this temperature, the crystal
structure is orthorhombic, and the transverse resistance
reﬂects an admixture of eﬀects arising from longitudi-
nal contamination, electronic anisotropy associated with
the orthorhombicity, twin domain populations, and twin
boundary motion.
Representative

changes
∆R(xy)′′, ∆R(xx)′′ , and ∆ℓ∆R(xx)′′
for three voltage
sweeps at 100 K are shown in Figure 9. The elastore-
sistive response in ∆R(xy)′′
is signiﬁcantly larger than
∆R(xx)′′, by a factor of ∼ 9 at 150 V. To subtract
out the ρxx contamination, one down-weights ∆R(xx)′′
even further by ∆ℓ; the resulting correction (∼ 0.4%)

strain-induced resistance

)

(
 

x
x

R

0.08

0.07

0.06

0.05

0.04

0.03
0.0035

)

0.0030

(
 

y
x

R

0.0025

0.0020

0.0015
0.055

0.050

0.045

0.040

x
x

R

 
/
 

y
x

R
=

 

 

 

TS , N

 

TS , N

TS , N

 

 

0.035

75

100

125

150

175

200

225

Temperature (K)

FIG. 8: Resistance measurements for the BaFe2As2 sample
showing Rxx (top panel), Rxy (middle panel), and the ratio
∆ℓ ≡ Rxy/Rxx (bottom panel). For temperatures above the
coupled structural and magnetic transition at TS,N (vertical
dashed gray line), ∆ℓ is small and temperature-independent;
by taking the average value for temperatures > 150 K, we
estimate ∆ℓ ∼ 4.1 ± 0.1% (horizontal dashed blue line). Since
this measurement was performed on a free-standing (unglued)
sample in zero magnetic ﬁeld, the measured Rxy in the tetrag-
onal state is due to Rxx contamination from contact misalign-
ment; ∆ℓ characterizes the physical extent of this misalign-
ment.

is essentially negligible on the scale of the ∆R(xy)′′
response. The hysteretic behavior evident in ∆R(xy)′′ is
an intrinsic property of the PZT stack.

Representative transverse elastoresistance data, which
have been corrected for the small longitudinal contami-
nation as described above, are shown in Figure 10 as a
function of applied shear strain (ǫxy = − 1
2 (ǫ(xx)′−ǫ(yy)′))
for a variety of temperatures. The applied shear strain
is relative to the strain experienced by the crystal with
0 V applied to the PZT stack. Because of the combined
eﬀects of gluing to the PZT stack and diﬀerential ther-
mal contraction between the crystal and PZT, the ap-
plied shear strain is not relative to the zero strain state
of the crystal. As can be seen, all measured elastoresis-
tances are linear in (relative) shear strain for all measured
temperatures. The elastoresistivity coeﬃcient 2mxy,xy at

10

T = 100 K

 

R(xy)"

R(xx)"

 

R(xx)"

4x10-4

2x10-4

0

)

R

(

 
"
)
j
i
(

-2x10-4

-50

0

50

Voltage (V)

100

150

FIG. 9: Representative data for BaFe2As2 showing strain-
in resistance ∆R(xy)′′ , ∆R(xx)′′ , and
induced changes
∆ℓ∆R(xx)′′ at a temperature of 100 K as a function of the
voltage applied to the PZT stack. Values of ∆ℓ are extracted
from Figure 8 as described in the main text.
In order to
correct for ρxx contamination, the relatively small amount
∆ℓ∆R(xx)′′ is subtracted from ∆R(xy)′′ .

each temperature is extracted from the slopes in Figure
10 and a multiplicative factor of the crystal’s length to
its width used to convert the resistance ratio to a resis-
tivity ratio ((∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′ = l
w (∆R(xy)′′/Rxx); see Appendix
D). The temperature dependence of the resulting values
of 2mxy,xy is shown in Figure 11. As has been previously
shown,9,11,24 2mxy,xy progressively increases on cooling,
reaches its peak at the coupled structural and magnetic
transition temperature, and then gradually decreases on
further cooling. The maximum value of 2mxy,xy is ∼ 52,
much larger than that of a typical metal (∼ 1).
In accordance with our previous analysis of diﬀeren-
tial longitudinal elastoresistance measurements,1,3 the di-
verging temperature dependence of 2mxy,xy can be ﬁt
well to the Curie-Weiss form

2mxy,xy =

λ

a0(T − θ)

+ 2m0

xy,xy.

(12)

the

form (12),

Directly ﬁtting the temperature dependence of 2mxy,xy
to the Curie-Weiss
temperature-
independent ﬁt parameter 2m0
xy,xy can be estimated and
then used to plot the temperature dependence of the
xy,xy)]−1 (which,
inverse susceptibility [−2(mxy,xy − m0
for an exact Curie-Weiss form,
is linear in tempera-
ture). Fitting over the temperature range of 136 K to
220 K results in an estimate of 2m0
xy,xy = 6.7 ± 0.5,
which we use to plot the temperature dependence of
xy,xy)]−1 as in Figure 12. Further de-
[−2(mxy,xy − m0
tails on the evaluation of the goodness of ﬁt and on the
temperature window used are discussed in Appendix E.

11

TABLE I: Fit Parameters from Transverse, Diﬀerential Longitudinal, and Modiﬁed Montgomery Methods
xy,xy; uncertainties represent 95% conﬁdence intervals from a least squares ﬁtting routine
Fit to 2mxy,xy =

λ

a0(T −θ) + 2m0

Parameter Transverse Method Diﬀerential Longitudinal Method24 Modiﬁed Montgomery Method11

2m0

xy,xy

6.7 ± 0.5

4.7 ± 0.98

7.7 ± 0.3

λ/a0 (K)

−909 ± 16

−897 ± 84

−1540 ± 13

θ (K)

120 ± 0.9

124.9 ± 1.6

109 ± 0.7

5.0x10-3

0.0

-5.0x10-3

 

-1.0x10-2

"
)
x
x
(

R

 

 

/
)
]

0
0
1

[
,
"
)
x
x
(

R

 

 
]

0
0
1

[
,
"
)
y
x
(

R

(

 

200 K

175 K

 

150 K

100 K

126 K

-1.5x10-2

-2x10-4

0
2x10-4
xy     ( (xx)'

4x10-4
(yy)') / 2

6x10-4

FIG. 10: Representative data showing the temperature de-
pendence of the elastoresistive response of BaFe2As2 in the
transverse conﬁguration (θ, φ) = (0, π/4) as a function of the
induced shear strain (ǫxy = − 1
2 (ǫ(xx)′ − ǫ(yy)′)) experienced
by the crystal. This is the appropriate conﬁguration for mea-
). Slopes have been corrected for ρxx
suring 2mxy,xy (∝ χB2g
contamination, as described in the main text and Appendix
D. All responses were linear in the applied strain for all mea-
sured temperatures.

The slope and intercept of [−2(mxy,xy − m0
xy,xy)]−1 yield
estimates of λ/a0 = −909 ± 16 K and θ = 120 ± 0.9 K,
as given in Table I. As we have previously discussed, the
observation of such a Curie-Weiss susceptibility with a
Weiss temperature θ close to the coupled structural and
magnetic transition deﬁnitively establishes the ferroelas-
tic phase transition in BaFe2As2 to be pseudo-proper
(i.e., strain is not the primary order parameter of the
transition but does have the same symmetry as the or-
der parameter).1,3 The physical origin of the electronic
nematic order that drives this phase transition remains a
subject of ongoing research (for example, see Fernandes
et al.25 for a recent review and discussion).

The estimated Curie-Weiss ﬁt parameters from the
transverse method can also be compared to the param-

60

50

40

y
x
,
y
x

30

m
2

20

10

 

TS , N

 

0
75

100

150

125
175
Temperature (K)

200

225

FIG. 11: Temperature dependence of the elastoresistivity co-
eﬃcient 2mxy,xy of BaFe2As2 from the transverse conﬁgura-
tion. Error bars represent 95% conﬁdence intervals from the
linear ﬁts to the elastoresistive slopes at each temperature.
The vertical dashed bar marks the coincident structural and
magnetic transition temperature TS,N of the sample.

eter estimates from earlier measurements of 2mxy,xy by
the diﬀerential longitudinal24 and modiﬁed Montgomery
methods11 (see Table I). All three measurements agree in
their divergent temperature dependence, which evinces
the existence and onset of a nematic order parame-
ter. The diﬀerential longitudinal and transverse mea-
surements agree within ∼ 4.0% in their estimate of θ
(which characterizes a bare mean ﬁeld nematic critical
temperature) and agree within ∼ 1.3% in their estimates
of λ/a0; meanwhile, there is a larger discrepancy between
the estimates of θ and λ/a0 as obtained from the modiﬁed
Montgomery and transverse methods.

The quantitative variations in the estimated ﬁt param-
eters between the three methods presumably reﬂect sys-
tematic diﬀerences in the physical environment in which
the three experiments are performed. Strictly, elastore-
sistivity coeﬃcients are deﬁned in the limit of vanishing
strain; however, this limit is not precisely realized in any
of the three methods. The elastoresistivity coeﬃcients
as extracted from the diﬀerential longitudinal and trans-

 

TS , N

0.12

0.10

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

1

]
)
0

y
x
,
y
x

m

 

y
x
,
y
x

m
(
2

[

 Curie-Weiss

0.00

75

100

150

125
175
Temperature (K)

200

225

Temperature dependence of

[−2(mxy,xy −
FIG. 12:
xy,xy)]−1, proportional to the inverse nematic susceptibility
m0
χ−1
in this conﬁguration. Error bars represent 95% conﬁ-
B2g
dence intervals from both the linear ﬁts to the elastoresistive
slopes at each temperature and the estimation of 2m0
xy,xy.
The red line shows a linear ﬁt (i.e., Curie-Weiss functional
form) between 136 K and 220 K, with ﬁt parameters given in
Table I. The vertical dashed line marks the coincident struc-
tural and magnetic transition temperature TS,N of the sample
(TS,N = 134 K).

verse methods are measured relative to the strain state of
the crystal with 0 V applied to the PZT (i.e., relative to a
state with some residual built-in isotropic and anisotropic
strain due to adhesion to the strain-transmitting sub-
strate and diﬀerential thermal contraction), while the
elastoresistivity coeﬃcients as extracted from the modi-
ﬁed Montgomery method are measured relative to a “B2g
neutral point”11 where the anisotropic strain is tuned to
zero by applying a ﬁnite voltage to the PZT (until the
longitudinal resistivities ρxx, ρyy are equal) but where
the isotropic strain is explicitly nonzero. Furthermore,
since the physical dimensions of the crystals vary be-
tween the three studies (“matchstick” rectangular bars
for the diﬀerential longitudinal measurements; square or
rectangular plates with a nearly 2:1 aspect ratio for the
modiﬁed Montgomery and transverse methods), the ef-

∗ Corresponding author: maxshaps@stanford.edu
1 Hsueh-Hui Kuo, Maxwell C. Shapiro, Scott C. Riggs, and

Ian R. Fisher, Phys. Rev. B 88, 085113 (2013).

2 M. C. Shapiro, Patrik Hlobil, A. T. Hristov, Akash V. Ma-
haraj, and I. R. Fisher, Phys. Rev. B 92, 235147 (2015).

3 Jiun-Haw Chu, Hsueh-Hui Kuo, James G. Analytis, and

Ian R. Fisher, Science 337, 710 (2012).

4 Hsueh-Hui Kuo and Ian R. Fisher, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112,

227001 (2014).

5 Scott C. Riggs, M. C. Shapiro, Akash V. Maharaj, S.

12

fect of strain relaxation due to the geometry of the crys-
tals could plausibly contribute to systematic variation in
the ﬁt parameter estimates as well. The exact reasons
for the quantitative diﬀerences, however, are not yet per-
fectly understood.

 

VI. CONCLUSION

In writing this paper, we have had two overarching
goals. First, building on the elastoresistivity formal-
ism that we have introduced in recent publications,1,2
we have proposed an alternative method to probe the
B1g and B2g components of the elastoresistivity tensor
for a tetragonal material via transverse elastoresistivity
measurements. We have quantiﬁed the eﬀects of vari-
ous experimental nonidealities that aﬀect both the earlier
diﬀerential longitudinal elastoresistance methods and the
new transverse elastoresistance method and have shown
that the transverse scheme has certain speciﬁc advan-
tages.
In particular, the transverse technique enables
measurement of mxx,xx − mxx,yy or 2mxy,xy via a single
Importantly, since isotropic strains can-
measurement.
not induce a transverse elastoresistivity (∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′, and
since 2mxy,xy was extracted from a single measurement,
the new method is fundamentally immune to A1g-like
strains and strain oﬀset errors.

Second, we have used the representative iron-pnictide
BaFe2As2 to explicitly demonstrate the viability of
the transverse elastoresistivity conﬁguration. The new
method corroborates the earlier ﬁnding of a Curie-Weiss-
like 2mxy,xy elastoresistivity coeﬃcient in this material,
signaling the divergent nematic susceptibility in the B2g
symmetry channel. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst dis-
cussion and measurement of transverse elastoresistance
for any material.

Acknowledgments

The authors thank P. Walmsley and Eric M. Spanton
for useful discussions. Work at Stanford was supported
by the U.S. DOE, Oﬃce of Basic Energy Sciences, under
contract DE-AC02-76SF00515.

Raghu, E. D. Bauer, R. E. Baumbach, P. Giraldo-Gallo,
Mark Wartenbe, and I. R. Fisher, Nature Comm. 6, 6425
(2015).

6 Patrik Hlobil, Akash V. Maharaj, Pavan Hosur, M. C.
Shapiro, I. R. Fisher, and S. Raghu, Phys. Rev. B 92,
035148 (2015).

7 Y. Sun, S. Thompson, and T. Nishida, Strain Ef-
fect in Semiconductors: Theory and Device Applications
(Springer, New York, 2010).

8 M. D. Watson, T. K. Kim, A. A. Haghighirad, N. R.

Davies, A. McCollam, A. Narayanan, S. F. Blake, Y. L.
Chen, S. Ghannadzadeh, A. J. Schoﬁeld, M. Hoesch, C.
Meingast, T. Wolf, and A. I. Coldea, Phys. Rev. B 91,
155106 (2015).

9 Hsueh-Hui Kuo, Jiun-Haw Chu, Steven A. Kivelson, and

Ian R. Fisher, arXiv:1503.00402v1 (2015).

10 M. A. Tanatar, A. E. B¨ohmer, E. I. Timmons, M. Sch¨utt,
G. Drachuck, V. Taufour, S. L. Bud’ko, P. C. Canﬁeld, R.
M. Fernandes, R. Prozorov, arXiv:1511.04757 (2015).

11 Hsueh-Hui Kuo, Jiun-Haw Chu, J. C. Palmstrom, Steven

A. Kivelson, and Ian R. Fisher, Unpublished (2016).

12 L. Onsager, Phys. Rev. 38, 2265 (1931).
13 For our initial elastoresistance measurements on the iron-
based superconductors, A1g strain contamination does not
aﬀect any of the conclusions since the observation of a sin-
gular divergence in χB2g
is immune to imperfect A1g sub-
traction. A divergence in the A1g symmetry channel would
manifest equally in both χB1g
(which is not
observed), and so an imperfect A1g subtraction at worst
contributes a small, non-singular, temperature-dependent
background.

and χB2g

14 On cooling from room temperature to 250 K, the PZT ex-
pands by ∼ 0.02% along its poling direction,15 which is
opposite to the typical thermal contraction of most mate-
rials. Silver (a represenative material) and BaFe2As2 (the
test material used in this manuscript) contract by ∼ 0.08%
and ∼ 0.05% on cooling to 250 K, respectively,16,17 and so
by adhering either material to a PZT, the materials are
placed under uniaxial tension of ∼ 0.1% and ∼ 0.07%, re-
spectively. These strains are smaller than the strain change
of ∼ 0.15% that is obtained by sweeping the applied volt-
age to the PZT between −50 V to +150 V at 250 K.1,19

15 A. M. Simpson and W. Wolfs, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 58, 2193

13

(1987).

16 Touloukian, Y. S., Kirby, R. K., Taylor R. E., and De-
sai, P. D., eds., Thermophysical Properties of Matter: The
TPRC Data Series, Vol. 12, Thermal Expansion: Metallic
Elements and Alloys, Plenum, NY (1975) p. 298−299.

17 S. L. Bud’ko, N. Ni, S. Nandi, G. M. Schmiedeshoﬀ, and

P. C. Canﬁeld, Phys. Rev. B 79, 054525 (2009).

18 Cliﬀord W. Hicks, Mark E. Barber, Stephen D. Edkins,
Daniel O. Brodsky, and Andrew P. Mackenzie, Rev. Sci.
Instrum. 85, 065003 (2014).

19 Physik Instrumente GmbH, “Piezo Material Data”.
20 A. S. Sefat, R. Jin, M. A. McGuire, B. C. Sales, D. J.
Singh, and D. Mandrus, Appl. Phys. Lett. 101, 117004
(2008).

21 J.-H. Chu, J. G. Analytis, C. Kucharczyk, and I. R. Fisher,

Phys. Rev. B 79, 014506 (2009).

22 Temperature stability is an important consideration for
these measurements, with the degree of stability needed
dictated by the particular material at hand. A requisite
condition is that the strain-induced response ∆ρ(T, ǫ+∆ǫ)
be much larger than the thermally-induced resistivity
change ∆ρ(T +∆T, ǫ); equivalently, this condition requires
dǫ is related to an appropriate
∆T ≪
combination of the material’s elastoresistivity coeﬃcients.
23 Haoran Man, Xingye Lu, Justin S. Chen, Rui Zhang, Wen-
liang Zhang, Huiqian Luo, J. Kulda, A. Ivanov, T. Keller,
Emilia Morosan, Qimiao Si, and Pengcheng Dai, Phys.
Rev. B 92, 134521 (2015).

dT , where dρ

·∆ǫ/ dρ

dρ
dǫ

24 Hsueh-Hui Kuo, “Electronic Nematicity in Iron-Based Su-
perconductors”, Ph.D. Thesis, Stanford University (2014).
25 R. M. Fernandes, A. V. Chubukov, and J. Schmalian, Na-

ture Phys. 10, 97 (2014).

Appendix A: Elastoresistivity Tensor for D4h and Transformation Properties

The explicit form of the elastoresistivity tensor for D4h point group symmetry is2

14

mtetragonal

ij,kl

(Hz) =





mxx,xx mxx,yy mxx,zz
mxx,yy mxx,xx mxx,zz
mzz,xx mzz,xx mzz,zz

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

mxy,xx mxy,xx mxy,zz
−mxy,xx −mxy,xx −mxy,zz

myz,yz myz,yz myz,zx myz,zx
myz,yz myz,yz −myz,zx −myz,zx
myz,zx myz,zx myz,yz myz,yz
−myz,zx −myz,zx myz,yz myz,yz

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

mxy,xy mxy,xy
mxy,xy mxy,xy





.

(A1)

This tensor has 10 independent coeﬃcients, all implicitly dependent on the magnetic ﬁeld. Those coeﬃcients (of which
there are seven) that have an even number of x or an even number of y indices are correspondingly even functions
of the magnetic ﬁeld due to the σx and σy symmetry constraints (where σx and σy are mirror operations about the
yz and xz planes, respecively). Conversely, those coeﬃcients (of which there are three, demarcated by surrounding
boxes) that have an odd number of x or an odd number of y indices are odd functions of the magnetic ﬁeld (and
hence vanish in zero magnetic ﬁeld). The symmetry properties of this tensor are described in detail elsewhere.2

In a given elastoresistivity measurement, what one measures is (∆ρ/ρ)(ij)′′ (i.e., the normalized resistivity change in
the transport frame) to an applied strain ǫ(kl)′ in the strain frame, and what one seeks to extract are terms in the
elastoresistivity tensor mij,kl in the crystal frame. These quantities are related by suitable transformation matrices
ˆαθ, ˆαφ according to (5) of the main text with the ˆαφ, ˆαθ given by rotational transformations of the form

ˆαφ =

cos2(φ)
sin2(φ)

sin2(φ)
cos2(φ)

0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
1
0 cos(φ)
0
0
0 sin(φ)

0
0

− cos(φ) sin(φ) cos(φ) sin(φ) 0
− cos(φ) sin(φ) cos(φ) sin(φ) 0

0
0

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

cos(φ) − sin(φ)
cos(φ)
sin(φ)

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

− sin(φ)

0
0

cos(φ)

0
0





and analogously for ˆαθ.

cos(φ) sin(φ)
cos(φ) sin(φ)
− cos(φ) sin(φ) − cos(φ) sin(φ)

0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

cos2(φ)
− sin2(φ)

− sin2(φ)
cos2(φ)

(A2)





Prior to discussing the implications of these transformations for the elastoresistivity tensor, it is elucidating to
focus ﬁrst on the eﬀect of these rotational transformations on the strain and normalized change in resistivity tensors
individually. If the crystal frame is oriented relative to the strain frame by an angle φ, then the strains experienced
by the crystal are related to the shearless strains in the normal strain frame by ǫkl = ˆαφǫ(kl)′ ; explicitly, this gives

=

ǫxx
ǫyy
ǫzz
ǫyz
ǫzy
ǫzx
ǫxz
ǫxy
ǫyx













ǫ(xx)′ cos2 φ + ǫ(yy)′ sin2 φ
ǫ(xx)′ sin2 φ + ǫ(yy)′ cos2 φ

ǫ(zz)′

0
0
0
0

− 1
2 (ǫ(xx)′ − ǫ(yy)′) sin(2φ)
− 1
2 (ǫ(xx)′ − ǫ(yy)′) sin(2φ)





.

(A3)

By rotating the crystal relative to the normal strain frame, the shearless strains in the normal strain frame are
experienced as both normal and shear strains in the crystal frame, with the amount of shear characterized by sin(2φ)
according to ǫxy = ǫyx = − 1

2 (ǫ(xx)′ − ǫ(yy)′) sin(2φ).

Exactly analogous relations exist for transport measurements expressed in the transport and crystal frames. As-
suming that the two frames are rotated relative to each other by an angle θ, then what one measures in the transport
frame is related to the normalized change in resistivity in the crystal frame by (∆ρ/ρ)(ij)′′ = ˆαθ (∆ρ/ρ)ij . Working this
out explicitly for in-plane transport measurements,

15

(∆ρ/ρ)(xx)′′ (Hz) = (∆ρ/ρ)xx cos2 θ + (∆ρ/ρ)yy sin2 θ +

(∆ρ/ρ)(yy)′′ (Hz) = (∆ρ/ρ)xx sin2 θ + (∆ρ/ρ)yy cos2 θ −
(∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′ (Hz) = (∆ρ/ρ)xy cos2 θ − (∆ρ/ρ)yx sin2 θ −
(∆ρ/ρ)(yx)′′ (Hz) = − (∆ρ/ρ)xy sin2 θ + (∆ρ/ρ)yx cos2 θ −

1

1

1

2(cid:16) (∆ρ/ρ)xy + (∆ρ/ρ)yx(cid:17) sin(2θ)
2(cid:16) (∆ρ/ρ)xy + (∆ρ/ρ)yx(cid:17) sin(2θ)
2(cid:16) (∆ρ/ρ)xx − (∆ρ/ρ)yy(cid:17) sin(2θ)
2(cid:16) (∆ρ/ρ)xx − (∆ρ/ρ)yy(cid:17) sin(2θ).

1

(A4a)

(A4b)

(A4c)

(A4d)

The form of (A4) emphasizes that the amount of (∆ρ/ρ)xy and (∆ρ/ρ)yx signal in a (∆ρ/ρ)(xx)′′ or (∆ρ/ρ)(yy)′′ measure-
ment is characterized by sin(2θ), and likewise for the amount of (∆ρ/ρ)(xx) and (∆ρ/ρ)(yy) in a (∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′ or (∆ρ/ρ)(yx)′′
measurement.

For the in-plane transport measurements that are the subject of this work, the transformation properties of the
relevant elastoresistivity coeﬃcients are given by performing the transformation (5) with the speciﬁc elastoresistivity
tensor (A1):

m(xx)′′,(xx)′ = m(yy)′′,(yy)′ = mxx,xx − mxy,xy sin(2θ) sin(2φ) − 1
m(xx)′′,(yy)′ = m(yy)′′,(xx)′ = mxx,yy + mxy,xy sin(2θ) sin(2φ) + 1

2 (mxx,xx − mxx,yy)h1 − cos(2θ) cos(2φ)i
2 (mxx,xx − mxx,yy)h1 − cos(2θ) cos(2φ)i

(A5a)

(A5b)

m(xx)′′,(zz)′ = m(yy)′′,(zz)′ = mxx,zz
m(xy)′′,(xx)′ = mxy,xx − mxy,xy cos(2θ) sin(2φ) − 1
m(xy)′′,(yy)′ = mxy,xx + mxy,xy cos(2θ) sin(2φ) + 1
m(yx)′′,(xx)′ = −mxy,xx − mxy,xy cos(2θ) sin(2φ) − 1
m(yx)′′,(yy)′ = −mxy,xx + mxy,xy cos(2θ) sin(2φ) + 1
m(xy)′′,(zz)′ = −m(yx)′′,(zz)′ = mxy,zz.
Expressing the in-plane transport quantities (∆ρ/ρ)(ij)′′ in terms of applied normal strains ǫ(kl)′ , plugging in the
transformed elastoresistivity coeﬃcients from (A5), and taking the symmetry-motivated combinations (∆ρ/ρ)(xx)′′ −
(∆ρ/ρ)(yy)′′ and (∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′ + (∆ρ/ρ)(yx)′′, we arrive at expressions (6) and (9) of the main text.

2 (mxx,xx − mxx,yy) sin(2θ) cos(2φ)
2 (mxx,xx − mxx,yy) sin(2θ) cos(2φ)
2 (mxx,xx − mxx,yy) sin(2θ) cos(2φ)
2 (mxx,xx − mxx,yy) sin(2θ) cos(2φ)

(A5d)

(A5h)

(A5g)

(A5c)

(A5e)

(A5f)

As a ﬁnal comment, and in order to connect with the experimental setup described in our previous work,1,3 we note

that for conﬁgurations in which the current is sourced coincidentally with the normal strain axes, φ = −θ and

m(ij)′′ ,(kl)′ = ˆαθmij,kl ˆα−θ = ˆαθmij,kl ˆα−1
θ .

(A6)

Appendix B: Quantifying Current and Strain Alignment Errors

As described in the main text (and illustrated in Figures 3, 4), the high-symmetry conﬁgurations for the dif-
ferential longitudinal elastoresistance measurement are given by (6) with (θ, φ) = (0, 0) or (−π/4, π/4), while the
high-symmetry conﬁgurations for the superposed transverse elastoresistance measurment are given by (9) with
(θ, φ) = (π/4, 0) or (0, π/4).
In an actual measurement, however, slight misalignment relative to these high sym-
metry directions can be anticipated. In this section we quantify the consequences of such misalignments.

Suppose that in a measurement of (∆ρ/ρ)(xx)′′ , it was intended that the crystal frame be oriented relative to
the transport and normal strain frames according to some (θ, φ), but the actual conﬁguration was given by (θ +
δθxx, φ + δφxx). Similarly, suppose that in an attempt to measure (∆ρ/ρ)(yy)′′, the intended orientation of the crystal
frame to be oriented relative to the transport and normal strain frames was (θ, φ), but the actual conﬁguration was
given by (θ + δθyy, φ + δφyy).
In general, we take δθxx 6= δθyy and δφxx 6= δφyy so that we treat all alignment

errors independently. We now show how such errors propagate in the experimental determination of the relevant
elastoresistivity coeﬃcients.

For this type of misalignment, the combination (∆ρ/ρ)(xx)′′ (Hz) − (∆ρ/ρ)(yy)′′ (Hz) is given by

16

1
2

(∆ρ/ρ)(xx)′′ − (∆ρ/ρ)(yy)′′ = −

(ǫ(xx)′ − ǫ(yy)′)2mxy,xyh sin 2(θ + δθxx) sin 2(φ + δφxx) + sin 2(θ + δθyy) sin 2(φ + δφyy)i
(ǫ(xx)′ − ǫ(yy)′)(mxx,xx − mxx,yy)h cos 2(θ + δθxx) cos 2(φ + δφxx) + cos 2(θ + δθyy) cos 2(φ + δφyy)i, (B1)

+

1
2

This expression naturally reduces to (6) for perfect angular alignment (i.e., δθxx = δθyy = δφxx = δθyy = 0).
Expanding this expression to quadratic order in the angular errors about the high-symmetry conﬁgurations (θ, φ) =
(0, 0) and (θ, φ) = (−π/4, π/4), we ﬁnd
(∆ρ/ρ)(xx)′′ − (∆ρ/ρ)(yy)′′ ≈ −(ǫ(xx)′ − ǫ(yy)′)2mxy,xyh2(δθxxδφxx + δθyyδφyy)i

(B2a)

+ (ǫ(xx)′ − ǫ(yy)′)(mxx,xx − mxx,yy)h1 − ((δθxx)2 + (δθyy)2 + (δφxx)2 + (δφyy)2)i

h(θ, φ) = (0, 0)i

(∆ρ/ρ)(xx)′′ − (∆ρ/ρ)(yy)′′ ≈ (ǫ(xx)′ − ǫ(yy)′)2mxy,xyh1 − ((δθxx)2 + (δθyy)2 + (δφxx)2 + (δφyy)2)i

− (ǫ(xx)′ − ǫ(yy)′)(mxx,xx − mxx,yy)h2(δθxxδφxx + δθyyδφyy)i.

h(θ, φ) = (−π/4, π/4)i

(B2b)

As can be seen from (B2), for the high-symmetry conﬁgurations, the amount of error introduced enters at second
order in the angular misalignments.

Consideration of alignment errors for the transverse elastoresistance conﬁguration proceeds in an analogous manner.
Suppose that for a high-symmetry conﬁguration (θ, φ), the measurements of (∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′ and (∆ρ/ρ)(yx)′′ are actually
characterized by (θ + δθxy, φ + δφxy) and (θ + δθyx, φ + δφyx), respectively, with δθxy 6= δθyx and δφxy 6= δφyx. A
measurement of (∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′ (Hz) + (∆ρ/ρ)(yx)′′ (Hz) is then given by

1
2

(∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′ + (∆ρ/ρ)(yx)′′ = −

(ǫ(xx)′ − ǫ(yy)′)2mxy,xyh cos 2(θ + δθxy) sin 2(φ + δφxy) + cos 2(θ + δθyx) sin 2(φ + δφyx)i
(ǫ(xx)′ − ǫ(yy)′)(mxx,xx − mxx,yy)h sin 2(θ + δθxy) cos 2(φ + δφxy) + sin 2(θ + δθyx) cos 2(φ + δφyx)i. (B3)

1
2

−

which reduces to (9) for perfect angular alignment. Again expanding this expression to quadratic order in the angular
errors about the high-symmetry conﬁgurations (θ, φ) = (π/4, 0) and (θ, φ) = (0, π/4), we ﬁnd

(∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′ + (∆ρ/ρ)(yx)′′ ≈ (ǫ(xx)′ − ǫ(yy)′)2mxy,xyh2(δθxyδφxy + δθyxδφyx)i

− (ǫ(xx)′ − ǫ(yy)′)(mxx,xx − mxx,yy)h1 − ((δθxy)2 + (δθyx)2 + (δφxy)2 + (δφyx)2)i

(B4a)

h(θ, φ) = (π/4, 0)i

(∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′ + (∆ρ/ρ)(yx)′′ ≈ −(ǫ(xx)′ − ǫ(yy)′)2mxy,xyh1 − ((δθxy)2 + (δθyx)2 + (δφxy)2 + (δφyx)2)i

+ (ǫ(xx)′ − ǫ(yy)′)(mxx,xx − mxx,yy)h2(δθxyδφxy + δθyxδφyx)i.

Once again, the errors enter at second order about the high-symmetry conﬁgurations.

(B4b)

h(θ, φ) = (0, π/4)i

Appendix C: Quantifying Strain Magnitude Errors

A second type of error to consider is the case of a diﬀerential or superposed elastoresistance measurement in which
the two samples are perfectly aligned but experience unequal strains. We do not make any speciﬁc assumptions about
the physical origin of this diﬀerence, which might be diﬀerent depending on the speciﬁc experimental conﬁguration

that is chosen. For the speciﬁc technique that we have used in which thin crystals are adhered to the side surface of
a piezoelectric stack, such a diﬀerence can arise from imperfect strain transmission by the epoxy used to adhere the
crystals to the stack or from strain relaxation due to geometric considerations.

17

Suppose that an experiment is characterized by a ﬁxed (θ, φ) conﬁguration but that diﬀerent relative amounts
of strain are experienced by the two samples during a diﬀerential longitudinal elastoresistance measurement (i.e.,
the strains which induce a ﬁnite (∆ρ/ρ)(xx)′′ are slightly diﬀerent than those causing (∆ρ/ρ)(yy)′′). In other words,
(∆ρ/ρ)(xx)′′ is measured in response to a strain ǫ(1)
(kl)′ and (∆ρ/ρ)(yy)′′ is measured in response to a slightly diﬀerent
strain ǫ(2)

(kl)′ , with ǫ(1)

(kl)′ and ǫ(2)

(kl)′ given by

ǫ(1)
(kl)′ =

(xx)′

ǫ(xx)′ + δǫ(1)
ǫ(yy)′ + δǫ(1)
(yy)′
ǫ(zz)′ + δǫ(1)
(zz)′

0
0
0
0
0
0









and

ǫ(2)
(kl)′ =

(xx)′

ǫ(xx)′ + δǫ(2)
ǫ(yy)′ + δǫ(2)
(yy)′
ǫ(zz)′ + δǫ(2)
(zz)′

0
0
0
0
0
0





.





The associated resistivity changes are given by

(∆ρ/ρ)(xx)′′ = m(xx)′′,(xx)′ǫ(1)
(∆ρ/ρ)(yy)′′ = m(yy)′′,(xx)′ǫ(2)

(xx)′ + m(xx)′′,(yy)′ǫ(1)
(xx)′ + m(yy)′′,(yy)′ǫ(2)

(yy)′ + m(xx)′′,(zz)′ǫ(1)
(yy)′ + m(yy)′′,(zz)′ ǫ(2)

(zz)′

(zz)′

(C1)

(C2a)

(C2b)

with the individual elastoresistivity coeﬃcients transforming according to (A5). Explicitly incorporating the angular
dependence of the m(ij)′′,(kl)′ , the symmetric combination (∆ρ/ρ)(xx)′′ (Hz) − (∆ρ/ρ)(yy)′′ (Hz) is given as
(∆ρ/ρ)(xx)′′ − (∆ρ/ρ)(yy)′′ = (ǫ(xx)′ − ǫ(yy)′)h(mxx,xx − mxx,yy) cos 2θ cos 2φ − 2mxy,xy sin 2θ sin 2φi

(C3)

+

+

1
2
1
2

(δǫ(1)

(δǫ(1)

(xx)′ + δǫ(2)
(xx)′ − δǫ(2)

(xx)′ − δǫ(1)
(xx)′ + δǫ(1)

(yy)′ − δǫ(2)
(yy)′ − δǫ(2)

(yy)′)h(mxx,xx − mxx,yy) cos 2θ cos 2φ − 2mxy,xy sin 2θ sin 2φi
(yy)′)hmxx,xx + mxx,yyi + (δǫ(1)

(zz)′)hmxx,zzi,

(zz)′ − δǫ(2)

where we have organized each term based on the particular irrep of D4h to which it corresponds. The leading term
in (C3) is simply (6) (i.e., the combination of B1g and B2g quantities dictated by the speciﬁc (θ, φ) conﬁguration),
but we also measure error terms in proportion to the amount of δǫA1g,1 ≡ 1
(yy)′),
δǫA1g,2 ≡ δǫ(1)
(yy)′) strain that is also applied during the
measurement. Note that the degree of error in the diﬀerential elastoresistance measurement is at ﬁrst order in the
magnitude of the relative strain oﬀset.

(zz)′ , and δǫB1g ≡ 1

(xx)′ − δǫ(2)

(yy)′ − δǫ(2)

(xx)′ − δǫ(1)

(yy)′ − δǫ(2)

(zz)′ − δǫ(2)

(xx)′ + δǫ(1)

(xx)′ + δǫ(2)

2 (δǫ(1)

2 (δǫ(1)

An analogous expression can be worked out for the superposed transverse elastoresistance conﬁguration as well.
(kl)′ and (∆ρ/ρ)(yx)′′ is measured in response to a slightly

Suppose that (∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′ is measured in response to a strain ǫ(3)
diﬀerent strain ǫ(4)

(kl)′ , with ǫ(3)

(kl)′ and ǫ(4)

(kl)′ given by

ǫ(3)
(kl)′ =





(xx)′

ǫ(xx)′ + δǫ(3)
ǫ(yy)′ + δǫ(3)
(yy)′
ǫ(zz)′ + δǫ(3)

(zz)′

0
0
0
0
0
0





and

ǫ(4)
(kl)′ =





(xx)′

ǫ(xx)′ + δǫ(4)
ǫ(yy)′ + δǫ(4)
(yy)′
ǫ(zz)′ + δǫ(4)

(zz)′

0
0
0
0
0
0

.





(C4)

The corresponding changes in resistivity are then

(∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′ = m(xy)′′,(xx)′ǫ(3)
(∆ρ/ρ)(yx)′′ = m(yx)′′,(xx)′ǫ(4)

(xx)′ + m(xy)′′,(yy)′ǫ(3)
(xx)′ + m(yx)′′,(yy)′ǫ(4)

(yy)′ + m(xy)′′,(zz)′ǫ(3)
(yy)′ + m(yx)′′,(zz)′ǫ(4)

(zz)′

(zz)′

18

(C5a)

(C5b)

with the individual elastoresistivity coeﬃcients transforming according to (A5). Explicitly incorporating the angular
dependence of the m(ij)′′,(kl)′ , the symmetric combination (∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′ (Hz) + (∆ρ/ρ)(yx)′′ (Hz) is given as

(∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′ + (∆ρ/ρ)(yx)′′ = −(ǫ(xx)′ − ǫ(yy)′)h(mxx,xx − mxx,yy) cos 2θ sin 2φ + 2mxy,xy sin 2θ cos 2φi

(C6)

−
+

1
2
1
2

(δǫ(3)

(δǫ(3)

(xx)′ + δǫ(4)
(xx)′ − δǫ(4)

(xx)′ − δǫ(3)
(xx)′ + δǫ(3)

(yy)′ − δǫ(4)
(yy)′ − δǫ(4)

(yy)′)h(mxx,xx − mxx,yy) cos 2θ sin 2φ + 2mxy,xy sin 2θ cos 2φi
(yy)′)hmxy,xxi + (δǫ(3)
(xx)′ − δǫ(4)
2 (δǫ(3)

(zz)′)hmxy,zzi.

(zz)′ − δǫ(4)

(yy)′ − δǫ(4)

(xx)′ + δǫ(3)

2 (δǫ(3)

(xx)′ + δǫ(4)

(yy)′ − δǫ(4)

(xx)′ − δǫ(3)

(yy)′), δǫA1g,2 ≡ δǫ(3)

Just as in the diﬀerential longitudinal case, the measured errors in the transverse superposed elastoresistance conﬁgu-
ration appear in proportion to the amount of δǫA1g,1 ≡ 1
(zz)′,
and δǫB1g ≡ 1
(yy)′) strain that are inadvertently applied during the measure-
ment, and the degree of error is at ﬁrst order in the magnitude of the relative strain oﬀset. However, since
(∆ρ/ρ)(yx)′′ (Hz) = (∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′ (−Hz), one can constrain these strain oﬀsets to be precisely zero since the measure-
ments can be performed under the same mounting conditions (only inverting the magnetic ﬁeld environment). That
is, for a measurement performed on one single crystal, δǫ(4)
= 0.
Rephrased in terms of group theory, the strain error does not mix symmetry channels (a measurement of the B1g
response is not contaminated by any A1g signal), but the absolute magnitude of the strain experienced by the sample
is incorrectly recorded as ǫ(xx)′ rather than ǫ(xx)′ +δǫ(3)
(yy)′. Thus, provided one can
isolate (∆ρ/ρ)xy and (∆ρ/ρ)yx (i.e., subtract out ρxx contributions which “contaminate” a nominally ρxy measurement,
which we describe in the following Appendix D), the transverse conﬁguration is immune to contamination from other
symmetry channels arising from relative strain magnitude errors. As discussed in the main text, this is the primary
advantage of the transverse elastoresistance technique.

(xx)′ and ǫ(yy)′ rather than ǫ(yy)′ +δǫ(4)

(yy)′, such that δǫA1g,2

(zz)′ − δǫ(4)

(xx)′ and δǫ(4)

(xx)′ = δǫ(3)

(yy)′ = δǫ(3)

Appendix D: Isolating Transverse Elastoresistivities in a Longitudinally-Contaminated Elastoresistance

Measurement

In this section we describe in detail the process by which a longitudinal resistivity (ρxx) “contamination” can be
subtracted from an erstwhile transverse resistivity (ρxy) measurement. Such a situation is often encountered in the
context of Hall eﬀect measurements, for which a nominally transverse signal Rmeasured
(due to a ˆz-oriented magnetic
ﬁeld H = Hz ˆz) is contaminated by a contribution from the longitudinal resistance Rxx such that

xy

Rmeasured

xy

= Rxy + αRxx,

(D1)

where α is a (not generally small) parameter characterizing the amount of Rxx contamination. Such a contamination
can arise, for example, from curved current paths within the crystal or from imperfectly aligned voltage contacts.
In the Hall eﬀect measurement case, to isolate the Hall resistance signal, one typically measures Rmeasured
for both
positive and negative magnetic ﬁeld and uses the fact that the longitudinal (transverse) signal is even (odd) in Hz:

xy

Rmeasured

xy

(Hz) − Rmeasured

xy

(−Hz) = 2Rxy(Hz).

(D2)

In this appendix, we will describe the analog to this magnetic ﬁeld anti-symmetrization for a transverse elastoresistance
measurement.
In contrast to the Hall eﬀect, though, we cannot rely on a simple parity-in-ﬁeld argument since
contamination of a nominal 2mxy,xy or mxx,xx − mxx,yy measurement can come from elastoresistivity coeﬃcients that
are either even (e.g., mxx,zz) or odd (e.g., mxy,xx) in the magnetic ﬁeld. Nevertheless, by pre-characterizing the
contact geometry, it is still possible to isolate the symmetry-connected elastoresistivity coeﬃcients which are related
to thermodynamic susceptibilities.

a)

w

Thickness t
2

y

y"

4
1
 l14

x

3

 l13

19

b)

y"

y

x"

z / z"

x"

Θ

x

FIG. 13: (a) Schematic diagram illustrating contact misalignment in a transverse measurement. The transverse voltage is to
be measured between contacts 1 and 2, while the longitudinal voltage can be measured between contacts 1 and 3. The degree
of transverse contact misalignment (horizontal oﬀset between contacts 1 and 2) has been greatly exaggerated for pedagogical
purposes. Contact 4 (dark gray) is a hypothetical contact which is perfectly vertically aligned with contact 2, which means
that the relative voltages between these contacts V2 − V4 = 0 in zero magnetic ﬁeld for zero strain. (b) Primitive crystal frame
and its relative alignment to the transport frame.

In performing a transverse resistivity measurement, the most straightforward manner in which one might encounter
longitudinal contamination is due to imperfect contact geometry (as in Figure 13) or to nonlinearly directed current
paths within the crystal. While microscopic details to do with the speciﬁc mechanism of current non-uniformity would
dictate how such a longitudinal contamination would be subtracted out, we instead focus on how to subtract out the
longitudinal contamination due to contact misalignment, otherwise assuming a homogeneous material with uniformly
directed current paths.

Consider an experimental conﬁguration as in Figure 13 in which one sources a current ~I = I · ˆx′′ = [wtj(x)′′ ] · ˆx′′
along the x′′ direction in the transport frame (with j(x)′′ the magnitude of the current density in the transport frame,
w the crystal width, and t the crystal thickness). One then seeks to isolate the true transverse resistivity ρ(xy)′′
(in the transport frame) from a measurement Rmeasured
which contains longitudinal contamination ρ(xx)′′ due to
imperfectly aligned contacts 1 and 2. One most conveniently characterizes this contamination by writing Ohm’s law
in the transport frame as

(xy)′′

E(i)′′ = ρ(ij)′′ j(j)′′

(D3)

E(x)′′
E(y)′′
E(z)′′







=


ρ(xx)′′ ρ(xy)′′
ρ(yx)′′ ρ(yy)′′

0
0

0

0

ρ(zz)′′

j(x)′′

0
0










= j(x)′′


ρ(xx)′′
ρ(yx)′′

0




and then expressing the resistances in terms of measured voltages, uniform electric ﬁelds, and crystal dimensions:

Rmeasured

(xx)′′

=

V3 − V1
I(x)′′

=

E(x)′′ l13

I(x)′′

=

l13
l14

V4 − V1
I(x)′′ ≡

1
∆ℓ

Rmeasured

(yx)′′

=

V2 − V1
I(x)′′

=

V2 − V4
I(x)′′

+

V4 − V1
I(x)′′

=

E(y)′′ w
j(x)′′wt

+ ∆ℓRmeasured

(xx)′′

V4 − V1
I(x)′′
ρ(yx)′′

=

t

(D4)

+ ∆ℓRmeasured

(xx)′′

,

where Vi denotes a voltage measured at the i-th contact in Figure 13 and ∆ℓ ≡ l14
l13
misalignment of the transverse contacts 1 and 2. Solving for ρ(yx)′′ in (D4), one obtains

characterizes the degree of

ρ(yx)′′ = t(cid:16)Rmeasured

(yx)′′

− ∆ℓRmeasured

(xx)′′

(cid:17) ≡ tR(yx)′′,

(D5)

20

where R(yx)′′ represents the resistance that would be measured in the absence of contact misalignment. Isolating
R(yx)′′ thus requires down-weighting the simultaneously measured quantity Rmeasured
by the parameter ∆ℓ, which is
most readily determined via a zero-ﬁeld, zero-strain measurement of the contacts. Speciﬁcally, in the absence of either
strain or a magnetic ﬁeld, there cannot be a transverse voltage for a crystal with D4h symmetry; therefore, V2 = V4
and, with the assumption of a uniform electric ﬁeld within the material,

(xx)′′

∆ℓ ≡

l14
l13

=

V4 − V1
V3 − V1

ˆǫ=ˆ0,Hz=0

=

V2 − V1
V3 − V1

.

(D6)

The equations (D5) and (D6) express how one corrects for contact misalignment in order to isolate the resistance
R(yx)′′; however, as prescribed in (4) of the main text, the meaningful quantity for elastoresistivity is the ratio of
resistivities, not resistances. The relationship between the two is elucidated by considering the transverse quantities
(∆ρ/ρ)(yx)′′ (Hz) and (∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′ (Hz), where

(cid:18) ∆ρ
ρ (cid:19)(yx)′′
ρ (cid:19)(xy)′′
(cid:18) ∆ρ

=

=

∆ρ(yx)′′

qρ(xx)′′(ˆǫ = ˆ0)ρ(yy)′′(ˆǫ = ˆ0)
qρ(xx)′′(ˆǫ = ˆ0)ρ(yy)′′(ˆǫ = ˆ0)

∆ρ(xy)′′

(D7)

and where the normalization factor contains the unstrained longitudinal resistivities ρ(xx)′′ and ρ(yy)′′ . Since ρ(yx)′′ =
tR(yx)′′ (and likewise for ρ(xy)′′), the linearized strain-induced resistivity change is given by ∆ρ(yx)′′ = t∆R(yx)′′ +
R(yx)′′∆t; substituting into (D7), and using the fact that for a tetragonal material ρ(xx)′′(ˆǫ = ˆ0) = ρ(yy)′′(ˆǫ = ˆ0),

ρ (cid:19)(yx)′′
(cid:18) ∆ρ

=

t∆R(yx)′′ + R(yx)′′∆t

(cid:16) wt
l13(cid:17) R(xx)′′(ˆǫ = ˆ0)

,

(D8)

. When the strain is of a B1g or B2g character (i.e., area-preserving), the thickness change

and likewise for (cid:16) ∆ρ

ρ (cid:17)(xy)′′

due to strain ∆t is precisely zero and so the second term in the numerator of (D8) vanishes (i.e., R(yx)′′∆t = 0).
When the strain is predominantly of a B1g or B2g character but also possesses an area-deforming (A1g) component
(as is a more realistic approximation to our speciﬁc experimental realization), ∆t is ﬁnite; nevertheless, provided the
measured resistance change is dominated by changes in the resistivity under strain as opposed to geometric eﬀects, it
will still be true that R(yx)′′ ∆t ≪ t∆R(yx)′′. In either case then, ∆ρ(yx)′′ ≈ t∆R(yx)′′, and, combining (D5) and (D8),

(cid:18) ∆ρ
ρ (cid:19)(yx)′′ ≈

l13

w (cid:20)  ∆Rmeasured

R(xx)′′ ! − ∆ℓ  ∆Rmeasured

R(xx)′′ !(cid:21),

(xx)′′

(yx)′′

(D9)

. In (D9), it is to be understood that the approximation becomes an exact equality under

and likewise for (cid:16) ∆ρ

ρ (cid:17)(xy)′′

conditions of pure B1g or B2g strain. This is the procedure we used to subtract longitudinal resistance “contamination”
and obtain the data described in the main text.

In zero magnetic ﬁeld and for appropriate mounting conﬁgurations, a single measurement with contact misalign-
ment accounted for according to (D9) is suﬃcient for extracting the relevant elastoresistivity coeﬃcients; in a ﬁnite
ﬁeld, one requires an extra measurement that is performed after reversing the magnetic ﬁeld. Upon taking the
symmetry-motivated sum (∆ρ/ρ)(yx)′′ (Hz) + (∆ρ/ρ)(xy)′′ (Hz) (and using (D9) and the Onsager relations), the gener-
alized expression for ﬁnite Hz is given by

ρ (cid:19)(yx)′′
(cid:18) ∆ρ

(Hz) +(cid:18) ∆ρ
R(xx)′′(Hz) ! − ∆ℓ  ∆Rmeasured

ρ (cid:19)(yx)′′
ρ (cid:19)(yx)′′
(Hz) +(cid:18) ∆ρ
(−Hz)
R(xx)′′(−Hz) ! − ∆ℓ  ∆Rmeasured
R(xx)′′(Hz) ! +  ∆Rmeasured
(−Hz)

(Hz) =(cid:18) ∆ρ

ρ (cid:19)(xy)′′

(Hz)

(Hz)

(xx)′′

(yx)′′

(xx)′′

(−Hz)

R(xx)′′(−Hz) !(cid:21).

l13

w (cid:20)  ∆Rmeasured

(yx)′′

(D10)

=

Equations (D9) and (D10) express the transverse elastoresistivity analog to anti-symmetrization in a magnetic ﬁeld

21

for Hall resistance measurements. By measuring(cid:0)∆Rmeasured

pre-characterized ∆ℓ in zero magnetic ﬁeld (using (D6), measured under conditions of zero strain), one can simply
subtract the two elastoresistance measurements (with the longitudinal contribution weighted by ∆ℓ and an overall
geometric correction by l13
w ) in order to isolate (∆ρ/ρ)(yx)′′. The same subtraction procedure works for measuring either
mxx,xx − mxx,yy or 2mxy,xy since the above derivation is independent of the relative orientation of the transport and
crystal frames.

(xx)′′ /R(xx)′′(cid:1) simultaneously, and having

(yx)′′ /R(xx)′′(cid:1) and(cid:0)∆Rmeasured

Appendix E: Evaluating Goodness of Fit of Curie-Weiss Model to the Measured Elastoresistivity Coeﬃcient

2mxy,xy

The elastoresistivity coeﬃcient 2mxy,xy exhibits a monotonic increase with decreasing temperature from the highest
temperature measured (220 K in the present work) down to 136 K, which is just above the coupled structural and
magnetic transition temperature TS,N ≈ 134 K. In this section, we brieﬂy describe the procedures used to ﬁt the
data to a Curie-Weiss temperature dependence above the phase transition, which is physically motivated based on a
mean-ﬁeld description of the nematic susceptibility.1,3

=

λ

xy,xy

a0(T −θ) + 2m0

As discussed in the main text, the 2mxy,xy elastoresistivity data were ﬁt to a Curie-Weiss temperature dependence
of the form 2mCurie-Weiss
xy,xy (see (12) of the main text). In order to evaluate the goodness of ﬁt
of the Curie-Weiss form to the measured data, we illustrate in Figure 14 a bullseye plot as a function of a varying
temperature window. A bullseye plot is a contour map of the root mean square error (RMSE) of the observed data
from an expected model as a function of a varying window in the independent variable.
In the ideal case where
the expected model perfectly conforms to the measured data over a particular range, the RMSE will obtain a local
minimum over this range and the output of the contour map will resemble a bullseye-like pattern. Since narrowing the
independent variable window also diminishes the sample size over which the ﬁt is performed and relaxes constraints
on the parameters in the ﬁt model, bullseye plots also display a general trend of decreasing RMSE as one increases
(decreases) the low (high) end cutoﬀ in the independent variable window; one therefore expects a general trend of
decreasing RMSE as one approaches the bottom right region of the contour map.

In the context of the present measurement, the expected model is a Curie-Weiss temperature dependence and the
color output of the bullseye plot in Figure 14 corresponds to the residual diﬀerence (for each temperature window)
xy,xy)−1 and a linear function of temperature. For each ﬁxed window,
between the inverse susceptibility (2mxy,xy − 2m0
we ﬁrst estimate the temperature-independent parameter 2m0
xy,xy by a least RMSE minimization procedure between
the measured 2mxy,xy and the Curie-Weiss form; with this 2m0
xy,xy, we then estimate the best-ﬁt parameters λ/a0
xy,xy)−1 and a linear ﬁt. The low temperature cutoﬀ
and θ by minimizing the RMSE between the (2mxy,xy − 2m0
for the windows varies between 135 K and 155 K, while the high temperature cutoﬀ for the windows varies between
190 K and 220 K. As displayed in Figure 14, a bullseye-like pattern is not observed; the only discernible feature is a
general trend of decreasing RMSE as the temperature window is narrowed. This indicates the absence of an “optimal”
temperature range over which the elastoresistivity coeﬃcient 2mxy,xy displays Curie-Weiss behavior; therefore, we
choose to ﬁt the data over the maximal range from 220 K (the highest temperature measured) down to 136 K (just
above TS,N ). This range is demarcated by a star in the top-left portion of Figure 14 and yields the ﬁt parameters
given in the main text (see Table I).

The most easily interpretable parameter from the Curie-Weiss ﬁt is the Weiss temperature θ. To characterize the
dependence of the Weiss temperature on the particular temperature window used for the ﬁt, we also plot a contour
map of the best-ﬁt estimates of θ as a function of a varying temperature window (Figure 15). The star in the top-left
region of Figure 15 again corresponds to the maximal temperature range, which we use due to the absence of any
particular best ﬁt range. The distribution of Weiss temperatures is heavily concentrated around ∼ 120 K for the
ranges close to the maximal window, which is the value of θ quoted in the main text.

220

215

210

205

200

195

)

K

(
 

d
n
u
o
B

 
r
e
p
p
U
e
r
u

 

t

a
r
e
p
m
e
T

190

135

xy,xy

22

×10-3
11

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

140
150
Temperature Lower Bound (K)

145

155

FIG. 14: Bullseye plot of the 2mxy,xy elastoresistivity coeﬃcient, illustrating the minimized RMSE from the Curie-Weiss form
as a function of a varying temperature window. While an ideal ﬁt over a particular range would produce a local minimum in the
RMSE in that range and hence a bullseye-like pattern in the contour map, no such bullseye pattern is observed for the present
data. This indicates that there is no “optimal” temperature range over which the data best conforms to the Curie-Weiss form.
Without such a best-ﬁt range, we opt to ﬁt over the maximal range from 220 K (the highest temperature measured) down to
136 K (just above TS,N ≈ 134 K).

220

215

210

205

200

195

)

K

(
 

d
n
u
o
B

 
r
e
p
p
U
e
r
u

 

t

a
r
e
p
m
e
T

190

135

θ

23

130

128

126

124

122

120

140
150
Temperature Lower Bound (K)

145

155

FIG. 15: Contour map of estimated Weiss temperatures θ as a function of a varying temperature window. The star in the
top-left region again corresponds to the maximal temperature range, which we use due to the absence of any particular best
ﬁt range. The distribution of Weiss temperatures is heavily concentrated around ∼ 120 K for the ranges close to the maximal
window, which is the value of θ quoted in the main text.

