6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
1

 
 
]

.

A
G
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
9
3
5
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 000, 000–000 (0000)

Printed 14 March 2016

(MN LATEX style ﬁle v2.2)

Suppression of galactic outﬂows by cosmological infall and
circumgalactic medium

Priyanka Singh1⋆, Sandeep Rana2, Jasjeet S. Bagla2, Biman B. Nath1
1Raman Research Institute, Sadashiva Nagar, Bangalore, 560080, India
2Indian Institute of Science Education & Research, Mohali, Mohali

Accepted, Received; in original form

ABSTRACT
We investigate the relative importance of two galactic outﬂow suppression mechanisms
: a) Cosmological infall of the intergalactic gas onto the galaxy, and b) the existence
of a hot circumgalactic medium (CGM). Considering only radial motion, the infall
reduces the speed of outﬂowing gas and even halts the outﬂow, depending on the
mass and redshift of the galaxy. For star forming galaxies there exists an upper mass
limit beyond which outﬂows are suppressed by the gravitational ﬁeld of the galaxy.
We ﬁnd that infall can reduce this upper mass limit approximately by a factor of two
(independent of the redshift). Massive galaxies (& 1012M⊙) host large reservoir of
hot, diﬀuse CGM around the central part of the galaxy. The CGM acts as a barrier
between the infalling and outﬂowing gas and provides an additional source of outﬂow
suppression. We ﬁnd that at low redshifts (z . 3.5), the CGM is more eﬀective than
the infall in suppressing the outﬂows. Together, these two processes give a mass range
in which galaxies are unable to have eﬀective outﬂows. We also discuss the impact of
outﬂow suppression on the enrichment history of the galaxy and its environment.

Key words: Galaxies: Haloes; Galaxies: Intergalactic medium

1

INTRODUCTION

The two components of matter in galaxies– dark matter
and baryons– have contrasting properties, a fact which
makes the study of galactic evolution a complex one. Un-
like dark matter, baryons undergo collisions, radiate, and
condense towards the central part of the galaxy in or-
der to form stars. However, a signiﬁcant fraction of these
baryons may remain too hot to condense and form stars,
especially in large galaxies. This gas likely stays in a
hot, diﬀuse, gaseous form and envelopes the central, opti-
cally visible part of the galaxy (Rees & Ostriker 1977; Silk
1977). This gaseous component of the galaxy is referred
to as the circumgalactic medium (CGM). Recent obser-
vations have indicated the presence of the CGM in mas-
sive galaxies (Anderson & Bregman 2011; Dai et al. 2012;
Anderson, Bregman & Dai 2013; Bogd´an et al. 2013b,a),
perhaps extending up to the virial radius of the galaxy.

Galaxies also undergo feedback processes like super-
novae (SNe) and active galactic nuclei (AGN) which may
give rise to galactic-scale outﬂows (Croton et al. 2006;
Dav´e, Oppenheimer & Finlator 2011; Vogelsberger et al.
2013). Simultaneously,
the galaxies also accrete mat-
intergalactic medium
ter

from their

surrounding

⋆ priyankas@rri.res.in

(Birnboim & Dekel

2003; Kereˇs et al.

(IGM)
2005;
Oppenheimer et al. 2010). Together, the infall and outﬂows
regulate the evolution of the host galaxies. However, the
interaction between these two opposing processes is not yet
well understood.

The CGM can also act as a barrier for infalling gas
as well as the outﬂowing material if the CGM gas cooling
timescale is comparable to or larger than the halo destruc-
tion timescale (Singh et al. 2015) leading to a hot, diﬀuse
gaseous barrier between the central galaxy and IGM. Recent
results of observations (Mathes et al. 2014) and simulations
(Goerdt & Ceverino 2015; Gabor & Dav´e 2015) can be ex-
plained by the existence of the hot CGM suppressing the
outﬂows as well as infall. The outﬂows are generally metal
rich and remove a signiﬁcant amount of metal from galax-
ies. Since the outﬂows can be decelerated and even stopped
by the hot CGM in massive galaxies, the recycling of met-
als in massive galaxies becomes more important as com-
pared to the low mass galaxies. This mass dependent recy-
cling behaviour is known as the diﬀerential wind recycling
(Oppenheimer et al. 2010) and it can alter the metal evolu-
tion history of these galaxies and the surrounding IGM. For
low mass galaxies(Mh . 1012M⊙), the gas cooling timescale
is small compared the halo destruction timescale. As a result
low mass galaxies cannot sustain the hot CGM gas. This gas
cools down, form clumps and does not interfere much with

2

Singh et al.

in the infall/outﬂows. Whereas, in case of massive galax-
ies, the CGM gas remains hot for long enough timescale,
leading to the existence of hot, gaseous barrier decelerat-
ing infalling (Dekel & Birnboim 2006) as well as outﬂow-
ing material. Therefore, the presence of the hot CGM di-
vides the galaxies into two categories: 1). Massive galaxies
(Mh & 1012M⊙), where the CGM is hot enough to aﬀect the
physical properties (infall, outﬂows, metal enrichment etc.)
of the galaxy and the wind recycling becomes important, 2).
low mass galaxies (Mh . 1012M⊙), where the CGM cools
fast enough and is essentially invisible to the outﬂowing and
infalling gas.

In this work, we address the question of interaction be-
tween outﬂows, infalling gas and CGM from a diﬀerent per-
spective. Instead of focussing on the fate of infalling gas, we
would like to study the eﬀect of infalling gas and CGM on
the outﬂowing gas. Can outﬂowing gas escape to the IGM,
or is its ultimate mixing with the IGM suppressed? How
does this suppression, if at all, depend on the galactic mass
and redshift? The possible suppression of outﬂows is more
important for low mass haloes where the hot CGM is essen-
tially absent. For a given halo mass, there exists a redshift
where the suppression of outﬂows by the presence of the hot
CGM becomes more important than its suppression by in-
fall. The relative importance of the two wind suppression
mechanisms depends on the mass and redshift of the galac-
tic halo. Therefore, it is important to take into account both
the mechanisms to understand the galaxy evolution and en-
richment.

However, the task is made a diﬃcult one by the com-
plications inherent in the physics of outﬂowing gas, and also
in the complicated nature of infalling gas. Firstly, the out-
ﬂowing gas may not be spherically symmetric and may have
a complicated density, temperature and velocity structure,
and this structure itself may be a function of time. Secondly,
the infalling gas may also have an anisotropic density and ve-
locity structure. One way to approach the problem is to use
cosmological hydrodynamical simulations, which, however,
is unlikely to help in understanding the physical processes
involved, because of the complexity of the processes. The
other approach is to set up idealised numerical experiments,
in which certain parameters are varied keeping the others
constant, and the processes are studied in detail. However,
even before such an exercise, it is useful to study idealised
theoretical scenarios with a mix of analytical and numerical
tools. This is what we attempt here. In this paper, for out-
ﬂows, we use the analytical prescription by Sharma & Nath
(2013). For infall we use N-body simulations with TreePM
code and N = 5123 particles (Bagla 2002; Khandai & Bagla
2009). Used together, they allow us to arrive at a few in-
teresting conclusions regarding the suppression of outﬂows
by infalling matter and CGM, which may have important
implications in the cosmological context.

This paper is organized as follows: In section-2 we de-
scribe the formalism used to calculate the infall and outﬂow
velocities. In section-3 we discuss the outﬂow suppression
processes and estimate the relative importance of these pro-
cesses. In section-4 we discuss the impact of the suppression
on the IGM enrichment and present our main conclusions
in section-6.

)
c
e
s
/

m
k
(
 

l
a
n
i
m
r
e
t

V

104

103

102

101

100
 
0

 

Mh =1010 M⊙h −1
Mh =1011 M⊙h −1
Mh =1012 M⊙h −1
Mh =1013 M⊙h −1

0.2

0.4

α

0.6

0.8

1

Figure 1. Terminal wind velocity as a function of energy injection
eﬃciency α, due to stellar feedback processes, for galactic haloes
in the mass range, 1010−13M⊙h−1 (shown in diﬀerent colors), at
redshift, z = 0.

2 FORMALISM

2.1 Outﬂow velocity

The velocity of the outﬂowing gas mainly depends on the
mass and redshift of the galactic halo and the feedback
recipe considered. Sharma & Nath (2013) derived the ter-
minal velocity of outﬂows driven by multiple supernovae
in a galaxy whose dark matter proﬁle is described by the
Navarro-Frenk-White (NFW) proﬁle. They showed that the
wind speed at large galacto-centric distance depends on two
velocity scales: (a) v∗, which depends on the mass and en-
ergy deposition rate due to supernovae, and is given by
v∗ ≈ ( ˙E/2 ˙M )1/2, and (b) vs, which depends on the dark
matter proﬁle, and is closely related to the circular speed
in a NFW proﬁle. The terminal speed of winds (in the ab-
sence of momentum injection from active galactic nuclei)
was shown to be,

vwind(r) = 2hv2

∗ −

1

2hφNF W (r) − φNF W (R)ii1/2

(1)

where R=200pc is assumed to be the sonic point, as well
as the size of the region in which mass and energy is being
injected and φNF W (r) = −2v2
is the NFW grav-
itational potential. The terminal wind velocity (r → ∞) is
given by:

ln(1+r/rs)

r/rs

s

vterm = 2(v2

∗ − v2

s )1/2

(2)

Crs

The velocity scale inherent in the energy deposition is given
by v∗ = 562√α km/s, and it is due to eﬀect of SNe, where
α represents energy injection eﬃciency. The other velocity
scale, vs = √ GMh
is due to the gravity of the halo, where,
Mh is the virial mass of the halo, rs = Rv/c is the scale
radius of the halo, C = ln(1 + c) − c/(1 + c) and c(M, Z) is
the concentration parameter (Mu˜noz-Cuartas et al. 2011).
In Figure-1, we show the terminal wind velocity as a
function of α, for the halo mass range ∼ 1010-1013h−1M⊙,
at z=0. For a given halo mass and redshift, the terminal

 

Mh = 5×1010 M ⊙h − 1
Mh = 5×1011 M ⊙h − 1

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

Suppression of galactic outﬂows

3

 

Mh = 5×1010 M ⊙h − 1
Mh = 5×1011 M ⊙h − 1

3.5

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

)

 
r
i
c

 

V
×
3
(
/
 

 

t
e
n

V

)

 
r
i
c

 

V
×
3
(
/
 

 

t
e
n

V

0
 
0

1

2

r / R

vir

3

4

5

0.5
 
0

1

2

r / R

vir

3

4

5

Figure 2. Ratio of outﬂow velocity to 3×circular speed of the halo as a function of r/Rvir at z=3.0 (left panel) and z=1.0 (right panel).
The thick red (thin green) solid line represents the unsuppressed wind velocity whereas the dashed line represents the net outﬂow velocity
(wind velocity-infall velocity) for halo mass Mh = 5 × 1010M⊙h−1 (Mh = 5 × 1011M⊙h−1) at corresponding redshifts.

wind velocity is close to zero below a particular value of α
(v∗ < vs), beyond which there is a sharp increase in the
wind velocity (v∗ > vs) and with further increase in α, the

terminal velocity varies slowly (vterm ∝ √α).

Recent hydrodynamical simulations have shown that
the eﬃciency of energy deposition by multiple SNe can
be as large as ≈ 0.3, which signiﬁes that the rest
of the energy is lost in radiation (Sharma et al. 2014;
Vasiliev, Nath & Shchekinov 2015). These studies have in-
vestigated the radiative energy loss in the case of SNe that
are separated in time and in space, but are coherent enough
to mildly compensate for the radiative loss. This is also cor-
roborated by inference from X-ray observations of outﬂows
from M82 by Strickland & Heckman (2009). We ﬁx the value
of α at 0.3 for the rest of this work.

Table 1. The table lists the simulations used here. The ﬁrst col-
umn lists the comoving size of the simulation box, the second
column lists the minimum halo mass that we can resolve in the
simulations, this is given in units of solar mass. Each simulation
was run with 5123 particles. Cosmological parameters used here
are described in text.

Lbox (Mpc) Mmin (M⊙)

51.2 h−1

76.8 h−1

109.02

109.43

153.6 h−1

1010.33

2.2 Infall velocity

We use gravity only simulations run with the TreePM code
(Bagla 2002; Khandai & Bagla 2009) to compute the ve-
locity of infalling gas under the assumption that the gas
particles follow the dark matter particles. The suite of sim-
ulations used here is described in the Table 1. The cosmo-
logical model and the power spectrum of ﬂuctuations cor-
responds to the best ﬁt model for WMAP-5: Ωnr = 0.26,
ΩΛ = 0.74, ns = 0.96, σ8 = 0.79, h = 0.72, Ωbh2 = 0.02273
(Komatsu et al. 2009).

We use the Friends-of-Friends (FOF) (Davis et al. 1985)
algorithm with a linking length l = 0.2 to identify haloes and
construct a halo catalog. Velocity ﬁeld around each halo is
obtained from the same simulations.

The velocity ﬁeld in the vicinity of haloes is highly
anisotropic with infall often along ﬁlaments and sheets. We
simplify the discussion here by considering only the radial
motion around haloes, and also by averaging in all directions
around haloes. This is an idealisation but should suﬃce to
give us a glimpse of the relative role of infall and outﬂows.
In order to calculate the infall speed (and hence the

net outﬂow speed), we divided the region around the halo
into shells of thickness Rvir/5, where Rvir is the virial radius
of the halo. We calculate the average infall velocity of the
shell by averaging over the radial velocity of the particles
present in the shell. This gives the infall velocity of each
shell as a function of distance from the centre of the halo. We
then average this radial infall velocity for approximately ten
randomly selected haloes for every mass scale and snapshot.
This gives the average radial infall velocity as a function of
halo mass and redshift.

3 SUPPRESSION OF OUTFLOWS

3.1 Suppression by infall

Subtracting the infall velocity from the radial outﬂow veloc-
ity gives the net outﬂow velocity. This approach ignores the
eﬀect of pressure and assumes a pure advection of outﬂow
in the velocity ﬁeld. Thus our estimate of the eﬀect of infall
on outﬂows is likely to be an under-estimate.

In Figure- 2, we show the variation of the wind velocity
and the net outﬂow velocity (wind velocity-infall velocity)
as a function of the distance from the centre of the dark

4

Singh et al.

 

o
t
 
y
t
i
c
o
l
e
v
 
w
o
l
f
t
u
o
 
t
e
n

o
i
t
a
r

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
y
t
i
c
o
l
e
v

 
d
n
i
w
 
e
h
t

 
f
o

 

1.5

1

0.5

0

 

 

z=0.5
z=1
z=3
z=5

10

10.5

11

11.5

12

12.5

13

log [M ha l o (M⊙h −1 )]

Figure 3. Ratio of net outﬂow velocity with and without the
infall, as a function of the halo mass, for diﬀerent redshifts (shown
in diﬀerent colors). The vertical lines represent the mass limit
above which the outﬂows cannot overcome the gravitational ﬁeld
of the galaxy and the galaxies do not host the outﬂows even in
the absence of the infall.

matter halo. We plot the ratio of distance from the centre
to the virial radius of the halo on the x-axis, and the ratio
of net outﬂow speed to 3×circular speed of the halo along
the y-axis. We also show the root-mean-square error on the
net outﬂow velocity. The main features of these plots are as
follows:

• For a given redshift, the eﬀect of infall increases with
the increasing halo mass. This is mainly due to the increase
in the gravitational ﬁeld of the galaxy with its increasing
mass, resulting in higher infall velocity.

• For a given halo mass, the eﬀect of infall increases with
the increasing redshift. This behaviour is due to the hierar-
chical formation history of the universe. Small galaxies form
early in the universe at high σ-peaks. These galaxies then
grow through accretion and merger to form larger galax-
ies and galaxy clusters. The same halo mass corresponds to
higher σ-peaks resulting in higher infall velocity at higher
redshifts.

Thus, by neglecting the eﬀect of infall one may over-predict
the outﬂow velocity and hence the mass outﬂow rate.

In Figure-3 we show the ratio of the net outﬂow veloc-
ity with and without taking into account the eﬀect of infall.
To ﬁnd this ratio, we calculate the average radial velocity
of the shells between Rvir and 2Rvir, for diﬀerent redshifts.
For a given mass, the suppression of outﬂow due to the pres-
ence of infall increases with increasing redshift. This eﬀect
is more prominent for high mass haloes as compared to low
mass haloes. For example, haloes with Mh ∼ 1010h−1M⊙,
the diﬀerence in the suppression of the outﬂow due to in-
falling gas is <10% in the redshift range 0.5-5.0, whereas
this diﬀerence increases to 20% at Mh ∼ 1011h−1M⊙ and
50% at Mh ∼ 2 × 1011h−1M⊙. This variation is due to the
decrease in the outﬂow speed and increase in infall speed
with increasing halo mass. This results in the sharp decline

in the net outﬂow speed near Mmax, where Mmax is the up-
per mass limit beyond which there are no eﬀective outﬂows,
as predicted by eqn 2. The vertical lines in Figure-(3) show
the values of Mmax at diﬀerent redshift. The curves in the
ﬁgure shows that the infall eﬀectively suppresses the out-
ﬂows even for mass lower than Mmax, eﬀectively decreasing
the value of Mmax, beyond which outﬂows cannot reach the
IGM. We ﬁnd that the value of Mmax decreases nearly by a
factor of 2 due to the presence of infall.

Next, in Figure-4 we show M infall

max , the upper mass limit
beyond which there are no eﬀective outﬂows as function of
redshift. M infall
includes the eﬀect of suppression of out-
max
ﬂows due the presence of infall which decreases the value of
Mmax approximately by a factor of two, independent of the
redshift, as shown in Figure-3 and to illustrate this eﬀect,
we compare Mmax (thin dashed, brown line) with M infall
max
as a function of redshift. In this ﬁgure, we also show the
value of M infall
max when the infall velocity is calculated analyt-
ically from a spherical top hat model (thin solid, cyan line).
It is interesting to ﬁnd that the prediction of M infall
from
max
N-body simulation (dot-dashed, blue line) and spherical col-
lapse model agree well with each other.

3.2 Suppression by hot CGM

In Figure-4, we also show M CGM
(dotted, pink line), which
max
is the mass limit above which the hot CGM exists in the
galactic halo. This mass limit is determined by the con-
dition tcool
> 1, where tcool is the halo gas cooling time
tdest
and tdest is the timescale in which a halo forms a larger
halo through merger or accretion and the halo gas is re-
heated during the process (Singh et al. 2015). The gas cool-
ing timescale is given by tcool = 3npkT /(2n2
eΛ(Z, T )), where
T is the gas temperature (assumed to be the virial temper-
ature of the galaxy), ne is the electron density (computed
assuming that the CGM contains approximately 10% of the
total halo mass), np(∼ µene/µ) is the total particle density
with µ and µe the mean molecular weight of the gas and per
free electron respectively and Λ(Z, T ) is the cooling function
(Sutherland & Dopita 1993) which depends on gas tempera-
ture and metallicity. The metallicity of the CGM is assumed
to be ∼ 0.1Z⊙. The value of M CGM
is consistent with earlier
studies by Birnboim & Dekel (2003) and Kereˇs et al. (2005).
It changes only slightly with redshift and is comparable to
M infall
max .

max

Recent simulations have found that for the haloes more
massive than M CGM
max , the outﬂow speed is reduced to the
sound speed in the CGM (Sarkar et al. 2015) due to the
presence of hot environment around the central galaxy. This
decelerates the outﬂow and even turns it around to form a
galactic fountain.

The observations by Mathes et al. (2014) showed that
the fraction of clouds escaping the galactic halo decreases
with increasing halo mass. They studied a sample of 14
galaxies in the redshift range 0.1 < z < 0.7 using the quasar
absorption spectroscopy. The authors divided the galaxy
sample into two mass bins: massive galaxies with Mh >
1011.5M⊙ and the low mass galaxies with Mh < 1011.5M⊙.
The cloud escape fraction (within the virial radius of the
galaxy) for the low mass galaxies is ∼ 55% whereas the
escape fraction decreases signiﬁcantly to ∼ 5% for massive
galaxies. It is interesting to ﬁnd that the dividing mass limit

 

PS characteristic mass
ST characteristic mass
N−body simulation
t
/t
cool
dest
top hat model
without infall and CGM

 > 1

e
s
p
a
l
l
o
c

M

/

w
o
l
f
t
u
o

M

Suppression of galactic outﬂows

5

 

Raw simulation
Corrected

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

1

1.5

2

2.5

z

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

 
0

1

2

3

4

5

z

1014

1013

1012

1011

1010

]

1
−
h
⊙
M

[

o
l
a
h

M

109

 

0.5

Figure 4. Comparison between Mmax (thin dashed, brown line)
which does not include the suppression of outﬂows by infall and
CGM, M infall
max calculated for N-body simulation (dot-dashed, blue
line) and the top hat model (thin solid, cyan line), M CGM
(dot-
ted, pink line) and Mchar calculated for the PS (thick solid, red
line) and ST (dashed, green line) mass function.

max

between the two samples is comparable to M CGM
max deter-
mined in the present work. This observation supports the
scenario of diﬀerential wind recycling where the hot halo gas
in massive galaxies decelerates the outﬂowing clouds. For
low mass galaxies Mh . 1012M⊙, the CGM cooling time
is short (compared to halo destruction time), and, conse-
quently, the gas pressure is not suﬃcient to support against
gravity. As a result, the gas forms clumps, reducing its cov-
ering fraction and hence the eﬃciency to suppress outﬂows.
We note that, in addition to interfering with outﬂows,
hot CGM forms a barrier in front of the infalling gas. In a re-
cent study by Gabor & Dav´e (2015), the authors found the
quenching of star formation due to the suppression of direct
supply of the gas to the central galaxy, in the mass range
1012
− 1013M⊙. The zoom-in hydrodynamic simulations by
Goerdt & Ceverino (2015) predict that the gas infall veloc-
ity increases with increasing halo mass up to Mh ≈ 1012M⊙
beyond which the infall velocity decreases as the halo mass
is increased. Note that, the halo mass where the relation
between the infall velocity and the halo mass is reversed,
is independent of the galaxy redshift and its comparable to
M CGM
max . This indicates that the presence of hot CGM de-
creases the infall velocity. However, Nelson et al. (2015b)
found a signiﬁcant suppression of the infall by the galac-
tic winds at small r (< 0.5Rvir) but they did not ﬁnd any
change in accretion properties as a function of halo mass, in
the mass range 1010-1012M⊙. Note that this is still not in
disagreement with diﬀerential wind recycling scenario if one
uses Mh ∼ 1012M⊙ as a dividing line between the galaxies
with and without a hot circumgalactic environment.

3.3 Relative importance of infall versus hot CGM

in suppressing outﬂows

The cosmological infall and the presence of hot CGM, both
give the upper mass limits, M infall
respectively,

max and M CGM
max

Figure 5. The ratio of mass in haloes hosting unsuppressed out-
ﬂows to the total mass in all collapsed structures. The blue curve
(dashed) shows the ratio as determined in N-Body simulations.
Given that we use simulations with diﬀerent mass resolution and
we are unable to resolve low mass haloes in simulations used at
low redshifts, this approach under-estimates the ratio. The red
curve (dot-dashed) is obtained by applying a correction by ex-
trapolating the mass function to the same mass resolution as is
available in the simulations used for high redshift snapshots. The
qualitative trend remains the same though the ratio has the value
closer to 0.5 rather than 0.3.

max < M CGM

beyond which the outﬂow is halted. If M infall
max , the
outﬂow is suppressed by the infall, even before the existence
of the pressure supported, hot circumgalactic gas. In this
scenario, the infall plays more important role than the CGM
max > M CGM
in suppressing the outﬂows. However, if M infall
max ,
the galaxies host the hot CGM before the infall velocity
becomes comparable to the outﬂow velocity. Therefore, the
process corresponding to minimum of the two mass-limits,
dominants the suppression. Comparing M infall
max and M CGM
max
(see ﬁgure-4) suggest that at low redshifts (z . 3.5), the role
of hot CGM, in suppressing the outﬂows is more important
than the infall, since M infall
max > M CGM
max , whereas at high red-
shifts where M infall
max < M CGM
max (z > 3.5), infall suppresses the
outﬂow more eﬀectively than the CGM. The two mass limits
are close in the redshift range considered. M infall
is larger
max
than M CGM
max by a factor of 2 − 3 near z ∼ 0. The diﬀer-
ence between the two mass-limits decreases with increasing
redshift. Therefore, these two processes give a mass range
separating the haloes with and without eﬀective outﬂows.

4 FRACTION OF GALAXIES AFFECTED BY

THE SUPPRESSION OF OUTFLOWS

The intergalactic medium is enriched by metals ejected by
galaxies through galactic winds. Therefore, the enrichment
level of IGM crucially depends on the feedback mechanism,
which throws out metals into the IGM and the processes
such as infall and the existence of hot CGM, which suppress
the outﬂows. In this section, we examine whether the sup-

6

Singh et al.

pression of outﬂows by cosmological infall/hot CGM aﬀects
a signiﬁcant fraction of the galaxy population.

δ2(z)

δ2(z)

for the Press-Schechter (PS) (deﬁned as

In Figure-4, we also show the characteristic mass Mchar
2σ2(Mchar) = 1) as
2σ2(Mchar) =
well as Sheth-Tormen (ST) mass function (αST
1, where αST = 0.707). The characteristic mass, Mchar rep-
resents the mass scale beyond which the number of haloes
decreases rapidly with increasing halo mass. Therefore, the
haloes with masses below Mchar, dominate the halo popu-
lation. The present day value of Mchar ∼ 1.4 × 1013h−1M⊙
for Press-Schechter mass function and it decreases with in-
creasing redshift as expected from the hierarchical structure
formation scenario. We ﬁnd that at z > 1 − 2, M infall
max and
M CGM
max > Mchar, which implies that the haloes in which out-
ﬂows are completely suppressed by infalling gas or the pres-
ence of the hot CGM, are rare. At low redshifts, majority of
the haloes lie near the characteristic mass range, and there-
fore outﬂow suppression becomes important. Therefore, the
suppression of the outﬂows due the infall as well as the hot
CGM should be taken into account while dealing with the
haloes hosting outﬂows, especially at low redshifts.

Next, to get an estimate of the population of galax-
ies with suppressed or unsuppressed outﬂows, we compute
the ratio of the total mass in the galaxies hosting unsup-
pressed outﬂows to the total mass present in collapsed struc-
tures. In Figure-5, we show this ratio as a function of red-
shift. The total mass in the collapsed structures is esti-
mated using the N-body simulation. To compute the mass
in the haloes supporting outﬂows, we consider haloes with
Mh . M in[M infall
max ]. Note that, while calculating the
number of galaxies with unsuppressed outﬂows, we exclude
those haloes in which outﬂows are completely suppressed.
Therefore, the ratio includes galaxies with partially sup-
pressed outﬂows.

max , M CGM

Given that the mass resolution of simulations used
in this study is diﬀerent, and that simulations with
a larger box-size are required for low redshift studies
(Bagla & Prasad 2006), the mass resolution is not indepen-
dent of redshift in the analysis. The mass resolution is poorer
at low redshifts and therefore we miss out on low mass haloes
that can potentially contribute to outﬂows. To overcome this
problem, we compute the mass function at each redshift and
extrapolate it to the mass resolution of the highest resolution
simulation used here. The red curve (dot-dashed) in ﬁgure-
5 incorporates this correction while computing the ratio of
total mass in galaxies that have an unsuppressed outﬂow to
the total mass in collapsed haloes.

The ratio is close to unity at high redshifts (z & 5)
due to the hierarchical formation history of the universe,
the haloes at high redshifts are mostly low mass ones. The
fraction of mass present in the outﬂow-supporting haloes
decreases with decreasing redshift due to the formation of
massive haloes at low redshifts. The redshift range, z ∼ 1−2,
represents the era of high star formation activity. Hence, the
abundance of outﬂow supporting systems can potentially de-
termine the enrichment history of the galaxies, CGM and
IGM. We ﬁnd that the ratio Moutf low/Mcollapse decreases
from 70% to 60% in this redshift range. Thus, a small but
signiﬁcant fraction of haloes lie in the mass range where the
outﬂows are completely suppressed by the infall or the pres-
ence of the hot CGM during the era of high star formation

hence high feedback activity. In the redshift range z < 1,
Moutf low/Mcollapse decreases from 60% to less than 50%.
Since, the presence of the hot CGM is more important at
low redshifts (see ﬁgure-4), the outﬂowing gas in approxi-
mately half of the haloes at low redshift, is decelerated and
suppressed by the surrounding CGM in these galactic haloes.
Therefore, the enrichment of the IGM is easier at high
redshifts whereas at low redshifts, the metal carrying out-
ﬂows are suppressed more eﬀectively, mostly by the hot
CGM. These suppressed outﬂows are then recycled into
the galaxy hence enriching the CGM as well as the stars.
This result is in agreement with the simulation result of
Dav´e & Oppenheimer (2007), indicating that the IGM con-
tains more metals at high redshifts whereas the stars and
the halo gas contain more metals at low redshifts.

5 CAVEATS

The usefulness of our results discussed above is, however,
subject to certain caveats. Firstly, the geometry of the in-
falling gas near the virial radius may not be isotropic as we
have assumed, and is likely to be in the form of streams
(Dekel, Sari & Ceverino 2009; Dekel et al. 2009). Simula-
tions show that gas mainly ﬂows along ﬁlaments in the cos-
mic web, and the enhanced density of gas in the ﬁlaments
causes it to cool, and avoids being shocked to the virial
temperature (Birnboim & Dekel 2003). Considerations of
such cold streams with regard to the fraction of outﬂow-
ing gas that can escape is diﬃcult without hydrodynami-
cal simulations, and beyond the scope of the present work.
However, we note that the cold mode of accretion domi-
nates galaxies below the mass scale of ∼ 1012 M⊙, and the
mode of accretion changes to that of slow cooling from hot
halo gas (hot mode) beyond this mass scale (Kereˇs et al.
2005). The shock heating and disruption of cold infalling
streams, especially at high redshifts and low galacto-centric
radii, becomes more important near Mh ∼ 1012 M⊙
(Danovich et al. 2012; Nelson et al. 2013; Danovich et al.
2015; Gabor & Bournaud 2014; Nelson et al. 2015a). This
mass scale coincides with the mass scale shown in Figure-4
(dotted pink line corresponding to the galactic haloes with
tcool/tdest > 1), and therefore the ﬁlamentary nature of cold
ﬂows in low mass galaxies does not signiﬁcantly alter our
conclusions.

Secondly, all of the CGM gas may not be in a hot, dif-
fuse state, and a fraction of it is likely to be in a warm
(∼ 104 K) phase, as indicated by the COS-Halos survey
(Werk et al. 2014). It is also believed that the interaction
of the CGM gas with the outﬂows driven by ﬁrst phases of
star formation may cause clumping (Marinacci et al. 2010;
Sharma et al. 2014). The gas in the interaction zone may
suﬀer from various instabilities, such as thermal instability
(due to the mixing of gas at diﬀerent temperatures and den-
sities) and Kelvin-Helmholz instability (due to shear). The
resulting structures and turbulence in the CGM may allow
some fraction of the outﬂowing gas to escape, in the cases
where our results above for a homogeneous CGM may not
allow any escape. However, this fraction is diﬃcult to esti-
mate without the aid of hydrodynamic simulations.

However, given these uncertainties,

it is interesting
to note the similarities of the mass scale we have dis-

cussed so far, that of M infall
max , with other mass scales that
are signiﬁcant for galaxy evolution. Several studies (e.g,
Behroozi, Wechsler & Conroy (2013)) have shown that the
ratio of baryonic mass to the total mass of galaxies reaches
a maximum around ∼ 1012 M⊙ at the present epoch, and
slightly lower at high redshift (e.g., lower by a factor of
∼ 3 at z ∼ 4). This is remarkably close to the mass scale
M infall
shown in Figure-4 (dot-dashed blue line and thin
max
solid cyan line). We can speculate, on the basis of our cal-
culations here, that the stoppage of the outﬂow is causally
connected to the baryon-to-total mass ratio. The analytic
work of Sharma et al. (2014), which did not consider the ef-
fect of infall or the presence of CGM, and only considered
the eﬀect of gravity, has already suggested that the stoppage
of outﬂow is related to the baryons-to-total mass ratio. Our
work on the eﬀect of infall and CGM’s presence provides
additional supports for this scenario.

6 CONCLUSIONS

In this work, we have studied the relative importance of
galactic outﬂows, cosmological infall and the role of presence
of hot circumgalactic gas on these processes under some sim-
pliﬁed assumptions such as spherically symmetric infall, con-
stant value of energy injection eﬃciency, and gas particles
following the dark matter particles. We have also neglected
the complexities involved in the dynamics and distribution
of the CGM as well as the infalling gas. However, as dis-
cussed in section-5, the detailed treatment of these complex-
ities is unlikely to change the conclusions drawn from our
analysis substantially. Our conclusions can be summarised
as follows:

(i) Without considering the CGM, the infalling gas inter-
feres with the outﬂowing gas reducing the net outﬂow veloc-
ity. This reduction depends on the mass and redshift of the
galaxy. The larger (massive) galaxies at high redshifts suﬀer
more suppression compared to smaller (low mass) galaxies
at low redshifts due to the combined eﬀect of weaker out-
ﬂows and stronger infall in the case of massive galaxies.

(ii) Even in the absence of any infall, there exits an upper
mass limit beyond which the outﬂows are unable to over-
come the gravitational ﬁeld of the galaxy. This upper mass
limit decreases roughly by a factor of two due to the addi-
tional suppression of outﬂows by infalling gas, independent
of the redshift. The value of this upper mass limit, M infall
max ,
predicted by simulations agrees well with the value predicted
by the top-hat model.

(iii) In addition to the infall, the presence of the hot
gaseous environment in the form of CGM, decelerates the
outﬂows. The CGM also gives an upper mass limit, M CGM
max ,
beyond which the hot CGM eﬀectively stops the outﬂows
from escaping the galaxy. The hot CGM may also reduce
the direct supply of infalling gas to the central part of the
galaxy. We estimate M CGM
max under the condition that the gas
cooling time exceeds the halo destruction timescale. M CGM
max
varies slowly with the redshift with its value ∼ 1012M⊙ in
the redshift range 0 − 5.
(iv) The hot CGM is more eﬀective than the infall in
the low redshift range 0-3.5 in counteracting the outﬂows
whereas the infall becomes more eﬀective at high redshift

Suppression of galactic outﬂows

7

(z > 3.5). The upper mass limits, for suppressing the out-
ﬂows, predicted by both the processes are comparable and
together determine the fate of the outﬂowing gas.

and M infall

(v) Comparison of M CGM
max

max with the charac-
teristic mass predicts the suppression of the outﬂows to be
important at low redshifts (z < 1 − 2), where the galaxies
with completely suppressed outﬂows constitute a signiﬁcant
fraction of the overall galaxy population. The fraction of
galaxies with unsuppressed outﬂows predicted by the simu-
lation decreases from ∼90% at z = 5 to ∼50% at z = 0. This
fraction is of order 60-70% in the era of high star formation
and hence high feedback activity (z ∼ 1− 2), likely aﬀecting
the enrichment history of the universe.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank the anonymous referee for valuable comments and
suggestions which helped in improving this paper. We also
thank Girish Kulkarni and Kartick C. Sarkar for helpfull dis-
cussions. PS acknowledges the hospitality of IISER, Mohali.

REFERENCES

Anderson M. E., Bregman J. N., 2011, ApJ, 737, 22
Anderson M. E., Bregman J. N., Dai X., 2013, ApJ, 762, 106
Bagla J. S., 2002, Journal of Astrophysics and Astronomy, 23,

185

Bagla J. S., Prasad J., 2006, MNRAS, 370, 993
Behroozi P. S., Wechsler R. H., Conroy C., 2013, ApJ, 770, 57
Birnboim Y., Dekel A., 2003, MNRAS, 345, 349
Bogd´an ´A., Forman W. R., Kraft R. P., Jones C., 2013a, ApJ,
772, 98
Bogd´an ´A. et al., 2013b, ApJ, 772, 97
Croton D. J. et al., 2006, MNRAS, 365, 11
Dai X., Anderson M. E., Bregman J. N., Miller J. M., 2012, ApJ,

755, 107

Danovich M., Dekel A., Hahn O., Ceverino D., Primack J., 2015,

MNRAS, 449, 2087

Danovich M., Dekel A., Hahn O., Teyssier R., 2012, MNRAS,

422, 1732

Dav´e R., Oppenheimer B. D., 2007, MNRAS, 374, 427
Dav´e R., Oppenheimer B. D., Finlator K., 2011, MNRAS, 415,

11

Davis M., Efstathiou G., Frenk C. S., White S. D. M., 1985,

ApJ, 292, 371

Dekel A., Birnboim Y., 2006, MNRAS, 368, 2
Dekel A. et al., 2009, Nature, 457, 451
Dekel A., Sari R., Ceverino D., 2009, ApJ, 703, 785
Gabor J. M., Bournaud F., 2014, MNRAS, 437, L56
Gabor J. M., Dav´e R., 2015, MNRAS, 447, 374
Goerdt T., Ceverino D., 2015, MNRAS, 450, 3359
Kereˇs D., Katz N., Weinberg D. H., Dav´e R., 2005, MNRAS,

363, 2

Khandai N., Bagla J. S., 2009, Research in Astronomy and As-

trophysics, 9, 861

Komatsu E. et al., 2009, ApJS, 180, 330
Marinacci F., Binney J., Fraternali F., Nipoti C., Ciotti L., Lon-

drillo P., 2010, MNRAS, 404, 1464

Mathes N. L., Churchill C. W., Kacprzak G. G., Nielsen N. M.,
Trujillo-Gomez S., Charlton J., Muzahid S., 2014, ApJ, 792,
128

Mu˜noz-Cuartas J. C., Macci`o A. V., Gottl¨ober S., Dutton A. A.,

2011, MNRAS, 411, 584

8

Singh et al.

Nelson D., Genel S., Pillepich A., Vogelsberger M., Springel V.,

Hernquist L., 2015a, arXiv:1503.02665

Nelson D., Genel S., Vogelsberger M., Springel V., Sijacki D.,

Torrey P., Hernquist L., 2015b, MNRAS, 448, 59

Nelson D., Vogelsberger M., Genel S., Sijacki D., Kereˇs D.,

Springel V., Hernquist L., 2013, MNRAS, 429, 3353

Oppenheimer B. D., Dav´e R., Kereˇs D., Fardal M., Katz N.,

Kollmeier J. A., Weinberg D. H., 2010, MNRAS, 406, 2325

Rees M. J., Ostriker J. P., 1977, MNRAS, 179, 541
Sarkar K. C., Nath B. B., Sharma P., Shchekinov Y., 2015, MN-

RAS, 448, 328

Sharma M., Nath B. B., 2013, ApJ, 763, 17
Sharma P., Roy A., Nath B. B., Shchekinov Y., 2014, MNRAS,

443, 3463

Silk J., 1977, ApJ, 211, 638
Singh P., Nath B. B., Majumdar S., Silk J., 2015, MNRAS, 448,

2384

Strickland D. K., Heckman T. M., 2009, ApJ, 697, 2030
Sutherland R. S., Dopita M. A., 1993, ApJS, 88, 253
Vasiliev E. O., Nath B. B., Shchekinov Y., 2015, MNRAS, 446,

1703

Vogelsberger M., Genel S., Sijacki D., Torrey P., Springel V.,

Hernquist L., 2013, MNRAS, 436, 3031

Werk J. K. et al., 2014, ApJ, 792, 8

