6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
1

 
 
]
T
E
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
0
3
5
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

A Vertical Channel Model of Molecular Communication

based on Alcohol Molecules

PengFei Lu

School of Computer Science
Shaanxi Normal University

Xi’an, Shaanxi, China

jacinto@snnu.edu.cn

Bo Liu

Science

School of Systems Information

Future University Hakodate

Hokkaido, Japan

boliujsj@gmail.com

Yang You

School of Computer Science
Shaanxi Normal University

Xi’an, Shaanxi, China

youyang@snnu.edu.cn

ZhenQiang Wu

School of Computer Science
Shaanxi Normal University

Xi’an, Shaanxi, China

zqiangwu@snnu.edu.cn

ABSTRACT
The study of Molecular Communication(MC) is more and
more prevalence, and channel model of MC plays an im-
portant role in the MC System. Since diﬀerent propagation
environment and modulation techniques produce diﬀerent
channel model, most of the research about MC are in hori-
zontal direction,but in nature the communications between
nano machines are in short range and some of the infor-
mation transportation are in the vertical direction, such as
transpiration of plants, biological pump in ocean, and blood
transportation from heart to brain. Therefore, this paper
we propose a vertical channel model which nano-machines
communicate with each other in the vertical direction based
on pure diﬀusion. We ﬁrst propose a vertical molecular com-
munication model, we mainly considered the gravity as the
factor, though the channel model is also aﬀected by other
main factors, such as the ﬂow of the medium, the distance
between the transmitter and the receiver, the delay or sen-
sitivity of the transmitter and the receiver. Secondly, we
set up a test-bed for this vertical channel model, in order
to verify the diﬀerence between the theory result and the
experiment data. At last, we use the data we get from the
experiment and the non-linear least squares method to get
the parameters to make our channel model more accurate.

Keywords
Molecular Communication, Vertical Channel Model, test-
bed, gravity, non-linear least squares method

INTRODUCTION

1.
Nowadays, modern telecommunication system conveys most
information with electrical or electromagnetic signals. How-

ever, still there are many applications which are not con-
venient or appropriate for these technologies. For exam-
ple, the use of wireless communication inside networks of
tunnels, pipelines, or salt water environment, can be very
ineﬃcien [6]. As another example, with the dimensions of
the transmitter and receiver become smaller and smaller,
electromagnetic communication is extremely challenging be-
cause of constrains such as the ratio of the antenna size to
the wavelength of the electromagnetic signal [1].
Inspired by nature, one possible solution to these problems
is to use chemical signals as carriers of information, which
is called molecular communication(MC) [15]. In molecular
communication, a transmitter releases small particles such
as molecules or lipid vesicles into an aqueous or gaseous
medium, where the particles propagate until they arrive at
a receiver. The receiver then detects and decodes the infor-
mation encoded in these particles.Moreover, molecular com-
munication signals are biocompatible, and require very little
energy to generate and propagate. These properties makes
chemical signals ideal for many applications, such as biomed-
ical application, environment application, where the use of
electromagnetic signals are not possible or not desirable.
Although MC is present in nature and is used by micro-
organisms, it was only recently that engineering a MC sys-
tem has been proposed as means of communication at the
microscale [7, 9]. Macroscale MC was not even considered
until Dr.Nariman Farsad developed the ﬁrst macroscale test-
bed for MC [4].
In [4], Dr.Nariman Farsad developed the ﬁrst horizontal,
modular, and programmable platform for MC in macro-
scale, which makes a big leap in the development of Molec-
ular Communication. Nariman et al. elaborate on the hori-
zontal ﬂow assisted propagation of molecular communication
in a long range, but discusses little about the short range
of MC based on pure diﬀusion. In biological systems, the
communications between nano machines are in short range
in most situation, also particles(information molecules) are
precious resources, thus releasing large numbers of particles
at once is impractical, we need to consider limitations on the
transmission amount of the molecules. Also for the reason
that in the vertical direction, the receiver can receive the
peak value [8] of the information molecules. In nature there

are many examples of information transportation in the ver-
tical direction, such as transpiration [2] of plants, biological
pump [3] in ocean, biological nitrogen removal using a verti-
cally moving bioﬁlm system [19], and blood transportation
from heart to brain. Therefore, we need to consider both
pure diﬀusion and information transmission in the vertical
direction.
In this paper, we propose a channel model of the isopropyl
alcohol molecules’ propagation in the vertical direction. Also
we refer Nariman Farsad’s model to set up our new platform
to test the channel model we proposed. The test bed we de-
veloped only measures the peak of the transmission, which
is especially useful in biological system.
This paper is organised as follows. In Section 2, we describe
the Molecular Communication via Diﬀusion. In Section 3,
we describe the theory model and set up a test-bed of molec-
ular communication model. In Section 4, we ﬁrst analyse the
theory knowledge of MC via Diﬀusion, and then through
experiments, we showed the diﬀerence of experiment result
with the theory result, at last we use the non-linear least
squares curve ﬁtting method to get the parameters of the
coeﬃcients. Last in Section 5, we draw a conclusion of our
work.

2. MOLECULAR COMMUNICATION VIA

DIFFUSION

We model a communication system composed of a pair of de-
vices, each called a nanonetworking-enabled node(NeN,ie.,nano
node or nano robot)[22]. In Molecular Communication via
Diﬀusion(MCvD), the NeNs communicate with each other
through the propagation of certain molecules via diﬀusion[16,
17]. The Molecular Communication via Diﬀusion is depicted
as Fig. 2.

In a MCvD system, communication pairs are assumed to
be synchronized. Information is modulated on some of the
physical properties of messenger molecules, it can be the
number, type, or any other property of the messenger molecules.
The information messengers’ movement is modulated as ei-
ther Brownian motion or diﬀusion process.The motion is
governed by the combined forces due to thermal energy of
the medium. If we consider the diﬀusion process of parti-
cles starting from its transmitter, then the concentration at
distance d and time t is given as

f (d, t) =

M

(4πDt)n/2 exp(cid:20)−d2

4Dt(cid:21) [6]

t > 0 and d > 0 . (1)

where n and D are the dimension of the environment and
the diﬀusion coeﬃcient[18], and M stands for the amount of
molecules. D depends on temperature of the environment,
viscosity of the ﬂuid, and Stokes’ radius of the molecules[21].

3. A VERTICAL MODEL OF MOLECULAR

COMMUNICATION

3.1 Theory Model of the vertical Model
Since diﬀerent propagation scheme and modulation tech-
nique lead to diﬀerent channel model. Therefore, we propose
a new channel model, which looks like the following Fig. 2,
when in a vertical situation, the receiver can receive the peak
value [8] of the information molecules, which is very eﬀec-
tive for communication, and in biological, the information
molecules spread for every direction, and vertical diﬀusion
is one of the common phenomenon, nutrition is transmitted
in bloods of human or animals and pheromones are trans-
mitted in plants, both are also in this direction sometimes,
therefore, it’s necessary to research it.

Figure 1: MCvD system model in a 3-D environ-
ment[22]

The MCvD system has ﬁve main processes: encoding, send-
ing, propagation, reception, and decoding[12, 20]. During
the encoding process before modulating the symbols during
the sending process, may need some channel coding tech-
niques. After emitting the messenger molecules, the propa-
gation process plays an important part in transmitting the
messenger molecules to the receiver. When some messen-
gers molecules arrive at the receiver(ie., hit the receiver),
they will form chemical bonds with the receptors on the
surface of the receiver. And after the molecular messengers
hit the receiver they are removed from the channel and the
properties of these received molecules(e.g., concentration,
type)constitute the received signal. Demodulation function
takes place during the absorption process and it is followed
by decoding if a channel coding is employed.

Figure 2: The sketch model of Molecular Commu-
nication

For this situation, we consider the amount of the molecules
at diﬀerent time steps, and when the information molecules
are transmitted in the vertical direction, the channel is ba-
sically aﬀected by the transmitter and receiver’s delay, the
ﬂow of the medium, also we need to consider the gravity of
the mass molecules which we denote mg and we all known
mg is positive.
In the uniform acceleration motion,if we know the initial ve-
locity, the instant time , the we get the velocity of the entity

at time t from the following equation

v(t) = v0 + at

t ≥ 0 .

(2)

where v(t) is the velocity of the entity at time t, v0 is the
initial velocity, a is the acceleration, and a is either negative
or positive.
Similarly, we assume that the decrease of molecules is pro-
portion to gravity as time gone, also due to the ﬂow may
aﬀect the gravity, we denote the ﬁnal result of gravity as e,
the amount of the molecules which denotes as f (t) is at dif-
ferent time steps can be regard as the velocity of the entity
at time t, then we get the following equation

f (t) = C(t) − et

t > 0 .

(3)

where C(t) looks like the initial velocity in the uniform ac-
celeration, but it decreases with time .
Due to the ﬁrst part C(t), we should introduce several pa-
rameters to adjust the formula of (1) in 1-D[5], n equals 1,
then we will get the following formula

f (t) =

a
√t

exp(cid:20)−bd2

t (cid:21) − et

t > 0 .

(4)

Figure 3: A test-bed of Molecular Communication

where d is the distance between sender and receiver, and t
is the time, for parameter a corresponds to this part M
√4πD
of (1), which is related to the diﬀusion coeﬃcient and the
delay of transmitter and receiver, and b corresponds to the
part 1
4D of (1), which is aﬀected by the diﬀusion coeﬃcient,
for the parameter e is related to the diﬀusion coeﬃcient and
the gravity of molecules, also we assume that the variation
of gravity is a constant. For the value of the coeﬃcients, we
will discuss in Section. 4.2.

To perform some measurements, we separate the transmitter
and the receiver by 10 cm. Fig. 4 shows the analogy value of
alcohol molecules at the receiver side. We wait between each
trial until the initial analogy reading of the sensor drops to
about a ﬁxed number. Although it is extremely diﬃcult to
ﬁnd the exact cause of deviations between trials, some likely
causes are: the spray, which is not precise to spray the same
amount of alcohol for each trial; the ﬂow can be turbulent;
the sensor can be noisy; and other environment factors such
as random ﬂows in the room.

3.2 A test-bed of Molecular Communication
In this section, we introduce a test-bed of molecular com-
munication which is depicted as Fig. 3[23]. Our test-bed
refer to Dr.Nariman Farsad’s work[4, 10].The transmitter is
composed of a spray and a microcontroller. When an input
command is given to the microcontroller, the information is
converted into a binary stream, which can be transmitted
through diﬀerent modulation schemes by precisely control-
ling the spray. The chemical signals is used as the informa-
tion. When the spray releases these molecules, they prop-
agate through the medium(i.e.,air) until reach the receiver.
The receiver consists of an alcohol sensor and a microcon-
troller that reads the sensor data which displays on the LCD
screen. Since alcohol is used as carrier of information, MQ-
3 semiconducting metal oxide gas sensor is used for detec-
tion at the receiver. The microcontroller at the receiver side
reads the sensor data using an analogy to digital converter.
The data can then be analyzed and sent to a computer se-
rial port. It was shown that short text messages could be
transmitted across a room using this setup through concen-
tration shift keying[11]. In this work, we analyse the system
response of the platform of this test-bed.

 

Analog value

200

190

180

170

160

150

140

i

r
e
v
e
c
e
r
 
e
h

t
 
t

a

l

 
e
u
a
v
 
g
o
a
n
a
e
h
T

 

l

130

 
0

2

4

6

Time(s)

8

10

12

Figure 4: The analogy value at the receiver vs Time

4. EXPERIMENT MODEL AND FITTING

MODEL

In this section, we present the diﬀerence of the theoreti-
cal models and the experimental data from our platform,
also according to the experiment data and non-linear least
squares method, we ﬁtted a more accurate model for our
test-bed.

4.1 Models Versus Experimental Results
In this section we compare the previously published theoret-
ical models to the experimental results obtained using the
table-top platform. To demonstrate this, we set the distance
of the transmitter and the receiver is 10 cm. Table 1 sum-
marizes all the experiment parameters we will use in our
test-bed.

Table 1: The Experiment Parameters

Parameters

Values

Distance between a transmitter and a receiver
Spraying during for each bit
Diﬀusion coeﬃcient of isopropyl alcohol
Temperature(room temperature)

10cm
100ms
0.0993cm2/s[13]
25◦C=298K

If these parameters are used in the theoretical formula, the
system response can be calculated. Because the number
of particles released by the transmitter is not known, we
assume M = 1 and then normalize the plots by dividing
them by their respective maximum values. Similarly the sys-
tem responses obtained from experiment result is normalized
with its maximum. By normalizing the plots, we compare
only the shape of the theoretical results with the shape of
the experimental results. For our experimental system re-
sponse, we average the response of 6 diﬀerent experimental
trials to produce a single plot. As Fig. 5, shows the the-
ory simulation versus the experiment simulation at diﬀerent
time steps.

 

experiment result
fit result

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

e
s
n
o
p
s
e
R
m
e
t
s
y
S

 

theoretical model reaches its peak early than the experiment
model. Then we need to consider some delay in the experi-
ment model. The sensitivity of transmitter and receiver and
the ﬂow of the medium may lead to the delay. we may re-
duce the delay when we adjust the formula of the theoretical
by adding or adjust some parameters, we may get a curve
as the experimental curve. For the details we will discuss in
the Section. 4.2.

4.2 Fitting model
For the reason that only the ﬁrst few seconds of the pulse
response is typically used in practice for information trans-
mission[4] in the molecular communication. Also, in order
to get a better and more accurate result, we use the ﬁrst
11 seconds of sensor measurements to ﬁt the curve of the
proposed model.
Through the experiment data we got from our test-bed, we
use non-linear least square curve ﬁtting method [14] to esti-
mate the coeﬃcients of a, b, e. In Fig. 6 shows the 6 trials
of the experiments and the ﬁtting models from the data we
get. And the red dot is the data from the test-bed, and the
green line is the ﬁtting models.

Figure 6: System response and the ﬁtted model for
set of 6 trials

−0.2

 
0

2

4

6

Time(s)

8

10

12

Figure 5: Comparison of the experimental data and
theoretical models

After six trials of experiments, we choose coeﬃcients of a,
b, e as the average of each trials. Then we get coeﬃcients of
a, b, e are 1.8788,60.4567,0.0301 respectively. Then we get
the following formula from(4).

f (t) =

1.8788
√t

exp(cid:20)−60.4567d2

t

(cid:21) − 0.0301t

t > 0 .

(5)

According to the shape of the two curves, we ﬁnd that the

Again we do the experiment with the coeﬃcients we get, and
plot the results as the Fig. 7.

Fitted curve with average coefficient VS Experiment curve

 

Experiment result
Fitted result

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

e
s
n
o
p
s
e
R
m
e

 

t
s
y
S

0

 
0

2

4

6

Time(s)

8

10

12

Figure 7: The ﬁtting line vs the experiment line

5. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we showed a vertical MC channel model based
on the alcohol molecules. From Fig.5, we know that the
experiment results have some diﬀerence from the theory re-
sults, but through comparing the model (4) to the experi-
ments results, we can get the coeﬃcient of the new model(5)
through experiments with non-linear least squares method.
As the Fig.4 show, the variation of the analogy value with
time ﬁts the power low after the maximum value.
For future work, we will research the diﬀerence of theoreti-
cally from the experiment results, how the distance between
transmitter and receiver aﬀect on the eﬃciency of MC, also
its application in blood transmission from heart to brain.

6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Fundamental Research Funds
for the Central Universities(GK201402038,GK201501008) and
the National Natural Science Foundation of China(61173190).

7. REFERENCES
[1] I. F. Akyildiz, F. Brunetti, and C. Bl´azquez.

Nanonetworks: A new communication paradigm.
Computer Networks, 52(12):2260–2279, 2008.

[2] C. T. de Wit et al. Transpiration and crop yields.

Versl. Landbouwk. Onderz. 64. 6., 1958.

[3] H. W. Ducklow, D. K. Steinberg, and K. O. Buesseler.

Upper ocean carbon export and the biological pump.
Oceanography-Washington DC-Oceanography Society,
14(4):50–58, 2001.

[4] N. Farsad, W. Guo, and A. Eckford. Table-top

molecular communication: Text messages through
chemical signals. CoRR, abs/1310.0070, 2013.

[5] N. Farsad, N.-R. Kim, A. Eckford, and C.-B. Chae.

Channel and noise models for nonlinear molecular
communication systems. IEEE Journal on Selected
Areas in Communications, 32(12):2392–2401, 2014.

[6] N. Farsad, H. B. Yilmaz, A. Eckford, C.-B. Chae, and

W. Guo. A comprehensive survey of recent
advancements in molecular communication. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1410.4258, 2014.

[7] R. A. Freitas. Nanomedicine, volume 1: basic

capabilities. Landes Bioscience, 1999.

[8] N. Garralda, I. Llatser, A. Cabellos-Aparicio, and

M. Pierobon. Simulation-based evaluation of the
diﬀusion-based physical channel in molecular
nanonetworks. In 2011 IEEE Conference on Computer
Communications Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS),
pages 443–448. IEEE, 2011.

[9] S. Hiyama, Y. Moritani, T. Suda, R. Egashira,

A. Enomoto, M. Moore, and T. Nakano. Molecular
communication. Journal-Institute of Electronics
Information and Communication Engineers, 89(2):162,
2006.

[10] N.-R. Kim, N. Farsad, C.-B. Chae, and A. Eckford. A
universal channel model for molecular communication
systems with metal-oxide detectors. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1503.02809, 2015.

[11] M. S. Kuran, H. B. Yilmaz, T. Tugcu, and I. F.

Akyildiz. Modulation techniques for communication
via diﬀusion in nanonetworks. In 2011 IEEE
International Conference on Communications (ICC),
pages 1–5. IEEE, 2011.

[12] M. ¸S. Kuran, H. B. Yilmaz, T. Tugcu, and I. F.

Akyildiz. Interference eﬀects on modulation techniques
in diﬀusion based nanonetworks. Nano
Communication Networks, 3(1):65–73, 2012.

[13] G. Lugg. Diﬀusion coeﬃcients of some organic and

other vapors in air. Analytical Chemistry,
40(7):1072–1077, 1968.

[14] D. W. Marquardt. An algorithm for least-squares
estimation of nonlinear parameters. Journal of the
Society for Industrial & Applied Mathematics,
11(2):431–441, 1963.

[15] T. Nakano, A. Eckford, and T. Haraguchi. Molecular

communication. Cambridge University Press, 2013.

[16] M. Pierobon and I. F. Akyildiz. A physical end-to-end
model for molecular communication in nanonetworks.
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,
28(4):602–611, 2010.

[17] M. Pierobon and I. F. Akyildiz. A statistical–physical

model of interference in diﬀusion-based molecular
nanonetworks. IEEE Transactions on
Communications, 62(6):2085–2095, 2014.

[18] S. Redner. A guide to ﬁrst-passage processes.

Cambridge University Press, 2001.

[19] M. Rodgers and X.-M. Zhan. Biological nitrogen
removal using a vertically moving bioﬁlm system.
Bioresource technology, 93(3):313–319, 2004.

[20] B. Tepekule, A. E. Pusane, M. S. Kuran, and

T. Tugcu. A novel pre-equalization method for
molecular communication via diﬀusion in
nanonetworks. IEEE Communications Letters,
19(8):1311–1314, 2015.

[21] H. Tyrell and K. Harris. Diﬀusion in liquids: A

theoretical and experimental study. Butterworths
Monographs in Chemistry, Butterworths & Co Ltd,
London, England, 448, 1984.

[22] H. B. Yilmaz, A. C. Heren, T. Tugcu, and C.-B. Chae.

Three-dimensional channel characteristics for
molecular communications with an absorbing receiver.
IEEE Communications Letters, 18(6):929–932, 2014.

[23] Y. You. Optimization design and implementation of a
prototype system for molecular communication based
on chemical signal. Master’s thesis, Shaanxi Normal
University, 2015.

