6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
1

 
 
]
T
I
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
1
5
5
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

The three primary colors of mobile systems

Hui Liu, Fellow, IEEE, Zhiyong Chen, Member, IEEE, Liang Qian

Abstract

In this paper, we present the notion of “mobile 3C systems” in which the “Communications”,
“Computing”, and “Caching” (i.e., 3C) make up the three primary resources/funcationalties, akin to
the three primary colors, for a mobile system. We argue that in future mobile networks, the roles of
computing and caching are as intrinsic and essential as communications, and only the collective usage
of these three primary resources can support the sustainable growth of mobile systems. By deﬁning
the 3C resources in their canonical forms, we reveal the important fact that “caching” affects the
mobile system performance by introducing non-causality into the system, whereas “computing” achieves
capacity gains by performing logical operations across mobile system entities. Many existing capacity-
enhancing techniques such as coded multicast, collaborative transmissions, and proactive content pushing
can be cast into the native 3C framework for analytical tractability. We further illustrate the mobile 3C
concepts with practical examples, including a system on broadcast-unicast convergence for massive
media content delivery. The mobile 3C design paradigm opens up new possibilities as well as key
research problems bearing academic and practice signiﬁcance.

I. BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION

Since the introduction of commercial mobile cellular services in 1983 [1], substantial research
efforts have been invested in the advancement of mobile networks, most of which, are dedicated
to increasing the communication capability of the networks. Indeed, for early generation services
such as voice and texting, a higher link capacity or system throughput means better services and
more satisﬁed users, which in turn yields more revenues to the operators. Semantically, the term
“communications” in early generation mobile communications systems (e.g., GSM) can be inter-
preted as a description of the system’s core functionality or its service type - mobile telephony.
However, as the mobile network evolves, its service offerings have expanded without boundary.

The authors are with the Institute of Wireless Communications Technology (IWCT), Department of Electronic Engineering,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, P. R. China, also with Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center. Emails: {huiliu,
zhiyongchen, lqian}@sjtu.edu.cn. Z. Chen and Q. Liang as both the corresponding authors.

March 14, 2016

DRAFT

1

As a matter of fact, it is neither possible nor necessary to list all the services supported by the
mobile networks. Consequently, it is only reasonable to interpret the term “communications” as
a depiction of the mobile system’s core functionality, i.e., the ability to transmit and receive data
over a wireless environment. On the other hand, should the core functionality of future mobile
networks be limited to communications? Are there other capabilities that are equally important
and intrinsic to future mobile systems?

A. The growth of communications (1C) alone is not sustainable

Throughout the evolution of mobile systems, the emphasis has always be on improving the
communication capabilities such as the peak data rate, the minimum delay, and the spectrum
efﬁciency. Early breakthroughs in modulation, channel equalization and multiple-access technolo-
gies had fueled the ﬁrst and second generation cellular networks, whereas advances in channel
coding, MIMO, and OFDMA cornstoned the 3G and 4G systems. For the next generation mobile
network, the well published technical target is to increase the network capacity by a factor of 1000
beyond 4G, which theoretically could be achieved through the use of i) denser basestations, ii)
additional spectra, and iii) improved spectral efﬁciency. Unfortunately the nature of diminishing
return due to the Shannon law deems such gains unsustainable. Clearly, alternative solutions
are needed in mobile systems to achieve long-term sustainability.

Unlike the communication resource which is constrained by the available spectrum and power,
the computing and caching (i.e., memory) resources are both abundant, economical, and sus-
tainable. The growth of these “green” resources [2] has been following the Moore’s low for
the past 5 decades with little sign of slowing down. Various attempts have been made to
accommodate expanding mobile services through the use of sustainable, non-communication
resources. For example, to deliver multimedia contents (which constitute nearly 80% of the
mobile trafﬁc), proactive pushing through data caching has been proposed at both basestations
and mobile terminals. In addition to use caching to provide “individualized” services to mobile
users, savings in the communication resources can also achieved through “computing”, in which
contents intended for different mobile users are logically processed through coded multicasting
or similar techniques [3].

March 14, 2016

DRAFT

2

B. Mobile 3C is practically necessary and theoretically canonical

Communications-Computing: The beneﬁts of marrying communications with computing have
been studied in various forms within the information-technology communities. In 1984, EI Gamal
proposed an open problem [4] about the communication complexity of distributed computation
in a noisy broadcast network. The minimum of the total number of transmission required to
compute any functions in the noisy broadcast network was further derived by Gallager in 1988
[5]. In 2000, network coding was proposed by Ahlswede, Cai, Li, and Yeung [6], where algebraic
algorithms are applied to data to accumulate the various transmissions in the network. By
incorporating simple computing, network coding can improve the effective throughput without
extra communication bandwidth. In-network computation was studied in wireless sensor networks
by Kumar [7] to cooperatively compute a desired function at the destinations.

Communications-Caching: Content caching technologies are widely used in content delivery
networks (CDN), where contents are pushed and stored in different network locations so that
the content closer to the end users can be accessed for QoS optimization. [8] investigated the
potential of content pushing via broadcasting and showed that exponential gains in the number
of users supported can be achieved. Early work on coded multicast [3] shows the promise of
caching and centralized computing for bandwidth saving. More recently, potential techniques
for caching in both the core networks and mobile radio access networks have proposed for 5G
cellular systems [9], [10].

To date however, both caching and computing are viewed only as supplementary to the
communication functionality of mobile systems, and therefore play a secondary role in the
mainstream design efforts. The reasons are probably both historical and academic. Historically,
all services offered by legacy mobile systems assuming a “connection-based” architecture, there-
fore the quality of services depend entirely on the link capacity of the network. This will no
longer be the case in the so-called information-centric networking (ICN) being developed as
an alternative Internet architectures [11]. In ICN, content caching will become an integral part
of network, and the departure from connection-based services allows the wireless network to
perform hostless content delivery through in-network caching and named contents, enabling
the use of caching and computing throughout the network. On the academic side, the lack of
a uniﬁed theoretical framework (similar to that of the information theoretical framework for

March 14, 2016

DRAFT

3

Fig. 1. The native mobile 3C cube

analyzing the communication capacity) handicaps the integration of computing and caching into
mobile systems, as their theoretical beneﬁts are far from fully understood. Fundamental questions
yet to be answered include but not limited to the following:

• Are caching and computing only supplementary to a mobile system, or should they be
treated as intrinsic as communications and thus become the primary resources/functinalities
of a mobile network?

• How can the caching and computing resources be characterized analytically? What are the

appropriate metrics to measure the computing and caching resources?

• How can the mobile network capacity be determined when all 3C resources are included?

In this article, we argue in Section II that “Communications”, “Computing”, and “Caching”
(i.e., 3C) make up the three primary resources/functionarlities, akin to the three primary colors,
for a mobile system. The three types of resources must be treated as equally essential and intrinsic
in order for mobile systems to be scalable and sustainable. Instead of only the communication
dimension, the capabilities of future mobile systems should be visualized by a native mobile 3C
cube as depicted in Fig. 1, in which different services are supported by the 3C core functionalities.
In particular, we attempt to address the above questions by providing a clear deﬁnition
of each of the 3C resources/functionalities, including their metrics and modes of operations.

March 14, 2016

DRAFT

(cid:38)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:38)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:38)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)VoiceSMSMultimediaContentsVehicleIOT4

By formulating “caching” as a form of non-causal operations and “computing” as a form of
logic operations across information streams, we established the three native and complementary
operations for mobile 3C systems.

In Section III, we illustrate the roles of the 3C resources and their impact on mobile system
performance with two practical examples. The ﬁrst one involves a classic cellular system where
the 3C resources are exploited at both the basestations and terminals. The second example
concerns a space-terrestrial converged network for the purpose of massive content delivery over
vast areas. In both cases, the signiﬁcance of 3C is revealed under the uniﬁed view of the mobile
system native functionalities, i.e., communications, caching, and computing.

Given that fact that mobile 3C related research is still shaping, we discuss in Section IV key
open issues on fundamental theories such as the mobile 3C system capacity limits, as well as
practical areas such as the design tradeoffs and protocol supports for the purpose of realizing
the full potentials of mobile 3C systems. The paper is then concluded in Section V.

II. A MOBILE SYSTEM IN ITS NATIVE FORM

The relentless pursuit of higher data rate and system capacity has led to many technological
breakthroughs. Owing to space limitations, we are unable to list all the relevant details here;
sufﬁce to say that almost all the major advances focused on the “communications” aspect of the
mobile systems. As a matter of fact, in the latest technical outlook for the 5th generation mobile
networks, the emphasis on higher communication capacity is highlighted by the so-called “5G
HyperService Cube” [12], in which the design objectives of three key communication parameters,
Links [Per Km2], Delay [ms], and Throughput [Kbps/Km], are explicitly deﬁned [12].

A. The three primary resources in mobile systems

While the pivotal role of link capability cannot be overemphasized, strictly speaking, only the
transmission of real-time data relies exclusively on the system’s communication functionarlity.
Many new services (even ”personalized” services such as multimedia content delivery) can be
delivered through means other than connection-based transmission. Despite the abundancy of
literature on the use of computing and caching in wireless systems, the computing and caching
resources have yet to be regarded as essential to a wireless system as communications. On the
other hand, the major shift from connection-based services to content-centric services in mobile

March 14, 2016

DRAFT

5

networks makes it increasing evident that both caching and computing are essential in providing
diverse mobile services, just like the communication functionality.

Fig. 1 presents an alternative view of mobile systems where 3C, i.e., Communications, Caching
and Computing, are represented in the primary form for mobile systems. Heuristically the 3C
resources form a “native mobile 3C cube” within which different services can be provided. For
example, the traditional real-time, connection-based services such as voice calls rely exclusively
on the communication resource, thus operate the X-axis: communications. For multimedia content
delivery on the other hand, a service can be provided either through the exclusive use of
the communications resource (which is the main driver behind the all for 1000x increase in
system capacity), or by leveraging caching (i.e., operating along the Z-axis) and therefore less
communications resources [13]. Other services such as vehicle networks and Internet-of-Things
(IoT) will depend more heavily on the combination of communication and computing resources.

B. The deﬁnition of 3C

In order to analytically characterize the mobile 3C cube, we must ﬁrst deﬁne their metrics
and mode of operations so that the impact of 3C can be quantiﬁed. In the native 3C form,
the capability of the mobile network is determined by three vectors: C comm, C cache, and
C comp:

• Communications [C comm: bit/s/Hz]: the “communication vector” of the mobile system
pertains to its ability to deliver information streams over an imperfect channel with given
bandwidth and power. Its capability is measured by the data rate R (unit: bit per second
per Hz), whose relation with the system bandwidth and the signal power to noise ratio is
well understood by Shannon’s capacity formula. Note that communication operations, for
example, modulations and channel coding, only protect but do not alter the information
stream upon delivery.

• Caching [C cach: bytes]: the “caching vector” of the mobile system pertains to its ability to
buffer or store certain amount of information (i.e., bit streams) at nodes within the networks.
Its capability is typically measured by the memory size (unit: Bytes). While neither protect
nor alter the information streams, the caching operations introduce non causality or
time-reversal into the system, which in turn, increase the system’s capability to deliver
information over longer period of time.

March 14, 2016

DRAFT

6

• Computing [C comp: degree of computing = DoC]: the “computing vector” of the mobile
system pertains to its ability to perform logic or algebraic operations across information
streams. Unlike the communication or caching operations, the computing operations do
alter the information bits such that additional logic operations must be performed at
the destination in order to recover the original information streams. The computing
ability is measured by the number of information streams involved in the operations, which
we term the “degree-of-computing” (DoC).

It is important to differentiate the notion of “caching” and “computing” as the mobile primary
functionalities from those used in the computer science community. Traditionally the computer
performance is measured by ﬂops, or ﬂoating-point operations per second. However in the mobile
3C system, we are not concern with the amount of computations of a speciﬁc algorithm in ﬂops,
but rather computing affects the performance limit of the mobile system. In order to establish the
theoretical bound on the capacity gains due to the incorporation of computing, we measure the
computing functionality by the DoC, or the degree of logical operations. Such deﬁnition makes
the measure of computing resource algorithm independent. For example, if only one information
stream is operated upon, then the DoC = 1 and thus no computing resource is utilized in the
system. In this case, the mobile system reduces to the traditional communication mode, i.e., 1C.
On the other hand, when two or more information streams are jointed operated upon, as those
performed in network coding, then the DoC = 2+ of computing resource is exploited in the
system.

The native 3C resources and their combined effects can be illustrated with the following

example on coded multicasting, introduced by Maddha-Ali and Niessen in 2012 [3]:

March 14, 2016

DRAFT

7

Fig. 2.

3C in wireless coded multicasting

Fig. 2 depicts a scenario in which contents are delivered to 3 mobile users over a shared
wireless channel. Given a ﬁxed amount of power and bandwidth, the 1st primary resource of the
wireless system, i.e., communications, in normalized to unity: C comm =1. For a conventional
wireless system with no additional resources in the system, the instantaneous sum rate of three
mobile users, which is also the rate at which the maximum amount of contents can be delivered,
is upper limited at 1:

R1 + R2 + R3 ≤ 1.

(1)

Now consider the incorporation of the 2rd primary resource: caching at the user ends. In this
particular example, the caching size of all users is set at 2, i.e., C cach=2. As mentioned above,
caching increases the system capacity by introducing non-causality in the system. For example,
the amount of communication resources required to deliver 1 bit of content over T seconds is
r = 1/T bit/s/Hz. With caching on the other hand, the content delivery process can start at
−T seconds or earlier. Consequently the required communication resources to deliver the same
content reduces to r = 1/|[−T T ]| = 1/2T , effectively doubles the content delivery capability
without additional communication resources.

Now consider the addition of the 3rd primary resource: computing. In the case of code
multicast, computing is invoked to perform logical operations across content bits intended for all
three mobile users, which means C comp=3. This “computing gain” (or the centralized coding
gain as deﬁned in [3]) is calculated as

March 14, 2016

DRAFT

1

1 + N/(C comp × C cach)

,

8

(2)

where N denotes the number of contents in a server. Interestingly, the computing gain is nearly
linear with both C comp and C cach, as opposite to logarithmic in the case of communication
resources. When N (cid:29) C comp× C cach, the computing gain becomes C comp× C cach/N,
which means the system enjoys linear gain with respective to both C comp and C cach.

Three important observations can be drawn from the above example:

1) While each of the 3 primary resources plays a different role in the mobile systems, it is
their combined effects that lead to the gains in system capacity. The optimum operating
point depends on the particular service offering and the 3C resource constraints.

2) In contrast to the communication resource (bit/s/Hz), which value is a real number, both
caching (Bytes) and computing (DoC) are measured in integers. Such deﬁnitions not only
decouple caching and computing from bandwidth and power, but also make the theoretical
analysis more tractable.

3) Observe that in this particular case, the capability of content delivery is proportional to
C cach and C comp. In other cases, caching has been shown to provide exponential gains
in terms of system’s capacity to deliver massive contents.

III. FROM THEORY TO PRACTICE

In reality, many attempts on 3C collaborations already have been made in the mobile systems.
In this section we cast two practical mobile systems into the 3C framework. The reformulation
is not intended to reinvent the existing solutions, but to offer an alternative perspective and more
insights under the 3C model.

A. 3C in mobile cellular applications

Fig. 3 shows a typical mobile cellular system in which the 3C resources are exploited in
different stages. A simple mobile 1C network, as illustrated in Fig. 3(a), only utilizes the
communication resource and provides no caching ability at either the base stations or at the
user terminals. Functioning solely as a transceiver, each base station has to serve users’ requests
instantaneously over wireless channels and relay them directly to the core networks, resulting
in potential bottlenecks at both the backhaul and over-the-air trafﬁcs.

March 14, 2016

DRAFT

9

Fig. 3.

3C in mobile cellular systems

Fig. 3(b) depicts the scenario in which the caching resource is added at the basestations.
Accordingly, the system expands from 1C to 2C, which allows the network to store the popular
contents at the basestations. Now users requests can be directly served via the content cached
in the local storage instead of the backhaul. This caching mechanism dramatically decreases the
duplicated transmissions between the base station and the core network.

Basic on the deﬁnition of DoC in Section II-B, the DoC of both Fig. 3(a) and Fig. 3(b) is
only 1. That is, no computing resources is exploited in these settings. The multicell network can
further expand its capacity by increasing the DoC in a way illustrated in Figure 3 (c) where the
basestations are inter-connected with a backhaul link. Speciﬁcally, the basestations collaborate
and share the caching information among neighboring basestations. As a result, each base station
can serve a content from its local storage, or from a neighboring basestation, or from the core
network. The DoC in this case is deﬁned as the number of collaborative basestations from which
cached contents can be shared.

The incorporation of 3C has positive impact on all system performance parameters, including
the total number of terminals served under certain QoS constraints, the average delays for content
delivery, and bandwidth savings etc. Fig. 4 illustrates one of the performance improvements by
measuring the local trafﬁc percent with respect to the DoC and the cache ratio. The local
trafﬁc percent is deﬁned as the ratio of the amount of contents served from local storage to the
total amount of contents served. As one can see the local trafﬁc percent grows with increasing
caching capability and the DoC. The higher the DOC is, the larger beneﬁt caching brings. On

March 14, 2016

DRAFT

10

Fig. 4. Local trafﬁc percent vs. DoC and Caching Capability

the other hand when the network has small caching capacity, e.g., caching ratio < 0.01, the DoC
increase only leads to insigniﬁcant performance gains. The results reconﬁrm the importance of
simultaneous exploitation of all 3Cs in mobile networks.

B. 3C in converged mobile networks

In the subsection, we describe a novel network being designed under the mobile 3C frame-
work. The application of interest here is of massive multimedia content delivery for vast-area
mobile terminals, such as vehicles, drones, trains, ships and sensors, etc. The unique application
requires the soultion to be ubiquitous, scalable, and at the same time, economical. The existing
infrastructures that are readily available include the cellular networks, the terrestrial broadcasting,
the satellite broadcasting, and the satellite communications systems. Unfortunately none of these
systems, when works independently, can simultaneously meet all the stringent requirements. The
cellular networks for example, while capable of providing extremely high data rates, only covers
about 20% of the landmass, and thus are inadequate to serve vast areas. On the other hand,
the satellite-based solutions offer much broader coverage but are either limited in capacity or
intractability.

March 14, 2016

DRAFT

00.020.040.060.080.11234567800.20.40.60.81Cache Capability (cache ratio)Degree of Computing (DoC)Local traffic percent11

Fig. 5.

3C-enabled Convergence Networks

The above challenges are being tackled by a so-called “space-terrestrial, unicast-broadcast
convergence” (STUBC) system under development, see Figure 5. The STUBC maximizes the
strengths of individual mobile networks and overcome their limitations. Without getting into
details of the converged networks, it is sufﬁce to describe the solution as ”over-the top content
provision” (OCP) through dynamic utilization of the 3C resource within the heterogeneous
satellite and terrestrial networks. By exploiting the caching and computing resources, the strategy
can potentially ofﬂoad 80% the multimedia trafﬁcs onto the broadcast networks and provides
the rest of services though unicasting [8].

In order to collaboratively deliver contents across different networks, the STUBC system
augments the existing communication protocols with two modules for the purpose of exploiting
the heterogeneous 3C resources:

• Task Representation Module (TRM): The essence of the converged mobile 3C network
is to distribute content objects according to OCP’s requirements by leveraging all 3C
resources within the heterogeneous network. The purpose of the TRM is to provide task
proﬁles specifying the preferences of each content object distribution subtask, including

March 14, 2016

DRAFT

12

the types and the amount of resources needed, QoS constraints and preferred management
interfaces. The OCP could understand the popularity of each content object, among other
characteristics, which could in turn help the OCP generate the task proﬁle.

• Service Negotiation Module (SNM): The OCP attempts to deliver its modularized content
objects to users by issuing tasks, with the users’ context and popularity of each object
taken into account, to the heterogeneous network. Since the 3C resources are controlled by
individual networks, a SNM resides in between the OCP and the wireless heterogeneous
networks is needed to negotiate the use of 3C resources within each network for distributing
contents, based on the task proﬁle and the service level agreement provided by individual
wireless networks. After the negotiation process, the modularized objects can then be
distributed over the converged mobile network.

IV. OPEN ISSUES

The mobile 3C design paradigm opens up new possibilities as well as key research prob-
lems bearing academic and practice signiﬁcance. On the academic side, the classic information
theoretical model which has anchored many fundamental breakthroughs in mobile technologies
cannot be easily extended to mobile 3C systems. Similarly the wireless communications protocols
established for early generations of mobile networks will be insufﬁcient in exploiting the 3C
resources.

A.

The “3C capacity”: One of the most challenging tasks associated with mobile 3C
research is to determine its theoretical capacity. The problem is rather involved even
for relative simple scenario such as the one depicted in Fig. 3(b). The classic information
theoretical model that addresses instantaneous rate regions is not directly applicable
here, as it cannot adequately address the caching-induced non-causality within the
system. As a matter of fact, our recent study shows that the conventional notion of
rate capacity is unsuitable to describe the network’s capability to deliver non-private
contents for multiple users [13].
To measure the impact of caching in content delivery, a so-called “content rate” was
introduced to better measure the rate at which the amount of contents is successfully
delivered to users over the shared wireless channel [13].

March 14, 2016

DRAFT

13

.

(cid:80)K
k=1 |yk(tk)|
B×T

Deﬁnition 1: Given a ﬁxed amount of wireless resource B × T (bandwidth and time),
the content rate RC is deﬁned as the total amount of service packages successfully
delivered to the users: RC =
The study reveals that when the contents objects are neither private nor common, the
maximum content rate is achieved when the caching size reaches inﬁnity, whereas the
minimum content rate is determined by the classic information rate bound with zero
caching.
There exists a large literature on how the incorporation of computing affect the capacity
of the mobile network. Within these literature, however, there exists a contrast over the
explicit role of computing in capacity calculation. One subset of approaches is that
of network coding where the algebraic operations (i.e., computing) are distinguished
from the communication operations [6]. Others approaches, such as those of BTS
collaborative transmission [14] and distributed MIMO [15], do not decouple computing
vs. communications, as the two types of operations (i.e., channel coding and logic
operations across information streams) are intertwined. Clearly, a uniﬁed capacity
analysis in which the 3C resources are represented in the canonical form (as in Fig.1)
will carry tremendous theoretical value.
The 3C tradeoffs: In early sessions we show through examples that the same types
of services can be accomplished through different combinations of 3C resources, rep-
resented by an operating subspace inside the 3C cube. For example, volume contents
can be unicasted to mobile users upon requests as is performed in connection-based
wireless networks, leading to the maximum usage of the communication resources
but zero caching or computing. Alternatively, selected contents (especially the popular
ones) can be proactively pushed and cached at basestations and/or the user terminals,
effectively trading the scarce communications resources with the more abundant and
sustainable caching and computing resources.
Unfortunately for each service type (see Fig. 1), there exists such tradeoffs which
has to be individual analyzed against its associated performance measures and resource
constraints. While it is nontrivial to determine the “optimum” tradeoff in each cases, one
could argue that the Moore’s law strongly favorites the use of caching and computing
resources over the communication resource, at least in the foreseeable future.

B.

March 14, 2016

DRAFT

C.

14

Software deﬁned mobile 3C networks: By treating communications, computing and
caching all as primary and intrinsic resources within mobile systems, a fundamentally
different approach need to be adopted in the design of future generation networks.
Indeed, the attempt to dynamic allocate the communication resources (e.g., software
deﬁned networks - SDN) should be extended to both the caching and computing
resources, entailing an entirely different set of signalings and protocols. While such an
exercise is academically feasible, its practical implementation is particularly challenging
for two reasons.
First of all, none of the existing communication protocols allows direct access to
the contents themselves, and therefore hinders the exploitation of distributed caching
within the network. The inability of the mobile systems to sufﬁciently exploit the
content characteristics is in part attributable to the fact that traditional connection-based
protocols. The need of fully utilizing the caching resources for content distribution
has motivated the development of future network architectures based on the named
data objects (NDOs), which is commonly known as the information-centric networking
(ICN) [11]. However, the full integration of ICN with mobile network protocols seems
to be in distant future.
The second challenge ahead is mostly algorithmic. Conceptually, a software deﬁned
mobile networks with rich 3C resources would lead to substantial gains. However the
dynamic allocations of 3C resources, most of them distributed, has signiﬁcant implica-
tions on the signaling overhead, algorithm implement ability and network stability. Both
fruitful research activities and signiﬁcant industrial advancements along this direction
can be anticipated in coming years.

V. CONCLUSION

In this article, we have presented an alternative framework for mobile systems in which
communications, caching and computing (3C) are identiﬁed as the three primary resources or
functionalities. By formulating “caching” as a form of non-causal operations and “computing”
as a form of logic operations across information streams, we established the three native and
complementary operations for mobile 3C systems. The fact that two of the primary resources
are scalable and sustainable (i.e., not subject to the bandwidth and power constraints) suggests a

March 14, 2016

DRAFT

15

fundamentally different design paradigm for future mobile systems. We have shown with several
examples that, the uniﬁed view of the mobile system functionalities provides deep insights on
how the 3C resources could be utilized to impacts the overall system performance. This led to
a discussion of open issues for 3C mobile system, not only in fundamental theories such as
the mobile 3C system capacity, but also in practical areas such as design tradeoffs and protocol
supports for realizing the full potentials of mobile 3C systems.

REFERENCES

[1] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History of mobile phones.
[2] Z. Niu, “Tango: trafﬁc-aware network planning and green operation,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 18, no. 5, pp.

25–29, October 2011.

[3] M. Maddah-Ali and U. Niesen, “Fundamental limits of caching,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory,, vol. 60, no. 5,

pp. 2856–2867, May 2014.

[4] A. E. Gamal, Open problem presented at the 1984 Workshop on Speciﬁc Problems in Communication and Computation

sponsored by Bell Communication Research.

[5] R. Gallager, “Finding parity in a simple broadcast network,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 34, no. 2, pp.

176–180, Mar 1988.

[6] R. Ahlswede, N. Cai, S.-Y. Li, and R. Yeung, “Network information ﬂow,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory,

vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 1204–1216, Jul 2000.

[7] A. Giridhar and P. Kumar, “Computing and communicating functions over sensor networks,” IEEE Journal on Selected

Areas in Communications, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 755–764, April 2005.

[8] K. Wang, Z. Chen, and H. Liu, “Push-based wireless converged networks for massive multimedia content delivery,” IEEE

Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 2894–2905, May 2014.

[9] X. Wang, M. Chen, T. Taleb, A. Ksentini, and V. Leung, “Cache in the air: exploiting content caching and delivery

techniques for 5g systems,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 131–139, February 2014.

[10] K. Shanmugam, N. Golrezaei, A. Dimakis, A. Molisch, and G. Caire, “Femtocaching: Wireless content delivery through

distributed caching helpers,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 8402–8413, Dec 2013.

[11] G. Xylomenos, C. Ververidis, V. Siris, N. Fotiou, C. Tsilopoulos, X. Vasilakos, K. Katsaros, and G. Polyzos, “A survey of
information-centric networking research,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 1024–1049, Second
2014.

[12] Huawei, “5g: a technology vision,” White Paper, Nov. 2013.
[13] H. Liu, Z. Chen, X. Tian, X. Wang, and M. Tao, “On content-centric wireless delivery networks,” IEEE Wireless

Communications, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 118–125, December 2014.

[14] D. Gesbert, S. Hanly, H. Huang, S. Shamai Shitz, O. Simeone, and W. Yu, “Multi-cell mimo cooperative networks: A
new look at interference,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 28, no. 9, pp. 1380–1408, December
2010.

[15] W. Roh and A. Paulraj, “Mimo channel capacity for the distributed antenna,” in Proc. IEEE VTC 2002-Fall, vol. 2, 2002,

pp. 706–709.

March 14, 2016

DRAFT

