Large N limits in tensor models: Towards more universality classes of

colored triangulations in dimension d ≥ 2

Valentin Bonzom1, ∗

1LIPN, UMR CNRS 7030, Institut Galil´ee, Universit´e Paris 13, Sorbonne Paris Cit´e,

99, avenue Jean-Baptiste Cl´ement, 93430 Villetaneuse, France, EU

We review an approach which aims at studying discrete (pseudo–)manifolds in dimension d ≥ 2
and called random tensor models. More speciﬁcally, we insist on generalizing the two–dimensional
notion of p–angulations to higher dimensions. To do so, we consider families of triangulations built
out of simplices with colored faces. Those simplices can be glued to form new building blocks,
called bubbles which are pseudo–manifolds with boundaries. Bubbles can in turn be glued together
to form triangulations. The main challenge is to classify the triangulations built from a given set
of bubbles with respect to their numbers of bubbles and simplices of codimension two. While the
colored triangulations which maximize the number of simplices of codimension two at ﬁxed number
of simplices are series–parallel objects called melonic triangulations, this is not always true anymore
when restricting attention to colored triangulations built from speciﬁc bubbles. This opens up the
possibility of new universality classes of colored triangulations.

We review and extend three existing strategies to ﬁnd those universality classes. The ﬁrst two
strategies consist in building new bubbles from old ones for which the problem can be solved. The
third strategy is a bijection between those colored triangulations and stuﬀed, edge–colored maps,
which are some sort of hypermaps whose hyperedges are replaced with edge–colored maps. We then
show that the present approach can lead to enumeration results and identiﬁcation of universality
classes, by working out the example of quartic tensor models. They feature a tree–like phase, a
planar phase similar to two–dimensional quantum gravity and a phase transition between them
which is interpreted as a proliferation of baby universes.

While this work is written in the context of random tensors, it is almost exclusively of combina-
torial nature and we hope it is accessible to interested readers who are not familiar with random
matrices, tensors and quantum ﬁeld theory.

Keywords: Colored triangulations, stuﬀed maps, random tensors, random matrices, large N

I.

INTRODUCTION

A. Random matrices and combinatorial maps

Random matrix models are probability distributions for a random (typically Hermitian) matrix A of size N × N . It
takes the form exp−N Tr V (A) where V is typically a polynomial [1]. Expectations of unitary invariant polynomials
like Tr An are in fact generating functions for connected combinatorial maps rooted on an edge incident to a vertex
of degree n. We will be interested in generalizing this approach to higher dimensional objects, and more particularly
in generalizing the notion of 2p–angulation.

A combinatorial map M is a graph equipped with a cyclic order of the edges incident to each vertex. In other words,
each vertex is locally embedded in a small disc. A corner is the portion of the disc between two consecutive edges at a
vertex and we orient them counter–clockwise from one edge to the other. A face of M is a cycle formed by following
edges and corners counter–clockwise. The genus g(M ) of the map satisﬁes 2− 2g(M ) = F (M )− E(M ) + V (M ) where
F (M ), E(M ), V (M ) are the number of faces, edges and vertices of M , respectively. Topologically, this genus is the
smallest value of the genus of a surface on which M can be embedded without crossings. Combinatorial maps thus
deﬁne a notion of discrete surfaces which generalize triangulations.

Let us consider the following example of a random matrix model. Deﬁne the partition function

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
h
t
a
m

[
 
 

1
v
0
7
5
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Z(N, t) =

dA exp−N

,

(cid:16)

Tr A2 + t Tr A2p(cid:17)

(cid:90)
Z(N,t) exp−N(cid:0)Tr A2 + t Tr A2p(cid:1) deﬁnes a probability distribution, and

(1)

1

and free energy f (N, t) = ln Z(N, t). Then

∗ bonzom@lipn.univ-paris13.fr

the so–called n–point functions are the following expectations

1

Z(N, t)

dA Tr(An) e

−N (Tr A2+t Tr A2p)

2

(2)

(cid:104)Tr An(cid:105) =
(cid:88)

(cid:90)

(cid:90)

(cid:88)

To unravel the connection with combinatorial maps, one expands e−N Tr A2p
For the free energy, one gets

and commutes the sum with the integral.

f (N, t) = ln

(−N t)k

k!

k≥0

(cid:124)
(cid:125)
dA Tr(A2p)··· Tr(A2p)

(cid:123)(cid:122)

k times

−N Tr A2

e

.

(3)

It is thus suﬃcient to evaluate the expectation of the product (Tr(A2p))k in the Gaussian distribution. According
to Wick’s theorem, such an expectation is the sum over all pairings (i.e. perfect matchings) of the 2p × k copies of
A, weighted in a certain way (which we will not explain here). One represents each A2p as a vertex of degree 2p,
and a pairing consists in drawing an edge between two vertices when some of the As are paired. A careful inspection
of Wick’s theorem in the case of matrix variables reveals that the cyclic order of the edges around each vertex does
matter. That is, it is an expansion onto combinatorial maps with k vertices of degree 2p. Taking the logarithm then
restricts the sum over connected maps.

Let M2p be the set of connected maps with vertices of degree 2p. The free energy then expands as

f (N, t) =

M∈M2p

s(M )

1

N 2−2g(M ) (−t)V (M ),

(4)

where V (M ) is the number of vertices and s(M ) a symmetry factor. Therefore, random matrix models provide
generating functions of maps with prescribed vertex degrees, counted with respect to their genera and numbers of
vertices. Applying the same reasoning to the expectation (cid:104)Tr An(cid:105) leads to a sum over rooted maps, i.e. maps with a
distinguished oriented edge outgoing at a vertex of degree n (the root further kills the symmetry factor).

B. Colored triangulations with prescribed bubbles as generalizations of p–angulations

A p–angulation is a map in which all faces have degree (i.e. length) p. Duality turns p–angulations into maps with
vertices of degree p bijectively. Each face f of M is represented as a vertex f∗ of D(M ). When two faces f1, f2 share
2 . The order around a vertex f∗ is inherited
an edge in M , there is a dual edge in D(M ) which connects f∗
from the cyclic order in which the edges are encountered along f . Therefore one can consider the matrix model (1)
as a generating function of 2p–angulations.

1 and f∗

By generalizing the above approach to higher dimensions we mean introducing a family of higher dimensional
discrete manifolds (e.g. simplicial complexes) and their generating function as in (4). Any attempts to do so then
face the following challenges.

• Find an equivalent in some sense to the genus of a map (and we know topology in dimension higher than two
is not characterized by a single number). Maps with vertex degrees equal to 2p satisfy E(M ) = pV (M ), which
simpliﬁes Euler’s relation to

The fact that g(M ) ≥ 0 means that there is a bound on the number of faces which is linear in the number of
vertices. This is precisely the kind of equations we would like to (and will) extend to higher dimensions.

2 − 2g(M ) = F (M ) − (p − 1)V (M ) ≤ 2.

(5)

• Is there a generalization of random matrices to other random objects which generate a family of higher dimen-

sional discrete manifolds?

The answer to the second point is that random tensors do generate discrete (pseudo–)manifolds of dimensions higher
than 2 by means of the same mechanism as the one from (1) to (4), as shown in [2–4] all coming up in the early 90s.
However, the methods used in most matrix models, e.g. reduction to eigenvalues and orthogonal polynomials, are not
available to random tensors. It means that the analysis of those models has to rely on combinatorial methods. This
was a problem because those early attempts generate wild objects, which may not be “nice” cellular decompositions
of pseudo–manifolds [5], and whose combinatorics is therefore too diﬃcult to control.

The diﬃculty to control both the topology and the combinatorics of the objects generated by tensor models explains
that they lay dormant for twenty years. It was eventually realized that colored triangulations form a family of higher

3

FIG. 1. A 2p–angle, drawn in solid lines, with boundary edges of color 0 can be obtained as the gluing of 2p colored triangles.
The dashed lines represent the dual object with all the colors except 0, with a vertex for each triangle and an edge of color c
between two vertices if the two triangles are glued along an edge of color c.

dimensional triangulations which may be suitable to combinatorics. At least, they were designed in the context of
topology [6, 7], which solve part of the topological issues. It was shown that colored triangulations are piecewise–
linear pseudo–manifolds and all piecewise–linear manifolds admit colored triangulations. We refer to the review [8]
for details on the structures of colored triangulations, in particular in the context of tensor models.

Colored triangulations are gluings of colored simplices. A colored d–simplex is an abstract simplex of dimension
d with its d + 1 faces (i.e. boundary (d − 1)–simplices) colored from 0 to d. The coloring induces colorings on the
subsimplices. Indeed, a (d−2)–simplex is at the intersection of exactly two (d−1)–simplices and is therefore identiﬁed
by the couple of colors of those two (d − 1)–simplices. Similarly (d − 3)–simplices are identiﬁed by triplets of colors
and so on. In 3D for instance, the colors are 0, 1, 2, 3 on the four triangles of a tetrahedra. An edge is identiﬁed by a
couple of colors (those of the two triangles which meet at that edge) and vertices are identiﬁed by triplets of colors.
Those induced colorings provide a canonical gluing rule. Two d–simplices have to be glued by identifying two of
their (d − 1)–simplices. There are generally lots of ways to do so, but there is a unique way which respects all the
induced colorings. In 3D, that would mean identifying a triangle of color c ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3} with another one, such that
the edge of colors (c, c(cid:48)) for c(cid:48)
(cid:54)= c of one tetrahedron is identiﬁed with the edge of the same colors on the other
tetrahedron and similarly for the three vertices of the triangle.
The combinatorial upside is that colored triangulations can be represented using colored graphs, i.e. regular graphs
with colored edges.
Indeed, each simplex is represented by a vertex of the graph and there is an edge of color
c ∈ {0, . . . , d} between two vertices of the graph if the two corresponding d–simplices are glued along a (d − 1)–
simplex of color c. All the vertices have degree d + 1, which is the number of (d − 1)–simplices around a simplex, and
all edges incident at a vertex have distinct colors. A (d − 2)–simplex on the boundary of a d–simplex is identiﬁed by
a pair of colors. When that (d − 2)–simplex is shared with other d–simplices, it is still labeled by the same pair of
colors and it is identiﬁed in the colored graph by a path alternating the two colors. When the (d − 2)–simplex, with
colors (cc(cid:48)), is not on the boundary of the gluing, it is then represented in the graph as a cycle alternating the colors
c and c(cid:48). We call those cycles faces and they represent simplices of codimension two.

There is a tensor model which generates colored triangulations (or equivalently colored graphs) in any ﬁxed dimen-
sion d ≥ 2 [9]. Gurau was able to study its colored graphs combinatorially and proved this way that there is a linear
bound on the number of faces. The distance to the upper bound is measured by Gurau’s degree, which thus extends
the genus of maps. In quantum ﬁeld theory terminology it means that the tensor model admits a 1/N –expansion, i.e.
the free energy is bounded like f ≤ N D for some D, [10–12]. At d ≥ 3, the graphs which dominate at large N are
those which generalize the genus zero maps from d = 2. They are those which maximize the number of faces at ﬁxed
number of vertices, just like at d = 2. For d ≥ 3, it was shown that they are series–parallel graphs called melonic
graphs. They are in bijection with trees and their enumeration is straightforward [9]. Next–to–leading–order graphs
were discovered in [13] by Kaminsky, Oriti and Ryan, and eventually the complete classiﬁcation of colored graphs was
performed with respect to Gurau’s degree in [14] by Gurau and Schaeﬀer.

In contrast with [14] in which the set of all colored graphs is considered, we wish to study generalizations of 2p–
angulations which only correspond to a subset of colored graphs. A 2p–angulation is a gluing of 2p–angles, each of
which can be seen as a gluing of 2p triangles by adding a vertex in the center of each 2p–angle. It can be done using
colored triangles, so that the edges of color 0 form the boundary of the 2p–angle, see Figure 1.

In higher dimensions, a bubble is a gluing of colored d–simplices whose boundary consists of all (d − 1)–simplices
of color 0. The choice of the color 0 is arbitrary, the idea begin that all (d − 1)–simplices are shared between two
simplices expect for those of a given color which then form the boundary. The topology of such a gluing is always a
disc in two dimensions, but it is typically not a ball in higher dimensions, hence the denomination of bubble instead.
A bubble can then be represented as a connected colored graph with all the colors except 0, as shown in Figure 2.
The generalization of the notion of 2p–angulation which we propose to study consists in choosing a bubble B, and
constructing all colored graphs whose bubbles (i.e. maximal subgraphs with all colors but 0) are copies of B. This
means taking some copies of B and adding the color 0 to all vertices so as to get a connected graph. We denote this
set of colored graphs G(B). Interestingly, this set is the one generated by random tensor models in a natural way [15].

0000001112224

FIG. 2. On the left is a three–dimensional bubble: a colored bi–pyramid, consisting of 8 tetrahedra, four forming an upward
pyramid, four others forming a downward pyramid, and the two pyramids glued to each other, such that all triangles on the
boundary have color 0. On the right is its the dual colored graph: a vertex for each tetrahedron and an edge of color c = 1, 2, 3
when two tetrahedra are glued along a triangle of color c.

When going from a random matrix with distribution of the form exp−N Tr V (A) for a polynomial V to a random
tensor T with a distribution of the form exp−Φ(T ), it is necessary to specify the admissible forms of Φ. It turns out
that restricting oneself to polynomials invariant under the natural action of d copies of the unitary group is equivalent
(via the same steps as from (1) to (4)) to considering the generating functions of colored graphs whose bubbles are
prescribed by the choice of Φ. In particular there is a ΦB such that

(cid:88)

1

N d−ω(G)tb(G),

(6)

(cid:90)

ln

dT dT exp−N d−1ΦB(T, T ; t) =

G∈G(B)

s(G)

where we use a complex random tensor with d indices ranging from 1 to N and its complex conjugate T . Here
ω(G) ≥ 0 is Gurau’s degree of G and t counts the graphs with respect to the number b(G) of copies of B in G.
On one hand, in order to saturate Gurau’s degree, i.e. ω(G) = 0, the allowed bubbles B must be of the melonic
type. This is very restrictive and leads to branched–polymer (i.e. tree–like) behaviors [15, 16]. This suggests that
in order to ﬁnd more interesting behaviors, one has to study graphs of non–vanishing Gurau’s degree, built from
non–melonic bubbles. However, a naive application of the Gurau–Schaeﬀer classiﬁcation [14] suggests that for most
choices of B, there is always a ﬁnite number of graphs of G(B) at ﬁxed Gurau’s degree. This implies that there is no
“large number of bubbles” limit at ﬁxed Gurau’s degree.
It means that if one insists on exploring tensor models and colored triangulations using the generalization of 2p–
angulations provided by the set G(B), this is a whole new combinatorial analysis which has to be performed. The
key point is to modify Gurau’s degree and deﬁne a B–degree which depends on the choice of B, such that there are
inﬁnitely many graphs at ﬁxed degree or at least in the large N limit (minimal B–degree). When this is achieved for
a bubble B, we say that it admits an enhancement.

universality class of the continuum limit.

Then the generating function of the graphs with minimal degree can be studied. Its singularity corresponds to the
continuum (thermodynamical) limit of the model where the number of bubbles becomes arbitrarily large. It typically

behaves like (tc − t)2−γ where γ is the entropy exponent. It is the critical exponent which (partly) characterizes the
The entropy exponent of melonic graphs is γmelons = 1/2, typical of trees, and it is γplanar = −1/2 for random
planar maps. We will see that tensor models equipped with diﬀerent bubbles can reproduce both those behaviors
as well as the proliferation of baby universes observed in multi–trace matrix models [17–21] with γ = 1/3 (and all
the associated multi–critical behaviors which we will not further mention). This will be done very naturally with the
“simplest” bubbles (those on four vertices).

The organization is as follows.

In Section II we review the framework of tensor models and its connection to
bubbles and colored graphs. Gurau’s degree theorem is given in Section III. While it reduces to standard results
on combinatorial maps for d = 2, we explain Gurau’s universality theorem for large random tensors [22] and its
application to the large N enumeration of melonic graphs for d ≥ 3 [15]. We then start the exploration of other
large N limits for tensor models in Section IV. We deﬁne enhancements and formulate the combinatorial problem
necessary to ﬁnd enhancements: ﬁnd the colored graphs in G(B) which maximize the number of faces at ﬁxed number
of bubbles. Three strategies are then provided to ﬁnd enhancements. The ﬁrst two of them consist in ﬁnding new
enhancements from existing ones, while the third strategy is a true new combinatorial approach to the issue. Those
strategies are the following three.

• New bubbles, with new enhancements, can be created by gluing bubbles whose enhancements are known. We
call this inherited enhancements. This gluing of bubbles increases the number of vertices of the bubbles. This

0000003333111122220033331112222strategy was used in [23] and [24] to get results for bubbles with more than four vertices (thus going beyond the
quartic tensor models), but it has not been presented as such yet. We do so in Section V.

5

• The strategy presented in Section VI consists in looking at sub-bubbles forming a partition of a bubble.

If
the enhancements of the sub–bubbles are known, the enhancement of the bubble itself can be found. This is
equivalent to thinking of colored graphs in dimension d as superpositions of subgraphs with dimensions ∆i, such

i ∆i = d. It extends the 1/N –expansions of [25] to non–trivial enhancements.

that(cid:80)

• The third strategy is a bijection. Since the challenge is to study faces of colored graphs, it would be enlightening
to ﬁnd a bijection with maps for which faces are well–controlled. This would also help understand the complexity
of combinatorics on objects of dimension d ≥ 3 with respect to d = 2. We present in Section VII a bijection
introduced in [26] which maps the set G(B) to some extension of edge–colored hypermaps where hyperedges
are replaced with a “stuﬃng” i.e. a prescribed edge–colored map. This bijection has made it possible to ﬁnd
enhancements and perform the enumeration of the graphs which maximize the number of faces beyond the case
of bubbles with four vertices and beyond melonic bubbles.

Finally, we show in Section VIII that the bijection enables to perform enumeration. We do so on the quartic models
to keep things simple and also because in that case there are several coupling constants to play with and we can have
an explicit algebraic description of the generating function. We ﬁnd in particular the exponents γ = 1/2, 1/3,−1/2
very naturally.
Although the presentation highlights the point of view of random tensor models, the main technique is combinatorics.
In fact random tensors and matrices are barely used beyond Section II. We even hope that readers who are unfamiliar
with tensor models and quantum ﬁeld theory methods can accept the results coming from those ﬁelds and go through
to the purely combinatorial parts.

II. RANDOM TENSOR MODELS

The framework is the one introduced in [15], with an additional freedom on the N –dependence.

A. Bubbles and tensorial invariants

In matrix models, both the potential of the model and the observables are (typically) unitary invariant quantities,
e.g. Tr(M M†)p. To generalize this, we introduce tensorial unitary invariants, or simply invariants. An invariant is
a polynomial in the tensor entries Ta1···ad and T a1···ad which is invariant under the following action of U (N )d,

Ta1···ad (cid:55)→

b1,...,bd

U (1)
a1b1 ··· U (d)

adbd

Tb1···bd ,

T a1···ad (cid:55)→

U (1)

a1b1 ··· U (d)

adbd Tb1···bd ,

(7)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

b1,...,bd

where U (1), . . . , U (d) are d independent unitary matrices.

The algebra of invariant polynomials is generated by a set of polynomials labeled by bubbles. A bubble is a
connected, bipartite graph, regular of degree d, whose edges must be colored with a color in {1, . . . , d}, and such that
all d colors are incident at each vertex (and is incident exactly once). Examples of bubbles are displayed in Figure 3.
To each bubble B, a polynomial PB(T, T ) is canonically associated, and the other way around. To do so, associate
to each white (black) vertex the tensor T (T ). If there is an edge of color c ∈ {1, . . . , d} between two vertices, one
identiﬁes the two indices in position c of the tensors corresponding to those two vertices, and sum the index from
ac=1 T···ac···T ···ac···. This way, it is easily seen that all indices are contracted between T s and T s in a

1 to N , (cid:80)N

position–preserving way which ensures unitary invariance.

There is a single quadratic invariant

T · T =

(cid:88)

a1,...,ad

Ta1···ad T a1···ad,

(8)

associated with the unique bubble on two vertices (both connected by d edges of all colors).

Special classes of bubbles include the melonic bubbles. To describe them, we recall that the (d − 1)–dipole of color
c is the (open) graph made of two vertices connected by the d − 1 edges of all colors except c, and half–edges of color

6

(a) The 2–vertex

bubble

(b) The
4–vertex
bubble Bc

(c) A 10–vertex bubble

at d = 4

FIG. 3. Here are some examples of bubbles. The dots indicate multiple edges.

c incident to both vertices. A melonic bubble on p + 2 vertices is obtained from a melonic bubble on p vertices by
cutting an edge of color c into two half–edges and gluing them back to the half–edges of the (d − 1)–dipole of color c,

B =

(cid:48)

B

=

→

(9)

The ﬁrst melonic graphs are obtained by doing so on the bubble with two vertices. One obtains a bubble Bc with
four vertices and c = 1, . . . , d. Identifying the bubble with the polynomial, we can write

PBc(T, T ) =

=

(cid:88)

a1,...,ad
b1,...,bd

Ta1···ac−1acac+1···ad T a1···ac−1bcac+1···ad Tb1···bc−1bcbc+1···bd T b1···bc−1acbc+1···bd .

(10)

Other remarkable bubbles are, for d even, the so-called necklaces. They are cycles of arbitrary length where two
adjacent vertices are connected by d/2 edges. Thus a white vertex receives the colors {i1, . . . , id/2} from a black vertex
and the complementary colors from another black vertex. Denoting M the N d/2 × N d/2–matrix between those two
sets of colors, the necklace of length 2p has associated polynomial Tr(M M†)p (see Equation (32)).
The counting of bubbles has been studied in [27]. Here we are interested in counting the diﬀerent ways to glue

bubbles together instead.

B. Tensor models and (d + 1)–colored graphs

Let I be a ﬁnite set, and {Bi}i∈I a set of bubbles. A tensor model is deﬁned by its partition function Z and free

energy f ,

(cid:90)

(cid:32)
−N d−1T · T −

(cid:88)

i∈I

(cid:33)

Z = exp f =

exp

N sitiPBi(T, T )

dT dT ,

(11)

and expectation of observables

(cid:104)PB(T, T )(cid:105) =

1
Z

(cid:90)

PB(T, T ) exp

(cid:32)

(cid:88)

i∈I

−N d−1T · T −

(cid:33)

N si tiPBi(T, T )

dT dT ,

(12)

which are all functions of the coupling constants {ti}i∈I . They also depend on the choice of the exponents {si}i∈I .
How to choose them is actually the main topic of the present article.

12dcc121111222213433334444ccccThe relationship with edge–colored graphs comes from applying Feynman’s expansion to (11) and (12). One expands
the exponentials of PBi (except the quadratic one) as power series and (illegally) commutes the sums with the integral.
Since each PBi is a polynomial in the entries of T, T , one ends up with moments of the Gaussian distribution,

(cid:90)

exp(cid:0)

−N d−1T · T(cid:1) (cid:89)

j

P

bij
Bij

(T, T ) dT dT .

(13)

7

They are evaluated thanks to Wick’s theorem, as sums over pairings of T s with T s. This can be represented graphically
as follows. The polynomials PBij
appearing in the Gaussian moment are represented by their bubbles (which carry
the colors from 1 to d). Since T s are white vertices and T s are black vertices, pairings between T s and T s are then
drawn as edges between black and white vertices. Those edges are assigned the color 0. This way, the calculation
expands onto graphs, which satisfy the same deﬁnition as that of bubbles, with the additional color 0 (and for the
calculation of Z, those graphs are not necessarily connected). We call them (d + 1)–colored graphs.

The free energy therefore expands onto connected (d + 1)–colored graphs, whose bubbles (i.e. maximally connected
subgraphs with colors 1, . . . , d) are chosen among the set {Bi}i∈I . We call this set of graphs G({Bi}i∈I ). Each graph
furthermore receives a weight. There is a free sum over a tensor index in position c from 1 to N for each cycle of
alternating colors 0 and c. We call such a cycle a face of color 0c. Moreover, each bubble of type Bi comes with a
weight N siti, i ∈ I and each edge of color 0 comes with N−(d−1). That gives

(cid:80)d
c=1 F0c(G)−(d−1)E(G)+(cid:80)

i∈I bi(G)si (cid:89)

(cid:88)

(14)

f =

G∈G({Bi})

1

s(G)

N

(−ti)bi(G).

i∈I

Here, F0c(G) denotes the number of faces of colors 0c of G, E(G) its number of edges of color 0, bi(G) its number of
bubbles of type Bi, and s(G) is a symmetry factor.

Similarly, we denote G({Bi}; B) the set of connected (d + 1)–colored graphs with a marked bubble B and all
other bubbles from the set {Bi}i∈I . The expectation of PB(T, T ) admits a Feynman expansion onto the graphs of
G({Bi}; B),

c=1 F0c(G)−(d−1)E(G)+(cid:80)
(cid:80)d

i∈I bi(G)si (cid:89)

(cid:88)

(cid:104)PB(T, T )(cid:105) =

G∈G({Bi};B)

1

s(G)

N

i∈I

(−ti)bi(G).
d(cid:88)

F0c(G)

c=1

(15)

(16)

It will be convenient to deﬁne the power of G ∈ G(B) as

δ{si}i∈I (G) = F (G) − (d − 1)E(G) +

bi(G)si,

with F (G) =

(cid:88)

i∈I

(G)(cid:81)

i∈I (−ti)bi(G).

being the total number of faces, so that a graph G in the above expansions like (14) is counted with a weight
N δ{si}i∈I

• A tensor model is said to have a 1/N –expansion if

f ≤ A N D,

for some N –independent quantities A, D, i.e. the exponent of N in the summand in (14) is bounded,

∃D

∀G ∈ G({Bi})

δ{si}i∈I (G) ≤ D.

(17)

(18)

• It is furthermore said that the large N limit is non-trivial if there is an inﬁnite family of graphs which contribute

to the limit limN→∞ f /N D.

Those two conditions (existence of a 1/N –expansion and non–triviality of the large N limit) will be used to determine
the values of the exponents {si}i∈I . Indeed, if some of the si are too large, the exponent of N in (14) can get larger
and larger as the number of bubbles grows. Requiring the existence of a 1/N –expansion enforces si not to be too
large. The reason the notion of non-trivial large N limit is introduced is that by taking the exponents si suﬃciently
small, one can easily built tensor models which do have a 1/N –expansion. However, the large N limits obtained
this way are typically uninteresting: only a ﬁnite number of graphs contributes to each order of the 1/N –expansion.
Then f /N D is a polynomial in the couplings {ti}. We are interested on the contrary in the cases where f develops
singularities. This is possible only when limN→∞ f /N D is an inﬁnite sum of graphs.

III. GURAU’S DEGREE THEOREM

8

Tensor models were revived thanks to Gurau’s discovery that there is a value of si which provides tensor models
with a 1/N –expansion. This was proved in [10–12] by a detailed analysis of all (d + 1)–colored graphs. It was then
adapted to the colored graphs G({Bi}) with prescribed bubbles in [15]. We state the theorem is this context.
Theorem 1. For any ﬁnite set of bubbles {Bi}i∈I and any graph G ∈ G({Bi}),
(cid:88)

d(cid:88)

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

δ{si=d−1}(G) =

F0c(G) − (d − 1)

E(G) −

bi(G)

≤ d.

(19)

Equivalently, one deﬁnes Gurau’s degree

(cid:16)

F0c(G) + (d − 1)

E(G) −

(cid:17)

bi(G)

,

(20)

ω(G) ≡ d −

c=1

d(cid:88)

c=1

i∈I

(cid:88)

i∈I

and the theorem states that ω(G) ≥ 0.
The key application of the theorem is to notice that with the choice si = d − 1 for all i ∈ I, each graph G in the
summand of (14) is weighted like N d−ω(G). In particular, the free energy is then bounded. In other words, choices

si ≤ d − 1

(21)

ensure the existence of the 1/N –expansion for any bubble. The bound obtained on the free energy is f ∼ N d. That
is natural since N d is the total number of degrees of freedom of the random tensor, and the free energy is extensive.
The question is then to ﬁnd whether the large N limit obtained for si = d − 1 is non–trivial. Before that, we show
that the above theorem encompasses the well–known 2D case, where the degree of a graph reduces to (twice) the
genus of a map.

A. The case d = 2: combinatorial maps

Bubbles at d = 2 are connected 2–colored graphs, hence they are cycles, characterized by their number of vertices.
A graph G ∈ G({Bp}p∈2N), where Bp is the cycle with 2p vertices, consists in cycles connected by edges of color 0.
First, one can represent G as a bipartite map Mcol(G) with colored edges. Indeed, draw G such that the cyclic,
counter–clockwise order of the colors around each black vertex is (0, 1, 2), and (0, 2, 1) around each white vertex.
The faces of the map obtained this way are by construction partitioned into three sets of colored faces: those with
alternating colors 01, colors 02 and colors 12. They are obviously in bijection with the corresponding faces of G.

Notice that the bubbles in G form a disjoint union of cycles which account for all edges of colors 1 and 2. Those
cycles are the faces of colors 12 in Mcol(G). They can be shrunk to a point, while keeping track of the cyclic order
of the edges of color 0 incident to the face. This way, one obtains for each face of colors 12 and degree 2p a locally–
embedded vertex of degree 2p. The remaining edges are the edges of color 0, whose color can now be erased. One
gets a combinatorial (non–colored) map M (G) whose vertices have the degrees of the original bubbles.

Topologically, M (G) is obtained from Mcol(G) through local homotopy transformations, so that they both have the

same genus g(M (G)).

This mapping can be inverted to associate a 3–colored graph to each map whose vertices have even degrees, up to

the symmetries which exchange black with white vertices and edges of colors 1 and 2.

Each graph G comes with an exponent of N , given in Equation (19). It can be rewritten in terms of the combinatorial

quantities of M (G),

F01(G) + F02(G) − E(G) +

(cid:88)

p≥2

bp(G) = F (M (G)) − E(M (G)) + V (M (G)) = 2 − 2 g(M (G)).

(22)

Indeed, the faces of M (G) are the faces of colors 01 and 02 of G, its edges are the edges of color 0 of G and its vertices
are the bubbles of G. Therefore, each graph in the Feynman expansion is weighted by N 2−2g(M (G)) where g(M (G))
is the genus of the map M (G). Gurau’s degree theorem thus reproduces at d = 2 the famous topological expansion
of matrix models. This means that it is a genuine generalization of the 2D case.

B. Large N limit for d ≥ 3

1. Melonicity

9

At d = 2, the large N limit thus consists in planar maps. However, the situation becomes drastically diﬀerent for
d ≥ 3. In Section II A we have deﬁned melonic bubbles. Melonic graphs are constructed exactly the same way with
one additional color. Notice that the bubbles of a melonic graph are melonic bubbles.
d(cid:88)
Theorem 2. Let G ∈ G({Bi}i∈I ). Then

(cid:88)

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

F0c(G) − (d − 1)

E(G) −

c=1

bi(G)

= d

i∈I

(which is the vanishing of Gurau’s degree) if and only if G is a melonic graph. This forces all bubbles appearing in G
to be melonic too.

The proof is given in [15]. This theorem shows that the large N limit obtained with si = d − 1 for all bubbles Bi

in the action is non–trivial only if some of those bubbles are melonic.

2. Universality

Tensor models can be solved at large N just like matrix models, using either direct combinatorial arguments [22],
or using the Schwinger–Dyson equations [28] (more details on the Schwinger–Dyson equations of tensor models can
be found in [29, 30]). One ﬁrst proves, using either methods, the following universality theorem, which ﬁrst appeared
in [22].

Theorem 3. Let B(cid:48) be a bubble with a (d− 1)–dipole and B the same bubble after the dipole removal, like in Equation

(9). Then,

(cid:104)PB(cid:48)(T, T )(cid:105) = G2({ti}i∈I ) (cid:104)PB(T, T )(cid:105)

where

G2({ti}i∈I ) =

1
N (cid:104)T · T(cid:105)

is the large N , 2–point function.

As a consequence, if B is melonic (meaning built out of recursive (d − 1)–dipole insertions), then

1
N (cid:104)PB(T, T )(cid:105) = G2({ti}i∈I )p(B),

(23)

(24)

where p(B) is the number of black vertices of B.

In the theorem and in the remaining of the section, all equalities hold in the large N limit. Equation (23) can be

explained as follows. Denote v, ¯v the white and black vertices of the (d−1)–dipole in B(cid:48). All graphs G ∈ G({Bi}i∈I ; B(cid:48))

which contribute to the expectation of PB(cid:48) at large N must contain a 2–point function between v and ¯v, i.e. a
contribution such that cutting the two edges of color 0 incident to v and ¯v disconnects G. The set of all contributions
surviving the large N limit therefore factorizes: all the 2–point functions connecting v to ¯v which sum up to G2({ti}i∈I ),
and all the large N contributions which do not see the dipole, i.e. the expectation of PB. Graphically,

(cid:42)

(cid:43)

(cid:104)PB(cid:48)(T, T )(cid:105) =

=

= G2({ti}i∈I )(cid:104)PB(T, T )(cid:105).

(25)

In fact the theorem in [22] shows that tensor models are Gaussian in the large N limit, with covariance given by G2,
i.e. all expectations factorize as products of the large N , 2–point function. In a Gaussian distribution, the expectation
of a polynomial reads as a sum over pairings of T s with T s. For a melonic bubble, there is a single pairing which
survives the large N limit. It can be found iteratively by pairing the vertices of each (d − 1)–dipole, then removing
those dipoles and repeating the process.
Note that (24) shows that the expectation of a melonic bubble only depends on its number of vertices, and not on

its particular structure.

B¯vvBG2¯vv3. Enumeration and continuum limit

10

If B is melonic, it has a (d − 1)–dipole with vertices v, ¯v. We denote B/(v, ¯v) the melonic bubble obtained by
replacing the dipole with an edge. We also deﬁne the gluings of bubbles: remove the vertex v of B, which leaves
half–edges of color 1, . . . , d hanging out from black vertices, and similarly remove a black vertex ¯vi from a bubble
Bi. One can connect the half–edges which have the same colors, so as to get a new (connected) bubble, denoted
B ·(v,¯vi) Bi. The gluing of two melonic bubbles still is melonic. The Schwinger–Dyson equations read [28]

(cid:104)PB/(v,¯v)(T, T )(cid:105) − (cid:104)PB(T, T )(cid:105) −

(cid:104)PB·(v,¯vi)Bi(T, T )(cid:105) = 0.

(26)

(cid:88)

i∈I

(cid:88)

ti

¯vi∈Bi

This a priori complicated set of equations simplify drastically thanks to the universality theorem (24), as all expecta-
tions then only depend on the numbers of vertices. They all collapse onto an equation which determines the 2–point
function,

1 − G2({ti}i∈I ) −

pi ti G2({ti}i∈I )pi = 0,

(27)

where pi is the number of black vertices of Bi.

This is a polynomial equation on G2. Let us rescale all the couplings {ti}i∈I with λ 1. Thus (dropping the explicit

dependence on the couplings except λ),

G2(λ) =

G∈G({Bi}i∈I

melonic with a marked edge

λb(G)(cid:89)

i∈I

(−ti)bi(G),

i.e. λ counts the melonic graphs G with a marked edge of color 0, with respect to the number of bubbles b(G). One
obtains

1 − G2(λ) − λ

pi ti G2(λ)pi = 0.

(29)

(cid:88)

i∈I

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

i∈I

(cid:112)

(28)

(30)

(31)

A standard theorem on algebraic generating functions [31] shows that for generic couplings, G2 has a dominant
singularity of the form

where λc is the radius of convergence of G2. The free energy f (λ) therefore behaves as

f (λ) ∼ (λc − λ)2−γ,

for γ =

1
2

.

G2(λ) ∼

λc − λ,

The critical exponent γ is known as the entropy exponent. The value 1/2 is quite universal for algebraic functions,
and typical of trees. γ = 1/2 is in fact known as the branched polymer exponent.
It was later proved that the
geometry of the melonic graphs also converges to that of the continuous random tree [16].

By tuning the couplings {ti}i∈I to speciﬁc values, one can in addition reach the multi–critical exponents of branched

polymers, γ = 1 − 1/m, for m integer and m ≥ 2, [15].

IV. NEW LARGE N LIMITS

For tensor models with melonic bubbles and s = d − 1,
• in combinatorial terms: melonic graphs (equivalent to trees) dominate the Feynman expansions of all expecta-

tions,

• in probabilistic terms: the large N limit is a Gaussian distribution with covariance G2.

1 It is also convenient and customary to instead rescale the action by a global parameter 1/λ, which turns the 1 in (27) into λ so that the

equation reads λ = F (G2) for some polynomial F . Such an equation is particularly easy to analyze.

11

Those are two related facts, and it is natural to expect that escaping the branched polymer behavior of melonic graphs
comes with a non–Gaussian large N limit.

This clearly has to be done using non–melonic bubbles. Theorems 1 and 2 however fall short of a description of
what happens with non–melonic bubbles. Indeed, one does not know the minimal value of the degrees of the graphs
built from arbitrary non–melonic bubbles. The degree certainly increases with the number of bubbles in the graphs.
If it does so linearly, one could then ﬁnd a value of si > d − 1 which would lead to a non–trivial large N limit.

A. An example

Let us ﬁrst show that the above scenario, that of a non–trivial, non–Gaussian large N limit, is valid on an example.
It relies on the fact that ordinary matrix models have non–branched polymer, non–Gaussian, large N limits. Moreover,
they can be turned to tensor models, by doubling the indices into pairs of indices for instance, MAB = Ta1a2a3a4, with
A = (a1, a3), B = (a2, a4). Through this correspondence one has

†

Tr(M M

)p = PBp (T, T ) =

where we represent the polynomial by its bubble Bp with 2p vertices, and thus

dM dM

†

e

p≥1 tp Tr(MM†)p

=

dT dT e

p≥2 tpPBp (T,T )).

Rescaling T, T by N 1/2 so that the factor in front of T · T becomes N d−1 at d = 4, as in (11) gives

dT dT exp

−N 3t1T · T +

N 2+ptpPBp (T, T )

.

(cid:90)

−N 2(cid:80)

(cid:90)

(cid:16)

(cid:90)

(cid:88)

p≥2

−N 2(t1T·T +(cid:80)

(cid:17)

(32)

(33)

(34)

In other words, we have found some exponents

(35)
for the bubbles Bp, p ≥ 2, such that i) there is a 1/N –expansion, ii) the large N limit is non–Gaussian (the set of
“planar” graphs, in the appropriate sense, as it can be solved as an ordinary matrix model [1]). Furthermore, the
trick we have just described can be applied to any tensor with an even number of indices (the matrix MAB would
have for instance an index A = (a1, a3, a5, . . . ) containing all the odd colors while B = (a2, a4, a6, . . . ) contains all the
even colors).

sp = p + 2 > d − 1,

If the exponent s = d − 1 of Theorem 1 had been used in front of the bubbles Bp shown in (32) in the action, the
large N limit would have been trivial (a Gaussian with covariance 1/t1) because they are not melonic. We can in fact
check that the degree of the graphs grows with the number of bubbles. From its deﬁnition, Gurau’s degree is

where bp(G) is the number of bubbles of type Bp in G, and we have used E(G) =(cid:80)

(p − 1)bp(G),

ω(G) = 4 −

F0c(G) + 3

c=1

p≥2 pbp(G). Notice that any graph
G can be obtained from a 3–colored graph with colors 0, 1, 2 by doubling the edges of colors 1 and 2. The corresponding
p≥2(p− 1)bp(G). Moreover,
3–colored graph represents a surface of genus g(G) with 2− 2g(G) = F01(G) + F02(G)−
by construction, F03(G) + F04(G) = F01(G) + F02(G), and then

(cid:80)

(36)

ω(G) = 4g(G) +

(p − 1)bp(G) ≥

(p − 1)bp(G).

(37)

4(cid:88)

(cid:88)

p≥2

(cid:88)

p≥2

(cid:88)

p≥2

It comes that among the set of planar graphs, the degree indeed increases linearly with the number of bubbles.
Choosing sp = p + 2 > d − 1 to be bubble–dependent and larger than d − 1 enhances the bubbles Bp so that
each graph G receives a weight N 4−4g(G) instead of N 4−ω(G). The large N limit consists of the set of graphs for
which g(G) = 0, which can be made of an arbitrary number of bubbles. Therefore the couplings tp contribute to a
non–trivial large N limit, while preserving the 1/N –expansion.

313124134B. The key question: do enhancements exist?

12

The key question we will henceforth discuss in this article is the following. Given a non–melonic bubble B, is there

a value of sB > d − 1 such that

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

fB(tB) = ln

dT dT exp

−N d−1T · T − N sB tB PB(T, T )

(cid:90)

(cid:88)

(38)

(39)

(40)

admits a 1/N –expansion? If so, we say that sB is the enhancement of B. When it exists, one can then ask what
the large N limit is? Also, if two bubbles have enhancements, can they be used together in the action like in (11)?

The above free energy has the Feynman expansion

(cid:80)d
c=1 F0c(G)−(d−1)E(G)+sB b(G) (−tB)b(G),

1

N

fB(tB) =

G∈G(B)

s(G)

where G(B) denotes the set of connected (d + 1)–colored graphs whose bubbles are copies of B, and b(G) is the
number of such bubbles in G. Assume that sB is ﬁxed so that fB is bounded by some ﬁxed power of N and also has
a non–trivial large N limit, i.e. there exists an inﬁnite family of graphs Gmax(B) maximizing the power of N . Then,
the enhancement is unique. Indeed, if  > 0 is added to sB, then the graphs in Gmax(B) will receive a weight which
grows like N b(G), i.e. which diverges with the number of bubbles. This would ruin the 1/N –expansion. Therefore,
there is a unique maximal enhancement.

Observe that E(G) = p(B)b(G), where p(B) denotes the number of black vertices of B. Thus, the number of edges

of color 0 is determined by and scales linearly with the number of bubbles. The power of a graph rewrites

(cid:2)(d − 1)p(B) − sB

(cid:3)b(G).

δsB (G) = F (G) −

As a consequence, establishing the existence of a 1/N –expansion of fB, which means ﬁnding a bound on fB, hence
on δsB (G), is equivalent to determining how the number of faces grows with the number of bubbles for
those graphs which maximize that number of faces at ﬁxed number of bubbles.

Therefore if for a given B one can identify combinatorially the graphs which maximize the number of faces at ﬁxed

number of bubbles, then one can ﬁnd the maximal value of the enhancement sB.

V. BUBBLE GLUING AND INHERITED ENHANCEMENTS

Before we present some strategies to ﬁnd the graphs which maximize the number of faces, let us assume that we
have done so for a given bubble B, and let us try and use this knowledge to identify the enhancements for other
bubbles.
More precisely, we assume that there exists sB such that fB admits a 1/N –expansion with a non–trivial large N
limit, i.e. δsB (G) in (40) is bounded for all G by δmax(B) = maxG(cid:48)∈G(B) δsB (G(cid:48)) and there is an inﬁnite family of
graphs Gmax(B) ⊂ G(B) whose graphs reach the bound on δsB (G),

Gmax(B) = {G ∈ G(B), δsB (G) = δmax(B)}.

(41)

in Gk(B) can be obtained (non–uniquely) by removing edges of color 0 from graphs in G(B).
faces F (H). Since it has free vertices, there are also paths alternating the colors 0 and c which are not closed.

Consider colored graphs with free vertices, i.e. vertices which do not have an incident edge of color 0 (but they
do have all the other colors 1, . . . , d). A bubble can thus be seen as a colored graph with only free vertices. Gluing
two bubbles with respectively 2p and 2p(cid:48) vertices via a single edge of color 0 leads to a graph with 2(p + p(cid:48)
− 1) free
vertices, and so on.
We denote Gk(B) the set of graphs whose bubbles are all copies of B and with 2k free vertices. Clearly, all graphs
Recall that a face of colors (0c) is a cycle alternating the colors 0 and c. If H ∈ Gk(B), we denote its number of
Any graph H ∈ Gk(B) deﬁnes naturally a bubble with 2k vertices which we denote ∂H and call the boundary
bubble of H. It is obtained in the following way. The vertices of ∂H are the free vertices of H (keeping the black
and white coloring). There is an edge of color c in ∂H between v and ¯v if there is a path alternating the colors 0 and
c between v and ¯v in H. The operation of taking the boundary bubble of two bubbles glued via an edge of color 0 is
one of the two operations necessary to formulate the Schwinger–Dyson equations of tensor models (analogous to the
loop equations of matrix models, or Tutte’s equations of combinatorial maps) [30].

Here, our interest in the boundary bubble is the following. Assume that H ∈ Gk(B) is a subgraph of G ∈ G(B). G
has two types of faces: those restricted to H (there are F (H) of them) and those which have at least one edge not in

13

H (F (G, H) = F (G) − F (H) of them). Let us form a new colored graph G(cid:48) with no free vertices by replacing H ⊂ G

with ∂H. Then, by deﬁnition of the boundary graph

(cid:48)
F (G

) = F (G, H).

(42)

In other words, the boundary graph ∂H keeps the structure seen by the rest of G while forgetting about the internal
structure of H (the non–free vertices).

Consider now H ∈ Gp(H)(B) with b(H) copies of B, and the set G(H) ⊂ G(B) obtained by gluing copies of H via
edges of color 0. Denote further Gmax(H) ⊂ Gmax(B) those which reach the maximal value of the power δsB and
assume that it is an inﬁnite set. It implies that we have found the graphs which maximize the number of faces at
ﬁxed number of bubbles for the bubble ∂H as well as its enhancement s∂H, as shown below.

First, the set G(∂H) can be seen as a subset of G(B). Let G ∈ G(∂H), then there exists ˜G in G(H) ⊂ G(B) such
that replacing all copies of H in ˜G with ∂H, one obtains G. We denote b(G) the number of copies of ∂H in G. Then

(43)

(44)

(45)

(46)

(47)

and moreover the number of copies of B in ˜G is b( ˜G) = b(G)b(H), hence

We know that F ( ˜G) is bounded like

We thus ﬁnd that the power

F (G) ≤

F (G) = F ( ˜G) − b(G)F (H).

(cid:2)(d − 1)p(B) − sB

(cid:3)b( ˜G) + δmax(B)

F ( ˜G) ≤

(cid:16)(cid:2)(d − 1)p(B) − sB

(cid:17)
(cid:3)b(H) − F (H)
(cid:2)(d − 1)p(∂H) − s∂H

(cid:3)b(G)

b(G) + δmax(B).

deﬁned with

s∂H = (d − 1)

p(∂H) − p(B)b(H)

+ sBb(H) + F (H),

δs∂H (G) = F (G) −

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

is bounded. There is moreover an inﬁnite family Gmax(∂H) of graphs which reach the maximal value of the power,
obtained by replacing H with ∂H in Gmax(H).
Notice that the above value of s∂H is inherited from B, i.e. deﬁned in a way which depends on the representative
H built from B, and not only on the bubble ∂H itself. However, uniqueness of the enhancement guarantees that we
would ﬁnd the same value of s∂H for any other way of representing this bubble as a boundary bubble.

Of course, the above reasoning applies with several bubbles {Bi}i∈I instead of the single bubble B. Similarly, one
can then add ∂H with its enhancement to the action including the bubbles {Bi}i∈I and still have a non–trivial large
N limit.
Since the technique we have presented here requires to generate ∂H as a boundary bubble from another bubble
B, one might ask what bubbles can be generated that way. The answer is all of them: the quartic model with its
d possible quartic melonic bubbles generate all bubbles as boundary bubbles, as shown in [26]. However, only the
melonic bubbles are boundary graphs of subgraphs in Gmax({Bi}) – all other bubbles are generated at higher orders of
the 1/N –expansion (and their enhancement cannot be found from the quartic model). Still, let us check our formula
(47) for the inherited enhancement on the melonic bubbles (for which we know that s = d − 1).
It is easy to see that a melonic bubble B with 2p vertices can be obtained as the boundary graph of a gluing
of quartic melonic bubbles in a tree–like fashion, meaning F (H) = 0 and b(H) = p − 1. Then formula (47) gives
s = (d − 1)(p − 2b(H)) + (d − 1)b(H) = d − 1, as expected.
Let us also derive the enhancements of the examples in Section IV A from the quartic case. Since those are not
melonic bubbles, we use the quartic “necklace” bubbles,



∂



=

(48)

31312134313124134Formula (47) is applied with p(∂H) = b(H) = p, F (H) = 2 (one face of colors (03) and one face of colors (01)) and
sB = 4 (the enhancement of the quartic necklace), and gives sp = −3p + 4p + 2 = p + 2, as already found from the
matrix model side in Equation (35).
It becomes more interesting when combining for instance melonic and necklace quartic bubbles. The graphs which
maximize the number of faces at ﬁxed number of bubbles were found in [24]. This then allowed the authors to ﬁnd
the enhancements and the graphs in Gmax for an inﬁnite family of bubbles which mixes melonic and necklace features
and called “trees of necklaces”. The enumeration of the graphs in Gmax (i.e. the calculation of the free energy) was
moreover performed in [24] (it leads to the same universality classes as those presented in Section VIII).

14

VI. ENHANCING BUBBLES USING COLOR SLICES

is always negative, (cid:80)6

There are some cases where the graphs which maximize the number of faces at ﬁxed number of bubbles are easily
found. Let us start with an example. Suppose we have a non–melonic bubble B at d = 6, with p(B) black vertices,
whose subgraph with colors 1, 2, 3 is melonic and whose subgraph with colors 4, 5, 6 is melonic too. Then, if sB = d−1,
the tensor model with that bubble as interaction is independent of the bubble coupling at large N because the degree
c=1 F0c(G) − 5(p(B) − 1)b(G) = 6 − ω(G) < 6. However, if B is such that G(B) contains
7–colored Feynman graphs G whose subgraphs G{1,2,3} with colors {0, 1, 2, 3} and G{4,5,6} with colors {0, 4, 5, 6} are
both melonic, then it is clear that they are the graphs which maximize the number of faces at ﬁxed number of bubbles.
Gurau’s degree formula for G{1,2,3} and G{4,5,6} gives

F01(G) + F02(G) + F03(G) = 2(p(B) − 1)b(G) + 3 − ω(G{1,2,3}),
F04(G) + F05(G) + F06(G) = 2(p(B) − 1)b(G) + 3 − ω(G{4,5,6}),

and therefore by summing both equations

F0c(G) − 4(p(B) − 1)b(G) = 6 − ω(G{1,2,3}) − ω(G{4,5,6}) ≤ 6.

We can write the left hand side in the same form as δsB (G),

F0c(G) − 4(p(B) − 1)b(G) =

F0c(G) − 5E(G) + (p(B) + 4)b(G),

6(cid:88)

c=1

6(cid:88)

c=1

(49)

(50)

(51)

6(cid:88)

c=1

L(cid:91)

k=1

from which we conclude that the enhancement for any bubble of this type is sB = p(B) + 4. If G(B) contains graphs
for which ω(G{1,2,3}) = ω(G{4,5,6}) = 0, then the large N limit is non–trivial.
The reason we could easily work out the above example is the partition of B into two subgraphs. To formalize this

situation, consider a bubble B and a partition of the set of colors

{1, . . . , d} =

λk,

(52)

such that:

1. Each λk, k = 1, . . . , L, has cardinality at least two, |λk| ≥ 2,
2. The subgraph of B with colors in λk, denoted Bλk , is connected.

This assumption can actually be relaxed but the analysis is then more involved [25]. Notice then that the
analysis which follows applies to any bubble. It may however not be conclusive as far as the enhancement is
concerned.

3. Assuming that assumption 2 holds, we can further assume that Bλk has an enhancement sλk . If assumption
2 is relaxed, one can always take sλk = |λk| − 1 as done originally in [25] to ensure the existence of the 1/N –
expansion. One could also try and adapt the analysis of [25] in case Bλk is not connected but each connected
piece has a given enhancement.

Let G ∈ G(B). We denote Gλk the subgraph of G with all edges of colors 0 and the edges with colors in λk. It is
connected because we have assumed that the restriction of B to λk is. Then the existence of the enhancement sλk
ensures that the number of faces with colors (0c) for c ∈ λk is bounded like in (40),

(cid:88)

c∈λk

F0c(G) =(cid:0)(|λk| − 1)p(B) − sλk

(cid:1)b(G) + δsλk

(Gλk ),

and dλk is the maximum of the power of Gλk ,

δsλk

(Gλk ) ≤ dk.

Summing over the parts of the partition, we get the following counting of the number of faces of G,

(cid:16)

L(cid:88)

(cid:17)

L(cid:88)

F0c(G) =

F0c(G) =

(d − L)p(B) −

sλk

b(G) +

δsλk

(Gλk ),

k=1

k=1

L(cid:88)

(cid:88)

k=1

c∈λk

15

(53)

(54)

(55)

d(cid:88)
where we have used(cid:80)L
d(cid:88)

sB,

c=1

δsB (G) =

k=1 |λk| = d. We now consider the power of G written for a yet–to–be–determined enhancement

(cid:0)(d − 1)p(B) − sB

(cid:1)b(G) =

(cid:16)

F0c(G) −

c=1

L(cid:88)

(cid:17)

L(cid:88)

sB − (L − 1)p(B) −

sλk

b(G) +

δsλk

(Gλk )

(56)

k=1

k=1

A 1/N –expansion exists provided the right hand side is bounded for any b(G). Since the last sum is bounded,
k=1 sλk . Moreover, a non–trivial large N limit exists

k=1 δsλk

(cid:80)L

(cid:80)L
k=1 dk, this imposes sB ≤ (L − 1)p(B) +(cid:80)L

(Gλk ) ≤

if and only ifG(B) contains an inﬁnite family of graphs such that ∀k = 1, . . . , L,

sB = (L − 1)p(B) +

L(cid:88)

sλk .

k=1

δsλk

(Gλk ) = dk, and

(57)

This way, we can ﬁnd the enhancement of B from those of its sub–bubbles Bλk .

It is still interesting even if the enhancements of the sub–bubbles are not known. Then, taking sλk = |λk| − 1
ensures the existence of a 1/N –expansion, by Gurau’s degree theorem, and the bound on the power of the subgraphs
is dk = |λk|. This reduces the new enhancement to sB = (L − 1)p(B) + d − L, and the condition δsλk
(Gλk ) = dk
becomes the vanishing of Gurau’s degree for each subgraph, ω(Gλk ) = 0.

For L = 1, one then recovers sB = d − 1. For L ≥ 2, one notices a limitation right away, since it is the same
limitation as for L = 1: the analysis is inconclusive if there are no graphs such that ω(Gλk ) = 0. It can nevertheless
solve tensor models with non–melonic bubbles, although the large N limit, if non–trivial, is always found to be either
similar to the melonic one or planar. This comes from the fact that ω(Gλk ) = 0 enforces Gλk to be either melonic if
λk has cardinality greater than 2, or planar if λk has cardinality 2.

We have thus found the following theorem

Theorem 4. Let B be a bubble, (λ1, . . . , λL) a partition of {1, . . . , d} such that the assumptions 1 and 2 hold. Then
the free energy

(cid:90)

(cid:16)

fB(tB) = ln

dT dT exp

−N d−1T · T − N sB tB PB(T, T )

(cid:17)

,

with sB = d− L + (L− 1)p(B), admits a 1/N –expansion. Its large N limit is non–trivial if and only if G(B) contains
an inﬁnite number of graphs satisfying ω(Gλk ) = 0 for all k = 1, . . . , L.
Moreover, if the sub-bubbles Bλk with colors in λk are connected and have enhancements sλk , then B has the

enhancement

sB = (L − 1)p(B) +

sλk .

(58)

L(cid:88)

k=1

More details can be found in [25], in particular the extension to the case where the assumption 2 is dropped.
Interestingly, that framework makes it possible to deﬁne tensor models for “rectangular” tensors, i.e. where the
tensor indices whose positions are in λk have a range Nk, where N1, . . . , NL can be chosen independently.

We close this section with a simple application of the theorem. At d = 5, consider the bubble

16

B =

(59)

With L = 2, λ1 = {1, 2, 3}, λ2 = {4, 5}, one ﬁnds the enhancement sB = 5 > d − 1 = 4 and the large N limit is non–
trivial. Indeed, the sub–bubble with colors 1, 2, 3 is melonic, hence the large N limit enforces the subgraphs G{1,2,3}
to be melonic. Moreover, ω(G{4,5}) = 0 imposes G{4,5} to be planar. This is in fact automatically the case if G{1,2,3}
is melonic. Indeed, all graphs contributing to the free energy at large N must have 2–point functions connecting the
vertices of the bubble which are connected by the colors 2, 3 (this is the universality Theorem 3 applied to G{1,2,3}).
It comes that there are inﬁnitely many graphs satisfying ω(Gλ1) = ω(Gλ2 ) = 0, and

(cid:104)PB(T, T )(cid:105) = N 2 G2(tB)2,

with

G2(tB) =

1
N 2(cid:104)T · T(cid:105).

(60)

Moreover, from the Schwinger–Dyson equation and the above expectation, one ﬁnds that the large N 2–point function
satisﬁes the equation 1 − G2(tB) − 2tBG2(tB)2 = 0, just like the 2–point function of a model with a quartic melonic
bubble (see (29)).

VII. STUFFED WALSH MAPS

Finding the enhancement of a bubble requires to study the growth of the number of faces of the graphs in G(B)
with the number of bubbles. There are combinatorial objects for which faces are under control: combinatorial maps.
Hence, a bijection between G(B) and maps could be useful. Such a bijection was introduced in [26].
In the case of quartic bubbles (bubbles with four vertices), the bijection can be seen directly in terms of integrals:
one performs a Hubbard–Stratonovich transformation of the quartic tensor integral, which leads to a matrix model
with a logarithmic potential [32–34]. This Hubbard–Stratonovich transformation translates to a bijection between
the graphs of the Feynman expansions of both sides of the transformation. Moreover, in the d = 2 matrix case, the
bijection obtained this way is Tutte’s bijection between bipartite quadrangulations (which in the dual are maps with
vertices of degree four, generated by a quartic matrix integral) and generic maps (generated by a matrix model with
a logarithmic potential). Therefore, the bijection we present can be thought of as an extension of Tutte’s bijection to
higher dimensions and arbitrary bubbles.

The bijection relies on a repeated use of the following idea. Consider a cyclically ordered list of objects l =
(o1, . . . , ok). It can be represented graphically as an oriented cycle where the objects o1, . . . , ok are drawn as vertices.
Equivalently, one can turn the cycle into a star–shaped map: still representing the objects as vertices, one add an extra
vertex V connected to each oject on via an edge en. The cyclic order between the objects thus translates into a cyclic
order of the edges, (e1, . . . , ek), around V . Using the counter–clockwise orientation of the plane, the transformation
looks like

(61)

Crucially, the edge from on to on+1 becomes a piece of a face (called a broken face), i.e. a path which goes from on
to on+1 by following the corner between en and en+1 at V counter–clockwise.

41532o1o2o3o5o4o1o2o3o5o4Ve1e2e3e5e4A. Representing a bubble as a map

17

One starts with a pairing π on B, i.e. a partition of its vertices into pairs of black and white vertices. We will
map B to a map M (B, π) with blue vertices representing the pairs of B. First, we erase the edges which connect the
two vertices of a pair (obviously, one can ﬁnd back the missing edges since they are those whose colors are missing
at each vertex) and orient the remaining edges of B from their white to black vertices. We can then merge the black
and white vertices of each pair into a blue vertex,

(62)

and the property “being incident to a black (white) vertex” is replaced with “being ingoing (outgoing) on a blue
vertex”. We obtain a graph denoted Bπ. Thus, if a blue vertex has an ingoing edge of color j, it also has an outgoing
edge of the same color. Moreover, it cannot have more than two edges of the same color. It other words, the restriction
of Bπ to a ﬁxed color is a disjoint union of oriented cycles. For instance,

B =

π

→

→ Bπ =

(63)

Let l(j) = (ρ1, . . . , ρkj ) be such a cycle of color j which goes along the (cyclically ordered) blue vertices ρ1, . . . , ρkj .
We apply the transformation (61) to l(j): we add a box–vertex Vl(j) and connect it with edges of color j to the vertices
ρ1, . . . , ρkj . This is done so that the (cyclic) counter–clockwise order around Vl(j) is the same as the (cyclic) order
of the blue vertices around l(j). This transformation is performed on all cycles of all colors in Bπ. Continuing the
example of (63),

Bπ =

→ M (B, π) =

.

(64)

The order between diﬀerent colors incident on a blue vertex is irrelevant and can be chosen arbitrarily.

Clearly, an edge of color j ∈ {1, . . . , d} is either not represented in M (B, π) if it connects two vertices of a pair,
or it is represented in Bπ by an oriented edge between two blue vertices. In the latter case, it is then represented in
M (B, π) as a counter–clockwise corner at a box–vertex between two edges of color j,

(65)

B. The universal part of the bijection

We now need to connect the maps M (B, π) together. In the original graph G ∈ G(B), bubbles are connected by
edges of color 0. The pairing π on B induces a pairing πG on all the graphs G ∈ G(B) by choosing π on all the copies
of B contained in G.

i1i2i3i1i2i3i1i2i3i1i2i3i1i2i3121212121212111222111222122211ρ1ρ2eeρ1ρ2ρ1ρ2e18

The pairing πG can be thought of as a permutation: given a labeling of the vertices, it maps each white vertex to
a black vertex. Similarly, the edges of color 0 can be encoded through a permutation τ0: using this same labeling, τ0
maps a black vertex to a white vertex if there is an edge of color 0 between them.

We now consider the cycles of πG ◦ τ0. Graphically, start from a black vertex and follow the incident edge of color
0 to a white vertex (this is τ0). This white vertex is part of a pair given by π, so jump to the black vertex of that
pair, and repeat. The cycles obtained that way contain all edges of color 0 and all pairs.

Denote c = (ρ1, . . . , ρk) a cycle of πG ◦ τ0 which encounters the pairs ρ1, . . . , ρk. If the vertices of ρj are connected
by the colors of a subset Ij ⊂ {1, . . . , d}, denote ˆIj = {1, . . . , d}\Ij its complement. These are the colors of the edges
that, when being followed from a vertex of ρj lead to other pairs in diﬀerent cycles of πG ◦ τ0.
We represent each cycle c = (ρ1, . . . , ρk) by a black vertex vc of degree k. A pair ρj is represented in the map
M (B, π) by a blue vertex. We therefore connect vc to the blue vertices representing ρ1, . . . , ρk. An edge connecting
vc to ρj is decorated with the color set ˆIj. Moreover, one has to record the order in which the pairs are encountered
along c. This gives rise to a cyclic order of the edges incident to vc. This is summarized graphically as follows,

→

(66)

Notice that the edges of color 0 are mapped to corners. It is done in such a way that following an edge of color 0
from its black vertex to its white vertex corresponds to the counter–clockwise orientation of the corner. Therefore,
an oriented path which alternates edges of color 0 (from black to white vertices) and edges of another ﬁxed color,
say j ∈ {1, . . . , d}, along the cycle becomes a path which follows corners counter–clockwise until an edge carrying the
color j is met. It is a closed path (i.e. a face of colors (0j) of G) if and only if the color j is not incident to the vertex.
In other words, the parts of the faces of colors (0j) which go through such a cycle become the corners around the
vertex between edges which carry the color j.

Notice that this part is universal: it does not depend on B. In principle, all subsets of {1, . . . , d} are allowed on
the edges connecting the blue and black vertices. The restriction to a particular bubble only puts restrictions on the
subsets of colors which can eﬀectively appear.

C. Stuﬀed Walsh maps

The set of maps obtained by gluing copies of M (B, π) via black vertices is denoted W(B, π). The maps W ∈ W(B, π)
are called stuﬀed Walsh maps, because if one replaces each copy of M (B, π) contained in W with a white vertex, one
would have a bipartite map where the white vertices can be thought of as hyper–edges (this is Walsh’s representation
of hypermaps [35]).
In fact, if B is a cycle, then the bijection precisely leads to bipartite maps which represent
hypermaps [26]. However a white vertex is generically not a faithful representation of M (B, π), so a map W can be
thought as obtained from stuﬃng a bipartite map with copies of M (B, π).

Due to the stuﬃng, a map W ∈ W(B, π) has three types of vertices: blue ones represent pairs, box–vertices incident
to edges of color j represent cycles of pairs and edges of color j, and black vertices represent cycles of pairs and edges
of color 0.

We introduce W (c) the submap of W with all the edges whose color sets contain c ∈ {1, . . . , d}. It is typically

disconnected and isolated vertices are taken into account.

Theorem 5. There is a bijection between G(B) and W(B, π) which maps copies of B to copies of M (B, π), pairs of
vertices to blue vertices, edges of color j ∈ {1, . . . , d} to corners around box–vertices between edges of color j, edges of
color 0 to corners around black vertices while the faces of colors (0c) are mapped to the faces of W (c).

The only bit we have not explained yet is the fact that the faces of colors (0c) become the faces of the submap
W (c). All the construction pointed that way. Indeed, an edge of color c from its white vertex to its black vertex

jk1k2i1i2i3eρiρjρki1i2i3k1k2jeρiρkρjis mapped to a counter–clockwise corner at a box–vertex. Moreover, an edge of color 0 from its black vertex to its
white vertex is mapped to a counter–clockwise corner at a black vertex of W between two edges containing the color
c. Following edges of colors c and 0 therefore amounts to following corners counter–clockwise between edges which
contain the color j, as shown below

19

→

(67)

Notice that no order is speciﬁed at the blue vertices because for a ﬁxed color, a blue vertex is always bivalent (and
the order between distinct colors is irrelevant).

D. Projected maps and trees

Stuﬀed Walsh maps remain complicated objects to study due to the structure of the map M (B, π) which represent
the bubble B. As such, the maps M (B, π) encodes all the richness of the possible bubbles. Yet, for any B, there are
some tree–like maps for which we can easily ﬁnd the number of faces.

To see that, we introduce the notion of projected maps. For a stuﬀed Walsh map W ∈ W(B, π), its projected
map P W is deﬁned by representing all submaps M (B, π) as vertices, say white vertices, while preserving the rest
of W . This requires to ﬁx an ordering of the edges around these white vertices. As a consequence, P W loses the
structure of the bubble B and becomes an edge–colored hypermap.

Proposition 1. The number of faces of a map W whose projected map P W is a tree is

F (W ) = (F (Bπ) − d)V◦(W ) + d.

(68)

where Bπ is the map which consists in a single M (B, π) whose blue vertices are each connected to a univalent black
vertex, and V◦(W ) is the number of copies of M (B, π) in W .

In other words, the number of faces of such maps grows linearly with the number of submaps M (B, π), with a
known coeﬃcient. This coeﬃcient features Bπ which is easily interpreted in terms of colored graphs. Indeed, it is
the graph obtained by representing the pairing π with edges of color 0 connecting the two vertices of each pair in B.
This is a contribution to the expectation of the polynomial PB(T, T ) in the Gaussian distribution.

Let us assume that B and π are such that the number of faces of any map F (W ) is bounded by the number of

faces of those whose projected maps are trees, at ﬁxed V◦. We can then ﬁnd the enhancement sB,

sB = d + (d − 1)p(B) − F (Bπ).

(69)

Indeed, since the bijection preserves the number of faces, F (W ) = F (G) and since V◦(W ) = b(G), our assumption
means that there exists a family of graphs G ∈ G(B) which maximizes the number of faces at ﬁxed number of bubbles.
Hence F (G) ≤ (F (Bπ) − d)b(G) + d. Then the power δ(G) of a graph G is bounded like

(70)

(cid:2)(d − 1)p(B) − (F (Bπ) − d) − sB

(cid:3)b(G).

δsB (G) ≤ d −

Choosing sB as in (69) is then the only choice which provides a bound independent of the number of bubbles and at
the same time which can be saturated by an inﬁnite family of graphs: those in bijection with maps whose projected
maps are trees.

The diﬃcult point is to prove the assumption that the number of faces is bounded by (68) for some choice of π.
It has been proved in some cases [24, 26], and no counter–examples have been found yet. Notice that in most cases
where it was proved, maps whose projected maps are trees are not the only maps which maximize the number of
faces. Often, the set of such maps include a subset of planar maps.

It is important to keep in mind that the graphs represented by trees in (68) depend on the choice of π. Diﬀerent
pairings on B can lead to projected maps which are similar trees, but with a diﬀerent counting of faces (due to
diﬀerent values of F (Bπ)). For instance, if B is melonic, there is a canonical pairing π (the one which maximizes
F (Bπ)). If chosen, this pairing is such that the number of faces is indeed bounded by the number of faces of maps

ρ1ρ2e0e1e00ρ1ρ2e0e00e1which project on trees. In fact, those trees are precisely the melonic graphs built from B. However, for a diﬀerent
choice of pairing, our bijection does not map melonic graphs to trees. Instead, trees then correspond to an entirely
diﬀerent family of graphs which certainly do not maximize the number of faces.

From this example, it appears that an interesting choice of π is one such that F (Bπ) is maximal, say π∗. Only
then one might hope to prove that (maps whose projected maps are) trees are dominant. In fact, it is proved in [26]
that maps whose projected maps have a single cycle always have fewer faces than trees, provided one chooses π∗ as
pairing for the bijection.

20

VIII. THE QUARTIC CASE

A. Description of the dominant maps

The bijection we have presented simpliﬁes quite a bit in the quartic case, i.e. the case of bubbles with four vertices
(as the bijection is then generated by a Hubbard–Stratonovich transformation). Indeed, those bubbles have two pairs
of vertices which are mapped in M (B, π) to two blue vertices. They are connected by the colors in I = {i1, . . . , ik}.
The box–vertices for each of those colors are then bivalent, meaning that they can be transformed to just edges
between the two blue vertices. Since one gets such an edge for all colors which connect the two pairs, the map
M (B, π) can simply be turned to an edge between two blue vertices, decorated with the colors which connect the two
pairs,

→

→

(71)

Each blue vertex therefore connects to another blue vertex and a black vertex, with edges carrying the same color set
I. They are thus bivalent and can be erased. One ends up with maps with only black vertices of arbitrary degrees,
and edges colored by I.
When several types of quartic bubbles are allowed, the generalization is obvious: each quartic bubble becomes an
edge of a map with a color set. We will consider quartic melonic and necklace bubbles with the following pairings

→

,

→

(72)

We already know the enhancements for all those bubbles, s = d − 1 for the melonic ones and s = 4 for the quartic
necklaces at d = 4. It remains to ﬁnd the maps which maximize the number of faces when the bubbles are all used
together. The results have appeared in [24]. The monocolored edges have to be bridges (or cut–edges, i.e. their
removals disconnect the map). We can therefore temporarily assume that M is a map without monocolored edge. It
therefore only has bicolored edges with colors (1i). To ﬁnd the maps which maximize the number of faces, we use a
result of [26] which gives the diﬀerence between the number of faces of a stuﬀed Walsh map and the number of faces
of another one whose projected map is a tree with the same number of copies of M (B, π). In our context, maps and
projected maps are the same, so we ﬁnd that the diﬀerence between the number of faces of M and that of a tree T
with the same number of edges is

4(cid:88)

i=1

4(cid:88)

i=1

F (M ) − F (T ) = −4l(M ) + 2

l(M (i)) − 2

g(M (i)).

(73)

Here l(M ) = E(M )−V (M )+1 is the cyclomatic number of M , M (i) is the (typically non–connected) submap obtained
by keeping only the edges whose color set contains the color i, and l(M (i)), g(M (i)) are its cyclomatic number and
genus. Notice that the color 1 labels all edges, therefore l(M ) = l(M (1)). Since M (2), M (3), M (4) are edge–disjoint
submaps, it comes

l(M (2)) + l(M (3)) + l(M (4)) ≤ l(M ).

(74)

i1i2iki1i2iki1i2ikI={i1i2...ik}iii11iThe right hand side of (73) is thus nonpositive and therefore F (M ) ≤ F (T ).
To get the equality F (M ) = F (T ), i) the map M should have all its colored submaps planar, g(M (c)) = 0 for
c = 1, 2, 3, 4, and ii) the equality has to hold in (74). The latter condition means that the edges of every cycle have
the same color type, either (12) or (13) or (14).

21

Let G(k,q)
bubbles which maximize the number of faces at ﬁxed number of bubbles. It is mapped to the set M(k,q)

max be the set of colored graphs made of q types of quartic melonic bubbles and k types of quartic necklace
max of maps

which satisfy the following conditions,

• vertices have unbounded degrees,
• monocolored edges can have q possible colors (as we allow q ≤ d types of quartic melonic bubbles)
• monocolored edges are bridges,
• bicolored edges carry the color type (1c) where c can take k values (and k ≤ 3 since there are at most the types

(12), (13) and (14)),
• the submaps M (c) made of all edges which carry the color c are planar,
• every cycle has a ﬁxed color type (1c).

B. Enumeration of the dominant maps

We denote ¯M(k,q)
its generating function (that is the 2–point function from the tensor model view2)

max the set of rooted maps (i.e. with an marked oriented edge) satisfying all those conditions, and

(cid:88)

f(k,q)(t, λ) =

tE(M )λEm(M ),

(75)

M∈ ¯M(k,q)

max

where E(M ) is the total number of edges and Em(M ) the number of monocolored edges of M .

Notice that the only constraint on monocolored edges is that every one of them is a bridge, so their colors are
irrelevant. It means that one can set a unique color to monocolored edges and simply rescale λ by q, f(k,q)(t, λ) =
f(k,1)(t, qλ). We thus forget about q and study fk(t, λ) ≡ f(k,q=1)(t, λ).
We consider the map consisting of a single vertex as a rooted map so that fk(t, λ) starts with 1. All other terms
have at least one edge. Assume that the root edge e is monocolored, then as it is a bridge, it separates two connected
components which can be canonically rooted on the ﬁrst edge after e by going counter–clockwise around each vertex

of e. Those two connected components are thus in ¯M(k,1)

max . We thus have

fk(t, λ) = 1 + tλ fk(t, λ)2 + Maps rooted on a bicolored edge.

(76)

The only diﬃcult part of the enumeration is to take into account the constraint that every cycle has a single color

type. To do so, we notice that connected components consisting of edges of color type (1c) and (1c(cid:48)) for c (cid:54)= c(cid:48) can
only touch at a cut–vertex which separate them (i.e. removing the vertex separates the two connected components).
max rooted on a bicolored edge e and let M(cid:48) be the maximal non–separable submap containing e. As
Let M ∈ ¯M(k,1)
explained in [36], M can be recovered from M(cid:48) by inserting rooted maps Mα ∈ ¯M(k,1)
max on each corner of M(cid:48) (if Mα
is inserted in the counter–clockwise corner between e1 and e2, one can root Mα on the ﬁrst edge met after e1). This
decomposition holds for generic planar maps [36]. In our case, the key point is that M(cid:48) has a single color type (the
same as its root edge e). However, the corner insertions Mα can be arbitrary and in particular rooted on an edge of
arbitrary color type.

Let P (t) be the generating function of non–separable rooted planar maps counted with respect to the number of
edges. Since the number of corners is twice the number of edges, one can consider that there are two maps Mα, Mβ

inserted on M(cid:48) for each edge. The contribution of the maps rooted on a bicolored edge is thus P (tfk(t, λ)2) − 1 for a

2 Indeed, the 2–point function of tensor model is the sum over the graphs with a marked edge of color 0. Given a marked edge of color
0, it is incident to the black vertex of a bubble. In the map point of view, this bubble is an edge e and the edge of color 0 is a corner
incident to e. We can then orient e outward, and the construction can be reversed, i.e. an oriented edge of a map is equivalent to an
edge of color 0.

The latter can be turned into an algebraic system describing f, k, t, λ with an extra parameter u,

(cid:26) t = θ(1 − θ)2

P = (1 − θ)(1 + 3θ).

(cid:40)

tf 2 = u(1 − u)2
f = k (1 − u)(1 + 3u) − k + 1 + λ u(1 − u)2,

22

(77)

(78)

(79)

(83)

single color type (P contains the single vertex map, which we have already taken into account in (76), hence the −1).
Adding the k types of bicolored root edge to (76) therefore gives

fk(t, λ) = 1 − k + tλ fk(t, λ)2 + k P(cid:0)t fk(t, λ)2(cid:1).

It remains to describe the generating function P (t). It satisﬁes the following algebraic system [36]

tfk(t, λ)2(cid:16)

and fk(t, λ) is the solution of this system for f after elimination of u. One then gets the polynomial equation

2k3 + k2(λ − 18) + 3λ − 4λk +(cid:0)18k2 − 6λ + 4λk(cid:1)fk(t, λ)
+(cid:0)3λ(1 + tλ) − 27k3t − 18k2tλ − 2ktλ2(cid:1)fk(t, λ)2 − 3tλ2fk(t, λ)3 + t2λ3fk(t, λ)4(cid:17)

(cid:0)fk(t, λ) − 1(cid:1)(cid:0)fk(t, λ) + k − 1(cid:1)2

−

= 0.

(80)

Notice that when allowing for a single type of bicolored edges, i.e. k = 1, and no monocolored edges, i.e. λ = 0,
one should be enumerating generic planar maps. The polynomial equation (80) indeed reduces to the well–known
quadratic equation on the generating function of rooted planar maps,

27t2A(t)2 + (1 − 18t)A(t) + 16t − 1 = 0,

(81)

with A(t) = fk=1(t, λ = 0).

We are going to discuss the singularities of fk(t, λ) with respect to t. Since t counts the total number of edges,
those singularities describe the asymptotic behavior of the number of maps in ¯M(k,1)
max with respect to the number of
edges. We ﬁnd it more convenient to work with the algebraic system (79) rather than the polynomial equation (80).
(cid:19)
The system (79) describes solutions for f and u as functions of t, with parameters k, λ. The system becomes

singular with respect to t when the Jacobian vanishes. The diﬀerential system reads
−f 2
0

,

(82)

−(1 − u)(1 − 3u)

(cid:19)(cid:18)f(cid:48)

(cid:19)

(cid:18)2tf

u(cid:48)

=

(cid:18)

1 −2k(1 − 3u) − λ(1 − u)(1 − 3u)

where the prime indicates the derivative with respect to t. The singularities are thus determined by adding the
vanishing of the determinant of the above matrix to the system (79),

 tf 2 = u(1 − u)2
(1 − 3u)(cid:0)1 − u − (2k + λ(1 − u))2tf(cid:1) = 0.

f = k (1 − u)(1 + 3u) − k + 1 + λ u(1 − u)2

Solutions to this system can be given using radicals but the explicit expressions are lengthy and not particularly
suitable for detailed analysis. Instead we solve explicitly the case where k = 1, i.e. a single type of bicolored edges
allowed, and the case λ = 0, i.e. no monocolored edges (which can only be bridges). Those two situations will both
give the same phase diagram, which we conjecture extends to the case of generic (k, λ):

• For k and λ small enough, a large typical map consists of several planar components each of a ﬁxed bicolored
type, connected by a ﬁnite number of monocolored edges (with weight λ) and/or cut–vertices which can connect
two components of diﬀerent color types. Therefore the criticality is expected to be that of planar maps, with a
singularity (tc − t)3/2.
• For k or λ large enough, a large typical map has mostly monocolored edges (which form trees) and/or numerous
cut–vertices separating planar components of diﬀerent color types (when k gets larger, the probability of adding
a component of a diﬀerent color type increases). The planar components of ﬁxed color type remain non–critical.
The maps are thus dominated by branching processes, so a singularity (tc−t)1/2 is expected, i.e. the universality
class of trees.

23

• Between those two phases, there should be a regime where bicolored planar components are in inﬁnite number
(connected by inﬁnitely many monocolored edges and/or cut–vertices) and each of them becomes inﬁnite too.
This phase thus has a proliferation of baby universes and the expected singularity is (tc − t)2/3.

The proliferation of baby universes is a known phenomenon, which has been encountered in the context of multi–
trace matrix models in [17–21]. A multi–trace matrix model has as interaction products of matrix traces, like
Tr M k1 ··· Tr M kq for the matrix M . An interaction of this type can be thought of as the superposition of q vertices
of degrees k1, . . . , kq. For maps which maximize the number of faces, the planar components which contain each of
those q vertices can only touch at the point where they are superimposed. This leads to planar components connected
in a cactus way. This phenomenon is analogous to the fact that planar components of diﬀerent color types can only
touch at vertices which separate them in our model. This is therefore a branching process also similar to connecting
planar components via bridges. This analogy explains the presence of the proliferation of baby universes in tensor
models.

We can further ﬁnd an equation on the radius of convergence of fk(t, λ) in terms of k, λ in the regime where it has

a square–root singularity. Let us look at solutions of (80) with a square–root singularity, fk(t, λ) = a + b√ρ − t +
o(√ρ − t). At orders 0 and 1 in √ρ − t, Equation (80) gives algebraic relations between a, ρ, k, λ. Eliminating a, the

resultant of those two equations then reduces to

− λρ + (4k3 + 40λk2 + 12λ2 − 8λ2k)ρ + (−128k5 − 192λk4 − 96λ2k3 − 320λk3 − 48λ3 − 16λ3k2 − 32λ2k2 + 64λ3k)ρ2
(84)

+ (1024k6 + 2048λk5 + 1536λ2k4 + 64λ4 + 512λ3k3 − 512λ2k3 + 64λ4k2 − 512λ3k2 − 128λ4k)ρ3 = 0.

Anticipating the cases studied below, notice that it has the solution ρ =
λ = 0.

By further developing some ansatz of the form fk(t, λ) = a0 + a1(ρ − t)α + a2(ρ − t) + . . . for some well–chosen
exponents α, and plugging them into (80), one might try and match the coeﬃcients to ﬁnd algebraic relations between
them. Instead of pursuing that approach, we will describe in details two cases where the values of the exponent α can
be found directly.

λ

4(1+λ)2 for k = 1 and ρ =

k+√k(k−1)

16k2

for

1. A single type of necklace bubble

Allowing for a single type of necklace bubbles corresponds to allowing for a single type of bicolored edges, i.e. k = 1.
This case has in fact been solved in [24] with the so–called “trees of necklaces” bubbles which generalize the present
case k = 1 beyond quartic bubbles. It was solved in [24] using the Schwinger–Dyson equations of tensor models which
were shown to reduce to the loop equations of multi–trace matrix models, already studied in [17–21]. Here we present
another approach, based on the system (79) instead, which to our knowledge has not appeared in the matrix model
literature.

(cid:0)1 + 2t(λ− 9)(cid:1)fk=1(t, λ) +(cid:0)3λt + t2(λ2 − 18λ− 27)(cid:1)fk=1(t, λ)2 − 3t2λ2fk=1(t, λ)3 + t3λ3fk=1(t, λ)4 = 0, (85)

1− 16t−
which itself reduces to the quadratic equation (81) for the generating function of planar maps A(t) by setting λ = 0.

Notice that the polynomial equation (80) reduces to a quartic equation,

The system (83) then admits the following solutions (depending on λ)

u1(λ) =

1
3
which is the singular locus for λ ≤ 3, and
1
λ

u2(λ) =

,

f1(λ) =

4
27

(λ + 9),

t1(λ) =

27

4(λ + 9)2

,

f2(λ) = 2

λ2 − 1
λ2

,

t2(λ) =

λ

4(1 + λ)2

(86)

(87)

for λ ≥ 3. The function fk=1(t, λ) is represented in Figure 4 as a function of t for various values of λ. For λ ≤ 3, f (t)
hits a singularity at t1(λ). For λ ≥ 3, the ﬁrst singularity encountered while coming from (t = 0, f = 1) becomes the
one at (t2(λ), f2(λ)).
Performing some Taylor expansion of the system (79) around the above critical points, one ﬁnds the singular

behaviors. For λ < 3, one ﬁnds

fk=1(t, λ) = f1(λ) +

16(λ + 3)(λ + 9)3

729(λ − 3)

(t1(λ) − t) +

6561(3 − λ)5/2 (t1(λ) − t)3/2 + o(cid:0)(t1(λ) − t)3/2(cid:1).

64(λ + 9)11/2

(88)

24

FIG. 4. The curves represent f as a function of t for λ = 1 up to λ = 8 with a step of .25. The dashed line is the singular locus
for λ ≤ 3, and the thick line for λ ≥ 3 where a f (t) develops a vertical tangent.

It thus extends the known singularity of the generating function of planar maps,

(cid:16) 1

(cid:17)

(cid:16) 1

(cid:17)3/2

(cid:16)(cid:16) 1

(cid:17)3/2(cid:17)

A(t) =

4
3 − 16

12 − t

+ 64√3

12 − t

+ o

12 − t

,

(89)

with t1(λ = 0) = 1/12, f1(λ = 0) = 4/3, to the case where planar maps can be connected by bridges with weight λ.

(90)

For λ > 3, one gets

fk=1(t, λ) = f2(λ) −

4(1 + λ)2

λ5/2

(cid:112)
λ2 − 2λ − 3 (t2(λ) − t)1/2 + o(cid:0)(t2(λ) − t)1/2(cid:1),
(cid:16) 3

(cid:17)2/3(cid:17)

(cid:17)2/3

which is the behavior expected for trees. Finally, at λ = 3, one gets t = 3/64 − 81/512(1/3 − u)3 + o((1/3 − u)3) and
f = 16/9 − 6(1/3 − u)2 + o((1/3 − u)2), and therefore
128
35/3

(cid:16)(cid:16) 3

fk=1(t, λ = 3) =

16
9 −

+ o

64 − t

64 − t

(91)

,

which corresponds to the phase where baby universes (each planar submap of ﬁxed color type becoming critical)
proliferate because there is an inﬁnity of them connected by bridges in a tree–like fashion. This phase was originally
described in the context of multi–trace matrix models [17–21].

2. No monocolored edges

The maps with no monocolored edges, i.e. λ = 0, corresponds to the case where the quartic melonic bubbles are
not allowed whereas k types of necklace bubbles are. A priori, k is an integer at most 3. Notice however that the
algebraic system (79) makes sense for k a positive real number.

Setting λ = 0, the polynomial equation (80) becomes of order 4,

(k − 1)2 − (k − 1)(k − 3)fk(t) + (3 − 2k − 18k2t + 2k3t)fk(t)2 + (18k2t − 1)fk(t)3 − 27k3t2fk(t)4 = 0,

(92)

where we have set fk(t) = fk(t, λ = 0). The linear and constant terms vanish at k = 1, thus reproducing (81).

The system (83) which determines the singularities has four solutions at λ = 0. Two of them give negative values
to fk for all k ≥ 1. We dismiss them and the “physical” solutions are the two others. For k ≤ 9/5 the singularities

0.010.020.030.040.050.06t1.21.41.61.82.02.22.4fΛ(cid:135)3Λ(cid:135)1Λ(cid:135)8t1Λ,f1Λt2Λ,f2Λ25

FIG. 5. The curves represent fk as a function of t for k = 1 up to k = 4 with a step of .1. The dashed line is the singular locus
for k ≤ 9/5, and the thick line for k ≥ 9/5 where a fk(t) develops a vertical tangent.

are on the following line parametrized by k

while for k ≥ 9/5, they are on

u(1)
k =

1
3

,

f (1)
k = 1 +

k = 4(cid:0)1 − k +

f (2)

k − 1
k

,

k
3

,

(cid:112)

t(1)
k =

4

3(k + 3)2

k(k − 1)(cid:1),

(cid:112)

k(k − 1)
16 k2

k +

t(2)
k =

(93)

,

(94)

(cid:114)

u(2)
k = 1 −

and those two solutions coincide at k = 9/5.

The behavior of fk(t) close to the singular points can be obtained by performing Taylor expansions of (79). For

meaning that fk(t) − f (2)

t(2)
k − t for some non–zero, explicit constant. As in the case k = 1 and λ > 3, the
universality class is that of ordinary trees. This is interpreted as the fact that when k is large enough, it becomes very
likely that a typical vertex separates planar components of diﬀerent color types. This produces cacti–like structures
similar to trees.

k ∼

Eventually, for k = 9/5, the critical values are f (1)

k = f (2)

k = 8/5 and t(1)

k = t(2)

k = 25/432. Moreover, the singularity

takes the form

fk=9/5(t) =

8
5 −

432

25 × 51/3

(cid:16) 25

(cid:17)2/3

(cid:16)(cid:16) 25

432 − t

+ o

432 − t

(cid:17)2/3(cid:17)

.

(97)

k < 9/5, that gives

fk(t) = f (1)

k −

k(k + 3)3
9 − 5k

k − t) + √3 k
(t(1)

(k + 3)11/2

(9 − 5k)5/2 (t(1)

(cid:113)

k(cid:0)20k3 − 31k2 + 11k −
(cid:113)

(cid:112)

k(k − 1)(20k2 − 21k + 3)(cid:1)(t(2)

k − t)3/2 + o(cid:0)(t(1)

k − t)3/2(cid:1),
k − t)1/2 + o(cid:0)(t(2)

k − t)1/2(cid:1).

(95)

(96)

which indeed reproduces (89) when k → 1. For k > 9/5, one ﬁnds

fk(t) = f (2)

k + 16

0.020.040.060.08t1.21.41.61.82.02.2fkk(cid:135)95k(cid:135)1k(cid:135)4tk1,fk1tk2,fk2IX. CONCLUSION

26

We started the present article by explaining how random tensor models generate higher–dimensional discrete
(pseudo–)manifolds, the same way random matrix models generate combinatorial maps. We insisted on general-
izing the notion of 2p–angulations (or more generally maps with restrictions on the allowed face degrees), by using
colored triangulations with prescribed bubbles. A bubble is a generalization of a 2p–angle, obtained by gluing colored
simplices until the boundary is formed by (d − 1)–simplices of a ﬁxed color, much like a 2p–angle is a gluing of 2p
colored triangles with 2p edges of color 0 on its boundary. We then went on studying the set of colored triangulations
built by gluing copies of an arbitrarily chosen bubble B, and denoted G(B). Importantly, those bubbles and colored
triangulations can be represented as regular, edge–colored graphs with respectively d and d + 1 colors.
The program of random tensors can then be put in purely combinatorial terms. It consists in classifying the graphs
of G(B) with respect to the number of bubbles and the number of faces, where a face is a cycle alternating the
colors 0 and c, for c ∈ {1, . . . , d}. The classiﬁcation by Gurau and Schaeﬀer [14] does precisely that for the set of
all colored graphs, using Gurau’s degree ω(G) ≥ 0. However, it is believed that for a typical bubble B, the degree
ω(G) for G ∈ G(B) scales with the number of bubbles in G. In other words, the generating function at ﬁxed degree
is polynomial and no interesting continuum limit can be achieved.

We have called an enhancement of B the maximal value of sB such that

(cid:2)(d − 1)p(B) − sB

(cid:3)b(G)

δsB (G) = F (G) −

is bounded for all G ∈ G(B). The strategy we used to ﬁnd enhancements was to try and ﬁnd the graphs which
maximize the number of faces at ﬁxed number of bubbles forming the set Gmax(B). We have also shown that ﬁnding
sB is crucial to deﬁning tensor models with non–trivial large N limits.
Sections V, VI and VII were then devoted to three techniques developed in the literature to ﬁnd enhancements,
using combinatorial tools. We have moreover taken the opportunity of reviewing those techniques to formalize and
actually extend two of them borrowed from [23–25] in Sections V and VI. The section VII then reviews the bijection
proposed recently in [26].

This bijection is ﬁnally used in Section VIII to perform the enumeration of the graphs in Gmax(B) in the quartic
cases (with four–vertex bubbles). The relevant graphs were already described in [24] but we have i) revisited their
derivation using the new bijection, ii) perform the enumeration beyond [24].

The set Gmax(B) was described for other bubbles in [26], but the set of universality classes that colored triangulations
can reach is far from being understood. We know that it includes all universality classes of combinatorial maps, since
the necklace bubbles are matrix models in disguise (as shown in Section IV A). The three techniques presented in this
article are fairly recent and have been applied to a handful of bubbles only. It is possible that those techniques, as
well as combinations of them, can lead to the enumeration of Gmax(B) for bubbles B which have not been investigated
yet. For instance, one might use the bijection to ﬁnd new enhancements, then the techniques of Sections V and VI to
derive other enhancements from them.

While the phase diagram resulting from the enumeration in Section VIII is not really surprising, we think the
method is worth discussing. We indeed used a decomposition of the relevant maps onto non–separable planar maps
whose generating function is known [36]. In particular, we did not use the Schwinger–Dyson/loop/Tutte equations.
This is in contrast with standard methods to count planar maps.

However, the maps counted in Section VIII can be generated by a matrix model [24]. In fact, stuﬀed Walsh maps
based on any bubble, as described in Section VII, can be generated using random matrix integrals as shown in [26].
This means that there are Schwinger–Dyson equations which characterize the relevant generating functions. We have
not however found any way to solve those equations yet. The diﬃculty lies in the fact the corresponding matrix
models are multi–matrix, multi–trace models, so that the matrices typically do not commute. The set of relevant
observables is thus more diﬃcult to analyze and so is the set of Schwinger–Dyson equations.

In the quartic case with only necklace bubbles, the matrix model is as follows. Let V = RN be the deﬁning
representation space of N × N matrices. We introduce N 2 × N 2 Hermitian matrices ψ12, ψ13, ψ14 and denote Ψ1c the
matrix which acts on V ⊗ V ⊗ V ⊗ V as ψ1c on the ﬁrst and c–th copies of V and as the identity on the two other
factors. Then

4(cid:88)

c=2

1c + TrV ⊗4 ln(cid:0)I + t(Ψ12 + Ψ13 + Ψ14)(cid:1)

(98)

(cid:90)

dψ12dψ13dψ14 exp−N 2

TrV ⊗2 ψ2

generates the maps studied in Section VIII for λ = 0. Evidently [Ψ1c, Ψ1c(cid:48)] (cid:54)= 0 for c (cid:54)= c(cid:48) because they both act on
the ﬁrst copy of V . The observables are thus multi–traces of words in the alphabet {Ψ12, Ψ13, Ψ14}.
It can be compared with the O(n) matrix model [1]. It is a single matrix model for a matrix ψ say of size N 2 × N 2
which acts on V ⊗ V . Denote Ψ12 = ψ ⊗ IV ⊗V the matrix acting on V ⊗ V ⊗ V ⊗ V as ψ on the ﬁrst two factors and

(cid:90)

dψ exp−N 2 TrV ⊗2 ψ2 + n TrV ⊗4 ln(cid:0)I + t(Ψ12 + Ψ34)(cid:1).

27

(99)

as the identity on the last two, and deﬁne Ψ34 = IV ⊗V ⊗ ψ acting non–trivially on the third and fourth factors. The
matrix model is then

Remarkably, it has a similar form to (98), except that the terms in the logarithm commute, [Ψ12, Ψ34] = 0, because
they act non–trivially on distinct copies of V . This leads to interpreting (98) as a non–commutative O(1) model.

It would therefore be interesting to directly write and solve the Schwinger–Dyson equations for (98), as done in the
quartic melonic case in [38]. There are further interests in doing that. A direct motivation is that it would in turn
help to solve the Schwinger–Dyson equations for tensor models directly. This is a set of equations analogous to the
Tutte/loop equations for colored triangulations in arbitrary dimensions. Those equations have been described in [30].
There were studied in the case of melonic bubbles in [37] at large N , and it was shown in [23] that the ﬁrst corrections
(colored graphs of degree ω(G) = d − 2, d) can be calculated from those equations. They have also been used for
bubbles which result from the gluings of melonic bubbles with necklaces in the sense of Section V. The enumeration
was performed using the Schwinger–Dyson equations in [24] which reproduce the loop equations of multi–trace matrix
models.

Schwinger–Dyson equations are also the key to go beyond the graphs which maximize the number of faces and to
obtain a full classiﬁcation of G(B) with respect to the number of faces. This is expected since this is the way it works
in matrix models. Tutte’s equations indeed give a recursion on the generating functions of maps of genus g with n
marked faces which is the starting point of the topological recursion [39]. Schwinger–Dyson equations also encode
algebraic properties which in the case of combinatorial maps show integrability. In the case of tensor models, similar
bilinear equations can be derived in the quartic melonic case [40].

We therefore expect that the techniques presented here, together with a better understanding of the Schwinger–
Dyson equations, will make it possible to identify more enhancements and to perform more enumeration of Gmax(G)
thereby leading to a better exploration of the universality classes of colored triangulations, as well as a full classiﬁcation
and enumeration of G(B) for more bubbles B.
As often techniques are ﬁrst developed for the purely combinatorial models and then adapted to more elaborate
ones. This was the case with the discovery of melonic graphs as the graphs of vanishing degree, which then lead
to using them to build renormalizable tensorial theories [41] and group ﬁeld theories [42]. The bijection we have
presented here was even used in the quartic case for such renormalizable tensorial theories to get closed equations on
some Green functions [43] (this is the equivalent of enumerating for renormalizable models).

Hopefully, our techniques could also be adapted to more general families of triangulations, such as the multi–
orientable one in d = 3 [44] and the family introduced in [45] which contain the multi–orientable and colored triangu-
lations in d = 3.

This research was supported by the ANR MetACOnc project ANR-15-CE40-0014.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

[1] P. Di Francesco, P. H. Ginsparg and J. Zinn-Justin, “2-D Gravity and random matrices,” Phys. Rept. 254, 1 (1995)

[hep-th/9306153].

[2] J. Ambjorn, B. Durhuus and T. Jonsson, “Three-Dimensional Simplicial Quantum Gravity And Generalized Matrix Mod-

els,” Mod. Phys. Lett. A 6, 1133 (1991).

[3] M. Gross, “Tensor models and simplicial quantum gravity in > 2-D,” Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 25A, 144 (1992).
[4] N. Sasakura, “Tensor model for gravity and orientability of manifold,” Mod. Phys. Lett. A 6, 2613 (1991).
[5] R. Gurau, “Lost in Translation: Topological Singularities in Group Field Theory,” Class. Quant. Grav. 27, 235023 (2010)

[arXiv:1006.0714 [hep-th]].
M. Smerlak, “Comment on ‘Lost in Translation: Topological Singularities in Group Field Theory’,” Class. Quant. Grav.
28, 178001 (2011) [arXiv:1102.1844 [hep-th]].
R. Gurau, “Reply to comment on ‘Lost in translation: topological singularities in group ﬁeld theory’,” Class. Quant. Grav.
28, 178002 (2011) [arXiv:1108.4966 [hep-th]].

[6] M. Ferri and C. Gagliardi, “Crystallization moves,” Paciﬁc J. Math. 100 (1982) 85.
[7] S. Lins, “Gems, Computers and Attractors for 3–Manifolds,” Series on Knots and Everything, Vol. 5, World Scientiﬁc

Publishing Co. Inc., River Edge, NJ, 1995.

[8] R. Gurau and J. P. Ryan, “Colored Tensor Models - a review,” SIGMA 8, 020 (2012) [arXiv:1109.4812 [hep-th]].

28

[9] V. Bonzom, R. Gurau, A. Riello and V. Rivasseau, “Critical behavior of colored tensor models in the large N limit,” Nucl.

Phys. B 853, 174 (2011) [arXiv:1105.3122 [hep-th]].

[10] R. Gurau, “The 1/N expansion of colored tensor models,” Annales Henri Poincar´e 12 (2011) 829 [arXiv:1011.2726 [gr-qc]].
[11] R. Gurau and V. Rivasseau, “The 1/N expansion of colored tensor models in arbitrary dimension,” Europhys. Lett. 95,

50004 (2011) [arXiv:1101.4182 [gr-qc]].

[12] R. Gurau, “The complete 1/N expansion of colored tensor models in arbitrary dimension,” Annales Henri Poincar´e 13,

399 (2012) [arXiv:1102.5759 [gr-qc]].

[13] W. Kamiski, D. Oriti and J. P. Ryan, “Towards a double-scaling limit for tensor models: probing sub-dominant orders,”

New J. Phys. 16, 063048 (2014) [arXiv:1304.6934 [hep-th]].

[14] R. Gurau and G. Schaeﬀer, “Regular colored graphs of positive degree,” [arXiv:1307.5279 [math.CO]].
[15] V. Bonzom, R. Gurau and V. Rivasseau, “Random tensor models in the large N limit: Uncoloring the colored tensor

models,” Phys. Rev. D 85, 084037 (2012) [arXiv:1202.3637 [hep-th]].

[16] R. Gurau and J. P. Ryan, “Melons are branched polymers,” arXiv:1302.4386 [math-ph].
[17] S. R. Das, A. Dhar, A. M. Sengupta and S. R. Wadia, “New Critical Behavior in d = 0 Large N Matrix Models,” Mod.

Phys. Lett. A 5, 1041 (1990).

[18] L. Alvarez-Gaume, J. L. F. Barbon and C. Crnkovic, “A Proposal for strings at D > 1,” Nucl. Phys. B 394, 383 (1993)

[hep-th/9208026].

[19] G. P. Korchemsky, “Loops in the curvature matrix model,” Phys. Lett. B 296, 323 (1992) [hep-th/9206088].
[20] I. R. Klebanov and A. Hashimoto, “Nonperturbative solution of matrix models modiﬁed by trace squared terms,” Nucl.

Phys. B 434, 264 (1995) [hep-th/9409064].

[21] J. L. F. Barbon, K. Demeterﬁ, I. R. Klebanov and C. Schmidhuber, “Correlation functions in matrix models modiﬁed by

wormhole terms,” Nucl. Phys. B 440, 189 (1995) [hep-th/9501058].

[22] R. Gurau, “Universality for Random Tensors,” arXiv:1111.0519 [math.PR].
[23] V. Bonzom, R. Gurau, J. P. Ryan and A. Tanasa, “The double scaling limit of random tensor models,” JHEP 1409, 051

(2014) [arXiv:1404.7517 [hep-th]].

[24] V. Bonzom, T. Delepouve and V. Rivasseau, “Enhancing non-melonic triangulations: A tensor model mixing melonic and

planar maps,” Nucl. Phys. B 895, 161 (2015) [arXiv:1502.01365 [math-ph]].

[25] V. Bonzom, “New 1/N expansions in random tensor models,” JHEP 1306, 062 (2013) [arXiv:1211.1657 [hep-th]].
[26] V. Bonzom, L. Lionni and V. Rivasseau, “Colored triangulations of arbitrary dimensions are stuﬀed Walsh maps,”

[arXiv:1508.03805 [math.CO]].

[27] J. Ben Geloun and S. Ramgoolam, “Counting Tensor Model Observables and Branched Covers of the 2-Sphere,”

arXiv:1307.6490 [hep-th].

[28] V. Bonzom, “Revisiting random tensor models at large N via the Schwinger-Dyson equations,” JHEP 1303 (2013) 160,

arXiv:1208.6216 [hep-th].

[29] R. Gurau, “A generalization of the Virasoro algebra to arbitrary dimensions,” Nucl. Phys. B 852, 592 (2011)

[arXiv:1105.6072 [hep-th]].

[30] R. Gurau, “The Schwinger Dyson equations and the algebra of constraints of random tensor models at all orders,” Nucl.

Phys. B 865, 133 (2012) [arXiv:1203.4965 [hep-th]].

[31] P. Flajolet and R. Sedgewick, “Analytic Combinatorics,” Cambridge University Press (2009).
[32] R. Gurau, “The 1/N Expansion of Tensor Models Beyond Perturbation Theory,” Commun. Math. Phys. 330, 973 (2014)

doi:10.1007/s00220-014-1907-2 [arXiv:1304.2666 [math-ph]].

[33] T. Delepouve, R. Gurau and V. Rivasseau, “Universality and Borel Summability of Arbitrary Quartic Tensor Models,”

arXiv:1403.0170 [hep-th].

[34] V. A. Nguyen, S. Dartois and B. Eynard, “An analysis of the intermediate ﬁeld theory of T4 tensor model,” JHEP 1501,

013 (2015) doi:10.1007/JHEP01(2015)013 [arXiv:1409.5751 [math-ph]].

[35] T. R. S. Walsh, “Hypermaps versus bipartite maps,” Journal of Combinatorial Theory (B) 18, 155-163 (1975).
[36] I. P. Goulden and D. M. Jackson, “Combinatorial enumeration,” John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Somerset, New Jersey, 1983.
[37] V. Bonzom, “Revisiting random tensor models at large N via the Schwinger-Dyson equations,” JHEP 1303, 160 (2013)

[arXiv:1208.6216 [hep-th]].

[38] V. A. Nguyen, S. Dartois and B. Eynard, “An analysis of the intermediate ﬁeld theory of T4 tensor model,” JHEP 1501,

013 (2015) [arXiv:1409.5751 [math-ph]].

[39] B. Eynard, “Topological expansion for the 1-Hermitian matrix model correlation functions,” JHEP 0411, 031 (2004)

[hep-th/0407261].

[40] S. Dartois, “A Givental-like Formula and Bilinear Identities for Tensor Models,” JHEP 1508, 129 (2015) [arXiv:1409.5621

[math-ph]].

[41] J. Ben Geloun and V. Rivasseau, “A Renormalizable 4-Dimensional Tensor Field Theory,” Commun. Math. Phys. 318, 69

(2013) [arXiv:1111.4997 [hep-th]].
J. Ben Geloun, “Two and four-loop β-functions of rank 4 renormalizable tensor ﬁeld theories,” Class. Quant. Grav. 29,
235011 (2012) [arXiv:1205.5513 [hep-th]].

[42] A. Baratin, S. Carrozza, D. Oriti, J. Ryan and M. Smerlak, “Melonic phase transition in group ﬁeld theory,” Lett. Math.

Phys. 104, 1003 (2014) [arXiv:1307.5026 [hep-th]].
S. Carrozza, D. Oriti and V. Rivasseau, “Renormalization of Tensorial Group Field Theories: Abelian U(1) Models in Four
Dimensions,” Commun. Math. Phys. 327, 603 (2014) [arXiv:1207.6734 [hep-th]].
S. Carrozza, D. Oriti and V. Rivasseau, “Renormalization of a SU(2) Tensorial Group Field Theory in Three Dimensions,”

Commun. Math. Phys. 330, 581 (2014) [arXiv:1303.6772 [hep-th]].

[43] V. Lahoche, D. Oriti and V. Rivasseau, “Renormalization of an Abelian Tensor Group Field Theory: Solution at Leading

Order,” JHEP 1504, 095 (2015) [arXiv:1501.02086 [hep-th]].

[44] A. Tanasa, “The multi-orientable random tensor model, a review,” arXiv:1512.02087 [hep-th].
[45] S. Carrozza and A. Tanasa, “O(N ) Random Tensor Models,” arXiv:1512.06718 [math-ph].

29

