Minimal Conformal Extensions of the Higgs Sector

Alexander J. Helmboldt, Pascal Humbert, Manfred Lindner, and Juri Smirnov

Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Kernphysik, Saupfercheckweg 1, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany

In this work we ﬁnd the minimal extension of the Standard Model’s Higgs sector which can lead to
a light Higgs boson via radiative symmetry breaking and is consistent with the phenomenological
requirements for a low-energy realization of a conformal theory. The model which turns out to be
stable under renormalization group translations is an extension of the Standard Model by two scalar
ﬁelds, one of which acquires a ﬁnite vacuum expectation value and therefore mixes into the physical
Higgs. We ﬁnd that the minimal model predicts a sizable amount of mixing which makes it testable
at a collider. In addition to the physical Higgs, the theory’s scalar spectrum contains one light and
one heavy boson. The heavy scalar’s properties render it a potential dark matter candidate.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
p
e
h
[
 
 

1
v
3
0
6
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

I.

INTRODUCTION

The gauge hierarchy problem continues to be one of the
most pressing questions of modern theoretical physics. It
is a naturalness problem which, at its core, asks the ques-
tion why the electroweak scale can be light in spite of a
high-energy embedding of the Standard Model (SM) into
a more complex theory with other heavy scalar degrees of
freedom. One approach to solve the hierarchy problem is
the systematic cancellation of bosonic and fermionic loop
contributions to the Higgs mass within supersymmetry.
However, due to the fact that no supersymmertic par-
ticle has been observed yet, alternative approaches are
appealing.

A radical way of addressing this problem is the as-
sumption that the fundamental theory describing Nature
does not have any scale. In such a conformal model, the
symmetry can be realized non-linearly and explicit scales
can appear. This approach has inspired a number of pa-
pers in the recent years, see for example [1–28] and ref-
erences therein. A common feature of those works is the
need for additional bosonic degrees of freedom, as in the
SM alone the large top mass does not permit radiative
breaking of the electroweak symmetry. The conceptual
diﬃculty in the conformal model building is the nature
of the symmetry, which is sometimes misleadingly called
classical scale invariance. This symmetry is anomalous,
since generically the renormalization-group (RG) running
of the parameters leads to a non-vanishing trace of the
energy-momentum tensor, which enters the divergence of
the scale current.

We now argue that, if conformal invariance is a funda-
mental symmetry of Nature, then the quantum ﬁeld the-
ory must have a vanishing trace anomaly at some scale.
In the absence of explicit mass parameters, the trace of
the energy-momentum tensor is given by a weighted sum
of the beta functions. The anomalous Ward identity thus
allows only logarithmic dependence of physical quanti-
ties on the renormalization scale. Any quadratically di-
vergent contributions to the Higgs mass must therefore
be purely technical and are typically introduced by ex-
plicitly breaking the conformal invariance by regulators.
The formal divergences can be absorbed by appropriate
counterterms.

In the Standard Model, the hypercharge gauge cou-
pling is not asymptotically free and thus will increase
with energy.
In this context, there are two options to
still accomplish a vanishing trace anomaly. First, the
SM gauge group is embedded in a non-Abelian group
so that the corresponding coupling is asymptotically free
[29]. Second, the hypercharge contribution to the trace
anomaly is canceled by the gravitational anomaly. This
is possible as the anomalous gravitational contribution
to the trace can be negative [30] given certain values of
the couplings of scalar ﬁelds and the curvature scalar.
We argue that this vanishing of the trace of the energy-
momentum tensor is a necessary matching condition be-
tween the low-energy theory and the UV-complete con-
formal embedding.

If the second possibility is realized, from the point
of view of a low-energy theory, this means that the
electroweak symmetry is broken by radiative corrections
without tree-level mass parameters. Furthermore, the
theory must allow a RG evolution up to the Planck scale,
at which the gravitational contributions become relevant.
This means in particular that in the RG evolution no
Landau poles or vacuum instabilities appear below the
Planck scale. Furthermore, no explicit threshold scales
can be located in between the Planck scale and the low-
energy theory.

Our analysis changes the perspective under which the
hierarchy problem is viewed. The question is not why in
a given model the Higgs mass is light, but rather whether
a quantum ﬁeld theory with a given set of ﬁelds and pa-
rameters is stable under renormalization group transla-
tions. This RG stability will be our essential criterion to
distinguish models and to analyze whether a particular
parameter conﬁguration is allowed. This criterion selects
certain representations which can be added to the SM.
We ﬁnd that only the interplay of scalars, fermions and
gauge bosons can lead to the desired RG stability.

In this paper we revisit several classically scale-
invariant models and investigate whether they can be
low-energy realizations of a conformal theory. Including
all relevant eﬀects we ﬁnd that in contrast to previous
studies, for example [20], the SM extension by one real
scalar ﬁeld is not consistent with this requirement. Even-
tually, we identify the minimal conformal extension of the

SM Higgs sector to consist of the usual complex Higgs
doublet supplemented by two real scalar gauge singlets,
one of which develops a non-zero vacuum expectation
value (vev). In this context, minimality implies that the
SM gauge group is not altered and the additional num-
ber of representations is minimal. We ﬁnd that the scalar
ﬁeld without the vev can be a viable dark matter candi-
date. Furthermore, small neutrino masses can be easily
accommodated in this model. Another important result
of our work is that the physical Higgs will have sizable
admixtures of one of the singlet scalars which can be used
to constrain our model’s parameter space.

We present our analyses in Section II. First, we de-
scribe the method used in this paper to obtain our re-
sults. After that we scan through the most simple con-
formal models, starting with the extension of the SM by
one additional scalar. We then systematically investigate
further scalar extensions until we ﬁnd a successful model.
In Section III we discuss important implications of our
ﬁndings and summarize our results.

II. FINDING THE MINIMAL MODEL

One of the central aspects in the Standard Model is the
spontaneous breaking of electroweak symmetry induced
by a negative mass parameter of the Higgs ﬁeld. In a con-
formal extension of the SM, without any explicit mass
scale present at tree level, the spontaneous breakdown
must be triggered by quantum eﬀects. The correspond-
ing mechanism was ﬁrst investigated by Coleman and
E. Weinberg in the context of massless scalar QED [31].
There, the authors showed that even if a theory possesses
a symmetric vacuum at tree level, the one-loop eﬀec-
tive potential may exhibit a non-trivial minimum which
then induces spontaneous symmetry breaking (SSB). In
other words, radiative corrections dynamically generate
a mass scale in a classically conformal model. A scale
generated in this way obviously also breaks the (anoma-
lous) conformal symmetry spontaneously. Accordingly,
we expect the theory’s low-energy phase to contain one
pseudo-Goldstone boson (PGB) which obtains its ﬁnite
mass only at loop level.

From a more technical point of view, determining the
eﬀective potential’s minimum is typically a challenging
task in models of several scalars. However, there ex-
ists a method due to Gildener and S. Weinberg which
allows a systematic minimization [32]. In their formal-
ism, minimization conditions manifest themselves as im-
plicit equations for the model’s scalar couplings, the so-
called Gildener-Weinberg conditions. Due to the cou-
plings’ running, these conditions will only be satisﬁed at
a particular energy, which then is to be identiﬁed with
the scale of SSB, henceforth referred to as the Gildener-
Weinberg scale ΛGW. We review the basic principles and
some technical details of the Gildener-Weinberg formal-
ism in Appendix A. In particular, we will introduce the
loop function B in Eq. (A5) which will play a central

2

role in our analysis. It quantiﬁes the eﬀective potential’s
curvature at its minimum and thus also the PGB mass
squared (cf. Eq. (A7)). Consistency requires B to be pos-
itive.

It is well known that radiative symmetry breaking `a la
Coleman-Weinberg does not work in the SM due to the
large top quark mass [33]. In the Gildener-Weinberg for-
malism this failure is reﬂected in the fact that B = BSM
is negative such that the eﬀective potential does not de-
velop a minimum but a maximum.
In order to render
B positive, one has to achieve a dominance of bosonic
degrees of freedom (see Eq. (A5)). By this line of ar-
gumentation, it is immediately clear that no model can
work in which the SM is extended by fermionic repre-
sentations only. In particular, the SM supplemented by
right-handed neutrinos cannot facilitate radiative SSB.
Hence, it is necessary to add bosonic degrees of freedom
to the theory.

The question for the rest of this work will be: What is
the minimal conﬁguration to enable radiative SSB with
successful RG running up to the Planck scale? In this
context minimality implies that the SM gauge group,

SU(3)c × SU(2)L × U(1)Y ,

is not altered and the additional number of representa-
tions is minimal. If two models are equal according to
the above criteria, the number of parameters selects the
minimal model. In particular, we will not add any new
gauge degrees of freedom. Note that the scalar degrees
of freedom added to the model in principle may or may
not acquire ﬁnite vacuum expectation values, depending
on their quantum numbers.

In the models under investigation we ﬁnd that obtain-
ing scalar couplings, which allow for a successful RG
running up to the Planck mass MPl, turns out to be a
tightrope walk. On the one hand, the couplings need to
be large enough at the GW scale in order to have suﬃ-
ciently heavy new scalars which then render B positive at
low energies. On the other hand, starting with too large
scalar couplings at ΛGW will inevitably lead to low-scale
Landau poles in the scalar sector.

The method used in our analysis is as follows. First, we
choose the class of models we want to investigate. Then,
we derive the corresponding potential and the one-loop
beta functions. The unknown scalar couplings introduced
by the potential constitute our initial parameter space.
We use the Gildener-Weinberg formalism to obtain the
theory’s vacuum and from this derive the masses of the
physical scalar modes.

In doing so, we ascertain that the well-established
physics of electroweak symmetry breaking (EWSB) is
preserved. For instance, we will directly exclude mod-
els which imply a signiﬁcant shift of the ρ-parameter.
We then explicitly check whether the observed values for
the Higgs mass mHiggs and the electroweak scale v are
properly reproduced. As an additional consistency re-
quirement, we make sure that the scalar to be identiﬁed
with the Higgs boson observed at the LHC, HLHC, mainly

consists of the ﬁeld that couples to the SM fermions.
An experimental bound on the mixing of HLHC to other
scalars is given by |sin β| ≤ 0.37 [34]. Together with ap-
propriate Gildener-Weinberg conditions, all of the above
constrains will allow us to limit the model’s parameter
space and obtain initial conditions for the renormaliza-
tion group equations (RGEs).

In a ﬁrst analysis of a given model’s RG running, we
apply a “best-case approximation”. Thus, we obtain a
conservative estimate for the largest possible scale ΛUV
at which at latest an instability occurs or the theory’s
couplings turn non-perturbative.
If the scale found in
this way is signiﬁcantly smaller than the Planck mass,
we exclude the model in accordance with our previous
discussion. Otherwise, we perform a numerically more
challenging but completely consistent calculation in order
to determine the actual value for ΛUV.

In the following we are going to present the results of
our study.
In Section II A we discuss the simplest ex-
tension of the SM by one additional scalar. We analyze
the next-to-simplest case of adding two scalar degrees of
freedom in Section II B. This set-up contains the mini-
mal extension of the SM that leads to correct SSB and
successful RG running up to the Planck scale.

A. SM + one scalar representation

In accordance with our discussion in the previous para-
graph, the simplest extension of the SM which might
allow for radiative symmetry breaking is obtained by
adding a scalar gauge singlet. Generalizing this ansatz,
we investigate models in which one in general complex,
colorless scalar SU(2)L multiplet with given hypercharge
is added to the SM,

3

However, the authors of [35] have found that for the most
stable RG running all associated couplings have to van-
ish in the infrared, i.e. at the Gildener-Weinberg scale in
our context. Nevertheless, we include the simplest repre-
sentatives of the above operators, namely the λ3 and κ2
term.

Besides, there exist additional operators, which are
only invariant for special combinations of N and Y .
Again motivated by the results of [35], we will in gen-
eral ignore those terms. In cases in which we take them
into account, we will discuss them separately.

Checking the consistency of the models of interest
necessarily requires knowledge about the corresponding
RGEs. Therefore, we have calculated the one-loop beta
functions for these models and list the results in Ap-
pendix B. Before we investigate the most general case, let
us ﬁrst restrict the discussion to the situation in which χ
represents a real multiplet.

1. Real multiplet with zero vacuum expectation value

Let χ for the moment be a real SU(2)L multiplet in the
sense that it coincides with its charge conjugate ﬁeld, i.e.

˜χ := Cχ∗ != χ ,

(3)
where C is a suitable charge conjugation matrix.2 As
obvious from the above deﬁnition, real multiplets neces-
sarily have zero hypercharge. Furthermore, it is easy to
show that the term χ†T aχ vanishes identically for all real
ﬁelds transforming under an arbitrary irrep of SU(2)L.
Hence, the only non-zero terms in the general potential
Eq. (2) are those proportional to λ1, λ2 and κ1. The po-
tential therefore reduces to

χ ∼ (1, N, Y ) .

(1)

V = λ1(φ†φ)2 + λ2(χ†χ)2 + κ1(φ†φ)(χ†χ) .

(4)

The scalar potential consistent with the SM gauge sym-
metries and scale invariance, which our discussion will be
based on, reads as follows

V = λ1(φ†φ)2 + λ2(χ†χ)2 + λ3(χ†T aχ)2

+ κ1(φ†φ)(χ†χ) + κ2(φ†τ aφ)(χ†T aχ) ,

(2)

(cid:124)

where φ = (φ+, φ0)
denotes the usual complex Higgs
doublet and T a are the generators of the SU(2) Lie alge-
bra in the N -dimensional irreducible representation (ir-
rep) under which χ transforms. Accordingly, τ a denote
the generators of SU(2) in the fundamental representa-
tion.
Note that further gauge-invariant operators of the form
(χ†T a1 . . . T an χ)2 as well as the corresponding portal
terms are, in principle, present in the potential Eq. (2).1

Notice that the above potential enjoys an accidental
global O(4) × O(N ) symmetry. Since only the odd-
dimensional
irreps of SU(2) are real (as opposed to
pseudo-real), multiplets satisfying the reality condition
in Eq. (3) can only be consistently deﬁned for odd N .

For real scalar multiplets χ, always one of its compo-
nent ﬁelds is electrically neutral and may therefore ac-
quire a ﬁnite vev. We will discuss this case separately
later. For now, let us assume that all χi have zero vac-
uum expectation value. Then the electroweak vev is just
that of the Higgs doublet, v ≡ vφ, and the new scalar’s
√
component ﬁelds all obtain a ﬁnite mass during EWSB
(φ0 = v + h/

2),

m2

(5)
Similarly, the mass of the physical Higgs mode HLHC ≡ h
is given by m2
Higgs = 6λ1v2 at tree level. Since all physical

χ = 2κ1v2 .

1 Depending on the dimension N , some operators might be redun-
dant in the sense that they can be expressed as a linear combina-
tion of operators containing less generator matrices. Accordingly,
no additional coupling is introduced in those instances.

2 For the proper deﬁnition of C, see the discussion after Eq. (20).

masses have to be real, the above formula shows that the
portal coupling κ1 is necessarily non-negative at the GW
scale.

Next, the Gildener-Weinberg condition corresponding
to the assumed vev conﬁguration is λ1(ΛGW) = 0. Ac-
cordingly, the tree-level mass of the Higgs vanishes at
ΛGW, which implies that the physical Higgs is to be iden-
tiﬁed with the PGB of broken scale invariance. Hence,
working in the GW formalism, the physical Higgs mass
at ΛGW is to be calculated via the one-loop formula given
in Eq. (A7), i.e.

Higgs = 8(BSM + Badd)(cid:104)ϕ(cid:105)2 = 8Baddv2 − K ,
m2

(6)
where K := −8BSMv2 > 0 and (cid:104)ϕ(cid:105) = v denotes the
condensate introduced after Eq. (A3) in the Appendix.
Furthermore, it follows from Eq. (A5) and Eq. (5) that

Badd =

N κ2
1
16π2 .

(7)

Eq. (6) and Eq. (7) can now be solved for the unique por-
tal coupling at the GW scale which is consistent with the
experimental values for mHiggs and v

(cid:113)

2(cid:0)m2
Higgs + K(ΛGW)(cid:1) · N−1/2 .

(8)

κ1(ΛGW) =

π
v

Even though mHiggs in the above equation is evaluated
at ΛGW, we can still insert the measured value of the
Higgs pole mass mHiggs = 125 GeV, since it runs loga-
rithmically and we always assume ln(ΛGW) ∼ ln(mHiggs).
Equation (8) now shows that increasing the number N
of new scalar degrees of freedom implies a smaller value
for the portal coupling for otherwise ﬁxed quantities. In
other words, introducing a large scalar multiplet helps
to maintain the necessary condition B > 0, while at the
same time allowing small portal couplings. One might
therefore think that for large enough N Landau poles
in the scalar sector can be entirely evaded. However, N
also unavoidably enters in some terms of the model’s beta
functions leading to a faster RG running such that even
for small couplings at ΛGW low-scale Landau poles are
possible (see also Appendix B). Since N enters the prob-
lem in a non-trivial way, only an explicit calculation of
the RG running can shed light on the question of whether
some Landau pole exists below MPl for given N .

In order to simplify such a calculation in the class of
models under consideration, we neglect the SM contribu-
tion to the Higgs mass K ≡ K(ΛGW) and set
N−1/2 .

κ1(ΛGW) :=

mHiggs

√

2π

(9)

v

As K is positive, this deﬁnition exempliﬁes the “best-case
approximation” in the sense that for given N , the exact
value for κ1(ΛGW) will always be larger than that deﬁned
in Eq. (9). But the larger the initial portal coupling, the
sooner one of the scalar couplings will develop a Landau
pole.

4

FIG. 1. Largest possible UV scale in extensions of the confor-
mal SM by one real SU(2)L N -plet with vanishing vev. The
color code indicates which set of beta functions and couplings
are taken into account.

Uniquely solving the given model’s RGEs requires to
additionally ﬁx the value of the second quartic coupling
at the GW scale λ2(ΛGW) as well as the renormaliza-
tion point ΛGW itself. Note that setting the portal cou-
pling according to Eq. (9) only guarantees the proper ra-
tio mHiggs/v, but not the correct overall scale. In a full
calculation the latter, would have to be set by adjust-
ing ΛGW appropriately. For the following study, we will,
however,
ignore this additional constraint and choose
ΛGW = 500 GeV. Since we expect the exact value of
ΛGW to be of the same order as v and the running is
not very sensitive on where we precisely start in the
range [100 GeV, 1 TeV], this approximation will not sig-
niﬁcantly aﬀect the position of Landau poles.

Lastly, we vary λ2(ΛGW) in the perturbative range and
eventually employ the value which allows the farthest
extrapolation into the UV. For given order N , Figure 1
shows the largest possible scale ΛUV at which at least one
of the model’s couplings becomes non-perturbative. Ac-
cording to our discussion right after Eq. (9), the plotted
values for ΛUV are to be seen as an upper bound for the
true values, which is suﬃcient to exclude running up to
the Planck scale.
The pure scalar contribution (blue circles) supports
running only up to log(ΛUV/GeV) ≈ 6, which is 13 orders
of magnitude below the Planck scale. This poor per-
formance can be explained as follows: With the scalar
couplings alone, see Eq. (B2), no cancellation can take
place and the couplings will always increase quickly. The
larger the initial values of the scalar couplings the more
drastic this eﬀect becomes. Including the top contribu-
tion into our calculation (red squares) makes the running
even worse.

To understand the eﬀects of including the gauge sec-
tor (green triangles) we consult Eq. (B3) and Eq. (B5).
On the one hand, the scalar beta functions receive stabi-
lizing (negative) contributions proportional to the gauge
coupling g2 which grow as N 2. The Landau poles in the
scalar RGEs are thus shifted towards larger energies for

345671357911log((cid:3)UV=GeV)Npurescalarsectorscalarsector+topquarkscalarsector+gaugesectorfullRGEs5

2. Real multiplet with ﬁnite vacuum expectation value

Starting again from the scalar potential in Eq. (4), we will
now investigate the situation in which one component of
the real scalar multiplet, say χm0 , develops a ﬁnite vev,
i.e. χm0 = vχ + σ. Since the symmetry group of electro-
magnetism is observed to be unbroken at low energies,
only electrically neutral components of χ may acquire a
non-zero vev. Together with Y = 0 for real multiplets
this gives the relation m0 = (N + 1)/2.

Anticipating the common origin of both vevs in the
Coleman-Weinberg mechanism and adopting the nota-
tion of Appendix A, we parametrize

vφ = n1(cid:104)ϕ(cid:105) ≡ sin α(cid:104)ϕ(cid:105) ,
vχ = n2(cid:104)ϕ(cid:105) ≡ cos α(cid:104)ϕ(cid:105) ,

(10)

thereby deﬁning the vev alignment angle α ∈ (0, π/2).
Following the steps of Appendix A, it is now straight-
forward to write down the GW conditions for the model
under consideration and deduce the following identities
which deﬁne the energy scale of spontaneous symmetry
breaking ΛGW

4λ1λ2 − κ2

1 = 0 , n2

1 =

κ1

κ1 − 2λ1

.

(11)

2 = 1 − n2

We emphasize that all couplings in the above relations
are to be understood as evaluated at ΛGW. Furthermore,
we have n2
1 can only be
between zero and one for positive λ1 if the portal coupling
is negative. Combining Eq. (10) and Eq. (11), we ﬁnd the
vev alignment angle in terms of scalar couplings at ΛGW,
namely

1 and we see that n2

tan α ≡ vφ
vχ

=

− κ1
2λ1

.

(12)

We will use this formula in a moment to obtain informa-
tion about the relative magnitude of the two vevs.

First, however, let us remark that for ﬁnite vχ, the
CP-even degrees of freedom σ and h will in general mix
and it is not clear a priori which mass eigenstate is to
be identiﬁed with the physical Higgs boson found at the
LHC. To answer this question, we consider the scalar
(cid:124)
mass matrix of the neutral, CP-even modes ˜Φ = (h, σ)
deﬁned via V ⊇ 1
(cid:124) ˜M 2 ˜Φ, which can be computed from
the potential in Eq. (4) as

˜Φ

2

(cid:114)

√
2

(cid:19)

(cid:18)6λ1v2

√
2

˜M 2 =

φ + κ1v2
χ
2κ1vφvχ

2κ1vφvχ
χ + 2κ1v2
φ

12λ2v2

.

(13)

Since ˜M 2 is symmetric and real it can be diagonalized
by an orthogonal matrix U , conveniently parametrized
by a single mixing angle β. The two mass eigenstates
(cid:124)
(Φ1, Φ2)

= U ˜Φ can then be written as
Φ1 = cos β · h − sin β · σ ,
Φ2 = sin β · h + cos β · σ ,

(14)

FIG. 2. Running of the relative contributions to the beta
function of the Higgs self-coupling. The diﬀerent contribu-
tions from the scalar, Yukawa and gauge sectors are displayed
in blue, red and green, respectively. Note that the dashed red
(dotted green) curve shows the absolute value of the negative
contribution proportional to −y4 (−λg2) for better compari-
son with the positive ones.

increasing N . Accordingly, we observe a rise in ΛUV for
N ≤ 5 in Figure 1. On the other hand, the coeﬃcient in
the g2 beta function becomes positive for large enough
N and a Landau pole emerges at ever smaller energies.
At some point the gauge-sector Landau pole drops be-
low that of the scalar subsystem and thus becomes the
restricting one. Correspondingly, the UV scale declines
for N > 5.

The results obtained via the full running (orange dia-
monds) shows that we cannot reach the Planck scale in
this set-up, so that the present class of models must be
discarded.

We can further illuminate the above observations by
analyzing the interplay between the diﬀerent contribu-
tions to the beta function of the Higgs self-coupling λ1,
illustrated in Figure 2 (cf. also Appendix B 1). It shows
the running of the contributions from the scalar (blue),
Yukawa (red) and gauge (green) sectors with respect to
the renormalization scale µ. Note the logarithmic scale
of the y-axis. While in the gauge sector the stabilizing
negative contribution −λg2 soon dominates over the pos-
itive +g4, it is still overpowered by the contribution +λy2
which dominates the Yukawa sector for large enough
scales µ. However, the most important observation from
Figure 2 is that the relative contribution of the portal
coupling κ1 is about one order of magnitude larger than
the non-scalar ones. Correspondingly, the divergence in
λ1 is triggered by the portal term which therefore must
be kept suﬃciently small in order to avoid any Landau
pole. However, Eq. (8) prevents small initial values for
κ1 in the present case. Additionally, Figure 2 explic-
itly demonstrates that there is no possibility for complete
cancellations between the Yukawa and gauge sectors on
the one hand, and the scalar sector on the other hand.
Consequently, stabilizing cancellation must spring from
negative contributions within the scalar sector itself.

10(cid:0)310(cid:0)210(cid:0)11003.03.54.04.55.05.56.0log((cid:22)/GeV)+(cid:21)2+(cid:20)2(cid:0)y4+(cid:21)y2(cid:0)(cid:21)g2+g4one of which will have to be identiﬁed with the physical
Higgs boson HLHC. To see which one, note that we can
assume β ∈ (−π/4, π/4) without loss of generality. But
then we immediately see the necessity of Φ1 ≡ HLHC,
since low-energy phenomenology requires the Higgs state
to consist mainly of the SM doublet ﬁeld [34].

The mass matrix in Eq. (13) has two distinct mass

eigenvalues, which are given by

(cid:113)(cid:2)tr( ˜M 2)(cid:3)2 − 4 · det( ˜M 2) .

2m2± = tr( ˜M 2) ±

As before, we can exploit the additional relations between
the scalar couplings given in Eq. (11) together with the
constraints λ1 > 0 and κ1 < 0 to obtain expressions for
the above tree-level masses at ΛGW, namely

+ = 4(λ1 − κ1)v2
m2

φ , m2− = 0 .

(15)

As expected, the spectrum in the broken phase still con-
tains one scalar degree of freedom with vanishing tree-
level mass, the PGB of broken scale invariance. In con-
trast, m2
+ is always positive. Which of the mass eigen-
states Φi is now to be identiﬁed with the PGB depends
on the sign of the scalar mixing angle. The correct as-
signment procedure can be deduced by simply calculating
the diagonalized mass matrix for both cases. For positive
β, we obtain U ˜M 2U
+, m2−) such that Φ2 is
the PGB, whereas the diagonal entries are exchanged for
negative β and Φ1 corresponds to the PGB (cf. Table I).
Next, let us derive an expression for β in terms of
to

model parameters by requiring the matrix U ˜M 2U
be diagonal. An explicit calculation yields

= diag(m2

(cid:124)

(cid:124)

√
4

2κ1 tan α

tan 2β =

(12λ2 − κ1) − 2(3λ1 − κ1) tan2 α

,

where we used Eq. (10) in order to introduce the vev
alignment angle α. The above identity shows that in
a general theory the relation between the angles α and
β explicitly depends on the scalar couplings. In partic-
ular, experimental constraints for one angle do not di-
rectly translate into bounds for the other one, unless all
involved couplings are known. In contrast, using the ad-
ditional restrictions imposed on the scalar couplings by
the GW condition in Eq. (11), we can rewrite the above
equation as

√

2
2 tan α
1 − 2 tan2 α

tan 2β =

,

(16)

which has the two solutions listed in Table I. Combining
the above identity with Eq. (12), we can deduce a relation
between the sign of β and the relative magnitude of the
two vevs, see once more Table I.

In order to see whether we can construct a consistent
conformal model in the present set-up, let us now study
the two cases β > 0 and β < 0 separately, starting with
the former. From Table I we learn that for positive mix-
ing angle the vev of the additional SU(2)L multiplet is

PGB
= HLHC
(cid:54)= HLHC

−(

√
tan β(α)
2 tan α)−1
√
2 tan α

β < 0
β > 0

6

√
2vφ/vχ
> 1
< 1

TABLE I. Summary of diﬀerences between positive and neg-
ative scalar mixing angle β ∈ (−π/4, π/4). The assignment
in the ﬁrst column is done according to the discussion right
after Eq. (15). The statements in the second (third) column
follow from Eq. (16) (and Eq. (12)).

√

2vφ. The presence of such a vev
sizable, namely vχ >
will in general signiﬁcantly shift away the ρ-parameter
from its experimentally well-established SM-like value of
ρ ≈ 1 [36]. However, there are exceptions to this. Con-
sidering real multiplets, it is only the singlet which does
not aﬀect the ρ-parameter. Hence, for positive β we can
restrict the discussion of the additional real scalar with
vev to this case.

Furthermore, a positive mixing angle implies m+ =
mHiggs, i.e. the physical Higgs cannot be identiﬁed with
the PGB. Consequently, only the Higgs mass contributes
to Badd in Eq. (6). But obviously, the LHC Higgs is
not heavy enough to compensate the large, negative top
quark contribution to B and the PGB therefore obtains a
negative mass-square. In other words, the one-loop eﬀec-
tive potential exhibits a maximum instead of a minimum
at the electroweak scale which is clearly unphysical and
rules out this scenario.
√
Moving to negative scalar mixing angles, we now have
2vφ > vχ (cf. Table I). So a priori vχ (cid:28) vφ is al-
lowed and the additional vev’s contribution to the ρ-
parameter can in principle be suﬃciently small. For
β < 0, we will therefore not only investigate the singlet
case, but also larger multiplets. Note at this point that
for N > 1 a non-zero vev in the χ-sector spontaneously
breaks O(N ) −→ O(N−1). The theory’s spectrum in the
broken low-energy phase will thus contain N − 1 Gold-
stone modes. Consequently, only one component ﬁeld of
χ will acquire a non-vanishing mass term.

Furthermore, negative β implies that the physical
Higgs is to be identiﬁed with the PGB (cf. Table I) and
the theory’s spectrum contains one additional scalar with
unknown mass m+. Correspondingly, we can calculate

Badd =

n4
1

4π2 (λ1 − κ1)2

and use Eq. (6) to eventually arrive at the constraint

(cid:0)2

(cid:1)−1

(125 GeV)2 != m2

Higgs =

2
π2 n2

1(λ1 − κ1)2v2

φ − K .

(17)

√

2GF

= v2

The electroweak vev can generically be written as v2 =
χ, with a model-dependent non-
negative constant c, implying vφ ≤ v. Hence, we can
rewrite Eq. (17) as a condition on the unknown couplings
evaluated at ΛGW

φ + cv2

1(λ1 − κ1)2 !
n2

> π2 m2

Higgs

2v2 =: r2 ,

which now depends on the empirically known quantities
v and mHiggs. We have used again that K is positive. Re-
placing the above inequality by an equality corresponds
to the “best-case approximation” in a similar sense as
discussed right below Eq. (9). Solving e.g. for λ1, one
obtains

(cid:0)r2 − κ2

1

(cid:1) ±(cid:113)

r2(cid:0)r2 − κ2

(cid:1)

1

,

(18)

λ1(κ1) =

−κ1

where only the solution with the plus sign gives positive
λ1 in the relevant κ1-range (small and negative). Fur-
thermore, general arguments allow to constrain the valid
range for the portal coupling. Firstly, λ1 is assumed to
be real, which directly gives |κ1| ≤ r. Secondly, as a
consequence of Eq. (12), negative scalar mixing angles
imply λ1 ≤ −κ1. This, in turn, is only satisﬁed for
|κ1| ≥ √
3r/2. Using the numerical value for r, we can

constrain κ1 to

1.38 ≤ |κ1| ≤ 1.60 .

(19)

For the following study, we will choose again ΛGW =
500 GeV and vary κ1(ΛGW) in the allowed range. The
remaining initial conditions λ1(ΛGW) and λ2(ΛGW) are
then ﬁxed by Eq. (18) and Eq. (11), respectively.

In complete analogy to Figure 1 from the last subsec-
tion, Figure 3 now illustrates the results for the present
case: The largest possible scale ΛUV at which at least one
of the model’s couplings develops a Landau pole is plot-
ted as a function of N , the dimension of the additional
scalar SU(2)L representation. The most important re-
sult lies in the fact that also within the present class of
models, there is no representative which allows an ex-
trapolation all the way up to MPl. Except for the singlet
case (N = 1), all models develop a Landau pole at even
lower scales compared to the corresponding case without
vev.

The relative magnitudes of the calculated UV scales
for diﬀerent sets of beta functions is very similar to those
observed in Figure 1 and the discussion there can be
adopted. Nevertheless, there are some qualitative dif-
ferences between the two set-ups. Whereas, for instance,
Figure 1 exhibits a peak for N = 5 in the case with-
out vev, Figure 3 shows a strict decrease of ΛUV with
N . This behavior can be easily understood as follows:
Eq. (18), which ﬁxes the valid initial parameter values in
the present case, does not depend on the number of added
scalar degrees of freedom. Hence, for each N , the RG
running starts from the same hypersurface in parameter
space. The RGEs, however, explicitly depend on N and
especially the scalar contributions tend to increasingly
destabilize the running for increasing N (cf. Eq. (B2)). In
the situation without vev the initial hypersurface is de-
termined by Eq. (9) showing that the initial value for the
portal coupling decreases with N . This can compensate
the aforementioned destabilization for suﬃciently low N .
Our ﬁndings generalize the analysis of [21] and are con-
sistent with the conclusions of Foot et al. This concludes

7

FIG. 3. Largest possible UV scale in extensions of the confor-
mal SM by one real SU(2)L N -plet with ﬁnite vev vχ <
2vφ.
The color code indicates which set of beta functions and cou-
plings are taken into account.

√

our discussion of extensions of the conformal SM by one
real scalar multiplet. Since we have not found a consis-
tent theory up to now, we move on to the next class of
models.

3. Complex multiplet with zero vacuum expectation value

In this section we drop the requirement of the additional
scalar multiplet χ being real. Correspondingly, all cal-
culations will be based on the potential introduced in
Eq. (2) and we can drop the restriction to only odd-
dimensional SU(2)L multiplets. Note that a complex
scalar, as opposed to a real one, can carry non-zero hy-
percharge. If appropriate quantum numbers are assigned
to χ, one of the scalar’s components can be electrically
neutral and may therefore acquire a ﬁnite vev. We will
discuss this case separately later.

After Eq. (2) we argued that there exist additional op-
erators for special conﬁgurations of N and Y , but that
it is reasonable to ignore them. For the analysis of the
present class of models, however, we decided to include
the special term

(cid:124)

(cid:124)CT aχ) + h.c.

ετ aφ)(χ

,

(φ

∆V1 = κ3

(20)
into the general potential. Here, C is a matrix in the
SU(2) algebra satisfying the deﬁning relation CT aC−1 =
−T a(cid:124)
for all a, and ε is the two-dimensional representa-
tion of this matrix. This term then forms a gauge singlet
for arbitrary N as long as Y = −Yφ = − 1
2 is fulﬁlled.
However, since the matrices CT a are anti-symmetric in
all odd-dimensional irreps of SU(2), the κ3-term is only
present for even N . We decided to include ∆V1 into our
analysis because it is gauge-invariant not only for one
special conﬁguration, but, as we have just learned, for all
even-dimensional representations with a particular hy-
percharge. Nevertheless, it turns out that the best RG
running is obtained for a value of κ3 ≈ 0. This further

(cid:104)

(cid:105)

3.54.04.55.01357911log((cid:3)UV=GeV)Npurescalarsectorscalarsector+topquarkscalarsector+gaugesectorfullRGEsfortiﬁes our assumption of choosing the special couplings
close to zero. For better clarity, we will set κ3 to zero in
all formulas (of this subsection), even though we include
∆V1 in our calculation.

8

√
i.e. φ0 = vφ + h/

As in the real case, we will ﬁrst consider the situ-
ation in which only the SM doublet acquires a ﬁnite
vev,
implying that the phys-
ical Higgs mode HLHC ≡ h is to be identiﬁed with
the PGB. The associated Gildener-Weinberg condition
is again λ1(ΛGW) = 0 so that the physical Higgs only be-
comes massive through quantum eﬀects with its one-loop
mass squared given by Eq. (6).

2,

For generic values of the portal couplings κ1 and κ2,
all (complex) component ﬁelds χk will obtain some ﬁ-
nite mass m2
k during EWSB. However, in contrast to the
real case, the presence of the κ2-term explicitly violates
the formerly exact O(N ) symmetry and thus leads to a
mass splitting between the individual components, which
is proportional to κ2. An explicit calculation yields

(cid:2)4κ1 − (N − 2k + 1)κ2

(cid:3)v2

m2

k = 1
4

(21)
with k ∈ {1, . . . , N}. The portal couplings are to be
understood as evaluated at ΛGW. One can show that
requiring real masses for all new scalar particles implies
non-negative κ1 at the Gildener-Weinberg scale. Using
Eq. (21), we can now compute

Badd = 2 ·

1

64π2(cid:104)ϕ(cid:105)

m4

k =

4N κ2

1 + Dκ2
2
128π2

,

N(cid:88)

k=1

where the overall factor of two takes into account the
complex nature of the component ﬁelds. The Dynkin
index D of the representation under which χ transforms
is deﬁned in Appendix B. Anticipating K > 0, Eq. (6)

then implies (cid:113)

4N κ2

1 + Dκ2

2 > 4π

mHiggs

v

.

(22)

Similar to the previous discussions, we are only interested
in an upper bound for the location of potential Landau
poles and therefore employ the “best-case approxima-
tion”. Accordingly, we replace the inequality in Eq. (22)
by an equality. Given N and e.g. κ2(ΛGW), we can then
simply compute the corresponding value of κ1(ΛGW) > 0.
Uniquely solving the given model’s RGEs requires to
ﬁx the remaining couplings at the GW scale, namely λ2
and λ3, as well as the renormalization point itself. In the
following, we will assume ΛGW = 500 GeV and vary all
unspeciﬁed parameters in the perturbative range.

The results of the RG running for one additional com-
plex representation with vanishing vev are shown in Fig-
ure 4. The largest possible UV scale log(ΛUV/GeV) ≈ 7
is obtained for N = 5 or N = 6 and small values of Y .
The symmetry of the ﬁgure reﬂects the exchange symme-
try of the beta functions with respect to Y ↔ −Y . Note
that the dots for even numbers N on the Y = − 1
2 axis
were obtained including the κ3-term. This term could,

FIG. 4. Largest possible UV scale in extensions of the con-
formal SM by one complex SU(2)L N -plet with hypercharge
Y and vanishing vev.

2 and Y = − 1

in principle, lead to diﬀerences in the UV scale for even-
dimensional multiplets with Y = 1
2 . But as
we see from Figure 4, it has practically no eﬀect on the
RG running since the optimal initial value for κ3 turns
out to be close to zero and it is multiplicatively renor-
malized. Also the other additional couplings with respect
to the real case, λ3 and κ2, are best chosen near zero at
the initial scale. Note that these ﬁndings are consistent
with our discussion after Eq. (2). Comparing Figure 4 to
the case of a real scalar without vev, Figure 1, we see
that their features are very similar: They both support
running up to about the same UV scale, which reaches
its maximum at approximately the same values of N and
Y . In conclusion we ﬁnd that this model, by far, does
not allow for RG running up to the Planck scale.

4. Complex multiplet with ﬁnite vacuum expectation value

After discussing the case of an additional real multiplet
with ﬁnite vev in Section II A 2, the transfer to a com-
plex representation is straightforward. First, we mention
that for a complex multiplet we naturally have a dif-
√
ferent normalization for the ﬁeld modes, and especially
χm0 = vχ + σ/
2 for the electrically neutral mode. As
for the complex multiplet without vev, we apply the
Gildener-Weinberg formalism to the general potential
Eq. (2). Introducing the following quantities

√

v(cid:48)
χ :=
λ(cid:48)
2 := 1
4
κ(cid:48)
1 := 1
4

2vχ ,

tan α(cid:48) := 1√

(cid:2)λ2 + (1 − δN,1)λ3Y 2(cid:3) ,
(cid:2)κ1 + 1
2 (1 − δN,1)κ2Y(cid:3) ,

2

tan α ,

(23)

we obtain exactly the same equations as in the case
with the additional real scalar (starting from Eq. (11)).
We only need to use the primed quantities, deﬁned in
Eq. (23), instead of the unprimed ones. By this, for in-
stance, the Gildener-Weinberg condition from Eq. (11)
now reads 4λ1λ(cid:48)
1 = 0. The only new aspect is an
additional GW condition, namely κ3(ΛGW) = 0. Using

2 − κ(cid:48) 2

-8-404851015YN3.04.05.06.07.0log((cid:3)UV=GeV)the aforementioned replacements, also the scalar mixing
phenomenology is the same as in Section II A 2, which we
summarized in Table I.
√
For positive mixing angle, Table I tells us that
2vφ/v(cid:48)
χ = vφ/vχ < 1. As a consequence the addi-
tional vev is sizable and thus will in general tarnish the
ρ-parameter. However, for N ≤ 20, there exist three
complex representations which leave the ρ-parameter in-
variant, namely a singlet with Y = 0, a doublet with
Y = 1/2 and a septet with Y = 2. The description of
one additional complex singlet with zero hypercharge is
equivalent to the description of two additional real sin-
glets and will be covered in Section II B. If χ is an SU(2)L
doublet with Y = 1/2 it is a second Higgs boson and
– without additional assumptions – would have Yukawa
couplings to all of the SM fermions. This contradicts our
principle of minimality and we will not further consider
this case here. Finally, we investigated the septet model.
In this case, due to the large dimensionality N and the
relatively large hypercharge Y = 2, the beta function of
the U(1)Y gauge coupling runs into a Landau pole before
reaching the Planck scale (cf. Eq. (B6)). In summary, the
case of positive β does not provide us with a consistent,
minimal conformal model with a complex scalar multi-
plet that develops a ﬁnite vev.

For negative scalar mixing angle we have vφ > vχ and
for not too large vχ the ρ-parameter is safe. The Higgs
boson HLHC is the PGB and its mass is generated by the
additional massive scalar modes at the one-loop level.
In the case of a real multiplet the potential possessed
a global O(N ) symmetry that was spontaneously bro-
ken and, by the Goldstone theorem, guaranteed that all
modes besides χm0 were massless. Here, the additional
couplings λ3 and κ2 explicitly break this symmetry. Con-
sequently, the masses of the charged modes are propor-
tional to the symmetry breaking parameters. However,
as our previous analysis as well as the analysis of [35]
suggest, the couplings λ3 and κ2 are best chosen close to
zero for optimal RG running, and the symmetry of the
potential is approximately restored. With the additional
masses close to zero, the results of the model with com-
plex multiplet acquiring a ﬁnite vev are comparable to
the real case. This argument is further substantiated by
the observation – stated within the discussion of Figure 4
– that the results from Section II A 1 and II A 3 are both
qualitatively and quantitatively very similar. Therefore,
there is no reason to expect a large diﬀerence when going
from real to complex χ also in the case of a ﬁnite vev. We
thus conclude that for negative β the case of the complex
multiplet with ﬁnite vev leads to similar results as in the
real case shown in Figure 3. In particular, there will be
no combination (N, Y ) for which the RG running can be
extended far beyond O(107 GeV).

This exhausts all reasonable possibilities in the case of
the conformal SM plus a complex multiplet that develops
a ﬁnite vev. We have not found a consistent minimal
conformal model up to now.

Before we proceed to the next class of models with

9

two additional scalar multiplets, let us comment on the
conformal SM with one additional scalar and additional
fermionic representation(s). One can easily see that this
set-up will also fail to provide a consistent conformal
model, since additional fermions destabilize the RG run-
ning in two ways: Firstly, any massive fermionic parti-
cle will give negative contributions to Badd. In order to
render B positive, the scalar couplings therefore have to
take larger initial values in comparison to the model with-
out fermion. Secondly, adding a fermion will ultimately
destabilize the scalar RGEs even more due to its positive
contribution proportional to λy2 to the beta function of a
generic scalar coupling (cf. the discussion about Figures
1 and 2). We conclude that, if a given theory develops
Landau poles well below the Planck scale, then the same
theory supplemented by fermions interacting via Yukawa
couplings with the scalar sector will, too.

B. SM + two scalar representations

In complete analogy to our discussion in Section II A,
we now consider the case in which two real scalar mul-
tiplets χ and ξ are added to the SM. In doing so, we
will neglect all but the standard quartic and portal cou-
plings, in accordance with our previous analyses (cf. in
particular Section II A 3). This is also in line with our no-
tion of minimality discussed earlier. In eﬀect, the afore-
mentioned assumption introduces an additional global
O(Nχ) × O(Nξ) symmetry in the scalar sector. The as-
sociated scale-invariant tree-level potential then reads

V = λφ(φ†φ)2 + λχ(χ†χ)2 + λξ(ξ†ξ)2

+ κφχ(φ†φ)(χ†χ) + κφχ(φ†φ)(ξ†ξ)
+ κχξ(χ†χ)(ξ†ξ) ,

(24)

where φ denotes the SM complex Higgs doublet as before
and both χ and ξ are now supposed to satisfy reality
conditions like the one in Eq. (3). For the model’s RGEs
we again refer to the formulas given in Appendix B.

1. Two real multiplets with zero vacuum expectation value

Similar to our one-scalar discussion, we ﬁrst assume that
neither χ nor ξ acquires a ﬁnite vev. In the GW formal-
ism, this corresponds to the renormalization condition
λφ(ΛGW) = 0. Hence, the physical Higgs is necessarily
√
the PGB of broken scale invariance. Electroweak sym-
metry breaking then proceeds via φ0 = v + h/
2 and
induces the following masses for all new scalar degrees of
freedom:

m2

χ = 2κφχv2

or m2

ξ = 2κφξv2 .

(25)

Since all physical masses have to be real, the two portal
couplings κφχ and κφξ are necessarily non-negative at
the GW scale. The one-loop mass squared of the physical

10

FIG. 6. Largest possible UV scale in the set-up described in
Figure 5. The results were obtained using Left: RGEs includ-
ing scalar and SM gauge contributions. Right: full RGEs.

are also similar for both set-ups.
In particular, com-
paring the panels on the right-hand side with the ones
on the left-hand side in Figures 5 and 6, again exem-
pliﬁes that including a generic Yukawa coupling desta-
bilizes the ﬂow and thus decreases the maximal possible
UV scale. On a quantitative level, the Landau poles in
the present study of two additional scalars develop at
somewhat higher scales compared to the corresponding
divergences in the one-scalar case.

We furthermore ﬁnd that for given dimensions of the
scalar multiplets, the farthest RG running is obtained for
vanishing quartic couplings, λχ and λξ, as well as neg-
ative and often sizable κχξ. As revealed by scrutinizing
the RGEs in Eq. (B2), negative κχξ may keep the scalar
part of portal coupling beta functions under control by
generating negative contributions through mixed terms
κφχ ⊇ 4Nξκφξκχξ. Accordingly, for negative and
like in β(1)
suﬃciently large κχξ, there can be cancellations already
within the scalar sector.
In addition, there exist com-
binations (Nχ, Nξ), for which also the other free portal
coupling, κφχ is of O(1). However, this is simply a con-
sequence of the constraint derived from Eq. (27).

Finally, the most important result from the present
paragraph is the following: the calculation based on the
full set of RGEs with all terms included shows that none
of the investigated models can be extrapolated all the
way up to the Planck scale. Hence, we do not ﬁnd a
consistent conformal model in this class of theories.

2. The minimal conformal model

As in the previous section, we will discuss the situa-
tion of two real scalar multiplets being added to the
conformal SM. However, whereas earlier both additional
scalars were supposed to have a trivial vacuum expecta-
tion value, we will now relax this assumption and investi-
gate cases in which one of the multiplets has a component
that acquires a ﬁnite vev.

FIG. 5. Largest possible UV scale in extensions of the confor-
mal SM by two real scalar SU(2)L multiplets with vanishing
vevs. The results were obtained using RGEs including Left:
scalar contributions only. Right: scalar and top-quark contri-
butions.

Higgs boson HLHC ≡ h is again given by equation Eq. (6),
but in the present situation we have

Badd =

Nχκ2

φχ + Nξκ2
φξ
16π2

.

(26)

Combining the previous identity with equation Eq. (6)
and taking into account K > 0, we arrive at

(cid:113)

Nχκ2

φχ + Nξκ2

φξ >

√

2π

mHiggs

v

.

(27)

For the purpose of ﬁnding out whether there exists a
pair (Nχ, Nξ), for which consistent radiative symmetry
breaking is possible, explicit calculations of the RG run-
ning are inevitable. To facilitate those, we will again
apply the “best-case approximation”, in which the above
inequality Eq. (27) is replaced by an equation. Given Nχ,
Nξ and e.g. κφχ(ΛGW), we can then simply compute the
corresponding value of κφξ(ΛGW).

Uniquely solving the given model’s RGEs requires
to ﬁx the three remaining couplings at the GW scale,
namely λχ, λξ and κχξ, as well as the renormalization
point ΛGW itself. For the following study, we will choose
ΛGW = 500 GeV and vary all unspeciﬁed couplings in
the perturbative range. Whereas the quartic couplings
are conﬁned to positive values due to the requirement of
vacuum stability, the sign κχξ(ΛGW) is not constrained a
priori.

Figures 5 and 6 summarize the ﬁndings for the largest
possible UV scale ΛUV we obtain working in the “best-
case approximation”. In total, we show four plots, diﬀer-
ing in the particle sectors included in the computation of
the RG running. It is instructive to compare the present
results to the outcome of the calculations with one ex-
tra scalar without vev (cf. Section II A 1). Thereby, each
of the above panels corresponds to one set of points in
Figure 1. On a qualitative level, each individual case
gives results resembling those of its one-scalar counter-
part. The respective diﬀerences between the four cases

51015205101520N(cid:24)N(cid:31)5101520N(cid:31)6.06.57.0log((cid:3)UV=GeV)51015205101520N(cid:24)N(cid:31)5101520N(cid:31)3.04.05.06.07.08.0log((cid:3)UV=GeV)In the following, we will demonstrate that already for
the simplest case with two additional scalar gauge sin-
glets S and R, the model allows for an extrapolation all
the way up to the Planck scale, while giving rise to the
correct phenomenology at the electroweak scale. Since
this time our goal is to actually prove that the largest
possible UV scale is at least the Planck scale, it is no
longer suﬃcient to calculate an upper bound for ΛUV as
we did before. In particular, we will not apply the previ-
ously introduced “best-case approximation”. Instead, we
will use a two-step procedure: First, we determine the hy-
persurface in the model’s parameter space on which the
given low-energy phenomenology requirements are satis-
ﬁed. In particular and in contrast to our analyses before,
we perform a fully consistent calculation of the Gildener-
Weinberg scale in the way outlined in Appendix A 2. Sec-
ond, we will numerically solve the full set of RGEs to-
wards the UV starting from the solution manifold from
step one. At each RG step, we check if basic perturba-
tivity and stability requirements are met by all running
couplings.

Furthermore, we test whether no GW condition is sat-
isﬁed at any intermediate energy scale Λ > ΛGW. Dur-
ing the evolution of the early universe, the tree-level po-
tential would have developed a non-trivial minimum be-
fore reaching the original ΛGW if such a scale Λ existed.
Hence, SSB would already have taken place at Λ which
would render our initial assumption inconsistent.

Let us now ﬁrst concentrate on the conformal SM ex-
tended by two real scalar gauge singlets (CSM2S), one
of which (say S) acquires a ﬁnite vev during EWSB,
i.e. S = vS + σ. The most general scalar potential which
is consistent with the SM gauge symmetries and classical
scale invariance can be written as
V = λφ(φ†φ)2 + λSS4 + λRR4

+ κφS(φ†φ)S2 + κφR(φ†φ)R2 + κSRS2R2
+ κ4SR(φ†φ)2 + κ5S3R + κ6SR3 .

(28)

In order to reduce the number of free parameters, we
impose an additional global Z2 symmetry in the following
way

Z2−→ −R ,

R

(29)

with all other ﬁelds in the theory left invariant. The
three terms in the last line of Eq. (28) are odd under
the above transformation and are thus forbidden. Note,
furthermore, that the deﬁnition in Eq. (29) implies abso-
lute stability of R which therefore might be a viable dark
matter candidate.3

√
As R does not acquire a ﬁnite vev, it does not mix with
the other CP-even scalar modes. With φ0 = vφ + h/
2

3 If we want the Z2 symmetry to be exact, it must be R rather
than S which transforms non-trivially under it. Otherwise, Z2
would be spontaneously broken by vS = (cid:104)S(cid:105) (cid:54)= 0.

as usual, we then obtain the following tree-level mass

R = 2(cid:0)κφRv2

m2

φ + κSRv2
S

11

(cid:1) .

Furthermore, the 2 × 2 mass matrix of (h, σ) is the same
as before in Section II A 2, Eq. (13), upon replacing

λ1 → λφ , λ2 → λS ,
vχ → vS .
κ1 → κφS ,

it is moreover
Using the above replacement rules,
formulas given in
straightforward to show that all
Eq. (10) to Eq. (16) apply to the present situation.
In
particular, we again have to distinguish positive and neg-
ative scalar mixing angle β (cf. Table I).

Here, we concentrate on the case in which the physi-
cal Higgs boson HLHC is not identiﬁed with the PGB of
broken scale invariance. In this situation, the Higgs mass
is given by m+ from Eq. (15). For given portal coupling
κφS(ΛGW), we can therefore directly calculate the value
of λφ at the GW scale, namely

λφ(κφS) = κφS +

Higgs

m2
4v2

at ΛGW .

We set vφ ≡ v = 174 GeV in accordance with the fact
that S is a gauge singlet whose vev does not contribute
to the electroweak scale. The above equation can further-
more be used to determine the range of portal couplings
consistent with positive β, namely |κφS| < 0.065.

Next, we use the assumed vev conﬁguration in form
of the GW condition in Eq. (11) to further reduce the
number of free parameters at the initial scale:

λS(κφS) =

κ2
φS
4λφ

at ΛGW .

The determination of the remaining parameters’ initial
values in terms of κφS and mPGB is presented in Appendix
A 2. In particular, we will show there how to consistently
calculate the GW scale.

Next, we need to clarify whether the model can be
consistently extended all the way up to the Planck scale
without any intermediate scale appearing. We do so by
solving the theory’s complete one-loop RGEs.
In each
RG step, we check basic perturbativity and stability cri-
teria of the model’s couplings and abandon the given pa-
rameter point as soon as any inconsistency occurs below
MPl. The beta functions for the CSM2S can be obtained
from the general formulas given in Appendix B by setting
Nχ = Nξ = 1.

Our calculation for positive scalar mixing angle gives
the plot shown in Figure 7. As discussed above, we vary
one of the portal couplings, κφS, and the PGB mass.
In accordance with the discussion after Eq. (8), we im-
mediately discard those parameter points, which imply a
large separation between ΛGW and the electroweak scale v
(grey area on the left). Since the eﬀective potential’s per-
turbative expansion is no longer reliable if ln((cid:104)ϕ(cid:105)/ΛGW)

12

FIG. 7. Largest possible UV scale in the CSM2S. (Case in
which the physical Higgs is not the PGB, i.e. β > 0.) The
white arrow marks the example point from Eq. (30).

is too large, we additionally exclude points, for which
the hierarchy between the GW scale and the conden-
sate (cid:104)ϕ(cid:105) becomes sizable (grey area on the top). For
small portal couplings |κφS| and suﬃciently low PGB
masses, mPGB (cid:46) 15 GeV, we then ﬁnd a viable region of
parameter space (red area). In this regime, a fully con-
sistent extrapolation of the model up to the Planck scale
is possible, while reproducing the correct low-energy phe-
nomenology.

The available parameter space can be further narrowed
down by noting that the mixing in the Higgs sector will
eﬀect the signal strength of Higgs events observed at the
LHC. The currently measured signal strength constrains
the scalar mixing angle to sin β ≤ 0.37 [34]. By including
this limit in Figure 7, we can rule out all points below the
dashed black curve. An other interesting phenomenolog-
ical aspect is the existence of exotic Higgs decays. The
Higgs boson can decay into two PGBs, which then further
decay to SM particles. In this decay chain possible ﬁnal
states contain, H → 4 jets, H → 4 leptons, H → 4γ.
H → 2 jets 2γ, H → 2 jets 2 leptons, H → 2 leptons 2γ.
While the hadronic decays have a large background at the
LHC, the ﬁnal states containing leptons can be well dis-
tinguished. In particular the leptons are pairwise boosted
in contrast to a decay mediated by the electro-weak gauge
bosons. Furthermore, the H → 4γ can provide a very
clean signature and only has the background coming from
highly suppressed Higgs self interactions. This opens a
window of opportunity to test a symmetry implemented
close to the Planck scale, directly at the TeV scale.

Let us now try to gain further insight on how the scalar
couplings can remain free of Landau poles in the present
model. In analogy to our analysis in Section II A 1, we
therefore compare the diﬀerent contributions to the Higgs
self-coupling beta function. The corresponding results
presented in Figure 8 were obtained for the example point
marked in Figure 7, namely

mPGB = 3 GeV , κφS = −0.0018 .

(30)

Requiring the correct vev implies mR = 313 GeV. Stable

FIG. 8. Running of the relative contributions to the beta
function of the Higgs self-coupling for the example point in
Eq. (30). The diﬀerent contributions from the scalar, Yukawa
and gauge sectors are displayed in blue, red and green, re-
spectively (cf. also caption of Figure 2).

RG running up to the Planck scale is then e.g. possible
for λR = 0.015 and κSR = 0.01.

Now, the key diﬀerence with respect to Figure 2 is
that the pure scalar contribution no longer dominates
over the whole energy range. Rather, it is exceeded by
the stabilizing contribution from the Yukawa coupling
for energies up to 1014 GeV so that the Higgs coupling
ﬁrst decreases. At larger scales, the portal terms start
to dominate. The coupling will hence ultimately develop
a Landau pole. However, our calculation shows that λφ
stays small up to the Planck scale.

We attribute this improved behavior of the scalar con-
tribution to two features. First, compared to the models
in Section II A, there is now a larger number of inde-
pendent scalar degrees of freedom (multiplets). Positiv-
ity of B therefore no longer implies that one coupling
must be particularly large at the initial scale: Whereas
e.g. equations (8) and (19) require κ1 to be of order one,
the corresponding portal coupling in the CSM2S, κφS, is
preferably of O(10−2) or smaller. Second, since all scalar
couplings can now be of the same order of magnitude,
there exists the possibility of cancellations between dif-
ferent scalar contributions. Those cancellations may help
to keep the beta functions of the portal couplings small.
Now that we have understood how a stable RG running
is realized in the minimal conformal model, let us look
for means to achieve larger PGB masses. To that end, we
brieﬂy discuss a non-minimal extension of the conformal
SM very similar to the CSM2S. Here, the singlet scalar
R is exchanged for a real SU(2)L triplet with vanishing
vev.4 The resulting model will be referred to as CSMTS
in the following. Figure 9 demonstrates that compared
to the minimal conformal model an extended region of

4 The imposed Z2 symmetry from Eq. (29) is replaced by a global

O(3) symmetry in the triplet sector.

-0.05-0.04-0.03-0.02-0.010.0001020304050(cid:20)(cid:30)SmPGB[GeV]101210151018(cid:3)UV[GeV](cid:3)GW>103GeVlnh’i(cid:3)GW>1sin(cid:12)>0:3710(cid:0)210(cid:0)1100369121518log((cid:22)/GeV)+(cid:20)2(cid:0)y4+(cid:21)y2(cid:0)(cid:21)g2+g4+(cid:21)213

pling which can only vanish in the UV once gravity con-
tributions become signiﬁcant. Thus, our necessary con-
dition is that the renormalization-group (RG) running
remains stable and does not develop Landau poles below
the Planck scale. We have used the Gildener-Weinberg
formalism, ensuring the perturbative nature of our ex-
pansion, and have taken into account the complete one-
loop RG equations. In particular, we include contribu-
tions from ﬁeld renormalization.

We ﬁnd that none of the conformal extensions of the
Higgs sector by one scalar SU(2)L multiplet meets the
stability criteria. The additional scalar can be either real
or complex and acquire a vacuum expectation value or
not. In all cases the models develop a Landau pole far
below the Planck scale. The reason is that in all param-
eter points the phenomenological requirement that the
Higgs boson mass is roughly half its vacuum expectation
value, leads to large portal couplings κ in the potential.
The RG running is then highly unstable, since the beta
function for the Higgs quartic coupling λ contains terms
proportional to λ2 and κ2 with positive coeﬃcients. Con-
tributions from gauge bosons can decelerate the running,
as they contain negative terms of the form −λg2, where g
is a generic gauge coupling. However, with growing scalar
couplings the scalar sector dominates and the system is
still unstable.

In particular, the simple model discussed in [20], in
which the SM is extended by one real SU(2)L-singlet
scalar and right-handed sterile neutrinos, turns out to be
unstable. Indeed, even though a Yukawa coupling y gives
a negative contribution proportional to −y4 to the beta
function of the Higgs self-coupling, the scalar ﬁeld wave
function renormalization unavoidably introduces positive
terms scaling as +λy2. Therefore, it is obvious that, with
growing λ, the fermionic contributions always destabilize
the system even more. 5

Other extensions of the Higgs sector by one SU(2)L
scalar representation turn out to be unstable as well, as
for example the conformal inert doublet model [23].6

Having excluded those simplest theories, we ﬁnd the
minimal model, which leads to correct radiative break-
ing of electroweak symmetry and is RG stable, among
the extensions of the Higgs sector by two scalars. To
be precise, our analysis shows that the minimal model
is the SM augmented by two scalar gauge singlets, one
of which has to obtain a non-zero vacuum expectation
value.
In this system a light Higgs boson can be real-
ized without ﬁne-tuning. In addition, the theory contains
a pseudo-Goldstone boson (PGB) with its mass being
strongly suppressed with respect to the vacuum expec-
tation value of the new singlet scalar. This turns out to

5 The diﬀerent treatment of the wave function renormalization

leads to deviations with respect to the results of [20].

6 In order to check this, we have performed a fully consistent anal-
ysis as presented in Section II B 2. In particular, we have taken
into account the complete scalar potential including the term
2 ).
∆V2 = κ4

(cid:2)(φ†χ)2 + h.c.(cid:3), which is only present for χ ∼ (1, 2, 1

FIG. 9. Largest possible UV scale in the CSMTS. (Case in
which the physical Higgs is not the PGB, i.e. β > 0)

PGB masses up to mPGB ≈ 35 GeV becomes accessible
in the CSMTS. With respect to the minimal model, two
heavy scalar degrees of freedom are added to the theory’s
spectrum. According to Eq. (A7) and Eq. (A5), a given
PGB mass can now be produced for smaller initial values
of the scalar couplings (cf. Appendix A). Consequently,
potential Landau poles will develop at higher scales. A
straightforward and minimally invasive way to generate
even larger PGB masses would be to replace the triplet by
a higher-dimensional real SU(2)L multiplet, e.g. a quintu-
plet or a septet. Note that in those cases the dark matter
stability does not need to be enforced by any additional
global symmetry.

Let us ﬁnally comment on the robustness of our results
under inclusion of higher loop orders in the RG running.
Since higher-order terms come with an additional loop
suppression factor of 1/16π2, their contributions can only
have a signiﬁcant impact, if the one-loop beta functions
are anomalously small. Hence, in all the cases that failed
to provide a perturbative evolution up to MPl, two-loop
eﬀects will be negligible, since the one-loop beta functions
are already sizable. In contrast, as there are mild can-
cellations in the RGEs of the minimal conformal model,
two-loop contributions may change our results quantita-
tively. However, we expect our ﬁndings to remain valid
from a qualitative perspective.

III. DISCUSSION

The present study contains the analysis of simple con-
formal extensions of the Higgs sector in which radia-
tive symmetry breaking within the Coleman-Weinberg
mechanism can take place. As a consequence of non-
linearly realized conformal symmetry implemented at a
much higher scale, the usual gauge hierarchy problem is
avoided. For this scenario to be consistent, the vanishing
of the trace anomaly at the high scale is necessary. As
simple extensions of the Standard Model (SM), we con-
sider theories with the same gauge group. Hence, there
is always the beta function of the Abelian gauge cou-

-0.05-0.04-0.03-0.02-0.010.0001020304050(cid:20)(cid:30)SmPGB[GeV]101210151018(cid:3)UV[GeV](cid:3)GW>103GeVlnh’i(cid:3)GW>1sin(cid:12)>0:3714

Higgs decays and therefore to a larger Higgs width than
in the SM.

Furthermore, the points of the parameter space in
which we ﬁnd stable RG running predict sizable singlet
scalar admixtures to the physical Higgs state with sines
of the mixing angle between 0.12 and 0.48. The mixing
can be compared to the SM prediction which leads to a
constraint on the mixing angle. The current LHC up-
per limit of sin β < 0.37 [34] therefore already rules out
a large fraction of the parameter space. The complete
model might be tested by the LHC in the ongoing run.

Finally, we would like to remark that in the minimal
conformal extension of the SM neutrino masses can easily
be accommodated. Once we introduce right-handed neu-
trino ﬁelds as SM gauge singlets they naturally possess a
conformal and gauge-invariant, Majorana-type Yukawa
coupling to the scalar singlet S.8 Additionally, we ob-
tain Dirac-type Yukawa couplings with the SM lepton
and Higgs doublet. After electroweak symmetry break-
ing the Yukawa couplings lead to a neutrino mass matrix
that realizes a type-I seesaw mechanism [10]. Of course,
it remains to be checked whether including the Majorana
Yukawa coupling negatively inﬂuences the RG running.
Based on our observations regarding the eﬀects of the top
quark Yukawa coupling on the RGEs, we expect changes
due to yM to be controllable.

To summarize our results, we found that it is necessary
to add at least two scalar ﬁelds to the Standard Model,
one of which has to develop a non-vanishing vacuum ex-
pectation value to have a model which is stable under
RG translations. Thus the minimal model we discuss is
an extension of the SM Higgs sector by two real singlet
scalar ﬁelds. We have found that the minimal model con-
tains a viable dark matter candidate and predicts sizable
mixing in the Higgs sector, which might be a powerful
tool to rule out or get a hint about the realization of
conformal models.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We acknowledge very helpful discussions with Hermann
Nicolai and his comments on our manuscript. We thank
Pavel Fileviez Perez for discussions.

be a natural set-up with no need for large couplings in
the potential. Furthermore, in the three-scalar potential
the portal term contributions to the RG running can be
negative and thus mutually stabilize their beta functions.
Those are the two reasons why the system remains stable
up to the Planck scale.

Our study raises the general question about the stabil-
ity of a Standard Model extension under RG translations.
A general observation is that the top-quark Yukawa cou-
pling runs towards a stable value between 0.4 and 0.6 in
the far ultraviolet, depending indirectly on the SU(2)L
scalar content. This is due to the fact that the top
Yukawa beta function at one-loop depends on itself and
the three gauge couplings, which only show a mild run-
ning in the ultraviolet regime. As can be seen from the
appropriate RG equations, the Higgs quartic coupling
can have a regime of RG-ﬂow stability at ﬁnite values
given a large top Yukawa and small portal couplings to
the new scalars. It is an interesting and non-trivial ob-
servation that in the SM there are no Landau poles below
the Planck scale and the Higgs self-coupling approaches
a constant (yet negative) value in the UV. In our exten-
sions of the Higgs sector portal couplings are necessarily
present. Their positive contributions to the Higgs beta
function lead to vacuum stability at all energy scales.
Additionally, if the portal couplings are suﬃciently small,
the near vanishing of the Higgs beta function in the UV
is maintained.7 Accordingly, in the RG-stable region of
parameter space the scalar beta functions have very small
values at the Planck scale. This is the desired behavior
to achieve the necessary anomaly matching, thus indicat-
ing that conformal symmetry is realized at the quantum
level.

Within the minimal model, we ﬁnd that one of the
scalar singlets is an excellent dark matter candidate, since
it does not develop a vacuum expectation value.
Its
eﬀective phenomenology is similar to the Higgs portal
model, see for example [38–40] and references therein.
We observe the dark matter mass to be conﬁned to a
rather small region between 300 GeV and 370 GeV. Fur-
thermore, we checked that the parameter space consid-
ered by us is consistent with cosmological observations,
i.e. the scalar ﬁeld abundance does not overclose the uni-
verse. However, a detailed study of the dark matter phe-
nomenology goes beyond the scope of this article. Notice
that if the second scalar is a quintuplet or a septet its
stability does not need to be enforced by any additional
symmetry.

Another important phenomenological consequence is
that the mass of the pseudo-Goldstone boson is found to
be always below half the Higgs mass and is preferably as
light as a few GeV. This necessarily leads to additional

7 The exact value of the Higgs quartic coupling at which its beta
function vanishes is sensitive to the top quark mass and can have
a small positive value or even vanish for some top mass values
[37].

8 Note that the right-handed neutrinos, however, do not couple to
R due to the Z2 symmetry. Even if such a coupling existed, it
still would not lead to a Majorana mass term because R does
not develop a ﬁnite vev.

Appendix A: The Gildener-Weinberg formalism

These minima lie on a ray through the origin of ﬁeld
space, henceforth referred to as the ﬂat direction.

15

In this appendix, we review the Gildener-Weinberg for-
malism introduced in [32]. Within the framework of the
Coleman-Weinberg mechanism, it allows to systemati-
cally minimize a potential in a theory with multiple scalar
ﬁelds without having to resort to numerical brute-force
algorithms. It can be considered the analogue of the RG-
improved potential in the one-scalar case. Furthermore,
the formalism allows us to derive conditions on the scalar
couplings and ensures the applicability of the loop expan-
sion of the eﬀective potential.

After discussing the formalism’s basic principles in Sec-
tion A 1, we present our method to consistently calculate
the scale of spontaneous symmetry breaking ΛGW in Sec-
tion A 2.

1. Basics

Gildener and Weinberg start by introducing a general
tree-level scalar potential of the form

V ((cid:126)Φ) =

1
24

fijk(cid:96) φi φj φk φ(cid:96) ,

(A1)

where (cid:126)Φ denotes the collection of all real scalar degrees
of freedom in a given theory. Note that the coupling
constants f = f (Λ) are subject to RG running, where
Λ is the renormalization scale. The potential Eq. (A1) is
assumed to develop a continuous set of degenerate min-
ima at a speciﬁc scale ΛGW, the Gildener-Weinberg scale.

In order for V to develop a ﬂat direction, the scalar
couplings must satisfy certain conditions which can
generically be written as

R(f )

= 0 ,

(A2)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)Λ=ΛGW

thereby determining the GW scale. We will refer to con-
ditions of this type as Gildener-Weinberg conditions. The
ﬂat direction can be parametrized as

(cid:126)Φﬂat = (cid:126)nϕ ,

(A3)

where (cid:126)n is a unit vector and ϕ gives the position on
the ray. Whereas the tree-level potential is minimal for
each ϕ, loop corrections will in general bend the poten-
tial along the ﬂat direction. Thus, a particular value (cid:104)ϕ(cid:105)
is singled out as the actual minimum. Equation (A3)
then implies that the scalar ﬁelds corresponding to the
non-vanishing components of (cid:126)n acquire ﬁnite vevs, the
relative magnitudes of which are given by the entries of
(cid:126)n. Depending on which of the scalar modes acquire a
ﬁnite vev, the relevant set of conditions R is diﬀerent.

The one-loop eﬀective potential along the ﬂat direction

can be written as [32]

V (1)
eﬀ ((cid:126)nϕ) = Aϕ4 + Bϕ4 ln

(cid:18) ϕ2

(cid:19)

Λ2

GW

where ΛGW is the renormalization point.9 The functions
A and B are given by

,

(A4)

(cid:88)

(−1)2si di · m4

i ((cid:126)n(cid:104)ϕ(cid:105))

i

(cid:32)

ln

(cid:33)

i ((cid:126)n(cid:104)ϕ(cid:105))
m2
(cid:104)ϕ(cid:105)2 − ci

,

B =

1

64π2(cid:104)ϕ(cid:105)4

A =

1

64π2(cid:104)ϕ(cid:105)4

(cid:88)

(−1)2si di · m4

i ((cid:126)n(cid:104)ϕ(cid:105)) .

i

(A5)

A few comments on the notation are in order. First,
the index i in the above sums runs over all particles in
the given theory. For each particle mi((cid:126)nϕ) is given by
its ﬁeld-dependent tree-level mass evaluated along the
ﬂat direction. Note that mi implicitly depends on the
renormalization point ΛGW. The coeﬃcient di counts the
particle’s real degrees of freedom and si denotes its spin.
The constants ci depend on the actual renormalization
scheme. Here, we will use the MS scheme, for which one
ﬁnds ci = 5
2 for
scalars or fermions. Finally, as mentioned before, (cid:104)ϕ(cid:105)

6 in the case of gauge bosons and ci = 3

9 Notice that due to dimensional transmutation all dimensional
quantities, and in particular masses, will be proportional to the
symmetry breaking scale. Hence, it is only reasonable to take
ΛGW as the renormalization point in Eq. (A4).

is the value of the parameter ϕ along the ﬂat direction
at which the one-loop eﬀective potential develops an ex-
tremum. This extremum is a minimum if and only if B is
positive. In particular, it is straightforward to show that
the minimum of the one-loop eﬀective potential Eq. (A4)
along the ﬂat direction lies at
(cid:104)ϕ(cid:105) = ΛGW · exp

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(A6)

.

− 1
4

− A
2B

The above equation shows that (cid:104)ϕ(cid:105) is of the same order
as ΛGW if A is of the same order as B. This is a neces-
sary condition to control the loop expansion in powers of
ln((cid:104)ϕ(cid:105)/ΛGW).

The excitation along the ﬂat direction (cid:126)Φﬂat deﬁned in
Eq. (A3) is the pseudo-Goldstone boson of broken scale
invariance. Massless at tree level, its mass is generated
radiatively only after SSB. The mass of the PGB at one-

loop level is given by

m2

PGB =

d2V (1)
eﬀ ((cid:126)nϕ)
dϕ2

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)ϕ=(cid:104)ϕ(cid:105)

= 8B(cid:104)ϕ(cid:105)2 .

(A7)

Note that in models, in which the PGB is identiﬁed with
the Higgs boson measured at the LHC, HLHC, the loop
function B has to match the Higgs mass according to this
equation.

2. Calculating the Gildener-Weinberg scale

In this part, we enlarge upon certain aspects of the
Gildener-Weinberg formalism introduced in the previous
section. Thereby, we concentrate on the consistent com-
putation of the GW scale, which we need in our treatment
of the minimal conformal model in Section II B 2. There,
we have already described how to express λφ(ΛGW) and
λS(ΛGW) in terms of κφS(ΛGW). Now, we show how to
calculate ΛGW and mR in a way consistent with the em-
pirically known values of v and mHiggs for given κφS and
mPGB.

The crucial quantity in determining a viable parameter
point is the loop function B introduced in Eq. (A5). It
is particularly important since it relates the PGB mass
to the other particles’ masses and the condensation scale
via Eq. (A7). As a ﬁrst step, we isolate the contributions
due to SM fermions and gauge bosons,

B = BSM + Badd ,

where Badd contains all additional contributions from the
scalar sector, including the one from the SM Higgs dou-
blet.

Before we proceed let us remark that the models
we consider in Section II B 2 are special in the follow-
ing sense: In addition to the usual Higgs doublet only
gauge singlets obtain non-vanishing vevs. Hence the elec-
troweak scale originates from the doublet sector only,
v = vφ = n1(cid:104)ϕ(cid:105), and we can therefore parametrize all
SM fermion and gauge boson masses as

mi = ˜mi n1(cid:104)ϕ(cid:105)

for i ∈ SM∗

(A8)

with appropriate dimensionless coeﬃcients ˜mi. The set
SM∗ contains all massive SM gauge bosons and fermions.
Deﬁning the function

(cid:88)

˜BSM =

1

64π2

i∈SM∗

(−1)2sidi · ˜m4
i ,

and using Eq. (A8), we can write

B(ΛGW) = n4
1

˜BSM(ΛGW) + Badd .

(A9)

The above partition is particularly convenient, because
n1 and Badd only depend on the scalar couplings whose

16

values are deﬁned at the GW scale. We suppress this im-
plicit dependence on ΛGW in the above equation. In con-
trast, ˜BSM depends on SM gauge and Yukawa couplings,
which are only known at the electroweak scale. However,
we can use the RGEs to evolve the gauge and Yukawa
couplings to any scale Λ < MPl.

Motivated by combining Eq. (A9) with the formula for

the PGB mass, Eq. (A7), we deﬁne the function
− n2
1
8

˜BSM(Λ) + B(cid:48)

G(Λ) := n4
1

m4
v4

add +

Higgs

PGB

m2
v2

.

(cid:123)(cid:122)

n4
1
64π2
=Badd

(cid:125)

(cid:124)

(A10)

Then the Gildener-Weinberg scale consistent with a given
set of scalar couplings and a particular PGB mass is de-
ﬁned via the condition10

G(ΛGW) != 0 .

(A11)

In addition, we must check whether ΛGW and v are
reasonably close to each other (cf. our discussion after
Eq. (8)).

In our previous discussion, we have already assumed
the electroweak scale to attain its proper value, v =
174 GeV. For a fully consistent calculation, we must
therefore ascertain, if our one-loop eﬀective potential, in-
deed, possesses an appropriate minimum, i.e. whether

v = n1ΛGW · exp

− 1
4

− A
2B

(A12)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

yields the correct number (cf. Eq. (A6)).

Solving Eq. (A11) and Eq. (A12)

self-consistently,
eventually ﬁxes two more variables at the GW scale,
namely ΛGW itself and B(cid:48)
add. Of course, the particular
form of B(cid:48)
add depends on the model under investigation.
An explicit calculation in the minimal conformal model
from Section II B 2, for instance, gives
1 + κSRn2
2
16π2

B(cid:48)
add =

κφRn2

.

Appendix B: One-loop beta functions

In this appendix, we collect the renormalization group
equations used throughout this work. For the pertur-
bative expansion of a given beta function, we adopt the
following notation

β(g) =

β(1)(g)
16π2 +

β(2)(g)
(16π2)2 + . . . .

In the following we list the one-loop beta functions for
two real scalars (B 1) and one complex scalar (B 2). The
beta functions for one real scalar are obtained from the
two-scalar functions by dropping every term with a ξ.

10 The uniqueness of the root of Eq. (A11) is guaranteed, since
˜BSM(Λ) is a strictly monotonously increasing function of the en-
ergy scale Λ.

1. SM + real scalar representation(s)

2. SM + one complex scalar representation

17

Here, we consider the scalar sector of the SM supple-
mented by up to two real scalar SU(2)L multiplets, de-
noted as χ and ξ, respectively. For the following, recall
the deﬁnition of the quadratic Casimir C and the Dynkin
index D, which are, respectively, given by

C = 1

4 (N 2 − 1) , D = 1

3 N C = 1

12 N (N 2 − 1)

(B1)

for an SU(2) N -plet. For the calculation of the RGEs, we
will assume that the scalar potential is of the form given
in Eq. (24), i.e. it is not only classically scale-invariant but
additionally enjoys a global O(4)× O(Nχ)× O(Nξ) sym-
metry. The one-loop scalar-sector beta functions then
turn out to be

β(1)
λφ
β(1)
λχ
β(1)
κφχ

= 24λ2

φ + 2Nχκ2

φχ + 2Nξκ2

φξ ,

= 8(Nχ + 8)λ2

χ + 2κ2

φχ + 2Nξκ2

χξ ,

= 8κφχ

2 λφ + (Nχ + 2)λχ + κφχ

(cid:105)

+ 4Nξκφξκχξ ,

(cid:104) 3
(cid:104)

(B2)

(cid:105)

β(1)
κχξ

= 8κχξ

(Nχ + 2)λχ + (Nξ + 2)λξ + 2κχξ

+ 4κφχκφξ .

The beta functions of λξ and κφξ can be obtained from
the ones of λχ and κφχ by exchanging χ ↔ ξ as well as
identifying κχξ ≡ κξχ.

Taking into account the scalars’ interactions with the
electroweak gauge bosons, the above RGEs obtain the
following additional contributions

2) + 3

1 + 3g2

= − 3λφ(g2
= − 12Cχλχg2
= − 3
= − 6(Cχ + Cξ)κχξg2

2 + 3
32

2 κφχ

(cid:104)

1g2

8 (g4

2 + 2g2

1 + 3g4

(cid:104)T (Nχ, Nχ) + 8δNχ,3

(cid:105)
2 Cχg4
2 ,
16T (Nχ, Nξ)g4
2 .

2 + 3

+ 3

g2
1 + (4Cχ + 3)g2
2

2) ,

(cid:105)

∆β(1)
λφ
∆β(1)
λχ

∆β(1)
κφχ
∆β(1)
κχξ

where Cχ and Cξ denote the Casimir invariants of the
scalar multiplets χ and ξ, respectively (cf. the deﬁnition
in Eq. (B1)). Furthermore, we use the abbreviation
T (Nχ, Nξ) = (Nχ − 1)(Nξ − 1)

NχNξ − (Nχ + Nξ) + 3

(cid:104)

(cid:105)

The only other sizable SM coupling is the top-quark
Yukawa coupling y, which enters the scalar RGEs in the
following way

∆β(1)
λφ

= 6(2λφ − y2)y2 , ∆β(1)

κφχ

= 6κφχy2 .

(B4)

Besides the Higgs beta function, the only SM RGE which
changes in the presence of χ and ξ is that of g2, namely

=(cid:2) 1

β(1)
g2

6 (Dχ + Dξ) − 19

6

(cid:3) g3

2

with the Dynkin indices Dχ and Dξ given in Eq. (B1).

and

g4
2 ,

(B3)

∆β(1)
λ1
∆β(1)
λ2

∆β(1)
λ3

(cid:1) + 3

(cid:105)
(cid:105)

2

8 g4

8 g4

1 + 9
1 + (N 2 − 1)g2
N (10 − N ) − 13
(cid:104)
1 + (N 2 − 1)g2

(N − 3)2 − 1

2

(cid:105)
(cid:105)

= − 3λ1
= − 3λ2

1 + 3g2
2
4Y 2g2

+ 3

= − 3λ3

+ 12Y 2g2

2 + 3

1g2
4 g2
2 + 3
2 ,
+ 6Y 4g4
1

.

∆β(1)
κ1

∆β(1)
κ2

= − 3

(4Y 2 + 1)g2

1 + (N 2 + 2)g2
2

+ 12Y 4g4

1 + 3Cg4
2 ,
(4Y 2 + 1)g2
1 + (N 2 + 2)g2
2

= − 3

+ 24Y 2g2

1g2
2 ,
(4Y 2 + 1)g2

∆β(1)
κ3

= − 3

1 + (N 2 + 2)g2
2

.

The modiﬁed one-loop gauge RGEs are

(cid:16) 41

(cid:104) 1
3 D − 19

6

(B5)

β(1)
g1

=

6 + 1

g3
1 , β(1)
g2

=

g3
2 .

(B6)

1g2

4Y 2g2

(cid:0)g2
(cid:104)
8 (N − 1)2(cid:104)
(cid:104)
(cid:104)
(cid:104)
(cid:104)
3 N Y 2(cid:17)

2 κ1

2 κ2

2 κ3

As in Section II A, let χ be a complex scalar representa-
tion with χ ∼ (1, N, Y ) and let the scalar interactions
be described by the potential in Eq. (2). Note that we
present the RGEs including κ3, since we used them in
our analysis in Section II A 3. The scalar sector beta
functions are then calculated to be

= 24λ2

1 + N κ2
= 4(N + 4)λ2

4 Dκ2
1 + 1
2 + 8Cλ2λ3

2 + 2Dκ2
3 ,

(cid:17)

N (10 − N ) − 13

2 δN,4

(cid:105)
κ2
δN,2 + 9
3 ,
N (N + 20) − 33
2 − 2δN,4κ2
3 ,

2 κ2

λ2
3

(cid:105)

λ2
3

(cid:105)

β(1)
λ1
β(1)
λ2

β(1)
λ3

β(1)
κ1

β(1)
κ2

β(1)
κ3

= 1

+ 1

2 (N − 1)2(cid:104)
(cid:16)
(cid:104)
+ 2κ2
1 +
3 (N − 2)
(cid:104)
+ 24λ2λ3 + 1
(cid:104)
(cid:104)

+ Cκ2

= 4κ1

= 4κ2

= 4κ3

3λ1 + (N + 1)λ2 + Cλ3 + κ1
2 + 8Cκ2
3 ,
λ1 + λ2 + (D + C − 1)λ3 + 2κ1
λ1 + λ2 − (C − 1)λ3 + 8κ1 − 4κ2

(cid:105) − 16κ2
(cid:105)

,

3 ,

where N , C and D refer to dimension and invariants of
the representation under which χ transforms. The scalar
sector is coupled both to SM fermions and to the elec-
troweak gauge bosons. The corresponding contributions
to the scalar RGEs are given by

∆β(1)
λ1

= 6(2λ1 − y2)y2 , ∆β(1)

κi

= 6κiy2 ,

g4
2 ,

g4
2 ,

(cid:105)
(cid:105)
(cid:105)
(cid:105)

18

[1] N. Haba, H. Ishida, N. Kitazawa, and Y. Yamaguchi,

[21] R. Foot, A. Kobakhidze, and R. R. Volkas, Phys. Lett.

(2015), 1512.05061.

B655, 156 (2007), 0704.1165.

[2] N. Haba, H. Ishida, R. Takahashi, and Y. Yamaguchi,

[22] R. Foot, A. Kobakhidze, K. McDonald, and R. Volkas,

(2015), 1511.02107.

Phys. Rev. D76, 075014 (2007), 0706.1829.

[3] N. Haba, H. Ishida, N. Okada, and Y. Yamaguchi, (2015),

[23] T. Hambye and M. H. G. Tytgat, Phys. Lett. B659, 651

1508.06828.

(2008), 0707.0633.

[4] A. Karam and K. Tamvakis, Phys. Rev. D92, 075010

[24] C. D. Carone and R. Ramos, Phys. Rev. D88, 055020

(2015), 1508.03031.

(2013), 1307.8428.

[5] A. Ahriche, K. L. McDonald, and S. Nasri,

(2015),

[25] R. Foot, A. Kobakhidze, and R. R. Volkas, Phys. Rev.

1508.02607.

[6] P. Humbert, M. Lindner, S. Patra, and J. Smirnov, JHEP

09, 064 (2015), 1505.07453.

[7] Z. Kang, Phys. Lett. B751, 201 (2015), 1505.06554.
[8] C. D. Carone and R. Ramos, Phys. Lett. B746, 424

(2015), 1505.04448.

D84, 075010 (2011), 1012.4848.

[26] C. T. Hill, Phys. Rev. D89, 073003 (2014), 1401.4185.
[27] A. Salvio and A. Strumia,

JHEP 06, 080 (2014),

1403.4226.

[28] C. Englert, J. Jaeckel, V. V. Khoze, and M. Spannowsky,

JHEP 04, 060 (2013), 1301.4224.

[9] P. Humbert, M. Lindner, and J. Smirnov, JHEP 06, 035

[29] G. M. Pelaggi, A. Strumia, and S. Vignali, JHEP 08,

(2015), 1503.03066.

130 (2015), 1507.06848.

[10] M. Lindner, S. Schmidt, and J. Smirnov, JHEP 10, 177

(2014), 1405.6204.

[30] A. A. Starobinsky, Phys. Lett. B91, 99 (1980).
[31] S. R. Coleman and E. J. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. D7, 1888

[11] K. Hashino, S. Kanemura, and Y. Orikasa, Phys. Lett.

(1973).

B752, 217 (2016), 1508.03245.

[32] E. Gildener and S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. D13, 3333

[12] A. Farzinnia,

Phys. Rev. D92, 095012 (2015),

(1976).

1507.06926.

[33] D0, V. M. Abazov et al., Nature 429, 638 (2004), hep-

[13] A. Latosinski, A. Lewandowski, K. A. Meissner, and

ex/0406031.

H. Nicolai, JHEP 10, 170 (2015), 1507.01755.
[14] H. Okada and Y. Orikasa, (2014), 1412.3616.
[15] Z. Kang, Eur. Phys. J. C75, 471 (2015), 1411.2773.
[16] S. Benic and B. Radovcic,

JHEP 01, 143 (2015),

1409.5776.

[34] A. Farzinnia, H.-J. He, and J. Ren, Phys. Lett. B727,

141 (2013), 1308.0295.

[35] Y. Hamada, K. Kawana, and K. Tsumura, Phys. Lett.

B747, 238 (2015), 1505.01721.

[36] Particle Data Group, K. A. Olive et al., Chin. Phys.

[17] A. Gorsky, A. Mironov, A. Morozov, and T. N. Tomaras,

C38, 090001 (2014).

J. Exp. Theor. Phys. 120, 344 (2015), 1409.0492.

[37] M. Holthausen, K. S. Lim, and M. Lindner, JHEP 02,

[18] V. V. Khoze and G. Ro, JHEP 10, 075 (2013), 1307.3764.
[19] R. Hempﬂing, Phys. Lett. B379, 153 (1996), hep-

037 (2012), 1112.2415.

[38] M. Duerr, P. Fileviez Perez, and J. Smirnov,

(2015),

ph/9604278.

1510.07562.

[20] K. A. Meissner and H. Nicolai, Phys. Lett. B648, 312

[39] M. Duerr, P. Fileviez Perez, and J. Smirnov,

(2015),

(2007), hep-th/0612165.

1509.04282.

[40] M. Duerr, P. Fileviez Perez, and J. Smirnov, Phys. Lett.

B751, 119 (2015), 1508.04418.

