6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
1

 
 
]
c
q
-
r
g
[
 
 

1
v
3
1
6
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Moving Closer to the Collapse of a Massless Scalar Field in Spherically Symmetric

Anti-de Sitter Spacetimes

Daniel Santos-Oliv´an1 and Carlos F. Sopuerta1

1Institut de Ci`encies de l’Espai (CSIC-IEEC), Campus UAB,

Carrer de Can Magrans s/n, 08193 Cerdanyola del Vall`es, Spain.

(Dated: March 14, 2016)

We present a new hybrid Cauchy-characteristic evolution method that is particularly suited for
the study of gravitational collapse in spherically-symmetric asymptotically (global) Anti-de Sitter
(AdS) spacetimes. The Cauchy evolution allows us to track the scalar ﬁeld through the diﬀerent
bounces oﬀ the AdS boundary while the characteristic method can bring us very close to the point
of formation of an apparent horizon. Here, we describe all the details of the method, including the
transition between the two evolution schemes and the details of the numerical implementation for
the case of massless scalar ﬁelds. We use this scheme to provide more numerical evidence for a
recent conjecture on the power-law scaling of the apparent horizon mass resulting from the collapse
of subcritical conﬁgurations. We also compute the critical exponents and echoing periods for a
number of critical points and conﬁrm the expectation that their values should be the same as in the
asymptotically-ﬂat case.

PACS numbers: 04.20.-q,04.25.dc,04.40.Nr

I.

INTRODUCTION

14] for reviews).

One of the main results in General Relativity (GR)
is the discovery of critical phenomena in gravitational
collapse by Choptuik [1]. Using numerical relativ-
ity computations Choptuik investigated a suggestion by
Christodoulou [2] (see also [3, 4] and [5, 6] for reviews) on
whether gravitational collapse of a massless scalar ﬁeld
in an asymptotically-ﬂat spacetime can form a black hole
(BH) with arbitrarily small mass. This study ignores
quantum eﬀects that may create stable stationary states
that do not collapse.
Indeed, in the case of degener-
ate stars, quantum properties of matter establish a lower
limit for the mass of an astrophysical BH [7]. In the orig-
inal Choptuik computations [1] there are only two pos-
sible ﬁnal states: (i) The formation of a (Schwarzschild)
BH. (ii) Dispersion of the scalar ﬁeld leading to ﬂat space
as the ﬁnal state of the evolution. Choptuik found that
near the threshold between these two possibilities, but
within BH formation, the behavior of the system exhibits
critical phenomena with the BH mass depending on the
deviations of a single initial-data parameter from a crit-
ical value in a universal way (the same for any family
of initial conﬁgurations and for any initial-data param-
eter). Previous to Choptuik’s work, Goldwirth and Pi-
ran [8] found out that collapse to a BH takes place for
initial scalar ﬁeld conﬁgurations with large enough ampli-
tudes. The work of Choptuik is based on a Cauchy-type
initial-value problem formulation and relies on the use
of Adaptive Mesh Reﬁnement (AMR). Soon after Chop-
tuik’s work, Garﬁnkle [9] reproduced the main results by
using a characteristic formulation of the problem that did
not use AMR techniques. These important results also
constitute the ﬁrst great triumph of the ﬁeld of numerical
relativity. Other important results of numerical relativ-
ity in asymptotically-ﬂat spacetimes are motivated by the
developments in gravitational wave astronomy (see [10–

There are three maximally-symmetric families of
spacetimes: Minkowski (Mink) spacetime, which has van-
ishing Riemann curvature tensor; de Sitter (dS) space-
time, which has vanishing positive and constant scalar
curvature; and Anti-de Sitter (AdS) spacetime, which
has negative and constant scalar curvature. These three
maximally-symmetric spacetimes, (Mink, dS, AdS), are
vacuum solutions of the Einstein Field Equations (EFEs)
for a null, positive, and negative cosmological constant
respectively. Both Mink and dS spacetimes have been
extensively studied. The ﬁrst one due to its relevance
not only in GR but also in Special Relativity and in
Quantum Field Theory, and the second for its impor-
tance in Cosmology. However, the AdS spacetime was
forgotten for many years and there were only a few
classical books (see, e.g. [15]) where it was mentioned.
However, recently, AdS and asymptotically-AdS (AAdS)
spacetimes have been extensively studied in connection
with the AdS/Conformal Field Theory (AdS/CFT) cor-
respondence [16] (see, e.g.
[17]), also known as the
Gauge/Gravity duality. This conjecture establishes a re-
lationship between a purely gravitational theory in an
AAdS spacetime and a CFT that lives in its boundary.
This duality has found diverse applications to subjects
like the thermalization of quark gluon plasma [18], su-
perconductors [19], and many others in condensed mat-
ter physics [20]. This activity has motivated a number of
developments in numerical relativity to deal with AAdS
spacetimes (see [21, 22]).

A natural question that arises is the stability of the
(global) AdS spacetime. Mink [23, 24] and dS [25] space-
times have been proven to be stable under small ﬁnite
perturbations. We also know that AdS is stable under
linear perturbations [26], but the problem of the stability
of AdS is still under debate [27]. The ﬁrst numerical stud-
ies of gravitational collapse in AdS spacetime appeared

in [28, 29] for the 2+1 dimensional case (see also [30]).
Recent abundant activity on this subject has shown an
instability in AAdS spacetimes endowed with a real mass-
less scalar ﬁeld [31, 32] and also for a complex massless
scalar ﬁeld [33]. What has been shown is that certain
families of initial conﬁgurations lead to the formation of
an apparent horizon (AH) independently of their total en-
ergy. This is due to the AdS causal structure that allows
light-like signals to reach the AdS boundary in a ﬁnite
time. Then, a scalar ﬁeld packet, no matter how small
its energy, can bounce repeatedly oﬀ the AdS boundary
while the non-linearity of Einstein’s equations transfers
power from long wavelength components to short wave-
length ones until the scalar ﬁeld packet gets compact
enough to form an AH. This instability, in reference to
the cascade towards shortwave modes typical in ﬂuids, is
called the turbulent instability of AdS [31, 34]. In this
sense, the AdS boundary provides a box-like structure
to space that is fundamental for the instability. Indeed,
studies [35–39] in asymptotically-ﬂat spacetimes with an
artiﬁcial boundary at a ﬁnite distance ﬁnd the same type
of instability. A previous study of gravitational collapse
in AdS [40] showed that the cosmological constant does
not change the properties of the collapse with respect to
the asymptotically-ﬂat case, in particular the critical ex-
ponent for direct collapse does not change. However, the
turbulent instability was not identiﬁed.

There are some open questions about this instability,
in particular whether or not it is generic. Recent stud-
ies [41, 42] indicate that some initial conﬁgurations never
form an AH, but numerical studies can only provide ev-
idence for these islands of stability. The properties and
characteristics of these islands are being currently inves-
tigated combining non-linear perturbation methods and
numerical simulations [43–58], and the structure of the
spectrum of AdS perturbations appears to play an impor-
tant role. Applications of these studies to the AdS/CFT
correspondence can be found in [59, 60]. New mathemat-
ical studies [61–64] have been motivated by the rich struc-
ture of AAdS spacetimes and the turbulent instability has
been recently studied (in spherical symmetry) for massive
scalar ﬁelds [65, 66], self-interaction potentials [67–70],
and even for modiﬁed theories of gravity like Einstein-
Gauss-Bonnet gravity [58, 71], where the outcome of the
evolution is very diﬀerent from the Einstein gravity case,
as it already happens in the asymptotically-ﬂat case [72].
There are also studies of the turbulent instability outside
spherical symmetry [73–75].

In this paper, instead of looking at the long-term evo-
lution we focus on the details of the collapse, i.e. we look
at the dynamics of AH formation. This is motivated
by the fact that the landscape of gravitational collapse
in AAdS spacetimes is much richer than in the case of
asymptotically-ﬂat spacetimes [31, 76]. This problem is
quite challenging from the numerical point of view be-
cause the scalar ﬁeld keeps bouncing between the ori-
gin and the AdS boundary while it develops sharper and
sharper proﬁles that we need to evolve all the way to the

2

AdS boundary and back near the origin until an AH is
ﬁnally formed. Most of the numerical computations done
until now to evolve a massless scalar ﬁeld in spherically-
symmetric AAdS spacetimes use a Cauchy-type evolution
like in Choptuik’s work [1], which allows us to follow the
diﬀerent bounces oﬀ the AdS boundary. In contrast, a
characteristic approach like the one proposed by Gold-
wirth and Piran [8], although it can potentially get much
closer to the formation of an AH than a Cauchy scheme,
cannot follow the bounces because the grid covers only
a part of the spacetime. In order to combine the best of
the two worlds, in this paper we introduce a new scheme
that combines them and has three essential ingredients:
(i) A Cauchy-based evolution scheme numerically imple-
mented using pseudospectral methods and a compacti-
ﬁed radial coordinate in order to follow the scalar ﬁeld
through all the bounces oﬀ the AdS boundary. (ii) Con-
struction of initial data on a null slide for the character-
istic evolution from the results of the Cauchy evolution.
(iii) A characteristic evolution scheme to follow the scalar
ﬁeld all the way to AH formation. This scheme has al-
ready been successfully used in [77], where it was found
that, in AdS spacetime, the AH mass of BHs formed fol-
lowing the evolution of subcritical solutions associated
with the n-th critical point (n = 0, 1, . . .) follow a power
law of the form

MAH − M n+1

g ∝ (pn − p)ξ ,

(1)

g

where pn is the critical value of the initial-data parameter
p for the n-th branch, M n+1
is the corresponding mass
gap (minimum mass from subcritical conﬁgurations), and
ξ (cid:39) 0.7 is the exponent. Moreover, ξ appears to be uni-
versal, independent of the initial data family and initial-
data parameter and the same for all the critical points.
In this paper, we give all the details about this hybrid
Cauchy-Characteristic scheme and its numerical imple-
mentation (including validation, convergence properties,
and other details about evolution in AAdS spacetimes),
and provide new results that make the ﬁndings of [77]
more robust and reliable. In addition, we compute the
scaling exponents of the supercritical conﬁgurations con-
ﬁrming the expected result [31] that they are the same
as in the asymptotically-ﬂat case, i.e. γ (cid:39) 0.374.

The plan of this paper is: In Sec. II we introduce the
Einstein-Klein-Gordon (EKG) system of equations and,
for the spherical-symmetric case, we adapt them to a
Cauchy-type formulation in Sec. II A and to a character-
istic formulation in Sec. II B. In Sec. II C we describe the
transition from the Cauchy-type evolution to the char-
acteristic one. In Sec. III we describe the ingredients of
the numerical implementation. In Sec. IV we show nu-
merical results for the validation of the code, including
convergence and some special features arising in AAdS
spacetimes. Finally, in Sec. V, using this hybrid Cauchy-
Characteristic code, we present new numerical results on
the dynamics of AH formation.
We use units in which c = 1 and 8πGd = d − 1, where
Gd is the (d+1)−dimensional Newton’s gravitational con-

stant and d is the number of spatial dimensions. A semi-
colon denotes covariant diﬀerentiation with respect to the
canonical connection; a dot denotes diﬀerentiation with
respect to the time coordinate t, ˙φ ≡ ∂φ/∂t; and diﬀeren-
tiation with respect to the compactiﬁed radial coordinate
x is denoted by a prime, φ(cid:48) ≡ ∂φ/∂x. For other partial
derivatives we use the notation: ∂yf ≡ ∂f /∂y ≡ f,y.
We use small-case Greek letters α, β, . . . = 0, . . . , d for
spacetime indices.

II. FIELD EQUATIONS

The ﬁeld equations for a self-gravitating, real massless
scalar ﬁeld in an AAdS spacetime are the EKG system
of equations for the metric gµν and scalar ﬁeld φ:

Gµν + Λgµν = (d − 1)(cid:0)φ;µφ;ν − 1

2 gµνφ;αφ;α(cid:1) ,

(2)
(3)

gµνφ;µν = 0 ,

where Gµν is the (d + 1)-dimensional Einstein tensor and
Λ is the (negative) cosmological constant.

We restrict our study to spherically-symmetric con-
ﬁgurations. This assumption simpliﬁes the structure of
the spacetime metric and the ﬁeld equations. Spher-
ically symmetric spacetimes have a warped geometry,
which means that their metric tensor can be written
in the form ds2 = gAB(xC)dxAdxB + r2(xC)γabdxadxb
(A, B, . . . = 0, 1 and a, b, . . . = 2, . . . , d), where gAB is
a Lorentzian metric (with associated manifold M 2), γab
is the unit curvature metric on the (d − 1)-sphere (with
associated manifold Sd−1), and r = r(xA) is the radial
area coordinate. The fact that r2(xC)γab is not a true
metric on Sd−1 is what prevents the spacetime manifold
M d+1 to be a true product of the two manifolds M 2 and
Sd−1. Instead, it is said that the spacetime manifold is
the warped product of M 2 and Sd−1 and this is some-
times denoted in the literature as M d+1 = M 2 ×r Sd−1.
We can freely choose the coordinates in the Lorentzian
manifold M 2.
In this work we will consider two dif-
ferent choices according to the type of spacetime slic-
ing that they induce: (i) Timelike slicing: We will con-
sider coordinates (xA) = (t, x) so that the spacetime is
sliced in spacelike (with timelike normal) hypersurfaces
{t = const.}. In addition, we take x to be a radial coor-
dinate that compactiﬁes the radial direction so that it is
in the range x ∈ [0, π/2], where x = 0 corresponds to the
center of the radial coordinate system and x = π/2 cor-
responds to the AdS boundary. Using these coordinates
we can set up a Cauchy-type system of evolution equa-
tions with some constraints. Given the causal structure
of AAdS spacetimes, the scalar ﬁeld can propagate to
reach the AdS boundary in a ﬁnite time. Previous works
on this problem (see, e.g. [31, 33]) showed that we can ex-
pect the ﬁeld to bounce oﬀ the AdS boundary a number
of times and eventually collapse near the center x = 0.
It is for this reason that we use the compactiﬁed coordi-
nate x in order to track the ﬁeld up to the AdS boundary.

3

FIG. 1. Diagram of the multidomain structure. The evo-
lution variables need to be communicated between domains
using the characteristic variables, U and V , which have a well
deﬁned direction of propagation. The communication is done
by copying the boundary values in the direction indicated by
the arrows.

The equations are given in Sec. II A. (ii) Lightlike slic-
ing: We will consider coordinates (xA) = (u, r) so that
the spacetime is foliated by outgoing null slices (com-
posed by outgoing null rays) {u = const.}. The radial
coordinate r is not a compactiﬁed radial coordinate as
in the previous case, in the sense that the AdS bound-
ary is located at r → ∞. This system of coordinates
allows us to set up a characteristic-type system of evo-
lution of equations. In contrast to the coordinates (t, x),
the coordinates (u, r) do not allow us to follow the ﬁeld
up to the AdS boundary. Instead, we want to use them
in order to track the evolution of the ﬁeld near collapse,
that is, near the center r = x = 0. The fact that the
{u = const.} slides are outgoing means that as we evolve
in u we approach faster the collapse than in the case of
Cauchy evolution. As we will see, the characteristic evo-
lution allows us to get much closer to the formation of an
AH than the Cauchy evolution. The equations for this
case are given in Sec. II B.

A. Cauchy-type Evolution of the EKG System

(cid:18)

(cid:96)2

ds2 =

d−1

(cid:19)

dx2
A

+ sin2 x dΩ2

Following [31, 32] and our previous discussion, the met-
ric of an spherically-symmetric AAdS spacetime in d + 1
dimensions can be written as
−Ae−2δ dt2 +

, (4)
cos2 x
d−1 is the metric of the unit (d − 1)-sphere
where dΩ2
(Sd−1); A and δ are the two metric functions that
completely determine the metric and depend only on
(t, x); and (cid:96) is the AdS length scale, which is related
to the cosmological constant Λ by the expression: (cid:96)2 =
−d(d − 1)/2 Λ. The time coordinate t has an inﬁnite
range, i.e. t ∈ (−∞,∞), whereas x is a radial compact-
iﬁed that goes from x = 0 (center) to π/2 (AdS bound-
ary). We can recover AdS spacetime by setting A = 1
and δ = 0.

From the ﬁeld equations (2) and (3) we can derive par-
tial diﬀerential equations (PDEs) for A, δ, and ψ (see,

e.g. [31]). Here, due to the type of numerical implemen-
tation we use for the Cauchy evolution, based on the
pseudospectral multidomain method (see Appendix B for
a summary of the main ingredients), we are interested
in a ﬁrst-order formulation of the equations based on
the characteristic variables associated with our dynam-
ics (see [78] for a deﬁnition of the characteristic variables
of a hyperbolic system of PDEs and Appendix A for a
derivation of the hyperbolic structure of our equations).
In our case, the only true hyperbolic sector is the one
corresponding to the Klein-Gordon equation (3). In Ap-
pendix A we ﬁnd the characteristic variables of our sys-
tem, U and V [see Eq. (A15)]. Variable U corresponds
to the scalar ﬁeld mode that propagates always with pos-
itive velocity and V to the mode with negative velocity
(see Fig. 1). In terms of the scalar ﬁeld they are:

(cid:19)
(cid:19)

φ(cid:48) − eδ
A

˙φ

φ(cid:48) +

eδ
A

˙φ

(cid:18)
(cid:18)

U =

1

cosd−2 x

V =

1

cosd−2 x

,

.

(5)

(6)

It is also convenient to introduce the following normalized
variable associated with the scalar ﬁeld:

ψ =

φ

cosd−1 x

.

(7)

Then, from the ﬁeld equations (2) and (3) we derive the
PDEs for (ψ, U, V, A, δ): (i) Evolution equations:

˙ψ =

Ae−δ
2 cos x

(V − U ) ,

(8)

˙U = −Ae−δU,x − (d − 2 cos2 x)
− 1

(d−1)Ae−δ
sin x cos x (U + V ) + (d − 2) sin x

sin x cos x

2

U e−δ (1 − A)

cos x U Ae−δ , (9)

(d − 2 cos2 x)
sin x cos x

˙V = Ae−δV,x +
(d−1)Ae−δ
sin x cos x (U + V ) − (d − 2) sin x

+ 1
2

V e−δ (1 − A)

cos x V Ae−δ , (10)

˙A = − 1

2 A2e−δ sin x cos2d−3 x (V 2 − U 2) ,

(11)

(ii) Constraint equations1:

d − 2 + 2 sin2 x

sin x cos x

(1 − A)

sin x cos2d−3 x(cid:0)V 2 + U 2(cid:1) ,

A(cid:48) =

− A
2

(12)

2 sin x cos2d−3 x(cid:0)V 2 + U 2(cid:1) .

δ(cid:48) = − 1

4

(13)

It is interesting to note that we have both an evolution
and a constraint equation for A. As we have already
indicated, only the scalar ﬁeld sector have a distinctive
hyperbolic structure, Eqs. (9) and (10), while the evolu-
tion of A does not contain any gradients of the variables.
In practice, we can solve for A either by evolving it us-
ing Eq. (11) or by solving the elliptic equation (12). On
the other hand, from the deﬁnition of U and V , Eqs. (5)
and (6), we can ﬁnd also a constraint equation for the
scalar ﬁeld variable φ:

φ(cid:48) =

1
2

cosd−2 x (U + V ) ,

and therefore also for the normalized scalar ﬁeld ψ:

ψ(cid:48) = ψ

sin x
cos x

(d − 1) +

1
2

U + V
cos x

.

(14)

(15)

Then, in the same way as with A, we can solve for ψ
either by evolving Eq. (8) or by solving this constraint
equation.

To solve these equations we need boundary conditions
at the center x = 0 and at the AdS boundary x = π/2.
Near x = 0 we ﬁnd that the scalar ﬁeld variables admit
the following power expansion:

ψ = ψ0 + ψ2 x2 + O(x4) ,
U = U0 + U1 x + U2 x2 + O(x3) ,
V = −U0 + U1 x − U2 x2 + O(x3) ,

and the metric coeﬃcients admit the expansions:

A = 1 + A2x2 + O(x4) ,
δ = δ0 + δ2x2 + O(x4) ,

(16)
(17)
(18)

(19)
(20)

where δ0 is a time-dependent quantity always greater
than zero.

We can also obtain a power expansion near the AdS
boundary by just introducing a coordinate change in the
radial direction: ρ = π/2 − x. Then, the expansions
for the normalized scalar ﬁeld ψ and the characteristic
variables U and V are:

ψ = ψ1ρ + O(ρ3) ,
U = U1ρ + U2ρ2 + O(ρ3) ,
V = U1ρ − U2ρ2 + O(ρ3) ,

and for the metric functions A and δ:

A = 1 + O(ρd) ,
δ = O(ρ2d) .

(21)
(22)
(23)

(24)
(25)

B. Characteristic-type Evolution of the EKG

System

1 The distinction between evolution and constraint equations we
make here is not in correspondence with the evolution and con-
straint equations of the 3+1 ADM formalism [79].

For the characteristic evolution, we adapt the scheme
ﬁrst introduced by Christodoulou [2] and later used

in [8, 9] to the case of AAdS spacetimes with spherical
symmetry. The form of the metric is:

Moreover, from the (r, r) and (u, r) components of the
Einstein equations (2) for the metric of Eq. (26), we get:

5

ds2 = −g¯g du2 − 2g dudr + r2 dΩ2

d−1 ,

(26)

where u is an outgoing null coordinate (u = const. is an
outgoing null geodesic) and r is the radial area coordi-
nate. The coordinate range for (u, r) is: u ∈ (−∞,∞)
and r ∈ (0, +∞) (although the range of r depends on
whether gravitational collapse takes place). The AdS
boundary corresponds to r → ∞. The functions g =
g(u, r) and ¯g = ¯g(u, r) are always greater that some nor-
malization value at the origin that we choose to be 1. The
AdS limit is: g → 1 and ¯g → 1 + r2/(cid:96)2. The coordinates
(u, r) have dimensions of length and, throughout this pa-
per, the numerical values that we quote are in units of
(cid:96).

To write down the ﬁeld equations (2) and (3) in the
coordinates of Eq. (26) we introduce two variables asso-
ciated with the scalar ﬁeld φ:

(cid:18)

(cid:0)rd−2 ¯g(cid:1)

g,r = rg(¯h,r)2 ,
d − 2 + d

,r =

(cid:19)

r2
l2

rd−3g ,

(30)

(31)

g(u, r) = exp

and from here, we can solve for the metric variables (g, ¯g)
in terms of scalar ﬁeld variables (h, ¯h) as:

(cid:90) r

0

dr(cid:48)

(cid:40)
(cid:90) r

(d − 1)2

4

dr(cid:48)(cid:18)

(cid:0)h(u, r(cid:48)) − ¯h(u, r(cid:48))(cid:1)2

(cid:41)

,

(32)

r(cid:48)

(cid:19)

r(cid:48)2
(cid:96)2

r(cid:48)d−3 g(u, r(cid:48)) .

(33)

¯g(u, r) =

1
rd−2

0

d − 2 + d

and

d − 1

2

¯h = φ ,

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

d−1
2 ¯h

.

,r

d−3
2 h =

r

r

Then, we can recover ¯h from h as follows

(cid:90) r

0

¯h(u, r) =

d − 1

2

r

1−d

2

(cid:18)

¯g(u, r) =

1 +

(27)

(28)

(29)

That is, as expected we can ﬁnd all the variables of
the problem from h. An important observation about
Eq. (33) is that both the numerator and denominator of
the right-hand side go to zero as we approach the origin
r = 0, although they do it in a way that the limit is well-
deﬁned and ﬁnite. However, this can problematic from
the point of view of the convergence of a numerical algo-
rithm. Then, following [80, 81] we can get an alternative
form for this equation by using integration by parts. The
result is:

r(cid:48) d−3

2 h(u, r(cid:48)) dr(cid:48) .

(cid:19)

g(u, r) − (d − 1)2
4 rd−2

(cid:90) r

0

dr(cid:48)r(cid:48)d−3

(cid:18)

r2
(cid:96)2

r(cid:48)2
(cid:96)2

1 +

(cid:19)(cid:0)h(u, r(cid:48)) − ¯h(u, r(cid:48))(cid:1)2

g(u, r(cid:48)) ,

(34)

where we have used the boundary conditions at the origin
and the equation for g(u, r) [Eq. (32)]. Now, the second
term in this equation goes to zero as we approach the
origin and hence, it is more amenable for numerical com-
putations. The only remaining equation is the one for
h, which can be obtained from the Klein-Gordon equa-
tion (3) and can be written as:
d − 1
2r

(cid:18) ∂¯h

∂2¯h
∂u∂r

= 0 . (35)

− 1
2

∂¯h
∂r

∂¯h
∂r

(cid:19)

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

− ¯g

¯g

+

∂
∂r

∂u

Using Eq. (28) we ﬁnally get the equation for h:

∂h
∂u

− 1
2

¯g

∂h
∂r

=

h − ¯h
2 r

d − 2 + d

r2
(cid:96)2

g − d − 1

2

(cid:20)(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(cid:21)

¯g

.

(36)
In this work we use the characteristic initial-value
problem in the traditional way, in the sense that we in-
tegrate the hyperbolic equations along their associated
characteristic lines (see, e.g. [78, 82]). Then, we set
up initial data on an initial outgoing null slide {u =

uo = const.} and evolve that data onto the next slide
{u = uo + ∆u = const.} through the ingoing null
geodesics (the purple lines in Fig. 2), which are given
by

dr
du

= − 1

2 ¯g .

(37)

Integrating along the ingoing null geodesics allows us
to exchange partial derivatives of our variables by total
derivatives with respect to u. For instance, in the case of
the ﬁeld variable h we have

(cid:18) ∂h

(cid:19)

(cid:18) ∂h

(cid:19)

+

∂u

r=r(u)

∂r

r=r(u)

dh(u, r(u))

du

=

dr(u)

du

, (38)

where r(u) is an ingoing null geodesic, solution of
Eq. (37). In this way we can replace Eq. (36) by ordinary
diﬀerential equations, one for the variable h,

dh
du

=

h − ¯h
2 r

d − 2 + d

r2
(cid:96)2

g − d − 1

2

¯g

,

(39)

(cid:20)(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(cid:21)

6

C. Transition from the Cauchy Evolution to the

Characteristic Evolution

During the Cauchy evolution we can monitor our vari-
ables to see when we are approaching the collapse. Then,
we can make the transition from the Cauchy evolution of
Sec. II A to the characteristic evolution of Sec. II B in
order to follow better the dynamics near collapse. This
transition consists in constructing initial data on an ini-
tial null slide {u = uo = const.} from the outcome of
the Cauchy evolution. It is important to cover a portion
of the spacetime that guarantees that the characteristic
evolution will cover the formation of the apparent hori-
zon as it is represented in Fig. 2, where we take the ﬁrst
purple line (a null outgoing geodesic) as the initial slice
for the characteristic evolution. As we can see, the ini-
tial data on that slice uses the information of the Cauchy
evolution for a time tf − ti ≈ π/2, and in this way AH
formation is covered.

This transition requires to ﬁnd the relations between
diﬀerent objects of the Cauchy and characteristic evo-
lutions. First we need to ﬁnd the relation between the
coordinates (t, x), used for the Cauchy evolution, and the
coordinates (u, r) of the characteristic one. The relation
between the radial coordinates x and r is quite straight-
forward considering the factor in front of the metric of
the unit (d − 1)-sphere in Eqs. (4) and (26), from where
we get:

r = (cid:96) tan x .

(44)

The second important ingredient is the construction
of the initial null slice for the characteristic evolution
from the information extracted from the Cauchy evo-
lution. This can be done by ﬁnding the outgoing null
geodesics from the Cauchy evolution. From the expres-
sion of the metric in Eq. (4) we have that the outgoing
null geodesics are given by:

= +Ae−δ ≡ v(t, x) ,

dx
dt

(45)

where the plus sign has been included to emphasize that
these radial null geodesics are outgoing (a minus sign
would correspond to the ingoing null geodesics). To in-
tegrate this ODE we need to know the metric functions
A(t, x) and δ(t, x), for which we need to have the evolu-
tion of the Cauchy initial-value problem over the space-
time region that includes the null geodesics of interest.
Some of these geodesics are shown in Fig. 2 in a t − x
diagram.

The next important ingredient is the construction of
initial data for the characteristic evolution on one of the
null outgoing geodesics that constitute the slicing {u =
const.}. To begin with, let us apply the coordinate trans-
formation of Eq. (44), adding the transformation τ = (cid:96) t,
to the metric in Eq. (4). This brings this metric to a

FIG. 2. Characteristic evolution. The green (mostly hori-
zontal) lines represent the energy density as computed using
the Cauchy evolution at diﬀerent times (evolution goes in the
vertical time direction). Blue dashed lines are characteris-
tics (outgoing null geodesics) computed through the Cauchy
data. Purple lines represent the surfaces we have evolved us-
ing the characteristic evolution using the thickest purple line
as a seed. The characteristic grid moves according to Eq. (37)
and therefore the range in r covered decreases over time.

and another one for r(u), namely Eq. (37). The ﬁrst one,
Eq. (39), tells us how to evolve h from a {u = const.}
slice to the next one. The second one tells us that the
r-coordinate of a point in a {u = const.} slice changes
according to the ingoing null radial geodesic to which
that point belongs.

Some of the previous expressions can be problematic at
the origin and in order to make perfect sense of them we
need to understand their behaviour around r = 0, from
where we can also extract boundary conditions. Assum-
ing the following expansion for the scalar ﬁeld φ = ¯h:

¯h = φ0 + φ1 r + φ2 r2 + O(r3) ,

(40)

we obtain the following expansions for the rest of vari-
ables:

h = φ0 +

g = 1 +

1
2

d + 3
d − 1

φ1 r +

d + 1
d − 1
φ2
1 r2 + O(r3) ,

¯g = 1 + O(r2) .

φ2 r2 + O(r3) ,

(41)

(42)

(43)

1.752.002.252.502.753.003.253.500π/8π/43π/8π/2tx(cid:18)

(cid:19)

more familiar form of AAdS spacetime metrics:
ds2 = −Ae−2δ

dτ 2 +

1 +

(cid:1) + r2 dΩ2

A(cid:0)1 + r2

dr2

r2
(cid:96)2

d−1 .

(46)
The AdS limit A → 1 and δ → 0 gives us the well-known
form of the AdS spacetime metric. With this in mind, let
us perform a general coordinate transformation from the
Cauchy-formulation metric to characteristic-formulation
metric:

(cid:96)2

τ = F(u, r) ,

(47)

which transforms the metric in Eq. (46) to the following
metric:

(cid:18)
(cid:18)

(cid:19)
(cid:19)

r2
(cid:96)2
r2
(cid:96)2

(cid:18)

− 2Ae−2δ

1 +

(cid:34)

1 − A2e−2δ

+

1 +

(cid:35)
FuFr dudr

(cid:19)2 F 2

r

r2
(cid:96)2

A(cid:0)1 + r2

dr2

(cid:96)2

(cid:1)

ds2 = −Ae−2δ

1 +

F 2
u du2

= u +

.

(54)

7

These are key relations to carry out the transition from
the Cauchy to the characteristic evolution, both for the
construction of the initial slice and for the initial data
on that slice. Given that AH formation in the Cauchy
evolution is given by the limit A → 0, from Eq. (53)
we have that in the characteristic evolution we can track
AH formation by monitoring the right-hand side of this
equation and controlling when it approaches unity.

On the other hand, from our particular choice of co-
ordinate change, Eqs. (47), (49), and (50), we can write
the following relation between τ and u (and r):

τ = u + (cid:96)

dx(cid:48)

(cid:90) x
(cid:90) r
(cid:0)1 + r(cid:48) 2

0

0

v(t+(x(cid:48)), x(cid:48))
dr(cid:48)

(cid:1) v(t+(r(cid:48)), r(cid:48))

(cid:96)2

where t+(x) denotes the solution for the outgoing null
geodesics, Eq. (45), and v is the function of (t, x) deﬁned
there.

Finally, we give the relations between the metric and
scalar ﬁeld variables in both formulations. First, ψ and
¯h are, by deﬁnition, directly related with the scalar ﬁeld:

¯h = φ = cosd−1 x ψ .

(55)

The scalar ﬁeld variable h can be constructed along the
outgoing null geodesics in term of the Cauchy variables
as follows:

h = ¯h +

2

d − 1
2

r ¯h,r

r(x)

(cid:18)

= φ +

d − 1
= cosd−1 x

(cid:18) ∂x

∂r
2

(cid:19)

φ

∂
∂x

+

∂t
∂r

∂
∂t

(cid:19)

ψ +

d − 1

sin x V

,

(56)

where we have used Eqs. (6), (28), (44), and (54).
It
is remarkable that h depends on the scalar ﬁeld itself,
through the variable ψ, and the ingoing (negative speed)
characteristic variable V [see Eq. (6)], but not on the
outgoing (positive speed) characteristic variable U [see
Eq. (5)]. The reason is that we are doing the characteris-
tic evolution using null slides made out of outgoing null
geodesics, and hence the evolution from one slide to the
next one of h takes place along ingoing null geodesics [see
Eq. (37)].

In summary, Eqs. (51)-(56) contain all the informa-
tion we need to construct the initial null slide during the
Cauchy evolution, the associated coordinate change, and
the initial data to initiate the characteristic evolution.
This completes the procedure to perform the transition
from the Cauchy to the characteristic evolution.

+ r2 dΩ2

d−1 ,

(48)
where Fu ≡ ∂F/∂u and Fr ≡ ∂F/∂r. Now, let us im-
pose two conditions on the general coordinate transfor-
mation of Eq. (47). The ﬁrst one comes by comparing
with the characteristic metric of Eq. (26), namely from
the fact that the vector ∂/∂r is a null vector for this
metric. If we impose the same condition on the metric in
Eq. (48) we are imposing a condition in the transforma-
tion between the coordinates (t, x) and (u, r), i.e. on the
function F in Eq. (47), which is the following: grr = 0.
Since the slides {u = const.} must be composed of null
outgoing radial geodesics we can write

Fr =

(cid:0)1 + r2

(cid:96)2

1

(cid:1) Ae−δ

.

(49)

In the case of ingoing geodesics we would have chosen the
opposite sign for Fr. The second condition that we im-
pose on the coordinate change has to do with the freedom
in rescaling the coordinate u, which is a freedom in the
choice of the quantity Fu. Our choice, motivated by the
implementation of the Cauchy-characteristic transition,
is:

Fu = eδ0 ,

(50)

where δ0 is the value of the metric function δ at x = 0 =
r. Now, by comparing the line element in Eq. (48) with
the one for the characteristic formulation in Eq. (26), and
using the conditions on the function F given in Eqs. (49)
and (50), we ﬁnd the following relations between (A, δ)
and (¯g, g):

g = eδ0−δ ,
¯g = Aeδ0−δ
¯g

g(cid:0)1 + r2

A =

(cid:96)2

cos2 x

1

(cid:1) .

,

(51)

(52)

(53)

III. BASICS OF THE NUMERICAL

IMPLEMENTATION

In this section we describe the basic ingredients for the
numerical implementation of the two evolution schemes,

and the transition between them, described in Sec. II.
In the case of the Cauchy evolution we use pseudospec-
tral collocation methods with multiple domains following
the line of previous works in the context of the compu-
tation of the self-force in black-hole spacetimes [83–86].
For the characteristic evolution we use the method in-
troduced in [8], consisting in using a null foliation where
the points of each slide follow ingoing null geodesics (the
characteristic lines). Finally, we describe the details of
how we store the information from several Cauchy slides
in order to construct the initial slide and data for the
characteristic evolution.

A. Numerical Implementation of the Cauchy

Evolution

In order to have a precise numerical evolution we
are going to use the PseudoSpectral Collocation (PSC)
method (see, e.g. [87–89]) for the space discretization,
which in our case means in the radial direction, in the
compactiﬁed radial coordinate x to be more precise. The
main tools of the PSC method used in this paper are
brieﬂy described in Appendix B. In a standard spectral
method the outcome of the spatial discretization of a set
of hyperbolic PDEs is a (much larger) set of ODEs for the
time-dependent spectral coeﬃcients. Instead, in the PSC
method we obtain a set of ODEs for the time-dependent
values of our variables, U = (U, V, ...) (which variables
are evolved in time depends on the choice of equations
since some variables, like A and ψ, can be found either
by time evolution or by radial integration) at the colloca-
tion points, {Ui(t) ≡ U (t, xi)}, where the equations are
forced to be satisﬁed exactly. The number of ODEs that
we obtain is equal to the total number of variables (Nv)
times the number of collocation points (N ), i.e. N × Nv.
The numerical evolution of the resulting ODEs for the
collocation values {Ui(t)} is performed using a standard
Runge-Kutta 4 (RK4) algorithm (see, e.g. [90, 91]).

The great advantage of the PSC method is that for
smooth solutions it provides exponential convergence, i.e.
the truncation error of the spectral series, which can be
approximated by the last spectral coeﬃcient, aN , decays
as e−N .
In contrast, the cost of most operations like
derivatives, computation of non-linear terms, etc.
in-
creases as N 2 with the number of collocation points, un-
less we use a fast Fourier algorithm to transform from the
physical space (the collocation values of our variables) to
the spectral space (the coeﬃcients of the spectral series
for our variables), in which case the cost increases only
as N log N .
In addition, the Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy
(CFL) condition for the stability of the evolution of the
PDEs (see, e.g. [92]), in the case of the PSC method, is
of the form ∆t < C N−2 (where C is a certain constant),
in contrast with the typical form of standard ﬁnite dif-
ference schemes for PDEs, where ∆t < C(cid:48) N−1 and C(cid:48)
is another constant. This is due to the structure of the
Lobatto-Chebyshev grid that we use (see details in Ap-

8

pendix B), where the points cluster near the boundaries
of the domain. As a consequence, the evolution in the
PSC method can be signiﬁcantly more expensive than
in the case of ﬁnite-diﬀerence schemes. A way to alle-
viate this is to use reﬁnement via a multidomain PSC
method. The idea is to adapt the size and number of the
domains so that diﬀerent regions in the radial direction
with diﬀerent resolution requirements are covered by an
adequate number of collocation points. We can change
the number and size of the diﬀerent domains along the
evolution, following the resolution needs of the problem.
The practical implementation of the AMR is described in
Sec. III B. Most computations are done at each domain
in an independent way. The diﬀerent domains are con-
nected via the corresponding matching conditions, which
depend on the type of equation that each variable satis-
ﬁes.

The Cauchy evolution allows us to follow the system
from its initial conditions to the latest stages, just be-
fore the collapse. As we have already mentioned we can
expect the scalar ﬁeld to travel to the AdS boundary
(x = π/2) several times, and in this sense using the com-
pactiﬁed radial coordinate x gives us control over the
whole space. On the other hand, when the scalar ﬁeld is
close to collapse, large gradients will be generated in our
variables and the AMR is crucial in order to guarantee
the high resolution requirements needed to resolve the
dynamics near collapse.

In Sec. II A we have presented the equations we ob-
tain from Einstein’s ﬁeld equations and from energy-
momentum conservation in terms of the Cauchy-type
variables, namely (ψ, U, V, A, δ). Some variables have
two equations, for instance the metric function A can
be obtained either by evolving Eq. (11) or by integrat-
ing Eq. (12) and the same happens with the scalar ﬁeld
variable ψ [See Eqs. (8) and (15)]. We have numeri-
cally implemented several combinations of equations but
in general we obtained the best results and eﬃciency by
evolving in time U and V [with Eqs. (9) and (10)] and
then obtaining ψ, A, and δ from radial integration [with
Eqs. (15), (12), and (13) respectively].

From Eqs. (12) and (13) we can ﬁnd an integral ex-

pression for the metric functions A and δ:
A(t, x) − 1 =

(cid:90) x

− cosd x eδ
2 sind−2 x

dy e−δ sind−1 y cosd−3 y(U 2 + V 2) ,
(57)

0

2

x

(cid:90) π
dy sin y cos2d−3 y(cid:0)U 2 + V 2(cid:1) ,
(cid:90) π/2
dy cosd−2 y(cid:0)U 2 + V 2(cid:1) .

1

(58)

(59)

δ(t, x) =

1
2

and using Eq. (15) for the scalar ﬁeld:

ψ(t, x) = −

cosd−1 x

x

9

FIG. 3. Center-of-mass evolution. In the left plot we show the evolution of Amin, xmin, xcm for initial conditions in Eq. (72),
that collapse after ﬁve bounces. In the right plot we use an initial proﬁle from Eq. (79).

On the other hand, we can introduce the energy density
E(t, x) = e−δ sind−1 y cosd−3 y

(60)

,

(cid:18) U 2 + V 2

(cid:19)

2

and from it we can compute the energy contained inside
a sphere of a given radius x, which we call the mass
function:

M(t, x) = eδ

dy E(t, y) ,

which is related to the metric function A by

0

A(t, x) = 1 − cosd x
sind−2 x

M(t, x) .

(61)

(62)

(cid:90) x

(cid:90) x

Then, the ADM mass is just the limit: MADM =
limx→π/2 M(t, x). The ADM mass is a constant, it does
not depend on time, that we can use in our simulations to
check the numerical accuracy. In addition, we can deﬁne
the following quantity:

1

dy y E(t, y) ,

(63)

xcm =

MADM

0

which plays the role of a radial center of mass, in the
sense that we can use it to track where the energy is
concentrated, which is specially useful when evolving lo-
calized scalar ﬁeld conﬁgurations, like for instance those
corresponding to the initial conditions given in Eq. (72).
There are other possible deﬁnitions of a radial center of
mass, for instance we can use the radial position of the
minimum of the metric function A, i.e. xmin such that
A(xmin) = min(A(x)) ≡ Amin. We compare these two
deﬁnitions of radial center of mass, xcm and xmin, in
Fig. 3, where their evolution is compared with the evolu-
tion of Amin for two diﬀerent sets of initial data, the one

given in Eq. (72), which collapses after ﬁve bounces oﬀ
the AdS boundary, and the one given in Eq. (79). As we
can see in Fig. 3, for the initial proﬁles in Eq. (72) (left
panel) the diﬀerences between xmin and xcm are quite
small although xmin presents some small abrupt features.
These features are more prominent for the more complex
initial proﬁle of Eq. (79) (right panel), where the evo-
lution of both xcm and xmin is more complex, but xcm
appears to be a much smoother indicator to track the
evolution of the scalar ﬁeld proﬁle.

Finally, regarding more technical details of the numer-
ical implementation, we remark that all the operations
involving the spatial radial direction, including the inte-
grals, are performed within the framework of the PSC
method as brieﬂy described in Appendix B. Another im-
portant ingredient of the numerical implementation is
how to deal with the multiple domains. In our scheme the
boundaries of each domain have duplicated information
because the boundary points of one domain are identi-
ﬁed, with the exception of the global boundaries (x = 0
and x = π/2), with the boundary points of the con-
tiguous domains. Although most operations are done
locally at each domain we need to communicate the dif-
ferent domains through these boundary points. This is
the main reason why we have introduced the character-
istic variables U and V . These variables have always a
well deﬁned direction of propagation (see Appendix A),
which is crucial in order to establish the communication
between domains. The characteristic variable U always
propagates with positive speed (in direction to the AdS
boundary) and the characteristic variable V always trav-
els with negative speed (towards the origin). Then, the
way to communicate two given contiguous domains dur-
ing the Cauchy evolution is to take the value of the vari-
able U from the right boundary of the domain to the left

0.60.81.0Aminπ/8π/43π/8π/2xminπ/8π/43π/8π/2 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16xcmt0.60.81.0Aminπ/8π/43π/8π/2xminπ/8π/43π/8π/2 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18xcmt10

FIG. 4. Cauchy Reﬁnement. Comparison between the U
proﬁle in two diﬀerent simulations at a similar time. Both of
them are supposed to collapse after one bounce but the shape
and the resolution needed to resolve them are very diﬀerent.

FIG. 5. Cauchy Reﬁnement. Comparison between U proﬁles
from the same simulation at diﬀerent times. This conﬁgura-
tion collapses after three bounces. The snapshots are taken
at the same position during the trip to the AdS boundary.

and to copy it into the U -value of the left boundary of
the domain to the right (see Fig. 1) and the equivalent
procedure for V . That is, we take the value of the vari-
able V from the left boundary of the domain to the right
and copy it into the V -value of the right boundary of
the domain to the left. This way of communicating the
characteristic variables ensures that we will not ﬁnd dis-
continuities in our variables across the boundaries during
the numerical evolution. In other words, we perform the
communication between domains according to the direc-
tions of propagation of the information.

B. Adaptive Mesh Reﬁnement for the Cauchy

Evolution

The typical scalar ﬁeld conﬁgurations that we consider
in this work, which are quite localized in the radial di-
rection, follow the same evolutionary pattern, already de-
scribed in Sec. II A. The scalar ﬁeld attempts to collapse
near the origin but if the initial amplitude is below some
threshold, the scalar ﬁeld bounces oﬀ the origin and dis-
perses towards the AdS boundary. Then, it bounces oﬀ
the AdS boundary and travels again towards the origin.
Then, this sequence is repeated until the scalar ﬁeld dis-
tribution is compact enough to collapse and form an AH.
This means that we need to simulate a compact scalar
ﬁeld distribution back and forth and some of the scalar
ﬁeld variables exhibit growing gradients as the evolution
proceeds. Then, in order to track the features of the
scalar ﬁeld during the evolution in an eﬃcient way we re-
sort to AMR techniques based on our multidomain PSC

approach. The aim is to design a method in which the
resolution follows the ﬁeld in its travel with the minimal
loss of precision and without slowing down much the evo-
lution. In this sense, it is important to mention that al-
though we know the evolutionary pattern the details can
vary signiﬁcantly as we change the initial conditions. To
illustrate this, in Fig. 4 we show proﬁle of the scalar ﬁeld
variable U at a similar time for two diﬀerent simulations
where collapse happens after one bounce. We see that
the shapes are quite diﬀerent and require diﬀerent grids
in order to resolve them. In Fig. 5, we show the proﬁle of
U at three diﬀerent times of a simulation where collapse
takes place after three bounces. The snapshots of these
ﬁgures are taken when the ﬁeld is traveling towards the
boundary so most of the energy is concentrated in the
U mode (the one propagating to the right as shown in
Fig. 1). They illustrate the need for AMR in our simu-
lations. We have developed two AMR methods for our
simulations.

1. First Approach: Gradient Density Estimator

(cid:90)

1
N

D

The ﬁrst AMR method for our spectral multidomain
grid is based on a functional that we call gradient density
and that is deﬁned at each domain as:

dx|V,x| ≥ 0 ,

ρD =

(64)
where D is the domain and as we can see this indica-
tor is based on the characteristic variable V . The idea
is to distribute the domain nodes to minimize the gradi-
ent density functional. In our numerical experiments we

-2.00-1.50-1.00-0.500.000.501.001.500.480.500.520.54U0.480.500.520.54x-1.5-1.0-0.50.00.51.01.50.510.54U0.510.54x0.510.5411

ﬁnd a threshold for ρD above which the evolution is no
longer valid because of the appearance of high-frequency
numerical noise. Then, during the simulations we mod-
ify the domain structure to keep ρD below the threshold,
adding more domains if needed.

This method works reasonably well for capturing the
gradients generated during the collapse but it has several
caveats. In particular, it can generate numerical noise far
from the region where the scalar ﬁeld is localized if we
do not allow for a minimum resolution there. It can also
give problems when the scalar ﬁeld presents very sharp
features that have to be propagated to the AdS boundary
and back, which are precisely the most relevant cases for
the study of the mass gap in [77].

in terms of gradients we can choose γ to be just A and
this provides a very good performance. For the more de-
manding simulations, a better choice is to take the scalar
ﬁeld characteristic variables U , when the ﬁeld is travel-
ing to the AdS boundary, and V , when it is traveling
towards the origin. This is motivated by the character
of this variables (see Sec. III A), U is the eigenfunction
that captures the movement with positive velocity and
V the one that captures the movement with negative ve-
locity. In practice we have seen that these simple choices
work quite well and allow us to resolve the large changes
in these variables that appear during the collapse in the
most extreme cases.

2. Second Approach: Domains over a Curve in

Conﬁguration Space

(cid:90) x

(cid:113)

In order to deal with the most extreme cases, where
the gradients of variables like U and V are very large
but still these functions are smooth, we have developed
an alternative method that appears to be more robust.
The starting point is to consider a combination of our
Cauchy variables that reﬂects in a very clear way the
regions where more reﬁnement is needed, that is, where
we ﬁnd the largest variations in our variables, let us call it
γ(A, δ, ψ, U, V ). The curve deﬁned in the plane (x, γ(x))
has a length that, when large gradients in our variables
appear, will have a large contribution from the relatively
small interval in the x direction where gradients occur.
Then, let us consider the length of this curve from the
origin to a certain radial location x:

L(x) =

d˜x

1 + γ(cid:48)(˜x)2 ,

(65)

0

where γ(cid:48) = (∂γ/∂A)A(cid:48) + . . .. The idea of this reﬁnement
method is to distribute the nodes of our domains so that
they cover the same length of the curve (x, γ(x)), in con-
trast with the traditional choice of taking them equally
distributed over the x direction. That is, we select the
nodes of our domains, {¯xi}, as: L(¯xi) = i L(π/2)/D
(i = 0, . . . , D), where D is the total number of domains.
In our simulations we have seen that this method does
not require to establish any threshold, instead we just
have to change the multidomain structure every a cer-
tain number of time steps to adapt to the changes in the
variables in a quite smooth way. Every time we change
the domain structure we have to interpolate the variables
into the new grid. The interpolation between the old and
new grids is performed via the pseudospectral represen-
tation (see Appendix B for details), and in this way the
numerical error introduced is relatively small.

The speciﬁc choice of the function γ is the key ingre-
dient of this method and is quite ﬂexible in the sense
that we can tune this choice to the type of initial scalar
ﬁeld proﬁles or even to the particular state of the nu-
merical evolution. For not very demanding simulations

C. Numerical Implementation of the Characteristic

Evolution

The characteristic evolution described in Sec. II B is
completely diﬀerent from the Cauchy one. We need to set
a grid on the initial null slide in the radial coordinate r.
When we evolve to the next null slide the r-values of each
grid point change according to the ingoing null geodesics
[see Eq. (37)]. This has two main eﬀects: First, our last
grid point (largest r) evolves making our physical compu-
tational domain to shrink every step as we show in Fig. 2.
Second, the points near the origin are swallowed because,
according to the equation for ingoing null geodesics, these
points should evolve to negative values of r, which do not
have a well-deﬁned physical meaning. This means that
we need to control the size of our grid and be careful with
the computations near the origin, but other than that it
is not problematic. Actually, the reduction of the grid
as we proceed with the characteristic evolution helps to
focus our numerical resolution around the region where
the collapse takes place and we do not need mesh reﬁne-
ment methods here. In the cases where the collapse does
not occur we will see that it gets scattered towards inﬁn-
ity as it would do in the asymptotically-ﬂat case [8, 9].
However, since we are considering AAdS spacetimes, the
scalar ﬁeld has to reach the AdS boundary in a ﬁnite
time, but the region around the AdS boundary is not
covered by our characteristic grid. This means that we
have made the transition from the Cauchy to the char-
acteristic evolution too early and therefore, we just need
to continue the Cauchy evolution until we can construct
an initial null slice that can cover the collapse.

To set up our initial characteristic grid it is very impor-
tant to establish its size, or equivalently the r-coordinate
of the last grid point, rmax. Once this is done, we can
freely distribute the other points. However, a uniform
distribution of the grid points in the radial coordinate r
is not a good idea because of the CFL condition. For the
characteristic evolution the CFL condition implies:

(cid:18) ri − ri−1

(cid:19)

¯gi

∆u <

1
2

min

,

(66)

where ri and ri−1 are two contiguous grid points and

12

¯gi = ¯g(ri). If we have a uniform grid, ri − ri−1 = ∆r
is the same for any i. But when we go to large values
of r we have that the metric function ¯g behaves as in
pure AdS spacetime, that is: ¯g ∼ r2. This means that
the CFL condition in this case is controlled by the outer
grid points, the ones with largest r, where ∆u should
be too small. But on physical grounds it should be the
opposite, the CFL condition should be dominated by the
points where we need more resolution, around the region
where the AH will form. What we do is to construct
a grid where the grid point separation is constant with
respect to the radial coordinate x instead of r, and then
the outer points are well separated in r. From the Cauchy
evolution we extract the values of the scalar ﬁeld variable
h at the diﬀerent grid points and, from the values of h
we ﬁnd the other variables, ¯h, g and ¯g, by integration
[see Eqs. (29)-(33), or Eq. (34)]. The ﬁrst grid point for
integration is the origin, where we need to prescribe the
boundary conditions:

¯h(r = 0) = h(r = 0)
¯g(r = 0) = g(r = 0) = 1 .

(67)

The integration proceeds to the next grid points by using
Simpson’s rule:

(cid:90) ri

Ii ≡

dr f (r)

(68)

0

= Ii−1 +

ri − ri−1

6

[f (ri−1) + 4f (rM ) + f (ri)] ,

where rM ≡ (ri + ri−1)/2 is the r-coordinate of the mid-
point between ri and ri−1, where the value of the inte-
grand is evaluated using spline interpolation [93].

Each grid point evolves according to the ODE system
of Eqs. (39) and (37). To that end, we use a standard
RK4 algorithm (see Refs. [90, 91]).

N | and |a(V )

FIG. 6. The upper and middle plots show the truncation error
for the variables U and V , |a(U )
N | respectively, as
a function of the number of collocation points per domain,
N . From all the truncation errors, one at each domain, we
take the one where the variables reach their maximum values.
The linear ﬁtting with the logarithmic scale in the vertical axis
shows the expected exponential convergence (see Sec. IV A).
The plot in the bottom shows that deviations in the ADM
mass during the evolution also decrease exponentially with
the number of collocation points per domain until saturation.

IV. CODE VALIDATION

In this section we show the performance of the diﬀerent
pieces of the numerical code that we have developed to
implement the Cauchy-characteristic scheme described in
the previous section to study gravitational collapse in
spherically-symmetric AAdS spacetimes.

A. Convergence Analysis for the Cauchy Evolution

The Cauchy evolution uses a PSC discretization
method for the radial direction with multiple domains.
At each domain we use a Chebyshev-Lobatto grid (with
a linear mapping to the physical radial space; see Ap-
pendix B for details). The PSC method provides two
representations for each variable, the spectral represen-
tation typical of general spectral methods, and the phys-
ical representation where the values of our variables at

the collocation points are the unknowns to be found nu-
merically. The truncation error, the diﬀerence between
the true values of our variables and their numerical ap-
proximation, is given by the terms in spectral series that
we neglect by truncating it. We can estimate the trun-
cation error by the absolute value of the last spectral
coeﬃcient, |aN| (see, e.g. [87]). For smooth functions,
the convergence rate of the Chebyshev series is expo-
nential [87] (spectral convergence), i.e.
the truncation
error drops exponentially with the number of collocation
points. We check convergence for our Cauchy-evolution
code by performing a series of runs with the same num-
ber of domains (D = 50), uniformly distributed in the
radial coordinate x, and with no reﬁnement. We set the
same initial conditions for all of them, from the family of
conﬁgurations in Eq. (72), and evolve it for a ﬁx interval
of time (tf ≈ 2, i.e. after a bounce oﬀ the AdS bound-
ary). Then, we look at the last spectral coeﬃcients for
the characteristic variables U and V . Here we only show

10-2210-2010-1810-1610-1410-1210-10|aN(U)|10-2210-2010-1810-1610-1410-1210-10|aN(V)|10-1010-910-810-710-610-510-410-3 30 40 50 60 70 80|ΔMADM|NB. Convergence Analysis for the Characteristic

Evolution

13

In the characteristic scheme, we have a non-uniform
discretization in the radial coordinate r in the initial grid,
and it turns out that the evolution of the r-coordinate of
the grid points [according to the ingoing null geodesic
Eq. (37)] makes our grid even more unequally spaced.
Despite of this, the resolution increases with the number
of grid points and we can study how the results converge
as we increase this number. To that end, we run simu-
lations with diﬀerent initial number of grid points (the
number of grid points changes along the evolution be-
cause we lose points through the origin) but with the
same initial scalar ﬁeld proﬁle [see Eq. (76)]. These ini-
tial conditions form an AH and the point of the evolution
that we take to analyze the convergence is just before the
formation of the AH, when A = 10−8 [A is estimated via
Eq. (53)]. That is, we monitor how the location of AH
formation changes with the number of grid points, N .
We use the following indicator:

(cid:33)

(cid:32)|rN/4

AH − rN/2
AH |
|rN/2
AH − rN
AH|

p = log2

.

(70)

For N = 120000 we obtain p ≈ 3.0034. This value means
that the convergence of our code is third-order, in agree-
ment with the convergence rate of the Simpson integra-
tion rule that we use.

C. Comparison between the Cauchy and

characteristic evolutions

The main reason for implementing a hybrid Cauchy-
characteristic evolution scheme is to bring together the
best of these two methods of evolution in order to
tackle interesting questions about gravitational collapse
in AAdS spacetimes, taking into account that the Cauchy
evolution based on the PSC method allows us to fol-
low the possible diﬀerent bounces of the matter ﬁelds
(a scalar ﬁeld in our case) oﬀ the AdS boundary with
high precision, whereas the characteristic evolution al-
lows us to get very close to the point of formation of an
AH. Then, although the two evolution schemes are used
in diﬀerent stages of the evolution, it is interesting to
see how they compare when they are applied to the ﬁnal
moments of the collapse, when an AH forms. This com-
parison is also a justiﬁcation for the introduction of our
hybrid scheme, which on top of the two evolution meth-
ods requires a non-trivial transition between them. Then,
we have evolved the same scalar ﬁeld conﬁgurations with
both evolution schemes to as close as possible to the point
of AH formation, which can be monitored with the met-
ric function A, which in the characteristic scheme can
be computed using Eq. (53). We show the results of this
comparison in Fig. 7, where we include a zoom to the rel-
evant region for AH formation. In the left zoomed plot,

FIG. 7. Comparison of the Cauchy and characteristic evo-
lution methods. We show a snapshot of the function A just
before collapse for both cases. The diﬀerences are due to the
fact that in the ﬁrst case A is plotted from a t = const. slice
while in the second case comes from a u = const. slice. The
plots coincide around r = rAH. The zoomed-in plot shows, by
using a logarithmic scale, how close to AH formation (A → 0)
we can get with each evolution scheme.

results from the domain where these variables present
more features, which is in principle the most challeng-
ing one from the numerical point of view, and we have
checked that we obtain equivalent results for the other
domains. In Fig. 6, at the upper and middle panels, we
show the spectral convergence for these two variables in a
logarithmic plot of the absolute value of the last spectral
coeﬃcient versus the number of collocation points. As we
can see, the linear scaling in the logarithmic plot stops at
some point, followed by an almost ﬂat proﬁle, indicating
that we have reached the round-oﬀ error of the computer
and hence we cannot expect to improve the truncation
error. In the bottom panel of Fig. 6, we show the varia-
tions in the ADM mass, MADM, with respect to its initial
value, MADM(t0), due to numerical inaccuracies during
the Cauchy evolution (in an ideal situation this quantity
should vanish for all times). Actually, what we show in
this ﬁgure is the normalized quantity:

∆MADM(t) =

|MADM(t) − MADM(t0)|

MADM(t0)

.

(69)

In Fig. 6 we also see an exponential convergence of the de-
viations from the ADM mass (∆MADM(tf ), with t0 = 0)
that saturate at a value around 10−10 for our particular
test runs.

0.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.90.0020.0040.0060.008ArCauchyCharacteristic10-1210-0910-0610-030.00220.00250.00220.002514

of the metric function ¯g is diﬀerent. In AdS spacetime
we have ¯gAdS(r) = 1 + r2/(cid:96)2 whereas is Mink we have
¯gMink(r) = 1. Therefore, by solving the ingoing null
geodesic equation, Eq. (37), we get the following expres-
sions for the ingoing null geodesics:

uMink(r) = 2 (r0 − r) ,
uAdS(r) = 2 (arctan(r0) − arctan(r)) .

(71)

These geodesics have been plotted in Fig. 8. This illus-
trates what can happen with our characteristic grid in
AAdS evolutions in comparison with the asymptotically-
ﬂat case. As shown in Fig. 8, the grid points of an initial
null slide (u = 0) move towards the origin much faster in
AdS spacetime than in Mink spacetime. The conclusion
of this for our simulations is that we must be very careful
in choosing the initial null slide, in particular its size, be-
cause the grid points in AdS travel very fast towards the
region near the origin, which means that our grid shrinks
very fast and we may miss the interesting phenomena, in
particular the formation of an AH.

On the other hand, in Fig. 9 we show the compari-
son between ingoing null geodesics in AdS spacetime and
the ones of an AAdS spacetimes where the scalar ﬁeld
collapses forming an AH. We compute these geodesics
numerically as the solution of Eq. (37). As soon as the
geodesics approach to the spacetime point in the (u, r)-
plane where the AH forms, all the ingoing null geodesics
with r > rAH focus at that point as it can be seen in
the zoom-in area of this ﬁgure, while those with r < rAH
follow a diﬀerent pattern.

V. RESULTS FROM THE NUMERICAL

EVOLUTION

In this section we present results of our evolutions
in spherically-
of the EKG system, Eqs. (2) and (3),
symmetric AAdS spacetimes. The families of initial con-
ﬁgurations that we use for our evolutions are shown be-
low: Eqs. (72) and (79) are initial data for Cauchy-only
and Cauchy-characteristic evolutions, whereas Eq. (76)
shows initial data used for characteristic-only evolutions.
The landscape of the gravitational collapse that
emerged after the pioneer work of Ref. [31] can be sum-
marized by saying that initially-compact scalar ﬁeld con-
ﬁgurations will sooner or later form an AH, depending
on how many bounces oﬀ the AdS boundaries are re-
quired for the AdS turbulent instability to convert long-
wavelength modes into short-wavelength ones so that the
scalar ﬁeld proﬁle gets compressed enough to form a BH.
This is illustrated in Fig. 10 where show the AH radius,
rAH , obtained by evolving a number of initial conﬁgu-
rations from the family of Eq. (72) with our Cauchy-
characteristic evolution scheme. This three-dimensional
plot has been obtained by varying both the amplitude, ε,
and the width, σ, of the initial conﬁgurations. It shows
the diﬀerent branches that appear and that represent
conﬁgurations that have bounced oﬀ the AdS boundary a

FIG. 8. Comparison of ingoing null geodesics in Mink (dashed
purple lines) and AdS (green continuous lines) spacetimes.
We see the strong eﬀect that the cosmological constant term
has in the geodesics. In AdS spacetime they reach the region
near the origin much faster than in Mink, as measured by the
time u.

we show the metric function A for a simulation with the
Cauchy evolution scheme until the numerical code is not
stable anymore without adding more domains, and such
that if we keep adding resolution the evolution would es-
sentially freeze because of the tiny time step allowed by
the CFL condition. For the right zoomed plot, we initi-
ated the evolution also with the Cauchy evolution scheme
(in order to guarantee that we are comparing the same
physical conﬁguration) and then changed to the charac-
teristic scheme until the point where the numerical noise
becomes signiﬁcant or the evolution eﬀectively stops due
a too small ∆u step. As we can see, with the character-
istic evolution we can get the function A many orders of
magnitude closer to the collapse than with the Cauchy
scheme. This clearly illustrates the power of our hybrid
scheme to study the collapse near AH formation.

D.

Ingoing Null Geodesics

In order to understand better the magnitude of the
numerical challenge posed by the study of gravitational
collapse in AAdS spacetimes it is interesting to analyze
the ingoing null geodesics in the characteristic evolution
of AAdS spacetimes and compare them with the ingo-
ing null geodesic in asymptotically-ﬂat spacetimes. To
begin with,
let us look at the diﬀerence between the
ingoing null geodesics in AdS spacetime, Eq. (26), and
in Mink spacetime, in the equivalent coordinate system
where the metric has the same form as in Eq. (26).
The equation for the ingoing null geodesics has also the
same form in both cases, i.e. Eq. (37), but the form

0.000.501.001.502.002.503.00 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 u  r 15

FIG. 10. AH location in a 2-parameter phase space. We show
the radial location of the AH formed for initial conﬁgurations
from the family in Eq. (72) for diﬀerent values of the ampli-
tude, ε, and the width, σ.

simulations near the critical point. In the present work
we extend this result for the next ﬁve branches (up to
branch 5) using the same family of initial data (similar
to the one used in [31]):

(cid:18)
U (to, x) = ε exp
V (to, x) = −U (to, x) .

(cid:19)

− 4 tan2 x
π2σ2

,

(72)

that represents a proﬁle centered around the origin at the
initial time, and characterized by the amplitude ε and
width σ. This particular choice, and anyone that ful-
ﬁls the condition V (to, x) = −U (to, x), directly implies:
(∂xφ)(to, x) = 0 .

To obtain the scaling of the AH mass near the critical
points of the diﬀerent branches we have used the method
introduced in [94], which consists in following the evo-
lution of subcritical conﬁgurations very near the critical
point and tracking the behaviour of the curvature scalar
R at the origin (x = 0). The subcritical character of
these evolutions allows us to make the computation ac-
curately using only the Cauchy evolution. The curvature
scalar R at x = 0, as well as other curvature scalars,
starts to grow when the scalar ﬁeld attempts to form an
AH, reaching a maximum value (in absolute value), and
then disperses towards the AdS boundary. This maxi-
mum will be higher the closer we approach the critical
point pn, being inﬁnite at that point. Actually, it follows
an scaling law of the kind [94]:

Rmax|x=0 ∼ (pn − p)−2γ .

(73)

The scalar ﬁeld near the critical point exhibits discrete
self-similarity (type II critical behaviour) with an echoing
period ∆, which for the same reasons than γ should be

FIG. 9. Comparison between ingoing null geodesics in pure
AdS spacetime (green color) and in an AAdS spacetime de-
scribing gravitational collapse of a scalar ﬁeld (fuchsia color).
In the second, the geodesics focus around the forming AH.
The small plot is a zoom-in of the region inside the red circle
where it can be seen how the geodesics behave around rAH .
This size of the zoom-in plot is ∆r (cid:39) 10−4 around r (cid:39) 0.03952
and ∆u (cid:39) 10−13 around u (cid:39) 0.224673828858275.

ﬁxed number of times (indicated by the color and branch
number in Fig. 10) before collapsing and forming an AH,
in contrast with the asymptotically-ﬂat case where we
have a single branch. The branches are clearly seen in
the direction of the amplitude ε, where we have a high
number of points, but it can be seen that it also happens
in the direction of the width σ. The same should happen
if we look at any direction in the plane (ε, σ).

In what follows we describe new results regarding the
critical collapse, that is, analyzing the conﬁgurations in
Fig. 10 near the plane rAH = 0, and we also describe
results about the mass gap between branches and the
power-law scaling found in our recent study [77] for the
AH mass of the near subcritical conﬁgurations. These
results consolidate further the conclusion reached in [77].

A. Critical Phenomena in AAdS Gravitational

Collapse

In [31] it was concluded that at the critical points sepa-
rating the branches, the supercritical conﬁgurations form
an AH with mass going to zero with the same scaling as
in the case of asymptotically-ﬂat spacetimes [1], that is:
rAH ∼ (p − pn)γ where p is an arbitrary parameter of
the family of initial conﬁgurations, pn is the n-th criti-
cal value at which the AH mass goes to zero, and γ is
an universal exponent that in d = 3 has the expected
value: γ (cid:39) 0.374. This conclusion was conﬁrmed in [77]
for the branch 0 in Fig. 10 by ﬁtting a large number of

0.000.050.100.150.200.250.30 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 u  r 1802002202402602803003203400.0500.0550.0600.0650.0700.0000.0010.0020.0030.0040.0050.0060.0070.0080.009rAHBranch 0Branch 1Branch 2Branch 3Branch 4ɛσrAHBranch 0Branch 1Branch 2Branch 3Branch 4ɛσrAH16

FIG. 12. Critical Exponents for branch zero from the charac-
teristic method. We show the results for the AH mass versus
initial amplitude for three diﬀerent families of initial conﬁgu-
rations with ﬁxed width [see Eq. (76)] of the branch 0 (direct
collapse). The values of the critical amplitudes, critical expo-
nent and echoing period are given in Table II.

ﬂat spacetimes [1, 4]. This was already shown for the ﬁrst
branch in [40] and also checked in [77].

We have already mentioned that the characteristic
method of Sec. II B cannot be used to follow the full evo-
lution of the scalar ﬁeld because the characteristic grid
shrinks with time and hence we cannot track bounces of
the scalar ﬁeld oﬀ the AdS boundary. However, we can in
principle use the characteristic evolution for the particu-
lar cases in which the scalar ﬁeld collapses directly, or in
other words, we can in principle study the branch 0 with
the characteristic evolution. Actually, this was already
done in [40] using a double-null characteristic scheme.
Here we repeat this analysis as a way of conﬁrming this
result and, at the same time, as a way of testing further
our characteristic evolution. To that end, we have to pre-
scribe initial data on a null slice u = const. for the scalar
ﬁeld variable h. We choose the following family of initial
conditions:

φ(r) = ¯h(r) = ε

r2
(cid:96)2 exp

− (r − r0)2

(cid:96)2 σ2

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

.

(76)

We have performed a series of characteristic evolutions
varying the amplitude ε for three ﬁxed values of the width
σ = 0.01, 0.05 and 0.10. We compute the critical expo-
nent γ and echoing period ∆ from the AH mass, in AAdS
spacetimes MAH = rAH
this mass that we quote in this paper are in units of (cid:96));
that is, we ﬁt our characteristic-only simulations to the

AH/(cid:96)2(cid:1) /2 (the values of

(cid:0)1 + r2

FIG. 11. Critical Exponents for ﬁxed width (σ = 0.05). Scal-
ing of the scalar of curvature for subcritical conﬁguration near
the critical point for the diﬀerent branches from the branch
of direct collapse (b = 0, bottom) to the branch with ﬁve
bounces (b = 5, top). An oﬀset ob have been added to the y
axis to make the plot more clear. The values of the oﬀset are:
ob = −2,−1, 0, +1, +2, +3, starting from b = 0. The results
from the ﬁttings are given in Table I.

the same as in the asymptotically-ﬂat case: ∆ ≈ 3.44.
In [4, 95] it was shown that on top of the scaling of
Eq. (73), a ﬁner structure can be seen as oscillations of
the following form:
ln Rmax|x=0 =

= (−2γ) ln(pn − p) + b0 + F (ln(pn − p)) ,

(74)

where F is a periodic function with a period depending
on the universal values of the exponent γ and the echoing
period ∆ and equal to ∆/2γ. In terms of the Cauchy-
evolution variables, the scalar of curvature at the origin
can be computed as:

R|x=0 = − 12

(cid:96)2 − 1

2(cid:96)2 (V − U )2 .

(75)

We have carried out a series of Cauchy evolutions of
initial conﬁgurations of the family in Eq. (72) with ﬁxed
width σ = 0.05 and amplitudes chosen to be subcritical
for the ﬁrst six critical points (see Fig. 10). The results
of these simulations are plotted in Fig. 11 with the corre-
sponding ﬁttings. The values of the critical amplitudes,
εn, the critical exponents, γ, and the echoing periods, ∆,
are presented in Table I. We can see that the values ob-
tained for γ and ∆ are consistent with the known values
for the collapse of massless scalar ﬁelds in asymptotically-

14161820222426283032-20-15-10-5ln (RMAX) + obln (pn - p)branch 0branch 1branch 2branch 3branch 4branch 5-9-8-7-6-5-4-16-14-12-10-8-6-4-2log (MAH)log(ɛ - ɛ0)σ = 0.01σ = 0.05σ = 0.1017

TABLE I. Critical Exponents for ﬁxed width (σ = 0.05). Fitting values of the critical exponents obtained in Sec. V A
corresponding to the critical parameters for the six ﬁrst branches as it is shown in Fig. 11.

Branch

n = 0

n = 1

n = 2

n = 3

n = 4

n = 5

Critical Value (εn)
335.572231 ± 0.000005
251.09427729 ± 0.00000001
216.208077165 ± 0.000000001
193.9755275 ± 0.0000001
178.070915 ± 0.000001
165.946674 ± 0.000004

Critical Exponent (γ)
0.374 ± 0.006
0.3746 ± 0.0008
0.3743 ± 0.0004
0.377 ± 0.007
0.376 ± 0.007
0.377 ± 0.010

Echoing Period (∆)
3.33 ± 0.15
3.45 ± 0.02
3.45 ± 0.02
3.43 ± 0.04
3.42 ± 0.06
3.46 ± 0.10

TABLE II. Critical Exponents for branch zero in the characteristic method. Fitting values of the critical exponents obtained in
Sec. V A corresponding to the critical parameters for the zero branch using the characteristic method as it is shown in Fig. 12

Critical Value (ε0)
7.828039 ± 0.000002
25.907772996 ± 0.000000003
23.8595911 ± 0.0000001

Critical Exponent (γ)
0.376 ± 0.006
0.3748 ± 0.0004
0.375 ± 0.005

Echoing Period (∆)
3.2 ± 0.4
3.33 ± 0.10
3.45 ± 0.10

Width (σ)

0.01

0.05

0.10

formula:

ln MAH = γ ln(p − pn) + b0 + F (ln(p − pn)) ,

(77)

where F is again a periodic function with period ∆/2γ [4,
94]. The results obtained from these simulations are plot-
ted in Fig. 12 with the ﬁttings to Eq. (77). The criti-
cal values of the amplitude, ε0, the critical exponent γ,
and the echoing period ∆ are given in Table I. Again,
the results are consistent with the predictions for the
asymptotically-ﬂat case.

B. Power-law Behavior near the Mass Gaps

The second application of our Cauchy-characteristic
evolution scheme is to study the mass gap between
the branches of collapsed scalar ﬁeld conﬁgurations [see
Fig. 10]. In a previous work [77], using already this evolu-
tion scheme, we found that the subcritical solutions that
are very close to the critical points form BHs with an AH
whose mass obeys an scaling law of the form:

MAH − M n+1

g ∝ (pn − p)ξ ,

(78)

g

where pn denotes the critical value of the initial-data pa-
rameter p for the n-th branch; M n+1
is the mass of the
(n + 1)-th gap, between the branches n and n + 1, cor-
responding to the minimum mass of the AH formed by
subcritical conﬁgurations; and ξ is the power-law expo-
nent. In [77] we found that the exponent ξ has a value
ξ (cid:39) 0.70 and it was conjectured that this value is univer-
sal, the same for all families of initial conﬁgurations and
for all branches/critical points. The numerical support

for this conjecture given in [77] came from the evolution
of two diﬀerent one-parameter families of initial conﬁgu-
rations and for the ﬁrst two mass gaps, the one between
branches 0 and 1, and the one between branches 1 and 2.
The two one-parameter families of initial conﬁgurations
both came from the same larger family of initial condi-
tions given in Eq. (72), one by ﬁxing the width σ and the
other one by ﬁxing the amplitude ε.

In this work we give new evidence for this conjecture.
First by considering a completely new diﬀerent family of
initial conﬁgurations, in the sense that it is functionally
diﬀerent, and second, by extending the study to the third
mass gap, between the branches 2 and 3.

The new family of initial conditions that we consider
is inspired by a proposal in [59, 60] of setting the initial
proﬁle far from the origin and centered close to the AdS
boundary. The form for the initial values of our Cauchy
variables is given by

(cid:18) tan(x) − tan(x0)

(cid:19)

−1

U (to, x) = ε cosh
V (to, x) = −U (to, x) .

σ

,

(79)

This family has also two parameters, an amplitude ε
and a width σ. These conﬁgurations are evolved us-
ing the Cauchy-characteristic evolution scheme. It turns
out that the simulations for the conﬁgurations within the
parameter region of interest, those that lead to subcriti-
cal scalar ﬁeld collapse, are numerically more challenging
than in the case of the initial conditions from the fam-
ily in Eq. (72). The reason for this is that the energy
distribution in the new family of conﬁgurations is not as
compact as in the old one. This has already been illus-
trated in the evolutions tracking the center of mass of the

18

is also challenging from the point of view of computa-
tional cost since each of these simulations takes signiﬁ-
cantly much more time than the previous ones. We need
to perform many of them in order to locate the critical
point and to have enough subcritical conﬁgurations close
to it in order to extract the values of the mass gap and
power-law exponent with a good precision. Again, con-
sidering the conjecture established in [77] we expect to
ﬁnd the same power law [Eq. (78)] around all the mass
gaps. We have analyzed the situation around the third
mass gap, between the branches 2 and 3, using the initial
conﬁgurations in Eq. (72) ﬁxing the value of the width to
σ = 0.05. The critical point associated with the second
branch is located at a value of ε = ε2 = 216.203 ± 0.009.
Then, from the evolution of subcritical conﬁgurations as-
sociated with this critical point we obtained the ε− MAH
plot shown in Fig. 14. The ﬁt to this data gives us the
value of the mass gap:

g = (5.44 ± 0.02) × 10−4 ,

M 3

(82)

and the power-law exponent of Eq. (78) is found to be:

ξ = 0.69 ± 0.04 .

(83)

This value is also consistent with the values found in [77],
for the ﬁrst two mass gaps, and with the value found here
[see Eq. 81], for the ﬁrst mass gap, using a functionally
diﬀerent family of initial data, namely the one given by
Eq. (79). Therefore, these results give more numerical
support to the conjecture about the universality of the
power law of Eq. (78), with an exponent of ξ (cid:39) 0.70.

VI. CONCLUSIONS

The

collapse of a massless

scalar ﬁeld in a
spherically-symmetric AAdS spacetime shows a much
richer phenomenology than the analogous problem in
asymptotically-ﬂat spacetimes as it was realized for the
ﬁrst time in [31] and is illustrated by our Fig. 10. Both
the long-term evolution and the dynamics of gravita-
tional collapse present distinctive features that are not
yet fully understood. In this work we have focussed on
the dynamics near collapse, when an AH is forming. To
study this question we need to resort to numerical meth-
ods, taking into account that we are dealing with a prob-
lem that represents an important challenge for the de-
sign and performance of a numerical code that solves the
PDEs describing the system, despite the fact that we are
dealing with a 1+1 problem (spherical symmetry). The
main reason for this lies behind the causal structure of
global AdS, where light-like signals can reach the AdS
boundary in a ﬁnite time. As a consequence, an scalar
ﬁeld conﬁgurations that fails to form an AH in a ﬁrst at-
tempt will travel to the AdS in a ﬁnite time, bounce and
travel back towards the origin, where it will have a sec-
ond chance to form an AH. This process will be repeated
until, after a number of bounces, the scalar ﬁeld will col-
lapse forming an AH. This is not the whole story as we

FIG. 13. Mass gap 1, between the branches 0 and 1. The be-
havior near the subcritical solutions marked by the red circle
follows the power law in Eq. (78). The zoom-in plot shows
the ﬁtting of the data. The critical point is located at an
amplitude ε0 = 1.093435± 0.000001. The values for the mass
gap, M 1
g , and power law exponent, ξ, are given in Eqs. (80)
and (81) respectively.

scalar ﬁeld proﬁle shown in Fig. 3. For our simulations
we set x0 = 1.2 and σ = 0.2. With this choice the ﬁrst
critical point is found at ε = ε0 = 1.093435 ± 0.000001.
In Fig. 13 we show, in the plane ε − MAH, the region
near this ﬁrst critical point. The red circle in the ﬁgure
indicates the area from where we have taken the data
to ﬁt the power law of Eq. (78), which is shown in the
zoom-in plot of the same ﬁgure. In this case we ﬁnd that
the mass gap is:

g = (7.2954 ± 0.0008) × 10−3 ,

M 1

(80)

and the power-law exponent has a value consistent with
the conjectured universal character:
ξ = 0.68 ± 0.07 .

(81)

On the other hand, we have also studied the power law
of Eq. (78) for additional mass gaps, beyond the gaps
between branches 0-1 and 1-2, already studied in [77].
This is a particularly challenging goal since it involves a
number of simulations where we have to track the scalar
ﬁeld through two bounces oﬀ the AdS boundary. Then,
the problem is challenging from the point of view of ac-
curacy because the subcritical conﬁgurations are quite
challenging in terms of resolution requirements since we
have to evolve the sharp features originated during the
quasi-collapse stage to the AdS boundary and back. It

01234567891.0701.0751.0801.0851.0901.0951.100AH  Mass (×10-3)ε-11.6-11.4-11.2-11.0-10.8-10.6-10.4-15.3-15.0-14.7-14.4-14.1ln (M - M g 1)ln (ε0 - ε) 19

sity is concentrated within a single radial interval, we
have studied how two deﬁnitions of center of mass can
track the evolution of the ﬁeld and how by using them
we can also have a sense of how compact a certain scalar
ﬁeld conﬁguration is.

g

g

With this numerical scheme we studied in [77] the
subcritical scalar ﬁeld conﬁgurations near the diﬀerent
branches that appear depending on the number of times
that ﬁeld bounced oﬀ the AdS boundary. We found
evidence that this conﬁgurations follow the power law:
MAH − M n+1
∝ (pn − p)ξ, with the mass gap between
branches (separated by the location of the critical point,
pn) given by M n+1
and the exponent ξ was conjectured to
be universal, independent of the initial data and also the
same for all the mass gaps/branches. The numerical sup-
port provided in [77] comes from the ﬁrst two mass gaps
using the initial conditions of Eq. (72) varying both the
amplitude and the width. In this paper we have further
evidence for this conjecture, ﬁrst by using a completely
diﬀerent class of initial conditions, the one in Eq. (79),
and second, by looking at the third mass gap. All these
results support our conjecture for the power law at the
mass gaps and the universal character of the exponent
which, in all cases, has been found to be consistent with
a value of ξ ≈ 0.7.

In addition, we have also obtained the critical expo-
nents associated with the multiple critical points that ap-
pear in the case of AAdS spacetimes. By tracking super-
critical conﬁgurations using only the Cauchy evolution
we have been able to ﬁnd the critical points associated
with the branches 0 to 5. We have conﬁrmed the expected
result [31] that at AH formation the presence of the nega-
tive cosmological constant is irrelevant. Indeed, the crit-
ical exponents and echoing periods that we have found
are consistent with the values of the asymptotically-ﬂat
case.

In summary, we have introduced a hybrid Cauchy-
characteristic method that is particularly suited to study
the dynamics in spherically-symmetric spacetimes near
the point of formation of an AH. This has allowed us
to ﬁnd new features and understand better gravitational
collapse in AAdS spacetimes. This evolution scheme is
quite general and it can be applied to other scenarios
of physical interest, including diﬀerent spacetime dimen-
sion, other matter ﬁelds, or even for a diﬀerent spacetime
causal structure.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors thank Sascha Husa, Esperanza L´opez,
and Ulrich Sperhake for discussions on diﬀerent as-
pects of this work. The authors acknowledge the high-
performance computing resources provided by the Con-
sorci de Serveis Universitaris de Catalunya (CSUC)
and the Galicia Supercomputing Center (CESGA) un-
der projects ICTS-CESGA-249 and ICTS-CESGA-266.
They also acknowledge support from contracts ESP2013-

FIG. 14. Subcritical solutions associated with the third mass
gap (between branches 2 and 3). The ﬁt of the data to the
power law in Eq. (78) is shown. The critical point is found
to be located at an amplitude ε = ε2 = 216.203 ± 0.009 and
values for the mass gap, M 3
g , and power law exponent, ξ, are
given in Eqs. (82) and (83) respectively.

have evidence of stable scalar ﬁeld conﬁgurations, but
the whole picture is not yet completely understood. The
near subcritical conﬁgurations are very challenging since
they are very close to collapse, which induce large gradi-
ents in the ﬁeld variables that we have to propagate to
the AdS boundary and back. In this sense, AAdS space-
times constitute an excellent arena for the development
of new numerical relativity methods and tools.

In this paper we have presented a new numerical
scheme to study these situations which, in essence, is
a hybrid Cauchy-characteristic evolution scheme. The
Cauchy evolution uses a multidomain PSC method for
the spatial discretization and the characteristic evolu-
tion follows the ingoing null geodesics, which allows us to
get much closer to the point of AH formation than with
the Cauchy evolution. An additional crucial part of this
method is the transition between the two schemes. We
have described in detail all the analytic and numerical in-
gredients of this Cauchy-characteristic evolution scheme.
In doing so we have also analyzed the diﬀerences between
evolution in AAdS and asymptotically-ﬂat spacetimes,
pointing out how the eﬀect of the cosmological constant
makes our simulations more challenging. We have also
shown the convergence properties of the diﬀerent parts
of the scheme and how we implement AMR techniques
for the Cauchy-evolution sector. Given that the scalar
ﬁeld conﬁgurations that we have considered are localized
in the radial direction, in the sense that the energy den-

-13.4-13.2-13.0-12.8-12.6-12.4-12.2-12.0-11.8-11.6-11.4-11.2-5.5-5.0-4.5-4.0-3.5-3.0ln (M - M g 3)ln (ε2 - ε)47637-P and ESP2015-67234-P (Spanish Ministry of
Economy and Competitivity of Spain, MINECO). DS ac-
knowledges support from a FPI doctoral contract BES-
2012-057909 from MINECO.

Appendix A: Hyperbolic structure of the scalar ﬁeld

equations

The PSC method used for the numerical implementa-
tion of the Cauchy evolution requires a ﬁrst-order hyper-
bolic formulation of the scalar ﬁeld equation, the Klein-
Gordon equation (3). This equation, for the metric in
Eq. (4), becomes the following second-order PDE:
˙A
¨φ − A2e−2δφ(cid:48)(cid:48) =
A
A2e−2δ
cos x sin x

˙φ − ˙δ ˙φ + Ae−2δφ(cid:48)A(cid:48) − A2e−2δδ(cid:48)φ(cid:48)

+ (d − 1)

φ(cid:48) .

(A1)

To reduce the order of the equation we introduce the
variables:

Π = ˙φ ,

Φ = φ(cid:48) .

(A2)

The equations for W = (φ, Π, Φ) constitute a ﬁrst-order
system of PDEs that can be derived from these deﬁni-
tions and from Eq. (A1):

˙Π − A2e−2δΦ(cid:48) =

Π − ˙δ Π + Ae−2δA(cid:48)Φ

˙φ = Π ,
˙A
A

(A3)

− A2e−2δδ(cid:48)Φ + (d − 1)

˙Φ − Π(cid:48) = 0 .

A2e−2δ
cos x sin x

Φ , (A4)

(A5)

As expected, this is a set of ﬁrst-order PDEs that admits
the following compact form:

∂tW + A[x, W ] · ∂xW = S[x, W ] ,

(A6)
where A is a matrix and S a vector that depend on the
radial coordinate x and our variables W , but they do not
depend explicitly on the time t. Here, the metric func-
tions δ and A have to be taken as functionals of our vari-
ables W since they are the result of integrating Eqs. (12)
and (13). From Eqs. (A3)-(A5), the components of the
matrix A are:

0 0

0

0 0 −A2e−2δ
0 −1

0

 ,

A =

20

The characteristic structure of this hyperbolic system of
ﬁrst-order PDEs is determined exclusively by the matrix
A (see, e.g. [78] for details), in such a way that the eigen-
vectors of A correspond to the diﬀerent characteristic
ﬁelds of the system and the eigenvalues to the character-
istic speeds associated with the eigenvectors. Strongly
hyperbolic systems are those that have a complete set of
eigenvalues and eigenvectors (see, e.g. [78, 82, 92] for a
description of PDEs with hyperbolic structure), which is
a key property for showing existence and uniqueness of
solutions, and also a condition for the stability of algo-
rithms to evolve the system. To ﬁnd out what happens
in our case we have to solve the eigenvalue problem:

A E = σE ,

(A9)
where E is any vector in the space {(φ, Π, Φ)}. By an-
alyzing Eq. (A9) we ﬁnd that we have a complete set
of real eigenvalues and eigenvectors, so our system is
strongly hyperbolic, as expected for a system of PDEs
that is equivalent to the Klein-Gordon equation. The re-
sulting set of eigenvalues and eigenvectors for Eq. (A9)
is:

σ1 = 0 −→ E1 = (1, 0, 0) ,

(A10)
σ2 = +Ae−δ −→ E2 = (0,−Ae−δ, 1) , (A11)
σ3 = −Ae−δ −→ E3 = (0, +Ae−δ, 1) . (A12)
The meaning of the eigenvalues is that they are the char-
acteristic speeds of the characteristic variables. Then,
we have a quantity, φ, that does not propagate (or in
other words, it propagates with zero speed) and two that
propagate with speed ±v ≡ ±A e−δ [this is the same
speed deﬁned in Eq. (45)]. We can diagonalize the ma-
trix A by the matrix transformation: A = K · DA · K−1,
where DA = diag(0, v,−v) and K = (E1, E2, E3). At
this point we can deﬁne a new set of variables Y as fol-
lows: Y = K−1 · W . We can see that the principal part
of our set of equations becomes completely decoupled for
the variables Y . These are the characteristic variables.
The ﬁrst one is φ, with zero associated propagation speed
(eigenvalue), and the other two are:

Y+ = Φ − Π
v
Π
v

Y− = Φ +

,

.

(A13)

(A14)

and the components of the vector S are:



S =

Π

˙A

A Π − ˙δ Π + Ae−2δA(cid:48)Φ
−A2e−2δδ(cid:48)Φ + (d − 1) A2e−2δ

cos x sin x Φ

0

(A7)

(A8)

 ,

The characteristic variable Y+ propagates with speed v
and Y− with speed −v respectively. Since v > 0, Y+
is a ﬁeld propagating to the right with speed v and Y−
is a ﬁeld propagating to the left with the same speed.
From these characteristic variables we have introduced
the variables in Eqs. (5), (6), and (7), which are also
characteristic variables as it can be seen from the evolu-
tion equations (8)-(10). Actually, we can see that

U =

Y+

cosd−2 x

,

V =

Y−

cosd−2 x

.

(A15)

The use of this variables is very important in this work
for several reasons, but mainly in order to use the PSC

method with a multidomain grid. The communication
between subdomains becomes very clear in terms of the
characteristic variables.

Appendix B: Basic ingredients of the PSC Method

Broadly speaking, spectral methods can approximate
solutions of PDEs by ﬁnite expansions of the variables
using a given basis of functions. The coeﬃcients of such
expansion are determined by imposing an appropriate
criterium that forces this expansion to approach the ex-
act solution as we increase the number of terms in the
expansion. In the case of the PSC method, the criterium
consists in imposing the expansion to be exact at a set
of collocation points (see, e.g. [87–89]). Here we use the
Chebyshev polynomials, {Tn(X)} (X ∈ [−1, 1], the spec-
tral domain), as the basis functions, which can be ex-
pressed in the following form:

They are orthogonal in the continuum in the following
sense:

(Tn, Tm) =

Tn(X) Tm(X) =

Tn(X) = cos(cid:0)n cos−1(X)(cid:1) .
(cid:90) 1

dX√
1 − X 2

−1

 2 for n = 0 ,

1 otherwise .

cn =

πcn
2

δnm ,

(B2)

(B3)

where the coeﬃcients cn are

(cid:18) π i

(cid:19)

The set of collocation points that we use are those
of a Lobatto-Chebyshev grid. The spectral coordinates
of these points are the zeros of the polynomial (1 −
X 2)T (cid:48)
N (X) = 0 , where the prime here indicates diﬀer-
entiation with respect to X. The zeros can be written
as

Xi = − cos

N

(i = 0, 1, . . . , N ) ,

(B4)
which means that the boundary points X = ±1 are in-
in contrast with other collocation
cluded in the grid,
grids, like for instance the Gauss-Chebyshev grid (see,
e.g. [87]). Taking into account the properties of the
Gauss-Lobatto-Chebyshev quadratures (see, e.g. [87]),
the Chebyshev polynomials have another orthogonality
relation, in the discrete, in the following sense (n, m =
0, . . . , N ):

N(cid:88)

i=0

where wi are the weights associated with the Chebyshev-
Lobatto grid, wi = π/(N ¯ci), and where the ¯ci’s are nor-
malization coeﬃcients given by

 2 for i = 0, N ,

1 otherwise .

¯ci =

[Tn, Tm] =

wi Tn(Xi) Tm(Xi) = ν2

n δnm ,

(B5)

Ua,N (t, x) =

(B1)

a=1

21

Finally, the constants νn in Eq. (B5) are given by ν2
π¯cn/2.
In general the computational domain, say [xL, xR],
does not coincide with the spectral one, [−1, 1] and we
need a one-to-one mapping between them. The simplest
choice, and the one we use, is the linear mapping:

n =

x −→ X(x) =

2x − xL − xR

xR − xL

.

(B7)

and the inverse one is:
X −→ x(X) =

xR − xL

2

X +

xL + xR

2

.

(B8)

For mesh reﬁnement purposes (see Sec. III B) we use
a multidomain PSC method consisting in the split the
computational domain, Ω = [xL, xR], into a number of
disjoint subdomains (D):

D(cid:91)

Ωa , Ωa =(cid:2)xa,L, xa,R

(cid:3) ,

Ω =

(B9)

where xa,L and xa,R are the left and right boundaries of
the subdomain Ωa (x1,L = xL and xD,R = xR). Since
they are disjoint subdomains we have that xa,L = xa−1,R
(a = 1, . . . , D). We apply the PSC method to each
subdomain, and hence our variables have diﬀerent ex-
pansions in Chebyshev polynomials in each subdomain.
Then, each physical subdomain is mapped to the spectral
domain [−1, 1] using the linear mappings of Eqs. (B7)
and (B8), which we call xa(X) and Xa(x). The diﬀerent
expansion for the diﬀerent subdomains are then matched
by using the appropriate boundary conditions (see the
description in Sec. III A).

Let us now look at the spectral approximation for the
variables of our problem, which we arranged in the vec-
tor Z. At a given subdomain Ωa, in the PSC method,
we have two representations of the approximation for our
variables. First, we have the standard spectral represen-
tation of the approximation to our variables in a given
subdomain a, Ua,N (t, x):

Ua,N (t, x) =

aa,n(t) Tn(Xa(x)) ,

(B10)

where the aa,n are (time-dependent) vectors that contain
the spectral coeﬃcients of the expansion of our variables.
In the PSC method, we have also a physical expansion,
which looks as follows:

Ua,i(t)Ci(Xa(x)) ,

(B11)

i=0

where Ci(X) are the cardinal functions [87] associated
with our choice of basis functions (Chebyshev polyno-
mials) and set of collocation points (Lobatto-Chebyshev
grid). Their expression is

N(cid:88)

n=0

N(cid:88)

(B6)

Ci(X) =

(1 − X 2)T (cid:48)
N (X)
i )(X − Xi)T (cid:48)(cid:48)

(1 − X 2

N (Xi)

.

(B12)

The cardinal functions have the following remarkable
property:

Ci(Xj) = δij

(i, j = 0, . . . , N ) ,

(B13)
so that the time-dependent (vector) coeﬃcients, {Ui}, of
the expansion in Eq. (B11) are the values of our variables
at the collocation points

Ua,N (t, xa(Xi)) = Ua,i(t) .

(B14)

These are the unknowns that one looks for in the
PSC method. The spectral and physical representations
[Eqs. (B10) and (B11) respectively] are related via a ma-
trix transformation [87]. The computations (ﬂoat-point
operations) required to change representation using the
matrix transformations increase, with the number of col-
location points, as ∼ N 2. Nevertheless, we can introduce
a new spectral coordinate via X = cos θ (with θ ∈ [0, π]),
in such a way that the Chebyshev polynomials become

e.g. [87])

(cid:8)2n an + bn+1

bN = bN−1 = 0 ,

bn−1 =

1
cn

22

(cid:9) (n = N − 1, . . . , 1) , (B18)

(B17)

where the coeﬃcients cn are given in Eq. (B3).

Another important operation where the changing be-
tween representation is very useful is integration. Let us
assume we want to integrate the function g(X) (we as-
sume we have already changed to the spectral coordinate
dX(cid:48) g(X(cid:48)),
which assumes that an integration constant/boundary
condition is imposed on the right boundary, f (XN ) =
fN . Then, we can follow the scheme

X) from the right, that is, f (X) = (cid:82) XN =1
(cid:82) 1
X : {Ui} F F T−→ {an} ∂x−→ {bn} F F T−→ {((cid:82) 1
X U )i} , (B19)
where {bn} are the spectral coeﬃcients associated with
the integral from the right, f (X), and their relation to
the spectral coeﬃcients of the function g(X), {an}, is
given by

X

Tn(cos θ) = cos(nθ) .

(B15)

bN =

,

(cid:8)¯cn−1 an−1 − an+1

aN−1
2N
1
2n

(cid:9) (n = N − 1, . . . , 1) , (B21)

(B20)

Then, an spectral expansion in Chebyshev polynomials
like the one in Eq. (B10) can be mapped to a cosine se-
ries. Then, we can perform the change of representation
by means of a discrete Fourier transform using a Fast-
Fourier Transform (FFT) algorithm.
In our numerical
codes, we use the routines of the FFTW library [96].
Then, the number of computations required for a change
of representations increases as ∼ N ln N with the number
of collocation points.

Changing between representations is useful in order to
compute derivatives and nonlinear terms.
In the case
of derivatives, they are much simpler to be computed
in the spectral representation. Then, we can transform
from the physical to the spectral representation, com-
pute derivatives there, and ﬁnally transform back to the
physical representation. In the case of a Chebyshev PSC
method, the diﬀerentiation process can be described by
the following scheme

∂x : {Ui} F F T−→ {an} ∂x−→ {bn} F F T−→ {(∂xU )i} ,

(B16)
where {bn} are the spectral coeﬃcients associated with
the spatial derivative ∂x, and their relation to the spec-
tral coeﬃcients of the variables, {an}, is given by (see,

n=1

bn .

bn =

b0 = fN − N(cid:88)
(cid:82) X
The process
to integrate from the left, f (X) =
X0=−1 dX(cid:48) g(X(cid:48)), is very similar. In this paper we use
both since some variables that are obtained via integra-
tion with respect to x require a boundary condition at
the origin and others on the AdS boundary. It is simple
to extend these rules to our multidomain scheme.

(B22)

Finally, in the PSC method, we ﬁnd a discretization
of our system of equations in Eqs. (8)-(13) by imposing
them at every collocation point. In practice, this is done
by introducing the expansion (B11) into the Eqs. (8)-
(13), and then we evaluate the result at every collocation
point of our Chebyshev-Lobatto grid (B4). We obtain a
system of ODEs for the variables {Ui(t)}
˙Ui = A · (∂xU )i + B · Ui + Si ,

(B23)

where the dot denotes diﬀerentiation with respect to the
time coordinate t, and (∂xU )i has to be interpreted ac-
cording to the scheme in Eq. (B16).

[1] M. W. Choptuik, “Universality and scaling in gravita-
tional collapse of a massless scalar ﬁeld,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
70, 9–12 (1993).

[2] D. Christodoulou, “The Problem of a Selfgravitating
Scalar Field,” Commun. Math. Phys. 105, 337–361
(1986).

[3] C. Gundlach, “The Choptuik space-time as an eigen-
value problem,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 3214–3217 (1995),
arXiv:gr-qc/9507054 [gr-qc].

[4] C. Gundlach, “Understanding critical collapse of a
scalar ﬁeld,” Phys. Rev. D55, 695–713 (1997), arXiv:gr-
qc/9604019 [gr-qc].

[5] C. Gundlach, “Critical phenomena in gravitational col-
lapse,” Phys. Rept. 376, 339–405 (2003), arXiv:gr-
qc/0210101 [gr-qc].

[6] C. Gundlach and J. M. Martin-Garcia, “Critical phe-
nomena in gravitational collapse,” Living Rev. Rel. 10,
5 (2007), arXiv:0711.4620 [gr-qc].

[7] S. Chandrasekhar, “The Maximum Mass of Ideal White

Dwarfs,” Astrophys. J. 74, 81 (1931).

[8] D. S. Goldwirth and T. Piran, “Gravitational Collapse
of Massless Scalar Field and Cosmic Censorship,” Phys.
Rev. D36, 3575 (1987).

[9] D. Garﬁnkle, “Choptuik scaling in null coordinates,”
Phys. Rev. D51, 5558–5561 (1995), arXiv:gr-qc/9412008
[gr-qc].

[10] L. Lehner, “Numerical relativity: A Review,” Class.
Quant. Grav. 18, R25–R86 (2001), arXiv:gr-qc/0106072
[gr-qc].

[11] C. Bona, C. Palenzuela-Luque, and C. Bona-Casas, Ele-
ments of Numerical Relativity and Relativistic Hydrody-
namics: From Einstein’s equations to Astrophysical Sim-
ulations (Springer, Berlin, 2009).

[12] T. W. Baumgarte and S. L. Shapiro, Numerical Relativ-
ity: Solving Einstein’s Equations on the Computer (Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge, 2010).

[13] L. Lehner and F. Pretorius, “Numerical Relativity and
Astrophysics,” Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 52, 661–
694 (2014), arXiv:1405.4840 [astro-ph.HE].

[14] U. Sperhake, “The numerical relativity breakthrough for
binary black holes,” Class. Quant. Grav. 32, 124011
(2015), arXiv:1411.3997 [gr-qc].

[15] S. W. Hawking and G. F. R. Ellis, The Large scale struc-
ture of space-time (Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, 1973).

[16] J. M. Maldacena, “The Large N limit of superconformal
ﬁeld theories and supergravity,” Int. J. Theor. Phys. 38,
1113–1133 (1999), arXiv:hep-th/9711200 [hep-th].

[17] E. Witten, “Anti-de Sitter space and holography,”
Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2, 253–291 (1998), arXiv:hep-
th/9802150 [hep-th].

[18] P. M. Chesler and L. G. Yaﬀe, “Numerical solution of
gravitational dynamics in asymptotically Anti-de Sitter
spacetimes,” JHEP 07, 086 (2014), arXiv:1309.1439 [hep-
th].

[19] G.T. Horowitz, “Using general relativity to study super-

conductivity,” J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 484, 012002 (2014).

[20] S. A. Hartnoll, “Lectures on holographic methods for con-
densed matter physics,” Strings, Supergravity and Gauge
Theories. Proceedings, CERN Winter School, CERN,
Geneva, Switzerland, February 9-13 2009, Class. Quant.
Grav. 26, 224002 (2009), arXiv:0903.3246 [hep-th].

[21] V. Cardoso, L. Gualtieri, C. Herdeiro, U. Sperhake,
P. M. Chesler, et al., “NR/HEP: roadmap for the future,”
Class. Quant. Grav. 29, 244001 (2012), arXiv:1201.5118
[hep-th].

[22] U. Sperhake, “Black Holes on Supercomputers: Numer-
ical Relativity Applications to Astrophysics and High-
energy Physics,” Acta Phys. Polon. B44, 2463–2536
(2013).

[23] D. Christodoulou and S. Klainerman, The Global Nonlin-
ear Stability of the Minkowski Space (PMS-41) (Prince-
ton University Press, Princeton, 1994).

[24] H. Lindblad and I. Rodnianski, “The global stability of
minkowski space-time in harmonic gauge,” Ann. of Math
171, 1401–1477 (2010).

23

[25] H. Friedrich, “On the existence of n-geodesically com-
plete or future complete solutions of Einsteins ﬁeld
equations with smooth asymptotic structure,” Commun.
Math. Phys. 107, 587–609 (1986).

[26] A. Ishibashi and R. M. Wald, “Dynamics in nonglob-
ally hyperbolic static space-times. 3. Anti-de Sitter
space-time,” Class. Quant. Grav. 21, 2981–3014 (2004),
arXiv:hep-th/0402184 [hep-th].

[27] H. Friedrich, “On the AdS stability problem,” Class.
Quant. Grav. 31, 105001 (2014), arXiv:1401.7172 [gr-qc].
[28] V. Husain and M. Olivier, “Scalar ﬁeld collapse in three-
dimensional AdS space-time,” Class. Quant. Grav. 18,
L1–L10 (2001), arXiv:gr-qc/0008060 [gr-qc].

[29] F. Pretorius and M. W. Choptuik, “Gravitational col-
lapse in (2+1)-dimensional AdS space-time,” Phys. Rev.
D62, 124012 (2000), arXiv:gr-qc/0007008 [gr-qc].

[30] D. Garﬁnkle, “An Exact solution for 2+1 dimensional
critical collapse,” Phys. Rev. D63, 044007 (2001),
arXiv:gr-qc/0008023 [gr-qc].

[31] P. Bizo´n and A. Rostworowski, “On weakly turbulent
instability of Anti-de Sitter space,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 107,
031102 (2011), arXiv:1104.3702 [gr-qc].

[32] J. Ja(cid:32)lmu˙zna, A. Rostworowski, and P. Bizo´n, “A Com-
ment on AdS collapse of a scalar ﬁeld in higher dimen-
sions,” Phys. Rev. D84, 085021 (2011), arXiv:1108.4539
[gr-qc].

[33] A. Buchel, L. Lehner,

and S. L. Liebling, “Scalar
Collapse in AdS,” Phys. Rev. D86, 123011 (2012),
arXiv:1210.0890 [gr-qc].

[34] M. Maliborski and A. Rostworowski, “Lecture Notes on
Turbulent Instability of Anti-de Sitter Spacetime,” Pro-
ceedings, Spring School on Numerical Relativity and High
Energy Physics (NR/HEP2), Int. J. Mod. Phys. A28,
1340020 (2013), arXiv:1308.1235 [gr-qc].

[35] M. Maliborski, “Instability of Flat Space Enclosed
in a Cavity,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 221101 (2012),
arXiv:1208.2934 [gr-qc].

[36] H. Okawa, V. Cardoso, and P. Pani, “Collapse of self-
interacting ﬁelds in asymptotically ﬂat spacetimes: do
self-interactions render Minkowski spacetime unstable?”
Phys. Rev. D89, 041502 (2014), arXiv:1311.1235 [gr-qc].
and P. Pani, “Study of the
nonlinear instability of conﬁned geometries,” Phys. Rev.
D90, 104032 (2014), arXiv:1409.0533 [gr-qc].

[37] H. Okawa, V. Cardoso,

[38] V. Cardoso and J. V. Rocha, “Collapsing shells, crit-
(2016),

ical phenomena and black hole formation,”
arXiv:1601.07552 [gr-qc].

[39] R.-G. Cai and R.-Q. Yang, “Multiple critical gravita-
tional collapse of charged scalar with reﬂecting wall,”
(2016), arXiv:1602.00112 [gr-qc].

[40] V. Husain, G. Kunstatter, B. Preston, and M. Birukou,
“Anti-de Sitter gravitational collapse,” Class. Quant.
Grav. 20, L23–L30 (2003), arXiv:gr-qc/0210011 [gr-qc].
[41] A. Buchel, S. L. Liebling, and L. Lehner, “Boson stars
in AdS spacetime,” Phys. Rev. D87, 123006 (2013),
arXiv:1304.4166 [gr-qc].

[42] M. Maliborski and A. Rostworowski, “A comment on

”Boson stars in AdS”,” (2013), arXiv:1307.2875.

[43] G. Fodor, P. Forg´acs,

and P. Grandcl´ement, “Scalar
ﬁeld breathers on Anti-de Sitter background,” Phys. Rev.
D89, 065027 (2014), arXiv:1312.7562 [hep-th].

[44] M. Maliborski and A. Rostworowski, “What drives
AdS unstable?” Phys. Rev. D89, 124006 (2014),
arXiv:1403.5434 [gr-qc].

[45] V. Balasubramanian, A. Buchel, S. R. Green, L. Lehner,
and S. L. Liebling, “Holographic Thermalization, Sta-
bility of Anti-de Sitter Space, and the Fermi-Pasta-
Ulam Paradox,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 071601 (2014),
arXiv:1403.6471 [hep-th].

[46] B. Craps, O. Evnin, and J. Vanhoof, “Renormalization
group, secular term resummation and AdS (in)stability,”
JHEP 10, 48 (2014), arXiv:1407.6273 [gr-qc].

[47] F. V. Dimitrakopoulos, B. Freivogel, M. Lippert, and
I.-S. Yang, “Instability corners in AdS space,” (2014),
arXiv:1410.1880 [hep-th].

[48] P. Bizo´n and A. Rostworowski, “Comment on “Holo-
graphic Thermalization, Stability of Anti-de Sitter Space,
and the Fermi-Pasta-Ulam Paradox”,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
115, 049101 (2015), arXiv:1410.2631 [gr-qc].

[49] B. Craps, O. Evnin,

and J. Vanhoof, “Renormaliza-
tion, averaging, conservation laws and AdS (in)stability,”
JHEP 01, 108 (2015), arXiv:1412.3249 [gr-qc].

[50] A. Buchel, S. R. Green, L. Lehner, and S. L. Liebling,
“Conserved quantities and dual turbulent cascades in
Anti-de Sitter spacetime,” Phys. Rev. D91, 064026
(2015), arXiv:1412.4761 [gr-qc].

[51] P. Bizo´n, M. Maliborski, and A. Rostworowski, “Reso-
nant dynamics and the instability of Anti-de Sitter space-
time,” (2015), arXiv:1506.03519 [gr-qc].

[52] V. Balasubramanian, A. Buchel, S. R. Green, L. Lehner,
and S. L. Liebling, “Reply to Comment on “Holographic
Thermalization, Stability of Anti-de Sitter Space, and
the Fermi-Pasta-Ulam Paradox”,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 115,
049102 (2015), arXiv:1506.07907 [gr-qc].

[53] F. Dimitrakopoulos and I.-S. Yang, “Occasionally Ex-
tended Validity of Perturbation Theory: Persistence of
AdS Stability Islands,” (2015), arXiv:1507.02684 [hep-
th].

[54] S. R. Green, A. Maillard, L. Lehner, and S. L. Liebling,
“Islands of stability and recurrence times in AdS,”
(2015), arXiv:1507.08261 [gr-qc].

[55] N. Deppe and A. R. Frey, “Classes of Stable Initial Data
for Massless and Massive Scalars in Anti-de Sitter Space-
time,” (2015), arXiv:1508.02709 [hep-th].

[56] B. Craps, O. Evnin, and J. Vanhoof, “Ultraviolet asymp-
totics and singular dynamics of AdS perturbations,”
(2015), arXiv:1508.04943 [gr-qc].

[57] B. Craps, O. Evnin, P. Jai-akson, and J. Vanhoof, “Ul-
traviolet asymptotics for quasiperiodic AdS 4 perturba-
tions,” (2015), arXiv:1508.05474 [gr-qc].

[58] D. S. Menon and V. Suneeta, “Necessary conditions for
an AdS-type instability,” (2015), arXiv:1509.00232 [gr-
qc].

[59] J. Abajo-Arrastia, E. da Silva, E. Lopez, J. Mas, and
A. Serantes, “Holographic Relaxation of Finite Size
Isolated Quantum Systems,” JHEP 05, 126 (2014),
arXiv:1403.2632 [hep-th].

[60] E. da Silva, E. Lopez, J. Mas, and A. Serantes, “Collapse
and Revival in Holographic Quenches,” JHEP 04, 038
(2015), arXiv:1412.6002 [hep-th].

[61] A. Ishibashi and K. Maeda, “Singularities in asymptoti-
cally Anti-de Sitter spacetimes,” Phys. Rev. D86, 104012
(2012), arXiv:1208.1563 [hep-th].

[62] H. Friedrich, “Geometric Asymptotics and Beyond,”

(2014), arXiv:1411.3854 [gr-qc].

[63] G. Holzegel, J. Luk, J. Smulevici,

and C. Warnick,
“Asymptotic properties of linear ﬁeld equations in Anti-
de Sitter space,” (2015), arXiv:1502.04965 [gr-qc].

24

[64] G. Holzegel and A. Shao, “Unique continuation from
inﬁnity in asymptotically Anti-de Sitter spacetimes,”
(2015), arXiv:1508.03820 [gr-qc].

[65] N. Kim, “Time-periodic solutions of massive scalar
ﬁelds in dynamical AdS background: Perturbative
constructions,” Phys. Lett. B742, 274–278 (2015),
arXiv:1411.1633 [hep-th].
[66] H. Okawa, J. C. Lopes,

and V. Cardoso, “Collapse
of massive ﬁelds in Anti-de Sitter spacetime,” (2015),
arXiv:1504.05203 [gr-qc].

[67] I.-S. Yang, “Missing top of the AdS resonance structure,”
Phys. Rev. D91, 065011 (2015), arXiv:1501.00998 [hep-
th].

[68] P. Basu, C. Krishnan,

and P. N. Bala Subramanian,
“AdS (In)stability: Lessons From The Scalar Field,”
Phys. Lett. B746, 261–265 (2015), arXiv:1501.07499
[hep-th].

[69] O. Evnin and C. Krishnan, “A Hidden Symmetry of
AdS Resonances,” Phys. Rev. D91, 126010 (2015),
arXiv:1502.03749 [hep-th].

[70] R.-G. Cai, L.-W. Ji, and R.-Q. Yang, “Collapse of self-
interacting scalar ﬁeld in Anti-de Sitter space,” (2015),
arXiv:1511.00868 [gr-qc].

[71] N. Deppe, A. Kolly, A. Frey, and G. Kunstatter, “Sta-
bility of AdS in Einstein Gauss Bonnet Gravity,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 114, 071102 (2015), arXiv:1410.1869 [hep-th].
[72] S. Golod and T. Piran, “Choptuik’s Critical Phenomenon
in Einstein-Gauss-Bonnet Gravity,” Phys. Rev. D85,
104015 (2012), arXiv:1201.6384 [gr-qc].

[73] O. J. C. Dias, G. T. Horowitz, and J. E. Santos, “Grav-
itational Turbulent Instability of Anti-de Sitter Space,”
Class. Quant. Grav. 29, 194002 (2012), arXiv:1109.1825
[hep-th].

[74] O. J. C. Dias, G. T. Horowitz, D. Marolf, and J. E.
Santos, “On the Nonlinear Stability of Asymptotically
Anti-de Sitter Solutions,” Class. Quant. Grav. 29, 235019
(2012), arXiv:1208.5772 [gr-qc].

[75] G. T. Horowitz and J. E. Santos, “Geons and the Instabil-
ity of Anti-de Sitter Spacetime,” (2014), arXiv:1408.5906
[gr-qc].

[76] P. Bizo´n, “Is AdS stable?” Proceedings, 20th Interna-
tional Conference on General Relativity and Gravita-
tion and 10th Amaldi Conference on Gravitational Waves
(GR20 / Amaldi10): The First Century of General Rela-
tivity, Gen. Rel. Grav. 46, 1724 (2014), arXiv:1312.5544
[gr-qc].

[77] D. Santos-Oliv´an and C. F. Sopuerta, “New Features
of Gravitational Collapse in Anti-de Sitter Spacetimes,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 041101 (2016), arXiv:1511.04344
[gr-qc].

[78] R. Courant and D. Hilbert, Methods of Mathematical

Physics Volume II (John Wiley and Sons, 1989).

[79] R. Arnowitt, S. Deser, and C. W. Misner, “The dynamics
of general relativity,” in Gravitation: An introduction to
current research, edited by L. Witten (Wiley, New York,
1962) pp. 227–265.

[80] J. Bland, B. Preston, M. Becker, G. Kunstatter, and
V. Husain, “Dimension dependence of the critical ex-
ponent in spherically symmetric gravitational collapse,”
Class. Quant. Grav. 22, 5355–5364 (2005).

[81] J. Bland and G. Kunstatter, “The 5-D Choptuik criti-
cal exponent and holography,” Phys. Rev. D75, 101501
(2007), arXiv:hep-th/0702226 [hep-th].

[82] F. John, Partial Diﬀerential Equations (Springer Verlag

25

New York Inc., New York, 1991).

[83] P. Canizares and C. F. Sopuerta, “An Eﬃcient Pseu-
dospectral Method for the Computation of the Self-
force on a Charged Particle: Circular Geodesics around
a Schwarzschild Black Hole,” Phys. Rev. D79, 084020
(2009), arXiv:0903.0505 [gr-qc].

[84] P. Canizares, C. F. Sopuerta, and J. L. Jaramillo, “Pseu-
dospectral Collocation Methods for the Computation of
the Self-Force on a Charged Particle: Generic Orbits
around a Schwarzschild Black Hole,” Phys. Rev. D82,
044023 (2010), arXiv:1006.3201 [gr-qc].

[85] P. Canizares and C. F. Sopuerta, “Tuning Time-Domain
Pseudospectral Computations of the Self-Force on a
Charged Scalar Particle,” Class. Quant. Grav. 28, 134011
(2011), arXiv:1101.2526 [gr-qc].

[86] J. L. Jaramillo, C. F. Sopuerta,

and P. Canizares,
“Are Time-Domain Self-Force Calculations Contami-
nated by Jost Solutions?” Phys. Rev. D83, 061503
(2011), arXiv:1101.2324 [gr-qc].

[87] J. P. Boyd, Chebyshev and Fourier Spectral Methods, 2nd

ed. (Dover, New York, 2001).

[88] B. Fornberg, A Practical Guide to Pseudospectral Meth-

ods (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1996).

[89] C. Canuto, A. Quarteroni, M. Y. Hussaini, and T. A.
Zang, Spectral Methods. Fundamentals in Single Domains
(Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg, 2006).

[91] W. H. Press, B. P. Flannery, S. A. Teukolsky,

[90] J. C. Butcher, Numerical Methods for Ordinary Diﬀer-
ential Equations (John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, 2003).
and
W. T. Vetterling, Numerical Recipes: The Art of Scien-
tiﬁc Computing (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
(UK) and New York, 1992).

[92] B. Gustafsson, H. Kreiss, and J. Oliger, Time dependent

problems (John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1995).

[93] B. Gough, GNU Scientiﬁc Library Reference Manual -

Third Edition, 3rd ed. (Network Theory Ltd., 2009).

[94] D. Garﬁnkle and G. C. Duncan, “Scaling of curvature
in subcritical gravitational collapse,” Phys. Rev. D58,
064024 (1998), arXiv:gr-qc/9802061 [gr-qc].

[95] S. Hod and T. Piran, “Fine structure of Choptuik’s
mass scaling relation,” Phys. Rev. D55, 440–442 (1997),
arXiv:gr-qc/9606087 [gr-qc].

[96] M. Frigo and S. G. Johnson, “The design and imple-
mentation of FFTW3,” Proceedings of the IEEE 93, 216
(2005), special issue on ”Program Generation, Optimiza-
tion, and Platform Adaptation”.

