6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
 
1
1

 
 
]
T
G
h
t
a
m

.

[
 
 

1
v
4
4
6
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Extending Topological Surgery to Natural Processes and
Dynamical Systems
Sofia Lambropoulou1∗, Stathis Antoniou2

1 Department of Mathematics, National Technical University of Athens, Athens, Greece.

2 Department of Mathematics, National Technical University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
∗ E-mail: sofia@math.ntua.gr (SL)

Abstract

Topological surgery is a mathematical technique used for creating new manifolds out of known ones. We

observe that it occurs in natural phenomena where a sphere of dimension 0 or 1 is selected, forces are

applied and the manifold in which they occur change type. For example, 1-dimensional surgery happens

during chromosomal crossover, DNA recombination and when cosmic magnetic lines reconnect, while

2-dimensional surgery happens in the formation of tornadoes, in Falaco Solitons, in drop coalescence,

in the cell mitosis and in the formation of black holes. Inspired by such phenomena, we introduce new

theoretical concepts which enhance topological surgery with the observed forces and dynamics. To do this,

we first extend the formal definition to a continuous process caused by local forces. Next, for modeling

phenomena which do not happen on arcs or surfaces but are 2-dimensional, or respectively 3-dimensional,

we fill the interior space by defining the notion of solid topological surgery. We also introduce the notion

of embedded surgery in S3 for modeling phenomena which involve more intrinsically the ambient space

such as the appearance of knotting and phenomena where the causes and effect of the process lies beyond

the initial manifold. Finally, we connect these new theoretical concepts with a dynamical system and

present it as a model for both 2-dimensional 0-surgery and natural phenomena exhibiting it. We hope that

through this study, topology and dynamics of many natural phenomena, as well as topological surgery

itself, will be better understood.

2010 Mathematics Subject Classification: 57R65, 57N12, 57M25, 57M99, 37B99, 92B99.
Keywords: layering, three-space, ambient space, three-sphere, embedded topological surgery, natural processes, topological
surgery, dynamics, continuous process, forces, joining ‘thread’, topological ‘drilling’, recoupling, reconnection, mathematical
model, Falaco Solitons, tornadoes, whirls, DNA recombination, mitosis, chromosomal crossover, solid topological surgery,
black holes, necking, gene transfer.

We are grateful to Louis H.Kauffman and Cameron Gordon for many fruitful conversations on Morse theory and 3-
dimensional surgery. We would also like to thank Nikola Samardzija for discussing the topological aspects of the dynamical
system presented in [10]. Finally, we would like to acknowledge a comment by Tim Cochran pointing out the connection of
our new notions with Morse theory. This research has been co-financed by the European Union (European Social Fund

2

1

Introduction

Topological surgery is a mathematical technique used for changing the homeomorphism type of a topological

manifold, thus for creating new manifolds out of known ones. More precisely, manifolds with homeomorphic

boundaries may be attached together via a homeomorphism between their boundaries which can be used

as ‘glue’. An n-dimensional topological surgery on an n-manifold M is, roughly, the topological procedure

whereby an appropriate n-manifold with boundary is removed from M and is replaced by another n-

manifold with the same boundary, using a ‘gluing’ homeomorphism along the common boundary, thus

creating a new n-manifold χ(M ). For example, all orientable surfaces may arise from the 2-dimensional

sphere using surgery.

As we observe in this study, topological surgery is exhibited in nature in numerous, diverse processes

of various scales for ensuring new results. Surgery in nature is usually performed on basic manifolds with

or without boundary that undergo merging and recoupling. Such processes are initiated by attracting (or

repelling) forces acting on a sphere of dimension 0 or 1. A large part of this work is dedicated to setting

the topological ground for modeling such phenomena in dimensions 1,2 and 3. Namely, we introduce new

theoretical concepts which are better adapted to the phenomena and which enhance the formal definition

of surgery. More precisely, the new concepts are:
• The introduction of forces: A sphere of dimension 0 or 1 is selected in space and attracting (or

repelling) forces act on it. These dynamics explain the intermediate steps of the formal definition and

extend surgery to a continuous process caused by local forces. Note that these intermediate steps can also

be explained through Morse theory. The theoretical forces that we introduce are also observed in the

phenomena exhibiting surgery. For example, in dimension 1, during chromosomal crossover (see Figure 3),

the pairing is caused by mutual attraction of the parts of the chromosomes that are similar or homologous.

In dimension 2, the creation of tornadoes (see Figure 13 (a)) is caused by attracting forces between the

cloud and the earth while soap bubble splitting (see Figure 9) is caused by the surface tension of each

bubble which acts as an attracting force.
• Solid surgery: The interior of the initial manifold is now filled in. For example, in dimension 1 this

allows to model phenomena happening on surfaces such as the merging of oil slicks. An oil slick is seen as

- ESF) and Greek national funds through the Operational Program ”Education and Lifelong Learning” of the National
Strategic Reference Framework (NSRF) - Research Funding Program: THALES: Reinforcement of the interdisciplinary
and/or inter-institutional research and innovation.

3

a disc, that is a continuum of concentric circles together with the center. An example in dimension 2 is

the process of mitosis (see Figure 18), whereby a cell splits into two new cells. The cell is seen as a 3-ball,

that is, a continuum of concentric spheres together with the central point. Other examples comprise the

formation of waterspouts (see Figure 13 (b)) where we see how the formation of the tornado’s cylindrical

‘cork’ has altered the surface of the sea and the creation of Falaco Solitons (see Figure 14) where the

creation of two discs joined with an ’invisible’ thread is taking place in a pool of water.
• Embedded surgery: All phenomena exhibiting surgery take place in 3-space. For this reason we

introduce the notion of embedded 1- or 2-dimensional surgery which is taking place on an embedding

of the initial manifold in 3-space. The ambient 3-space leaves room for the initial manifold to assume a

more complicated configuration and allows the complementary space of the initial manifold to participate

actively in the process. For example, in dimension 1 any embedding of S1 is a knot and a related

phenomenon is the DNA recombination of circular DNA (see Figure 4). An example in dimension 2 is the

formation of black holes (see Figure 15) where the whole space is involved in the process. Note that the

appearance of forces, enhanced with the notions of solid 1- and 2-dimensional surgery, can be all viewed

within the context of embedded surgery. In fact all the above culminate to the notion of embedded solid

2-dimensional surgery and can be derived from there.
• Connection with a dynamical system: Finally, combining these new notions with the ideas

presented in [3] and [4], we establish a connection between the dynamical system presented in [10] and

2-dimensional topological surgery. We analyze how, with a slight perturbation of parameters, trajectories

pass from spherical to toroidal shape through a ‘hole drilling’ process. We show that our new topological

notions are verified by both the local behavior of the steady state points of the system and the numerical

simulations of its trajectories. This result give us on the one hand a mathematical model for 2-dimensional

surgery and on the other hand a system that can model natural phenomena exhibiting these types of

surgeries.

This paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 we recall the topological notions that will be used

and provide specific examples that will be of great help to readers that are not familiar with topological

surgery. In Section 3, we introduce dynamics to 1-dimensional surgery, we define solid 1-dimensional

surgery and we discuss 1-dimensional natural processes exhibiting these types of surgeries. In Section 4

we extend these definitions to 2-dimensional surgery and discuss related 2-dimensional natural processes.

We then use these new theoretical concepts in Section 5 to pin down the relations among topological

surgeries of different dimensions. As all natural phenomena exhibiting surgery (1 or 2-dimensional, solid

or usual) take place in the ambient 3-space, in Section 6 we present our 3-space S3 and the duality of its

descriptions. This allows us to define in Section 7 the notion of embedded surgery in S3. Finally, our

connection of solid 2-dimensional surgery with a dynamical system is established in Section 8.

4

2

Introductory notions

2.1 Basic manifolds

In each dimension the basic closed (compact without boundary), connected, oriented (c.c.o.) n-manifold,
is the n-sphere, Sn, which may be viewed as Rn with all points at infinity compactified to one single point.
For n = 0, the space S0 is the disjoint union of two one-point spaces {+1} and {−1}: S0 = {+1} (cid:113) {−1}.
The product space S0 × Dn is the disjoint union Dn (cid:113) Dn.

We also need to recall that the basic connected, oriented n-manifold with boundary is the solid n-ball,

Dn. In particular for n = 3, other 3-manifolds with boundary, that we will be referring to, are: the solid
torus, which can be described as the product set S1 × D2, and the handlebodies, which generalize the

solid torus, having higher genus.

2.2 The formal definitions of surgery

We recall the following topological notions:

(i) An embedding of a submanifold N n (cid:44)→ M m is framed if it extends to an embedding N n × Dm−n (cid:44)→

M .

(ii) An n-embedding in an m-dimensional manifold M m is an embedding e : Sn (cid:44)→ M .

(iii) A framed n-embedding in M is an embedding h : Sn × Dm−n (cid:44)→ M , with core n-embedding

e = h| : Sn = Sn × {0} (cid:44)→ M .

Definition 1 An m-dimensional n-surgery is the topological procedure of creating a new m-manifold M(cid:48)
out of a given m-manifold M by removing a framed n-embedding h : Sn × Dm−n (cid:44)→ M , and replacing it
with Dn+1 × Sm−n−1, using the ‘gluing’ homeomorphism h along the common boundary Sn × Sm−n−1.

5

That is:

M(cid:48) = χ(M ) = M \ h(Sn × Dm−n) ∪h|Sn×Sm−n−1 Dn+1 × Sm−n−1.

Note that from the definition, we must have n + 1 ≤ m.

Further, the dual m-dimensional (m− n− 1)-surgery on M(cid:48) removes a dual framed (m− n− 1)-embedding
g : Dn+1 × Sm−n−1 (cid:44)→ M(cid:48) such that g|Sn×Sm−n−1 = h−1|Sn×Sm−n−1, and replaces it with Sn × Dm−n,
using the ‘gluing’ homeomorphism g (or h−1) along the common boundary Sn × Sm−n−1. That is:

M = χ−1(M(cid:48)) = M(cid:48) \ g(Dn+1 × Sm−n−1) ∪h−1|Sn×Sm−n−1 Sn × Dm−n.

Note that resulting manifold χ(M ) may or may not be homeomorphic to M . From the above definition,
it follows that M = χ−1(χ(M )). For preliminary definitions behind the definitions of surgery such as

topological spaces, homeomorphisms, embeddings and other related notions see Appendix A. For further

reading, excellent references on the subject are [1, 2, 5].

Example 1 We only have one kind of surgery on a 1-manifold M , the 1-dimensional 0-surgery where

m = 1 and n = 0:

M(cid:48) = χ(M ) = M \ h(S0 × D1) ∪h|S0×S0 D1 × S0.

The above definition means that two segments S0 × D1 are removed from M and they are replaced by two
different segments D1 × S0 by reconnecting the four boundary points S0 × S0 in a different way. There are

two ways of reconnecting four points, both of which are illustrated in Figure 1. For example, if we start
with the circle M = S1, depending on the type of reconnection, we obtain two circles S1 × S0 if h is the

standard embedding , see Figure 1 (a), or one circle S1 if h is modified by twisting one of the emdeddings
of D1, see Figure 1 (b). More specifically, if we define the homeomorphism ω : D1 → D1; t → −t, the
embedding used in (b) is hb : S0 × D1 = D1 (cid:113) D1 1(cid:113)ω−−−→ S0 × D1 h−→ M .

Note that in one dimension, the dual case is also a 1-dimensional 0-surgery. For example, as seen

in both Figure 1 (a) and (b), the reverse processes are 1-dimensional 0-surgeries which give back
χ−1(M(cid:48)) = M = S1. More specifically, starting with two circles M(cid:48) = S1 (cid:113) S1, if each segment of D1 × S0

is embedded in a different circle, the result of 1-dimensional 0-surgery is one circle (see the reverse process

of Figure 1 (a)).

6

Figure 1. Formal 1-dimensional surgery.

Example 2 Starting with a 2-manifold M , there are two types of surgeries. For m = 2 and n = 0, we
have the 2-dimensional 0-surgery whereby two discs S0 × D2 are removed from M and are replaced in
the closure of the remaining manifold by a cylinder D1 × S1, which gets attached via a homeomorphism
along the common boundary S0 × S1, comprising two copies of S1. The gluing homeomorphism of the

common boundary can twist one or both copies of S1. For M = S2, the above operation changes the

homeomorphism type from the 2-sphere to that of the torus, see Figure 2 (a). In fact, every c.c.o. surface

arises from the 2-sphere by repeated surgeries and each time the above process is performed the genus of

the surface is increased by one.

The other possibility of 2-dimensional surgery on M is the 2-dimensional 1-surgery for m = 2 and
n = 1: here an annulus S1 × D1 (perhaps twisted) is removed from M and is replaced in the closure of
the remaining manifold by two discs D2 × S0 attached along the common boundary S1 × S0. For M = S2

the result is two copies of S2. See Figure 2 (b).

From Definition 1, it follows that a dual 2-dimensional 0-surgery is a 2-dimensional 1-surgery and vice

versa. Hence, Figure 2 (a) shows that a 2-dimensional 0-surgery on a sphere is the reverse process of a

2-dimensional 1-surgery on a torus. Similarly, as illustrated in Figure 2 (b), a 2-dimensional 1-surgery on
a sphere is the reverse process of a 2-dimensional 0-surgery on two spheres. In the figure the symbol ←→

depicts surgeries from left to right and their corresponding dual surgeries from right to left.

7

Figure 2. Formal 2-dimensional surgeries.

3

1-dimensional topological surgery

1-dimensional 0-surgery happens in nature, in various scales, in phenomena where 1-dimensional splicing

and reconnection occurs. For example, it happens on chromosomes during meiosis and produces new

combinations of genes (see Figure 3), in site-specific DNA recombination (see Figure 4) whereby nature

alters the genetic code of an organism, either by moving a block of DNA to another position on the

molecule or by integrating a block of alien DNA into a host genome (see [6]), in magnetic reconnection,

the phenomenon whereby cosmic magnetic field lines from different magnetic domains are spliced to one

another, changing their patterns of connectivity with respect to the sources (see Figure 5 from [7]) and in

the reconnection of vortices in classical and quantum fluids (see [8]).

In this section we introduce dynamics which explains the process of 1-dimensional surgery, define the

notion of solid 1-dimensional surgery and examine in more details the aforementioned natural phenomena.

3.1 Introducing dynamics

The formal definition of 1-dimensional 0-surgery gives a static description of the initial and the final stage

whereas natural phenomena exhibiting 1-dimensional 0-surgery follow a continuous process. In order to

address such phenomena or to understand how 1-dimensional 0-surgery happens, we need a non-static

description.

8

Figure 3. Crossing over of chromosomes during meiosis.

Figure 4. DNA Recombination.

Figure 5. The reconnection of cosmic magnetic lines.

Furthermore, in nature, 1-dimensional 0-surgery often happens locally, on arcs or segments. That is,
the initial manifold is often bigger and we remove from its interior two segments S0 × D1. Therefore, we

also need dynamics that act locally.

In Figure 6, we introduce dynamics which explain the intermediate steps of the formal definition and

extend surgery to a continuous process caused by local forces. The process starts with the two points

specified on the manifold (in red), on which attracting forces are applied (in blue). We assume that these
forces are created by an attracting center (also in blue). Then, the two segments S0 × D1, which are

neighbourhoods of the two points, get close to one another. When the specified points (or centers) of two

segments reach the attracting center, they touch and recoupling takes place giving rise to the two final
segments D1 × S0, which split apart. As mentioned in previous section, we have two cases (a) and (b),

depending on the homemorphism h.

9

Figure 6. Introducing dynamics to 1-dimensional surgery.

As mentioned in Example 1, the dual case is also a 1-dimensional 0-surgery as it removes segments
D1 × S0 and replace them by segments S0 × D1. This is the reverse process which starts from the end

and is illustrated in Figure 6 as a result of the orange forces and attracting center which are applied on

the ‘complementary’ points.

Remark 1 It is worth mentioning that the intermediate steps of surgery presented in Figure 6 can also

be viewed in the context of Morse theory [9]. By using the local form of a Morse function, we can visualize
the process of surgery by varying parameter t of equation x2 − y2 = t. For t = −1 it is the hyperbola

shown in the second instance of Figure 6 where the two segments get close to one another. For t = 0 it is

the two straight lines where the reconnection takes place as shown in the third instance of Figure 6 while

for t = 1 it represents the hyperbola of the two final segments shown in case (a) of the fourth instance of

Figure 6. This sequence can be generalized for higher dimensional surgeries as well, however, in this paper

we will not use this approach as we are focusing on the introduction of forces and of the attracting center.

These local dynamics produce different manifolds depending on where the initial neighbourhoods are
embedded. Taking the known case of the standard embedding h and M = S1, we obtain S1 × S0 (for

both regular and dual surgery), see Figure 7 (a). Furthermore, as shown in Figure 7 (b), we also obtain
S1 × S0 even if the attracting center is outside S1. Note that these outcomes are not different than the

ones shown in formal surgery (Figure 1) but we can now see the intermediate instances.

Looking closer at the aforementioned phenomena, the described dynamics and attracting forces are

present in all cases. Namely, magnetic reconnection (Figure 5) corresponds to a dual 1-dimensional
0-surgery (see Figure 6 (b)) where g : D1 × S0 (cid:44)→ M(cid:48) is a dual embedding of the twisting homeomorphism

10

Figure 7. 1-dimensional surgery on one and two circles.

hb defined in Example 1 of Section 2.2. The tubes are viewed as segments and correspond to an initial
manifold M = S0 × D1 (or M = S1 if they are connected) on which the local dynamics act on two smaller
segments S0 × D1. Namely, the two magnetic flux tubes have a nonzero parallel net current through

them, which leads to attraction of the tubes (cf. [14]). Between them, a localized diffusion region develops

where magnetic field lines may decouple. Reconnection is accompanied with a sudden release of energy

and the magnetic field lines break and rejoin in a lower energy state.

In the case of chromosomal crossover (Figure 3), we have the same dual 1-dimensional 0-surgery

as magnetic reconnection (see Figure 6 (b)). During this process, the homologous (maternal and paternal)

chromosomes come together and pair, or synapse, during prophase. The pairing is remarkably precise

and is caused by mutual attraction of the parts of the chromosomes that are similar or homologous.

Further, each paired chromosomes divide into two chromatids. The point where two homologous non-sister

chromatids touch and exchange genetic material is called chiasma. At each chiasma, two of the chromatids

have become broken and then rejoined (cf. [15]). In this process, we consider the initial manifold to be
one chromatid from each chromosome, hence the initial manifold is M = S0 × D1 on which the local
dynamics act on two smaller segments S0 × D1.

For site-specific DNA recombination (see Figure 4), we have a 1-dimensional 0-surgery (see

Figure 6 (b)) with a twisted homeomorphism hb as defined in Example 1 of Section 2.2. Here the initial

manifold is a knot which is an embedding of M = S1 in 3-space but this will be detailed in Section 7. As

11

mentioned in [16], enzymes break and rejoin the DNA strands, hence in this case the seeming attraction of

the two specified points is realized by the enzyme. Note that, while both are genetic recombinations, there

is a difference between chromosomal crossover and site-specific DNA recombination. Namely, chromosomal

crossover involves the homologous recombination between two similar or identical molecules of DNA and

we view the process at the chromosome level regardless of the knotting of DNA molecules.

Finally, vortices reconnect following the steps of 1-dimensional 0-surgery with a standard embedding
shown in Figure 6 (a). The initial manifold is again M = S0 × D1. As mentioned in [17], the interaction

of the anti-parallel vortices goes from attraction before reconnection, to repulsion after reconnection.

3.2 Defining solid 1-dimensional surgery

There are phenomena which undergo the process of 1-dimensional 0-surgery but happen on surfaces, such

as tension on membranes or soap films and the merging of oil slicks. In order to model topologically

such phenomena we introduce the notion of solid 1-dimensional 0-surgery. Solid 1-dimensional 0-surgery
on the 2-disc D2 is the topological procedure whereby a ribbon D1 × D1 is being removed, such that
the closure of the remaining manifold comprises two discs D2 × S0. See Figure 1 where the interior is

now supposed to be filled in. This process is equivalent to performing 1-dimensional 0-surgeries on the

whole continuum of concentric circles included in D2. More precisely, and introducing at the same time

dynamics, we define:

Definition 2 We start with the 2-disc of radius 1 with polar layering:

D2 = ∪0<r≤1S1

r ∪ {P},

where r the radius of a circle and P the limit point of the circles, that is, the center of the disc. We

specify colinear pairs of antipodal points, with neighbourhoods of analogous lengths, on which the same

colinear attracting forces act, see Figure 8 (1) where these forces and the corresponding attracting center

are shown in blue. Then, in (2), antipodal segments get closer to one another or, equivalently, closer to

the attracting center. Note that here, the attracting center coincides with the limit point of all concentric

circles, which is shown in green from instance (2) and on. Then, as shown from (3) to (9), we perform

1-dimensional 0-surgery on the whole continuum of concentric circles. The natural order of surgeries is as

follows: first, the center of the segments that are closer to the center of attraction touch, see (4). After all

12

other points have also reached the center, see (5), decoupling starts from the central or limit point. We

define 1-dimensional 0-surgery on the limit point P to be the two limit points of the resulting surgeries.

That is, the effect of solid 1-dimensional 0-surgery on a point is the creation of two new points , see (6).

Next, the other segments reconnect, from the inner, see (7), to the outer ones, see (8), until we have two

copies of D2, see (9) and (10). Note that the proposed order of reconnection, from inner to outer, is the

same as the one followed by skin healing, namely, the regeneration of the epidermis starts with the deepest

part and then migrates upwards.

Figure 8. Solid 1-dimensional surgery.

The above process is the same as first removing the center P from D2, doing the 1-dimensional

0-surgeries and then taking the closure of the resulting space. The resulting manifold is

χ(D2) := ∪0<r≤1χ(S1

r ) ∪ χ(P ),

which comprises two copies of D2.

We also have the reverse process of the above, namely, Solid 1-dimensional 0-surgery on two discs
D2 × S0 is the topological procedure whereby a ribbon D1 × D1 joining the discs is added, such that

the closure of the remaining manifold comprise one disc D2, as illustrated in Figure 8. This process is

13

the result of the orange forces and attracting center which are applied on the ‘complementary’ points.

This operation is equivalent to performing 1-dimensional 0-surgery on the whole continuum of concentric
circles in D2 (cid:113) D2. We only need to define solid 1-dimensional 0-surgery on two limit points to be the

limit point P of the resulting surgeries. That is, the effect of solid 1-dimensional 0-surgery on two points

is their merging into one point. The above process is the same as first removing the centers from the
D2 × S0, doing the 1-dimensional 0-surgeries and then taking the closure of the resulting space. The

resulting manifold is

χ−1(D2 × S0) := ∪0<r≤1χ−1(S1

r × S0) ∪ χ−1(P × S0),

which comprises one copy of D2.

Remark 2 In analogy to embedded 1-dimensional 0-surgery, we also have the notion of embedded solid

1-dimensional 0-surgery. As S1 is the boundary of D2, any knot is the boundary of a, so-called, Seifert

surface, so embedded solid 1-dimensional 0-surgery could be extended to a Seifert surface.

4

2-dimensional topological surgery

Both types of 2-dimensional surgeries are present in nature, in various scales, in phenomena where

2-dimensional merging and recoupling occurs. Natural processes undergoing 2-dimensional 0-surgery

comprise, for example, drop coalescence, the formation of tornadoes and Falaco Solitons (see Figures 13

and 14), gene transfer in bacteria (see Figure 16) and the formation of black holes (see Figure 15) . On the

other hand, phenomena undergoing 2-dimensional 1-surgery comprise soap bubble splitting (see Figure 9),

the biological process of mitosis (see Figure 18) and fracture as a result of tension on metal specimen (see

Figure 17). In this section we introduce dynamics which explains the process of 2-dimensional surgery,

define the notions of solid 2-dimensional surgery and embedded solid 2-dimensional surgery and examine in

more details the aforementioned natural phenomena. The key notion of this section is the embedded solid

2-dimensional surgery from which 2 and 1-dimensional surgeries can be derived. This will be discussed in

Section 5.

Note that except for soap bubble splitting which is a phenomena happening on surfaces, the other

mentioned phenomena involve all three dimensions and are, therefore, analyzed after the introduction of

solid 2-dimensional surgery, in Sections 4.3 and 4.4.

14

Figure 9. Soap bubble splitting. An example of 2-dimensional 1-surgery.

4.1 Introducing dynamics

In order to model topologically phenomena exhibiting 2-dimensional surgery or to understand 2-dimensional

surgery through continuity we need, also here, to introduce dynamics. In Figure 10 (a), the 2-dimensional

0-surgery starts with two points, or poles, specified on the manifold (in red) on which attracting forces
created by an attracting center are applied (in blue). Then, the two discs S0 × D2, neighbourhoods of the

two poles, approach each other. When the centers of the two discs touch, recoupling takes place and the
discs get transformed into the final cylinder D1 × S1.

As mentioned in Example 2, the dual case of 2-dimensional 0-surgery is the 2-dimensional 1-surgery

and vice versa. This is also shown in Figure 10 (a) where the reverse process is the 2-dimensional 1-surgery

which starts with the cylinder and a specified cyclical region (in red) on which attracting forces created

by an attracting center are applied (in orange). A ‘necking’ occurs in the middle which degenerates into
a point and finally tears apart creating two discs S0 × D2. As also seen in Figure 10 (a), in the case

of 2-dimensional 0-surgery, forces (in blue) are applied on two points, or S0, while in the case of the

2-dimensional 1-surgery, forces (in orange) are applied on a circle S1.

In Figure 10 (b), we have an example of twisted 2-dimensional 0-surgery where the two discs S0 × D2
are embedded via a twisted homemorphism ht while, in the dual case, the cylinder D1 × S1 is embedded
via a twisted homemorphism gt. Here ht rotates the two discs while gt rotates the top and bottom
of the cylinder by 4π/3 and −4π/3 respectively. More specifically, if we define the homeomorphism
ω1, ω2 : D2 → D2 to be rotations by 4π/3 and −4π/3 respectively, then ht is defined as the composition
ht : S0 × D2 ω1(cid:113)ω2−−−−→ S0 × D2 h−→ M . The homeomorphism gt : D1 × S1 → M is defined analogously.

These local dynamics produce different manifolds depending on the initial manifold where the neigh-

bourhoods are embedded. Taking M = S2, the local dynamics of Figure 10 (a) are shown in Figure 11 (a)

and (b) producing the same manifolds seen in formal 2-dimensional surgery (recall Figure 2). Note that,

15

Figure 10. Introducing dynamics to 2-dimensional surgery. (a) 2-dimensional surgeries with
standard embeddings (b) 2-dimensional surgeries with a twisted embeddings.

as also seen in 1-dimensional surgery (Figure 7 (b)), if the blue attracting center in Figure 11 (a) was

outside the sphere and the cylinder was attached on S2 externally, the result would still be a torus.

Figure 11.
2-dimensional 1-surgery on M = S2 and 2-dimensional 0-surgery on M(cid:48) = S0 × S2.

(a) 2-dimensional 0-surgery on M = S2 and 2-dimensional 1-surgery on M(cid:48) = S0 × S2 (b)

Looking back at the natural phenomema happening on surfaces, an example is soap bubble splitting

during which a soap bubble splits into two smaller bubbles. This process is the 2-dimensional 1-surgery

on M = S2 shown in Figure 11 (b). The orange attracting force in this case is the surface tension of each

16

bubble that pulls molecules into the tightest possible groupings.

4.2 Defining solid 2-dimensional surgery

Most natural phenomena undergoing 2-dimensional surgery do not happen on surfaces but are three-

dimensional. Therefore we introduce, also here, the notion of solid 2-dimensional surgery. There are

two types of solid 2-dimensional surgery on the 3-ball, D3, analogous to the two types of 2-dimensional

surgery.

The first one is the solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery which is the topological procedure of removing a
solid cylinder homeomorphic to the product set D1 × D2, h(D1 × D2) (such that the part S0 × D2 of its
boundary lies in the boundary of D3) and taking the closure of the remaining manifold D3 \ h(D1 × D2),

which is a regular (or twisted) solid torus. See Figure 2 (a) where the interior is supposed to be filled in.

The second type is the solid 2-dimensional 1-surgery which is the topological procedure of removing a
solid cylinder homeomorphic to the product set D2 × D1, h(D2 × D1), (such that the part S1 × D1 of its
boundary lies in the boundary of D3) and taking the closure of the remaining manifold D3 \ h(D2 × D1),

which is two copies of D3. See Figure 2 (b) where the interior is supposed to be filled in. Those processes

are equivalent to performing 2-dimensional surgeries on the whole continuum of concentric spheres included

in D3. More precisely, and introducing at the same time dynamics, we define:

Definition 3 Start with the 3-ball of radius 1 with polar layering:

D3 = ∪0<r≤1S2

r ∪ {P},

where r the radius of a 2-sphere and P the limit point of the spheres, that is, the center of the ball. Solid

2-dimensional 0-surgery on D3 is the topological procedure shown in Figure 12 (a): on all spheres S2
r

colinear pairs of antipodal points are specified, on which the same colinear attracting forces act. The poles

have disc neighbourhoods of analogous areas. Then, 2-dimensional 0-surgeries are performed on the whole

continuum of the concentric spheres using the same homeomorphism h. Moreover, 2-dimensional 0-surgery

on the limit point P is defined to be the limit circle of the nested tori resulting from the continuum of

2-dimensional surgeries. That is, the effect of 2-dimensional 0-surgery on a point is the creation of a

circle. The process is characterized on one hand by the 1-dimensional core L of the removed solid cylinder

joining the antipodal points on the outer shell and intersecting each spherical layer in the two antipodal

points and, on the other hand, by the homeomorphism h, resulting in the whole continuum of layered tori.

The process can be viewed as drilling out a tunnel along L according to h. For a twisted embedding h,

this agrees with our intuition that, for opening a hole, drilling with twisting seems to be the easiest way.

17

Figure 12. Solid 2-dimensional surgery on the 3-ball. (a) 2-dimensional 0-surgery with the
standard embedding (b) 2-dimensional 1-surgery with the standard embedding.

On the other hand, solid 2-dimensional 1-surgery on D3 is the topological procedure where: on all spheres

S2

r nested annular peels of the solid annulus of analogous areas are specified and the same coplanar

attracting forces act on all spheres, see Figure 12 (b). Then, 2-dimensional 1-surgeries are performed on

the whole continuum of the concentric spheres using the same homeomorphism h. Moreover, 2-dimensional

1-surgery on the limit point P is defined to be the two limit points of the nested pairs of 2-spheres resulting

from the continuum of 2-dimensional surgeries. That is, the effect of 2-dimensional 1-surgery on a point is

the creation of two new points. The process is characterized by the 2-dimensional central disc of the solid

annulus and the homeomorphism h, and it can be viewed as squeezing the central disc D or, equivalently,

as pulling apart the upper and lower hemispheres with possible twists if h is a twisted embedding. This

agrees with our intuition that for cutting a solid object apart, pulling with twisting seems to be the easiest

way.

For both types, the above process is the same as: first removing the center P from D3, performing the

18

2-dimensional surgeries and then taking the closure of the resulting space. Namely we obtain:

χ(D3) := ∪0<r≤1χ(S2

r ) ∪ χ(P ),

which is a solid torus in the case of solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery and two copies of D3 in the case of solid

2-dimensional 1-surgery.

As seen in Figure 12, we also have the two dual solid 2-dimensional surgeries, which represent the

reverse processes. As already mentioned in Example 2 the dual case of 2-dimensional 0-surgery is the

2-dimensional 1-surgery and vice versa. More precisely:

Definition 4 The dual case of solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery on D3 is the solid 2-dimensional 1-surgery on
a solid torus D2× S1 whereby a solid cylinder D1× D2 filling the hole is added, such that the closure of the

resulting manifold comprises one 3-ball D3. This is the reverse process shown in Figure 12 (a) which results

from the orange forces and attracting center. It only remain to define the solid 2-dimensional 1-surgery on

the limit circle to be the limit point P of the resulting surgeries. That is, the effect of solid 2-dimensional

1-surgery on the core circle is that it collapses into one point. The above process is the same as first
removing the core circle from D2 × S1, doing the 2-dimensional 1-surgeries on the nested tori, with the

same coplanar acting forces, and then taking the closure of the resulting space. Given that the solid torus
can be written as a union of nested tori together with the core circle: D2 × S1 = (∪0<r≤1S1
r ∪ {0}) × S1,
the resulting manifold is

χ−1(D2 × S1) := ∪0<r≤1χ−1(S1

r × S1) ∪ χ−1({0} × S1),

which comprises one copy of D3.

Further, the dual case of solid 2-dimensional 1-surgery on D3 is the solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery
on two 3-balls D3 whereby a solid cylinder D2 × D1 joining the balls is added, such that the closure

of the resulting manifold comprise of one 3-ball D3. This is the reverse process shown in Figure 12 (b)

which results from the blue forces and attracting center. We only need to define the solid 2-dimensional

0-surgery on two limit points to be the limit point P of the resulting surgeries. That is, as in solid

1-dimensional surgery, the effect of solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery on two points is their merging into
one point. The above process is the same as first removing the centers from the D3 × S0, doing the

19

2-dimensional 0-surgeries on the nested spheres, with the same colinear forces, and then taking the closure

of the resulting space. The resulting manifold is

χ−1(D3 × S0) := ∪0<r≤1χ−1(S2

r × S0) ∪ χ−1(P × S0),

which comprises one copy of D3.

Remark 3 The notions of 2-dimensional (resp. solid 2-dimensional) surgery, can be generalized from S2

(resp. D3) to a surface (resp. a handlebody of genus g) creating a surface (resp. a handlebody of genus

g + 1).

4.3 Natural phenomena exhibiting solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery

Solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery is often present in natural phenomena where attracting forces between two

poles are present, such as the formation of tornadoes, the formation of Falaco Solitons, the formation of

black holes, gene transfer in bacteria and drop coalescence. We shall discuss these phenomena in some

detail pinning down their exhibiting of topological surgery.

Regarding tornadoes: except from their shape (see Figure 13) which fits the cylinder D1 × S1 that

gets attached in the definition of 2-dimensional 0-surgery, the process by which they are formed also follows

the dynamics introduced in Section 4.2. Namely, if certain meteorological conditions are met, an attracting

force between the cloud and the earth beneath is created and funnel-shaped clouds start descending toward

the ground. Once they reach it, they become tornadoes. In analogy to solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery, first

the poles are chosen, one on the tip of the cloud and the other on the ground, and they seem to be joined

through an invisible line. Then, starting from the first point, the wind revolves in a helicoidal motion

toward the second point, resembling ‘hole drilling’ along the line until the hole is drilled. Therefore,

tornado formation undergoes the process of solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery with a twisted embedding, as in
Figure 10 (b). The initial manifold can be considered as M = D3 × S0, that is, one 3-ball on the cloud

and one on the ground. Note that in this realization of solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery, the attracting center

coincides with the ground and we only see helicoidal motion in one direction.

Another natural phenomenon exhibiting solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery is the formation of Falaco

Solitons, see Figure 14 (for photos of pairs of Falaco Solitons in a swimming pool, see [18]). Note that

the term ‘Falaco Soliton’ appears in 2001 in [19]. Each Falaco Soliton consists of a pair of locally unstable

20

Figure 13. (a) Funnel clouds drilling and tornado formation (b) waterspout. An example of
solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery.

but globally stabilized contra-rotating identations in the water-air discontinuity surface of a swimming

pool. These pairs of singular surfaces (poles) are connected by means of a stabilizing thread. This thread

corresponds to the ‘invisible line’ mentioned in the process of tornado formation which is visible in this

case. The two poles get connected and their rotation propagates below the water surface along the joining

thread and the tubular neighborhood around it. This process is a 2-dimensional 0-surgery with a twisted

embedding (see Figure 10 (b)) where the initial manifold is the water contained in the volume of the

pool where the process happens, which is homeomorphic to a 3-ball, that is M = D3. Two differences

compared to tornadoes are: here the helicoidal motion is present in both poles and the attracting center

is not located on the ground but between the poles, on the topological thread joining them.

It is also worth mentioning that the creation of Falaco Solitons is immediate and does not allow us to

see whether the transitions of the 2-dimensional 0-surgery shown in Figure 10 (b) are followed or not.

However, these dynamics are certainly visible during the annihilation of Falaco Solitons. Namely, when

the topological thread joining the poles is cut, the tube tears apart and slowly degenerates to the poles

until they both stops spinning and vanish. Therefore, the continuity of our dynamic model is clearly

present during the reverse process which corresponds to a solid 2-dimensional 1-surgery on a pair of Falaco
Solitons, that is, a solid torus D2 × S1 degenerating into a still swimming pool D3.

Note that it is conjectured in [18] that the coherent topological features of the Falaco Solitons and,

by extension, the process of solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery appear in both macroscopic level (for example

in the Wheeler’s wormholes) and microscopic level (for example in the spin pairing mechanism in the

microscopic Fermi surface). For more details see [18].

Another phenomena undergoing solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery is the formation of black holes. Most

21

Figure 14. Pairs of Falaco Solitons. An example of solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery

black holes form from the remnants of a large star that dies in a supernova explosion and have a

gravitational field so strong that not even light can escape. In the simulation of a black hole formation

(see [20]), the density distribution at the core of a collapsing massive star is shown. In Figure 15 matter

performs solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery as it collapses into a black hole. Matter collapses at the center of

attraction of the initial manifold M = D3 creating the singularity, that is, the center of the black hole,

which is surrounded by the toroidal accretion disc (shown in white in Figure 15 (c)).

Figure 15. The formation of a black hole. An example of solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery.

Solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery is also found in the mechanism of gene transfer in bacteria. See

Figure 16 (also, for description and instructive illustrations see [21]). The donor cell produces a connecting

tube called ”pilus” which attaches to the recipient cell, brings the two cells together and transfers the

donor’s DNA. This process is similar to the one shown in Figure 12 (b) as two copies of D3 merge into

one, but here the attracting center is located on the recipient cell. This process is a solid 2-dimensional
0-surgery on two 3-balls M = D3 × S0.

Finally, drop coalescence is the merging of two dispersed drops into one. As gene transfer in bacteria,
this process is also a solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery on two 3-balls M = D3 × S0, see Figure 12 (b). The

22

Figure 16. Gene transfer in bacteria. An example of solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery.

process of drop coalescence also exhibits the forces of our model. Namely, the surfaces of two drops must

be in contact for coalescence to occur. This surface contact is dependent on both the van der Waals

attraction and the surface repulsion forces between two drops. When the van der Waals forces cause

rupture of the film, the two surface films are able to fuse together, an event more likely to occur in areas

where the surface film is weak. The liquid inside each drop is now in direct contact, and the two drops are

able to merge into one.

Remark 4 Although in this Section some natural processes were viewed as a solid 2-dimensional topo-
logical surgery on M = D3 × S0, we could also consider the initial manifold as being a 3-ball surrounding

the phenomena and view it as a surgery on M = D3. Concerning the process of tornado formation,

this approach also has a physical meaning. Namely, as the process is triggered by the difference in

the conditions of the lower and upper atmosphere, the initial manifold can be considered as the 3-ball

containing this air cycle.

4.4 Natural phenomena exhibiting solid 2-dimensional 1-surgery

As already mentioned, the collapsing of the central disc of the sphere caused by the orange attracting

forces in Figure 12 (b) can also be caused by pulling apart the upper and lower hemispheres of the 3-ball

D3, that is, the causal forces can also be repelling. For example, during fracture of metal specimens under

tensile forces, solid 2-dimensional 1-surgery is caused by forces that pull apart each end of the specimen.

On the other hand, in the biological process of mitosis, both attracting and repelling forces forces are

present.

23

When the tension applied on metal specimens by tensile forces results in necking and then fracture,

the process exhibits solid 2-dimensional 1-surgery. More precisely, in experiments in mechanics, tensile

forces (or loading) are applied on a cylindrical specimen made of dactyle material (steel, aluminium,

etc.). Up to some critical value of the force the deformation is homogeneous (the cross-sections have

the same area). At the critical value the deformation is localized within a very small area where the

cross-section is reduced drastically, while the sections of the remaining portions increase slightly. This is

the ‘necking phenomenon’. Shortly after, the specimen is fractured (view [22] for details). In Figure 17

are the the basic steps of the process: void formation, void coalescence (also known as crack formation),

crack propagation, and failure. Here, the process is not as smooth as our theoretical model and the tensile

forces applied on the specimen are equivalent to repelling forces. The specimen is homeomorphic to the

sphere shown in Figure 12 (b) hence the initial manifold is M = D3.

Figure 17. Tension and the necking phenomenon. An example of solid 2-dimensional 1-surgery.

Solid 2-dimensional 1-surgery on M = D3 also happens in the biological process of mitosis, where a cell

splits into two new cells. See Figure 18 (for description and instructive illustrations see for example [23]).

We will see that both aforementioned forces are present here. During mitosis, the chromosomes, which have

already duplicated, condense and attach to fibers that pull one copy of each chromosome to opposite sides

of the cell (this pulling is equivalent to repelling forces). The cell pinches in the middle and then divides

by cytokinesis. The structure that accomplishes cytokinesis is the contractile ringa dynamic assembly of

filaments and proteins which assembles just beneath the plasma membrane and contracts to constrict

the cell into two (this contraction is equivalent to attracting forces). In the end, two genetically-identical

daughter cells are produced.

Remark 5 It is worth noting that the splitting of the cell into two coincide with the fact that 2-dimensional

24

Figure 18. The process of mitosis. An example of solid 2-dimensional 1-surgery.

1-surgery on a point is the creation of two new points (see Definition 3).

5 Connecting 1- and 2-dimensional surgeries

As shown in Figure 19, a 1-dimensional surgery is a cross-section of the corresponding 2-dimensional

surgery which, in turn, is a crossection of the corresponding solid 2-dimensional surgery. This is true for

both 1 or 0-surgeries (see Figure 19 (a) and (b) respectively).

On the left-hand top and bottom pictures of Figure 19 (a) and (b) we see the initial and final stage of

solid 2-dimensional surgery. Taking the intersection with the boundary of the 3-ball D3 we pass to the

middle pictures where we see the the initial and final pictures of 2-dimensional surgery. Taking finally

the intersection with a meridional plane gives rise to the initial and final stages of 1-dimensional surgery

(rightmost illustrations). The above concerns 0-surgeries in Figure 19 (a) and 1-surgeries in Figure 19 (b).

Figure 19. Connecting low-dimensional surgeries. From left to right we pass from solid
2-dimensional to 2-dimensional to 1-dimensional surgery for (a) 0-surgeries and (b) 1-surgeries

Furthermore, as seen in Figure 20, we see the relation between solid surgeries in dimensions 2 and 1.

25

Namely, solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery on the central point of the spherical nesting results in the central

circle of the toroidal nesting. This circle has two intersecting points with the plane which are the result

of solid 1-dimensional 0-surgery on the central point, see Figure 20 (a). On the other hand, both solid

2-dimensional 1-surgery and solid 1-dimensional 0-surgery on the central point creates two points, see

Figure 20 (b).

Figure 20. Connecting solid surgeries. From left to right we pass from solid 2-dimensional to solid
1-dimensional surgery via a cutting meridional plane.

6 The ambient space S3

All natural phenomena exhibiting surgery (1- or 2-dimensional, solid or usual) take place in the ambient

3-space. As we will see in the next section, the ambient space can play an important role in the process of
surgery. By 3-space we mean here the compactification of R3 which is the 3-sphere S3. This choice, as
opposed to R3, takes advantage of the duality of the descriptions of S3. In this section we present the

three most common descriptions of S3 in which this duality is apparent and which will set the ground for

defining the notion of embedded surgery in S3. Beyond that, we also demonstrate how the descriptions

are interrelated via solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery which, due to the duality of the dimensions, takes place

in both the initial 3-ball and its complement.

26

6.1 Descriptions of S3

In dimension 3, the simplest c.c.o. 3-manifolds are: the 3-sphere S3 and the lens spaces L(p, q). In this

paper however, we will focus on S3. We start by recalling its three most common descriptions:
• S3 can be viewed as R3 with all points at infinity compactified to one single point: S3 = R3 ∪{∞}. See
Figure 21 (b). R3 can be viewed as an unbounded continuum of nested 2-spheres centered at the origin,

together with the point at the origin, see Figure 21 (a), and also as the de-compactification of S3. So, S3

minus the point at the origin and the point at infinity can be viewed as a continuous nesting of 2-spheres.

Figure 21. S3 is the compactification of R3.

• S3 can be viewed as the union of two 3-balls: S3 = B3 ∪ D3, see Figure 22 (a). This second description

of S3 is clearly related to the first one, since a (closed) neighbourhood of the point at infinity can stand

for one of the two 3-balls. Note that, when removing the point at infinity in Figure 22 (a) we can see

the concentric spheres of the 3-ball B3 (in red) wrapping around the concentric spheres of the 3-ball
D3, see Figure 22 (b). This is another way of viewing R3 as the de-compactification of S3. This picture
is the analogue of the stereographic projection of S2 on the plane R2, whereby the projections of the

concentric circles of the south hemisphere together with the projections of the concentric circles of the
north hemisphere form the well-known polar description of R2 with the unbounded continuum of concentric

circles.
• The third well-known representation of S3 is as the union of two solid tori, S3 = V1 ∪ϑ V2, via the torus
homeomorphism ϑ along the common boundary. ϑ maps a meridian of V2 to a longitude of V1 which

has linking number zero with the core curve c of V1. The illustration in Figure 23 (a) gives an idea of

this splitting of S3. In the figure, the core curve of V1 is in dashed green. So, the complement of a solid

27

Figure 22. S3 is the result of gluing two 3-balls.

torus V1 in S3 is another solid torus V2 whose core curve l (in dashed red) may be assumed to pass by

the point at infinity. Note that, S3 minus the core curves c and l of V1 and V2 (the green and red curves

in Figure 23) can be viewed as a continuum of nested tori. When removing the point at infinity in the

representation of S3 as a union of two solid tori, the core of the solid torus V2 becomes an infinite line

l and the nested tori of V2 can now be seen wrapping around the nested tori of V1. See Figure 23 (b).
Therefore, R3 can be viewed as an unbounded continuum of nested tori, together with the core curve c of

V1 and the infinite line l. This line l joins pairs of antipodal points of all concentric spheres of the first

description. Note that in the nested spheres description (Figure 21) the line l pierces all spheres while in

the nested tori description the line l is the ‘untouched’ limit circle of all tori.

Figure 23. (a) S3 as a union of two solid tori. (b) De-compactificated view.

Remark 6 It is worth observing the resemblance of Figure 23 (b) with the well-known representation of

the Earth’s magnetic field. A numerical simulation of the Earth magnetic field via the Glatzmaier-Roberts

geodynamo model was made in [24], see Figure 24. The magnetic field lines are lying on nested tori and

comprise a visualization of the decompactified view of S3 as two tori.

28

Figure 24. The Earth magnetic field as a decompactified view of S3 as two tori

Remark 7 It is also worth mentioning that another way to visualize S3 as two tori is the Hopf fibration,

which is a map of S3 into S2. The parallels of S2 correspond to the nested tori of S3, the north pole of

S2 correspond to the core curve l of V2 while the south pole of S2 corresponds to the core curve c of V1.

An insightful animation of the Hopf fibration can be found in [25].

6.2 Connecting the descriptions of S3

6.2.1 Via corking

The third description of S3 is a bit harder to connect with the first two. We shall do this here. A way to

see this connection is the following. Consider the description of S3 as the union of two 3-balls, B3 and

D3 (Figure 22). Combining with the third description of S3 (Figure 23) we notice that both 3-balls are

pierced by the core curve l of the solid torus V2. Therefore, D3 can be viewed as the solid torus V1 to
which a solid cylinder D1 × D2 is attached via the homeomorphism ϑ:

D3 = V1 ∪ϑ (D1 × D2).

This solid cylinder is part of the solid torus V2, a ‘cork’ filling the hole of V1. Its core curve is an arc L,

part of the core curve l of V2. View Figure 25. The second ball B3 (Figure 22) can be viewed as the

29

remaining of V2 after removing the ‘cork’ D1 × D2:

B3 = V2 \ϑ (D1 × D2).

In other words the solid torus V2 is cut into two solid cylinders, one comprising the ‘cork’ of V1 and the

other comprising the 3-ball B3.

Figure 25. Passing from (a) S3 as two tori to (b) S3 as two balls.

Remark 8 If we remove a whole neighbourhood B3 of the point at infinity and focus on the remaining

3-ball D3, the line l of the previous picture is truncated to the arc L and the solid cylinder V2 is truncated

to the ‘cork’ of D3.

6.2.2 Via surgery

We will now examine how we can pass from the two-ball description to the two-tori description of S3

via solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery. We start with two points that have a distance L between them. Let

M = D3 be the solid ball having arc L as a diameter. We define this 3-ball as the ‘truncated’ space on

which we will focus. When the center of D3 becomes attracting, forces are induced on the two points

of D3 and solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery is initiated. The complement space is the other solid ball B3

containing the point at infinity, see Figure 22. This joining arc L is seen as part of a simple closed curve
l passing by the point at infinity. In Figure 26 (1) this is shown in S3 while Figure 26 (1(cid:48)) shows the
corresponding decompactified view in R3.

In Figure 26 (2), we see the ‘drilling’ along L as a result of the forces. This is exactly the same process

as in Figure 12 if we restrict it to D3. But since we are in S3, the complement space B3 participates in

30

the process and, in fact, it is also undergoing solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery. In Figure 26 (3), we can see

that, as surgery transforms the solid ball D3 into the solid torus V1, B3 is transformed into V2. That is,

the nesting of concentric spheres of D3 (respectively B3) is transformed into the nesting of concentric tori

in the interior of V1 (respectively V2). This is a double surgery with one attracting center which is inside

the first 3-ball D3 (in grey) and outside the second 3-ball B3 (in red). By Definition 3, the point at the

origin (in green) turns into the core curve c of V1 (in green). Figure 26 (3) is exactly the decompactified
view of S3 as two solid tori as shown in Figure 23 (b) while Figure 26 (3(cid:48)) is the corresponding view in S3

as shown in Figure 23 (1).

Figure 26 shows that one can pass from the second description of S3 to the third by performing solid

2-dimensional 0-surgery (with the standard embedding homeomorphism) along the arc L of D3. It is

worth mentioning that this connection between the descriptions of S3 and solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery is

a dynamic way to visualize the connection established in Section 6.2.1.

Figure 26. Passing from the two balls description to the two tori description of S3 via
solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery

7 Embedding surgery in S3

In this section we define the notion of embedded surgery in 3-space. As we will see, when embedded

surgery occurs, depending on the dimension of the manifold, the ambient space either leaves ‘room’ for

the initial manifold to assume a more complicated configuration or it participates more actively in the

process.

31

7.1 Embedded m-dimensional n-surgery

Definition 5 An embedded m-dimensional n-surgery is a m-dimensional n-surgery where the initial
manifold is an m-embedding e : M (cid:44)→ Sd, d >= m of some m-manifold M . Namely, according to

Definition 1:

M(cid:48) = χ(e(M )) = e(M ) \ h(Sn × Dm−n) ∪h|Sn×Sm−n−1 Dn+1 × Sm−n−1.

Let d = 3. First of all, embedding the process of surgery allows to view surgery as a process happening

in 3-space instead of abstractly.

Furthermore, when 1-dimensional 0-surgery on a circle M = S1 is embedded in 3-space, the ambient

space gives enough ‘room’ for the initial 1-manifold to become any type of knot. Hence, embedding allows

the initial manifold to assume a more complicated homeomorphic configuration. This will be analyzed in

Section 7.2.

Although knotting on surfaces cannot occur by embedding 2-dimensional manifolds in S3, because

knots require embeddings of codimension 2, embedding 2-dimension surgeries allows the complementary

space of the initial manifold to participate actively in the process. Namely, while some natural phenomena

undergoing surgery can be viewed as ‘local’, in the sense that they can be considered independently from

the surrounding space, some others are intrinsically related to the surrounding space. This relation can be

both causal, in the sense that the ambient space is involved in the triggering of the forces causing surgery,

and consequential, in the sense that the forces causing surgery, can have an impact on the ambient space

in which they take place. This will be analyzed in Sections 7.3 and 7.4.

7.2 Embedded 1-dimensional 0-surgery

We will now get back to site-specific DNA recombination (see Section 3.1), in order to better define this

type of surgery. As seen in this process (recall Figure 4) the initial manifold of 1-dimensional 0-surgery

can be a knot, in other words, an embedding of the circle M = S1 in 3-space. We therefore introduce the

notion of embedded 1-dimensional 0-surgery whereby the initial manifold M is embedded in the 3-space.

This notion allows the topological modeling of phenomena with more complicated initial 1-manifolds. As

mentioned, for our purposes, we will consider S3 as our standard 3-space. For details on the descriptions
of S3, see Section 6.1. Since an embedding of the circle M = S1 in S3 or R3 is a knot, in this case

32

embedded 1-dimensional surgery is the so-called knot surgery. It is worth mentioning that there are

infinitely many knot types and that 1-dimensional surgery on a knot may change the knot type or even

result in a two-component link. A good introductory book on knot theory is [26] among many other.

Looking back to the process of DNA recombination which exhibits embedded 1-dimensional 0-surgery,

a DNA knot is the self-entanglement of a single circular DNA molecule. With the help of certain enzymes,

site-specific recombination can transform supercoiled circular DNA into a knot or link. The first electron

microscope picture of knotted DNA was presented in [27].

In this experimental study, we see how

genetically engineered circular DNA molecules can form DNA knots and links through the action of a

certain recombination enzyme. A similar picture is presented in Figure 4, where site-specific recombination

of a DNA molecule produces the Hopf link.

Another theoretical example of knot surgery comprises the knot or link diagrams involved in the skein

relations satisfied by knot polynomials, such as the Jones polynomial [28] and the Kauffman bracket

polynomial [29]. For example, the illustration in Figure 27 represents a so-called ‘Conway triple’, that

is, three knot or link diagrams L+,L− and L0 which are identical everywhere except in the region of a

crossing and the polynomials of these three links satisfy a given linear relation.

Figure 27. One can pass from one of these three links to another via knot surgery.

7.3 Embedded solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery

In Section 6.2.2 we showed how we can pass from the two-ball description to the two-tori description of

S3. Although we had not yet defined it at that point, the process we described is, of course, an embedded

solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery in S3 on an initial manifold M = D3. It is worth mentioning that all natural

processes undergoing embedded solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery on an initial manifold M = D3 can be also

viewed in this context. For example, if one looks at the formation of black holes and examines it as an

independent event in space, this process shows a decompactified view of the passage from a two 3-ball

description of S3, that is, the core of the star and the surrounding space, to a two torus description,

33

that is, the accretion disc surrounding the black hole (shown in white in the third instance of Figure 15)

and the surrounding space. In this Section, we will see how some natural phenomena undergoing solid

2-dimensional 0-surgery exhibit the causal or consequential relation to the ambient space mentioned in

Section 7.1 and are therefore better described by considering them as embedded in S3.

For example, during the formation of tornados, recall Figure 13 (a), the process of solid 2-dimensional

0-surgery is triggered by the difference in the conditions of the lower and upper atmosphere. Although the
air cycle lies in the complement space of the initial manifold M = D3 × S0, it is involved in the creation

of funnel-shaped clouds that will join the two spherical neighborhoods (one in the cloud and one in the

ground). Therefore the cause of the phenomenon extends beyond its initial manifold and surgery is the

outcome of global changes.

We will now discuss phenomena where the outcome of the surgery process propagates beyond the final

manifold. A first example are waterspouts. After their formation, the tornado’s cylindrical ‘cork’, that
is, the solid cylinder homeomorphic to the product set D1 × D2, has altered the whole surface of the sea

(recall Figure 13 (b)). In other words, the spiral pattern on the water surface extends beyond the initial

spherical neighborhood of the sea, which is represented by one of the two 3-balls of the initial manifold.

As another example, during the formation of black holes, the strong gravitational forces have altered

the space surrounding the initial star and the singularity is created outside the final solid torus. In all

these phenomena, the process of surgery alters matter outside the manifold in which it occurs. In other

words, the effect of the forces causing surgery propagates to the complement space, thus causing a more

global change in 3-space.

Remark 9 Looking back at Figure 26, it is worth pinning down the following duality of embedded solid

2-dimensional 0-surgery for M = D3: the attraction of two points lying on the boundary of segment L by

the center of D3 can be equivalently viewed in the complement space as the repulsion of these points by
the center of B3 (that is, the point at infinity) on the boundary of curve (or line, if viewed in R3) l − L.

7.4 Embedded solid 2-dimensional 1-surgery

We will now discuss the process of embedded solid 2-dimensional 1-surgery in S3 in the same way we

did for the embedded solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery in S3, recall Figure 26. Taking again M = D3 as the

initial manifold, embedded solid 2-dimensional 1-surgery is illustrated in Figure 28. The process begins

with disc D in the 3-ball D3 on which colinear attracting forces act, see instances (1) and (1(cid:48)) for the

34

decompactified view. In (3), the initial 3-ball D3 is split in two new 3-balls D3

1 and D3

2. By Definition 3,

the point at the origin (in green) evolves into the two centers of D3

1 and D3

2 (in green). This is exactly the

same process as in Figure 12 if we restrict it to D3, but since we are in S3, the complement space B3 is

also undergoing, by symmetry, solid 2-dimensional 1-surgery. Again, this is a double surgery with one

attracting center which is inside the first 3-ball (in yellow) and outside the second 3-ball (in red). This

process squeezes the central disc D of D3 while the central disc d of B3 engulfs disc D and becomes the
separating plane d ∪ D.

As seen in instance (3) of Figure 28, the process alters the existing complement space B3 to B3

1 and

creates a new space B3
2. By viewing the process
in this way, we pass from a two 3-balls description of S3 to another one, that is, from S3 = B3 ∪ D3 to

2 which can be considered as the ’void’ between D3

1 and D3

S3 = (D3

1 ∪ B3

2 ∪ D3

2) ∪ B3
1 .

Figure 28. Embedded solid 2-dimensional 1-surgery

Remark 10 The duality described in 2-dimensional 0-surgery is also present in 2-dimensional 1-surgery.

Namely, the attracting forces from the circular boundary of the central disc D to the center of D3 can be

equivalently viewed in the complement space as repelling forces from the center of B3 (that is, the point

at infinity) to the boundary of the central disc d, which coincides with the boundary of D.

All natural phenomena undergoing embedded solid 2-dimensional 1-surgery take place in the ambient

3-space. However, we do not have many examples of such phenomena which demonstrate the causal

or consequential effects discussed in Section 7.1. Yet one could for example imagine taking a (metal)

specimen that has started necking and immerse it in water until water pressure causes fracture. In this

case the complement space is water and it triggers the surgery.

35

Also, the annihilation of Falaco Solitons is also a case of embedded solid 2-dimensional 1-surgery. The

topological thread can be cut by many factors but in all cases these are related to the complement space.

8 A dynamical system modeling embedded solid 2-dimensional

0-surgery

So far, inspired by natural processes undergoing surgery, we have extended the formal definition of

topological surgery by introducing new notions such as forces, solid surgery and embedded surgery.

However, in our schematic models, time and dynamics were not introduced by equations. In this Section

we connect topological surgery, enhanced with these notions, with a dynamical system. We will see

that, with a small change in parameters, the trajectories of its solutions are performing embedded solid

2-dimensional 0-surgery. Therefore, this dynamical system constitutes a specific set of equations modeling

natural phenomena undergoing embedded solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery. More specifically, we will see that

the change of parameters affects the eigenvectors and induces a flow along a segment joining two steady

state points. This segment corresponds to the segment L introduced in Section 6 and the induced flow

represents the attracting forces shown in Figure 12 (a). Finally, we will see how our topological definition

of solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery presented in Section 4.2 is verified by our numerical simulations, and we

will see, in particular, that surgery on a steady point becomes a limit cycle.

8.1 The dynamical system and its steady state points

In [10], N.Samardzija and L.Greller study the behavior of the following dynamical system (Σ) that

generalizes the classical Lotka–Volterra problem [30, 31] into three dimensions:



dX

dt = X − XY + CX 2 − AZX 2
dt = −Y + XY
dt = −BZ + AZX 2

dY

dZ

 A, B, C > 0

(1)

In subsequent work [11], the authors present a slightly different model, provide additional numerical

simulations and deepen the qualitative analysis done in [10]. Since both models coincide in the parametric

region we are interested in, we will use the original model and notation and will briefly present some key

features of the analyses done in [10] and [11].

36

The system (Σ) is a two-predator and one-prey model, where the predators Y, Z do not interact directly

with one another but compete for prey X. As X, Y, Z are populations, only the positive solutions are

considered in this analysis. It is worth mentioning that, apart from a population model, (Σ) may also

serve as a biological model and a chemical model, for more details see [10].

The parameters A, B, C are analyzed in order to determine the bifurcation properties of the system,

that is, to study the changes in the qualitative or topological structure of the family of differential

equations (Σ). As parameters A, B, C affect the dynamics of constituents X, Y, Z, the authors were able

to determine conditions for which the ecosystem of the three species results in steady, periodic or chaotic

behavior. More precisely, the authors derive five steady state solutions for the system but only the positive

ones are taken into consideration. These three points are:



0

0

0

 , S2 =



S1 =

 , S3 =



(cid:112)B/A

√
0
√
1+C

B/A

AB



1

1 + C

0

It is worth reminding here that a steady state (or singular) point of a dynamical system is a solution

that does not change with time.

8.2 Local behavior and numerical simulations
Let, now, J(Si) be the Jacobian of (Σ) evaluated at Si for i = 1, 2, 3 and let the sets Γ{J(Si)} and
W{J(Si)} to be, respectively, the eigenvalues and the corresponding associated eigenvectors of J(Si).
These are as follows:

Γ{J(S1)} = {1,−1,−B}; W{J(S1)} =




Γ{J(S2)} = {A − B, (C +(cid:112)(C − 2)2 − 8)/2, (C −(cid:112)(C − 2)2 − 8)/2}




 ,

 ,



0

0

1

1

0

0

0

1

0




(cid:114)



1

A

1
(C−2)2−8
2

√

C−


 ,
(cid:113)
1 − 8B(1 + C(cid:112)B/A)


−1−(cid:113)

 ,

2

0

1

1−8B(1+C

0

,

2

0

C+

√

1
(C−2)2−8




 ,
−1 −(cid:113)

1 − 8B(1 + C(cid:112)B/A)

 ,

1−8B(1+C

(cid:113)

−1+

√

B/A)

2

0

1

√

2B

2B

B/A)

37




W{J(S2)} =

(C + 1)/(A − B)
B+C−A+(C+1)/(B−A)

Γ{J(S3)} =

−1 +

− 1,

B
A





W{J(S3)} =

√
−1 − 2

AB(1+C

√
1
√
√
B/A−1
B/A)
B/A−1

2(1+C

√

B/A)

Using the sets of eigenvalues and eigenvectors presented above, the authors characterize in [10], [11]

the local behavior of the dynamical system around these three points using the Hartman-Grobman (or
linearization) Theorem. Since 1 > 0 and −1,−B < 0, S1 is a saddle point for all values of parameters
A, B, C. However, the behavior around S2 and S3 changes as parameters A, B, C are varied. The

authors show that the various stability conditions can be determined by only two parameters: C and

B/A. It is also shown in [10] that stable solutions are generated left of and including the line B/A = 1

while chaotic/periodic regions appear on the right of the line B/A = 1. We are interested in the

behavior of (Σ) as it passes from stable to chaotic/periodic regions. Therefore we will focus and analyze

the local behavior around S2 and S3 and present numerical simulations for: stable region (a) where

B/A = 1 and (1/8B − 1)(cid:112)A/B < C ≤ 2(1 +
(1/8B − 1)(cid:112)A/B < C ≤ 2(1 +

√

2).

√

2) and chaotic/periodic region (b) where B/A > 1 and

• Region (a)

Setting B/A = 1 and equating the right side of (Σ) to zero, one finds as solution the one-dimensional

singular manifold:

L = {(X, Y, Z); X = 1, Z = (1 + C − Y )/A}

that passes through the points S2 and S3. Since all points on L are steady state points, there is no motion

along it. For (1/8B − 1)(cid:112)A/B < C ≤ 2(1 +

√

2), S2 is an unstable center while S3 is a stable center (for

a complete analysis of all parametric regions see [10]). This means that if λ1, λ2, λ3 denote the eigenvalues
of either S2 or S3 with λ1 ∈ R and λ2, λ3 ∈ C, then λ1 = 0 and Re(λ2) = Re(λ3) > 0 for S2 while λ1 = 0

38

and Re(λ2) = Re(λ3) < 0 for S3. Moreover, the point (X, Y, Z) = (1, 1, C/A) is the center of L. The

line segment X = 1, 0 < Y < 1 and (1 + C)/A < Z < C/A supports attracting type singularities (and

includes S3) while the line segment defined by X = 1, 1 < Y < 1 + C and 0 < Z < C/A supports unstable

singularities (and includes S2), for details see [11]. More precisely, each attracting point corresponds to an

antipodal repelling point, the only exception being the center of L which can be viewed as the spheroid of

0-diameter. The local behavior of (Σ) around S2 and S3 in this region together with line L are shown in

Figure 29 (a). A trajectory (or solution) initiated near L in the repelling segment expands until it gets

trapped by the attracting segment, forming the upper and lower hemisphere of a distinct sphere. Hence, a

nest of spherical shells surrounding line L is formed, see Figure 30 (a). Moreover, the nest fills the entire

positive space with stable solutions.

Figure 29. Flow induced along L by changing parameter space from (a) B/A = 1 to (b) B/A > 1.
Indices 1,2 and 3 indicate the first, second and third component in W (J(S2)) and W (J(S3)).

• Region (b)

For B/A > 1 and (1/8B − 1)(cid:112)A/B < C ≤ 2(1 +

√

2), S2 is an inward unstable vortex and S3 is
an outward stable vortex. This means that in both cases they must satisfy the conditions λ1 ∈ R and
λ2, λ3 ∈ C with λ3 = λ∗
2, the conjugate of λ2. The eigenvalues of S2 must further satisfy λ1 < 0 and
Re(λ2) = Re(λ3) > 0, while the eigenvalues of S3 must further satisfy λ1 > 0 and Re(λ2) = Re(λ3) < 0.

The local behaviors around S2 and S3 for this parametric region are shown in Figure 29 (b). It is worth

mentioning that Figure 29 (b) reproduces Figure 1 of [10] with a change of the axes so that the local

39

behaviors of S2 and S3 visually correspond to the local behaviors of the trajectories in Figure 30 (b)

around the north and the south pole.

Note now that the point S2 as well as the eigenvectors corresponding to its two complex eigenvalues,

all lie in the xy–plane. On the other hand, the point S3 and also the eigenvectors corresponding to its

two complex eigenvalues all lie in the xz–plane. The flow along line L produced by the actions of these

eigenvectors forces trajectories initiated near S2 to wrap around L and move toward S3 in a motion

reminiscent of hole drilling. The connecting manifold L is also called the ‘slow manifold’ in [10] due to

the fact that trajectories move slower when passing near it. As trajectories reach S3, the eigenvector

corresponding to the real eigenvalue of S3 breaks out of the xz–plane and redirects the flow toward S2.

As shown in Figure 30 (a) and (b), as B/A = 1 moves to B/A > 1, this process transforms each spherical

shell to a toroidal shell. The solutions scroll down the toroidal surfaces until a limit cycle (shown in green

in Figure 30 (b)) is reached. It is worth pointing out that this limit cycle is a torus of 0-diameter and

corresponds to the sphere of 0-diameter, namely, the central steady point of L also shown in green in

Figure 30 (a).

Figure 30. Embedded solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery by changing parameter space from (a) B/A = 1 to
(b) B/A > 1.

However, as the authors elaborate in [11], while for B/A = 1 the entire positive space is filled with

nested spheres, when B/A > 1, only spheres up to a certain volume become tori. More specifically, quoting

the authors: “to preserve uniqueness of solutions, the connections through the slow manifold L are made

40

in a way that higher volume shells require slower, or higher resolution, trajectories within the bundle”. As

they further explain, to connect all shells through L, (Σ) would need to possess an infinite resolution. As

this is never the case, the solutions evolving on shells of higher volume are ‘choked’ by the slow manifold.

This generates solution indetermination, which forces higher volume shells to rapidly collapse or dissipate.

The behavior stabilizes when trajectories enter the region where the choking becomes weak and weak

chaos appears. As shown in both [10] and [11], the outermost shell of the toroidal nesting is a fractal torus.

Note that in Figure 30 (b) we do not show the fractal torus because we are interested in the interior of

the fractal torus which supports a topology stratified with toroidal surfaces. Hence, all trajectories are

deliberately initiated in its interior where no chaos is present.

It is worth pointing out that Figure 30 reproduces the numerical simulations done in [11]. More

precisely, Figure 30 (a) represents solutions of (Σ) for A = B = C = 3 and trajectories are initiated

at points [1, 1.59, 0.81], [1, 1.3, 0.89], [1, 1.18; 0.95], [1, 1.08, 0.98] and [1, 1, 1]. Figure 30 (b) represents

solutions of (Σ) for A = 2.9851, B = C = 3 and trajectories are initiated at points [1.1075, 1, 1], [1, 1, 0.95],

[1, 1, 0.9] and [1, 1, 1].

As already mentioned, as B/A = 1 changes to B/A > 1, S2 changes from an unstable center to an

inward unstable vortex and S3 changes from a stable center to an outward stable vortex. It is worth

reminding that this change in local behavior is true not only for the specific parametrical region simulated

in Figure 30, but applies to all cases satisfying (1/8B − 1)(cid:112)A/B < C ≤ 2(1 +

√

2). For details we refer

the reader to Tables II and III in [10] that recapitulate the extensive diagrammatic analysis done therein.

Finally, it is worth observing the changing of the local behavior around S2 and S3 in our numerical

simulations. In Figure 30 (a), for B/A = 1 we have:

Γ{J(S2)} = {0.0000, 1.500−1.3229i, 1.500+1.3229i}, Γ{J(S3)} = {0.0000,−1.000+4.8780i,−1.000−4.878i}

while in Figure 30 (b), for B/A > 1, both centers change to vortices (inward unstable and outward stable)

through the birth of the first eigenvalue shown in bold (negative and positive respectively):

Γ{J(S2)} = {−0.0149, 1.500−1.3229i, 1.500+1.3229i}, Γ{J(S3)} = {0.0025,−1.000+4.8780i,−1.000−4.878i}

Remark 11 The use of different numerical methods may affect the shape of the attractor. For example,

as mentioned in [11], higher resolution produces a larger fractal torus and a finer connecting manifold.

41

However, the hole drilling process and the creation of a toroidal nesting is always a common feature.

8.3 Connecting the dynamical system with embedded solid 2-dimensional

0-surgery

In this section, we will focus on the process of embedded solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery on a 3-ball D3
viewed as a continuum of concentric spheres together with their common center: D3 = ∪0<r≤1S2
r ∪ {P}.
Recall from Section 4.2 that the process is defined as the union of 2-dimensional 0-surgeries on the whole

continuum of concentric spheres S2
r and on the limit point P . For each spherical layer, the process starts
with attracting forces acting between S0 × D2, i.e two point, or poles, centers of two discs. In natural

phenomena undergoing solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery, such as tornadoes (recall Figure 13) or Falaco

Solitons (recall Figure 14), these forces often induce a helicoidal motion from one pole to the other along

the line L joining them.

Having presented the dynamical system (Σ) in Section 8.1 and its local behavior in Section 8.2, its

connection with embedded solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery on a 3-ball is now straightforward. To be precise,

surgery is performed on the manifold formed by the trajectories of (Σ). Indeed, as seen in Figure 30

(a) and (b), with a slight perturbation of parameters, trajectories pass from spherical to toroidal shape

through a ‘hole drilling’ process along a slow manifold L which pierces all concentric spheres. The spherical

and toroidal nestings in Figures 12 (a) and 30 are analogous. The attracting forces acting between the

two poles shown in blue in the first instance of Figures 12 (a) are realized by the flow along L (also shown

in blue in Figure 29 (b)). When B/A > 1, the action of the eigenvectors is an attracting force between S2

and S3 acting along L, which drills each spherical shell and transforms it to a toroidal shell.

Furthermore, in order to introduce solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery on D3 as a new topological notion,

we had to define that 2-dimensional 0-surgery on a point is the creation of a circle. The same behavior is

seen in (Σ). Namely, surgery on the limit point P , which is a steady state point, creates the limit cycle

which is the limit of the tori nesting. As mentioned in [11], this type of bifurcation is a ‘Hopf bifurcation’,

so we can say that we see surgery creating a Hopf bifurcation.

Hence, instead of viewing surgery as an abstract topological process, we may now view it as a property

of a dynamical system. Moreover, natural phenomena exhibiting 2-dimensional topological surgery through

a ‘hole-drilling’ process, such as the creation of Falaco Solitons, the formation of tornadoes, of whirls, of

wormholes, etc, may be modeled mathematically by a one-parameter family of the dynamical system (Σ).

42

Remark 12 It is worth pointing out that (Σ) is also connected with the 3-sphere S3. We can view the
spherical nesting of Figure 30 (a) as the 3-ball D3 shown in Figure 26 (1) and (1(cid:48)). Surgery on its central
point creates the limit cycle which is the core curve c of V1 shown in Figure 26 (3) and (3(cid:48)). If we extend
the spherical shells of Figure 30 to all of R3 and assume that the entire nest resolves to a toroidal nest,

then the slow manifold L becomes the infinite line l. In the two-ball description of S3, l pierces all spheres,
recall Figure 26 (1(cid:48)), while in the two-tori description, it is the core curve of V2 or the ‘untouched’ limit
circle of all tori, recall Figure 26 (3) and (3(cid:48)).

Remark 13 It is also worth mentioning that in [18] R.M. Kiehn studies how the Navier-Stokes equations

admit bifurcations to Falaco Solitons. In other words, the author looks at another dynamical system

modeling this natural phenomenon which, as we showed in Section 4.3, exhibits solid 2-dimensional

0-surgery. To quote the author: “It is a system that is globally stabilized by the presence of the connecting

1-dimensional string” and “The result is extraordinary for it demonstrates a global stabilization is possible

for a system with one contracting direction and two expanding directions coupled with rotation”. It is

also worth quoting Langford [32] which states that “computer simulations indicate the trajectories can be

confined internally to a sphere-like surface, and that Falaco Soliton minimal surfaces are visually formed at

the North and South pole”. One possible future research direction would be to investigate the similarities

between this system and (Σ) in relation to surgery.

9 Conclusions

Topological surgery occurs in numerous natural phenomena of various scales where a sphere of dimension

0 or 1 is selected and attracting (or repelling) forces are applied. Examples of such phenomena comprise:

chromosomal crossover, magnetic reconnection, mitosis, gene transfer, the creation of Falaco Solitons, the

formation of whirls and tornadoes, magnetic fields and the formation of black holes.

In this paper we explained these natural processes via topological surgery. To do this we first enhanced

the static description of topological surgery of dimensions 1 and 2 by introducing dynamics, by means

of attracting forces. We then filled in the interior spaces in 1- and 2-dimensional surgery, introducing

the notions of solid 1- and 2-dimensional surgery. This way more natural phenomena can fit with these

topologies. Further, we introduced the notion of embedded surgery, which leaves room for the initial

manifold to assume a more complicated configuration and the complementary space of the initial manifold

43

to participate actively in the process. Thus, instead of considering surgery as a formal and static topological

process, it can now be viewed as an intrinsic and dynamic property of many natural phenomena.

Equally important, all these new notions combined with the ideas presented in [3], [4] resulted in

pinning down the connection of solid 2-dimensional 0-surgery with a dynamical system. This connection

gives us on the one hand a mathematical model for 2-dimensional surgery and, on the other hand, a

dynamical system modeling natural phenomena exhibiting 2-dimensional topological surgery through a

‘hole-drilling’ process.

We hope that through this study, topology and dynamics of natural phenomena, as well as topological

surgery itself, will be better understood and that our connections will serve as ground for many more

insightful observations.

A Definitions

Manifolds

44

1. A Hausdorff space M n with countable base is said to be an n-dimensional topological manifold if
+ = {(x1, ..., xn) |

any point x ∈ M n has a neighborhood homeomorphic to Rn or to Rn
xi ∈ R, x1 ≥ 0}. For example, a surface is a 2-dimensional manifold.

+, where Rn

2. The set of all points x ∈ M n that have no neigbourhoods homeomorphic to Rn is called the boundary
of the manifold M n and is denoted by ∂M n. When ∂M n = ∅, we say that M n is a manifold without

boundary. It is easy to verify that if the boundary of a manifold M n is nonempty, then it is an
(n − 1)-dimensional manifold.

Topologies

3. If (X, τ ) is a topological space, a base of the space X is a subfamily τ(cid:48) ⊂ τ such that any element of
τ can be represented as the union of elements of τ(cid:48). In other words, τ(cid:48) is a family of open sets such

that any open set of X can be represented as the union of sets from this family. In the case when at

least one base of X is countable, we say that X is a space with countable base.

4. To define the topology τ , it suffices to indicate a base of the space. For example, in the space
Rn = {(x1, ..., xn) | xi ∈ R}, the standard topology is given by the base Ua, = {x ∈ Rn | |x− a|< },
where a ∈ Rn and  > 0. We can additionally require that all the coordinates of the point a, as well

as the number , be rational; in this case we obtain a countable base.

5. To the set Rn let us add the element ∞ and introduce in Rn ∪ {∞} the topology whose base is
the base of Rn to which we have added the family of sets U∞,R = {x ∈ Rn | |x|> R} ∪ {∞}. The
topological space thus obtained is called the one-point compactification of Rn; it can be shown that
this space is homeomorphic to the n−dimensional sphere Sn = {x ∈ Rn+1 | |x|= 1}.

Topological spaces

6. A topological space is a set X with a distinguished family τ of subsets possessing the following

properties:

• the empty set and the whole set X belong to τ

45

• the intersection of a finite number of elements of τ belongs to τ
• the union of any subfamily of elements of τ belongs to τ

The family τ is said to be the topology on X. Any set belonging to τ is called open. A neighborhood
of a point x ∈ X is any open set containing x. Any set whose complement is open is called closed.
The minimal closed set (with respect to inclusion) containing a given set A ⊂ X is called the closure
of A and is denoted by ¯A. The maximal open set contained in a given set A ⊂ X is called the

interior of A and is denoted by Int(A).

7. The map of one topological space into another is called continuous if the preimage of any open set
is open. A map f : X → Y is said to be a homeomorphism if it is bijective and both f and f−1 are

continuous; the spaces X and Y are then called homeomorphic or topologically equivalent.

8. A topological space is said to be a Hausdorff space if any two distinct points of the space have

nonintersecting neighborhoods.

9. Suppose X and Y are topological spaces without common elements, A is a subset of X, and
f : X → Y is a continuous map. In the set X ∪ Y , let us introduce the relation a ∼ f (a). The
resulting quotient space (X ∪ Y )/ ∼ is denoted by X ∪f Y ; the procedure of constructing this space
is called gluing or attaching Y to X along the map f .

10. If X × Y is the Cartesian product of the topological spaces X and Y (regarded as sets), then X × Y

becomes a topological space (called the product of the spaces X and Y ) if we declare open all the

products of open sets in X and in Y and all possible unions of these products.

11. An injective continuous map between topological spaces f : X (cid:44)→ Y is called an embedding if f is an

homeomorphism between X and f (X).

For further reading, excellent references on the subject are [1, 2, 5].

46

References

[1] V.V. Prasolov, A.B. Sossinsky (1997) Knots, links, braids and 3-manifolds. AMS, Translations of

Mathematical Monographs: 154.

[2] D. Rolfsen (2003) Knots and links. Publish or Perish Inc. AMS Chelsea Publishing.

[3] S. Antoniou (2005) The chaotic attractor of a 3-dimensional Lotka–Volterra dynamical system and

its relation to the process of topological surgery. Diplom Thesis, National Technical University of

Athens.

[4] S. Antoniou, S. Lambropoulou (2008) Dynamical systems and topological surgery. arXiv:0812.2367v1

[math.DS].

[5] A. Ranicki (2002) Algebraic and Geometric Surgery. Oxford Mathematical Monographs, Clarendon

Press.

[6] D. Sumners (1995) Lifting the Curtain: Using Topology to Probe the Hidden Action of Enzymes.

Not Am Math Soc 42, No. 5: 528–537.

[7] R.B. Dahlburg, S.K. Antiochos (1995) Reconnection of antiparallel magnetic flux tubes. J Geophys

Res 100, No. A9: 16991–16998. DOI: 10.1029/95JA01613.

[8] C.E. Laing, R.L. Ricca, D. Sumners (2014) Conservation of writhe helicity under anti-parallel

reconnection. Scientific Reports 5, No. 9224. DOI: 10.1038/srep09224.

[9] J. Milnor (1963) Morse Theory. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-08008-9.

[10] N. Samardzija, L. Greller (1988) Explosive route to chaos through a fractal torus in a generalized

Lotka-Volterra model. Bull Math Biol 50, No. 5: 465–491. DOI: 10.1007/BF02458847.

[11] N. Samardzija, L. Greller (1992) Nested tori in a 3-variable mass action model. Proc R Soc Lond A

Math Phys Sci 439, No. 1907: 637–647. DOI: 10.1098/rspa.1992.0173.

[12] N. Samardzija (1995) Low dimensional worm-holes. Physica D 80: 21–25. DOI: 10.1016/0167-

2789(94)00164-L.

[13] S. Lambropoulou (1993) A study of braids in 3-manifolds. PhD Thesis, Warwick University.

47

[14] D. Kondrashov, J. Feynman, P.C. Liewer, A. Ruzmaikin (1999) Three-dimensional Magnetohydro-

dynamic Simulations of the Interaction of Magnetic Flux Tubes. The Astrophysical Journal 519:

884–898. DOI: 10.1086/307383.

[15] S.Pujari (2015) Useful Notes on the Mechanism of Crossing Over. Your Article Library.

[16] A.B. Johnson, J. Lewis et al. (2002) Molecular Biology of the Cell. Garland Science.

[17] R.M. Kerr (2013) Fully developed hydrodynamic turbulence from a chain reaction of reconnection

events. Procedia IUTAM, No. 9: 57-68. DOI: 10.1016/j.piutam.2013.09.006.

[18] R.M. Kiehn (2004) Non-equilibrium systems and irreversible processes - Adventures in applied

topology vol. 1 - Non equilibrium thermodynamics. University of Houston Copyright CSDC. Inc.

147,150 p.

[19] R.M. Kiehn (2001) Falaco Solitons, Cosmic Strings in a Swimming Pool. ArXiv:gr-qc/0101098 [gr-qc].

[20] C.D. Ott, et al. (2011) Dynamics and Gravitational Wave Signature of Collapsar Formation. Phys

Rev Lett 106: 161103. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.106.161103.

[21] L.H. Hartwell, L. Hood, M.L. Goldberg, A.E. Reynolds, L.M. Silver, R.C. Veres (2000) Genetics,

from genes to genomes. McGraw Hill. 486 p.

[22] Applied Research Associates, Inc. (2014) Showcase project - Fracture of welded steel structures.

[23] W.T. Keeton, C.H. McFadden (1983) Elements of biological science. W.W. Norton & Company Inc.

395 p.

[24] G. A. Glatzmaier, P.H. Roberts (1995) A three-dimensional self-consistent computer simulation of a

geomagnetic field reversal, Nature 377 (6546): 203-209. DOI:10.1038/377203a0.

[25] N. Johnson, A visualization of the Hopf fibration.

[26] C. Adams (2004) Why Knot?: An Introduction to the Mathematical Theory of Knots with Tangle.

Key College Publishing.

[27] S.A Wasserman, J.M. Dungan , N.R. Cozzarelli (1985) Discovery of a predicted DNA knot substanti-

ates a model for site-specific recombination. Science 229 :171–174.

48

[28] V. F. R. Jones (1986) A new knot polynomial and von Neumann algebras, Not Am Math Soc 33, No.

2: 219–225.

[29] L.H. Kauffman (1987) State models and the Jones polynomial, Topology 26, No. 3: 395–407. DOI:

10.1016/0040-9383(87)90009-7.

[30] A.J. Lotka (1920) Undamped Oscillations Derived from the Law of Mass Action, J. American Chem.

Soc., No. 42: 1595–1599.

[31] V. Volterra (1931) Le¸cons sur la Th´eorie Math´ematique de la lutte pour la vie, Paris, Gauthier-Villars.

Reissued 1990, Gabay, J., ed. DOI: 10.1090/S0002-9904-1936-06292-0.

[32] L.D. Langford (1983) A review of interactions of Hopf and steady-state bifurcations, Non-linear

dynamics and turbulence, G.I. Barrenblatt, G.Iooss, D.D Joseph, Pitman, Boston: 215-237.

