6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
 
9
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
2
5
6
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Floquet-Bloch waves and suppression of

vibrations in multi-scale ﬂuid-solid systems

Giorgio Carta∗, Luca P. Argani, Alexander B. Movchan

Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Liverpool, UK

Abstract

The paper presents a mathematical model for an industry inspired
problem of vibration isolation applied to a cluster of elastic ﬂuid-ﬁlled
containers. We develop a systematic approach employing full ﬂuid-solid
interaction and Floquet-Bloch waves in periodic multi-scale systems.
The analytical ﬁndings are accompanied by numerical simulations, in-
cluding frequency response analyses and computations in the transient
regime.

Keywords: vibration isolation; multi-scale resonators; ﬂuid-solid interaction; sloshing
waves; Floquet-Bloch waves; dispersion analysis.

Introduction

1
Mathematical modelling of linear waves in ﬂuids is a classical subject, which
has generated a lot of interest among applied mathematicians, physicists
and engineers. In particular, the classical texts by Ursell (1958, 1994) and
Kuznetsov et al. (2002) present an excellent theoretical framework of linear
water waves in the context of partial diﬀerential equations. The dynamics
of sloshing is well described in the text by Ibrahim (2005), which provides
elegant estimates of eigenfrequencies of sloshing waves in solid containers.

∗Corresponding author. Email addresses: giorgio_carta@unica.it; luca.argani@unitn.it;

abm@liverpool.ac.uk

1

In many engineering systems the ﬂuid interacts with a deformable or a
moving solid, in which case the coupling between the ﬂuid and the solid
needs to be taken into account in the design process. Fluid-solid interaction
problems concerning vibrations of slender structures induced by axial ﬂow are
discussed in the comprehensive treatise by Païdoussis (1998, 2004). Banerjee
and Kundu (2007) used the Distributed Point Source Method to derive the
ultrasonic ﬁeld created by ultrasonic transducers in a solid plate immersed
in a ﬂuid, and compared the analytical results with the Lamb wave modes
visualised experimentally with stroboscopic photoelasticity. Cho et al. (2015)
investigated the frequency response of plate structures in contact with a ﬂuid
under an internal harmonic force. Liao and Ma (2016) calculated the resonant
frequencies and the associated mode shapes of a rectangular plate lying at
the bottom of a container ﬁlled with inviscid compressible ﬂuid.

Another important application involving ﬂuid-solid interaction concerns
wave propagation in deformable pipes, such as gas risers and blood vessels.
Fuller and Fahy (1982) determined the dispersion properties and the en-
ergy distribution of waves in ﬂuid-ﬁlled cylindrical pipes, modelled as shells.
Sorokin et al. (2004) investigated dispersion and power ﬂow in a cylindrical
shell with and without internal ﬂuid loading. Mencik and Ichchou (2007)
presented a ﬁnite element formulation to compute the dispersion curves and
the forced response of a generic elastic waveguide containing an acoustic ﬂuid.
If the ﬂuid inside a solid has a free surface, sloshing waves are generated
when the system is subjected to a dynamic excitation. The frequencies of
sloshing waves can be calculated analytically if the solid container is assumed
to be rigid (see Ibrahim (2005)). On the other hand, when the container is
elastic, numerical or experimental investigations are usually conducted. Jiang
et al. (2014) performed an experimental sweep test to determine the lower
frequencies of sloshing waves in a tank with a prismatic base, considering
both thick (rigid) and thin (elastic) walls, and they found that the resonant
frequencies are very close to each other. Pal and Bhattacharyya (2010)
proposed a meshless formulation based on the Petrov-Galerkin method to
study non-linear sloshing waves in a prismatic container under harmonic base
excitation, and they obtained a good agreement with the solutions given by
Frandsen (2004) and Washizu et al. (1984). In engineering applications, the
amplitudes of sloshing waves are usually attenuated by using baﬄes, as shown
by Belakroum et al. (2010) and Wang et al. (2012).

The purpose of the present paper is to analyse Floquet-Bloch type waves
in large systems of ﬂuid-ﬁlled containers and to oﬀer a design leading to

2

Figure 1: (a) Array of tanks in a petrochemical plant (image taken from www.joc.com,
accessed on 19/01/2016); (b) cylindrical steel tanks, used to storage water, resting on a
concrete foundation (image taken from www.alibaba.com, accessed on 19/01/2016).

suppression of undesirable vibrations. The main applications are in the
protection of storage tanks in industrial facilities (see Fig. 1), subjected to
dynamic excitations such as seismic waves, which can cause serious accidents
and endanger human life (Krausmann et al. (2010)).

In order to mitigate the vibrations of ﬂuid-ﬁlled containers, we propose
to introduce a novel system of high-contrast multi-scale resonators, made of
many concentrated masses linked by light beams (see Fig. 2). This system is
designed to re-distribute vibrations within a ﬂuid-solid system in a predeﬁned
ﬁnite frequency range. The high-contrast multi-scale resonators can be tuned
to serve the required frequency interval by varying the masses or the connecting
beams. The proposed design is diﬀerent from the conventional Tuned Mass
Dampers, which are eﬀective only around the eigenfrequency of the damper.
The possibility to reduce the vibrations in a ﬁnite frequency interval is crucial
when the spectrum of the system depends on a random parameter, such as
the level of ﬂuid inside the container. We also point out that the masses of
the resonators can be much smaller than the mass of the ﬂuid-ﬁlled container.
We begin by illustrating the use of the multi-scale resonators in the
reduction of the vibrations of a three-dimensional cylindrical fuel tank, used
in a petrochemical plant. The ﬂuid-solid system and the design of the
resonators are described in Section 2. A signiﬁcant dynamic eﬀect of the
resonators on the tank is shown in Fig. 5. We continue by taking a large
cluster of connected ﬂuid-ﬁlled elastic containers, subjected to externally

3

Figure 2: (a) Scheme of a chain of multi-scale resonators connected to a solid container
ﬁlled with ﬂuid; (b) ﬁrst eigenmode of the ﬂuid-ﬁlled container without the resonators;
(c) eigenmode of the system with the resonators. It is apparent that the resonators are
capable of diverting the vibrations away from the main structure. The simulations are
carried out taking into account the full interaction between solid and ﬂuid.

induced vibrations, as discussed in Section 3. A set of many containers
is an interesting scenario, considering that in an industrial plant there are
areas covered by many tanks connected to each other (see Fig. 1). In the
periodic approximation for Floquet-Bloch waves describing lateral motion
of the connected containers, we deduce a dispersion relation and construct
dispersion diagrams, which clearly show existence of stop-bands as well as
standing waves in this multi-scale structure, which incorporates ﬂuid-solid
interaction. As a part of the model, we present several approximations to
estimate the resonant frequencies of the combined ﬂuid-solid system.
In
Section 4 we discuss a simpliﬁed approach, whereby the ﬂuid is modelled
by masses connected to the elastic structure by springs. Eigenfrequency
computations show that this approach provides an approximate estimate of
the natural frequencies of the ﬂuid-solid system. We conclude by presenting
in Section 5 analytical results of sloshing waves in three-dimensional and
two-dimensional containers. We also perform some numerical simulations to
assess the eﬀect of the multi-scale resonators on the sloshing waves in the
ﬂuid. Finally, in Section 6 we provide some concluding remarks.

4

2 Vibration isolation of cylindrical tanks ﬁlled

with ﬂuid

Tanks in an industrial plant, used to store ﬂammable gases or liquids, are
generally designed as steel cylinders with small thickness. If the plant is located
in a region of high seismicity, the tanks need to resist strong earthquakes
without serious damage.

In this Section, we study a typical slender cylindrical tank containing petrol
(see Fig. 3a). The tank has radius r = 4 m, height hT = 14 m and thickness
tT = 0.006 m. It is made of steel, having the following properties: Young’s
modulus Es = 190 GPa, Poisson’s ratio νs = 0.3 and density ρs = 7870 kg m−3.
At the top the tank is covered by a steel lid of thickness tL = 0.08 m, pinned
to the tank. The ﬂuid, which is assumed to have a height hP = 12 m in the
computations, is characterised by a bulk modulus Kf = 1.3 GPa, a density
ρf = 750 kg m−3 and a dynamic viscosity µf = 0.0006 Pa s. Since Kf is very
large and µf is very small, the ﬂuid can be considered as incompressible
and inviscid. The foundation, which is a square block of side lF = 12 m
and thickness hF = 1 m, is made of concrete, having a Young’s modulus
Ec = 30 GPa, a Poisson’s ratio νc = 0.2 and a density ρc = 2500 kg m−3.

2.1 Governing equations of the ﬂuid-solid system
For an incompressible ﬂuid with uniform density ρf and dynamic viscosity µf,
the continuity equation and the Navier-Stokes equations have the following
expressions:

+ (vf · ∇) vf + ∇p

∇ · vf = 0 ,
− µf
ρf

ρf

∂vf
∂t

∇2vf = −g k ,

(1a)
(1b)

where vf is the velocity ﬁeld in the ﬂuid, p is the pressure, g is the acceleration
of gravity and k is the unit vector in the z direction. The equations of motion
of the elastic tank and foundation are given by

µs∇2uT + (λs + µs)∇∇ · uT = ρs
µc∇2uF + (λc + µc)∇∇ · uF = ρc

∂2uT
∂t2
∂2uF
∂t2

(steel tank),

(concrete foundation).

(2a)

(2b)

5

Figure 3: (a) Geometry of the three-dimensional cylindrical tank with ﬂuid; ﬁrst eigenmode
and corresponding eigenfrequency of the ﬂuid-ﬁlled tank obtained with the model based on
the linearised Navier-Stokes equations (b) and with the acoustic approximation (c).

6

Here uT and uF denote the displacement vectors of the tank and the founda-
tion, while µα = Eα/ [2 (1 + να)] and λα = Eανα/ [(1 + να) (1 − 2να)] (where
α = c, s) are the Lamé constants for the two materials.

The boundary conditions of the ﬂuid-solid system are the following:

· n

vf · n = ∂uT
∂t
σTn = −pn

p = p0
uT = uF , σT = σF
uF = ¯u

at the interfaces ﬂuid-solid,
at the interfaces ﬂuid-solid,
on the ﬂuid free surface,
at the interfaces tank-foundation,
at the bottom of the foundation,

(3a)
(3b)
(3c)
(3d)
(3e)

where σT and σF are the stress tensors in the tank and in the foundation, p0 is
the atmospheric pressure and n is the normal unit vector. The displacement
vector ¯u at the bottom of the foundation is assumed to be given. In the
computations carried out in the transient regime, the system is assumed to
be at rest at the initial time.

2.2 Frequency response of the cylindrical tank
We determine the eigenfrequencies and eigenmodes of the ﬂuid-solid system by
employing two approaches, based on diﬀerent formulations of the ﬂuid domain.
In the ﬁrst approach we simplify the governing equations of the system in the
framework of the linear water wave theory, while in the second formulation we
approximate the ﬂuid as an acoustic medium. In Section 4 we will discuss an
alternative method, in which the ﬂuid is modelled by spring-mass oscillators,
and we will show that this method, that is widely used in the literature,
can lead to an imprecise evaluation of the eigenfrequencies of the ﬂuid-solid
system.

2.2.1 Simpliﬁed governing equations
In order to perform an eigenfrequency analysis, we need to remove the non-
linear and viscous terms from the Navier-Stokes equations (1b). We consider
small harmonic oscillations around the equilibrium conﬁguration, such that
vf = Vf + ˜vf ei ωt and p = P + ˜pei ωt, where ω is the radian frequency. At
equilibrium the ﬂuid is quiescent (Vf = 0) and P is the hydrostatic pressure

7

(P = ρf g|z|). The amplitudes of the ﬂuid variables are obtained from the
following equations:

∇ · ˜vf = 0 ,
i ω ˜vf + ∇˜p

= 0 .

ρf

(4a)
(4b)

For conciseness, he time factor ei ωt is suppressed throughout the paper. After
imposing time-harmonic conditions, the equations of motion of the elastic
solids (2) become
µs∇2 ˜uT + (λs + µs)∇∇ · ˜uT + ρs ω2 ˜uT = 0 (steel tank),
µc∇2 ˜uF + (λc + µc)∇∇ · ˜uF + ρc ω2 ˜uF = 0 (concrete foundation).

(5a)
(5b)

The boundary conditions (3) are changed into

˜vf · n = i ω ˜uT · n
˜σTn = −˜pn

˜p = 0
˜uT = ˜uF , ˜σT = ˜σF
˜uF = ¯u

at the interfaces ﬂuid-solid,
at the interfaces ﬂuid-solid,
on the ﬂuid free surface,
at the interfaces tank-foundation,
at the bottom of the foundation.

(6a)
(6b)
(6c)
(6d)
(6e)

The eigenfrequencies and eigenmodes of the ﬂuid-solid system are com-
puted by means of a ﬁnite element model developed in Comsol Multiphysics R(cid:13)
(version 5.1), where the tank is modelled as a shell to simplify the compu-
tations. The bottom of the foundation is assumed to be ﬁxed (¯u = 0 in
Eq. (6e)). The ﬁrst antisymmetric eigenmode is shown in Fig. 3b, and it
corresponds to an eigenfrequency f1 = 6.11 Hz. We focus the attention on the
antisymmetric modes of the system, since they are the only modes excited by
a horizontal acceleration of the ground (Graham and Rodriguez (1952)), as
in the presence of an earthquake.

2.2.2 Acoustic approximation
The second approach that we follow consists in modelling the ﬂuid as an
acoustic medium, characterised by the following equation of motion in the
transient regime:

∂2p
∂t2 ,

Kf∇2p = ρf

8

(7)

which under time-harmonic conditions takes the form:

Kf∇2˜p + ρf ω2˜p = 0 .

(8)

In this case, the boundary condition (3a) or (6a) needs to be removed from
the formulation of the problem.

The present approach represents an approximation of the method described
in Section 2.2.1, since the velocity is not a variable of the problem so that
the ﬂuid ﬂow is neglected. Only pressure waves propagate in the ﬂuid, as the
latter is assumed to be inviscid.

The ﬁrst eigenfrequency associated with an antisymmetric mode, shown
in Fig. 3c, is found to be f ac
1 = 6.15 Hz, which is very close to the value deter-
mined with the linear water wave theory. The reason is that the frequencies of
sloshing waves are considerably smaller than 6.15 Hz (see 5.1), therefore the
contribution of the ﬂuid velocity can be ignored. On the other hand, at low
frequencies the model based on the linearised Navier-Stokes equations should
be employed, since in this case the velocity of sloshing waves is signiﬁcant.

2.3 Design of multi-scale resonators
In order to reduce the vibrations of the tank induced by earthquakes, we
propose to insert a passive system of high-contrast multi-scale resonators.
When the ﬂuid-solid system is subjected to a dynamic base excitation charac-
terised by a Fourier spectrum having a peak around a frequency close to one
of the eigenfrequencies of the resonators, the latter start to vibrate, while the
oscillations of the main structure are reduced. In this way, waves are diverted
away from the tank, which undergoes smaller deformations and is subjected
to lower stresses and displacements. We observe that the lower modes of the
resonators are more eﬃcient, as they require more energy to vibrate.

The system of resonators consists of four chains of masses m, two in the
x direction and two in the y direction, linked by light ﬂexural elements with
uniform length d and ﬂexural stiﬀness EJ (see Figs. 4a and 4b). The chains
are pinned at the bottom to the concrete foundation and at the top to a truss
made of bars with high rigidity, which is connected to the tank.

If the number of masses is large enough, each chain of resonators can be
studied analytically as a periodic structure made of point masses connected
by non-inertial beams. This periodic structure is characterised by a single

9

Figure 4: Proposed system of multi-scale resonators: front section (a) and top view (b);
dispersion curve of the system of resonators analysed as a periodic structure (c).

10

vuut6EJ [3 + cos (2kd) − 4 cos (kd)]

md3 [2 + cos (kd)]

ω =

,

(9)

dispersion curve, which has the following expression (Carta et al. (2016)):

where k is the wavenumber. The upper limit of this dispersion curve is

ωlim = 4q3EJ/(md3). If the system of resonators is made of a ﬁnite number

of masses, as in reality, its eigenfrequencies lie inside the pass-band of the
periodic structure, for any boundary conditions imposed at the ends (see also
Mead (1996) and Carta et al. (2014a)).

Eq. (9) allows to determine precisely the frequency interval where the
resonators are eﬀective. The upper limit ωlim of this frequency interval can
be easily modiﬁed by changing the masses or the properties of the beams.
The capability of the resonators to work in a large frequency range is very
important when the natural frequencies of the system can vary during its
service life, as in the present case due to the variation of the ﬂuid level inside
the tank: this is the main advantage of the proposed design. We also point
out that the number of the eigenfrequencies of the resonators, around which
the resonators are more eﬃcient, can be increased by adding more masses.
For the tank examined in this Section, we design each chain of resonators
as made of nine steel spheres of radius 0.26 m. The masses are connected to
each other by steel beams of length 1.4 m and hollow circular cross-section of
outer radius equal to 0.085 m and inner radius equal to 0.075 m. The elastic
modulus, Poisson’s ratio and density of steel used for the resonators are equal
to 200 GPa, 0.3 and 7850 kg m−3, respectively. We note that the mass of each
beam is much smaller than the mass of each sphere. Moreover, the total mass
of the four chains of resonators is less than 4% of the total mass of the tank
completely ﬁlled with petrol. The dispersion curve obtained from Eq. (9) is
shown in terms of the frequency f and the normalised wavenumber kd in
Fig. 4c, where the upper limit is flim = ωlim/(2π).

2.3.1 Eﬀect of multi-scale resonators on the transient response of

the tank

In order to assess the eﬃciency of the proposed system of resonators, we
carry out numerical simulations in the transient regime. We model the
ﬂuid as an acoustic medium using Eq. (7), because at high frequencies the
velocity of sloshing waves is negligible, as demonstrated in Section 2.2.2. This

11

Figure 5: Time-histories of the relative displacement along the x direction between the
top and the bottom of the tank at f = 6.1 Hz, in absence of resonators (a) and when the
resonators are attached to the tank (b); time-histories of the displacements of resonators
R1, R2 and R3 (c), indicated in Fig. 4a.

simpliﬁcation allows to perform the simulations at an aﬀordable computational
cost.

We impose a sinusoidal displacement in the x direction at the bottom
x = d0 sin (2πf t), where d0 = 0.005 m is the
of the foundation, given by uB
amplitude, f = 6.1 Hz is the frequency and t is time. By using a ﬁnite element
model built in Comsol Multiphysics R(cid:13), we compute the time-history of the
relative displacement in the x direction between the top and the bottom of
the tank, namely ∆ux = uT
x , both when the resonators are absent and
when they are installed.

The relative displacement ∆ux in the system without resonators is plotted
in Fig. 5a. From this diagram it is apparent that ∆ux increases unbounded
with time, because the forcing frequency is close to the natural frequency of
the tank and damping has not been included in the computations.

x − uB

Fig. 5b shows the time-history of the relative displacement ∆ux after

12

the resonators have been introduced. The displacements of three resonators,
labelled as R1, R2 and R3 in Fig. 4a, are plotted in Fig. 5c. They increase
unlimited in time because the chosen value of the imposed frequency is close
to the one of the eigenfrequencies of the system of resonators, more speciﬁcally
the third one. Figs. 5a-5c show that the resonators redistribute the vibrational
energy produced by the external source, so that in the main structure the
vibration amplitudes are decreased and resonant eﬀects disappear. The
resonators work well also if the frequency is close to – but not coincident with
– one of their natural frequencies.

3 Waves in periodic systems of ﬂuid-ﬁlled con-

tainers

In an industrial facility some areas are usually covered by sets of fuel storage
tanks, connected to each other by the piping system or through the soil. In
regions of high seismicity, it is essential to study how these sets of tanks
behave when they are subjected to an earthquake and how their vibrations
can be reduced in order to avoid serious accidents due to structural failure.
For simplicity we look at two-dimensional systems, because numerical
simulations with several three-dimensional cylindrical tanks would require
industrial scale computations. Nonetheless, the ideas and the procedures pre-
sented in this Section can be easily extended to three-dimensional geometries.

3.1 Two-dimensional models for ﬂuid-solid interaction

in the frequency domain

In order to determine the eigenfrequencies and eigenmodes of the two-
dimensional system of containers, we employ the same approaches used
in Section 2.2 for the three-dimensional cylindrical tank.

We assume that each container of the system has a rectangular section
(see Fig. 6a) and unit thickness in the z direction, orthogonal to the xy plane.
It is made of concrete, having Young’s modulus Ec = 30 GPa, Poisson’s ratio
νc = 0.2 and density ρc = 2500 kg m−3. The height and the half-width of
the container are given by hT = 10 m and lT = 2.5 m, respectively, while
the thickness of the walls is tT = 0.3 m. The container is rigidly connected
to a lid of thickness tL = 0.1 m, which is also the thickness of the bottom.

13

Figure 6: (a) Geometrical details of each ﬂuid-ﬁlled container; ﬁrst three antisymmetric
eigenmodes and corresponding eigenfrequencies of a single container, obtained with the
linear water wave theory (b) and with the acoustic approximation (c).

The container stands on a concrete foundation, having for simplicity the
same constitutive properties as the container, with height hF = 1.0 m and
width lF = 9.6 m. The ﬂuid is assumed to have the properties of water, with
density ρf = 1000 kg m−3, bulk modulus Kf = 2.2 GPa and dynamic viscosity
µf = 0.001 Pa s, hence it can be studied as incompressible and inviscid. In the
computations, the height of the ﬂuid is taken as hW = 8 m.

3.1.1 Simpliﬁed governing equations in the two-dimensional for-

mulation

In the frequency domain, we neglect the contributions of the non-linear and
viscous terms in the Navier-Stokes equations and we consider small harmonic
oscillations around the equilibrium conﬁguration, where the amplitudes of
velocity and pressure are ˜vf and ˜p respectively. The latter are described by
(10a)
(10b)

∇ · ˜vf = 0 ,
i ω ˜vf + ∇˜p

= 0 .

ρf

14

The container and the foundation are modelled as elastic solids, governed by
the following equations in the time-harmonic regime:

µc∇2 ˜uS + (λc + µc)∇∇ · ˜uS + ρc ω2 ˜uS = 0 ,

(11)
where ˜uS is the displacement ﬁeld in the solid, while µc = Ec/ [2 (1 + νc)]
and λc = Ecνc/ [(1 + νc) (1 − 2νc)] are the Lamé constants. The boundary
conditions are summarised below:

˜vf · n = i ω ˜uS · n , ˜σSn = −˜pn at the interfaces ﬂuid-solid,

˜p = 0
˜uS = ¯u

(12a)
(12b)
(12c)
where ˜σS is the stress tensor in the solid and ¯u is a prescribed displacement
vector.

on the ﬂuid free surface,
at the bottom of the foundation,

The equations above are implemented in a ﬁnite element model developed
in Comsol Multiphysics R(cid:13), in which the analysis is performed under plane
strain conditions. The bottom of the foundation is assumed to be ﬁxed, i.e.
¯u = 0 in Eq. (12c). The ﬁrst three antisymmetric eigenmodes and their
associated eigenfrequencies for a single container are shown in Fig. 6b.

3.1.2 Acoustic approximation
In this approximate method the velocity of the ﬂuid is neglected, implying
that the ﬂuid ﬂow is not taken into account. The only variable deﬁned in the
ﬂuid domain is the pressure, which is governed by Eq. (8) in the time-harmonic
regime.

The ﬁrst three eigenfrequencies related to antisymmetric eigenmodes of a
single container are reported in Fig. 6c. By comparing Figs. 6b and 6c, we
can notice that also in the two-dimensional case the acoustic approximation
provides a good estimate of the natural frequencies of the ﬂuid-solid system.
This is due to the fact that the ﬁrst resonant modes of sloshing waves are found
at much lower values of the frequency (refer to 5.1 for details), consequently
the contribution of ﬂuid ﬂow at higher frequencies is negligible.

3.2 Floquet-Bloch waves in a periodic system of con-

tainers

A set of many tanks can be studied as a periodic system, consisting of an
inﬁnite array of repetitive cells. The analysis of this system can be simpliﬁed

15

Figure 7: Identiﬁcation of the repetitive cell in the periodic system of containers.

by studying a single cell with Floquet-Bloch boundary conditions. In this
way, we can determine the dispersive properties of the system, in particular
the frequency ranges where waves propagate without attenuation (pass-bands)
and where they decay exponentially in space (stop-bands).

The interaction between the ﬂuid and the solid is modelled by using the
equations derived from the linear water wave theory (see Section 3.1.1), which
gives the most accurate results and which can be handled numerically in the
two-dimensional setting.

3.2.1 Periodic cell and quasi-periodicity conditions
We assume that the containers lie on a medium-dense sand soil, that is
characterised by a Young’s modulus Eg = 70 MPa, a Poisson’s ratio νg = 0.25
and a density ρg = 2100 kg m−3. The soil stands over a rigid layer of rock,
hence we impose zero vertical displacements at the bottom of the sand layer.
The repetitive cell of the system is indicated in Fig. 7, where D = 15.6 m is
the distance between two adjacent cells and hG = 2 m is the thickness of the
sand layer.

At the ends of the periodic cell we apply Floquet-Bloch conditions:

˜u (¯x + D, y) = ˜u (¯x, y) ei kD ,

(13)

where ˜u is the displacement ﬁeld and k is the wavenumber.

3.2.2 Dispersion curves
The dispersion curves of the periodic system in Fig. 7 are determined numeri-
cally by means of a ﬁnite element analysis. In particular, they are obtained
by computing the eigenfrequencies of the periodic cell for several values of the

16

wavenumber, ranging within the ﬁrst Brillouin zone. The dispersion curves
show how the frequency f depends on the wavenumber k.

We consider three diﬀerent levels of ﬂuid, i.e. hW = hT, hW = hT/2 and
hW = hT/4, where hW and hT denote the heights of the ﬂuid and of the
container respectively. The dispersion curves corresponding to these three
cases are plotted in Fig. 8, where the solid lines represent the antisymmetric
modes, the dashed lines the symmetric modes and the dotted lines the mixed
modes. For each case, the dispersion curves associated with symmetric modes
are almost ﬂat, while those associated with mixed modes appear at higher
frequencies.

The results in Fig. 8 show that, as the height of ﬂuid is decreased, the
dispersion curves move up towards higher frequencies. This result can be
explained from a physical point of view considering that the eigenfrequencies of
a system generally become larger if its mass is diminished. At the boundaries
of the ﬁrst Brillouin zone standing waves are observed, where the group
velocity is zero. We also note that, for each case examined, there are large
ﬁnite frequency intervals between the dispersion curves, which represent the
stop-bands of the system, where waves cannot propagate.

3.3 Multi-scale resonators for the periodic system of

containers

As shown in Fig. 8, the dispersion curves of the periodic system of containers
can vary signiﬁcantly with the level of ﬂuid inside the containers. Therefore,
in order to suppress or reduce the structural vibrations, we would need an
isolation device that is eﬀective in a large frequency interval. This purpose
cannot be achieved with conventional Tuned Mass Dampers, which work
well only in a narrow frequency range around the natural frequency of the
damper. On the other hand, the system of resonators described in Section 2
is capable of mitigating the vibrations of the containers for many frequencies
within a large interval, deﬁned by the dispersion relation (9). The number
of frequencies around which the resonators are eﬃcient can be increased by
adding more masses to the system.

We design the resonators in order to cover the interval (0, 10)Hz, where
the dispersion curves related to the antisymmetric modes of the system of
containers are found for very diﬀerent values of ﬂuid heights (see Fig. 8).
The resonators, sketched in Fig. 9d for one container, are nine steel spheres

17

Figure 8: Dispersion curves for the periodic system of containers depicted in Fig. 7 without
resonators, computed for three diﬀerent levels of ﬂuid.

of diameter 0.35 m, connected by steel beams of length 1 m and circular
cross-section of diameter 0.035 m. The Young’s modulus, Poisson’s ratio and
density of steel are Es = 200 GPa, νs = 0.3 and ρs = 7850 kg m−3, respectively.
The system of resonators is linked to the top of the container by a rigid truss
and tied to the foundation by a hinge. We point out that the mass of each
beam is much smaller than the mass of each resonator, which justiﬁes the
approximation, used in the derivation of Eq. (9), that the beams can be
analysed as non-inertial ﬂexural elements. Furthermore, we note that the
total mass of the system of resonators is less than 3% of the total mass of the
ﬂuid-ﬁlled container.

3.3.1 Application to a single container
We assess the performance of the resonators by carrying out some numerical
simulations in the transient regime. In this case the motion of the ﬂuid is
governed by the complete Navier-Stokes equations (1b), which include both
the convective and viscous terms. We consider ﬁrst a single container and
we assume that the solid and the ﬂuid are at rest at t = 0. We apply a

18

Figure 9: Time-histories of the relative horizontal displacement between the top and the
bottom of a single container at f = 1.28 Hz in the case without resonators (a) and when
resonators are introduced (b); (c) displacements versus time of resonators R1, R2 and R3;
(d) schematic representation of the proposed system of resonators for a single container.

19

horizontal harmonic displacement at the bottom of the foundation, expressed
by uB
x = d0 sin (2πf t), with d0 = 0.002 m and f = 1.28 Hz, the latter being
the ﬁrst eigenfrequency of the ﬂuid-solid system (see Fig. 6b). Then, we
compute the horizontal displacement at the top of the container, indicated as
x , and we calculate the relative displacement ∆ux = uT
uT

If the resonators are absent, we obtain the diagram in Fig. 9a, which shows
that the relative displacement between the top and the bottom of the container
increases unbounded with time, since the frequency of the external excitation
is close to the ﬁrst eigenfrequency of the ﬂuid-ﬁlled container. Resonance is
detected also in correspondence of the second and third eigenfrequencies of
the ﬂuid-solid system, namely f = 6.17 Hz and f = 17.25 Hz (see Fig. 6b),
which conﬁrms the accuracy of the eigenfrequency analysis.

x − uB
x .

When the resonators are installed, the vibrations in the container decrease
considerably and resonant eﬀects disappear, as can be seen from the time-
history of ∆ux in Fig. 9b. The reason is that most of the energy is absorbed by
the resonators, which undergo large oscillations as shown in Fig. 9c. Indeed,
the system of resonators has the following nine natural frequencies: 0.14 Hz,
0.56 Hz, 1.25 Hz, 2.25 Hz, 3.50 Hz, 4.98 Hz, 6.62 Hz, 8.24 Hz and 9.50 Hz, hence
the resonant behaviour of the resonators is due to the fact that the applied
frequency is close to their third eigenfrequency. The eigenmode corresponding
to 1.25 Hz is shown in Fig. 2c.

3.3.2 Eﬀect of the resonators on the dispersion properties of the

periodic system of containers

If we connect the system of resonators to the container and we perform
the dispersion analysis by imposing the quasi-periodicity conditions at the
boundaries of the periodic cell, as described in Section 3.2.2, we ﬁnd that new
dispersion curves appear in correspondence of the modes of the resonators.
These dispersion curves lie within the frequency interval (0, 10)Hz, in agree-
ment with the design target. In Fig. 10 we present the results for the case
hW = hT/2, namely when the containers are half-ﬁlled with ﬂuid. Narrow
stop-bands open up in proximity of the new dispersion curves, where waves
decay exponentially; furthermore, standing waves are detected at the limits
of the pass-bands.

20

Figure 10: Dispersion curves for the periodic system of containers when the resonators are
installed in the system, for the case hW = hT/2. The inset shows more clearly a stop-band
created by the resonators, highlighted in grey.

21

Figure 11: Time-histories of the relative displacements between the top and the bottom
of the ﬁrst, ﬁfth and ninth containers of a semi-inﬁnite set of containers, shown on top,
evaluated near the limit of a stop-band (f = 4.79 Hz).

3.3.3 Eﬀect of the resonators on the transient response of a system

of containers

We analyse the transient response of a semi-inﬁnite system of identical con-
tainers by referring to the dispersion properties of the corresponding periodic
system, illustrated in Fig. 10. In the numerical computations we consider
a set of ten containers connected by the soil layer, sketched at the top of
Fig. 11. At the left boundary of the system (x = 0) we impose a harmonic
horizontal displacement, given by d0 sin (2πf t), with d0 = 0.002 m and for
diﬀerent values of the frequency f. At the right boundary of the system
(x = 10D) we attach a soil layer with viscous damping, which absorbs waves.
In this way, reﬂections of waves at the right boundary of the system are
avoided and the system behaves as semi-inﬁnite. The layer with damping
plays the role of a Perfectly Matched Layer (PML), in which the damping
coeﬃcient has been tuned in order to minimise reﬂections, as discussed in
Carta et al. (2014b).

First, we consider an applied frequency equal to f = 4.79 Hz, which lies
at the beginning of a stop-band (see Fig. 10). We determine the relative
displacements ∆ux between the top and the bottom of the ﬁrst, ﬁfth and
ninth containers, which are reported at the bottom of Fig. 11. It is apparent
that the amplitude of ∆ux decreases considerably moving from the ﬁrst to
the ninth container, as expected since waves decay exponentially in space
when the frequency is inside a stop-band.

22

Figure 12: Time-histories of the relative displacements between the top and the bottom of
the ﬁfth container in a semi-inﬁnite system without resonators (a) and with resonators (b),
calculated at f = 1.25 Hz.

Next, we impose a harmonic horizontal displacement at x = 0 with a
frequency f = 1.25 Hz, falling within a pass-band of the system (see Fig. 10).
In Fig. 12a we plot the time-history of the relative displacement between the
top and the bottom of the ﬁfth container when the resonators are absent,
while in Fig. 12b we illustrate the response of the ﬁfth container after the
resonators have been installed in the system. The comparison between the
two cases shows that the resonators can reduce the structural vibrations
of around 50%. The chosen value of the frequency is close to one of the
ﬂat dispersion curves produced by the resonators. Nonetheless, attenuation
of waves has been observed also for other frequencies close to f = 1.25 Hz,
namely at f = 1.35 Hz (refer to Fig. 17) and f = 1.15 Hz.

4 Discussion on the approximate spring-mass

model for containers with sloshing waves

Approximate formulations have been proposed in the literature, whereby the
ﬂuid is modelled as a system of masses connected to the main structure by
springs. This method, which is referred to as spring-mass approximation, is
commonly used in practical applications, because it is simple and requires a
lower computational cost. In this Section, we determine the eigenfrequencies
of both the three-dimensional and two-dimensional ﬂuid-ﬁlled containers by
using the approximate spring-mass model, and we compare the results with the
natural frequencies of the ﬂuid-solid system derived from the approach based

23

on the linearised Navier-Stokes equations and from the acoustic approximation,
discussed in the previous Sections.

4.1 Three-dimensional tank
For the three-dimensional tank studied in Section 2, we refer to the papers by
Housner (1957, 1963) and Veletsos (1984). The ﬂuid is represented by a mass
M0, rigidly connected to the container, and by a mass M1, linked to the walls
by an elastic spring of equivalent stiﬀness k1 (see Fig. 13a). The positions of
the masses with respect to the bottom of the tank are indicated by h0 and
h1, respectively. The expressions of these quantities are reported below:

for hP
r

>

8
3 ,

(14a)

(14b)

(14c)

(14d)

(14e)

(cid:17)

tanh(cid:16)√

3 r
hP

√
3 r
hP

M ,

M1 =

M0 =
h0 = 9
s27
M ,
(cid:19)2s27
(cid:18)11
20hP
M1 ,
s27
s27
8 tanh
 hP ,
1 − cosh(cid:16)q 27
(cid:17) − 135
r sinh(cid:16)q 27
q 27
(cid:17)

k1 = g
r

h1 =

tanh

hP
r

8

hP
r

8

r
hP

8

88
hP
r

8

hP
r

8

hP

8

24

where M = πr2hPρf is the total mass of the ﬂuid.

The ﬁrst antisymmetric mode, illustrated in Fig. 13b, is found at f sm

1 =
6.44 Hz. This value of the eigenfrequency is larger than the values determined
with the more accurate methods based on the linearised Navier-Stokes equa-
tions and the acoustic approximation, presented in Sections 2.2.1 and 2.2.2
respectively (see Figs. 3b and 3c). Therefore, the spring-mass approximation
should be employed only to have a rough estimate of the ﬁrst eigenfrequency
of the three-dimensional ﬂuid-ﬁlled tank.

4.2 Two-dimensional container
The spring-mass approximation has been applied to two-dimensional contain-
ers in the works by Graham and Rodriguez (1952), Housner (1957), Li et

24

Figure 13: (a) Spring-mass approximation of the three-dimensional ﬂuid-ﬁlled tank; (b)
ﬁrst eigenmode and eigenfrequency obtained with the spring-mass approximation.

25

al. (2012) and Bursi et al. (2015). For the rectangular container examined
in Section 3 we consider the model by Li and Wang (2012), which is an
improvement of the formulation provided by Graham and Rodriguez (1952).
The ﬂuid is represented by a mass M0, rigidly connected to the container,
and by a set of spring-mass oscillators (Mn, kn) (n = 1, 2, . . . ) that simulate
the sloshing modes of the ﬂuid. We consider the case of two spring-mass
oscillators, sketched in Fig. 14a. The positions of the masses M0, M1 and
M2 with respect to the bottom of the tank are indicated by h0, h1 and h2,
respectively. The formulae for all the quantities indicated in Fig. 14a are
reported below:

hn =

"

M0 =

(βnhW)3

Mn = 2(hW/lT)2 tanh (βnhW)
#
1 + 2 − cosh (βnhW)
"
βnhW sinh (βnhW)
1 − 2X
(cid:17)2P2
(cid:17)2 − 2(cid:16) hW
1 −P2
!2"tanh (βnhW)
  hW
(n) = 2M g

2(hW/lT)2 tanh (βnhW)

(βnhW)3

n=1

lT

n=1

hW

lT

βnhW

(cid:16) lT

hW

#2

2(hW/lT)2 tanh (βnhW)

(βnhW)3
2+βnhW sinh (βnhW)−cosh (βnhW)

M ,

(βnhW)4 cosh (βnhW)

n=1

2 + 1
1
3

h0 =

kn = Mnω2

M (n = 1, 2) ,

hW (n = 1, 2) ,

#

(15a)

(15b)

(15c)

hW ,

(15d)

(n = 1, 2) .

(15e)

Here βn = (2n − 1)π/(2lT), ω(n) is the n-th frequency of the sloshing waves
(given also by Eq. (19) in 5.1), and M = 2lThWρf is the total mass per unit
thickness of the ﬂuid.

The ﬁrst three antisymmetric eigenmodes and their corresponding eigen-
frequencies obtained with the approximate spring-mass model are plotted
in Fig. 14b. Comparing the results illustrated in Figs. 6b and 14b, we note
that the spring-mass model does not provide a good estimate of the natural
frequencies of the ﬂuid-solid system, in particular for the second and third
modes. We have checked that the accuracy of this approximation does not
improve signiﬁcantly by increasing the number of spring-mass oscillators.

26

Figure 14: (a) Approximate spring-mass model for the two-dimensional ﬂuid-ﬁlled container;
(b) ﬁrst three antisymmetric eigenmodes and relative eigenfrequencies derived from the
approximate spring-mass model.

5 Analytical and numerical study of sloshing

waves

The sloshing of the ﬂuid in a liquid storage tank is an important factor to
consider when evaluating the serviceability of the structure, since sloshing
waves can aﬀect the functionality of the container and they can also lead to
local damages of the tank.

In this Section, we determine analytically the frequencies of sloshing waves
in the two-dimensional and three-dimensional containers described in the
previous Sections. Subsequently, we investigate the capability of the system
of resonators to limit the sloshing of the ﬂuid contained in the tanks.

5.1 Analytical estimates of the frequencies of sloshing

waves

The frequencies of sloshing waves in the ﬂuid are calculated analytically in
the framework of linear water wave theory, assuming that the walls of the
container are rigid. The continuity equation and the linearised Navier-Stokes

27

equations are given by

∂vf
∂t

∇ · vf = 0 ,
+ ∇p

= −g k .

ρf

(16a)
(16b)

We recall that ρf, vf, p, g and k are the density of the ﬂuid, the velocity ﬁeld,
the pressure, the acceleration of gravity and the unit vector in the direction
normal to the free surface, respectively. The boundary conditions in a rigid
container are expressed by
vf · n = 0
p = p0

(17a)
(17b)
where p0 is the atmospheric pressure and n is the unit vector normal to the
rigid walls.
Considering an irrotational ﬂow, it is possible to deﬁne a velocity potential
ϕ such that vf = ∇ϕ. Assuming small perturbations of the free surface,
the equations of the system and the boundary conditions become (see also
Ibrahim (2005)):

on the rigid walls,
on the free surface,

∇2ϕ = 0
∇ϕ · n = 0
∇ϕ · n = ω2ϕ

g

inside the ﬂuid,
on the rigid walls,

on the free surface,

(18a)
(18b)

(18c)

where ω is the radian frequency. The solution of the linear water waves
problem, deﬁned by Eqs. (18), provides the radian frequencies of sloshing
waves. We are interested, in particular, in the frequencies of sloshing waves
relative to antisymmetric modes, which are the only modes that are excited
when the ﬂuid-solid system is subjected to ground shaking.

The radian frequencies of sloshing waves in the two-dimensional rectangular
container examined in Section 3 are given by (Ibrahim (2005); Li and Wang
(2012))

q

ω2D
(n) =

g βn tanh (βnhW) with βn = nπ
2lT

(n = 1, 2, . . . ) ,

(19)

where lT and hW are the half-width of the container and the height of the
ﬂuid, respectively. The ﬁrst three frequencies of sloshing waves associated

28

(1) = 0.3951 Hz, f 2D

with antisymmetric modes are f 2D
0.8835 Hz, where f 2D
a ﬁnite element model developed in Comsol Multiphysics R(cid:13).

(5) =
(n)/(2π). The same values have been obtained from
For what concerns the three-dimensional cylindrical tank studied in Sec-
tion 2, the radian frequencies have the following expressions (Ibrahim (2005)):

(3) = 0.6844 Hz and f 2D

(n) = ω2D

vuutgξmn

r

  ξmnhP

!

r

ω3D
(mn) =

tanh

with ξmn = λmnr

(m, n = 1, 2, . . . ) ,

(20)
where r is the radius of the cylinder, hP is the height of the ﬂuid and λmn are
the roots of the equation

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)ρ=r

∂Jm (λmnρ)

∂ρ

= 0 ,

(21)

being Jm the Bessel function of the ﬁrst kind of order m. With the values
assigned to the parameters in Section 2, the ﬁrst three frequencies of sloshing
waves related to antisymmetric modes are found to be f 3D
(11) = 0.338 Hz,
(mn)/(2π). Also in this
(31) = 0.511 Hz and f 3D
f 3D
case, the ﬁnite element model built in Comsol Multiphysics R(cid:13) provides a very
accurate estimate of the analytical results.

(12) = 0.576 Hz, where f 3D

(mn) = ω3D

If we consider an elastic container, namely if Eq. (17a) is substituted by
Eq. (6a), the frequencies of sloshing waves decrease very slightly (as also
found experimentally by Jiang et al. (2014)). The reason is that, both in
the two-dimensional and in the three-dimensional cases, the deformations
of the container are very small at those frequencies. Accordingly, we have
not considered the frequencies of sloshing waves as eigenfrequencies of the
ﬂuid-solid system.

5.2 Sloshing waves in the two-dimensional container
We carry out numerical simulations in the transient regime for the two-
dimensional container examined in Section 3. We impose a sinusoidal dis-
placement at the bottom of the foundation, having a frequency equal to
one of the frequencies of sloshing waves. Then, we determine the vertical
displacement uy of a point of the ﬂuid close to the boundary with the solid,
indicated by a black dot in the insets of Fig. 15.

29

The time-histories of uy at 0.395 Hz and 0.684 Hz, which are the frequencies
of the ﬁrst and second antisymmetric modes of sloshing waves, are plotted by
solid lines in Fig. 15a and 15b. The amplitudes of the applied displacement
are 0.05 m and 0.04 m, respectively. For these simulations, the ﬁnite element
software Abaqus R(cid:13) (version 6.14-4) has been used. The deformations of the
ﬂuid at diﬀerent instants of time are shown in the insets of the diagrams,
where the shapes of the ﬁrst and second modes are clearly identiﬁed. For
both frequencies, the level of the ﬂuid increases unbounded with time due
to resonance. In reality, the viscosity of the ﬂuid would limit the increase in
amplitude of sloshing waves.

The dotted lines in Figs. 15a and 15b represent the time-histories of
uy when the resonators are installed in the system.
It is apparent that
the resonators do not signiﬁcantly modify the amplitudes of sloshing waves,
therefore they result to be ineﬃcacious to reduce the sloshing in the ﬂuid.
The reason is that at these frequencies the displacements of the container
walls are very small, so that the container behaves as a rigid body and the
resonators cannot divert the energy from the ﬂuid.

5.3 Sloshing waves in the three-dimensional tank
We perform transient regime simulations for the three-dimensional container
examined in Section 2. A sinusoidal displacement is imposed at the bottom of
the foundation with a frequency corresponding to the ﬁrst antisymmetric mode
of sloshing waves (equal to 0.338 Hz) and with an amplitude equal to 0.02 m.
Using the ﬁnite element software Abaqus R(cid:13), we compute the diﬀerence between
the vertical displacements uz of the two points of the ﬂuid free surface close
to the boundary with the solid, indicated by the black dots in the inset of
Fig. 16. The time-history of the diﬀerence ∆uz is plotted by a solid line in
Fig. 16.

The deformations of the ﬂuid at diﬀerent instants of time are shown in the
insets of the diagram, where the shapes of the ﬁrst mode are clearly identiﬁed.
Moreover, we can note that the level of the ﬂuid increases unbounded with
time due to resonance.

The dotted line in Fig. 16 represents the time-history of ∆uz when the
resonators are installed in the system. Similarly to the two-dimensional case,
we can note that at this frequency the container behaves as a rigid body and
the resonators do not signiﬁcantly modify the amplitudes of sloshing waves.
This result conﬁrms that the resonators are not useful for the reduction of the

30

Figure 15: Time-histories of the vertical displacement uy of the ﬂuid point indicated by the
black dot in the schematic representation on the left, computed at the frequencies 0.395 Hz
(a) and 0.684 Hz (b). The solid and dotted lines refer to the cases without and with
resonators, respectively.

31

Figure 16: Time-histories of the diﬀerence ∆uz between the vertical displacements of
the ﬂuid points indicated by the black dots in the schematic representation on the left,
computed at the frequency 0.338 Hz. The solid and dotted lines refer to the cases without
and with resonators, respectively.

amplitudes of sloshing waves; to achieve this objective, the simplest solution
is to introduce baﬄes (Belakroum et al. (2010); Wang et al. (2012)), which
do not aﬀect the properties of the resonators.

Finally, we observe that if the structure were more ﬂexible, the frequencies
of sloshing waves and the eigenfrequencies of the ﬁlled-ﬂuid container would
be closer. In this case, sloshing waves could increase the vibrations of the
structure and viceversa. In such a system, the resonators would be very useful,
as they would reduce the oscillations of the container and, as a consequence,
the amplitudes of sloshing waves would not be increased by the structural
vibrations.

6 Conclusions
The paper has presented an innovative design for isolation of vibrations
of multi-scale structures consisting of ﬂuid-ﬁlled containers. The idea of
employing high-contrast multi-scale resonators has proved to be elegant and
eﬃcient to reduce vibrations of elastic containers ﬁlled with ﬂuid within a
predeﬁned interval of frequencies. Another example of the eﬀectiveness of
the resonators for a large cluster of containers is illustrated in Fig. 17, where
it is shown that in the system with resonators the vibration amplitudes are

32

Figure 17: Relative displacement between the top and the bottom of the ﬁfth container
in a large system of ﬂuid-ﬁlled containers, excited by a harmonic horizontal displacement
d0 sin (2πf t) with frequency f = 1.35 Hz, in the case without resonators (a) and in the
presence of resonators (b). The capability of the resonators to reduce the vibrations of the
system is evident.

decreased considerably and resonant eﬀects in the main structure disappear.
The analytical estimates for the choice of parameters of the resonators
have been based on the Floquet-Bloch approach, which provides a construc-
tive guidance for the design of the multi-scale resonators. The numerical
simulations have been carried out in the full ﬂuid-solid interaction mode,
with the ﬂuid velocity and pressure satisfying the Navier-Stokes equations.
Frequency response analyses have been performed in the framework of the
linear water wave theory, and their results have been conﬁrmed by transient
simulations both in two and three dimensions.

In the practical implementation, viscous energy dissipating dampers are
desirable and to be attached to the multi-scale resonators system. The
current design clearly identiﬁes the “energy sink”, and channels the energy of
vibrations away from the main body of the fuel tank. The combined system,
which includes viscous dampers, complements the design to the level of robust
practical implementation.

The mass of the resonators and the stiﬀness of the connecting ﬂexural links
can be changed without aﬀecting the dispersion properties of the Floquet-
Bloch waves, as described in the analytical model presented in the main
text of the paper. Hence, depending on the power of the external wave, the

33

resonators can be chosen to be heavier or lighter, in order to absorb the
required amount of energy from the vibrating fuel container.

The model has high potential impact on industrial applications, concerning
in particular the protection of fuel storage tanks in petrochemical plants
subjected to seismic waves.

Acknowledgments
G.C. acknowledges the support from the Research Fund for Coal and Steel
of the European Commission, INDUSE-2-SAFETY project, grant number
RFSR-CT-2014-00025. L.A. would like to thank the University of Liverpool
for ﬁnancial support and provision of excellent research facilities. A.B.M.
would like to thank the EPSRC (UK) for its support through Programme
grant no. EP/L024926/1.

References
Banerjee, S., Kundu, T., 2007. Ultrasonic ﬁeld modeling in plates immersed

in ﬂuid. Int. J. Solids Struct. 44, 6013-6029.

Belakroum, R., Kadja, M., Mai, T.H., Maalouf, C., 2010. An eﬃcient passive
technique for reducing sloshing in rectangular tanks partially ﬁlled with
liquid. Mech. Res. Commun. 37, 341-346.

Bursi, O.S., Abbiati, G., Caracoglia, L., La Salandra, V., Di Filippo, R., Reza,
M.S., 2015. Dynamic response of coupled tanks and piping systems under
seismic loading, in: 2015 ASME Pressure Vessels & Piping Conference,
Boston.

Carta, G., Brun, M., Movchan, A.B., 2014a. Dynamic response and localiza-
tion in strongly damaged waveguides. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 470, 20140136.
Carta, G., Brun, M., Movchan, A.B., Movchan, N.V., Jones, I.S., 2014b.
Dispersion properties of vortex-type monatomic lattices. Int. J. Solids
Struct. 51(11-12), 2213-2225.

Carta, G., Brun, M., Movchan, A.B., Boiko, T., 2016. Transmission and
localisation in ordered and randomly-perturbed structured ﬂexural systems.
Int. J. Eng. Sci. 98, 126-152.

34

Cho, D.S., Kim, B.H., Kim, J.-H., Vladimir, N., Choi, T.M., 2015. Frequency
response of rectangular plate structures in contact with ﬂuid subjected to
harmonic point excitation force. Thin Wall. Struct. 95, 276-286.

Frandsen, J.B., 2004. Sloshing motions in excited tanks. J. Comput. Phys.

196(1), 53-87.

Fuller, C.R., Fahy, F.J., 1982. Characteristics of wave propagation and energy
distributions in cylindrical elastic shells ﬁlled with ﬂuid. J. Sound Vib.
81(4), 501-518.

Graham, E.W., Rodriguez, A.M., 1952. The characteristics of fuel motion

which aﬀect airplane dynamics. J. Appl. Mech. 19(3), 381-388.

Housner, G.W., 1957. Dynamic pressures on accelerated ﬂuid containers. Bull.

Seism. Soc. Am. 47(1), 15-35.

Housner, G.W., 1963. The dynamic behavior of water tanks. Bull. Seism. Soc.

Am. 53(2), 381-387.

Ibrahim, R.A., 2005. Liquid Sloshing Dynamics: Theory and Applications,

Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Jiang, M.-R., Ren, B., Wang, G.-Y., Wang, Y.-X., 2014. Laboratory investi-
gation of the hydroelastic eﬀect on liquid sloshing in rectangular tanks. J.
Hydrodyn. 26(5), 751-761.

Krausmann, E., Cruz, A.M., Aﬀeltranger, B., 2010. The impact of the 12 May
2008 Wenchuan earthquake on industrial facilities. J. Loss Prev. Process
Ind. 23, 242-248.

Kuznetsov, N., Maz’ya, V., Vainberg, B., 2002. Linear Water Waves: A

Mathematical Approach, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Li, Y., Wang, J., 2012. A supplementary, exact solution of an equivalent
mechanical model for a sloshing ﬂuid in a rectangular tank. J. Fluids Struct.
31, 147-151.

Li, Y., Di, Q., Gong, Y., 2012. Equivalent mechanical models of sloshing
ﬂuid in arbitrary-section aqueducts. Earthquake Eng. Struct. Dyn. 41,
1069-1087.

35

Liao, C.-Y., Ma, C.-C., 2016. Vibration characteristics of rectangular plate in

compressible inviscid ﬂuid. J. Sound Vib. 362, 228-251.

Mead, D.M., 1996. Wave propagation in continuous periodic structures:
Research contributions from Southampton, 1964-1995. J. Sound Vib. 190(3),
495-524.

Mencik, J.-M., Ichchou, M.N., 2007. Wave ﬁnite elements in guided elastody-

namics with internal ﬂuid. Int. J. Solids Struct. 44, 2148-2167.

Païdoussis, M.P., 1998. Fluid-Structure Interactions: Slender Structures and

Axial Flow, Vol. 1, Academic Press, San Diego.

Païdoussis, M.P., 2004. Fluid-Structure Interactions: Slender Structures and

Axial Flow, Vol. 2, Elsevier Academic Press, London.

Pal, P., Bhattacharyya, S.K., 2010. Sloshing in partially ﬁlled liquid containers
- Numerical and experimental study for 2-D problems. J. Sound Vib. 329,
4466-4485.

Sorokin, S.V., Nielsen, J.B., Olhoﬀ, N., 2004. Green’s matrix and the boundary
integral equation method for the analysis of vibration and energy ﬂow in
cylindrical shells with and without internal ﬂuid loading. J. Sound Vib.
271, 815-847.

Ursell, F., 1958. Forced small-amplitude water waves: A comparison of theory
and experiment, Massachusetts Institute of Technology Hydrodynamics
Laboratory, Boston.

Ursell, F., 1994. Ship Hydrodynamics, Water Waves and Asymptotics, World

Scientiﬁc, Singapore.

Veletsos, A.S., 1984. Seismic response and design of liquid storage tanks, in:
Guidelines for the Seismic Design of Oil and Gas Pipeline Systems. ASCE,
New York, pp. 255-370.

Wang, J.D., Lo, S.H., Zhou, D., 2012. Liquid sloshing in rigid cylindrical
container with multiple rigid annular baﬄes: Free vibration. J. Fluids
Struct. 34, 138-156.

36

Washizu, K., Nakayama, T., Ikegawa, M., Tanaka, Y., Adachi, T., 1984. Some
ﬁnite element techniques for the analysis of non-linear sloshing problems,
in: Gallagher, R.H., Oden, J.T., Zienkiewicz, O.C., Kawahara, M. (Eds.),
Finite Elements in Fuids. John Wiley, New York, pp. 357-376.

37

