Learning Gaze Transitions from Depth to Improve Video Saliency Estimation

G. Leifman1, D. Rudoy, T. Swedish1, E. Bayro-Corrochano and R. Raskar1 ∗

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
1

 
 
]

V
C
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
9
6
6
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

In this paper we introduce a novel Depth-Aware Video
Saliency approach to predict human focus of attention when
viewing RGBD videos on regular 2D screens. We train a
generative convolutional neural network which predicts a
saliency map for a frame, given the ﬁxation map of the
previous frame. Saliency estimation in this scenario is
highly important since in the near future 3D video con-
tent will be easily acquired and yet hard to display. This
can be explained, on the one hand, by the dramatic im-
provement of 3D-capable acquisition equipment. On the
other hand, despite the considerable progress in 3D dis-
play technologies, most of the 3D displays are still expen-
sive and require wearing special glasses. To evaluate the
performance of our approach, we present a new compre-
hensive database of eye-ﬁxation ground-truth for RGBD
videos. Our experiments indicate that integrating depth into
video saliency calculation is beneﬁcial. We demonstrate
that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods for
video saliency, achieving 15% relative improvement.

1. Introduction

In recent years we have witnessed a dramatic improve-
ment of 3D-capable acquisition equipment; 3D cameras,
e.g. Kinect and RealSense, have become highly popular and
affordable. Moreover, in the near future many laptops and
tablets are expected to be shipped with integrated 3D cam-
eras. We also see a considerable progress in 3D display
technologies, e.g. [13]. However, high-quality 3D displays
are still expensive and not easily accessible to the aver-
age consumer. Combining the above two factors leads to
a world where the 3D content is easy to acquire but hard
to display. Thus we predict human foci of attention when
viewing 3D content on regular 2D screens.

Saliency detection in video sequences has attracted a lot
of attention in recent years due to its contribution for var-
ious computer vision applications, which include segmen-
tation, classiﬁcation, key-frame selection, retargeting and
compression. 3D visual information supplies a powerful
cue for saliency analysis. This has been shown by numer-

∗ 1 MIT Media Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Ground-truth

Our approach

Rudoy et al. [38]

Figure 1: Our depth-aware video saliency is more similar to
the ground-truth than the state-of-the-art method [38].

ous studies that investigate the effect of depth information
for image and video saliency [4, 20, 26, 33, 34]. The eye
movement patterns in 3D stereoscopic moving sequences
have been recently investigated as well [15, 16] and were
proven to differ from the eye movement when viewing the
same content on a 2D screen. This difference is beyond the
scope of this paper since we focus on the scenarios where
depth information exists but is not displayed to the viewer.
We propose a novel Depth-Aware Video Saliency ap-
proach that exploits depth information to establish saliency
in video sequences (see Figure 1). Integrating depth infor-
mation as a simple prior into video saliency algorithms (e.g.
increasing the saliency of close objects) is insufﬁcient due
to the ambiguity of depth impact on saliency. As demon-
strated in Figure 2, in some cases the closest object attracts
the most attention, while in other cases distant objects are
the salient ones.

To determine the correct impact of depth on saliency, we
train a generative convolutional neural network. The net-
work predicts a saliency map for a frame, given the map of
the previous frame. This prediction resolves the ambiguity

1

sive comparison on state-of-the-art techniques. This sec-
tion discusses two saliency aspects closely related to our
research: video saliency and depth-aware saliency.
Video Saliency: Most existing motion saliency methods
are based on image attention models by taking into account
simple motion cues. For instance, Guo et al. [8] adopt an
efﬁcient method based on spectral analysis of the frequen-
cies in the video. Similarly, Cui et al. [5] concentrate on
motion saliency only by analyzing the Fourier spectrum of
the video along X-T and Y-T planes. Le Meur et al. [27]
propose a spatio-temporal computational model, which in-
corporates several visual features by combining achromatic,
chromatic and temporal saliency maps. Kienzle et al. [23]
learn a ﬁxation operator from human eye movements col-
lected under video free-viewing, then learn action classi-
ﬁcation models. Mahadevan and Vasconcelos [29] model
video patches as dynamic textures, to handle complicated
backgrounds and a moving camera. Seo and Milanfar [40]
propose using self-resemblance in static and space-time
saliency detection. Rahtu et al. [36] apply a sliding window
on video frames comparing the contrast between the feature
distribution of consecutive windows. Kim et al. [24] extend
the center-surround approach for images to video by adding
another dimension. Mathe et al. [31] present a large scale
dataset annotated with human eye movements under various
task constraints and show how to train an effective human
ﬁxation detector based on this set. Hou and Zhang [14] pro-
pose using incremental coding length to measure the rarity
of features. Zhong et al. [47] use optical ﬂows based on the
dynamic consistency of motion. Rudoy et al. [38] narrow
their focus to a sparse set of candidate gaze locations and
then use learning to predict conditional gaze transitions over
time. Zhou et al. [48] introduce motion saliency method
that combines various low-level features with region-based
contrast analysis to generate low-frame-rate videos.
Depth-Aware Saliency: Compared to the number of
saliency papers on 2D images and 2D videos, only a small
amount of work on 3D content visual attention can be
found. For example, Jansen et al. [19] investigate the in-
ﬂuence of disparity on viewing behavior in the observation
of 2D and 3D still images. Hakkinen et al. [9] examine
the difference in the eye movement patterns between view-
ing of 2D and 3D versions of the same video content. Liu
et al. [28] examine visual features at ﬁxated positions for
stereo images with a natural content. Wang et al. [44] ex-
amine “depth-bias” in the task-free viewing of still stereo-
scopic synthetic stimuli. A review of 3D visual attention
papers is presented in [43].

In our research we assume that depth information ex-
ists but is not displayed to the viewer. Thus, we are less
concerned about the impact of 3D viewing experience on
the human visual perception. We are interested in exploit-
ing depth for saliency estimation, when the stimuli are two-

(a) close = salient

(b) distant = salient

Figure 2: An ambiguous impact of depth on saliency. In
some cases, the closest object is the salient one (a). In other
cases, the fact that the object is distant increases its saliency
(b).

of depth impact by learning its inﬂuence on the saliency.

To the best of our knowledge, a comprehensive eye
tracking database for video sequences containing depth in-
formation is yet to be developed. To evaluate the perfor-
mance of our approach we introduce Depth-Aware Video
Saliency (DAViS) dataset. DAViS dataset includes videos
that represent the scenarios where depth-aware saliency is
beneﬁcial. The ground-truth was established by recording
eye-ﬁxations while viewing the video on regular screens,
ignoring the depth information. Moreover, to establish an
objective baseline for the comparison we incorporate depth
into the video saliency approach recently proposed by [38].

Our contribution is threefold.
• First, we introduce a novel depth-aware video saliency
approach and implement it using a generative convolu-
tional neural network. We show that our approach out-
performs state-of-the-art methods for video saliency.

• Second, we present a new comprehensive dataset of

RGBD videos with eye-ﬁxation ground-truth.

• Third, we experimentally demonstrate that integrating
depth information into saliency estimation framework,
which is based on learning, improves its accuracy.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion 2 reviews the previous work on saliency. Section 3
describes our database and the baseline algorithm for depth-
aware saliency. Section 4 introduces our depth-aware video
saliency approach. Section 5 presents our experimental re-
sults. Section 6 concludes with a discussion of the work.

2. Related Work

Researchers have studied human visual attention for
decades. We refer the readers to [3] for a recent comprehen-

dimensional. To the best of our knowledge there is no such
previous work for video saliency.

In the domain of still images, integrating depth informa-
tion into the saliency model was ﬁrst proposed more than
a decade ago by Ouerhani et al. [34]. They extend the ap-
proach of [18] and treat depth as just another channel, along
with color and other cues.

The recent dramatic improvement of 3D-capable acqui-
sition devices has prompted many researchers to ﬁnd more
effective ways to exploit depth for image saliency calcu-
lation. Ciptadi et al. [4] explicitly construct 3D layout
and shape features from the depth measurements. Niu et
al. [33] exploit binocular images to estimate a disparity map
and only use depth data to identify salient objects. Lang
et al. [26] present a depth prior for saliency learned from
human gaze information. This saliency prior produces a
saliency map that is then either directly added or multiplied
by the saliency results of other methods. A novel saliency
method, which is based on an anisotropic center-surround
difference, is proposed in [20]. Desingh et al. [6] verify that
depth really matters on a small dataset and propose to fuse
saliency maps, produced by appearance and depth cues in-
dependently, through non-linear support vector regression.
Finally, Peng et al. [35] propose a saliency model, where
depth and appearance information from multiple layers is
taken into account simultaneously, rather than simply fus-
ing depth-induced saliency with color-produced saliency.

3. Baseline Dataset and Algorithm

Before presenting our novel depth-aware video saliency
approach we discuss a baseline which is required for its
evaluation. Providing a fair performance evaluation of our
approach requires the following two components, which are
described in the rest of this section:

1. dataset of RGBD videos containing ground-truth of

human attention

2. state-of-the-art video saliency estimation algorithm,

extended to take into account depth information

3.1. DAViS Dataset

An overview of eye-tracking datasets can be found
in [45]. To evaluate the performance of our approach a com-
prehensive database containing a ground-truth of human at-
tention on RGBD video sequences is needed. We are not
aware of such a dataset. Thus, we built a new dataset of
RGBD videos and capture human attention when display-
ing the RGB information only. We call it the DAViS dataset
and we intend to make it publicly available.
Collecting the videos: The videos in our dataset should
represent the scenarios where depth-aware saliency is ben-
eﬁcial. Thus, we focus on RGBD videos acquired by built-
in phone/tablet/laptop depth/stereo cameras or 3D sensors,

(a) human ﬁxations

(b) probability map

Figure 3: Gaze probability map. Given a sparse ground-
truth set of human ﬁxations, marked with yellow ’+’ per
each viewer, we convert it into a dense probability map by
convolving with a constant-size Gaussian kernel (σ is 5%
of the frame diagonal).

such as Kinect or LiDAR. We consider acquisitions devices
that can be either static or installed on moving vehicles or
robots. Thus, we include video sequences of static and dy-
namic scenes, acquired by static and dynamic sensors, in-
doors and outdoors. We cover scenarios such as video con-
ference, surveillance, tracking and obstacle avoidance.

To achieve diversity, we included in the DAViS dataset
RGBD videos that were selected from seven publicly avail-
able databases [22, 25, 37, 41, 42, 46, 49]. These datasets
were not designed for saliency detection, but rather for other
tasks, such as reconstruction, tracking or action recognition.
Thus, they lack the ground-truth of human attention. We
have included only videos where the color and depth frames
are fully synchronized. After ignoring videos with missing
regions of the depth map, we included in the DAViS dataset
54 videos with varying durations ranging from 25 to 200
seconds. The videos were converted to a 30 frame-rate, re-
sulting in approximately 100K frames across all videos.
Building the ground-truth: To build a ground-truth for
DAViS dataset we conducted a comprehensive user study.
To identify where participants were looking while watching
the ﬁlms, we monitor their eye movements using a Gaze-
point GP3 Eye Tracker. Video presentation was controlled
using the Gazepoint Analysis Standard software.

For the purpose of the study we recruited 91 participants
(52 males, 39 females). Ages ranged from 20 to 67 with
the mean age of 26. All the participants had normal or
corrected-to-normal vision and were na¨ıve to the underly-
ing purposes of the experiment.

First, we performed a calibration procedure by asking the
participants to look at ﬁve red dots appearing on the screen.
Then, we informed the participants that they would watch a
series of short videos. We displayed the videos in random
order at a viewing distance varying between 70 and 110 cm.
Finally, to get a dense probability map, we convolved
the sparse set of ﬁxations from all the participants with a
constant-size Gaussian kernel. Figure 3 demonstrates an
example of the ﬁxation set and its resulting probability map.

Quality of the ground-truth: To assess the quality of the
collected ground-truth we quantify the homogeneity of the
human ﬁxations. In other words, we measure how much the
ﬁxation map “explains itself.” This quality measure also
serves as an upper bound for saliency prediction.

To calculate the quality, we randomly divide the set of
individual ﬁxation maps, F, into two subsets and the prob-
ability maps of each subset are compared using χ2 metric.
We repeat this random process N times and average the re-
sults to obtain the homogeneity score for each frame:

Q = 1 −

1
N

N

Xi=1

2
χ

(M (Fi), M (F \ Fi)),

(1)

where Fi ⊆ F is a random subset of the ﬁxation set F in
the i − th iteration and M (F) is the dense probability map
of F. The ﬁnal quality score for each video is calculated by
averaging the scores over all the frames.

We compare the quality of our ground-truth to qual-
ity of the DIEM (Dynamic Images and Eye Movements)
dataset [32]. DIEM is a well-known dataset, which has been
widely used for evaluation of video saliency techniques. It
includes 84 high-deﬁnition videos of varying styles. The
dataset is provided together with gaze tracks of about 50
participants per video. The video clips included in the
DIEM dataset lack any depth information.

Figure 4 compares the quality of our gaze tracking
ground-truth (DAViS) to the quality of the ﬁxation data in
the DIEM dataset. Perfect correlation, meaning that all
the participants followed the exact same focus point on the
screen, corresponds to a score of 1.

The DIEM dataset contains movies that have been pro-
fessionally ﬁlmed and usually edited with a goal to attract
human attention to speciﬁc objects on the screen. This is
especially noticed in commercials and movie trailers. Thus,
we expect high homogeneity of the human ﬁxations.
In-
deed, Figure 4(a) demonstrates the average score of 0.87
varying from 0.78 to 0.93 between the different movies.

DAViS dataset includes mostly unedited clips, ﬁlmed ei-
ther by amateurs or automatically. As explained above, we
have intentionally included such videos since they represent
the scenarios in which depth-aware saliency is beneﬁcial.
Thus, our dataset is more “challenging” in this regard, and
we cannot always expect people to agree on one speciﬁc
focus of attention. Still, as shown in Figure 4(b), the aver-
age score of the DAViS dataset is 0.84 varying from 0.74
to 0.91. These comparable results indicate that most people
agree on the same limited number of attention foci, even
when the videos were ﬁlmed without trying to draw human
attention to speciﬁc objects. We also verify visually that the
viewers are not looking at a single point most of the time.

We believe that our DAViS dataset represents the wide
range of common scenarios where depth-aware saliency is
beneﬁcial. The size of the DAViS dataset (54 videos) was

(a) DIEM dataset [32]

(b) DAViS dataset

Figure 4: Quality of the gaze ground-truth. To assess the
quality of the collected ground-truth we measure how much
the ﬁxation map “explains itself.” (Each bar corresponds to
one video; the red line indicates the average). The quality
of the ﬁxation maps in our DAViS dataset is comparable to
the one of the DIEM dataset [32].

chosen to be similar to the other two most popular datasets
for video saliency: DIEM [32] and CRCNS [17], which in-
clude 85 and 50 videos, respectively.

3.2. Baseline Depth-Aware Algorithm

To establish a fair and objective baseline for the compari-
son we extend the algorithm recently proposed by [38] with
depth information in its key stages. Let us ﬁrst summarize
the original scheme and then explain our extensions.

Original scheme: As demonstrated in Figure 5, ﬁrst, a
sparse set of candidates is generated for each frame. Then, a
classiﬁer that predicts gaze transitions between various can-
didates of different frames is trained. The feature space of
the classiﬁer accounts for the candidates’ properties (e.g.
saliency magnitude, motion magnitude) and also captures
the relation between the candidates (e.g. the distance be-
tween their locations). Next, applying the trained classi-
ﬁer, the gaze transition probability from each candidate of
a source frame to each candidate of a target frame is calcu-
lated. Finally, a saliency map is generated for each frame
based on transition probabilities.

The candidate locations are generated for all video
frames based on three cues. First, Graph-Based Visual
Saliency (GBVS) [10] is calculated for each frame. Sec-
ond, some high-level cues (e.g. human ﬁgures and faces)
are added to the frame saliency. Third, to account for mo-
tion the optical ﬂow is calculated between the consecutive
frames. Finally, each candidate location is represented by
a Gaussian blob, calculated by applying mean-shift cluster-

estimation using color and depth (e.g. [11]). However, the
complexity of such techniques is high, making them im-
practical to apply to videos. Third, when calculating the
feature vectors associated with each candidate pair we ex-
ploit depth information, by adding a signed difference in
candidates’ depths to the set of the geometric features.

All the candidates in the source and destination frames
are examined and labeled as positive or negative. The tran-
sitions are positive when they connect between the candi-
dates that are aligned with the human ﬁxations. Other tran-
sitions are marked as negative.

An SVM classiﬁer is trained on the feature vectors and
their corresponding labels. The output of the classiﬁer is the
signed distance from the separating hyper-plane. This dis-
tance is proportional to the conﬁdence C(s, d) of transition
from the candidate s of the source frame to the candidate
d of the destination frame. The overall probability P (d) of
gaze to reach the destination candidate d is calculated by
combining all positively classiﬁed transitions to candidate
d. Thus, ignoring transitions with negative conﬁdence, we
calculate P (d) as follows:

P (d) =

1

|NS| Xs∈NS

S(s) · max(cid:0)C(s, d), 0(cid:1),

(2)

where NS is the set of all the sources and S(s) is the
saliency of the source candidate.

Finally, the saliency of pixel p in the destination frame
is given by a sum of constant-size Gaussians around each
destination candidate d, scaled up by the probability P (d):

S(p) =

1

|ND| Xd∈ND

P (d) · exp(cid:18)−

||p − d||2

2σ2 (cid:19) ,

(3)

where ND is the set of all the destination candidates in a
given frame and σ equals 5% of the frame diagonal.

4. Our Approach

This section presents our approach for depth-aware
video saliency estimation, which is based on the following
three principles. First, in video the gaze usually slightly
varies between frames, and when it does change signiﬁ-
cantly, it is constrained to a limited number of foci of atten-
tion. Second, people usually follow the action by shifting
their gaze to a new interesting location. Thus, we consider
a sparse candidate set of salient locations and use learning
to predict transitions between them over time. Third, in
addition to the above two principles, which are common
to many previous video saliency approaches, we claim that
depth perception has an impact on human attention. This
claim is supported by our experimental results as shown in
Section 5. Note that in some cases, the closest object at-
tracts the most attention (Figure 2(a)) and in other cases, a
distant object causes humans to concentrate their attention

Figure 5: Saliency estimation using explicit transition
prediction.
Initially, the features are calculated on the
source candidates (previous frame saliency) and the target
ones (detected). The aggregated features that represent gaze
transitions are fed to a trained classiﬁer that outputs a prob-
ability of transition to target candidates. Finally, the proba-
bilities are integrated into a saliency map.

ing and Gaussian ﬁtting on the normalized saliency maps
and on the differences in the optical ﬂow magnitude.

After generating a set of candidates in each frame, the
gaze transition probability from the candidates of two con-
secutive frames is calculated. All the possible pairs of can-
didates are considered and each pair is associated with a
feature vector. The feature vector consists of (1) the mean
saliency of the candidate neighborhood, (2) Difference-of-
Gaussians of the optical ﬂow vectors and of their magni-
tude, (3) discrete candidate labels: face, body and center
and (4) geometric features: the distance between the can-
didates and the distance from the candidate location to the
center of the frame. A classiﬁer is trained on a subset of
videos based on the eye-tracking ground-truth. Finally, the
transition probabilities are calculated by applying the clas-
siﬁer on the entire dataset.

Depth-aware extension: We incorporate depth informa-
tion in three key stages: static saliency estimation, optical
ﬂow calculation and gaze transition modeling. Our experi-
ments show that all three improvements are vital.

First, depth-aware image saliency is used for generat-
ing candidate locations. We calculate depth-aware saliency
based on a multi-stage RGBD model recently proposed
in [35]. This technique accounts for both depth and appear-
ance cues derived from low-level feature contrast, mid-level
region grouping, and high-level prior enhancement. Sec-
ond, depth is used for the optical ﬂow calculation between
consecutive frames. Instead of calculating optical ﬂow on
three color channels, we use an additional channel — the
depth. This way our motion estimation is more accurate
than in the previous methods, especially for objects mov-
ing on a similarly colored background. We have considered
implementing more sophisticated methods for dense motion

Figure 6: Saliency reconstruction using a generative convolutional neural network. The input is the saliency calculated
for the previous frame and additional information from the current frame. Then the data is encoded and only the saliency of
the current frame is reconstructed.

on it (Figure 2(b)). To resolve this ambiguity, we propose
incorporating depth into the learning process.

To realize the above three principles, we propose to train
a generative convolutional neural network to predict the
saliency for each frame. According to the ﬁrst and the sec-
ond principles, the gaze transition between frames is lim-
ited to a small number of locations. Therefore, it is safe
to assume that it is feasible to learn a compact representa-
tion for gaze transition between frames. As shown in Fig-
ure 6, our network’s input is the saliency calculated for the
previous frame and additional information from the current
frame. Then the data is encoded in a compact way, which
represents the gaze transition between frames and only the
saliency of the next frame is reconstructed.

Work on generative models typically addresses the prob-
lem of unsupervised learning of a compressed, distributed
representation (encoding) for a set of data. Such networks
are usually used to generate samples from a hidden rep-
resentation. The most known examples are auto-encoders
based on Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBMs) [12] and
Deep Boltzmann Machines (DBMs) [39]. A basic auto-
encoder is an artiﬁcial neural network used for learning data
coding. Following the notation from [30], ﬁrst, the input
x is mapped to the latent representation h using a func-
tion h = σ(W x + b). This compressed representation is
then used to reconstruct the input by a reverse mapping of
ˆx = σ(W ′h + b′). The weights of W are optimized, min-
imizing an appropriate cost function over a given training
set. Usually the same weights for encoding the input and
the decoding are used, i.e. W ′ = W T .

Conventional auto-encoders are fully connected and con-
sequently ignore the spatial image structure. This intro-
duces redundancy in the parameters, forcing each feature to
be global. We base our architecture on convolutional auto-

encoder structure [30, 1], whose weights are shared among
all locations in the input, preserving spatial locality.

In the aforementioned auto-encoders, an input image x
is passed through the hidden layers, computing activations
at all the layers to obtain the output image ˆx. Then, the
deviation error from the input e = x − ˆx is calculated and
back-propagated through the network.

As shown in Figure 6, our generative convolutional neu-
ral network gets as an input a set of seven images X =
1 and reconstructs only one image. For each frame,
{xi}7
the set X consists of the following seven channels: RGB (3
images), optical ﬂow (2 images), depth map and a saliency
map S(t − 1) calculated for the previous frame. The out-
put of the network is an estimation of a single saliency map
ˆS(t) for the current frame. Therefore, the deviation error is
calculated as e = S(t) − ˆS(t), introducing an asymmetry
between the input and the output, i.e. W ′ 6= W T . Then, the
error is back-propagated through the network, updating the
weights using stochastic gradient descent. The whole pro-
cess is recursive, where we start with a saliency map S(0)
which consists of a single Gaussian located in the center of
the frame. Then the estimated saliency map ˆS(1) is fed as
an input S(1) to the network for the next frame.

Finally, following our ﬁrst principle, we strive to esti-
mate a sparse set of attention foci. However, the nature of
our generative network is to reconstruct relatively smooth
output images. Thus, we add an output post-processing
stage to sharpen the peaks of a limited number of attention
foci. This is done by applying mean-shift clustering and
Gaussian ﬁtting which results in a mixture of Gaussians.
Architecture details: We experimented with different
network conﬁgurations and the best results are achieved by
the network shown in Figure 6. First, the input 7-channel
image is passed through an encoder. The encoder consists

of three layers of convolutions followed by max-pooling
whose sizes are 128x96, 64x48 and 32x24 with kernel sizes
of 5x5, 3x3 and 3x3, respectively. Then the data is encoded
in 256 latent variables fully connected to the encoder and
the decoder. The decoder consists of three layers of un-
pooling followed by convolution of the same sizes in re-
verse order. The un-pooling is performed according to the
scheme proposed by [7].

We used stochastic gradient descent with a ﬁxed momen-
tum of 0.9. For 200 epochs the learning rate was 10−4 and
then for an additional 200 training epochs we divided the
rate by two after every 50 epochs. The network is trained
on a subset of two-thirds of the videos and the training error
is estimated based on the eye-tracking ground-truth.

Since our saliency learning is recursive, only frames
from different videos are used simultaneously, limiting the
batch size to the number of videos in the training set. In
other words, the ﬁrst batch consists of all the ﬁrst frames,
the second batch consists of all the second frames, when
the input to the second batch is the saliency maps estimated
in the ﬁrst batch. For the simplicity of the exposition we
used the term “previous frame”; however in the implemen-
tation we use an interval of 10 frames, since it takes up to
10 frames for humans to ﬁxate on a new object.

5. Results

This section presents both quantitative and qualitative

evaluation of our technique.
Quantitative evaluation: For quantitative evaluation we
use two common metrics: area-under-curve (AUC) and χ2
distance between distributions. AUC is the area under the
Receiver Operating Characteristics (ROC) curve [2]. Hu-
man ﬁxations are considered as the positive set, while the
negative set is formed from randomly sampled points from
the image. The saliency map is then treated as a binary
classiﬁer to separate the positive samples from the negative
ones. Thresholding over the saliency map and plotting true
positive rate vs. false positive rate results in the ROC curve.
AUC considers the saliency results at the locations of
the human ﬁxations. Thus, it distinguishes purely between
a peaky saliency map and a smooth one. To view the ﬁx-
ations as samples of a distribution, rather than considering
each ﬁxation separately, similarly to [38], we prefer another
metric: χ2 distance between two distributions. The χ2 dis-
tance prefers a peaky saliency map over a smooth one.

For the χ2, perfect prediction corresponds to a score of
0. For AUC, perfect prediction corresponds to a score of 1,
while a score of 0.5 indicates the chance level. Thus, to be
consistent, we use 1 - χ2 when reporting our results.

To the best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to propose
depth-aware video saliency. Therefore, to provide a fair
evaluation we compare our approach to the extended base-
line algorithm (Sec. 3.1). We also compare our approach

Method
RGBD [35]
GBVS [10]
Center [21]
Rudoyet al. [38]
Extended baseline
Our approach (w/o depth)
Our approach (w/ depth)
Ground-truth

1 − χ2

0.53 ± 0.21
0.54 ± 0.25
0.56 ± 0.39
0.61 ± 0.26
0.64 ± 0.22
0.60 ± 0.23
0.70 ± 0.15
0.84 ± 0.05

AUC

0.66 ± 0.19
0.65 ± 0.21
0.66 ± 0.36
0.68 ± 0.23
0.70 ± 0.18
0.68 ± 0.21
0.75 ± 0.14
0.88 ± 0.06

Table 1: Quantitative Evaluation. We compare our
method to depth-aware image saliency (RGBD) [35], image
saliency (GBVS) [10], a Gaussian placed in the center of
the frame (Center) [21], video saliency (Rudoy et al.) [38]
and the extended baseline algorithm from Section 3.1. The
upper bound (Ground-truth) for the saliency prediction is
given in Equation 1. According to both χ2 and AUC mea-
sures our method is the closest to the ground-truth, outper-
forming other state-of-the-art methods. Moreover, it is clear
that employing depth in video saliency algorithms which
are based on learning improves their accuracy.

to video saliency technique [38], image saliency approach
(GBVS) [10], depth-aware image saliency (RGBD) [35]
and a Gaussian placed in the center [21].

Table 1 demonstrates a quantitative comparison using
two different metrics: χ2 and AUC. The “Ground-truth” in
the bottom row is the upper bound for the saliency predic-
tion, which measures how much the ground-truth ﬁxation
map “explains itself” (Equation 1). We use 38 out of 54
RGBD videos in DAViS dataset for training, while the other
16 videos form the testing set. To quantify the impact of
depth, we also carried out an experiment where we removed
the depth information from the input to our approach.

The results of our depth-aware methods are the clos-
est to the ground-truth. According to both χ2 and AUC
measures, the relative improvement over the state-of-the-art
method [38] is approximately 15% (0.70/0.61). We also see
that employing depth in video saliency algorithms, which
are based on learning, improves their accuracy; both the
extended baseline (Sec. 3.1) and our approach outperform
previous approaches. Finally, the standard deviation of our
approach is lower than in all other methods, making it more
reliable than the others.

Note that the trivial approach of a Gaussian, placed in the
center of the frame, produces fairly good average results due
to two facts. First, when ﬁlming the videos we usually at-
tempt to place the most interesting composition in the cen-
ter of the frame. Second, when viewing relatively boring
scenes we tend to move the gaze to the center of the frame.
Thus, when comparing this trivial approach to the ground-

truth we see relatively a high score in average. However,
the standard deviation of this score is almost twice as high
as the standard deviation of other methods, which makes the
center-based Gaussian approach highly unreliable.
Qualitative evaluation: Figure 7 demonstrates a qualita-
tive comparison of our approach to the ground-truth and
other saliency techniques.
In both cases the depth-aware
saliency map is more visually consistent with the ground-
truth than the maps of the other methods. For exam-
ple, while watching a conversation between two persons,
the gaze shifts from one face to the other, which is accu-
rately captured by depth-aware saliency.The complete video
saliency results are given in the supplemental material.

6. Conclusion

In this paper, we proposed a novel depth-aware video
saliency method, which predicts human foci of attention
when viewing 3D video content on 2D screens. Our method
employs a generative convolutional neural network to re-
construct saliency for each frame by implicitly learning the
gaze transition from the previous frame. The network was
trained to predict the saliency of the next frame by learning
from depth, color, motion and saliency of the current frame.
Experimental results show that exploiting depth is beneﬁ-
cial for video saliency, allowing our method to outperform
previously proposed state-of-the-art methods.

Moreover, we presented DAViS dataset, comprehen-
sive dataset of eye-ﬁxation ground-truth for RGBD videos.
DAViS dataset contains videos representing common sce-
narios where depth-aware saliency is beneﬁcial. To record
eye-ﬁxation ground-truth, we conducted a comprehensive
user study, where the RGBD videos were displayed on reg-
ular screens ignoring depth information.

We believe that the constructed dataset and our work are
helpful to stimulate further research in the area. In the fu-
ture we plan to test our methods in various applications, e.g.
video editing, video compression and video summarization.
We also plan to adapt our technique to stereo videos.

References

[1] M. Baccouche, F. Mamalet, C. Wolf, C. Garcia, and
A. Baskurt.
Spatio-temporal convolutional sparse auto-
encoder for sequence classiﬁcation. In BMVC, pages 1–12,
2012.

[2] A. Borji and L. Itti. Exploiting local and global patch rarities

for saliency detection. In CVPR, pages 478–485, 2012.

[3] A. Borji, D. N. Sihite, and L. Itti. Salient object detection: A

benchmark. In ECCV, pages 414–429, 2012.

[4] A. Ciptadi, T. Hermans, and J. M. Rehg. An in depth view

of saliency. In BMVC, pages 9–13, 2013.

[5] X. Cui, Q. Liu, and D. Metaxas. Temporal spectral residual:
fast motion saliency detection. In ACM int. conf. on Multi-
media, pages 617–620, 2009.

[6] K. Desingh, M. Krishna, D. Rajan, and C. Jawahar. Depth
really matters: Improving visual salient region detection with
depth. BMVC, pages 1–11, 2013.

[7] A. Dosovitskiy, J. T. Springenberg, and T. Brox. Learning
In

to generate chairs with convolutional neural networks.
CVPR, 2015.

[8] C. Guo, Q. Ma, and L. Zhang. Spatio-temporal saliency
detection using phase spectrum of quaternion fourier trans-
form. In CVPR, pages 1–8, 2008.

[9] J. H¨akkinen, T. Kawai, J. Takatalo, R. Mitsuya, and G. Ny-
man. What do people look at when they watch stereoscopic
movies? In IS&T/SPIE Electronic Imaging, 2010.

[10] J. Harel, C. Koch, and P. Perona. Graph-based visual
saliency. Advances in neural inf. proc. systems, 19:545–552,
2007.

[11] E. Herbst, X. Ren, and D. Fox. RGB-D ﬂow: Dense 3-D
In ICRA, pages

motion estimation using color and depth.
2276–2282, 2013.

[12] G. E. Hinton and R. R. Salakhutdinov.

dimensionality of data with neural networks.
313(5786):504–507, 2006.

Reducing the
Science,

[13] M. Hirsch, G. Wetzstein, and R. Raskar. A compressive light
ﬁeld projection system. In SIGGRAPH Emerging Technolo-
gies, page 2, 2014.

[14] X. Hou and L. Zhang. Dynamic visual attention: Searching
for coding length increments. Advances in neural informa-
tion processing systems, 21:681–688, 2008.

[15] Q. Huynh-Thu, M. Barkowsky, and P. Le Callet. The im-
portance of visual attention in improving the 3d-tv viewing
experience: overview and new perspectives. IEEE Transac-
tions on Broadcasting, 57(2):421–431, 2011.

[16] Q. Huynh-Thu and L. Schiatti. Examination of 3D visual
attention in stereoscopic video content. In IS&T/SPIE Elec-
tronic Imaging, 2011.

[17] L. Itti. Automatic foveation for video compression using a
neurobiological model of visual attention. Image Processing,
IEEE Transactions on, 13(10):1304–1318, 2004.

[18] L. Itti, C. Koch, and E. Niebur. A model of saliency-based vi-
sual attention for rapid scene analysis. TPAMI, 20(11):1254–
1259, 1998.

[19] L. Jansen, S. Onat, and P. K¨onig. Inﬂuence of disparity on
ﬁxation and saccades in free viewing of natural scenes. Jour-
nal of Vision, 9(1):29, 2009.

[20] R. Ju, L. Ge, W. Geng, T. Ren, and G. Wu. Depth saliency
In ICIP,

based on anisotropic center-surround difference.
2014.

[21] T. Judd, K. Ehinger, F. Durand, and A. Torralba. Learning
to predict where humans look. In ICCV, pages 2106–2113,
2010.

[22] K. Karsch, C. Liu, and S. Kang. Depthtransfer: Depth ex-
traction from video using non-parametric sampling. TPAMI,
pages 775–788, 2014.

[23] W. Kienzle, B. Sch¨olkopf, F. Wichmann, and M. Franz. How
to ﬁnd interesting locations in video: A spatiotemporal inter-
est point detector learned from human eye movements.
In
Pattern Recognition: 29th DAGM Symposium, pages 405–
414, 2007.

Ground-truth

GBVS [10]

Rudoy et al. [38]

Our w/o depth

Depth

RGBD [35]

Extended baseline

Our w/ depth

Depth-aware saliency maps are similar to the ground-truth, detecting interesting motion in the background.

Ground-truth

GBVS [10]

Rudoy et al. [38]

Our w/o depth

Depth

RGBD [35]

Extended baseline

Our w/ depth

While watching a two-person conversation, the gaze shifts from one face the other, which is accurately captured by depth-aware saliency.

Figure 7: Qualitative evaluation on DAViS dataset. We compare our results to the ground-truth and to the additional
three saliency methods: video saliency (Rudoy et al.) [38], image saliency (GBVS) [10] and depth-aware image saliency
(RGBD) [35]. The left side of the ﬁgure demonstrates the input RGB frame, the depth data and the ground-truth, while the
saliency results are shown on the right side. Both depth-aware methods outperform other state-of-the art methods. Our novel
approach produces more concise results, and this fact is supported by the low standard deviation in Table 1.

[24] W. Kim, C. Jung, and C. Kim. Spatiotemporal saliency
detection and its applications in static and dynamic scenes.
IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Tech-
nology, 21(4):446–456, 2011.

[25] K. Lai, L. Bo, and D. Fox. Unsupervised feature learning for

3d scene labeling. In ICRA, pages 3050–3057, 2014.

[26] C. Lang, T. V. Nguyen, H. Katti, K. Yadati, M. Kankanhalli,
and S. Yan. Depth matters: Inﬂuence of depth cues on visual
saliency. In ECCV, pages 101–115, 2012.

[27] O. Le Meur, P. Le Callet, and D. Barba. Predicting visual
ﬁxations on video based on low-level visual features. Vision
research, 47(19):2483–2498, 2007.

[28] Y. Liu, L. K. Cormack, and A. C. Bovik. Natural scene statis-

tics at stereo ﬁxations. In Symposium on Eye-Tracking Re-
search&Applications, pages 161–164. ACM, 2010.

[29] V. Mahadevan and N. Vasconcelos. Spatiotemporal saliency

in dynamic scenes. TPAMI, 32(1):171–177, 2010.

[30] J. Masci, U. Meier, D. Cires¸an, and J. Schmidhuber. Stacked
convolutional auto-encoders for hierarchical feature extrac-
tion. In ICANN, pages 52–59, 2011.

[31] S. Mathe and C. Sminchisescu. Dynamic eye movement
datasets and learnt saliency models for visual action recog-
nition. In ECCV, pages 842–856, 2012.

[32] P. Mital, T. Smith, R. Hill, and J. Henderson. Clustering of
gaze during dynamic scene viewing is predicted by motion.
Cognitive Computation, 3(1):5–24, 2011.

[33] Y. Niu, Y. Geng, X. Li, and F. Liu. Leveraging stereopsis for

saliency analysis. In CVPR, pages 454–461, 2012.

[34] N. Ouerhani and H. Hugli. Computing visual attention from

scene depth. In ICPR, volume 1, pages 375–378, 2000.

[35] H. Peng, B. Li, W. Xiong, W. Hu, and R. Ji. RGBD salient
In ECCV,

object detection: A benchmark and algorithms.
pages 92–109, 2014.

[36] E. Rahtu, J. Kannala, M. Salo, and J. Heikkil¨a. Segment-
ing salient objects from images and videos. In ECCV, pages
366–379, 2010.

[37] C. Richardt, C. Stoll, N. Dodgson, H. Seidel, and
C. Theobalt. Coherent spatiotemporal ﬁltering, upsampling
and rendering of RGBZ videos. Computer Graphics Forum,
31(2), 2012.

[38] D. Rudoy, D. Goldman, E. Shechtman, and L. Zelnik-Manor.
Learning video saliency from human gaze using candidate
selection. In CVPR, pages 1147–1154, 2013.

[39] R. Salakhutdinov and G. E. Hinton. Deep boltzmann ma-

chines. In AISTATS, pages 448–455, 2009.

[40] H. J. Seo and P. Milanfar. Static and space-time visual
saliency detection by self-resemblance. Journal of vision,
9(12), 2009.

[41] N. Silberman, D. Hoiem, D. Kohli, and R. Fergus. Indoor
segmentation and support inference from RGBD images. In
ECCV, pages 746–760, 2012.

[42] J. Sturm, N. Engelhard, F. Endres, W. Burgard, and D. Cre-
mers. A benchmark for the evaluation of RGB-D slam sys-
tems. In IROS, pages 573–580, 2012.

[43] J. Wang, P. Da-Silva, P. Le-Callet, and V. Ricordel. A com-
putational model of stereoscopic 3D visual saliency. Trans-
actions on Image Processing, 22(6):2151–2165, 2013.

[44] J. Wang, P. Le Callet, S. Tourancheau, V. Ricordel, M. P.
Da Silva, et al. Study of depth bias of observers in free view-
ing of still stereoscopic synthetic stimuli. Journal of Eye
Movement Research, 5(5), 2012.

[45] S. Winkler and S. Ramanathan. Overview of eye tracking

datasets. In QoMEX, pages 212–217, 2013.

[46] J. Xiao, A. Owens, and A. Torralba. Sun3d: A database of
In

big spaces reconstructed using SFM and object labels.
ICCV, pages 1625–1632, 2013.

[47] S.-h. Zhong, Y. Liu, F. Ren, J. Zhang, and T. Ren. Video
saliency detection via dynamic consistent spatio-temporal at-
tention modelling. In AAAI, 2013.

[48] F. Zhou, S. Kang, and M. Cohen. Time-mapping using

space-time saliency. In CVPR, pages 3358–3365, 2014.

[49] Q.-Y. Zhou and V. Koltun. Dense scene reconstruction with

points of interest. TOG, 32(4):112, 2013.

