Energy Harvesting Communication System with

SOC-Dependent Energy Storage Losses

Department of Information Engineering, University of Padova - via Gradenigo 6b, 35131 Padova, Italy

Alessandro Biason and Michele Zorzi

{biasonal,zorzi}@dei.unipd.it

1

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
1

 
 
]
T
I
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
5
9
6
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—The popularity of Energy Harvesting Devices
(EHDs) has grown in the past few years, thanks to their capability
of prolonging the network lifetime. In reality, EHDs are affected
by several inefﬁciencies, e.g., energy leakage, battery degradation
or storage losses. In this work we consider an energy harvesting
transmitter with storage inefﬁciencies. In particular, we assume
that when new energy has to be stored in the battery, part of this
is wasted and the losses depend upon the current state of charge
of the device. This is a practical realistic assumption, e.g., for a
capacitor, that changes the structure of the optimal transmission
policy. We analyze the throughput maximization problem with
a dynamic programming approach and prove that, given the
battery status and the channel gain, the optimal transmission
policy is deterministic. We derive numerical results for the energy
losses in a capacitor and show the presence of a loop effect that
degrades the system performance if the optimal policy is not
considered.

I. INTRODUCTION

One of the most interesting techniques to prolong network
lifetime is Energy Harvesting (EH), that allows the nodes of
a Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) to reﬁll their batteries
with a renewable energy source, e.g., sunlight, vibrations,
wind, etc. Differently from traditional networks, where the key
aspects are energy conservation and efﬁciency, in an EH-WSN
one of the most important aspects is energy management,
i.e., in order to improve the communication performance, the
Energy Harvesting Devices (EHDs) have to correctly exploit
the available resources.

A lot of research has focused on ideal devices [1]–[4]. In
reality, EHDs have several inefﬁciencies, e.g., energy leak-
age [5], battery degradation [6], imperfect knowledge of the
State Of Charge (SOC) [7] or storage losses [8]. In this
work we focus on this last problem. In [8], Tutuncuoglu et
al. assumed that the energy losses can be described with
a ﬁxed constant in [0, 1]. Our work, instead, assumes that
the storage losses depend upon the current SOC, which is
a realistic assumption, e.g., for a capacitor [9]. Typically,
when the battery is depleted or almost fully charged, it is
not possible to store a lot of energy (high losses), whereas,
when the battery is half-charged, almost all the harvested
energy can be stored (low losses). With these considerations,
the structure of the traditional optimal transmission policy
changes. In this work we ﬁnd the new optimal policy using
a Markov Decision Process approach. Analytically, we prove
the threshold structure of the optimal policy, i.e., for every
SOC and channel gain, the optimal policy always uses the
same transmission power. We present numerical results in

order to describe the properties of the optimal policy. In
particular, we notice a loop effect (when the battery is almost
empty and does not manage to be reﬁlled), that degrades
the system performance when the optimal policy is not used.
Also, we show that the traditional optimal policy (obtained
ignoring storage losses) is strictly sub-optimal in this context.
Finally, we describe how the battery size inﬂuences the system
throughput.

The paper is organized as follows. Section II deﬁnes the
system model and the optimization problem. In Section III we
present the structure of the optimal policy. Section IV presents
our numerical results. Finally, Section V concludes the paper.

II. SYSTEM MODEL

We consider an Energy Harvesting Device (EHD) with
energy losses in the battery storage process. Time is divided
in slots of equal length. In slot k, EHD harvests Bk Joule
of energy according to some energy arrival statistic. The
harvested energy is divided in two parts: the ﬁrst fraction,
IkBk, is directly sent into the channel, whereas the second
one, (1−Ik)Bk, recharges the device battery. Ik ∈ [0, 1] is the
power splitting parameter and is dynamically chosen by the
device in each slot k. The battery has a ﬁnite size of Emax J
and the energy stored in slot k can be exploited only in a
later slot. In an ideal situation, all the energy (1 − Ik)Bk is
stored in the battery. Here instead, we consider a real battery
where only a fraction of (1 − Ik)Bk can be stored, while the
rest is wasted due to the battery inefﬁciencies, a behavior that
depends upon the current State Of Charge (SOC) Ek of the
battery. For example, in a capacitor [9], when SOC is very high
or very low, it is not possible to store a lot of energy (very
high losses), whereas, when SOC is approximately half of the
maximum storable energy, then almost all the energy can be
stored (very low losses). This inefﬁciency can be described
by a function s(y), where y is the current SOC. An example,
that was proposed in [9] and will be used as a baseline in this
work, is

s(y) = 1 − (y − Emax/2)2
βn.l.(Emax/2)2 ,

(1)

which is a symmetric function with respect to Emax/2. If the
harvested power is ω (assumed constant in a time slot), then
a power of ω · s(y) W can be converted to energy and stored
in the battery. When y = 0 or y = Emax, then only ω(1 −
1/βn.l.) W can be converted and ω/βn.l. W are wasted. Ideally,
EHD wants to operate at Ek = Emax/2 because s(Emax/2) =

2

1. βn.l. is a technology parameter strictly greater than one, e.g.,
βn.l. = 1.05. When βn.l. → ∞, we have an ideal battery. We
remark that the wasted power cannot be used in any other way,
e.g., sent directly into the channel, because it is necessary to
recharge the battery. In this paper, we use (1), proposed in [9],
as an approximate model to describe the energy losses in a
capacitor. However, our analytical results do not depend upon
the particular structure of s(y), and can be used with other
models as well.
The energy drawn from the battery and used for transmis-
sion in slot k is Pk ≤ Ek. Transmitting with power ρ provides
a reward g(ρ, h), where h is a parameter related to the channel
status. The reward function g(ρ, h) is increasing and concave
in ρ. An example, that we use as baseline in our numerical
evaluation, is g(ρ, h) = ln(1 + Λhρ), i.e., g(ρ, h) represents
the transmission rate (Λ is an SNR scaling factor). Thus, in
slot k the reward is g(Pk + BkIk, Hk) (Hk represents the
channel gain in slot k, i.i.d. over time and constant in a single
slot), i.e., it is given by the sum of the energy drawn from the
battery, Pk, and the part of the harvested energy directly sent
into the channel, BkIk. A time slot is structured as follows. At
the beginning of the slot, EHD decides Pk and Ik according
to its current energy level Ek and to the channel gain Hk.
During the slot, the device transmits and harvests energy with
constant power. We assume we have only a causal energy
arrival information, thus Bk is unknown at the beginning of
slot k.

Equation (1) is an instantaneous expression. To convert it to
an amount of energy, we have to consider the battery evolution
during a slot. Suppose that at the beginning of the slot the
energy level is y0. After a time t, the energy level is

yt = y0 +

xs(yτ )dτ

0

Note that yT depends upon 1) the energy stored in the slot,
namely x (that is given by the combination of harvested and
transmission power), 2) the slot length T and 3) the initial
battery level y0. We explicitly write yT as yT = yT (x, y0). In
the next we assume a ﬁxed slot length, thus we interchangeably
use the notions of energy or power.

Ek+1 = min{yT ((1 − Ik)Bk − Pk, Ek), Emax}

The battery evolution is described by the following relation:
(2)
Note that also Ik inﬂuences the battery evolution. We include
Pk in the ﬁrst argument of yT (·,·) because, during the slot
evolution,
the battery level changes also according to the
transmission power ((1 − Ik)Bk − Pk represents the stored
energy in slot k). The min is used because battery overﬂow
may occur.

In this paper we consider energy as measured in discrete
energy quanta, and model the system with a discrete Markov
Chain (MC). The MC state (e, h) ∈ (cid:69)× (cid:72) (cid:44) {0, . . . , emax}×
{0, . . . , hmax} corresponds to e energy quanta stored in the
battery and to a channel gain h. When emax energy quanta are
stored, the battery is fully charged at Emax J. The harvested
energy can assume values in (cid:66) = {0, . . . , bmax}. We also
apply a Round operation to yT (·,·) and without
loss of
generality, we require Round(yT (bmax, e(cid:48))) ≥ 1, where e(cid:48) is
the energy state with the smallest yT (bmax, e(cid:48)). If this were not

(cid:90) t

possible, then, when EHD is in state e(cid:48), its battery level could
not increase. Note that the problem can always be reformulated
by changing the notion of energy quanta in order to realize the
previous condition. When the number of states is sufﬁciently
large, these assumptions are not critical and the discrete model
converges to the continuous one.

A. Optimization

A policy µ, for every MC state, determines the probability
of performing a certain action, i.e., µ is a set of random
variable pairs Θe,h and Φe,h (one for every MC state) with
joint probability density functions f (ρ, ι; e, h). Each function
maps an action pair (ρ, ι) ∈ {0, . . . , e} × [0, 1] (transmission
power and power splitting parameter) to a value in R+.

If µ induces a Markov Chain with at most one recurrent
class, the long-term average reward does not depend upon the
initial state S0 = (E0, H0). In this case, the long-term average
reward Gµ can be expressed as

Gµ = lim inf
K→∞

EBk,Hk,Pk,Ik

1
K

g(Pk + BkIk, Hk)|S0

(cid:34)K−1(cid:88)

k=0

(cid:35)

(cid:88)

e∈(cid:69)

=

πµ(e)jµ(e),

(3)

where πµ(e) is the steady state probability of being in state e
and jµ(e) (cid:44) EB,H [EΘe,H ,Φe,H [g(Θe,H + BΦe,H , H)]]. Sk =
(Ek, Hk) is the state of the system in slot k. B and H are
the random variables of the energy arrivals and of the channel
gain (i.i.d. over time) with means ¯b and ¯h. Their pmfs are
pB(b), b ∈ (cid:66) and pH (h), h ∈ (cid:72), respectively (note that we
assume a discrete channel).

In this work we want to ﬁnd the Optimal Policy (OP) µ(cid:63)

such that

µ(cid:63) = arg max

µ

Gµ

(4)

Therefore, the problem is formulated using the theory of
Markov Decision Processes, and can be solved with standard
stochastic optimization techniques, e.g., the Policy Iteration
Algorithm (PIA) [10]. In Proposition 2 we show that the
optimal policy induces a MC with one recurrent class.

III. OPTIMAL POLICY

The aim of this section is to prove a fundamental property

of OP.
Theorem 1. OP is deterministic, i.e., for any given battery
level e and channel state h, there exists an optimal action
pair (ρ(cid:63), ι(cid:63)) that is chosen with probability one to obtain the
maximum reward.

Formally, the previous theorem states that, using OP,
f (ρ, ι; e, h) = δρ,ρ(cid:63) · δ(ι − ι(cid:63)),

∀e ∈ (cid:69),∀h ∈ (cid:72) (5)
is the Kronecker delta function and δ(·) is the
where δ·,·
Dirac delta function. In the remainder of this section we prove
Theorem 1 in two steps. We ﬁrst show that in the maximiza-
tion process of Equation (4) it is sufﬁcient to focus on the
second term jµ(e) of Equation (3). This is a consequence of

Proposition 1. Later, we apply a Lagrangian approach to show
that a deterministic policy maximizes jµ(e).
Proposition 1. P(Ek = e|S0) depends upon the policy only
through EH [f (ρ, ι; e, H)] for ρ = 0, . . . , e, ∀ι ∈ [0, 1] and
∀e ∈ (cid:69).
Proof: The proof is by induction on k. At k = 0, P(E0 =
e|S0 = (e0, h0)) is equal to 1 if e = e0 and to 0 otherwise.
In this case there is no dependence upon the policy.

emax(cid:88)

Suppose that the thesis is true for k (inductive hypothesis).
Using the chain rule, the probability that Ek+1 = e(cid:48) given the
initial state is
P(Ek+1 = e(cid:48)|S0) =

P(Ek+1 = e(cid:48)|Ek = e)P(Ek = e|S0)
Therefore, it is sufﬁcient to show that P(Ek+1 = e(cid:48)|Ek =
e) depends upon the policy only through the expectations
EH [f (ρ, ι; e, h)]. Now, deﬁne the set (cid:88)e(cid:48),e (cid:44) {(ρ, ι, b) :
min{yT ((1 − ι)b − ρ, e), emax} = e(cid:48)}. We have

e=0

P(Ek+1 = e(cid:48)|Ek = e)
pB(b)
=

(ρ,ι,b)∈(cid:88)e(cid:48) ,e

(cid:88)

h∈(cid:72)

(cid:88)
(cid:88)

=

(ρ,ι,b)∈(cid:88)e(cid:48) ,e

pH (h)f (ρ, ι; e, h)

pB(b)EH [f (ρ, ι; e, H)]

Thus, P(Ek+1 = e(cid:48)|E0) depends upon the policy only

through the expectations EH [f (ρ, ι; e, h)].

For every e ∈ (cid:69), ρ = 0, . . . , e and ι ∈ [0, 1], ﬁx a
value α(ρ, ι; e). Consider now the set of policies Ξ such that
EH [f (ρ, ι; e, H)] is equal to α(ρ, ι; e) for every µ ∈ Ξ. Thanks
to Proposition 1, in Equation (3) πµ(e), ∀e ∈ (cid:69), is the same for
every µ ∈ Ξ. Thus, the maximization of Gµ can be rewritten
e∈(cid:69) πµ(e) maxµ jµ(e), i.e.,
as maxµ
Gµ is maximized when jµ(e) is maximized for every e. The
maximization problem becomes a set of emax + 1 simpler
optimization problems.
Focus now on a ﬁxed e ∈ (cid:69). We want to ﬁnd the optimal

(cid:80)
e∈(cid:69) πµ(e)jµ(e) = (cid:80)

f (ρ, ι; e, h) that maximizes

jµ(e) = EB,H [EΘe,H ,Φe,H [g(Θe,H + BΦe,H , H)]]

subject to the constraints
EH [f (ρ, ι; e, H)] = α(ρ, ι; e),

ι ∈ [0, 1]
We now want to show that the optimal f (ρ, ι; e, h) has
a deterministic structure using a Lagrangian approach. The
Lagrangian function is

ρ = 0, . . . , e,

(cid:76)(e) = EB,H

(cid:34) e(cid:88)

= EH

(cid:18)(cid:90) 1
(cid:34) e(cid:88)

0

(cid:34) e(cid:88)

ρ=0

−EH

(cid:18)(cid:90) 1

(cid:90) 1

ρ=0

0

(cid:34) e(cid:88)

(cid:90) 1

ρ=0

0

ρ=0

0

−EH

(cid:19)(cid:35)
(cid:35)
(cid:19)(cid:35)
(cid:35)

f (ρ, ι; e, H)g(ρ + Bι, H)dι

vth(ρ, ι; e)f (ρ, ι; e, H)dι

f (ρ, ι; e, H)EB [g(ρ + Bι, H)] dι

vth(ρ, ι; e)f (ρ, ι; e, H)dι

(cid:34) e(cid:88)

(cid:90) 1

ρ=0

0

= EH

f (ρ, ι; e, H) (˜g(ρ, ι, H) − vth(ρ, ι; e)) dι

3

(cid:35)

where vth(ρ, ι; e) is the Lagrange multiplier associated with
the constraint EH [f (ρ, ι; e, H)] = α(ρ, ι; e). Note that we
neglected the terms α(ρ, ι; e) in the deﬁnition of (cid:76)(e) because
they do not contribute in the Lagrangian maximization process.
We also introduced a new function ˜g(ρ, i, h) (cid:44) EB[g(ρ +
Bι, h)] that summarizes the contributions of the energy ar-
rivals. Note that we assume not to know the realization of B
but we know its statistics (that is used to compute ˜g(ρ, ι, h)),
thus OP depends upon the energy arrival statistics.

˜g(ρ, i, h) − vth(ρ, ι; e)

e and h, (ρ(cid:63), ι(cid:63)) = arg max(ρ,ι)e

The structure of Equation (5) is proved by taking, for a ﬁxed
.1
In this section we proved that for every state of the system,
there exists an optimal pair that has to be always chosen to
obtain the maximum long-term average reward. It is sufﬁcient
to ﬁnd the optimal pair for every system state to deﬁne the
optimal policy.

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

We now derive another property of OP, that is useful to

perform the numerical evaluation.
Proposition 2. The optimal policy induces a Markov Chain
with at most one recurrent class if pH (0) > 0.

Proof: The Markov Chain has two dimensions: the battery
and the channel. Since the channel gain is not controlled by
the device and changes over time, it is always possible to move
along this dimension. We now want to show that it is always
possible to go from e ∈ {0, . . . , emax − 1} to emax and that
the recurrent class is deﬁned by the states that are reachable
from emax.

Since pH (0) > 0, for some k, we have Hk = 0 and
Ek < emax. In this case, the best policy is to choose Pk = 0
and Ik = 0, otherwise energy would be wasted without
increasing the reward, which is sub-optimal. Thus, there exists
a positive probability to go from state (e, 0) to (e(cid:48), h(cid:48)), with
e(cid:48) ≥ e + 1 (no transmissions are performed and new energy
quanta arrive) and h(cid:48) a generic channel state. The reasoning
can be iteratively applied to e(cid:48) until emax is reached. We
showed that it is always possible to increase the state along the
battery dimension. The converse (decreasing the state along
the battery dimension) in general is not true.

In summary, we have a recurrent class composed of the
last part of the MC in the battery dimension and, possibly, a
transient class for low e.

The proposition guarantees that the problem is well posed,
i.e., it is independent of the initial state S0. In reality, the
channel gain is a continuous quantity. In this case, we can
assume that the device does not transmit for very low channel
gains in order to guarantee a minimum SNR level.

IV. NUMERICAL EVALUATION

We use g(x, Hk) = ln(1 + ΛHkx) as the reward function,
thus Gµ represents the throughput of the system. To model

1The idea behind this result is the following. Consider the maximization
over ξ ∈ [0, 1] of ξg1 + (1 − ξ)g2, where g1 and g2 are two ﬁxed numbers.
The maximum is obtained when ξ = 1 if g1 > g2 and ξ = 0 otherwise. In our
case ξ is substituted by f (ρ, ι; e, H) and g1, g2 by ˜g(ρ, i, h) − vth(ρ, ι; e).

4

(a) h ∈ [0, 7]

(b) Section obtained for h = 2

Figure 1: Sent energy ρ(e, h) of OP as a function of the battery state and of
the channel gain.

the channel gain, we discretize an exponentially distributed
variable (Rayleigh fading). We consider an energy arrivals
process described by a truncated geometric r.v. of mean ¯b = 20
and maximum energy arrivals bmax = 50. In this section
we want to show the importance of applying the optimal
transmission policy to obtain high performance. In particular,
we show that the optimal policy computed without considering
the inefﬁciencies of a real battery is strictly sub-optimal.

Several transmission techniques can be applied. Here, we
compare three approaches: 1) Optimal Policy (OP) deﬁned in
Sec. II-A, 2) optimal policy of an ideal battery (OP-IDEAL)
and 3) Greedy Policy (GP). OP-IDEAL is the optimal policy
derived considering an ideal battery (without storage losses)
and then applied to a real battery (with storage losses). GP
is a policy that always poses Ik = 1 (the harvested energy is
directly sent into the channel and the presence of the battery is
neglected). This choice could be interesting for very inefﬁcient
or small batteries, but, in general, provides low rewards.

Initially, suppose Ik = 0, i.e., the harvested energy cannot
be sent directly. In Figure 1a, we show the amount of sent
energy ρ of OP for every state of the system when emax = 100,
Λ = 0.1 and βn.l. = 1.05. It can be seen that at h = 0 we have
ρ = 0, as explained in Proposition 2. An interesting point is
that the sent energy increases fast when the channel gain is
very low and later becomes almost channel independent. This
fact can be used to design a low-complexity policy.

In Figure 1b we present a section of the sent energy,
obtained when h = 2. Here we also represent OP-IDEAL
in order to compare the two policies. Note that, when e is not
very high, the OP curve is lower than the other. In practice,
OP tends to transmit with low powers in order to avoid the
low energy states (that have high storage losses). This results
(see Figure 2) in πµ(e) = 0 when e is very low (as stated
in Proposition 2, there is only one recurrent class). This is
particularly important because, due to the energy losses, a loop
effect may happen. We remember that when e is low or high,
a lot of energy is wasted in the recharging process (see the
structure of s(y)). In particular, focus on the low energy states.
If a high power transmission is performed in these states (as
per OP-IDEAL), the battery does not manage to be recharged
(the transmissions almost compensate the energy arrivals). In
practice, the SOC is trapped in the low energy states. Note that
also for the high energy states the energy losses are high, but
in this case the loop effect is not present because it is always
possible to empty the battery, thus moving the energy state to

Figure 2: Steady-state probabilities π(e, h) of OP and OP-IDEAL (for an
ideal as well as a real battery) as a function of the battery state when h = 2.

a more advantageous region. These behaviors can be seen in
the steady-state probabilities depicted in Figure 2. When we
apply OP-IDEAL to the real battery, we can notice the loop
effect for the low energy states. This is particularly critical
because it degrades the system performance (if e is low, only
little energy can be used for transmission, resulting in low
rewards) and the device availability (for most of the time
EHD is almost in outage). The circled green line represents
the steady-state probabilities for an ideal battery. This curve is
smoother than the others because the energy arrival distribution
is independent of e, whereas in the other cases, for every
energy state we have a different energy arrival distribution
according to Equation (1). In an ideal battery, the probability
of being in the ﬁnal energy state is high because a lot of energy
arrives with respect to the battery size. By increasing the size,
the peak decreases. In a real battery instead, since the storage
losses are high for high e, the peaks are much smaller.

OP-IDEAL and GP have long-term average throughput
equal to 84% and 78% of the throughput of OP. In this case,
using OP-IDEAL for a real battery is not convenient, since it
has almost the same throughput of GP, that is much simpler
to compute and easier to implement.

Figure 3 shows the effects of a ﬁnite battery size on the
throughput. Focus on the continuous lines. We plot the rewards
for OP and OP-IDEAL (for an ideal as well as a real battery).
As expected, the OP curve falls between OP-IDEAL in the real
and ideal case. When the battery is very small with respect
to the energy arrivals, OP-IDEAL and OP are close. This
is because a lot of energy arrives and the battery is almost
always full. Instead, as emax increases, the gap between the
two policies increases signiﬁcantly. This is due to the loop
effect because the larger the battery, the larger the region where
the energy losses are high. Consider the OP curve. It can be
seen that it increases slowly for high emax, e.g., at emax = 100
we have a reward of 0.80 and to increase this value to 0.83
it is necessary to have a much larger battery (emax = 140).
This happens because the effects of overﬂow and outage are
reduced with large batteries. Note that the reward saturates
and does not grow unbounded.

We now want

to show the improvements that can be
obtained when Ik > 0. Intuitively, when the battery is charged
in a high losses region, it is better to directly send the harvested

Channel gain (h)64200Battery level (e)500204060100Sent energy (ρ)Battery level (e)020406080100Sent energy (ρ)0102030405060OPOP-IDEALBattery level (e)0102030405060708090100Steady-state probabilities (π)×10-300.20.40.60.811.21.41.61.82OP (real battery)OP-IDEAL (ideal battery)OP-IDEAL (real battery)loop effect5

Figure 3: Long-term average throughput Gµ for OP and OP-IDEAL (for an
ideal as well as a real battery) as a function of the battery size emax.

Figure 4: Power splitting parameter ι(e, h) for OP as a function of the battery
state e and of the channel state h.

energy into the channel. However, note that, as seen in the
previous example, OP already avoids the inefﬁcient regions
(the low SOC states are rarely reached).

In Figure 3, with dashed lines, we show the system through-
put when Ik is not forced to zero. For OP and OP-IDEAL
for an ideal battery, as expected, the curves are above their
counterparts with Ik = 0. Instead, for OP-IDEAL for a real
battery, it may be better not to use Ik > 0 in some regions.
Thus, as can be seen, even with Ik > 0, OP-IDEAL is
strictly sub-optimal when applied to a real battery. Intuitively,
allowing to directly send the harvested energy does not provide
a great improvement when the battery is large: in this case it
is sufﬁcient to operate in a region with low energy losses in
order to efﬁciently store the harvested energy and use it later.
This is not possible in a small battery, and in this case directly
sending the harvested energy may provide a signiﬁcant reward
improvement (left part of Figure 3).

With the parameters of Figure 1a, when we ﬁnd OP with
Ik > 0, the reward becomes 0.83 (instead of 0.80). Even if
the relative improvement is small, note that, with Ik = 0, it is
necessary to have a much larger battery to obtain a reward of
0.83 (emax = 140). Thus, allowing Ik > 0 permits to obtain
higher rewards without increasing the battery size. In Figure 4
we show the power splitting parameter ι for every battery
state and channel gain. When SOC is high or low, the energy
losses are high, thus in these cases it is better to directly send
the harvested energy. As e moves toward emax/2, also ι(e, h)
decreases until the mid region where ι(e, h) ≈ 0.5. In this
case it is convenient to store the energy for future use because
the losses are very low and, at the same time, to directly send
energy into the channel to obtain an immediate reward. When
the SOC is low, the battery can still be charged by exploiting
the states where the channel gain is zero.

V. CONCLUSIONS

We studied an Energy Harvesting Device with imperfect
energy storage capabilities. During the energy saving process,
part of the incoming energy is wasted and this effect depends
upon the current state of charge of the device. We proved that,
for given battery status and channel gain, the Optimal Policy is
deterministic. We also showed that the underlying MC induced
by OP has at most one recurrent class. These results were used
to develop the numerical evaluation, where we studied how OP

inﬂuences the performance of an EHD with a capacitor. We
found that the energy losses degrade the system performance,
making the device fall into a region where the loop effect may
be present. Finding the optimal policy in this context is useful
in order to avoid the loop effect and to restore high rewards.
We noticed that the reward increases slowly with the battery
size and is upper bounded. Finally, we showed that allowing
Ik > 0 is equivalent, in terms of reward, to using a much larger
battery, thus implementing the power splitting mechanism is
convenient when the battery is small.

Possible extensions consist in the relaxation of some hy-
pothesis, e.g., those about perfect SOC and channel knowl-
edge. Also, the circuitry costs can be taken into account.
Moreover,
it would be interesting to study the effects of
imperfect energy storage with other functions (in addition
to (1)).

REFERENCES

[1] J. Lei, R. Yates, and L. Greenstein, “A generic model for optimizing
single-hop transmission policy of replenishable sensors,” IEEE Trans.
Wireless Comm., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 547–551, Feb. 2009.

[2] V. Sharma, U. Mukherji, V. Joseph, and S. Gupta, “Optimal energy
management policies for energy harvesting sensor nodes,” IEEE Trans.
Wireless Comm., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 1326–1336, Apr. 2010.

[3] O. Ozel and S. Ulukus, “Information-theoretic analysis of an energy
harvesting communication system,” in 21st International Symposium
on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications Workshops
(PIMRC Workshops), Sep. 2010, pp. 330–335.

[4] ——, “Achieving AWGN capacity under stochastic energy harvesting,”

IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 10, pp. 6471–6483, Jun. 2012.

[5] B. Devillers and D. Gunduz, “A general framework for the optimization
of energy harvesting communication systems with battery imperfec-
tions,” IEEE J. of Commun. and Netw., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 130–139,
Apr. 2012.

[6] N. Michelusi, L. Badia, R. Carli, L. Corradini, and M. Zorzi, “Energy
management policies for harvesting-based wireless sensor devices with
battery degradation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 12, Nov. 2013.
[7] N. Michelusi, L. Badia, and M. Zorzi, “Optimal transmission policies
for energy harvesting devices with limited state-of-charge knowledge,”
IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 11, pp. 3969–3982, Sep. 2014.

[8] K. Tutuncuoglu, A. Yener, and S. Ulukus, “Optimum policies for an
energy harvesting transmitter under energy storage losses,” IEEE J. on
Selected Areas in Commun., vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 467–481, Jan. 2015.

[9] M. Gorlatova, A. Wallwater, and G. Zussman, “Networking low-power
energy harvesting devices: Measurements and algorithms,” IEEE Trans.
Mobile Computing, vol. 12, no. 9, pp. 1853–1865, Jul. 2013.
[10] D. Bertsekas, Dynamic programming and optimal control.

Athena

Scientiﬁc, Belmont, Massachusetts, 2005.

emax20406080100120140Long-term average throughput (Gµ)0.50.550.60.650.70.750.80.850.9OP (real batt.) Ik = 0OP-IDEAL (ideal batt.) Ik = 0OP-IDEAL (real batt.) Ik = 0OP (real batt.) Ik > 0OP-IDEAL (ideal batt.) Ik > 0OP-IDEAL (real batt.) Ik > 08channel gain (h)6420020Battery level (e)406080100010.80.60.40.2Power splitting parameter (ι)