Hysteresis of noninteracting and spin-orbit coupled atomic Fermi gases with relaxation

Mekena Metcalf,1 Chen-Yen Lai,1 and Chih-Chun Chien1

1School of Natural Sciences, University of California, Merced, CA 95343, USA

Hysteresis can be found in driven many-body systems such as magnets and superﬂuids. Rate-dependent hys-
teresis arises when a system is driven periodically while relaxing towards equilibrium. A two-state paramagnet
driven by an oscillating magnetic ﬁeld in the relaxation approximation clearly demonstrates rate-dependent hys-
teresis. A noninteracting atomic Fermi gas in an optical ring potential, when driven by a periodic artiﬁcial gauge
ﬁeld and subjected to dissipation, is shown to exhibit hysteresis loops of atomic current due to a competition of
the driving time and the relaxation time. This is in contrast to electronic systems exhibiting equilibrium persis-
tent current driven by magnetic ﬂux due to rapid relaxation. Universal behavior of the dissipated energy in one
hysteresis loop is observed in both the magnetic and atomic systems, showing linear and inverse-linear depen-
dence on the relaxation time in the strong and weak dissipation regimes. While interactions in general invalidate
the framework for rate-dependent hysteresis, an atomic Fermi gas with artiﬁcial spin-orbit coupling exhibits
hysteresis loops of atomic currents. Cold-atoms in ring-shape potentials are thus promising in demonstrating
rate-dependent hysteresis and its associated phenomena.

PACS numbers: 05.60.Gg, 67.85.-d, 67.10.Jn

I.

INTRODUCTION

Experimental advancements of cold atoms in optical poten-
tials have renewed interest in the study of persistent current
in mesoscopic metallic rings. A one-dimensional (1D) ring of
electrons in the presence of magnetic ﬂux can support a non-
vanishing current in thermal equilibrium, known as persistent
current, and is identical to magnetization [1–3]. Recent work
has focused on persistent current measurement of atomic su-
perﬂuids. While bosonic atoms are commonly implemented,
studies of fermion persistent current in cold atoms remain less
explored [4–6]. Past experiments studying persistent current
in mesoscopic rings came across difﬁculties with disorder and
interaction effects, and cold atoms seem to be ideal systems
for studying the persistent current of non-interacting fermions
in a ring [1, 7].

However, a lack of relaxation mechanisms for noninteract-
ing atomic Fermi gases will be detrimental to the experimental
measurement of a genuine persistent current because the very
deﬁnition of a persistent current requires the system to reach
thermal equilibrium when magnetic ﬂux is introduced [2, 3].
Without any dissipation mechanism to bring a clean noninter-
acting atomic Fermi gas back to equilibrium in the presence of
an effective magnetic ﬂux, the current induced by an artiﬁcial
vector potential in a ring cannot be identiﬁed as the persistent
current. For cold-atom systems, dissipation must be added for
them to settle into equilibrium. Exchange of energy with a
thermal bath relaxes the system and allows for the persistent
current at a ﬁxed value of the magnetic ﬂux to be observed in
the long-time limit.

Interestingly, dissipation is not only necessary for the ob-
servation of persistent current, but also induces hysteresis
when the artiﬁcial magnetic ﬂux is periodically modulated.
Hysteresis has been intensely studied in magnetic systems.
Well known forms of hysteresis include ferromagnetic ma-
terials [8] and superﬂuids [5], and it is known to be a sig-
niﬁcant mechanism in the advancement of modern electron-
ics because it provides memory to a system and can can-
cel systematic effects [9–11]. Hysteresis arising from ther-

mal relaxation occurs in two forms: rate-dependent hysteresis
and rate-independent hysteresis [8]. In rate-independent hys-
teresis, two or more metastable energy states are separated
by an energy barrier and the free energy takes a non-linear
form. When an external driving force moves the system from
one metastable state to another, the system exhibits history-
dependent behavior. Rate-independent hysteresis of supercur-
rent in a rotating, superﬂuid Bose-Einstein Condensate (BEC)
was observed and has been considered a milestone in the ad-
vancement of atomtronic circuitry [5]. Local energy minima
are dependent on the quantized angular momentum of the su-
perﬂuid and the system can move around different minima by
stirring the atoms with an optical potential. After reaching a
critical rotation, the angular winding number changes, leading
to hysteresis loops of angular velocity. In addtion, a recent ex-
periment has demonstrated hysteresis when a BEC is placed in
a double-well potential with tunable interactions and potential
minima [12].

In contrast, rate-dependent hysteresis does not require
symmetry-broken phases or even energy minima. Instead, the
hysteresis arises due to a competition between the time scales
of driving and response. Here we explore rate-dependent hys-
teresis in noninteracting atomic fermions driven by an artiﬁ-
cial gauge ﬁeld. One signiﬁcant point of using cold atoms
is to provide a means to explore the rate-dependent hystere-
sis outside of magnetic systems. The competition between
the period of driving and relaxation time leads to hysteresis
loops of mass current when a periodically modulated artiﬁ-
cial, magnetic ﬂux and dissipation are present. Moreover, we
will discuss techniques for realizing the setup.

Universal behavior of dissipated energy in one hysteresis
loop, which can be measured by the hysteresis-loop area, will
be presented. The area of a hysteresis loop determines how
much energy is transferred from the driving force to the reser-
voir via the system. Rate-independent hysteresis of ferromag-
netic materials provides a common illustration of energy dissi-
pation from hysteresis behavior, and knowledge of the energy
dissipation is highly important when ferromagnetic and fer-
roelectric materials are used in electronic systems [13]. The

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
1

 
 
]
s
a
g
-
t
n
a
u
q
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
1
0
7
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

ability to form and magnetize domains depends on the mate-
rial. Hard magnets dissipate more energy during a hystere-
sis loop, thus requiring more energy to align the magnetiza-
tion with the magnetic ﬁeld. This explains why hard magnets
make efﬁcient memory systems. Energy dissipation from soft
magnets is much less, which is why they are used in elec-
tronic systems. In rate-dependent hysteresis, behavior similar
to hard and soft magnets is observable by tuning the relax-
ation time. The area of hysteresis loop increases linearly with
the relaxation time in the strong dissipation regime and de-
creases inversely linearly with the relaxation time in the weak
dissipation regime. In the middle where the relaxation time
is comparable to the period of driving, the dissipated energy
reaches a maximum. This universal behavior will be clearly
demonstrated in magnetic and cold-atom systems. Moreover,
we found that the response function of rate-dependent hys-
teresis resembles the response function of a damped oscillator
in the massless limit. Interestingly, similar examples can be
seen in Kramers transition-rate theory of chemical reactions
[14] and thermal transport in a classical 1D lattice [15, 16].

While the framework of rate-dependent hysteresis analyzed
here can be generic, interactions may invalidate the frame-
work. However, there exist systems with interactions exhibit-
ing rate-dependent hysteresis. The Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert
model of magnetization is an example [17]. Here we will
show that, in cold-atom systems, artiﬁcial spin-orbit coupling
[18–20] also permits rate-dependent hysteresis. Moreover, a
spin-orbit coupled Fermi gas will be shown to exhibit the uni-
versal behavior of dissipated energy.

This paper is organized as follows. Two examples of rate-
dependent hysteresis in noninteracting systems, a two-state
paramagnet and ultracold fermions in a ring, are analyzed in
Sec. II. Both systems exhibit hysteresis loops in the presence
of tunable dissipation and periodic driving. The dissipated
energy as a function of the relaxation time exhibits universal
behavior and is summarized in Sec. III with detailed explana-
tions. Sec. IV addresses how interactions can invalidate the
framework implemented here and shows that spin-orbit cou-
pled Fermi gases still follows the framework and exhibits rate-
dependent hysteresis. Sec. V concludes our work.

II. HYSTERESIS IN NONINTERACTING SYSTEMS WITH

DISSIPATION

The principle behind rate-dependent hysteresis, arising
from relaxation towards equilibrium, can be demonstrated in
simple noninteracting systems. We begin with a two-state
paramagnet subjected to a periodically modulated magnetic
ﬁeld, and then present an extension following the same for-
malism for ultra-cold fermions in a ring-shape trap driven by
a periodically modulated artiﬁcial vector potential.

A. Two-State paramagnet

In a simpliﬁed model, a two-state paramagnet has two en-
ergy levels labeled by the spin in the presence of a magnetic

2

Figure 1. Magnetization m of a two-state paramagnetic system
driven by an oscillating magnetic ﬁeld B. (a) The equilibrium (black)
and dissipationless (red) magnetization for the two-state paramagnet
as a function of the magnetic ﬁeld. Hysteresis loops of the magne-
tization emerge as the magnetic ﬁeld is periodically modulated with
dissipation characterized by a relaxation time of (b) τ /tp = 0.1, (c)
τ /tp = 1, (d) and τ /tp = 10. Here tp and τ are the period of
the magnetic ﬁeld and the relaxation time, respectively. We choose
βµBB0 = 1, where β = 1/(kBT ), µB is the magnetic moment,
and B0 is the magnitude of the magnetic ﬁeld.

ﬁeld, say in the ˆz direction with magnitude B [21]. The en-
ergy levels are Eσ=↑,↓ = ∓µBB, where µB is the magnetic
moment of one spin. In equilibrium, the probability of seeing
the spin-up or spin-down state can be calculated from the par-
tition function. We deﬁne β = 1/(kBT ), where kB and T are
Boltzmann constant and temperature, respectively. Explicitly,
Pσ = e−βEσ /Z and Z = 2 cosh(βµBB). The magnetization
is m = µB(P↑ − P↓), and in equilibrium

meq = µB tanh(βµBB).

(1)

In equilibrium, the magnetization as a function of the mag-
netic ﬁeld follows the black curve in Figure 1(a). In contrast,
if there is no dissipation to relax the system, the distributions
of the two states will remain the same as the initial condi-
tion. For example, if we consider a case with B = 0 and
Pσ=↑,↓ = 1/2 as the initial condition, then m remains zero
even when B is turned on because the distribution cannot re-
lax. The dissipationless case is shown as the red curve in
Fig. 1(a). We may consider the fully equilibrium case and
the dissipationless case as the two extremes, and discuss gen-
eral cases with ﬁnite dissipation. A simple and widely used
formalism for modeling relaxation towards equilibrium is the
relaxation approximation

= − Pσ(t) − Pσ,eq(t)

τ

.

dPσ
dt

(2)

Here τ is the relaxation time and Pσ,eq(t) is the equilibrium
distribution at time t. In a semiclassical picture, the relaxation
time is the duration between scattering events and determines
the characteristic time for the system to return to equilibrium.

Relaxation of nuclear moments [22] and electron properties in
metals [23] have been determined with the relaxation approx-
imation and it proves to be versatile.

Here we consider the system continually exposed to a pe-
riodic magnetic ﬁeld B = B0 sin(ωt) with m(t = 0) = 0.
Time-evolution of the magnetization is calculated from the
ﬁrst-order differential equation describing the relaxation ap-
proximation:

dm(t)

dt

= − m(t) − meq(t)

τ

.

(3)

The explicit solution is

(cid:90) t

0

3

fermions can be described in the single particle picture [26].
The Hamiltonian describing noninteracting fermions in a ring
subjected to an effective vector potential A along the ring is

H =

1

2mf

(px + A)2.

(5)

Here mf is the mass of the atom, x is the coordinate along
the ring and is periodic in the circumference L of the ring, the
momentum operator is px = −i ∂
∂x, and the dimensionless
magnetic ﬂux φ is derived from the artiﬁcial vector potential
A circulating along the ring via Φ = AL = 2πφ.

The

energy spectrum is obtained by solving the

Schr¨odinger equation with the eigenfunction

(cid:114) 1

L

m(t) =

1
τ

e−(t−t(cid:48))/τ µB tanh(βµBB(t(cid:48)))dt(cid:48).

(4)

ψn =

eiknx.

(6)

The time-dependent magnetization is shown in Figure 1(b)-
(d).

The evolution of magnetization of the two-state paramagnet
in the presence of an oscillating magnetic ﬁeld clearly exhibits
hysteresis. Moreover, after a few training cycles, hysteresis
loops are formed. Using the oscillation period tp = 2π/ω as
the time unit, the magnetization from selected relaxation times
τ /tp = 0.1, 1, 10 are plotted against the magnetic ﬁeld over
ten periods in Figure 1(b-d). Training cycles are required for
the initial condition to decay away, and the number of train-
ing cycles depends on τ /tp. When τ /tp is small (large), the
initial condition decays faster (slower) and less (more) train-
ing cycles are needed. Training cycles have been seen in the
micro-states of artiﬁcial spin ice when subjected to a periodic
magnetic ﬁeld and self organization of nanoparticles undergo-
ing periodic shearing [24, 25].

The formation of the hysteresis loops can be understood in
the weakly and strongly dissipative regimes as follows. The
integrand of Eq. (4) is a product of the exponential factor
exp(−(tf − t(cid:48))/τ ) and a periodic function with period tp.
In the strongly dissipative regime τ /tp (cid:28) 1, and the expo-
nential factor severely suppresses the integrands if tf − t(cid:48) is
ﬁnite. Therefore, only the contribution from the last cycle is
visible and forms the hysteresis loop. In the other limit when
τ /tp (cid:29) 1, the exponential factor is basically a constant over
many periods, and the result is a summation of many repeat-
ing cycles, which also produces hysteresis loops. Importantly,
after proper training cycles, hysteresis loops can be observed
for ﬁnite values of τ as shown in Figure 1.

B. Atomic current from noninteracting fermions in a ring

The same theoretical framework can be applied to non-
interacting fermions in a ring trap threaded with effective
magnetic ﬂux. Ultracold atoms are particularly suitable for
realizing such a system, and we consider fermionic atoms
trapped in a ring-shaped potential and driven by an artiﬁcial
vector potential equivalent to an artiﬁcial magnetic ﬂux. The
setup is similar to Ref. [5] except here a current is driven by
the artiﬁcial magnetic ﬂux rather than a laser barrier. In ab-
sence of self interactions, the wave function of non-interacting

Here kn = 2πn/L with n labeling the states. Importantly,
this wave function is the exact eigenfunction for any value of
the vector potential, as one can check by applying the Hamil-
tonian (5) on it. The energy eigenvalues, however, explicitly
depend on A and have the following expresion

En = Eu(n + φ)2.

(7)
Here Eu = (2π)2/(2mf L2) serves as the unit of energy in
this case. By plotting En of several n values as a function
of φ, one can see that the energy spectrum repeats itself as φ
changes to φ + 1 [2]. Following the idea of Brillouin zone
in solid-state physics, we may focus on the ”ﬁrst Brillouin
zone” of the spectrum with −0.5 < φ < 0.5. Moreover, the
states with ±n are degenerate at φ = 0 and the degeneracy
is lifted when φ > 0. When φ = 0, the generalized Bloch
theorem rules out a ﬁnite equilibrium current in the absence
of magnetic ﬂux [27].
(cid:80)
The current can be obtained from the conservation of par-
ticles ∂ρ/∂t = −∇ · j. Since the particle density is ρ =
n ψ∗
nψn, the current from each eigenstate can be found from
jn = (/i2mf )(ψ∗
n). Equivalently, the cur-
rent can be found by [2]

n∇ψn − ψn∇ψ∗

jn = − ∂En
∂Φ

= J0(n + φ).

(8)
Here J0 = (2π)/(mf L2). At zero temperature, the total
current can be found by summing the currents from the state
below the Fermi energy. The expression can be generalized to
ﬁnite temperatures by including the distribution functions of
the energy states and is given by

JT ot =

jnfn.

(9)

n

Here fn denotes the population of the state ψn. Thus the den-
sity distribution affects the total current, and a relaxation pro-
cess is necessary to induce re-distribution of the density dis-
tribution, which will shift the current aways from the dissipa-
tionless limit. In thermal equilibrium the distribution should
be the Fermi-Dirac distribution

fn,eq =

1

eβ(En−µ)+1

.

(10)

(cid:88)

4

eigenstates. In a system of noninteracting fermionic atoms,
there is no dissipation because of a lack of scattering mecha-
nism. Therefore, observations of genuine persistent currents
by ramping up the effective vector potential can be a chal-
lenging task. First, the system can not reach thermal equilib-
rium after the vector potential changes, so a non-equilibrium
current will be observed instead. Second, the current can be
small because when jn is summed over all levels weighted by
the distribution, the contributions from n and −n mostly can-
cel. Realizing a fermionic persistent current in a cold atom
system thus requires some form of relaxation by introducing
external dissipation mechanisms and also accurate measure-
ments of the current.

In stark contrast, for electrons in metallic systems dissipa-
tion is strong and inevitable because scatterings result from
crystal defects and impurities. As shown in the two-state
paramagnet example, a widely implemented formalism for de-
scribing the relaxation of a system subjected to a dissipative
environment is the relaxation approximation. Here the relax-
ation approximation for an n-level system governed by the
Fermi-Dirac statistics leads to

∂fn
∂t

=

−(fn − fn,eq)

τ

,

(11)

where fn,eq is the equilibrium distribution function for the
n-th state and we assume the relaxation time τ is the same
for all states [23]. The relaxation time estimates the dura-
tion between two consecutive scattering events of a particle.
For an electron in typical metals, τ is roughly 10−14s [28–
30]. The fast relaxation for electrons in metals allows for di-
rect measurements of persistent current [1, 7]. On the other
hand, in the natural setting ultracold atoms are dissipation-
less, which hinders the emergence of fully equilibrium per-
sistent current. Nevertheless, dissipation may be introduced
in cold-atom systems by allowing the system to interact with
background atoms or photons. Moreover, by engineering the
dissipation to tune the relaxation time, nonequlibrium currents
will reveal the competition between the driving vector poten-
tial and the dissipation. The collision rate of cold fermions
in a boson bath is tunable by varying the density of bosons
[31], and the investigation of different relaxation times leads
to dynamical hysteresis effects.

The solution to Eq. (11) at time tf is

(cid:90) tf

0

e−(tf−t)/τ fn,eq(t)

fn(tf ) = e−tf /τ fn(t = 0) +

dt.
(12)
Here the equilibrium distribution at time t is given by Eq. (10)
with φ(t) in the energy dispersion En(t) from Eq. (7). The
equilibrium chemical potential µ(t) at time t for a given φ(t)
should conserve the total particle number Ntot and can be de-
termined by the relation

τ

Ntot =

1

eβ(En(t)−µ(t)) + 1

.

(13)

(cid:88)

n

In our simulations we choose φ(t) to be periodic with period
2t0 and a linear dependence on the time. Therefore, φ(t)

Figure 2. Total atomic current JT ot over the ﬂux φ at kBT /Eu = 10
for noninteracting fermions in a ring. The left (right) column shows
a system with Ntot = 100 (Ntot = 101) particles.
(a) and (b):
The equilibrium (black) and dissipationless (red) currents. (c-h) The
current exhibit hysteresis loops as the ﬂux is periodically modulated
in the presence of dissipation with a relaxation time of (c,d) τ =
0.1t0, (e,f) τ = t0, (g,h) and τ = 10t0.

Persistent current refers to the current on a ring induced by
a magnetic ﬂux through the ring when the system is in ther-
mal equilibrium [2]. The persistent current thus corresponds
to the equilibrium current shown in Fig. 2 (a). For each value
of φ, the corresponding equilibrium distribution fn,eq should
be used to evaluate the persistent current. Summing over all
energy levels to determine total equilibrium current results in
a dependence on the total particle number as shown in Fig-
ure 2(a,b). At ﬁnite temperatures, the persistent current shows
smooth dependence on φ. When the ﬂux is absent (φ = 0),
there will be no genuine persistent current in the system and
this is consistent with the generalized Bloch theorem [27].

Maintaining an equilibrium current as the ﬂux varies, how-
ever, requires strong dissipation. Imagine that the initial state
is in equilibrium with no effective magnetic ﬂux, and then a
ﬂux is turned on.
In the noninteracting fermion case, each
eigenstate remains the same eigenstate, but the correspond-
ing eigenvalue shifts. In absence of any dissipation, the pop-
ulation of each eigenstate will not re-distribute because the
Hamiltonian does not have cross-correlation between differ-
ent states, and changing the population distribution requires
an external mechanism to reshufﬂe the particles at different

shows a saw-tooth pattern when plotted as a function of t.
As we will show, the system exhibits rate-dependent hystere-
sis, so the choice of the periodic form of φ(t) is not important.
We also choose φ(t) to oscillate between −0.25 and 0.25. The
unit of time will be t0, so the relaxation time is expressed as
τ /t0. For a given τ and tf , the corresponding φ(tf ) is deter-
mined. Then En(tf ), µ(tf ), and fn,eq(tf ) can be evaluated.
The total current JT ot(tf ) is then given by Eq. (9). This pro-
cedure produces a pair of (φ(tf ), JT ot(tf )), and by sweeping
tf we traced out the dynamic evolution of the current in the
presence of dissipation.

A competition between the driving period and the relax-
ation time is necessary to observe hysteresis in a cold atom
system. In the limits when the system is always brought into
equilibrium immediately (τ /t0 → 0) or in the absence of
dissipation (τ /t0 → ∞), the current will simply follow the
fully-equilibrium curve or the dissipationless current in Fig-
ure 2(a,b) without hysteresis. In the presence of ﬁnite dissipa-
tion, the current will lie somewhere between the equilibrium
and dissipationless current. After a couple of training cycles,
the current clearly exhibits hysteresis loops as shown in Fig-
ure 2 for selected values of τ and numbers of fermions N.
The larger the relaxation time τ is, the more training cycles
are needed to form hysteresis loops. Moreover, the size of
hysteresis depends explicitly on the relaxation time τ, and we
will analyze the dependence later.

Therefore, starting with noninteracting fermions with dis-
sipation, hysteresis loops of mass current are expected to
emerge. This is in contrast to previous work [5] where atomic
superﬂuids with interactions are used to demonstrate hystere-
sis loops. By analogue with rate-dependent hysteresis in a
paramagnet [8], hysteresis loops can arise without the need
of self interactions. Therefore, cold-atoms are particularly
suitable for demonstrating hysteresis behavior with and with-
out interactions. Dissipation of the noninteracting fermions
is from inter-species interactions with a background of atoms
of a different species or electromagnetic waves. The inter-
species interactions may induce higher-order corrections to
the fermions acting like effective self-interactions. However,
the induced interaction is expected to be weak and considered
as secondary effects.

C. Experimental Realization of Hysteresis in Noninteracting

Fermions

Measurement of atomic persistent current is achievable
with current technology, and has already been facilitated for
bosons in the superﬂuid phase using a rotating laser barrier
to stir the atoms [5]. The ring trap can be constructed by
using Laguerre-Gaussian (LG) beams for azimuthal conﬁne-
ment and a pair of laser sheets for tight vertical conﬁnement
[32, 33]. Atoms propagating in a ring-shape trap with periodic
boundary conditions could further allow cold-atom studies of
entanglement between boson species [34] and persistent cur-
rent of interacting bosons[6].

There have been a variety of methods to induce artiﬁcial
gauge ﬁelds, which is done by ﬁnding methods mimicking the

5

momentum shift due to the Lorentzian force [35–37]. In cold
atoms, atom-light coupling from an external laser ﬁeld causes
an effective vector potential and corresponding magnetic ﬁeld.
Use of gauge ﬁelds from the coupling of the atoms and laser
ﬁeld is an advantageous tool, and has lead to measurements
of new topological phases not easily realizable in condensed
matter systems [38, 39].

To mimic a circulating vector potential along the ring, an
Abelian gauge ﬁeld is sufﬁcient to induce the required ef-
fective magnetic ﬂux. The direction of the gauge ﬁeld is
along the direction of lightwave momentum vector, so the
light must propagate along the direction of the ring for a ﬂux
to be present. The optical ring potential is conﬁned in the xy-
plane meaning the lightwave momentum vector must propa-
gate along the circular ring potential in the 2D-plane. The
LG beam will serve as an appropriate tool to obtain a circu-
lar momentum ﬂux [40]. Modes of the beam can be selected
from the angular momentum l in units of , and the value of
l determines the accumulated phase as the atoms traverse the
ring. If l = 0, no phase is accumulated which is equivalent to
having no effective magnetic ﬁeld. A beam with l = 1 acts
as an Abelian gauge ﬁeld, which is the type needed to drive
the current, because the atoms accumulates a phase of π af-
ter circulating the ring once. A non-Abelian gauge ﬁeld can
be selected when l = 2, but such a complicated ﬁeld is not
needed for the system in question.

The above methods address how to trap the atoms and cre-
ate a synthetic magnetic ﬂux, but the key component is a back-
ground dissipation mechanism. To bring the system towards
thermal equilibrium, the fermions need to interact with the
environment. In condensed matter systems, scattering of par-
ticles with impurities occurs on a fast timescale, allowing for
equilibrium current to be observed. It is necessary to add a
form of scattering to the particles trapped in the ring poten-
tial.

Introducing dissipation through Hamiltonian engineering
has been highly useful for creating pure entangled states, and
a variety of methods to couple the system to its environment
have been explored using electron beams and the release of
a Bogoliubov quasi-particle after undergoing a Raman tran-
sition to an excited state [41–43]. However, a simpler and
more direct method utilizes the broad tunability of atomic
fermion-boson mixtures. By immersing the fermions trapped
in a ring potential into a Bose-Einstein Condensate (BEC),
collisions between the two species can facilitate the dissipa-
tive processes caused by impurities in metals. The relaxation
time τ can be controlled by adjusting the number of bosons
in the atomic cloud, and collisions occur on the millisecond
timescale [31].

Particle loss is an apparent concern when artiﬁcially in-
voking collisions because the collision process can excite a
fermion out of the potential barrier and can affect the direct
observation of the system. However, it has been experimen-
tally observed that fermions experience very little loss while
the depletion of bosons is prominent in an atomic fermion-
boson mixture [44]. The dynamics of a Bose-Fermi mix-
ture is also in favor of experimental realization. It has been
shown theoretically and experimentally the dissipative mech-

6

state because the relaxation time is too long. The current thus
does not respond promptly to the driving, and again the ener-
gies from the two halves of a cycle tend to cancel. Prominent
hysteresis loops are possible when τ is of the same order of the
period of driving. In this case, the current lags behind the driv-
ing, so the system dissipates and absorbs different amounts of
energy in one cycle. As a consequence, there is a net energy
ﬂow from the driving force to the reservoir, and its magnitude
is proportional to the area of the hysteresis loop.

For the atomic current in a ring, the dissipated energy inher-
its the dependence of the current on the number of particles.
Since the fully equilibrium current and fully dissipationless
current limit the range of nonequilibrium current for ﬁnite dis-
sipation, the size of hysteresis loop is constrained by the sepa-
ration of the two limiting cases. For odd numbers of fermions,
the fully equilibrium current is close to the dissipationless cur-
rent according to the initial distribution, so the hysteresis loop
is in general small. In contrast, for even numbers of fermions,
the difference between the fully equilibrium and dissipation-
less currents are signiﬁcant, so the hysteresis loop can have a
larger area. Figure 2 clearly demonstrates the dependence of
the hysteresis loop on the fermion number.

The area of the hysteresis curve, which represents the en-
ergy transferred from the driving to the reservoir, has a non-
monotonic dependence on the relaxation time. The area in-
creases with a linear dependence on the relaxation time, E ∝
τ, but after reaching a critical value the area decreases in-
versely, E ∝ 1/τ as shown in Figure 4. The dissipated en-
ergy reaches a maximum when τ is of the same order of the
driving period. This behavior can be explained through evalu-
ation of the integrals in Eqs. (4) and (12), but a closer evalua-
tion demonstrates deep connections with a damped harmonic
oscillator in the massless limit. We begin with the behavior
in the small and large τ limits. After enough training cycles,
the leading term from the initial condition is diminished. The
relaxation of the distribution then takes the form
e−(t−t(cid:48))/τ geq(t(cid:48))dt(cid:48).

(cid:90) t

g(t) =

(14)

1
τ

0

(cid:82) t

τ

t−tp

When τ >> tp, the value of the exponential is roughly con-
stant during one cycle, so g(t) ≈ 1
geq(t(cid:48))dt(cid:48) ∝ 1
τ .
Here tp is the period of the driving. Thus in this regime
the area decreases inversely with the relaxation time. In the
regime where τ << tp, a small amount of t − t(cid:48) leads to
a severe suppression due to the exponential factor. Thus,
we may focus on a small period (τ ) prior to the ﬁnal time
t. The major contribution to the integral is from this small
(cid:82) t
period and the equilibrium distribution function can be con-
g(t) ≈
sidered constant over the small period in time.
t−(τ ) e−(t−t(cid:48))/τ dt(cid:48) By setting ˜t = t − t(cid:48) the integral
geq(t)

τ

becomes

τ

g(t) ≈ geq(t)

e−˜t/τ d˜t = geq(t)(1 − e−(τ )/τ ).(15)
Expanding (τ ) = aτ + bτ 2 + ... leads to 1 − e−(a+bτ ) ≈
1 − e−a(1 − bτ ). Only ﬁrst-order terms are considered with
small τ, so g(t) ≈ geq(t)(1 − e−a + e−abτ ). Taking the limit

0

(cid:90) (τ )

Figure 3. Maximal persistent current as a function of the normalized
temperature T /T0 for N = 101 noninteracting fermions.

anism can induce a current of non-interacting fermions in a
periodic potential by acting as a driving force for an initially
insulating phase [31, 45]. In direct contrast, localization is ob-
served in the bosonic cloud when interacting with fermionic
impurities [46]. Moreover, advanced imaging techniques al-
low separate resolutions of the fermionic and bosonic quan-
tities [44, 47, 48], and here we will focus on the fermionic
system by treating the bosons as the environment.

equilibrium current,(cid:80)

The amplitude of the fully equilibrium current is highly sen-
sitive to temperature, and the value decreases exponentially as
the system gets warmer. Figure 3 shows the amplitude of the
n jn, for Ntot = 101. The Fermi tem-
perature is TF = 2500T0, where T0 = Eu/kB.
In order
to observe the current, the system may need to be cooled to
1% of the Fermi energy. Using a compensated lattice tech-
nique the system can be compressed and cooled to nearly
the ground state[49, 50]. A previous experiment using meso-
scopic, copper rings also reported an exponential decrease of
the electronic persistent current as temperature increases, but
were able to measure the persistent current when the system
was cooled to 80 mK since copper has a Fermi temperature of
about 8000K [1, 23].

III. UNIVERSAL BEHAVIOR OF DISSIPATED ENERGY

The relaxation dissipates energy as the system is being
driven. The system acts as a media for transferring the energy
input from the driving force (B in the two-state paramagnet
or φ in the atomic current) to the reservoir responsible for dis-
sipation. The amount of transferred energy is reﬂected by the
amount of dissipated energy of the system, ∆E. Importantly,
∆E can be measured by the area of the hysteresis curve. By
calculating the area of one hysteresis loop, how much energy
is dissipated in a cycle can be determined. For the two-state
paramagnet system, the energy dissipated in one hysteresis

loop is E =(cid:72) m · dB and for the atomic current in a ring is
E =(cid:72) JT ot·dΦ. A smaller hysteresis loop means a cycle dis-

sipates less energy. When τ is small (compared to the period
of driving), the system relaxes into thermal equilibrium eas-
ily, so the current basically follows the driving and the energy
transferred by the system in one direction (say, when B or φ
increases) is mostly canceled by the other half of the cycle.
When τ is large, the system has a strong memory of its initial

7

limτ→0 g(t) = 0 forces a = 0, leaving the linear dependence
on the relaxation time τ.

A fully analytic analysis of the area of hysteresis loop in
rate-dependent hysteresis of the two-state paramagnet case
in the full range of τ can be performed following the dis-
cussion in Ref. [8]. The driven magnetization in the relax-
ation approximation is described by Eq. (3) The magnetiza-
tion meq in equilibrium is given by Eq. (1), and the evolution
In the high temperature limit,
of m(t) is given by Eq. (4).
meq ≈ m0B(t) with m0 = βµ2
B. Then,

(cid:90) t

−∞

m(t) ≈ m0
τ

e−(t−t(cid:48))/τ B(t(cid:48))dt(cid:48)

(16)

The magnetic ﬁeld B(t) acts as a driving force. The magnetic
susceptibility χ(ω) is the response function connecting mag-
netization with magnetic ﬁeld [8] in the frequency domain.

Explicitly,

m(ω) = χ(ω)B(ω)

χ(ω) =

χ0

1 − iωτ

.

(17)

(18)

Here χ0 = m0.

A damped harmonic oscillator is described by the Langevin
equation M ¨x + kx + γ ˙x = η, where M, k, and γ denote
the mass, spring constant, and friction coefﬁcient, and η is a
random force with white-noise spectrum [51]. When the os-

cillator is overdamped, γ (cid:29) M(cid:112)M/k, the inertial term in

the equation can be ignored and the response function has ex-
actly the same structure as Eq. (18). In the magnetization case,
however, we are not taking the overdamping limit. Instead,
the system corresponds to the massless limit of the Langevin
equation, and the response function (18) applies to any value
of τ ∝ 1/γ. Importantly, the energy dissipated in one hys-
0 χ(cid:48)(cid:48)(ω), where χ(cid:48)(cid:48)(ω) is the imaginary
teresis loop is E = πB2
part of the response function. Explicitly,

E = πm0B2
0

ωτ

1 + ω2τ 2 .

(19)

Here ω = 2π/tp with tp denoting the period of the periodic
driving. Therefore, E ∝ τ when τ (cid:28) tp and E ∝ 1/τ when
τ (cid:29) tp.

Interestingly, the linear and inverse-linear dependence on
dissipation have been demonstrated elsewhere in chemistry
and thermal physics. The Kramers transition rate theory mod-
els a chemical reaction rate by the Brownian motion of a
particle moving out of a metastable well [14]. Due to the
ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem, the magnitude of the random
force in the Langevin equation increases with the friction co-
efﬁcient. When the friction is small, there are insufﬁcient
kicks to move the particle out of the well, and the transition
rate increases linearly as the friction coefﬁcient increases. Af-
ter the crossover point, the friction becomes large. Then, the
particle has more chance of climbing up the energy barrier,
but the violent kicks randomly throw the particle back to the
well. In the strong friction regime, the transition rate is sup-
pressed by the inverse of the friction coefﬁcient. By plotting

Figure 4. Energy dissipated in one hysteresis loop as a function
of the relaxation time τ for (a) the magnetization of the two-state
paramagnet and (b), (c) the atomic currents from N = 100 (b) and
N = 101 (c) noninteracting fermions in a ring. In the strongly dis-
sipative regime, E ∝ τ is apparent with small τ.
In the weakly
dissipative regime, the inverse relationship E ∝ 1/τ with large τ is
observable. The blue and red curves show the τ and 1/τ dependence
in the three cases. The energy units are EB = µBB0 for (a) and
Eu = (2π)2/(2mf L)2 for (b) and (c).

the transition rate as a function of the friction coefﬁcient, there
is a linear regime and an inverse-linear regime connected by a
maximal transition rate in between.

Similar effects are also observable when two reservoirs
with different temperatures are connected by a 1D classical
lattice [15, 16]. The thermal conductance exhibits similar de-
pendence on the friction coefﬁcient coupling the lattice to the
reservoirs. When the friction is small, the heat conduction is
limited by how much energy is pumped into the lattice from
the reservoir.
Increasing the friction allows for higher en-
ergy input and increases thermal conduction linearly. When
the friction is strong, however, the lattice sites coupled to the
reservoirs are basically in thermal equilibrium with the reser-
voirs and exhibit different energy spectra from the rest of the
lattice. The mismatch of the energy spectra suppresses heat
conduction. As a consequence, heat conduction decreases
with the inverse of the friction coefﬁcients. A maximal ther-
mal conductance emerges when the two regimes meet in be-
tween.

IV.

INTERACTION EFFECTS

So far we only present rate-dependent hysteresis in nonin-
teracting systems. One important feature of the framework
built here is that the eigenstates remain the same regardless
of the periodic driving force. The eigenvalues, nevertheless,
depend explicitly on the driving. By examining the two-state
paramagnet and the Fermi gas in a ring, the following struc-
ture emerges

H(R)|ψn(cid:105) = En(R)|ψn(cid:105) .

(20)

Here R denotes the driving force, which corresponds to B in
the two-state paramagnet or φ in the atomic current in a ring.
Since the basis |ψn(cid:105) is independent of R, we can focus on
their population distribution. Relaxation mechanisms are then
introduced to redistribute the population in the eigenstates.

This framework can be invalidated in the presence of inter-
actions, which usually correlate the eigenstates of the nonin-
teracting Hamiltonian and make them explicitly depend on the
driving force. Then it is no longer useful to analyze the popu-
lation on the eigenstates at a given instance because the eigen-
states at a different instance will be different. In the following
we give some illustrations of how interactions invalidate the
hysteresis mechanism presented here. Interestingly, there are
special cases where selected types of interactions still allow
the framework to describe rate-dependent hysteresis and we
will summarize some examples, too.

A. Limitation of the relaxation framework

H = Bx ˆσx + Bz(t)ˆσz.

−Bx

(cid:19)
(cid:18)
Bz(t) −(cid:112)Bz(t)2 + B2
(cid:18)−Bz(t) +(cid:112)Bz(t)2 + B2
x + (Bz(t) −(cid:112)Bz(t)2 + B2

1
N
1
N

−Bx

x

x

|n, t(cid:105)+ =
|n, t(cid:105)− =
(cid:113)

(21)

(cid:19)

.

(22)

and break the invariance. The corresponding Hamiltonian is

8

The eigenstates at a given time t is

x.

Here N =
x)2 being a nor-
malization factor, and the corresponding eigen energies are

B2

E± = ±(cid:112)Bz(t)2 + B2

As time evolves, the magnetic ﬁeld Bz(t) at each instance
introduces a different set of eigenstates, and (cid:104)n, t1|n, t2(cid:105) (cid:54)=
1. With each increment of time, not only the eigenvalues but
the eigenstates are different from the previous one. In such a
system, it is more advantageous to choose a ﬁxed basis (such
as the eigenstates in the absence of interactions) and analyze
the evolution of the density matrix instead.

For multi-component ultracold fermions in a ring, contact
interactions between different components due to collisions
invalidate the single-particle picture. To ﬁnd the ground state,
one has to diagonalize the full Hamiltonian taking into ac-
count correlations between particles. For a simpliﬁed delta-
function interaction between two particles modeling the con-
tact interactions, one has to resort to the Bethe Ansatz for ﬁnd-
ing the ground state and its energy. Even for only two particles
in a ring subjected to an artiﬁcial vector potential, one has to
match the boundary conditions of the wave functions. The
consistent wavefunction then requires the wave vectors to be
solved from coupled equations [52]. Adjustment of the mo-
mentum of one particle alters the other, so one cannot ﬁll the
two particles in an arbitrary way like the noninteracting case.
The complexity of solving the Bethe Ansatz increases rapidly
as more particles are added to the system, so it will be a great
challenge to verify whether rate-dependent hysteresis still sur-
vives in the presence of strong interactions. It is clear, though,
the framework for noninteracting fermions does not apply to
systems with contact interactions.

Hysteresis loops, however, can be found in some interact-
ing systems. For example, the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilber (LLG)
model describes spin injection from a ﬁxed layer into a free
layer (see Refs. [53, 54] for a review), and effective interac-
tions and dissipation are incorporated. By driving the LLG
model with an oscillating magnetic ﬁeld, hysteresis loops of
magnetization are found in simulations [17]. For atomic cur-
rents in ring-shape potentials, here we show that hysteresis
loops are observable in the presence of Rashba spin-orbit cou-
pling.

For the two-state paramagnet we assume the spins are only
inﬂuenced by a modulating magnetic ﬁeld in the z-direction,
Bz(t) = B0 sin(ωt). This will allow the z-directional eigen-
states to be invariant under the drive. A simple modiﬁcation
of the problem is to add a constant transverse magnetic ﬁeld

B. Hysteresis in Rashba Spin-Orbit Coupled Fermi Gases

Here we present another case where rate-dependent hys-
teresis can be found in interacting systems. Although the
spin-orbit couplings in cold-atom experiments can be more

9

general [18–20], here we consider two-component ultracold
fermions with artiﬁcial Rashba spin-orbit coupling (RSOC)
[55–61]. Coupling of electronic spin to its momentum arises
from an effective ﬁeld produced by the moving electron in the
presence of Coulomb ﬁelds [62–65]. Although cold-atoms are
charge neutral, spin-orbit interactions can be engineered with
similar experimental techniques as artiﬁcial gauge ﬁelds [18–
20]. Coupling is induced in dressed atomic states by a pair of
Raman lasers and the coupling strength is dependent on the
momentum of the laser.

The Hamiltonian of atoms traversing a 1D ring on the xy-
plane acquires an extra coupling term from an additional arti-
ﬁcial gauge ﬁeld, which mimics an effective electric ﬁeld and
can be realized using laser to induce coupling of the spin to the
momentum [18]. The effective coupling is dependent on the
ratio of the momentum and energy of the laser. An artiﬁcial
vector potential in the azimuthal direction Aˆθ is periodically
modulating to drive an atomic current. The effective Hamilto-
nian in the presence of spin-orbit coupling is

H =

1

2mf

((cid:126)p + (cid:126)A)2 + α[ˆσ × ((cid:126)p + (cid:126)A)]z + V (r).

(23)

The spin, represented by the vector ˆσ consisting of Pauli ma-
trices, couples to the momentum with coupling constant α.
Here a harmonic conﬁning potential V (r) ∝ x2 is explicitly
included, where x = (r − a) is the width of the conﬁning
potential with a = L/(2π) being the ring radius [66]. Once
the Hamiltonian has been formulated, the conﬁning potential
can be taken in the 1D limit r → a and V (r) → 0. Using
cylindrical coordinates where ˆσr = ˆσx cos(θ) + ˆθy sin(φ) and
ˆσθ = ˆσy cos(θ) − ˆσx sin(θ), and using the previously deﬁned
relationship between A and φ, the Hamiltonian becomes

H = − 2
− α
r

2mf

ˆσr(i

∂r2 +
∂
∂θ

+

1
r
φ
φ0

− 1

∂
∂r

∂
r2 (i
∂θ
∂
∂r

) + iαˆσθ

+ V (r).

(24)

)2(cid:105)

+

φ
φ0

(cid:104) ∂2

Separating the radial and azimuthal variables H = Hr +Hθ
allows for the lowest radial mode, R0(r) ∝ e−(r−a)2/2 to
be determined from the solution to the simple harmonic os-
cillator. After taking the limit r → a, the Hamiltonian
H1D = (cid:104)R0|Hφ|R0(cid:105) is found to be
φ
φ0

H1D = Eu(i

α
2Eu

∂
∂θ

ˆσr)2

(25)

+

+

with Eu = (2π)2/(2mf L2). By solving Hψn = Enψn
with the following spinor

n

(cid:19)

eiθb±

(cid:18) a±
(1 ±(cid:112)(α/Eu)2 + 1)

n

,

(26)

(cid:17)2

.

(27)

En,± = Eu

we obtain the energy eigenvalues

(n − φ) +

(cid:16)
α (1 ±(cid:112)(α/Eu)2 + 1)a±

1
2

Using the following relationship for the eigenfunction coef-
ﬁcients Eu
n , the eigenstates

n = b±

ψ±
n = einθ

Figure 5. Hysteresis loops and dissipated energy of spin-orbit cou-
pled Fermi gases in a ring. (a-d) The total current, JT ot, as a function
of the normalized ﬂux, φ, at kBT /Eu = 3 with the spin-orbit cou-
pling α/Eu = 0.75. (a) The equilibrium (black) and dissipationless
(red) currents for N↑ = N↓ = 100 fermions. The currents exhibit
hysteresis loops as the ﬂux is periodically modulated with relaxation
times (b) τ /t0 = 0.1, (c) τ /t0 = 1, (d) and τ /t0 = 10. (e) En-
ergy dissipated in one hysteresis loop as a function of the relaxation
time τ. The linear (blue) and inversely linear (red) dependence on τ
in the strongly and weakly dissipative regimes similar to Fig. 4 are
observable.

can be found with the trigonometric relationship 1/ cos(θ) =

(cid:112)(α/Eu)2 + 1. We obtain
(cid:19)
(cid:18) cos( θ

(cid:18) sin( θ

(cid:19)

, ψ−

2 )
eiθ sin( θ
2 )

2 )
−eiθ cos( θ
2 )

n = einθ

ψ+
n = einθ

.
(28)
An important feature is that the eigenstates have no depen-
dence on the artiﬁcial magnetic ﬂux φ, meaning only the en-
ergy eigenvalues vary as the ﬂux is turned on. This feature
allows the system to be treated with the relaxation approxi-
mation, and the atomic current driven by a periodically mod-
ulating ﬂux can be determined.
jn,± = −∂En,±/∂Φ. Thus,

The current from a selected eigenstate can be found by

(1 ±(cid:112)(α/Eu)2 + 1)

(cid:17)

.

(29)

jn,± = J0

(n − φ) +

1
2

(cid:16)

Here again J0 = (2π)/(mf L2). The current in the pres-
ence of RSOC and dissipation can be evaluated using the re-
laxation approximation in the same fashion as non-interacting
fermions. We again implement the Fermi-Dirac statistics for
the En,± energy states in equilibrium.

fn,±,eq =

1

eβ(En,±−µ) + 1

.

(30)

bution functions, Ntot =(cid:80)
bution function over all levels, JT ot =(cid:80)

The chemical potential µ can be determined with a root ﬁnd-
ing method when evaluating Ntot = N↑ + N↓ from the distri-
n(fn,+ + fn,−). The total current
can be found by summing the current multiplied by the distri-
n,± fn,±jn,±. The
fully equilibrium current is obtained by using fn,±,eq in the
evaluation. To determine the current in the presence of dissi-
pation, we evaluate the distribution function using the relax-
ation approximation for fn,±.

∂fn,±

∂t

=

−(fn,± − fn,±,eq)

τ

.

(31)

In Fig. 5 the total current is plotted against the periodic, driv-
ing ﬂux φ with ﬁxed α/Eu = 0.75. The period of the driving
is again taken as 2t0. The persistent current (labeled as the
equilibrium current) in the presence of RSOC decays rapidly

[1] L. P. Levy, G. Dolan, J. Dunsmuir, and H. Bouchiat, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 64, 2074 (1990).

[2] E. Akkermans and G. Montambaux, Mesoscopic Physics of

Electrons and Photons (Cambridge, 2007).

[3] Y. V. Nazarov and Y. M. Blanter, Quantum transport: Introduc-
tion to nanoscience (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
UK, 2009).

[4] A. Ramanathan, K. C. Wright, S. R. Muniz, M. Zelan, W. T.
Hill, C. J. Lobb, K. Helmerson, W. D. Phillips, and G. K.
Campbell, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 130401 (2011).

[5] S. Eckel, J. G. Lee, F. Jendrzejewski, N. Murray, C. W. Clark,

10

with temperature, so we choose kBT = 3Eu in Fig. 5. Hys-
teresis loops are observable for N↑ = N↓ = 100 with spin-
orbit interactions as shown in Figure 5(a-d). Similar hystere-
sis loops are observable for N↑ = N↓ = 101 with suitable
parameter, too.

The dependence of energy dissipation on the relaxation
time of the RSOC system also exhibits the universal behav-
ior found in the noninteracting cases. Since the RSOC system
can still be described in the framework of rate-dependent hys-
teresis, the linear and inverse-linear dependence of dissipated
energy on the relaxation time holds true and is illustrated in
Figure 5(e). Therefore, the RSOC induced by artiﬁcial gauge
ﬁelds are also suitable for experimental measurements and ob-
servations of rate-dependent hysteresis in cold-atom systems.

V. CONCLUSION

Hysteresis loops of atomic current have been demonstrated
to exist for non-interacting fermions as well as fermions with
spin-orbit coupling conﬁned in a 1D ring potential with tun-
able dissipation, and similar rate-dependent hysteresis has be
found in magnetic systems as well. The dissipated energy ex-
hibits universal dependence on the relaxation time τ. The
universal behavior can be analyzed in the small and large τ
regimes. The two-state paramagnet case is exactly solvable
and the origin of the universal behavior arises from the re-
sponse function possessing an identical structure as a damped
harmonic oscillator in the massless limit. The observed de-
pendence on the relaxation time is reminiscent to the depen-
dence of the transition rate in Kramers transition rate theory of
chemical reactions and the thermal conductance in 1D lattice
on the friction coefﬁcient. The observations illustrate striking
similarities of dynamical phenomena across different research
ﬁelds.

Hysteresis loops of noninteracting or spin-orbit coupled
ultracold Fermi gases are promising because of recent ad-
vance in rapid loading of atoms [67], portable cold atom sys-
tems [68], and artiﬁcial gauge ﬁelds. Although cooling of
fermionic systems is challenging, it is also a research ﬁeld un-
der active investigations. Usage of rate-independent hystere-
sis and related dynamic phenomena will bring opportunities
for atomtronic applications [69, 70].

Acknowledgment — We thank Yu-Ju Lin, Kuei Sun,
Michael Zwolak, and Roland Winston for stimulating discus-
sions.

C. J. Lobb, W. D. Phillips, M. Edwards, and G. K. Campbell,
Nature 506, 200 (2014).

[6] M. Cominotti, D. Rossini, M. Rizzi, F. Hekking, and A. Min-

guzzi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 025301 (2014).

[7] V. Chandrasekhar, R. A. Webb, M. J. Brady, M. B. Ketchen,
W. J. Gallagher, and A. Kleinsasser, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 3578
(1991).

[8] G. Bertotti, Hysteresis in Magnetism: for physicists, material

scientists and engineers (Academic Press, 1998).

[9] E. J. Mueller, Phys. Rev. A 66, 063603 (2002).
[10] R. James, Nature 521, 298 (2015).

[11] M. D. Ventra, Y. V. Pershin, and L. O. Chua, Proc. IEEE 97,

1717 (2009).

[12] A. Trenkwalder, G. Spagnolli, G. Semeghini, S. Coop, M. Lan-
Inguscio,

dini, P. Castilho, L. Pezze, G. Modugno, M.
A. Smerzi, and M. Fattori, (2016), arXiv: 1603.02979.

[13] D. Jiles and D. L. Atherton, IEEE Trans. Magn. 19, 5 (1983).
[14] P. Hanggi, P. Talkner, and M. Borkovec, Rev. Mod. Phys. 62,

251 (1990).

[15] S. Lepri, R. Livi, and A. Politi, Phys. Rep. 377, 1 (2003).
[16] K. A. Velizhanin, C.-C. Chien, Y. Dubi, and M. Zwolak, Sci.

Rep. 5, 17506 (2015).

[19] P. Wang, Z. Q. Yu, Z. Fu, J. Miao, L. Huang, S. Chai, H. Zhai,

and J. Zhang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 095301 (2012).

[20] L. W. Cheuk, A. T. Sommer, Z. Hadzibabic, T. Yefsah, W. S.
and M. W. Zwierlein, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 095302

[21] D. Schroeder, An Introduction to Thermal Physics (Addison-

[22] F. Bloch, Phys. Rev. 70, 460 (1946).
[23] N. Ashcroft and D. Mermin, Solid State Physics (Cengage

83 (2011).

Bakr,
(2012).

Wesley, 1999).

Learning, 1976).

[17] S. Liu, H. Zhang, and H. Yu, (2016), arXiv: 1602.05375.
[18] Y.-J. Lin, K. Jim´enez-Garc´ıa, and I. B. Spielman, Nature 471,

K. Sengstock,
(2006).

11

[41] G. Barontini, R. Labouvie, F. Stubenrauch, A. Vogler, V. Guar-

rera, and H. Ott, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 035302 (2013).

[42] S. Diehl, E. Rico, M. A. Baranov, and P. Zoller, Nat. Phys. 7,

2106 (2011).

[43] S. Diehl, A. Micheli, A. Kantian, B. Kraus, H. P. Buchler, and

P. Zoller, Nat. Phys. 4, 878 (2008).

[44] K. Gunter, T. Stoferle, H. Moritz, M. Kohl, and T. Esslinger,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 180402 (2006).

[45] A. V. Ponomarev, J. Madronero, A. R. Kolovsky, and A. Buch-

leitner, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 050404 (2006).

[46] S. Ospelkaus, C. Ospelkaus, O. Wille, M. Succo, P. Ernst,
and K. Bongs, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 180403

[47] W. S. Bakr, J. I. Gillen, A. Peng, S. F¨olling, and M. Greiner,

[48] G. Reinaudi, T. Lahaye, Z. Wang, , and D. Gu´ery-Odelin, Opt.

Nature 462, 74 (2009).

Lett. 32, 3143 (2007).

[49] R. A. Hart, P. M. Duarte, T.-L. Yang, X. Liu, T. Paiva,
E. Khatami, R. T. Scalettar, N. Trivedi, D. A. Huse, and R. G.
Hulet, Nature 519, 211 (2015).

[50] P. M. Duarte, R. A. Hart, T.-L. Yang, X. Liu, T. Paiva,
E. Khatami, R. T. Scalettar, N. Trivedi, and R. G. Hulet, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 114, 070403 (2015).

[51] P. Chaikin and T. Lubensky, Principles of Condensed Matter

Physics (Cambridge University Press, 1995).

[52] F. N. ¨Unal, B. Hetenyi, and M. O. Oktel, Phys. Rev. A 91,

[53] S. Bandyopadhyay and M. Cahay, Introduction to spintronics

[54] A. Kamenev, Field theory of non-equilibrium systems (Cam-

bridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2011).

[55] D. L. Campbell, G. Juzeli¨unas, and I. B. Spielman, Phys. Rev.

A 84, 025602 (2011).

[24] I. Gilbert, G.-W. Chern, B. Fore, Y. Lao, S. Zhang, C. Nisoli,

and P. Schiffer, Phys. Rev. B 92, 104417 (2015).

[25] L. Corte, P. Chaikin, J. Gollub, and D. Pine, Nat. Phys. 4, 420

053625 (2015).

[26] M. Buttiker, Y. Imry, and R. Landauer, Phys. Lett. 96A, 327

(CRC Press, Boca Raton, 2016).

[27] N. Yamamoto, Phys. Rev. D 92, 085011 (2015).
[28] J.-Y. Bigot, J.-C. Merle, O. Cregut, and A. Daunois, Phys. Rev.

(2008).

(1983).

Lett. 75, 4702 (1995).

Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 1680 (1987).

102, 3860 (1995).

[29] R. W. Schoenlein, W. Z. Lin, J. G. Fujimoto, and G. L. Eesley,

[56] J. Ruseckas, G. Juzeli¨unas, P. ¨Ohberg, and M. Fleischhauer,

[30] T. W. Roberti, B. A. Smith, and J. Z. Zhang, J. Chem. Phys.

[57] K. Osterloh, M. Baig, L. Santos, P. Zoller, and M. Lewenstein,

[31] H. Ott, E. de Mirandes, F. Ferlaino, G. Roati, G. Modugno, and

[58] S.-L. Zhu, H. Fu, C. J. Wu, S. C. Zhang, and L. M. Duan, Phys.

M. Inguscio, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 160601 (2004).

[32] L. Amico, A. Osterloh, and F. Cataliotti, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95,

Rev. Lett. 97, 240401 (2006).

[59] J. Dalibard, F. Gerbier, G. Juzeli¨unas, and P. ¨Ohberg, Rev. Mod.

Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 010404 (2005).

Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 010403 (2005).

Phys. 83, 1523(21) (2011).
[60] G. Bihlmayer, O. Rader,

and R. Winkler, New J. Phys 17,

[34] S. A. Reyes, L. Morales-Molina, M. Orszag, and D. Spehner,

[61] G. Juzeli¨unas, J. Ruseckas, and J. Dalibard, Phys. Rev. A 81,

063201 (2005).

[33] L. Amico, D. Aghamalyan, F. Auksztol, H. Crepaz, R. Dumke,

and L. C. Kwek, Sci. Rep. 4, 04298 (2014).

EPL 108, 20010 (2014).

[35] N. Goldman, G. Juzeliunas, P. Ohberg, and I. B. Spielman,

Rep. Prog. Phys. 77, 126401 (2014).

[36] Y.-J. Lin, R. L. Compton, K. Jimenez-Garca, J. V. Porto, and

I. B. Spielman, Nature 462, 628 (2009).

[37] V. Galitski and I. B. Spielman, Nature 494, 49 (2013).
[38] J. Struck, M.Weinberg, C. ¨Olschl¨ager, P. Windpassinger, J. Si-
monet, K. Sengstock, R. H¨oppner, P. Hauke, A. Eckardt,
M. Lewenstein, and L. Mathey, Nat. Phys. 9, 738 (2013).

[39] P. Hauke, O. Tieleman, A. Celi, C. ¨Olschl¨ager, J. Simonet,
J. Struck, M. Weinberg, P. Windpassinger, K. Sengstock,
M. Lewenstein, and A. Eckardt, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 145301
(2012).

[40] M.-X. Huo, W. Nie, D. A. W. Hutchinson, and L. C. Kwek,

Sci. Rep. 4, 5992 (2014).

050202 (2015).

053403 (2010).

[62] E. I. Rashba, Fiz. Tverd. Tela(Leningrad) 2, 1224 (1960).
[63] Y. A. Bychkov and E. I. Rashba, J. Phys. C 17, 6039 (1984).
[64] F. Mireles and G. Kirczenow, Phys. Rev. B 64, 024426 (2001).
[65] P. Streda and P. Seba, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 256601 (2003).
[66] F. E. Meijer, A. F. Morpurgo, and T. M. Klapwijk, Phys. Rev.

B 66, 033107 (2002).

[67] B. J. Lester, N. Luick, A. M. Kaufman, C. M. Reynolds, and

C. A. Regal, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 073003 (2015).

[68] J. A. Rushton, M. Aldous, and M. D. Himsworth, Rev. of Sci.

Instr. 85, 121501 (2014).

[69] C. C. Chien, S. Peotta, and M. Di Ventra, Nat. Phys. 11, 998

(2015).

[70] C. Y. Lai and C. C. Chien, Phys. Rev. Applied 5, 034001 (2016).

