6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
t
n
a
u
q
[
 
 

1
v
6
2
7
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Parametric down-conversion photon pair source on a nanophotonic chip

Xiang Guo,1 Chang-Ling Zou,1 Carsten Schuck,1 Hojoong Jung,1 Risheng Cheng,1 and Hong X. Tang1

1Department of Electrical Engineering, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06511, USA

Quantum photonic chips, which integrate quantum light sources alongside active and
passive optical elements, as well as single photon detectors, show great potential for
photonic quantum information processing and quantum technology. Mature semicon-
ductor nanofabrication processes allow for scaling such photonic integrated circuits to
on-chip networks of increasing complexity. Second order nonlinear materials are the
method of choice for generating photonic quantum states in the overwhelming part of
linear optic experiments using bulk components but integration with waveguide cir-
cuitry on a nanophotonic chip proved to be challenging. Here we demonstrate such
an on-chip parametric down-conversion source of photon pairs based on second order
nonlinearity in an Aluminum nitride microring resonator. We show the potential of our
source for quantum information processing by measuring high-visibility antibunching
of heralded single photons with nearly ideal state purity. Our down conversion source
operates with high brightness and low noise, yielding pairs of correlated photons at
MHz-rates with high coincidence-to-accidental ratio. The generated photon pairs are
spectrally far separated from the pump ﬁeld, providing good potential for realizing suf-
ﬁcient on-chip ﬁltering and monolithic integration of quantum light sources, waveguide
circuits and single photon detectors.

Keywords: nanofabrication, quantum photonic chip, second order nonlinear material, single photon
source

INTRODUCTION
Photons are excellent quantum information carriers be-
cause they combine high-speed with long coherence times
at room temperature [1, 2]. Photon pair sources based on
spontaneous parametric down conversion (SPDC) have
enabled major advances in photonic quantum computa-
tion and communication [3, 4]. Quantum teleportation
[5–7], multi-photon manipulation [8–14], quantum algo-
rithms [15–19] and loophole-free tests of local realism
[20, 21] were all achieved with SPDC-photons generated
in materials with a strong second order (χ(2)) optical
nonlinearity. Common nonlinear crystals employed for
SPDC, e.g.
lithium niobate (LiNbO3), are centimeter-
sized and not yet compatible with standard nanofab-
rication technologies [22–24]. Meanwhile, silicon-based
nanophotonic chips have emerged, which leverage ma-
ture semiconductor fabrication processes to provide a
stable and scalable solution for optical quantum infor-
mation processing [2, 25–28]. However, the generation
of SPDC photons for current experiments with silicon
photonic chips is still realized in separate bulk optic se-
tups. One alternative approach resorts to exploiting the
χ(3) optical nonlinearity of silicon, which allows for gen-
erating correlated photon pairs via the process of spon-
taneous four wave mixing (SFWM) [29–31].
Integrat-
ing an optically pumped source of correlated photons
with waveguides and detectors on the same chip requires
one, however, to eﬃciently separate the generated sig-
nal and idler photons from the co-propagating classical
pump ﬁeld. In the SFWM process the generated photon
pairs are spectrally separated by only a few nanometers
from the optical pump wavelength, which hence makes
suﬃcient ﬁltering and integration of such sources with

detectors on one chip a challenging task. Because on-chip
pump light suppression requires sophisticated techniques
[32] a variety of important physical processes could only
be realized using SFWM in combination with oﬀ-chip ﬁl-
tering, e.g. in source multiplexing [33], on-chip quantum
interference [31], and entanglement [34–36]. SPDC oﬀers
better prospects for eﬃcient pump light suppression and
consequently integrating source and detector on the same
chip. Eﬃcient ﬁltering can for example be achieved by
implementing a down conversion photon pair source on
a silicon substrate, where the pump light is in the visi-
ble wavelength range and photon pairs are generated at
infrared wavelengths. The material absorption of silicon
for visible light is then large enough (1740 dB/cm) to
guarantee eﬃcient suppression of undesired pump light
before SPDC photons reach an on-chip detector.

Aluminum nitride (AlN) is a new material suitable
for scalable photonic integrated circuits [37, 38].
Its
strong intrinsic second order nonlinearity (χ(2)) not only
shows great potential for realizing on-chip photon pair
sources based on SPDC [38], but also permits integrated
low-loss, high-speed electro-optic (EO) phase modulation
[37]. Here we demonstrate an integrated SPDC photon
pair source using a high quality factor (Q) AlN micror-
ing resonator. For compatibility with telecommunica-
tion technology we realize nonlinear conversion of visi-
ble wavelength (775 nm) pump photons to telecom wave-
length (1550 nm) photon pairs. High refractive index
contrast between the AlN-waveguides and a silicon diox-
ide (SiO2) cladding layer allows for small device footprint
and enables dense integration on silicon handles. The
generated photon pairs are characterized by waveguide
coupled superconducting single photon detectors (SSPD)
integrated on a dedicated chip. We achieve high photon

a

b

χ(2)

On-chip
  WDM

Photon-pair
   Source

Source chip

1550nm TM0

M0
T
 
m
n
5
7
7

0

1550n m T M

AlN

SiO2

Silicon

M 2

775nm T

775nm TM2

IR photon pairs

Fiber and
off-chip filter

Visible pump

On-chip
  WDM

Visible
 Laser

160 µm

c

d

2

C
o

r

r

e

l

a

t

o

r

  SSPD

Detector chip

e

30 µm

2 µm

FIG. 1: On-chip spontaneous parametric down conversion photon pair source. (a) Schematic illustration of an on-chip photon
pair source based on a χ(2) nonlinearity connected to superconducting single photon detectors (SSPD) on another chip. Higher
energy pump photons (visible wavelengths) are coupled into a microring resonator and the generated lower energy photon pairs
(IR wavelengths) are randomly split on the detector chip for coincidence measurements with integrated SSPDs. A ﬁber coupled
silicon ﬁlter (labeled as oﬀ-chip ﬁlter) is used to reject the remaining pump light reﬂected back from ﬁber-to-chip interface. (b)
Eﬀective refractive indices of modes in microring. Phase match condition is satisﬁed with waveguide width around 1.10 µm.
Lower left inset: the cross-section of the AlN waveguide. Insets on the right: The electric ﬁeld proﬁles at the cross-section of
microring of two phase-matched modes. (c-e) Device images of AlN down conversion photon pair source. The white dashed
box shows the zoom-in region. (c) Optical image of an array of microring photon pair source with on-chip WDMs. (d) Zoom-in
of a single microring resonator with both IR (top) and visible (bottom) bus waveguides. (e) SEM picture showing the coupling
region of visible light bus waveguide (narrow) with microring resonator (wide).

pair production rates of 3 MHz/mW(5.8 MHz/mW) for
degenerate (non-degenerate) down conversion. The over-
all photon pair emission rate is more than 20 MHz/mW,
which is comparable to the state-of-the-art bulk optic
photon pair sources [24]. In terms of the spectral bright-
ness, the demonstrated AlN microring SPDC source is
much brighter than conventional waveguide or bulk crys-
tal based sources. We observe high-visibility antibunch-
ing of heralded single photons, characterized by second
order intensity correlations of g(2)
h (0) = 0.088±0.004.
The suitability of our SPDC source for quantum infor-
mation applications is further highlighted by nearly ideal
purity of the heralded photons, which we demonstrate in
self-correlation measurements of the idler photons.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Experimental setup and device engineering
The device is shown in Fig. 1a. We realize the SPDC
source as a high quality factor AlN microring resonator,
which enhances the pump photon interaction with the
material’s χ(2) nonlinearity [39]. This allows for produc-
ing down-conversion photon pairs with long-coherence
time at low optical pump power. Here, the visible wave-
length pump laser ﬁeld is guided into the microring res-
onator via a narrow wrap-around waveguide, while the
generated IR photon pairs are coupled out via a wider
bus waveguide. We design an on-chip wavelength divi-
sion multiplexer (WDM), which guides IR photons back
into the optical ﬁber towards the detectors. After passing
through a ﬁber coupled silicon ﬁlter, the residual visible
pump photons are rejected while IR photons are guided

to waveguide coupled superconducting single photon de-
tectors (SSPD), which are integrated on a separate chip
[27, 28, 40] inside a cryostat. Waveguide directional cou-
plers on this detection chip allow for 50/50 splitting of
photon pairs before detection with the SSPDs and sig-
nal analysis with time correlated single photon counting
(TCSPC) electronics.

The lower left inset in Fig. 1b shows the cross-section of
the AlN chip. AlN forms the core of the waveguide while
SiO2 acts as a low refractive index cladding layer, on top
of the silicon substrate. A degenerate (non-degenerate)
SPDC process involves one optical pump mode in the
visible wavelength band and one (two) signal and idler
modes in the IR wavelength band. Energy conserva-
tion implies the condition ωvis = ωIR,1 + ωIR,2, while
momentum conservation requires mvis = mIR,1 + mIR,2,
where ωx and mx (x = vis, IR, 1 or IR, 2) are the fre-
quencies and azimuthal numbers of the visible and IR
modes, respectively (for degenerate SPDC ωIR,1 = ωIR,2
and mIR,1 = mIR,2). To fulﬁll these two conditions and
realize eﬃcient nonlinear conversion, it is necessary to
match the eﬀective refractive indices nef f = mxc/ωxr
(c is the speed of light in vacuum and r is the radius
of the microring) of the visible pump and IR signal and
idler modes. This phase matching condition can be satis-
ﬁed for a higher order transverse magnetic (TM) visible
wavelength pump mode and fundamental TM (TM0) sig-
nal and idler modes in the IR [38, 41]. In Fig. 1b we show
how this eﬀective refractive index matching is achieved
for a 775 nm TM2 mode and a 1550 nm TM0 mode by
engineering the waveguide-width of the AlN microring.
In the right two insets of Fig. 1b the corresponding mode
proﬁles in a 1.10 µm width waveguide are shown.

The high refractive index contrast between waveguide
(AlN) and cladding (SiO2) materials allows for a small
device footprint and dense integration. In Fig. 1c we show
an optical micrograph of an array of AlN microring pho-
ton pair sources integrated with on-chip WDMs. Two
independent waveguide channels are designed for visible
and IR light, respectively (Fig. 1d). To excite the visi-
ble wavelength TM2 mode inside the ring resonator we
utilize a narrow wrap-around waveguide. Adjusting the
gap between the ring and the wrap-around waveguide
as well as the wrap-around waveguide width it is possi-
ble to adiabatically couple the TM0 pump mode of the
feed waveguide to the TM2 mode of the microring under
critical coupling conditions. As long as the gap between
the wrap-around waveguide and the microring is large
enough, the existence of this narrow waveguide will not
deteriorate the quality factor for the ring resonator’s IR
modes (see supplementary section I). The wrap-around
waveguide is tapered down to 100 nm, as shown in the
SEM image of the coupling region (Fig. 1e) while the cou-
pling gap between wrap-around waveguide and microring
is 500 nm.

Device fabrication and measurement
A 1 µm thin AlN ﬁlm is sputtered on a commercial oxide-

3

on-silicon wafer. We use FOX-16 resist and deﬁne pat-
terns in electron beam lithography. After development in
MF312 developer, Cl2/BCl3/Ar chemistry is used to etch
into the AlN layer. The chip is then coated with a 2.5 µm
of PECVD oxide cladding layer as protection during sub-
sequent polishing steps. The device is ﬁnally annealed in
an O2 atmosphere for 5 h at 950 C to improve the quality
of PECVD oxide. The detector chip is fabricated from
a commercial 330 nm SiN-on-insulator wafer onto which
we sputter an 8 nm thin ﬁlm of NbTiN. Electrode pads
are deﬁned in PMMA resist via electron beam lithogra-
phy followed by gold deposition and lift-oﬀ in acetone.
In a second electron beam lithography step the SSPD
nanowires are patterned in HSQ negative tone resist and
transferred into the NbTiN layer using CF4 chemistry.
In the third and ﬁnal electron beam lithography step the
SiN waveguides are written in ZEP positive tone resist
followed by a timed reactive ion etch in CHF3/O2 chem-
istry.

We use a continuous-wave visible wavelength laser
(TLB-6712) to pump the SPDC source. A ﬁber cou-
pled silicon absorber (OZ optics) is used to ﬁlter out
the pump light reﬂected from ﬁber-to-chip interface. We
achieve 80 dB attenuation for pump light at 3 dB inser-
tion loss for IR light. For the degenerate SPDC coin-
cidence measurement, a band-pass tunable ﬁlter is used
to spectrally ﬁlter out the degenerate down conversion
photons. For the measurements of the SPDC thermal
state, a dense wavelength division multiplexer (DWDM)
is used to select the idler branch from the nearest non-
degenerate down conversion photon pair. The photons
are then sent into the detector chip, where superconduct-
ing single photon detectors are integrated with a 50/50
directional coupler for self-correlation measurements [28].
Electrical signals from the on-chip detectors are sent into
a Time-Correlated Single Photon Counting (TCSPC)
system (Picoharp 300) for time tagging [42]. For non-
degenerate cross-correlation measurements, a DWDM is
used to separate signal and idler photons, which are then
sent to two separate on-chip detectors for coincidence
measurement.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Characterization of on-chip down-conversion
source
We ﬁrst characterize the classical performances of the mi-
croring resonator. Figure 2a shows the microring trans-
mission spectrum for visible light in a slightly under-
coupled conﬁguration (a critically-coupled spectrum is
shown in the supplementary section I). Figure 2b shows
the transmission spectrum for IR light, when the bus
waveguide is critically-coupled to the microring res-
onator. The two spectra show how the TM2,2N mode
at 775 nm aligns with the TM0,N mode at twice the
wavelength according to energy conservation (ωvis =
2ωIR). Here N(2N) stands for the azimuthal mode num-
ber, which is determined by momentum conservation
(mvis = 2mIR) in the degenerate SPDC process. To

a

b

c

d

Pump1

Pump2 Pump3

DFG3

DFG2

DFG1

FIG. 2: Linear and nonlinear characteristics of the χ(2)
source.
(a-b) Transmission spectra of the microring res-
onator. Four gray dashed lines are aligned with the visible
TM2 mode resonances. Gray region shows the phase-matched
mode pair (TM2,2N and TM0,N) for SHG and degenerate
SPDC, whose resonances are aligned within the linewidth of
IR mode resonance. (a) Visible light transmission spectrum,
with TM2 mode resonances emphasized by red lines. (b) IR
light transmission spectrum, with TM0 modes identiﬁed by
the azimuthal mode number. (c) Diﬀerence frequency gener-
ation (DFG) measured by optical spectrum analyzer. Peaks
due to input IR pump lasers are shown in the light orange re-
gion and generated DFG signals are shown in the light green
region. Visible pump laser with 1.9 mW power on-chip is
ﬁxed on resonance with TM2,2N mode. (d) Single photon
ﬂux arriving at the detector chip from the degenerate and
nearest three groups of non-degenerate down conversion. The
counts are calibrated by the wavelength dependent detection
eﬃciency (Supplementary Section II).

4

perfectly fulﬁll the energy conservation (ωvis = 2ωIR),
we vary the global temperature of the chip and deter-
mine the optimized working temperature using second
harmonic generation (SHG) [37, 38] as a ﬁgure of merit,
which is directly related to SPDC eﬃciency (see theoreti-
cal derivation in supplementary section III). By pumping
at TM0,N mode and monitoring the output SHG from
TM2,2N mode, we observe a maximum SHG eﬃciency
of ηSHG = PSHG/P 2
p = 1.16 W−1, where PSHG(Pp) is
the optical power of the generated second harmonic light
(pump laser). Due to the group velocity mismatch be-
tween visible and IR modes, energy conservation cannot
be satisﬁed for SHG in other modes, as can be seen in
Figs. 3a and b, where no pairs of IR and visible light
modes are aligned except for the TM2,2N and TM0,N
modes. However, the group velocity dispersion (GVD) is
relatively small in the IR region, and energy conservation
can be fulﬁlled for IR modes over a wide wavelength range
for diﬀerence/sum frequency generation (DFG/SFG) and
conversely for non-degenerate SPDC. We verify this by
ﬁxing the visible wavelength pump laser at the resonance
of the TM2,2N mode and sweep the IR probe laser over
a wavelength range covering the neighboring resonances
(e.g. TM0,N−1/TM0,N−2/TM0,N−3 modes). We observe
DFG of various modes, as shown in Fig. 2c. The fact
that both SHG and various DFG-conﬁgurations can be
observed indicates the possibility of generating both de-
generate and non-degenerate photon-pairs in wavelength
bands spaced similar to a frequency-comb.

We use SSPDs to characterize the statistical properties
of photons generated by the SPDC source. In Fig. 2d the
photon ﬂux for diﬀerent ring resonances is shown for ﬁxed
power and wavelength of the visible light pump laser.
The variation in the detected photon rates for diﬀerent
resonance wavelengths can be explained by the diﬀerence
in the quality factors of the IR resonator modes because
the photon-pair generation rate is linearly dependent on
the quality factor. As discussed in the supplementary in-
formation, the bandwidth for non-degenerate SPDC can
be as large as 40 nm.

Correlated photon-pair generation
The statistical properties of the generated photon-pairs
can be analyzed in terms of the second order correlation
function (g(2)), which we measure using two detectors at
the outputs of a beam splitter and normalize to photon
ﬂux [43]

g(2)(τ ) =

Rcc(τ )
R1R2τb

(1)

where Rcc is the coincidence count rate, R1 (R2) is the
count rate of detector 1(2), and τb is the coincidence time
window. Here the coincidence rate Rcc is a function of
photon-photon arrival time delay τ , while R1, R2 and τb
are constant, which combine to the accidental coincidence
rate Rac = R1R2τb . We note that the g(2)(τ ) function
is a rescale of coincidence rate Rcc(τ ) by accidental coin-
cidence rate Rac. While the value of Rcc(τ ) and Rac are

a

b

c

775

1550

6

5

5

1

775

1

5

4

4

FIG. 3: Second order correlation function (g(2)(τ )) of down
converted photons. (a) Self-correlation measurement of de-
generate down conversion photon pairs. Right inset: Power
dependence of degenerate photon pair generation rate. Nor-
malized Generation rate of 3.0 MHz/mW has been ﬁtted. (b)
Cross-correlation measurement of the nearest non-degenerate
down conversion photon pairs. (c) Self-correlation measure-
ment of the idler in the nearest non-degenerate down con-
version. The left insets in (a-c) show the schematics of each
measurement. The solid lines are ﬁttings with the convolution
function between a double exponential decay and a Gaussian
distribution function related to the chosen bin-width and de-
tector jitter.

both dependent on the losses of the measuring systems,
the value of g(2)(τ ) is independent of system losses, al-
lowing us to extract the pair generation rate and SPDC
photon bandwidth from the measured g(2)(τ ) function
directly.

For degenerate SPDC photon pairs we measure the
self-correlation function with two waveguide coupled
SSPDs integrated with a 50/50 directional coupler, as
sketched in the left inset of Fig. 3a. We observe a clear
coincidence peak centered at zero delay time, which indi-
cates strong temporal correlations between the photons
emitted from the SPDC source. The second order self-
correlation function for degenerate SPDC photon-pairs is

given by [44–46]

g(2)
self (τ ) = 1 +

1

4Rτc

e−|τ|/τc,

5

(2)

where τ is the delay time between two photons, τc is
the coherence time of the SPDC photons, and R is the
photon-pair generation rate. Here, random ﬂuctuations
in the photons arrival time (δτ ) have to be taken into
account because the detector jitter (τj , see supplemen-
tary section V) and the coincidence time window (τb) are
not negligible compared with the photons’ coherence time
(τc). Assuming the arrival time ﬂuctuations δτ follow a
w, with standard devi-
normal distribution
ation τw = q2τ 2
be expressed as (see supplementary section V)

2 )2, the correlation function can

e−δτ 2/2τ 2

j + ( τb

1√2πτw

g(2)
self (τ ) = 1 +

1

8Rτc

w/2τ 2

eτ 2

c [f+(τ ) + f−(τ )] ,

(3)

w/τc

where f±(τ ) = h1 ∓ erf (cid:16) τ±τ 2
√2τw (cid:17)i · e±τ /τc and erf(x) is
the error function. From a ﬁt to the data in Fig. 3a,
we obtain the degenerate photon pair generation rate
R = 5.9 MHz for 1.9 mW pump power on-chip. The
bandwidth of the photons extracted from the ﬁt to the
data is ∆ν = 1
= 1.1 GHz, which agrees with the mea-
2πτc
sured linewidth of the IR resonator mode. The photon-
pair generation rate as a function of pump power is shown
in the right inset of Fig. 3a. We obtain a generation rate
of 3.0 MHz/mW for degenerate SPDC.

For non-degenerate SPDC photon pairs, the photons
of a pair may have diﬀerent wavelengths. If we discard
all the signal photons and only measure the emission of
idler photons, a thermal state statistics is expected [47].
We measure the self-correlation function for the nearest
idler (TM0,N−1) photons, as shown in the inset of Fig. 3c.
We obtain g2(0) = 2.07 ± 0.12 from a ﬁt to the data in
Fig. 3c, which is in agreement with the expected value of
g2(0) = 2 for single mode thermal state [43, 48].

We then separate signal and idler photons by a DWDM
and use two independent waveguide coupled SSPDs to
measure the second order cross-correlation function be-
tween signal and idler, as shown in the inset of Fig. 3b.
For non-degenerate photon pairs, the cross-correlation
function is given as:

g(2)
cross(τ ) = 1 +

1

4Rτc

w/2τ 2

eτ 2

c [f+(τ ) + f−(τ )] .

(4)

1

From a ﬁt to the data in Fig. 3b we extract the pho-
ton pair generation rate of R = 11.0 MHz for 1.9 mW
pump power (5.8 MHz/mW) and the bandwidth ∆ν =
= 1.1 GHz, which is similar to the degenerate SPDC
2πτc
case. We conclude that non-degenerate SPDC is around
two times more eﬃcient than degenerate SPDC, which
matches well with our theoretical calculation and origi-
nates from diﬀerent coeﬃcients of interaction Hamilto-
nian for degenerate and non-degenerate SPDC processes

(supplementary section III). Additional cross-correlation
measurements for photon pairs emitted into other micror-
ing resonance modes are shown in the supplementary in-
formation. The total (including degenerate and diﬀerent
groups of non-degenerate) photon pair generation rate
for this AlN microring source is more than 20 MHz/mW,
which is comparable or even higher than the state-of-the-
art SPDC photon pair source using bulk or waveguide-
based χ(2) crystals [24]. In terms of the spectral bright-
ness, AlN microring source is much brighter due to mi-
croring’s narrow linewidth.

)

(
)
2
h
(
g

1.2

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

Delay time   (ns)

FIG. 4: Heralded signal-signal correlation function (g(2)
h (τ ))
of down converted photons. On-chip pump power of 1.9 mW
is used to get enough counting rate. Here the heralded anti-
bunching dip of g(2)
h (0) = 0.088 ± 0.004 indicates that the
photon pair source is operating in the single photon regime.

Source of heralded single photons
With 1.9 mW pump power on-chip, the photon pair
generation rate for the nearest non-degenerate modes
(TM0,N+1 and TM0,N−1) is 11.0 MHz. To further ver-
ify that our photon pair source can be used as a her-
alded single photon source, we measure the normalized
signal-signal self-correlation function conditioned on the
detection of an idler photon [44, 49]

g(2)
h (ts1, ts2|ti) =

Pssi(ts1, ts2, ti)
si (ts1 − ti) · g(2)

r(0)3g(2)

si (ts2 − ti)

, (5)

where Pssi is the coincidence rate of detecting one idler
and two signal photons, g(2)
is the second order cross cor-
si
relation function and r(τ ) is ﬁrst order correlation func-
tion [49]. Here we are interested in the special case of
g(2)
h (τ ) ≡ g(2)
h (0, τ |0). For an ideal photon pair source,
we expect to detect at most one signal photon upon de-
tection of one (heralding) idler photon. Thus an anti-
bunching dip around zero delay time (τ = 0) is expected.
In our experiment, we split up the nearest non-degenerate
photon pairs deterministically using a DWDM. We then

6

use the idler photon as a herald for the detection of its
partner photon and measure the autocorrelation function
for the latter. Shown in Fig. 4 is the measurement result
with no background noises or dark counts subtracted.
We extract g(2)
h (0) = 0.088 ± 0.004 ≪ 0.5 from the data,
which conﬁrms that our SPDC source indeed yields single
photons with nonclassical correlations.

Device losses and measuring eﬃciencies
The raw data of the coincidence measurements is shown
in the supplementary information. The measured co-
incidence rate is around 80 Hz. For a pump power of
1.9 mW on-chip we infer an emission rate of photon pairs
in the nearest non-degenerate modes of 11.0 MHz from
a ﬁt to the coincidence data in Fig. 3b. The diﬀerence
between these rates arises from losses at the various de-
vice interfaces, i.e. microring-to-waveguide (3 dB), ﬁber-
to-chip interface (3.5 dB), silicon ﬁlter (3 dB), DWDM
(6 dB) and non-ideal detector eﬃciency (10 dB). With-
out subtracting any background noise or dark counts we
ﬁnd a coincidence-to-accidental ratio (CAR) of 560 for a
minimum pump power of 0.6 mW, at which the on-chip
generation rate amounts to 3.5 MHz.

On-chip wavelength division multiplexer
The large diﬀerence in pump and signal / idler wave-
lengths in the SPDC process allows for a variety of de-
sign choices to separate pump light from the generated
photons. One could choose to exploit wavelength selec-
tive material absorption, e.g. silicon will strongly absorb
visible light but transmit IR light. Another approach
is to design WDM waveguide circuits. In this work we
choose to realize the latter one because a WDM struc-
ture has the additional beneﬁt of simplifying the ﬁber-to-
chip coupling interface: 1) When characterizing the IR
and visible performances of the microring, only one op-
tical ﬁber at each side of the photonic chip is needed. 2)
When characterizing the down-conversion photon pairs,
a single optical ﬁber is simultaneously used to send the
pump light into and collect generated photon pairs from
the chip (as shown in Fig. 1a). The designed WDM
structure employs tapered waveguide couplers, as shown
in Figs. 5a and b.
In dielectric waveguides the optical
mode conﬁnement decreases towards longer wavelengths,
such that IR light will have a longer-range evanescent
ﬁeld outside the waveguides as compared to visible light.
For two waveguides in close proximity the resulting cou-
pling is hence stronger for IR than for visible wavelength
light. We hence adjust the coupling length such that
IR light is eﬃciently transferred from one waveguide to
another (Fig. 5a) while visible light remains unaﬀected
and is transmitted through the coupling region without
coupling to the neighboring waveguide (Fig. 5b).

Here the adiabatic taper WDM design is realized
with large fabrication tolerances and broadband working
wavelength. The relationship between coupling eﬃciency
and coupling length is shown in Fig. 5c for λ = 1550 nm
and λ = 775 nm. The design shown in Figs. 5a and b

λ = 1550nm 

C r o s s

λ = 775nm 

C r o s s

b

Input

Drop

Input

Drop

a

c

775nm Drop

s
s
o
r

m C

n
0
5
5
1

FIG. 5: On-chip wavelength division multiplexer (WDM). (a-
b) Simulated electric ﬁeld proﬁles of the designed on-chip
WDM device for IR (λ = 1550 nm) and visible (λ = 775 nm)
light. (c) Coupling eﬃciency of IR light to cross port and
visible light to drop port. Inset, Zoom in of coupling eﬃciency
for coupling length ranging from 200 µm to 400 µm.

corresponds to a coupling length of 350 µm and a gap
of 0.4 µm. With increasing coupling length, the cross
port coupling for IR light increases monotonically and
saturates at 100%, while the visible light transmission
into the drop port decreases linearly with coupling length
but remains above 99% over the entire range. The inset
of Fig. 5c shows that more than 99% coupling eﬃciency
into the cross and drop ports are achieved simultaneously
for IR and visible light, respectively, for coupling lengths
ranging from 250 µm to 400 µm. This performance cor-
responds to 20 dB suppression of visible pump light with
less than 0.044 dB insertion loss for IR light for each of
the on-chip WDM structures. In future implementations,
a cascade of such WDMs could be used for realizing suf-
ﬁcient suppression of guided pump light. Note that in
the current experimental conﬁguration, a portion of the
pump light is directly reﬂected back into the optical ﬁber
from the ﬁber-to-chip interface and is thus guided to-
wards the detectors. To suppress these residual pump
photons we use an additional ﬁber-coupled silicon ﬁlter,
i.e. oﬀ-chip.

Discussion
The high-visibility antibunching of heralded single pho-
tons shown in Fig. 4 conﬁrms the nonclassical character
of our SPDC source. However, for quantum information
processing it is furthermore desirable to generate pho-
tons in a pure state [50]. We use the Schmidt number,

7

K, to describe any remaining entanglement between opti-
cal modes of a SPDC pair. Schmidt number K, heralded
single photon state purity P and the second order self-
correlations are related via g(2)(0) = 1 + 1/K = 1 + P
[48, 50]. Ideal heralded purity (P = 1) is obtained if all
measured photons are found in the same optical mode
(K = 1). Conversely, if photons are found in multiple
output modes (K ≫ 1), the correlation function g(2)(0)
approaches 1 and the heralded purity approaches 0. In
our experimental conﬁguration, down-converted photons
will only be emitted into TM0 modes because other spa-
tial modes do not fulﬁll the phase matching condition.
These TM0 modes are spectrally separated by at least one
free spectral range (FSR) , as shown in Fig. 2d. Select-
ing one of these modes with a bandpass ﬁlter thus yields
single mode emission. The measured g2(0) = 2.07 ± 0.12
(P = 1.07 ± 0.12) in Fig. 3c conﬁrms that single mode
emission and nearly ideal (unit) heralded purity are in-
deed achieved by our SPDC source.

In addition to the purity of generated photons, suf-
ﬁcient on-chip pump rejection is a key requirement for
achieving source-detector integration on the same chip.
Here we discuss the prospects of realizing suﬃcient on-
chip ﬁltering. 1) Suppressing guided pump light in pho-
tonic waveguide circuits: The ﬁltering of pump pho-
tons propagating inside a waveguide could for example
be achieved by depositing a thin layer of silicon on top
of the waveguide interfacing source (circuit) and detec-
tor. Silicon has an absorption coeﬃcient of 1740 dB/cm
for the pump wavelength (775 nm) at cryogenic temper-
atures, while being transparent for down-converted pho-
tons (around 1550 nm). The hybrid AlN-silicon waveg-
uide hence results in great selective absorption of pump
photons. Alternatively, ﬁve cascaded on-chip WDMs (as
described above) could also provide eﬃcient pump light
rejection. 2) Suppressing unguided pump photons prop-
agating in free-space, substrate and cladding materials:
Photons incident from free space can eﬃciently be ab-
sorbed in a metal layer covering the area where detec-
tors are located [51]. Pump photons scattered into a
transparent substrate on the other hand pose a signiﬁ-
cant challenge in SFWM experiments, where the pump
light in telecom band near 1550 nm can propagate loss-
lessly in the cladding (usually SiO2) and substrate (usu-
ally silicon) materials and ﬁnally couple to the detection
region, limiting the on-chip ﬁlter’s performance [32]. In
our case, however, the visible pump photons scattered
into the silicon substrate layer are eﬃciently absorbed
due to large material absorption. Pump photons coupled
directly from the input ﬁber into SiO2 slab modes may
propagate for somewhat longer distances before leaking
into the underlying silicon substrate of higher refractive
index. Numerical simulations show that the attenua-
tion of slab modes is ≥ 90(200) dB/cm for a 3(2) µm
thick SiO2 buﬀer layer. Hence, detectors can be eﬃ-
ciently shielded from pump photons propagating inside
the cladding layer if they are separated by a centimeter
from the ﬁber-to-chip interface.

8

AlN has a χ(2) coeﬃcient (4.7 pm/V) [38] which is al-
most ten times smaller than that of LiNbO3 (41.7 pm/V)
[52]. However, using advanced nanofabrication tech-
niques we are able to realize microring resonators with
high quality factors, which results in a resonant pump
power enhancement that compensates for the weaker
nonlinear coeﬃcient. This is conﬁrmed by comparing the
SHG eﬃciency achieved in our AlN-device (1.16 W−1) to
recently reported SHG eﬃciencies in LiNbO3 micro disks
(0.109 W−1) [52, 53]. We see potential for further enhanc-
ing the nonlinear conversion eﬃciency for AlN microring
resonators by decreasing the ring radius and improving
the quality factor of the microring resonator. We believe
that ﬁve times higher quality factors and a three-fold
decrease in radius are achievable in future AlN devices,
which brings SHG eﬃciencies of 400 W−1 within reach.

CONCLUSIONS
In conclusion, the demonstrated photon pair source based
on the χ(2) nonlinearity of AlN microring resonators and
the quantum correlation measurement with waveguide-
integrated single-photon detectors constitute an excit-
ing step towards fully integrated quantum photonic cir-
cuits. Compared to photonic circuits fabricated from

more traditional semiconductor materials, e.g.
silicon-
on-insulator, AlN permits high quality (high brightness,
high purity, low noise) correlated photon pair emission
spectrally far separated from the pump light. AlN-on-
insulator therefore holds great potential for realizing ef-
ﬁcient pump suppression and monolithic integration of
non-classical light sources with single photon detectors
on the same chip. Additionally, high-speed phase modu-
lation via the electro-optic eﬀect will enable real-time cir-
cuit reconﬁguration. In combination with high-eﬃciency
single-photon detectors it will thus be possible to gen-
erate non-classical photonic states and implement feed-
forward schemes as well as quantum logic operations in
a scalable manner.

Acknowledgments
H.X.T. acknowledges support from a Packard Fellowship
in Science and Engineering. C.S. acknowledges ﬁnan-
cial support from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(SCHU 2871/2-1). Facilities used for fabrication were
supported by Yale SEAS cleanroom and Yale Institute
for Nanoscience and Quantum Engineering. The authors
thank Michael Power and Dr. Michael Rooks for assis-
tance in device fabrication.

[1] Kok, P. et al. Linear optical quantum computing with

[13] Spring, J. B. et al. Boson Sampling on a Photonic Chip.

photonic qubits. Rev. Mod. Phys. 79, 135–174 (2007).

Science 339 , 798–801 (2013).

[2] O’Brien, J. L., Furusawa, A. & Vuckovic, J. Photonic
quantum technologies. Nature Photon. 3, 687–695 (2009).
[3] Burnham, D. C. & Weinberg, D. L. Observation of Si-
multaneity in Parametric Production of Optical Photon
Pairs. Phys. Rev. Lett. 25, 84–87 (1970).

[4] Kwiat, P. G. et al. New High-Intensity Source of
Polarization-Entangled Photon Pairs. Phys. Rev. Lett.
75, 4337–4341 (1995).

[5] Bouwmeester, D., Pan, J.-W., Mattle, K., Eibl, M., We-
infurter, H., Zeilinger, A. Experimental quantum telepor-
tation. Nature 390, 575-579 (1997).

[6] Ma, X.-S. et al. Quantum teleportation between the Ca-
nary Islands La Palma and Tenerife over both quantum
and classical 143-km free-space channels. Nature 489,
269-273 (2012).

[7] Bussi`eres, F. et al. Quantum teleportation from a
telecom-wavelength photon to a solid-state quantum
memory. Nature Photon. 8, 775-778 (2014).

[8] Peruzzo, A. et al. Quantum Walks of Correlated Photons.

Science 329 , 1500–1503 (2010).

[9] Matthews, J. C. F., Politi, A., Stefanov, A. & O’Brien, J.
L. Manipulation of multiphoton entanglement in waveg-
uide quantum circuits. Nature Photon. 3, 346–350 (2009).
[10] Shadbolt, J. et al. Generating, manipulating and mea-
suring entanglement and mixture with a reconﬁgurable
photonic circuit. Nature Photon. 6, 45–49 (2012).

[11] Huang, Y.-F. et al. Experimental generation of an eight-
photon Greenberger–Horne–Zeilinger state. Nature Com-
mun. 2, 546 (2011).

[12] Pan, J.-W. et al. Multiphoton entanglement and inter-

ferometry. Rev. Mod. Phys. 84, 777–838 (2012).

[14] Broome, M. A. et al. Photonic Boson Sampling in a Tun-

able Circuit. Science 339 , 794–798 (2013).

[15] Lu, C.-Y., Browne, D. E., Yang, T. & Pan, J.-W. Demon-
stration of a Compiled Version of Shor’s Quantum Fac-
toring Algorithm Using Photonic Qubits. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 99, 250504 (2007).

[16] Lanyon, B. P. et al. Experimental Demonstration of a
Compiled Version of Shor’s Algorithm with Quantum En-
tanglement. Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 250505 (2007).

[17] Politi, A., Matthews, J. C. F. & O’Brien, J. L. Shor’s
Quantum Factoring Algorithm on a Photonic Chip. Sci-
ence 325, 1221 (2009).

[18] Martin-Lopez, E. et al. Experimental realization of Shor’s
quantum factoring algorithm using qubit recycling. Na-
ture Photon. 6, 773–776 (2012).

[19] Zhou, X., Kalasuwan, P., Ralph, T. & O’Brien, J. Calcu-
lating unknown eigenvalues with a quantum algorithm.
Nature Photon. 7, 223–228 (2013).

[20] Giustina, M., et al. Signiﬁcant-Loophole-Free Test of
Bell’s Theorem with Entangled Photons. Phys. Rev. Lett.
115 , 250401 (2015).

[21] Shalm, L. K., et al. Strong Loophole-Free Test of Local

Realism. Phys. Rev. Lett. 115 , 250402 (2015).

[22] Kruse, R. et al. Spatio-spectral characteristics of para-
metric down-conversion in waveguide arrays. New J.
Phys. 15, 083046 (2013).

[23] Solntsev, A. S. et al. Generation of Nonclassical Biphoton
States through Cascaded Quantum Walks on a Nonlinear
Chip. Phys. Rev. X 4, 31007 (2014).

[24] Jin, H. et al. On-Chip Generation and Manipulation of
Entangled Photons Based on Reconﬁgurable Lithium-

Niobate Waveguide Circuits. Phys. Rev. Lett. 113,
103601 (2014).

AlGaAs microring resonators. Opt. Lett. 32, 3296–3298
(2007).

9

[25] Tanzilli, S. et al. On the genesis and evolution of Inte-
grated Quantum Optics. Laser Photon. Rev. 6, 115–143
(2012).

[26] Politi, A., Cryan, M. J., Rarity, J. G., Yu, S. & O’Brien,
J. L. Silica-on-Silicon Waveguide Quantum Circuits. Sci-
ence 320 , 646–649 (2008).

[27] Pernice, W. H. P. et al. High-speed and high-eﬃciency
travelling wave single-photon detectors embedded in
nanophotonic circuits. Nature Commun. 3, 1325 (2012).
[28] Schuck, C., Guo, X., Fan, L., Ma, X., Poot, M.,
Tang, H. X., Quantum interference in heterogeneous
superconducting-photonic circuits on a silicon chip. Na-
ture Comm. 7, 10352 (2016).

[29] Sharping, J. E. et al. Generation of correlated photons
in nanoscale silicon waveguides. Opt. Express 14, 12388
(2006).

[30] Clemmen, S. et al. Continuous wave photon pair gen-
eration in silicon-on-insulator waveguides and ring res-
onators. Opt. Express 17, 16558–70 (2009).

[31] Silverstone, J. W. et al. On-chip quantum interference
between silicon photon-pair sources. Nature Photon. 8,
104–108 (2014).

[32] Harris, N. C. et al. Integrated Source of Spectrally Fil-
tered Correlated Photons for Large-Scale Quantum Pho-
tonic Systems. Phys. Rev. X 4, 041047 (2014).

[33] Collins, M. J. et al. Integrated spatial multiplexing of
heralded single-photon sources. Nature Commun. 4, 2582
(2013).

[34] Matsuda, N. et al. A monolithically integrated polariza-
tion entangled photon pair source on a silicon chip. Sci.
Rep. 2, 817 (2012).

[35] Rassani, D. A. G. et al. Micrometer-scale integrated sil-
icon source of time-energy entangled photons. 2, 88–94
(2015).

[36] Silverstone, J. W. et al. Qubit entanglement between
ring-resonator photon-pair sources on a silicon chip. Na-
ture Commun. 6, 7948 (2015).

[37] Xiong, C. et al. Aluminum nitride as a new material for
chip-scale optomechanics and nonlinear optics. New J.
Phys. 14, 95014 (2012).

[38] Pernice, W. H. P., Xiong, C., Schuck, C. & Tang, H.
X. Second harmonic generation in phase matched alu-
minum nitride waveguides and micro-ring resonators.
Appl. Phys. Lett. 100, 223501 (2012).

[39] Yang, Z. & Sipe, J. E. Generating entangled photons
via enhanced spontaneous parametric downconversion in

[40] Schuck, C., Pernice, W. H. P. & Tang, H. X. Waveguide
integrated low noise NbTiN nanowire single-photon de-
tectors with milli-Hz dark count rate. Sci. Rep. 3, 1893
(2013).

[41] Levy, J. S., Foster, M. A., Gaeta, A. L. & Lipson, M.
Harmonic generation in silicon nitride ring resonators.
Opt. Express 19, 11415–21 (2011).

[42] Schuck, C., Pernice, W. H. P., Ma, X. & Tang, H.
X. Optical time domain reﬂectometry with low noise
waveguide-coupled superconducting nanowire single-
photon detectors. Appl. Phys. Lett. 102, 191104 (2013)
[43] F¨ortsch, M. et al. Highly eﬃcient generation of single-
mode photon pairs from a crystalline whispering-gallery-
mode resonator source. Phys. Rev. A 91, 23812 (2015).

[44] F¨ortsch, M. et al. A versatile source of single photons
for quantum information processing. Nature Commun.
4, 1818 (2013).

[45] Reimer, C. et al. Integrated frequency comb source of her-

alded single photons. Opt. Express 22, 6535–46 (2014).

[46] Clausen, C. et al. A source of polarization-entangled pho-
ton pairs interfacing quantum memories with telecom
photons. New J. Phys. 16, 93058 (2014).

[47] Blauensteiner, B., Herbauts, I., Bettelli, S., Poppe, A.
& H¨ubel, H. Photon bunching in parametric down-
conversion with continuous-wave excitation. Phys. Rev.
A 79, 063846 (2009).

[48] Christ, A., Laiho, K., Eckstein, A., Cassemiro, K. N. &
Silberhorn, C. Probing multimode squeezing with corre-
lation functions. New J. Phys. 13, 33027 (2011).

[49] Bettelli, S. Comment on ”Coherence measures for her-
alded single-photon sources”. Phys. Rev. A 81, 37801
(2010).

[50] Spring, J. B. et al. On-chip low loss heralded source
of pure single photons. Opt. Express 21, 13522–13532
(2013).

[51] Reithmaier, G. et al. On-Chip Generation, Routing, and
Detection of Resonance Fluorescence. Nano Lett. 15,
5208–5213 (2015).

[52] Wang, C. et al. Integrated high quality factor lithium nio-
bate microdisk resonators. Opt. Express 22, 30924–30933
(2014).

[53] Lin, J. et al. Fabrication of high-Q lithium niobate mi-
croresonators using femtosecond laser micromachining.
Sci. Rep. 5, 8072 (2015).

