6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
1

 
 
]
c
q
-
r
g
[
 
 

1
v
3
2
7
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Quantum clock: A critical discussion on space-time

Luciano Burderi,1 Tiziana Di Salvo,2 and Rosario Iaria2

1Dipartimento di Fisica, Università degli Studi di Cagliari, SP Monserrato-Sestu, KM 0.7, 09042 Monserrato, Italy

2Dipartimento di Fisica e Chimica, Università degli Studi di Palermo, via Archiraﬁ 36, 90123 Palermo, Italy

We critically discuss the measure of very short time intervals. By means of a Gedankenexperiment, we describe
an ideal clock based on the occurrence of completely random events. Many previous thought experiments have
suggested fundamental Planck-scale limits on measurements of distance and time. Here we present a new type
of thought experiment, based on a different type of clock, that provide further support for the existence of such
limits. We show that the minimum time interval ∆t that this clock can measure scales as the inverse of its size
∆r. This implies an uncertainty relation between space and time:

∆r∆t > G/c4,

where G, , and c are the gravitational constant, the reduced Planck constant, and the speed of light, respectively.
We outline and brieﬂy discuss the implications of this uncertainty conjecture.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The deﬁnition of a quantity or a concept in physics has to be
operational in order to clarify the terms in which that quantity
should be used and to avoid unjustiﬁed assumption of prop-
erties that belong more to our mental representation of that
quantity than to its effective nature (e.g. [1]).

This point of view has been particularly fruitful e.g when
applied to the critical discussion of the concept of simultane-
ity, leading to the foundation of Special Relativity (SR, [2]).
Indeed, it is worth noting that an operational deﬁnition of time
is crucial in SR. In particular the setting-up of a device that
deﬁnes time in an operational way, whose behavior is con-
strained by the postulate of the invariance of the speed of light,
implies directly the heterodox phenomenon of time dilation.
Such a device is the so called Light-Clock: two plane parallel
mirrors, facing each other at a constant along time – i.e. ﬁxed
– distance ∆x, over which a light pulse bounces back and
forth beating time in equal intervals of duration ∆t = ∆x/c,
where c is the speed of light.

In what follows we adopt the rigorously operational deﬁni-

tion of time as:

time ≡ a physical quantity that is measured by an

appropriate clock.

(1)

This apparently trivial (or somewhat circular) deﬁnition is es-
sential to point out some subtle features of this elusive quan-
tity. The assumptions and the limitations of any experimen-
tal apparatus adopted to measure (deﬁne) the quantity "time"
have to be discussed carefully since they enter directly into
play when the physical properties of the deﬁned quantity en-
ter into relationship with other physical quantities.

In particular, since in General Relativity (GR) time is a local
quantity, deeply linked to every spatial point, it is desirable to
keep the physical size of the device used to measure it as small
as possible, which results in the limitations discussed in § IV.
To clearly address this question, in the next section we de-
scribe an ideal quantum device whose spatial extension can
be suitably reduced, that is, in principle, capable of measur-
ing arbitrarily short time intervals with any given accuracy.
Curiously, this device is based on a process that, in some

sense, is just the opposite of a strictly periodic phenomenon,
namely the (in some respect more fundamental) occurrence
of totally random events, such as the decay of an ensemble
of non-interacting particles in an excited state. In this case
the time elapsed may be obtained by the amount of particles
that have decayed. Such a device has been discussed in [3] as
an example of a simple microscopic clock. We dubbed this
device “Quantum Clock”. Limits, imposed on our device by
Quantum Mechanics (QM) and GR, result in an uncertainty
relation that we brieﬂy discuss.

Many previous thought experiments have suggested funda-
mental Planck-scale limits on measurements of distance and
time (see e.g. [4] for a review). Here, we present a new set of
thought experiments, based on a different type of clock (which
was brieﬂy alluded to in [3]), that provide further support for
the existence of such limits.

II. THE QUANTUM CLOCK

Let us consider a statistical process whose probability of

occurrence

dP = λ dt

(2)

is independent of time (i.e. λ constant with time).

A good example of this sort of situation is given by radioac-
tive decay 1. Given an amount of radioactive matter of mass
M = N mp, where N is the number of particles and mp is the

1 The exponential decay law implied by equation (2) is, strictly speaking
false for an unstable quantum system (see e.g. [5] and references therein).
In particular the deviations at very short times are known as quantum Zeno
effect. On the other hand, Fonda, Ghirardi & Rimini [6], with a formalism
based on a deﬁnition of an unstable state that takes into account “the fact
that an unstable system unavoidably interacts with its environment” (to use
their own words), demonstrated that, from the experimental point of view
(in the sense of its deﬁnition given by Operationalism), the resulting non–
decay probability is, for all practical purposes, a pure exponential, although
there is a possible dependence of the decay lifetime on the experimental
apparatus. These modiﬁcations of the simple exponential decay law result,
in general, into an increased effective lifetime (or shortened decay rate)

mass of a single particle, it can be easily proved that, if equa-
tion (2) holds, the mean variation of the number of particles
in the unit time interval is given by

dN
dt

= −λN

(3)

(see e.g. [7]). The mean number of decays in a time ∆t ≪
λ−1 is ∆N∆t = λN ∆t. The measured number of decays
ﬂuctuates around the expected value with Poissonian statis-
tics i.e with σ = √λN ∆t. Therefore it is possible to measure
a time interval ∆t counting λN ∆t events. The relative error
on our measure is σt/∆t = ǫ = (λN ∆t)−1/2. Whenever
it is required to measure a short time interval (∆t → 0), in
order to keep the relative error below a given threshold, say
σt/∆t < ǫ0, one should keep the product λN ∆t > ǫ−2
0 .
Providing that enough particles are available, N can be con-
veniently increased up to the required precision.

A physical device based on the process discussed above
can be built in several ways. The simplest (albeit perhaps
not practical) device consists of a given amount of mass M
of radioactive particles (corresponding to a given number of
particles N = M/mp) , that decay by emitting a photon,
completely surrounded by proportional counters (e.g. Geiger–
Muller counters) of quantum efﬁciency ∼ 1. We consider this
device, dubbed Quantum Clock hereinafter (QmCl), for the
operational deﬁnition of time. If we count a number of decays
N∆t ∼ ∆N∆t = λN ∆t in the QmCl the time elapsed is

∆t = N∆tmp
λM

(4)

where we have expressed the number of particles in terms of
their mass. The associated relative accuracy is ǫ = σt/∆t =
N −1/2
. Because at least one event must be recorded by the
device we have ǫ ≤ 1. Therefore in terms of this uncertainty,
and expressing mp in terms of its rest energy Ep = mpc2, the
time elapsed is

∆t

∆t =

1

ǫ2M c2 ×

Ep
λ

.

(5)

III. THE QUANTUM CLOCK AND THE HEISENBERG

UNCERTAINTY PRINCIPLE

As a quantum device, the QmCl is subject to Heisenberg’s
In particular we will use the relation

uncertainty relations.
between energy and time, namely

δE × δt ≥ /2

(6)

where δE and δt are the uncertainties in energy and time co-
ordinate of a particle, and  = h/(2π) is the reduced Planck
constant.

with respect to the theoretical value (calculated from the moment in which
the unstable system is prepared), as compared to the theoretical lifetime,
which, ultimately, strengthens the inequality that we propose in this paper:
equation (11) of § IV.

2

In (5) the factor Ep/λ depends on the speciﬁc nature of the
radioactive substance used for the construction of the clock.
To make the QmCl independent of the particular substance
adopted, we consider the limitations imposed by (6). Let
us consider a particle of energy Ep. Conservation of mass-
energy imposes an upper limit to the uncertainty in the de-
cay energy δEp namely Ep ≥ δEp max where δEp max is the
maximum uncertainty obtainable in the measure of the decay
energy. The decay rate λ is the inverse of the average decay
time 1/λ = τ ≥ δtmin where δtmin is the minimum uncer-
tainty obtainable in the measure of the time elapsed before the
decay. Since the maximum uncertainty in the energy and the
minimum uncertainty in the time elapsed are related by the
uncertainty relation (6), we have:

Ep
λ

= Ep × τ ≥ δEp max × δtmin ≥ /2

Inserting (7) in (5) we have

∆t ≥



2ǫ2c2 ×

1
M

(7)

(8)

which expresses the same lower limit for the mass of a clock,
capable to measure time intervals down to an accuracy ∆t,
given by [3] (see eq. 6 in their paper). More recently, Ng and
van Dam ([8], and reference therein) discussed a similar rela-
tion which limits the precision of an ideal clock (see eq. 8 in
their paper). In the above relation the “fuzziness” of the QM
manifest itself in the inequality. However the mass in the de-
nominator of the second member allows, in principle, to build
such a massive clock that an arbitrarily short time interval can
be adequately measured with the required accuracy ǫ.

IV. THE QUANTUM CLOCK AND GENERAL

RELATIVITY

In GR time is a local quantity in the sense that, in general,
the metric implies time coordinate factors (namely the factors
in front of the time coordinate interval) which may be differ-
ent in different points of space. If a non-uniform gravitational
ﬁeld is present (e.g.
the gravitational ﬁeld outside a spheri-
cal mass distribution, Schwarzschild metric), the proper time
of an observer at rest in a place where the gravitational ﬁeld
is quite intense (e.g. at a few Schwarzschild’s radii from the
centre of the mass distribution), is shorter than the time inter-
val measured by a clock located where the gravitational ﬁeld
is less intense (i.e. at several Schwarzschild’s radii from the
centre of the mass distribution). Because of its spatial exten-
sion, a clock deﬁned by (8) is capable of measuring a sort
of “average” time interval over the region deﬁned by its size.
Since we measure time counting events which may occur ran-
domly in any point of the clock, the size of the region over
which we are measuring the time is identiﬁed with the entire
size of the clock. In other words a spatial uncertainty, corre-
sponding to the ﬁnite size of the clock, is associated with the
measure of time. To minimize this uncertainty (providing that
the single particles are so weakly interacting with each other

that their behavior is unaffected by the proximity of neigh-
bors) it is possible to compress the QmCl in order to make its
spatial extension as small as possible.

However the presence of the clock mass affects the struc-
ture of space-time. In particular, the Hoop Conjecture (see
e.g. [9]) states that a piece of matter of mass M , around which
– in every direction – it is possible to place a circular hoop of
length 2πRSch, unavoidably undergoes gravitational collapse
(RSch = 2GM/c2 is the Schwarzschild radius, G is the grav-
itational constant).

In the following, we will assume that the volume in which
the QmCl is compressed is spherically symmetric and coinci-
dent with a sphere. The assumption of a spherical clock is not
merely a simpliﬁcation, but an important issue whose conse-
quences will be discussed in § V.

If the QmCl were compressed in a spherical volume whose
circumferential radius is smaller than its Schwarzschild ra-
dius it would face the gravitational collapse and it would not
be useable as a device to measure time intervals because the
products of the decays (e.g. the photons of the example dis-
cussed above) cannot escape outside the Schwarzschild radius
to bring the information that time is ﬂowing in that region of
space.

This implies that the smallest possible radius for the QmCl

is its Schwarzschild radius, R > RSch or

1
M

>

2G
c2R

.

(9)

The condition above has been discussed in the literature as
a necessary lower limit on the size of a massive clock.
In
particular Amelino-Camelia proposed an equation for a lower
bound on the uncertainty in the measurement of a distance in
which the condition above is included [10], [11].

Inserting (9) into (8) gives

∆tR >

1
ǫ2

G
c4 ,

(10)

where R = ∆r is the radius of the QmCl (i.e.
the uncer-
tainty on the exact position of the radioactive decay events).
Because, as we noted in § II, ǫ ≤ 1, we can write

∆r∆t >

G
c4

(11)

The equation above quantiﬁes the impossibility to simultane-
ously determine spatial and temporal coordinates of an event
with arbitrary accuracy.

V. DISCUSSION

Several thought experiments have been proposed to ex-
plore fundamental limits in the measurement process of time
and space intervals (see e.g. [4] for an updated and com-
plete review).
In particular Mead [12] “postulate the exis-
tence of a fundamental length” (to use his own words) and
discussed the possibility that this length is the Planck length,
ℓmin ∼ pG/c3 = ℓPlanck, which resulted in limitations

3

in the measure of arbitrarily short time intervals originating
relations similar to (11) of § IV. Moreover in a subsequent
paper [12], Mead discussed an in principle observable spec-
tral broadening, consequence of the postulate the existence of
a fundamental length of the order of Planck Length. More re-
cently, in the framework of String Theory a space-time uncer-
tainty relation has been proposed which has the same structure
of the uncertainty relation discussed in this paper ([13], [14],
see e.g. [15] for a discussion of the possible role of a space-
time uncertainty relation in String Theory). The relation pro-
posed in String Theory constraints the product of the uncer-
tainties in the time interval c∆T and the spatial length ∆Xl
to be larger than the square of the string length ℓS, which is
a parameter of the String Theory. However, to use the same
words of Yoneya [15], this relation is “speculative and hence
rather vague yet”. Indeed, in the context of Field Theories,
uncertainty relations between space and time coordinates sim-
ilar to that proposed here have been discussed as an ansatz
for the limitation arising in combining Heisenberg’s uncer-
tainty principle with Einstein’s theory of gravity [16]. In 1995
Garay [17] postulated and discussed, in the context of Quan-
tum Gravity, the existence of a minimum length of the order
of the Planck Length, but followed the idea that this limita-
tion may have a similar meaning to the speed limit deﬁned by
the speed of light in Special Relativity, in line with what was
already pointed out previously (see e.g. [18] and references
therein). In the framework of the so called Quantum Loop
Gravity (see e.g. [19], [20] and [21] for a review) a minimal
length appears characteristically in the form of a minimal sur-
face area ([22], [23]): indeed the area operator is quantized
Planck [24]. It has been sometimes argued that
in units of ℓ2
this minimal length might conﬂict with Lorentz invariance,
because a boosted observer could see the minimal length fur-
ther Lorentz contracted, however this problem is solved in
Loop Quantum Gravity since the minimal area does not ap-
pear as a ﬁxed property of geometry, but rather as the min-
imal (nonzero) eigenvalue of a quantum observable that has
the same minimal area ℓ2
Planck for all the boosted observers.
What changes continuously in the boost transformation is the
probability distribution of seeing one or the other of the dis-
crete eigenvalues of the area (see e.g. [25]).

In this paper the analysis of a thought experiment designed
to explore fundamental limits of clocks has brought us to
consider the uncertainty relation between space and time ex-
pressed in equation (11). Here we brieﬂy outline some of the
implications of this equation. To this aim it is useful to repre-
sent space (indeed circumferential distance since the "size" of
the QmCl is limited by assuming the Hoop Conjecture) and
time intervals in a standard space-time diagram. We choose
the space and time units in order to have c = 1, or c∆t as the
ordinate. In this representation the bisector deﬁnes the null
intervals, separating the timelike intervals, above the bisector,
from the spacelike intervals, below. The relation (11) of §IV,
namely

∆r c∆t >

G
c3

(12)

deﬁnes an hyperbola in this plane whose asymptotes are the

∆r and c∆t axes and whose vertex is located at (∆r)vertex =
(c∆t)vertex = pG/c3.

The following considerations can be made:

i) The minimum (measurable) spatial circumferential distance
is the Planck Length. This is because a proper space distance
is deﬁned for spacelike intervals and the minimum circumfer-
ential distance coordinate “∆r” of the points below the bisec-
tor is (∆r)min = pG/c3, which is the Planck Length. It
is important to note that the assumption of a QmCl of spher-
ical shape, made § IV, means that, in principle, it is possi-
ble to measure a spatial coordinate with an accuracy better
than the Planck Length. In particular, it is possible to mea-
sure the coordinate position of an object (e.g. the x coordinate
of its centre of mass) to much better precision if the object
is big enough and extended enough along the other coordi-
nates (i.e. in the y–z plane). Indeed it is conceivable to build
an object (our clock) with different length in each dimension,
say ∆x, ∆y, and ∆z, and to violate the uncertainty relation
proposed for one of these lengths. However a ﬁrm upper
limit should exist since the Hoop Conjecture establishes that
the collapse of the object/clock should be unavoidable once
∆r = p∆x2 + ∆y2 + ∆z2 ≤ 2GM/c2, where M is the
mass of the clock/object. Thus, the assumption of a QmCl of
spherical shape, shows that is impossible to measure a “size”
∆r ≡ p∆x2 + ∆y2 + ∆z2 smaller than Planck length 2.
ii) The minimum (measurable) time interval is the Planck
Time. This is because a proper time interval is deﬁned for
timelike intervals and the minimum “∆t” coordinate of the
points above the bisector is (∆t)min = pG/c5, which is the
Planck Time.
iii) The uncertainty relation cannot be violated by using the
phenomenon of length contraction predicted by Special Rel-
ativity. As the spatial length in the direction of motion (with
speed modulus v) is contracted by the inverse of the Lorentz
factor γ−1 = [1−(v/c)2]1/2, it would in principle be possible
to imagine to build a clock capable of measuring time intervals
of duration ∆t whose proper length along a given direction,
say the x axis, is such that its size (p∆x2 + ∆y2 + ∆z2 )
is slightly above the minimum ∆r determined by (11). It is
then possible to observe the clock from a reference system in
which the clock moves at uniform speed v along the x axis. If
the speed is high enough, the length of the clock in the direc-
tion of motion is so Lorentz contracted that its size falls be-
low the minimum above. Time dilation, by the Lorentz factor
γ = [1−(v/c)2]−1/2, prevents the violation of the uncertainty
relation.
iv) The uncertainty relation holds in Schwarzschild met-
ric [26] since:

ds2 = (1 − RSch/r)c2dt2 − (1 − RSch/r)−1dr2
−r2(dθ2 + sin2 θdφ2),

(13)

where ds is the inﬁnitesimal interval, r is the circumferential
radius, θ and φ are the angles of a spherical coordinate system.

2 We thank L. Susskind (private communication) for pointing out this subtle

although important question.

4

Although relation (11) has the structure of an uncertainty
relation, and therefore does not contain a minimum spatial
length or a minimum time duration explicitly, the timelike and
spacelike classiﬁcation of the intervals, determined by Spe-
cial Relativity, when combined with (11), implies (in a some-
what unexpected way) the existence of minimal space-time
“quanta” equal to the product of the Planck Length and Time,
respectively. In other words, equation (11) would mean that
Nature manifest the existence of “atoms” of space and time
(whose size does not require the introduction of any extra pa-
rameter in the theory) only whenever space and time are si-
multaneously probed down to the smallest scale. No intrinsic
discreteness characterizes, individually, space or time coordi-
nates, which are the continuous and smooth components of
the fabric of space-time. Discreteness naturally emerges in
the operational deﬁnition of a simultaneous measure of space
and time whether the limitations imposed by the Uncertainty
Principles of QM and the formation of an Event Horizon (oc-
curring – according to GR – during complete gravitational col-
lapse) are taken into account, together with the universal hy-
perbolic character of the “local” metric implied by SR. Indeed
QM, GR, and SR enter in the uncertainty relation through their
fundamental constants, , G, and c.

We ﬁnally note that in the limits  → 0 and c → ∞ (that
means in the classical limit), there is no uncertainty relation
between space and time, as expected. A similar discussion on
the role of , c, and G in determining a spatial resolution limit
can be found in [17].

VI. CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, by means of a gedankenexperiment, we have
argued on the existence of a Space-Time uncertainty relation
expressed by equation (11). This relation does not depend on
parameters deﬁned within a speciﬁc theory but only on funda-
mental constants, since the previously discussed "free" param-
eter of String Theory ℓ2
S is naturally replaced by G/c3 in our
QmCl, without postulating the existence of any fundamental
length. We argue that an uncertainty relation between space
and time arises naturally if we take into account: i) the Uncer-
tainty Principles of Quantum Mechanics; ii) the well known
result of GR that gravitational collapse – and the subsequent
formation of an Event Horizon – is unavoidable once a given
amount of mass-energy is concentrated into a spatial extension
smaller than the volume encompassed by the Schwarzschild
Radius of that amount of mass-energy. Fundamental (mini-
mal) space length and time interval emerge in a natural way,
when this uncertainty relation is considered within the local
Minkowskian structure of space-time.

Canonical commutation relations imply the Heisenberg Un-
certainty Principles [27]: the product of the standard devia-
tions of two operators that do not commute is greater or equal
to the modulus of the average value of the operator built from
the commutator of the two operators [28]. It is therefore possi-
ble to develop QM adopting the Heisenberg uncertainty prin-
ciples (and the commutation relations associated) as the pos-
tulates over which the whole quantum theory is built. This

justiﬁes the view, shared by many physicists, that the Heisen-
berg uncertainty relations should be considered as fundamen-
tal laws of Nature (see e.g. [29]). In a similar way, we argue
that it would be possible to develop the foundations of a math-
ematical theory of gravity, which will be fully consistent with
the postulates of the quantum theory, starting from the uncer-
tainty relation between space and time discussed above.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

First, we would like to thank Giovanni Amelino-Camelia
and Leonard Susskind for several stimulating discussions on
the topics discussed in this paper which have deepened our

5

understanding of the subject. We are also grateful to the ref-
erees Steven Carlip and Thibault Damour for useful discus-
sions and suggestions that have greatly improved quality of
the present paper. Finally, we would like to thank many col-
leagues and friends who have contributed with encouraging
and stimulating discussions that helped us in clarifying sev-
eral subtle points addressed in this work: among the others, F.
Burderi, L. Colombo, E. Fiordilino, F. Haardt, N. La Barbera,
M.T. Menna, R. Passante, L. Rizzuto, C. Rovelli, L. Stella.
This work was partially supported by the Regione Autonoma
della Sardegna through POR-FSE Sardegna 2007-2013, L.R.
7/2007, Progetti di Ricerca di Base e Orientata, Project No.
CRP-60529, and by the Fondo Finalizzato alla Ricerca (FFR)
2012/13, Project No. 2012-ATE-0390, founded by the Uni-
versity of Palermo.

[1] P. Bridgman, The Logic of Modern Physics, publ. MacMillan,

New York (1927).

[2] A. Einstein, Zur Elektrodynamik bewegter Körper, Ann. Phys.

(Berlin) 322, 891 (1905).

[3] H. Salecker and E.P. Wigner, Quantum limitations of the mea-
surement of space-time distances, Phys. Rev. 109, 571 (1958).
[4] S. Hossenfelder, Minimal length scale scenarios for quantum

Gravity, Living Rev. Relativity 16, 2 (2013).

[5] D.A. Dicus et al., D. A. Dicus, W.W. Repko, R.F. Schwitters,
and T.M. Tinsley, Time development of a quasistationary state,
Phys. Rev. A 65, 032116 (2002).

[6] L. Fonda, G.C. Ghirardi, and A. Rimini, Decay theory of unsta-

ble quantum systems, Rep. Prog. Phys. 41, 587 (1978).

[7] P. Bevington, Data Reduction and Error Analysis for the Phys-

ical Sciences, (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1969).

[8] Y.J. Ng and H. van Dam, Uncertainty in measurements of dis-

tance, Classical Quantum Gravity 20, 393 (2003).

[9] C.W. Misner, K.S. Thorne, and J.A. Wheeler, Gravitation

(W.H. Freeman and Co., San Francisco, 1973).

[10] G. Amelino-Camelia, Limits on the measurability of space-
time distances in (the semiclassical approximation Of) quantum
gravity, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 9, 3415 (1994).

[11] G. Amelino-Camelia, On local observations in quantum gravity,

Mod. Phys. Lett. A 11, 1411 (1996).

[12] C.A. Mead, Possible connection between gravitation and fun-

damental length, Phys. Rev. 135, B849 (1964).

[13] T. Yoneya, Wandering in the Fields,

edited by K.
Kawarabayashi and A. Ukawa (World Scientiﬁc, Singa-
pore, 1987).

[14] T. Yoneya, On the interpretation of minimal length in string the-

[16] S. Doplicher, K. Fredenhagen, and J.E. Roberts, The quantum
structure of spacetime at the Planck scale and quantum ﬁelds,
Commun. Math. Phys. 172, 187 (1995).

[17] P.J. Garay, Quantum gravity and minimum length, Int. J. Mod.

Phys. A 10, 145 (1995).

[18] H.H. Borzeszkowski and H.J. Treder, The Meaning of Quantum

Gravity (Reidel, Dordrecht, 1988).

[19] C. Rovelli and L. Smolin, Knot Theory and Quantum Gravity,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 1155 (1988).

[20] C. Rovelli and L. Smolin, Loop space representation of quan-

tum general relativity, Nucl. Phys. B331, 80 (1990).

[21] C. Rovelli, C. Rovelli, Loop quantum gravity, Living Rev. Rel-

ativity 1, 1 (1998).

[22] C. Rovelli and L. Smolin, Discreteness of area and volume in
quantum gravity, Nucl. Phys. B442, 593 (1995); B456, 734(E)
(1995).

[23] A. Ashtekar, and J. Lewandowski, Quantum theory of geometry
I: Area operators, Classical Quantum Gravity 14, A55 (1997).
[24] C. Rovelli, A generally covariant quantum ﬁeld theory and a
prediction on quantum measurements of geometry, Nucl. Phys.
B405, 797 (1993).

[25] C. Rovelli and S. Speziale, Reconcile Planck-scale discrete-
ness and the Lorentz-Fitzgerald contraction, Phys. Rev. D 67,
064019 (2003).

[26] K. Schwarzschild, Über das Gravitationsfeld eines Massen-
punktes nach der Einsteinschen Theorie, Sitzungsberichte der
Königlich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften (Berlin),
189 (1916).

[27] E.H. Kennard, Zur Quantenmechanik einfacher Bewe-

gungstypen, Z. Phys. 44, 326 (1927).

ories, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 4, 1587 (1989).

[28] H.P. Robertson, The uncertainty principle, Phys. Rev. 34, 163

[15] T. Yoneya, D-particles, D-instantons, and a space-time uncer-

(1929).

tainty principle in string theory, arXiv:hep-th/ 9707002.

[29] J. Baggott, The Meaning of Quantum Theory (Oxford Univer-

sity Press, New York, 1992).

