6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
1

 
 
]
l
l
a
h
-
s
e
m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
5
3
7
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Faraday cage angled-etching of nanostructures in bulk dielectrics

P. Latawiec, M. J. Burek, Y.-I. Sohn, and M. Lonˇcar

John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Science, Harvard University

(Dated: March 14, 2016)

For many emerging optoelectronic materials, heteroepitaxial growth techniques do not oﬀer the
same high material quality aﬀorded by bulk, single-crystal growth. However, the need for optical,
electrical, or mechanical isolation at the nanoscale level often necessitates the use of a dissimilar
substrate, upon which the active device layer stands. Faraday cage angled-etching (FCAE) obviates
the need for these planar, thin-ﬁlm technologies by enabling in-situ device release and isolation
through an angled-etching process. By placing a Faraday cage around the sample during inductively-
coupled plasma reactive ion etching (ICP-RIE), the etching plasma develops an equipotential at the
cage surface, directing ions normal to its face. In this Article, the eﬀects Faraday cage angle, mesh
size, and sample placement have on etch angle, uniformity, and mask selectivity are investigated
within a silicon etching platform. Simulation results qualitatively conﬁrm experiments and help to
clarify the physical mechanisms at work. These results will help guide FCAE process design across
a wide range of material platforms.

I.

INTRODUCTION

High-quality heteroepitaxially grown substrates, from
III-V semiconductors such as GaAs/AlGaAs to the read-
ily available silicon-on-insulator (SOI) platform, form but
a short section of the list of materials with attractive
electro-optical, mechanical, piezoelectric, or other prop-
erties useful
in nano-devices. These thin ﬁlm struc-
tures, on the other hand, enable the necessary three-
dimensional architectural control required for the iso-
lation of the active layer from the bulk substrate. For
nanomechanics, access to the mechanical degrees of free-
dom often requires the physical separation of structures
from the host, such as in suspended beams, cantilevers,
and membranes[1]. Nanophotonics,
likewise, requires
light conﬁnement due to either total internal reﬂection
or distributed Bragg reﬂection[2]. Although a heterolayer
structure composed of materials with distinct photonic or
phononic properties can suﬃce to make these devices, a
common route is to go one step further and remove (sac-
riﬁce) the layer immediately underneath the device with
a selective, isotropic etch, thereby suspending the struc-
ture in air. For the most part, this design constraint
severely restricts the use of a wide range of materials,
like the metal oxides (LiNbO3, BaTiO3), group IV (SiC
or diamond), III-V (GaN), II-VI semiconductors (PbS,
CdS), and other high quality single crystals (quartz, sap-
phire) due to the diﬃculty of growing thin ﬁlms (∼1 µm)
on host substrates at requisite quality and crystallinity.
Nonetheless, the push for chip-scale devices made out of
these materials has not faltered, with recent demonstra-
tions of thin ﬁlm technologies (i.e. crystal-ion slicing for
complex metal oxides[3–5] and diamond[6, 7], alternative
preparation from the bulk[8, 9]) enabling the fabrication
of nanophotonic devices[10–12], albeit at lower quality
than commercially available bulk substrates.

Outside of the thin ﬁlm paradigm, several pattern
transfer techniques with three-dimensional control have
been developed. A commonality across a number of
these methods (which this work shares) is the modiﬁ-

cation of the ion angular distribution during etching.
This includes techniques such as Reactive Ion Beam
Etching (RIBE)[13, 14], ion-sheath sculpting[15], passi-
vation gas ﬂow and DC bias control[16], and focused ion
beam etching[17–19]. A second class of methods relies on
an anisotropic etch followed by a second isotropic etch,
where the layer of interest is shielded from etching by a
protective coating[20]. Although this technique requires
favorable etch chemistries, it has recently seen extension
to new platforms like diamond[21, 22].

In this Article, we study the physics and ion dynamics
of a new etching conﬁguration - Faraday cage angled-
etching (FCAE). Speciﬁcally, a Faraday cage is placed
inside an ICP-RIE etch chamber during processing, with
the sample placed therein. After the plasma is struck,
an equipotential develops at the cage boundaries, result-
ing in a ﬁeld-free region inside the cage with electric
ﬁelds pointing normal to its faces[23–27].
Ions enter-
ing from the plasma then get directed toward the sam-
ple at an oblique angle of incidence, undercutting the
structure and freeing it from the substrate upon comple-
tion (Fig. 1(b)), eﬀectively fashioning a device from the
bulk. Building on initial demonstrations in diamond sin-
gle crystals[27, 28], free-standing mechanical cantilevers
are shown in silicon and quartz. The eﬀects of varying
cage parameters on silicon angled-etching are observed,
driving cage optimization. Finally, multiphysics simu-
lations of the dynamics of FCAE elucidate the physical
processes aﬀecting etch performance.

II. FABRICATION METHODS

A. Faraday Cage Construction

Faraday cages built for etching typically consisted of an
aluminum base plate with an aluminum mesh arranged
around the sample etching region in the shape of a cone
or a triangular prism, though in principle other geome-
tries may be interesting[24, 26]. Fig. 1(c) shows several

2

support, and Fig. 1(c,ii) shows a coarse meshed wrapped
around a large aluminum base. Panel (iii) shows a
molded-mesh cage design. The mesh is created by press-
ing it against two custom metal dies, although it can
also be done by hand. Because of the modularity of this
design it is easy to swap out meshes constructed for dif-
ferent etch angles. The retaining ring around the mesh
(Fig. 1(c,iii)) provides stability and reduces movement
during loading and unloading; likewise, directly aﬃxing
the mesh to the carrier wafer via an etch-compatible ad-
hesive maintains angled-etching functionality and place-
ment stability.

Angled-etching of devices follows a process ﬂow similar
to standard lithography[27]. First, a hard mask is de-
ﬁned either through photolithography or electron beam
lithography (Fig. 1(b, i)). Once deﬁned, the sample is
etched vertically in order to ensure clearance from the
substrate (Fig. 1(b, ii)). After this step, the sample
is placed inside a Faraday cage and etched at an an-
gle, often with the same recipe used to etch vertically
(schematically shown in Fig. 1(b, iii)). Typically, the
extent of etching is recorded via scanning electron mi-
croscopy (SEM) in order to time the release of the struc-
ture precisely. This becomes especially important for de-
vices where thin supporting regions underneath the de-
vice need to be maintained[29, 30]. After this step is run
to completion, the mask is removed.

B. Diamond FCAE

Diamond angle-etched devices were ﬁrst demonstrated
for quantum photonics applications[27, 28, 31] and have
since shown promise as nanomechanical resonators[32]
and high quality factor optical cavities[29]. For complete-
ness, we describe the process here. A smooth, polished
(<1 nm rms roughness) diamond surface is ﬁrst cleaned
in a reﬂuxing mixture of equal parts perchloric, nitric,
and sulfuric acid[33]. After this, it is placed in a boiling
piranha mixture (3:1 sulfuric acid to hydrogen peroxide)
before being rinsed and sonicated in solvent, then dried.
A thin layer of titanium (∼15 nm) is then deposited on
the surface. This helps with resist adhesion and charge
compensation during the electron beam lithography. A
negative-tone electron beam resist is spun on (FOx-16,
hydrogen silsesquioxane, HSQ) to a thickness of ∼1 µm.
After the resist is exposed and developed, the titanium
layer is ﬁrst removed with a brief Ar/Cl2 plasma etch
(Unaxis Shuttleline) at forward power of 250 W and RF
power of 400 W at 8 mTorr. This ensures the smooth
removal of the titanium underlayer. The sample is then
etched with an oxygen chemistry ﬂowing at 50 sccm and
maintained at 10 mTorr. The forward and RF powers
are held at 100 W and 700 W, respectively. Once the
vertical etch has been completed, the sample is placed
in the appropriate Faraday cage. The same oxygen etch
is run, except for an additional slow ﬂow (2 sccm) of
either Ar or Cl2 to mitigate micromasking[27]. Once the

FIG. 1.
(Color online) Overview of Faraday cage angled-
etching (a) 3D simulation of reactor chamber with an ar-
gon plasma and a central Faraday cage (details in text).
(b) Schematic of angled-etching. The ions, directed by the
equipotential on the cage boundaries, are incident upon the
sample at an angle. The etch mask deﬁnes the shape of the
structure.
(c) Examples of diﬀerent cages used for angled-
etching, including (i) a triangular cage with a ﬁne mesh (ii)
a wrapped cage with a coarse mesh and (iii) a molded cage
with a medium mesh, with a shape maintained by retaining
plates.

diﬀerent cage constructions. Meshes (TWP Inc.) used
in the experiment had wires of ∼400 µm diameter at a
∼1.6 mm pitch (coarse), ∼250 µm diameter and ∼635 µm
pitch (medium), or ∼50 µm diameter and ∼125 µm pitch
(ﬁne). Coarse and medium sized meshes could be pressed
and molded into shape, while ﬁne meshes required some
underlying structure to provide support. The cages were
constructed in a variety of sizes, with the only signiﬁcant
limitation being the height of the etching tool’s load-lock
(the smallest cage was ∼7 mm tall and the largest ∼18
mm).

Fig. 1(c,i) shows a simple, folded mesh over a base

3

a passivation layer must be well-controlled in order to
prevent chemical undercut. The mask was removed with
a standard hydroﬂuoric (HF) etch or a vapor HF etch,
in the case of HSQ. The vertical etch ﬂowed 130 sccm of
C4F8 and 80 sccm of SF6 at a pressure of 10 mTorr, RF
power of 1000 W, and platen power of 12 W on a silicon
carrier wafer.

The same plasma parameters were used for the an-
gled etch but a quartz wafer was used as the carrier.
This reduces the loading due to Si etching and eﬀectively
frees more SF6 molecules for etching. Because the an-
gled etch of SF6 radicals is directional while passivation
layer formation is isotropic, a shadowing eﬀect arises from
the blocking of etching ions by the structure. In order
to compensate for this to allow for a reasonable etching
rate, more SF6 must remain in the plasma, either by in-
creasing the ﬂow or switching carrier wafers. Using this
recipe, silicon waveguides and high quality factor optical
resonators have recently been demonstrated[30].

D. Quartz FCAE

Quartz is an interesting material platform, widely used
as a mechanical resonator in micro-electromechanical sys-
tems (MEMS) and other technologies[38]. However, lack-
ing a native thin-ﬁlm technology, it is diﬃcult to integrate
into nano-scale systems. Motivated by its excellent ma-
terial properties, we realized quartz nanobeam cantilever
resonators via angled-etching[39] (Fig. 2(c)). A metal
hard mask was patterned using a bi-layer poly(methyl
methacrylate) (PMMA) liftoﬀ procedure (cantilevers) or
direct etching using an e-beam resist as a mask (opti-
cal resonators). The pattern was then transferred to the
quartz using a CHF3-based recipe at 10 mTorr pressure
(STS MPX/LPX ICP-RIE). The ICP power was held
at 600 W and the platen at 90 W. Argon, CF4, CHF3,
and H2 were all ﬂowed at 6, 2, 50, and 15 sccm respec-
tively. Due to the physical milling introduced by angled-
etching and the small loadlock (∼8 mm) on this etcher,
the angled-etching was completed in a diﬀerent machine
which could accommodate a larger cage design (Nexx
ECR RIE). This etcher relies on a diﬀerent mechanism
to generate a plasma (electron-cyclotron resonance), yet
was still shown to be suitable for angled-etching. The
microwave power was set to 600 W while the platen RF
power was set to 90 W and the pressure was held at 10
mTorr. The ratio of gasses remained the same, with the
overall ﬂow rate reduced by a factor of two to accommo-
date machine constraints.

III. SIMULATION

The eﬀect of the Faraday cage on the reactor potential
was investigated with COMSOL Multiphysics using the
plasma physics module[40]. This simulation technique
has been shown to yield results of reaction parameters

FIG. 2. Angled-etched devices (left, nanomechanical can-
tilevers, right, optical resonators) in diﬀerent materials. (a)
Structures etched in diamond, following the recipe in the
text. The lines in the substrate visible on the cantilever de-
vice are from the coarse cage used to etch, which impacts
the ion trajectory. The optical resonators are supported by
ﬂared-out sections in the mask, which transfer to pedestals
for an appropriately-timed etch.[29]. Silicon (b) and quartz
(c) cantilevers, ∼ 40µm and ∼ 10µm long, respectively. All
the optical resonators pictured support modes in the telecom
wavelength range.

etch reaches completion, the mask is removed in HF. For
sensitive applications, critical point drying can increase
the device yield.

C. Silicon FCAE

Free-standing silicon devices are important in a num-
ber of applications and are already made possible by the
readily available silicon-on-insulator platform. However,
this approach may be inadequate for some select uses, in-
cluding mid-infrared photonics[34–36] or mechanical res-
onators with small vertical cross-section[37]. Angled-
etching of silicon can circumvent the material thickness
restrictions inherent with SOI technology, realizing struc-
tures with both lateral and vertical dimensions on the or-
der of tens of nanometers[30]. Angled-etching of silicon
cantilevers (Fig. 2(b)) was based on an SF6/C4F8 plasma
chemistry (STS MPX/LPX RIE). Two mask materials
were shown to have suﬃcient selectivity: a lifted-oﬀ sput-
tered alumina mask, well known to be highly selective to
this chemistry, and a HSQ mask. Fluorine chemistries
are commonly used to etch silicon but the formation of

with reasonable agreement to experiment[40, 41] and can
be extended to couple to models describing feature proﬁle
evolution[42]. The modeling was preformed using a stan-
dard Gaseous Electronic Conference (GEC) reference cell
with argon gas, a chemistry which qualitatively captures
the impact of the presence of the Faraday cage. The sim-
ulation was performed under axial symmetry, with the
cage wires forming rings around the sample. No biasing
was coupled into the simulation, so the forward power re-
mained at eﬀectively 0 W. Figs. 1(a) and 3(a) show the
potential distribution of the plasma with a cage placed in-
side. The cage wires are maintained at ground while the
plasma potential develops in the simulation. The etcher
frequency used in the simulation is the standard 13.56
MHz. The coil current is maintained at 100 A, and the
power within is monitored until convergence (typically
measured ∼2000 W). As expected, the plasma potential
decreases as the plasma gets closer to the cage, creating
electric ﬁelds normal to the cage face. Towards the bot-
tom of the cage, the plasma sheath starts to resemble the
sheath at the carrier wafer, ﬂattening out. As the sheath
moves up the cage, it follows its contours more closely,
resulting in electric ﬁelds that are more normal to the
cage face.

By changing the simulated cage geometry, we can in-
vestigate the eﬀects of diﬀerent cage types on the poten-
tial distribution using straightforward simulation param-
eters. In particular, we change the mesh parameters by
changing the thickness of the wires or their spacing. An-
other parameter of interest is the sample height within
the Faraday cage. This is changed by placing a metallic
(grounded) block within the cage, and then recording the
ﬁnal ion velocities upon hitting the top surface, where the
sample presumably lies. Throughout the simulations, the
mesh face angle is maintained at 60 degrees. The impact
of the mesh angle is not explicitly studied, as the etch
angle has been seen to be proportional to the mesh face
angle previously[27].

To study the action of the ions under the cage po-
tential, the motion of ions was simulated using a parti-
cle tracing module in COMSOL. After releasing the ions
(argon) from the sheath with a Maxwellian velocity dis-
tribution (at a temperature of 400 K), their velocity and
position is charted. Once the ion intersects with a deﬁned
sample region, its velocity vector and position is recorded
to generate an angle/energy ion distribution map. This
simulation procedure is repeated with the diﬀerent cage
geometries, showing stark diﬀerences in the incident an-
gle distribution, as well as ion energies.

IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Synthesizing the simulation results and incorporating
experimental evidence, we can make deﬁnite statements
on the plasma physics and ion dynamics, whose qualita-
tive ideas transfer to the etching of many other material
types in FCAE. To begin with, the simulations (Fig. 3)

4

(Color online) Simulated voltage drops inside the
FIG. 3.
Faraday cage. (a) Simulated etching potentials for a coarse
cage (left) and ﬁne cage (right). The coarse cage has a larger
potential gradient within, inﬂuencing the path the ion takes.
The simulated ion trajectories from a single point outside the
cage are overlayed on the right hand side, with coloring to
provide visual contrast. All simulated cages have a cage angle
of 60 degrees. (b) Voltage drop inside the cage relative to the
etch potential (squares, left axis) and resultant mean incident
ion etching angle, deﬁned from the normal (diamonds, right
axis).

show that coarser meshes allow the leakage of potential
past the mesh, resulting in a secondary ion sheath inside
the cage. This implies the existence of a secondary elec-
tric ﬁeld pointed normal to the carrier wafer, after the
initial electric ﬁeld which accelerates the ions and gives
them their angle. This secondary ﬁeld is detrimental to
the function of the cage, adding a vertical component
to the incident ion angle.
In Fig. 3(a), the simulated
cage potentials show the elevated internal potential in
the coarsely-spaced mesh. Fig. 3(b) makes the link be-
tween the internal secondary sheath and ion incident an-
gle explicit. As the mesh spacing increases, the fractional
voltage drop (deﬁned as the maximum voltage within the
cage divided by the maximum voltage outside the cage)
increases to as high as 40%. Likewise, as this internal
voltage drop increases, the average incident ion angle de-
creases, as the ions are deﬂected to a more vertical inci-
dence (here deﬁned as zero degrees).

5

FIG. 4.
(Color online) Detailed results from changing cage
parameters. (a) Incident angle/ion energy histograms for sim-
ulated cage designs with ﬁne (left) and coarse (right) mesh
spacings and raised (bottom) and lowered (top) samples. The
ion data are taken upon collision with the sample area. The
angle-energy histograms show clear ”banding” of the ions due
to the eﬀect of the Faraday cage wires. Notably, both the
raised sample position and coarse mesh spacing increase the
variability in angle/momentum space. Generally, higher ion
energy (equivalently, momenta) can negatively eﬀect mask
selectivity as the etch becomes more physical. (b) Averaged
ion incident angle for the cage designs in part (a), correspond-
ing to their number. (c) Head-on SEM images of cantilevers
etched in (i) a raised, coarse cage, (ii), a lowered, ﬁne cage,
and (iii) a raised, ﬁne cage. The angle ϕ is deﬁned as the
observed etch angle. The SEMs show that ϕ varies in accor-
dance with simulation. The visible sidewall roughness seems
to be a characteristic of the particular etch and is not greatly
aﬀected by cage design.

FIG. 5.
(Color online) Impact on sample height and incident
angle across a sample. (a) Incident ion angle as a function of
radial position on the sample for samples on the carrier (left)
and placed on a 10 mm pedestal (right). The bottom shows
the relative ﬂux of etching ions as a function of position. The
sample placed on the pedestal shows a larger variation in ion
ﬂux and incident angle.
(b) Incident ion angles for a cage
as the sample is placed on higher pedestals (top). Mean ion
energy and standard deviation for ions as the sample height
is raised (bottom)

By looking at the ion distribution in both incident an-
gle and energy, as in Fig. 4(a), we can ﬁne-tune our
observations. An ideal Faraday cage design would show
a narrow distribution of ions in both angle and energy
space, implying that all incident ions are similar in both
direction and momentum, providing a well-deﬁned and
controlled etch. In reality, we see that ﬁner meshes are
seen to create a larger incident etching angle on the sur-
face, closer to the value prescribed by the cage geometry,
although they also create tightly-deﬁned bands of angles.
These bands are a result of the local deﬂection of the tra-

jectory of the ions due to the mesh wire itself[25]. Finer
meshes have more wires per unit area, resulting in more
of these bands. However, the larger wire sizes of coarser
meshes tend to bend the trajectory for a longer time, in-
creasing the glancing angle. To simplify the interpreta-
tion of these results, we project the ion distribution onto
the angular axis, averaging over the diﬀerent ion energies,
as in Fig. 4(b). The corresponding distributions carry
the same label as in part (a). These simpliﬁed charts
show the decrease in standard deviation of incident an-
gle aﬀorded by ﬁner meshes (labels 1 and 3). They also
simultaneously show the increase in mean ion etch angle
as the sample is raised within the Faraday cage, an eﬀect
which is further explored in Fig. 5. In a real chamber,
a DC bias is expected to increase the electric potential
gradient, resulting in a mean incident ion angle closer to
that prescribed by the Faraday cage. The stronger elec-
tric ﬁelds should also reduce the perturbation on the ion
trajectories caused by the cage wires, resulting in nar-
rower ion distributions.

To support the results from these simulations, silicon
cantilever samples were fabricated with the recipe out-
lined beforehand and imaged at head-on incidence to
record the etch angle, deﬁned as ϕ in Fig. 4(c). A
coarse mesh was observed to increase the verticality of
the etch (larger ϕ, Fig. 4(c,i)) even though the sample
was raised. Positioning a sample lower while using a ﬁne
mesh made the etch more vertical (Fig. 4(c,ii), while rais-
ing the sample within a ﬁne mesh gave the most acute
etch angle, Fig. 4(c,iii). This corroborates exactly the re-
sults from simulation, where the incident angle changes
starkly based on sample positioning and mesh type (Fig.
4(a,b)).

The etch rate and etch angle at diﬀerent points inside
the conical Faraday cage was experimentally shown to
vary dramatically due to the asymmetry of the cage it-
self and oﬀ-center placement of the sample within.
In
order to mitigate the eﬀects of this so-called etch gra-
dient, the sample was etched at intervals of 30 seconds,
with rotations of the cage in-between[43]. Although this
process signiﬁcantly symmetrizes the etch angle across
the device, the etch rate was still observed to be vari-
able, with the highest etch rate in the middle of the de-
vice. This is supported by the simulations of the ion
trajectories in Fig 5(a). Toward the center of the sam-
ple, there is a large ﬂux of ions coming not only from
the side of the cage (at an angle), but also from the top
of the cage, where it curves to become horizontal (di-
recting ions downward). Capping the top of the cage
with a shield can prevent these stray ions from enter-
ing the cage. Experimentally, it was also observed that
cages which resulted in more acute etch angles ϕ had
larger etch gradients. This can also be observed in the
simulation data, as the angle/ion energy histogram dis-
plays a large spread of incident ion angle for samples po-
sitioned higher and with tighter meshes. Looking across
the sample, Fig. 5(a) shows just how sample position
aﬀects ion properties. For low-positioned samples, the

6

angle distribution of ions is constant across the sample.
There is some modulation of ﬂux, as seen in the bottom
chart, possibly due to the eﬀects mentioned beforehand.
Highly-positioned samples show a larger variation in ﬂux
and a large change in incident ion angle, especially to-
wards the edge of the sample. In general, from Fig. 5(b),
it can be seen that higher-positioned samples tend to not
only have higher-energy incident ions, but a larger spread
of incident angles and energies as well, possibly leading
to less-controlled etching conditions.

It is a well-known result from ion-beam etching that
physical mask milling changes with changes in etch an-
gle. Within FCAE etching, the selectivity of the etch
decreases as more acute etch angles (ϕ approaching 0)
are attempted[23]. This eﬀect is seen qualitatively in di-
amond devices using both HSQ and alumina as a mask.
Furthermore, because of the milling action that occurs
when etching ions are incident on the mask, acute etch
angles are also associated with an increase in micromask-
ing, roughening the surface of the etched device signiﬁ-
cantly. Likewise, increasing the mask coverage of the
sample leads to an increase in micromasking as more
mask particles are resputtered into the chamber. This
can be mitigated by designing patterns with less mask
area.

With this in mind as well as the results from Fig. 5(a),
angled-etching may also be used to non-invasively engi-
neer continuous etch proﬁles on a sample surface. This
can be accomplished by appropriately shaping the design
of the Faraday cage. In our simulations, we have shown
that even a cage without bends (and therefore a nom-
inally constant radius of curvature equal to zero) can
create a spatially-varying angular and ﬂux distribution
in ions, thereby modifying the local etch rate. Adding
curved components in the Faraday cage can create a
lensing eﬀect, in analogy with electron and ion optics.
This can be used to three-dimensionally pattern a sur-
face without any lithographic steps[44].

V. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

Faraday cage angled-etching has been demonstrated to
be a robust platform with which to etch a wide range of
materials[27, 30, 45], marrying the high material quality
of bulk single-crystal substrates with the versatility of a
three dimensional etching technique able to etch complex
nanostructures. After reviewing the design of Faraday
cages suitable for etching in standard ICP-RIE tools and
looking at results in three widely diﬀerent material plat-
forms (diamond, silicon, and quartz), we studied the in-
ﬂuence of cage parameters on the etch angle, uniformity,
and selectivity. Simulations of FCAE within a standard
reactor setup helped illuminate the dynamics involved in
angled-etching, driving physical intuition. These results
should help guide future eﬀort in nanofabrication using
FCAE, as well as inform new paths for extensions to this
technology. This study could be expanded by looking

into the eﬀects of diﬀerent plasma chemistry and forward
bias on the plasma potential, as well as by incorporating
a full 3D model of the etching chamber and Faraday cage.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was performed in part at the Center for
Nanoscale Systems (CNS), a member of the National

7

Nanotechnology Infrastructure Network (NNIN), which
is supported by the National Science Foundation under
NSF award no. ECS-0335765. CNS is part of Harvard
University. This work was supported by the DARPA
SCOUT program through grant number W31P4Q-15-1-
0013 from AMRDEC. P. L. is supported by the National
Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship un-
der Grant No. DGE1144152. M. J. B. was supported
in part by the Natural Science and Engineering Council
(NSERC) of Canada and the Harvard Quantum Optics
Center (HQOC).

[1] K. L. Ekinci and M. L. Roukes, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 76, 1

[18] I. Bayn, B. Meyler, J. Salzman, and R. Kalish, New J.

(2005), arXiv:0502566 [cond-mat].

Phys. 13, 025018 (2011).

[2] J. D. Joannopoulos, S. G. Johnson, J. N. Winn, and
R. D. Meade, Photonic Crystals: Molding the Flow of
Light, 2nd ed. (Princeton University Press, Princeton,
NJ, 2008).

[3] M. Levy, R. M. Osgood, R. Liu, L. E. Cross, G. S. Cargill,
A. Kumar, and H. Bakhru, Appl. Phys. Lett. 73, 2293
(1998).

[4] T. Izuhara, R. M. Osgood, M. Levy, M. E. Reeves, Y. G.
Wang, A. N. Roy, and H. Bakhru, Appl. Phys. Lett. 80,
1046 (2002).

[5] T. Izuhara, I. L. Gheorma, R. M. Osgood, A. N. Roy,
H. Bakhru, Y. M. Tesfu, and M. E. Reeves, Appl. Phys.
Lett. 82, 616 (2003).

[6] M. K. Zalalutdinov, M. P. Ray, D. M. Photiadis, J. T.
Robinson, J. W. Baldwin, J. E. Butler, T. I. Feygelson,
B. B. Pate, and B. H. Houston, Nano Lett. 11, 4304
(2011).

[7] M. Liao, S. Hishita, E. Watanabe, S. Koizumi,

and

Y. Koide, Adv. Mater. 22, 5393 (2010).

[8] B. J. M. Hausmann, B. Shields, Q. Quan, P. Maletinsky,
M. McCutcheon, J. T. Choy, T. M. Babinec, A. Kubanek,
A. Yacoby, M. D. Lukin, and M. Lonˇcar, Nano Lett. 12,
1578 (2012), arXiv:1111.5330v1.

[9] C. Xiong, W. H. P. Pernice, K. K. Ryu, C. Schuck, K. Y.
Fong, T. Palacios, and H. X. Tang, Opt. Express 19,
10462 (2011), arXiv:1010.6042.

[10] T.-J. Wang, C.-H. Chu, and C.-Y. Lin, Opt. Lett. 32,

2777 (2007), arXiv:0705.2392.

[11] C. Wang, M. J. Burek, Z. Lin, H. A. Atikian,
V. Venkataraman, I.-C. Huang, P. Stark, and M. Lonˇcar,
Opt. Express 22, 30924 (2014), arXiv:1405.6473.

[12] P. Latawiec, V. Venkataraman, M. J. Burek, B. J. M.
and M. Lonˇcar, Optica 2, 924

Hausmann, I. Bulu,
(2015).

[13] R. E. Lee, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 16, 164 (1979).
[14] C. C. Cheng, A. Scherer, and E. Yablonovitch, Physica

17, 17 (1996).

[15] S. Takahashi, K. Suzuki, M. Okano, M.

Imada,
T. Nakamori, Y. Ota, K. Ishizaki, and S. Noda, Nat.
Mater. 8, 721 (2009).

[16] S. S. Walavalkar, A. P. Homyk, M. D. Henry,

and

A. Scherer, Nanoscale 5, 927 (2013).

[17] T. M. Babinec, J. T. Choy, K. J. M. Smith, M. Khan,
and M. Loncar, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 010601 (2010),
10.1116/1.3520638, arXiv:1008.1431.

[19] T. Zhong, J. M. Kindem, E. Miyazono, and A. Faraon,

Nat. Comm. 6, 8206 (2015).

[20] N. C. MacDonald, Microelectron. Eng. 32, 49 (1996).
[21] B. Khanaliloo, M. Mitchell, A. C. Hryciw, and P. E.

Barclay, Nano Lett. 15, 5131 (2015).

[22] B. Khanaliloo, H. Jayakumar, A. C. Hryciw, D. P. Lake,
H. Kaviani, and P. E. Barclay, Phys. Rev. X 5, 041051
(2015), arXiv:1502.01788.

[23] G. D. Boyd, L. A. Coldren, and F. G. Storz, Appl. Phys.

Lett. 36, 583 (1980).

[24] B.-O. Cho, S.-W. Hwang, J.-H. Ryu, I.-W. Kim, and

S.-H. Moon, Electrochem. Solid St. 2, 129 (1999).

[25] J.-H. Ryu, B.-O. Cho, S.-W. Hwang, S. H. Moon, and

C.-K. Kim, Korean J. Chem. Eng. 20, 407 (2003).

[26] H. E. Jeong, J.-K. Lee, H. N. Kim, S. H. Moon, and

K. Y. Suh, P. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106, 5639 (2009).

[27] M. J. Burek, N. P. De Leon, B. J. Shields, B. J. M.
Hausmann, Y. Chu, Q. Quan, A. S. Zibrov, H. Park,
M. D. Lukin, and M. Lonˇcar, Nano Lett. 12, 6084 (2012).
[28] I. Bayn, S. Mouradian, L. Li, J. A. Goldstein,
T. Schr¨oder, J. Zheng, E. H. Chen, O. Gaathon, M. Lu,
A. Stein, C. A. Ruggiero, J. Salzman, R. Kalish, and
D. Englund, Appl. Phys. Lett. 105, 211101 (2014),
arXiv:1411.3639.

[29] M. J. Burek, Y. Chu, M. S. Z. Liddy, P. Patel,
J. Rochman, S. Meesala, W. Hong, Q. Quan, M. D.
Lukin,
and M. Lonˇcar, Nat. Comm. 5, 5718 (2014),
arXiv:1408.5973.

[30] P. Latawiec, M. J. Burek, V. Venkataraman,

and
M. Lonˇcar, Appl. Phys. Lett. 108, 031103 (2016),
arXiv:1511.03332.

[31] B. J. M. Hausmann, B. J. Shields, Q. Quan, Y. Chu,
N. P. De Leon, R. Evans, M. J. Burek, A. S. Zibrov,
M. Markham, D. J. Twitchen, H. Park, M. D. Lukin,
and M. Lonˇcar, Nano Lett. 13, 5791 (2013).

[32] M. J. Burek, D. Ramos, P. Patel,

I. W. Frank,
and M. Lonˇcar, Appl. Phys. Lett. 103 (2013),
10.1063/1.4821917, arXiv:1309.1834.

[33] H. A. Atikian, A. Eftekharian, A. Jafari Salim, M. J.
Burek, J. T. Choy, A. Hamed Majedi, and M. Lonˇcar,
Appl. Phys. Lett. 104, 22 (2014), arXiv:1401.4490.

[34] R. Soref, Nat. Photonics 4, 495 (2010).
[35] P. T. Lin, V. Singh, Y. Cai, L. C. Kimerling,

and

A. Agarwal, Opt. Lett. 38, 1031 (2013).

[36] P. T. Lin, V. Singh, J. Hu, K. Richardson, J. D. Mus-
and

graves, I. Luzinov, J. Hensley, L. C. Kimerling,

A. Agarwal, Lab Chip 13, 2161 (2013).

[42] C.-C. Hsu, J. Hoang, V. Le, and J. P. Chang, J. Vac.

[37] J. Llobet, M. Sansa, M. Gerbol´es, N. Mestres, J. Arbiol,
X. Borris´e, and F. P´erez-Murano, Nanotechnology 25,
135302 (2014).

[38] W. Cady, P. IRE 10, 83 (1922).
[39] Y.-I. Sohn and M. Lonˇcar, in 60th Int. Conf. EIPBN

(2015).

Sci. Technol. B 26, 1919 (2008).

[43] M. J. Burek, J. D. Cohen, T. Ruelle, S. Meesala,
J. Rochman, H. Atikian, M. Markham, D. J. Twitchen,
M. D. Lukin, O. Painter, and M. Lonˇcar, ArXiv (2015),
arXiv:1512.04166.

[44] K. K. Kovi, R. S. Balmer, and J. Isberg, Diam. Relat.

[40] C.-C. Hsu, M. A. Nierode, J. W. Coburn, and D. B.

Mater. 58, 185 (2015).

Graves, J. Phys. D Appl. Phys. 39, 3272 (2006).

[41] C. S. Corr, E. Despiau-Pujo, P. Chabert, W. G. Graham,
F. G. Marro, and D. B. Graves, J. Phys. D Appl. Phys.
41, 185202 (2008).

[45] Y. Yamaguchi, S.-W. Jeon, B.-S. Song, Y. Tanaka,
T. Asano, and S. Noda, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 32, 1792
(2015).

8

