An Investigation of Coreference Phenomena in the Biomedical Domain

Dane Bell, Gus Hahn-Powell, Marco A. Valenzuela-Esc´arcega, Mihai Surdeanu

University of Arizona

Tucson, AZ 85721, USA

{dane, hahnpowell, marcov, msurdeanu}@email.arizona.edu

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
1

 
 
]
L
C
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
8
5
7
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

We describe challenges and advantages unique to coreference resolution in the biomedical domain, and a sieve-based architecture
that leverages domain knowledge for both entity and event coreference resolution. Domain-general coreference resolution algorithms
perform poorly on biomedical documents, because the cues they rely on such as gender are largely absent in this domain, and because
they do not encode domain-speciﬁc knowledge such as the number and type of participants required in chemical reactions. Moreover, it
is difﬁcult to directly encode this knowledge into most coreference resolution algorithms because they are not rule-based. Our rule-based
architecture uses sequentially applied hand-designed “sieves”, with the output of each sieve informing and constraining subsequent
sieves. This architecture provides a 3.2% increase in throughput to our Reach event extraction system with precision parallel to that of
the stricter system that relies solely on syntactic patterns for extraction.

Keywords: coreference resolution, information extraction, biomedical text mining

1.

Introduction

Cancer is triggered by extremely complex protein signaling
pathways that interact in an intricate network, leading to
accordingly complex reactions to cancer treatment drugs.
This complexity, combined with the rapid pace of publish-
ing in the biomedical domain, makes these systems effec-
tively intractable for human experts, and so studies are typ-
ically reductionist, focusing on a single pathway at a time.
The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
(DARPA) created the Big Mechanism program (Cohen,
2015) to develop a holistic view of these cancer pathways
through automated, large-scale reading and pathway as-
sembly in amendment of and extension to already-existing
human-made models of protein reaction networks. Two
major requirements to accomplish this ambitious goal are
effective automatic reading and assembly, i.e., extracting
individual biochemical interactions, linking these isolated
interactions together to form larger pathways, and merging
them into an existing cancer model.
Coreference resolution is a fundamental requirement for
effective reading and assembly, as it is crucial for decid-
ing which spans of text refer to the same entity in the real
world, which can have such disparate labels as “the pro-
tein”, “both”, or “ASPP1”. However, with the notable ex-
ception of the BioNLP shared task (Kim et al., 2013), coref-
erence has rarely been a focus of reading-based work.
Domain-general coreference systems perform poorly in this
domain, because they fail to capitalize on domain-speciﬁc
constraints on possible coreference relations. This is illus-
trated in example 1a, in which a domain-general corefer-
ence resolution system (Lee et al., 2013) would link its to
GSK3β because of a generally trustworthy heuristic that the
earliest named entity in the sentence is likely to be the an-
tecedent of a pronoun if they match grammatically (Hobbs,
1978). The domain-speciﬁc knowledge that a protein bind-
ing to itself would not be referred to this way allows us to
rule this link out and instead correctly choose Axin GBD,
as in 1b.

(1)

a.

b.

* . . . we incubated GSK3β with excess Axin
GBD protein to saturate its binding to
GSK3β . . . 1
. . . we incubated GSK3β with excess Axin
GBD protein to saturate its binding to
GSK3β . . .

Similarly, domain-general systems would typically make in
incorrect link in example 2a. Because such systems would
not know that interaction refers to a biochemical reaction
that has molecules as its participants, “study” is considered
as a possible antecedent (a mistake avoided by our approach
in example 2b):

(2)

a.

b.

* The only previous study concerned the class
II paired box gene Pax8, and its interaction
with Smad3.
The only previous study concerned the class
II paired box gene Pax8, and its interaction
with Smad3.

Finally, domain general systems are able to make assump-
tions that do not hold in this domain. For example, in the
general domain, a mention of Barack or Obama is likely to
corefer with the more complete mention President Barack
Obama. However, in the biomedical domain, entity names
overlap to a great extent, and “glycogen synthase kinase 3
beta” is a different entity than “glycogen”.
The contributions of this work are twofold. First, we adapt
a sieve-based coreference resolution algorithm (Lee et al.,
2013; Lee et al., 2011) to the biomedical domain, capitaliz-
ing on domain-speciﬁc knowledge, extending the biomedi-
cal information extraction system of Valenzuela-Esc´arcega

1Bold face text denotes an anaphor, and italicized text denotes
the antecedent chosen by the approach in discussion. Importantly,
for entity resolution, we focus only on entities that participate in
biochemical events; an underline denotes the anchor phrase of the
corresponding event. The asterisk indicates an incorrect resolu-
tion.

et al. (2015). Importantly, our extensions address both en-
tity and event (i.e., interaction) coreference resolution. The
“sieves” are sequentially applied heuristics for linking men-
tions in text, ordered from greatest to least precision and
from least to greatest recall. Second, we show that with
only seven such sieves, we achieve signiﬁcant through-
put gains while maintaining high precision in a large-scale
DARPA evaluation based on the full content of 1000 pa-
pers.

2. System architecture

The sieve-based architecture described here was developed
in tandem with the Open Domain Informer (Odin) system
(Valenzuela-Esc´arcega et al., 2015) for event extraction.
This system uses a relatively small set of human-written
(and human-interpretable) rules to extract events from text.
Odin, including this coreference component, is highly scal-
able, and can readily process thousands of papers at a rate
of less than ﬁve seconds per paper, allowing the full effect
of coreference resolution to be measured reliably.
Even without the coreference resolution component, Odin
is capable of recognizing some relations involving corefer-
ence, because of their grammatical regularity. Speciﬁcally,
it can recognize relations through relative pronouns such as
which, as exempliﬁed in 3.

(3) TGFβ signaling is initiated by the binding of TGFβ
to TBRII, which leads to the recruitment of TBRI.

Similarly, Odin already recognizes appositive structures as
in example 4, again due to their grammatical (appositive)
structure.

(4) Central to the hyperphosphorylation of Tau was the
activation of GSK-3β (glycogen synthase kinase 3
beta). . .

2.1. Assumptions
Anaphors, not cataphors. Although an abbreviated ref-
erence may precede a complete reference, as in example 5,
most anaphors point backward in biomedical texts (and in
open domain texts). We make the simplifying and con-
straining assumption that full mentions will appear before
anaphors.

(5) After its release from IκBα, NF-κB p65 can un-
dergo post-translational modiﬁcation to activate
gene transcription.

Event cardinality. Based on our ontology of reactions
and the corresponding requirements for participants, we
split n-ary event mentions into multiple binary events. In
example 6, we ﬁnd two binding reactions, one each be-
tween PIK3CA and Ras and between BRAF and Ras.

Figure 1: The architecture of our biomedical coreference
system.

Antecedent order determines anaphor order.
In rela-
tively rare cases of events involving multiple anaphors, if
no information hints at which anaphor corefers with which
antecedent(s), we proceed left to right. This is a successful
strategy in sentences like example 7.

(7)

. . . while over-expressed c-Cbl1 stabilized “acti-
vated” MLK32 , it1 suppressed its2 capacity to pro-
mote phosphorylation . . .

2.2. Sieve architecture
Based on Lee et al. (2013), we adopt a rule-based sieve ar-
chitecture for resolving coreference, in which deterministic
processes are ordered from highest precision to lowest pre-
cision, and from lowest recall to highest recall. The advan-
tages of this approach are similar to those of the rule-based
architecture of Odin, and include stability and interpretabil-
ity by humans, and high overall performance in open do-
main resolution.
Though successful in the open domain, Lee et al. (2013)’s
system is not well-suited to the biomedical domain, produc-
ing low-precision results. For example, it uses a sieve called
relaxed head match that allows two mentions to corefer if
the head of the anaphor appears anywhere in the antecedent
and has no words not contained in the antecedent. This is
problematic in cases such as example 8, where it is insufﬁ-
ciently restrictive, matching IκB with IκB kinase α.

(8) Two related kinases, IκB kinase α (IKKα) and

IKKβ, phosphorylate the IκB proteins . . .

Here we adapt the sieves to the biomedical domain using
four strategies:

1. We eliminate sieves that: are not applicable to the
biomedical domain, are already captured by Odin
rules, or are insufﬁciently restrictive in this domain.
We eliminated the following sieves from Lee et al.
(2013)’s architecture: speaker identiﬁcation, relaxed
string match, relaxed string match, precise constructs,
proper head noun match, relaxed head match.

(6)

. . . PIK3CA and BRAF are, in part, regulated by
direct binding to activated forms of the Ras pro-
teins. . .

2. We created sieves that are speciﬁc to the biomedical
domain. For clarity, we mark these sieves as “domain
speciﬁc” in the discussion below.

Sieve1: String MatchSieve3: Mutant MatchMention DetectionSieve2: Grounding MatchSieve4: Strict Head MatchSieve5: Noun Phrase MatchSieve6: Pronominal MatchSieve7: Event MatchPost ProcessingRecallincreases3. We constrain the remaining open-domain sieves such
as pronominal resolution with domain-speciﬁc con-
straints, e.g., forcing a pronominal anaphor to resolve
to a protein when this knowledge is available.

4. Because our ultimate goal is to re-construct protein
signaling pathways, we resolve only entity mentions
that participate in biochemical interactions, and in-
complete event mentions. We ignore all other poten-
tial anaphors such as protein mentions that do not par-
ticipate in interactions2, and pronominal or nominal
phrases in any other constructs.

Figure 1 shows the proposed sieve-based coreference reso-
lution architecture for the biomedical domain. We detail all
components below.
Mention detection. Unlike open-domain coreference
resolution, which aims to resolve all pronominal and nomi-
nal mentions in text, here we consider as anaphors only en-
tity and event mentions that participate in fragments of pro-
tein signaling pathways. In particular, we only consider en-
tity mentions that are arguments of relevant biochemical in-
teractions previously extracted by Odin (e.g., phophoryla-
tions, ubiquitinations, bindings, translocations), and nomi-
nal event mentions, e.g., “this binding”. We identify the lat-
ter using a dictionary of event trigger phrases, which must
match noun phrases that also include a deﬁnite determiner.
Exact string match. We cluster entity mentions that have
the same characters in the same order. This is less reliable
in the biomedical domain as it is elsewhere, since differ-
ent proteins (in different species) may have the same name.
However, precision remains high.

(9)

. . . we incubated GSK3β with excess Axin GBD
protein to saturate its binding to GSK3β . . .

This sieve does not boost throughput of event extraction,
since the mentions it concerns are full mentions (rather
than, say, pronouns) and thus are recognized by Odin al-
ready. However, linking full mentions as referring to the
same real-world entity constrains later sieves and aids in
assembly. For example, in example 9, the link between the
two mentions of GSK3β ensures that at a later sieve, its
will not be linked to GSK3β, which would posit an incor-
rect chemical reaction between a protein and itself.
Shared grounding match (domain speciﬁc). The in-
verse problem to multiple proteins with the same name is
one protein with multiple names, sometimes within a sin-
gle document. We use a lookup table produced from large
databases such as Uniprot (UniProt Consortium, 2015),
containing many aliases, to cluster mentions that refer to
the same real-world entity, whether it be a protein, a gene,
a simple chemical, or cell part. For example, in 10, GSK-
3β and glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta refer to the same
entity. If this sentence were followed by “it phosphorylates
GSK-3β”, we could thereby prevent it from coreferring to
glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta.

2These are still considered as candidates for entity resolution.

(10) Central to the hyperphosphorylation of Tau was the
activation of GSK-3β (glycogen synthase kinase 3
beta). . .

Similarly to the exact string match sieve, this sieve princi-
pally has the effect of constraining later sieves, in addition
to aiding in assembly.
Mutant match (domain speciﬁc). Knowing whether a
protein or gene is mutated (i.e. altered by substituting,
deleting, adding, etc., a section of the amino acids that
make up a protein) is crucial to understanding reactions.
The differences in reaction participation between “wild-
type” (non-mutated) and speciﬁc mutants of a protein is
often the main point of a paper. There are three types of
shorthand used to refer back to fully described mutations:
(i) Noun phrases such as “the deletion mutant” that only
specify that there is a protein with a (kind of) mutation, but
not which protein was mutated or which part of the pro-
tein was affected. These cases, exempliﬁed in example 11
are handled by our later class-based noun phrase resolu-
tion sieve. (ii) Noun phrases such as “S34A mutant” that
specify which mutation is discussed (S34A), but not which
protein is being mutated. This case, exempliﬁed in 12 is
similarly handled as a special case of noun phrase resolu-
tion, which is discussed later. (iii) Noun phrases such as
“all six FGFR3 mutants” that specify which protein is mu-
tated (FGFR3), but not which mutation has taken place, as
exempliﬁed in example 13. This last class is handled by the
mutant match sieve, which tries to link an entity that has
an unknown mutation to a prior mention of the same en-
tity with the mutation spelled out. Note that this may yield
one-to-many resolution links, if the anaphor is a plural noun
such as in example 13:

(11) The anti-pSer34 antibody reacted with AATYK1A
but not with the S34A mutant [of AATYK1A] . . . .

(12)

. . . we prepared recombinant H2AX-K134A. . . The
intensity of the band corresponding to histone
H2AX methylation was signiﬁcantly diminished in
the K134A mutant compared with that of wild-
type H2AX (H2AX-WT). . . .

(13) Cells were transfected with N540K, G380R,
R248C, Y373C, K650M and K650E-FGFR3 mu-
tants . . . all six FGFR3 mutants induced activatory
ERK(T202/Y204) phosphorylation. . . .

Strict head match. Entities are linked if the anaphor’s
head word is contained in the antecedent mention and the
anaphor mention contains only words contained in the an-
tecedent mention (with the exception of stop words). For
example, a phosphorylated ASPP2 protein matches the
ASPP2 and the phosphorylated protein but not the activated
ASPP2. An example of a match is given in example 14,
where the head enzyme precedes the entity mention text.

(14)

. . . in the enzyme guanylate cyclase. As a result,
the enzyme becomes active and catalyses the pro-
duction of more cGMP from GTP.

Pronominal and determiner resolution. Pronominal
coreference is very common in biomedical literature.
In
fact, pronominal anaphora are the most common in the
BioNLP Genia Event Extraction (GE) 2013 gold corpus,
with it and its being the two most common anaphoric ex-
pressions. A typical case is shown in example 15.

(15) FOXP3 is an essential transcription factor . . . ; how-
ever, the mechanisms regulating its expression are
as yet unknown.

Most of the variables useful for open-domain pronoun res-
olution are irrelevant here, particularly gender, person, and
animacy, since the entities and events mentioned are invari-
ably referred to as neuter, 3rd person, and inanimate in En-
glish (it, its, them, etc.). However, pronoun number remains
crucial, in that it denotes how many antecedents to link to.
Following Hobbs (1978), we use a simple heuristic for ﬁnd-
ing the antecedent of these expressions, starting from the
beginning of the current sentence and traveling linearly
rightward until an appropriate mention (or mentions) is
reached. If insufﬁcient mentions are found this way, we tra-
verse the immediately previous sentence left to right. Un-
like Hobbs, who traversed trees, we simply use word order,
which is effective in most cases.
We improve this search using several domain-speciﬁc con-
straints. We exclude from this search any mentions that are
participants in the current event, which prevents the sys-
tem from concluding that a protein phosphorylated itself,
for example. We further exclude any mentions that have
been previously marked as coreferent to any mention that
is a participant in the current event, as well as any men-
tions that we know through domain knowledge cannot be a
participant in the current reaction. For example, in a phos-
phorylation event (the addition of a phosphate molecule to
another molecule), the thing being phosphorylated must be
a protein or other chemical, and cannot be a sub-cellular
location such as the cytoplasm.
Furthermore, a single event mention in the text may be split
into multiple events based on the cardinality of the event
and of its anaphoric participants. In example 16, their must
refer to multiple antecedents (or to one or more plural an-
tecedent), and each of these antecedents must participate
in a binding event with FLAG-CUL4A but not with each
other.

(16)

. . . endogenous BAF and emerin consistently “co-
peaked” in their interaction with FLAG-CUL4A
after UV-treatment.

Class-based noun phrase resolution (domain speciﬁc).
Relevant entities fall into discrete classes, each with its own
set of periphrastic expressions.

(17)

(18)

. . . Rb binds to E2F. The protein also inhibits the
transactivation capacity of E2F.
. . . the receptor Smads (Smad-1, Smad-5, and
Smad-8). The R- Smads then form complexes with
the co-Smad (Smad4) and are translocated into the
nucleus. . .

Classes include proteins (the protein, kinases), protein fam-
ilies, genes, sites (site, this position), and simple chemicals,
but periphrastic noun phrases are much more numerous, re-
ferring to subclasses and subsubclasses of each.
Of the anaphora in the gold-annotated GE corpus, 41.0%
(91 of 222) are closed-class words such as it, which, and
that. The remainder are periphrastic noun phrases that ref-
erence the class of the antecedent entity or event.
At each noun phrase from a constrained set such as “the
protein”, we search only for proteins, using the same
search heuristic as in the pronominal resolution sieve. The
matches are further constrained in that the anaphoric ex-
pressions must contain linguistic evidence that they are
coreferent with some already mentioned entity, such as a
deﬁnite determiner article (the) or a demonstrative word
(these, that). Thus, “a kinase” does not match, but “this
kinase” can.
Event coreference (domain speciﬁc). Simple event
mentions such as phosphorylation events can be partici-
pants in regulations. When this occurs, they may be full
mentions or they may be incomplete, as in example 19:

(19) LL-37 forms a complex together with the IGF-1R
. . . and this binding results in IGF-1R activation
. . . .

When an incomplete simple event mention is a participant
in a regulation, we search for complete event mentions,
i.e., event mentions with the expected number of arguments
present, constraining our search to events of the same type.
Although in principle regulation events can be participants
in other regulation events, we constrain the system to one
level of recursion to maintain precision, so we do not per-
form searches on anaphora that indicate regulation events
such as the promotion.
Clean-up. The entity and event recognition process for
ﬁnding anaphoric expressions casts a very wide net. Be-
cause the event rules and sieves are carefully constrained
to only ﬁnd appropriate anaphoric relationships, it is not
harmful to recognize, for example, expletive it in expres-
sions like It is hypothesized. . . . However, it is necessary
to clear any entities and events for which appropriate an-
tecedents were not found. These are simply ﬁltered out of
the reported entities and events.

3. Experiments

The system was evaluated on materials from a 2015 large-
scale Big Mechanism evaluation on 1000 papers. While
a corpus gold-annotated for coreference does exist for the
biomedical domain, the BioNLP GE 2013 corpus (Kim et
al., 2013), we instead use the Big Mechanism evaluation
corpus for two main reasons.
First, the BioNLP corpus is not compatible with the model
architectures that are central
to Big Mechanism, e.g.,
the Biological Pathways Exchange Language (BioPAX)
(Demir et al., 2010) and Biological Expression Language
(BEL)3. For example, the BioNLP corpus makes no func-
tional distinction between regulation and activation events,

3http://www.openbel.org/

Throughput mentions

Odin
Coreference alone
Odin + coreference

Generous Precision

46,234
1,492
47,726

Odin + coreference
Coreference alone

74.2%
68.0%

Table 1: Throughput and precision for the Odin system with
and without the coreference resolution component.

contrary to BioPAX’s ontology, which speciﬁes regulations
(as “controls”) but not activations. Also, BioPAX binding
events require at least 2 participants, while BioNLP binding
events allow 1 to 6 participants.
Second, the scale of the BioNLP corpus is necessarily lim-
ited due to its hand-curated design, with only 20 papers in
its training and development subcorpora combined. The
relative sparsity of coreference relations that contribute to
event extraction that would otherwise be impossible makes
this size insufﬁcient.
Because Odin does not require training, but rather is rule-
based, and its rules were developed on different texts, no
separation of the DARPA corpus into training and testing
was necessary.
3.1. Evaluation
Given that this 1000-paper corpus is not annotated, a recall
measure is not possible, as there is no gold set of events to
be extracted. Following the DARPA Big Mechanism evalu-
ation, then, we measure throughput, deﬁned as the number
of events (or interactions) mentions extracted, as an approx-
imation of recall.4
Likewise, precision must be hand-coded on a random sam-
ple of the program’s output. For the overall system, this was
performed by independent raters chosen by DARPA, using
a metric called generous precision. In generous precision,
the accuracy of a single event extraction is 1 if it is consid-
ered useful, i.e., if it is the correct event type and has at least
one correct participant, and 0 otherwise. The overall gener-
ous precision is the average accuracy over evaluated events.
Because too few of the events so evaluated resulted from
coreference resolution to sufﬁciently evaluate the corefer-
ence system itself, we performed a similar evaluation on
100 randomly selected events extracted using coreference
resolution, using the same metric.
3.2. Results
The results summarized in Table 1 show that our sieve-
based coreference system contributed a 3.22% increase in
throughput. A separate analysis of the BioNLP 2013 GE
gold-annotated corpus shows that the maximum possible
contribution of coreference is 8.9% (under slightly differ-
ent deﬁnitions of reaction types). The BioNLP ﬁgure in-

4In a slight departure from DARPA’s deﬁnition of throughput,
here we count regulations and biochemical reactions as distinct
event mentions. In the DARPA evaluation, regulations were col-
lapsed with the corresponding controlled reaction into a single
event mention.

Error source
Named entity recognition
Event recognition
Coreference resolution

Portion of errors
14%
36%
50%

Table 2: Error analysis by source of the error. This analysis
was performed over all precision errors produced by the
coreference resolution component.

Error type
Named entity
recognition

Event recogni-
tion

Coreference
resolution

Example
Moreover, although RoR-siRNA alone
was able to increase the p53 level, it did
not cause p53 phosphorylation or acety-
lation. . .
GST and GST-hBex2 fusion proteins were
used to test their interaction with EGFP-
tagged LMO2 .
. . . one of two adaptor proteins that var-
ied in their reported interactions: (1) an
adaptor protein that was not known to di-
rectly associate with the neurotrophin re-
ceptor or the channel (Grb10), and (2) an
adaptor protein that was known to bind to
Y490 (NPQpY motif) of the neurotrophin
receptor (nShc).

Table 3: Examples of errors in coreference resolution by
class of error. The correct antecedent is italicized for clarity,
but the antecedents were not recognized.

cludes phenomena commonly included under the umbrella
of “coreference”, namely the anaphor which followed by a
relative clause and the appositive structures described ear-
lier, which the original Odin system already addressed.
Importantly, the precision of the coreference system ap-
proaches that of the Odin system generally (68% vs. 74%).
This is encouraging: the 74% generous precision was the
second highest precision score reported in this evalua-
tion (the highest was 75.8%, but at a lower throughput).
This demonstrates that, despite its simplicity, the proposed
coreference resolution approach has state-of-the-art perfor-
mance.
A further error analysis summarized in Table 2 shows that
only half of the precision errors are due to actual faulty
coreference resolution, while the remaining half are due
to errors of the general system, e.g., failure to recognize
named entities for antecedents, failures of the event detec-
tion rules, and incorrect syntactic analysis on complex sen-
tences.
Table 3 shows an example of each of the types of error
found. The ﬁrst example fails because RoR-siRNA was not
recognized as an entity; replacing it with an entity known
to the event extraction system causes the correct antecedent
to be recovered. In the second case, the correct result is
that GST and GST-hBex2 should each interact with LMO2.
Because the event extraction system did not recognize that
LMO2 was involved in the event, although it recognized
the entity LMO2, the coreference system was left to re-

solve only their interaction and produced a single event
with two participants, GST and GST-hBex2. Finally, there
is a case in which the assumptions of the coreference sys-
tem have been violated: the fully speciﬁed mentions follow
rather than precede the anaphor. This situation is difﬁcult
to detect, but future work may extend to recognizing list
structures such as that in this example, which may indicate
cataphora (in which the full mention follows the anaphoric
expression) in a reliable fashion.

3.3. Mutation evaluation
Mutation resolution was a late addition to the coreference
system and so evaluated separately for precision. Three
raters examined a total of 77 entity and event extractions
that included at least one mutant that required coreference
resolution. For these entity and event mentions, a point
was awarded for each correct resolution, a half point if the
named antecedent was the correct protein but had the wrong
modiﬁcations (e.g., it was not mutated), and zero points if
the named antecedent was incorrect. This is similar to the
“generous precision” above in that it gives credit for less
than maximally informative resolutions. The precision un-
der this deﬁnition was 75.7%. Of the errorful resolutions,
79% were due to failures of named entity recognition in
sentences like example 20 in which the mutation descrip-
tion was complicated or used nonstandard notation.

(20) When RUFY1 was further truncated from the C-
terminus [RUFY1(1-420)], the truncation mutant
could not bind to either Rab14 or Rab4.

The remaining 21% of errors were due to coreference res-
olution failures, but 67% of these were because a full an-
tecedent was simply never mentioned in the prior text.
In example 21, a sentence from an abstract mentions the
double mutant which has not yet been deﬁned.
In a
later section of the text, the mutant is fully described as
NudelN20/C36. This violates the system’s general assump-
tion that a full antecedent will precede the anaphor, and by
several paragraphs.

(21)

In contrast, the wild-type Nudel and the double
mutant that binds to neither protein are much less
effective.

All in all, this analysis indicates that the resolution of pro-
tein mutants performs comparably (slightly higher in fact)
to the rest of the biomedical coreference resolution system.
To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst evaluation of a system
linking mentions in text that are more or less speciﬁc refer-
ences to mutant proteins. Furthermore, similar to the anal-
ysis in the previous sub-section, this error analysis supports
the observation that only a small percentage of the errors
are inherent limitations of the proposed coreference resolu-
tion architecture.

4. Discussion

This system, while productive, does not yet take maximal
advantage of the information in the text. Future work and
ongoing improvements are discussed next.

4.1. Alias resolution
Terminology is quite inconsistent between papers, because
authors often introduce name aliases for proteins or muta-
tions such as “E3 ligase BRAP (also referred to as IMP)”.
These aliases will hold for the duration of the paper, but
they generally do not appear in knowledge bases such as
Uniprot (UniProt Consortium, 2015), which complicates
resolution. In this case, the nonce equivalence of two names
is informative for building models of interactions, in which
the precise entity referred to must be known.
In future
work, we will implement patterns for the detection of these
aliases when they are introduced, e.g., “also referred to as”.
Additionally, some papers contain a special section or note
naming these aliases or abbreviations, as shown in Figure 2.
Our coreference resolution system is currently being ex-
panded to recognize text that marks two names equivalent
in this way.
4.2.
Because of the mechanistic nature of the events in this do-
main, authors may omit a great deal of information. For
example, ellipsis, once reconstructed, can easily double the
number of reactions detectable in a clause.
(22) The dephosphorylated Axin binds β-catenin less ef-
ﬁciently than the phosphorylated form [of Axin
binds β-catenin].5
a.

Informative ellipsis

(23)

JNK-I revealed a stronger inhibitory effect
on IL-6 expression than the PKC-I [revealed
an inhibitory effect on IL-6 expression].

b.

* JNK-I revealed a stronger inhibitory effect
on IL-6 expression than [JNK-I revealed an
inhibitory effect on] the PKC-I.

In example 22, proper understanding of the elided material
allows us to capture the binding of phosphorylated Axin to
beta-catenin as well as the negative regulation of dephos-
phorylation of Axin on the binding of Axin and β-catenin.
To accomplish this, it is necessary to match the protein an-
tecedent (Axin) but not the modiﬁcation (dephosphoryla-
tion).
Similarly, the regulation of PKC-I on the IL-6 is captured
only using ellipsis in example 23a. We must discount com-
peting interpretations of the ellipsis such as that in example
23b, which is a grammatically acceptable but factually in-
correct alternative.
4.3. Reference to latent entities
The outputs of biochemical reactions are redundant with
the reaction type and participants, so they are also often
elided. For example, a (protein) binding reaction results in
a (protein) complex made up of the participants in the bind-
ing. The complex may then be referred to without being
explicitly named. This is essentially an anaphor without an
explicit antecedent—a latent entity.
(24) TGFβ signaling is initiated by the binding of TGFβ
to TBRII. The [resulting] complex [TGFβ:TBRII]
then recruits TBRI.

5Material between square brackets is added to complete the

ellipsis and is not in the original text.

Figure 2: A note containing explicit abbreviations from Kadrmas et al. (2004).

Kadrmas, J. L., Smith, M. A., Clark, K. A., Pronovost,
S. M., Muster, N., Yates, J. R., and Beckerle, M. C.
(2004). The integrin effector PINCH regulates JNK ac-
tivity and epithelial migration in concert with Ras sup-
pressor 1. The Journal of Cell Biology, 167(6):1019–
1024.

Kim, J.-D., Wang, Y., and Yasunori, Y. (2013). The Genia
event extraction shared task, 2013 edition – overview. In
Proceedings of the BioNLP Shared Task 2013 Workshop,
pages 8–15.

Lee, H., Peirsman, Y., Chang, A., Chambers, N., Sur-
deanu, M., and Jurafsky, D. (2011). Stanford’s multi-
pass sieve coreference resolution system at the CoNLL-
2011 shared task. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth Con-
ference on Computational Natural Language Learning:
Shared Task, pages 28–34.

Lee, H., Chang, A., Peirsman, Y., Chambers, N., Surdeanu,
M., and Jurafsky, D.
(2013). Deterministic corefer-
ence resolution based on entity-centric, precision-ranked
rules. Computational Linguistics, 39(4):885–916.

Miwa, M., Thompson, P., and Ananiadou, S.

(2012).
Boosting automatic event extraction from the litera-
ture using domain adaptation and coreference resolution.
Bioinformatics, 28(13):1759–1765.

UniProt Consortium. (2015). UniProt: A hub for protein
information. Nucleic Acids Research, 43(D1):D204–
D212.

Valenzuela-Esc´arcega, M. A., Hahn-Powell, G., and Sur-
deanu, M.
(2015). A domain-independent rule-based
framework for event extraction. In Proceedings of the
53rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: Software Demonstrations (ACL),
pages 127–132.

In example 24, The complex refers to TGFβ:TBRII, the
outcome of the binding described in the previous sentence.
It is this complex that recruits (i.e., binds with) TBRI to
form the complex TGFβ:TBRII:TBRI.
This extension requires a model of the output of each event
that has been found, work which is currently underway.

5. Conclusion

This work provides one of the ﬁrst empirical measurements
of the impact of entity and event coreference on large-scale
event extraction in the biomedical domain. Furthermore,
while prior work by Miwa et al. (2012) discusses the ideas
of coreference in the biomedical domain, here we offer a
concrete algorithm which leverages speciﬁc domain con-
straints.
This work was motivated by the observation that open-
domain coreference resolution systems perform poorly in
the biomedical domain because open-domain algorithms
are insufﬁciently restrictive in this domain. To address this,
we modiﬁed the sieve-based approach of Lee et al. (2013)
to infuse domain knowledge by: (i) removing open-domain
sieves that do not transfer well to the biomedical domain;
(ii) adding novel, domain-speciﬁc sieves, and (iii) con-
straining the remaining open-domain sieves with domain-
speciﬁc restrictions that control which anaphors to resolve
and which candidates to consider during the resolution pro-
cess.
We offer quantiﬁed results for a state-of-the-art event ex-
traction system extended with the resulting coreference res-
olution approach, which show increased throughput at com-
parable precision when coreference resolution is used.

6. Software

The software described here is open-source and available at
http://github.com/clulab/reach.

Acknowledgments

This work was funded by the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency (DARPA) Big Mechanism program under
ARO contract W911NF-14-1-0395. We thank MITRE for
implementing the evaluation discussed in Section 3.1.

7. References

Cohen, P. R. (2015). DARPA’s Big Mechanism program.

Physical Biology, 12(4):045008.

Demir, E., Cary, M. P., Paley, S., Fukuda, K., Lemer, C.,
Vastrik, I., Wu, G., D’Eustachio, P., Schaefer, C., Lu-
ciano, J., et al. (2010). The BioPAX community stan-
dard for pathway data sharing. Nature Biotechnology,
28(9):935–942.

Hobbs, J. R. (1978). Resolving pronoun references. Lin-

gua, 44(4):311–338.

