Simulated Quantum Annealing with Two All-to-All Connectivity Schemes

Tameem Albash,1, 2, 3, ∗ Walter Vinci,1, 2, 4, ∗ and Daniel A. Lidar1, 2, 4, 5

1Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California 90089, USA

2Center for Quantum Information Science & Technology,

University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California 90089, USA

3Information Sciences Institute, University of Southern California, Marina del Rey, California 90292, USA

4Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California 90089, USA

5Department of Chemistry, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California 90089, USA

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
t
n
a
u
q
[
 
 

1
v
5
5
7
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Quantum annealing aims to exploit quantum mechanics to speed up the solution to optimization problems.
Most problems exhibit complete connectivity between the logical spin variables after they are mapped to the
Ising spin Hamiltonian of quantum annealing. To account for hardware constraints of current and future physical
quantum annealers, methods enabling the embedding of fully connected graphs of logical spins into a constant-
degree graph of physical spins are therefore essential. Here, we compare the recently proposed embedding
scheme for quantum annealing with all-to-all connectivity due to Lechner, Hauke and Zoller (LHZ) [Science
Advances 1 (2015)] to the commonly used minor embedding (ME) scheme. Using both simulated quantum
annealing and parallel tempering simulations, we ﬁnd that for a set of instances randomly chosen from a class
of fully connected, random Ising problems, the ME scheme outperforms the LHZ scheme when using identical
simulation parameters, despite the fault tolerance of the latter to weakly correlated spin-ﬂip noise. This result
persists even after we introduce several decoding strategies for the LHZ scheme, including a minimum-weight
decoding algorithm that results in substantially improved performance over the original LHZ scheme. We
explain the better performance of the ME scheme in terms of more efﬁcient spin updates, which allows it to
better tolerate the correlated spin-ﬂip errors that arise in our model of quantum annealing. Our results leave
open the question of whether the performance of the two embedding schemes can be improved using scheme-
speciﬁc parameters and new error correction approaches.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Many important and hard optimization problems can be
mapped to ﬁnding the ground state of classical Ising mod-
els [1, 2]. The observation that such models can also be
solved via quantum annealing [3–5] has spurred a great deal
of recent interest in building special-purpose analog quantum
devices [6, 7] with the hope of realizing quantum speedups
[8].
In general, all pairs of spins in the Ising Hamiltonian
can be coupled, resulting in long-range interactions, e.g., as
in the Sherrington-Kirkpatrick model [9–11]. A direct phys-
ical implementation of such spin systems would require all-
to-all connectivity, an impossibility for analog devices with
local hardware connectivity.
Instead one must embed the
logical problem deﬁned by the given Ising model into the
available physical device connectivity. This embedding rep-
resents long-range logical interactions in terms of short-range
physical interactions, a process which introduces unavoidable
tradeoffs between energy scales, hardware resources, and ac-
curacy [12–18].

The ﬁrst embedding technique used for quantum annealing
is due to Choi and involves a graph-theoretical construction
known as minor embedding (ME) [12, 13]. In ME, the spins
of the given Ising problem with long-range interactions, which
we refer to as the logical spins, are replaced by chains of phys-
ical spins with short-range interactions implemented on the
device hardware. Physical spins within a chain are induced to
behave as a single logical spin using strong ferromagnetic in-
teractions acting as energy penalties. The hardware connectiv-

∗ These authors contributed equally to this work.

ity graph should allow for the minor embedding of complete
graphs, i.e., the latter should be obtainable from the former via
edge contractions. A well known example is the “Chimera”
graph used in the D-Wave quantum annealing devices [19].

Recently, Lechner, Hauke and Zoller (LHZ) proposed an
elegant alternative embedding technique, realized on a two-
dimensional triangular-shaped grid [17]. In the LHZ scheme,
the relative alignment (parallel or antiparallel) of pairs of log-
ical spins is mapped to a physical hardware spin. Both the
logical local ﬁelds and the logical couplings are mapped to
local ﬁelds acting on the physical spins. This is appealing,
since it places the burden of implementing the logical prob-
lem entirely on the implementation of local ﬁelds, thus ob-
viating the need for simultaneous control of local ﬁelds and
couplings. Couplings between the physical spins (acting as
energy penalties) must still be introduced to ensure that the
mapping is consistent.

Since in the LHZ scheme the logical spins are encoded
redundantly and non-locally in the physical degrees of free-
dom, it was suggested in Ref. [17] that the scheme includes
an intrinsic fault tolerance, with some similarities to the er-
ror robustness of topological quantum memories [20]. This
has been conﬁrmed by Pastawski and Preskill (PP) under
the assumption of a noise model of random spin-ﬂips [21].
More speciﬁcally, PP pointed out that the LHZ scheme may
be viewed as a classical low-density parity-check code that
makes the scheme highly robust against weakly correlated
spin-ﬂip noise.

While allowing for a rigorous analytical treatment, weakly
correlated random spin-ﬂips are unfortunately not the most
relevant errors in quantum annealing, the algorithm for which
the LHZ scheme was proposed. In adiabatic quantum com-

puting and quantum annealing, a time-dependent Hamiltonian
evolves a system from an easily prepared and trivial ground
state to the non-trivial ground state of the Hamiltonian of in-
terest. In a closed system, the adiabatic theorem provides a
guarantee that the probability of dynamical excitations can
be made arbitrarily small if the evolution is sufﬁciently slow
relative to the inverse of the minimum gap [22–24]. Under
the favorable assumption of weak system-environment cou-
pling, decoherence in open-system, ﬁnite temperature quan-
tum annealing takes place in the instantaneous energy eigen-
basis [25–27]. In both the closed and open-system cases, er-
rors may occur throughout the evolution, resulting in the gen-
eration of ﬁnal-time excited states that differ from the ground
state by a large number of spin-ﬂips, that are neither random
nor weakly correlated [28–31], as also recognized in Ref. [21].
Motivated by these considerations, here we study whether
the ME or the LHZ scheme is preferable under a realistic noise
model for quantum annealing. This is particularly pertinent
since the LHZ scheme would require the development of a
new quantum annealing architecture, while the ME scheme
has already been experimentally implemented in numerous
studies, e.g., Refs. [32–39]. We employ simulated quantum
annealing (SQA) [40, 41], a quantum Monte Carlo method
that iteratively updates an approximation to the instantaneous
quantum Gibbs state governed by the time-dependent system
Hamiltonian [Eq. (2) below]. While it is not a completely
faithful description of the annealing process since it neglects
unitary dynamics, it is the method of choice for large-scale
simulations of stoquastic (sign-problem free) quantum anneal-
ing [42], and has been used to successfully describe exper-
iments on the D-Wave devices [43–47]. Our SQA simula-
tions aim to model the behavior of two quantum annealing de-
vices implementing the same annealing schedule with identi-
cal physical parameters, but with different Hamiltonians, rep-
resenting the ME and LHZ embedded problem Hamiltonians,
respectively. In addition to SQA, we also use parallel temper-
ing (PT) [48, 49], a highly efﬁcient variant of classical Monte
Carlo that enables us to focus purely on the classical Hamilto-
nian, independently of the quantum evolution that takes place
during the annealing.

For the range of parameters and problem sizes studied, we
ﬁnd that the ME scheme outperforms the LHZ scheme for the
majority of instances studied. Using PT simulations on the
ﬁnal (classical) Hamiltonian, we show that the two schemes
perform similarly when the number of updates is sufﬁciently
large. We interpret this to mean that the difference between
the two schemes arises from more efﬁcient SQA updates for
the ME Hamiltonian, arising during the evolution governed by
the intermediate (quantum) Hamiltonian. Our results imply
that the LHZ scheme does not necessarily exhibit an intrinsic
fault tolerance against a noise model that is appropriate for
quantum annealing.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we
describe the ME and LHZ schemes for embedded quantum an-
nealing in more detail, as well as errors and majority vote de-
coding. We present our SQA and PT results in Sec. III, where
we compare the ME and LHZ schemes subject to majority
vote decoding. In Sec. IV we consider several other decod-

2

ing strategies for the LHZ scheme. In particular we describe
how to map the decoding of the LHZ scheme to the decod-
ing of a fully-connected, quadratic Sourlas code [50, 51].This
allows us to deﬁne minimum-weight (MWD) and maximum-
likelihood (MLD) decoding strategies, the latter being optimal
in the case of errors generated by random spin-ﬂips. We also
consider the belief propagation strategy proposed in Ref. [21].
We conclude and provide a broader discussion of our results
in Sec. V. Additional details are provided in the Appendix.

II. EMBEDDED QUANTUM ANNEALING

In quantum annealing one encodes the solution of a hard
combinatorial optimization problem into the ground state of a
classical Ising Hamiltonian:

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

HP =

hiσz

i +

Jijσz

i σz
j .

(1)

i

i<j

Hard problems typically result in highly frustrated spin sys-
tems with a spin-glass phase at low temperatures [52]. A
quantum annealing device attempts to solve for the ground
state of Eq. (1) by implementing the following time-dependent
Hamiltonian

where HX = −(cid:80)

H(t) = A(t)HX + B(t)HP ,

t ∈ [0, tf ] ,

(2)

i σx
i

is the “driver” term whose ground
state is a uniform superposition in the computational basis
that initializes the computation. The annealing schedule is
speciﬁed by the functions A(t) and B(t), where typically
A(0) (cid:29) B(0) and A(tf ) (cid:28) B(tf ). The most general op-
timization problem on N binary variables is deﬁned on an
all-to-all connectivity problem Hamiltonian HP graphically
represented in Fig. 1(a).

The construction of a physical device that implements the
system described by Eq. (2) with all-to-all connectivity can
be technically demanding because it requires the implemen-
tation of long-range interactions. While in trapped ions long-
range interactions are unproblematic [53], not all physical im-
plementations support such interactions; e.g., in most super-
conducting and semiconducting devices interactions are hard-
wired and quasi-local [19, 54–56], and for ultracold gases in
optical lattices interactions are determined by the geometry
[57]. Schemes that approximate long-range interactions with
short-range interactions are thus desirable for certain imple-
mentations. The ME and LHZ schemes are both designed to
address this challenge, as we brieﬂy review next.

A. Minor Embedding Scheme

The ME scheme replaces long-range interactions between
logical qubits by short-range interactions between chains (or
clusters) of physical qubits, where each chain represents a log-
ical qubit, and correspondingly replaces the logical problem
Hamiltonian HP [Eq. (1)] by a minor-embedded Hamiltonian

3

(a) All-to-all connectivity

(b) Minor embedding

(c) LHZ

FIG. 1. All-to-all connectivity and its representation using the ME and LHZ schemes. (a) A complete graph of 12 logical qubits. Brown
and blue lines correspond to types of couplings (e.g., ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic). (b) ME of the all-to-all Hamiltonian shown in (a).
Brown and blue lines are the physical realizations of the logical couplings. Black lines are the energy penalties within the logical chains. (c)
LHZ implementation of the same Hamiltonian. Red and blue dots represent physical qubits with either negative (ferromagnetic) or positive
(antiferromagnetic) local ﬁelds. Small black dots and lines represent three and four-body energy penalties.

P . Physical qubits belonging to the same logical-qubit
H ME
chain are connected by strong ferromagnetic interactions (act-
ing as energy penalties), which lowers the energy of conﬁg-
urations where these qubits are aligned at the end of the an-
neal. “Broken” chains (where not all members of a chain are
aligned) do not correspond to logical states and must be cor-
rected, e.g., by majority vote. For a more formal and complete
exposition of ME see, e.g., Ref. [16].

We consider here a particular ME on “Chimera” graphs.
Chimera is a degree-six graph formed from the tiling of an
L × L grid of K4,4 cells. Despite its low degree and near pla-
narity, an L × L Chimera graph allows for the minor embed-
ding of an all-to-all logical problem HP deﬁned on N = 4L
logical qubits where each logical qubit is represented by a
chain of (cid:100)N/4(cid:101) + 1 physical qubits. Figure 1(b) depicts a mi-
nor embedded Hamiltonian H ME
P of the all-to-all Hamiltonian
HP of Fig. 1(a), on a Chimera subgraph. Blue and red thin
links correspond to physical couplers representing the logical
interactions of HP, while black couplers represent strong fer-
romagnetic interactions that couple physical qubits belonging
to the same logical chain. Note in particular that while the full
Chimera graph would have 8L2 = N 2/2 spins, the embed-
ding of the complete graph of size N only uses N ((cid:100)N/4(cid:101)+1),
i.e., about half of these spins. For a more detailed description
of the ME scheme on Chimera graphs see, e.g., Refs. [12, 13].

B. Lechner-Hauke-Zoller Scheme

deﬁned on K =(cid:0)N

(cid:1) physical qubits corresponding to the K

is

P

In the LHZ scheme, the embedded Hamiltonian H LHZ

logical interactions of the original problem Hamiltonian HP.

2

The logical couplings Jij ≡ Jk are mapped to local ﬁelds
applied to the physical qubits (we denote the physical qubit’s
value in the computational basis by qk ≡ qi,j = ±1 ). The
value of a physical qubit in the LHZ scheme encodes the rel-
ative alignment of the corresponding pair of logical qubits: a
physical qubit pointing up (down) corresponds to an aligned
(anti-aligned) logical pair. Since K > N, the physical sys-
tem includes physical states that do not correspond to logical
states, similarly to what happens in the ME case. The ap-
pearance of these spurious states is suppressed by imposing
a sufﬁcient number of constraints (energy penalties). These
constraints are designed to favor an even number of spin-ﬂips
around any closed loop in the logical spins, in order to induce
a consistent mapping. The form of the LHZ Hamiltonian we
consider here is the following [17]:

H LHZ

P =

Jkσz

k +

Cc ,

(3)

(cid:88)

k∈VLHZ

(cid:88)

c∈VC

cu

σz
cl

σz
cd

where Cc = −λσz
cr are four-body interactions be-
σz
tween the physical qubits. In addition, three-body interactions
appear at the LHZ graph edges, as shown in Fig. 1(c). Both
the three and four-body interactions can be replaced by two-
body interactions, by coupling to ancilla qutrits [17]. VLHZ
represents the vertex set of the LHZ physical graph depicted
in Fig. 1(c) by circles, with K = |VLHZ|, and where VC

represents the C = |VC| = (cid:0)N−1

(cid:1) constraint interactions

shown as black dots. Local ﬁelds hi can be included by rep-
resenting them as couplings to an additional ancilla qubit, via
hiσz

i → hiσz

i .
0σz

2

1211123456789107106171085431254113125431287108111171081129612961254312296195,96,97,98,99,91,102,103,104,105,106,107,108,109,1010,101,21,112,113,114,115,116,117,118,119,1110,112,211,111,122,123,124,125,126,127,128,129,1210,1211,121,32,33,31,42,43,44,41,52,53,54,55,51,62,63,64,65,66,61,72,73,74,75,76,77,71,82,83,84,85,86,87,88,81,92,93,94,94

(a) K8, SQA

(b) K16, SQA

FIG. 2. Relative performance of the ME and LHZ schemes. Shown are scatter plots of success probabilities for 100 random (a) K8 and
(b) K16 instances generated via SQA and majority vote decoding. The ME scheme exhibits substantially better performance. Majority vote
decoding with the same number of votes (3 and 5 for K8 and K16, respectively) was used for both schemes, and the optimal energy penalty
was used for each instance. SQA parameters: 104 sweeps, β = 1. Note that the effective temperature of SQA is modulated through the anneal
by the annealing schedule (Fig. 11 in Appendix B). By the end of the anneal, the effective (dimensionless) temperature is ≈ 0.05, smaller than
the absolute value of the smallest coupling used in our simulations, 0.1.

C. Leakage errors in embedded quantum annealing

Due to the fact that in both the ME and LHZ schemes a
problem Hamiltonian deﬁned on N logical qubits is embed-
ded into a system with O(N 2) physical qubits, the physical
system has a much larger number of physical states (∼ 2N 2)
than the original logical system (∼ 2N ). This allows for “leak-
age”: broken chains in the ME scheme or physical states with
unsatisﬁed constraints in the LHZ scheme, that appear be-
cause of thermal and dynamical errors occurring during the
annealing process. Such leakage states do not directly corre-
spond to a logical state (see Fig. 10 in Appendix A for typical
examples of leakage states one expects in the LHZ scheme
for the random weakly correlated errors model and for ﬁnite-
temperature open-system quantum annealing).

A leaked physical state must be decoded, i.e., it must be
mapped back to a logical state. This decoding can be consid-
ered as partial error correction, in the sense that it recovers
a logical state but it does not guarantee the recovery of the
logical ground state. Next, we brieﬂy review majority vote
decoding; additional decoding schemes for the LHZ scheme
will be considered in Sec. IV.

D. Majority vote decoding of the ME Scheme

A minor-embedded logical qubit i is encoded into a set of
a=1. Majority vote decoding (MVD) of

physical qubits {ai}nA
logical qubit i consists of computing

where qai represents the measured value of physical qubit
ai in the computational basis. In addition to its being used
routinely in decoding minor embedded quantum annealing
[58–62], MVD has been successfully used in the context of
quantum annealing correction (QAC) [30, 31, 63] and hybrid
minor-embedded implementations of QAC [16, 64].
MVD relies on the assumption that the decoded values {¯qi}
are the most likely to recover the logical ground state. How-
ever, this is not ensured due to the complex way errors are
generated in quantum annealing. Alternatives such as energy
minimization, which tends to be a better strategy for quantum
annealing, have been explored as well [16], but will not be
further considered here.

E. Majority vote decoding of the LHZ Scheme

In the absence of leakage, any spanning tree (i.e., a graph
where there is a path connecting all vertices but any two ver-
tices are connected by exactly one path) on the logical graph
can be used to reconstruct a logical conﬁguration from the val-
ues of the physical qubits. In the presence of leakage, how-
ever, different spanning trees may decode the same physical
state to different logical states. A simple decoding technique
is to perform a majority vote on nT logical states decoded
from random spanning trees [17]:

nT(cid:88)

¯qi = sign

¯qt,i ,

(5)

¯qi = sign

qai ,

(4)

where ¯qt,i represents the decoded value of logical qubit i re-
trieved from spanning tree t (see Appendix A for further de-

t=1

nA(cid:88)

a=1

00.20.40.60.81LHZ00.20.40.60.81ME00.20.40.60.81LHZ00.20.40.60.81ME5

(a) SQA, 104 sweeps

(b) SQA, 5 × 104 sweeps

(c) SQA, 105 sweeps

FIG. 3. Dependence on penalty strength and the number of sweeps. Shown is the success probability of the ME and LHZ schemes for
a representative instance generated via SQA, as a function of penalty strength, with a varying number of sweeps. The decoded ME scheme
always outperforms the decoded LHZ scheme. The optimal penalty strength increases with the number of sweeps. Performance improves
consistently for both ME and LHZ as the number of sweeps increase. The non-vanishing success probability at zero penalty for the decoded
LHZ scheme is an artifact of the small size of the logical problems considered, which allows for a non-negligible probability that MVD will
retrieve a logical ground state.

tails and examples).

III. RESULTS FOR MAJORITY VOTE DECODING

P

P

In order to compare the ME and LHZ schemes we
random instances
ﬁrst generated a set of 100 logical
on complete graphs {K8, K16} with couplings Jij ∈
{±0.1,±0.2,±0.3,··· ± 1} chosen uniformly at random, and
all logical local ﬁelds set to zero. For each instance, we
and
constructed the embedded physical Hamiltonians H ME
. For each instance and embedding scheme, we ran
H LHZ
SQA [40, 41] using the quantum annealing Hamiltonian
Eq. (2) with the same annealing schedule, temperature, and
number of Monte Carlo sweeps. A single sweep involves ap-
plying a Wolff cluster update along the imaginary time di-
rection for all spatial quantum Monte Carlo slices (see Ap-
pendix B for more details on SQA).

The annealing schedule sets the effective energy scale of
the Hamiltonian [Eq. (2)], and the ratio of this scale to the
temperature changes during the anneal. The annealing sched-
ule can play a crucial role in determining the performance
of the adiabatic algorithm, and in principle can be optimized
separately for the ME and LHZ schemes. Furthermore, the
ME and LHZ schemes may beneﬁt from controlling the con-
straints (the chains in the ME case, and the four-body terms
in the LHZ case) using an independent annealing schedule.
We do not address these issues in this work, and leave the ex-
ploration of possible improvements using these strategies for
future work.

P

P

and H LHZ

In order to understand the role of the purely classical
Hamiltonians H ME
in the success of each scheme,
we used parallel tempering (PT) [48, 65]. For sufﬁciently long
runtimes, PT samples from the classical thermal (Gibbs) state.
If the temperature is sufﬁciently low, PT samples predomi-
nantly from the ground state, and hence it can be used as a
solver to ﬁnd the ground state of the classical Hamiltonian.

PT is a more efﬁcient algorithm than simulated annealing [66]
for both the sampling and solver tasks (see Appendix B for
more details on PT). Here we use PT as a sampler on the ME
and LHZ Hamiltonians, whereby we run PT with a long but
ﬁxed runtime, while restricting it to single-spin updates in or-
der to keep the algorithm as close to the SQA implementa-
tion as possible for both the ME and LHZ schemes1 At suf-
ﬁciently large penalty values, we expect the leakage states to
be completely decoupled from the low-lying levels in both the
ME and LHZ schemes. The low energy physical states are
then equivalent to the low energy logical states, which are the
same for the two schemes, so at sufﬁciently low temperatures
we expect the PT success probabilities for both schemes to
coincide. As we increase the temperature but keep the run-
time constant, we expect deviations between the two schemes
to emerge. This allows us to compare how well each scheme
performs in recovering the logical ground state from the low-
energy physical states.

In this section we perform the comparison between the ME
and LHZ schemes using only majority vote decoding, before
considering more sophisticated decoding strategies in Sec. IV.
MVD allows us to equalize the decoding effort between the
two schemes.

A. Comparing ME and LHZ via simulated quantum annealing

Fig. 2 shows scatter plots comparing the ME and LHZ
schemes on SQA-generated states. For both the ME and

1 Cluster updates that take into account the geometry of each embedding
scheme are likely to help speed up the convergence of PT to the Gibbs
state for both the ME and LHZ schemes. For example, cluster updates
associated to the ﬂip of a logical qubit (a chain in the ME case and a cluster
consisting of all physical qubits {qi,k, qk,i}k for logical qubit ¯qi in the
LHZ case).

012345Penaltystrength00.20.40.60.8SuccessprobabilityLHZ,nodecodingLHZME,nodecodingME012345Penaltystrength00.20.40.60.8SuccessprobabilityLHZ,nodecodingLHZME,nodecodingME012345Penaltystrength00.20.40.60.8SuccessprobabilityLHZ,nodecodingLHZME,nodecodingME6

updates via time-like cluster spin-ﬂips less effective. It is pos-
sible that alternative implementations of the constraints (us-
ing for example two-body interactions along with coupling to
qutrits, as suggested in Ref. [17]) may improve the perfor-
mance of the LHZ scheme under SQA simulation; this is left
for a future study.

B. Comparing ME and LHZ via parallel tempering

We next study the probability with which the logical ground
state can be retrieved from the results of PT simulations that
use the classical physical Hamiltonians H LHZ
P . This
analysis allows us to directly study the resiliency to leakage
due to purely classical thermal errors.

and H ME

P

Fig. 5 presents our PT simulation results, as a function
of energy penalty, for representative K8 and K16 instances,
where we also examine the size and temperature-dependence.
We conﬁrm in Fig. 5 for the K8 case that for sufﬁciently large
penalties and sufﬁciently low temperatures, the success prob-
ability for both schemes is identical and high. Therefore, the
observed difference is attributable to more efﬁcient spin up-
dates in the case of SQA simulations of the ME scheme.

At smaller energy penalties, thermal excitations are more
likely to populate leakage states, leading to differences be-
tween the two schemes. This is instance and size-dependent,
as can be seen by the differences between the two schemes in
Figs. 5(a) and 5(c), but the absence of a difference in Fig. 5(b).
The typical behavior is presented in the scatter plot of
Fig. 6, where we compare the success probabilities of the LHZ
and ME schemes at particular values of the inverse temper-
ature and energy penalty, for the same 100 random K8 in-
stances as in the SQA case of Fig. 2(a). At this relatively small
penalty value, the ME scheme exhibits a small but consistent
advantage in its ability to recover states that have leaked due
to thermal excitations.

Differences between the two schemes are also expected if
the number of updates is insufﬁcient to reach the low-energy
physical states, and hence leakage states can still be popu-
lated.
In this case, even at large penalty values the physi-
cal state need not be equivalent to the logical state. This is
what happens in the LHZ case for the K16 instance shown in
Fig. 5(c), where evidently the success probability does not sat-
urate at both the high and low temperature value. We ﬁnd that
increasing the number of steps in the PT simulations elimi-
nates this feature (Fig. 14 in Appendix D). Moreover, we ﬁnd
that for most of the instances and penalty values, the SQA
states are closer to the PT states for ME than for LHZ (Fig. 15
in Appendix D). Thus, we see once again that the LHZ scheme
has greater difﬁculty with single spin updates than ME, in
agreement with our earlier SQA results.

The different response to small and large energy penalties
explains the striking step-like behavior of the success proba-
bility observed in Fig. 5 for the low temperature simulations,
where PT overwhelmingly samples the physical ground state.
This step-like behavior appears at the smallest value of the
energy penalty such that the physical ground state is correctly
mapped to the logical ground state. A scatter plot of the cor-

FIG. 4. Optimal penalty strength comparison. Shown is a compar-
ison of optimal penalties, i.e., the penalty values that maximize the
success probability after MVD and using SQA. These correspond to
the penalty strengths used for the results shown in Fig. 2. The op-
timal penalty is roughly equally distributed on K8 instances (blue
dots) but tends to be higher for the LHZ scheme on K16 instances
(red dots). SQA parameters: 104 sweeps, β = 1.

LHZ cases we ran SQA simulations over a wide range of en-
ergy penalty values and, for each instance, chose the value
that maximizes the success probability, which we refer to as
the optimal penalty value. In both cases we used majority-
vote decoding as described in Secs. II D and II E. In the ME
case, logical values were obtained with a majority vote on
nA = (cid:100)N/4(cid:101) + 1 = 3 and 5 physical qubits, correspond-
ing, respectively, to the length of the chains required to minor-
embed K8 and K16. Figure 2 clearly shows an advantage for
the ME scheme over the LHZ scheme using majority vote de-
coding, with the advantage growing as the problem size in-
creases from K8 to K16.

The number of sweeps is ﬁxed in Fig. 2; to test the depen-
dence on this number, Fig. 3 shows the success probability
for a representative K8 instance as a function of the penalty
strength, when the number of sweeps is increased from 104
to 105. The performance of both schemes improves, but we
ﬁnd that the decoded ME scheme’s success probability is al-
ways larger than LHZ’s, except at very small penalty values;
we discuss the reason for this below. In addition, the optimal
penalty strength for ME appears smaller; this is studied more
systematically in Fig. 4, which shows a roughly equal dis-
tribution for K8, but it conﬁrms that the LHZ scheme tends
to require higher optimal penalties for K16. This could be a
disadvantage given practical limitations of quantum annealing
devices.

As we demonstrate in the next subsection, the reason for
the relatively poorer performance of the LHZ scheme is likely
due to its less efﬁcient spin updates in the SQA simulations.
Two factors are likely responsible for this difference: ﬁrst, the
LHZ scheme requires asymptotically twice as many physical
qubits as ME [more precisely, N (N − 1)/2 > N ((cid:100)N/4(cid:101) + 1)
for N ≥ 8]; second, the four-body constraint terms may make

012345OptimalPenaltyLHZ012345OptimalPenaltyME7

(a) K8: Instance 3

(b) K8: Instance 95

(c) K16: Instance 72

FIG. 5. Performance of the ME and LHZ schemes using PT. Shown are the success probabilities after MV decoding for three representative
instances generated via PT on K8 [(a) and (b)] and K16 (c) graphs. Results for two temperatures are shown; reducing the temperature boosts
the success probabilities, as expected. The ME and LHZ schemes exhibit similar performance for the K8 instances, though the optimal penalty
value is again smaller for the ME scheme in (a). Similar results are seen for the K16 instances. The drop in success probability at large penalty
strength for β = 1.05 in the LHZ case (all but two of our 100 instances exhibit this signature) can be understood as a signature of incomplete
thermalization at the chosen parameter values. It is alleviated by increasing the number of PT swaps (see Appendix D). PT parameters are
discussed in Appendix B.

FIG. 6. Comparing leakage resiliency of the ME and LHZ
schemes. Shown is a scatter plot for the K8 instances. The suc-
cess probability on both axes is measured relative to the PT state
(β = 1.05) at a ﬁxed intermediate value of the energy penalty
(γ = 1). Decoding was performed via majority vote.

FIG. 7. Critical penalty strength comparison. Shown is the
penalty strength where the PT success probability after MVD is 0.5
for β = 20. There is a systematic increase in the critical penalty
strength for both schemes as the problem size increases from K8
(blue dots) to K16 (red dots). Additionally, the ME critical penalty
strength is systematically lower for the K16 instances.

IV. MINIMUM WEIGHT, MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD, AND

BELIEF PROPAGATION DECODING OF THE LHZ

SCHEME

responding critical energy penalty values is shown in Fig. 7,
where it is seen to be larger for the LHZ scheme, in agreement
with the SQA optimal penalty results seen in Fig. 4. However,
a lower bound argument shows that the value of the optimal
penalty should scale at least with N in both schemes (see Ap-
pendix F).

In an attempt to improve the performance of the LHZ
scheme, in this section we present and study a decoding strat-
egy that extends the approaches of Refs. [17, 21], and is de-
signed to address independent or weakly correlated physical
spin-ﬂip errors. As we have already stressed, this is not an ac-
curate model of noise in quantum annealing. However, adopt-
ing this perspective allows us to develop well-deﬁned decod-
ing strategies, which we in turn test on relevant distributions

0246810Penaltystrength00.20.40.60.81SuccessprobabilityLHZ,-=1:05LHZ,-=20ME,-=1:05ME,-=200246810Penaltystrength00.20.40.60.81SuccessprobabilityLHZ,-=1:05LHZ,-=20ME,-=1:05ME,-=200246810Penaltystrength00.20.40.60.81SuccessprobabilityLHZ,-=1:05LHZ,-=20ME,-=1:05ME,-=2000.20.40.60.7ME00.20.40.60.7LHZ012345CriticalPenaltyLHZ012345CriticalPenaltyMEgenerated via SQA and PT. We shall ﬁnd that this leads to
substantial improvements.

A. Minimum Weight Decoding

k=1

Let us denote the ﬁnal states of the K physical qubits at
the end of a quantum annealing run by Ψtf = {sk}K
(with sk = ±1). This readout amounts to a syndrome mea-
surement S deﬁned by the list of values of the four-local
}C
constraints: S = {ζc}C
c=1, with
ζc = ±1. Given a physical state with violated constraints, the
goal of minimum-weight decoding (MWD) is to ﬁnd the near-
est Hamming distance constraint-satisfying physical state.
k=1 (ek = ±1) of the
following Hamiltonian, deﬁned on the same LHZ graph as the
original optimization problem:

Consider the ground state Φ = {ek}K

c=1 = {−λsz

sz
cd

sz
cr

sz
cl

cu

HMWD = − (cid:88)

k∈VLHZ

k − (cid:88)

σz

c∈VC

ζcCc ,

(6)

where it is assumed that the four-body interactions Cc =
−λσz
cr are sufﬁciently strong such that Φ mini-
σz
mizes (satisﬁes) all constraint terms. The MWD decoded state
is then given by:

σz
cd

σz
cl

cu

ΨMWD = {eksk}K

k=1 ,

(7)

in the absence of any constraint-
for the following reason:
violating terms Φ = {+1}K
k=1, i.e., the original physical state
need not be changed. When the physical state violates a con-
straint, a sequence of spin-ﬂips must be performed to correct
this violation. The second term in Eq. (6) forces the state Φ
to undo the measured syndrome, and the ﬁrst term minimizes
the number of spin-ﬂips (i.e., ek = −1) in G.

To gain additional insight into the MWD problem, and to
connect it to maximum likelihood decoding of Sourlas codes
[50, 51], we ﬁrst note that the MWD Hamiltonian (6) can be
brought back to the LHZ form (3). Let us assume that we
can ﬁnd a set of spin-ﬂips G = {gk}K
k=1 with gk = ±1 (−1
means a spin-ﬂip) that removes all unsatisﬁed constraints, i.e.,
that replaces every ζc by +1. It is easy to ﬁnd at least one such
G state, by performing a sequence of spin-ﬂips that changes
the sign of each constraint one by one [this is not necessar-
ily the MWD state since it need not minimize the number of
spin-ﬂips; an example is shown in Appendix F, Fig. 19(b)].
Alternatively, one can think of G as a gauge transformation
k such that ζc (cid:55)→ 1, which allow Eq. (6) to be
k (cid:55)→ gkσz
σz
rewritten as

MWD = − (cid:88)

H g

k∈VLHZ

(cid:88)

c∈VC

gkσz

k +

Cc .

(8)

Equation (8) is now in the form of Eq. (3), and thus can be
mapped back to an optimization over a complete (logical)
graph KN with couplings gij = gk:

MWD = −(cid:88)

H spin

i<j

gijσz

i σz
j .

(9)

8

k}K

We can extract a vector Eg = {eg
k=1 from the ground state
i }N
{sg
i sg
i=1 of this optimization problem, where eg
[i.e., eg
k is positive or negative if the coupling corresponding
to the pair (i, j) is satisﬁes or unsatisﬁed, respectively]. Eg is
the minimum-weight corrected state. Taking into account the
gauge transformation we have:
ΨMWD = {eg

k = gijsg

kgksk}K

k=1 .

(10)

j

Note that a syndrome measurement does not uniquely iden-
tify an error. In fact, there are 2N possible G states, related
by gauge transformations on the logical graph. Two different
choices of G will thus deﬁne two optimization problems over
a KN that only differ by a gauge transformation, i.e., the two
corresponding decoding processes are equivalent.

B. Maximum Likelihood Decoding

In Eq. (9) we have formulated the decoding process in terms
of a spin system with ferromagnetic or antiferromagnetic unit
interactions gij = ±1. In this formulation, the spin ﬂip error
probability P corresponds to the probability of an antiferro-
magnetic interaction gij = −1. Errors thus corrupt the sign
of the couplings of the spin system Eq. (9). This formulation
of the decoding of the LHZ scheme corresponds precisely to
the decoding of a Sourlas code for error correction of classical
signals transmitted over a noisy channel, wherein the transmit-
ted physical bits correspond to the couplings, while the logical
bits are encoded in the ground state of an Ising model [50, 51].
As was shown in Refs. [67, 68], optimal, maximum-likelihood
decoding (MLD) decoding of a Sourlas code corresponds to
performing a thermal average at the Nishimori inverse tem-
perature βN = 1

2 ln[(1 − P)/P]:
ijsign((cid:104)sg
k)MLD = gg

(eg

i (cid:105)βN(cid:104)sg

j(cid:105)βN ) .

(11)

An intuitive explanation for the need to perform a ﬁnite tem-
perature decoding for optimal performance is that for sufﬁ-
ciently large error probabilities P, the Ising Hamiltonian (9)
is corrupted to such a degree that the correct state is most
likely encoded in one of the excited states rather than in the
ground state. These excited states are optimally explored by
thermal sampling, if performed at the Nishimori temperature.

C. Hardness of MWD and MLD

MWD requires the minimization of the Hamiltonian de-
ﬁned in Eq. (9). This is equivalent to solving an instance
of MAX-2-SAT, which is NP-hard; MLD requires thermal
sampling, which is #P-hard and thus even harder [69–71].
Nevertheless, we expect the typical instance to be easy in the
small P regime. This observation can be made more pre-
cise thanks to the connection between Sourlas decoding and
statistical mechanics. Speciﬁcally, the spin system deﬁned
in Eq. (9) will be in a ferromagnetic phase for sufﬁciently
small error probabilities P, where decoding is expected to

9

(a) SQA, K8

(b) SQA, K8

(c) SQA, K16

FIG. 8. Performance of different decoding strategies for the LHZ scheme. Shown are scatter plots comparing success probabilities obtained
at the optimal penalty strength for (a) the LHZ scheme with BP decoding (using an error rate of 0.2 and 10 iterations) and the ME scheme on
the K8 set; (b) the LHZ scheme with MWD decoding and the ME scheme on the K8 set; (c) same as (b) but for the K16 set. Data was obtained
with SQA simulations (104 sweeps, β = 1). Color denotes the energy penalty values for the LHZ scheme. Note that LHZ outperforms ME
only for optimal penalty strength (cid:28) 1 (blue dots).

(a) K8: Instance 3

(b) K8: Instance 95

(c) K16: Instance 5

FIG. 9. Comparison of MWD and MVD for the LHZ scheme as a function of energy penalty. Shown are results for two representative
K8 instances and a representative K16 instance. (a) MWD wins by peaking at a very small energy penalty value. (b) A rare example where
MVD performs better than MWD on a K8 instance. (c) A typical K16 instance where MWD beats MVD by a large margin.

be easy. On the other hand, a disordered phase will arise for
sufﬁciently large P. A phase transition between the decod-
able (ordered) and undecodable (disordered) regimes is thus
expected at a threshold error probability Pth. A mean ﬁeld
analysis of the problem in Eq. (9), valid in the large-N limit,
reveals the presence of a phase transition between ferromag-
netic and spin-glass phases at Pth = 1/2 [9, 10]. Moreover,
in the ferromagnetic phase the thermal average in Eq. (11)
recovers the uncorrupted state perfectly at any ﬁnite tempera-
ture. In this sense, in the large-N limit MWD is equivalent to
MLD.2 On the other hand, for P ≥ Pth = 1/2 we are in the
undecodable regime, in which (eg
k)MLD does not recover the
uncorrupted state. Note that the perfect decoding achievable
with MWD/MLD for P ≤ 1/2 is a consequence of the fault
tolerance of the LHZ scheme when the only source of errors

2 At ﬁnite N, MWD decoding is equivalent to MLD decoding in the P → 0
(βN → ∞) limit only.

is random spin-ﬂips [17, 21].

D. Weight-3 Parity Check with Belief Propagation

Given a classical error correcting code, instead of perform-
ing MLD, which is hard, one can use belief propagation (BP)
as a suboptimal, but more manageable decoding technique,
where decoded values are iteratively updated based on the ex-
pected error rate. It turns out that BP works very well with
low-density parity check (LDPC) codes.

The relative alignment of a pair of logical spins ¯qi and ¯qj
can be recovered in multiple ways. One way is to use the value
of the physical spin qi,j, but using weight-3 parity checks
there are N − 2 additional independent ways, speciﬁcally,
qi,kqk,j, with k (cid:54)= i, j. This particular approach was proposed
by Pastawski and Preskill (PP) [21] and can be viewed as a
classical LDPC code, which can be decoded with belief prop-
agation. We follow the same implementation of BP as used in

00.20.40.60.81ME00.20.40.60.81LHZBP00.20.40.60.81ME00.20.40.60.81LHZMWD00.20.40.60.81ME00.20.40.60.81LHZMWD012345LHZ optimum penalty0246810PenaltyStrength00.20.40.60.81SuccessProbabilityLHZ,nodecodingLHZ,MV(3)LHZ,MWD0246810PenaltyStrength00.050.10.150.2SuccessProbbabilityLHZ,nodecodingLHZ,MV(3)LHZ,MWD0246810PenaltyStrength00.020.040.060.080.1SuccessProbabilityLHZ,nodecodingLHZ,MV(5)LHZ,MWDRef. [21]. For the case of weakly correlated errors, the prob-
ability of a decoding error is exponentially small in N [21].
PP noted that including higher-weight parity checks can yield
further improvements. Indeed, to approach the performance
of the MLD described in section IV B, one should include all
parity checks and use ﬁnite temperature decoding. We do not
consider these extensions here; they are an interesting possi-
bility for future work.

E. Decoding Results

To understand whether the advantage that ME has over
LHZ originates in the decoding step, we studied the efﬁcacy
of several other decoding strategies for the LHZ scheme. We
included MWD, BP of Ref. [21], MVD over a large number
of trees (100). We did not include MLD since it gives a well-
deﬁned decoding procedure only in the case of random spin-
ﬂips, where the error probability P and the corresponding
Nishimori temperature are known.

Different decoding strategies using majority vote give very
similar results, as shown in more detail in Appendix C. This
suggests that majority voting schemes that attempt to exploit
a large number of decoding trees are not beneﬁcial, as a con-
sequence of the fact that the noise generated via SQA simu-
lations does not correspond to uncorrelated random bit ﬂips.
(We explicitly show how the SQA results differ from uncorre-
lated noise in Appendix E.) In the latter case we would expect
the decoding errors to decay exponentially with the number of
trees (below a decoding threshold as discussed in the previous
subsection).

We focus our attention here on MWD, which gives a sub-
stantial improvement over MVD and slightly improved per-
formance over BP as seen in Figs. 8(a) and 8(b). Figures 8(b)
and 8(c) show that after MWD the LHZ scheme becomes
competitive with ME on the K8 instances, although its perfor-
mance remains worse on the K16 instances. We can thus not
conclude that MWD (which requires substantial effort beyond
MVD) is sufﬁcient to enable the LHZ scheme to outperform
ME.

A closer examination shows that when the LHZ scheme
with MWD is superior to ME, it typically does so by having a
peak in the success probability at almost vanishing penalty
strengths [represented by the color scale of Figs. 8(b) and
8(c)]. Fig. 9(a) shows the success probability as a function of
the penalty strength for an instance with the aforementioned
behavior.
In this situation, success arises entirely from the
decoding process. This is related to the fact that MWD at
zero penalty strength corresponds to ﬁnding the ground state
of the following approximation of the original logical prob-
lem: Jij → sign(Jij). To see this, note that when the energy
penalties vanish, the physical ground state is trivially given by
the physical conﬁguration with all spins aligned to their local
ﬁelds. This conﬁguration is typically a leaked state. Follow-
ing the steps described in Sec. IV A it is easy to check that
gij = −sign(Jij) is a possible choice for a gauge transforma-
tion which allows one to write the MWD problem Eq. (9), i.e.,
the approximation of the logical problem mentioned above. It

10

turns out that for our set of K8 instances, the ground state of
this approximate problem typically corresponds to the ground
state of the original problem, resulting in the observed peak
in success probability. Even when this does not happen, how-
ever [as in the examples of Figs. 9(b) and 9(c)], MWD gives
comparable or better results than MVD.

V. CONCLUSIONS

The path toward the achievement of “quantum supremacy”
[72] using quantum annealing is fraught with many chal-
lenges, among which is the embedding problem we have fo-
cused on here. Lechner, Hauke and Zoller have proposed
an embedding scheme which they claimed exhibits intrinsic
fault tolerance [17]. Unfortunately, our ﬁndings do not sup-
port the fault tolerance claim in the context of a realistic error
model for quantum annealing: we ﬁnd that the performance
of the LHZ scheme suffers under the errors generated using
simulated quantum annealing, as well as (to a smaller degree)
under classical thermalization. This is perhaps unsurprising,
since the fault tolerance claim was based on a model of weakly
correlated spin-ﬂip errors, which does not accurately describe
the errors that arise due to dynamical and thermal excitations
during the course of a quantum annealing evolution (see Ap-
pendix E).

Since the earlier minor embedding scheme due to Choi
[12, 13] has already found widespread use, it is important to
compare the performance of the two schemes. A particularly
attractive feature of the LHZ scheme is that it separates the
problem of controlling local ﬁelds and couplings. In princi-
ple this appears to allow for a drastic design simpliﬁcation.
Still, it remains to be seen how ﬂexible the LHZ scheme is to
the occurrence of faulty qubits or couplers, a problem that has
prompted the development of improvements to Choi’s origi-
nal ME scheme, showing that ME is easily adaptable to archi-
tectures with faults [14, 18]. Another attractive feature of the
LHZ scheme is that it is amenable to a host of different decod-
ing techniques, beyond the majority vote decoding strategy
that is typically used for ME. Indeed, we have derived optimal
minimum weight and maximum likelihood decoding strate-
gies for the random bit-ﬂip error model, and demonstrated
that the former boosts the performance of the LHZ scheme for
SQA. It is possible that the LHZ scheme may rival or surpass
the ME scheme with even better decoding strategies, tailored
to correlated spin-ﬂip errors.

However,

in several other important respects the ME
scheme appears to be more attractive. First, the LHZ scheme
requires a factor of two more physical qubits than ME for a
given number of logical qubits. Second, the LHZ scheme re-
quires four-body interactions (or two-body interactions with
qutrits;
it is an open question whether this would change
our results), which can be harder to implement, while the
ME scheme only requires standard, realizable two-body in-
teractions between qubits. Third, we found that the optimal
penalty strength tends to be lower for the ME scheme, which
can be important given practical constraints on the highest
energy scales achievable, especially in superconducting ﬂux

qubit based quantum annealing devices. Finally, and perhaps
most importantly, we found that the ME scheme seems to out-
performs the LHZ scheme under a broad set of conditions.
Namely, subject to identical simulation parameters and de-
coding effort, the success probabilities of the ME scheme are
nearly always higher than those of the LHZ scheme for ran-
domly generated Ising instances over complete graphs, up to
the largest sizes we were able to test. We have explained this
ﬁnding in terms of better spin- update properties of the ME
scheme under SQA simulations.

We note several caveats regarding our results. First, the
LHZ scheme’s spin-update bottleneck under SQA simulations
does not necessarily correspond to a performance bottleneck
for an actual quantum annealing device: we used a discrete-
time quantum Monte Carlo version of SQA with only time-
like cluster updates, and such a model is ultimately not a com-
plete model of a true quantum annealer. Only experiments
or more detailed open-system quantum simulations can deﬁ-
nitely address whether one scheme has a true implementation
advantage over the other. However, the past success of SQA
simulations in reproducing experimental quantum annealing
data does suggest that our results have predictive power.

Second, our study is not comprehensive, and our conclu-
sions are obviously limited to the set of instances we have
considered. Thus, while we have observed a drop in perfor-
mance for the LHZ scheme relative to the ME scheme when
going from K8 to K16, our study does not sufﬁce to ascertain
whether the observed relative performance between the two
embedding schemes persists for larger problem sizes.

Third, we focused on simulations with identical parameters
and annealing schedule, with the choices based on present val-
ues for quantum annealing devices [47]. We expect that using
lower temperatures and longer anneals will improve the per-
formance of both schemes, but whether it changes the relative
performance is unclear. Furthermore, we did not explore the
possibility of separately optimizing all the parameters of both
schemes to improve their respective performance. For exam-
ple, one possibility is to optimize the annealing schedule for
each scheme separately, as well as using a third independent
annealing schedule for the constraint strength.

Finally, in our tests, we did not include the effects of errors
in controlling the local ﬁelds and couplings. Given that the
LHZ only needs to control the local ﬁelds precisely to imple-
ment the logical problem, while the ME scheme requires con-
trol of both local ﬁelds and couplings, it is conceivable that
under inclusion of noise on the local ﬁelds and couplings, the
LHZ scheme may be robust to such hardware implementation
errors. This in itself would be very advantageous since such
errors can dominate the performance of quantum annealing
devices [73, 74].

In conclusion, there is no question that the ﬁeld of quantum
annealing will beneﬁt from continued research into improved
embedding methods. An important consideration that should
guide such efforts is the integration of quantum error correc-
tion to achieve scalability. Our work highlights the impor-
tance of testing new embedding methods using errors models
that directly match quantum annealing.

11

VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors would like to thank Itay Hen, Philipp Hauke,
Wolfgang Lechner, Hidetoshi Nishimori, Fernando Pastawski,
John Preskill, Federico Spedalieri, and Peter Zoller for use-
ful discussions and comments on the manuscript. Part of
the computing resources were provided by the USC Cen-
ter for High Performance Computing and Communications.
This work was supported under ARO grant number W911NF-
12-1-0523, ARO MURI Grant Nos. W911NF-11-1-0268
and W911NF-15-1-0582, and NSF grant number INSPIRE-
1551064.

Appendix A: Mapping Physical States to Logical States for LHZ

Examples of leakage errors are given in Fig. 10. The ab-
sence of unsatisﬁed penalties (all four-local constraints are
satisﬁed) ensures that the physical conﬁguration describes a
legitimate logical conﬁguration. As described in Ref. [17], a
logical qubit conﬁguration can be reconstructed from the val-
ues of an appropriately chosen group of independent physical
qubits. One possibility is to choose a group of physical qubits
that corresponds to a spanning tree of the logical graph. For
example, the group of physical qubits corresponding to the
upper diagonal of Fig. 10(a) [or Fig. 10(b)] deﬁnes a spanning
chain q1,2, q2,3, . . . , qN−2,N−1, qN−1,N . To see how to per-
form decoding, recall that the values of the physical qubits in
the LHZ scheme specify the alignment of the corresponding
logical pairs. This implies that each physical conﬁguration
corresponds to a logical state only up to an overall ﬂip of all
logical qubits. We may thus choose, by convention, to ﬁx the

(a)

(b)

FIG. 10. Examples of leakage errors in the LHZ scheme. Blue
circles represent logical qubit errors, i.e., the corresponding physical
qubits have been ﬂipped from the physical state representing the log-
ical ground state (all red circles). Because of the presence of unsatis-
ﬁed constraints (red dots) the two conﬁgurations shown are leakage
states, i.e., do not represent a logical state and need to be decoded.
Panel (a): a small number of spin-ﬂips, as expected for a model of
weakly correlated, random spin-ﬂips. Panel (b): a small number of
constraints is unsatisﬁed, but a large number of spin ﬂips have oc-
curred, as expected for a realistic model of open-system quantum
annealing.

5,96,97,98,99,91,102,103,104,105,106,107,108,109,1010,101,21,112,113,114,115,116,117,118,119,1110,112,211,111,122,123,124,125,126,127,128,129,1210,1211,121,32,33,31,42,43,44,41,52,53,54,55,51,62,63,64,65,66,61,72,73,74,75,76,77,71,82,83,84,85,86,87,88,81,92,93,94,95,96,97,98,99,91,102,103,104,105,106,107,108,109,1010,101,21,112,113,114,115,116,117,118,119,1110,112,211,111,122,123,124,125,126,127,128,129,1210,1211,121,32,33,31,42,43,44,41,52,53,54,55,51,62,63,64,65,66,61,72,73,74,75,76,77,71,82,83,84,85,86,87,88,81,92,93,94,912

(a) K8

(b) K16

FIG. 11. Annealing schedule used in our SQA simulations. The
vertical axis units are arbitrary but correspond to the energy scale of
our Hamiltonians.

(c) K8

(d) K16

i−1(cid:89)

value of one logical qubit: ¯q1 = +1. To decode the value of
logical qubit ¯qi, we simply read out the relative alignments of
the logical pairs following the chain induced by the spanning
tree which connects ¯qi to ¯q1. Using the upper diagonal chain
mentioned above we can decode as follows:

¯qi =

qm,m+1 .

(A1)

m=1

Similarly, the ﬁrst column of Fig. 10(a) deﬁnes a star-like
spanning tree where each qubit is only connected to ¯q1:
q1,2, q1,3, . . . , q1,N−1, q1,N , thus we have:

¯qi = q1,i .

(A2)

In the examples given in Fig. 10(a), decoding using the chain
of Eq. (A1) gives the wrong state (one error hit), while decod-
ing using the star of Eq. (A2) gives the correct state (no errors
hit).

Appendix B: Numerical Simulations

Simulated Quantum Annealing. Our simulated quantum
annealing simulations are based on a discrete-time quantum
Monte Carlo algorithm [5, 40]. Details of the implementation
of this algorithm have been described elsewhere [75]. Here
we use a ﬁxed Trotter slicing of Nτ = 64. The annealing
schedule used is shown in Fig. 11.

Parallel Tempering. Parallel tempering (also known as ex-
change Monte Carlo) [49] is a standard method used to ther-
malize spin systems. In PT simulations, replicas of the spin
system at different temperatures are evolved independently for
a ﬁxed number of Metropolis updates, followed by a ‘swap’
operation. A swap involves comparing the energies of neigh-

(e) K8

(f) K16

FIG. 12. Comparison of different decoding strategies for the LHZ
scheme. Shown are scatter plots comparing the success probabilities
computed via SQA for (a,b) belief propagation of Ref. [21], (c,d)
majority vote over 100 spanning trees, (e,f) MWD, all relative to
majority vote decoding over three and ﬁve spanning trees for the K8
and K16 instances respectively. The optimal penalty was used for
each instance. SQA parameters: 104 sweeps for K8 and 5 × 104
sweeps for the K16 instances, β = 1.

boring replicas, and swapping their temperatures with a prob-
ability pswap given by:

pswap = min{1, exp [(Ei+1 − Ei) (βi+1 − βi)]}

(B1)
where (βi+1 − βi) < 0, ∀i. For our simulations we perform
10 sweeps of single spin Metropolis updates per swap, and
we perform a total of 105 swaps. We use 64 different temper-
atures distributed according to:

(cid:18) 0.1

(cid:19)(i−1)/63

βi =

20

β1

(B2)

with β1 = 20 and i = 1, . . . , 64.

00.20.40.60.81t/tf05101520253035AnnealingScheduleA(t)B(t)00.20.40.60.81MV(3)00.20.40.60.81BP10-210-1100MV(5)10-210-1100BP00.20.40.60.81MV(3)00.20.40.60.81MV(100)10-210-1100MV(5)10-210-1100MV(100)00.20.40.60.81MV(3)00.20.40.60.81MWD10-210-1100MV(5)10-210-1100MWD13
value using a majority vote on N − 2 parity checks (qil, qlj)
(l (cid:54)= i, j). We then use a single random spanning tree to read
out the full logical state.

The various panels of Fig. 12 present our SQA success
probability results for the same 100 random K8 and K16
instances considered earlier.
It can be seen that the MVD
scheme give comparable results, with the BP and MWD
scheme giving much better results, as discussed in the main
text.

Appendix D: Additional results for the LHZ scheme

1. SQA simulations for at colder temperatures and larger

number of sweeps

In the main text, our SQA simulations for the K8 instances
were limited to β = 1 and 104 sweeps. Here we show for the
same instance in Fig. 3 that increasing the number of sweeps
and lowering the temperature does not necessarily improve
the performance of LHZ relative to ME. We show in Fig. 13
the performance of each when using β = 5 and 106 sweeps.
Both the ME and LHZ performance is improved, but relative
performance is unchanged with ME continuing to show better
results.

2. PT simulations for LHZ at higher swaps

In Sec. III A of the main text we noted that the ﬁxed num-
ber of updates performed in the PT simulations on the LHZ
embeddings was insufﬁcient to properly thermalize the PT
replicas, which led to the drop in success probability at large
penalty strength in Fig. 5. In order to validate this conclusion,
we increase the total number of swaps (the number of sweeps
per swap remains ﬁxed) by an order of magnitude and show
the corresponding results in Fig. 14. With this increased num-
ber of swaps, the performance saturates for large penalties as
expected, indicating that the behavior observed in Fig. 5 is
indeed a consequence of an insufﬁcient number of updates.
This behavior is to be expected, since single spin-ﬂip thermal-
ization is completely frozen in the limit of very large penalty
values; in such a limit, only cluster updates of physical qubits
corresponding to a logical spin-ﬂips would be efﬁcient up-
date moves (these are moves we do not perform in our simu-
lations).

3. Distance between the SQA and PT states

In order to quantify how close the ME and LHZ states are to
the PT states, we use the following distance measure [76]. For
each instance i we deﬁne the probability distribution function
pi(E) of ﬁnding a state with physical energy E:

NE(cid:88)

n=0

pi(E) =

1
NE

δEn,E ,

(D1)

FIG. 13. Effect of increasing the number of sweeps and lowering
the temperature. A comparison of the SQA results using majority
vote for the K8 instance shown in Fig. 3 for an increasing number of
sweeps (106) and lowering the temperature (β = 5).

FIG. 14. Effect of increasing the number of swaps. A comparison
of the PT results for the K16 instance shown in Fig. 5 for different
numbers of swaps. Increasing the number of swaps keeps the success
probability more ﬁxed at high penalty values.

Appendix C: Decoding Strategies

Here we provide a more direct comparison of the various
decoding strategies we have tried: MWD, BP as in Ref. [21],
and majority vote on a large number (100) of random spanning
trees. As remarked in the main text, we did not implement
MLD.

To perform MWD, we ran simulated annealing with the
Hamiltonian in Eq. (9) 100 times with a linear schedule for
β ∈ [0.1, 5] and 1000 sweeps. We found this to be sufﬁcient
to ﬁnd the ground state of the decoding Hamiltonian Eq. (9)
for our relatively small problem sizes.
In the BP decoding
approach of Ref. [21] the alignment of a given pair of log-
ical qubits (¯qi, ¯qj) is determined by iteratively updating its

012345Penaltystrength00.20.40.60.81SuccessprobabilityLHZME0246810Penaltystrength00.20.40.60.81SuccessprobabilityLHZ,-=1:05,100kswapsLHZ,-=20,100kswapsLHZ,-=1:05,1000kswapsLHZ,-=20,1000kswaps14

(a) β = 2.1

(b) β = 4.0

(a) K8: instance 3, γ = 2.9

(b) K8: instance 95, γ = 2.4

FIG. 15. Distance test between PT and SQA. Scatter plot of the dis-
tance [Eq. (D2)] of the LHZ and ME states obtained via SQA from
their respective PT simulation states. Panel (a): higher temperature.
Panel (b) lower temperature. For most instances the ME scheme dis-
tance is smaller, indicating better thermalization. Results are shown
for all 100 K8 instances.

FIG. 17. Error probability as a function of distance from the
corner of the LHZ graph. Shown is the probability that a spin
at distance d from the top corner of the LHZ graph ﬂips subject to
uncorrelated noise and SQA-generated noise, for two K8 instances.
The uncorrelated case is ﬂat as expected, while the SQA case has a
non-trivial distance dependence.

(a) K8

(b) K16

FIG. 16. Average error rate. Shown is a histogram of the average
error rate for the 100 instances for the K8 and K16 instances for
SQA with β = 1 and 104 sweeps. The error rate is calculated as
follows. For the 1000 states generated for each instance and each
penalty value, we ﬁnd the average minimum distance in terms of spin
ﬂips to the nearest degenerate ground state. The distance divided by
the total number of spins gives the average error rate for a given
instance and penalty value. The data in the histogram uses the error
rate at the optimal penalty from the data shown in Fig. 2.

where En is the energy of the nth excited state and NE is the
total number of energy levels observed for the given instance.
We then compute the total variation distance

D (p, q) =

1
2

|p(x) − q(x)|

(D2)

FIG. 18. Distance dependence of error probability across all K8
instances. Shown is a histogram of the values of the coefﬁcients of a
degree-6 polynomial ﬁt to the curves generated as in Fig. 17, but for
all 100 K8 instances. We deﬁne a cutoff based on the average (over
distance) error rate minus twice the standard deviation of the error
rate of the uncorrelated noise. For each coefﬁcient of the polynomial,
if the coefﬁcient is above this threshold, we count it, otherwise we
do not. The histogram shown is the result of this binning process.

(cid:88)

x

Appendix E: SQA noise is not uncorrelated

i

i

and q = pPT

for a given instance i between the probability distributions for
SQA and PT, i.e., we let p = pSQA
. We resort
to this distance measure because of the relatively small num-
ber of states (103) we have for each scheme, which prevents
us from reliably computing, e.g., the trace-norm distance be-
tween states. Figure 15 is a scatter plot of the distances com-
paring the ME and LHZ schemes, evaluated at the penalty
that maximizes the success probability (after MV decoding)
for each respectively, at two inverse temperatures of PT. For
the majority of the instances, the ME states tend to be closer
to the PT states than the LHZ scheme, in support of our as-
sertion that the ME scheme thermalizes more easily than the
LHZ scheme.

Our motivation for using SQA as a noise model is that it
mimics thermal noise effects we expect from a ﬁnite tempera-
ture quantum annealer. Here we demonstrate how SQA noise
differs from uncorrelated noise on the instances we have stud-
ied. First, Fig. 16 shows the average error rate for our in-
stances in the SQA simulations. For all instances, the average
error rates are below 0.5. Thus, our SQA simulations gener-
ate noise in a regime that is favorable from the perspective of
decoding the LHZ scheme if in addition the noise were uncor-
related [21].

However, SQA generates noise that is not uncorrelated. To
show this, we contrast it with uncorrelated noise and perform

00.20.40.60.81ME00.20.40.60.81LHZ00.20.40.60.81ME00.20.40.60.81LHZ00.10.20.30.40.5Averageerrorrateperbit051015202530Numberofinstances0.10.20.30.40.5Averageerrorrateperbit010203040Numberofinstances0123456Distance0.10.20.30.40.50.6ErrorprobabilitySQAUncorrelatednoise0123456Distance0.10.20.30.40.50.60.7ErrorprobabilitySQAUncorrelatednoise0123456Powerofexponent020406080100# of coefficients above thresholdSQAUncorrelatednoise15

tance. This distance behavior is strongly instance and penalty
strength dependent. To demonstrate that this difference occurs
across all instances, we ﬁt both the uncorrelated and SQA re-
sults to a degree-6 polynomial, as shown in Fig. 18. Ideally,
the uncorrelated noise case will have its entire weight on the
constant (x0) term. We see that, as expected, the uncorrelated
noise has most of its weight on the low powers of the polyno-
mial, whereas the SQA-generated noise has most of its weight
on the higher powers.

(a) Antiferromagnetic: Jij = 1

(b) Random couplings: Jij = ±1

Appendix F: Scaling of the Strength of Energy Penalties

FIG. 19. Conﬁgurations used to derive a lower bound on the scal-
ing of the energy penalty strength.
(a) Antiferromagnetic case.
Colors represent alignment to the local ﬁelds: all the ∼ N 2 can be
aligned (blue) to the physical local ﬁeld by violating only N con-
straints. (B) Random couplings case. Colors represent physical ﬂips
(blue) from the logical ground state: a domain of ∼ N 2 physical
qubits can be ﬂipped by violating only one constraint. To prevent
these two conﬁgurations from being the physical ground state, the
strength of the energy penalties should scale in both cases with N.

the following test. Starting at the top corner of the LHZ graph
for the K8 case [the spin labeled 1, 2 in Fig. 1(c)], we calcu-
late the average error rate for the spins at distances 0 to 6 (the
largest for the K8 case) from this corner spin; see the cap-
tion of Fig. 16 for how the error rate is calculated. Note that
there are d + 1 spins at distance d. For uncorrelated noise
we expect there not to be any dependence on distance. We
show in Fig. 17 the behavior of SQA-generated noise for the
two instances shown in Figs. 5(a) and 5(b), relative to un-
correlated noise, generated by randomly ﬂipping spins with
a probability equal to the averaged SQA error rate per spin
(over all distances), to generate 103 uncorrelated error states
on the physical state associated with the corresponding logical
ground state of the LHZ scheme.

Clearly,

the two cases behave very differently: as ex-
pected, the uncorrelated noise is effectively ﬂat, while the
SQA-generated noise has a non-trivial dependence on dis-

An important limitation of the embedded approach is that
the strength of the energy penalties grows with problem size.
This is true for the ME scheme [58], but also for the LHZ
scheme. We do not have a general lower bound for the
strength of the penalties in the LHZ scheme, but simple argu-
ments suggest that in both schemes, the strength of the energy
penalties must grow linearly with the number of logical qubits
N. To see this in the case of the LHZ scheme, consider, e.g.,
a completely antiferromagnetic KN . Roughly half of the cou-
plings are frustrated in the logical ground state. This should be
mapped to roughly half the physical qubits in the LHZ scheme
being down and the other half being up. However, for sufﬁ-
ciently weak constraints, the LHZ ground state is a physical
conﬁguration like that shown in Fig. 19(a) where all physical
qubits are pointing down, i.e., aligned with the physical local
ﬁeld. The energy from aligning with the local ﬁelds is of or-
der −N 2, while the number of violated constraints is of order
N. This implies that the strength of the constraints must grow
at least with N in order for the physical ground state to faith-
fully represent the logical ground state. Consider now a KN
with random couplings Jij = ±1. In this case we expect the
logical ground state to be highly frustrated, with roughly half
of the corresponding physical qubits not aligned to the local
ﬁelds. Flipping a domain of order N 2 physical qubits like that
shown in Fig. 19(b) will typically result in a change in the en-
ergy of the physical conﬁguration of the order of
N 2 = N.
To avoid the possibility of such domain-ﬂips to lower the en-
ergy of the physical conﬁguration, the constraints must grow
again at least with N.

√

[1] F. Barahona, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen 15, 3241 (1982).
[2] A. Lucas, Front. Phys. 2, 5 (2014).
[3] T. Kadowaki and H. Nishimori, Phys. Rev. E 58, 5355 (1998).
[4] E. Farhi, J. Goldstone, S. Gutmann, J. Lapan, A. Lundgren, and

D. Preda, Science 292, 472 (2001).

[5] G. E. Santoro, R. Martoˇn´ak, E. Tosatti, and R. Car, Science

295, 2427 (2002).

[6] W. M. Kaminsky and S. Lloyd, in Quantum Computing and
Quantum Bits in Mesoscopic Systems, edited by A. Leggett,
B. Ruggiero,
and P. Silvestrini (Kluwer Academic/Plenum
Publ., 2004) arXiv:quant-ph/0211152.

[7] M. W. Johnson, M. H. S. Amin, S. Gildert, T. Lanting,
F. Hamze, N. Dickson, R. Harris, A. J. Berkley, J. Johansson,

1792 (1975).

(1978).

11828 (1989).

P. Bunyk, E. M. Chapple, C. Enderud, J. P. Hilton, K. Karimi,
E. Ladizinsky, N. Ladizinsky, T. Oh, I. Perminov, C. Rich,
M. C. Thom, E. Tolkacheva, C. J. S. Truncik, S. Uchaikin,
J. Wang, B. Wilson, and G. Rose, Nature 473, 194 (2011).

[8] T. F. Rønnow, Z. Wang, J. Job, S. Boixo, S. V. Isakov,
D. Wecker, J. M. Martinis, D. A. Lidar, and M. Troyer, Sci-
ence 345, 420 (2014).

[9] D. Sherrington and S. Kirkpatrick, Physical Review Letters 35,

[10] S. Kirkpatrick and D. Sherrington, Physical Review B 17, 4384

[11] P. Ray, B. K. Chakrabarti, and A. Chakrabarti, Phys. Rev. B 39,

5,96,97,98,99,91,102,103,104,105,106,107,108,109,1010,101,21,112,113,114,115,116,117,118,119,1110,112,211,111,122,123,124,125,126,127,128,129,1210,1211,121,32,33,31,42,43,44,41,52,53,54,55,51,62,63,64,65,66,61,72,73,74,75,76,77,71,82,83,84,85,86,87,88,81,92,93,94,95,96,97,98,99,91,102,103,104,105,106,107,108,109,1010,101,21,112,113,114,115,116,117,118,119,1110,112,211,111,122,123,124,125,126,127,128,129,1210,1211,121,32,33,31,42,43,44,41,52,53,54,55,51,62,63,64,65,66,61,72,73,74,75,76,77,71,82,83,84,85,86,87,88,81,92,93,94,9[12] V. Choi, Quant. Inf. Proc. 7, 193 (2008).
[13] V. Choi, Quant. Inf. Proc. 10, 343 (2011).
[14] C. Klymko, B. D. Sullivan, and T. S. Humble, Quant. Inf. Proc.

13, 709 (2014).

[15] J. Cai, W. G. Macready, and A. Roy, arXiv:1406.2741 (2014).
[16] W. Vinci, T. Albash, G. Paz-Silva, I. Hen, and D. A. Lidar,

Phys. Rev. A 92, 042310 (2015).

[17] W. Lechner, P. Hauke,

and P. Zoller, Science Advances 1

(2015), 10.1126/sciadv.1500838.

[18] T. Boothby, A. D. King, and A. Roy, arXiv:1507.04774 (2015).
[19] P. I. Bunyk, E. M. Hoskinson, M. W. Johnson, E. Tolkacheva,
F. Altomare, A. Berkley, R. Harris, J. P. Hilton, T. Lanting,
A. Przybysz, and J. Whittaker, IEEE Transactions on Applied
Superconductivity 24, 1 (Aug. 2014).

[20] E. Dennis, A. Kitaev, A. Landahl, and J. Preskill, Journal of

Mathematical Physics 43, 4452 (2002).

[21] F. Pastawski and J. Preskill, arXiv:1511.00004 (2015).
[22] T. Kato, J. Phys. Soc. Jap. 5, 435 (1950).
[23] S. Jansen, M.-B. Ruskai,

and R. Seiler, J. Math. Phys. 48,

[24] D. A. Lidar, A. T. Rezakhani, and A. Hamma, J. Math. Phys.

[25] A. M. Childs, E. Farhi, and J. Preskill, Phys. Rev. A 65, 012322

(2007).

50, (2009).

(2001).

[26] M. H. S. Amin, D. V. Averin, and J. A. Nesteroff, Phys. Rev. A

[27] T. Albash and D. A. Lidar, Phys. Rev. A 91, 062320 (2015).
[28] K. C. Young, M. Sarovar, and R. Blume-Kohout, Phys. Rev. X

79, 022107 (2009).

3, 041013 (2013).

[29] S. Boixo, T. F. Ronnow, S. V. Isakov, Z. Wang, D. Wecker, D. A.
Lidar, J. M. Martinis, and M. Troyer, Nat. Phys. 10, 218 (2014).
[30] K. L. Pudenz, T. Albash, and D. A. Lidar, Nat. Commun. 5,

[31] K. L. Pudenz, T. Albash, and D. A. Lidar, Phys. Rev. A 91,

3243 (2014).

042302 (2015).

[32] A. Perdomo-Ortiz, N. Dickson, M. Drew-Brook, G. Rose, and

A. Aspuru-Guzik, Sci. Rep. 2, 571 (2012).

[33] Z. Bian, F. Chudak, W. G. Macready, L. Clark, and F. Gaitan,

Physical Review Letters 111, 130505 (2013).

[34] A. Perdomo-Ortiz, J. Fluegemann, S. Narasimhan, R. Biswas,
and V. Smelyanskiy, The European Physical Journal Special
Topics 224, 131 (2015).

[35] I. Trummer and C. Koch, arXiv:1510.06437 (2015).
[36] D. P. Nazareth and J. D. Spaans, Physics in Medicine and Biol-

ogy 60, 4137 (2015).

16

S. Uchaikin, J. Wang, A. B. Wilson, Z. Merali, and G. Rose,
Nat. Commun. 4, 1903 (2013).

[45] T. Lanting, A. J. Przybysz, A. Y. Smirnov, F. M. Spedalieri,
M. H. Amin, A. J. Berkley, R. Harris, F. Altomare, S. Boixo,
P. Bunyk, N. Dickson, C. Enderud, J. P. Hilton, E. Hoskin-
son, M. W. Johnson, E. Ladizinsky, N. Ladizinsky, R. Neufeld,
T. Oh, I. Perminov, C. Rich, M. C. Thom, E. Tolkacheva,
and G. Rose, Phys. Rev. X 4,
S. Uchaikin, A. B. Wilson,
021041 (2014).

[46] S. Boixo, V. N. Smelyanskiy, A. Shabani, S. V. Isakov, M. Dyk-
man, V. S. Denchev, M. H. Amin, A. Y. Smirnov, M. Mohseni,
and H. Neven, Nat Commun 7 (2016).

[47] T. Albash, W. Vinci, A. Mishra, P. A. Warburton, and D. A.

Lidar, Phys. Rev. A 91, 042314 (2015).

[48] C. J. Geyer, in Computing Science and Statistics Proceedings of
the 23rd Symposium on the Interface, edited by E. M. Kerami-
das (American Statistical Association, New York, 1991) p. 156.
[49] K. Hukushima and K. Nemoto, Journal of the Physical Society

of Japan 65, 1604 (1996).

[50] N. Sourlas, Nature 339, 693 (1989).
[51] N. Sourlas, EPL (Europhysics Letters) 25, 159 (1994).
[52] G. Parisi, arXiv preprint cs/0312011 (2003).
[53] R. Islam, C. Senko, W. C. Campbell, S. Korenblit, J. Smith,
A. Lee, E. E. Edwards, C. C. J. Wang, J. K. Freericks, and
C. Monroe, Science 340, 583 (2013).

[54] R. Barends, A. Shabani, L. Lamata, J. Kelly, A. Mezzacapo,
U. L. Heras, R. Babbush, A. G. Fowler, B. Campbell, Y. Chen,
Z. Chen, B. Chiaro, A. Dunsworth, E. Jeffrey, E. Lucero,
A. Megrant, J. Y. Mutus, M. Neeley, C. Neill, P. J. J. O’Malley,
C. Quintana, P. Roushan, D. Sank, A. Vainsencher, J. Wen-
ner, T. C. White, E. Solano, H. Neven, and J. M. Martinis,
arXiv:1511.03316 (2015).

[55] K. Eng, T. D. Ladd, A. Smith, M. G. Borselli, A. A. Kiselev,
B. H. Fong, K. S. Holabird, T. M. Hazard, B. Huang, P. W.
Deelman, I. Milosavljevic, A. E. Schmitz, R. S. Ross, M. F.
Gyure, and A. T. Hunter, Science Advances 1 (2015).

[56] L. Casparis, T. W. Larsen, M. S. Olsen, F. Kuemmeth,
P. Krogstrup, J. Nyg˚ard, K. D. Petersson, and C. M. Marcus,
arXiv:1512.09195v1 (2015).

[57] I. Bloch, Nature 453, 1016 (2008).
[58] D. Venturelli, S. Mandr`a, S. Knysh, B. O’Gorman, R. Biswas,

and V. Smelyanskiy, Phys. Rev. X 5, 031040 (2015).

[59] D. Venturelli, D.

J.

J. Marchand,

and G. Rojo,

arXiv:1506.08479 (2015).

[60] K. M. Zick, O. Shehab, and M. French, Scientiﬁc Reports 5,

[37] G. Rosenberg, P. Haghnegahdar, P. Goddard, P. Carr, K. Wu,

11168 EP (2015).

and M. L. d. Prado, arXiv:1508.06182 (2015).

[38] W. Vinci, K. Markstr¨om, S. Boixo, A. Roy, F. M. Spedalieri,

P. A. Warburton, and S. Severini, Scientiﬁc reports 4 (2014).
[39] S. H. Adachi and M. P. Henderson, arXiv:1510.06356 (2015).
[40] R. Martoˇn´ak, G. E. Santoro, and E. Tosatti, Phys. Rev. B 66,

[61] T. S. Humble, A. J. McCaskey, R. S. Bennink, J. J. Billings,
E. D Azevedo, B. D. Sullivan, C. F. Klymko, and H. Seddiqi,
Computational Science & Discovery 7, 015006 (2014).

[62] A. D. King and C. C. McGeoch, arXiv:1410.2628 (2014).
[63] A. Mishra, T. Albash, and D. A. Lidar, Quant. Inf. Proc. 15,

094203 (2002).

348, 215 (2015).

[41] B. Heim, T. F. Rønnow, S. V. Isakov, and M. Troyer, Science

[64] W. Vinci, T. Albash,

and D. A. Lidar, arXiv:1511.07084

[42] S. Bravyi and M. Hastings, arXiv:1410.0703 (2014).
[43] S. Boixo, T. Albash, F. M. Spedalieri, N. Chancellor, and D. A.

Lidar, Nat. Commun. 4, 2067 (2013).

[44] N. G. Dickson, M. W. Johnson, M. H. Amin, R. Harris,
F. Altomare, A. J. Berkley, P. Bunyk, J. Cai, E. M. Chapple,
P. Chavez, F. Cioata, T. Cirip, P. deBuen, M. Drew-Brook,
C. Enderud, S. Gildert, F. Hamze, J. P. Hilton, E. Hoskinson,
K. Karimi, E. Ladizinsky, N. Ladizinsky, T. Lanting, T. Ma-
hon, R. Neufeld, T. Oh, I. Perminov, C. Petroff, A. Przybysz,
C. Rich, P. Spear, A. Tcaciuc, M. C. Thom, E. Tolkacheva,

[65] H. G. Katzgraber, S. Trebst, D. A. Huse, and M. Troyer, J. Stat.

Mech. 2006, P03018 (2006).

[66] S. Kirkpatrick, C. D. Gelatt, and M. P. Vecchi, Science 220,

[67] P. Ruj´an, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 2968 (1993).
[68] H. Nishimori, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 62, 2973

[69] C. Papadimitriou, Computational Complexity (Addison Wesley

Longman, Reading, Massachusetts, 1995).

[70] L. G. Valiant, SIAM Journal on Computing 8, 410 (1979).

609 (2015).

(2015).

671 (1983).

(1993).

[71] V. Dahll¨of, P. Jonsson, and M. Wahlstr¨om, Theoretical Com-

[74] Z. Zhu, A. J. Ochoa, S. Schnabel, F. Hamze, and H. G. Katz-

puter Science 332, 265 (2005).

[72] J. Preskill, arXiv:1203.5813 (2012).
[73] V. Martin-Mayor and I. Hen, arXiv:1502.02494 (2015).

graber, arXiv:1505.02278 (2015).
[75] S. Muthukrishnan, T. Albash,

arXiv:1511.03910 (2015).

17

and D. A. Lidar,

[76] T. Albash, T. F. Rønnow, M. Troyer, and D. A. Lidar, Eur. Phys.

J. Spec. Top. 224, 111 (2015).

