6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
1

.

 
 
]
P
E
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
3
7
7
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Journal of the Korean Astronomical Society
00: 1 ∼ 99, 2014 March
c(cid:13)2014. The Korean Astronomical Society. All rights reserved.

http://dx.doi.org/10.5303/JKAS.2014.00.0.1
pISSN: 1225-4614 / eISSN: 2288-890X
http://jkas.kas.org

MICROLENSING BY KUIPER, OORT, AND FREE-FLOATING PLANETS

1Max-Planck-Institute for Astronomy, K¨onigstuhl 17, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany; gould@astronomy.ohio-state.edu

2Korea Astronomy and Space Science Institute, Daejon 305-348, Republic of Korea

3Department of Astronomy Ohio State University, 140 W. 18th Ave., Columbus, OH 43210, USA;

Andrew Gould1,2,3

weizhu@astronomy.ohio-state.edu

Received —; accepted —

Abstract: Microlensing is generally thought to probe planetary systems only out to a few Einstein
radii. Microlensing events generated by bound planets beyond about 10 Einstein radii generally do not
yield any trace of their hosts, and so would be classiﬁed as free ﬂoating planets (FFPs).
I show that
it is already possible, using adaptive optics (AO), to constrain the presence of potential hosts to FFP
candidates at separations comparable to the Oort Cloud. With next-generation telescopes, planets at
Kuiper-Belt separations can be probed. Next generation telescopes will also permit routine vetting for all
FFP candidates, simply by obtaining second epochs 4–8 years after the event. At present, the search for
such hosts is restricted to within the “confusion limit” of θconfus ∼ 0.25′′, but future WFIRST observations
will allow one to probe beyond this confusion limit as well.
Key words: astrometry – gravitational microlensing – planets – stars

1. INTRODUCTION

Oort-Cloud like orbits 150 . a/rsnow . 104. Here

Sumi et al. (2011) have reported evidence of a vast pop-
ulation of free-ﬂoating planets (FFP) based on an ex-
cess of short timescale (tE ∼ 1 day) microlensing events
seen in observations toward the Galactic bulge by the
Microlensing Observations in Astrophysics (MOA) col-
laboration. As the authors recognize, these planets are
not necessarily unbound: they may simply be so far
from their hosts that the host leaves no trace on the
microlensing event. Sumi et al. (2011) searched for two
such eﬀects: (1) “bumps” (perhaps of very low ampli-
tude) due to microlensing by the host long before or
after the short “FFP” event; (2) distortions in the short
event (relative to a point lens event) due to shear from
the host. For each FFP candidate, they quantiﬁed the
limits that could be put on hosts due to the absence of
both eﬀects.

Generically, one expects the hosts to be detectable
only for planets at projected separations of up to about 5
host Einstein radii. Of course, any particular host might
be detected at much larger separation provided that the
source trajectory is suﬃciently closely aligned with the
planet-star separation axis. For example Poleski et al.
(2014) and Sumi et al. (2016) detected two such exam-
ples, which they characterized as “Uranus” and “Nep-
tune” analogs, respectively. However, for a large frac-
tion of such ice-giant analogs, the host would have left
no trace. And this would be even more true of more
distant planets.

Planets that leave no trace may turn out to be in
Kuiper-Belt like orbits at 15 . a/rsnow . 150, or in

Corresponding author: Andrew Gould

1

rsnow ∼ 2.7 AU

M
M⊙

(1)

is the snow line, assumed to scale linearly with stellar
mass. The snow line can be related to the Einstein ra-
dius rE = DLθE by

rsnow

rE

= 2.7

πL(M/M⊙)

(κM πrel)1/2 = 0.95(cid:18) M

M⊙(cid:19)1/2(cid:18) DLDLS/DS

kpc

(cid:19)−1/2

.

(2)
Here, κ = 4G/c2AU = 8.14 mas M −1
⊙ , πL = AU/DL is
the lens parallax, πrel = πL − πS is the lens-source rel-
ative parallax, and DLS = DS − DL. Thus, for typical
lens masses (M ∼ 0.3 M⊙) and distances DLDLS/DS ∼
1 kpc, we have rsnow ≃ 0.5 rE. Therefore, Kuiper plan-
ets are at least 7.5 Einstein radii from their hosts, and
thus it is very unlikely that their hosts will induce mi-
crolensing signatures on the “FFP” event.

2. CONFUSION LIMIT OF MICROLENSING

On very general grounds, the optical depth to microlens-
ing is of order τ ∼ O(v2/c2) where v is the characteristic
velocity of the system. For the Milky Way, this pre-
dicts τ ∼ 10−6 which agrees with observations. That
is, the probability that some lens will lie within n Ein-
stein radii of a given location is p = n2τ . Or, in other
words, we expect of order one such lens to lie withing
θconfus = τ −1/2θE & 103θE of any given point. Since typ-
ically θE ∼ 0.25 mas, this corresponds to θconfus ∼ 0.25′′.
In particular, for genuine FFPs, we expect the nearest
star (other than the source) to be separated by of order
∆θ ∼ θconfus. The only exception would be a companion
to the source. Of course, by chance, there could be

2

Andrew Gould

unassociated stars that lie closer than this. However,
the prior probability for, .e.g., an unassociated star at
∆θ = 0.1 θconfus ∼ 25 mas would be just 1%. While
not much can be concluded from the detection of such
a nearby star in any particular case, even a few such
detections in a sample of a few dozen “FFPs”, would be
evidence for a population of well-separated planets.

Such closely separated stars cannot be resolved even
in excellent-seeing ground-based survey data. There-
fore, special eﬀorts and/or new space-based surveys are
required to detect them.

3. OORT PLANETS FROM AO ON EXISTING

TELESCOPE

Batista et al. (2015) and Bennett et al. (2015) have de-
tected a lens star that had separated from the source by
∼ 60 mas due to ∼ 8 yr of relative proper motion using
Keck adaptive optics (AO) and Hubble Space Telescope
(HST) observations, respectively. In that case, the lens
and source were of comparable brightness. Hence, it is
plausible that one could detect very faint hosts of FFPs
at ∆θ ∼ 100 mas., i.e., roughly 400 θE or 800 rsnow.

If such a star were detected, it would not automati-
cally imply that it was the host to the “FFP”. The star
could be a companion to the source, a companion to the
true host, which was itself much closer to the planet, or
a random interloper. The ﬁrst of these possibilities is
easily tested by taking a second epoch of observations a
few years later. If the detected star is a companion to
the source, the two will have the same proper motion.

Then, assuming it passes this test, there are only three
possibilities: host, companion to the host, or random in-
terloper. Either of the ﬁrst two possibilities would imply
that this is not an FFP. As mentioned above, the last
would occur with probability p ∼ 16%(∆/θ/100 mas)2.
Hence, by searching for such hosts of a few dozen FFP
candidates, one could place signiﬁcant limits on such
hosts (or conﬁrm their existence).

However, even if the result of this statistical analysis
were that a signiﬁcant fraction of putative FFPs had
distant companions, this still would not distinguish Oort
planets from Kuiper planets whose hosts happen to have
substantially more distant companions.

4. KUIPER PLANETS FROM AO ON NEXT

GENERATION TELESCOPES

it would enable very strong statistical statements with
even three detections out of a few dozen searches. More-
over, the possibility that the detected star is a compan-
ion to the host rather than the host itself will be far more
restricted for the close-in detections enabled by next-gen
telescopes. That is, an FFP candidate would have to be
a least a few θE from a putative host to avoid the two de-
tectable eﬀects mentioned above (bump from host and
distortion of planetary event due to shear from host).
And hierarchical stability typically requires factor & 3
ratio in semi-major axes. These considerations cannot
be used to rule out such companions, partly because at
∆θ ∼ 70 θE, there is still easily enough room for such
hierarchies. Moreover, due to projection eﬀects, it is
possible for companions that are well separated in three
space to have similar projected position. Nevertheless,
these scenarios would be far more restricted than what
is achievable with present-day telescopes.

Such cases could be further constrained by followup
observations taken a few years after the event when the
source and lens had separated. If the true host of the
planet is much closer than the star that was separately
resolved at the time of the event, then three stars will
be observed in the late time observations, including the
source star, the host, and its more distant companion,
with the latter two having the same proper motion.

5. AO IMAGING OF ALL FFP CANDIDATES

Indeed, all FFP candidates can be directly tested for
distant companions “simply” by obtaining two high res-
olution images: one at the time of the event and one at
a suﬃciently later time that the source and lens can be
separately resolved. If the planet has a luminous host
(i.e., not a brown dwarf, neutron star or black hole), this
will appear next to the source at the second epoch.

I have placed “simply” in quotation marks because
with present technology, the second epoch must wait
about 25 years to achieve 100 mas separation, even as-
suming typical proper motions of µ = 4 mas yr−1. To
be relatively certain that the failure to observe the host
was not just due to abnormally low proper motion, one
should really wait 50 years.

However, with next generation telescopes, these num-
bers will each come down by a factor 6. Hence, one
could obtain a good statistical understanding after just
4 years, and an excellent one after 8 years.

Next generation telescopes such as the Giant Magellan
Telescope (GMT), Thirty Meter Telescope (TMT) and
Extremely Large Telescope (ELT) will have diameters
2.5 to 4 times larger than Keck and will operate eﬀec-
tively in J band (compared to the K band observations
of Batista et al. 2015), and so will be able to search for
hosts that are closer by a factor 5–8. To be concrete,
I adopt a factor 6, i.e., ∆θ ∼ 17 mas or about 70 θE.
This is within the Kuiper range of planetary orbits that
I deﬁned above. The chance of random interlopers is re-
duced by a factor 62 = 36 at this limit, i.e., to of order
p ∼ 0.5 %. While, this is still not low enough to ab-
solutely rule out this possibility in any individual case,

6. PROBING KUIPER PLANETS WITH WFIRST

WFIRST is a planned NASA mission, currently in Phase
A. It will have a substantial microlensing component,
probably consisting of six 72-day campaigns centered
on quadrature and covering 2.8 deg2 with a 15 min ca-
dence (Spergel et al., 2015). True FFPs detected by
WFIRST should be point-lens events with blended light
fractions consistent with zero. In principle, there could
be blended light from a companion to the source or from
a random interloper. However, as mentioned above the
ﬁrst possibility is easily vetted by checking for common
proper motion with the source over several years using

Kuiper, Oort, and Free-Floating Planets

3

AO imaging. The prior probability of the second is, as
before, p = (∆θ/θconfus)2. For example, if the blended
light is fb = 10% of the source light, and the putative
FFP event is detected with total (S/N) = 100, then the
oﬀset between the blend and the source (and so lens) can
be measured with precision σ(∆θ) ∼ θpsf /(fb(S/N)) →
10 mas. Here θpsf is the characteristic size of the point
spread function. Thus, these measurements could both
reliably detect oﬀsets and make strong statistical state-
ments against interlopers.

7. BEYOND THE CONFUSION LIMIT

The confusion limit of θconfus = 0.25′′ corresponds to
about 2000 AU, which is well inside the zone containing
the Oort Cloud comets that come by the Sun after being
perturbed by random stars. Moreover, it would be dif-
ﬁcult to reliably identify a star even a factor few closer
than this limit as the host of a putative FFP based on
statistical arguments alone. Is it possible to probe out
to – or beyond – this confusion limit?

Zhu & Gould (2015) have analyzed the potential for
measuring microlens parallaxes of FFPs by simultane-
ously observing the WFIRST ﬁelds from a network of
ground-based observatories. See also Han et al. (2004)
and Yee (2013). Zhu & Gould (2015) showed that par-
ticularly for low mass FFPs (mp . Mjup), measure-
ments of the full 2-D microlens parallax πE are possible.
Here

πE = πE

;

πE =

(3)

µrel
µrel

πrel
θE

(Gould, 1992), where µrel
proper motion.

is the lens-source relative

Each candidate host that is observed in AO images
can be vetted as follows. First one can check whether
the direction of proper motion µrel is consistent with the
direction of the πE parallax of the FFP. Now, in fact,
there is a slight wrinkle here because πE is measured in
the geocentric frame whereas the relative proper motion
of the putative host and the source would be measured
in the geocentric frame. These diﬀer by

δµrel = µrel,hel − µrel,geo =

πrel
AU

v⊕,⊥

(4)

where v⊕,⊥ is the velocity of Earth projected on the
sky at the time of the event. However, ﬁrst v⊕,⊥ is
typically small for WFIRST because the observations
are centered at quadrature. Second, πrel of the putative
host can be estimated photometrically. Hence, δµrel
is both small and partly calculable. For example, if
v⊕,⊥ = 10 km s−1 and one estimates πrel with an error
of σ(πrel) = 0.03 mas, then the error in the estimate
of this diﬀerence is |σ(δµrel|) ∼ 0.06 mas yr−1, which
is quite small compared to typical proper motions of
microlensing events, µrel ∼ 4 mas yr−1.

Second, in some cases, one can estimate the magni-
tude of the proper motion as well as the direction. That
is, µrel = θEtE = πreltE/πE. For putative hosts in the
bulge, πrel cannot be estimated precisely enough for this
equation to be useful. However, for hosts in the disk, πrel

can often be estimated photometrically to much better
than a factor 2. Hence, for these, both the magnitude
and direction of µrel can be predicted well enough to
eliminate most random interlopers as hosts.

Finally, in a signiﬁcant minority of cases for which
πE can be measured by combined ground-based and
WFIRST observations,
θE can also be measured
(Zhu & Gould, 2015). For these, the full proper motion
of putative hosts can be predicted. Moreover, their pho-
tometrically estimated relative parallax must be consis-
tent with that of the FFP, i.e., πrel = πEθE.

It is notable that very low mass FFPs, i.e., in the
Mars–Earth range, are the most likely to yield parallax
measurements.
If the mechanisms that drive objects
into Oort-Cloud like orbits are similar to those in the
Solar System, then these are most feasibly applied to
such low mass objects.

8. DYNAMICAL STABILITY OF OORT PLANETS

If planets were launched into orbits similar to those
of Oort-Cloud comets when a given planetary system
formed, would they remain bound until today?

To address this I consider ﬁrst the deﬂection due to
the closest single encounter with a passing star (to either
the planet or the host), which has impact parameter b
satisfying 2πb2nvT ≃ 1, where n is the number density
of ambient stars, v is their typical velocity relative to
the host, and T is the age of the planetary system. In
this closest impact, the host or planet will be deﬂected
in velocity by δv = 2Gm/bv where m is the mass of the
passing star. I then set (δv)2 = Gm′/a as the condition
to ionize the planet, where m′ is the host mass and a is
the semimajor axis. For simplicity, I take m′ = m and
then ﬁnd

amax =

v

8πGρT

(5)

where ρ ≡ nm is the stellar density. For disk lenses,
ρ ∼ 0.05 M⊙, v ∼ 50 km s−1, and T = 5 Gyr, which
implies amax ∼ 2 pc. This is consistent with the survival
of the Oort Cloud in our own Solar System.

For basically self-gravitating stellar systems like the
Galactic bulge, one may ﬁrst note that v2/8πGρ ≃ R2
where R is the size of the system. Hence

amax →

R2
vT

(self − gravitating).

(6)

Adopting R ∼ 1 kpc, T = 10 Gyr and v = 150 km s−1
for the bulge, one ﬁnds amax ∼ 0.7 pc.

A more precise calculation would take account of dif-
fusive processes from multiple sub-ionizing encounters.
However, it is clear from this calculation that planets
in Oort-like orbits are permitted even in the Galactic
bulge.

9. CONCLUSION

Microlensing is generally thought to probe planetary
systems on scales of the Einstein radius, or perhaps
a few Einstein radii. I have shown that by combining
microlensing observations of seemingly isolated planets

4

Andrew Gould

with high resolution imaging, one can probe planetary
systems out to the confusion limit ∆θ ∼ θconfus ∼ 0.25′′,
and even beyond.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I thank Scott Gaudi for stimulating discussions. I thank
the Max Planck Institute for Astronomy for its hospi-
tality. This work was supported by NSF grant AST-
1516842.

REFERENCES

Batista, V., Beaulieu, J.-P., Bennett, D.P., et al. 2015,
Conﬁrmation of the OGLE-2005-BLG-169 Planet
Signature and Its Characteristics with Lens-Source
Proper Motion Detection, ApJ, 808, 170

Bennett, D. P., Bhattacharya, A., Anderson, J., et al.
2015, Conﬁrmation of the Planetary Microlensing Sig-
nal and Star and Planet Mass Determinations for
Event OGLE-2005-BLG-169, ApJ, 808, 169

Gould, A. 1992, Extending the MACHO search to about

10 exp 6 solar masses, ApJ, 392, 442

Han, C., Chung, S.-J., Kim, D. et al. 2004, Gravitational
Microlensing: A Tool for Detecting and Characteriz-
ing Free-Floating Planets, ApJ, 604, 372

Poleski, Skowron, J., R., Udalski, A., et al. 2014, Triple
Microlens OGLE-2008-BLG-092L: Binary Stellar Sys-
tem with a Circumprimary Uranus-type Planet, ApJ,
795, 42

Spergel, D., Gehrels, N., Baltay, C., et al. 2015,
Wide-Field Infrared Survey Telescope-Astrophysics
Focused Telescope Assets WFIRST-AFTA 2015 Re-
port, arXiv:1503.03757

Sumi, T., Kamiya, K., Bennett, D.P. 2011, Unbound or
distant planetary mass population detected by gravi-
tational microlensing, Nature, 473, 349

Sumi, T., Udalski, A., Bennett, d.P. et al. 2016, he First
Cold Neptune Analog Exoplanet: MOA-2013-BLG-
605Lb, ApJ, submitted, arXiv:1512.00134

Yee, J.C. 2013, WFIRST Planet Masses from Microlens

Parallax, ApJL, 770, 31

Zhu, W., & Gould, A., 2016, Augmenting WFIRST Mi-
crolensing With A Ground-Based Telescope Network,
JKAS, submitted, arXiv:1601.03042

