6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
1

 
 
]

.

A
G
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
8
7
7
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2016)

Preprint 15 March 2016

Compiled using MNRAS LATEX style ﬁle v3.0

Giant clumps in the FIRE simulations: a case study of a
massive high-redshift galaxy

Antonija Oklopˇci´c,1(cid:63) Philip F. Hopkins,1 Robert Feldmann2, Duˇsan Kereˇs3,
Claude-Andr´e Faucher-Gigu`ere4 and Norman Murray5
1California Institute of Technology, MC 350-17, 1200 East California Boulevard, Pasadena, California 91125, USA
2Department of Astronomy and Theoretical Astrophysics Center, University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
3Department of Physics, Center for Astrophysics and Space Science, University of California at San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive,
La Jolla, CA 92093, USA
4Department of Physics and Astronomy and CIERA, Northwestern University, 2145 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208, USA
5 Canadian Institute for Theoretical Astrophysics, 60 St George Street, University of Toronto, ON M5S 3H8, Canada

Accepted XXX. Received YYY; in original form ZZZ

ABSTRACT
The morphology of massive star-forming galaxies at high redshift is often dominated
by giant clumps of mass ∼ 108 − 109 M(cid:12) and size ∼ 100 − 1000 pc. Previous studies
have proposed that giant clumps might have an important role in the evolution of
their host galaxy, particularly in building the central bulge. However, this depends
on whether clumps live long enough to migrate from their original location in the
disc or whether they get disrupted by their own stellar feedback before reaching the
centre of the galaxy. We use cosmological hydrodynamical simulations from the FIRE
(Feedback in Realistic Environments) project that implement explicit treatments of
stellar feedback and ISM physics to study the properties of these clumps. We follow
the evolution of giant clumps in a massive (M∗ ∼ 1010.8 M(cid:12) at z = 1), discy, gas-rich
galaxy from redshift z (cid:38) 2 to z = 1. Even though the clumpy phase of this galaxy lasts
over a gigayear, individual gas clumps are short-lived, with mean lifetime of massive
clumps of ∼ 20 Myr. During that time, they turn between 0.1% and 20% of their gas
into stars before being disrupted, similar to local GMCs. Clumps with M (cid:38) 107 M(cid:12)
account for ∼ 20 % of the total star formation in the galaxy during the clumpy phase,
producing ∼ 1010 M(cid:12) of stars. We do not ﬁnd evidence for net inward migration of
clumps within the galaxy. The number of giant clumps and their mass decrease at
lower redshifts, following the decrease in the overall gas fraction and star-formation
rate.

Key words:
galaxies: ISM

galaxies: evolution – galaxies: formation – galaxies: high-redshift –

1 INTRODUCTION
Most massive (M∗ ∼ 1010−11 M(cid:12)) star-forming galaxies at
high redshift (z ∼ 1− 3) have much more irregular morphol-
ogy than star-forming galaxies of similar mass in the local
Universe. Although these galaxies often show signs of hav-
ing extended rotating discs, their structure is dominated by
a few giant star-forming clumps (e.g. Cowie et al. 1995; van
den Bergh et al. 1996; Elmegreen et al. 2007, 2009; Bournaud
et al. 2008; Genzel et al. 2008, 2011; F¨orster Schreiber et al.
2011; Guo et al. 2012; Wuyts et al. 2012; Guo et al. 2015),
especially in the UV light that traces young stars. The size
of these clumps is usually between a few hundred parsecs

(cid:63) E-mail: oklopcic@astro.caltech.edu

c(cid:13) 2016 The Authors

and a kiloparsec, with mass in the range ∼ 108 − 109 M(cid:12).
Clumps typically comprise a few percent of a galaxy’s mass,
but they can account for a signiﬁcant fraction of its total
star formation (Elmegreen et al. 2009; Guo et al. 2015).

Clumpy morphology of galaxies at high redshift has
been established in numerous observational campaigns in
terms of diﬀerent tracers of star formation activity. Giant
clumps have been observed in the rest-frame UV and opti-
cal images (Elmegreen et al. 2007, 2009; F¨orster Schreiber
et al. 2011; Guo et al. 2012), in the rest-frame optical line
emission spectra (Genzel et al. 2008, 2011), resolved maps of
molecular gas (Tacconi et al. 2013) and in the line emission
of lensed galaxies (Jones et al. 2010; Swinbank et al. 2010).
On the other hand, maps of stellar mass distribution of those

2

A. Oklopˇci´c et al.

the

that

is possible

galaxies do not show very prominent clumps (Wuyts et al.
2012).
It

irregular morphology of
some high-redshift galaxies is due to an ongoing merger
(Somerville et al. 2001). However, the overall abundance
of clumpy galaxies is too high compared to the expected
merger rate to explain all of them as merging systems (Dekel
et al. 2009a; Stewart et al. 2009; Hopkins & Hernquist 2010;
Hopkins et al. 2010). Alternatively, clumpy morphology can
be the result of disk fragmentation due to gravitational in-
stabilities in gas-rich discs (e.g. Noguchi 1999; Dekel et al.
2009b). The observed structure and kinematics of high-
redshift clumpy galaxies suggest that many of them do in
fact have underlying rotating discs (e.g. Elmegreen et al.
2007; Genzel et al. 2008, 2011) and that they are very gas-
rich, with gas fraction ∼ 50% (Tacconi et al. 2010). Local
fragmentation occurs in regions of the disc where self-gravity
of gas and stars overcomes the pressure support in the form
of velocity dispersion and the shearing eﬀect of diﬀerential
rotation. Disc stability can be parametrized in terms of the
Toomre Q parameter (Toomre 1964) given by

Q =

σκ
πGΣ

,

(1)

where σ is the 1D velocity dispersion, κ is epicyclic frequency
(which is related to the circular frequency κ ∝ Ω), and Σ is
the mass surface density. If Q is above the critical value of
order unity, the disc is stable against fragmentation. On the
other hand, if Q < 1, the disc is locally unstable and will
undergo gravitational collapse. This scenario is used to ex-
plain the formation of giant molecular clouds (GMCs) in the
local Universe. Assuming that giant clumps at high redshift
form via the same mechanism as GMCs, though in a more
gas-rich environments, can explain many of their properties,
as we discuss below (see also Murray et al. 2010).

Discs with large surface densities that drive Q below the
critical value can experience gravitational instabilities that
lead to disc fragmentation. Fragmentation can then stir up
the disk, causing velocity dispersions to increase, and hence
increasing Q. If Q grows beyond the critical value, the disc
becomes stable, further fragmentation is suppressed and the
velocity dispersion gradually decreases, consequently bring-
ing down the value of Q along with it. In this way discs
can self-regulate and maintain a marginally stable state with
Q ≈ 1. Analysis of gravitational instability in a disc with two
components (gas and stars) is slightly more complicated (see
e.g. Jog 1996, Elmegreen 2011), but qualitatively similar to
this single-component analysis.
The characteristic size of fragments is given by λc ∼
GΣ/Ω2 (Binney & Tremaine 2008). For a disc with Q ≈ 1
this becomes λc ∼ σ/Ω. The characteristic radius and mass
of fragments (clumps) in that case are1
Rcl ∝ σ
Ω

Ω2 ∝ ΣR2

R ∝ fgR

∝ GΣ

(2)

M

1 If the gas component is characterized by Q = 1, then σ ∝
GΣ/Ω, where σ and Σ are the gas velocity dispersion and the gas
surface density, respectively. We use the expression for the angu-

lar frequency Ω = vc/R = (cid:112)GM/R3, where vc is the circular

velocity at radius R and M is the total mass enclosed within that
radius. The mass of gas in the galaxy is proportional to ΣR2,
hence the gas fraction is fg ∝ ΣR2/M .

(3)

g M .

cl ∝ Σf 2

g R2 ∝ f 3

Mcl ∝ ΣR2
Here fg denotes the galaxy’s gas fraction and R and M
are respectively the radius and mass of the galaxy. Obser-
vations indicate that star-forming galaxies at high redshift
have much higher gas fractions (fg ∼ 0.3 − 0.7) compared
to galaxies in the local universe (fg ∼ 0.1). Hence, these
relations explain the diﬀerence in size and mass of GMCs
(with R ∼ 100 pc, M ∼ 105−6 M(cid:12)) in the Milky Way,
and giant clumps in high-redshift galaxies (with R ∼ 1 kpc,
M ∼ 108−9 M(cid:12)), assuming that they form via the same
type of gravitational instability. In other words, the giant
clumps observed in high-redshift galaxies seem to be a con-
sequence of their gas-rich nature, caused by fresh supplies
of gas that are continuously being provided through accre-
tion of gas from the intergalactic medium (Kereˇs et al. 2005;
Kereˇs & Hernquist 2009; Dekel et al. 2009b; Brooks et al.
2009; Faucher-Gigu`ere et al. 2011).

The importance of giant clumps for the evolution of
high-redshift galaxies is a subject of ongoing research. In re-
cent years it has been proposed that giant clumps may be
responsible for the formation of bulges in their host galax-
ies, as an alternative to the classical bulge-forming scenario
involving mergers. In these models, clumps form throughout
the disk, lose angular momentum due to dynamical friction
and gravitational torques within the disc and gradually sink
toward the centre of the galaxy (Noguchi 1999; Immeli et al.
2004; Dekel et al. 2009a). Typical time-scales over which
clumps can migrate to the centre are a few times 108 yr
(Ceverino et al. 2010; Bournaud et al. 2011).

However,

it is uncertain whether individual clumps
can survive that long. Because they are sites of intense
star formation, clumps are exposed to strong stellar feed-
back which could destroy them on much shorter time-scales
(106 − 108 yr). Analytical studies of this problem give dif-
ferent results depending on the assumptions made (Murray
et al. 2010; Krumholz & Dekel 2010). Over the past sev-
eral years, a number of groups have used numerical simula-
tions, both cosmological and idealized simulations of isolated
galaxies, to study the phenomenon of giant clumps (e.g. Cev-
erino et al. 2010; Genel et al. 2012; Hopkins et al. 2012; Perez
et al. 2013; Mandelker et al. 2014, 2015; Moody et al. 2014;
Bournaud et al. 2014; Tamburello et al. 2015). In most cases,
gas-rich discs with properties similar to those of observed
high-redshift galaxies do break up into large clumps of mass
∼ 107 − 109 M(cid:12). However, what happens to the clumps af-
terwards – how long they live and whether they migrate to
the centre of the galaxy before being disrupted – heavily de-
pends on the details of the ISM physics and stellar feedback
implemented in the simulation. For example, most simula-
tions that model stellar feedback as heating from supernovae
only, while ignoring some other modes of feedback such as
radiation pressure, produce massive, gravitationally bound
clumps that manage to survive for hundreds of millions of
years, long enough to sink to the centre of the galaxy.

On the other hand, the cosmological simulations of
Genel et al. (2012) that include a phenomenological model of
feedback in the form of strong momentum-driven winds have
giant clumps that get disrupted on time-scales ∼ 50 Myr.
Improved physical models of feedback have been imple-
mented by Hopkins et al. (2012) in simulations of isolated

MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2016)

galaxies with properties that match those of high-redshift
star-forming discs galaxies. They found that giant clumps
get disrupted by stellar feedback in a few times 107 yr, after
converting only a few percent of their gas into stars, which
suppresses the bulge formation rate.

Stellar feedback seems to be crucial

in determining
whether or not clumps live long enough to have an important
eﬀect on their host galaxy. However, properly accounting
for environmental eﬀects such as mergers and gas accretion
from large-scale ﬁlaments can be just as important, because
these processes aﬀect the overall state of the host galaxy.
Isolated, gravitationally unstable discs are inherently artiﬁ-
cial and those galaxies quickly exhaust their gas. Since there
is no fresh supply of gas, there can be no new clumps formed
after the initial clumpy phase. Hence, using simulations with
feedback models as realistic as possible and in a full cosmo-
logical context is the most promising way to improve our
understanding of the nature of giant star-forming clumps
and their signiﬁcance for galaxy evolution.

In this paper, we use the results of the FIRE project, a
suite of cosmological zoom-in simulations with explicit treat-
ment of stellar feedback (Hopkins et al. 2014). We analyse
the formation and evolution of giant clumps in a simulated
massive gas-rich galaxy at 2.2 ≥ z ≥ 1.0. Section 2 describes
the simulation used in this work. In Section 3 we outline
the procedure employed to identify clumps in snapshots. In
Section 4 we present distributions of various physical prop-
erties of giant clumps, such as their mass, size, elongation,
gas fraction, and stellar age. We investigate how the oc-
currence of giant clumps changes with redshift and overall
properties of the host galaxy. We re-run our simulation with
high time resolution (taking snapshots every ∼ 1 Myr) over
six 50-Myr periods in order to follow the evolution of in-
dividual clumps. This allows us to directly measure clump
lifetimes and compare them to stellar ages of clumps. We
discuss the implications of our results and compare them to
previous studies of clumpy galaxies in Section 5. Finally, we
summarize the conclusions in Section 6. In Appendix A we
compare the properties of clumps found in this simulation
with clumps from a few additional cosmological simulations
of galaxies at high redshift, run at higher resolution, but
over a more limited redshift range.

2 THE SIMULATION

2.1 The FIRE project

The simulation analysed in this study is part of the FIRE
(Feedback in Realistic Environments) project2, a suite of
high-resolution cosmological zoom-in simulations of galaxy
evolution. A detailed description of the numerical methods
and physics implemented in the FIRE simulations can be
found in Hopkins et al. (2014) and references therein. Here
we brieﬂy summarize the most important features.

The FIRE simulations were performed with the newly-
developed GIZMO code3, using a pressure-entropy formula-
tion of the smoothed particle hydrodynamics equations (P-
SPH). The P-SPH implementation gives a good agreement

2 http://fire.northwestern.edu/
3 http://www.tapir.caltech.edu/~phopkins/Site/GIZMO.html

MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2016)

Clumpy galaxy in the FIRE simulations

3

with analytic solutions and grid codes on a broad range of
test problems (Hopkins et al. 2013), thereby resolving some
well-known issues of density-based SPH codes and their dif-
ferences with grid-based codes. The gravity solver used is a
modiﬁed version of GADGET-3 (Springel 2005). The initial
conditions for our simulations were generated with the MU-
SIC code (Hahn & Abel 2011) and are part of the AGORA
comparison project (Kim et al. 2014).

The FIRE simulations include explicit treatment of the
multi-phase interstellar medium (ISM) consisting of molec-
ular, atomic, ionized and hot diﬀuse components. This was
made possible by the high resolution and the improved mod-
eling of gas cooling and heating. The resolution of simula-
tions is chosen so that the eﬀective Jeans mass in the tur-
bulent ISM is resolved in the redshift range over which we
analyse the simulation. The initial particle mass in the high
resolution region of the simulation we analyse in detail is
3.7 × 105 M(cid:12) for gas and star particles, and 2.3 × 106 M(cid:12)
for dark matter. Force softening lengths are adaptive, with
the minimum ﬁxed past z ∼ 10 at 20 pc (physical units) for
baryons and 210 pc for dark matter.

Star formation proceeds in regions that are: i) dense
(above density threshold nth = 10 cm−3), ii) molecular and
iii) self-gravitating. Gas particles that meet all of these cri-
teria form stars at 100% eﬃciency per free-fall time. This
is motivated by high-resolution simulations of turbulent me-
dia (e.g. Padoan & Nordlund 2011; Ballesteros-Paredes et
al. 2011; Padoan, Haugbolle & Nordlund 2012) that suggest
that small-scale star-formation eﬃciency should be high,
however our results are not very sensitive to the exact value
we chose. The galaxy-averaged eﬃciency of ∼ 1% per dy-
namical time is regulated by stellar feedback and basically
independent of the small-scale star-formation law (Hopkins
et al. 2011; Ostriker & Shetty 2011; Faucher-Gigu`ere et al.
2013).

The FIRE simulations implement multiple modes of
stellar feedback: stellar radiation pressure, photoionization
and photoelectric heating, energy and momentum feedback
from supernovae of type I & II, stellar winds from AGB and
O-type stars. The input parameters for modeling feedback
are not adjusted ‘by hand’ to produce results that match ob-
servations. They are taken directly from stellar population
models in STARBURST99 (Leitherer et al. 1999), assum-
ing a Kroupa (2002) initial-mass function for masses in the
range 0.1−100 M(cid:12). We do not consider feedback from active
galactic nuclei (AGN).

Explicit treatments of the ISM and feedback physics al-
low the FIRE simulations to successfully reproduce many
observed galaxy properties, such as the stellar mass-halo
mass relation, Kennicutt-Schmidt law, and the star-forming
main sequence (Hopkins et al. 2014). They show a good
agreement with the observed mass-metallicity relations (Ma
et al. 2015). Furthermore, our simulations predict neutral
hydrogen covering fractions around high-redshift galaxies
consistent with observations (Faucher-Gigu`ere et al. 2015;
Faucher-Giguere et al. 2016). The FIRE simulations also
produce galactic-scale winds whose velocities and mass
loading factors satisfy observational requirements (Muratov
et al. 2015). These results give us conﬁdence that our simu-
lations can reliably reproduce star formation and ISM prop-
erties on galactic scales, which are crucial for investigating

4

A. Oklopˇci´c et al.

the nature of giant star-forming clumps and their impact on
the host galaxy.

2.2 The m13 simulation

In this work, we study in detail the most massive galaxy in
the suite of FIRE simulations that is described in Hopkins
et al. (2014), named m13 4. We choose to focus on this galaxy
because it is the only galaxy in the original FIRE sample
that is as massive at z ∼ 2 as most observed clumpy galaxies
at this redshift – its stellar mass at z = 2 is ∼ 4 × 1010 M(cid:12),
matching the stellar mass of clumpy galaxies in Genzel et al.
(2011). The mass of m13 ’s dark matter halo at z ∼ 2 is
8.7× 1011 M(cid:12). The advantage of using m13 for our analysis
is that is falls into the mass range of the observed clumpy
galaxies at high redshift, which makes the comparison be-
tween simulated data and observations more meaningful. We
analyse the evolution of the m13 galaxy from z = 2.2 to
z = 1.0. During this period, the galaxy changes from being
a very clumpy, gas-rich system that forms stars vigorously,
to a more regular and moderately star-forming galaxy, sim-
ilar to those at lower redshift. By studying the transition of
one galaxy from its clumpy to non-clumpy phase, we wish to
determine what causes this transformation and what long-
term eﬀects clumps might have on the evolution of their host
galaxy.

In order to simulate a galaxy as massive as those ob-
served at high redshift to z = 0, we adopted a resolution
lower than in the rest of the original FIRE sample. In Ap-
pendix A we compare the main properties of clumps in m13
with clumps found in a subset of simulations from the Mas-
siveFIRE sample (Feldmann et al. 2016). This suite of sim-
ulations includes more massive galaxies than the original
FIRE sample, run at 16 times higher resolution. However,
they have only been evolved down to z ∼ 1.7 due to their
high computational cost. When possible, we also compare
our results to the results of Hopkins et al. (2012) who anal-
ysed the properties of star-forming clumps in high-resolution
simulations of isolated galaxies.

During the analysed period the galaxy experiences in-
teractions with a few smaller systems, but no major mergers.
The most notable merger is that with a galaxy whose bary-
onic mass is ∼ 20 times smaller than the baryonic mass of
m13. The merger begins at z ∼ 2.3 (that is ∼ 150 Myr before
the ﬁrst snapshot analysed in our series) and the secondary
loses almost all of its gas during the ﬁrst passage near the
centre of m13. What is left is a stellar component that is dis-
cernible in maps of stellar surface density all the way down
to z = 1, as is orbits around m13.
We record snapshots of m13 and its surroundings every
∼ 15− 40 Myr, depending on the redshift. Thus we obtain a
suite of 111 snapshots, which we refer to as the original se-
ries. We analyse these snapshots to determine the properties
of clumps and how they change with redshift. In addition to
that, we re-simulate six 50-Myr periods, starting at redshifts
of 2.0, 1.9, 1.8, 1.7, 1.6 and 1.5, over which we follow the evo-
lution of the m13 galaxy with ﬁne time resolution, taking

snapshots every ∼ 0.5−5 Myr. This results in additional 170
snapshots. The short time-scale between these snapshots al-
lows us to track individual clumps and put constraints on
their lifetime.

3 CLUMP IDENTIFICATION

To identify giant star-forming clumps, we assume that they
correspond to regions of the disc with high surface density
of gas. We choose this two-dimensional criterion for the def-
inition of clumps in order to more easily compare our results
with those from observations of real galaxies and mock im-
ages created from simulations. We tried using other criteria
for the deﬁnition of clumps, ones that are more related to
the physical (3D) density of gas and we ﬁnd that they give
very similar results when it comes to identifying the largest
clumps. In observations of high-redshift galaxies, clumps are
usually identiﬁed based on UV and optical light, serving as
tracers of star formation. Here we use gas surface density
to identify clumps, which is a good approximation because
maps of the projected star-formation rate (SFR) show that
the locations of gas clumps coincide with regions of intense
star formation (see Fig. 1). In general, we do not observe
obvious clumps in the distribution of stars or dark matter
coincident with the gas clumps. Discernible star clumps cor-
respond to a few (in total, not per snapshot) smaller galaxies
orbiting around m13.

As a ﬁrst step in our clump-ﬁnding procedure, we
ﬁnd the total angular momentum of gas particles within
10 (physical) kpc from the centre of mass of the galaxy
and determine the Euler angles of the face-on projection
in the simulation’s coordinate system. Next, we form a two-
dimensional 10 kpc×10 kpc grid in the face-on projection,
with cell size of 50 pc. We project the location of every
particle within 10 kpc radius from the centre of the galaxy
onto the grid and for the sake of computational convenience
deposit the entire particle into the corresponding cell (i.e. ig-
noring the particle’s SPH kernel). We construct the gas sur-
face density map by dividing the entire gas mass contained
in a cell with its surface area. Using all cells with non-zero
surface density, we ﬁnd the mean value of gas surface density
and the standard deviation. We use these two values in our
deﬁnition of clumps – clumps correspond to regions that are
at least one standard deviation above the mean surface den-
sity. Finally, we smooth the gas surface density ﬁeld using a
Gaussian ﬁlter with the standard deviation of 50 pc (FWHM
of ∼ 120 pc) and the radius of the Gaussian kernel of 450
pc. The ∼ 100 pc scale roughly coincides with the lower end
of the reported size distribution of observed giant clumps at
high redshift. This smoothing scale should be large enough
to mitigate the eﬀect of ignoring the SPH kernel in creating
gas surface density maps.

To ﬁnd clumps in the gas surface density map, we make
use of a Python package astrodendro5 to compute dendro-
grams – trees of hierarchical structure in our simulated data.
To ﬁnd clumps, we need to specify three parameters: 1)
the minimum value of gas surface density that is used as
a threshold to deﬁne clumps, which we set to be equal to

4 The name of the galaxy comes from the fact that it resides in
a dark matter halo of mass ∼ 1013 M(cid:12) at z = 0, corresponding
to a halo hosting a small galaxy group.

5 http://www.dendrograms.org/

MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2016)

Clumpy galaxy in the FIRE simulations

5

Figure 1. Surface density of gas (top panels), stars (bottom left), and the star-formation rate (bottom right) for the m13 galaxy at
z = 2.0. The size of the region shown is 10 kpc × 10 kpc (physical). Contours in the face-on projections show gas clumps identiﬁed by
our clump-ﬁnding procedure (ignoring the central clump).

one standard deviation above the mean surface density of
all non-empty cells in that snapshot; 2) the minimum dif-
ference in the surface density between a large structure and
any substructure within it, which we set to 10% of the mean
surface density (this parameter is not very important in our
particular study, since we primarily care about large clumps,
and not so much the substructures within them); 3) the
minimum number of pixels within a clump which we set to
20, corresponding to a minimum eﬀective radius of selected
clumps of about 125 pc.

After computing a dendrogram for each snapshot us-
ing the described procedure, we obtain a list of clumps that
satisfy the criteria we imposed. If a selected region has sub-
structure, we decide what is going to be considered a ‘clump’
(whether the larger structure as a whole or smaller substruc-
tures individually) by visual inspection. In most cases we
choose the largest structure to represent the clump. How-
ever, in a few instances the largest structure was branching
out in such a way that it would be unlikely that it would
be recognized as a single clump in real observation. In such
cases, we selected the smaller, more compact substructures

MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2016)

within that region to be identiﬁed as clumps. Many snap-
shots contain a clump located in the centre of the galaxy,
which corresponds to the bulge of the galaxy – we disregard
those clumps from further analysis.

Using the astrodendro package to select clumps allows
us to easily measure the size of each clump in the plane
of the disk (xy plane), and express it in terms of its area
(A), eﬀective major (a) and minor (b) axes. We calculate
the eﬀective radius (R) of a clump from its area as R =

(cid:112)A/π. We assume that the extent of each clump in the

z-direction (perpendicular to the plane of the disk) equals
2R centered on the densest part of the clump. For most
clumps, the enclosed mass does not heavily depend on the
exact choice of its vertical extent, as long as it is roughly on
the order of disc scale height. Even if we extend clumps to
10 kpc in the z-direction (while keeping the surface area in
the plane of the disc ﬁxed), their mass increases only by a
factor of a few (for the most massive clumps that factor is
(cid:46) 2)

All gas and stellar particles within the volume of space
that is identiﬁed as a clump, belong to that clump. These

6

A. Oklopˇci´c et al.

selection criteria were devised to match the observational
identiﬁcation of clumps and do not tell us anything about
whether clump particles are bound together or not.

Fig. 1 shows the gas surface density of m13 at z = 2
in the face-on and edge-on projections (top panels). The
contours in the face-on projection mark the clumps identi-
ﬁed in this snapshot. The ﬁgure also shows the surface den-
sity of the star-formation rate (bottom right). The identiﬁed
clumps (and the central clump, which is excluded from our
analysis) correspond to regions of intense star formation and
would likely be prominent in the rest-frame UV images and
other tracers or recent star formation. The stellar distribu-
tion (bottom left panel) is fairly smooth and does not show
prominent overdensities. For reference, the contours of gas
clumps are also shown in the map of stellar surface density.

4 RESULTS

4.1 Clump properties in the m13 simulation

The clump-ﬁnding procedure identiﬁed a total of 506 clumps
in the original m13 series of snapshots at 2.2 ≥ z ≥ 1.0 (not
counting clumps located in the centre of the galaxy, which
we discarded). The average number of identiﬁed clumps per
snapshot varies with redshift (as discussed in more detail in
Section 4.2) from about 8 clumps per snapshot at z ∼ 2, to
no clumps at all at z ∼ 1. Fig. 2 shows clump distributions
in terms of their baryonic mass, physical size (eﬀective ra-
dius), elongation (the ratio of the minor and major axis) and
gas fraction (deﬁned as fg = Mgas/[Mgas + Mstars]). Even
though the focus of this study is on giant clumps, which typ-
ically have masses in the range 108 − 109 M(cid:12), our clump-
ﬁnding procedure is capable of ﬁnding clumps smaller than
that, with masses ∼ 107 M(cid:12). The lower limit for clump mass
is slightly diﬀerent for every snapshot because it depends on
the gas surface density threshold which varies from snapshot
to snapshot. The highest surface density threshold over all
snapshots is ∼ 650 M(cid:12)pc−2, which corresponds to the min-
imum clump mass of 107.5 M(cid:12). This is a conservative limit
on our mass completeness over the entire analysed redshift
range. In many snapshots we are able to identify clumps
much smaller than that limit.

The number of clumps with total baryonic mass greater
than 108 M(cid:12) is 155 and their eﬀective radii range from
∼ 150 to ∼ 600 pc, which is consistent with the proper-
ties of observed giant clumps at high redshift (e.g. F¨orster
Schreiber et al. 2011). Clump gas fractions vary from highly
gas-dominated clumps that have over 90% of their mass in
gas, to clumps with fg ∼ 0.3. Most giant clumps have com-
parable mass contributions from gas and stars, with the me-
dian value for giant clumps of fg = 0.57. Morphologies of
giant clumps in our sample are very diverse, from nearly
spherical clumps with the ratio of minor to major axis close
to unity (b/a ≈ 1), to highly elongated clumps with minor
axis almost an order of magnitude smaller than the major
(b/a ∼ 0.1).

4.2 Occurrence of clumps over redshifts

The number of massive clumps present in the galaxy de-
creases with time over the redshift range 2.2 ≥ z ≥ 1.0

which spans almost 3 Gyr. Fig. 3 shows the mass distribu-
tion of clumps in three redshift bins. The number of identi-
ﬁed clumps clearly decreases with decreasing redshift. The
clumps also get smaller with time – the mean and median of
the mass distribution, indicated by solid and dashed lines,
respectively, move towards lower masses at lower redshifts.
If large clumps do form due to gravitational instabili-
ties in gas-rich disks, then their occurrence rate might be
correlated with the gas fraction of the galaxy. Fig. 4, top
panel, shows the galaxy’s gas fraction and the gas velocity
dispersion in the z direction, both as functions of redshift.
We calculate the gas fraction by taking into account gas
in all phases. The line-of-sight velocity dispersion calcula-
tion also includes all gas particles – we do not exclude any
inﬂows/outﬂows that may be present. The galaxy is very
gas-rich at z > 2, with gas fraction above 30%, which is con-
sistent with observations of high-redshift galaxies (Tacconi
et al. 2008, 2010). With time, the gas fraction decreases, set-
tling at about 10− 15% around z ∼ 1, when the stellar mass
of the galaxy is ∼ 6 × 1010 M(cid:12). The gas velocity dispersion
follows the same trend, though in a more bursty manner.
The middle panel shows the star-formation rate (SFR) in
the galaxy as a whole and in clumps. Clumps are sites of
intense star formation that account for 10 − 60% of the to-
tal SFR in the galaxy at any given time, even though they
make up only a few percent of its total mass. About 1010 M(cid:12)
of stars is formed in clumps during the clumpy phase in the
evolution of the galaxy (2.2 (cid:38) z (cid:38) 1.3), which is ∼20% of the
total star formation over that period. The SFR experiences
a similar decrease with redshift as the gas fraction. The bot-
tom panel shows the mass of individual giant clumps with
mass (cid:62) 108 M(cid:12) as a function of redshift. The most massive
clumps approximately follow the expected scaling with the
gas fraction given in Eq. 3 (Mcl ∼ f 3
g Mgal). There are no
clumps with mass above 108 M(cid:12) at z < 1.3, when the gas
fraction falls under ∼ 15%. At these redshifts, the clump
masses are in the range 106 − 108 M(cid:12), i.e. comparable to
the mass of ‘normal’ GMCs found in the Milky Way. The
properties of clouds in this mass range, found in simulations
of isolated galaxies that implement the same model of stellar
feedback as our simulation, are analysed in detail in Hopkins
et al. (2012).
There is a relatively short period around z ∼ 1.7 when
the gas fraction slightly increases due to a minor merger with
a galaxy of stellar mass ∼ 109 M(cid:12). The gray band in Fig. 4
marks the period during which the small in-falling galaxy is
within 30 kpc from the centre of mass of the whole system.

4.3 Stellar age in clumps

Fig. 5 shows the mass-weighted age of star particles in gi-
ant clumps, as a function of the clump’s galactocentric ra-
dius, i.e. the distance between the centre of the galaxy and
the clump’s centre of mass, color-coded by redshift. Mass-
weighted stellar ages of clumps are typically a few hundred
Myr, however they span a broad range from tens of Myr for
a few smallest clumps to about a Gyr. These numbers are
consistent with the estimated ages of stellar populations in
observed high-redshift clumps, which range from ∼ 10 Myr
to several hundred Myr (Elmegreen et al. 2005, 2009; F¨orster
Schreiber et al. 2011; Genzel et al. 2011; Guo et al. 2012;

MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2016)

Clumpy galaxy in the FIRE simulations

7

distribution of clump eﬀective radius, calculated from clump’s surface area (A) as R =(cid:112)A/π. The red line marks R = 125 pc, the lower

Figure 2. Distribution of clump properties in the m13 simulation from z = 2.2 to z = 1.0. Upper left panel shows the distribution of
the total clump baryonic mass. The red line indicates the mass limit above which our clump sample is complete. Clump gas fraction,
obtained as the ratio of clump gas mass to the sum of gas and stellar mass is shown in the lower left panel. Upper right panel shows the
limit on the radius, set by our requirement that clumps span the area of at least 20 pixels of size 50 pc × 50 pc. The distribution of the
ratio of minor (b) and major (a) axes is shown in the lower right panel. Dark blue histograms represent giant clumps with baryonic mass
≥ 108 M(cid:12), and light blue is for less massive clumps (the light blue bars lie on top of the dark ones).

Wuyts et al. 2012). However, as we show below, stellar ages
are not necessarily indicative of clump lifetimes.

over the course of their lifetime, causing a positive stellar
age gradient.

Most star-forming clumps in m13 are centrally located,
within ∼ 3 kpc from the centre, especially at high redshift.
For a given redshift bin, there is a slight tendency for clumps
with older stellar populations to be located closer to the
centre of the galaxy, as indicated by dashed lines in Fig.
5 which represent linear ﬁts through data points in each of
the redshift bins. Anti-correlation of stellar age and distance
from the centre has been observed in high-redshift clumps
by F¨orster Schreiber et al. (2011). Because clumps are re-
gions of intense star formation, most of them contain slightly
younger stellar populations than the disc average at the cor-
responding redshift (indicated by solid lines in Fig. 5), which
includes stars in clumps and inter-clump regions. The aver-
age stellar age increases with radius in the outskirts of the
disc (i.e. beyond ∼ 3 kpc from the centre). This is similar
to the results of El-Badry et al. (2015) who analysed stellar
migration due to gas outﬂow/inﬂow cycles caused by stel-
lar feedback in the FIRE simulations of low-mass galaxies.
They found that most stars form in the central parts of the
host galaxy and then exhibit systematic outward migration

MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2016)

4.4 Clump lifetime

Snapshots used in the previous section to describe physical
properties of clumps in m13 were not useful for estimating
their lifetimes. Typical time diﬀerences between two consec-
utive snapshots in the series are 15 − 40 Myr (it varies with
redshift), which is too long to follow individual clumps from
snapshot to snapshot as the galaxy’s morphology can change
considerably over that time-scale. In order to track individ-
ual clumps we re-run our simulation from six starting points
and evolve it for 50 Myr in each case, taking snapshots every
few Myr6.

After identifying gas clumps in all additional snapshots

6 For re-runs starting at z = 2.0 and z = 1.5 we tried out several
diﬀerent time steps (∆t) ranging from 0.5-5 Myr to ﬁnd the most
appropriate one – short enough to allow us to track individual
clumps, but long enough to reduce the number of needed snap-
shots to a manageable size. We ﬁnd that ∆t ∼ 2 Myr is a good

8

A. Oklopˇci´c et al.

Figure 3. Distribution of clump baryonic mass in three redshift
bins. Histograms indicate the average number of clumps per snap-
shot in each bin, whereas the error bars mark the standard devi-
ation. The number of clumps at low redshift is reduced compared
to high redshift and the clumps are less massive, as indicated by
the mean and median of the distribution (represented by solid
and dashed lines, respectively) which move over to lower mass
values at lower redshift.

using the same procedure as described in Sec 3, we deter-
mine the history of each clump from snapshot to snapshot by
visual inspection. Thus we are able to constrain the lifetime
of each clump – the time diﬀerence between the ﬁrst and
last snapshot in which that region of the disc is identiﬁed as
a clump. For clumps that are already present in the ﬁrst or
still present in the last snapshot in a 50-Myr series, we are
only able to set a lower limit on the lifetime. Smaller clumps
sometimes end their lives by merging with more massive
ones. If two or more clumps merge, the newly-formed clump
carries the designation of the most massive progenitor, while
the smaller ones cease to exist. Because we have no way of
knowing how long the smaller clumps would have lived had
they not merged, we exclude these clumps from our esti-
mates of average lifetime. Fig. 6 shows the lifetime of each
clump as a function of its maximum mass. Lifetimes range
between 2 and 48 Myr, and the mean lifetime of clumps
with mass above 108 M(cid:12) is ∼ 17 Myr. More massive clumps
typically live longer than less massive ones, consistent with
the results from isolated disc simulations in Hopkins et al.
(2012). In Section 5.2.1 we discuss the fate of stars formed
inside of a clump after the gas gets disrupted.

compromise, and we use that time step for the remaining four
re-runs.

Figure 4. Upper panel: Blue line represents the gas fraction of
the m13 galaxy as a function of redshift. Gas velocity dispersion
perpendicular to the plane of the disc is represented by the vio-
let line. Middle panel: Star-formation rates (SFR) in the whole
galaxy (orange) and in clumps (green) show that 10− 60% of the
total star formation occurs in clumps at any given time. Averaged
over the analysed time period, clumps account for ∼ 20% of the
total star formation in the galaxy. Bottom panel: Mass of individ-
ual giant clumps (M(cid:62) 108 M(cid:12)) at their corresponding redshift.
The most massive clumps follow the expected scaling with the
gas fraction and mass of the galaxy, Mcl ∼ f 3
g Mgal, represented
by the gray dashed line. The velocity dispersion, star-formation
rate and the occurrence of giant clumps are all high when the
gas fraction is high, and decrease with decreasing redshift. The
gray band marks the period during which the galaxy experiences
a close encounter with a smaller galaxy, resulting in an increase of
the gas fraction, star formation rate and number of giant clumps.

5 DISCUSSION

5.1 Clump formation and destruction

5.1.1 Clump formation in gas-rich systems

We follow the evolution of a massive, gas-rich, star-forming
galaxy from z = 2.2 to z = 1.0 and investigate the nature
of massive gas clumps formed within it. During the ﬁrst
∼ 1 Gyr (2.2 (cid:38) z (cid:38) 1.5), when the gas fraction and veloc-
ity dispersion are both very high (see Fig. 4), the morphol-
ogy of the gaseous disc is highly irregular and asymmetric,
dominated by a few clumps of increased gas surface den-
sity. Some of the clumps look compact and nearly spherical,
whereas some are elongated ﬁlaments that often break up
into smaller sub-clumps. At later times (z (cid:46) 1.5), as the gas
fraction and velocity dispersion drop to roughly half of their
initial value and the cold gas component stabilizes into a
more regular disc of lower surface density, the gas overden-

MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2016)

Clumpy galaxy in the FIRE simulations

9

sities (i.e. clumps) become smaller and less frequent. This
change with redshift is related to the lack of gas-rich merg-
ers and decreased gas accretion. At later times there are no
obvious ﬁlaments of in-ﬂowing gas and the overall gas con-
tent of the galaxy goes down.

5.1.2 Stellar clumps

The analysed clumps are identiﬁed in the gas surface den-
sity maps of the m13 galaxy. We do not see corresponding
clumps in stellar maps. Prominent substructures in the stel-
lar component are associated with smaller galaxies falling
into the potential well of m13, orbiting around and merg-
ing with it. One merger event, with a galaxy of initial stellar
mass of 1.6×109 M(cid:12), starts a few tens of Myr before our ﬁrst
analysed snapshot, and lasts until z ∼ 1. Another galaxy
with stellar mass ∼ 109 M(cid:12) passes through the m13 ’s po-
tential well around z ∼ 1.6. Both of these smaller galaxies
lose or exhaust their gas during the ﬁrst passage through
the densest regions of m13. After that, they appear only
as stellar overdensities and we do not identify them as (gas)
clumps. However, their presence might contribute to the dis-
turbed state of the gaseous disc of m13.

5.1.3 Clump destruction and lifetimes

Giant gas clumps in m13 have relatively short lives, of order
107 yr. There is a correlation of clump lifetime and mass –
more massive clumps tend to live longer. Smaller clumps
can end their lives by merging with more massive ones or by
dissolving as their surface density drops below the threshold
that is used to deﬁne clumps. Massive clumps often end their
lives by breaking up into smaller pieces, which can form a
ring-like structure, indicating that the clump was disrupted
from within by its own stellar feedback. These fragments
often merge with other gas clouds to form new clumps.

The lifetimes of clumps that we measure in m13 are
consistent with the result of Hopkins et al. (2012), as shown
in Fig. 6. They studied clumps in isolated galaxies with simi-
lar implementation of stellar feedback as is used in this work
but at much higher resolution. Even though their methods
for ﬁnding clumps and measuring clump lifetime are diﬀer-
ent from those that we employ, the conclusions derived from
their work and ours are very similar. On the other hand,
cosmological simulations that include only thermal feedback
from supernovae and stellar winds, (Ceverino et al. 2010;
Moody et al. 2014; Mandelker et al. 2014) often produce gi-
ant clumps that live long lives ((cid:38) 108 yr) and migrate to
the centre of their discs. Unlike the FIRE simulations, many
previous studies do not resolve the evolution of supernovae
and hence do not account for the momentum accumulated
in the process. Direct comparison between our results and
the results presented by these authors is complicated due to
many diﬀerences in the way we deﬁne clumps and measure
clump properties, however it seems that including radiation
pressure feedback in their simulations (although their treat-
ment of radiation pressure is diﬀerent from ours) decreases
the lifetime of their giant clumps and makes our results qual-
itatively more similar (Mandelker et al. 2015).

Comparing the clump lifetime (Fig. 6) with the age of
stellar population in clumps (Fig. 5) we ﬁnd that the lat-
ter is about an order of magnitude greater than the former.

Figure 5. Mass-weighted stellar age in individual giant clumps
with M(cid:62) 108 M(cid:12) as a function of distance from the centre of
the galaxy, color-coded by redshift. For all three redshift bins we
show linear ﬁts (dashed) through the data points which indicate
a slight preference for clumps with older stellar populations to be
located closer to the centre of the galaxy. Average stellar ages of
all the stars in the disc (including those in clumps), at the central
redshift for each bin, are shown as solid lines. Clumps have slightly
younger stellar populations than the disc average because they are
regions of intense star formation and hence contain more young
stars than the rest of the disc.

Figure 6. Clump lifetime as a function of clump’s maximum
mass. Blue dots represent clumps which we are able to follow
from the beginning to the end of their lives. Cyan triangles stand
for clumps which were already formed in the ﬁrst snapshot in a
50-Myr series or were still present in the last snapshot, hence we
could only place a lower limit on their lifetime. Clumps that end
their lives by merging with larger clumps are indicated in red.
The shaded region shows the 10 − 90% range of clump lifetimes
as a function of their mass, for clumps found in high-resolution
simulations of isolated galaxies by Hopkins et al. (2012).

MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2016)

107108109maximum mass of clump [Mﬂ]100101102clump lifetime [Myr]full lifetimelifetime lower limit10

A. Oklopˇci´c et al.

Figure 7. Fractional change of clump’s orbital angular momen-
tum per unit mass over the course of clumps lifetime. Clumps
change their speciﬁc orbital angular momentum by up to ∼ 50%,
and they are equally likely to gain angular momentum as they
are to lose it. This result does not support the scenario in which
clumps systematically migrate toward the centre of the galaxy.

This indicates that a signiﬁcant fraction of stars that re-
side in clumps were not actually formed there, but belong
to an older stellar population whose location happens to co-
incide with the clump or which have been accreted by the
clump. This ‘contamination’ by older stars may be more sig-
niﬁcant in the inner regions of the galaxy, which are more
densely populated than the outskirts. This may explain the
observed anti-correlation between galactocentric radius and
stellar age of clumps. A similar anti-correlation exists in the
overall stellar population in the inner parts of m13 and could
simply be translated to clumps. Therefore, measuring stellar
ages of clumps might not be a reliable way to establish the
absolute age of clumps themselves or the relative age of one
clump to another.

5.1.4 Clump orbits and (lack of ) inspiral

On average, clumps follow the overall rotation of the disc,
with some deviations, presumably induced by gravitational
torques. Several clumps end up reaching the centre of the
galaxy, but interestingly most of those that do start their
descent from nearly the same location in the disc. Some other
clumps at similar distances from the centre, but at diﬀerent
locations, have very diﬀerent trajectories and do not end up
in the centre.

The change in the clump’s galactocentric radius is re-
lated to its loss of orbital angular momentum. To get a sense
of how this quantity changes over the lifetime of a clump,
in Fig. 7 we show the diﬀerence in the speciﬁc orbital angu-
lar momentum of clumps, i.e. the sum of angular momenta
(with respect to the centre of the galaxy) of all clump par-

Figure 8. Map of Toomre Q parameter of the gas disc at z ≈ 1.9.
Clumps identiﬁed in this snapshot are overlaid as black contours.
Most clumps, especially those in the early phase of their life,
coincide with regions of low Q.

ticles (gas and stars) divided by the mass of the clump

(cid:80)

(cid:80)
j mjvj × rj

j mj

L =

,

(4)

between the ﬁnal and initial snapshot of that clump, ex-
pressed as a percentage of its initial angular momentum
(∆L/Li = (Lf − Li)/Li). We ﬁnd that clumps experience
a change in their orbital angular momentum by a few tens
of percent (up to ∼ 50%) and that roughly equal numbers
of clumps experience inward migration as outward. Small
clumps on average experience smaller changes in their angu-
lar momentum compared to more massive ones, due to their
shorter lifetimes.

Our ﬁnding that giant clumps are equally likely to gain
angular momentum over the course of their lifetime as they
are to lose it indicates that clump migration on such short
time-scales might be dominated by gravitational torquing
and tidal forces due to asymmetric state of the disc, inﬂowing
gas streams and orbiting companion galaxies, rather than
due to dynamical friction which acts on longer times scales
and would produce a ‘one-sided’ systematic trend of angular
momentum loss, as seen in simulations that produce long-
living clumps (e.g. Ceverino et al. 2010; Bournaud et al.
2014; Mandelker et al. 2014).

5.2 Are clumps gravitationally bound?

Empirically determined values of Toomre Q parameter in
clumpy galaxies at high redshift (Genzel et al. 2011) sug-
gest that giant clumps reside in unstable regions of the disc,
characterized by Q-values below unity. In order to compare
our simulation with these observations, we create maps of
the ‘observed’ Q-parameter (for gas) by locally evaluating
Eq. (1) using the line-of-sight velocity dispersion (σz).

Maps of Toomre Q values throughout the disc (Fig. 8)
indicate that the locations of many clumps coincide with re-
gions of the disc that are gravitationally unstable (Q < 1).
However, there is large scatter. Often, regions of low Q cor-
respond to areas that are still in the process of turning into

MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2016)

Clumpy galaxy in the FIRE simulations

11

& McKee 1992):

α =

Mvir

M

=

5σ2R
GM

,

(5)

where σ is the 1D velocity dispersion (in our case σz) of gas
particles in the clump and R is the clump radius. The virial
parameter of a clump is related to the ratio of its kinetic
and potential energy and can be used to gauge whether a
clump will collapse under its own gravity. Structures with
α (cid:46) 1 are considered gravitationally bound, whereas those
with α (cid:38) 1 are unbound – they have enough kinetic energy
to overcome its self-gravity and expand into the surround-
ing medium. The results in Fig. 9 tell us that some clumps
might be gravitationally bound. However, most of them seem
not to be, at least not entirely. Smaller substructures within
clumps must be self-gravitating, otherwise they would not
be forming stars (that is one of our imposed criteria for star
formation; see Section 2 for more details). Giant clumps may
hence be regarded as massive, fragmented clump complexes,
which could explain why they are easily sheared apart and
destroyed by feedback.
Giant clumps, especially the most massive ones at z ∼ 2,
almost always show signs of substructure – from when they
were formed until they get destroyed and broken up into
smaller fragments. The remaining fragments often get ‘recy-
cled’ into clumps by coming together or by being accreted
onto a larger clump (clumps that end their lives by merg-
ing with larger clumps are highlighted in Fig. 6). Similarly,
Behrendt et al. (2015) ﬁnd evidence of substructure within
giant clumps in their high resolution simulation of an iso-
lated galaxy. They suggest that giant clumps seen at high
redshifts might just be groups or clusters of smaller (∼ 100
pc) clumps observed with coarse angular resolution.

5.2.1 Where do the clump stars go?

Clump lifetime tells us how long the clump exists as an over-
density of gas, but it does not give us insight into what hap-
pens to the stars that were formed in the clump after the
gas has dispersed. To investigate that, we identify particles
in our simulation that were part of a clump as gas parti-
cles and then turned into star particles during the lifetime
of that clump (particle IDs are preserved as particles turn
from gas to stars). Note that each star particle represents
a star cluster of mass ∼ 105 M(cid:12). We follow the positions
of these particles during and after clump’s lifetime. We ﬁnd
that stars formed in the same clump do not remain close to
each other for a long time – they get dispersed on time-scales
of order few times 107 yr. We demonstrate this in Fig. 10,
which shows a series of snapshots around z ≈ 1.8. In the ﬁrst
snapshot, marked with ‘t = 0’, one clump starts to disinte-
grate. We indicate the positions of star particles that were
formed in that clump by black asterisks. In the consecutive
images we show the positions of those same particles at later
times. After ∼ 30 Myr, stars that were formed in the same
clump are distributed along a ring-like (or a spiral arm-like)
feature ∼ 7 kpc long.

5.2.2 Contribution to bulge growth

One of open questions related to giant clumps in high-
redshift galaxies is what is their role in the build-up of the

Figure 9. Virial parameter α of each clump in the original series
of m13 clumps as a function of their mass. The virial parameter
is a ratio of clump’s virial mass to its actual mass. Values of α (cid:38) 1
indicate that clumps are not gravitationally bound.

clumps. Similarly, ‘mature’ clumps that have already sus-
tained substantial star formation can have values of Q > 1.
This is not surprising because the Q parameter was devel-
oped in the context of linear perturbation theory and is only
useful as a diagnostic of the onset of gravitational instability
and the early phases of fragmentation. When the fragmen-
tation is already under way, we move into non-linear regime
and Toomre Q is no longer a valid diagnostic.

Some previous studies of simulated clumpy discs (e.g.
Ceverino et al. 2010; Bournaud et al. 2014; Mandelker et al.
2014) found clumps to be roughly spherical, gravitationally
bound structures able to maintain their compact morphol-
ogy for hundreds of millions of years. Clumps that we ﬁnd
in m13 are qualitatively very diﬀerent. Their morphology
is more complex: some clumps seem compact, while oth-
ers are very elongated, with prominent substructures along
the ﬁlaments. The shape of clumps can change over the
course of their (short) lifetime as clumps stretch, break up,
and merge. This behaviour does not support the picture of
clumps as long-lived, virialized (gravitationally bound and
relaxed) structures. The most probable reason for this qual-
itative diﬀerence between our clumps and clumps found in
some of the earlier studies is the treatment of stellar feed-
back. Many simulations so far have used relatively simple
models of feedback that mostly include thermal energy from
supernovae, but ignore some other types of feedback present
in the early phase of stellar evolution. The additional feed-
back modes that are included in the FIRE simulations, es-
pecially radiation pressure, may play an important role in
determining clump properties, as discussed in Hopkins et al.
(2012).

Fig. 9 shows the virial parameter (α) of each clump in
the original series of m13 snapshots. It is deﬁned as the ratio
of the virial mass of each clump and its actual mass (Bertoldi

MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2016)

107108109Mclump [Mﬂ]100101102virial parameter  (α)12

A. Oklopˇci´c et al.

Figure 10. A series of snapshots spanning 30 Myr around z ∼ 1.8. The colormap shows the gas surface density and the black contours
represent gas clumps. Black asterisks mark stars that were formed in one of the clumps. The initial snapshot (upper left panel) is taken at
the time when the clump starts to break apart. At that point, all the stars are still located in the clump that formed them. Consecutive
snapshots were taken at times indicated in the upper left corner with respect to the initial snapshot. Stars that were formed in the same
clump are not bound, they gradually drift apart and after 30 Myr form a ring-like structure almost 7 kpc long.

galactic bulge. The m13 galaxy has a substantial spheroidal
component at low redshifts, and its morphology at z = 0 is
that of an elliptical galaxy, with stellar mass of ∼ 1011 M(cid:12).
As indicated before, the total mass of stars formed in clumps
between z ≈ 2 and z ≈ 1 is ∼ 1010 M(cid:12). Even if all that
mass ended up in the centre of the galaxy, it would not be
enough to account for the entire present-day bulge mass.
However, even that is unlikely, as our results do not sup-
port the picture in which all clumps migrate to the centre
of the galaxy. We ﬁnd that clumps do not experience very
dramatic changes in their orbital angular momentum (up
to ∼ 50%), and when they do change their radial position,
they are equally likely to move inward as they are to move
outward.

The results of our simulation therefore do not support
the scenario in which giant star-forming clumps form bound
stellar clusters in the outer regions of the disc that uniformly
sink to the centre of the galaxy, thus building up the bulge.
Clumpy morphology of high-redshift galaxies may still play
a role in bulge growth by facilitating transport of material
across the disc via tidal forces and gravitational torquing.
However, that analysis is beyond the scope of this paper.

5.3 Clumps in comparison with GMCs

Finally, we compare giant clumps found in our simulated
galaxy with the GMCs observed in the Milky Way. Local

Figure 11. Comparison of giant clumps in our simulated high-
redshift galaxy and GMCs in the Milky Way. Left panel: The
black line represents the mass-radius relation found for local
GMCs by Roman-Duval et al. (2010). Giant clumps identiﬁed
in the original series of snapshots of m13 are shown in blue. The
simulated giant clumps lie on an extension of the Milky Way GMC
relation. The sharp cut-oﬀ in radius is a result of the minimum
area threshold imposed by our clump-ﬁnding procedure.

MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2016)

10-1100101102103radius [pc]100101102103104105106107108109mass [Mﬂ]M=228×R2.36GMCs (Roman-Duval et al. 2010)m13 clumpsClumpy galaxy in the FIRE simulations

13

Figure 12. Clump star-formation eﬃciency (clump, left panel) and star-formation eﬃciency per free-fall time (f f , right panel) as
functions of mass, compared to the local GMCs (Murray 2011). On the left, we also show the median value and 1σ range for clumps
found in four high-resolution simulations of isolated galaxies by Hopkins et al. (2012).

GMCs follow a tight relation between their mass and ra-
dius (Larson 1981), empirically derived to be M[ M(cid:12)] = 228
R2.36[pc] (Roman-Duval et al. 2010). Fig. 11 shows that our
simulated clumps follow that relation reasonably well, even
though their masses and radii are orders of magnitude above
those of the GMCs that were used to derive the relation. The
sharp cut-oﬀ in radius of our clumps is a consequence of our
clump identiﬁcation criteria – we impose a minimum area
of clumps of 5 × 104 pc2, which corresponds to a minimum
eﬀective radius of ∼ 125 pc.

Next, we compare the star-formation eﬃciency (clump)
and star-formation eﬃciency per free-fall time (f f ) of giant
clumps to those of local GMCs (Murray 2011). To calculate
the star-formation eﬃciency of giant clumps, we use clumps
found in six re-runs of our simulation in which we can follow
the evolution of individual clumps from snapshot to snap-
shot. We compute clump by calculating the total mass of
stars formed in that clump over the course of its lifetime
and dividing it by its maximum mass (i.e. total mass of gas
and stars in the clump at the time when the clump is at its
maximum mass):

clump =

M∗,f ormed

Mclump

.

(6)

To calculate the star formation eﬃciency per free-fall time
f f , which is more easily obtained in observations than
clump, we multiply clump by the ratio of clump’s free-fall
time (τf f ) and its lifetime. The free-fall time of a clump is
given by

(cid:114) 3π

32Gρ

τf f =

.

(7)

where ρ is the mean gas density of the clump calculated at
the time when the clump is at its maximum mass.
The results are shown in Fig. 12. Clumps span a broad
range in star-formation eﬃciency, from less than 10−3, to
a few tens of percent, indicating that giant clumps get de-
stroyed well before they turn all their gas into stars. These
values are very similar to star formation eﬃciency observed
in the local GMCs (Murray 2011). They are also roughly
consistent with the results from four simulations of isolated

MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2016)

disc galaxies (Hopkins et al. 2012) that implement the same
feedback processes as this work, but at higher resolution.
Note that we use a diﬀerent clump-ﬁnding algorithm and
a diﬀerent deﬁnition of clump lifetime than Hopkins et al.
(2012) did, which may cause a variation, or perhaps a sys-
tematic oﬀset, between our results.

6 CONCLUSIONS

We use high-resolution cosmological hydrodynamical simu-
lations from the FIRE project that implement explicit mod-
els of stellar feedback and ISM physics to investigate giant
star-forming clumps in high-redshift galaxies. We present
a detailed analysis of a massive (M∗ ∼ 1010.8 M(cid:12) at
z = 1), discy, star-forming galaxy over the redshift range
2.2 (cid:62) z (cid:62) 1.0. Our main ﬁndings can be summarized as
follows:

• At any given time around z ∼ 2 the galaxy hosts
a few giant clumps with baryonic masses in the range
∼ 108 − 109 M(cid:12) and radii ∼ 200 − 600 pc. The clumps
are identiﬁed as overdensities in the gas component of the
disc, however most of them also contain signiﬁcant mass of
stars (gas fraction in clumps ranges from 20% to over 90%).
Clump shape can vary dramatically from clump to clump,
from nearly spherical to highly elongated clumps.
• Maps of stellar surface density in general do not show
prominent overdensities at the locations of gas clumps. A few
prominent ‘stellar clumps’ found in our simulation belong to
smaller galaxies merging with m13.
• The number of giant clumps decreases with time over
the analysed redshift range, and the clumps become less
massive at lower redshift. This follows the Toomre scale
(∼ f 3
g Mgal), given the decreasing galaxy gas fraction over
the same time.
• Individual clump lifetimes are relatively short, typically
(cid:46) 20 Myr. More massive clumps on average live longer than
less massive ones.
• Very massive clumps often end their lives by being dis-
rupted from within and broken apart into smaller pieces by

14

A. Oklopˇci´c et al.

stellar feedback and tidal forces. Less massive clumps grad-
ually fade away below the surface density threshold used to
deﬁne clumps or merge with larger clumps.
• The mass-weighted stellar age of clumps ranges from
(cid:46) 100 Myr to about 1 Gyr. This is much longer than the
lifetime of any given gas clump, suggesting that a signif-
icant fraction of stars in a clump were formed before the
clump itself. They most likely belong to the underlying stel-
lar population of the galaxy that happens to spatially coin-
cide with the gas clump. Therefore, stellar ages of clumps
are not necessarily indicative of clumps’ own lifetimes. At a
given redshift, there is a tendency of clumps with older stel-
lar populations to be located closer to the galactic centre.
• Most clumps do not seem to be gravitationally bound,
based on their often elongated and complex shape and the
value of the virial parameter. Smaller regions within clumps
are most likely bound and those are the regions were stars
are born. The clumps are in fact ‘complexes’ with substan-
tial sub-structure. This facilitates their destruction by stellar
feedback. Stars formed in the same clump do not stay to-
gether for a long time, they drift apart on a time-scale of
∼ 107 years.
• During the gas-rich (or ‘clumpy’) phase in the evolution
of the galaxy, clumps contain ∼ 10 − 60% of the total star-
formation at any given time. They form ∼ 1010 M(cid:12) of stars
over the analysed redshift range, which is ∼20% of the total
star formation during that period.
• Over the course of their short lifetime, clumps can either
gain or lose orbital angular momentum. We ﬁnd that both
outcomes are roughly equally likely. There is no evidence of
overall inward migration of clumps. Even the most dramatic
angular momentum loss causes change only by a factor of

∼ 2.• The lack of evidence for systematic inward migration
of clumps, and the total stellar mass produced in clumps,
which is only a modest fraction ((cid:46) 20%) of the total z = 0
bulge mass, do not support the scenario in which giant star-
forming clumps form bound stellar clusters that sink to the
centre of the galaxy, thus forming the bulge. Whether the
mere presence of clumps helps the bulge growth by facili-
tating transport of material across the disc via tidal forces
and gravitational torquing is an open question that is not
addressed in this work.
• Giant clumps at high redshift look like scaled-up ver-
sions of GMCs in the local Universe. They lie on the same
mass-radius relation and their star-formation eﬃciencies are
similar to those of GMCs.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This research made use of astrodendro, a Python pack-
age to compute dendrograms of Astronomical data (http:
//www.dendrograms.org/). AO thanks Stella Oﬀner for rec-
ommending the use of astrodendro for this work. AO is
supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, the David
& Lucile Packard Foundation, and the Simons Foundation.
Support for PFH was provided by an Alfred P. Sloan Re-
search Fellowship, NASA ATP Grant NNX14AH35G, and
NSF Collaborative Research Grant #1411920 and CAREER
grant #1455342. Numerical calculations were run on the
Caltech compute cluster “Zwicky” (NSF MRI award #PHY-

0960291) and allocation TG-AST130039 granted by the
Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment
(XSEDE) supported by the NSF. DK was supported by NSF
grant AST-1412153. CAFG was supported by NSF through
grants AST-1412836 and AST-1517491, by NASA through
grant NNX15AB22G, and by STScI through grant HST-AR-
14293.001-A.

REFERENCES

Behrendt M., Burkert A., Schartmann M., 2015, preprint,

(arXiv:1512.03430)

Bertoldi F., McKee C. F., 1992, ApJ, 395, 140
Binney J., Tremaine S., 2008, Galactic Dynamics: Second Edition.

Princeton University Press

Bournaud F., et al., 2008, A&A, 486, 741
Bournaud F., Dekel A., Teyssier R., Cacciato M., Daddi E.,

Juneau S., Shankar F., 2011, ApJ, 741, L33

Bournaud F., et al., 2014, ApJ, 780, 57
Brooks A. M., Governato F., Quinn T., Brook C. B., Wadsley J.,

2009, ApJ, 694, 396

Ceverino D., Dekel A., Bournaud F., 2010, MNRAS, 404, 2151
Cowie L. L., Hu E. M., Songaila A., 1995, AJ, 110, 1576
Dekel A., et al., 2009a, Nature, 457, 451
Dekel A., Sari R., Ceverino D., 2009b, ApJ, 703, 785
El-Badry K., Wetzel A. R., Geha M., Hopkins P. F., Kereˇs

D., Chan T. K., Faucher-Gigu`ere C.-A., 2015, preprint,
(arXiv:1512.01235)

Elmegreen B. G., Elmegreen D. M., Vollbach D. R., Foster E. R.,

Ferguson T. E., 2005, ApJ, 634, 101

Elmegreen D. M., Elmegreen B. G., Ravindranath S., Coe D. A.,

2007, ApJ, 658, 763

Elmegreen B. G., Elmegreen D. M., Fernandez M. X., Lemonias

J. J., 2009, ApJ, 692, 12

Faucher-Gigu`ere C.-A., Kereˇs D., Ma C.-P., 2011, MNRAS, 417,

2982

Faucher-Gigu`ere C.-A., Quataert E., Hopkins P. F., 2013, MN-

RAS, 433, 1970

Faucher-Gigu`ere C.-A., Hopkins P. F., Kereˇs D., Muratov A. L.,

Quataert E., Murray N., 2015, MNRAS, 449, 987

Faucher-Giguere C.-A., Feldmann R., Quataert E., Keres D., Hop-

kins P. F., Murray N., 2016, preprint, (arXiv:1601.07188)

Feldmann R., Hopkins P. F., Quataert E., Faucher-Giguere C.-A.,

Keres D., 2016, preprint, (arXiv:1601.04704)
F¨orster Schreiber N. M., et al., 2011, ApJ, 739, 45
Genel S., et al., 2012, ApJ, 745, 11
Genzel R., et al., 2008, ApJ, 687, 59
Genzel R., et al., 2011, ApJ, 733, 101
Guo Y., Giavalisco M., Ferguson H. C., Cassata P., Koekemoer

A. M., 2012, ApJ, 757, 120

Guo Y., et al., 2015, ApJ, 800, 39
Hahn O., Abel T., 2011, MNRAS, 415, 2101
Hopkins P. F., Hernquist L., 2010, MNRAS, 402, 985
Hopkins P. F., et al., 2010, ApJ, 724, 915
Hopkins P. F., Quataert E., Murray N., 2011, MNRAS, 417, 950
Hopkins P. F., Kereˇs D., Murray N., Quataert E., Hernquist L.,

2012, MNRAS, 427, 968

Hopkins P. F., Cox T. J., Hernquist L., Narayanan D., Hayward

C. C., Murray N., 2013, MNRAS, 430, 1901

Hopkins P. F., Kereˇs D., O˜norbe J., Faucher-Gigu`ere C.-A.,
Quataert E., Murray N., Bullock J. S., 2014, MNRAS, 445,
581

Immeli A., Samland M., Westera P., Gerhard O., 2004, ApJ, 611,

20

Jones T. A., Swinbank A. M., Ellis R. S., Richard J., Stark D. P.,

2010, MNRAS, 404, 1247

MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2016)

Table A1. Physical parameters for the inner 10 kpc of m13 and
the additional MassiveFIRE galaxies, averaged over ∼ 150 Myr
at z ∼ 2.0.

name

m13
MFz2 A1
MFz2 A3

M∗ [ M(cid:12)] Mgas [ M(cid:12)]
1.6 × 1010
3.8 × 1010
2.3 × 1010
0.4 × 1010
1.1 × 1010
0.6 × 1010

fg

0.29
0.13
0.32

SFR [ M(cid:12)yr−1]

44
5
4

Kereˇs D., Hernquist L., 2009, ApJ, 700, L1
Kereˇs D., Katz N., Weinberg D. H., Dav´e R., 2005, MNRAS, 363,

2

Kim J.-h., et al., 2014, ApJS, 210, 14
Kroupa P., 2002, Science, 295, 82
Krumholz M. R., Dekel A., 2010, MNRAS, 406, 112
Larson R. B., 1981, MNRAS, 194, 809
Leitherer C., et al., 1999, ApJS, 123, 3
Ma X., Hopkins P. F., Faucher-Giguere C.-A., Zolman N.,

Muratov A. L., Keres D., Quataert E., 2015, preprint,
(arXiv:1504.02097)

Mandelker N., Dekel A., Ceverino D., Tweed D., Moody C. E.,

Primack J., 2014, MNRAS, 443, 3675

Mandelker N., Dekel A., Ceverino D., DeGraf C., Guo Y., Primack

J., 2015, preprint, (arXiv:1512.08791)

Moody C. E., Guo Y., Mandelker N., Ceverino D., Mozena M.,

Koo D. C., Dekel A., Primack J., 2014, MNRAS, 444, 1389

Muratov A. L., Keres D., Faucher-Giguere C.-A., Hopkins P. F.,
Quataert E., Murray N., 2015, preprint, (arXiv:1501.03155)

Murray N., 2011, ApJ, 729, 133
Murray N., Quataert E., Thompson T. A., 2010, ApJ, 709, 191
Noguchi M., 1999, ApJ, 514, 77
Ostriker E. C., Shetty R., 2011, ApJ, 731, 41
Perez J., Valenzuela O., Tissera P. B., Michel-Dansac L., 2013,

MNRAS, 436, 259

Roman-Duval J., Jackson J. M., Heyer M., Rathborne J., Simon

R., 2010, ApJ, 723, 492

Somerville R. S., Primack J. R., Faber S. M., 2001, MNRAS, 320,

504

Springel V., 2005, MNRAS, 364, 1105
Stewart K. R., Bullock J. S., Barton E. J., Wechsler R. H., 2009,

ApJ, 702, 1005

Swinbank A. M., et al., 2010, Nature, 464, 733
Tacconi L. J., et al., 2008, ApJ, 680, 246
Tacconi L. J., et al., 2010, Nature, 463, 781
Tacconi L. J., et al., 2013, ApJ, 768, 74
Tamburello V., Mayer L., Shen S., Wadsley J., 2015, MNRAS,

453, 2490

Toomre A., 1964, ApJ, 139, 1217
Wuyts S., et al., 2012, ApJ, 753, 114
van den Bergh S., Abraham R. G., Ellis R. S., Tanvir N. R.,

Santiago B. X., Glazebrook K. G., 1996, AJ, 112, 359

APPENDIX A: CLUMP PROPERTIES IN
ADDITIONAL FIRE SIMULATIONS OF
MASSIVE GALAXIES AT REDSHIFT 2

Simulation m13 is the most massive galaxy in the origi-
nal FIRE suite of simulations that were evolved all the way
to z = 0. These simulations produce many galaxy proper-
ties that match observations across a broad redshift range
(Hopkins et al. 2014). Simulation m13 is the only galaxy
in that sample with mass similar to the mass of observed
clumpy galaxies at high redshift (M∗ ∼ 1010 − 1011 M(cid:12)).
To evolve such massive systems with high resolution down

MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2016)

Clumpy galaxy in the FIRE simulations

15

to z = 0 is computationally demanding, so m13 was run
at a lower resolution than the other original FIRE zoom-in
simulations.

Because our analysis is based on one galaxy, there is a
possibility that this system is a peculiar outlier from the rest
of the population of similar galaxies. To test this, we com-
pare the properties of m13 at z = 2.0 with the properties of a
couple of additional massive galaxies evolved down to z ∼ 2,
using the same code and the same implementation of stel-
lar feedback, but at higher resolution. These galaxies (called
MFz2 A1 and MFz2 A1 ) are part of the MassiveFIRE sam-
ple (Feldmann et al. 2016), a suite of high-resolution simu-
lations of massive galaxies at high-redshift (z (cid:38) 1.7). Their
mass resolution is 16 times better (i.e. particle mass is 16
times smaller) than that of m13. Table A1 contains some of
the basic properties of m13 and the additional galaxies at
z = 2.
These particular simulations were chosen because at
z ∼ 2 they do not show obvious signs of ongoing major merg-
ers and appear to have discy morphologies. The gas surface
densities of these two galaxies at z = 2 are shown in Fig. A1.
Upon further investigation, we noticed that in many z ∼ 2
snapshots these galaxies do not have well-deﬁned gas discs
(unlike m13 which has a substantial gas disc throughout the
redshift range analysed in this work) and their gaseous ma-
terial seems much more erratic than that of m13. Hence, to
make the comparison of clump properties more robust, we
only use snapshots in which the additional simulated galax-
ies have disc-like gas distributions. This criterion however
reduces our sample of ‘good’ snapshots to the total of seven
(four from MFz2 A3 and three from MFz2 A1 ).

We apply the clump-ﬁnding procedure described in Sec-
tion 3 7 to the snapshots of additional simulations and com-
pare the clump properties to those of m13. The resulting
distributions are shown in Fig. A2. Blue histograms show
the average number of clumps per bin for all m13 snapshots
that contain gas clumps. The error bars show the standard
deviation (1σ) for each bin. Results from the seven disc-like
snapshots of MassiveFIRE simulations are shown in red.
Even though we have a fairly small sample of suitable Mas-
siveFIRE snapshots taken over a small redshift range, the
average number of MassiveFIRE clumps per snapshot in
each bin falls within 1σ of the m13 average, suggesting that
clumps properties in the m13 and MassiveFIRE simulations
are similar.

Although we do not include them in Fig. A2, galax-
ies with non-discy gas distributions might be an interesting
topic for future studies in the context of high-redshift clumpy
galaxies. Applying the same analysis as for the snapshots
with disc-like gas morphology, we found that some of these
highly irregular gas distributions break up into gas clumps.
These clumps might be a result of outﬂows and winds, un-
like clumps in discs which most likely form via gravitational

7 We had to slightly modify the way we compute the gas surface
density threshold used in the clump-ﬁnding procedure to account
for higher resolution (i.e. smaller particle mass) of MassiveFIRE
simulations. In order to achieve the surface density threshold val-
ues in the MassiveFIRE snapshots similar to those we use for
m13, in the high-resolution simulations we calculate the thresh-
old using all cells with eight or more gas particles, instead of all
cells with at least one gas particle.

16

A. Oklopˇci´c et al.

Figure A1. Gas surface density in the face-on projection at z ∼ 2 for the two additional simulations, MFz2 A1 on the left and MFz2 A3
on the right panel.

Figure A2. Distribution of clump properties, same as in Fig. 2. Blue histograms show the average number of clumps in each bin,
calculated using all clumps from the m13 simulation. Error bars mark the standard deviation for each bin. The same is shown in red for
clumps in z ∼ 2 MassiveFIRE snapshots with disc-like gas distributions. The mean number of MassiveFIRE clumps in each bin falls
within 1σ of the m13 result.

instability. Preliminary analysis of clumps in non-discy snap-
shots indicate that they might be more gas-dominated com-
pared to clumps found in discs. A detailed investigation into
the properties of clumps in non-discy galaxies, and how they
compare to clumps observed in high-redshift galaxies is left
for future work.

This paper has been typeset from a TEX/LATEX ﬁle prepared by
the author.

MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2016)

