6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
1

 
 
]
n
o
c
-
r
p
u
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
0
8
7
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Proximity eﬀect and Majorana bound states in clean semiconductor nanowires

coupled to disordered superconductors

William S. Cole, Jay D. Sau, S. Das Sarma

Condensed Matter Theory Center and Joint Quantum Institute,

Department of Physics, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA

(Dated: March 15, 2016)

We study a semiconductor wire with strong spin-orbit coupling, which is proximity-coupled
to a superconductor with chemical potential disorder. When tunneling at the semiconductor-
superconductor interface is very weak, it is known that disorder in the superconductor does not
aﬀect the induced superconductivity nor, therefore, the eﬀective topological superconductivity
that emerges above a critical magnetic ﬁeld. We demonstrate nonperturbatively how this result
breaks down with stronger proximity coupling by obtaining the low-energy (i.e., subgap) excita-
tion spectrum through direct numerical diagonalization of an appropriate BdG hamiltonian. With
strong proximity coupling, we ﬁnd that disorder in the parent superconductor suppresses the (non-
topological) induced gap at zero magnetic ﬁeld by disordering the induced pair potential. In the
topological superconducting phase at large magnetic ﬁeld, strong proximity coupling reduces the lo-
calization length of Majorana bound states, such that the induced disorder eliminates the topological
gap while bulk Majorana zero modes emerge, even for short wires.

Topological superconductors (TS), though exceedingly
rare among naturally occuring superconducting materi-
als, can be synthesized through the proximity eﬀect be-
tween a conventional superconductor (SC) and either the
surface of a topological insulator (TI) [1] or a semicon-
ductor (SM) with strong spin-orbit coupling and spin
splitting [2]. Presently, most solid state experiments fol-
low this “recipe” (similar ideas for producing topological
superﬂuids have been proposed for ultracold atomic sys-
tems [3, 4], though we restrict our attention here to solid
state systems only). After several experimental groups
reported promising measurements consistent with TS [5–
10], lingering disagreements between theory and exper-
iment motivated the development of an increasingly so-
phisticated theoretical picture. This has allowed some
controversy to persist as to whether or not TS has truly
been observed.

The earliest proposals for this kind of synthetic TS, fol-
lowing [1], modeled induced superconductivity under the
assumption that a uniform s-wave pair potential may be
added to a non-superconducting hamiltonian (e.g., that
of a TI surface) and that any further eﬀects of coupling
to the SC can be ignored. This approximation turns
out to be qualitatively, and even quantitatively, accu-
rate for “weak” proximity coupling [11, 12]. Explicitly,
if the proximity coupling is characterized by an energy
scale γ, while the parent superconductor gap is ∆sc, then
this model is viable when γ/∆sc (cid:28) 1. Unfortunately for
applications, the induced spectral gap in this regime is
approximately γ, while a large induced gap (relative to
the energy resolution, temperature, etc., of the speciﬁc
experiment) is a necessary requirement for experimen-
tally robust signatures of in-gap modes. An additional
requirement is that the proximity induced gap be hard,
that is, free of sub-induced-gap states that contribute to
low-bias conductance. This in turn demands a uniform

SC-nanowire coupling along the length of the wire [13].

In an eﬀort to fabricate TS devices with large and hard
induced gaps, epitaxial superconductor/semiconductor
hybrids have recently been produced and characterized
in this strong proximity coupling regime [14] (a simi-
lar platform relies on metal-on-superconductor hybrids
which are intrinsically in this regime [15, 16].)
It is,
therefore, worth understanding the signatures of devia-
tions from this simpliﬁed model in the context of the
intense current experimental activity [17] for the labo-
ratory realization of synthetic TS based on proximity-
induced superconductivity. There is a growing consensus
that the consequences of strong proximity coupling are
crucial for accurate theoretical interpretation of experi-
ments.

One such implication, however, has received little at-
tention. To lowest order in γ/∆sc, the induced super-
conductivity is known to be “protected” against disorder
in the parent superconductor [18, 19]. This is a reas-
suring result - even a very dirty parent superconductor
will not introduce disorder into the eﬀective low-energy
TS description of the wire. At intermediate or strong
proximity coupling, though, this perturbative result must
break down. Along with any superconducting correla-
tions, strong coupling to a disordered superconductor
must also give rise to eﬀective disorder in an otherwise
perfectly clean system. This work seeks to characterize
the combined nonperturbative eﬀects of strong proximity
coupling and parent superconductor disorder.

We begin our study with a relatively minimal model
of a single-channel, clean, ballistic nanowire with spin-
orbit coupling and Zeeman splitting with a large g factor
[20, 21]. This wire is coupled through a uniform inter-
face hopping to a conventional s-wave superconducting
bulk (represented by a ribbon, with width much greater
than the SC coherence length). Our goal is to treat

the composite wire and SC system in a nonperturbative,
approximation-free manner to the extent that the wire
is noninteracting and the parent superconductor can be
treated within the BdG mean-ﬁeld approximation. Be-
cause the model is fundamentally quadratic, it seems that
it should be amenable to an exact numerical solution.
However, there are length scale and energy scale consid-
erations that make a full diagonalization unreasonable in
practice, which has generally motivated the use of sim-
pler eﬀective models. For semiconductor/superconductor
hybrids (which are the most experimentally relevant sys-
tems), the Fermi wavelength of electrons in the semicon-
ductor wire is typically of the order of tens of nm, while
the Fermi wavelength of electrons in the superconductor
is a fraction of a nm. A typical superconducting coher-
ence length could be ∼ µm for Aluminum or tens of nm
for Niobium. Additionally, the wire is expected to have a
long mean-free path, while the superconductor mean-free
path is typically signiﬁcantly shorter than the coherence
length.

In the following, we will not pursue a detailed quan-
titative simulation of any existing experiments, rather
a qualitative approach in which this hierarchy of length
scales can be captured without making any additional
approximations that may obscure the eﬀects of induced
disorder. We have overcome the practical limitation of
diagonalizing a suﬃciently large hamiltonian to capture
these widely varying scales by abandoning the goal of
such a full diagonalization outright. We are only inter-
ested in a relatively small subset of states with energy
eigenvalues below (or on the order of) the parent SC gap,
which is itself a much smaller energy scale than the band
structure scales (i.e., chemical potential in the SC and
hopping matrix elements). With this understanding, we
can leverage the sparse matrix structure of the problem
and use the Lanczos method, with the shift-and-invert
scheme appropriate to interior eigenvalue problems, to re-
solve only the part of the spectrum corresponding to the
induced (topological) superconductivity, while using very
large lattices. More details on the model and method of
solution are relegated to the supplementary material.

Our main ﬁndings are the following: (1) We introduce
nonmagnetic (speciﬁcally, chemical potential) disorder in
the SC, ﬁrst without any external magnetic ﬁeld. There
is no intrinsic disorder in the wire. For suﬃciently strong
interface coupling we observe “pair-breaking” behavior in
the induced superconductivity, despite the explicit pres-
ence of time reversal symmetry, in apparent violation of
Anderson’s theorem [22]. We attribute this to a dis-
ordered SC-induced pair potential in the wire.
(2) As
even moderate chemical potential disorder is expected to
be catastrophic for the realization of isolated Majorana
zero modes (MZMs) in the TS phase of the wire [23],
we also consider the combined eﬀect of SC disorder and
an external magnetic ﬁeld. The topological gap is ex-
tremely fragile against disorder at strong proximity cou-

2

FIG. 1.
(Color online) (a) Induced gap (in units of par-
ent superconductor gap) versus interface coupling for several
values of disorder. We plot this over a moderate range of cou-
pling, showing that (i) disorder suppresses the induced gap
substantially at intermediate coupling, γ/∆sc (cid:39) 1, while (ii)
for suﬃciently small γ, all of the curves recover the expected
EG = γ limit (red dashed line) as γ → 0. In this limit the wire
is “protected” from bulk SC disorder. (b) Disorder averaged
and single realization subgap densities of states at interme-
diate coupling (γ/∆sc (cid:39) 1). Each disorder averaged curve is
obtained from the same set of 30 independent samples. Dis-
order in the parent SC broadens the subgap “coherence peak”
and produces bound states below the clean-limit induced gap
(thus suppressing EG).

pling, corresponding to a proliferation of near-zero energy
localized states, which produce a Griﬃths-like singularity
[23] in the density of states. Observation of non-Abelian
statistics would be essentially impossible in this Griﬃths
phase, although some robust signatures of MZMs (e.g.
zero bias conductance peaks) could still be present.

Spectral gap at zero ﬁeld: First, we calculate the
excitation gap EG, which is the smallest eigenvalue of
the full (wire + SC bulk) hamiltonian, as a function of
the interface coupling γ and a dimensionless measure of
the disorder strength d in the superconductor (see sup-
plement).
In the limit of zero disorder and zero mag-
netic ﬁeld, this also coincides with the eﬀective induced
pair potential, although the two scales are otherwise gen-
erally unrelated. Our exact numerical results for EG,
shown in Fig. 1(a) in the absence of spin splitting, agree

0.00.51.01.52.02.53.0interfacecoupling,γ/∆sc0.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.8EG/∆sc(a)d=0d’0.23d’0.92d’2.060.00.20.40.60.81.0ω/∆sc0.00.20.40.60.81.0DOS(ω)[a.u.]0.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9(b)disorder averaged0.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9single realizationqualitatively with a recent self-consistent Born approxi-
mation (SCBA) calculation [24]. We recover the pertur-
bative result [18] that SC disorder does not aﬀect EG
for γ/∆sc (cid:28) 1, however, at stronger coupling disorder
does substantially suppress the induced gap (although it
has no eﬀect on the gap of the parent SC, which is ∆sc
regardless of the disorder by virtue of Anderson’s theo-
rem). Fluctuations around an averaged EG arise from
sampling several independent disorder realizations. Van-
ishing sample-to-sample ﬂuctuations for γ/∆sc (cid:28) 1 fur-
ther conﬁrm the disorder independence of EG in that
weak proximity coupling regime, however, these ﬂuctua-
tions do become increasingly dramatic with disorder at
moderate interface coupling, γ (cid:39) ∆sc.

In Fig. 1(b), we consider a cut at ﬁxed γ = ∆sc
and show characteristic densities of states (averaged over
30 disorder realizations) for several values of d. In the
disorder-free case, the subgap spectrum exhibits a “co-
herence peak” of states accumulating at EG. However,
even for weak disorder, this peak is broadened with the
lowest-lying states shifting to energies well below the
clean EG. These are phenomenological signatures of pair
breaking. As an alternative perspective, we also show the
DOS evaluated for a single disorder realization. Here,
we can see that the high-energy states (that is, near the
parent gap) form a broad continuum, while the lowest
energy states (which determine EG) are energetically iso-
lated and correspondingly spatially localized. Because of
this localization, these states will not contribute to the
wire edge LDOS, probed via the conductance of a normal
metal-superconductor junction, unless by accident they
are within a localization length of the wire edge.

For zero ﬁeld, this suppression of the induced gap and
pair-breaking behavior in the DOS is an initially surpris-
ing result in light of Anderson’s theorem, which suggests
that conventional s-wave superconductors are immune to
disorder that preserves time-reversal symmetry (TRS)
[22]. We indeed ﬁnd that the parent SC gap remains
constant despite the presence of disorder. This apparent
pair breaking eﬀect is limited to the induced supercon-
ductivity in the wire.

It is not universally realized that Anderson’s theorem
actually relies both on TRS and an approximately spa-
tially uniform pair potential ∆(r) (cid:39) ∆. An inhomo-
geneous pair potential also can produce bound states
and give rise to pair breaking, even in the presence of
TRS. In conventional superconductors with a small gap
and a correspondingly large correlation length, a self-
consistent pair potential disorder is energetically costly,
so this physics is not relevant even for very dirty samples
of, say, Aluminum or Niobium on their own. There is no
such penalty for a strongly inhomogeneous induced pair
potential in a hybrid device with no intrinsic attractive
interaction in the semiconductor, as is clear from our nu-
merical calculation despite a spatially uniform wire-SC
coupling and uniform pair potential in the SC. This in-

3

FIG. 2.
(Color online) (a) Induced topological gap versus
interface coupling energy for several values of disorder, with
a bare wire Zeeman energy V Z
nw = 4∆sc, such that the wire
is topological over the entire coupling window in the clean
limit. Compared to Fig. 1, the gap suppression is much more
substantial. The topological gap however also exhibits “pro-
tection” from bulk SC disorder at small γ. The data points
correspond to disorder averaging, while the dashed lines des-
ignate the minimum EG over all sampled disorder realiza-
tions.
(b) Disorder averaged subgap densities of states for
several representative values of disorder at intermediate cou-
pling (γ/∆sc (cid:39) 1), as in Fig. 1. For suﬃciently strong disor-
der, the DOS acquires a long tail such that the disorder av-
eraged DOS closes, even though most individual realizations
have a noticeable gap.

homogeneous proximity-induced pair potential leads to
a “violation” of Anderson’s theorem in the clean wire,
even without any spin-orbit coupling or spin splitting
(i.e. even in the non-topological s-wave SC regime). This
is qualitatively similar to an eﬀective model for pair-
potential disorder studied previously in this context [13],
although the mechanism is quite diﬀerent. Here, the pair-
ing inhomogeneity appears even though the SC-wire in-
terface is perfectly smooth.

Spectral gap in the topological regime: Next, we
can proceed with a similar analysis for the eﬀect of SC
disorder on the subgap spectrum with a very large spin
splitting in the wire, V Z
nw = 4∆sc. In a naive approxi-
mation, topological superconductivity is achieved (in the
clean limit) when V Z
nw > γ [25]. The “topological gap”
cannot be a monotonically increasing function of γ, since

012345interfacecoupling,γ/∆sc0.000.050.100.150.200.250.300.35EG/∆sc(a)d=0d’0.23d’0.92d’2.060.00.20.40.60.81.0ω/∆sc0.00.20.40.60.81.0DOS(ω)[a.u.]0.00.10.20.30.40.5(b)disorder averaged0.00.10.20.30.40.5single realization4

minimum EG has gone essentially to zero. This is the
Griﬃths eﬀect - in this crossover window, any individual
disorder realization will most likely have a comparably
large EG, but in some “rare” disorder conﬁgurations (or,
equivalently, for a suﬃciently long wire) the smallest EG
is exponentially small.
To explore this further, in Fig. 3(a), we track the dis-
order averaged density of states for d (cid:39) 0.92 along this
foot, from γ/∆sc = 1.5 − 3.5. We see that the gap in
the DOS closes and is replaced by a Griﬃths singular-
ity at zero energy, as every disorder realization provides
near-zero energy states.

This Griﬃths eﬀect provides a useful alternative ex-
planation of Fig. 2(a). The probability of the disorder
eﬀectively producing a segment of wire (topological em-
bedded in non-topological or vice versa) with two MZMs
separated by a length L is P (L) ∝ e−cL for some model-
dependent constant c. If such a segment exists, it con-
tributes an excitation of energy E ∝ e−L/ξ, with ξ the
localization length of the MZMs. It has recently been ap-
preciated though that the localization length of MZMs is
strongly renormalized by the proximity coupling [26, 27].
Since ξ ∝ γ−1, the required L to produce a state of some
ﬁxed (low) energy decreases as γ increases. The relative
probability of generating this segment likewise increases,
to the point where one (or more) of these states will re-
liably occur in the ﬁnite system for any particular disor-
der potential. That is, as γ is increased, the destruction
of the topological gap and onset of a zero-energy DOS
singularity, even for a short wire, is driven by the expo-
nentially increasing probability of making a domain that
contributes a near-zero eigenvalue to the spectrum. In
Fig. 3(b), we show the distribution of low-energy eigen-
values in a histogram over several disorder realizations,
demonstrating this exponential dependence and its scal-
ing with γ.

Of course, this has particularly unfortunate conse-
quences for the application of wire edge MZMs in quan-
tum information. Although a zero bias conductance peak
may still arise from MZMs localized near the wire edges,
the system is by no means topologically protected since
there are many other MZMs localized at random spatial
locations along the wire (in fact, the conductance signa-
ture should be similar to that found in [28]).
Indeed,
these bulk low-energy modes will participate in braiding
in an uncontrollable way. An upside, however, is that
this situation cannot persist down to arbitrarily small γ
(again, in a ﬁnite wire), since we eventually return to the
protected regime, where the TS gap is small (∝ γ) but
unaﬀected by SC disorder.

Field-tuned topological phase transition: The
previous section analyzed how disorder and strong prox-
imity coupling conspire to suppress topological supercon-
ductivity. In experiments, however, γ will be ﬁxed, while
the topological phase transition is tuned by an external
magnetic ﬁeld. In Fig. 4 we show the disorder averaged

FIG. 3.
(Color online) (a) Disorder averaged low-energy
DOS for d (cid:39) 0.92 with increasing γ = 1.5 − 3.5∆sc from bot-
tom to top, demonstrating the closure of the gap and eventual
emergence of a singularity at zero-energy. (b) Distribution of
the negative logarithm of low-energy eigenvalues for several
values of coupling. Exponentially small eigenvalues are expo-
nentially rare, however the relative probability of obtaining an
exponentially small eigenvalue increases substantially with γ.

increasing γ in turn reduces the eﬀective spin splitting, so
crossing γ > V Z
nw drives a gap-closing transition back to
the trivial state. In our numerical results, this actually
occurs at a larger value of γ, attributable to including
the small, typically neglected, Zeeman energy in the SC.
In Fig. 2(a), we show the disorder-averaged excitation
gap EG, with the dashed lines here highlighting the min-
imum value of EG over several disorder realizations. (We
have used periodic boundary conditions to avoid the con-
tribution from edge MZMs.) We emphasize that these
are, of course, both length-dependent quantities. In the
limit of an inﬁnite length of wire both of these measures
must coincide and tend to zero. A ﬁnite wire length and
ﬁxed number of disorder samples is, however, reﬂective
of the distribution of gap measurements from a ﬁnite set
of devices in experiment. That the average EG is sub-
stantially larger than the minimum EG suggests that the
ﬁnite system disorder-averaged DOS is characterized by
a long tail of low-energy but unlikely states, as veriﬁed
in Fig. 2(b).

The general fragility of the underlying 1D eﬀective
(topological) p-wave superconductivity against disorder
is well understood [23], however, the speciﬁc dependence
on the proximity coupling is interesting and has not been
studied before. For any value of disorder, at suﬃciently
strong coupling the average EG in Fig. 2(a) vanishes.
That is, EG ∼ 0 regardless of the particular disorder
conﬁguration. However, this closing is not sharp. For
each d, the average EG shows a “foot” well after the

0.20.10.00.10.2ω/∆scDOS(ω)[a.u.](a)123456−log10(ε)020406080100Ncounts(b)γ=3.5γ=3.0γ=2.5γ=2.05

just the edge LDOS. The expected beneﬁts of strong
proximity coupling vanish in the presence of SC disor-
der, even if the wire itself has zero disorder, suggesting
that experiments should aim for the protected limit of
γ (cid:28) ∆sc. This also suggests the optimality of larger gap
(but still BCS-like) parent superconductors, both to in-
crease the overall energy scale and to decrease disorder
eﬀects through the shorter coherence length. While our
results are obtained for a quasi-one-dimensional model,
the general principle extends just as well to synthetic TS
in two dimensional SM-SC hybrids, where the experimen-
tal status is advancing rapidly [29, 30].

This work is supported by Microsoft Q and LPS-MPO-

CMTC.

[1] L. Fu and C. L. Kane, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 096407

(2008).

[2] J. D. Sau, R. M. Lutchyn, S. Tewari, and S. Das Sarma,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 040502 (2010).

[3] C. Zhang, S. Tewari, R. M. Lutchyn, and S. Das Sarma,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 160401 (2008).

[4] M. Sato, Y. Takahashi,

and S. Fujimoto, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 103, 020401 (2009).

[5] V. Mourik, K. Zuo, S. M. Frolov, S. R. Plissard, E. P.
A. M. Bakkers, and L. P. Kouwenhoven, Science 336,
1003 (2012).

[6] A. Das, Y. Ronen, Y. Most, Y. Oreg, M. Heiblum, and

H. Shtrikman, Nat Phys 8, 887 (2012).

[7] M. T. Deng, C. L. Yu, G. Y. Huang, M. Larsson,
P. Caroﬀ, and H. Q. Xu, Nano Letters 12, 6414 (2012).
[8] A. D. K. Finck, D. J. Van Harlingen, P. K. Mohseni,
K. Jung, and X. Li, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 126406 (2013).
[9] H. O. H. Churchill, V. Fatemi, K. Grove-Rasmussen,
M. T. Deng, P. Caroﬀ, H. Q. Xu, and C. M. Marcus,
Phys. Rev. B 87, 241401 (2013).

[10] L. P. Rokhinson, X. Liu, and J. K. Furdyna, Nat Phys

8, 795 (2012).

[11] J. D. Sau, R. M. Lutchyn, S. Tewari, and S. Das Sarma,

Phys. Rev. B 82, 094522 (2010).

[12] T. D. Stanescu, J. D. Sau, R. M. Lutchyn,

and

S. Das Sarma, Phys. Rev. B 81, 241310 (2010).

[13] S. Takei, B. M. Fregoso, H.-Y. Hui, A. M. Lobos, and

S. Das Sarma, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 186803 (2013).

[14] W. Chang, S. M. Albrecht, T. S. Jespersen, F. Kuem-
meth, P. Krogstrup, J. Nyg˚ard, and C. M. Marcus, Nat
Nano 10, 232 (2015).

[15] P. M. R. Brydon, S. Das Sarma, H.-Y. Hui, and J. D.

Sau, Phys. Rev. B 91, 064505 (2015).

[16] S. Nadj-Perge, I. K. Drozdov, J. Li, H. Chen, S. Jeon,
J. Seo, A. H. MacDonald, B. A. Bernevig, and A. Yaz-
dani, Science 346, 602 (2014).

[17] S. M. Albrecht, A. P. Higginbotham, M. Madsen,
F. Kuemmeth, T. S. Jespersen, J. Nyg˚ard, P. Krogstrup,
and C. M. Marcus, Nature 531, 206 (2016).

[18] R. M. Lutchyn, T. D. Stanescu, and S. Das Sarma, Phys.

Rev. B 85, 140513 (2012).

[19] A. C. Potter and P. A. Lee, Phys. Rev. B 84, 059906

(2011).

FIG. 4.
(Color online) Spectral gap versus Zeeman energy in
the nanowire for several values of disorder at ﬁxed intermedi-
ate coupling γ = ∆sc. As in Fig. 2(a), the markers represent
the disorder averaged EG while the dashed lines designate the
minimum EG over all disorder samples. In addition to sub-
stantially suppressing the topological gap at V Z
nw > γ, there
is a large, disorder-induced gapless regime, such that a very
large Zeeman energy is required to reopen the gap.

EG at γ = 1 across this ﬁeld-tuned phase transition. The
dashed lines of Fig. 4 again highlight the minimum EG
over many disorder realizations. On the non-topological
side V Z
nw < γ the gap suppression is rather mild, as in
Fig. 1. While the average EG shows a “rounded” ap-
proach to zero at the transition, the gap in the disorder
averaged DOS, sensitive to the minimum EG, can close
well before the transition. This eﬀect is far more sub-
stantial on the topological side where, for d (cid:39) 2.06, the
nw ∼ 4. In all cases, how-
gapless region persists up to V Z
ever, at suﬃciently large V Z
nw the DOS gap reopens and
any wire edge MZMs are energetically isolated. However,
large ﬁelds are undesirable as they suppress the parent
SC, and also the TS gap is small in the high-ﬁeld regime

going approximately as 1/(cid:112)V Z

nw.

Discussion: We conclude by summarizing the main
message of this work. Strong proximity coupling is exper-
imentally desirable for maximizing the induced pair cor-
relations and spectral gap in the nanowire, however, this
also necessarily eliminates the protection, predicted for
weak coupling, of the induced superconductivity in the
nanowire against SC disorder. Realistically, the parent
SC materials in present experiments are quite disordered
and the resulting induced disorder in the nanowire can
easily be suﬃcient to close the spectral gap and, in par-
ticular, produce an accumulation of low-energy MZMs in
the wire bulk, consistent with previously studied eﬀec-
tive models of disordered semiconductor nanowires. New
to this work is a technique addressing this issue directly,
beyond eﬀective models or Born approximation, which
also characterizes the entire wire spectrum, rather than

0123456wireZeemanenergy,VZnw/∆sc0.00.10.20.30.40.5EG/∆scd=0d’0.23d’0.92d’2.066

[20] R. M. Lutchyn, J. D. Sau, and S. Das Sarma, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 105, 077001 (2010).

[21] Y. Oreg, G. Refael, and F. von Oppen, Phys. Rev. Lett.

105, 177002 (2010).

[22] P. W. Anderson, J. Phys. Chem. Sol. 11, 26 (1959).
[23] O. Motrunich, K. Damle, and D. A. Huse, Phys. Rev. B

63, 224204 (2001).

[24] H.-Y. Hui, J. D. Sau, and S. Das Sarma, Phys. Rev. B

92, 174512 (2015).

[25] D. Chevallier, P. Simon, and C. Bena, Phys. Rev. B 88,

165401 (2013).

[26] S. D. Sarma, H.-Y. Hui, P. M. R. Brydon, and J. D. Sau,

New Journal of Physics 17, 075001 (2015).

[27] Y. Peng, F. Pientka, L. I. Glazman, and F. von Oppen,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 106801 (2015).

[28] K. Flensberg, Phys. Rev. B 82, 180516 (2010).
[29] J. Shabani, M. Kjaergaard, H. J. Suominen, Y. Kim,
F. Nichele, K. Pakrouski, T. Stankevic, R. M. Lutchyn,
P. Krogstrup, R. Feidenhans’l, S. Kraemer, C. Nayak,
M. Troyer, C. M. Marcus, and C. J. Palmstrøm, ArXiv
e-prints (2015), arXiv:1511.01127 [cond-mat.mes-hall].

[30] M. Kjaergaard, F. Nichele, H. J. Suominen, M. P. Nowak,
M. Wimmer, A. R. Akhmerov, J. A. Folk, K. Flensberg,
J. Shabani, C. J. Palmstrøm, and C. M. Marcus, ArXiv
e-prints (2016), arXiv:1603.01852 [cond-mat.mes-hall].

Supplementary material for “Proximity eﬀect and Majorana bound states in clean semiconductor

nanowires coupled to disordered superconductors”

7

MODEL AND METHODS

The hamiltonian naturally decomposes into three parts: H = Hsc + Hnw + Tγ. The superconducting part of the
system is a conventional s-wave superconductor, described by a square lattice BdG hopping model with on-site singlet
pairing, Zeeman spin-splitting, and nonmagnetic potential disorder,

Hsc = −tsc

+

Hnw = −tnw

+

(cid:17)

†
i↓ − ai↑ai↓

(cid:1) ai

i

(cid:17)

+ ∆sc

†
a
i↑a

(cid:88)

†
a
iσajσ + h.c.

(cid:16)
(cid:0)[4tsc − µsc + Wsc(i)] σ0 − EZ
(cid:16)

(cid:88)

†
iσcjσ + h.c.
c

+ αnw

(cid:0)[2tnw − µnw + Wnw(i)] σ0 − EZ

(cid:17)

i

scσx

(cid:16)

†
a
i

(cid:16)

(cid:104)ij(cid:105)σ

(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)

(cid:104)ij(cid:105)σ

i

i

†
i

c

†
c
i+ˆx[iσy]ci + h.c.

(cid:1) ci

nwσx

The nanowire has no intrinsic pairing, but includes a spin-orbit coupling ∝ kxσy,

(cid:17)

(1)

(2)

(cid:88)

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

To complete the model, we take a single chain of Hnw
sites and couple them to a ribbon of Hsc sites through a
nearest-neighbor interface term

Tγ = −tγ

†
c
iσaiσ + h.c.

(3)

iσ

(The lattice indices are assumed the same for the NW
and the ﬁrst chain of SC sites; they are distinguished by
their creation and annihilation operators.)

We are primarily interested in spectral features on the
order ∆sc, so we take that as our natural unit of energy.
In the next section we provide numerical values and jus-
tiﬁcations for all of the model parameters.

For all simulations we consider very large lattices with
Ns sites. Since each site has 4 degrees of freedom (spin
and particle-hole) there will be a total of 4Ns states. This
makes direct diagonalization unfeasible, but the hamilto-
nian is sparse – there will be of order Ns, as opposed
to N 2
s , nonzero matrix elements. Further, we expect
relatively few of the eigenvalues to be on the scale of
the parent gap, as this is, realistically, a small energy
scale (i.e., ∆sc (cid:28) tsc, µsc, tnw). In particular, we primar-
ily wish to describe a region of the spectrum of width
∼ 2∆sc, while the diﬀerence between the largest and
smallest eigenvalues of the full BdG matrix is set by
the nanowire combined particle and hole bandwidth, at
∼ 8tnw, and tnw (cid:29) ∆sc (by two orders of magnitude). To
get the eigenvalues and associated eigenvectors we apply
the Lanczos method with the standard shift-and-invert
scheme appropriate to interior eigenvalue problems, as
implemented in ARPACK.

MODEL PARAMETERS

Superconductor parameters

We begin with the geometry. The superconductor is
discretized on a two-dimensional square lattice, with lat-
tice constant a. The dimensions are then (Lx, Ly) =
(Nxa, Nya), and we use Nx = 1500, Ny = 60.

Next, ∆sc is our unit of energy, and we describe a
realistic separation of scales by taking µsc = 60∆sc. This
in turn determines an appropriate value for tsc – we do
not want the presence of the square lattice to signiﬁcantly
inﬂuence our results, so µsc should be suﬃciently less
than half the bandwidth 8tsc. To ensure that we are in
that limit, we take tsc = µsc/2 = 30∆sc.

In principle this also sets our lattice parameter, since
a =
and the eﬀective mass is realistically sim-
ilar to the bare electron mass. Once ∆sc is given in ab-
solute units then this parameter is determined. Taking

2m∗

sctsc

(cid:113) 2

FIG. 5.
Schematic representation of our lattice model.
The grey region represents a superconducting bulk which is
treated in the BdG formalism; Tγ represents the nearest-
neighbor tunneling matrix elements (tγ) across the supercon-
ductor/semiconductor interface.

a value ∆sc = 0.2 meV appropriate to aluminum, for
example, gives a ∼ 2.5nm, or alternatively Nx = 1500
describes a ∼ 3.75µm wire, which is reasonable.

On the other hand, this simple model does not de-
scribe realistically the Fermi velocity or wavelength of
aluminum strictly speaking, however, the values are ﬁne
for representing the substantial separation in scales with
corresponding values for the semiconductor nanowire, as
discussed in the next subsection.

In both the wire and SC, the Zeeman energy is given
in terms of the applied ﬁeld B as EZ
2 gαµBB. For
a conventional superconductor, we take gsc = 2. The
disorder potentials are Wα(i) ∈ [−wα, wα], i.e., at each
site the potential is a uniformly chosen random value
from the “box” distribution of width 2wα.

α = 1

However, to make better contact with experiment and
previous theoretical work, we need to reparametrize the
SC disorder. The box distribution disorder that we im-
plement microscopically is a convenient and widely used
model, but the associated energy scale in the hamiltonian
does not have any straightforward, experimentally mean-
ingful analog. To make better connection to experiment
and previous theoretical work, we estimate (from Fermi’s
golden rule) the associated mean free path λ in the su-
perconductor for a given parameter w (the subscript sc
is implied in the following),

(cid:18)

(cid:19)−1

λ = vF τ (cid:39) vF

2π

a2ν2D(EF )

w2
3

(4)

We then use the 2D density of states appropriate to the
superconductor (in the normal state) and ignore small
quantitative complications from the underlying square
lattice,

ν2D(E) =

m∗
π2 ⇒ a2ν2D(E) =

1
2πt

,

(5)

vF
Now, using the BCS coherence length ξ =
π∆ (which
corresponds to ∼ 27a for our choice of parameters), we
can write down two dimensionless measures of disor-
der strength in terms of experimentally accessible length
scales:

η1 ≡ ξ
λ

=

1
3π

w2
∆t

η2 ≡ 1
kF λ

=

1
6

w2
µt

(6)

(7)

√

combine them into one dimensionless measure of disor-
der, d =
η1η2. The values used in the paper are given
in the following Table.

8

w/∆

20
40
60

η1
∼1.41
∼5.66
∼12.7

η2

∼0.037
∼0.148
∼0.333

d

∼0.23
∼0.92
∼2.06

Wire parameters

We take a single chain to represent a single chan-
nel semiconductor nanowire, neglecting the higher-energy
sub-bands. Electrons in the wire have a substantially
smaller eﬀective mass than in the SC. Assuming a shared
lattice constant, we account for this qualitatively by set-
ting tnw = 120∆sc > tsc, rather than using a realistic
value of the eﬀective mass. This is because tnw also sets
the scale of ﬁnite size gaps ∼ tnw/N 2
x which we want to
keep small. We choose µnw = 0 both for simplicity and
to reﬂect the desired low carrier density in the wire.

The lattice spin orbit coupling scale is related to the

physical Rashba velocity αR as

αnw =

αR
2a

=

Es.o.tnw, Es.o. =

m∗

nwα2
R
2

(8)

(cid:112)

and we choose a realistic value αnw = 0.05tnw = 6∆sc,
corresponding to Es.o. = 0.3∆sc

For the Zeeman energy, we choose a much larger g-
factor in the wire, gnw = 20. Finally, we only con-
sider cases where the nanowire is completely clean,
Wnw(i) = 0.

Proximity coupling parameter

As with the disorder, to compare with prior work it will
be useful to reparametrize the interface coupling, not as
the microscopic tunneling matrix element tγ directly, but
with an energy scale γ ∝ |tγ|2. The proportionality factor
should have units of energy−1 and arises from the local
density of superconductor states at the interface. We ﬁt
this disorder-dependent proportionality factor to recover
the correct limiting behavior, ∆ind (cid:39) γ for γ (cid:28) ∆.

Since t = 30∆ and µ = 60∆, taking w = t gives
η1 (cid:39) 3.2 and η2 = 1/12. That is, the mean free path
is much shorter than the SC coherence length, but still
much longer than the SC Fermi wavelength. We there-
fore expect disorder in this regime to qualitatively reﬂect
experiments.

Because we have ﬁxed the other parameters, these two
scales are not independent. However, following [24] we

THE SELF-ENERGY MODEL

For completeness, we include a formal description
of the self-energy model - i.e., “integrating out” the
superconductor degrees of freedom. This is a com-
pletely generic approach and is manifestly exact for any
quadratic model. Given a hamiltonian matrix H describ-
ing the entire hybrid system, we can separate the Hilbert

space into blocks describing spatial degrees of freedom in
the wire (A) and the superconductor (B), as in Fig. 5. We
otherwise leave the spatial indices implicit in the matrix
structure of the following equations. The full resolvent
matrix for this hamiltonian is
ω − HA

(cid:33)−1

(cid:32)

T

(9)

G(ω) =

T †

ω − HB

and since we are interested only in the amplitudes for
propagation between points in A, we only need the upper
left block of the inverted matrix. This is easily found to
be

GA(ω) =

ω − HA − T (ω − HB)

(10)

−1 T †(cid:17)−1

(cid:16)

or, deﬁning G(0)

α ≡ (ω − Hα)

−1, we can write

[GA(ω)]−1 = [G(0)A (ω)]−1 − T G(0)B (ω)T †

(11)

which is formally a Dyson equation for the Green’s func-
tion in region A with a self-energy matrix

Σ(ω) ≡ T G(0)B (ω)T †

(12)

To this point no approximations have been made.
However, treating the induced self-energy exactly re-
quires similar computational resources to diagonalizing
the full hamiltonian H. One therefore typically relies
on self-energies with simple analytic forms (i.e., a clean,
inﬁnite superconductor) or introduces some approxima-
tions (i.e., Born approximation to treat disorder in the
superconductor) at this stage.

As an example, invoking the simple, well-justiﬁed, and

frequently used self-energy model

(cid:18) ω + ∆σyτy

(cid:19)

√

∆2 − ω2

Σ(ω) = −γ

the Green’s function for region A can be reorganized, and
to linear order in ω/∆ we have

[GA(ω (cid:28) ∆)]−1 = ω − HA − Σ(ω)

(cid:17)

(cid:39)(cid:16)
= Z−1(cid:16)

1 +

ω − HA + γσyτy
γ
∆
ω − ZHA + ˜∆σyτy

(cid:17)

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

9

where Z = (cid:0)1 + γ

(cid:1)−1

scales associated with HA, while ˜∆ = Zγ = γ∆
induced pair potential.

renormalizes the “bare” energy
γ+∆ is the

∆

In this reduced model, for HA = Hnw, the condition

for opening a topological gap becomes

nw > Z−1(cid:112)(Zµnw)2 + (Zγ)2 =(cid:112)µ2

V Z

nw + γ2

(17)

In other words, because of the downward renormalization
of the bare wire energy scale, the bare Zeeman energy
needs to exceed the coupling, rather than the induced
gap, even in the strong coupling limit where γ (cid:29) ˜∆.

The superconducting coherence length in the nanowire
should be obtained from the renormalized Fermi velocity
and pair potential as

ξ =

(Zvnw
F )
π(Zγ)

=

vnw
F
πγ

(18)

which suggests that the coherence length is independent
of the spectral gap or the pair potential, and can be made
arbitrarily short by increasing γ.

PAIR BREAKING FROM PAIRING

INHOMOGENEITY

That a spatially varying pair potential gives rise to sim-
ilar DOS behavior as magnetic disorder is easily demon-
strated (and shown in [13]), following the Abrikosov-
Gorkov pair breaking formalism. Writing a generalized
disorder potential

ˆU = U1(r)τz + U2(r)S · α + U3(r)σyτy

(19)

where the last term has the same Nambu structure as
the pairing, we note that the diﬀerence between magnetic
and nonmagnetic impurities arises from the fact that

{τz, σyτy} = 0,

[S · α, σyτy] = 0

(20)

for arbitrary S. Obviously [σyτy, σyτy] = 0 as well, so the
two potentials U2, U3 contribute in an identical fashion
to the renormalized Green’s function in Born approxima-
tion.

