Nonlinear and time-resolved optical study of the 112-type iron-based superconductor

parent Ca1−xLaxFeAs2 across its structural phase transition

J. W. Harter,1, 2 H. Chu,2, 3 S. Jiang,4 N. Ni,4 and D. Hsieh1, 2, ∗

1Department of Physics, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125, USA

2Institute for Quantum Information and Matter,

California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125, USA

3Department of Applied Physics, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125, USA

4Department of Physics and Astronomy and California NanoSystems Institute,

University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA

(Dated: March 15, 2016)

The newly discovered 112-type ferropnictide superconductors contain chains of As atoms that
break the tetragonal symmetry between the a and b axes. This feature eliminates the need for
uniaxial strain that is usually required to stabilize large single domains in the electronic nematic
state that exists in the vicinity of magnetic order in the iron-based superconductors. We report de-
tailed structural symmetry measurements of 112-type Ca0.73La0.27FeAs2 using rotational anisotropy
optical second harmonic generation. This technique is complementary to diﬀraction experiments
and enables a precise determination of the point group symmetry of a crystal. By combining our
measurements with density functional theory calculations, we uncover a strong optical second har-
monic response of bulk electric dipole origin from the Fe and Ca 3d-derived states that enables us to
assign C2 as the crystallographic point group. This makes the 112-type materials high-temperature
superconductors without a center of inversion, allowing for the possible mixing of singlet and triplet
Cooper pairs in the superconducting state. We also perform pump-probe transient reﬂectivity ex-
periments that reveal a 4.6 THz phonon mode associated with the out-of-plane motion of As atoms
in the FeAs layers. We do not observe any suppression of the optical second harmonic response or
shift in the phonon frequency upon cooling through the reported monoclinic-to-triclinic transition at
58 K. This allows us to identify C1 as the low-temperature crystallographic point group but suggests
that structural changes induced by long-range magnetic order are subtle and do not signiﬁcantly
aﬀect electronic states near the Fermi level.

PACS numbers: 74.70.Xa, 74.25.Gz, 61.50.Ah, 42.65.Ky

I.

INTRODUCTION

The iron-based superconductors feature an antifer-
romagnetically ordered phase at low chemical doping
that evolves into a superconducting phase upon fur-
ther doping.
In most cases, such as in the 1111- and
122-type materials, the long-range antiferromagnetic or-
der is preceded in temperature by a structural transi-
tion that lowers the lattice symmetry from tetragonal
to orthorhombic1–3. Theoretical and experimental evi-
dence suggests that this intermediate “nematic” phase
is induced by incipient spin ﬂuctuations above the mag-
netic ordering temperature4–6. The electronic nematic
state within this symmetry-broken phase is manifested
through an array of striking behaviors, including a large
in-plane resistivity anisotropy7 and a substantial split-
ting of orthogonal energy bands8, with important ram-
iﬁcations for superconductivity in this class of materi-
als.
In compounds studied thus far, spatially-averaged
signatures of nematic symmetry breaking are obscured
by the presence of orthorhombic domains, compelling re-
searchers to detwin samples via uniaxial strain. How the
strain itself contributes to properties measured this way
is also an active area of research9.

Recently,

iron-based
superconductors—the 112-type materials—have been
discovered. These materials contain zigzag As chains

family

of

a

new

that break the tetragonal symmetry between the a and b
axes, making samples intrinsically detwinned without the
application of uniaxial strain.
In addition, in contrast
to all other known high-temperature superconductors,
the reported crystal structure of the 112-type materials
lacks a center of inversion10. This is noteworthy because
noncentrosymmetric superconductors in the presence of
spin-orbit coupling can show a mixing of spin-singlet and
spin-triplet Cooper pairs11, and spin-orbit coupling is
expected to be non-negligible in the 112-type materials
because of the presence of heavy rare earth atoms.

The

chemical

112-type materials have

formula
Ca1−xRE xFeAs2, where RE is a rare earth atom10,12,13.
In these compounds, substitution of Ca by rare earth
ions is necessary for structural stability; the x = 0 end-
member is unstable and cannot be synthesized. One
study of RE = La has reported an enhancement of an-
tiferromagnetism with increasing x, with a maximum
N´eel transition temperature at x > 0.2414.
In addi-
tion, the highest superconducting critical temperatures,
exceeding 40 K, have only been achieved via a secondary
doping mechanism such as chemical substitution or oﬀ-
stoichiometry15,16. For these reasons, it is argued that
Ca1−xLaxFeAs2 with x ≈ 0.27 should be thought of as
the “parent” of the family, with superconductivity in-
duced by hole or electron doping away from this parent
state17. As illustrated in Figs. 1(a) and 1(b), the crystal

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
1
 
 
]
l
e
-
r
t
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
5
8
7
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

2

FIG. 1: Structure of Ca1−xLaxFeAs2 and experimental setup. (a) Crystal structure of Ca1−xLaxFeAs2 in the monoclinic phase
(T > TS). Zigzag As chains run along the b-axis. The space group of the crystal, P 21 (point group C2), is noncentrosymmetric
and possesses a single symmetry element: a two-fold screw axis along b. (b) Iron atomic planes above and below the structural
transition temperature TS (distortions from a perfect square lattice are exaggerated for clarity). Below TS the crystal loses its
screw axis and becomes triclinic. (c) Simpliﬁed schematic of the RA-SHG experimental setup. A laser beam (800 nm; red),
incident from the left, passes through a dichroic mirror and is focused by a lens onto the sample. The reﬂected second harmonic
(400 nm; blue) is recollimated by the lens and reﬂects oﬀ the mirror into a charge-coupled device (CCD) detector. Additional
optics used for polarization compensation are omitted for clarity but are described in Ref. 22. By rotating the position of
the incident laser beam about the central optical axis, the scattering plane rotates by an angle φ about the sample surface
normal, simultaneously tracing out a circle on the CCD. Bottom right inset shows linear polarizations in (P) and out of (S) the
scattering plane. (d) Electrical resistivity (top) and magnetic susceptibility (bottom) measurements showing clear anomalies
at the structural and magnetic transition temperatures, respectively. (e) Partial and total density of states of CaFeAs2 as
computed by DFT. States near the Fermi level have predominantly Fe 3d character, mixing with Ca 3d orbitals well above
EF . Vertical arrows show the relative scale of the electronic energy bands and the fundamental (ω) and second harmonic (2ω)
photons.

structure of Ca0.73La0.27FeAs2 is unique among the wider
family of iron-based superconductors. Instead of showing
a tetragonal-to-orthorhombic structural phase transition,
the material undergoes a monoclinic-to-triclinic transi-
tion at TS = 58 K followed closely by long range antifer-
romagnetic order at TN = 54 K17. This unusually low
crystalline symmetry is due to the presence of zigzag As
chains running along the b-axis, breaking the symmetry
between the a and b axes and distorting the atoms in the
unit cell into a noncentrosymmetric arrangement. How
the 112-type materials compare with the other iron-based
superconductors—and in particular whether or not an
electronic nematic state exists in the intermediate region
between TS and TN —is an open question. In attempt-
ing to answer such a question, it is imperative to under-
stand the as-yet unknown detailed point group symmetry
changes that occur at the reported monoclinic-to-triclinic
transition.

When employed to determine crystallographic struc-
ture, diﬀraction experiments generally require accurate
measurements of a multitude of Bragg reﬂections and the
analysis of such data through nontrivial structural reﬁne-
ment routines. It can therefore be challenging to detect
minute changes in symmetry from such techniques. Rota-
tional anisotropy second harmonic generation (RA-SHG)
is an alternative method that relies on carefully measur-
ing the tensor optical response of a crystal in order to de-

termine the crystallographic and electronic point group
symmetries of solids18,19. As illustrated in Fig. 1(c), in
this technique an incident laser beam is focused onto a
sample and the intensity of the second harmonic of the
reﬂected light is measured as the angle φ between the
scattering plane and a well-deﬁned direction parallel to
the sample surface is swept. By selecting a combination
of diﬀerent incoming and outgoing light polarizations—
typically linear polarized either in (P) or out of (S) the
scattering plane—the nonzero elements of the nonlinear
optical susceptibility tensor χ can be deduced from the
measured rotational anisotropy.
In the electric dipole
approximation of SHG, χ is a third-rank tensor that re-
lates the incident electric ﬁeld components at frequency
ω to the radiating dipole response P of the material at
frequency 2ω20:

Pi(2ω) ∝ χijkEj(ω)Ek(ω).

(1)

By Neumann’s principle, the symmetries of the crystal
completely determine the susceptibility tensor elements
that are independent and nonzero. As a consequence,
the underlying crystallographic point group symmetries
of the sample under study can be deduced by carefully
measuring the susceptibility tensor. Accordingly, one
can in principle study the symmetry changes across the
monoclinic-to-triclinic transition in Ca1−xLaxFeAs2 us-
ing RA-SHG.

(a)FeAs(Ca    La  )1-xx(d)(b)SampleScatteringPlaneɸinoutPSSPSampleCCDDichroicMirrorLensDOS (states/eV·f.u.)02Energy (eV)468-4-2024TotalFe 3dCa 3dAs 4pabab(c)Monoclinic (T > T )sTriclinic (T < T )sω2ωωccba91.4°3

FIG. 2: RA-SHG data for Ca0.73La0.27FeAs2 taken at 70 K. Raw CCD images for (a) Pin-Pout, (b) Pin-Sout, (c) Sin-Pout, and
(d) Sin-Sout polarization geometries. (e)-(h) Corresponding rotational anisotropy polar plots extracted from the CCD images.
A single intensity scale is maintained across the ﬁgures and relative intensities are accurately depicted. Solid curves show a
global ﬁt to the data assuming a C2 point group, as discussed in the text.

II. EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS

Details concerning the growth and characterization of
Ca1−xLaxFeAs2 single crystals can be found in Ref. 17.
As Fig. 1(d) shows, resistivity and magnetic susceptibil-
ity measurements on the batch of samples used in our
study are consistent with those reported in Ref. 17. To
assess the orbital character of the low-energy electronic
states, density functional theory (DFT) calculations were
performed on the hypothetical compound CaFeAs2 using
the WIEN2k software package21 with the unit cell param-
eters of Ref. 10. Treating La substitution within a rigid
band picture in which one free electron per La atom is
added to the system, the Fermi level (EF ) will shift by
a negligible amount (∼ 0.1 eV) for x ∼ 0.27. RA-SHG
experiments were performed on the (001) crystal cleav-
age plane. Samples were cleaved in air and then immedi-
ately placed in vacuum (pressure below 10−7 Torr) before
measurement. We utilized a RA-SHG setup that greatly
improves the precision and sensitivity of the technique
as compared to previous methods18. In this setup, data
points along a full 360◦ rotation of the scattering plane
are rapidly collected and averaged by sweeping φ at a
rate of ∼ 4 rev/s. The SHG intensity is projected onto
a two-dimensional CCD detector, as shown in Fig. 1(c),
with each angle φ corresponding to a unique ﬁxed posi-
tion along a circle on the CCD. Further details concern-
ing the setup can be found in Ref. 22. The fundamental
beam was generated with a Ti:sapphire regenerative am-
pliﬁer that produces 60 fs optical pulses, broadened to
150 fs at the sample by dispersion, operating at a 10
kHz repetition rate and with an 800 nm center wave-

length (¯hω = 1.5 eV). The laser ﬂuence at the sample
was ∼ 2 mJ/cm2 and the CCD exposure time was 300
s for each image. After subtraction of a constant back-
ground resulting from CCD pixel readout noise, rota-
tional anisotropy curves were extracted from the CCD
images by radially integrating over the annular illumi-
nation region and then binning the data in 6◦ intervals.
We supplement our RA-SHG measurements with pump-
probe transient reﬂectivity experiments, which were car-
ried out using 70 fs pulses from the same 800 nm laser
with a pump ﬂuence of ∼ 4 mJ/cm2 in a crossed linear
polarization geometry.

III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND

DISCUSSION

During SHG, two photons at frequency ω are absorbed
and one photon at frequency 2ω is emitted in a coherent
quantum process between an occupied electronic level
and two unoccupied levels. The total and partial den-
sity of states calculated by DFT for CaFeAs2 is shown
in Fig. 1(e). Like the other iron-based superconductors,
states near EF have dominantly Fe 3d character with
some As 4p hybridization. Interestingly, the density of
states has a large contribution from Ca 3d orbitals start-
ing ∼ 2 eV above EF . Our RA-SHG experiments at
2¯hω = 3 eV will therefore mainly probe states derived
from the Fe and Ca 3d orbitals. Figure 2(a-d) show
raw CCD images taken for Ca0.73La0.27FeAs2 at a sam-
ple temperature of 70 K, where the crystal structure is
monoclinic (T > TS). We measure a very strong SHG
response. This is consistent with a noncentrosymmetric

I(2ω) / I     (2ω)max011LowHighPPPSSPSS(a)(b)(c)(d)PPPSSPSS(e)(f)(g)(h)FitDataϕabpoint group because inversion-symmetric systems forbid
bulk electric dipole SHG and only allow weaker electric
quadrupole and other higher-order responses20. For com-
parison, under the same experimental conditions the bulk
electric quadrupole response of Sr2IrO4 is ∼ 100 times
weaker23. Based on the diﬀraction data of Ref. 10, the
atomic positions in the unit cell of Ca1−xLaxFeAs2 diﬀer
from a centrosymmetric structure by less than 0.024 ˚A,
with the largest deviations from centrosymmetry occur-
ring in the Ca1−xLax planes. This suggests that Ca 3d-
derived states contribute signiﬁcantly to the signal that
we observe, as predicted by our DFT calculations.

To obtain the point group symmetry of the crystal
above TS, we extract rotational anisotropy curves from
the raw CCD images [Fig. 2(e-h)] and ﬁt them to the
square of Eq. 1, taking advantage of the intrinsic per-
mutation symmetry of SHG (χijk = χikj) to reduce
the number of free parameters. Using a nonlinear op-
tical susceptibility tensor constrained by the noncen-
trosymmetric point group C2 established from diﬀraction
measurements10, the only nonzero tensor elements are20:

χxyz = χxzy, χxxy = χxyx, χyzx = χyxz,
χzyz = χzzy, χzxy = χzyx, χyxx, χyyy, χyzz,

where we deﬁne the orthogonal (x, y, z) coordinate sys-
tem with respect to the crystal axes such that the y-axis
is parallel to b and the z-axis is parallel to c, which is
perpendicular to the FeAs planes and the sample sur-
face, as shown in Fig. 1(a).
[We note that the two-fold
rotational symmetry in the crystal is about the b-axis,
not the sample surface normal; we therefore do not ex-
pect, and do not observe, two-fold rotational symmetry
in our RA-SHG patterns.] We use the eight independent
tensor elements as free parameters in a single global ﬁt,
the result of which is displayed in Fig. 2(e-h). Excellent
agreement with the data is achieved with the following
values, normalized so that χyzz = 1:

χyzz ≡ +1.000,
χyxx = −0.788,
χxxy = −0.434,
χzxy = +0.125,

χzyz = −0.841,
χyyy = −0.524,
χxyz = −0.149,
χyzx = +0.066.

We emphasize that
in addition to the rotational
anisotropies, the relative intensities of the diﬀerent polar-
ization geometries are also replicated by the ﬁt. Further-
more, the data are incompatible with an electric dipole
response from any point group of higher symmetry, as
attempts to ﬁt the data with such symmetries do not
show even qualitative agreement with the data. The high
quality of the ﬁts demonstrates that our SHG signal orig-
inates from the bulk electric dipole response of a C2 point
group. This result conﬁrms that the 112-type materials
lack a center of inversion with implications for the poten-
tial mixing of spin-singlet and spin-triplet Cooper pairs
in the superconducting state. We point out that if the
sample were to contain small twin structural domains,

4

with As chains aligned at 90◦ with respect to each other,
we would expect to measure a superposition of the ob-
served RA-SHG patterns and their 90◦-rotated counter-
parts. Instead we observe a single set of patterns with
ﬁxed alignment across multiple locations on the sample
over a length scale of ∼ 0.5 mm, showing that the sample
is macroscopically detwinned and the As zigzag chains
are globally aligned.

FIG. 3:
Temperature dependence of RA-SHG for
Ca0.73La0.27FeAs2. Rotational anisotropy curves for (a) Pin-
Pout, (b) Pin-Sout, (c) Sin-Pout, and (d) Sin-Sout polarization
geometries taken from 30 to 80 K in 10 K steps. Curves are
normalized by their respective average values in order to re-
move the eﬀects of long-term laser power drift. There is no
detectable change in anisotropy with temperature across the
structural phase transition.

We can measure possible changes in point group sym-
metry across the reported monoclinic-to-triclinic struc-
tural transition at TS = 58 K by examining the temper-
ature dependence of the SHG rotational anisotropy. The
two possible point groups for a triclinic lattice are Ci and
C1. The former case has no bulk electric dipole SHG re-
sponse because of the presence of inversion symmetry,
which would lead to a dramatic decrease in SHG inten-
sity. The latter case possesses no point group symmetry
operations other than the identity, making all nonlinear
optical susceptibility tensor elements χijk independent
and nonzero (with intrinsic permutation symmetry still
requisite). Consequently, we write

χ(T ) = χmono + ∆χ(T )

(2)

and associate all changes in the susceptibility tensor at
the transition with the temperature-dependent ∆χ(T )

01010101I(2ω) / I     (2ω)maxϕ0°90°180°270°360°30 K40 K50 K60 K70 K80 K(a) PP(b) PS(c) SP(d) SSterm, which is expected to turn on below TS and en-
codes changes away from the high-temperature suscepti-
bility χmono induced by the lowering of symmetry in the
triclinic phase. The possibility of accurately measuring
such a parameter is enabled by our RA-SHG setup, which
averages over long time scale laser ﬂuctuations that limit
the sensitivity of conventional setups.

FIG. 4: Pump-probe transient reﬂectivity measurements of
Ca0.73La0.27FeAs2, showing the time-resolved relative change
in reﬂectivity after the pump pulse above and below the struc-
tural phase transition. Inset shows the corresponding Fourier
transform (FT) of the reﬂectivity after subtracting a long
timescale exponential response, as discussed in the text. A
phonon resonance at 4.6 THz is present in both measure-
ments.

A comparison of rotational anisotropy curves as a func-
tion of temperature through TS is shown in Fig. 3. We
do not observe any detectable change in the symme-
try of the crystal to within our experimental resolution
[∆I(2ω)/I(2ω) < 5%], placing bounds on the magnitude
of ∆χ(T ) for 800 nm incident light. Despite the absence
of a detectable change in the nonlinear optical suscepti-
bility, we can conclude that the low-temperature point
group is C1 since we do not see a suppression of SHG
intensity expected if the lattice were to acquire inver-
sion symmetry (Ci). The spin order that sets in at TN
should in principle also contribute to a change in the op-
tical susceptibility. Such a change, however, is likely to
be overwhelmed by the strong nonmagnetic contribution
already present above TN .
Indeed, in practice nonlin-
ear optical studies of magnetic structure predominantly
focus on centrosymmetric materials where the nonmag-
netic bulk electric dipole response is zero24. The absence
of an observable change in the SHG rotational anisotropy
suggests that structural changes at the monoclinic-to-
triclinic transition are subtle and do not signiﬁcantly af-
fect the electronic states near the Fermi level that are
probed by SHG.

In addition to RA-SHG measurements, which we
have shown mainly probe the Fe and Ca 3d-derived
states in the crystal, we also present pump-probe tran-
sient reﬂectivity experiments because such measurements
have previously been shown to be sensitive to Raman

5

active phonons involving As atoms in the iron-based
superconductors25. Our results are displayed in Fig. 4.
Immediately after the pump pulse, we observe a drop
in reﬂectivity of order ∆R/R ≈ 4 × 10−3 followed by a
ps-timescale recovery with high-frequency oscillations su-
perimposed. The long timescale behavior is likely due to
the relaxation of hot electrons in the system by exchange
of energy with the lattice. The high-frequency oscilla-
tions, on the other hand, are the result of the coherent
excitation of an optical phonon mode.

To isolate the oscillatory component of the response,
we ﬁt the reﬂectivity for t > 0 to a constant plus a de-
caying exponential (decay time τ ≈ 0.5 ps) and subtract
it from the data. A Fourier transform of the remaining
oscillations produces a frequency power spectrum show-
ing an isolated peak at 4.6 THz (inset of Fig. 4). This
frequency corresponds to a phonon energy of 19 meV. To
date, we are not aware of any Raman spectroscopy stud-
ies of the 112-type materials. The other iron-based super-
conductor families, however, show Raman active phonons
near this energy, including the out-of-plane As A1g mode
at 20 to 25 meV reported in the 111-, 1111-, and 122-type
materials26–30. A comparable time-resolved reﬂectivity
study using an 800 nm pump reported similar oscillations
in Ba(Fe1−xCox)2As2 that they also attributed to the As
A1g mode25, suggesting the mode as a likely candidate
for the reﬂectivity oscillations observed here.
If this is
the case, these vibrational modes of the FeAs planes in
Ca1−xLaxFeAs2 are comparable to those measured in the
other iron-based superconductors despite their diﬀering
crystallographic symmetries. Within our experimental
resolution, we do not observe a change in the phonon
frequency at the monoclinic-to-triclinic structural transi-
tion. This observation suggests that the potential land-
scape of the As atoms does not signiﬁcantly change across
TS and may indicate that the unit cell distortion at the
transition is primarily within the (a, b)-plane [as illus-
trated in Fig. 1(b)] since the phonon mode that we ob-
serve involves strictly out-of-plane motion. Finally, we
note that our detection of only the A1g phonon mode does
not rule out the possible existence of other Raman-active
modes in the frequency range accessible by our experi-
ment. Our results are consistent with Ref. 25, where a
similar transient reﬂectivity experiment on the 122-type
materials also revealed only the A1g mode. They sug-
gested that the phonon excitation mechanism was not
impulsive stimulated Raman scattering (in which all op-
tical phonon modes may be excited), but was instead
either displacive excitation of coherent phonons or elec-
tronic temperature gradient. Either of those mechanisms
would selectively excite only the totally symmetric mode.

IV. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

In conclusion, we have used optical second harmonic
generation and transient reﬂectivity experiments to study
the structural symmetry of the 112-type iron-based su-

Time (ps)012Frequency (THz)2468FT (a.u.)-202ΔR/R (10   )–312 K60 K010-410perconductor parent compound Ca0.73La0.27FeAs2. Our
RA-SHG results, sensitive to the Fe and Ca 3d-derived
states near EF , allow us to unambiguously identify the
crystallographic point group as C2 in the monoclinic
phase and C1 in the triclinic phase. The strong elec-
tric dipole nonlinear optical response highlights the non-
centrosymmetric nature of the crystal, and the observed
alignment of the a and b axes at multiple locations im-
plies intrinsically detwinned samples. Pump-probe tran-
sient reﬂectivity measurements uncover a Raman active
phonon at 4.6 THz associated with the out-of-plane mo-
tion of As atoms. We observe no changes in RA-SHG
or transient reﬂectivity across the monoclinic-to-triclinic
structural transition, showing that it does not signiﬁ-
cantly aﬀect electronic states near the Fermi level and
possibly suggesting a weak coupling between the lattice
and magnetic order. These subtle but compelling proper-
ties make the 112-type compounds a unique and impor-
tant addition to the iron-based superconductor family of
materials.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

6

RA-SHG and transient reﬂectivity experiments were
supported by the U. S. Department of Energy under
award number de-sc0010533.
Instrumentation for the
RA-SHG setup was partially supported by a U. S.
Army Research Oﬃce DURIP award under grant num-
ber W911NF-13-1-0293 and the Alfred P. Sloan Foun-
dation under grant number FG-BR2014-027. D.H. also
acknowledges funding from the Institute for Quantum In-
formation and Matter, an NSF Physics Frontiers Center
(PHY-1125565) with support of the Gordon and Betty
Moore Foundation through grant number GBMF1250.
Work at UCLA was supported by the U.S. Department
of Energy Oﬃce of Basic Energy Sciences under award
number de-sc0011978.

∗ Author to whom correspondence should be addressed.

Email address: dhsieh@caltech.edu

1 M. D. Lumsden and A. D. Christianson, J. Phys.: Con-

dens. Matter 22, 203203 (2010).

2 J. Paglione and R. J. Greene, Nat. Phys. 6, 645 (2010).
3 G. R. Stewart, Rev. Mod. Phys. 83, 1589 (2011).
4 C. Fang, H. Yao, W.-F. Tsai, J. P. Hu, and S. A. Kivelson,

Phys. Rev. B 77, 224509 (2008).

5 S. Nandi, M. G. Kim, A. Kreyssig, R. M. Fernandes, D.
K. Pratt, A. Thaler, N. Ni, S. L. Bud’ko, P. C. Canﬁeld,
J. Schmalian, R. J. McQueeney, and A. I. Goldman, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 104, 057006 (2010).

6 R. M. Fernandes, L. H. VanBebber, S. Bhattacharya, P.
Chandra, V. Keppens, D. Mandrus, M. A. McGuire, B. C.
Sales, A. S. Sefat, and J. Schmalian, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105,
157003 (2010).

7 J.-H. Chu, J. A. Analytis, K. De Greve, P. L. McMahon,
Z. Islam, Y. Yamamoto, and I. R. Fisher, Science 329, 824
(2010).

8 M. Yi, D. Lu, J.-H. Chu, J. A. Analytis, A. P. Sorini, A. F.
Kemper, B. Moritz, S.-K. Mo, R. G. Moore, M. Hashimoto,
W.-S. Lee, Z. Hussain, T. P. Devereaux, I. R. Fisher, and
Z.-X. Shen, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 108, 6878 (2011).
9 H. Man, X. Lu, J. S. Chen, R. Zhang, W. Zhang, H. Luo,
J. Kulda, A. Ivanov, T. Keller, E. Morosan, Q. Si, and P.
Dai, Phys. Rev. B 92, 134521 (2015).

10 N. Katayama, K. Kudo, S. Onari, T. Mizukami, K. Sug-
awara, Y. Sugiyama, Y. Kitahama, K. Iba, K. Fujimura,
N. Nishimoto, M. Nohara, and H. Sawa, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn.
82, 123702 (2013).

11 S. Yip, Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys. 5, 15 (2014).
12 H. Yakita, H. Ogino, T. Okada, A. Yamamoto, K. Kishio,
T. Tohei, Y. Ikuhara, Y. Gotoh, H. Fujihisa, K. Kataoka,
H. Eisaki, and J. Shimoyama, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 136, 846
(2014).

13 A. Sala, H. Yakita, H. Ogino, T. Okada, A. Yamamoto,
K. Kishio, S. Ishida, A. Iyo, H. Eisaki, M. Fujioka, Y.

Takano, M. Putti, and J. Shimoyama, Appl. Phys. Express
7, 073102 (2014).

14 S. Kawasaki, T. Mabuchi, S. Maeda, T. Adachi, T.
Mizukami, K. Kudo, M. Nohara, and G. Q. Zheng, Phys.
Rev. B 92, 180508(R) (2015).

15 K. Kudo, T. Mizukami, Y. Kitahama, D. Mitsuoka, K. Iba,
K. Fujimura, N. Nishimoto, Y. Hiraoka, and M. Nohara,
J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 83, 025001 (2014).

16 W. Zhou, J. Zhuang, F. Yuan, X. Li, X. Xing, Y. Sun, and

Z. Shi, Appl. Phys. Express 7, 063102 (2014).

17 S. Jiang, C. Liu, H. Cao, T. Birol, J. M. Allred, W. Tian,
L. Liu, K. Cho, M. J. Krogstad, J. Ma, K. M. Taddei, M.
A. Tanatar, M. Hoesch, R. Prozorov, S. Rosenkranz, Y. J.
Uemura, G. Kotliar, and N. Ni, Phys. Rev. B 93, 054522
(2016).

18 D. H. Torchinsky, H. Chu, T. Qi, G. Cao, and D. Hsieh,

Rev. Sci. Instrum. 85, 083102 (2014).

19 D. H. Torchinsky, H. Chu, L. Zhao, N. B. Perkins, Y.
Sizyuk, T. Qi, G. Cao, and D. Hsieh, Phys. Rev. Lett.
114, 096404 (2015).

20 R. W. Boyd, Nonlinear optics, 3rd ed. (Academic Press,

2008).

21 P. Blaha, K. Schwarz, G. Madsen, D. Kvasnicka, and J.
Luitz, WIEN2k, An Augmented Plane Wave + Local Or-
bitals Program for Calculating Crystal Properties (Techn.
Universit¨at Wien, Austria, 2001).

22 J. W. Harter, L. Niu, A. J. Woss, and D. Hsieh, Opt. Lett.

40, 4671 (2015).

23 L. Zhao, D. H. Torchinsky, H. Chu, V. Ivanov, R. Lifshitz,
R. Flint, T. Qi, G. Cao, and D. Hsieh, Nat. Phys. 12, 32
(2016).

24 M. Fiebig and R. V. Pisarev, J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 272,

e1607 (2004).

25 B. Mansart, D. Boschetto, A. Savoia, F. Rullier-Albenque,
A. Forget, D. Colson, A. Rousse, and M. Marsi, Phys. Rev.
B 80, 172504 (2009).

26 S. C. Zhao, D. Hou, Y. Wu, T. L. Xia, A. M. Zhang, G.

F. Chen, J. L. Luo, N. L. Wang, J. H. Wei, Z. Y. Lu, and
Q. M. Zhang, Supercond. Sci. Technol. 22, 015017 (2009).
27 L. Zhang, P. F. Guan, D. L. Feng, X. H. Chen, S. S. Xie,
and M. W. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132, 15223 (2010).
28 Y. J. Um, J. T. Park, B. H. Min, Y. J. Song, Y. S. Kwon,
B. Keimer, and M. Le Tacon, Phys. Rev. B 85, 012501

(2012).

29 A. Antal, T. Knoblauch, Y. Singh, P. Gegenwart, D. Wu,

and M. Dressel, Phys. Rev. B 86, 014506 (2012).

30 J. Teng, C. Chen, Y. Xiong, J. Zhang, R. Jin, and E. W.
Plummer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110, 898 (2013).

7

