Towards Using Social Media to Identify Individuals at Risk for Preventable

Chronic Illness

Dane Bell, Daniel Fried, Luwen Huangfu, Mihai Surdeanu, Stephen Kobourov

{dane, dfried, huangfuluwen, msurdeanu, kobourov}@email.arizona.edu

University of Arizona
Tucson, AZ 85721, USA

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
1

 
 
]
L
C
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
4
8
7
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

We describe a strategy for the acquisition of training data necessary to build a social-media-driven early detection system for individuals
at risk for (preventable) type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). The strategy uses a game-like quiz with data and questions acquired
semi-automatically from Twitter. The questions are designed to inspire participant engagement and collect relevant data to train a
public-health model applied to individuals. Prior systems designed to use social media such as Twitter to predict obesity (a risk factor for
T2DM) operate on entire communities such as states, counties, or cities, based on statistics gathered by government agencies. Because
there is considerable variation among individuals within these groups, training data on the individual level would be more effective, but
this data is difﬁcult to acquire. The approach proposed here aims to address this issue. Our strategy has two steps. First, we trained a
random forest classiﬁer on data gathered from (public) Twitter statuses and state-level statistics with state-of-the-art accuracy. We then
converted this classiﬁer into a 20-questions-style quiz and made it available online. In doing so, we achieved high engagement with
individuals that took the quiz, while also building a training set of voluntarily supplied individual-level data for future classiﬁcation.

Keywords: machine learning, obesity detection, social media

1.

Introduction

Data collection in the public health domain is difﬁcult due
to privacy concerns and low engagement. For example,
people seldom engage with surveys that require them to re-
port their height and weight. However, such data is cru-
cial for training automated public health tools, such as al-
gorithms that detect risk for (preventable) type 2 diabetes
mellitus (T2DM, henceforth diabetes). We propose a semi-
automated data collection algorithm for obesity detection
that mitigates these issues with a game-like quiz that is au-
tomatically bootstrapped from a machine-learning model
trained over social media data. The resulting quiz is non-
intrusive, focusing on “fun” questions about food and food
language while avoiding personal questions, which leads to
high engagement.
We believe this idea contributes to addressing one of the
most challenging unsolved public health problems:
the
high rate of chronic illness resulting from modiﬁable risk
factors such as poor diet quality and physical inactiv-
ity.
It is estimated that more than 86 million Americans
over the age of 20 exhibit signs of pre-diabetes, and 70%
of these pre-diabetic individuals will eventually develop
T2DM, a chronic and debilitating disease associated with
heart disease, stroke, blindness, kidney failure, and ampu-
tations (National Center for Health Statistics, 2014; Amer-
ican Diabetes Association and others, 2008). In the United
States, the estimated cost of T2DM rose to $245 billion in
2012 (Association, 2013). Yet, 90% of these individuals at
high risk are not aware of it (Li et al., 2013).
Our long-term goal is to develop tools that automatically
classify overweight individuals (hence at risk for T2DM1)

1In

the CDC diabetes

questionnaire

available

at

http://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/prevention/
pdf/prediabetestest.pdf, overweight BMI contributes
more than half of the points associated with diabetes risk.

using solely public social media information. The advan-
tage of such an effort is that the resulting tool provides
non-intrusive and cost-effective means to detect and warn
at-risk individuals early, before they visit a doctor’s ofﬁce,
and possibly inﬂuence their decision to visit a doctor.
Previous work has demonstrated that intervention by so-
cial media has modest but signiﬁcant success in decreasing
obesity (Ashraﬁan et al., 2014). Furthermore, there is good
evidence that detecting communities at risk using computa-
tional models trained on social media data is possible (Fried
et al., 2014; Culotta, 2014). However, in all cases, classi-
ﬁcation is made on aggregated data from cities, counties,
or states, so these models are not immediately applicable to
the task of classifying individuals.
Our work takes the ﬁrst steps towards transferring a clas-
siﬁcation model that identiﬁes communities that are more
overweight than average to classifying overweight (and
thus at-risk for T2DM) individuals. The contributions of
our work are:
1. We introduce a random-forest (RF) model that classiﬁes
US states as more or less overweight than average using
only 7 decision trees with a maximum depth of 3. Despite
the model’s simplicity, it outperforms Fried et al. (2014)’s
best model by 2% accuracy.
2. Using this model, we introduce a novel semi-automated
process that converts the decision nodes in the RF model
into natural language questions. We then use these ques-
tions to implement a quiz that mimics a 20-questions-like
game. The quiz aims to detect if the person taking it is over-
weight or not based on indirect questions related to food or
use of food-related words. To our knowledge, we are the
ﬁrst to use a semiautomatically generated quiz for data ac-
quisition.
3. We demonstrate that this quiz serves as a non-intrusive

and engaging data collection process for individuals2. The
survey was posted online and evaluated with 945 par-
ticipants, of whom 926 voluntarily provided supplemen-
tal data, such as information necessary to compute the
Body Mass Index (BMI), demographics, and Twitter han-
dle, demonstrating excellent engagement. The random-
forest model backing the survey agreed with self-reported
BMI in 78.7% of cases. More importantly, the differences
prompted a spirited Reddit discussion, again supporting our
hypothesis that this quiz leads to higher participant engage-
ment3.
This initial experiment suggests that it is possible to use
easy-to-access community data to acquire training data on
individuals, which is much more expensive to obtain, yet is
fundamental to building individualized public health tools.
The anonymized data collected from the quiz is publicly
available.

2. Prior work

Previous work has used social media to detect events, in-
cluding monitoring disasters (Sakaki et al., 2010), clus-
tering newsworthy tweets in real-time (McCreadie et al.,
2013; Petrovi´c et al., 2010), and forecasting popularity of
news (Bandari et al., 2012).
Social media has also been used for exploring people’s
opinions towards objects, individuals, organizations and ac-
tivities. For example, Tumasjan et al. (2010) and O’Connor
et al.
(2010) have applied sentiment analysis on tweets
and predicted election results. Hu and Liu (2004) analyzed
restaurant ratings based on online reviews, which contain
both subjective and objective sentences. Golder and Macy
(2011) and Dodds et al. (2011) are interested in the tempo-
ral changes of mood on social media. Mysl´ın et al. (2013)
focus on understanding the perception of emerging tobacco
products by analyzing tweets.
Social media, especially Twitter, has been recently utilized
as a popular source of data for public health monitoring,
such as tracking diseases (Ginsberg et al., 2009; Yom-
Tov et al., 2014; Nascimento et al., 2014; Greene et al.,
2011; Chew and Eysenbach, 2010), mining drug-related
adverse events (Bian et al., 2012), predicting postpartum
psychological changes in new mothers (De Choudhury et
al., 2013), and detecting life satisfaction (Schwartz et al.,
2013) and obesity (Chunara et al., 2013; Cohen-Cole and
Fletcher, 2008; Fernandez-Luque et al., 2011).
We focus our attention on the language of food on social
media to identify overweight communities and individuals.
In the last couple of years, several variants of this prob-
lem have been considered (Fried et al., 2014; Abbar et al.,
2015; Culotta, 2014; Ardehaly and Culotta, 2015). Fried
et al. (2014) collected a large corpus of over three million

2Previous work has demonstrated the high engage-
the most popular
in the New York Times for 2013 was a quiz pre-
their dialect
http://www.nytco.com/

ment of such quizzes.
post
dicting respondents’
such
distinctive
the-new-york-timess-most-visited-content-of-2013

For example,

as

locations by features of
vocabulary:

3http://www.reddit.com/r/SampleSize/comments/3hbiz3/

academic_can_our_automatically_generated/

food-related tweets and use it to predict several popula-
tion characteristics, namely diabetes rate, overweight rate
and political tendency. Generally, they use state-level pop-
ulations, e.g., one of their classiﬁcation tasks is to label
whether a state is more overweight than the national me-
dian. Overweight rate is the percentage of adults whose
Body Mass Index (BMI) is larger than a normal range de-
ﬁned by NIH. The classiﬁcation task is to label whether a
state is more overweight than the national median. Individ-
uals’ tweets are localized at state level as a single instance
to train several classiﬁer models, and the performance of
models is evaluated using leave-one-out cross-validation.
Importantly, Fried et al. (2014) train and test their mod-
els on communities rather than individuals, which limits
the applicability of their approach to individualized public
health.
Abbar et al. (2015) also used aggregated information for
predicting obesity and diabetes statistics. They considered
energy intake based on caloric values in food mentioned on
social media, demographic variables, and social networks.
This paper begins to address individual predictions, based
on the simplifying assumption that all individuals can be
labeled based on the known label of their home county,
e.g., all individuals in an overweight county are overweight,
which is less than ideal. In contrast, our work collects ac-
tual individual information through the survey derived from
community information.
Even though performing classiﬁcation at state or county
granularity tends to be robust and accurate (Fried et al.,
2014), characteristics that are speciﬁc to individuals are
more meaningful and practical. A wave of computational
work on the automatic identiﬁcation of latent attributes
of individuals has recently emerged. Ardehaly and Cu-
lotta (2015) utilize label regularization, a lightly supervised
learning method, to infer latent attributes of individuals,
such as age and ethnicity. Other efforts have focused on
inferring the gender of people on Twitter (Bamman et al.,
2014; Burger et al., 2011) or their location on the basis of
the text in their tweets (Cheng et al., 2010; Eisenstein et al.,
2010). These are exciting approaches, but it is unlikely they
will perform as well as a fully supervised model, which is
the ultimate goal of our work.

3. Method

Fried et al. (2014) showed that states and large cities gen-
erate a considerable number of food-related tweets, which
can be used to infer important information about the re-
spective community, such as overweight status or diabetes
risk. In an initial experiment, we tested this classiﬁer on
the identiﬁcation of overweight individuals. This classiﬁer
did not perform better than chance, likely due to the fact
that individuals have a much sparser social media presence
than entire communities (most tweeters post hundreds of
tweets, not millions, and rarely directly about food). This
convinced us that a realistic public health tool that identi-
ﬁes individuals at risk must be trained on individual data
directly, in order to learn to take advantage of the speciﬁc
signal available.
We describe next the process through which we acquire
such data.

fruit
> 1

yes

no

#cook
> 0

yes

curry
> 1

no

over-
weight

no

not
over-
weight

yes

over-
weight

brunch
> 1

no

not
over-
weight

yes

over-
weight

Figure 2: A decision tree from the random forest classiﬁer
trained using state-level Twitter data.

motivation for this decision was interpretability: as shown
below, decision trees can be easily converted into a series of
if . . . then . . . else . . . statements, which form the building
blocks of the quiz. To minimize the number of questions,
we trained a random forest with 7 trees with maximum
depth of 3, and we ignored tokens that appear fewer than
3 times in the training data. These parameter values were
selected to make the quiz of reasonable length. We aimed
at 20 questions, as in the popular “20 questions” game, in
which one player must guess what object the other is think-
ing of by asking 20 or fewer yes-or-no questions. Further
tuning conﬁrmed that a small number of shallow trees are
most effective in accurately partitioning the state-level data.
To further increase the interpretability of the model, word
and hashtag counts were automatically discretized into
three bins (e.g., infrequent, somewhat frequent, and very
frequent) based on the quantiles of the training data. Fig-
ure 2 illustrates one of the decision trees in the trained ran-
dom forest, with 0 standing for the infrequent, 1 for the
somewhat frequent, and 2 for the very frequent bin of the
corresponding word or hashtag. The ﬁgure highlights that
the tree is immediately interpretable. For example, the left-
most branch indicates that a state is classiﬁed as overweight
if its tweets mention the word “fruit” infrequently or some-
what frequently (f ruit (cid:54)> 1), and the hashtag “#cook” ap-
pears infrequently (#cook (cid:54)> 0).5 A state with infrequent
mention of the word fruit would take the left branch, then
test for the frequency of #cook. If this is not an infrequent
token, then the classiﬁer tests for curry; very frequent use
of curry would lead to an “overweight” classiﬁcation (rela-
tive to the median state).
3.2. Quiz
We next manually converted all decision statements in the
random forest classiﬁer into natural language questions.
The main assumption behind this process is that language
use parallels actual behavior, e.g., a person who talks about
fruit on social media will also eat fruit in real life. This al-
lowed us to produce more intuitive questions, such as How
often do you eat fruit? for the top node in Figure 2, instead

Figure 1: Architecture of the semi-automatic approach for
quiz generation from social media data.

3.1. An interpretable model for community

classiﬁcation

Our main data-collection idea is to use a playful 20-
questions-like survey, automatically generated from a
community-based model, which can be widely deployed to
acquire training data on individuals.
Our approach is summarized in Figure 1. The ﬁrst step is
to develop an interpretable predictive model that identiﬁes
communities that are more overweight than average, in a
way that can be converted into fun, engaging natural lan-
guage questions. To this end, we started with the same set-
tings as Fried et al. (2014): we used the 887,310 tweets they
collected which were localizable to a speciﬁc state and con-
tained at least one relevant hashtag, such as #breakfast
or #dinner. Each state was assigned a binary label (more
or less overweight than the median) by comparing the per-
centage of overweight adults against the median state. For
each state, we extracted features based on unigram (i.e., sin-
gle) words and hashtags from all the above tweets localized
to the corresponding state. To mitigate sparsity, we also in-
cluded topics generated using Latent Dirichlet Allocation
(LDA) (Blei et al., 2003) and all tweets collected by Fried
et al. For example, one of the generated topics contains
words that approximate the standard American diet (e.g.,
chicken, potatoes, cheese, baked, beans, fried, mac), which
has already been shown to correlate with higher overweight
and T2DM rates (Fried et al., 2014).
Unlike Fried et al. (2014), we do not use support vector
machines, but rather a random forest (RF) classiﬁer4. The

4https://code.google.com/p/

fast-random-forest/

5Despite its simplicity, the proposed RF model performs better

than the SVM model of Fried et al. (2014) on the same data.

Location Normalizer LDA Topic Annotator El Paso, Texas TX I love waffles #breakfast TOPIC_97 Solr Database Tweet Text User Metadata Tweet Metadata LDA Topic Normalized Location Tweets + Topics #breakfast, #lunch, #dinner, #snack... Query Filters Tweet Stream Predictive Models State-level overweight rate (using random forests) Twitter handles, locations, height, weight, age, gender Decision Trees Quiz Questions Quiz Generation Data Collection How often do you eat fruit?
→ Practically never, Sometimes, Often
What proportion of your meals are home cooked?
→ None or very little, About half, Most or all
How often do you eat curry?
→ Practically never, Sometimes, Often

(a) affective

Table 1: Example questions derived from the decision
nodes in Figure 2.

(b) hypothesizing

Model
Majority baseline
SVM (Fried et al., 2014)
RF (food + hashtags)
Discretized RF (food + hashtags)

Accuracy
50.89
80.39
82.35
78.43

Table 2: Random forest (RF) classiﬁer performance on
state-level data relative to majority baseline and Fried et
al.
(2014)’s best classiﬁer. We include two versions of
our classiﬁer: the ﬁrst keeps numeric features (e.g., word
counts) as is, whereas the second discretizes numeric fea-
tures to three bins.

of How often do you mention “fruit” in your tweets? Ta-
ble 1 shows the questions and corresponding answers we
used for the three left-most decision nodes in Figure 2.
Conversion to natural language questions was as consistent
as possible. For example, whenever the relevant feature’s
word was a food name x, the question would be formulated
as “How often do you eat x?” with an accompanying pic-
ture of the food named. When the relevant word was not a
food (such as hot or supper) or a topic (such as the cluster
containing diner, bacon, omelette, etc.), the question was
formulated in terms of proportion of meals rather than fre-
quency.
In all, we generated 33 questions that cover all decision
nodes in the random forest classiﬁer. However, when tak-
ing the quiz, each individual participant answered between
12 and 24 questions, depending on their answers and the
corresponding traversal of the decision trees.
This quiz serves to gather training data, which will be used
in future work to train a supervised model for the identiﬁca-
tion of individuals at risk. To our knowledge, this approach
is a novel strategy for quiz generation, and it serves as an
important stepping-stone toward our goal of building indi-
vidualized public health tools driven by social media. With
respect to data retention, we collect (with the permission
of the participants) the following additional data to be used
for future research: height, weight, sex, location, age, and
social media handles for Twitter, Instagram, and Facebook.
We only downloaded public posts using these handles. This
data (speciﬁcally height and weight) is also immediately
used to compute the participant’s BMI, to verify whether
the classiﬁer was correct.

4. Empirical results

4.1. Evaluation of random forest classiﬁer
Table 2 lists the results of our RF classiﬁer on the task
of classifying overweight/not-overweight states. We used

(c) cultural

(d) result-based

(e) constructive criticism

(f) understanding

Figure 4: Some comments of various classes from Reddi-
tors in response to the quiz.

identical experimental settings as (Fried et al., 2014), i.e.,
leave-one-out-cross-validation on the 50 states plus the Dis-
trict of Columbia. The table shows that our best model per-
forms 2% better than the best model of (Fried et al., 2014).
Our second classiﬁer, which used discretized numeric fea-
tures and was the source of the quiz, performed 2% worse,
but it still had acceptable accuracy, nearing 80%. As dis-
cussed earlier, this discretization step was necessary to cre-
ate intelligible Likert-scaled questions (Likert, 1932).
4.2. Quiz response
Many of the 945 participants were highly engaged with the
quiz; 97.9% volunteered demographic information at the
end of the quiz. Many of the participants also left feedback,
some on the Reddit page linking to the quiz, as shown in
Figure 4, some on the quiz page itself, as shown in Table 3.
The feedback comprised mostly comments on the accuracy
(or inaccuracy) of the quiz, comments expressing interest

(a) Age distribution in the NHANES survey and in the
present study’s online quiz.

(b) BMI distribution in the NHANES survey and in the present
study’s online quiz.

(c) Gender distribution in the NHANES survey and in the
present study’s online quiz.

(d) BMI distribution by gender in the present study. Too few
respondents marked a gender of other to allow a density plot.

(e) Geographical distribution of survey respondents world-
wide. Of 625 respondents providing location information,
421 (67.4%) provided a location within the US.

(f) Geographical distribution of survey respondents in the US.

Figure 3: Demographic data from the present study and from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
(NHANES) (National Center for Health Statistics, 2013). Of 945 respondents, 833 provided their age, 864 provided
information for their BMI calculation, 846 provided their gender, and 625 provided their location.

in particular questions, and speculation about how the quiz
was constructed.
It seems that quiz accuracy was not a prerequisite for com-
menting on the quiz. On the contrary, participants were
more likely to comment when their results were inaccurate.
It is unknown whether the up- and down-voting was mo-
tivated by the accuracy of the quiz, but researchers mak-
ing interactive prediction sites may discover that inaccuracy
is in fact more engaging in some regards. The perceived
stigma of obesity was also evident in the reactions to the
quiz, with some negative reactions to a prediction of over-
weight regardless of its accuracy.
For a better understanding of the feedback received, we
performed a post-hoc analysis. Our analysis indicated that

while there were 3 comments made about accuracy out of
744 people with correct predictions (0.40% commented),
and 13 noting incorrect answers out of 201 with incorrect
predictions (6.5% commented). Thus, the participants were
16 times as likely to comment on the quiz’s accuracy if its
prediction was incorrect than they were if it was correct.
We further classiﬁed the Reddit comments received into
six classes: affective comments (7%), hypothesizing com-
ments (17%), cultural comments (17%), result-based com-
ments (53%), constructive criticism (7%), and comments
seeking a greater understanding of the quiz (7%)6, exam-
ples of which can be seen in Figure 4. The comments made

6Numbers sum to more than 100% because of comments with

multiple classes of content.

0.000.020.040.0620406080Age (years)Density0.0000.0250.0500.07520406080Body Mass Index (BMI)DensityDatasetNHANESquiz respondents0.00.10.20.30.40.5NHANESquiz respondentsDatasetProportionGenderfemalemaleother0.0000.0250.0500.07520304050Body Mass Index (BMI)DensityGenderfemalemaleComment type % Example
affective

11 This is awesome. Good luck and

hypothesizing

20

cultural

result-based

demographic

constructive
criticism

5

13

25

26

keep up the great work!
I probably stumped your system be-
cause I love all types of food, but I
know how to portion correctly.
was the question about “supper”
meant to isolate people from the
Midwest?
Surprised that this was correct, I eat
like a fat person. Good job!
Single, Caucasian, eat fast food 3-5
times a week
Further breaking down the options
would be better.

Table 3: Comments submitted with the demographic ques-
tionnaire on the quiz site.

.

on the quiz site also frequently included additional diet and
demographic information.
4.3. Quiz evaluation
We evaluated the quiz on 945 volunteers recruited at the
University of Arizona and on social media, namely Face-
book, Twitter, and Reddit’s SampleSize subreddit7. The
results are summarized in Table 4. We evaluated the ac-
curacy of the random forest classiﬁer by comparing each
individual’s actual BMI, based on the self-reported height
and weight, to the classiﬁer’s prediction. The cutoff bound-
ary BMI for both training and testing was 28.7 – the aver-
age US adult BMI according to National Center for Health
Statistics (2013). This ﬁgure is above the NIH’s deﬁnition
of overweight (BMI ≥ 25) because the average US resident
is overweight by that standard. These results are promis-
ing: the quiz had a 78.7% accuracy for the classiﬁcation of
individuals into the two classes: higher or lower BMI than
the average US resident.

5. Discussion

It is important to note that the limitations of the sample are
considerable: as shown in Table 4 and Figure 3, our ini-
tial sample is taller, lighter, and younger than the average
US adult, leading to a biased test sample. The strong bias
of the sample means that the trivial baseline of predicting
no participants to be over BMI 28.7 would have accuracy
82.3%.
Moreover, while the overall accuracy of the random forest
backing the quiz was 78.7%, the accuracy on participants
who reported a BMI over 28.7 was only 16.0%. Our con-
jecture is that, in general, participants who are overweight
are more reluctant to mention food- and health-related top-
ics on social media, which led to lower-quality training data
for this group, and the distribution of BMI for participants
classiﬁed as under 28.7 was not signiﬁcantly different from
that of those classiﬁed as over 28.7.

7http://www.reddit.com/r/SampleSize/

Quiz accuracy
Accuracy, participants BMI ≥ 28.7
Accuracy, participants BMI < 28.7
Proportion, participants BMI ≥ 28.7
Proportion, participants BMI < 28.7
Mean participant weight
Mean US adult weight
Mean participant height
Mean US adult height
Mean participant BMI
Mean US adult BMI
Mean participant age
Mean US adult age

78.7%
16.0%
92.2%
17.7%
82.3%
74.4 kg (164 lbs)
80.3 kg (177 lbs)
173 cm (5 ft 8 in)
167 cm (5 ft 6 in)
24.9
28.6
26.1 years
47.1 years

Table 4: Results of the quiz evaluation, together with statis-
tics of the adult participants (18 or older) who took the test,
compared against average values in the US (National Cen-
ter for Health Statistics, 2014).

Far from being a problem for this data collection technique,
however, the failure of transfer from state-level training to
individual-level testing underscores the need for the data
collection itself. No existing system has been able to auto-
matically predict individuals’ weight after training on state-
level data.

6. Conclusions and future work

We described a strategy for the acquisition of training data
necessary to build a social-media-driven early detection
system for individuals at risk for T2DM, using a game-like
quiz with data and questions acquired from Twitter. Our
approach has proven to inspire considerable participant en-
gagement and, in so doing, provide relevant data to train a
public-health model applied to individuals.
First, we built a random forest classiﬁer that improves on
the state of the art for the classiﬁcation of overweight com-
munities (in particular US states). We then use this as the
basis of a 20-questions-style quiz to classify individuals.
Early results are promising: 78.7% accuracy, but the sam-
ple does not represent the general population well, and the
quiz performs poorly on classifying overweight individuals.
The most immediate goal is to obtain a large respondent
sample that is more representative of US adults, and to ex-
tend the information gathered to longitudinal data. Based
on the high engagement observed in this initial experiment,
we hope that a large dataset can be constructed at minimal
cost. This dataset will be used to develop a public-health
tool capable of non-intrusively identifying at-risk individu-
als by monitoring public social-media streams.
Our long term goal is to use this data to train a supervised
classiﬁer for the identiﬁcation of individuals at risk for type
2 diabetes. The dataset collected through the quiz described
here is sufﬁcient for this goal: it includes necessary infor-
mation for the calculation of BMI (weight, height), demo-
graphic information, and social media handles. We plan
to explore (public) multi-modal social media information:
natural language, posted pictures, etc. From this, we will

extract and use preventable risk factors, such as poor diet
or lack and perceived lack of physical activity. The data
will be made available to interested researchers. There is
great potential for further improvements of the model by
adding calorie count estimates for food pictures associated
with individual tweets, by incorporating individual-level
demographic features such as gender and age, and by us-
ing words and hashtags about physical activities.

7. Resources

• The software used to generate and test the random
forest classiﬁer is open-source at http://github.
com/clulab/twitter4food/

• The quiz is available from the project’s main
page at http://sites.google.com/site/
twitter4food/

• Anonymized quiz results are available at http://
git.io/vZY5U. They detail the responses of each
participant to the quiz questions, the system’s predic-
tion, its accuracy, and the participants’ height, weight,
location, age, gender, and (anonymized) comments.

8. References

Abbar, S., Mejova, Y., and Weber, I. (2015). You tweet
what you eat: Studying food consumption through Twit-
ter. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Confer-
ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’15,
pages 3197–3206, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

American Diabetes Association and others. (2008). Diag-
nosis and classiﬁcation of diabetes mellitus. Diabetes
Care, 31(Supplement 1):S55–S60.

Ardehaly, E. and Culotta, A. (2015). Inferring latent at-
tributes of Twitter users with label regularization.
In
North American Chapter of the Association of Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Ashraﬁan, H., Toma, T., Harling, L., Kerr, K., Athanasiou,
T., and Darzi, A. (2014). Social networking strategies
that aim to reduce obesity have achieved signiﬁcant al-
though modest results. Health Affairs, 33(9):1641–1647.
Association, A. D. (2013). Economic costs of diabetes in

the US in 2012. Diabetes care, 36(4):1033–1046.

Bamman, D., Eisenstein, J., and Schnoebelen, T. (2014).
Gender identity and lexical variation in social media.
Journal of Sociolinguistics, 18(2):135–160.

Bandari, R., Asur, S., and Huberman, B. A. (2012). The
pulse of news in social media: Forecasting popularity.
CoRR, abs/1202.0332.

Bian, J., Topaloglu, U., and Yu, F. (2012). Towards large-
scale Twitter mining for drug-related adverse events. In
Proceedings of CIKM Workshop on SHB, pages 25–32.
Blei, D., Ng, A., and Jordan, M. (2003). Latent dirich-
let allocation. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
3:993–1022.

Burger, J. D., Henderson, J., Kim, G., and Zarrella, G.
(2011). Discriminating gender on Twitter. In Proceed-
ings of EMNLP, pages 1301–1309.

Cheng, Z., Caverlee, J., and Lee, K. (2010). You are where
you tweet: A content-based approach to geo-locating
Twitter users. In Proceedings of CIKM, pages 759–768.

Chew, C. and Eysenbach, G. (2010). Pandemics in the age
of Twitter: content analysis of Tweets during the 2009
H1N1 outbreak. PloS one, 5(11).

Chunara, R., Bouton, L., Ayers, J. W., and Brown-stein,
J. S. (2013). Assessing the online social environment
for surveillance of obesity prevalence. PloS one, 8(4).

Cohen-Cole, E. and Fletcher, J. M.

Is obesity
contagious? Social networks vs. environmental factors
in the obesity epidemic. Journal of Health Economics,
27(5):1382–1387.

(2008).

Culotta, A.

(2014). Estimating county health statistics
with twitter. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 1335–
1344.

De Choudhury, M., Counts, S., and Horvitz, E. (2013).
Predicting postpartum changes in emotion and behavior
via social media. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Confer-
ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’13,
pages 3267–3276, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Dodds, P. S., Harris, K. D., Kloumann, I. M., Bliss, C. A.,
and Danforth, C. M. (2011). Temporal patterns of hap-
piness and information in a global social network: Hedo-
nometrics and Twitter. PloS one, 6(12):e26752.

Eisenstein, J., O’Connor, B., Smith, N. A., and Xing, E. P.
(2010). A latent variable model for geographic lexical
variation. In Proceedings of EMNLP, pages 1277–1287.
Fernandez-Luque, L., Karlsen, R., and Bonander, J.
(2011). Review of extracting information from the So-
cial Web for health personalization. Journal of Medical
Internet Research, 13(1):1382–1387.

Fried, D., Surdeanu, M., Kobourov, S., Hingle, M., and
Bell, D. (2014). Analyzing the language of food on so-
cial media. In 2014 IEEE International Conference on
Big Data (Big Data), pages 778–783. IEEE.

Ginsberg, J., Mohebbi, M. H., Patel, R. S., Brammer, L.,
Smolinski, M. S., and Brilliant, L. (2009). Detecting in-
ﬂuenza epidemics using search engine query data. Na-
ture, 457(7232):1012–1014.

Golder, S. A. and Macy, M. W. (2011). Diurnal and sea-
sonal mood vary with work, sleep, and daylength across
diverse cultures. Science, 333(6051):1878–1881.

Greene, J. A., Choudhry, N. K., Kilabuk, E., and Shrank,
W. H.
(2011). Online social networking by patients
with diabetes: a qualitative evaluation of communication
with Facebook. Journal of General Internal Medicine,
26(3):287–292.

(2004). Mining and summarizing
Hu, M. and Liu, B.
In Proceedings of the Tenth ACM
customer reviews.
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Dis-
covery and Data Mining, KDD ’04, pages 168–177, New
York, NY, USA. ACM.

Li, Y., Geiss, L. S., Burrows, N. R., Rolka, D. B., and Al-
bright, A. (2013). Awareness of prediabetes — United
States, 2005–2010. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Re-
port, 62(11):209–212.

Likert, R. (1932). A technique for the measurement of at-

titudes. Archives of psychology, 140:1–55.

McCreadie, R., Macdonald, C., Ounis, I., Osborne, M., and
Petrovi´c, S. (2013). Scalable distributed event detection

for Twitter. In International Conference on Big Data,
2013, pages 543–549. IEEE.

Mysl´ın, M., Zhu, S.-H., Chapman, W., and Conway, M.
(2013). Using Twitter to examine smoking behavior and
perceptions of emerging tobacco products. J Med Inter-
net Res, 15(8):e174, Aug.

Nascimento, T. D., DosSantos, M. F., Danciu, T., DeBoer,
M., Holsbeeck, H., Lucas, S. R., Aiello, C., Khatib, L.,
Bender, M. A., Zubieta, J., and DaSilva, A. F. (2014).
Real-time sharing and expression of migraine headache
suffering on Twitter: A cross-sectional infodemiology
study. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 16(4).

National Center

for Health Statistics.

(2013). Na-
tional Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 2011–
2012. http://wwwn.cdc.gov/nchs/nhanes/
search/nhanes11_12.aspx.

for Health
Diabetes

Statistics.
Statistics

(2014).
Report.

National Center

National

2014
http://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/data/
statistics/2014StatisticsReport.html.

O’Connor, B., Balasubramanyan, R., Routledge, B. R., and
(2010). From tweets to polls: Linking
Smith, N. A.
text sentiment to public opinion time series. ICWSM,
11(122-129):1–2.

Petrovi´c, S., Osborne, M., and Lavrenko, V.

(2010).
Streaming ﬁrst story detection with application to Twit-
ter. In Human Language Technologies: The 2010 Annual
Conference of the North American Chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, HLT ’10, pages
181–189, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Sakaki, T., Okazaki, M., and Matsuo, Y. (2010). Earth-
quake shakes Twitter users: Real-time event detection by
social sensors. In Proceedings of the 19th International
Conference on World Wide Web, WWW ’10, pages 851–
860, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Schwartz, H. A., Eichstaedt, J. C., Kern, M. L., Dzi-
urzynski, L., Agrawal, M., Park, G. J., Lakshmikanth,
S. K., Jha, S., Seligman, M. E. P., Ungar, L., and Lu-
cas, R. E. (2013). Characterizing geographic variation
in well-being using tweets. In ICWSM.

Tumasjan, A., Sprenger, T. O., Sandner, P. G., and
Welpe, I. M. (2010). Predicting elections with Twitter:
What 140 characters reveal about political sentiment. In
Fourth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and
Social Media.

Yom-Tov, E., Borsa, D., Cox, I. J., and McKendry, R. A.
(2014). Detecting disease outbreaks in mass gatherings
using Internet data. Journal of Medical Internet Re-
search, 16(6).

