Direct-Digital-Drive Microring Modulator

Yossef Ehrlichman, Member, IEEE, Ofer Amrani, Member, IEEE Shlomo Ruschin, Member, OSA

1

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
1

 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
2
0
8
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—The method of Direct Digital Drive is applied to a
microring resonator. The microring resonator is thus controlled
by a segmented set of electrodes each of which is driven by
binary (digital) signal. Digital linearization is performed with
the aid of digital memory lookup table. The method is applied
to a single microring modulator to provide an M-bit digital-to-
analog converter (DAC), which may also be viewed as an M-level
pulse amplitude modulator (M-PAM). It is shown, by means of
simulation, that a 4-bit DAC can achieve an effective number
of bits (ENOB) of 3.74bits. Applying the same method for two
rings, enables the generation of two-dimensional optical M-QAM
signals. It is shown, by means of simulation, that a 16-QAM
modulator achieves an EVM better than -30dB.

Index Terms—Micoring modulators, optical digital-to-analog

converter, optical M-PAM, optical M-QAM.

I. INTRODUCTION

A TTEMPTING to apply photonic technologies to data

processing has been taking place for several decades. Yet,
their implementation in practical systems remained limited
and failed to penetrate practical processors. Many demon-
strated optical devices are still oversized, were based on
exotic materials and needed rather complicated interfacing
with other electronic components. This paper takes advantage
of recent developments in Silicon microphotonics and novel
interfacing schemes in order to realize photonic components
for fast communication and signal processing. In addition to
its practical potential, as presented, the ideas exposed herein
present basic physical and mathematical challenges.
Microring modulators were proposed and demonstrated for
analog signal modulation and for simple digital modulation,
such as On-Off-Keying (OOK). Recently, microring modula-
tors were investigated for advanced digital modulation formats
such as PAM [1] [2] [3], QPSK [4] and even QAM [5] [6].
All the works mentioned above ([6] excluded) use an analog
voltage signal
to drive the modulator. The application of
analog signals usually calls for mediating electronic circuitry,
such as digital-to-analog conversion. In the current work
we promote the application of the, so-called, Direct Digital
Drive (DDD)
[7] method for use with microring resonators.
DDD allows the utilization of only two voltage levels directly
on the photonic device;
it makes the need for mediating
devices, such as electrical digital-to-analog converter, unnec-
essary.
In the ﬁrst part of this work we present a design of an N-bit
digital-to-analog converter. A digital-to-analog converter is a
device that converts an N-bit digital word to a corresponding
analog (voltage) representation. A 4-bit DAC produces 16,
equally spaced analog levels and can therefore be viewed as (a
digitally controlled) 16-PAM modulator. In the second part of
this work we extended a previous work [5] for generating M-
QAM signals with microring modulators by utilizing the DDD

approach. An all-digital M-QAM modulator is thus presented.

II. MULTI-ELECTRODE MICRORING DIGITAL-TO-ANALOG

CONVERTER/M-PAM MODULATOR

As an example, consider the 4-bit optical DAC based on a
microring modulator, illustrated in Figure 1. The device basic
layout is similar to previously published microring resonators.
A CW light of wavelength λ and intensity Iin is coupled
from the waveguide to the microring. The coupling coefﬁcient
between the waveguide and the microring is denoted by t and
the loss per round trip inside the microring is a. The light
inside the microring is modulated by several, in this example
M = 5, independent phase shifter segments (electrodes). The
phase shifter can be implemented as reversed-bias pn-diode or
as zig-zag pn diode, etc. Hereinafter, each phase shifter will
be referred to as an electrode.
At its electrical input, the device accepts an N = 4 bits
digital word, denoted Di, where i = {1 . . . 2N}. The input
word is mapped onto each of the 5 electrodes via the digital-to-
digital converter (DDC). In essence, the DDC converts a 4-bit
input to a 5-bit output, which, in turn, control the 5 electrodes.
Note that each electrode is driven by one of two voltage levels,
0 and V1, representing binary 0 and 1. Described as such, the
DDC is basically a lookup-table that can be realized by a (high
speed) digital memory.
An optical modulator is typically characterized by the
product Vπ · L where Vπ is the voltage whose application
to an electrode of length L,
induces a phase shift of π.
Without loss of generality, we set L = 2πR1, i.e. as the
circumference of the microring, where R1 is the radius of the
ring. Let j, denote the index of the electrodes (in this example
j = 1 . . . 5). Assume that the length of each electrode is given

by: Lj = L · 2−j. Note that L >(cid:80) Lj.

If a voltage V1 is applied to electrode j, the induced phase

shift φj will be:

φj = k

2π
λ

∆nbjLj,

(1)

where ∆n is the effective refractive index modulation due to
the applied voltage V1 on phase shifter j, k is an empirical
constant that accounts for both the optical conﬁnement and
the coefﬁcient of the charge density induced refractive index
change. The parameter bj is a binary quantity that indicates
whether voltage V1 was applied to phase shifter j. The
dependance between ∆n and the applied voltage V1 is known
to be a nonlinear function, f (V1). The exact relation depends
on the phase shifter design. The intensity transmission of the
DDD multi-electrode microring structure can be written as:

(cid:16)(cid:80)M
(cid:16)(cid:80)M

(cid:17)

(cid:17)

Iout = Iin

a2 − 2ta · cos
1 − 2ta · cos

j=1 bijLj

+ t2
1

j=1 bijLj

+ t2a2

,

(2)

where a binary matrix Bi = {bij} of dimensions M ×N holds
the mapping of the N = 4-bit input word Di on the M = 5
electrodes - evidently, a highly non-linear transmission.

2

Fig. 2. The output intensity of a microring resonator for phase shifts between
0 and π.

Fig. 1. Schematic illustation of a multi-electrode microring DA.

A. M-PAM: the design process

To maximize the output dynamic range (DR), the microring
resonator should be in critical coupling, a = t. This will allow
the smallest possible output intensity level to approach 0.

Figure 2 shows the output intensity of a microring resonator
for phase shifts between 0 and π. Phase shifts greater than
about 0.5[rad] contribute very little to the output dynamic
range because of the high nonlinearity of the microring mod-
ulator. Hence, the voltage V1 will be set so as to produce
the intensity Iφ1 = Iin − ∆I. The quantity ∆I is chosen
as a tradeoff between (best achievable) linearity and output
dynamic range. Smaller values of ∆I can increase the output
dynamic range, but also will reduce the linearity of the device,
unless additional electrodes are added. A dynamic range of
about 90% of the total available DR will keep the electrode
count low and close to the input bit length. In this example V1
was set to induce a phase shift that leads to an output dynamic
range of about 93%.

Figure 3 shows the output intensity of a 4-bit DAC (16
levels on a straight line), based on a microring modulator with
5 electrodes. Figure 4 shows a sinewave generated with the
proposed device. The linearity of the DAC can be quantiﬁed by
standard ﬁgure of merits: its Differential Non-Linearity (DNL)
is 0.2 bits; the Integral Non-Linearity (INL) is 0.4bits and the
Effective Number of Bits (ENOB) is 3.74bits.

III. MULTI-ELECTRODE MICRORING M-QAM

MODULATOR

In the previous sections we presented the design of a
DAC, which is equivalent to a PAM modulator, by using
a single microring modulator with several electrodes driven
by a digital signal. In this section we use a two microring
conﬁguration to generate M-QAM (two-dimensional) signal
constellations. Quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM) is a
modulation scheme that conveys data by means of modulating
both the amplitude and the phase of a sinusoid carrier thus
providing spectral efﬁciencies in excess of 2bit/symbol. In
previous work [5], we introduced a method for generating

Fig. 3. The output intensity of an ideal output of a 4-bit DAC (16 levels on
a straight line) compared to a DDD microring modulator with 5 electrodes.

optical M-QAM signals by using two mutually decoupled
microring modulators. In this conﬁguration, one ring was used
to generate the amplitude of the desired signal (perturbed by
some deterministic phase shift), while the second ring was
used to complement the phase required to obtain the desired
complex signal. The electronic input to this modulator was an
analog voltage.

Herein, in order to drive the two rings with digital (two-
level) signals, we split the electrode into segments. An M-
QAM modulator is schematically depicted in Figure 5.

A. M-QAM: the design process

The design process is similar to the one described in Section
II-A except that we now have to generate complex signals
rather than intensity levels only. The role of the modulator
is to generate a speciﬁc constellation of points consisting of
M distinct complex points (also refereed to as signals); the
constellation points can be generally formulated as follows:

0 ≤ θi ≤ 2π,

(3)

ri > 0,

i = 1, . . . , 2M .

si = riejθi,
The proposed modulator is described by means of an ex-
ample. Figure 5 depicts a 16QAM optical modulator based on
two micro-ring resonators equipped with multiple electrodes.
The electrodes in this example are divided between the two
micro-rings: 7 electrodes on each micro-ring.

00.511.522.5300.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9Iout[a.u.]φ[rad]0000010010001100111100.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91DiIout[a.u.]Target lineIout3

where Ein denotes the amplitude of the optical ﬁeld entering
the modulator.

The geometrical structure and the loss and coupling param-
eters are set in a similar manner to the description in [5]. The
ﬁrst ring is designed to work in critical coupling for which
t = a in order to generate the largest span of amplitudes.
The second microring is designed to work in under-coupling
regime, t < a,
to act as a phase shifter with minimum
amplitude loss. By applying all possible combinations of
the digital words Bi, a ﬁnite pool of points, of maximum
cardinality 2N1+N2, can be generated.

As an example, a pool of (green) points is shown in Figure 6
for N1 = N2 = 7. From this large pool of possible points,
one can choose a ﬁnite set of points that form a constellation
for digital optical communications, 16-QAM in this example.
An ideal set of points that constitute a 16-QAM constellation,
as suggested by Eq. 3 with M = 4, is portrayed by the red
triangles in Figure 6. Out of the green pool of 27+7 signal
points, we ﬁrst select the 16 signals that provide the best
match for the ideal 16 points. The selected set of best points
amounts to a mapping between 16 Di digital input values and
the corresponding Bi’s, and is executed by the DDC.

Fig. 6.

16QAM with N1 = N2 = 7. The EVM obtained is −30.6dB.

As can be seen in the ﬁgure, the selected points are not iden-
tical to the ideal points, thus producing an error. To quantify
this error, we employ the Error Vector Magnitude (EVM) [5]
measure. For the above example the EVM is −30.6dB. Note
that the EVM can be further reduced by increasing the number
of electrodes in each microring. Such an increase will allow
generating a denser pool of points from which one can select
a desired set of constellation points with higher accuracy.
Table I presents the obtained EVM for various constellations
and varying number of electrodes. It shows the EVM for
16-QAM with 6 + 6 and 7 + 7 electrodes. The difference
between these conﬁgurations is 9dB. It can be seen that the
inherent nonlineariy of the microring leads to a more involved
implementation of M-QAM modulators compared to M-PAM
modulators. The table also presents results for 64-QAM and
256QAM. While for 64QAM we achieve EVM better than -
30dB with 7+7 electrode conﬁguration, 256QAM requires one
additional electrode in the amplitude-related modulator ring to

Fig. 4. A sinewave generated by the 4-bit DAC of Fig. 1

16QAM Modulator based on two, multi-electrode, DDD micro-ring
Fig. 5.
resonators. A 4-bit digital input, Di, is mapped by the DDC to a 14-bit output
that drives the 14 segmented electrodes. The electrode lengths (per micro-
ring) follow a divide-by-two sequence. The DDC, shown here for exposition
purposes as two separate boxes, is actually a single memory device.

As input, this QAM modulator accepts a 4-bit digital word,
denoted Di. The 4-bit input word is mapped onto each of the
14 electrodes via the DDC. Thus, each electrode is driven by
one of two voltage levels, 0 or v, representing binary 0 and
1, respectively.

1 , L(1)

2 , ...L(1)
N1

2 , ...L(2)
N2

More generally, Let L(1) = (L(1)
1 , L(2)

) and L(2) =
(L(2)
) be two vectors of dimensions N1 and N2,
whose elements correspond to the lengths of the electrodes of
the ﬁrst microring and the second microring, respectively. Let
B(1) be a binary M × N1 matrix. Row i of B(1), B(1)
, holds
the mapping from input Di onto the N1 electrodes of the left
ring. Likewise, binary matrix B(2), of dimensions M × N2,
holds the mappings from each of the input digital words to
the N2 electrodes of the right ring. With this nomenclature,
the output of the modulator can be formulated as a function
of the digital input Di:

i

α1 − t1exp−jφ1
1 − t1α1exp (jφ1)

Eout(Di) = Einexp [j (π + φ1)]

·exp [j (π + φ2)]

α2 − t2exp−jφ2
1 − t2α2exp (jφ2)

and the phase shift are

φ1 = π

φ2 = π

N1(cid:88)
N2(cid:88)

j=1

j=1

v
vπ

v
vπ

B(1)

ij L(1)

j

B(2)

ij L(2)

j

·

(4)

(5)

(6)

010020030040050000.20.40.60.81Time [a.u..]Intensity [a.u.]IdealLinearizedI-1-0.500.51Q-1-0.500.51PoolIdealBest matchEVM AS A FUNCTION OF NUMBER OF ELECTRODE

TABLE I

M-QAM N1 N2
6
7
7
7
7

16
16
64
256
256

6
7
7
7
8

EVM [dB]

-21.8
-30.6
-30.4
-26.9
-30.9

4

V. CONCLUSION

We presented application of the Direct Digital Drive ap-
proach to microring resonators. We showed that this approach
enables one to realize a digitally driven optical devices, that
include compact M-PAM modulator and DACs. Extending the
approach to more then one microring, enables the generation
of optical M-QAM constellations. We showed that it is possi-
ble to generate any constellation order either by using a large
number of electrodes, or by using a small number of electrodes
but employ additional microring modulators.

achieve such EVM.

REFERENCES

[1] M. S. Hai, M. M. P. Fard, and O. Liboiron-Ladouceur, “A low-voltage
pam-4 soi ring-based modulator,” in Photonics Conference (IPC), 2014
IEEE.

IEEE, 2014, pp. 194–195.

[2] J. Ding, F. Zhang, W. Zhu, P. Zhou, Q. Chen, L. Zhang, and L. Yang,
“Optical digital to analog converter based on microring swithes,” 2014.
[3] S. Karimelahi and A. Sheikholeslami, “Pam-n signaling by coupling
modulation in a ring resonator,” Optics Letters, vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 332–
335, 2015.

[4] P. Dong, C. Xie, L. L. Buhl, and Y.-K. Chen, “Silicon microring modula-
tors for advanced modulation formats,” in Optical Fiber Communication
Conference. Optical Society of America, 2013, pp. OW4J–2.

[5] Y. Ehrlichman, O. Amrani, and S. Ruschin, “Generating arbitrary optical
signal constellations using microring resonators,” Optics express, vol. 21,
no. 3, pp. 3793–3799, 2013.

[6] S. Karimelahi and A. Sheikholeslami, “Quadrature amplitude modulation
(qam) using binary-driven coupling-modulated rings,” Optics Communi-
cations, 2016.

[7] Y. Ehrlichman, O. Amrani, and S. Ruschin, “Improved digital-to-analog
conversion using multi-electrode mach zehnder interferometer,” J. Lightw.
Technol., vol. 26, no. 21, pp. 3567–3575, Nov.1, 2008.

B. Higher order QAM constellations

The number of distinct electrode segments that can be
effectively mounted on a single microring is obviously limited.
This, however, does not limit the proposed technology, as
the original conﬁguration can be augmented by additional
rings with additional electrodes. Thus for example, rather than
generating 256-QAM with 7 and 8 electrodes on each ring, one
can utilize 4 rings with 5 electrodes on each ring: two of the
rings will act as amplitude modulators while the other two
will act as phase modulators, as depicted in Figure 7. For the
same parameters as above, with the new conﬁguration of 4
microrings, EVM of −33dB is achieved.

Fig. 7. Multi micron conﬁguration. The number of microring has been
increased, but the number of electrodes per microring was reduced.

IV. PRACTICAL IMPLEMENTATION

The practical implementation of the DDD modulators is not
obvious. Next, we brieﬂy discuss issues that are associated
with the implementation of the above devices in silicon pho-
tonic technology. Silicon has the potential of full integration
of optics and electronics either in a monolithic or a hyrbrid
process. The ﬁrst problem that arises with silicon is that the
plasma dispersion effect (which is used widely to make phase
shifters for silicon modulators) induces a voltage dependent
loss. Meaning, it is impossible to make a lossless phase shifter.
However, this problem can be alleviated by the DDD approach.
More speciﬁcally,
the VDL (Voltage
Dependent Loss) will reduce the average optical power and
hence ”compress” the signal pool. The solution is simply to
conﬁgure the DDC to map (shrink) the required constellation
to a lower average optical power.

the problem is that

The second problem that might arise is that in order to
generate a phase shifter to induce phases between 0 and
2π, a large voltage signal will be needed. This problem can
be solved by using the multiple microring conﬁguration as
discussed in the previous section. For example, instead of
using a single ring to induce the 2π phase shift, we can use
multiple modulators to induce the phase we are targeting.

