6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
 
1
1

 
 
]
T
G
h
t
a
m

.

[
 
 

1
v
8
0
8
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

TANGLE INSERTION INVARIANTS FOR PSEUDOKNOTS,

SINGULAR KNOTS, AND RIGID VERTEX SPATIAL GRAPHS

ALLISON K. HENRICH AND LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN

Abstract. The notion of a pseudoknot is deﬁned as an equivalence class of knot di-
agrams that may be missing some crossing information. We provide here a topological
invariant schema for pseudoknots and their relatives, 4-valent rigid vertex spatial graphs
and singular knots, that is obtained by replacing unknown crossings or vertices by rational
tangles.

1. Introduction

Pseudoknots and pseudolinks are knots and links about which we have incomplete infor-
mation. This incompleteness is expressed in diagrams by the appearance of precrossings
that have no over or under designation. In [6], pseudoknots are deﬁned as equivalence
classes of knot or link diagrams (called pseudodiagrams in [5]) where some crossing in-
formation may be missing. We picture the precrossings that lack deﬁnitive over/under
information, as undecorated self-intersections. These unknown crossings can be involved
in Reidemeister-like moves in predictable ways. (See Figure 1.)

Figure 1. Classical and pseudo-Reidemeister moves

In terms of their behavior, pseudoknots act like 4-valent rigid vertex spatial graphs (as
in [10]) or singular knots (as in [13]). The one important diﬀerence between pseduoknots

2000 Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation. 57M27.
Key words and phrases. pseudoknot, pseudolink, rigid vertex spatial graph, singular knot, tangle.

R1R2R3PR1PR2PR3PR3PR22

ALLISON K. HENRICH AND LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN

and these other objects is entirely characterized by the PR1 move. The PR1 move allows
us to eliminate a single unknown crossing at a curl. The reason this move is reasonable
for pseudoknots is that, regardless of whether we replace the precrossing with a positive
or negative classical crossing, it can be removed with an R1 move. On the other hand,
vertices or singularities are not removable in rigid vertex spatial graphs or singular knots.
While several new pseduoknot invariants have been introduced [2, 3, 6, 7], we introduce
a schema for a large collection of new invariants. These invariants of pseudoknots, deﬁned
by replacing precrossings with tangles, can be adapted to serve as invariants for 4-valent
rigid vertex spatial graphs and singular knots as well.

In [13], Vassiliev showed how to extend an invariant I of links to the class of singular

2. Tangle Insertion Invariants

links. He did so by deﬁning the derivative of an invariant as follows:

I(cid:48)( ) = I(

) − I( )

The derivative of an invariant is an invariant of singular links with a single double-
point. In general the nth derivative, deﬁned recursively as follows, is an invariant of a
singular link with n double-points. Note that when n = 1, I (n) is the ﬁrst derivative I(cid:48),

and I (n−1) = I.I(n)( ) = I(n−1)(

) − I(n−1)( )

This idea of extending invariants by taking linear combinations of invariant values for
diagrams that are related by tangle replacements can be generalized (see [9]). For instance,
we could deﬁne I recursively as follows.

I( ) = aI(

) + bI( ) + cI( )

If we are careful about which invariants I we use and how we choose our coeﬃcients
a, b, and c, this equation can be used to deﬁne an invariant of singular links, rigid vertex
spatial graphs, or pseudoknots and links. Note that any choice of coeﬃcients that yields
an invariant of singular links is also an invariant of pseudoknots if it satisﬁes the following
additional relation.

In general, suppose I is a polynomial or integer, real, or complex-valued invariant of
knots and links that behaves nicely under and connected sum. In particular, suppose I
obeys the following property.

I(K#L) = I(K)I(L)

I(   ) =I(  )TANGLE INSERTION INVARIANTS

3

Here, K and L denote arbitrary pseudoknot or link diagrams, and # indicates a con-
nected sum. We observe that the Jones and Alexander polynomials satisfy this property,
among other commonly used invariants.
Once a suitable link invariant has been chosen, we choose a set of oriented, rational (2,2)-
tangles, T = {t1, t2, ..., tn}. Recall that, since each t ∈ T is a rational tangle, t satisﬁes
the symmetries shown in Figure 2, by the Flip Theorem for rational tangles [4, 11, 12].
Some examples of oriented rational tangles are shown in Figure 3.

Vertical Flip

Horizontal Flip

Figure 2. Rational tangle symmetries

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 3. Examples of tangles with the required symmetries

~~~~4

Now that we have our desired link invariant and set of tangles, we deﬁne (cid:98)I(P ) recur-

ALLISON K. HENRICH AND LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN

sively as follows for an oriented pseudodiagram Pc containing precrossing c.

n(cid:88)

(cid:98)I(Pc) =

Ai(cid:98)I(Pc=ti)

i=1

In this deﬁnition, Pc=ti denotes the pseudodiagram where tangle ti is inserted at pre-
crossing c (respecting the orientations of the tangles and the pseudodiagram), and the
symbol Ai is a variable. If a given pseudodiagram P contains no precrossings, we deﬁne

(cid:98)I(P ) = I(P ).
The restrictions on our allowable invariants and tangles guarantee that(cid:98)I is an invariant

of singular links and 4-valent rigid vertex spatial graphs. To guarantee invariance under all
pseudo-Reidemeister moves, we need to further impose a relation among our coeﬃcients.

AiI(D(ti)) = 1

We take (cid:98)I(P ) modulo a linear combination of the values of the link invariant of the

denominator closures of each of our tangles to ensure that I(P ) is invariant under PR1,
and hence, is an invariant of oriented pseudoknots and links. Note that we are implicitly
assuming that the value of our chosen invariant is nonzero on the denominator closure of
at least one of our tangles ti ∈ T .
To gain an understanding of why each of the restrictions imposed above is necessary,
let us prove that I(P ) is an invariant of oriented pseudolinks. We begin by acknowledging
that, since I is a link invariant, invariance of I for classical Reidemeister moves is imme-
diate. PR1 invariance is shown in Figure 4. Line 1 follows from the deﬁnition of I, line 2
follows from our required connected sum property of the link invariant I (which ensures
that I behaves similarly under connected sum), line 3 is an algebraic distribution, and

line 4 is a consequence of the relation(cid:80)n

i=1 AiI(D(ti)) = 1.

I(P ) =(cid:98)I(P )/

(cid:42) n(cid:88)

i=1

(cid:43)

Figure 4. PR1 Invariance

The proof of invariance under the PR2 move illustrates why our tangles t ∈ T are
chosen to have the symmetries of rational tangles. A ﬂype together with a rational tangle

(     ) +    +I(   ) =I(  )A1I(   ) +    +t1...AnI(   )tn= A1It1...(     ) I(  ) AnItn=I(  )((     ) +    + A1It1...(     ))  AnItn=I(  )TANGLE INSERTION INVARIANTS

5

symmetry is required to show invariance of I under each oriented PR2 move, pictured in
Figure 5.

Figure 5. PR2 Invariance

Finally, PR3 invariance is straightforward. Figure 6 illustrates how I is invariant under
PR3 since a strand that lies entirely above or entirely below a tangle can be moved freely
past the tangle.

Figure 6. PR3 Invariance

This completes our proof that I is an invariant of pseudoknots. Note that we also

proved that (cid:98)I is a singular link and 4-valent rigid vertex spatial graph invariant.

Remark. This tangle insertion method can be generalized beyond rational tangle inser-
tion by asking that the tangles satisfy the symmetries shown in Figure 2. We shall take
up this aspect of the construction in another paper.

One obvious question to ask now that we have created a schema for creating pseudoknot
invariants is: how does this schema relate to known pseudoknot invariants? One of the

flypeflypeVflipVflip6

ALLISON K. HENRICH AND LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN

simplest, yet most powerful invariants of pseudoknots is the weighted resolution set, or
were-set, introduced in [6]. The were-set of a pseudodiagram is the set S of pairs

S = {(K1, p1), (K2, p2), ..., (Kn, pn)}

of knot types Ki that can be realized by some choice of crossing information for the
diagram’s precrossings. The number pi is the probability that knot Ki will be produced if
crossing information is randomly chosen, where positive and negative crossings are both
equally likely. It was proven that the were-set is indeed a pseudoknot invariant. How does
this invariant relate to our schema?

First, we notice that choosing crossing information for a precrossing is equivalent to
inserting a basic +1 or -1 rational tangle (i.e. tangles (a) and (b) in Figure 3), so let
our tangle set T consist of these two tangles. Next, let I be a knot invariant such that
I(U ) = 1 if U is the unknot (such as the Jones polynomial or the Alexander polynomial).
i=1 AiI(D(ti)) = 1,
Then choosing the coeﬃcients A1 = A2 = 1
since this amounts to

2 will satisfy the relation(cid:80)n

I(

1
2

) +

I(

1
2

) =

1
2

+

1
2

= 1,

so an invariant I is determined by our ingredients, following the recipe above. The
invariant we have just created with our schema is equivalent to the following composition
of the were-set with I.

p1I(K1) + p2I(K2) + ··· + pnI(Kn)

Note that, if we make a diﬀerent coeﬃcient choice, we no longer recover the were-
4 would correspond to a distinct
4 and negative

set. For instance, making the choice A1 = 3
variant of the were-set where positive crossings are chosen with probability 3
crossings are chosen with probability 1
4.

4 and A2 = 1

3. Examples

relation(cid:80)n

Let us return to our original motivation for tangle insertion invariants: the derivative
of an invariant. In our new framework, the tangles t1, t2 ∈ T that are used to deﬁne the
derivative are tangles (a) and (b) in Figure 3, respectively. Their denominator closures are
both the unknot, U . The coeﬃcient A1 is 1 and A2 = −1. Notice, then, that our imposed
i=1 AiI(D(ti)) = 1 states that I(U )−I(U ) = 1. But clearly I(U )−I(U ) = 0.
So, oddly enough, our original motivating example is not an instance of our scheme after
all. This is one of the reasons why the generalization is so valuable. It allows for the
creation of many new invariants of pseudoknots just as our old singular knot invariants
fail to be useful.

Instead, let us consider the other example we mentioned above, namely:

I( ) = aI(

) + bI( ) + cI( )

TANGLE INSERTION INVARIANTS

7

Here, we take tangles (a), (b), and (c) from Figure 3 to form the tangle set T , and we

don’t yet specify values for our coeﬃcients.

aI(

) + bI(

) + cI(

) = 1

Suppose we choose our link invariant I to be the Jones polynomial, J(L). We will

compute J(L) using the bracket polynomial, < L >, via the relation

J(L) = (−A3)−w(L) < L >

where w(L) is the writhe of the link L as in [8], and A is a variable. Then any choice for
a, b, and c satisfying a + b + δc = 1 will do, where δ = −A2 − A−2 is the polynomial such
that I(K (cid:116) U ) = δI(K). In particular, we could choose a = b = 0 and c =
1−A2−A−2 . Note
that this choice is equivalent to simply starting with the singleton tangle set consisting
of the 0-tangle, (c). Let us apply this invariant to a pseudo-trefoil and its mirror image,
shown in Figure 7.

Figure 7. A pseudo-trefoil and its mirror image.

When we insert tangle (c) into both pseudodiagrams, we get the links shown in Figure 8.

Figure 8. Insertion of tangle (c) into a pseudo-trefoil and its mirror image.

The link on the left is L2a1{1} and the link on the right is L2a1{0}. Both links have
the same bracket polynomial value, −A4 − A−4, since they are the same as unoriented
links. (See [1], p. 151 for this computation.) But the writhe of L2a1{1} is 2 while the
writhe of L2a1{0} is -2. Hence, the Jones polynomial of L2a1{1} is

while the Jones polynomial of L2a1{0} is

(−A4 − A−4)(−A3)−2 = −A−2 − A−10

(−A4 − A−4)(−A3)2 = −A10 − A2.

~8

ALLISON K. HENRICH AND LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN

Thus, the two pseudoknots shown in Figure 7 are distinct, since their I values are
1−A2−A−2 )(−A−2 − A−10) and (
(

1−A2−A−2 )(−A10 − A2), respectively.

Figure 9. Pseudodiagrams related to the Perko pair.

Another interesting pair of examples, pictured in Figure 9, is derived from the famous

Perko pair, pictured in Figure 10.

Figure 10. The Perko pair.

Let us use the Alexander polynomial and take our tangle set T to be the set consisting
of tangles (a) and (b). If we insert tangle (b) at both precrossings in both diagrams, we
recover the Perko pair itself, which were shown by Perko to be equivalent. On the other
hand, the knot 73 is obtained by inserting tangle (a) at one precrossing and tangle (b)
at the other precrossing (regardless of the order of insertion) in both diagrams. Finally,
if tangle (a) is inserted at both precrossings in both diagrams as in Figure 11, the two
resulting knots are distinct. One knot is determined by the Alexander polynomial to be
the knot 10148, while the other is knot 10160. Hence, the invariant I derived from the
Alexander polynomial and tangle set T (where, say, A1 = A2 = 1
2) can distinguish these
two pseudoknots.

Remark. Notice that, because our pseudoknot invariant was deﬁned using the Alexander
polynomial and tangles (a) and (b) with the coeﬃcient choice A1 = A2 = 1
2, the were-set
together with the Alexander polynomial can alternatively be used to distinguish the Perko
pseudoknots.

In our next example, we consider the pseudodiagram related to the Borromean rings
pictured in Figure 12 (on the left). Here, we use the tangle insertion invariant I that is
deﬁned using the Jones polynomial (computed via the bracket, with variable A) and take

TANGLE INSERTION INVARIANTS

9

Figure 11. Inserting tangle (a) into the precrossings in Figure 9.

our tangle set to be the singleton set containing the tangle (c). As shown in Figure 12,
inserting the tangle (c) produces the Whitehead link. Since this link has Jones polynomial

−A6 + A2 − 2A−2 + A−6 − 2A−10 + A−14,

I can be used to prove that the original Borromean pseudoknot is nontrivial. Note that,
if we had used a linking number invariant rather than the Jones polynomial to deﬁne
our pseudoknot invariant, we would not have been able to detect the nontriviality of this
example since the linking number of the Whitehead link is 0.

Figure 12. Insertion of tangle (c) into a pseudo-Borromean ring diagram
yields the Whitehead link, link L5a1{0}.

These are just a few examples to illustrate how invariants of pseudoknots can be derived
from classical link invariants and tangle sets. We intend to consider many more examples
in future work.

4. Questions & Future Work

Given this framework for developing pseudoknot invariants, there are many questions
that have yet to be be explored. We provide the reader with an initial list of open
questions.

(1) Are there examples of pseudoknot pairs that can only be distinguished using a
tangle set T that contains more complex tangles than the basic tangles (a), (b),
and (c) in Figure 3? For instance, can tangles (d), (e), or (f) be used to construct
more powerful pseudoknot invariants?
(2) Given two arbitrary distinct pseudoknots K1 and K2, does there exist a classical
link invariant I and tangle set T such that the corresponding pseudoknot invariant
I distinguishes K1 and K2?

~10

ALLISON K. HENRICH AND LOUIS H. KAUFFMAN

(3) Can our invariant schema be generalized to include invariants of other sorts, e.g.
the matrix of linking numbers? (This can be done for the case of a single precross-
ing.)

(4) Is there a relationship between the Gauss-diagrammatic pseudoknot invariants

deﬁned in [2] and the invariant schema presented here?

(5) Can we determine if a given reduced pseudodiagram has the fewest number of
precrossings among all equivalent diagrams? Speciﬁcally, can our tangle insertion
invariants be used for this purpose?

References

[1] C. Adams, The Knot Book: An Elementary Introduction to the Mathematical Theory of Knots,

American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2004.

[2] F. Dorais, A. Henrich, S. Jablan, and I. Johnson. Isotopy and Homotopy Invariants of Classical and

Virtual Pseudoknots. Osaka J. Math. Vol. 52, No. 2 (2015) 409–423.

[3] H. Dye. Pseudo knots and an obstruction to cosmetic crossings. arXiv:1512:04753 (2015) 1–7.
[4] J. Goldman and L. H. Kauﬀman. Rational Tangles. Adv. Appl. Math. Vol. 18 (1997) 300–332.
[5] R. Hanaki. Pseudo diagrams of knots, links and spatial graphs. Osaka J. Math. Vol. 47, No. 3 (2010)

863–883.

[6] A. Henrich, R. Hoberg, S. Jablan, L. Johnson, E. Minten, and L. Radovi´c. The Theory of Pseudo-

knots. J. Knot Theory Ramif. Vol. 22 (2013) 1–21.

[7] A. Henrich and S. Jablan. On the Coloring of Pseudoknots. J. Knot Theory Ramif. Vol. 23, No. 12

(2014) 1–22.

[8] L.H. Kauﬀman, State Models and the Jones Polynomial, Topology Vol. 26 (1987) 395–407.
[9] L. H. Kauﬀman and P. Vogel. Link polynomials and a graphical calculus. J. Knot Theory Ramif.

Vol. 1, No. 1 (1992) 59–104.

[10] L. H. Kauﬀman. Invariants of Graphs in Three-Space. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. Vol. 311, No. 2

(1989) 697–710.

[11] L. H. Kauﬀman and S. Lambropoulou. On the classiﬁcation of rational tangles. Adv. in Appl. Math.

Vol. 33, No. 2 (2004) 199–237.

[12] L. H. Kauﬀman and S. Lambropoulou. Classifying and applying rational knots and rational tangles.
Physical knots: knotting, linking, and folding geometric objects in R3 (Las Vegas, NV, 2001). 223–259,
Contemp. Math., 304. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI (2002).

[13] V. A. Vassiliev. Cohomology of knot spaces. In: Adv. in Sov. Math.; Theory of Singularities and its

Appl. (ed. V. I. Arnold). AMS, Providence, R.I. (1990) 23–69.

Department of Mathematics, Seattle University, 901 12th Ave. Seattle, WA 98122-

1090, U.S.A.

E-mail address: henricha@seattleu.edu
URL: http://fac-staff.seattleu.edu/henricha

Department of Mathematics, Statistics and Computer Science, University of Illinois

at Chicago, 851 South Morgan St., Chicago IL 60607-7045, U.S.A.

E-mail address: kauffman@math.uic.edu
URL: http://www.math.uic.edu/∼kauffman/

