6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
1

 
 
]
T
G
h
t
a
m

.

[
 
 

1
v
2
2
8
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

ON THURSTON’S EULER CLASS ONE CONJECTURE

MEHDI YAZDI

Abstract. In 1976, Thurston proved that taut foliations on closed hyperbolic 3–manifolds
have Euler class of norm at most one, and conjectured that, conversely, any Euler class with
norm equal to one is Euler class of a taut foliation. We construct counterexamples to this
conjecture and suggest an alternative conjecture.

1. Introduction

Roussarie and Thurston showed that taut foliations and connected incompressible surfaces
inside 3-manifold M , have an ‘eﬃcient intersection property’ [23][25][26]. More precisely,
the surface, S, can be isotoped to be a leaf or transverse to the foliation where the number
of tangencies is exactly equal to |χ(S)|. One can put this into the algebraic language of
the Thurston inequality. Let e(F) ∈ H 2(M ) 1 be the Euler class of the tangent bundle to
the foliation. For each embedded surface S we have the following inequality for the pairing
between homology and cohomology:

(1)

he(F), [S]i ≤ |χ(S)|

In other words, the Euler class has dual norm at most one, i.e.,

(2)

x∗(e(F)) ≤ 1

here x∗ is the dual Thurston norm on second cohomology of M . This puts extreme bounds
on the Euler class of a taut foliation. In particular, if M is hyperbolic, the number of second
cohomology classes that can arise as the Euler class of some taut foliation on M is ﬁnite.
Thurston conjectured that conversely the following happens [26]. We call it ‘the Euler class
one conjecture.’

Euler class one conjecture 1.1 (Thurston). Let M be an atoroidal closed 3–manifold and
let a ∈ H 2(M ; Z) be any integral class with x∗(a) = 1. Then there is a taut foliation F on M
whose Euler class is equal to a.

There are index sum formulae for both sides of inequality (1). It immediately follows from
comparing those sums that both sides of (1) have the same parity when M is closed [26]. So
we always assume having the same parity as a necessary condition, and we call it ‘the parity
condition’ (likewise for when M has tori boundary and F|∂M has no two dimensional Reeb
component). Gabai gave a positive answer to the Euler class one conjecture for a subset of
points in dual unit ball. Note that dual unit ball is a convex polyhedron with integral vertices
[26].

1All (co)homologies have coeﬃcients in R, unless otherwise stated.

1

2

MEHDI YAZDI

Theorem 1.2 (Gabai). Let M be a compact oriented 3-manifold, possibly with tori boundary,
and let a ∈ H 2(M, ∂M ) be a vertex of the dual unit ball. Then there is a taut foliation on M
whose Euler class is equal to a.

Our ﬁrst aim in this paper is to construct counterexamples to the Euler class one conjecture
in the general setting of C 0 taut foliations. The diﬃculty is that the conjecture is about
manifolds with inﬁnite ﬁrst homology and so Gabai’s theorem [8] guarantees the existence
of many taut foliations on M ; therefore the usual methods for ruling out the existence of
taut foliations do not work here and one needs a more delicate argument for ruling out taut
foliations with a certain Euler class.

Theorem 1.3. There are inﬁnitely many closed hyperbolic 3-manifolds M for which the Euler
class one conjecture does not hold; i.e., there is an integral point in the unit dual ball, satisfying
the necessary parity condition, which is not realized by any taut C 0-foliation.

For closed 3–manifold our counterexamples are obtained by a suitable surgery on certain
ﬁbered hyperbolic manifolds. It is natural to ask the same question for manifolds with tori
boundary; i.e., can every element a ∈ H 2(M, ∂M ) with dual norm equal to one be realized as
Euler class of a taut foliation on M ? The answer is again negative under natural boundary
conditions and our examples are a family of two–bridge link complements.

Theorem 1.4. There are inﬁnitely many hyperbolic two-bridge link complements, M , for
which there is an integral point in the unit dual ball, satisfying the parity condition that is not
realized by any taut C 0-foliation F, where F|T is a leaf or a suspension foliation for every
component T of ∂M . These examples can be described as m
mn+1 two-bridge links where both
m, n > 1 are odd numbers and 4|m − 1.

We say an embedded incompressible surface S is ‘fully-marked’ when in (1) the equality
holds. The crucial but elementary observation is that any compact leaf is fully–marked [26]
(see section 2.2). The converse, however, cannot be true since one can homotope F to a new
taut foliation without changing the Euler class but with a drastic change in the leaves, so that
there is no compact leaf anymore. We prove a converse to this statement up to homotopy by
which we mean a homotopy of plane ﬁelds of foliations. This would be a main ingredient in
the proof of theorem 1.3. Here is the statement for closed manifolds (there is a similar one
for manifolds with tori boundary (Theorem 3.6)).

Fully–marked surface theorem 1.5. Let M be a closed 3-manifold, F be a transversely
oriented C 0 taut foliation on M , and S be a fully–marked surface in M . There is a new C 0
taut foliation G homotopic to F that has S as a leaf.

Here is the idea of the proof for theorem 1.3 which goes by contradiction. Starting with
a foliation whose Euler class is the prescribed element with dual norm one, we pick a fulyl–
marked surface S. By theorem 1.5 we can assume it is a leaf (otherwise, replace the foliation
by a homotopic one that has S as a leaf). Then we can cut the manifold and foliation along
S to get a foliation on a simpler manifold. We continue this until we get a taut foliation on
a very simple manifold (a solid torus with two sutures on its boundary). Then we directly
prove that this simple 3–manifold does not have such a taut foliation to get a contradiction.
Here is the outline of the paper. In section 2, we brieﬂy explain the background. The expert
reader should only look at the part on cornered manifolds.
In section 3, we explain the
construction of counterexamples without boundary and use theorem 1.5 to prove theorem
1.3. In section 4, we prove theorem 1.5. In section 5, we discuss the Euler class of general
foliations (not necessarily taut) and explain how the situation is diﬀerent there. In section 6,

ON THURSTON’S EULER CLASS ONE CONJECTURE

3

we explain the counterexamples for manifolds with tori boundary and prove theorem 1.4. In
section 7, we suggest future directions and some related open problems.

1.1. Acknowledgment. This paper is part of my doctoral thesis at Princeton University. I
would like to thank my adviser, David Gabai, who has always supported me and encouraged
me. His guidance has always been invaluable to me. Many thanks to Shabnam Hossein for
helping me with drawing the pictures using Inkscape software. I would like to thank Ian Agol,
Danny Calegari, Nathan Dunﬁeld, John Etnyre, Sergio Fenley, ´Etienne Ghys, Alan Reid and
Laura Starkston for helpful discussions.

2. Preliminaries

2.1. Taut Foliations. A (two dimensional) foliation F of 3-manifold M is a partition of M
into immersed surfaces (called leaves) such that locally they ﬁt together nicely, like a stack
of papers. F is called transversely oriented if there is a compatible choice of orientation for
each leaf and also for transverse direction to the leaves. Every closed orientable 3-manifold
has a foliation, so the existence of a foliation does not give much information about the
ambient manifold. However, there is a class of foliations called taut foliations that reﬂect
many topological and geometric properties of their ambient manifold. F is called taut if for
every leaf there is a closed transversal intersecting that leaf.

2.2. Euler Class. Given any plane bundle T with base space B (so a continuously varying
family of planes parametrized by B ) one can associate a characteristic class to it, called the
Euler class, which lives in H 2(B) and measures how twisted the bundle is comparing to the
trivial bundle, in particular the Euler class of trivial bundle is 0 ∈ H 2(B). It can also be
seen as the obstruction for ﬁnding a section of T . In this paper we are concerned with the
case that T is the tangent plane to a foliation F at each point of 3-manifold M . There is a
geometric description of Euler class in this case as follows:
Let e(F) ∈ H 2(M ) be the Euler class of F. Since second homology and cohomology are dual
spaces, in order to understand an element in H 2(M ) we need to understand its pairing with
every element of H2(M ). So given an embedded oriented surface S inside M , we can put it in
general position w.r.t. F so that they are transverse to each other except at a ﬁnite number
of tangencies which are of saddle or center type. Then:

(3)

he(F), [S]i = X

tangent
points p

±i(p)

Here i(p) is the index of tangency point. Saddle points have index −1 and center points
have index +1. The ± sign is chosen according to whether the orientation of the two planes
‘tangent plane to S’ and ‘tangent plane to foliation’ agree at the point p or not. Note that
the same index sum without ± sign gives the Euler characteristic of S (or negative of that)
by the Poincare-Hopf formula. In particular if S is a leaf of F the one can perturb S so that
all tangencies have the same sign and so we have:

(4)

he(F), [S]i = ±χ(S), For S a compact leaf of F

We have mentioned so far that a surface S can be put in general position w.r.t. the foliation
so that there are only saddle or center tangencies. If the foliation is taut and the surface S is
incompressible, then Thurston and Roussarie showed that one can actually get rid of center

4

MEHDI YAZDI

tangencies as well. This is an ‘eﬃcient intersection property’ for surfaces and taut foliations.
Note that this has the the following interesting consequence:

(5)

he(F), [S]i ≤ |χ(S)|, F a taut foliation

Remark 2.1. Since we are mainly working with C 0 foliations, we should note that both general
positions that we mentioned hold in the C 0 case as well although the original argument was
for C 2 foliations [24] [11]

2.3. Pseudo-Anosov maps. Let S := Sg be a surface of genus g. A multi-curve on S is a
union of disjoint simple closed curves on S. Given a homeomorphism φ of S one can look at
the action of φ on the set of multi-curves on S, and pseudo-Anosov homeomorphisms can be
characterized by the property that they do not ﬁx isotopy class of any multi-curve. We need
a special case of a theorem of [28] about the existence of pseudo-Anosov maps with control
over their action on the set of simple closed curves:

Theorem 2.2 (Wang-Wu-Zhou). Suppose S is a closed surface with negative Euler charac-
teristic. Let α, β be simple closed curves on S which are not isotopic. Then there is a a
pseudo-Anosov homeomorphism f of S that sends α to β.

Note that the condition that α and β are non-isotopic is necessary because otherwise such

a homeomorphism would be isotopic to a reducible representative instead.

Thurston famous hyperbolization theorem states that the mapping torus of a homeomor-
phism φ : S −→ S is a hyperbolic manifold if and only if φ is isotopic to a pseudo-Anosov
representative.

2.4. Thurston Norm. Thurston deﬁned a natural (semi)norm on the second homology of
3-manifolds which measures the minimum complexity between representatives a homology
class. More precisely for each properly embedded surface S inside M deﬁne its complexity to
be

c(S) = max{0, −χ(S)}

and deﬁne the norm of a homology class a ∈ H2(M, ∂M ) as follows:

x(a) = min{c(S)|[S] = a}

This is a semi-norm on H2(M, ∂M ) whose unit ball a convex polyhedron with rational vertices.
Associated to any norm x on a vector space V there is a dual norm x∗ on the dual vector
space V ∗ as follows:

x∗(u) = sup{hu, vi|x(v) = 1}

This gives a dual norm on H 2(M, ∂M ), whose unit ball is a convex polyhedron with integral
vertices. The next proposition describes the behavior of the Thurston dual norm under
(covering) maps between 3–manifolds.

Proposition 2.3. Let M , N be a compact, orientable, irreducible 3-manifolds and p : N −→
M be a map and let p∗ : H 2(M, ∂M ) −→ H 2(N, ∂N ) be the induced map on real cohomology
equipped with the dual Thurston norm. Then the map p∗ is norm decreasing and it preserves
the norm if p is a covering map.

ON THURSTON’S EULER CLASS ONE CONJECTURE

5

Figure 1. Diﬀerent types of corners from left to right: convex, two-sided and concave

Proof. Let a ∈ H 2(M, ∂M ) with norm equal to k. Then for each [h] ∈ H2(N, ∂N ) we have:

hp∗a, [h]i = ha, p∗[h]i ≤ k.x(p∗[h]) ≤ k.x([h])

The last inequality comes from the fact that the Thurston norm and the Gromov norm are
proportional and the Gromov norm is functorial. This implies that p∗a has norm at most k,
so p∗ is norm decreasing.
Now suppose p is a covering map and choose [F ] ∈ H2(M, ∂M ), represented by the embedded
surface F , so that the following equality happens:

Let [h] = p−1(F ) ∈ H2(N, ∂N ), then we have:

ha, [F ]i = k.x([F ])

hp∗a, [h]i = ha, p∗[h]i = ha, (deg(p)).[F ]i = k.deg(p).x([F ]) = k.x([h])

Here the last equality is a result of Gabai. So in this case equality happens.

(cid:3)

2.5. Cornered Manifolds. In our discussion, we need to consider the Euler class of some
cornered manifolds as well, whose corners are among three types: convex, concave and two
sided (see ﬁgure 1). Corners are used to specify how leaves of a foliation intersect the bound-
ary of manifold. Note that if there are just convex corners, the cornered manifold is a sutured
manifold introduced by Gabai. One can deﬁne tangential and transversal boundary of cor-
nered manifolds similar to sutured manifolds. Again Euler class is deﬁned as before, now
an element of H 2(M, ∂M ), but keeping in mind that the cornered structure of a manifold
contains information about T|∂M . Again the number he(T ), [S]i can be obtained by putting
the surface in general position w.r.t. foliation and adding indices of tangencies with signs.

In order to have an analogue inequality (1) for these cornered manifolds, we need to take into
eﬀect cornered structure of embedded surfaces when computing their Euler characteristic. The
Poincare-Hopf formula says that for a closed surface, Euler characteristic is the obstruction
for ﬁnding a section of the tangent bundle of surface; similarly for a cornered surface, it is the
obstruction for ﬁnding a section of the tangent bundle of surface with prescribed boundary
condition coming from the cornered structure of ∂M . The analogue of inequality (1) follows
from existence of Thurston-Roussarie general position.

Example 2.4. Suppose S is a cornered surface with a combination of convex, concave and two
sided corners. Llet ˆS be the surface obtained by forgetting about cornered structure of S.
Let m, n be the number of convex and concave corners. Then:

χ(S) = χ( ˆS) −

1
2

m +

1
2

n

Example 2.5. Let M be a solid torus with two sutures on its boundary. Each of the sutures
goes twice in the longitudinal direction and once in the meridional direction. There is a taut
foliation of M by a ‘stack of chairs’ obtained in the following way. Take an inﬁnite ‘stack of
chairs’ and glue the top to the bottom by 180◦ rotation (see ﬁgure 2). The core disk of M

6

MEHDI YAZDI

Figure 2. foliation by a stack of chairs

is a sutured disk with χ(D) = 1 − 4 × ( 1
2 ) = −1. The Euler class of this foliation assigns ±1
to the core disk of M . Both ±1 can be realized. One can deﬁne a similar foliation on other
sutured solid tori such as the sutured solid torus N (deﬁned in the next section). For N , the
foliation looks like a stack of monkey saddles. We still call it the standard foliation by ‘a stack
of chairs’.

3. Thurston’s Conjecture

Thurston and Roussarie realized that taut foliations and embedded incompressible surfaces
have an ‘eﬃcient intersection property’, meaning that inequality (1) holds for them [26][23].
Thurston introduced a natural norm on second homology of 3-manifolds (named Thurston
norm nowadays) and studied connections between taut foliations and this norm. Putting
inequality (1) in the language of the Thurston norm, he obtained that the Euler class of any
taut foliation of a 3-manifold has dual Thurston norm at most one.

Theorem 3.1 (Thurston). Let M be an oriented 3-manifold and F a codimension one, trans-
versely oriented foliation of M. Suppose that F contains no Reeb components and each com-
ponent of ∂M is either a leaf of F or a surface T such that F is transverse to T and F|∂M
has no two dimensional Reeb component. Then:

x∗(e) ≤ 1

Holds in H 2(M, ∂M ) (respectively H 2(M ) if ∂M = ∅)
Here x∗ is dual Thurston norm and e is Euler class of the tangent plane bundle to foliation
F.

This shows that not every integral second cohomology class can be realized as the Eu-
In particular, the number of such classes is ﬁnite if M is
ler class of some taut foliation.
an-annular and atoroidal. This is in contrast with the case of general foliations on closed
foliations, where every cohomology class can be realized as the Euler class of some foliation
(section 5). Conversely Thurston conjectured the following [26].

Conjecture 3.2 (Thurston). If M has no ‘essential’ singular tori, and if a ∈ H 2(M ; Z) is
any element with x∗(a) = 1, then there is some (taut) foliation F of M such that e(F) = a.

Thurston showed that the unit ball for the dual Thurston norm is a convex polyhedron
whose vertices are integral points [26]. Later Gabai proved the following (personal commu-
nication) [10]. We bring Gabai’s proof here.
It has not appeared in the literature in the

ON THURSTON’S EULER CLASS ONE CONJECTURE

7

complete form before.

Theorem 3.3 (Gabai). The conjecture holds for vertices of dual unit ball.

Proof. Let a ∈ H 2(M, ∂M ) be a vertex of the dual unit ball. The ray through a passes
through a top dimensional face of the unit ball. Let ¯a be this intersection and S be a norm
minimizing embedded surface representing a multiple of the homology class ¯a. By [8], there
exist a taut foliation F on M such that S is a leaf of F, F is transverse to ∂M and ∂F has
no Reeb component. We show that e := e(F) = a.
Since ¯a is in the interior of a top dimensional face, we can choose a basis ¯a1, ¯a2, ..., ¯an for the
second homology of M such that

and 0 < ti < 1. Let

¯a = t1¯a1 + ... + tn¯an

be the pairing between second cohomology and homology of M . Then we have

h.i : H 2(M, ∂M ) × H2(M, ∂M ) −→ Z

1 = he, ¯ai = X tihe, ¯aii ≤
|{z}(1)

X tix(¯ai) =
|{z}(2)

x(X ti¯ai) = x(¯a) = 1

Where (1) is the fact that Euler class e has dual norm at most one and (2) is the linearity of
Thurston norm inside a top dimensional face. So each of inequalities in (1) should be in fact
equality and for each index i we have

he, ¯aii = x(¯ai) = ha, ¯aii
Since ¯ai’s are a basis for second homology we have e = a.

(cid:3)

When interpreting the conjecture, we should consider a necessary ‘parity condition’. This
necessary parity condition is as follows: χ(S) and he(F), [S]i have the same parity. This is
a consequence of the index-sum formulas for both of these numbers [26] (Here we are using
our assumption about boundary behavior of taut foliations, i.e., there are no boundary Reeb
components.)

Our aim here is to give a counterexample to the conjecture for the case that the the coho-

mology class is not a vertex.

Theorem 3.4. There are inﬁnitely many closed hyperbolic 3-manifolds M for which the
conjecture does not hold; i.e. there is some integral point in the unit dual ball, satisfying the
parity condition, which is not realized by any taut C 0-foliation.

Remember that the number that a taut foliation F assigns to a connected and incompress-
ible surface S is at most |χ(S)|, and if S is a leaf then equality happens. This motivates the
following deﬁnition.

Deﬁnition 3.5. Let F be a taut foliation on a 3-manifold M and S be a connected, embedded
and incompressible surface such that he(T F), [S]i = ±χ(S). We call S a fully–marked surface
with respect to F. When there is no ambiguity about F we just say S is a fully-marked surface.
Note that if χ(S) < 0 then any embedded surface that satisﬁes the equality is automatically
incompressible (in fact norm minimizing).

8

MEHDI YAZDI

Compact leaves of taut foliations are fully–marked. Next theorem gives a converse to this

observation up to homotopy of foliation. It will be our main tool for proving theorem 3.4.

Theorem 3.6. Let M be a 3-manifold (possibly with boundary) and F be a transversely
oriented taut foliation on M that is tangent to ∂M . Let S be a fully–marked surface with
respect to F.

a) If ∂S = ∅, there is a new taut foliation G homotopic to F, that has S as its leaf.
b) If ∂S 6= ∅, there is a new taut foliation G homotopic to F, that has S almost as its
leaf. This means that S is leaf except at annular neighborhood of ∂S in S where the induced
foliation on each of them is a suspension foliation.

Remark 3.7. Without allowing a homotopy of F this cannot be true. To see this, note that
the Euler class is invariant of the homotopy type of foliation and starting from a foliation
that has S as a leaf and perturbing the foliation by a small homotopy(and maintaining the
taut property, since tautness is an open condition), the quantity he(F), [S]i does not change
but the leaves change somehow radically so that S is not a leaf any more.

Remark 3.8. Since the foliation is taut, we can put the surface S in Thurston general position;
i.e. all tangencies between surface and leaves are saddle type. So the condition he(F), [S]i =
±χ(S) is equivalent to requiring that all of these tangencies have the same sign (either at all
points the orientation of S and the tangent leaf agree or at all points they disagree.)

Let N be a solid torus with two parallel sutures on its boundary, each of which goes three
times in the longitudinal direction and once in the meridional direction(see ﬁgure 7). A fact
about sutured solid torus N is that it violates a stronger version of Thurston’s conjecture in
the sense that there is some point inside (but not on the boundary of) its unit dual ball which
is not realized by any taut foliation (see Lemma 3.14). The idea is to use surgery to plant
N inside another closed manifold to make it a counterexample. Here is the rough idea why
these manifolds are counterexamples to the conjecture: starting from a taut foliation with
prescribed Euler class of norm one on these manifolds, there is always a fully–marked surface
S and using theorem 3.6, we can assume S is (almost) a leaf and so we can split the mani-
fold along the surface and get a taut foliation on a simpler 3-manifold that we have partial
information about its Euler class. Continue this by splitting along other surfaces until we get
to the solid torus N with a taut foliation that has Euler class zero (our speciﬁc construction
leads us to manifold N ). But such a taut foliation does not exist on solid torus N by Lemma
3.14 .

3.1. Construction. In this section, we explain the construction of our counterexamples. The
manifold is obtained by a ( 3
1 ) Dehn–surgery on a ﬁbered 3-manifold, but we should put some
constraints on the monodromy of the ﬁbered manifold and also specify the curve on which we
are doing the surgery.
Let S be a surface of genus g ≥ 3 and Mf be a ﬁbered 3–manifold with ﬁber S and mon-
odromy f : S −→ S. Let γ be a non–separating simple closed curve on S. We start with the
pair (Mf , γ) where the map f has the following three properties.

1) f is pseudo-Anosov.

2) ker(f∗ − id∗ : H1(S) −→ H1(S)) = {0}. This condition is equivalent to saying that

H2(Mf ) has rank one.

ON THURSTON’S EULER CLASS ONE CONJECTURE

9

p3 × { 3

4 }

p2 × { 3

4 }

p1 × { 3

4 }

q3 × { 3

4 }

p3 × { 1

4 }

q2 × { 3

4 }

p2 × { 1

4 }

q1 × { 3

4 }

p1 × { 1

4 }

q3 × { 1

4 }

q2 × { 1

4 }

q1 × { 1

4 }

Figure 3. Left: Arcs li on A × { 3

4 }, Right: Arcs mi on A × { 1
4 }

3)It sends a certain curve, α, in S × {1} to a certain curve, β, in S × {0}, where α and β
are deﬁned in terms of γ and are non–isotopic. This condition allows us to completely control
homology and Thurston norm of the manifold obtained by surgery.

Later in lemma 3.12 we show that f can be chosen to have these three properties. For now,

let us assume that we have such a map f .

4 , 3

4 ] with γ × { 1

4 , 3

1 surgery on this solid torus. M = Mf ( 3

Now we specify how to do the surgery on Mf to get the desired manifold M . Let A be an
annulus neighborhood of γ in S. We call its boundary components γ+ and γ−. Now consider
the solid torus U = A × [ 1
4 } as its preferred longitude. The desired manifold
M is obtained by 3
1 ). One should think about the
glued-in solid torus as the sutured solid torus N (ﬁgure 7), and M − U as a sutured manifold
with two sutures γ± × [ 1
4 ] on its torus boundary. Note that the gluing sends sutures to
sutures and tangential boundaries to tangential boundaries.
Now we deﬁne α and β. Pick an orientation on γ. This induces orientations on γ+ and γ−.
Choose three points pi, i ∈ {1, 2, 3}, that are cyclically ordered on γ+ and similarly three
points qi ,i ∈ {1, 2, 3}, on γ−. Choose three disjoint arcs li, i ∈ {1, 2, 3}, on A × { 3
4 }, where li
4 } to qi × { 3
connects pi × { 3
4 },
where mi connects pi × { 1
4 }. (Note the shift in indices.) We choose these in
such a way that mi is obtained by adding the arc qiqi+1 to the projection of li to A × { 1
4} and
then perturbing them to be disjoint and properly embedded in A × { 1

4 }. Likewise, choose three disjoint arcs mi, i ∈ {1, 2, 3}, on A × { 1
4 } to qi+1 × { 1

4 }(see ﬁgure 3).

Now let δi, i ∈ {1, 2, 3}, be disjoint arcs in S \ A that connect pi to qi−1(again note the shift
in indices). Then α0 will be the union of the six arcs, li, and δi × { 3
4 }, i ∈ {1, 2, 3}. β0 will
be the union of mi and δi × { 1
4 }, i ∈ {1, 2, 3}. α = π(α0) , β = π(β0). By this we mean α is
the parallel translation of α0 to S × {1} and similarly for β. Note that the appropriate shift
in indices implies that α and β are simple closed curves. Although α and β are not uniquely
deﬁned in terms of γ, any choice of them would work for the construction.

Lemma 3.9. Let M be the manifold constructed above. H2(M ) has rank two and the unit
balls for Thurston norm and Thurston dual norm are as in ﬁgure 4.

Proof. First we show that H2(M ) has rank two. Since H2(Mf ) has rank 1, by a Mayer-
Vietoris argument, one can show that H2(M ) has rank at most 2. More precisely, we have
the following exact sequence for Mf = (M − U ◦) ∪ U .

... → H1(∂U ) → H1(M − U ◦) ⊕ H1(U ) → H1(Mf ) → 0

10

MEHDI YAZDI

(0,

1

2g−2 )

(0, 2g − 2)

( 1
2 , 0)

(2, 0)

Figure 4. Left: Unit ball of Thurston norm, Right: Unit ball of dual Thurston norm

This implies that:

rankH1(M − U ◦) + rankH1(U ) ≤ rankH1(∂U ) + rankH1(Mf )

⇒ rankH1(M − U ◦) ≤ 2

We also have the exact sequence for M = (M − U ◦) ∪ N .

... → H1(∂U ) → H1(M − U ◦) ⊕ H1(N ) → H1(M ) → 0

This implies that.

H1(M ) ∼=

H1(M − U ◦) ⊕ H1(N )

ker(Φ)

Where Φ : H1(M − U ◦) ⊕ H1(N ) → H1(M ), so we have:

rankH1(M ) ≤ rankH1(M − U ◦) + rankH1(N ) − rank(ker Φ) ≤ 2

4 , 3

On the other hand, the three properties assumed about f imply that H2(M ) has rank at
least 2. Certainly the surface S ×{1} is a homology class. A second surface can be obtained as
4 , 3
follows. Let D be the core disk of N . We can assume that ∂D is the union of li, mi, pi × [ 1
4 ],
and qi × [ 1
4 ] (because this union is homologically 3m + l, where m and l are respectively
the meridian and the longitude of the removed solid torus, U , and we have done 3
1 surgery).
So if we attach three annuli δi × [ 1
4 ] to D, what we get is a surface with two boundary
components, α0 and β0, with Euler characteristic equal to −2. Since f sends α to β, we can
close this surface to get a closed surface of genus two, which we call F . F is the union of
4 , 1] and β × [0, 1
the core disk of N , the three mentioned bands, two vertical annuli α × [ 3
4 ]
(identifying α × {1} with β × {0}).
Now we compute Thurston norm of H2(M ). We already know that H2(M ) is generated by S
and F . Each of these classes has Thurston norm at most 2g −2 and 2, respectively. We exhibit
taut foliations on M and show that the unit balls for Thurston norm and dual Thurston norm
are as in ﬁgure 4.

4 , 3

There is a taut foliation of M whose Euler class assigns to S and F respectively the numbers

χ(S) and χ(F ). This implies that:

x([S]) = |χ(S)|
x([F ]) = |χ(F )|

x([S] + [F ]) = |χ(S) + χ(F )|

ON THURSTON’S EULER CLASS ONE CONJECTURE

11

To construct such a foliation on M , decompose M into two pieces, Mf − N and N . On the
ﬁrst piece, consider the ﬁbration with ﬁber the surface S − A. On the second piece, choose a
standard taut foliation of N by a ‘stack of chairs’ that assigns χ(F ) = −2 to the core disk of
N (see Example 2.5). Glue these two foliations together, on their common boundary, to get
a taut foliation of M . The Euler class of this foliation assigns to S and F respectively the
numbers χ(S) and χ(F ).
Likewise, one can show the following by constructing taut foliations on M .

x([S] − [F ]) = |χ(S) + χ(F )|

Here we should construct a taut foliation on M whose Euler class assigns to S and −F
respectively the numbers χ(S) and χ(F ). We would do the same steps, except, at the end
we use a standard taut foliation of N by a ‘stack of chairs’ that assigns −χ(F ) = 2 to the
core disk of N . The above four equalities show that the unit balls have the claimed shapes in
ﬁgure 4.

(cid:3)

So far, we have explained the construction of M .

In lemma 3.11 we prove that M is

atoroidal and hyperbolic. Assuming this, we can prove theorem 3.4.

Proof of theorem 3.4. We show that the manifold M violates Thurston’s conjecture. Consider
the point (0, 2 − 2g). This point is on the boundary of the unit ball of dual Thurston norm.
We want to show that it cannot be realized as Euler class of any taut foliation on M . Assume
the contrary: that there is such a foliation F. Note that S is a fully–marked surface, i.e.,
he(F), [S]i = χ(S). By fully–marked surface theorem 1.5, F can be homotoped to a new
taut foliation that has S as its leaf. By abuse of notation we still call the new foliation F.
Cut F along S to get a taut folation, F ′, of M ′ = M \ \S that assigns 0 to F ′ = F \ \α.
Consider the annuli A1 = γ+ × [0, 1] and A2 = γ− × [0, 1]. By Thurston’s general position, A1
and A2 can be isotoped such that the induced foliations on them are suspension foliations.
Now we can cut M ′ along A1 and A2 to get a taut foliation, F ′′, of the sutured manifold
M ′′ = N ∪ (A × [ 3
4 ]). M ′′ is homemorphic to N . Note that Euler class of
F ′′ assigns 0 to the core disk of M ′′. This is because the core disk can be obtained from
F ′ = F \ \α by cutting a couple of annuli, and the contribution of these annuli to he(F ′′), [F ′]i
is zero (the annuli can be isotoped so that the induced foliations on them are suspensions.
Hence the Euler class assigns zero to them.) Thus we have a taut foliation on a sutured
manifold homeomorphic to N whose Euler class assigns zero to the core disk. However we
will prove in lemma 3.14 that this is not possible. Contradiction.
(cid:3)

4 , 1]) ∪ (A × [0, 1

The next lemma is a standard position result for embedded tori in M , that is useful in

proving that M is atoroidal.

Lemma 3.10. Let T be an embedded essential torus in M . T can be isotoped in such a way
that if we cut M along S × {1}, it will be a collection of disjoint properly embedded essential
annuli in (S − A) × [0, 1], each of which has one boundary component on each of S × {0} and
S × {1}.

Proof. Firstly we isotope T such that T ∩ S is a collection of simple closed curves that are
essential in both T and S. In particular, these curves are parallel in the torus T . This set of
simple closed curves cut T into a collection of annuli in M \ \S. Let T1 be one of these annuli.
Now we show that T1 can be isotoped away from N . Without loss of generality, we might

12

MEHDI YAZDI

Type1

Type2

Figure 5. Two types of arcs

Figure 6. Annulus T1 is chopped up into squares

4 , 1] and S × [0, 1
throw out the top and bottom product pieces of M \ \S, that is, S × [ 3
4 ].
Let B and C be the annuli γ+ × [ 1
4 ], respectively. The intersection of T1
with B and C is a collection of properly embedded arcs in B and C. Two types of arcs that
can occur are shown in ﬁgure 5. Type one starts and ends on the same boundary component
of B (respectively C) whereas, type two goes between diﬀerent boundary components of B
(respectively C).

4 ] and γ− × [ 1

4 , 3

4 , 3

First we can get rid of type one arcs. Choose an intermost type one arc. This arc together
with a portion of the boundary of B (respectively C) bounds a disk. Use this disk to push
the arc out of B (respectively C) and reduce the number of type one arcs. After doing this
ﬁnitely many times, we are left with a number of type two arcs. So T1 ∩ N is a collection of
squares going from B ∪ C to B ∪ C. From the perspective of T1 these arcs start from one
boundary component of T1 and end on the other boundary component of T1 (ﬁgure 6). Again
we can start from ones that go from B to B (or C to C) and push that part of T1 which is
between them out of N . So T1 is partitioned into a union of squares that are inside N and
inside the product part of M in an alternating order. Therefore we can isotope them out of
N . We have shown that T1 can be isotoped away from N and we can do the same for other
chopped pieces of T . Now we can get rid of the pieces of T that start and end on the same
boundary component of M \ \S by pushing them out (note that now pieces are totally inside
the product part of M \ \S.) This completes the proof of lemma.

(cid:3)

Lemma 3.11. The manifold M is atoroidal and hyperbolic.

Proof. Suppose there is an essential torus inside M . Use lemma 3.10 to chop it into annuli
pieces, each going from top boundary S to bottom boundary S of M \ \S, and all disjoint
from N . However this means that the collection of curves C = T ∩ S is a reducing collection
for the map f , that is, f (C) = C, contrary to f being pseudo-Anosov. So M is atoroidal. Now

ON THURSTON’S EULER CLASS ONE CONJECTURE

13

Thurston’s hyperbolization theorem for Haken manifolds implies that M is hyperbolic, since
M is Haken, atoroidal and irreducible (because it admits a taut foliation).
(cid:3)

Now we show that f can be chosen to satisfy the three conditions mentioned in the begin-

ning.

Lemma 3.12. Let S be a closed, orientable surface of genus at least two. Let α and β be two
simple closed curves on S that are not isotopic. There is a pseudo-Anosov homeomorphism f
of S with the following two properties.
1) ker(f∗ − id∗ : H1(S) −→ H1(S)) = {0}
2) f (α) = β

Proof. First choose any map g : S −→ S, not necessarily pseudo-Anosov, that satisﬁes both
properties (1) and (2). This is possible since α and β are in diﬀerent isotopy classes. Let τα
α := (τα)n. For large n (depending on g) the map g ◦ τ n
be the right Dehn twist along α and τ n
α
is pseudo-Anosov [28]. It is suﬃcient to show that g ◦ τ n
α satisﬁes both properties (1) and (2).
It satisﬁes (2) because τ n
α ﬁxes α. We compute its action on H1(S), in order to see that it
satisﬁes (1). Extend α to a symplectic basis of H1(S). In this basis, the action of τ n
α can be
written as the following matrix:

W =





0
1 n 0 . . .
0
0 1 0 . . .
0 0 1 . . .
0
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
0 0 0 . . .
1





Suppose that the action of f is represented by a matrix X. Property (1) is equal to det(X −
Id) 6= 0. Now the action of f ◦ τ n
α is represented by the matrix XW . Hence we should show
that for large n, det(XW −Id) 6= 0. Consider n as a variable, so det(XW −Id) is a polynomial
P (n) with variable n, and P (0) = det(X − Id) 6= 0. Since P (0) 6= 0, for all large n we have
P (n) 6= 0. This completes the proof.
(cid:3)

Remark 3.13. The proof of the cited theorem from [28] uses Thurston’s hyperbolic Dehn
surgery theorem and it is not clear in theory how large should we choose n. However, in
practice almost any value of n would work and one can construct the desired map f .

3.2. Taut foliations on the sutured solid torus. In this section we will prove the following
lemma.

Lemma 3.14. Let N be a solid torus with two parallel sutures on its boundary, where each
of the sutures goes three times in longitudinal direction and once in meridional direction (see
ﬁgure 7 where we have marked one of the sutures with diamonds in order to make it visually
salient.) There is no taut foliation on N whose Euler class assigns zero to the core disk of N .

Remark 3.15. This condition is equivalent to having Euler class zero.

Remark 3.16. The same is true for a similar sutured solid torus replacing 3 with any odd
number.

Remark 3.17. One can think about this sutured manifold as a sutured-disk (6–gon) bundle
over the circle (ﬁgure 7) that is twisted. Having this twist is the obstruction for the existence
of such a taut foliation: otherwise, one could take two (4-gon) sutured-disk bundles over the
circle with opposite orientations each of which is foliated in the standard way by a ’stack of
chairs’, and glue them together in the right way to get the desired foliation (see Example 2.5).

14

MEHDI YAZDI

Figure 7. Left: Sutured solid torus N , Right: its cross section

Figure 8. The product of two positive transversals is a positive transversal.

Figure 9. The product of a positive transversal and an element of i∗(π1(L))
is a positive transversal.

Deﬁnition 3.18. Given a transversely oriented foliation F on a 3-manifold M and a leaf L of
foliation, let T (L) be the set of free homotopy classes of positive closed transversals through
L. Here positive means that its orientation agrees with the transverse orientation of F. We
call this set the transversal semigroup of L w.r.t. F (or just transversal semigroup if there is
no ambiguity about L and F).

In general, this set might be empty, but when F is taut and M is closed, by deﬁnition
T (L) is by nonempty for each leaf L. By Novikov’s theorem for a Reebless foliation F, every
element in T (L) is (homotopically) non-trivial [22].

Observation 3.19. T (L) is closed under product (hence the name semigroup).

Proof. See ﬁgure 8.

(cid:3)

Observation 3.20. If T (L) is nonempty then it is closed under multiplication by elements
of i∗(π1(L)).

Proof. See ﬁgure 9.

(cid:3)

Corollary 3.21. Let F be a transversely oriented taut foliation on the sutured solid torus N
Any non-compact leaf L of F is simply connected.

Proof. Assume the contrary. Let L be a non-compact leaf such that π1(L) 6= {0}. Let l
be a generator of π1(N ). We have i∗(π1(L)) =< lk > for some k ∈ N (L is π1-injective by

ON THURSTON’S EULER CLASS ONE CONJECTURE

15

Figure 10. sutured manifold N before and after shaving a small neighbor-
hood of tangential boundary

Novikov’s theorem [22]). Since L is non-compact and F is taut, T (L) is non-empty., Thus
we have lm ∈ T (L) for some m ∈ Z \ {0}. By observation 3.19 we have lkm ∈ T (L), and
by observation 3.20 we have 0 = (lk)−m.lkm ∈ T (L). This contradicts Novikov’s theorem
therefore L should be simply connected.
(cid:3)

Proof of 3.14. We assume there is such a foliation F and we will get a contradiction. Firstly,
we show that it can be assumed that F has no compact leaf other than its tangential boundary.
This is because every compact leaf has to be a ∂τ M -parallel annulus (isotopic to tangential
boundary of M ). By Haeﬂiger’s theorem [15], the set of compact leaves inside M is closed,
so one can choose the one that is farthest from the tangential boundary. Call it L. Because
L is boundary parallel, the foliation between L and the tangential boundary is standard and
removing it does not change the Euler class of foliation. This leaves us with a taut foliation
without compact leaves (other than the tangential boundary) and with the same Euler class.

Now assume that F has no compact leaf other than its tangential boundary. By corollary
3.21, every non-compact leaf of F is simply connected. This implies that if µ ∈ Homeo+(I)
is the holonomy of transverse boundary of M , then µ has no ﬁxed point except interval end-
points (it is a shift), since otherwise a ﬁxed point corresponds to a nontrivial loop inside a
non-compact leaf. Without loss of generality we can assume that it is a contracting shift. If
we shave a small neighborhood of the tangential boundary, we obtain a foliation, G, on the
solid torus that is transverse to the boundary and has two boundary Reeb components. Each
of boundary Reeb components goes around the core curve three times (see ﬁgure 10). Double
this new solid torus to obtain a foliation DG on the manifold S2 × S1. This foliation is taut
because the core curve of each of the boundary Reeb components of G ia a closed transversal
that hits every leaf (because µ was a contraction). On the other hand, the Euler class of
DG assigns 0 to the S2 factor since the original foliation was assigning 0 to the D2 factor
(2 × 0 = 0). This is not possible because any taut foliation on S2 × S1 assigns ±2 to the S2
factor (has S2 factor as a leaf up to isotopy [22][24].) Contradiction.

(cid:3)

16

MEHDI YAZDI

p4

p2

p3

p1

Figure 11. An example of induced singular foliation G on surface S

4. Proof of Theorem 3.6

We prove it for a closed surface of genus two. It captures ideas of the general case. Put
the surface S in Thurston general position with respect to the foliation F such that all tan-
gencies are of saddle type. Without loss of generality we can assume that in both tangencies,
orientations of S and the leaf agree. Let G be the induced singular foliation on S. G has two
singular points by the Poincare-Hopf formula and, by Haeﬂiger’s argument we can assume
that these two points are not connected to each other in G. So a typical picture for G looks
like ﬁgure 11. Here if we split the surface along curves p1, ..., p4, we get three open cylinders.
The induced foliation on each of these cylinders is a suspension of a diﬀeomorphism of an
interval. In ﬁgure 11, we see suspension by the identity map that is a foliation by circles. In
the right cylinder, these circles start from the curve p1 on one side of the cylinder and end on
the curve p1 ∪ p2 on the other side.

Let L be the leaf containing p1 and p2 and L′ be the leaf containing p3 and p4. Consider
L. It has a saddle tangency with S. Near this tangency point, p, L stands higher than S
in two directions and stands lower in the other two directions (height is considered relative
to transverse orientation.) Without loss of generality, assume that it stands higher in W/E
directions and lower in N/S direction. We have the same story for L′ except once we assumed
that L is higher in W/E directions, we are forced to assume that L′ is lower in W/E directions.
Here we used the assumption that in both tangencies the orientations agree. Let T be a small
closed neighborhood of p1 ∪ p2 in L. T is a compact three times punctured sphere. Deﬁne
T ′ similarly. Isotope S so that T and T ′ become parts of S, and the induced foliations on
S − T ∪ T ′ (= Union of three cylinders), remain suspension foliations. The picture for S , T
and T ′ looks like ﬁgure 12 now. To get a better intuition, note that if we had assumed that
the orientations at two tangency points disagree, then the middle corner in ﬁgure 12 would
be a convex or concave corner (not a two-sided corner).
Let Q be the cornered manifold obtained by splitting M open along S (the path metric
completion of M − S). Let F ′ be the induced foliation on Q. Q has just two-sided corners.
By lemma 4.2 (Resolving two-sided corners) there is a new taut foliation, F ′′, on Q, homotopic
to F ′, without two-sided corners. Note that F ′′ is a taut foliation on the sutured manifold
M \ \S. Now identify two copies of S in M \ \S together to get a taut foliation of M that has
S as its leaf. The same arguments work for a higher genus surface with or without boundary.
Next we prove lemma 4.2 (resolving two-sided corners). We need to mention two facts from
[9].

ON THURSTON’S EULER CLASS ONE CONJECTURE

17

T ′

T

Figure 12.

If F is any surface with boundary which is not compact planar and b is a boundary com-
ponent of F , then there are foliations of F × I (I is a closed interval), transverse to I factor
that have a given holonomy on b and trivial holonomy on all other boundary components.
In the remaining case that F is compact planar (not a disk), if b and b′ are two boundary
components with the induced orientations from F , then there exists a foliation transverse to
I factor that has a given holonomy µ on b and µ−1 on b′ and trivial holonomy on all other
boundary components [9].

The next lemma is a modiﬁcation of a lemma in [9].

Lemma 4.1. Suppose u, v are given homeomorphisms of the interval. There exist a homem-
orphism τ such that τ is conjugate to:

a) uτ −1v
b) uτ v
c) uτ
d) τ v
e) uτ −1
f ) τ −1v
Here uτ v shows concatenation, likewise for uτ −1v.

Proof. a) Identify the interval with [−1, 1]. Break this interval into symmetric pieces as:

[−1, −

1
2

], [−

1
2

, −

1
3

], ..., [

1
3

,

1
2

], [

1
2

, 1]

deﬁne τ to be conjugate to u and v respectively on [−1, − 1
conjugate with v−1 and u−1 respectively on [− 1
3 ] and [ 1
set τ (0) = 0. ⋄

2 , − 1

2 ] and [ 1
3 , 1

2 , 1], then deﬁne it to be
2 ], and continue so on. Finally

b) Similar to previous part.
c)The constructed homeomorphism in part (b) for v = Id works for this case.
d,e,f) Similar to part (c).

(cid:3)

Lemma 4.2. (Resolving two-sided corners) Let M be a cornered 3-manifold whose corners
are among the types convex, concave and two-sided. Let F be a taut foliation of M . Suppose
no annulus component of the tangential boundary of M is adjacent to a two-sided corner. If
M ′ is the 3-manifold obtained by forgetting the two-sided corners of M , then there is a taut
foliation F ′ on M ′ homotopic to F.

18

MEHDI YAZDI

Figure 13. A two-side corner

Proof. Let A be an annulus corresponding to a two-sided corner with holonomy µ, and let
b be its bottom boundary curve. Let M ′ be M cut along the curve b and L be the leaf
of M ′ adjacent to b which is on tangent boundary side of b (see ﬁgure 13). Do an I-bundle
replacement for L and foliate it to have certain holonomies on diﬀerent boundary components,
so that holonomies of thickened b and new annuli A match up. Then glue them together to
resolve this two-sided corner. Consider three diﬀerent cases:

First) L is not compact planar. Let the product foliation have holonomy τ on b and
identity on all other boundary components, where τ = µ′ and µ′ can be obtained from µ in
the following way: for each boundary component of L in A, replace that circle by a thickened
circle. Write µ′ for the new holonomy of A.

Second) L is compact planar but has some boundary component c disjoint from A. Let the
product foliation have holonomy τ on b and τ −1 on c and identity on all other ones. Since c
is disjoint from A, this is similar to previous case.

Third) L is compact planar and all of its boundary components intersect A. Let c be one
such boundary component. Choose the product foliation so that it has holonomy τ on b and
τ −1 on c and the identity on all other ones. Choose τ such that τ is conjugate to f ′τ g′ or τ µ′
depending on whether c = b or not, where f, g are holonomy of two parts of A separated by
c and f ′, g′ can be obtained from f, g similarly to ﬁrst part.
Finally, if the new foliation is not C 0, isotope it to a C 0 foliation using Calegari’s theorem
[1].
(cid:3)

4.1. The new foliation is taut. Since the original foliation F is taut and M is compact,
there are ﬁnitely many transversals such that every leaf is hit by at least one of them. Now In
each step we have isotoped the foliation or inserted foliated product pieces in certain places, or
sheered the leaves along annuli. Isotope the transversals so that they are disjoint from these
annuli and remain transverse to leaves. The leafs of the new foliation, G, are still transverse
to these transversals, so G is taut.

4.2. The new foliation is homotopic to the original foliation (as plane ﬁelds).
Choose a metric on the ambient manifold and let V be the vector ﬁeld normal to the fo-
liation pointing in the positive direction. Then both foliations are transverse to this vector
ﬁeld and so they are homotopic as plane ﬁelds (by a straight line homotopy using the fact
that tangent bundle of 3-manifold is a trivial bundle). Moreover if γ is a closed transversal
intersecting every leaf of the original foliation, then at each time during the homotopy, the

ON THURSTON’S EULER CLASS ONE CONJECTURE

19

plane ﬁeld is also transverse to γ which is a from of ‘tautness’ for these plane ﬁelds(if they
were integrable then they were taut).

5. Euler classes of general foliations

Let M be a closed orientable 3–manifold. In this section we show that every second coho-
mology of M , satisfying the parity condition, can be realized as Euler class of a foliation (not
necessarily taut) of M . This follows from some well known theorems and we bring it here for
the sake of completeness.

Observation 5.1. Let M be a closed orientable 3-manifold with H1(M ) inﬁnite and a ∈
H 2(M ; Z) be any element that satisﬁes the parity condition. There is a foliation F of M
(possibly with Reeb components) such that e(F) = a.

Remark 5.2. Here the parity condition means that a has even coeﬃcients. This is because
every closed orientable surface has even Euler characteristic.

Proof. By theorem of Wood [29] every plane ﬁeld on M is homotopic to an integrable one
(coming from a foliation).
In particular they have the same Euler class. Therefore it is
suﬃcient to ﬁnd a plane bundle over M with the Euler class equal to a. The tangent bundle
of a closed orientable 3-manifold is trivial. Fix a trivialization of T M (tangent bundle of M ).
Then the set of plane bundles over M can be parametrized by maps f : M −→ S2. One can
show that twice the pullback of the fundamental cohomology class of S2 under the map f
does not depend on the choice of trivialization and is equal to the Euler class of the plane
bundle [14]. So it is enough to show that every element in H 2(M ) can be obtained by pulling
back the fundamental cohomology class of S2 under some map f : M −→ S2. Note that this
would be true if we had CP ∞ instead of S2, since it is a K(Z, 2). We can replace CP ∞ by
S2 here, since every map f : S2 −→ CP ∞ can be homotoped so that its image lies in the
three-skeleton of CP ∞ that is a copy of S2.
(cid:3)

6. Manifolds with boundary

Although Thurston’s conjecture is originally stated for closed manifolds, a priori one might
have the same guess for general 3-manifolds with tori boundary, i.e. any class a ∈ H 2(M, ∂M )
with x∗(a) = 1 can be realized as the Euler class of some taut foliation. Indeed we are going
to explain that the ﬁrst counterexamples that we found are for manifolds with boundary. The
advantages of these examples over closed examples constructed in section 3.2 are that ﬁrstly
these manifolds are very simple and so easier to visualize (in fact an inﬁnite family of two
bridge link complements) and secondly they are counterexamples for the same reason, i.e.
having sutured solid torus N as a submanifold in a suitable way. We found these examples
while trying to see if the conjecture holds for two bridge link complements by actually ﬁnding
a sutured manifold hierarchy which gives the desired Euler class. Throughout this section, we
explicitly see this sutured manifold hierarchy for the ﬁrst example that we found and from
there one can see what would be suitable family of two bridge link complements. One more
remark is that we should describe the behavior of foliation near the boundary tori. For each
boundary component T , the foliations that we consider are either tangential to T (i.e., T is
a leaf) or are transverse to T and the induced two dimensional foliation on T has no Reeb
component (i.e., is a suspension foliation). This assumption about boundary behavior implies
a necessary parity condition similar to what we saw before in case of closed manifolds.

20

MEHDI YAZDI

Figure 14.

3
16 – two bridge link

(−1, 3)

(−2, 2)

(0, 2)

(1, 1)

(2, 0)

(3, −1)

(0, 1
3 )

( 1
2 , 1
2 )

( 1
3 , 0)

( 1
4 , −1
4 )

Figure 15. Right: Unit ball of the Thurston norm Left: Unit ball of the dual
Thurston norm

Let M be S3 \L where L is the 3

16 two-bridge link (ﬁgure 14). The second homology of M is
generated by two surfaces, each of them spanning one of link components. We call them a, b.
It is easy to see each of a, b are represented by three-times punctured disks so x(a) ≤ 2 and
x(b) ≤ 2. Using Seifert algorithm (or just by staring at the picture for a few seconds) one sees
that x(a + b) ≤ 2 and x(a − b) ≤ 4 (see ﬁgure 16 for a norm minimizing surface representing
a + b). Actually one can see these are all equalities (Lemma 6.2). So the Thurston unit ball
and dual unit ball are as in ﬁgure 15, where we have shown the coordinates for some of the
points and others can be obtained from its symmetry w.r.t. the origin.

If we look at the dual ball, we see twelve integral points, four of which are vertices. By
Gabai’s theorem, the four vertices are realized as Euler classes of taut foliations. Of the eight
remaining points, six of them do not satisfy the necessary ‘parity condition’ so they cannot
be the Euler class of any such taut foliation.
In this case since both a, b have odd Euler
characteristic so any point that is the Euler class of such a taut foliation should have both
coordinates odd numbers. So we are left with two points (1, 1), (−1, −1). We will prove none
of them can be realized as euler class of a taut foliation. We show it for the class (1, 1) and
the other one follows from this case since a foliation with opposite transverse orientation has
the same Euler class with negative sign. Suppose F is such a taut foliation with Euler class
(1, 1). We want to get a contradiction at the end.

Firstly we can assume that foliation is tangent to boundary tori.

If it was transverse,
then we could replace it by a taut foliation tangent to the boundary and with the same
Euler class. To be precise, let U be a foliation on M which is obtained by spinning leaves

ON THURSTON’S EULER CLASS ONE CONJECTURE

21

Figure 16. S is a norm-minimizing surface representing homology class a + b

of F around boundary annuli (such a foliation always exist since we are working with C 0
foliations [3]). In particular U coincides with F outside a tubular neighborhood of ∂M . If
F was an arbitrary properly embedded surface inside M , F could be isotoped so that each
component of ∂F would be either a leaf of F|∂M or completely transverse to F|∂M (since we
have assumed F|∂M has no Reeb component). So the index-sum formula for Euler class shows
that he(F), [F ]i = he(U ), [F ]i. Since F was arbitrary we obtain e(F) = e(U ). So without loss
of generality we can assume that F is tangent to ∂M at ﬁrst.

The class (1, 1) assigns 1 to each of the surfaces a, b so it assigns 2 to a + b. a + b has norm
2 so the foliation assigns χ(a + b) to a + b. Let S be the norm minimizing representative of the
homology class a+b (ﬁgure 16). This implies that we can homotope the foliation to a new taut
foliation that has S almost as a leaf (meaning that it is a leaf except in a neighborhood of its
boundary, where the induced foliation is a suspension foliation). Since the new foliation has
the same Euler class as F so we can assume that F had S almost as a leaf at the beginning.
Let P be M split along S and let G be the induced foliation on P . Note that P is a
cornered manifold with one convex and one two-sided corner for each boundary component
of S. First we can get rid of two-sided corners by Lemma 4.2, preserving the Euler class of
G, so we are left with a usual sutured manifold which we call again P with foliation G (ﬁgure
17). P is the sutured manifold M \ \S. Let F be a surface representing homology class a − b
in M (basically the ‘complement’ of the surface in ﬁgure 16) and let F ′ be its image in the
manifold P . The Euler class of F assigned 0 to F by assumption, so the Euler class of G
assigns 0 to F ′. As a homology class F ′ can be written as D1 + D2 + 2D3 where Di’s are disks
show in the ﬁgure 17 . Now the disks D1, D2 have complexity zero so G assigns zero to them,
so G should assign 0 to D3 as well. Because D1, D2 are disks with complexity 0, again by
Thurston general position, we can isotope them such that they are completely transverse to
the foliation. The picture for the induced foliation on D1 (respectively D2) is as in ﬁgure 18.
A tubular neighborhood will be the same picture times as interval. This enables us to split P
along them to get a taut foliation on a new sutured manifold N which one can see is a solid
torus with two sutures on it is boundary and a foliation P on it. Note that because of the
special position of sutures, the orientations of disks D1, D2 are not important when we split
along them, and the resulting manifolds are the same with either orientations. The image of
D3 in this sutured torus is the core disk of the solid torus so the Euler class of P assigns zero
to the core disk of the solid torus.

But we have shown that such a taut foliation does not exist by analyzing taut foliations on

this manifold (lemma 3.14). This completes the proof for 3

16 -two bridge link complement.

22

MEHDI YAZDI

Figure 17. Sutured manifold P . Disks D1, D2, D3(from right to left) are shown.

Figure 18.

Induced foliation on disks D1, D2

Theorem 6.1. There are inﬁnitely many hyperbolic two-bridge link complements M for which
there is some integral point in the unit dual ball, satisfying the parity condition, which is not
realized by any taut C 0-foliation F where F|T is a leaf or a suspension foliation for every
component T of ∂M . These examples can be described as m
mn+1 two-bridge links where both
m, n > 1 are odd numbers and 4|m − 1.

This family of links basically have the same picture as in ﬁgure 14 but with more twists, so
the same sutured manifold hierarchy works for them. The essential fact for generalizing our
argument to the mentioned family of links is the picture for the unit ball of Thurston dual
norm. As you can see in the following lemma it has basically the same shape as the example
3
16 which we considered.
Lemma 6.2. Let K be the m
mn+1 –two-bridge link where m, n are both odd numbers. Then
the unit ball for Thurston norm and dual norm are as in ﬁgure 19 where the axis show the
generators corresponding to the link components.

Proof. Let a, b be generators for second homology corresponding to the two components. It
is suﬃcient to show that:

because then we have

x(a + b) = n − 1
x(a − b) = m − 1

x(a) = x(b) =

m + n − 2

2

x(a + b) + x(a − b) = 2x(a)

ON THURSTON’S EULER CLASS ONE CONJECTURE

23

( n−m

2

, m+n−2

2

)

( n−1

2 , n−1
2 )

( m+n−2

2

, n−m

2

)

( 1
n−1 ,

1

n−1 )

(0,

2

m+n−2 )

(

2

m+n−2 , 0)

m−1 , −1
( 1

m−1 )

Figure 19. Right: Unit ball for Thurston norm; Left: Unit ball for dual
Thurston norm

which implies that these three points are co-linear in the unit ball. For the ﬁrst and sec-
ond equality, these numbers are exactly the numbers that we get from Seifert algorithm for
ﬁnding a Seifert surface for an alternating link, and by [21] [5] [12] these surface are actually
norm minimizing. For the third equality note that each link component bounds a punctured
disk with this complexity and this is the minimum possible since the linking number of two
components is m+n

and so for any such surface:

2

χ(S) ≤ 1 −

m + n

2

= −

m + n − 2

2

(cid:3)

Note the conditions 4|m − 1 is the same as assuming the two points ( n−1

( m+n−2

2

, n−m

2

) on the unit dual ball have the same parity.

7. Questions

2 , n−1

2 ) and

Although Thurston’s conjecture is for the unit sphere of dual norm, a priori we only know
that the Euler class of a taut foliation is inside the unit ball, so a natural question would be
the following.

Question 7.1. Which points inside the unit dual ball can be realized as the Euler class of
some taut foliation on M ?

A point strictly inside the unit dual ball cannot correspond to a taut foliation with a
compact leaf. This makes it diﬃcult to construct taut foliations with Euler class strictly
inside the unit dual ball. An interesting case is taut foliations with trivial Euler class. Anosov
ﬂows provide one way of constructing taut foliations of Euler class zero, since the stable
(unstable) foliation of an Anosov ﬂow has trivial Euler class (the ﬂow direction is a section.)

Question 7.2. Which 3-manifolds with inﬁnite ﬁrst homology have a taut foliation with trivial
Euler class?

As a concrete example we do not even know if the Whitehead link complement has a ‘taut’
foliation with Euler class zero. Such a taut foliation, if it exists, should have boundary Reeb
components because of the parity condition (here we say a foliation is taut if the doubled
foliation on the doubled manifold is taut.)

24

MEHDI YAZDI

Since [26], other classes of geometric structures such as pseudo-Anosov ﬂows on closed
3-manifolds and quasi-geodesic ﬂows on closed hyperbolic 3-manifolds are known to have a
similar ‘eﬃcient intersection property’, i.e., inequality (1) holds for their Euler class (here the
Euler class is associated to the orthogonal plane bundle to the ﬂow) [2].

Question 7.3. Let Φ be the set of pseudo-Anosov ﬂows on a closed 3-manifold (respectively
quasi-geodesic ﬂows on a closed hyperbolic 3-manifold). What points inside the dual unit ball
can be realized as Euler class of elements of Φ?

Gabai and Mosher [20] proved that for any ﬁnite depth taut foliation on M there is an
almost transverse pseudo-Anosov ﬂow. Fenley and Mosher [7] proved that these ﬂows are
quasi-geodesic as well, when the underlying manifold is hyperbolic. Moreover it can be easily
seen that they have the same Euler class. Hence Gabai’s theorem about vertices of unit dual
ball (theorem 3.3), implies similar results for these classes of ﬂows as well, that is, the vertices
of dual unit ball can be realized as Euler classes of pseudo-Anosov ﬂows on closed 3-manifolds
(respectively quasi-geodesic ﬂows on hyperbolic 3–manifolds).

Another class of geometric structures that satisfy a similar ‘eﬃcient intersection property’ is
tight contact structures. Every C 0 taut foliation can be perturbed to a tight contact structure
[6][16] so Euler classes of tight contact structures include Euler classes of taut foliations.

Question 7.4. Which points inside the unit dual ball can be realized as Euler class of some
tight contact structure on M ?

Associated to any taut foliation F is a faithful representation into Homeo+(S1). This has

been done using the universal circle construction [4][27].

ρF : π1(M ) −→ Homeo+(S1)

There is a canonical way to assign an Euler class e(ρ) ∈ H 2(M ) to each such representation.
Firstly construct a circle bundle associated to this representation using Borel’s construction:

E = ( ˜M × S1)/(m, θ) ∼ (α(m), ρ(α)(θ)), ∀α ∈ π1(M )

Deﬁne the Euler class of the representation to be the Euler class of the associated circle
bundle. When the representation comes from a taut foliation, these two Euler classes coincide
[2], i.e.,

e(ρF ) = e(F)

Therefore, if Thurston’s Euler class one conjecture about taut foliations was true, then for
every integral second cohomology class a of dual norm one, there would be a representation
with Euler class equal to a. On the other hand, there is a similar eﬃcient intersection property
for Euler classes of representation into Homeo+(S1), called Milnor-Wood inequality [17][30].
It says that for any embedded surface S in M we have:

he(ρ), [S]i ≤ |χ(S)|

So it makes sense to conjecture the following that is weaker than Thurston’s original conjec-
ture.

Conjecture 7.5. Let M be a closed hyperbolic 3-manifold with inﬁnite ﬁrst homology. Then
any integral class a ∈ H 2(M ; R) of dual norm exactly one and satisfying the parity condition,
can be realized as the Euler class of some faithful representation ρ : π1(M ) −→ Homeo+(S1).

ON THURSTON’S EULER CLASS ONE CONJECTURE

25

Miyoshi[18] proved that the above conjecture is true for closed orientable Seifert ﬁbered
manifolds under the condition that H1(M ; Z) is torsion free if the Euler number of Seifert
ﬁbration is zero (he worked with cohomology with integral coeﬃcients and so he considered
torsions as well.) One cannot in general replace Homeo+(S1) with Diﬀ +(S1) instead since
Miyoshi [19] gave examples of cohomology classes that are representable as continuous Euler
classes but not as smooth ones. He showed, using a rigidity theorem of Ghys [13], that in fact
the Euler class of any ﬁbration of a closed hyperbolic 3-manifold is not smoothly representable.
One can ask if a virtual version of Thurston’s conjecture is true or not. Given any taut
foliation F on M with Euler class a and a ﬁnite covering map p : ˆM −→ M, one can pull
back the foliation to a foliation ˆF on ˆM with Euler class p∗(a). If a ∈ H 2(M ) is any integral
class of norm 1 (no matter if it is realized as the Euler class of a taut foliation on M or not)
and p : ˆM −→ M is any ﬁnite covering then the pullback of a under the covering map has
norm 1 again (proposition 2.3). Therefore it might be possible that every class a ∈ H 2(M )
of norm 1 could be be realized as Euler class of some taut foliation after passing to a suitable
ﬁnite cover.

Question 7.6. Let a ∈ H 2(M ) be an integral point with dual norm 1 that satisﬁes the parity
condition. Is there a ﬁnite covering map p : ˆM −→ M and a taut foliation, ˆF , of ˆM such that
e( ˆF ) = p∗(a)?

In fact for our counterexamples, the above question has a positive answer. Here is the
sketch of a proof. There is a sutured manifold hierarchy that almost gives us the desired
foliation with prescribed Euler class a. The only problem is that at the last step there is no
foliation on N with Euler class 0. N does not admit such a foliation because of the 2π
3 twist.
Now by the LERF property of the fundamental group, one can untwist N at the expense of
going to a ﬁnite cover p : ˜M −→ M . We construct a foliation ˜F of ˜M with e( ˜F ) = p∗(a).
Decompose ˜M as the union of p−1(N ) and ˜M − p−1(N ). On ˜M − p−1(N ) deﬁne ˜F to be
the lift of the foliation of M − N obtained by the sutured manifold hierarchy. On p−1(N ),
deﬁne ˜F to be a foliation of p−1(N ) which has Euler class 0. While gluing the pieces, one
should be careful about holonomies. To overcome this issue, one can change the holonomies
by attaching product pieces (similar to section 5).

References

[1] Danny Calegari. Leafwise smoothing laminations. Algebraic & Geometric Topology, 1(1):579–587, 2001.
[2] Danny Calegari. Universal circles for quasigeodesic ﬂows. Geometry & Topology, 10(4):2271–2298, 2006.
[3] Danny Calegari. Foliations and the geometry of 3-manifolds. Clarendon, 2007.
[4] Danny Calegari and Nathan M Dunﬁeld. Laminations and groups of homeomorphisms of the circle. In-

ventiones mathematicae, 152(1):149–204, 2003.

[5] Richard H Crowell. Genus of alternating link types. Annals of Mathematics, pages 258–275, 1959.
[6] Yakov Eliashberg and William Thurston. Confoliations, volume 13 of university lecture series. American

Mathematical Society, 1998.

[7] S´ergio Fenley and Lee Mosher. Quasigeodesic ﬂows in hyperbolic 3-manifolds. Topology, 40(3):503–537,

2001.

[8] David Gabai. Foliations and the topology of 3-manifolds. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society,

8(1):77–80, 1983.

[9] David Gabai. Taut foliations of 3-manifolds and suspensions of s

1. In Annales de l’institut Fourier, vol-

ume 42, pages 193–208, 1992.

[10] David Gabai. Problems in foliations and laminations. Stud. in Adv. Math. AMS/IP, 2:1–34, 1997.
[11] David Gabai. Combinatorial volume preserving ﬂows and taut foliations. Commentarii Mathematici Hel-

vetici, 75(1):109–124, 2000.

[12] David Gabai et al. Genera of the alternating links. Duke Math. J, 53(3):677–681, 1986.

26

MEHDI YAZDI

[13] ´Etienne Ghys. Rigidit´e diﬀ´erentiable des groupes fuchsiens. Publications Math´ematiques de l’IH ´ES, 78:163–

185, 1993.

[14] Robert E Gompf. Handlebody construction of stein surfaces. Annals of mathematics, pages 619–693, 1998.
[15] Andr´e Haeﬂiger. Vari´et´es feuillet´ees. Annali della Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa-Classe di Scienze,

16(4):367–397, 1962.

[16] William H Kazez and Rachel Roberts. Approximating c1, 0–foliations. Geometry & Topology Monographs,

19(1):21–72, 2015.

[17] John Milnor. On the existence of a connection with curvature zero. Commentarii Mathematici Helvetici,

32(1):215–223, 1958.

[18] Shigeaki Miyoshi. On foliated circle bundles over closed orientable 3-manifolds. Commentarii Mathematici

Helvetici, 72(3):400–410, 1997.

[19] Shigeaki Miyoshi et al. On representability of the smooth euler class. Tohoku Mathematical Journal,

56(4):523–530, 2004.

[20] Lee Mosher. Laminations and ﬂows transverse to ﬁnite depth foliations, part i: Branched surfaces and

dynamics. preprint, 1996.

[21] Kunio Murasugi. On the genus of the alternating knot ii. Journal of the Mathematical Society of Japan,

10(3):235–248, 1958.

[22] Sergei Petrovich Novikov. Topology of foliations. Trans. Moscow Math. Soc, 14:248–278, 1965.
[23] Robert Roussarie. Plongements dans les vari´et´es feuillet´ees et classiﬁcation de feuilletages sans holonomie.

Publications Math´ematiques de l’IH ´ES, 43:101–141, 1974.

[24] VV Solodov. Components of topological foliations. Sbornik: Mathematics, 47(2):329–343, 1984.
[25] W Thurston. Foliations of 3-manifolds which are circle bundles. University of California at Berkeley,

Thesis, 1972.

[26] William P Thurston. A norm for the homology of 3-manifolds. Memoirs of the American Mathematical

Society, 59(339):99–130, 1986.

[27] WP Thurston. Three manifolds, foliations and circles, ii: The transverse asymptotic geometry of foliations.

preprint, 1998.

[28] Shicheng Wang, Ying-Qing Wu, and Qing Zhou. Pseudo-anosov maps and simple closed curves on sur-
faces. In Mathematical Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, volume 128, pages 321–326.
Cambridge Univ Press, 2000.

[29] John W Wood. Foliations on 3-manifolds. Annals of Mathematics, pages 336–358, 1969.
[30] John W Wood. Bundles with totally disconnected structure group. Commentarii Mathematici Helvetici,

46(1):257–273, 1971.

