Draft version March 15, 2016
Preprint typeset using LATEX style emulateapj v. 5/2/11

LIGHT CURVES OF 213 TYPE IA SUPERNOVAE FROM THE ESSENCE SURVEY

G. Narayan1,2,3, A. Rest4, B. E. Tucker5, R. J. Foley6,7, W. M. Wood-Vasey8, P. Challis2, C. Stubbs2,3, R. P.
Kirshner2, C. Aguilera9, A. C. Becker10, S. Blondin11, A. Clocchiatti12, R. Covarrubias10, G. Damke13, T. M.

Davis14, A. V. Filippenko15, M. Ganeshalingam15, A. Garg2, P. M. Garnavich16, M. Hicken3, S. W. Jha17, K.
Krisciunas18, B. Leibundgut19, W. Li15,20, T. Matheson1, G. Miknaitis21, G. Pignata22, J. L. Prieto23, A. G.

Riess4,24, B. P. Schmidt5, J. M. Silverman25, R. C. Smith8, J. Sollerman26, J. Spyromilio19, N. B. Suntzeff18, J. L.

Tonry27, and A. Zenteno9

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
1

 
 
]

.

O
C
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
3
2
8
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Draft version March 15, 2016

ABSTRACT

The ESSENCE survey discovered 213 Type Ia supernovae at redshifts 0.1 < z < 0.81 between 2002
and 2008. We present their R and I-band photometry, measured from images obtained using the
MOSAIC II camera at the CTIO 4 m Blanco telescope, along with rapid-response spectroscopy for
each object. We use our spectroscopic follow-up observations to determine an accurate, quantitative
classiﬁcation and a precise redshift. Through an extensive calibration program we have improved
the precision of the CTIO Blanco natural photometric system. We use several empirical metrics to
measure our internal photometric consistency and our absolute calibration of the survey. We assess
the eﬀect of various potential sources of systematic bias on our measured ﬂuxes, and we estimate that
the dominant term in the systematic error budget from the photometric calibration on our absolute
ﬂuxes is ∼1%.
Subject headings: cosmology: observations — methods: data analysis — stars: supernovae: general,

surveys

gnarayan@noao.edu

1 National Optical Astronomy Observatory, 950 North Cherry

Avenue, Tucson, AZ 85719, USA

2 Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, 60 Garden

Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA

3 Department of Physics, Harvard University, 17 Oxford

Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA

4 Space Telescope Science Institute, 3700 San Martin Drive,

Baltimore, MD 21218, USA

5 The Research School of Astronomy and Astrophysics,
Australian National University, Mount Stromlo Observatory,
via Cotter Road, Weston Creek, ACT 2611, Australia

6 Department of Astronomy, University of Illinois at Urbana-

Champaign, 1002 W. Green Street, Urbana, IL 61801, USA

7 Department of Astronomy, University of Illinois at Urbana-

Champaign, 1010 W. Green Street, Urbana, IL 61801, USA

8 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of

Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA

9 Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory, National Optical

Astronomy Observatory, Casilla 603, La Serena, Chile

10 Department of Astronomy, University of Washington, Box

351580, Seattle, WA 98195-1580, USA

11 Aix Marseille Universit´e, CNRS, LAM (Laboratoire
d’Astrophysique de Marseille) UMR 7326, 13388, Marseille,
France

12 Pontiﬁcia Universidad Catolica de Chile,

Instituto de
Astroﬁsica, Casilla 306, Santiago 22, Chile and Millenium
Institute of Astrophysics, Chile

13 Department of Astronomy, University of Virginia, Char-

lottesville, VA 22904-4325, USA

14 School of Mathematics and Physics, University of Queens-

land, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia

15 Department of Astronomy, 501 Campbell Hall, University

of California, Berkeley, CA 94720-3411

16 Department of Physics, University of Notre Dame, 225

Nieuwland Science Hall, Notre Dame, IN 46556-5670, USA

17 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Rutgers, The State

University of New Jersey, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA

18 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Texas A&M

University, College Station, TX 77843-4242, USA

19 European Southern Observatory, Karl-Schwarzschild-

Strasse 2, D-85748 Garching, Germany

20 Deceased 2011 December 12.
21 Fermilab, P.O. Box 500, Batavia, IL 60510-0500, USA

22 Departamento de Ciencias Fisicas, Universidad Andres

Bello, Avda. Republica 252, Santiago, Santiago RM, Chile

23 Astronomy Nucleus, Faculty of Engineering, Universidad

Diego Portales, Ej´ercito 441, Santiago, Santiago RM, Chile

24 Johns Hopkins University, 3400 North Charles Street,

Baltimore, MD 21218, USA

25 Department of Astronomy, University of Texas, Austin,

TX 78712-0259, USA

26 Oskar Klein Centre, Department of Astronomy, AlbaNova,

Stockholm University, 10691, Stockholm, Sweden

27 Institute for Astronomy, University of Hawaii, 2680

Woodlawn Drive, Honolulu, HI 96822, USA

2

Narayan et al.

1. INTRODUCTION

We present the calibrated photometry of 213 Type Ia
supernovae (SN Ia) measured by the ESSENCE (Equa-
tion of State: Supernovae trace Cosmic Expansion) sur-
vey between 2002 and 2008. Our report more than dou-
bles the sample presented by Miknaitis et al. (2007) and
Wood-Vasey et al. (2007). We have made a signiﬁcant
eﬀort to improve the photometric calibration of the sur-
vey. As ESSENCE observed in only two passbands, our
measurements of luminosity distance are strongly corre-
lated with extinction in the host galaxy of the SN Ia and
very sensitive to the systematic error budget from pho-
tometry. In particular, the light curves in this work are
computed using data taken only with the Blanco 4 m
telescope at the Cerro-Tololo Inter-American Observa-
tory, eliminating cross-telescope systematics present in
the calibration by Miknaitis et al. (2007). A companion
work (Tucker et al. 2016, submitted) reports on proper-
ties of the host galaxies of our SN Ia sample. In future
work, we will use this sample along with low-redshift
SN Ia from the literature to perform a full cosmological
analysis and improve constraints on the nature of dark
energy.

Since the discovery of the luminosity-width-color rela-
tion (Phillips 1993), SN Ia have been our most precise
standardizable candles at cosmological distances. The
initial Cal´an-Tololo sample of 29 SN in 4 colors (Hamuy
et al. 1996) enabled the development of various algo-
rithms capable of correcting the dispersion in the intrin-
sic brightness of SN Ia and inferring the luminosity dis-
tances to ∼ 10% per object (Riess et al. 1996; Phillips
et al. 1999; Goldhaber et al. 2001). These light-curve
ﬁtters have been reﬁned as the size of the nearby sam-
ple has increased and its photometric precision has im-
proved; current algorithms can determine the luminosity
distance to well-observed SN Ia to ∼5% (Jha et al. 2007;
Guy et al. 2007; Conley et al. 2008; Mandel et al. 2011).
The distance moduli derived for these SN Ia indicated
that the Universe’s expansion is accelerating (Riess et al.
1998; Perlmutter et al. 1999). SN Ia observations have
remained our most sensitive cosmological probe of the
expansion history. The accelerating expansion has been
modeled by introducing a ﬂuid with negative pressure,
called “dark energy,” into the Friedmann equation:

(cid:18) ΩM

(cid:19)

,

h2(a) = h2
0

a3 +

Ων
a4 +

Ωk
a2 + ΩDE exp[3(1 + w)]

(1)
where h is the Hubble parameter, h0 = H0/100 km s−1
Mpc−1, a is the scale factor, and Ω is the total energy
density of matter (M ), photons (ν), curvature (k), and
dark energy (DE), respectively. Several groups have fo-
cused on measuring the ratio of pressure to density — the
equation-of-state parameter of this ﬂuid, w = P/(ρc2) —
to distinguish between diﬀerent models of the dark en-
ergy.

High-redshift SN Ia surveys (Wood-Vasey et al. 2007;
Riess et al. 2006; Guy et al. 2010; Betoule et al. 2014;
Sako et al. 2014) have independently reported measure-
ments of w consistent with −1, in good agreement with
a classical cosmological constant. However, despite the
rapidly growing number of SN Ia, the precision of the

measurement of w has stubbornly remained at the 10%
level, dominated by various sources of systematic uncer-
tainty. Several groups have attempted to reduce the ef-
fect of systematic errors in SN Ia measurements on the
dark energy ﬁgure of merit (FoM; Albrecht et al. 2006),
by either incorporating new sources of data or improving
the calibration of existing data.

Early work by Krisciunas et al. (2000) demonstrated
uniformity in the evolution of near-infrared (NIR) col-
ors of SN Ia, and the potential of NIR measurements for
cosmology (Krisciunas et al. 2004). Using increasingly
larger and better-calibrated samples of nearby SN Ia with
JHKs measurements, Wood-Vasey et al. (2008), Mandel
et al. (2009), and Barone-Nugent et al. (2012) have shown
that the NIR light curves of SN Ia span a smaller range
in luminosity than in the optical. Because distance mod-
uli derived from NIR measurements are less susceptible
to host-galaxy dust absorption, the residual scatter in a
Hubble diagram generated from NIR light curves alone is
comparable to the scatter derived from light-curve-shape
corrected optical data. Consequently, high-redshift sur-
veys have increasingly attempted to probe further into
the rest-frame NIR. Freedman et al. (2009) presented
the ﬁrst NIR Hubble diagram to redshift z ≈ 0.7, but
were limited by a relatively small sample size, system-
atic uncertainties in their photometric calibration, and
the diﬃculty of obtaining rest-frame NIR data at high z,
where the light is redshifted to even longer wavelengths.
Future high-z surveys, such as RAISIN (PI R. P. Kirsh-
ner, HST GO-13046), will provide valuable high-z SN Ia
measurements that probe the rest-frame NIR.

Kelly et al. (2010) illustrated that in addition to de-
mographic diﬀerences between SN Ia in passive and star-
forming hosts, the Hubble-diagram residuals are corre-
lated with derived host-galaxy size and stellar mass. This
correlation indicates that the empirical luminosity-shape
relations employed by SN Ia light-curve ﬁtters do not
fully account for the spread in peak luminosity.
In an
eﬀort to reduce this dispersion, Lampeitl et al. (2010)
employed a simple linear correction based on host-galaxy
stellar mass and found an improvement in statistical ﬁt
to the SN Ia measurements. Sullivan et al. (2010) used
diﬀerent SN Ia absolute magnitudes for high-mass and
low-mass hosts in their cosmological ﬁts, ﬁnding a signif-
icant improvement in χ2 over using a relation expressed
as a function of host-galaxy stellar mass.

However, although metallicity, extinction properties,
and speciﬁc star-formation rate correlate with host-
galaxy mass, the fundamental relation underlying this
correlation with SN Ia luminosity is not well under-
stood. These relations may be an artifact of the treat-
ment of SN Ia color by light-curve ﬁtters; Scolnic et al.
(2014b) found that the strength of correlation of the host-
galaxy properties with Hubble residual was reduced by
∼ 20% when SN Ia are treated as having an intrinsic
color scatter for a ﬁxed luminosity distance, rather than
an achromatic scatter in peak luminosity. In addition,
there are challenges in deriving host-galaxy properties
from broadband optical photometry at high redshift in
a manner that does not introduce additional systematic
uncertainty into SN Ia measurements. ESSENCE has
undertaken a signiﬁcant eﬀort to determine host-galaxy
morphology and properties for our sample, to appear in
Tucker et al. (2016, submitted.).

ESSENCE 6-Year Data Release

3

Many authors (Wang et al. 2009; Blondin et al. 2011;
Nordin et al. 2011; Foley & Kasen 2011; Walker et al.
2011; Silverman et al. 2012) have found that measure-
ments from spectra of SN Ia correlate with the residual
intrinsic color dispersion after light-curve shape correc-
tion. They further ﬁnd that these measurements, typi-
cally derived from pseudoequivalent widths of Ca or Si,
can be used to improve the precision of distance moduli,
although Blondin et al. (2011) ﬁnd that the improvement
is not statistically signiﬁcant (< 2σ). While promising,
this approach is limited by the need for high signal-to-
noise ratio (S/N) spectra of SN Ia. Additionally, the
dependence on measuring the Si ii λ6355 feature limits
its use at high z, where the redshifted Si features are
often not covered by the high-throughput low-dispersion
spectrographs used by SN Ia surveys.

Surveys such as ESSENCE, the Supernova Legacy Sur-
vey (SNLS), the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS), and
the Panoramic Survey Telescope and Rapid Response
System (Pan-STARRS) have now produced well over
1000 well-sampled SN Ia light curves that span the red-
shift range over which the transition from cosmic deceler-
ation to acceleration occurred. The crucial measurement
for characterizing the nature of dark energy is mapping
out luminosity distance versus redshift, to constrain the
parameters of Equation 1. The precision of photometric
calibration is now the dominant term of the SN Ia sur-
vey systematic error budget. Wood-Vasey et al. (2007)
found that systematic uncertainties from the photometry
alone could lead to a ∼4% change in w. Exploiting the
improved statistics from these large samples requires a
corresponding improvement in the photometric calibra-
tion across diverse instruments, detectors, and ﬁlters.

The most important aspect of this calibration chal-
lenge is to establish a well-grounded understanding of
ﬂux measurements made in diﬀerent broad optical pass-
bands. This in turn requires adopting a spectrophoto-
metric standard that serves as the metrology basis for re-
lating ﬂuxes across the bands being used. In essence, we
need to be able to distinguish cosmological evolution in
the luminosity distance vs. redshift relation from cross-
band calibration issues.

There are two methods in use or in development for

ﬂux calibration at CCD wavelengths.

1. Adopt an astrophysical source, particularly Vega,
as a celestial transfer standard, with ground-based
blackbody emitters as the fundamental calibration
sources. This is a long-standing method, serving as
the basis for Vega-based magnitudes (Oke & Schild
1970; Hayes & Latham 1975), and it underpins the
Landolt (1992) standard-star network.

2. Use well-calibrated laboratory standards (such as
silicon photodiodes from NIST) as the foundational
metrology layer, and measure the system through-
put in comparison to these devices. This was the
approach advocated by Stubbs & Tonry (2006),
and it is now in various stages of implementation by
Pan-STARRS (Tonry et al. 2012; Rest et al. 2014),
SNLS (Regnault et al. 2009), the joint eﬀorts of
SDSS and SNLS (Betoule et al. 2013, 2014), the
Dark Energy Survey (DES), and the Large Synop-
tic Survey Telescope (LSST).

While the ﬁrst method is well established, SN Ia sur-
veys require a higher level of precision than is possi-
ble with existing standard-star networks. The second
method is still nascent, and systems to measure the at-
mospheric component of the throughput are under active
development (Albert et al. 2014). No purely laboratory-
standard-based magnitude system yet exists. Several
surveys, including ESSENCE, have elected to use a com-
bination of both methods; the ﬁrst to determine the
absolute-ﬂux calibration, and the second to determine
precise relative system throughputs.

Kessler et al. (2009) demonstrated that measurements
of w are extremely sensitive to the calibration of the U
band at low redshift: inclusion of rest-frame U -band data
at all redshifts causes a 0.12 mag shift in distance moduli,
corresponding to an enormous 0.3 change in w. The U -
band anomaly might arise from diﬀerences between the
spectral energy distribution (SED) of SN Ia that corre-
late with host-galaxy properties or between objects at
low and high redshift (Foley et al. 2012; Maguire et al.
2012). Additionally, U -band measurements of the same
nearby SN Ia from diﬀerent telescopes often exhibit dif-
ferences that are inconsistent with the stated photomet-
ric uncertainties and system-throughput measurements.
Krisciunas et al. (2013) have demonstrated that careful
modeling of the U -band transmission with appropriate
S-corrections can resolve the diﬀerences between SN Ia
measurements. The size of the systematics associated
with the U band, however, has led most high-z surveys
to downweight or discard rest-frame ultraviolet (UV) ob-
servations.

Larger, more precisely calibrated nearby samples
(Ganeshalingam et al. 2010; Stritzinger et al. 2011;
Hicken et al. 2012), along with better calibration of high-
z SN Ia surveys, oﬀer the most direct path to reducing
the systematic uncertainty on w, Wide-ﬁeld deep surveys
such as Pan-STARRS and DES will obtain SN Ia mea-
surements over 0 < z < 1.2 (Rest et al. 2014), further
reducing systematic uncertainties from photometry by
avoiding any errors associated with cross-telescope cali-
bration and weakening the sensitivity of w to the over-
all photometric calibration of the survey (Scolnic et al.
2014a). Recognizing the need for precision calibration to
reduce systematics (Stubbs & Tonry 2006; Tucker et al.
2007), and following the example set by SDSS (Ivezi´c
et al. 2007; Padmanabhan et al. 2008), current surveys
have undertaken ambitious calibration programs. These
eﬀorts combine high-precision measurements of system
throughput calibrated to laboratory standards, with at-
mospheric data and repeated observations of stellar stan-
dards to obtain < 1% photometry over much of the sky
(Stubbs et al. 2010; Schlaﬂy et al. 2012; Tonry et al.
2012). The work presented here details the calibration
of the ESSENCE survey, with a focus on minimizing the
systematic error budget from photometry.

We provide a brief overview of the ESSENCE survey
in §2, followed by our photometric data reduction and
calibration in §3. Our spectroscopic follow-up observa-
tions and classiﬁcation are described in §4. We illus-
trate our SN Ia light curves, compare and contrast our
methodologies for light-curve ﬁtting, and detail the prop-
erties of the full ESSENCE 6-year sample in §5. Our
photometric error budget from various sources with sys-
tematic uncertainty is discussed in §6. We conclude

4

Narayan et al.

TABLE 1

Primary ESSENCE Fields

Field

waa
wbb
wcc
wdd

◦ (cid:48)

α (J2000) δ(J2000) N Images
(cid:48)(cid:48)
h m s
23:27:27 −09:51:00
01:12:00 −00:20:17
02:07:41 −04:55:00
02:28:36 −08:24:17

172
275
289
293

in §7. The Appendices contain further information on
the computation of illumination corrections, the proper-
ties of the CTIO Blanco natural-magnitude system em-
ployed in this work, tables containing the photometry of
ESSENCE SN Ia and likely SN Ia without spectroscopic
conﬁrmation (hereafter,“Ia?”) during the year of discov-
ery, and light-curve-ﬁt parameters using the two most
common methodologies.

2. THE ESSENCE SURVEY

Previous ESSENCE publications have described the
survey strategy, ﬁelds, data processing (Miknaitis et al.
2007, hereafter M07), spectroscopic selection criteria and
follow-up observations (Matheson et al. 2005; Foley et al.
2009), performed a preliminary cosmological analysis
(Wood-Vasey et al. 2007, hereafter WV07), and scruti-
nized exotic cosmological models (Davis et al. 2007). The
SN Ia search was carried out on the CTIO 4 m Blanco
telescope (hereafter, Blanco) over 197 half-nights in dark
and gray time between September and January from 2002
to 2008. Science images were obtained using the 64 Mega
pixel MOSAIC II camera with an Atmospheric Disper-
sion Corrector (ADC) through two primary ﬁlters (de-
noted R and I) similar to Cousins RC and IC. The ﬁeld
of view of the system is 0.36 deg2 on the sky at the f /2.87
prime focus.

The imager consists of eight 2k × 4k CCDs arranged in
two rows of four. Each CCD is bisected along its length,
and each section is read out in parallel, resulting in 16
ampliﬁer images for every science exposure. Readout

times are ∼ 100 s. Each pixel subtends 0.27(cid:48)(cid:48) at the
center of the ﬁeld. Optical distortions cause a radial
variance of ∼8% in the pixel scale.
The survey covered a set of 4 primary ﬁelds (listed in
Table 1, together with the number of times each ﬁeld
was observed), each consisting of 8 subﬁelds clustered
spatially. Fields were selected to be equatorial but out-
side the Galactic and ecliptic planes,
in regions with
low Milky Way extinction and minimal IR cirrus, and
with coverage from existing surveys (including SDSS, the
NOAO Deep Wide-Field Survey, and the Deep Lens Sur-
vey) where possible. The ﬁelds were spaced to ensure
that science images could be taken at low airmass. Fields
were divided into two sets, and each set was imaged in
both ﬁlters every other observing night resulting in a typ-
ical cadence of 4 days. Science frames are exposed for
200 s in R and 400 s in I. The original I ﬁlter (NOAO
code c6005) sustained signiﬁcant damage on 2002 Nov
10, severely degrading the image quality of I-band data
in CCDs 1 and 2 (ampliﬁers 1–4). The ﬁlter was replaced
on 2003 May 25. CCD 3 failed shortly before the start
of the 2003 observing season, resulting in a 12.5% loss in
eﬃciency until it was replaced in 2004.

Survey images were reduced at CTIO using the
“photpipe” pipeline developed for use on the CTIO
Blanco by the SuperMACHO survey (Rest et al. 2005;
Miknaitis et al. 2007; Garg et al. 2007) that operated
contemporaneously with the ESSENCE survey. Each
science image was calibrated and aligned with a ﬁxed
astrometric grid. We subtracted a reference template
for each ﬁeld, constructed using deep images from pre-
vious observations. Point-spread function (PSF) pho-
tometry from the resulting diﬀerence image was com-
bined to identify sources that had varied over multi-
ple epochs, while eliminating sources of contamination
such as diﬀerence-image artifacts and diﬀraction spikes
from saturated stars. With limited time for spectroscopic
follow-up observations, we were forced to employ various
cuts and selection criteria in order to determine the most
promising candidates.

The spectroscopic follow-up observations of ESSENCE
candidates are described in § 4. All candidates were vi-
sually inspected to select spectroscopic targets to clas-
sify them and obtain redshifts. We produced a prelimi-
nary reduction of all spectra in real time, using standard
IRAF28 routines, and some custom IDL routines to facil-
itate data processing for the various instruments. Es-
timates of the redshift and classiﬁcation were obtained
onsite using SNID (Blondin & Tonry 2007). When pre-
liminary classiﬁcations were unclear, we relied on the ex-
perience of the observers to determine if additional spec-
troscopic observations were warranted.

Fields containing candidates with a clear classiﬁcation
as SN Ia were monitored for the remainder of the observ-
ing season. Following survey operations, all data were
transferred, initially to the Hydra Computing Cluster
maintained by the Smithsonian Institution, and later to
the Odyssey Compute Cluster, hosted by the Research
Computing Group at Harvard University for the analy-
sis presented in this paper. All data are also available
through the NOAO archive29.

3. DATA REDUCTION
3.1. Image Detrending

The eight CCDs of MOSAIC II were read out in pairs,
through two ampliﬁers per chip, by four Arcon con-
trollers. The crosstalk between the ampliﬁers is sub-
tracted using the xtalk task from the mscred package
in IRAF. All CCD images are debiased and trimmed,
and masking was applied to bad pixels and columns.
The mask is propagated through all subsequent reduc-
tion stages.

All science images are ﬂat-ﬁeld corrected using dome
ﬂats. These ﬂats accurately corrected for pixel-to-pixel
variations, but large-scale variations were introduced as
a result of uneven illumination of the dome screen and
stray light paths in the optical system. While the pre-
cision obtained from dome-ﬂat images alone is suitable
for many projects, we required higher precision for SN Ia
cosmology and strived to minimize potential systematic
errors in our photometry. We therefore accounted for
large-scale illumination variation by constructing an illu-

28 IRAF is distributed by the National Optical Astronomy Ob-
servatory, which is operated by AURA, Inc. under cooperative
agreement with the NSF.

29 http://archive.noao.edu/nsa/

ESSENCE 6-Year Data Release

5

mination correction from the science images, as described
below.

We applied the nightly dome-ﬂat image to all science
images to construct a temporary preliminary ﬂattened
image. The resulting images were masked to remove con-
tamination from all astrophysical sources, normalized to
have the same sky value, and then averaged. The derived
calibration image was inverted, smoothed with a large
kernel, and scaled to have a mean of unity. This illu-
mination correction was applied to the dome-ﬂat images
to take out residual large-scale gradients. The science
images were reprocessed with this ﬁnal ﬂat-ﬁeld image.
To estimate the night-to-night stability of the illumina-
tion correction, we took the ratio of the correction image
between diﬀerent nights of a single run — a period of time
during which MOSAIC II was continuously mounted on
the telescope, typically one lunation. We found that the
gradient pattern (a representative example is shown in
Fig. 1) was very stable within a lunar cycle. The stan-
dard deviation of the ratio without sigma-clipping was
typically less that 0.1%, and the absolute value of the
maximum diﬀerence between the ratio and the average
of the ratio image was < 0.003. Therefore, on nights
with few science images of sparse ﬁelds or with excess
stray light — either from insuﬃcient baﬄing or around
the time of full moon — we exploited the stability of the
gradient pattern to estimate the illumination correction
from nearby nights. This estimation and temporal stabil-
ity of the illumination corrections is examined in further
detail in Appendix A.

Surveys that use master ﬂats constructed for each run
are susceptible to systematic trends, such as long-period
variations in ampliﬁer gain. By contrast, our procedure
avoids such eﬀects: science frames were normalized with
nightly ﬂat frames and primarily used illumination cor-
rections determined from the same, or at the least ex-
trapolated only from nearby nights.

3.2. Astrometric Calibration

In order to construct diﬀerence images to search for
and measure the ﬂux of variable and transient objects,
we ﬁrst imposed a consistent astrometric solution and
warped all the science images to a consistent pixel coor-
dinate system. The transformation between the local im-
age pixel coordinate system and the FK5 World Coordi-
nate System is dominated by optical distortions that are
well described by a low-order polynomial in radius from
the ﬁeld center. We determined the polynomial terms
of the distortion function from images of dense Large
Magellanic Cloud ﬁelds using the IRAF task msctpeak.
The distortion terms were used in combination with the
IRAF task msccmatch to derive a world coordinate sys-
tem (WCS) solution for each ﬁeld. The distortion terms
were recomputed monthly as they vary over timescales
If left uncorrected, this variation would
of 6 months.

introduce systematic oﬀsets at the ∼0.01(cid:48)(cid:48) level.

With the distortion modeled, the astrometric solution
for any image with the equatorially mounted Blanco re-
duces to determining the linear rotation matrix with re-
spect to the center. We used the IRAF task mscmatch
from the mscred package to match pixel coordinates for
objects in the image to an existing catalog of the ﬁeld
with precise astrometry. We generated an initial astro-
metric solution for the survey using reference catalogs

derived from the SDSS DR7 (Abazajian et al. 2009)
wherever possible, defaulting to astrometry from the
USNO CCD Astrograph catalog 2 (UCAC; Zacharias
et al. 2004) where SDSS coverage was unavailable. As
the SDSS is itself tied to the UCAC, and as we only re-
quire precise relative astrometric calibration to precisely
position the PSF and measure ﬂux, errors caused by the
diﬀerences of the astrometric solution between the two
diﬀerent reference catalogs are negligible. We used this
initial solution to generate secondary astrometric cata-
logs using our multiple observations of each ﬁeld.

Finally, we used the astrometric solution and the SWarp
(Bertin et al. 2002) package to resample each image to a
common pixel coordinate system using a ﬂux-conserving
Lanczos-windowed sinc kernel. We generated weight
maps for each image to account for the change in the
noise properties produced by resampling. Some covari-
ance between pixels is introduced as a result of the resam-
pling process and we accounted for it during diﬀerence
imaging.

3.3. Flux Measurement

We used the DoPHOT photometry package (Schechter
et al. 1993) to identify and measure sources within the
warped images. DoPHOT is appropriate for point-source
photometry. Tucker et al. (2016, submitted) will report
on photometry of extended sources.

3.4. Photometric Calibration

High-redshift SN Ia surveys typically report observa-
tions in their natural photometric system, relating mag-
nitudes to measured ﬂux via

mT,i = −2.5 log10(φADU,T,i) + ZPT,i,

(2)

where m is the natural magnitude, φ is the measured
ﬂux, and ZPT,i is the instrumental zero point of image i
observed through passband T .

Natural magnitudes have several advantages: they al-
low surveys to schedule observations in diﬀerent pass-
bands independently, as the SN Ia colors at every epoch
are not needed, and they avoid the additional photo-
metric errors that arise from converting the observed SN
ﬂux to a standard system. These transformations are
nontrivial, as the simple linear transformations derived
for stars are not directly applicable to SN Ia with their
more complex SEDs. However, as these measurements
are reported in a nonstandard magnitude system, sur-
veys must establish a network of stellar calibrators in
the natural system of the telescope to derive accurate
and precise zero points. In addition, an accurate model
of the survey throughput in each passband is required so
that measurements in the natural system can be com-
pared to synthetic ﬂuxes generated from models derived
from SN Ia measurements at low redshifts in the standard
system. We have developed various metrics to quantify
our internal photometric consistency, and we veriﬁed our
zero-point consistency using the SDSS. We detail the im-
provements to the photometric calibration for the survey
in the next subsections.

3.4.1. Aperture Corrections

6

Narayan et al.

Fig. 1.— A representative R-band illumination correction for Ampliﬁer 6 of the MOSAIC II. The primary structure in the illumination
correction is a ∼0.5% gradient from left to right and top to bottom. The median value of each column is indicated in red. The bar at right
indicates the grey-scale values.

The extended aureole of astrophysical objects has a
surface-brightness proﬁle that roughly follows r−2, and a
large fraction of the ﬂux is outside the seeing disk. Thus,
an aperture larger than the seeing disk is necessary for
the enclosed ﬂux to be a reliable estimator of the true
source ﬂux. However, the larger the aperture, the higher
the uncertainty from sky subtraction, and the higher the
probability of enclosing contaminating sources. We fol-
low the standard technique of addressing this tradeoﬀ by
measuring the ﬂux in a ﬁxed aperture, and determining
an aperture correction to correct for its ﬁnite size.

Accurate aperture corrections are critical to establish-
ing a consistent photometric system across the survey.
We have signiﬁcantly reﬁned the algorithm used to gen-
erate aperture corrections for images. For each subﬁeld,
we identiﬁed several isolated objects (typically 10–25 per
ampliﬁer) with S/N > 20 that are consistent with a
point-source PSF in multiple images. We took care to
eliminate instances where we found ﬂux measurements
from isolated, but nonstellar objects in the growth curves
computed for M07. The ﬂux of each star was mea-
sured using aperture radii from 5 to 40 pixels, accounting
for the weight map and any ﬂux lost to masked pixels.
We constructed diﬀerential growth curves for each image
(a representative example is provided in Fig. 2). The
growth curves of individual stars that indicate contami-
nation by a secondary source (cosmic rays, stray reﬂec-
tions, streaks) were removed. If more than 25% of the
stars were clipped, the aperture correction for the image
was ﬂagged “bad”. We checked that the growth curves
asymptotically approached a constant value for all aper-
tures larger than 22 pixels, and ﬂagged those that did
not. We measured the total aperture correction to an

sen to eﬀectively enclose most of the ﬂux of each object
for all ESSENCE images, which have a typical PSF full

aperture radius of 25 pixels, or ∼13.5(cid:48)(cid:48) in diameter, cho-
width at half-maximum intensity (FWHM) of ∼1.2(cid:48)(cid:48) in

both passbands (see Fig. 3).

3.4.2. Choice of Standard-Star Network and a

Fundamental Spectrophotometric Standard

While several standard stellar catalogs report broad-
in diﬀerent photometric systems
band magnitudes
through a range of passbands (Landolt 1983; Stetson
2000; Ivezi´c et al. 2007; Landolt & Uomoto 2007), the
standard-star network of Landolt (1992) extended by
Stetson (2005) remains the most obvious choice to tie to
the Johnson-Morgan-Cousins photometric system. The

RC and IC Cousins ﬁlters are broadly similar to those
used on the Blanco (see Fig. 4), and the magnitudes re-
ported by low-redshift SN Ia surveys are converted into
the Johnson system using observations of the Landolt
network stars. This allows us to minimize systematic
uncertainties when comparing our data to the nearby
sample.

The choice of standard-star network and the transfor-
mation equations derived between the natural and stan-
dard systems also play a critical role in determining the
absolute throughput of each passband. This calibration
enables SED models of SN Ia generated from low-redshift
observations to be converted into the Blanco natural-
magnitude system via

(cid:18)(cid:90)

(cid:19)

λ
hc

dλ

(3)

+ ZPT .

F (λ)T (λ)

mT = −2.5 log10
This equation is inverted to determine the zero point,
ZPT , for the full optical system (detector, optics, ﬁlter,
and atmosphere) with dimensionless total photon eﬃ-
ciency, T (λ), using a star with a well-measured SED,
F (λ)30, whose magnitudes (mT ) are known in the natu-
ral system — a “fundamental spectrophotometric stan-
dard.”

Unfortunately, most well-measured spectrophotomet-
ric standards are too bright to be imaged directly by
the Blanco. We must therefore infer the Blanco natural
magnitudes of the fundamental standard using the star’s
standard magnitudes. The most direct way of achiev-
ing this is to deﬁne the transformation equations such
that the Landolt and natural-system magnitudes agree
at some color.

Historically, the choice for the fundamental standard
for SN Ia surveys has been α Lyrae (Vega), either implic-
itly when the rest-frame SN Ia model is constructed from
low-z data, or explicitly when deﬁning the passband zero
points for high-z surveys (Astier et al. 2006; Miknaitis
et al. 2007; Hicken et al. 2009b; Contreras et al. 2010;
Stritzinger et al. 2011; Hicken et al. 2012). Vega was one
of six A0 V stars used to establish the color zero point

30 The formalism employed throughout this work represents
SEDs as power per unit wavelength as a function of wavelength,
while the system throughput is represented as a dimensionless pho-
ton eﬃciency. The former is typically provided in erg s−1 cm−2
˚A−1. If the system throughput is provided in erg ˚A−1, then the ex-
tra factor of the inverse energy, λ/hc, must be dropped to account
for the Jacobian of the transformation.

05121024153620482560307235844096Column(pixel)02565127681024Row(pixel)0.99550.99700.99851.00001.00151.00300.99700.99851.00001.00151.0030MedianofColumnESSENCE 6-Year Data Release

7

Fig. 2.— Typical diﬀerential curves of growth for R (left, red) and I (right, orange) on 20071103 (YYYYMMDD), for Ampliﬁer 4
(both randomly selected). The point at the smallest physical aperture is the diﬀerence between the DoPHOT magnitude of the object and
magnitude with an aperture radius of 5 pixels. We have used a piecewise ordinate-axis scale to show the full range of the data without
compressing local variations. We plot the individual isolated stars in grey, oﬀseting each individual star slightly from the aperture through
which the ﬂux is measured along the negative abscissa direction for clarity. We checked that the growth curve is consistent with a constant
for apertures larger than 22 pixels, indicated by vertical lines with an arrow in between. Uncertainties in the average measurement at each
aperture, δA, are typically smaller than the plot symbols. We propagated the covariance matrix between apertures to determine the ﬁnal
aperture correction at a radius of 25 pixels (indicated with a blue star, and labeled in the left panel).

ubiquitous.

However, as discussed by Regnault et al. (2009), Vega
is far from an ideal choice for the fundamental standard.
Taylor (1986) found that in order for several sources of
synthetic and observed Cousins RC − IC measurements
to agree, the IC transmission curve had to be shifted
to the red by 50–100 ˚A. With this shift, the synthetic
color of Vega was found to be 0.006 mag. Fukugita et al.
(1996) report a similar value. Furthermore, the Lan-
dolt (R − I)L color of Vega is signiﬁcantly more blue
than the average for the Landolt standard-star network
(with (R − I)L ≈ 0.47 mag) and consequently, any sys-
tematic error in the color term or the Landolt (R − I)L
color of Vega has a much larger systematic eﬀect on the
RI natural magnitudes than would a standard with a
color closer to the average Landolt standard. Vega may
exhibit some photometric variability (Fernie 1981).
In
addition it’s SED is punctuated with several unusually
shaped absorption lines. Vega has an excess of NIR emis-
sion longwards of 1–2 µm, likely a result of its dust ring
(Bohlin 2014) and possibly its rapid rotation (Peterson
et al. 2006) It also has an excess of UV emission relative
to a 9400K model (a result of its rapid rotation Bohlin
et al. (2014)). These may introduce systematic errors
when models are used to extend the observed SED of
Vega into the UV and IR.

Following several groups including SDSS (Ivezi´c et al.
2007) and SNLS (Regnault et al. 2009), we instead select
the sdF8 D star, BD+17◦4708, as our fundamental spec-
trophotometric standard. At (R − I)L = 0.32 mag, the
color of BD+17◦4708 is considerably closer to the aver-
age Landolt network star than Vega. The Hubble Space
Telescope (HST) CALSPEC program has measured the

Fig. 3.— FWHM distribution of R and I science images from
the survey. The mean FWHM is 1.24(cid:48)(cid:48) for the R band and 1.2(cid:48)(cid:48)
for I.

on the photometric system of Johnson & Morgan (1953)
by deﬁning the mean U − B and B − V colors of the six
stars to be zero, and this deﬁnition was further extended
to Cousins RC − IC. Vega’s SED was tied to tungsten-
ribbon ﬁlament lamps and laboratory blackbody sources
employed as fundamental standards (Oke & Schild 1970;
Hayes & Latham 1975). With the widespread adoption
of the Landolt standard-star network to tie instrumen-
tal photometry to the Johnson system, the use of Vega
as the fundamental spectrophotometric standard became

510152025303540ApertureRadius(r,pixels)-0.10-0.08-0.06-0.04-0.02+0.00+0.02+0.04ANorm25pxδAR4m(r)510152025303540ApertureRadius(r,pixels)-0.10-0.08-0.06-0.04-0.02+0.00+0.02+0.04δAI4m(r)+0.150+0.175+0.200+0.100+0.125+0.150+0.175+0.200MagnitudeDifference(Mr−Mr−1,mag)0.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0FWHM(′′)0123456789#(1000s)R:1.24′′I:1.20′′8

Narayan et al.

and A, X, and Z denote the aperture correction, airmass,
and zero point of image i, respectively. These relations
are deﬁned such that at the color of BD+17◦4708, the
calibrated magnitudes of the Blanco system match those
of Landolt.

We expect diﬀerences in the aperture corrections be-
tween science and calibration-ﬁeld frames. Images of the
calibration ﬁelds were generally short exposures (< 60 s)
and often unguided, while science images are 200 s in R
and 400 s in I. We found typical systematic diﬀerences of
1–3% between the aperture corrections measured in the
calibration ﬁelds and the mean aperture correction of all
science ﬁelds observed on the same nights. The aperture
correction diﬀerences are correlated with the PSF size
and ellipticity measured in the calibration ﬁelds. We ac-
counted for these aperture correction diﬀerences while
extrapolating zero points between images to construct
the tertiary photometric catalogs in §3.5.
The average oﬀset between Landolt magnitudes for
catalog stars and measured instrumental magnitudes was
calculated for each ﬁeld, ﬁtting for a single linear term
in Landolt 0.3 < (R − I)L < 0.8 color. As there were in-
suﬃcient stars covering the full color range in any single
image, the weighted mean color term for all calibration
ﬁeld images with at least 20 stars in I and 50 stars in
R was computed. Computing the color term image by
image allowed us to look for trends in the color term
with time and airmass. While this procedure leads to
slightly higher statistical uncertainties than if a single
color term was determined simultaneously for all images,
it produces a robust estimate of the color term, and as
shown in §6, the systematic uncertainties in the photo-
metric calibration are dominated by the uncertainty in
determining the absolute zero points.

We found color terms of cR
R−I = −0.030 ± 0.001 and
cI
R−I = 0.022 ± 0.001. These values are in good agree-
ment with measurements by observatory staﬀ31 for the
Blanco. The dispersion about the ﬁtted value is ∼2.5% in
R and ∼1.5% in I. While this dispersion is signiﬁcantly
larger than the photon noise, this is not unexpected. We
seek a single linear color term that is applicable over a
range of color, and in a variety of observing conditions
that reﬂect the conditions under which science images
were acquired. As we compute these color terms image-
by-image, the dispersion about the mean value reﬂects
unmodeled variation in site conditions, as well as any
variation in the sample of stars used to compute the color
term for any given image. This procedure is preferable to
one in which a subset of images is designated as having
been acquired in “perfectly photometric” conditions and
is used for calibration, as any diﬀerence between condi-
tions on photometric nights and the mean condition of
science nights will lead to systematic errors in the pho-
tometric calibration.

The value in R is the same as that used by M07, while
we ﬁnd cI
R−I to be lower by 0.008±0.003 than that work.
We attribute this diﬀerence to the diﬀerent methodology
used and the redder color range of stars selected for pho-
tometric calibration in the M07 analysis.

Several imagers show a strong radial dependence on the
color term. Any relative error in the photometry between

Fig. 4.— Throughput curves for CTIO Blanco R and I pass-
bands (thick red and orange, respectively), representing full sys-
tem throughput including wavelength dependence of CCD quan-
tum eﬃciency (dot-dashed blue), aluminum reﬂectance of the mir-
rors (solid grey) in the Blanco telescope, the optical ﬁlters (thin
red and orange), and a model of the atmosphere (dashed green)
generated using the MODTRAN4 code at an airmass of 1 with 2 mm
of water vapor at an altitude of 2 km and a contribution from
aerosols appropriate for the CTIO Blanco site. The measurement
of the various components of the system throughput is discussed in
§B.1, and the response curves are listed in Table B2. The Bessell
R and I ﬁlter curves (red and orange circles, joined by dot-dashed
black lines, and normalized to have the same peak transmission)
are shown for comparison.

SED of BD+17◦4708 covering 0.17–1 µm with an uncer-
tainty of < 0.5% in the ﬂux calibration derived from the
three primary HST white-dwarf standards and ∼2% in
the relative ﬂux calibration over the entire wavelength
range.

3.4.3. Transformation Between Landolt Network and the

CTIO Blanco Natural System

In order to calibrate the natural system of the
Blanco, we obtained several
images of three Landolt
standard ﬁelds (L92, L95, Ru149) directly with the
Blanco/MOSAIC II over 63 nights in 2006 and 2007.
The images covered a wide range of airmass and expo-
sure time, and the calibration ﬁelds were dithered across
the entire ﬁeld of view. With this large dataset, we ro-
bustly determined extinction and color terms between
the Blanco (4m) and the Landolt network using the re-
lations

RIns
4m + Ai =RL + kR4m(Xi − 1)

+ cR4m

(R−I)L

((R − I)L − 0.32) − Zi,

(4)

I Ins
4m + Ai =IL + kI4m(Xi − 1)

+ cI4m

(R−I)L

((R − I)L − 0.32) − Zi,

where R and I denote the R- and I-band magnitudes in
the Landolt (L) and Blanco instrumental (4m) systems,

31 http://www.ctio.noao.edu/mosaic/ZeroPoints.html

5000600070008000900010000Wavelength(˚A)0.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91.0ThroughputRc6004Ic6028MirrorReﬂectivityMOSAICIICCDQEAtmosphericTransmissionESSENCE 6-Year Data Release

9

the center and periphery of the detector can aﬀect the
color term. Such eﬀects can arise because of errors in
the illumination correction or chromatic eﬀects. Other
wide-ﬁeld imagers often include devices from diﬀerent
suppliers, and the quantum eﬃciency (and therefore the
color term) is a function of position on the detector. Nei-
ther factor is a major consideration for MOSAIC II, and
there is no evidence of this eﬀect being a signiﬁcant con-
cern in other studies with this instrument. Neverthe-
less, we elected to look for any systematic CCD-to-CCD
variation in the color terms. We found that the color
term had a standard deviation of 0.005 in R and 0.003
in I about the mean. However, as standard ﬁelds were
not observed over the full duration of the survey, and
we might expect any low-level CCD-to-CCD variation to
change as the instrument was mounted, unmounted, and
cleaned, we cannot determine if this variance is system-
atic. Consequently, we elected to use a single color term
for the entire imager, as in M07, and absorb this into our
systematic error budget in §6.
We looked for systematic trends in the residuals be-
tween the image-by-image color terms and the mean color
term over time, but found that these were not statisti-
cally signiﬁcant. The increasing accumulation of dust on
the optical surfaces leads to a changing zero point but
does not signiﬁcantly aﬀect the color terms.

The oﬀset was reﬁt with the color term ﬁxed to this
value and the aperture correction was added. Thus,
the oﬀset represents the average diﬀerence between
the Landolt-catalog magnitudes and our instrumen-
tal magnitudes through a consistent 25 pixel aperture.
These aperture-corrected zero points were then regressed
against the airmass to determine the slope of the extinc-
tion law and the intercept.

We found no improvement in allowing the extinc-
tion term to vary between survey years. Rather, we
found that we could suﬃciently account for year-to-
year changes in the overall transparency at the CTIO
site by decomposing the survey zero point into a domi-
nant constant term with a small night-to-night variation.
We measured extinction-law slopes of 0.104 mag/airmass
and 0.058 mag/airmass in R and I (respectively), with
dispersions of ∼ 0.02 mag about the ﬁtted linear rela-
tion. The airmass relation and color terms determined
are shown in Fig. 5. Additionally, we used the RANSAC
algorithm (Fischler & Bolles 1981) to determine both the
extinction and color terms, to ensure that our ﬁts were
not sensitive to outliers. We found diﬀerences at the
10−5 level for the extinction coeﬃcient, and typically at
the 10−4 level for the image-by-image color terms, con-
sistent with the uncertainties on these quantities.

3.5. Tertiary Catalogs and Zero Points

Having calibrated the ampliﬁers within the footprint
of the Landolt standard ﬁeld, we derived an extended
standard catalog covering the entire ﬁeld of view of MO-
SAIC II. As this catalog was generated by extrapolating
the zero point to other ampliﬁers of the same image,
we accounted for the diﬀerences in the aperture correc-
tion between ampliﬁers. This procedure prevented any
systematic errors arising from PSF variation, a mises-
timation of the extinction coeﬃcient, or short-timescale
variations in transparency from aﬀecting the extended

standard catalog.

The zero points were then redetermined using the ex-
tended catalog, without any additional color correction
applied. We extrapolated these zero points to science
images on the same nights as the calibration images, ad-
justing for diﬀerences in exposure time, aperture correc-
tion, and airmass. For each star in the science ﬁelds, we
determined the 3σ-clipped error-weighted mean magni-
tudes to generate our ﬁnal photometric reference catalog
for each ﬁeld. Stars with a high root-mean square (RMS)
scatter relative to their mean magnitude errors were re-
jected as variable. The resulting catalogs typically have
∼30 stars per ampliﬁer, with at least 3 observations in
both ﬁlters, and a median of 8 observations each in R
and 5 in I. A 0.4% uncertainty was added in quadrature
to all stars, in order to make the average reduced χ2
unity. The error-magnitude distribution of the reference
catalog stars is shown in Fig. 6.

These reference catalogs were used to determine zero
points for all science images. To examine the temporal
stability of the zero points, we adjusted them for diﬀer-
ences in aperture correction, airmass, and exposure time,
but not nightly variations in transparency or variation
between diﬀerent ampliﬁers. The adjusted zero points
of all available ampliﬁers were averaged together to con-
struct the average adjusted zero point for a given image.
In Fig. 7, we plot this quantity as a function of the time
since the start of the each year’s observing season; the
conditions at the Blanco remained very stable over the
entire duration of the survey. We also constructed the
nightly average zero point, and the histogram of residu-
als to the nightly average zero point is plotted in Fig. 8.
The residual scatter in the nightly zero-point residuals is
< 2% in both R and I.

3.6. Image Subtraction

Having established zero points for each science image,
we used image subtraction to remove the background
light of the host galaxies. Prior to subtraction, the
PSF of each image was ﬁrst determined from ﬁeld stars.
We used the “High Order Transform Of PSF And Tem-
plate Subtraction” (HOTPANTS)32 package to determine
the convolution kernel between each image and template
pair. For each pair, the image with the narrower PSF was
convolved to match the image with the broader PSF. All
N (N − 1)/2 possible pairs of image and reference tem-
plates from at least three observing seasons were used to
create diﬀerence images for each object (the “NN2 pro-
cess”), following the algorithm of Barris et al. (2005). We
used a version of DoPHOT (Schechter et al. 1993), modi-
ﬁed to use the PSF and ﬂux calibration of the image with
the broader PSF, to measure ﬂux in the diﬀerence image.
The ﬂux calibration of the diﬀerence image was adjusted
by the normalization of the convolution kernel. The po-
sition of the SN was measured by taking the weighted
mean of all detections with S/N > 5. The derived posi-
tions are accurate to 0.02(cid:48)(cid:48). The ﬂux in each diﬀerence
image was measured with the PSF centroid ﬁxed to the
position of the SN. A representative example of our im-
age subtraction is provided in Figure 9.

As described by M07, the uncertainties in ﬂux in our
diﬀerence image are underestimated owing to pixel-pixel

32 https://github.com/acbecker/hotpants

10

Narayan et al.

Fig. 5.— (Left) Extinction relation for CTIO Blanco system in R and I using calibration data for three Landolt ﬁelds (L92, L95, and
Ru149) imaged during the 2006 and 2007 observing seasons. The vertical axis is the diﬀerence between instrumental aperture magnitudes
and Landolt catalog magnitudes, corrected for exposure time and variation with Landolt R − I color. We exclude any data taken in
nonphotometric conditions. We ﬁnd extinction-law slopes of 0.104 mag/airmass and 0.058 mag/airmass in R and I, respectively. (Right)
Distribution of color terms, determined per image, to Landolt R − I for the CTIO Blanco system in I (above) and R (below), using
calibration data from 2006–2007. Only images with at least 50 stars in R and at least 20 stars in I were used in the analysis. As
there are typically insuﬃcient stars spanning the full color range in any single image, the weighted mean color term for all the images is
computed (indicated by dashed vertical lines) and used for all further analysis. We ﬁnd color terms of cR4m
= −0.030 ± 0.001 and
cI4m
(R−I)L

= 0.022 ± 0.001.

(R−I)L

covariance introduced during the resampling process.
Rather than scale the noise in each image up by a con-
stant factor of 1.2 as in M07, we determined a correction
for each individual diﬀerence image using ﬂux measure-
ments across the frame. We convolved the PSF on a
regular grid across the diﬀerence image, measured the
standard deviation of the distribution of ﬂux/σﬂux, and
scaled each noise image by this factor. This process ef-
fectively accounts for the small residual pixel-pixel co-
variance introduced by deprojecting each image onto a
common astrometric grid and by the PSF convolution.

Additionally, we constructed a light curve for each ob-
ject using a single deep reference image, observed in pho-
tometric conditions with excellent seeing, to identify any
potential problems introduced in processing the thou-
sands of diﬀerence images produced by the NN2 process.
We found excellent agreement between the ﬂuxes mea-
sured in the single template and in the NN2 process, with
the uncertainty in the ﬂux being lower in the latter, as
is expected by the use of multiple images to measure the
galaxy template and sky background at each epoch.

4. SPECTROSCOPY

Our full sample consists of all SN Ia for which we
were able to obtain a positive spectroscopic identiﬁca-

tion. If possible, slits were aligned to obtain spectra of
the host galaxies of the SN candidates in order to ob-
tain a more accurate redshift. The ﬁrst two years of
spectroscopic data from ESSENCE were presented by
Matheson et al. (2005), while M07 detailed our selection
criteria and classiﬁcation algorithms. The spectroscopic
observations for the objects included in M07 were pre-
sented by Foley et al. (2009). The 6-year spectroscopic
sample from the ESSENCE survey is presented in this
work, together with a summary of the spectroscopic ob-
servations, data reduction, and the process of candidate
classiﬁcation and redshift determination.

4.1. Selection Criteria for Candidates

As discussed in §2, during the 6 years of survey opera-
tion, ESSENCE detected thousands of objects exhibiting
variability over multiple epochs, at a signiﬁcance of S/N
> 5. Given the limited spectroscopic resources for follow-
up observations, it was impossible to obtain spectra of
all candidates. We employed various selection criteria to
narrow the list of candidates from the imaging search to
the subset with the most promise of being SN Ia. The
ﬁrst set of these selection criteria was implemented as
software cuts in our search pipeline. We required the
following.

-25.1-25.-24.9-24.811.41.82.22.6Airmass-25.9-25.8-25.7-25.6-25.5kI=0.058σI=0.017magkR=0.104σR=0.020mag-0.2-0.100.10.2cIR−I020406080100cIR−I=+0.022±0.001σ=0.015-0.2-0.100.10.2cRR−I020406080cRR−I=−0.030±0.001σ=0.025LandoltOffset(mag)ESSENCE 6-Year Data Release

11

Fig. 6.— Uncertainty in the Blanco photometry of ESSENCE reference catalog stars as a function of magnitude for R and I. The color
of each bin indicates the number of stars in that bin. Individual stars require at least 3 measurements in each ﬁlter. The systematic error
arising from an error in the airmass or color term, determined in §6, has been added in quadrature with the statistical uncertainties.

1. Candidates detected in diﬀerence images have the
same PSF as stellar objects in the source image
that was convolved by HOTPANTS.

2. Candidates exhibit no signiﬁcant negative ﬂux (<
30% of the total number of pixels within an aper-
ture of radius 1.5 × FWHM around the detection)
to select against diﬀerence-image artifacts, such as
dipoles resulting from slight image misalignment.

3. Candidates did not exhibit signiﬁcant variability
in ESSENCE data from previous years, to reject
variable stars and active galactic nuclei (AGNs).

4. Candidates in the diﬀerence image are not within
1 pixel (0.27(cid:48)(cid:48)) of objects in the template image,
as these are frequently AGNs and spectra of such
candidates suﬀer from excessive host-galaxy con-
tamination, making classiﬁcation very uncertain.

5. Candidates exhibit at least two coincident detec-
tions with S/N > 5, in at least two passbands or
within a 5-night window in a single passband, to
reject moving objects within the Solar System.

6. Detector and image-reduction artifacts were ex-

cluded by visual inspection.

To select SN Ia from the resulting list of candidates,
we ﬁt preliminary light curves using a BV template of a
normal SN Ia (∆m15 = 1.1 mag) constructed from well-
sampled low-z SN Ia. This template is a good match
to SN Ia observed in RI at z ≈ 0.4, typical for the
ESSENCE survey. Using χ2 minimization, we deter-
mined the time of B maximum, the RI magnitudes at
maximum, and the light-curve stretch (s). These factors
allowed us to determine an approximate photometric red-
shift for the object, which, along with the R − I color,
and the rise-time information where available, was used
to select likely SN Ia.

An additional level of selection cuts was imposed by
the observers onsite. Observers tended to favor candi-
dates thought to be in elliptical or low surface brightness
hosts, as the former are reliably SN Ia, while the latter

aid in extraction of a clean spectrum. As the various
facilities and instruments have diﬀerent capabilities, and
reach diﬀerent depths, our faintest objects were prefer-
entially observed at larger-aperture facilities.

We obtained spectra using a range of facilities in-
cluding the Blue Channel spectrograph on the MMT
(Schmidt et al. 1989); IMACS on Baade (Dressler 2004),
and LDSS2 (Allington-Smith et al. 1994) and LDSS333
on Clay at the Las Campanas Observatory; GMOS on
Gemini North and South (Hook et al. 2003); FORS1
on the 8 m VLT (Appenzeller et al. 1998); and LRIS
(Oke et al. 1995), ESI (Sheinis et al. 2002), and DEIMOS
(Faber et al. 2003) at the W. M. Keck Observatory.

Spectra were processed and extracted using standard
IRAF routines. Except for the VLT data, all spectra
were extracted using the optimal algorithm of Horne
(1986). VLT spectra were extracted using a novel two-
channel Richardson-Lucy restoration algorithm devel-
oped by Blondin et al. (2005) to minimize galaxy contam-
ination in the target spectra. Spectra were wavelength
calibrated using calibration-lamp spectra (usually He-
Ne-Ar) ﬁt with low-order polynomials, and were ﬂux cali-
brated using a suite of IRAF and IDL procedures, includ-
ing the removal of telluric lines using the well-exposed
continua of spectrophotometric standards.

To avoid relying on subjective assessments of noisy
data, we employed the SuperNova Identiﬁcation (SNID)
algorithm (Blondin & Tonry 2007) to determine SN clas-
siﬁcations objectively and reproducibly. SNID is based on
the cross-correlation techniques of Tonry & Davis (1979).
The input spectrum is compared to a large library of tem-
plate spectra at zero redshift, including nearby SN of all
types (SN Ia, Ib, Ic, II) and subtypes (e.g., SN Ia-pec, SN
1991T, and SN 1991bg; see Filippenko 1997 for a review
of SN spectral classiﬁcation), as well as other astrophys-
ical sources such as luminous blue variables (LBVs) and
other variable stars, galaxies, and AGNs. Where the
redshift of the host galaxy is available, we forced SNID
to look for correlations at that redshift (±0.02) to deter-
mine the SN classiﬁcation. In general, the spectra of SN

33

http://www.lco.cl/telescopes-information/magellan/

instruments/ldss-3/

14.015.016.017.018.019.020.021.0R4m(mag)0.00.0050.010.0150.02σR4m(mag)14.015.016.017.018.019.020.0I4m(mag)0.00.0050.010.0150.02σI4m(mag)105090130170210250290103050709011013012

Narayan et al.

Fig. 7.— Average zero points for images, adjusted for diﬀerences in exposure time, aperture correction, and airmass over the full duration
of the ESSENCE survey in R (left) and I (right). In 2002, the I ﬁlter (NOAO code c6005) was damaged and replaced. The zero-point
evolution is correlated in both R and I, and the short-timescale variations correspond to changes in weather conditions at CTIO, whereas
the gradual drift in zero points is likely caused by the increasing accumulation of dust in the optical system.

25558511525.825.725.6AdjustedZeropoints(mag)2002:MJD-5252653565952003:MJD-5291053565951252004:MJD-532661545751052005:MJD-5363853565951252006:MJD-5399253565951252007:MJD-54351535659525.125.024.9AdjustedZeropoints(mag)2003:MJD-5291053565951252004:MJD-5326653565951252005:MJD-5363853565951252006:MJD-5399253565951252007:MJD-54351Time(days)Time(days)Time(days)Time(days)ESSENCE 6-Year Data Release

13

Fig. 8.— Histograms of the residuals of R (left) and I (right) zero points to the average nightly zero point, adjusted for diﬀerences in
exposure time, airmass, and the aperture correction. The measured scatter in the nightly zero-point residuals is < 2% in both passbands,
consistent with the standard deviations derived from a ﬁt to a Gaussian distribution (dashed grey lines), and very comparable to the values
found by M07, illustrating that zero points are very consistent from ﬁeld to ﬁeld.

Fig. 9.— Representative diﬀerence imaging “postage stamps” in R (top) and I (bottom) for x025, a SN Ia at z = 0.35, near the median
redshift of the survey. In this instance, HOTPANTS has convolved the PSF of the reference (left) to match the science image (middle). The
reference is subtracted to produce the diﬀerence image (right). Despite the complex gradient in the background, and clear diﬀerences in
PSF and depth between the reference and image, the diﬀerence-image background is extremely uniform and free of artifacts.

-0.1-0.050.00.050.1NightlyZeropointResiduals(mag)20060010001400NimagesσR=0.015mag-0.1-0.050.00.050.1NightlyZeropointResiduals(mag)100300500700900NimagesσI=0.019mag14

Narayan et al.

with z > 0.5 have low S/N, and thus ambiguities between
classiﬁcations occurred mainly in that redshift range.

The SNID algorithm has been presented by Matheson
et al. (2005) and Foley et al. (2009), and we refer the
reader to these publications for further details.

Fig. 10.— The redshift distribution of spectroscopically identi-
ﬁed SN Ia from the ESSENCE survey. Candidates which have a
high conﬁdence of being of Type Ia (all objects whose SNID correla-
tions with SN Ia templates exceed 50%) are plotted in the shaded
region. The histogram is shown for observing seasons spanning
2002–2003 (red), 2002–2005 (yellow), and 2002–2007 (blue), along
with cumulative totals, to illustrate the evolution of the redshift
distribution over the course of the survey. Candidates for which
we have less conﬁdence have been classiﬁed as “Ia?” objects. Sev-
eral of these have well-measured redshifts from their host galaxies
and are shown in the open region.

A list of all objects selected for spectroscopic observa-
tions is provided in Table 6. An analysis of the spectro-
scopic eﬃciency of the ESSENCE survey was presented
by Foley et al. (2009). The redshift distribution of all
ESSENCE SN Ia is shown in Figure 10.

5. SN Ia LIGHT CURVES FROM THE ESSENCE

SIX-YEAR SAMPLE

Of the 422 objects listed in Table 6, 233 were consid-
ered SN Ia candidates based on their preliminary light
curves. Spectra were obtained for 229 of those 233 ob-
jects.
206 objects have been deﬁnitively classiﬁed as
SN Ia using the observed spectra.

Eight objects were observed in nonstandard ﬁelds,
without overlap with the calibration ﬁelds used in this
paper. Additionally, a few objects were discovered near
bright stars, or near the edge of the detector, and suﬀer
from repeated diﬀerence-imaging failures. We have ex-
cluded these objects from further analysis. Despite being
classiﬁed as a SN Ia (IAUC 825134), an analysis of the
spectra of object e315 with SNID indicates that it does
not meet the criteria used to classify an object as a SN Ia
employed by this work.

The ﬁnal RI photometry of 213 of the original 233
candidate SN Ia presented in this paper is listed in Ta-
ble 7. Full light curves (including non-SN Ia objects) and
measurements of the baseline ﬂux will be made available
as machine-readable tables35 along with this work. Pho-
tometry is presented in linear ﬂux units, φ, in the Blanco
natural system for each passband, T . Fluxes can be con-
verted to calibrated magnitudes via

34 http://www.cbat.eps.harvard.edu/iauc/08200/08251.html
35 Available through FAS Research Computing at Harvard —

http://telescopes.rc.fas.harvard.edu/index_w.html

mT = −2.5 log10(φT ) + 25.

(5)

The system-throughput curves and zero points required
to derive magnitudes in our passbands from SED mod-
els using Equation 3 are provided in Appendix B. The
ESSENCE SN Ia and “Ia?” light curves are illustrated
in Figure 11.

5.1. Light-Curve Shape and Color Distributions

Several diﬀerent algorithms to ﬁt SN Ia optical pho-
tometry exist,
including MLCS2k2 (Jha et al. 2007),
BayeSN (Mandel et al. 2011), SALT2 (Guy et al. 2007,
2010), SiFTO (Conley et al. 2008), and Dm15 (Pri-
eto et al. 2006). Each of these corrects for the shape
and color relations, but they diverge when making two
choices: how to train their spectral models and how to
account for intrinsic and extrinsic color variations. This
divergence results in a dichotomy between a physical
model, where color variation is decomposed into an in-
trinsic variance and a reddening attributed to extinction
from dust (MLCS2k2 and BayeSN), vs. an empirical
model, where all color variation is directly correlated
with luminosity (SALT2 and SiFTO). In the following
subsection, we compare the color and shape parameter
distributions derived using MLCS2k2 and SALT2 for the
ESSENCE light-curve sample presented in this work.

5.1.1. Light-Curve Quality Cuts

While all the light curves are ﬁt with both techniques,
not all the ﬁts are reliable, as several objects lack high-
signiﬁcance ﬂux measurements pre- or post-maximum
light, and these typically exhibit a high χ2 per degree
of freedom (dof). Furthermore, objects in Table 6 with-
out determined redshifts are not ﬁt.

Some selection cuts are common to all SN Ia sur-
veys, and are required to ensure that the light-curve
ﬁt is well constrained. These cuts are typically ex-
pressed in terms of the rest-frame phase in rest-frame
days Φ = (TObs − TMax)/(1 + z). K09 required at least
one measurement with Φ < 0.0. Guy et al. (2010, here-
after G10)36 employed a more ﬂexible cut, only requiring
a single measurement in the range of −8 < Φ < +5 days,
and found that this provided a comparable constraint
to the K09 cut. Similarly, WV07 required at least one
observation with Φ ≤ +5 days for both MLCS2k2 and
SALT, but also demanded that the observation had S/N
> 5, while requiring that the uncertainty on the ﬁt time
of maximum brightness (σTmax) be < 2 days. The WV07
cut is eﬀective at ensuring that the time and the ﬂux of
the peak are well constrained, and we adopt it here for
ESSENCE SN Ia. The compilation of 441 SN Ia pre-
sented by Conley et al. (2011, hereafter, C11) uses the
weaker G10 cut on observations near maximum bright-
ness. In addition, G10 do not impose any cut on S/N.
However, these objects have observations in more pass-
bands than ESSENCE, and the more conservative cut is
appropriate.

When the cut on pre-maximum measurements is not
applied, both the MLCS2k2 and SALT2 light-curve

36 http://supernovae.in2p3.fr/~guy/salt/

0.20.40.60.8Redshift0102030405060NumberofSNIaIa?:23’02–7:206SNIa’02–5:122SNIa’02–3:53SNIaESSENCE 6-Year Data Release

15

maximum data are excluded. G10 did not ﬁnd such a
trend with high-S/N SN Ia at z < 0.4, illustrating how
the eﬀect of light-curve quality cuts varies with median
redshift and therefore with survey.

WV07 and K09 also required that the ﬁt statistic,
χ2/dof, be < 3 for both light-curve ﬁtters. C11 did not
impose any quality-of-ﬁt cut, as they felt that the re-
ported uncertainties for low-z photometry are frequently
inaccurate, rendering such a cut misleading. They also
suggested that several light curves contain the occasional
outlying photometric observation that drives χ2/dof to
artiﬁcially high values, despite having little to no eﬀect
on the derived light-curve shape and color parameters.
C11 also argue that any χ2-based cut has an asymmetric
eﬀect with a SN Ia sample, and therefore can potentially
introduce a bias with redshift. This in turn could lead to
a systematic bias on w. While there is merit in this ar-
gument, upon visual inspection of our light-curve ﬁts we
concluded that the χ2/dof statistic did accurately rep-
resent the quality of the ﬁt, and that this cut was well
motivated. In future work, we will use Monte Carlo sim-
ulations to assess any bias in cosmological inference that
results from this cut.

Another common cut is on the minimum number of de-
grees of freedom. Both WV07 and K09 require N min
dof ≥ 5.
C11 do not explicitly state such a requirement, but the
compilation they presented nevertheless satisﬁes that re-
quirement. We adopt N min
dof ≥ 5 for MLCS2k2; however,
we found that this cut had the consequence of biasing
us towards intrinsically brighter objects. WV07 also re-
quired one observation with Φ ≥ +9 days for MLCS2k2.
This cut was intended to ensure that the post-maximum
decline is well sampled. As MLCS2k2 also imposes its
own cut by requiring observations with S/N > 5, this cut
is considerably more stringent than was intended. This
requirement causes a total of 44 SN Ia and “Ia?” ob-
jects to fail the selection cuts — by far the single largest
cut on our MLCS2k2 ﬁts.
In addition to eliminating
observations of faint sources, or sources at high z with
extremely well-sampled declines, the S/N cut imposed
by MLCS2k2 causes several light-curve ﬁts to fail the se-
lection cuts as a result of insuﬃcient observations, given
the requirement of N mindof ≥ 5 in the MLCS2k2 ﬁt.
By contrast, WV07 only required one observation after
B-band maximum for SALT, and only three objects in
our sample do not meet this cut. We believe that this
demonstrates that MLCS2k2 is being needlessly conser-
vative by requiring that all observations have S/N > 5.
However, the intent of the cut on the number of post-
maximum observations is to ensure that the light-curve
extinction or color is well constrained, and that the loca-
tion of the peak is bounded. We are wary of the relatively
weak eﬀect of the post-maximum cut on our SALT2 light-
curve ﬁts, and require a stricter N min
dof ≥ 8 for that ﬁtter.
With the ESSENCE 4 day cadence, this eﬀectively en-
sures that there are at least four measurements of the
observer-frame R − I color. As a result, the number of
objects that fail the N min
dof cut for MLCS2k2 and SALT2
are similar, and some of the most egregious outliers in x1
and c are eliminated.

Based on the results of G10, C11 imposed a restriction
on the SALT2 color parameter, and required −0.25 < c <
0.25 mag. WV07 did not explicitly impose an equivalent
cut on AV for MLCS2k2. Several groups have used mul-

Fig. 11.— Example ESSENCE R (red) and I (orange) light
curves, in units of linear ﬂux, scaled such that a ﬂux of unity cor-
responds to magnitude 25. Gaps between observing seasons have
been removed, and the reported MJD is discontinuous at the loca-
tions of the vertical black lines. The ﬁrst of these lines is elongated
and the year of the observing season is indicated to the left and
right of it.

shape parameters (∆ and x1, respectively) exhibit a sig-
niﬁcantly increased scatter as a result of light-curve ﬁts
being ill constrained with only the post-maximum de-
cline. Scolnic et al. (2014a) also report that x1 shows
a trend toward bigger values for z > 0.4 if the pre-

539885401854048540785410854365543955442554455-20020406080100120140Flux25‘06‘07x107(2007tq)z=0.1553633536635369353723539975402754057540875411754374544045443454464-505101520253035Flux25‘05‘06q054(2006mb)z=0.33539885401854048540785410854366543965442654456-50510152025Flux25‘06‘07z180(2007uk)z=0.4652904529345296452994532845331453344533745364653676537065373654010540405407054100-4-2024681012Flux25‘03‘04h323(2004he)z=0.6053635536655369553725540015403154061540915434854378544085443854468MJD-4-2024681012Flux25‘05‘06r317z=0.7416

Narayan et al.

ticolor photometry of highly extinguished low-z SN Ia to
demonstrate that the extinction law in the host galaxies
of these objects appears to follow the O’Donnell (1994)
extinction law with a signiﬁcantly lower RV than the
Milky Way (Hicken et al. 2009a; Folatelli et al. 2010;
Mandel et al. 2011).

Additionally, Scolnic et al. (2014a) employs a require-
ment that −3 < x1 < 3 for the Pan-STARRS1 SN Ia
sample. Both of these cuts are well motivated, as there
are few SN Ia in the SALT2 training sample outside these
ranges, and the ﬁts are likely to be ill-conditioned there.
WV07 adopted a requirement of −0.4 ≤ ∆ ≤ 1.7. All
objects in our ESSENCE SN Ia sample that fail this re-
quirement also fail other selection cuts.

A summary of the number of light curves that fail each
cut for both MLCS2k2 and SALT2 is provided in Table 2.

TABLE 2 Eﬀect of Light-Curve Quality Cutsa

c

SALT2
—
20
20
17
3
3
18
33

MLCS2k2
7
10
18
9
5
44
14
NA

Cut
Fit failed
χ2 > 3
N min
b
dof
ΦFirst S/N>5
σTmax
Φlast
x1|∆ cut
c cutd
a The number of SN Ia and “Ia?”
objects in the ESSENCE sample
that are removed by each selec-
tion criterion. Each cut is imposed
independently. Many objects fail
multiple cuts.

b We require N min

dof ≥ 8 for SALT2,
rather than the weaker cut of 5 for
MLCS2k2, as the last phase cut is
very ineﬀective with SALT2 when
our well-sampled NN2 light curves
are ﬁt in ﬂux space.

c While at ﬁrst glance it appears
that more objects fail the cut
on pre-maximum imaging with
SALT2 than with MLCS2k2, this
is not the case upon closer in-
spection. MLCS2k2 merely fails
catastrophically for objects with-
out pre-maximum imaging, and
consequently does not report Tmax
at all.

d WV07 did not employ an extinc-
tion cut. While we have not used
one in this work to faciliate com-
parison to WV07, it is likely that
we will employ a reasonable cut
on this value to remove any highly
reddened objects at low z from the
sample for a cosmological analy-
sis, as there is considerable uncer-
tainty about the nature of the dust
in the host galaxies of highly extin-
guished SN Ia.

5.1.2. MLCS2k2 Light-Curve Analysis

We employ “v007” of MLCS2k2 with the “tweaked-
slowz” vectors. These vectors, and the correspond-
ing matrix of model uncertainties (denoted S), are
trained using the low-z Hubble-ﬂow sample in Jha et al.
(2007) (hence “slowz”) and “tweaked” with small mag-
nitude oﬀsets (typically < 0.005 mag) to match the

color-extinction distribution zero point, and extended to
−20 days prior to B-band maximum. We follow WV07
in using the “glosz” prior on extinction, and we assume
RV = 3.1.

The MLCS2k2 light-curve shape (∆) and extinction
(AV ) distributions for ESSENCE SN Ia and “Ia?” ob-
jects are shown in Figure 12. The MLCS2k2 light-curve
ﬁt parameters for the ESSENCE sample are provided in
Table 3. Additionally, we have indicated if the objects
pass the light-curve quality cuts used by WV07 for the 4-
year sample. From our spectroscopically conﬁrmed SN Ia
sample, 126 objects pass these cuts and are useful for cos-
mological inference. This doubles the 4-year ESSENCE
sample of 60 SN Ia.

Objects with ∆ > 1.0 are underluminous relative to
normal SN Ia, and they are more rare. Consequently,
we are extremely unlikely to ﬁnd any at the redshifts
probed by the ESSENCE survey. Objects that appear
to be extremely overluminous (very negative values of
∆) relative to the training sample of Jha et al. (2007)
typically have little or no high-signiﬁcance ﬂux measure-
ments pre-maximum, but have well-measured declines
post-maximum. Without a good constraint on the peak
and time of maximum, light-curve ﬁtters typically ex-
plore unphysical regions of parameter space. The χ2/dof
of these light-curve ﬁts is often relatively high (> 3)
and all fail the quality cuts of WV07, either owing to
a high χ2/dof or because of insuﬃcient observations pre-
maximum brightness.

The AV distribution for ESSENCE SN Ia is consistent
with the “glos” model employed by WV07. The distri-
bution is signiﬁcantly narrower than the MLCS2k2 “de-
fault” distribution, derived from nearby SN Ia, as we are
unlikely to ﬁnd highly extinguished and therefore faint
objects at high z. As MLCS2k2 is a magnitude-based
ﬁtter, it rejects measurements with S/N < 5. Most of
the objects that fail the selection cuts in the right panel
of Fig. 12 are extremely faint or at high z.

Note that Figure 12 shows the distribution for all re-
covered ﬁts, and several of these objects do not have
light-curve ﬁts that meet the quality cuts of WV07.
Quality cuts are imposed to select spectroscopically con-
ﬁrmed SN Ia, with several high-S/N measurements over
rest-frame phase −5 ≤ Φ ≤ 20 days, to ensure that the
derived distance moduli are unbiased, whereas derived
light-curve shape and extinction are generally less sus-
ceptible to poor phase coverage.

5.1.3. SALT2 Light-Curve Analysis

Additionally, we employ version 2.2.0b of SALT2 re-
leased together with G10. SALT2 is a ﬂux-based ﬁt-
ter and employs measurements of the baseline ﬂux to
restrict the search range for ﬁtted parameters. How-
ever, only data within the rest-frame phase range −15 <
Φ < 45 days are used in the χ2 minimization. Mea-
surements in observer-frame ﬁlters that map to the rest-
frame wavelength range 3000 < λ < 7000 ˚A are used in
the ﬁt. Model and K-correction uncertainties are prop-
agated into the error matrix, and an additional U -band
calibration uncertainty of 0.1 mag is added in quadrature
for low-z near-UV data.

The SALT2 light-curve shape (x1) and color (c) distri-
butions for ESSENCE SN Ia and “Ia?” objects are shown
in Figure 13. The SALT2 light-curve ﬁt parameters for

ESSENCE 6-Year Data Release

17

Fig. 12.— The light-curve shape (∆, left panel) and extinction (AV , right panel) distributions estimated by MLCS2k2 for ESSENCE
SN Ia (orange) and “Ia?” (red). Objects that pass the selection cuts (except the cuts on the parameter itself being plotted) imposed by
WV07 are indicated in the solid regions, while objects that fail are shown in the light regions bounded by dashed lines. The MLCS2k2
priors employed in the light-curve ﬁtting are shown as dashed blue lines. The “default” prior is the extinction distribution derived from
low-z SN Ia during the training procedure.

MLCS2k2 Light-Curve Fit Parameters for ESSENCE SN Ia and “Ia?” Objects

TABLE 3

ID

e108
k425
q002
x080

µa

42.370
41.207
41.212
42.006

σµ

0.140
0.254
0.359
0.440

T B

max

52979.48
53335.19
54002.83
54384.94

σT B
max
0.59
0.43
0.75
1.54

ΦFirst

b ΦLast

∆

-11.768
-9.535
-6.340
-4.178

9.954
19.618
15.192
17.699

-0.338
-0.087
0.594
0.132

σ∆

0.111
0.177
0.279
0.343

c

AV

0.097
0.310
0.549
0.315

σAV
0.102
0.236
0.369
0.276

Qd

T
T
T
T

Note. — This table is published in its entirety in the electronic edition of the journal. A portion is shown

here for guidance regarding its form and content.
a MLCS2k2 reports distance moduli with H0 = 65 km s−1 Mpc−1.
b ΦFirst—Last is the rest-frame phase of the ﬁrst and last observation (respectively) and is dependent on the
B-band time of maximum brightness, T B
c Mag units. We use the Galactic reddening law of O’Donnell (1994), with RV ﬁxed to 3.1, to model the
extinction in the host galaxy of the SN.
d Flag describing if the object passes (T) or fails (F) the light-curve quality cuts described by WV07.

max.

the ESSENCE sample are provided in Table 4. Addition-
ally, we have indicated whether the objects pass a combi-
nation of the light-curve quality cuts used by WV07 for
the 4-year sample, as well as shape and color cuts em-
ployed by Conley et al. (2011) and Scolnic et al. (2014a).
Objects with x1 < −3.0 and x1 > 3.0 are poorly rep-
resented in the SALT2 training sample. Fits with these
values often have unconstrained rises or peaks and pro-
vide unreliable distance estimates.

Conley et al. (2011) required that −0.25 < c <
0.25 mag to eliminate blue objects that were not ade-
quately represented in the training sample, as well as
objects with very red colors, which they believe are the
result of a combination of diﬀerent eﬀects. It is possible
that extinction in the host galaxy in the SN Ia is one
of these eﬀects. Three objects (m040, m070, and m075)
are catastrophic outliers and are not displayed here. All
three were discovered near the start of the 2005 observing

season, and none has any pre-maximum photometry.

6. SYSTEMATICS AFFECTING THE ESSENCE

SURVEY PHOTOMETRY

Here we identify and assess the size of each eﬀect using
empirical tests of internal and absolute photometric cal-
ibration. Wherever possible, we quantify systematics by
directly introducing a bias at either the image or catalog
level and propagating the bias through our pipeline to
measure the eﬀect on output photometry. We also com-
pare our photometry to SDSS photometry converted to
the Landolt system, to set an upper limit on our system-
atic error budget and evaluate our absolute photometric
calibration in the diﬀerent ESSENCE ﬁelds.

The systematic eﬀects can be divided into two cate-

gories:

1. Eﬀects that cause errors in individual photometric
measurements and correlate with distance, leading

-0.8-0.6-0.4-0.2-0.0+0.2+0.4+0.6+0.8+1.0MLCS2k2∆0102030405060#IaIa?Prior∆0.00.40.81.21.62.02.4AV(mag)010203040506070#q007IaIa?PriorDefaultPriorglos0.00.20.40.60.81.0PriorProbability,p(AV)0.00.20.40.60.81.0PriorProbability,p(∆)18

Narayan et al.

Fig. 13.— The light-curve shape (x1, left panel) and color (c, right panel) distributions estimated by SALT2 for ESSENCE SN Ia (orange)
and “Ia?” (red) objects. Objects that pass the original SALT selection cuts (except the cuts on the parameter itself being plotted) imposed
by WV07 are indicated in the solid regions, while objects that fail are shown in the light regions bounded by dashed lines. Only the WV07
cuts relating to the sampling and χ2/dof of the ﬁt are used here. Based on a visual inspection of all the light-curve ﬁts, we required that
the ﬁts used at least 8 epochs, rather than the weaker cut of at least 5 epochs employed for SALT by WV07. We adopt the same cuts as
Conley et al. (2011) and Scolnic et al. (2014a) on c and x1, respectively.

SALT2 Light-Curve Fit Parameters for ESSENCE SN Ia and “Ia?” Objects

TABLE 4

ID

b010
g050
h323
n322

a

mB

23.4583
23.2239
23.4921
24.3561

σmB

0.0666
0.0702
0.0594
0.0919

mV

23.5138
23.4278
23.3174
24.4587

σmV

0.0937
0.1084
0.0873
0.2019

T B

max

b

52593.2578
53302.2280
53329.8365
53707.8798

σT B
max
0.8841
0.5811
0.6337
1.4726

x1

0.9105
-0.2400
0.6074
0.1779

σx1

0.7618
0.5682
0.5493
1.0967

cc

σc

Cov(c, x1)d Qe

-0.0781
-0.2226
0.1485
-0.1237

0.1012
0.1069
0.0930
0.1342

0.0248 T
0.0153 T
0.0094
F
0.0518 T

Note. — This table is published in its entirety in the electronic edition of the journal. A portion is shown here for guidance regarding

its form and content.
a SALT2 does not directly report distance estimates. The distance modulus is determined using a global ﬁt for all SN Ia together with
other cosmological parameters.
b While the SALT2 shape estimates are strongly aﬀected by measurements pre-maximum brightness, it uses signiﬁcantly more low-S/N
measurements on the decline, as well as measurements for faint and/or high-z objects. Consequently, the cut on the number of measurements
post-maximum has very little impact. We instead require that a total of 8 observations be used in the ﬁt, to ensure that the measured
parameters are reliable.
c We use the updated SALT2 color law described by Guy et al. (2010). This diﬀers signiﬁcantly from the O’Donnell (1994) extinction law
in the near-UV.
d Covariances between all the ﬁt parameters — Cov(mB ,x1), Cov(mB ,c), and Cov(x1,c) — are calculated, and these values will be included
in the machine-readable tables provided with this work.
e Flag describing if the object passes (T) or fails (F) the light-curve quality cuts for SALT described by WV07 and the shape and color
cuts described by Conley et al. (2011).

-5.0-4.0-3.0-2.0-1.0+0.0+1.0+2.0+3.0+4.0+5.0SALT2x105101520253035#IaIa?S14cuts-0.6-0.4-0.20.00.20.40.60.81.0SALT2c(mag)0102030405060#IaIa?S14cutsESSENCE 6-Year Data Release

19

to a bias in cosmological inference.

2. Eﬀects that cause errors in individual photomet-
ric measurements, but are not correlated with dis-
tance, and therefore do not bias the cosmological
result but nevertheless lead to increased dispersion
in Hubble residuals.

We list the various sources of photometric error in Ta-
ble 5, and we detail and estimate the eﬀect of each in the
subsections that follow.

TABLE 5 Summary of the ESSENCE Systematic Uncertaintiesa

Eﬀect

∆R
(mag)

∆I
(mag)

Errors in the Measurement of Flux

Shutter precision
Detector linearity
Image Detrending
Astrometric Uncertainties

< 0.001 < 0.001
0.005
0.005
±0.005 ±0.005
0.005
0.005

Errors in the Photometric Calibration

±10% error in airmass relation
∓0.001 ∓0.002
±0.005 ±0.005
Uncertainties in color term
Uncertainties in the zero point
0.001
0.003
Uncertainties in extrapolating zero points < 0.001 < 0.001
Magnitudes of BD+17◦4708
±0.002 ±0.002
±0.011 ±0.010
Total
SED of BD+17◦4708
±0.002 ±0.003
±0.012 ±0.011
Total
a Italicized entries are sources of increased dispersion on distance

moduli but do not introduce systematic bias.

6.1. Shutter Precision

The MOSAIC II shutter is described in §2. The shut-
ter blades take 23 ms to cover the entire ﬁeld, leading to
a ±0.5% nonuniformity for a 1 s exposure. The correc-
tion is negligible for the exposure times of all ESSENCE
science (200 s in R and 400 s in I) and calibration frames
(> 10 s in both ﬁlters).

6.2. Detector Linearity

We imaged the Ru149 ﬁeld in R and I, varying the
exposure times from 2 s to 400 s37. Fluxes are mea-
sured for isolated stars using a ﬁxed 20 pixel aperture
radius and corrected for extinction. These stars span
the dynamic range of the detector below saturation. We
compute residuals to the average magnitude for each star
and the 3σ clipped average residuals for all stars. We ﬁnd
that these average residuals are < 0.005 mag over the en-
tire range of exposure times for both ﬁlters, so we infer
that the detector is linear to ∼0.5%. We also examined
the diﬀerence between our measured instrumental mag-
nitudes and catalog magnitudes, at constant exposure
time, to check if there was any departure from linearity
with ﬂux. We do not see any evidence of nonlinearity
with ﬂux below saturation.

6.3. Systematic Uncertainties with Image Detrending
We avoid most long-period systematic errors with im-
age preprocessing by using biases and ﬂat ﬁelds obtained

37 Exposures under 10 s are not used outside this analysis of

detector linearity.

nightly, rather than a global bias or ﬂat ﬁeld for a full ob-
serving season. Any systematic errors caused by a mis-
estimation of the bias or the ﬂat ﬁeld will only aﬀect
measurements made on a single night. While photomet-
ric measurements of objects observed on those nights will
be systematically biased, this error does not aﬀect pho-
tometric measurements of the same objects from other
nights. Consequently, the eﬀect is very unlikely to cor-
relate with distance modulus and will not lead to a bias
in cosmological measurements.

The systematic uncertainties associated with the illu-
mination correction are estimated in Appendix A and
found to be < 0.3%. We typically obtain ∼ 10 bias
and dome-ﬂat images in each ﬁlter each observing night.
Comparing the combined bias and ﬂat-ﬁeld images of
consecutive nights, we ﬁnd diﬀerences of ∼ 0.1%. As
these errors can occur simultaneously, and aﬀect the im-
age processing additively, we adopt a 0.5% error as the
systematic error associated with our image detrending.

6.4. Astrometric Uncertainties

The astrometric uncertainty of a single detection is
composed of a systematic ﬂoor and a term that is in-
versely proportional to the S/N and directly proportional
to the FWHM of the detection:

(cid:18) FWHM

(cid:19)2

σ2
a = σ2

sys + σ2
d

S/N

.

(6)

We use the procedure detailed by Rest et al. (2014,
Appendix A) and ﬁnd that the single-epoch positions
for supernovae are accurate to within 0.02(cid:48)(cid:48). M07 mea-
sured the impact of such an oﬀset by identifying sources
of known ﬂux with FWHM typical for the survey, and
measuring their ﬂux through a PSF oﬀset by 1(cid:48)(cid:48). As this
is much larger than the typical astrometric uncertainty,
we adopt the procedure used by Rest et al. (2014) and
ﬁnd that an oﬀset of 0.3 pixels produces a subpercent
impact on photometry. Since the uncertainty is related
to the S/N, we expect increased dispersion at high z;
however, our cadence provides S/N > 10 for even our
highest-redshift objects, and we do not ﬁnd any net bias
in the recovered astrometry of known sources with mag-
nitude. We adopted a ﬁxed valued of 0.005 mag in both
ﬁlters to account for the systematics arising from astro-
metric uncertainties.

6.5. Uncertainties in Determining the Airmass

Relation

An error in the slope of the airmass relation would lead
to an error in extrapolating the zero points from the Lan-
dolt standard ﬁelds to the ESSENCE ﬁelds, as well as
between the ESSENCE ﬁelds. We mitigate this uncer-
tainty by requiring the images we use to extrapolate the
zero point for a given image to have a diﬀerence in air-
mass smaller than 0.5. We introduce a 10% error in the
airmass relation and propagate the error to our photo-
metric catalogs. Such a large error is extremely unlikely,
and would be visually apparent as we obtained images
of standard ﬁelds over an extended range in airmass, but
allows us to place an upper limit on the resulting sys-
tematic error in magnitudes.

We ﬁnd that a ±10% error in the airmass term causes
a ∓0.001 mag error in R and a ∓0.002 mag error in I

20

Narayan et al.

(see Fig. 14). The slightly larger eﬀect in I, despite the
weaker extinction coeﬃcient, is a result of the smaller
number of I images overall, and the larger fraction of I
calibration images that were observed at high airmass,
relative to R.

We also compute the mean diﬀerence as a function of
magnitude to look for any residual trends. This is critical
for SN Ia measurements which span a wide range in mag-
nitude as a function of redshift, light-curve shape, and
host-galaxy extinction. We ﬁnd weak (< 0.1%) trends as
a function of magnitude.

6.6. Uncertainties in Determining the Photometric

Transformation to the Landolt System

Extinction caused by dust in the host galaxies of the
supernovae makes them appear fainter than predicted for
their redshift, mimicking the eﬀect of dark energy. Ac-
curate measurements of SN Ia color are critical in con-
straining the reddening and allow us to disentangle the
eﬀect of dust from the dark-energy signal.

Because high-z SN Ia surveys are deep but cover a
small solid angle, they are ineﬃcient at ﬁnding large
numbers of nearby supernovae. Analysis of the high-
z samples requires low-z SN Ia from the literature as
an anchor for cosmological measurements (Hamuy et al.
1993; Riess et al. 1999; Jha et al. 2006; Hicken et al.
2009b; Contreras et al. 2010; Ganeshalingam et al. 2010;
Stritzinger et al. 2011; Hicken et al. 2012). Thus, any ab-
solute zero-point oﬀsets, even if arising from inaccuracies
in the nearby sample, are a common source of systematic
error for high-z surveys. Because most nearby surveys
are tied to the Landolt network, we can estimate a lower
bound to this oﬀset by examining how the ESSENCE
data are tied to the Landolt system.

In addition, any errors in our R and I ﬂux scaling
relative to each other would distort the observed color
of the entire sample. At the typical redshifts probed
by ESSENCE, our RI photometry covers the rest-frame
BV , and our inferred host-galaxy extinction is related
to the measured rest-frame color excess, E(B − V ). If
we assume that the slope of the reddening law, RV , in
the host galaxies of our SN Ia is similar to that in our
Milky Way Galaxy (RV ≈ 3.1), then any error in our
measured color would lead to an error ∼3 times larger in
the extinction (AV ) and the distance modulus (µ).
SN Ia surveys like ESSENCE are therefore particularly
sensitive to systematics aﬀecting measured colors. An er-
ror in the photometric transformation can take the form
of an error in determining the slope of the color law, or
a residual diﬀerence in magnitudes around the intercept.
The eﬀect of an error in the slope of the color relation is
small, as the error is on the order of the product of the er-
ror in the color term and the diﬀerence between the mean
color of our ﬁeld stars and the color of BD+17◦4708. We
measure the eﬀect of an error in the color term using
synthetic photometry, as described in Appendix B.2, and
ﬁnd that a ±0.02 error in the slope of the color relation
would lead to a ∼±0.003 mag systematic error in the
magnitudes of ﬁeld stars and derived zero points. We
conservatively adopt an error of 0.005 mag as the sys-
tematic error resulting from an error in the estimate of
the color term.

We measure the residual diﬀerence in magnitudes,
m4m− mLandolt, for our calibration ﬁelds around R− I =

0.32 mag in our standard ﬁelds and ﬁnd these to be
−0.003 mag and −0.001 mag in R and I, respectively,
with an uncertainty of ∼0.001 mag in both bands (see
Fig. 15). The dispersions about the mean residual are
∼1% in both R and I. The residual is consistent with
zero in I and of low signiﬁcance in R. We adopt these
values as systematic uncertainties in the absolute zero
point.

6.6.1. Comparison to the Sloan Digital Sky Survey

While we cannot directly compare our magnitudes to
Landolt magnitudes in our science ﬁelds, we use stars
selected from SDSS DR7 and converted onto the Lan-
dolt network using transformation equations. This pro-
cedure has some limitations: the SDSS imaging is not as
deep as MOSAIC II images of the ESSENCE ﬁelds, and
SDSS magnitudes converted onto the Landolt network
have large statistical uncertainties associated with the
transformation between two dissimilar photometric sys-
tems. In addition, our “wcc” ﬁeld is outside the SDSS
footprint and is not included in the analysis. However,
as the SDSS photometry was not used in determining
our photometric calibration, it provides a useful, inde-
pendent test of our photometric accuracy.

We cross-match stars from Stetson (2005) in SDSS, and
extract ¨Ubercal (Padmanabhan et al. 2008) corrected
magnitudes. We select from SDSS only objects with
clean photometry, point-source PSFs, gri uncertainties
< 0.1 mag, and σz < 0.15 mag without a corresponding
entry in the DR7 QSOBest catalog, satisfying

0.95 < u − g < 2.75 mag,
−0.01 < g − r < 1.78 mag,
−0.12 < r − i < 2.74 mag, and,
−0.13 < i − z < 1.58 mag,

in close proximity to the stellar locus (see Fig. 16).

We use simple linear transformations for stars with
r − i < 0.8 mag, determined using the “LINMIX ERR”
routine (Kelly 2007) available in the IDL Astronomy Li-
brary38. We derive the following transformations (see
Fig. 17) using > 1300 measured stars:

RL = r − (0.303 ± 0.006)(r − i) − (0.133 ± 0.002) mag,
(7)
IL = i − (0.213 ± 0.007)(r − i) − (0.388 ± 0.002) mag.
We ﬁnd large intrinsic dispersions of ∼ 0.025 mag in
the relations between the SDSS and Landolt photometry
for both RL and IL. This dispersion is inherent in the
transformation between two photometric systems having
very dissimilar transmissions and signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
dynamic ranges, and further justiﬁes our choice to base
the calibration of the Blanco natural system on the Lan-
dolt standard network. We do not ﬁnd any signiﬁcant
trend in the residuals of transformed RL with g− r, or of
IL with i − z. We apply these transformations to SDSS
stars in our science ﬁelds, selected using the same crite-
ria, to derive their Landolt magnitudes.

We compare our tertiary photometric catalogs for the
science ﬁelds to SDSS stars, selected using the same

38 http://idlastro.gsfc.nasa.gov/

ESSENCE 6-Year Data Release

21

Fig. 14.— Diﬀerences in R-band (left) and I-band (right) photometry with a 10% error in the slope of the airmass relation (in the
sense of with oﬀset minus no oﬀset), in each case binned as a function of magnitude (left large panel) and for all ampliﬁer images (right
small panel). The color bars indicate the number of ampliﬁer images in each bin. The means in bins with 1 mag widths are overplotted
(black diamonds). We ﬁnd −0.001 mag and −0.002 mag diﬀerences in the R and I bands, respectively. Dispersions are computed using a
Gaussian ﬁt to the histograms shown in the right small panels.

Fig. 15.— Diﬀerences in the I-band (upper left) and R-band (lower left) magnitude between the CTIO Blanco (4m) and the Landolt
network in the standard ﬁelds. The solid line indicates the slope of the color relation. The slopes are determined at an intercept of
R − I = 0.32 mag. We examine the residuals in a range of ±0.03 mag (this range is indicated by short vertical lines in the left panels)
around the color intercept. We ﬁnd the diﬀerences in both R (lower right) and I (upper right) are consistent with zero, indicating that
there is no signiﬁcant residual oﬀset after the color transformation is determined.

criteria as above, converted to Landolt using our de-
rived transformations. No signiﬁcant ﬁeld-to-ﬁeld dif-
ferences are found. We measure the oﬀset between the
CTIO Blanco natural system and these transformed stars
around R − I = 0.32 mag as in the standard ﬁelds,
and ﬁnd oﬀsets (in the sense of Blanco magnitude mi-
nus transformed SDSS magnitude) of 0.009 ± 0.03 mag
in R and 0.013±0.03 mag in I, consistent with zero. The
large uncertainties arise from the intrinsic dispersion in
the transformation to R and I, as well as the r and i
uncertainties that are propagated into the uncertainty in
R − I.
6.7. Uncertainties in Extrapolating Photometric Zero

Points

We evaluate the uncertainty in determining the photo-
metric zero point for a single ampliﬁer by extrapolating
the zero point of the image using the average of all other
ampliﬁers of the same image, and the average of all other

images that are within ±0.5 in airmass and ±100 s in ex-
posure time, adjusted for both the diﬀerence in airmass
and the diﬀerence in exposure time. We ﬁnd the diﬀer-
ence between the zero point and the extrapolated zero
point to be < 0.001 mag. We also construct this statistic
ﬁeld by ﬁeld and ampliﬁer by ampliﬁer, ﬁnding no signif-
icant diﬀerence in these subsamples. The histograms of
diﬀerences between the extrapolated and directly ﬁtted
zero points are shown in Fig. 18.

Additionally, we ﬁnd that the images with the largest
diﬀerences between ﬁtted and extrapolated zero points
are typically taken in nonphotometric conditions and fail
quality tests for diﬀerence imaging. We ﬁnd no signiﬁ-
cant trends in the diﬀerence between direct and extrapo-
lated zero points with airmass, aperture correction error,
exposure time, FWHM, or sky background. The stan-
dard deviations of the unclipped data are ∼0.01 mag in
both R and I. Either 3σ clipping extreme outliers or us-
ing a Gaussian to model the data reduces the estimate of

16.017.018.019.020.021.0R4m(mag)-0.009-0.006-0.0030.0000.0030.0060.009∆R4m(mag)Rµ=−0.001magσ=0.002mag0369#(1000s)5025045065085016.017.018.019.020.0I4m(mag)-0.009-0.006-0.0030.0000.0030.0060.009∆I4m(mag)Iµ=−0.002magσ=0.001mag02468#(1000s)501502503504500.20.40.60.8(R−I)Landolt(mag)-0.06-0.030.000.030.060.090.12I4m−ILandolt(mag)cIR−I=0.022-0.04-0.0200.020.04∆Iat(R−I)L=0.32±0.03(mag)0204060µ∆I=0.001±0.001magσ∆I=0.011mag0.20.40.60.8(R−I)Landolt(mag)-0.09-0.06-0.030.000.030.060.09R4m−RLandolt(mag)cRR−I=−0.030-0.04-0.0200.020.04∆Rat(R−I)L=0.32±0.03(mag)01020304050µ∆R=−0.003±0.001magσ∆R=0.011mag22

Narayan et al.

Blanco natural system without employing any observa-
tions from the CTIO 0.9 m telescopes, thereby avoiding
cross-telescope systematics.
Additionally, in this work we selected BD+17◦4708 as
the fundamental spectrophotometric standard star. The
R − I color of this standard is considerably closer to
the average color of Landolt network stars as well as of
SN Ia around the median redshift of ESSENCE. This
choice minimizes systematic errors arising from errors in
determining the photometric transformation between the
Landolt and Blanco natural systems.

We employed these transformations to derive sec-
ondary photometric catalogs for our Landolt calibration
ﬁelds that span the MOSAIC II ﬁeld of view. We demon-
strated that we could accurately extrapolate zero points
between the diﬀerent ampliﬁers of the imager. Ter-
tiary catalogs were derived for ESSENCE ﬁelds and zero
points were established for our imaging. The zero points
in both passbands are stable relative to each other over
the entire duration of the survey. We provided a model of
the system response of the R and I ESSENCE passbands,
and we made a comprehensive estimate of the eﬀect of
various systematics on magnitudes in both passbands.

The primary application of this work is the calibration
of light curves of SN Ia discovered by ESSENCE, to de-
rive the equation-of-state parameter (w) of the dark en-
ergy. We outlined our spectroscopic follow-up and clas-
siﬁcation program to identify SN Ia within survey data,
presenting calibrated light curves in the CTIO Blanco
natural system of 213 SN Ia discovered by ESSENCE.

There remain several potential areas for improvement
where the calibration given in this paper may be further
reﬁned. Our imaging of Landolt standard ﬁelds was ob-
tained during our 2006–2007 observing seasons. Conse-
quently, we use science images obtained only on the same
nights to derive our tertiary catalogs, rather than all sur-
vey images. While there are clear changes in the zero
points over the course of the survey, the lack of standard-
ﬁeld imaging covering the same range of time prevents us
from deriving the absolute CTIO-to-Landolt photometric
transformation as a function of time. As our fundamental
spectrophotometric standard, BD+17◦4708, was not di-
rectly observed using the CTIO Blanco, we derived esti-
mates of its natural-system magnitudes using the CTIO-
to-Landolt transformations, together with Landolt pho-
tometry and the PHOENIX synthetic spectral library to
characterize the eﬀect of metallicity, surface gravity, and
extinction. However, the principal shortcoming of the
ESSENCE SN Ia photometry remains its lack of multi-
color information. This increases our sensitivity to pri-
ors on the colors or extinction of SN Ia. Nevertheless,
this work demonstrates that the systematic errors from
photometry are ∼1% in both R and I. This represents
a better understanding of the systematic errors arising
from photometric calibration and an overall reduction of
its impact on the ESSENCE systematic error budget.

In future work, we will combine our calibrated light
curves with our spectroscopic observations, as well as
SN Ia host-galaxy information (Tucker et al. 2016,
submitted), to derive accurate distance moduli from
ESSENCE. We will combine our measurements with
those from other low-z and high-z SN Ia surveys to place
constraints on cosmological parameters.

Fig. 16.— Color-color diagram of SDSS stars in ESSENCE ﬁelds.
Only stars with r − i < 0.8 mag are used to derive transformations
to Landolt and assess our absolute photometric consistency.

the standard deviation to < 0.01 mag. This is a strong
indication that our internal photometric calibration is no
worse than 1%.

6.8. Uncertainties in Determining the Natural-System

Magnitudes of BD+17◦4708

The CTIO Blanco natural-magnitude system adopted
in this work utilizes BD+17◦4708 as the fundamental
spectrophotometric standard; consequently, the magni-
tudes of BD+17◦4708 in the natural system are close
How-
to its Landolt magnitudes by construction.
ever, there are several astrophysical diﬀerences between
BD+17◦4708 and the “typical” Landolt standard star.
We determine the corrections to the ﬁrst-order magni-
tudes of BD+17◦4708 in Appendix B.3. Systematic er-
rors in the magnitudes of BD+17◦4708 would lead to an
error in the synthetic zero points and K-corrections, and
the uncertainty budget is dominated by the impact of a
potential unresolved binary companion.

6.9. Uncertainties in the SED of BD+17◦4708

While the derivation of the magnitudes of BD+17◦4708
in the Appendix relies on the PHOENIX synthetic spec-
tral library (Hauschildt et al. 1997; Sordo et al. 2010,
and references therein), the derivation of synthetic zero
points requires its true SED. We use the CALSPEC de-
termination of the SED of the BD+17◦4708 and adopt
a 0.5% uncertainty over 3000–10,000 ˚A. These translate
into 0.002 mag and 0.003 mag diﬀerences in the synthetic
R and I Blanco (4m) magnitudes.

7. CONCLUSIONS

We have recalibrated the CTIO Blanco and MO-
SAIC II system, with a focus on minimizing the sys-
tematic errors that originate from photometry and aﬀect
the high-redshift SN Ia measurements from ESSENCE.
This calibration supersedes that presented by Miknaitis
et al. (2007), and improves on it by deriving photomet-
ric transformations between the Landolt network and the

0.00.20.40.60.81.01.21.41.61.8(g−r)SDSS(mag)-0.20.00.20.40.60.81.0(i−z)SDSS(mag)5101520253035404550ESSENCE 6-Year Data Release

23

Fig. 17.— Transformations between the Landolt and SDSS photometric systems using stars observed by Stetson (2005) for R (left) and
I (right). The shaded gray region enclosed between dashed gray lines indicates the intrinsic dispersion in the ﬁt and is ∼0.025 mag for
both transformations.

Fig. 18.— Diﬀerences between the ﬁtted zero point of an ampliﬁer image and the zero point extrapolated from the average of the other
ampliﬁers of the same image, in R (left) and I (right). We ﬁnd no net oﬀset between the directly ﬁtted and extrapolated zero points. In
addition, the standard deviation of the residuals normalized by the uncertainties is close to 1, indicating that the uncertainties are well
modeled.

Based in part on observations obtained at the Cerro
Tololo Inter-American Observatory (CTIO), part of
the National Optical Astronomy Observatory (NOAO),
which is operated by the Association of Universities for
Research in Astronomy (AURA), Inc. under a coopera-
tive agreement with the US National Science Foundation
(NSF); the European Southern Observatory, Chile (ESO

Programmes 170.A-0519 and 176.A-0319); the Gemini
Observatory, which is operated by AURA, Inc.
un-
der a cooperative agreement with the NSF on behalf
of the Gemini partnership [the NSF (United States),
the Particle Physics and Astronomy Research Coun-
cil (United Kingdom), the National Research Council
(Canada), CONICYT (Chile), the Australian Research

−0.10.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.8(r−i)SDSS(mag)−0.45−0.40−0.35−0.30−0.25−0.20−0.15−0.10−0.050.00RLandolt−rSDSS(mag)∆R=−0.303(r−i)SDSS−0.133−0.10.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.8(r−i)SDSS(mag)−0.65−0.60−0.55−0.50−0.45−0.40−0.35−0.30−0.25ILandolt−iSDSS(mag)∆I=−0.213(r−i)SDSS−0.388−0.04−0.020.000.020.04ZPExtrap−ZP(mag)0100200300400500600700800900R:µ=0.000σ=0.012−0.04−0.020.000.020.04ZPExtrap−ZP(mag)0100200300400500600700I:µ=0.000σ=0.01024

Narayan et al.

Council (Australia), CNPq (Brazil) and CONICET (Ar-
gentina) (Programs GN-2002B-Q-14, GS-2003B-Q-11,
GN-2003B-Q-14, GS-2004B-Q-4, GN-2004B-Q-6, GS-
2005B-Q-31, GN-2005B-Q-35)]; the Magellan Telescopes
at Las Campanas Observatory; the MMT Observatory,
a joint facility of the Smithsonian Institution and the
University of Arizona; and the F. L. Whipple Observa-
tory, which is operated by the Smithsonian Astrophysical
Observatory. Some of the data presented herein were ob-
tained at the W. M. Keck Observatory, which is operated
as a scientiﬁc partnership among the California Institute
of Technology, the University of California, and the Na-
tional Aeronautics and Space Administration. The Ob-
servatory was made possible by the generous ﬁnancial
support of the W. M. Keck Foundation. The ESSENCE
survey team is very grateful to the scientiﬁc and techni-
cal staﬀ at the observatories we have been privileged to
use.

The ESSENCE survey is supported by the NSF
through grants AST-0443378 and AST-0507475. G.N.
is supported by NSF award AST–0507475 and the De-
partment of Energy. A.V.F.’s group at UC Berkeley
received additional assistance from NSF grants AST-
0908886 and AST-1211916, the TABASGO Foundation,
and the Christopher R. Redlich Fund. The Dark Cosmol-
ogy Centre is funded by the Danish National Research
Foundation. J.M.S. is supported by an NSF Astronomy
and Astrophysics Postdoctoral Fellowship under award
AST-1302771. A.C. acknowledges support from grant
IC120009 awarded to the Millennium Institute of Astro-
physics, MAS, by the Ministry of Economy, Development
and Tourism, and grant Basal CATA PFB 06/09 from
CONICYT.

Our project was made possible by the survey pro-
gram administered by NOAO, and builds upon the data-
reduction pipeline developed by the SuperMACHO col-
laboration.

We made extensive use of the Odyssey Cluster admin-
istered by the FAS-IT Research Computing Group at
Harvard and are very grateful to the staﬀ there.

Facilities:

Blanco

(MOSAIC II), CTIO:0.9m
(CFCCD), Gemini:South
(GMOS), Gemini:North
(GMOS), Keck:I (LRIS), Keck:II (DEIMOS, ESI), VLT
(FORS1), Magellan:Baade (IMACS), Magellan:Clay
(LDSS2).

ESSENCE 6-Year Data Release

TABLE 6

Transient Objects Considered for Follow-up Observations by the

ESSENCE Survey

25

ESSENCE ID IAU ID

Type

Subﬁeld Amp

α (h:m:s)

δ(J2000) (◦ :(cid:48):(cid:48)(cid:48))

zSNID

σz

zGal

σzGal

E(B − V )MW

a002
b001
b002
b003
b004
b005
b006
b008
b010
b013
b014
b015
b016
b017
b019
b020
b022
b023
b024
b025
b027
c002
c003
c005
c012
c014
c015
c016
c020
c022
c023
c024
c025
c027
c028
d009
d010
d029
d033
d034
d051
d057
d058
d059
d060
d062
d083
d084
d085
d086
d087
d089
d091
d093
d097
d099
d100
d115
d117
d120
d123
d124
d149
d150
d156
e018
e020
e022
e025
e027
e029
e103
e106
e108

—
—
—
2002iu
2002iv
2002iw
2002ix
2002jq
2002iy
2002iz
—
—
2002ja
2002jb
—
2002jr
2002jc
2002js
—
—
2002jd
—
2002jt
—
2002ju
2002jv
2002jw
2002jx
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
2003jp
—
2003jo
—
—
2003jk
2003jj
—
—
—
2003jn
2003jm
2003jv
2003ju
2003jr
2003jl
—
2003js
2003jt
2003ji
2003jq
—
2003jw
—
—
—
2003jy
—
2003jx
—
2003kk
2003kj
—
—
2003kl
—
—
2003km Ia

Gal
Unk
Star
Ia
IaT
Gal
II?
Ia
Ia
Ia
Gal
Gal
Ia
Ia
Gal
Ia
Ia
Ia
Star
Unk
Ia
Unk
Ia
AGN
Ia
Ib
Ia
Gal
Unk
Ib
Ia
Gal
AGN
Gal
AGN
Ia
Ic
AGN
Ia
AGN
Gal
Unk
Ia
Gal
Star
AGN
IaT
Ia
Ia
Ia
Ia
Ia
Unk
Ia
Ia
Ia
IaP
Unk
Ia
AGN
Gal
AGN
Ia
Gal
Unk
AGN
Ia
IIP
Gal
Gal
Ia
Unk
Unk

wxc1
wxc1
wxh1
wx06
wx17
wxd1
waa7
wx01
wdd5
wdd5
wdd5
wcx1
waa7
waa7
wxd1
wcc9
wcc2
wx18
wxc1
wxa1
wx11
wbb6
wx06
waa7
wx18
wcc3
wdd5
wxm1
wxt2
wxu2
wx11
wdd5
waa7
wxm1
wxu2
waa6
waa6
waa6
waa6
waa7
wcc8
wbb6
wbb6
wcc5
wcc7
wcc9
wdd9
wdd9
waa5
waa5
wbb5
wdd6
wcc1
wdd5
wdd5
wcc2
waa7
wbb6
wdd8
wcc1
wcc9
wcc9
wcc4
wcc1
wcc2
wbb7
waa6
wbb7
wdd3
wcc7
wbb3
wbb9
wbb6
wdd8

4
14
1
14
6
11
16
5
7
10
15
9
15
6
4
1
3
9
16
5
16
14
15
10
16
3
2
4
15
15
15
5
14
4
16
16
16
13
10
10
2
3
3
3
3
3
12
11
16
3
4
8
2
3
10
16
16
11
16
2
16
15
11
12
4
2
9
12
15
16
15
2
11
4

23:34:48.580
23:36:07.860
00:12:51.140
00:13:33.100
02:19:16.110
23:43:07.250
23:31:00.863
23:35:57.960
02:30:40.022
02:31:20.745
02:31:11.408
23:36:44.070
23:30:09.685
23:29:44.149
23:40:47.490
02:04:41.039
02:07:27.285
02:20:35.390
23:36:31.330
23:24:11.150
00:28:38.390
01:10:05.029
00:13:36.700
23:30:54.777
02:20:11.000
02:04:34.815
02:30:00.539
00:26:54.136
02:20:32.124
02:21:06.336
00:28:03.160
02:29:56.521
23:30:18.309
00:27:56.787
02:20:03.304
23:25:55.900
23:26:03.281
23:25:11.206
23:25:24.047
23:30:31.616
02:06:48.703
01:08:06.169
01:07:58.519
02:06:49.459
02:09:02.757
02:04:19.323
02:29:21.199
02:28:50.940
23:27:58.197
23:27:01.704
01:11:06.232
02:28:28.568
02:09:35.211
02:29:52.152
02:31:54.595
02:07:54.841
23:30:51.191
01:09:45.163
02:31:06.836
02:09:44.494
02:06:08.565
02:06:04.554
02:10:53.987
02:10:12.486
02:06:33.398
01:13:59.547
23:25:36.054
01:14:36.556
02:29:07.399
02:11:09.129
01:09:48.798
01:09:32.340
01:09:45.163
02:30:09.001

−10:11:02.260
−10:02:26.660
−10:38:27.050
−10:13:09.920
−07:44:06.720
−09:48:05.200
−09:29:07.205
−10:05:56.880
−08:11:40.469
−08:36:13.414
−08:10:53.113
−10:24:23.300
−09:35:01.809
−09:36:34.508
−09:42:19.340
−05:09:40.727
−03:50:20.744
−09:34:43.900
−09:55:01.600
−09:13:20.120
+00:40:29.290
+00:16:31.437
−10:08:24.000
−09:56:47.863
−09:04:37.500
−03:51:57.919
−08:36:22.561
+00:22:49.750
−07:36:02.690
−09:06:51.820
+00:37:50.430
−08:23:52.283
−09:38:02.438
+00:25:19.760
−09:05:20.990
−08:56:41.300
−08:59:22.829
−09:13:38.505
−09:26:00.659
−09:56:24.390
−05:08:46.023
+00:02:20.636
+00:03:01.918
−04:26:47.244
−05:03:39.667
−05:01:44.661
−09:02:15.490
−09:09:58.077
−08:57:11.687
−09:24:04.573
+00:13:44.210
−08:08:44.932
−03:56:17.327
−08:32:28.155
−08:35:48.609
−03:28:28.055
−09:28:34.044
+00:02:02.740
−08:45:36.535
−03:57:02.923
−04:39:08.710
−04:41:45.145
−04:25:49.436
−03:49:09.928
−03:48:39.117
+00:32:48.750
−09:31:44.807
+00:23:58.180
−07:36:34.479
−04:39:19.417
+01:00:05.496
+00:36:43.930
+00:02:02.740
−09:04:35.621

—
—
—

0.115
0.226

—
—

0.477
0.594
0.427

—
—

0.334
0.272

—

0.431
0.534
0.557

—
—

0.316

—

0.565
0.248
0.349

—

0.356

—
—
—

0.412

—

0.361

—

2.033
0.351

—

2.584
0.530
2.285

—
—

0.589

—

0.001
2.433
0.330
0.516
0.401
0.201
0.337
0.425

—

0.361
0.430
0.216
0.158

—

0.301
1.279

—

0.617
0.344

—
—

0.181
0.159

—
—
—

—
—

0.005
0.005
0.003

—
—

0.008
0.006

—

0.004
0.008
0.003

—
—

0.003

—

0.006
0.002
0.005

—

0.007

—
—
—

0.011

—

0.002

—

0.004
0.002

—

0.003
0.008
0.007

—
—

0.009

—

0.003
0.004
0.006
0.006
0.008
0.003
0.004
0.005

—

0.003
0.005
0.003
0.003

—

0.005
0.005

—

0.023
0.008

—
—

0.001
0.006

—
—
—

0.332

0.008

—
—

—
—

0.473

0.009

—

—

0.3155

—
—
— −0.0003
0.005
0.2283
0.006
0.2048

—

—

—
—

0.587
0.4274
0.2689
0.2070

—
—

0.0002

—

0.0002

—

0.0006
0.0003

—
—

0.0010
0.0005
0.0002
0.0002

—
—

0.2129

0.0007

—
—
—

—
—
—

0.0001

0.0002

—
—
—
—
—

0.3473
0.2203
0.3575
0.8446

—

0.2123
0.3987
0.3174

—

—
—
—
—
—

0.0001
0.0001
0.0006
0.0004

—

0.0003
0.0003
0.0001

—

0.4534

0.0002

—

0.3535
0.0829

—

—

0.0002
0.0001

—

0.5251

0.0003

—

—

0.3817

0.0002

—

0.5839
0.2076

—

0.0002
0.0002

—
—
—

—
—
—

0.5221
0.4047

—

0.0002
0.0001

—

0.3400

0.0003

—
—

—
—

0.3636

0.0001

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—

0.2968

0.0002

—

—

0.4995

0.0004

—

0.3388
0.1910

—
—

0.1643
0.0784
0.1797
0.8043
0.3333

—

—

0.0002
0.0003

—
—

0.0008
0.0001
0.0002
0.0000
0.0009

—

0.3219

0.0009

0.02469
0.02580
0.03826
0.03980
0.02329
0.02989
0.02854
0.02647
0.03252
0.03283
0.03390
0.02875
0.03111
0.03442
0.03084
0.02485
0.02457
0.02399
0.02861
0.03153
0.02587
0.02483
0.03682
0.02350
0.02649
0.02400
0.03399
0.02350
0.02342
0.02529
0.02295
0.03786
0.02845
0.02240
0.02664
0.03752
0.03668
0.03429
0.03621
0.02421
0.02180
0.02948
0.02883
0.02262
0.02159
0.02430
0.02798
0.02516
0.03495
0.03459
0.02516
0.02997
0.02298
0.03212
0.03114
0.02456
0.02863
0.03106
0.02918
0.02299
0.02430
0.02348
0.02020
0.02450
0.02311
0.02879
0.03411
0.02926
0.02982
0.01969
0.03509
0.02437
0.03106
0.03216

26

Narayan et al.

TABLE 6 — Continued

ESSENCE ID IAU ID

Type

Subﬁeld Amp

α (h:m:s)

δ(J2000) (◦ :(cid:48):(cid:48)(cid:48))

zSNID

σz

zGal

σzGal

E(B − V )MW

e118
e119
e120
e132
e133
e136
e138
e140
e141
e143
e147
e148
e149
e309
e315
e418
e501
e504
e510
e528
e529
e531
e604
f001
f011
f017
f041
f044
f076
f095
f096
f123
f213
f216
f221
f231
f235
f244
f247
f301
f304
f308
f401
f441
g001
g004
g005
g009
g014
g043
g046
g050
g052
g053
g055
g097
g108
g120
g128
g133
g142
g151
g160
g166
g181
g185
g199
g204
g213
g219
g225
g230
g240
g276
h280
h283

—
—
—
2003kn
—
2003ko
2003kt
2003kq
—
—
2003kp
2003kr
2003ks
—
2003ku
—
—
—
—
—
—
2003kv
—
2003lg
2003lh
—
2003le
—
2003lf
—
2003lm
—
—
2003ll
2003lk
2003ln
2003lj
2003li
—
—
—
—
—
—
2004ﬁ
—
2004fh
—
—
2004fj
—
2004fn
2004fm
2004ﬂ
2004fk
—
2004fp
2004fo
—
—
—
2004fq
2004fs
2004fr
—
—
2004ft
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
2004ha

AGN
Gal
Gal
Ia
Gal
Ia
Ia
IaT
Ib
Unk
Ia
Ia
Ia
Star
Ia
Unk
Unk
AGN
Unk
Unk
Unk
Ia?
Gal
IIP
Ia
AGN
Ia
Ia
Ia
Gal
Ia
Ia
Unk
Ia
Ia
Ia
Ia
Ia
Gal
Ia
Unk
Ia
Gal
Unk
Ia
Ic
Ia
Gal
Gal
IIP
Gal
Ia
Ia
Ia?
Ia
Ia
IIP
Ia
II?
Ia
Ia
Ic
Ia
Gal
Unk
II
Gal
Unk
Gal
II?
Ia
Ia
Ia
Gal
II
Ia

waa5
wbb1
waa5
wcc1
wcc1
wcc1
wdd4
wdd5
wdd7
wdd7
wdd5
wdd5
wdd5
waa9
wbb9
wcc2
waa1
waa3
waa1
wcc5
wcc5
wcc1
waa6
wbb7
wcc7
wdd9
wbb6
wbb8
wbb9
wcc2
waa3
wcc1
wbb4
wdd4
wcc4
waa1
wbb5
wdd3
wbb8
wdd6
wdd6
wdd6
waa1
wbb6
waa1
wbb4
waa2
wbb4
wbb1
wbb6
wcc9
waa7
waa8
waa8
wbb7
waa8
wdd8
wbb1
waa2
wcc4
waa2
waa2
wdd8
wdd9
wdd9
waa2
wdd4
wcc2
wbb8
wbb9
waa5
wbb5
waa1
wcc1
wbb6
wcc9

11
7
9
7
7
12
1
15
2
3
9
10
10
14
3
8
1
4
13
3
3
4
8
1
12
10
8
8
1
8
3
7
12
15
14
13
13
8
10
1
2
10
1
7
1
14
13
13
6
16
14
10
7
7
7
16
4
1
5
7
11
14
15
14
2
1
7
13
6
10
2
3
14
7
10
5

23:27:48.448
01:14:16.912
23:28:37.492
02:09:15.549
02:09:17.662
02:11:06.495
02:33:46.992
02:31:04.089
02:32:30.272
02:33:11.715
02:31:02.652
02:31:20.960
02:31:34.528
23:25:14.230
01:08:36.253
02:07:30.851
23:29:20.159
23:25:01.338
23:30:59.971
02:07:37.767
02:06:42.954
02:09:42.519
23:23:51.868
01:13:32.675
02:10:19.505
02:28:38.844
01:08:08.739
01:11:20.561
01:08:49.807
02:06:56.203
23:24:25.501
02:09:57.282
01:14:50.770
02:35:41.190
02:11:12.817
23:30:27.131
01:12:10.034
02:27:47.294
01:12:32.219
02:27:26.513
02:28:23.108
02:29:22.391
23:29:40.692
01:08:58.453
23:29:45.348
01:15:06.214
23:28:27.197
01:14:28.998
01:13:18.202
01:09:51.075
02:05:34.300
23:30:20.114
23:26:58.138
23:26:57.910
01:13:35.842
23:27:37.164
02:29:53.012
01:13:28.975
23:26:43.669
02:09:49.626
23:28:37.713
23:27:45.638
02:31:19.943
02:28:43.772
02:28:35.984
23:26:56.854
02:33:32.622
02:08:26.690
01:11:54.176
01:10:27.165
23:27:15.685
01:11:56.314
23:30:41.823
02:09:17.715
01:09:28.330
02:04:27.005

−09:22:53.295
+01:03:06.427
−09:30:30.569
−03:35:41.010
−03:35:41.255
−03:47:55.899
−08:36:22.141
−08:10:56.603
−09:05:53.662
−09:03:32.183
−08:39:50.909
−08:36:14.195
−08:36:46.462
−09:44:25.810
−00:33:20.780
−03:30:49.497
−08:54:27.836
−08:41:49.753
−08:37:34.344
−04:27:06.738
−04:26:31.293
−03:46:48.442
−08:59:17.456
+00:36:57.310
−04:59:32.063
−09:11:09.202
+00:27:09.580
+00:04:10.020
−00:44:13.490
−03:31:07.936
−08:45:50.834
−03:32:26.609
+00:14:35.919
−08:06:29.788
−04:13:52.110
−08:35:46.927
+00:19:51.267
−07:33:46.220
+00:31:12.730
−08:42:24.782
−08:34:22.780
−08:37:38.480
−08:56:37.030
+00:22:15.570
−08:54:36.347
+00:23:38.571
−08:36:55.071
+00:16:56.247
+00:57:00.728
+00:27:20.934
−04:46:30.968
−09:58:30.698
−09:37:19.346
−09:37:18.984
−00:09:27.500
−09:35:21.041
−09:01:16.554
+00:35:16.179
−08:37:31.458
−04:10:55.064
−08:45:03.948
−08:31:12.785
−08:49:21.751
−08:54:24.030
−09:13:43.261
−08:55:12.970
−08:09:34.178
−03:44:44.620
−00:13:45.690
−00:39:11.615
−09:27:59.728
+00:07:27.441
−08:34:10.893
−03:35:43.709
−00:01:22.880
−04:52:46.192

0.552

0.007

—
—

0.235

—

0.348
0.608
0.614

—
—

0.647
0.431
0.498
0.001

—
—
—

—
—

0.006

—

0.006
0.006
0.006

—
—

0.008
0.006
0.008
0.003

—
—
—

0.675

0.005

—
—
—
—
—

0.171
0.544
0.725
0.560

—

0.408

—

0.413
0.534

—

0.595
0.443
0.615
0.422
0.546

—

0.514

—

0.388

—
—

0.268
0.143
0.220

—
—

0.190

—

0.616
0.381

—

0.302
0.339
0.162
0.507

—

0.422
0.398
0.455
0.507

—
—

—
—
—
—
—

0.006
0.006
0.004
0.004

—

0.004

—

0.004
0.009

—

0.011
0.004
0.003
0.006
0.005

—

0.011

—

0.010

—
—

0.002
0.006
0.006

—
—

0.002

—

0.008
0.007

—

0.006
0.004
0.004
0.004

—

0.003
0.013
0.003
0.019

—
—

0.345

0.007

—
—
—
—

0.579

—

0.696

—
—

—
—
—
—

0.009

—

0.007

—
—

0.498

0.008

—

0.5584
0.2974
0.2443
0.2450
0.3602

—

0.6060
0.0982
0.1107

—

0.427

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

—

0.0002
0.0002
0.0003
0.0003
0.0008

—

0.0002
0.0001
0.0001

—

0.0010

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

0.4357

0.0001

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—

0.4078

0.0003

—

0.3130
0.4080
0.5261

—

0.5958
0.4413

—

0.4171
0.5403
0.4306

—
—
—

—

0.0008
0.0001
0.0002

—

0.0001
0.0003

—

0.0006
0.0002
0.0003

—
—
—

0.2023

0.0002

—

—

0.2648

0.0002

—
—

0.1831
0.1949
0.1874
0.1833
0.6045

—

0.6329
0.2964
0.3434

—
—

—
—

0.0003
0.0003
0.0008
0.0002
0.0003

—

0.0022
0.0004
0.0002

—
—

0.1642

0.0006

—

0.4033
0.1462

—

0.2016
0.5324

—

0.7665
0.1114
0.8423

—
—

—

0.0001
0.0004

—

0.0007
0.0002

—

0.0002
0.0001
0.0002

—
—

0.3934

0.0001

—

0.2442
0.2633

—

—

0.0002
0.0005

—

0.03665
0.03121
0.03937
0.02585
0.02596
0.02329
0.03294
0.03341
0.02972
0.02632
0.03419
0.03281
0.03166
0.02968
0.03573
0.02304
0.03161
0.04289
0.03116
0.02129
0.02226
0.02288
0.03519
0.02730
0.02000
0.02542
0.02934
0.02544
0.03948
0.02336
0.04193
0.02410
0.03231
0.03288
0.02044
0.02860
0.03243
0.02690
0.03018
0.03007
0.03088
0.02955
0.02929
0.02517
0.02895
0.02853
0.02759
0.02991
0.02787
0.02529
0.02507
0.02444
0.03110
0.03110
0.02823
0.03130
0.03378
0.02854
0.02539
0.02434
0.02842
0.02689
0.02952
0.02988
0.02629
0.03440
0.03713
0.02356
0.02886
0.03111
0.03504
0.03077
0.02974
0.02597
0.03395
0.02678

ESSENCE ID IAU ID

Type

Subﬁeld Amp

α (h:m:s)

δ(J2000) (◦ :(cid:48):(cid:48)(cid:48))

zSNID

ESSENCE 6-Year Data Release

TABLE 6 — Continued

h293
h296
h299
h300
h304
h311
h317
h319
h323
h336
h342
h345
h352
h353
h359
h361
h363
h364
k374
k396
k397
k402
k411
k425
k426
k429
k430
k432
k437
k440
k441
k442
k443
k444
k448
k453
k459
k467
k472
k485
k490
k505
k509
m001
m002
m003
m004
m006
m010
m011
m012
m014
m022
m025
m026
m027
m028
m032
m034
m035
m037
m038
m039
m040
m041
m042
m043
m057
m062
m070
m075
m078
m082
m087
m095
m111

Unk
Gal
Gal
Ia
Gal
Ia
Gal
Ia
Ia
Gal
Ia
Unk
Gal
Gal
Ia
Unk
Ia
Ia
Gal
Ia?
Unk
Unk
IaP
Ia
Gal

—
—
2004hb
—
—
2004hc
—
2004hd
2004he
—
2004hf
2004hg
—
—
2004hi
—
2004hh
2004hj
—
2004hk
—
—
—
2004hl
—
2004hm Ia
Ia
2004hn
—
Ia
Gal
2004ho
Unk
—
Ia
2004hq
Unk
—
Unk
2004hp
—
Gal
Ia
2004hr
Gal
—
Unk
—
Ia?
—
Gal
—
2004hs
Ia
Ia
—
Gal
—
Gal
—
Ia
—
Gal
—
—
IIP
Gal
—
Ib/c?
—
Ib
—
II
—
Gal
—
—
II
Ia
—
Gal
—
Ia
—
Ia
—
Gal
—
—
Ia
Ia
—
AGN
—
Gal
—
II
—
Ia
—
—
Ia
IIP
—
Gal
—
Ia
—
Ia
—
Ia
—
—
Ia
Ia
—
Gal
—
Unk
—
Ia
—
AGN
—
—
AGN

wcc9
wdd6
wcc8
wdd8
wcc1
waa3
wcc8
wcc5
wdd6
waa3
wdd5
wdd4
wcc4
waa2
wcc8
wcc7
wcc9
wdd9
wdd9
waa2
wcc1
wbb5
waa3
wbb7
wdd8
wdd3
wbb1
waa2
wcc3
wbb4
wdd5
wcc3
wcc1
wdd5
wbb6
wdd8
wcc7
wdd2
wcc3
wcc4
wdd2
wcc3
waa5
wbb6
waa6
wcc9
wcc8
wdd8
wdd8
wcc5
wdd3
wcc5
waa1
waa6
waa5
wbb6
wcc5
waa7
wdd3
waa1
wdd3
wcc9
wdd3
wdd3
wcc7
waa6
waa1
wcc4
wbb3
wdd4
waa3
wcc2
wcc2
wdd4
wdd2
wcc7

2
12
15
15
2
4
10
11
13
7
9
10
13
15
10
13
16
16
1
5
7
12
10
3
4
6
2
3
11
7
5
10
4
2
2
13
10
13
15
6
4
13
10
1
15
15
8
1
9
16
16
3
14
11
12
12
12
2
2
5
10
6
6
6
7
3
1
11
10
7
7
5
4
3
3
11

02:05:11.580
02:28:45.533
02:08:09.708
02:31:40.680
02:09:10.894
23:24:32.664
02:08:21.585
02:08:48.217
02:29:48.797
23:24:56.441
02:32:00.143
02:34:55.193
02:10:48.002
23:28:14.068
02:08:38.835
02:11:14.030
02:06:25.028
02:29:41.943
02:27:34.292
23:27:04.384
02:09:31.278
01:12:54.197
23:26:11.781
01:13:38.174
02:30:51.203
02:28:03.110
01:13:32.382
23:26:46.120
02:06:16.041
01:14:18.151
02:30:18.037
02:06:19.076
02:09:35.522
02:30:00.763
01:08:48.336
02:31:36.957
02:10:28.886
02:31:11.801
02:06:29.663
02:09:33.689
02:30:24.320
02:06:11.608
23:28:31.296
01:08:22.010
23:26:06.272
02:05:27.303
02:07:12.708
02:30:27.266
02:31:46.238
02:08:06.229
02:29:13.485
02:07:12.911
23:30:02.706
23:25:11.601
23:28:39.960
01:09:15.013
02:08:49.544
23:29:35.343
02:27:50.324
23:28:55.967
02:29:03.971
02:05:10.823
02:28:04.636
02:27:30.201
02:09:49.784
23:24:23.781
23:29:51.729
02:10:56.774
01:09:52.911
02:33:46.821
23:24:42.288
02:07:05.775
02:07:13.757
02:33:37.004
02:30:26.427
02:10:36.083

−05:09:04.692
−08:27:36.835
−04:41:51.880
−08:49:03.377
−03:58:00.789
−08:41:03.574
−05:05:09.208
−04:26:10.319
−08:20:45.875
−08:28:40.498
−08:42:23.852
−08:30:43.591
−04:17:54.131
−08:26:54.628
−05:08:11.825
−04:53:40.148
−04:38:04.035
−08:43:49.480
−09:17:08.085
−08:38:45.178
−03:34:21.189
+00:11:25.151
−08:50:17.355
−00:27:39.045
−09:04:27.406
−07:42:29.656
+00:37:15.455
−08:45:42.405
−03:52:27.803
+00:29:02.397
−08:22:25.045
−03:58:01.372
−03:46:23.520
−08:37:25.930
+00:00:49.449
−08:58:10.962
−05:07:11.337
−07:47:34.124
−03:33:08.079
−04:13:03.931
−07:53:20.935
−03:44:17.379
−09:25:39.880
−00:05:46.654
−09:05:22.919
−04:42:53.777
−04:37:27.898
−09:16:10.189
−09:16:25.667
−04:03:51.137
−07:34:07.335
−04:26:40.049
−08:33:36.539
−09:23:41.144
−09:19:49.986
+00:08:14.797
−04:23:12.189
−09:58:46.304
−07:59:11.705
−08:38:18.364
−07:59:43.697
−04:47:13.982
−07:42:44.373
−07:41:49.985
−04:45:10.513
−09:22:12.082
−08:56:46.084
−04:27:29.962
+00:36:19.019
−08:08:26.888
−08:29:08.021
−03:41:28.385
−03:49:12.890
−08:27:32.462
−07:57:27.227
−05:00:57.306

0.669

0.006

—
—
—

—
—
—

0.405

0.007

—
—

0.607

—

0.417
0.709

—
—

—
—

0.008

—

0.003
0.001

—
—

0.290

0.004

—
—
—

—
—
—

0.051

0.001

—
—
—
—

0.238

—

0.656
0.285

—

0.154
0.562
1.497

—
—

0.249
0.481
0.220

—

0.266
0.183
0.316
0.214
0.101

—
—

0.289
0.992
1.001

—
—
—
—

0.004

—

0.006
0.003

—

0.003
0.006
0.009

—
—

0.003
0.003
0.006

—

0.003
0.004
0.004
0.003
0.003

—
—

0.006
0.012
0.004

σz

—
—
—

0.003

—

0.003

—

0.002
0.007

—

0.005

—
—
—

0.005

—

0.006
0.003

—

0.006

—
—

0.004
0.003

—

0.006
0.007
0.010

—
—

—
—
—

0.657

—

0.752

—

0.478
0.603

—

0.421

—
—
—

0.347

—

0.211
0.344

—

0.271

—
—

0.562
0.274

—

0.171
0.576
0.706

—
—

27

zGal

σzGal

E(B − V )MW

0.5462
0.0590
0.7186

0.0001
0.0003
0.0002

—
—
—

0.6377
0.4903
0.5978
0.3916

—
—

—
—
—

0.0001
0.0002
0.0003
0.0005

—
—

0.1807
0.2196

0.0002
0.0002

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—

0.1423

0.0004

—
—
—
—

0.2702
0.7572
0.1720

—
—

—
—
—
—

0.0001
0.0003
0.0006

—
—

0.2878

0.0001

—
—
—
—

0.1921
0.4081
0.5418

—
—

—
—
—
—

0.0002
0.0001
0.0003

—
—

0.1368

0.0002

—

0.7147
0.2405
0.2064

—

0.3545
0.2014
0.3834
0.0572
0.2156
0.2045
0.1138
0.1988

—

0.7008
0.6548
0.2885
0.6075

—

—

0.0009
0.0001
0.0001

—

0.0002
0.0003
0.0004
0.0002
0.0003
0.0003
0.0002
0.0001

—

0.0001
0.0003
0.0002
0.0001

—

0.5577

0.0002

—

0.2397
0.0507
0.2481

—
—

0.1254
0.2654
0.1810
0.3139
0.2122
0.0996
0.3951
0.3472
0.2870

—
—

—

0.0002
0.0004
0.0002

—
—

0.0001
0.0010
0.0002
0.0001
0.0002
0.0002
0.0005
0.0002
0.0003

—
—

0.02479
0.03198
0.02098
0.02939
0.02352
0.04188
0.02130
0.02047
0.03481
0.03609
0.02867
0.03145
0.02172
0.02513
0.02095
0.02149
0.02475
0.03400
0.02785
0.02637
0.02564
0.03139
0.03456
0.02922
0.02568
0.03060
0.02719
0.02786
0.02292
0.02874
0.04245
0.02295
0.02244
0.03426
0.03243
0.02825
0.01991
0.02913
0.02320
0.02454
0.03220
0.02248
0.03928
0.03584
0.03602
0.02508
0.02205
0.02980
0.02735
0.02310
0.02954
0.02264
0.03070
0.03662
0.03742
0.02834
0.02094
0.02911
0.03114
0.03167
0.02607
0.02412
0.03069
0.03237
0.02231
0.03098
0.02926
0.01992
0.02457
0.03753
0.03620
0.02350
0.02425
0.03448
0.03305
0.02014

28

Narayan et al.

TABLE 6 — Continued

ESSENCE ID IAU ID

Type

Subﬁeld Amp

α (h:m:s)

δ(J2000) (◦ :(cid:48):(cid:48)(cid:48))

zSNID

σz

zGal

σzGal

E(B − V )MW

m135
m138
m139
m142
m158
m161
m166
m193
m219
m226
n244
n246
n255
n256
n258
n260
n261
n263
n268
n271
n278
n284
n285
n295
n312
n322
n326
n346
n368
n395
n400
n404
n406
n408
p415
p425
p429
p434
p444
p445
p454
p455
p458
p459
p461
p520
p521
p524
p527
p528
p534
p535
q002
q006
q007
q008
q014
q018
q021
q022
q031
q036
q048
q049
q054
q060
q061
q067
q069
q070
q075
q102
q106
q107
q108
q112

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
2006lw
2006ly
2006lx
—
—
—
—
2006lz
2006ma
2006mc
2006mb
—
2006me
2006mf
2006md
—
2006mg
2006mh
2006mk
2006mj
2006mi
2006ml

waa1
Gal
wbb3
Ia
waa3
IIn
wbb1
Unk
waa6
Ia
wdd9
Gal
waa1
AGN
wdd3
Ia
wdd4
Gal
wcc9
Ia
wdd3
Unk
wbb7
Ia?
wcc7
Gal
wdd3
Ia
wcc5
Ia
wcc8
AGN
wbb7
AGN
wcc9
Ia
wdd6
Gal
wbb5
IIP
waa5
Ia
waa1
AGN
waa3
Ia
waa3
AGN
wdd9
Gal
wdd9
Ia
waa1
Ia
waa1
IIn
waa7
Ia
wcc8
Gal
wbb8
Ia
wdd8
Ia
wdd8
Ia?
wbb9
Gal
waa3
Gal
waa1
Ia
waa3
Ia?
wbb5
Ia
wcc2
Ia
wbb1
Ia
wcc2
Ia
wcc4
Ia
waa3
Unk
wcc4
Ia
waa5
Gal
wcc2
Ia?
wcc7
Gal
wdd8
Ia
wcc2
Ia?
wcc2
Ia
wcc3
Ia
wcc5
Unk
wcc3
Ia
wcc1
Ia?
wcc2
Ia
wdd4
Ia?
wdd5
Ia
wdd5
Ia?
wdd4
Ia?
wbb5
Ia?
Gal
wbb6
II-pec wdd6
wbb7
Ia
Ia
wdd8
wdd8
Ia
wbb1
IIP
wbb4
Ia
wdd2
Ia
wbb5
Ia?
Gal
wdd6
wdd2
Ia
wbb4
Ia?
wdd5
Ia
wcc1
Ia
wcc3
Ia
Ia
wbb9

2
3
7
12
3
4
5
14
5
16
7
11
5
5
4
2
16
4
15
16
11
8
8
3
14
12
10
3
9
7
12
14
16
16
16
14
13
12
5
4
15
15
10
10
6
12
14
6
15
8
4
13
6
10
10
10
8
14
7
9
2
8
11
11
5
11
11
3
6
6
9
14
1
8
9
3

23:29:32.878
01:08:56.340
23:23:57.823
01:15:17.691
23:24:03.540
02:28:23.645
23:29:20.817
02:28:52.199
02:34:28.090
02:06:03.688
02:28:11.797
01:14:33.074
02:09:05.303
02:28:09.012
02:06:42.346
02:06:36.320
01:14:59.513
02:05:14.946
02:29:19.971
01:13:06.506
23:28:17.550
23:29:38.374
23:23:51.357
23:24:03.280
02:28:45.104
02:29:00.487
23:29:58.590
23:28:58.301
23:30:32.013
02:07:32.469
01:13:13.258
02:31:31.433
02:31:19.601
01:09:49.036
23:26:02.504
23:29:56.189
23:26:02.216
01:12:40.253
02:06:36.165
01:13:14.547
02:08:32.461
02:11:00.014
23:25:30.268
02:10:20.082
23:26:42.317
02:08:09.339
02:10:17.525
02:30:10.156
02:08:10.469
02:07:04.661
02:04:56.094
02:08:28.123
02:05:12.945
02:10:52.276
02:08:33.670
02:34:42.381
02:30:10.389
02:31:39.017
02:33:43.919
01:12:03.875
01:08:42.081
02:27:40.742
01:15:11.657
02:32:02.611
02:30:54.298
01:14:48.945
01:14:47.189
02:30:37.318
01:11:31.492
02:28:04.925
02:31:37.750
01:15:13.398
02:30:16.911
02:09:03.042
02:05:55.040
01:08:43.977

−08:51:20.312
+00:39:25.350
−08:27:08.205
+00:47:17.513
−09:23:18.267
−09:03:12.171
−08:36:48.770
−07:42:09.763
−08:15:19.399
−04:39:59.080
−07:36:29.340
−00:26:23.184
−04:53:36.615
−07:47:49.616
−04:22:36.982
−05:06:45.964
−00:05:55.501
−04:56:39.087
−08:12:02.467
+00:30:04.835
−09:23:12.360
−08:21:32.166
−08:23:18.503
−08:44:36.907
−08:55:47.232
−09:02:52.992
−08:53:12.468
−08:46:52.839
−10:03:22.140
−04:42:10.706
−00:23:25.853
−08:55:11.512
−08:45:09.787
−00:07:42.929
−08:21:10.846
−08:34:24.400
−08:35:47.978
+00:14:56.591
−03:41:33.614
+00:48:47.659
−03:33:34.241
−04:09:37.601
−08:52:04.940
−04:33:13.440
−09:07:28.646
−03:48:04.967
−04:46:52.214
−08:52:50.856
−03:32:17.637
−03:28:04.268
−03:49:03.645
−04:16:34.893
−03:39:00.723
−03:57:39.374
−03:57:12.888
−08:30:39.885
−08:06:54.094
−08:18:05.170
−08:05:50.050
−00:01:29.045
−00:00:57.201
−08:10:08.182
−00:28:03.151
−09:07:21.181
−08:57:42.078
+00:44:47.120
+00:10:13.284
−07:57:04.538
+00:24:34.163
−08:15:40.481
−08:06:40.098
+00:23:57.312
−08:40:47.345
−03:28:27.832
−04:00:53.216
−00:31:36.593

—

0.585

—
—

0.461

—

0.304
0.336

—

0.674

—

0.503

—

0.620
0.525
2.013
3.540
0.365

—

0.236
0.308
1.990
0.531
1.235

—

0.753
0.267

—

0.342

—

0.421
0.211
0.7700

—
—

0.456

—
—

0.633
0.816
0.691
0.285

—

0.702

—
—
—

0.516

—

0.780
0.610

—

0.350
0.290
0.210
0.287
0.270
0.270
0.360
0.226

—

0.179
0.440
0.421
0.331

—

0.302
0.187
0.262

—

0.427
0.435
0.477
0.650
0.622
0.637

—

0.004

—
—

0.006

—

0.002
0.006

—

0.008

—

0.005

—

0.007
0.008
0.006
0.040
0.003

—

0.003
0.006
0.008
0.009
0.007

—

0.006
0.006

—

0.006

—

0.007
0.005
0.01
—
—

0.004

—
—

0.004
0.002
0.008
0.006

—

0.004

—
—
—

0.004

—

0.009
0.005

—

0.003
0.010
0.004
0.010
0.003
0.010
0.010
0.010

—

0.006
0.010
0.005
0.005

—

0.005
0.007
0.010

—

0.005
0.010
0.004
0.009
0.005
0.003

0.2887
0.5877
0.2113

—
—

0.0001
0.0001
0.0001

—
—

0.2304

0.0001

—

0.3304
0.3104
0.6739

—

0.7055
0.1369

—

—

0.0002
0.0003
0.0013

—

0.0005
0.0002

—

0.5191

0.0002

—
—
—

—
—
—

0.2791

0.0004

—

—

0.3037

0.0002

—

—

0.5325

0.0001

—

—

0.2860

0.0002

—

0.2637
0.2661
0.3419
0.4617
0.4250

—
—

0.9198
0.3434
0.4583
0.5482
0.3383

—

—

0.0002
0.0002
0.0002
0.0002
0.0001

—
—

0.0003
0.0002
0.0001
0.0002
0.0004

—

0.8069

0.0002

—

—

0.2974

0.0002

—
—

—
—

0.4075

0.0005

—

—

0.3053

0.0002

—

0.4351
0.7812
0.6202

—

—

0.0002
0.0001
0.0011

—

0.3469

0.0002

—

0.2135
0.2913
0.2693

—
—
—

—

0.0002
0.0002
0.0002

—
—
—

0.2697

0.0002

—

0.4371
0.4204
0.3275
0.1441
0.2996
0.1824
0.2470
0.1256

—

0.4359
0.4754
0.6514
0.6231

—

—

0.0007
0.0001
0.0003
0.0002
0.0001
0.0003
0.0004
0.0003

—

0.0008
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001

—

0.02885
0.02758
0.03730
0.03129
0.03056
0.02661
0.02623
0.02804
0.03676
0.02413
0.02938
0.03047
0.02116
0.02975
0.02257
0.02087
0.03026
0.02569
0.03090
0.03371
0.03983
0.02812
0.03738
0.03854
0.02937
0.02713
0.02986
0.02994
0.02315
0.02208
0.03102
0.02875
0.02933
0.03468
0.02900
0.03095
0.02983
0.03441
0.02423
0.02458
0.02282
0.02023
0.03947
0.02173
0.03451
0.02298
0.02171
0.03528
0.02451
0.02355
0.02438
0.02216
0.02326
0.02208
0.02401
0.03191
0.03147
0.03499
0.03818
0.03038
0.03289
0.02762
0.03018
0.02963
0.02705
0.03191
0.03176
0.03380
0.02595
0.02960
0.04023
0.02898
0.03976
0.02406
0.02476
0.03642

ESSENCE ID IAU ID

Type

Subﬁeld Amp

α (h:m:s)

δ(J2000) (◦ :(cid:48):(cid:48)(cid:48))

zSNID

σz

zGal

σzGal

ESSENCE 6-Year Data Release

TABLE 6 — Continued

29

E(B − V )MW

q114
q125
q150
r184
r185
r186
r190
r192
r193
r195
r196
r199
r200
r204
r205
r206
r207
r209
r212
r213
r215
r225
r230
r311
r314
r317
r318
r322
r328
r329
r331
r334
s340
s346
s347
s349
s350
s351
s353
s354
s355
s362
s370
s371
s372
s373
s374
s375
s377
s378
s379
s380
s383
x005
x016
x017
x020
x022
x024
x025
x027
x028
x033
x034
x035
x038
x039
x055
x066
x068
x071
x072
x076
x077
x080
x084

wbb6
2006mm Ia
wbb6
Ia
2006mn
wdd5
Unk
—
wcc9
2006sa
IIP
wbb8
Ia
—
wcc5
Ia
2006sb
wcc7
Ia
2006sc
wcc9
—
Gal
wdd4
2006sm Ia
wcc1
2006si
Ia
wcc1
IIn
2006sh
wdd7
Ia?
2006sl
wbb1
Ia
2006sd
wcc1
Gal
—
wcc1
IIn
—
wbb4
2006se
Ia
wcc2
Ia
2006sf
wcc2
Ia
2006sg
wcc1
Ia
2006sj
wcc4
Ia
2006sk
wcc7
Unk
—
wcc9
2006sn
Ia
wdd7
Ia
2006so
wbb8
Ia
2006sp
wcc4
Gal
—
wbb1
Ia
—
wcc2
Ia
2006sq
wcc9
2006tg
Ia
waa1
II
2006th
wcc2
Gal
—
waa1
Gal
—
waa1
II
2006ti
wbb3
Ia
2006tj
wbb9
2006tl
Ia
wbb6
2006tk
Ia
wbb6
2006tm Ia
wcc2
Ia
2006to
wcc4
Ia
2006tp
wdd3
Ia?
2006tr
wcc9
—
Ia?
Ia
2006tn
wcc9
Ib-pec wcc4
2006tq
wdd2
Ia
2006tu
wbb8
II?
—
wcc2
Ia
—
2006tt
Ia
wcc4
wdd4
Ia?
2006tv
wcc1
IaT
2006ts
wbb6
IaT
2006tw
wbb9
SN?
2006tx
wbb3
Ia
2006ty
—
Ia
wcc7
wcc4
SN?
2006tz
wcc8
IIP
2007sz
wcc3
IIn
2007td
wbb4
Ia
2007ta
wcc1
Ia
2007te
2007sx
IIP
wbb9
wbb1
II?
2007sy
wbb1
Ia
2007tb
wcc2
Unk
—
wbb4
Ia
2007tc
wbb6
Ia
2007tf
2007th
Ia
wcc7
wcc9
Gal
—
wcc9
Ia
2007tg
wdd3
Ia
—
wdd5
Ia?
2007tk
wcc4
Ia
2007tj
—
Gal
wdd5
wcc7
Ia
2007ti
wcc8
Gal
—
wdd6
II
2007tn
wdd8
Ia
2007tp
wbb8
Ia
2007tl
—
Gal?
wdd3

6
1
16
6
3
8
15
13
2
5
5
6
7
7
7
11
11
12
15
16
4
13
12
3
5
5
2
8
1
16
14
3
4
1
8
12
1
1
4
10
10
8
2
11
16
12
9
15
6
11
10
2
13
2
5
1
7
9
12
12
12
13
10
11
11
15
15
6
14
14
16
16
2
2
6
12

01:08:48.662
01:07:48.392
02:31:18.622
02:05:14.944
01:11:48.238
02:06:30.312
02:10:10.226
02:05:23.959
02:33:29.487
02:09:51.320
02:09:11.064
02:32:15.952
01:14:24.151
02:09:47.393
02:09:37.948
01:14:48.050
02:08:11.658
02:08:13.041
02:10:22.419
02:10:33.800
02:08:55.716
02:06:18.251
02:33:49.152
01:10:55.171
02:09:59.003
01:13:24.658
02:07:11.267
02:04:14.168
23:29:00.954
02:07:48.017
23:30:49.841
23:29:13.133
01:09:23.284
01:09:17.282
01:07:52.640
01:09:17.297
02:07:34.387
02:09:14.040
02:28:29.532
02:06:10.482
02:05:36.019
02:10:00.697
02:29:56.534
01:12:57.431
02:08:24.257
02:10:47.935
02:35:34.225
02:10:18.687
01:08:54.227
01:10:26.793
01:10:45.361
02:09:00.048
02:10:27.034
02:07:00.230
02:04:26.895
01:13:15.801
02:09:29.402
01:10:09.249
01:15:25.989
01:14:41.252
02:08:15.486
01:14:46.894
01:09:59.349
02:10:57.582
02:05:24.988
02:06:10.505
02:29:18.063
02:30:24.609
02:11:04.611
02:31:12.905
02:10:09.836
02:08:37.294
02:28:14.790
02:30:23.940
01:11:04.912
02:29:20.643

+00:17:22.315
−00:06:35.454
−08:07:11.563
−04:48:51.685
−00:29:49.579
−04:05:30.553
−04:44:12.545
−04:52:16.485
−08:30:11.879
−03:43:32.520
−03:44:42.104
−08:48:34.335
+01:02:39.488
−03:34:25.676
−03:31:20.238
+00:06:39.370
−03:51:40.230
−03:46:21.937
−03:33:09.269
−04:04:03.845
−04:59:46.063
−04:51:33.148
−08:59:15.768
−00:27:52.289
−04:18:53.926
+00:51:27.757
−03:57:07.942
−04:40:18.623
−08:54:04.953
−03:29:12.632
−08:32:37.728
−08:47:57.762
+00:42:42.313
−00:40:27.967
+00:27:55.293
+00:09:11.389
−04:00:04.177
−04:37:11.970
−07:53:28.493
−05:05:23.000
−05:08:46.272
−04:06:00.903
−07:59:50.850
−00:26:54.525
−03:27:32.636
−04:24:56.952
−08:34:22.069
−03:32:26.335
+00:17:56.510
−00:34:07.640
+00:34:04.408
−05:07:41.787
−04:17:08.159
−05:06:08.212
−03:44:18.859
−00:01:31.428
−03:35:35.054
−00:42:08.035
+00:49:06.597
+00:46:51.824
−03:49:35.804
+00:17:06.778
−00:01:06.947
−05:00:24.789
−05:03:33.228
−04:42:23.286
−07:39:01.433
−08:17:54.401
−04:11:50.056
−08:18:18.552
−04:39:49.342
−04:37:35.354
−08:36:32.198
−09:13:39.846
−00:15:43.364
−07:51:00.932

0.701
0.347

—
—

0.179
0.313
0.355

—

0.609
0.542
0.260
0.410
0.283

—
—

0.610
0.560
0.428

—

0.321

—

0.415
0.259

—
—

0.736
0.222
0.521

—
—
—
—

0.528
0.270
0.313
0.220
0.682
0.720
0.581

—

0.670
0.262
0.439

—

0.706
0.630
0.757
0.551

—
—

0.011
0.004

—
—

0.006
0.004
0.007

—

0.005
0.008
0.010
0.010
0.007

—
—

0.010
0.010
0.003

—

0.008

—

0.006
0.005

—
—

0.005
0.002
0.010

—
—
—
—

0.006
0.010
0.003
0.007
0.010
0.006
0.010

—

0.010
0.001
0.005

—

0.010
0.003
0.010
0.006

—
—

0.181

0.004

—
—

0.046

—

0.418
0.686
0.12
0.19
0.372

—

0.609
0.405
0.508

—

0.512
0.771

—

0.331

—

0.476

—
—

0.517
0.374

—

—
—

0.005

—

0.006
0.008
0.01
0.01
0.008

—

0.007
0.007
0.003

—

0.008
0.004

—

0.003

—

0.008

—
—

0.009
0.008

—

0.6875
0.3486

—

0.1609
0.1800
0.3126
0.3568
0.6336

—

0.5424
0.2639
0.4180

—

0.4212
0.0517
0.6108
0.5616
0.4451
0.6535
0.3270

—

0.0002
0.0004

—

0.0002
0.0003
0.0001
0.0002
0.0001

—

0.0001
0.0001
0.0002

—

0.0001
0.0004
0.0003
0.0006
0.0002
0.0004
0.0001

—

0.4149

0.0001

—

0.7989
0.1092
0.3361

—

0.5138
0.1463
0.6209
0.4225
0.2051

—

—

0.0002
0.0003
0.0004

—

0.0002
0.0002
0.0001
0.0003
0.0004

—

0.2721

0.0006

—

0.2156
0.6834
0.7275
0.5956
0.5588
0.6734
0.2622
0.4394
0.2499
0.7076

—

0.7581
0.5569
0.3987
0.5005
0.1923
0.6355
0.3920

—

0.3442
0.4222

—

0.1171
0.1936
0.3553

—

0.600
0.4062

—

—

0.0002
0.0001
0.0002
0.0002
0.0004
0.0002
0.0001
0.0002
0.0001
0.0014

—

0.0002
0.0003
0.0005
0.0002
0.0001
0.0002
0.0001

—

0.0002
0.0004

—

0.0004
0.0002
0.0001

—

0.0010
0.0012

—

0.4029

0.0002

—
—

0.3495
0.3286
0.4350
0.4865
0.1919

—

0.520
0.3731

—

—
—

0.0002
0.0002
0.0002
0.0002
0.0001

—

0.0010
0.0002

—

0.02730
0.03112
0.03639
0.02442
0.02423
0.02101
0.02261
0.02426
0.03296
0.02335
0.02275
0.02808
0.03124
0.02441
0.02574
0.03126
0.02335
0.02290
0.02468
0.02228
0.02095
0.02228
0.03030
0.02510
0.02445
0.02550
0.02526
0.02531
0.03533
0.02405
0.02973
0.02897
0.02954
0.03367
0.02954
0.02782
0.02453
0.02118
0.02658
0.02130
0.02461
0.02390
0.03014
0.02858
0.02480
0.02041
0.02855
0.02473
0.02658
0.02851
0.02689
0.02096
0.02371
0.02235
0.02666
0.02770
0.02540
0.03418
0.03165
0.03295
0.02259
0.03209
0.03114
0.02021
0.02415
0.02367
0.02975
0.03726
0.02047
0.03451
0.02324
0.02107
0.03026
0.03026
0.02838
0.02666

30

Narayan et al.

TABLE 6 — Continued

ESSENCE ID IAU ID

Type

Subﬁeld Amp

α (h:m:s)

δ(J2000) (◦ :(cid:48):(cid:48)(cid:48))

zSNID

σz

zGal

σzGal

E(B − V )MW

x085
x089
x093
x103
x107
x113
y117
y118
y122
y123
y125
y126
y127
y131
y134
y136
y137
y142
y143
y145
y146
y151
y154
y155
y156
y158
y163
y173
y175
y177
z179
z180
z181
z183
z184
z185
z187
z195
z200
z202
z203
z204
z205
z208

Ia

wdd9
2007to
wcc3
2007tm IaT
wdd9
Ia
—
wbb5
Ia?
—
wdd3
Ia
2007tq
wdd4
II?
—
wcc5
Unk
—
wbb7
IIP
2007tu
wdd6
Ic
2007tx
wdd7
Gal
—
wcc9
Ia
2007tv
wcc9
Gal
—
wdd6
Ia
2007ty
wcc9
SN?
2007tw
wbb6
Ia
2007ts
wdd8
Ia?
2007tz
wbb8
Ia
2007tt
wdd8
Ia
2007ud
wcc2
Ia
2007ub
wbb3
Ia
2007ua
wdd6
Unk
—
wcc4
Ia?
2007uc
Ia?
wcc7
2007ug
PISN? wbb6
—
wbb9
Ia
2007ue
wcc5
Ia
2007uf
wcc3
Ia
2007uh
Ic?
wdd4
—
wdd4
Ia
2007ui
wdd4
Ia
2007uj
wbb8
Gal
—
wbb8
Ia
2007uk
wcc8
Ia
2007ul
Ia
wbb1
2007un
wcc4
Gal
2007up
wbb4
2007uv
Ia
wbb5
2007um Ia
wdd9
—
wbb1
2007uo
2007uq
wcc3
wcc2
2007ur
wdd3
2007us
wdd8
2007ut
2007uu
wbb1

Unk
Ia
Ia
Ia?
Ia
Ia
Ia

12
15
11
4
12
16
16
1
2
2
3
3
5
11
8
8
6
1
3
10
12
16
5
6
7
7
9
13
16
2
4
4
7
8
3
9
13
12
13
3
15
2
2
5

02:29:42.061
02:06:04.748
02:29:43.134
01:10:48.009
02:29:23.345
02:34:36.128
02:08:14.332
01:14:05.219
02:28:33.314
02:32:56.953
02:05:13.326
02:04:27.408
02:28:34.381
02:05:32.964
01:07:58.159
02:30:07.153
01:11:20.516
02:30:13.145
02:07:24.132
01:10:31.955
02:29:26.184
02:10:15.529
02:09:36.845
01:07:56.085
01:09:09.843
02:06:30.881
02:06:05.200
02:35:34.821
02:34:57.445
02:33:19.036
01:11:21.637
01:10:55.006
02:07:16.534
01:14:22.736
02:09:56.068
01:15:11.994
01:12:29.210
02:29:47.674
01:14:43.186
02:04:21.320
02:08:41.591
02:27:54.863
02:30:23.642
01:14:01.011

−09:02:05.252
−03:32:29.261
−09:06:54.931
+00:13:36.806
−07:52:27.686
−08:01:11.116
−04:05:09.772
−00:36:25.629
−08:35:25.690
−09:08:21.287
−05:01:42.415
−05:01:59.892
−08:23:49.491
−05:02:46.626
+00:27:48.972
−08:43:09.354
−00:12:19.423
−09:15:39.519
−03:51:55.226
+00:35:49.434
−08:27:52.797
−04:04:06.465
−04:51:52.280
+00:17:41.484
−00:14:01.124
−04:09:55.047
−04:01:37.458
−08:19:07.016
−08:03:57.919
−08:32:30.217
−00:22:45.114
−00:22:53.197
−04:42:23.201
+01:07:45.632
−04:28:57.352
−00:02:08.387
+00:17:01.211
−09:01:08.431
+00:54:27.657
−03:54:10.960
−03:34:10.527
−08:00:55.479
−09:12:20.022
+00:53:47.598

0.648

0.5
—
—

0.145

—
—

0.222
0.674

—

0.310

—

0.518

—

0.336

—

0.368
0.592
0.466
0.555

—
—
—
—
—
—

0.640

—

0.421
0.303

—

0.447
0.604
0.287

—

0.414
0.293

—

0.457
0.220

—
—

0.416
0.502

0.008
0.05
—
—

0.002

—
—

0.007
0.006

—

0.006

—

0.003

—

0.006
0.001
0.009
0.006
0.008
0.001

—
—
—
—
—
—

0.003

—

0.009
0.004

—

0.004
0.004
0.006

—

0.005
0.004

—

0.005
0.005
0.001

—

0.020
0.008

0.6345
0.4919
0.5004

—

0.0001
0.0001
0.0001

—

0.1462

0.0009

—
—
—

0.6764
0.1939
0.3108
0.7944

—

0.6654
0.3149
0.5200
0.3741
0.5820
0.4642
0.5514

—

0.5837
0.6540
0.7973
0.6614
0.4856
0.630
0.4078
0.4130

—

—
—
—

0.0001
0.0007
0.0003
0.0002

—

0.0001
0.0002
0.0010
0.0004
0.0010
0.0003
0.0003

—

0.0006
0.0001
0.0000
0.0004
0.0001
0.0010
0.0002
0.0002

—

0.4462

0.0007

—

0.620
0.2806
0.6116
0.4068

—
—

0.4548
0.2205
0.2500
0.6201

—

—

0.0010
0.0001
0.0002
0.0001

—
—

0.0002
0.0002
0.0010
0.0002

—

0.5300

0.0010

0.03208
0.02307
0.03314
0.02585
0.02682
0.03962
0.02299
0.02995
0.03035
0.02755
0.02459
0.02355
0.03131
0.02404
0.02953
0.03795
0.02732
0.02938
0.02487
0.02788
0.03430
0.02255
0.02246
0.03096
0.03364
0.02182
0.02411
0.03593
0.03688
0.03212
0.02664
0.02561
0.02248
0.03050
0.02245
0.02924
0.03491
0.03279
0.03175
0.02510
0.02317
0.03008
0.03042
0.03017

• Ia = Type Ia supernova, no subtype reported
• IaT = similar to the overluminous Type Ia SN 1991T or SN 1999aa
• IaP = similar to peculiar Type Ia supernovae SN 2000cx or SN 2002cx
• Ib = Type Ib supernova, no subtype reported
• Ib-pec = Type Ib supernova with peculiar spectral features
• Ic = Type Ic supernova, no subtype reported
• II = Type II supernova, no subtype reported
• IIn = Type II supernova with relatively narrow emission lines
• IIP = Type II supernova with a “plateau” in the light curve
• II-pec = Type II supernova with peculiar spectral features
• Classiﬁcations followed by a “?” are not deﬁnitive
• PISN? = Possible pair-instability supernova (P. Garnavich, priv. communication)
• Gal = Galaxy, subtypes are reported by Tucker et al. (2016)
• AGN = active galactic nucleus
• Unk = not observed or could not be classiﬁed based on spectra.

Notes: zSNID and zGal are reported in the heliocentric frame, and must be converted into the cosmic microwave background (CMB) frame, while
accounting for local peculiar velocities at low z. For this work, we have employed the Milky Way reddening values from Schlegel et al. (1998), rather
than the updated values provided by Schlaﬂy et al. (2012), to facilitate the combination of our objects with literature samples.

31

ESSENCE 6-Year Data Release

Photometry of ESSENCE Objects

TABLE 7

MJD

Passband

Flux25

σFlux

k425

52990.0582
52990.0745
52994.0601
52994.0772
53268.1072
53268.1484
53283.1311
53283.1629
53289.0561
53289.0726
53293.0558
53297.0640
53297.0809
53301.0728
53301.0973
53315.0736
53315.0906
53323.0829
53323.1006
53329.0363
53329.0533
53342.0814
53342.0984
53346.0734
53346.0919
53350.0550
53350.0724
53358.0431
53358.0720
53360.0755
53360.1073
53385.0554
53385.0589
53639.0843
53639.1007

R
I
R
I
R
I
R
I
R
I
I
R
I
R
I
R
I
R
I
R
I
R
I
R
I
R
I
R
I
R
I
R
I
R
I

-0.331500
-0.013500
0.468100
1.395600
0.029500
-0.254100
-0.815500
1.064200
0.149500
-1.360000
1.089600
-0.521300
-1.181900
0.085300
-1.519200
0.777700
0.207800
10.472000
11.788600
17.830900
24.461000
24.361700
30.781000
20.966300
25.465800
17.523900
21.250500
10.427300
16.345000
10.464500
14.251400
1.924400
4.661300
-0.178200
0.131800

0.561100
1.108300
0.468700
0.782300
0.836900
1.248500
0.746300
1.631700
0.764900
1.253400
1.544700
0.616900
0.945800
1.094000
1.085500
0.493500
0.852200
0.477600
0.649700
0.655000
0.892200
0.582500
0.963700
0.543200
1.022600
1.083800
1.189000
0.720000
0.915900
1.257200
2.462600
0.784900
1.151400
0.629700
0.934900

Note. — This table is published in its entirety in the electronic
edition of the journal. A portion is shown here for guidance regarding
its form and content.

32

Narayan et al.

REFERENCES

Abazajian, K. N., et al. 2009, ApJS, 182, 543
Albert, J., et al. 2014, in American Astronomical Society Meeting

Abstracts, Vol. 224, American Astronomical Society Meeting
Abstracts #224, 405.01

Albrecht, A., et al. 2006, ArXiv Astrophysics e-prints
Allington-Smith, J., et al. 1994, PASP, 106, 983
Appenzeller, I., et al. 1998, The ESO Messenger, 94, 1
Astier, P., et al. 2006, A&A, 447, 31
Barone-Nugent, R. L., et al. 2012, MNRAS, 425, 1007
Barris, B. J., Tonry, J. L., Novicki, M. C., & Wood-Vasey, W. M.

2005, AJ, 130, 2272

Bertin, E., Mellier, Y., Radovich, M., Missonnier, G., Didelon, P.,

& Morin, B. 2002, in Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc
Conference Series, Vol. 281, Astronomical Data Analysis
Software and Systems XI, ed. D. A. Bohlender, D. Durand, &
T. H. Handley, 228

Bessell, M. S. 1990, PASP, 102, 1181
Betoule, M., et al. 2013, A&A, 552, A124
—. 2014, A&A, 568, A22
Blondin, S., Mandel, K. S., & Kirshner, R. P. 2011, A&A, 526,

Blondin, S., & Tonry, J. L. 2007, ApJ, 666, 1024
Blondin, S., Walsh, J. R., Leibundgut, B., & Sainton, G. 2005,

Bohlin, R. C. 2014, AJ, 147, 127
Bohlin, R. C., Gordon, K. D., & Tremblay, P.-E. 2014, PASP,

A81

A&A, 431, 757

126, 711

Conley, A., et al. 2008, ApJ, 681, 482
—. 2011, ApJS, 192, 1
Contreras, C., et al. 2010, AJ, 139, 519
Davis, T. M., et al. 2007, ApJ, 666, 716
Dressler, A. 2004, A User’s Manual for IMACS
Faber, S. M., et al. 2003, in Instrument Design and Performance
for Optical/Infrared Ground-based Telescopes. Edited by Iye,
Masanori; Moorwood, Alan F. M. Proceedings of the SPIE,
Volume 4841, pp. 1657-1669 (2003)., ed. M. e. a. Iye, 1657–1669

Fernie, J. D. 1981, PASP, 93, 333
Filippenko, A. V. 1997, ARA&A, 35, 309
Fischler, M. A., & Bolles, R. C. 1981, Commun. ACM, 24, 381
Folatelli, G., et al. 2010, AJ, 139, 120
Foley, R. J., & Kasen, D. 2011, ApJ, 729, 55
Foley, R. J., et al. 2009, AJ, 137, 3731
—. 2012, AJ, 143, 113
Freedman, W. L., et al. 2009, ApJ, 704, 1036
Fukugita, M., Ichikawa, T., Gunn, J. E., Doi, M., Shimasaku, K.,

& Schneider, D. P. 1996, AJ, 111, 1748

Ganeshalingam, M., et al. 2010, ApJS, 190, 418
Garg, A., et al. 2007, AJ, 133, 403
Goldhaber, G., et al. 2001, ApJ, 558, 359
Guy, J., et al. 2007, ArXiv Astrophysics e-prints
—. 2010, A&A, 523, A7
Hamuy, M., Phillips, M. M., Suntzeﬀ, N. B., Schommer, R. A.,

Maza, J., & Aviles, R. 1996, AJ, 112, 2391

Hamuy, M., et al. 1993, AJ, 106, 2392
Hauschildt, P. H., Baron, E., & Allard, F. 1997, ApJ, 483, 390
Hayes, D. S., & Latham, D. W. 1975, ApJ, 197, 593
Hicken, M., Wood-Vasey, W. M., Blondin, S., Challis, P., Jha, S.,
Kelly, P. L., Rest, A., & Kirshner, R. P. 2009a, ApJ, 700, 1097

Hicken, M., et al. 2009b, ApJ, 700, 331
—. 2012, ApJS, 200, 12
Hook, I., et al. 2003, in Instrument Design and Performance for

Optical/Infrared Ground-based Telescopes. Edited by Iye,
Masanori; Moorwood, Alan F. M. Proceedings of the SPIE,
Volume 4841, pp. 1645-1656 (2003)., 1645–1656

Horne, K. 1986, PASP, 98, 609
Ivezi´c, ˇZ., et al. 2007, AJ, 134, 973
Jha, S., Riess, A. G., & Kirshner, R. P. 2007, ApJ, 659, 122
Jha, S., et al. 2006, AJ, 131, 527
Johnson, H. L., & Morgan, W. W. 1953, ApJ, 117, 313
Kelly, B. C. 2007, ApJ, 665, 1489
Kelly, P. L., Hicken, M., Burke, D. L., Mandel, K. S., & Kirshner,

R. P. 2010, ApJ, 715, 743

Kessler, R., et al. 2009, ApJS, 185, 32
Krisciunas, K., Hastings, N. C., Loomis, K., McMillan, R., Rest,

A., Riess, A. G., & Stubbs, C. 2000, ApJ, 539, 658

Krisciunas, K., Phillips, M. M., & Suntzeﬀ, N. B. 2004, ApJ, 602,

L81

Krisciunas, K., et al. 2013, AJ, 145, 11
Lampeitl, H., et al. 2010, ApJ, 722, 566
Landolt, A. U. 1983, AJ, 88, 439
—. 1992, AJ, 104, 340
Landolt, A. U., & Uomoto, A. K. 2007, AJ, 133, 768
Maguire, K., et al. 2012, MNRAS, 426, 2359
Mandel, K. S., Narayan, G., & Kirshner, R. P. 2011, Astrophys.

J., 731, 120

Mandel, K. S., Wood-Vasey, W. M., Friedman, A. S., & Kirshner,

R. P. 2009, ApJ, 704, 629

Matheson, T., et al. 2005, AJ, 129, 2352
Miknaitis, G., et al. 2007, ApJ, 666, 674
Nordin, J., et al. 2011, ApJ, 734, 42
O’Donnell, J. E. 1994, ApJ, 422, 158
Oke, J. B., & Schild, R. E. 1970, ApJ, 161, 1015
Oke, J. B., et al. 1995, PASP, 107, 375
Padmanabhan, N., et al. 2008, ApJ, 674, 1217
Perlmutter, S., et al. 1999, ApJ, 517, 565
Peterson, D. M., et al. 2006, Nature, 440, 896
Phillips, M. M. 1993, ApJ, 413, L105
Phillips, M. M., Lira, P., Suntzeﬀ, N. B., Schommer, R. A.,

Hamuy, M., & Maza, J. 1999, AJ, 118, 1766

Prieto, J. L., Rest, A., & Suntzeﬀ, N. B. 2006, ApJ, 647, 501
Ram´ırez, I., Allende Prieto, C., Redﬁeld, S., & Lambert, D. L.

2006, A&A, 459, 613

Regnault, N., et al. 2009, A&A, 506, 999
Rest, A., et al. 2005, ApJ, 634, 1103
—. 2014, ApJ, 795, 44
Riess, A. G., Press, W. H., & Kirshner, R. P. 1996, ApJ, 473, 88
Riess, A. G., et al. 1998, AJ, 116, 1009
—. 1999, AJ, 117, 707
—. 2006, ArXiv Astrophysics e-prints
Sako, M., et al. 2014, ArXiv e-prints
Schechter, P. L., Mateo, M., & Saha, A. 1993, PASP, 105, 1342
Schlaﬂy, E. F., et al. 2012, ApJ, 756, 158
Schlegel, D. J., Finkbeiner, D. P., & Davis, M. 1998, ApJ, 500,

Schmidt, G. D., Weymann, R. J., & Foltz, C. B. 1989, PASP,

525

101, 713

Scolnic, D., et al. 2014a, ApJ, 795, 45
Scolnic, D. M., Riess, A. G., Foley, R. J., Rest, A., Rodney, S. A.,

Brout, D. J., & Jones, D. O. 2014b, ApJ, 780, 37

Sheinis, A. I., Bolte, M., Epps, H. W., Kibrick, R. I., Miller, J. S.,

Radovan, M. V., Bigelow, B. C., & Sutin, B. M. 2002, PASP,
114, 851

Silverman, J. M., Ganeshalingam, M., Li, W., & Filippenko,

A. V. 2012, MNRAS, 425, 1889

Sordo, R., et al. 2010, Ap&SS, 328, 331
Stetson, P. B. 2000, PASP, 112, 925
—. 2005, PASP, 117, 563
Stritzinger, M., Suntzeﬀ, N. B., Hamuy, M., Challis, P., Demarco,

R., Germany, L., & Soderberg, A. M. 2005, PASP, 117, 810

Stritzinger, M. D., et al. 2011, AJ, 142, 156
Stubbs, C. W., Doherty, P., Cramer, C., Narayan, G., Brown,
Y. J., Lykke, K. R., Woodward, J. T., & Tonry, J. L. 2010,
ApJS, 191, 376

Stubbs, C. W., & Tonry, J. L. 2006, ApJ, 646, 1436
Stubbs, C. W., et al. 2007, in Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc

Conference Series, Vol. 364, The Future of Photometric,
Spectrophotometric and Polarimetric Standardization, ed.
C. Sterken, 373

Sullivan, M., et al. 2010, MNRAS, 406, 782
Taylor, B. J. 1986, ApJS, 60, 577
Tonry, J., & Davis, M. 1979, AJ, 84, 1511
Tonry, J. L., et al. 2012, ApJ, 750, 99
Tucker, D. L., et al. 2007, in Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc

Conference Series, Vol. 364, The Future of Photometric,
Spectrophotometric and Polarimetric Standardization, ed.
C. Sterken, 187

Tucker et al., B. E. 2016
Walker, E. S., et al. 2011, MNRAS, 410, 1262
Wang, X., et al. 2009, ApJ, 699, L139
Wood-Vasey, W. M., et al. 2007, ApJ, 666, 694
—. 2008, ApJ, 689, 377
Zacharias, N., Urban, S. E., Zacharias, M. I., Wycoﬀ, G. L., Hall,

D. M., Monet, D. G., & Raﬀerty, T. J. 2004, AJ, 127, 3043

ESSENCE 6-Year Data Release

33

A. ESTIMATION AND PROPERTIES OF THE ILLUMINATION CORRECTION

Flat-ﬁeld images obtained with the CTIO Blanco are corrected using an illumination correction derived from science
images as described in §3.1. Here we detail the estimation of the illumination corrections and their time dependence,
and quantify the associated systematic errors.

APPENDIX

We create our illumination corrections using the following prescription:

A.1. Deriving the Illumination Correction

1. Create a master dome ﬂat from the set of dome ﬂats, FD,

2. Calibrate science frames, FS, with the master dome ﬂats.

3. Mask out all stars in the resulting science frames.

4. Normalize the masked science frames to the same average sky value.

5. Average the resulting frames to produce one combined image.

6. Normalize the combined image to a mean of unity, and take the multiplicative inverse.

7. Smooth the normalized combined image with a large kernel to generate the ﬁnal illumination correction.

8. Multiply the dome ﬂat with the illumination correction.

Mathematically, we can describe our ﬁnal illumination correction, I(t), as

(cid:32)(cid:28) FS

(cid:29)−1(cid:33)

(cid:104)FD(cid:105)

I = SK

,

(A1)

where SK represents the smoothing kernel used in the stage, and angled braces denote the average. We bin each
1024 × 4096 pixel ampliﬁer image by a factor of 4, and we smooth the binned image with a 30 × 30 pixel area before
re-expanding the binned image to the original dimensions. This eﬀective 120 pixel scale is larger than the small-scale
structures of the ﬂat ﬁeld, such as out-of-focus dust “donuts,” while retaining the large-scale gradients that we seek
to remove. Finally, we construct a master illumination-corrected ﬂat-ﬁeld image, FI , via

where I and FD are normalized to an average value of 1.0 and t denotes the night of observation. The illumination-
corrected ﬂat-ﬁeld image is used to ﬂatten the science images from the night.

FI (t) = FD(t) × I(t),

(A2)

We distinguish two types of changes aﬀecting the optical system:

A.2. Temporal Stability of the Illumination Correction

1. Global changes that aﬀect all images, including new dust grains on the optics, changes in instrument mounting,

and mechanical changes in the mirror support.

2. Flat-ﬁeld changes that only aﬀect our dome-ﬂat images, including ghosting, nonuniformity of the ﬂat-ﬁeld screen,

and instances where a ﬂat-ﬁeld lamp burned out.

We examine the temporal stability of the illumination-corrected ﬂat ﬁelds when subjected to both types of changes.
From Equations A1 and A2, provided the global changes are small, the product FI (t) should not be sensitive to changes
in the dome ﬂats. We determine the ratios of dome ﬂat, illumination correction, and illumination-corrected ﬂat ﬁelds
for all nights within an observing run. This is illustrated in Fig. A1, where we compare frames between 20030927 and
20031020. The ratio of the illumination-corrected ﬂat ﬁeld images is within 0.1% of unity, despite diﬀerences at the
0.5% level between the ﬂat ﬁeld and illumination-correction frames. We calculate the standard deviation of the ratio
images, as well as the maximum diﬀerence between the ratio image and the average of the ratio. Nights for which
the standard deviation of the ratio is consistently > 0.1%, or the maximum error of the ratio is consistently > 0.3%,
are ﬂagged. Comparing our ﬂagged nights to subjective observing logs for the nights, we ﬁnd that ﬂagged nights have
excessive moonlight. This diﬀerence presumably arises from nonfocusing light paths producing stray light illumination
of the focal plane, with an intensity pattern diﬀerent from that of the light path for focused celestial sources. We ﬁnd
that the illumination corrections degrade more rapidly toward full moon in R than I, and we attribute this to the
steeper gradients in the sky brightness in R. This temporal stability is exploited to estimate an illumination correction
for ﬂagged nights using other nights within the observing run. A 0.3% error is adopted as the systematic on the
illumination-correction frames.

34

Narayan et al.

Fig. A1.— An illustration of the stability of the illumination corrections from 20030927 (randomly selected) and 20031020 (∼1 month
later). (Top) The ratio of the dome-ﬂat frames is shown in red, while the ratio of the illumination-correction frames is shown in blue. Both
ratios indicate that there are diﬀerences at the ∼0.5% level between these two nights. The ratio of the illumination-corrected ﬂat ﬁeld
between the two nights, shown in black, is within 0.1% of unity, indicating that the illumination correction is accurately accounting for
the variations in the dome-ﬂat images, despite them being separated by almost a month. (Bottom) The ratio of the illumination-corrected
ﬂat ﬁelds between 20030927 and 20031020 is again shown in black on a ﬁner scale to illustrate the structure. We construct an estimated
illumination correction for 20030927, F (cid:48)I , using the ﬂat and bias images from 20031020 and the science frames from 20030927. The ratio of
the ﬂat-ﬁeld image processed with the estimated illumination correction and the illumination-corrected ﬂat ﬁeld for 20031020 is shown as
a dashed grey line. The ratio of the derived and the estimated illumination-corrected ﬂat ﬁelds on 20030927 is shown in green; it illustrates
that the illumination-corrected ﬂat ﬁelds are stable to better than 0.1% between the two dates.

B. PROPERTIES OF THE CTIO BLANCO NATURAL SYSTEM

We describe the properties of the CTIO Blanco natural system in the following subsections. We derive the system
transmission and compute synthetic color terms to the Landolt system. Our determined transmission and synthetic
photometry of model SEDs are used to study the diﬀerences between our fundamental spectrophotometric standard,
BD+17◦4708, and “typical” Landolt stars at similar colors. Finally, we establish synthetic zero points to derive
natural-system magnitudes from ﬂux-calibrated SEDs.

We model the transmission (T ) of the CTIO Blanco system by the product of four components: the atmosphere

(Atm), optics (Opt), ﬁlter (PB), and quantum eﬃciency of the MOSAIC II CCDs (QE):

B.1. Transmission

T (λ) = TAtm(λ) × TOpt(λ) × TPB(λ) × QE(λ).

B.1.1. Detector Quantum Eﬃciency

(B1)

The eight Tek CCDs that comprise the MOSAIC II have slightly diﬀerent QEs (listed in TableB1). However, we
ﬁnd the diﬀerences in synthetic photometry from using diﬀerent QE curves is < 0.001 mag for both R and I over a
wide range of color. Consequently, we elect to use a single average value of the QE for all the CCDs.

Quantum Efficiency of the MOSAIC II Imager

TABLE B1

Wavelength

(˚A)

CCD 1 CCD 2 CCD 3 CCD 4 CCD 5 CCD 6 CCD 7 CCD 8 Average

Transmission (%)

3000
3200
3340
3650
3800

8.90
18.00
22.70
48.40
62.80

9.70
18.90
27.90
52.60
56.10

7.60
15.80
22.40
42.10
56.20

7.80
16.10
23.00
43.50
57.10

9.50
18.50
26.40
53.00
62.10

9.40
18.50
27.10
52.70
61.90

8.40
18.50
25.40
49.20
58.20

9.60
19.30
27.60
54.90
65.80

8.86
17.95
25.31
49.55
60.02

0.9900.9951.0001.0051.010DomeﬂatIlluminationcorrectionIlluminationcorrectedﬂat-ﬁeld01024204830724096Column(pixel)0.9991.0001.001FI(030927)/FI(031020)F′I(030927)/FI(031020)F′I(030927)/FI(030927)RatioofMedianPixelValuesESSENCE 6-Year Data Release

TABLE B1 — Continued

Transmission (%)

35

CCD 1 CCD 2 CCD 3 CCD 4 CCD 5 CCD 6 CCD 7 CCD 8 Average

Wavelength

(˚A)

4050
4500
5000
5500
6000
6500
7000
7500
8000
8500
9000
9500
10000

67.50
74.00
77.90
83.20
86.80
87.80
84.70
78.20
68.40
54.00
39.30
24.50
10.90

68.80
74.40
79.40
83.90
87.00
88.70
86.20
78.30
68.80
54.50
40.30
25.40
11.60

57.90
63.60
69.90
75.30
80.30
82.70
82.80
76.40
67.00
54.70
40.20
25.40
11.80

60.90
65.60
73.60
77.70
84.40
86.60
84.50
77.00
68.00
55.30
44.10
25.50
12.20

63.90
70.70
76.10
81.60
88.30
89.70
88.40
81.50
71.90
57.60
41.90
26.20
12.00

66.90
72.50
77.80
81.40
87.70
89.20
86.30
80.50
68.10
54.00
39.20
24.50
10.60

63.40
70.20
75.00
80.30
85.10
87.10
85.70
79.00
69.50
56.50
41.30
26.20
11.80

72.10
78.30
81.40
86.50
89.70
90.60
88.10
80.30
70.10
56.10
40.90
26.00
11.70

65.17
71.16
76.39
81.24
86.16
87.80
85.84
78.90
68.97
55.34
40.90
25.46
11.57

B.1.2. R and I Optical Filters

The MOSAIC II uses ﬁlters that are 146 × 146 mm and ∼12 mm thick. The transmissions of the R (NOAO code
c6004) and I (c6028) ﬁlters were measured by CTIO staﬀ39 using an OceanOptics S2000 spectrometer. The S2000 is
a crossed Czerny-Turner spectrometer, conﬁgured with a 600 line mm−1 grating blazed at 7500 ˚A for measurements
over 6000–12,000 ˚A. Measurements were obtained through a 10 µm wide slit coupled to a ﬁber optic with 400 µm core
diameter. The resulting optical resolution is ∼100 ˚A FWHM. The ﬁlters are illuminated with a General Electric 787
halogen lamp with quartz bulb, identical to those used to illuminate the Blanco ﬂat-ﬁeld screen, through a ground-glass
diﬀuser. The spectrum is projected onto a 1 × 2048 pixel CCD array and digitized. An OceanOptics HG-1 He-Ar
lamp produces reference spectral features to determine the pixel-to-wavelength transformation. The transformation is
modeled as a simple cubic polynomial. The central wavelength of the ﬁlters is shifted ∼15 ˚A to the blue when mounted
in the prime focus of the f /2.87 beam with ADC, relative to measurements at normal incidence. The shift is included
in the provided transmission curve.

B.1.3. Telescope Optics

As the MOSAIC II is mounted at prime focus, the transmission of the optics is dominated by the wavelength-
dependent reﬂectivity of the primary mirror, and is well modeled by the reﬂectivity of aluminum. The transmission of
the ADC40 was measured to above 85% in the range 3500–8500 ˚A. The transmission of the ADC does fall signiﬁcantly
in the UV, but this has no eﬀect on our RI photometry. The dropoﬀ at the red end is very gradual and the transmission
at 10,000˚A is ∼75%.

B.1.4. Atmospheric Transmission

M07 used a model of the atmospheric transmission derived from observations of spectrophotometric standards, with
removal of telluric features. The resulting atmospheric model, while reasonably precise, depends on the standard used
and the details of the reduction, particularly on the ﬁt of a smooth psuedocontinuum. We generate an atmospheric
model using the MODTRAN4 code. The generated atmosphere is appropriate for an airmass of 1, and consists of 2 mm
PMW of water vapor at an altitude of 2 km, convolved with the atmospheric scattering function and the transmission
from aerosols. The diﬀerences between our atmospheric model and that employed by M07 are primarily in the strength
of the absorption features, with the largest diﬀerences on the red wing of the I band (> 9500 ˚A). The diﬀerences result
in a < 0.001 mag change in synthetic colors over a wide range (note that the M07 transmission is provided in erg ˚A−1
and must be divided by λ for comparison with this work).

The total system throughput at an airmass of unity is listed in Table B2. Measurements of the system throughput
using a tunable laser, calibrated to a NIST photodiode, were consistent with the product of each component (Stubbs
et al. 2007). We could not measure the system throughput of the I ﬁlter (c6005) used very early in the survey and
replaced after signiﬁcant damage in November 2002.

B.2. Synthetic Color Relations

We derive synthetic color terms between the CTIO natural system and the Landolt network, using a procedure
similar to that of Stritzinger et al. (2005). We approximate the Landolt passbands using the Cousins RC and IC
transmissions published by Bessell (1990), convolved with a model atmosphere, and shifted in wavelength by a small
amount (∆λ). The shifts are determined by comparing the observed Landolt photometry of the nonvariable standards
in the spectral library of Stritzinger et al. (2005) to their synthetic photometry, and shifting the passbands without
shifting the atmospheric features, until the R and I synthetic and observed photometry agreed, with a color term

39 http://www.ctio.noao.edu/noao/content/mosaic-filters

40 http://www.ctio.noao.edu/mosaic/manual/pfadc_paper.ps

36

Narayan et al.

Fig. B1.— (Top and Middle) Residuals between observed (Obs) Landolt magnitudes and synthetic (Syn) magnitudes of 99 nonvariable
stars in the spectral library of Stritzinger et al. (2005), as a function of the observed Landolt color indicated for R (left panels) and I (right
panels). The Landolt passbands are modeled by shifting the Bessell (1990) determinations in wavelength by ∆λ = −36 ˚A and −12 ˚A in
R and I, respectively. A solid black line at ∆M = 0 is included as a visual guide. (Bottom) Synthetic color transformations between
our determination of the CTIO system throughput and the model Landolt system throughput for R (left) and I (right). The observed
color relations from photometric measurements is indicated by dashed blue lines, while the best-ﬁt relation to the synthetic photometry is
indicated by a solid black line. There is excellent agreement in R. We believe that the disagreement in I is a result of not modeling the rolloﬀ
in the detector QE for the model Landolt throughput. A blueward shift of −40 ˚A is suﬃcient to recover the observed Landolt-to-CTIO
color term in I, but it introduces a small color term between the observed and synthetic Landolt measurements in R − I. The observed
and synthetic photometry of BD+17◦4708, using the CALSPEC SED, is indicated by a blue square in all the plots. There is a ∼1% oﬀset
between the ﬂux calibration of the CALSPEC BD+17◦4708 SED and the mean ﬂux calibration of the Stritzinger et al. (2005) spectral
library.

−0.20.00.20.40.60.81.0(V−R)ObsL(mag)−0.10−0.050.000.050.10R:∆λ=−36.4˚A−0.50.00.51.01.52.0(V−I)ObsL(mag)−0.10−0.050.000.050.10I:∆λ=−12.4˚A−0.20.00.20.40.60.8(R−I)ObsL(mag)−0.10−0.050.000.050.10−0.20.00.20.40.60.8(R−I)ObsL(mag)−0.10−0.050.000.050.10−0.20.00.20.40.60.8(R−I)SynL(mag)−0.02−0.010.000.010.02RSyn4m−RSynL(mag)cRR−I(Syn)=−0.034cRR−I(Obs)=−0.030−0.20.00.20.40.60.8(R−I)SynL(mag)−0.03−0.02−0.010.000.010.020.03ISyn4m−ISynL(mag)cIR−I(Syn)=0.047cIR−I(Obs)=0.022(IObs−ISyn)L(mag)(RObs−RSyn)L(mag)ESSENCE 6-Year Data Release

37
consistent with zero in V − R, V − I, and R− I. We ﬁnd that the R and I Bessell ﬁlters have to be blueshifted by 36 ˚A
and 12 ˚A in R and I, respectively. Using our determination of the CTIO system throughput in Table B2, we compare
synthetic photometry of the spectral library to synthetic photometry through the shifted Bessell passbands. We derive
synthetic Landolt-to-CTIO color transformations, ﬁnding cR
R−I (Syn) = 0.047. The results of
this analysis are presented in Figure B1.

R−I (Syn) = −0.033 and cI

The synthetic color term in R is in excellent agreement with the color term determined from photometric observations,
but there is a signiﬁcant discrepancy in I. A blueshift of ∼40 ˚A to the I Bessell transmission is required to reproduce
the observed Landolt-to-CTIO color term in I, but a shift of this size introduces a nonzero R − I color term between
the observed and synthetic Landolt magnitudes. There is no wavelength shift for the Bessell determination of I
such that the synthetic and observed Landolt magnitudes and the synthetic CTIO and synthetic Landolt magnitudes
simultaneously agree with nonzero color terms. Fundamentally, approximating the Landolt I passband by a shifted
Bessell I ﬁlter is not accurate, as the shapes of these ﬁlters diﬀer. Speciﬁcally, the transmission in the I band is
signiﬁcantly aﬀected by the rolloﬀ in the detector QE, which is not included in the Bessell determination. The detector
QE is eﬀectively constant over R, and therefore has an insigniﬁcant eﬀect on the shape of the transmission. Current
and future surveys observing in griz will be able to calibrate to photometric systems such as SDSS, Pan-STARRS,
and SkyMapper, which have well-measured system responses.

B.3. The Magnitudes of BD+17◦4708 in the CTIO Blanco Natural System

The transformations deﬁned by Equation 4 are constructed such that, to ﬁrst order, the natural-system magnitudes
of BD+17◦4708 are equal to its Landolt magnitudes in R and I. However, since we could not observe BD+17◦4708
directly, we determine the coeﬃcients of the transformation equations using the Landolt network of stars.
In this
subsection, we quantify the diﬀerence in natural-system magnitudes between BD+17◦4708 and Landolt stars having
R − I color similar to it by examining the photometric residual:

δLT = M4m − ML − cM4m

(R−I)L

((R − I)L − 0.32).

(B2)

By construction, the average residual (cid:104)δL(cid:105) = 0 for average Landolt stars. Following Regnault et al. (2009), we consider
the photometric residual arising from metallicity and surface gravity, extinction diﬀerences between BD+17◦4708 and
the average Landolt star, and the systematic eﬀect of a possible faint, unresolved companion. The various eﬀects
considered are illustrated in Figure B2.

B.3.1. Metallicity and Surface Gravity

We determine the diﬀerence in synthetic R and I Blanco (4m) magnitude residuals between BD+17◦4708 and
“typical” Landolt stars with metallicity [M/H] = −0.5 and log(g) = 4.0 as a function of the diﬀerence in synthetic
R− I color, over 5600 K< Teﬀ <6500 K. We ﬁnd the relationship between the mean magnitude residual and diﬀerence
in R − I color to be linear for both R and I. We determine the intercept at R − I = 0.32 mag, and ﬁnd (in the sense
of BD+17◦4708 mag minus Landolt mag) that δL < 0.001 mag for both R and I.
To measure the eﬀect of surface gravity alone, we select synthetic SEDs with the same parameters as above, except
at log(g) = 4.5. We measure the diﬀerence in the residual to normal Landolt stars, δLM , caused by perturbing the
synthetic SEDs from log(g) = 4.0 to log(g) = 4.5. We ﬁnd the eﬀect of changing surface gravity on the diﬀerence
in residual (in the sense of residual at log(g) = 4.5 minus residual at log(g) = 4.0) is δLR < 0.001 mag, while
δLI ≈ +0.002 mag. The combined eﬀect of metallicity and surface gravity leads to a negligible diﬀerence in R and a
net δLI of ∼0.001 mag.

B.3.2. Extinction

Regnault et al. (2009) express the distance of BD+17◦4708 from the stellar locus in V − R vs. R − I in terms of
the eﬀect of the diﬀerence in extinction and the diﬀerence in metallicity (the eﬀect of surface gravity being negligible
over the color range in question). Having determined the eﬀect of a diﬀerence in metallicity using a procedure similar
to that above, they found the diﬀerence in the reddening between BD+17◦4708 and Landolt stars of similar color to
be ∆E(B − V ) ≈ 0.045 mag.
We redden the synthetic SED of BD+17◦4708 by this amount and examine the diﬀerence in the residual to normal
Landolt stars (in the sense of residual with reddened SED minus residual with unreddened SED) to be less than
0.001 mag in R and ∼ 0.001 mag in I.
and δLI = 0.002 mag. These oﬀsets are added to the ﬁrst-order estimates of the magnitudes of BD+17◦4708.

The combined eﬀect of the diﬀerence in metallicity, surface gravity, and extinction is found to be δLR = 0.001 mag

Using the estimates from Ram´ırez et al. (2006) for the possible companion of BD+17◦4708 (Teﬀ = 3000 K, log(g) =
4.5, and [M/H] = −2), we compute the diﬀerence in photometric residuals and ﬁnd (in the sense of with companion
minus without companion) that δLR,I ≈ 0.001 mag. As we do not know the fraction of Landolt stars that are also
in binaries, we treat these oﬀsets as systematic errors.

B.3.3. Binarity

38

Narayan et al.

Fig. B2.— (Top left) Synthetic colors of Phoenix SEDs as a function of metallicity, compared to the synthetic color of the CALSPEC SED
of BD+17◦4708. The best model has Teﬀ = 6100 K and [M/H] = −2.0 dex. (Top right) Comparison of the CALSPEC SED and the adopted
Phoenix model. The adopted model for the companion of BD+17◦4708 has Teﬀ = 3000 K and [M/H] = −2.0 dex. Normalized CTIO
Blanco (solid) and Bessell (dashed) transmissions in R (red) and I (orange) are shown for comparison. (Middle) Diﬀerence in photometric
residual, δL [in the sense of BD+17◦4708 mag minus Landolt mag (Teﬀ,[M/H])] over a range of temperature and metallicity for R (Mid
left) and I (Mid right) vs. the diﬀerence in R − I color (in the sense of BD+17◦4708 color minus Landolt color). The eﬀect of changing
metallicity is negligible in I. (Bottom left) The values of δL at ∆(R − I) = 0 for the diﬀerent metallicities. The typical metallicity of
Landolt stars ([M/H] = −0.5 dex) is indicated by the vertical line. (Bottom right) Deviations from the relation of δL at [M/H] = −0.5 dex
are shown for changes in surface gravity (dashed), extinction (dot-dashed), and the addition of a companion (dot-dashed grey) for R (red)
and I (orange).

−4−3−2−10[M/H](dex)0.290.300.310.320.33SyntheticR−ILandoltcolorPhoenixModelsLTE6100KLTE6000KCALSPECBD+17−0.08−0.040.000.040.08∆(R−I)(BD+17-Star,mag)−0.20.00.20.40.6δLR(BD+17-Star,mmag)-0.5-1.0-1.5-2.0-2.5-3.0−0.08−0.040.000.040.08∆(R−I)(BD+17-Star,mag)−2.0−1.5−1.0−0.50.00.51.01.5δLI(BD+17-Star,mmag)-0.5-1.0-1.5-2.0-2.5-3.0−3.0−2.5−2.0−1.5−1.0−0.5[M/H](dex)−0.2−0.10.00.10.20.30.40.50.6δLM,∆(R−I)=0(BD+17-Star,mmag)−0.06−0.030.000.030.060.09∆(R−I)(BD+17-Star,mag)−2−10123∆M(BD+17-Star,mmag)5600K5700K5800K5900K6000K6100K6200K6300K6400K6500K5000650080009500Wavelength(˚A)012345678F(λ)×10−13CALSPECBD+17PhoenixModelLTE6100KCompanion0.00.20.40.60.81.0NormalizedThroughputESSENCE 6-Year Data Release

39

With the Landolt magnitudes of BD+17◦4708 (R = 9.166 mag and I = 8.846 mag) and the photometric residuals
caused by the diﬀerences in metallicity, surface gravity, and extinction to typical Landolt stars computed in the previous
subsection, we invert Equation 3 to derive synthetic passband zero points for R and I and ﬁnd

B.4. Photometric Zero Points

ZPR4m = −21.649 ± 0.001 mag,
ZPI4m = −22.305 ± 0.002 mag.

(B3)

These values diﬀer from those determined using the Stritzinger et al. (2005) SED library by 0.012 mag. This
discrepancy is likely the result of a diﬀerence in ﬂux calibration between CALSPEC and Stritzinger et al. (2005) as
illustrated in Figure B1. We use the CALSPEC SED of BD+17◦4708 for the determination of passband zero points,
as its ﬂux calibration is not aﬀected by atmospheric transmission and has been carefully studied by several groups.

B.5. Diﬀerences in Natural-System Deﬁnition from the 4 year Data Release

M07 tied the natural system of the Blanco to Landolt using α Lyrae as their fundamental standard, with (R −
R−I color term was employed in that work, and we expect a
I)Landolt = 0 mag.
diﬀerence on the order of the product of color-term diﬀerences and the average color of Landolt stars, (cid:104)(R− I)Landolt(cid:105).
To ﬁrst order, the diﬀerences between the photometry of stars in this work and M07 are the result of the diﬀerences
between the deﬁnition of the photometric system in Equation 4 and the M07 deﬁnition:

In addition, a slightly steeper cI

∆R ≈ cR

R−I × (R − I)BD+17

≈ −0.030 × 0.32
≈ −0.01 mag,

R−I × (R − I)BD+17
R−I × ((cid:104)(R − I)Landolt(cid:105) − (R − I)BD+17)

∆I ≈ cI
+ ∆cI
≈ (0.030 × 0.32) − 0.008 × (0.47 − 0.32)
≈ 0.009 mag.

(B4)

However, we have taken various measures to improve the calibration of the natural system, with a view to minimizing
our overall photometric error budget, as discussed in §3. Consequently, the methodology used in this paper diﬀers
substantially from that used by M07. In particular, this work uses observations of the ESSENCE ﬁelds tied directly
to Landolt ﬁelds, whereas M07 tied the Blanco photometry to 0.9 m observations of ﬁeld stars that were in turn tied
to Landolt. This is a potential source of additional diﬀerences above the expected 1% level.

Photon Transmission Function of the ESSENCE Survey

TABLE B2

Wavelength

(˚A)

Transmission (%)

QE

Filter Optics Atmosphere Total

R (c6004)

0.8018

0.0000

0.9087

...

...

...

0.8760

0.7764

0.9021

...

...

...

0.8546

0.4846

0.8904

...

...

...

0.7454

0.1784

0.8725

...

...

...

0.5431

0.0409

0.8719

...

...

...

0.3111

0.0000

0.9133

I (c6028)

0.8592

0.0000

0.8916

...

...

...

0.7721

0.9348

0.8763

...

...

...

0.6052

0.9563

0.8674

...

...

...

0.3959

0.0070

0.9007

...

...

...

0.1912

0.0047

0.9275

5470

...

6240

...

7005

...

7775

...

8540

...

9310

6940

...

7635

...

8330

...

9030

...

9725

0.8400

...

0.8700

...

0.9160

...

0.9410

...

0.9530

...

0.8530

0.9060

...

0.5660

...

0.9420

...

0.9330

...

0.9490

0.0000

...

0.5338

...

0.3378

...

0.1092

...

0.0185

...

0.0000

0.0000

...

0.3580

...

0.4729

...

0.0023

...

0.0008

40

Narayan et al.

TABLE B2 — Continued

Wavelength

(˚A)

Transmission (%)

QE

Filter Optics Atmosphere Total

...

10425

...

...

...

0.0000

0.0047

0.9365

...

0.9690

...

0.0000

Note. — This table is published in its entirety in the electronic edition of the journal. A portion is shown here for guidance regarding its form

and content.

