6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
2
1

 
 
]
n
o
c
-
r
p
u
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
1
5
8
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Superconductivity driven by pairing of the coherent parts of the physical electrons

Yuehua Su1 and Chao Zhang1

1 Department of Physics, Yantai University, Yantai 264005, P. R. China

How the superconductivity in unconventional superconductors emerges from the diverse mother
normal states is still a big puzzle. Whatever the mother normal state is the superconductivity is nor-
mal with BCS-like behaviours of the paired quasiparticles in condensation. To reconcile the diverse
mother normal states and the normal superconductivity in unconventional superconductors, we re-
visit a proposal that the emergence of the low-energy coherent parts of the physical electrons, which
survive from the interaction correlations, is an essential prerequisite for superconductivity. The su-
perconductivity is driven by the pair condensation of these coherent parts of the physical electrons.
Moreover the incoherent parts of the physical electrons can enhance the superconducting transition
temperature Tc although they are not in driven role in the emergence of the superconductivity.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The generic phase diagram of the unconventional
superconductors has a dome-structure superconducting
phase.
It is proximate to an antiferromagnetic insula-
tor or bad-metal state on one underdoped side and to a
normal Fermi-liquid state on the other overdoped side.
The mother normal states from which the superconduc-
tivity emerges can be such as in the cuprate superconduc-
tors the mysterious pseudogap state, the strange metal-
lic state or the normal Fermi-liquid state. Although the
mother normal states are diverse with some in non Fermi-
liquid states, it is remarkable that the emergent super-
conductivity is normal, where most of the superﬂuid re-
sponses such as the penetration depth, the Andreev re-
ﬂection, the Josephson eﬀects, etc. and the quasiparticle-
relevant responses such as angle-resolved photoemission
spectroscopy (ARPES), scanning tunneling microscope
(STM), Raman scatterings, nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR), thermodynamics, impurity scattering, etc. show
BCS-like behaviours and can be simulated with BCS
theoretical formalisms. This is conﬁrmed recently by a
universal scaling of the condensation energy in diﬀerent-
family superconductors,1

U
γ

,

U

∆C/Tc ∝ T 2
c ,

(1)

where U is the condensation energy for superconductiv-
ity, γ is the speciﬁc heat constant and ∆C is the spe-
ciﬁc heat jump at Tc. This universal scaling behaviour
is followed in element superconductors, phonon-mediated
metal superconductors, Fe-based superconductors, heavy
fermion superconductors, Sr2RuO4, Li0.1ZrNCl, organic
superconductors and optimal-doped cuprate supercon-
ductors. This scaling behaviour shows that the super-
conductivity whatever the mother normal state is comes
from the condensation of the Cooper pairs.

How to reconcile the diverse mother normal states and
the normal superconductivity is one big issue in the con-
densed matter ﬁled. One interesting idea for this issue
comes from Shen and Sawatzky, who propose that the
superconducting phase transition in cuprate supercon-
ductors is not only the opening of the superconducting

gap but also the emergence of the well-deﬁned coherent
quasiparticles.2 This is one idea in large debate, espe-
cially for underdoped cuprate superconductors which are
mostly regarded in doped Mott-insulator states. How-
ever, experiments seem to support this idea. The co-
herent weight of the physical electrons near antinodal
points k = (π, 0)/(0, π) accumulates largely when tem-
perature decreases across Tc.3,4 The well-deﬁned Fermi
arc in the pseudogap normal state shows the emergence
of the nodal quasiparticles,5 the coherent weight of which
follows 2p/p + 1 doping dependence.6 The discrimination
of the superconducting gap and the pseudogap as two dis-
tinct energy scales7,8 strongly shows that the supercon-
ducting phase transition is relevant to the opening of the
superconducting gap, not as coherence of the preformed
Cooper pairs. Uchida’s group ﬁnd that the supercon-
ducting transition Tc is smaller than both the coherent
Fermi temperature TF and the pseudogap temperature
T ⋆ and conclude that the superconductivity emerges out
of the coherent Fermionic quasiparticles.9

In this article, we revisit this proposal that the emer-
gence of the low-energy coherent parts of the physical
electrons, which survive from the correlations of the elec-
trons, is an essential prerequisite for superconductivity,
and the superconductivity is driven by the condensation
of the paired coherent parts of the physical electrons.
We show that Tc is strongly inﬂuenced by the renormal-
ized coherent weight of the physical electrons and pro-
pose that this is one dominant mechanism for the doping
variation of Tc in underdoped unconventional supercon-
ductors. Our proposal is made for the unconventional
superconductors, such as the cuprate superconductors,
the Fe-based superconductors and the heavy fermion su-
perconductors, etc. It should be noted that Anderson’s
resonating valence bond (RVB) theory10 and its extended
gauge theories are one elegant formalism for cuprate su-
perconductors. However, the novel spin-charge separa-
tion of the physical electrons in these theories is not con-
ﬁrmed by experiments, which instead favour the integrity
of the physical electron as the component of the Cooper
pair. There are no large debate on our proposal for the
Fe-based superconductors where the interaction correla-
tions are not strong. For the heavy fermion superconduc-

In Sec.

This article is arranged as following.

tors where antiferromagnetic quantum criticality may be
relevant for superconductivity, the normal superconduct-
ing responses and the universal scaling behaviour in Eq.
(1) show that our proposal is one favour mechanism for
superconductivity in the heavy fermion superconductors.
I, we
show a novel property in unconventional superconduc-
tors that the normal superconductivity can emerge from
the diverse mother normal states, some of which are non
Fermi-liquid states. In Sec. II, we revisit the proposal in
detailed that the normal superconductivity in unconven-
tional superconductors is driven by the condensed coher-
ent parts of the physical electrons in pairs. In Subsection
II A, we present a schematic formulation to redeﬁne the
mother normal states and the emergent superconducting
state.
In Subsection II B, we propose a single-particle
spectrum function with the separated coherent and in-
coherent weights of the physical electrons in the mother
normal states. In Subsection II C, we study the Thou-
less’s instability for superconductivity and show how the
coherent parts of the physical electrons drive the emer-
gence of the superconductivity. The inﬂuence of the inco-
herent parts of the physical electrons on the superconduc-
tivity is also shown to enhance Tc although they are not a
driven factor. Sec. III shows some remarks on the dom-
inant factors on Tc. Some further theoretical problems
are also discussed.
In Appendix A, some remarks are
given on the theoretical formalisms, the weak-coupling
BCS theory, the strong-coupling Eliashberg theory and
the macroscopic Ginzburg-Landau functional theory. In
Appendix B, we present a reduced model for the renor-
malized coherent parts of the physical electrons, where
we discuss their responses in experiments.

II. SUPERCONDUCTIVITY FROM MOTHER

NORMAL STATES

A. Schematic formulation for the mother normal

states and the superconducting state

As there are no uniﬁed theory for the diverse mother
normal states in unconventional superconductors, we in-
troduce a schematic representation |Ψmi for them,

|Ψmi = PI |Ψ0i .

(2)

Here |Ψ0i is the interaction-free ground state and PI is an
operation to project the freely interacting ground state
into a special mother normal state. PI is interaction
relevant.

We should remark that the interactions in a model
study are treated in diﬀerent levels. The most relevant in-
teractions in condensed matters are the electron-electron
and electron-ion Coulomb interactions. While the static
electron-ion Coulomb interaction has been included pri-
orly in Bloch electronic band structure, the dynamical
electron-phonon interactions should be involved exclu-
sively. These interactions are the basic ones and in gen-

2

eral have high energy scales. There are some other ef-
fective low-energy interactions such as super-exchange
antiferromagnetic interactions which come from virtual
processes. The relevant interactions in PI are the above
two categories, which dominate the physics of the mother
normal states. The pairing interactions for superconduc-
tivity is separated from the above two categories in our
formulation, although in concept they come from the pro-
jection of the above two-category interactions in particle-
particle channels.

The mother normal states thus deﬁned can be nor-
mal Fermi-liquid state, antiferromagnetic state with long-
range order, metallic state with strong antiferromagnetic
ﬂuctuations, non Fermi-liquid state such as the strangle
metallic state in the cuprate superconductors, the heav-
ily renormalized Fermionic state in the heavy fermion
superconductors, etc. To establish well-deﬁned theories
or formalisms for the diverse novel mother normal states
is still one challenge.

The superconducting state from the mother normal

states can be deﬁned as

|Ψsci = Psc |Ψmi ,

(3)

where Psc is the projection of the pairing interactions
upon the mother normal state |Ψmi to produce the su-
perconducting state |Ψsci. The role of Psc is to bind the
low-energy coherent parts of the physical electrons into
pairs. In general case, the superconducting state |Ψsci
thus deﬁned involves both the pairing physics of the low-
energy coherent parts of the physical electrons and the
normal physics of their high-energy parts. Superconduct-
ing phase transition is a pairing physics, which is our
assumption and the starting point to study the super-
conductivity of the unconventional superconductors.

In many cases, the pairing interactions in Psc are much
smaller than the interactions in PI . For example, the
paring attractive interaction in normal metal supercon-
ductors comes from the eﬀective electron-phonon inter-
actions. It has energy scale of the Debye frequency and
is much smaller than the Fermi energy which comes
from direct Coulomb interactions. The pairing inter-
action in heavy fermion superconductors is still in de-
bate. The superconducting temperature Tc ∼ 1K, which
is much smaller than the antiferromagnetic temperature
TN ∼ 100 − 1000K. The separation of the interaction
energy scales in Psc for superconductivity and in PI for
mother normal states in these cases is the basis to pre-
serve the reliability of our assumption in Eq.(3). In some
case such as in high-Tc cuprate superconductors, it is
suggested that the antiferromagnetic interaction may re-
sponse for both the novel non Fermi-liquid physics and
the pairing of the superconductivity.
In this case, the
detailed interactions in Psc and PI should be the diﬀer-
ent representations of the same interaction in diﬀerent
interacting channels. It should be noted that in our as-
sumption PscPI 6= PI Psc. Thus in our formulation the
Anderson’s RVB state deﬁned by |ΨRV Bi = PI Psc |Ψ0i
with PI the Hubbard-interaction driven Gutzwiller pro-

3

jection is not the physical relevant superconducting state
in high-Tc cuprate superconductors.

B. Single-particle spectrum function of the mother

normal states

As we have pointed out in the above sections, the
superconductivity in unconventional superconductors is
normal, i.e., the superconducting phase transition is a
pairing physics and the superconducting responses in
both superﬂuid and quasiparticle relevant channels show
BCS-like behaviours. Moreover, the resistivity above
Tc involves the scattering eﬀects of the interactions,
which should not diminish absolutely when supercon-
ductors enter into the superconducting state across Tc.
It implies that the superconducting state involves both
the low-energy dissipation-less superconducting conden-
sate and the high-energy interaction scattering entangle-
ments, most of the latter which are continuously trans-
ferred from the mother normal states.

Based upon the above two facts, the normal supercon-
ductivity and the interaction scattering entanglements
in superconducting state, we assume that in the mother
normal states the single-particle spectrum function of the
Green’s function Gσ(k, τ ) = −hTτ c†kσ(τ )ckσ(0)i has two
parts,

The incoherent part Ainc(k, ω) describes the high-
energy entanglement physics in the single-particle chan-
nels and has negligible modiﬁcation in superconducting
phase transition from the mother normal states to the
superconducting state. It should be noted that the phys-
ical electrons in the mother normal states are strongly
entangled even in the normal Fermi-liquid state. The en-
tanglements of the physical electrons which contribute to
the incoherent part Ainc(k, ω) is an exact N -body prob-
lem unsolved.

C. Thouless’s criterion for superconductivity

In this article, we propose that the normal supercon-
ductivity is driven by the pairing of the coherent parts of
the physical electrons and the ﬁnite coherent weight Zk
near Fermi energy is essential prerequisite for supercon-
ductivity in unconventional superconductors.

We will use the Thouless’s criterion to study the su-
perconductivity instability of the mother normal states.
Consider a simple case where the attractive paring inter-
action is dominantly in channel with symmetry function
φk,

Hp = −

1

N Xk1k2

gφk1 φk2c†k1↑

c†
−k1↓

c−k2↓ck2↑.

(6)

A(k, ω) = Acoh(k, ω) + Ainc(k, ω),

(4)

Introduce the paring operator

where Acoh(k, ω) is the low-energy coherent part deﬁned
by

∆ =

1

√N Xk

φ(k)c−k↓ck↑,

Acoh(k, ω) = ZkδΓ(ω − ε⋆
k),

(5)

we deﬁne the pairing susceptibility as

Γk

k

k. δΓ(x) = 1
π

and Ainc(k, ω) is the high-energy incoherent part. Here
we have assumed the spectrum is spin independent. Zk ≡
k is the coherent weight of the single physical
Zk(ω)|ω=ε⋆
electrons with renormalized energy ε⋆
x2+Γ2
is an extended δ-function with scattering rate Γk. Phys-
ically, the renormalized energy ε⋆
k, the scattering rate
Γk and the coherent weight Zk of a physical electron
are determined by the real scattering processes where
the energy conservation law is preserved as described by
the Fermi’s Golden rule. The incoherent part Ainc(k, ω)
comes from the virtual scattering processes where the
energy conservation law is broken.
In the latter case,
the intermediate states for c†kσ during scattering may be

a composite one such as deﬁned by Pq c†k−q,σb†q with
b†q =Pk1σ c†k1+q,σck1σ + ··· .

The coherent parts of the physical electrons have dom-
inant roles in the normal pairing superconductivity. The
renormalized electronic structure ε⋆
k has a well-deﬁned
Fermi surface, whose topology combined with the pair-
ing interaction plays important role in the symmetry of
the pairing gap potential.11 The ﬁnite coherent weight
Zk has a dominant role in determination of Tc as shown
below.

χ(τ ) = hTτ ∆(τ )∆†(0)i.

(7)

In random-phase approximation (RPA), the pairing sus-
ceptibility is given by

χ(iνn) =

χ0(iνn)

1 − gχ0(iνn)

,

(8)

where χ0(iνn) is the bare zero-th order pairing suscepti-
bility. The Thouless’s criterion for superconductivity is
deﬁned as

1 − gχ0(0) = 0.

(9)

Suppose the spectrum function of the mother normal
states A(k, ω) = Acoh(k, ω) + Ainc(k, ω) has following
behaviours,
Acoh(k, ω) = Zkδ(ω − ε⋆
where θΛ(ω) = 1
2Λ [θ(ω + Λ) − θ(ω − Λ)] with θ(x) the
step function and Λ the eﬀective bandwidth, and Pk =
1 − Zk. It can be shown that

k), Ainc(k, ω) = PkθΛ(ω), (10)

χ0(0) = χ(1)

0 + χ(2)

0 + χ(3)
0 ,

(11)

with

χ(1)
0 =

χ(2)
0 =

χ(3)
0 =

,

φ2

(φkZk)2 fβ(ε⋆
k)
ε⋆
k
kZkPkZ +∞
(φkPk)2Z +∞

−∞

−∞
fβ(ω1) + fβ(ω2)

.

2

1

N Xk
N Xk
N Xk
·

1

dωθΛ(ω)

fβ(ε⋆
k) + fβ(ω)
ε⋆
k + ω

,

dω1dω2θΛ(ω1)θΛ(ω2)

2

. Physically, χ(1)
0

ω1 + ω2
Here fβ(ω) ≡ tanh(βω/2)
comes from the
pure coherent parts of the physical electrons, χ(2)
is the
0
mixed contribution of the coherent and incoherent parts
and χ(3)
is the contribution from the pure incoherent
0
parts. One additional interesting result is that the renor-
malized factors Zk and Pk appear combined with the
paring symmetry function φk. It implies that the pairing
symmetry function, which is dominated by the pairing
interaction, can be renormalized further by the renor-
malized factors. This is an interesting result analogue
to the strong-coupling Eliashberg theory, as remarked in
Appendix B.

Consider a simple s-wave case with k-independent

renormalized factor,

φk = 1, Zk = Z,

(12)

and in a weak-coupling limit where the pairing interac-
tion g is mainly within an energy range |ε⋆
k| < ωg with
ωg ≪ Λ. In this case, χ(1)
shows singularity at low tem-
perature T → 0+,

0

χ(1)

0+(cid:17) .
0 = Z 2NF ln(cid:16) ωg

(13)

shows non sin-

However, in the same limit, χ(2)
gularity,

0 and χ(3)

0

χ(2)
0 = 4(ln 2)ZP NF
0 = (ln 2)P 2 ωg
χ(3)
Λ2 .

ωg
Λ

,

(14)

(15)

Here NF is the density of state (DOS) of the mother nor-
mal state at Fermi energy and P = 1− Z. The logarithm
singularity of χ(1)
implies that at some ﬁnite Tc, the
0
Thouless’s condition of the superconductivity Eq. (10)
can be satisﬁed. Tc is the critical temperature for su-
perconducting phase transition. Since there are non sin-
gularity in χ(2)
0 , the superconductivity is domi-
0
nantly driven by the coherent parts of the physical elec-
trons. As χ(2)
and χ(3)
are shown to be positive, the
0
0
Thouless’s criterion Eq.
(9) can be modiﬁed into the
form:

and χ(3)

h1iT − gχ(1)

0 = 0,

(16)

4

where h1iT is a renormalized value by the incoherent
parts of the physical electrons deﬁned by h1iT ≡ 1 −
g(χ(2)
0 ). The superconducting transition Tc follows

0 + χ(3)

Tc = αωge−

h1iTc
gZ2NF ,

(17)

where the constant α ≃ 1.13 for s-wave attractive inter-
action.
There are two dominant factors for Tc, one from the
pairing interaction in the interaction range ωg, the in-
teraction constant g and the paring symmetry φk, and
the other from the qusiparticle properties of the mother
normal state in such as the renormalized DOS and the
coherent weight Zk. Larger pairing interaction range and
stronger interaction constant favour higher Tc. More nor-
mal DOS and larger coherent weight lead to higher Tc.
One additional interesting factor comes from the inco-
herent parts of the physical electrons in h1iT . Although
it is not a driven factor for superconductivity, the renor-
malization eﬀects of the incoherent parts of the physical
electrons can enhance Tc.

In the above weak-coupling limit, the renormalized
DOS can be approximated constant near Fermi energy.
In the reverse strong-coupling limit with ωg ≫ Λ, if the
DOS is weakly energy-dependent in such as 2D system,
the paring susceptibilities χ(i)
0 have similar singularity
behaviours with just a substitution of ωg by Λ. In this
case, the coherent parts of the physical electrons can
also lead to the dominant singularity of the supercon-
ducting pair instability. A general strong-coupling limit
with strong frequency-dependent DOS should be studied
extensively12 as there maybe a crossover from wide-band
BCS to narrow-band BEC.13,14

The mother normal states of the underdoped uncon-
ventional superconductors have more abnormal physics
beyond the Fermi-liquid state. The interaction correla-
tions strongly suppress the coherent parts of the physical
electrons and thus reduce the coherent weight Zk. The
renormalized reduced Zk largely suppresses the supercon-
ducting temperature Tc. With doping increases, the elec-
tron correlations become weaker and Zk increases. This
leads to an enhanced Tc with increased doping. There-
fore, the doping variation of Tc in underdoped uncon-
ventional superconductors is strongly inﬂuenced by the
interaction renormalization coherent weight Zk.

III. DISCUSSIONS AND REMARKS

In this article, we propose that the ﬁnite coherent parts
of the physical electrons in the mother normal states are
prerequisite for superconductivity. By considering the
Thouless’s criterion for superconductivity instability, we
show that the ﬁnite coherent parts of the physical elec-
trons drive the emergence of the superconductivity. The
superconducting Tc is determined by two factors, the at-
tractive pairing interaction and the quasiparticle prop-
erties of the physical electrons. The former involves the

interaction range, the interaction constant and the pair-
ing symmetry function; the latter involves the coherent
weight Zk, the DOS and the Fermi-surface topology of
the electronic structure ε⋆
k. Larger interaction range and
larger interaction constant favour higher Tc, and more
renormalized DOS and larger Zk lead to higher Tc. More-
over, although the incoherent parts of the physical elec-
trons play no dominant role for superconductivity, they
can also enhance Tc by a renormalization eﬀect. We show
that the reduced coherent weight Zk can be one domi-
nant factor for the superconducting phase transition in
underdoped unconventional superconductors.

It should be noted that the collective modes of the su-
perconducting condensate maybe another important fac-
tor for superconductivity. Most of the unconventional
superconductors are quasi-two-dimensional in crossover
from two- to three-dimension. Hohenberg theory15
states that there is no ﬁnite-Tc superconductivity in one-
and two-dimensional superconductors since the collective
modes can easily destroy the long-range superconducting
order. The roles of the collective modes of the super-
conducting condensate have been investigated by Emery
and Kivelson as a proposal to account for the reduction
of Tc in underdoped cuprate superconductors.16 Which
one, the reduced coherent weight of the physical electrons
or the thermal ﬂuctuations of the collective modes, plays
the dominant roles in the reduction of Tc in unconven-
tional superconductors is still an issue to be studied.

It is known that the well-established BCS formalisms,
the weak-coupling BCS theory and the strong-coupling
Eliashberg theory, can not predict reliable Tc for a given
superconductor! From our study we can understand why
the prediction of Tc is so unreliable. Most of the attrac-
tive paring interactions for the Cooper pairs are residual
ones generated from high-energy scattering processes and
thus are hardly deﬁned deﬁnitely for a realistic super-
conductor. The single-particle coherent weight Zk and
the renormalized band structure ε⋆
k are strongly corre-
lated to the high-energy physics in the mother normal
states where a well-deﬁned theory is absent. The ﬂuctu-
ation feedback eﬀects of the collective modes of the paired
condensate involve dimensionality. All these factors in a
realistic superconductor are too complex to be deﬁnitely
deﬁned.

In future, we have some further problems following our
proposal such as to study the experimental responses of
the paired coherent parts of the physical electrons which
drive the emergence of the superconductivity, and to
show how these coherent parts survive from the entangled
correlations in diverse mother normal states.

It should also be noted that in this article we in-
troduce the single-particle spectrum function A(k, ω) to
describe the low-energy coherent physics and the high-
energy incoherent entanglement of the physical elec-
trons. One underlying well-established formalism is the
strong-coupling Eliashberg theory where the extended
self-energy and the full single-particle spectrum func-
tion of the Nambu’s spinor for the mixed particles and

5

holes are self-consistently constructed. However in the
Eliashberg theory the mother normal state is assumed
the Fermi-liquid state. Moreover only the single-particle
excitations are involved directly in the Eliashberg theory
and the underlying ground state of the superconductors
are not known as discussed in Appendix A. More exact
deﬁnition and better well-deﬁned formalism to describe
the coherent and incoherent physics of the physical elec-
trons are worth to be established.

This work was supported by the National Natural Sci-
ence Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 11304269 and
11304268).

Appendix A: Remarks on weak-coupling BCS
theory, strong-coupling Eliashberg theory and

Ginzburg-Landau functional theory

There are some well-established theories for supercon-
ductivity, the weak-coupling BCS theory and the strong-
coupling Eliashberg theory in BCS formalism from micro-
scopic perspective, and the Ginzburg-Landau functional
theory from the macroscopic perspective. In the weak-
coupling BCS theory, the mother normal state is approxi-
mated as Fermi-liquid state. The PI is now deﬁned as the
perturbation evolution S-matrix, PI = S(0,−∞). The
Fermi-liquid ground state is adiabatically evolved from
the interaction-free ground state and the low-energy ex-
citations are the so-called quasiparticles, which can be
regarded as freely independent excitations with inter-
action renormalization included. The superconductivity
in weak-coupling BCS theory comes from the pairing of
the nearly independent quasiparticles near Fermi energy.
The eﬀects of the interactions in PI on the superconduc-
tivity have been implicitly included in parameters of the
renormalized quasiparticles. The adiabatic principle and
the Pauli exclusion principle preserve the reliability of
the weak-coupling BCS theory in good metal supercon-
ductors.

The strong-coupling Eliashberg theory is an updated
version of the weak-coupling BCS theory. In the strong-
coupling Eliashberg theory, the time retarded forma-
tion of the Cooper pairs and the scattering renormal-
ization of the single-particle excitations are additionally
included upon the weak-coupling approximations. While
the weak-coupling BCS theory is a mean-ﬁeld theory with
static pairing potential, the strong-coupling Eliashberg
theory can be regarded as a dynamical mean-ﬁeld theory
with dynamical pairing potential. In the latter theory, al-
though the mother normal state is also the Fermi-liquid
state, the physics of PscPI are treated uniformly with
the dynamical retarded pairing physics and the scattering
renormalization of the single-particle excitations included
simultaneously. However, unlike in the weak-coupling
BCS theory where the ground and excited states can be
given out clearly, in the strong-coupling Eliashberg the-
ory the ground and excited states can not be directly
shown while only the physics of the particle and hole

excitations are involved in a perturbative self-consistent
theory with the dynamical pairing potential in an ex-
tended self-energy.

Physically, both the weak-coupling BCS theory and the
strong-coupling Eliashberg theory are in BCS formalisms
where the pairing of the physical electrons is the essen-
tial concept for superconductivity.
It should be noted
that in the above two theoretical formalisms, only the
inner-pair physics of the Cooper pairs is involved. The
center-of-mass physics of the Cooper pairs is described
by the macroscopic Ginzburg-Landau functional theory,
where the detailed inner-pair physics as given in micro-
scopic BCS formalisms is neglected. An updated for-
malism to unify both the microscopic pairing formation
and the macroscopic pair condensate of the supercon-
ductivity can be established in a path integral method
where both the single-particle and the pairing physics
are treated uniformly. The pairing ﬂuctuations should
be carefully included such as done in Reference.13

Unfortunately, neither the weak-coupling BCS theory
nor the strong-coupling Eliashberg theory can predict re-
liable Tc for a given superconductor! Moreover, there
is no simple Ginzburg-Landau functional for the super-
conductors which are described by the strong-coupling
Eliashberg theory.

6

Here |Ψ(0)
sc i is the weak-coupling BCS mean-ﬁeld ground
state corresponding to the renormalized coherent Hamil-
tonian eHcoh. In the above derivation, we use P †scHPsc =

H since only the pairing interaction Hp involved in
Hamiltonian H.

Now let us extend the above approximation at ground
state into the ﬁnite-temperatue case. For any operator
O, the thermal average hOi is deﬁned and approximated
as following:

hOi ≡

Tr(cid:2)e−β(H+HI )O(cid:3)
Tr(cid:2)e−β(H+HI )(cid:3)
TrhP †I e−βHOPIi
TrhP †I e−βHPIi

≃
≃ heOicoh,

(B6)

where eO = P †I OPI and heOicoh ≡ TrheρcoheOi with
eρcoh = e−βfHcoh
Trhe−βfHcohi .

interactions in PI are only approximated by the projec-
tion operation PI and the high-energy incoherent physics
is neglected. In our following discussion, the coherent ap-
proximations in Eq. (B5) and Eq. (B6) are assumed.

In the above approximation, the

Appendix B: A reduced model for the renormalized

normal superconductivity

1. Pairing order parameter

Consider a superconductor with Hamiltonian H =
Ht + Hp, where the kinetic part Ht is given by Ht =

Pkσ εkc†kσckσ and the pairing interaction Hp is deﬁned

by Eq. (6). Here the interactions in PI of Eq. (2) are not
explicitly given out. The renormalization eﬀects of the
projection PI on the Hamiltonian H can be described by

by eH = P †I HPI . Consider the following projection of the

operator,

P †I ckσPI = Z 1/2

k ckσ + ··· ,

the coherent part of the renormalized Hamiltonian eH can

be simpliﬁed as

eHcoh = eHt + eHp,

The renormalized variables are deﬁned as following:

1

c†
−k1↓

kc†kσckσ,
ε⋆

where eHt and eHp are given by
N Xk1k2egeφk1eφk2 c†k1↑

eHt = Xkσ
eHp = −
k = ZkP †I εkPI ,eg = P †I gPI ,eφk = ZkP †I φkPI .
sc |eHcoh|Ψ(0)
hΨsc|H|Ψsci ≃ hΨ0|eHcoh|Ψ0i ≃ hΨ(0)

ε⋆

from the following assumption for the ground state:

c−k2↓ck2↑.

The above coherent projection approximation comes

sc i. (B5)

(B4)

(B1)

(B2)

(B3)

Introduce a pairing order parameter ∆c as

∆c = −

1

N Xk1,k2egeφkhc−k↓ck2↑i,

(B7)

we can decouple the renormalized pairing interaction eHp

into a mean-ﬁeld approximation

eHp =Xk

∆k(cid:16)c†k↑

c†
−k↓

+ c−k↓ck↑(cid:17) ,

(B8)

1

1 =

(B9)

k
2Ek

where ∆k = ∆ceφk. We can then obtain a self-consistent

equation for the pairing order parameter,

2 (cid:19) ,
tanh(cid:18) βEk

parts of the Bogoliubov quasiparticles.

where Ek = pε∗2

N Xk egeφ2
k + |∆k|2 is the energy of the coherent
Eq. (B9) shows that the pairing order parameter ∆c
has a BCS mean-ﬁeld solution. Moreover, the pairing
symmetry function ∆k is renormalized by the coher-
ent weight Zk. This latter fact is important since it
shows that the pairing symmetry function ∆k observed
in ARPES is not only determined by the pairing interac-
tion but also renormalized by the coherent weight. This
result is analogue to that in the strong-coupling Eliash-
berg theory. If the higher-order renormalization eﬀects

of the interactions in PI can be ignored, it predicts from
Eq. (B9) that

∆m
Tc

= const.

(B10)

In cuprate superconductors, ARPES shows

where ∆m ≡ ∆c|eφk|max and Tc is given by Eq. (17) with
h1iTc → 1.
that
exact d-wave
the pairing symmetry function has
symmetry,8,17 ∆k ∼ (cos kx − cosky).
It is consistent
exactly to the theoretical prediction from the hypothesis
that the nearest-neighbour antiferromagnetic interaction
is the pairing interaction. This result shows that the co-
herent weight Zk in cuprate superconductors is unusual
k independent,

Zk = Z.

(B11)

The k-independent coherent weight Z implies that the
dominant interactions in PI are on-site ones, which seems
rule out the antiferromagnetic ﬂuctuations with charac-
teristic momentum Q = (π, π) as the dominant interac-
tions for the abnormal mother normal states in cuprate
superconductors.

2. Experimental responses

Firstly,

let us consider the superﬂuid responses in
the penetration depth measurement. The diamagnetic
current corresponding to the model Hamiltonian H is
given by j(d)
α (q) = −ΛαAα(q), where A(q) is the
vector potential for electromagnetic ﬁled, and Λα =
Pkσ Tα(k)hc†kσckσi with Tα(k) a kinetic energy εk rel-

evant parameter. It can be shown that the penetration
depth λα follows

λα =

,

(B12)

1

qµ0eΛα

where eΛα = Pkσ eTα(k)Zkhc†kσckσicoh with eTα(k) =

P †I Tα(k)PI , and µ0 is the vacuum permeability.

In cuprate superconductors, since Zk is nearly k inde-

pendent, we have

where

λα,coh

=

λα =

λα,coh√Z
1√µ0eΛα,coh

,

with

(B13)

=

eΛα,coh

Pkσ eTα(k)hc†kσckσicoh.
k ≃ εk, thus eTα(k) ≃ Tα(k). Therefore, the dominant

low-
energy band dispersion is weakly renormalized,18,19
ε⋆
inﬂuence of the interactions in PI on the penetration
depth comes from the coherent weight.

Moreover,

since

the

Secondly,

let us consider the low-energy and low-
temperature thermodynamic responses. The free-energy

It
should be noted that only contribution from the itinerant

αβ,coh(q, τ ) = hTτ Sα(q, τ )Sβ (−q, 0)icoh.

7

corresponding to the coherent Hamiltonian eHcoh is given
by eFcoh = − 1

In the superconducting
state with ﬁnite pairing order parameter, the free-energy
is approximated further as

β ln Trhe−β eHcohi.

1
β

ln Trhe−β eHmfi ,

(B14)

eF (0)
coh = −

where eHmf is the corresponding superconducting mean-
ﬁeld Hamiltonian of eHcoh. Since all of the thermody-

namic variables such as the entropy S and the speciﬁc
heat C etc. can be obtained by the derivatives of the
free energy, the renormalization eﬀects of the interactions
in PI on the thermodynamic responses are dominantly
manifested by the energy spectrum Ek and there are no
additional renormalized factor such as
in penetration
depth of Eq. (B13).

1√Z

Thirdly, let us consider the single-particle responses in
such as ARPES and STM experiments. For the single-
particle Green’s function Gσ(k, τ ) = −hTτ ckσ(τ )c†kσ(0)i,
in the coherent approximation deﬁned by Eq. (B5) and
Eq. (B6), we have

Gσ(k, τ ) = ZkeGσ,coh(k, τ )

(B15)

where eGσ,coh(k, τ ) = −hTτ ckσ(τ )c†kσ(0)icoh. There-
the spectrum function in ARPES A(k, ω) =
fore,
− 1
π ImGσ(k, ω) is approximated at low-energy in super-
conducting state as

(B16)

A(k, ω) = ZkeAcoh(k, ω),
where eAcoh(k, ω) = u2
kδΓ(ω − Ek) + v2
Ek(cid:17).
2(cid:16)1 ± ε⋆
N Pk A(k, ω). In the coherent approxima-

k, v2
u2
The STM experimental signal is related to the local

DOS ρ(ω) = 2
tion, the low-energy local DOS is approximate as

kδΓ(ω + Ek) and

k = 1

k

(B17)

Lastly,

whereeρcoh(ω) = 2

ρ(ω) = Zeρcoh(ω),
N Pk eAcoh(k, ω). In Eq. (B17) we have

assumed that the coherence weight Zk is k independent.
let us focus on the low-energy and low-
temperature magnetic responses in such as Knight shift
and 1/T1T from NMR and the inelastic spectra from
neutron scatterings. These magnetic responses are re-
lated to the spin susceptibility deﬁned by χ(s)
αβ(q, τ ) =
hTτ Sα(q, τ )Sβ (−q, 0)i, where the spin operator Sα(q) =
1√N Pkσσ′ c†kσ(cid:0) σ
It is easily shown that
in the coherent approximation and with k-independent
quasiparticle coherent weight, the spin response suscepti-
bility at low-energy and low-temperature is approximate
as

2(cid:1)σσ′ ck+qσ′.

χ(s)

αβ(q, τ ) = Z 2eχ(s)

αβ,coh(q, τ ),

(B18)

where eχ(s)

8

coherent parts of the physical electrons has been consid-
ered in Eq. (B18) to the low-energy and low-temperature
magnetic responses.

3. Remarks

In the above discussion, the coherent parts of the phys-
ical electrons are simply described by a reduced coherent

Hamiltonian eHcoh deﬁned in Eq.(B2), where the higher-

order renormalization eﬀects other than the projection

PI from the incoherent parts of the physical electrons are
neglected. For realistic superconductors where the phys-
ical electrons are in strong entanglement, the roles of the
interactions in PI cannot be well described by the simple
coherent projection approximations deﬁned in Eq. (B1)
and Eq. (B4). In this case, the entanglement physics re-
quires a theory where both the coherent superconducting
state and its strongly correlated mother normal states are
uniformly involved, such as the strong-coupling Eliash-
berg theory for the superconductors with the entangled
Fermi-liquid mother normal state.

1 J. S. Kim, G. N. Tam, and G. R. Stewart, Phys. Rev. B

92, 224509 (2015).

2 Z.-X. Shen and G. A. Sawatzky, Phys. Stat. Sol. B 215,

523 (1999).

3 D. L. Feng, D. H. Lu, K. M. Shen, C. Kim, H. Eisaki, A.
Damascelli, R. Yoshizaki, J.-i. Shimoyama, K. Kishio, G.
D. Gu, S. Oh, A. Andrus, J. ODonnell, J. N. Eckstein, and
Z.-X. Shen, Science 289, 277 (2000).

4 H. Ding, J. R. Engelbrecht, Z. Wang, J. C. Campuzano,
S.-C. Wang, H.-B. Yang, R. Rogan, T. Takahashi, K. Kad-
owaki, and D. G. Hinks, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 227001
(2001).

5 A. Kanigel, M. R. Norman, M. Randeria, U. Chatterjee, S.
Suoma, A. Kaminski, H. M. Fretwell, S. Rosenkranz, M.
Shi, T. Sato, T. Takahashi, Z. Z. Li, H. Raﬀy, K. Kadowaki,
D. Hinks, L. Ozyuzer, and J. C. Campuzano, Nat. Phys.
2, 447 (2006).

6 D. Fournier, G. Levy, Y. Pennec, J. L. McChesney, A.
Bostwick, E. Rotenberg, R. Liang, W. N. Hardy, D. A.
Bonn, I. S. Elﬁmov, and A. Damascelli, Nat. Phys. 6, 905
(2010).

7 K. Tanaka, W. S. Lee, D. H. Lu, A. Fujimori, T. Fujii,
Risdiana, I. Terasaki, D. J. Scalapino, T. P. Devereaux, Z.
Hussain, and Z.-X. Shen, Science 314, 1910 (2006).

8 W. S. Lee, I. M. Vishik, K. Tanaka, D. H. Lu, T. Sasagawa,
N. Nagaosa, T. P. Devereaux, Z. Hussain, and Z.-X. Shen,
Nature(London) 450, 81 (2007).

9 M. Hashimoto, T. Yoshida, K. Tanaka, A. Fujimori, M.
Okusawa, S. Wakimoto, K. Yamada, T. Kakeshita, H.
Eisaki, and S. Uchida, Phys. Rev. B 79, 140502 (2009).

10 P. W. Anderson, Science 237, 1196 (1987).
11 J. Hu and H. Ding, Scientiﬁc Reports 2, 381 (2012).
12 L. P. Gorkov, Phys. Rev. B 93, 054517 (2016).
13 P. Nozi`eres and S. Schmitt-Rink, J. Low Temp. Phys. 59,

195 (1985).

14 R. Micnas, J. Ranninger, and S. Robaszkiewicz, Rev. Mod.

Phys. 62, 113 (1990).

15 P. C. Hohenberg, Phys. Rev. 158, 383 (1967).
16 V. J. Emery and S. A. Kivelson, Nature (London) 374,

434 (1995).

17 J. Q. Meng, W. T. Zhang, G. D. Liu, L. Zhao, H. Y. Liu,
X. W. Jia, W. Lu, X. L. Dong, G. L. Wang, H. B. Zhang,
Y. Zhou, Y. Zhu, X. Y. Wang, Z. X. Zhao, Z. Y. Xu, C. T.
Chen, and X. J. Zhou, Phys. Rev. B 79, 024514 (2009).

18 A. Lanzara, P. V. Bogdanov, X. J. Zhou, S. A. Kellar, D.
L. Feng, E. D. Lu, T. Yoshida, H. Eisaki, A. Fujimori, K.
Kishio, J.-I. Shimoyama, T. Noda, S. Uchida, Z. Hussain,
and Z.-X. Shen, Nature(London) 412, 510 (2001).

19 T. Yoshida, A. Lanzara, P. V. Bogdanov, S. A. Kellar,
K. M. Shen, W. L. Yang, F. Ronning, T. Sasagawa, T.
Kakeshita, T. Noda, H. Eisaki, S. Uchida, C. T. Lin, F.
Zhou, J. W. Xiong, W. X. Ti, Z. X. Zhao, A. Fujimori, Z.
Hussain, and Z.-X. Shen, Nature(London) 423, 398 (2003).

