Two Lectures On Gauge Theory and Khovanov Homology

Edward Witten

School of Natural Sciences, Institute for Advanced Study

Einstein Drive, Princeton, NJ 08540 USA

Abstract

In the ﬁrst of these two lectures, I use a comparison to symplectic Khovanov homology to
motivate the idea that the Jones polynomial and Khovanov homology of knots can be deﬁned by
counting the solutions of certain elliptic partial diﬀerential equations in 4 or 5 dimensions. The
second lecture is devoted to a description of the rather unusual boundary conditions by which
these equations should be supplemented. An appendix describes some physical background.
(Versions of these lectures have been presented at various institutions including the Simons
Center at Stonybrook, the TSIMF conference center in Sanya, and also Columbia University
and the University of Pennsylvania.)

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
 
2
1

 
 
]
T
G
h
t
a
m

.

[
 
 

1
v
4
5
8
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Figure 1: A knot embedded in R3.

1 Lecture One

The ﬁrst physics-based proposal concerning Khovanov homology of knots was made by Gukov, Vafa,
and Schwarz [1], who suggested that vector spaces associated to knots that had been introduced
a few years earlier by Ooguri and Vafa [2] were related to what appears in Khovanov homology.
A number of years later, I re-expressed this type of construction in terms of gauge theory and the
counting of solutions of PDE’s [3]. That is the story I will describe today. Several previous lectures
are available [4, 5] (the second of these may be a better starting point) and I will take a diﬀerent
approach here.

In any event, the goal is to construct invariants of a knot embedded in R3 (ﬁg. 1).

In the
simplest version, the invariants will be obtained by simply counting, with signs, the solutions of
an equation. The solutions will have an integer-valued1 topological invariant P , and if an is the
“number” (counted algebraically) of solutions with P = n, then the Jones polynomial of the knot
will be

(cid:88)

J(q) =

anqn.

(1.1)

n

To get Khovanov homology, this situation is supposed to be “categoriﬁed,” that is, we want
for each n to deﬁne a complex of vector spaces whose Euler characteristic is an. The only general
situation that I know of in which one can naturally categorify the counting of solutions of an
equation is the case that the equation whose solutions we are counting describes the critical points
of some Morse function h. We will be in this framework. Our equations will be partial diﬀerential
equations or PDE’s, so h will be a Morse function on an inﬁnite-dimensional space of functions,
namely the functions that appear in the PDE. The categoriﬁcation will involve a middle-dimensional
cohomology theory of the function space, analogous to Floer theory. Let us put this aside for a
1To be more precise, P takes values in a Z-torsor, rather than being canonically an integer. This is related to the

framing anomaly of Chern-Simons theory. See Lecture 2.

1

Figure 2: A knot embedded in R3 and stretched in one direction.

moment and assume we are just trying to describe the uncategoriﬁed theory, that is the Jones
polynomial.

The equations whose solutions I claim should be counted to deﬁne the Jones polynomial and
ultimately Khovanov homology might look ad hoc if written down without an explanation of where
they come from. I could have started today’s lecture by explaining the physical setup, but this might
be unhelpful for some. I decided instead to try a diﬀerent approach of motivating the equations
by comparing to an established mathematical approach to Khovanov homology, namely symplectic
Khovanov homology [6–8].

Going all the way back to the original work of Vaughn Jones [9], most approaches to the Jones
polynomial deﬁne an invariant in terms of some sort of presentation of a knot, for example a
projection to a plane – such as the projection used in drawing ﬁg. 1. One deﬁnes something that
is manifestly well-deﬁned and explicitly computable once such a presentation is given. What one
deﬁnes is not obviously independent of the knot presentation, but turns out to be. That step is
where the magic is. And there is always some magic.

An approach based on counting solutions of PDE’s has the opposite advantages and drawbacks.
Topological invariance is potentially manifest (given certain generalities about elliptic PDE’s and
assuming compactness is under control), but it may not be clear how to calculate. The ideal is
to have manifest three- or (in the categoriﬁed case) four-dimensional symmetry together with a
method of calculation. How might this be achieved?

I will suggest how to guess the right equations starting from a knowledge of symplectic Khovanov
homology. But in order to do this, we need to know something about a possible strategy to actually
count the solutions of an equation. So I will begin by explaining what we would do if we knew
which equations we want to analyze, and this will help us in guessing the equations.

There is a standard strategy, applicable to the present problem, for trying to count solutions of
a PDE under suitable conditions. The original version was the Atiyah-Floer conjecture concerning
Floer homology of a three-manifold [10]. Adapting their approach to the present problem, the idea

2

Figure 3: Inﬁnite parallel strands parametrized by u, with −∞ ≤ u ≤ ∞.

Figure 4: Semi-inﬁnite strands that extend to u = +∞.

is to stretch a knot in one direction, say the u direction, as in ﬁg. 2. Then one wants it to be the
case that except near the ends, the solutions are independent of u. This is not automatically the
case and in [11], where this strategy was followed for the present problem, it was necessary to make
a perturbation to a more generic system of equations to get to a situation in which this would be
true.

Given this, we deﬁne a moduli space M of u-independent solutions. We can think of these as

the solutions in the presence of inﬁnite parallel strands that run in the u direction, as in ﬁg. 3.

Now as in ﬁg. 4 consider solutions in the presence of semi-inﬁnite strands that extend to
u = +∞ or to u = −∞ but not both. Let L(cid:96) and Lr be the moduli spaces of such solutions. Thus
a point in L(cid:96) represents a solution in a semi-inﬁnite situation in which the strands terminate on
the left (as drawn in ﬁg. 4). Likewise Lr parametrizes solutions in the presence of semi-inﬁnite

3

strands that terminate on the right. We assume that a solution in such a semi-inﬁnite situation
is independent of u for u → +∞ or u → −∞, respectively. If this is so, then L(cid:96) and Lr come
with natural maps to M. For simplicity in our terminology, we will assume that these maps are
embeddings; this amounts to assuming that each solution in the interior in ﬁg. 2 can be extended
over the left or over the right in at most one way. This assumption is not necessary but makes the
explanation simpler.

The solutions for a global knot like the one in ﬁg. 2 can be understood as solutions in the
middle that extend over both ends. So the global solutions are intersection points of L(cid:96) and Lr.
The integer an that appears as a coeﬃcient in the Jones polynomial is supposed to be the algebraic
intersection number of L(cid:96) and Lr:

an = L(cid:96) ∩ Lr.

(1.2)

(To be more exact, an is this intersection number computed by counting only intersections with
P = n.)

In this language of intersections, categoriﬁcation can happen if M is in a natural way a sym-
plectic manifold and L(cid:96) and Lr are Lagrangian submanifolds. Then Floer cohomology – i.e. the
A-model or the Fukaya category – of M gives a framework for categoriﬁcation. From the point of
view of today’s lecture, the reason that all this will happen is that, even before we stretched the
knot to reduce to intersections in M, the equations whose solutions we were counting are equations
for critical points of some Morse function(al) h.

In “symplectic Khovanov homology,” a version of such a story is developed for Khovanov ho-
mology (at least in a singly-graded version) with a very speciﬁc M. A description of this M that
was proposed in [12] (and exploited in a mirror version in [13]) and which provided an important
clue in my work is as follows. M can be understood as a space of Hecke modiﬁcations. Let me
explain this concept. Let C be a Riemann surface and E → C a holomorphic GC bundle over C,
where GC is some complex Lie group. A Hecke modiﬁcation of E at a point p ∈ C is a holomorphic
GC bundle E(cid:48) → C with an isomorphism to E away from p:
∼= E|C\p.

ϕ : E(cid:48)|C\p

(1.3)

For example, if GC = C∗, the we can think of E as a holomorphic line bundle L → C. A

holomorphic bundle L(cid:48) that is isomorphic to L away from p is
L(cid:48) = L(np) = L ⊗ O(p)n

(1.4)
for some integer n. Here n can be thought of as a weight of the Langlands-GNO dual group of C∗,
which is another copy of C∗.

The reason that I write GC, making explicit that this is the complex form of the group, is
that when we do gauge theory, the gauge group will be the compact real form and I will call this
simply G. In general, for any G, there is a corresponding Langlands-GNO dual group G∨, with
C, such that Hecke modiﬁcations of a holomorphic GC-bundle at a point p ∈ C
complexiﬁcation G∨

4

Figure 5: A conﬁguration of points pi ∈ R2, at which we are going to make Hecke modiﬁcations.

occur in families classiﬁed by dominant weights (or equivalently ﬁnite-dimensional representations)
of G∨

C (or equivalently G∨).
For example, if GC = GL(2, C), we can think of a GC-bundle E → C as a rank 2 complex vector
bundle E → C. The Langlanda-GNO dual group G∨
C is again GL(2, C), and a Hecke modiﬁcation
C is as follows. For some local decomposition E ∼=
dual to the 2-dimensional representation of G∨
O ⊕O in a neighborhood of p ∈ C, one has E(cid:48) ∼= O(p)⊕O. The diﬀerence from the abelian case is
that there is not just one Hecke modiﬁcation of this type at p but a whole family of them, arising
from the choice of a subbundle O of E that is going to be replaced by O(p).

Because of this dependence, the Hecke modiﬁcations of this type at p form a family, parametrized
by CP1. Suppose we are given 2n points on C ∼= R2 at which we are going to make Hecke
modiﬁcations of this type of a trivial bundle rank 2 complex vector bundle E → C (ﬁg. 5). The
space of all such Hecke modiﬁcations would be a copy of (CP1)2n, with one copy of CP1 at each
point. However, there is a natural subvariety M ⊂ (CP1)2n deﬁned as follows. One adds a point ∞
at inﬁnity to compactify C to CP1, so we are now making Hecke modiﬁcations of a trivial bundle
E = O ⊕ O → CP1. A point in (CP1)2n determines a way to perform Hecke modiﬁcations at the
points p1, p2, . . . , p2n to make a new bundle E(cid:48). M is deﬁned by requiring that E(cid:48) ⊗ O(−n∞) is
trivial. (If we were working in P GL(2, C) rather than GL(2, C), we would just say that E(cid:48) should
be trivial.)

Symplectic Khovanov homology is constructed by considering intersections of Lagrangian sub-
manifolds of the space M of multiple Hecke modiﬁcations from a trivial bundle to itself. We want
to reinterpret this in terms of gauge theory PDE’s.

In my work with Kapustin on gauge theory and geometric Langlands [15], an important fact
was that M can be realized as a moduli space of solutions of a certain system of PDE’s. However,
although M is deﬁned in terms of bundles on a 2-manifold R2 ∼= C, the PDE’s are in 3 dimensions
– on R3. As a result of this, everything in the rest of the lecture will be in a dimension one more

5

than one might expect. To describe the Jones polynomial – an invariant of knots in 3-space – we
will count solutions of certain PDE’s in 4 dimensions, and the categoriﬁed version – Khovanov
homology – will involve PDE’s in 5 dimensions.

The 3-dimensional PDE’s that we need are known as the Bogomolny equations. They are
equations, on an oriented three-dimensional Riemannian manifold W3, for a pair A, φ, where A is
a connection on a G-bundle E → W3, and φ is a section of ad(E) → W3 (i.e. an adjoint-valued
0-form). If F = dA + A ∧ A is the curvature of A, then the Bogomolny equations are

(Here (cid:63) is the Hodge star and dA is the gauge-covariant extension of the exterior derivative.)

F = (cid:63)dAφ.

(1.5)

The Bogomolny equations have many remarkable properties and we will focus on just one
aspect. We consider the Bogomolny equations on W3 = R × C with C a Riemann surface. Any
connection A on a G-bundle E → C determines a holomorphic structure on E (or more exactly on
its complexiﬁcation): one simply writes dA = ∂A + ∂A and uses ∂A to deﬁne the complex structure.
(In complex dimension 1, there is no integrability condition that must be obeyed by a ∂ operator.)
So for any y ∈ R, by restricting E → R× C to E → {y}× C, we get a holomorphic bundle Ey → C.
However, if the Bogomolny equations are satisﬁed, Ey is canonically independent of y. Indeed, a
consequence of the Bogomolny equations is that ∂A is independent of y up to conjugation. If we
parametrize R by y, then the Bogomolny equations imply that

= 0.

(1.6)

(cid:20) D

Dy

(cid:21)

− iφ, ∂A

Thus ∂A is independent of y, up to a natural conjugation.

The Bogomolny equations admit solutions with singularities at isolated points. To understand
the basic picture, we take the three-manifold to be simply R3, and the gauge group to be U (1).
One ﬁxes an integer n and one observes that the Bogomolny equation has an exact solution for any
x0 ∈ R3:

(1.7)
I have only deﬁned F and not the connection A whose curvature is F or the line bundle L on which
A is connection. Such an L and A exist (and are essentially unique) if and only if n ∈ Z.

2|(cid:126)x − (cid:126)x0| , F = (cid:63)dφ.

φ =

n

We simply take φ =(cid:80)

For G = U (1), since the Bogomolny equations are linear, they have a unique solution with
singularities of this type labeled by speciﬁed integers n1, n2, . . . at speciﬁed points pi ∈ R3 (ﬁg. 6).
i ni = 0, which ensures that φ and
the connection A vanish at inﬁnity faster than 1/|(cid:126)x|.

2|(cid:126)x−(cid:126)xi| , F = (cid:63)dφ. We assume that(cid:80)

ni

i

Now pick a decomposition R3 = R×R2, where we identify R2 as C. Suppose that the singularities
are at yi×pi, with yi ∈ R, pi ∈ C. For each y /∈ {y1, . . . , yn}, the indicated solution of the Bogomolny
equations determines a holomorphic line bundle Ly → C, and upon adding a point at inﬁnity, this
naturally extends to Ly → CP1. (Here we use the fact that A vanishes at inﬁnity faster than 1/|(cid:126)x|.)

6

Figure 6: Points yi × pi ∈ R3 labeled by weights ni of the group U (1).

Ly is independent of y up to isomorphism as long as y is not equal to one of the yi, but even when
y crosses one of the yi, Ly is constant when restricted to CP1\pi. In crossing y = yi, Ly undergoes
a Hecke modiﬁcation

(1.8)
Ly is trivial for y → −∞ and for y → +∞ (again because the solution vanishes at inﬁnity faster
than 1/|(cid:126)x|). The solution thus describes a sequence of Hecke modiﬁcations mapping the trivial
bundle to itself.

Ly → Ly ⊗ O(pi)ni.

We can do something similar for any simple Lie group G. (The underlying idea was introduced
by ’t Hooft in the late 1970’s [14] and is important in physical applications of quantum gauge
theory.) Let T be the maximal torus of G and let t be its Lie algebra. Pick a homomorphism
ρ : u(1) → t. Up to a Weyl transformation, such a ρ is equivalent to a dominant weight of the dual
group G∨, so it corresponds to a representation R∨ of G∨. We turn the singular solution (1.7) of
the U (1) Bogomolny equations that we already used (more exactly, the special case of this solution
with n = 1) into a singular solution for G simply by

(A, φ) → (ρ(A), ρ(φ)).

(1.9)

Then we look for solutions of the Bogomolny equations for G with singularities of this type at
speciﬁed points yi × pi ∈ R3.

faster than 1/r (for U (1), this was automatic once we set(cid:80)

The picture is the same as before except that now (ﬁg. 7) the points yi × pi are labeled by
homomorphisms ρi : u(1) → t, or in other words by representations R∨
i of the dual group G∨,
rather than by integers ni. Also, now we must specify that the solution should go to 0 at inﬁnity
i ni = 0). Given this, such a solution
describes a sequence of Hecke modiﬁcations at pi of type ρi, mapping a trivial G-bundle E → CP1
to itself.

7

Figure 7: Points in R3 labeled by homomorphisms ρi : u(1) → t, or equivalently by representations of the
dual group.

The moduli space M of solutions of the Bogomolny equations on R3 with the indicated sin-
gularities and vanishing at inﬁnity faster than 1/r is actually a hyper-Kahler manifold, essentially
ﬁrst studied by P. Kronheimer in the 1980’s. If we pick a decomposition R3 = R × R2, this picks
one of the complex structures on the hyper-Kahler manifold and in that complex structure, M is
the moduli space Mp1,ρ1;p2,ρ2;... of all Hecke modiﬁcations of the indicated types at the indicated
points, mapping a trivial bundle over CP1 to itself.

This construction can be used to account for a number of properties of spaces of Hecke modi-
ﬁcations, but for today we want to focus on the application to knot theory. The reduction to M
is supposed to result from stretching a knot in one direction, so we want M to be the space of
u-independent solutions of some equations, as suggested in ﬁg. 3. We already described M via
solutions of some PDE’s on R3, so now we have to think of M as a space of u-independent solutions
on R4 = R3 × R, where the second factor is parametrized by u.

There actually are natural PDE’s in four dimensions that work. They play a role in the gauge
theory approach to geometric Langlands [15], and are sometimes called the KW equations. They
are equations for a pair A, φ where A is a connection on E → Y4, Y4 a four-manifold, and φ is a
1-form on Y4 valued in ad(E):

F − φ ∧ φ = (cid:63)dAφ,

(1.10)
In a special case Y4 = W3 × R, with A a pullback from W3 and φ = φ du (where φ is a section
of ad(E) and u parametrizes the second factor in Y4) these equations reduce to the Bogomolny
equations on W3:

dA (cid:63) φ = 0.

Therefore, the singular solution (1.9) of the Bogomolny equations that we have already studied

F = (cid:63)dAφ.

(1.11)

8

Figure 8: A four-manifold Y with an embedded 1-manifold S along which one speciﬁes a desired singularity.

can be lifted to a singular solution of the KW equations, but now the singularity is along a line
rather than a point. Of course, the singularity is still in codimension three. We view this solution
as a model that tells us what sort of codimension three singularity to look for in a more general
situation. If Y4 is a 4-manifold and S ⊂ Y4 is an embedded 1-manifold, labeled by a homomorphism
ρ : u(1) → t (or by a representation of G∨), then one can look for solutions of the KW equations
with a singularity along S associated to the given choice of ρ (ﬁg. 8).

If we specialize to the case that Y4 = R3 × R, with S = ∪iSi, and Si = pi × R ⊂ R3 × R (pi are
points in R3 and R is parametrized by u) then the u-independent solutions of the KW equations
are just the solutions of the Bogomolny equations on R3, with the chosen singularities. So these
solutions are parametrized by M; and indeed one can show that these are all solutions of the KW
equations in this situation with reasonable behavior at inﬁnity.

So we have an elliptic PDE in four dimensions and we can specify in an interesting way what
sort of singularity it should have on an embedded circle S ⊂ Y4. But this sounds like a ridiculous
framework for knot theory, because there is no knottedness of a 1-manifold in a 4-manifold!

To resolve this point, we have to explain what is involved in categoriﬁcation. Let us prac-
tice with an ordinary equation rather than a partial diﬀerential equation. Suppose that we are
on a ﬁnite-dimensional compact oriented manifold N with a real vector bundle V → N with
rank(V )=dimension(N ). Suppose also we are given a section s of V . We can deﬁne an integer by
counting, with multiplicities (and in particular with signs) the zeroes of s. This integer is the Euler

class(cid:82)

M χ(V ).

In general as far as I know, there is no way to categorify the Euler class of a vector bundle.
However, suppose that V = T ∗N and that s = dh where h is a Morse function. Then the zeroes
of s, which are critical points of h, have a natural “categoriﬁcation” described in Morse homology.
One deﬁnes a complex V with a basis vector ψp for each critical point p of h. The complex is

9

Figure 9: A ﬂow from one critical point to another.

Z-graded by assigning to ψp the “index” of the critical point p, and it has a natural diﬀerential
that is deﬁned by counting gradient ﬂow lines between diﬀerent critical points.

Concretely the diﬀerential is deﬁned by

dψp =

(cid:88)

q

npqψq

(1.12)

where the sum runs over all critical points q whose Morse index exceeds by 1 that of p, and the
integer npq is deﬁned by counting ﬂows from p to q (ﬁg. 9). A “ﬂow” is a solution of the gradient
ﬂow equation

= −(cid:126)∇h.

d(cid:126)x
dt

(1.13)

(To deﬁne this equation, one has to pick a Riemannian metric on the manifold N . The complex
that one gets is independent of the metric up to quasi-isomorphism. One considers ﬂows that start
at p at t = −∞ and end at q at t = +∞. Such ﬂows come in one-parameter families related by
time translations and npq is the number of such families, counted algebraically.)

This tells us what we need in order to be able to categorify a problem of counting solutions of
the KW equations. We have to be able to write those equations as equations for a critical point of
a functional Γ(A, φ):

(1.14)
And the associated gradient ﬂow equation, which will be a PDE in 5 dimensions on X5 = R × Y4

= 0.

δΓ
δA

=

δΓ
δφ

dA
dt

= − δΓ
δA

,

dφ
dt

= − δΓ
δφ

(1.15)

has to be elliptic, so that it will makes sense to try to count its solutions.

10

Generically, it is not true that the KW equations on a manifold Y4 are equations for a critical
point of some functional. However, this is true if Y4 = W3 × R for some W3. If singularities are
present on an embedded 1-manifold S ⊂ Y4 then there is a further condition: The KW equations
in this situation are equations for critical points of a functional if and only if S is contained in a
3-manifold W3×p, with p a point in R. (For an explanation of “why” this is true, see the appendix.)
So to make categoriﬁcation possible, we have to be in the situation that leads to knot theory: S
is an embedded 1-manifold in a 3-manifold W3. Once this restriction is made, the ﬁve-dimensional
ﬂow equations exist and are indeed elliptic. (They were introduced independently in [3] and [18]
and are sometimes called the HW equations.)

Naively, this leads to “categoriﬁed” knot invariants for any three-manifold W3, but to justify this
claim one needs some compactness properties for solutions of the equations under consideration. I
suspect that a proper proof of these compactness properties may require that the Ricci tensor of
W3 is nonnegative, a very restrictive condition.

What I have described so far is supposed to correspond (for W3 = R3, G = SO(3) and ρ
corresponding to the 2-dimensional representation of G∨ = SU (2)) to “singly-graded Khovanov
homology.” It is singly-graded because the only grading I have mentioned is the grading that is
associated to the Morse index, or in other words to categoriﬁcation. In the mathematical theory, one
says that singly-graded Khovanov homology becomes trivial (it does not distinguish knots) if one
“decategoriﬁes” it and forgets the grading. In the approach I have described, this is true because
in the uncategoriﬁed version, the embedded 1-manifold S is just a 1-manifold in a 4-manifold Y4
(it has no reason to be embedded in the 3-manifold W3 × p) so there is no knottedness.

The physical picture makes clear where the additional “q”-grading of Khovanov homology would
come from. It is supposed to come from the second Chern-class, integrated over the 4-manifold
Y4. The second Chern class is the invariant that I called P at the beginning of the lecture. But
for topological reasons, the second Chern class cannot be deﬁned in the presence of a codimension
three singularity of the type I have described on an embedded one-manifold S ⊂ Y4. (Because of the
singularity, Y4 behaves as a noncompact four-manifold on which there is no topological invariant
corresponding to the second Chern class of a G bundle.) And therefore the construction as I have
presented it so far has no q-grading.

The physical picture tells us what we have to do to get the q-grading: Y4 should be a manifold
with boundary, with the knot placed in its boundary (ﬁg. 10). The appropriate boundary condition
will be the subject of Lecture Two and is such that the second Chern class can be deﬁned.

In [11], Gaiotto and I analyzed this problem (in the uncategoriﬁed situation, meaning that we
counted solutions in 4 dimensions, not 5) with the aim of showing directly, without referring to the
physical picture, that the Jones polynomial is

(cid:88)

J(q) =

anqn

(1.16)

where an is the number of solutions with second Chern class n. The starting point was to stretch
the knot in one direction, reducing to equations in one dimension less, as in ﬁg. 2. It turns out

n

11

Figure 10: A four-manifold Y4 with boundary, with a knot placed in its boundary.

that the solutions in one dimension less that satisfy the boundary condition are related to a lot
of interesting mathematical physics involving integrable systems, conformal ﬁeld theory, geometric
Langlands, and more. A description of the Jones polynomial emerges that is along the lines of
work by Bigelow [16] and Lawrence [17]. What the approach in [11] adds is a derivation of the
Bigelow-Lawrence description from a starting point with manifest 3-dimensional symmetry. The
analog of this for the categoriﬁed theory has not been well understood yet. In one version, it is
expected to involve a Fukaya-Seidel category with a certain superpotential.

2 Lecture Two

In Lecture One, I explained that to deﬁne a q-grading in Khovanov homology, we have to be able to
make sense of the second Chern class of a solution of the KW equations on a four-manifold Y4, in the
presence of a knot. As already explained, if the knot is represented by a codimension 1 embedded
submanifold S ⊂ Y4, this will not work, because the singularity that we want to postulate along S
does not allow the deﬁnition of a second Chern class as a topological invariant. Instead, we embed
the knot in the boundary of Y4, as in ﬁg. 10. The boundary condition that we use is subtle to
describe, but has the property that the bundle is ﬁxed on the boundary, so the second Chern class
can be deﬁned.

We could actually get the q-grading for any Y4 with boundary, but to also allow categoriﬁcation,
we want more speciﬁcally Y4 = W × R+, where R+ is a half-line, parametrized by y. For the Jones
polynomial and Khovanov homology, we further take W = R3. (More general choices of W are
certainly also interesting, but not much is known about what to expect. See [19].) So as sketched
in ﬁg. 10, Y4 is R3 × R+ with the knot embedded in the boundary.

For y → ∞, we ask for A, φ → 0. For y → 0, there is a subtle boundary condition which is one

12

of the main points of the theory. Describing it is actually my main goal for today. This boundary
condition depends on the knot K, and on the labeling of K (or of each component of a link L) by a
representation R∨ of the Langlands or GNO dual group G∨. That is the only place that K enters
the setup.

The desired boundary condition is an elliptic boundary condition though possibly an unex-
pected one. Here, “elliptic” means that although the deﬁnition may look unexpected, the resulting
properties are similar to what one would get with more familiar elliptic boundary conditions such
as Dirichlet or Neumann. For example, on a compact four-manifold, the linearization of the KW
equation becomes a Fredholm operator and has discrete spectrum.

With this boundary condition, which I will describe in some detail, the restriction to the bound-
ary W × {y = 0} of the bundle E and connection A are speciﬁed. As a result, one can deﬁne a
second Chern class

(cid:90)

n =

1
8π2

Tr F ∧ F.

W×R+

(2.1)

However, because the bundle is ﬁxed on the boundary but is not trivialized, this invariant really
takes values in a Z-torsor associated to framings of W and K. “Torsor” means that it is not true
that n is an integer in a canonical way; rather the value of n mod Z depends only on the boundary
conditions and not on the speciﬁc gauge ﬁeld that satisﬁes them. One can “trivialize the torsor”
and make n an integer by picking framings of W and K.

To deﬁne a knot polynomial, one counts (with signs, in a standard way) the number an of

solutions of the KW equations with second Chern class n, and then one deﬁnes

J(q; K, R∨) =

anqn.

(2.2)

(cid:88)

n∈Z

Compactness (not yet proved with the appropriate boundary conditions) of the solutions of the KW
equations will mean that there are only ﬁnitely many terms in the sum so that this is a Laurent
polynomial.

As I explained in Lecture One, with this deﬁnition of the Jones polynomial, the “categoriﬁ-
It arises because the
cation” that leads to Khovanov homology is straightforward in principle.
KW equations can be “lifted,” in a certain sense, to certain elliptic diﬀerential equations in ﬁve
dimensions, and these equations can be interpreted as gradient ﬂow equations. But rather than
say more about that today, what I want to do is to describe the boundary condition that is needed
for the four (or ﬁve) dimensional equations. This boundary condition is of a possibly somewhat
unfamiliar type, and understanding it is essential for making progress with this subject.

The boundary conditions have been studied in [20], and were shown to be elliptic in the absence
of a knot. A paper is in progress on the case with a knot [21], and I will tell a little about that
case later. I will carry out this discussion in the language of the four-dimensional equations, since
going to ﬁve dimensions does not change much, as was shown in [20].

The boundary condition of interest is not a simple Dirichlet or Neumann boundary condition

13

– it is not deﬁned by saying what ﬁelds or derivatives of ﬁelds vanish along the boundary. Rather,
the boundary condition is deﬁned by specifying a model solution of the KW equations that has a
singularity along the boundary, and saying that one only wants to consider solutions of the KW
equation that are asymptotic to this singular solution along the boundary.

The model solution is a solution on R3 × R+, where I will parametrize R3 by x1, x2, x3 and R+

by y. There is a simple exact solution with A = 0 and
ti · dxi

3(cid:88)

φ =

,

(2.3)

y

i=1

where ti are elements of the Lie algebra g of G that obey the su(2) commutation relations

[t1, t2] = t3, and cyclic permutations.

(2.4)
Thus the ti are images of a standard basis of su(2) under some homomorphism ρ : su(2) → g. Every
ρ leads to an interesting theory, but to get the Jones polynomial and Khovanov homology, we take
ρ to be a principal embedding in the sense of Kostant. (For G = SU (2), this simply means that ρ
is the identity map su(2) → g. For G = SU (N ), it means that the N -dimensional representation
of g is irreducible with respect to ρ(su(2)).)

The solution I have just described is what I call the Nahm pole solution, since the relevant
singularity was introduced long ago by Nahm in his work on magnetic monopoles [22]. That was
in the context of “Nahm’s equation,” which is an ordinary diﬀerential equation for three g-valued
functions φ1, φ2, φ3 of a real variable y:

dφ1
dy

+ [φ2, φ3] = 0, and cyclic permutations.

(2.5)

The KW equations reduce to Nahm’s equation if we drop the dependence on (cid:126)x and set A = φy = 0.
On R3 × R+, the Nahm pole boundary condition just says that a solution is supposed to be
asymptotic to the Nahm pole solution for y → 0.

To state the Nahm pole boundary condition on M4 = W3 × R+, for a more general 3-manifold
W3, one needs to specify some terms of O(1) in the solution (for y → 0) as well as the singular terms
of order 1/y. For G = SU (2), one takes the G-bundle E on which we are solving the equations to
be, when restricted to W3 × {y = 0}, the frame bundle of W3, so that ad(E) = T W3. Then one
takes A, restricted to the boundary, to be the Levi-Civita connection on T W3. With this choice of
E, the formula

3(cid:88)
makes sense (one can think of the numerator(cid:80)
i ti· dxi as stating the identiﬁcation ad(E) ∼= T W3).
One can show that this choice of (A, φ) obeys the Nahm pole boundary condition up to an error
of O(y), and the Nahm pole boundary condition simply says that the solution should agree with
what I have described up to O(y). (One can generalize this to the case that the metric of M4 is
not a product near the boundary.)

ti · dxi

(2.6)

y

i=1

φ =

14

Showing that the Nahm pole boundary condition is elliptic is mostly an exercise in “uniformly
degenerate elliptic operators,” but one needs to know some speciﬁc facts about the KW equations.
The main thing that one needs to know is that if L is the linearization of the KW equations on a
+ around the Nahm pole solution, then L as an operator between appropriate Hilbert
half-space R4
spaces of functions on R4
+ has no kernel or cokernel. Actually one can show in an elementary way
that L† = −NLN−1 with an explicit matrix N , so it suﬃces to show that there is no kernel.

solution of the KW equations on R4

Much the same argument that proves this actually proves the following statement: The only
+, approaching the Nahm pole solution for y → 0 and also for

(cid:112)(cid:126)x2 + y2 → ∞, is the Nahm pole solution. In terms of Khovanov homology, this means that the

Khovanov homology of the empty link is of rank 1.

Before trying to prove these vanishing results, I will explain a simpler vanishing result for the
KW equations on a four-manifold M = M4 without boundary. This will help us know what to aim
for.

The KW equations actually have many diﬀerent useful Weitzenbock formulas. I will ﬁrst state
some formulas that are useful if we are on a manifold without boundary. Let V = F − φ∧ φ− (cid:63)dAφ,
W = dA (cid:63) φ, so the KW equations are V = W = 0. Clearly then the KW equations are equivalent
to the vanishing of

(cid:90)

A short calculation gives

(cid:90)

M

I = −

√

d4x

gTr

I = −

Tr (V ∧ (cid:63)V + W ∧ (cid:63)W) .

(cid:18) 1

2

M

FijF ij + DiφjDiφj + Rijφiφj +

1
2

(cid:19)

[φi, φj][φi, φj]

(2.7)

(2.8)

with Rij the Ricci tensor. If Rij is non-negative, then this is a sum of non-negative terms. The
condition I = 0 forces all these terms to vanish and leads to only a rather trivial class of solutions.

But if is possible to say something useful even if Rij is not non-negative, because it is possible
to ﬁnd a family of Weitzenbock formulas. Deﬁne the selfdual and anti-selfdual two-forms V +(t) =
(F − φ ∧ φ + tdAφ)+, V−(t) = (F − φ ∧ φ − t−1dAφ)−. The equations V +(t) = V−(t) = W = 0 are
a 1-parameter family of elliptic equations, parametrized by t ∈ RP1. One ﬁnds that

(cid:90)

−

M

√

d4x

gTr

(cid:18) t−1
t + t−1V +
t − t−1
4(t + t−1)

= I +

(cid:90)

ij (t)V + ij(t) +

t

t + t−1V−
d4x ijklTrFijFkl.

M

(cid:19)

ij (t)V− ij(t) + W 2

In other words, the same quantity I can be written as a sum of squares in many diﬀerent ways,

modulo the topological invariant

J(t) =

t − t−1
4(t + t−1)

· 32π2P, P =

15

(cid:90)

1

32π2

M

d4x ijklTrFijFkl.

(2.9)

Now we can deduce the following: (1) The KW equations cannot have any solutions for t (cid:54)= 0,∞
except with P = 0 (if P (cid:54)= 0 for some solution, then by looking at the Weitzenbock formula at some
value of t(cid:48) with J(t(cid:48)) < J(t), we reach a contradiction). And (2): If the KW equations are obeyed
at one value of t other than 0,∞, then they are obeyed at all t. This is an immediate consequence
of the Weitzenbock formula, once we know that P = 0. The equations then reduce to F = 0, where
F = dA + A ∧ A, with A the complex connection A = A + iφ, along with dA (cid:63) φ = 0. According
to a theorem of Corlette [23], the solutions correspond to homomorphisms π1(M ) → GC that are
in a certain sense semi-stable.

The moral of the story is that the KW equations participate in many diﬀerent Weitzenbock
formulas, not just one, and it is important to know all of them. However, none of the formulas that
I have written down so far are useful for understanding the Nahm pole boundary condition. The
reason is that if ∂M (cid:54)= ∅, then the preceding formulas (whose derivation involves integration by
parts) will have boundary contributions if we are on a manifold with boundary, and those boundary
contributions are divergent in the case of a solution with Nahm pole boundary behavior. This is
inevitable because the expression that I called I in writing the Weitzenbock formula is divergent
in the case of a solution with Nahm pole behavior. A formula like

−

Tr (V ∧ (cid:63)V + W ∧ (cid:63)W) = I + boundary correction

(2.10)

(cid:90)

must have a boundary correction −∞ in the case of a Nahm pole, since the left hand side is 0 and
I = +∞. A Weitzenbock formula with such divergent terms is not likely to be useful.

To get around this, the best we could hope for would be a Weitenbock formula on R4

+ in which I
is replaced by a sum of squares of quantities whose vanishing characterizes the Nahm pole solution
A = 0, φ = (cid:126)t · d(cid:126)x/y. The quantities that vanish2 in the Nahm pole solution are the curvature
F , covariant derivatives and commutators that involve φy, namely Diφy and [φi, φy], covariant
derivatives of φb along R3 such as Daφb, and ﬁnally Wa = Dyφa + 1
2 εabc[φb, φc]. (Nahm’s equation
is Wa = 0.) What we need is true. Deﬁne the following sum of squares of the objects whose
vanishing characterizes the Nahm pole solution:

(cid:90)

I(cid:48) = −

 1

2

(cid:88)

i,j

d4x Tr

R3×R+

F 2

ij +

(Daφb)2 +

(Diφy)2

(cid:88)
(cid:88)

a,b

(cid:88)
(cid:88)

i

(cid:33)

+

[φy, φa]2 +

a

a

W 2
a

.

(2.11)

Then there is an identity along the lines that we need:

(cid:90)

−

Tr(cid:0)V 2 + W 2(cid:1) = I(cid:48) + ∆

2In the following, indices i, j take four values corresponding to x1, x2, x3, y, but indices a, b take only three values

corresponding to x1, x2, x3. Also, εabc is the Levi-Civita antisymmetric tensor.

M

16

∆ = −

∂R4

+

(2.12)

where ∆ is a certain boundary term

(cid:90)
and on a large hemisphere(cid:112)(cid:126)x2 + y2 >> 1.
to prove that if A, φ approach the Nahm pole solution for y → 0 and for(cid:112)(cid:126)x2 + y2 → ∞, then they

Now to get a vanishing theorem that will say that the global Nahm pole solution is the only
+ that obeys Nahm pole boundary conditions, we need to do the following. We have

(I have omitted some further terms in ∆.) ∆ is the sum of a contribution at the boundary y = 0

Tr (φ ∧ F + . . . ) .

solution on R4

approach it fast enough so that ∆ = 0. Once this is established, the Weitzenbock formula will say
that a KW solution that satisﬁes the boundary condition must have I(cid:48) = 0. But I(cid:48) was constructed
so that it vanishes for and only for the Nahm pole solution.

To ﬁnd the expected behavior of a solution for y → 0 is a matter of looking at an ODE in which
one ignores the (cid:126)x dependence, since that is nonsingular. In eﬀect, then, we just have to look at the
eigenvalues of the linearization of Nahm’s equation (or more exactly a doubled version of Nahm’s
equation with A as well as φ). Half of the linearized eigenvalues are negative and half are positive.
The Nahm pole boundary condition amounts to setting to 0 the coeﬃcients of perturbations with
negative eigenvalues, and allowing the positive ones. The positive eigenvalues are large enough to
ensure that ∆ = 0 when the Nahm pole boundary condition is obeyed.

no contribution to ∆ at(cid:112)(cid:126)x2 + y2 → ∞, one needs to look at the eigenvalues of the “angular” part of

This shows that there is no contribution to ∆ from the boundary at y = 0. To show that there is

the operator L, which is an operator on a hemisphere S3
+ with Nahm pole boundary conditions along
the boundary. Those eigenvalues determine how fast a solution will vanish at inﬁnity, assuming
that it does vanish at inﬁnity. Again the spectrum is such that there is no contribution to ∆.

This leads to the nonlinear vanishing theorem – the global Nahm pole solution is the only
solution on the half-space that satisﬁes the boundary conditions. Much the same argument proves
a linearization of the same statement: the operator L obtained by linearizing around the Nahm
pole solution has trivial kernel (and hence also trivial cokernel, since L is conjugate to −L†).

Together with the machinery of uniformly degenerate elliptic operators, this leads to the ellip-
ticity of the Nahm pole boundary condition in the absence of knots. But what are we supposed
to say in the presence of knots? As already noted, the knot will be in the boundary (ﬁg. 10).
To incorporate a knot in the boundary, we introduce a reﬁnement of the Nahm pole boundary
condition, such that (A, φ) obeys the Nahm pole boundary condition at a generic boundary point
away from a knot, but has some more subtle behavior near the knot.

To describe what this more subtle behavior should be, we consider the case that the knot is
+ with a knot that lives on a straight line K in the

locally a straight line R ⊂ R3, so we work on R4
boundary (ﬁg. 11).

The idea is going to be to ﬁnd a singular model solution in the presence of the knot. This

17

Figure 11: A model situation in which a knot is represented by a straight line K = R in the boundary of a
half-space R4
+.

Figure 12: Assuming translation invariance along the K direction in ﬁg. 11, we reduce to R3
with the knot now represented by a point p in the boundary.

+ = R2 × R+,

18

solution will coincide with the Nahm pole solution near a boundary point away from K, but it will
look diﬀerent near a point of K. The model solution will depend on the choice of an irreducible
representation R∨ of the dual group G∨. Then a boundary condition is deﬁned by saying that one
only allows solutions of the KW equations that look like the model solution near a knot.

For this to make sense, the model solution must look the same near any point of K, so we
assume that the model solution is invariant under translations along K. So we reduce to equations
on R2 × R+ with the knot now represented by a point p ∈ R2 (ﬁg. 12).

Once we reduce to 3 dimensions (and assume vanishing of A1 and φy in a way that can be
motivated by the Weitzenbock formula) the KW equations become tractable. Pick coordinates so
that x1 runs along the knot K; x2, x3 parametrize the normal plane to K in the boundary; and y
measures the distance from the boundary. Deﬁne the three operators

D1 = D2 + iD3 =
∂
∂x2
D2 = Dy − i[φ1, · ] =
D3 = [φ2 − iφ3, · ],

∂
∂y

+ i

+ [A2 + iA3, · ]

∂
∂x3
+ [Ay − iφ1, · ]

and also the “moment map”

µ = F23 − [φ2, φ3] − Dyφ1.

The KW equations in this situation become
0 = [Di,Dj],

i, j = 1, . . . , 3

along with a “moment map” condition

µ = 0.

(2.13)

(2.14)

These equations are a sort of hybrid of three much-studied equations in the mathematics of gauge
theory. If we drop D1 (by assuming that the ﬁelds are independent of x2 and x3 and that A2 =
A3 = 0), we get Nahm’s equation; if we drop D2 (by assuming that the ﬁelds are independent of y
and that Ay = φ1 = 0) we get Hitchin’s equation; and if we drop D3 (by setting φ2 = φ3 = 0), we
get the Bogomolny equation.

The full system of equations is tractable for the same reason each of those three specializations
is. There are two key facts: (a) the equations [Di,Dj] = 0 are invariant under GC-valued gauge
transformations (GC is the complexiﬁcation of G); (b) the combination of setting µ = 0 and dividing
by G-valued gauge transformations is equivalent to forgetting the condition µ = 0 and dividing by
GC-valued gauge transformations. This means that the solutions can be understood in terms of
complex geometry.

It is reasonable to expect that the model solution possesses the symmetries of the knot. So
we assume that the model solution is invariant under a rotation of the boundary R2 around the
point p ∈ R2 at which the knot lives, and also invariant under a scaling of R2 × R+ keeping p ﬁxed.

19

With these assumptions, the equations [Di,Dj] = µ = 0 reduce to aﬃne Toda equations which are
integrable. One can ﬁnd all the solutions in closed form, and the solutions that satisfy the Nahm
pole boundary condition away from the knot are classiﬁed by an irreducible representation R∨ of
the dual group G∨. These solutions were found for G = SO(3), G∨ = SU (2) in [3] and more
generally in [24].

How would one go about proving that the KW equations with a boundary condition deﬁned
by one of these model equations is a well-posed (elliptic) problem? Basically, modulo generalities
about uniformly degenerate elliptic operators, we need to show that the operator L obtained by
linearizing around one of these solutions has no kernel or cokernel. It is again suﬃcient to show
that the kernel vanishes, since L† is conjugate to −L.

Just as in the absence of a knot, we will actually ﬁnd a nonlinear analog of the vanishing of the
kernel of L: any solution of the KW equations on R3 × R+ (with the knot as an inﬁnite straight
line in the boundary, as before) that is asymptotic to the model solution both along the boundary
and at inﬁnity actually coincides with it.

The vanishing results we want are the sort that often follow from a Weitzenbock formula. But
none of the Weitzenbock formulas that we considered before are well-adapted to the presence of
a knot. Even the more subtle Weitzenbock formula that includes the Nahm pole singularity away
from a knot

(cid:90)

−

Tr(cid:0)V 2 + W 2(cid:1) = I(cid:48) + ∆

(2.15)
does not give any useful information, because I(cid:48) (which is the sum of squares of quantities that
vanish in the Nahm pole solution without a knot) is divergent in the presence of a knot so I(cid:48) will
be +∞ and hence ∆ will be −∞ with a knot present.

M

So we need a new Weitzenbock formula. We imitate what we did before. We ﬁnd a collection
of quantities Xi whose vanishing characterizes the model solution. (Some obvious Xi are real and
imaginary parts of [Di,Dj], and also µ; the others are quantities like [φi, φy] that vanish because
the model solution has A1 = φy = 0.) Then if

we have to hope that there is an identity

(cid:90)

I(cid:48)(cid:48) = −(cid:88)
Tr (V ∧ (cid:63)V + W ∧ (cid:63)W) = I(cid:48)(cid:48) +(cid:98)∆,

Tr X 2
i ,

R3×R+

i

(cid:90)

−

(2.16)

(2.17)

R3×R+

where (cid:98)∆ is a new boundary term. It turns out that there is indeed an identity like this.
We still need to show that (cid:98)∆ = 0 in the case of a solution that obeys the KW equations and is

asymptotic near the knot to the model solution. For this, one needs to know what is the asymptotic
behavior near the boundary and at inﬁnity of a solution of the KW equations. We already know
the behavior at a generic boundary point, which was used in our proof of the well-posedness of the

20

Figure 13: To prove the vanishing theorem in the presence of a knot, one has to study the angular operator
near a singular point on the boundary. The angular operator is deﬁned on the indicated hemisphere.

Nahm pole boundary condition without a knot. To ﬁnd the behavior near the knot and also at
inﬁnity, we now need to solve the angular part of the equation on a 2d hemisphere S2

+ (ﬁg. 13).

contribution to (cid:98)∆ either near p or at inﬁnity. This fact together with the relevant Weitzenbock

Again it turns out that the eigenvalues of the angular operator are favorable, so there is no
formula imply that a solution of the KW equations on R3 ×R+ that is asymptotic on the boundary
and at inﬁnity to the model solution with the knot actually coincides with that model solution.
A linearized version of the same argument shows that the kernel of L vanishes, which is what we
actually needed to know for ellipticity.

This is the main step in showing that L is a Fredholm operator in the presence of an arbitrary
knot K embedded in any three-manifold W . Some details are still needed to show that this gives
an elliptic boundary condition for the nonlinear KW equations in the general case of a curved
knot [21].

A Some Physics Background

In this appendix, I will brieﬂy describe some physics background to the treatment of singly-graded
Khovanov homology in Lecture One. Only a bare outline of the string/M-theory context and the
framework of [3] for doubly-graded Khovanov homology will be given. I aim primarily to explain
what is diﬀerent for the singly-graded theory.

The starting point is the existence of a six-dimensional superconformal ﬁeld theory with (0, 2) su-
persymmetry, associated to any simply-laced Lie group G, or more precisely to its Dynkin diagram.
This theory has a Spin(5) group of R-symmetries. Making use of a subgroup F = Spin(2) ⊂ Spin(5),
the theory can be topologically twisted in such a way that it can be compactiﬁed on a Riemann

21

class S, as studied in [25]. They have an R-symmetry group (cid:98)F = (Spin(3) × Spin(2))/Z2

surface C to give a four-dimensional theory with N = 2 supersymmetry. These are the theories of
∼= U(2)

(the subgroup of Spin(5) that commutes with F ). Using the Spin(3) factor, a theory of class S
can be topologically twisted and compactiﬁed on a four-manifold M in a way that preserves one
supercharge Q. This gives a theory on M ×C that is topological along M and holomorphic along C.
(The holomorphy along C means, for example, that the cohomology of Q acting on local operators
on M × C varies homomorphically on C.) The topological-holomorphic theory on M × C still has

an F = Spin(2) symmetry, because F commutes with the group (cid:98)F that was used in the twisting.

The underlying six-dimensional (0, 2) model admits half-BPS surface operators that can be
supported on any two-manifold U in six dimensions. However, when the theory is formulated on
M × C as summarized in the last paragraph, if we wish to preserve the supercharge Q of the
topological-holomorphic theory, the possible choices of U are quite limited. U must be of the form
p × C, where p is a point in M , or Σ × q, where Σ ⊂ M is a two-manifold and q is a point in C.
The reason for this is essentially that any (complete, connected) complex submanifold of C is C
itself or a point q ∈ C. For constructing Khovanov homology, we take U = Σ × q.

rotations of R4 (combined with a suitable element of Spin(3) ⊂ (cid:98)F ) but not under more general

To get singly-graded Khovanov homology, we take M to be simply R4, and C to be a cylinder
R× S1. The six-manifold M × C is then simply R4 × R× S1. The supercharge Q is invariant under
rotations of R4 × R. Now we use the fact that the (0, 2) model, when formulated on M(cid:48) × S1 for
any ﬁve-manifold M(cid:48), with the radius of M(cid:48) being much greater than that of S1, reduces at long
distances on M(cid:48) to maximally supersymmetric gauge theory, with gauge group G. In the context
of the topological-holomorphic theory described above, this reduction is valid without taking any
large distance limit. The resulting supersymmetric gauge theory on M(cid:48) = R4×R is infrared-free (in
sharp contrast to the underlying (0, 2) model in six dimensions) and can be analyzed by classical
methods.
In particular, the condition for Q-invariance becomes the HW equations, which were
mentioned in Lecture One. These are equations for a pair consisting of a gauge ﬁeld A, and a ﬁeld
B on R4 × R that is an adjoint-valued section of the pullback to R4 × R of the bundle of selfdual
two-forms on R4.

A surface operator in six dimensions supported on Σ× q reduces in the gauge theory description
to an ’t Hooft-like surface operator supported on Σ × q(cid:48), where q ∈ R × S1 projects to q(cid:48) ∈ R.
A solution of the HW equations in the presence of this surface operator is supposed to have a
singularity along Σ × q(cid:48). This codimension three singularity should be modeled on the standard
codimension three singularity of the Bogomolny equations, suitably embedded in the HW equations
with gauge group G.

To categorify the quantum knot invariants associated to a representation R∨ of a simply-laced3
compact Lie group G∨, one studies the HW equations with gauge group G (the Langlands-GNO
dual of G∨, which in particular has the same Lie algebra as G∨ if G is simply-laced), and with
the appropriate singularity along Σ × q(cid:48). The appropriate singularity is obtained, as discussed in
Lecture One, by embedding a singular U (1) solution in G using the homomorphism ρ : u(1) → t ⊂ g

3If G∨ is not simply-laced, one requires a reﬁnement described in section 5.5 of [3].

22

that is dual to R∨.

The HW equations on R4 × R are compatible with the familiar codimension three singularity
on a two-manifold V ⊂ R4 × R if and only if V is of the form Σ × q(cid:48) with Σ ⊂ R4, q(cid:48) ∈ R. This
statement is easily veriﬁed by inspection of the HW equations. The explanation that we have
given here starting with the (0, 2) model serves to explain “why” it is true. The restriction to
V ⊂ R4 × q(cid:48) ⊂ R4 × R is completely essential for getting knot theory out of this construction, since
the relevant topology would disappear if V were free to move in ﬁve dimensions. For example,
Khovanov homology arises in the “time”-independent case Σ = Rt × K ⊂ Rt × R3 = R4, where K
is a knot in R3 and the ﬁrst factor in R4 = Rt × R3 is parametrized by the “time.” If V were free
to vary in R4 × R, then K would be free to vary in R3 × R (the product of the last two factors
in R4 × R = Rt × R3 × R), and could be trivially unknotted. Much the same point was made in
Lecture One. A more general V (not of the time-independent form Rt × K) is used to deﬁne the
“morphisms” of Khovanov homology.

What we have described corresponds to the singly-graded version of Khovanov homology (with
only the cohomological grading and no “q”-grading). The single grading comes from the symmetry
group F ∼= Spin(2) that was maintained throughout the construction. To get doubly-graded Kho-
vanov homology, one takes C to be not C∗ = R × S1 but C. This is done by adding to C∗ a point
q0 “at inﬁnity.” C admits an S1 action, leaving ﬁxed the point q0. In the underlying (0, 2) model,
one considers a surface operator supported on U = Σ × q0. Reduction of M × C on the orbits of
S1 leads now to a description in terms of gauge theory on M × R+ (where R+, a half-line, is the
quotient C/S1). The S1 action leads to the desired second grading. This doubly-graded version of
the construction was the main subject of [3], and the details will not be repeated here.

Research supported in part by NSF Grant PHY-1314311. I thank M. Abouzaid, C. Manolescu,

and R. Mazzeo for discussions.

References

[1] S. Gukov, A. S. Schwarz, and C. Vafa, “Khovanov-Rozansky Homology And Topological

Strings,” Lett. Math. Phys. 74 (2005) 53-74, hep-th/0412243.

[2] H. Ooguri and C. Vafa, “Knot Invariants And Topological Strings,” Nucl. Phys. B577 (2000)

419, hep-th/9912123.

[3] E. Witten, “Fivebranes And Knots,” Quantum Topology 3 (2012) 1-137, arXiv:1101.3216.

[4] E. Witten, “Khovanov Homology and Gauge Theory,” in R. Kirby, V. Krushkal, and Z. Wang,
eds., Proceedings Of The FreedmanFest (Mathematical Sciences Publishers, 2012) 291-308,
arXiv:1108.3103.

[5] E. Witten, “Two Lectures On The Jones Polynomial And Khovanov Homology,”

arXiv:1401.6996.

23

[6] P. Seidel and I. Smith, “A Link Invariant From The Symplectic Geometry of Nilpotent Slices,”

Duke Math. J. 134 (2006) 453-514.

[7] C Manolescu, “Nilpotent Slices, Hilbert Schemes, and the Jones Polynomial,” Duke Math. J.

132 (2006) 311-369.

[8] M. Abouzaid and I. Smith, “Khovanov Homology From Floer Cohomology,” arXiv:1504.01230.

[9] V. F. R. Jones, “A Polynomial Invariant For Knots Via Von Neumann Algebra,” Bull. Am.

Math. Soc. 12 (1985) 103-11.

[10] M. F. Atiyah, “Floer Homology,” Progr. Math. 133 (1995) 105.

[11] D. Gaiotto and E. Witten, “Knot Invariants From Four-Dimensional Gauge Theory,” Adv.

Theor. Math. Phys. 16 (2012) 935, arXiv:1106.4789.

[12] J. Kamnitzer, “The Beilinson-Drinfeld Grassmannian and Symplectic Knot Homology,” in D.
A. Ellwood (ed.), Grassmannians, Moduli Spaces, and Vector Bundles (Clay Math Institute,
Cambridge MA and American Mathematical Society, Providence RI, 2011) 81-94.

[13] S. Cautis and J. Kamnitzer, “Knot Homology Via Derived Categories Of Coherent Sheaves, I.

The sl(2) Case,” Duke Math. J. 142 (2008) 511-588.

[14] G. ’t Hooft, “On The Phase Transition Towards Permanent Quark Conﬁnement,” Nucl. Phys.

B138 (1978) 1-25.

[15] A. Kapustin and E. Witten, “Electric-Magnetic Duality And The Geometric Langlands Pro-

gram,” Commun. Numb. Th. Physics 1 (2007) 1-236.

[16] S. Bigelow, “A Homological Deﬁnition Of The Jones Polynomial,” Geometry and Topology

Monographs, Volume 4: Invariants of Knots and 3-Manifolds (Kyoto, 2001), pp. 29-41.

[17] R. Lawrence, “A Functorial Approach to the One-Variable Jones Polynomial,” J. Diﬀ. Geom.

37 (1993) 689-710.

[18] A. Haydys, “Fukaya-Seidel Category And Gauge Theory,” J. Symp. Geom. 13 (2015) 151-207,

arXiv:1010.2353.

[19] S. Gokov, P. Putrov, and C. Vafa, “Fivebranes and 3-manifold Homology,” arXiv:1602.05302.

[20] R. Mazzeo and E. Witten, “The Nahm Pole Boundary Condition,” in The Inﬂuence Of
Solomon Lefschetz in Geometry and Topology, ed. L. Katzarkov et. al. (American Mathe-
matical Society, 2014), arXiv:1311.3167.

[21] R. Mazzeo and E. Witten, “The Nahm Pole Boundary Condition With Knots,” to appear.

[22] W. Nahm, “All Selfdual Multimonopoles for Arbitrary Gauge Groups” (NATO ASI, 1983).

[23] K. Corlette, “Flat G-Bundles With Canonical Metric,” J. Diﬀ. Geom. 28 (1988) 361-82.

[24] V. Mikhaylov, “On The Solutions Of Generalized Bogomolny Equations,” JHEP 05 (2012)

112, arXiv:1202.4848.

24

[25] D. Gaiotto, “N = 2 Dualities,” JHEP 1208 (2012) 034, arXiv:0904.2715.

25

