6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
2
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
9
0
9
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Covariant Magnetic Connection Hypersurfaces

F. Pegoraro

Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit`a di Pisa, Italy

francesco.pegoraro@unipi.it

Accepted for publication in Journal of Plasma Physics

Abstract

In the single ﬂuid, nonrelativistic, ideal-Magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) plasma descrip-
tion magnetic ﬁeld lines play a fundamental role by deﬁning dynamically preserved “magnetic
connections” between plasma elements. Here we show how the concept of magnetic connec-
tion needs to be generalized in the case of a relativistic MHD description where we require
covariance under arbitrary Lorentz transformations. This is performed by deﬁning 2-D mag-
netic connection hypersurfaces in the 4-D Minkowski space. This generalization accounts for
the loss of simultaneity between spatially separated events in different frames and is expected
to provide a powerful insight into the 4-D geometry of electromagnetic ﬁelds when E · B = 0.

Pacs: 52.27.Ny, 03.50.De, 52.35.Vd

1 Introduction

The dynamics of large scale relativistic plasma conﬁgurations plays an important role in our un-
derstanding of high energy astrophysical phenomena such as, just to mention a recently discovered
one, the ﬂaring of the Crab nebula [1].
Even without including general relativistic effects, as
would be the case, e.g., in the neighbourhood of a black hole (see for example the system of equa-
tions investigated by [2]), the phenomena we need to describe involve velocities close to the speed
of light and internal energies that can be larger than the electron rest mass energy. Furthermore
relativistic plasmas with very large energy densities have been produced in the laboratory in laser
plasma experiments and it has been stressed that such experiments can help us to understand high
energy astrophysical phenomena (see e.g., [3]).

With this in mind, several concepts that have been introduced for nonrelativistic plasmas need
to be extended to relativistic regimes. In such a generalization space and time properties are nec-
essarily combined since the basic invariance properties of the matter equations are now given in
terms of the Lorentz group of transformations between different reference frames. This is particu-
larly important since, in the presence of very large velocity differences between different parts of
the plasma conﬁguration, there may not be a clear way of deﬁning a preferred reference frame on
physics grounds. In addition, the observer reference frame may move with a relativistic velocity
with respect to the plasma under observation and thus observe as simultaneous events that are not
simultaneous in the plasma frame.

1

For phenomena occurring on macroscopic scales, i.e. on space and time scales large on the
characteristic microscopic scales of the particle dynamics, the single ﬂuid nonrelativistic MHD
plasma description has been extended (see [4, 5]) and used in numerical simulations (see e.g., [6])
so as to include relativistic ﬂuid velocities and relativistic internal energy densities. A Hamilto-
nian reformulation of ideal relativistic MHD dynamics in terms of noncanonical variables has been
recently derived in [7].
In this process of generalization a number of basic phenomena of nonrel-
ativistic MHD, such as e.g. magnetic reconnection, have been reconsidered in relativistic plasma
regimes both in the laboratory (see [8, 9]), and in astrophysics (see [10, 11]). In particular in the
astrophysical context relativistic magnetic reconnection has been considered mostly as a mecha-
nism of energy conversion, usually choosing a preferred frame of reference, possibly thought of
as an “average comoving frame”, i.e. as a frame in which the plasma region under consideration
is globally at rest. As mentioned above, such an approach may not be fully unambiguous in sit-
uations where very large velocity relativistic variations can be present between different plasma
regions. This is so in particular from the observational point of view when describing magnetic
reconnection structures since magnetic ﬁelds and electric ﬁelds are transformed one into the other
when seen in a Lorentz boosted reference frame.
Thus an important point in the relativistic extension of the MHD plasma description is to provide
a frame independent deﬁnition of magnetic reconnection. However such a deﬁnition is neither
obvious from a theoretical nor from an observational point of view since, as already mentioned,
the distinction between electric and magnetic ﬁelds is frame dependent and the tracing of ﬁeld
lines, which are only deﬁned in coordinate space at ﬁxed time, is also frame dependent due to the
violation of simultaneity in different reference frames of events at different spatial locations.

Although a clearcut deﬁnition of magnetic reconnection is not simple to formulate even for a
non relativistic plasma, its common deﬁnition is not simply limited to the fact that magnetic energy
is converted to kinetic and/or internal plasma energy but refers to the local violation of the magnetic
topology and, in particular, to the local breaking of the structure of magnetic connections.
Magnetic connections are deﬁned by the fundamental property of ideal MHD (see [12]) that if two
plasma elements, moving with plasma in a smooth ﬂow, are connected at time t by a magnetic ﬁeld
line then at any following time there exists a magnetic ﬁeld line that connects them. This property
is the conceptual basis from which the expressions that the magnetic ﬁeld is frozen in the plasma
and that ﬁeld lines move with the plasma are derived.
Thus in order to deﬁne magnetic reconnection in a covariant way we must ﬁrst obtain a covariant
deﬁnition of magnetic connections. Again, such a deﬁnition is not a priori obvious because of two
already mentioned related reasons: the distinction between electric and magnetic ﬁelds and the
very concept of ﬁeld lines are frame dependent. This point was explicitly addressed in [13] where
it was shown that the covariant formulation of magnetic connections can be restored by means of a
time resetting projection along the trajectories of the plasma elements. This projection is consistent
with the ideal Ohm’s law and compensates for the loss of simultaneity in different reference frames
between spatially separated events.

In the present paper we address this same issue again and show that the time resetting along
the trajectories of the ﬂuid elements introduced in [13] is essentially equivalent to a redeﬁnition of
the geometrical object that we use in order to deﬁne magnetic connections. We argue that, while
in 3-D (coordinate) space magnetic connections are deﬁned by 1-D curves (ﬁeld lines), in the 4-D
Minkowski space they are deﬁned by 2-D hypersurfaces that are generated by a suitably deﬁned
magnetic (space-like) 4-vector ﬁeld and by the velocity (time-like) 4-vector ﬁeld of the plasma.
In fact, following a somewhat different line of approach from the one adopted in [13], we show

2

that, if the electromagnetic (e.m) ﬁeld tensor satisﬁes an ideal Ohm’s law, it exhibits special geo-
metrical properties that are simply the consequence of the homogeneous Maxwell’s equations and
that make it possible to deﬁne such 2-D hypersurfaces so that, if in a given frame two plasma ele-
ments in 4-D Minkowski space lie on the same 2-D hypersurface, they do so in any other reference
frame.
We call these 2-D hypersurfaces (with one space-like and one time-like tangent vector ﬁeld) Co-
variant Magnetic Connection Hypersurfaces, or connection hypersurfaces for short. The standard
magnetic connections in 3-D space can then be recovered in any chosen reference frame by taking
sections of these surfaces at a ﬁxed (in that frame) time. We stress that these 2-D hypersurfaces
bear no relation to the 3-D magnetic surfaces of nonrelativistic MHD that, if generalized to 4-D
Minkowski space, would involve 3-D “volumes”.

The present paper stops at this result, just after noting that the violation of the ideal Ohm’s law
leads to a violation of the geometrical properties of the e.m. ﬁeld tensor that make it possible to
deﬁne the connection hypersurfaces. Thus in this 4-D framework magnetic reconnection, caused
by a local violation of the ideal Ohm’s law, can be interpreted in a frame independent way as a
local “piercing and merging” of connection hypersurfaces. These lose their identity only locally,
in exactly the same way as magnetic ﬁeld lines do in the standard 3-D space setting. The physical
and observational consequences of this deﬁnition will be investigated in detail in a later paper.
However, even remaining within the validity of the ideal Ohm’s law, i.e. without allowing for
magnetic reconnection to occur, important open questions remain to be investigated: in particular
how to generalize the study of the topological properties such as, e.g., ﬁeld line braiding (see e.g.,
[14]), that have been investigated within a ﬁxed frame 3-D description to the study of the properties
of connection hypersurfaces in 4-D Minkowski space. In the present paper only some very general
properties of the magnetic helicity 4-vector ﬁeld are discussed and are shown to allow us to deﬁne
a Lorentz-scalar Lagrangian invariant that is advected by the plasma motion.

Before entering the detailed derivation of the covariant connection hypersurfaces we stress that
their deﬁnition only requires that an ideal Ohm’s law be valid, supplemented by the homogeneous
Maxwell’s equations. The inhomogeneous Maxwell’s equations, that relate the e.m. ﬁeld tensor
to the charge and current densities and that thus determine the ﬁeld dynamics from the plasma
dynamics, are not directly involved in the deﬁnition of the connection hypersurfaces which, in
this sense, are more general than relativistic MHD and thus apply under more general conditions..
Depending on the plasma description adopted, the connection hypersurfaces can either relate to the
single ﬂuid description or to a selected species in the plasma, generally the lighter one. Physically,
the main assumption that is made is that kinetic effects can be neglected in the chosen regime
for this lighter species and that a ﬂuid velocity can be deﬁned, independently of whether it is a
single ﬂuid velocity, as in MHD, or e.g., the electron velocity. We also note (see e.g., [16]) that
electron inertia effects and electron thermal effects (for an isotropic and isentropic thermodynamic
closure) can be included by a suitable redeﬁnition of the electromagnetic ﬁeld tensor. In fact, this
redeﬁned ﬁeld tensor obeys an ideal Ohm’s law and a set of equations analogous in form to the
homogeneous Maxwell equations. On the other hand dissipative effects, either resistive or arising
from the “friction term” due to incoherent high frequency radiation in fully relativistic regimes,
can lead to violation of the ideal Ohm’s law, in particular in the presence of a nonlinear plasma
dynamics that leads to the formation of smaller and smaller space and time scales. If these effects
are local, they provide the local breaking and merging of the connection hypersurfaces involved in
magnetic reconnection. Finally the case of an electron-positron plasma where there are two light
species, and that is quite important for astrophysics, would require within the present framework
the additional assumption that both species satisfy an ideal Ohms law (not necessarily the same).

3

2 Ideal Ohm’s law

An important feature of the ideal 3-D Ohm’s law

E + v × B/c = 0, ⇒ E · B = 0,

(1)

with v the 3-D plasma ﬂuid velocity ﬁeld and E and B the electric and the magnetic ﬁelds, is that
it is in no sense restricted to a nonrelativistic plasma regime or to a preferred reference frame. In
fact it can be written (unmodiﬁed) in the fully covariant form (see e.g., [15])

Fµν uν = 0,

(2)

where Fµν is the e.m. ﬁeld tensor, uµ is a timelike 4-vector which we interpret as the ﬂuid velocity
4-vector ﬁeld of the plasma (or of the plasma species with respect to which the magnetic ﬁeld is
frozen, see e.g. the generalized formulation given in [16, 17, 18]).
From Eq.(1) and Faraday’s equation ∇ × E + (1/c) ∂B/∂t = 0, the 3-D magnetic equation

∂B/∂t − ∇ × (v × B) = 0

(3)

follows, together with the 3-D connection theorem [12] mentioned in the Introduction: if at t = 0
we have dl × B = 0, where dl is the the vector ﬁeld tangent to a curve connecting two plasma
elements, i.e., if the two elements are connected by a magnetic ﬁeld line, then dl × B = 0 for all
t since

(dl × B) = −(dl × B) (∇ · v) − [(dl × B) × ∇] v.

(4)

d
dt

Here d/dt is the Lagrangian time derivative along the plasma element motion.
While the ideal Ohm’s law (1) can be set in an explicitly covariant form (2), the interpretation
of Eq.(4) in terms of the conservation of magnetic connections cannot be directly transferred to a
different reference frame, as can be seen from the fact that a Lorentz boost will in general add a
time component to the transformed vector ﬁeld dl′ so that it will no longer be possible to interpret
it as the vector ﬁeld tangent to a curve in 3-D (coordinate) space.
However the simple fact that Ohm’s law is fully covariant suggests that it must be possible to
reformulate the connection theorem in a frame independent way.

2.1 Lichnerowicz-Anile representation

In contrast to [13], here we adopt the two 4-vector ﬁelds representation [4, 5, 7] of the e.m. ﬁeld
tensor Fµν

Fµν = εµνλσbλuσ + [uµeν − uν eµ] ,

(5)

where bµ is the 4-vector magnetic ﬁeld and eµ is the 4-vector electric ﬁeld, with uµeµ = 0 and
uµbµ = 0. The 4-vectors eµ and bµ are related to the standard electric and magnetic ﬁelds E and
B in 3-D space by

bµ = γ(B + E × v , B · v ),

(6)

and

(7)
with eµbµ = E · B. We have adopted the Minkowski metric tensor ηµν deﬁned by (+, +, +, −)
and normalized 3-D velocities v to the speed of light: γ is the relativistic Lorentz factor and
uµ = γ(v, 1) and uµuµ = −1. The orthogonality conditions uµeµ = uµbµ = 0 make this

eµ = γ(E + v × B , −E · v),

4

representation unique.
In the following we will call this representation the Lichnerowicz-Anile
(LA) representation. The LA representation is physically convenient as it allows us to separate
covariantly the magnetic and the electric parts of the e.m. ﬁeld tensor on dynamical grounds, i.e.
relative to the plasma velocity 4-vector ﬁeld uµ. In the local rest frame of a plasma element the
time components of eµ and of bµ vanish, while their space components reduce to the standard 3-D
electric and magnetic ﬁelds.
A corresponding representation holds for the dual tensor Gµν ≡ εµναβ Fαβ/2 with eµ and bµ
interchanged. Thus:

Gµν = εµνλσuλeσ + [uµbν − uν bµ], with eµ = Fµν uν

and bµ = Gµν uν.

(8)

If the ideal Ohm’s law Fµν uν = 0 holds, the electric 4-vector eµ vanishes, the tensors Fµν and

Gµν have rank two and can be written as

Fµν = εµνλσbλuσ ,

Gµν = [uµbν − uν bµ] ,

with

Fµν bν = Fµν uν = 0,

Fµν Gνµ = 0 → E · B = 0,

and bµbµ = Gµν Gνµ/2 = Fµν Fνµ/2.

In this case we can use eµ = 0 in order to express bµ in terms of B and v only as

Note that in general ∂µbµ 6= 0 while from Maxwell’s equations we have

bµ = γ(B/γ 2 + v (v · B) , B · v).

and thus

∂µGµν = 0,

∂µbµ = Gµν(∂µuν) = bν(∂τ uν),

where ∂τ = uµ∂µ with τ the proper time and ∂τ uν the 4-acceleration of the plasma element.
Unless explicitly stated in the rest of this article we will assume eµ ≡ 0.

3 Covariant magnetic 4-vector ﬁeld equation

From Eqs.(9) and (13) we obtain the “magnetic vector ﬁeld equation”

uµ∂µbν − bµ∂µ uν + bν∂µuµ − uν∂µbµ = 0,

i.e.

∂τ bν = uν∂µbµ − bν∂µuµ + bµ∂µ uν

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

which differs “in form” from the standard 3-D magnetic ﬁeld equation, as obtained e.g.
from
Eq.(3) by expanding the ∇ × (v × B) term, because bµ is not divergence-free. Inserting Eq.(14)
into Eq.(16) we obtain the magnetic equation in relativistic Lagrangian variables

∂τ bν = uν bα(∂τ uα) − bν∂µuµ + bµ∂µ uν

where only 3 components are independent. Eq.(17) can also be written in projection form as

(δν

α + uν uα) ∂τ bα = bµ∂µ uν − bν∂µuµ.

5

(17)

(18)

3.1 Frobenius condition and 2-D Hypersurfaces

Equation (15) can be viewed as a Frobenius involution condition for the 4-vector ﬁelds bµ and uµ.
This condition, which is a consequence of the homogeneous Maxwell’s equations ∂µGµν = 0, i.e.
of Faraday’s equation and of B being divergence-free, and of the ideal Ohm’s law, allows us1 to
construct in the 4-D space-time 2-D hypersurfaces generated by the vector ﬁelds uµ and bµ.
These hypersurfaces, which we call connection hypersurfaces because they will allow us to recast
the connection theorem (4) in a covariant form, see Sec.5, are the 4-D counterpart of magnetic
ﬁeld lines in 3-D space and are not related to the magnetic surfaces deﬁned in 3-D by the equation
B · ∇ψ = 0.

4 Gauge freedom in the LA representation

We can assume, without loss of generality, that the velocity 4-vector uµ satisﬁes a continuity
equation of the form

∂µ(nuµ) = 0,

(19)

where n can be taken to play the role of the proper density of the plasma element and nuµ of the
density 4-vector.
As shown in detail in [7] a gauge freedom is allowed in the deﬁnition of the magnetic 4-vector
ﬁeld bµ in the LA representation provided we relax the orthogonality condition bµuµ = 0:

bµ → hµ ≡ bµ + g uµ,

(20)

where g is a free scalar ﬁeld. Different choices of the gauge ﬁeld g allow us to impose speciﬁc
conditions on hµ. If, as in [7], we choose the divergence gauge

we have ∂µhµ = 0, while, if we take in a given frame2 the magnetic gauge

∂τ (g/n) = −(1/n) ∂µbµ,

g = −v · B,

(21)

(22)

we can make the time component of hµ vanish and h || B in that frame.
Note that, since the expression for Gµν is unchanged if we insert hµ for bµ in Eq.(9), the Frobenius
condition (15) holds independently of the gauge. Thus the connection-hypersurfaces generated by
the 4-vector ﬁelds uµ and bµ can also be seen as generated by the 4-vector ﬁelds uµ and hµ. For
the sake of notational clarity in the following we will denote by hµ
|| the 4-vector ﬁeld corresponding
to the magnetic gauge (22) and speciﬁcally by hµ without any additional mark the 4-vector ﬁeld
corresponding to the divergence gauge (21).

5 Covariant Connection theorem

Extending the procedure developed in Sec.2 to 4-D Minkowski space, we consider in a given frame
a magnetic ﬁeld line ℓ at a ﬁxed time in 4-D Minkowski space with tangent (spacelike) 4-vector

1Provided bµ 6= 0, see Sec.7
2The quantity −v · B is a Lorentz scalar. Its expression in a frame moving with respect to the chosen frame with

velocity 4-vector Vµ is −(Vµbµ)/(Vν uν).

6

In this frame its time component dlo = 0 and the condition Fµν dlν = 0

ﬁeld dlµ.
dl × B = 0 corresponding 3 to the ﬁeld line condition used in Sec.2.
Recalling that the rank of Fµν must be even, the condition Fµνdlν = 0 also implies that dlµ must
be a linear combination of bµ and uµ (aside for the null points of Fµν, see Sec.7) i.e. that it lies on
a connection hypersurface deﬁned in Sec.3.1.

implies

5.1 Time resetting gauge

The condition Fµνdlν = 0 remains valid even without imposing dlo = 0 because of the “time
gauge” freedom dlµ → dˆlµ = dlµ + uµ dλ, with λ a scalar function, i.e. dˆlµ remains in the
hypersurface generated by bµ and uµ.
Conversely, in a boosted frame (where quantities are denoted by a “prime”) the transformed vector
ﬁeld dl′µ will acquire a time component but will still lie on the boosted 2-D hypersurface generated
by the boosted vector ﬁelds b′µ and u′µ. Then, using the time gauge in reverse as done in [13], it
will be possible to set dl′o = 0 without violating the condition in the boosted frame F′
µνdl′ν = 0
because of the ideal Ohm’s law.

5.2 Magnetic gauge

After performing the time resetting gauge, using the magnetic gauge given by Eq.(22) we can
bring the boosted 4-vector ﬁeld b′µ to the form h′µ
|| = (0, B′/γ). Then in the boosted frame
F′

µνdl′ν = 0 implies dl′ × B′ = 0.

This proves that it is possible to deﬁne magnetic connections in a covariant way, provided
we refer to connection hypersurfaces instead of connection ﬁeld lines and provided we properly
“gauge” the 4-vector magnetic ﬁeld bµ and the tangent (spacelike) 4-vector ﬁeld dlµ within the
connection hypersurface in order to compensate for the mixing between 3-D magnetic and electric
ﬁelds under a Lorentz boost and for the loss of simultaneity in different frames.
Magnetic connections in 3-D space can then be recovered in any chosen reference frame by taking
sections of these surfaces at a ﬁxed (in that frame) time.

6 Coordinates on Connection Hypersurfaces

Choosing instead the divergence gauge (21), the Frobenius condition (15) can be reformulated in
a way that allows us to deﬁne the following two commuting operators

∂τ = (nµ/n)∂µ

and ∂h = (hµ/n)∂µ,

where

∂τ ∂h − ∂h∂τ = [(nµ/n)∂µ(hν/n) − (hµ/n)∂µ(nν/n)] ∂ν

= (1/n)[∂µ(nµhν/n − hµnν/n)] ∂ν = (1/n)[∂µGµν] ∂ν = 0.

(23)

(24)

Then the set of curves on a Connection Hypersurface with tangent ﬁelds nµ/n = uµ and hµ/n
deﬁne a (nonorthogonal, and in general only local) coordinate system on the connection hypersur-
face. From the Minkowski line element ds2 = dxµηµνdxν we obtain the following expression for
line element on a connection hypersurface

ds2 = −dτ 2 + (hµhµ/n2) dh 2 − (2g/n) dh dτ,

(25)

3It includes dl · E = 0 which is satisﬁed if the ideal Ohm law holds

7

where hµhµ = bµbµ − g2 and the gauge function g is deﬁned by Eq.(21).

7 Advected magnetic 4-D Nulls

When using the LA representation to construct the connection-hypersurfaces we have not consid-
ered the null points of the e.m. tensor Fµν explicitly. Note that at these 4-D null points both the
magnetic and the electric ﬁeld vanish, which is a frame independent condition.
Since the velocity 4-vector uµ has no nulls (uµuµ = −1), in the LA representation with eµ = 0 a
4-D null of Fµν implies a 4-D null of bµ and viceversa a null of bµ implies4 a null of B.
A generic local expansion around a null 4-point (placed at the origin of the coordinate system)
truncated at the ﬁrst term reads

bµ = N µ
ν

xν,

ν = 0.
ν is a numerical tensor that in general need not be symmetric5. Then

where uµbµ = 0 ⇒ uµN µ

Here N µ

(26)

Gµν = (N ν
α

uµ − N µ
α

uν) xα

and ∂µGµν = 0 ⇒ N ν
µ

uµ − N µ
µ

uν = 0

(27)

µ

µ = 0 from the r.h.s. of Eq.(26),
uµ = 0. Thus in the instanta-
ν reduces to a 3-D tensor (only its space-space components

at the null. Contracting the latter identity with uν and using uνN ν
we ﬁnd at the 4-D null N µ
µ = 0, i.e. ∂µbµ = 0 at the null and N ν
neous local rest frame of the 4-D null N µ
do not vanish).
Finally we note that, since ∂µbµ = 0 at the null point, from Eq.(16) we ﬁnd that at the null point
∂τ bµ = 0, which can be used to trace along the ﬂuid element trajectory the singularities of the
connection-hypersurfaces that arise at the nulls of bµ.
Furthermore, because of the two above conditions at the null point, we can take the gauge func-
tion g in Eq.(21) equal to zero at the null point so that a null of bµ corresponds to a null of hµ.
Conversely, since bµ cannot be equal to guµ with g 6= 0 because of the orthogonality condition
uµbµ = 0, a null point of hµ must correspond to a null point of bµ and of g.

8 Covariant Magnetic Helicity

As is well known, the homogeneous Maxwell equation ∂µGµν = 0 implies that we can introduce a
4-vector potential ﬁeld Aµ such that Fµν = ∂µAν − ∂ν Aµ. The introduction of the vector potential
allows us for a general e.m. ﬁeld to give a covariant deﬁnition of the 4-vector magnetic helicity in
the form

Kµ ≡ Gµν Aν,

(28)

such that

(29)
The magnetic helicity 4-vector is deﬁned up to a 4-divergence ∂ν(χ Gµν), with χ a scalar ﬁeld,
because of the usual gauge freedom in the deﬁnition of the 4-vector potential Aν → Aν + ∂νχ.
The r.h.s. of Eq.(29) vanishes if the ideal Ohm’s law holds. In this case from Eqs.(9) we ﬁnd

∂µKµ = −Fµν Gνµ/2.

Kµ = uµ(bν Aν) − bµ(uνAν),

(30)

4Such a one to one relationship is not generally true in the case where e

µ 6= 0 where, e.g., a null of B at the

X-point of a reconnecting magnetic ﬁeld does not imply a null of b

µ.

5Its antisymmetric part is related to the current density 4-vector at the null point

8

i.e. Kµ lies on connection-hypersurfaces. From the conditions Fµν uν = 0 and Fµν bν = 0, we
obtain

uµ∂µAν = uµ∂ν Aµ,

bµ∂µAν = bµ∂νAµ,

(31)

and, using ∂µGµν = 0 and Eq.(31), we verify that

∂µKµ = Gµν∂µAν = (uµbν − bµuν)(∂µAν) = bµuν∂µAν − bν uµ∂νAµ ≡ 0.

(32)

If we choose the gauge scalar function χ such that Aµuµ = 0, i.e. if we make the time component
of the 4-vector potential vanish in the local rest frame, from Eqs.(30), (32) and (19) we obtain

∂µ[nµ(bν Aν)/n] = nµ∂µ(bνAν/n) = 0 → ∂τ (bνAν/n) = 0,

(33)

which provides us with a Lagrangian invariant scalar ﬁeld advected by the plasma ﬂow.

9 Conclusions

In this article we have addressed the problem of deﬁning covariant magnetic connections for a
relativistic plasma that obeys the ideal Ohm’s law and have obtained the following main results.

1) We have reformulated the covariant connection theorem discussed in [13] in terms of 2-D

hypersurfaces in 4-D Minkowski space making use of
a) the representation of the electromagnetic ﬁeld tensor in terms of two 4-vector ﬁelds (which we
called the Lichnerowicz-Anile representation) in the case where the ideal Ohm’s law holds,
b) the gauge freedom in the deﬁnition of the magnetic 4-vector ﬁeld,
c) a time-gauge transformation (time resetting) of the 4-vector ﬁeld tangent to the curve connecting
two plasma elements in 4-D space.
We call these hypersurfaces connection hypersurfaces.

2) We have indicated that these connection hypersurfaces take the role, for the full electromag-

netic ﬁeld tensor in 4-D, of the magnetic ﬁeld lines in 3-D.
We thus argue that a covariant deﬁnition of magnetic reconnection may be given in a 4-D frame-
work as a local “piercing and merging” of connection hypersurfaces that lose their identity only
locally (where eµ 6= 0 and the Frobenius condition does not hold), just as magnetic ﬁeld lines do
in the standard 3-D space setting.

Regarding point 1), we stress that different forms of gauge freedom play a very important role
in our formulation, a common feature of electrodynamic theory. In fact the use of gauge transfor-
mations is a convenient tool for implementing useful but non-explicitly covariant conditions in a
covariant theory. A well known example is provided by the transverse potential gauge condition
(φ = 0, with φ the time component of the vector potential) for a plane electromagnetic wave. This
condition is not explicitly covariant, i.e. it is not in general preserved by a Lorentz boost, but can
be restored by a gauge transformation of the boosted vector potential.

Point 2) suggests that the investigation of topological properties of the magnetic ﬁeld in 3-D
space, which play a fundamental role in ideal MHD, should be extended to the investigation of
the topological properties of the full electromagnetic ﬁeld tensor in 4-D space. This future line of
enquiry may well open a novel and rich way of reinterpreting the topological properties of ideal
MHD.

Finally we note again that the treatment developed in the present paper does not involve the full
set of MHD plasma equations and only requires that an ideal Ohm’s law in terms of a ﬂuid velocity

9

be satisﬁed. Thus this treatment can be applied to different plasma theories where the velocity
4-vector ﬁeld uµ is not the plasma ﬂuid velocity but, for example, the electron ﬂuid velocity as is
the case, e.g., in EMHD (see [19]).

Acknowledgments

The author acknowledges clarifying discussions with G. Tomassini, P.J. Morrison and E. D’Avignon.

References

[1] M. Tavani, et al., Science, 331, 736 (2011),

[2] S.Koide, Ap.J. , 708, 1459 (2010).

[3] S.V. Bulanov, T.Zh. Esirkepov, D. Habs, F. Pegoraro, T. Tajima, Eur. Phys. J. D 55, 483

(2009).

[4] A. Lichnerowicz, in Relativistic Hydrodynamics and Magnetohydrodynamics, (New York:

Benjamin) 1967.

[5] M. Anile, in Relativistic ﬂuids and magneto-ﬂuids, Cambridge Monographs on Mathematical

Physics, Cambridge 1989.

[6] A. Mignone, G. Bodo, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., 368, 1040 (2006).

[7] E. D’Avignon, P.J. Morrison, F. Pegoraro , Phys. Rev. D, 91, 084050 (2015).

[8] G.A. Askaryan, S.V. Bulanov, F. Pegoraro, A.M. Pukhov, Comm. Plasma Phys. and Contr.

Fusi., 17, 35 (1995).

[9] P.M. Nilson, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett., 97, 255001(2006).

[10] M. Hesse, S. Zenitani, Phys. Plasmas, 14, 112102 (2007).

[11] S. Zenitani, M. Hoshino, Astroph. J., 670, 702 (2007).

[12] W.A. Newcomb, Ann. Phys., 3, 347 (1958).

[13] F. Pegoraro, EPL, 99, 35001 (2012).

[14] M.A. Berger, Phys. Rev. Lett. , 70, 705 (1993).

[15] M. Gedalin, Phys. Rev. Lett., 76, 3340 (1996).

[16] F. Pegoraro, Phys. Plasmas, 22, 112106 (2015).

[17] F.A. Asenjo, L. Comisso, Phys. Rev. Lett., 114, 115003 (2015).

[18] F.A. Asenjo, L. Comisso, S.M. Mahajan Phys. Plasmas, 22, 122109 (2015).

[19] S.V. Bulanov, F. Pegoraro, A.S. Sakharov, Phys. Fluids B, 4, 2499 (1992).

10

