6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
2
1

 
 
]
t
f
o
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
2
3
9
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

This draft was prepared using the LaTeX style ﬁle belonging to the Journal of Fluid Mechanics

1

Critical shear rate and torque stability

condition for a particle resting on a surface

in a ﬂuid ﬂow

Arshad Kudrolli, David Scheﬀ, and Benjamin Allen

Department of Physics, Clark University, Worcester, MA 01610

(Received xx; revised xx; accepted xx)

We advance a quantitative description of the critical shear rate ˙γc needed to dislodge a
spherical particle resting on a surface with a model asperity in laminar and turbulent ﬂuid
ﬂows. We have built a cone-plane experimental apparatus which enables measurement
˙γc over a wide range of particle Reynolds number Rep from 10−3 to 1.5 × 103. The
of
condition to dislodge the particle is found to be consistent with the torque balance
condition, which yields a lower ˙γc compared with force balance because of the torque
component due to drag about the particle center. The data for Rep < 0.5 is in good
agreement with analytical calculations of the drag and lift coeﬃcients in the Rep →
0 limit. For higher Rep, where analytical results are unavailable, the hydrodynamic
coeﬃcients are found to approach a constant for Rep > 1000. We show that a linear
combination of the hydrodynamic coeﬃcients found in the viscous and inertial limits can
describe the observed ˙γc as a function of the particle and ﬂuid properties.

Key words: Erosion; Granular; Onset; Shear ﬂow

1. Introduction

The threshold condition needed to dislodge particles, which are initially at rest on
a surface, due to a ﬂuid ﬂow is important in a wide range of physical systems and
industries. Examples include wind blown dynamics of sand dunes, erosion of sediments
and rocks on river beds and ocean ﬂoors, deposition of proppants in hydraulic fracturing
of shales, and drug delivery via inhalation. In spite of a long standing interest in such
problems (see Shields 1936; Buﬃngton & Montgomery 1997), the conditions under which
particles are dislodged by a ﬂuid ﬂow are not well established quantitatively. The Shields
number, given by the ratio of the hydrodynamic drag and gravitational force acting on
the particles at the surface, is often used to characterize the physical conditions at the
threshold of motion (see Shields 1936; Wiberg & Smith 1987; Buﬃngton & Montgomery
1997). When this number exceeds a value corresponding to an eﬀective friction, the ﬂuid
is considered to dislodge the particles. It may be noted that this implies that force balance
characterizes the condition at onset (see Phillps 1980; Wiberg & Smith 1987) even though
this condition can yield a higher threshold compared to torque balance for sheared ﬂuid
ﬂow (see Lee & Balachandar 2012). Accordingly, the recorded Shields number at the
threshold of motion has been reported over a wide range of Reynolds numbers estimated
at the particle scale and shows broad trends with considerable scatter (see Buﬃngton &
Montgomery 1997) that depend on bed preparation, particle size and degree of exposure

2

A. Kudrolli, D. Scheﬀ and B. Allen

Figure 1. (a) A schematic diagram of the apparatus. The conical top plate spins about
its vertical central axis with a prescribed frequency f resulting in a uniform shear rate
˙γ = 2πf / tan β. A vertical
light sheet through the particle is used for visualization. (b)
Cross-sectional and top view of a spherical particle lodged against a rod which is bent into
a U-shaped pocket. (c) Cross-sectional and top view of a spherical particle lodged inside a
circular pocket. (d) Flow ﬁeld observed using Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) corresponding
to Rep = 0.1 superimposed on a sample image.

to the ﬂuid ﬂow (see Charru, Mouilleron & Eiﬀ 2004; Ouriemi, et al. 2007; Hong, Tao &
Kudrolli 2015; Clark, et al. 2015).

A spherical particle resting on a rough surface in a linear sheared ﬂuid ﬂow is an
important model to understand the threshold of motion of a particle exposed to a ﬂuid
ﬂow. In the case of suﬃciently low Reynolds numbers, the net hydrodynamic force and
torque acting on a sphere attached to a smooth wall in a linear shear ﬂow has been
analytically calculated by O’Neill (1968) and Leighton & Acrivos (1985). At moderate
and higher Reynolds number, where ﬂuid inertia is important, analytical results do not
exist. However, numerical results have been obtained by Zeng, et al. (2009) for the drag
and lift coeﬃcients acting on a particle attached to a surface at moderate Reynolds
numbers. These results indicate that both the lift and moment coeﬃcients about the
particle center decrease relative to the drag coeﬃcient with increasing Reynolds numbers,
which would lead the torque and force balance conditions to approach each other. Thus,
there is a need for an investigation to quantitatively test the relative merits of these
ideas, and clarify the conditions needed to dislodge particles in sheared ﬂuid ﬂows.

Here, we discuss a new experimental system that enables us to quantitatively measure
the threshold of motion of a particle in a linearly sheared ﬂuid where the ﬂuid ﬂow
and particle motion are visualized to understand its characteristics. Model asperities
with well deﬁned pivot points are used to investigate its importance in determining
the onset of motion. We demonstrate that the torque balance condition, and not the
force balance condition, is important to determining the threshold in laminar as well
as turbulent sheared ﬂows. Further, we quantitatively describe the critical shear rate
required to dislodge a particle as a function of its physical properties using a superposition
of hydrodynamic drag and lift coeﬃcients obtained in the viscous and inertial limits.

(a)(b)fβVertical Light SheetFluidφφ(c)(d)Critical shear rate and torque stability condition for a particle in a ﬂuid ﬂow

3

Figure 2. The measured critical shear rate ˙γc as a function of ﬂuid height h/d required to
dislodge a PTFE particle. We observe that ˙γc is essentially constant for h/d (cid:38) 2 in the case
of both low and high viscosity ﬂuids used in the experiments. The horizontal dashed lines are
guides to the eye.

2. Experimental system

A schematic of the experimental apparatus is shown in Fig. 1(a). It consists of a station-
ary transparent cylindrical container with a ﬂat bottom ﬁlled with a ﬂuid with a dynamic
viscosity µ and density ρf , prepared using water and glycerol mixture ratios reported by
Cheng (2008). An inverted cone-shaped top plate, with an apex which coincides with the
bottom of the container, is rotated about its axis with a prescribed frequency f similar to
a conical rheometer. Then, the shear rate is constant provided secondary ﬂows are small
and is given by ˙γ = 2πf / tan β, where β is the angle complementary to the cone apex
angle. In order to test the relative eﬀects of gravity, inertia and viscosity, we use spherical
particles composed of Delrin, polytetraﬂuoroethylene (PTFE), glass, aluminum, ceramic,
titanium, and stainless steel with density ρs = 1400, 2170, 2500, 2700, 3875, 4512, and
7960 kg m−3, respectively. While a range of particle diameters were probed, we discuss
the data for d = 3.175 ± 0.005 mm for simplicity of presentation. The Reynolds number
at the particle scale Rep is deﬁned by using the velocity v = ˙γd/2 corresponding to the
center of the particle. Then,

Rep =

ρf ˙γd2

2µ

=

ρf πf d2
µ tan β

.

(2.1)

Two kinds of model asperities were used including a rod bent into a U shaped pocket
illustrated in Fig. 1(b) and a circular pocket using a ﬂat ring illustrated in Fig. 1(c). The
angle φ subtended by the line joining the particle center and the pivot point from the
vertical characterizes the barrier size relative to the particle size in both cases. The U
shape allows the particle to be fully exposed to the ﬂuid ﬂow while also allowing it to
move freely in the pocket. This leads the particle to rattle inside the pocket when the ﬂow
becomes time dependent at higher Rep as shown in the supplementary documentation. In
contrast, the circular pocket geometry leads the particle to be conﬁned in all directions
inside the pocket and is observed to be stationary at both high and low Rep before
getting dislodged. Because the bottom of the sphere is shielded by the ring, the particle
is partially exposed to the ﬂuid ﬂow as in a granular bed. This leads to an approximate
10% lowering of Cd and a 7% lowering of Co for a circular pocket with φ = 38o compared
to a fully exposed particle using estimates obtained by Pozrikidis (1997) for low Rep
ﬂows.

Further, because the ﬂuid velocity has to match the velocity of the spinning top

10100100011.522.5γc (s-1)h/d  µ = 55.0 mPa s µ = 0.92 mPa s4

A. Kudrolli, D. Scheﬀ and B. Allen

Figure 3. The ﬂuid ﬂow observed around a spherical particle glued to the substrate visualized
with tracer particles. The exposure time is 1.0 s. (a) f = 0.01 Hz and Rep = 0.7, (b) f = 0.03 Hz
and Rep = 2.2, (c) f = 0.1 Hz and Rep = 7.3, and (d) f = 0.3 Hz and Rep = 22, (e) f = 1.0 Hz
and Rep = 73, and (f) f = 3.0 Hz and Rep = 220. The ﬂow is symmetric at low Rep and vortices
develop as Rep is increased and a vortex clearly develops in the wake at Rep ∼ 20. The ﬂow in
the wake clearly becomes time dependent at Rep = 220. A smaller vortex in front of the sphere
is observed for Rep (cid:62) 22. (See movies in Supplementary Documentation.)

boundary, the proximity of the top boundary can lead to a greater drag coeﬃcient at
least at low Reynolds numbers compared to unbounded ﬂows (see Happel & Brenner
1973). We varied the distance rb that we place the barrier and the particle from the axis
of rotation to understand the eﬀect of the top boundary for a high and low viscosity
ﬂuid used in our experiments. Because of the slope of the top surface, this results in
a gap height h = rb tan β between the top boundary and the container bottom. The
measured ˙γc as a function of h is shown in Fig. 2. Indeed, we observe that ˙γc is lower
for z/d < 2, but remains essentially constant for z/d (cid:38) 2 for both low and high viscosity
ﬂuids used in the experiments. Accordingly, we have conﬁned our discussion to h = 2d,
which corresponds to the particle being placed at a distance rb = 7 cm from the axis of
rotation, where the direct eﬀect of the top surface can be expected to be small.

3. Flow visualization

In order to characterize the nature of the ﬂow, we performed experiments with tracer
particles added to a water-glycerol mixture corresponding to ρf = 1100 kg m−3 and
µ = 3 mPa s in which the tracers are neutrally buoyant. The ﬂuid was illuminated with
a light sheet which transects the particle in a vertical plane through its center. Using
Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV), we obtained the ﬂow ﬁelds at low Rep, an example
of which is shown in Fig. 1(d). The ﬂuid velocity shown by the length of the arrows can
be noted to be symmetric about the vertical axis. Further, the velocity can be observed
to increase linearly with height far away from the sphere. The ﬂow structure at higher
Rep can be deduced by examining the streaks made by the tracers over one second in
Fig. 3 and the corresponding movies in the Supplementary Documentation. One can
observe that the ﬂow is essentially symmetric for Rep ∼ 1, but grows asymmetric as
Rep is increased. A vortex can be clearly observed at Rep ∼ 20 and the wake grows and
becomes time dependent for Rep ∼ 220. Further, one also observes the development of a

(a)(b)(c)(d)(e)(f)Critical shear rate and torque stability condition for a particle in a ﬂuid ﬂow

5

Figure 4. (a) The critical shear rate ˙γc is observed to decrease with viscosity (φ = 44o). The
ﬂuid viscosity is obtained by using water glycerol mixture ratios reported by Cheng (2008). The
error bars are of the order of the symbol size. Inset: The net hydrodynamic and gravitational
forces and the torque acting about the center of the particle lodged against an asperity with a rod
cross-section. The contact forces are not drawn for clarity (see text). (b) ˙γc increases nonlinearly,
irrespective of the shape of the asperity. Inset: Same plot in log-log scale with a slope 1/2 line
to guide the eye.
systematically greater for higher φ. The dashed lines in the plots correspond to ˙γc calculated
using Eq. 5.3 and Eq. 5.5 with α0 = 0.45 and αd = 0.65.

˙γc increases consistent with (cid:112)ρs/ρf − 1 for both kinds of barriers. (c) ˙γc is

smaller vortex for Rep (cid:62) 22 in the front of the sphere near the substrate (see Movie in
Supplementary Documentation). In all cases, the ﬂow well in front of the particle appears
to be laminar, and the eddies generated by the ﬂow around the particle have decayed
by the time the ﬂuid ﬂow returns after going around the circular track over the range of
Rep visualized.

4. Measured critical shear rate

With this characterization of the ﬂow, we now discuss the measured critical shear rate
˙γc as a function of experimental control parameters. Figure 4(a) shows ˙γc as a function

0501001502002503000246γc (s-1)ρs/ρf-1φ = 60 deg.φ = 44 deg.φ = 20 deg.0501001502002500246γc (s-1)ρs/ρf-1Circular pocketU pocket1010000.110γc (s-1)ρs/ρl-10.111010010000.00010.0010.010.11γc(s-1)µ(Pa s)PTFEDelrinFgFlFdToφ(a).(b)..(c).6

A. Kudrolli, D. Scheﬀ and B. Allen

of µ corresponding to a U-shaped pocket with φ = 44o. Each data point corresponds to
three independent measurements and the error is less than 5%. The data was obtained
by linearly increasing the rotation frequency of the top plate to a prescribed value f and
holding it constant for a ﬁxed wait time of 100 s. The threshold is reached if the particle
is observed to roll out over the barrier during this wait time interval. The particle was
observed to move and dislodge immediately after threshold was reached at low Rep.
However, the particle was observed to rattle inside the pocket and dislodge after a few
seconds in the case of the U-shaped pocket when Rep (cid:38) 10. In the case of a circular
pocket, no such rattling was observed and the particle dislodged right after ﬁrst moving.
We also found that using a longer wait time did not lead to a systematic change in the
measured threshold. But, decreasing the wait time increased the threshold somewhat.
Because we are interested in the long time behavior, we have used a wait time of 100 s
for consistency.

We observe that

˙γc decreases systematically because the drag can be expected to
˙γc is observed to be systematically higher for PTFE because it
increase with µ. Further,
has a higher density compared with Delrin. To further probe the trends with respect to
the density of the particle, we plot ˙γc as a function of ρs/ρf −1 in Fig. 4(b) corresponding
to µ = 5.2 mPa s, and where the data corresponds to Rep > 10. From the log-log plot
in the corresponding inset, we observe that ˙γc increases consistent with a square root
function. We have also plotted data corresponding to a barrier with a circular pocket,
and we observe similar trends. Finally, we have plotted ˙γc in Fig. 4(c) for various φ and
ﬁnd higher ˙γc for higher φ. Thus,
˙γc increases systematically with greater barrier height.

5. Condition to dislodge particle

d

2 sin φ. The net drag force acting on a sphere can be written as Fd = 1

To explain these observations, we next discuss the gravitational and hydrodynamic
forces and torques acting on the particle which are used to determine the condition for
stability. The gravitational force acting on the particle including the eﬀect of buoyancy
6 π(ρs − ρf )gd3, where g is the acceleration due to gravity, and the
is given by Fg = 1
corresponding torque due to gravity about the pivot point on the barrier is given by
8 Cdρf v2πd2,
Tg = Fg
where, Cd is the drag coeﬃcient which depends on Rep. The torque due to drag about
the center of the particle can be written as To = 1
16 Coρf v2πd3, where, Co is a drag
coeﬃcient which also depends on Rep. Then, the torque due to drag Td about the pivot
point can be written as the sum of the torque about the center and the net force times
d
2 cos φ. The lift
the projected distance from the center to the pivot point i.e. Td = To + Fd
due to the diﬀerence of ﬂow velocity above and below the particle center, can be written
as Fl = 1
8 Clρf v2πd2, where Cl is the lift coeﬃcient, and the corresponding torque due
d
2 sin φ. Further, the particle also experiences normal reaction and
to the lift Tl = Fl
tangential friction forces at contact points with the substrate and the barrier. One may
expect these contact forces to approach zero at the point of contact between the particle
and the bottom substrate, just when the particle is about to be dislodged. However,
contact forces are present at the point of contact between the particle and the barrier
even as the particle is dislodged.

We ﬁrst consider the force components perpendicular to the line joining the particle
center and the contact point between the particle and the barrier when the particle is
about to be dislodged. Then, the force balance condition is given by Fd cos φ + Fl sin φ−
Fµ = Fg sin φ, where, Fµ is the friction force at the point of contact. By rearranging

Critical shear rate and torque stability condition for a particle in a ﬂuid ﬂow

7

terms, one sees that

(Fd cos φ + Fl sin φ)/Fg sin φ = 1 + Fµ/Fg sin φ.

(5.1)

Because of the presence of the ﬂuid and because it is diﬃcult to determine the degree to
which the particle rolls versus slides at the point of contact, Fµ is diﬃcult to estimate
with certainty. Nonetheless, the second term on the right hand side can be assumed to
be positive if not zero in the case where Fµ goes to zero. Thus, the ratio on the left hand
side of Eq. 5.1 can be assumed to be greater if not equal to one when force balance is
approached.

Next, one assumes that the sliding friction between the particle and the barrier is large
and that the particle rolls over the barrier. Then, the condition for torque balance about
the pivot point on the barrier where the particle is in contact with the barrier is given
by

Td + Tl = Tg,

(5.2)

where, both Td and Tl can be seen to act clockwise in the inset to Fig. 4(a) to dislodge
the particle, while Tg acts in the counterclockwise direction and keeps the particle from
being dislodged. Because the contact forces act at the pivot point, they do not appear
in Eq. 5.2. We substitute Td, Tl, and Tg with their expressions in terms of Cd, Co, Cl, ρs
and ρf in Eq. 5.2 for torque balance. Then, introducing a net hydrodynamic coeﬃcient
Ch = Co + Cd cos φ + Cl sin φ and recalling that v = ˙γcd/2, we obtain the shear rate
required to dislodge a particle as

(cid:115)

˙γc =

16(ρs − ρf )g sin φ

3ρf Chd

.

(5.3)

Thus, for a given particle, ﬂuid and surface roughness,
is known for that Rep. Alternately, Ch can be determined by rewriting Eq. 5.3 as

˙γc can be evaluated provided Ch

Ch =

16(ρs − ρf )g sin φ

3ρf

˙γ2
c d

,

(5.4)

where, all the quantities on the right hand side can be measured in our experiments.

The measured Ch using Eq. 5.4 is plotted in Fig. 5 as a function of Rep also over a wide
combination of particle densities and viscosities for a ﬁxed roughness. We ﬁnd that the
measured Ch decreases linearly for low Rep before rapidly approaching a constant value
at the highest Rep studied. We have further plotted Ch for Rep ∼ 1000 for the three
diﬀerent φ studied in the inset to Fig. 5. It can be observed that Ch becomes relatively
independent of Rep, while systematically decreasing with φ.

In the viscous limit, the total drag force and torque acting on a particle attached to
a wall in a linear shear ﬂow has been calculated by O’Neill (1968). Assuming drag to
be linear with velocity, he found Cd and Co to be C 0
, where,
fw = 1.7005 and bw = 0.944 are constants which arise due to the no-slip boundary
condition at the substrate. Further, a lift coeﬃcient C 0
l = 6.888fw has been calculated
corresponding to viscous shear lift for low Rep by Leighton and Acrivos (1985). We
compare Ch using these hydrodynamic coeﬃcients in Fig. 5 with those obtained directly
from our experimental measurements. We ﬁnd good agreement for Rep < 1 whether or
not we include lift in the calculations.

d = 24fw
Rep

, and C 0

o = 16bw
Rep

Extrapolating the curves into the inertial regime, the two curves deviate systematically
above or below the data, depending on whether we consider lift or not. In fact, Zeng, et
al. (2009) have found Cd = 24fw
) based on numerical simulations for a
Rep

(1 + 0.104Re0.753

p

8

A. Kudrolli, D. Scheﬀ and B. Allen

Figure 5. The net hydrodynamic coeﬃcient Ch obtained from the experiment as a function
of Rep for φ = 43.5o compared with various models. Here, the curve labeled as the quadratic
model includes the quadratic drag contribution in calculating Ch (see Eq. 5.5). The curves
corresponding to linear drag use O’Neill’s form for Cd, and the lift is obtained using Leighton
and Acrivos’s form for Cl (see text). Ch is observed to approach a constant at the highest Rep
(α0 = 0.45 and αd = 0.65). Inset: Ch decrease somewhat for higher φ (Rep ∼ 1000). The line
corresponds to Eq. 5.4 with Rep = 1000.

ﬁxed sphere on an inﬁnite plane which is linearly sheared by a ﬂuid ﬂow when Rep (cid:54) 250.
They also found that C 0
o can be extended up to Rep = 200. Further, they postulated
that the lift coeﬃcient can be interpolated between the low and high Rep limits as Cl =
p + 0.1173)−0.22 for Rep < 200, although it may be noted that higher lift has
3.663(Re2
been also measured over the same regime by Mollinger & Nieuwstadt (1996). Accordingly,
we have calculated Ch and plotted the result in Fig. 5. The corresponding curve appears
to capture the overall trend in the data to Rep ∼ 10 within experimental error, but
then remains somewhat systematically above the experimental data for Rep > 10. It is
noteworthy that this deviation is opposite to the trend one may expect due to the onset
of time dependent ﬂow which occurs in the system at high Rep. Time dependence results
in higher instantaneous velocities, which would lead to a higher estimate of Ch compared
to the mean values used here.

In order to describe the data over the entire Rep measured, we consider Cd and Co
as a superposition of analytically calculated coeﬃcients in the low Rep limit and a term
corresponding to quadratic drag which is independent of Rep, i.e. Cd = C 0
d + αd, and,
Co = C 0
o + αo, where, αd and αo depend further on the ﬂow geometry. The lift acting on
a particle attached to a wall at high Rep has been measured to be 0.242 (see Okamoto
1979) which we round up to 0.25. Accordingly, we postulate that

Ch = (C 0

o + αo) + (C 0

d +

5
2

αd) cos φ + Cl sin φ,

(5.5)

where Cl is interpolated between the viscous shear lift at low Rep and the lift at high
l − 0.25) exp (−Rep) + 0.25. Then, by ﬁtting Eq. 5.4 to the data in
Rep, and thus Cl = (C 0
the inset to Fig. 5, we obtain αo = 0.5 ± 0.1, and αd = 0.7 ± 0.1. The latter is consistent

0.11101001000100000.0010.1101000ChRepQuadratic ModelLinear Drag & LiftLinear Drag, No LiftZeng, et al.0.511.50306090Chφ (deg.)Critical shear rate and torque stability condition for a particle in a ﬂuid ﬂow

9

Figure 6. (a) The ratio of the torques associated with hydrodynamic forces and gravity
calculated from the measured ˙γc and using the linear drag model, and the quadratic drag model
in Eq. 5.5. The horizontal dashed line corresponds to the torque balance condition given by
Eq. 5.2. Good agreement is observed with analytical calculations in the Rep < 1 regime. Overall
good agreement is also observed with the torque balance condition by using a quadratic model
over the entire range of Rep. (b) The ratio of the force components given by the left hand side
of Eq. 5.1 plotted versus Rep. The drag and lift are obtained using the measured shear rate
required to dislodge the particle. The measured ratio is clearly below the horizontal dashed line
corresponding to the lower bound for the force balance condition given by Eq. 5.1 in the limit
where the friction is negligible.

with measurements of drag coeﬃcent of 0.627 reported for a sphere near a surface at
high Rep by measuring the surface-pressure distribution on a sphere by Okamoto (1979),
and much greater than for a sphere in uniform unbounded ﬂow. It may be noted that Ch
is not very sensitive to φ at high Rep. This is because as φ is increased, the decrease in
drag contribution to torque is compensated by an increase in the lift contribution.

We have plotted ˙γc obtained using Eq. 5.3 and Eq. 5.5 in all three plots in Fig. 4.
We ﬁnd that by including the quadratic drag in the inertial regime and combining it
with the analytical results in the viscous regime, we are able to capture the observed
˙γc dependence as a function of ﬂuid viscosity, particle density, and surface roughness
characterized by φ. We have also tested to see if a force balance condition can similarly
describe the data. This corresponds to forcing Co to be zero in our ﬁts, and we are simply
not able to obtain an accurate description of these trends.

In order to summarize the results, we have plotted the ratio of the torques due to

01230.0010.1101000(Td+ Tl )/TgRepLinear DragQuadratic Drag01230.0010.1101000(Fdcosφ + Fl sinφ)/Fg sinφRepLinear DragQuadratic Drag(a)(b)10

A. Kudrolli, D. Scheﬀ and B. Allen

hydrodynamic forces and gravity in Fig. 6(a) and the ratio of the hydrodynamic forces
and gravity in Fig. 6(b) as a function of Rep. We ﬁnd that the threshold condition is
well described by the analytically calculated torques in the viscous limit for Rep < 0.5
before inertial eﬀects grow, leading to systematic deviations. The form of drag given by
the viscosity and inertia components captures the data relatively well over the entire
range of Rep investigated. By contrast, the data shown in Fig. 6(b) falls systematically
below one, which is the lower bound for the force balance condition given by Eq. 5.1
even if one assumes Fµ = 0. Thus, the critical shear rate remains distinct and well below
the threshold required by the force balance condition to dislodge the particle. Based on
this observation, we conclude that the condition when the particle gets dislodged clearly
corresponds to the torque balance condition, implying that the particle rolls over the
barrier as soon as the corresponding critical shear rate is exceeded.

In performing this analysis, we have assumed that the shear rate at onset is given
by the mean shear rate as measured by the critical rotation frequency of the top plate
required to dislodge the particle. While, it is possible that the eﬀective hydrodynamic
coeﬃcients may thus in fact be lower at higher Rep compared to what we report, it is
noteworthy that this is oﬀset by the lower estimate of shear rates used in the calculation
of torques and forces. Thus, we expect the relative comparison of the hydrodynamic
forces and torques to those due to gravity, as embodied in Fig. 6, to be relatively robust.

6. Conclusions

In summary, we have shown with experiments that the shear rate at onset of erosion is
determined by the torque balance condition, and not the force balance condition which
is widely used to understand erosion. The main reason for this discrepancy is because
the net hydrodynamic force does not act at the center of the particle but rather some
distance above it because of the fact that the mean ﬂow speed increases with distance
from the bottom substrate. In the torque balance condition, this is taken into account
by considering the additional torque about the center of the particle which is ignored
if the net drag force is assumed to act at the center of the particle. Building on this
condition, we have then quantitatively described the observed critical shear rate ˙γc on
the particle density, the ﬂuid viscosity, and the surface roughness over a wide range of
particle Reynolds Numbers Rep. We ﬁnd that a linear combination of the hydrodynamic
coeﬃcients obtained in the viscous and inertial limits can describe the observed ˙γc as a
function of the particle and ﬂuid properties from laminar to turbulent ﬂow conditions.

Further, we show that the data at low Rep < 0.5 is in good agreement with analytical
calculations of the drag and lift coeﬃcients in the Rep → 0 limit, but diﬀer from
numerical results at moderate Rep reported by Zeng, et al. (2009) for ﬂow past a sphere
resting on a smooth surface. At higher Rep, where analytical results are unavailable,
the hydrodynamic coeﬃcients are found to approach a constant for Rep > 1000. It is
possible that the diﬀerences from the numerical results at moderate Rep arise because
of the presence of the physical barriers near the base of the particle in the experiments
which can modify the ﬂow. Further research is required to fully understand the eﬀect of
surface roughness and particle exposure to extend the implications of our study to the
erosion of a granular bed as in rivers and streams.

Critical shear rate and torque stability condition for a particle in a ﬂuid ﬂow

11

7. Acknowledgments

This material is based upon work supported by the U.S. Department of Energy Oﬃce
of Science and Oﬃce of Basic Energy Sciences program under DE-FG02-13ER16401, and
National Science Foundation Grant No. CBET-1335928.

REFERENCES

Buﬃngton, J. M. and Montgomery, D. R. 1997 “A systematic analysis of eight decades of
incipient motion studies, with special reference to gravel bedded rivers,” Water Resources
Research 33, 1993.

Charru, F. Mouilleron, H. and Eiﬀ, O. 2004 “Erosion and deposition of particles on a bed sheared

by a viscous ﬂow,” Journal of Fluid Mechanics 519, 55.

Cheng, N.-S. 2008 “Formula for the Viscosity of a Glycerol-Water Mixture,” Industial &

Engineering Chemistry Research 47, 3285.

Clark, A. H. Shattuck, M. D. Ouellette, N. T. and O’Hern, C. S. 2015 “Onset and cessation of

motion in hydrodynamically sheared granular beds,” Physical Review E 92, 042202.

Happel, J. and Brenner, H. 1973 Low Reynolds Number Hydrodynamics, 2nd edn. Noordhoﬀ,

Leyden.

Hong, A. Tao, M. J. and Kudrolli, A. 2015 “Onset of erosion of a granular bed in a channel

driven by ﬂuid ﬂow,” Physics of Fluids 27, 013301.

Lee, H. and Balachandar, S. 2012 “Critical shear stress for incipient motion of a particle on a

rough bed,” Journal of Geophysical Research: Earth Surface 117, F1.

Leighton, D. and Acrivos, A. 1985 “The lift on a small sphere touching a plane in the presence
of a simple shear ﬂow,” Zeitschrift f¨ur angewandte Mathematik und Physik ZAMP 36,
174.

Mollinger, A. M. and Nieuwstadt, F. T. M. 1996 “Measurement of the lift force on a particle
ﬁxed to the wall in the viscous sublayer of a fully developed turbulent boundary layer,”
Journal of Fluid Mechanics 316, 285.

O’Neill, M. E. 1968 “A sphere in contact with a plane wall in a slow linear shear ﬂow,” Chemical

Engineering Science 23, 1293.

Okamoto, S. 1980 “Turbulent Shear Flow Behind a Sphere Placed on a Plane Boundary,” in:
Turbulent Shear Flows 2, ed. by L.J.S. Bradbury, F. Durst, B.E. Launder, F.W. Schmidt,
J.H. Whitelaw (Springer, Berlin Heidelberg New York) 246.

Ouriemi, M. Aussillous, P. Medale, M. Peysson, Y. and Guazzelli, E. 2007 “Determination of
the critical Shields number for particle erosion in laminar ﬂow,” Physics of Fluids 19,
061706.

Phillips, M. 1980 “A force balance model for particle entrainment into a ﬂuid stream,” Journal

of Physics D: Applied Physics 13, 221.

Pozrikidis, C. 1997 “Shear ﬂow over a protuberance on a plane wall,” Journal of Engineering

Mathematics 31, 29.

Shields, A. 1936 “Anwendung der ¨Ahnlichkeitsmechanik und der Turbulenz-forschung auf die
Geschiebebewegung,” Preussische Versuchsanstalt f¨ur Wasserbau und Schiﬀbau 26, 524.
Wiberg, P. L. and Smith, J. D. 1987 “Calculations of the critical shear stress for motion of

uniform and heterogeneous sediments,” Water Resources Research 23, 1471.

Zeng, L. Najjar, F. Balachandar, S. and Fischer, P. 2009 “Forces on a ﬁnite-sized particle located

close to a wall in a linear shear ﬂow,” Physics of Fluids 21, 033302.

