Record dynamics in the parking lot model

Paolo Sibani1 and Stefan Boettcher2

1FKF, University of Southern Denmark, Campusvej 55, DK5230, Odense M, Denmark

2Department of Physics, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
2
1

 
 
]
t
f
o
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
9
6
9
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

We study the aging dynamics in the parking lot model of granular relaxation with extensive
numerical simulations. Our results reveal the log-Poisson statistics in the progression of intermittent
events that lead to ever slower increases in the density. Deﬁning clusters as domains of parked cars
which must be re-arranged to reach new records in density, we ﬁnd that their length-scale grows
logarithmically with time for low enough temperatures. We further characterize the aging process
in terms of the statistics of ﬂuctuations in the interstitial free volume that shows a clear separation
between quasi-equilibrium Gaussian ﬂuctuations and the record-sized events.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The Parking Lot Model (PLM) is an oﬀ-lattice model
where identical cars are placed on a one-dimensional
parking strip with no marked bays.
Its origin can be
traced back to the one dimensional random packing prob-
lem, ﬁrst considered by Renyi [1] decades ago, where
cars are inserted in random positions until no intersti-
tial space remains to accommodate yet another car. Its
(more recent) physical applications allow both insertion
and removal and include molecule ad- and de-sorption
within a crowded surface area [2], and the compactiﬁca-
tion of granular materials [3]. Some glassy features of
the PLM dynamics were discussed in Ref. [4] but seem-
ingly unnoticed is that the PLM qualiﬁes as a Kinetically
Constrained Model, (KCM), and thus belongs to a large
class which has recently received intense theoretical at-
tention for its connections to glassy dynamics [5]. The
asymptotic properties of the PLM average observables
have been explored previously [6]. Here we investigate in
more detail the spatial and temporal complexity of the
model, showing in particular that it provides a generic
and analytically tractable example for the emergence of
dynamic heterogeneity in time and space. Furthermore,
the ‘thermal’ model version presently investigated fur-
nishes a prime example of decelerating aging dynamics
controlled by kinematic constraints.
Its analysis clari-
ﬁes a key model assumption made in a recent description
of particle motion in dense colloidal suspensions [7, 8].
Speciﬁcally, the PLM features reversible ﬂuctuations sim-
ilar to in-cage rattlings of dense colloids together with
irreversible releases of free volume. The latter are associ-
ated with escapes in a free-energy landscape [9, 10] and
are connected to a cooperative and increasingly rare re-
structuring of the spatial domains present in the system.
The basic mechanism behind the model’s decelerating
dynamics is that the kinetic constraint provided by car
impenetrability becomes harder to overcome as the den-
sity increases. A minute and increasingly rare O(1/N )-
change to the car density lowers the free energy, but con-
comitantly raises the free energy barrier which must be
overcome to further increase the density.

A non-trivial spatial structure associated to increas-
ing free-energy barriers [11] is indeed responsible for the
dynamical behaviour: let an active cluster or active do-
main be a group of adjacent cars, of size as small as
possible, which must be rearranged in order to make the
next insertion possible. As we shall see, the size of ac-
tive clusters grows logarithmically with the system’s age,
and the characteristic time for their rearrangement by
means of random moves grows exponentially with their
size, similarly to what is observed in both recent experi-
ments [12, 13] and in numerical model simulations [7, 8]
of aging dense colloids.

The aging dynamics of the PLM is induced by record
ﬂuctuations [14–18] which trigger non-equilibrium quake
events, in our case the rearrangement of an active clus-
ter followed by the insertion of an extra car. Speciﬁcally,
PLM quakes are induced by the appearance of an inter-
stitial volume wide enough to accommodate one addi-
tional car. These ﬂuctuations are rare in dense systems,
have a nearly homogeneously distribution when viewed
on a logarithmic time-scale and happen at a decelerating
rate. Correspondingly, the model’s dynamics transverses
metastable states of growing duration, each characterized
by reversible ﬂuctuations around a ﬁxed average number
of parked cars and each modiﬁed by an irreversible quake.
The paper is organized as follows: In the next Section,
we introduce the PLM; in Sec. III, we analyze its hier-
archical conﬁguration space structure and, using heuris-
tic arguments, sketch the dynamical consequences this
structure generically brings; in Sec. IV we introduce a
rejection-less Monte Carlo algorithm able to relax the
system to equilibrium by transversing the required num-
ber of metastable states; we make connections with the
phenomenology of kinetically constraint models, draw
some conclusions and oﬀer an outlook on future work
in Sec. V. In the Appendix, we detail the algorithm used
to obtain our numerical results.

II. THE PARKING LOT MODEL

A brief description of the PLM is given here for con-
venience and to ﬁx the notation. Our parking lot is a

2

Figure 1: Left: The data points depict the diﬀerence between the equilibrium average car density at T = 0.80, (cid:104)n(0.8)(cid:105)/L = .777
from Eq. (8), and the car density obtained in simulations at that temperature for twenty independent trajectories starting from
an empty lot of length L = 1000. The blue line represents the average of the data points. The ordinate is seen to converge to
zero, signaling that the equilibrium state is reached quickly. Right: Same type of data for T = 0.42. Here equilibrium density
(cid:104)n(0.42)(cid:105)/L = .915 is not reached during the simulations. The upper horizontal line marks the value of the ordinate 1 − ρ0 at
which the greedy T = 0 dynamics stops.

strip delimited by two rigid walls to avoid center-of-mass
drifts, has no marked bays, and can at most accommo-
date L cars of unit width [1]. At a given time, N ≤ L
cars are present, all parked perpendicularly to the strip’s
longitudinal axis. A conﬁguration is equally well speci-
ﬁed by a list of N + 1 interstitial spaces Ii, which, for
0 < i < N, separate parked cars i and i + 1, with I0
separating the left wall from the ﬁrst car and IN sepa-
rating the last car from the right wall. We gloss over the
distinction between an interstitial space and its size, or
length.

An empty lot has a single interstitial space I0 = L,
and the ﬁrst insertion generates two interstitial spaces
I0 = q(I0 − 1) and I1 = (1 − q)(I0 − 1), where q is a
random number drawn from the uniform distribution in
the unit interval.
In general, a new insertion into an
existing interstitial Ii > 1 splits the latter into two parts.
First the indices of the interstitials from i+1 and onwards
are incremented by one, and then the ith and i + 1st
values are recalculated as Ii ← q(Ii − 1) and Ii+1 ←
(1−q) (Ii − 1). For a car removal, we set Ii ← Ii+Ii+1+1,
and decrement by one the indices of the interstitials from
the rightmost one and down to Ii+2.

Starting from an empty lot, random insertions suc-
ceed as long as interstitial spaces larger than unity exist.
When this stops being true, a ‘random loosely packed’
conﬁguration is reached which can only be changed by
two-car processes [4]: either a ‘bad parker’ is removed
leaving suﬃcient space for two ‘good parkers’, or the
opposite process occurs. This metastable situation is
dubbed stage zero because it turns out to be the ﬁrst
in a hierarchy of metastable states. The average parked
car density at this stage was analytically shown by Renyi

[1] to approach, for L → ∞, ρ0 = 0.7475 . . . , a value also
close to numerical results obtained for a two dimensional
version of the same problem [19].

In the ‘thermal’ version of the model discussed later,
extracting a car raises the energy and the ‘greedy’ ran-
dom packing algorithm mentioned above therefore corre-
sponds to zero temperature dynamics where only inser-
tion attempts are possible. In general, the temperature T
can be so low and the chemical potential so high that any
leaving car is immediately replaced by another, the latter
placed in the same slot but with a slightly shifted posi-
tion. A series of such removal/insertion processes thus
amounts to small positional changes of already parked
cars, which is similar to in-cage rattlings of a dense col-
loid [20].

In Fig. 1 the dots are diﬀerences between the equilib-
rium average car density and the densities calculated for
20 independent simulations starting from an empty lot,
while the line represents the average of these simulations.
A thermal algorithm is used where insertion and removal
of single cars are the only possible elementary moves.
The left panel shows that the above diﬀerence quickly
vanishes, i.e., that the system quickly equilibrates, when
the temperature is T = 0.80. The right panel shows
data from simulations run at T = 0.42. In this case the
curves ﬂatten out at a value clearly diﬀerent from zero,
indicating the presence of the metastable ‘zeroth stage’
metastable state mentioned above. The upper horizontal
line marks the value 1 − ρ0 at which the T = 0 greedy
dynamics on average grinds to a halt due to a lack of
suﬃciently wide spaces between parked cars. Note the
diﬀerence in the time scales of the relaxation processes
occurring at T = 0.80 and T = 0.42. Simulations were

10−110010100.20.40.60.81L=1000 T=0.80time (WTM) (µn(T) − n)/L10010210400.20.40.60.81L=1000 T=0.42time (WTM) (µn(T) − n)/Lconducted with the Waiting Time Method (WTM) [21],
see Sec. V A, which provides an eﬀective time based on
the likelihood an insertion succeeds.

III. HIERARCHICAL STRUCTURE AND

SPATIAL AND TEMPORAL HETEROGENEITY

Deﬁning I 0

In this section the hierarchical organization of PLM
conﬁgurations and its relation to spatial and temporal
heterogeneity is discussed with no mention of a speciﬁc
dynamical rule. We do assume, however, that the rule
in question is ‘blind’, in the sense that a large number
of failed random attempts are needed to successfully re-
arrange d cars in a preassigned way. Our conclusions,
which are qualitative but general, are conﬁrmed in the
next section, where a numerical approach is considered.
max ≥ 1 as the largest interstitial in a sys-
tem which has not yet reached metastability, we iden-
tify a stage zero metastable state, M0(1), as the conﬁg-
max < 1 becomes
uration reached when the condition I 0
fulﬁlled for the ﬁrst time. Such state corresponds to a
loosely packed conﬁguration, where no additional cars
can be inserted without previous removals. Using k in-
dependent simulations, each starting from an empty lot,
k = 1, 2, . . . kmax loosely packed conﬁgurations
M0(k),
with the same statistical properties can be generated,
which possibly contain slightly diﬀerent numbers of cars.
In the limit of large kmax and L, we ﬁnally obtain

(cid:28) M0(k)

(cid:29)

L

k

ρ0 =

= 0.7475 . . .

(1)

for the averaged car density in stage zero, consistent with
Renyi [1].

def= I 0

l−1 + I 0

Even though no additional insertions into any conﬁgu-
ration M0(k) are possible, removing the lth car will pro-
duce enough space for the insertion of two cars wher-
ever the condition I 1
l > 1 is satisﬁed.
l
Starting now from a state M0(k) and repeating when-
ever possible and as long as possible the random removal
of one car followed by the insertion of two cars in the
empty slot thus generated, a stage-one metastable state
M1(k, 1) is eventually reached. In such state removing
one car never allows the insertion of two cars, because
l } < 1. Repeating the above procedure
I 1
max
m times, with M0(k) as starting point, and stopping as
soon as the condition I 1
max < 1 is satisﬁed, generates a
series of stage one metastable states M1(k, m). Each of
these can only be modiﬁed by randomly searching for two
adjacent cars whose simultaneous removal makes room
for three cars. This step can be iterated until all possi-
bilities are exhausted. Proceeding along this line, we can
now deﬁne a hierarchy

def= maxl{I 1

Mr(k, m, n . . .) ⊂ Mr−1(k, m, n, . . .) . . . ⊂ M0(k),

(2)

3

where the largest of the sums of all possible sets of r + 1
adjacent interstitial spaces obeys I r
max < 1 in conﬁgura-
tion Mr(k, m, n . . .). The symbol ⊂ used in Eq.(2) in-
dicates that, say, state M1(3, 0) ⊂ M0(0) is generated
dynamically from state M0(0), and does not indicate a
static set inclusion relationship. The car density at level
r is

(cid:28) Mr(k, m, n . . .)

(cid:29)

ρr =

L

,

k,m,n,...

(3)

where the average is taken over all the available in-
dices. The critical car car densities separating each of
the ﬁrst ﬁve levels of the hierarchy from its successor
were obtained numerically for L = 1000 and are given,
with ±1σ error bars, by: ρ0 = 0.7476 ± 4 · 10−4; ρ1 =
0.8587 ± 3 · 10−4; ρ2 = 0.8992 ± 3 · 10−4; ρ3 = 0.9205 ±
2 · 10−4; and ρ4 = 0.9343 ± 2 · 10−4. Renyi’s result corre-
sponds to the ﬁrst value of the list.

To obtain a physical process with a proper timescale,
we follow Ben-Naim et al. [6] in assuming that cars move
independently, only constrained by the free volume of
interstitial spaces left to them by their neighbors.
In-
dependent car motion, in turn, translates into interstitial
l , 1 ≤ l ≤ N, with a marginal distribution that is
spaces I r
uniform but collectively constrained in their total length,
l = L − N. In that case, one ﬁnds [4] that their

(cid:80)N

l=1 I r

eﬀective distribution is asymptotically exponential,
Q(I) ∼ N

e− N I

− I(cid:104)I(cid:105) ,

L−N =

L, N → ∞. (4)

L − N

1
(cid:104)I(cid:105) e

The result is not too surprising, representing merely
an exponential distribution with the mean interstitial
length, (cid:104)I(cid:105) = L−N
N , as its cut-oﬀ. Then, the probabil-
ity that an interstitial opening could arise to ﬁt in the
N + 1st car of unit size, is given by

L−N

dI Q(I) ∼ e− N
L−N

def= e−dr ,

(5)

ˆ

pN +1|N (dr) =

1

where the last equality deﬁnes the typical size dr of
the domain on which r cars need to collectively moved
to provide an opening of unit size through the relation
(cid:104)I(cid:105) dr ≈ 1.
In a large system, at each level r of the hierarchy many
domains dr ∼ r may coexist. Those are the “soft spots”
where further insertions are most likely to occur, sepa-
rating areas that are minutely more resistant to further
insertions at this level. Dynamical activity will wander
from one domain to the next until all successful insertions
at level r have taken place. At this point, the domains
characteristic of the next level will start to play their role.
The spatially localized dynamical activity, which as we
just argued is typical of the PLM, is also the manifesta-
tion of dynamic spatial heterogeneity [22].

Turning to temporal heterogeneity, or intermittency,
we note that pN +1(rd) deﬁnes the rate at which the rare

4

ﬂuctuations occur which trigger a quake, i.e., the demise
of a domain of size dr and the corresponding insertion
of an extra car. Quakes occurring at level r determine
the time ∆tr (=number of trials) it takes to go from the
rth to the r + 1st level of the hierarchy. This time grows
as t ∼ τ edr, where τ is a constant. Conversely, we can
say that the size of such domains grows logarithmically
in time,

dr(t) ∼ ln

t
τ

.

(6)

The logarithmic growth of the size of such active domains
is a key property of the cluster model discussed in Ref. [8]
and represents a key prediction of the record dynamics
description of colloidal aging [7].

To further connect our record dynamics picture with

previous work [6] on the PLM, we also note that

dr =

1
(cid:104)I(cid:105) =

N

L − N

=

ρr
1 − ρr

,

(7)

where ρr = N/L is the car density when domains have
size dr. Then, for times t such that dr (cid:29) 1 and T → 0
the density approaches ρ∞ = 1 as

ρr(t) =

dr

1 + dr

∼ ρ∞ − 1
ln t
τ

,

as expected for the PLM [6].

IV. THERMAL DYNAMICS

As a check of the dynamical behavior just described in
qualitative terms, we turn to the numerical analysis of a
‘thermal’ version of the PLM, where energies  = 0 and
 = 1 are respectively assigned to the parked and non-
parked state of a car. Cars have no interaction energy and
only notice each other’s presence through the kinematic
constraint forbidding their spatial overlap. While the
constraint has no eﬀect on the thermal equilibrium value

(cid:104)n(T )(cid:105) =

L

1 + exp(−1/T )

(8)

of the number of parked cars, it has a strong eﬀect on
the time scale of the thermalization.
To see how the eﬀect comes about, we note that Eq. (8)
for (cid:104)n(T )(cid:105) = ρrL deﬁnes a series of characteristic tem-
peratures

(cid:17) =

(cid:16) ρr

1

1−ρr

Tr =

ln

1

ln(dr)

,

Tr < Tr−1 . . . < T0, (9)

each corresponding to the equilibrium density at the
‘edge’ between metastable states r and r +1. For T > Tr,
the equilibrium car density satisﬁes (cid:104)n(T )(cid:105)/L < ρr,

and, consequently, a dynamical process starting from
an empty lot reaches equilibrium before reaching a
metastable state of stage r + 1 or higher.
In particu-
lar, for T > T0 ≈ 0.921 the equilibrium car density is too
low for the kinematic constraint to play any role.
The equilibrium thermal density at T = 0.8 , (cid:104)ρ(cid:105) =
.777, is only slightly above the Renyi density and, as
shown in the left panel of Fig 1, the calculated discrep-
ancy (cid:104)ρ(cid:105) − N/L quickly equilibrates and vanishes. The
right panel shows corresponding data for T = 0.42, where
the equilibrium thermal density, (cid:104)ρ(cid:105) = .966 is way above
the Renyi density and where no equilibrium is reached
within the time scales considered.

In order to equilibrate starting from an empty lot, a
system quenched to a low temperature must surmount a
number of growing free energy barriers. This forms the
basis of the PLM aging dynamics since, as shown below,
the equilibration time teq,r can easily outlast the patience
of any observer. To estimate teq,r at temperature Tr, we
use Eqs. (6) and (9), ﬁnding

teq,r = exp(C exp(1/Tr)),

(10)

a quantity which becomes astronomically large when
ρr → 1 and Tr → 0.

To explore the thermal aging dynamics of the PLM,
the Metropolis algorithm is woefully inadequate, since it
would spend most computer resources to generate and
reject conﬁgurations. We use instead an adaptation of
the Waiting Time Method (WTM) [21], a rejection-less
algorithm whose application to the PLM is sketched in
the Appendix. At the zero’th stage, car insertions do
not require prior removals, and the algorithm inserts and
removes single cars with the frequencies required to ap-
proach equilibrium. At low temperatures equilibrium
densities are high, and the equilibration process will reach
a stage where at least r contiguous cars need to be re-
arranged to increase the density. Such minimal cluster
of cars correspond to the active domains dr deﬁned in
Sec. III.

When r > 0, removing a single car is in most cases
followed by a re-insertion in the same slot at a slightly
diﬀerent position. As argued, this amounts to quasi-
equilibrium ﬂuctuations within the metastable state.
These ﬂuctuations are bypassed using two steps: ﬁrst, the
time needed to remove r contiguous car using blind at-
tempts is drawn from an exponential distribution whose
average is proportional to the Arrhenius time exp(r/T ).
An active domain is randomly chosen among those avail-
able, and its cars are all removed. This creates a void and
pushes the system back into its zero’th stage state. In the
second step, zero’th stage dynamics is utilized, until stage
r(cid:48) with 1 ≤ r(cid:48) ≤ r + 1 is reached. If r(cid:48) = r + 1 an extra
car has been inserted the event is registered as a quake,
while if r(cid:48) < r the system simply enters a lower active
stage. In both cases, the steps just described are repeated
ad libitum. Note that, once the system is near thermal

5

Figure 2: Left: The data points depict the diﬀerence between the equilibrium average of the car density at T = 0.30, and the
actual car density for 256 independent trajectories all starting from an empty parking lot of length L = 1000. The average of
these data points is plotted as a blue line. The ordinate goes through a fast initial decrease, followed by a considerably slower
relaxation toward zero. Right: the dots show the number of active domains present is the system versus the logarithm of time
for 256 independent simulations. The green circles depict averages over the data points..

equilibrium, the insertion of additional cars through the
zero’th stage dynamical step becomes unlikely and the
dynamics enters a ﬂuctuation regime where active clus-
ters of size near the equilibrium cluster size are continu-
ously removed and recreated.

The progress of the system toward equilibrium can be
followed by monitoring the number of active domains,
see Fig. 2, which illustrates the system dynamics at
T = 0.3. The left panel depicts the diﬀerence between
(cid:104)n(T )(cid:105)/L = 0.9656, and the calculated car density n/L
for 256 independent simulations, all starting with an
empty lot. The initial phase of the relaxation ends when
the car density reaches the Renyi value ρ0 = 0.7475 . . .,
i.e., the value which delimits the lower boundary of the
ﬁrst metastable state. What then follows is a slow decay
of the ordinate toward its equilibrium value, i.e., zero. In
the right panel, the number of active domain present is
plotted versus the logarithm of time for the same set of
simulations.

Figure 3 illustrates how record dynamics predictions
ﬁt the low T dynamics of the PLM, based on estimates
obtained from 256 independent runs. First, in a Poisson
process with average ln t, τk denotes the time at which
the k’th quake occurs, the ‘logarithmic waiting times’
log τk − log τk−1 are independent and exponentially dis-
tributed stochastic variables. Both properties are sup-
ported by the left panel of the ﬁgure. Note, however,
that the PDF of the log-waiting time has a structure su-
perimposed to the exponential trend. The right panel of
the ﬁgure shows the length of the active domains vs. the
logarithm of time. Active domains of many diﬀerent sizes
replace each other in rapid succession and seem to coex-
ist due to insuﬃcient graphical resolution. Longer and

longer active domains are seen to develop as the system
ages. The circle at the leftmost edge of every plateau
indicates the time at which an active domain of a certain
length ﬁrst appears, which is the event marking the in-
crease in the level of metastability of the system. The line
is a ﬁt of the position of these events vs. the logarithm
of time. The observed logarithmic trend is in excellent
agreement with Eq. (6).

V. CONCLUSIONS

In spite of being relatively simple to simulate and an-
alyze, Kinetically Constrained Models (KCM) can re-
produce key dynamical features of real glass formers
as temperature is decreased or density is increased to-
ward the glass transition. KCM have simple interac-
tions and hence simple equilibrium statistical mechanics
and thermodynamics, but since many dynamical paths in
their conﬁguration spaces are blocked by kinematic con-
straints, an equilibrium or steady-state conﬁguration is
hard to reach.

Not prominently featured in its origin and history is
that the PLM is a bona ﬁde kinetically constrained model
where the constraint, no overlaps allowed in the parking
lot, becomes increasingly hard to overcome as the density
of parked cars increases. Consequently, the low temper-
ature dynamics of the our ‘thermal’ PLM, where parked
cars are energetically favored, has a rich non-equilibrium
dynamics, which is already manifest in the ultra slow
thermalization of the density of parked cars and which
coexists with a completely trivial thermodynamics. The
PLM’s equilibration time grows super-exponentially as a

10203040log10time  050100150200 no. of domains6

Figure 3: Left: The main ﬁgure shows the PDF of the diﬀerences log τk − log τk−1, where τn marks the occurrence of the
k’th quake. The data are extracted from 256 independent trajectories run at T = 0.3, all starting from an empty parking lot
of length L = 1000. The insert shows that the correlation function of the series τ1, τ2 . . . is a Kroneker delta indicating that
successive quakes are independent events. Right: The length of the active domains present in the systems is plotted vs. the
logarithm of time using blue points. In any small time interval, domains of diﬀerent sizes are generated in rapid succession,
giving the false impression that domains of diﬀerent length can coexist. The circles mark the shortest time at which an active
domain of a certain length ﬁrst appear, and the red line is linear ﬁt of the data vs. the logarithm of time.

function of the inverse temperature, a non-Arrhenius re-
laxation behavior which matches the cooperative nature
of the moves required to relax the system. Equilibra-
tion is only achievable using a rejection-less algorithm
which gives access to the required time scales by coarse-
graining away all quasi-equilibrium ﬂuctuations. What
remains is a series of heterogeneous and intermittent non-
equilibrium events, connected to the rearrangements of
the domains of contiguous cars which allow the insertion
of an additional car. These events require climbing free
energy barriers of growing height and can be described
as a Poisson process with average proportional to ln t, a
property which, as discussed in Ref. [23] is tantamount
to pure aging behavior.

Let us connect our present ﬁndings to dense colloidal
suspensions as described in Refs. [7, 8], where key exper-
imental properties are reproduced by a ‘cluster model’
based on the idea that colloidal particles belong to clus-
ters whose collapse controls all irreversible movements in
the systems. To describe an aging colloid, the probabil-
ity density P (h) that a cluster of size h collapse must
decrease very quickly, e.g. exponentially, with h. The
origin of the clusters and of the form of P (h) is however
left unexplained in Refs. [7, 8]. Irreversible particle mo-
tion was analyzed experimentally by Yunker et al. [12]
who deﬁned irreversible events as those which disrupt at
least three nearest neighbour relationships. These au-
thors ﬁnd that, as the system ages, irreversible changes
require the correlated motion of increasingly large clus-
ters. The similarity with the active domains of the PLM

is clear, since in order to introduce an extra car we need
the cooperative motion of an increasingly large domain.
The probability that a PLM domain be re-arranged hence
decreases exponentially with its size, a property which is
shared by the cluster model and which was already used
by Adam and Gibbs [24] to describe the approach to the
glass transition. Identifying a PLM domain with a cluster
of correlated particles in a colloid points to a statistical
mechanism shaping the form of P (h). Stability increases
with cluster size as irreversible events are connected to a
correspondingly decreasing free volume or, equivalently,
to a local increase in density. The repulsive short range
interactions between colloidal particles prevent such irre-
versible events from happening unless a spontaneous col-
lective ﬂuctuation of h particles provides the free space
needed. Such ﬂuctuation becomes exponentially unlikely.
Finally, it seems reasonable to speculate that a simi-
lar analysis would apply to other familiar models of slow
relaxation and jamming, such as the East model [25] or
the Backgammon model [11]. In the East model, an en-
tire domain of unfrustrated spins has to collectively ac-
tivate to dislodge and move a single frustrated spin on
its boundary, merely to be able to expand by a minute
increment. Similarly, in the Backgammon model, N un-
coupled particles are spread over n domains, where the
energy of the system is proportional to n. Particles hop
randomly between domains until, by some chance ﬂuctu-
ation of size ∼ N/n, a domain empties out and becomes
leaving n − 1 domains, each of minutely
inaccessible,
larger occupation on average. Thus, these models share

the same phenomenology of clusters of variables requir-
ing ever new records in the size of collective activations
that are exponentially unlikely in their size to progress
towards a marginally improved state.

Acknowledgements: SB thanks SDU for their hospi-
tality and the V. Kann Rasmussen Foundation for sup-
porting the visit. SB further acknowledges ﬁnancial sup-
port from the U. S. National Science Foundation through
grant DMR-1207431. PS enjoyed interesting discussions
with Mads Elmelund Hjadstrup Hansen and Jakob Rath
Mortensen.

Appendix:

A. The Waiting Time Method

The gist of the WTM is to determine the possible
moves in a given situation, draw for each of these a wait-
ing time from an exponential distribution with a suitable
average, and carry out the move with the shortest wait-
ing time. The WTM satisﬁes detailed balance and even-
tually generates the Boltzmann equilibrium distribution
but, at low temperatures, does so much faster than the
Metropolis algorithm. The algorithm is particularly sim-
ple to apply to the PLM, whose degrees of freedom have
no mutual interactions.

Our version of the algorithm generates a stochastic se-
ries t0 < t1 < t2 < . . . recording the times at which
the system conﬁguration undergoes a change. Depend-
ing on the severity of the constraints, the algorithm goes
through several incarnations, or ‘stages’. At stage zero,
interstitials are available which can accommodate a car,
while in the k’th stage, k = 1, 2, . . . L − 2, a domain con-
sisting of k contiguous cars must be rearranged, in order
to create the space for an additional car. To reach ther-
mal equilibrium for T > T0, only the zeroth stage of the
algorithm is needed while for temperatures in the range
Tk−1 > T > Tk,

k > 1, k stages are required.

Initially, t0 = 0, the lot is empty, and the zeroth
stage of the algorithm is applied: Each car is assigned
i = 0, 1 . . . (L − 1), drawn from
a waiting time τ free
the exponential distribution with unit average. The car
, is selected for
with the lowest waiting time, say τ free
a change of status to ‘parked’, the global time is up-
and the waiting times of the
dated to t1 = t0 + τ free
cars which remain parked are synchronized to t1, i.e.,
i = 1, 2 . . . (L − 1). To complete
i ← (τ free
τ free
the ﬁrst update, the newly parked car is assigned a wait-
, drawn from the exponential distribution
ing time τ parked
with average e1/T .

i − τ free

Subsequent updates follow the same pattern as above:
time tn is obtained from tn−1 by adding the shortest
available waiting time; all other waiting times are syn-
chronized to tn, and a new waiting time for the last car
moved is drawn from an exponential distribution whose

0

),

0

,

i

0

0

7

average is either 1 or e1/T . The ﬁrst choice applies if the
last move was a car removal, and the second if it was a
car placement.

As mentioned, for T1 < T < T0, the dynamics thermal-
izes in a metastable state of type M0, where insertions
are by deﬁnition impossible without previous removals.
With the previous scheme, a car removal would with
high probability be followed by a re-insertion in the same
slot, since this is the only possible sequence unless the
sum of the two interstitials adjacent to the car removed
is larger than one. Removal/re-insertion sequences con-
stitute the bulk of the pseudo-equilibrium ﬂuctuations in
the metastable state but do not change the number N of
parked cars, and do not further the equilibration process.
Rather than waiting for a car removal which allows the
placement of two cars to happen by chance, stage one
makes the move and draws the waiting time associated
to it from an exponential distribution, whose average is
calculated as follows: Let n0 denote the number of pairs
of adjacent interstitials with total length larger than one
(note that n0 > 0 in a metastable state of type M0) and
deﬁne the above average as

µ0(n0) =

N
n0

e1/T .

(11)

The ﬁrst term on the right hand side of the equation is
the average number of random removals needed to se-
lect a car surrounded by one out of n0 interstitial pairs.
The second is the Arrhenius factor associated with its
removal. Once the move is carried out and the global
time is updated, the algorithm returns to the stage zero
update, which continues until a new metastable state of
type M0 is identiﬁed.

Stage k dynamics entails reshuﬄing a domain of k ad-
jacent cars. This is done by ﬁrst removing the respective
cars, and by then returning to stage zero to ﬁll up the
opening thus created. The waiting time for removing k
adjacent cars is drawn from an exponential distribution,
whose average is taken to be

(cid:18)N

(cid:19)

k

µ0(nk) =

1
nk

ek/T ,

(12)

where nk is the number of domains of length rk present
in the system. The initial factor accounts for the number
of choices for the placement of the domain, the binomial
coeﬃcient is the average number of attempts needed to
place k cars out of N in contiguous positions, and the
exponential is the Arrhenius factor corresponding to the
removal of a group of k cars. As was the case for k = 1,
the algorithm returns to stage zero to ﬁll in the empty
space left by the removal. We note that removing k cars
does not guarantee, for k > 1, that k cars can be success-
fully re-inserted in the vacant space.

8

[1] A. Rényi. On a One-Dimensional Problem Concerning
Random Space-Filling. Publ. Math. Inst. Hung. Acad.
Sci. , 3:109–127, 1958.

[2] P. L. Krapivsky and E. Ben-Naim. Collective proper-
ties of adsorption-desorption processes. J. Chem. Phys.,
100:6778, 1994.

[3] Edmund R. Nowak, James B. Knight, Eli Ben-Naim,
Heinrich M. Jaeger, and Sidney R. Nagel. Density ﬂuc-
tuations in vibrated granular materials. Phys. Rev. E,
57:1971–1982, 1998.

[4] Amy J. Kolan, Edmund R. Nowak, and Alexei V.
Tkachenko. Glassy behaviour of the parking lot model.
Phys. Rev. E, 59:3094–3099, 1998.

[5] F. Ritort and P. Sollich. Glassy dynamics of kinetically
constrained models. Advances in Physics, 52:219–342,
2003.

[6] E. Ben-Naim, J.B. Knight, E.R. Nowak, H.M. Jaeger,
and S.R. Nagel. Slow relaxation in granular compaction.
Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena, 123:380 – 385, 1998.
[7] Stefan Boettcher and Paolo Sibani. Ageing in dense col-
loids as diﬀusion in the logarithm of time. Journal of
Physics: Condensed Matter, 23(6):065103, 2011.

[8] Nikolaj Becker, Paolo Sibani, Stefan Boettcher, and
Skanda Vivek. Temporal and spatial heterogeneity in
aging colloids: a mesoscopic model. J. Phys.: Condens.
Matter, 26:505102, 2014.

[9] Luca Cipelletti, S. Manley, R. C. Ball, and D. A. Weitz.
Universal aging features in the restructuring of fractal
colloidal gels. Phys. Rev. Lett., 84:2275–2278, 2000.

[10] Tadashi Kajiya, Tetsuharu Narita, Veronique Schmitt,
Francois Lequeuxa, and Laurence Talini. Slow dynam-
ics and intermittent quakes in soft glassy systems. Soft
Matter, 9:11129, 2013.

[11] Felix Ritort. Glassiness in a model without energy bar-

riers. Physical Review Letters, 75:1190, 1995.

[12] P. Yunker, Z. Zhang, K. B. Aptowicz, and A. G. Yodh. Ir-
reversible rearrangements, correlated domains, and local
structure in aging glasses. Phys. Rev. Lett., 103:115701,
2009.

[13] Rojman Zargar, Bernard Nienhuis, Peter Schall, and

Daniel Bonn. Direct measurement of the free energy
of aging hard sphere colloidal glasses. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
110:258301, 2013.

[14] P. Sibani and H. Jeldtoft Jensen.

Intermittency, aging
and extremal ﬂuctuations. Europhys. Lett., 69:563–569,
2005.

[15] Paolo Sibani. Mesoscopic ﬂuctuations and intermittency

in aging dynamics. Europhys. Lett., 73:69–75, 2006.

[16] P. Sibani, G.F. Rodriguez and G.G. Kenning. Intermit-
tent quakes and record dynamics in the thermoremanent
magnetization of a spin-glass. Phys. Rev. B, 74:224407,
2006.

[17] P. Sibani. Linear response in aging glassy systems, inter-
mittency and the Poisson statistics of record ﬂuctuations.
Eur. Phys. J. B, 58:483–491, 2007.

[18] Paolo Sibani. Coarse-graining complex dynamics: Con-
tinuous time random walks vs. record dynamics. EPL,
101:3004, 2013.

[19] David Aristoﬀ and Charlesi Radin. Random Loose Pack-
ing in Granular Matter. Journal of Statistical Physics,
135:1–23, 2006.

[20] Eric R. Weeks, J.C. Crocker, Andrew C. Levitt, An-
drew Schoﬁeld, and D.A. Weitz. Three-dimensional di-
rect imaging of structural relaxation near the colloidal
glass transition. Science, 287:627–631, 2000.

[21] Jesper Dall and Paolo Sibani. Faster Monte Carlo sim-
ulations at low temperatures. The waiting time method.
Comp. Phys. Comm., 141:260–267, 2001.

[22] Ludovic Berthier, Giulio Biroli, Jean-Philippe Bouchaud,
Luca Cipelletti, and Wim van Saarloos, editors. Dynam-
ical Heterogeneities in Glasses, Colloids, and Granular
Media. Oxford University Press, 2011.

[23] Paolo Sibani and Jesper Dall. Log-Poisson statistics and
pure aging in glassy systems. Europhys. Lett., 64:8–14,
2003.

[24] Gerold Adam and Julian H. Gibbs. On the temperature
dependence of cooperative relaxation properties in glass-
forming liquids. J. Chem. Phys., 43:139, 1965.

[25] P. Sollich and M. R. Evans. Glassy dynamics in the asym-
metrically constrained kinetic Ising chain. Phys. Rev. E,
68:031504, 2003.

