Note on the ”size” of Schroedinger cats∗

1Department of Physics, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA

Anthony J. Leggett1

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
3
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
t
n
a
u
q
[
 
 

1
v
2
9
9
3
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

PACS numbers:

In ref. [1] Korsbakken et al.deﬁne a number which they
propose as a measure of the degree of ”macro/mesoscopic
distinctness” of two states which may be involved in a
quantum superposition. Crudely speaking,this number
(which they call ∆Ntot; for brevity I will refer to it as
W) is the minimum number of single particles which one
needs to shift to orthogonal states in order to go from one
state to the other.More technically, in a basis k in which
the single-particle occupation numbers nk are diagonal,
we have

W = X

|∆nk|

k

(1)

where ∆nk is the diﬀerence in hnki in the two states
compared. They then evaluate W for those experiments
on ﬂux qubits in the existing literature which have been
interpreted as evidence for ”macroscopic quantum coher-
ence”, and ﬁnd that the maximum value which has been
obtained to date is only of order 5000. They comment
that ”[this number is] well short of anything that could
reasonably be considered meso-or macroscopic”.

While I agree with Korsbakken et al.’s evaluation of
W for the ﬂux qubit experiments, the purpose of this
note is to point out that for at least one type of situa-
tion where I think most people would agree that the two
states in question are ”macro-(not meso-!)scopically dis-
tinct” the value of W is actually smaller than in those
experiments. However, examination of the the example
used suggests strongly that the use of the value of W
as a measure of ”macroscopic distinctness” is rather un-
natural,and suggests a diﬀerent ﬁgure of merit, which I
evaluate for the ﬂux qubit case.

Let us provisionally deﬁne two diﬀerent states of a
physical system as ”macroscopically distinct” if they can
be resolved by the unaided human senses over a ”rea-
sonable” period,say for deﬁniteness one second;and fur-
ther more deﬁne two states as ”mesoscopically distinct”
if they can be similarly resolved under some magniﬁca-
tion X −1. (The reader is invited to pause at this point
and decide,before reading further,whether he/she agrees
with the ﬁrst deﬁnition, and to choose a value of X in the
second deﬁnition). Now, the minimum spatial diﬀerence

∗This note was originally written (but not widely circulated) in
April 2009,in response to a preprint version of ref. [1].This slightly
expanded version is posted now because of its relevance to ref. [4].

which can be resolved by the unaided human eye is about
1.5 microns [2]. Let us err on the side of conservatism
and thus consider a particle, say for deﬁniteness of LiF,
of diameter 5 microns,traversing its own diameter over a
period of a second; then according to the above deﬁnition
this state of the particle is macroscopically distinct from
its rest state.(Similarly, the two corresponding states of
a particle of diameter 5X microns are ”mesoscopically”
distinct.)

Now let us make an approximate evaluation of the
number W for this pair of states.It is convenient to in-
troduce quite generically (also for the ﬂux- qubit case)
a characteristic velocity v0 such that the contribution of
each kind of particle to W can be written in the form
N (v/v0) where N is the total number of such particle in-
volved. Thus, for the ﬂux-qubit case, which involves only
electrons, N is of order 109-1010 and v0 is,apart from a
factor of order unity,the electron Fermi velocity [1].

The LiF particle considered contains about 8 ∗ 1014
electrons and about 2.2 times that number of nucleons.
Consider ﬁrst the electrons. Since in the rest state they
occupy only Bloch-wave states in ﬁlled bands, and the
only diﬀerence in the moving state is that the bands are
shifted, it is clear that the value of v0 is simply of order
h/ma, where a is the linear dimension of the cubic unit
cell; thus v0 is about 3∗108 cm/sec (which is comparable,
not surprisingly, to the Fermi velocity of a typical metal).
Before assessing the eﬀect of the nucleons, let us con-
sider one possible objection to the above line of argu-
ment: It may be argued that the only way in which we
can in fact tell the two states of the particle apart is be-
cause we actually discriminate not the two velocities but
the two positions occupied after one second, for which
W (or even the contribution to it from the electrons) is
deﬁnitely of order N. Even supposing that this argument
is psychophysically correct, the problem is that in view
of the diﬀerent nature of the geometry there is no cor-
responding number one can deﬁne for the ﬂux qubit, so
the point seems moot.

In considering the nucleons, it is at ﬁrst sight tempt-
ing to take v0 to be of the order of the root-mean-square
atomic velocity, which is about three orders of magnitude
smaller than the electron Fermi velocity; this would give
a contribution to W several orders of magnitude greater
than that of the electrons. However-and this is the cru-
cial point-if we take the deﬁnition given by Korsbakken
et al. seriously, we should actually take v0 to be of the or-
der of the rms velocity of the individual nucleons within

the nucleus! Since the latter is about one order of mag-
nitude larger than the electron Fermi velocity, and the
number of nucleons is only about twice that of the elec-
trons, the nucleon contribution to W is only about 0.2 of
the electronic one.

Putting these results together, we see that the value of
W for the two macroscopically distinct states of our LiF
particle is approximately 1.2 ∗ 8 ∗ 1014 ∗ (5 ∗ 10−4/3 ∗ 108),
i.e.around 1600- smaller than that for ”best” ﬂux qubit!
It is amusing that by reducing the size to the ”minimum
visible” value of 1.5 microns we can actually get a value
of W which is smaller than 3.

Of course,the reader’s ﬁrst and entirely natural reac-
tion to this surprising result will no doubt be that I have
”cheated” by not treating the motion of the individual
nucleons in terms of that of the composite nuclei. But
my point is that the ”cheating” is also implicit in the
calculation carried out in ref. [1]: If one wishes, perhaps
reasonably, to argue that when a particular type of parti-
cle is bound into a composite then the quantity W should
be evaluated in terms of the ∆nk of the composite, then
one must be prepared to treat the ﬂux-qubit case in terms
of the center-of-mass coordinates of the Cooper pairs,
which are, after all, perfectly good ”composites”. (One
can bolster this point by a thought-experiment in which
we sweep the system across the ”BCS-BEC crossover”;
at the BEC end it is clear that it is the COM degree of
freedom of the molecules which is relevant, and current
theory and experiment suggests no discontinuity in the
crossover).

I

should

note

that

Before

proceeding,

in
p.3,col.2.para.2 of their extended discussion in ref.[3]
Korsbakken et al. also brieﬂy refer to the Cooper pairs
and conclude that ”looking at Cooper-pair modes rather
than single-electron modes does not change the eﬀective
cat size”. However, the quantity they consider (the
∆Nk,−k of their eqn.(6)) bears no relation to anything
that could reasonably be called the COM wave function
of the pairs, and would give a very small cat size even in
the BEC limit; I therefore believe that it is irrelevant to
the present discussion.

2

ate) many-body states which are superposed correspond
to center-of-mass (kinematic) angular momentum 1/2 ∗ 
and −1/2 ∗  respectively and the corresponding COM
wave functions are mutually orthogonal. Then if one
takes the reasonable point of view that the fraction of
all the electrons which are ”bound into Cooper pairs” is
Np/N where Np ≈N ∗ (∆/ǫF ) is the single macroscopic
eignvalue of the reduced 2-particle density matrix, then
the resultant value of W (call it WCP ) is of order 106-
107. Since the corresponding number for the LiF particle
(i.e.that obtained by treating the basic constituents as
electrons and nuclei) is about 105, we see that the states
superposed in the ﬂux qubit should still count as macro-
scopically distinct.

The ”asymmetric” case, which is realized in the ex-
periment reported in ref.
[4], is trickier, since while the
many-body wave functions of the two states whose su-
perposition is conﬁrmed [5] are of course mutually or-
thogonal to a very high degree of accuracy, the corre-
sponding Cooper-pair COM wave functions are not. In
this case the most natural extension of the deﬁnition of
WCP would seem to be simply Np times (1 − K) where
K is the overlap of the two COM wave functions (this
would seem to correspond most closely to the deﬁnition
of W for the single-particle case in ref. [1]). However, it
is clear that a more quantitative discussion is desirable.

I am grateful to Birgitta Whaley for sending me a copy
of ref.[1] before publication, to Frances Wang for informa-
tion on human visual acuity and to Markus Aspelmeyer
for helpful discussions. I also thank Mao-chuang Yeh for
pointing out a numerical error in the original version, and
for useful comments.

[1] J.Korsbakken, F.K.Wilhelm and K.B.Whaley, Physics

Scripta T137, 014022 (2009)

[2] R-X.Wang,private communication.
[3] J.Korsbakken,F.K.Wilhelm and K.B.Whaley,Europhysics

Letters 89,30003 (2010)

Suppose,ﬁrst,that the external ﬂux is half a ﬂux quan-
tum (”symmetric” case), so that the (classically degener-

[4] G.Knee et al.,submitted to Nature
[5] In the sense that a macrorealistic account is excluded.

