6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
3
1

 
 
]

Y
C
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
2
1
0
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Death and Life of Great Italian Cities:

A Mobile Phone Data Perspective

Marco De Nadai

Fondazione Bruno Kessler

University of Trento

Trento, Italy

denadai@fbk.eu

Jacopo Staiano
Sorbonne Universités

Paris, France

jacopo.staiano@lip6.fr

Roberto Larcher
SKIL, Telecom Italia

Trento, Italy

roberto.larcher@telecomitalia.it

Nicu Sebe

University of Trento

Trento, Italy

sebe@disi.unitn.it

Daniele Quercia

Bell Labs

Cambridge, United Kingdom

quercia@cantab.net

Bruno Lepri

Fondazione Bruno Kessler

Trento, Italy

lepri@fbk.eu

ABSTRACT
The Death and Life of Great American Cities was written
in 1961 and is now one of the most inﬂuential book in city
planning. In it, Jane Jacobs proposed four conditions that
promote life in a city. However, these conditions have not
been empirically tested until recently. This is mainly because
it is hard to collect data about “city life”. The city of Seoul
recently collected pedestrian activity through surveys at
an unprecedented scale, with an eﬀort spanning more than
a decade, allowing researchers to conduct the ﬁrst study
successfully testing Jacobs’s conditions. In this paper, we
identify a valuable alternative to the lengthy and costly
collection of activity survey data: mobile phone data. We
extract human activity from such data, collect land use and
socio-demographic information from the Italian Census and
Open Street Map, and test the four conditions in six Italian
cities. Although these cities are very diﬀerent from the places
for which Jacobs’s conditions were spelled out (i.e., great
American cities) and from the places in which they were
recently tested (i.e., the Asian city of Seoul), we ﬁnd those
conditions to be indeed associated with urban life in Italy as
well. Our methodology promises to have a great impact on
urban studies, not least because, if replicated, it will make it
possible to test Jacobs’s theories at scale.

1.

INTRODUCTION

By 2030, 9% of the world population is expected to live in
just 41 mega-cities, each of which will accommodate more
than 10M inhabitants1. Cities are essential crucibles for
innovation, tolerance, novelty, and economic prosperity [4,
13], but they also face challenges in terms of, for example,
traﬃc, pollution, poverty, and criminality [13].

1http://www.economist.com/node/21642053

WWW 2016, April 11–15, 2016, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
.

A fundamental research question that urban planners,
sociologists and economists are investigating is what creates
urban life. The urban sociologist Jane Jacobs in The Death
and Life of Great American Cities [19], one of the most
inﬂuential books in city planning, introduced the urban
physical environment (the urban fabric) as an essential factor
for urban vitality [19]. As the book title says, Jacobs dealt
with the death and life of American cities. In its most basic
form, her argument was that death was caused by elimination
of pedestrian activity (e.g., by highway construction, large-
scale development projects), and that life was created by the
presence of pedestrians at all times of the day.

She argued that, to promote urban life in large cities, the
physical environment should be characterized by diversity
at both the district and street level. Diversity, in turn,
requires four essential conditions: (i) mixed land uses, that
is, districts should serve more than two primary functions,
and that would attract people who have diﬀerent purposes;
(ii) small blocks, which promote contact opportunities among
people; (iii) buildings diverse in terms of age and form, which
make it possible to mix high-rent and low-rent tenants; and
(iv) suﬃcient dense concentration of people and buildings.

Despite their importance, those conditions have not been
empirically tested all together until recently, mainly because
it is hard to collect data about which neighborhoods have
full urban life and which have little of it. After an eﬀort
lasting more than a decade, the city of Seoul recently man-
aged to collect pedestrian activity through surveys, and local
researchers performed the ﬁrst study testing Jacobs’s condi-
tions in the city [40]. The researchers found her claims to
hold in Seoul too: mixed use, old buildings, and density all
contributed to urban life.

To complement the lengthy and costly survey-based collec-
tion of activity data, this work put forward the use of mobile
phone data. We extracted human activity measurements
from mobile phone records in six Italian cities - Bologna,
Florence, Milan, Palermo, Rome, and Turin. These cities are
very diﬀerent from the places in which Jacobs’s conditions
were spelled out (i.e., great American cities) and from the
places in which they were recently tested (i.e., the Asian
city of Seoul). Despite that, our results showed that the
four conditions for promoting urban life do hold for Italian

cities as well. To produce those results, we made three main
contributions:

• Building upon previous works [19, 40], we proposed a
set of metrics for urban diversity derived from open,
aggregated, and anonymous map data, and a metric
for urban vitality derived from mobile phone activity
(Section 5);

• We provided a comprehensive assessment of the pre-
dictive power of Jacobs’s diversity conditions in the
Italian context (Section 6);

• Finally, we identiﬁed our work’s theoretical and practi-

cal implications, and its limitations (Section 7).

2. RELATED WORK

Our work is best placed in an emerging interdisciplinary
ﬁeld called “urban computing” [42]. This combines computer
science approaches with more traditional ﬁelds like urban
planning, urban economy, and urban sociology.

The idea of testing urban theories using novel sources of
data (e.g., social media, online images and videos, mobile
phone data) has received increasing attention [35, 36, 37].
The urban sociologist Kevin Lynch showed that people living
in an urban environment create their own personal “mental
map” of the city based on features such as the areas they
visit and the routes they use [26]. Hence, he hypothesized
that, the more recognizable a city, the more navigable the
city. To test Lynch’s theory, Quercia et al. built a web game
that crowd-sourced Londoners’ mental images of the city [36].
They showed that areas suﬀering from social problems such
as poor living conditions and crime are rarely present in
residents’ mental images.

Researchers also investigated which urban elements people
use to visually judge a street to be safe, wealthy, and attrac-
tive using web crowdsourcing games [32, 35, 37], and they
also studied how to identify walkable streets using the social
media data of Flickr and Foursquare (e.g., unsafe streets
tended to be photographed during the day, while walkable
streets were tagged with walkability-related keywords [34]).
The recent availability of large-scale data sets, such as those
automatically collected by mobile phone networks, opens
new possibilities for studying city dynamics at ﬁner and
unprecedented granularity [5]. Mobile phone data represents
a highly valuable proxy for human mobility patterns [14,
22, 39]. Such data was recently used to map functional
uses [16, 23], to identify places that play a major role in the
life of citizens [18], to compare cities based on their spatial
similarities and diﬀerences [24], and to predict socio-economic
indicators [11, 38], including crime [6, 7, 41].

Researchers recently tested Jane Jacobs’s observations
about crime [6, 7, 41]. They veriﬁed her natural surveillance
theory. She posited that people diversity and presence of
visitors in a neighborhood contribute to natural surveillance
and, as such, discourage crime: as people are moving around
an area, they eﬀectively become “eyes on the street” able to
observe what is going on around them.

To go beyond crime, we set out to conduct a comprehensive
validation of Jacobs’s four conditions for urban life. To do
that, we gather several sets of data.

3. SETS OF DATA

Mobile Phone Activity. Every time a mobile phone com-
municates, a radio base station delivers the communication
through the network, and a new call data record is created.
This record reports the time of the communication, and the
radio base station that handled it. Diﬀerent types of call
records exist, recording various types of communication (e.g.,
incoming calls, Internet, outgoing SMS). We decided to focus
on Internet activity, since it allows for the passive reconstruc-
tion of people’s mobility: even in the absence of direct user
activity (e.g., making/receiving a call, receiving/sending an
SMS), mobile phones can be tracked since they are likely to
be connected to the Internet for background traﬃc and push
notiﬁcations.

Call records have been provided by the Semantics and
Knowledge Innovation Lab of Telecom Italia Mobile, which
is the largest mobile operator in Italy with 34% of the entire
market share2. Our data is aggregated every 60 minutes,
comes from both TIM customers and roaming customers in
the six cities, and covers the time ranging from February to
October 2014.

OpenStreetMap. OpenStreetMap3 (OSM) is a global
project that aims to collaboratively create a detailed map of
the world. With more than 2.1 million contributors, it has
become the most valuable and openly accessible source of in-
formation about the physical world. OSM data is composed
by three data primitives: nodes, ways and relations. Nodes
deﬁne points in space like Point Of Interests (which we call
“places”), ways deﬁne roads and other linear features, and
relations reﬂect how those elements are related to each other.
Since we focused on the geographic unit of a block (i.e., the
smallest area that is surrounded by street segments), we ﬁl-
tered out suburban elements: ways with tag highways using
Overpass API4, footpaths, primary roads, and proposed
roads.

Census Data. The Italian National Institute for Statistics
(ISTAT) provides, under open data licences, information
gathered via the 2011 Italian Census5. We used the census’
variables related to people and buildings (Table 1), which
were deﬁned at various geographic levels.

Land Use. Urban land-cover and land-use for Large Urban
Zones (LUZs) is mapped by the Urban ATLAS European
project6. This project exploits satellite images to categorize
the city in 20 classes (e.g., agricultural areas, continuous
urban fabric) with a precision between 0.25 and 1 hectares,
and accuracy above 80%. The dataset is built and validated
for 2006, while its version updated to 2012 will be released
at the end of 2015. However, for Turin and Rome, the new
data is already available, and we used it.

Infrastructures. In addition to the Urban ATLAS dataset,
we used the ISTAT statistical atlas of infrastructures (Atlante

2http://bit.ly/1LtNrFY
3http://www.openstreetmap.com
4http://overpass-turbo.eu/
5http://www.istat.it/it/archivio/104317
6http://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/data/
urban-atlas

ISTAT code Description

P1
E2
E3
E8-E16

E17-E20

E21-E26

ADDETTI

number of residents
number of used buildings
number of residential buildings
number of buildings in 9 age bands in the range
[1919, 2011]
number of buildings of 4 types based on their
number of ﬂoors
number of buildings of 6 types based on their
internal apartments
number of employees

ISTAT open data variables under study.
Table 1:
The last variable comes from the census of industry
and services (censimento dell’industria e dei servizi ),
while the rest come from the census of population
and housing (censimento della popolazione e delle
abitazioni ).

statistico delle infrastrutture)7, which provides details on the
logistic facilities (e.g., presence of railways) in Italy.

Foursquare Data. Created in 2008, Foursquare is the world
leading location-based social network. It has attracted more
than 30 million users8. Through a gamiﬁcation system, users
are encouraged to check-in their geographical position into
the social network and sharing the places they visit (venues).
Venues are places whose geographical information is enriched
with semantic labels specifying details about them. Three
hierarchical levels for place categories exist in Foursquare:
an abstract level grouping venues in macro categories (e.g.,
“food”); a more speciﬁc one (e.g., “restaurant”); and a third
highly detailed level (e.g., “Thai restaurant”)9. We extracted
Foursquare venues from the public API10 for the categories
in Table 2.

Group

NightLife

Art-night

Services

Foursquare category

Brewery, Champagne Bar, Cocktail Bar, Dive
Bar, Gay Bar, Hookah Bar, Lounge, Night Mar-
ket, Night club, Other Nightlife, Pub, Strip
Club, Whisky Bar, Wine bar, Nightlife Spot
Laser Tag, Movie Theater, Music Venue, Per-
forming Arts
Medical Center, Library, Government Building,
Military Base, Post Oﬃce

Eating-drinking Food
Org. activity

Outside
Commercial

Comedy Club, Country Dance Club, Salsa
Club, Club, Community Center, Cultural Cen-
ter, Library, Social Club, Spiritual
Park, Plaza, Pedestrian Plaza
Shop & Service (excluding ATM, Construction,
EV Charging, Gas Station / Garage, News-
stand)

Table 2: The Foursquare categories of the venues
under study.

7http://www.istat.it/it/archivio/41899
8http://bit.ly/1VNf4jQ
9https://developer.foursquare.com/categorytree
10https://api.foursquare.com

4. DEATH AND LIFE OF CITIES

In The Death and Life of Great American Cities [19], Jane
Jacobs argued that “death” in urban areas is caused by the
elimination of pedestrian activity from urban streets. By
contrast, urban life is created by a continual sidewalk ballet
consisting of a street ﬁlled with pedestrians at all times
of the day.
In her own words, “a well-used city street is
apt to be a safe street and a deserted city street is apt
to be unsafe” [19]. This means that streets must be used
fairly continuously during the day, both by residents and by
strangers. These “eyes on streets” generate a virtuous loop
which, in turn, increases public safety, creates diverse face-
to-face interactions, and contributes to the local economy.

Jacobs spelled out four diversity requirements essential for
the generation and maintenance of urban life. First, a district
should serve more than one primary function, preferably
more than two. This attracts people with diverse purposes
who end up sharing common facilities. Moreover, when
primary uses are combined in a way that attracts people at
diﬀerent times of the day, then that positively impacts the
local economy. For instance, a neighbourhood where people
are present only during oﬃce hours is likely to provide only
a few, if any, leisure facilities: it would be neither eﬃcient
nor attractive for residents. Conversely, should a secondary
function ﬂourish by, e.g., the presence of theaters, museums
or night-life places, residents would likely beneﬁt.

Second, Jacobs argued that street blocks must be short.
She observed that large rectangular blocks are apt to thwart
the eﬀective mixture of use and people, resulting into paths
that meet each other too infrequently. By contrast, smaller
blocks provide more intersections, and thus slow down au-
tomobiles, which, she argued, are inclined to destroy urban
vitality by discouraging the presence of pedestrian activity.
Third, in Jacobs’s view, the buildings in a district should
be diverse in terms of age and form. This ensures diversity
of economic activity. Diverse buildings make it possible to
have a mixture of jobs (i.e., high-, medium- and moderate-
income jobs) and a mixture of tenants (e.g., high-rent and
low-rent tenants) [12, 15, 19, 21]. Her view came from ob-
serving large-scale projects in the New York of her time: she
saw that large-scale buildings did not change over time and
hardly adapted to the environment that surrounded them;
by contrast, old buildings helped to cultivate new primary
uses in the neighborhood (e.g., new companies were likely to
start and initially grow in old and low-rent buildings).

The fourth and ﬁnal condition is about dense concentration
of people and buildings. The idea is that density fosters
“lively” district that are able to attract people for diﬀerent
purposes.

Jacobs emphasized that all four factors are necessary:
density alone cannot create urban diversity, and mixed-land
use would not ﬂourish in areas with big blocks and of low
density.

Further, in addition to those four conditions, Jacobs talked
about ‘vacuums’, which are patches of land dedicated to a
single use (e.g., transport facilities, parks). Those elements
might be good or bad. Small railway stations, bus stops and
small parks may act as hubs for the pedestrian activity; but,
at the same time, if not well managed, a park could be used
only at a certain time of the day, exposing it to deprivation
and criminality.

#Districts Size (avg) Population (avg)

Land use

Distribution

µ

City

Bologna
Florence
Milan
Palermo
Rome
Turin

23
21
85
43
146
56

3.34
2.89
1.72
2.01
3.24
2.00

15,918
16,633
14,551
15,075
17,312
15,543

Table 3: Number, average size (in km2), and popu-
lation of the districts in our six cities.

5. METHODOLOGY

Our approach leverages mobile Internet activity from call
data records to extract proxies for urban vitality, and web
data from public entities (e.g., national census) and com-
mercial ones (e.g., Foursquare) to extract urban diversity
as per Jacobs’s four conditions. Our goal is to study the
relationship between urban vitality and diversity. Next, we
spell out the metrics and the regression models we used to
meet that goal.

In the 2011 Italian census, the smallest administrative
unit of cities is represented by the census sections (sezioni
di censimento), also called blocks. These sections are delim-
ited by street segments and are grouped with other nearby
sections to form a census area (area di censimento) called
district. The boundaries of a district are drawn on the basis
of socio-economic conditions in a way that districts can be
compared with each other in terms of, for example, popula-
tion: districts have between 13,000 and 18,000 inhabitants11.
This is a loose constraint, however: city administrations may
ignore it and deﬁne their own districts. Empirically, we verify
that, in our data, a district covers an average area of 2.47
km2 with an average population density of 10,000 people
per km2 (Table 3). Jacobs did not deﬁne any strict criterion
concerning district size: she simply proposed that the edge of
an administrative district should not exceed 2.4 km, and that
each district should have a minimum population of 50,000
people. Compared to that deﬁnition, our districts are similar
in terms of area and smaller in terms of population.
5.1

Jacobs’s metrics

We extracted several variables to quantify the four condi-

tions (Table 4), and we will detail them next.

5.1.1 Land use
The ﬁrst of Jacobs’s four conditions is to have mixed pri-
mary uses in a district [19]. Primary categories include resi-
dential buildings, oﬃces, industrial facilities, entertainment
places, education facilities, recreation facilities, museums,
libraries, and galleries.

We computed Land Use Mix (LUM) [10] in district i as:

LUMi = − n(cid:88)

j=1

Pi,j log(Pi,j)

log(n)

(1)

where Pi,j is the percentage of square footage with land
use j in district i, and n is the number of possible land
uses (in our case, n = 3). If district i’s land is dedicated

11We exclude districts that are not densely populated (e.g.
the national park in Rome, the volcano in Naples) These are
marked by the Italian census with an identiﬁer ace equal to
zero.

(1) Land use mix
(2) Closeness to small parks (SPs)
(3) Residential vs. Non-Res.
(4) Housing types
(5) Commercial
(6) Nightlife
(7) Nightlife density
(8) Daily
(9) 3rdPlaces

Small blocks

(10) Block area
(11) Intersections density
(12) Anisotropicity

Aged buildings

(14) building age
(16) σbuilding age
(17) Employees per company

Concentration

(18) Population density
(19) Employment density
(20) population density
employee density
|internal apartments|
(21)

|buildings|

(22) Density of daily places
(23) Density non-daily places

Vacuums

(24) Closeness to large parks
(25) Closeness to railways
(26) Closeness to highways
(27) Closeness to water

Mobile phone activity

(28) Activity density

0.73

1 × 10−3

0.67
4.98
0.30
0.10

1 × 10−5
1 × 10−4

0.02

9.61

1 × 10−4

0.38

50.34
12.96
6.98

0.01

5 × 10−3

3.72

15.31

5 × 10−3
3 × 10−3

3 × 10−3
1 × 10−3
6 × 10−4
1 × 10−3

3.84

Table 4: Urban diversity metrics plus mobile Inter-
net activity. Most variables are not normally dis-
tributed. Density measures are computed with sur-
face area in m2, and closeness measures are the in-
verse of the distance (1/m).

to one use only, then LU Mi is zero; instead, if the land is
used equally in all n ways, then LU Mi is one. The higher
LU Mi, the more mixed i’s land use. We deﬁned the three
land uses following the recommendations in [28]: the ﬁrst
land use is “residential”; the second includes the categories
“commercial”, “institutional and governmental”, and “resource
and industrial”; and the third includes “park and recreational”
and “water”.

Since well-managed parks might well function as hubs for
pedestrian activity, we deﬁned the average distance from the
nearest small park (area smaller than 1 km2) for each district

i:

Closeness to SMi = (

(cid:88)

j∈Bi

1
|Bi|

dist(j, closest(j, SM )))

−1

we computed:

3rdplacesi =

|3rdplacesi|
|placesi|

(9)

Small blocks

We determined whether a place is a third place or not by
following the 4-category classiﬁcation proposed by Jeﬀres et
al. [20]. Third places fall into these four categories: eating,
drinking and talking (e.g., coﬀee shops, bars, pubs, restau-
rants, and cafes); organized activities contributing to social
capital [33] (e.g., places of worship, clubs, organizations, com-
munity centers, and senior centers); outdoor (e.g., plazas and
parks); and commercial venues (e.g., stores, malls, shopping
centers, markets, beauty salons, and barber shops).
5.1.2
Jacobs listed the presence of small blocks as the second
necessary condition for diversity. Small blocks are believed
to support stationary activities and provide opportunities
for short-term and low-intensity contacts, easing interactions
with other people in a relaxed and relatively undemanding
way. Speciﬁcally, she stated that “lowly, unpurposeful and
random as they may appear, sidewalk contacts are the small
change from which a city’s wealth of public life may grow”.
She criticized super-blocks and rectangular blocks, which
constrain urban mobility with high travel distances and
limited opportunities of cross-use.

The easiest way to identify small blocks is to compute the
average block area among the set Bi of blocks in district i:

Block areai =

1
|Bi|

areaj

(10)

(cid:88)

j∈Bi

Since a district with high intersections density is likely to

contribute to random contacts, we also computed:
|intersectionsi|

Intersection densityi =

areai

(11)

Finally, since block size is distributed as a power law

Ar with r ∼ 2, we characterized a district i by its
P (A) ∼ 1
average shape anisotropicity [25] of the blocks Bi within it:

District anisotropicityi =

1
|Bi|

Φj

(12)

(cid:88)

j∈Bi

where Φj is the ratio between the area of the block j and
the area of its circumscribed circle Cj:

Φj =

areaj
areaCj

(13)

The quantity Φj is always smaller than one, and the larger
its value, the less anisotropic block j, the more opportunities
for contacts the block creates.

All those metrics were computed using the district net area
areai, which excludes unpopulated patches such as rivers
and natural parks.
5.1.3 Aged buildings
Jacobs stressed the importance of having old buildings in
a district. If a district has only new buildings, then it would
have only enterprises that can support the high costs of new
constructions. If it has old buildings too, instead, it would
be able to incubate new small enterprises that cannot aﬀord
high rents, and that will beneﬁt the local economy in the
long run: “If the incubation is successful enough, the yield
of the building can, and often does, rise” [19].

(2)
where Bi is the set of blocks in district i, closest(j, Y ) is a
function that ﬁnds the geographically closest element in set
Y from block j’s centroid, SM is the set of small parks, and
dist(a, b) is the geographic distance between two elements’
centroids a and b.

We also computed the Residential/Non-Residential (RNR)

balance in district i as:

RNRi = 1 − | Resi − N onResi

Resi + N onResi

|

(3)

where Resi is the area occupied by residential buildings
in district i, and N onResi is the area occupied by non-
residential ones. The higher RN Ri, the more balanced the
district in terms of residential vs. non-residential uses.

To go beyond horizontal land use and look at vertical
development, we computed the average number of ﬂoors per
building in district i and called it ‘housing types’ (as [40]
did):

Housing typesi =

(4)

where hc,i is the number of buildings that are in height
category c in district i, and zc is the number of ﬂoors cor-
responding to height category c. The sums were repeated
over all height categories (i.e., over the categories E17-E20
in Table 1).

The previous deﬁnitions have characterized spatial use
in terms of land use and building use. However, activities
are important too. Jacobs argued for mixing primary uses
so that people are on the street at diﬀerent times of the
day. To characterize spatial use in terms of activities, upon
Foursquare data, we determined whether each place is used
daily (e.g., convenience stores, restaurants, sport facilities) or
not, and whether it is used at night or daylight [40]. Based
on that, we deﬁned:

(cid:80)
(cid:80)
c hc,i · zc
c hc,i

Commerciali =

Nightlifei =

|non daily-use placesi|

|placesi|

|nightlife placesi|

|placesi|
|nightlife placesi|

Nightlife densityi =

areai

Dailyi = (

1
|Bi|

dist(j, closest(j, D)))

−1

(cid:88)

j∈Bi

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

where D is the set of places that are used daily, and Bi is,
again, the set of street blocks in district i.

Also, not all activities are equal. There are activities
that are more ‘social’ than others. To capture that, we re-
sorted to the concept of third places. These are deﬁned by
Oldeburg [30] as the “great, good places” that foster commu-
nity and communication among people outside home (the
ﬁrst place) and work (the second place): “they are places
where people gather primarily to enjoy each others’ company”.
Third Places function as unique public spaces for social inter-
action, providing a context for sociability, spontaneity, com-
munity building and emotional expressiveness [31]. Therefore,

As a ﬁrst measure, we computed the average building age

in district i:

Building agei =

(cid:80)
b |buildingb,i| · oldb
b |buildingb,i|

(14)

(cid:80)

This measures how old, on average, a building in district i is.
Since age is expressed in age bands in the Italian census (the
ﬁrst band is E8 in Table 1, and the last is E16), we needed to
compute the temporal length of each band. More speciﬁcally,
for each band b in the range [startb, endb], we computed:

(last − startb) + (last − endb)

oldb =

2

(15)

where last is the year of the latest built building in the whole
census data. Then, in equation (14), we weighted age band
b’s temporal length (oldb) by the number of buildings in that
band (|buildingb,i|), and that gave us the average age of the
district’s buildings.

We also computed the corresponding standard deviation

as:

σbuilding agei =

(cid:80)
b |buildingb,i|(cid:1)2 · σ2
(cid:0)(cid:80)
b |buildingb,i|2

(16)

where σ2 is the standard deviation of the number of buildings
in each band. The higher the standard deviation, the higher
the district’s heterogeneity in terms of building age.

Finally, we computed the average number of employees

per company in district i:

Employees per companyi =

1
|Fi|

(cid:88)

j∈Fi

employees(j)

(17)

where Fi is the set of companies in district i.
5.1.4 Concentration
Jacobs’s fourth and ﬁnal condition is about having con-
centration of (both residential and non-residential) buildings
and of people. Similarly to Sung et al. [40], we computed
two sets of concentration measures: one for people, and the
other for buildings.

First, population and employment density measures were
calculated dividing the number of people (employees) by the
district’s net area.

Population densityi =

|Populationi|

areai

Employment densityi =

|Employed peoplei|

areai

(18)

(19)

We then computed the interaction term between those
two measures as the ratio between population density and
employment density:

Population densityi
Employment densityi

(20)

The higher it is, the more residents (as opposed to employees)
in the district. Diﬀerent values correspond to districts with
diﬀerent social textures.

To add to those people-based concentration measures one

building-based measure, we computed:

internali =

|internal apartmentsi|

|buildingsi|

Closeness to Hi = (

Closeness to Ai = (

1
|Bi|

1
|Bi|

dist(j, closest(j, H)))

−1

dist(j, closest(j, A)))

−1

(26)

(27)

(21)

12We took areas identiﬁed by leisure=park, ﬁltering out the
parks with barrier.

which is the average number of apartments per building.

Finally, as we have done previously, to go beyond people

and buildings and look at activities, we computed:
|daily-use placesi|

Density of daily placesi =

areai

(22)

Density of non-daily placesi =

|non-daily-use placesi|

areai

(23)
These two quantities are not totally anti-correlated to each
other since not all places can be classiﬁed as being fully daily
vs. non-daily.
5.1.5 Vacuums
Border vacuums are places that act as physical obstacles
to pedestrian activity. For instance, parks can be a hub
of pedestrian activity, if eﬃciently managed [19], but they
could also be deplorable places in which criminality ﬂour-
ishes (especially at night). In a similar way, the proximity
to expressways may discourage pedestrian activity or may
eﬀectively connect diﬀerent parts of the city. This is what
Jacobs called “the curse of border vacuums”.

Therefore, we needed to identify large areas with single use.
From OSM, we took parks12, and, from the Urban ATLAS,
we took railway areas, fast transit zones, rivers, lakes, and
highways. That extraction allowed us to build the sets of
large parks LP , railways R, highways H and water areas W .
To verify the impact of a type of vacuum area, say, that of
large parks on a district, we calculated the average distance
between a district’s block (i.e., smallest area surrounded by
street segments) and its closest large park:

Closeness to LPi = (

1
|Bi|

dist(j, closest(j, LP )))

−1

(24)
where dist(j, closest(j, LP ) is the distance between block j
and its closest large park. The sum of distances is done over
all blocks in district i (Bi is indeed the set of district i’s
blocks).

The next type of vacuum area is that of railways. Our
dataset did not diﬀerentiate between rails and stations. How-
ever, in terms of pedestrian activity, the two diﬀer: often,
rails act as obstacles of activity, while stations act as hubs.
To incorporate that distinction, we excluded the stations
(i.e., the 600-meter buﬀer areas around them) from the set
R of railways, and computed:

Closeness to Ri = (

1
|Bi|

dist(j, closest(j, R)))

−1

(25)

(cid:88)

j∈Bi

In a similar way, we computed the average distance between
a district’s block and its closest highway, and its closest water
area:

(cid:88)

j∈Bi

(cid:88)
(cid:88)

j∈Bi

j∈Bi

Figure 1: District activity density in Milan (left) and Rome (right), and their corresponding values of mixed
land use (LUM). The colors are in logarithmic scale.

where H and A are the sets of highways and of water areas.
5.2 Activity density

As it has been extensively done in previous work, we used

mobile Internet activity as a proxy for urban vitality.

To roughly estimate the number of Internet connections
that fell into each district, we needed to represent the ur-
ban space somehow. We chose to represent it as a set of
2-dimensional, non-overlapping, and non-convex polygons.
These polygons come from a Voronoi tessellation based on
the radio stations’ positions.

Then, to estimate the number of Internet call records Si(t)
in each district i at time t, we counted the number of Internet
connections over all polygons v’s that fell into district i:

(cid:88)

v

Si(t) =

Rv(t)

Av∩i

Av − Av∩W

(28)

Av∩i

Av−Av∩W

, which is the proportion Av∩i
Av

where v is a polygon, and Rv(t) is the number of Internet
connections in v at time t. The count of Internet connections
is weighted by
of v’s
area that falls into district i (Av∩i is v’s area that falls into
district i, and Av is v’s total area). From v’s total area we
removed sea areas denoted by W (i.e., we removed Av∩W ).
Then, having Si(t), we computed a district’s activity den-
sity as the average number of Internet connections through-
out a typical business day, divided by the district’s area.
The results for Milan and Rome are shown in Figure 1. The
normalization of surface area makes it possible to compare
the activities of districts of diﬀerent sizes.
5.3 The regression model

We used an Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) model to eval-
uate the relationship between each district’s structural di-
versity (Section 5.1) and the district’s activity density (Sec-
tion 5.2).

Since most of the regression variables were skewed, we
transformed them. More speciﬁcally, we log-transformed
activity density using the natural logarithm, and transformed
the structural diversity metrics using the Box-Cox method [8].
To avoid over-ﬁtting, we did split the data into training set

(75%) and test set (25%), and repeated our measurements
1000 times using a shuﬄe split cross-validation.

We created six linear models. First, we created ﬁve models,
each of which had one of the ﬁve sets of Jacobs’s metrics as
independent variables (i.e., we separately analyzed land use,
small blocks, aged buildings, concentration, and vacuums).
Those models always had activity density as dependent vari-
able. The resulting coeﬃcients are shown in the ﬁrst ﬁve
columns of Table 5. We then had a combined model by
selecting the independent variables through both recursive
feature elimination and stability selection [29]. The resulting
selected variables and corresponding coeﬃcients are shown
in the last column of Table 5.

6. RESULTS
6.1 Land use

Mixed land use matters only in cities in which functional
uses were historically separated like in the case of Milan. By
looking at the ﬁrst two predictors of land use in Table 5,
one learns that mixed land use does not contribute neither
positively nor negatively. That is because not all cities are
equal: land use in Rome is mixed (Figure 1), while Milan
is separated in functional areas. Consequently, in Milan,
vitality is experienced only in the mixed districts. However,
the highest beta coeﬃcient concerning land use is found to
be related to the presence of third places (β = 0.3972). Daily
errands are important, but third places are more so (with
a Spearman’s correlation of 0.8337 with activity density).
These places are public places in which people can hang out
for good company and lively conversations, putting aside the
concerns of home and work (their ﬁrst and second places) [30].
Examples of such places include pubs, coﬀee shops, and
taverns.
6.2 Small blocks

Continental European cities do not have the super-blocks
typical of American cities. This is especially true in Italy,
so it comes at no surprise that block size does not greatly
matter (β = 0.0615 in model “small blocks” of Table 5). By

−0.20.00.20.40.60.81.0LandUseMix−0.20.00.20.40.60.81.01.2LandUseMix0.81.63.47.215.231.9Activitydensity×103ROMEMILANLand use

Small blocks Aged buildings Concentration Vacuums

Combined

0.70
0.0236
0.0409
-0.0180
0.1959***
0.0138
0.0110
-0.1107*
0.0440
0.3972***

AdjR2
Land use mix (1)
Closeness to small parks (SPs) (2)
Residential vs. Non-Res. (RNR) (3)
Housing types (4)
Commercial (5)
Night-life (6)
Night-life density (7)
Daily (8)
3rdPlaces (9)
Block area (10)
Intersections density (11)
Anisotropicity (12)
building age (14)
σbuilding age (16)
Employees per company (17)
Population density (18)
Employment density (19)
population density
employee density (20)
|internal apartments|
(21)

|buildings|

Density of daily places (22)
Density non-daily places (23)
Closeness large parks (24)
Closeness railways (25)
Closeness highways (26)
Closeness water (27)
3rdPlaces × Closeness to highways
Closeness to SPs × Closeness to highways

0.63

0.40

0.73

0.19

0.77

0.0615
0.7380***
0.0462

0.3689***
0.2264***
-0.0778

-0.1480
0.7401***
0.3020*

0.0220

0.2046**
0.1061

0.1854***

0.1914***

0.4344***

0.1384**
0.1745***
-0.3457***
0.0991

-0.1018***

0.0681**
-0.0788**

Table 5: Linear regression models that predict district activity density. Each column is a diﬀerent model.
For each model’s column, the table reports the model’s predictive power (Adjusted R2 in the ﬁrst row) and
the β coeﬃcients. Blank cells correspond to variables that are absent from the model. As for statistical
signiﬁcance, we use the following notation: *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.

.

contrast, the density of intersections does matter: vibrant
urban areas are those with dense streets, which, in fact, slow
down cars and make it easier for pedestrian to cross [9],
creating what Jane Jacobs called the “sidewalk ballet”. This
‘ballet’ goes beyond simple pedestrian activity. It is about
informal contacts and public trust (e.g., children playing on
the street, adults other than their parents paying attention
to them, leaving home keys with shopkeepers). To increase
the potential for such types of interactions, it is essential to
be able to look into each others’ eyes, and only small streets
could foster that.
6.3 Aged buildings

In large American cities, Jacobs observed that neighbor-
hoods with aged buildings tended to have a diversiﬁed local
economy. By mingling building of varying age and conditions
(i.e., mixing expensive building with “a good lot of plain,
ordinary, low-value old buildings, rundown old buildings”),
a neighborhood attracts not only standardized and high-
earning enterprises but also ordinary and innovative ones.
Aged buildings were a rarity in American cities. Back in her
days, Jacobs noted: “in Miami Beach, where novelty is the
sovereign remedy, hotels ten years old are considered aged
and are passed up because others are newer” [19]. Decisions
about which buildings get to stay and which get to go depend

on culture: they are inﬂuenced by the relationship that a
culture has with time and place. In a neighborhood, the
patina of time may be retained, imitated, or removed, as
Kevin Lynch puts it [27]. In Western Europe, the idea of
preservation appeared about 1500 and, since then, retention
is by far preferred over removal. As a result, Italian districts
are deﬁned by age. Central areas are the ancient ones and
their surrounding areas followed over time - each district
ended up having its own era. Consequently, in the Italian
context, mixing buildings of diﬀerent eras is not as important
as (or, rather, as possible as) it is in the American context.
6.4 Concentration

The last of Jacobs’s conditions is about dense concentration
of people and buildings. In our cities, the most informative
purpose is that of oﬃce work (highest beta coeﬃcient for
the column named “Concentration” of Table 5). This is
reasonable as the previous three conditions (embedded in
the regression) speak to the vitality contributed by residents,
and this fourth condition adds to it the vitality contributed
by dwellers who likely work in the district.
6.5 Border vacuums

Finally, looking at the “vacuums” model in Table 5, we
observe little eﬀect of border vacuums. Surprisingly, railways

or rivers - which might hamper pedestrian activity at times -
seem, instead, to be eﬀectively integrated in the social fabric
of active districts. However, as one expects, highways are not:
in general, being close to them ends up being detrimental
(β = −0.3457 in the “vacuums” column and β = −0.1018 in
the “combined” column).

Figure 4 shows to which extent (in terms of β coeﬃcients)

each of Jacobs’s four conditions explains district activity.
6.6 Summary

Taken together, our results suggest that Jacobs’s four
conditions for maintaining a vital urban life hold for Italian
cities as well (see Figure 4). From Figure 4 and the last
column of Table 5, we see that as much as 77% of the
variability of district activity is explained by simple structural
and static features. As Figure 2 details, even individual
features are strongly associated with activity.

Also, the extent to which the diﬀerent features matter does
not dramatically change across cities. To partly verify that,
we took the largest and smallest cities: Rome and Firenze.
As Figure 3 suggests, all the main features mattered to a
very similar extent.

Based on our ﬁndings, to paraphrase the four conditions

in the Italian context, we might say that:

Active Italian districts have dense concentrations of oﬃce
workers, third places at walking distance, small streets, and
historical buildings.

Figure 3: The β coeﬃcients of two city-speciﬁc linear
regression models for Roma and Firenze.

Figure 2: Plots of district activity as a function of in-
tersection density, housing types, employment den-
sity, and closeness to highways. A district’s activity
is strongly associated with the district’s static struc-
tural features.

Figure 4: The predictive power of Jacobs’s features.
The bar size is proportional to the absolute β value
in the linear regression model. The ﬁrst column
shows individual features, and the second shows
grouped features. The three grouped features - con-
centration, land use, and small blocks - plus vacuum
areas explain 77% of the variability of activity den-
sity.

7. DISCUSSION

After having operationalized Jane Jacobs’s four conditions,
we now discuss our work’s practical and theoretical implica-
tions, and the questions it left open.

Practical Implications. We foresee several practical im-
plications of our work:

City dashboards. Part of our work could inform the selection
of which features should go into a city dashboard. We

Intersectionsdensity−9−8−7−6−5−4−3−2ActivityDensity¯R2:0.63HousingtypesActivityDensity¯R2:0.48−3−2−10123Employmentdensity−9−8−7−6−5−4−3−2ActivityDensity¯R2:0.69−3−2−10123ClosenesshighwaysActivityDensity¯R2:0.11−0.2−0.10.00.10.20.30.40.50.6βcoeﬃcientEmploymentdensityHousingtypesIntersectionsdensityClosenesstohighwaysClosenesstoSPsXClosenesstohighways3rdPlacesXClosenesstohighwaysRomaFirenzeCONCENTRATIONLAND USESMALL BLOCKSVACUUMSCLOSENESS TO HIGHWAYSCLOSENESS TO SMALL PARKS XCLOSENESS TO HIGHWAYSEMPLOYMENT DENSITYHOUSING TYPESINTERSECTIONS DENSITY3rd PLACES XCLOSENESS TO HIGHWAYShave shown that a variety of structural features of the
built environment are closely linked to district activity.
Given the importance of those features and the ease
with which they could be computed upon web and
oﬃcial data, city dashboards could show and track
them and, in so doing, could support well-informed
decisions by policy makers, urbanists, and architects.

Quantifying regulatory interventions. In his paper ‘A City
is Not a Tree’ [1], Christopher Alexander argued that
the variety and diversity essential for urban vitality
was being destroyed by the implementation of zoning
laws. Our work has focused on urban diversity features,
the very features that zoning laws impact. To track the
impact of a regulation, one now knows which features
to contrast before and after the implementation of the
regulation.

Place recommendation. How to best place retail stores?
Researchers have recently tried to answer that ques-
tion with semi-automatic mechanisms that identify the
amenities that are missing from a neighborhood. Hi-
dalgo et al. [17] analysed the economic diversity of neigh-
borhoods to recommend new places for them. Similar
analyses could proﬁt from the addition of our work’s
structural features to the already present economic
ones.

Theoretical Implications. Some of Jane Jacobs’s theories
continue to be controversial, while others have been criticized
for their non-veriﬁability. This study showed that those
theories not only are veriﬁable but also are still important
today and valid in the European context too.

Limitations. Our measure of activity has been assumed to
be a good proxy for city’s vitality. However, that measure
has left out one important factor that might be extracted
in the future: temporal dynamics of district activity (e.g.,
diﬀerences between day and night). Also, if one were to have
individual calls records instead of (as in our case) aggregate
ones, one could well extract additional factors: duration of
individual stays, radius of gyration, and identiﬁcation of
particular segments of the population (e.g., pedestrians vs.
non-pedestrians, residents vs. dwellers). Finally, it would
be diﬃcult to fully replicate this study without call records.
Those records were diﬃcult to obtain in the past but have
now been increasingly made publicly available by telecoms
operators for research purposes [2].

8. CONCLUSION

For the ﬁrst time, we veriﬁed Jane Jacobs’s four conditions
necessary for the promotion of urban life in the Italian context.
We have done so by operationalizing her concepts in new
ways: we used mobile phone records to extract a proxy for
urban vitality, and web data to extract structural proxies for
urban diversity. As Jacobs envisioned, vitality and diversity
are intimately linked.

Until now, the research community has relied on limited
data sets that reﬂect how a group of people experience bits
of the city. Here we have found that web data and mobile
records oﬀer insights on how most urban dwellers experience
entire cities. Web data (especially Open Street Map data)
is available around the world, and mobile phone records

have been increasingly made publicly available by telecoms
operators in search of new business models. As such, our
study can be replicated at scale without resorting to lengthy
and costly survey-based data collection.

By collecting bread crumbs from cell phones, social media,
and participatory platforms, researchers will increasingly rely
on data sets orders of magnitude richer than previous urban
studies data sets [3] and, consequently, they will be able
to test traditional urban theories in ﬁne-grained detail - a
totally new way to look at cities.

9. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank OpenStreetMap and all its contributors for

making their data freely available.

10. REFERENCES

[1] C. Alexander. A city is not a tree. Architectural Forum,

1965.

[2] G. Barlacchi, M. De Nadai, R. Larcher, A. Casella,

C. Chitic, G. Torrisi, F. Antonelli, A. Vespignani,
A. Pentland, and B. Lepri. A multi-source dataset of
urban life in the city of Milan and the Province of
Trentino. Scientiﬁc data, 2015.

[3] M. Batty. Big data, smart cities and city planning.

Dialogues in Human Geography, 3(3):274–279, 2013.
[4] L. M. Bettencourt, J. Lobo, D. Helbing, C. K¨uhnert,
and G. B. West. Growth, innovation, scaling, and the
pace of life in cities. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 104(17):7301–7306, 2007.

[5] V. Blondel, A. Decuyper, and G. Krings. A survey of
results on mobile phone datasets analysis. EPJ Data
Science, 4(10), 2015.

[6] A. Bogomolov, B. Lepri, J. Staiano, E. Letouz´e,

N. Oliver, F. Pianesi, and A. Pentland. Moves on the
street: Classifying crime hotspots using aggregated
anonymized data on people dynamics. Big Data,
3(3):148–158, 2015.

[7] A. Bogomolov, B. Lepri, J. Staiano, N. Oliver,

A. Pianesi, and A. Pentland. Once upon a crime:
Towards crime prediction from demographics and
mobile data. In Proceedings of the 16th International
Conference on Multimodal Interaction, pages 427–434,
2014.

[8] G. E. Box and D. R. Cox. An analysis of

transformations. Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society. Series B (Methodological), pages 211–252,
1964.

[9] P. Calthorpe. The Next American Metropolis: Ecology,

Community, and the American Dream. Princeton
Architectural Press, 1993.

[10] R. Cervero. Land-use mixing and suburban mobility.
University of California Transportation Center, 1989.

[11] N. Eagle, M. Macy, and R. Claxton. Network diversity

and economic development. Science,
328(5981):1029–1031, 2010.

[12] S. S. Fainstein. New directions in planning theory.

Urban aﬀairs review, 35(4):451–478, 2000.

[13] E. Glaeser. Triumph of the city: How our greatest

invention makes us richer, smarter, greener, healthier,
and happier. Penguin Press, 2011.

[14] M. Gonzalez, C. Hidalgo, and L. Barabasi.

[29] N. Meinshausen and P. B¨uhlmann. Stability selection.

Understanding individual mobility patterns. Nature,
453(7196):779–782, 2008.

Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B
(Statistical Methodology), 72(4):417–473, 2010.

[15] P. Gordon, S. Ikeda, et al. Does density matter?

[30] R. Oldenburg. The Great Good Place: Caf´e, Coﬀee

Chapters, 2011.

[16] S. Grauwin, S. Sobolevsky, S. Moritz, I. G´odor, and

C. Ratti. Towards a comparative science of cities:
Using mobile traﬃc records in new york, london, and
hong kong. In Computational Approaches for Urban
Environments, pages 363–387. Springer, 2015.

[17] C. A. Hidalgo and E. E. Casta˜ner. Do we need another

coﬀee house? the amenity space and the evolution of
neighborhoods. arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.02868, 2015.

[18] S. Isaacman, R. Becker, R. C´aceres, S. Kobourov,

M. Martonosi, J. Rowland, and A. Varshavsky.
Identifying important places in people’s lives from
cellular network data. In Pervasive computing, pages
133–151. Springer, 2011.

[19] J. Jacobs. The death and life of American cities.

Random House, 1961.

[20] L. W. Jeﬀres, C. C. Bracken, G. Jian, and M. F. Casey.
The impact of third places on community quality of life.
Applied Research in Quality of Life, 4(4):333–345, 2009.
[21] K. King. Jane Jacobs and “the need for aged buildings’:

Neighbourhood historical development pace and
community social relations. Urban Studies, 2013.
[22] K. Kung, K. Greco, S. Sobolevsky, and C. Ratti.

Exploring universal patterns in human home-work
commuting from mobile phone data. PloS one,
9((6):e96180), 2014.

[23] M. Lenormand, M. Picornell, O. G. Cant´u-Ros,

T. Louail, R. Herranz, M. Barthelemy,
E. Fr´ıas-Mart´ınez, M. S. Miguel, and J. J. Ramasco.
Comparing and modeling land use organization in
cities. arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.06152, 2015.

[24] T. Louail, M. Lenormand, O. G. C. Ros, M. Picornell,

R. Herranz, E. Frias-Martinez, J. J. Ramasco, and
M. Barthelemy. From mobile phone data to the spatial
structure of cities. Scientiﬁc reports, 4, 2014.

[25] R. Louf and M. Barthelemy. A typology of street
patterns. Journal of The Royal Society Interface,
11(101), 2014.

[26] K. Lynch. The image of the city, volume 11. MIT press,

1960.

[27] K. Lynch. What Time is this Place? MIT Press, 1972.
[28] K. Manaugh and T. Kreider. What is mixed use?

presenting an interaction method for measuring land
use mix. Journal of Transport and Land Use,
6(1):63–72, 2013.

Shops, Community Centers, Beauty Parlors, General
Stores, Bars, Hangouts, and How They Get You
through the Day. Paragon House Publishers, 1989.

[31] R. Oldenburg and D. Brissett. The third place.

Qualitative sociology, 5(4):265–284, 1982.

[32] L. Porzi, S. Rota Bulo, B. Lepri, and E. Ricci.

Predicting and understanding urban perception with
convolutional neural networks. In Proceedings of the
ACM MultiMedia. ACM, 2015.

[33] R. D. Putnam. Bowling alone: The collapse and revival

of American community. Simon and Schuster, 2001.

[34] D. Quercia, L. M. Aiello, R. Schifanella, and A. Davies.

The digital life of walkable streets. In International
Conference on World Wide Web, pages 875–884, 2015.

[35] D. Quercia, N. K. O’Hare, and H. Cramer. Aesthetic
capital: what makes london look beautiful, quiet, and
happy? In ACM conference on Computer supported
cooperative work & social computing, pages 945–955,
2014.

[36] D. Quercia, J. Pesce, V. Almeida, and J. Crowcroft.

Psychological maps 2.0: A web gamiﬁcation enterprise
starting in london. In Proceedings of ACM Conference
on World Wide Web (WWW), 2013.

[37] P. Salesses, K. Schechtner, and C. A. Hidalgo. The

collaborative image of the city: mapping the inequality
of urban perception. PloS one, 8(7):e68400, 2013.

[38] C. Smith-Clarke, A. Mashhadi, and L. Capra. Poverty

on the cheap: Estimating poverty maps using
aggregated mobile communication networks. In ACM
conference on Human factors in computing systems,
pages 511–520, 2014.

[39] C. Song, Z. Qu, N. Blumm, and A. Barabasi. Limits of

predictability in human mobility. Science,
327(5968):1018–1021, 2010.

[40] H. Sung, S. Lee, and S. Cheon. Operationalizing jane

jacobs’s urban design theory: Empirical veriﬁcation
from the great city of seoul, korea. Journal of Planning
Education and Research, 35(2):117–130, 2015.

[41] M. Traunmueller, G. Quattrone, and L. Capra. Mining
mobile phone data to investigate urban crime theories
at scale. In International Conference on Social
Informatics, pages 396–411, 2014.

[42] Y. Zheng, L. Capra, O. Wolfson, and Y. Hai. Urban

computing: Concepts, methodologies, and applications.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and
Technology, 5, 2014.

