Diss. ETH No. 20039

A wave packet approach to interacting fermions

Abhandlung zur Erlangung des Doktor der Wissenschaften

der

ETH Z¨urich

vorgelegt von

Matthias Ossadnik

Dipl. Phys., Julius-Maximilians-Universit¨at W¨urzburg (Germany)

geboren am 20.03.1981

Staatsangeh¨origkeit: Deutsch

Angenommen auf Antrag von
Prof. Dr. M. Sigrist, examiner

Prof. Dr. T. M. Rice, co-examiner

Prof. Dr. C. Honerkamp, co-examiner

2012

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
3
1
 
 
]
l
e
-
r
t
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
1
4
0
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

The complexity of the cuprate superconductors continues to challenge physicists
even 25 years after their discovery. At half-ﬁlling they are antiferromagnetic Mott
insulators. Upon doping the antiferromagnetism vanishes, and at some ﬁnite doping
superconductivity sets in. In between these two phases lies the so-called pseudogap
phase, which features a gap for electronic excitations in the anti-nodal directions
around the saddle points (0, π) and (π, 0)as well as a partial spin gap [18]. At the
same time, electronic excitations around the nodal points (±π/2,±π/2) are gapless
even for relatively small doping. For large doping, the superconductivity vanishes,
and the cuprates behave like ordinary Fermi liquids.
The Mott insulator and the Fermi liquid phase are understood very well, yet the
intermediate pseudogap phase remains controversial. In order to tackle this problem
theoretically, one may base the description either on the Mott insulator and consider
the eﬀect of doping, or on the Fermi liquid, and consider the partial truncation of
the Fermi surface.
In this thesis, we use the latter approach, and study the breakdown of the Fermi
liquid state using the renormalization group (RG) [10]. The advantage of the method
is that it is well suited for studying anisotropies in momentum space. Moreover, it
treats d-wave pairing- and antiferromagnetic spin-ﬂuctuations on an equal footing.
In the ﬁrst part of this thesis, we use the RG approach in order to study anisotropic
quasi-particle scattering rates. This undertaking is motivated by transport exper-
iments on overdoped cuprates [1], which point towards a breakdown of the Fermi
liquid phenomenology due to strong scattering at the saddle points, leading to a
linear temperature dependence of the transport scattering rates. We show that a
similar linear dependence arises from the renormalization group treatment down to
low temperatures, thus providing an additional piece of evidence that the breakdown
of the Fermi liquid phase is dominated by the saddle points.
In the remainder of the thesis, we seek to extend the work on the crossover from the
Fermi liquid state to the pseudogap phase [20]. In earlier works it has been argued
that the RG ﬂows in the so-called saddle point regime, where the Fermi surface
lies close to the saddle points, are indicative of a transition to an insulating spin
liquid state, which truncates the Fermi surface in the vicinity of the saddle points

iii

[12, 58, 66]. Progress in the derivation of eﬀective models for the conjectured spin
liquid state has been hindered, however, by the diﬃculties involved in solving the
strong coupling low energy Hamiltonian. We approach the problem by observing that
the pseudogap phase is intermediate between a phase where electrons are localized
in real space (Mott insulator) and a phase where they are localized in momentum
space (Fermi liquid). We introduce an orthogonal wave packet basis, the so-called
Wilson-Wannier (WW) basis [41, 42], that can be used to interpolate between the
momentum space and the real space descriptions. Its main feature is that the basis
functions are localized in phase space, which allows for a coarse grained description
of the physics in both momentum space and real space at the same time. The price
that is paid for this convenience is that the translational invariance of the lattice is
explicitly broken from the onset.
Nevertheless, the positive features of the WW basis appear to be very attractive
for studying the pseudogap regime because it is experimentally well established
that nodal and anti-nodal states behave very diﬀerently in this regime, so that the
anisotropy in momentum space is important. At the same time, scanning tunnel-
ing microscope measurements suggest that the physics of the anti-nodal states takes
place in real space, rather than momentum space [24].
In order to prepare the stage for the study of the saddle point regime, we develop
the necessary ideas step by step, starting with the construction of the basis and the
derivation simple approximate formulas for the transformation of the Hamiltonian.
Since the approach is novel, these steps are performed in considerable detail.
We then discuss the relation of the WW basis to the phenomenon of fermion pairing
in both particle-particle and particle-hole channels in one and two dimensions. We
use the example of simple mean-ﬁeld Hamiltonians to show that when the size of
the wave packets is chosen properly, the description of states with fermion pairing
simpliﬁes considerably. Moreover, we relate the geometry of the Brillouin zone in two
dimensions to a separation of length scales between nodal and anti-nodal directions,
which suggests that the anti-nodal states are locally decoupled from the nodal states.
The phase space localization allows to include both of these aspects.
In the remainder we show how to combine the WW basis with the RG, such that the
RG is used to eliminate high-energy degrees of freedom, and the remaining strongly
correlated system is solved approximately in the WW basis.
We exemplify the approach for diﬀerent one-dimensional model systems, and ﬁnd
good qualitative agreement with exact solutions even for very simple approximations.
Finally, we reinvestigate the saddle point regime of the two-dimensional Hubbard
model. We show that the anti-nodal states are driven to an insulating spin-liquid
state with strong singlet pairing correlations, thus corroborating earlier conjectures
[20, 66].
Throughout, we limit ourselves to the simplest treatment of each model, so that
all results are rather qualitative in nature. On the other hand, we hope that this

iv

allows to understand the workings of the method and the physical arguments that
are derived from the phase space analysis of the interacting fermion system.

Abstract

v

vi

Contents

Abstract

Contents

1 Introduction

2 Renormalization group calculation of angle-dependent scattering

rates in the two-dimensional Hubbard model
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.1
2.2 Renormalization group setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.4 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

iii

vii

1

5
5
6
9
12

3 Introduction to the wave packet approach to interacting fermions 13
13

3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 The pseudogap phase of the cuprates and the saddle point regime of
the Hubbard model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3 Phase space localized basis functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.4 Outline of the remaining chapters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 Wilson-Wannier basis for a ﬁnite lattice

4.1 Wilson-Wannier basis in one dimension . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.1.1 Construction of the basis functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.1.2 Relation to real space and momentum states
. . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.1.3 Analytical window functions
4.2 Wilson-Wannier basis for the square lattice . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5 Wilson-Wannier representation of operators

5.1 General transformation formula in one dimension . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2 Wilson-Wannier basis and wave packet transformation . . . . . . . .
5.3 Transformation of hopping and interaction operators . . . . . . . . .
5.3.1 Hopping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

vii

14
16
21

25
25
25
29
30
31

35
35
37
40
40

CONTENTS

5.3.2

Interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.4 Two-dimensional square lattice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.4.1 General transformation formula, wave packet transform, and
local approximation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.4.2 Hopping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.4.3

6 Wave packets and fermion pairing

6.1 One dimension . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.1.1
Superconductivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.1.2 Antiferromagnetism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.2 Two dimensions: Eﬀect of anisotropy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.2.1 Antiferromagnetism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.2.2
d-wave superconductivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.3 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7 Wave packets and the renormalization group

7.1 Scaling dimensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.2 One-loop RG via continuous unitary transformations . . . . . . . . .
7.3 The geometry of the low-energy states in the Brillouin zone . . . . .

8 Wave packets and eﬀective Hamiltonians in one dimension

8.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8.2 Renormalization group and wave packets for chains . . . . . . . . . .
8.3 Chain with repulsive interactions at half-ﬁlling . . . . . . . . . . . .
8.4 Chain with attractive interactions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8.5 Two-leg ladder at half-ﬁlling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8.6 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9 Saddle point regime of the two-dimensional Hubbard model

9.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9.2 The microscopic model and its renormalization group treatment . . .
9.3 Eﬀective Hamiltonian for the saddle points
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9.4 The local problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9.5 Diagonalization of small clusters
9.6 Eﬀective quantum rotor model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9.7 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

10 Conclusions and outlook

10.1 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10.2 Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

42
44

44
45
46

49
50
50
55
56
58
59
61

63
64
67
68

73
73
74
78
81
83
88

91
91
92
94
96
99
101
105

107
107
109

viii

CONTENTS

A Construction of the window function

A.1 Conditions on the window function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.2 Zak transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.3 Conditions for band limited window functions . . . . . . . . . . . . .

B Window function gymnastics

C One loop RG equations from Wegner’s ﬂow equation

D Contractor renormalization

Bibliography

111
111
114
115

119

121

127

129

ix

CONTENTS

x

Chapter 1

Introduction

Despite many eﬀorts, the phenomenology of the cuprate superconductors still oﬀers
challenging problems [18, 24]. Their schematic phase diagram is shown in Fig. 1.1.
At half-ﬁlling, they are antiferromagnetic Mott insulators. Upon doping, the anti-
ferromagnetic order is destroyed rapidly, and the materials enter a phase known as
the pseudogap phase that has a variety of exotic properties [18]. Among them is a
gap for electronic excitations around the so-called anti-nodal directions (0, π) and
(π, 0) that coexists with a truncated Fermi surface around the nodal directions. At
even larger doping, they eventually become superconducting with a d-wave order
parameter. The pseudogap gradually decreases with doping, until it merges with
the superconducting gap around the optimal doping, where Tc is maximal. As the
doping is increased even more (overdoped region in Fig. 1.1), Tc decreases, and the
system behaves like a conventional Fermi liquid.
There are diﬀerent routes that can be followed in order to increase our understanding
of these complex materials theoretically. Either one starts from the Mott insulator

Figure 1.1: Schematic phase diagram of the cuprates. (Figure reproduced from [13])

1

CONTENTS5Figure1.(Coloronline)Theboundarybetweentheantiferromagneticallyorderedstate(denotedbyAFM)andthed-wavesuperconductor(denotedbyd-sc.)isuncertain.TheoverdopedFermiliquidhasafullFermisurfacewhilethestoichiometricMottinsulatorhasachargegap.T2-behavior,peaksintheantinodaldirectionsandimpliesthepresenceofananomalousandanisotropicstrongscatteringvertexforlowenergyquasiparticlesconnectingtheseantinodalregionsink-space.Aswillbediscussedlatersuchanomalousbehaviorwasforeshadowedbyfunctionalrenormalizationgroup(FRG)calculationsonasinglebandHubbardmodeladecadeearlier[10,11]Startingfromtheundopedsideat−JmodeldescribesthedopedMottinsulatorasadilutedensityofholesmovinginabackgroundofanAFcoupledsquarelatticeofS=1/2spins.Themotionofaholerearrangesthespinconﬁgurationleadingtostrongcouplingbetweenthetwodegreesoffreedom.Inthepasttwodecadesmanymethods,bothnumericalandanalytical,havebeenemployedtoanalyzethist−Jmodel,e.g.renormalizedmeanﬁeldtheories(RMFT)andnumericalMonteCarlosamplingofvariationalwavefunctions(VMC)forGutzwillerprojectedfermionicwavefunctions[12].AnothersetoftheoriesimplementstheGutzwillerconstraintintermsofagaugetheoryandslavebosonformulationoraslavefermionandSchwingerbosonformulation.ThesemethodshavebeenextensivelyreviewedinaseriesofrecentarticlesbyLee,NagaosaandWen[13],Edegger,MuthukumarandGros[14],Lee[15],andOgataandFukuyama[16].AnearlierreviewbyDagottocoverednumericalapproaches[17]andasurveyofthecurrentstatusofvarioustheorieshasrecentlybeenpublishedbyAbrahams[18].Inthisreviewwewillnotcovertheseapproachesagainandreferthereaderinsteadtothesecomprehensivereviews.TheseapproachessuccessfullyexplainthesuppressionoflongrangeAForderasholesareintroduced.Oneissue,whichremainsopen,concernsthepossiblecoexistenceofd-wavesuperconductivityandlongrangeAForder.EarlierexperimentsfoundanintermediateregionwithadisorderedspinglassseparatingthetwoorderedphasesbutrecentlyNMRexperimentsonmultilayerHg-cuprateshavebeeninterpretedasevidenceforcoexistenceofbothbrokensymmetries[19,20].ThemultilayeredHg-cupratesareundoubtedlycleanerespeciallyintheinnerlayers,thantheacceptordopedsinglelayercupratesbutsuﬀerfromthecomplicationsofinterlayercouplingbetweenadjacentCuO2and investigates the eﬀect of doping, or one starts at the overdoped side and tries to
understand the transition from a Fermi liquid to the unconventional pseudogap state
around optimal doping. We follow the latter path and focus on the transition from
a normal Fermi liquid phase to the pseudogap phase. Since the cuprates are Fermi
liquids in the overdoped regime, we base our investigation on a weak to moderate
coupling approach, the functional renormalization group [10].
This method has been successfully used in the past in order to arrive at a phase
diagram of the Hubbard model at moderate coupling [2–4, 7, 58]. Similar to the
phase diagram of the cuprates, antiferromagnetic and superconducting phases are
obtained at half-ﬁlling and moderate doping, respectively.
In between, one ﬁnds
the so-called saddle point regime, which is characterized by a crossover between the
two phases, with a strongly anisotropic scattering vertex and dominant correlations
around the saddle points.

It has been conjectured that the latter regime is the weak coupling analogue of
the Fermi surface truncation that is observed in cuprates [12, 20, 66]. This con-
jecture is based on similarities of the ﬂow to strong coupling in the saddle point
regime and quasi-one dimensional ladder systems [33, 53]. The latter systems can be
solved exactly, and exhibit the so-called d-Mott phase at half-ﬁlling, with gaps for
all excitations and strong singlet correlations, similar to the RVB states proposed
by Anderson [17, 20]. This analogy has been fruitfully used as a starting point for a
phenomenological theory of the underdoped cuprates recently [13].
In this thesis, we try to add some new aspects to these earlier works. It consists
of two parts: The ﬁrst part is very short, consisting only of Ch. 2.
In this part,
we apply the renormalization group to study recent transport measurements on
overdoped cuprates [1]. In the experiment, superconductivity was suppressed using
a magnetic ﬁeld, and the transport scattering rate was determined from interlayer
angle-dependent magnetoresistance (ADMR) measurements.
Interestingly, it was
found that the onset of superconductivity is accompanied by a strong anisotropic
scattering rate with maxima in the anti-nodal directions. Moreover, the anisotropic
part of the scattering rate shows a linear temperature dependence, whereas the
isotropic part retained the usual quadratic temperature dependence. From the point
of view of the saddle point regime found within the RG, the pronounced anisotropy is
very natural since the scattering vertex itself is highly anisotropic, with the strongest
scattering occurring at the saddle points. Hence we investigate the quasi-particle
scattering rates using a band structure from [1] in order to see whether the anisotropy
and temperature dependence of the renormalized vertex can explain the observed
phenomena. We ﬁnd good qualitative agreement with the experimental results,
including the approximately linear temperature dependence of the scattering rate.
The bulk of this work is contained in the second part, where we seek to establish a
new approach for the approximate solution of the strong coupling ﬁxed point found
in the RG. Since the two parts are independent of each other, we present a separate

2

introduction to this part in Ch. 3.

Introduction

3

4

Chapter 2

Renormalization group
calculation of
angle-dependent scattering
rates in the two-dimensional
Hubbard model

2.1

Introduction

In this chapter we apply the functional renormalization group (RG) in order to
compute quasi-particle life-times in the two-dimensional Hubbard model. The mo-
tivation for this study is provided by transport experiments by Abdel-Jawad et al.
[1]. In their experiment they found that the close to onset of superconductivity in
overdoped cuprate superconductors, the quasi-particle scattering rate can be decom-
posed into two term: The ﬁrst term is isotropic, does not depend strongly on doping
and shows the usual T 2 dependence on temperature characteristic of Fermi liquids.
The second term is anisotropic, with the maxima at the anti-nodal points (π, 0) and
(0, π). This term increases strongly at the onset of superconductivity as the super-
conducting dome is approached from the overdoped side. Strikingly, it shows linear
temperature dependence. Since the cuprates appear to be ordinary Fermi liquids in
the highly overdoped regime, the linear temperature dependence is a puzzling result.
In the following, we use the functional renormalization group (FRG) investigate the
problem. Since we are dealing with the overdoped regime, eﬀects due to strong on-
site interactions are not expected to be very important, so that it makes sense to

5

2.2 Renormalization group setup

employ the (weak coupling) renormalization group in the following.
We note that within the RG framework, it is natural to expect anisotropy along
the Fermi surface due to an interplay of anisotropy of the Fermi velocity and the
imperfect nesting of the Fermi surface in the regime under study. In fact, earlier
investigations of the two-dimensional Hubbard model on a square lattice using the
renormalization group found that d-wave pairing in the overdoped region of the phase
diagram was driven by the appearance of a strongly anisotropic scattering vertex in
the particle-particle and particle-hole channels at low energies and temperatures
[2–5]. Relatedly, it was shown that the self-energy is also anisotropic [6–9].
In the following section, we describe the RG setup used, in particular the calculation
of the self-energy, and the introduction of an (artiﬁcial) decoherence rate for the
fermions, that we use to suppress the superconducting instability in our calculation.
We then show how the anisotropic scattering vertex leads to the anisotropy of the
quasi-particle scattering rate. Surprisingly, the renormalization of the vertex gives
rise to a linear temperature dependence of the scattering rate due to the scale depen-
dence of the vertex when the pairing divergence is suppressed, in good qualitative
agreement with the experiments.

2.2 Renormalization group setup

Our approach relies on the functional RG equation for the one-particle irreducible
(1PI) generating functional Γ[Φ], which is derived in [4, 10], and which leads to a
hierarchy of coupled ﬂow equations for the 1PI vertices after a suitable expansion
of the functional. We use a Wilsonian ﬂow scheme with a sharp momentum cutoﬀ.
This cutoﬀ underestimates eﬀects of small wavelength scattering [25], but these
processes are important only if the FS is very close to a van Hove singularity. This
is not the case in the doping regime studied here. To solve the ﬂow equations,
the hierarchy has to be truncated, and in the following we will use the standard
truncation of neglecting all vertices with more than four legs. In this approximation,
the only quantities appearing in the calculation are the self-energy ΣΛ(k) and the
four-point vertices VΛ(k1, k2, k3). The ki also contain the frequency, ki = (ωi, ki).
All propagators contain a sharp infrared cutoﬀ χΛ(k) = θ(|(k)| − Λ) in momentum
space, where the ﬂow parameter Λ ﬂows from Λ = ∞ to Λ = 0 with the initial
condition V∞(k1, k2, k3) = U . We neglect the frequency dependence of all vertices
and discretize their momentum dependence. The latter is done by dividing the
Brillouin zone into elongated patches, cf. Fig. 2.1. The vertices are taken to be
constant in each patch. Their values are calculated at a reference point in each
patch, which we choose to lie where the FS crosses the center of the patch.
Typically, the truncated ﬂows diverge at some energy scale Λ > 0. The leading
divergence can be interpreted as the dominant instability. The scale at which the
divergence occurs gives an estimate of the corresponding Tc [4]. In the regime of

6

Renormalization group calculation of angle-dependent scattering rates in the
two-dimensional Hubbard model

Figure 2.1: Left: Fermi surface (solid line) and discretization of the BZ for p = 0.22.
The boundaries of the patches (labelled by 1, 2, . . . , 40) are indicated by the dashed
lines. All vertices are evaluated at the points marked by the red dots, and are
taken constant within each patch. Right: Two-loop diagrams contributing to the
self-energy. Only diagrams a) and b) contribute to the scattering rate.

interest here, d-wave pairing is the leading instability, and in our approximation Tc
takes the values Tc = 0.26t1 for p = 0.15, Tc = 0.22t1 for p = 0.22, and Tc =
0.16t1 for p = 0.30. These Tcs are way too high, mainly because we neglect self-
energy corrections in the ﬂow of the scattering vertex. Nevertheless, Tc grows with
decreasing hole doping reproducing qualitatively the experimental results [1].
[1] were carried out on well character-
The experiments by Abdel-Jawad et al.
ized Tl2Ba2CuO6+x samples. The interlayer angle-dependent magnetoresistance
(ADMR) provided detailed Fermi surface (FS) information which we use to ﬁx the
band parameters as follows:

(kx, ky) = −2t1 (cos kx + cos ky) + 4t2 (cos kx cos ky)

+2t3 (cos 2kx + cos 2ky) + 4t4(cos 2kx cos ky

+ cos 2ky cos kx) + 4t5 (cos 2kx cos 2ky) ,

(2.1)

with t1 = 0.181, t2 = 0.075, t3 = 0.004, t4 = −0.010, and t5 = 0.0013(eV).
We use a moderate starting value of the onsite repulsion, U . Our goal is a qualitative
rather than a quantitative description which would require a larger value of U and
multi-loop corrections to the RG ﬂow equations. The experiments were carried out
in a high magnetic ﬁeld to suppress superconductivity and allow to access the normal
state down to low T . However, including a magnetic ﬁeld into our RG calculation is
diﬃcult, so that we choose to suppress superconductivity by introducing an isotropic

7

1401011202130312.2 Renormalization group setup

Figure 2.2: Characteristic momentum dependence of the renormalized vertex
VΛ(k1, k2, k3)/t1 for p = 0.22, T = 0.02t1, 1/τ0 = 0.2t1 at Λ = 0.
In the ﬁg-
ure, the dependence on the two ingoing wave vectors (k1, k2) is shown, where the
outgoing wave vector k3 is taken to lie in patch 1 close to (π, 0) (cf. Fig. 2.1) and
k4 is ﬁxed by momentum conservation.

scattering rate 1/τ0 into the action. This smears out the Fermi distribution at the
FS, which in turn regularizes the loop integrals and subsequently the ﬂow of the
four-point vertices. This scattering rate is included in the ﬂow equation of the four-
point vertex only, whereas the ﬂow equation for the self-energy is left unaltered. We
found that for our choice of U = 4t1 and the range of temperatures (T ≥ 0.004t1)
and dopings (p ≥ 0.15), a scattering rate of 1/τ0 = 0.2t1 is suﬃcient to suppress the
divergences associated with superconductivity, while leaving the one-loop integrals
the π − π-particle-hole diagram, basically
corresponding to other channels, e.g.
unchanged. On average the vertices remain comparable to the bandwidth and the
largest vertices do not grow larger than ≈ 3×bandwidth (Fig. 2.2). The renormalized
vertex is used as an input into a standard lowest order calculation of the quasi-
particle decay rate.

In Fig. 2.2 we display a typical result of our calculations for the four-point vertex
VΛ(k1, k2, k3) at energy scale Λ for ﬁxed outgoing wavevector k3 close to (π, 0) as a
function of the two incoming wavevectors (k1, k2). The remaining outgoing wavevec-
tor is determined by momentum conservation allowing for umklapp processes. The
strongest scattering processes occur for a momentum change of (π, π) and the ki
near (π, 0) and (0, π).
As we are only interested in the scattering rates at the FS, which are given by
Im Σ(k ∈ F S, ω → 0 + iδ), we will restrict the calculation of the self-energy to this
quantity in the following. Obviously, the frequency-dependence of Σ cannot be ne-
glected in the calculation. On the other hand, if we neglect the frequency-dependence

8

110203040110203040k1k224201612840(cid:45)4(cid:45)8(cid:45)12Renormalization group calculation of angle-dependent scattering rates in the
two-dimensional Hubbard model

of the four-point vertices, it is clear from the structure of the ﬂow equations that
Σ will also be frequency-independent, as only Hartree and Fock diagrams are in-
cluded. This diﬃculty can be overcome by replacing the four-point vertex appearing
in the self-energy ﬂow equation by the integrated ﬂow equation of the vertex [7],
schematically,

ΣΛ=0 =(cid:90) dΛ(cid:18)(cid:90) d¯ΛV ¯ΛS ¯ΛG ¯ΛV ¯Λ(cid:19) SΛ,

(2.2)

(2.3)

where in our approximation the single-scale propagator SΛ [4, 10] and the full prop-
agator GΛ are related to the free propagator G0 by SΛ = ˙χΛG0 and GΛ = χΛG0,
respectively. The RHS of eq. (2.2) depends on Λ only through the cutoﬀ χΛ. After
a partial integration with respect to Λ and after explicitly inserting a sharp cutoﬀ
χΛ(k) = Θ(|(k)| − Λ) we have

ΣΛ=0 = (cid:90) dΛθ(|(k1)| − Λ)δ(|(k2)| − Λ)θ(Λ − |(k3)|)

×V 2

Λ G0(k1)G0(k2)G0(k3),

where summation and integration over internal momenta and Matsubara frequencies
is implied.
Inspection of (2.3) shows that it amounts to evaluting the two-loop
contribution to the self-energy, but with the ﬂowing vertex VΛ instead of the initial
interaction U .
The diagrams corresponding to (2.3) are shown in Fig. 2.1. As we are inter-
ested in the scattering rates at the FS, we need only consider diagrams a) and
b), because the contribution of diagram c) is real for external frequencies ω + iδ.
For a) and b), for external frequency limω→0 ω + iδ, we obtain an imaginary part
∝ δ ((k3) − (k2) − (k1)), reﬂecting energy conservation.
Neglecting the ﬂow of the four-point vertices, i.e. setting VΛ = U in eq. (2.2), is
equivalent to a second order perturbative calculation of the scattering rate, which
gives a T 2 behavior away from van Hove singularities. All deviations from the
Landau theory scaling form may be attributed to the renormalization of the four-
point vertices.

2.3 Results

Based on eq. (2.3) we calculate both the temperature and the doping dependence of
the angle-resolved quasi-particle scattering rates at the Fermi surface. We ﬁnd that
the scattering rates are anisotropic for all choices of parameters. The precise shape
of the angular dependence changes with doping, but does not change very much with
temperature, as shown in Fig. 2.3. In general, we ﬁnd that in the nodal direction
(φ = π/4) the scattering rates have a minimum, and increase towards the anti-nodal
direction (φ = 0). The size of the anisotropy grows as doping is decreased. This
parallels the increase of Tc with lower doping in a calculation without the regularizing

9

2.3 Results

Figure 2.3: Angle-dependence of the anisotropic component of the quasi-particle
scattering rate on a Fermi surface segment for p = 0.15 (dashed line) and p = 0.30
(solid line). The scattering rates are normalized to unity in the antinodal direction.
The dots are the values at diﬀerent temperatures, the lines connect the temperature
averages.

scattering rate. This is in accord with the results of Ref. [1], where with decreasing
doping both Tc and the anisotropic part of the scattering rates increase, whereas the
uniform component remains constant.
Separating the scattering rates into an isotropic and an anisotropic part, we write

1
τ

(φ, T ) =

1
τi

(T ) +

1
τa

(φ, T ),

(2.4)

where 1/τi ≡ minφ 1/τ (Φ) so that 1/τa(φ) ≥ 0. We characterize the T -dependence
of the anisotropic part by its average over the angle, (cid:104)1/τa(cid:105)(T ). This makes sense as
the angular dependence of 1/τa is approximately T -independent (Fig. 2.3). Using
these deﬁnitions, we ﬁnd that the T -dependence of 1/τi and (cid:104)1/τa(cid:105) can be ﬁtted
very well by a quadratic polynomial, as shown in Fig. 2.4. In the same ﬁgure, one
sees that for p = 0.22 and p = 0.15, (cid:104)1/τa(cid:105) is linear in T with a coeﬃcient which
increases with decreasing hole doping. In contrast with this, the isotropic part 1/τi
has always a predominantly quadratic T -dependence and does not change much with
doping. Thus our calculations reproduce the main features of the striking correlation
between charge transport and superconductivity reported in Ref. [1].
Note that in our theory, the linear relationship between (cid:104)1/τa(cid:105) at ﬁxed T and Tc
from Ref.
[1] is replaced by a slightly superlinear behavior that is consistent with
(cid:104)1/τa(cid:105) = 0 for Tc = 0. However, as mentioned earlier, our theoretical Tc’s are not
reliable, and the experimental Tcs might be aﬀected by additional eﬀects like sample
quality. In our view, the essential physical point of Ref. [1] which is well reproduced
by our theory is that (cid:104)1/τa(cid:105) and Tc grow together, as they are both caused by the
same interactions with wavevector transfer near (π, π).

10

0.050.100.150.200.00.20.40.60.81.0ΦΠΤa0ΤaΦRenormalization group calculation of angle-dependent scattering rates in the
two-dimensional Hubbard model

Figure 2.4: Temperature dependence of (a) the anisotropic and (b) the isotropic
component of the quasi particle scattering rate at the Fermi surface for diﬀerent
values of the hole doping. The solid lines are ﬁts to quadratic polynomials in T .
= −0.17 + 0.09T +
(Result of ﬁts:
0.0004T 2 for p = 0.22, and 1
τa

= −0.35 + 0.20T − 0.0007T 2 for p = 0.15, 1

1
τa

= −0.020 + 0.012T + 0.0016T 2 for p = 0.30

τa

11

0510152025300123456103Tt11031Τat1Τ=12.5Τ=25.0Τ=37.5051015202530024681012103Tt11031Τit1Τ=12.5Τ=25.0Τ=37.52.4 Conclusions

2.4 Conclusions

The results signal presented above point towards a clear breakdown of Landau-
Fermi liquid behavior. The linear temperature dependence is not due to a proximity
to the van Hove singularity at the saddle points of the band structure, as these
points lie well below the Fermi surface at energies (cid:29) T . Further, the increase
in the linear term in T with decreasing hole dopings occurs as the energy of the
van Hove singularity moves further away from the Fermi energy. Recalling Eq.
(2.3), it is clear that deviations from the ordinary Fermi liquid behavior result from
the scale-dependence of the scattering vertex, since this is the only quantity that
diﬀers from the perturbative calculation that leads to Fermi liquid behavior. Hence
anomalous T -dependence of (cid:104)1/τa(cid:105) arises from the increase in the four-point vertex
with decreasing temperature or energy scale. This increase is not restricted to the
d-wave pairing Cooper channel since the divergence in this channel is suppressed
in our calculations. Examination of the RG ﬂows shows that several channels in
the four-point vertex grow simultaneously, e.g. particle-hole and particle-particle
umklapp processes, both with wavevector transfer near (π, π) and with initial and
ﬁnal states in the anti-nodal regions. This phenomenon is not simply a precursor
of d-wave superconductivity but rather signals that a crossover to strong coupling
in several channels of the four-point vertex is responsible for the breakdown of the
Landau-Fermi liquid.
It will be challenging to ﬁnd out more about the relation
of this breakdown to the opening of the pseudogap at smaller doping levels. The
simultaneous enhancement of several channels through mutual reinforcement was
earlier identiﬁed as a key feature of the anomalous Fermi liquid in the cuprates and
associated with the onset of resonant valence bond (RVB) behavior [4, 12].
In conclusion, our RG calculations suggest that the anomalous behavior of the in-
plane quasi-particle scattering rate revealed by the ADMR experiments [1] on over-
doped cuprates can be understood as an intrinsic feature of the doped Hubbard
model that is already present at weaker interaction strengths. The positive correla-
tion between Tc and the anisotropic scattering rate shows up in the calculation as a
general increase of correlations in the anti-nodal direction that is not restricted to the
d-wave pairing channel. Our calculations are in agreement with earlier RG studies
using diﬀerent hopping parameters [2–4, 7] as far as the structure of the scattering
vertex is concerned, so that we expect that our results hold in more general settings
as well.

12

Chapter 3

Introduction to the wave
packet approach to
interacting fermions

3.1

Introduction

In this chapter we give a general overview of the wave packet approach to interacting
fermions that has been newly developed in this work. It is based on a description
of electrons in terms of a complete orthogonal basis of phase space localized states -
the wave packets. These states are intermediate between real and momentum space
states in the sense that they have a ﬁnite extension in both spaces, similar to a
Gaussian. As a consequence, a length scale M is introduced into the problem from
the beginning.
Intuitively, this makes sense only when a physical length scale is
present in the system under investigation. The typical example of the introduction
of such a length scale is provided by systems with a gap for single particle excita-
tions. Because of the gap, single particle correlations decay exponentially in space,

(cid:10)c†(r) c (0)(cid:11) ∼ e−|r|/ξ, and in this case ξ yields a natural length scale.

The two limiting case ξ → ∞ and ξ → a (where a is the lattice constant) are
relatively well understood: The most celebrated example of the former is given by
conventional, weakly coupled superconductors. These systems are known to be very
well described by a mean-ﬁeld approach, the BCS theory of superconductivity [14].
In a superconductor, electrons are bound into pairs, and ξ may be thought of as
the pair size. The success of the BCS theory relies on the fact that the pairs are so
large that many of them overlap, eﬀectively eliminating quantum ﬂuctuations [23].
Corresponding to the large pair size in real space, the pairs are very localized in
momentum space, and only a thin shell around the Fermi surface is correlated. The

13

3.2 The pseudogap phase of the cuprates and the saddle point regime of the
Hubbard model

opposite limit of ξ → 0 is exempliﬁed by the strong coupling limit of a Mott insulator,
where each lattice site is occupied by one electron and only local spin degrees of
freedom remain, which are well separated from the charge sector. Alternatively, one
may think of this state as a paired state as well, where each electron is bound to a
hole. Since the pairs are localized, the pair size vanishes. Conversely, the pairs are
very delocalized in momentum space and spread out over the whole Brillouin zone
in this limit.
Clearly, these two extreme cases are best described in the space where the fermion
pairs are as local as possible, which allows to map the fermion problem to a tractable
eﬀective model. Our motivation is to obtain a similar description for the intermediate
regime, where ξ is neither small nor large, and hence momentum space concepts such
as the Fermi sea and real space phenomena like the suppression of double occupancy
both play a role. From this point of view it is quite natural to employ phase space
localized basis functions: Due to their localization in real space some eﬀects of local
correlations can be taken into account, and their localization in momentum space
allows to resolve certain features of the Brillouin zone, such as the approximate
position of the Fermi surface.
The remainder of this chapter is organized as follows: First, we introduce the speciﬁc
context of our study, the pseudogap phase of the cuprate superconductors. After a
brief review of the part of the phenomenology that is relevant in the following, we
discuss some theoretical studies that try to elucidate the opening of the pseudogap
from a weak coupling point of view [20], and the problems faced there related to
the diﬃculties of treating renormalization ﬂows that ﬂow to strong coupling. Then
we explain the wave packet approach and how it relates to the experimental and
theoretical situation. Finally, we give an outline of the remaining chapters.

3.2 The pseudogap phase of the cuprates and the

saddle point regime of the Hubbard model

The pseudogap phase of the cuprates

The pseudogap phase of cuprate superconductors is arguably one of the more puz-
zling aspects of their phenomenology. Here we highlight some aspects of this phase
which are important for what follows, and refer to the review [18] for a more detailed
account. The phase lies between the Mott insulating state at zero doping, and the
superconducting state at doping p ≈ 16% as displayed schematically in Fig. 3.1 a).
Spectroscopic experiments, in particular ARPES measurements have shown that it
is characterized by highly anisotropic electronic excitations, shown in Fig. 3.1 b): In
the nodal regions, close to (π/2, π/2) a Fermi surface exists and electronic excita-
tions are gapless. For large enough doping, a superconducting gap opens on these
Fermi surface arcs. The corresponding gap for electronic excitations tracks the Tc of

14

Introduction to the wave packet approach to interacting fermions

Figure 3.1: Electronic excitations in the pseudogap phase. a) Schematic phase di-
agram of the cuprates. Tc is the critical of d-wave superconductivity, Tφ is the
maximal temperature at which superconducting phase ﬂuctuations are detectable,
and T ∗
is the pseudogap temperature. b) Electronic excitations in the cuprates
fall into two classes: The dome shaped curve (∆0) corresponds to excitations above
the superconducting state. The gap tracks Tc and decreases for small doping. The
curve labelled ∆1 separates from the superconducting gap in the underdoped regime,
increasing towards half-ﬁlling. The diﬀerent symbols correspond to diﬀerent exper-
imental techniques (Figure reproduced from [16])

the superconducting phase. At the same time, the gap for excitations at the saddle
points stays large and increases as the doping is decreased [24]. The gap for exci-
tations at the saddle points persists up to the pseudogap temperature T ∗, which is
much larger than Tc at low doping. NMR Knight shift measurements [19] indicate
that a (partial) spin gap opens below T ∗, which is generally taken as evidence for
spin-singlet pairing.

The saddle point regime of the Hubbard model

Despite the fact that the cuprates are often modeled as lightly doped Mott insulators,
we have seen in Ch. 2 that the opposite approach using weak coupling renormaliza-
tion group equations can yield valuable insights. The analysis of the RG equations
for the full Hubbard model is still very complicated. Since the correlations are
strongest in the vicinity of the saddle points, various researchers were led to study a
reduced saddle point model instead of the full Hubbard model [59–62, 66]. Within
the one-loop RG approach it has been established that the model has strong corre-
lations at low energies, with the leading instablities occuring in the d-wave pairing
and antiferromagnetic channels. However, it was found that at the same time, the
uniform spin and charge susceptibilities are suppressed. Since the latter behavior is
consistent with gaps for spin and charge excitations, Furukawa et al. [66] were lead
to conjecture that the ground state for this model is an insulating spin liquid. The
conjecture is based on an analogy to the physics of ladder systems [33, 53], where

15

40.050.100.150.200.2504080120160E (meV)pOptimalDoping10bT ( K )pAFIPGdSCTcTφT*aFigure1.(a)Schematiccopperoxidephasediagram.Here,Tcisthecriticaltemperaturecircumscribinga‘dome’ofsuperconductivity,TφisthemaximumtemperatureatwhichsuperconductingphaseﬂuctuationsaredetectablewithinthePGphase,andT∗istheapproximatetemperatureatwhichthePGphenomenologyﬁrstappears.(b)Thetwoclassesofelectronicexcitationsincuprates.Theseparationbetweentheenergyscalesassociatedwithexcitationsofthesuperconductingstate(dSC,denotedby￿0)andthoseofthePGstate(PG,denotedby￿1)increasesaspdecreases(reproducedfrom[7]).Thedifferentsymbolscorrespondtotheuseofdifferentexperimentaltechniques.Theenergies￿0and￿1divergefromoneanotherwithdiminishingp,asshowninﬁgure1(b)(reproducedfrom[7]).Angle-resolvedphotoemission(ARPES)revealsthat,inthePGphase,excitationswithE∼￿1occurintheregionsofmomentumspaceneark∼=(π/a0,0);(0,π/a0)andthat￿1(p)increasesrapidlyasp→0[6–9].Incontrast,the‘nodal’regionofk-spaceexhibitsanungapped‘FermiArc’[41]inthePGphase,andamomentum-andtemperature-dependentenergygapopensuponthisarcinthedSCphase[41–47].Resultsfrommanyotherspectroscopiesappeartobeinagreementwiththispicture.Forexample,opticaltransientgratingspectroscopyﬁndsthattheexcitationsnear￿1propagateveryslowlywithoutrecombinationtoformCooperpairs,whereaslower-energyexcitationsnearthed-wavenodespropagateeasilyandreformdelocalizedCooperpairsasexpected[37].Andreevtunnelingexhibitstwodistinctexcitationenergyscalesthatdivergeasp→0:theﬁrstisidentiﬁedwiththePGenergy￿1andthesecondlowerscale￿0withthemaximumpairinggapenergyofdelocalizedCooper-pairs[38].RamanspectroscopyﬁndsthatscatteringnearthenodeisconsistentwithdelocalizedCooperpairing,whereasscatteringattheantinodesisnot[39].Finally,muonspinrotationstudiesofthesuperﬂuiddensityshowitsevolutiontobeinconsistentwithstatesonthewholeFermisurfacebeingavailableforcondensation,asifanti-nodalregionscannotcontributetodelocalizedCooperpairs[40].Tunnelingdensity-of-statesmeasurementshavereportedanenergeticallyparticle–holesymmetricexcitationenergyE=±￿1,whichisindistinguishableinmagnitudeinthePGanddSCphases[48,49].Inﬁgure2(b),weshowtheevolutionofspatiallyaverageddifferentialtunnelingconductance[50–52]g(E)forBi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ.ThepdependenceofthisPGenergyE=±￿1isindicatedbyabluedashedcurve(seesections3,5and7),whereastheapproximateNewJournalofPhysics13(2011)065014(http://www.njp.org/)3.3 Phase space localized basis functions

Figure 3.2: Truncated Fermi surface due to strong RVB correlations. Figure taken
from [66]

a similar RG ﬂow leads to a spin liquid phase with gaps for all excitations. Later
work using exact diagonalization of the low energy Hamiltonian on small clusters
[12] corroborated this view. However, it has proven diﬃcult to derive an eﬀective
model for this problem, and to embed it into the full Hubbard model.

3.3 Phase space localized basis functions

What is phase space localization?

In this section we give a gentle introduction to phase space localized basis functions,
the basic building block of out approach. As we have stated above, these functions
are localized to some extent in both real space and momentum space at the same
time.
In order to contrast this with the usual real space and momentum space
basis states, Fig. 3.3 compares the phase space density of three diﬀerent functions.
The phase space density can be deﬁned in the following way: Take any function
f (j), that is deﬁned on a one-dimensional lattice with N sites, where the position
is labelled by j = 0, . . . , N − 1. Call its Fourier transform ˜f (p), where p is the
wave-vector, such that f (j) = 1/√N(cid:80)p eipj ˜f (p). Deﬁne the phase space density
to be ρ(j, p) =(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)f (j) ˜f (p)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12). The phase space density depends on both position and

momentum variables, and is a neat way to visualize the localization of a function (or
basis state) in real and momentum space simultaneously. Clearly, the real space basis
state f (j) = δij in Fig. 3.3 a) is localized in real space, but completely delocalized

16

VOLUME81,NUMBER15PHYSICALREVIEWLETTERS12OCTOBER1998TruncationofaTwo-DimensionalFermiSurfaceduetoQuasiparticleGapFormationattheSaddlePointsNobuoFurukawa*andT.M.RiceInstituteforTheoreticalPhysics,ETH-Hönggerberg,CH-8093Zurich,SwitzerlandManfredSalmhoferMathematik,ETHZentrum,CH-8092Zürich,Switzerland(Received12June1998)Westudyatwo-dimensionalFermiliquidwithaFermisurfacecontainingthesaddlepoints￿p,0￿and￿0,p￿.IncludingCooperandPeierlschannelcontributionsleadstoaone-looprenormalizationgroupﬂowtostrongcouplingforshortrangerepulsiveinteractions.Inacertainparameterrangethecharacteristicsoftheﬁxedpoint,openingofaspinandchargegap,anddominantpairingcorrelationsaresimilartothoseofatwo-legladderathalf-ﬁlling.WearguethatanincreaseoftheelectrondensityleadstoatruncationoftheFermisurfacetoonlyfourdisconnectedarcs.[S0031-9007(98)07323-2]PACSnumbers:71.10.Hf,71.27.+a,74.72.–hTheoriginoftheinstabilityoftheLandau-Fermiliquidstateastheelectrondensityisincreasedinoverdopedcupratesisoneofthemostinterestingopenquestionsintheﬁeld.Recently,weproposedthattheoriginliesinaﬂowofumklappscatteringtostrongcoupling[1].ThesimplercasewiththeFermisurface(FS)extremaat￿6p￿2,6p￿2￿wasconsideredandnottherealisticcaseforhole-dopedcuprateswheretheleadingcontributionfromumklappprocessescomesfromscatteringatthesaddlepoints￿p,0￿and￿0,p￿.InthisLetterwereportaone-looprenormalizationgroup(RG)calculationfortherealisticcaseincludingcontributionsfrombothCooperandPeierlschannels.Reasonableconditionscanleadtoastrongcouplingﬁxedpointwhosecharacteristicsaresimilartothoseofhalf-ﬁlledtwo-legladders.There,strongcouplingumklappprocessesleadtospinandchargegapsbutonlyshortrangespincorrelations.Aparticularlyinterestingandnovelfeatureisthat,althoughthestrongestdivergenceisinthed-wavepairingchannel,thechargegapcausesinsulatingnotsuperconductingbehavior.TherehavebeenanumberofpreviousRGinvestigationsforaFSwithsaddlepoints.Schulz[2]andDzyaloshinskii[3]consideredthespecialcasewithonlynearestneigh-bor(nn)hoppingsothatthesaddlepointscoincidewithasquareFSandperfectnestingexactlyathalf-ﬁlling,lead-ingtoaﬁxedpointwithlongrangeantiferromagnetic(AF)order.Ledereretal.[4]andDzyaloshinskii[5]alsocon-sideredthesamemodelaswedo.Therearetwoﬁxedpoints,oneatastrongcouplingﬁxedpointwithd-wavepairingfoundbyLedereretal.[4],andaweakcouplingexaminedbyDzyaloshinskii[5].AHubbardparametriza-tionoftherepulsiveinteractions￿U￿andmoderateinterac-tionstrengthsufﬁcestostabilizethestrongcouplingﬁxedpoint.Thenewfeaturewewishtostressisthattherecanbebothspinandchargegaps.TheFSisthentruncatedthroughtheformationofaninsulatingspinliquid(ISL)withresonancevalencebond(RVB)character.Wepro-posethatastheholedopingdecreasesthesegapsspreadoutfromthesaddlepointssotheFSconsistsofasetofarcs,whichprogressivelyshrinkastheholedopingdecreases.Westartwithatwo-dimensionalFStouchingthesaddlepoints￿p,0￿and￿0,p￿.SuchaFSisrealizedinthecaseofthedispersionrelation´￿k￿￿22t￿coskx1cosky￿24t0coskxcoskywitht.0￿t0,0￿asnn[next-nearestneighbor(nnn)]hoppings.ThroughoutthisLetter,weassumet0￿tsmallbutnonzerosothatweareclosetohalf-ﬁlling.BecauseofthevanHovesingularity,theleadingsingularityarisesfromelectronstatesinthevicinityofthesaddlepoints.WeconsidertwoFSpatchesatthesaddlepointsandexaminethecouplingbetweenthemusingone-loopRGequations,asillustratedinFig.1a.kcistheradiusofthepatches.ThesusceptibilityfortheCooperchannelatq￿0hasalog-squarebehavioroftheformxpp0￿v￿￿2hln￿v￿E0￿ln￿v￿2tk2c￿.(1)Here,thesumoverkisrestrictedtothepatches.E0isthecutoffenergyandh￿￿8p2t￿21forjt0￿tjø1.TheFIG.1.Fermisurface(FS).(a)TwopatchesoftheFSatthesaddlepoints.(b)TruncatedFSaselectrondensityisincreased.0031-9007￿98￿81(15)￿3195(4)$15.00©1998TheAmericanPhysicalSociety3195Introduction to the wave packet approach to interacting fermions

Figure 3.3: Real space representation f (j) (left) and phase space density
(right) for three diﬀerent functions. a) Localized real space basis state, b) plane
wave state, c) wave packet. The real space basis state and the momentum space
basis state are fully localized in j or p directions, respectively, and fully delocalized
in the other direction. The wave packet state on the other hand is localized in both
real and momentum space.

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)f (j) ˜f (p)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

17

jp￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿0510150.00.20.40.60.81.0jf￿j￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿051015￿0.4￿0.20.00.20.40.60.81.0jf￿j￿jp￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿051015￿0.2￿0.10.00.10.2jf￿j￿jpa)b)c)Wednesday, October 26, 20113.3 Phase space localized basis functions

in momentum space, and thus represented by a vertical straight line in the phase
space plot. The function can be used to generate a complete orthogonal basis by
shifting it ’horizontally’ in phase space, i.e. by shifting in real space, f (j) → f (j +1).
Repeating this procedure N times yields a complete orthogonal basis that is invariant
under real space shifts. Similarly, the plane wave f (j) = 1/√N eipj in Fig. 3.3 is
represented by a horizontal line in phase space. A complete basis is generated by
shifting it ’vertically’, i.e. f (j) → eijf (j), and repeating the procedure N times.
Now consider the function in Fig. 3.4, which is a Gaussian. Due to its phase space
localization, it looks more two-dimensional than the real space and momentum space
basis states, in that it has both a deﬁnite mean position and mean momentum, so
that it appears like a smeared point in the phase space plot instead of an extended
line.

How can one construct a nice basis from phase space localized functions?

The Gaussian is the type of state we intend to use as a basis function for the descrip-
tion of interacting electron systems. Thus the question arises how one can create a
nice complete basis from this kind of wave function. By analogy with the examples
above, the na¨ıve approach is to use one such function, which we denote by g(j).
g(j) is referred to as the window function in the following. This function should
be localized in phase space in the same way as the Gaussian, i.e. it should have a
maximum in real space, say at j = 0, and a maximum in momentum space, at p = 0.
To be well localized, it should decay rapidly as one moves away from this maximum.
To generate a basis that covers the full phase space, one shifts it around in both real
space and momentum space, by deﬁning

gmk(j) = eiKkjg(j − M m),

(3.1)

where m, k, and M are integers. The mean position of the shifted window function
gmk(j) is M m, and its mean momentum is Kk. Counting the number of states that
are obtained in this way, we see that K must satisfy K = 2π/M . Note that the
basis functions lie on a lattice in phase space, as shown in Fig. 3.4. This basis has
the following nice properties

1. Good phase space localization of the basis functions,

2. Shift invariance in real (with period M ) and momentum space (with period

K).

Unfortunately, orthogonality is not among them. However, Wilson [41] found a
way to obtain a orthogonal basis that shares the good phase space localization with
the na¨ıve approach here, and (almost) retains its shift invariance properties. The
construction principle is very similar, but involves a second step. Essentially one

18

Introduction to the wave packet approach to interacting fermions

Figure 3.4: Phase space positions of the basis states of a complete shift-invariant
wave packet basis. The basis is created by applying real and momentum shifts to
a single wave packet For a complete basis, the states generated lie on a lattice in
phase-space. In order to have the correct number of states, the area of a unit cell
must be N for a lattice with N sites.

ﬁrst generates a basis with 2N states by setting K = π/M (instead of K = 2π/M ).
One then forms linear combinations such as

ψmk(j) =

1
√2

[gm,k(j) ± gm,−k(j)] ,

(3.2)

which are either even or odd under reﬂections (i.e. parity ±1). Finally, one discards
half of the states, such that neighboring states in phase space have the opposite
parity. In Ch. 4 we present more details on the construction of this so-called Wilson-
Wannier basis.

How can phase space localization help to understand correlated electrons?

Most microscopic approaches to correlated electron systems can be loosely catego-
rized into two classes: First, there are methods that are more naturally situated in
momentum space such as the renormalization group [10]. These methods are very
eﬀective in capturing longer range correlations, and relatedly are good at resolving
features in the Brillouin zone, such as the anisotropy of quasi-particle life times on
the Fermi surface in Ch. 2.
In addition, they often lead to simple physical pic-
tures, that allow an intuitive understanding of complex physical problems, a feature
that has merits on its own. On the other hand, it is rather diﬃcult to treat strong
short-range correlations, and more often than not uncontrolled approximations are
necessary. The second class is usually deﬁned in real space, and contains methods

19

Example: Gaussian Frame151016151016151016151016￿jgmk(j)gm￿k￿(j)Matrix of scalar productsNot orthogonal!Generate basis by shifting Gaussian wave packet in real- and momentum-spaceg(j)=e−j2M2•Complete basis for N = M K•Basis states form lattice in phase-space•Real space shift: M mMomentum space shift: K kgmk=e2πiNKkjg(j−Mm)0<m<K0<k<MjpMonday, October 3, 20113.3 Phase space localized basis functions

Figure 3.5: The diﬀerent steps in the wave packet approximation

like exact diagonalization of small clusters [21], strong coupling expansions [22], or
the dynamical mean-ﬁeld theory [35]. These methods are usually very eﬀective when
it comes to dealing with strong correlations on small length scales, but it is diﬃcult
to incorporate the build-up of correlations on longer length scales. Moreover, they
often involve a high computational cost, and the sheer complexity of the calculations
can make it hard to develop a physical understanding of the solution.
We try to ﬁnd a middle ground between these two approaches, by combining features
of both: We split the Brillouin zone into a low-energy part in the vicinity of the Fermi
surface, and the remaining states which are at higher energies. It stands to reason
that the states at the Fermi surface are more strongly correlated than states that
are very far away from the Fermi surface. Hence we use the renormalization group
to treat the high-energy problem perturbatively and obtain an eﬀective Hamiltonian
for the low energy degrees of freedom. Note that this only makes sense when the
onsite interactions are not too strong. The remaining low-energy problem is then
transformed to the Wilson-Wannier (WW) basis, and solved using real space meth-
ods, namely strong coupling approximations and real space RG [36]. The diﬀerent
steps are summarized in Fig. 3.5.
The usefulness of the momentum space localization lies in the fact that one can
isolate the low-energy degrees of freedom simply by truncating the basis, retaining
only those states whose mean moment lies close to the Fermi surface, or a part
of the Fermi surface, such as the saddle points. At the same time, the real space

20

MicroscopicModelHEﬀectivemomentumspacemodelHΛatscaleΛLatticemodelHWwithshortrangeinteractionsLow-energydegreesoffreedomEﬀectiveHamiltonianHeﬀforlow-energydegreesoffreedomRenormalizationgroupTruncatedWilsonbasisexpansionLocalpartofHamiltonianRealspacerenormalizationIntroduction to the wave packet approach to interacting fermions

localization is helpful because the eﬀective Hamiltonian in the WW basis remains
short-ranged, which makes it possible to analyze the strong coupling problem.
In closing, we would like to remark that the wave packet approach is not really a
method to solve Hamiltonians, but rather a diﬀerent way to view many-electron
problems. Thus it is in principle compatible with many diﬀerent methods that can
be used to solve these problems.

3.4 Outline of the remaining chapters

In the remainder of this thesis, we develop the above heuristic ideas in more detail,
and discuss applications to one- and two-dimensional interacting fermion systems.
Since our approach is novel, the exposition starts from scratch, gradually moving
towards the saddle point regime that is the motivation for our work. We begin
with two rather technical chapters where the basic formalism for dealing with the
Wilson-Wannier basis is established.
In Ch. 4 we introduce the Wilson-Wannier (WW) basis states for one-dimensional
lattices, following the exposition given in [43, 44]. In particular, we show how the
basis can be generated from a single window function (or wave packet) by applying
shifts in real space and momentum space. We reformulate the construction by relat-
ing the construction principle to the point group of the lattice, which leads to a more
compact and physically transparent form. Some elementary, yet lengthy mathemati-
cal derivations are involved in the construction. These are relegated App. A to avoid
interrupting the logical ﬂow. In order to generate the basis, one must have a suitable
window function ﬁrst. We introduce a family of such window functions which allows
to obtain many approximate analytical results. Finally, we extend the WW basis to
the square lattice by taking the tensor product of one-dimensional basis functions.
Ch. 5 deals with the transformation of operators from real or momentum space to
the WW basis in one and two dimensions, respectively. For each case, we derive the
general basis transformation formula ﬁrst. Then we decompose it into two steps:
First the operator is expanded into an overcomplete wave packet basis, which has
the advantage that matrix elements are much simpler to understand than in the
WW basis itself. This step naturally leads to a systematic and intuitively appealing
approximation method for local operators (referred to as 1/M -expansion, where M
is the size of a wave packet), similar to the gradient expansion in ﬁeld theory. In the
second step, the orthogonalization procedure for the WW basis is applied to the wave
packet transform in order to arrive at the ﬁnal form. We ﬁnd our group theoretical
formulation form Ch. 4 very helpful in developing intuition and (relatively) simple
formulas for this step.
In Chs. 6 and 7 we use the results from the preceding sections to explore the physics
of interacting fermions from the point of view of phase space localization, focussing
on superconductivity and antiferromagnetism and the resulting Fermi surface insta-

21

3.4 Outline of the remaining chapters

bilities.
In Ch. 6 we investigate correlations in the ground state of simple mean-ﬁeld Hamilto-
nians in the WW basis in one and two dimensions. This exercise serves the purpose
of relating the free parameter of the WW basis, namely the size M of the generating
wave packet, to physical length scales due to fermion correlations.
In particular,
the ground state of all Hamiltonians considered exhibits fermion pairing, where the
pairs may consist of either two particles (superconductivity) or a particle and a hole
(antiferromagnetism). In one dimension, the pair binding energy ∆ deﬁned by the
symmetry-breaking mean-ﬁeld corresponds to a length scale ξ ∼ 2πvF /∆, which
may be interpreted as the pair size. We discuss the appearance of local physics in
the WW basis as the ratio ξ/M is varied. We ﬁnd a crossover between the two limits
ξ (cid:28) M , where all fermions are paired into bound states that are local in the WW
basis, and ξ (cid:29) M , where locally the system appears to be almost uncorrelated. This
insight will be used in later chapters in order to map interacting fermion systems to
bosonic systems with the paired fermions as new degrees of freedom.
Subsequently we investigate the changes that appear in two-dimensions, focussing
on the saddle point regime of the two-dimensional Hubbard model. We show that
no single length scale can be associated to the pair breaking energy because of the
large anisotropy of the Fermi velocity. Instead, we observe a separation of length
scales along the Fermi surface, similar to the crossover in one dimension as ξ/M is
varied. Due to their small Fermi velocity, states in the vicinity of the saddle points
are eﬀectively bound into pairs on very short length scales, whereas states in the
nodal direction around (π/2, π/2) are very weakly correlated at the same length
scale. This leads us to conjecture that the states at the saddle points decouple from
the nodal states at short length scales, corroborating the arguments made in earlier
works that were discussed above in Sec. 3.2.
From Ch. 7 on we leap from simple mean-ﬁeld Hamiltonians to interacting models.
As a preparation for the renormalization group based studies that follow, we clarify
the relationship between wave packets and the RG. We start by relating the 1/M -
expansion from Ch. 5 to the scaling dimension of operators in the RG approach,
which serves to understand the relative importance of diﬀerent operators. In a short
technical section, we discuss certain problems that occur due to the cutoﬀ that is
introduced by the RG, and point out a remedy for this issue. Finally, we pick up
the discussion on the separation of length scales in the saddle point regime (Ch. 6),
and perform a similar analysis based on the geometry of the low energy phase space
from the point of view of the renormalization group. We obtain similar results as
before.
After this long preparation, we ﬁnally study actual interacting fermion systems in
Ch. 8, starting with one-dimensional systems at weak coupling, where exact solutions
are available from bosonization [67, 68]. The main goal is not to aim at numerical
accuracy, but to see if and how the qualitative behavior at low energies is reproduced

22

Introduction to the wave packet approach to interacting fermions

in the wave packet approach. Hence we analyze two kinds of systems that exhibit
strong coupling ﬁxed points with very diﬀerent behavior: First we treat chains with
repulsive and attractive interactions, where the model is known to show quasi long
range order in the form of algebraic decays of various correlation functions for charge,
spin, and singlet pair densities. The second kind of system is the two-leg ladder at
half-ﬁlling. This model is known to become Mott insulating with gaps for all excita-
tions at any coupling strength. Nevertheless, the ground state features pronounced
d-wave pair and antiferromagnetic spin correlations, on short length scale, resembling
the RVB states proposed in the context of cuprate superconductors [17, 20].
We study these models following the approach outlined in Fig. 3.5 above. In each case
we ﬁrst introduce the relevant RG ﬁxed point. Then we transform the low energy
degrees of freedom to the WW basis. In this step, we limit ourselves to the simplest
possible approximation, and keep only states at the Fermi points. Eﬀectively, this
maps the low energy sector of the chain (ladder) at weak coupling to another, strongly
coupled chain (ladder) with a larger lattice constant. The resulting model is then
analyzed step by step at strong coupling, using mappings to eﬀective bosonic models.
The major reason for this approach is that then the resulting Hamiltonians are
relatively simple to analyze, thus allowing to understand why and how the diﬀerences
in low energy physics come about. Despite the simplicity of the approximations, we
ﬁnd that the qualitative behavior of all systems is reproduced well. In particular, the
diﬀerence between quasi long range order and the RVB-like short ranged correlations
show up very clearly. Finally, we demonstrate that the diﬀerent behavior of the
two kinds of systems can be related to the structure of the respective local Hilbert
spaces in the WW basis, a result that will be useful in two dimensions as well. More
concretely, for the chain models we generically obtain locally degenerate ground
states in the strong coupling limit, whereas for the ladder the ground state is unique,
with large gaps for all excitations. We link this diﬀerence to the energy separation
(or lack thereof) between single particle excitations and collective modes.
In Ch. 9 we return to the discussion of the saddle point regime of the Hubbard
model, the main motivation for our study. In the same manner as in one dimension,
we use the RG in order to obtain an eﬀective Hamiltonian at low energies. Based
on the arguments from Chs. 6 and 7, we use the separation of length scales inherent
to the model in the saddle point regime to devise approximations. We only consider
the simplest such approximation, and ignore all low-energy states except the ones in
the vicinity of the saddle points. For these states, we show that in the WW basis
the saddle point states are mapped to a bilayer, the two-dimensional analogue of the
two-leg ladder system. Consequently, the local Hilbert space is the same as the one
for the ladder systems. Moreover, from the RG ﬂow for diﬀerent model parameters
we infer that the eﬀective low-energy Hamiltonian is similar as well, in that its local
part has a unique local ground state with large gaps for all excitations and strong
d-wave pairing and antiferromagnetic correlations. The main diﬀerence to the ladder

23

3.4 Outline of the remaining chapters

model is that there is no universal ﬁxed-point of the RG, and that in particular we
observe a crossover between AF and dSC dominated regimes as a function of doping.
In order to assess the eﬀect of the higher dimensionality on the stability of the local
ground state, we diagonalize the eﬀective model on small clusters, and map it to an
eﬀective bosonic model that is analyzed by means of variational coherent states. We
ﬁnd that the RVB-like ground state appears to be robust over a sizable parameter
range, indicating spin-liquid behavior.
Even though the results are robust within our approximations, we are reluctant to
draw deﬁnite conclusions from the calculations at this point, since the approxima-
tions involved are quite drastic. However, since the wave packet approach is still in
its early stages of development, there is a lot of space for improvements in diﬀerent
directions, some of which we point out in the conclusions. Moreover, the approxima-
tion is based on physical arguments that are fairly elementary, namely the separation
of length scales due to the vicinity of the saddle points and the possibility to localize
states due to umklapp scattering (manifested by the commensurability of the AF
spin correlations), both of which are independent of the details of the calculation.
Finally, we summarize our thesis in Ch. 10, and give an outlook on possible future
work.

24

Chapter 4

Wilson-Wannier basis for a
ﬁnite lattice

In this technical chapter we introduce the Wilson-Wannier (WW) basis [41, 43, 44],
an orthogonal basis whose basis states are wave packets that are localized in real
space and bimodal in momentum space. The reason for using this type of basis is that
even though there are no-go theorems on the localization in both momentum- and
real space of orthonormal wave packet bases[47, 48], these can be circumvented if one
allows wave packets to be localized around two points in momentum space. Moreover,
the packets can be chosen such that in momentum space each wave packet is localized
around the two momenta ±p, so that for systems with inversion symmetry, they can
still be used to resolve states that are close to the Fermi points.

4.1 Wilson-Wannier basis in one dimension

4.1.1 Construction of the basis functions

Deﬁnition

In the following we consider a ﬁnite one-dimensional lattice of size N with periodic
boundary conditions. In order to introduce the Wilson basis, we assume that N can
be written as N = M L, where both M and L are even. The basis is generated from
a single window function (or wave packet) g(j), 0 ≤ j < N . We demand that it is
exponentially localized in both real and momentum space with widths of order M
and K ≡ π
M , respectively. In order to generate the basis, we will need the shifted
window function

gmk(j) =

momentum shift

eiKkj

(cid:124)(cid:123)(cid:122)(cid:125)

25

(cid:124)

g (j − mM )

position shift

(cid:123)(cid:122)

(cid:125)

.

(4.1)

4.1 Wilson-Wannier basis in one dimension

The shifted window functions are labelled by two coordinates, the position coordinate
m = 0, 1, . . . , L − 1, and the momentum coordinate −M < k ≤ M . K is the step
size of a momentum shift. These coordinates are connected to the mean position ¯j
and mean momentum ¯p of the function by

¯j = M m,

¯p = Kk,

(4.2)

There are 2N shifted window functions gmk(j) in total for a lattice of size N .
We now use the gmk(j) to generate a complete and orthogonal basis for the lattice.
The basis states are denoted by |m, k(cid:105). Their relation to the real space states |j(cid:105) is
given by the wave function

Following [43, 44], the wave functions ψmk(j) are given by

(cid:104)j | m, k(cid:105) = ψmk(j).

ψmk(j) =

gm,0(j)
gm,M (j)
1√2
−i√2

(gm,k(j) + gm,−k(j))
(gm,k(j) − gm,−k(j))

m even, k = 0
m even, k = M
1 ≤ k < M, m + k even
1 ≤ k < M, m + k odd

(4.3)

(4.4)

When the window function g(j) satisﬁes certain orthogonality conditions to be stated
below, the states | m, k(cid:105) form a complete orthogonal basis. In addition, the functions
ψm,k(j) have the useful property of exponential localization in both real space and
(around two points in) momentum space if g(j) is chosen appropriately.
The window function g(j) has to satisfy certain conditions to make the ψmk(j)
orthogonal. The derivation of the conditions on g(j) for the case of a ﬁnite lattice
with an even number of sites is given in appendix A.1. In real space, the conditions
are

g (j − mM ) g (j − M (m + 2l)) =

1
M

δl,0,

(4.5)

L−1(cid:88)m=0

which has to be satisﬁed for all j with 0 ≤ j < N and l with 0 ≤ l < L/2. Conditions
(4.5) are in the form of a convolution. The convolution can be turned into a multi-
plication by means of the Zak transformation [45], so that suitable window functions
can be readily constructed on a computer. The usage of the Zak transformation in
this context is detailed in appendix A.2.
In Sec. 4.1.3, we show that restriction to a special class of window functions that are
band limited in momentum space leads to considerable simpliﬁcation [43]. In fact,
analytical window functions can be easily constructed in this case.
The choice of M in the factorization N = M K deﬁnes the length scale over which the
basis functions are delocalized. The unit cell for the basis functions is 2M because
of the phase factors e±iφm+k in (4.9) that are diﬀerent on adjacent WW sites but
identical on second nearest neighbor sites, corresponding to wave packets with even
(odd) parity on even (odd) phase space lattice sites. The states with k = 0 and

26

Wilson-Wannier basis for a ﬁnite lattice

Figure 4.1: Schematic representation of the relation of Wilson-Wannier functions to
the real space lattice. The ﬁgure shows one unit cell of the Wilson basis for M = 4.
j labels lattice sites in the real lattice, and gray circles represent these sites. The
WW momentum is denoted by k and runs in the vertical direction. The 2M = 8
sites in the original lattice are replaced by two sets of states centered around j = 0
and j = M in the Wilson basis. Note that the two superlattice sites within one unit
cell are inequivalent, which can be seen best from the fact that the states k = 0 and
k = M exist only once per unit cell.

k = M are already parity eigenstates, so that they appear only once per unit cell,
for all other k there are two states per unit cell for even and odd parity (or k < 0
and k > 0). A schematic picture of the basis function in one unit cell is shown in
Fig. 4.1. From N = M L one sees that there are L/2 unit cells in total. Note that
this ﬁgure is intended to show how the states are rearranged in the new basis only,
and that it does not reproduce the shape of the wave packets correctly. The real
space form of the wave packets within one unit cell is shown in Fig. 4.2. The ﬁgure
shows wave packets with m = 2, 3 and k = 1, 2. The parity of the states follows
a checkerboard pattern in the m − k-plane, where nearest neighbors always have
opposite parity. These ﬁndings suggest to use another deﬁnition of the WW basis
function based on their symmetry properties.

Improved deﬁnition based on group theory

The deﬁnition (4.4) is awkward to work with.
It can be simpliﬁed by the action
of the point group G of the lattice on a wave packet gmk(j). Since the lattice is
one-dimensional, G = {E,P}, where E is the identity and P is the inversion. For
practical purposes, we replace the elements of G by their 1×1 matrix representations
when acting on momenta p. Note that the action on the mean momentum k of a
wave packet gmk(j) is the same as the one on the momentum p = Kk. Hence we

27

k(cid:135)4k(cid:135)3k(cid:135)2k(cid:135)1k(cid:135)0j(cid:135)01234(cid:61)M5674.1 Wilson-Wannier basis in one dimension

Figure 4.2: A subset of the Wilson-Wannier basis functions within one unit cell of the
basis for N = 210 and M = 25. The ﬁgure shows ψmk(j) with m = 2, 3 and k = 1, 2.
States with k = 2 are oﬀset vertically for sake of clarity. The centers of the wave
packets in real space are marked by the dotted gray lines at positions j = M m. The
parity of the states is given by (−1)m+k and hence follows a checkerboard pattern
in the m − k-plane. States with even parity are shown in red (dashed line), states
with odd parity in blue (solid line).

use the correspondence

E ↔ 1
P ↔ −1
G ↔ {1,−1},

and deﬁne the point group action on a wave packet to be

Aα gmk(j) = gm,αk,

(4.6)

(4.7)

where α = ±1, and Aα ∈ G is its associated group element. Note that (4.7) implies
that the center of mass of the wave packet is used as the origin of the lattice. For
each k we can ﬁnd the stabilizer (or little group) Hk ⊆ G, which is the subgroup of
G that leaves gmk(j) invariant. We ﬁnd

Hk =(cid:26) {E}

for
G for

0 < |k| < M
|k| = 0, M

(4.8)

Finally, we denote the number of elements of a group G by |G|. Then (4.4) can be
written as

ψm,k(j) =

e−iαφm+k gm,αk(j).

(4.9)

1

(cid:112)|G||Hk| (cid:88)α∈G

28

012345m(cid:61)2m(cid:61)3k(cid:61)1k(cid:61)2j(cid:77)ΨmkWilson-Wannier basis for a ﬁnite lattice

meaning
position in real space

N , . . . , π − 2π

N , π momentum

variable

range

0, . . . , N
N ,−π + 2 2π

−π + 2π

0, . . . , L − 1

j
p
m

k

α

M

K
L

0, . . . , M

±1

even

π
M
N
M

WW position label for state with
center position ¯j = M m
WW momentum label for state
with center momenta ¯p = ±Kk
the point
Representation of
group G on wave packets
Real space shift length. Size of
WW unit cell is 2M
Momentum shift length
Range of m

Table 4.1: Variables for the description of the spatial degrees of freedom in one
dimension.

The phase factor φm+k is given by

Hence

π
2

φa =(cid:26) 0
e−iαφa =(cid:26) 1

α
i

a even
a odd

for a even
for
a odd

,

(4.10)

(4.11)

and it is straightforward to show that the deﬁnitions (4.4) and (4.9) are equivalent.

4.1.2 Relation to real space and momentum states

In the remainder of this work, we will frequently switch between momentum space,
real space, and WW descriptions. This section summarizes the relation between
states in all three bases. We begin by summarizing the diﬀerent variables and their
meaning in Tab. 4.1.
We have already introduced the relation between WW basis states | m, k(cid:105) and real
space basis states | j(cid:105), which deﬁnes the basis functions ψmk(j),

ψmk(j) = (cid:104)j | mk(cid:105) .

(4.12)

29

4.1 Wilson-Wannier basis in one dimension

A brief glance at the deﬁnition (4.4) of the basis functions reveals that they are real:

ψm,k(j) =

=

1

√2(cid:2)e−iφm+k gm,k(j) + eiφm+k gm,−k(j)(cid:3)
√2(cid:104)ei(Kkj−φm+k) ± e−i(Kkj−φm+k)(cid:105) g (j − M m)

1

= √2 cos [Kk − φm+k] g (j − M m) .

As a consequence, we ﬁnd that

(cid:104)m, k | j(cid:105) = (cid:104)j | m, k(cid:105)∗ = ψm,k(j).

The relation to momentum states follows directly from

(cid:104)p| m, k(cid:105) = (cid:88)j

=

1

√N (cid:88)j

= ˜ψm,k(p),

(cid:104)p| j(cid:105) (cid:104)j | m, k(cid:105)

e−ipjψm,k(j)

(4.13)

(4.14)

(4.15)

where ˜ψm,k(p) denotes the Fourier transform of ψm,k(j). Note that ˜ψm,k(p) is not
real in general, so that (cid:104)m, k | p(cid:105) = ˜ψm,k(p)∗.

4.1.3 Analytical window functions

In general, window functions that satisfy (4.5) have to be constructed numerically.
However, a special class of window functions can be readily constructed analytically.
The key condition for the simpliﬁcation is that the window function is band limited
in momentum space. In order to make this notion more quantitative, we introduce
the Fourier transform ˜g(p) of g(j) via

g(j) =

1

√N (cid:88)p

eipj ˜g(p).

(4.16)

Then we call the window function band limited when its Fourier transform satisﬁes

˜g(p) = 0 for |p| ≥ K.

(4.17)

Condition (4.17) states that only shifted window functions that are nearest neighbors
in momentum space overlap, i.e.

˜gmk(p) ˜gm(cid:48)k(cid:48)(p) = 0 for |k − k(cid:48)| > 1.

(4.18)

Moreover, from condition (4.17) one sees it is more convenient to use the momentum
space representation in order to specify g(j), since the number of parameters needed

30

Wilson-Wannier basis for a ﬁnite lattice

N/M ˜g (0)

2
4

1
1√2

˜g(cid:0) 2π
N(cid:1)

0
1
2

Table 4.2: Analytical window functions in momentum space for small lattices with
N/M = 2, 4. The value of ˜g(p) for all other momenta is either zero or related to the
ones given by symmetry.

to ﬁx ˜g(p) is N/2M = L/2, which is independent of the wave packet size M . In
appendix A.3 we show that for a band limited window function the orthogonality
conditions (4.5) become

|˜g (p)|2 + |˜g (K − p)|2 =

2M
N

for 0 ≤ p ≤ K.

(4.19)

This implies that the values

˜g(0) = (cid:114) N
2(cid:114) N

2M

1

,

M

˜g (K/2) =

(4.20)

are ﬁxed. For the remaining momenta, any value ˜g(p) ≤(cid:112)2M/N can be chosen for

0 < p < K/2, the remaining values are ﬁxed by (4.19) and (4.17), and ˜g(p) = ˜g(−p).
Window functions that satisfy (4.17) are listed in Tab. ?? for the cases N/M = 2, 4.
Note that for N/M = 2, 4, the window function is unique, whereas for N/M > 4 it is
not. In the following, we use the window function for N = 4M for most calculations.
It is noteworthy that for N/M = 2 the WW basis states are simply standing waves
with wave vector p = K, i.e.

ψmk(j) = cos [Kj − φm+k] .

(4.21)

As a consequence, in order to resolve the full momentum dependence of matrix
elements, the interactions in at least one WW unit cell have to be known, and the
purely local matrix elements are insuﬃcient to do so (except for k = 0, M , where
there is only one state per unit cell).

4.2 Wilson-Wannier basis for the square lattice

The Wilson-Wannier (WW) basis for a square lattice is the tensor product of two
one-dimensional bases. Each basis state |m, k(cid:105) is labelled by two two-dimensional
vectors: The mean position m and the WW momentum k. The transformation
from real- or momentum-space to the WW basis is hence no diﬀerent from the

31

4.2 Wilson-Wannier basis for the square lattice

group element

E

α (1, 1)

Px

(−1, 1)

Py

(1,−1)

PxPy
(−1,−1)

Table 4.3: Correspondence between point group elements and the integer vectors
α.

transformation in one dimension. Hence we have for the state |j(cid:105) at lattice site
j = (j1, j2), that

(cid:104)j| m, k(cid:105) = ψm1,k1 (j1) ψm2,k2 (j2) ,

≡ Ψm,k (j) ,

(4.22)

with ψmk(j) deﬁned above in (4.9). Thus the position labels m are integer vectors
that deﬁne a square lattice with lattice constant M . The momentum label k =
(k1, k2) lies in the ﬁrst quadrant of the Brillouin zone since 0 ≤ ki ≤ M . In a similar
manner, we can deﬁne the two-dimensional window function as a tensor product of
one-dimensional ones,

gm,k (j) = gm1,k1 (j1) gm2,k2 (j2) .

(4.23)

In order to facilitate computations, it is again useful to consider point group actions
on the wave packets gm,k (j) in order to simplify the deﬁnition of basis functions.
Since we use a product of one-dimensional basis functions, we do not base the dis-
cussion on the point group C2v of the square lattice but on its subgroup

G = {E,Px,Py,PxPy},

(4.24)

consisting of reﬂections around the x and y axes. The action of a group element
A on a wave vector k is given by a 2 × 2 matrix, parametrized by two numbers
α = (α1, α2):

Aα gm,k (j) = gm,Aαk (j)
0

Aα = (cid:18) α1

α2 (cid:19) .

0

(4.25)

In the following we use the vector α = (α1, α2) in order to label elements of G,
similar to what we have done above in one dimension. The correspondence between
group elements and vectors is summarized in Tab. 4.3.
Now we can express the WW basis functions on the square lattice in a convenient
way as

Ψmk (j) =

e−iα·Φm+kgm,Aαk(j),

(4.26)

where |G| = 4 is the number of elements of G, and |Hk| is the number of elements of
the stabilizer Hk of k. |Hk| = 1 when π/M k lies in the interior of the ﬁrst quadrant

1

(cid:112)|G| |Hk| (cid:88)α∈G

32

Wilson-Wannier basis for a ﬁnite lattice

Figure 4.3: Connection between wave packet momenta and WW momentum for the
square lattice. Each WW basis state | m, k(cid:105) is a linear combination of wave packets
with up to four diﬀerent mean momenta Aαk, where α ∈ G. All WW momenta
lie in the ﬁrst quadrant of the Brillouin zone (shaded area). The phase space cells
for the are drawn as a grid. The three blue cells are obtained from the red cell by
group transformations, and are thus represented by the same WW momentum k.

of the BZ, |Hk| = 2 when it lies on the boundary, and |Hk = 4| when it lies on a
corner. Thus in general each basis state is a linear combination of wave packet states
with up to four diﬀerent momenta that lie on the G-orbit of the WW momentum k.
The connection between WW momentum k and wave packet momenta is shown in
Fig. 4.3
Since the WW basis functions for a square lattice derive directly from the one-
dimensional variant, the analytical window functions from Sec. 4.1.3 can be directly
used in two dimensions as well. For later convenience, the variables used in the
diﬀerent representations - real space, momentum space, and WW basis - are listed
in Tab. 4.4.

33

Wilson-Wannier BasisGmk(j)=gm1k1(j1)gm2k2(j2)Ψmk(j)=ψm1k1(j1)ψm2k2(j2)Tensor product basis•Tensor-product window function localized in square of area M!•k lies in ﬁrst quadrant because of symmetrization•WW unit cell contains four sites•Everything else unchanged￿Π,0￿￿Π,Π￿￿0,Π￿πMSunday, October 2, 20114.2 Wilson-Wannier basis for the square lattice

variable

j = (j1, j2)
p = (p1, p2)
m = (m1, m2)

range

ji = 0, . . . , N
N ,−π + 2 2π
mi = 0, . . . , L − 1

meaning
position in real space

WW position label for state with
center position ¯j = M m
WW momentum label for state
¯p =
with center momenta
KAαk, where α ∈ G
Representation of
group G

the point

pi = −π + 2π

N , . . . , π − 2π

N , π momentum

k = (k1, k2)

ki = 0, . . . , M

α = (α1, α2)

αi = ±1

Table 4.4: Variables for the description of the spatial degrees of freedom in two
dimensions.

34

Chapter 5

Wilson-Wannier
representation of operators

This chapter discusses the transformation of operators to the WW basis. We consider
the one-dimensional case ﬁrst, beginning with the general transformation formula
for many-body operators in Sec. 5.1. In Sec. 5.2 we introduce a useful splitting of
the general formula into two steps: A transformation into an overcomplete wave
packet basis, and a second step to orthogonalize these basis states, similar to the
construction in Ch. 4. We focus in particular on the transformation of local and
almost local operators, leading to an expansion in 1/M for those operators that
is analogous to gradient expansions in ﬁeld theory. The subsequent sections apply
these results to the most relevant cases, namely hopping and interaction operators.
Finally we generalize all results to two dimensions in Sec. 5.4.

5.1 General transformation formula in one dimen-

sion

Transformation of annihilation and creation operators

We consider transformation properties of the fermion creators and annihilators ﬁrst.
We denote the state with no fermions by | 0(cid:105), and states with one fermion in state
j by | j(cid:105) etc. For sake of clarity, we omit spin indices in this section. The fermion
annihilator (creator) for a fermion in state | m, k(cid:105) is denoted by γm,k (γ†m,k). Using

35

5.1 General transformation formula in one dimension

the resolution of the identity(cid:80)j | j(cid:105)(cid:104)j |, we the ﬁnd

γ†m,k | 0(cid:105) = | m, k(cid:105)
= (cid:88)j
= (cid:88)j

| j(cid:105) (cid:104)j | m, k(cid:105)
ψm,k(j) c†j | 0(cid:105) .

(5.1)

Taking the Hermitian conjugate of (5.1) yields a similar relation for (cid:104)0| γm,k. Hence
the transformation from real space to WW basis takes the form

ψm,k(j)c†j,

ψm,k(j) cj.

(5.2)

γ†m,k = (cid:88)j
γm,k = (cid:88)j

γ†m,k = (cid:88)p
γm,k = (cid:88)p

Using the resolution of the identity(cid:80)p | p(cid:105)(cid:104)p| instead of(cid:80)j | j(cid:105)(cid:104)j |, the analogous

transformation from momentum space to WW basis is obtained:

˜ψm,k(p) c†p

˜ψm,k(p)∗ cp.

(5.3)

Transformation of arbitrary operators

Eqns. (5.2, 5.3) can be used to transform all many-body operators from real (mo-
mentum) space to the WW basis. This is done by applying the transformation rule
for the fermion operators to each operator separately. Consider a general operator
ˆO. It can be expanded in any of the three bases. The transformation rule for the
expansion coeﬃcients follows from the fact that the operator is independent of the
particular representation chosen. We assume that the real space expansion is given
by

O (j1, . . . , j2n) c†j1 ··· c†jn

cjn+1 ··· cj2n

.

(5.4)

ˆO = (cid:88)j1···j2n

The same operator in the WW representation can be written as

ˆO = (cid:88)m1k1···m2nk2n

O (m1k1, . . . , m2nk2n) γ†m1k1 ··· γ†mnkn

γmn+1kn+1 ··· γm2nk2n

.

Using (5.2), the relation between the two expansions is given by

O (m1k1, . . . , m2nk2n) = (cid:88)j1···j2n

O (j1, . . . , j2n)(cid:34) 2n(cid:89)l=1

ψml,kl (jl)(cid:35) .

36

(5.5)

(5.6)

Wilson-Wannier representation of operators

In a similar manner, the momentum space representation can be written as

ˆO =

1

N n−1 (cid:88)p1···p2n

O (p1, . . . , p2n) c†p1 ··· c†pn cpn+1 ··· cp2n .

(5.7)

It is related to the real space representation (5.4) by Fourier transformation in each
index. From the WW representation (5.5) and the transformation rule (5.3) it follows
that

O (m1k1, . . . , m2nk2n) =

O (p1, . . . , p2n)

1

N n−1 (cid:88)p1···p2n
× (cid:34) n(cid:89)l=1

˜ψml,kl (pl)(cid:35)(cid:34) 2n(cid:89)l=n+1

˜ψml,kl (pl)∗(cid:35) .

(5.8)

Eqns. (5.6, 5.8) can be used directly in order to obtain the WW representation of any
operator. On the other hand, it is not very intuitive due to the rather complicated
deﬁnition of the ˜ψmk(p).
In the next section, we bring (5.8) into a more easily
understandable (if less compact) form.

5.2 Wilson-Wannier basis and wave packet trans-

formation

The goal of this section is to split the transformation (5.8) into two steps, where the
ﬁrst step involves sums over products of window functions. This step yields matrix
elements between diﬀerent wave packet states with wave function gmk(j), and hence
we refer to it as wave packet transformation. The second step involves the sum over
the point group G that takes the overcomplete wave packet states to the WW basis
states. Simpliﬁcations occur because the wave packet states are shift invariant under
general phase space shifts, so that only a few matrix elements have to be evaluated.
Moreover, the wave packet matrix elements are easier to understand, since each wave
packet is localized around one point in phase space (instead of two points for the
WW basis states). In the following we focus on the wave packet part of the WW
transformation, since this part contains most of the physical information. The eﬀect
of the symmetrization is discussed in Secs. 5.3.1-5.3.2 below.
We restrict ourselves to the transformation from momentum space to the WW basis,
since this transformation will be used most of the time in the remainder of this work.
The corresponding formulas in real space are completely analogous.
First, we use the deﬁnition (4.9) of ψmk(j) (and hence ˜ψmk(p)) in terms of the wave
packets, and split each sum over p in two parts as follows:

(cid:88)p (cid:16)···(cid:17) ˜ψmk(p) =

e−iαφm+k

1

(cid:112)|G||Hk| (cid:88)α∈G
(cid:123)(cid:122)
(cid:124)

37

orthogonalization

× (cid:34)(cid:88)p (cid:16)···(cid:17)˜gm,αk(p)(cid:35)
(cid:125)
(cid:124)

wave packet transformation

(cid:123)(cid:122)

(cid:125)

(5.9)

5.2 Wilson-Wannier basis and wave packet transformation

Now we exploit the shift invariance of the window function in order to replace all
˜gmk(p) by ˜g(p), using Eq. (B.7) that is derived in App. B. It states that for an
arbitrary function f (p) the identity

(cid:88)p

f (p)˜gmk(p) =(cid:88)p

f (p + Kk) e−iM mp˜g (p)

(5.10)

holds. Applying (5.9) and (5.10) to (5.8), we ﬁnd

O (m1k1, . . . , m2nk2n) =

(5.11)

n(cid:88)l=1(cid:0)αl φml+kl − αn+lφmn+l+kn+l(cid:1)(cid:41)

(5.12)

(mlpl − mn+lpn+l)(cid:41)(cid:34) 2n(cid:89)l=1

n(cid:88)l=1

˜g (pl)(cid:35) .

(5.13)

1
l=1 |Hkl|

1
(cid:113)(cid:81)2n
|G|n
exp(cid:40)−i
× (cid:88)α1···α2n
× ¯O (m1α1k1, . . . , m2nα2nk2n) ,
N n−1 (cid:88)p1...p2n
× exp(cid:40)−iM

1

where the wave packet transform ¯O (m1α1k1, . . . , m2nα2nk2n) is given by

¯O (m1α1k1, . . . , m2nα2nk2n) =

O (p1 + α1Kk1, . . . , p2n + α2nKk2n)

Wave packet transformation for local operators

Eqns. (5.12-5.13) appear to be rather formidable, and it is indeed tedious to dis-
cuss their properties in full generality. Hence we will consider only a special case
here, which is nevertheless instructive. To be speciﬁc, we consider the wave packet
transform of a local operator,

O (p1, . . . , p2n) = Oloc δ(cid:32) n(cid:88)i=1

[pi − pi+n](cid:33) ,

(5.14)

where δ (··· ) is the delta function modulo 2π that enforces momentum conservation.
We also deﬁne the wave packet momentum mismatch

Q = K

2n(cid:88)i=1

[αiki − αi+nki+n] ,

(5.15)

which speciﬁes the amount of violation of conservation of k, where Q = 0 when k is
conserved modulo 2M . Inspection of (5.13) shows that the delta function in (5.14)
now enforces the condition

n(cid:88)i=1

[pi − pi+n] = −Q mod 2π.

(5.16)

38

Wilson-Wannier representation of operators

Since this is the only dependence on the variables αi and ki, these variables inﬂuence
the matrix element only through Q. Thus we may set k1 = Q/K, ki = 0 for i > 1,
and αi = 1 without loss of generality. In order to keep the notation readable, we use

i=2 [pi − pn+i] as a short hand. Then (5.13) becomes

p1 ≡ −Q − pn+1 +(cid:80)n

¯O (m1, 1, Q; . . . ; m2n, 1, 0) = Oloc

˜g (pi)

(5.17)

2n(cid:89)i=1

1

N n−1 (cid:88)p2···p2n
n(cid:88)i=1

× exp{−iM

[mipi − mn+ipn+i]},

which depends only on ˜g, on Q, and on the mi. By virtue of translational invariance
of the wave packet states, the expression is shift invariant in real space with period
2M when Q (cid:54)= 0, and with period M when Q = 0.
It is important to realize that the assumption that ˆO is local is not as restrictive as
it might seem. Since the presence of the window functions restrict all sums over p
to −K < p < K, in fact the local case is a valid approximation whenever

O (p1 + Kα1k1, . . . , p2m + Kα2mk2m) ≈ C δ(cid:32) 2n(cid:88)i=1

[pi + Kαiki − pn+i − Kαn+ikn+i](cid:33)

(5.18)
for some constant C and −K < pi < K. This translates into the statement that
the spatial range of ˆO should be small compared to M . This short range spatial de-
pendence is then contained in the dependence on αiki in the wave packet transform,
and ki in the WW basis. As a consequence, only few matrix elements need to be
evaluated, and the evaluation is very fast because (5.18) can be computed once and
tabulated for later use.
When greater precision is necessary (for instance for longer ranged interactions), or
when matrix elements vanish in the local approximation (which we will see to be the
case for the hopping operator), it is straightforward to improve the approximation
by Taylor expanding O (p1, . . . , p2m) around the maximum of the product of wave
packets. Since the window functions restrict the summation over the momenta to

|p| (cid:46) π/M , the Taylor expansion leads eﬀectively to an expansion in 1/M . This

1/M -expansion leads to expansion coeﬃcients that are universal in the sense that
they depend on the window function and a few parameters only. We will pursue this
procedure for the hopping matrix elements below in Sec. 5.3.1, but stick to the local
approximation for interaction terms. We discuss the relation of the wave packet
transform of an operator to the notion of scaling dimension of operators that is used
in the renormalization group below in Ch. 7.

39

5.3 Transformation of hopping and interaction operators

5.3 Transformation of hopping and interaction op-

erators

5.3.1 Hopping

In this section we discuss the WW representation of the kinetic energy operator

Hkin =(cid:88)p

(p)c†p cp,

(5.19)

where we assume p = −2t cos p in the following, but the treatment below applies to
any dispersion. t is the hopping rate for nearest neighbor hopping, the bandwidth
is W = 4t. We denote the WW transform of (p) by T (mk, m(cid:48)k(cid:48)). From the
transformation formula (5.8) we obtain

T (mk, m(cid:48)k(cid:48)) =(cid:88)p

(p) ˜ψmk(p) ˜ψm(cid:48)k(cid:48) (p(cid:48))∗ .

(5.20)

Since ˜g(p) is band limited (cf. Sec. 4.1.3), T (mk, m(cid:48)k(cid:48)) = 0 if |k − k(cid:48)| > 1 because of
vanishing overlap of the WW basis functions in momentum space. In the following
we focus on the case k(cid:48) = k, which, again by virtue of momentum space localization,
is the dominant term in the expansion. We express ˜ψmk(p) in terms of ˜g(p) using
(5.12) as discussed above:

e−i(αφm+k−α(cid:48)φm(cid:48)+k) δαk,α(cid:48)k

(5.21)

T (mk, m(cid:48)k) =

=

1

|G||Hk|(cid:88)α,α(cid:48)
× (cid:88)p
2(cid:88)α

1

 (p + αK) e−iM p(m−m(cid:48)) |˜g (p)|2
e−iα(φm+k−φm(cid:48)+k) (cid:88)p

 (p + αK) e−iM p(m−m(cid:48)) |˜g (p)|2 ,

where we have used |G| = 2. Note that the factor 1/Hk cancels against one of the
sums over α for the case k = 0, where the Kronecker delta does not restrict the
summation over α.

Wave packet transformation and 1/M -expansion around the local limit
We note that the factor |˜g (p)|2 restricts the sum over p to −π/M < p < π/M , so
that it makes sense to expand  (p + αq) around p = 0:

 (p + αK) ≈

+ α(cid:48) (Kk)

mean kinetic energy

group velocity

 (Kk)

(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)

1
2

p2 + . . . ,

(5.22)

p + (cid:48)(cid:48) (Kk)

dispersion

(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)

(cid:123)(cid:122)

(cid:125)

where (cid:48) (Kk) = ∂p (Kk + p)(cid:12)(cid:12)p=0 etc.

(cid:124)

40

Wilson-Wannier representation of operators

We treat the kinetic energy contribution term by term, starting with the ﬁrst term.
Since this term is a constant, the corresponding contribution in the WW basis is
diagonal by virtue of the orthogonality of the basis states. Hence the contribution

is(cid:80)mk  (Kk) γ†mk γmk

For the remaining contributions, we focus on the leading terms only. These are the
terms that are diagonal in k and act over the shortest distance. We use the wave
packet transformation ﬁrst in order to estimate the magnitude of the diﬀerent terms,
and apply the orthogonalization afterwards. Moreover, we use the analytical window
function for N/M = 4 from Tab. ?? in order to obtain analytical estimates. For the
group velocity term the leading contribution arises from nearest neighbor hopping
with m(cid:48) − m = ±1, with magnitude
(cid:48) (Kk)(cid:88)p

pe±iM p ˜g2(p) = ±i

(cid:48) (Kk) ,

π
4M

which is O(1/M ) as announced above. The term proportional to p2 is dominated by
hopping to second nearest neighbors, m(cid:48) − m = ±2, and its contribution is

(5.23)

(5.24)

1
2

(cid:48)(cid:48) (Kk)(cid:88)p

p2e±i2M p ˜g2(p) = −

π2
16M 2 (cid:48)(cid:48) (Kk) .

Orthogonalization

In order to arrive at the WW representation of the hopping operator, its wave packet
transform has to be orthogonalized. This eliminates some term that are ﬁnite in the
wave packet transform. For example, consider the ﬁrst term of the expansion of
 (Kk + p) ≈  (Kk). In the wave packet transform, matrix elements between wave
packets that are adjacent in phase space are ﬁnite, since they involve the scalar
product of two wave packets,

 (Kk)(cid:88)p

˜gmk (p) ˜gm(cid:48)k(cid:48) (p)∗ (cid:54)= 0,

(5.25)

and the wave packet states are not orthogonal. The WW basis states, on the other
hand, are orthogonal, so that their scalar product is (cid:104)mk | m(cid:48)k(cid:48)(cid:105) = δmm(cid:48)δkk(cid:48). As a
consequence, the constant term in the expansion of (p) leads to a diagonal contri-
bution to the WW transform.
In a similar manner, other matrix elements that are ﬁnite in the wave packet trans-
form vanish in the WW basis due to the symmetry of the basis states (recall that
the orthogonalization amounts to linear combining wave packet states such that they
fall into irreducible representations of the point group).

Hopping Hamiltonian in WW-representation

In summary, the hopping Hamiltonian in the WW basis is dominated by the k-
diagonal part, however, in principle the other hopping matrix elements are not

41

5.3 Transformation of hopping and interaction operators

negligible. Contributions can be evaluated using an expansion around the local
approximation, which yields an expansion of Hkin in powers of 1/M . For the ana-
lytical window function for N/M = 4, the analytical estimate of the kinetic energy
Hamiltonian is

Hkin ≈ (cid:88)k (cid:88)m,m(cid:48)

γ†mk γm(cid:48)k(cid:104) (Kk) δm,m(cid:48) + (−1)m π
4M(cid:17)2
+(cid:16) π

(cid:48)(cid:48) (Kk) (δm,m(cid:48) − δm+2,m(cid:48))(cid:105) + h.c.

4M

(cid:48) (Kk) δm+1,m(cid:48)

(5.26)

Since the goal of this work is to use the WW basis in order to obtain new approx-
imation schemes to interacting fermion systems rather than to aim at the highest
precision, we will conﬁne ourselves to the approximate kinetic energy (5.26) in the
remainder of this work.

5.3.2

Interaction

In this section we consider the WW transform of a short ranged (compared to M )
interaction Hamiltonian

1

2N (cid:88)p1···p4

Hint =

δ (p1 + p2 − p3 − p4) ˜U (p1, p2; p3, p4) ˆJ (p1, p3) ˆJ (p2, p4) , (5.27)
where ˆJ (p1, p2) =(cid:80)s c†p1,s cp2,s. ˜U (p1, p2; p3, p4) contains the spatial dependence of
Hint, for a purely local interaction with strength U we have ˜U (p1, p2; p3, p4) = U .

Wave packet transformation

Since we assume that Hint is short ranged, we apply the local approximation (5.18) to
the wave packet transformation. Moreover, we consider k-conserving matrix elements
only, i.e. matrix elements for which α1k1 + α2k2 − α3k3 − α4k4 = 0 mod 2M . In
order to obtain analytical estimates, we employ the analytical window function from
?? with N/M = 4.
The ﬁrst step is to make use of the local approximation by transforming (5.14) to
real space. This leads to the wave packet transform

¯U (m1α1k1, . . . , m4α4k4) =

˜U (α1k1, . . . , α4k4)

2N

δ (p1 + p2 − p3 − p4)

(cid:88)p1···p4

× exp(cid:110) − iM (m1p1 + m2p2 − m3p3 − m4p4)(cid:111) 4(cid:89)i=1

˜U (α1Kk1, . . . , α4Kk4)

=

(cid:88)j (cid:34) 4(cid:89)i=1

g (j − M mi)(cid:35)

˜g (pi)

(5.28)

2

42

Wilson-Wannier representation of operators

N/M

m

4
4
2
2

V (0, 0, 0, m)
V (0, 0, m, m)
V (0, 0, 0, m)
V (0, 0, m, m)

0
17
32M
17
32M

1
2M
1
2M

1
2
32M − 1
8

64M
1

7

32M

1
4M
1
4M

64M
0
0

Table 5.1: Approximate analytical values of V (m1, . . . , m4) (see Eq. (5.29)) for the
dominant matrix elements in the wave packet transform of a local interaction. In
the following, we us the matrix elements for N/M = 2.

It follows that the spatial dependence of the wave packet matrix elements is deter-
mined by

V (m1,··· , m4) ≡(cid:88)j (cid:34) 4(cid:89)i=1

g (j − M mi)(cid:35) .

(5.29)

The dominant matrix elements arise for m1 = m2 = m3 (cid:54)= m4, where three operators
reside on one site, and m1 = m2 (cid:54)= m3 = m4, where two operators are located at
the same site. Note that only the relative positions matter due to the residual
translational invariance of the wave packet states. Approximate analytical values of
V (m1, . . . , m4) for these cases are tabulated in Tab. 5.1. Interactions decay rapidly,
with spatial separation, so that V (0, 0, 0, 2)/V (0, 0, 0, 0) ≈ 1/32. Consequently, we
will take only nearest neighbor interactions into account. The table also shows the
corresponding value for the case that the window function for N/M = 2 is used.
Since these are very similar, we will use the latter in the following for analytical
calculations, and the former for numerical ones.

Orthogonalization

In order to obtain the WW representation of the interaction, the wave packet states
have to be orthogonalized (see Sec. 5.2). The orthogonalization leads to cancellations
between some non-local terms. We focus on weakly coupled systems, so that the
states at k = 0, M can be ignored, which implies |Hk| = 1 in the following. Plugging
the wave packet transform (5.28) into the orthogonalization formula (5.12), we obtain

U (m1k1, . . . , m4k4) =

V (m1, . . . , m4)

2

˜U (α1Kk1, . . . , α4Kk4)

1

2 (cid:88)α1···α4

× e−i(α1φ1+α2φ2−α3φ3−α4φ4),

(5.30)

where we have introduced the short hand φi = φmi+ki .
At low energies, the interaction Hamiltonian that couples states at the Fermi points
can be reduced to a small set of coupling constants. This will be considered in Ch. 8.

43

5.4 Two-dimensional square lattice

5.4 Two-dimensional square lattice

Having discussed the transformation of operators to the WW basis for the one-
dimensional case, we now turn to the two-dimensional square lattice. All the steps
from the one-dimensional calculation can be essentially repeated in the same man-
ner. Therefore the discussion in this section is somewhat shorter, highlighting the
diﬀerences to the one-dimensional case. Only the transformation from momentum
space to WW basis will be treated. All the WW basis related quantities can be
found in Tab. 4.4.

5.4.1 General transformation formula, wave packet transform,

and local approximation

Transformation of annihilation and creation operators

The transformation formula follows directly from the deﬁnition (4.26) of the basis
functions Ψmk(j and their Fourier transform ˜Ψmk (p), where now all position related
coordinates are vectors, e.g. j = (j1, j2). Thus we have

γ†mk = (cid:88)p
γmk = (cid:88)p

˜Ψmk (p) c†p,

˜Ψmk (p)∗ cp.

(5.31)

Transformation of arbitrary operators

In the same way as in one dimension, an arbitrary many-body operator ˆO can be
expanded in any single-particle basis. The transformation rules for the coeﬃcients in
the expansion follow from the fact that the operator is independent of the basis. For
sake of readability, we continue to suppress spin indices in this section. We assume
that ˆO contains n creators and n annihilators. Hence its momentum representation
can be written as

ˆO =

1

N 2n−2 (cid:88)p1···p2n

O (p1, . . . , p2n) c†p1 ··· cp2n.

(5.32)

The WW representation can be similarly written as

ˆO = (cid:88)m1k1···m2nk2n

O (m1k1,··· , m2nk2n) γ†m1k1 ··· γm2nk2n

.

(5.33)

44

Wilson-Wannier representation of operators

Equating the right hand sides of (5.32) and (5.33), we obtain the general transfor-
mation rule for the square lattice:

O (m1k1, . . . , m2nk2n) =

O (p1, . . . , p2n)

1

N 2n−2 (cid:88)p1···p2n
× (cid:34) n(cid:89)l=1

˜Ψmlkl (pl)(cid:35)(cid:34) 2n(cid:89)l=n+1

˜Ψmlkl (pl)∗(cid:35)

(5.34)

WW basis and wave packet transformation

In order to arrive at a more manageable form of (5.34), we use the two-dimensional
version of the wave packet transformation (cf. Sec. 5.2) and write

(cid:88)p (cid:16)···(cid:17) ˜Ψmk(p) =

e−iα·Φm+k

1

(cid:112)|G||Hk| (cid:88)α∈G
(cid:124)
(cid:123)(cid:122)

orthogonalization

×(cid:34)(cid:88)p (cid:16)···(cid:17)˜gm,Aαk(p)(cid:35)
(cid:125)
(cid:124)

wave packet transformation

(cid:123)(cid:122)

(5.35)

(cid:125)

We only treat k-conserving matrix elements in the following. In the local approxi-
mation, the wave packet transform of O (p1, . . . , p2n) is given by

¯O (m1α1k1, . . . , m2nα2nk2n) ≈ O (KAα1k1, . . . , KAα2n k2n)
g (j − M mi)(cid:35)

× (cid:88)j (cid:34) 2n(cid:89)i=1

(5.36)

The WW representation of ˆO is then obtained from the wave packet transform using
the orthogonalization part of the WW transformation. This yields

O (m1k1, . . . , m2nk2n) =

l=1[αl·Φl−αn+l·Φn+l]

e−i(cid:80)n

1

i=1 |Hki| (cid:88)α1···α2n

|G|n(cid:113)(cid:81)2n

× ¯O (m1α1k1, . . . , m2nα2nk2n)

(5.37)

where we have used the short hand Φi ≡ Φm+k. In analogy to the one-dimensional
case, the local approximation can be improved by expandingO (p1, . . . , p2n) around
pi = KAαiki, leading to an expansion in 1/M .

5.4.2 Hopping

Wo consider the hopping operator

Hkin =(cid:88)p

c†p cp [−2t (cos px + cos py) + 4t(cid:48) cos px cos py − µ]
(cid:125)

(cid:123)(cid:122)

=: (p)

(cid:124)

45

(5.38)

5.4 Two-dimensional square lattice

which includes nearest and next-to-nearest neighbor hopping. First note that when
t(cid:48) = 0, the hopping Hamiltonian consists of two one-dimensional hopping terms, so
that in this case the results from one dimension can be reused without any changes for
each direction. In order to take the t(cid:48) term into account, we abbreviate Q = KAαk
and expand  (Q + p) to leading order around p = 0. To the ﬁrst order we obtain

 (Q + p) ≈  (Q) + vg (Q) · p + . . . ,

where the group velocity vg (Q) is given by

vg (Q) = 

2t sin Qx(cid:104)1 − 2t(cid:48)
2t sin Qy(cid:104)1 − 2t(cid:48)

t cos Qx(cid:105)  .
t cos Qy(cid:105)

(5.39)

(5.40)

Thus we can still use the one-dimensional result without changes up to O(1/M ), and
the t(cid:48) term merely leads to a Q-dependent multiplicative correction to the nearest
neighbor hopping term. At order O(1/M 2), a mixed term ∝ pxpy appears, which
leads to diagonal hopping in the WW basis. However, taking into account the leading
order only, this term can be neglected unless the ﬁrst order term vanishes. This is
the case whenever vg (Q) = 0, i.e. at the band edges Q = (0, 0) and Q = (π, π),
and at the saddle points Q = (π, 0) and Q = (0, π).
In both cases, the group
velocity vanishes because of the higher symmetry around these points which demands
 (Q + p) =  (Q − p). However, the same symmetry forbids the mixed term pxpy in
the expansion of the kinetic energy, so that the second order contribution is a sum
of two one-dimensional terms as well in this case.
Summarizing the above, to the leading order in the 1/M -expansion the hopping
operator for the square lattice is the sum of two one-dimensional hopping operators
with a k and direction dependent hopping rate

tx → t(cid:18)1 −
ty → t(cid:18)1 −

2t(cid:48)
t
2t(cid:48)
t

cos Kky(cid:19)
cos Kkx(cid:19)

(5.41)

5.4.3

Interaction

We consider the WW representation of the interaction operator

δ (p1 + p2 − p3 − p4) ˜U (p1, . . . , p4) J (p1, p3) J (p2, p4) ,

(5.42)

where J (p, p(cid:48)) =(cid:80)s c†p,s cp(cid:48),s. Similarly, in the WW basis we write

U (m1k1, . . . , m4k4) J (m1k1, m3k3) J (m2k2, m4k4) , (5.43)

Hint =

1

2N 2 (cid:88)p1···p4

Hint =

1

2 (cid:88)m1k1···m4k4

46

Wilson-Wannier representation of operators

where J (mk, m(cid:48)k(cid:48)) =(cid:80)s γ†mk,s γm(cid:48)k(cid:48),s.
We follow the argumentation of Sec. 5.3.2 and focus on matrix elements that are
k-conserving, i.e. Aα1k1 + Aα2k2 = Aα3 k3 + Aα4 k4 in the wave packet transform
¯U (m1α1k1, . . . , m4α4k4) of Hint. Moreover, we use the local approximation for
the interaction matrix elements in momentum space. The general transformation
formula (5.37) then reduces to

U (m1k1, . . . , m4k4) =

1

i=1 |Hki| (cid:88)α1···α4

|G|n(cid:113)(cid:81)4

¯U (m1α1k1, . . . , m4α4k4)

(5.44)

× e−i(αl·Φl+α2·Φ2−α3·Φ3−α4·Φ4).

Similarly to Sec. 5.3.2, the wave packet transform ¯U (m1α1k1, . . . , m4α4k4) is given
by

¯U (m1α1k1, . . . , m4α4k4) =

1
˜U (KAα1k1, . . . , KAα4 k4)
2
× δAα1 k1+Aα2 k2,Aα3 k3+Aα4 k4
× V (m1,x, . . . , m4,x) V (m2,y, . . . , m4,y)

(5.45)

with the same function V (m1,··· , m4) = (cid:80)j(cid:81)4

i=1 g (j − M mi) as in the one-
dimensional case. Thus the decay properties are the same as in one dimension,
and we restrict ourselves to nearest neighbor interactions only, neglecting all but the
leading matrix elements. It is noteworthy that individual interaction matrix elements
U (m1k1, . . . , m4k4) are proportional to 1/M 2 because V (m1, . . . , m4) ∝ 1/M (cf.
Tab. 5.1), whereas they are ∝ 1/M in one dimension. The scaling of operators and
its connection to their relevance in the RG sence is considered in Ch. 7. We conclude
this chapter with the remark that since the low-energy region of the Brillouin zone
in two dimensions extends over the whole Fermi surface, there is no universal low-
energy parametrization of interactions as it was the case in one dimension. Instead,
the full momentum dependence of the interaction along the Fermi surface has to
be taken into account in general. Whether approximations are admissible has to
be decided based on the shape of the Fermi surface and the length scale M under
consideration. This is discussed in Ch. 9.

47

5.4 Two-dimensional square lattice

48

Chapter 6

Wave packets and fermion
pairing

Symmetry breaking in fermion systems can often be understood as a transition
from free to paired fermions. The best known example is superconductivity [23],
where electrons bind into pairs which form the condensate that characterizes the
superconducting state. However, spin and charge density waves may also be viewed
as pairing of electrons and holes, so that a wide variety of states falls into the class
of paired fermion states. Such a paired state introduces an energy scale ∆, given by
the fermion gap, and a length scale, the pair size ξ. In the weak coupling limit, we
can estimate

2πvF

∆

ξ ≈

(6.1)

on dimensional grounds.
In this section we discuss fermion pairing in the context of the WW basis. Since the
WW basis states are localized on the length scale M , one expects that for M > ξ
pairs are (predominantly) local in the WW basis, whereas for M < ξ they are non-
local. On the other hand, the pair correlations in the BCS state decay as one moves
away from the Fermi surface, and the corresponding width in momentum space is
2π/ξ ∼ ∆/vF . Hence, we expect states within a distance less than ∆/vF to the
Fermi surface to be strongly correlated, whereas they should be weakly correlated
when they are far away from the Fermi surface.
These estimates suggest that it is possible to replace fermionic degrees of freedom by
pairs that are local (in real space) in the WW basis when M/ξ is chosen large enough.
In this way the low energy problem may be bosonized. They also suggest that only
about ξ/M states in the direction perpendicular to the Fermi surface are strongly
correlated, whereas the remainder may be treated perturbatively. Thus pairs may
be considered to be local in momentum space (in the direction perpendicular to the
Fermi surface) when M/ξ is made small enough. It is natural to expect that for

49

6.1 One dimension

M ∼ ξ, pairs are reasonably localized in both momentum and real space, hence
allowing for a simpliﬁed description of the low energy physics in terms of relatively
few (by momentum space localization) bosonic degrees of freedom that are local in
real space (by virtue of real space localization) in the WW basis.
The remainder of this chapter elaborates on these heuristic considerations. To this
end, we compute the WW transform of several mean-ﬁeld Hamiltonians, discussing
the relevance of diﬀerent terms and their dependence on ξ/M . Moreover, we com-
pute single-particle correlations of the respective ground states in the WW basis.
Motivated by applications in later chapters, we focus on superconductivity and anti-
ferromagnetism. In Sec. 6.1 we treat one-dimensional systems, the extension to the
square lattice follows in Sec. 6.2.

6.1 One dimension

6.1.1 Superconductivity

We consider the BCS mean-ﬁeld Hamiltonian in one dimension, which is given by

HBCS = −t(cid:88)j (cid:88)s (cid:104)c†j,s cj+1,s + c†j+1,s cj,s − µc†j,s cj,s(cid:105) + ∆(cid:88)j (cid:104)c†j,↑

c†j,↓

+ cj,↓

cj,↑(cid:105) .

(6.2)
HBCS can be easily diagonalized by applying a Bogoliubov transformation to the
fermion operators [23], so that in particular its ground state and correlation functions
can be computed exactly. We ﬁrst transform HBCS to the WW basis and investigate
the relative importance of the hopping and the pairing term as a function of ξ/M .
Afterwards we compute single-particle correlations of the exact ground state in the
WW basis. Both results illustrate that unpaired fermions become less and less
important as ξ/M goes to zero.

WW representation of the BCS mean-ﬁeld Hamiltonian

We consider the WW representation of HBCS. The hopping term has already been
5.3.1, so we will turn directly to the anomalous term
discussed above in Sec.

∆(cid:80)j(cid:16)c†j,↑
+ h.c.(cid:17). Its WW representation can be obtained using Eq. (5.2):
c†j,↓
+ h.c.(cid:17) = ∆ (cid:88)mk,m(cid:48)k(cid:48)(cid:16)γ†mk,↑
∆(cid:88)j (cid:16)c†j,↑
c†j,↓
= ∆(cid:88)mk(cid:16)γ†mk,↑
γ†mk,↓

γ†m(cid:48)k(cid:48),↓
+ h.c.(cid:17) .

+ h.c.(cid:17)(cid:88)j

ψmk(j)ψm(cid:48)k(cid:48)(j)

(6.3)

The pairing mean-ﬁeld term is local in the WW basis, hence it acts independently
on each WW orbital. All non-vanishing matrix elements are O(1). In conjunction

50

Ek =(cid:113) (Kk)2 + ∆2.

4tk
Ek ∼

π
M

ξ
2M

∼

vF

1

(cid:113) (Kk)2 + ∆2
(cid:113) (Kk)2

∆2 + 1

,

(6.5)

(6.6)

Wave packets and fermion pairing

with the WW transform of the hopping operator, Eq. (5.26), we obtain in the limit
of large M that

HBCS =(cid:88)mk(cid:88)s

 (Kk) γ†mk,s γmk,s + ∆(cid:88)mk(cid:16)γ†mk,↑

γ†mk,↓

+ h.c.(cid:17) + O(cid:18) 1

M(cid:19) (6.4)

In order to estimate the eﬀect of the neglected O(1/M ) hopping terms, we ﬁrst
obtain the single particle gap Ek for each WW orbital from the local Hamiltonian.
It is given by

Now we compare the single particle energy with the band width 4tk, where the
hopping rate tk ∼ π
4 vF /M is given by the k-diagonal nearest-neighbor hopping
matrix element T (m, k; m + 1, k) (cf. Sec. 5.3.1). This yields the dimensionless
ratio

where we have used ξ ∼ 2πvF /∆. It is clear that the importance of the hopping term
decreases as one moves away from the Fermi points since  (Kk) ∼ KvF (k − pF /K).
Thus we consider the states at the Fermi points, k ≈ pF /K to estimate the impor-
tance of the hopping term. When the gap Ek exceeds the band width 4tk, the system
can be considered to be strongly coupled in the sense that the hopping term leads to
corrections that can be treated perturbatively and decay over distances of about M .
On the other hand, when Ek < 2tk, the energy gain from delocalizing an electron is
large enough to overcome the single particle gap locally. In this case perturbation
theory around the local Hamiltonian is not expected to converge rapidly (if at all).
In summary, the hopping term can be treated perturbatively in the mean-ﬁeld Hamil-
tonian HBCS when we choose M such that

ξ
M

(cid:46) 1
2

.

(6.7)

One particle correlations in the BCS mean-ﬁeld state

In the following, we will be interested in one-body equal time correlation functions
only. Since the calculation is elementary (see e.g. [23]), we state the results directly.

There are two diﬀerent correlation functions, the normal part ˜Gp :=(cid:10)c†p,s cp,s(cid:11), which
yields the fermion distribution function, and the anomalous part ˜Fp := (cid:104)cp,s c−p,−s(cid:105),

51

6.1 One dimension

that contains pair correlations. They are given by
Ep − p
2Ep

˜Gp =

˜Fp =

∆
Ep

,

where p = −2t cos p − µ is the kinetic energy, and Ep = (cid:113)2

p + ∆2 is the energy
of a Bogoliubov quasi-particle. The corresponding correlation function in the WW
representation is obtained using Eq. (5.3). For the normal part Gmk,m(cid:48)k(cid:48) this yields

(6.8)

(6.9)

(6.10)

(6.11)

Gmk,m(cid:48)k(cid:48) = (cid:68)γ†mks γm(cid:48)k(cid:48)s(cid:69)

˜ψmk(p) ˜ψm(cid:48)k(cid:48)(p)∗ (cid:10)c†p,s cp,s(cid:11)

˜ψmk(p) ˜ψm(cid:48)k(cid:48)(p)∗ ˜Gp.

= (cid:88)p
= (cid:88)p

Fmk,m(cid:48)k(cid:48) = (cid:68)γmk,s γm(cid:48)k(cid:48),−s(cid:69)

= (cid:88)p

˜ψmk(p)∗ ˜ψm(cid:48)k(cid:48)(−p)∗ Fp.

Similarly, for the anomalous part we obtain

In the following, we focus on two key quantities. First, we evaluate Gmk,m+1,k,
which non-local fermion correlations, and Fmk,m+1,k/Fmk,mk, which measures the
decay of pair correlations with distance from the Fermi surface. Since correlations
are strongest at the Fermi surface, we set k = kF = pF /K. A plot of these ratios as
a function of ξ/M is shown in Fig. 6.1. It can be seen that the non-local correlators
vanish when the pair size ξ is much smaller than M .
Next we consider the decay of correlations with distance from the Fermi surface. To
this end, we evaluate the ratios 2Gmk,mk for k = 1 + kF . This is a measure of the
occupation of WW orbitals next to the Fermi surface. Analogously, we evaluate the
anomalous correlator Fmk,mk/Fm kF ,m kF at k = 1 + kF , which measures the decay
of pair correlations as one moves away from the Fermi surface. This is shown in
Fig. 6.2.
We are interested in the case that the states at the Fermi points are strongly coupled,
i.e. ξ/M ≈ 1/2 (cf. Eq. 6.7), the non-local correlations are strongly suppressed. At
the same time, from Fig. 6.2 we see that the WW orbitals next to the Fermi surface
have a mean occupancy of about 1/6 above the Fermi surface (5/6 below the Fermi
surface). For larger |k − kF|, the occupation number approaches its non-interacting
value apart from small deviations, as shown in Fig. 6.3. This suggests that most
of the WW orbitals can be treated perturbatively, since they deviate only slightly
from their non-interacting ground state, where all orbitals below (above) the Fermi
surface are ﬁlled (empty).

52

Wave packets and fermion pairing

Figure 6.1: Dependence of nearest neighbor correlations on ξ/M . The left panel
shows the normal correlator, which measures the strength of hopping of unpaired
fermions. The right panel displays the ratio of nearest-neighbor pair correlations
to onsite pair correlation. Both non-local correlations are seen to decrease with
decreasing ξ/M .

53

(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)0123450.000.050.100.150.200.25ΞMGmk,m(cid:43)1k(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)0123450.00.10.20.30.4ΞMFmk,m(cid:43)1kFmk,mk6.1 One dimension

Figure 6.2: Decay of correlation with separation from the Fermi surface as a function
of ξ/M . Left panel: Decay of the occupation number at k = kF + 1. Note that
the plot shows two times the occupation number. Right panel: Ratio of local pair
correlations at k = kF + 1 and k = kF . Both quantities decrease with increasing
ξ/M .

Figure 6.3: WW orbital occupation number as a function of k − kF for ξ/M = 1/2.
All orbitals except the ones at the Fermi surface and their nearest neighbors deviate
only weakly from their non-interacting occupation number.

54

(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)0123450.00.20.40.60.81.0ΞM2Gmk,mk(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)0123450.20.40.60.81.0ΞMFmk,mkFmkF,mkF(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:45)5050.00.20.40.60.81.0k(cid:45)kFGmk,mk6.1.2 Antiferromagnetism

Wave packets and fermion pairing

The antiferromagnetic case is relevant when the system half-ﬁlled, which implies
that pF = π/2 = KM/2 and µ = 0. The mean-ﬁeld Hamiltonian is given by

HAF = −t(cid:88)j (cid:88)s (cid:104)c†j,s cj+1,s + c†j+1,s cj,s(cid:105) + ∆(cid:88)j

(−1)j c†j,s σz

ss(cid:48) cj,s(cid:48),

(6.12)

where ∆ is the mean-ﬁeld for the staggered magnetization, which we take to point
into the z-direction. In many respects, HAF leads to results similar to the BCS case
above, so that the discussion will be focussed on obtaining the WW transform of the
AF mean-ﬁeld operator.

WW representation of the AF mean-ﬁeld Hamiltonian

The WW transform of the mean-ﬁeld term is given by

(−1)j c†j,s σz

ss(cid:48) cj,s(cid:48) = ∆ (cid:88)mk,m(cid:48)k(cid:48)
∆(cid:88)j
Now we use that (−1)j = eiπj to obtain

γ†mk,s σz

ss(cid:48) γm(cid:48)k(cid:48),s(cid:48)(cid:88)j

(−1)j ψmk(j)ψm(cid:48)k(cid:48)(j)
(6.13)

(−1)j ψmk(j) =

=

=

1

(cid:112)|G||Hk|(cid:88)α
(cid:112)|G||Hk|(cid:88)α
(cid:112)|G||Hk|(cid:88)α

1

1

e−iαφm+k eiπjgm,αk (j)

e−iαφm+k gm,−M +αk(j)

e−iαφm+k (−1)m+k gm,M−αk(j)

(6.14)
where we have used that e−iφm+k = (−1)m+k e+iφm+k and 0 ≤ M − k = −M + k
mod 2M in the third line. Plugging the result into (6.13) we obtain

= (−1)m+k ψm,M−k(j),

∆(cid:88)j

(−1)j σz

ss(cid:48) c†j,s cj,s(cid:48) = ∆(cid:88)mk

(−1)m+k γ†mk,s σz

ss(cid:48) γm,M−k,s(cid:48).

(6.15)

In general, the staggered magnetization couples the two WW orbitals | m, k(cid:105) and
| m, M − k(cid:105). However, at the Fermi points we have k = M/2 = M − k, so that only
one orbital is involved.
The AF mean-ﬁeld Hamiltonian in the WW representation is thus given by

HAF =(cid:88)mk(cid:104)δss(cid:48) (Kk) γ†mk,s γmk,s(cid:48) + ∆ σz

ss(cid:48) γ†mk,s γm,M−k,s(cid:48)(cid:105) + O(cid:18) 1

M(cid:19) (6.16)

Note that the single particle gap is exactly the same as for the BCS case above, Eq.
(6.5). Thus the ratio tk/Ek and the single particle correlations show exactly the
same behavior as a function of ξ/M and k.

55

6.2 Two dimensions: Eﬀect of anisotropy

6.2 Two dimensions: Eﬀect of anisotropy

In this section we apply a similar analysis to the case of the two-dimensional square
lattice. Since we will be interested mainly in the case that the Fermi surface lies
close to the saddle points (0, π) and (π, 0), we use the kinetic energy

Hkin = −2t(cid:88)p (cid:88)s

(cos px + cos py) c†p,s cp,s

(6.17)

and set the chemical potential µ = 0. We consider two types of mean-ﬁelds, d-wave
superconductivity (dSC) and antiferromagnetism (AF). The major novelty compared
to the one-dimensional case is that now several WW orbitals lie close to the Fermi
surface. Moreover, the number of orbitals at the Fermi surface depends on the wave
packet scale M , with M orbitals at the Fermi surface for the model considered here.
In addition, the Fermi velocity along the Fermi surface is strongly anisotropic. As one
moves from (π, 0) to (0, π) along the Fermi surface, i.e. py = π− px, its x-component
(the y-component is the same) varies as

vF,x (p) = 2t sin px.

(6.18)

As a consequence, no simple relation between the gap magnitude ∆ and the pair
size ξ exists that holds for the whole Fermi surface even in the case of an angle-
independent mean-ﬁeld.
Since correlations are expected to be strongest where vF is smallest, we use estimates
of the pair size at the saddle points in the following, and adjust M accordingly. In
the vicinity of the saddle point (π, 0), the kinetic energy (6.17) can be approximated
as

and similarly for the other saddle point (0, π). The natural length scale ξ for a pair
gap of size ∆ is then given by

x(cid:1) ,
y − p2

 (p − (π, 0)) ≈ t(cid:0)p2
ξ = π(cid:114) t

∆

.

(6.19)

(6.20)

We are mainly interested in cases where pairing occurs at relatively small scales. We
hence ﬁx M = 4 for the remainder of this chapter. The phase space cells and the
states at the Fermi surface for this case are shown in Fig. 6.4.
Since at the saddle points the distance between two WW states in real space is 2M
(cf. Ch. 4), ξ should be compared to 2M . For ξ = 2M we obtain

π2
4M 2 t =

π2
64

t,

∆ ∼

(6.21)

which evaluates to ∆ ≈ 0.15 t.
In the following two sections we discuss pairing in the AF and dSC channels. We
will show that even when the order parameter is constant along the Fermi surface,

56

Wave packets and fermion pairing

Figure 6.4: Low energy WW orbitals (blue cells) for the two-dimensional square
lattice with nearest neighbor hopping at half-ﬁlling for M = 4. The Fermi surface
(solid black line), and the phase space cells (gray grid) are also shown.

the strength of correlation is much larger at the saddle points than for the other
states at the Fermi surface. This is due to the large anisotropy of the Fermi velocity.
In order to measure the strength of correlation for diﬀerent angles, we compute the
ratio

(6.22)

(cid:104)Ekin(cid:105)k
(cid:104)Epair(cid:105)k

= (cid:80)m(cid:48) T (mk, m(cid:48)k) G (mk, m(cid:48)k)
(cid:80)m(cid:48) ∆ (mk, m(cid:48)k(cid:48)) F (mk, m(cid:48)k(cid:48))

where T and ∆ are the WW transforms of the hopping Hamiltonian and the order
parameter, respectively. k(cid:48) in the denominator of the right hand side is either k(cid:48) = k
for dSC, or k(cid:48) = (M, M ) − k, as discussed below. F and G are the WW transforms
of the normal and anomalous correlators, cf. Sec. 6.1 above. Hence (6.22) yields the
strength of correlation of the WW orbitals | mk(cid:105) in the mean-ﬁeld ground state in
the sense that when the ratio is large, the energy is dominated by the kinetic energy,
so that electrons in the orbital can be considered as almost uncorrelated at scale
M . On the other hand, when it is small, the pairing energy (AF or dSC) dominates
over kinetic energy, so that the orbital can be approximated by almost local fermion
pairs.

57

pxpy(cid:45)Π0Π(cid:45)Π0Π6.2 Two dimensions: Eﬀect of anisotropy

Figure 6.5: Strength of correlations for the WW orbitals | mk(cid:105) at the Fermi surface.
There are three inequivalent classes of states, with mean momenta Kk = (π/2, π/2),
(3π/4, π/4), and (π, 0), respectively. The strength of correlation is determined by
applying Eq. 6.22 to the ground state of the mean-ﬁeld Hamiltonian Hkin + HAF.
The pair size at the saddle points ξ is connected to the size of the order parameter
via Eq. (6.20). Local correlations are strong when (cid:104)Ekin(cid:105) /(cid:104)Epair(cid:105) < 1.

6.2.1 Antiferromagnetism

We start with the AF case, since this is more similar to the one-dimensional examples
in that the order parameter is constant along the Fermi surface. The WW transform
of the AF mean-ﬁeld Hamiltonian can be obtained in exactly the same way, as in
one dimension, Eq. (6.16). Since in two dimension the wave vector of the antifer-
romagnetic ordering is Q = (π, π), the WW orbitals | m, k(cid:105) and | m, Q/K − k(cid:105) are
coupled. The WW transform of the staggered AF magnetization is

HAF = ∆(cid:88)j
= ∆(cid:88)mk

ss(cid:48)c†j,s cj,s(cid:48)

(−1)jx+jy σz
(−1)mx+my+kx+ky σz

ss(cid:48) γ†mk,s γm,Q/K−k,s(cid:48).

(6.23)

We use Eq. (6.22) in order to estimate the strength of correlation in diﬀerent or-
bitals, dependent on the ratio ξ/M . This ratio is shown in Fig. 6.5. It is evident
that for ξ ∼ 2M , the states at the saddle points are very strongly correlated, with
(cid:104)Ekin(cid:105) /(cid:104)Epair(cid:105) ≈ 0.1. The other states are much less correlated, the corresponding
ratios are given by (cid:104)Ekin(cid:105) /(cid:104)Epair(cid:105) ≈ 2.7 for the states with Kk = (3π/4, π/4), and
(cid:104)Ekin(cid:105) /(cid:104)Epair(cid:105) ≈ 4.8 for the nodal states with Kk = (π/2, π/2).
The spatial decay of the pair correlations for the states at the Fermi surface is shown
in Fig. 6.6. The pair correlations are strongest at the saddle points. Surprisingly,
the pair correlations decay very rapidly even for the nodal states, which are weakly
correlated. This is probably connected to the fact that the system is half-ﬁlled and

58

(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)0.00.51.01.52.001234Ξ2MEkinEpair(cid:236)Π,0(cid:224)3Π4,Π4(cid:230)Π2,Π2Wave packets and fermion pairing

Figure 6.6: Spatial decay of the AF pair correlations for WW states at the
Fermi surface for M = 4, ξ = 2M . The ﬁgure shows the anomalous correla-
(cid:48), M − k) (where M = (M, M )) for k on the Fermi surface, and
tor F (m, k, m
= m = m(cid:48)
(1, 1), the slowest decay direction.
m

(cid:48)

thus perfectly nested, so that even the uncorrelated Fermi sea contains relatively
strong density-density correlations at the wave vector Q.

6.2.2

d-wave superconductivity

In this section, we consider d-wave superconductivity. The corresponding mean-ﬁeld
Hamiltonian is given by

HdSC = Hkin +

∆

2 (cid:88)j

ss(cid:48) [cj,s cj+x,s(cid:48) − cj,s cj+y,s(cid:48)] + h.c.,

(6.24)

where x and y are unit vectors in the x- and y-directions, respectively.

WW representation of the Hamiltonian

The transformation of this Hamiltonian to the WW basis can be obtained from the
transformation of the hopping operator (5.26), noting that in real space cj,s and c†j,s
transform in the same way because the basis functions are real. Thus we obtain to
leading order in 1/M

HdSC =(cid:88)mk(cid:88)s

 (Kk) γ†mk,s γmk,s + ∆(cid:88)mk

(sin Kkx − sin Kky) γ†mk,↓

γmk,↑ + h.c..
(6.25)
As a consequence, the d-wave pairing term for the nodal states vanishes to leading
order in 1/M , so that the pairs are always non-local there. By symmetry, the
corrections at the saddle point are O(1/M 2) and hence relatively small. Naturally,
the correlations are strongest at the saddle points because of the d-wave symmetry
of the order parameter.

59

(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:45)4(cid:45)20240.00.10.20.30.4m(cid:45)m'Fmk,m'M(cid:45)k(cid:236)Π,0(cid:224)3Π4,Π4(cid:230)Π2,Π26.2 Two dimensions: Eﬀect of anisotropy

Figure 6.7: Amount of correlation for the WW orbitals | mk(cid:105) at the Fermi surface
for the dSC mean-ﬁeld state. There are three inequivalent classes of states, with
mean momenta Kk = (π/2, π/2), (3π/4, π/4), and (π, 0), respectively. The strength
of correlation is determined by applying Eq. 6.22 to the ground state of the mean-
ﬁeld Hamiltonian (6.25). The pair size ξ at the saddle points is connected to the
size of the order parameter via Eq. (6.20). Local correlations are strong when
(cid:104)Ekin(cid:105) /(cid:104)Epair(cid:105) < 1.

Correlations in the mean-ﬁeld ground state

Similar to the AF case above, we calculate the ratio (cid:104)Ekin(cid:105) /(cid:104)Epair(cid:105) for all states at
the Fermi surface. In the dSC case, the correlations decay faster towards the nodal
direction because of the angle dependence of the order parameter. We compute the
pair correlations to order 1/M , so that the pair amplitude is ﬁnite for the nodal
states. The results are shown in Fig. 6.7. The behavior at the saddle points is
almost the same as in the AF case, namely, the saddle points are strongly correlated

for ξ (cid:46) 4M , with (cid:104)Ekin(cid:105) /(cid:104)Epair(cid:105) ≈ 0.11 at ξ/2M = 1. The states at (3π/4, π/4) are
less correlated, with (cid:104)Ekin(cid:105) /(cid:104)Epair(cid:105) ≈ 3.2 for ξ/2M = 1. This is a slightly larger
ratio than for the AF case, but still similar. The nodal states, on the other hand
have (cid:104)Ekin(cid:105) /(cid:104)Epair(cid:105) ≈ 40, so that correlations can be neglected at scale M .
The spatial decay of the pair correlations at ξ/2M = 1 is diﬀerent from the AF case
because of the angular dependence of the order parameter. Since pair correlations
for the nodal states are small, we only show the decay of correlations for the other
states. This is displayed in Fig. 6.8. The increase of the correlation function for the
states at Kk = (3π/4, π/4) is again an artifact of the window function that is used,
which is obtained for N/M = 8 (cf. Ch. 4). The main result is that correlations at
the saddle points decay very rapidly, similar to the AF case.

60

(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)0.00.51.01.52.001234Ξ2MEkinEpair(cid:236)Π,0(cid:224)3Π4,Π4(cid:230)Π2,Π2Wave packets and fermion pairing

Figure 6.8: Spatial decay of the dSC pair correlations for WW states at the
Fermi surface for M = 4, ξ = 2M . The ﬁgure shows the anomalous correlator
(cid:48)
F (m, k, m
(1, 1), the
slowest decay direction.

Q/K − k) for k on the Fermi surface, and m

(cid:48)

= m = m(cid:48)

6.3 Conclusions

In this chapter we have used the WW basis states in order to analyze the correlations
of AF and dSC mean-ﬁeld states in one and two dimensions. We found that the ratio
ξ/M of the (particle-hole or particle-particle) pair size to the size of the wave packets
that deﬁne the WW basis controls a crossover between locally almost uncorrelated
fermions for ξ (cid:29) M and tightly bound fermions for ξ (cid:28) M . Even though this result
is based on simple mean-ﬁeld Hamiltonians, it is reasonable to expect that locally
the physics is similar at scale M independently of the behavior at larger scales. This
insight will be used in the following sections to analyze strong coupling ﬁxed points of
the renormalization group in one and two dimensions. The key idea from this section
is that if the wave packet size M is chosen appropriately, the fermions can be replaced
by eﬀective bosonic degrees of freedom corresponding to the paired fermions. The
interactions between the new degrees of freedom determine the physical behavior at
larger distances and low energies.
In two dimensions, we have seen that even in simple mean-ﬁeld states the physics
involves multiple length scales when the Fermi velocity is strongly anisotropic. In
particular, when the Fermi surface lies in the vicinity of the saddle points, the wave
packets there are easily localized and bound into pairs. On the other hand, states in
the nodal direction remain essentially uncorrelated at the same length scale. This
separation of length scales forms the basis of the treatment of the saddle point regime
of the two-dimensional Hubbard model in Ch. 9.

61

(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:45)2(cid:45)10120.00.10.20.30.4m(cid:45)m'Fmk,m'k(cid:224)Π,0(cid:230)3Π4,Π46.3 Conclusions

62

Chapter 7

Wave packets and the
renormalization group

In the last chapter we have discussed the manifestation of fermion pairing in the WW
basis for simple mean-ﬁeld Hamiltonians. The type of pairing and its associated
length scale ξ have been put in by hand.
It is clear, however, that microscopic
Hamiltonians rarely are of the mean-ﬁeld variety, instead it is a complex task by itself
to obtain an eﬀective Hamiltonian that eventually leads to pair formation (or more
complicated orderings) from the microscopic interactions. For weak to moderate
initial interactions, the renormalization group is one of the standard methods for
obtaining eﬀective Hamiltonians for the low-energy degrees of freedom of a many-
fermion system from the microscopic interactions [26].
In this chapter we seek to establish the connection between the renormalization
group for interacting fermions and the WW basis. We begin in Sec. 7.1 by relating
the M -dependence of the wave packet transform of an operator to its na¨ıve scaling
dimension. This serves to discuss the relevance of diﬀerent operators for large M .
In Sec. 7.2 we introduce very brieﬂy the method of continuous unitary transforma-
tions [54–56], a Hamiltonian formulation of the renormalization group, which avoids
certain problems connected with the cutoﬀ in the renormalization group. Since this
topic is rather technical, we relegate the bulk of the material to App. C. Finally, in
Sec. 7.3 we discuss the implications of the geometry of the Brillouin zone and the
Fermi surface for the treatment of low-energy problems. In particular, we show that
in the proximity of the van Hove singularity, the problem can be simpliﬁed due to
a separation of scales. This is an ingredient to the treatment of the saddle point
regime of the Hubbard model in Ch. 9.

63

7.1 Scaling dimensions

7.1 Scaling dimensions

In the following we elaborate on the relation between the so-called na¨ıve scaling di-
mension of operators in the RG approach [26] and the dependence of matrix elements
on the wave packet scale M in the wave packet transform of operators. In particular,
we will see that the latter is given by the scaling dimension of the operator under
consideration.

Scaling dimensions in the RG approach

The scaling dimension within the renormalization group arises as follows: In its orig-
inal formulation [26], each renormalization step consists in integrating out degrees of
freedom with energy Λ/s < E < Λ, where s is close to one. Afterwards, the cutoﬀ Λ
is lowered to Λ/s, and all length scales are rescaled, such that in the new units the
cutoﬀ is again Λ. All ﬁeld operators are rescaled such that the kinetic energy part
remains unchanged, which allows to compare the relative growth of the interaction
part compared to the kinetic energy. In addition to the rescaling, perturbative cor-
rections arise from integrating out degrees of freedom, which completes the RG step.
The na¨ıve scaling dimension of an operator is related to the rescaling of lengths,
and is thus obtained by omitting the perturbative renormalization. It measures the
importance of operators at low energies. An operator that becomes asymptotically
more important than the kinetic energy is called relevant, it is called marginal if it
scales in the same way as the kinetic energy, and irrelevant if it decreases at low
energies. We follow the discussion in [26] for the RG part.
For interacting fermion systems, the programme is implemented by imposing an
upper cutoﬀ on all momentum space integrals as follows

(cid:90) ddp →(cid:90) Λ/vF

−Λ/vF

dp⊥(cid:90) dd−1p(cid:107),

(7.1)

where p⊥ measures the distance to the Fermi surface, p⊥ = |p| − pF with the Fermi
momentum pF . vF is the Fermi velocity which is assumed to be constant. The

remaining integral (cid:82) dd−1p(cid:107) runs over ﬁxed energy shells, with energy vF p⊥. The

action of spinless free fermions in the vicinity of the Fermi surface (i.e. with cutoﬀ
Λ (cid:28) vF pF ) is then given by

(7.2)

S =(cid:90) dω(cid:90) Λ/vF

−Λ/vF

dp⊥(cid:90) dd−1p(cid:107)

¯ψ (ω, p)(cid:104) − iω + vF p⊥(cid:105)ψ (ω, p) .

This action is a ﬁxed point of the RG transformation Λ → Λ/s when ω, p⊥, and
ψ (ω, p) are rescaled as

ω → ω/s
p⊥ → p⊥/s

ψ (ω, p) → s3/2ψ (ω, p) .

64

(7.3)

Wave packets and the renormalization group

¯ψ (ω, p) is rescaled in the same way as ψ (ω, p). This deﬁnition of the rescaling
ensures that the kinetic energy part of the action remains invariant, so that the eﬀect
of rescaling on other operators measures the change in their importance when the
cutoﬀ is lowered. Relevant (irrelevant) operators are proportional to some positive
(negative) power of s after rescaling, whereas marginal ones are unchanged. On the
other hand, other types of operators are aﬀected by the rescaling, for example one
may add a quadratic term ∝ p2
⊥ to the kinetic energy. Under rescaling (omitting the
angular integrals over p(cid:107) which do not play a role), this term changes as

(cid:90) dω(cid:90) p⊥

¯ψ (ω, p) p2

⊥ψ (ω, p) → (cid:90) dω

s (cid:90) dp⊥
s(cid:90) dω(cid:90) dp⊥

s

1

s (cid:17)2
s3/2 ¯ψ (ω, p)(cid:16) p⊥

¯ψ (ω, p) p2

⊥ψ (ω, p) ,

=

s3/2ψ (ω, p)

(7.4)

so that it decreases as the cutoﬀ is lowered. It is clear that additional powers of p⊥
make the decrease even faster. In a similar manner, one ﬁnds that interactions that
involve the full Fermi surface when evaluated at p⊥ = 0 are marginal, whereas all
others are irrelevant. Since it is quite lengthy to show this, we refer the reader to
[26]. Instead, we show how the scaling dimensions of operators follow directly from
their wave packet transform.

Scaling dimensions from wave packets

The dependence of the wave packet transform of an operator on M can be found
using the transformation rules from Ch. 5.
Instead of reiterating them, we give
intuitive arguments why they are true in this section. We ﬁrst consider the kinetic
energy, and consider its wave packet transform. We focus on k-conserving matrix
elements that involve wave packets with m(cid:48) = m + 1. Since the states are wave
packets with a mean momentum Kk, they move at the group velocity vg = (cid:48) (Kk).
The distance between two adjacent sites is M , hence we ﬁnd for the wave packet
hopping rate

hopping rate ∼

group velocity

distance

∼ M−1.

(7.5)

Rescaling the Hamiltonian by M , the leading part of the kinetic energy is hence
independent of M . Consequently, operators that decrease faster (slower) than 1/M
as M → ∞ are irrelevant (relevant), and operators that scale like 1/M are marginal.
Expanding the kinetic energy to higher order around Kk leads to higher powers of p
that are integrated against the wave packets. Since the wave packets are narrow in
p-space, with a width ∼ 1/M , each additional power of p contributes an additional
power of 1/M , so that corrections to the leading term are less and less important as
M → ∞.

65

7.1 Scaling dimensions

Figure 7.1: WW basis states at the Fermi surface in two dimensions. There are
O(M ) states at the Fermi surface in total.

For states at points of high symmetry in the Brillouin zone, the behavior is diﬀerent.
Because of the symmetry, (cid:48) (Kk) vanishes, and the kinetic energy is O(1/M 2).
Consequently, the kinetic energy at these points can be neglected compared to generic
points on the Fermi surface for large M .
The scaling of local (at scale M ) interactions can be understood as follows: The
matrix element of a local interactions between two pairs of wave packet states is of
the form

interaction strength ∼ (density of wave packet)2
(cid:125)

(cid:124)
∼ M−d.

∼M−2d

(cid:123)(cid:122)

(cid:124)

× volume of wave packet

∼M d

(cid:123)(cid:122)

(cid:125)

(7.6)

Note that the interaction need only be local compared to the wave packet scale M
for the argument to hold, since all k-conserving matrix elements transform in the
same way, regardless of the momenta involved.
In order to link this result to the scaling dimensions from the RG approach, we
implement the cutoﬀ by restricting the WW basis states to states that lie at the Fermi
surface. There is one such state per WW lattice site in one dimension, regardless of
M . Since the interaction matrix elements for this state scale like 1/M , the interaction
is marginal in one dimension. The matrix elements in two dimensions scale like
M−2 and may thus appear to be irrelevant. However, the number of states at the
Fermi surface scales linearly with M , since the Fermi surface has a ﬁxed length in

66

Scaling Dimensions￿Π,0￿￿Π,Π￿￿0,Π￿hoppingrate=groupvelocitydistanceinteractionstrength∝density2×volumeRecall from d = 1:independent of dimension:t∼1MBUT:depends on dimension:u∼1MdNeed to sum over O(M) states to have marginal interactionsInteractions that involve full Fermi surface marginal, all others irrelevantO(M)Saturday, October 1, 2011Wave packets and the renormalization group

momentum space, cf. Fig. 7.1. Thus each state can couple to M other states, and
interaction terms that involve a ﬁnite fraction of the states at the Fermi surface
(i.e. with all four momenta at the Fermi surface) scale like 1/M instead. In the
same manner as for the kinetic energy, when the interaction is not local but contains
additional powers of p, each power of p contributes an additional power of 1/M in
the wave packet transform, so that for large enough M interactions can be assumed
to be local to high accuracy.
The argument that interactions have to couple many states at the Fermi surface
is not new, and has been used by various investigators to facilitate the analysis
of weakly coupled fermion systems by means of a 1/N -expansion, where N is the
number of states at the Fermi surface with discretized angles [26–30].
It should be noted, that for the states at the saddle points (or other points of high
symmetry) the interaction in two dimensions always scales in the same way as the
hopping terms. This suggests that when the Fermi surface touches the saddle points,
the states there may become strongly coupled even when they are not coupled to
the rest of the Fermi surface.

7.2 One-loop RG via continuous unitary transfor-

mations

In this section we introduce the continuous unitary transformations (CUT) [54–
56], which are the Hamiltonian equivalent of the action-based RG ﬂow equations
[10, 26]. Whereas the RG is based on integrating out degrees of freedom, and thus
decreases the number of the degrees of freedom in the system, the CUT method
merely decouples states with diﬀerent kinetic energies, so that the number of degrees
of freedom stays the same. The decoupling is achieved by a sequence of inﬁnitesimal
canonical transformations that is applied to the Hamiltonian of the system. We
denote the generator of the inﬁnitesimal transformation by η (B), where B is the
ﬂow parameter related to the renormalization scale. The ﬂowing Hamiltonian H (B)
obeys the equation

d
dBH (B) = [η (B) ,H (B)] ,

(7.7)

which is just the ﬁrst order expansion of the unitary transformation e−η(B)Heη(B).
In principle, the ﬂow equation is exact, but in practice one has to resort to approx-
imations. In App. C we show that for a suitable generator η(B), the ﬂow equation
(7.7) leads to a set of coupled ﬂow equations for a set of auxiliary coupling constants
F (p1,··· , p4). These ﬂow equations are structurally very similar to the usual RG
equations when the frequency dependence is neglected. The major diﬀerence to the
RG equations is that there is no cutoﬀ.
Instead, the physical coupling constants

67

7.3 The geometry of the low-energy states in the Brillouin zone

U (p1,··· , p4) are obtained from the auxiliary ones via

U (p1,··· , p4) = e−[(p1)+(p2)−(p3)−(p4)]2/16Λ2

F (p1,··· , p4) ,

(7.8)

where Λ is the RG energy scale. The exponential on the right hand side contains
the kinetic energy diﬀerences of the initial and ﬁnal states of an interaction matrix
elements. As a consequence, states with kinetic energy larger than Λ decouple from
the low energy states and can be neglected when || (cid:29) Λ. The advantage of this
scheme within the wave packet approach is that the wave packet states may lie
partially below and partially above the cutoﬀ.
In the RG scheme it is diﬃcult
to obtain an eﬀective Hamiltonian in this situation, whereas in the CUT method,
Eq. 7.8 gives a simple rule for all cases. Since the CUT ﬂow equations in the one-
loop approximations are essentially equivalent to the RG one-loop equations, we do
not discuss them any further. The only CUT related equation that is needed in the
remainder of this work is Eq. 7.8.
More details can be found in App. C and many more in the book by Kehrein [57].

7.3 The geometry of the low-energy states in the

Brillouin zone

In this section we discuss the inﬂuence of the shape of the low-energy phase space
on the low-energy physics of the Hubbard model in two dimensions. In particular,
we look at the inﬂuence of strong anisotropy in the Fermi velocities along the Fermi
surface. The most extreme case of anisotropy is realized when the Fermi surface
touches the saddle points, where the van Hove singularity in the density of states
manifests itself through a vanishing Fermi velocity at the saddle points. We will
show that in this case, slow and fast parts of the Fermi system at a ﬁxed energy
scale Λ live on diﬀerent length scales, which leads to an approximate decoupling of
these two kinds of states.

van Hove singularities

The inﬂuence of the latter can be seen in Fig. 7.2, which shows the tube of states
with energy || < Λ for Λ = 0.1t. In the case of a generic Fermi surface, the Fermi
velocity is approximately constant along the Fermi surface. Since the energy close to
the Fermi surface is  ∼ vF p⊥, the tube has width ∆p ∼ 2/vF everywhere. On the
other hand, when the Fermi surface is in the vicinity of the saddle points, the Fermi
velocity becomes strongly anisotropic (and vanishes at the saddle points). In the

vicinity of the saddle points the width of the tube is asymptotically ∆p ∼ 2(cid:112)Λ/t.

We will be mainly interested in the latter case in the following. Due to the large
anisotropy of the Fermi velocity, there is no unique length scale associated to the
problem, so that there exists no single wave packet size M that ﬁts for all angles.

68

Wave packets and the renormalization group

Figure 7.2: Low energy phase-space for the two-dimensional square lattice with
nearest neighbor hopping. The shaded area is the region where | (p)| < 0.1t. The
left panel shows the generic situation, where the Fermi surface is far away from the
saddle points. The width of the tube around the Fermi surface is approximately
independent of the angle. In the right panel, on the other hand, the Fermi surface
touches the saddle points. Due to the van Hove singularity, the tube is much broader
in the vicinity of the saddle points than around the rest of the Fermi surface.

However, a second glance at Fig. 7.2 reveals that most of the low energy phase space
is concentrated around the saddle points, so that it appears reasonable to adjust the
size of the wave packets to this part of the Brillouin zone. Accordingly, the wave
packets are too small (in real space) for the remaining part of the Fermi surface.
This is shown in Fig. 7.3 for Λ = 0.1t and M = 4. At the saddle points the phase
space cell covers the low energy region neatly, but the tube is much narrower than a
phase space cell as one moves into the nodal direction. The fact that the cells are too
large in momentum space is also reﬂected in the WW transform of the interactions.

Approximate decoupling of fast and slow states

At this point we can appreciate the CUT approach from Sec. 7.2 above, as it treats
states below and above the cutoﬀ on the same footing. From Eq. 7.8 we see that
states above the cutoﬀ decouple exponentially, whereas states below the cutoﬀ are
relatively unaﬀected by the exponential suppression of the energy transfer. There-
fore the WW transform for interactions at the saddle points is essentially the same
whether the ﬂowing auxiliary coupling F (p1, . . . , p4) (which is the pendant of the
usual RG couplings) or the physical coupling U (p1, . . . , p4) is used. In particular,
the coupling can be transformed using the local approximation from Sec. 5.4. When
the tube is much narrower than a cell, however, the exponential suppression of inter-

69

(cid:45)1.0(cid:45)0.50.00.51.0(cid:45)1.0(cid:45)0.50.00.51.0pxΠpyΠ(cid:45)1.0(cid:45)0.50.00.51.0(cid:45)1.0(cid:45)0.50.00.51.0pxΠpyΠ7.3 The geometry of the low-energy states in the Brillouin zone

Figure 7.3: Low energy phase space for the two-dimensional square lattice with
nearest neighbor hopping at half-ﬁlling. Λ = 0.1t, the region with || < Λ is shaded.
The phase space cells of the WW basis with M = 4 are also shown. At the saddle
points, the size π/4 of the cells matches the width of the low energy tube, but the
cells are too large for the remaining part of the Fermi surface.

70

pxpy(cid:45)Π0Π(cid:45)Π0ΠWave packets and the renormalization group

actions eﬀectively restricts all the momentum space summations in the wave packet
transform to the area of the tube. As a rule of thumb, we have

interaction strength ∝

area in momentum space

area of BZ

.

(7.9)

Thus we expect the interactions in the nodal directions to decrease in the WW basis
representation when the tube is chosen too small. This expectation is born out, and
the decrease of the local interaction as a function of 2M
Λ, which measures the size
πvF
mismatch between the tube and the cells, is shown in Fig. 7.4. The decrease of the
local eﬀective interactions leads to a partial decoupling of the slow parts of the Fermi
surface from the fast parts, where slow and fast refer to the Fermi velocity compared
to Λ, i.e. a region is fast when vF > 2M/(πΛ) and slow otherwise. This eﬀect is
increased because of the kinetic energy in the WW basis. The key observation is
that the RG ﬂow does not enter the strong coupling regime for all parts of the Fermi
surface simultaneously. In particular, for the states at the saddle points the band
width in the WW basis is Wsp ≈ 8t/M 2 ∼ Λ, where 8t is the full band width of the
model. The ﬂow goes to strong coupling at the saddle points when the interaction
strength U ≈ Wsp ∼ Λ. In the nodal region, on the other hand, the band width is
Wnod ∼ 16t/M = 2M Wsp. Thus, even for the relatively small value M = 4 we have
Wnod ≈ 8Wsp. As a consequence, the fast regions behave almost like non-interacting
fermions at scale M , and correlations involve very delocalized states only.
This separation of scales justiﬁes to treat the region around the saddle point in
isolation when it becomes strongly coupled. The strong correlations imply that at
larger length scales this region should be modeled in terms of the low energy degrees
of freedom that emerge from the strongly correlated problem at scale M . The
coupling to the remaining states at larger length scales involves these new degrees of
freedom only. This route is pursued in Ch. 9 for the saddle point regime of the two-
dimensional Hubbard model. It should be emphasized that the decoupling of scales
does not rely on the fact that the Fermi surface touches the saddle points exactly.
Indeed, it is clear that for strong coupling problems at ﬁnite Λ, the width of the tube
with || < Λ limits the sensitivity to the precise position of the Fermi surface. For
Λ = 0.1t, the width at the saddle points is π/4, so that the same reasoning should
hold when the Fermi surface is dislocated from the saddle points by less than about
half this distance.
Finally, it is noteworthy that the idea of a decoupling of fast and slow fermions
is not new.
In fact, it is a well established eﬀect for multi-band systems, where
the most celebrated example is probably the Kondo-lattice model of heavy fermion
systems [31, 32], where slow f -electrons are modeled as localized spins (i.e. eﬀective
low-energy degrees of freedom), whereas the fast s-electrons are treated as non-
interacting. Another example that is more closely related to the problem here is
given by N -leg ladders at weak coupling, where a similar decoupling of slow and fast
bands has been observed within the renormalization group [33].

71

7.3 The geometry of the low-energy states in the Brillouin zone

Figure 7.4: Reduction of the local interaction due to size mismatch between low
energy tube and phase space cells. The local part of the wave packet transform is
shown as a function of 2M
Λ < 1, the tube is narrower than the phase
πvF
space cell, and the exponential cutoﬀ (7.8) reduces the interaction in the WW basis.
A window function with N/M = 8 is used. For very narrow tubes (Λ → 0), the
momentum resolution of this function is not suﬃcient to resolve the decreasing
width of the tube.

Λ. For 2M
πvF

72

0.00.51.01.52.00.00.20.40.60.81.02MΠvF(cid:76)UChapter 8

Wave packets and eﬀective
Hamiltonians in one
dimension

8.1

Introduction

In this chapter we apply the WW basis states to three strongly coupled ﬁxed points
of RG ﬂows for one dimensional systems: Chains with attractive interactions away
from half-ﬁlling (Sec. 8.4), chains with repulsive interactions at half-ﬁlling (Sec. 8.3),
and the two-leg ladder with repulsive interactions at half-ﬁlling (Sec. 8.5). The low-
energy phenomenology of these systems is very well understood (see e.g.
[67, 68]),
so that we can compare the results obtained from the wave packet approach with
exact solutions that are obtained from bosonization and Bethe ansatz [67, 68]. We
do not aim at quantitative results, and merely seek to obtain qualitative features of
the low-energy physics. The main concern in this respect is the distinction between
algebraic decays and exponential decays of correlation functions. Since the WW basis
breaks the translational invariance of the system, it is not obvious that power-law
correlations can be obtained at all.
The qualitative nature of the study is reﬂected in the approximations used: Through-
out, we discard all basis states except the ones at the Fermi points, with k = pF /K,
where pF is the Fermi momentum. We use the ﬁxed point Hamiltonians obtained
from one-loop RG for the interaction, and expand around the strong coupling limit.
Somewhat surprisingly, we recover the nature of the dominant correlations in the
ground state in all three cases, despite the simplicity of the approximations.
More explicitly, we will see that within the WW approach, the long range physics at
the strong coupling ﬁxed points is to a large extent determined by the structure of

73

8.2 Renormalization group and wave packets for chains

Figure 8.1: Scattering processes corresponding to the four coupling constants
u1, . . . , u4.

the local (at scale M ) Hilbert space and its ground state degeneracy. This motive is
picked up in the study of the two-dimensional Hubbard model in the next chapter.

8.2 Renormalization group and wave packets for

chains

In this section we brieﬂy review the one-loop renormalization group equations for the
one-dimensional Hubbard model at weak coupling (see e.g. [67]). Based on the weak
coupling assumption we take into account only interaction terms that are allowed
in the vicinity of the Fermi points. Momentum conservation can then be used to
parametrize the interaction in terms of four coupling constants u1, . . . , u4 following
the so-called g-ology scheme [67].

Low energy Hamiltonian in momentum space

We begin with the interaction part of the Hamiltonian, and introduce the current
operators

c†αpF +p,s cα(cid:48)pF +p(cid:48).

(8.1)

Jα,α(cid:48) (p(cid:48), p(cid:48)) =(cid:88)s

The indices α, α(cid:48) label right- and left-movers and take the values α = ±1. Note that
this use of α coincides with the one in the deﬁnition of the WW basis functions,
Ch. 4.
In the spirit of the renormalization group we assume that the interaction does not
depend on the momenta relative to the Fermi points, i.e. we set

Hint = (cid:88)α1···α4

×

1

N (cid:88)p1···p4

˜U (α1pF , . . . , α4pF ) δα1pF +α2pF ,α3pF +α4pF ,

δp1+p2,p3+p4 Jα1α2 (p1, p2) Jα3α4 (p3, p4) ,

(8.2)

where ˜U (p1, . . . , p4) is the interaction in momentum representation. Note that this
approximation is analogous to the local approximation in the wave packet transfor-
mation introduced in Ch. 5. Momentum conservation restricts the values of the αi,

74

Wave packets and eﬀective Hamiltonians in one dimension

so that one can parametrize

˜U (α1pF , . . . , α4pF ) =

u1 δα1,−α3δα2,−α4δα1,−α2

+ u2 δα1,α3 δα2,α4 δα1,−α2
+

δα1,−α3δα2,−α4δα1,α2
δα1,−α3δα2,−α4δα1,α2.

u3
2
u4
2

+

(8.3)

Note that u3 is present at half-ﬁlling only, when umklapp scattering is allowed at low
energies because of pF = π/2. The coupling u4 will be neglected in the following,
since it does not inﬂuence the ﬂow to strong coupling.
The prefactors in (8.3) are chosen such that for the case of an onsite interaction U
the coupling constants have the value

ui = U,

(8.4)

which is used as initial condition for the renormalization group.
The kinetic energy can be linearized around the Fermi points at weak coupling and
is given by

α p Jαα (p, p) .

(8.5)

Hkin =

2πvF

N (cid:88)p (cid:88)α

Renormalization group equations and their ﬁxed points

The one-loop RG equations for the coupling constants ui are given by [49, 50]:

˙u1 = −
˙u2 = −
˙u3 = −

u2
1

1
πvF
1

2πvF (cid:0)u2

3(cid:1)
1 − u2

1

2πvF

(u1 − 2u2) u3,

(8.6)

where the dot is shorthand for the logarithmic scale derivative d
d
dΛ , so that
s = e−Λ/W . Λ is the renormalization scale, and W is the initial bandwidth. We will
be interested in two cases, both involving ﬁnite scale singularities. The ﬁrst one is
the half-ﬁlled repulsive Hubbard model, for which the strong coupling ﬁxed-point of
(8.6) is given by

ds = − 1

Λ

2u2 = u3 = uAF > 0

u1 = 0.

(8.7)

This ﬁxed point is characterized by a diverging staggered spin-susceptibility.

75

8.2 Renormalization group and wave packets for chains

Figure 8.2: The simplest wave packet approximation for chains: Only one WW
momentum k = pF /K is kept, the remainder is discarded. It is assumed that M is
chosen such that only this state lies below the cutoﬀ (shaded region). WW basis
states are marked by red dots at momentum Kk, and drawn on top of the dispersion
of the chain.

The second one is the attractive Hubbard model away from half-ﬁlling (i.e. g3 = 0),
for which the ﬁxed point couplings are

u1 = 2u2 = uSC < 0.

(8.8)

This ﬁxed point is characterized by diverging singlet pairing correlations.
The couplings uAF and uSC diverge at a critical scale Λc, that depends on the initial
interaction strength U and the full band width W . Here we are not interested in
the magnitude of this scale. It is suﬃcient to know that at some scale the couplings
exceed the band width below the cutoﬀ, at which point the perturbative approach
breaks down.
In order to obtain a qualitative picture of the ﬁxed point behavior, we assume in
the following that the couplings deﬁne the largest energy scale in the problem, and
investigate the strong coupling limit. This approach is similar to the semi-classical
approximation to the sine-Gordon problem that describes the low-energy physics of
one-dimensional chains in the bosonization method [67, 68]. In order to study the
ﬁxed points, we need the WW representation of the ﬁxed point Hamiltonian ﬁrst.
The kinetic energy part has been discussed in Sec. 5.1, and will not be important in
what follows.

WW representation of Hint
Moreover, we will restrict the WW basis to states | mk(cid:105) with k = pF /K ≡ kF ,
and assume that M is chosen such that only this state lies below the cutoﬀ, as
indicated in Fig. 8.2. In order to investigate the properties of the ﬁxed points, we

76

Simplest approximation￿1.0￿0.50.00.51.0￿1.0￿0.50.00.51.0p￿ΠΕpcouplingregime,whichmakesitimpossibletocontinuetheﬂowbecauseitisbasedontheperturbativeexpansionaroundthenon-interactinggroundstate.Inordertoarriveataneﬀectivedescriptionofthelow-energybehavior,weswitchtotheWilsonbasis.Becauseoftheexponentiallocalizationofthebasisfunctionsinrealspace,theinteractionsareshort-rangedinthisbasis.Henceweaimtoﬁndnewlocaldegreesoffreedomthatarenotstronglyinteractingbysolvingalocal(inrealspace)problem.Subsequently,wederiveaneﬀectiveHamiltonianforthenewdegreesoffreedombymeansofcontractorrenormalization[2,3].Becauseofthehigh-energycutoﬀintherenormalizedcouplings,theexpansionintotheWilsonbasiscanberestrictedtocontainonlystatesthatareclosetotheFermilevel.Clearly,theintroductionofthenewlengthscaleM-thesizeofhalfaunitcelloftheWilsonbasis-mayleadtoartifacts,socarehastobetakenhowtotruncatetheexpansioninmomentumspace.InthenextsectionwewillshowhowtoperformtruncationsthatconservesalientfeaturesoftheoriginalHamiltonianforthesimplesttruncationwhereonlyonevalueofkiskept.Theextensiontomorevaluesofkisstraightforwardandwillbethesubjectoffuturework.5.1Simplesttruncationscheme:Singlek-pointWestoptheRGﬂowatthescaleΛwheretherenormalizedinteractionexceedsthebandwidth,becausethisisthetransitionlinebetweenweakcouplingandstrongcouplingregimes,andoneexpectsatransitionfromfreetoconﬁnedfermionsatthisscale.WechooseMsuchthatthereducedbandwidthπvFMequalsthebandwidthbelowthecutoﬀ,πvFM=2Λ.WerestrictourattentiontothecasethattheFermimomentumisgivenbypF=πMkFforsomekF,andtruncatetheexpansionforleft-andright-moversinthefollowingway:Rp≈1√2￿mγm,kFe−iφm˜gm,0(p)(50)Lp≈1√2￿mγm,kFeiφm˜gm,0(p),(51)wherewehaveusedpF=πMkFtoremovetheFermimomentumfromthewindowfunction˜gm,±kF,andhaveeliminatedaglobalphaseinthephasefactorsiφm+kFthatoccurswhenkFisoddbyreplacingφm+kF→φm.Inthistruncatedexpansion,therearetwostatesperWWunitcell,correspondingtothetwoFermipoints.Thesestatesarecenteredaroundthemomenta±π2.Whenthesystemishalfﬁlled,therearetwofermionsperWWunitcellinthestatesattheFermipoints.25Truncated WW expansionThetransformationforc†jisidenticalbecausetheψmk(j)arereal.Nowweturntomomentumspace,wherethetransformationisgivenbytheFouriertransform˜ψmk(p)ofψmk(j):cp=￿mk˜ψmk(p)γmkc†p=￿mk˜ψmk(p)∗γ†mk.(8)However,itwillturnouttobeconvenienttouse(3)andexpressthetransformationintermsofthefouriertransformoftheshiftedwindowfunction˜gmk(p).Thetransformationthenbecomescp=1√2￿mk￿e−iφm+k˜gmk(p)+eiφm+k˜gm,−k(p)￿γmk=￿mkγmk1√2￿µ=±1e−iµφm+k˜gm,µk(p).(9)Intheformulaforc†p,oneobtainsthecomplexconjugateof(9).Onereasonwhytheshiftedwindowfunctions(andtheirfouriertransform)areusefulisthattheyleadtouniversalexpressionsforthetransformationofoperators,inthesensethattransformationformulasareindependentofthevaluesofthelabelsmandk,anddependondiﬀerencesofmeanpositionlabelmandmeanmomentumlabelkonly.Inordertoexposethissimplicity,wewillfrequentlyexpresstheshiftedwindowfunction˜gm,k(p)intermsoftheunshiftedfunction˜g0,0(p).Therelationbetweenthetwois˜gm,k(p)=˜gm,0￿p−πMk￿=e−iMm(p−πMk)˜g0,0￿p−πMk￿.(10)Sincewealwaysusewindowfunctionssuchthat˜g0,0(p)isrealandsymmetricaroundp=0,weobtainthefurtherrelation˜g∗m,k(p)=eiMm(p−πMk)˜g0,0￿p−πMk￿=e−iMm(−p+πMk)˜g0,0￿−p+πMk￿=˜gm,−k(−p)(11)forthecomplexconjugate˜g∗m,k(p)of˜gm,k(p).10Thetransformationforc†jisidenticalbecausetheψmk(j)arereal.Nowweturntomomentumspace,wherethetransformationisgivenbytheFouriertransform˜ψmk(p)ofψmk(j):cp=￿mk˜ψmk(p)γmkc†p=￿mk˜ψmk(p)∗γ†mk.(8)However,itwillturnouttobeconvenienttouse(3)andexpressthetransformationintermsofthefouriertransformoftheshiftedwindowfunction˜gmk(p).Thetransformationthenbecomescp=1√2￿mk￿e−iφm+k˜gmk(p)+eiφm+k˜gm,−k(p)￿γmk=￿mkγmk1√2￿µ=±1e−iµφm+k˜gm,µk(p).(9)Intheformulaforc†p,oneobtainsthecomplexconjugateof(9).Onereasonwhytheshiftedwindowfunctions(andtheirfouriertransform)areusefulisthattheyleadtouniversalexpressionsforthetransformationofoperators,inthesensethattransformationformulasareindependentofthevaluesofthelabelsmandk,anddependondiﬀerencesofmeanpositionlabelmandmeanmomentumlabelkonly.Inordertoexposethissimplicity,wewillfrequentlyexpresstheshiftedwindowfunction˜gm,k(p)intermsoftheunshiftedfunction˜g0,0(p).Therelationbetweenthetwois˜gm,k(p)=˜gm,0￿p−πMk￿=e−iMm(p−πMk)˜g0,0￿p−πMk￿.(10)Sincewealwaysusewindowfunctionssuchthat˜g0,0(p)isrealandsymmetricaroundp=0,weobtainthefurtherrelation˜g∗m,k(p)=eiMm(p−πMk)˜g0,0￿p−πMk￿=e−iMm(−p+πMk)˜g0,0￿−p+πMk￿=˜gm,−k(−p)(11)forthecomplexconjugate˜g∗m,k(p)of˜gm,k(p).10Whereasthegmk(j)arebythemselvesnotagoodbasisforthelattice,weshow-followingrefs.[8,9]-thatthefunctionsψmk(j)=gm,0(j)meven,k=0gm,M(j)meven,k=M1√2(gm,k(j)+gm,−k(j))1≤k<M,m+keven−i√2(gm,k(j)−gm,−k(j))1≤k<M,m+kodd(3)formanorthonormalbasisforthesingleparticlestateswheng(j)satisﬁescertainconditionstobederivedbelow.First,weintroduceanewnotationwhichismoreconvenientforpracticalcalculations:ψm,k(j)=gm,0(j)meven,k=0gm,M(j)meven,k=M1√2￿e−iφm+kgm,k(j)+eiφm+kgm,−k(j)￿0<k<M,(4)whereφa=￿0aevenπ2aodd(5)Apartfrombeingorthonormalized,thefunctionsψm,k(j)havetheusefulpropertyofexponentiallocalizationinbothrealspaceand(aroundtwopointsin)momen-tumspacewheng(j)ischosenappropriatelyasdetailedbelow.BeforeweembarkintotheexplicitconstructionoftheWilson-Wannier(WW)functions,wewillinvestigatesomegeneralpropertiesofthebasis.ThechoiceofMinthefactorizationN=2MKdeﬁnesthelengthscaleoverwhichthebasisfunctionsaredelocalized.Theunitcellforthebasisfunctionsis2Mbecauseofthephasefactorse±iφm+kin(4)thatarediﬀerentonadjacentsitesbutidenticalonsecondnearestneighborsites.Infact,theprincipleoftheconstructionisnottousetheshiftedwindowfunctionsgmk(j)asbasisfunctions,buttodecomposethemintoparityeigenstates,wheretheparityofastateis(−1)m+k(Notethatbytheparityoperationwemeanreﬂectionaboutthecenterofthewavepacket,notabouttheorigin).Thestateswithk=0andk=Marealreadyparityeigenstates,sothattheyappearonlyonceperunitcell,forallotherktherearetwostatesperunitcellforevenandoddparity(ork<0andk>0).Aschematicpictureofthebasisfunctioninoneunitcellisshowninﬁg.2.FromN=2MKoneseesthatthereareKunitcellsintotal.Notethatthisﬁgureisintendedtoshowhowthestatesarerearrangedinthenewbasisonly,andthatitdoesnotreproducetheshapeofthewavepacketscorrectly.Therealspaceformofthewavepacketswithinoneunitcellisshowninﬁg.3.Theﬁgureshowswavepacketswithm=2,3andk=1,2.Theparityofthestatesfollowsacheckerboardpatterninthem−k-plane,wherenearestneighborsalwayshaveoppositeparity.7Low energy part mapped to chainwith Interactions from RG ﬁxed pointSunday, October 2, 2011Wave packets and eﬀective Hamiltonians in one dimension

ﬁrst transform the ﬁxed point interactions to the WW basis using the methods from
Sec. 5.3.2, in particular Eq. (5.30), which we restate here for convenience. Since we
set all the ki to pF /K, we suppress the WW momentum index k in the following.
Then Eq. (5.30) becomes

U (m1, . . . , m4) =

V (m1, . . . , m4)

2

˜U (α1pF , . . . , α4pF )

1

2 (cid:88)α1···α4

× e−i(α1φ1+α2φ2−α3φ3−α4φ4),

(8.9)

where φi = φmi, and φa = π/2 (φa = 0) for a even (odd). The values of V (m1, . . . , m4)
depend on the window function, the values we use are tabulated in Tab. 5.1.
Plugging the g-ology couplings (8.3) into the right hand side of (8.9), we observe
that the Kronecker deltas can be used to perform three of the four sums over the αi.
We evaluate the remaining sum for the u1 term (the other terms being similar) only,
and state the results for the other terms. We note that α1 = −α2 = −α3 = α4 = α,
and ﬁnd

e−iα(φ1−φ2+φ3−φ4) = cos [φ1 + φ3 − φ2 − φ4]

(8.10)

1

2(cid:88)α

Now recall from Eq. (4.10) that φi can take on the values 0 (for m + k even) and π/2
(for m + k odd) only. Then the cos vanishes when an odd number of operators acts
on an odd (i.e. m + k odd) WW orbital, since its argument is either π/2 or 3π/2. In
particular, terms of the form m1 = m2 = m3 = m4 ± 1 vanish, since there is always
an even number of odd ki (for k-conserving matrix elements). Since the interactions
decay rapidly with distance, the contribution from this type of interaction is thus
strongly suppressed in one dimension, and we neglect it in the following. Now we
turn to the type m1 = m2 (cid:54)= m3 = m4. Focussing on nearest neighbor interactions
and setting all k = pF /K, we ﬁnd that the cosine contributes ±1, depending on
which of the mi are even (odd). Thus there are no terms that vanish exactly in this
case. Finally, when all sites involved are even (odd), the cosine always evaluates to
1.
The general form of the Hamiltonian for the states at the Fermi points, ki = pF /K
can now be written down using similar considerations for the other parts of the
interaction. In order to simplify the notation, we deﬁne

ˆJ (m1, m2) ≡(cid:88)s

γ†m1,pF /K,s γm2,pF /K,s.

(8.11)

77

8.3 Chain with repulsive interactions at half-ﬁlling

Then the WW Hamiltonian for the states at the Fermi points is given by

Hint(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)ki=pF /K ≈

(8.12)

1

1

+

(u1 + u2 + u3/2 + u4/2) ˆJ (m, m) ˆJ (m, m)

4M (cid:88)m
8M (cid:88)(cid:104)m,m(cid:48)(cid:105)(cid:104) (−u1 + u2 − u3/2 + u4/2) ˆJ (m, m) ˆJ (m(cid:48), m(cid:48))
+ (u1 − u2 − u3/2 + u4/2) ˆJ (m, m(cid:48)) ˆJ (m(cid:48), m)
+ (u1 + u2 − u3/2 − u4/2) ˆJ (m, m(cid:48)) ˆJ (m, m(cid:48))(cid:105)

(8.13)

where we have used the values of V (0, 0, m, m) from Tab. 5.1. The WW transforms
of the ﬁxed point couplings can be obtained in a straightforward manner from (8.13).
This is used in the following two sections to analyze the two ﬁxed points above.

8.3 Chain with repulsive interactions at half-ﬁlling

In this section we discuss the ﬁxed point 2u2 = u3 = uAF > 0 for the half-ﬁlled
chain with repulsive interactions. We use Eq. (8.13) in order to obtain the WW
representation of the interaction. We proceed by diagonalizing the local part of the
Hamiltonian, and ﬁnd that charge degrees of freedom are gapped, so that locally
only the spin degree of freedom survives. As a consequence, the ground state of the
local interaction Hamiltonian has two-fold degeneracy per site, corresponding to the
two possible spin states. In the next step, we show that the non-local part of the
interaction is of the Heisenberg form, so that it leaves the local low-energy subspace
invariant. The Heisenberg model can be solved using the Bethe ansatz [67], so that
the asymptotic form of the spin-spin correlation functions can be obtained. The
correlation functions of the eﬀective model in the WW basis are then transformed
back to momentum space, revealing a power-law form of the spin-spin correlation
function for momenta close to p = 0 and p = π. This result is in qualitative
agreement with the bosonization solution of the chain problem [67, 68].

Fixed point interaction in WW representation

The ﬁxed point interaction can be transformed to the WW basis by plugging 2u2 =
u3 = uAF into (8.9). The result is

ˆJ (m, m) ˆJ (m, m)

ˆJ (m, m + 1) ˆJ (m + 1, m)

.

HAF =

1
4M

uAF(cid:88)m

(cid:124)

Using the identity

uAF(cid:88)m

−

1
4M

(cid:124)

(cid:125)

(cid:123)(cid:122)

(cid:123)(cid:122)

(cid:125)

(8.14)

(8.15)

local interaction

nearest neighbor interaction

σi
ab σi

cd =

1
2

δad δbc −

1
4

δab δcd

3(cid:88)i=1

78

Wave packets and eﬀective Hamiltonians in one dimension

the non-local part of the interaction can be rewritten as

−(cid:88)m

ˆJ (m, m + 1) ˆJ (m + 1, m) = 2(cid:88)m

ˆS (m) · ˆS (m + 1) +

1
2

ˆn (m) ˆn (m + 1) ,

(8.16)
where the ˆSi (m) and ˆn (m) are spin and charge operators at site m, respectively.
Similarly, the local part can be rewritten as

Hloc =

1
4M

uAF(cid:88)m

ˆJ (m, m) ˆJ (m, m) =

1
4M

uAF(cid:88)m

ˆn (m) ˆn (m) .

(8.17)

Local Hilbert space and eﬀective spin model

In order to arrive at suitable low-energy degrees of freedom, we investigate the local
part (8.17) of the interaction ﬁrst. The local Hilbert space consists of the four states
| 0(cid:105), |↑(cid:105), |↓(cid:105), and |↑↓(cid:105). Since the wave packets lie at the Fermi surface, there is one
fermion per site, and after adjusting the chemical potential accordingly, the energies
of the four states are

Hloc |↑(cid:105) = 0
Hloc |↓(cid:105) = 0
Hloc | 0(cid:105) =
Hloc |↑↓(cid:105) =

1
4M
1
4M

uAF | 0(cid:105)
uAF |↑↓(cid:105) .

(8.18)

Hence the low energy sector of the local Hamiltonian consists of the two states
|↑(cid:105) ,|↓(cid:105). Since these states are degenerate, the eﬀective Hamiltonian to leading
order is found by simply projecting each WW site down to the spin sector.
The action of the non-local interactions in the spin sector can be inferred from (8.16).
The charge operators ˆn (m) have no eﬀect on the spin sector. Therefore we are left
with the nearest-neighbor spin-spin interactions. Hence we arrive at the eﬀective
Hamiltonian

Heﬀ = J(cid:88)m

ˆS (m) · ˆS (m + 1) ,

(8.19)

where J = 1
Heisenberg model.

2M uAF > 0. The eﬀective model is simply an antiferromagnetic S − 1/2

Asymptotic spin-spin correlation function

The properties of the Heisenberg model in one dimension are well known, and the
spin-spin correlation function has been derived using the Bethe ansatz [51, 67]:

(cid:68)ˆS (m) · ˆS (m(cid:48))(cid:69) = C1

1

(m − m(cid:48))2 + C2 (−1)m−m(cid:48)

1

|m − m(cid:48)|

,

(8.20)

79

8.3 Chain with repulsive interactions at half-ﬁlling

Figure 8.3: Schematic spectral weight of spin-density excitations of the repulsive
Hubbard model at half-ﬁlling. Low energy excitations exist at q ≈ 0 and q ≈ π.
The spin-density excitations in the truncated WW basis are conﬁned to the encircled
regions when transformed back into momentum space. At the points q = 0, π the
correspondence is exact (cf. (8.21)), but for general momenta excitations around
q = 0 and q = π are mixed because translational invariance is broken.

where the Ci are constants. It follows that there are soft excitations at the points 0
and π of the Brillouin zone of the superlattice deﬁned by the WW basis states.
Now we transform this correlator back to momentum space in order to see what
these results mean. We denote the momentum representation of the spin density by
˜s (q), where q is the momentum transfer. Since the WW basis states are localized in
momentum space around ±π/2, the momentum transfer q of two-fermion operators
such as the ˆSi (m) is restricted to the vicinity of the two points q = 0 and q = π,
as indicated in Fig. 8.3. In Ch. 6 we have found that the staggered magnetization
˜si (q = π) is given by

˜si (q = π) = (cid:88)j
= (cid:88)mk
≈ (cid:88)m
= (cid:88)m

ss(cid:48)c†j,s cj,s(cid:48)

(−1)j σi
(−1)m+k σi
(−1)m σi
(−1)m ˆSi (m) ,

ss(cid:48)γ†mk,s γm,M−k,s(cid:48)
ss(cid:48)γ†m,M/2,s, γm,M/2,s(cid:48)

(8.21)

in the WW basis. Therefore the power law in the staggered magnetization in the WW
basis corresponds to the same power law in the staggered magnetization in real space.
A similar line of reasoning for the uniform spin-density, ˜si (q = 0) shows that in the
same manner the uniform spin density in the WW basis corresponds to the uniform
spin density in the original lattice. The momenta that lie far away from the center

80

0.00.20.40.60.81.0qΠΩWave packets and eﬀective Hamiltonians in one dimension

and boundary of the Brillouin zone of the WW basis are in general superpositions
of momenta close to 0 and π, reﬂecting the broken translational invariance.
In summary, the asymptotic behavior of the spin-spin correlation function in the real
space lattice inferred from the eﬀective model is the same as in eq. (8.20), with m−m(cid:48)
replaced by j−j(cid:48). The wave velocity of excitations has to be rescaled because the unit
cell is larger in the WW basis by a factor of M . We conclude that our approximation
produces algebraically spin-density correlations round q = 0 and q = π, and gaps
for all charged excitations in agreement with bosonization treatments. However, the
exponents of the power law decays, which are inﬂuenced by the Luttinger liquid
physics are not recovered. This is not surprising given that the Luttinger liquid
physics has its origins in the asymptotically linear fermion dispersion [52], a feature
that is hard to conserve in a cluster approximation (not to mention that the Fermi
velocity appears nowhere in the present treatment). Nevertheless, we emphasize
that the qualitative features of the model including algebraic decays are recovered,
which is in our view a non-trivial result, in particular when taking into account the
simplicity of the approximation.

8.4 Chain with attractive interactions

Now we consider the ﬁxed point for attractive interactions at arbitrary ﬁlling, char-
acterized by u1 = 2u2 = −uSC < 0. We follow the same step as in Sec. 8.3 above.
First we obtain the WW representation of the interaction Hamiltonian. We analyze
the local part of the interaction and ﬁnd that the low energy sector contains only
singlet pairs of fermions. Then we map the projected Hamiltonian to a spin problem
and deduce the asymptotic correlation function from the Bethe ansatz solution.

Fixed point interaction in WW representation

The WW transform of the interaction Hamiltonian is again obtained using (8.13).
The local part is given by

Hloc = −

= −

3
4M

3
4M

uSC(cid:88)m
uSC(cid:88)m

ˆJ (m, m) ˆJ (m, m)

ˆn (m) ˆn (m) .

(8.22)

For the non-local part, we introduce the additional pair annihilation operators

ˆ∆ (m) = γm,pF /K,↓ γm,pF /K,↑

(8.23)

and their hermitian conjugates ˆ∆† (m).

In terms of the spin-, charge- and pair-

81

8.4 Chain with attractive interactions

operators the non-local interactions are given by

Hn.n. =

3
4M

uSC(cid:88)m (cid:104) − ˆ∆† (m) ˆ∆ (m + 1) − ˆ∆ (m) ˆ∆† (m + 1)
ˆn (m) ˆn (m + 1) + ˆS (m) · ˆS (m + 1)(cid:105)

1
2

+

(8.24)

Local Hilbert space and eﬀective spin model

The analysis of the local Hilbert space and Hamiltonian is the same as in Sec. 8.3,
except that now the interactions are attractive, so that the low-energy states are | 0(cid:105)
and |↑↓(cid:105). Again, the ground state is two-fold degenerate per site so that we obtain
the eﬀective Hamiltonian by projection onto the degenerate subspace. The spin
operators in the second line of (8.24) do not contribute since in the low energy sector
all spins are bound into singlet pairs. In order to treat the remaining interactions
we note that the local low energy subspace can be mapped onto a spin system with
S = 1/2, similar to the repulsive chain above.
The mapping is accomplished by identifying

1
2

ˆSz (m) ≡
ˆS− (m) ≡ ˆ∆ (m) .

(ˆn (m) − 1)

(8.25)

(8.26)

In terms of the spin operators, the projection of the interaction Hamiltonian to the
low energy subspace becomes

Heﬀ = (cid:88)m (cid:104) −

J

2(cid:16) ˆS+ (m) ˆS− (m + 1) + ˆS− (m) ˆS+ (m + 1)(cid:17)
+ J ˆSz(m) ˆSz (m + 1)(cid:105),

(8.27)

where J = 3
8M uSC. The eﬀective Hamiltonian is hence an XXZ spin chain model.
Note that the sign of the ﬁrst term can be reversed by a gauge transformation on
the spin states, e.g. |↑(cid:105) → −|↑(cid:105) on every second site without changing the model.
Consequently, we ﬁnd that the eﬀective model is again an antiferromagnetic S − 1/2
Heisenberg model. Note however, that the emergent SU (2)-symmetry is due to the
approximation, and that in general the symmetry is U (1).

Asymptotic correlation functions

Since the eﬀective Hamiltonian (8.27) is again of the Heisenberg type, we do not
need to discuss the asymptotic correlations in the WW basis, for the results we
refer to Eq. (8.20). Instead we discuss the meaning of the diﬀerent correlators in
real space. In the same way as before, the uniform spin-densities in the WW basis
correspond to uniform spin-densities in real space. The staggered spin-density in the

82

Wave packets and eﬀective Hamiltonians in one dimension

WW basis corresponds to spin-density in real space that oscillates with wave vector
pF (instead of π/2). Translating the spin operators back to the fermion operators
(using Eq. 8.26), we obtain that the charge density (corresponding to ˆSz) becomes
soft at the momenta q = 0 and q = 2pF . The pair correlations (corresponding to
ˆS±) show algebraic decay for the same momenta.
Comparison with the solution from bosonization [67] shows that the slow decay of
pair correlations with momentum 2pF is an artifact of our approximation. The other
power laws are in qualitative agreement, however. For the same reasons as for the
repulsive chain, it is clear that the precise power laws connected to Luttinger liquid
physics can not be recovered.

8.5 Two-leg ladder at half-ﬁlling

In this section we discuss the low energy behavior of the SO(5) symmetric two-leg
ladder at half-ﬁlling. Since the Hubbard ladder has two legs, the diagonalization
of the hopping term leads to two bands. The bands will be labelled by indices like
a, b, c, . . . = 1, 2 in the following. There are four Fermi points in total which are
all equivalent in the sense that the Fermi velocity is the same (because of particle-
hole symmetry). Compared to the single chains considered so far, this opens up
the possibility of competition between diﬀerent order parameters. Indeed, it is well
established that the Hubbard ladder has a Mott insulating ground state at half-
ﬁlling, regardless of the interaction strength.
In this so-called d-Mott phase [53],
dSC and AF correlations are strong, but decay exponentially, and all excitations are
gapped. Remarkably, the single particle excitations at weak coupling are of the same
order of magnitude as the bosonic spin- and pair-excitations.
The renormalization group ﬂow for the Hubbard ladder at half-ﬁlling has been de-
rived by Lin and Balents [53]. There it was also shown that the system generically
ﬂows to strong coupling, and that the ﬁxed point displays an enhanced SO(8) sym-
metry. The resulting low-energy Hamiltonian turns out to be exactly solvable, with
a so-called d-Mott ground state, which has gaps for all excitations. When the high-
energy Hamiltonian is SO(5) symmetric, the system retains this symmetry, which
shows up as a degeneracy of d-wave pair excitations and AF spin-excitations. Since
the interplay between superconductivity and antiferromagnetism is our main inter-
est, we focus on the SO(5) case.
The existence of more than one band poses no problems for the transformation to
the WW basis. Since the problem is weakly coupled, we transform each band to
the WW basis separately, and label all WW quantities by an additional band index.
The position of the WW states in the Brillouin zone is illustrated in Fig. 8.4. In the
following, we use the same approximations as before, namely, we truncate the WW
basis and keep only the states at the Fermi points. We use the ﬁxed point couplings
of the RG to deﬁne the interaction Hamiltonian, and solve it in the strong coupling

83

8.5 Two-leg ladder at half-ﬁlling

Figure 8.4: The simplest wave packet approximation for the two-leg ladder. The
blue lines show the kinetic energy of the two bands as a function of p. The red
dots indicate the mean momenta and mean kinetic energy of the WW basis states.
Since there are two bands, there are two families of WW basis states as well. In the
simplest approximation to the low energy problem, we truncate the basis and keep
only states at the Fermi points.

limit.
We will see that within the WW basis, the presence of two bands leads to a local
problem with a non-degenerate ground state. This is to be contrasted with the
generic case of degenerate ground states for chains above. The ground state features
pronounced d-wave SC and AF correlations. The lowest excited states fall into two
classes: There are eight degenerate fermionic excitations, and ﬁve degenerate bosonic
excitations that correspond to the vector bosons above. Both types of excitations
have comparable gaps. We ﬁnd that this situation is robust against the perturbation
by non-local interactions and fermion hopping, hence reproducing the exact solution
of this problem qualitatively.

Eﬀective Hamiltonian

The SO(5) symmetry at low energies is realized in terms of local fermion bilinears
in the continuum limit. The Lie algebra is generated by 10 operators: The particle
number, the three spin operators and six so-called π-generators which create and
annihilate triplet pairs with total momentum (π, π). Because of the high symmetry
of the kinetic energy part of the Hamiltonian, all these operators commute with the
kinetic energy. The Lie algebra generators will not be important in the following,
so that we refer the interested reader to the review by Zhang [64]. In addition to
the generators, there are ﬁve bilinears that transform in the vector representation
of SO(5). In order to avoid amassing more indices than necessary, we omit position
labels, and write Ras and Las instead of cp±αpF ,a,s. With this notation, the vector

84

(cid:45)1.0(cid:45)0.50.00.51.0(cid:45)2(cid:45)1012pΠΕpWave packets and eﬀective Hamiltonians in one dimension

operators are given by

σz

˜∆x =

1
2
i
2
˜Ai = σx
ab σi

˜∆y =

σz

ab ss(cid:48)(cid:16)Ras Lbs(cid:48) + R†as(cid:48) L†bs(cid:17)
ab ss(cid:48)(cid:16)Ras Lbs(cid:48) − R†as(cid:48) L†bs(cid:17)
ss(cid:48)(cid:16)R†as Lbs(cid:48) + L†as Rbs(cid:48)(cid:17) .

(8.28)

The eﬀective interaction can be written in terms of these operators. Due to the

symmetry, it is convenient to introduce the vector ˜B = (cid:16) ˜∆x, ˜∆y, ˜Ax, ˜Ay, ˜Az(cid:17).The

ﬁxed-point interaction is given by [53]

Hint = −u(cid:90) dr ˜B(r) · ˜B(r)

(8.29)

in the continuum limit, where u > 0. The operators ˜Ai create AF spin-ﬂuctuations
with momentum (π, π). Note that this involves a transition from one band to the
other. The operators ˜∆i create d-wave pair excitations with both fermions of a pair
in the same band, and a relative minus sign of the phase between the bands.

WW representation of the eﬀective Hamiltonian

We now turn to the transformation of the interaction (8.29) to the WW basis. Sur-
prisingly, the transformation is simpler for the ladder than for the chain systems.
The reason is that the interaction is written as a scalar product of operators with
deﬁnite parity.
In fact, all components of the vector B(r) are even under parity.
Since the parity of a bilinear is the product of the parity of its constituting fermions,
the fact that the parity of the WW basis states is opposite on neighboring sites can
be expected to lead to cancellations of terms in the WW transformation.
We show the highlights of the transformation for the dSC operators only, since the
AF operators behave essentially in the same way. We use the local approximation
as before, so that we only need the matrix elements ¯U∆ (a1, α1, s1; . . . ; a4, α4 s4) at
the Fermi points:

¯U∆ (a1, α1, s1; . . . ; a4, α4, s4) = −u

T
s1,s2 s3,s4

δa1a2 δa3a4

δα1,−α2 δα3,−α4

,

pair within one band

pair momentum =0

(cid:124)

(cid:123)(cid:122)

(cid:125)

(cid:124)

(cid:123)(cid:122)

(cid:125)

(8.30)
where we have omitted the pF ’s on the left hand side. The important point is
that there are only two Kronecker deltas involving the αi, and that the ﬁrst pair
of coordinates is indpendent of the second pair of coordinates, because the of the
factorization into bilinears. In the orthogonalization formula (8.9) the summation

1
4

(cid:124)

spin singlet

(cid:123)(cid:122)

(cid:125)

85

8.5 Two-leg ladder at half-ﬁlling

over αi then leads to

U (m1, . . . , m4) ∝

e−i(α1φ1+α2φ2−α3φ3−α4φ4)δα1,−α2 δα3,−α4

1

4 (cid:88)α1···α4
= (cid:34) 1
2(cid:88)α1

e−iα1(φ1−φ2)(cid:35) × (cid:34) 1
2(cid:88)α2

e−iα2(φ3−φ4)(cid:35)

= cos [φ1 − φ2] cos [φ3 − φ4] .

(8.31)

Recalling that φi = φmi at the Fermi points, we see that the contribution is ﬁnite for
m1 = m2 mod 2 and m3 = m4 mod 2. Since we keep nearest neighbor interactions
only, this leads to m1 = m2, m3 = m4. In the SC case this implies that interactions
involve local pairs only, which may interact locally or hop to the neighboring site.
The same conclusion holds for the operators ˜Ai, which involve local particle-hole
pairs only.
In summary, the local Hamiltonian can be expressed conveniently in terms of the
operators

ˆ∆− (m) =

1
√2
1
√2
ˆAi (m) = σx
ab σi

ˆ∆+ (m) =

σz
γb↑
ab γa,↓
ab γ†a,↑
γ†b↓
σz
ss(cid:48) γ†as γbs(cid:48)

(8.32)

and the corresponding local SO(5) vector operator

B (m) =(cid:16)( ˆ∆−(m) + ˆ∆+(m))/2, i( ˆ∆−(m) − ˆ∆+(m))/2, ˆAx(m), ˆAy(m), ˆAz(m)(cid:17) .

(8.33)

The interaction is given by

Hint = −

1
4M

u(cid:88)m (cid:18)B(m) · B(m) +

1
2

B(m) · B(m + 1)(cid:19) .

(8.34)

As usually, the numerical prefactors depend on the choice of the window function.

Local Hilbert space and eﬀective quantum rotor model

Following the same routine as before, we start by investigating the local Hilbert
space of the problem, focussing on the bosonic states. The ground state | 0(cid:105) is
non-degenerate, and consists of one d-wave pair per site,

| 0(cid:105) ≡(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

↑↓

0 (cid:29) −(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

0

↑↓ (cid:29) .

86

(8.35)

Wave packets and eﬀective Hamiltonians in one dimension

Figure 8.5: Finite size scaling of the gap for SO(5) vector excitations in the two-leg
ladder. The gap quickly converges due to its inﬁnite system value.

In addition, there are ﬁve degenerate bosonic excited states that are obtained by
applying the components of the vector operator B to the ground state,

↑

0

(cid:12)(cid:12) A+(cid:11) = (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
(cid:12)(cid:12) ∆+(cid:11) = (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
(cid:12)(cid:12) ∆−(cid:11) = (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

↑↓

↑ (cid:29) × 3,
↑↓ (cid:29) , and
0 (cid:29) ,

(8.36)

(8.37)

where (cid:12)(cid:12) Ai(cid:11) = ˆAi | 0(cid:105) etc. Finally, there are eight equivalent single fermion excita-

tions. The energies of these two types of excitations are are very close to each other.
In units of the WW basis coupling, they are given by

Efermion =

15
4
Eboson = 4.

(8.38)

This situation is quite diﬀerent from the behavior of the single chains, where the
bosonic (spin or pair) excitations are in the degenerate ground state manifold of the
local Hamiltonian, and thus far below the single particle spectrum. In the ladder
case, the bosonic and fermionic excitations are almost degenerate locally, and in fact
the bosonic excitations lie slightly above the fermionic ones.

Results

Since the ground state is non-degenerate, we may expect it to be of the RVB form
[17, 20], with strong but short ranged d-wave pairing and AF correlations. In order to
check the robustness of these ﬁndings with respect to non-local perturbations, we use

87

456789100.00.51.01.52.02.53.0Lpairgap8.6 Conclusions

the CORE algorithm [36] to integrate out the fermionic degrees of freedom. A short
description of this algorithm can be found in App. D. The resulting bosonic model is
then diagonalized on a cluster. Results of ﬁnite size scaling of the bosonic gap and
the inferred value at inﬁnite size are shown in Fig. 8.5. The gap remains practically
unchanged, and we conclude that the system is in a RVB state, in agreement with
the exact solution [53].
In addition to the results at half-ﬁlling, we can infer the behavior when the system is
doped away from half-ﬁlling. From the spectrum of the local Hamiltonian it follows
directly that doped holes (or electrons) are bound into pairs, since the pair binding
energy is of the same order as the single particle gap. As soon as hole pairs are
introduced, the ground state of the system is degenerate, and a low-energy model
is obtained by projecting the Hamiltonian onto the degenerate ground state. This
leads to a hardcore boson problem at small ﬁlling, with the number of bosons (i.e.
hole pairs) equal to δ/2, where δ denotes the doping level. We conclude that the
system turns into a superﬂuid with superﬂuid density ∝ δ.

8.6 Conclusions

In this section we have applied the simplest possible wave packet approximation to
a variety of one-dimensional systems. The approach consists of ﬁrst applying the
renormalization group to the microscopic model to ﬁnd possible ﬁxed points of the
ﬂow. The ﬁxed point Hamiltonians are then solved in the strong coupling limit for
the set of WW basis states that lie at the Fermi surface. Due to the fact that the
WW basis states always involve at least nearest neighbor interactions, the resulting
eﬀective Hamiltonians are non-trivial even when the kinetic energy is neglected.
A surprising amount of information about the nature of the ground state has been
shown to be present in the local interaction and the excitation spectrum of the local
problem in the WW basis. We have seen two radically diﬀerent cases: For the chain
problems, the ’order parameter’ decouples from the fermionic degrees of freedom lo-
cally, in the sense that the corresponding bosonic excitations are ungapped, whereas
fermions have a gap. This kind of behavior is very much in line with the assumptions
made in deriving eﬀective ﬁeld theories for slow order parameter ﬁelds that separate
from the gapped fermions. For the ladder case, on the other hand, we have seen
that fermions and ’order parameter’ excitations exist on the same energy scale, due
to strong short ranged singlet correlations, leading to an RVB state that has very
little in common with the paradigm of eﬀective theories for slow variables.
In the next chapter, we will apply a similar methodology to the two-dimensional
Hubbard model, where we will ﬁnd a similar behavior at the saddle points.
In closing this chapter, we would like to explain brieﬂy how the admittedly oversim-
pliﬁed approach presented here can be extended. Based on our ﬁndings of correla-
tions in mean-ﬁeld states in Ch. 6, it is clear that it is inconsistent to use the strong

88

Wave packets and eﬀective Hamiltonians in one dimension

coupling limit for states at the Fermi surface while neglecting states away from the
Fermi surface. The reason is that correlations of the neglected states are signiﬁcant
when the coupling at the Fermi points is strong. A straightforward extension of the
approach considered here is two include more WW momenta, so that the transition
from weak-coupling RG to strong-coupling wave packet approach becomes smoother.
However, in the presentation here we have chosen simplicity over numerical accuracy,
and leave this exploration for future work.

89

8.6 Conclusions

90

Chapter 9

Saddle point regime of the
two-dimensional Hubbard
model

9.1

Introduction

In this chapter we apply the methodology developed in the previous chapter to the
two-dimensional Hubbard model at moderate coupling. We focus on the so-called
saddle point regime, where the Fermi surface lies in the vicinity of the saddle points
(π, 0) and (0, π). As discussed in Ch. 3, earlier RG studies [58, 66] in this regime have
shown that both d-wave pairing (dSC) and antiferromagnetic (AF) correlations are
strong in this region of the phase diagram, and especially the exact diagonalization
study by L¨auchli et al. [12] points to the possibility that an insulating RVB is realized
in the vicinity of the saddle points, which would lead to a natural explanation for
the truncated Fermi surface of the cuprate superconductors [18, 20] that does not
rely on symmetry breaking. This type of scenario requires a ’phase separation in
the Brillouin zone’, in that electrons at the saddle points are localized on relatively
short length scales, whereas the electrons in the nodal directions are delocalized over
large distances.
In Ch. 6 we have seen that the corresponding separation of length scales naturally
appears even at the mean-ﬁeld level in the saddle point regime due to the vastly
diﬀerent Fermi velocities in the nodal and anti-nodal directions. Relatedly, we have
shown in Ch. 7 that in this situation RG ﬂows to strong coupling lead to a strongly
correlated problem at the saddle points, whereas the faster states in the nodal di-
rections behave almost like free particles at the same length scale (at moderate
coupling). As a consequence, the slow states decouple from the fast states, and may

91

9.2 The microscopic model and its renormalization group treatment

be bound into pairs at relatively small length scales more or less independently of
the what the fast states in the nodal direction do.
These ﬁndings in conjunction with the experimental phenomenology discussed in
Ch. 3 motivate us to apply the wave packet method to states in the vicinity of the
saddle points. Following the procedure we have already used for one-dimensional
systems, we ﬁrst compute an eﬀective Hamiltonian using the one-loop renormal-
ization group. Details of the implementation can be found in Sec. 9.2. In order to
monitor the ﬂow of correlations at the saddle points, we compute the WW transform
of the ﬂowing interaction vertex at each step, as discussed in Sec. 9.3. In partic-
ular, we compute the single particle gap from the local interactions, and stop the
ﬂow when the gap exceeds the bandwidth of the wave packet states at the saddle
points. The analysis of this local problem is dealt with in Sec. 9.4. We ﬁnd a striking
similarity between the local (in the WW basis) behavior of the saddle point states
and the low-energy problem for the two-leg ladder from Sec. 8.5. In particular, the
system has the same local ground state, and large gaps for all excitations when the
ﬂow approaches the strong coupling region. In order to assess the stability of the
local ground state to the non-local couplings, we diagonalize the eﬀective saddle
point Hamiltonian on a plaquette in Sec. 9.5. Depending on the parameters, we ﬁnd
cooperon- and spin triplet-modes emerging below the single particle continuum. In
order to overcome the limitations of small clusters, we compute an eﬀect model for
the d-wave pairs at the saddle points using the CORE algorithm [36] (see App. D),
and estimate the stability of the insulating RVB state against pair ﬂuctuations with
a variational ansatz in Sec. 9.6. In this section we also discuss the general structure
of the low energy states and relate it to the phenomenological SO(5) theory proposed
by Zhang [64].

9.2 The microscopic model and its renormalization

group treatment

Model

We investigate the two-dimensional Hubbard model on a square lattice with nearest
and next-to-nearest neighbor hopping. The Hamiltonian is given by

 (p) c†p,s cp +

U

2N (cid:88)p1···p4

H = (cid:88)p (cid:88)s
where ˆJ (p, p(cid:48)) =(cid:80)s c†p,s cp(cid:48),s. The kinetic energy part is given by
 (p) = −2t (cos px + cos py) + 4t(cid:48) cos px cos py − µ.

δ (p1 + p2 − p3 − p4) ˆJ (p1, p3) ˆJ (p2, p4) ,
(9.1)

(9.2)

92

Saddle point regime of the two-dimensional Hubbard model

Figure 9.1: Discretization of the ﬂowing vertex. The vertex is computed on a discrete
set of points that lie on a lattice with lattice constant 2π/16 in the Brillouin zone
(green dots). The shaded area contains all states with energy | (p)| < 0.1t for
t(cid:48)
= 0.2t. WW phase space cells for M = 4 are also shown. The size of the π/M
of the cells is adjusted to the saddle point regions such that the cells around each
saddle point (marked in red) contain approximately all low energy states there. The
states that are kept in the saddle point truncation are marked red.

We focus on the case that the Fermi surface touches the saddle points, which ﬁxes
µ = −4t(cid:48). The interaction part describes onsite repulsion of strength U .

Renormalization group

The setup of the RG in this chapter is diﬀerent from the one in Ch. 2. Based on the
ﬁndings of Ch. 7, we prefer to use the Hamiltonian ﬂow equations (or continuous
unitary transformations [54–56]) that are derived in App. C. The main reason is
that it is unclear in the usual RG approach [10] how the transformation to the WW
basis is to be performed when the cutoﬀ cuts through a phase space cell. We recall,
however, that the Hamiltonian ﬂow equations are essentially the same as the RG
equations when both are performed in the leading one-loop approximation as shown
in App. C.
Moreover, we use a diﬀerent discretization of the ﬂowing vertex. This is connected
to our aim to use the WW basis states in order to treat the low-energy problem.
As discussed in Sec. 5.4, this is facilitated when the interaction vertex is known on

93

pxpy(cid:45)Π0Π(cid:45)Π0Π9.3 Eﬀective Hamiltonian for the saddle points

a discrete set of p-points that lie on a square lattice. The lattice spacing (in the
Brillouin zone) should be ∆p = π/(nM ) = K/n for some integer n in order to be
able to transform the interaction to the WW basis using the formulas from Sec. 5.4.
Since such a discretized Brillouin zone corresponds to a lattice of linear extension
N = 2nM , the analytical window function for N/M = 2n (cf. Sec. 4.1.3) can be
used in order to transform the discretized interaction numerically. In practice, we
use M = 4 and N = 4M = 16 throughout, so that the vertex is computed for 256
diﬀerent momenta in total. The discretization is shown in Fig. 9.1.
The restriction to M = 4 has diﬀerent reasons. First, this value corresponds to
a strong coupling scale Λ ≈ 0.1t, which is in the range where the unconventional
RG ﬂows have been observed in earlier studies [58].
In addition, we think it is
advantageous to use a relatively large value for the minimum energy scale Λ at which
the RG ﬂow is stopped, since for small values the results depend very strongly on
the precise shape of the Fermi surface, whereas we are more interested in the eﬀect
of short-ranged correlations which build up at higher energies and are therefore
relatively insensitive to the detailed geometry of the Fermi surface.
Fixing M implies that we do not use a ﬁxed value for U . Instead, we adjust the value
of U such that the ﬂow goes to strong coupling at Λ ≈ 0.1t. We estimate the onset of
the strong coupling regime by computing the local fermion gap at the saddle points
in the WW basis (see Sec. 9.4), and stop the ﬂow when the gap exceeds the band
width of the states there. All calculations are done at zero temperature. Since U is
ﬁxed, the only parameter that is varied is t(cid:48). We consider the cases t(cid:48)/t = 0.1, 0.2
and 0.3 in the following. The corresponding values of U are U = 2.5, 3, and 3.7
respectively.
The ﬂows are very similar to the ones reported in earlier works [58], with the dom-
inant correlations in the dSC and AF channels. The AF channel is dominant for
small t(cid:48), but the dSC channel becomes increasingly important for larger t(cid:48). Since
the general behavior of the RG ﬂows in this regime has been dealt with extensively
in the literature [2–4, 7], we focus on the analysis of the saddle point states in the
following.

9.3 Eﬀective Hamiltonian for the saddle points

In the following we restrict the WW basis to the states right at the saddle points
(0, π) and (π, 0). Accordingly, we restrict the WW momentum coordinates k to the
two vectors k(1) = (M, 0) and k(2) = (0, M ).

Interaction Hamiltonian in momentum space

Since we focus on the region around the saddle points in the following, only a fraction
of the renormalized couplings is needed. It is useful to parametrize the couplings
that act on states in the vicinity of the saddle point such that short- and long-range

94

Saddle point regime of the two-dimensional Hubbard model

behavior are separated. This is achieved by shifting p → Kk(a), where a = 1, 2
labels the saddle points. Since all momentum space sums are eﬀectively restricted to
a square with side length 2π/M around the saddle points, there is no risk of double
counting.
We introduce the operators

Jab (p1, p2) ≡ (cid:88)s

c†
Kk(a)+p1,s cKk(b)+p2,s

= ˆJ(cid:16)Kk(a) + p1, Kk(b) + p2(cid:17) .

(9.3)

In terms of the Jab (p, p(cid:48)), the part of the ﬂowing interaction ˜U (p1, p2, p3) that acts
on states in the vicinity of the saddle points can be expanded as

1

Hint =

δ (p1 + p2 − p3 − p4)

N (cid:88)p1···p4
× (cid:110)˜u1 (p1, p2, p3) J12 (p1, p3) J21 (p2, p4)

+ ˜u2 (p1, p2, p3) J11 (p1, p3) J22 (p2, p4)

+

+

˜u3
2
˜u4
2

(p1, p2, p3) [J21 (p1, p3) J21 (p2, p4) + J12 (p1, p3) J12 (p2, p4)]

(p1, p2, p3) [J11 (p1, p3) J11 (p2, p4) + J22 (p1, p3) J22 (p2, p4)](cid:111),

(9.4)

where all momentum sums are restricted to −π/M < pi < π/M for some M that
depends on the renormalization scale as discussed above. The spatial dependence
of the interaction for scales less than M is contained in the average values of the
˜ui (p1, p2, p3), whereas the dependence on scales greater than M is given by the p
dependence of each ˜ui. In accordance with the usual RG scaling arguments [26], we
ﬁnd numerically that the p-dependence of the interactions is always small compared
to the a-dependence, so that the eﬀective interactions are short ranged for length
scales larger than the renormalization scale.

Eﬀective Hamiltonian in the Wilson-Wannier basis

Summarizing the results established above, we arrive at a model on a square lattice
with lattice constant 2M . There are two orbitals per site, labelled by the orbital
index a = 1, 2. The hopping Hamiltonian connects nearest neighbors only, and is de-
termined by the two hopping terms t and t(cid:48) of the original Hamiltonian. Interactions
are local, and there are four coupling constants u1, . . . , u4 that are related directly
to the corresponding coupling constants in the two-patch model from Sec. 8.2. All
couplings scale like M−2, so that it makes sense pull this factor out to arrive at an

95

9.4 The local problem

M -independent Hamiltonian. The Hamiltonian is given by

(M )2 Heﬀ = Hhop + Hint
= − (cid:88)m,m(cid:48)(cid:88)σ
+(cid:88)m (cid:104)u1 J 12
2 (cid:0)J 12

m J 12

u3

+

m =(cid:80)σ γ†maσ γmbσ.

where J ab

m,m(cid:48) γ†maσ γm(cid:48)aσ
T ab

m J 21

m + u2 J 11

m J 22
m

m + J 21

m J 21

m J 11

m + J 22

m J 22

m(cid:1) +

u4

2 (cid:0)J 11

(9.5)

m(cid:1)(cid:105),

9.4 The local problem

Local Hilbert space

The unperturbed Hamiltonian Hint is local, so that we begin the investigation with
the local physics. The local Hamiltonian has a non-degenerate ground state for all
values of the couplings ui considered here. The local ground state is given by

with energy

| 0(cid:105)loc =

1

√2(cid:18)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

↑↓

0 (cid:29) −(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

0

↑↓ (cid:29)(cid:19) ,

E0 = u1 − u3 + 2u4.

(9.6)

(9.7)

There are eight degenerate single particle excitations with energy Ep per site, corre-
sponding to all combinations of the three quantum numbers orbital, spin, and charge
(particle or hole). Furthermore, there are six bosonic excitations with relatively low
energy, corresponding to the three order parameters for antiferromagnetism (three

states, labelled by (cid:12)(cid:12) Ai(cid:11)), d-wave superconductivity (two states | ∆±(cid:105)) and dCDW

(one state | φ(cid:105)). The states are
↑

↓

↓ (cid:29)(cid:27)

↓

↑ (cid:29)(cid:19) , (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

1

↑

√2(cid:18)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
↓ (cid:29) +(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
(cid:12)(cid:12) Ai(cid:11) = (cid:26)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
↑ (cid:29) ,
(cid:12)(cid:12) ∆±(cid:11) = (cid:26)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
↑↓ (cid:29) , (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
0 (cid:29)(cid:27) ,
√2(cid:18)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
↓ (cid:29) −(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
↑ (cid:29)(cid:19) .

| φ(cid:105) =

↑↓

↑

↓

0

1

The remaining state is given by an s-wave pair on a WW site, and is always highest
in energy. The energies of the fermionic and bosonic excited states (relative to the

(9.8)

96

Saddle point regime of the two-dimensional Hubbard model

groundstate) are

u1 + u4

2

Ef = −
+ u2 + u3
EA = −u1 + u2 + u3 − u4
E∆ = −u1 + 2u2 + u3
Eφ = u1 + u2 + u3 − u4.

(9.9)

At the beginning of the ﬂow we have ui ∝ U , so that the excitation energy of the

triplet states(cid:12)(cid:12) Ai(cid:11) vanishes exactly. This can be understood by performing a linear
transformation on the two states | 1(cid:105) =(cid:12)(cid:12) k(1)(cid:11) and | 2(cid:105) =(cid:12)(cid:12) k(2)(cid:11) (at ﬁxed m), such

that

| a(cid:105) =

| b(cid:105) =

1
√2
1
√2

(| 1(cid:105) + | 2(cid:105))

(| 1(cid:105) − | 2(cid:105)) .

(9.10)

In terms of the new states, the Hubbard interaction is a local repulsive interaction
for a two-orbital model, so that locally the two orbitals are decoupled, and the
ground state degeneracy is two per orbital. All other excitations have gaps of order
U (corresponding to about U/4M 2 in the original units). The following section
discusses how this picture changes when renormalization is taken into account.

Inﬂuence of renormalization on the local problem

In this section, we use the RG method discussed in Sec. 9.2 together with the anal-
ysis of the local spectrum above to investigate the inﬂuence of the renormalization
group ﬂow on the saddle point states. Instead of monitoring the ﬂowing couplings
u1, . . . , u4, we use (9.9) and follow the ﬂowing local energy gaps. Results for U = 3.7t,
t(cid:48) = 0.3t are shown in ﬁg. 9.2. Initially, the excitation energies for charge and (AF)
spin excitations are separated: The spin excitation energy vanishes for the initial in-
teraction, whereas the pair and dCDW energies are exactly twice the single particle
energy U . However, in the course of the RG ﬂow a spin gap starts to build up. At
the end of the ﬂow at Λ ≈ 0.1t, the spin gap is comparable to the single particle gap.
The energy of the dCDW excitations remains comparable to the energy to excite a
d-wave pair, but the pair excitations are slightly lowered when t(cid:48) is increased. For
t(cid:48) = 0.3t, the spin excitations are pushed up in energy, so that they lie above the
single particle excitations and their energy is comparable to that of a pair excitation.
The local behavior for t(cid:48) = 0.3t is similar to the strong coupling ﬁxed point of the
RG for the two-patch model [65] with particle-hole symmetry, which displays an
emergent O(6) symmetry. In this case, all three bosonic excitations are degenerate.
However, the symmetry is realized only locally in the case at hand. Particle-hole
symmetry violating terms show up in the non-local part of the Hamiltonian, in par-
ticular in the hopping term. In order to obtain a more complete picture of the local

97

9.4 The local problem

(a) t(cid:48)/t = 0.1

(b) t(cid:48)/t = 0.2

(c) t(cid:48)/t = 0.3

Figure 9.2: Flow of the excitation energies of the lowest excitations of the saddle
point states for t(cid:48)/t = 0.1, 0.2, 0.3. Energies of single particle excitations (Ep),
antiferromagnetic spin excitations (EA), d-wave pair excitations (E∆), and d-wave
charge density excitations (Eφ) are shown as functions of the logarithm of the RG
scale Λ.

98

(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:45)2(cid:45)10120.00.20.40.60.81.01.2Logt(cid:76)EWSP(cid:242)EΦ(cid:236)E(cid:68)(cid:224)EA(cid:230)Ep(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:45)2(cid:45)10120.00.20.40.60.81.01.2Logt(cid:76)EWSP(cid:242)EΦ(cid:236)E(cid:68)(cid:224)EA(cid:230)Ep(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:45)2(cid:45)10120.00.20.40.60.81.01.2Logt(cid:76)EWSP(cid:242)EΦ(cid:236)E(cid:68)(cid:224)EA(cid:230)EpSaddle point regime of the two-dimensional Hubbard model

physics of the eﬀective saddle point Hamiltonian we turn to the diagonalization of a
plaquette in the next section.

9.5 Diagonalization of small clusters

In order to better estimate the interplay between kinetic energy and interaction at
low energy scales, we diagonalize the eﬀective Hamiltonian on a 2× 2 plaquette. We
also take into account the non-local part of the interaction. The non-local interac-
tions are generally an order of magnitude smaller than their local counterparts, so
that their overall eﬀect is not large, but still noticeable. The main eﬀect is to push
pair- and spin-excitations down in energy with respect to single particle and dCDW
excitations. We use periodic boundary conditions, so that bandwidth of the hopping
operator is the same as for an inﬁnite size system. The eﬀect of renormalization
on the saddle point degrees of freedom is discussed in the same way as before, by
evaluating all quantities at diﬀerent stages of the ﬂow, characterized by the ﬂow
parameter Λ.
We compute three diﬀerent kinds of observables: First, the excitation energies for
the four types of interactions discussed above in Sec. 9.4. The ﬂow of the excitation
energies is shown in Fig. 9.3. Compared to the local Hamiltonian above, we note
that the dCDW excitations are raised in energy compared to the other excitations
in the later stages of the ﬂow. For the other bosonic excitations, we ﬁnd that there
is a crossover controlled by t(cid:48). For t(cid:48) = 0.1t, the AF spin excitations are lowest in
energy, and are lowered in energy compared to the local Hamiltonian, so that they lie
signiﬁcantly below the single particle excitations. For t(cid:48) = 0.3t, on the other hand,
the pair excitations have the lowest energy. At t(cid:48) = 0.2t, pair and spin excitations
are approximately degenerate, and are both comparable to the single particle energy.
Note that for all parameter values the bosonic excitations retain a large gap that is
of the order of the fermion gap on the plaquette. However, it is clear that the system
is very small, so that ﬁnite size eﬀects are expected to be large. In order to gain a
better understanding of the model, we now turn to the ground state properties of
the plaquette Hamiltonian.
The saddle point Hamiltonian consists of a local part, with a non-degenerate local
ground state, and the non-local terms, which are dominated by the kinetic energy.
The ground state of the kinetic energy is the half-ﬁlled Fermi sea.
In order to
characterize the behavior of the saddle point system, we compute the weight of two
trial ground states in the plaquette ground state. The ﬁrst state is the uncorrelated
Fermi sea state

γ†pσ | vac(cid:105) ,

(9.11)

where here the momenta p refer to the Fourier transform with respect to m, and
Ep is the single particle energy associated to the WW hopping operator T ab
mm(cid:48). The

| FS(cid:105) =

Ep<0(cid:89)|p (cid:89)σ

99

9.5 Diagonalization of small clusters

Figure 9.3: Excitation energies for single particles (Ep), AF spin excitations (EA),
pairs (E∆), and dCDW excitations (Eφ) on a plaquette. The WW transform of the
ﬂowing RG interactions is used as discussed in Sec. 9.3.

100

(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:45)2(cid:45)10120.00.20.40.60.81.01.2Logt(cid:76)EWSP(cid:242)EΦ(cid:236)E(cid:68)(cid:224)EA(cid:230)Ep(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:45)2(cid:45)10120.00.20.40.60.81.01.2Logt(cid:76)EWSP(cid:242)EΦ(cid:236)E(cid:68)(cid:224)EA(cid:230)Ep(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:236)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:242)(cid:45)2(cid:45)10120.00.20.40.60.81.01.2Logt(cid:76)EWSP(cid:242)EΦ(cid:236)E(cid:68)(cid:224)EA(cid:230)EpSaddle point regime of the two-dimensional Hubbard model

second state is the tensor product of the local ground state | 0(cid:105)loc, deﬁned in Eq. (9.6):
(9.12)

| ISL(cid:105) =(cid:89)m

| 0(cid:105)loc,m

The label ISL is shorthand for insulating spin liquid, because the state is compatible
with a charge gap and has short ranged spin correlation only. The weight of the two
states in the Λ-dependent plaquette ground state is shown in Fig. 9.4. In all three
cases (t(cid:48)/t = 0.1, 0.2, 0.3) there is a crossover during the RG ﬂow. Initially, the FS
state is always a better approximation to the plaquette ground state than the ISL
state. Due to the renormalization of interactions, this situation is reversed in the
later stages of the ﬂow. As an interesting feature, we ﬁnd that the weight of the ISL
state at the end of the ﬂow is maximal for t(cid:48) = 0.2t, which, by comparison with Fig.
9.3, marks the transition between an AF and a SC dominated regime. In all three
cases we ﬁnd that the excitation energy of AF and pair excitations is comparable
to or lower than the single particle gap. This motivates a mapping to a bosonic
low-energy model, which is the subject of the next section.

9.6 Eﬀective quantum rotor model

The form of the excitation spectrum of the saddle point model on a plaquette suggests
to reduce the model to an eﬀective bosonic model, with either d-wave pairs, AF
triplet excitations, or both as degrees of freedom. The mapping is performed using
the contractor renormalization (CORE) [36] algorithm to reduce the local Hilbert
space appropriately.
We ﬁrst revisit the local Hilbert space and show that the low-energy part of the local
Hilbert space is the same as that for a truncated O(N ) quantum rotor. The value
of N depends on the degrees of freedom that are kept, and is given by N = 2 when
only pairs are kept, N = 3 for triplet excitations only, and N = 5 when both are
included. Note that the eﬀective Hamiltonian is O(N ) symmetric for the case N = 3
only, where the symmetry is the usual spin rotation invariance.
Afterwards we brieﬂy discuss the CORE algorithm, and point out some problems
we have encountered connected to the fact that the gaps of bosonic excitations are
large. Finally, we introduce a variational coherent state for the eﬀective model in
order to overcome the limitations of small clusters.

The quantum rotor subspace of the local Hilbert space

In order to elucidate the structure of the low-energy local Hilbert space, we discuss
its properties and show that it has the same structure as a truncated quantum rotor.
The local Hilbert space is 16-dimensional, and has already been discussed in Sec. 9.4.
We keep the local ground state | 0(cid:105), and the pair and/or spin excitations | ∆±(cid:105) and

101

9.6 Eﬀective quantum rotor model

Figure 9.4: Weight of the two trial ground states | FS(cid:105) and | ISL(cid:105) in the ground
state of the saddle point model on a plaquette for diﬀerent values of Λ, and t(cid:48)/t =
0.1, 0.2, 0.3.

102

(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:45)2(cid:45)10120.00.20.40.60.81.0Logt(cid:76)GSX2(cid:224)X(cid:61)FS(cid:230)X(cid:61)ISL(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:45)2(cid:45)10120.00.20.40.60.81.0Logt(cid:76)GSX2(cid:224)X(cid:61)FS(cid:230)X(cid:61)ISL(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:224)(cid:45)2(cid:45)10120.00.20.40.60.81.0Logt(cid:76)GSX2(cid:224)X(cid:61)FS(cid:230)X(cid:61)ISLSaddle point regime of the two-dimensional Hubbard model

(cid:12)(cid:12) Ai(cid:11), respectively. The excited states are obtained from the ground state by applying

pair- and AF-spin-operators:

where

∆± | 0(cid:105) = (cid:12)(cid:12) ∆±(cid:11)
Ai | 0(cid:105) = (cid:12)(cid:12) Ai(cid:11) ,
√2(cid:16)γ†1↑
∆− = (cid:2)∆+(cid:3)†
σσ(cid:48)(cid:16)γ†2σγ1σ(cid:48) + γ†1σγ2σ(cid:48)(cid:17) .

γ†1↓ − γ†2↑

γ†2↓(cid:17)

∆+ =

Ai =

1
2

σi

1

We also introduce the total charge and spin operators for a WW site, that locally
generate the corresponding O(2) (equivalently U(1)) and O(3) symmetries:

1

n =

2(cid:32)(cid:88)a (cid:88)σ
Si = (cid:88)a (cid:88)σ,σ(cid:48)

γ†aσ γaσ(cid:33) − 2

γ†aσ σi

σσ(cid:48) γaσ(cid:48).

(9.15)

Note that the charge operator has zero eigenvalue at half-ﬁlling, and that the charge
of a fermion is ±1/2 in this convention. Then it is straightforward to verify the
commutation relations

(9.13)

(9.14)

(9.16)

(9.17)

(cid:2)n, ∆±(cid:3) = ±∆±
(cid:2)∆+, ∆−(cid:3) = n
(cid:2)Si, Aj(cid:3) = iijkAk
(cid:2)Ai, Aj(cid:3) = iijkSk.

πi =

i

2(cid:0)σyσi(cid:1)σσ(cid:48) γ1σ γ2σ,

The ﬁrst and third line are identical to the deﬁning commutation relations of the O(2)
and O(3) quantum rotors, respectively [46]. The second and fourth line originate
in the fact that the Hilbert space is ﬁnite, as opposed to the inﬁnite Hilbert space
of the quantum rotor. When both pairs and AF triplets are kept, the symmetry
generators (9.15) can be augmented by the so-called π-generators

and their hermitian conjugates. These operators transform ∆± into Ai and vice
versa. In conjunction with the spin and charge operators, they generate the O(5)
algebra [64].
The local ground state | 0(cid:105) is annihilated by all the generators, and is thus a singlet

under O(5) and its O(2) and O(3) subgroups, the ﬁve states | ∆±(cid:105) and(cid:12)(cid:12) Ai(cid:11) transform

103

9.6 Eﬀective quantum rotor model

under the vector representation of O(5). Hence the bosonic state may be viewed as
the ﬁrst two levels of a quantum rotor system with the appropriate dimensionality
(2,3, or 5). We stress, however, that the Hamiltonian is not O(5) symmetric, and
that the rotor model is only a convenient way to organize the low-energy sector of the
local Hilbert space. The Hamiltonian is always O(3) symmetric. The O(2) charge
symmetry holds when it is particle-hole symmetric, which can only be the case when
t(cid:48) = 0.

Contractor Renormalization

The CORE method is a real space renormalization scheme for lattice systems. It
consists of two steps: First, one truncates the local Hilbert space to a subset of states
that are the most relevant for the low energy behavior. The eﬀective Hamiltonian for
these local degrees of freedom is then found by diagonalization of small clusters using
the linked cluster theorem, essentially by projecting low energy cluster states to the
reduced Hilbert space followed by orthogonalization. Contributions from clusters
with n sites lead to n-site interactions in the eﬀective model. n is called the range of
an interaction. When the reduction is good, the importance of interactions decays
with their range. For a detailed discussion, we refer to [36] and to App. D. In the
following, we keep interactions up to range 3.
Since the CORE algorithm is based on an application of the linked cluster theorem
and it is controlled only when the renormalization due to high energy states is short
ranged. For this reason, we apply it only to the Hamiltonian obtained at the end
of the ﬂow, where the weight of the RVB state in the ground state of the plaquette
system is large, cf. Fig. 9.4.
We have encountered problems when applying the method to the spin excitations.
The main reason is that the bosonic excitations are not well separated from the
fermionic excitations, due to the insulating spin liquid nature of the local ground
state.
In a nutshell, the algorithm works by diagonalizing a small cluster, and
projecting low-lying eigenstates to the tensor product of local bosonic states. When
there are κ states in the local projected Hilbert space, then κ2 eigenstates have to
be projected for the simplest case of a two-site cluster. However, even when these
bosonic states are lower in energy locally than the fermions, the tensor product
state contains high-energy states as well. For example, there are nine possible states
with two spin excitations, with S = 0, 1, 2. The state with S = 0 has the same
quantum numbers as the ground state, a state with two fermion excitations that
form a singlet, or a state with two pair excitations of opposite charge. Hence there
are many possibilities which Eigenstate should be chosen, and the algorithm tends
to become unstable with respect to level crossings.
As a consequence, we limit ourselves to the case t(cid:48)/t = 0.3, and obtain an eﬀective
Hamiltonian for the pair states.

104

Saddle point regime of the two-dimensional Hubbard model

Variational ground state for d-wave pair excitations

The eﬀective quantum rotor Hamiltonian obtained from the CORE method is very
complicated, since it contains interactions involving up to three sites in the present
setup. Since our main interest here is to distinguish regimes with long range order
from quantum disordered states, we use a family of coherent states in order to
estimate the behavior of the eﬀective model on longer length scales.
For t(cid:48) = 0.3t, we reduce the model to the pair excitations (or O(2) rotor model). We
estimate the charge gap using the variational wave function

| θ(cid:105)m

| θ(cid:105) = (cid:89)m
| θ(cid:105)m = cos θ | 0(cid:105)m + sin θ(cid:12)(cid:12) ∆±(cid:11)m ,

(9.18)

(9.19)

where the sign of the charge carriers is selected according to the charge carrier type
with the lower gap. The wave function | θ(cid:105) is a coherent state wave function, the
local charge ﬂuctuations depend on θ. For θ = 0, there are no charge ﬂuctuations
at the mean-ﬁeld level, and the system is insulating. For ﬁnite θ, the system is
doped away from half-ﬁlling, and charges move freely. The charge gap is estimated
by introducing a chemical potential term into the Hamiltonian. Results are shown
in Fig. 9.5. For small values of µ, the system remains insulating. For large negative
(positive) values, hole (particle) pairs are doped into the system, and it becomes
superconducting, with a superﬂuid density that depends on the doping level. The
size of the insulating region yields an estimate of the charge gap. We ﬁnd that the
charge gap remains large within this approach. It is clear, however, that the nature
of the approximations made does not allow to make ﬁrm conclusions at present.

9.7 Conclusions

In summary, we have applied the wave packet approach to the saddle point regime of
the two-dimensional Hubbard model. Based on arguments developed in earlier chap-
ters, we have argued that a separation of length and energy scales takes place in this
regime, allowing the states at the saddle points to become localized independently
of the behavior of the nodal states, which extend over much larger length scales. We
have then used the WW basis states to isolate the region around the saddle points,
and have analyzed the ﬂow of the eﬀective saddle point Hamiltonian using exact
diagonalization and a mapping to an eﬀective bosonic model. We observed that the
local Hilbert space at the saddle points is identical to the two-leg ladder, Ch. 8.
Similarly, the local ground state is the same, even though the excitation spectrum
depends on the doping, displaying a crossover between AF dominated and dSC dom-
inated regimes as t(cid:48) (and therefore the doping) is increased. Correspondingly, the
non-degeneracy of the local ground state and the fact that it is compatible with AF

105

9.7 Conclusions

Figure 9.5: Phase diagram for the eﬀective pair model at t(cid:48)
= 0.3t. The energy
of the eﬀective Hamiltonian obtained from the CORE method is evaluated for the
variational coherent states 9.19. In order to estimate the size of the charge gap, we
add a chemical potential term to the Hamiltonian. The ﬁgure shows the optimized
value of the parameter θ as a function of the chemical potential µ. θ = 0 corresponds
to the insulating spin liquid (ISL) or RVB state. We ﬁnd that the charge gap remains
large for moderate values of µ. Only at values of µ ≈ ±WSP/4, pairs begin to be
doped into the system. Here WSP is the band width of the saddle point states.

and dSC ﬂuctuations make it very diﬃcult to perturb. Within all methods we found
that all excitations remain gapped in a ﬁnite range of chemical potentials.

106

Effective hardcore boson modelfor pair excitationsReduce local Hilbert space to U(1)-rotor subspaceCORE algorithm, Morningstar & Weinstein 96￿￿￿￿↑↓0￿−￿￿￿￿0↑↓￿￿￿￿￿00￿￿￿￿￿↑↓↑↓￿n=−1n=0n=1ˆn=12￿−2+￿aσγ†aσγaσ￿ˆ∆−=1√2(γ1↑γ1↓−γ2↑γ2↓)ˆ∆+=￿ˆ∆−￿†￿ˆn,ˆ∆±￿=±∆±H=￿mˆn2m−λ￿￿m,m￿￿￿∆+m∆−m￿+h.c.￿+...￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿ISLSCSC￿1.5￿1.0￿0.50.00.51.01.50.00.20.40.60.81.0Μ￿WSPΘ−0.50.50SCSCRVB/ISLThelocalgroundstate|0￿isannihilatedbyallthegenerators,andisthusasingletunderO(5)anditsO(2)andO(3)subgroups,theﬁvestates|∆±￿and|Ai￿transformunderthevectorrepresentationofO(5).Hencethebosonicstatemaybeviewedastheﬁrsttwolevelsofaquantumrotorsystemwiththeappropriatedimensionality(2,3,or5).Westress,however,thattheHamiltonianisnotO(5)symmetric,andthattherotormodelisonlyaconvenientwaytoorganizethelow-energysectorofthelocalHilbertspace.TheHamiltonianisalwaysO(3)symmetric.TheO(2)chargesymmetryholdswhenitisparticle-holesymmetric,whichcanonlybethecasewhent￿=0.Comment:writesomethingaboutcore5.3.2VariationalgroundstateTheeﬀectivequantumrotorHamiltonianobtainedfromtheCOREmethodisverycomplicated,sinceitcontainsinteractionsinvolvinguptofoursitesinthepresentsetup.Sinceourmaininteresthereistodistinguishregimeswithlongrangeorderfromquantumdisorderedstates,weuseafamilyofcoherentstatesinordertoestimatethebehavioroftheeﬀectivemodelonlongerlengthscales.Fort￿=0.3t,wereducethemodeltothepairexcitations(orO(2)rotormodel).Weestimatethechargegapusingthevariationalwavefunction|θ￿=￿m|θ￿m(46)|θ￿m=cosθ|0￿m+sinθ￿￿∆±￿m,(47)wherethesignofthechargecarriersisselectedaccordingtothechargecarriertypewiththelowergap.Thewavefunction|θ￿isacoherentstatewavefunction,thelocalchargeﬂuctuationsdependonθ.Forθ=0,therearenochargeﬂuctuationsatthemean-ﬁeldlevel,andthesystemisinsulating.Forﬁniteθ,thesystemisdopedawayfromhalf-ﬁlling,andchargesmovefreely.ThechargegapisestimatedbyintroducingachemicalpotentialtermintotheHamiltonian.ResultsareshowninFig.7.Forsmallvaluesofµ,thesystemremainsinsulating.Forlargenegative(positive)values,hole(particle)pairsaredopedintothesystem,anditbecomessuperconducting,withasuperﬂuiddensitythatdependsonthedopinglevel.Thesizeoftheinsulatingregionyieldsanestimateofthechargegap.23U(1) rotor operatorsLocal Hilbert spaceRenormalized HamiltonianVariational coherent statet￿=0.3tU=3.5tTuesday, October 4, 2011Chapter 10

Conclusions and outlook

10.1 Summary

The unifying theme of this work is the investigation of the competition and mu-
tual reinforcement of antiferromagnetism and superconductivity in one- and two-
dimensional interacting electron systems, motivated by the phenomenology of cuprate
superconductors. We have pursued a weak coupling approach, sacriﬁcing the pos-
sibility to treat strong coupling eﬀects, while gaining momentum space resolution.
Throughout, we have employed the renormalization group which treats all particle-
particle and particle-hole channels on an equal footing - a prerequisite for the study
of the mutual inﬂuence of diﬀerent possible instabilities.

Anisotropic scattering rates in the Hubbard model

We began our investigation with an experimentally motivated study of anisotropic
quasi-particle scattering rates in the two-dimensional Hubbard model with parame-
ters corresponding to the overdoped regime of Tl2Ba2CuO6+x. We found that the
strongly renormalized interactions lead to enhanced scattering for electrons in the
anti-nodal direction. In conjunction with the scale-dependence of the renormalized
vertex this was found to give rise to a highly anisotropic quasi-particle scattering
rate at the Fermi surface. Moreover, the anisotropic part, which was shown to be
peaked in the anti-nodal direction, was seen to have an almost linear temperature
dependence down to very low temperatures, in qualitative agreement with experi-
ment [1]. We traced this behavior back to the simultaneous growth of correlations
in the antiferromagnetic and d-wave superconducting channels in the vicinity of the
saddle points.
In fact, it has been known for a long time that the Hubbard model exhibits other
peculiar features in the so-called saddle point regime [58], where the Fermi surface
lies in the vicinity of the saddle points (but not necessarily at these points).
In

107

10.1 Summary

particular, the overlap between the antiferromagnetic and d-wave pairing channels
is large there, especially when the couplings are not too weak. The strong coupling
phase does not appear to lead to a simple ordered phase, but to an insulating spin
liquid phase with RVB correlations [12, 20].

The wave packet approach to the saddle point regime

In order to investigate this phase we set out to try to obtain a better grasp of
the low-energy physics in this regime in the remaining chapters. To this end, we
introduced a novel tool, the use of the Wilson-Wannier basis functions [41–44], for
the study of the strongly correlated low energy problem. The basis is generated from
wave packet states with a ﬁxed length scale M . It involves two coordinates, a coarse
grained momentum coordinate that describes the physics on scales less than M , and
a coarse grained real space coordinate, that describes scale larger than M .
The basic idea was based on the fact that a gap in the single particle spectrum
introduces a length scale into the problem that is given by the exponential decay of
spatial correlations. This led us to expect that the description simpliﬁes if a basis
is chosen that reﬂects this length scale, the fermions should ’disappear’ from the
physics at larger length scales, leaving only eﬀective degrees of freedom that can be
determined from an analysis of the Hamiltonian. At the same time, the dependence
on the wave packet momentum can be used to single out the low energy states close
to the Fermi surface, and to incorporate eﬀects of Fermi surface anisotropy.
Since the approach is new, we spent some time developing the necessary formal-
ism and useful approximation methods. These were used in order to highlight the
inﬂuence of the (coarse grained) geometry of the Brillouin zone on Fermi surface
instabilities. In particular, we have seen in Ch. 6 that a separation of length scales
between nodal and anti-nodal states occurs whenever the Fermi surface lies in the
vicinity of the saddle points. While it is well known that because of the van Hove
singularity the low energy phase space tends to concentrate around the saddle points
[59, 60], our approach allowed us to estimate the anisotropy of the strength of cor-
relations at a ﬁxed length scale. We found that generically the states at the saddle
points are much more correlated than the nodal states at the same length scale, so
that they eﬀectively decouple.
We proceeded by studying one-dimensional chains with quasi-long range order, and
the two-leg ladder at half-ﬁlling, which is known to exhibit a RVB-like insulating
spin liquid phase [53]. The main aim was to compare the results from the wave
packet approach to exact solutions, and we found good qualitative agreement in all
three cases despite of very simplistic approximations. We explained the agreement
in terms of the separation of scales between fermionic and bosonic excitations at the
length scale where the pairing occurs.
We used this separation of scales and computed and eﬀective Hamiltonian for the
anti-nodal states in isolation. We analyzed this Hamiltonian, and compared it to

108

Conclusions and outlook

the two-leg ladder system that was treated in a similar approximation. We found
that locally, the two models are very similar. Consequently, the states at the saddle
point appear to be prone to localize in a state with strong (but short ranged) singlet
correlations, resembling the RVB state of the ladder system with large gaps for all
excitations at the pairing scale, in agreement with earlier calculations based on exact
diagonalization [12].
We emphasize that all the results are only qualitative, and that the approxima-
tions made are quite drastic. Nevertheless, we think that the underlying physical
arguments based on the separation of length scales on the one hand and the non-
degeneracy of local ground states are sound. Clearly the WW basis breaks the
underlying translational invariance so that one might think that it overestimates
gap formation. While this is certainly true to some extent, the states involved can
localize because they are coupled by umklapp scattering. Moreover we have seen
that our approach does lead to quasi-long range order for one-dimensional chains,
where the order parameter modes separate from the fermionic degrees of freedom. It
is worth pointing out that it is not necessary for the Fermi surface to lie exactly at
the van Hove points, since we consider singlet-pair formation on rather short scales
(about 8 lattice constants), so that the pairs are too delocalized in momentum space
to resolve the exact position of the Fermi surface.
Finally, our results are compatible with other studies that start from the strong
In particular, exact diagonalization studies for the t − J-model
correlation limit.
[21] ﬁnd a cooperon mode with weight at the saddle point at ﬁnite energy for a
lightly doped system. This is consistent with our results which naturally lead to
such a mode. Similarly, recent cluster DMFT calculations indicate that strong short-
ranged singlet correlations can lead to the formation of a pseudogap in the anti-nodal
direction without long range ordering [63]. The authors attributed the opening of
the single fermion gap to strong single correlations, similar to our observation.
In summary, the wave packet approach to interacting fermions provides surprising
insights to complicated problems already in its simplest implementation. Its main
strength in our view is that it provides a relatively straightforward bridge between
eﬀective interactions and the geometry of the Brillouin zone on the one hand to
eﬀective models low energy physics on the other hand. However, the approach is
still in its infancy, and much more work is needed in order to assess its merits and
shortcomings.

10.2 Outlook

We see several possible extensions to this work. First and foremost, we think it would
be highly useful to improve on the approximations made in this thesis by using more
WW orbitals (recall that we have truncated the basis to only one or two states per
WW site). There is no problem of principle, and only the ﬁnite time horizon of this

109

10.2 Outlook

project has prevented us from pursuing this route so far.
From the point of view of ﬂexibility it would be interesting to see whether similar
constructions can be worked out for other lattice geometries, such as the honeycomb
lattice. Note that the WW basis is in essence a one-dimensional construct, so that
it can be used for all rectangular lattices directly, but not for lattices that are not
tensor products of the one-dimensional chain. We hope that our group theoretical
reformulation from Ch. 4 may be helpful for this problem.
The WW basis incorporates a single length scale, but many problems, such as the
pseudogap problem, exhibit multiple length scales. In this work we invoked the sep-
aration of length scales in order to treat the anti-nodal states in isolation. However,
it is clear that for a full account of the phenomenology the nodal states have to be
dealt with. We see two possible approaches: First, in the sprit of two-length-scale
expansions, one could use the eﬀective Hamiltonian for the d-wave pairs at anti-
nodal states and couple them to the nodal states. This is feasible since all couplings
are known. Since the translational invariance breaking strongly distorts the Fermi
surface, one might then take the continuum limit, eﬀectively setting the length scale
for the nodal states to inﬁnity. This leads to a model of mobile fermions coupled to
immobile pairs, similar to some phenomenological models [69].
On the other hand, one might try to develop a true multiscale approach, that can deal
with several length scales at once, for example by applying the WW transformation
for a second time to some of the WW orbitals of the ﬁrst transformation. However,
we can not judge at present the feasibility or usefulness of this idea.
Finally, the model developed so far exhibits several features which should be elabo-
rated from a phenomenological point of view: First, as the doping level is increased,
a transition in the charge sector arises at the nodal points (cf. Fig. 9.5, and the
hole pairs become mobile.
Intuitively, this transition may be linked to the rapid
rise of the superconducting dome at this point. Second, our model includes spin
excitations with wave vector around (π, π), which are expected to be coherent since
they lie below the particle-hole continuum at the saddle points. These might oﬀer
a natural explanation of the so-called hourglass that is observed at optimal doping
[70].
We are conﬁdent that more such extensions can be found, and that many routes are
open to extend the very modest ﬁrst steps presented in this work.

110

Appendix A

Construction of the window
function

A.1 Conditions on the window function

We derive the conditions that the window function g(j) has to satisfy to make the
Wilson basis orthonormal. The derivation closely follows the ones given in [43, 44].
The conditions on g(j) that make the ψmk(j) an orthogonal basis can be derived
from the conditions

ψmk(j1) ψmk(j2) = δj1,j2.

(A.1)

(cid:88)mk

We consider only the case of a real window function g(j), so that the ψmk(j) are
real, too. Condition (A.1) then amounts to demanding that the matrix ψmk,j with
rows given by ψmk(j) is an orthogonal matrix. This implies that the condition

of orthonormality, (cid:80)j ψm1k1 (j)ψm2k2 (j) = δm1m2 δk1k2, is automatically fulﬁlled

whenever (A.1) is satisﬁed.
We use the deﬁnition (4.9), and write ψmk(j) in terms of the window function g(j).

111

A.1 Conditions on the window function

Moreover, we split the sum over m into sums over even and odd m,

ψmk(j1) ψmk(j2) =

(cid:88)mk

Now we use

2 cos(cid:104) π

M

kj1 − φ(cid:105) cos(cid:104) π

M

and notice that

Hence we have

ψmk(j1) ψmk(j2) =

(cid:88)mk

2φk = πk mod 2π.

Then

cos(cid:104) π

M

k(j1 + j2) − 2φk+m(cid:105) = (−1)m cos(cid:104) π

+

M

M

+ 2

kj1 − φk(cid:105) cos(cid:104) π

L/2−1(cid:88)l=0
g(j1 − 2M l)g(j2 − 2M l)(cid:110)1 + (−1)j1+j2
kj2 − φk(cid:105)(cid:111)
cos(cid:104) π
M−1(cid:88)k=1
M/2−1(cid:88)l=0
M−1(cid:88)k=1

g(j − M (2l + 1)) g(j − M (2l + 1))

cos(cid:104) π
kj2 − φ(cid:105) = cos(cid:104) π

kj1 − φk+1(cid:105) cos(cid:104) π
k (j1 − j2)(cid:105) + cos(cid:104) π

kj2 − φk+1(cid:105)
k (j1 + j2) − 2φ(cid:105) ,

× 2

(A.2)

M

M

M

M

M

k (j1 + j2 − M )(cid:105) .
g(j1 − 2M l)g(j2 − 2M l)(cid:40)(cid:0)1 + (−1)j1+j2(cid:1)
L/2−1(cid:88)l=0
cos(cid:104) π
M−1(cid:88)k=1
L/2−1(cid:88)l=0
×(cid:40) M−1(cid:88)k=1(cid:16)cos(cid:104) π

k(j1 − j2)(cid:105) + cos(cid:104) π

k(j1 − j2)(cid:105) − cos(cid:104) π

g(j1 − M (2l + 1))g(j2 − M (2l + 1))

M

M

M

M

+

+

k(j1 + j2 − M )(cid:105)(cid:41)

k(j1 + j2 − M )(cid:105)(cid:17)(cid:41)

(A.3)

Because of the symmetry cos x = cos (−x) we can transform the domain of the sums
over k from {1, . . . , M − 1} to {−M + 1, . . . , M} as follows:

(cid:0)1 + (−1)j1+j2(cid:1) +
M(cid:88)k=−M +1

M−1(cid:88)k=1(cid:16) cos(cid:104) π
cos(cid:104) π

k(j1 − j2)(cid:105) +

k(j1 − j2)(cid:105) + cos(cid:104) π
cos(cid:104) π

M(cid:88)k=−M +1

k(j1 + j2 − M )(cid:105)(cid:17)
k(j1 + j2 − M )(cid:105)

1
2

1
2

M

M

M

M

=

(A.4)

112

for terms even in m and

Construction of the window function

M

M−1(cid:88)k=1(cid:16) cos(cid:104) π
cos(cid:104) π

k(j1 − j2)(cid:105) −

k(j1 − j2)(cid:105) − cos(cid:104) π
cos(cid:104) π

M(cid:88)k=−M +1

k(j1 + j2 − M )(cid:105)(cid:17)
k(j1 + j2 − M )(cid:105)

1
2

M

M

M

=

1
2

M(cid:88)k=−M +1

(A.5)

for the odd terms. Now the summation over k can be performed using the orthogo-
nality of exponential functions, yielding

1
2

M(cid:88)k=−M +1

cos(cid:20) 2π

2M

ka(cid:21) = M δ(2M )

a,0

,

(A.6)

where a is any integer and δ(2M )
expression is then

ij

is the Kronecker delta modulo 2M . The ﬁnal

ψmk(j1)ψmk(j2) = M

(cid:88)mk

L−1(cid:88)m=0
g(j1 − M m)g(j2 − M m) δ(2M )
L−1(cid:88)m=0

(−1)mg(j1 − M m)g(j2 − M m) δ(2M )

j1,j2

j1+j2,M .

+ M

(A.7)

Now we show that whenever g(j) = g(−j), the second line vanishes identically. We
set j2 = −j1 + M (2l + 1) (with 0 ≤ l < L/2) to satisfy the Kronecker delta. The
resulting expression is

L−1(cid:88)m=0

(−1)mg(j−M m)g(−j−M (m−2l−1)) =

L−1(cid:88)m=0

(−1)mg(j−M m)g(j−(2l+1−m)),

where we have used g(j) = g(−j). To see that this sum vanishes we introduce the
new summation variable ˜m = 2l + 1 − m. Under this transformation the product of
the window functions is invariant, but (−1)m = −(−1) ˜m, and hence the sum has to
vanish.
From (A.7) we then conclude that the conditions

g(j − M m)g(j − M (m + 2l)) =

1
M

δl,0

0 ≤ l < L/2

(A.8)

L−1(cid:88)m=0

guarantee orthonormality of the Wilson basis. These are the conditions stated above
in eq. (4.5). Since (A.8) depends on j mod M only, the number of independent
conditions is N/2.

113

A.2 Zak transformation

Figure A.1: Window functions in real space. a) shows the function g0(j) before the
application of the transformation (A.12), in b) the function g(j) that results from
the transformation is shown.

A.2 Zak transformation

To simplify these conditions it is convenient to introduce the so-called ﬁnite Zak
transform Zg(j, p) of g(j) [45]. From the deﬁnition

Zg(j, p) =

g(j + mM ) =

1
L

1
L

L−1(cid:88)m=0
L−1(cid:88)p=0

g(j + mM )e− 2πi

L pm

Zg(j, p)e

2πi

L pm,

(A.9)

where 0 ≤ j < L and 0 ≤ p < M , one can see that the Zak transform of a function
is very similar to the Bloch representation of wave functions in a periodic potential.
The lattice is split into unit cells of size M , and the degrees of freedom within
one unit cell are represented in real space, but the change from unit cell to unit
cell is Fourier transformed leading to the pseudo-momentum p. The Zak transform
simpliﬁes conditions (4.5) because they are in the form of a convolution with the sum
running over unit cells of size M . The convolution is turned into a multiplication,
and the conditions on Zg are

|Zg(j, p)|2 + |Zg(j, p + L/2)|2 = C(j),

(A.10)

114

(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)a(cid:45)400(cid:45)20002004000.000.050.100.150.200.25jgj(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)(cid:230)b(cid:45)400(cid:45)20002004000.000.050.100.150.200.25jgjConstruction of the window function

where C(j) is independent of p. C(j) is ﬁxed by the condition

|Z(j, p)|2 =

1
M

.

L−1(cid:88)p=0

(A.11)

As a practical consequence of this simple condition, one can use (almost) any initial
window function g0(j) as long as Zg0 (j, p) and Zg0(j, p + L/2) do not vanish simul-
taneously for some j. A window function g(j) that satisﬁes conditions (A.10) up to
a constant prefactor can then be obtained via

Zg(j, p) ∝

Zg0(j, p)

(cid:112)|Zg0(j, p)|2 + |Zg0(j, p + L/2)|2

The normalization is ﬁxed by demanding

g2(j) = 1

(cid:88)j

.

(A.12)

(A.13)

for the modiﬁed window function. For ﬁnite lattices this procedure is easily imple-
mented on a computer. A convenient choice of g(j) is a Gaussian centered around
j = 0 with width M , but the qualitative results do not depend on the exact choice
of g(j). In particular, one one can show that salient features like the exponential
decay are preserved [43]. To illustrate the preservation of rapid decay, we display
the eﬀect of the transformation (A.12) on a Gaussian initial window function in ﬁg.
A.1.

A.3 Conditions for band limited window functions

The orthogonality conditions (A.8) on the window function simplify when it is band

limited in the sense that the Fourier transform ˜g(p) = 1√N(cid:80)j g(j)e−ipj satisﬁes

(A.14)

˜g(p) = 0 for |p| ≥

π
M

.

In this case it is more useful to express (A.8) in momentum space. We ﬁrst express
g(j) in (A.8) in terms of ˜g(p), which leads to

˜g (p) ˜g (p(cid:48)) eij(p+p(cid:48))e−i2M lp

1

N (cid:88)p,p(cid:48)

e−iM m(p+p(cid:48)) =

1
M

δl,0.

(A.15)

L−1(cid:88)m=0

Now we take the Fourier transform of (A.8) with respect to j. The right hand side
becomes

δl,0 =

δq,0 δl,0.

(A.16)

1

N (cid:88)j

e−iqj 1
M

1
M

115

A.3 Conditions for band limited window functions

The left hand side becomes

1

N (cid:88)p,p(cid:48)

˜g (p) ˜g (p(cid:48)) e−i2M lp × 1
N (cid:88)j
(cid:124)

1

M (cid:88)p

˜g (p) ˜g(cid:18) 2π

M

=δp+p(cid:48),q

eij(p+p(cid:48)−q)
×(cid:34) L−1(cid:88)m=0
e−iM m(p+p(cid:48))(cid:35)
=L(cid:80)
(cid:125)
(cid:123)(cid:122)
(cid:124)
(cid:123)(cid:122)
(cid:125)
a − p(cid:19) e−i2M lp =

a δp+p(cid:48) , 2π

δa,0 δl,0,

1
M

M

a

.

(A.17)

(A.18)

The ﬁrst Kronecker delta can be used to eliminate via p(cid:48) = q−p, and using L = N/M
we arrive at

where we have used the Kronecker deltas to replace q by the integer a. From the
condition (A.14) that ˜g(p) is band limited it follows that

˜g (p) ˜g(cid:18) 2π

M

a − p(cid:19) = 0 for a (cid:54)= 0,

(A.19)

so that all conditions with a (cid:54)= 0 are identically satisﬁed, so that only the case a = 0
has to be taken into account. Hence the orthogonality conditions become

δl,0 = (cid:88)p
= (cid:88)p

˜g (p) ˜g (−p) e−i2M lp
|˜g(p)|2 e−i2M lp,

(A.20)

since ˜g(p) = ˜g(−p) by assumption. The exponential on the right hand side is periodic
in p with period π

M , so that we can write

where we have introduced the reduced Brillouin zone (rBZ) −π
(A.20) states that

M ≤ p < π

M . Hence

(cid:88)p

|˜g(p)|2 e−i2M lp = (cid:88)p∈rBZ
a(cid:17)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
(cid:88)a (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)˜g(cid:16)p +

π
M

e−i2M lp(cid:88)a (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)˜g(cid:16)p +

π
M

a(cid:17)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2

,

(A.21)

2

=

2M
N ∀ p ∈ rBZ.

(A.22)

The value of the constant on the right hand side is determined by the number of
points in the reduced Brillouin zone, which is N
2M . This can be further simpliﬁed
using the fact that ˜g(p) is band limited and symmetric. The band limitation implies
that only a = −1, 0, +1 contribute to the sum. Moreover, we must have ap < 0,
otherwise the term vanishes. By virtue of the symmetry of ˜g(p), it is clear that

˜g(cid:0)p − π

M(cid:1) = ˜g(cid:0)−p + π

we obtain the ﬁnal form of the orthogonality conditions:

M(cid:1), so that it is suﬃcient to consider the case p ≥ 0. Hence
|˜g (p)|2 +(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)˜g(cid:16) π

M − p(cid:17)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

for 0 ≤ p ≤

2M
N

(A.23)

π
M

116

=

2

.

Construction of the window function

Note that these conditions can be trivially satisﬁed by ﬁxing ˜g(p) to arbitrary values

less than(cid:112)2M/N for 0 < p < π/2M , and to use (A.23) to infer the absolute value of
˜g(p) for π/2M < p < π/M . Note that ˜g(0) =(cid:112)2M/N and ˜g (π/2M ) =(cid:112)M/N are

ﬁxed. When we choose ˜g(p) ≥ 0 everywhere, the window function is fully determined.

117

A.3 Conditions for band limited window functions

118

Appendix B

Window function gymnastics

This appendix summarizes some useful relations between window functions. In par-
ticular, it is shown how to replace the shifted window functions gmk(j) by their
unshifted counterparts. All relations follow from the fact that g(j) is symmetric
around the origin and real for all j, i.e.

g(j) ∈ R
g(j) = g(−j)

We recall the deﬁnition (cf. Eq. (4.1)) of the phase space shift of g(j):

gm,k(j) = ei π

M kj g (j − M m)

It follows directly that

gm,k(j)∗ = gm,−k(j),
where gm,k(j)∗ is the complex conjugate of gm,k(j).
For the Fourier transform ˜gm,k(p) we ﬁnd

(B.1)

(B.2)

(B.3)

(B.4)

(B.5)

˜gm,k(p) =

e−ipjgm,k(j)

1

√N (cid:88)j
√N (cid:88)j

1

=

e−i(p− π

M k)g (j − M m)
√N (cid:88)j
= (−1)mk e−iM mp 1
= (−1)mk e−iM mp˜g(cid:16)p −

k(cid:17) ,

π
M

e−i(p− π

M k)jg(j)

where we have used (B.3) in the second line, and shifted the summation variable
j → j + M m in the third line.

119

Now we note that the properties (B.1) and (B.2) imply that ˜g(p) is real, and that
˜g(p) = ˜g(−p). For the complex conjugate ˜gm,k(p)∗ of ˜gm,k(p) this leads to

˜gm,k(p)∗ = (−1)mk e+iM mp˜g(cid:16)p −
= (−1)mk e+iM mp˜g(cid:16)−p +

π
M

k(cid:17)
k(cid:17)

π
M

= ˜gm,−k(−p),

(B.6)

where we have used (B.5) in the ﬁrst line and ˜g(p) = ˜g(−p) in the second line.
The replacement of ˜gmk(p) by ˜g(p), Eq. (B.5) can be used in order to simplify sums
involving the shifted window function. Let f (p) be an arbitrary function of the
momentum, then

(cid:88)p

f (p)˜gmk(p) = (−1)mk(cid:88)p

f (p)e−iM mp˜g(cid:16)p −
f(cid:16)p +
k(cid:17) e−iM mp˜g (p) ,

π
M

= (−1)mk eiπM mk (cid:88)p
= (cid:88)p

f(cid:16)p +

π
M

π
M

k(cid:17)
k(cid:17) e−iM mp˜g (p)

(B.7)

where we have used (B.5) in the ﬁrst line, and shifted p → p + π
line.
Finally, it is worth mentioning that the phase space shift (B.3) could also be deﬁned
as

M k in the second

gm,k(j) = ei π

M k(j−M m) g (j − M m) .

(B.8)

Both deﬁnitions can be used, since the diﬀerence amounts to a gauge transformation

| m, k(cid:105) → (−1)mk | m, k(cid:105) .

(B.9)

With the alternative deﬁnition (B.8), the factor (−1)mk shows up in the real space
representation of the shifted window function instead of the momentum space form,
i.e.

gm,k(j) = (−1)mk ei π
˜gm,k(p) = e−iM mp˜g(cid:16)p −

π
M

k(cid:17) .

M kjg (j − M m) ,

(B.10)

In this work, we will stick to the deﬁnition (B.3), however, since it is more convenient
for practial calculations.

120

Appendix C

One loop RG equations from
Wegner’s ﬂow equation

We derive equations that are structurally similar to the one loop RG equations from
Wegner’s ﬂow equation [54], also known as continuous unitary transformation (CUT,
[55, 56]).
In this method, a sequence of inﬁnitesimal canonical transformations
is applied to partially diagonalize the Hamiltonian. Since each transformation is
inﬁnitesimal, it can be approximated by linearizing in its generator η:

eηHe−η = [η,H] + . . .

(C.1)

Introducing a parameter ﬂow parameter B, the ﬂow equation for the Hamiltonian is
given by

d
dBH(B) = [η(B),H(B)] .
One can show [54] that the so-called canonical generator

(C.2)

(C.3)

η(B) = [Hkin(B),Hint(B)]

leads to a Hamiltonian that commutes with the kinetic energy in the limit B → ∞.
In general, single particle states with a kinetic energy diﬀerence ∆Ekin start to
decouple at B ∼ (∆Ekin)−2. In particular, states with a kinetic energy greater than
B−1/2 decouple from the states at the Fermi surface. From the low energy point
of view, the method is thus similar to the usual renormalization group approach of
integrating out states [26] that are far away from the Fermi surface, with the RG
scale Λ ∼ B−1/2. However, it should be noted that no modes are integrated out,
and thus the full information about the Hamiltonian and its spectrum is conserved
in the ﬂow equation approach. Moreover, whereas in the renormalization group an
eﬀective action is obtained, the ﬂow equation yields an eﬀective Hamiltonian, which
is more suitable for our purposes.

121

In order to solve eq. (C.2), approximations are necessary, since inﬁnitely many opera-
tors are generated during the ﬂow. We follow the usual practice of making an ansatz
for the ﬂowing Hamiltonian H(B), and thus truncating the number of operators.
More speciﬁcally, we use the ansatz

H(B) = (cid:88)p

p : J(p, p) :

+

1

2N (cid:88)p1···p4

c†p1σ cp2σ,

J (p1, p2) = (cid:88)σ

Up1p2p3 (B) δp1+p2,p3+p4 : J (p1, p3) J (p2, p4) :,

where : O : denotes normal ordering of the operator O with respect to the Fermi sea.
We omit the ﬂow of the kinetic energy in the following, so that only the couplings
Up1p2p3 (B) depend on B. From (C.3), the canonical generator is then given by

η (B) =

Up1p2p3 (B) Dp1p2p3 δp1+p2,p3+p4 : J (p1, p3) J (p2, p4) :,

1

2N (cid:88)p1···p4

Dp1p2p3 = p3 + p4 − p2 − p1.

Plugging this into the ﬂow equation (C.2), we see that there are two diﬀerent con-
tributions:

d
dBH(B) = [η(B),Hkin]

+ [η(B),Hint(B)]

(cid:124)

O(U )

(cid:123)(cid:122)

(cid:125)

(cid:124)

O(U 2)

(cid:123)(cid:122)

(cid:125)

.

(C.6)

The ﬁrst term gives rise to a set of linear diﬀerential equations for the couplings
Up1p2p3(B), whereas the second term incorporates perturbative renormalization ef-
fects. We will ﬁrst investigate the ﬂow equation to O(U ). With the generator given
by (C.5) we obtain

(C.4)

(C.5)

(C.7)

d

dBH(B) = [η(B),Hkin] + O(cid:0)U 2(cid:1)

= −

1

2N (cid:88)p1···p4

δp1+p2,p3+p4 D2

p1p2p3Up1p2p3 (B) : J (p1, p3) J (p2, p4) :

Comparing the coeﬃcients of the operators :J (p1, p3) J (p2, p4): on both sides, we
obtain an equation for the couplings Up1p2p3 (B):

d
dB

which is solved by

Up1p2p3 (B) = −D2

p1p2p3Up1p2p3(B) + O(cid:0)U 2(cid:1) ,

Up1p2p3 (B) = Up1p2p3(0) e−D2

p1p2p3

B.

(C.8)

(C.9)

From the solution one sees that interaction matrix elements that couple states with
energy diﬀerence larger than B−1/2 are suppressed exponentially, as announced

122

One loop RG equations from Wegner’s ﬂow equation

Figure C.1: One loop diagrams contributing to the renormalized vertex (Figure
from [25])

above. In order to include the renormalization eﬀects, the second order equation
has to be solved. In order to satisfy the ﬁrst order equation automatically, it makes
sense to write

B Fp1p2p3 (B),

(C.10)

Up1p2p3(B) = e−D2

p1 p2 p3

and to use Fp1p2p3 (B) as ﬂowing coupling function. The ﬂow equation for Fp1p2p3(B)
is then given by

d
dB

Fp1p2p3 (B) = eD2

p1p2p3

BD2

p1p2p3 Fp1p2p3(B) + eD2

p1p2p3

B d
dB

Up1p2p3 (B).

(C.11)

The ﬁrst term cancels the O(U ) term in the ﬂow equation (C.6) for Up1p2p3(B), so
that only the second order term contributes. In order to evaluate the commutator
[η(B),Hint(B)], Wick’s theorem for the product of normal ordered operators can be
used. This allows to decompose a product of normal ordered operators into a sum of
normal ordered operators. The decomposition is achieved by means of contractions
of fermion operators. With the ansatz (C.4), only terms with two contractions are
needed. When contractions are represented as Feynman diagrams, the standard
second order diagrams for the renormalization of the interaction appear.
Applying Wick’s theorem and comparing coeﬃcients of operators on both sides of
the ﬂow equation yields the following equation for Up1p2p3(B):

d
dB

Up1,p2,p3(B) = T (phd)

p1,p2,p3 (B) + T (phc)

p1,p2,3 (B) + T (pp)

p1,p2,p3 (B)

(C.12)

The three terms in (C.12) correspond to diﬀerent physical renormalization processes,
via particle-hole excitations in the charge (T (phd)) and spin (T (phc)) channels, and
through particle-particle excitations (T (pp)). The diagrams contributing to each

123

FIG.2.Theparticle-particleandparticle-holediagramscontributingtotheone-loopRGequation.TdPH,Λ(p1,p2;p3,p4)=−!dp"−2VΛ(p1,p,p3)L(p,p+p1−p3)VΛ(p+p1−p3,p2,p)+VΛ(p1,p,p+p1−p3)L(p,p+p1−p3)VΛ(p+p1−p3,p2,p)+VΛ(p1,p,p3)L(p,p+p1−p3)VΛ(p2,p+p1−p3,p)#(16)TcrPH,Λ(p1,p2;p3,p4)=−!dpVΛ(p1,p+p2−p3,p)L(p,p+p2−p3)VΛ(p,p2,p3)(17)Intheseequations,L(p,p!)=SΛ(p)W(2)Λ(p!)+W(2)Λ(p)SΛ(p!)(18)withtheso-calledsingle-scalepropagatorSΛ(p)=−W(2)Λ(p)"ddΛQΛ(p)#W(2)s(p).(19)Theone-loopdiagramscorrespondingtotheterms(15),(16)and(17)areshowninFig.2.Inthetypicalmomentum-shellRG,thevaryingparameterΛisanenergyscalewhichseparateshighandlowenergymodes.Thestrategyistointegrateoutthehighenergymodesﬁrst.InthiscasethescaleparameteronlyaﬀectsthequadraticpartQΛ(p),whichismultipliedwithanappropriatecutoﬀfunction.Here,forthereasonsdiscussedintheintroduction,wewanttotreatthetemperatureasvaryingparameter.Ourreasoningisasfollows:athightemperatures,whereπTislargerthanthebandwidthandtheinteractionenergies,perturbationtheoryconverges,andmoreoverthecorrectionstotheselfenergyandfour–pointfunctionareoforder1/T,hencesmall.Thusathightemperature,thevertexfunctionsareessentiallyidenticaltothetermsintheaction.Thenwetracktherenormalizationofthevertexfunctionswhenthetemperatureislowered.Ofcoursethisideaisimplicitinmostofthewell-knownscalingapproaches4.Onatechnicallevelhoweverthisstrategyhasusuallybeencastintosomecutoﬀ-variationprocedurewithsimilarresultsasthemoreelaboratemodernWilsonianschemes.InordertoapplytheRGschemeforthe1PIvertexfunctionswithTasaﬂowparameterweﬁrsthavetoperformatransformationwhichshiftsalltemperaturedependencetothequadraticpartoftheaction.A.NewﬁeldsTheT3-factorintheinteractionpartcanberemovedbytransformingtheactiontothenewfermionicﬁeldsgivenby5FIG.2.Theparticle-particleandparticle-holediagramscontributingtotheone-loopRGequation.TdPH,Λ(p1,p2;p3,p4)=−!dp"−2VΛ(p1,p,p3)L(p,p+p1−p3)VΛ(p+p1−p3,p2,p)+VΛ(p1,p,p+p1−p3)L(p,p+p1−p3)VΛ(p+p1−p3,p2,p)+VΛ(p1,p,p3)L(p,p+p1−p3)VΛ(p2,p+p1−p3,p)#(16)TcrPH,Λ(p1,p2;p3,p4)=−!dpVΛ(p1,p+p2−p3,p)L(p,p+p2−p3)VΛ(p,p2,p3)(17)Intheseequations,L(p,p!)=SΛ(p)W(2)Λ(p!)+W(2)Λ(p)SΛ(p!)(18)withtheso-calledsingle-scalepropagatorSΛ(p)=−W(2)Λ(p)"ddΛQΛ(p)#W(2)s(p).(19)Theone-loopdiagramscorrespondingtotheterms(15),(16)and(17)areshowninFig.2.Inthetypicalmomentum-shellRG,thevaryingparameterΛisanenergyscalewhichseparateshighandlowenergymodes.Thestrategyistointegrateoutthehighenergymodesﬁrst.InthiscasethescaleparameteronlyaﬀectsthequadraticpartQΛ(p),whichismultipliedwithanappropriatecutoﬀfunction.Here,forthereasonsdiscussedintheintroduction,wewanttotreatthetemperatureasvaryingparameter.Ourreasoningisasfollows:athightemperatures,whereπTislargerthanthebandwidthandtheinteractionenergies,perturbationtheoryconverges,andmoreoverthecorrectionstotheselfenergyandfour–pointfunctionareoforder1/T,hencesmall.Thusathightemperature,thevertexfunctionsareessentiallyidenticaltothetermsintheaction.Thenwetracktherenormalizationofthevertexfunctionswhenthetemperatureislowered.Ofcoursethisideaisimplicitinmostofthewell-knownscalingapproaches4.Onatechnicallevelhoweverthisstrategyhasusuallybeencastintosomecutoﬀ-variationprocedurewithsimilarresultsasthemoreelaboratemodernWilsonianschemes.InordertoapplytheRGschemeforthe1PIvertexfunctionswithTasaﬂowparameterweﬁrsthavetoperformatransformationwhichshiftsalltemperaturedependencetothequadraticpartoftheaction.A.NewﬁeldsTheT3-factorintheinteractionpartcanberemovedbytransformingtheactiontothenewfermionicﬁeldsgivenby5FIG.2.Theparticle-particleandparticle-holediagramscontributingtotheone-loopRGequation.TdPH,Λ(p1,p2;p3,p4)=−!dp"−2VΛ(p1,p,p3)L(p,p+p1−p3)VΛ(p+p1−p3,p2,p)+VΛ(p1,p,p+p1−p3)L(p,p+p1−p3)VΛ(p+p1−p3,p2,p)+VΛ(p1,p,p3)L(p,p+p1−p3)VΛ(p2,p+p1−p3,p)#(16)TcrPH,Λ(p1,p2;p3,p4)=−!dpVΛ(p1,p+p2−p3,p)L(p,p+p2−p3)VΛ(p,p2,p3)(17)Intheseequations,L(p,p!)=SΛ(p)W(2)Λ(p!)+W(2)Λ(p)SΛ(p!)(18)withtheso-calledsingle-scalepropagatorSΛ(p)=−W(2)Λ(p)"ddΛQΛ(p)#W(2)s(p).(19)Theone-loopdiagramscorrespondingtotheterms(15),(16)and(17)areshowninFig.2.Inthetypicalmomentum-shellRG,thevaryingparameterΛisanenergyscalewhichseparateshighandlowenergymodes.Thestrategyistointegrateoutthehighenergymodesﬁrst.InthiscasethescaleparameteronlyaﬀectsthequadraticpartQΛ(p),whichismultipliedwithanappropriatecutoﬀfunction.Here,forthereasonsdiscussedintheintroduction,wewanttotreatthetemperatureasvaryingparameter.Ourreasoningisasfollows:athightemperatures,whereπTislargerthanthebandwidthandtheinteractionenergies,perturbationtheoryconverges,andmoreoverthecorrectionstotheselfenergyandfour–pointfunctionareoforder1/T,hencesmall.Thusathightemperature,thevertexfunctionsareessentiallyidenticaltothetermsintheaction.Thenwetracktherenormalizationofthevertexfunctionswhenthetemperatureislowered.Ofcoursethisideaisimplicitinmostofthewell-knownscalingapproaches4.Onatechnicallevelhoweverthisstrategyhasusuallybeencastintosomecutoﬀ-variationprocedurewithsimilarresultsasthemoreelaboratemodernWilsonianschemes.InordertoapplytheRGschemeforthe1PIvertexfunctionswithTasaﬂowparameterweﬁrsthavetoperformatransformationwhichshiftsalltemperaturedependencetothequadraticpartoftheaction.A.NewﬁeldsTheT3-factorintheinteractionpartcanberemovedbytransformingtheactiontothenewfermionicﬁeldsgivenby5term are shown in Fig. C.1. The mathematical expressions look diﬀerent from the
usual one loop diagrams, but we will show in the following how they are related to
them.
T (phd)
p1,p2,p3(B) =

1

(C.13)

+ 2Uq+p3−p1,p1,q Up2,q,q+p3−p1 Dq+p3−p1,p1,q (nq − nq+p3−p1 )

N (cid:88)q (cid:110)4Up1,q,p3 Uq+p3−p1,p2,q Dp1,q,p3 (nq − nq+p3−p1)
+ 2Uq+p3−p1,p1,q Uq,p2,q+p3−p1 Dq+p3−p1,p1,q (nq − nq+p3−p1 )(cid:111)
N (cid:88)q
N (cid:88)q (cid:110)Uq,−q+p1+p2,p3 Up1,p2,qDq,−q+p1+p2,p3 (1 − nq − n−q+p1+p2)
− Up1,p2,q Uq,−q+p1+p2,p3 Dp1,p2,q (1 − nq − n−q+p1+p2)(cid:111),

Uq,p2,p3 Up1,q+p2−p3,q Dq,p2,p3 (nq − nq+p2−p3)

1

(C.15)

(C.14)

T (phc)
p1,p2,p3(B) = −2
1

T (pp)
p1,p2,p3(B) = −

where np is the Fermi function evaluated at p. The terms containing Fermi functions
correspond to the numerators in one loop diagrams, whereas the denominators of
the diagrams are not explicitly visible in the present formulation. In the remainder
we show how Eqns. (C.13-C.15) relate to the usual one loop RG expressions. Since
the the steps are essentially the same for all three types of diagrams, we will do the
analysis for T (phc) only, and summarize the results for the other contributions in the
end.
First we substitute Fp1p2p3 for Up1p2p3 in (C.12) and plug the result into the ﬂow
equation for Fp1,p2,p3 . We obtain
= −eBD2

N (cid:88)q (cid:110)2Fq,p2,p3 Fp1,q+p2−p3,q

d
dB

(C.16)

p1 ,p2,p3

1

Fp1,p2,p3(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)phc

where the subscript ’phc’ indicates that we have suppressed phd and pp contri-
butions.
In analogy with the one loop RG we now distinguish between internal
(or loop) lines and external legs. The external legs correspond to the momenta
p1, . . . , p4, whereas the internal lines are the momenta which are summed over, here
q and q +p2−p3. Since we are chieﬂy interested in the couplings in the vicinity of the
Fermi surface, we set the kinetic energy of all external lines to zero in the Dp1,p2,p3.
This step is the analogue of evaluating diagrams at zero external frequency in the
one loop RG. This simpliﬁes the ﬂow equation considerably. In (C.17), this leads to
the replacements

× Dq,p2,p3 e−B(D2

+D2

q,p2,p3

p1,q+p2−p3 ,q) (nq − nq+p2−p3)(cid:111),

Dp1,p2,p3 → 0
Dq,p2,p3 → q − q+p3−p1
Dp1,q+p2−p3,q → q+p2−p3 − q,

124

(C.17)

One loop RG equations from Wegner’s ﬂow equation

i.e. only the energies of the loop momenta q and q + p2 − p3 remain. This leads to
the approximation

d
dB

Fp1,p2,p3(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)phc ≈ −

1

N (cid:88)q (cid:110)Fq,p2,p3 Fp1,q+p2−p3,q
× 2 (q − q+p2−p3) e−2B(q−q+p2−p3)2

We now deﬁne the ph loop function

(C.18)

(nq − nq+p2−p3)(cid:111),

L(ph)
q,p (B) ≡ R (q − q+p, B)

nq − nq+p
q − q+p

which diﬀers from the standard expression by the scale dependent prefactor

R (, B) = 1 − e−2B2

(C.19)

(C.20)

that suppresses low-energy excitations with energy less than B−1/2. Then we have

d
dB

q,p2−p3(B) = 2 (q − q+p2−p3) e−2B(q−q+p2−p3)2
L(ph)

(nq − nq+p2−p3 ) ,

(C.21)

which is just the second line of (C.19). Thus we can write

d
dB

Fp1,p2,p3(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)phc

= −

1

N (cid:88)q

Fq,p2,p3 Fp1,q+p2−p3,q

d
dB

L(ph)
q,p2−p3 (B).

(C.22)

Finally, we can substitute the scale Λ = B−1/2/4 for the ﬂow parameter B, where
Λ is chosen such that the ﬂow at scale Λ receives contributions mainly from states
with single particle energy Λ. Since the derivative with respect to B appears on
both sides, the form of (C.22) is unchanged under this substitution.
Similar manipulations on the other contributions to the ﬂow equation lead to the
ﬁnal form

d
dΛ

p1,p2,p3 (Λ) + T (pp)
with the contributions from the diﬀerent channels given by

Fp1,p2,p3(Λ) = T (phd)

p1,p2,p3 (Λ) + T (phc)

p1,p2,p3(Λ),

(C.23)

T (phd)
p1,p2,p3 (Λ) = −

T (phc)
p1,p2,p3(Λ) = −

T (pp)
p1,p2,p3 (Λ) = −

1

1

1

N (cid:88)q (cid:16) − 2Fp1,q,p3 Fq+p3−p1,p2,q + Fq+p3−p1,p1,q Fp2,q,q+p3−p1
+ Fq+p3−p1,p1,q Fq,p2,q+p3−p1(cid:17) d
N (cid:88)q
N (cid:88)q

dΛ
L(ph)
q,q+p2−p3(Λ)

Fq,−q+p1+p2,p3 Fp1,p2,q

Fq,p2,p3 Fp1,q+p2−p3,q

L(ph)
q,q+p3−p1(Λ)

L(pp)

q,p1+p2(Λ).

d
dΛ

d
dΛ

(C.24)

(C.25)

(C.26)

125

Figure C.2: Dependence of the cutoﬀ function R(n)
the average single-particle energy .

Λ (2) and its scale derivative on

The loop functions with Λ as a ﬂow variable are

L(ph)
q,p (Λ) = RΛ (q − q+p)
L(pp)
q,p (Λ) = RΛ (q + −q+p)
RΛ() = 1 − e−2/8Λ2

nq − nq+p
q − q+p
1 − nq − n−q+p

q + −q+p

(C.27)

(C.28)

(C.29)

Once the ﬂow equation is solved up to some scale Λ, the renormalized interaction
Hamiltonian is obtained by transforming from Fp1,p2,p3(Λ) back to Up1,p2,p3(Λ). Re-
calling (C.10), we have

Up1,p2,p3(Λ) = e−D2

p1,p2 ,p3

/16Λ2

Fp1,p2,p3(Λ),

(C.30)

the physical interaction decouples states at the Fermi surface from states with single
particle energy || > Λ. As a consequence, states above the cutoﬀ may be neglected
or treated perturbatively, so that only states below the cutoﬀ remain.
Comparison of (C.23) with the ﬂow equation derived from functional RG [25] shows
that the structure of the two equations is identical when the FRG equation is eval-
uated in the one-loop approximation, i.e. omitting the frequency dependence and
using bare propagators in all diagrams. In both equations, the ﬂow is generated by
second order perturbation theory. The bubble diagrams are scale dependent due to
the presence of an infrared cutoﬀ, and their contribution to the ﬂowing couplings is
given by the scale derivative of the bubble. However, in the present approach, the
cutoﬀ function acts on the energy of two-particle excitations (pp or ph), whereas
in the functional RG the cutoﬀ acts on single particle energies. From a practical
point of view, however, this diﬀerence should be small in most situations, since the
two types of cutoﬀ only diﬀer when the single particle energies of the two particles
taking part in the excitation are very diﬀerent. Due to kinematic restrictions in the
presence of a Fermi surface this is not expected to matter in most situations.

126

012340.00.20.40.60.81.0Ε(cid:76)R(cid:76)2Ε012340.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.7Ε(cid:76)(cid:45)(cid:76)2(cid:182)(cid:76)R(cid:76)2ΕAppendix D

Contractor renormalization

In the following we review brieﬂy the contractor renormalization (CORE) method
[36] for correlated lattice systems. The method is based on ﬁrst choosing a truncated
set of κ states for the local Hilbert space of a lattice system. There is no general rule
how to choose these states, so that the choice has to be based on physical insight.
These κ states are used as eﬀective degrees of freedom per site. The dimension of
the local Hilbert space is denoted by ν. The couplings between sites are evaluated
by diagonalizing connected clusters of lattice sites and projecting lowest states onto
the tensor product of the truncated local basis. For an N -site cluster, one has to
diagonalize an νN -dimensional matrix and ﬁnd its lowest κN states.
We denote the κ2 tensor products of projected single-site states by |αi(cid:105). We need
the κ2 lowest eigenstates of the two-site cluster for the projection, and will denote
the n-th such state by |n(cid:105). The CORE algorithm consists of three steps:
First the low-lying states of the cluster are projected onto the |αi(cid:105),

|ψn(cid:105) =(cid:88)i

|αi(cid:105)(cid:104)αi|n(cid:105).

(D.1)

Second, the projected states |ψn(cid:105) are orthonormalized, using the Gram-Schmidt
method starting with the groundstate:

The eﬀective Hamiltonian for the N -site cluster is then given by

| ˜ψn(cid:105) =

| ˜ψi(cid:105)(cid:104) ˜ψi|ψn(cid:105)(cid:33) .

1

Zn(cid:32)|ψn(cid:105) −(cid:88)i<n
H(N ) =(cid:88)n

En| ˜ψn(cid:105)(cid:104) ˜ψn|,

(D.2)

(D.3)

where En is the energy of state |n(cid:105). Finally, one can write the total eﬀective Hamil-
tonian as a sum over irreducible N -site operators, where the irreducible part of the

127

N -site Hamiltonian for the cluster CN is deﬁned by

Hirred.(CN ) = H(N ) − (cid:88)N(cid:48)<N (cid:88)CN(cid:48)∈CN

H(CN(cid:48))

(D.4)

denotes summation over all connected subclusters of CN of size

where (cid:80)CN(cid:48) ∈ CN

N(cid:48). One can show [36] that the expansion

Heﬀ =

Nmax(cid:88)N =1(cid:88)CN

H(CN )

(D.5)

reproduces the lowest κ energies of the original Hamiltonian in the limit Nmax → ∞.
In practice, however, the expansion has to be truncated at some point, and here
we will consider the simplest approximation only, and restrict ourselves to two-site
interactions.

128

Bibliography

[1] M. Abdel-Jawad et al., Nature Physics 2, 821 (2006). M. Abdel-Jawad et al.,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 107002 (2007).

[2] D. Zanchi, H. J. Schulz, Europhys. Lett. 44, 235 (1998).

[3] C. J. Halboth, W. Metzner, Phys. Rev. B 61, 7364 (2000); Phys. Rev. Lett.

85, 5162 (2000).

[4] C. Honerkamp et al., Phys. Rev. B 63, 035109 (2001).

[5] A. A. Katanin, arXiv:0806.0300.

[6] D. Zanchi, Europhys. Lett. 55, 376 (2001).

[7] C. Honerkamp, Eur. Phys. J. B 21, 81 (2001).

[8] A. A. Katanin, A. P. Kampf, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 106406 (2004).

[9] D. Rohe, W. Metzner, Phys. Rev. B 71, 115116 (2005).

[10] C. Honerkamp, M. Salmhofer, Prog. Theor. Phys. 105, 1 (2001).

[11] C. Honerkamp, M. Salmhofer, Phys. Rev. B 64, 184516 (2001).

[12] A. L¨auchli et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 037006 (2004).

[13] T. M. Rice et al., cond-mat:1109.0632.

[14] J. Bardeen et al., Phys. Rev. 108, 1175 (1957).

[15] J. G. Bednorz and K. A. M¨uller, Z. Phys. B 64, 189 (1986).

[16] S. H¨uefner et al., Rep. Prog. Phys. 71, 062501 (2008).

[17] P. W. Anderson, Science 235, 1196 (1987).

[18] T. Timusk and B. Statt, Rep. Prog. Phys. 62, 61 (1999).

[19] H. Alloul et al., Phys. Rev. Lett 63, 1700 (1989).

129

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[20] T. M. Rice, Prog. Theor. Phys. Supp. 160, 39 (2005).

[21] T. A. Maier et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 237001.

[22] J. Oitmaa et al., Series expansion methods for strongly correlated lattice models,

Cambridge University Press (2006).

[23] M. Tinkham, Introduction to Supeconductivity, Dover Publications (2004).

[24] A. R. Schmidt et al., New J. Phys. 13, 065014 (2011).

[25] C. Honerkamp and M. Salmhofer, Phys. Rev. B 64, 184516 (2001).

[26] R. Shankar, Rev. Mod. Phys. 66, 129 (1994).

[27] A. H. Castro Neto and E. Fradkin, Phys. Rev. B 49, 10877 (1994).

[28] T. Chen et al., Fluctuating geometries in statistical mechanics and ﬁeld theory,

Les Houches session LXII (1994).

[29] W. Metzner et al., Adv. Phys. 47, 317 (1998).

[30] C. Honerkamp and M. Salmhofer, Prog. Theor. Phys. 113 (6), 1145 (2005).

[31] A. C. Hewson, The Kondo Problem to Heavy Fermions, Cambridge University

Press (1993).

[32] H. Tsunetsugu et al., Rev. Mod. Phys. 69, 809 (1997).

[33] U. Ledermann et al., Phys. Rev. B 62, 16383 (2000).

[34] S. R. White, Phys. Rev. B 48, 10345 (1993).

[35] A. Georges and G. Kotliar, Phys. Rev. B 45, 6479 (1992).

[36] C. Morningstar and M. Weinstein, Phys. Rev. D 54, 4131 (1996).

[37] J. Reiss, D. Rohe, and W. Metzner, Phys. Rev. B 75, 075110 (2007).

[38] E. Altman and A. Auerbach, Phys. Rev. B 65, 104508 (2002)

[39] A. Auerbach, cond-mat/0510738 (2005).

[40] E. Hernandez and G. Weiss, A ﬁrst course on wavelets, CRC Press (1996).

[41] K. G. Wilson, Generalized Wannier functions, Cornell preprint (1987).

[42] D. J. Sullivan et al., cond-mat:1007.3522.

[43] I. Daubechies et al., SIAM J. Math. Anal. 22 (2), 554 (1991).

130

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[44] H. B¨olcskei et al., Proc. of the IEEE-SP symposium on time-frequency and

time-scale analysis, 525 (1996).

[45] J. Zak, Phys. Rev. Lett. 19, 1385 (1967).

[46] S. Sachdev, Quantum phase transitions (1999).

[47] R. A. Balian, C.R. Acad. Sci. Paris 292 (20), 13571362, (1981).

[48] F. Low, Complete sets of wave packets, in A Passion for Physics - Essays in
Honor of Geoﬀrey Chew, C. DeTar et al., Eds., World Scientiﬁc, Singapore,
1722, (1985).

[49] J. Solyom, Adv. Phys. 28 (2), 201 (1979).

[50] P. Kopietz et al., Introduction to the Functional Renormalization Group,

Springer (2010).

[51] J. Timonen and A. Luther, J. Phys. C 18, 1439 (1985).

[52] J. M. Luttinger, J. Math. Phys. 4, 1154 (1963).

[53] H.-H. Lin, L. Balents, and M. P. A. Fisher, Phys. Rev. B 58, 1794 (1998).

[54] F. Wegner, Ann. Phys. 3, 77 (1994).

[55] S. D. Glazek and K. G. Wilson, Phys. Rev. D 48, 5863 (1993).

[56] S. D. Glazek and K. G. Wilson, Phys. Rev. D 49, 4214 (1994).

[57] S. Kehrein, The Flow Equation Approach to Many-Particle Systems, Springer

(2006).

[58] C. Honerkamp et al., Phys. Rev. B 63, 035109 (2001).

[59] H. J. Schulz, Europhys. Lett. 4, 609 (1987).

[60] I. Dzyaloshinskii, Sov. Phys. JETP 66, 848 (1987).

[61] P. Lederer et al., J. Phys. (France) 48, 1613 (1987).

[62] I. Dzyaloshinskii, J. Phys. I (France) 6, 119 (1996).

[63] M. Ferrero et al., Phys. Rev. B 80, 064501 (2009).

[64] E. Demler, W. Hanke, and S.-C. Zhang, Rev. Mod. Phys. 76, 909 (2004).

[65] Chubukov et al., Phys. Rev. B 78, 134512 (2008).

[66] M. Furukawa, T. M. Rice, and M. Salmhofer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 3195 (1998).

131

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[67] T. Giamarchi, Quantum Physics in One Dimension.

[68] A. O. Gogolin et al., Bosonization and Strongly Correlated Systems, Cambridge

University Press (1999).

[69] V. B. Geshkenbein et al., Phys. Rev. B 55, 3173 (1996).

[70] M. Arai et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 608 (1999).

132

Acknowledgements

During the time I spent working on this thesis, I had the pleasure of interacting
with many people that contributed directly or indirectly.
I would like to thank
my supervisors Manfred Sigrist and T. Maurice Rice for giving me the opportunity
to work on a project which for a long time resembled Schr¨odingers cat, oscillating
between success and failure.

The time I spent at my oﬃce was made much more fun by the people that shared
it with me, Andreas R¨uegg, Hiroto Adachi, Kaiyu Yang, Sebastian Pilgrim, Yoshiki
Imai, and Daniel M¨uller. I thank all of them for discussions, creating a friendly at-
mosphere, and in particular for enduring my frequent and lengthy rants, digressions,
and ’brief’ sketches of ideas.

I would also like to thank the other members of the solid state theory groups,
Jonathan Buhmann, Adrien Bouhon, Mark Fischer, Sarah Thaler, Ludwig Klam,
Jun Goryo, Sebastian Huber, Fabian Hassler, Barbara Theiler, Alexander Thomann,
Roland Willa, and David Oehri. I have learnt many things through fruitful discus-
sions with them, and beneﬁtted greatly from their kindness in many ways.

Finally, I am very grateful to Lena Hartmann for spending the last few years
with me emotionally, and for her tolerance in spending them mainly without me
physically.

133

BIBLIOGRAPHY

134

