6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
3
1

.

 
 
]
P
C
n
i
f
-
q
[
 
 

1
v
9
9
0
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Contagion and Stability in Financial

Networks

Department of Statistics and Applied Probability, University of California Santa Barbara, CA

Seyyed Mostafa Mousavi

Centre of Complexity Science, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK

Robert Mackay

Centre of Complexity Science, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK

Alistair Tucker

December 10, 2013

Abstract

This paper investigates two mechanisms of ﬁnancial contagion that are,
ﬁrstly, the correlated exposure of banks to the same source of risk, and sec-
ondly the direct exposure of banks in the interbank market. It will con-
sider a random network of banks which are connected through the inter-
bank market and will discuss the desirable level of banks exposure to the
same sources of risk, that is investment in similar portfolios, for different
levels of network connectivity when peering through the lens of the sys-
temic cost incurred to the economy from the banks simultaneous failure.
It demonstrates that for all levels of network connectivity, certain levels
of diversifying individual banks diversiﬁcations are not optimum under
any condition. So, given an acceptable level of systemic cost, the regula-
tor could let banks decrease their capital buffers by moving away from the
non-optimum area.

1

1

Introduction

The recent ﬁnancial crisis has brought many scholars to the consensus that
there exist some weak points in the current system and it is necessary to reform
it to improve its stability ([15], [13], [21], [17]). Safeguarding the stability of the
whole ﬁnancial system, or in other words, ensuring that the system works well
even during bad economic periods in which some individual institutions may
fail, is in charge of central banks. In fact, they are very concerned about the
systemic risk, that is, the risk of a total system collapse like in 2007, after the
failure of the Lehman Brothers (which was the counterpart of about $5 trillion
Credit Default Swap (CDS) contracts) there was a great fear that this failure
might spread to the other institutions causing a cascade such that the whole
economy could collapse. Also to avoid lending to distressed institutions, banks
hoarded liquidity exacerbating the situation through ﬁnancial contagion, that
is when the solvency difﬁculties of some distressed institutions are spread like
a disease to the other healthy ones. The culprit of ﬁnancial contagion is the
complex interconnections which exist between the ﬁnancial institutions and
generally, it crops up because of four mechanisms [20]: 1) correlated exposure
of banks to the same source of risk, 2) direct exposure of banks in the interbank
market, 3) assets ﬁre-sale of the bankrupted banks, 4) Informational contagion.
Correlated exposure of institutions to the same source of risk is when they
invest in the same type of portfolio as the other institutions. According to the
Modern Portfolio Theory, there is an optimum portfolio, which maximizes the
expected return, for a given level of risk [12]. So, institutions, based on how
risk-averse they are, would invest in their optimum portfolio and their portfo-
lios would be very similar if they could tolerate almost the same level of risk.
When individual institutions takes the long position on similar type of assets to
maximize their individual return, the system become exposed to the risk that
many banks fail simultaneously when those assets lose value for any reason.
So, the regulator faces with a dilemma whether she has to let individual in-
stitutions maximize their return or she has to impose some regulations on the
institutions to make them diversify their portfolio from that of each other [5].
At a moment in time, a bank may be in need of money for any reason, such
as giving a loan to a customer or investing in an asset, while another one may
have extra credit for which he does not have any investment plan, so a win-win
decision could be the case when the second bank lends money to the ﬁrst bank
for a rate which is determined by the risk that the borrowing bank defaults on
his loan. LIBOR, or London Interbank Offered Rate, is the interest rate at which
banks can borrow funds from the other banks in London interbank market.
When a bank fails, he might not be able to pay back his borrowings from the
other banks and this would incur a loss to them and sometimes lead them
towards bankruptcy. In bad economic states, banks become very fussy about
lending in order not to incur any loss from the default of the borrowing bank
and consequently, the interest rate soars or in other words, the credit dries up.

2

For example, in the credit crunch of 2007, LIBOR surged from about 4% to
about 6%. To name a few works investigating the interbank market as a source
of contagion, it could be [3], [18], [19], [20], [14], [22], [24] and [25].

When a bank goes bankrupt, it has to follow the bankruptcy procedure
and sell its assets to pay back his liabilities for as much as possible. Since the
supply of those assets that the failed bank has in its balance sheet increases
sharply, their prices tumble, so it is called the assets ﬁre sale and it incurs great
losses to those banks who have the same assets in their balance sheets.
In
fact, the bankruptcy of a bank can implicitly affect another bank which is not
directly exposed to the failed bank at all ([9], [8], [23], [14] have discussed the
effects of assets ﬁre-sale).

Informational contagion happens when depositors or the other banks hoard
liquidity even when the bank is working well and it causes a liability-side
shock to the bank leading it to insolvency. In fact, it occurs because of the im-
perfect information about the bank assets and exposures. Historical evidence
shows that there is a connection between dire liquidity problems and the eco-
nomic state [10]. [11], [2], [1] and [4] are a few works in the literature in this
regard.

This paper is based on Beale et al paper [5], which investigates the corre-
lated exposure of banks to the same source of risk while quantifying the cost
incurred to the economy from the banks simultaneous failure. In this paper,
the direct exposure of banks in the interbank market, which could serve as a
gate of contagion, has been also taken into account. This paper will consider a
random network of banks which are connected through the interbank market
and will discuss the optimum level of banks exposure to the same source of
risk, that is investing in similar portfolios, for different levels of network con-
nectivity when peering through the systemic cost lens. It demonstrates that for
all levels of network connectivity, certain levels of regulators diversifying indi-
vidual banks diversiﬁcations are not optimum under any condition. So, given
an acceptable level of systemic cost, regulator could let banks decrease their
capital buffers by moving away from the non-optimum area.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the
mathematical model. Section 3 discusses the partitioning of the assets loss
space over possible conﬁgurations of banks state. Section 4 presents the sim-
ulation model. Section 5 explains the simulations results and ﬁnally section 6
wraps up the conclusions.

2 Mathematical Model

In this model, a network of N banks is considered. In this paper, bank is a gen-
eral term and can refer to any type of ﬁnancial intermediaries. Financial inter-
mediaries can be classiﬁed as depository institutions (e.g. commercial banks),

3

insurance and pension funds, ﬁnance companies, securities ﬁrms (e.g. invest-
ment banks and hedge funds) and mutual funds [7]. Here, the same as some
other works like [14], [20] and [16], each bank, as the node of the network, is
schematically deﬁned as follows:

Figure 1: Schematic view of a bank

.

For the ”external asset” part of the asset side of the banks’ balance sheet,
each bank can invest in M assets. The banks are connected to each other
through interbank exposures, including interbank loans and interbank borrow-
ings and they make a directional network. A bank would go bankrupt if it loses
more than its net worth or its capital buffer for any reason, such as incurring
loss from its investment portfolio, and then in this case it cannot return its lia-
bilities to the other nodes of the system causing harm for them.
The mathematical model of the network is as follows:

Y = XV + LF

(1)

Yi: bank i’s asset side loss as a fraction of its capital buffer.

Xij: bank i’s investment in asset j as a fraction of its capital buffer.

Vj: simple loss of asset j or how much asset j has lost its value.

Lij: bank i’s loan to bank j as a fraction of bank i’s capital buffer. Appar-
ently, the elements on the diagonal of this matrix would be zero since a bank
cannot lend money to itself.
Fi = I(Yi ≥ 1): is 1 when bank i loses more than its capital buffer or in other
words is bankrupt. When the loss of bank i is more than its capital buffer
(Yi ≥ 1), then the indicator function (I) would output the value of 1 as a result
of bank i’s bankruptcy.

4

Here the system is an excursive equation which should be initialized from
a state, F vector, which is usually the case when all banks are working well.
Then, given the point of assets loss, V vector, the ﬁnal state of the system would
be achieved from the excursion of the equation until the state does not change
anymore with more excursion. From now on, we mean the ﬁnal state with F
unless it is stated otherwise.

It is worthwhile mentioning that there is no indication of time in this
model. All banks’ assets, including external assets (X matrix) and interbank
loans (L matrix) are static not dynamic and the intuition is that this model is
to understand how unstable different sorts of ﬁnancial systems, X and L ma-
trices, are from the regulator perspective and apparently this usually relates to
the time of bad economic conditions when many assets lose value and cause
loss to the holders and at that point, banks cannot evade the bad fortune by
borrowing money from the other banks since the credit dries up and no other
bank is keen to lend money to the distressed institutions for fear of increasing
their possible loss as the case of those banks bankruptcy [18].

As a corollary of the lack of time, an important tenet of the model is that
it is contemplating the interbank loans only as a gate of contagion and is not
taking into account its returns over time, so it is not the right means to analyze
what level of interbank exposure is right for the system.

3 Partition of assets loss space over the banks state

The M dimensional space of assets loss vector, V , could be partitioned up to
2N possible conﬁgurations of F , the binary vector of the banks state, and for
the simple case of M = N = 2, the partition diagram could be as follows:

5

Figure 2: Partition of V-space over F

In the V -space, each bank, according to its investment portfolio in the
assets, would make a hyperplane (a line in the 2-dimensional V -space) such
that when the point of assets loss is higher than the hyperplane, the bank is
bankrupt. Otherwise, it is working well. Each hyperplane would be displaced
in the points where another bank over which the bank has claims has already
defaulted because that bank cannot return its borrowings and consequently
causes harm to the bank which has exposure to it. Consequently, it enlarges
the regions on which the bank is liquidated to the extent of its exposure to the
defaulted bank. In ﬁgure 2, the ﬁnal bank lines which are from some point dis-
placed according to the exposure of the bank to the other defaulted bank, are
shown.

From the continuation of the shifted parts of each at least two hyperplanes,
a multiple-behavior region would be made like region 5 in ﬁgure 2. The ﬁnal
state of this region is completely contingent on the state with which the system
is initialized. For example, in region 5 of ﬁgure 2, if the system is initialized
with the state in which both banks are working well, then in the ﬁnal state,
both banks would work well and if in the initial state, the banks are already
liquidated, they would remain insolvent in the ﬁnal state, so it has a multiple
behavior tendency. In fact, this behavior could be characterized as the lack of
conﬁdence in the banks whose ﬁnal state depends on the initial state. In other
words, those banks are not in a very good state and are likely to go bankrupt
soon. Apparently, any path in the V -space through which a few banks go
bankrupt simultaneously would pass through a multiple-behavior region.

6

If the number of assets is greater than or equal to the number of banks, one
could make an invertible coordinate change in the V -space such that all the hy-
perplanes become coordinate direction. In the new coordinate system, which
is a linear combination of the old coordinate system, it is apparent that all 2N
possible conﬁgurations of F would exist, so it can be said that if the number
of assets is greater than or equal to the number of banks, then all 2N possible
regions would exist. Besides, there would be a multiple-behavior region be-
tween the hyperplanes of any at least two banks, which are mutually directly
or indirectly (through another bank) exposed to each other, given a combina-

tion of the other banks state, so there would be up to(cid:80)N

(cid:1)2(N−i) multiple

behavior regions. Interestingly, assuming that all banks are at least indirectly
connected to each other, there would always exist a multiple-behavior region,
one side of which all banks are well and on the other side, they are all insolvent.
In other words, regardless of how banks invest in the assets and regardless of
how they are all exposed to each other, some paths in the V -space are possible,
through which all banks go bust simultaneously.

(cid:0)N

i

i=2

4 Simulation Model

In order to do the simulation, a network of banks should be constructed and,
a probability distribution is required over the V -space to numerically calculate
the probability of the regions in the partition diagram of V -space over the con-
ﬁgurations of F . Finally, a measure, which is called cost function here, should
be deﬁned so as to compare it for different parameters of the model.

4.1 Network Model

In our network, the nodes represent the banks and node A is connected to node
B if there is a link from node A to node B which shows how much bank A has
lent to bank B. Here the simplest type of random network, that is Erdos-Renyi
model, is used. So, each node is connected to any other node with the ﬁxed
probability of P .

It is assumed that all banks are the same. In other words, their total assets
are equal and they have the same capital buffer, η, that is represented as a per-
centage of the total assets. Consequently, they would diversify their external
assets investment portfolio in exactly the same manner and the default of any
bank incurs the same cost to the economy.

In this model, how much each bank is willing to invest in interbank loans
depends on the level of the connectivity of the network (P ). When P = 0,
which means there is no link in the network, all banks invest only in external
assets in the asset-side of their balance sheets. However, for the other values
of P , all banks invest a portion of their total assets in interbank loans if it is

7

possible (For any value of P between 0 and 1, sometimes it is not possible for a
particular bank to invest in interbank loans because it is not connected to any
other bank and in this case it would invest only in external assets). The larger
P is, the more willing banks are to invest in interbank loans until the network
is complete (P = 1), and at that time all banks invest their highest percentage
in interbank loans. The idea is that banks do not like to lend a large volume of
money to an individual bank because of its high risk, but when the connectivity
of the network increases, on average, a bank is connected with more banks, so,
in fact, the bank has found the opportunity of lending to more banks and as a
result, it would invest more in interbank loans. Besides, as far as it is assumed
that all banks are the same, all banks divide their total interbank loans equally
with the banks with whom they are connected and do not distinguish between
them.

As [5] suggests, an important parameter regarding the investment portfo-
lio of the banks in the external assets (X matrix), is how much different banks
diversify their portfolios from each other. This parameter, called D, could be
calculated by the average distance between the asset allocations of each pair of
banks as follows

(cid:88)
(cid:88)
capital buffer, when it is normalized by(cid:80)

2N (N − 1)

D =

1

l(cid:54)=i

j

i

(cid:88)

| ´Xij − ´Xlj|

(2)

Here ´Xij is Xij, which is the investment of bank i in asset j as a fraction of its
j Xij, which is the total investment
of bank i in the assets as a fraction of its capital buffer. When all banks invest
in exactly the same portfolio, D would equal to 0 and when they do not invest
in any asset in which the others have already invested, D would equal to 1.

For a given level of the connectivity of the network, it is desirable to gen-
erate random X matrices with different values of D and Appendix shows how
to do that when the number of banks are equal to the number of assets. It is
also of great importance to note that here it is assumed all assets are the same.
In other words, banks are completely impartial to the assets and do not prefer
any one to the others.

4.2 Probability distribution over V -space

For an asset, there are two types of return, including simple return and log
return and they are deﬁned as follows:

Simple return =

Log return = ln

Pf − Pi

Pi
Pf
Pi

(3)

(4)

Here Pf is the ﬁnal price of the asset and Pi is the initial price of it. Log return
could take any value while simple return has a bound that it cannot be less

8

than -1 since asset price cannot be negative. When ﬁnal price is close to initial
price, these two returns would approximately be equal ([6])

For simplicity, it is assumed that log return is distributed as 1

α T when T
is a student t distribution with 1.5 degrees of freedom and α is a critical value
of t-distribution corresponding to the probability q that a bank fails if it has
invested only in that asset (the same probability distribution as [6]). When the
log return follows that distribution, the simple return would be distributed as
α T − 1 so that its bound would not be violated. Here since the model deals
e 1
with loss not return, it could be said that the loss is distributed as 1 − e 1

α T .

In the model, what has been meant by assets is, in fact, asset classes, that
is a group of assets whose returns/losses are correlated, but independent from
that of the other asset classes. In other words, it is assumed that all asset re-
turns/losses are independent of each other. Also because assets are assumed to
be the same, it could be said that asset losses are independently and identically
distributed as 1 − e 1

α T .

4.3 Systemic Cost

There is a tension between the best investment portfolios for individual banks
and the safest one for the system as a whole [5]. When banks individually try
to diversify their portfolio to maximize their proﬁt, they all invest in the same
portfolio and as a result, they are all exposed to the same source of risk. This
herding behavior is harmful for the stability of the system as a whole. From
this aspect, since it is extremely difﬁcult for the economy to absorb the costs
incurred by the bankruptcy of several banks together, it is desirable that banks
are never exposed to the same source of risk, so it would be less likely that some
banks fail together. So, the regulator has been faced with a dilemma whether
to let the banks maximize their individual proﬁts or to make some regulations
for enhancing the stability of the system.

To explore this tension, the same notion of systemic cost as [5] is intro-

duced.

2N(cid:88)

Expected(C) =

PiK S
i

(5)

C: systemic cost.

i=0

Pi: Probability of region i in the partition diagram of V -space over F .

Ki: Number of failed banks in region i.

S: Power which determines how nonlinear the cost is on the number of failed
banks (S ≥ 1).

9

5 Simulation Results

In order to develop the simulation, P and D both are discretized and for each
pair of them, the average of the expected systemic cost over 1000 randomly
generated X and L matrices is calculated. For calculating expected systemic
cost, probability of each region in the partition diagram is required and that
is done by using a 10000 M-elements V -tuples which are generated from the
probability distribution introduced in section 4.2.

The values of the model parameters which are used in these simulations
are summarized in table 1 although the results are still valid for the other choice
of parameters.

Parameter
Number of banks
Number of assets
Maximum Percentage of interbank loans to total assets
(when P=1)
Type of the function of percentage of interbank loans to
total assets versus connectivity

Value
10
10
20%

Linear

Table 1: Summary of the parameters of the model

The average of the expected systemic cost in ﬁgure 3 is plotted against
network connectivity, P , and diverse diversiﬁcation parameter, D, for different
nonlinearity levels of the cost on the number of failed banks, S.

10

Figure 3: Average of the expected systemic cost versus network connectivity
level and the diverse diversiﬁcation parameter for four degrees of nonlinearity
of the cost function

For different levels of network connectivity, it is interesting how Dopt, D in
which the cost is minimum, changes with the increase of S. When P = 0, there
is no interbank linkage, and also the cost function is linear (S = 1), Dopt equals
to 0 since there is no premium cost for the case that some banks fail together
and consequently, the systemic cost is minimum when all banks invest in their
same optimum portfolio. However, when S increases, Dopt shifts away gently
from 0 towards 1 depending on how nonlinear the cost function is, and this
means banks would diversify their diversiﬁcation to minimize the extra cost
associated with the simultaneous failure of the banks. This is in harmony with
the results in [5]

When P > 0, that is when banks to some level are connected to each other,
the pattern of change in Dopt by the increase of S is different from that of the
case when P = 0 since the interbank linkages can be served as a gate of con-
tagion. Here Dopt, at ﬁrst, remains constant at 0 when S increases, but there

11

exists a brink point in S at which Dopt swiftly changes from 0 to some value
between 0 and 1. The higher the connectivity of the network is, the bigger this
jump is and the later the brink point would happen. After this sudden change
in Dopt, it would again drift gently towards 1 as S increases.

In fact, there is an area in P − D space in which the systemic cost would
never be minimum and it is the area over which Dopt jumps and is schemat-
ically shown in gray colour in ﬁgure 4. From system stability point of view,
the system should not be in that area under any form of the cost function since
given any level of network connectivity, there always exists another D out of
that area in which the systemic cost is lower. In fact, the regulator could let
banks decrease their capital buffers when the system is moving away from the
non-optimum area while the systemic cost still remains at its acceptable level.

Figure 4: Non-optimum area in P − D space. The gray area could not be opti-
mum under any form of cost function

The intuition behind the existence of such an area in P − D space is that
when banks are connected to each other, interbank loans would work as a gate
of contagion, but when D = 0, or in other words all banks have invested in the
same portfolio, interbank loans could not spread the difﬁculty of distressed in-
stitutions to the other banks since when one bank has failed, it means that all
the other banks are already bankrupt (because they have invested in exactly
the same portfolio). So, even for very nonlinear cost functions, as D drifts from
0, the systemic cost would increase at ﬁrst because this diverse diversiﬁcation
would open the gate for interbank linkages to spread ﬁnancial difﬁculty. How-
ever, after some point, for nonlinear enough cost functions, the systemic cost
would decrease because of having less of the cost associated with the simulta-
neous failure of banks. In fact, this phase transition in Dopt occurs because of

12

this initial increase in the systemic cost as D moves from 0 to 1 for any type of
cost function.

It is important to mention that the results do not depend on these par-
ticular parameters and by changing the parameters, including number of as-
sets, number of banks, banks’ capital buffer, maximum percentage of interbank
loans to total assets, and type of the function of percentage of interbank loans
to total assets versus connectivity, the pattern of the results remains intact. Be-
sides, the results are not because of this particular assets loss probability dis-
tribution. If the t-distribution be swapped with another distribution like the
normal distribution, the same type of results would be still achieved.

6 Conclusion

This paper extends Beale et al model in [5] to account not only for the corre-
lated exposure to the same source of risk, but also for the direct exposure of
banks in the interbank market. We found that the existence of interbank loans
which could serve as a means of contagion makes certain levels of the regu-
lator diversifying the banks individual diversiﬁcation non optimum given a
level of network connectivity for any type of systemic cost function. Also, this
moral for the banking system does not depend on the input parameters, in-
cluding number of assets, number of banks, banks’ capital buffer, maximum
percentage of interbank loans to total assets, and the type of the function of
percentage of interbank loans to total assets versus connectivity. So, in fact,
the regulator could let banks decrease their capital buffers when the system is
moving away from the non-optimum area while the systemic cost still remains
at its acceptable level.

References

[1] V. Acharya and T. Yorulmazer. Information contagion and bank herding.

Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 40(1):215–231, 2008.

[2] V. Acharya, T. Yorulmazer, and C. for Economic Policy Research. Informa-
tion contagion and inter-bank correlation in a theory of systemic risk. Centre for
Economic Policy Research, 2003.

[3] F. Allen and D. Gale. Financial contagion. Journal of political economy, pages

1–33, 2000.

[4] D. Backus, S. Foresi, and L. Wu. Liquidity and contagion in ﬁnancial mar-

kets. CRIF Working Paper series, page 31, 1999.

[5] N. Beale, D. Rand, H. Battey, K. Croxson, R. May, and M. Nowak. Indi-
vidual versus systemic risk and the regulators dilemma. PNAS, In press.

13

[6] N. Bingham and R. Kiesel. Risk-neutral valuation: Pricing and hedging of

ﬁnancial derivatives. Springer Verlag, 2004.

[7] D. Blackwell, M. Grifﬁths, D. Winters, and I. Books24x7. Modern ﬁnancial

markets: prices, yields, and risk analysis. Wiley, 2007.

[8] N. Boyson, J. Helwege, and J. Jindra. Crises, liquidity shocks, and ﬁre
sales at ﬁnancial institutions. Technical report, working paper, University
of South Carolina, 2010.

[9] R. Caballero and A. Simsek. Fire sales in a model of complexity, 2009.

[10] C. Calomiris and G. Gorton. The origins of banking panics: models, facts,

and bank regulation, 1991.

[11] Y. Chen. Banking panics: The role of the ﬁrst-come, ﬁrst-served rule and
information externalities. Journal of Political Economy, 107(5):946–968, 1999.

[12] E. Elton, M. Gruber, S. Brown, and W. Goetzmann. Modern portfolio theory

and investment analysis. Wiley-India, 2009.

[13] K. French, M. Baily, J. Campbell, J. Cochrane, D. Diamond, D. Dufﬁe,
A. Kashyap, F. Mishkin, R. Rajan, D. Scharfstein, et al. The squam lake
report: Fixing the ﬁnancial system*. Journal of Applied Corporate Finance,
22(3):8–21, 2010.

[14] P. Gai and S. Kapadia. Contagion in ﬁnancial networks. Bank of England,

Working Paper, 2007.

[15] A. Haldane. Rethinking the ﬁnancial network. Speech delivered at the Fi-

nancial Student Association, Amsterdam, April, 2009.

[16] A. Haldane and R. May. Systemic risk in banking ecosystems. Nature,

469(7330):351–355, 2011.

[17] International Monetary Fund.

IMF Global Financial Stability Report:
Meeting New Challenges to Stability and Building a Safer System. 2010.

[18] R. May and N. Arinaminpathy. Systemic risk: the dynamics of model

banking systems. Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 7(46):823, 2010.

[19] P. Mistrulli. Assessing ﬁnancial contagion in the interbank market: Maxi-
mum entropy versus observed interbank lending patterns. Journal of Bank-
ing & Finance, 2010.

[20] E. Nier, J. Yang, T. Yorulmazer, and A. Alentorn. Network models and
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 31(6):2033–

ﬁnancial stability.
2060, 2007.

[21] NYU Stern School of Business. Repairing the US Financial Architecture: An

Independent View.

14

[22] J. Rochet and J. Tirole.

Interbank lending and systemic risk.

Money, Credit and Banking, 28(4):733–762, 1996.

Journal of

[23] A. Shleifer and R. Vishny. Fire sales in ﬁnance and macroeconomics. Tech-

nical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2010.

[24] J. Stiglitz. Risk and global economic architecture: Why full ﬁnancial inte-

gration may be undesirable, 2010.

[25] S. Wells. Financial interlinkages in the united kingdom’s interbank market

and the risk of contagion. Bank of England Working Paper No. 230, 2004.

Appendix:
Randomly generating X matrices with a speciﬁc di-
verse diversiﬁcation parameter

Here is the algorithm that we have devised to randomly generate X matrices
with a speciﬁc diverse diversiﬁcation parameter, D, given that the number of
assets equals to the number of banks (M = N = n) or in other words, the X is
a square matrix.

At ﬁrst, a seed point, consisted of n numbers, is randomly generated such
that the sum of the n numbers equals to 1. When D = 0, all banks invest in
the same type of portfolio as the seed (in fact, they multiply the seed according
to their total investment in the external assets). As D increases, banks make
some perturbation to the seed and each one approaches a particular asset such
that when D = 1, each bank has invested only in one asset (since all assets are
assumed to be the same, it does not matter in which asset a bank specializes.
For the perturbation, a vector made of n elements, all of which except one are
negative and whose sum is 0, is added to the seed as follows:

sn − n
sn − n−1


(cid:1) is the perturbation vec-

...

sn + 1

...

...

X =

s1 + 1
s1 − n

···
···
...
···

s2 − 2
s2 + 1


(cid:1) is the initial seed and(cid:0) 1 −2 ··· −n
n[(n − 1)(1 + 2) +(cid:80)n−2

s1 − 2

s2 − 3

D =

Here(cid:0) s1 s2 ··· sn

tor that for each bank is added to the initial seed as above.

For such an X matrix, given that 2 ≥ 3 ≥ ··· ≥ n, D would be:

i=1 [(n − 1 − 2i)i+2]]

n(n − 1)

(A-1)

15

So, by replacing 1 with 2 + ··· + n in equation A-1, there would be:

n−2(cid:88)

(2n − 2)2 +

[(2n − 2 − 2i)i+2] = Dn(n − 1)

(A-2)

i=1

Therefore, n − 1 random numbers are generated and after descendingly order-
ing are passed to 2,··· , n respectively and these i, i ≥ 1 are normalized so as
to satisfy equation A-2. Since short-selling is not allowed in this model, all the
elements of X matrix should be non-negative and if it has not been the case,
the above process is repeated until all the elements become non-negative.

For large values of D, it is computationally better that the seed be closer
to the seed weighting equally all the assets, so it may be better off that the seed
feasible area become restricted to some extent corresponding to how large D
is.

16

