Model of the Songbird Nucleus HVC as a Network of Central Pattern

Generators

Eve Armstrong∗1 and Henry D. I. Abarbanel†2,3

1BioCircuits Institute, 2Department of Physics, 3Marine Physical Laboratory (Scripps Institution of Oceanography), University of

California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0374

(Dated: March 12, 2016)

We propose a functional architecture of the adult songbird nucleus HVC in which the core element is a
"functional syllable unit" (FSU). In this model, HVC is organized into functional syllable units, each of which
provides the basis for the production of one syllable in vocalization. Within each unit, the inhibitory neuron
population takes one of two operational states:
(A) synchronous ﬁring wherein all inhibitory neurons ﬁre
simultaneously, and (B) competitive ﬁring of the inhibitory neurons. Switching between these basic modes of
activity is accomplished via changes in the synaptic strengths among the inhibitory neurons. The inhibitory
neurons connect to excitatory projection neurons such that during state (A) the activity of projection neurons is
suppressed, while during state (B) patterns of sequential ﬁring of projection neurons can occur. The latter state
is stabilized by feedback from the projection to the inhibitory neurons. Song composition for speciﬁc species
is distinguished by the manner in which different FSUs are functionally connected to each other. Ours is a
computational model built with biophysically based neurons. We illustrate that many observations of HVC activity
are explained by the dynamics of the proposed population of FSUs, and we identify aspects of the model that are
currently testable experimentally. In addition, and standing apart from the core features of an FSU, we propose
that the transition between modes may be governed by the biophysical mechanism of neuromodulation.

I.

INTRODUCTION

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
 
4
1

 
 
]

.

C
N
o
i
b
-
q
[
 
 

1
v
1
3
1
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

In the song system of the avian brain, nucleus HVC
plays a central role at the junction of the auditory and
song production pathways. The sparse ﬁring of excitatory
projection neurons within HVC into the song production
pathway via nucleus RA has been the subject of both ex-
periments and model development. A critical role of the
inhibitory interneurons was suggested by Gibb, Gentner,
& Abarbanel (2009a) (hereafter GGA1) and supported by
experiments by Kosche et al. (2015) (hereafter KVL15). In
light of those experiments and earlier observations, we
suggest an architecture for HVC that is consistent with a
critical role for both structured inhibition and excitation
within the nucleus. This paper lays out and explores
the consequences of this architecture, which is built on
functional units in HVC that underly the formation of
syllables in vocalization.

We model the nucleus HVC as a simple pattern-
generating network capable of qualitatively reproducing
many observations at the whole-cell, population, and
behavioral levels.
In doing so, we offer a biophysical

∗earmstrong@ucsd.edu
†habarbanel@ucsd.edu

1

explanation for the sparse ﬁrings of HVC projection neu-
rons established by Hahnloser et al. (2002) and the ex-
periments that subsequently uncovered details of the
underlying neuronal processes and neural circuit rela-
tionships, particularly the work of KVL15. We depart
from previous modeling efforts by shifting focus from
the sparse ﬁrings alone to a broader picture including
other salient features of HVC that complementary lines
of research have illuminated. In particular, we are inter-
ested in a cell’s effect upon a circuit at times when it is
spiking and equally at times when it is not spiking.

Our model consists of two key components: i) a sub-
circuit that can assume one of two modes of behavior,
depending on inhibitory synaptic coupling strengths, and
ii) a mechanism capable of effecting a rapid transition
between these modes. We ﬁnd that these aims can be
accomplished by invoking Lotka-Volterra-like dynamics
subject to possible neuromodulatory mechanisms that
have been proposed to explain neuronal activity in a va-
riety of species, but which have been studied minimally

Hahnloser et al.

within the context of the avian song generation system.
(2002) established the pattern-
generating capability of HVC by demonstrating that
some HVC excitatory cells that project to the nucleus
RA (HVCRA neurons) reliably participate in one sparse
pattern during song. Lesioning studies had previously
identiﬁed HVC as residing high on the control pathway
for song production, thereby poised to pass its instruc-
tions downstream where the song is ultimately generated
by the syrinx and lungs. The cellular dynamics in HVC
have been signiﬁcantly illuminated by KVL15. Their work
focused on the HVCRA neurons and inhibitory interneu-
rons (HVCI), which project within HVC only. KVL15
demonstrated via a series of GABA antagonist (gabazine)
induced responses that the role of inhibition is central
in modulating activity of the HVCRA cells. They estab-
lished the importance of both a structured inhibition
and structured excitation for song generation, where all
activity is set within an ambient background of excita-
tion. In addition, KVL15 reported high in vitro rates of
reciprocal connectivity between cell pairs and disynap-
tic connectivity between HVCRA cells, which Mooney &
Prather (2005) had noted are reminiscent of such rates in
pattern-generating networks throughout the central ner-
vous systems in other species. Pattern-generating activity
has also been induced via electrical stimulations in slice
preparations of HVC (Solis & Perkel 2005).

Previous HVC models have focused on producing
the observed series of HVCRA neuron activations, by in-
voking a feedforward "synﬁre" chain of excitation (Li &
Greenside 2006; Long, Jin, & Fee 2010; GGA1). GGA1
suggested in addition that inhibition plays a mediating
role upon such a chain. One of the artiﬁcial constructs of
GGA1 was the introduction of a neuronal oscillator loop
that could transition between an "on" and "off" state. This
functional loop was arrayed in a chain stimulated in an
unspeciﬁed manner to excite a signal moving down the
chain, as interneuron activity conﬁned the excitation to
a short temporal window. In this way, GGA1 suggested
that inhibition is integral to the series propagation, yet
their proposed mechanism was not a biophysical one.

Cannon et al. (2015) also proposed a chain modulated
by inhibition, without offering a biophysical motivation.
Yildiz & Kiebel (2011) went further by attributing the
inhibition-modulated excitation to the "winnerless com-
petition" phenomenon, although they proposed no partic-
ular connectivity for effecting the functionality. No model
of HVC explains the structured excitation and inhibition
within a biophysical framework.

We depart from earlier modeling efforts by building
a functional architecture - the "functional syllable unit"
(FSU) - that not only produces series activations, but
more broadly, can assume two modes of behavior, where
a transition between modes can occur via a neuromodu-
latory mechanism. We suggest that this FSU is the core
HVC element, and we describe it qualitatively in the next
section.

The remainder of the paper is structured as follows.
Methods lays out the model neurons and synapses used in
the functional architecture. In Results, numerical results
from the Hodgkin-Huxley based circuit show how the
connectivity can give rise to two distinct modes of dy-
namics. In Building Complete Songs we offer an example
of creating a species-speciﬁc song using these FSUs as
building blocks. In Discussion, we examine winnerless
competition as a theoretical framework for the compet-
itive inhibitory neuron dynamics, and our suggestion
that neuromodulation is the biophysical switch sculpting
the HVC interneuron activity. We also comment on the
signiﬁcance of the silent inter-syllable gaps in the context
of song generation. Then we turn to ways in which the
model predictions can be tested experimentally.

In subsequent papers, we will: I) add biophysical
detail to the FSU architecture, based on the available elec-
trophysiological measurements of the cellular properties;
II) examine the model dynamics in terms of bifurcation
theory, in which the synaptic maximal conductivities are
the parameters of interest; and III) describe a technique
of statistical data assimilation that can in principle deter-
mine whether our proposed functional connectivity (or
any connectivity) is accurate.

A FUNCTIONAL SYLLABLE UNIT

II.

The central constituent of our model is a functional
syllable unit (FSU). We consider HVC to be comprised
of numerous FSUs; inter-FSU connectivity we will dis-
cuss later. An FSU is comprised of an "inner" inhibitory

loop that can assume one of two operational modes, de-
pending on the synaptic coupling strengths among the
inhibitory cells: (A): a state in which all inhibitory neu-
rons ﬁre in synchrony, and (B): a state in which the in-

2

hibitory neurons are forced, via mutual inhibition, to
ﬁre in alternation. We call these modes "quiescent" and
"active", respectively. These two modes are captured in a
Lotka-Volterra-like system, which expresses the quiescent
mode when the inhibitory coupling strengths are weak;
above some threshold value of coupling strengths, the
circuit makes a bifurcation to the active mode. This phe-
nomenon of mode switching was formalized in another
neural context as "winnerless competition" by Rabinovich
et al. (2001).

The inhibitory loop of HVCI neurons is connected to
an "outer" loop of excitatory HVCRA projection neurons
as shown in Figure 1. Each triangle represents one in-
hibitory neuron and each circle represents an ensemble
of HVCRA neurons. The circle- and arrow-headed lines
represent inhibitory and excitatory functional synaptic
connections, respectively.

With this connectivity, we can make the following
associations between behavior and FSU activity. When
the bird is not singing, all FSUs in HVC sit in a back-
ground of excitation sufﬁcient for quiescence: all HVCI
cells ﬁre in synchrony, thereby - via the wiring of Figure
1 - silencing all HVCRA neurons. The coupling strengths
in this FSU then increase beyond the threshold required
for a bifurcation to active mode. This switching might be
effected via an infusion of an inhibitory neurotransmitter
such as GABA in the vicinity of a particular FSU. The
HVCI neurons within that particular FSU now are forced
into a winnerless competition, and they ﬁre sequentially.
The wiring of Figure 1 then effects sequential ﬁrings of
the HVCRA neurons. That is: during its active state, an
FSU represents the playing of one syllable, where - in
the example architecture of Figure 1 - three HVCRA en-

sembles ﬁre in sequence. The syllable can play until the
elevated inhibition drops below some threshold, at which
point the FSU rapidly returns to quiescence.

To model the full song of a speciﬁc species, we con-
sider HVC to be a collection of such pattern-generating
structures. While "Syllable A" is presumed to be initi-
ated by an incentive to vocalize, we attribute subsequent
syllables to a feedback loop, most likely from the motor
area (e.g. Vallentin & Long 2015), in which a series of
FSUs in HVC is targeted by a succession of inhibitory
neurotransmitter infusions. Such a loop was proposed by
Gibb, Gentner, & Abarbanel (2009b), who suggested the
nucleus Uva as a likely source of the feedback. In this
aspect of our model, the silent inter-syllable gaps most
likely play an integral role.

Figure 1: A functional syllable unit (FSU), comprised of three
HVCI neurons and three ensembles of HVCRA neurons. Trian-
gles and circles represent the former and latter populations, re-
spectively. Circle- and arrow-headed lines represent inhibitory
and excitatory functional connections, respectively.

CONSTITUENTS OF A FUNCTIONAL SYLLABLE UNIT

III.

A. Simplified neurons

To build the FSU architecture, we use single-compartment
Hodgkin-Huxley-type neurons with sodium, potassium,
and leak currents only (NaKL neurons). Detailed known
electrophysiological properties of the neurons in an FSU
will be examined in the next of this series of HVC model
papers. The time evolution of the membrane potential
V(t) of each neuron is expressed as:

C

dVi(t)

dt

= IL,i(t) + INa,i(t) + IK,i(t) + ∑
j(cid:54)=i

Isyn,ij(t)

+ Ibackground

(1)

where C is the membrane capacitance. The Isyn terms rep-
resent the synaptic input currents, Ibackground is a constant
DC current representing ambient background excitation,
and the ion channel currents for the ith neuron are:

IL,i(t) = gL(EL − Vi(t))
INa,i(t) = gNa,im(t)3h(t)(ENa − Vi(t))
IK,i(t) = gK,in(t)4(EK − Vi(t)).

The gL, gNa, and gK are the maximum conductances of
the leak, sodium, and potassium currents, respectively;

3

EL, ENa, and EK are the respective reversal potentials.
The gating variables m, h, and n satisfy:

dai
(t) = (a∞(Vi(t)) − ai(t))/τa(Vi(t));
dt
a∞(Vi) = 0.5[1 + tanh((Vi − θa,i)/σa,i)]
τa(Vi) = ta0 + ta1[1 − tanh2((Vi − θa,i)/σa,i)];
a(t) = m(t), h(t), n(t).

All parameters in the neuron equations we take to be
constant values when examining the full model dynam-
ics. We deﬁne a particular neuron as "excitatory" or
"inhibitory" via the resting potential EL and synaptic
reversal potential Esyn,rev. We render the neurons dis-
tinguishable via slightly different values of their leak
maximum conductances gL and resting potentials EL. All
other parameter values in the neuron equations are iden-
tical among neurons. Values are listed in Table 1.

gL,0 0.00303 µS gL,1 0.00302 µS
gL,2 0.00299 µS gL,3 0.00301 µS
gL,4 0.00298 µS gL,5 0.00297 µS
-60.0 mV EL,1 -59.96 mV
EL,0
EL,2 -59.94 mV EL,3
-80.0 mV
EL,4 -80.05 mV EL,5 -79.95 mV
gNa
0.2
µS
ENa
-77.0 mV
-60.0 mV
θm
-16.0 mV
σm
t0,m
1.0 ms
t1,m
7.0 ms
C
-55.0 mV
25.0 mV
1.0 ms
5.0 ms

µS gK
1.2
50.0 mV EK
-40.0 mV θh
16.0 mV σh
0.1 ms t0,h
0.4 ms t1,h
0.01 uF θn
σn
t0,n
t1,n

Table 1: Parameter values for neurons. The neurons are dis-
tinguished via slightly different values of gL and EL, where
gL,0 and EL,0 denote the maximum leak conductance and rest-
ing potential of cell number zero (out of zero, one, two, three,
four, and ﬁve). Unit notation: mV are milli-Volts; ms are
milli-seconds; uF are micro-Farads; µS are micro-Siemens.

Our use of simple NaKL neurons merits a comment,
in light of the well established presence of calcium ion
channels in all neurons of HVC (e.g. Daou et al. 2013).
We chose NaKL nodes for simplicity; our focus in this
paper is to identify functional connectivity designs at the
single-neuron level that can effect certain modes of net-
work activity. We sought to reduce the number of degrees
of freedom in our model while retaining some degree of

biological realism. Using NaKL neurons was a reason-
able compromise. In a detailed investigation to come,
we will compare these results to those of a model that
includes L-type calcium ion channels in both HVCRA and
HVCI cells and a hyperpolarization-activated current in
the HVCI cells.

B. Synapses

For the synapse dynamics, we adopt the formalism of
Destexhe & Sejnowski (2001) and Destexhe et al. (1994)
for electrically-delivered neurotransmitter pulses, with
one alteration: we deﬁne the inhibitory synapse coupling
strengths gij not as ﬁxed numbers but rather as func-
tions of the maximum neurotransmitter concentration
Tmax presented to a post-synaptic neuron.

Isyn,ij = gij(Tmax(t))sij(t)(Esyn,ij − Vi(t)) (2)
dsij(t)
= α(Tmax(t), Vj(t))[1 − sij(t)] − βsij(t);
(3)

dt

α(Tmax(t), Vj(t)) =

Tmax/T0

1 + exp(−(Vj(t) − VP)/KP)

(4)

where Isyn,ij is the current seen by post-synaptic cell i as
a result of input from pre-synaptic cell j. Esyn,ij is the
synaptic reversal potential of cell i with respect to cell j,
Vi(t) is the instantaneous membrane voltage of cell i, and
sij(t) is the gating variable of the synapse entering cell
i from cell j. T0 has units of ms-mM so that α, the rate
of gate opening, has units of 1/time; β, the rate of gate
closing, also has units of 1/time. Vj(t) is the pre-synaptic
membrane voltage, and VP and KP are parameters gov-
erning the shape of the distribution of neurotransmitter
rise and fall.

There are two neurotransmitter concentrations to con-
sider: excitatory and inhibitory. The maximum concen-
tration of excitatory neurotransmitter we take to have a
constant value of 1.5 mM1; the maximum concentration
of inhibitory neurotransmitter (Tmax,inh) we permit to vary.
We deﬁne the inhibitory-to-inhibitory coupling strengths
(gij,inh−to−inh) so that they rise with Tmax,inh, and where
Tmax,inh is some unspeciﬁed function of the membrane
voltage of a cell that may be external to HVC:

gij,inh−to−inh(Tmax,inh) ∝ Tp

max,inh

Tmax,inh = f (Vexternal(t)).

(5)
(6)

1Throughout this paper, we will adopt the custom of referring to concentration in moles. The custom exists because of the many

uncertainties involved in determining synapse volumes (see Discussion).

4

The cell indicated by "Vexternal" is to be the "donor" of
the stimulus that effects the change in Tmax. The propor-
tionality constant in Equation 5 is some positive number,
which we leave unspeciﬁed; the exponent p is some num-
ber equal to or perhaps slightly greater than one. All
values in the synapse equations that we take to be con-
stants during our examination of the dynamics are listed
in Table 2. Finally, hereafter we shall refer to Tmax,inh sim-
ply as Tmax, and we will occasionally refer to an inhibitory
neurotransmitter as simply GABA, the primary type of

inhibitory neurotransmitter in HVC (Dutar & Perkel 1998;
Schmidt & Perkel 1998).

Esyn,inh -80.0 mV βinh 0.18 ms−1
Esyn,exc 0.0 mV βexc 0.38 ms−1
Vp
1 ms-mM
Kp

2.0 mV T0
5.0 mV

Table 2: Parameter values for synapses. T0 is taken to have a
magnitude of 1 for both inhibitory and excitatory neurotrans-
mitters; β takes different values for inhibitory and excitatory
synapses.

IV.

RESULTS

of three of the HVCRA ensembles as shown, where
no two HVCI neurons "omit" the same HVCRA en-
semble;

• Neurons within each HVCRA ensemble synapse to

all three HVCI neurons as shown.

With this connectivity, each HVCRA ensemble connects
disynaptically, via an interneuron, to both of the other
HVCRA ensembles. There are no monosynaptic connec-
tions between HVCRA ensembles in an FSU.2

B. HVCRA neurons spike in absence of inhibition
To simulate an environment in which HVCRA neurons,
in the absence of inhibition, ﬁre above the threshold

Figure 2: Voltage traces of three HVCRA projection neurons,
one in each of the three ensembles, ﬁre when given a constant
low background current of 0.3 nano-Amperes (nA), in the ab-
sence of inhibition. All three are able to ﬁre. (The voltage trace
numbers 3, 4, and 5 correspond to the numbering scheme of
Figure 3).

In this section we illustrate, via the time course of
membrane voltages of an FSU’s constituent neurons, how
an FSU functions dynamically. First we will demonstrate
that the excitatory neurons of an FSU will ﬁre given a low
background excitation. Secondly, we will show that im-
posing sufﬁcient inhibition upon these excitatory neurons
leads to a quiescent FSU, for a low range of inhibitory-to-
inhibitory coupling strengths. Third, we will show that
a higher range of these coupling strengths, combined
with a higher value of Tmax, can effect a regime in which
the inhibitory neurons alternate their ﬁring patterns; this
scenario represents an active FSU. Fourth, we will demon-
strate that connections from the excitatory to inhibitory
cells are critical for the stable propagation of a series in
active mode. Fifth, we will suggest a possible role of
inter-FSU excitatory-to-excitatory connections.

For all voltage time series shown in this paper, the
generative model was written in Python, and the volt-
age equations of motion were integrated using Python’s
adaptive fourth-order Runge-Kutta "odeINT" with a step
of 0.1 millisecond.

A. Essential architecture of an FSU

Our FSU is constructed as depicted in Figure 1. The
essential features of the connectivity are these:

• There is all-to-all connectivity among the HVCI

neurons;

• Each HVCI neuron synapses to neurons in two out
2We leave unspeciﬁed: i) the rate of excitatory-to-excitatory connections within an ensemble; ii) the number of neurons within each
ensemble to which one HVCI neuron projects; iii) the number of neurons within an ensemble that project to a particular HVCI neuron. The
number of HVCRA neurons per ensemble may be taken to be eight, for agreement with the observed ~8:1 ratio of HVCRA to HVCI neurons
in the nucleus; however, our model does not require any particular value.

5

required to generate an action potential, we give the three
HVCRA ensembles of Figure 1 a constant injected current
of 0.3 nA. Figure 2 shows the voltage traces of three
HVCRA cells, one in each ensemble; all projection cells
spike.

C. A quiescent FSU

Now we involve the interneurons. First we connect the
interneurons all-to-all and set these synapse strengths
at values near 0.01 µS (see Table 3 for the connectivity
matrix), and with the value of Tmax at an initial low value
of 0.5 mM. With these choices, the HVCI cells ﬁre in
synchrony.

Next we permit each HVCI neuron to synapse di-
rectly to two of the three HVCRA ensembles, where no
two HVCI neurons "omit" the same HVCRA ensemble.
We set these inhibitory-to-excitatory connection strengths
to be of order 1.0 µS. With these choices, the inhibition
is sufﬁciently strong to overpower the background stim-
ulation of 0.3 nA and silence all the HVCRA ensembles.
That is: each HVCI neuron actively suppresses two of
the HVCRA ensembles.

Figure 3 illustrates this result. The voltage traces of
the HVCI cells (top) indicates that they are ﬁring in syn-
chrony. As each HVCI neuron projects to two HVCRA
ensembles, the three previously uninhibited HVCRA en-
sembles are suppressed. The corresponding schematic
is shown at bottom, where blue- and white-ﬁlled sym-
bols represent neural activity above and below threshold,
respectively. This regime we call quiescence.

Cell
0
1
2
3
4
5

3

4

5

2

1

0
0.0 0.011 0.011 1.11 1.1 1.11
0.011 0.0
0.01 1.11 1.1 1.1
0.011 0.011 0.0 1.11 1.1 1.1
0.0 0.0 0.0
1.1
0.0
0.0
0.0 0.0 0.0
1.1
1.11 0.0 0.0 0.0
1.11

1.11
1.11
0.0

Table 3: Synapse strengths gij for the voltage traces in Fig-
ure 3 for a quiescent FSU. Units are micro-Siemens (µS). The
value of 0.011 µS in [row 0, column 1] corresponds to g01: the
synapse entering Cell 0 from Cell 1. Here, the inhibitory-to-
inhibitory coupling strengths are of order 0.01 µS (they must
be below ~0.5 µS for synchronous ﬁring of the HVCI neu-
rons to occur); the inhibitory-to-excitatory coupling strengths
must be above ~1 µS to overpower the background excitation
and silence the HVCRA neurons; the excitatory-to-inhibitory
connections here are of order 1 µS, but they need not be any
particular value for synchronous activity of the HVCI neurons
in the FSU to occur.

Figure 3: A quiescent FSU. Voltage traces of the three HVCI
neurons (top) and three HVCRA neurons each representing
one ensemble (middle), representing a quiescent FSU, where
the inhibitory-upon-inhibitory coupling strengths (see Table
3) are sufﬁciently low to permit the HVCI neurons to ﬁre in
synchrony, and Tmax is 0.5 mM. Bottom: The corresponding
schematic, where triangles (cells 0, 1, and 2) and circles (cells
3, 4, and 5) represent HVCI and HVCRA neurons, respectively.
The cell numbers on the schematic correspond to the number-
ing of the voltage traces. Blue and white represent activity
above and below threshold only, respectively. Each HVCI
projects to two HVCRA neurons. When all three HVCI neu-
rons are active simultaneously, the three HVCRA ensembles
are suppressed.

6

D. An active FSU

To transition to active mode, our model requires two
modiﬁcations:

• the HVCI-to-HVCI coupling strengths must in-
crease by roughly two orders of magnitude: from
~0.01 to 1.0 µS (see Table 4);

• Tmax must increase by a factor of roughly three:

from ~0.5 to 1.5 mM.

This second requirement implies the direct correlation be-
tween synapse coupling strengths and neurotransmitter
concentration that we have embodied in Equation 5.

Figure 4: An active FSU, represented in a three-frame "movie". Here, the inhibitory-to-inhibitory coupling strengths are of
order 1 µS Table 4) and Tmax = 1.5 mM, so that the inhibitory neurons may engage in competitive dynamics. Left: Three
"pairs" of voltage traces, each representing one HVCI neuron (top panel in each pair) and the one HVCRA ensemble to
which that particular HVCI neuron does not directly project (bottom panel in each pair). Cells designated as "pairs" may ﬁre
simultaneously. Thus, series activity of the HVCI neurons effects a series of activity of the HVCRA ensembles. Right: The
corresponding schematic of each pair, where a currently-active pair is highlighted by a speciﬁc color. The activity proceeds
clockwise, beginning with the "green pair" (top row), followed by the "red pair" second (middle), and "blue pair" third (bottom).
The numbering of cells on the schematic corresponds to the numbering of the voltage traces.

7

With these two adjustments, and with the same back-
ground current of 0.3 nA, the HVCI cells now alternate
their spiking activity. Given the wiring, the activity of
the HVCRA ensembles also alternates. The alternations
are a particular repeating series. Figure 4 illustrates this
activity in a three-frame "movie".

At left in Figure 4 are three pairs of voltage traces.
Each pair represents the activity of one HVCI neuron
and one HVCRA ensemble, where the HVCRA ensemble
in each pair is the one HVCRA ensemble in the FSU to
which that particular HVCI neuron does not project. At
right are the corresponding schematics, where each pair
is sequentially highlighted by a speciﬁc color. Cells in
each pair may ﬁre simultaneously. By this wiring, series
activity of the HVCI neurons effects a series of activity
of the HVCRA ensembles.

First, the "green pair" ﬁres (top row). Here, the green
HVCI neuron has activated and is able to suppress the
other two HVCI neurons, which are colored in white
in the schematic to indicate that they are currently inac-
tive above threshold. The active (green) HVCI neuron
projects to two of the three HVCRA ensembles; these two
are colored in white in the schematic to indicate that they
are not active above threshold. The third HVCRA ensem-
ble, to which the active HVCI neuron does not project,
is the only uninhibited ensemble. In the presence of the
background excitation, this HVCRA ensemble ﬁres; hence
it is also colored green.

Next, activity in the "inner loop" of inhibitory neurons
proceeds clockwise, to the "red" HVCI neuron. An analo-
gous situation to the above is now established, wherein
the active (red) HVCI neuron suppresses the other two
HVCI neurons and two of the HVCRA ensembles, and
the one unsuppressed HVCRA ensemble (also red) may
ﬁre. Finally, in the third row, the third "blue pair" ﬁres.
The complete sequence might be most readily apparent
by a comparison of the three voltage traces of the HVCRA
ensembles: a brief two-spike event occurs beginning at
t ~60 (for the green ensemble), 145 (red), and 200 (blue)
ms, respectively.

This active FSU represents one syllable of song dur-
ing which three ensembles of HVCRA neurons ﬁre in
a sequence. Note again that to effect this series, along
with the increase in the inhibitory coupling strengths, an
increase in Tmax from 0.5 to 1.5 mM was required.

Figure 5 demonstrates that this particular series re-
peats. The six voltage traces are shown, now over three
times the duration of Figure 4. The six panels are ar-
ranged so that the voltage traces of the three inhibitory

neurons are shown ﬁrst (top) and those of the projection
ensembles are listed below. This organization is intended
to facilitate recognition that the inhibitory cells all pos-
sess roughly identical waveforms with phase offsets, as
is the case for the projection neurons.

Figure 5: Three rotations of the series activity represented
in Figure 4., where the three inhibitory cells and excitatory
ensembles are each grouped together at top and bottom, re-
spectively. Color coding is as deﬁned in Figure 4.

1

2

3

4

5

Cell 0
0
1
2
3
4
5

0.0 1.1 1.0 1.11 1.1 1.11
1.1 0.0 1.1 1.11 1.1 1.1
1.0 1.1 0.0 1.11 1.1 1.1
1.1 1.11 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
0.0 1.11 1.1 0.0 0.0 0.0
1.11 0.0 1.11 0.0 0.0 0.0

Table 4: Synapse strengths gij for the voltage traces in Figure
4 of an active FSU. Units are micro-Siemens (µS). Notation:
the value of 1.1 µS in [row 0, column 1] corresponds to g01: the
synapse entering Cell 0 from Cell 1. Here, the inhibitory-to-
inhibitory coupling strengths must reach a threshold of order
1 µS for series activity of HVCI to occur; the inhibitory-to-
excitatory strengths may remain of order 1 µS; the excitatory-
to-inhibitory strengths must reach a value of order 1 µS for the
series of HVCI to occur.

E. Lower limit on Tmax for active mode

We were able to effect a quiescent FSU using a value of
Tmax as low as 0.5 mM, but a transition to active mode re-
quired a roughly threefold increase in Tmax. We have not

8

identiﬁed the precise value of Tmax required to effect this
transition, yet we expect that the transition occurs effec-
tively instantaneously, as there occurs a sharp transition
from quiescence to active mode as Tmax increases.

The values of Tmax that we examined spanned 0.5 to

10.5 mM in increments of 1. In Figure 6 we show the
voltage traces of inhibitory and projection neurons for
four values of Tmax: 0.5, 1.5, 9,5, and 10.5 mM. Here, the
connectivity strengths are the active-mode strengths as
listed in Table 4.

Figure 6: FSU behavior for four values of Tmax. Inhibitory and projection neuron voltage traces for Tmax = 0.5, 1.5, 9.5, and
10.5 mM, where the inhibitory coupling strengths are of order 1 µS (see Table 4). Colors are as deﬁned in Figure 4. Top left:
Tmax = 0.5 is insufﬁcient for creating the series of three activations (although Tmax = 0.5 can effect the quiescent behavior).
Bottom left: Tmax = 1.5 is sufﬁcient for creating the series activity; the dotted rectangle draws attention to one series rotation.
This set of voltage traces is identical to those in Figure 5. The cellular behavior at this value of Tmax is identical to the behavior
at values, in increments of 1, from 1.5 through 8.5. Top right: Once Tmax increases beyond a value of 8.5, the stability of series
activations sharply degrades. Bottom right: At a Tmax value of 10.5, winnerless competition fails completely: we enter a regime
in which one of the three HVCI neurons is able to consistently suppress the other two (a "winner-take-all" regime).

We see that a value of Tmax of 0.5 (top left) is insufﬁ-
cient to yield sequential HVCI neuron ﬁrings. At Tmax
= 1.5 (bottom left), the series activity occurs; the dotted
rectangle draws attention to one series rotation. This

set of voltage traces is identical to the set of Figure 5
for an active FSU. The time series are identical for Tmax
values from 1.5 through 8.5. Once Tmax increases beyond
8.5 (top right), the stability of sequential HVCI neuron

9

ﬁrings sharply declines. At Tmax = 10.5 (bottom right),
winnerless competition fails completely, and we are in-
stead in a "winner-take-all" regime in which one of the
three HVCI neurons consistently suppresses the other
two.

We note that the cells exhibit no gradual evolution
of behavior as the Tmax value varies; for example, the
series does not speed or slow. Rather, at certain values of
Tmax there occurs a rapid switching between distinct be-
haviors. We observed the same behavior upon gradually
tuning the inhibitory-upon-inhibitory coupling strengths.
Such behavior is reminiscent of a sequence of bifurcations
common in nonlinear systems.

F.

Importance of the excitatory-upon-inhibitory

connections

In our simulations of an active FSU, we found an unex-
pected result regarding the excitatory-to-inhibitory con-
nections (as pictured in Figure 1): the series of HVCI
neuron ﬁrings cannot occur without them. We discov-
ered this when, while maintaining the minimum value of
1.5 mM for Tmax and 1 µS for the inhibitory-to-inhibitory
coupling strengths that are required for active mode, we
removed the excitatory-to-inhibitory connections. The
series of HVCI neuron ﬁrings then failed to occur.

Figure 7: Importance of excitatory-to-inhibitory connections in an FSU. Voltage traces of the six cell groups in an FSU for
two values of excitatory-to-inhibitory coupling strengths, where the inhibitory-upon-inhibitory strengths are of order 1 µS
and Tmax = 1.5 mM - the requirements for an active FSU. Colors are as deﬁned in Figure 4. Left: Excitatory-to-inhibitory
coupling strengths are 0.1 µS, and the series fails to occur. Rather, one HVCI consistently suppresses the other two. Right:
Excitatory-to-inhibitory coupling strengths are 1.0 µS, and the series is stable; this panel is a reproduction of Figure 5 for an
active FSU. A stable propagation of series activity in active mode requires not only minimum threshold values of Tmax and
inhibitory coupling strengths, but also that these excitatory-to-inhibitory connections be of order 1 µS.

This result is demonstrated in Figure 7. Here we show
voltage traces of the six groups of an FSU, colored as
before, for two values of the excitatory-to-inhibitory cou-
pling strengths: 0.1 (left panel) and 1.0 µS (right panel);
the right panel is a reproduction of Figure 5 for an active
FSU. In both panels, the inhibitory-to-inhibitory coupling
strengths are those for active mode (Table 4), and Tmax
is 1.5 mM. We see that below a minimum value of the

excitatory coupling strengths, no series of activity occurs;
rather, one HVCI neuron continuously suppresses the
other two. Mutual inhibition alone is insufﬁcient to achieve
winnerless competition; feedback from the excitatory cells is
required. We noted a similar failing of the series when
we removed any one of the excitatory connections in-
dependently. An increase in the inhibitory-to-inhibitory
coupling strengths did not remedy this effect: similar re-

10

sults occurred for all values of inhibitory-upon-inhibitory
connections from 1 to 20 µS. We ﬁnd this result to be
extremely interesting, with the possible implication that
variable concentrations of excitatory neurotransmitters are
also contributing to HVC dynamics (see Discussion).

to-inhibitory couplings does not reach the bottom FSU
as well. In this way, such connections could in principle
increase the number of excitatory cells participating in a
particular ensemble of a particular syllable, while allow-
ing the spatial extent of the stimulus to remain localized.

G. Excitatory-upon-excitatory connections

We investigated the possible utility of various other func-
tional connections, one of which struck us as potentially
useful in the trained bird: excitatory-to-excitatory con-
nections linking ensembles across - not within - FSUs. An
example of such wiring is depicted in Figure 8, where
these connections are depicted by thicker lines for em-
phasis. Our model does not require these connections,
but we will illustrate a reason why they might be useful.

Possible excitatory-to-excitatory connections
Figure 8:
among FSUs. Each HVCRA ensemble of one FSU (top) projects
to one ensemble in a second FSU (bottom), which does not send
projections back.

Figure 8 is intended to show that an ensemble of
HVCRA neurons in one FSU (at top) may project to
one ensemble of HVCRA neurons in a second FSU (at
bottom), which does not project back. To consider
how these connections might be useful, imagine that
the projection-sending FSU receives the stimulus for en-
hanced inhibitory-to-inhibitory coupling strengths (the
stimulus being, perhaps, an infusion of a neuromodu-
latory agent). That is: the interneurons in the top FSU
of Figure 8 must assume active mode in order for the
syllable to occur. This FSU then can excite neurons in the
bottom FSU even if the stimulus for enhanced inhibitory-

Possible utility of

inter-FSU excitatory-to-
Figure 9:
excitatory connections. Top left: Neurons in separate ensem-
bles of a "sending" FSU, each of which projects to one ensemble
of a "receiving" FSU, as indicated by the thick-lined synapses
in the schematic (right). The "sending" FSU receives the stim-
ulus to transition to active mode. Second, third, and fourth left
panels: Neurons in separate ensembles of the "receiving" FSU,
for three values of the excitatory-to-excitatory (thick-lined)
synapse strengths: 0, 0.1, and 5.0 µS, respectively. For sufﬁ-
ciently large inter-FSU coupling, HVCRA neurons from the
"receiving" FSU may be recruited for a particular ensemble
without the need to target a larger population of HVCI’s with
the stimulus.

11

We illustrate this scenario in Figure 9. The top left
panel represents HVCRA cells in the "sending" FSU. In
the absence of any connection to the sender, the "receiv-
ing" FSU is quiescent (second left panel). The third and
fourth left panels show the time series of ensembles in
the "receiving" FSU for increasing values of the excitatory-
to-excitatory synapse coupling strengths: 0.1 and 5.0 µS,
respectively. To the right is the corresponding schematic.

H. Model scalability

as follows:

• the all-to-all inhibitory-to-inhibitory connectivity

must be preserved;

• each HVCI neuron projects to all but one HVCRA

ensemble;

• each HVCI neuron "chooses" a distinct HVCRA en-
semble to deny a projection; that is: no two HVCI
neurons omit the same HVCRA ensemble.

Our FSU model is generalizable to an arbitrary number
of HVCI neurons and HVCRA ensembles. The rules are

We have yet to examine how the excitatory-to-inhibitory
projections scale.3

V.

BUILDING COMPLETE SONGS

We now illustrate how a full song may be constructed
from individual FSUs. We will use as our example the
highly stereotyped song "motif" of the zebra ﬁnch.

A trained male zebra ﬁnch sings a motif consisting
of an invariant number of syllables separated by gaps
corresponding to inhalation. This song is represented
in the frequency time series by Hahnloser et al. (2002),
reproduced in Figure 10. During normal, uninterrupted
singing, the syllable order is invariant and both syllables
and the silent inter-syllable gaps are precisely timed upon
repeated renditions of the song.

Figure 10: A frequency time series of the zebra ﬁnch motif,
reproduced from Hahnloser et al. (2002). This is the image
that the cartoon model of Figure 11 aims to represent.

Now, within the "FSU framework" that we have proposed,
the full motif could be attributable to a chain-like propaga-
tion linking FSU to FSU within HVC. In light of various
lines of evidence that the syllables represent relatively
independent structures in HVC, we seek another expla-
nation. Studies of learning in juveniles have shown that
syllables become stabilized by inhibition independently
as they are learned (Vallentin & Long 2016). Attempts
to interrupt song have indicated that individual syllables
are relatively robust compared to the full motif: the mo-

tif can be interrupted by non-invasive techniques (Cynx
1990), but syllable interruption requires direct electrical
interference (Ashmore et al. 2005; Vu et al. 2005). Finally,
KVL15 found that global GABA antagonist infusions to
HVC dissolved song while local GABA injections affected
the activity of certain cells in the region of infusion but
but the overall song was preserved. Thus, in our exam-
ple model of a zebra ﬁnch four-syllable motif, we take
the inter-FSU connectivity to be essentially nonexistent
and instead invoke a feedback loop as a mechanism for
activations of a succession of four FSUs.

Figure 11 shows a cartoon representation of Figure 10.
It is a four-frame movie, each frame corresponding to the
vocalization of one syllable. To minimize complication
in this ﬁgure, we represent each FSU (of Figure 1) as a
triangle, which is white when quiescent and dark grey
when active.

The frames proceed as follows.
• Frame 1: An external stimulus enhances the
inhibitory-to-inhibitory coupling strengths of an
FSU in HVC, which corresponds to the ﬁrst syllable
of song ("Syllable A"). If the stimulus is a neuro-
modulatory mechanism, Syllable A can play until
the elevated concentration of the synaptic strength-
enhancing agent falls below some threshold.

• Frame 2: A motor mechanism, perhaps the transi-
tion from exhalation to inhalation, triggers a second
infusion of neurotransmitter to a second FSU, which
corresponds to Syllable B. Syllable B plays out.

3In addition, not all HVCRA neurons in one active FSU must receive a turn to ﬁre. We suspect that a given FSU contains a reservoir of

HVCRA ensembles: signiﬁcantly more than are required to generate one syllable in the trained bird.

12

• Frames 3 and 4: Step 2 repeats to create Syllables C

and D.

To be clear: Each FSU in HVC reliably corresponds to
one particular syllable of motif.

We note two observations of the zebra ﬁnch HVC
that arise naturally within this model framework. First
is the population activity of HVC cells when the awake
bird is not singing: during these times, the HVCI neu-
rons are active and HVCRA neurons are essentially silent
(Kozhevnikov & Fee 2007). Secondly, during song, oc-
casional "pauses" in activity of certain HVCI cells occur
simultaneously with the ﬁring of particular HVCRA cells
(KVL15).

The songs of other species can be constructed via
similar considerations of the relationships among sylla-
bles. The starling, for example, sings a more complicated
pattern that reﬂects a richer interplay among syllables.
A model of the starling song thus would involve more
complicated and varied functional connectivities among
different pairs of speciﬁc FSUs. In general, for the song
of any species, we expect that inter-FSU connectivity is
signiﬁcantly less extensive than within-FSU connectivity.

Figure 11: A four-frame "movie" representing the four-
syllable zebra ﬁnch motif. A triangle represents one FSU
(as depicted in Figure 1). Numberings in each frame denote
the temporal order of signaling.

13

VI.

DISCUSSION

A. Central-pattern-generator-like activity as a

"winnerless competition"

The observed phenomenon of patterned activity among
inhibitory neurons has been explained in terms of an
interplay between competition and background excita-
tion. The phenomenon was formalized in a framework
called "winnerless competition" (WLC) by Rabinovich et
al. (2001). WLC has been used to model some biological
circuits that display central-pattern-generator-like (CPG)
behavior, including a pyloric circuit (Huerta et al. 2001),
molluscan hunting behavior (Varona et al. 2002), and
olfactory processes in locusts (Laurent et al. 2001).

Rabinovich et al. (2001) describe a "node" as a coop-
erative ensemble of neural clusters in state space; they
showed that one can alter the stabilities of nodes by al-
tering the synapse strengths. For low values of coupling
strengths all nodes are stable attractors, corresponding to
neurons (or ensembles) that may all be active simultane-
ously. For a higher range, each node can correspond to a
saddle ﬁxed point, where a trajectory in state space is a
closed heteroclinic orbit that sequentially traverses stable
limit cycles in the vicinity of each saddle ﬁxed point. This
conﬁguration represents sequential switching of activity
among the three nodes. (See Rabinovich et al. 2013 for
pictorial illustrations of these two modes of dynamics.)

The neuronal interactions are deﬁned in terms of com-
petitive Lotka Volterra dynamics (see Zeeman 1993 for a
bifurcation analysis of a competitive three-dimensional
Lotka Volterra system, and Afraimovich et al. 2004 for a
phase space analysis of a "winnerless" Lotka Volterra sys-
tem). The equation, in terms of an instantaneous ﬁring
rate ai of cell i, is:

dai(t)

dt

= ai(t)[σi(S) − N∑

j=1

ρij(S)aj(t))] + Qi(t)

where σ represents the strength of stimulation of the ith
neuron, ρij is the matrix of inhibitory connections, S is
the stimulus, and Q is external noise. Note that the con-
nectivity matrix elements are functions of stimulus S. We
have embodied this feature in our model as the inhibitory
coupling strengths’ dependence on Tmax.

The dynamics of our model are consistent with this
framework, save one feature: the reliance of stable se-
ries activations on feedback from the excitatory HVCRA
neurons. In our simulations, this feedback was a neces-

sary condition for series propagation in an active FSU,
in addition to threshold values of Tmax and inhibitory-to-
inhibitory couplings. Such dynamics are not considered
within the context of WLC theory. We are uncertain of the
biophysical implications of this ﬁnding; we suspect that
the excitatory feedback serves to stabilize the competitive
mode of behavior so that patterns of alternating activity
can occur.

B. Plausibility of a chemically-delivered signal to

alter synaptic coupling strengths

We have suggested that a bird’s need to vocalize triggers
a sequence of events leading to an infusion of inhibitory
neurotransmitter in the vicinity of an FSU, which in
turn initiates the ﬁrst syllable of song. We have further
suggested that a feedback loop triggers sequential re-
leases of neurotransmitter, to play a complete song. Here
we examine the plausibility of such a neuromodulatory
mechanism and its timescale of action.

Mechanisms of neuromodulation

Sources of transient changes in synaptic action (com-
monly called "synaptic agonist transients" or just "tran-
sients") have been identiﬁed throughout the central ner-
vous systems of many species.
In some mammalian
brains, the ventral tegmental area (VTA) has been identi-
ﬁed as a reservoir of dopaminergic cells (Phillipson 1979),
which, in the avian brain, project to regions throughout
the CNS including HVC and are a likely source of tran-
sients. The VTA appears to rely on GABAergic control
(Barrot et al. 2012; Bourdy & Barrot, 2012).

What are the mechanisms of neuromodulatory action
and the effects on synapses? There exist many experimen-
tal obstacles to answering this question. They include the
inaccessibility of narrow synaptic clefts, uncertainties in
the geometry of the synapse structure, and the observa-
tion that synapses vary widely in geometry (Scimemi &
Beato 2009). Rise times are coupled to receptor dynam-
ics; decay times can be mediated by diffusion, reuptake,
binding to receptors, and enzymic breakdown. Further-
more, only changes in concentrations of neurotransmitter
transients are typically measured directly at a sub-second
timescale; methods to measure absolute concentrations
are in their infancy (Burrell et al. 2015). The absolute con-

14

centration critically affects the receptor occupancy and
can change the effect of released neurotransmitters on
the receptors. Moreover, synapses are extremely suscepti-
ble to a variety of modulatory processes, including the
presence of various receptor agonists and particular ions
(e.g. Barberis et al. 2011).

Sources differ regarding the magnitude over which a
neurotransmitter concentration can change in a synaptic
cleft. Most cite a peak (saturating) value on the order
of 1 mM before dropping over two to three orders of
magnitude (Scimemi and Beato 2009; Barberis et al. 2011).
The effects of such changes on synaptic coupling is gen-
erally measured via current responses (e.g. Mozrzymas
2004), but no direct methods are available to measure the
transient at synapses.

For a coarse idea, we look to behavioral studies. Here,
we implicitly assume that a change in macroscopic behav-
ior reﬂects a change, on the cellular level, in circuit modal-
ity. Much work in this area has focused on dopamine
as a modulator of behavior. Dopamine levels in Area
X of zebra ﬁnches are found to be signiﬁcantly lower
during undirected compared to sexually-motivated song
(Heimovics & Riters 2008), which suggests that dopamin-
ergic neurotransmission may differentially modulate vo-
cal behavior depending on context. In a related exper-
iment, multi-neuron activity in the VTA of Bengalese
ﬁnches consistently increased prior to the initiation and
termination of song bouts (Kapur 2008).

We distill from this information that it is reasonable
to propose neuromodulation as a mechanism for transi-
tioning between a circuit’s modes of activity, and that the
mechanism may involve a change of synaptic coupling
strengths. We further infer that our model’s requirement
of a roughly threefold increase in Tmax to effect such a
change falls well within the bounds set by the current
level of understanding.

Timescales of neuromodulatory action

Burst times of HVCRA neurons during song have a
typical precision of ~1 ms (Kozhevnikov & Fee 2007).
Our model thus implies that neurotransmitter rise and
decay timescales must be that precise if neuromodulation
is to serve as the mode-switching mechanism. We also
have implied that the temporary elevation of neurotrans-
mitter can sustain an FSU’s active mode for hundreds of
milliseconds, a typical syllable duration. How reasonable
are these requirements?

Some is known about the degree to which neurotrans-

mitter concentration can rise over millisecond timescales
(e.g. Robinson et al. 2003). Experimentally injected neu-
rotransmitter "pulses" are routinely given in the lab to
simulate real synaptic action and are typically delivered
over 0.1 ms. Implications of such studies are clouded
by the fact that the gating mechanisms activated by the
process are not well understood (Barberis et al. 2011). We
take from this information merely the impression that
neurotransmitter concentrations in real biological circuits
are believed to be capable of changing signiﬁcantly over
0.1 ms.

How long can a transient’s effect on a circuit last?
Calculations based on the diffusion equation yield decay
times as fast as hundreds of microseconds (e.g. Mozrzy-
mas 2004). It is apparent, however, that the time course
can vary over a signiﬁcantly broader timescale, depend-
ing on the magnitude of the initial injection and other
modulatory factors.
Jones & Westbrook (1995) found
that following brief pulses of GABAA, gating channels
opened brieﬂy for ~10 ms but re-opened several tens
of ms later. The authors postulated that reopening may
enhance inhibitory synaptic transmission by prolonging
the response to a brief synaptic GABA transient. In a
related ﬁnding, Scimemi & Beato (2009) showed that the
duration of post-synaptic glutamatergic currents can vary
over orders of magnitude, depending on whether they
are mediated by AMPA receptors alone (tdecay ~2 ms) or
if NMDA receptors are also recruited (tdecay ~200 ms).

Finally, we are concerned about the temporal preci-
sion of neurotransmitter decay. Can such a process occur
reliably with a precision of 1 ms, upon the sounding of
each syllable? The consideration here is not the shape of
neurotransmitter fall-off, but rather that the fall-off reach
one critical value at a reliable time following infusion.
That is: in our model, the series that occurs during ac-
tive mode does not slow gradually as neurotransmitter
concentration decreases. Rather, the series occurs at a
constant rate above the threshold concentration, below
which there occurs a sharp transition back to quiescence.
An answer to our question here would be speculative,
however, given the current experimental uncertainties.

C. Attempts to incite FSU mode-switching via

electrical manipulation

We describe brieﬂy an alternative method we investigated
to achieve an active series of ﬁrings of HVCI neurons:
electrical stimulation. Electrical signaling can occur faster
than chemical signaling, and on a timescale whose preci-
sion has been established well beyond the current state

15

of understanding of the temporal precision of neuromod-
ulatory action. We initially considered it to be the most
likely candidate for an FSU mode-switching mechanism.
Beginning from the quiescence regime, we attempted
to incite series activity via current pulses delivered to
particular cells in the circuit. We gave a current pulse
(shorter than 10 ms) atop the background current to vari-
ous subsets of neurons in one FSU. The pulse-receiving
neuron(s) spiked once in response; the other neurons did
not respond to the pulse for any biophysically realistic
values of injected current (lower than 700 pA) or synapse
strength (lower than 100 µS). The circuit activity resumed
its previous behavior within 10 ms. We concluded that if
electrical stimulation is to effect mode-switching, more
elaborate injection designs would be required. Seeking a
simpler solution, we looked elsewhere.

D. The silent inter-syllable gaps

We chose not to include the silent inter-syllable gaps
in our model of HVC, because at this time we ﬁnd no
particularly compelling representation for a gap. We
strongly suspect, however, that the gaps are integral to
song production and have a temporal representation at
the level of HVC. This suspicion comes from two lines of
reasoning. The ﬁrst are from formal experiments. Cool-
ing HVC uniformly stretches syllables and gaps while
cooling the nucleus RA had no effect on song (Long
& Fee 2008). More importantly, Andalman, Foerster, &
Fee (2011) demonstrated a strong correlation between
respiratory action and activity in HVC.

Our second line of reasoning comes from our by-eye
observations of time series of songs. We note qualita-
tively - as it appears that no formal studies have been
conducted - that gaps in one song of one species are not
of uniform duration. Furthermore, the duration of a par-
ticular gap does not appear to correlate with the duration
of the immediately-preceding or immediately-following
syllable. That is: prior to a particularly long gap, the
bird has not reliably sung a long syllable, which might
require a long rest. Similarly, following a long gap, the
bird does not reliably sing a long syllable, which might
have required longer preparation. Gap duration, then,
does not appear to be purely a reﬂection of the mechani-
cal requirement to breathe. We suspect that the duration
of each silence conveys part of the informational content
of song.

E. Structural versus functional connectivity

rates

Our model requires extremely high rates of functional
connectivity within an FSU, and it suggests varying (and
signiﬁcantly lower) rates of connectivity among FSUs in
HVC, depending on the species-speciﬁc song under con-
sideration. We would like to directly compare these rates
to observed structural connectivity rates (e.g. Mooney
& Prather (2005); KVL15). Such a comparison would
require, however, knowledge of the learning stage (see
Okubo et al. (2015) for evidence of synapse pruning dur-
ing learning in HVC) and the rate at which a formerly-
used synaptic connection dissolves (see Luo & O’Leary
(2005) and Walsh & Lichtman (2003) for evidence that ax-
ons projecting to unused synapses have some timescale of
retraction or degeneration). Calcium imaging techniques
appear to hold the greatest promise for illuminating the
relationship between structural and functional connec-
tions. Until then, we will withhold speculation.

F. Model predictions and suggested experiments

Testing the FSU-based architecture

Here we suggest tests to probe the functional architec-
ture of HVC. These tests might distinguish between an
HVC consisting of i) feedforward excitatory chains modu-
lated by inhibition, versus ii) FSU-like structures in which
excitatory activity is compartmentalized by the inhibitory
architecture and there are few excitatory connections
among FSUs. In these experiments, the population activ-
ity of HVCRA cells will serve as the diagnostic criterion.
Each test involves whole-cell recordings of HVCRA and
HVCI neurons in an awake bird.

1. Infuse some pharmacological agent known to excite
the HVCRA neurons (such as glutamate or a gluta-
mate receptor agonist) globally to HVC. FSU and
chain model prediction: All HVCRA neurons in HVC
will respond (or not respond) in a uniform manner.

2. Infuse that agent locally to HVC. If there is no effect
on HVCRA cells in the region, the result is not diag-
nostic. If there is enhanced activity upon HVCRA
neurons targeted by that infusion, FSU prediction:
the activity will not propagate out of that region;
Chain model prediction: the activity might propagate
out of that region to other areas in HVC, depending
on the particular model’s design for the inhibitory
modulation acting upon the chain. The result is

16

only diagnostic if there does occur a propagation
of HVCRA activity outside of the localized region,
in which case the FSU model is not supported.

Similar tests can be done for antagonists of excitatory
transmission, and with agonists and antagonists of in-
hibitory activity. KVL15 performed such a test involving
the GABA antagonist gabazine, where local infusions
enhanced the activity of HVCRA cells in the region while
the overall song was preserved. This result is consistent
with our "FSU model".

Testing the proposal that neuromodulation initiates song

We suggest tests of the proposal that neuromodula-
tion plays a key role in initiating song. These tests involve
whole cell recordings in the awake bird, in the absence
of an external stimulus. The idea is to identify an area
of the avian brain that, when stimulated with either an
excitatory or inhibitory neurotransmitter agonist, mimics
the external stimulation and initiates song.

One area to target is VTA, the reservoir of dopamin-
ergic cells that project to HVC. Here, the question is
whether an initial stimulus to release dopamine can sub-
sequently trigger the release of GABA (from an unspeci-
ﬁed source).

Another experiment is to determine whether a direct
infusion of GABA to the inhibitory population in HVC

can initiate song. Here it would be interesting to compare
the result of infusing GABA both globally and locally to
HVC. In our model, a global infusion within some partic-
ular range of concentration would ignite all FSUs in HVC
simultaneously. This would manifest as the engagement
of all HVC inhibitory cells in patterned activity, where
they all "pause" roughly an equal number of times until
the infusion decays. This HVCI activity would occur
simultaneously with patterned HVCRA activity. A local
infusion would have a similar affect, only in a localized
region of HVC. Above a critical range of GABA concen-
tration, the mutual inhibition would be replaced by a
winner-take-all regime, in which a subset of the targeted
HVCI neuron population would ﬁre continuously and
another subset of that population would be continuously
suppressed. The corresponding activity of the HVCRA
cells would be constant excitation of some and constant
suppression of others.

Finally, we note that Heimovics & Riters (2008) in-
fused dopamine agonists and antagonists directly to HVC
in the starling. The agonists stimulated song while antag-
onists hindered it. The latter ﬁnding is consistent with
our model’s requirement that excitatory-to-inhibitory cou-
pling strengths be above a threshold value for stable series
propagation during active mode. We do not comment
on the former result, as our model does not specify how
dopamine might indirectly effect a transition to song.

VII.

SUMMARY

We have offered a biophysically-based model for the
basic unit of song representation in the avian HVC. Our
simulations have yielded the discovery that excitatory
feedback, in addition to inhibitory coupling strengths,
is necessary for a stable propagation of series ﬁrings
within the framework of winnerless competition. The
biophysical implications are unclear and merit a detailed
follow-up examination.

We have offered no details of how the FSU represents
a syllable. How are the temporal and spectral content
of a syllable respectively represented? Could the rate of
series propagation be related? We have not identiﬁed a
particular parameter or variable in our model that is able
to alter this rate. Could the number of HVCRA ensembles
ﬁring per syllable be related? Both possibilities might be
addressed by performing tests akin to Hahnloser et al.
(2002) during a cooling experiment.

Many questions arise regarding the mechanisms that

we have proposed to effect a bi-modal FSU. If this mecha-
nism is an inhibitory neurotransmitter infusion: By what
mechanism is the "donor" inhibitory cell triggered to
release neurotransmitter? Is this donor cell internal or ex-
ternal to HVC? How does the neurotransmitter infusion
ﬁnd its target FSU? What spatial precision is required of
the infusion?

Next we will add biophysical detail to the model in
light of the known electrophysiological properties. In par-
ticular, as pre-synaptic calcium concentration is known
to alter synapse strengths, we will be interested to see
how the addition of calcium ion channels in the neurons
affects the dynamics. In a third paper, we will describe a
method of statistical data assimilation that can, in prin-
ciple, determine whether a proposed functional connec-
tivity accurately represents data from a real biophysical
circuit.

17

VIII.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Thank you to Arij Daou, Daniel Margoliash, and
Michael Long for enlightening explanations, perspectives,
and translations. Thank you to Misha Rabinovich, Daniel

Breen, and Nirag Kadakia for valuable conversations.
This research was funded by the Ofﬁce of Naval Research
grant N00014-13-1-0205.

References

[1] Afraimovich, V., Zhigulin, V., and Rabinovich, M. On the origin of reproducible sequential activity in neural

circuits. Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science 14, 4 (2004), 1123–1129.

[2] Andalman, A. S., Foerster, J. N., and Fee, M. S. Control of vocal and respiratory patterns in birdsong:

dissection of forebrain and brainstem mechanisms using temperature. PLoS One 6, 9 (2011), e25461.

[3] Ashmore, R. C., Wild, J. M., and Schmidt, M. F. Brainstem and forebrain contributions to the generation of

learned motor behaviors for song. The Journal of neuroscience 25, 37 (2005), 8543–8554.

[4] Barberis, A., Petrini, E. M., and Mozrzymas, J. W. Impact of synaptic neurotransmitter concentration time
course on the kinetics and pharmacological modulation of inhibitory synaptic currents. Building up the inhibitory
synapse (2011), 57.

[5] Barrot, M., Sesack, S. R., Georges, F., Pistis, M., Hong, S., and Jhou, T. C. Braking dopamine systems: a
new gaba master structure for mesolimbic and nigrostriatal functions. The Journal of Neuroscience 32, 41 (2012),
14094–14101.

[6] Bourdy, R., and Barrot, M. A new control center for dopaminergic systems: pulling the vta by the tail. Trends

in neurosciences 35, 11 (2012), 681–690.

[7] Burrell, M. H., Atcherley, C. W., Heien, M. L., and Lipski, J. A novel electrochemical approach for prolonged
measurement of absolute levels of extracellular dopamine in brain slices. ACS chemical neuroscience 6, 11 (2015),
1802–1812.

[8] Cannon, J., Kopell, N., Gardner, T., and Markowitz, J. Neural sequence generation using spatiotemporal

patterns of inhibition. PLoS Comput Biol 11, 11 (2015), e1004581.

[9] Cynx, J. Experimental determination of a unit of song production in the zebra ﬁnch (taeniopygia guttata).

Journal of Comparative Psychology 104, 1 (1990), 3.

[10] Daou, A., Ross, M. T., Johnson, F., Hyson, R. L., and Bertram, R. Electrophysiological characterization and

computational models of hvc neurons in the zebra ﬁnch. Journal of neurophysiology 110, 5 (2013), 1227–1245.

[11] Destexhe, A., Mainen, Z. F., and Sejnowski, T. J. Synthesis of models for excitable membranes, synaptic
transmission and neuromodulation using a common kinetic formalism. Journal of computational neuroscience 1, 3
(1994), 195–230.

[12] Destexhe, A., and Sejnowski, T. J. Thalamocortical assemblies: How ion channels, single neurons and

large-scale networks organize sleep oscillations.

[13] Dutar, P., Vu, H. M., and Perkel, D. J. Multiple cell types distinguished by physiological, pharmacological, and
anatomic properties in nucleus hvc of the adult zebra ﬁnch. Journal of Neurophysiology 80, 4 (1998), 1828–1838.
[14] Gibb, L., Gentner, T. Q., and Abarbanel, H. D. Brain stem feedback in a computational model of birdsong

sequencing. Journal of neurophysiology 102, 3 (2009), 1763–1778.

18

[15] Gibb, L., Gentner, T. Q., and Abarbanel, H. D. Inhibition and recurrent excitation in a computational model

of sparse bursting in song nucleus hvc. Journal of neurophysiology 102, 3 (2009), 1748–1762.

[16] Hahnloser, R. H., Kozhevnikov, A. A., and Fee, M. S. An ultra-sparse code underliesthe generation of neural

sequences in a songbird. Nature 419, 6902 (2002), 65–70.

[17] Heimovics, S. A., and Riters, L. V. Evidence that dopamine within motivation and song control brain regions

regulates birdsong context-dependently. Physiology & behavior 95, 1 (2008), 258–266.

[18] Huerta, R., Varona, P., Rabinovich, M. I., and Abarbanel, H. D. Topology selection by chaotic neurons of a

pyloric central pattern generator. Biological Cybernetics 84, 1 (2001), L1–L8.

[19] Jones, M. V., and Westbrook, G. L. Desensitized states prolong gaba a channel responses to brief agonist

pulses. Neuron 15, 1 (1995), 181–191.

[20] Kapur, R. Contributions of the Avian VTA to Behavioral Switching. ProQuest, 2008.
[21] Kosche, G., Vallentin, D., and Long, M. A. Interplay of inhibition and excitation shapes a premotor neural

sequence. The Journal of Neuroscience 35, 3 (2015), 1217–1227.

[22] Kozhevnikov, A. A., and Fee, M. S. Singing-related activity of identiﬁed hvc neurons in the zebra ﬁnch. Journal

of neurophysiology 97, 6 (2007), 4271–4283.

[23] Laurent, G., Stopfer, M., Friedrich, R. W., Rabinovich, M. I., Volkovskii, A., and Abarbanel, H. D. Odor
encoding as an active, dynamical process: experiments, computation, and theory. Annual review of neuroscience
24, 1 (2001), 263–297.

[24] Li, M., and Greenside, H. Stable propagation of a burst through a one-dimensional homogeneous excitatory

chain model of songbird nucleus hvc. Physical Review E 74, 1 (2006), 011918.

[25] Long, M. A., and Fee, M. S. Using temperature to analyse temporal dynamics in the songbird motor pathway.

Nature 456, 7219 (2008), 189–194.

[26] Long, M. A., Jin, D. Z., and Fee, M. S. Support for a synaptic chain model of neuronal sequence generation.

Nature 468, 7322 (2010), 394–399.

[27] Luo, L., and O’Leary, D. D. Axon retraction and degeneration in development and disease. Annu. Rev. Neurosci.

28 (2005), 127–156.

[28] Mooney, R., and Prather, J. F. The hvc microcircuit: the synaptic basis for interactions between song motor

and vocal plasticity pathways. The Journal of neuroscience 25, 8 (2005), 1952–1964.

[29] Mozrzymas, J. W. Dynamism of gaba a receptor activation shapes the â ˘AIJpersonalityâ ˘A˙I of inhibitory synapses.

Neuropharmacology 47, 7 (2004), 945–960.

[30] Okubo, T. S., Mackevicius, E. L., Payne, H. L., Lynch, G. F., and Fee, M. S. Growth and splitting of neural

sequences in songbird vocal development. Nature 528, 7582 (2015), 352–357.

[31] Phillipson, O. Afferent projections to the ventral tegmental area of tsai and interfascicular nucleus: a

horseradish peroxidase study in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology 187, 1 (1979), 117–143.

[32] Rabinovich, M., Tristan, I., and Varona, P. Neural dynamics of attentional cross-modality control. PloS one 8,

5 (2013), e64406.

[33] Rabinovich, M., Volkovskii, A., Lecanda, P., Huerta, R., Abarbanel, H., and Laurent, G. Dynamical
encoding by networks of competing neuron groups: winnerless competition. Physical review letters 87, 6 (2001),
068102.

19

[34] Robinson, D. L., Venton, B. J., Heien, M. L., and Wightman, R. M. Detecting subsecond dopamine release

with fast-scan cyclic voltammetry in vivo. Clinical chemistry 49, 10 (2003), 1763–1773.

[35] Schmidt, M. F., and Perkel, D. J. Slow synaptic inhibition in nucleus hvc of the adult zebra ﬁnch. The Journal

of neuroscience 18, 3 (1998), 895–904.

[36] Scimemi, A., and Beato, M. Determining the neurotransmitter concentration proﬁle at active synapses.

Molecular neurobiology 40, 3 (2009), 289–306.

[37] Solis, M. M., and Perkel, D. J. Rhythmic activity in a forebrain vocal control nucleus in vitro. The Journal of

neuroscience 25, 11 (2005), 2811–2822.

[38] Vallentin, D., and Long, M. A. Motor origin of precise synaptic inputs onto forebrain neurons driving a

skilled behavior. The Journal of Neuroscience 35, 1 (2015), 299–307.

[39] Varona, P., Rabinovich, M. I., Selverston, A. I., and Arshavsky, Y. I. Winnerless competition between sensory
neurons generates chaos: A possible mechanism for molluscan hunting behavior. Chaos: An Interdisciplinary
Journal of Nonlinear Science 12, 3 (2002), 672–677.

[40] Vu, E. T., Mazurek, M. E., and Kuo, Y.-C. Identiﬁcation of a forebrain motor programming network for the

learned song of zebra ﬁnches. The Journal of neuroscience 14, 11 (1994), 6924–6934.

[41] Walsh, M. K., and Lichtman, J. W. In vivo time-lapse imaging of synaptic takeover associated with naturally

occurring synapse elimination. Neuron 37, 1 (2003), 67–73.

[42] Yildiz, I. B., and Kiebel, S. J. A hierarchical neuronal model for generation and online recognition of birdsongs.

PLoS Comput Biol 7, 12 (2011), e1002303.

[43] Zeeman, M. L. Hopf bifurcations in competitive three-dimensional lotka–volterra systems. Dynamics and

Stability of Systems 8, 3 (1993), 189–216.

20

