Ab-initio electron scattering cross-sections and transport in liquid

xenon

G. J. Boyle,1 R. P. McEachran,2 D. G. Cocks,1 M. J.

Brunger,3, 4 S. J. Buckman,2, 4 S. Dujko,5 and R. D. White1

1College of Science, Technology & Engineering,

James Cook University, Townsville 4810, Australia

2Plasma and Positron Research Laboratory,

Research School of Physical Sciences and Engineering,

Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 0200, Australia

3School of Chemical and Physical Sciences,

Flinders University, Adelaide, SA 5001, Australia

4Institute of Mathematical Sciences,

University of Malaya, 50603 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia

5Institute of Physics, University of Belgrade,

Pregrevica 118, 11080 Belgrade, Serbia

Abstract

Ab-initio fully diﬀerential cross-sections for electrons scattering in liquid xenon are developed

from a solution of the Dirac-Fock scattering equations, using a recently developed framework [1]

which considers multipole polarizabilities, a non-local treatment of exchange, and screening and

coherent scattering eﬀects. A multi-term solution of Boltzmann’s equation accounting for the full

anisotropic nature of the diﬀerential cross-section is used to calculate transport properties of excess

electrons in liquid xenon. The results were found to agree to within 25% of the measured mobilities
and characteristic energies over the reduced ﬁeld range of 10−4–1 Td. The accuracies are comparable
to those achieved in the gas phase. A simple model, informed by highly accurate gas-phase cross-

sections, is presented to improve the liquid cross-sections, which was found to enhance the accuracy

of the transport coeﬃcient calculations.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
4
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
7
5
1
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

An understanding of the behavior of free electrons in liquids and dense systems is of
interest to both fundamental physics research and to technological applications [1].
In
particular, liquid-phase noble gases are used in high-energy particle detectors and at present
several LAr (liquid argon) and LXe (liquid xenon) TPCs (time projection chambers) have
been built for dark matter searches [2–6], neutrino detection [3, 6–8], and have also been
used in high-energy beam-line experiments [6, 9]. Optimizing the performance of these liquid
TPC particle detectors requires an accurate understanding of electron drift and diﬀusion in
noble liquids subject to electric ﬁelds. In a previous paper, Boyle et al. [1], we investigated
the elastic scattering of electrons from gas-phase and liquid-phase argon. In this paper, we
extend the previous discussion to consider elastic scattering of electrons in gas-phase and
liquid-phase xenon, using the same techniques previously outlined [1].

The study of excess electrons in dense gases and liquids involves many eﬀects that are
not signiﬁcant in dilute gaseous systems. When the de Broglie wavelength of the electrons
(near thermal energies) is comparable to the interatomic spacing of the medium, scattering
occurs oﬀ multiple scattering centres simultaneously, rather than through binary scattering.
Furthermore, these scattering centres are highly correlated in space and time. Historically,
transport simulations neglected these correlations and simply scaled calculations in the dilute
gas phase to higher densities. It has been shown [1] that this simplistic approach cannot
explain the non-linearities seen in the experiments . As we have described in Boyle et
al.
[1], there are other theoretical approaches to exploring the eﬀect of liquid correlations
on the transport of light particles [10–15], however these either require empirical inputs,
are applicable only close to equilibrium, or have heuristically combined the liquid eﬀects
identiﬁed above to obtain an eﬀective cross-section.

As also discussed in Boyle et al.

[1], we employ the ab initio procedure of Cohen and
Lekner [16] using updated scattering theory to address transport in dense systems under a
kinetic theory framework. Atrazhev et al.
[17] have used a similar procedure based on a
simpliﬁcation of the Cohen and Lekner theory where they argued that, for small energies,
the eﬀective cross-section becomes dependent on the density only and they obtained good
agreement with experiment. However, the distance at which to enforce this new behaviour of
the eﬀective cross-section remains a free parameter in the theory and this constant eﬀective

2

cross-section must be found empirically. By performing a detailed analysis of the partial
phase shifts, Atrazhev and co-workers [18] were able to isolate the important properties
of the potential which are required for accurate determination of the transport properties.
Our calculations instead avoid these diﬃculties by using accurate forms for the electron-
atom interaction. The transport theory employed in this manuscript also represents an
improvement over previous calculations as we use a full multi-term treatment of the velocity
distribution function [14, 19] which utilizes all the available anisotropic details of the scatter-
ing cross-sections. It is well known that the often-used two-term approximation for transport
calculations can be in serious error [20], and we compare our solutions for transport in the
xenon system using two-term and multi-term treatments.

In the following sections we consider the calculation of the macroscopic swarm trans-
port properties, in the gaseous and liquid xenon environments, from the microscopic cross-
sections, modiﬁed by the screening and coherent scattering eﬀects discussed above. We
ﬁrst discuss a multi-term solution of Boltzmann’s equation in Section II, using the calcu-
lation of the elastic scattering cross-section for electrons in dilute gaseous xenon via the
Dirac-Fock scattering equations in Section III. We determine the xenon pair-correlator at
the xenon triple point in Section IV A using a Monte-Carlo simulation of a Lennard-Jones
with parameters ﬁtted from experimental data in the gas phase and compare the results
with previous calculations. The pair-correlator allows us to determine an eﬀective liquid
scattering cross-section for xenon (see Section IV B), in the manner outlined in Boyle et al.
[1]. The application of these cross-sections to determine macroscopic transport properties
via kinetic theory is also outlined in Section II. We present the results of our transport calcu-
lations in Section V. Initially in Section V A we consider only electrons in gas-phase xenon,
and we compare the reduced mobility and characteristic energies with swarm experiment
measurements for a range of ﬁelds. Electrons in liquid-phase xenon are then considered in
Section V B. The impact of anisotropic scattering and validity of the two-term approxima-
tion is also investigated, and we highlight the importance of using a multi-term framework
when solving Boltzmann’s equation accurately. Finally, we discuss a scaling procedure to
adapt other gas-phase cross-section sets, such as those compiled from various theoretical
and experimental sources, to the liquid phase in Section V C, and compare the transport
properties. Throughout this paper we will make use of atomic units (me = e = a0 =  = 1)
unless otherwise speciﬁed.

3

II. MULTI-TERM SOLUTION OF BOLTZMANN’S EQUATION

A dilute swarm of electrons moving through gaseous or liquid xenon, subject to an ex-
ternal electric ﬁeld E, can be described by the solution of the Boltzmann’s equation for the
phase-space distribution function f (r, v, t) [21]:

+ v · ∇f +

∂f
∂t

eE
me

· ∂f
∂v

= −J(f ),

(1)

where r, v and e denote the position, velocity and charge of the electron respectively. The
collision operator J(f ) accounts for all the necessary collision types and interactions between
the electrons of mass me and the background medium. In this paper we will only consider
reduced electric ﬁeld strengths E/N (where N is the number density of the background
material) such that there is no signiﬁcant contribution from excitation collisions in xenon.
In swarm experiments only a few macroscopic variables can be controlled and/or mea-
sured [22]. The most commonly reported transport quantities for electrons in liquids are the
mobility µ (= W/E, where W is drift velocity), and the transverse and longitudinal char-
acteristic energies, DT /µ and DL/µ respectively. As shown in [1], we can calculate these
coeﬃcients through multi-term spherical harmonic representations of the necessary velocity
distribution functions:

∞(cid:88)
∞(cid:88)

l=0

l=0

∞(cid:88)

l=0

and

F (v) =

F (L)(v) =

F (T )(v) =

Fl(v)P 0

l (cos θ) ,

F (L)

l

(v)Pl(cos θ) ,

F (T )

l

(v)P 1

l (cos θ) .

(2)

(3)

(4)

Note that θ denotes the angle relative to the electric ﬁeld direction (taken to be the z-
axis) and P m
l (cos θ) are associated Legendre polynomials. The Boltzmann equation can be
re-written as the following hierarchy of equations for these expansion coeﬃcients:

(cid:18) ∂

(cid:19)

J lFl +

l + 1
2l + 3

a

+

l + 2

v

∂v

(cid:18) ∂

∂v

(cid:19)

− l − 1

v

Fl+1 +

l

2l − 1

a

4

Fl−1 = 0,

(5)

(cid:18) ∂

∂v

(cid:19)

+

l + 2

v

F (L)

l+1+

l

2l − 1

a

(cid:18) ∂

∂v

(cid:19)

− l − 1

v

F (L)

l−1 = v

(cid:18) l + 1

2l + 3

Fl+1 +

(cid:19)

,

Fl−1

l

2l − 1
(6)

J lF (L)

l +

l + 1
2l + 3

a

and

(cid:18) ∂

(cid:19)

l + 2

v

(cid:18) ∂

(cid:19)

(cid:18) Fl−1

J lF (T )

l + 2
2l + 3

a

F (T )

l+1 +

+

∂v

l +

,
(7)
where the J l represent the Legendre projections of the collision operator detailed below and
a = eE/me. We enforce the normalisation condition:

l−1 = v

2l − 1

∂v

F (T )

− Fl+1
2l + 3

l − 1
2l − 1

a

− l − 1

v

(cid:19)

(8)

(9)

(10)

The solution of this hierarchy of equations then yields the mobility:

ˆ ∞

4π

0

F0(v)v2dv = 1 .

∞ˆ

µ =

1
E

4π
3

v3F1dv,

v3F (L,T )

1

dv .

and the characteristic energy:

0

∞ˆ

0

D(L,T ) =

4π
3

Note, this theory avoids the traditional two-term approximation used in electron transport
in liquids [12, 16, 23], and is a true multi-term solution of Boltzmann’s equation, whereby
the upper bound in each of the l-summations is truncated at a value lmax, and this value
is incremented until some convergence criteria is met on the distribution function or its
velocity moments.

We only consider low-energy elastic scattering in this study. Hence, the collision operator
appearing in (1), which describes the rate of change of the distribution function due to
interactions with the background material, will include elastic collisions only. For the liquid
systems considered here, the de Broglie wavelength of the electron is often of the order of the
average inter-particle spacing ∼ N−1/3. In this energy regime, the electron is best viewed
as a wave that simultaneously interacts with multiple scattering centres that comprise the
medium. For liquid xenon, the average interparticle spacing is approximately 2.6 Å, implying
that “low” energies are those less than ∼ 0.5 eV, which is several orders of magnitude larger

5

than the thermal energy of ∼ 0.014 eV. The interaction potential is then modiﬁed from the
dilute gas phase as discussed in Section IV B.

The Legendre projections of the elastic collision operator, in the small mass ratio limit,

accounting for coherent scattering, are given by:

(cid:26)

(cid:20)

(cid:21)(cid:27)

Φl

J 0 (Φl) =

where M is the mass of a xenon atom, Φl =(cid:8)Fl, F (L), F (T )(cid:9) and

vν1(v)

d
dv

me
M v2
J lΦl = ˜νl(v)Φl

d
dv

kT
vΦl +
me
for l≥1,

νl(v) = N v2π

0

π

σ(v, χ) [1 − Pl(cos χ)] sin χdχ,

is the binary transfer collision frequency in the absence of coherent scattering eﬀects with
σ(v, χ) the diﬀerential scattering cross-section. In addition,

(11)

(12)

(13)

ˆ

ˆ

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(cid:18)2mev



(cid:19)

sin

χ
2

˜νl(v) = N v

2π

0

π

Σ(v, χ) [1 − Pl(cos χ)] sin χdχ

.

(14)

are the structure-modiﬁed higher-order collision frequencies that account for coherent scat-
tering through:

Σ(v, χ) = σ(v, χ) S

,

(15)

which represents an eﬀective diﬀerential cross-section. S is the static structure factor, which
can be determined from the pair-correlator as discussed in Section IV B. In what follows we
also deﬁne the momentum transfer cross-sections without and with coherent scattering via
ν1(v) = N vσm(v) and ˜ν1(v) = N vΣm(v), respectively.

III. SCATTERING OF ELECTRONS BY XENON GAS

The theoretical procedures used in this paper, to describe the elastic scattering of electrons
from xenon atoms at low energies, are essentially the same as those used in Boyle et al. [1]
for electron scattering from argon. We thus present only a short summary here and refer
the reader to reference [1] for more details.

In the pure elastic scattering energy region, only two interactions need to be considered,
namely polarization and exchange. The polarization interaction is accounted for by means of

6

a long-range multipole polarization potential, while the exchange interaction is represented
by a short-range non-local potential formed by antisymmetrizing the total scattering wave-
function. The scattering of the incident electrons, with wavenumber k, by xenon atoms can
then be described in the gaseous phase by the integral equation formulation of the partial
wave Dirac-Fock scattering equations (see Chen et al. [24] for details).

In matrix form, these equations can be written as:

 fκ(r)

gκ(r)

 =

 v1(kr)

v2(kr)

 +

ˆ

r

0

1
k

(cid:20)

 fκ(x)

gκ(x)

 −

 WQ(κ; x)

WP (κ; x)

(cid:21)

,

(16)

dx G(r, x)

U (x)

where the local potential U (r) is given by the sum of the static and local polarization
potentials i.e.,

U (r) = Us(r) + Up(r)

(17)

and WP (κ; r) and WQ(κ; r) represent the large and small components of the exchange inter-
action.

The precise form of these exchange terms is given in equation (5) of Boyle et al.

[1].
In particular, the polarization potential Up(r) in equation (17) was determined using the
polarized orbital method [25] and contained several static multipole terms as well as the
corresponding dynamic polarization term [26, 27]. In total, the potential U (r) contained all
terms up to and including those that behave as r−16 asymptotically.

In equation (16), fκ(r) and gκ(r) are the large and small components of the scattering
wavefunction. Here the quantum number κ is related to the total and orbital angular
momentum quantum numbers j and l according to κ = −l − 1 when j = l + 1/2 (spin-up)
and κ = l when j = l − 1/2 (spin down). Furthermore, G(r, x) is the free particle Green’s
function given in equations (23) and (24a,b) of Chen et al. [24]. The kinetic energy  of the
incident electron and its wavenumber k are related by:

2c2 (cid:0) + 2mc2(cid:1),

1

k2 =

(18)

where c is the velocity of light which, in atomic units, is given by c = 1/α where α is the
ﬁne-structure constant.

In the integral equation formulation, the scattering phase shifts can be determined from

the asymptotic form of the large component of the scattering wavefunction i.e.,

fκ(r)r→∞−→ Aκ ˆjl(kr) − Bκ ˆnl(kr),

(19)

7

where ˆjl(kr) and ˆnl(kr) are the Riccati-Bessel and Riccati-Neumann functions while the
constants Aκ and Bκ are deﬁned in equations (7) and (8) of Boyle et al.
[1] . The partial
wave phase shifts are then given by:

tan δ±(k) =

Bκ
Aκ

,

(20)

where the δ± are the spin-up (+) and spin-down (−) phase shifts. The total elastic and
momentum transfer cross-sections are given, in terms of these phase shifts, by:

(cid:111)

(21)

∞(cid:88)

(cid:110)

l=0

σel(k2) =

4π
k2

(l + 1) sin2 δ+

l (k) + l sin2 δ−

l (k)

and

σmt(k2) =

(cid:110)(l + 1)(l + 2)
∞(cid:88)

2l + 3

l=0

4π
k2

sin2(cid:0)δ+

l+1(k)(cid:1) +

l (k) − δ+

sin2(cid:0)δ−

l (k) − δ−

l+1(k)(cid:1)
l+1(k)(cid:1)(cid:111)

.

l ((k) − δ−

l(l + 1)
2l + 1

sin2(cid:0)δ+

(22)

+

(l + 1)

(2l + 1)(2l + 3)

Analytic ﬁts of the above momentum-transfer cross-section (and for other noble gases) are
given in McEachran and Stauﬀer 2014 [28] to aid in plasma modelling calculations.

In Figure 1, the momentum transfer cross-section in the gas-phase is compared to the
cross-section recommended by Biagi [29] from the “Magboltz” Boltzmann equation solver.
The Biagi elastic momentum transfer cross-section has been constructed from the unpub-
lished analysis of Elford, ﬁtting to the available drift velocity and diﬀusion coeﬃcients [30].
It is often considered the reference cross-section for electron-xenon interactions in the gas
phase. Our momentum transfer cross-section gives good qualitative agreement with the Bi-
agi reference cross-section, but generally somewhat over-estimates the value. The location
and depth of the Ramsauer minima, however, agrees closely.

IV. SCATTERING OF ELECTRONS BY XENON LIQUID

A. Xenon pair correlation

The only measurements of the liquid phase xenon structure factor that are known to
us, are by Becchi and Magli [31] for T = 274.7 K and N = 8.86 × 1021 cm−3, near to
the critical point of T = 289.72 K. In order to obtain a structure factor at the lower

8

temperature of T = 165 K and N = 14.2×1022 cm−3, where the transport measurements have
been performed, we have used a Lennard-Jones model, calibrated to the high temperature
structure factor, to construct a low temperature structure factor by performing Monte-Carlo
simulations of the ﬂuid.

The Lennard-Jones ﬂuid has a pair-wise potential given by:

(cid:34)(cid:18) r

(cid:19)12 −

(cid:18) r

(cid:19)6(cid:35)

V (r) = 4LJ

σLJ

σLJ

,

(23)

with the characteristic energy LJ and length scale σLJ. Often, this potential is truncated to
a range of rtrunc = 2.5 σLJ but we work with an eﬀectively untruncated potential by extending
rtrunc to the system size rtrunc = L/2. For the truncated potential, Atrazhev et al [32] have
used values of LJ /kB = 299 K and σLJ = 4.05 but, by comparing to the experimental data
of reference [31], we ﬁnd a better ﬁt for our untruncated model by matching the critical
temperature of the Lennard-Jones model (kBTcrit = 1.312 LJ [33]) to the measured value
of 289.72 K leaving us instead with LJ /kB = 220.83 K. Given this value, the best ﬁt to
the data of reference [31] is σLJ = 3.86 . We then use these parameters to obtain the pair-
correlator at the desired temperature of T = 165 K. A plot of the various structure factors is
shown in ﬁgure 2, where we compare with the structure factor calculated from the truncated
potential in the paper of Atrazhev et al. [32].

B. Liquid xenon cross-section

In order to capture the major eﬀects of increasing the number density of the ﬂuid system,
we include two modiﬁcations to the gas scattering potentials due to: a) the screening of
the long-range polarization potential, and b) the inﬂuence of the particles in the medium
bulk. The procedure outlined in this section closely follows that of references [1, 16]. We
summarize the steps here.

Firstly, the eﬀective charge-multipole polarization potential acting between the electron
and the induced multipole of an individual atom is reduced by the presence of the induced
multipoles in the surrounding atoms, which produces a screening eﬀect. Using the (isotropic)
pair-correlator for xenon, g(r), determined in Section IV A, we have self-consistently calcu-
lated the screening function f (r) for an electron located at position r via:

9

f (r) = 1 − πN

ˆ ∞

0

ds

g(s)
s2

ˆ

r+s

|r−s|

dt Θ (r, s, t)

α(t)f (t)

t2

,

which has been represented in bipolar coordinates, s and t, and where

Θ (r, s, t) =

3
2

(s2 + t2 − r2) (r2 + t2 − s2)

s2

+(cid:0)r2 + t2 − s2(cid:1) ,

(24)

(25)

arises due to the form of the electric ﬁeld of a dipole. The screening function is used to
determine the screened polarization potential, ˜Up(r), of an electron with one atom in a
dense ﬂuid,

˜Up(r) = f (r)Up(r).

(26)

Secondly, the direct interaction of the electrons with other atoms in the bulk is signiﬁcant
in a dense system, even when the electron is very close to the focus atom. By following the
procedure of Lekner [34], we construct an eﬀective potential, Ueﬀ = U1 + U2, where U1
describes the direct (screened) interaction of the electrons and the target atom, and where
U2 describes the collective interaction of the electron with the rest of the bulk atoms. We
approximate U2 by an ensemble average of the bulk, i.e.,

ˆ ∞

ˆ

r+t

U2(r) =

2πN

r

0

dt U1(t)

ds sg(s).

|r−t|

(27)

We note that taking the ensemble average has the advantage of enforcing spherical symmetry
of the total eﬀective potential Ueﬀ.

Since, in a dense system, the electron is never in eﬀectively free space, a diﬀerent measure
of the volume “owned” by the focus atom is required. It is natural to deﬁne the distance of
ﬁrst turning point of the potential Ueﬀ, which is denoted by rm, as the spherical distance
under the inﬂuence of the focus atom. Hence we can say that a single collision event
takes place when an electron enters and leaves the radius rm of a single atom. In order to
calculate the phase shift at the distance rm rather than inﬁnity, we have set the upper limits
of equations (7) and (8) of Boyle et al. [1] for Aκ and Bκ to be rm.

The full diﬀerential elastic scattering cross-section for the gas and liquid phases (with and
without coherent scattering) are displayed in Figure 3. For the dilute gas phase, we observe
the presence of a forward-peaked minimum in the range 0.2–1 eV, below which the diﬀer-
ential cross-section is essentially isotropic. This minimimun is the well-known Ramsauer

10

minimimun which occurs in a number of electron-atom gas-phase cross-sections. At energies
above the minimun, the diﬀerential cross-section demonstrates increased magnitude and also
enhanced anisotropy, with peaks in the forward- and back-scattering directions. When the
modiﬁcation due to screening and interactions from the liquid bulk are included, we observe
the suppression of the Ramsauer minimum and a removal of the forward peak for low and
moderate energies. At higher energies, the liquid diﬀerential cross-section becomes similar
both qualitatively and quantitatively to the gas phase cross-section. When the liquid phase
diﬀerential cross-section is combined with the static structure factor accounting for coher-
ent scattering eﬀects, the resulting diﬀerential cross-section Σ(, χ) takes on a completely
diﬀerent qualitative structure. At low energies, the diﬀerential scattering cross-section has
been further reduced in magnitude at all scattering angles. At higher energies the forward-
scattering has been reduced, while the back-scattering peak remains essentially unaﬀected.
The momentum transfer cross-sections corresponding to the diﬀerential scattering cross-
sections in Figure 3 are displayed in Figure 4, along with the cross-sections from Atrazhev
et al. [32]. The comments made regarding the diﬀerential scattering cross-sections are once
again reﬂected here. The Ramsauer minimum observed in the gas-phase is completely sup-
pressed in the liquid-phase, and there is a large reduction in the magnitude of the cross-
sections when the screening and liquid eﬀects are included, and again when coherent scat-
tering eﬀects are included. At higher energies, the liquid-phase cross-sections approach the
gas-phase values, with some additional oscillatory structure evident when coherent scattering
is included. The cross-sections of Atrazhev et al. [32] have been calculated using a similar
formalism, but with a pseudo-potential that replaces the short-range part of the interaction
by a boundary condition that reproduces the expected scattering length in the gas-phase.
Their cross-sections are qualitatively similar to ours, but are consistently smaller in magni-
tude over the range of energies considered. We attribute these diﬀerences to our treatment
of the static and exchange parts of the potential, for both the focus and surrounding atoms,
as well as the inclusion of a full multipole polarization potential.

V. RESULTS

One of the key functions of modern-day swarm experiments is to assess the complete-
ness and accuracy of cross-section [35–38] sets. Swarm experiments are many-scattering

11

experiments, where there is a balance established between the number of particles and the
momentum and energy transfers occurring. In the following sections we consider the calcu-
lation of the macroscopic swarm transport properties in the gaseous and liquid environments
from the microscopic cross-sections. Particular attention is given to investigating the valid-
ity of the two-term approximation in our calculations, and we compare these with the full
multi-term results. In Section V C, we introduce a simple scaling algorithm to adapt any
gas-phase cross-section to the liquid-phase based on the our ab initio scattering calculations.

A. Electrons in gaseous xenon

The calculated reduced mobility and characteristic energies using the gas-phase cross-
sections detailed in Section III and the reference cross-sections of Biagi [30] are presented in
Figure 5. They are compared against various experimental data for xenon gas [39, 40]. We
restrict ourselves to the reduced electric ﬁelds of less than 1 Td, to ensure we are in the energy
regime where only elastic scattering is operative. For the gas calculations, using the present
cross-sections, we observe agreement to within 30% or better for both the reduced mobility
and the transverse characteristic energy over the range of the reduced ﬁelds considered.
These errors decrease to 5% or better for the transverse characteristic energy, above the
ﬁeld region where the transport properties rapidly increase. This can be compared with the
Biagi [30] cross-section calculations, which demonstrate agreement to within 10% or better
(generally less than 5%) for reduced mobility and transverse characteristic energy. Although
the experimental longitudinal characteristic energies exhibit larger variation and error than
the transverse counterpart, our calculated energies using the present cross-sections and those
of Biagi [30] appear to give good agreement. The major diﬀerence between the transport
calculations using the two diﬀerent cross-sections is in the turning point of the longitudinal
characteristic energy proﬁle: our ab initio cross-sections cause a turning point at slightly
higher reduced electric ﬁeld strengths than the experiment, whereas the Biagi cross-sections
is consistent with the experimental measurements.

In a direct reﬂection of our increased momentum transfer cross-section, as compared to the
reference, the transverse characteristic energy and reduced mobility generally underestimate
the experimental measurements [39, 40]. The increased momentum transfer tends to increase
the randomization of the electron’s direction during a collision, which reduces the ﬁeld’s

12

ability to eﬃciently pump energy into the system. It is no surprise that the Biagi cross-
section gives closer agreement between calculation and experiment, since it is informed by
experimental swarm measurements and was not from an ab initio theory.

B. Electrons in liquid xenon

In Figure 6 the reduced mobility and characteristic energies are now compared in both the
gaseous and liquid phases. The transport coeﬃcients are presented against reduced electric
ﬁelds so that any linear dependence on density (as occurs in the dilute-gas limit) has been
removed, and so we have a true comparison of the gaseous and liquid phases. Qualitatively,
for a given reduced ﬁeld in the low-energy regime, we observe that the reduced mobility
and transverse characteristic energy in the liquid phase are both signiﬁcantly larger, often
by several orders of magnitude over the gaseous phase. In our investigations of electrons in
liquid argon [1], the transverse characteristic energy in the liquid phase was instead smaller
than in the gaseous phase. The longitudinal characteristic energy is generally larger for
reduced electric ﬁeld strengths of less than ∼ 0.2 Td, but smaller for the higher electric ﬁeld
strength considered. Our calculations using the ab-initio theory are accurate to within 25%
for the mobility (generally less than 15%) and 25% for the transverse characteristic energy.
These are of similar magnitude to those for the gas phase.

Although the diﬀerential scattering cross-sections for Xe displayed an enhanced anisotropic
nature in the liquid phase over that in the gas phase, the impact of this anisotropy on the
velocity distribution function was not particularly signiﬁcant here. The errors associated
with the two-term approximation (lmax = 1) to the velocity distribution function are dis-
played in Figure 7. In the gaseous and liquid phases there are diﬀerences as large as 10% and
40% respectively, in the transverse characteristic energies. The errors associated with the
longitudinal characteristic energies was less than 0.1% for both the gas and liquid phases,
and hence were omitted from Figure 7.

C. Rescaling gas phase cross-sections

It was noted in Section V A that our gas phase momentum-transfer cross-section overes-
timates the reference cross-section of Biagi [29, 30], the latter of which is shown to produce

13

transport data accurate to within 10% of the experimental data, compared with 30% for the
current ab-initio theory. In order to utilize the apparent enhanced accuracy associated with
the experimental cross-section, we postulate a method of extracting the explicit liquid-based
eﬀects from the theory and applying it to the experimentally measured cross-section. The
ratio of the liquid to gas phase cross-section using our formalism gives an energy dependent
scaling for the importance of screening and coherent scattering. Let us deﬁne a scaling
factor, ξl(v), such that:

ξl(v) =

˜νl(v)
νl(v)

,

(28)

where these ν correspond to our scattering calculations using the Dirac-Fock equations
described in Section III and IV B respectively. We can then build an eﬀective liquid-phase
momentum-transfer cross-section based on the Biagi [30] reference data, ΣBiagi

m (v) , via:

ΣBiagi

m (v) = ξ(v)σBiagi

m (v),

(29)

m (v) is the Biagi recommended gas-phase cross-section [30]. It should be noted
where σBiagi
that, due to the lack of diﬀerential cross-section information for the Biagi set, only a two-
term approximation can be used here, i.e. only the momentum transfer cross-section is
known. The eﬀective Biagi liquid momentum transfer cross-section is shown in Figure 8.
The method is similar in spirit to the procedure proposed in reference [41], though scaling
was done with respect to the transport coeﬃcients rather than the cross-sections.

The characteristic energies and reduced mobility calculated using the eﬀective Biagi liquid
momentum transfer cross-section is shown in Figure 9, along with the previous calculations
considered in this manuscript. It appears that this result gives a slightly better agreement
with experiment for the reduced mobilities at low ﬁeld strengths i.e., errors within 20%,
while it is no worse for the transverse characteristic energiy. The biggest improvements
occur at the low electric ﬁeld strengths, where the errors are eﬀectively half that of the ab
initio approach.

VI. CONCLUSIONS

We have presented an ab-initio treatment of electron scattering and transport in liquid
xenon. There are no free parameters in this calculation, and hence the agreement to within

14

25% in the mobility and the transverse characteristic energy in the reduced ﬁeld range 10−4–
1 Td is considered satisfactory.Given that, in the dilute gas phase, agreement to within 30%
for the mobility and transverse characteristic energy transport coeﬃcients was achieved, with
the current scattering calculations, this gives conﬁdence that the majority of the essential
physics for considering high mobility noble liquids is present in the theory. A scaling factor
formed from the ratio of the calculated liquid to gas phase cross-sections, was postulated to
encompass the “liquid”-based eﬀects, enabling more accurate gas-phase cross-sections derived
from experiment to be translated to liquid-phase cross-sections. Subsequent enhancements
in the accuracy of the transport coeﬃcient calculations were achieved, with the mobility
errors reduced to 20% and and even bigger improvement displayed for the lowest ﬁelds
considered.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported in part by the Australian Research Council through its Dis-
covery Program scheme. M. J. B. and S. J. B. acknowledge University Malaysia for their
“Icon Professor” appointments, while R. D. White thanks Prof. K Ratnavelu for some ﬁnan-
cial support through the University Malaysia grant UMRP11A-13AFR. S. D. acknowledges
support from MPNTRRS Projects OI171037 and III41011.

[1] G. J. Boyle, R. P. McEachran, D. G. Cocks, and R. D. White, J. Chem. Phys. 142, 154507

(2015).

[2] C. Regenfus and the ArDM collaboration, J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 203, 012024 (2010).

[3] E. Aprile and T. Doke, Rev. Mod. Phys. 82, 2053 (2010).

[4] E. Aprile, J. Angle, F. Arneodo, L. Baudis, A. Bernstein, A. Bolozdynya, et al, Astropart.

Phys. 34, 679 (2011).

[5] G. J. Alner, H. M. Araújo, A. Bewick, C. Bungau, B. Camanzi, M. J. Carson, et al, Astropart.

Phys. 28, 287 (2007).

[6] B. Baller, C. Bromberg, N. Buchanan, F. Cavanna, H. Chen, E. Church, et al, J. Instrum. 9,

T05005 (2014).

15

[7] S. Amerio, S. Amoruso, M. Antonello, P. Aprili, M. Armenante, F. Arneodo, et al, Nucl. Instr.

Meth. Phys. Res. A 527, 329 (2004).

[8] C. Rubbia, M. Antonello, P. Aprili, B. Baibussinov, M. Baldo Ceolin, L. Barzé, et al, J.

Instrum. 6, P07011 (2011).

[9] The ATLAS collaboration, J. Instrum. 9, P07024 (2014).

[10] N. Gee and G. R. Freeman, Can. J. Chem. 64, 1810 (1986).

[11] G. Braglia and V. Dallacasa, Phys. Rev. A 26, 902 (1982).

[12] A. F. Borghesani, IEEE Transactions on Dielectrics and Electrical Insulation 13, 492 (2006).

[13] Y. Sakai, Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 40, R441 (2007).

[14] R. D. White and R. E. Robson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 230602 (2009).

[15] E. E. Kunhardt, Physical Review B 44, 4235 (1991).

[16] M. H. Cohen and J. Lekner, Physical Review 158, 305 (1967).

[17] V. M. Atrazhev and I. T. Iakubov, Journal of Physics C: Solid State Physics 14, 5139 (1981).

[18] V. Atrazhev and I. Timoshkin, Physical Review B 54, 11252 (1996).

[19] R. D. White and R. E. Robson, Physical Review E 84, 031125 (2011).

[20] R. D. White, R. E. Robson, B. Schmidt, and M. Morrison, Journal of Physics D: Applied

Physics 36, 3125 (2003).

[21] L. Boltzmann, Wein. Ber. 66, 275 (1872).

[22] L. G. H. Huxley and R. W. Crompton, The Drift and Diﬀusion of Electrons in Gases (Wiley,

New York, 1974).

[23] Y. Sakai, Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 40, R441 (2007).

[24] S. Chen, R. P. McEachran, and A. D. Stauﬀer, J. Phys. B 41, 025201 (2008).

[25] R. P. McEachran, A. D. Stauﬀer, A. G. Ryman, and D. L. Morgan, J. Phys. B 10, 663 (1977).

[26] R. P. McEachran and A. D. Stauﬀer, J. Phys. B 23, 4605 (1990).

[27] D. J. R. Mimnagh, R. P. McEachran, and A. D. Stauﬀer, J. Phys. B 26, 1727 (1993).

[28] R. P. McEachran and A. D. Stauﬀer, Eurl. Phys. J. 68, 153 (2014).

[29] S. F. Biagi, “Biagi database,” www.lxcat.net (2014), accessed 30 April, 2014.

[30] M. C. Bordage, S. F. Biagi, L. L. Alves, K. Bartschat, S. Chowdhury, L. C. Pitchford, G. J. M.

Hagelaar, V. P. Morgan, and O. Zatsarinny, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 46, 334003 (2013).

[31] M. Becchi and R. Magli, Physica B: Condensed Matter 234, 316 (1997).

16

[32] V. M. Atrazhev, A. V. Berezhnov, D. O. Dunikov, and I. V. Chernysheva, in IEEE Interna-

tional Conference on Dielectric Liquids (2005) pp. 329–332.

[33] J. Pérez-Pellitero, P. Ungerer, G. Orkoulas, and A. D. Mackie, Journal of Chemical Physics

125, 1 (2006).

[34] J. Lekner, Physical Review 158, 103 (1967).

[35] G. Boyle, M. Casey, R. White, and J. Mitroy, Physical Review A 89, 022712 (2014).

[36] G. J. Boyle, M. J. E. Casey, R. D. White, Y. Cheng, and J. Mitroy, Journal of Physics D:

Applied Physics 47, 345203 (2014).

[37] J. de Urquijo, E. Basurto, a. M. Juárez, K. F. Ness, R. E. Robson, M. J. Brunger, and R. D.

White, The Journal of chemical physics 141, 014308 (2014).

[38] R. D. White, M. J. Brunger, N. a. Garland, R. E. Robson, K. F. Ness, G. Garcia, J. de Urquijo,

S. Dujko, and Z. L. Petrović, The European Physical Journal D 68, 125 (2014).

[39] T. Koizumi, E. Shirakawa, and I. Ogawa, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Phys. 19, 2331 (1986).

[40] J. L. Pack, R. E. Voshall, A. V. Phelps, and L. E. Kline, J. Appl. Phys. 71, 5363 (1992).

[41] G. J. Boyle, R. D. White, R. E. Robson, S. Dujko, and Z. Lj Petrović, New Journal of Physics

14, 045011 (2012).

[42] J. Yarnell, M. Katz, R. Wenzel, and S. Koenig, Phys. Rev. A 7, 2130 (1973).

[43] E. Shibamura, K. Masuda, and T. Doke, in 8th Workshop on Electron Swarms (1984).

[44] S. S. S. Huang and G. R. Freeman, J. Chem. Phys. 47, 1355 (1978).

17

Figure 1. The current momentum transfer cross-sections in the gas-phase (Gas), and the reference

momentum transfer cross-section of Biagi [30] (Biagi gas).

18

Figure 2. Xenon structure factors. The crosses represent the Becchi measurements [31] and the

solid blue lines are our Monte-Carlo simulations of the Lennard-Jones ﬂuid at a high temperature

near the critical point of 274.7 K. The solid green line represents the structure factor at 165 K

that we use in this paper and the dashed green line shows the rescaled measurements from argon

experimental data [42] used by reference [32].

19

Figure 3. Current diﬀerential cross-sections, Σ(, χ)., in square angstroms for electrons in Xe for a)

dilute gas phase, b) eﬀective liquid phase including screening eﬀects, and c) liquid phase including

coherent scattering eﬀects.

20

Figure 4. The current momentum transfer cross-sections in the gas-phase (Gas; Biagi gas), liquid-

phase (Scr liq, Atrazhev scr liq) and including their modiﬁcations when coherent scattering eﬀects

are included (Scr + coh liq, Atrazhev scr + coh liq). A detailed description of the Atrazhev et al.

cross-section calculations is given in reference [32].

21

Figure 5. The transverse (DT /µ) and longitudinal (DL/µ) characteristic energies (top) and reduced
mobility (n0µ) (bottom) of electrons in gaseous xenon, calculated using the current potentials and
associated cross-sections detailed in Section III (Gas), and the recommended cross-section of Biagi

[30] (Biagi gas), and compared with available experimental data (Koizumi et al. [39] at 300 K; Pack

et. al [40] at 300 K;). The background xenon gas for the calculations was ﬁxed at 300 K.

22

Figure 6. Comparison of the transverse (DT /µ) and longitudinal (DL/µ) characteristic energies
(top) and reduced mobilities (n0µ) (bottom) in gaseous and liquid xenon, with those calculated from
the various approximations to the cross-sections. Experimental data ( Liquid phase: Shibamaru et

al. [43] at 165K; Huang and Freeman [44] at 163 K). The current liquid-phase cross-sections (Liq)

have been calculated including coherent scattering eﬀects. All other proﬁles are the same as given

in Figure 5.

23

Figure 7. Percentage diﬀerences between the two-term and multi-term values of the characteristic

energy for the gas (Gas) and liquid (Liq) phases. All percentages are relative to the converged

multi-term result using the full diﬀerential cross-section.

24

Figure 8. The momentum transfer cross-sections in the gas-phase (Gas; Biagi), liquid-phase (Scr

liq, Scaled scr liq) and including their modiﬁcations when coherent scattering eﬀects are included

( Scr+coh liq, Scaled scr+coh liq).

25

Figure 9. Comparison of the transverse (DT /µ) and longitudinal (DL/µ) characteristic energies
(top) and reduced mobilities (n0µ) (bottom) in gaseous and liquid xenon, with those calculated from
the various approximations to the cross-sections. The current liquid-phase cross-sections (Liq) have

been calculated including coherent scattering eﬀects. All other proﬁles are the same as in Figure 5.

The calculations using the re-scaled Biagi cross-sections are given by the red lines (Scaled liq). All

other proﬁles are the same as given in Figures 5 and 6.

26

