Quasi-thermal depletion of a polariton condensate by phonons near room temperature

Sebastian Klembt,1 Thorsten Klein,2 Anna Minguzzi,3 and Maxime Richard1

1Institut Néel, Université Grenoble Alpes and CNRS, B.P. 166, 38042 Grenoble, France∗

2University of Bremen, P.O. Box 330440, 28334 Bremen, Germany†

3LPMMC, Université Grenoble Alpes and CNRS, B.P. 166, 38042 Grenoble, France

(Dated: April 1, 2016)

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
3

 
 
]
s
a
g
-
t
n
a
u
q
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

2
v
6
0
2
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Thermalization of ultra-cold atoms conﬁned in a magneto-optical trap occurs on a timescale
much faster than the trapping lifetime. Thus, quantum degenerate atomic gases behave in close
agreement with the laws of equilibrium thermodynamics. Owing to much higher loss rate and more
complex energy relaxation mechanisms, this is not the case for quantum ﬂuids of polaritons in solid-
state microcavities, which are characterized by a dominant and generally unknown nonequilibrium
character. In this work, we exploit the large polariton-phonon interaction near room temperature
to achieve and unambiguously determine a signiﬁcant degree of thermalization within a polariton
condensate. We show that the heat thus picked-up from the phonon bath gives rise to a quasi-
thermal depletion mechanism characterized by a condensation threshold increase, a decrease of the
coherence length, and a scrambling of the topological excitations.

PACS numbers: 71.36.+c,05.70.Ln,67.10.Ba

Unlike ultra-cold atoms kept in a magneto-optical trap,
where Bose-Einstein condensation formation and growth
has been well described as a thermal equilibration pro-
cess [1, 2], photons or exciton-polaritons (polaritons) con-
ﬁned in solid-state optical microcavities have a typical
lifetime in the picosecond range, usually shorter than
their thermalization time. Their steady state thus re-
sults from competition between drive and losses, plus
some possible partial thermalization within their lifetime.
In this regime, that challenges the textbook thermal-
equilibrium description of quantum ﬂuids, a driven-
dissipative version of Bose-Einstein condensation has
been clearly shown to take place both for photons [3],
and polaritons [4, 5].

In the context of steady-state thermodynamics [6, 7]
of quantum gases, this phenomenon is highly intriguing.
Indeed, most fundamental results of equilibrium thermo-
dynamics do not apply in a driven-dissipative Bose gases
and a whole range of exciting new physics is expected.
For instance, condensation can take place in non-zero
momentum state as a result of broken time reversal sym-
metry [8, 9], a non-trivial excitation spectrum is expected
which includes a diﬀusive Goldstone mode [10, 11], and
phase transitions with new dynamical universality class
are predicted [12]. Experimentally, a steady-state popu-
lation of photons in a cavity constitute a model system of
a driven-dissipative ideal Bose gas (i.e. with negligible in-
terparticle interactions). It has been shown recently that
their condensation is mostly by faster-than-lifetime equi-
libration with a rovibronic thermal reservoir provided by
dye molecules ﬁlling the cavity [13, 14].

Polaritons are elementary excitations of microcavities
in the strong coupling regime [15]. They constitute an-
other type of driven-dissipative bosonic quantum ﬂuid,
characterized by signiﬁcant interparticle interactions re-
sulting from their excitonic fraction. This feature is

FIG. 1. (Color online) Schematic representation of a steady-
state polariton condensate. The optical pump P and the po-
lariton radiative loss rate γ are shown and sets the timescale of
the driven-dissipative regime. At cryogenic temperature (left
panel), phonons play no role in ﬁxing the condensate steady-
state. At elevated temperature (right panel) the steady-state
involves a quasi-thermal depletion mechanism (ﬁgured by the
bubbles) disturbing the condensate population and phase,
driven by the heat picked up from the thermal phonon bath
of elevated temperature T (the ﬂame).

at the basis of incredibly rich quantum hydrodynamics
phenomena such as superﬂuidity, and the spontaneous
or triggered occurence of vortices, solitons, and spin-
dependent complex phase structures [16]. From the ther-
modynamical point-of-view, it has been shown that the
excitonic reservoir coexisting at higher energy with the
polariton condensate plays a key role in driving their re-
distribution in phase space and Bose-Einstein conden-
sation [17–21]. However, whether this mechanism is of
thermal or driven-dissipative nature is not well estab-
lished yet, as thermal-like Boltzmann tails in the polari-
ton spectrum might be sometimes coincidental [22] or
result from quantum noise of purely driven-dissipative
origin [11].

In this work, we have explored the nature of a driven-

dissipative polariton condensate interacting with a reser-
voir of perfectly known thermal state:
lattice phonons.
While at cryogenic temperatures (T < 50K, Fig.1.a) the
polariton-phonon scattering rate γpp is far too weak as
compared to the polariton loss rate γ to drive any ther-
mal equilibration with thermal phonons [23], the situa-
tion is very diﬀerent near room temperature. Owing to
the much larger phonon population, γpp reaches a point
where it matches γ. This criterion characterizes an in-
termediate steady-state situation, where thermal equi-
libration and the driven-dissipative kinetics both con-
tribute signiﬁcantly in setting the polariton condensate
equilibrium state.
In our speciﬁc experimental situa-
tions, phonons give rise to a thermal depletion mecha-
nism of the condensate for which, by picking up heat
from the phonon bath, polaritons from the condensate
are excited into the non-condensed fraction and perturb
the condensate phase (T = 243 K, Fig.1.b). This mecha-
nism does not fully determine the new condensate steady
state, but modiﬁes it signiﬁcantly; it can thus be quali-
ﬁed as “quasi-thermal” as opposed to the purely driven-
dissipative or the thermodynamic limit. We evidence
this quasi-thermal mechanism by a speciﬁc decrease of
the condensate correlation length, and by the modiﬁ-
cation and disappearance of the topological excitations
such as vortices and solitons, as temperature is increased.
Our interpretation is backed up by a stochastic driven-
dissipative model that we have developed.

EXPERIMENT

For this set of experiments, we used two high quality
Zinc selenide microcavities [24] in which, like in nitride
[21], Zinc oxide [25, 26] or organic material-based mi-
crocavities [27], a polariton condensate can be driven up
to room temperature. Both microcavities are of equal
design but tuned diﬀerently to achieve polaritonic res-
onance within two diﬀerent temperature ranges (cryo-
genic and close to room temperature). A Rabi splitting
of Ωhh = (32 ± 2) meV between the cavity mode and
the heavy-hole exciton at T = 5 K is found and kept up
to room temperature. The exciton energy varies from
Ehh = 2817 meV at T = 10 K, to Ehh = 2730 meV
at T = 243 K. Polaritons are excited by non-resonant
(∼ 100 meV above Ehh) picosecond pulses of average
power density P generated by a doubled Ti-Sapphire
laser.

Quantitative estimate of the crossover between the

driven-dissipative and the thermalized regime

As a preliminary requirement to this experiment, we
need to characterize the polaritons’ thermodynamical
state depending on the experimental parameters, and

2

FIG. 2.
(Color online) Circle symbols: measured k(cid:107) = 0
polariton emission spectrum full width at half maximum
(FWHM) below threshold versus polariton energy Elp minus
the bare exciton energy Ehh at T = 6 K (a), on a ﬁxed micro-
cavity position labeled ’area 1’ versus temperature (b), and
at a ﬁxed temperature T = 243 K versus polariton energy (c).
The square symbols in (b) show the measured ground-state
polariton energy in area 1 versus temperature. The green
(black) dashed lines show the calculated polariton radiative
losses γ, (quantum well disorder γinh) contribution to the
linewidth in (a) and (c). The solid blue (red) line is the calcu-
lated polariton FWHM excluding (including) the polariton-
phonon scattering contribution γpp. The hatched area shows
the parameters region where γpp contributes signiﬁcantly to
the FWHM.

in particular the phonon temperature T and the polari-
tons energy Elp. To do so, we compare the polariton-
phonon interaction rate γpp(Elp, T ) with the polariton
radiative loss rate γ(Elp).Thus, when γpp (cid:29) γ, polaritons
are at full thermodynamic equilibrium with the phonons
at a temperature T , while when γpp (cid:28) γ polaritons
are in the purely driven-dissipative limit. As mentioned
above, the criterion γpp ∼ γ characterizes an interme-
diate steady-state situation, where thermal equilibration
and the driven-dissipative kinetics both contributes sig-
niﬁcantly in setting the polaritons equilibrium state.

To carry out this measurement, we excite polaritons
far below the condensation threshold Pth and measure
their photoluminescence spectral linewidth γp at k(cid:107) = 0.
The latter quantity is directly proportional to γpp, plus to
two other contributions: (i) the polariton radiative rate
γ which depends on the photonic fraction and (ii), the
quantum well disorder which causes elastic scattering of
polaritons at a rate γinh towards localized dark exciton
states (a review on the latter eﬀect can be found in [28]).
In a ﬁrst stage, we thus perform a linewidth measure-
ment at cryogenic temperature T = 6 K, where γpp can
be safely neglected as compared to γ and γinh. The mea-
surement is shown in Fig.2.a versus the polariton energy

3

(Color online) Polariton condensate correlation amplitude |g(1)(x,−x, y,−y)| (top row), relative phase φ(x, y) −
FIG. 3.
φ(−x,−y) (middle row), and relative velocity |v(x, y) − v(−x,−y)| (bottom row) in color scale, versus position (x, y) for
diﬀerent temperatures: T = 172 K (a,e,i); 196 K(b,f,j); 218 K (c,g,k); 243 K (d,h,l). The diamond,round, and x symbols show
the position of a soliton, a +1 and a −1 charge vortex, respectively. Their nature is derived from their speciﬁc phase pattern
(middle row) and their position matches local velocity maxima (bottom row). The ﬂat areas surrounding the condensate in
every panels results from the suppression, during the numerical data analysis, of the raw data with too low signal-to-noise ratio.

Elp − Ehh. Both contributions, γ and γinh to the polari-
ton linewidth γp, are well understood within a simple
model [29]. This analysis yields a pure cavity photon
linewidth γc = 1.2 meV, a disordered excitonic density
of states linewidth Γinh = 11 meV and a characteris-
tic rate of polariton scattering over the quantum well
disorder γ0 = 2 meV. Note that these three parameters
are temperature independent, and that the last two are
structural characteristics of the quantum wells and can
thus be used for both microcavities.

In order to ﬁnd a working regime where γpp approaches
γ, i.e. contributes signiﬁcantly to the linewidth, we use
the second microcavity and carry out the same linewidth
measurement at higher temperature. The results are
shown in Fig.2.b where the polariton linewidth on a ﬁxed
point of the microcavity, labeled ’area 1’ further on, is
shown for temperatures increasing from 150 K to 243 K.
In Fig.2.c, the polariton linewidth is also shown at a ﬁxed
temperature of T = 243 K and for various points of the
microcavity (i.e. various polariton energies Elp [30]). We
ﬁt these measurements using the previous analysis(solid
blue line) where only γ and γinh are accounted for. The
diﬀerence, shown as a cross-hatched region in Fig.2.b and
Fig.2.c, can thus be attributed to the contribution of

polariton-phonon scattering rate γpp alone.

To further verify this interpretation, we have calcu-
lated numerically the inelastic scattering rate of k(cid:107) = 0
polaritons by thermal phonons. We ﬁnd that the main
contribution to the scattering rate is given by longitudi-
nal optical phonons, within the Fröhlich interaction. The
contribution of acoustic phonons, via deformation poten-
tial interaction, is three orders of magnitude smaller than
the optical-phonon one, as previously reported [23, 31],
and will be henceforth neglected. Note that for this cal-
culation we used the known material constants as input
parameters and left no parameters free [29]. The sum of
the calculated γpp to the previously derived γ and γinh
yields a quite good agreement with the measurement as
shown by the solid red line in Fig.2.c, thus conﬁrming
that we have a reliable measurement of γpp at hand.
As shown in Fig.2.b, the regime where γpp ∼ γ is
achieved on area 1 (a 15 × 10 µm2 surface), for a tem-
perature T ∼ 240 K (i.e.
for which the hatched area
is about one half of the total polariton linewidth). We
choose to work on this speciﬁc sample area for two im-
(i) γ is a bit lower than its aver-
portant reasons:
age value on the microcavity (3 meV against ∼ 4 meV);
and (ii) the photonic disorder landscape is kept identical

throughout the experiment. Thus when we change the
temperature, the disordered potential Ur(x, y; T ) expe-
rienced by polaritons only changes in global magnitude
Ur(x, y; T (cid:48)) = Ur(x, y; T ) × C 2
0 is
the polariton photonic fraction, an eﬀect easy to account
for. As a result, when a temperature-dependent change
is observed on the condensate properties, it cannot be
attributed to a change of the disordered potential land-
scape.

0 (T ), where C 2

0 (T (cid:48))/C 2

Measurement of the coherence properties

throughout the crossover

After this preparatory work, we increase the pulsed op-
tical excitation on area 1 to reach the polariton conden-
sate regime. The pump power is chosen 1.02 times the po-
lariton stimulation power threshold Pth. We checked that
the condensate remains in the single mode regime [32] for
each investigated temperatures. Interestingly, upon in-
creasing the temperature from T = 150 K to T = 243 K,
the condensation threshold increases by 60%, or at ﬁxed
excitation power, the condensate vanishes. It means that
the net eﬀect of the condensate interaction with thermal
phonons is a depletion mechanism, that kicks polaritons
out of the condensate much more than it brings some in.
Within our experimental parameters, this trend suggests
that a hypothetical polariton ﬂuid at full thermal equi-
librium with phonons would be further away from con-
densation than the driven-dissipative case. This is actu-
ally in agreement with the fact that the critical polariton
density ρeq,c = 2mkBT /h2 = 1014cm−2, that would be
required to achieve the quantum degenerate regime at
thermal equilibrium, is four orders of magnitude larger
than in our experiment. From a practical point of view,
we compensate for this threshold increase by adjusting
the excitation power throughout the experiment, such
that P (T ) = 1.02Pth(T ) regardless of the temperature.
This strategy maintains an approximately constant con-
densate fraction.

To further characterize the properties of the quasi-
thermal polariton gas, we address its coherence prop-
erties. Using an imaging Michelson arrangement in
cross-correlation conﬁguration [4], we measure the spa-
tial correlation function g(1)(x, y,−x,−y) of the po-
lariton condensate for various temperatures.
In or-
der to remain accurately on area 1 we have used
a position tracking optical setup on the backside of
the sample holder providing a 0.5 µm repositioning
accuracy.
The amplitude of the correlation func-
tion |g(1)(x, y,−x,−y)|, the condensate relative phase
tive velocity ﬁeld |v(x, y) − v(−x,−y)| = |∇[φ(x, y) −
φ(−x,−y)]| are shown in Figs.3.a-d, Figs.3.e-h and
Figs.3.j-l respectively,
for four diﬀerent temperatures.
We use the relative velocity ﬁeld (Fig.3 bottom row) to

φ(x, y)− φ(−x,−y) = Arg(cid:8)g(1)(x, y,−x,−y)(cid:9), and rela-

4

spot the possible presence of a topological excitation and
we identify its nature by looking at the phase pattern at
this position ((Fig.3 middle row)).

At T = 172 K (left panels), γpp is negligible versus γ
as determined by our above analysis (cf. Fig.2.b). We
thus are in the quasi-pure driven-dissipative regime for
which we observe long range correlations, with a shape
strongly inﬂuenced by local disorder (Fig.3.a), plus sev-
eral permanent topological excitations, namely a vortex
anti-vortex pair and two solitonic structures. Upon in-
creasing temperature, i.e. increasing the ratio γpp/γ, we
observe two diﬀerent features: (i) the correlation length
shrinks by ∼ 20% upon reaching T = 243 K (Figs.3.a-
d), and (ii) the topological excitations are perturbed and
their number decreases and eventually vanishes. Re-
garding point (ii) we observe more speciﬁcally that at
T = 196 K (Figs.3.b,f,j), a solitonic structure disappears
as well as a vortex-anti-vortex pair, and a soliton is ob-
served instead. At T = 218 K one of the two remaining
solitonic structures is suppressed, followed by the last one
at T = 243 K (Figs.3.d,h,l).

THEORY

In order to provide some insight into these observa-
tions, we have simulated the behaviour of the condensed
part of the polariton ﬂuid using a time-dependent driven-
dissipative mean ﬁeld calculation [10, 16], including a
thermal space- and time-dependent noise source account-
ing for polariton - LO phonon interactions, in a simi-
lar fashion as in [33]. The model is presented in de-
tail in [34]. We used the same temperature-dependent
phonon amplitude as that derived above to calculate
γpp(T, Elp). The equations are explicitly solved in time
and the obtained correlation function is time-integrated,
thus simulating the same quantity which is measured
in the experiment. The polariton disordered potential
Ur(x, y) has been measured in a photoluminescence spec-
troscopy mapping experiment [35] and accounted for in
the simulation. The calculated |g(1)(x, y,−x,−y)|, rel-
ative phase φ(x, y) − φ(−x,−y), and relative velocity
|v(x, y) − v(−x,−y)| are shown in Figs.4.a-b, Figs.4.c-
d, and Figs.4.e-f, respectively, for two diﬀerent tempera-
tures: T = 172 K and T = 243 K. In agreement with the
experiment, the calculation shows that the correlations
range decrease upon increasing the phonon tempera-
ture. However, as shown by the quantitative experiment-
theory comparison shown in Fig.4.g-h, the correlations
are overestimated at all temperatures. This discrepancy
results from the adopted mean-ﬁeld model, which ne-
glects the noncondensed fraction, while in the experi-
ment a signiﬁcant non-condensed polariton population
is present and increases with temperature.

Regarding the topological excitations of the conden-
sate, the theory agrees with the experimental observation

5

the reduction of the correlation length, a topological ex-
citation can still exist but it is not coherent enough with
the remote area of the condensate it is overlapped with,
and thus does not show up in the measurement. A second
possibility is that the condensate vanishes locally, taking
with it a topological excitation if present, as it requires
a phase degree of freedom to exist.

To summarize, we have identiﬁed two temperature-
dependent signatures of the interactions of polaritons
with the thermal phonon bath at elevated tempera-
ture: a population transfer from the condensed to the
non-condensed fraction, as evidenced by the increase
of the excitation threshold with temperature, and a
perturbation of the condensate phase by thermal noise,
as evidenced experimentally and predicted theoretically
by the analysis of the ﬁrst-order correlation function.
This set of results is fully consistent with a quasi-thermal
depletion mechanism of the nonequilibrium polariton
condensate, induced by heat transfer from the thermal
phonon reservoir. More generally, this work shows that
the nonequilibrium character of a polariton condensate
can be tuned and known in an unambiguous and con-
trolled way, by using close-to-room temperature phonons
as a heat bath of perfectly known thermodynamical
state. As such, polaritons at elevated temperatures
constitute a unique experimental platform to investigate
nonequilibrium thermodynamics of quantum ﬂuids and
the nature of their phase transitions, with many exciting
perspectives.

The authors acknowledge ﬁnancial support by the
ERC starting grant "Handy-Q" Nb 258608. We thank
D. Hommel and C. Kruse for their support in the
fabrication activities. Enlightening discussions with I.
Carusotto, M. Wouters, A. Chiocchetta, A. Auﬀèves
and C. Elouard are warmly acknowledged. MR wishes
to express his immense gratitude to B. Richard for her
constant support.

address:

∗ Present
Technische Physik, Universität
Würzburg, Am Hubland, D-97074 Würzburg, Germany
† Present address: BIAS, Institute of Applied Beam Tech-

nology, Bremen, Germany

[1] H.-J. Miesner, D. M. Stamper-Kurn, M. R. Andrews, D.
S. Durfee, S. Inouye, W. Ketterle, “Bosonic Stimulation
in the Formation of a Bose-Einstein Condensate”, Science
279 1005 (1998)

[2] S. Ritter, A. Öttl, Tobias Donner, Thomas Bourdel,
Michael Köhl, and Tilman Esslinger, “Observing the For-
mation of Long-Range Order during Bose-Einstein Con-
densation”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 090402 (2007)

[3] J. Klaers, J. Schmitt, F. Vewinger and M. Weitz “Bose-
Einstein condensation of photons in an optical microcav-
ity”, Nature 468, 545 (2010)

[4] J. Kasprzak, M. Richard, S. Kundermann, A. Baas, P.

FIG. 4. (Color online) Calculated Polariton condensate cor-
relation amplitude |g(1)(x,−x, y,−y)| (upper row), relative
phase φ(x, y) − φ(−x,−y) (middle row), and relative velocity
|v(x, y) − v(−x,−y)| (bottom row) in color scale, versus po-
sition (x, y) for two diﬀerent temperatures: T = 172 K (a,c,e)
and T = 243 K (b,d,f). Symbols are deﬁned as in Fig.3.(a-d),
with the addition of the triangle corresponding to a charge 2
vortex. Measured (g) and calculated (h) proﬁles |g(1)(r,−r)|
taken across the condensate, along a chosen direction, for tem-
peratures T = 172 K (blue); 196 K (cyan); 218 K (orange);
243 K (red). The dashed arrows are a guide to the eye showing
the decrease in correlation length for increasing temperature.

in predicting their suppression upon increasing the tem-
perature, as hot thermal phonons cause too much spa-
tial phase noise for a vortex or a soliton to maintain its
characteristic phase pattern over time. Thus, in our cal-
culation shown in Fig.4, the low temperature condensate
(T = 172 K) exhibits two solitons and a charge 2 vortex,
while at T = 243 K, the weakest soliton (in terms of phase
diﬀerence between both sides of the structure) and the
vortex are fully scrambled and the strongest soliton ex-
hibits a markedly decreased average phase contrast. Note
that the model used does not capture two other mecha-
nisms possibly also responsible for the disappearance of
topological excitations. A ﬁrst one is related to the ex-
perimental method used to measure the phase: owing to

[8] M. Richard, J. Kasprzak, R. Romestain, R. André, and
L. S. Dang, “Spontaneous Coherent Phase Transition of
Polaritons in CdTe Microcavities” Phys. Rev. Lett. 94,
187401 (2005)

[9] M. Wouters, I. Carusotto, and C. Ciuti “Spatial and
spectral shape of inhomogeneous nonequilibrium exciton-
polariton condensates”, Phys. Rev. B 77, 115340 (2008)
[10] M. Wouters and I. Carusotto, “Excitations in a Nonequi-
librium BoseEinstein Condensate of Exciton Polaritons”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 140402 (2007)

[11] A. Chiocchetta and I. Carusotto, “Quantum Langevin
model for nonequilibrium condensation” Phys. Rev. A
90, 023633 (2014)

[12] L. M. Sieberer, S. D. Huber, E. Altman, and S. Diehl,
“Dynamical Critical Phenomena in Driven-Dissipative
Systems” Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 195301 (2013)

[13] J. Klaers, F. Vewinger and M. Weitz, “Thermalization of
a two-dimensional photonic gas in a ’white wall’ photon
box” Nature Phys. 6, 512 (2010)

[14] J. Klaers “The thermalization, condensation and ﬂicker-
ing of photons” J. Phys. B: Atomic, Molecular and Opti-
cal Physics, 47, 243001 (2014)

[15] C. Weisbuch, M. Nishioka, A. Ishikawa, and Y. Arakawa,
“Observation of the coupled exciton-photon mode split-
ting in a semiconductor quantum microcavity” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 69, 3314 (1992)

[16] I. Carusotto and C. Ciuti “Quantum ﬂuids of light”, Rev.

Mod. Phys. 85, 299 (2013)

Jeambrun, J. M. J. Keeling, F. M. Marchetti, M. H. Szy-
manka, R. André, J. L. Staehli, V. Savona, P. B. Little-
wood, B. Deveaud and Le Si Dang, “Bose-Einstein con-
densation of exciton polaritons”, Nature 443, 409 (2006)
[5] R. Balili, V. Hartwell, D. Snoke, L. Pfeiﬀer and K. West
“Bose-Einstein Condensation of Microcavity Polaritons
in a Trap” Science 316 1007-1010 (2007)

[6] T. Hatano and S. Sasa, “Steady-State Thermodynamics
of Langevin Systems” Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 3463 (2001)
[7] Y. Oono and M. Paniconi, “Steady State Thermodynam-

ics” Prog. Theor. Phys. Suppl. 130, 29 (1998).

[17] D. Porras, C. Ciuti, J. J. Baumberg, and C. Tejedor,
“Polariton dynamics and Bose-Einstein condensation in
semiconductor microcavities” Phys. Rev. B 66, 085304
(2002)

[18] T. D. Doan, Huy Thien Cao, D. B. Tran Thoai, and H.
Haug, “Condensation kinetics of microcavity polaritons
with scattering by phonons and polaritons” Phys. Rev.
B 72, 085301 (2005)

[19] D. Krizhanovskii, A. Love, D. Sanvitto, D. Whittaker,
M. Skolnick, and J. Roberts, “Interaction between a high-
density polariton phase and the exciton environment in
semiconductor microcavities” Phys. Rev. B 75 233307
(2007)

[20] J. Kasprzak, D. D. Solnyshkov, R. André, Le Si Dang,
and G. Malpuech, “Formation of an Exciton Polariton
Condensate: Thermodynamic versus Kinetic Regimes”,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 146404 (2008)

[21] J. Levrat, R. Butté, E. Feltin, J.-F. Carlin, N. Grandjean,
D. Solnyshkov, and G. Malpuech, “Condensation phase

6

diagram of cavity polaritons in GaN-based microcavities:
Experiment and theory” Phys. Rev. B 81, 125305 (2010)
[22] D. Bajoni, P. Senellart, A. Lemaitre, and J. Bloch, “Pho-
ton lasing in GaAs microcavity: Similarities with a po-
lariton condensate” Phys. Rev. B 76, 201305(R) (2007)
[23] F. Tassone, C. Piermarocchi, V. Savona, A. Quattropani,
and P. Schwendimann, “Bottleneck eﬀects in the relax-
ation and photoluminescence of microcavity polaritons”
Phys. Rev. B 56, 7554 (1997).

[24] S. Klembt, E. Durupt, S. Datta, T. Klein, A. Baas,
Y. Léger, C. Kruse, D. Hommel, A. Minguzzi, and M.
Richard, “Exciton-Polariton Gas as a Nonequilibrium
Coolant” Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 186403(2015)

[25] F. Li, L. Orosz, O. Kamoun, S. Bouchoule, C. Brimont, P.
Disseix, T. Guillet, X. Lafosse, M. Leroux, J. Leymarie,
M. Mexis, M. Mihailovic, G. Patriarche, F. Réveret, D.
Solnyshkov, J. Zuniga-Perez, and G. Malpuech, “From
Excitonic to Photonic Polariton Condensate in a ZnO-
Based Microcavity” Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 196406 (2013)
[26] A. Trichet, E. Durupt, F. Médard, S. Datta, A. Minguzzi,
M. Richard, “Long-range correlations in a 97% excitonic
one-dimensional polariton condensate” Phys. Rev. B 88,
121407 (2013)

[27] J. D. Plumhof, T. Stöferle, L. Mai, U. Scherf,R. F. Mahrt,
“Room-temperature Bose-Einstein condensation of cavity
exciton-polaritons in a polymer” Nature Materials 13,
247-252 (2014)

[28] V. Savona “Eﬀect of interface disorder on quantum well
excitons and microcavity polaritons” J. Phys.: Condes.
Matter 19 295208 (2007)

[29] See Supplemental Material at http://link.aps.org... for
details on the model used for the polariton linewidth
analysis.

[30] As frequently done, the microcavities have been fabri-
cated with a slightly wedged shape, such that the cavity
mode energy can be tuned at will by changing the work-
ing point on the microcavity.

[31] G. Cassabois, A. L. C. Triques, F. Bogani, C. Dela-
lande, Ph. Roussignol, and C. Piermarocchi “Polariton-
acoustic-phonon interaction in a semiconductor micro-
cavity” Phys. Rev. B 61, 1696(2000)

[32] D. N. Krizhanovskii, K. G. Lagoudakis, M. Wouters, B.
Pietka, R. A. Bradley, K. Guda, D. M. Whittaker, M.
S. Skolnick, B. Deveaud-Plédran, M. Richard, R. André,
and Le Si Dang “Coexisting nonequilibrium condensates
with long-range spatial coherence in semiconductor mi-
crocavities” Phys. Rev. B 80, 045317 (2009)

[33] I. G. Savenko, T. C. H. Liew, and I. A. Shelykh “Stochas-
tic Gross-Pitaevskii Equation for the Dynamical Ther-
malization of Bose-Einstein Condensates” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 110, 127402 (2013)

[34] See Supplemental Material at http://link.aps.org... for
details on our model describing the polariton condensate
mean-ﬁeld perturbation by thermal phonons.

[35] A. Baas, K. G. Lagoudakis, M. Richard, R. André, Le
Si Dang, and B. Deveaud, “Synchronized and Desyn-
chronized Phases of Exciton-Polariton Condensates in
the Presence of Disorder” Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 170401
(2008)

