Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society

Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc. 00: 1–15 (0000)

Equatorial superrotation in Held & Suarez-like ﬂows

with weak equator-to-pole surface temperature gradient

a Department of Meteorology, University of Reading, Reading RG6 6BX, UK

b School of Physics and Astronomy, Queen Mary University of London, London E1 4NS, UK
c Institute for Theory and Computation, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA

∗Correspondence to: Department of Meteorology, University of Reading, Reading RG6 6BX, UK. E-mail:

I. Polichtchouka,b∗and J. Y-K. Chob,c†

I.Polichtchouk@reading.ac.uk,

†On leave from Queen Mary University of London

Equatorial superrotation under zonally-symmetric thermal forcing is investi-
gated in a setup close to that of the classic Held and Suarez (1994) setup.
In contrast to the behaviour in the classic setup, a transition to equatorial
superrotation occurs when the equator-to-pole surface equilibrium entropy
gradient is weakened. Two factors contribute to this transition: 1) the reduction
of breaking Rossby waves from the mid-latitude that decelerate the equatorial
ﬂow and 2) the presence of barotropic instability in the equatorial region,
providing stirring to accelerate the equatorial ﬂow. In the latter, Kelvin waves
excited by instability near the equator generate and maintain the superrotation.
However, the superrotation is unphysically enhanced if simulations are under-
resolved and/or over-dissipated.
Copyright c(cid:13) 0000 Royal Meteorological Society

Key Words:

superrotation; GCM; instabilities; waves

Received . . .

Citation: . . .

1.

Introduction

Superrotation is an important phenomenon in atmospheric
ﬂows. It is deﬁned as a zonal-mean zonal ﬂow with axial
angular momentum, M = M (φ), greater than the solid
body angular momentum at
the equator, M0 = M (0);
here φ is the latitude. For a “shallow” atmosphere, M =
a cos φ(U + Ωa cos φ) and therefore M0 = Ωa2, where a
is the planetary radius, U is the zonal-mean zonal ﬂow
and Ω is the planetary rotation rate. Because superrotation
away from the equator is inertially unstable∗, it is mainly
manifested as prograde (westerly) ﬂow at the equator. If
friction maintains a solid body rotation at the surface (i.e.,
M = M0 cos2 φ at the surface), a zonally-symmetric mean
meridional circulation conserves M such that M ≤ M0 at
all latitudes in the absence of sources and sinks. In general,
superrotation can be generated if there is a process which
provides a steady eddy angular momentum ﬂux directed

∗When superrotation is not present at the equator.

Copyright c(cid:13) 0000 Royal Meteorological Society

Prepared using qjrms4.cls [Version: 2011/05/18 v1.02]

it

up the meridional gradient of the angular momentum,
a−1∂Mφ/∂φ (Hide 1969, and see also Read 1986).

Superrotation is observed in the Earth’s atmosphere (e.g.
the quasi-biennial oscillation), but
is only transient.
The current explanation for the transience is that Rossby
waves generated by baroclinic instability at mid-latitudes
propagate upwards, then refract equatorward and break in
the equatorial region (e.g. Held and Hoskins 1985). Because
the waves deposit prograde momentum in the source region
and retrograde momentum in the breaking or saturation
region, equatorial superrotation does not occur. On the
other hand, superrotation does occur more robustly on other
planets and in idealized general circulation model (GCM)
experiments. For example, in the latter, superrotation occurs
under a variety of forcing conditions: zonally-asymmetric
tropical heating (e.g. Suarez and Duffy 1992; Saravanan
1993; Hoskins et al. 1999; Arnold et al. 2012), zonally-
symmetric heating with a convective equatorial wave source
(e.g. Schneider and Liu 2009; Laraia and Schneider 2015),
and statically-stable zonally-symmetric heating with Ω or
a smaller than those of the Earth (e.g. Williams 1988,

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
4
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
o
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
8
1
2
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

2

I. Polichtchouk and J. Y-K. Cho

2003; Mitchell and Vallis 2010). In the statically-stable
zonally-symmetric case, the increase in the global scale
Rossby number — effected by reducing Ω or a — results
in a weakened mid-latitude baroclinic instability and a
strengthened barotropic instability. Williams (2003) and
Mitchell and Vallis (2010) have attributed superrotation to
barotropic instability.

Williams (2003) has also shown that superrotation can
occur on a planet with Earth’s Ω and a subject
to
statically-stable zonally-symmetric heating, when the center
of maximum baroclinicity is shifted to a lower latitude than
that in the classic setup of Held and Suarez (1994) [hereafter
HS]. The shift is effected by narrowing the meridional width
of the radiative heating proﬁle compared to that in HS. In
this case the barotropic instability at the equatorward ﬂank
of the subtropical jet provides the mechanism for producing
superrotation. Williams (2006) has extended this work by
showing that high tropospheric static stability enhances
superrotation by inhibiting baroclinic instability.

Recently the barotropic instability view has been
questioned by Potter et al. (2014). They propose that
equatorial Kelvin waves drive and maintain superrotation
in small Ω or a ﬂows and in Williams (2003), although the
origin and precise driving mechanism of the Kelvin waves
were not identiﬁed in their study. Later, Wang and Mitchell
(2014) attribute the Kelvin waves to a linear resonant
coupling of equatorial Kelvin and higher-latitude Rossby
waves originating from an ageostrophic instability (e.g.
Sakai 1989): the instability ‘funnels’ westerly momentum to
the equator, producing superrotation. However, as we shall
show, in our study the superrotation is likely generated and
maintained by different mechanisms.

Our study can be regarded as an extension of Williams
(2003, 2006), Mitchell and Vallis (2010), Potter et al.
(2014) and Wang and Mitchell (2014). Here transition
to superrotation is also investigated under statically-stable
zonally-symmetric thermal forcing; however, it is shown
that superrotation also occurs with Earth’s Ω and a, if the
equator-to-pole equilibrium temperature gradient near the
surface (from 1000 hPa to 700 hPa) is weakened, compared
to that in HS. While such a setup is not necessarily more
(or less) realistic, it does help to elucidate the processes
involved in producing superrotation. We show that when
the temperature gradient is weak, baroclinic instability is
weakened and barotropic instability in the equatorial region
excites Kelvin waves, which help to drive superrotation. The
key ingredient in the excitation is the stirring provided by
the instability that occurs within the equatorial deformation
length scale of a Kelvin wave. Further, we show that the
strength of the resulting superrotation is strongly affected
by numerical resolution and dissipation: superrotation is
artiﬁcially strengthened by explicit and implicit model
diffusion.

Throughout this paper, the reduced temperature gradient
region is denoted as the ‘RTG’ region. Such a reduced
gradient region is not necessarily meant to address the
present-day Earth, but it may be relevant for past and future
climates of the Earth or other ‘Earth-like’ planets in the
Solar and extrasolar systems. For example, such a thermal
forcing can be applicable to the runaway greenhouse state of
paleo-Earth or the present-day atmosphere of Venus, both of
which are characterized by a weak equator-to-pole surface
temperature gradient (see e.g. Tziperman and Farrell 2009;
Yamamoto and Takanashi 2003; Lee et al. 2005).
Copyright c(cid:13) 0000 Royal Meteorological Society

Prepared using qjrms4.cls

The overall plan of the paper is as follows. In section 2 the
primitive equation model and the setup used in this study is
discussed. In section 3 results from the model simulations
with a RTG region are presented and compared with the
classic HS-like simulations. This section also discusses in
detail the non-convergence of simulations when they are
under-resolved or over-dissipated. Finally, conclusions are
given in section 4.

2. Method

2.1. Numerical model

In this study a global pseudospectral model, BOB (Scott
et al. 2003), is used. BOB solves the ‘dry’ hydrostatic
primitive equations in pressure (p) coordinates with rigid
boundary conditions at the top and bottom of the model
domain. The equations are solved in vorticity-divergence
form. A parallel pseudospectral algorithm is used in the
horizontal direction and a second-order ﬁnite differencing
is used in the vertical direction. A hyperviscosity operator
−ν∇8, with constant ν,
is applied to the prognostic
variables (relative vorticity ζ, divergence δ and potential
temperature θ). The timestepping is performed using
a semi-implicit, second-order leapfrog scheme and the
Robert-Asselin ﬁlter (Robert 1966; Asselin 1972) with a
small ﬁlter coefﬁcient (= 0.02) is applied at each timestep
to stabilize the time integration.

The physical setup is essentially that of HS, as well
as Williams (2003) (his case A). A simple Newtonian
relaxation scheme for the net heating,
θ − θe

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

(1)

,

Q = − 1
τ

is applied in the potential temperature tendency equation;
here τ is the characteristic relaxation time, and θe =
θe(φ, p) is a speciﬁed equilibrium potential temperature
distribution. The surface friction is parametrized as a linear,
Rayleigh drag in the momentum equation:
p − pb
ps − pb

D = − v
τR

(cid:26)

(cid:27)

max

(2)

0,

,

where v is the ﬂow on an isobaric surface, τR is the
characteristic damping time and pb and ps are the pressures
at the top of the boundary layer (700 hPa) and at the
bottom surface (1000 hPa), respectively. The only important
physical difference relevant for superrotation in this setup,
compared to that of HS, is θe. This is discussed more in
detail below.

2.2.

Setup

The physical parameters used in all
the simulations
discussed in this study are listed in Table 1. The simulations
are initialized with an isothermal state of rest, with a
small amount of Gaussian white noise (10−7 s−1 standard
deviation) introduced to the ζ ﬁeld to break symmetry. The
speciﬁed equilibrium potential temperature is

θe(p, φ) = max

Ts

,

T0 + ∆T cosbφ F (p)

(cid:40)

(cid:18) ps

(cid:19)κ

(cid:104)

p

(cid:105)(cid:41)

(cid:18) p

(cid:19)

ps

−∆θ log

cos2φ

.

(3)

Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc. 00: 1–15 (0000)

Superrotation by weak surface temperature gradient

3

Figure 1. Prescribed zonally-symmetric radiative equilibrium potential temperature distribution θe [K], normalized pressure vs. latitude, for the control
(HS-like) case (a) and the reduced temperature gradient (RTG) case (b). The contour interval is 10 K.

Table 1. Parameter values used in the simulations: g is the surface
gravity; a is the radius; Ω is the rotation rate; R is the gas constant;
cp is the speciﬁc heat at constant pressure; ps is the surface pressure; pb
is the top of the boundary layer pressure; τ is the radiative relaxation
time; τR is the Rayleigh drag time; Ts and T0 are the stratospheric
and upper tropospheric reference temperatures, respectively; ∆T is the
equator-to-pole temperature difference; and, ∆θ is the vertical potential
temperature difference.

Parameter

g
a
Ω
R
cp
ps
pb
τ
τR
Ts
T0
∆T
∆θ

Value
9.8
6.4×106
7.3×10−5
287
1004
1000
700
20
1
200
255
60
10

Units
m s−2
m
s−1
J kg−1 K−1
J kg−1 K−1
hPa
hPa
days
day
K
K
K
K

in general. This broad sensitivity to the physical parameters
is discussed in section 3.4.

Note also that, apart from F ,

there are additional
differences in the setup used in HS, Williams (2003) and
the present study. For example, in Williams (2003) ∆θ in
equation (3) is not modulated by cos2φ. In addition, τ =
20 days everywhere in this study – different than in HS, but
the same as in Williams (2003). None of these differences
qualitatively affect the results presented here, however.

The model domain, which extends vertically from
103 hPa to 17 hPa, is resolved by 30 levels equally spaced
in p. Simulations are performed at {T42, T85, T170,
T341} horizontal resolutions. The ‘control simulations’ (i.e.
essentially HS simulations), with θe shown in Figure 1a, are
integrated for t = 1200 days; and, the ‘RTG simulations’,
with θe shown in Figure 1b, are integrated for up to t =
7000 days. In the latter simulations, equilibration takes
longer at lower horizontal resolutions and/or with stronger
dissipation. The timestep size ∆t (in seconds) is {600, 300,
150, 75} for the resolutions given above, respectively. The
hyperdiffusion coefﬁcient ν is chosen so that the e-folding
time τd (in days) for the smallest scale in the system is {0.1,
0.01, 0.001, 0.0001}, respectively. Assuming

(cid:20)

(cid:21)4

τd ≈ 1
ν

a2

NT (NT + 1)

,

(5)

where NT is the spectral truncation wavenumber, the above
τd’s correspond to ν (in 1037 m8 s−1) of {3.0, 0.1, 0.004,
0.0002}, respectively. Sensitivity of the results to horizontal
resolution and hyperdissipation speciﬁcations is discussed
in section 3.3.

Here Ts and T0 are the stratospheric and upper tropospheric
reference temperatures, respectively; ∆T is the equator-to-
pole temperature difference; ∆θ is the vertical potential
temperature difference; and, κ ≡ R/cp = 2/7.

In equation (3), b and F (p) control

the meridional
width of the equilibrium temperature and the equator-to-
pole temperature gradient near the surface, respectively; the
masking function F is deﬁned,

(cid:26)

(cid:27)

F (p) = exp

− (p/ps)12

γ2

,

(4)

3. Results

where γ is a thickness parameter and is used to specify the
vertical ‘e-folding’ extent of the RTG region. With b = 4
and F (p) = 1 (i.e. γ → ∞), θe reduces to the HS case,
which roughly captures the statistical mean state of the
Earth’s troposphere. The resulting θe distribution is shown
in Figure 1a. Here the magnitude of the equator-to-pole
equilibrium temperature gradient in the lower troposphere is
≈ ∆T . In section 3 simulations with γ = 0.045 are mainly
discussed, for which θe is shown in Figure 1b. In the present
study, the focus is on the inﬂuence of γ on superrotation;
however, we note that
the generation and strength of
superrotation are highly sensitive to all of {γ, b, ∆T , Ts},

Copyright c(cid:13) 0000 Royal Meteorological Society

Prepared using qjrms4.cls

3.1. Mean circulation

Before describing the turbulent three-dimensional simula-
tions, it is fruitful to examine the axisymmetric eddy-free
circulation that results from prescribing the θe shown in
Figure 1 and spinning up the atmosphere from an initially
resting state. Figure 2 shows the resulting axisymmetric
zonal-mean zonal wind and mass streamfunction (u and
ψ, respectively) from the control (a) and RTG (b) simula-
tions at T170L30 resolution (i.e. T170 horizontal resolu-
tion with 30 vertical levels). The axisymmetric circulations
are obtained by running the BOB model with no initial

Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc. 00: 1–15 (0000)

4

I. Polichtchouk and J. Y-K. Cho

Figure 2. The axisymmetric zonal-mean zonal wind u [m s−1] (contours) and mass streamfunction ψ × 3 × 10−11 [kg s−1] (in greyscale) for the
control (HS-like) (a) and RTG (b) simulations at T170L30 resolution, with corresponding θe from Figure 1. Maximum and minimum values for u are
± 60 m s−1, with contour interval 6 m s−1. Negative u values are dashed (and in black) and positive are solid (and in red). The zero contour is drawn
with double thickness. The light shading corresponds to the clockwise circulation and the dark shading corresponds to the anticlockwise circulation,
respectively. No superrotation is present in the axisymmetric, eddy-free case.

∗ × 3 × 10−11 [kg s−1] for the
Figure 3. The time- and zonal-mean potential temperature θ
fully turbulent three-dimensional control (HS-like) (a and c) and RTG (b and d) simulations at T170L30 resolution, with corresponding θe from Figure 1.
The time averages are taken over t = [700, 1200] days (a and c), and over t = [4500, 5000] days (b and d). Contour values for θ
are the same as in
Figure 1 and values for u∗ and ψ
are the same as in Figure 2. Clear superrotation is generated at the equator (at all altitudes) in the fully turbulent RTG
simulation.

[K], zonal wind u∗ [m s−1], and mass stream function ψ

∗

∗

∗

perturbation†. Both simulations produce a weak Hadley
circulation and the zonal ﬂow consists of weak subrotation
(easterly ﬂow) at the equator and westerly jets centred at
φ ≈ ±25◦. However, the ﬁnal axisymmetric circulation is
dependent on the initial condition, in general.

Figure 3 shows the time- and zonal-mean potential tem-
perature, zonal wind and mass streamfunction meridional
cross-sections (θ
, respectively) from the fully
turbulent, three-dimensional control (a and c) and RTG

, u∗ and ψ

∗

∗

†The axisymmetric simulations are integrated for t ≈500 days, up until
gravity waves degrade the ﬂow.

Copyright c(cid:13) 0000 Royal Meteorological Society

Prepared using qjrms4.cls

(b and d) simulations. Time-averaging is performed over
25 τ’s after the simulations have reached a statistically
equilibrated state, over the intervals t = [700, 1200] days
for the control simulation and t = [4500, 5000] days for the
RTG simulation.

In the control simulation,

initially zonally-symmetric
westerly jets (cf. Figure 2a) become baroclinically unstable
and zonally-asymmetric ﬂow develops. Following the onset
of baroclinic instability,
the jets move poleward and
equilibrate at φ ≈ ±45◦ (Figure 3b). The exact mechanism
leading to the poleward migration is currently not well
understood, but all of the proposed mechanisms involve
some form of eddy-mean ﬂow interaction (see e.g. Chen

Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc. 00: 1–15 (0000)

Superrotation by weak surface temperature gradient

5

Figure 4. Eliassen-Palm ﬂux vector, F = (Fφ, Fp) [m2 s−2], and its divergence, ∇·F ×109 [m s−2], ﬁelds for the control (a) and RTG (b) simulations
at T170L30 resolution averaged in time during the equilibrated stage. Negative ∇·F values are dashed (and in blue) and positive values are solid (and
in red). Fφ and Fp are scaled by 1 radian of latitude and 1 Pa of pressure, respectively.

et al. 2007; Kidston and Vallis 2010). Crucially, the ﬂow
remains weakly easterly at the equator, at all heights in
the control simulation. Baroclinic eddies transport heat
from low to high latitudes; as a result, the equator-to-
pole temperature gradients are weaker in the equilibrated
∗
distribution than in the prescribed θe distribution (cf.
θ
Figure 3a with Figure 1a). Note that the Hadley circulation
in the fully non-linear simulation is mainly eddy-driven (cf.
Figures 2a and 3c).

the θ

In contrast, the equilibrated ﬂow in the RTG simulation
is superrotating at the equator when the eddies are present
– and there at all altitudes, except at
the very top
(cf. Figures 2b with Figure 3d). There is also a weak
Hadley circulation in the RTG simulation in this case.
Accordingly,
distribution changes only slightly
from the prescribed θe distribution (cf. Figure 3b with
Figure 1b). This is consistent with the marked reduction
in baroclinic instability observed in this simulation. The
equilibrated subtropical jets remain close to their initial
latitude (i.e. at φ ≈ ±25◦) and take a much longer
time to equilibrate, compared to the control simulation.
The total (column-mean) equatorial zonal wind (cid:104)ueq(cid:105)
undergoes rapid acceleration over t = [200, 1000] days,
reaching statistical equilibration thereafter. Throughout this
paper, this stage is referred to as the ‘equilibrated stage’ and
the stage prior to this as the ‘acceleration stage’.

∗

3.2. Wave-mean ﬂow analysis

Acceleration of the zonal-mean zonal ﬂow and direction
of wave propagation can be assessed via the Eliassen-Palm
(EP) ﬂux vector, F = (Fφ, Fp) (e.g. Andrews and McIntyre
1978):

Fφ = a cos φ

−u(cid:48)v(cid:48) +

Fp = a cos φ

(ζ + f )

(cid:20)
(cid:20)

(cid:18) v(cid:48)θ(cid:48)
(cid:18) v(cid:48)θ(cid:48)

∂θ/∂p

(cid:19)
(cid:19)

∂θ/∂p

(cid:21)
(cid:21)

∂u/∂p

− u(cid:48)ω(cid:48)

,

(6)

(7)

where the primes denote deviations from the zonal mean,
v is the meridional velocity, f = 2Ω sin φ is the Coriolis
parameter, θ ≡ T (p/ps)κ is the potential temperature and
ω = Dp/Dt is the ‘vertical’ velocity. The second term in

Copyright c(cid:13) 0000 Royal Meteorological Society

Prepared using qjrms4.cls

for

the control

In the control simulation,

the brackets in equation (6) and the ﬁrst (i.e. the ζ term)
and third terms in equation (7), which are the ageostrophic
terms, are generally small compared to the remaining,
geostrophic terms.
Figure 4 shows the EP ﬂux vector ﬁeld and its
divergence, ∇·F (contours),
(a) and
the
RTG (b) simulations.
EP ﬂux and its divergence follow the classic scenario:
Rossby waves, generated near the surface by mid-latitude
baroclinic instability, transport wave activity upward in the
troposphere and equatorward at mid-height, transporting
momentum poleward and heat upward and poleward. In
the northern hemisphere, according to equation (6), Fφ <
0 implies u(cid:48)v(cid:48) > 0 (assuming the ageostrophic term to
be small), leading to a poleward eddy momentum ﬂux;
correspondingly, according to equation (7), Fp > 0 implies
f v(cid:48)θ(cid:48) > 0,
leading to a poleward eddy heat ﬂux. The
vector ﬁeld is divergent (positive) near the surface at
mid- and high-latitudes and convergent (negative) in the
upper troposphere and lower stratosphere, as well as in
the equatorial region near the surface. According to the
transformed Eulerian mean (TEM) equations (e.g. Andrews
et al. 1987), zonal ﬂow is accelerated (decelerated) in
regions of positive (negative) ∇·F; hence, the jet becomes
increasingly barotropic.

In the RTG simulation, the transport of wave activity
is upward and mainly poleward, unlike in the control
simulation (see Figure 4b). The poleward heat ﬂux is
considerably weaker (n.b.
the smaller reference vector
magnitude in Figure 4b) and the ﬂux activity is clearly
dominant at higher altitudes (above p ≈ 600 hPa level).
The eddy momentum ﬂux is mostly equatorward in both
the northern and southern hemispheres. The ∇·F ﬁeld is
also weaker than in the control simulation (n.b. the smaller
∇·F values in Figure 4b) and displays a more complicated
structure than in the control simulation. Signiﬁcantly, a
westerly zonal ﬂow acceleration is present in the tropics,
in the p ≈ [250, 600] hPa region. Note also that at p =
200 hPa,
the equator
and decelerated in the subtropics, in the 10◦ < |φ| < 30◦
region, where the wave propagation is equatorward. In
addition, the poleward ﬂanks of the subtropical jets are

the zonal ﬂow is accelerated at

Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc. 00: 1–15 (0000)

6

I. Polichtchouk and J. Y-K. Cho

decelerated at higher altitudes (p ≈ [200, 450] hPa) and
accelerated at lower altitudes (p ≈ [450, 600] hPa).

is useful

It
the eddy momentum ﬂux convergence. For

to examine the spectral characteristics
of
this,
the eddy momentum ﬂux at each φ is ﬁrst spectrally
decomposed among the zonal wavenumbers {m} and the
m–φ covariance spectrum is obtained before computing
the divergence (e.g. Hayashi 1971; Randel and Held
1991). Similarly, the angular phase speed, cA (m, φ) =
a/m with  = (m) the frequency, is computed to
obtain the cA–φ spectrum. We use cA instead of phase
speed c, because cA is conserved following a meridionally
propagating Rossby wave packet in a zonally-symmetric
background ﬂow. Note that a positive (negative) region in
the convergence spectrum is associated with a momentum
source (sink). The convergence spectra from both the
control and RTG simulations are shown in Figure 5.
Spectra are taken from the p = 500 hPa level, the level of
maximum zonal wind acceleration in the RTG simulation
(see Figure 4b)‡. Recall that there is no superrotation in the
control case.

First we discuss the m–φ spectra. Figure 5a shows
the m–φ spectrum calculated for ten consecutive 50-
day windows over t = [700, 1200] days from the control
simulation during the equilibrated stage. The spectrum
for only m ≤ 10 is shown because larger wavenumbers
possess insigniﬁcant amplitudes. The spectrum shows that
the modes of m≈ 6, centered on the jets, dominate at
mid-latitudes. Figure 5b shows the corresponding m–φ
spectrum from the RTG simulation in the equilibrated stage
(t = [4500, 5000] days). The spectrum in this simulation
is also dominated by m≈ 6 modes, but the waves are
jets, at φ ≈
excited on both ﬂanks of the subtropical
±5◦ and φ ≈ ±35◦. These waves stir
the ﬂow and
converge westerly momentum into their source region and
easterly momentum into their breaking/saturation region.
In addition, low wavenumber (i.e. m≈ 2) modes converge
westerly momentum at the equator. Later we show that the
m≈ 2 modes have a distinct Kelvin wave-like behaviour, as
also identiﬁed by Potter et al. (2014) in their study.

There are other important, distinguishing features in the
RTG simulations. For example, at lower model resolutions
the convergence spectra exhibit signiﬁcant qualitative
differences, compared to the spectrum in Figure 5b. At
resolutions lower than T170 (and assuming the nominal
values for the hyper-dissipation coefﬁcients (section 3.3))
the m≈ 6 modes, which are located on the ﬂanks of
the subtropical jet, disappear completely after the initial
acceleration stage. In the simulation presented in Figure 5b,
these modes persist well into the equilibrated stage. As
will be shown in section 3.3, the disappearance is due to
inadequate horizontal resolution.

the cA–φ spectra at

Now we discuss the cA–φ spectra. Figures 5c and 5d
present
the p = 500 hPa level for
the control (c) and RTG (d) simulations, respectively.
Note that in both spectra, there is insigniﬁcant amplitude
at cA ≤ −10 m s−1 and cA ≥ 45 m s−1. The spectra are
obtained from the data over the same time windows as
in the corresponding spectra in Figures 5a and 5b. In
Figures 5c and 5d, the superimposed red curve shows
angular velocity uA = u/ cos φ.

‡This level also lies just above the tropospheric static stability maximum.

Copyright c(cid:13) 0000 Royal Meteorological Society

Prepared using qjrms4.cls

The mean ﬂow acceleration is such that uA evolves
towards cA (e.g. Andrews et al. 1987; Holton and Lindzen
1972). In Figure 5c, because cA (cid:46) uA everywhere, the
equatorward propagating Rossby waves can only decelerate
the zonal ﬂow. The waves, which are generated at the cores
of the jets, propagate equatorward until they encounter
layer on the equatorward ﬂanks of the jets.
a critical
In the critical
layer, Rossby waves break and deposit
easterly momentum. Hence, no superrotation is present
in the control simulation. In contrast, in Figure 5d (RTG
simulation), the m≈ 6 modes that propagate poleward from
their source region at φ ≈ ±5◦ deposit westerly momentum
near the equator where cA (cid:38) uA. These waves break at φ ≈
±15–20◦ and decelerate the ﬂow there. While the m≈ 6
modes are only able to accelerate the ﬂow at φ ≈ ±5◦,
the m≈ 2 modes (with cA ≈ 30 m s−1) accelerate the zonal
ﬂow at the equator by converging westerly momentum
and forcing uA towards cA throughout the duration of the
simulation.
For a more detailed view of the ﬂow ﬁeld at equilibrated
stage, a snapshot of Ertel potential vorticity, q = [(ζ + f )·
∇θ] / ρ, is shown in Figure 6; here ρ is the density and
the projection shown is cylindrical-equidistant centered on
the equator. Figure 6a shows q for the control simulation
at t = 1000 days, on the θ = 315 K isentrope. Figure 6c
shows q for the RTG simulation at t = 6000 days, on the
θ = 300 K isentrope. Both isentropes lie approximately on
the p = 500 hPa surface in the tropics. Both simulations are
at T170L30 resolution. To illustrate how the PV distribution
changes from the initial stage, the zonal-mean PV (q) for
snapshots in Figures 6a and 6c is shown in the equatorial
region in Figures 6b and 6d (black curves) together with
q at t = 40 days (red curve). Note that at t = 40 days the
unaveraged ﬂow in both simulations is nearly axisymmetric,
but becomes increasingly non-axisymmetric over time.
The m≈ 6 structure can clearly be seen in Fig-
ures 6a and 6c, but stirring of q occurs closer to the
equator in the RTG simulation than in the control simulation
(6c and 6a, respectively). This is consistent with the diag-
nostics in Figure 5 discussed above. In the control simula-
tion no stirring is taking place in the equatorial region as the
zonal-mean PV changes little from the zonally-symmetric
PV at t = 40 days (see Figure 6b). Crucially, in the RTG
simulation, stirring results in a band of steep q-gradient,
which is pushed to the equator; a corresponding band is not
present in the control simulation. The band is not zonally-
symmetric and often appears with a blob of q that appears
to have broken off from large-amplitude undulations of the
high-gradient band to the north (south) of the equator in the
northern (southern) hemisphere. In addition to inducing a
‘q-jump’ at the equator, the undulations and concentrations
of large-amplitude PV at the equator, act as sources of
enhanced superrotation. The blobs of q at the equator trans-
late longitudinally faster than the zonal mean zonal wind
and manifest themselves in the convergence spectrum as the
m ≈ 2 Kelvin wave-like features (see Figure 5b). Note that
in the presence of meridional shear in the background ﬂow,
Kelvin waves perturb meridional velocity and hence q (e.g.
Iga and Matsuda 2004).
While the m ≈ 2 features lack a coherent wave-like
structure in the q ﬁeld in Figure 6c,
the wave-like
behaviour
is more clearly visible in the perturbation
geopotential height ﬁeld Φ(cid:48)
in the equatorial region of
the RTG simulation. Figure 7 shows composites of Φ(cid:48)
and perturbation horizontal wind vectors on the p =

Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc. 00: 1–15 (0000)

Superrotation by weak surface temperature gradient

7

Figure 5. Eddy momentum ﬂux convergence spectra ×10−6 [m s−2] at p = 500 hPa for the control and RTG simulations at T170L30 resolution: (a)
and (b) show the m–φ spectrum and (c) and (d) show the cA–φ spectrum (contours) as well as the angular velocity u/ cos φ (red curve). The spectra
are computed from ten 50-day windows over t = [700, 1200] days for the control simulation (a and c) and over t = [4500, 5000] days (b and d) for the
RTG simulation. Negative contours are dashed and positive contours are solid. Notice the dominance of zonal wavenumbers m ≈ 6 in both simulations.
The phase speeds in the control simulation have values less than or comparable to u/ cos φ, whereas cA > u/ cos φ in the RTG simulation at the
equator. Critical layers are located at latitudes where cA ≈ u/ cos φ. High phase speed, zonal wavenumber m≈ 2 modes help to accelerate the zonal
mean zonal ﬂow at the equator in the RTG simulation.

500 hPa surface for the RTG simulation. The composites are
constructed from the m −  spectrum from the equilibrated
ﬁelds. The spectrum is ﬁltered by removing all westward
propagating signal, eastward propagating signals with
frequencies below 1/30 day−1 and above 1/4 day−1, and m
below 1 and above 6. An inverse transform is then applied
to reconstruct the ﬁltered time series and the entire ﬁelds are
regressed against the ﬁltered time series at a base point on
the equator, where the wave variance is maximum. In (a) the
complete composited ﬁelds are shown and in (b) the ﬁelds
have been ﬁltered to accentuate the m = 2 signal.

The ﬁltered ﬁelds in particular, resemble the classic
Kelvin wave solution for the equatorial beta-plane shallow
water model (e.g., Matsuno 1966). By examining the
time-lagged composites, we have found that the m = 2
in Figure 7b is only coherent up to φ ≈ ±15◦
signal
(not shown). Linear resonance between equatorial Kelvin
waves and subtropical Rossby waves via ageostrophic
instability is proposed by Wang and Mitchell (2014)
to drive superrotation under zonally-symmetric thermal

forcing. Such instability would have a distinct Kelvin-wave
like structure at the equator (see e.g. Figure 1 in Wang
and Mitchell (2014)). However, the linear Rossby-Kelvin
instability also requires matching phase speeds between
the two types of waves, since the wavenumber m is ﬁxed
in the linear resonance analysis. In Figure 5d, however,
the phase speed of the subtropical Rossby waves (cA ≈
10 m s−1) is clearly different than the phase speed of the
equatorial Kelvin waves (cA ≈ 30 m s−1). This is so even
during the acceleration stage of the well-resolved RTG
simulation (not shown). Hence, the linear Rossby-Kelvin
wave instability is not the likely mechanism generating
and maintaining superrotation in the RTG simulations.
Instead, as in (Williams 2003), it appears that here the
barotropic instability on the equatorward ﬂank of the
westerly subtropical jets stirs the ﬂow and excites equatorial
Kelvin waves.

Kelvin waves in the RTG simulation can be further
identiﬁed by Fourier transforming equatorial geopotential
height ﬁeld Φ in space and time and depicting the resulting

Copyright c(cid:13) 0000 Royal Meteorological Society

Prepared using qjrms4.cls

Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc. 00: 1–15 (0000)

8

I. Polichtchouk and J. Y-K. Cho

Figure 6. Snapshot of Ertel potential vorticity q × 10−6 [K m2 kg−1 s−1] and its zonal-mean q for the control simulation (a and b) and RTG simulation
(c and d) at T170L30 resolution. The q ﬁelds are shown at t = 1000 days in (a) and at t = 6000 days in (c) in cylindrical-equidistant projection on the
Θ = 315 K and Θ = 300 K isentropes, respectively. The m≈ 6 mode can be seen in (a) and (c), as well as the presence of equatorial q-gradients and
blobs in (c) (only). q in the equatorial region is shown in (b) and (d) on the same isentropes and at the same times as in (a) and (c). q at t = 40 days
(red) is also shown. Superrotation is generated in the RTG simulation as a consequence of extrusion of high q from higher latitudes to the equator in the
northern hemisphere via stirring. In contrast, notice the absence of q-stirring at the equator in the control simulation.

Figure 7. Composites of perturbation geopotential height Φ(cid:48) [m2 s−2] with perturbation horizontal wind vectors overlaid for the RTG simulation at
T170L30 resolution. The ﬁelds are shown in cylindrical-equidistant projection for |φ| < ±60◦ at the p = 500 hPa level. The unﬁltered ﬁelds are shown
in (a). The ﬁelds ﬁltered so that only m = 2 signal remains are shown in (b). Note the resemblance of the ﬁltered ﬁelds with the classic Kelvin wave
solution.

spectra in the Wheeler-Kiladis diagrams as a function of 
and m (Wheeler and Kiladis 1999). Here ten 96-day time
windows are taken to obtain the Φ spectrum. In Figure 8,
both symmetric (a and b) and antisymmetric (c and d)
Wheeler-Kiladis diagrams for the control (a and c) and RTG
simulations (b and d) at T170L30 resolution are shown at
the p = 500 hPa level. Overlaid on the symmetric diagrams
are the linear dispersion curves for the Kelvin waves and
on the antisymmetric diagrams the linear dispersion curves

for the mixed Rossby-gravity waves for equivalent depths
of h0 = 12, 40, and 100 m, respectively.

is present at

For the control simulation, only a weak Kelvin wave
the equator (Figure 8a) and the
signal
spectrum is dominated by the westward propagating mixed
Rossby-gravity waves with h0 = 100 m (Figure 8c). For
the RTG simulation, a clear h0 = 100 m Kelvin wave
signal dominates the spectrum (Figure 8b) with little or
no westward propagating wave activity. The phase speed

Copyright c(cid:13) 0000 Royal Meteorological Society

Prepared using qjrms4.cls

Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc. 00: 1–15 (0000)

Superrotation by weak surface temperature gradient

9

Figure 8. Symmetric and antisymmetric mode Wheeler-Kiladis diagrams of the geopotential height ﬁeld in the equatorial region (|φ| < 10◦) for the
control (a and c) and RTG (b and d) simulations at p = 500 hPa. The linear dispersion curves for Kelvin and mixed Rossby-gravity waves for equivalent
depths h0 = 12, 40, and 100 m are overlaid on the diagrams. Notice the h0 = 100 m Kelvin wave in the RTG simulation.

Figure 9. Time- and zonal-mean meridional gradient of quasi-geostrophic potential vorticity ∂Q/∂φ [normalized by 2Ω], pressure vs. latitude, for the
control (a) and RTG (b) simulations at T170L30 resolution in the equatorial region. Negative ∂Q/∂φ values are dashed (and in blue) and positive are
solid (and in red). The zero contour is drawn with double thickness. Note the reversal of ∂Q/∂φ sign in the equatorial region of the RTG simulation.

of the h0 = 100 m Kelvin waves is ≈ 30 m s−1, suggesting
that Kelvin waves are important in driving and maintaining
superrotation in the RTG simulations (cf. Figure 5d). We
note that the equatorial Φ spectra is of lower amplitude
in simulations with lower horizontal resolution after the
acceleration stage.

To establish the role of shear instabilities in Kelvin
wave excitation, it is instructive to examine the meridional
gradient of the zonal-mean PV in the equatorial region. As
in Williams (2003), we show quasi-geostrophic time- and
zonal-mean PV ∂Q/∂φ (scaled by 2Ω/a) in Figure 9 for
the control (a) and RTG (b) simulations, respectively. In
Figure 9b ∂Q/∂φ changes sign on the equatorward ﬂank
of the subtropical jet, at φ = ±5◦ in the p = [200, 700] hPa

vertical region throughout the RTG simulation. The reversal
of the gradient at φ = ±5◦ is due to the barotropic
component (i.e. the meridional gradient of the absolute
vorticity) of ∂Q/∂φ (not shown). Hence, the source of
the m≈ 6 Rossby waves on the equatorward ﬂanks of
the jets and the equatorial m≈ 2 Kelvin waves is likely
the barotropic, Rayleigh-Kuo, instability. The (latitudinal)
deformation length scale LD of an equatorially trapped
the wave with c ≈ 30 m s−1 (cf. Figures 5d and 8b), LD ≈
1200 km or φ ≈ ±10◦. Therefore, to excite equatorially
trapped Kelvin waves, stirring must occur within the φ ≈
±10◦ band centered on the equator. This occurs in the
RTG simulation. For the control simulation, the necessary

Kelvin wave is roughly LD =(cid:112)c/β, where β = 2Ω/a. For

Copyright c(cid:13) 0000 Royal Meteorological Society

Prepared using qjrms4.cls

Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc. 00: 1–15 (0000)

10

I. Polichtchouk and J. Y-K. Cho

Figure 10. Hovmöller diagrams of the perturbation geopotential height ﬁeld Φ(cid:48) [m2 s−2] at p = 500 hPa in the beginning of the RTG simulation. The
Φ(cid:48) ﬁeld ﬁltered for m = 6 is shown at φ = 10◦ N in a). The Φ(cid:48) ﬁeld ﬁltered for m = 2 is shown at φ = 10◦ N in b) and at the equator in c). The
m = 6 subtropical Rossby waves are generated before the equatorial m = 2 Kelvin waves.

condition for neither the barotropic (see Figure 9a) nor the
baroclinic instability is satisﬁed in this region in the time-
and zonal-mean, which likely explains the weak equatorial
Kelvin wave signal in the control simulation (see Figure 8a).
That stirring in the subtropics (within LD) by the m ≈ 6
Rossby waves precedes the generation of equatorial m ≈ 2
Kelvin waves (with c ≈ 30 m s−1) in the RTG simulation
can be seen in Hovmöller diagrams in Figure 10. The ﬁgure
shows Φ(cid:48) at p = 500 hPa in the beginning of the simulation.
The Φ(cid:48) ﬁeld ﬁltered for m = 6 is shown at φ = 10◦N in
(a). The Φ(cid:48) ﬁeld ﬁltered for m = 2 is shown at φ = 10◦N
in (b) and at the equator in (c). The Kelvin waves are excited
at t ≈ 110 days (Figures 10b and c), after the development
of the m = 6 Rossby waves at t ≈ 80 days (Figure 10a).
These waves continue to propagate eastward throughout the
simulation (not shown).

In summary,

the following mechanisms contribute
to generating and/or maintaining superrotation in well-
resolved RTG simulations:

• Mechanical stirring inside the latitudinal

range
of
the deformation length scale L D from the
equator, is required to excite m ≈ 2 Kelvin waves
under statically stable zonally-symmetric thermal
forcing§. Here the source of the stirring is barotropic
instability (with predominantly m ≈ 6 signal) on the
equatorward ﬂank of the subtropical westerly jet.
• Since Kelvin waves are not excited if the stirring
occurs at
the speciﬁed
equilibrium temperature proﬁle has to produce and
maintain westerly jets that are unstable to shear
instabilities within L D from the equator.

latitudes outside L D,

3.3. Resolution and dissipation

We have seen that superrotation may be generated and
maintained by wave-mean ﬂow interaction. However, in the
RTG simulations, a stronger superrotation is also clearly
produced at lower horizontal resolution. This indicates that
part of the superrotation is of numerical origin. In general,
the strength of superrotation depends sensitively on the
horizontal resolution and dissipation. We have found that

§The destabilization of the m ≈ 2 waves is dependent on the background
ﬂow (e.g. Iga and Matsuda (2004))

Copyright c(cid:13) 0000 Royal Meteorological Society

Prepared using qjrms4.cls

relatively high horizontal resolution ( (cid:38) T170) is required
for numerical convergence – particularly for the RTG case.
Among other things, the high resolution ensures accurate
representation of the eddy ﬂuxes.

In this study, simulations are deﬁned to be converged if
both of the following criteria on the total (column-averaged)
equatorial zonal wind (cid:104)ueq(cid:105)—averaged over the φ = ±5◦
band centered on the equator—are met:
i) At equilibration, (cid:104)ueq(cid:105) is statistically the same at least
at two different horizontal resolutions, with a given
viscosity coefﬁcient ν.

ii) At equilibration, (cid:104)ueq(cid:105) is not sensitive to the choice
of viscosity coefﬁcient ν, at a given horizontal
resolution.

Criterion i) tests for ‘numerical’ convergence while
criterion ii) tests for ‘physical’ convergence. At very
high Reynolds number, a simulation (particularly the large
scales in it) should not be sensitive to the choice of
numerical viscosity coefﬁcient ν, whose primary purpose
is to remove enstrophy near the grid-scale and to prevent
the simulation from blowing up. For criterion ii), ν values
are heuristically chosen from a ‘credible’ range, by which
reference is made to those values that permit the vorticity
ﬁeld to be neither under-dissipated (i.e. inundated with
grid-scale noise) nor over-dissipated (i.e. devoid of any
strong coherent structures, such as vortices and sharp
gradients). Experience has shown that a certain amount of
tuning is always necessary and that there always exists a
ﬁnite range of values that is reasonably free from gross
subjectivity and satisﬁes the credibility condition on the
vorticity ﬁeld. Each new problem and setup necessitates a
thorough characterization of accuracy and convergence for
conﬁdence in the obtained results.
Before we discuss (cid:104)ueq(cid:105), the equilibrated u∗ from the
RTG simulations at T42L30 (a), T85L30 (b), T170L30 (c)
and T341L30 (d) resolutions is presented in Figure 11. The
ﬁgure clearly shows that RTG simulations are not converged
at resolutions lower than T170L30, as they do not satisfy
criterion i). The T170 and T341 results are very similar. In
contrast, the equilibrated u∗ for the control simulations can
exhibit qualitatively the same behaviour at the same four
horizontal resolutions presented (although they are still not
converged, as is also discussed below). Interestingly, as can

Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc. 00: 1–15 (0000)

Superrotation by weak surface temperature gradient

11

Figure 11. The time- and zonal-mean zonal wind u∗ [m s−1] for the RTG simulation at T42L30 (a), T85L30 (b), T170L30 (c) and T341L30 (d)
resolutions. Contour intervals are the same as in Figure 2. Subtropical jets diffuse together at the equator much more strongly at low resolution.

be seen in the ﬁgure, superrotation is considerably stronger
at lower horizontal resolution in the RTG simulations, as
already mentioned.
Figure 12 now shows the time series of (cid:104)ueq(cid:105) from the
control (Figure 12a) and RTG (Figure 12b) simulations.
For reference, the time series from the T341L30 RTG
simulation is also shown in Figure 12b. Note that, with
exceptions as noted in the discussion below, the value of
ν for all the simulations in the ﬁgure is chosen so that
the e-folding time for the truncation scale is nominally
{0.1, 0.01, 0.001, 0.0001} days at {T42, T85, T170, T341}
resolutions, respectively. The chosen times correspond to
ν = {3.0, 0.1, 0.0044, 0.00017}×1037m8 s−1, respectively.
All simulations are with L30 vertical resolution.

resolutions lower

Figure 12a shows that

the convergence criterion i)
is fulﬁlled for the control simulation at T42 resolution.
However, the control simulation does not fulﬁll criterion ii)
at
than T85. For example, a T42
resolution simulation employing the ν value from the T21
resolution simulation (i.e. 25 times greater value) leads to
a signiﬁcantly different time series behaviour (cf. black
and green lines); the behaviour does not persist into T85
resolution simulations, as is shown below. Convergence
criterion i) is also fulﬁlled by the RTG simulation – but
at much higher (T170) resolution. Moreover, the value of
(cid:104)ueq(cid:105) at equilibration for the converged RTG simulations
is much lower than for the un-converged, lower-resolution
simulations, by as much as 17 m s−1 (cf. black and blue
curves in Figure 12b); this is consistent with the behaviour
in Figure 11. In addition, RTG simulations at T42 and
T85 resolutions take a considerably longer time to reach
equilibration than that at T170 resolution; in the latter case,
equilibration is reached at t≈ 1000 days, compared with
t≈ 7000 days for the former cases.

Throughout

this work, a larger value of ν is used
when performing a given simulation at a lower horizontal
resolution – as is commonly practiced in numerical
simulations. Alternatively, a smaller value of ν is used
when performing a given simulation at a higher horizontal
resolution. The practice is primarily carried out
for
numerical stability and/or ‘spectrum tuning’ reasons, and it
results in different damping times for a given wavenumber
at
the different resolutions. However, as advocated in
Polvani et al. (2004) and Polichtchouk and Cho (2012), the
same value of ν should be used for all resolutions in order to
‘cleanly’ assess numerical convergence: each wavenumber,
up to the truncation, then experiences the same dissipation
rate for a given simulation. This philosophy is closely
related to convergence criteria i) and ii). All
imply
that once simulation is adequately resolved,
including
additional, higher wavenumbers in the simulation would

Copyright c(cid:13) 0000 Royal Meteorological Society

Prepared using qjrms4.cls

not signiﬁcantly affect the large-scale ﬂow. Criterion ii),
in particular, ensures that most ‘stable’ value of ν is used
when assessing convergence, since there exists a ﬁnite range
of values which prevent a simulation from blowing up. Of
course, all this assumes weak (or absence of) spectral non-
locality of the ﬂow, which generally appears not to be the
case in practice.

Consider the green and red curves in Figure 12b, showing
two RTG simulations at different horizontal resolutions
(T85 and T170) using the same ν value. It is clear that the
RTG simulation is not converged at T85 resolution since
the two curves deviate from each other; on the other hand,
the curves for T170 and T341 resolutions, subjected to the
same test, do match very closely. In fact, in general, the
disagreement is much stronger, than in the control case
(cf. green and black curves in Figure 12a). Clearly, the
‘extra modes’ included in the T170 resolution affect (cid:104)ueq(cid:105)
quantitatively in the RTG simulations.

Figure 13 illustrates the above points more explicitly
with simulations at T85L30 resolution, for the control
(Figure 13a) and RTG (Figure 13b) cases. Criterion i)
is met for the control case at T85 resolution, and has
already been discussed above. Figure 13a demonstrates
that criterion ii) is also met:
the simulations are not
sensitive to variations in ν, suggesting the control case
is converged at T85 resolution. In contrast, Figure 13b
demonstrates that criterion ii) is not met for the RTG
case: the simulations are acutely sensitive to variations
in ν. Moreover, superimposing the time series from the
T170 resolution simulation illustrates that it is possible
to erroneously conclude that criterion i) is met (see the
blue and purple curves), if ν were not varied at the T85
resolution; and signiﬁcantly, the equatorial superrotation is
surprisingly weaker at the higher resolution. It is important
to reiterate at this point that the ‘correct’ ν at T85 resolution
cannot be determined a priori: it is only after performing
the RTG simulation at T170L30 resolution and establishing
that the converged simulations have (cid:104)ueq(cid:105) ≈ 5 m s−1 that it
is possible to tune ν for an ‘optimal’ simulation.

Superrotation is stronger in the lower-resolution and/or
stronger-dissipation simulation, due to diffusion of q. In
those simulations, q-contours are more diffused in the
subtropics. Hence,
the resulting jets are less sharp on
their equatorward ﬂanks and the ﬂow is more strongly
superrotating at
the equator (cf. Figures 11a–d). The
mechanism can be clearly seen in Figure 14, which
shows the q distributions on the θ = 330 K isentrope from
two RTG simulations (T42 and T170 resolutions) at t =
5000 days. The q-gradients are clearly sharper at φ ≈ ±25◦

Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc. 00: 1–15 (0000)

12

I. Polichtchouk and J. Y-K. Cho

Figure 12. Time series of column-averaged zonal wind at the equator (cid:104)ueq(cid:105) [m s−1] at varying horizontal resolutions for the control (a) and RTG (b)
simulations: (cid:104)ueq(cid:105) for {T42L30, T85L30, T170L30, T341L30} resolutions are shown in {black, red, blue, yellow}, respectively. The green curve in
a) shows the control simulation performed at T42 horizontal resolution with ν from a T21 resolution simulation, which is 25 times larger than in the
‘nominal’ T42 simulation (black curve). The green curve in b) shows the RTG simulation performed at T170 horizontal resolution with ν the same as in
the T85 resolution simulation (red curve). The magnitude of (cid:104)ueq(cid:105) is insensitive to the horizontal resolution in the control simulations – when properly
tuned, whereas (cid:104)ueq(cid:105) decreases with increasing resolution in the RTG simulations. In the latter simulations, T170L30 simulations with different ν
produce nearly-identical results.

Figure 13. Time series of (cid:104)ueq(cid:105) [m s−1] at T85L30 resolution with varying ν for the control (a) and RTG (b) simulations. The viscosity coefﬁcient
ν is chosen so that τd is 0.001 days (black curve), 0.01 days (red curve) and, 0.1 days (purple curve). In addition, (cid:104)ueq(cid:105) from the nominal T170L30
simulation is plotted in b). Note the insensitivity of the control simulations to ν but the reduction of (cid:104)ueq(cid:105) with decreasing ν in the RTG simulations.
Note also that T170L30 results are the same as T85L30 results with τd = 0.1 days in b).

and the equatorial q-step¶ is wider in the T170 resolution
simulation – i.e., the jets across the equator are much less
‘fused’ into each other. It is important to understand that
this is an entirely different mechanism than the ‘barotropic
instability exciting equatorial Kelvin waves’ mechanism
discussed in section 3.2.

In addition,

in under-resolved and/or over-dissipated
simulations the meridional shear on the equatorward ﬂanks
of the subtropical jets is reduced as the jets are ‘fused’
into each other. Therefore it becomes increasingly harder
to satisfy the Rayleigh-Kuo instability criterion in the
time- and zonal-mean, following the acceleration stage
(e.g., at T42 resolution this occurs at t = 400 days). This
results in the mitigation of nonlinear mixing of q at
the equatorward ﬂanks of the subtropical jets. The m≈
6 eddies at φ ≈ ±10◦–25◦ (Figure 5; see also Figure 6)
are completely absent
in the equilibrated stage in the
low-resolution/high-dissipation simulations. Note that the
Kelvin waves can still be excited in under-resolved and
over-dissipated simulations as the ∂Q/∂φ continues to
change sign at φ ≈ ±5◦. The reversal of the ∂Q/∂φ sign in
this case is, however, due to the baroclinic component. The

¶q = q(φ) forms a ‘staircase-like’ structure, with ‘steps’ and ‘jumps’ (see
e.g. Dritschel and McIntyre 2008, and references therein)

Copyright c(cid:13) 0000 Royal Meteorological Society

Prepared using qjrms4.cls

Kelvin wave amplitude in the equilibrated stage is, however,
by as much as ≈ 30% weaker than in the converged
simulations.

To summarize:

• Compared to the control

simulation, high ( (cid:38)
T170) horizontal resolution is required for numerical
convergence in the RTG simulation.
• In low-resolution/high-dissipation RTG simulations
superrotation is artiﬁcially enhanced as the linear
diffusion of q ‘fuses’ the subtropical jets together
on their equatorward ﬂanks. This creates an artiﬁcial
source of superrotation as the ﬂanks of the westerly
jets overlap at the equator.
• Because the q-gradients on the equatorward ﬂanks of
the subtropical jets are less sharp, barotropic insta-
bility is weaker or absent in the under-resolved/over-
dissipated RTG simulations. This mitigates non-
linear mixing of q by the barotropic m ≈ 6 eddies at
φ ≈ ±10◦–25◦.
• ‘Numerical diffusion’ mechanism is entirely different
from the ‘barotropic instability exciting Kelvin
waves’ mechanism for generating and maintaining
superrotation, discussed in the preceding subsection.

Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc. 00: 1–15 (0000)

Superrotation by weak surface temperature gradient

13

Figure 14. Potential vorticity ﬁeld, q × 10−6 [K m2 kg−1 s−1], in cylindrical-equidistant projection on the Θ = 330 K isentrope (approximately at
p = 200 hPa in the tropics) and t = 5000 days for the RTG simulation at T42L30 (a) and T170L30 (c) resolutions. Notice the weaker q-gradients in the
subtropics and narrower equatorial q-step at T42 horizontal resolution. In b) and d), q (black curve) and zonal-mean u (red curve) for the simulations
shown in a) and c), respectively. At low resolution, the subtropical jets are more diffused and broader than at high resolution. At high resolution mixing
of q on the equator-ward ﬂanks of the jets is stronger. As a consequence, superrotation is actually stronger at low resolution.

3.4. Other sensitivities

In addition to resolution and dissipation,
the strength
of superrotation in the RTG simulations is sensitive to
parameters in the equilibrium temperature distribution, such
as {γ, b, ∆T , Ts} in equation (3). Recall that the following
criteria on the westerly jets must be met for generation
of superrotation in fully resolved simulations: 1) weak
mid-latitude baroclinic instability; and 2) shear instability
within the deformation length scale of an equatorial Kelvin
wave. If the speciﬁed equilibrium temperature distribution
produces westerly jets that do not meet the above criteria,
superrotation does not occur. For example, for γ ≥ 0.05
or b < 4, transition to superrotation does not occur —
especially in high-resolution/low-dissipation simulations.
For a larger γ baroclinic instability becomes stronger as
the near-surface equator-to-pole temperature gradient is
increased. However, a transition is still possible if b >
4 for the same γ (≥ 0.05) because baroclinic instability
is then conﬁned to lower latitudes (Williams 2003). For
smaller b the subtropical jets are located too far from the
equator for criterion 2) to be satisﬁed. Setting ∆T > 60 K
(and keeping all other parameters the same) also produces
stronger superrotation because stronger meridional shear on
the equatorward ﬂanks of the subtropical jets more strongly
satisﬁes the necessary criterion for barotropic instability
than in the nominal RTG case.

The magnitude of superrotation in the RTG simulation
is also somewhat sensitive to the form of the initial
perturbation. A north-south symmetric perturbation—such
as a small amplitude localized bump at (±φ0, λ0) or a pure
spherical harmonic mode perturbation—produces north-
south symmetric circulation and considerably stronger

Copyright c(cid:13) 0000 Royal Meteorological Society

Prepared using qjrms4.cls

superrotation than in the simulations initialized with north-
south asymmetric perturbation—such as Gaussian white
noise. In such north-south symmetric simulations,
the
equatorial ﬂow is purely zonal (i.e., does not meander) and
as a result the superrotation is stronger.

It is also worth noting that superrotation is generated in
the RTG simulation started from rest even in the absence
of the Rayleigh drag. Hence, superrotation can occur on
planets with no solid surface as long as the equator-to-pole
equilibrium temperature gradient is weakened in the region
below where the superrotating ﬂow occurs. In summary, it
appears that superrotation can be generated and maintained
under a surprisingly wide range of conditions, in general.

4. Conclusions

In this paper, we have shown that equatorial superrotation
can be readily generated, if the equator-to-pole surface
temperature gradient is weak. This is so even under zonally-
symmetric, statically-stable, thermal forcing in many cases.
However, in general, superrotation does not arise as easily
under zonally-symmetric forcing. Superrotation can be
maintained under this situation if stirring from a near-
equatorial barotropic instability is continuously provided.

When the equator-to-pole surface temperature gradient is
reduced, the role of Rossby waves produced by mid-latitude
baroclinic instability in converging easterly momentum
into the equatorial region is diminished. Also, if a wave
‘source’ exists at the equator (e.g. in the form of stirring),
superrotation can develop if the eddy angular momentum
ﬂuxes out of the region are strong enough and directed
up the mean angular momentum gradient. Similar to
Williams (2003) and Mitchell and Vallis (2010), we also
observe in this study that barotropic instability generates

Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc. 00: 1–15 (0000)

14

I. Polichtchouk and J. Y-K. Cho

equatorial superrotation in the zonally-symmetric RTG
setup: the instability excites equatorial Kelvin waves, which
are important for ﬂow acceleration at the equator. In the
control simulation the necessary criterion for barotropic or
baroclinic instability is satisﬁed too far from the equator –
outside the deformation length scale distance of a Kelvin
wave – for the instabilities to inﬂuence equatorial dynamics.
Barotropic instability might also be the source of Kelvin
wave-like disturbances that produce superrotation in small
a or Ω regimes in Potter et al. (2014). For a ﬁxed phase
speed, the meridional width of a Kelvin wave increases with
decreasing a (and Ω). Thus, the Rayleigh-Kuo instability
criterion does not need to be satisﬁed as close to the equator
as in the RTG simulations with Earth’s Ω and a, discussed
in this paper. In contrast to what is suggested in Potter et al.
(2014), according to this study, it is likely that the Kelvin
wave mechanism they propose must be accompanied by
a simultaneous occurrence of barotropic (or other shear)
instability, in simulations with statically-stable, zonally-
symmetric forcing.

The barotropic instability is not, however,

the only
mechanism responsible for superrotation in the RTG
setup. Numerical diffusion (both implicit and explicit)
generates artiﬁcially strong superrotation in under-resolved
and/or over-dissipated RTG simulations. In this study,
it is found that to adequately resolve the dynamics of
angular momentum ﬂuxes near the equator, relatively
high horizontal resolution is required ( (cid:38) T170). In low
resolution or strongly dissipated simulations, potential
vorticity is more spread out by diffusion than in the high
resolution or low dissipation simulations. Consequently,
in the under-resolved cases the subtropical jets are less
sharp on their equatorward ﬂanks. The ﬂanks overlap
at
the equator and this provides an additional source
of superrotation. In addition, weaker potential vorticity
gradients mitigate barotropic instability and mixing by
the m≈ 6 Rossby waves, equatorward of φ ≈ ±25◦. This
allows the subtropical jets to further ‘fuse’ into each other.
the relative contributions of
barotropic instability and numerical diffusion to superro-
tation generation can be adequately quantiﬁed only after
thoroughly assessing numerical convergence of the simu-
lations. The stronger resolution requirement for the RTG
simulation, compared to the control simulation (which is
converged at T85 horizontal resolution), is due to the near-
equatorial location of the mixing region in the RTG sim-
ulations. When the subtropical jets (and hence the mixing
zone) are located further poleward, low resolution or high
dissipation can still induce superrotation.

Given the foregoing,

Acknowledgments

The authors thank David Dritschel, Simon Peatman, Peter
Read, Ted Shepherd and Stephen Thomson for useful
discussions pertaining to this work. The two anonymous
reviewers and Ed Gerber are also thanked for their helpful
comments on the manuscript. I.P. acknowledges support by
the UK Science and Technology Facilities Council research
studentship and the hospitality of
Institute
for Theoretical Physics (KITP), Santa Barbara. J.Y-K.C.
acknowledges the hospitality of the Isaac Newton Institute
for Mathematical Sciences (Cambridge, UK) and KITP,
where some of this work was completed.

the Kavli

Copyright c(cid:13) 0000 Royal Meteorological Society

Prepared using qjrms4.cls

References

Andrews DG, Holton JR, Leovy CB. 1987. Middle atmosphere

dynamics. No. 40. Academic press

Andrews DG, McIntyre ME. 1978. Generalized Eliassen-Palm and
Charney-Drazin theorems for waves on axisymmetric mean ﬂows in
compressible atmospheres, J. Atmos. Sci., 35, 175–185.

Arnold NP, Tziperman E, Farrell B. 2012. Abrupt transition to strong
superrotation driven by equatorial wave resonance in an idealized
GCM. J. Atmos. Sci., 69, 626–640. DOI:10.1175/JAS-D-11-0136.1
integrations,
10.1175/1520-

487–490. DOI:

Asselin R.

Frequency

Mon. Wea.
0493(1972)100<0487:FFFTI>2.3.CO;2

Rev.,

100,

1972.

ﬁlter

for

time

Chen G, Held IM, Robinson WA. 2007. Sensitivity of the latitude of the
surface westerlies to surface friction. J. Atmos. Sci., 64, 2899–2915.
DOI: 10.1175/JAS3995.1

Dritschel DG, McIntyre ME. 2008. Multiple jets as PV staircases: The
Phillips effect and the resilience of eddy-transport barriers. J. Atmos.
Sci., 65, 855–874. DOI: 10.1175/2007JAS2227.1

Hayashi Y. 1971. A generalized method of resolving disturbances into
progressive and retrogressive waves by space Fourier and time cross-
spectral analysis, J. Meteorol. Soc. Jpn., 49, 125–128.

Held IM, Hoskins BJ. 1985. Large-scale eddies and the general

circulation of the troposphere, Advances in geophysics, 28, 3–31.

Held IM, Suarez MJ. 1994. A proposal

the intercompari-
son of
the dynamical cores of atmospheric general circula-
tion models, Bull. A.M.S., 75, 1825–1830. DOI: 10.1175/1520-
0477(1994)075<1825:APFTIO>2.0.CO;2

for

Hide R. 1969. Dynamics of the atmospheres of major planets with
an appendix on the viscous boundary layer at the rigid boundary
surface of an electrically conducting rotating ﬂuid in the presence
of a magnetic ﬁeld, J. Atmos. Sci., 26, 841–853. DOI:10.1175/1520-
0469(1969)026<0841:DOTAOT>2.0.CO;2

Holton JR, Lindzen RS. 1972. An updated theory for the quasi-biennial
cycle of the tropical stratosphere. J. Atmos. Sci., 29, 1076–1080. DOI:
10.1175/1520-0469(1972)029<1076:AUTFTQ>2.0.CO;2

Hoskins B, Neale R, Rodwell M, Yang G-Y. 1999. Aspects of the
large-scale tropical atmospheric circulation, Tellus, 51, 33–44. DOI:
10.1034/j.1600-0889.1999.00004.x

Iga S, Matsuda Y. 2005. Shear instability in a shallow water model
with implications for the Venus atmosphere, J. Atmos. Sci., 62, 2514–
2527. DOI: 10.1175/JAS3484.1

Kidston J, Vallis GK. 2010. Relationship between eddy-driven jet

latitude and width. GRL, 37. DOI:10.1029/2010GL044849

Laraia AL, Schneider T. 2015. Superrotation in Terrestrial Atmospheres,

J. Atmos. Sci., 72, 4281–4296. DOI: 10.1175/JAS-D-15-0030.1

Lee C, Lewis SR, Read PL. 2005. A numerical model of the atmosphere
of Venus. Advances in Space Research, 36, 2142–2145. DOI:
10.1016/j.asr.2005.03.120

Matsuno T. 1966. Quasi-geostrophic motions in the equatorial area, J.

Meteor. Soc. Japan, 44, 25–43.

Mitchell C, Vallis GK. 2010. The transition to superrotation in terrestrial

atmospheres, J. Geophys. Res., 115. DOI: 10.1029/2010JE003587

Polichtchouk I, Cho Y-K J, 2012. Baroclinic instability on hot
extrasolar planets, MNRAS, 424, 1307–1326. DOI:10.1111/j.1365-
2966.2012.21312.x

Polvani LM, Scott RK, Thomas SJ. 2004. Numerically converged
solutions of the global primitive equations for testing the dynamical
core of atmospheric GCMs. Mon. Wea. Rev., 132, 2539–2552. DOI:
10.1175/MWR2788.1

Potter SF, Vallis GK, Mitchell JL. 2014. Spontaneous superrotation and
the role of Kelvin waves in an idealized dry GCM. J. Atmos. Sci., 71,
596–614. DOI: 10.1175/JAS-D-13-0150.1

Randel WJ, Held IM. 1991. Phase speed spectra of transient eddy
ﬂuxes and critical layer absorption, J. Atmos. Sci., 48, 688–697.
DOI:10.1175/1520-0469(1991)048<0688:PSSOTE>2.0.CO;2

Read PL. 1986. Super-rotation and diffusion of axial angular
momentum: II. a review of quasi-axisymmetric models of planetary
atmospheres, Quart. J. R. Met. Soc., 112, 253–272. DOI:
10.1002/qj.49711247114

Robert A. 1966. The integration of a low order spectral form of the
primitive meteorological equations, J. Met. Soc. Japan, 44, 237–245.

Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc. 00: 1–15 (0000)

Superrotation by weak surface temperature gradient

15

Sakai S. 1989. Rossby-Kelvin instability: a new type of ageostrophic
instability caused by a resonance between Rossby waves and gravity
waves. JFM, 202, 149–176. DOI: 10.1017/S0022112089001138

Saravanan R.

1993.

Equatorial

superrotation

and mainte-
two-level models.
DOI:10.1175/1520-

Atmos.

of

the

in
nance
J.
1211–1227.
0469(1993)050<1211:ESAMOT>2.0.CO;2
Schneider T, Liu J. 2009. Formation of

general
50,

circulation

Sci.,

Jets and Equatorial
Superrotation on Jupiter. J. Atmos. Sci., 66, 579–601. DOI:
10.1175/2008JAS2798.1

Scott RK, Rivier L, Loft R, Polvani LM. 2003. ‘BOB: model description
and users guide’, NCAR Technical Note, 32pp, NCAR: Boulder,
Colorado, USA.

Suarez MJ, Duffy DG. 1992: Terrestrial superrotation: A bifurcation
of the general circulation. J. Atmos. Sci., 49, 1541–1554. DOI:
10.1175/1520-0469(1992)049<1541:TSABOT>2.0.CO;2

Tziperman E, Farrell B. 2009. Pliocene equatorial

temperature:
Lessons from atmospheric superrotation. Paleoceanography, 24.
DOI:10.1029/2008PA001652

Wang P, Mitchell JL. 2014. Planetary ageostrophic instability leads to

superrotation. GRL, 41, 4118-4126. DOI: 10.1002/2014GL060345

Wheeler M, Kiladis GN. 1999. Convectively coupled equatorial
waves: Analysis of clouds and temperature in the wavenumber-
frequency domain, J. Atmos. Sci., 56, 374–399. DOI:10.1175/1520-
0469(1999)056<0374:CCEWAO>2.0.CO;2

Williams GP. 2006. Equatorial Superrotation and Barotropic Insta-
bility: Static Stability Variants, J. Atmos. Sci., 63, 1548–1557.
DOI:10.1175/JAS3711.1

Williams GP. 2003. Barotropic instability and equatorial super-
rotation, J. Atmos. Sci., 60, 2136–2152. DOI:10.1175/1520-
0469(2003)060<2136:BIAES>2.0.CO;2

Williams GP. 1988. The dynamical range of global circulations–I.

Climate Dyn., 2, 205–260. DOI:10.1007/BF01371320

Yamamoto M, Takahashi M. 2003. The fully developed superro-
tation simulated by a general circulation model of a Venus-
like atmosphere. J. Atmos. Sci., 60, 561–574.DOI:10.1175/1520-
0469(2003)060<0561:TFDSSB>2.0.CO;2

Copyright c(cid:13) 0000 Royal Meteorological Society

Prepared using qjrms4.cls

Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc. 00: 1–15 (0000)

