Samoilenko et al.

RESEARCH

Linguistic neighbourhoods: Explaining cultural
borders on Wikipedia through multilingual
co-editing activity
Anna Samoilenko1,3*, Fariba Karimi1, Daniel Edler2, J´erˆome Kunegis3 and Markus Strohmaier1,3

*Correspondence:
anna.samoilenko@gesis.org
1GESIS – Leibniz-Institute for the
Social Sciences, 6-8 Unter
Sachsenhausen, 50667 Cologne,
Germany
Full list of author information is
available at the end of the article

Abstract
In this paper, we study the network of global interconnections between language
communities, based on shared co-editing interests of Wikipedia editors, and show
that although English is discussed as a potential lingua franca of the digital
space, its domination disappears in the network of co-editing similarities, and
instead local connections come to the forefront. Out of the hypotheses we
explored, bilingualism, linguistic similarity of languages, and shared religion
provide the best explanations for the similarity of interests between cultural
communities. Population attraction and geographical proximity are also
signiﬁcant, but much weaker factors bringing communities together. In addition,
we present an approach that allows for extracting signiﬁcant cultural borders
from editing activity of Wikipedia users, and comparing a set of hypotheses
about the social mechanisms generating these borders. Our study sheds light on
how culture is reﬂected in the collective process of archiving knowledge on
Wikipedia, and demonstrates that cross-lingual interconnections on Wikipedia are
not dominated by one powerful language. Our ﬁndings also raise some important
policy questions for the Wikimedia Foundation.

Keywords: Wikipedia; Multilingual; Cultural similarity; Network; Digital
language divide; Socio-linguistics; Digital Humanities; Hypothesis testing

1 Introduction
Measuring the extent to which cultural communities overlap via the knowledge
they preserve can paint a picture of how culturally proximate or diverse they are.
Wikipedia, the largest crowd-sourced encyclopedia today, is a platform that doc-
uments knowledge from diﬀerent cultural communities via diﬀerent language edi-
tions. The collective traces left by editors of Wikipedia can be utilized to identify
cultural communities that are most similar with regard to the knowledge they doc-
ument. Certainly, co-editing similarities among language communities of Wikipedia
editors are just a particular dimension of culture and are not representative of cul-
tural similarities among the communities in general. Yet, Wikipedia plays a critical
role in today’s information gathering and diﬀusion processes and Wikipedians con-
stitute an important cultural subset of educated and technology-savvy elites who
often drive the cultural, political, and economic processes [1]. In this paper, we tap
into the traces left by editors of Wikipedia to gain new insights into how language
communities on Wikipedia relate to each other via common co-editing interests.

Problem. We are thus interested in seeking answers to the following overarching
research question: What are common editing interests between language commu-

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
4
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
5
2
2
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Samoilenko et al.

Page 2 of 23

nities on Wikipedia, and how can they be explained? In addition, we also aim
to establish a computational method which would allow measuring culture-related
similarities based on the topics the editors document in Wikipedia.

We assume that collective interest of a language-speaking community is reﬂected
through the aggregation of articles documented in the corresponding language edi-
tion of Wikipedia. These articles are an approximation of the topics which are
culturally relevant to that language community, though by no means are represen-
tative of the entire underlying cultural community. We deﬁne cultural similarity as a
signiﬁcant interest of communities in editing articles about the same topics; in other
words, language communities are similar when they signiﬁcantly agree regarding the
topics they choose to edit.

Methods. Our approach consists of several steps. We ﬁrst use statistical ﬁltering
to identify language pairs which show consistent interest in articles on the same
topics. Based on this dyadic information, we create a network of interest similarity
where nodes are languages and links are weighted as the strength of shared interest.
We cluster the network and inspect it visually to inform the generation of hypothe-
ses about the mechanisms that contribute to cultural similarity. Finally, we express
these hypotheses as transition probability matrices, and test their plausibility us-
ing two statistical inference techniques – HypTrails [2] and MRQAP [3] (Multiple
Regression Quadratic Assignment Procedure). Using both Bayesian and frequentist
approaches, we obtain similar results, which suggests that our ﬁndings are robust
against the chosen statistical measure.

Contribution and ﬁndings. Our main contribution is empirical. We expand
the literature on culture-related research by (a) presenting a large-scale network of
interest similarities between 110 language communities, (b) showing that the set of
languages covering a concept of Wikipedia is not a random choice, and (c) by statis-
tically demonstrating that similarity in concept sets between Wikipedia editions is
inﬂuenced by multiple factors, including bilinguality, proximity of these languages,
shared religion, and population attraction. We also combine multiple techniques
from network theory, Bayesian and frequentist statistics in a novel way, and present
a generalisable approach to quantify and explain culture-related similarity based on
editing activity of Wikipedia editors.

We ﬁnd that the topics that each language edition documents are not selected
randomly, however small the underlying community of editors. We test several hy-
potheses about the underlying processes that might explain the observed nonran-
domness, and ﬁnd that bilingualism, linguistic similarity of languages, and shared
religion provide the best explanations for the similarity of interests between cultural
communities. Population attraction and geographical proximity are also signiﬁcant,
but much weaker factors bringing communities together.

The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In Related Literature (Section
2) we will give a brief overview of work on how cultural diﬀerences ﬁnd reﬂection in
multilingual online platforms, as well as on how Wikipedia has been used to compare
cultural and linguistic points of view, and cultural biases involved in knowledge
production. In the Data, Section 3 we will describe in detail the process of data
sampling and collection. Sections 4 and 5 will focus on identifying and explaining
co-editing interests, give a technical overview of the quantitative methods, and

Samoilenko et al.

Page 3 of 23

report the results. We will oﬀer our reﬂection upon the ﬁndings in the Discussion
(Section 6), and Conclusions and Implications (Section 7).

2 Related literature
Deﬁnition of culture and its borders is a long-debated and still unresolved issue in
Anthropology and Social Sciences; a 1951 review of the works on the issue already
contained close to 300 deﬁnitions of culture [4]. Cultural communities have fuzzy
boundaries: several distinct cultures might co-exist in one state, or alternatively,
reach beyond and across continents. This is especially true for multilingual countries
or those with colonial past. While there are many non-verbal expressions of material
culture, language is an important bearer of culture – its meanings have to be learnt
socially and represent the way of life as seen by a particular community [5, 6,
7, 8]. Language-speaking communities form distinct and unique cultures around
themselves [9, 10], and overlap of interests between these communities might signify
cultural proximity between them. Language is central to culture for several reasons:
it reﬂects the collective agreement of a language community to view the world
in a certain way, and helps a community to perpetuate its culture, develop its
identity, and archive accumulated knowledge [11]. It is the latter feature of collective
knowledge selection and archiving that this paper focuses on.

Wikipedia as a lens for studying cultural repertoires of language com-
munities. The online encyclopedia Wikipedia is a prominent example of collective
knowledge accumulation, and it is becoming one of the most interesting and conve-
nient sources for academics to study cultural and historical processes [12]. Wikipedia
is one of the most linguistically diverse projects online, with a constant base of ed-
itors contributing in almost 300 languages [13], ranging from almost 5 million in
the largest edition (English) to just 89 in Cree, the smallest one [13]. This makes
it accessible to more than 5 billion people, or 75% of the world’s population [14].
There is no central authority that dictates which topics must be covered, and every
editor is free to select their own, as long as they are consistent with the notability
guidelines [15]. All language editions have their own notability guidelines and are
edited independently from each other, although an editor can also co-edit several
editions in parallel. Large language editions like English are not supersets of smaller
ones, and each edition contains unique concepts which are not covered by others. For
example, concept overlap between the two largest editions, English and German, is
only 51% [16]. Opposite to the common misconception, even when articles on the
same concept exist in diﬀerent language editions, they are not translated replicas
of each other, but instead reveal consistent cultural biases [17, 18] and introduce
various linguistic viewpoints [19, 20, 21].

These diﬀerences in number, selection, and content of articles across languages
are not accidental, but relate to the cultural diﬀerences between the underlying lan-
guage communities. Contributing to Wikipedia means more than writing encyclope-
dic content: it allows communities to store cultural memories of events [22, 23, 24],
document their point of view [20, 21], and give prominence to people [25]. This col-
lective sifting of culturally-relevant knowledge is such an important social process
that conﬂicts and edit wars frequently emerge before reaching consensus [26]. Fi-
nally, the language communities not yet represented on Wikipedia seek the inclusion

Samoilenko et al.

Page 4 of 23

as an opportunity to establish and promote their language and culture in the dig-
ital realm [27]. There are currently 160 open requests for new Wikipedia language
editions in the Wikimedia Incubator [28]. Wikipedia is rich in cultural material,
and all data are recorded and openly available, which makes the encyclopedia an
attractive object for research on culturally-mediated behaviour.

Quantifying cultural similarity. Multiple numerical measures have been pro-
posed to assess the degree of cultural similarity, although many of them suﬀer from
practical scalability issues or focus on a narrow aspect of culture. The most often
cited measure is known as Hofstede’s dimensions of culture, which delineates cul-
tures by national borders [29]. Evidence of national cultural diﬀerences has been
found in the style of collaborative authoring of Wikipedia articles [30, 31]. West
[32] quantiﬁes cultural distance through linguistic distance between languages. Sev-
eral studies delineated cultures by language, and focused on Wikipedia data. In
particular, Laufer and colleagues [33] developed measures of cultural similarity, un-
derstanding, and aﬃnity through comparing how food cultures are described by self-
and foreign communities. Eom et al. [34] applied ranking algorithms to biographical
articles and obtained a network of cultural agreement on what historical ﬁgures are
viewed as important, which includes 24 language points of view. Finally, the value
of Wikipedia for such anthropological questions as assessing cultural chauvinism
or diﬀerences in historical world view between cultures has been discussed in [35].
Cultural diﬀerences have also been found in other modalities of online communi-
cation and collaboration, on such multilingual platforms as Facebook [36], Twitter
[37, 38, 39], and YouTube [40].

Although previous research has advanced scientiﬁc understanding of cultural sim-
ilarity, attempts to quantify it, for practical reasons, were mostly limited to com-
paring a small number of cultures along a selected topical dimension. The literature
shows a need to establish a scalable approach to quantifying cultural similarity
which allows comparing multiple permutations of language dyads and obtaining a
bird’s-eye view on global intercultural relationships.

3 Data
There are almost 300 language editions of the encyclopedia, which vary greatly in
size. This makes sampling a nontrivial decision: on the one hand, many editions are
rather small, and sampling from them would not provide data suﬃcient for statis-
tical analysis. On the other hand, downloading full data on every language edition
over a long period of time would be computationally expensive. As a compromise,
we focused the analysis on a sample of 126 largest editions which contained more
than 10,000 article pages, as of July 2014 [13].

Sampling procedure. To account for variations in editions’ age, number of
active contributors, and growth rates, we selected the time frame such that (1)
to ensure a suﬃcient amount of editions existed in the beginning of the observa-
tion; (2) to allow enough time for each edition to accumulate concepts. We traced
back each edition to its ﬁrst registered article page, and found out that 110 out of
126 largest editions had been created before 01.01.2005. We excluded 11 editions
which appeared later (min, vo, be, new, pms, pnb, bpy, arz, mzn, sah, vec) and
those whose language codes could not be mapped to the ISO 639-1 standard (be-x-
old, zh-yue,bat-smg, map-bms, zh-min-nan). These remaining 110 editions became

Samoilenko et al.

Page 5 of 23

the focus of our subsequent analysis which covers the period of 9 years between
01.01.2005 and 31.12.2013.

We sampled from each edition separately, collecting IDs of all article pages cre-
ated between 2005 and 2013 (excluding other types of pages, redirects, and pages
created by bots). For each ID we also collected the entire editing history in all linked
language editions. Thus, each ID corresponds to a concept (the topic of the article
regardless of the language), and all interlinked language editions represent various
linguistic points of view on the concept. After removing duplicates, our dataset
includes 3,066,736 unique concepts and a total of 1,360,647,795 article pages in dif-
ferent languages. The data were collected between 20.12.2015 and 25.01.2016 from
Wikimedia servers directly, using the access provided by Wikimedia Tool Labs [41].
One algorithmic limitation of our approach is the fact that we rely on Wikipedia’s
interlanguage link graph to identify articles on the same concepts in diﬀerent lan-
guage editions. This approach has some known issues with the lack of triadic closure
and dyadic reciprocity [19]. To ensure that the maximal set of interlanguage links
related to a concept is retrieved, we collect all articles with their interlanguage links
from each edition separately, removing duplicates afterwards. Thus, all existing in-
terlanguage links are extracted.

4 Extraction of co-editing patterns
In this section, we describe the procedure of extracting cultural similarities from co-
editing activity in Wikipedia, and present the network of signiﬁcant shared interests
between 110 language communities. The section begins with summarising our pre-
analysis check of whether the language-concept overlap in Wikipedia is random.

4.1 Testing for non-randomness of co-editing patterns
Theoretically, each concept covered in Wikipedia could exist in all 288 language
editions of the encyclopedia. This is possible because Wikipedia does not censor
topic inclusion depending on the language of edition, and anyone is free to contribute
an article on any topic of signiﬁcance. However in practice, such complete coverage
is very rare, and concepts are covered in a limited set of language editions. Is this
set of languages random? To answer this question, we analyse matrices of language
co-occurrences based on a 6.5% random sample of the data (200,748 concepts).

We construct the matrix of empirical co-occurrences Cij, based on the probability
of languages i, j to have an article on the same concept. We also construct a synthetic
dataset where we preserve the distribution of languages and the number of concepts,
N = 200,748, but allow languages to co-occur at random. We use the resulting data
to produce the matrix of random co-occurrences C rand
, and compare it to the matrix
of co-occurrences Cij. Our null model corresponds to belief that in Wikipedia each
concept has equal chances to be covered by any language, with larger editions
sharing concepts more frequently purely because of their size. Comparing the two
matrices (Figure A1 in the Appendix) allows us to get a preliminary intuition of
the extent to which co-editing patterns are non-random.

ij

We establish that language dyads do not edit articles about the same concept
(co-occur) by chance. Large editions share concepts more frequently than expected:
although in the data EN-DE and EN-FR overlap in 45% of cases, only 15% is ex-
pected by the null model. To little surprise, the amount of overlap between editions

Samoilenko et al.

Page 6 of 23

Figure 1 Illustration of the z-score-based ﬁltering method. The method requires three steps:
(a) to retrieve all edits to each concept in all linked language editions; (b) to compare the
empirical and expected probabilities of each language pair to co-edit a concept; and (c) to create
a ﬁltered network of languages with signiﬁcant shared interests. In the ﬁnal network, ‘heavier’
links signify stronger co-editing similarity between the nodes.

in the data decreases with the size of the editions. One notable exception is the
Japanese edition which, despite being among the ten largest Wikipedias, co-occurs
with other top editions noticeably less frequently. Similarly, the Uzbek edition, be-
ing among the ten smallest in the dataset, shows high concept overlap with large
editions. By simply plotting frequencies of co-occurrences, we do not observe any
local blocks or clusters, neither among large nor small editions (see Fig. A1).

These overlap diﬀerences are statistically signiﬁcant, and the null model explains
only 1,386 out of 11,990 language pairs (11% of observed data, 95% conﬁdence
level). Such low explained variation suggests that concept overlap is not random
and cannot be explained only by edition sizes. Instead, there are non-random, pos-
sibly cultural processes, that inﬂuence which languages cover which concepts on
Wikipedia. Having evidence that the data contain a signal, we continue our inves-
tigation by performing network analysis.

4.2 Inferring the network of shared interest
We look for the languages that are consistently interested in editing articles on
the same topics by comparing the diﬀerences between observed and expected co-
editing activity on each concept. We give a z-score to every language pair, and
compare it to the threshold of signiﬁcance to ﬁlter out insigniﬁcant pairs. This logic
is demonstrated in Fig. 1. The result is a weighted undirected network of languages,
where languages are connected based on shared information interest.

We ﬁrst compute the empirical weight wc

ij of a link between languages i, j which

co-edit a concept c:

wc

ij = kc

i kc
j .

(1)

Here, kc

i is the number of edits to the concept c in the language edition i, which
we use as a proxy to the amount of editing work invested in the concept. This is
done across all concepts and language permutations. To determine which links are
statistically signiﬁcant, and which exist purely by chance or due to size eﬀects, we
construct a null model where we assume that links between languages i and j are
random.

Let the total editing probability of a language be pi = 1
M

i , where M is the
total number of edits for all concepts and language editions. Then the expected

c kc

(cid:80)

z-scores over all concepts

(cid:88)

Samoilenko et al.

Page 7 of 23

probability E[wc

ij] that languages i and j co-edit the same concept c is:

E[wc

ij] = nc(nc − 1)pipj,

(2)

where nc is the total number of edits to a concept from all language editions. To
compare the diﬀerence between observed and expected link weights, we compute a
z-score zc

ij for each concept and pair of languages i, j, deﬁned as

zc
ij =

ij − E[wc
wc
ij]

σc
ij

,

(3)

where σc

ij is the standard deviation of the expected link weight [42].

Finally, to ﬁnd the cumulative z-score for a pair of languages i, j, we sum their

zij =

zc
ij.

(4)

c

The relationship between i and j is signiﬁcant if the cumulative probability of their
total z-score, zij in the right tail falls beyond the p-value p = 1 − 0.05/N , where N
is the total number of languages. We use the Bonferroni correction [43] to account
for the multiple comparisons and size eﬀects in the data. This corresponds to a
z-score of 3.32. Since z-scores are sums across many independent variables, their
√
distribution can be approximated by the normal distribution, and the threshold for
L, where L = 3,066,736 is the number
link signiﬁcance in the right tail is t = 3.32
of concepts. We create a link between a pair of languages i, j if the observed z-score,
zij, is above the threshold t [42].

We use the resulting z-scores to build a network of shared topical interests, where
the edges are weighted by the similarity of interest, quantiﬁes via z-scores. In sum-
mary, this approach allows for discovering signiﬁcant language pairs of shared in-
terest, accounting for editions of diﬀerent sizes, and avoiding over-representing the
large editions [42].

Other methods exist to extract signiﬁcant weights in graphs. For example, [44]
used the hypergeometric distribution for ﬁnding the expected link weights for bipar-
tite networks and measured the global p-value. Serrano et al. [45] used a disparity
ﬁltering method to infer signiﬁcant weights in networks. Similar to our work, [46]
proposed pair-wise connection probability by the conﬁguration model and used the
p-value to measure statistical signiﬁcance of the links.

The network consists of 110 nodes (language editions) and 11,986 undirected
edges, and is a complete graph. This means that most languages show at least
some similarity in the concepts they edit, however the strength of similarity diﬀers
highly across language pairs. The distribution of edge weights is highly skewed with
the lowest z-score between Korean and Buginese and the highest z−-score between
Javanese and Indonesian.

4.3 Clustering the network of signiﬁcant shared interests
We use the Infomap algorithm [47] to identify language communities that are most
similar in their interests. We release a random walker on the network, and allow

Samoilenko et al.

Page 8 of 23

Figure 2 The network of signiﬁcant Wikipedia co-editing ties between language pairs. Nodes
are coloured according to the clusters found by the Infomap algorithm [50], and link weights
within clusters represents the positive deviation of z-scores from the threshold of randomness;
links are signiﬁcant at the 99% level. For visualisation purposes we display only 23 clusters and
the strongest inter-cluster links in the network. The inter-cluster links show the aggregated
z-scores between all nodes of a pair of clusters. The network suggests that local factors such as
shared language, linguistic similarity of languages, shared religion, and geographical proximity play
a role in interest similarity of language communities. Notably, English forms a separate cluster,
which suggest little interest similarity between English speakers and other communities.

it to travel across links proportional to their weights. By measuring how long the
random walker spends in each part of the network, we are able to identify clusters
of languages with strong internal connections [47]. Additionally, we compare these
results with the Louvain clustering algorithm [48] and establish that both methods
show high agreement.

Our cluster analysis suggests that no language community is completely sepa-
rated from other communities, and in fact, there are signiﬁcant topics of common
interest between almost any two language pairs. We reveal 21 clusters of two and
more languages, plus 9 languages that are identiﬁed as separate clusters (see SI
for full information on the clusters). Notably, English forms a self-cluster, and this
independent standing means little interest similarity between English and other
languages. This is an interesting ﬁnding in the light of the recent discussions on
whether English is becoming a global language and the most suitable lingua franca
for cross-national communication [49].

The resulting network is visualised in Fig. 2. The links within clusters are weighted
according to the amount of positive deviation of z-score per language pair from the
threshold of randomness. Stronger weights indicate higher similarity. The links are
signiﬁcant at the 99% level. The inter-cluster links should be interpreted with care in
the context of this study, as they are weighted according to the aggregated strength
of connection between all nodes of both clusters. The network is undirected since it
depicts mutual topical interest of both language communities, which is inherently
bidirectional. For visualisation purposes, we display only the strongest inter-cluster

Samoilenko et al.

Page 9 of 23

links and 23 language clusters. Cluster membership information is detailed in Ta-
ble A1 (in the Appendix).

Cluster interpretation. Visual inspection of language clusters suggests a num-
ber of hypotheses which might explain such network conﬁguration. For example,
(1) geographical proximity might explain the Swedish-Norwegian-Danish-Faroese-
Finnish-Icelandic cluster (light blue), since those are the languages mostly spoken
in Scandinavian countries. Other groups of languages form around (2) a local lingua
franca, which is often an oﬃcial language of a multilingual country, and include other
regional languages which are spoken as second- and even third language within the
local community. This way, Indonesian and Malay form a cluster with Javanese and
Sundanese (brown), which are the two largest regional languages of Indonesia. Sim-
ilarly, one of the largest clusters in the network (purple) consists of 11 languages
native to India, where cases of multilingualism are especially common, since one
might need to use diﬀerent languages for contacts with the state government, with
the local community, and at home [49]. Another interesting example is the cluster
of languages primarily spoken in the Middle Eastern countries (yellow), which apart
from geographical proximity are closely intertwined due to (3) a shared religious
tradition. Finally, some clusters illustrate (4) the recent changes in sociopolitical
situation, which can also be partially traced through bilingualism. Following the
civil war of the 1990s in former Yugoslavia, its former oﬃcial Serbo-Croatian lan-
guage is now replaced by three separate languages: Serbian, Croatian, and Bosnian
(green cluster). Notably, there is still a separate Serbo-Croatian Wikipedia edition.
To give another example, Russian held a privileged position in the former Soviet
Union, being the language of the ideology and a priority language to learn at school
[49]. Even twenty years after the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Russian remains
an important language of exchange between the post-Soviet countries. Similarity of
interests between speakers of Russian and the languages spoken in nearby countries,
as seen in the magenta cluster, comes as little surprise.

We use this anecdotal interpretation of the clusters to inform our hypotheses
about the mechanisms that aﬀect the formation of co-editing similarities. In the
next section we will build on these initial interpretations and formulate them as
quantiﬁable hypotheses. To evaluate the validity of the hypotheses, we will compare
their plausibility against one another using statistical inference approach.

5 Explanation of co-editing patterns
In this section we show how the network of signiﬁcant shared interests could be
used to inform hypothesis formulation. We compare the plausibility of hypotheses
using two statistical approaches. First, we use Bayesian approach and visually com-
pare the strengths of hypotheses. Then we apply frequentist approach to report
the explanatory power of diﬀerent models. We begin by outlining the necessary
methodology and continue with reporting the results.

5.1 Hypothesis formulation
We convert our initial interpretation of the network clusters into quantiﬁable hy-
potheses, which we express through transition probability matrices illustrated in
Fig. 3. The hypotheses aim to explain the link weights in the network of co-editing

Samoilenko et al.

Page 10 of 23

similarities, which correspond to the obtained z-scores. The transition probability
matrices are square with dimensions N = 110, corresponding to the number of
language editions studied. The diagonal is empty, since self-loops are not allowed.
The formulas, the deﬁnitions, and data sources for hypotheses formulation are sum-
marised for reference in Table 1. Below we give more extended explanations on the
process of hypotheses construction.

• H0: Uniform

All language co-occurrences are possible with the same probability. A concept
can be randomly covered by any language edition. The transition probability
tij for all permutations of languages i and j is

tij = 1.

• H1: Shared language family

We retrieve the whole family tree proﬁle of each language and count the
number of branches overlapping between each language dyad. For example,

– Arabic: Afro-Asiatic; Semitic; Central Semitic; Arabic languages; Arabic
– Hebrew: Afro-Asiatic; Semitic; Central Semitic; Northwest Semitic;

Canaanite; Hebrew

Arabic and Hebrew share three levels of language tree hierarchy (Afro-Asiatic;
Semitic; Central Semitic) and thus will have the transition score of 3 in the
hypothesis table. If fi is the set of branches describing the full language family
proﬁle of language i, the transition probability tij corresponds to the count of
shared branches in the family tree of languages i and j, and is computed as

tij = |fi ∪ fj|.

• H2: Bilingual population within a country

To formalise other hypotheses, we needed to map languages to countries where
they are spoken. We list all countries where a pair of languages are co-spoken;
for each country we compute the probability of a person to speak both lan-
guages. The hypothesis table contains the average probability of a person to
speak both languages computed across all countries where both languages are
spoken by more than 0.1% of the population. The transition probability is
described by

(cid:88)

A

tij =

1
Nij

p(i)Ap(j)A,

where p(i)A, p(j)A are proportions of speakers of languages i, j in a country
A, Nij is the number of countries where i,j are co-spoken. The more bilinguals
speaking i and j live in the same country, the higher the transition belief.

• H3: Geographical proximity of language speakers

We assign each country with its primary language (the language that the
majority of its population speaks) and compute the average distance between

Samoilenko et al.

Page 11 of 23

all permutations of countries where language i or j are spoken. All inter-
country distances are scaled between 0 and 1. Thus,

(cid:88)

A,B

tij =

1
Nij

dmin
dAB

,

where Nij is the number of country permutations where i or j are spoken as
primary language, dAB is Euclidean distance between each pair of countries,
and dmin is the smallest distance between countries in the dataset. The smaller
the distance between speakers of i and j living in separate countries, the higher
the chances for languages i, j to cover the same concept.

• H4: Gravity law – demographic force attracting language commu-

nities
Like in the previous example, we allow one (primary) language per country
and consider all country permutations where languages i or j are spoken. De-
mographic attraction is strongest between large population of speakers who
live in separate counties which are located closely. Consider the example of
France and Germany, where large numbers of French and German speakers
correspondingly, live at close distance. We compute average demographic at-
traction between all permutations of country pairs. We deﬁne

(cid:88)

A,B

tij =

1
Nij

mA,imB,j

d2
AB

,

where mA,i, number of speakers of the primary language i in a country A,
dAB is Euclidean distance between each pair of counties (in kilometers), Nij is
the number of country pairs where i or j are spoken as primary language. The
larger the language-speaking population and the smaller the distance between
the countries A, B, the more the attraction between i and j.

• H5: Shared primary religion

For each country we identiﬁed its primary language and its most widespread
religion (Christian, Muslim, Hindu, Buddhist, Folk, other or unaﬃliated).
The religion we assign to a language is the most common religion in the list
of countries where the language is spoken as primary. For a language pair, if
they share the religion, we add 1 to the hypothesis matrix, and 0 otherwise.
Thus the linguistic communities which profess the same religion will show
consistent interest in the same topics.

5.2 Bayesian inference – HypTrails
In order to explain why certain languages form communities of shared interest, we
need to explain the link weights, or z-score values. We formulate multiple hypotheses
based on real-world statistical data, and compare their plausibility using HypTrails
[2], a Bayesian approach based on Markov chain processes. We input the z-scores
into a matrix, and express hypotheses about their values via Dirichlet priors – ma-
trices of transition probabilities between each possible state (in our case – language
edition). We use the trial roulette method to compare diﬀerent hypothesis. This

Samoilenko et al.

Page 12 of 23

Table 1 Formalisation of hypotheses to explain the probability of language dyads to co-edit a
Wikipedia article about the same concept. The hypotheses aim to explain the values of link weights
(z-scores) in the network of co-editing similarity (see Fig.2 for illustrative purposes). The transition
probability matrices are square with dimensions N = 110, corresponding to the number of language
editions studied. The diagonal is empty, since self-loops are not allowed. The value tij expresses the
hypothesised probability of Wikipedia language editions i and j to cover the same concept. After
construction of the hypotheses matrices, the matrices undergo Laplacian smoothing of weight 1 (for
HypTrails hypotheses testing only), and are further normalised row-wise. The precess is illustrated in
Fig.3. The results of hypothesis testing are represented in Fig.4 for the HypTrails approach, and in
Fig.2 for the MRQAP approach, and are discussed in sections 5.2 and 5.3 correspondingly.

Hypothesis and Formalisation

Notation

Description

Data Source

H0: Uniform hypothesis

tij = 1

–

co-occurrences

All
are
equally probable, i.e. every
edition i covers the same
concept as edition j with
a constant probability.

–

H1: Shared language family

tij = |fi ∪ fj|

H2: Bilingual population within
a country

tij =

1
Nij

p(i)Ap(j)A

(cid:88)

A

(cid:88)

A,B

H3: Geographical proximity of
languages

tij =

1
Nij

dmin
dAB

H4: Gravity law – demographic
force attracting language com-
munities

tij =

1
Nij

mA,imB,j

A,B

d2
AB

(cid:88)

H5: Shared religion

(cid:40)

tij =

1,
0

if ri = rj
otherwise

fi is the set of branches de-
scribing the full
language
family proﬁle of language
i, tij is the count of shared
branches in the family tree
of i and j.

p(i)A, p(j)A are propor-
tions of speakers of i, j in a
country A, Nij is the num-
ber of countries where i,j
are co-spoken.

Nij is the number of coun-
try permutations where i
or j are spoken as pri-
mary language, dAB is Eu-
clidean distance between
each pair of countries, and
dmin is the smallest dis-
tance between countries in
the dataset.

mA,i, number of speakers
of the primary language i
in a country A, dAB is Eu-
clidean distance between
each pair of counties, Nij
is the number of country
pairs where i or j are spo-
ken as primary language.

ri is the dominating reli-
gion of a language com-
munity. It is deﬁned as the
most common religion in
the list of countries whose
primary language is i.

Language communities of
linguistically related lan-
guages will show more co-
editing similarity.

Multilingual editors belong
to multiple cultural com-
munities and might serve
as bridges between them.
The more bilinguals speak-
ing i and j live in the
same country, the higher
the transition belief.

of

The smaller the distance
between speakers
i
and j living in separate
countries, the higher the
chances for languages i, j
to cover the same concept.
We consider one (primary)
language per country.

The larger the language-
speaking population and
the smaller the distance
between
countries
A, B,
the more the at-
traction between i and j.
Based on the countries’
primary languages.

the

Cultures which profess the
same religion will
show
consistent interest in the
same topics.

The data on language fam-
ily classiﬁcation was taken
from English Wikipedia in-
foboxes of articles on each
of 110 languages, such as
‘Hebrew language’.

Territory–language
infor-
mation was downloaded
from [51], and is based on
the data from the World
Bank, Ethnologue, Fact-
Book, and other sources,
including
per-country
census data.

Distance between coun-
tries is computed as Eu-
clidean distance in kilome-
ters between country capi-
tals [52].

Country population data is
taken from CIA Factbook
[52].

The data on world religions
was taken from the most
recent 2010 Report on Re-
ligious Diversity provided
by the Pew Research Cen-
ter [53].

Samoilenko et al.

Page 13 of 23

Figure 3 A toy example of expressing a hypothesis through a transition probability matrix. The
matrices are symmetrical. The diagonal is empty since the data do not allow self-loops. According
to each hypothesis, the cells with more likely transitions are coloured in darker shades of blue. In
(a) Uniform hypothesis – all transitions are equally possible, i.e. the editions are covering random
topics. In (b) Shared religion hypothesis – the dyads Russian-Ukrainian and Polish-Estonian are
given more belief on the basis of shared religion. Finally, in (c) Geographical proximity hypothesis
– the shorter the distance between languages, the stronger belief in the transition.

approach allows to visualise how plausibility of the hypotheses changes with the in-
creasing belief and decreasing allowed variation. Although it was initially designed
to compare hypotheses about human trails, in this paper we show that HypTrails
is also useful in explaining link weights in networks.

Data preparation. Using the formalisations detailed in Table 1, we ﬁll out
corresponding transition probabilities matrices. We apply Laplacian smoothing of
weight 1 to all matrices to avoid sparsity issues and to account for the cases when
editions co-edit a topic of a general encyclopedic importance which might be relevant
for multiple language communities. All matrices are normalised row-wise; diagonals
are zero as no self-loops are allowed.

Hyptrails ranking. The Hyptrails algorithm does not output the absolute
values for plausibility of hypotheses, but only compares them one to another. Thus,
one must always compare the hypotheses to a uniform hypothesis, and discard those
hypotheses that are ranked below the uniform. For the upper bound of comparison,
we use the z-scores data itself, since no hypothesis can explain the data better than
the data itself.

The results suggest that multiple factors play role in how shared interests are
shaped, including geographical proximity, population attraction, shared religion,
and especially strongly, linguistic relatedness of the languages and the number of
bilingual speakers. No hypothesis explains perfectly all variations in the data, how-
ever and all Bayes Factors for all pairs of hypotheses are decisive. Geographical
proximity only explains the data to a limited extent, and decays for higher values
of k, while the number of bilinguals in the same country, shared language family,
and shared religion hypotheses grow stronger with more belief, which suggests that
they explain the data most robustly. The explanatory power of hypotheses should
be compared for the same values of k, which expresses how strongly we believe in the
hypotheses and how much variation is allowed. Fig. 4 summarises the results of the
HypTrails algorithm. All hypotheses are compared against the uniform hypotheses
of random co-occurrence.

5.3 Frequentist approach – MRQAP
In addition to the HypTrails analysis, we use Multiple Regression Quadratic As-
signment Procedure (MRQAP) [54] to assess statistical signiﬁcance of association

Samoilenko et al.

Page 14 of 23

Figure 4 HypTrails-computed Bayesian evidence for hypotheses plausibility on shared editing
interest Wikipedia data. Higher values of the Bayesian evidence denote that a hypothesis ﬁts the
data well. The bottom black line represents the hypothesis of random shared interests and the top
grey line is the ﬁt of data on itself – together forming an upper and lower limit for ﬁtting
hypothesis. The ranking of hypotheses should be compared for the same k. All hypotheses are
signiﬁcant, but the most plausible ones to explain cultural proximity are the shared language
family, the bilingual, the shared religion, and the gravity law hypotheses. The results show that
cultural factors such as language and religion play a larger role in explaining Wikipedia co-editing
than geographical factors.

between the concept co-editing network ties and various hypothesis. This method
has a long established tradition in social network analysis as a way to sift out spuri-
ously observed correlations [55], and is well-suited for analysing dyadic data where
observations are autocorrelated if they are in the same row or column [3]. We treat
the network of concept co-editing as a dependent variable matrix; the independent
variable contains the set of hypotheses about the conﬁguration of the network, ex-
pressed via hypotheses matrices. Formulation of hypotheses is given in Table 1.
We normalise the matrices row-wise in order to standardise the values across ma-
trices. MRQAP is a nonparametric test – it permutes the dependent variables to
account for dyadic inter-dependencies. It is also robust against various underlying
data distributions [56]. We used 1,000 permutations, which usually suﬃces for the
procedure [57].

MRQAP ranking. The results of the test are in agreement with the hypothesis
ranking obtained from applying HypTrails. The number of bilinguals, shared lan-
guage family, shared religion and demographic attraction are the factors signiﬁcantly
contributing to cultural similarity, as suggested by the t-statistic. By including all
ﬁve hypotheses into Model 1, we are able to explain 15% of variation in the data.
Geographical distance, although a signiﬁcant factor in several models, is not a very
strong one: after excluding the distance hypothesis (Model 2), precision does not
decrease. Excluding other hypotheses one by one (Models 3, 4, 5 and 6) lowers pre-
cision considerably. Finally, shared language family and bilinguals alone (Models
21 and 22) explain 5% and 7% variation in shared interests correspondingly. The
results of the MRQAP are reported in Table 2. Diﬀerent models include variations
of hypotheses combinations that explain the variation in language co-editing ties.

Samoilenko et al.

Page 15 of 23

Table 2 MRQAP decomposition of pairwise correspondence between concept co-occurrence and
cultural factors. The combination of all hypotheses explains most of the variation in the data (15%).
The most plausible explanations are the number of bilinguals and shared religion. The results of
MRQAP agree with the ranking of hypotheses by the HypTrails algorithm. All statistics except those
labelled with ∗ are signiﬁcant at the 0.05 level.

Model

Bilinguals

Lang. family

Religion

Estimate
t-statistic

0.0688
27.6524

0.1074
23.6158

0.0900
13.4772

Gravity

Distance1
−0.0042∗
10.2732 −1.3422∗

0.0470

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

Estimate
t-statistic

Estimate
t-statistic

Estimate
t-statistic

Estimate
t-statistic

Estimate
t-statistic

Estimate
t-statistic

Estimate
t-statistic

Estimate
t-statistic

Estimate
t-statistic

Estimate
t-statistic

Estimate
t-statistic

Estimate
t-statistic

Estimate
t-statistic

Estimate
t-statistic

Estimate
t-statistic

Estimate
t-statistic

Estimate
t-statistic

Estimate
t-statistic

Estimate
t-statistic

Estimate
t-statistic

Estimate
t-statistic

0.0676
29.1517

0.0703
28.1932

0.0685
27.3119

0.0716
28.1697

–
–

0.0700
30.2487

0.0703
27.9237

–
–

0.0700
29.5521

–
–

0.0712
30.4703

0.0738
28.6184

–
–

0.0733
30.9368

–
–

–
–

–
–

–
–

–
–

–
–

0.0746
31.1808

0.1075
23.6428

0.1129
24.8853

0.1080
23.5817

–
–

0.1134
24.2095

0.1129
24.8885

0.1151
25.1460

–
–

–
–

0.1140
24.1755

0.1151
25.1430

–
–

–
–

–
–

0.1222
25.9063

–
–

–
–

–
–

–
–

0.1233
25.9798

–
–

1 primary language

R2 adj.

F-stat.

dF

Intercept

0.1458

410.3

11984

0.0066

0.1458

512.4

11985

0.0067

0.1384

482.3

11985

0.0067

0.1329

460.5

11985

0.0074

0.1061

356.9

11985

0.0075

0.09140

302.5

11985

0.0070

0.1386

643.1

11986

0.0067

0.1212

552.2

11986

0.0076

0.0470

198.2

11986

0.0079

0.1060

474.8

11986

0.0075

0.0790

344.0

11986

0.0077

0.1212

827.8

11987

0.0076

0.0749

486.5

11987

0.0085

0.0342

213.4

11987

0.0086

0.0940

622.8

11987

0.0076

0.0641

411.6

11987

0.0080

0.0409

256.8

11987

0.0080

0.0894
13.4200

0.1022
15.4831

–
–

0.0916
13.4180

0.0881
12.7958

0.1020
15.5098

–
–

0.0898
12.7323

0.0909
13.3370

–
–

–
–

–
–

–
–

0.1072
15.9020

–
–

0.0464
10.1893

–
–

0.0581
12.7773

0.0598
12.8396

0.0546
11.5815

–
–

–
–

0.0684
14.2619

0.0590
12.7297

0.0654
13.9808

–
–

–
–

0.0794
16.7162

–
–

–
–

0.0936
13.2534

0.0741
15.5280

–
–
−0.0009∗
−0.2989∗
−0.0016∗
−0.5225∗
−0.0055∗
−1.7256∗
0.0272
9.0453

–
–
0.0030∗
0.9388∗
0.0272
8.8191

–
–

0.0296
9.7791

–
–

0.0027
0.8295

0.0296
9.5508

–
–

0.0357
11.8512

–
–

–
–

–
–

0.1144
16.3447

–
–

–
–

–
–

0.0372
12.0025

0.0118

144.1

11988

0.0090

0.0861
18.2514

–
–

–
–

–
–

0.0269

333.1

11988

0.0087

0.0217

267.1

11988

0.0081

0.0532

674.9

11988

0.0081

0.0749

972.2

11988

0.0085

–
–

–
–

–
–

–
–

Samoilenko et al.

Page 16 of 23

6 Discussion
In this paper, we have used edit co-occurrences data to investigate cultural simi-
larities between language communities on Wikipedia. We have applied a statistical
ﬁltering approach to quantify co-editing similarities and build a network of mutual
interests. We have utilised the logic of Bayesian and frequentist hypothesis testing
to examine what societal features can explain the observed language clusters. Both
approaches render similar results, suggesting that cultural proximity and similarity
of interests are best explained by bilingualism, linguistic relatedness of languages,
shared religion, and demographic attraction of communities. Geographical distance
is a weak, and not very signiﬁcant factor.

Limitations. Our study is not free of limitations, some of which are inherent
to the nature of the chosen data. Although we found in the literature mounting
evidence that Wikipedia is a promising and rich data source for those interested in
mining cultural relations, we agree that it is only one of many possible media where
culture might ﬁnd reﬂection. Moreover, Wikipedia itself is not free from structural
biases, as it reﬂects the activity of selected technology-savvy, mostly white and
male [58, 59], educated, and economically stable social elites. It by no means is
representative of the views of general population. However, it is the elites that often
drive the cultural, political, and economic processes [1], and thus Wikipedia editors
represent a group worthy of being studied. Furthermore, we point out that even
though we focus on 110 largest language editions, we still compare the editions
at diﬀerent growth stages and levels of topical saturation. Although this might
introduce unforeseen biases, we do not see it as a major limitation, since we focus
on aggregated editing activity and only on the articles created between 2005 and
2013. We leave for future research the interesting task of incorporating the time
dimension in the analysis and examining how interests shape and change over time.
Additionally, while our approach is quantitative, it requires some subjectivity in
interpreting the clusters and formulating hypotheses. To strengthen the internal
validity of the study, we inform our reasoning about the hypotheses both in vi-
sual analysis of the clusters and in previous literature on the subject. Still, we do
not claim to have exhausted all possible hypotheses which could explain the data.
Moreover, other formalisations of the selected hypotheses might render diﬀerent
results.

One of the beneﬁts of our approach is that it is free of biases related to topic
selection, since we avoid focusing on speciﬁc kinds of topics where cultural similar-
ities might be expected. It also scales well in terms of the number of communities
and hypotheses that could be analysed. In case of research on multilingual data,
an important beneﬁt of our approach is that it only uses metadata on user interac-
tions, and understanding the language itself is not required. Finally, it is applicable
for any example of collaborative production of a common good where individual
activity of participants is recorded.

Discussion of results. Culture is a very complex concept without a deﬁnition
that is unanimously accepted by Anthropologists, Social Scientists, or Linguists.
Although it is universally agreed that cultural communities exist, their borders are
very fuzzy and depend on how the researcher deﬁnes the term ’culture’. In this work,
we focus on the relation between language and culture, and particularly, on how

Samoilenko et al.

Page 17 of 23

online linguistic expressions can help distil cultural similarities between multilingual
communities of Wikipedia editors. An inseparable part of culture, language is only
one way of cultural expression, and more studies are needed to explore how other
aspects of culture manifest themselves in oﬀ- and online world.

Our analysis shows that the decision to write or not to write an article on a certain
topic is not a random one. Similar to the idea of national cultural repertoires in the
traditional Cultural Sociology [60], we ﬁnd that various linguistic communities apply
diﬀerent grammars of worth and criteria of evaluation when selecting the topics to
cover, that would appeal to the common interest of the language community. Thus,
each language edition represents a community of shared understanding with unique
linguistic point of view [19, 20, 21], its own controversial topics [26], and concept
coverage [18].

We demonstrate that similarity of co-editing interests between language com-
munities can be partially explained by the number of bilinguals and by linguistic
similarity of the languages themselves. This comes as little surprise, since language
is a fundamental part of identity, self-recognition, and culture [11, 61, 62, 5]. It is
hard to separate the eﬀects of the number of bilinguals and shared language family
from one another, since both might be related: shared vocabulary and grammatical
features of the languages from the same language family might explain higher level
of bilingualism for these language dyads. Moreover, language choice and bilingual-
ism are an eﬀect of factors galore, such as post-colonial history, education, language
and human right policies, free travel, and migration due to political instability,
poverty, religious persecutions or work [63, 64]. Finally, cultural similarity deﬁned
through Hofstede’s four dimensions of values [29] has also been found to relate to
language [30, 32].

Shared religion is another uniting factor for language communities. Our ﬁnding is
in line with Huntington’s thesis which argues that cultural and religious identities of
people form the primary source of potential conﬂict in the post-Cold War era [65].
The studies of email and Twitter communication [66] and similarity in country
information interests [42] also reveal the patterns that echo religious “fault lines”.
Population attraction and geographical proximity are the uniting factors that
have been extensively discussed in the literature, most relevantly in the context of
mobile communication ﬂows [67] and migration [68]. Similar to our results, several
studies report gravity laws in online settings, including [69] and [42]. Not only choice
of topics to edit, but also online trade in taste-dependent products is aﬀected by
distance. For example, [70] ﬁnds that proximate countries show more similarity in
taste. Notably, this eﬀect only holds for culture-related products such as music.
This further supports our ﬁnding that there is a relationship between geographical
distance and culture, and allows us to speculate that the Internet fails to defy the
law of gravity.

The question of whether English is becoming the world’s lingua franca is an in-
triguing one [49]. Its central, inﬂuential position in the global language network
has been reported in networks of book translations, multilingual Twitter users, and
Wikipedia editors [1, 71, 72]. On the one hand, such high visibility allows infor-
mation to radiate between the more connected languages. On the other hand, our
study shows that global language centrality plays a minor role in shared interests.

Samoilenko et al.

Page 18 of 23

Moreover, we show that the domination of English disappears in the network of co-
editing similarities, and instead local interconnections come to the forefront, root-
ing in shared language, similar linguistic characteristics, religion, and demographic
proximity. A similar eﬀect has been observed in international markets, where eco-
nomic competitiveness is linked to the ability to speak a local lingua franca, rather
than English [73].

7 Conclusions and Implications
Out of almost 300 Wikipedia’s language editions, 76% have less than 100 active
users [13]. Linguistically, this means that those languages are in danger of extinction
[64], at least in the online space [74]. Nevertheless, [27] emphasises the role of
Wikipedia in helping peripheral languages cross the digital divide, acquire digital
functions and prestige as their speakers go online. At the same time, Pentzold [24]
describes Wikipedia as a global cultural memory place, access to which depends on
the language skills. In his view, Wikipedia is not a mere encyclopedia where facts are
documented, but rather a space where the entire collective memories of important
events are constructed during a discursive, social process. We show that the topics
that each language edition documents are not selected randomly, however small
the underlying community of editors. These non-random processes might relate to
the fact that each Wikipedia language edition presents a cultural memory place,
where the linguistic point of view and the memorable events of that community are
negotiated.

Our ﬁndings bring some important policy questions for the Wikimedia Founda-
tion, such as: What are the cultural implications of populating editions with au-
tomatically translated concepts present in other language editions? Should English
Wikipedia aim at becoming an all-inclusive collection of information from other lan-
guage editions? Should the decision on who and what will be remembered belong
to the community of editors, however small, or to an automated algorithm? We
hope that our research will inspire dialogue on how similarities between language
communities can be used to improve participation of editors speaking peripheral
languages and expand the content of smaller editions.

In addition, Wikipedia has a power to mobilise cultural communities around a
very important collective task – selecting and archiving important knowledge for
future generations. Our analysis sheds light on how cultural similarities are reﬂected
in this process. We also demonstrate that global cultural interconnections are not
dominated by one powerful player, but instead follow the locally established “fault
lines” of bilingualism, shared religion and population attraction. We hope that
these results will be useful for managers, economists and politicians working in
multicultural settings, enthusiastic Wikipedians, academics wishing to study culture
via the web, as well as for the public curious about global, intercultural relationships.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Author’s contributions
AS, MS, FK conceived and designed the research. AS acquired the data. AS, FK and DE analysed the data. AS and
FK interpreted the results. All authors discussed, wrote, and approved the ﬁnal version of the manuscript.

Samoilenko et al.

Page 19 of 23

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Michael Macy, Florian Lemmerich, and Philipp Singer for inspiring discussions and useful
comments. We also thank the Wikimedia Foundation for developing and hosting the Wikimedia Labs infrastructure
and granting access to its servers. JK acknowledges the funding from the European Community’s Seventh
Framework Programme under grant agreement no 610928, REVEAL.

Author details
1GESIS – Leibniz-Institute for the Social Sciences, 6-8 Unter Sachsenhausen, 50667 Cologne, Germany. 2Integrated
Science Lab, Department of Physics, Ume˚a University, Ume˚a, Sweden. 3University of Koblenz-Landau, Koblenz,
Germany.

References

1. Ronen, S., Gon¸calves, B., Hu, K.Z., Vespignani, A., Pinker, S., Hidalgo, C.A.: Links that speak: The global

language network and its association with global fame. PNAS (2014). doi:10.1073/pnas.1410931111

2. Singer, P., Helic, D., Hotho, A., Strohmaier, M.: Hyptrails: A bayesian approach for comparing hypotheses
about human trails. In: 24th International World Wide Web Conference (WWW2015). ACM, Firenze, Italy
(2015)

3. Krackardt, D.: QAP partialling as a test of spuriousness. Social networks 9(2), 171–186 (1987)
4. Kroeber, A.L., Kluckhohn, C.: Culture: a Critical Review of Concepts and Deﬁnitions vol. XLVII(1). Peabody

Museum of American Archeology and ethnology, Massachusetts, USA (1952)

5. Bloomﬁeld, L.: About foreign language teaching. Yale Review 34, 625–41 (1945)
6. Hoijer, H.: Linguistic and cultural change. Language 24, 335–45 (1948)
7. Silvia-Fuenzalida, I.: Ethnolinguistics and the study of culture. American Anthropologist 51(3), 446–56 (1949)
8. Voegelin, C.F., Harris, Z.S.: Linguistics in ethnology. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 1, 455–65 (1945)
9. Bucholtz, M., Hall, K.: All of the above: New coalitions in sociocultural linguistics. Journal of Sociolinguistics

12(4), 401–431 (2008). doi:10.1111/j.1467-9841.2008.00382.x

10. Geertz, C.: The Interpretation of Cultures: Selected Essays vol. 5019. Basic books, New York (1973)
11. Kramsch, C.: Language and Culture. Oxford University Press, Oxford (1998)
12. Schich, M., Song, C., Ahn, Y.-Y., Mirsky, A., Martino, M., Barab´asi, A.-L., Helbing, D.: A network framework

of cultural history. Science 345(6196), 558–562 (2014). doi:10.1126/science.1240064

13. Wikipedia: Wikipedia:List of Wikipedias. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List of Wikipedias. Accessed 24 Sept

2015 (2015)

14. Petzold, T.: The uses of multilingualism in digital culture: The case of inter-language linking. PhD thesis,

Queensland University of Technology (2011)

15. Wikipedia: Wikipedia:Notability. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Notability. Accessed 24 Sept 2015

(2015)

16. Hecht, B., Gergle, D.: The tower of babel meets Web 2.0: User-generated content and its applications in a

multilingual context. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI
’10, pp. 291–300. ACM, New York, NY, USA (2010). doi:10.1145/1753326.1753370

17. Hecht, B., Gergle, D.: Measuring self-focus bias in community-maintained knowledge repositories. In:

Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Communities and Technologies, pp. 11–20. ACM, New
York, NY, USA (2009). doi:10.1145/1556460.1556463

18. Callahan, E.S., Herring, S.C.: Cultural bias in Wikipedia content on famous persons. J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci.,

1899–1915 (2011). doi:10.1002/asi.21577

19. Bao, P., Hecht, B., Carton, S., Quaderi, M., Horn, M., Gergle, D.: Omnipedia: Bridging the Wikipedia

language gap. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI ’12,
pp. 1075–1084. ACM, Austin, Texas, USA (2012). doi:10.1145/2207676.2208553

20. Massa, P., Scrinzi, F.: Manypedia: Comparing language points of view of Wikipedia communities. In:

Proceedings of the Eighth Annual International Symposium on Wikis and Open Collaboration. WikiSym ’12,
pp. 21–1219. ACM, New York, NY, USA (2012). doi:10.1145/2462932.2462960

21. Massa, P., Scrinzi, F.: Exploring linguistic points of view of Wikipedia. In: Proceedings of the 7th International
Symposium on Wikis and Open Collaboration. WikiSym ’11, pp. 213–214. ACM, New York, NY, USA (2011).
doi:10.1145/2038558.2038599

22. Keegan, B., Gergle, D., Contractor, N.: Hot oﬀ the Wiki: Dynamics, practices, and structures in Wikipedia’s

coverage of the T¯ohoku Catastrophes. In: Proceedings of the 7th International Symposium on Wikis and Open
Collaboration. WikiSym ’11, pp. 105–113. ACM, New York, NY, USA (2011). doi:10.1145/2038558.2038577

23. Keegan, B.C.: A history of newswork on Wikipedia. In: Proceedings of the 9th International Symposium on

Open Collaboration. WikiSym ’13, pp. 7–1710. ACM, New York, NY, USA (2013).
doi:10.1145/2491055.2491062

24. Pentzold, C.: Fixing the ﬂoating gap: The online encyclopaedia wikipedia as a global memory place. Memory

Studies 2(2), 255–272 (2009). doi:10.1177/1750698008102055

25. Samoilenko, A., Yasseri, T.: The distorted mirror of Wikipedia: A quantitative analysis of Wikipedia coverage of

academics. EPJ Data Science 3:1 (2014)

26. Yasseri, T., Spoerri, A., Graham, M., Kert´esz, J.: The most controversial topics in Wikipedia: A multilingual

and geographical analysis. In: Fichman, P., Hara, N. (eds.) Global Wikipedia: International and Cross-Cultural
Issues in Online Collaboration, pp. 25–48. Rowman & Littleﬁeld Publishers, Inc., Maryland (2014)

27. Kornai, A.: Digital language death. PLoS ONE 8, 52–64 (2013). doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0077056
28. Requests for new languages. The Wikimedia Incubator.

https://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/Requests for new languages. Accessed 24 Sept 2015 (2015)

29. Hofstede, G.: Culture’s Consequences: International Diﬀerences in Work-related Values. Sage Publications,

London and Beverly Hils (1980)

Samoilenko et al.

Page 20 of 23

30. Pfeil, U., Zaphiris, P., Ang, C.S.: Cultural diﬀerences in collaborative authoring of Wikipedia. Journal of

Computer-Mediated Communication 12(1), 88–113 (2006). doi:10.1111/j.1083-6101.2006.00316.x

31. Hara, N., Shachaf, P., Hew, K.F.: Cross-cultural analysis of the Wikipedia community. Journal of the American

Society for Information Science and Technology 61(10), 2097–2108 (2010). doi:10.1002/asi.21373

32. West, J., Graham, J.L.: A linguistic-based measure of cultural distance and its relationship to managerial

values. MIR: Management International Review, 239–260 (2004)

33. Laufer, P., Wagner, C., Fl¨ock, F., Strohmaier, M.: Mining cross-cultural relations from Wikipedia – a study of

31 European food cultures. arXiv preprint arXiv:1411.4484 (2014)

34. Eom, Y.-H., Arag´on, P., Laniado, D., Kaltenbrunner, A., Vigna, S., Shepelyansky, D.L.: Interactions of cultures

and top people of Wikipedia from ranking of 24 language editions. PloS ONE (2015).
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0114825

35. Gloor, P., De Boer, P., Lo, W., Wagner, S., Nemoto, K., Fuehres, H.: Cultural anthropology through the lens of
Wikipedia - a comparison of historical leadership networks in the English, Chinese, and Japanese Wikipedia. In:
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Collaborative Innovation Networks COINs15, Tokyo, Japan
(2015)

36. Barnett, G.A., Beneﬁeld, G.A.: Predicting international facebook ties through cultural homophily and other

factors. New Media & Society (2015). doi:10.1177/1461444815604421

37. Eleta, I., Golbeck, J.: Multilingual use of Twitter: social networks at the language frontier. Journal Computers

in Human Behavior 41, 424–432 (2014)

38. Garc´ıa-Gavilanes, R., Mejova, Y., Quercia, D.: Twitter ain’t without frontiers: Economic, social, and cultural

boundaries in international communication. In: Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work &#38; Social Computing. CSCW ’14, pp. 1511–1522. ACM, New York, NY, USA
(2014). doi:10.1145/2531602.2531725. http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2531602.2531725

39. Mocanu, D., Baronchelli, A., Perra, N., Gon¸calves, B., Zhang, Q., Vespignani, A.: The Twitter of Babel:

Mapping world languages through microblogging platforms. PloS ONE (2013).
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0061981

40. Platt, E., Bhargava, R., Zuckerman, E.: The international aﬃliation network of YouTube trends (2015)
41. Wikimedia: Wikimedia Tool Labs. https://wikitech.wikimedia.org/wiki/Main Page. Accessed 24 Sept 2015

(2015)

42. Karimi, F., Bohlin, L., Samoilenko, A., Rosvall, M., Lancichinetti, A.: Mapping bilateral information interests

using the activity of Wikipedia editors. Palgrave Communications 1(15041) (2015).
doi:10.1057/palcomms.2015.41

43. Dunn, O.J.: Multiple comparisons among means. Journal of the American Statistical Association 56(293),

52–64 (1961)

44. Tumminello, M., Miccich`e, S., Lillo, F., Piilo, J., Mantegna, R.N.: Statistically validated networks in bipartite

complex systems. PLoS ONE 6(3)(e17994) (2011). doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0017994

45. Serrano, M.A., Bogu˜n´a, M., Vespignani, A.: Extracting the multiscale backbone of complex weighted networks.

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106(16), 6483–6488 (2009). doi:10.1073/pnas.0808904106

46. Dianati, N.: Unwinding the hairball graph: Pruning algorithms for weighted complex networks. Phys. Rev. E 93,

012304 (2016). doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.93.012304

47. Rosvall, M., Axelsson, D., Bergstrom, C.T.: The map equation. The European Physical Journal Special Topics

178(1), 13–23 (2010)

48. Blondel, V.D., Guillaume, J.-L., Lambiotte, R., Lefebvre, E.: Fast unfolding of communities in large networks.

Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment 2008(10), 10008 (2008)

49. Crystal, d.: English as a Global Language, 2nd edn. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (2003)
50. Edler, D., Rosvall, M.: The MapEquation software package. http://www.mapequation.org. Accessed 24 Sept

2015 (2013)

51. Territory-Language Information. CLDR Charts - Unicode Common Locale Data Repository.

http://www.unicode.org/cldr/charts/latest/supplemental/territory language information.html. Accessed 24
Sept 2015 (2015)

52. CIA: The world factbook. https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/. Accessed 24 Sept

2015 (2015)

53. Religious Diversity Index Scores by Country. Pew Research Center.

http://www.pewforum.org/2014/04/04/religious-diversity-index-scores-by-country/. Accessed 24 Sept 2015
(2010)

54. Hubert, L., Schultz, J.: Quadratic assignment as a general data analysis strategy. Br J Math Stat Psychol

29(2), 190–241 (1976). doi:10.1111/j.2044-8317.1976.tb00714.x

55. Dekker, D., Krackhardt, D., Snijders, T.: Multicollinearity robust QAP for multiple regression. In: 1st Annual

Conference of the North American Association for Computational Social and Organizational Science, pp. 22–25
(2003)

56. Dekker, D., Krackhardt, D., Snijders, T.A.: Sensitivity of MRQAP tests to collinearity and autocorrelation

conditions. Psychometrika 72(4), 563–581 (2007)

57. Jackson, D.A., Somers, K.M.: Are probability estimates from the permutation model of mantel’s test stable?

Canadian Journal of Zoology 67(3), 766–769 (1989)

58. Hill BM, S.A.: The Wikipedia gender gap revisited: Characterizing survey response bias with propensity score

estimation. PLoS ONE 8(6)(e65782) (2013). doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0065782

59. Antin, J., Yee, R., Cheshire, C., Nov, O.: Gender diﬀerences in wikipedia editing. In: Proceedings of the 7th
International Symposium on Wikis and Open Collaboration. WikiSym ’11, pp. 11–14. ACM, New York, NY,
USA (2011). doi:10.1145/2038558.2038561

60. Lamont, M., Th´evenot, L. (eds.): Rethinking Comparative Cultural Sociology. Repertoires of Evaluation in

France and the United States. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK (2000)

61. Castells, M.: The Power of Identity: The Information Age: Economy, Society, and Culture vol. 2, 2nd edn.

Samoilenko et al.

Page 21 of 23

Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford (2011)

62. Whorf, B.L.: Science and linguistics. Technology Review 42(6), 229–231 (1940)
63. Rassool, N.: Postmodernity, cultural pluralism and the nation-state: Problems of language rights, human rights,

identity and power. Language Sciences 20(1), 89–99 (1998)

64. Crystal, D.: Language Death. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (2000)
65. Huntington, S.P.: The clash of civilizations? Foreign Aﬀairs, 22–49 (1993)
66. State, B., Park, P., Weber, I., Macy, M.: The mesh of civilizations in the global network of digital

communication. PLoS ONE (2015). doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0122543

67. Krings, G., Calabrese, F., Ratti, C., Blondel, V.D.: Urban gravity: a model for inter-city telecommunication

ﬂows. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment 2009(07), 07003 (2009)

68. Simini, F., Gonzalez, M.C., Maritan, A., Barabasi, A.-L.: A universal model for mobility and migration patterns.

Nature 484, 96–100 (2012). doi:10.1038/nature10856

69. Backstrom, L., Sun, E., Marlow, C.: Find me if you can: Improving geographical prediction with social and

spatial proximity. In: Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on World Wide Web. WWW ’10, pp.
61–70. ACM, New York, NY, USA (2010). doi:10.1145/1772690.1772698

70. Blum, B.S., Goldfarb, A.: Does the internet defy the law of gravity? Journal of international economics 70(2),

384–405 (2006)

71. Hale, S.A.: Multilinguals and Wikipedia editing. In: Proceedings of the 2014 ACM Conference on Web Science.

WebSci ’14, pp. 99–108. ACM, New York, NY, USA (2014). doi:10.1145/2615569.2615684

72. Hale, S.A.: Global connectivity and multilinguals in the Twitter network. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI

Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI ’14, pp. 833–842. ACM, New York, NY, USA
(2014). doi:10.1145/2556288.2557203

73. Bel Habib, I.: Multilingual skills provide export beneﬁts and better access to new emerging markets.

Sens-Public (2011)

74. Prado, D.: Language Presence in the Real World and Cyberspace, pp. 38–51. C&F ´editions, Caen (2012)

Samoilenko et al.

Page 22 of 23

Appendix

Figure A1 Comparison of empirical and experimental data on editing co-occurrences. White
cells are explained by the null model, shades of blue/red show the distance of observed
co-occurrences from the lower/upper border of the conﬁdence interval. Low explained variation
(11%, 95% conﬁdence level), suggests that non-random processes are in place. Based on a
random 6.5% data (N = 200,748 concepts).

Samoilenko et al.

Page 23 of 23

Table A1 Clusters of languages with shared interest as found by the Infomap clustering algorithm.
The weight of each language is the normalized weighted degree of the node. Some languages,
including English, do not belong to a larger community and form a self-cluster instead.

Cluster

Language

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

French
Occitan
Waray-Waray
Latin
Italian
Cebuano
Alemannic
Tagalog
Lombard
Sicilian
Buginese
Neapolitan

Russian
Polish
Ukrainian
Armenian
Estonian
Lithuanian
Latvian

Sanskrit
Hindi
Tamil
Malayalam
Telugu
Marathi
Bengali
Kannada
Nepali
Gujarati
Punjabi
Sinhalese

Norwegian (Bokmal)
Swedish
Norwegian (Nynorsk)
Finnish
Danish
Icelandic
Faroese

Serbian
Serbo-Croatian
Croatian
Slovenian
Bosnian
Haitian

Vietnamese
Turkish
Persian
Azerbaijani
Arabic
Urdu
Kurdish
Tajik
Sorani

Esperanto
Hungarian
Czech
Slovak
Romanian

Weight

0.01415
0.01372
0.01291
0.01219
0.01147
0.00652
0.00591
0.00581
0.00566
0.00536
0.00394
0.00355

0.01665
0.01584
0.01509
0.01190
0.01068
0.00994
0.00800

0.01046
0.01032
0.00927
0.00869
0.00861
0.00826
0.00613
0.00578
0.00578
0.00537
0.00528
0.00337

0.01818
0.01499
0.01311
0.01093
0.01048
0.00640
0.00432

0.01884
0.01632
0.01417
0.01133
0.01036
0.00568

0.01362
0.01022
0.00966
0.00965
0.00886
0.00838
0.00629
0.00523
0.00423

0.01717
0.01552
0.01361
0.01159
0.01104

Cluster

Language

8

9

10

11

12

13

Catalan
Galician
Basque
Spanish
Aragonese
Asturian

Chechen
Bashkir
Tatar
Kazakh
Chuvash

Indonesian
Malay
Javanese
Sundanese

Bulgarian
Macedonian
Greek
Albanian

Chinese
Japanese
Korean
Thai

Breton
Welsh
Scottish Gaelic
Irish

14 Dutch

West Frisian

German
Low Saxon

Georgian
Quechua

Uzbek
Kirghiz

Hebrew
Yiddish

Luxembourgish
Walloon

Ido
Interlingua

Afrikaans
Amharic

Portuguese

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

Weight

0.01566
0.01011
0.00983
0.00903
0.00864
0.00576

0.01332
0.01191
0.01184
0.01005
0.00878

0.02004
0.01410
0.01310
0.00773

0.01232
0.01135
0.00878
0.00688

0.00891
0.00792
0.00734
0.00617

0.00948
0.00648
0.00509
0.00494

0.01673
0.00630

0.01354
0.00520

0.01042
0.00451

0.00797
0.00385

0.00847
0.00298

0.00710
0.00295

0.00612
0.00390

0.00740
0.00229

0.00892

0.00763

0.00560

0.00486

0.00453

0.00349

0.00238

0.00187

Simple English

0.00806

English

Swahili

Scots

Yoruba

28 Mongolian

29

Burmese

30 Malagasy

