6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
4
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
2
3
2
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Laser Ion Acceleration from Mass-Limited Targets with Preplasma

K. V. Lezhnin,1, 2 F. F. Kamenets,2 T. Zh. Esirkepov,3 S. V. Bulanov,3, 4 O. Klimo,1, 5 S. Weber,1 and G. Korn1

1Institute of Physics of the ASCR, ELI-Beamlines, Na Slovance 2, 18221 Prague, Czech Republic

2Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Institutskiy per. 9, Dolgoprudny, Moscow Region 141700, Russia

3Kansai Photon Science Institute, 8-1-7 Umemidai, Kizugawa, Kyoto 619-0215, Japan

4A. M. Prokhorov General Phys. Inst. of RAS, Vavilov Str. 38, Moscow 119991, Russia

5Faculty of Nuclear Sciences and Physical Engineering,

Czech Technical University in Prague, 11519 Prague, Czech Republic

(Dated: March 15, 2016)

The interaction of high intensity laser radiation with mass-limited target exhibits signiﬁcant en-
hancement of the ion acceleration when the target is surrounded by an underdense plasma corona,
as seen in numerical simulations. The self-generated quasistatic magnetic ﬁeld squeezes the corona
causing the intensiﬁcation of a subsequent Coulomb explosion of the target. The electric ﬁeld inten-
siﬁcation at the target edges and plasma resonance eﬀects result in the generation of characteristic
density holes and further contributes to the ion acceleration.

Keywords: Relativistic laser plasmas, Ion acceleration, Quasi-static magnetic ﬁeld, Particle-in-Cell
simulation

PACS numbers: 52.38.Kd, 52.65.Rr

I.

INTRODUCTION

High energy ion generation in the interaction of in-
tense laser pulses with mass-limited targets is promising
for applications in a wide range, from the development
of ion sources for medicine and the fast ignition of con-
trolled thermonuclear fusion to the investigation of warm
dense matter, high energy density phenomena, and lab-
oratory astrophysics (see review articles [1–5] and ref-
erences therein). Mass-limited targets otherwise called
reduced mass targets have a ﬁnite transverse size com-
parable with the laser focal spot diameter [6–9]. Their
principal advantage is that an intense laser pulse can re-
move much more electrons from it than from a wide and
thick target. This generates a greater electrostatic poten-
tial thus enhancing the ion acceleration. In wider targets,
electrons from the periphery additionally reduce the ion
acceleration quickly smoothing out the electric potential,
while in thick targets, the laser radiation cannot reach
deeper layers.

The advantage of mass-limited targets is best seen with
isolated clusters, from which an intense laser sweeps all
the electrons. Then the Coulomb explosion occurs: the
ions are accelerated under the repulsion force of uncom-
pensated electric charge. A pure Coulomb explosion pro-
vides an isotropic ion acceleration with very characteris-
tic energy spectrum, where a large number of ions acquire
a high energy [10].

When the laser radiation can not penetrate inside the
target deeper than the skin depth, it heats electrons cre-
ating a plasma sheath with a strong electric charge sepa-
ration. The latter causes the ion acceleration in the tar-
get normal sheath acceleration (TNSA) regime [11–13].
In mass-limited targets, this regime can give a substantial
contribution to the ion acceleration when the laser pulse
power is far from being enough to wipe all the electrons.

For suﬃciently high intense laser pulses and optimally
dense targets, the laser radiation pressure pushes the tar-
get as a whole in the propagation direction, while the
target remains, on average, mostly quasi-neutral. This
is the regime of the radiation pressure dominated accel-
eration (RPDA) of ions [14–17]. A tailored laser pulse
can provide in principle unlimited ion acceleration [18].
In the case of a mass-limited target, the RPDA of ions
can be stable even if the target is initially oﬀ-axis [19].
A combination of the RPDA and a subsequent Coulomb
explosion of a thick target leads to a directed Coulomb
explosion regime of the ion acceleration [20].

In general, a laser system produces a high-intensity
short-duration (main) pulse on top of a relatively low-
intensity nanosecond (background) ampliﬁed sponta-
neous emission (ASE), possibly with a few prepulses.
The main-pulse-to-background intensity ratio is called
the laser pulse contrast. When a laser pulse with a
ﬁnite contrast irradiates a solid target, preplasma is
created before the main pulse arrival. Preplasma is a
plasma region where the density gradually drops from
values typical to solid state at some depth in the target
down to a value well below the critical density. Pre-
plasma created around structured snow-targets irradi-
ated by intense laser pulses facilitates the eﬃcient ion
acceleration via the edge ﬁeld intensiﬁcation eﬀect [7, 8].
The main pulse interacting ﬁrst with preplasma exhibits
regimes typical to gaseous targets, especially when the
plasma density is near-critical. Under these conditions,
laser radiation can form a long-living quasi-static mag-
netic dipole leading to the Magnetic Vortex Accelera-
tion regime [21, 22], or can create a shock wave putting
into eﬀect the Shock Wave Acceleration [23]. While the
main pulse loses its energy in preplasma it can also self-
focus due to relativistic eﬀects [24], thus an optimised
preplasma can crucially enhance the ion acceleration [25].

Here we investigate how the above mentioned ion accel-
eration mechanisms reveals itself depending on the geom-
etry of a mass-limited target and a plasma corona around
it. We carry out two-dimensional (2D) Particle-in-Cell
(PIC) simulations using the REMP code based on the
density decomposition scheme [26]. We describe the ef-
fects occurring in the presence of a plasma corona around
a mass-limited target: the enhancement of the Coulomb
explosion of the ion core of the target due to the density
squeezing by the quasistatic magnetic ﬁeld, formation of
a density hole near the tip of the target due to plasma
resonance, etc. The paper is organized as follows. In the
next Section, we describe the laser and target param-
eters and the simulation conﬁguration.
In Section III,
the results of PIC simulations of the laser pulse inter-
action with mass-limited targets in a wide range of the
irradiation parameters are presented. There we discuss
the eﬀects of magnetic squeezing and electric ﬁeld inten-
siﬁcation at the target edge on the ion acceleration. In
Section IV, we consider the high power limit when the
ion acceleration occurs in the radiation pressure domi-
nated acceleration regime. In the concluding Section, we
summarize the results obtained.

II. SIMULATION CONFIGURATION

In order to investigate the processes that occur during
the interaction of a relativistically strong laser pulse with
a mass-limited water ice target surrounded by a plasma
corona, we conduct a series of 2D PIC simulations. The
laser pulse is obliquely incident on the target as is shown
in the upper panel of Fig. 1.

The plasma corona with a typical size of the order of
several tens of micrometers plays an important role in
the laser interaction with mass-limited targets [6]. When
it is created due to a ﬁnite contrast of the laser pulse,
it has a typical density proﬁle consisting of three regions
(see also Ref.
[25]). The ﬁrst region is a plateau with
the solid density, corresponding to unperturbed portion
of the target. The second region has the density proﬁle
which can be approximated by the Gaussian function as
shown in the lower panel of Fig. 1. There the density de-
creases from the solid density value to the critical density,
ncr = π/reλ2, corresponding to the laser wavelength λ.
Here re = e2/mec2 ≈ 2.8 × 10−13 cm is classical electron
radius. In the third region, the plasma density linearly
drops with a substantially larger scale.

In our simulations, the target has the shape of an ellip-
soid, so that the same density value curves are ellipses.
For such a shape it is enough to describe the density
proﬁle along the major semi-axes. We assume the fol-
lowing density proﬁle. The density decreases from max-
imum according to the Gaussian function down to ncr,
then it linearly drops down to 0.1ncr, then it is trun-
cated to zero. In order to restrict the total number of
quasi-particles representing plasma (which amounts to
1.2 × 106), we limit the plasma density by the cutoﬀ at

2

10ncr. For moderate laser intensities, when the laser ra-
diation pressure is not dominant in the interaction, this
artiﬁcial cutoﬀ does not signiﬁcantly aﬀect the simula-
tion results, as justiﬁed by a number of test simulations
performed without a density cutoﬀ (note the analogous
computational trick used in Ref. [6]).

Here we present the results for a relatively high eccen-
tricity,  = 0.995, of the ellipsoid representing the tar-
get shape. This choice allows emphasizing the eﬀects of
a quasistatic magnetic ﬁeld generated during the inter-
action. In preliminary simulations (not shown here) we
have found that for targets with a smaller eccentricity the
quasi-static magnetic ﬁeld is not suﬃciently symmetrical
with respect to the target major axis. The ion energy
reaches maximum when the magnetic ﬁeld is generated
in a symmetrical way (this is applicable for moderate
laser intensities, when the laser radiation pressure does
not dominate the interaction). If the target has the form
of a foil (in terms of ellipsoid target, it means that the
major semiaxis is substantially larger than the laser fo-
cal spot size), the electrons move away from the region
of irradiation, along the target surface, so that the as-
sociated quasi-static magnetic ﬁeld disperses along the
target surface and eventually dissipates.

The laser pulse has a super-Gaussian proﬁle with an
index of 4, so that the laser pulse intensity time proﬁle is
described by the function I = 1.37×1018×a2
0(2)−(2t/τ )4×
(1µm/λ)2 W/cm2. The transverse laser pulse proﬁle is
also super-Gaussian with an index of 4. The dimension-
less amplitude, a0 = eE0/meωc, characterizes the laser
electric ﬁeld stregth, E0. Here ω = 2πc/λ. The laser
pulse duration is τ = 15λ/c, its focal spot diameter is 5λ.
The laser pulse is p-polarized, i.e., its electric ﬁeld vector
is in the simulation plane (x, y). In our simulations, the
laser amplitude varies from a0 = 3 to a0 = 134, which
corresponds to the peak laser power in the range from 5
TW to 10 PW. The laser focal plane is at the sharp edge
of the target where the density is ne = ncr, if not stated
otherwise. The laser pulse is obliquely incident on the
target at the angle of 45 degrees. This conﬁguration is
chosen to maximize the laser energy transmission to the
target. For references concerning the dimensional val-
ues of the target density, laser energy and intensity, etc,
the laser wavelength can be assumed to be λ = 0.8µm.
For the scaling into the high laser power, we used the
same proﬁle but multiplied by some factor in accordance
with the a0 = πnel0/ncrλ criteria, where l0 is the target
thickness (the size along the minor axis).

Our target is composed of electrons, protons, and
oxygen ions corresponding to frozen water, H2O. The
follwoing mass ratios has been used: mp/me = 1836,
mO/mp = 16. As is well known, one of the parameters
that could inﬂuence the ion acceleration signiﬁcantly is
the ionization degree, Z, and its spatial distribution [27].
For the sake of simplicity, in our simulations we assume
a homogeneous spatial distribution of the ionization de-
gree, which is ﬁxed during the simulation’s run and does
not exceed the maximum value of Zmax. We estimate

3

FIG. 2. Magnetic ﬁeld distribution in the (x, y) plane at t =
80 for a0 = 3 case showing the laser pulse scattering at the
target tip and reﬂection by the overdense plasma region.

III. SIMULATION RESULTS

We start our consideration with the case of a 5 TW
laser pulse, corresponding to a0 = 3. While such the
laser power can be considered relatively low in compar-
ison with the up-to-date laser systems, it allows us to
clarify a number of eﬀects that can occur in the high-
power limit.

Fig. 2 shows the magnetic ﬁeld distribution at a ﬁnal
stage of the laser pulse interaction with the target. About
60% of the laser pulse energy passes through, because of
the location of the focus at the target tip, where plasma is
underdense. Nevertheless, a substantial part of the laser
energy is absorbed: eventually about 35% is transferred
to the particle energy. One of the absorption mecha-
nisms is the plasma resonant absorption, because for a
p-polarized electromagnetic wave obliquely incident on
the target the projection of the vector of electric ﬁeld on
the plasma density gradient does not vanishes, (cid:126)E·∇n (cid:54)= 0
(for detals of the plasma resonance phenomenon see, e.g.,
Refs.
[28, 29]). A small part of the laser pulse is scat-
tered at the target tip and specularly reﬂected by the
overdense plasma region, as is clearly seen in Fig. 2.
Scattered radiation has a form a cylindrical electromag-
netic wave with an inhomogeneous distribution of the
ﬁeld amplitude. The transverse modulations seen in the
transmitted and reﬂected pulses are due to strong plasma
density modulations created by the incident laser pulse.
During the laser pulse interaction with the plasma
corona, it undergoes relativistic self-focusing, which can
be seen in a slight increase of the transmitted pulse am-
plitude. We also note that the electric ﬁeld strength at
the target tip increases due to the edge intensiﬁcation
of electromagnetic ﬁeld and the rise of plasma resonance

FIG. 1. a) A conﬁguration of the laser interaction with the
mass-limited target (MLT), the electron density, the laser
propagation direction and the focal plane. Hereafter, all spa-
tial dimentons are normalized to laser wavelength λ, temporal
one - to laser period 2π/ω0, densities are normalized to crit-
ical density ncr, and electromagnetic ﬁelds are normalized to
E0 = meω0c/e. b) The electron density proﬁle along the ma-
jor semiaxis. Hereafter we call the Gaussian proﬁle as “short-
ened” and complex one marked with blue as “extended”.

this ionization degree maximum within the framework of
the optical ﬁeld ionization model. Following Ref.
[27],
max ≈ Ca × a0, with Ca ∼ 12. Depending
we obtain Z2.4
on the laser amplitude, in our simulations we initially set
oxygen ions with the ionization degree of +3, +5, +7 and
+8.

In our simulations, the grid mesh size is λ/32 in each
spatial direction. For moderate laser intesities, the sim-
ulation box has the size of 80λ × 120λ. For higher
laser intensity, a0 > 20, the simulation box is larger,
200λ × 200λ), in order to avoid stronger unphysical ef-
fects from the boundaries. The boundaries are absorb-
ing for particles. For the electromagnetic radiation, the
boundaries are periodical. The space and time values are
given in units of the laser wavelength and period, i.e., λ
and 2π/ω, respectively.

[30].

A well-pronounced temporal periodicity of the maxi-
mum amplitude ﬁeld (with the frequency close to that of
the laser) and the absence of substantial ﬁeld enhance-
ment in the case of s-polarized pulse indicate the eﬀect of
the plasma resonance at the tip of the overdense target.
Considering the simulation results for diﬀerent initial
laser amplitude a0, we ﬁnd the following properties of the
instantaneous electric and magnetic ﬁeld strength max-
imum, Ei and Bi, respectively. For a0 < 10, Bi ≈ 2a0,
which is merely due to a transient standing wave formed
during the laser pulse reﬂection from the target and due
to just logarithmic enhancement of the magnetic ﬁeld in
the resonance region (see Ref.
[31]). Weaker reﬂection
is observed for a0 ≥ 10, correspondingly, in this range
Bi ≤ 1.5a0. The dependence of the instantaneous electric
ﬁeld stregth maximum on the laser amplitude changes
from Ei ≈ 6a0 at a0 = 1 to Ei ≈ 2a0 at a0 ≥ 10.

A. Magnetic Squeezing

Fig. 3 shows the evolution of the electron density dis-
tribution at the bottom part of the target, quite far from
the laser pulse focus location, for the case of a0 = 3.
At t = 80 × 2π/ω, the density modulations with the
wavelength equal to that of the laser are seen along the
target. At later time, the plasma corona is squeezed.
Eventually a high-density ﬁlament is formed, as seen at
t = 140 × 2π/ω. The sqeezing takes place for every kind
of particles on their own timescale determined by their
charge-to-mass ratio.

We also observe the appearance of the proton depletion
regions in the upper part of the corona (see Fig. 4), where
the quasistatic magnetic ﬁeld is maintained for a long
time, making a substantial impact on the ion acceleration
as well (hole 2, see Fig. 4 and 6).

Eﬀect of the corona squeezing is strongly correlated
with the magnetic ﬁeld evolution. Figures 5 and 6 show
the magnetic ﬁeld evolution at the same instants of time.
Laser pulse interacts with the electrons from the corona,
forcing them to circulate around the upper and lower
parts of the target in the (x, y) plane. The electric cur-
rent carried by the electrons generates the magnetic ﬁeld,
i.e., the magnetic vortex structure is being created. It is
noticeable that the maximum value of the generated qua-
sistatic magnetic ﬁeld exceeds the maximum laser pulse
amplitude by a factor of more than two. As is well known,
the magnetic vortex formation is a common process in
the laser irradiated underdense plasma [32] having a den-
sity gradient [21]. The crucial parameter for the vortices
is the density gradient as it determines their lifetime
and propagation velocity. We have considered various
conﬁgurations of the corona density distribution, and it
turns out that density proﬁle should be gentle enough
(≈ 0.1ncr/µm, in agreement with [21]) in order to keep
the vortices in the corona for relatively long time. How-
ever the plasma density gradient should not be too small

4

FIG. 3.
a0 = 3. Electron density distribution at t = 80,
100, 120 and 140. The underdense corona squeezing can be
seen. Apart from that, the overdense part of the target is
being shaped by the magnetic ﬁeld.

FIG. 4.
a0 = 3. Proton density distribution at t = 70,
80, 90 and 100. The hole appearance in the upper corona
regions can be seen. The overdense part of the target is being
compressed by the magnetic ﬁeld.

because the vortices do not move in this case. Moreover,
the geometry of the underdense region aﬀects the vortex
formation dramatically. This is due to the strong connec-
tion with the number of electrons trapped by the mag-
netic ﬁeld of the pulse–the more electrons laser pulse sees
during the propagation in the corona, the more stable
magnetic ﬁeld is generated. Propagating along the ma-
jor semiaxis of the ellipsoid, these vortices force corona

5

FIG. 5.
a0 = 3. Distribution of the z-component of the
magnetic ﬁeld in the lower target region at t = 80, 100, 120
and 140. The appearance of the quasistatic magnetic ﬁeld
corresponds to the hole in proton density, which can be ex-
plained by the vortices propagating along the major semi-axis,
compressing the target and then slowly decreasing due to the
electron expansion to vacuum.

FIG. 7. a0 = 3. Distribution of the proton density at t = 80,
100, 120 and 200. The hole boring in the upper corona regions
and the corona squeezing in the bottom corona part can be
seen.

FIG. 6.
a0 = 3. Distribution of the z-component of the
magnetic ﬁeld in the upper target region at t = 70, 80, 90
and 100. Vortices propagate along the major semi-axis, com-
press the target and then slowly decrease due to the electron
expansion to vacuum.

compression due to the magnetic pressure and then their
amplitude gently decreases due to the expansion of the
electrons to vacuum (Fig. 6).

Proton component of the target experiences the
squeezing on its own timescale. From initial ellipsoidal
layer with the density below the critical one, it is being
increased at least by a factor of 5, which leads to the

FIG. 8. a0 = 3. Proton phase space and the energy spectrum
((px, py), (x, py), (y, py), and (x, px)) for t = 250 (a), b), c),
and d), respectively); protons accelerated from both holes
can be seen along with the magnetic squeezing eﬀect. Inset:
proton energy spectrum, Emax ≈ 10 MeV.

more energetic Coulomb explosion than in more dense
but also more quasi-neutral central part of the target.

We observe such eﬀect in our simulations–we detect
that for the case of a0 = 3 we get at least by an order
of magnitude larger positive-signed total charge density
than we could possibly had by removing all the electrons
from the the target without any pre-compression (see Fig.
9). All the ”hair” with the largest energies in the conﬁg-
uration on the (px, py) distribution in Fig. 8 correspond

6

FIG. 9.
a0 = 3. Maximum charge density distribution in
bottom corona region (44 < x < 50, −10 < y < −4, see Fig.
3). We see a substantial increase of charge density at t = 120,
when the Coulomb explosion of this region initiates (see Fig.
ﬁg5)

to this type of acceleration.

Similar eﬀect also takes place in the upper corona re-
gion (hole 2). Pre-accelerated by the magnetic ﬁeld, it
eventually experiences the Coulomb explosion. Finally,
it gives one of the most energetic populations of acceler-
ated protons in the system, see (x, py) and (y, py) phase
planes in Fig. 8.

It is also notable that the magnetic ﬁeld penetrates into
the overdense target region (see Figs. 5 and 6). As the
solid state target part is always rich with electrons, the
magnetic ﬁeld would be sustained here for much longer
time in comparison with corona vortices. These ﬁelds
aﬀect the ion acceleration process, boring the gaps and
pushing the external target layers along the minor semi-
axis, directing the acceleration of the protons (see Fig.
7).

Although there is an isotropic component of the pro-
ton momentum distribution (see Fig. 8, (px, py) plot)
that can originate from the Coulomb explosion of an ex-
ternal layer of the underdense corona, the most energetic
particles (and also the largest fraction of protons) are
distributed in the vicinity of the diagonal py = px on a
corresponding phase distribution plot (see Fig. 8). This
strong anisotropy is in a tight connection with the ge-
ometry of the target having the form of a high eccen-
tricity ellipsoid. The target can be regarded locally as a
charged plane with the electric ﬁeld orthogonal to the ma-
jor semi-axis. However, there are some deviations from
the main direction–ﬁlaments in the distribution of pro-
tons in the phase plane. Some of the proton beams con-
tain substantial number of particles compared with the
isotropic component. For example, two ﬁlaments seen in
the (x, py) plot (the curved one around x ≈ 35 − 40 and
the plane one around ≈ 52 − 60); even though they do
not correspond to the maximum energy value, they are
at least an order of magnitude more energetic than the

FIG. 10. a) charge density distribution around the target’s
tip; b) proton density distribution around the target’s tip; c)
and d): Ex and Ey electric ﬁeld components. All graphs are
presented at t=60, simulation for a0 = 3 laser pulse. Strong
charge separation, corresponding ﬁeld enhancement and start-
ing point of proton acceleration are seen.

particles in the central part of the target. Taking into
account that the initial central density is 10 times larger
than the maximum corona density, we can conclude that
the magnetic squeezing does have a positive eﬀect, pro-
viding larger initial density for the Coulomb explosion of
the corona.

B. Edge ﬁeld intensiﬁcation and plasma resonance

We note that we do not see substantially large mag-
netic ﬁelds in the vicinity of the target tip (hole 1). Fig.
7 shows how the proton density evolves for 80, 100, 120
and 200 laser periods. As the laser pulse is focused on
the sharp edge of the target, the electric ﬁeld is ampliﬁed
signiﬁcantly in this region, which in its turn bores a hole
in the proton density. The strong charge separation is
observed at the sharp edge of the target for the whole
period of laser propagation through the target, see Fig.
10. This hole might be associated with the plasma reso-
nance [33] and edge ﬁeld ampliﬁcation [30, 31, 34] which
can lead to the particle acceleration from the target’s
edge and hole 1 formation (see Figs. 10 and 11).

Plasma resonance is attributed to the enhancement of
the electric ﬁeld in the region of critical plasma density.
The maximum electric ﬁeld amplitude in nonlinear Lang-
muir oscillations excited at the resonance surface is deter-
mined by the wave breaking process (see Ref.
[29] and
literature cited therein). This results in the fast elec-
tron component generation and in the light ion acceler-
ation. The light ion emission from the resonant region
has been observed in our simulation. The light ion ac-
celeration occurs under action of the pondermotive force
that arises in the high-frequency ﬁeld localized in the
plasma resonance region [29, 33]. These ions are accel-
erated to the energies of the order of Ei ≈ ZEE, where
EE ≈ mev2
m/2meω2, Em is the electric ﬁeld
in the plasma resonance region, corresponds to the elec-
tron quiver energy, and vE is the electron quiver velocity.

E/2 = e2E2

7

FIG. 11. a0 = 3. a) and b): proton phase distributions in the
planes (x, px) and (y, py) for t = 60; the peak of proton mo-
mentum magnitude at (x = 37, y = 4) corresponds to plasma
resonance at the sharp edge of the target. c) and d): distribu-
tion of electric ﬁeld Ex and Ey projections amplitude; MAX
and MIN denote to maximum positive and negative projec-
tions of the electric ﬁeld in the resonant region (hole 1, see
Figs. 4 and 7)

The proton energy, in our case, is approximately equal
to a2
0mec2/4 which is of the order of 0.5 MeV for protons
in case of a0 = 1, corresponding to the electron quiver
velocity. The ion phase distributions and charge density,
proton density and projections of the electric ﬁeld around
the target tip can be seen in Fig. 10.

All these processes lead to the energy spectrum that is
shown in Figure 12. We present two spectra–one for the
target discussed above and another with the ﬂat density
proﬁle in order to demonstrate how the density gradi-
ent impacts the maximum ion energy. Targets have the
same shape of ellipsoid and the ﬂat target is limited by
the ellipsoid with semiaxises of 1µm × 10µm. As we see,
implementing targets with density gradients leads to the
proton energy increase up to 5 MeV. The maximum
value of proton energy for corona-equipped target equals
to ≈ 16MeV, which can be considered as advanced accel-
eration level with the considered type of terawatt laser.
The use of the corona-equipped target also provides bet-
ter energy transmission, which is about 32% against 19%
for the case of the ﬂat target.

C. High power limit

Here we discuss the physical processes that dominate
the laser-target interaction in the limit of higher peak
laser power. We show the results of the PIC simulations
with the same target but with the larger laser amplitude

FIG. 12. Energy spectrum for ﬂat-proﬁle target (1) and
inhomogeneous-proﬁle target (”extended” corona, see Figure
1) setup (2), a0 = 3.

a0. We take it equal to 20, which corresponds to 200 TW
laser power. In this high ﬁeld amplitude limit, the light
ion acceleration is less pronounced because of the non-
linear saturation of the resonance due to aperiodicity of
plasma oscillations caused by the relativistic eﬀects.

Besides, the fraction of the radiation that passes
through the target has the amplitude increased to about
≈ 20%, which might be attributed to the self-focusing in
the plasma corona, see Fig. 13.

The conﬁguration of the target provides a high-level
pulse energy transfer to the plasma and fast particle en-
ergy, energy transfer is about 52%. We note that the
energy transfer in the ﬂat-density proﬁle targets is lower,
about 35%. During the interaction with the laser pulse,
the electrons are being heated and expand into the vac-
uum, generating a strong charge separation along with
the heavy oxygen ions with uncompensated charge that
contribute to the repelling ﬁeld, in which the protons are
being accelerated.
Ions are seen to move in two shell
way (see Fig. 14, c and d). The ﬁrst shell of protons
moves with higher speed and only afterwards, the shell
of oxygen ions moves with lover velocity as seen in Fig.
14. Corresponding electric ﬁeld could be seen at Ex (the
symmetrical picture can be seen for Ey as well) distribu-
tion ﬁgure as well - inner repelling ﬁelds are for oxygen
shell and outer - for protons. In case of extended corona
we observe the maximum energies of 160 MeV protons
and 14 MeV/u oxygen ions with the angle and energy
distributions presented in Figure 15. With the exponen-
tial corona, we derived maximum energies at least 10%
larger. Similar results have been obtained in Ref. [8].

As it has been shown in Ref.

[19], the ﬁnite pointing
precision of the laser imposes constraints on the maxi-
mum attainable energies of accelerated ions. However,
while it is still true for the considered type of the target,
the shift of the focus can give rise to a number of the
eﬀects that also provide energetic particles, even though
their maximum energy is a factor of 1.5 smaller. For
moderate laser power, we still observe that the most en-

8

FIG. 14. a) The x-component of the electric ﬁeld, b) The
electron, proton (c) and oxygen (d) ion density distributions
for t = 135, a0 = 20.

FIG. 13. Self-focusing for a0 = 20 laser pulse in the plasma
corona. a) The z-component of the magnetic ﬁeld in the
(x, y)-plane at t = 67. b) The same as in the frame a) at
t = 89.

ergetic particles form two opposite directing streams that
are emitted from the target’s tip. This is a consequence
of both plasma resonance and edge ﬁeld intensiﬁcation,
which give larger maximum ﬁeld amplitudes.
In the limit of the ultrahigh laser powers (≈ 10 PW)
we can observe that these targets along with oblique in-
cidence do not allow to reach the highest energies. Using
the scaling parameter a0 = ε = 2πnee2l/meωc (see Refs.
[35, 36]), we derive that the maximum energy of the ions
is below 1 GeV, while for normal incidence and thicker
central part of the target we can get energies larger at
least by a factor of two. Here two mechanisms come into
play. The ﬁrst of them is the RPDA, when the laser pulse
pressure wipes out the central–the densest part of the
target and after that, it undergoes a Coulomb explosion
according to Ref. [20], reaching the maximum energy of

FIG. 15. The (px, py) phase distributions of protons (a) and
oxygen ions (c), energy distributions of protons (b) and oxy-
gen ions (d), a0 = 20.

protons above 2 GeV and 6 GeV for oxygen ions for the
target with nmax/ncr = 80. Using simple estimates for
maximum ion energies gained in RPDA regime ([20], eq.
(3)), we get lower values than observed in simulations,
which could be caused by both Direct Coulomb Explo-
sion and self-focusing of the laser pulse. The parts of
the target that were not in touch with the main pulse
exploded after the squeezing by the magnetic ﬁeld. Fig.
16 shows how the magnetic ﬁeld evolves in the case of

9

FIG. 16. The z-component of the magnetic ﬁeld (a), the
electric charge density (b), the proton (c) and the oxygen (d)
density distributions in the (x, y) plane for the case of the
laser pulse normal incidence on the target; a0 = 134.

FIG. 17. The proton phase plots a) (px, py), b) (x, px), c)
(y, px), and d) the energy spectrum for t = 155, a0 = 134 in
the case of normal laser incidence on the target.

a0 = 134 and nmax/ncr = 80. Being focused into the pre-
plasma, the maximum ﬁeld amplitude increases at least
by the factor of 1.5. Phase space distributions for ions
can be seen on Fig. 17. It is noticeable that magnetic
squeezing eﬀect still takes place for the ions at high laser
pulse intensities in the regions of the target, which are
not in the direct contact with the laser pulse (see Fig. 17,
hemispheres at (px, py) and (y, px) plots). Even though
it did not give the most energetic ions, it still allows to
reach 500 MeV level.

Scaling of the maximum ion energy with the peak laser
power in the log-log scale is presented in Fig. 19. The
simulations of diﬀerent targets (with various corona con-
ﬁgurations) are presented as color dots, the line repre-
sents the expected maximum energy from the simple an-
alytical estimation from the typical maximum energies
obtained from Coulomb explosion, see Eqn. 1 from [25].
Even though the maximum energy scales with the laser
power E as ∼ P 1/2, we still obtain the ion energies that
are high enough for the moderate laser systems. For in-
stance, using these corona-equipped targets, we can reach
the proton energies up to 200 MeV which is of high im-
portance for the applications in hadron therapy [3]. The
oxygen ion energy is about 15 MeV/u with the use of
the ﬁnite contrast 200 TW laser systems.
In the limit
of Petawatt laser systems (1 − 10 PW), which would be
accessible in the nearest future at ELI-Beamlines project
[37], we observe the shift to the foil acceleration by the
radiation pressure rather than magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁed
Coulomb explosion.

FIG. 18. The oxygen ion phase plots a) (px, py), b) (x, px),
c) (y, px), and d) the energy spectrum, a0 = 134 in the case
of normal laser incidence on the target.

IV. CONCLUSION

Here by using the 2D PIC simulations we show that the
conﬁgurations corresponding to the mass-limited targets
surrounded by an underdense plasma corona exhibit a
number of eﬀects enhancing the maximum energy and
increasing the total number of high energy ions. We
observe the magnetic squeezing of the underdense parts
of the target, when the pressure of self-generated quasi-
static magnetic ﬁeld pushes the electrons and ions into
the target thus increasing the target plasma density. This
eﬀect has an important implication at the stage of the
Coulomb explosion enlarging the achievable ion energy.
While not giving the maximum energy in the whole fast

10

Hole boring by the electric ﬁeld arising due to the edge
intensiﬁcation and the plasma resonance at the sharp
edge of the target is considered to be in strong corre-
lation with the proton acceleration at the beginning of
the interaction (before Coulomb explosions of the main
target and preliminary compressed ﬁlaments come into
play), providing the maximum proton energy at this in-
teraction stage. Strong anisotropy of the proton acceler-
ation in such a high-eccentricity ellipsoidal target is also
an important feature that can be used for the generation
of strongly collimated proton beams.

We also demonstrate than the presence of down-ramp
density corona around the target can increase the maxi-
mum ion energies in comparison with ﬂat density proﬁles.

FIG. 19. Maximum proton energy at the peak of the laser
pulse power: simulations with extended and shortened (expo-
nential) corona vs theoretical curve for the Coulomb explosion

(Ep ≈ 173(cid:112)P[petawatt] MeV, see [25]).

V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

ion population, it is still a major factor in the proton
acceleration as it allows to accelerate a substantial (large
compared with the maximum energy isotropic compo-
nent) number of protons up to energies that are an order
of magnitude larger than the majority of protons are ac-
celerated to.

The authors thank M. Botton and A. Zigler for fruitful
discussions. KVL expresses gratitude to M. Bussmann
for the detailed comments on the early version of the
work. This work was supported by the ELI Project No.
CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/15 008/0000162. We also would like
to acknowledge the support from Russian Foundation for
Basic Research (grant No. 15-02-03063).

[1] M. Borghesi, J. Fuchs, S. V. Bulanov, A. J. Mackinnon,
P. Patel, and M. Roth, Fus. Sci. and Technology 49, 412
(2006); H. Daido, M. Nishiuchi, and A. S. Pirozhkov,
Rep. Prog. Phys. 75, 056401 (2012); A. Macchi, M. Pas-
soni, and M. Borghesi, Rev. Mod. Phys. 85, 751 (2013).
[2] K. W. D. Ledingham and W. Galster, New J. Phys. 12,

E. Cowan, G. Hays, and K. B. Wharton, Nature (Lon-
don) 398, 489 (1999); K. Nishihara, H. Amitani, M. Mu-
rakami, S. V. Bulanov, T. Zh. Esirkepov, Nucl. Instrum.
Meth. Phys. Res. A 464, 98 (2001); V. F. Kovalev and
V. Yu. Bychenkov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 185004 (2003).
[11] A. V. Gurevich, L. V. Parijskaya, and L. P. Pitaevskii,

045005 (2010).

[3] S. V. Bulanov, J. J. Wilkens, T. Zh. Esirkepov, G. Korn,
G. Kraft, S. D. Kraft, M. Molls, and V. S. Khoroshkov,
Phys. Usp. 57, 1149 (2014).

[4] S. V. Bulanov, T. Zh. Esirkepov, M. Kando, A. S.
Pirozhkov, and N. N. Rosanov, Phys. Usp. 56, 429
(2013).

[5] S. V. Bulanov, T. Zh. Esirkepov, M. Kando, J. Koga, K.

Kondo, and G. Korn, Plasma Phys. Rep. 41, 1 (2015).

[6] T. Kluge, W. Enghardt, S. D. Kraft, U. Schramm, K.
Zeil, T. E. Cowan, and M. Bussmann, Phys. Plasmas
17, 123103 (2010).

[7] A. Zigler, S. Eisenman, M. Botton, E. Nahum, E.
Schleifer, A. Baspaly,
I. Pomerantz, F. Abicht, J.
Branzel, G. Priebe, S. Steinke, A. Andreev, M.
Schnuerer, W. Sandner, D. Gordon, P. Sprangle, and K.
W. D. Ledingham, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110 215004 (2013).
[8] E. Schleifer, Z. Henis, M. Botton, O. Shavit, D. F. Gor-

don, and A. Zigler, Appl. Sci., 5, 459 (2015).

[9] K. Zeil, J. Metzkes, T. Kluge, M. Bussmann, T. E.
Cowan, S. D. Kraft, R. Sauerbrey, B. Schmidt, M. Zier
and U. Schramm, Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 56,
084004 (2014).

[10] I. Last, I. Schek, and J. Jortner, J. Chem. Phys. 107,
6685 (1997); T. Ditmire, J. Zweiback, V. P. Yanovsky, T.

Sov. Phys. JETP 22 , 449 (1966).

[12] S. Wilks, W. L. Kruer, M. Tabak, and A. B. Langdon,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 1383 (1992).

[13] P. Mora, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 185002 (2003).
[14] V. I. Veksler, At. Energ. 2, 427 (1957).
[15] T. Zh. Esirkepov, M. Borghesi, S. V. Bulanov, G.
Mourou, and T. Tajima, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 175003
(2004).

[16] O. Klimo, J. Psikal, J. Limpouch, and V. T. Tikhonchuk,
Phys. Rev. ST Accel. Beams 11, 031301 (2008); A. P. L.
Robinson, M. Zepf, S. Kar, R. G. Evans, C. Bellei, New
J. Phys. 10, 01302 (2008).

[17] S. S. Bulanov, E. Esarey, C. B. Schroeder, S. V. Bulanov,
T. Zh. Esirkepov, M. Kando, F. Pegoraro, and W. P.
Leemans, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 105003 (2015).

[18] S. V. Bulanov, E. Yu. Echkina, T. Zh. Esirkepov, I. N.
Inovenkov, M. Kando, F. Pegoraro, and G. Korn, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 104, 135003 (2010); S. V. Bulanov, E. Yu.
Echkina, T. Zh. Esirkepov, I. N. Inovenkov, M. Kando,
F. Pegoraro, and G. Korn, Phys. Plasmas 17, 063102
(2010).

[19] K. V. Lezhnin, F. F. Kamenets, V. S. Beskin, M. Kando,
T. Zh. Esirkepov and S. V. Bulanov, Phys. Plasmas 22,
033112 (2015).

[20] S. S. Bulanov, A. Brantov, V. Yu. Bychenkov, V.
Chvykov, G. Kalinchenko, T. Matsuoka, P. Rousseau, S.
Reed, V. Yanovsky, D. W. Litzenberg, K. Krushelnick,
and A. Maksimchuk, Phys. Rev. E 78, 026412 (2008).

[21] A. V. Kuznetsov, T. Zh. Esirkepov, F. F. Kamenets, S.
V. Bulanov, Plasm. Phys. Rep. 27, 211 (2001); S. V. Bu-
lanov, D. V. Dylov, T. Zh. Esirkepov, F. F. Kamenets,
D. V. Sokolov, Plasm. Phys. Rep. 31, 369 (2005); S. V.
Bulanov, T. Zh. Esirkepov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 049503
(2007); A. Yogo, H. Daido, S. V. Bulanov, K. Nemoto, Y.
Oishi, T. Nayuki, T. Fujii, K. Ogura, S. Orimo, A. Sag-
isaka, J.-L. Ma, T. Zh. Esirkepov, M. Mori, M. Nishiuchi,
A. S. Pirozhkov, S. Nakamura, A. Noda, H. Nagatomo,
T. Kimura, and T. Tajima, Phys. Rev. E 77, 016401
(2008); S. S. Bulanov, V. Yu. Bychenkov, V. Chvykov,
G. Kalinchenko, D. W. Litzenberg, T. Matsuoka, A. G.
R. Thomas, L. Willingale, V. Yanovsky, K. Krushelnick,
and A. Maksimchuk, Phys. Plasmas 17, 043105 (2010);
T. Nakamura, S. V. Bulanov, T. Zh. Esirkepov, and M.
Kando, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 135002 (2010); Y. J. Gu,
Z. Zhu, X. F. Li, Q. Yu, S. Huang, F. Zhang, Q. Kong,
and S. Kawata, Phys. Plasmas 21, 063104 (2014).

[22] Y. Fukuda, A. Ya. Faenov, M. Tampo, T. A. Pikuz, T.
Nakamura, M. Kando, Y. Hayashi, A. Yogo, H. Sakaki,
T. Kameshima, A. S. Pirozhkov, K. Ogura, M. Mori, T.
Zh. Esirkepov, J. Koga, A. S. Boldarev, V. A. Gasilov,
A.I. Magunov, T. Yamauchi, R. Kodama, P. R. Bolton,
Y. Kato, T. Tajima, H. Daido, and S. V. Bulanov, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 103, 165002 (2009).

[23] D. Haberberger, S. Tochitsky, F. Fiuza, C. Gong, R. A.
Fonseca, L. O. Silva, W. B. Mori, C. Joshi, Nature Phys.
8, 95 (2012); F. Fiuza, A. Stockem, E. Boella, R. A. Fon-
seca, L. O. Silva, D. Haberberger, S. Tochitsky, C. Gong,
W. B. Mori, and C. Joshi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 215001
(2012); A. Macchi, A. S. Nindrayong, F. Pegoraro, Phys.
Rev. E 85, 046402 (2012).

[24] G. A. Askar’yan, Sov. Phys. JETP 15, 8 (1962); A. Lit-

vak, Sov. Phys. JETP 30, 344 (1970).

[25] T. Zh. Esirkepov, J. K. Koga, A. Sunahara, T. Morita, M.
Nishikino, K. Kageyama, H. Nagatomo, K. Nishihara, A.

11

Sagisaka, H. Kotaki, T. Nakamura, Y. Fukuda, H. Okada,
A. S. Pirozhkov, A. Yogo, M. Nishiuchi, H. Kiriyama, K.
Kondo, M. Kando, and S. V. Bulanov, Nucl. Instrum.
Meth. Phys. Res. A 745, 150 (2014).

[26] T. Zh. Esirkepov, Comput. Phys. Commun. 135, 144

(2001).

[27] J. Braenzel, A. A. Andreev, K. Platonov, M. Klingsporn,
L. Ehrentraut, W. Sandner, and M. Schnurer, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 114, 124801 (2015)

[28] V. L. Ginzburg, The Propagation of Electromagnetic

Waves in Plasmas (Pergamon, New York, 1964).

[29] S. V. Bulanov, L. M. Kovrizhnykh, and A. S. Sakharov,

Phys. Rep. 186, 1 (1990).

[30] G. A. Askar’yan and S. V. Bulanov, Sov. Techn. Phys.

Lett., 9, 533 (1983).

[31] L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Electrodynamics of

Continuous Media (Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1984).

[32] S. V. Bulanov, M. Lontano, T. Zh. Esirkepov, F. Pe-
goraro, and A. M. Pukhov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 3562
(1996); T. Nakamura and K. Mima, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100,
205006 (2008); L. Romagnani, A. Bigongiari, S. Kar,
S. V. Bulanov, C. A. Cecchetti, M. Galimberti, T. Zh.
Esirkepov, R. Jung, T. V. Liseykina, A. Macchi, J. Oster-
holz, F. Pegoraro, O. Willi, and M. Borghesi, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 105, 175002 (2010); F. Sylla, A. Flacco, S. Kahaly,
M. Veltcheva, A. Lifschitz, V. Malka, E. d’Humieres, I.
Andriyash, and V. Tikhonchuk, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110,
085001 (2013).

[33] S. V. Bulanov, N. M. Naumova, and F. Pegoraro, Phys.

Plasmas 1, 745 (1994).

[34] V. Kumarappan, M. Krishnamurthy, and D. Mathur,

Phys. Rev. A 67, 043204 (2003).

[35] V. A. Vshivkov, N. M. Naumova, F. Pegoraro, and S. V.

Bulanov, Phys. Plasmas 5, 2727 (1998).

[36] T. Zh. Esirkepov, M. Yamagiwa and T. Tajima, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 96, 105001 (2006).

[37] ELI–Extreme Light Infrastructure Science and Technol-
ogy with Ultra-Intense Lasers Whitebook, Ed. by G. A.
Mourou, G. Korn, W. Sandner, and J. L. Collier (THOSS
Media, Berlin, 2011).

