Dual gauge ﬁeld theory of quantum liquid crystals in two dimensions

Aron J. Beekman,1, 2, 3, ∗ Jaakko Nissinen,4 Kai Wu,5 Ke Liu,4 Robert-Jan

Slager,4 Zohar Nussinov,6 Vladimir Cvetkovic,4 and Jan Zaanen4

1Department of Physics, and Research and Education Center for Natural Sciences,

Keio University, Hiyoshi 4-1-1, Yokohama, Kanagawa 223-8521, Japan

2Computational Materials Science Unit, National Institute for Materials Science, Namiki 1-1, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0044, Japan

3RIKEN Center for Emergent Matter Science (CEMS), Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan

4Institute-Lorentz for Theoretical Physics, Leiden University,

PO Box 9506, NL-2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands
5Stanford Institute for Materials and Energy Sciences,

SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory and Stanford University, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA

6Department of Physics, Washington University, St. Louis, MO 63160, USA

(Dated: March 15, 2016)

We present a self-contained review of the theory of dislocation-mediated quantum melting at
zero temperature in two spatial dimensions. The theory describes the liquid-crystalline phases with
spatial symmetries in between a quantum crystalline solid and an isotropic superﬂuid: quantum
nematics and smectics.
It is based on an Abelian-Higgs-type duality mapping of phonons onto
gauge bosons (“stress photons”), which encode for the capacity of the crystal to propagate stresses.
Dislocations and disclinations, the topological defects of the crystal, are sources for the gauge ﬁelds
and the melting of the crystal can be understood as the proliferation (condensation) of these defects,
giving rise to the Anderson-Higgs mechanism on the dual side. For the liquid crystal phases, the
shear sector of the gauge bosons becomes massive signaling that shear rigidity is lost. After provid-
ing the necessary background knowledge, including the order parameter theory of two-dimensional
quantum liquid crystals and the dual theory of stress gauge bosons in bosonic crystals, the theory
of melting is developed step-by-step via the disorder theory of dislocation-mediated melting. Rest-
ing on symmetry principles, we derive the phenomenological imaginary time actions of quantum
nematics and smectics and analyze the full spectrum of collective modes. The quantum nematic is
a superﬂuid having a true rotational Goldstone mode due to rotational symmetry breaking, and the
origin of this ‘deconﬁned’ mode is traced back to the crystalline phase. The two-dimensional quan-
tum smectic turns out to be a dizzyingly anisotropic phase with the collective modes interpolating
between the solid and nematic in a non-trivial way. We also consider electrically charged bosonic
crystals and liquid crystals, and carefully analyze the electromagnetic response of the quantum
liquid crystal phases. In particular, the quantum nematic is a real superconductor and shows the
Meissner eﬀect. Their special properties inherited from spatial symmetry breaking show up mostly
at ﬁnite momentum, and should be accessible by momentum-sensitive spectroscopy.

Contents

C. The phase-disordered superﬂuid as a vortex

List of symbols

I. Introduction

A. The prehistory: ﬂuctuating stripes and

other high-Tc empiricisms

B. Platonic perfection and the big guns of

quantum ﬁeld theory

C. The warped dual view on quantum liquid

crystals

D. Organization of this paper
E. Conventions and notation

2

3

4

5

8
11
11

12
II. Vortex–boson duality
A. Bose–Hubbard model
12
B. The superﬂuid as a Coulomb gas of vortices 13

∗Electronic address: aron@phys-h.keio.ac.jp

condensate

D. Propagators and duality

III. Field-theoretic elasticity

A. Crystalline states and displacement ﬁelds
B. Isotropic elastic solid
C. Quantum elasticity
D. Propagators of the isotropic elastic solid

IV. Topological defects in solids

A. Volterra processes
B. Dislocations and disclinations
C. Defect densities
D. Interdependence between dislocations and

disclinations

E. Kinematic constraints
F. Interstitials and vacancies
G. Preview of defect-mediated melting

14
15

17
17
19
20
21

22
23
23
24

25
26
27
28

V. Order parameter theory of

two-dimensional quantum nematics
30
A. Finite point group symmetries and melting 30

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
4
1
 
 
]
l
e
-
r
t
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
4
5
2
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

B. Classical crystal melting in two dimensions

D. Superconductivity and electromagnetism of

— KTHNY theory

31

the quantum nematic

E. Electromagnetism of the charged quantum

smectic

XII. Conclusions

A. Open problems

1. The dual stress superconductor by ﬁrst

principle

2. Duality squared is one
3. Anisotropy and the quantum smectic
4. Generalization to 3+1D dimensions
5. Perturbing from the strong correlation

limit: interstitials

6. Translational disorder in the background:

glassy stress superconductivity

7. Relations to gravity

Acknowledgments

A. Fourier space coordinate systems

2

81

86

90
91

91
92
92
93

93

94
95

96

96

C. 2+1-dimensional quantum nematics and

point group symmetries

32
34
D. Gauge theory and nematics
E. Phase diagram of the O(2)/ZN model
36
F. Dual formulation and fractionalized charges 37
38
G. CN -nematic transitions
H. Concluding remarks
39

VI. Dual elasticity

A. Stress gauge ﬁelds
B. Physical content of the stress tensor
C. Constraints in the path integral
D. Second-gradient elasticity
E. Torque stress gauge ﬁeld
F. Dual Lagrangian of the isotropic solid
G. Correlation functions
H. Correlation functions from stress gauge

ﬁelds

I. Collective modes of the isotropic solid

VII. Disorder ﬁeld theory of dislocations: the

dual stress superconductors
A. Vortex disorder ﬁeld theory
B. Dislocations are diﬀerent
C. Dislocation disorder ﬁeld theory

39
39
41
41
42
43
44
44

46
47

48
49
50
52

VIII. Quantum nematic

55
A. Stress propagators in the quantum nematic 56
57
B. Collective modes of the quantum nematic
57
58

1. Longitudinal sector
2. Transverse sector

C. Torque stress in nematics and the rotational

Goldstone mode

60

IX. Quantum smectic

62
63
A. Lagrangian of the quantum smectic
B. Stress propagators of the quantum smectic 64
C. Collective modes of the quantum smectic
66

X. Elasticity and electromagnetism: the

formalism
A. Preliminaries: electromagnetic ﬁelds and

70

crystals

71
B. Stress–strain duality and electromagnetism 72
C. Photons versus stress photons
74
75
D. The eﬀective electromagnetic actions
75
75
76

1. Charged isotropic crystal
2. Charged quantum nematic
3. Charged quantum smectic

XI. Electromagnetic observables of the

quantum nematic and smectic
A. Electromagnetic linear responses
B. The Drude model and the charged viscous

ﬂuid

C. Electromagnetism of the isotropic Wigner

crystal

77
78

79

80

B. Euclidean electromagnetism conventions 97

C. Dual Kubo formula

References

97

99

List of symbols

Field quantities will be denoted with their spacetime

argument (x) = (t, x).

aij

(cid:101)a(cid:101)i(cid:101)j

A(ω, q)
Aµ(x)
Ba
B(x)
ba
µ(x)
cL
cT
cK
cd
cR
cl
Cµνab
D
e∗
Em(x)
hµ(x)
G(ω, q)
GL(ω, q)
GT(ω, q)
G
H
H(x)
K(x)
J (x)
J a(x)

lattice gauge ﬁeld
dual lattice gauge ﬁeld
spectral function
electromagnetic (photon) gauge ﬁeld
Burgers vector
magnetic ﬁeld
stress gauge ﬁeld
longitudinal phonon velocity
transverse phonon velocity
compression (sound) velocity
dislocation velocity
rotational velocity
velocity of light
elastic constants
number of dimensions
electric charge
electric ﬁeld
torque stress gauge ﬁeld
stress propagator
longitudinal propagator
transverse propagator
electromagnetic propagator
Hamiltonian
Hamiltonian density
compressional source
external source / rotation source
displacement source

J a
µ (x)
jm(x)
jµ(x)
L(x)
LE(x)
(cid:96)
(cid:96)(cid:48)
m∗
n
na
q
qm
p
P , ¯P
R
S
SE
t
τ
t
x
ua(x)
Z
δ
ˆεab(ω, q)
ε0
ε(x), εa(x)
η
θ(x), θi
Θµ(x), Θa
κ
λ(x)
λ, λ(ω, q)
λL
λd
λs
µ
µ0
ν
ρ
ρQ(x)
σa
µ(x)
ˆσab(ω, q)
τµ(x)
τ (cid:96)
µ
Φ(x)
Φa(x)
ω(x), ωab(x)
ω
ωn
ωp
Ω
Ωc
Ωab

µ(x) disclination current

dislocation current
electric current density
spacetime electric current density
Lagrangian density
Euclidean Lagrangian density
rotational stiﬀness length
higher-order compressional length
mass
electric particle density
Burgers vector
momentum absolute value
momentum
spacetime momentum
discrete point group
particle coordinate
action
Euclidean action
time
imaginary time
imaginary time × a velocity
space coordinates
displacement ﬁeld
partition function
imaginary time convergence factor
dielectric function
dielectric constant
gauge transformation ﬁeld
smectic interrogation angle
nematic order parameter ﬁeld

compression modulus
Lagrange multiplier ﬁeld
screening length / penetration depth
London penetration depth
dislocation penetration depth
shear penetration depth
shear modulus
magnetic constant
Poisson ratio
mass density
electric charge density
relativistic stress tensor
conductivity tensor
torque stress
second-gradient torque stress
condensate ﬁeld
dislocation condensate ﬁeld
rotational strain ﬁeld
frequency
Matsubara frequency
plasma frequency
Higgs mass
Frank vector
deﬁcient rotation

I.

INTRODUCTION

How do crystals melt at zero temperature into quan-
tum liquids? This seems to be a question that was an-
swered a long time ago. The 4He superﬂuid solidiﬁes

3

under pressure, through a ﬁrst-order transition that is
regarded as well understood. Similarly, it is widely be-
lieved that at low density the Fermi liquid formed from
electrons will turn into a Wigner crystal also involving a
ﬁrst-order transition. However, dealing with microscopic
constituents which are less simple than helium atoms, in
principle zero-temperature phases can be formed which
are in between the crystal and the isotropic superﬂuid:
the ‘vestigial’ quantum liquid-crystalline phases.

It appears that such phases are realized in the strongly-
interacting electron systems found in iron and copper su-
perconductors, and in recent years this has grown into a
sizable research ﬁeld [1–8]. This development was started
a long time ago, by a seminal paper due to Kivelson,
Fradkin and Emery [9] that explained the potential for
such vestigial phases to exist in the electron systems. In-
spired by this work, one of the authors of this review
(J.Z.) in 1997 asked himself the question “what can be
learned in general about such quantum liquid crystals?”
He decided to focus ﬁrst on circumstances that simplify
the life of a theorist: bosonic matter living in the maxi-
mally symmetric Galilean space, and two space and one
time dimensions (2+1D). For physical reasons explained
below, the interest was particularly focused on the case
that the (crystalline) correlations in the quantum liquid
states are as pronounced as possible.

As a lucky circumstance it turned out that a rather
powerful mathematical methodology was already lying
in wait, originating in the ﬁeld of ‘mathematical elas-
ticity theory’ that was rewritten in a systematic ﬁeld-
theoretical language by Hagen Kleinert in the 1980s [10,
11]. This work dealt with the classical statistical physics
of crystal melting in three space dimensions, but can
be extended to handle the quantum problem in 2+1D.
This revolves around a weak–strong duality:
it can be
viewed as an extension of the well-known Abelian-Higgs
or vortex–boson duality used in quantum melting of su-
perﬂuid order in 2+1D, which is exquisitely able to
deal with the strong-correlation aspect given its non-
perturbative powers. However, this generalization is far
from trivial. Deeply rooted in the intricacies of the sym-
metries of spacetime itself, the duality reveals that the
physics of crystal quantum melting is much richer than
the superﬂuid case. This is the story that we wish to
expose in this review.

The groundwork was laid down in the period 1998–
2003 and these results were published in comprehensive
form [12]. This description was however in a number
of regards rather crude and contained several ﬂaws. It
turned out that ambitious junior scientists that passed by
in Leiden since then were allured to the subject, perfect-
ing gradually the 2003 case and discovering new depths
in the problem. Crucial parts were never published [13]
while the remainder got scattered over the literature [14–
21]. With the advent of the present third generationof
students it appears that the last missing pieces have fallen
into place and we believe that we have now an essentially
complete theory in our hands at least for 2+1 dimensions.

All that remains are some quantitative details such as the
eﬀects of crystalline anisotropy that are easy but tedious.
We decided to endeavor to present the whole story in a
comprehensive and coherent fashion, making it accessible
for the larger community beyond the ‘Leiden school’.

More recently we have been concentrating increasingly
on the 3+1D case: this is technically much harder but
rewarded by a much richer physical landscape. Several
research directions are presently under investigation but
a thorough understanding of the easier 2+1D case is a
necessity to appreciate fully the vestigial marvels that
one discovers in the most physical of all dimensions. This
formed an extra motivation for us to write this extensive
review.

Before we turn to the mathematical substances de-
scribed in the bulk of this review let us ﬁrst present a
gross overview of the context, and the main features of
this quantum ﬁeld theory of liquid crystalline matter.

A. The prehistory: ﬂuctuating stripes and other

high-Tc empiricisms

It all started in the late 1990s during the heydays
of the subject of ﬂuctuating order in the copper-oxide
high-Tc superconductors. Before the discovery of high-
Tc superconductivity in 1986 it was taken for granted
that electron systems realized in solids were ruled by
the principles of the highly-itinerant electron gas. The
essence of such systems is that they are quite feature-
less: the Fermi liquid is a simple, homogeneous state of
matter, ‘equalized’ by the highly delocalized nature of
its quasi-particles. Structure can emerge in the form of
spontaneous symmetry breaking but this should be of
the Bardeen–Cooper–Schrieﬀer (BCS) kind where it be-
comes discernible only at the long time and length scales
associated with the weak-coupling gap.
It came then
as a big surprise when inelastic neutron scattering mea-
surements seemed to reveal that at least in the under-
doped “pseudogap” regime the electron quantum liquid
in the cuprates is much more textured. Spin ﬂuctuations
were observed at energies associated with highly collec-
tive physics (∼0-80 meV) that reveal a high degree of
spatial organization, although there is no sign of static
translational symmetry breaking (for recent experimen-
tal results, see Refs. [22, 23]).

It was found that under very speciﬁc circumstances
static order can occur in the form of stripes, see e.g. [22]
for a review. These stripes are a ubiquitous ordering
phenomenon found generically in doped Mott insulators
diﬀerent from the cuprates (nickelates, cobaltates, man-
ganites . . . ) which are best understood as a lattice of
electronic discommensurations (“rivers of charge”) that
are formed when the charge-commensurate Mott insu-
lator is doped. For the present purposes these might
be viewed as ‘crystals’, likely formed from (preformed)
electronic Cooper pairs that break the rotational sym-
metry (tetragonal, C4) of the underlying square lattice

4

of ions in a unidirectional (orthorhombic, C2) way. This
in turn goes hand-in-hand with an incommensurate an-
tiferromagnetic order. The surprise revealed by inelas-
tic neutron scattering was that at somewhat higher en-
ergies the spin ﬂuctuations in superconducting, under-
doped cuprates, which lack any sign of static stripe or-
der, look very similar to those of the striped cuprates.
The diﬀerence is that in the former a gap is opening up
at small energies in the spin-wave spectrum of the latter.
On basis of these observations the idea of dynamical or
ﬂuctuating stripes was born: at mesoscopic distances (∼
nanometers) and energies (∼ 10 meV) the electron liquid
approaches closely a striped state but eventually quan-
tum ﬂuctuations take over, turning it into a featureless
superconducting state at macroscopic distances.

It proved very diﬃcult to make this notion more pre-
cise employing phenomenological or theoretical means:
sharp observables are just absent dealing with ﬂuctuating
states. However, in the seminal paper by Kivelson, Frad-
kin and Emery [9] it was argued that it forms a natural
stage for the formation of new zero-temperature phases
of matter: the quantum liquid crystals.

This follows a wisdom which is well tested in the realms
of the physics of classical, ﬁnite-temperature matter [24].
Typically the system forms a fully symmetric liquid at
high temperatures, while it breaks the translations and
rotations of Euclidean space at low temperatures forming
a solid. However, given particular microscopic conditions
(e.g. ‘rod-like molecules’) one ﬁnds the partially ordered
or vestigial phases. One form corresponds to the nematic-
type liquid crystalline order where translational symme-
try is restored—the liquid aspect—while rotational sym-
metry is still broken (“the rods are lined up”). There are
also smectic-type phases which break translations in one
direction while the system remains ﬂuid in the other di-
rections (“stack of liquid layers”), see Fig. 1. A priori, the
same hierarchy of symmetry breakings can occur at zero
temperature, with the diﬀerence that the liquids are now
identiﬁed as quantum liquids. It was envisaged by Kivel-
son et al. that the ‘stripiness’ takes the role of the rod-like
molecules on the microscopic scale. Subsequently one can
picture that a quantum smectic is formed which behaves
like a zero temperature metal or superconductor in one
spatial direction, while it insulates in other directions.
Similarly, metallic or superconducting zero temperature
states can be imagined which are anisotropic because of
the spontaneous breaking of spatial rotations: the quan-
tum nematics.

This appeared to be a fruitful idea. Not long thereafter
evidences were found for the occurrence of such quan-
tum nematic order in part of the underdoped regime of
YBa2Cu3O6+x and Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+x cuprate supercon-
ductors [1, 25–28]. The theme became particular promi-
nent in the iron-pnictide superconductors [29] where such
nematic order appears to be very prominent although
the debate regarding its precise microscopic origin (spin-
density wave, charge-density wave, or orbital-driven) is
still raging [8]. Much of the contemporary interest in

5

(a)solid – Z2 (cid:111) ¯P

(b)smectic – (R × Z) (cid:111) ¯P

(c)nematic – R2 (cid:111) ¯P

(d)liquid – R2 (cid:111) O(2)

FIG. 1: Sketch of classical melting of a 2D crystalline solid. The thick dashed lines denotes crystal axes along which the
‘particles’ are ordered while the thin dashed lines are for reference with the previous situation only. Denoted in the ﬁgure labels
is the symmetry group as a subgroup of the 2D Euclidean group E(2) (cid:39) R2 (cid:111) O(2), where ¯P denotes the (rotational) discrete
point group of the lattice. (a) Solid: regularly ordered breaking both translations and rotations completely to a discrete space
group. (c) Smectic: translational symmetry is restored in the horizontal direction, but these liquid layers are still periodically
stacked in the vertical direction. Rotations are broken. (c) Nematic: all translational symmetry is now restored like a liquid,
but the constituents maintain orientational order. (d). Liquid: completely disordered and all symmetry is restored. For the
complementary dual picture, see Fig. 6

this ‘electronic nematicity’ is rooted in the role it might
play in the microscopic pairing mechanism. This is based
on the Hertz–Millis idea of a quantum phase transition
taking place in a Fermi-liquid where the critical bosonic
quantum ﬂuctuations might act as a pairing glue [30–32].
There is however a more general question one can
ask: what is the general nature of the generalized rigid-
ity, the universal collective physics at macroscopic scales
associated with the zero-temperature quantum-liquid-
crystalline order? Dealing with the quantum nematics
as realized in cuprates and pnictides there is actually not
much to look for. The ionic lattice has already broken
the symmetry of Euclidean space down to a discrete space
group. Although the electronic subsystem might have a
‘life of its own’ all it can do is to break this further down
to a lower-symmetry space group: in the pnictides one is
eventually just dealing with a structural transition from
a tetragonal to an orthorhombic crystal. Although the
electrons might drive the transition the lattice has to re-
act and it is impossible to sharply distinguish the lattice
contributions from the electronic distributions because
symmetrywise it is all the same. Accordingly, there is
no more than the old-fashioned physics of a structural
transition at macroscopic scales.

B. Platonic perfection and the big guns of

quantum ﬁeld theory

Quantum ﬁeld theory as it comes alive in condensed
matter physics is precisely tied to the universal long
wavelength physics associated with zero-temperature
matter.
Inspired by the empirical developments de-
scribed above we became aware that actually the general
description of the quantum liquid crystals is among the
remaining open problems that can be tackled at least in

principle by the established machinery of quantum ﬁeld
theory. More generally, this is about quantum many-
body systems that spontaneously break spatial symme-
tries. This is what we set out to explore some 15 years
ago. This program is not quite completed yet. Dimen-
sionality is a particularly important factor and quite se-
rious complications arise in 3+1 and higher dimensions.
However, in two space dimensions the theory is brought
under complete control, which this review is intended to
present in a comprehensive and coherent fashion.

In order to get anywhere we consider matter formed
from bosons: there are surely some very deep questions
related to fermionic quantum liquid crystals but there
is just no controlled mathematical technology available
that can tackle the fermion sign problem. As related
to the empirical context of the previous paragraphs, at
zero temperature one is invariably dealing with nematic
(or smectic) superconductors formed from Cooper pairs
which are bosons. Hence, insofar as any of our ﬁndings
can be of direct relevance in this empirical context, it is
natural to explore what the bosonic theory has to tell.

The next crucial assumption is that we start out with
a system living in Galilean-invariant space. There is no
ionic background lattice and our bosonic system has to
break the spatial symmetries all by itself. This assump-
tion detaches our theoretical work from a literal appli-
cation to the empirical electron systems. This is how-
ever the natural theatre for the elegant physics associated
with the ﬁeld theory and it is just useful to know what
happens in this limit, as we hope to demonstrate. After
all, there are signs that the strength of the ‘anisotropy’
coming from the lattice might not be at all that large: the
case in point is that the scanning tunneling spectroscopy
(STS) images of cuprate stripes are littered with rather
smooth dislocation textures of a type that would not oc-
cur when the eﬀective lattice potential would be domi-

nant [33]. We will later present several results following
from the continuum theory that might be still of rele-
vance to the lattice incarnation when the pinning energy
of the lattice is suﬃciently weak. Of course, the experi-
mentalists should take up the challenge to engineer such
a continuum bosonic quantum liquid crystal, for instance
by exploiting cold atoms etc.

The experienced condensed matter physicist might
now be tempted to stop reading: what new is to be
learned about a system of bosons in the Galilean con-
tinuum? This realm of physics is supposed to be com-
pletely charted: dealing with bosonic particles like 4He
atoms these are well known to form either close packed
(in 2+1D, triangular) crystals or superﬂuids at zero tem-
perature. Dealing with ‘rod-like bosons’ there is surely
room to have an intermediate quantum nematic phase
corresponding to a superﬂuid breaking space rotations in
addition. Resting on generic wisdoms of order parame-
ter theory it is obvious that a Goldstone boson will be
present in this phase associated with the rotational sym-
metry breaking that can be sorted out in a couple of lines
of algebra. What is the big deal?

This industry standard paradigm is based on a weak-
interaction, ‘gaseous’ perspective. To describe the su-
perﬂuid one takes the free boson Bose–Einstein conden-
sate perspective dressed by weak interactions (Bogoli-
ubov theory). In helium one typically ﬁnds a strong ﬁrst-
order transition to the crystal phase, which can be well
understood as a classical crystal dressed by mild zero-
point motions. The reason, however, for this review to
be quite long is that we will mobilize the ‘big gun’ ma-
chinery of quantum ﬁeld theory. This is actually geared
to deal with a physics regime that might be described
as a ‘maximally strongly-interacting’ regime of the mi-
croscopic bosons. In fact, the reader will ﬁnd out that
these bosons have disappeared altogether from the math-
ematical description that is entirely concerned with the
emergent collective degrees of freedom that are formed
from a near inﬁnity of microscopic degrees of freedom.

We will ﬁnd out that the zero-temperature liquids
are invariably superﬂuids or superconductors. However,
these are now characterized by transient crystalline cor-
relations extending on length scales that are large com-
pared to the lattice constant. From this non-perturbative
starting point, it is rather natural for the ﬁeld theory to
describe the kind of physics that is envisioned by the
ﬂuctuating stripes hypothesis, where the superconductor
is locally, at the smallest length scales, still behaving as
a crystal.

The big gun machinery that we will employ is weak–
strong or Kramers–Wannier duality [34]. The immediate
predecessor of the present pursuit is the intense activity
in the 1970s revolving around the Berezinskii–Kosterlitz–
Thouless (BKT) topological melting theory [35–37],
and the particular implementation in the form of the
Kosterlitz–Thouless–Nelson–Halperin–Young (KTNHY)
theory of ﬁnite-temperature melting of a crystal in two
dimensions, involving the hexatic vestigial phase [36–40].

6

The central notion is that the destruction of the ordered
state can be best understood in terms of the unbind-
ing (proliferation) of the topological defects associated
with the broken symmetry. The topological defects of
the superﬂuid are vortices. The vortex is thereby the
unique agent associated with the destruction of the or-
der: in a strict sense a single delocalized vortex suﬃces
to destroy the order parameter of the whole system. In
the ordered state the excitations can therefore be divided
in smooth conﬁgurations corresponding to the Goldstone
bosons, whose existence is tied to the presence of order,
and the singular or multivalued conﬁgurations character-
ized by topological quantum numbers. As long as the
latter occur only as neutral combinations (e.g. bound
vortex–antivortex pairs) the order parameter cannot be
destroyed. Conversely, when the topological excitations
unbind and proliferate, the system turns automatically
into the disordered state, which now can be seen as a
condensate, a ‘dually ordered state’ formed out of topo-
logical defects. This is in essence the basic principle of
ﬁeld-theoretical weak–strong or Kramers–Wannier dual-
ities. Many weak–strong mappings have been developed
since, ranging all the way to the fanciful dualities discov-
ered in string theory such as the AdS/CFT correspon-
dence [41].

If this principle applies universally (which is not at all
clear) it will lead to the staggering consequence that,
away from the critical state, all ﬁeld-theoretical sys-
tems are always to be regarded as ordered states.
It
is just pending the access of the observer to order op-
erators or disorder operators whether he/she perceives
the disordered state as ordered or the other way around.
The beneﬁt for theorists is that the mathematical de-
scription of the weakly-coupled ordered/symmetry bro-
ken state is very well controlled (Goldstone bosons and
so forth) while strongly-coupled disordered states are typ-
ically much harder to describe. Now in the dual descrip-
tion the latter are yet again of the tranquil, ordered kind.
This review explores in detail the workings of the weak–
strong duality as applied to zero temperature quantum
crystals and its duals in 2+1 spacetime dimensions.

Turning to crystals, the symmetry that is broken is the
Euclidean group associated with space itself which is a
much richer aﬀair than the internal U (1) global symme-
try of XY -spin systems/superﬂuids. In crystals this can
be broken to the smallest possible subgroups as classi-
ﬁed in terms of the space groups. Solids are of course
overly familiar from daily life but to a degree this famil-
iarity is deceptive. The symmetry principles which are
involved are much more intricate than the usual internal
symmetries. The Euclidean group in D space dimensions
involves D independent translations, RD, forming an in-
ﬁnite group, in semidirect relation with the orthogonal
group O(D) including rotations and reﬂections. Semidi-
rect here means that rotating, translating and rotating
back is in general not the same as simply translating (the
rotation group acts on the translation group). This is de-
noted as E(D) = RD (cid:111) O(D). Crystals are described by

space groups S ⊂ E(D) which are comprised of lattice
translations ZD, again in semidirect relation to discrete
point group symmetries ¯P ⊂ O(D), augmented by non-
symmorphic symmetries such as glide reﬂections. This
will be the underlying theme throughout this review: the
surprising richness of the physics is an expression of this
intricate symmetry structure.

The point of departure will be the theory describing
the nature of the maximally ordered phase (the solid):
this is the 19th century theory of elasticity, promoted to
the Lagrangian of the quantum theory by adding a ki-
netic term. Although it has been around for years, as a
ﬁeld theory it is quite involved given its tensor structure.
The topological content is also remarkably rich, despite
the fact that the basics have been identiﬁed a long time
ago, and much of it has been exported to engineering
departments. The topological defect associated with the
restoration of translational invariance is the dislocation
identiﬁed by Burgers in the 1930s [42]. Its topological in-
variant is the Burgers vector associated with the discrete
lattice translation symmetry of the crystal; this transla-
tional defect does not aﬀect the rotational symmetry and
its charge has therefore to keep track of this information.
The rotational O(D) symmetry is restored by a separate
disclination defect with the Frank vector (or Frank scalar
in 2D) as topological charge [43]. The dislocation can be
in turn viewed as a bound disclination–antidisclination
pair while the disclination also corresponds to a bound
state of an inﬁnite number of dislocations with parallel
Burgers vector, see Fig. 3 below.

In a solid, dislocations and disclinations are topologi-
cally distinct defects with an explicit hierarchy: the de-
conﬁned (in the solid) dislocations are intrinsically easier
to produce than the conﬁned disclinations, although a
priori one cannot exclude the possibility that the discli-
nations will proliferate together with the dislocations giv-
ing rise to the ﬁrst-order transition directly from the solid
to the isotropic liquid. This depends on the details of the
‘UV’ (the ‘chemistry’ on the molecular scale).

We now insist that the disclinations stay massive and
thereby the breaking of the rotational symmetry of the
solid is maintained. However, when the dislocations pro-
liferate, translational symmetry is restored and the sys-
tem turns into a ﬂuid. Given the vectorial nature of
the Burgers vectors this can be accomplished in diﬀerent
ways. When free dislocations occur with precisely equal
probability the translational symmetry is restored in all
possible directions while the rotational symmetry is still
broken as characterized by the point group of the ‘parent’
crystal. These form the family of ‘nematic-like’ liquid
crystals. There is actually an ambiguity in the vocabu-
lary that is not settled: in the soft matter community it
is convention to reserve nematic for the uniaxial, Dh∞-
symmetric variety (ordered states of ’rod-like’ molecules),
while for instance the nomenclature p-atics has been sug-
gested for 2D nematics characterized by a p-fold axis [44].
In full generality, these substances are classiﬁed by their
point group symmetries. Because we are mainly inter-

7

ested in long distance hydrodynamic properties which do
not really diﬀer between the diﬀerent point groups, and
by lack of a generally accepted convention, we will call
all these substances nematics, with a point group preﬁx
when needed. See Sec. V for a more nuanced view.

The topology allows for yet another possibility [45],
It is a topological re-
which is sometimes overlooked.
quirement for the nematic order that the Burgers vec-
tors in the dislocation condensate are locally anti-parallel
since a net ‘Burgers uniform magnetization’ corresponds
to a ﬁnite disclination density, which we excluded from
the start. However, there is no requirement to populate
all Burgers directions equally as happens in the nematics.
Instead, one can just preferentially populate the Burgers
vectors in one direction. The eﬀect is that in this direc-
tion the system turns into a ﬂuid while translations are
still broken in the orthogonal direction: this is the topo-
logical description of the smectics as the state that can
occur in between the crystal and the nematic. Obviously,
when the disclinations proliferate one will eventually end
up in an isotropic liquid although still other phases are
possible with a higher point group symmetry associated
with a preferential population of certain Frank vectors.
In the present context of crystal quantum melting in
two spatial dimensions, the crucial ingredient is that the
dislocations are ‘quite like’ vortices with regard to their
status in the duality, as was already realized by KTNHY
in the 2+0D case. It was then asserted that an unbinding
BKT transition can take place involving only the dislo-
cations (keeping the disclinations massive) into a hexatic
state (in our terminology: C6-nematic). Our pursuit is in
essence just the next logical generalization of this aﬀair:
how does this topological melting work out in the 2+1D
bosonic quantum theory realized at zero temperature?

The quantum version is however richer in a number
of regards, and in a way more closely approaching a pla-
tonic perfected incarnation of liquid crystalline order. As
we will see, the ﬂuids associated with the quantum dis-
ordered crystal can also be viewed as ‘dual superconduc-
tors’ but now the “gauge bosons that acquire a mass”
are associated with shear forces while the ‘dual matter’
corresponds to the Bose condensate formed out of dislo-
cations. The similarity between dislocations and vortices
is rooted in the fact that, like the vortices, the dislo-
cations restore an Abelian symmetry: the translational
symmetry of space. For this reason, the crystal duality
is still governed by the general rules of Abelian duali-
ties. However, there are also fundamental diﬀerences:
in constructing the duality the richness associated with
ﬁeld-theoretical elasticity comes to life. For instance, in
the dual dislocation superconductors the information as-
sociated with the rotational symmetry breaking in the
liquid crystals is carried by the Burgers vectors of the
dislocations. In the gauge theoretical description these
take the role of additional ‘ﬂavors’ which in turn deter-
mine the couplings to the ‘stress photons’ mediating the
interactions between the dislocations.

As we will explain at length in Secs. VII–IX, this has

the net eﬀect that shear stress has a similar fate in the
liquid as the magnetic ﬁeld in a normal superconduc-
tor: the capacity to propagate shear forces is expelled
from the dual stress superconductor at distances larger
than the shear penetration depth. By just populating
the Burgers charges equally or preferentially in a partic-
ular orientational direction these dislocation condensates
describe equally well nematic- and smectic-type phases
where now the solid-like behavior of the latter is cap-
tured naturally by the incapacity of the dislocations to
‘Higgs’ shear stress in a direction perpendicular to their
Burgers vector.

In fact, one could nonchalantly anticipate that this
general recipe applies a priori equally well to the clas-
sical, ﬁnite-temperature liquid crystals in three space di-
mensions as to the 2+1D quantum case in the usual guise
of thermal ﬁeld theory. In equilibrium, one can compute
matters ﬁrst in a spacetime with Euclidean signature and
Wick rotate to Minkowski time afterwards. Where is,
then, the diﬀerence between 3D classical and 2+1D quan-
tum ‘elastic matter’ ? The quantum matter is formed
from conserved constituents (like electrons, atoms) at ﬁ-
nite density, and we are interested in phenomena occur-
ring at energies which are small compared to the ther-
modynamic potential. Under these conditions Lorentz
invariance is badly broken: the ‘crystal’ formed in space-
time is made from worldlines and although these do dis-
place in space directions they are incompressible in the
time direction. Compared to 3D crystals this ‘spacetime
crystal’ is singularly anisotropic; as realized by Nelson
and coworkers its only sibling in the classical world is the
Abrikosov lattice formed from ﬂux lines in superconduc-
tors [46].

Nevertheless, one can take the bold step to postulate
the existence of a Lorentz-invariant ‘world crystal’ corre-
sponding to a spacetime as an isotropic elastic medium.
This is characterized by stress tensors that are symmet-
ric in spacetime labels and it is very easy to demonstrate
that the nematic-type quantum liquid crystal which is
dual to this medium is the vacuum of strictly linearized
gravity where the disclinations are the exclusive sources
of curvature [14, 19]. As an intriguing consequence, since
gravity is incompressible in 3D there are no massless
propagating modes in 2+1D while in 3+1D one just ﬁnds
the two spin-2 gravitons. As we will see, this is very
distinct from the mode spectrum of the real life non-
relativistic quantum nematics.

However, a signiﬁcant simpliﬁcation is associated with
the fact that the symmetry breaking only aﬀects the 2D
space in the non-relativistic case.
In the soft matter
tradition it is well understood that the classiﬁcation of
nematic-type orders is in terms of the point groups, and
in 2D this is a rather simple aﬀair given that the 2D point
groups are all Abelian. We will discuss the precise nature
of these orientational order parameters in Sec. V, actu-
ally making the case that these are most conveniently
approached in the language of discrete O(2)/ZN -gauge
theory. In three space dimensions hell breaks loose since

8

the point groups turn non-Abelian with the eﬀect that
the order parameters acquire a highly non-trivial tensor
structure. This can be also brought under control em-
ploying discrete non-Abelian gauge theory; this will be
subject of a separate publication. In fact, in the dual-
ity construction we will close our eyes for the intricacies
associated with particular nematic symmetries and con-
centrate instead of the maximally symmetric ‘spherical
cow’ cases descending from isotropic elasticity; the lower
symmetry cases just invoke adding details like anisotropic
velocities which do not play any interesting role in the
duality per se.

There is yet another aspect that is special to the non-
relativistic quantum liquid crystals, which in turn plays
a crucial role for their physics. In the classical setting,
dynamics does not aﬀect the thermodynamics, but this
is diﬀerent in the quantum incarnation since quantum
physics ‘entangles’ space and time. From the study of the
motions of classical dislocations in solids it is well known
that these are subjected to a special principle rooted in
topology: dislocations can move ballistically in the direc-
tion of their Burgers vector (called glide motion) while
in the absence of interstitial and/or substitutional de-
fects climb motion perpendicular to the Burgers vector is
completely impeded. In addition, the inertial mass asso-
ciated with the climb motion is identical to the mass of
the constituents of the solid, but dislocations do not fall
in the gravitational ﬁeld of the earth, the reason being
that the dislocation “does not carry volume”. It can only
accelerate by applying shear forces to the medium. This
glide principle will play a remarkable role in the quan-
tum problem. As we will see that it is responsible for the
capacity of the zero-temperature quantum ﬂuid, that is
ultimately a dislocation condensate, to propagate sound.

C. The warped dual view on quantum liquid

crystals

This completes the exposition of the basic ingredients
for the dual quantum theory of elasticity for bosonic mat-
ter in 2+1D. These in turn form the building blocks for
a quantum ﬁeld theory with remarkable mathematical
qualities. By just blind computation one obtains results
that shed a diﬀerent, often surprising light on a seemingly
very classical physics topic. This will be the substance
of the remainder of this review but to whet the appetite
of the reader let us ﬁnish this introduction with a list of
these surprises, roughly in the same order as they appear
below.

1. Phonons are gauge bosons. The theory of quan-
tum elasticity is just the 19th century theory of
elasticity with a kinetic energy term added to its
Lagrangian. This is nothing else than the long-
wavelength theory of acoustic phonons. Using
Kleinert’s way of employing the stress–strain du-
ality [10, 11] we show how to rewrite this in terms

of U (1)-gauge ﬁelds. In contrast to textbook wis-
doms, phonons can be regarded as ‘photons’ when
the question is asked how the medium propagates
forces. The elastic medium is richer than the vac-
uum of electromagnetism in the regard that the
crystal directions enter as ‘ﬂavors’ in the gauge the-
ory. These stress photons are sourced by external
shear and compressional stresses but also by the
dislocations, which in turn have the same status
as charged particles in electromagnetism, with the
same complication that they carry the Burgers vec-
tor charge as a ’ﬂavor’ (Sec. VI).

2. The disordered solid is a stress superconductor. As
individual dislocations are ‘charged particles’ in-
teracting via ‘stress photons’, when the disloca-
tions proliferate and condense the resulting quan-
tum ﬂuid can be viewed as a stress superconductor.
Shear stress is the rigidity exclusively associated
with translational symmetry breaking, and it is this
form of stress that falls prey to the analogue of the
Meissner eﬀect. Shear stress is “expelled from the
liquid” in the same way that magnetic ﬁelds can-
not enter the superconductor. One can identify a
shear penetration depth having the meaning that
at short distances the medium remembers its elas-
tic nature with the eﬀect that shear forces propa-
gate. At a length scale larger than the average dis-
tance between (anti-)dislocations, shear stress be-
comes perfectly ‘screened’ by the response of the
Bose-condensed dislocations (Section VIII).

3. The disordered solid is a real superﬂuid. The fact
that dislocations “do not occupy volume” is in the
duality encapsulated by the glide principle. Af-
ter incorporating this glide constraint, one ﬁnds
that the dislocation condensate decouples from the
purely compressional stress photons: the quantum
liquid carries massless sound, which in turn can
be viewed as the longitudinal phonon of the dis-
ordered crystal that “lost its shear contributions”
(Sec. VIII). The mechanism involves a mode cou-
pling between the longitudinal phonon and a con-
densate mode having surprising ramiﬁcations for
experiment. Besides the specialties associated with
the orientational symmetry breaking, we ﬁnd a
bosonic quantum ﬂuid that just carries sound. By
studying the response of its EM charged version
to external magnetic ﬁelds (item 9.) we prove
that this liquid is actually a superﬂuid! At ﬁrst
sight this might sound alarming since we have con-
structed it from ingredients (phonons, dislocations)
that have no knowledge of the constituent bosonic
particles forming the crystal.
It seems to violate
the principle that superﬂuidity is governed by the
oﬀ-diagonal long range order (ODLRO) of the (con-
stituent) bosonic ﬁelds. This is less dramatic than
it appears at ﬁrst sight: the braiding of the dislo-
cations will give rise to the braiding of the world-

9

lines of the constituent bosons. In fact, it amounts
to a reformulation of the usual ODLRO principle
to the limit of maximal crystalline correlations in
the ﬂuid: “a bosonic crystal that has lost its shear
rigidity is a superﬂuid”.

4. The rotational Goldstone mode deconﬁnes in the
quantum nematic. By insisting that the disclina-
tions stay massive while the dislocations proliferate,
the quantum liquids we describe are automatically
quantum liquid crystals, where we just learned that
these are actually superﬂuids in so far their ‘liq-
uid’ aspect is concerned. Given that the isotropy
of space is still spontaneously broken there should
be a rigidity present, including the associated Gold-
stone boson: the ‘rotational phonon’ and the asso-
ciated reactive response to torque stress. But now
we face a next conundrum: the phonons of the crys-
tal are purely translational modes, how does this
rotational sector “appear out of thin air” when the
shear rigidity is destroyed? Why is there no sep-
arate mode in the crystal associated with the ro-
tational symmetry breaking? The reason is that
translations and rotations are in semidirect rela-
tion in the space groups describing the crystal: one
cannot break translations without breaking rota-
tions. To do full justice to this symmetry prin-
ciple,
in Sec. VI E we introduce a more fanciful
‘dynamical Ehrenfest constraint’ duality construc-
tion, where the role of rotations and the associated
disclination sources is made explicit already in the
crystal. We ﬁnd, elegantly, that in this description
the torque photon as well as the associated discli-
nation sources are literally conﬁned in the crystal,
in the same physical (although not mathematical)
sense as quarks are conﬁned in QCD. When the
dislocations condense the torque stresses and the
disclinations deconﬁne becoming the objects en-
capsulating the ‘rotational physics’ of the quan-
tum nematics (Sec. VIII C). As compared to the
classical (ﬁnite-temperature) nematics there is one
striking diﬀerence.
It is well known that the ro-
tational Goldstone mode couples to the dissipative
circulation in the normal hydrodynamical ﬂuid, and
is overdamped. The superﬂuid is however irrota-
tional, thereby protecting the rotational Goldstone
mode as a propagating excitation.

5. Partial translational melting is a quantum smectic.
The dislocation condensate consists in essence of
D U (1)-ﬁelds in D space dimensions. By prefer-
entially condensing one Burgers orientation in the
dislocation condensate we construct the quantum
smectic in Sec. IX. Although one anticipates the
conventional picture of “stacks of liquid layers”, the
zero temperature quantum case deﬁes such intu-
itions. It cannot be viewed as simply a ‘solid × liq-
uid’, and the transverse and longitudinal characters
mix in the mode spectrum, depending on the inter-

rogation angle of the linear response (see Fig. 17
below). Surprisingly, the ‘most isotropic’ response
is found with ﬁeld propagating at 45◦ to the layers.
Nevertheless, for ﬁelds propagating along the lay-
ers (in the ‘liquid direction’), the duality construc-
tion ﬂawlessly reproduces the transverse “undula-
tion mode” in the solid direction with a quadratic
(ω ∝ q2) dispersion, that is known in classical smec-
tics [24, 47].

6. Order parameter theory of 2+1-dimensional nemat-
ics.
In Sec. V we develop a completely general
theory of order parameters arising due to broken
rotational symmetry in 2+1 dimensions. The con-
vential ‘uniaxial’ nematic is just one example of a
host of possible p-atic orders, which derive directly
from the space group of the crystal that undergoes
dislocation-mediated melting. This is extended to
a gauge theory formulation, where the topologi-
cal defects in the nematic phase (disclinations) are
represented by ZN -ﬂuxes. At zero temperature,
this leads to the prediction of a new phase, the
ZN -deconﬁned phase, where these gauge ﬂuxes are
frozen but not condensed.

7. Transverse phonons become massive shear modes
in the quantum liquid crystal. Up to this point
we have highlighted universal features of the long
wavelength limit. These are in fact not depending
on the assumption of maximal crystalline correla-
tions intrinsic to the duality description. By adia-
batic continuation they are smoothly connected to
the outcomes of the weakly-interacting, gaseous de-
scription. The diﬀerence between the two descrip-
tions becomes manifest considering the spectrum
of ﬁnite-energy excitations. The dual stress super-
conductor description yields a plethora of propa-
gating massive modes in the quantum liquid crys-
tals which depend critically on the assumption that
the crystalline correlation length/shear penetration
depth is large compared to the lattice constant.
Their origin is easily understood in terms of the
dual relativistic superconductor description.
In
the Higgs phase of a real superconductor the pho-
ton becomes massive; in the stress superconductor
the stress photons (the phonons) become massive,
and they propagate shear forces only over a short
range.
In other words, these new modes in the
liquid phases correspond with massive shear pho-
tons. A simple example is the transverse phonons
of the crystal that just acquire a ‘Higgs mass’ in
the liquid. However, the stress superconductor is
more intricate than just the Abelian-Higgs conden-
sate. The case in point is the way that the longi-
tudinal phonon of the crystal, sensitive to both the
compression and the shear modulus, turns into the
sound mode of the superﬂuid, rendering the sound
mode of the quantum nematic to be of a purely
compressional nature. The existence of these mas-

10

sive modes is critically dependent on the assump-
tion that interstitials (the constituent bosons) are
absent. When the crystalline correlation length
shrinks towards the lattice constant these modes
will get damped to eventually disappear in the
gaseous limit where they are completely absent at
small momenta. We believe that the roton of e.g.
4He can be viewed as a remnant of such a shear
photon in the regime where the crystalline correla-
tion length has become a few lattice constants.

8. Elasticity and the charged bosonic Wigner crystal.
Up to here we have dealt with electromagnetically
neutral systems, but as we will show in Secs. X,XI it
is straightforward to extend the description to elec-
trically charged systems. The ﬁrst step is to derive
the elastic theory of the charged bosonic Wigner
crystal. We shall obtain the spectrum of (coupled)
stress and electromagnetic (EM) photons, consid-
ering the coupling of the 2+1D matter to 2+1D
electrodynamics. The unpinned Wigner crystal be-
haves as a perfect conductor, where the plasmon
now propagates with the longitudinal phonon ve-
locity. In the transverse optical response however,
next to the expected plasmon there is also a weak
massless mode, with quadratic dispersion at low
energies, extrapolating to the transverse phonon at
high energies.

9. The charged quantum nematic shows the Meissner
eﬀect. Since the dislocation does not carry vol-
ume it does not carry charge either. Accordingly,
in the dislocation condensate the longitudinal EM
response is characterized by a ‘true’ plasmon, a
sound wave that has acquired a plasmon energy.
The surprise is in the transverse EM response: the
EM photon acquires a mass and the system expels
magnetic ﬁelds according to the Meissner eﬀect of
a superconductor. This proves the earlier asser-
tion that the bosonic quantum nematic, described
in terms of a dual stress superconductor, is indeed
a genuine superﬂuid that turns into a superconduc-
tor when it is gauged with electromagnetic ﬁelds.
The mechanism is fascinating: the Meissner eﬀect
is in a way hiding in the Wigner crystal where it
is killed by a term arising from the massless shear
photons. When the latter acquire a mass this com-
pensation is no longer complete with the outcome
that EM photons are expelled (Sec. XI D).

10. The charged quantum smectic shows

strongly
anisotropic properties. The quantum nematic is
just an isotropic superconductor but the charged
quantum smectic is just as intriguing as the neutral
conterpart: in the ‘liquid’ direction it is character-
ized by a ﬁnite superﬂuid density and the capacity
to expel EM ﬁelds, but at an angle of 45◦ with
respect to the ‘solid’ direction its EM response is
identical as to the Wigner crystal. For momenta

along the ‘solid’ direction, there is a massive trans-
verse plasma polariton and massive mode from aris-
ing from mode coupling with the shear photon (i.e.
phonon). At intermediate angles, the plasma po-
lariton remains but the spectral weights of the cou-
pled modes interpolate between the ‘magic’ an-
gles with massless and massive modes at ﬁnite mo-
menta. For transverse ﬁelds propagating at ﬁnite
momenta near but not exactly in the liquid direc-
tion, magnetic screening at ﬁnite frequencies (the
skin eﬀect) is enhanced with respect to the Wigner
crystal (Sec. XI E).

11. The massive shear mode is detectable by ﬁnite-
momentum spectroscopy. The charged case is the
one of greatest potential relevance to the physics of
the electron systems. Given the very small mass of
electrons the only way to exert external forces on
the system probing the physical properties of the
liquid crystalline states is by its electromagnetic re-
sponses. A key prediction is that the massive shear
photons are in principle observable by electromag-
netic means, albeit with the practical diﬃculty that
these carry only ﬁnite optical weight at ﬁnite mo-
menta. This runs into the usual diﬃculty that be-
cause of the large mismatch between the ‘material
velocity’ and the speed of light the experimental-
ists can only easily interrogate the zero-momentum
limit. However, using modern techniques, such as
electron energy-loss spectroscopy or inelastic X-ray
scattering, this regime becomes accessible and in
Sec. XI D we will present a very precise prediction
regarding the massive shear photon that should be-
come visible in the longitudinal EM channel.

12. Probing the liquid crystalline order parameter. Last
but not least, is it possible to directly probe the
order parameters of the quantum-liquid crystals
directly using electromagnetic means? Given the
presence of the pinning energy in the real solids, an
even more pressing issue is whether there is any way
to couple into the rotational Goldstone boson of the
nematic that is expected to be characterized in any
case by a ﬁnite ‘anisotropy gap’ caused by the pin-
ning. In Sec. XI D we shall see that the rotational
Goldstone mode leaves its signature in the trans-
verse conductivity at low but non-zero momenta.

D. Organization of this paper

This is a review paper and we have therefore striven
to present a reasonably self-contained exposition. Un-
derstanding of basic condensed matter physics (phase
transitions, Green’s functions) as well as ﬁeld theory and
path integrals, is assumed. This article supersedes our
earlier works [12–21] wherever results are contradictory.
We warm up in Sec. II by treating a simpler and well-
studied problem: vortex–boson or Abelian-Higgs duality

11

for interacting bosons. Here the principles of the duality
construction are laid out, and we will refer to it often in
the remainder of the text. Classical elasticity is restated
in ﬁeld theory language in Sec. III, up to the deriva-
tion of the phonon propagators. The topological defects
of spatially ordered systems, dislocations and disclina-
tions, are introduced in Sec. IV, including ﬁeld-theoretic
defect currents leading to a compact form for the glide
constraint for dislocations. Up to this point, nothing
essentially new has been oﬀered. In Sec. V an indepen-
dent, gauge-theoretic treatment of the order parameters
of the nematic–isotropic liquid is included, which also
contains a justiﬁcation for our use of the word nematic for
any state with complete translational symmetry but bro-
ken rotational symmetry. The remainder of the review
concerns the main topic: dislocation-mediated quantum
melting of two-dimensional crystals. In Sec. VI we per-
form the duality transformation by going from the strain
variables of Sec. III to stress variables expressed as gauge
ﬁelds. Here we rederive the phonon propagators in this
dual language. Higher-order elasticity is considered as
well, leading to the introduction of torque stress gauge
ﬁelds. Sec. VII deals with the condensate of dislocation
worldlines, culminating in a Higgs term for the dual stress
gauge ﬁelds. This is then used to derive the hydrodynam-
ics of the quantum nematic in Sec. VIII and the quantum
smectic in Sec. IX. These are the main results presented
in this review. In the quantum nematic, where transla-
tional symmetry is restored, a Goldstone mode related
to rotational symmetry breaking emerges. This ‘decon-
ﬁnement’ is discussed as the release of a constraint in
the latter half of Sec. VIII. Finally, it is straightforward
to incorporate electrically charged media into the melt-
ing program, which is the topic of Sec. X. In Sec. XI
we derive and compare several experimental signatures
such as conductivity, spectral functions and the electron
energy loss function as well as the Meissner eﬀect, indi-
cating superconductivity. Together with a summary, an
outlook for future developments is presented in Sec. XII.
Appendix A details the Fourier space coordinate systems
which are employed throughout this text, while appen-
dices B,C contain details about derivations in electrically
charged elastic media.

E. Conventions and notation

• For the temporal components we use the follow-
ing notation.
Italic t denotes real time; Greek τ
denotes imaginary time, and fraktur t denotes an
imaginary temporal component with dimensions of
length, rescaled with a factor of shear velocity c
via t = cτ (cf. Eqs. (9), (139)). Most of the cal-
culations are performed in imaginary time τ = it,
for which the partition function Z = exp(iS) →

exp(−SE), where SE = (cid:82) dτ dDx LE is the Eu-

clidean action. Note that the Euclidean Lagrangian
LE diﬀers by a sign compared to the real-time La-

grangian in the non-kinetic components due to the
choice τ = it. We will suppress the subscript E
when there is no confusion. Consequently there is
no distinction between upper and lower indices.

• Greek indices µ, ν, . . . refer to spacetime indices,
while Roman indices m, n, . . . refer to spatial in-
dices only. Spatial Fourier directions (see below)
use capital indices E, F, . . .. For quantum elasticity
ﬁelds in Euclidean time, like the stress tensor σa
µ,
the lower index is the space-time vector index while
the upper index is a purely spatial index related to
the Burgers charge. This is important since these
tensors are not fully symmetric unlike the ‘classical’
stress tensor σmn.

• The fully antisymmetric symbols in 3+1, 3, 2+1
and 2 dimensions respectively obey txyz = xyz =
txy = xy = +1.

• The Fourier transforms are:

(cid:90)
(cid:90)

1(cid:112)(2π)D+1
1(cid:112)(2π)D+1

f (q, ω) =

f (x, t) =

dDx dt f (x, t)ei(q·x−ωt)

dDq dω f (q, ω)e−i(q·x−ωt)

(cid:113) 1

c ωn, q) and p = |pµ| =

• In Fourier space we use Matsubara frequencies ωn.
Explicitly ∂τ → iωn and ∂m → iqm. The momen-
tum is pµ = ( 1
n + q2,
where c is an appropriate velocity to be deﬁned
in the text. The analytic continuation is −iωn →
ω + iδ where δ (cid:28) 1 is a convergence factor, such
that the Fourier transforms are calculated using
eiωt−iq·x = e−iωnτ−iq·x.

c2 ω2

• In position space, all ﬁelds will be real-valued; in
Fourier space we therefore use the notation A†(p) =
A(−p).

• Next to the standard (t, x, y)-coordinate system,
we employ two other coordinate systems in Fourier
space. The (t, L, T)-system has spatial components
parallel (L) and orthogonal (T) to the spatial mo-
mentum q. The (0, +1,−1)-system has compo-
nents parallel (0) and orthogonal (+1, −1) to the
spacetime momentum pµ, where −1 (cid:107) T. These
systems are detailed in Appendix A, which we en-
courage the reader to study before repeating any
calculations. We shall often employ longitudinal
and transverse projectors (P 2 = P ) for spatial co-
ordinates,

qmqn

P L
mn(q) =
mn(q) = δmn − qmqn
P T
q2

q2

(1)

(2)

Obviously P L + P T = I.

• Planck’s constant is set  ≡ 1, energies are equiva-

lent to frequencies ω via E = ω → ω.

12

II. VORTEX–BOSON DUALITY

There are two reasons to start with a diﬀerent prob-
lem: vortex–boson or Abelian-Higgs or XY -duality in
the superﬂuid–Bose-Mott insulator phase transition [48–
54]. First, it is an easy warm up for the more complicated
physics and dualities relevant to elasticity later. And sec-
ond, it is the simplest duality that yet contains the most
important ingredients we need, namely the nature of the
condensate of topological defects and the status of dual
gauge ﬁelds. Because the interpretation will, from time
to time, diﬀer from that found in the literature, we advise
even researchers well-versed in this ﬁeld to read through
this section.

The idea behind vortex–boson duality is the follow-
ing. An ordered state is eventually destroyed by the
proliferation (unbinding) of vortices or topological de-
fects, which in two spatial dimensions are point-like, and
quantum mechanically it is the Bose–Einstein conden-
sation thereof. The defects are topological singularities
in the order parameter ﬁeld and disturbances in the or-
der parameter ﬁeld are communicated by the Goldstone
modes. This neatly comes together in the dual formula-
tion, where it turns out that the Goldstone modes are in
fact dual gauge ﬁelds, that precisely mediate the inter-
action between topological defect sources. Thus we shall
adopt the view that the topological defects are ordinary
bosonic particles that interact with each other by ex-
changing gauge ﬁelds, like electric charges interact by ex-
changing photons. Next, the proliferation of topological
defects introduces a collective bosonic condensate ﬁeld to
which the gauge ﬁelds are minimally coupled. This is ex-
actly as in a superconductor where photons are minimally
coupled to the Cooper-pair condensate. We know what
will happen: the photons acquire a mass (gap) through
the Anderson–Higgs mechanism such that magnetic ﬁelds
are expelled. Thus the dual gauge ﬁelds correspond to
massless Goldstone modes in the ordered phase and mas-
sive excitations in the disordered phase.

This general framework is virtually literally realized
in the superﬂuid–Bose-Mott insulator phase transition,
which we will detail in this section. It will also form the
basis of the dislocation-mediated melting transitions in
the remainder of the paper. More details can be found
in Refs. [16, 55].

A. Bose–Hubbard model

The Bose-Hubbard model [48] describes bosons, cre-
†
ated by operators ˆb
i on lattice sites i with commutation
†
relations [bi, b
j] = δij, with Hamiltonian

H = −t

†
(ˆb
i

ˆbj + ˆbi

†
ˆb
j) + U

†
(ˆb
i

ˆbi)2.

(3)

(cid:88)

i

(cid:88)

(cid:104)ij(cid:105)

Here the ﬁrst sum is over nearest-neighbor sites, t is the
hopping parameter and U is an on-site repulsion term.

√

†
nieiϕi where ni = ˆb
i

A chemical potential was ﬁxed to ensure a large, integer
number ¯n of bosons per site such that ¯n + 1 ≈ ¯n. Now
we can write ˆbi =
ˆbi is the num-
ber operator and ϕi is the phase operator. They obey
[ϕi, nj] = iδij and are canonically conjugate. Then the
Hamiltonian reads
H = −t

cos(ϕi − ϕj) + U

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(4)

n2
i .

(cid:104)ij(cid:105)

i

Here we have rescaled t with the number of bosons per
site ¯n. The physics of this model is as follows. For t (cid:29) U
we have a well-deﬁned phase variable nearly constant in
space, and the ﬁrst term denotes the ﬂuctuations from
that phase. This is a superﬂuid with a spontaneously
broken U (1)-symmetry and phase rigidity. In this limit
Eq. (4) is also called the XY -model. For U (cid:29) t the re-
pulsion dominates, and the boson number is ﬁxed at each
site to the average value, with a large gap to the parti-
cle and hole excitations. This is the Mott insulator of
bosonic particles (there are no spin degrees of freedom).

The parameter (cid:101)g ∝ U/t tunes the phase transition. In
limit(cid:101)g (cid:28) 1, the superﬂuid phase, where we can neglect
2 (∇ϕ)2) since deviations from

the quantized bosonic degrees of freedom in the second
term. Furthermore we take the continuum limit, and ap-
proximate cos(∇ϕ) ∼ (1− 1
the preferred phase value are costly. The continuum limit
Hamiltonian of the system is now

the following, we start out deep in the weak-coupling

(cid:90)

dDx(cid:2)(∇ϕ(x))2 +(cid:101)gn(x)2(cid:3) ,

(5)

H =

t

2aD−2

where a is the lattice constant and a constant term has
been dropped. Following from the commutation rela-
tion, the number excitations n(x) ∼ ni are canonical
momenta conjugate to ϕ(x). The quantum partition
sum Z = Tr(e−βH) of this Hamiltonian becomes the Eu-

clidean imaginary time path integral Z = (cid:82) Dϕ e−SE

with the following action [56],

SE = 1

(∂τ ϕ)2 + (∇ϕ)2,

dDxdτ

1
c2
ph

(6)

0

2g

where β = 1/kBT , g ∼ aD−2/t and cph ∼ t(cid:112)(cid:101)ga is the

phase velocity of the superﬂuid. In this section and the
rest of the review, we shall work exclusively in the imag-
inary time τ = it path integral formalism as is stan-
dard for quantum phase transitions [56]. In this conven-
tion we have LE = iπϕ∂τ ϕ + H, the canonical momenta
being πϕ ∼ n, in order to have the partition function

Z =(cid:82) Dϕ exp(−S), where S is the Euclidean action and

we have dropped the subscript E. While the Euclidean
theory of the phase ﬁeld ϕ in Eq. (6) is emergently rel-
ativistic with ‘speed of light’ cph, we must keep in mind
that the phase-disordered side in fact corresponds to the
Bose-Mott insulator.

(cid:90) β

B. The superﬂuid as a Coulomb gas of vortices

13

When weakly-interacting bosons condense they form a
superﬂuid, spontaneously breaking global internal U (1)-
symmetry. The resulting Goldstone mode is the zero-
sound mode of the superﬂuid, and it is a single free mass-
less mode described by a scalar ﬁeld, as derived from the
Bose-Hubbard model above. The partition function for
the relativistic zero-sound mode is
Z =

Dϕ e−S ,

(7)

(cid:90)
(cid:90) β
(cid:0) 1

dτ

c2
ph

S =

L =

0
1
2g
≡ 1
2g

(∂µϕ)2.

(cid:90)
(∂τ ϕ)2 + (∂mϕ)2(cid:1) ≡ 1

dDx L,

(cid:0)(∂tϕ)2 + (∂mϕ)2(cid:1)

(8)

(9)

2g

cph

Here β = 1/kBT is the inverse temperature; by cph we
denote the phase velocity of the superﬂuid condensate,
and we have deﬁned ∂µ ≡ (∂t, ∂m). All components have
dimension of inverse length via ∂t ≡ 1
∂τ . Furthermore,
g is the coupling constant: for small g, deviations from
the spontaneously chosen value of the superﬂuid phase ϕ
are very costly and thus strongly suppressed, stabilizing
the superﬂuid regime. When g is large the phase can
ﬂuctuate wildly. Now we need to remember that ϕ is
in fact a compact variable originating from cos(∇ϕ) in
Eq. (4), and a change by 2π brings it back to its original
value. Such windings of the phase variable correspond to
vortices in the superﬂuid, and at large g can be created
easily. To incorporate the vortices, we must treat the
phase ϕ as a multivalued ﬁeld [11, 51, 57], having both
smooth and singular contributions

ϕ(x) = ϕsmooth(x) + ϕsing(x).

(10)

(11)

Here ϕsing(x) obeys(cid:73)

dxµ∂µϕsing(x) = 2πN,

∂S

for any contour ∂S that encloses the singularity, and N
is the winding number of the quantized vorticity. By
deﬁnition, the same contour integral for the smooth part
ϕsmooth is zero. We shall restrict ourselves to 2+1 di-
mensions, the generalization to higher dimensions can be
found in Ref.
[55]. For a vortex of winding number N
we have by Stokes’ theorem

(cid:90)

2πN =

=

∂S

dxµ∂µϕ =
dSλλνµ∂ν∂µϕsing ≡

S

S

S

(cid:90)

dSλλνµ∂ν∂µ(ϕsmooth + ϕsing)

dSλJ V
λ .

(12)

Here S is a surface pierced by the vortex, and ∂S is its
boundary. Note that derivatives operating on a multival-
ued ﬁeld do not commute. We have deﬁned the vortex

(cid:73)
(cid:90)

current

J V
λ (x) = λνµ∂ν∂µϕsing(x).

We can also conveniently write it as,

J V
λ (x) = 2πδλ(L, x).

(13)

(14)

(cid:82)

Here δλ(L, x) is a delta function that is non-zero only on
the vortex worldline L pointing in direction λ [11, 51];
S dSλδλ(L, x) = 1, if and only if the worldline L pierces
the surface S (see also Sec. IV C). We shall from now on
treat topological defects as ‘ordinary’, bosonic particles
in 2+1 dimensions encoded by these currents. They obey
an integrability condition,

∂λJ V

λ = ∂λ(λνµ∂ν∂µ)ϕsing = 0,

(15)

implying that vortex worldlines cannot begin or end but
must either appear as closed spacetime loops, or extend
to the boundary of the system.

∂S

= −i

To see how vortices interact in the superﬂuid, we per-
form the duality operation, which is in fact a Legendre
transformation to the relativistic canonical momentum
associated with the ﬁeld-theoretic velocity ﬁeld ∂µϕ. The
canonical momentum is
ξµ = −i

(16)
The factor −i is used in the imaginary time formalism
and is consistent with Refs. [12, 13, 16, 51]. The ﬁeld ξµ
is related to the supercurrent of the superﬂuid by ana-
lytic continuation to real time. Now we can go from a
Lagrangian in terms of the velocity ∂µϕ to a Hamiltonian
density in terms of the momentum ξµ,
g
2

H = −iξµ∂µϕ + L =

∂(∂µϕ)

1
g

∂µϕ.

ξ2
µ.

(17)

Here we used Eq. (9) and Eq. (16). Again, this form of
the Hamiltonian density stems from the convention for
imaginary time τ = it. The partition function is given

by Z ∝ exp(−(cid:82) dτ dDx H). As we are interested in a

quantum ﬁeld-theoretic description, we actually prefer
to work with Lagrangians. Therefore we will formally
reobtain a Lagrangian, but keep the ξµ as the principal
ﬁeld, thus Ldual = Ldual(ξµ). Hence
g
ξ2
µ + iξµ∂µϕ.
2

Ldual = H + iξµ∂µϕ =

(18)

Note that we could have also directly obtained this form
by a Hubbard–Stratonovich transformation applied to
Eq. (9), but we would not have the interpretation of ξµ as
the canonical momentum. Also note that the dual cou-
pling constant g is inversely proportional to the original
coupling constant 1/g. This is therefore a weak–strong
duality, in the sense of Kramers and Wannier [34].

Now comes the important step in the duality construc-
tion. We again separate the phase ﬁeld in smooth and
singular parts
Z =

DξµDϕsmoothDϕsing e−(cid:82) Ldual .

(cid:90)

(19)

14

On the smooth part, one is allowed to perform integration
by parts ξµ∂µϕsmooth → −(∂µξµ)ϕsmooth, and to then
integrate out ϕsmooth in the path integral as a Lagrange
multiplier ﬁeld, producing the constraint

∂µξµ = 0.

(20)

It follows that ξµ is the conserved supercurrent of the su-
perﬂuid, and the conservation law (continuity equation)
arises because the phase ﬂuctuations have to be smooth.
The constraint Eq.
(20) can be enforced explicitly by
expressing it as the curl of another vector ﬁeld, the dual
gauge potential or dual gauge ﬁeld bλ(x),

ξµ(x) = µνλ∂νbλ(x).

(21)

The physical ﬁeld ξµ is invariant under the addition of
the gradient of any smooth scalar ﬁeld
bλ(x) → bλ(x) + ∂λε(x),

(22)

so bλ is a gauge potential for the ‘ﬁeld strength’ ξµ. We
substitute the deﬁnition Eq. (21) into Eq. (18) to ﬁnd

Ldual =

=

g
2
g
4

(µνλ∂νbλ)2 + i(µνλ∂νbλ)∂µϕsing
(∂νbλ − ∂λbν)2 + ibλJ V
λ .

(23)

Here we performed integration by parts on bλ and sub-
stituted the deﬁnition of the vortex current Eq.
(12).
This form is identical to the Maxwell Lagrangian for
charged particles interacting by exchanging photon ﬁelds.
Vortices in a 2+1D superﬂuid are identical to a gas of
charged particles, interacting by the electromagnetic-like
dual gauge ﬁelds bλ. Therefore we refer to this as the
Coulomb phase for vortex particles. Recall that bλ en-
codes for the supercurrent ξµ which encodes for the su-
perﬂuid sound mode ∂µϕ. We conclude that the Gold-
stone modes that communicate the rigidity of the su-
perﬂuid medium also mediate interactions between the
topological defects of that medium: the vortices. The
gauge freedom Eq. (22) can in turn be viewed as enforc-
ing vortex conservation Eq. (15).

C. The phase-disordered superﬂuid as a vortex

condensate

The real power of duality is that it reveals how to
take the analogy with electrodynamics one step fur-
ther. When the free photon encounters a superconduc-
tor, which is a condensate of bosons (Cooper pairs), it
minimally couples to the condensate and acquires a mass
through the Anderson–Higgs mechanism. The interac-
tion mediated by massive gauge bosons is not long- but
short-ranged. The rigidity communicated by the dual
gauge ﬁelds persists over a short distance only, signaling
that long-range order has been lost. In other words, a
hallmark of the disordered phase is that the dual gauge
ﬁelds become massive.

In the dual language such a disordered state corre-
sponds to a condensate of vortices. When the coupling
constant g increases above a critical value, vortices can
be freely created and annihilated and undergo an unbind-
ing transition, which is very similar to the Berezinskii–
Kosterlitz–Thouless transition in 2+0 dimensions. This
statement can be made very precise on a lattice by con-
sidering a grand canonical ensemble of meandering vor-
tex worldlines [51] and has been conﬁrmed by numerical
calculations [52, 53], see also Sec. VII. The vortex con-
densate is described by a collective complex scalar ﬁeld
Φ = |Φ|eiφ to which the dual gauge ﬁelds are minimally
coupled.

Since the ﬂow around the vortex core is superﬂow, the
vortex condensate is governed by the same velocity cph
as the superﬂuid phase ﬂuctuations. It will however be
useful to keep track of the inﬂuence of the condensate
degrees of freedom by assigning to it a hypothetical ve-
locity cV, which could be diﬀerent from cph. This turns
out to be even more useful in the dual elasticity context.
The minimal coupling term then becomes

Lmin.coup. =
1
2
≡ 1
2

cV

(∂τ − ibτ )Φ|2 +

| 1
|( ˜∂λ − i˜bλ)Φ|2.

|(∂l − ibl)Φ|2

1
2

(24)

The tildes˜indicates rescaling with the diﬀerent velocity
cV. Recall from Eqs. (16), (20) and (21) that bt = 1
bτ ,
cph
so we have ˜bt = cph
bt. The action for the dual supercon-
cV
ductor is
LSC =

|( ˜∂µ − i˜bµ)Φ| +

|Φ|2 +

(µνλ∂νbλ)2 +

|Φ|4.
(25)
Here α and β are dual Ginzburg–Landau parameters.
When α < 0 the condensate ﬁeld obtains a ﬁnite vacuum

expectation value |Φ| = (cid:112)−α/β = Φ0 and its phase

g
2

1
2

α
2

β
4

φ (not to be confused with the superﬂuid phase ϕ) ob-
tains a spontaneously chosen value φ0. We will always
work in the London limit or strong type-II limit, where
ﬂuctuations in the condensate amplitude |Φ| = Φ0 are
neglected. The dual gauge ﬁeld acquires a Higgs mass
0/g ≡ Ω2. The interactions mediated by bλ have turned
Φ2
short-ranged: the dual Meissner eﬀect.
In addition to
the zero-sound mode, which has turned massive, there
is a second mode provided by the condensate. By gauge
transformation this can also be interpreted as the longitu-
dinal polarization of the dual gauge ﬁeld. In the physical
case where cV = cph, the two modes are degenerate. In
the Bose-Hubbard model, these two degenerate gapped
modes correspond to the particle and hole excitations of
the Bose-Mott insulator.

At this point we would like to dispel one common mis-
conception regarding vortex–boson duality, namely that
instead of the massive dual gauge ﬁeld, the dual vortices
in the Mott insulator phase (singularities in φ) would cor-
respond to the particle and hole (doublon/holon) excita-
tions. As the insulator is a condensate of vortices which

15

has the action of a type-II superconductor Eq. (25), there
are the dual incarnations of Abrikosov vortices, some-
times called vortex pancakes in two dimensions. In sev-
eral works, following the ideas laid out in Refs. [49, 50], it
is surmised that these dual vortex and antivortex excita-
tions be the particle and hole excitation in the Mott in-
sulator. As we mentioned, that role is played by the dual
gauge ﬁelds, coding for the Goldstone modes in the super-
ﬂuid but acquiring a mass through the Anderson–Higgs
mechanism in the Mott insulator [16]. There are several
ways to see this. First, vortices are topological defects as
opposed to localized particle excitations. The energy of
a single vortex grows with the system size whereas the
particle/hole excitations are local and at rest have a well-
deﬁned energy, the Mott gap. Second, the particle and
hole have a well-deﬁned boson number. Conversely, a
vortex in the Mott insulator is precisely that state where
boson number is no longer well-deﬁned, since number and
phase are canonically conjugate operators, and according
to the duality the core of the Mott vortex recovers the
superﬂuid phase. Similarly, since the Mott insulator is
a dual Ginzburg–Landau superconductor, if the charged
particle (hole) were a vortex (antivortex), this would im-
ply that an Abrikosov vortex in a real superconductor
would carry an elementary charge 2e, which to the best
of our knowledge and observations is not the case. Third,
in higher dimensions the vortices become extended ob-
jects, for instance vortex lines in three dimensions. But
the particle and hole excitations in the Mott insulator are
always particlelike in any dimension. Instead, the dual
vortices are just that: topological defects that carry a
quantized value of the current whose rigidity was lost in
the disordered state [19]. This statement was proven by
the derivation in Ref. [16] that the propagating modes on
each side of the phase transition are represented by the
dual gauge ﬁelds. Will we repeat this argument below.

For more details on the duality construction see for
instance Refs. [11, 55]. One concludes that the disordered
superﬂuid is dual to a superconductor in 2+1D, where
vortices no longer have long-range correlations. Such a
disordering transition is reﬂected by the gapping out of
the dual gauge ﬁeld representing the original Goldstone
mode, a theme that will feature prominently in quantum
elasticity.

D. Propagators and duality

Although we can read oﬀ most of the physics directly
from the Lagrangian for the superﬂuid Eq.
(9), more
rigor is acquired by studying the Green’s functions or
propagators. The phase–phase propagator is easy to
compute in momentum space,

(cid:104)ϕ(p)ϕ(p)(cid:105) = g

1
p2 ,

(26)

as one expects for a massless scalar ﬁeld. However, the
phase variables are not well deﬁned across the phase tran-

sition and therefore we cannot compare the correlator Eq.
(26) with anything on the disordered side. In this light,
it is better to consider the velocity–velocity correlator,
where vµ = ∂µϕ, and this is precisely the point of the
duality construction. By deﬁnition (cid:104)vµvν(cid:105) = pµpν(cid:104)ϕϕ(cid:105),
but we can also calculate it directly from the generating
functional Z with external sources Jµ:
(cid:104)vµ(p)vν(−p)(cid:105) =
Z[J] =

Dϕ exp(cid:2) −

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)J =0

(cid:90) 1

δJµ(p)

δJν(0)

1
Z[0]

Z[J]

(cid:3).

(cid:90)

δ

δ

,

2g

(∂µϕ)2 + (∂µϕ)Jµ
(27)

Integrating out the phase ﬁeld will leave a Lagrangian
L ∼ g

p2 Jν, leading to

2Jµ

pµpν

(cid:104)vµvν(cid:105) = g

pµpν
p2 .

(28)

Obviously, since the duality is a mathematical identity,
calculating the same quantity using dual variables ξµ one
should obtain the same results. This is a more subtle is-
sue than it seems at face value. With the external source
Jµ in place, the dual current is redeﬁned through the
left-hand side of Eq. (16), so that

ξµ = −i

1
g

∂µϕ − iJµ.

(29)

Thus, the above equation relates the original velocity
ﬁelds to the dual variables. The dual Lagrangian be-
comes

Ldual =

It follows directly from Z =(cid:82) exp(−(cid:82) Ldual) that

JµJµ + igJµξµ + iξµ∂µϕ.

µ − g
ξ2
2

g
2

(30)

(cid:104)vµvν(cid:105) =

1
Z[0]

δ
δJν

δ
δJµ

Z[J]

= gδµν − g2(cid:104)ξµξν(cid:105).

(31)
This relation was ﬁrst derived in Ref. [12], relating prop-
agators on the original and the dual sides. The propaga-
tor (cid:104)ξµξν(cid:105) can be calculated directly from (18) but only
after implementing the constraint ∂µξµ = 0. Another
route automatically taking care of this constraint is to
substitute the dual gauge ﬁeld Eq. (21), via
(cid:104)ξµξν(cid:105) = µκλνρσ(−ipκ)(ipσ)(cid:104)bλbρ(cid:105).

(32)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)J =0

Since the dual gauge ﬁelds couple to the vortex sources,
their propagators have a meaningful interpretation by
themselves. Since their action is just that of massless
free vector ﬁelds, transforming to the (t, L, T)-system (see
Sec. I E and appendix A) and using relation Eq. (A11),
we ﬁnd

T q2

cph

i

ωnq

 b

†
t
†
b
L
†
b
T
†
t J V

+ ib

†
LJ V
t + ib

L + ib

− i

cph
1
c2
ph

ωnq
ω2
n

†
TJ V

T

p2





 bt

bL
bL

(33)

Ldual =

g
2

16

µ(p) = bµ(−p), and b
Recall from Sec. I E that b†
λ is a
†
shorthand for 1
λ + J V
bλ). The propagators can be
λ
obtained as (cid:104)bµbν(cid:105) = 1Z[0]
Z[J] etc. One should
δ
δJ V†
integrate out the ﬂuctuating gauge ﬁelds, which we do
for bτ and then bT to ﬁnd,

†
λJ V

†
λJ V

2 (b

δJ V
µ

δ

ν

T +

1
2g

1

q2|J V
t |2

Ldual =

g
2

( 1
c2
ph

L ) + h.c.

†
n + q2)|bT|2 + ib
ω2
TJ V
†
L(− iωn
cphq
1
1
ω2
n + q2
c2
ph
†
L(− iωn
cphq

t + J V
J V
|J V
T |2 +

J V
t + J V

1
2g

L ) + h.c.

1

q2|J V
t |2

+ 1

2 ib

=

1
2g

+ 1

2 ib

(34)

τ + ∂mJ V

t − qJ V
J V

In the last line, we see that bL is to be integrated out as
a Lagrange multiplier for the constraint i ωn
L =
cph
∂tJ V
m = 0, the conservation of vortex current.
This is a consequence of the gauge invariance Eq. (22).
This ascertains that in future calculations, is it allowed
to impose the Coulomb gauge ∂mbm = −qbL = 0, or any
other gauge ﬁx at will, right at the Lagrangian level Eq.
(33). We ﬁnd two propagators in the Coulomb gauge,

(cid:104)btbt(cid:105) =
(cid:104)bTbT(cid:105) =

1
g
1
g

1
q2 ,

1
c2
ph

1
n + q2
ω2

=

1
g

1
p2 .

(35)

(36)

Next to the expected massless propagating mode corre-
sponding to the transverse polarization bT , we also dis-
cern the static Coulomb force bt between ‘vortex charges’
t , with propagator (cid:104)btbt(cid:105) ∼ 1/q2. It is interesting that
J V
the single scalar ﬁeld ϕ through the duality transforma-
tion also immediately yields these static forces. This fea-
ture will become more revealing in the elasticity context.
With these results one ﬁnds the supercurrent correlators,

(cid:104)ξtξt(cid:105) =

q2
gp2 ,

(cid:104) 1

c2
ph

(cid:104)ξmξn(cid:105) =

1
g

ω2
n
p2 P L

mn + P T
mn

(cid:105)

(37)

(38)

Here we used the longitudinal and transverse projectors
Eqs. (1) and (2). Given these equations and the gen-
erating functional relation Eq. (31), one can reobtain
Eq. (28). Note that the propagating mode shows up in
(cid:104)ξtξt(cid:105) and (cid:104)ξLξL(cid:105) while the transverse current correlator
(cid:104)ξTξT(cid:105) is constant: a sound mode has no transverse com-
ponent.

Eq. (31) holds both in the ordered (Coulomb) and the
disordered (Higgs) phase.
In the disordered phase, we
add the Higgs term as in Eq. (25). We can now choose
the unitary gauge φ ≡ 0, simplifying the Higgs term to
0b2
Φ2
λ. The gauge freedom is absorped, and we ﬁnd the

17

III. FIELD-THEORETIC ELASTICITY

In this section, we present the theory of elasticity as a
quantum ﬁeld theory of broken translational symmetries.
Crystalline states of matter and their correlations are in
some sense the most tangible and everyday case of spon-
taneous symmetry breaking in macroscopic quantum sys-
tems. We now discuss this brieﬂy, since it is the starting
point of the framework of this review. The path-integral
formulation will allow a straightforward introduction of
an vortex–boson-type dualization of elasticity in Sec. VI.
As opposed to the classical theory of elasticity, see e.g.
[58], the roots of which are centuries old, the ﬁeld theory
of elasticity as we formulate it is a recent development, in
great part by Kleinert [10]. We will now explain in detail
how the theory of elasticity emerges from the many-body
path-integral formalism, followed by a discussion on the
excitations of the model.

Lagrangian

LH =

Tq2 +

i

cph

 b

g
2

†
t
†
b
L
†
b
T
†
t J V
+ ib

t + ib

†
LJ V

L + ib

†
TJ V

T

c2
ph
c2
V
ωnq

Ω2 − i
ωnq
cph
ω2
n + Ω2

1
c2
ph

p2 + Ω2



 bt

bL
bL



(39)

Here Ω2 = Φ2
0/g is the Higgs mass. Note the velocity
ratio in the top-left matrix element. Employing external
sources to ﬁnd the propagators, we must integrate out
the ﬂuctuating gauge ﬁelds. Starting with bt, we obtain

LH =

†
L

b

g
2

Ω2( 1
c2
V

ω2
n + q2 +

c2
ph
c2
V

Ω2)

q2 +

Ω2

c2
ph
c2
V
1
cph

ωnq
c2
ph
c2
V

+ i

1
2

+

g
2

†
L(J V
b

L − i

q2 +
†
(p2 + Ω2)b
TbT + ib

Ω2
†
TJ V
T .

bL +

1
2g

|J V
t |2
q2 +

c2
ph
c2
V

Ω2

J V
t ) + h.c.

Since the currents J V
λ are external sources, we can study
one gauge ﬁeld component at a time, and as such the
cross-terms between J V
L are not important. We
can read oﬀ the propagators,

t and J V

(cid:104)btbt(cid:105) =

(cid:104)bLbL(cid:105) =

(cid:104)bTbT(cid:105) =

1
g

1
g

1
g

1

q2 + Ω2 ,

q2 +

c2
ph
c2
V

Ω2

Ω2( 1
c2
V

ω2

n + q2 +
1

1
c2
ph

ω2

n + q2 + Ω2

c2
ph
c2
V

=

,

Ω2)

1
g

1

p2 + Ω2 .

(41)

(42)

(43)

From these relations we read oﬀ the following physical
phenomena: the static Coulomb force Eq.
(41) turns
short ranged, with a length scale inversely proportional
to the Higgs mass. The superﬂuid sound mode Eq. (43)
is Higgsed and decays exponentially indicating the loss of
superﬂuid order. Next to these, there is a second propa-
gating, massive mode Eq. (42), as the gauge freedom was
ﬁxed by removing the condensate phase φ. This is some-
times referred to as that the gauge ﬁeld bλ “has eaten the
Goldstone boson” (the phase mode of the vortex conden-
sate) to become massive. This is the Anderson–Higgs
mechanism for gauge ﬁelds to obtain a mass. Noticing
that the propagation velocity of this mode is cV, it is
clear that this mode originates from the vortex conden-
sate. In a real-world superﬂuid, the velocities cph and cV
are identical. In conclusion, the spectrum of the disor-
dered superﬂuid contains two massive propagating modes
and one short-ranged static force. As mentioned above,
in the Bose-Hubbard model the doublet of massive modes
corresponds to the doublon and holon excitations of the
Bose-Mott insulator.

(40)

A. Crystalline states and displacement ﬁelds

The quantum Hamiltonian of a non-relativistic many

body system is very generally

N(cid:88)

i=1

H =

P2
i
2Mi

+ V(x1, . . . , xN ),

(44)

where Pi are the momenta, Mi the masses, xi coordi-
nates of the N ‘particles’, and V is the many-body po-
tential. The above form of the Hamiltonian represents
the starting point of all condensed matter systems, re-
gardless whether these are gaseous, liquid, or solid. In
terms of symmetries, the Hamiltonian Eq. (44) is invari-
ant under all spatial symmetries of isotropic Euclidean
space E(D) = RD (cid:111) O(D). We will be interested in
states which spontaneously break the symmetries E(D)
to a subgroup; this means that the ground state of (44)
breaks them even though the Hamiltonian and the poten-
tial V(x1, . . . , xN ) are invariant under these symmetries.
Our deﬁnition of a (crystalline) solid is that both the
translations and rotations are broken down to a discrete
subgroup, and the groundstate consists of the particles
localized around some equilibrium positions R0
i . We de-
ﬁne the groundstate as a product state of semiclassical
coherent states, where the ‘one-particle coherent states’
localized around Ri are denoted as ψ(Ri) (the detailed
form of the wave packets is not important in the follow-
ing). The ground state is

(cid:16) N(cid:89)

(cid:17)|vacuum(cid:105).

|{Ri}(cid:105) =

ˆψ†(Ri)

(45)

i

Here ˆψ†(Ri) is an operator that creates the localized
state ψ(Ri). Since the states are highly localized in po-
sition, the center-of-mass momentum a priori ﬂuctuates
and Eq. (45) is not an eigenstate of Eq. (44), although

the classical state emerges as the many-body quantum
state. In the case of bosons, ˆψ(Ri) are commuting op-
erators, whereas for fermions the Pauli principle has to
be obeyed; in this case the ˆψ(Ri) anticommute and the
groundstate wave function is a Slater determinant of the
one-particle localized states. In the crystalline state the
particles hardly move from their equilibrium positions
and the statistics are unimportant. However, we will
later focus on states involving quantum melting, which
means that the particle positions {Ri} eventually wind
around each other in arbitrary ways, and this simpliﬁca-
tion no longer holds. Therefore we restrict ourselves to
bosonic matter only, avoiding any possible fermion-sign
problems.

In the (coherent state) path-integral formulation, the
partition function of the quantum system is obtained as
a path integral with periodic boundary conditions (trace)
over all possible intermediate states |{Ri(τ )}(cid:105) of the sys-
tem weighed by the Euclidean action,

e−SE[Ri(τ )](cid:105)

,

(cid:90)
D{Ri(τ )} (cid:104)
(cid:90) β
N(cid:88)

0

Z =

SE =

L =

dτ L(Ri(τ ), ∂τ Ri(τ )),

iPi∂τ Ri + H({Pi, Ri(τ )}).

(46)

(47)

(48)

i

Here we make the assumption that the localized states
form a sensible set of states for the problem at hand, as
a starting point to study ﬂuctuations. In the crystalline
solid, the low-energy excitations are described by small
displacements ui(τ ) from equilibrium

Ri(τ ) = R0

i + ui(τ ),

(49)

which are highly collective excitations in terms of the
original particle degrees of freedom. Note that these are
the ﬂuctuations around the broken symmetry state de-
scribed by Eq. (45).
In this representation of the the-
ory of elasticity, crystalline displacements ui(τ ) (or later
u(x, τ ) in the continuum limit) take the role of the low en-
ergy, Goldstone degrees of freedom: the phonons. Their
gapless nature is protected by the Goldstone theorem.
They will be the principal actors in what follows, anal-
ogous to the phase ﬁeld ϕ in Eq. (9) of the superﬂuid.
Compared to the scalar phase ﬁeld, a very important
distinction is that u(τ ) = ua(τ ) is a spatial vector and
displacements in the timelike direction are prohibited,
uτ ≡ 0. Thus, the Euclidean action cannot possibly be
subject to emergent Lorentz-invariance, and this is the
origin of much of the special properties of the quantum

(cid:90)

ﬁeld theory describing quantum solids and liquid crys-
tals (Lorentz-invariant quantum nematics are discussed
in Refs. [14, 19]).

18

Let us now consider how the displacements enter the
elastic action of the model. The Lagrangian in Eq. (48),
obtained from the Hamiltonian Eq. (44), contains two
contributions: (i) the inter-particle interaction V, which
acts as a potential energy, and (ii) the quantum kinetic
term T . First consider the classical limit Mi → ∞ when
the quantum ﬂuctuations are completely supressed. The
contribution to the action from the potential energy can
be written as an integral over imaginary time

Spot =

dτ V[{Ri(τ )}],

(50)

with V[{Ri(τ )}] being the potential energy of a given
conﬁguration of particles at a given imaginary time τ .

Due to the translational symmetry of the multi-particle
Hamiltonian, the potential energy must be a function of
the relative displacement between two particles

Rij = Ri − Rj = (R0

i + ui) − (R0

j + uj)

≡ R(0)

ij + ∆ij.

(51)

As a consequence, the expansion of Eq. (50) depends only
on the relative displacements ∆ij ≡ ui − uj and not on
the displacements themselves. We expand the potential
energy in powers of the relative displacements:

V = V0 +

∂V
∂Ra
ij

∆a

ij + 1
2

∂2V
ij∂Rb
kl

∂Ra

∆a

ij∆b

kl + O(∆3). (52)

The ﬁrst term is the binding energy of the solid and it rep-
resents an overall constant which we neglect from now on.
Given the fact that the expansion Eq. (52) is performed
around the equilibrium state, the second, linear term in
the expansion which represents the restoring force, must
vanish.

The next step is a coarse-graining procedure, turning
the lattice displacements ui(τ ) to continuum displace-
ments u(x) ≡ u(x, τ ). The gradient expansion in terms
of relative displacements is,

∆a

ij = ua

i − ua

j

= R(0)m

ij

∂mua +

ij R(0)n

ij

R(0)m
2

∂m∂nua + . . . .

(53)

Insert this into the second-order term of Eq. (52), yield-
ing the leading harmonic terms of the elastic potential
energy:

R(0)m

ij R(0)n

kl ∂mua∂nub ≡ 1

2 ∂muaCmnab∂nub,

R(0)m

ij R(0)r

ij R(0)n

kl R(0)s

kl ∂m∂rua∂n∂sub ≡ 1

2 ∂m∂ruaC (2)

mrnsab∂n∂sub.

19

(54)

(55)

e1(x) = 1
2

e2(x) = 1
2

∂2V
ij∂Rb
kl
∂2V
ij∂Rb
kl

∂Ra

∂Ra

The ﬁrst line is the elastic energy governing the physics at
large scales, while the second line represents the second-
order gradient elastic potential energy, which is impor-
tant only at shorter length scales. However, in the quan-
tum liquid-crystalline phases central to this work, the
second-order gradient terms become relevant again at
long distances. Therefore, we will keep track of both the
ﬁrst- and second-order gradient elastic terms in the anal-
ysis. Higher order terms in expansion Eq. (53) contain
even higher-order derivatives, and can be safely ignored.
The tensor Cmnab is called the elastic tensor and
C (2)
mnrsab represents second-order contributions. These
tensors are derived from the derivatives of the micro-
scopic energy V. Regardless of the speciﬁc microscopic
details of V, elasticity exhibits universal behavior at
macroscopic scales. This is related to the spontaneous
symmetry breaking by the crystalline state, such that
Goldstone’s theorem governs the physics associated with
the ﬂuctuations ua(x). First, the case ua(x) ∼ const. cor-
responds to a uniform center-of-mass displacement and
cannot change the energy of the system. In other words,
when the momentum of a ﬂuctuation ua(k) goes to zero,
the excitation is gapless. Accordingly, it is immediately
obvious that only derivatives ∂mua appear in the action.
From this perspective the theory of elasticity can be seen
as a ﬁeld theory of suitable tensors constructed from the
derivatives of the displacement ﬁeld ua(x). Let us now
brieﬂy discuss the structure of these tensors.

A priori, in general space dimension D, the elastic ten-
sor Cmnab may have up to D4 independent elements but
the actual number of independent components is always
smaller due to symmetry constraints. The structure of
the theory is not as straightforward in terms of the sym-
metries as perhaps one would expect. This is due to the
fact that the symmetry group E(D) = RD (cid:111) O(D) is
the semidirect product of translations and rotations and
these are not independent. One can see that the anti-
symmetric quantity

ωab = (∂aub − ∂bua)/2.

(56)

corresponds to an inﬁnitesimal rotation induced by
ua(x). Since a constant rotation ωab ∼ const. cannot
change the energy of the system either, this rotation ﬁeld
has to drop out from Eq. (54). Nevertheless, at higher
order in the expansion, derivatives ∂mωab can appear,
see Eq. (64). Another way of looking at the matter is
that to linear order a local rotation is indistinguishable
from a local translation [59, 60]. The absence of local

rotations is also responsible for the suppression of rota-
tional Goldstone modes in systems with broken transla-
tion symmetry, as discussed in Sec. VIII C. Summarizing,
only the symmetrized combinations of the derivatives of
ua or strains

uab = 1

2 (∂aub + ∂bua)

(57)

can appear in Eq. (54) and this implies that Cmnab is
symmetric in the corresponding indices m, a and n, b. We
can now count the number of the independent elements
as follows: there are M = D(D + 1)/2 strain compo-
nents, and each can couple with any other one, except
that the oﬀ-diagonal couplings are counted twice (Cmnab
and Cnmba must be the same). Thus, the number of the
independent elements in the elasticity tensor can be at
most M (M + 1)/2 = [D(D + 1)(D2 + D + 2)]/8. In two
dimensions there can be up to 6 independent elements,
while in three dimensions one ﬁnds 21 such entries.

B.

Isotropic elastic solid

The number of independent elements of Cmnab reduces
further due to the point group symmetries of the crys-
tal [10, 58]. We will focus on the case of the isotropic
solid as it is fully representative for the theory of the liq-
uid crystals we wish to present. Obviously, as rotational
symmetry is broken, the crystalline solid is never truly
isotropic but the long-distance physics of several solids
is well approximated by the isotropic limit. The reader
can generalize the theory for an arbitrary elasticity ten-
sor if desired, as this amounts to just more independent
components of Cmnab.

Here we present the theory of elasticity in arbitrary
space dimensions D until we specialize to 2+1 dimensions
in Sec. VI. In order for the system to be isotropic, i.e. in-
variant under the group of improper rotations O(D), the
most general symmetric elastic tensor takes the form [10]

Cmnab = DκP (0)

mnab + 2µP (2)

mnab.

(58)

Here, the rigidities of the solid are parameterized through
the compression and shear moduli, κ and µ respectively.
They are related to the Lam´e constant λ via λ = κ− 2
D µ.
P (s)
mnab is the projector on the subspace of matrices that
are irreducible tensors with angular momentum s. There

20

Here, (cid:96)(cid:48) deﬁnes the length below which the gradient of
the compression strain ∂m∂juj becomes relevant. The
rotational stiﬀness length (cid:96) deﬁnes the length scale at
which torque/curvature become physically relevant; re-
member that local rotations are absent in ﬁrst-gradient
elasticity. Most calculations can be performed in ﬁrst-
gradient elasticity only, but the term ∼ (cid:96)2 will be useful
in examining the quantum nematic phase of Sec. VIII.

(59)

(60)

(61)

δmaδnb,

are three such projectors,

P (0)

mnab =

P (1)

mnab =

1
δmaδnb,
D
[δmnδab − δmbδna],
1
2
[δmnδab + δmbδna] − 1
1
D
2

P (2)

mnab =

sition of unity) (cid:80)

s P (s)

which, together, satisfy the closure identity (decompo-
mnab = δmnδab. The absence of
the angular momentum s = 1 projector in Eq. (58)
reﬂects the absence of local rotations Eq. (56), since
P (1)
mnab∂nub = ωma.
In our analysis, we will substitute one of the elastic
rigidities with the Poisson ratio ν, the ratio of transverse
to longitudinal strain when the material is put under ex-
ternal longitudinal stress. The compression modulus is
related to ν through [10]

(cid:104)

(cid:105)

κ = µ

2
D

1 + ν

1 − (D − 1)ν

It is useful to notice that, for stability in equilibrium,
both the compression and the shear modulus must be
positive. This, in turn, implies that the Poisson ratio can
vary between ν = −1 (for a compressionless solid) and
ν = 1/(D − 1) (for a body with no shear rigidity). The
majority of solids have a positive Poisson ratio. Solids
with negative Poisson ratio are also known as auxetics
and they are common in systems where the shape defor-
mation (i.e., shear) is more costly than compression on
the macroscopic level [61]. Such a property implies that
the solid will reduce its cross section upon pressure which
deﬁes our everyday experience with solids. Known exam-
ples are the Abrikosov lattice in type-II superconductors
(D = 2) [62], α-quartz (D = 3) [63], and some foams [64].
Some phases of biopolymers have been shown to exhibit
negative Poisson ratio [65].

The exact form of the isotropic elasticity tensor in two

(cid:105)

(cid:104)

dimensions is

Cmnab = µ

δmnδab + δmbδna + 2ν

1−ν δmaδnb

.

(63)

Two-dimensional solids with the triangular type of the
lattice symmetry group (C3n, D3n) share this elasticity
tensor. In other words, the notion of the crystalline axes
is lost in the long-distance physics. Thus, the results de-
rived in this work will also be applicable not only to an
isotropic solid but also to a solid with triangular or hexag-
onal lattice symmetry. As one of the consequences, we
will recover the quantum generalization of the KTNHY
transition in two dimensions [36–40].

Let us brieﬂy examine the second-order gradient term
Eq. (55) for the case of an isotropic solid. From sym-
metry, it follows that it can have only two independent
coupling constants deﬁned via two lengths (cid:96)(cid:48) and (cid:96) [10].
The second-order term can be expressed as

1−(D−1)ν (cid:96)(cid:48)2∂m∂juj∂m∂kuk + (cid:96)2∂mωab∂mωab(cid:105)
(cid:104) 1−(D−2)ν

e2(x) = µ

(64)

.

(62)

Lkin = 1

2 ρ(∂τ u)2,

(65)

C. Quantum elasticity

Let us now add the quantum Euclidean time dynamics
to the static elasticity obtained so far, following Ref. [12].
The kinetic energy for the particle coordinates {Ri(τ )}
is given by T = 1
i Mi(∂τ Ri)2. In the coherent state
path integral for the displacement ﬁelds (49) in imaginary
time this turns into the term in the Lagrangian [12]

(cid:80)N

2

with ρ the mass density of the solid.
In the case of
most real crystalline solids, the lattice is formed by atoms
with very big masses Mi → ∞, quenching the quantum
ﬂuctuations. This is the theory of low-energy (acous-
tic) phonons, which are then just independent harmonic
oscillators in the normal-smode decomposition of the lat-
tice. The only quantum eﬀect to quadratic order is the
zero-point ﬂuctuations of the harmonic oscillators. One
of the central points for the theory of quantum elasticity
is therefore the assumption of small masses Mi such that
the quantum ﬂuctuations implied by Eq. (65) are impor-
tant, which is the opposite limit of the usual harmonic
lattice story.

We are now ready to deﬁne the ﬁeld theory of quantum
elasticity. We combine the kinetic energy contribution
Eq. (65) and the potential energy Eq. (54) into the total
Lagrangian, and recast it in a useful form as

L0[∂µua] = 1

2 ∂µuaCµνab∂νub.

(66)

The sum over the Greek indices includes not only the
spatial, but also the temporal direction. To do this, we

must deﬁne a velocity cT =(cid:112)µ/ρ, called the shear ve-

locity or transverse velocity, see below. We have deﬁned
∂µ ≡ (∂t, ∂m) ≡ ( 1
∂τ , ∂m) and the extended elasticity
tensor becomes

cT

Cµνab = µδabδµtδνt + Cmnab.

(67)

The Lagrangian Eq. (66), with the isotropic elastic-
ity tensor Eq. (58), deﬁnes the Euclidean action S =

0 dτ(cid:82) dDx L0[∂µua] of quantum elasticity in two di-
(cid:82) β

mensions, with partition sum,

Z =

Dua e−S[∂µua].

(68)

(cid:90)

.

This action will ﬁgure as the starting point for the ﬁeld
theoretical description of a (quantum) solid and its melt-
ing.

We shall now discuss the basic results of the the-
ory of elasticity followed by elastic response functions
of the isotropic solid. For more details, see for exam-
ple Refs. [10, 58]. In the solid phase, the displacements
ua are well-deﬁned ﬁelds in terms of which the action is
Gaussian. It is most convenient to consider the generat-
ing functional with external sources Ja,
Dua e−(cid:82) dxdτ L[Ja].

Z[Ja] =

(cid:90)

(69)

where the external sources couple to displacement as
L[Ja] = L0 + J aua. The Euler–Lagrange equations of
motion are
∂L[Ja]
∂ua − ∂µ

= Ja − ∂µCµνab∂νub = 0.

∂L[Ja]
∂(∂µua)

(70)

It is convenient to deﬁne the imaginary time stress tensor
σa
µ and rewrite the equations of motion as

∂µσa

µ + iJa = 0,

µ = −iCµνab∂νub,
σa

(71)

where the imaginary factors are the same as in Sec. II.
If we temporarily set the temporal part to zero, the La-
grangian becomes the classical elastic energy density Ecl
and the equations reduce to those of classical elasticity

m + Ja = 0,

∂mσa

σa
m = Cmnab∂nub,

(72)
where the Ja have the interpretation as external force
densities. Correspondingly, the temporal component
τ = ρi∂τ ua can be interpreted as the momentum den-
σa
sity in imaginary time. In ﬁrst-order elasticity, the elastic
tensor Cmnab is symmetric and therefore the stress tensor

21

is symmetric as well, and can be alternatively deﬁned in
terms of the symmetric strains as [58]

σa

m =

δEcl
δuma

.

(73)

We will however deﬁne the stress tensor σa
µ explicitly in
terms of the strains ∂µua without invoking any a priori
symmetry properties. As already shown by Kleinert [10],
the classical theory of elasticity can be written in terms
of the stresses by a dualization procedure. This duality
will be discussed extensively in Sec. VI for the quantum
case.

D. Propagators of the isotropic elastic solid

The displacement propagators are given by taking the
second derivative of Z[Ja] with respect to the external
sources

(cid:104)uaub(cid:105) =

1
Z[0]

∂2Z[J ]
∂J a∂J b

.

(74)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)J →0

The absence of topological defects in the crystal phase
means that the path integral in Eq. (69) incorporates
only smooth contributions of the ua ﬁelds and these can
be resolved by Gaussian integration. For convenience, in
the following we switch to the Matsubara–Fourier trans-
formed displacement ﬁelds. Denoting the bosonic Mat-
subara frequency by −i∂τ (cid:55)→ ωn and the spatial momen-
tum by −i∇ (cid:55)→ q, the action with the external source
terms included turns into

2 ua†(cid:104)
2 ρ ua†(cid:2)(ω2

(ρω2

L = 1
= 1

n + µq2)δab + µ 1−(D−3)ν
n + c2
n + c2

ab + (ω2

Lq2)P L

1−(D−1)ν qaqb

Tq2)P T
ab

(cid:105)

ub + J a†ua

(cid:3) ub + J a†ua.

(75)

In the second line, ua† = ua(−ωn,−q); even though the
displacements are real ﬁelds, the Fourier transformed
components contain complex values, and the Hermi-
tian conjugate must be properly taken into account, see
Sec. I E. We will employ this shorthand notation through-
out this work. Eq. (75) introduces both longitudinal and
transverse projectors Eqs. (1), (2),

P L

ab =

qaqb
q2 ,

ab = δab − P L
P T
ab.

(76)

These separate the displacements into components par-
allel and perpendicular to the wavevector q. The two
velocities cL, cT in Eq. (75) correspond to the longitudi-

nal and the transverse phonon velocity

1 − (D − 2)ν
1 − (D − 1)ν

=

κ + 2µ D−1

D

ρ

,

(77)

(78)

c2
L =

c2
T =

2µ
ρ
µ
ρ

.

While the longitudinal phonon (sound, compression) ex-
ists even in shearless media, the transverse phonons owe
their existence to the shear rigidity associated with spon-
taneous translational symmetry breaking and these are
absent in gases and liquids. Notice that the deformations
due to longitudinal phonons in a solid involve both shear
and compression as reﬂected in the propagation velocity
of this mode. From Eq. (77) we see that the longitudinal

velocity is always larger than the transverse velocity for
D ≥ 2.
After integration of one longitudinal and D − 1 trans-
verse displacement components in Eq. (75), we ﬁnd the
generating functional

22

In more than two spatial dimensions, there is more than
one rotation ﬁeld ωab, and Eq. (84) is a sum of all rota-
tion contributions. Multiple excitations (phonons) show
up as separate poles in this propagator.
Interestingly,
we see that the local rotation ﬁelds acquire a nontriv-
ial propagator although they are not present explicitly in
the action of Eq. (66). This is due to the interdependence
between translations (shear) and rotations, cf. Sec. IV D.
One could construct a correlation function between the

compression strain and the local rotation

.

Gchiral

bc

= (cid:104)∂auaωbc(cid:105).

(85)

If a phase of the system possesses a mirror symmetry
such that it is invariant under the change of sign in di-
rection b, the above propagator has to vanish since the
local rotation changes sign under this mirror symmetry.
In isotropic phases the propagator Eq. (85) acquires a
ﬁnite value only if the chirality is violated, meaning that
the mirror image of the ground state represents a diﬀer-
ent physical state. This is the origin of the name of this
“chiral” propagator.

The smectic phase that we construct in Sec.

IX is
not isotropic, and it possesses the mirror symmetry only
with respect to axes parallel and perpendicular to the
order parameter. Accordingly, the chiral propagator will
have to vanish for an excitation propagating in either of
these two directions. When propagating at some diﬀerent
angle with respect to the layers of the smectic, the mirror
symmetry is violated, and the propagator of Eq. (85) may
acquire a ﬁnite value.

We now want to perform the dualization of the theory
in tems of strains variables into stresses [10, 12], but in
order to do that, we must ﬁrst become acquainted with
the topological defects in solids.

IV. TOPOLOGICAL DEFECTS IN SOLIDS

The groundstate of the ordered system is perturbed by
excitations. Ordinary excitations like shear forces and
propagating phonons are smooth disturbances of the or-
der parameter. There are also excitations that diminish
the order in the form of local singularities in the order
parameter ﬁelds. Because the order parameter ﬁeld is
smooth everywhere outside of the singularity, the inﬂu-
ence of the singularity can be noticed throughout the rest
of the system. As this inﬂuence does not depend on local
details, these singularities are called topological defects.
Because the order parameter is an otherwise smooth ﬁeld,
the classiﬁcation of topological defects employs the math-
ematics of homotopy theory, which studies the properties
of mappings of closed loops and other hyperspheres that
are independent of local, smooth deformations [66].

Since the topological defect perturbs the order, and
its inﬂuence is noticeable even at long distances from
the singularity, the energy of a single defect grows with
distance. For instance the energy of a vortex in a super-
ﬂuid grows logarithmically with distance. Therefore, one

Z[J a] =

(cid:89)

q,ωn

exp

n + c2

ρD(ω2

(cid:115)
2J a†(cid:104)
(cid:16) 1
(cid:16) 1
2J a†(cid:104)
(cid:18)

ρ(ω2

= Z[0] exp

n + c2

(2π)D
Lq2)(ω2
P L
ab
n+c2

Lq2) +
P L
ab
n+c2

ρ(ω2

ρ(ω2

Lq2) +

Tq2)D−1×
(cid:105)J b(cid:17)
(cid:105)J b(cid:17)

P T
ab
n+c2

Tq2)
P T
ab
n+c2

Tq2)

ρ(ω2

(79)

(cid:19)

The imaginary-time displacement propagator for the
elastic ideal solid Eq. (74) is found to be

(cid:104)uaub(cid:105) =

1
ρ

P L
ab
n + c2
ω2

Lq2 +

P T
ab
n + c2
ω2

Tq2

.

(80)

The excitation spectrum of an ideal isotropic crystal has
one massless linear pole associated with the longitudinal
displacements, and D−1 degenerate massless linear poles
associated with the transverse displacements. These are
respectively, of course, the longitudinal and transverse
acoustic phonons of the crystal.

Let us consider a solid with the second-order gradient
terms Eqs.(55) or (64) added. The resulting displacement
propagator is

(cid:16)

(cid:104)uaub(cid:105) =

1
ρ

n + c2
ω2

P L
ab
Lq2(1 + (cid:96)(cid:48)2q2)
P T
ab

+

(cid:17)

.

n + c2
ω2

Tq2(1 + (cid:96)2q2)

(81)
The choice of the lengths (cid:96)(cid:48) and (cid:96) in the second or-
der gradient energy density Eq. (64) is now clear: the
second-order gradient elasticity eﬀects become visible in
the phonon spectra only at lengths smaller than (cid:96)(cid:48) in the
longitudinal and (cid:96) in the transverse sector.

The displacement ﬁelds are only well deﬁned in the
total absence of topological defects, and so are the prop-
agators Eq. (74). This situation mimics the phase propa-
gator of the XY -model in Sec. II D. There, it was shown
that the velocity–velocity propagators are also valid in
the presence of defects and even in the defect-mediated
molten phase. Similarly, we now go over to strain prop-
agators that can be dualized, and which can be used on
both sides of the melting phase transition. The general
strain propagator (Green’s function) is

Gstrain,mnab = (cid:104)∂mua∂nub(cid:105),

(82)

of which certain combinations are of greater physical rel-
evance.
In particular, we deﬁne the longitudinal and
transverse strain propagators,
GL(ωn, q) ≡ (cid:104)∂aua∂bub(cid:105) =

, (83)

q2

1
ρ

n + c2
ω2

Lq2(1 + (cid:96)(cid:48)2q2)
q2

n + c2
ω2

Tq2(1 + (cid:96)2q2)

.

(84)

GT(ωn, q) ≡ 2(cid:104)ωabωab(cid:105) =

1
ρ

23

(cid:73)

hardly ﬁnds isolated defects in long-range ordered mate-
rials; instead one ﬁnds pairs of defects–antidefects that
together are topologically neutral. The creation of such
a pair costs a ﬁnite amount of energy, and can be ther-
mally excited. This excitation energy of closely-bound
defect pairs is typically lower than the energy to create
an interstitial which is a missing or additional particle
in the crystal, i.e. a non-topological defect. From here
on, we will always consider such processes prohibitively
expensive, so that we take the number of particles to be
conserved.

In elasticity, we are primarily interested in point de-
fects in two, and line defects in three dimensions. They
are classiﬁed by the homotopy properties of closed loops,
collected in the so-called fundamental group π1(C) where
C is the order parameter space or conﬁguration space [66].
The order parameter space depends on the symmetry
breaking pattern, which for crystals is from the con-
tinuous Euclidean group to the discrete space group
RD (cid:111) O(D) → ZD (cid:111) ¯P where ¯P is the point group of the
crystal. Since both translational and rotational symme-
tries are broken, we expect translational and rotational
types of topological defects. However the symbol (cid:111) de-
notes a semidirect product indicating that the operations
of performing a translation and of a rotation do not com-
mute. As a consequence, the translational and rotational
defects are not independent, as we shall see in Sec. IV D.

A. Volterra processes

The construction of topological defects in a piece per-
fectly ordered crystal, can be done via a so-called Volterra
process. This entails making an imaginary cut in the ma-
terial, adding or removing certain particles near the cut
and then gluing the altered pieces back together such
that locally the crystal order is untainted, except for
a point (in 2D) or line (3D) singularity. This singu-
larity is called the defect core. An example of such a
Volterra process is given in Fig. 2(c). More details on
the Volterra construction can be found in textbooks, for
instance Refs. [10, 67, 68].

tity called the Burgers vector B = Ba [42], cf. a vortex
in a superﬂuid Eq. (11),

dxm∂mua = Ba

(86)

∂S

It is the topological charge associated with the disloca-
tion. The circuit ∂S around the dislocation core used
to measure the displacement is sometimes called Burgers
circuit (see Fig. 2(a)). In three dimensions there is a dis-
location line L with Burgers vector Ba. If the Burgers
vector is orthogonal to the line, it is called an edge discli-
nation, and when the Burgers vector is parallel to the
dislocation it is called a screw dislocation. By viewing a
2D system as a planar cut orthogonal to the defect line,
2D dislocations can be said to be edge dislocations.

In real materials, degradation of integrity, e.g. metal
fatigue, is due to the introduction of dislocations caused
by severe strain. Once these dislocations have formed,
they are very diﬃcult to remove and have non-trivial
dynamics, precisely because of their topological nature.
Dislocations can move, but only parallel to their Burgers
vector (glide motion). Motion in the perpendicular di-
rection (climb motion) would come down to the addition
of removal of particles, and is therefore energetically very
costly. This can be turned into a mathematically precise
statement, the glide constraint, see Sec. IV E. Disloca-
tions are sources of torsion [10]: a material with disloca-
tions is torsionally strained, and imposing torsion from
the outside on a material can induce the formation of
dislocations.

The topological defects associated with rotational or-
der are called disclinations. The Volterra process for cre-
ating a disclination is making a cut and inserting or re-
moving a whole wedge of material, see Fig. 2(c).
In a
crystal, the operation must always be an element of the
point group (e.g. a multiple of 90◦ rotation in a square
lattice) to ensure the gluing together is locally smooth,
but in the continuum limit we may envisage wedges of
any angle. The topological charge is obtained by the an-
gle of rotation in parallel transporting of a vector around
the disclination core, see Fig. 2(b). It is called the Frank
angle Ωab or tensor Ωc1···cD−2 = c1···cD−2abΩab [43],

(cid:73)

B. Dislocations and disclinations

∂S

dxm∂mc1···cD−2abωab = Ωc1···cD−2.

(87)

The topological defects associated with translational
order are called dislocations. The Volterra process for
creating a dislocation is cutting the material and insert-
ing a half-line that ends at the singularity. If we traverse
a circuit around the dislocation core, we notice that there
is a deﬁcient displacement. In other words: the lattice
distance becomes ill-deﬁned near the dislocation. It is in
this sense that dislocations perturb translational order.
In the extreme case, dislocations proliferate and com-
pletely destroy translational order. This is the defect-
mediated melting process that is the main topic of this
work. The deﬁcient lattice displacement is a vector quan-

In D spatial dimensions, the Frank tensor has D−2 com-
ponents. So in 2D it is a scalar Ω and in 3D a vector Ωc.
The Frank tensor points perpendicular to the plane of
rotation, and its magnitude denotes the deﬁcient angle.
In 3D, the straightforward generalization of a 2D discli-
nation is to have the disclination line pointing out of the
plane in Fig. 2(b), that is, parallel to its Frank vector.
This is called a wedge disclination for obvious reasons.
When the Frank vector is orthogonal to the disclination
line it is called a twist disclination.

Since the disclination Volterra process involves much
more inserted or removed material than a dislocation,

24

(a)dislocation

(b)disclination

(c)Volterra construction

FIG. 2: Topological defects in a 2D square lattice crystal. The core of the defects is indicated by a dot. (a) A dislocation is
a half-line insertion, indicated by the dashed red line. Its topological charge is a Burgers vector, indicated by an arrow. This
charge can be picked up by traversing a contour around the defect as indicated by the dotted line. (b) A disclination is the
insertion of a wedge. The site at the defect core has ﬁve instead of four neighboring sites, therefore the Frank charge is +90◦.
This can be picked up by parallel transport of a vector along a closed circuit around the disclination core, indicated by the
dotted line. (c) The Volterra construction of a disclination. The inserted material us indicated by dashed lines.

it is energetically much more costly.
In practice, in a
crystal one never ﬁnds isolated disclinations. One may
ﬁnd bound disclination–antidisclination pairs which ac-
tually corresponds to dislocations as we will explain in
Sec. IV D. Disclinations are sources of curvature.
If
one tries to impose a regular lattice on a curved sur-
face, it necessarily involves the introduction of disclina-
tions. Famously, it follows from Euler’s characteristic
that putting a triangular lattice on a sphere involves 12
−60◦-disclinations.

C. Defect densities

The Burgers vector and Frank tensor are topological
charges of the defects as a whole. However, the cores
of the defects are localized, and we can describe them
as local, ﬁeld-theoretic objects as follows. For clarity,
we ﬁrst introduce static line defects in 3+0D, and then
discuss the peculiarities of going to 2+1D with a special
time axis.

Let δm(L, x) be the Dirac delta function of unit vectors
tangent to the line L of the defect core in 3+0D. That
is, if we integrate over a two-dimensional surface with

normal (cid:98)n that is pierced by the line L with tangent t,
the integral is (cid:98)n · t. To be precise, let the line L have

coordinates xL

k (s) parametrized by s, then [10, 11],

δm(L, x) =

ds ∂sxL

(88)

(cid:90)

L

m(s)δ(D)(cid:0)x − xL
k (s)(cid:1).

Here the integral is over the whole line L. This deﬁnition
can be generalized to other dimensions, in particular to
3+1D dimensions where the line defects trace out world-
sheets in spacetime, which are divided into surface ele-
ments with two spacetime indices δµν(L, x), or in D + 1
dimensions to hypersurfaces with D − 1 spacetime ele-
ments δµ1···µD−1(L, x). If the line L is closed (or extends

to inﬁnity), this function satisﬁes ∂mδm(L, x) = 0 every-
where.

We can now deﬁne the dislocation density J a

m(x) and

the disclination density Θc

m(x) as follows:

J a
m(x) = δm(L, x)Ba,
Θc
m(x) = δm(L, x)Ωc.

(89)
(90)

In this text, upper indices always refer to the spatial
components of the topological charge, while the lower
indices correspond to normal space(time) indices of the
worldline.

Just as in vortex–boson-duality Eq. (10), the displace-
ment ﬁeld ua(x) of Eq. (49) can be split into smooth
and singular contributions:
it is a multivalued ﬁeld.
The defect densities follow directly. Everywhere away
from the singularity, the displacement ﬁeld is smooth
and single valued. Then derivatives commute, and
(∂m∂n − ∂n∂m)ua(x) always vanishes. At the singularity
the displacement ﬁeld is multivalued, and we can deﬁne
in 3+0D,

J a
m(x) = mkl∂k∂lua(x).

(91)
The combination of derivatives (∂m∂n − ∂n∂m) can be
pictured as the tiniest Burgers circuit around the defect
core. This agrees with Eq. (89) as the dislocation core is
located at the singularity. Similarly we have,

1

Θc

m(x) = mkl∂k∂l

(92)
Here ωab = ∂aub−∂bua is the local rotation tensor. These
deﬁnitions generalize straightforwardly to higher dimen-
sions D+0 as

2 cabωab(x).

(x) = m1···mD−2kl∂k∂lua(x),

J a
m1···mD−2
Θc1···cD−2
m1···mD−2(x) = m1···mD−2kl∂k∂l

1

(93)
2 c1···cD−2abωab(x).
(94)

Using Stokes’ theorem and Eqs. (88), (89) and (90),
Eqs. (91) and (92) lead back to Eqs. (86) and (87).

In quantum elasticity, we introduce a time axis. How-
ever, the displacements ua(x, t) are always spatial; there
can be no temporal component of the displacement ﬁeld
(ut = 0). This also implies that Burgers vectors Ba are
always spatial, as are rotations ωab, such that one of the
indices in the Frank tensor Ωc1···cD−2 must be the tem-
poral one. For instance, in 2+1D, there is only one ro-
tational plane, and Ωt ≡ Ω is the Frank scalar. Thus in
D + 1 dimensions we have

(x) = µ1···µD−1κλ∂κ∂λua(x),

J a
µ1···µD−1
Θc1···cD−2
µ1···µD−1(x) = µ1···µD−1κλ∂κ∂λ

1

(95)
2 tc1···cD−2abωab(x).
(96)

Specializing back to 2+1D, the defect densities we shall
use here are

J a
µ = µκλ∂κ∂λua(x),

Θµ = µκλ∂κ∂λ

1

2 tabωab(x).

(97)

(98)

For

individual

topological defects,

the property

∂mδm(L, x) = 0 ensures, in 3+0D,

∂mJ a

m = 0,

∂mΘc

m = 0.

(99)

These equations state that dislocation and disclination
lines cannot end within a piece of material; they must
extend to inﬁnity. In other words, there are no monopoles
associated with dislocations and disclinations. In 2+1D,
these equations become,

∂µJ a

µ = 0,

∂µΘc

µ = 0.

(100)

These are continuity equations for the particle-like topo-
logical defects, stating that the defect density can only
increase (decrease) when it ﬂows into (out of) the region
in question. These equations hold for individual, isolated
defects. In the presence of disclinations, the equation for
dislocations change, which is the topic of the next sub-
section.

D.

Interdependence between dislocations and

disclinations

For the same reason that translations and rotations
are not independent in the symmetry group RD (cid:111) O(D),
dislocations and disclinations are not independent. This
is shown pictorially in Fig. 3. We will sharpen this state-
ment in the following.

In the presence of a topological defect at the origin,
we want to know the deﬁcient displacement across the
cutting surface where some slab of material was inserted
in the Volterra process. For a single dislocation, the de-
ﬁcient displacement ∆ua is everywhere the same across
the inserted half-line, as can be seen in Fig. 2(a). For

25

a disclination however, since a wedge of material is in-
serted, the deﬁcient displacement increases with distance
from the disclination core. Take two reference points x1,
x2, then the deﬁcient displacement in the presence of a
disclination with deﬁcient rotation ¯Ωab ≡ abcΩc ≡ ∆ωab
is

∆ua(x2) = ∆ua(x1) + ¯Ωab(x2

b − x1
b).

(101)

This simply states that the displacement in the x-
direction increases with separation in the y-direction
from the core of the rotational defect in the xy-plane.
A more thorough derivation can, for instance, be found
in Ref. [10]. Thus a deﬁcient displacement can be caused
both by dislocations and disclinations. Then a disclina-
tion can be interpreted as a collection of dislocations.

We would like to translate the above equation into a
statement about defect densities. Away from the rota-
tional defect, we could assign the deﬁcient displacement
as a local dislocation density. That is, in the presence
of a disclination with Frank vector ¯Ωc = 1
2 cab ¯Ωab at the
origin, consider the dislocation density of a line L at a
point ¯x away from the origin, which itself possibly has a
Burgers vector Ba. Then from Eq. (101) we ﬁnd

m(x) = δm(L, x)(Ba + ¯Ωab ¯xb),
J a

(102)

But since the delta function is non-zero only at L, we
can identify ¯x = x. This equation states that a stack
of dislocations emanates from the disclination core, as
pictured in Fig. 3. Another important consequence of
this equation is that a disclination–antidisclination pair
is in fact a dislocation with Burgers vector equal to the
separation between the disclination and antidisclination
cores. Therefore a disclination–antidisclination pair is
topologically neutral as far as deﬁcient rotations are con-
cerned, but not so for translations. A completely topo-
logically neutral combination involves at least one other
disclination–antidisclination pair that cancel the Burgers
vector of the ﬁrst pair. The other side of the coin is that
a net non-zero Burgers vector corresponds to a ﬁnite den-
sity of disclination–antidisclination pairs. If the presence
of disclinations is restricted, for instance dynamically,
then dislocations can only appear in topologically neu-
tral combinations, that is, in dislocation–antidislocation
pairs.
In 2+1D spacetime this corresponds to having
closed spacetime loops of such pairs, which can be viewed
as the spontaneous creation and annihilation of disloca-
tion pairs.

From the non-local equation Eq. (102), we can obtain
a very important local equation by taking a derivative.
Using the Leibniz rule and ∂mδm(L, x) = 0 we ﬁnd

∂mJ a

m(x) = δb(L, x) ¯Ωab = abcδb(L, x)Ωc

= abcΘc

b(x).

(103)

Here we used ¯Ωab = abcΩc and Eq. (90). It can also be
derived from Eqs. (91) and (92). This equation states
that the dislocation density is not conserved in any re-
gion where the disclination line is not parallel to its Frank

26

(a)atoms

(b)disclination

(c)stack of dislocations

FIG. 3: Equivalence between a disclination and a stack of dislocations. (a) Lattice sites of a strained piece of crystal. The two
colored points are indicated for reference. The assignment of the topological charge is partly arbitrary. (b) The conﬁguration
corresponds to a +90◦-disclination, the same one as in Fig. 2(b). Taking a Burgers circuit starting from the red, dotted point
shows there is no displacement deﬁciency, and the Burgers vector is zero. (c) The same conﬁguration can be assigned as an
inﬁnite stack of dislocations, indicated by red lines and arrows. The Frank charge is zero, but a Burgers circuit from the same
starting point yields a non-vanishing Burgers vector.

(a)initial dislocation

(b)glide motion

(c)climb motion

FIG. 4: Motion of a 2D dislocation. 4(a) Initial conﬁguration with Burgers vector indicated by the arrow. 4(b) Glide motion
parallel to the Burger vector. This is only a change of a single ‘molecular’ bond, and the energy cost for such a process is
limited and of dynamic nature. 4(c) Climb motion orthogonal to the Burgers vector. The particle with dotted outline does
not ﬁt into the resulting lattice. Climb necessarily entails the addition or removal of an interstitial particle and is energetically
very costly.

vector. Recall that a twist dislocation has its Frank vec-
tor orthogonal to its defect line. Thus twist disclinations
necessarily involve dislocation lines ending on the discli-
nation line. The change of the rotational axis from one
position to the next necessitates the addition and removal
of dislocations.

In 2+1 dimensions, this becomes even clearer:

∂µJ a

µ(x) = abΘb(x).

(104)

Now the left hand side can be considered as an actual
dislocation creation process. The right-hand side con-
tains the current or ﬂow Θb of disclination density Θτ
in the direction b. Thus, when the disclination moves, it
creates or annihilates dislocations with Burgers vector in
the orthogonal direction. This is also clear from Fig. 3: if
we were to move the position of the disclination core up
one lattice spacing, we need to insert an additional dislo-
cation line. The same point of view is taken in Ref. [68].
Let us stress that any disclination line can be pictured
as a stack of dislocations. This is a static picture. But the

motion of the disclination perpendicular to its Frank vec-
tor will create and annihilate dislocations. In 2+1D, any
motion of the disclination is perpendicular to its Frank
vector, which necessarily lies in the temporal direction.
In the following, we will see how the dislocations and
disclinations are, respectively, the sources of torsional
stress and curvature stress [10]. It is important to keep
Eq. (104) in mind, as it shows that these sources are not
always independent of each other.

E. Kinematic constraints

As we mentioned, the motion that dislocations can un-
dergo is restricted to glide motion, parallel to the Burgers
vector, whereas climb motion orthogonal to its Burgers
vector is energetically strongly disfavored. The intuitive
reason is simple, see Fig. 4: for glide motion, it is only
necessary that some ‘molecular’ bond is broken and re-
stored somewhere else. The energy of the before- and

after-conﬁgurations are the same. The reader can al-
ready imagine that having many dislocations facilitates
this sort of gliding motion, that is, the resistance to shear
is lessened. The presence of dislocations leads to the loss
of shear rigidity, and the melting to a liquid crystal is the
proliferation of dislocations where the restoring forces for
shear are completely absent.

Conversely, climb motion requires the addition or re-
moval of a particle from the regular lattice,
in other
words, an interstitial excitation. Such interstitials are
usually very costly. If we are operating at energy scales
well below the interstitial creation energy, we can neglect
climb altogether, and this would be the whole story. But
we can do one better than that, using the dislocation
density deﬁned in Eq. (91). We summarize here the ar-
guments put forward in Ref. [15].

Recall that J a

t (x) is the density of dislocations with
Burgers vector Ba at point x, and J a
m(x) is the current
of those dislocations in direction m. In the absence of any
disclinations, they satisfy the continuity equation ∂µJ a
µ =
0 via Eq. (104). Now the glide constraint is a dynamical
constraint, and as such does not pertain to the (static)
density J a
a (no
sum) is the ﬂow in the direction of the Burgers vector,
m, a (cid:54)= m is ﬂow orthogonal to the
i.e. glide, while J a
Burgers vector, i.e. climb. The constraint turns out to
be

t but only to the current J a

m. Clearly J a

amJ a

m(x) = 0.

(105)
Here am ≡ tam. To better appreciate the physical con-
tent of Eq. (105), we may examine Fig. 4(a) with, y de-
noting the vertical and x the horizontal direction. Thus,
J x
y is the current of the dislocation along the y direction
associated with the Burgers vector that in Fig. 2(a) lies
along the x axis. Eq. (105) states that J y
y . How-
ever, in Fig. 4(a), the current J y
x identically vanishes as
the Burgers vector only has an x-component. Thus, if
correct, Eq. (105) mandates that J y
x = 0. The equality
J y
x = 0 states that climb motion (current orthogonal to
the Burgers vector direction) is impossible. The deriva-
tion of Eq. (105) is therefore tantamount to proving that
only glide motion is possible. This equation actually has
a very sound basis in conservation of mass [15]. To see
this, substitute Eq. (91) in this equation to ﬁnd

x = J x

0 = amJ a

m(x) = ammκλ∂κ∂λua = (∂t∂a − ∂a∂t)ua.
(106)
Now let the mass density be ρ(x). To lowest order
it is the uniform density ρ0 minus volume distortions
ρ = ρ0(1 − ∂aua). Meanwhile, the mass density current
is ja = ρ0∂tua. Then the conservation of mass, or con-
tinuity equation ∂tρ + ∂aja = 0 coincides precisely with
Eq. (106).

This derivation is valid for higher dimensions as well.
For instance, in 3+1D, J a
mn denotes the ﬂow in direction
n of the dislocation line along direction m with Burgers
vector Ba. The associated density is J a
mt. Contracting
the mass conservation law (∂t∂a − ∂a∂t)ua = 0 with the

27

four-dimensional Levi-Civita symbol µνκλ leads to the
glide constraint tamnJ a
In general dimensions
D + 1, the statement is [15]:

mn = 0.

tam1···mD−1J a

m1···mD−1

= 0.

(107)

(cid:82)

Note that only spatial components of the dislocation cur-
rent are involved, and that all the spacetime indices
mi are orthogonal to the Burgers vector.
In dimen-
sions higher than two, one could imagine that the dis-
location line could not necessarily be a straight line,
and hence an interstitial at one point could be ‘bor-
rowed’ from another point along the line. This is some-
times called restricted climb. In that case, the constraint
Eq. (107) is not strictly zero locally, but instead we have
V dDx tam1···mD−1J a
= 0. Such an integral
constraint can be enforced in a partition function by a
Lagrange multiplier. This is exactly what we need in or-
der to implement the glide constraint dealing with an en-
semble of dislocation lines that is used in defect-mediated
melting, which we will do in Sec. VII C. It turns out that
the glide constraint ensures that compression rigidity is
maintained even in the liquid crystal. The consequence
is that the zero temperature bosonic liquid crystal is at
the same time a superﬂuid with a longitudinal zero sound
mode. We will come back to this point in Secs. VIII B
and IX C.

m1···mD−1

F.

Interstitials and vacancies

There is yet another crystalline defect that we have not
discussed [12, 67]. These are the interstitials or vacancies
that are formed by extra or missing atoms in the lattice
and are non-topological point-like defects. In a real crys-
tal, these are ﬁnite energy excitations and always present
at ﬁnite temperatures. In fact, the real-world crystal is a
mixture of the crystalline condensate with a gas of inter-
stitials and vacancies, similarly as e.g. a superﬂuid has
both normal and superﬂuid components. The conserva-
tion of mass implies the combined conservation of inter-
stitials and vacancies. Upon the melting of the lattice,
these excitations should clearly become eﬀectively liber-
ated as the constituents are free to meander to arbitrary
positions. At zero temperature, the crystal is always well
deﬁned and for strong potentials V, the interstitials and
vacancies are just very heavy virtual excitations dressing
the ﬂuctuating zero-temperature crystal. At some criti-
cal couplings these bosons can in principle be liberated
and form a ﬁnite density Bose-condensate living in har-
mony with the background crystal: this is the disputed
and elusive supersolid [69–73]. We feel that this vestigial
phase, however, is not a generic situation and requires a
ﬁned tuned competition between the kinetic energy (the
constituent mass Mi), the lattice potential V and a small
energy for the excitations well below the topological de-
fects for the superﬂuid to form.

In two dimensions in fact, topologically we can inter-
pret an interstitial or a vacancy as a bound pair of a

28

space there is a superposition of zero, one, or any number
of Burgers vectors [19]. It has acquired gauge freedom in
the sense that there is an arbitrariness in choosing which
(lattice) distance to assign between two points. Thus,
the lattice has disappeared and this state has now be-
come fully translationally symmetric.

Second, the rotational symmetries are not aﬀected
since disclinations are much more energetically costly
than dislocations.
In fact, in real-life solids, disclina-
tions never appear whereas dislocations are easily iden-
tiﬁed and are, for instance, the cause of metal fatigue.
From the ﬁgures 2(a)–(b) one can immediately tell that
a disclination is a much stronger disturbance of order
than a dislocation. Similarly from Eq. (104) one infers
that any disclination may serve as a source of dislocations
which are themselves topological defects costing energy
growing with the system size. Therefore it is justiﬁed to
assume the absence of disclinations in any plane where
there is still translational order. Topological neutral com-
binations of disclinations (which on the square lattice in-
volve at least four disclinations) may in principle appear
as low-energy ﬂuctuations, that are nevertheless much
more costly than dislocation–antidislocation pairs.

Moreover, we argued above that in the absence of
disclinations, there can be no net Burgers vector in the
system. As such, only dislocation–antidislocation pairs
can appear. When these topological defects proliferate
in a melting transition restoring the translational sym-
metry, they must do so with zero net Burgers vector.
Therefore, translational symmetry will be restored in an
orientation along an axis (“the left-right axis”), and not
in a direction (“left” or “right”), see Fig. 5. When a
condensate forms along a single Burgers orientation, the
resulting phase is the quantum smectic and when two lin-
early independent Burgers directions condense, the quan-
tum nematic phase results.

Just as for its classical sibling, the topological defects
of the quantum nematic (liquid crystal) are disclinations,
related to the remaining rotational order. These defects
are ‘deconﬁned’ in the nematic phase when the transla-
tional dislocations condense to be are part of the ground
state. Proliferation of these disclinations lead to the fully
symmetric state: the isotropic liquid, or rather the su-
perﬂuid pertaining to bosonic quantum matter at zero
temperature. This is again a second-order phase transi-
tion.

Let us now discuss ways to realize the above heuristic
picture theoretically. In a rigorous symmetry classiﬁca-
tion, Mathy and Bais applied the formalism of Hopf sym-
metry or quantum double symmetry to two-dimensional
quantum liquid crystals [74, 75].
In their work, the
topological defects are treated on equal footing with the
particle-like matter excitations both of which are repre-
sentations of quantum double symmetry groups that de-
scribe the topological braiding of arbitrary quantum sys-
tems in two spatial dimensions. The topological defects
are representations of the Hopf algebra that corresponds
to the residual symmetry group in the ordered phase.

(a)triangular

(b)square

FIG. 5: Lattice vectors for triangular (a) and square (b) lat-
tices.
In two dimensions, any crystal is described by two
elementary lattice vectors e1 and e2. Burgers vectors of dislo-
cations are linear combinations of these lattice vectors. Upon
condensing dislocations along one lattice direction, say e1, all
lattice points which diﬀer by multiples of e1 become equiva-
lent, such that for instance e2 is equivalent to e2 + e1. This
is the restoration of translation symmetry in the e1-direction.
The remaining translational order is always perpendicular to
e1, regardless of whether e1 and e2 are orthogonal. Eﬀec-
tively, we can describe dislocation melting by condensates Φx
and Φy regardless of the underlying crystal structure, which
is indicated in red dashed lines.

dislocation and an anti-dislocation with a separation of
the order of the lattice spacing. Importantly, such dislo-
cation dipoles do not disrupt the lattice at long distances.
In 2+1-dimensions these are small dislocation loops that
can be in principle be incorporated in perturbation the-
ory dressing the vacuum (the crystal). However, we will
actually develop the theory in the opposite limit of di-
lute and well-separated dislocations that proliferate by
unbinding.

In the following we will neglect the interstitials and
vacancies altogether focusing on the orderly crystalline
lattice with the displacement ﬁelds encoding the associ-
ated symmetry breaking.

G. Preview of defect-mediated melting

Armed with just the classiﬁcation and properties of
the topological defects of the crystalline solid, we can
analyze the pattern of defect-mediated quantum melting
phenomenologically. This follows by the general wisdom
of vortex–boson duality that the topological defects per-
turb the ordered state and their proliferation restores the
symmetry that was spontaneously broken by the order
parameter.

Let us ﬁrst discuss the heuristic idea of melting where
the proliferation of defects causes restoration of the as-
sociated symmetry. From Fig. 2(a) one can see that
the notion of distance between lattice points becomes ill
deﬁned in the presence of a dislocation. Depending on
whether one counts distance either including or excluding
the inserted half-line will give diﬀerent results. A conden-
sate of dislocations is that state where on each point in

s
s
e
n
ﬀ
i
t
s

l
a
n
o
i
t
a
t
o
r

e
s
r
e
v
n

i

crystal

superﬂuid

smectic

nematic

dislocations

dislocations

disclinations

quantum disorder

FIG. 6: Phase diagram for spatial ordering of bosonic matter
at zero temperature. Consecutive defect-proliferation transi-
tions are indicated in blue. We have chosen the point group
D6 for simplicity, but any rotational order follows the same
pattern. The horizontal axis denotes increasing quantum dis-
order, that perturbs the crystalline state. On the vertical
axis is inverse rotational stiﬀness, or the inverse energy cost
to form disclinations. If the rotational stiﬀness is very large,
dislocations proliferate in the absence of disclinations. When
only dislocations with a single Burgers orientation prolifer-
ate, one obtains a quantum smectic. If the condensate is a
superposition of all Burgers orientations, a quantum nematic
forms, which has no preferred orientation but is nevertheless
rotationally rigid. Finally, disclinations can proliferate to lead
to the perfectly spatially symmetric superﬂuid. If rotational
stiﬀness is low, instead dislocations and disclinations prolif-
erate at the same time, resulting in a ﬁrst-order transition to
the superﬂuid state.

Just as symmetry breaking occurs when a state vector
in a particular representation obtains a vacuum expecta-
tion value (forms a condensate), the defect condensate is
signaled also by the ﬁnite vacuum expectation value of
a state vector in the Hopf algebra symmetry representa-
tion. In the framework of the continuum ﬁeld theory of
(dual) elasticity used in this review, the important result
from this rigorous Hopf algebra derivation is that the con-
densate state vector can be any superposition of topolog-
ical defect states. In particular, we verify the conclusion
that the quantum nematic is a condensate of all possible
dislocation states in Fig. 5, whereas the quantum smectic
condensate is a superposition of dislocations with Burg-
ers vector along one orientation only; this is also the only
possible loophole evading full translational symmetry in
two dimensions after dislocation condensation.

We are led to the following scenario of quantum melt-
In the following sections, we
ing, sketched in Fig. 6.
address this phase diagram within the continuum ﬁeld
theory of dual elasticity laying bare the associated long-
distance Goldstone modes and the topological defects,
whose symmetries classify the disordered states. The
dual theory is formulated in Section VI and the defect
condensates are described by ﬂavored dual stress super-
conductors, which are introduced in Section VII. The
melting from a solid to a liquid can either take place

29

directly as a ﬁrst-order phase transition, which is the
consequence of dislocations and disclinations melting si-
multaneously [76], or in two separate second-order phase
transitions: (i) ﬁrst dislocations proliferate to melt the
solid to a smectic or directly to the nematic, and (ii)
disclinations melt the liquid crystal to a liquid [38, 39].
This is depicted in the lower part of Fig. 6, where disloca-
tions in one particular Burgers orientation proliferate to
restore symmetry along an axis, say along the x-axis, via
a second-order phase transition of the KTNHY-type [38–
40]. The diﬀerence between these two paths is dictated
by the propensity of disclinations to appear in the crystal
phase, denoted the inverse of the rotational stiﬀness (cid:96) of
Eq. (64). Similarly, the smectic phase results when the
dislocations have a non-isotropic Hamiltonian [45] favor-
ing a Burgers direction. The zero-temperature phase dia-
gram follows the same outline, see Fig. 6. The only diﬀer-
ence is that at T = 0, the liquid phase is now a superﬂuid
phase, with a well-deﬁned zero-sound mode and no dis-
sipation. Here we are interested in the limit of large ro-
tational stiﬀness, implying the consecutive second-order
phase transitions.

In the quantum smectic, one orientation is liquid-like,
while the other one remains solid-like [17], which is the
topic of Sec. IX. After dislocations with Burger orienta-
tion along one axis have proliferated, all lattice points
that diﬀer by lattice vectors purely in this orientation
become equivalent: this is the demise of the crystal and
the restoration of translational symmetry. Therefore, re-
gardless of the discrete symmetry of the original crystal
lattice, the remaining translational order is always per-
pendicular to the ‘liquid direction’ in two dimensions, see
Fig. 5.

Due to the highly anisotropic properties of this quan-
tum phase, we will ﬁrst discuss the simpler case of full
translational symmetry restoration. Upon further dis-
ordering the smectic, also dislocations in the remaining
crystal directions can proliferate, again through a second-
order phase transition. This is the quantum nematic (liq-
uid crystal), treated in Sec. VIII. Then all translational
symmetry is restored, but disclinations are still massive
and there is rotational rigidity and its associated Gold-
stone modes. Note that there is no preferred direction
in the isotropic quantum nematic and no point group
symmetry inherited from the underlying crystal orienta-
tions; the situation is akin to the continuum treatment
of the classical hexatic phase [39]. Here we are faced
with a potential cause for confusion in our nomenclature
“nematic” for the quantum liquid crystal phases. First,
however, in Sec. V we argue for the correct description of
the full the long-distance hydrodynamical order param-
eter description of phases with translational symmetry
but ﬁnite point group symmetry. The overall picture is
in fact largely independent on which rotational order with
point group symmetry is realized, which further justiﬁes
bundling them all under the umbrella “nematic”.

V. ORDER PARAMETER THEORY OF

A. Finite point group symmetries and melting

TWO-DIMENSIONAL QUANTUM NEMATICS

30

In this somewhat independent section, we focus on the
ﬁnite rotational symmetries of the nematic state. This is
appropriate in the framework of quantum melting, since
the rotational symmetries evident in Fig. 5 are not af-
fected by the dislocations restoring the translations. The
task is to develop a long-distance hydrodynamic order
parameter theory describing the nematic phase(s) and
their transitions to the isotropic liquid, incorporating the
correct rotational symmetries. In the main part of this
review, the melting process is described in terms of a
dual gauge ﬁeld description of 2+1-dimensional isotropic
continuum quantum elasticity. The latter theory ignores
the discrete rotational symmetries by construction.

In what follows, starting from neither a correlated crys-
tal nor an isotropic quantum liquid, the nematic quan-
tum liquid is described by identifying the correct orien-
tational degrees of freedom that lead to the long-distance
hydrodynamic order parameter. We then proceed to de-
scribe the possible phase transitions between the nematic
phases and the isotropic liquid. In the nematic phase all
translational symmetries are restored, and what remains
of the crystalline order is an unbroken, residual discrete
point group symmetry ¯P ⊂ O(D). Since the resulting
nematic phases and phase transitions are then associ-
ated with the rotational point group symmetries ¯P , the
order parameter also encodes for the correct unbroken
symmetries describing the ordered phases. Similarly, a
pure symmetry group classiﬁcation of nematic states, not
necessarily descending from crystal melting, leads to the
possibility of unbroken subgroups ¯P of the rotation group
O(D) in the context of the Landau paradigm of phase
transitions. In two spatial dimensions, the subgroup clas-
siﬁcation will be relatively straightforward since the rota-
tional group is given by O(2) and we will in the following
only focus on the proper rotational part SO(2), which is
Abelian.

The subgroups P ⊂ SO(2) are ﬁnite and discrete.
The order parameters and coarse-grained eﬀective the-
ories have to embody the discrete symmetry from the
outset. We will formulate the nematic phases and their
discrete symmetries using a gauge theory on a lattice fol-
lowing Refs. [77, 78]. The gauge formulation also natu-
rally leads to the incorporation of the topological defects,
i.e. the disclinations, into the theory. We can then con-
sider defects and melting from the nematic state(s) to
the isotropic state in full generality in 2+1 dimensions.

Before constructing the order parameter theory of
2+1-dimensional nematics, we ﬁrst review the classi-
cal 2+0-dimensional nematic (hexatic) state, following
Refs. [39, 79], emphasizing the role of the discrete sym-
metries. Further details regarding this section can be
found in Ref. [21].

Classical nematic states are usually imagined as phases
of matter where microscopic constituents or “mesogens”
of diﬀerent shapes break the rotational SO(D) symme-
tries of D-dimensional isotropic space by aligning along
a macroscopic direction. Such ‘molecular’ phases have
inherent symmetries related to the point group symme-
tries of the ‘molecules’ forming the phase. Similarly, in
the theory of crystal melting, the nematic phase occurs
in between the crystal and isotropic liquid phases, and
possesses (quasi-)long-range orientational order with the
rotational symmetries being inherited from the crystal
due to local crystalline correlations, even in the absence
of the crystalline translational order.

Let us start reviewing the order parameters for crys-
talline states of matter, hereafter ﬁxing the space dimen-
sions to D = 2. For the crystal phase the order parameter
is the density ρG(x) [79], and long-range order is deter-
mined by the density correlation function g(x, x(cid:48)) (for a
thermal phase transition),
ρG(x) = eiG·(x+u(x)),
g(x, x(cid:48)) = (cid:104)ρG(x)ρ∗

r−ηG(T ), T < Tc1
e−r/ξ(T ), T > Tc1

G(x(cid:48))(cid:105) ∝

(cid:40)

(108)

,

where the displacement vector u(x) is the Goldstone ﬂuc-
tuation (phonon) and the relevant wave vectors G are re-
ciprocal lattice vectors [80]. These comprise a discrete set
of vectors instead of a continuum. The message is that in
two dimensions the density shows power law correlations
with (temperature-sdependent) exponents ηG(T ) at the
reciprocal lattice wavevectors G in the ordered phase.
This already hints at the discrete nature of proper order
parameters for crystalline ordering and related phases.

In the case of thermal melting of classical crystals,
the ﬁnite point group symmetries of the crystalline and
nematic phases have been discussed in relation to the
melting transition of the two-dimensional triangular lat-
tice [38–40]. Driven by defect-mediated melting, there is
a BKT-type transition from the crystal phase to a C6-
symmetric nematic phase, coined hexatic in Refs. [38, 39].
However, the ramiﬁcations of the ﬁnite point group are
minimal due to the fact that the long-distance elastic
properties of the triangular lattice are identical to the
isotropic case, which was part of the original motivation
to study them. Nevertheless, due to the absence of true
long-range order in two dimensions and the topological
properties of the defects, these phases and melting transi-
tions have many interesting properties in their own right.
With regards to the deﬁning properties of the ne-
matic/hexatic phase, the Goldstone modes or low-energy
ﬂuctuations are constrained by the rotational part of the
crystal symmetry. Physical ﬂuctuations of the orienta-
tional order parameter are invariant under the rotational
point group symmetry. In the context of continuum elas-
ticity, the orientational order parameter and its ﬂuctua-
tions are simply the local crystal orientation in terms of

the rotation θ(x) = 1
2 ij∂iuj representing an angle with
respect to the chosen axes. Note that in this section we
use the symbol θ to denote the orientational order param-
eter, in contrast with the local rotation ﬁeld ω = abωab
of Eq. (56). Due to the short-range crystalline order,
the order parameter θ(x) exists in the nematic, although
the displacement ﬁeld u(x) is not well deﬁned. The hex-
atic C6 order parameter is then [79] (for a thermal phase
transition)

ψ6(x) = ei6θ(x),

g6(x, x(cid:48)) = (cid:104)ψ6(x)ψ6(x(cid:48))(cid:105) ∝

(cid:40)

(109)

r−η6(T ),
e−r/ξ6(T ), T > Tc2 .

Tc1 < T < Tc2 ,

Here Tc1 is the critical temperature for the crystal-to-
hexatic phase transition and Tc2 is the critical tempera-
ture for the hexatic-to-liquid transition. The order pa-
rameter ψ6 carries manifest C6 symmetry θ → θ + 2π/6.
We note that in the crystal phase the same order param-
eter ψ6 approaches a constant, instead of the algebraic
decay. This is related to the conﬁnement of rotational
Goldstone modes, see Sec. VIII C. Moreover, in the two-
dimensional hexatic phase, the six-fold periodicity of the
orientational degree order parameter θ does not aﬀect the
nature of the phase transition:
it remains in the XY -
universality class. The details including the exponents
η6(T ) and correlation lengths ξ6(T ) are aﬀected however
[79].

B. Classical crystal melting in two dimensions —

KTHNY theory

Below, we will now quickly summarize the relevant as-
pects of the classical C6-melting transitions in two dimen-
sions [79] before we discuss the 2+1-dimensional quan-
tum case.

The melting transition from the crystal to the ne-
matic/hexatic occurs as an unbinding process of defect
pairs (dislocations) and is similar to the BKT-transition
of the two-dimensional XY -model, discussed in Sec. II.
In particular, there are power-law correlations in the or-
dered phase with temperature-dependent exponents η(T )
and essential singularities in the correlation length ξ(T ).

At the level of the Hamiltonian, the main diﬀerence
of the crystal melting compared to the XY -model comes
from the vectorial nature of the defect’s Burgers charge
carried by the dislocations. In terms of strains umn(x)
deﬁned in Eq. (57), the reduced Hamiltonian is given by

31

[39] (see also Eq. (54)),

H
kBT

=

H0 =
Hdefect[{J}] =

(cid:90)

d2x

(cid:90)

(cid:88)

1
2
−1
8π
− K2(T )
− Ec(T )

x(cid:54)=x(cid:48)

(cid:88)

x

d2x umn

umnCmnklukl = H0 + Hdefect,

1
2

(110)

smooth,

(cid:18)|x − x(cid:48)|

smooth Cmnkl ukl
K1(T )J(x) · J(x(cid:48)) ln
J(x) · (x − x(cid:48))J(x(cid:48)) · (x − x(cid:48))

a

(cid:19)

|x − x(cid:48)|2

J(x)2

(111)

x(cid:48) du =(cid:82) d2x J(x) =

entering the defect part is given by(cid:72)
ity(cid:80)

Here a is the dislocation core size acting as a UV cut-
oﬀ scale. The displacements are decomposed as ua(x) =
ua
smooth(x)+ua
sing(x) in terms of the smooth and multival-
ued parts. This leads to a elastic Hamiltonian H0 and a
defect Hamiltonian Hdefect. The dislocation density J(x)
B(x(cid:48)) with B = ne1 + me2 the Burgers vector, where
{e1, e2} are a lattice basis, cf. Eqs. (89), (93) and Fig 5.
There is the constraint of overall Burgers charge neutral-
x J(x) = 0. The smooth elastic part H0 gives rise
to the crystal correlations as expected for isotropic bare
elastic constants Eq. (58), Cmnkl = 2µ0P (2)
mnkl.
The Hamiltonian Hdefect represents the contribution from
the elastic defects and has been written in terms of
a lattice regularization. The non-zero defect densities
weighted with K1 and K2 contribute to the renormal-
ized values of the elastic constants and drive the phase
transition from the crystal to the liquid crystal phases.
The ﬁrst term proportional to K1 in Hdefect is the
Coulomb-like logarithmic interaction between the vecto-
rially charged dislocations with a dislocation core size of
a. We will later see how this type of interactions arise
from the interaction of the dislocations with the dual
gauge ﬁelds. The second scalar term with coeﬃcient K2
is actually the divergent V (x) ∼ x2 potential between the
non-zero disclination densities, see Eqs. (102) and (94),

mnkl+2κ0P (0)

Θ(x) =

1
2π

J(x(cid:48)) · (x − x(cid:48))

|x − x(cid:48)|2

(112)

(cid:88)

x(cid:48)

that arise due to the non-zero dislocation density J(x).
That is, the scalar interaction is schematically of the
form K2(T )Θ(x)Θ(x(cid:48))V (|x − x(cid:48)|) with a quadratically
increasing kernel V (|x − x(cid:48)|) in the separation |x − x(cid:48)|.
The quadratic divergence implies the conﬁnement of the
disclinations at all temperatures T where the Hamil-
(111) is valid. Since H0 is independent
tonian Eq.
of rotations in ﬁrst-order elasticity, the rotational de-
grees of
freedom eﬀectively drop out in the crystal
phase. This was discussed from the dual perspective
in 2+1-dimensions in Ref. [20] and will be discussed in
Sec. VIII C. Finally the term Ec is a dislocation core-
energy.

One of the main results of the KTHNY theory [37–40]
is the explicit renormalization group recursion relations
for the couplings K = K1 = K2 and y = e−Ec(T ) and
the elastic constants µ, κ. These show the existence of a
phase transition from the crystal to a liquid crystal via
the unbinding of the dislocation pairs, K → 0, y (cid:29) 0.
The liquid crystal phase has no translational order and
a vanishing shear modulus µ but power law correlations
in the orientational order parameter ψ6, see below.

As we mentioned, the elastic tensor Cmnkl is isotropic
for C6 in two dimensions, so only two elastic constants
µ and κ enter and no diﬀerence is seen in the continuum
limit to the isotropic case, at least at the level of the
couplings of the Hamiltonian. Nematics with other point
groups are more complex due to the additional elastic
constants in Cmnkl. Ref. [45] considered these and fur-
thermore a smectic phase was found at T = 0 between
the nematic and crystal due to anisotropies preferring
certain types of dislocations. The unbinding of disloca-
tion pairs is the thermal analogue of the quantum dislo-
cation condensate in Sec. VII. Finally, two-dimensional
crystals on commensurate or incommensurate substrates
can also be considered [39]. Depending on the substrate
lattice, these can feature true long-range orientational
order (cid:104)ψ6(cid:105) ∼ const. and the transition from the liquid
crystal to the liquid is then washed out due to the pin-
ning with the substrate.

In conclusion,

the analysis of

the Hamiltonian
Eq. (110) establishes the hexatic liquid crystal, or ne-
matic phase with symmetry C6, in two dimensions via
topological dislocation melting from the crystal [36, 38–
40]. Numerical and experimental observations of this
phase on various systems have been found in Refs. [81–
83] and we should note that the transition can be ﬁrst
order, too, in some systems, see e.g. Ref.
[84]. The re-
duced eﬀective Hamiltonian for the hexatic liquid crystal,
inherited from the crystal phase, is [39]

(cid:90)
(cid:90)

H6
kBT

=

=

K(T )

2

1
2

d2x (∂iθ(x))2

K(T )

d2x (∂iϑ(x))2

(cid:88)
(cid:88)

x(cid:54)=x(cid:48)

− πK(T )

36

+ Ec(cid:48)(T )

Θ(cid:48)(x)Θ(cid:48)(x(cid:48)) ln

Θ(cid:48)2(x),

(cid:18)|x − x(cid:48)|

(cid:19)

a

(113)

x

where θ(x) = ϑ(x) + πΘ(cid:48)(x)/3 in terms of a smooth
part ϑ(x) and a multivalued disclination part Θ(cid:48)(x) ∈ Z.
Here Θ(cid:48)(x) is the integer-valued disclination density (as
compared to the real-valued disclination density Θ(x)
of Eq. (94)), measured in terms of the elementary tri-
angular π/3-disclination. Furthermore Ec(cid:48)(T ) is a phe-
nomenological disclination core-energy. The Coulomb-
like logarithmic interaction between disclinations is cut
oﬀ by the disclination core size a. In the ordered phase at
Tc1 < T < Tc2, the system described by the Hamiltonian

Eq. (113) features algebraic order in the orientational or-
der parameter ψ6.

32

C. 2+1-dimensional quantum nematics and point

group symmetries

In the 2+1-dimensional quantum case, we can in prin-
ciple expect more quantum nematic states at very low
temperatures. In this section we assume the existence of
the quantum nematic states via dislocation melting but
refrain from analyzing their existence or stability via the
phase transition from the crystal phase. The feasibil-
ity of these quantum nematic states has been discussed
in Refs. [85–87], mostly regarding the quantum version
of the hexatic. For the transition to the nematic from
the crystal phase, one can use the ﬁniteness of the shear
rigidity µ as an order parameter deﬁning the crystal. We
will show in Sec. VIII that 1/µ diverges at the transition
to the nematic in terms of the dual gauge formulation of
isotropic continuum elasticity. In the dual formulation,
this role is played by Ω2/µ0 where Ω2 is the density of the
dislocation condensate and µ0 is the ‘bare’ shear modu-
lus. The introduction of lattice symmetries will introduce
additional elastic constants Cmnkl, and all the shear com-
ponents vanish at the transition to the nematic.

The starting point is then similar to postulating
the quantum equivalent of the classical Hamiltonian in
Eq. (113). The question regarding the fate of the ﬁ-
nite point group symmetries in quantum nematic phases
was addressed in Ref. [21], focusing on the properties at
T = 0. Considering all possible crystal lattices in two
spatial dimensions, in general one expects several dif-
ferent nematic phases. The resulting phases in terms
of mere symmetry group analysis are summarized in
Table II. These follow from the consideration that the
dislocation melting eﬀectively disorders all translational
correlations while it leaves the global rotational correla-
tions intact. In order to analyze the rotational symmetry
group P ⊂ SO(2), we must brieﬂy recollect the full space
group classiﬁcation of crystal.

In two dimensions, the crystal carries a ﬁnite space or
wallpaper group ¯W = T (cid:111) ¯P , where T is the lattice trans-
lation group and ¯P ⊂ O(2). In two dimensions there are
17 wallpaper groups; while in three dimensions there are
230 space groups. The translational part T of the group
W generates the Bravais lattice related to W with non-
translational symmetries ¯P . In two and three dimensions
there are 5 and 14 Bravais lattices, respectively. Thus the
symmetry group of the nematic is given by a subgroup
¯P (cid:39) ¯W /T ⊂ O(2) after the dislocation melting. If we
focus on the strictly rotational part P ⊂ SO(2) of ¯P
pertaining to the ordered nematic, the conjectured dislo-
cation melting from two-dimensional crystals with space
groups W = T (cid:111)P leads to the nematic phases with sym-
metries CN for N = 1, 2, 3, 4 and 6, with the trivial group
C1 indicating no point group symmetry, see Table II.

In order to relate this to the results presented later

Bravais-lattice structure ( ¯P ) Bravais rotations (P ) Space group ( ¯P ) CN nematic phase

33

Hexagonal (D6)

Square (D4)

Rectangular (D2)

Rhombic (D2)

Oblique (C2)

C6

C4

C2

C2

C2

p6mm (D6)

p6 (C6)

p31m (D3)
p3m1 (D3)

p3 (C3)

p4mm (D4)
p4gm (D4)

p4 (C4)

p2mm (D2)
p2gm (D2)
p2gg (D2)
pm (D1)
pg (D1)

c2mm (D2)

cm (D1)
p2 (C2)
p1 (C1)

C6 nematic

C3 nematic

C4 nematic

C2 nematic

C1 nematic

C2 nematic
C1 nematic
C2 nematic
C1 nematic

TABLE II: Two dimensional nematic phases or p-atics which arise as descendants of crystals by dislocation melting. The ﬁrst
column shows the ﬁve Bravais lattice structures, with their corresponding point groups ¯P ⊂ O(2). The second column displays
the relevant CN group describing the rotational order associated with this Bravais lattice. The actual nematic phase is then
obtained by considering the full space group and its associated point group, which may break the rotational symmetry to a
smaller CN subgroup, as presented in the last two columns. Reproduced from Ref. [21].

in this review, let us reproduce here the imaginary time
action Eq. (247) of the nematic from Sec. VIII C,

(cid:90)

Snematic[ω] =

Ω2
2cTµ

≡ J(cid:48)(cid:90)

dτ d2x

1
2

(∂µω)2

(114)

dτ d2x

1
2

(∂µω)2.

which is obtained within the dual gauge formulation of
isotropic elasticity via a dislocation condensate in the
limit of the Higgs mass Ω → ∞. Here the nematic
orientational degree of freedom ω(x, τ ) represents local
rotational ﬂuctuations with rigidity J(cid:48) > 0. This ac-
tion clearly has the expected 2+1-dimensional XY form.
Since the action is derived from isotropic continuum elas-
ticity, diﬀerent from the crystal with discrete point group
symmetries, the theory is only valid for long-distance
ﬂuctuations ω = ωsmooth + ωsing representing small dis-
tortion angles and inﬁnitesimal disclination densities and
lacking the additional role played by the C1 periodicity
ω ∼ ω + 2π (or its CN generalizations).
It is imme-
diately clear that more realistic results for any nematic
are obtained by considering the compact angular variable
θ(x, τ ) ≡ θ(x, τ ) + 2π, with the lattice regulated action

where {θi} ∈ [0, 2π) and zi = eiθi are rotor variables on
the sites i, with (cid:104)ij(cid:105) denoting nearest neighbor sites, of an
auxiliary space-time lattice Λτ . We take this to be cubic
and isotropic J = Jx,y = Jτ along the Euclidean time-
direction τ ∼ β for convenience with J > 0 being the
nematic coupling. The variables {θi} can now be taken
to have manifest 2π-periodicity due to the cosine form
of the interaction. The model also implicitly features the
long distance ‘spin-waves’ δθ ∼ δω and the corresponding
rotational defects (disclinations) as 2π-vortices, as is well
known [88, 89]. The role of the defects becomes clear in
the 2π-periodic Gaussian or Villain model approximation
of Eq. (115). We have thus arrived at a lattice regulated
model of the C1 quantum nematic in Euclidean time.
The properties of the model Eq. (115) are as follows:
there is a critical value Jc = Jc,3D (cid:39) 0.45 of the XY
model that determines the long-range ordering in the ori-
entational degree of freedom {θi} in the sense that, in the
three dimensional Euclidean formulation,

(cid:104)ei(θi−θj )(cid:105) ∝

lim|i−j|→∞

const.,
J > Jc
e−|i−j|/ξ, J < Jc.

(116)

(cid:40)

SXY [{θi}] = −J

= − J
2

(cid:88)
(cid:88)

(cid:104)ij(cid:105)∈Λτ

(cid:104)ij(cid:105)∈Λτ

cos(θi − θj)

(115)

z∗
i zj + c.c.,

We clearly identify the ordered phase as the nematic and
the disordered phase as the isotropic liquid. A notable
fact is that although the transition is tuned with respect
to the coupling J, at the critical point Jc the defect or
vortex loops also unbind and proliferate [90].

D. Gauge theory and nematics

Comparing the XY -model of the C1 nematic above
and the hexatic Hamiltonian Eq. (113), these are sim-
ilar except for the order parameter ψ6.
Indeed, this is
the traditional approach to the subject where one con-
siders the physical order parameter and an invariant ac-
tion for them. An example is the two-dimensional di-
rector order parameter Qab = nanb − 1
2 δab, where the
vector n = na determines the director via the identi-
ﬁcation n ≡ −n. One can then consider ﬂuctuations
of the order parameter by constructing eﬀective actions
that are invariant under this symmetry.
In the two-
dimensional case, the natural (complex) order parame-
ters are ψN = eiN θ. From these one can of course con-
struct traceless real tensor order parameters in terms of
the vector n = (cos θ, sin θ) [21, 44] but this is not as con-
venient in two dimensions as the complex representation.
We can conclude that in two dimensions, the nematic
order parameters have the expected complex XY -rotor
form and their excitations are of the type spin waves +
vortices, and so are expected to feature transitions in
the XY universality class for the nematic-isotropic tran-
sition. However, one could expect that there are diﬀer-
ences in the melting process due to the existence of CN
disclinations not just the ‘vanilla’ 2π-vortices present al-
ready in the XY -model. The situation is reminiscent
of Ref. [45], where the eﬀect of anisotropic lattices was
considered and it was found that certain combinations
of dislocation pairs could be more favorable to unbind,
leading to diﬀerent phase transitions.

There is a natural generalization of the order param-
eter approach that still retains simple representations of
the degrees of freedom including the appropriate discli-
nations. This is achieved by demanding the correct or-
der parameter symmetry for the degrees of freedom right
from the outset. For the CN point groups this means that
the nematic O(2) rotor ni ∼ eiθi should be identiﬁed as
(117)

k = 1, 2, . . . , N, for i ∈ Λτ .

θi ≡ θi + 2πk/N,

under the CN symmetry. This is a local, discrete symme-
try enforcing the point group symmetries on the rotor θi.
On the other hand, the order parameter ψN (i) = eiN θi
is invariant under the transformations and well deﬁned,
as it should. In contrast to global symmetries that imply
degeneracies of states, such local symmetries imply that
two states related by the local symmetries are physically
the same or indistinguishable. In eﬀect, the rotor ceases
to be a physical variable due to the local symmetry, sim-
ilarly to the uniaxial nematic vector n ≡ −n giving rise
to the director.

Such local symmetries are ubiquitous in physics and
are usually referred to as gauge symmetries. They do not,
however, represent symmetries in the traditional sense
but instead redundancies in the degrees of freedom and
in this sense can be introduced whenever convenient [91].
All physical observables are gauge invariant and the dis-
appearance of the gauge degrees of freedom can be made

34

explicit by imposing a suitable gauge ﬁx.
The gauge formulation was ﬁrst applied in the context
of (three-dimensional) nematics in Refs. [77, 78] as a Z2-
gauge theory of the nematic director n. Following the
same logic, the eﬀective theories of the order parameters
for 2+1-dimensional nematics with CN point group sym-
metries can be formulated using a gauge theory descrip-
tion [21]. This follows from the XY -model Eq. (115),
since the principles of lattice gauge theories [92, 93] al-
low us to immediately write down a generalization of
Eq. (115) to a theory of CN gauged rotors in the sense
of Eq. (117) as

SN [{θi},{Uij}] = SXY [{θi},{Uij}] + Sgauge[{Uij}]

where

SXY [{θi},{Uij}] = −J

= − J
2
Sgauge[{Uij}] = −K

= −K

(cid:104)ij(cid:105)∈Λτ

(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)

(cid:3)∈Λτ

(cid:104)ij(cid:105)∈Λτ

(118)

cos(θi − θj − aij)

z∗
i Uijzj + c.c. ,

(cid:88)

aij)

(cid:104)ij(cid:105)∈(cid:3)

cos(

(cid:89)

Uij + c.c. .

(cid:3)∈Λτ

(cid:104)ij(cid:105)∈∂(cid:3)

Here the invariance of SN under the local symmetry
Eq. (117) necessitates the introduction of the CN gauge
ﬁeld Uij = e−iaij ∈ CN acting on the rotors zi = eiθi,
N kij and kij = 0, 1, . . . , N−1 are ZN valued
where aij = 2π
ﬁelds on the links (cid:104)ij(cid:105) of the lattice. Consistency requires
Uji = U∗
ij and all sums and products over the plaquettes
(cid:3) ∈ Λτ are taken in a counterclockwise manner along
their boundary ∂(cid:3). The local gauge transformation at
site i now reads

θi → θi +
aij → aij +

,

2πki
N
2π(ki − kj)

N

,

(119)

where the ki are ZN -valued ﬁelds; this local transforma-
tion is a symmetry of SN . By the isomorphism CN (cid:39) ZN ,
the theory with action SN was referred to as O(2)/ZN
gauge theory in Ref. [21].
Let us now brieﬂy describe the interpretation of the
O(2)/ZN gauge theory in the context of nematics [21, 78].
The meaning of the term SXY is as usual: it favors the
ordering of the orientational degrees of freedom but now
modulo the gauge symmetries. On the other hand, the
term Sgauge represents the simplest gauge invariant term
for the gauge ﬁelds {Uij}, and has been included in the
action with a coupling K > 0. This gives independent
dynamics to the gauge ﬁelds and it is therefore not de-
termined by just symmetry considerations.
The interpretation of Sgauge and the gauge ﬁelds {Uij}
for nematics is as follows: by the Volterra process

35
from topological defects in a continuum, while the {aij}
are ZN -valued and serve to encode the diﬀerent, but CN -
equivalent local lattice orientations.

non-zero gauge ﬂux ∆θ((cid:3)) = −(cid:80)(cid:104)ij(cid:105)∈∂(cid:3) aij around the
−J(cid:80)(cid:104)ij(cid:105)∈∂(cid:3) cos(θi − θj + aij), the gauge ﬁelds rotate

For the nematic described by Eq. (118) we can see this
explicitly, as depicted in Fig. 7. We imagine a perfectly
ordered nematic with θi = θ0 ∀i in a suitable gauge ﬁx
and trivial gauge ﬁelds {Uij} ∼ wiw∗
j , where Uij = 1
up to gauge transformations wi ∈ CN . Then we put a
plaquette (cid:3). The rotor ﬁelds are now deformed from
the aligned conﬁguration in the sense that it is impossi-
ble to satisfy SXY ((cid:3)) = −4J. Since the elastic part is
the rotor ﬁeld {θi}i∈(cid:3) by an amount UijUjkUklUli =
e−i∆θ((cid:3)) around the plaquette (cid:3), see Fig. 7. We con-
clude that the presence of a non-trivial plaquette implies
that there is a disclination in the rotor ﬁeld θi, and a
consistent single-valued orientation of the rotor ﬁeld (i.e.
the local crystal axes) is impossible to deﬁne in the re-
gion surrounding the frustrated plaquette. The term
Sgauge assigns the action cost −K cos ∆θ((cid:3)) to the gauge
ﬁeld conﬁguration {Uij} independent of the elastic con-
tribution from SXY , which include the elastic distortion
cost accompanying the disclination. A large positive K
acts as a defect suppression term analogous to the two-
dimensional dislocation and disclination core-energies Eb
and Ec. It is linked to the rotational stiﬀness expressed
by Eq. (64). We also note that it is most favorable to
create disclination–antidisclination pairs, which are topo-
logically neutral, due to the frustration introduced by the
non-trivial gauge links {Uij}.

Meanwhile, irrespective of the gauge ﬁeld conﬁguration
{Uij}, it is possible to deﬁne a consistent conﬁguration
of the gauge invariant variable ψN (i) = eiN θi , since the
ambiguity along the loop is an element of CN . This is de-
picted in Fig. 8. Therefore the physical order parameter
ψN is well-deﬁned and winds to itself around the plaque-
tte or defect. As is appropriate for the defect, however,
the extension of ψN is undeﬁned at the core region (cen-
ter of the plaquette).

The physical interpretation of the ZN -gauge ﬂuxes as
CN -disclinations is tied to the presence of the rotor ﬁelds,
as is ﬁtting for a defect in a nematic state. In the gauge
theory formulation, however, they have a life of their own
and a physical status regardless of the charged matter
ﬁelds {θi}. This brings into question their role in the
physics of the model, apart from fulﬁlling the required
gauge symmetries.
In particular, the ﬁeld strength of
the gauge ﬁelds {Uij} associated with the ﬂuxes is gauge
invariant and therefore always physical and is controlled
by the coupling K. In the following, we will see how the
presence of an independent weight K aﬀects the phase
diagram of 2+1-dimensional nematics.

FIG. 7: The lattice model has rotors {θi} (red) deﬁned on
sites and gauge ﬁelds {Uij} on the links (black arrows). In
the simplest case of O(2)/Z2, a disclination is given by a
e−iπ = −1 gauge ﬂux over a plaquette and leads to a π-
rotation ambiguity (dashed) at the site 1 when encircling
clockwise.

FIG. 8: Left: All Z2-gauge transformations (red and red
dashed arrows θi and links Uij) of the C2 defect conﬁgura-
tion in Fig. 7. All possible combinations of the rotors and
gauge links are physically equivalent states. Right: The order
parameter ψ2 is unique and single valued around the C2 discli-
nation, although cannot be continuously extended through
the core region (center of the plaquette).

(Sec. IV A), we know that the disclinations are labeled by
the elements of the rotational symmetry group CN . Upon
encircling the disclination core, the local crystal axes ro-
tate under parallel transport but otherwise the lattice has
(nearly) perfect local order. This continues to be true for
the nematic with the local (crystal) axis orientation but
no translational crystalline order, see Fig. 2(b). Since the
gauge ﬁelds are labeled by the elements of ZN and the or-
der parameter ﬁelds are charged under it, we expect them
to be related to the defects. More precisely, the gauge in-
variant ﬁeld strength is related to the disclination charge
density and the contributions of Sgauge are then related
to the action cost of disclinations [21]. These gauge ﬁelds
are reminiscent of the defect gauge ﬁelds introduced by
Kleinert [10, 11]; however, those take continuous values
and are employed to describe inﬁnitesimal contributions

U12U23U34U41θ1θ2θ3θ4-U12U23U34U41θ1θ2θ3θ4-U12U23U34U41ψ2(1)ψ2(2)ψ2(3)ψ2(4)-E. Phase diagram of the O(2)/ZN model

Having deﬁned the gauge model of nematics encoding
for the correct degrees of freedom and symmetries, we
now want to analyze its universal properties and possible
phases and transitions.
From the perspective of the original orientational de-
grees of freedom {θi}, the most natural limit is K → ∞,
where the gauge ﬂuxes are very expensive and the gauge
ﬁelds are ‘frozen’. More precisely in this limit, assum-
ing a topologically trivial lattice, Uij = wiw∗
j for some
wi ∈ CN and we can choose a gauge where Uij = 1 for
all (cid:104)ij(cid:105) ∈ Λτ , indicating that the gauge ﬁelds are frozen.
In this limit the action becomes
SN [K → ∞] = −J

(cid:88)

cos(θi +

2πmi

),

− θj − 2πmj
N

N

(cid:104)ij(cid:105)∈Λτ

(120)

where wi = e2πimi/N . We can now compute the partition

function ZN =(cid:80){Uij}∈ZN
(cid:88)

ZN [K → ∞] =

(cid:82) Dθ e−SN as
(cid:90) (cid:89)

{mi}∈ZN

i∈Λτ

dθi e−SN [{θi},{mi}]

(cid:90) (cid:89)

i∈Λτ

= N sites

dθ(cid:48)

i e−SXY [{θ(cid:48)

i}] = N sitesZXY [J],

(121)

where we have performed the change of variables θ(cid:48)
i =
θi + 2πmi/N and trivially summed over the gauge ﬁelds
{mi}. The conclusion is that the partition function in the
limit K → ∞ is exactly given by a multiple (the gauge
group volume) of the XY model at coupling J, from
which all critical properties follow. However, the XY
variable θi cannot order in the usual sense of spontaneous
symmetry breaking, since (cid:104)θi(cid:105) ≡ 0 due to the gauge sym-
metries (Elitzur’s theorem [94]), and moreover all phys-
ical quantities in the theory should be gauge invariant.
The physical order parameter ﬁeld ψN (i) = eiN θi
is a
composite, gauge-invariant quantity and follows a tran-
sition with some exponents and properties diﬀering from
the usual XY model, dubbed the XY ∗ universality class
(for the Z2 case) in Refs. [95–99].
In the opposite limit K → 0, the ﬂuxes (disclinations)
cost no action and will proliferate if the nematic stiﬀness
the gauge ﬁelds {Uij} are free
J is not too large, i.e.
to ﬂuctuate [19]. In this case we can conveniently sum
over them in the Villain or 2π-periodic Gaussian approx-
imation of the XY -model, expected to be in the same
universality class [100, 101]. The model is deﬁned as the
quadratic approximation of the cosine that retains the
2π-periodicity by summing over auxiliary integer-valued
{li,µ} variables as
S Villain

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

ki,µ + 2πli,µ)2,

=

N

((cid:52)µθi − 2π
N

−JV
2

(i,µ)∈Λτ

{li,µ}∈Z

(122)

36

where the shorthand (i, µ) denotes the links from site i in
the directions µ = x, y, τ , (cid:52)µf (i) ≡ f (i + µ) − f (i) and
the Villain coupling JV(J) is an analytic function of the
original coupling J [100, 101]. The sum over the gauge
ﬁelds can now just be combined with {li,µ} to a sum over
new integers {si,µ} in the partition function
Z Villain

− JV
N 2 ((cid:52)µN θi+2πsi,µ)2

(cid:90) (cid:89)

(cid:88)

(cid:89)

=

e

dθi

N

i∈Λτ

{si,µ}∈Z

(i,µ)∈Λτ

,

(123)

which is the Villain approximation of the cosine model

SN,eﬀ [K → 0] = −J(cid:48)(cid:88)

(cid:104)ij(cid:105)

cos N (θi − θj),

(124)

with J(cid:48) (cid:39) JV(J)/N 2 in the Villain approximation. Since
the Villain model has a critical point JV,c = 0.33 in three
dimensions, we ﬁnd that the vanishing cost of arbitrary
defects in the limit K = 0 shifts the disordering tran-
sition to larger J as a function of N . Another salient
feature is that after summing over the gauge ﬁelds, only
the gauge invariant combination ψN (i) = eiN θi appears
in the model, as is to be expected.

We are now in the position to discuss the various lim-
iting behaviors in the (K, J) plane that reveals the topol-
ogy of the phase diagram.
J (cid:28) 1 In the limit J → 0 the theory Sgauge is just pure
ZN -gauge theory in three dimensions. There is
a conﬁnement–deconﬁnement phase transition at
K = Kc [102–104] in the pure gauge theory. The
conﬁned phase at K < Kc features condensed
gauge ﬂuxes and only ZN charge-neutral ﬁelds can
have non-zero expectation values.
In the decon-
ﬁned regime at K > Kc, the gauge ﬁelds have a gap
and the ZN gauge ﬂuxes remain well deﬁned exci-
tations over the vacuum. At ﬁnite but small J, we
expect that the behavior of the gauge ﬁelds remain
similar to those corresponding to the pure gauge
theory phases. This phase is actually topological
[21, 78, 105, 106] given that this is the deconﬁned
phase of ZN gauge theory.

J (cid:29) 1 In this limit, the rotors are ordered and similarly
also the gauge ﬁelds are gapped due to the elastic
terms proportional to J, irrespective of the value
of K. There is therefore only one phase at large
enough J where the rotors are ordered (the ZN
Higgs phase [107]). Gauge ﬂuxes can however ap-
pear as tightly bound disclination–antidisclination
pairs with Coulomb (logarithmic) interactions.

K (cid:28) 1 Here we have the expected XY -transition of the
gauge invariant and ZN -conﬁned order parameter
ψN (i) = eiN θi, as described by Eq. (124).

K (cid:29) 1 In this limit the ZN ﬂuxes are completely sup-
pressed and an XY ∗ transition from the nematic
to the deconﬁned phase takes place as a function of

J. For large but ﬁnite K the gauge ﬂuxes are well-
deﬁned and either show Coulomb (logarithmic) in-
teractions in the nematic, or appear as free excita-
tions over the vacuum in the topological phase.

We also expect that the critical value Jc(K) shifts up-
wards as the value of K is lowered below Kc due to the
cheap ZN -ﬂuxes that disorder the rotors. For K > Kc
on the other hand, the ZN -disclinations are eﬀectively
always gapped and the disordering of the rotors is due to
spin-waves and 2π-vortices, both controlled by the cou-
pling J. The full phase diagram in the (K, J)-plane can
then be completed and leads to the schematic phase dia-
gram shown in 9, which was also also veriﬁed by Monte-
Carlo simulations for lattices of sizes Nsites = 123 and is
shown in Figures 10 and 11 [21].

The surprise is the appearance of the topological phase
at small J and large K. This phase has disordered rotors
but deconﬁned ZN -gauge ﬁelds. An order parameter that
discerns it from the isotropic liquid phase with conﬁned
gauge ﬁelds is given by the so-called Fredenhagen–Marcu
(FM) order parameter [21, 106, 108]. It is deﬁned as

(cid:104)R(CLn,m )(cid:105) =

.

(125)

(cid:104)z∗

n((cid:81)(cid:104)ij(cid:105)∈CL
(cid:113)(cid:104)(cid:81)(cid:104)ij(cid:105)∈C2L

Uij)zm(cid:105)
Uij(cid:105)

where zi = eiθi, CLn,m is a curve of length L ∼ |n − m|
between the sites n, m and C2L is a closed loop formed
by closing the curve CL. The idea of the non-local FM
order parameter R(CL) is the following. In gauge the-
ories with matter, the Wilson loop ceases to be a good
order parameter and always has a perimeter law decay
e−L. The form of the FM order parameter is given by the
gauge string CL connecting the rotors at n, m in the nu-
merator, divided by the square root of a suitable Wilson
loop C2L formed from CL in the denominator, so that a
non-vanishing limit can be obtained. In the deconﬁned
phase with disordered matter ﬁelds, the string of rotors
connected by the gauge links decays faster than e−L. We
conclude that

L→∞(cid:104)R(CL)(cid:105) =

lim

0,
const. (cid:54)= 0,

ZN deconﬁned phase,
otherwise.

(cid:40)

It is noteworthy that

(cid:104)ψ∗

N (n)ψN (m)(cid:105) = (cid:104)z∗N

n zN

m(cid:105) ∼ (cid:104)R(CLn,m )N(cid:105),

(126)

(127)

from which we conclude that the transition to the topo-
logical ZN -deconﬁned phase is always accompanied by
the XY ∗-transition of the rotors when the gauge ﬁelds
are deconﬁned and stays second order but with associ-
ated topological order in the gauge ﬁelds as measured by
the FM loop order parameter.

F. Dual formulation and fractionalized charges

To make connection to the duality methods used in
this review and to gain further intuition, we can per-

37

FIG. 9: The schematic phase diagram of the O(2)/ZN theory.

FIG. 10: The phase diagram of the O(2)/Z2 theory as
determined by Monte-Carlo calculations, reproduced from
Ref. [21].

FIG. 11: The phase diagram of the O(2)/Z6 theory as
determined by Monte-Carlo calculations, reproduced from
Ref. [21]. Note the larger Jc at K = 0 and the shrinking
of the deconﬁned region to larger K as compared to O(2)/Z2.

form a duality transform on the rotors of the O(2)/ZN
model. The transformation is strictly valid in the large-J
limit and proceeds as for the XY -model (see e.g. [89] and
Sec.

II), with the result [21]

(cid:101)SN = − 1

(cid:88)
(cid:101)(cid:3)∈(cid:101)Λτ
(cid:88)

(cid:3)

8π2J
− K

(cid:101)a2(cid:101)(cid:3) − i

(cid:16)

(cid:101)a(cid:101)i(cid:101)j

(cid:88)
(cid:104)(cid:101)i,(cid:101)j(cid:105)∈(cid:101)Λτ

(cid:17)

J V(cid:3) +

a(cid:3)
2π

cos(a(cid:3)).

(128)

CNNematicIsotropicLiquidZNDeconfinedKc∞0XY∞XY*KJ■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■0.00.20.40.60.81.00.00.51.01.52.0KJ■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■0123402468101214KJ■■■■■■■■2.533.5400.512 )3 obtained from the cu-
bic lattice Z3 by a shift by half a lattice translation.

Here {(cid:101)a(cid:101)i(cid:101)j} is a non-compact U (1)-gauge ﬁeld dual to
the the rotors {θi} and is deﬁned on the links (cid:104)(cid:101)i,(cid:101)j(cid:105) of
the dual lattice (cid:101)Λτ (cid:39) (Z + 1
The sites(cid:101)i, links (cid:104)(cid:101)i,(cid:101)j(cid:105) and plaquettes (cid:101)(cid:3) of the dual lat-
(cid:101)(cid:3) as f(cid:3) ≡(cid:80)(cid:104)ij(cid:105)∈(cid:3) fij. Similarly, J V(cid:3) denotes the wind-
(core energy) of the form ∼ K(cid:48)(cid:80)(cid:3)∈Λτ
instructed to sum over the gauge ﬁelds (cid:101)a(cid:101)i(cid:101)j (in a gauge

ing number of the 2π-vortices over (cid:3). An action cost
(J V(cid:3) )2 has been
neglected for these.
In the partition function, we are
ﬁx), and the integer defect conﬁgurations {J V(cid:3)} ∈ Z and
{a(cid:3)} ∈ ZN .

tice are canonically related to the cubes, plaquttes and
links of the original lattice, respectively. We have used
a shorthand for the gauge ﬂuxes over plaquettes (cid:3) and

The actions in Eqs. (118) and (128) can be seen as the
lattice formulations of the generalizations of Eq. (113) to
2+1-dimensions including the explicit point group sym-
metries. The continuum action, corresponding to the
non-compact gauge ﬁeld (dual to the spin waves) and
the defects, arises from coarse graining the microscopic
lattice degrees of freedom. We see that the gauge interac-
tions in Eq. (128) give rise to the Coulomb (logarithmic)

interactions between the defects {J V(cid:3)}, whereas the {(cid:101)a(cid:101)i(cid:101)j}

a(cid:101)i,µ

J V(cid:101)i,µ

(cid:88)

gauge ﬁelds also contain the smooth spin-wave ﬂuctua-
tions when summing over the defect-free conﬁgurations.
The diﬀerence compared to the continuum treatment
is, however, the explicit presence of the ZN -vortices and
their relation to the 2π-vortices. Of course, these addi-
tional ﬁelds are due to the inclusion of the ﬁnite point
group symmetries. The 2π-vortices J V(cid:3) and the ZN de-
fects are charged under the dual gauge ﬁeld, as in the
standard XY -duality. However, the ZN defects carry
only a 1/N -charge compared to the 2π-vortices and we
conclude that the fractionaslized charge represents the
ZN disclinations. The action is invariant under the dual
gauge transformations

(cid:101)a(cid:101)i,µ →(cid:101)a(cid:101)i,µ + (cid:52)µλ(cid:101)i,
where {λ(cid:101)i} ∈ R is an arbitrary function on the dual lat-
tice (remember that the dual links ((cid:101)i, µ) uniquely label
plaquettes (cid:3) and vice versa). We see that the dual gauge
symmetry, or the conservation of the rotor current, leads
to the conservation of the charged defect currents in units
of 1/N . It is still possible for the ZN current to source
the 2π-vortices and a(cid:3) is only conserved mod 2π. Sim-
ilar considerations of fractionalized line-charges in 3+1-
dimensions appeared in Ref. [109].
Phases with disordered rotors {θi} are characterized
by Higgs condensates of the vortices J(cid:3) and a(cid:3)/2π that
break the dual gauge symmetry.
It is however possi-
ble that only the 2π-vortices proliferate leaving the ZN -
vortices above the vacuum (and this happens at J =
Jc,3D). This is the topological ZN -deconﬁned phase at
large K and small J. If we naively sum over the integers

= 0. (129)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(cid:52)µ

2π

+

µ

38

J V(cid:3) in Eq. (128), we get the constraint (cid:101)a(cid:101)i(cid:101)j ∈ 2πZ sig-

naling the condensation of N -tuples of the ZN vortices,
and arrive at a large gap ∼ 1/4J for the dual gauge ﬁelds
(rotors) and the pure ZN -gauge theory in its deconﬁned
phase. This is the “Villain analogue” of the Higgs tran-
sition. Finally, if K < Kc, the ZN -gauge ﬁelds always
condense as the rotor ﬁelds disorder.

G. CN -nematic transitions

The above gauge model is the simplest model incorpo-
rating the CN -nematics and leads to three phases, with
the deconﬁned ZN phase as surprise due to the possi-
bility of independent defect dynamics. We now consider
slightly more general theories with anisotropies and addi-
tional order parameters in order to drive transitions be-
tween the diﬀerent CN -nematics and the ZN -deconﬁned
phases.

Just as for the nematic and smectic phases formed from
dislocation condensates with certain (an)isotropies (see
Sec. IV G and later Secs. VIII and IX) we can imagine
cases where it is favorable to condense only certain types
of disclinations. This is achieved by considering gener-
alizations of Sgauge by including anisotropic disclination
weights K → {Km}m∈ZN of the form

Kmδm,k(cid:3) cos(2πk(cid:3)/N ),

(130)

gauge = − (cid:88)

S(cid:48)

(cid:88)

(cid:3)∈Λτ

m∈ZN

where have expanded the coeﬃcients in terms of the
ZN character decomposition of k(cid:3) in the ﬂuxes a(cid:3) =
2πk(cid:3)/N . In particular for the cases ZN = ZM × ZN/M ,
we can consider the decomposition

2π
N

2π
N

N
M

(

kij =

aij =

lij + nij),

(131)
where lij ∈ {0, 1, . . . , M − 1} = ZM and nij ∈
{0, 1, . . . , N/M − 1} = ZN/M . We can now envisage dif-
ferent disclination weights for the subgroups as
−KN/M δk(cid:3),ZN/M cos(2πk(cid:3)/N )
−KM δk(cid:3),ZM cos(2πl(cid:3)/M ).

S(cid:48)
gauge =

(cid:88)

(cid:3)∈Λτ

(132)

By tuning the coeﬃcients KM and KN/M we can in prin-
ciple condense diﬀerent subsets of the original ﬂuxes,
provided that the elastic term controlled by J is small
enough. We can see that this scenario is feasible from
the phase diagrams in Figs. 10 and 11, since the defect
proliferation occurs with larger J and K as a function
of N . Any ﬂux condensate will however always com-
pletely disorder the O(2) rotor ﬁelds. Nevertheless, the
conclusion is that we can drive transitions between the
diﬀerent ZN → ZM deconﬁned phases by tuning KN/M ,
which then have the role of describing anisotropies in the
disclination weights, analogous to Ref. [45].

An explicit way to break the nematic symmetry CN →
CM where CN = CM×CN/M is by introducing additional
Higgs ﬁelds of the form

SHiggs = −JM

σ∗
i U M

ij σj + c.c.,

(133)

(cid:88)

(cid:104)ij(cid:105)∈Λτ

where σi ∈ CN/M (cid:39) ZN/M is a discrete ﬁeld, carrying
charge M under the original CN group. Summing over
the ﬁeld {σi} ∈ ZN/M produces terms ∼ U N
ij that are
trivial in the CN theory. For JM large enough or by ex-
plicit symmetry breaking, the auxiliary Higgs ﬁeld con-
denses (cid:104)σi(cid:105) (cid:54)= 0, and the resulting theory is diﬀerent. We
can pick a gauge where σi = e2πiM mi/N = 1 ∀i ∈ Λτ ,
where mi ∈ {0, 1, . . . , N/M − 1} = ZN/M and deﬁne a
N (kij + mi − mj), to get
new gauge ﬁeld a(cid:48)
cos(2πM k(cid:48)

N k(cid:48)
ij = 2π

SHiggs = −(

(cid:88)

ij/N ),

(134)

ij = 2π

N
M

)sitesJM

(cid:104)ij(cid:105)∈Λτ

ij ≡ 0, for all (cid:104)ij(cid:105) ∈ Λτ for
which forces k(cid:48)
JM (cid:29) K, J. In the gauge term of the action this leads
to

ij ∈ ZM , or n(cid:48)
(cid:88)
→ (cid:88)

(cid:3)∈Λτ

(cid:3)∈Λτ

Sgauge,N =

−Kδk(cid:48)(cid:3),ZN/M cos(2πk(cid:48)(cid:3)/N )
− Kδk(cid:48)(cid:3),ZM cos(2πl(cid:48)(cid:3)/M )
−K cos(2πl(cid:48)(cid:3)/M ) ≡ Sgauge,M .

(135)

We see that the the resulting theory is exactly the
O(2)/ZM theory describing the CM nematic. From the
results of [107], we know in general that the Higgs phase
and the conﬁned phase of ZN/M /ZN/M gauge theory
are in fact in the same phase, with a phase transition
to the deconﬁned phase of ZN/M gauge ﬁelds described
by a ZN/M clock-spin model. We do not expect that
the Higgs model Eq. (134) with slightly modiﬁed gauge
terms Eq.
(135) has diﬀerent universal behavior. For
the CN point groups this then leads to Ising transitions
between C6 → C3 or C4 → C2 nematics, and to a (vec-
tor) Z3-Potts transitions between C6 → C2 nematics. Of
course, there should also be a transition CN → C1 to
a nematic with no symmetries which is in the (vector)
Potts universality classes Eq. (134).

H. Concluding remarks

This section has discussed the ﬁnite rotational sym-
metries of the quantum nematics in two spatial dimen-
sions. We classiﬁed the possible symmetries of nemat-
ics using the two-dimensional rotational symmetries in-
herited from the crystalline wallpaper group. We then
described the long-distance hydrodynamic order param-
eters of these quantum nematic states, using a gauge-
theoretical framework.

39

We have seen also in this section that compared to
the standard Abelian-Higgs duality with (a non-compact)
U (1) group (Sec. II), the presence of the ﬁnite CN -point
group symmetries allows for a completely new phase: the
topological deconﬁned ZN -phase, where the gauge ﬂuxes
have become the only entities discernible from the ground
state. This is possible when the cost of 2π-vortices is
lower than that of the ZN ﬂuxes.
It has been argued
that such a phase has in principle a microscopic iden-
tiﬁcation in the context of ﬂuctuating electronic stripes
[97, 99, 110, 111], where also a spin nematic can be real-
ized. However, dealing with the ‘molecular’ microscopy
of the quantum liquid crystals discussed here, such an
identiﬁcation remains obscure.

VI. DUAL ELASTICITY

We will now commence the development of the main
topic of this review: the quantum analogue of dislocation-
mediated melting (Sec. V B) within the continuum ﬁeld
theory of elasticity. We will do so by employing dual
gauge ﬁelds (Sec. II) that encode the phonon degrees of
freedom (Sec. III) mediating interactions between dislo-
cation with Burgers vectors (Sec. IV). We will ignore the
CN -periodicity of the real nematic order parameter dis-
cussed in Sec. V, focusing on the ‘spherical cow’ isotropic
limit. The discreteness of the Frank scalars can be re-
stored at the very end of this development.

In Sec. II, we have learned from the vortex–boson-
duality that dual operators are uniquely suited to handle
disordering (melting) phase transitions. Smoothness of
the original operators dictates a conservation law for the
dual operators (the canonical momenta), which leads to
the deﬁnition of a dual gauge ﬁeld. These gauge ﬁelds
correspond to the Goldstone modes in the ordered state,
and they communicate the perturbations in the medium
caused by defect sources. When these defects proliferate,
the dual gauge ﬁelds become gapped by the Anderson–
Higgs mechanism, signaling the demise of order. In elas-
ticity, this pattern moves largely along the same lines, but
is complicated by the larger amount of ﬁelds since dis-
placements ua are vectors whereas the XY -phase ﬁeld ϕ
is a scalar, and the strain components are not indepen-
dent of each other. Furthermore, we must deal with the
Ehrenfest constraint prohibiting local rotations and the
glide constraint which will enforce compressional rigidity
even in the disordered states.

A. Stress gauge ﬁelds

The ﬁrst part of the duality construction, which was
pioneered by Kleinert [10], reproduces the familiar stress–
strain relations. In the duality context, the strain vari-
ables ∂mua are the original ﬁelds from which the dual
stress ﬁelds σa
m are derived. The stresses are the canoni-
cal momenta conjugate to the generalized velocities that

the strains represent. Here we expand this description
to the quantum, dynamical case with imaginary-time
derivatives ∂τ ua taken into account [12]. The standard
textbook spatial elasticity tensor is now expanded to a
spatio-temporal variant Cµνab as in Eq. (66). Unlike in
the vortex–boson-duality of Sec. II, the resulting theory
is absolutely not Lorentz-invariant due to the absence of
timelike displacements uτ ≡ 0. The dualization proce-
dure is nevertheless rather straightforward thanks to the
Abelian symmetries.

The Lagrangian in terms of strains is Eq. (66):

L0 =

1
2

∂µuaCµνab∂νub.

(136)

The stress tensor familiar from elasticity textbooks [10,
58] is

δEcl
δuma ,

σma =

(137)
where Ecl is the static energy of a crystal, basically the
non-kinetic part of the action and the strain uma is de-
ﬁned in Eq. (57). This stress tensor is symmetric in its
indices by deﬁnition. Here we consider dynamics as well,
in imaginary time and the stress tensor that we employ in
the duality was brieﬂy deﬁned in Eq. (71) as the canoni-
cal momentum analogous to Eq. (16):

µ = −i
σa

δS

= −iCµνab∂νub.

δ(∂µua)

(138)
The factor −i stems from the imaginary-time formalism,
and is the same as in Eq. (16). We need to choose a ve-
locity for the temporal derivative, and it is most natural
to choose cT from Eq. (78), so that

∂µ = (∂t, ∂m) = (

1
cT

∂τ , ∂m).

(139)

Because there are no displacements in the timelike direc-
tion ut = 0, the indices µ, a of σa
µ now have an inequiv-
alent status, and we ﬁnd it useful to keep them apart
as lower and upper indices respectively. In the absence
of local rotations ωma in the action S[∂µua], this stress
m = σm
tensor is still symmetric in its spatial indices: σa
a .
Next, we will take the stresses as the principal vari-
ables, so that we need to invert Eq. (138), and express
the strains ∂νub in terms of stress σa
µ. However, the ten-
sor Cµνab is in general not invertible. Let us consider the
isotropic solid of Eq. (58). The antisymmetric strains are
absent, leading to several zero-eigenvalues of the elastic-
ity tensor. However, if we restrict ourselves to symmetric
strains, we can invert those parts. The decomposed rela-
tions explicitly read,

n = −iDκP (0)
P (0)
mnabσb
P (1)
mnabσb
n = 0,
n = −i2µP (2)
P (2)
mnabσb
t = −iµ∂tua.
σa

mnab∂nub,

mnab∂nub,

(140)

(141)

(142)
(143)

40

Here Eq. (141) implies that the stress tensor must be
symmetric in its spatial indices. This result, which holds
in equilibrium in the absence of external torques, can
for quantum solids be traced back to the Ehrenfest theo-
rem [112] which states that the net force on a particle is
proportional to the negative gradient of the potential,
see e.g. Ref. [113]. Therefore we call this constraint
Eq. (141) the Ehrenfest constraint.
In the present du-
ality derivation, it is a direct consequence of the absence
of local rotations in ﬁrst-gradient elasticity, Eq. (56). In
the context of the Dirac program of categorizing con-
straints [91, 114], it is a so-called primary constraint as
an overcomplete set of momenta. This is opposed to a
secondary constraint, which is a dynamical consequence
of equations of motion, as for instance a conservation law.
These relations are readily inverted. We formally de-

ﬁne

C−1
µνab =

1
µ

δµtδνtδab +

1
Dκ

P (0)

µνab +

1
2µ

P (2)

µνab.

(144)

Using the fact that projectors are idempotent for the
same spin P (a)2
= P (a) and orthogonal for diﬀerent spin
P (a)P (b) = 0, a (cid:54)= b, one may verify that the Hamilto-
nian can be written as,
µ∂µua + L0
H = −iσa
t ∂tua − iσa
= −iσa
P (0)
mnabDκP (0)

P (0)
mnab + P (1)
nkbc + P (2)

mnab + P (2)
mnab2µP (2)

2 ∂mua(cid:104)

(cid:17)
(cid:105)

∂nub

∂kuc

(cid:16)

+ 1

mnab

nkbc

m

2 µ(∂tua)2
+ 1
µC−1
2 σa
µνabσb
ν.

= 1

(145)

Here we used P 2 = P for each of the projectors and
the deﬁnition of the stresses. As we did for the vortex–
boson-duality, we transform this Hamiltonian back into a
Lagrangian, where now the σa
µ are the principal variables,
µ] = H + iσa
µC−1

µ∂µua
µνabσb

Ldual[σa

ν + iσa

µ∂µua

(146)

= 1

2 σa

Again, we could have arrived here directly by perform-
ing a Hubbard–Stratonovich transformation. For two-
dimensional isotropic solids we can substitute the elastic
tensor Eq. (144), leading to

(cid:90)
(cid:90) β

Z =

Dσa

(cid:90)
µDub e−Sdual ,
d2x Ldual,

dτ

Sdual =
Ldual =

(cid:2)σa

0
1
2µ
+ iσa

(σa

t )2 +

µ∂µua.

1
8µ

mσa

m + σa

mσm

a − 2ν
1 + ν

σa
aσb
b

(147)

(148)

(cid:3)

(149)

Next we separate the displacement ﬁeld into smooth and
singular parts ua(x) = ua
sing(x). On the

smooth(x) + ua

smooth part we perform integration by parts, and then
integrate it out as a Lagrange multiplier for the (sec-
ondary) constraint

∂µσa

µ = 0.

(150)

This relation represents the well-known fact that stress is
locally conserved in a solid. We will now restrict ourselves
to 2+1 dimensions.

For two spatial dimensions, Eq. (150) can be explicitly
enforced by expressing the stress as the curl of a dual
gauge ﬁeld called the stress gauge ﬁeld,

σa
µ(x) = µνλ∂νba

λ(x).

(151)

λ has six components. Here ba

The ﬁeld ba
( 1
cT
formations which leave the stress tensor invariant,

m) =
m) and there are two independent gauge trans-

µ = (ba

ba
τ , ba

t , ba

λ(x) → ba
ba

λ(x) + ∂λεa(x),

(152)

where εx and εy are two arbitrary scalar ﬁelds. The num-
ber of physical degrees of freedom is then reduced to four.
Enforcing the Ehrenfest constraint Eq. (141)

tamσa

m = ∂mbm

t − ∂tbn

n = 0,

(153)

reduces this further to three degrees of freedom, which
correspond to the three symmetric strains uab of Eq. (57).
Substituting the deﬁnition Eq. (151) into the Lagrangian
Eq. (146) we ﬁnd
Ldual = 1
= 1

σ) + i(µκλ∂κba
σ) + iba

µνab(µρσ∂ρbb
µνab(µρσ∂ρbb

2 (µκλ∂κba
2 (µκλ∂κba

λ)C−1
λ)C−1

λ)∂µua
(154)

λJ a
λ ,

λ = λµν∂µ∂νua

λ. For this reason the ﬁelds ba

where in the second line we have substituted the dislo-
cation current J a
sing from Eq. (91), after
performing partial integration. From this action we see
that dislocations J a
λ interact in the solid by exchanging
gauge ﬁelds ba
λ are inter-
changeably referred to as stress photons in this review.
The dynamic term for the gauge ﬁelds is slightly more
complicated than in the vortex–boson-duality Eq. (23),
yet we will refer to the isotropic solid as the Coulomb
phase in terms of these dual gauge ﬁelds. See Sec. VI F
for explicit expressions.

B. Physical content of the stress tensor

Using the angular momentum projectors Eqs. (59)–
(61), we can give a direct physical
interpretation of
the diﬀerent components of the stress tensor. This fol-
lows from the Clebsch–Gordan composition of 2 ⊗ 2-
dimensional representations of the 2-dimensional rotation
group [13]. The real representations of a rotation over an
angle α are

(cid:33)

.

(155)

(cid:32)

Rn : α →

cos nα − sin nα
sin nα cos nα

41

With a slight abuse of language, we will call these the
spin-n representations. Over a complex ﬁeld, the irre-
ducible representations are ρn : α (cid:55)→ einα. Then Rn is
in fact a reducible representation if considered over the
complex ﬁeld, as Rn (cid:39) ρn⊕ρ−n. In the spatial part of the
stress tensor σa
n both indices transform under rotations
as R1. The decomposition is

R1 ⊗ R1 (cid:39) R0 ⊕ R2 (cid:39) ρ0+ ⊕ ρ0− ⊕ R2.

(156)
Here ρ0+ and ρ0− have signs of +1 respectively −1 un-
der spatial inversion. The change under spatial inversion
m ∝ ∂mua. The
stems from the corresponding strains σa
eigenvectors of these representations when acting on the
stress tensor are

ρ0+ : σx
ρ0− : σx
R2 : σx

x + σy
y − σy
x − σy

y ∝ P (0) · σa
m,
x ∝ P (1) · σa
m
y + σy
y and σx

x ∝ P (2) · σa
m.

(157)

(158)

(159)

x + σy

a = σx

a = σx

y − σy

Not surprisingly, we see that these representations corre-
spond precisely with the previous decomposition in terms
of the spin-projectors. The component σa
y is
called compression:
it is the response to isostatic pres-
It corresponds to stress due to volume changes.
sure.
The component abσb
x is called rotation stress.
It is absent in a solid to lowest order (Ehrenfest constraint
Eq. (141)), but see Sec. VI D. The spin-2 components are
called shear stress, the response in one direction when
strained in the perpendicular direction. When expressed
in coordinates in longitudinal (L) and transverse (T) rel-
ative to the momentum q, we name these components:
L − σT
σL
L magnetic shear. The
reason for this is that the electric shear is part of the
longitudinal sector of the Lagrangian and it is associated
with the longitudinal phonon, while the magnetic shear
is part of the transverse sector of the Lagrangian and is
related to the transverse phonon, see Sec. VI F.

T electric shear and σL

T + σT

These arguments can be extended to 2+1 dimensions
including the temporal components σa
[13]. These two
components transform under R1⊗ 1 and therefore do not
t
‘mix’ with the other components in the decomposition,
forming a vector (doublet) under the spatial rotations.

C. Constraints in the path integral

The action Eq. (154) must be amended by the
constraints in the system:
the Ehrenfest constraint
Eq. (153), the glide constraint Eq. (105) and gauge ﬁx-
ing. The Ehrenfest constraint can be implemented by a
Lagrange multiplier, or equivalently, by a delta function
in the measure of the path integral. Similarly we can add
a gauge ﬁxing term to remove the gauge volume due to
the unphysical degrees of freedom Eq. (152) in the path

integral. The path integral then reads,

(cid:90)

(cid:89)

Zdual =

Dba

µ “DJ a
µ”

F a[ba

µ] δ(∂mbm

t − ∂tbn

n)e−Sdual .

b=x,y

(160)
Here F a[ba
µ] is a gauge ﬁxing functional to remove the
gauge degrees of freedom. For instance, for the general-
ized Lorenz gauge this would be F a[ba
µ). Fur-
thermore, the path integral over the dislocation sources
J a
µ is not rigorously deﬁned: at this stage we aim to de-
scribe the response of the solid to the disturbance by a
small number of isolated dislocations, or rather use the
dislocation as external sources to probe the elasticity re-
sponse of the solid. A full grand-canonical treatment of
dislocations will be the topic of Sec. VII.

µ] = δ(∂µba

The glide constraint Eq. (105) is a constraint on dis-
locations, not on the gauge ﬁelds. Since in the solid dis-
locations are treated as external sources, it is possible to
violate the glide constraint as an experimentalist may in-
ject interstitials to engage climb motion. The constraint
per se applies only to internal, spontaneously formed dis-
locations. To enforce the constraint in the bulk of the
solid, a Lagrange multiplier term can be imposed as

Lglide constraint = iλ(tmaJ a
m).

(161)

This form will be revisited in Section VII.

To understand the physical consequences of the glide
constraint, consider the minimal coupling term iba
λ in
Eq. (154). The terms relevant for the glide constraint
can be rewritten as

λJ a

x =

yJ x
y + by
bx
1
2

xJ y
y − by
(bx

x)(J x

y − J y

x ) +

1
2

(bx

y + by

x)(J x

y + J y

x ).

(162)

m = J x

y − J y

The ﬁrst term on the right-hand side contains the glide
motion amJ a
x which must be set to zero.
Therefore, the stress component bx
x has no sources in
the bulk of a solid. Via a gauge transformation εx = −bt
and εy = −bt
x
y in Eq. (152) the time derivative of this is
equivalent to

y − by

∂t(bx

x + σy

y − by

t + ∂xby

t = −(σx

x) → ∂t(bx

y − by

x) − ∂ybx

y ).
(163)
Here we use the deﬁnition of the stress gauge ﬁeld
Eq. (151). Therefore, it is precisely the compressional
stress Eq. (157) that has no dislocation sources in the
bulk of the solid. In other words: dislocations in the solid
only cause shear stress, not volume changes. In Sec. IV E
we had already shown that the glide constraint originates
in the conservation of particle number. In the analysis of
the quantum liquid crystal phases in Secs. VIII and IX we
will see that this has the consequence that the compres-
sional Goldstone mode is protected from the dual Higgs
mechanism and remains massless even after dislocation
proliferation.

42

D. Second-gradient elasticity

It is useful to consider higher-order terms, not only
for completeness, but also to get a better handle on the
Ehrenfest constraint for dual ﬁelds. Furthermore, we
cannot include disclinations if the stress ﬁelds are in-
cluded only up to lowest order. We depart from second-
gradient curvature ∼ (∂mω)2, Eq. (64). The higher-order
compression is neglected by taking (cid:96)(cid:48) ≡ 0, because it does
not add any new physics other than a reﬁnement of the
longitudinal propagator in Eq. (83). Since the rotations
ω = ∂xuy − ∂yux are gradients of displacements ﬁeld and
the dynamics of displacements was already incorporated
in Eq. (65), at this stage there is no separate kinetic term
for rotations. This amounts to an extra non-dynamical
ﬁeld ω ≡ ωτ = 1
2 τ ab∂aub and an extra term in the La-
grangian Eq. (136),

L(2) = 1

2 4µ(cid:96)2(∂mω)2,

(164)

However, in the quantum nematic phase the displacement
ﬁelds have lost their physical meaning, and then the ro-
tation ﬁeld acquires its own kinetic term originating in
the dislocation condensate, see Sec. VIII C.

This introduces a new canonical momentum, the so-

called torque stress τ (cid:96)
m,

m = −i
τ (cid:96)

∂S

∂(∂mω)

= −4iµ(cid:96)2∂mω.

(165)

Torque stress is the canonical angular momentum con-
jugate to rotation strains, just as linear stress σa
µ is the
canonical linear momentum conjugate to displacement
strains [10]. Here the label (cid:96) indicates that it is the
torque stress descendant from the second-gradient elas-
ticity term. Later we shall also ﬁnd a relation between
shear stress and torque stress, and this label will dis-
criminate between these diﬀerent origins. The dual La-
grangian Eq.(146) has to be extended by

L(2)
dual = 1
2

1
4µ(cid:96)2 (τ (cid:96)

m)2 + iτ (cid:96)

m∂mω.

(166)

Substituting ω = 1
2 ab∂aub back, and integrating out the
smooth part of the displacement ua as a Lagrange mul-
tiplier,

Lint = iσa

µ∂µua + iτ (cid:96)

n∂nω
= −i(∂µσa)ua + i 1
= −iua∂µ(σa
µ − 1

2 (tµa∂µ∂nτ (cid:96)
2 tµa∂nτ (cid:96)

n),

n)ua

(167)

we ﬁnd a modiﬁed form of the stress conservation
Eq. (150),

∂µ(σa

µ − 1
2

tµa∂nτ (cid:96)

n) = 0.

(168)

The second term is non-zero only for the antisymmetric
part of σa
m, and only the equation for those components is

modiﬁed. We see that the Ehrenfest constraint Eq. (141)
is modiﬁed to [58]

maσa

m = ∂nτ (cid:96)
n.

(169)

When the rotational stiﬀness length (cid:96) is ﬁnite, the
Ehrenfest constraint is softened and antisymmetric stress
can exist, but only when it is sourced by torque stress.
This creates the possibility to invert the elasticity ten-
sor Cµνab, which was up to now only partially accom-
plished in Eq. (144). We mention brieﬂy two other ways
to achieve this inversion. Firstly, to the ﬁrst-order La-
grangian (146), one can add an Ehrenfest-violating ﬁrst-
gradient local rotation term ∼ η(ab∂aub)2 with small
parameter η, which is sent to zero at the end of the
calculation. Secondly, one could introduce an external
source term J ma∂mua and include Lagrange multiplier
ﬁeld that enforces the Ehrenfest constraint with an ex-
ternal source. After the duality transformation one can
integrate out this ﬁeld to ﬁnd the correlation function.
The latter method was used in Ref. [13].

E. Torque stress gauge ﬁeld

We wish to elaborate on torque stress a bit more, since
this will be greatly important in determining the rota-
tional degrees of freedom in the quantum liquid crys-
tals. Even in the absence of second-gradient elasticity
it is possible to deﬁne the torque stress tensor, again
because translations and rotations are not independent.
The Ehrenfest constraint then turns into a dynamical
constraint. This technique was developed in Ref. [20].

m = ¯σa

m: σa
m ≡ σa

m+˘σa
m − σm

m in a symmetric ¯σa

Consider again the displacement and rotation ﬁelds ua
and ω on the strain side of the duality. We will consider
them as independent variables only now, and enforce the
2 nb∂nub − ω = 0.
relation between them as a constraint 1
Split the stress tensor σa
m and anti-
symmetric part ˘σa
m, and recognize that in
ﬁrst-gradient elasticity, the antisymmetric component of
the stress tensor ˘σa
m fea-
tures quadratically in Eq. (146). We are for this reason at
liberty to use the linearly appearing antisymmetric com-
ponent as a Lagrange multiplier for the constraint and
we add ma ˘σa
2 nb∂nub) to the Lagrangian. Then,
2 nb∂nub − ω)
Lconstr. = iσa
= iσa

m(ω − 1
t ∂tua + i¯σa
µ∂µua − imaσa

a is absent. Only ¯σa

(170)

m∂mua + ima ˘σa

m( 1

mω.

Integrating out the smooth part of ua leads again to the
stress conservation law ∂µσa
µ = 0, while ω enforces the
Ehrenfest constraint maσa
m = 0. However, we may take
the stress gauge ﬁeld ba
λ from Eq. (151), and formally
deﬁne the torque stress via,

τµ ≡ babµλba
λ,
a and τa = ba

such that τt = −ba
t . Note the diﬀerent
origin of this torque stress, which is applicable even in

(171)

43

linear elasticity, and of the one originating from second-
gradient elasticity in Eq. (165). Substituting Eq. (171)
into the Ehrenfest constraint maσa
m = 0 it follows that
this constraint corresponds to

∂µτµ = 0.

(172)

This turns the strict absence of antisymmetric stress into
a dynamical constraint, that ensures that torque stress
is conserved in any solid lacking a rotational elastic re-
sponse. In this way we have accomplished to turn the pri-
mary constraint into a secondary constraint, in Dirac’s
terminology [91, 114]. Note that even though the con-
straint can be reduced to just eliminating the component
τ0 along the space-time 3-momentum of the ﬁeld (see
Sec. I E), all three components τµ in Eq. (171) have a
physical meaning. The temporal part τt corresponds to
intrinsic ‘spin’ angular momentum density (i.e. angular
momentum not due to the linear momenta σa
t ) and ∂aτa
is the intrinsic rotational moment or couple-stress den-
sity [58, 115, 116]. Note the diﬀerence between this equa-
tion with temporal components and Eq. (169) of second-
gradient elasticity with only spatial components; the con-
sequence is that when the right-hand side of Eq. (169)
is expressed in terms of the stress gauge ﬁeld ba
λ, these
components do not match with those of Eq. (171). One
should be careful with distinguishing between τ (cid:96)
m and τµ.
The constraint Eq. (172) can be explicitly enforced by
expressing the torque stress as the curl of yet another
gauge ﬁeld, the torque stress gauge ﬁeld hλ:

τµ = µνλ∂νhλ.

(173)

The transverse component hT correspond to the rota-
tional Goldstone mode (in a suitable gauge ﬁx), while
the temporal component ht corresponds to static forces
between disclination and dislocation sources. The great
beneﬁt of the deﬁnition Eq. (171) is that the torque stress
gauge ﬁeld hλ couples directly to disclination sources Θλ
of Eq. (98), just as the stress gauge ﬁeld bλ couples to
the dislocation density according to Eq. (154). This can
be seen from
−imaσa

mωsing = −i(∂µτµ)ωsing = iτµ∂µωsing

= i(µνλ∂νhλ)∂µωsing
= −ihλλµν∂ν∂µωsing
= ihλΘλ.

(174)

Because in two dimensions there is only one plane of
rotation, both the torque stress and the torque stress
gauge ﬁeld do not carry any upper indices. The number
of indices follows those of the Frank tensor and in par-
ticular in three dimensions we would have a vector index
c that is orthogonal to the plane of rotation ab. We will
come back to the torque stress and rotational gauge ﬁelds
in Sec. VIII C.

F. Dual Lagrangian of the isotropic solid

In the remainder we will need an explicit expression for
the Lagrangian Eq. (154) of the isotropic solid. This is
accomplished by inserting the values of the inverse elastic
tensor C−1
µνab of the isotropic solid, Eq. (144). Interest-
ingly, if we go to Fourier space and (t, L, T)-coordinates

(see Sec. I E and appendix A) the Lagrangian becomes
block diagonal with two blocks L = LL +LT that we shall
call longitudinal LL and transverse LT, as they contain
the longitudinal and transverse phonon, respectively. In-
cluding the second-gradient rotation terms by substitut-
q (i ωn
ing τ (cid:96)
t ) from
cT
Eq. (169) into Eq. (166), we ﬁnd

L − qbL
bL

m = − 1

L = − 1

T + i ωn
bT
cT

q maσa

44

t

T q2
bT†
T q2(1 + 1

i 1
cT
iν 1
cT

bT†
bL†

T

L

i 1
cT
−i 1

cT

(1 + ν)

2

bL†

bL†
bT†

L

t

T

ωnq
ωnq

LL = 1

2

1
4µ

LT = 1

2

1
4µ



bT

t
bT
L
bL
T

−iν 1
cT
ν 1
c2
T

ωnq
ω2
n

ω2
n + 2(1 + ν)q2

−i 1

ωnq
cT
1
ω2
n
c2
T
ν 1
ω2
n
c2
T
−i 1

1
c2
T

 + ibT†


(cid:96)2q2 )
(cid:96)2q2 )

L J T

 + ibL†

bL

t
bL
L
bT
T

t + ibT†

t J T

L + ibL†

T J L
T,

(175)

(cid:96)2q2 )
ωnq(1 + 1
(cid:96)2q2 )
ωnq(1 − 1
(cid:96)2q2 ) − 1

cT
1
c2
T

(cid:96)2q2 )

ωnq(1 + 1
n(1 + 1
ω2
(cid:96)2q2 )
n(1 − 1
ω2
(cid:96)2q2 )

c2
T

ωnq(1 − 1
n(1 − 1
ω2

i 1
cT
− 1
c2
T
n(1 + 1
ω2

(cid:96)2q2 ) + 4q2

1
c2
T

t + ibL†

L J L

L + ibT†

T J T
T .

t J L

(cid:82)

λ (p) = (cid:82)

Recall that the gauge ﬁelds and dislocation sources
are real ﬁelds, and the †-symbol merely denotes
ba†
λ(−p) in Fourier space. This also implies
λ (p) = ba
p iba†
λ (p)J a
λ(p) which can be seen by
transforming p → −p for the whole integral. Note that
longitudinal and transverse directions in the Burgers in-
dex a get mixed in these two sectors.

p iJ a†

λ (p)ba

The expressions Eqs.

(175), (176) do not yet take
into account any gauge ﬁxing or constraints. Each of
them contains one gauge degree of freedom due to the
gauge transformations ba
λ + ∂λεa. This can be
handled in two ways. One can either perform an ex-

λ → ba

(176)

+1 = i ωn
cT

L−qba
ba

m = −qba

L = 0 removing the components ba

plicit gauge ﬁx, such as imposing the Coulomb gauge ﬁx
∂mba
L from the
Lagrangian altogether. The other option is to perform a
coordinate transformation to the (0, +1,−1)-system and
substitute pba
t , see appendix A. The gauge
degree of freedom corresponds then precisely to the 0-
direction in Fourier space, and is therefore completely
absent from the Lagrangian. This is equivalent to choos-
ing the explicit Lorenz gauge ﬁx ∂µba
µ = 0. In either case,
the superﬂuous gauge degree of freedom has to be gauge
ﬁxed or integrated out at some stage of the calculation.
The result is that the expressions simplify to

(cid:33)T(cid:32)

p2
−iν 1

cT

(cid:32)
(cid:33)T(cid:32)

bT†
bL†

+1

T

p2(1 + 1
(cid:96)2q2 )
ωnp(1 − 1

(cid:96)2q2 )

i 1
cT

LL = 1

2

LT = 1

2

1
4µ

1
4µ

2

(cid:32)

(1 + ν)
bL†
bT†

+1

T

ωnp 1
c2
T

ωnp

iν 1
cT
n + 2(1 + ν)q2
ω2
−i 1
ωnp(1 − 1
cT
n(1 + 1
ω2

(cid:96)2q2 )
(cid:96)2q2 ) + 4q2

1
c2
T

(cid:33)

(cid:33)(cid:32)
(cid:33)(cid:32)

bT
+1
bL
T

(cid:33)

bL
+1
bT
T

+ ibT†

+1J T

+1 + ibL†

T J L
T,

+ ibL†

+1J L

+1 + ibT†

T J T
T .

(177)

(178)

G. Correlation functions

To compare results on the original and dual sides, we
should formulate correlation functions in terms of the
dual stress: we want to obtain relations of the kind
Eq. (31) for dual elasticity. The naive general form of
these relations is,

However, the elasticity tensor Cµνab is generally not in-
vertible. We focus primarily on the longitudinal and
transverse propagators Eqs.
(83) and (84). Following
the recipe of Section II D, we add external sources K and

(cid:104)∂µua∂νub(cid:105) = C−1

µνab − C−1

µκacC−1

νλbd(cid:104)σc

λ(cid:105).
κσd

(179)

J to the strain Lagrangian Eq. (136):

L =

=

1
2
1
2

∂µuaCµνab∂νub + K∂aua + J ab∂aub
∂µuaCµνab∂νub + KδmaP (0)
+ J maP (1)

mnab∂nub

mnab∂nub.

(180)

The stress tensor Eq. (138) changes accordingly, and we
ﬁnd the modiﬁed versions of Eqs (140)–(142) as,

mnab∂nub − iKδma,

n = −iDκP (0)
P (0)
mnabσb
n = −imaJ ,
P (1)
mnabσb
n = −i2µP (2)
P (2)
mnabσb
t = −iµ∂tua.
σa

mnab∂nub,

(181)

(182)

(183)
(184)

Due to the relation Eq. (182) this is still not invertible.
For the longitudinal propagator this poses no problem,
and we repeat the procedure of Section II D to ﬁnd,

H[K] = −iσa

∂µuaCµνab∂νub + K∂aua

µ∂µua +
µC−1
σa
µC−1
σa

µνabσb

µνabσb

1
2
ν − 1
2κ
ν − 1
2κ

=
Ldual =

1
2
1
2

K2 + i
K2 + i

1
Dκ
1
Dκ

Kσa
a,
Kσa

a + iσa

µ∂µua.

(185)

The correlation function relation for the longitudinal
propagator becomes,

GL = (cid:104)∂aua∂bub(cid:105) =
1
Z[0]
− 1
(Dκ)2(cid:104)σa
b(cid:105).
aσb

1
κ

=

δ
δK

δ

δKZ[K]

(186)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)K=0

We can also express this in terms of stress gauge ﬁelds
by using

T − pbT
bL
+1.

ωn
cT

(187)

t − ∂xby
t = i

t

T) + qbT

x − bx
y) + ∂ybx
a = ∂t(by
σa
= −i
L − bL
ωn
(bT
cT
(cid:104)

yielding the result in terms of stress photons
p(cid:104)bT†
T(cid:105)
+1bL

p2(cid:104)bT†

− 1

+1bT

GL =

1
κ

(Dκ)2

+1(cid:105) − i
ωn
cT
†
+1(cid:105) +
bT

†

(cid:104)bL

T

ω2
n
c2
T

T(cid:105)(cid:105)

bL

+ i

ωn
cT

p(cid:104)bL

T

45

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

variable, the torque stress τ (cid:96)
is, cf. Eq. (84),

m. The transverse propagator

GT =

(cid:104)(∂aub − ∂bua)2(cid:105) = 2

(cid:104)ωabωab(cid:105) = 4(cid:104)ωω(cid:105).

ab

ab

Recall that ω = 1
substitute this in the external source term of Eq. (180)
added to Eq. (164),

2 abωab = 1

2 (∂aub − ∂bua). We

2 ab

1

(189)

L(2) = 1

2 4µ(cid:96)2(∂mω)2 + 2ωJ .

(190)

It follows that the last form in Eq. (189) corresponds to
GT = 1
Z[0]
we use 1 = ∂2
m
∂2
n

δJ Z[J ]|J =0. To obtain the torque stress
= ∂m
∂2
n

∂m to ﬁnd

δJ δ

δ

m = −i4µ(cid:96)2∂mω + 2i
τ (cid:96)
∂m
∂2
n

(cid:0)iτ (cid:96)

m + 2

4µ(cid:96)2

1

∂mω =

J ,

∂m
∂2
n

J(cid:1).

(191)

(192)

Now we perform the dualization procedure as in Eq. (166)
but including the external source, to ﬁnd,

m

1

=

2 (τ (cid:96)

J ∂m
∂2
n

=

1

4µ(cid:96)2

(cid:0) 1
(cid:0) 1
(cid:0) 1

H = −im∂mω + 1

J(cid:1)
2 4µ(cid:96)2(∂mω)2 + 2ωJ
m)2 − 2iτ (cid:96)
J − 2
∂m
J(cid:1)
∂2
n
J + 2J 1
q2J(cid:1).
∂2
n
(∂mτ (cid:96)
q2 J − 2J 1

∂m
∂2
n
∂mτ (cid:96)
m
∂2
n

m)2 + 2i
m)2 − 2i
2 (τ (cid:96)
n = (iqn)2 = −q2 in the last line. The
Here we used ∂2
correlation function relation in terms of torque stress be-
comes

2 (τ (cid:96)

(193)

4µ(cid:96)2

4µ(cid:96)2

m)

=

1

GT =

=

1
δ
Z[0]
δJ
µ(cid:96)2q2 −
1

δ

δJ Z[J ]
(2µ(cid:96)2q2)2(cid:104)∂mτ (cid:96)

1

n(cid:105).
m ∂nτ (cid:96)

(194)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)J =0

This is still expressed in terms of torque stress, pertaining
to second-gradient ﬁelds. However, we can substitute the
Ehrenfest constraint Eq. (169) to ﬁnd the form which is
also valid for linear elasticity in the limit (cid:96) → 0,

.

(188)

GT =

1

µ(cid:96)2q2 −

1

(2µ(cid:96)2q2)2(cid:104)maσa

n(cid:105).
m nbσb

(195)

For the transverse propagator, we must deal with the
non-invertibility of Eq. (182), using any one of the meth-
ods mentioned at the end of Section VI D. Since second-
gradient elasticity has a well-established physical origin,
it is arguably more elegant to use this rather than intro-
ducing unphysical ﬁelds and setting them to zero later.
We therefore choose to incorporate the second-gradient
elasticity term of Eq. (164), which gives rise to a new dual

This can also be expressed in terms of the stress gauge
ﬁelds by using,

maσa

t + ∂xbx
t

m = −∂t(bx
x + by
L − i
= −i
ωn
bL
cT
= −pbL
+1 − i
ωn
cT

y) + ∂yby
ωn
cT
bT
T,

T + qbL
bT
t

(196)

46

to practice such derivations that we need for the quan-
tum liquid crystal phases with dislocation condensates of
Secs. VIII and IX.

The recipe is as follows: take the partition function in
terms of stress gauge ﬁelds Eq. (154); use the external
dislocation sources J a
λ and integrate out all gauge ﬁelds
ba
λ in the path integral, leaving only expression in terms
of J a
λ ; take functional derivatives with respect to these
sources and then set them to zero to obtain propaga-
tors for all the components separately; substitute these
expressions into the relations Eqs. (188) or (197).

Since the coupling between the stress gauge ﬁelds and
the dislocation sources is just iba†
λ, and since
the matrix in Eq. (177) in Fourier space is just algebraic,
we can simply invert the matrices to immediately ﬁnd

λ = iJ a†
λ ba

λ J a

Z L[J] =

Db exp

= exp

M−1

L = 4µ

(cid:17)M−1

L

(cid:33)(cid:17)

,

(cid:32)

J T
+1
J L
T

(cid:16) −
(cid:16)

1
2

(cid:90)

LL(cid:17)

J T†
+1 J L†

T

1
n + q2)
ω2

×

(cid:90)

(cid:90)

(cid:16) −
(cid:32) 1

c2
T

4p2( 1
c2
L

n + 2(1 + ν)q2 −iν 1
ω2
cT
iν 1
p2
cT

ωnp

(cid:33)

ωnp

.

(200)

Being careful to use (cid:104)bT†
for Eq. (188),

+1bL

T(cid:105) = δ
δJ L†

T

Z etc., we ﬁnd

δ
δJ T

+1

GL =

(cid:105)

n + ω2
n

1
κ

(cid:104) 1

− 1

(2κ)2 4µ

1
ω2
n + q2)

×

4( 1
c2
L

2

c2
T

1
c2
T
1
c2
L

µ(1 + ν)

n + 2(1 + ν)q2 + 2νω2
ω2
n + q2
ω2
ω2
n + q2
L − c2
c2
κ

− 1
κ2
− 1
κ

n + c2
ω2
n + c2
ω2
−q2
ω2 − c2
Lq2 + iδ

Tq2
Lq2 =
.

T

q2

n + c2
ω2

Lq2

(201)

(198)

(199)

=

1
κ

=

1
κ
→ 1
ρ

yielding as the ﬁnal result

(cid:104)

GT =

1

µ(cid:96)2q2 −

1

(2µ(cid:96)2q2)2
− i
p(cid:104)bT

T

ωn
cT

†

p2(cid:104)bL

+1

†

+1(cid:105) +
bL

+1(cid:105) + i
ωn
bL
cT
†
ω2
(cid:104)bT
n
c2
T

T(cid:105)(cid:105)

bT

T

p(cid:104)bL

+1

†

T(cid:105)
bT

.

(197)

One should insert the correlation functions (cid:104)b†b(cid:105) and set
(cid:96) → 0 afterwards, to obtain results for ﬁrst-gradient elas-
ticity only. The terms with factors (cid:96)2 in the denominator
will cancel, as we shall see later.

At this point one can wonder whether it is really nec-
essary to use the dual gauge ﬁelds at all, since the lon-
gitudinal and transverse propagators appear to be com-
plete and simpler when expressed in terms of the stress
tensor σa
µ. The reason for introducing gauge ﬁelds is
twofold. First, the conservation of stress ∂µσa
µ = 0
is automatically imposed, whereas otherwise one would
have to keep track of an additional constraint, which
at least makes the calculation of Eqs. (186) and (195)
not as easy as it may seem. Second, the true objec-
tive of this work is to describe the quantum smectic
and nematic phases, which are Bose–Einstein conden-
sates of dislocations. The dislocation sources couple not
to the stress tensor (the ‘ﬁeld strength’) but instead to
the gauge ﬁelds in Eq. (154). The dislocation conden-
sate is the Higgs phase for these gauge ﬁelds, and mimics
precisely the photon ﬁeld in a superconductor. Just as
the electrodynamics of superconductors follows directly
from the Ginzburg–Landau action for the superconduct-
ing order parameter (Cooper pair condensate) with the
minimally coupled photon ﬁeld, so does the elasticity of
quantum liquid crystal follow immediately from the ac-
tion of the dislocation condensate with minimally coupled
stress gauge ﬁelds.

For later use, let us also present the propagator relation

for the chiral propagator Eq. (85), which follows from

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)K=J =0
T(cid:105)(cid:105)

,

+1(cid:105)
+1bL
(cid:104)bT†
+1bT

GLT = (cid:104)∂auaωbc(cid:105) =
q2(cid:96)2(cid:104)σa
(cid:104) − ω2

4µκ

=

=

1

1

1

1

4µκ

q2(cid:96)2

δ

1
Z[0]

δJ Z[K,J ]

δ
δK
m(cid:105)
ambσb
T(cid:105) + p2(cid:104)bT†
(cid:104)bL†
n
T bT
c2
T
(cid:104)bL†
+1(cid:105) + i
ωnp
ωnp
T bL
cT
cT

+ i

†
while GTL = G
LT.

H. Correlation functions from stress gauge ﬁelds

It is instructive to rederive the explicit expressions for
the propagators of the isotropic solid Eqs. (83),(84) com-
pletely on the dual side. We can verify that the relations
Eqs. (188),(197) are in fact correct, and we will be able

L = κ+µ

This agrees with Eq. (83). We used µ 1+ν
1−ν = κ from
Eq. (62); c2
ρ from Eq. (78);
and we can combine these to substitute 1−ν
2 c2
T. We
performed analytic continuation to real time ωn → iω− δ
in the last step.

from Eq. (77); c2

T = µ

L = c2

ρ

The derivation for the transverse propagator is simi-
lar, with slight complications coming from the second-
gradient terms. We can invert the matrix in Eq. (178) to

(cid:90)

ﬁnd
Z T[J] =

= exp

M−1

T = 4µ

(cid:90)

LT(cid:17)

(cid:16) −
(cid:16)

1
2

Db exp

(cid:90)

(cid:16) −
(cid:32)(cid:0) 1

(cid:96)2q2
4p2

T

T

J L†
+1 J T†

(cid:17)M−1
(cid:96)2q2 ) + 4q2(cid:1) i 1

×

1

n + q2(1 + (cid:96)2q2)

ω2

1
c2
T
n(1 + 1
ω2
−i 1

cT

c2
T

ωnp(1 − 1

(cid:96)2q2 )

(cid:33)(cid:17)

,

(cid:32)

J L
+1
J T
T

(cid:33)

.

cT

ωnp(1 − 1
p2(1 + 1
(cid:96)2q2 )

(cid:96)2q2 )

We ﬁnd for Eq. (197),

(202)

GT =

(cid:104)

=

×

(cid:105)

µ(cid:96)2q2
Tq2(1 + (cid:96)2q2)
(cid:105)
n(1 − 1
(cid:96)2q2 )

1

1

2ω2

µ(cid:96)2q2 −
n + c2
(2µ(cid:96)2q2)2
ω2
(cid:104)
(cid:96)2q2 ) + 4c2
Tq2 + 2ω2
n(1 + 1
n + c2
ω2
1 −
n + c2
Tq2(1 + (cid:96)2q2)
ω2
(cid:96)2q2c2
Tq2
Tq2(1 + (cid:96)2q2)

µ(cid:96)2q2

Tq2

1

1

n + c2
ω2
q2

=

=

µ(cid:96)2q2
1
ρ
→ 1
ρ

n + c2
ω2

Tq2(1 + (cid:96)2q2)

−q2

ω2 − c2

Tq2(1 + (cid:96)2q2) + iδ

(203)

T = µ

This agrees with Eq. (84). We used c2
ρ from Eq. (78)
in the second-to-last step and performed analytic contin-
uation to real time ωn → iω − δ in the last step. As
anticipated, this result is meaningful even in the limit of
linear elasticity where (cid:96) → 0, even though the expres-
sion Eq. (197) seems at ﬁrst sight to be divergent in that
limit.

We see here a quite convoluted way to reobtain the
familiar propagators Eqs. (83), (84). However, the rela-
tions Eqs. (188), (197) work as well in the liquid crystal
phases. The calculations in this section set a template
for those derivations.

I. Collective modes of the isotropic solid

l = 0 rather than the Lorenz gauge ∂λba

Let us conclude this section by making up the inven-
tory static forces and dynamic modes in the isotropic
solid. This is most readily done in the Coulomb gauge
∂lba
λ = 0, because
the temporal components of gauge ﬁeld then correspond
directly to static forces (cf. the scalar potential V = At in
electrodynamics). We can use the dislocation sources J a
λ
directly to probe the modes carried by these gauge ﬁelds
with no need to resort to the longitudinal and transverse
propagators. Since we are interested in the perfect crys-
tal, there are no dislocations in the bulk, and the sources

47

component

character

name

bL
T
bT
T
bT
t
bL
t

massless propagating
massless propagating

long-ranged static
short-ranged static

longitudinal phonon
transverse phonon
dislocation force
rotational force

TABLE III: Mode spectrum of the isotropic solid

We impose the Coulomb gauge ﬁx ∂lba

J a
λ refer only external forces (strains) that interrogate the
(stress) response. As the quantities presented here con-
cern physical observable, we will present the ﬁnal results
in real time via analytic continuation ωn → iω − δ.
l = −qba

L =
0, removing the ba
L-components from the Lagrangians
Eqs. (175), (176). We can then integrate out the gauge
ﬁelds, which amounts to inverting the matrices as we did
in Eqs. (200), (202). We will focus on the ‘diagonal’ cor-
relation functions, taking double derivatives of Z T,L[J]
with the corresponding currents.

In the longitudinal sector we ﬁnd

4κµ
κ + µ

1
q2

(cid:104)bT†
t bT
(cid:104)bL†
T bL

t (cid:105) =
T(cid:105) = µ

1

1−ν2 ω2 − c2
Lq2
ω2 − c2
Lq2 + iδ
1

ω2 − q2 + iδ

.

−1
c2
L

,

(204)

(205)

Clearly, the second equation is the longitudinal phonon
propagating with velocity cL. As expected, the trans-
verse component of the dual gauge ﬁeld corresponds to
the massless, propagating mode. The ﬁrst equation has
a clear interpretation as well. Taking the high-energy
limit ω → ∞, this propagator becomes proportional to
1
q2 , and it is therefore an instantaneous or static force,
and not a dynamic mode. In analogy with the photon
gauge ﬁeld in electrodynamics, we could call bL
T the lon-
gitudinal stress photon, and bT
t the Coulomb force be-
tween dislocation sources. Note that the Burgers index
In the static limit
of the Coulomb force is transverse.
ω → 0, we ﬁnd (cid:104)bT†
1
q2 . The Coulomb force
disappears for either vanishing compression modulus κ or
vanishing shear modulus µ. The ﬁrst (compressionless)
case cannot exist in nature; it would correspond to a hy-
pothetical ‘compressionless’ solid where the excess row
of atoms (constituting a dislocation) can be stacked on
top of another row at no energy cost. The second case is
a medium without shear stress, i.e. a liquid or nematic
liquid crystal, where dislocations cannot exist.

t (cid:105) = 4 κµ

t bT

κ+µ

For the transverse sector we ﬁnd

(cid:104)bL†
t bL

(cid:104)bT†
T bT

t (cid:105) = µ
T(cid:105) = µ

ω2(1 + (cid:96)2q2) − 4c2
ω2 − c2

Tq2(cid:96)2q2
Tq2(1 + (cid:96)2q2) + iδ

,

1
q2

1(1 + (cid:96)2q2)

ω2 − q2(1 + (cid:96)2q2) + iδ

.

1
c2
T

(206)

(207)

The second equation is readily identiﬁed as the transverse
phonon propagating with velocity cT.
It persists even

48

FIG. 12: Spectral functions Eq. (209) (left: transverse; right: longitudinal) of the isotropic solid in units of the inverse shear
modulus 1/µ ≡ 1, with Poisson ratio ν = 0.1. The width of the poles is artiﬁcial and denotes the relative pole strengths: these
ideal poles are actually inﬁnitely sharp. Each sector has one propagating mode, the phonon, which is massless (zero energy as
q → 0) and has linear dispersion ω = cq. The velocities are the transverse cT resp. longitudinal velocity cL.

when (cid:96) = 0, only considering linear elasticity. By taking
the high-energy limit ω → ∞ the ﬁrst equation becomes
proportional to 1+(cid:96)2q2
q2 ; yet
again this is not a propagating mode but a instantaneous
force. More insightful is the static limit ω → 0, where

, which for q → 0 goes as 1

q2

(cid:104)bL†
t bL

t (cid:105)(ω → 0) = 4µ

(cid:96)2

1 + (cid:96)2q2 = 4µ

1

q2 + 1
(cid:96)2

.

(208)

Here we see that this is also a Coulomb force, but short-
ranged with a length scale set by (cid:96). For (cid:96) = 0, this prop-
agator vanishes completely, getting eﬀectively removed
by the Ehrenfest constraint. We call this therefore the
rotational Coulomb force, since it only shows up when
rotational (torque) stress is applied.

This mode spectrum is summarized in Table III. The
dual variables capture both the dynamic and static inter-
actions, even though they were derived from the strain
action Eq. (136) which contained only the phonons. Here
we note that conventional 2+0D “elastostatics” is ob-
tained by going to the static limit ω → 0 and considering
only densities and not currents, that is only ba
t and J a
t
and not ba

m and J a
m.

In the liquid crystal phases in Secs. VIII and IX we

will analyze the spectral function S(ω, q):

SL,T(ω, q) = Im GL,T(iω − δ, q),

(209)
using the analytic continuation of the frequency −iωn →
ω + iδ and δ (cid:28) 1. The poles of the spectral function are

propagating modes. For comparison to the quantum liq-
uid crystals responses later on, we have plotted the trans-
verse and longitudinal spectral functions of the isotropic
solid in Fig. 12. There is clearly one phonon in each sec-
tor, which is massless and has linear dispersion with the
transverse and longitudinal velocity, respectively.

Now that we have identiﬁed the mode spectrum, we
can return to another gauge ﬁx: the Lorenz gauge where
∂µba
µ = 0 and let us examine the sum of the Lagrangians
of Eqs. (177), (178). Since ba−1 = ba
T, the components
bL−1, bT−1 are to be identiﬁed as the longitudinal and trans-
verse phonons. This implies that bL
+1, bT
+1 represent the
(rotational, dislocation) Coulomb forces.
In the quan-
tum liquid crystal phases, the Lorenz gauge ﬁx is more
appropriate due to the nature of the minimal coupling
to the dislocation condensate. With this identiﬁcation,
it becomes useful to compare the fate of the static forces
resp. dynamic modes in the smectic and nematic phases.

VII. DISORDER FIELD THEORY OF
DISLOCATIONS: THE DUAL STRESS

SUPERCONDUCTORS

After setting the stage, we are now entering the core
of this review. By describing the elastic stresses as gauge
ﬁelds, up to this point we have been collecting all the
pieces that are needed for the construction of the theories

cTcLof the dual stress superconductors describing the physics
of the maximally strongly-correlated quantum nematic
and smectic crystals. Now we will put them all together
in a general disorder ﬁeld theory framework, which will
be further explored below for the speciﬁc cases of quan-
tum nematic and smectic order.

This disorder ﬁeld theory is build upon the central no-
tion of weak–strong (or Kramers–Wannier) duality that
the physics of the disordered state can be regarded as an
ordered state in terms of the disorder ﬁelds, coding for a
system formed out of topological excitations of the origi-
nal ordered state. Upon approaching the quantum melt-
ing transition from the ordered side, the number of closed
loops formed from the (particlelike in two-dimensions)
defect–antidefect pairs increases, while at the same time
the loops grow in size. At the quantum critical point
these loops in spacetime ‘blow out’, becoming as large as
the size of the system. The original order is destroyed
since individual defects occur freely, while from the dis-
ordered viewpoint one obtains a ‘tangle’ of free defect
and antidefect worldlines. Such a tangle corresponds
generally to a relativistic superﬂuid. However, when the
topological excitations have long-range interactions that
can be captured in terms of eﬀective U (1)-gauge ﬁelds,
as is the case for both vortices and dislocations due to
Eqs. (23) resp. (154), one is dealing with a charged su-
perﬂuid, which is nothing else than the Abelian-Higgs
problem describing the physics of the relativistic super-
conductor.

This program has been carried out in full detail for
the vortex–boson duality associated with the superﬂuid–
Mott insulator system introduced in Sec. II [11, 16, 51–
53, 117, 118]. These results employs only the Villain
construction as a simplifying approximation. Such an ex-
plicit construction has not quite been accomplished for
the more complex case of disorder ﬁelds associated with
proliferating dislocations. However, the form of the dual
disorder ﬁeld theory describing the vortex condensate re-
lies only on general phenomenological arguments. This
same basic strategy then also applies to the construction
of the theories of the dual stress superconductors. A cru-
cial aspect in common with the vortex system is that one
is dealing with Abelian global symmetries. In the vortex–
boson problem this is the internal U (1)-symmetry, while
in the crystal-to-liquid crystal melting problem we are
coping with the Abelian ‘pure’ translations since we re-
gard the rotations to be broken, remaining frozen at the
melting transition from the solid to the liquid crystal, re-
call Fig. 6. An Abelian symmetry group has Abelian
topological defects, so that the braiding of the defect
worldlines is trivial. The tangle of proliferated defect
worldlines then reduces to a featureless quantum ﬂuid (a
superﬂuid).

The generalization of the vortex duality to the liquid
crystal context is nevertheless a bit of hairy aﬀair. This
was for the ﬁrst time accomplished in Ref. [12]; although
the outcome was guessed right, the line of arguments was
actually not quite correct. The general theory of nematic

49

order parameters as reviewed in Sec. V was not available
back then, leading to some confusion. Let us here present
the case as it is now understood [13, 20]. As a caution,
the theory as it will unfold below might look overly gen-
eral, but the reader should be aware that all of it rests on
the ‘low fugacity of defects’ in the Villain approximation
assumption. Kept implicit, the key assumption is that
only the Goldstone bosons and defects are available as
building material. But this requires that the defects are
very dilute, which in turn implies that the length scale
associated with the crystalline correlations in the liquid
are very large compared to the lattice constant/UV cut-
oﬀ. In this way the “maximally correlated liquid” motive
is hard-wired into the construction, rendering the theory
actually to be tractable. Let us ﬁrst warm up by revisit-
ing the U (1) vortex–boson (or Abelian-Higgs) duality in
2+1D that we already discussed at length in Sec. II.

A. Vortex disorder ﬁeld theory

The action Eq. (23) describes individual vortices
J V
λ (x) = 2πδλ(L, x) that interact via dual gauge ﬁelds
bλ(x), Fig. 13(a). The quantum ﬂuctuations in the su-
perﬂuid phase feature as a dilute gas of small vortex–
antivortex loops in spacetime:
see Fig. 13(b). These
have the same status as e.g.
fermion loops in QED —
since these represent bound pairs of defects they just
perturbatively dress the vacuum. Upon increasing the
coupling constant g these loops grow in size and num-
ber, and right at the quantum phase transition matters
turn non-perturbative: When the loops grow to become
of the same size as the system, these unbind (the loop
blow-out, see Fig. 13(c)) and on the disordered side of
the phase transition one is dealing instead with a quan-
tum liquid formed from freely occurring vortices and anti-
vortices. Everything propagates with the same ‘velocity
of light’ (actually, the superﬂuid sound velocity) while the
(anti)vortices have the same status as the (anti)particles
of a relativistic ﬁeld theory. Finally, the (anti)vortices
obey a bosonic exchange statistics (because they descend
from the symmetry breaking of an Abelian group) and
this is in fact all one needs to know to construct the dual
disorder ﬁeld theory.

Such a tangle of worldlines of relativistic bosons that
interact via (compact) U (1) gauge ﬁelds is very famil-
iar:
it is just a relativistic superconductor as described
by Abelian-Higgs theory. It carries now a rigidity asso-
ciated with the inﬁnite winding of the worldlines around
the imaginary time axis and this is captured by a col-
lective ﬁeld Φ(x) describing the superconducting order
parameter formed from (anti)-vortex matter. This is the
literal disorder ﬁeld. By general principles, the eﬀective
ﬁeld theory describing this vortex tangle has to be of the

50

(a)vortex worldline

(b)vortex Coulomb gas

(c)vortex blowout

FIG. 13: Proliferation of vortices in 2+1 dimensions. (a) The worldline of a single U (1)-vortex in a superﬂuid. The conﬁguration
of the phase ﬁelds indicated by the in-plane arrows correspond to a singularity of the core. The evolution in time of this
singularity is the vortex worldline. The orientation of the worldline corresponds to the vorticity of the vortex; an antivortex
would have the opposite orientation. (b) If the phase stiﬀness is large, vortices are conﬁned. The combination of a vortex
and an antivortex is topologically neutral, and the creation and subsequent annihilation of a vortex–antivortex pair can occur
as a ﬂuctuation, represented by a closed loop in spacetime. In terms of the dual gauge ﬁeld, the superﬂuid is a Coulomb gas
of vortex excitations. (c) As the phase stiﬀness shrinks, it is easier to create vortex ﬂuctuations. In dual language, the line
tension of the vortex worldline becomes smaller. The size and occurrence of closed vortex worldlines increases. Upon the phase
transition to the disordered phase, these loops have grown to the size of the whole system. The line tension is so low that
vortices and antivortices can be created spontaneously; locally, there is no conservation of vortex (winding) number. The only
diﬀerence between vortex worldlines in 2+1 dimensions and vortex lines in 3+0D dimensions is that the worldlines must still
respect causality: they must always have a non-zero temporal component, whereas static vortex lines can lie in the xy-plane.

Abelian-Higgs form,

B. Dislocations are diﬀerent

2c2
V

LΦ = 1
+ 1
= 1

|(∂τ − ibτ )Φ|2 + 1
4 β|Φ|4 + 1
2 α|Φ|2 + 1

2 α|Φ|2 + 1
2| ˜DµΦ|2 + 1

2|(∂m − ibm)Φ|2
4 FµνFµν
4 β|Φ|4 + 1

4 FµνFµν.

(210)

2 α|Φ|2 + 1

in terms of the velocity-rescaled covariant derivative
˜Dµ = ˜∂µ − i˜bµ (cf. Eq. (24)), the disoreder poten-
tial V (|Φ|) = 1
4 β|Φ|4 and the gauge ﬁeld
strength Fµν = ∂µbν − ∂νbµ. The mass of the disorder
ﬁeld is now regulating the size of the vortex–antivortex
loops: when α > 0 these are pushed out of the vacuum
(Fig. 13(b)) while a negative α signals that they pro-
liferate and condense (Fig. 13(c)). It has been demon-
strated that the short-range repulsions between ‘vortex
particles’ turn into the quartic self-interaction β after
coarse-graining [13, 117]. We learned in Sec. II that the
long-range interactions between the vortices in 2+1D are
precisely captured in terms of the U (1)-ﬁelds analogous
to electromagnetism. Accordingly, the disorder ﬁeld Φ(x)
is minimally coupled to these eﬀective gauge ﬁelds via the
covariant derivative, while the gauge ﬁelds themselves are
governed by a Maxwell action, see Eq. (25). The fur-
ther ramiﬁcations such as the identiﬁcation of the dual
superconductor as the Bose-Mott insulator were already
discussed at length in Sec. II.

Once again, we emphasize that the dual condensate
is fully relativistic, characterized by a single ‘velocity of
light’ set by the sound velocity cph of the superﬂuid.
However, it will be convenient to introduce a separate
velocity governing the vortex condensate cV for the sole
purpose of identifying the origin of the various excitations
in the dual condensates.

Let us now turn to the task of formulating the disor-
der ﬁeld theory associated with disordering the crystal
into quantum liquid crystals. Once again, this should
have its basic features in common with vortex duality,
rooted in the Abelian nature of the ‘pure’ translations.
This ensures that the exchange statistics of dislocations
is bosonic. Another crucial similarity is that disloca-
tions are particle-like excitations in 2+1D, just as vor-
tices are. To restore the translational invariance charac-
teristic of a liquid, dislocations have to proliferate, and
since these are bosons they will condense. Last but not
least, since dislocations have long-range interactions gov-
erned by electromagnetism-like stress gauge ﬁelds, they
will form some sort of charged condensate: the dual stress
superconductor.

Here the similarities end and compared to the vortex
condensate we are facing a variety of complications, ren-
dering the stress superconductor to be a much richer af-
fair. First of all, instead of the simple scalar topolog-
ical charge of the vortex (winding number N ), disloca-
tions carry the Burgers vector charge Ba as discussed in
Sec. IV. These Burgers vectors in turn are lattice transla-
tions also constrained by the point group symmetry that
is broken both in the crystal and the liquid crystals, as
discussed in section Sec. V. The rule is that the Burg-
ers vector is a lattice vector, as was indicated in Fig. 5.
The dislocations in turn lead to shear stress in the ma-
terial and therefore source the stress gauge ﬁelds that
we discussed extensively in Sec. VI. We found that the
dislocation currents that followed directly from the dual-
ization Eq. (154) couple to the dual gauge ﬁelds with
the same ﬂavor labels according to the sourcing term
∼ iba
µ com-

µ. This translates to stress gauge ﬁelds ba

µJ a

ing in two ‘Burgers ﬂavors’ that we have parametrized
by either a = x, y- or a = L, T-coordinates. Moreover,
by carefully taking the constraints into account for these
ﬂavored gauge ﬁelds, we veriﬁed the existence of two
propagating phonons associated with the two orthogonal
directions L, T along the momentum, fundamental for
two space dimensions. We called a casually the “Burg-
ers vector direction”, but dealing with the construction
of the dislocation condensate we have now to pay ex-
tra attention. For instance, in the hexatic with its six-
fold axis one can discern six possible directions of the
Burgers vector Fig. 5(a) with quantized Burgers vectors
Ba ∈ {Z(cid:126)e1 + Z(cid:126)e2}. This leads to the quantization con-
t ∈ {Z(cid:126)e1 + Z(cid:126)e2} in the lattice basis. How
can we reconcile this with the arbitrary dislocation densi-
ties in the x, y directions of 2D space in the (non-compact
dual gauge) continuum disorder ﬁeld theory?

straint(cid:82) d2xJ a

There is a constraint to impose on the dislocation
condensate in the disorder theory that we mentioned in
Sec. IV G. In Sec. IV D we reviewed the interdependence
between dislocations and disclinations, and we learned
that a disclination is actually identical to an inﬁnite num-
ber of dislocations with their Burgers vectors pointing in
the same direction. The other side of the same coin is
that a local uncompensated dislocation (a “net Burgers
charge”) corresponds to a disclination–antidisclination
pair. However, to maintain rotational symmetry break-
ing, disclinations have to be “kept out of the vacuum”.
This means that the quantum liquid crystals have to be
characterized by a vanishing local “Burgers-vector mag-
netization” in addition to that the net Burgers vector
must vanish. There is a universal way of accommodating
this requirement:
for all wallpaper groups of Table. II,
the allowed Burgers vectors should occur in anti-parallel
pairs, and one has to impose that in the condensate
these precisely opposite Burgers vectors are equally pop-
ulated on the microscopic scale, so that they compen-
sate each other. This “local Burgers neutrality” is the
motive in this topological language behind the director
nature/tensor nature of the order parameter in Sec. V D.
In order to avoid confusion with the magnetic ﬁeld
B = Bz, here and below we shall denote the Burgers vec-
tor by n = (nx, ny). As we discussed, the directions of the
Burgers vectors n are set directly by the point group sym-
metry of the crystal. However, in the liquid crystal one
has to impose that n and −n are locally indistinguishable
because of the topological condition of local Burgers neu-
trality. This is in turn a very basic example of the general
mechanism by which gauge theories governing the collec-
tive physics emerge in condensed matter physics (in this
speciﬁc context, see also Refs. [19, 110, 111]). This is
just the condition encoded explicitly in the gauge-theory
language of Secs. V D and V E by the ZN -gauge ﬁelds.
In fact, there we found that all possible Burgers vector
directions should become gauge equivalent when dealing
with the nematic order.
In the continuum formulation
at long-distance hydrodynamic level, its actually enough
to just impose the Burgers neutrality condition, while

51

the quantization of the Burgers charges can be added by
hand in the end, as is usual in compact gauge theories.
In addition, the Burgers neutrality condition following
from the crystal topology is less stringent with an impor-
tant consequence:
it leaves room for the occurrence of
the quantum smectic as will become clear soon.

We are not done yet because we also learned in
Sec. VI C that extra constraints have to be imposed which
are not standard in ﬁeld theory. In the ﬁrst place, we have
to handle the Ehrenfest constraint Eq. (153), that di-
rectly relates to the fact that rotational motions and the
associated torque stress should become alive in the quan-
tum liquid crystal in the form of a rotational Goldstone
boson. This is an elegant aﬀair, that will be exposed in
its full glory using the dynamical Ehrenfest constraint of
Eq. (172) in Sec. VIII C. An unfamiliar but crucial ingre-
dient in the construction of the disorder ﬁeld theory is as-
sociated with the glide constraint discussed in Secs. IV E
and VI C. This appears at ﬁrst sight as a highly unusual
kinematic constraint telling that the dislocation can only
move in the direction of the Burgers vector. However,
it is derived from particle number conservation or equiv-
alently the condition that dislocations do not “occupy
volume”, and we will see that as a natural consequence
the dislocation condensate does not couple to compres-
sional stress.

Finally, there is yet one other property that the dislo-
cation condensate has in common with the vortex con-
densate: it is ‘relativistic’, not only because it is formed
out of opposite charges, but also because its characteris-
tic propagation velocity should be related to the trans-
verse sound velocity cT of the crystal. As ﬁrst realized
by Friedel in the 1960s dealing with screw dislocations
in three dimensions [67], the inertial mass associated
with glide motions of the dislocations is coincident with
the mass of the atomic constituents. For the same rea-
sons as in the vortex condensate, this just implies that
there is only one velocity scale and this is the transverse
phonon velocity since the dislocation condensate is asso-
ciated with the shear modulus of the background elas-
ticity. However, diﬀerent from the vortex condensate,
the glide constraint restricts the motions of the individ-
ual dislocations and this should imprint on the collective
velocity characterizing the condensate. We expect that
this velocity is parametrically diﬀerent from the phonon
velocity (by a factor of
2 or so). Resting on mere phe-
nomenological arguments, this factor cannot be estab-
lished and we leave it therefore as a free parameter in the
remainder. We leave the determination of this factor in a
microscopic calculation as a future challenge. Moreover,
in order to decipher the role of the dislocate condensate
in the dual stress superconductor it is convenient to keep
the condensate velocity cd explicit, while it should be put
equal (or nearly equal) to the shear velocity to read oﬀ
the physical outcomes. Using the same rescaling as for
the vortex condensate Eq. (210) we indicate the compo-
nents that are rescaled to the velocity cd with a tilde ˜:
˜∂µ = ( 1
m). For completeness,
cd

∂τ , ∂m) and ˜ba

√

µ = ( 1
cd

ba
τ , ba

let us reproduce here the results for the isotropic solid
where Lstress contains both longitudinal and transversal
sectors (Eqs. (177) and (178)), rewritten in terms of the

rescaled tilde ﬁelds ˜ba
λ,

T




˜bT†
+1
˜bL†
−1
˜bL†
+1
˜bT†
−1

2

1+ν

− 2iν

1+ν

˜p2

c2
d
c2
T
1
ωn
cT
0

cd
cT

˜p

2iν
1+ν
2

1+ν

cd
cT

1
ωn
˜p
cT
1
ω2
n + 4q2
c2
T
0

0

0

0

0

c2
d
c2
T
ωn

˜p2(1 + 1
cd
cT

(cid:96)2q2 )
˜p(1 − 1

(cid:96)2q2 )

i 1
cT

0

−i 1
ωn
cT
n(1 + 1
ω2

cd
cT

1
c2
T

0
˜p(1 − 1
(cid:96)2q2 )
(cid:96)2q2 ) + 4q2

Lstress = 1

2

1
4µ

(cid:113) 1

52



 .



˜bT
+1
˜bL−1
˜bL
+1
˜bT−1

(211)

,

˜bL−1(cid:105)(cid:105)
˜bT−1(cid:105)(cid:105)

ω2
n
c2
d

.

(cid:104)˜bT†
−1

˜bT−1(cid:105)(cid:105)

,

(212)

(213)

(214)

Here ˜p =

n + q2 and have imposed the the Lorenz gauge ﬁx ˜p˜ba
ω2

0 = 0 (see below), which will turn out to be
particularly convenient. We can now express the stress photon propagators of Sec. VI G in terms of these tilde-ﬁelds
˜ba
µ in the Lorentz gauge ﬁx:

c2
d

c2
d
c2
T
1

(cid:104)
(cid:104) − ω2

(2µ(cid:96)2q2)2
c2
d
c2
T

n
c2
d

GL =

GT =

(Dκ)2

1
κ

− 1
µ(cid:96)2q2 −

1

GLT =

1

1

4µκ

q2(cid:96)2

˜p2(cid:104)˜bT†

+1

+1

˜p(cid:104)˜bT†

+1(cid:105) − i
(cid:104)
˜bT
˜p2(cid:104)˜bL†

ωn
cd
+1(cid:105) + i
˜bL
˜bT−1(cid:105) + ˜p2(cid:104)˜bT†

˜bL−1(cid:105) + i
˜p(cid:104)˜bL†

ωn
cd
+1(cid:105) + i
˜bL

˜p(cid:104)˜bL†
ωn
−1
cd
˜bT−1(cid:105) − i
(cid:104)˜bL†
−1

+1(cid:105) +
˜bT
˜p(cid:104)˜bT†
ωn
−1
cd
+1(cid:105) + i
˜bL

+1

+1

+1

c2
d
c2
T
(cid:104)˜bL†
−1

ωn ˜p
cd

ω2
(cid:104)˜bL†
n
−1
c2
d
+1(cid:105) +
˜bL
(cid:104)˜bT†

ωn ˜p
cd

+1

C. Dislocation disorder ﬁeld theory

In principle one would like to explicitly construct the
disorder ﬁeld theory departing from the Villain construc-
tion for isolated dislocations with the Burgers charge
quantization condition of the associated lattice, to then
evaluate numerically the full quantum partition sum de-
scribing the tangle of dislocation lines, mimicking results
in vortex–boson duality [52, 53, 118]. This has not been
accomplished yet but the structure of the eﬀective disor-
der ﬁeld theory in the continuum can be deduced via a
phenomenological procedure just resting on general sym-
metry arguments we outlined above.

The ﬁrst conundrum we have to overcome was intro-
duced in the previous section: the mismatch between the
values of the Burgers vectors as set by the lattice point
group symmetry versus the outcome of the continuum
stress–strain duality that only the number of orthogo-
nal directions in space should matter. Departing from a
hexagonal crystal as associated with isotropic elasticity,
one identiﬁes a total of six distinguishable elementary
vectors and including the ‘Burgers-neutrality’ rule this
would amount to three distinguishable Burgers-neutral
combinations, Fig. 5(a). However, this does not appear
to match the outcome of the dualization, in which there
are two unquantized disorder ﬁelds J x,y
associated with
the two orthogonal (x, y) directions of two dimensional
space, Eq. (91). However, this problem is easily ad-
dressed. As soon as a dislocation condensate with Burg-

µ

ers vectors in, say, the x-direction forms, all points which
diﬀer from each other in the x-direction have become
equivalent, and therefore x must be along on of the lat-
tice vectors. Consequently, the remaining perfect trans-
lational order can exist only in the orthogonal direction
of the (now deformed) lattice, here the y-direction (later
we identify this with the quantum smectic). Any further
dislocation condensation can only destroy this remaining
order, leading to the quantum nematic liquid crystal.

In this way, it was implicitly assumed in the stress–
strain duality construction that the Burgers vector cho-
sen from the ‘rotational cross’ of Fig. 5(a) was actually
aligned with the disordering direction. The conclusion
is that there are only two independent disorder ﬁelds in
2+1D formed by the condensed dislocations, associated
with the two space directions in which translational sym-
the Z6-
metry can be restored. As expressed by e.g.
gauge invariance of the quantum hexatic, the distinction
between the six directions in the cross of Fig. 5(a) has be-
come immaterial anyhow in the quantum nematic. One
can therefore supplement this in the continuum with a
minimal C4-cross in the (x, y)-directions, indicated in red
in the ﬁgure, more as if one were to depart from a square
lattice (that would also have quantized Burgers charges).
Nonetheless, this continuum picture remains correct in
terms of the net ‘disordering capacity’ of the full dislo-
cation condensate where all Burgers directions are pop-
ulated equally. The quantization of Burgers charges can
in principle be added by hand at the end and it remains

to verify the predictions of the continuum theory with re-
sults from explicit lattice realizations incorporating the
discrete Burgers charges for the disorder ﬁelds.

As compared to the vortex condensate characterized by
a single U (1)-condensate ﬁeld, the above implies that in
D space dimensions we have to cope with D independent
disorder ﬁelds taking care of the restoration of transla-
tional symmetry in the D orthogonal space directions.
We therefore need in two dimensions two complex scalar
Higgs ﬁelds Φa = |Φa|eiφa
with a = x, y to represent
the dislocation condensate. Given that these two ﬁelds
are to taken to be independent, can this freedom have
physical ramiﬁcations? Remarkably, this expresses the
room in this topological formulation for the occurrence
of the extra vestigial quantum smectic phases, occurring
in between the solid and the nematic, see Fig 6.

To keep the disclinations out of the vacuum, the topo-
logical requirement is that the dislocations proliferate
with their Burgers vectors in opposite directions. This
requirement can be satisﬁed not only by dislocations in
all lattice directions, but also by dislocations in a sin-
gle direction [12, 17]. This will turn the system into a
quantum liquid exclusively in the x-direction, while the
translational order persists in the precisely orthogonal y-
direction. This implies that only the Φx disorder ﬁeld
condenses while the Φy ﬁeld stays massive. The con-
clusion is that the description of this (quantum) smectic
order is just a natural part of the weak–strong duality,
demonstrating that there are indeed D linearly indepen-
dent disorder ﬁelds are at work. This independence of
dislocations was somewhat understood in the 1980s in
the classical statistical physics literature following the
KTHNY-tradition [45], but is becomes very clear in the
dual framework presented here.

In the two-dimensional quantum realm, this symme-
try structure was elucidated by Mathy and Bais [74, 75].
They put defect condensation by a disorder parameter,
analogous to symmetry breaking by an order parame-
ter, on ﬁrm mathematical footing via the language of
quantum doubles or Hopf algebras [74, 75]. Whereas in
symmetry breaking one considers residual symmetry sub-
groups, defect condensation leads to sub-Hopf algebras.
And just as the order parameter is a particular vector in
order parameter space on which the group acts, so is the
disorder parameter a vector in the space on which the
Hopf algebra acts. Since we can take superpositions of
vectors, in principle any condensate could be considered,
in particular a symmetric combination of basis vectors,
see Fig. 5.

We have now suﬃcient information to write down the
general form of the amplitude part of the Lagrangian de-
scribing the dual stress superconductors just using stan-
dard symmetry arguments, up to fourth order in the am-
plitude. It is just the potential of two condensates which
couple through local density–density interactions, as in

53

FIG. 14: Phase diagram of the two-condensate model
Eq. (215) for the simpliﬁed case α1 = α2 ≡ α and β1 =
β2 ≡ β > 0, as function of α (arbitrary units) and γ/β. The
corresponding phases in quantum elasticity are denoted in
sans-serif font.
If α > 0 no condensation takes place (the
crystal), while for α < 0 some condensate (liquid crystal) will
form. Its nature depends on the ratio γ/β. If γ > β the re-
pulsion between the two ﬁelds is so strong that only one will
condense while the other stays massive. This corresponds to
a dislocation condensate along one axis only: the quantum
smectic. If −β < γβ, both ﬁelds condense and automatically
acquire the same expectation value. This corresponds to the
quantum smectic. The case γ < −β is unphysical.

e.g. two-component Bose–Einstein condensates [119],

L|Φ| = V (|Φx|,|Φy|) =
2 |Φx|2 + αy
2 |Φy|2 + βx

αx

4 |Φx|4 + βy

4 |Φy|4 + γ

2|Φx|2|Φy|2.

(215)

Here γ describes the nature of interaction between the
two condensates (γ < 0 : attraction; γ > 0 : repulsion).
If we assume the C4-symmetry of the lattice, there is a
priori no diﬀerence between x- and y-directions, leading
to αx = αy ≡ α and βx = βy ≡ β. The phase dia-
gram of the C4-symmetric model is sketched in Fig. 14.
If α < 0 and β > 0, a condensate forms as is familiar
from basic Ginzburg–Landau theory. The nature of the
condensation depends on the value of the interconden-
sate coupling γ, which can be easily found by energy
If −β < γ < β, attrac-
minimization of Eq. (215).
tion between the condensates dominates and we are in
the miscible regime. Both condensate ﬁelds acquire the
same expectation value |Φx| = |Φy| = |Φ|, this is the
isotropic quantum nematic. When γ > β, the repulsion
between condensates dominates and we are in the im-
miscible regime. Only one out of Φx, Φy will condense
(“phase separation”). This is the quantum smectic. In
this simpliﬁed, isotropic case, which particular conden-
sate form is a spontaneous choice. Therefore, even the
simple theory Eq. (215) shows that one can go from a
solid to a smectic to a nematic depending on the ratio
γ/β, which at this stage of development are phenomeno-
logical parameters. The case γ < −β does not lead to
physical solutions.

-2-112γ/β-11αunstablecoupledcondensatesmisciblenematicsinglecondensateimmisciblesmecticnocondensationcrystalHow to account further for the large family of nematic
states characterized by the diﬀerent point groups, as dis-
cussed in Sec. V and Table. II? We just noticed that
in principle the Φx,y condensates can acquire diﬀerent
strengths in the case of less symmetric point groups.
The nematic will also reﬂect the corresponding rotational
symmetry through the extra anisotropy in the rotational
Goldstone modes. This is in accordance with the fact
that for any wallpaper group diﬀerent from the hexatic
the elasticity itself becomes anisotropic. This requires
one or two extra moduli besides the shear and compres-
sion modulus [10]. This has the eﬀect that the phonons
and thereby the stress photons become anisotropic as
well. Although not yet enumerated in detail, it is an-
ticipated that the anisotropy in the dislocation conden-
sates will properly reproduce the anisotropies in the mode
spectra of these nematics. In particular, leads to diﬀerent
values for αx and αy, and for βx and βy. In the remainder
we will ignore these cases because they do not give rise to
anything essentially new: they just interpolate between
the smectic and the isotropic nematic.

Even after these lengthy arguments, at the present
stage it might appear as rather obscure how the nematic
states as constructed via the disorder condensates could
‘know’ that they break rotational symmetry to a ﬁnite
subgroup. We have actually incorporated the rotational
symmetry breaking in a rather undynamical fashion by
just imposing by hand that the Burgers vector have to lie
along the lattice directions but otherwise live in the con-
tinuum. As highlighted in Sec. VIII C, the isotropic Gold-
stone modes associated with the spontaneous rotational
breaking are nevertheless correctly recovered. These are
actually encoded in a seemingly implicit way already in
the elasticity theory describing the crystal. As we will
see, these are literally conﬁned in the solid while they de-
conﬁne in the quantum liquid crystal phases. The discli-
nations have the same fate, becoming ﬁnite energy topo-
logical excitations in the nematics. Surely, their Frank
scalars are determined by the elements of the point group.
Again, since these involve ﬁnite quantized discontinu-
ities of the nematic order parameter, the quantization
of the Frank scalars can be restored by hand in the dual
stress superconductors, leading to the theories discussed
in Sec. V when regulated on a lattice (in the limit of
|Φ| → ∞).

Finally, we have to incorporate the condensate phase
ﬂuctuations and the dual stress gauge ﬁelds that mediate
long-range interactions between the dislocations. Here
we can rest on a general principle: the coupling between
gauge ﬁelds and an isolated charged particle iAµJµ turns
into the minimal gauge coupling of the condensate ﬁeld
formed from these particles, enumerated by the covariant
derivative ∂µ − iAµ acting on the condensate ﬁeld. Deal-
ing with the stress photons we depart from the a = x, y
ﬂavored terms sourcing the stress gauge ﬁelds iba
µ sug-
gesting that the disorder ﬁeld theory should contain the
covariant derivative terms ∼ |( ˜∂µ − i˜ba
µ)Φa|2 for a = x
and/or a = y. This intuition is correct, except that there

µJ a

54

is one more ingredient that has to be dealt with: the
glide constraint. Glide motion is associated with the dy-
namics of isolated dislocations and it is therefore obvious
that it has to enter via the kinetic (gradient) terms in
the disorder ﬁeld theory.

This is accomplished as follows [12, 13, 15]. The glide
constraint Eq. (105) can be imposed by a Lagrange mul-
tiplier ﬁeld λ(x). A term is added to the original La-
grangian,

Lglide = iλtµaJ a
µ.

(216)

Then at any stage of the calculation, integrating out λ
will impose the glide constraint. The source term involv-
ing the dislocation current becomes [12],

Lsource = i(cid:0)ba

(cid:1) J a

µ.

µ + λtµa
µ with ba

(217)

The recipe is now to replace ba
µ +λtµa when cou-
pling to dislocations, which works equally well for single
dislocations as for dislocation condensates.

The glide principle amounts to the statement that dis-
locations can move ballistically in the direction of their
Burgers vectors. We are again facing the conundrum
that the Burgers vector directions are quantized rather
than just having two independent orthogonal directions
in the continuum space where the disorder ﬁelds do their
work. However, as we showed in Sec. IV E, in the long-
distance hydrodynamic theory the glide principle is just
equivalent to the fact that dislocations do not occupy
volume. Therefore,
individual dislocations only com-
municate with shear stress and not with compressional
stress. This in turn implies that the disorder ﬁelds formed
from the dislocations should not carry charge associated
with the compressional stress gauge ﬁelds. The single La-
grange multiplier ﬁeld λ(x) will protect the scalar “spin-
0”-component of the stress gauge ﬁelds ba
λ from obtaining
a mass through the Anderson–Higgs mechanism. Impres-
sively, the constraint in Eq. (217) captures this regardless
of the details of the dislocation condensate, and applies
equally well to smectics, isotropic and anistropic nemat-
ics. Concluding, the single dislocation source term in-
cluding the glide constraint Eq. (217) is just promoted to
a covariant derivative “dressed with the glide constraint”
acting on the Φx,y disorder ﬁelds. This implies that we
are dealing with gradient terms in the eﬀective action,

(cid:88)

|(cid:16) ˜∂µ − i˜ba

a=x,y

Lkin =

1
2

(cid:17)

µ − iλtµa

Φa|2

(218)

Again, note the tilde ﬁelds, referring to the rescaling in
terms of the condensate velocity cd. Again, we do not
know whether cd diﬀers from cT by factors of order 1.

We have now completed the formulation of the disorder
ﬁeld theory describing the dual stress superconductors.
In full it is given by the Lagrangian,

Lstress SC = Lkin + L|Φ| + Lstress

(219)

where the minimal coupling term Eq. (218) takes care of
the interactions between the stress gauge ﬁelds and the

dual disorder parameters, the condensation of the disor-
der ﬁelds is governed by the potential L|Φ|, Eq. (215), and
Lstress, describing the stress gauge ﬁelds of the crystal,
given by Eq. (211).

The foundational work is hereby completed and in the
next three sections we will just evaluate the theory on its
physical consequences, ﬁnding out that it is a remarkably
powerful aﬀair. Before we turn to these computations,
let us end this section with introducing some convenient
technicalities.

In the remainder we will focus on the long-wavelength
physics well inside the stable quantum liquid crystals
phases. We can regard the amplitude ﬂuctuations to
be frozen out such that (cid:104)|Φa|(cid:105) is constant, and only the
phase ﬁelds φa remain as dynamical degrees of freedom
in this London limit. We introduce the Higgs mass Ωa
associated with the dual stress superconductor via

(Ωa)2 = µc2

T|Φa|2,

a = x, y,

(220)

having units of energy (since  ≡ 1).
In the isotropic
nematic Ωx = Ωy = Ω while in the smectic Ωx = Ω (cid:54)= 0
while Ωy = 0. The phase action follows immediately from
Eq. (218) as,

(cid:88)

(Ωa)2(cid:16) ˜∂µφa − ˜ba

(cid:17)2

LLondon = 1

2

µ − λtµa

+ Lstress

a=x,y

(221)
Apart for the x, y-ﬂavors we are of course dealing here
with the usual Abelian-Higgs/relativistic superconduc-
tor problem. For future reference let us introduce here
the standard gauge ﬁxes. For every Burgers ﬂavor there
is one gauge degree of freedom that becomes physical

55

via the Anderson-Higgs mechanism. When dealing with
the nematic, the unitary gauge is convenient, where both
condensate phase ﬁelds vanish φx = φy ≡ 0, leading to

Lunitary =

Ω2
2c2
Tµ

|˜ba
µ + λtµa|2 + Lstress.

(222)

(cid:88)

a=x,y

such that all stress gauge ﬁeld components ba
λ corre-
spond to physical degrees of freedom after imposing the
Ehrenfest constraint. Another convenient gauge ﬁx is the
Lorenz gauge,

∂τ ba

τ + ∂mba

m = ˜∂µ

˜ba
µ = 0.

(223)

1
c2
d

In this gauge we have to pay some extra care, keeping
track of the condensate velocity cd. Rescale according to
µ ≡ (˜bt, ˜bm) ≡ ( 1
˜ba
ωn, qm) and further-
more (see Appendix A),

τ , bm), ˜pµ = ( 1
ba
cd

cd

(224)

(225)

˜ba
L,

˜ba
L,

˜ba
t +

q
˜p
iωn
cd ˜p

0 = − iωn
˜ba
cd ˜p
+1 = − q
˜ba
˜ba
t +
˜p
˜ba−1 = ˜ba
T = ba
T,
µ = i˜p˜ba
˜ba
0 = 1
c2
d

∂τ ba

(226)
such that indeed ˜pµ
m = 0.
˜ba
The relation with the ‘ordinary’ b-ﬁelds is ba
t and
˜ba
+1 = cd
ba
+1. In the Lorenz gauge ﬁx Eq. (223), the
cT
condensate phase degrees of freedom φa decouple while
the longitudinal component of the stress gauge ﬁelds is
projected out via a factor δµν − ˜pµ ˜pν
˜p2 . The Higgs term in
this gauge takes the form

τ + ∂mba
t = cd
cT

˜p
p

LHiggs,Lorenz gf =

(cid:88)

a=x,y

(Ωa)2
2c2
Tµ

(cid:104)| ˜∂µφa|2 + (˜ba†

µ + λ†τ µa)(δµν − ˜pµ ˜pν

˜p2 )(˜ba

ν + λτ νa)

(cid:105)

.

(227)

This is the form we shall use most of the time in the
calculations that follow in the next two sections. Perhaps
confusingly, in this Lorenz gauge it appears that the now
physical phase modes of the condensate φa appear to
be completely decoupled from the stress gauge ﬁelds ba
µ
while in the computations of the propagators only the
latter are sourced externally. However, we will ﬁnd that
the phase modes will show up in the dynamical responses
of the system.

VIII. QUANTUM NEMATIC

We are now facing the in principle straightforward task
of exploring the physical consequences of the theory of
the dual stress superconductor as formulated in the pre-
vious section. Symmetry is always a simplifying circum-
stance and obviously the quantum nematic is more sym-
metric and therefore simpler than the quantum smectic.
We therefore ﬁrst focus on the nematic states, that at the
same time reveal the most striking consequences of the
disorder ﬁeld formulation. Speciﬁcally we will consider
the isotropic nematic characterised by the condensed dis-
order ﬁelds having equal amplitudes |Φx| = |Φy| (cid:54)= 0.
The focus is on the physics deep in the quantum nematic

state where the full theory Eq.(219) reduces to its Lon-
don/Josephson form Eq. (221) since the amplitude ﬂuc-
tuations of the dislocation condensate can be regarded as
frozen out.

A. Stress propagators in the quantum nematic

For later convenience, we rescale the Higgs mass Ω
from Eq. (220) into Ω/2; this could be conceived as ‘nor-
malizing’ the Higgs mass as the average over the two
identical components Ωx and Ωy. Taking the London
limit and the Lorenz gauge ﬁx, the Higgs term Eq. (227)
that we shall use in this section is
LHiggs =

µ + λ†τ µa)(δµν − ˜pµ ˜pν

(cid:88)

˜p2 )(˜ba

Ω2
4c2

Tµ (˜ba†

ν + λτ νa).

a=x,y

(228)

We now have to deal with the Lagrange multiplier ﬁeld λ
enforcing the glide constraint in the path integral. This
is accomplished as follows.
In the Lorenz gauge only
‘transverse’ stress gauge ﬁeld components (orthogonal to
spacetime momentum ˜pµ) enter and this is conveniently
µ → ˜ba±1,
accomodated to in the helical spacetime basis ˜ba
Eqs. (224)–(226). First expand the Higgs term into these
components. This further simpliﬁes by going over to the
L, T basis for the Burgers index a, see Appendix A. One
notices that the λ ﬁeld can be straightforwardly inte-
grated out, which leads to (the sum over a is now im-
plicit)

ω
cd ˜p

+1|2 + |˜ba−1|2 + λ†λ(2 − q2
˜p2 )

(cid:104)|˜ba
(cid:104)|˜ba
+1|2 + |˜ba−1|2 − |˜p˜bL−1 + i ωn
(cid:104)|i ωn
˜bL−1 + ˜p˜bT
ω2
n + ˜p2

(cid:105)
+1|2 + |˜bT−1|2(cid:105)

˜bT
+1) + h.c.

˜bT−1|2

cd
+ ˜p2

+ |˜bL

+1|2

cd

1
c2
d

(cid:105)

ω2
c2
d

.

LHiggs = 1

4

Ω2
c2
Tµ
+ λ†(bL−1 + i

= 1
4

= 1
4

Ω2
c2
Tµ

Ω2
c2
Tµ

(229)

With these simple operations we have accomplished
quite a feat: the meaning of this result is that the stress
gauge ﬁeld component that is propagating purely com-
pressional forces Eq. (163) is decoupled from the disloca-
tion condensate! As we already announced, this is rooted
in the principle (encoded by the glide constraint) that
the dislocations do not occupy volume. The other way
around, the diﬀerence between a solid and liquid is that
both carry pressure but the solid is in addition character-
ized by a reactive response to shear stresses. Our quan-
tum nematic does not break translations but it is a liquid

56

that should be capable of propagating sound. This is in-
deed the case: we will soon ﬁnd out that at energies less
than the Higgs mass Ω of the dislocation condensate, it
carries a purely compressional massless sound mode, that
crosses over into the stress-photon version of the longitu-
dinal phonon at energies larger than Ω. We are at zero
temperature and this sound mode is clearly not the hy-
drodynamical sound of a classical liquid. Below it will
become clear that it is actually the zero-sound (phase)
mode of the superﬂuid. At the same time, Eq. (229)
also implies that the stress photons that propagate shear
forces acquire a Higgs mass: the beauty of dual stress
superconductor is that it takes care that shear forces can
only propagate over a ﬁnite distance in the liquid.

How does one infer these important physical conse-
quences from the equations? By imposing the Lorenz
gauge ﬁx in the form of the helical ±1 spacetime in-
dices we are dealing with the physical stress ﬁelds
˜bL
+1, ˜bT
+1, ˜bL−1, ˜bT−1. Their action in the solid is given by
Eq. (211), and one immediately reads oﬀ that the ˜bL
+1
and ˜bT−1 stress photons are associated with the trans-
verse phonons. According to the last line of Eq. (229)
these just acquire the Higgs mass: these photons in the
transverse sector mediate shear stress, and one reads oﬀ
immediately that “shear stress acquires a Higgs mass” in
the quantum nematic.

The longitudinal phonon is associated with the other
+1 and ˜bL−1. The glide constraint has
two components ˜bT
taken care that these occur only in one particular com-
bination in the Higgs term. The orthogonal combination
formed from these two ﬁelds is absent from the Higgs
term, which is the one that “does not carry charge under
dislocation condensation”. We will soon ﬁnd out that for
energies much less than Ω this mode propagates with the
real sound velocity set by the compression modulus only,
c2
K = κ/ρ.
The bottom line is this: the longitudinal phonon of
the solid automatically causes shear deformations when
it occurs at ﬁnite wave vectors, such that its velocity
also involves the shear modulus, c2
L = (κ + µ)/ρ. In the
liquid this shear component has to be removed at long
distances and this is precisely what the ﬁrst term in our
Higgs action Eq. (229) accomplishes.

In order to get a clearer view on the physics of the
quantum nematic let us now compute the propagators of
the stress photons ˜ba
µ. For the quantum nematic this is
a rather straightforward computation. We combine the
Higgs term Eq. (229) with the isotropic crystal result
Eq. (211). Then we calculate the stress photon prop-
agators Eqs. (212)–(214). The chiral propagator van-
ishes since there are cross terms between longitudinal and
transverse sectors in neither Eq. (229) nor Eq. (211). For
the longitudinal and transverse propagators we obtain
the important results,

c2
Tq2(ω2

n + c2

Rq2 + Ω2)
Rq2) + Ω2(ω2

,

n + c2

Kq2)

(ω2

n + c2

Lq2)(ω2

n + c2

c2
Tq2(ω2

n + c2

dq2) + Ω2(ω2

n + 2c2

Tq2 + c2

Rq2 + Ω2)

GL =

GT =

1
µ

1
µ

(ω2

n + c2

dq2)(ω2

n + c2

Tq2(1 + (cid:96)2q2)) + Ω2(ω2

n(1 + (cid:96)2q2) + c2

Rq2(1 + (cid:96)2q2) + (cid:96)2q2(2c2

Tq2 + Ω2))

57

(230)

.

(231)

(cid:113) 2
1−ν cT =(cid:112)(κ + µ)/ρ, and introduce the
(cid:113) 1+ν
1−ν cT =(cid:112)κ/ρ and rota-

cd. The diﬀerent velocities in the

We use cL =

compressional velocity cK =
tional velocity cR = 1√
problem are summarized in Table IV.

2

The transverse propagator even takes into account the
corrections coming from second-order elasticity. For the
time being we can ignore these by taking (cid:96) → 0, and
Eq. (213) simpliﬁes to,

GT =

1
µ

Tq2(ω2
c2
(ω2

n + c2
n + c2

dq2) + Ω2(ω2
dq2)(ω2

n + c2

n + 2c2

Tq2 + c2

Rq2 + Ω2)

Tq2) + Ω2(ω2

n + c2

Rq2)

.

(232)

B. Collective modes of the quantum nematic

As in the case of the solid, the longitudinal and trans-
verse propagators Eqs. (230),(232) enumerate precisely
the collective properties of the quantum nematic state.
We immediately infer that the response is isotropic in
space, depending only on the magnitude and not on the
direction of q as it should since we wired this in by us-
ing Eq. (229). To discern the nature of the excitation
spectrum the spectral functions Eq. (209) are of central
interest and in Fig. 15 we show some representative re-
sults. As expected from Eqs. (230),(232) we can discern
a pair of propagating modes in both the longitudinal and
the transverse sector. In both sectors these divide into
a massless and a massive mode. This is in stark con-
trast with the solid, where we found a single propagating
massless mode in each sector, just corresponding to the
transverse and longitudinal phonons, Fig. 12. What is
the physical nature of this richer mode spectrum of the
nematic? To identify the various modes it is now conve-
nient to heed the various velocities in the problem, where
especially the artiﬁcial dislocation condensate velocity cd
becomes quite revealing — in fact, the main reason for
the eﬀort to keep track of it during the derivations. The
various velocities are tabulated in Table IV.

1. Longitudinal sector

Let us ﬁrst consider the longitudinal response. From
Fig. 15 we directly infer that for energies much less than
the Higgs mass the massless mode propagates with the

lus κ via cK =(cid:112)κ/ρ =(cid:112)c2

literal sound velocity set by only the compression modu-
T. In fact, by expanding
Eq. (230) for ωn (cid:28) Ω it follows immediately,

L − c2

GL(Ω → ∞) =

1
µ

c2
Tq2
n + c2
ω2

Kq2 .

(233)

This demonstrates explicitly the case we already dis-
cussed: in the liquid crystal translational symmetry is re-
stored but at zero temperature it is still carrying a prop-
agating sound mode. The shear component of the longi-
tudinal mode has to be removed at low energy and this
is accomplished by a mode coupling to the massive mode
in the longitudinal spectrum. At energies larger than the
dislocation Higgs mass Ω, the characteristic length scales
become smaller than the distance between dislocations
and the medium restores its elastic, solidlike nature. At
the Higgs mass the sound mode of the nematic therefore
shows a crossover back to a longitudinal phonon velocity,
as follows immediately from the longitudinal propagator
Eq. (230) in the limit Ω (cid:28) cRq. We still have to identify
the nature of the massive mode in the longitudinal spec-
trum. Compared to the solid we need an extra medium
that can ‘vibrate’: this is actually associated with the
phase modes φa of the dislocation condensate that got
shuﬄed into the stress sector using the Lorenz gauge ﬁx!
We now proﬁt from the artiﬁcial condensate velocity as
a diagnostic tool. We ﬁnd that for small momenta q,
the dispersion of the massive mode is given by (for real
frequency ω),

ω2 = Ω2 + ( 1

2 c2

d + c2

T)q2 + . . .

(234)

This demonstrates that this mode is associated with the
phase modes of the dislocation condensate since the ve-
locity cd enters. Similarly, the signiﬁcance of this mode
is that it ‘absorbs the shear component’ of the longitudi-
nal phonon and therefore the signature of shear through

cT =(cid:112)µ/ρ is present even in the longitudinal response.

At large energy it turns into a pure dislocation conden-
sate mode propagating at a velocity cR = cd/

2.

√

In summary, we ﬁnd out that the longitudinal phonon
has changed at low energy into a pure (compressional)
sound mode, of which by the mode coupling with the
condensate mode “the shear components have been re-
moved”. This mechanism is quite remarkable, tying to-
gether the requirements that (a) the liquid cannot sup-
port reactive shear responses, with (b) the liquid itself is
descending from the solid in this dual language such that

deﬁnition

(cid:112)µ/ρ
(cid:112)(κ + µ)/ρ
(cid:112)κ/ρ

√
–
2
cd/

symbol

cT
cL
cK
cd
cR

name

transverse velocity
longitudinal velocity
compressional velocity

occurrence
solid phonon
solid phonon

nematic compression mode

dislocation velocity

dislocation condensate sound mode

rotation velocity

rotational Goldstone mode

58

TABLE IV: Velocities in the quantum liquid crystal. The dislocation velocity cd should be equal or almost equal to the
transverse velocity cT. Other velocities used in this article are the phase velocity cph and vortex velocity cV in the XY -model
(Sec. II) and the velocity of light cl (Sec. X).

the longitudinal phonon turns into real sound through
the action of the dual condensate, in turn rooted in the
fact (c) that “sound does not carry (stress) gauge charge
in the dual stress superconductor”. As we repeatedly
emphasized, this is in turn a ramiﬁcation of the fact that
dislocations “do not have a volume” which via the de-
tour involving the glide constraint resurfaces in the ﬁnal
outcomes.

With regard to macroscopic collective behavior, of
course only the massless excitations matter and we have
discovered that the quantum nematic as a zero temper-
ature state of matter is characterized by a sound mode.
Given that we are dealing with zero temperature mat-
ter formed from bosons, what else can this be than a
superﬂuid? We also have to demonstrate that this ﬂuid
is irrotational, i.e. the circulation can only occur in the
form of massive quantized vortices. The easiest way to
accomplish this is by considering the electrically charged
system as we will do in Sec. X. There we will ﬁnd that the
charge quantum nematic is at the same time a full-ﬂedged
superconductor characterized by expulsion of magnetic
ﬁelds, i.e. the Meissner eﬀect.

One can now be concerned that at ﬁrst sight this seems
to violate the general principle that superﬂuidity is as-
sociated with the spontaneous breaking of global,
in-
ternal U (1)-symmetry: eventually it has to invoke oﬀ-
diagonal long-range order in terms of the constituent
bosons. However, from a ﬁrst-quantized path integral
perspective this apparent paradox is directly resolved.
Oﬀ-diagonal long-range order means that inﬁnite wind-
ings of the worldlines of the constituent bosons around
the imaginary time axis acquire a ﬁnite probability in the
superﬂuid. Now one should realize that the dislocation
condensate ‘liberates’ the constituent bosons from their
crystal lattice sites so that they can move about freely:
the system is a genuine liquid. Therefore the particle
worldlines can braid arbitrarily and the dislocation con-
densate ‘stirs’ the particle system into the inﬁnite wind-
ing aﬀair of the standard superﬂuid. It is crucial in this
regard that the particle condensate and the dislocation
condensate perspectives actually reside ‘on the same side’
of the duality — shear stress is on the ‘opposite side’. As
usual, in the dual language one can understand physics
from a very diﬀerent but yet equivalent perspective, sum-
marized here by: “a bosonic crystal losing its shear rigid-

ity by restoring translational symmetry automatically be-
comes a superﬂuid”.

2. Transverse sector

Let us now turn to the transverse response. We in-
fer a similar pattern as in the longitudinal sector but
now the physics is very diﬀerent. Yet again we ﬁnd that
at high energies the transverse phonon is recovered (the
pole characterized by cT) and a condensate phase mode
propagating with cd. However, considering very small
energies we ﬁnd now a massless pole,

GT(Ω → ∞) =

1
µ

Ω2
n + c2
ω2

Rq2 .

(235)

We interpret this massless mode as follows. The rota-
tional symmetry is still broken. Although hidden in the
crystal, this fact becomes manifest again in the quantum
nematic crystal: this is just the Goldstone boson associ-
ated with the broken rotational symmetry! Remarkably,
its stiﬀness is set by the dislocation Higgs mass as is man-
√
ifest both from the fact that it propagates at the rota-
2, as well as the prefactor Ω2/µ.
tional velocity cR = cd/
This rotational mode is rooted literally in ‘vibrating’ the
dislocation condensate. Below we will expose the precise
‘deconﬁnement’ mechanism behind this phenomenon us-
ing the ‘dynamical Ehrenfest constraint’ formalism which
makes this explicit.

The massive mode in the transverse sector is clearly
identiﬁed as the transverse phonon which has acquired
a Higgs mass, obviously because shear stress is ‘ex-
pelled from the liquid’ very much in the same way as
magnetic ﬁelds are expelled from a superconductor. In
fact, in analogy with the London penetration depth of
the superconductor, the Higgs mass sets a characteristic
length scale, the dislocation penetration depth, given by
λd = Ω/cd, which is equal or almost equal to the shear
penetration depth λs = Ω/cT since cd ≈ cT. This is the
length over which shear stresses can penetrate the liq-
uid/liquid crystal. The dispersion relation at small mo-
menta coincides with the one associated with the mas-
sive mode in the longitudinal sector Eq. (234). There
is a mode coupling between the ‘pure’ transverse stress
photon and the condensate mode at work at these large

59

FIG. 15: Spectral functions (left: transverse; right:
longitudinal) of the nematic liquid crystal in units of the inverse shear
modulus 1/µ ≡ 1, with Poisson ratio ν = 0.1 and dislocation Higgs mass Ω = 0.2 (in arbitrary units). The top row shows a
realistic situation with cd ≈ cT, whereas the bottom row artiﬁcially has cd = 4cT which reduces mode couplings in order to trace
the nature of the massive poles. The width of the poles is artiﬁcial and denotes the relative pole strengths: these ideal poles
are actually inﬁnitely sharp. The insets show zoom-ins near the origin. In both the transverse and the longitudinal response
we ﬁnd a massive and a massless pole. The massive poles are identiﬁed as the collective modes of the dislocation condensate
√
itself. They have a Higgs gap Ω and dispersion at low momenta following Eq. (234) while at high momenta q > Ω/cd they
2 (longitudinal). The massless pole
approach linear dispersions with the condensate velocities cd (transverse) resp. cR = cd/
in the longitudinal sector propagates at the pure compressional velocity cK at low momenta while it reduces to the longitudinal
phonon with velocity cL at high momenta where the underlying crystal again becomes apparent. In the transverse response
one clearly identiﬁes the rotational Goldstone mode with the rotational velocity cR at low momenta, while at high momenta it
reduces to the transverse phonon with velocity cT.

cLcKcTcRcdcondensatename

sound mode

rotational Goldstone mode

dislocation condensate

shear mode

dislocation force
dislocation force

static torque

character

longitudinal, massless
transverse, massless
longitudinal, massive
transverse, massive

longitudinal, short-ranged
transverse, short-ranged
transverse, long-ranged

TABLE V: Mode content of the quantum nematic

length scales. The presence of these propagating mas-
sive modes is actually tied into the strongly-correlated
liquid assumption underlying the entire formalism. We
departed from the assertion that the dislocations occur at
a low fugacity: their typical separation is large compared
to the lattice constant. The shear penetration depth coin-
cides with this typical distance between dislocations. At
larger length scales the dislocation condensate takes care
that translational symmetry is restored such that shear
rigidity cannot propagate. At shorter distances, however,
the system discovers that it is still a crystal and therefore
it supports propagating shear stress. The occurrence of
such propagating ‘massive shear photons’ can therefore
be used as a diagnostic for the strength of the crystal
correlations in the liquid. When the shear penetration
depth becomes of the order of the lattice constant these
massive modes get completely invisible. Even in the case
of a reasonably strongly-interacting superﬂuid like 4He
these modes have not be seen, which is no surprise be-
cause λd is at most a few times the lattice constant. One
might wonder, however, whether the roton minimum is a
leftover of propagating massive shear.

Finally, we still have to address the nature of the in-
stantaneous static stresses that are supported by the
quantum nematic; since translational rigidity has per-
ished, the instantaneous forces between individual dislo-
cations must vanish as well. Looking more closely, the
correlation functions of the instantaneous forces in the
static limit ω → 0 are
4κµ
κ + µ

q2 + (1 + ν)Ω2/c2
d

(236)

(cid:104)bT†
t bT
(cid:104)bL†
t bL

t (cid:105) =
t (cid:105) = 4µ

1

,

1

q2 + 1/(cid:96)2 + 2Ω2/c2
d

,

(237)

These should be compared with Eqs. (204) and (208)
of the solid. We see that in both cases, the range of
the forces is cut oﬀ by the dislocation penetration depth
λd = cd/Ω.

The only long-range static rigidity is rotational, related
to the rotational Goldstone boson mentioned above. We
will discuss this further below. The mode content of the
quantum nematic is summarized in Table V.
for very high mo-
menta q (cid:29) 1/λd we expect to recover the character of
the underlying crystal. One way of looking at this is

There is one question remaining:

60

that the cores of the topological defects (the dislocations)
should correspond to the ‘normal state’ as is familiar from
Abrikosov vortices in superconductors. The normal state
of the dual stress superconductor is obviously the crys-
talline solid. Indeed we have noticed above that the longi-
tudinal massless mode goes to cLq for high momenta and
the transverse massless mode goes to cTq, recovering the
longitudinal and transverse phonons. But in the spectral
functions of Fig. 15 we also see the two dislocation sounds
modes with velocities cR resp. cd, that should be absent
in the solid. The answer is that the spectral weight of
these dislocation modes vanishes in the limit qλd → ∞,
leaving only the phonons.

C. Torque stress in nematics and the rotational

Goldstone mode

Above we have seen the emergence of a massless mode
in the transverse sector of the quantum nematic. Re-
call that the transverse propagator is in fact the rota-
tion strain correlation function Eq. (84). The quantum
nematic has full translational symmetry, but broken ro-
tational symmetry—since even the ‘isotropic’ dislocation
condensate of Fig. 5 remembers the underlying crystal
axes—and it is tempting to identify this mode as the
Goldstone mode associated with this broken rotational
symmetry. Here we will show that that is indeed the
case. Then the important question is raised: what hap-
pens to this Goldstone mode in the ordered, solid phase,
which also breaks rotational symmetry spontaneously?
The duality construction provides a satisfactory and sur-
prising answer: the rotational Goldstone mode is conﬁned
in the solid, in the sense that the interaction it medi-
ates is stronger than logarithmic in separation. This goes
hand-in-hand with the conﬁnement of disclinations in the
solid. The derivation presented here was carried out in
Ref. [20]. For complementary discussions on the interde-
pendence between translational and rotational Goldstone
modes, see for instance Refs. [59, 60, 120, 121].

It should be emphasized that this propagating rota-
tional Goldstone boson is actually a unique feature of
the superﬂuid (or superconducting, see Sec. X) nematic
state. It is actually a well-known conundrum that in the
thermal nematic state the Goldstone theorem appears to
be violated in the sense that despite the breaking of a
global symmetry (the rotations) a propagating Goldstone
mode is missing. The culprit is the hydrodynamical na-
ture of the classical nematic: it breaks rotations, but is at
the same time a normal ﬂuid governed by the equations
of hydrodynamics. Upon stirring the ﬂuid, circulation in
the hydrodynamical ﬂow will appear which is subjected
to viscous damping. The highly unusual feature that
this viscous normal ﬂuid circulation is coupled to the ro-
tational Goldstone ‘mode’ and this coupling is “relevant
in the deep IR” [24, 47]. The eﬀect is that this Goldstone
boson just gets completely overdamped. Similarly, deal-
ing with a quantum nematic arising in a Fermi liquid by

deforming the Fermi surface, one ﬁnds that the Goldstone
boson is overdamped, in essence by Landau damping, but
concurrently the perturbation expansion associated with
the quasiparticle dressing blows up [3, 5]. Remarkably, it
appears that ‘fermionic nematics’ have to be non-Fermi
liquids! But here we are dealing with superﬂuid nemat-
ics and in superﬂuids “circulation is massive”: rotational
motions can only enter in the form of quantized vortices,
and below the vortex creation energy scale the superﬂuid
is irrotational. Therefore the rotational Goldstone boson
is protected against the circulation in the ﬂuid and can
therefore propagate as an undamped mode.

Very recently,

At the heart of the increased structure of Goldstone
modes due to spatial symmetry breaking is the fact that
translations and rotations are not independent. Recall
that in the derivation of the Noether theorem, which con-
structs a conserved current for each global symmetry, one
considers inﬁnitesimal symmetry transformations. How-
ever, locally, an inﬁnitesimal rotation amounts to just
an inﬁnitesimal translation [59]. This is reﬂected in
the deﬁnition of a local rotation deformation Eq. (56),
ω = ∂xuy − ∂yux. Clearly, an inﬁnitesimal rotation ω
can be represented by an inﬁnitesimal displacement ua.
it has been cleared up that in such
cases of interdependent symmetries (Noether currents),
the correct spectrum of Goldstone modes needs to take
account of so-called inverse Higgs constraints [60, 120–
122]. This reasoning also explains why, for instance, we
do not observe any Goldstone modes due to spontaneous
breaking of symmetry under Galilean boosts (Galileons)
in superﬂuids, or moreover those due to broken Lorentz
boosts. Next to these symmetry considerations, there
is a neat kinematic explanation of what happens when
both translations and rotations are spontaneously bro-
ken, which is the topic of the remainder of this section.
Heuristically, if one attempts to excite a rotational Gold-
stone mode in a solid by exerting an external torque,
instead one excites transverse, shear phonons.

The rotational Goldstone mode is in fact a propagat-
ing excitation in the rotation ﬁeld ω(x), which is dualized
into the torque stress gauge ﬁeld hλ(x) in Sec. (VI E). To
accomplish this, we converted the Ehrenfest constraint
maσa
m = 0 into a dynamical constraint, or conserva-
tion law, ∂µτµ = 0. This allowed us to investigate
torque stress even in ﬁrst-gradient elasticity of the solid
phase. A part of the stress tensor σa
µ can be represented
by the torque stress gauge ﬁeld, by using consecutively
Eqs. (151), (171) and (173). In explicit form we ﬁnd the
exact relations:

L − bT

T

τt = −bL
τL = bL
t
τT = bT
t

= −qhT,
= −i 1
= i 1
cT

cT

ωnhT,
ωnhL − qht = ph+1.

(238)

(239)

(240)

Upon taking the Coulomb gauge ﬁx for the torque stress
gauge ﬁeld ∂mhm = −qhL = 0, we can interpret as usual
the temporal component ht as the instantaneous, static
force and the transverse component hT as the propagat-

61

ing excitation.
Interestingly, the static force between
sources of torque (disclinations) is carried by the same
component as the static force between dislocations, via
t = −qht. In the solid, the force be-
the last relation bT
tween dislocations derives from (cid:104)bT†
q2 , amount-
ing to a decay logarithmic in the separation between two
sources. We now immediately ﬁnd that the force between
disclinations becomes,
†
t ht(cid:105) =
(cid:104)h

t (cid:105) ∝ 1

t bT

q2(cid:104)bT†
t bT

t (cid:105) ∝ 1
q4 ,

(241)

1

which implies that the energy cost of a disclination–anti-
disclination pair at separation r grows like r2, see for
instance Ref. [123]. This is obviously a much stronger
dependence than for dislocations, and using standard
terminology this implies that disclinations are conﬁned
in the solid phase. This is not dissimilar to the conﬁne-
ment of quarks due to the strong interaction which grows
with r according to quantum chromodynamics (QCD).
From Eqs. (238), (239), we see that also the propagating
component of the torque stress gauge ﬁeld hT has this
behavior. In fact, substituting these equations in the La-
grangian of the solid Eq. (176) using the stress Coulomb
gauge ﬁx ∂mbL
L = 0 leads to the simple expres-
sion,

m = −qbL

LT = 1

2

1
µ

q2( 1
c2
T

†
n + q2)h
ω2
ThT.

(242)

c2
T

n + q2)bT†
ω2

Note that terms coming from second-gradient elasticity
with factors (cid:96)2 drop out. The additional factor of q2 with
respect to the phonon Lagrangian ∼ ( 1
T bT
T
implies that it is energetically more costly to excite rota-
tional Goldstone modes than phonons at any ﬁnite mo-
mentum. Perturbing a solid by an external torque source
will therefore excite transverse phonons rather than ro-
tational Goldstone modes. But the solid in fact behaves
like a completely ‘incompressible’ medium in its response
to torque: it is the way that crankshafts do their work,
and conﬁnement of torque is thereby actually fundamen-
tal in mechanical engineering.

Let us now zoom in on the torque stress gauge ﬁeld
in the quantum nematic phase. The derivation of the
Higgs term for the quantum smectic and nematic was
carried out in a gauge ﬁx that removed cross terms for
the stress gauge ﬁelds, Eq. (223). Here it is more conve-
nient to choose the unitary gauge ﬁx, which eliminates
the phase ﬁelds of the dislocation condensate Eq. (222).
In this gauge ﬁx, all six components of the stress gauge
ﬁeld ba
µ initially acquire a Higgs contribution, whereas
in the other case two of these were assigned to the dis-
location phase modes. Obviously, the end results are
gauge invariant, so this procedure can be used without
any problems. One component in the longitudinal sector
will be removed by the glide constraint, but since torque
resides purely in the transverse sector we can leave that
aside here.
Since we are only interested in the massless mode, we
can take the limit Ω2 → ∞ immediately, and consider

only the Higgs term, dropping the contribution from the
original isotropic solid Eq. (154). Going back from ˜ba
µ to
ba
µ ﬁelds, the Higgs term in the unitary gauge ﬁx reads,

(cid:104) c2

T
c2
d

m|2(cid:105)

LHiggs =

Ω2
2c2
Tµ

|ba
t |2 + |ba

.

(243)

We substitute the torque stress tensor Eq. (171) in real-
space coordinates,
x − by
y,

τt = −bx

τy = by
t .

τx = bx
t ,

(244)

This leads to

LHiggs =

Ω2
2c2
Tµ
2|bx
x − by
y − by

1

T
c2
d

T
c2
d

|τx|2 + c2
2|bx
y|2 + 1

|τy|2 + 1
x|2 + 1

2|τt|2+
y − by
2|bx

x|2(cid:105)

y + by

. (245)

(cid:104) c2

(cid:104)
(cid:104)

q2|ht|2(cid:105)
ht|2(cid:105)

.

Here bx
x is part of the compression component which
will be eliminated from the Higgs term by the glide con-
straint. Focusing on the components that appear in the
torque stress τµ, we substitute the torque stress gauge
ﬁeld hµ from Eq. (173). Taking care of appropriate fac-
tors of cT/cd, the ﬁrst line reads,

=

T
c2
d

( 1
c2
d

( 1
c2
R

Ltorque
Higgs =

2 q2)|hT|2 + c2
ω2
n + 1
n + q2)|hT|2 + q2| cT
ω2

Ω2
2c2
Tµ
Ω2
4c2
Tµ
√
Here cR ≡ cd/
2, cf. Eq. (235). For convenience, we
have imposed the Coulomb gauge ﬁx ∂mhm = −qhL = 0.
We recognize this Lagrangian as simply the dual of a real
scalar ﬁeld as in Eq. (23). Therefore we can ‘dualize back’
in which case we retrieve the action

(246)

cR

Lrot
Higgs = 1
2

2c2
Tµ
Ω2 (∂R

µ ω)2,

(247)

µ ≡ ( 1

cR

where ∂R
∂τ , ∂m). Here ω(x) is in fact the rotation
ﬁeld ω = ∂xuy − ∂yux from Eq. (56). That this must be
so can be seen from the fact that the multivalued part
of this ﬁeld are the rotational defects, disclinations, that
source the ﬁelds hµ.

Let us now interpret the physical meaning of Eq. (246).
In Sec. VI E we interpreted ht as the static force between
disclinations. Clearly, this is now of the ‘ordinary’ 1/q2
form, leading to interactions logarithmic in separation.
This is of course completely in line with what we know
from classical nematics, cf. Sec. V. In the nematic phase
disclinations are deconﬁned and can occur as ordinary
topological defects, on the same footing as vortices in su-
perﬂuids and dislocations in solids. One way to look at
this is that by increasing the separation between a discli-
nation and an antidisclination in the solid additional dis-
locations are introduced given Eq. (102). But in the ne-
matic phase dislocations are completely condensed which

62

implies that dislocations can be pulled out of the con-
densate ‘for free’. Therefore, there is no longer a ‘topo-
logical barrier’ obstructing the creation of disclination–
antidisclination pairs. This is surely reﬂected by the
static force mediated by ht.

Another interesting observation is the prefactor of
Eq. (246) which is proportional to Ω2, see also Eq. (235).
Recall from Eq. (220) that this Higgs mass is proportional
to the density of the dislocation condensate |Ψ|2. If this
density goes to zero—upon returning to the solid phase—
the rotational Goldstone mode disappears. Therefore,
the dislocation condensate can be said to form a medium
which carries the rotational Goldstone mode. Adopting
fully the dual viewpoint, one must accept that a conden-
√
sate of topological defects is a real form of matter.

Also note that the velocity of this mode is cR = cd/

2,
as we have already seen in Eq. (235). We can now
trace back the origin of this velocity reduction from cd
to Eq. (244): the spatial propagation of the rotational
mode is ‘shared’ between the x- and y-directions.

IX. QUANTUM SMECTIC

In the soft matter literature the smectic order appears
as a vestigial order in between the crystal and the ne-
matic order. It is typically viewed from a ‘molecular per-
spective’ [24, 47]: one asserts that rod-like molecules ori-
ent themselves, like in the uniaxial nematic of Fig. 1(c),
while the interactions are so anisotropic that these want
to form liquid layers. These liquid layers subsequently
stack in a periodic array in the direction perpendicular
to the layers, see Fig. 1(b). The resulting medium has
collective elasticity-like properties that are unique: it is
behaving neither as a solid, nor as a liquid but instead
as something that is ‘hanging in the middle’. The most
striking consequence is the appearance of a quadratically
dispersing ‘phonon’: consider a periodic transverse dis-
placement that is propagating along the liquid direction.
Since the layers are liquid (no translational symmetry
breaking), the reactive response associated with strains
∼ ∂u vanishes. However, considering the next order in
the gradient expansion ∼ ∂2u an elastic response is recov-
ered associated with the curvature interactions between
the liquid layers [24, 47]. Accordingly, one is dealing
with an eﬀective action of the form (∂tu)2 + (∂2
mu)2 de-
scribing this ‘liquid direction transverse phonon’, called
undulation mode, which is therefore characterized by a
quadratic dispersion ω ∝ q2.

Turning to the zero temperature realms, the idea of a
quantum incarnation of a smectic state was introduced
by Fradkin, Kivelson, Emery and Lubensky in the spe-
ciﬁc microscopic setting of the electron stripes in doped
Mott insulators and the stripe phases formed in quantum
Hall systems [124, 125]. This school of thought departs
from the assertion that in the two-dimensional setting
of the copper-oxide planes, the electrons self-organize in
Mott-insulating domains separated by ‘rivers of charge’

(the stripes of the introduction) which are to zeroth or-
der considered to form an array of independent 1+1D
Luttinger liquids. One can then demonstrate that for
very speciﬁc intra- and inter-Luttinger-liquid couplings
the interactions between the diﬀerent Luttinger liquids
in the array can become irrelevant in the IR. The eﬀect
is that a state is obtained in 2+1D which is in the scal-
ing limit behaving like a 1+1D Luttinger liquid metal in
the ‘liquid direction’, while it is Mott-insulating in the
perpendicular direction.

In fact,

This is based on a microscopic model associated with
strong electron–electron interactions in the presence of
a very strong periodic background potential. Like in the
soft-matter context, one would like to ﬁnd out whether
such quantum smectic states can be formed from bosonic
matter living in the Galilean continuum.
in
Sec. VII we already demonstrated that this arises as a
natural part of the dual stress superconductor portfolio.
As we argued, in D space dimensions there are D dis-
order ﬁelds required to represent the dislocation conden-
sate. Since these are symmetrywise inequivalent, they do
not have to condense simultaneously. Given the appro-
priate microscopic conditions (such as ‘rod-like bosons’)
it can therefore happen that the dislocations proliferate
exclusively in one of the high symmetry (“x”) directions
of the crystal, leaving the orthogonal (“y”) space direc-
tion unaﬀected. This dual perspective on smectic order
still obscure in the soft matter tradition. Based on these
mathematical considerations it was put forward for the
ﬁrst time in Ref. [12], where it was initially misidenti-
ﬁed as an “ordered nematic state”. This was put in the
proper context in Refs. [13, 17].

As we will show in detail in this section, these proper
bosonic quantum smectics form an entertaining and quite
rich stage. We learned in Sec. VIII that the bosonic quan-
tum nematics are at the same time genuine superﬂuids.
Accordingly, we will ﬁnd that the quantum smectics are
also behaving like superﬂuids in so far as their ‘liquid
side’ is concerned. Just as in the case of the classical
smectics, they also have a ‘solid side’, but eventually the
solid and superﬂuid characteristics are ‘glued together’
into an indivisible entity with unique characteristics that
we will present in this section. We focus on the elastic
properties.

Following precisely the template that we exposed for
the quantum nematic in Sec. VIII, we will now com-
pute the dual stress propagators and mode spectra for
the quantum smectics. Since there is less symmetry, the
computations become more involved with the reward that
there is also more going on.

63

FIG. 16: The smectic liquid crystal is a periodic stack of liquid
layers (blue lines). Within the layers there is full translational
symmetry and therefore it is referred to as the liquid direc-
tion. In the perpendicular direction translation symmetry is
still broken and it is referred to as the solid direction. Dis-
locations have proliferated with their Burgers vectors na in
the liquid direction. Dislocations with Burgers vectors in the
solid direction are still allowed as stable topological defects.
When probing the system with linear response, we deﬁne the
angle η between the momentum and the smectic layers via
tmaqmna = q sin η.

simply use Ω = Ωx to denote the Higgs mass Eq. (220).
Dropping the pure phase ﬁeld terms |∂µφx|2 because they
are decoupled in the Lorenz gauge ﬁx, the Higgs term in
the Josephson limit Eq. (227) is explicitly,

LHiggs =

1
2

Ω2
c2
Tµ

µ + λ†tµx)(δµν − ˜pµ ˜pν
(˜bx†

˜p2 )(˜bx

ν + λtνx).

(248)

We deﬁne an angle η between the Burgers direction of the
dislocation condensate and the momentum, see Fig. 16,
via:

tmaqmna = q sin η.

(249)

This implies qmnm = q cos η. For our choice nx = 1, ny =
0 we have sin η = −qy/q and cos η = qx/q. Furthermore
d + cos2 η q2. With this we expand,
we deﬁne ˜p2
using ˜pµ

η ≡ ω2
n/c2
µ = i˜p˜bx
˜bx
0 ,

LHiggs =

1
2

Ω2
c2
Tµ

=

1
2

Ω2
c2
Tµ
+ λ†(sin η ωn

cd ˜p

(cid:1)λ†λ

(cid:16)|˜bx
+1|2 + |˜bx−1|2 +(cid:0)1 − |tµx ˜pµ|2
(cid:17)
(cid:16)|˜bx

+ λ†(−˜bx
+1|2 + |˜bx−1|2 +

˜bx
0 ) + h.c.
˜p2 λ†λ

y − i sin η q

˜p2

˜p2
η

˜p

+1 − i cos η ˜bx−1) + h.c.
˜bx

(cid:17)

.

(250)

A. Lagrangian of the quantum smectic

Here we used the transformations in appendix A to ex-
pand

Let us depart from the general expression for the dual
stress superconductor Eq. (219). Without loss of gen-
erality, we consider the case where only the Φx-disorder
ﬁeld condenses while the Φy-ﬁeld stays massive. We shall

y = i qy
˜bx
= −i sin η q

0 + ωnqy
˜bx
˜bx
+1 + i qx
cd ˜pq
q
0 − sin η ωn
˜bx

˜p

˜bx−1
˜bx
+1 + i cos η ˜bx−1.

˜p

cd ˜p

(251)

Integrating out the Lagrange multiplier ﬁeld λ leads to

(cid:16)|bx

+1|2 + |bx−1|2
− 1
|sin η ωn
˜p2
η
|cos η ˜p ˜bx

cd

|−qx

˜bx
t + ωn
cd

x|2
˜bx

|−qxbx

t + ωn
cT

1
˜p2
η
|σx
y|2.

LHiggs =

1
2

Ω2
c2
Tµ

=

=

=

=

1
2

1
2

1
2

1
2

Ω2
c2
Tµ
Ω2
c2
Tµ
Ω2
c2
Tµ
Ω2
c2
dµ

1
˜p2
η
1
˜p2
η
c2
T
c2
d
1
˜p2
η

+1 − i cos η ˜p ˜bx−1|2(cid:17)

˜bx

+1 + i sin η ωn
cd

˜bx−1|2

64

Higgs mass to two components ˜bx
+1, ˜bx−1, but by imposing
the glide constraint we ﬁnd out that only one particu-
lar linear combination of these remains, while the other
combination stays massless. We saw this mechanism at
work as well in the quantum nematic, where out of the
initial four components, one remains massless. For com-
pleteness, we note that if the crystal axis along which
the dislocations condense does not line up with the x-
axis, we have an arbitrary two-vector na, and the last
equation reads:

x|2
bx

(252)

LHiggs =

1
2

Ω2
c2
dµ

1
˜p2
η

|acnanbσb

c|2.

(253)

In the last line we used the deﬁnition of the stress gauge
ﬁeld Eq. (151). We started out in Eq. (248) by giving a

Writing out this term explicitly gives



+1

˜bT†
˜bL†
˜bL†
˜bT†

+1

T

T

LHiggs =

1
2

Ω2
c2
Tµ

1
˜p2
η

T


˜p2 cos2 η sin2 η

−i ωn

˜p cos2 η sin2 η

cd
˜p2 cos3 η sin η

−i ωn

cd

˜p cos η sin3 η

i ωn
cd
ω2
n
c2
d
i ωn
cd
ω2
n
c2
d

˜p cos2 η sin2 η
cos2 η sin2 η −i ωn
˜p cos3 η sin η
cos η sin3 η −i ωn

cd

cd

˜p2 cos3 η sin η

˜p cos3 η sin η
˜p2 cos4 η
˜p cos2 η sin2 η

i ωn
cd
ω2
n
c2
d
i ωn
cd

˜p cos η sin3 η
cos η sin3 η
˜p cos2 η sin2 η
ω2
n
c2
d

sin4 η



 .



˜bT
+1
˜bL
T
˜bL
+1
˜bT
T

(254)

+1 and only σL

As we already learned in Sec. VIII the principle gov-
erning the longitudinal sector is the fact that the glide
constraint decouples the compressional stress from the
dislocation condensate, which only gives a Higgs mass to
the shear stress component. The character of this compo-
nent depends on the angle η, referring to the orientation
of the observer looking at the stress response relative to
the liquid direction. Zooming in on the liquid direction
η = 0, it follows immediately from Eqs. (253),(254) that
only bL
T acquire a Higgs mass. In contrast,
for momentum along the solid direction η = π/2, only
bT
T and only σT
In these two
cases the gapped component belongs to the ‘magnetic
shear’ σL
L (see Sec. VI B). Observing the system
halfway these directions (η = π/4) the stress component
L − σT
σL
T gets the Higgs mass, corresponding to the ‘elec-
tric shear’ of Sec. VI B. For angles η in between these
special values, linear combinations of these stress com-
ponents acquire the mass. As we will see soon, this will
have important ramiﬁcations for the collective modes of
the quantum smectic.

L acquire the Higgs mass.

T + σT

B. Stress propagators of the quantum smectic

The eﬀects of smectic order are fully encoded in the
Higgs action Eq. (254) and together with the crystal La-
grangian Eq. (211) we have available all the information
necessary to determine the mode spectrum. As we did
for the quantum nematic, we shall compute the longi-
tudinal and transverse propagators Eqs. (188), (197) for
the quantum smectic. However, since we are now dealing
with the lowered symmetry of the smectic we also have
to pay attention to the chiral propagator Eq. (199) since
the longitudinal and transverse components mix via the
Higgs sector: Eq. (254) is no longer block-diagonal for
intermediate angles 0 < η < π/2. Let us ﬁrst seek some
simpliﬁcations of these relatively complicated equations.

Let us depart from the matrix of propagators,

(cid:32)

(cid:33)

G =

GL GLT
GTL GT

.

(255)

Deﬁning the ‘unperturbed’ propagator matrix G0 =
diag(G0
T) in terms of the isotropic solid propagators
Eqs.(83), (84), the eﬀects of the condensate can be ab-

L, G0

65

sorbed in an (anomalous) self-energy Π according to,

G =

1

G0−1 − Π

, ⇒ Π = −(G−1 − G0−1

).

(256)

This involves a matrix inversion of a 4× 4-matrix, which
becomes a quite lengthy aﬀair when one also wants to
keep track of the second-order elasticity corrections. This

is easily enough accomplished using a computer; ignoring
the second-order corrections ((cid:96) → 0) the expression stays
manageable. Here we derive the leading-order results in
explicit form. The inverse of the diagonal matrix G0 is
Introducing the notation (α, β)⊗2 =
of course trivial.

(cid:32)

(cid:33)

, the self-energy matrix Π becomes,

α2 αβ
αβ β2

Π =

µΩ2
c2
Tq2

c2
Tq2(ω2

n + c2

dq2 cos2 η) + Ω2(ω2

n + 4c2

Tq2 cos2 η)

1

(cid:16)−c2

Tq2 sin 2η, ω2

n + 2c2

Tq2 cos2 η

(cid:17)⊗2

(257)

stress-photon self-energy Π is

The
clearly highly
anisotropic, depending on angle η between the direc-
tion of propagation of the photon relative to the ‘smectic
frame’.

The general expressions for the propagators are quite
complicated. However, the essence of the physics is re-
vealed by focusing on momenta which are parallel to the
liquid (η = 0) and solid (η = π/2) directions [17]. We
shall see that also the η = π/4 case is quite informa-
tive. Although one has to cope with the full 4 × 4 prop-
agator matrix at intermediate angles 0 < η < π/2, the
outcomes just interpolate between these limits as can be
easily checked by solving the system on the computer. A
ﬁrst simpliﬁcation that one encounters along the highest
symmetry directions η = 0, π/2 is that the chiral GLT

propagator vanishes as is also the case in the nematic
and the solid. This is just associated with the lowered
symmetry in the smectic that renders a decomposition
in terms of purely transverse and longitudinal modes im-
possible at intermediate η angles. For the momentum
along the solid direction (η = π/2),

Tq2
c2
n + c2
ω2

n + (c2
ω2

Lq2 ,
Tq2 + Ω2
c2
Tq2 + Ω2)(1 + (cid:96)2q2)

GL =

1
µ

GT =

1
µ
GLT = 0.

,

(258)

(259)

(260)

While for the momentum in the liquid direction (η = 0),

Tq2
c2
n + c2
ω2

Lq2 ,

(ω2

n + c2

GL =

GT =

1
µ

1
µ

GLT = 0.

dq2)(cid:0)ω2

Tq2(1 + (cid:96)2q2)(cid:1) + ω2

nΩ2 + c2
ω2
n + c2

Tq2(ω2

n + c2

dq2 + 4Ω2)
nΩ2(1 + (cid:96)2q2) + 4c2

Tq2Ω2(cid:96)2q2

,

(261)

(262)

(263)

In these cases we can even keep track of the eﬀects of the second-order elasticity corrections and the artiﬁcial condensate
velocity cd ≈ cT , tied to the rotational velocity cR = 1√
cd, introduced in Sec. VIII A. One anticipates that the
momentum direction precisely in between the solid and liquid directions η = π/4 is ‘fairly’ symmetric. The full
expressions get quite lengthy but when we ignore the second-order elasticity by putting (cid:96) → 0 we ﬁnd,

2

(cid:104)

GL =

1
µ

GT =

1
µ
GLT = − 1
µ

n + c2

(ω2

n + c2
c2
Tq2
n + c2
ω2

Lq2)(ω2
Tq2 + Ω2

c2
Tq2(ω2

n + c2

Rq2 + Ω2)
Rq2) + Ω2(ω2

,

n + c2
ω2
n + c2
n + c2
n + c2
(ω2
Tq2Ω2
c2
Rq2 + Ω2) − c2

Kq2)
Lq2
Rq2 + Ω2) − c2
Tq2Ω2 .

Lq2)(ω2

(ω2

n + c2

Lq2)(ω2

n + c2

(cid:105)

,

(264)

(265)

(266)

Tq2Ω2

In this direction the chiral propagator GLT is no longer

vanishing. Notice also that along this direction the longi-

tudinal propagator becomes exactly equal to that of the
quantum nematic Eq. (230) and we will see below that
this has a quite profound meaning.

At stake is that these equations reveal that the re-
sponses of the quantum smectic, even along the ‘liquid’
and ‘solid’ directions, are neither those of a superﬂuid,
nor of a solid but instead that of a medium where these
responses are truly intertwined. To shed light on this
interesting aﬀair we analyze the collective modes of the
quantum smectic.

C. Collective modes of the quantum smectic

ω =(cid:112)c2

To get a handle on the special nature of the modes
of the quantum smectic let is ﬁrst zoom in on the high-
symmetry directions η = 0, π/2 [17]. The response in
the solid direction η = π/2 is quite simple, see Fig. 17
a),b). From Eq. (258) one reads oﬀ directly that the lon-
gitudinal response is governed by a literal longitudinal
phonon: there is just a single pole at ω = cLq. How-
ever, the transverse mode is now Higgsed: the pole is at
Tq2 + Ω2 (ignoring the higher-order corrections)
showing that the transverse acoustic phonon of the solid
has turned into a ‘massive transverse stress photon’, the
simplest manifestation of the dual stress superconduc-
tor principle. This is according to the intuition that a
smectic is a solid in one, and a liquid in the other direc-
tion. However, this simplicity is deceptive. The quantum
nematic is a true liquid and there we found that the Hig-
gsing of the shear sector always involves the degrees of
freedom of the dislocation condensate itself, signaled by
factors of cd which are now absent at η = π/2. That
the longitudinal mode propagates with the longitudinal

phonon velocity cL =(cid:112)(κ + µ)/ρ is even more striking.
pressional with velocity cK = (cid:112)κ/ρ. But the velocity

Shear rigidity is impossible dealing with a strictly one-
dimensional translational symmetry breaking, since shear
requires at least two space directions and a phonon in a
one-dimensional crystal is therefore always purely com-

of the smectic longitudinal mode is altered by the shear
modulus µ and in this regard the quantum smectic is still
behaving as a two-dimensional solid.
Within the naive ‘solid×liquid’ intuition, what would
one expect when the momentum is directed along the
liquid direction? One would anticipate that the longitu-
dinal mode should now be a pure compressional sound
mode with velocity cK, while in the transverse direction
it appears that it should ‘shear the solid’: naively one
expects a transverse phonon. However, for η = 0 this
intuition is completely defeated, see Fig. 17 c),d). It fol-
lows immediately from Eq. (261) that the longitudinal
response is identical to that of a solid, characterized by
a single mode propagating with the longitudinal phonon
velocity cL! Giving it a bit of thought this makes sense.
Just as for the standard longitudinal phonon, this mode is
in ﬁrst instance associated with compressional motions in
the propagation direction and it does not matter whether

66

in this direction the system is solid or liquid. However,
this compressional wave can relax by ‘expanding’ in the
transverse direction with the eﬀect that the shear mod-
ulus enters its velocity:
in the smectic at η = 0, this
transverse direction is the ‘solid’ direction where shear
rigidity is still present. Remarkably, the massless longi-
tudinal mode turns into a precise sound mode when the
propagation direction is precisely in the middle between
the liquid and the solid directions: one reads oﬀ from the
η = π/4 propagator GL Eq. (265) that it is characterized
by a massless mode propagating with the compressional
velocity cK, see Fig. 17 f). This is a ﬁrst signal of a quite
profound phenomenon, as we will ﬁnd out below.
Considering the transverse response in the η = 0 direc-
tion, one would perhaps expect from the ‘solid×liquid’ in-
tuition that this correspond with shearing motions in the
solid direction, giving rise to a simple transverse acous-
tic phonon. But this intuition is completely missing the
point. One infers immediately that the GT propagator
in Eq. (262) has similarities with the transverse propa-
gator of the quantum nematic Eq. (231), although it is
in detail yet diﬀerent. Again the dislocation condensate
mode enters with velocity cd and upon expanding for
long wavelengths (q (cid:28) Ω/cd ≡ 1/λd) one ﬁnds a massive
mode with real frequency dispersion relation,

ω2
1 = Ω2 + (c2

d + c2

T)q2 + ··· .

(267)

This is quite similar to the ‘massive shear photon’ we
found in the transverse response of the quantum nematic,
involving a mixing with the condensate mode as signaled
by the appearance of the cd velocity. For the nematic we
found that this goes hand in hand with a massless ex-
citation corresponding with the torque mode/rotational
Goldstone mode, that ‘acquired rigidity through the dis-
location condensate’. In the quantum smectic something
else happens, miraculously. Computing the other, mass-
less pole for small momenta from Eq. (262) we ﬁnd the
dispersion relation,

ω2
2 = (λ2

d + 4(cid:96)2)c2

Tq4 + ··· .

(268)

Here we recall the deﬁnition of the dislocation penetra-
tion depth λd = cd/Ω, and keep the second order cor-
rection ∼ (cid:96)2 to make manifest that this is rooted in a
similar ‘rotational logic’ as the emergent torque rigidity
discussed in the previous section. The conclusion is that
for a momentum oriented precisely in the liquid direction
η = 0 the quantum smectic is characterized by a trans-
verse massless mode with a quadratic dispersion relation
ω ∝ q2! Upon going to large momenta q (cid:29) Ω/cd one
ﬁnds that these two modes turn into a transverse phonon
and a pure condensate mode (take Ω → 0 in Eq. (262)),
linearly dispersing with cT and cd respectively, in the
same way as we found in the transversal response of the
nematic. The diﬀerence is that both in the η = 0 and
π/2 cases only a single longitudinal phonon is present
regardless the momentum while the condensate mode is
absent, see Fig. 17.

67

FIG. 17: Spectral functions (left: transverse; right:
longitudinal) of the smectic liquid crystal in units of the inverse shear
modulus 1/µ ≡ 1, for the special angles η = π/2, 0 between the momentum q and condensate Burgers vector n. We have
again artiﬁcially set cd = 3cT for clarity only. The width of the poles is artiﬁcial and denotes the relative pole strengths: these
ideal poles are actually inﬁnitely sharp. The insets show zoom-ins near the origin. a,b) η = π/2, momentum along the solid
direction. Here we ﬁnd the longitudinal phonon in the longitudinal sector, whereas the shear stress is completely gapped. c,d)
η = 0, momentum along the liquid direction. In the longitudinal response one ﬁnds again a massless mode with the longitudinal
phonon velocity cL, implying that the shear of the stack of smectic layers still contributes. In the transverse sector we ﬁnd
a massless mode with quadratic dispersion at low momenta, the undulation mode, while at high momenta it reduces to the
transverse phonon. It also features the massive dislocation condensate mode.

Yet again, the dual stress superconductor has accom-
plished a miracle which is similar to the ‘resurrection’ of
the rotational Goldstone boson in the quantum nematic.
The massless quadratic mode has to be there, although
for a universal reason that is speciﬁc to smectic order.
In the context of the ‘molecular perspective’ of the clas-
sical smectic corresponding with a stack of liquid layers
this quadratic mode is canonical: it is well known as the
undulation mode (see for instance Refs. [24, 47]). The
elastic energy density of the classical smectic is,

(cid:0)B(∇(cid:107)u)2 + K(∇2⊥u)2(cid:1).

e(x) = 1
2

(269)
where ⊥ refers to the liquid direction and B and K

are elastic constants. The leading order gradient term
∼ (∇⊥u)2 has to vanish because global rotations cause
a ﬁnite modiﬁcation of ∇⊥u while e(x) must be invari-
ant under such transformations. Therefore only the term
∼ (∇2⊥u)2 survives, explaining the appearance of the
quadratic dispersion. Remarkably, via an apparently
completely diﬀerent route, the ‘unidirectional’ disloca-
tion condensate has correctly reproduced this universal
property of smectic order. Although ultimately caused
by rotational symmetry breaking, just like the rotational
Goldstone mode of the quantum nematic, its physical
origin is yet very diﬀerent. The undulation mode is en-
coding for the fact that the smectic can still support a

cLcKcTcRcdquadratic68

Spectral functions (left: transverse; right:

FIG. 18:
longitudinal) of the smectic liquid crystal. a,b) Here η = 3π/16 is
taken as a representative angle. Both transverse and longitudinal sectors share the same three modes, the only diﬀerence is
in the spectral weights. The massive mode originates in the dislocation condensate sound and carries zero spectral weight at
q = 0 in the longitudinal response. The two massless modes extrapolate to the longitudinal resp. transverse phonons at high
momenta. At low momenta their velocities follow Eq. (271) and Fig. 19. c,d) η = π/4 ‘right in the middle’ between solid and
liquid directions. Here the massless modes obtain the ‘ideal’ velocities cK (purely compressional) and cT (perfect shear). The
transverse massless mode vanishes from the longitudinal sector.

reactive response to shear stresses transverse to the liq-
uid direction, although these are no longer of the usual
elastic kind (leading-order gradients in the displacement)
because these cannot be supported by the liquid nature
of the layers. However, these liquid layers can support
an extrinsic curvature-like reactive response involving
second-order derivatives.

There is yet another, deeper way to understand how
this works. As we argued in Secs. IV B,VI E, disclina-
tions are primarily associated with curvature which is
conﬁned in the solid. However, disclinations deconﬁne in
the dislocation condensate as we emphasized in the pre-
vious section and this in turn has the eﬀect that in the
dislocation condensate ‘curvature stress’ (torque stress)
becomes deconﬁned and it can freely propagate as a re-

active force. The quadratic mode Eq. (268) is from this
general perspective just the expression that the disloca-
tion condensate turns the system into a quasi-liquid state
that has the capacity to propagate torque stress, and
torque stress is related to linear stress via an additional
derivative Eq. (171).

Let us now ﬁnd out what happens at intermediate an-
gles 0 < η < π/2 — the limiting cases η = 0, π/2 are
qualitatively diﬀerent and beforehand it is unclear how
the results extrapolate to the general case. Since L and
T no longer refer to a normal mode decomposition away
from these limits, these sectors mix. At η = 0 we found
a total of three modes (1 longitudinal and 2 transverse
modes) and this number does not change as function of
η. Therefore, there is a total of three modes and for

cLcKcTcRcd69

the massless longitudinal mode turns into a pure com-
pression sound mode at this angle. However, according
to Eq. (271) a second mode has developed which is mass-
less and linear, propagating with precisely the transverse
phonon velocity cT! Surprisingly, at this magic angle the
‘merger of ﬂuid and solid’ reaches Platonic perfection!
Upon applying density oscillations in the this direction
of the wave propagation the quantum smectic responds
as if it were just a run-of-the-mill superﬂuid. However,
upon application of transverse stress it responds as if
nothing happened to the crystal, exhibiting an impecca-
ble reactive response to shear forces! Notice that this was
overlooked in the work ten years ago[13, 17]: we discov-
ered it while writing this review.

This is clearly rooted in an intricate balance of the rem-
nant shear in the quantum smectic. We in fact have not
managed to reconstruct this on basis of phenomenological
arguments of the kind behind Eq. (269) — it is a typi-
cal instance where it is better to rely on the remarkable
powers of the duality formalism which computes these
delicate matters for us. That such a ‘partitioning’ in
solid and liquid characteristics can occur at special an-
gles must undoubtedly be rooted in symmetry. Such a
phenomenon does not occur within the soft matter ‘liquid
layer’ perspective: after all, there is no room for magic
angles of this kind just taking Eq. (269). However, one
should realize that these classical constructions are based
on the highly anisotropic ‘rod-like molecule’ perspective.
One wires in that the nematic state will be of the uniax-
ial O(2)/Z2 kind in the classiﬁcation scheme of Sec. V.
The associated solid is of the extreme orthorhombic kind,
while the vestigial smectic phase between the uniaxial ne-
matic and this solid can be pictured in terms of the stack
of liquid layers. The present construction of the quantum
smectic departs however from the maximally isotropic
situation that implicitly refers to a hexagonal crystal and
a hexatic state: the O(2)/Z6 class of Sec. V. For the
reasons spelled out above, a smectic state can still be
realized that at ﬁrst sight appears to have the same ‘liq-
uid versus solid’ direction appearance as the conventional
‘liquid layers’. However, it is actually much more sym-
metric and the eﬀective isotropy in this situation opens
up room for the ‘magic angle’ phenomenon.

One can also view this from the perspective of the
present weak–strong duality. It has to be so that when
one constructs the ‘smectic stress-superconductor’ de-
parting from the anisotropic elasticity theory describing
the orthorombic crystal, the propagating shear-like mode
will disappear from the spectrum, to be supplemented by
the undulation mode also at intermediate angles as im-
plied by Eq. (269). Fundamentally, the trouble is that a
general symmetry classiﬁcation scheme for smectic order
parameters is still lacking. The classical soft matter lit-
erature [24, 47] suﬀers from a ‘uniaxial tunnel vision’. In
the context of nematic order, this was already recognized
in the 1970s by the introduction of the hexatic order,
which has been brought to completion (at least in two
space dimensions) by the recent developments outlined in

FIG. 19: Velocities of the leading terms of the two massless
poles of the quantum smectic Eq. (271) as a function of the
angle η between momentum and condensate Burgers vector,
for the Poisson ratio ν = 0.4. We can identify these as the
longitudinal and transverse phonons. For η → π/2 and η → 0
the transverse velocity completely softens. At η = π/2 the
transverse sound is simply gapped, while at η = 0 we ﬁnd
instead the quadratic undulation mode Eq. (268). For η =
π/4, the maximum velocity is reached, which is that of the
transverse phonon cT. In the longitudinal sector, the velocity
varies between cL (same as the solid) and cK (same as the
quantum nematic/superﬂuid).

η (cid:54)= 0, π/2, π/4 these will show up as the poles of all
propagators GL, GT or GLT since these sectors are just
mixed. In Fig. 18 a,b) we plot the spectral function for a
representative angle η = 3π/16 and for the special angle
η = π/4.

It is helpful to consider what these spectra look like at
long wavelength. To lowest order in q (and real frequency
ω) we ﬁnd the dispersion relations

ω1 = Ω +

(cid:114)

(c2

T + cos2 η c2
2Ω

(cid:113)

d + (cid:96)2Ω2)q2

+ O(q4),

(270)

ω2,3 = cLq

1

2 ± 1

2

cos2 2η + ν2 sin2 2η + O(q3). (271)

d + c2

(cid:112)c2

The ω1 mode is obviously associated with the ‘mas-
sive shear photon’ showing up in the transverse response
at the end points (η = 0, π/2), which is just evolving
smoothly with varying η, changing only its velocity from
T at η = 0 to the pure shear velocity cT at
η = π/2. Similarly, the ω2 mode (plus sign) is the contin-
uation of the massless longitudinal mode that we found
for η = 0, π/2.
Its velocity is changing smoothly from
cL at η = 0 to cK at η = π/4 back to cL at η = π/2
as we already anticipated in the above (see Fig. 19). As
expected, these two modes can be smoothly interpolated
between the two η end points, but the remaining the
third mode ω3 (minus sign) is the most interesting one:
for η = 0 this is the quadratic undulation mode, while it
apparently disappears from the η = π/2 spectrum. What
is going on here?

The key to understanding is the ‘right in the middle’
η = π/4 propagation direction. We already observed that

0π8π43π8π20cTcLcKηcLTSec. V. In order to keep the mathematics simple, we just
described in this section a smectic characterized by max-
imal spatial isotropy: it is the ‘smectic precursor to the
hexatic order’. It behaves very diﬀerently from the ‘uni-
axial smectic’ of conventional soft matter physics, which
is no wonder because symmetrywise they are at opposite
sides of the spectrum. Presently, the full order parame-
ter theory of superﬂuid smectic order yielding symmetry-
based predictions for the spectrum of Goldstone modes
is an open problem that remains as a challenge.

We have not yet pinned down precisely what happens
to the ‘transverse-like’ massless mode ω3 at arbitrary
angles η. To recall, we found at η = 0 the quadratic
undulation mode, it disappears completely at η = π/2,
but it reappears as a full-ﬂedged transverse phonon at
η = π/4. How to smoothly interpolate between these dif-
ferent cases? The answer can be read oﬀ from Eq. (271):
for any η (cid:54)= 0, π/2 this transverse-like mode acquires a ﬁ-
nite velocity c∗
T(η) that depends on the observation angle
η, see Figs. 19 and 18. In fact, expanding the dispersion
relation of the transverse-like pole for both small q and
small η, and (cid:96) = 0, the lowest order terms read

(cid:115)

1 −(cid:112)

ω3 = cTq

cos2 2η + ν2 sin2 2η

1 − ν

+

c2
d

Ω2 q2 + ···

(272)

For small but ﬁnite η this gives the linear dispersion
Eq. (271) to lowest order in q, but for η = 0 it gives the
quadratic dispersion Eq. (268) of the undulation mode.
For η > 0 the transverse oscillation picks up the rem-
nant shear rigidity of the isotropic smectic that reaches
its maximum at η = π/4. Increasing η further this veloc-
ity goes down again to vanish again precisely at η = π/2.
But according to Eq. 259) and Fig. 17a) this mode has
completely disappeared from the spectrum! The reason
for this can be deduced from the propagators, by zooming
in on the limit η → π/2. The would-be transverse pole is
canceled by an identical term in the numerator exactly
at η = π/2. For η < π/2 this cancellation is incomplete,
such that a massless pole emerges with diminishing ve-
locity as η → π/2. The physical interpretation is in fact
obvious. The transverse-like velocity c∗
Eq. (78)) where ρ is the mass density which of course is
constant, while µ∗(η) is an eﬀective shear modulus asso-
ciated with the transverse mode propagating at the angle
η. This eﬀective modulus vanishes precisely at π/2: the
system can no longer propagate shear stresses and there-
fore there is no longer a corresponding Goldstone boson!
Diﬀerent from the liquid direction η = 0 also the curva-
ture rigidity that is responsible for the undulation mode
does not act when the system is transversely oscillates
in the solid direction and therefore there is no longer a
propagating massless mode at all!
Finally, we can investigate the three poles at high mo-
menta q (cid:29) 1/λd. Here we ﬁnd that the three modes
acquire a linear dispersion with velocities cL, cT and
cos η cd respectively. When cos η cd < cT, there is a mode

T =(cid:112)µ∗(η)/ρ (cf.

70

coupling between the massive and the massless mode,
such that the massive mode extrapolates continuously to
the transverse phonon, which amongst others accounts
for the behavior we encountered for η = π/2. As was the
case for the quantum nematic, the spectral weight of the
pole with velocity cos η cd vanishes in the limit qλd → ∞,
such that we recover the response of the crystalline solid
with longitudinal and transverse phonons only.

We have reached the end of this exhibition of the amaz-
ingly rich landscape formed by the elastic properties of
the isotropic quantum smectics. But this not yet the
end of the whole story; besides its solidlike properties
highlighted in this section this quantum smectic is also
a superﬂuid of a quite unusual kind. A convenient way
to address the natureof this superﬂuidity is to couple in
electromagnetic charge to ﬁnd out how it behaves as a
superconductor when it is interrogated by external elec-
tromagnetic ﬁelds. This is the subject of the next two
sections.

X. ELASTICITY AND ELECTROMAGNETISM:

THE FORMALISM

Up to this point we have focused on electrically neu-
tral matter. To complete the story, in this section we
will discuss charged matter, coupling elasticity to elec-
tromagnetic ﬁelds. In part this is done for practical rea-
sons: extracting information from the quantum elasticity
that is in principle experimentally available, as to be dis-
cussed in Sec. XI. For quantum elasticity, we need forms
of matter that are highly quantal, capable of avoiding full
crystallization at zero temperature. In earthly laborato-
ries the only form of neutral matter that is available is
formed out of atoms. There is hope that the cold-atom
community might eventually get so much control that
they can access the regime required to form the kind of
quantum liquid crystals that are the subject of this re-
view. On the other hand, the questions that formed the
initial motivation for the subject of this review arose in
the ﬁeld of strongly-interacting electrons in solids. As we
highlighted in the introduction, could it be that the su-
perconductors in underdoped cuprates are characterized
by very strong solid-like (“stripy”) correlations, which are
also behind the nematic properties that appear to have
been observed? If this is the case, how to measure this in
the laboratory? In practice, the only way to interrogate
electrons is by exploiting the fact that they interact with
external electromagnetic ﬁelds. We have therefore to ﬁnd
out how the physics discussed up to this point imprints
on the electromagnetic response. In fact, it will become
clear that the ‘ﬂuctuating solid order’ will give rise to
unambiguous ﬁngerprints in speciﬁc electromagnetic re-
sponses, which are however not so easy to measure.

There is also a good theoretical reason to consider the
charged versions of quantum nematics and smectics. As
we found out in the previous sections, the ‘liquid’ as-
pect of the quantum liquid crystals we are dealing with

refers to superﬂuidity. To interrogate the nature of this
superﬂuidity it is just very convenient to couple in elec-
tromagnetic ﬁelds, turning them into superconductors,
and study the electromagnetic responses which directly
reﬂect the speciﬁc rigidities associated with their super-
ﬂuid side. It will turn out that the marriage between our
‘generalized elasticity’ and electromagnetism is a quite
happy one. We will demonstrate that the whole portfolio
of electromagnetic responses such as optical conductivi-
ties, dielectric functions, polariton spectra and the Meiss-
ner eﬀect involve rather eﬀortless computations resting
on the ground work we have laid out in the previous sec-
tions.

In this section we will just derive the equations gov-
erning the electromagnetic response of the solid and the
quantum nematic/smectic, analyzing them in further de-
tail in the next section.
In fact, the only hurdle that
amusingly takes some eﬀort is to ﬁnd out how to deal
with the electromagnetism of charged ‘bosonic Wigner
crystals’, in the ﬁeld theoretical formulation of elasticity
we have used throughout this review. It should be em-
phasized that we consider strictly 2+1 dimensions where
not only the matter but also the EM ﬁelds are conﬁned to
the plane. We avoid in this way the unnecessary compli-
cations that one is facing dealing with the laboratory two-
dimensional systems such as graphene where the 2+1D
matter interacts with 3+1D EM ﬁelds.

The study of charged elastic systems is of course a
rather classic subject [126] but it appeared that in the
early stages of the current research program the wheel
had to be reinvented. Ref. [12] introduced the formalism
that incorporates electromagnetism with the stress-gauge
ﬁeld formulation of elasticity. We will review this here,
climaxing in a highly economical — and to a degree sur-
prising — description of the electrodynamics of Wigner
crystals in the stress-photon description. The key is that
the stress photons (dual to the phonons) are the natural
partners of the electromagnetic photons and the theory
becomes much more transparent than in the conventional
formulations that keep the matter on the strain side of
the stress–strain duality. We derive the eﬀective action
governing the electromagnetism by integrating out the
stress photons, which is then rather eﬀortlessly lifted to
the description of the quantum nematic and quantum
smectic states by just augmenting the crystal with the
dislocation condensates.

A. Preliminaries: electromagnetic ﬁelds and

crystals

Let us ﬁrst ﬁnd out how to incorporate Maxwell theory
in the theory of elasticity. This is straightforward but we
have to pay some care dealing with the non-relativistic
nature of the crystal, as well as the theory 2+1D electro-
magnetism in the Euclidean signature.

Let us depart from standard Maxwell theory in real
time t, with its the electric ﬁeld Em and magnetic ﬁeld

B,

Em = −∂mV − ∂tAm,

B = mn∂mAn,

(273)

71

in terms of the scalar potential V and vector potential
Am. In two space dimensions the Maxwell action is,
SMaxw =
m − B2) − V ρQ + Amjm
E2

d2x dt

(cid:21)

(cid:90)
(cid:90)

(cid:20) 1
(cid:20)

( 1
c2
l

2µ0
− 1
4µ0

(cid:21)

=

d2x dt

FµνF µν + Aµjµ

,

(274)

where ρQ is the charge density, jm the electric current
density, µ0 is the magnetic constant and cl is the speed
of light. We will also use the dielectric constant ε0 =
1/µ0c2
l . Furthermore, we have deﬁned the three-potential
Aµ = ( 1
V, Am), the three-current jµ = (clρ, jm) and the
cl
Maxwell tensor Fµν = ∂l
νAµ, where the three-
derivative is ∂l
∂t, ∂m) . We use the mostly-plus
Minkowski metric ηµν = diag(−1, +1, +1) throughout.
In two spatial dimensions, the units of the electromag-
netic constants diﬀer from 3D as µ0 ≡ µ3D
0 /[length] with
units [µ0] = J s2
C2 m2 . The dielectric constant changes to
ε0 ≡ [length]ε3D
0 with units [ε0] = C2
J .

µAν − ∂l

µ = ( 1
cl

To avoid potential confusion, let us pay some care to
the Wick rotation to imaginary time. We use τ = it
such that ∂τ = −i∂t; all covariant tensors with temporal
components undergo this coordinate transformation. It
is useful to keep track of this deﬁning for instance V ı =
Q = −iρQ (see appendix B).
−iV , Eı
This results in the Euclidean Maxwell action SE, where
we shall always use covariant (lower) indices referring to
spacetime directions, while upper indices will be reserved
for the Burgers ﬂavors:

m = −iEm and ρı

(cid:90)

(cid:20) 1

SE,Maxw =

(cid:90)

=

dτ d2x

dτ d2x

(cid:20) 1

( 1
c2
l

2µ0

F ı
µνF ı

µν − Aı,l
4µ0
m + B2) − V ıρı
Eı2

µ jı,l
µ
Q − Amjm

(cid:21)

.

(cid:21)

The deﬁnition of the electric current follows immediately,

jı
µ = (ρı

Q, jm) = − ∂SE

∂Aµ

.

(276)

(275)

A new, and crucially important ingredient is that we are
now dealing with two velocity scales that are very diﬀer-
ent. Besides the light velocity cl introduced above for the
Maxwell action, the material system is characterized by
the phonon velocity that we take as before in units of the
shear velocity cT. We will compute matters in terms of
the phonon velocity such that ∂t = 1
∂τ , and this forces
cT
us to rescale the velocity factors in the electrodynamics
in the following way (in contrast to the quantities with
the label l above),

cT

t = − 1
Aı
V ı,
t = −cTρı,
jı
Eı
m = cT(∂mAı

t − ∂tAm),

µ = (− 1
Aı
V ı, Am),
µ = (−cTρı, jm),
jı

cT

(277)

(278)

(279)

(cid:90)

and the Maxwell action becomes,

SE,Maxw =

dτ d2x

1
2µ0

(cid:16) c2
+ (mnk∂nAk)2(cid:17) − Aı

t − ∂tAm)2

(∂mAı

T
c2
l

µjı
µ.
(280)

Having set the various deﬁnitions, let us now spell out,
following Ref. [12], how the electromagnetic ﬁelds cou-
ple to the strain ﬁelds of the elastic solid of Sec. III C.
The standard (real time) action of a system of N non-
relativistic microscopic particles of charge e∗ with trajec-
tories Ri(t) in an external potential Aµ(x) without any
retardation eﬀects is [127]:

(cid:110)−e∗V(cid:0)Ri(t)(cid:1)+e∗(cid:0)∂tRi(t)(cid:1)·A(cid:0)R(t)(cid:1)(cid:111)

.

SEM =

dt

(cid:90)

N(cid:88)

i

(281)
In elasticity, we consider a macroscopic state of such
particles forming a periodic lattice with ﬂuctuations:
Ri(t) (cid:39) R(x, t) = R0(x) + u(x, t), where R0 are the
equilibrium positions that do not vary in time and u(x, t)
are small displacements; as in Sec. III C we have taken
the continuum limit with x denoting the spatial coordi-
nates. The continuum version follows immediately from
Eq. (281)

SEM = ne∗(cid:90)

(cid:110) − V(cid:0)R(x, t)(cid:1)
+(cid:0)∂tu(x, t)(cid:1) · A(cid:0)R(x, t)(cid:1)(cid:111)

dt dDx

,

(282)
where n = N/V is the particle density and V the volume
of the system. We now exploit the fact that the displace-
ments u are small compared to the lattice and we can
Taylor-expand V (R0+u) = V (R0)+u·∇V (R0)+O(u2),
keeping only the term linear in u. After a partial inte-
gration,

SEM = ne∗(cid:90)
Comparing this with the coupling term(cid:82) −V ρQ + Amjm

(cid:110)
V (∇ · u) +(cid:0)∂tu(cid:1) · A

dt dDx

(cid:111)

(283)

.

from Eq. (274), we identify the deformation charge den-
sity and current as ρQ = −ne∗∇ · u and j = ne∗∂tu,
according to expectation.
S = iSE, V = −icTAı
Euclidean action becomes
SE,EM = −ine∗cT

Upon performing the Wick rotation to imaginary time,
jı
t, ∂t = icT∂t, the

t(∇ · u) +(cid:0)∂tu(cid:1) · A

(cid:110) − Aı

t, ρQ = − i

dτ dDx

(cid:111)

(cid:90)

cT

dτ dDx jı

µAµ,

(284)

(cid:90)

= −

with

t = −ine∗cT∇ · u,
jı

j = +ine∗cT∂tu.

(285)

72

The coupling of elasticity to electromagnetism is com-
pletely captured by Eq. (284), where we just rested on
the physical EM law (281) and the fact that the displace-
ment ﬁelds are small (the governing principle of contin-
uum elasticity).

The total theory is deﬁned by adding the coupling
Eq. (284) to the Maxwell action Eq. (280) and the strain
action Eq. (66) of elasticity. It will turn out to be conve-
nient to deﬁne [12]

Aa
µ = ne∗cT(δµaAı

t − δµtAı
a),

and the action Eq. (284) reduces to the form

SE,EM =

dτ dDx iAa

µ∂µua

(cid:90)

(286)

(287)

explicitly featuring the strains ∂µua. Finally, notice that
there is a natural relation between the gauge invariance
of the electromagnetic potentials and the glide principle.
The conservation law for the deformation current ∂µjµ =
0 is tied to the gauge invariance of the electromagnetic
ﬁeld Aµ → Aµ + ∂µε. Using Eq. (285) and the deﬁnition
µ = µνλ∂ν∂λua, it
of the dislocation current Eq. (91) J a
follows immediately that ∂µjµ = 0 is coincident with the
glide constraint baJ a
b = 0. Therefore, gauge invariance
of the electromagnetic ﬁeld must imply the validity of
the glide constraint. Given that the glide constraint is
a consequence of the conservation of particle number, it
has to be reﬂected in the conservation of electric charge
that is responsible for the U (1) gauge symmetries of Aµ.

B. Stress–strain duality and electromagnetism

The photons of electromagnetism encode of the capac-
ity of the fundamental vacuum to propagate electromag-
netic forces. In the previous sections we learned to ap-
preciate that it is quite convenient to treat elastic media
in a very similar way, in terms of the stress photons that
reveal the capacity of the elastic medium to propagate
elastic forces. To describe the charged crystal one could
of course stick the more familiar strain side of the stress–
strain duality, to depart from Eq. (285) and compute the
way that electromagnetism modiﬁes the elasticity. How-
ever, since EM photons and stress photons are close sib-
lings a much more convenient and transparent formalism
is obtained in the dual stress language. To the best of
our knowledge this formalism was discovered for the ﬁrst
time in Ref. [12]. Even for the simple Wigner crystal it
reveals surprising features, such as that the “crystal is on
the verge of becoming a superconductor”.

The plan is easy: starting with the coupling Eq. (287)
between strains and electromagnetic potentials we have
just to ‘carry the photon ﬁeld through the stress-strain
duality transformation’ following the steps in Sec. VI A.
Adding the coupling Eq. (287) to the elasticity action of
the solid Eq. (66) gives,
L =

∂µuaCµνab∂νub + iAa

µν. (288)

µ∂µua +

F ı
µνF ı

1
4µ0

1
2

Here ∂µ = ( 1
∂τ , ∂m) = (∂t, ∂m). This leads to a modi-
cT
ﬁcation in the canonical momenta and the stress tensor
becomes,

t = −i
σa
m = −i
σa

∂S

∂(∂tua)

∂S

∂(∂mua)

= −iµ∂tua + Aa
t ,
= −iCmnab∂nub + Aa
m.

(289)

(290)

µ into a gauge covariant object,
µ follow from those

This deﬁnition turns σa
while the gauge transformations of σa
of Eq. (286).
Using the spin-projectors Eqs. (59)–(61), in addition to
the temporal component Aa
a, we ﬁnd that
only the spin-0 components of strains are inﬂuenced by
the electromagnetic ﬁeld,

t = −ne∗cTAı

m = ne∗cTδmaAı
t,

mnabAb
P (0)
mnabAb
P (1)
mnabAb
P (2)

n = Aa
n = 0,

n = 0.

(291)

(292)

(293)

Using Eq. (144) from the inverse elastic tensor, the in-
verse relations are:

(σa
∂tua = i
∂mua = iC−1

t − Aa
1
t ),
µ
m − Aa
mnab(σa

m).

(294)

(295)

We can now repeat the derivation of the dual Lagrangian
from Sec. VI A with the outcome,
mnabAb
mC−1
t Aa
σa

µC−1
2 σa
− σa

ν + 1
mnabAb

Ldual = 1

(Aa
t )2

t + iσa

µ∂µua

n + 1
2

1
µ

µνabσb
mC−1
1
4µ0

+

F ı
µνF ı

2Aa
n − 1
µ
µν + Lconstraints.

(296)

The glide and Ehrenfest constraints are left here implicit
and they are treated as in the charge-neutral case. This
is a very elementary result that appears to be missing
it is just the action describing the
from the textbooks:
charged crystal in terms of the stress tensors σa
µ and the
electromagnetic ﬁeld Aµ.
foremost a Meissner-like
term LMeissner quadratic in photon ﬁelds that has
emerged in terms of the dressed potentials Aa
µ. This has
the explicit form

It has surprising features,

LMeissner = 1

2Aa

mnabAb
mC−1
Aa
1
mP 0
Dκ

2 (ne∗cT)2(cid:0) 1
(cid:0)(Aı

2 ε0ω2

p

= 1
2

= 1

= 1

n + 1
2
mnabAb

n + 1
2

1
µ

(Aa
t )2
(Aa
t )2

t)2(cid:1)

1
µ
1
κ

t)2(cid:1).

(Aı

a)2 +

(Aı

µ
a)2 + c2

T
c2
K

(Aı

73

Here we used c2
plasmon frequency via

T = µ/ρ and c2

K = κ/ρ, and deﬁned the

ω2

p =

(ne∗)2
ρε0

ne∗2
m∗ε0

.

=

(298)

Here the mass density is given by ρ = m∗n where m∗
is the mass of the charge carriers; recalling that in two
dimensions [ε0] = C2/J, the plasmon frequency ωp has
units of 1/s as expected, while the plasmon energy is ωp.
Since we are dealing with 2+1D charged matter cou-
pled to 2+1D electromagnetism, we anticipate that a
plasmon frequency ωp has to be around. According to
textbook wisdom, regardless whether one is dealing with
a classical plasma, a degenerate electron gas or a charged
crystal which is not pinned, the longitudinal oscillations
should acquire the plasmon energy at small momentum.
We will ﬁnd that the longitudinal phonon of the neu-
tral crystal acquires indeed a plasmon mass in Sec. XI C.
However, at ﬁrst sight it appears that the term Eq. (297)
also ‘gives mass’ to the transverse electromagnetic ﬁelds:
if this would be the whole story the charged crystal
should also be a superconductor! Of course this is not
the case and we shall see that upon integrating out the
massless shear photons/transverse phonons a countert-
erm is produced that precisely cancels this electromag-
netic Higgs mass. We already emphasized the dual way
of understanding the superﬂuidity of the quantum liq-
uid crystals, in terms of the principle that a “bosonic
solid that loses its shear rigidity turns automatically in a
superﬂuid”. This becomes elegantly exposed in the pres-
ence of the EM ﬁelds:
in our liquids the shear photons
acquire a mass and upon integrating them out the coun-
terterms no longer cancel the ‘Higgs mass lying in hide’ of
the crystal, with the outcome that the liquid crystals do
expel magnetic ﬁelds. This is precisely the Meissner eﬀect
and it leaves no doubt that the quantum liquid crystals
are electromagnetic superconductors as well. These have
in turn peculiar superconducting properties that will be
the subject of Sec. XI D.

As before the smooth part of ua in the Lagrangian
Eq. (296) can be integrated out, leaving the constraint
∂µσa
µ = 0. The stress ﬁelds however now contain a con-
tribution from the electromagnetic ﬁeld via Eqs. (289)–
(290). We introduce the symbol σ for the stress origi-
nating only in elastic and not electromagnetic degrees of
freedom,

σa
t = σa

t + Aa
t ,

σa
m = σa

m + Aa
m,

Using Eq. (279) we ﬁnd the conservation laws,

∂µσa
∂µσa

µ = 0
µ = −∂tAa
= ne∗cT(∂tAa − ∂aAı

t − ∂mAa

m

t) = −ne∗Eı
a,

(299)

(300)

(301)

(297)

Elastic stress is no longer conserved by itself for the sim-
ple reason that the electromagnetic ﬁelds exert forces on
the system: Eq. (299) expresses the total stress that is

conserved while the purely elastic stress σa
µ is sourced by
the external EM ﬁeld. Since the conservation law applies
the total stress, it is this quantity that relates to the dual
stress gauge ﬁeld ba

µ imposing stress conservation,
σa
µ = µνλ∂νba
λ,
λ − Aa
σa
µ = µνλ∂νba
µ.

(302)

(303)

These stress gauge ﬁelds ba
µ are no longer EM gauge-
invariant objects. We already observed that this relates
to the glide constraint. Tracking the deﬁnitions it follows
that the gauge transformation Aµ → Aµ + ∂µε is repre-
sented as ba
µ + taµε, which coincides with the form
of the dual gauge ﬁeld Lagrange multiplier enforcing the
glide constraint.

µ → ba

C. Photons versus stress photons

We want to know how external electromagnetic ﬁelds
‘pull’ on the elastic media. Therefore we expand the in-
teraction terms in Eq. (296) in terms of the stress gauge
ﬁelds Eq. (302) which impose the conservation of the to-
tal stress,
Lint = −σa

mnabAb

2κ

mC−1
= − ne∗cT
= − ne∗cT
2κ
ne∗cT
2κ

=

i

n − 1
t Aa
σa
µ
ne∗cT

t

µ

t +

aAı
σa
(−i

σa
t Aa
T − pbT†
bL†
ne∗cT
2κ

ωn
+1)Aı
t +
cT
p bT†
bL†
T Aı
t +
− ne∗cT
T AL − ne∗cT
q bL†

ωn
cT

+1Aı
t
qbT†

µ

T AT.

(304)

µ

(cid:113) 1

c2
T

ω2

t + i ωn
cT

t couples to σa

+1 = −qba

Here we transformed directly to momentum space in
ba
the third line, using pba
L, where
n + q2. As usual, the dagger symbol denotes
p =
A†(p) = A(−p) . Notice once again that the scalar po-
tential Aı
a, which is precisely compression
stress: a volume change leads to an increase or decrease
of the charge density.
We use the above Lint, specializing as usual to the
isotropic form of the elastic tensor C−1
mnab, as the deﬁning
relation for how external EM ﬁelds couple to dual stress
ﬁelds. With the dual formulation of elasticity coupled to
electromagnetism, we shall now compute the electromag-
netic properties of elastic media in the crystal, nematic
and smectic phases. The electromagnetic response of the
medium LEM
stress consists of a ‘diamagnetic’ contribution
LMeissner from Eq. (297) and a ‘paramagnetic’ contribu-
tion Lpara that follows from integrating out the stress
gauge ﬁelds, which we now shall calculate. Surely also
the bare Maxwell term must be added:
LEM
eﬀ = LMaxw + LEM

stress = LMaxw + LMeissner + Lpara.
(305)

ne∗cT

µ

(−qba†

T )Aa

ba†
µ ga

µνAı

ν =

74
To determine Lpara we have to integrate out the elastic
stress ﬁelds. The general form of the stress part of the
Lagrangian is L = 1
ν and the dual gauge in-
teraction (304) is of the form Lint = ba†
µ ga
µνAı
µνba
ν,
where ga
µν are momentum-dependent coeﬃcients, with
the Hermitian conjugate (g†)a
νµ)∗. Deﬁne the
matrix G via (G−1)ab
νκ = δacδµκ. We are now in the
position to integrate out the stress gauge ﬁelds, ﬁnding
out how these dress the EM contributions,

µ(G−1)ab

µν = (ga

ν +Aı†

µ g†a

µνGbc

µνbb

2 ba

Lpara = 1
2 ba†
µ (G−1)ab
µνbb
= − 1
2 Aı†
νκgb
µνGab

µ ga†

2 ba†
µ ga
ν + 1
κλAı
λ

µνAı

ν + 1

2 Aı†

µ g†a

µνba
ν
(306)

Collecting the indices a, µ pertaining to the stress gauge
ﬁeld in a four-vector, and the index ν pertaining to the
EM gauge ﬁeld in a three-vector, the couplings ga
µν are,

ωn,

gL
Tt = i

ne∗
2κ
TL = − ne∗

gL

µ

cTq,

cTp,

gT
+1t =

ne∗
2κ
TT = − ne∗

gT

µ

cTq,

(307)

while all other components vanish. The coupling terms
can be written as,

†



bT

+1
bL
T
bL
+1
bT
T



ne∗

1
2κ cTp
2κ ωn − 1
i 1
0
0

0
µ cTq
0
0

0
0
0
− 1
µ cTq



 .

 Aı

t
AL
AT

(308)
The recipe for calculating the total eﬀective electro-
magnetic response of an elastic state of matter is: (a)
compute the inverse stress propagator G−1 in terms of
the dual gauge ﬁelds, (b) invert the propagator matrix
to ﬁnd G, (c) insert it in Eq. (306) to ﬁnd the ‘paramag-
netic’ contribution Lpara, and (d) add this result to the
‘diamagnetic’ contribution LMeissner from Eq. (297), that
arises in the duality construction, and the bare Maxwell
term to obtain the total Lagrangian LEM
eﬀ from Eq. (305).
Since everything is quadratic in the stress ﬁelds, inte-
grating them out is equivalent to substituting their on-
shell equations of motion, meaning that there is much one
can infer directly regarding LEM
eﬀ . For example, we no-
ticed already that Aı
t couples to compression stress, and
therefore the term ∼ Aı†
t Aı
t is proportional to the com-
pression correlator (cid:104)σa
b(cid:105). In fact, we can see directly
aσb
from Eq. (288) that

t

δ
δAı
t

1
Z[0]

δ
δAı†

Z = (ne∗cT)2(cid:104)∂aua∂bub(cid:105) = (ne∗cT)2GL,
(309)
where we have used the Coulomb gauge AL = 0. Since in
this gauge ﬁx Eı
t, the longitudinal electric ﬁeld
directly measures compression response. We will see this
conﬁrmed below.

L = cTqAı

D. The eﬀective electromagnetic actions

gradient elasticity),

75

The ground work is completed and in this subsection
we will compute the eﬀective actions governing the elec-
tromagnetism of the charged solid, quantum nematic and
quantum smectic. This is now a straightforward aﬀair,
amounting to integrating out the stress-gauge ﬁelds ba
µ
as developed for the neutral case, relying on the coupling
between the EM photons and stress photons as intro-
duced in the previous section. The template is set by
the computation for the solid, and in order to determine
the eﬀective actions for the quantum liquid crystals one
just has to add the Higgs terms of the appropriate dual
stress superconductors Eqs. (229) resp. (254). This is
just a technical aﬀair — what matters are the results
Eqs. (315), (323), (324) for the eﬀective electromagnetic
theories in the Coulomb gauge for respectively the solid,
nematic and smectic that will be analyzed in detail in
the next subsections.

1. Charged isotropic crystal

For the isotropic solid, or rather a Wigner crystal in the
charged case, the inverse propagator is (ignoring second-

LXtal = 1

ba
µ =

G−1
Xtal =

1
8µ

(cid:16)
µ (G−1
2 ba†
bT
+1 bL

Xtal)ab

µνbb
ν,

+1 bT
T

T bL
1+ν p2

2

−i 2ν
1+ν
0

ωnp
cT



0

(cid:17)T

,

ωnp
cT
+ 4q2

i 2ν
1+ν
ω2
2
n
c2
T
0

1+ν

0

0

0
p2
i ωnp
cT

 .

0

0

−i ωnp
+ 4q2

cT

ω2
n
c2
T

(310)

The propagator is then

GXtal =

µ
p2

ω2

T+2(1+ν)q2
n/c2
n/c2
ω2
L+q2
iν ωnp/cT
L+q2

ω2

n/c2
0

−iν ωnp/cT
L+q2

ω2

n/c2
p2
n/c2
L+q2
0

ω2

0

0



 .

0

0

0

0
Tp2 −i ωn
ω2
n
c2
i ωn
cTp

cTp
1
(311)

Inserting this in Eq. (306) and using Eq. (308) yields,

 Aı

t
Aı
L
Aı
T

† c2

T
c2
K

ω2+c2
Tq2
n+c2
ω2
Lq2
−i ωncTq
n+c2
ω2
Lq2
0

i ωncTq
n+c2
ω2
Lq2
c2
Lq2
n+c2
0

Lq2

ω2

Lpara
Xtal = − 1

2 ε0ω2

p



 ,

 Aı

t
Aı
L
Aı
T

(312)

0

0
c2
Tq2
n+c2

ω2

Tq2

where we have used the deﬁnition of the plasmon fre-
quency Eq. (298), and 1−ν

.

1+ν = c2

T
c2
K

Taking the EM Coulomb gauge ∂mAı

L = 0,
we ﬁnd for the ‘paramagnetic’ contribution to the EM
action,
Lpara
Xtal = − 1

T|2(cid:17)
Tq2
c2
Tq2|Aı
n + c2
ω2

Tq2
Lq2 |Aı

ω2
n + c2
ω2 + c2

(cid:16) c2

t|2 +

2 ε0ω2

T
c2
K

p

.

m = −qAı

(313)

This must be added to the ‘diamagnetic’ contribution
Eq. (297) yielding the total stress contribution to the
EM Lagrangian,

LEM
Xtal = 1

2 ε0ω2

p

Tq2
c2
Lq2|Aı
n + c2
ω2

t|2 +

ω2
n
n + c2
ω2

T|2(cid:17)
Tq2|Aı

(314)

(cid:16)

To compute the full EM response, we must add the
Maxwell contribution Eq. (280) and this yields the eﬀec-
tive action which is the point of departure for the further
analysis of the electromagnetism of the charged crystals:

(cid:16)

(cid:16)

LEM
eﬀ,Xtal = 1

2 ε0

c2
Tq2 + ω2
p

Tq2
c2
n + c2
ω2

Lq2

+ 1

2 ε0

ω2
n + c2

l q2 + ω2
p

ω2
n
n + c2
ω2

Tq2

(cid:17)|Aı

t|2

(cid:17)|Aı

T|2.
(315)

.

2. Charged quantum nematic

This agrees with what one would obtain integrating out
directly the displacement ﬁelds ua and not invoking the
p = (n2e∗2)/ρ and compar-
duality mapping. Using ε0ω2
ing with Eq. (83) we see that the coeﬃcient of Aı†
t is
2 (ne∗cT)2GL, as expected from Eq. (309).

t Aı

1

Let us now turn to the quantum nematic – this follows
the same pattern as for the charged solid except that
we have now to account for the eﬀects of the dislocation
condensate. Given that this dislocation condensate plays
its part, we ﬁrst need to reintroduce the tilde-coordinates
which associated with the condensate velocity cd: ˜p =

(cid:113) 1

c2
d

ω2

n + q2, see Eq. (211),

ba
t =

cd
cT

˜ba
t ,

ba
+1 =

cd
cT

˜p
p

˜ba
+1,

T = ˜ba
ba
T.

(316)

The matrix Eq. (308) of photon-stress photon couplings
becomes

†





˜bT
+1
˜bL
T
˜bL
+1
˜bT
T



˜ba†
µ ˜ga

µνAı

ν =

ne∗

1
2κ cd ˜p
2κ ωn − 1
i

0
0

0
µ cTq
0
0

0
0
0
− 1
µ cTq



 ,

 Aı

t
Aı
L
Aı
T

(317)

while the paramagnetic contribution to the eﬀective EM
action becomes,

76

Lpara
nem =

µ ( ˜G−1
˜ba†
1
2
= − 1
2 Aı†
µ ˜ga†

˜bb
nem)ab
ν + 1
µν
2
µν( ˜Gnem)ab
νκ˜gb

˜ba†
µ ˜ga
κλAı
λ.

µνAı

ν + 1

2 Aı†

µ ˜g†a

µν

˜ba
ν

(318)

To evaluate this contribution, we need the speciﬁcs of
the stress gauge ﬁelds of the neutral quantum nematic
encoded in the inverse propagator ˜G−1
nem. This was dis-
cussed in Sec. VIII:



(cid:104)

˜G−1
nem = 1
2

1
4µ

2

1+ν

−i 2ν

˜p2

c2
d
c2
T
ωncd ˜p

c2
T

1+ν
0

ωncd ˜p

c2
T
+ 4q2

i 2ν
1+ν
ω2
2
n
c2
T
0

1+ν

0

0

 +

2Ω2
c2
T



c2
d ˜p2
n+c2

ω2

dp2
−i ωncd ˜p
n+c2
ω2
dp2
0
0



ω2

i ωncd ˜p
n+c2
ω2
ω2
n
n+c2
0
0

dp2 0 0
dp2 0 0
1 0
0 1

(cid:105)

(319)

0

0

0

0
˜p2 −i cdωn ˜p
c2
d
c2
T
i cdωn ˜p
+ 4q2

c2
T

ω2
n
c2
T

c2
T

which has to be inverted to obtain the propagator matrix ˜Gnem. The components entering the electromagnetic eﬀective
action are Eqs. (230), (231) in Sec. VIII A,

( ˜Gnem)LL

TT =

( ˜Gnem)TT

TT =

µ
q2
µ
q2

n + c2
Lq2(ω2
c2
n + c2
n + c2
Lq2)(ω2
Tq2(ω2
c2
n + c2
Tq2)(ω2

n + c2

Kq2
Rq2) + Ω2c2
n + c2
Rq2) + Ω2(ω2
n + c2
dq2) + Ω2(ω2

n + c2

dq2)

(ω2

(ω2

Kq2)

Rq2)

,

,

(320)

while the cross-terms are zero. The full matrix ( ˜Gnem)ab
term Eq. (297) we ﬁnd,

µν is substituted in Eq. (318) and adding the ‘diamagnetic’

† c2

 Aı

t
Aı
L
Aı
T

Tq2g−1
iωncTqg−1

b

b

0

−iωncTqg−1

b

ng−1
ω2
0

b

LEM
nem = 1

2 ε0ω2

p

g−1
b =

(ω2
Lq2)(ω2

n + c2
n + c2

Rq2 + Ω2)
Rq2) + Ω2(ω2

(ω2

n + c2

n + c2

Kq2)



 ,

 Aı

t
Aı
L
Aı
T

0
0

ω2
n+c2

n(ω2
n+c2
Tq2)(ω2

dq2)+Ω2(ω2
n+c2

n+c2
dq2)+Ω2(ω2

Rq2)
n+c2

(ω2

Rq2)

.

(321)

(322)

(323)

We add this to the the Maxwell term Eq. (280) and upon taking the electromagnetic Coulomb gauge qAL = 0, we
obtain the ﬁnal result, the eﬀective EM Lagrangian of the nematic:

LEM
eﬀ,nem = 1

2 ε0

c2
Tq2 + ω2
p

c2
Tq2(ω2

n + c2

(ω2

n + c2

Lq2)(ω2

n + c2

+ 1

2 ε0

ω2
n + c2

l q2 + ω2
p

n + c2
ω2
n(ω2
n + c2
Tq2)(ω2

(ω2

Rq2 + Ω2)
Rq2) + Ω2(ω2
dq2) + Ω2(ω2
n + c2

n + c2
n + c2
dq2) + Ω2(ω2

Kq2)
Rq2)
n + c2

Rq2)

(cid:17)|Aı

T|2.

(cid:17)|Aı

t|2

(cid:16)
(cid:16)

As a check, this expression reduces to the one we obtained
for the solid (315) upon taking the limit Ω → 0, as it
should.

3. Charged quantum smectic

The derivation for the quantum smectic just follows the
pattern of the quantum nematic, substituting instead of

the disorder ﬁeld Higgs term in Eq. (319) the smectic
version given by Eq. (254). While the computations are
straightforward, the expressions are long and tedious and
we just state the end result here. Recall that the smectic
is parametrized by the angle η between the liquid direc-
tion and the momentum or propagation direction of the

stress photons (Fig. 16), which are of course the same
as the momentum directions of the electromagnetic pho-
tons that probe the system. For arbitrary angle η the
stress contribution (that is added to the Maxwell action)
to the electromagnetic response is, in the electromagnetic
Coulomb gauge ∂mAm = −qAL = 0, given by

77

LEM
smec = 1
2

ω2
pD

(cid:104)

Tq2(cid:8)c2
(cid:8)c2

+ ω2
n

c2

D = c2

dp2

η(ω2

+ iωnc3
n + c2

η(ω2
η(ω2

n + c2
n + c2

dp2
Tq2) + Ω2(ω2
Lq2) + Ω2(ω2
dp2
Tq3Ω2 cos 2η sin 2η(Aı†
T Aı
Tq2)(ω2
Lq2) + Ω2(ω4

n + c2

t|2

Tq2 sin2 2η)(cid:9)|Aı

Tq2 sin2 2η)(cid:9)|Aı
n + c2
(cid:105)
Lq2 − c2
n + c2
t − Aı†
t Aı
,
T)
nc2
n + ω2

Lq2 + c2

Kq2c2

Tq2 sin2 2η)

T|2

(324)

(325)

η = 1
c2
d

Here we have used p2
ω2
n + cos2 η q2. Notice that
for angles that are not multiples of η = π/4 there are
now cross terms between At and AT. The ﬁnal answer
in terms of the eﬀective EM action of the smectic is then
given by adding the Maxwell term Eq. (280),

LEM
eﬀ,smec = LMaxw + LEM

smec

(326)

and will be analyzed further in the next section.

XI. ELECTROMAGNETIC OBSERVABLES OF

THE QUANTUM NEMATIC AND SMECTIC

The eﬀective electromagnetic actions for the solid
(315), quantum nematic
(323) and quantum smectic
(324) encode in full generality all the information of
these phases that can be retrieved using electromag-
netic means. As we already argued, this is the only
access experimentalists have to interrogate these sys-
tems.
It is now just a matter of extracting these ob-
servables using standard electromagnetic linear response
theory. The reader might already anticipate that a lot
more is going on in these ‘near-solids’ than in the usual
‘gaseous’ Drude metals. For the neutral systems we
learned about the existence of a plethora of propagating
elastic modes. Just by glancing at the eﬀective EM ac-
tions of the previous section, it is obvious that these have
left ﬁngerprints on the EM response that are measur-
able, at least in principle. The massless, long-wavelength
modes are universal, governed by symmetry principles
and they therefore do not convey direct information re-
garding the strength of the solid-like correlations in the
liquid-crystalline phases. This information is instead en-
coded by the massive modes that propagate at ﬁnite mo-
menta when the solid-like correlations are strong enough.
One way to obtain ﬁnite-frequency information is by in-
terrogating the system with light. Photons probe the
transverse response and the eﬀective actions indicate that

there is much going on in principle. Here we encounter a
frustrating practical limitation of electromagnetic exper-
iments in condensed matter: it is just the habit of non-
relativistic matter that the velocity of light cl is very large
compared to the material velocities (cT, cL, cd, . . .) and
therefore one can access only the small-momentum limit,
q → 0, in the laboratory. Due to universal, in essence hy-
drodynamical, reasons our “massive stress photons” lose
their spectral weights in this limit and there is just no way
to discriminate between the ultimate gaseous and solid-
like quantum liquids using only information extracted at
small momenta.

This is perhaps the most important take-home mes-
sage: it could well be that some correlated electron sys-
tems are quite solid-like but, for the practical reasons
we just explained, this information is hidden from the
experimentalist’s view. There is however a way to cir-
cumvent this: one can also probe the system using elec-
tron beams. These measure the dynamical, longitudinal
density response through the electron loss functions and
one can probe larger momenta, easily up to the recipro-
cal lattice factors. As we will show below, the massive
stress photons do leave characteristic ﬁngerprints on the
longitudinal responses and these are therefore the spec-
troscopy of choice to address the physics. Dealing with
real systems (say the cuprates) this requires machinery
with an energy resolution of the order of meV and mo-
menta of the order of inverse nanometers. Such machines
can be built and it appears that these are on the verge
of being operational [23]. We will further discuss this is
in Sec. XI D.

Besides these practical issues there is also the funda-
mental question: How does the electric charge alter the
nature of the solid, quantum nematic and smectic? The
highlight is the simple demonstration that the eﬀective
action of the nematic Eq. (323) contains the Meissner
eﬀect: this proves that it is a superconductor. How-
ever, there is more entertainment around such as our
ﬁnding that the genuine Wigner crystal
is character-

ized by a massless ‘polariton’ with a quadratic dispersion
(Sec XI C), while the electromagnetism of the quantum
smectic will turn out to be a dizzying aﬀair. We start out
with a short review of general electromagnetic response
theory.

A. Electromagnetic linear responses

Given an eﬀective electromagnetic action, it is easy to
compute the response of the medium to electromagnetic
ﬁelds by performing the Wick rotation ωn → iω − δ to
real time where δ is an inﬁnitesimal factor that is only im-
portant when taking imaginary parts of quantities. This
factor δ will be almost always suppressed to keep the no-
tation compact. In this section we will express all results
in real time and real frequency. Let us shortly recall
this, using the standard Drude metal as a reference to
textbook wisdoms [128, 129]. As a matter of principle
one has to distinguish the longitudinal and transverse re-
sponses, a division that we already wired in as much as
possible in our eﬀective actions Eqs.
(315), 323, (324).
From Eq. (273) and using appendix A and the deﬁnition
At = − 1
V , the longitudinal and transverse components
of the EM ﬁelds are given by

cT

EL(ω, q) = cTqAt(ω, q) − iωAL(ω, q),
ET(ω, q) = −iωAT(ω, q),
B(ω, q) = −qAT(ω, q).

(327)
(328)
(329)

The magnetic ﬁeld B(ω, q) and propagating photons are
purely transverse; AT is gauge invariant, whereas, un-
der gauge transformations ε, the longitudinal component
transforms AL → AL + qε and is not physical. There-
fore everything that is measured by propagating light is
in the transverse sector, while the static electric screen-
ing and the electron-loss-density spectra are exclusively
longitudinal and couple to the charge density.

Let us ﬁrst consider the transverse response. The nat-

ural point of departure is the photon propagator,

(cid:104)A

†
T(ω, q)AT(−ω,−q)(cid:105) =

1
ε0

1

ω2 − c2

l q2 − ΠT(ω, q)

(330)

where the transverse photon self-energy ΠT (polarization
propagator) contains all the information regarding the
charged medium. One notices that one can read oﬀ this
self-energy directly from our eﬀective actions Eqs. (315),
(323),(324), since the factors multiplying |AT(ω, q)|2 are
just the inverse of this propagator after Wick rotation to
real frequency.

The photon propagator can also be written in an equiv-

alent form,

(cid:104)A

†
T(ω, q)AT(−ω,−q)(cid:105) =

1

ˆεTT(ω, q)ω2 − q2/ˆµ(ω, q)

(331)

78

T/c2

deﬁning the transverse dielectric function ˆεTT(ω, q)
and magnetic permeability ˆµ(ω, q) of the medium.
We will use the approximation ˆµ(ω, q) = µ0(1 +
O(c2
l )). For instance, frequency dependent refrac-
tive index N (ω) is given by the usual formula N (ω)2 =
l limq→0 ˆεT T (ω, q)ˆµ(ω, q). From now on we always take
c2
ˆµ(ω, q) = µ0. The poles of the photon propagator de-
ﬁne the transverse modes of the combined matter–light
system while the pole strengths deﬁne the EM spectral
weight. The dispersion of the transverse modes is deter-
mined by solutions of

ω2 =

ε0

ˆεTT(ω, q)

c2
l q2.

(332)

In semiconductors these will reveal the ‘polaritons’ or
coupled photon-exciton modes. We emphasize yet again
that in general only the q → 0 limit is experimentally
accessible because of the mismatch between the light and
material velocities. We will see that the charged elastic
medium has here a surprise in store.

The quantity that is typically ﬁrst extracted from ex-
periment is the optical conductivity. In the appendix C,
its Kubo formula is carefully rederived when one is deal-
ing with the stress gauge ﬁelds. The quantity that is plot-
ted by the experimentalist is the real part ˆσ1(ω, q) of the
momentum- and frequency-dependent optical conductiv-
ity ˆσTT(ω, q) = ˆσT,1(ω, q) + iˆσT,2(ω, q), which is related
to the transverse dielectric function ˆεTT(ω, q) and to the
photon self-energy ΠT(ω, q) as

ˆσTT(ω, q) = −iω (ˆεTT(ω, q) − ε0)

= ε0

i
ω

ΠT(ω, q).

(333)

(334)

The conductivity tensor ˆσab is not to be confused with the
stress tensor σa
µ. We have identiﬁed the neutral nematic
phase, or the dual stress superconductor, as a true su-
perﬂuid of the constituent bosons that becomes a super-
conductor in the charged case. To reveal the supercon-
ducting state emerging from the unpinned Wigner crystal
with perfect conductivity, we analyze the behavior of the
magnetic ﬁelds in the phases. Given that B = −qAT,
the interest is in the the equation of motion for AT fol-
lowing from the eﬀective electromagnetic action. In any
conductor, the transverse ﬁelds ET and B decay expo-
nentially at high frequencies ω due to the skin eﬀect: the
oscillating EM ﬁeld induces a current which in turn in-
duces a magnetic ﬁeld opposing the external ﬁeld [130].
In some sense, the Meissner eﬀect is the extreme version
of this that even holds at ω = 0. We can capture both
these eﬀects by a slight generalization of textbook elec-
tromagnetism. The response of a medium (x ≥ 0) to
an outside (x < 0) plane wave of frequency ω, momen-
tum q = ω/cl and amplitude A0 is the general solution
(one-dimensional for simplicity)

AT(x, t) = A0e

−κ(ω,q) ω
cl

xein(ω,q) ω

cl

x−iωt.

(335)

Here N (ω, q) = n(ω, q) + iκ(ω, q) is the complex and
momentum-dependent refractive index. This quantity

is determined from Eqs. (331)–(332).
In our case
ˆµ(ω, q) ≈ µ0, and we shall use as a deﬁnition N (ω, q) =

(cid:112)ˆεTT(ω, q)/ε0. Clearly, if the imaginary part of the re-

fractive index κ is positive, the ﬁeld decays exponentially
with distance with length scale

λ(ω, q) =

cl

ωκ(ω, q)

.

(336)

This deﬁnes the penetration depth λ, also called skin
depth in the case of the skin eﬀect at ﬁnite ω.
It
is directly related to the photon propagator via N =

(cid:112)ˆεTT/ε0 and Eq. (334) as

λ(ω, q) =

ωIm

cl
1 − 1

ω2 ΠT

=

√
Im

c
ω2 − ΠT

.

(337)

(cid:113)

We will ﬁnd surprising behavior of the penetration depth
for both the quantum nematic and the quantum smectic.
Let us now turn to the longitudinal response. This
can only be measured through ‘material’ probes such as
electron beams, or by looking at the screening of static
electrical monopole sources in the system. The longitu-
dinal dielectric function ˆεLL(ω, q) is deﬁned through the
longitudinal electrical ﬁeld propagator,

(cid:104)EL(ω, q)EL(−ω,−q)(cid:105) = c2

†
t (ω, q)At(−ω,−q)(cid:105)

Tq2(cid:104)A
1

,

=

ˆεLL(ω, q)

(338)
where cTAt = −V is the scalar potential and we have
taken the Coulomb gauge ﬁx −qAL = 0. As before, the
longitudinal dielectric function can be simply read oﬀ
directly from the eﬀective actions Eq. (315,323,324).
In the static limit, this determines the Debye electri-
cal screening length lD = q−1
D via ˆεLL(ω = 0, qD) = 0.
In fact, using electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS),
this longitudinal dielectric function can be accessed over
a large kinematical range which is of primary physical
relevance. The quantity measured in transmission spec-
troscopy is the transmissive energy loss function fT(ω, q),
deﬁned as

fT(ω, q) = −Im

ε0

ˆεLL(ω, q)

,

(339)

while in reﬂection mode used in low-energy high-
resolution (HR) EELS, the the quantity measured is the
reﬂective energy loss function fR(ω, q), s

fR(ω, q) = −Im

1

1 + ˆεLL(ω, q)/ε0

.

(340)

We will focus in the remainder on the transmissive loss
function Eq. (339), since these both are determined es-
sentially just by ˆεLL. This should hold also for the longi-
tudinal charge response, that can be extracted from the
novel resonant inelastic X-ray scattering (RIXS) experi-
ments. Finally, notice that in the limit q → 0 the momen-
tum space directions L, T become degenerate, yielding
the identity ˆεLL(ω, q → 0) = ˆεTT(ω, q → 0) satisﬁed by
our results, see e.g. [131] (note that when also ω → 0, the
order of limits is important in the presence of long-range
order).

79

B. The Drude model and the charged viscous ﬂuid

We are done with our summary of the standard reper-
toire of electromagnetic response functions. Before we
turn to the EM response for our generalized elasticity, let
us ﬁrst ﬁll this in with the expectations for the ‘gaseous’
limit. Instead of the usual RPA treatment of the electron
gas, a more informative reference frame is given by a clas-
sical single-component plasma. This just corresponds to
a charged version of a dissipative hydrodynamical ﬂuid;
its electromagnetism has been studied in full detail only
recently [132] and we present here the simpliﬁed cartoon
version.

The transverse response of a classical ﬂuid is dissi-
pative; this is the regime of hydrodynamics. It follows
from general hydrodynamical principles that the trans-
verse photon self-energy have the form

ΠT(ω, q) = ω2
p

ω

ω + i(DTq2 + 1/τ )

.

(341)

where, as before, ωp is the plasmon frequency. This self-
energy implies that translation symmetry is broken, or
equivalently that the total momentum is no longer con-
served, as parametrized by a momentum relaxation time
τ . This parameter is equivalent to the phenomenolog-
ical scattering time in Drude theory [80].
In addition,
the ﬂuid is viscous, and this is parametrized in terms of
the transverse momentum diﬀusion constant DT, which
is set by the shear viscosity ηshear and mass density ρ of
the ﬂuid,

DT =

ηshear

ρ

.

(342)

Obviously the transverse self-energy is characterized by
a purely dissipative pole. In the small momentum limit,
assuming τ is ﬁnite, this reduces to the familiar Drude
results

ˆεTT(q → 0, ω) = ε0

(cid:0)1 − ω2

p
ω2

(cid:1),

1

1 + i/(ωτ )

ˆσTT(q → 0, ω) = ε0

ω2
pτ
1 − iωτ

.

(343)

For later reference, we show in Fig. 20 the photon spectral
function as a function of the momentum and frequency,
together with Drude peak of the real part of the optical
conductivity.

Turning to the longitudinal response, the ﬂuid is now
characterized by a propagating sound mode which is hy-
drodynamically protected in the Galilean continuum. Let
us for simplicity ignore the damping ∝ q2 and momentum
relaxation. It follows immediately that

ˆεLL(ω, q) = ε0(1 −

ω2
p
ω2 − c2

Kq2 ),

(344)

where cK is the sound velocity. The Debye screening
length must be lD ≈ cK/ωp and we ﬁnd for the EELS

spectrum Eq. (339),

fT(ω, q) = −Im

80

.

(345)

ω2 − c2

Kq2

ω2 − c2

Kq2 − ω2

p

(cid:113)

This is plotted in Fig. 21, and one immediately discerns
the canonical plasmon characterized by a dispersion ω =

p + c2
ω2

Kq2 and pole strength Z(q) =

√

2

ωp
p+c2

Kq2 .

ω2

FIG. 20: The spectral function Eq. (330) using the self-energy
Eq. (341) of the viscous charged ﬂuid for DT = 0.5, τ = 100,
ωp = 1, cl = 10. A transverse plasma-polariton with mass ωp
is a propagating mode. The zero-momentum DC Drude peak
is almost not visible. The broadening is due to the Drude
scattering 1/τ and to the viscous diﬀusion ∼ DTq2. Inset:
the diﬀusive broadening of the Drude peak as function of the
momentum q.

C. Electromagnetism of the isotropic Wigner

crystal

Let us now turn to the electromagnetic response of
charged version of isotropic quantum elasticity. This
in principle entails the bosonic Wigner crystal and one
would expect it to be textbook material. However, we
do ﬁnd a surprise in the form of a ‘polariton-like’ mass-
less mode that appears at very long wavelengths. We
did not manage ﬁnd any reference to this phenomenon
in the literature. One should keep in mind that we are
considering a charged crystal living in a perfectly ho-
mogeneous isotropic background that, at the same time,
carries the compensating positive charge to avoid the
Coulomb catastrophe. This is an unphysical limit: any
laboratory Wigner crystal will be subjected to a trans-
lational symmetry breaking of the background charges
that will immediately pin the crystal. However, as mat-
ter of principle it is entertaining to contemplate the ques-
tion of what happens in the impeccable Euclidean contin-
uum. In addition, the charged elastic medium is another
useful template to enhance the intuition of how things
work in the quantum liquid crystals. As usual, at high
momenta/short length scale one will recover the ‘solid’
behavior in the liquids.

It is a famous observation that in the continuum limit
any charged object will behave like an ideal metal. Let
us start with a simple notion: the longitudinal dielectric
function. It follows immediately from the eﬀective action
Eq. (315) that the longitudinal dielectric function of the
charged isotropic medium is

ω2
p
ω2 − c2

ˆεLL(ω, q) = ε0(1 −

Lq2 ).

(346)
The Debye screening length can be read oﬀ to be lD ∼
cL/ωp:
the Wigner crystal also behaves like an ideal
metal, in the regard that a charge is screened perfectly.
Compared to the ﬂuid of the previous section, the only
diﬀerence is that the longitudinal phonon velocity cL en-
ters instead of the velocity of sound cK.

FIG. 21: The EELS spectral function fT(ω, q) for the charged
viscous ﬂuid for cK = cL (cid:39) 1.73 corresponding to ν = 0.5 and
cT = 1, and ωp = 1. We see a propagating mode with velocity
cK and the plasmon mass ωp. The pole strength is given by

Z(q) = ωp/2(cid:112)ω2

p + c2

Kq2.

The loss function of the Wigner crystal follows imme-

diately from Eqs. (339),(346),
fT(ω, q) = −Im

ω2 − c2

Lq2

ω2 − c2

Lq2 − ω2

p

.

(347)

This reveals yet again that the crystal carries the same
plasmon as the ‘ordinary’ liquid Eq. (345) with the only

81
†
T(ω, q)AT(−ω,−q)(cid:105) and the spectral func-
propagator (cid:104)A
†
T(ω, q)AT(0, 0)(cid:105). The poles or the propagating
tion Im (cid:104)A
modes are the solutions of Eq. (332). Using the exact ex-
pression,

ˆεTT(ω, q) = ε0(1 −

ω2
p
ω2 − c2

Tq2 ),

the photon propagator is,

(cid:104)A

†
TAT(cid:105) =

1
ε0

ω2 − c2
Tq2
l q2) − ω2
Tq2)(ω2 − c2

pω2 .

(ω2 − c2

(350)

(351)

There are two pairs of solutions associated with the
mode-coupled photon resp. transverse stress photon,

ω2

T(q) =

p + (c2
l + c2
ω2
2

T)q2

±(cid:113)

(ω2

l + c2

Tc2

l q4.

l + c2

p + (c2

T)q2)2 − 4c2

Here the Galilean velocity (cid:112)c2

(352)
T (cid:39) cl is an artifact
of the non-relativistic theory of elasticity coupled to EM
ﬁelds. We see two modes that are composed of the trans-
verse photon and phonon. Due to cT (cid:28) cl and the ﬁnite
plasmon gap ωp, the modes couple very little in gen-
eral. At high momenta clq (cid:29) ωp, we simply recover
the photon and phonon dispersion. However, at very
large wavelength a surprise is happening. The charac-
teristic momentum turns out to be set by ωp/cl = 1/λL,
the quantity that is associated with the London pene-
tration depth. Expanding Eq. (352) for small momenta
clk (cid:28) ωp yields

(cid:113)
(cid:113)

T)q2 (cid:39)(cid:113)

ωT,1(q) =

ωT,2(q) =

(ω2

p + (c2

l + c2

cTclq2

(ω2

p + (c2

l + c2

T)q2)

l q2 + O(q2),

p + c2
ω2
(cid:39) clcT
ωp

q2 + O(q4).

(353)

The ωT,1 mode is familiar: it is just the plasma-polariton
with a mass ωp. However, there is also a massless mode
inherited from the transverse phonon with a quadratic
dispersion and a very small ‘mass-coeﬃcient’ ∼ 2clcT/ωp!
In Fig. 23 we show the full photon spectral function
and the spectral weights. Both pole strengths decrease
as ∼ q2 from the zero-momentum values 1/2ωp and
cT/2clωp, for the photon and phonon, respectively. Note
that taking q = 0 ﬁrst, the photon propagator obtains
only the plasma-polariton. This is a singular limit.

D. Superconductivity and electromagnetism of the

quantum nematic

FIG. 22: The real part of the transverse optical conductivity
Re ˆσTT(ω, q) for the Wigner crystal for cT = 1 and ωp =
1, showing a propagating pole with constant pole strength
corresponding to the transverse phonon.

diﬀerence that it now propagates with the longitudinal
phonon velocity. In hindsight this is not all surprising re-
alizing that we are dealing with a 2D charged solid inter-
acting with 2D electromagnetic ﬁelds. After all, one can
explain the plasmon frequency invoking charged plates
that freely oscillate relative to each other.

Let us now turn to the transverse response. One reads
oﬀ the photon self-energy from Eq. (315) for the charged
solid,

ΠT(ω, q) = ω2
p

Tq2 ,
which leads to the transverse conductivity,

ω2
ω2 − c2

ˆσTT(ω, q) = ε0ω2
p

iω
ω2 − c2

Tq2 .

(348)

(349)

p(i/ω):

ω has weight ε0ω2

At zero momentum ˆσTT(ω, 0) = ε0ω2
the pole
∼ 1
p, and it is related to a Drude delta-
function peak at zero frequency in ˆσ1(ω, 0), indicative of
a perfect conductor. This is yet again according to the
expectations. However, in stark contrast with the dis-
sipative ﬂuid result in Fig. 20 with broad Drude peaks;
here the ﬁnite momentum conductivity Eq. (349) is char-
acterized by a sharp propagating pole with a strength
ε0ω2
p/2 that is independent of momentum, see Fig. 22.
This is of course the transverse phonon that does carry
electromagnetic spectral weight.

However, hell breaks loose when the transverse modes
of the combined photon–stress photon system are consid-
ered. For this purpose we zoom in on the full photon

This might well be the most important part of this
long theoretical story with regard to the potential rel-
evance to experiments in high-Tc superconductors.
It

82

As we already discussed, from the transverse photon
propagator one can directly deduce the Meissner eﬀect,
using Eq. (337). The photon self-energy follows immedi-
ately from the eﬀective action for the nematic Eq. (323),

ω2(ω2 − c2

dq2) − Ω2(ω2 − c2

Rq2)
dq2) − Ω2(ω2 − c2

.

ΠT(ω, q) = ω2
p

(ω2 − c2

Tq2)(ω2 − c2

Rq2)
(354)
The Meissner eﬀect is the existence of a ﬁnite penetration
depth in the static limit ω → 0. Taking this limit and
√
using the deﬁnition cR = cd/

2, we ﬁnd

(cid:112)1 + λ2

s q2.

λ(ω = 0, q) = λL

(355)

polariton with only slightly modiﬁed velocity (cid:112)c2

FIG. 23: The transverse spectral function of the Wigner crys-
tal from Eq. (351) in units set by ωp = cT = 1. For clarity of
the ﬁgure we take cl = 10cT which is much smaller than real-
ity. The poles are inﬁnitely sharp and the width denotes the
relative pole strength. We identify the usual photonic plasma-
T ≈ cl
and a much weaker transverse phonon. The disappearance of
the phonon near q → 0 is an artifact due to the numerical res-
olution. Inset: pole strengths in units of 1/ε0. The phonon is
weaker by a factor of cT/cl than the polariton at q = 0. Both
pole strengths decrease as 1/q2 at low momenta.

l + c2

is of course obvious that at large momenta one will re-
cover the ‘maximally-correlated’ electromagnetic features
of the Wigner crystal also in the nematic. We just learned
that the gross qualitative diﬀerences reside at rather large
momenta in transverse probes revealing the reactive re-
sponses towards shear stresses in the medium, instead
of the dissipative responses of the weakly-interacting liq-
uid. Unfortunately this kinematical regime is not ex-
perimentally accessible because of the smallness of cT/cl
ratio. But what is happening at scales small compared to
the shear Higgs mass Ω and the inverse dislocation pen-
etration depth 1/λd, where the system has turned into
a ﬂuid? Is there any unconventional feature to be dis-
cerned at these small momenta, which is perhaps even in
reach of optical experiments?

The longitudinal response is a diﬀerent story since
the small-momentum regime is in principle accessible by
EELS and RIXS. As we will review below, already in 2007
a smoking gun prediction was put forward in the form of
an extra mode visible in the loss spectrum [18], which has
been on the benchmark list of the machine builders ever
since. Before we turn to these matters, let us ﬁrst high-
light perhaps the most stunning outcome of this whole
endeavor: the proof that the quantum nematic is also a
superconductor.

√

Here λL = cl/ωp is the usual London penetration depth
while λs =
2cT/Ω is the shear penetration depth. Since
cT ≈ cd up to factors of order 1, this is related to the
dislocation penetration depth λd = cd/Ω of Sec. VIII.
Obviously, in the Wigner crystal the photon self-energy
vanishes at zero frequency and a static magnetic ﬁeld can
freely penetrate the medium. However, at the moment
the Higgs mass Ω and the associated length scale λs of
the dual shear superconductor become ﬁnite the magnetic
ﬁeld is expelled. In fact, for a uniform (q = 0) magnetic
ﬁeld the penetration depth becomes λL as if one is dealing
with a meat-and-potato BCS superconductor! This is the
hard evidence we have in the oﬀering for the ‘theorem’:
upon losing its shear rigidity a charged bosonic Wigner
crystal at zero temperature will become a superconductor.
Is the response to static magnetic ﬁelds of our
maximally-correlated superconductor completely con-
ventional? In fact, there is a second scale in the problem:
the shear penetration depth λs. This length scale has
a very diﬀerent status from the usual coherence length
(“pair size”), since it signals that at this length scale the
system rediscovers that there is a reactive response to
shear forces. This has a very unusual consequence for
the penetration of spatially modulated (q > 0) magnetic
ﬁelds. Surely, when the length scale of this modulation
is large compared to λs, one ﬁnds the ubiquitous Lon-
don response. However, when it becomes of order and
smaller than λs, according to Eq. (355) a momentum de-
pendence in the magnetic penetration depth develops.
The meaning of this becomes clear by computing the
r-dependence of the magnetic ﬁeld strength B(r), pene-
trating the superconductor close to its boundary with the
vacuum as shown in Fig. 24. When λL (cid:29) λs one ﬁnds
the usual exponential decay. However, when λL (cid:46) λs one
ﬁnds a surprising overscreening of the magnetic ﬁeld [12].
However, in the systems of physical relevance the shear
penetration will be typically quite small compared to
the London penetration depth. The take-home message
is that with regard to the response to static magnetic
ﬁelds our maximally-correlated nematic superconductor
will behave just as an extreme type-II conventional su-
perconductor. As we have encountered more often, the
unusual solid-like features are perfectly hidden for the
experimentalist’s eye.

83

√
FIG. 25: The real part of the transverse optical conductivity
ˆσTT(ω, q) of the nematic with cT = cd = 1, cR = cd/
2, Ω =
0.2, showing the transverse phonon that has obtained a Higgs
gap from loss of shear rigidity, a low-energy massless mode
with velocity cR that we identify as the rotational Goldstone
mode, and the zero-frequency Drude peak. The red dashed
and solid lines are Eqs. (359), (360) respectively.

Tq2 (cid:28) Ω, indicating the loss of shear
for small momenta c2
rigidity. Its pole strength decreases as q2 for small mo-
Tq2 (cid:28) Ω, and becomes momentum-independent
menta c2
Tq2 (cid:29) Ω. Apparently for small q, all
for large momenta c2
the spectral weight is transferred to the Drude peak.
In the physically relevant case cd ≈ cT and cR =
√
2, next to the zero-frequency Drude peak we ﬁnd

cd/
two propagating modes with dispersion relations,

(cid:32)
(cid:32)

(cid:114)
(cid:114)

1 +

1 −

1 +

1 +

(cid:33)
(cid:33)

4(c2

R)q2

T − c2
Ω2
T − c2
Ω2

4(c2

R)q2

(359)

.

(360)

ω2
2(q) = c2

Tq2 +

ω2
3(q) = c2

Tq2 +

Ω2
2

Ω2
2

The ﬁrst equation contains the massive shear phonon.
However, the second equation shows the emergence of
an additional massless mode with velocity cR at low mo-
menta. This mode we identify as the rotational Gold-
stone mode, see below. The three poles show up clearly
in the plot of the real part of the optical conductivity
Fig. 25.

Let us now turn to the full transverse spectrum of
coupled photon–stress photon modes and the way they
show up in the photon spectral
function. The full
transverse propagator is given by Eq. (330) with self-
energy Eq. (354), and its spectral function is depicted in
Fig. 26. We observe the expected transverse photon or
plasma-polariton with gap ωp and two weaker propagat-

FIG. 24: Proﬁle of the DC magnetic ﬁeld B in the quan-
tum nematic as a function of distance r within the medium
in units of the London penetration depth λL ≡ 1, normalized
to B(0) = 1, following from Eq. (355). For small shear pen-
etration depth λs (cid:28) λL, the screening follows the ordinary
exponential decay. However when λs is of the order of λL or
greater, the magnetic ﬁeld shows damped oscillatory screen-
ing, where the sign of the ﬁeld is even reversed at certain
distances.

Rq2)
dq2) − Ω2(ω2 − c2
(356)

Rq2)

,

ˆσTT(ω, q) =

Let us now turn to the frequency dependence of the
transverse response. We ﬁrst inspect the easier optical
conductivity before turning to the problem of the spec-
trum of transverse modes. The optical conductivity fol-
lows directly from Eqs. (334),(354),
ω2(ω2 − c2

dq2) − Ω2(ω2 − c2

iε0ω2
p

(ω2 − c2

Tq2)(ω2 − c2

ω
√
where cR = cd/
2 and cd is of order cT; the precise pro-
portionality factor is presently not known. As expected,
one immediately infers that in the q → 0 limit this yields
just the perfect conductor in the from of the delta func-
tion peak in ˆσ1(0, ω) at zero frequency. At momenta
much larger than 1/λs, the response will become similar
to the Wigner crystal: in this regime one can send Ω → 0
and recovers the transverse-phonon optical conductivity.
What happens at frequencies and momenta in the ﬂuid
regime, up to scales of order Ω and 1/λs? We can ﬁrst
look at a simpliﬁed case, where we artiﬁcially set cd = cR:

ˆσTT(ω, q) = ε0ω2
p

i
ω

ω2 − Ω2

ω2 − c2

Tq2 − Ω2 .

(357)

In this case, there is a positive frequency pole and a zero
frequency Drude peak with pole strengths that follow

Tq2 δ(ω −(cid:113)

Ω2 + c2

Tq2)

p

ˆσT,1(ω, q) ∼ πω2
2
πω2
p
2

+

c2
Tq2
Ω2 + c2
Ω2

Tq2 + Ω2 δ(ω).
c2

(358)

The pole in the ﬁrst line reduces to the transverse phonon
Tq2 (cid:29) Ω, but obtains a Higgs gap
for large momenta c2

2468r(λL)0.20.40.60.81.0B(a.u)λs=0.2λs=0.6λs=1λs=2ing modes at ﬁnite momenta. To solve for the dispersions
†
of the poles (cid:104)A
T(ω, q)AT(0, 0)(cid:105)−1 = 0, we take the limit
Ω (cid:28) ωp and expand around q = 0. There are three pairs
of solutions, namely

Tq2(cid:0)1 +

(cid:1) + O(q4),

Ω4
ω4
p
) + O(q4),

+

Ω2
ω2
p
Ω4
ω4
p

+

ω2
1 = ω2

p + c2

l q2 + c2

ω2
2 = Ω2 + c2

Rq2 − c2

Tq2(

Ω2
ω2
p

ω2
3 = c2

Rq2(1 − c2

Rq2
Ω2 ) + O(q6).

(361)

(362)

(363)

The plasma-polariton in the ﬁrst pair of solutions and
has the same form as in the Wigner crystal Eq. (353),
but it has corrections due to the Higgs mass Ω. This is
the result from mode coupling to the transverse phonon,
identiﬁed now with the dispersion on the second line with
cd ∼ cT, where the O(q4)-transverse phonon dispersion
is dominated by quadratic terms from the condensate,
in addition to the Higgs mass. At high momenta, this
mode indeed obtains the linear dispersion of the trans-
verse phonon, although all spectral weight is shifted to
the polariton. Both the transverse phonon and the re-
maining third mode now involve the eﬀects of the dis-
location condensate, as can be seen from the appear-
ance of the rotational velocities cR. A massless prop-
agating mode Eq. (363) emerges and is related to the

84

massless elastic mode of the quantum nematic: the rota-
tional Goldstone mode. This is how the emergence of the
additional Goldstone mode shows in the EM spectrum;
meanwhile the transverse phonon just gets gapped in the
nematic, as required for liquidlike correlations.

Finally we analyze the longitudinal response of the
quantum nematic. From the scalar potential contribu-
tion of Eq. (323), we read oﬀ the longitudinal dielectric
function of the quantum nematic,

ˆεLL(ω, q) = 1−

p(ω2 − c2
ω2
Lq2)(ω2 − c2

Rq2 − Ω2)
Rq2) − Ω2(ω2 − c2

(ω2 − c2

.

Kq2)
(364)

In the static limit this simpliﬁes to

ˆεLL(q, ω = 0) = 1 + ω2
p

Rq2 + Ω2
c2
c2
Lc2
Rq4 + Ω2c2

Kq2 .

(365)

At momenta large compared to Ω/cL, one recovers the
screening properties of the Wigner crystal. However, the
dual shear superconductor exerts control at small mo-
menta. Then the terms containing Ω2 dominate and it
follows that ˆεLL(q, ω = 0) (cid:39) 1 + ω2
Kq2) The Debye
screening length is now governed by the velocity of sound
cK, as it should be in a true ﬂuid!

p/(c2

The loss function of the quantum nematic follows from

Eqs. (339), (364),

fT(ω, q) = − 1
ε0

Im

(ω2 − c2

Lq2)(ω2 − c2

(ω2 − c2
Rq2)(ω2 − c2

Lq2 − ω2

Rq2) − Ω2(ω2 − c2
p) − Ω2(ω2 − c2

Kq2)
Kq2 − ω2
p)

.

(cid:113)(cid:0)(c2

p + Ω2(cid:1)2 − 4(cid:0)Ω2(cid:0)c2

Kq2 + ω2
p

(cid:1) + c2

Lc2

Rq4 + c2

Rq2ω2
p

This has two propagating poles at

(cid:18)

ω(q)2

L1,L2 =

1
2

(c2

L + c2

R)q2 + ω2

p + Ω2 ±

L + c2

R)q2 + ω2

(366)

(cid:1)(cid:19)

.

(367)

The loss function fT(ω, q) is shown in Fig. 27. At small
momenta cTq, Ω (cid:28) ωp, the poles look like
Rq2 + Ω2 + O(q3, Ω2/ω2
p),
p + O(q3, Ω2/ω2
Lq2 + ω2
p),

(369)
whereas in the opposite, liquid-like limit Ω (cid:29) ωp, we
have

ω2
L,1(q) = c2
ω2
L,2(q) = c2

(368)

ω2
L,1(q) = (c2
ω2
L,2(q) = c2

T + c2
Kq2 + ω2

R)q2 + Ω2 + O(q3, ω2
p + O(q3, ω2

p/Ω2)

p/Ω2),

(370)

(371)

In the Wigner crystal we found a single longitudinal ex-
citation, corresponding to the longitudinal phonon that
had acquired a plasmon gap, Eq. (347).
In the ﬂuid
regime 1/λL (cid:28) q (cid:28) 1/λs of the quantum nematic, the

plasmon propagates with the sound velocity cK instead,
just as in the generic liquid, Eq. (345)! This of course is
expected but the mechanism at work is quite intriguing.
We already encountered it in Sec. VIII B. The diﬀerence
between a sound mode and the longitudinal phonon is
that the latter automatically involves shear deformations
with the eﬀect that its velocity contains the shear mod-
ulus via c2
T. This implies that only in the
q = 0 limit can purely compressional stresses be applied.
In the ﬂuid regime, the shear component has to some-
how be ‘removed’ from the longitudinal oscillation. The
theory is Gaussian and the only way that this can be ac-
complished is by a mode coupling. One reads oﬀ from
Eq. (366) that this second mode is a condensate mode
since it propagates with the velocity cR. What happens
is that for Ω (cid:29) ωp, the transverse part ∼ c2
Tq2 has been

L = c2

K + c2

85

FIG. 28: Intensity Z(q) of the two poles, plasmon and massive
shear, of the transmissive loss function fT(ω, q) of the quan-
tum nematic in units of the inverse dielectric constant 1/ε0,
for the values ωp = 1eV, Ω = 0.05ωp, cT = cd ≡ 106m/s
and ν = 0.5. Here we assume that the phonon velocity of
a Wigner crystal is of electronic origin and therefore of the
order of the Fermi velocity vF ≈ 106m/s. The purple dashed
line is the plasmon mode with axis on the right, and the
solid blue line is the massive shear mode with axis on the
left. Notice the diﬀerence in scales: the plasmon is about
1000 times stronger. The intensity of the shear mode has a
strong non-monotonic behavior, with a maximum intensity
. Also indicated are the inverse shear

near qmax ≈(cid:113) 2−2ν

ωp
cT

9+3ν

√
2cT and the inverse De-

penetration depth qs = 1/λs = Ω/
bye length qe = 1/λe = ωp/cT.

(cid:0)c2

)(cid:1)q2.

ω2
p

K( Ω2

transferred into the condensate mode by the coupling
L − c2
Accordingly, the always-‘shearish’ condensate mode
has spectral weight only at ﬁnite momenta. This mech-
anism has universal consequence for the spectral weight
distribution as function of momentum in the EELS spec-
trum: this is the smoking gun of the quantum nematic,
making it possible to prove or disprove whether this is of
relevance to experimental systems. The condensate mode
in isolation does not carry electric charge: as we repeat-
edly emphasized the dislocation condensate is electrically
neutral. However, due to the mode coupling related to
the removal of the shear of the plasmon it acquires in
return a ﬁnite electromagnetic weight that is growing as
function of momentum. The plasmon completely domi-
nates the loss function at small momenta. However, for
increasing momentum the lower condensate momentum
becomes better visible, while its spectral weight again
decreases for quite large momenta q (cid:29) 1/λd. The spec-
tral weight of both poles is plotted in Fig. 28 for the
parameters that might have bearing on the “ﬂuctuating
stripes” of the high-Tc superconductors [18]: Ω = 0.05ωp,
cT = cd = 106m/s and ν = 0.5. Notice the diﬀerence be-
tween the scales: the condensate mode is indeed much
weaker. For small momenta the weight of the condensate
(“massive shear photon”) mode increases ∼ q2. However,
upon exceeding the inverse shear penetration depth the
mode coupling becomes again weaker because the plas-
mon turns into a longitudinal phonon again.
In fact,

√

FIG. 26: The transverse spectral function of the nematic for
cl = 10, cT = 1, cd = 0.8, cR = cd/
2, ωp = 1, Ω = 0.2 with
artiﬁcial broadening proportional to the pole strengths. Most
of the spectral weight is concentrated on the transverse pho-
ton Eq.
(361) with mass ωp, with the massive transverse
phonon and rotational Goldstone appearing at ﬁnite q but
weak spectral weight. Inset: zoom on the much weaker trans-
verse phonon and the rotational Goldstone mode, Eqs. (362)
and (363).

√
FIG. 27: The transmissive EELS spectrum fT(ω, q) for the
nematic with cT = cd = 1, ν = 0.5, cR = cd/
2,ωp = 1,
Ω = 0.2. The poles are inﬁnitely sharp and the width of
the features indicates the spectral weight. There is the lon-
gitudinal massive plasmon mode and a massless mode with
much weaker spectral weight, see Fig. 28. The red dashed and
solid lines are the approximate dispersions Eqs. (368), (369)
respectively.

0qsqmax0.40.8qe1.20.0.000050.00010.000150.00020.140.220.30.380.46qAcondensateAplasmon(cid:113) 3−3ν

one ﬁnds a maximum in the pole strength of the con-
densate mode Z(qmax) ≈ 3
at a momentum

16

3+ν

Ω2
ωp

qmax ≈(cid:113) 2−2ν

9+3ν

ωp
cT

[18].

There are considerable complications in trying to de-
tect the “massive shear photon” in the laboratory. Be-
lieving that the energy scales seen in the spin ﬂuctua-
tions measured by neutron scattering have any bearing on
maximal charge correlations one would estimate Ω ≈ 40
meV, while λs ∼ 10 nm. The ‘phonon’ velocity should
be of a typical electronic kind ∼ 1 eV ˚A, while the plas-
mon energy is established to be of order 1 eV. This does
imply that the EELS spectral weight of the shear pho-
ton should be quite small. In addition, this kinematical
regime is littered with other excitations, especially the
normal phonons of the real crystal. In order to stand a
chance to detect this feature a very high (meV) resolu-
tion appears to be required. High-energy (transmissive)
EELS and RIXS have still a long way to go, and it re-
mains to be seen whether low energy electron loss is ca-
pable of picking up such genuine electronic features [23].

E. Electromagnetism of the charged quantum

smectic

As we learned in Sec. IX, the neutral quantum smectic
is behaving like an intricate and counterintuitive mixture
of ‘intertwined’ solid and ﬂuid characteristics. It is enter-
taining to ﬁnd out how these characteristics get further
ampliﬁed in the charged quantum smectic.

For convenience, let us ﬁrst shortly recollect the con-
ventions introduced for the neutral case. The angle
η parametrizes the direction of propagation relative to
the smectic liquid (η = 0) and solid (η = π/2) direc-
tions. The decomposition into longitudinal and trans-

86

verse responses is only possible at the special angles
η = 0, π/4, π/2. Accordingly, only at these angles one can
separate the electromagnetic response in terms of trans-
verse and longitudinal response functions: as Eq. (324)
shows, one ﬁnds non-diagonal terms in the self-energy
matrix associated with the transverse photon AT and
the longitudinal scalar potential At. This follows simply
from the spatial anisotropy of the smectic, and the prop-
agator matrices do not decompose into longitudinal and
transverse sectors, except at the special angles.

The expression in Eq. (324) is not very illuminat-
ing and we start by analyzing the special angles, where
Eq. (324) gives the following eﬀective actions:

a. Solid direction η = π/2

LEM
smec = 1

2 ε0ω2

p

Tq2
c2
Lq2|At|2 +
n + c2
ω2

ω2
n + Ω2
n + c2
ω2

Tq2 + Ω2|AT|2(cid:17)

.

(372)

(cid:16)

(cid:16)

The longitudinal response is equal to that of the Wigner
crystal, while the transverse response simply picks up the
Higgs mass.

b. Liquid direction η = 0

LEM
smec = 1

2 ε0ω2

p

Tq2
c2
Lq2|At|2
n + c2
ω2
n(ω2
ω2
n + c2
Tq2)(ω2

n + c2

n + c2

dq2 + Ω2)

dq2) + ω2

nΩ2|AT|2(cid:17)

.

+

(ω2

(373)

The longitudinal response is independent of Ω and still
equal to the Wigner crystal but the transverse response
is a bit more complicated with the condensate velocity
cd entering.

c.

Intermediate η = π/4

LEM
smec = 1

2 ε0ω2

p

(cid:16)

c2
Tq2(ω2

n + c2

Rq2 + Ω2)
Rq2) + Ω2(ω2

(ω2

n + c2

Lq2)(ω2

n + c2

n + c2

Kq2)

Tq2|AT|2(cid:17)

ω2
n
n + c2
ω2

|At|2 +

.

(374)

Interestingly and coincidentally, the transverse sector is
identical to the isotropic solid; the propagating photons
do not pick up the smectic condensate. The longitudinal
response is however aﬀected by the condensate, and is
identical to the quantum nematic. This is not a surprise:
already in Sec. IX B we had noticed that the longitudinal
response of the π/4 smectic is identical to that of the
quantum nematic.

d. other angles As it turns out the angles η =
0, π/4, π/2 are very special and not representative of
other interrogation directions.
In particular, at those
angles the oﬀ-diagonal terms in the electromagnetic La-
grangian Eq. (324) vanish, while at other angles they do

not. This leads e.g. to the possibility of anomalous Hall
conductivity (a non-zero σxy in the absence of an external
magnetic ﬁeld).

Let us ﬁrst zoom in on the longitudinal response along
the special directions which is easy to comprehend. In
Sec. IX, we learned that both along the liquid (η = 0)
and solid (η = π/2) directions the smectic just exhibits a
solid response in the form of a longitudinal phonon, while
along the η = π/4 directions this is turned into the sound
mode as if one would be dealing with a pure liquid. From
Eqs. (372), (373) we read oﬀ the longitudinal dielectric
function εLL(ω, q) = ε0
the result for the Wigner crystal Eq. (346). More inter-

Lq2)(cid:1), identical to

(cid:0)1 − ω2

p/(ω2 − c2

estingly, what happens at the special angle η = π/4? For
the neutral case we found the genuine sound mode prop-
agating with velocity cK. Inspecting the temporal part in
Eq. (374), we ﬁnd a longitudinal dielectric function iden-
tical to that of the quantum nematic Eq. (364), with the
same ramiﬁcations for the electron-loss spectrum that we
just discussed at length!

Naively one would perhaps anticipate that apparently
the smectic wants to behave like a crystal in the trans-
verse sector along the η = 0 or in the longitudinal sector
along η = π/2, while it should behave like a supercon-
ductor in the intermediate direction η = π/4. But we
already learned from the neutral smectic that this is not
at all the case. Superconductivity is associated with the
transverse response and we found there the undulation
ω ∝ q2 mode in the (η = 0) liquid direction, while in the
π/4-direction the transverse phonon with velocity cT got
completely resurrected. The solid direction (η = π/2) ap-
peared to have a special status exhibiting just the massive
shear phonon, diﬀerent for the nematic not accompanied
by any condensate mode. According to Eq. (324), the
transverse photon propagator becomes particularly sim-
ple for the η = π/4 case. One reads oﬀ from Eq. (374)
that it is actually identical to the transverse photon prop-
agator of the Wigner crystal Eq. (348)! As for the crystal,
for this angle the transverse mode spectrum is character-
ized by the plasma-polariton and the transverse phonon
that turns into the remarkable ‘polariton-phonon’ with
quadratic dispersion at very small q (cid:28) 1/λL.

This is as far as the relationship between the charged
quantum smectic properties and the now familiar proper-
ties of the charged Wigner crystal and quantum nematic
extends. Everything else is unique to the quantum smec-
tic. Let us now focus on the transverse response in the
liquid (η = 0) direction. In the neutral case we learned
that precisely for this direction we recovered the famous
undulation mode with a quadratic dispersion. What hap-
pens in the charged system? The photon propagator fol-
lows from Eq. (373),

(cid:104)A

†
T(ω, q)AT(−ω,−q)(cid:105)η=0 =
1
ω2(ω2−c2
Tq2)(ω2−c2

l q2 − ω2

ω2 − c2

(ω2−c2

1
ε0

p

dq2−Ω2)

dq2)−ω2Ω2

.

(375)

Upon closer inspection it becomes clear that this de-
scribes quite diﬀerent physics than any of the other cases
we have considered. The interest is in the spectrum of
transverse modes and their pole strengths in the photon
propagator at small momenta. For clq, Ω (cid:28) ωp,
T)q2 + O(q4, Ω2/ω2
p),

(376)

l + c2
dq2 + O(q4, Ω2/ω2
p),

ω2
p + (c2
1,η=0(q) = ω2
2,η=0(q) = Ω2 + c2
ω2
l c2
c2
Tc2
pΩ2 q6 + O(q8).
d
ω2

3,η=0(q) =

ω2

(377)

(378)

(cid:112)c2

We ﬁnd, as before, the plasma-polariton with velocity
T ≈ cl and a condensate-like mode with velocity

l + c2

87

FIG. 29: The transverse photon spectral function of the smec-
tic along the liquid direction η = 0 for cl = 10, cT = cd = 1,
ωp = 1, Ω = 0.2. The poles are inﬁnitely sharp and the width
indicates the spectral weight. We identify the strong plasma-
polartion, and the weaker massive condensate and massless
undulation modes. Inset: zoom to the origin, where the two
elastic modes have non-zero spectral weights.

T

ω2

cd ≈ cT characterized by the masses ωp and Ω respec-
tively. However, there is also a gapless mode character-
ized by a cubic dispersion ω3,η=0(q) ∼ clc2
pΩ2 q3! In hind-
sight this actually makes sense. We already mentioned
that the transverse phonon of the Wigner crystal turns
at distances larger than λL into a quadratic mode, indi-
cating that the inﬂuence of the EM screening is to ‘add
an extra derivative’ to the dispersion. In the liquid di-
rection of the smectic, we started out with the transverse
undulation mode which has a quadratic dispersion in the
neutral case. The EM screening will have yet again the
same eﬀect, causing the undulation mode to acquire a
cubic dispersion. Given that it has the status of a Gold-
stone mode excitation dressed with EM ﬁelds, this has
to the best of our knowledge an unique status as record
holding power-of-momentum dependence!

Similar as in the case of the neutral smectic in
Sec. IX C, the undulation mode turns into the linear con-
densate mode ω ∝ cdq and the transverse phonon for
q (cid:29) 1/λs. The transverse photon spectral function for
η = 0 is shown in Fig. 29. Again, the spectral density
for the elastic modes around q = 0 is zero and vanishes
quickly for ﬁnite q.

Now let us turn to the transverse response in the solid
(η = π/2) direction.
In the neutral case, we found in
this direction a ‘minimalistic Higgsed shear response’ in
the form of a single massive shear photon, with no sign
of condensate modes taking part. Again the interest is

in the transverse photon propagator, which follows from
Eq. (372) as

(cid:104)A

†
T AT(cid:105)η=π/2 =

ω2 − c2

1
l q2 − ω2

p

ω2−Ω2

ω2−c2

Tq2−Ω2

.

(379)

This is actually coincident with the ‘minimal supercon-
ductor’ Eq. (357) that arises when cT = cd = cR, and we
discussed this for the charged nematic. We learn there-
fore directly that precisely in this direction the smectic
turns into the simplest incarnation of a superconducting
state that can be imagined in the present setting! In this
direction there will be a fully developed Meissner eﬀect.
However, what happens when we deviate by any amount
from η = π/2? We have already seen in the neutral case
that this angle was strangely singular. We found that
for all η (cid:54)= 0, π/2 we were dealing with a genuine trans-
verse phonon, be it one with a velocity that vanishes
both in both limits η → 0, π/2, see Fig. 19. Let us there-
fore inspect what happens to the transverse response at
generic angles. Since the longitudinal and transverse sec-
tors mix, the full photon propagator becomes a compli-
cated expression, but the spectrum of transverse modes
is again of primary interest and the transverse propaga-
†
T(ω, q)AT(−ω,−q)(cid:105) follows simply from the self-
tor (cid:104)A
energy ΠT(ω, q; η) which is the TT entry of Eq. (324). In
Fig. 30 we show the spectral function for several angles.
for all angles there is
the plasma-polariton that carries most of the spectral
weight. At ﬁnite momenta, there are elastic modes that
quickly vanish for large momenta. These include the mas-
sive condensate mode, and up to two massless modes:
the longitudinal/sound mode and the transverse phonon
mode. The spectral weight of the elastic modes interpo-
lates as follows. For η = 0, we have a condensate mode
with mass Ω and a massless cubic mode Eq. (378). As
the angle grows, the longitudinal sound mode emerges,
while also spectral weight is transferred from the massive
condensate mode to the massless modes. Half-way at
η = π/4, both the condensate mode and the sound mode
vanish and there is only a massless transverse phonon
carrying all the spectral weight. This is precisely the
response of the Wigner crystal in Fig. 23! As the an-
gle approaches the solid direction η → π/2, there are
re-emerging massive and sound modes to which spectral
weight is transferred back from the massless transverse
mode. At η = π/2, all the spectral weight is carried by
the massive shear mode with mass Ω, as both massless
modes disappear.

The general picture is clear:

Summarizing we identify the photonic plasmon at ωp

88

and the massive shear photon (condensate mode) at Ω
and two massless modes with changing spectral weight
as a function of η that interpolates between the limit-
ing cases related to the solid and liquid behaviors of the
smectic. For small momenta they are

ω2
1(q; η) = ω2

p + c2

l q2 +

c2
Tω2

p − c2
TΩ2 sin2 2η
p − Ω2
ω2

q2 + O(q4)

ω2
2(q; η) = Ω2 + cos2 ηcdq2 +

p − Ω2

sin2 2ηω2
p − Ω2
ω2

(cid:18)

L − sin2 2ηc2
ω2
3(q; η) = (c2
(cid:19)
− ( 1
c2
K+c2
ω2
p

4(q; η) =

ω2

l

T)q2 + O(q4)
Ω2 + 1
ω2
p

)(c2

L − sin2 2ηc2
T)

(380)
Tq2 + O(q4)
c2
(381)

(382)

+ c2

d cos2 η

)

Ω2

sin2 2ηc2

Tq4 + O(q6).

(383)

For the limiting cases of the special angles, we recover
the results discussed above with at most a single massless
mode within the accuracies stated. The bottom line is
that we have just re-identiﬁed the surprise we already en-
countered in the case of the neutral smectic: for all angles
except η = π/2, the transverse response of the smectic
shows that it behaves like a solid as signaled by the pres-
ence of the velocity-renormalized but massless transverse
phonon. Remarkably, at the intermediate angles and at
small momenta, this massless transverse phonon mixes
with the longitudinal phonon with velocities cL and cK
but this is what we intuitively expect: when the trans-
verse modes are in between the liquid layers they can
mix with the longitudinal modes that always exist in the
solid and liquid. We emphasize that in the special cases
of η = 0, π/4, π/2 the spectral weight of this mixed mode
vanishes.

With regards to the superconducting identity of the
dislocation condensate, we were facing the conundrum in
the neutral case that the superﬂuid density ‘spikes’ pre-
cisely at η = π/2. But now we are in a better shape to
address what is going on since in the charged case we can
apply the coupling to external ﬁelds, and the electromag-
netic response has to be susceptible to a reasonable phys-
ical interpretation. Let us therefore zoom in on the be-
havior of the frequency- and momentum-dependent mag-
netic penetration depth λ(ω, q), as deﬁned in Eq. (337).
Let us ﬁrst consider the general expression for this dy-
namical penetration depth for arbitrary angle η as follows
directly from Eqs. (337), (324).

(cid:32)

(cid:115)

λ(ω, q; η) = cl

Im

ω2 − ω2

p

ω2(cid:0)(ω2 − cos2 ηc2

(ω2 − cos2 ηc2

dq2)(ω2 − c2

dq2)(ω2 − c2
Tq2)(ω2 − c2

Lq2) − Ω2(ω2 − c2
Lq2) − Ω2(ω4 − ω2c2

Lq2 + c2

Lq2 + c2

Kc2

Tq4 sin2 2η)

Tq2 sin2 2η)(cid:1)

(cid:33)−1

,

(384)

89

FIG. 30: The transverse photon spectral function for η = π/8, π/4, 3π/8, π/2 respectively. The parameters were chosen as
cl = 10, cT = cd = 1, ν = 0.5, ωp = 1, Ω = 0.2. The broadening of the dispersions is artiﬁcial and is proportional to the
spectral weight. For general angle we observe four poles: the plasma-polariton with gap ωp, the condensate mode with gap Ω
and two massless modes which we assign to the longitudinal (compression) and transverse sound modes. The velocities of these
two modes at low momenta vary similar to Fig. 19, although the transverse mode is also coupled to the polariton. For the
special angle η = π/2, we observe only the polariton and the condensate mode, as expected from the neutral case. However, at
η = π/4 the response of the Wigner crystal is recovered.

where we used the deﬁnition pη(ω, q) = − 1
ω2 +cos2 ηq2.
One infers an overall factor of ω in the denominator, hav-
ing as a consequence that λ → ∞ in the static limit
ω → 0, and the penetration depth diverges. However,
by ﬁrst taking the limit η → π/2 the above expression
reduces to

c2
d

(cid:115)

ω4 − ω2(c2

ω2 − cTq2 − Ω2
Tq2 + Ω2 + ω2

p) + Ω2ω2
p
(385)

λ(ω, q; η = π

2 ) = clIm

(cid:113)

In the static limit, this results in a penetration depth,

λ(ω = 0, q; η = π/2) = λL

1 + 1

2 λ2

s q2,

(386)

√

2cT/Ω except for the factor of 1

which is identical to the expression for the quantum ne-
2 . Ap-
matic with λs =
parently the order of limits η → π/2, ω → 0 is crucial.
The clue is however that this is only singular precisely
at zero frequency. The screening of magnetic ﬁelds be-
comes a smooth aﬀair at any ﬁnite frequency and mo-
menta, which usually is called the skin-eﬀect [130], this
can be neatly studied by looking at the ﬁnite-frequency
behavior of λ(ω, q). This is shown in Fig. 31 for the
angles η = π/2, 15π/32. We conclude that the supercon-
ducting condensate is really measured only at η = π/2,
whereas the angular dependence at ﬁnite frequencies is
very weak.

XII. CONCLUSIONS

The reader who is still with us has shown resilience –
we hope that he/she shares with us a sense of wonder re-
garding the scenery we have exposed in this story. What
has happened? We departed from a topic that perhaps
at ﬁrst sight seemed antiquated: the theory of elasticity,
the quantum melting of solids into superﬂuids, subject
matter that was supposed to be brought under complete
control some ﬁfty years ago. Arguably, the quantum liq-
uid crystal in its bosonic incarnation adds some novelty
but at least dealing with the quantum nematics we could
have as well written a short note pointing out that the
continuum version should be characterized by a prop-
agating rotational Goldstone mode since circulation is
quantized in the superﬂuid.

Instead, we arrived at a mathematical theory of this
part of everyday reality where everything familiar seems
turned upside down. It is the Alice in Wonderland ver-
sion of “Condensed Matter Physics 101”. Upon going
through the mirror, phonons turn into photons, neutral
superﬂuids are actually stress superconductors character-
ized by massive shear photons, the Meissner eﬀect is lying
in hide in the Wigner crystal and torque stresses decon-
ﬁne like gluons upon entering the liquid-crystal phase.
There is a lot more, but we already listed this full port-
folio in the introduction, Sec. I C.

Surely, the reader has already realized a long while
ago that the diﬀerence is that we are just starting out

90

.

FIG. 31: Frequency dependence of the penetration depth
Eq. (384) in units of the London penetration depth λL at
momentum q = 0.5, for the parameters cT = cd = 1, ν = 0.5,
for angles η = π/2 and η = 15π/32 and for varying Higgs
mass Ω. The black solid line is the case of no condensate
Ω = 0 i.e. the Wigner crystal. The skin eﬀect sets in above a
certain momentum-dependent energy gap. The dashed green
lines are for η = π/2 and we ﬁnd a true Meissner eﬀect up
to ω = 0. The weaker the condensate (lower Ω), the longer
the momentum-dependent penetration depth Eq. (386). The
dotted red lines are for the angle η = 15π/32. There is no
Meissner eﬀect in the static limit ω → 0, but at ﬁnite fre-
quencies the penetration depth quickly follows the behavior
of η = π/2 and the energy gap is small.
In other words,
the skin eﬀect at ﬁnite momentum is much stronger in the
quantum smectic than in the Wigner crystal.

from a limit that is opposite to the one that ﬁgures in
the textbooks. The conventional way to deal with (quan-
tum) liquids is to begin with in essence kinetic gas the-
ory. As point of departure the weakly-interacting system
of microscopic constituents is chosen and subsequently
one works in the eﬀects of correlations using perturba-
tive means. Here we have exposed the dual perspective,
insisting the liquid is locally as solid-like as permitted
by the laws of physics:
from the limit of the strongest
interactions imaginable. The miracle is that it is all not
that hard to describe this in minute detail resting on a
surprisingly elegant mathematical theory.

The basic notions are of course dating back to the
Kosterlitz–Thouless–Nelson–Halperin–Young theory of
classical topological melting as developed in the 1970s.
However, to make this work in the 2+1D quantum case
a more powerful mathematical formalism was required,
and this was supplied by Kleinert in the 1980s. Klein-
ert was however focused on the 3D classical case and our
discovery has been that its remarkable powers become to
full fruition when twisted into the 2+1D quantum realms.
The reason is simply that a lot more is going on, and the
stress gauge ﬁelds are exquisitely suited to deal with the
zero-temperature realms.

0.00.20.40.60.81.0ω0.51.01.52.0λ(λL)Ω=0η=π2;Ω=0.5η=π2;Ω=0.8η=15π32;Ω=0.5η=15π32;Ω=0.8Is it good for anything in real nature? It is far from ob-
vious whether the microscopic circumstances in systems
that do occur in nature will be ever of the kind that
this maximally correlated circumstances can be realized.
However, it is the usual credo that reality is always in the
middle and in order to ﬁgure what it is about one bet-
ter know the limiting cases. Although presently this is a
strictly theoretical aﬀair, we of course hope that it will
enlighten the experimentalists to have a look in the un-
usual corners suggested by the dual view. A typical case
in point are the “ﬂuctuating stripes” that we already dis-
cussed in the introduction, forming the initial motivation
for this work. Based on the somewhat indirect infor-
mation coming from the spin ﬂuctuations, it is literally
asserted that the underdoped cuprate superconductors
are characterized by stripe (crystalline-type) correlations
that extends over many lattice constants. We conclude
directly that the shear penetration depth is large, which
in turn implies that there should be at least remnants of
our massive stress photons to be discerned in the electro-
magnetic responses of Sec. XI D.

However, despite the fact that these massive stress
photons leave behind big ﬁngerprints in the dynamical re-
sponse functions, these are just not accessible using stan-
dard spectroscopic techniques. As we discussed at length
in Sec. XI, this is tied in the practical circumstance that
the velocity of light is very large compared to the ma-
terial velocities with the eﬀect that the experimentalists
can only access the q → 0 limit of the electromagnetic
response functions, where by principle the massive stress
photons lose their electromagnetic spectral weight. Plain
vanilla light does not work, but there are other ways of
measuring these response functions giving in principle ac-
cess to the relevant kinematical regime involving energies
in the range of 1−100 meV’s and momenta of order of in-
verse nanometers. The longitudinal electron energy-loss
function is in fact directly measured by electron energy-
loss spectroscopy (EELS), and Figs. 27, 28 show in great
detail where to expect the massive shear photon (see also
Ref. [17]). The trouble is yet again on the experimen-
tal side: the high-energy transmission EELS technique
would be exquisitely suited to observe these features but
unfortunately the technical development came to a stand-
still in the 1970s with the eﬀect that the energy resolution
is measured in hundreds of meV’s, way beyond what is
needed to resolve the shear photon. A next contender
is Resonant Inelastic X-ray Scattering (RIXS); yet again
the energy resolution of the existing beam lines falls short
by an order of magnitude while perhaps even a bigger
problem is that although this technique is supposed to
measure the loss function as well, up to now the evidence
that this is actually the case is still missing. Last but
not least, one can attempt to use a low-energy, reﬂec-
tion mode EELS spectrometer. Only very recently proof
of principle was delivered that such a machine can pick
up bosonic excitations of the strongly-correlated electron
system [23], and perhaps this approach might in some
near future deliver conclusive information. The verdict

91

is that because of the shortcomings of the existing ex-
perimental machinery it cannot be decided whether ﬂuc-
tuating stripes exist or whether the interpretations are
ﬂawed. The beneﬁt of the dual description is that it de-
livers an unambiguous prediction for a signature of ‘se-
rious’ ﬂuctuating order that in principle is accessible by
experiment.

A. Open problems

The reader might have the impression that the theory
we have presented is fairly complete, while only some de-
tails remain to be settled. In fact, there are quite a num-
ber of challenging problems becoming visible given the
state of the art as presented in this review. Let us ﬁnal-
ize this review with a list of the open questions, roughly
in order of increasing complexity and profundity.

1. The dual stress superconductor by ﬁrst principle

In Sec. VII we explained the central wheel around
which everything else revolves: the construction of the
dual dislocation condensate. The sections that follow
can be viewed as a conﬁrmation that this framework has
to be correct. This construction is however just rest-
ing on a phenomenological approach. In essence it takes
for granted that dislocation quantum melting is governed
by the same general weak–strong duality mechanism as
vortex–boson duality, as validated by the Abelian na-
ture of pure translations. There is just a unique way
to incorporate the additional features rendering the dual
stress condensate to be richer than the vortex conden-
sate such as the rotational structure and the glide prin-
ciple. This completely determines the structure of the
eﬀective dual theory. Even the number of free param-
eters is kept to nearly the absolute minimum. Assum-
ing that the mass density, shear and compression moduli
of the ‘background crystal’ are known, the ideal theory
would only have the dual Higgs mass (or shear penetra-
tion depth) as free parameter. We get very close: we
know that the condensate velocity cd is parametrically
related to the phonon velocity cT. However, as we dis-
cussed in Secs. VII, X, and XI, we cannot be sure whether
this involves a O(1) factor in between.

It is an open challenge to construct a ‘microscopic’
theory of the dislocation quantum melting. This has
been accomplished successfully for (multi-component)
vortices in the Abelian-Higgs duality in 2+1 and 3 di-
mensions [52–54, 89, 117, 133–139], as well as for dislo-
cations in two-dimensional melting [76, 140–143], and it
appears that this can be rather straightforwardly gener-
alized to dislocations in 2+1-dimensions, just involving
an extensive numerical Monte Carlo eﬀort. The strategy
is to exploit the Villain construction with ﬁnite, quan-
tized Burgers charges to derive the dual gauge theory.
The “dislocation-loop blow-out” of the topological de-

fects can be explicitly constructed in the framework of
lattice gauge theory, where the stress superconductor is
just a ﬂavored version of the vortex condensate. Surely
extra complications such as the glide principle can be
readily incorporated and it would be very interesting
whether this will indeed reproduce the universal long-
wavelength description that we have highlighted in this
review.

2. Duality squared is one

First of all, since duality is supposed to work both
ways, one should be able to dualize the disorder pa-
rameter of the quantum nematics (and/or smectics) once
more, to return to the original ordered state by a con-
densation of the topological defects that are singularities
in the disorder ﬁeld. For instance, one should be able
to go from the nematic to the solid by a proliferation of
dual topological defects. What are these defects? Nom-
inally, the disorder ﬁelds of the nematic are coincident
with the superﬂuid. Their topological excitations are in
turn the familiar vortices, and we learned in Sec. II, deal-
ing with the vortex–boson duality that the condensate of
vortices forms a dual superconductor which is coincident
with the boson-Mott insulator [55, 144]. But the Mott
insulator does not break translations in the way of the
crystal since translational symmetry is already broken by
the background lattice. The moral is that the superﬂuid
by itself does not carry suﬃcient information to recon-
struct the crystal dual.

Obviously one has to focus on the dislocation conden-
sates since these are the disorder ﬁelds that themselves
have been ‘formed’ departing from the crystal.
It has
to be so that this follows the template of the vortex–
boson duality in backward gear, that can be viewed as the
transition from a charged superconductor to its metal-
lic Coulomb phase. The topological excitations are now
the ﬂuxoids of the superconductor with their short-range
interactions and it is well understood that when these
proliferate and condense one gets back to the Coulomb
phase/superﬂuid with its massless Goldstone mode. In
case of the present stress duality this becomes technically
a much more involved aﬀair given the many extra modes
that have to be tracked, that eventually should resurrect
the phonons of the solid.

This backward dualization might also have some inter-
esting ramiﬁcations for the interpretation of experiments
that presently attract much attention: the ﬁeld-induced
charge density waves in the YBCO and BISCO cuprate
superconductors [145–151]. A closely related subject is
the ﬁeld-induced magnetism in the LSCO superconduc-
tors that were discovered in the 1990s, often interpreted
as as a signature of freezing of the charge stripes [152].
Departing from an underdoped cuprate which appears
to be nominally just a superconductor at a low tempera-
ture, the eﬀect of an applied magnetic ﬁeld is to stabilize
an Abrikosov lattice of ﬂuxoids. It is now observed that

92

in the core of these vortices a charge density modulation
appears that might lock into a long-range charge density
order when the ﬁeld exceeds a critical value [148, 153].

This can be rationalized on basis of simple Ginzburg–
Landau theory involving just competing charge and su-
perconducting order [154–157]. However, our dual stress
superconductor perspective suggests a quite natural and
highly elegant alternative explanation. As we just ar-
gued, the superconducting ﬂuxoid is falling short as pri-
mary topological defect since it has not the capacity to
encode for the resurrection of the crystalline order. How-
ever, given that the superconductivity and the dual stress
condensate ‘live on the same side’ of the duality it has to
be the case that the superconducting ﬂuxes, stabilized as
usual by the magnetic ﬁeld, are coincident with a com-
posite of vortices in the dual stress superconductor. The
dislocations are expelled from the core of such a topolog-
ical defect with the eﬀect that the crystalline order has to
re-emerge in the core of the superconducting ﬂuxoid! It is
a no-brainer: upon destroying the superconductivity our
system can only rediscover its crystalline heritage! The
question arises whether any observable consequences can
be deduced from this alternative perspective. We have
just not attempted to work this out in any detail and we
present it here as an interesting and quite timely chal-
lenge.

Finally, we should note that the disorder theory of crys-
tal melting can become considerably more complex when
considered in a crystal formed in a topological state of
matter with intrinsic couplings to strains and curvature,
i.e.
the lattice defects themselves [158]. These results
emerge from the concept of geometric response of two-
dimensional topological states, see e.g. [159] and refer-
ences therein, and in addition to Ref. [158] would cer-
tainly be an interesting avenue to apply the theory de-
veloped here. At the moment these geometric consider-
ations would rest on an uncontrolled assumption about
the coexistence of the (liquid) crystalline correlations and
the topological state — but there is work to be done even
without the assumption of the extra topological correla-
tions, as we discuss in Item 7. of this list.

3. Anisotropy and the quantum smectic

With regard to the symmetry characteristics we have
been focused on the quite literal ‘spherical-cow’ limit of
generalized elasticity. Symmetry is a simplifying circum-
stance and for this reason we considered the maximally
isotropic versions of solid, quantum nematic and smec-
tic order. For solids it is well understood how to deal
with the complications associated with lower-dimensional
space groups:
this just introduces extra elastic mod-
uli and these are classiﬁed and available in tabulated
form [10, 58]. Although we have not studied this in de-
tail, it should also be straightforward to generalize the
theory to less symmetric quantum nematics. In Sec. V
we presented the systematic order parameter theory for

nematics in two space dimensions. Departing from the
stress ﬁelds of the anisotropic crystals it appears to be
straightforward to arrive at a full dynamical description
of the anisotropic stress superconductors.

Another issue is the quantum smectic: although we did
not emphasize it, to quite a degree the general order pa-
rameter theory is still quite a mysterious aﬀair. This is
especially the case at zero temperature. We highlighted
the very surprising interplay of superﬂuid and solid char-
acteristics, noting that these orders are genuinely inter-
twined in the quantum smectic. It seems obvious that
the behavior we found is tied into the isotropic limit —
we argued that this would work in a quite diﬀerent deal-
ing with the quantum generalization of the conventional
‘liquid-layer’ smectics of soft matter that are the smectic
partners of the uniaxial nematics. To ﬁnd their long-
wavelength physics one does need the heavy machinery
of the full duality which also processes the information
associated with the massive modes. Embarrassingly, the
Ginzburg–Landau–Wilson theory that prescribes what to
expect at long wavelengths merely on basis of symmetry
principles, is still lacking. We perceive it as confusing
aﬀair. On the one hand, the rotational symmetry of the
crystal and nematic phases that border the smectic on
opposite sides is still remembered — we dealt implicitly
with a hexagonal crystal and a hexatic quantum nematic.
However, at face value the rotational symmetry appears
to be broken to a C2-symmetry associated with the liquid
and solid direction, followed by the rather intricate way
that the system behaves depending on the transverse and
longitudinal ﬂuctuations in particular momentum direc-
tions. Embarrassingly, we have not found out how to
formulate such a general theory and we present this as a
challenge to the readership.

4. Generalization to 3+1D dimensions

A major limitation of the work reported in this re-
view is that is exclusively focused on two space dimen-
sions. This is mostly for technical reasons: 2+1D is just
much easier than 3+1D. Adding one dimension has the
eﬀect that hell breaks loose. But this also has its ben-
eﬁts: there is much more going on in the three space
dimensions of our universe. This becomes already man-
ifest dealing with the bare-bone order parameter theory
as discussed in Sec. V. As we learned, the principle is
that the generalized nematic states are classiﬁed by the
point groups, and in 2D this is just all about discrete
Abelian symmetries. However, in 3+1D the point groups
are nearly always non-Abelian. Nematic liquid crystals
have been extensively studied in 3D but for the practical
reason that this only works well for rod-like molecules
this is nearly exclusively dealing with uniaxial nemat-
ics.
It is just a coincidence that these are singular in
the regard that these are still governed by an Abelian Z2
symmetry related to the simple D∞h point group. As
it turns out, not much is known regarding the order pa-

93

rameter theories associated with the generic non-Abelian
point groups: these are surprisingly complicated, involv-
ing order parameter tensors of a high rank. In this con-
text, the gauge-theoretical formulation of Sec. V comes
to full fruition: one just generalizes the O(2)/ZN theory
to O(3)/P where P is any of the 3D point groups and
by taking the limit of strong gauge coupling it turns into
a generating functional for the order parameter theories
of the generalized nematics. We are presently exploring
this fascinating landscape [160].

Yet another matter is to formulate the full elastic dual-
ity in 3+1D. Here one meets questions of deep and gen-
eral principle.
In 2+1D the dislocations are ‘particles’
and in the construction of the dual stress superconductor
we relied heavily on the machinery of second quantiza-
tion: the system of bosonic particles can be described in
terms of the disorder ﬁeld theory describing the evolu-
tion of the condensate order parameter. The diﬃculty is
that in 3+1D dislocations become strings or line defects
on the quantum level (see Sec. IV B). It is still possi-
ble to formulate a stress gauge theory, describing how
these dislocation-strings source long-range interactions,
now involving two-form gauge ﬁelds. To parametrize a
worldsheet we need two space-time indices, and as such
a 3+1D dislocation is given by J a
µν, where a denotes the
Burgers vector. Accordingly, the stress gauge ﬁelds that
couple to these dislocations are ba
µν, the so-called two-
form gauge ﬁelds. Dealing with the solid this works ﬁne
as a quite eﬃcient framework to compute how stresses
are sourced and propagate in the 3+1D elastic medium.
However, it is just not known how to generalize second
quantization to deal with the “tangle” (better, “foam”)
formed by such strings that have proliferated into the
liquid (crystal). This is a very basic incarnation of the
infamous hurdle called string ﬁeld theory. One could then
argue that the duality principle should be universal, with
the consequence that the 3+1D quantum liquid crystal
can be still viewed as some kind of dual stress super-
conductor fueled by a stringy dislocation condensate. It
is instructive to take a step back to vortex–boson dual-
ity as in Sec. II. In the 3+1D superﬂuid one has vortex
worldsheets and two-form gauge ﬁelds, which in the high-
energy literature are referred to as Nielsen–Olesen strings
and Kalb–Ramond gauge ﬁelds respectively. In the con-
text of condensed matter systems (as opposed to critical,
coreless strings), the condensation of such vortex strings
was considered in Ref. [55]. The bottom line is that it is
possible to describe the eﬀects of the string condensate in
terms of a Josephson-limit Higgs term deduced on phe-
nomenological grounds. In an upcoming publication we
will show how to generalize this the ‘ﬂavored version’ as-
sociated with the dislocation condensation [161].

5. Perturbing from the strong correlation limit: interstitials

It is insightful in physics to know the limiting cases,
but it is even more useful to perturb away from the lim-

its to ﬁnd out what is happening in the middle. This is
perhaps the most pressing open question we are facing.
The maximally-correlated ﬂuid limit on which we have
focused rests on the assumption that the typical distance
between the dislocation is large compared to the lattice
constant: the low-fugacity requirement. The physics in-
volved in the perturbation theory is clear: one has to
restore the constituent bosons which are the building
blocks of the kinetic gas theory of weak coupling as de-
grees of freedom. Departing from the low-fugacity limit
it is clear when these appear in a strong-coupling per-
turbative sense. In the solid they correspond to intersti-
tial/vacancy excitations; the loose atoms in the lattice.
These have a clear identity with respect to the topology
of the strongly-coupled crystals: interstitials are equal to
bound pairs of dislocation–antidislocation pairs that are
separated by a lattice constant. One can picture a pertur-
bative procedure where one systematically ‘dresses’ the
strong-coupling limit with dislocation-loop corrections,
but we have not developed this in any detail.

Such a perturbation theory could be quite useful to ad-
dress a number of physics phenomena which are beyond
the scope of the present theory. First, one can imagine
that these massive excitations could overdamp the rem-
nant massive modes left over from the crystal for ﬁnite
Higgs mass Ω, making their observation more challeng-
ing. Another example is the supersolid [69–73], how does
this ﬁt into the greater scheme? In the two-dimensional
Galilean continuum, supersolids will not be encountered.
The supersolid should be simply viewed as Bose gas of
interstitials peacefully coexisting with the crystal. The
reason that this can happen is of course that topologically
interstitials can be regarded as bound pairs of neutral
dislocation–antidislocation pairs that do not destroy the
crystal when they proliferate. However, this also provides
the reason why supersolids do not exist in the 2D contin-
uum: both the dislocations and interstitials are particle-
like and the core energies of the latter are higher than
those of individual dislocations and antidislocations that
generically repel each other.
In three dimensions this
is a diﬀerent aﬀair since dislocations are strings, while
the interstitials are still point particles which can carry
a much larger zero-point (kinetic) energy [162]. How-
ever, in the presence of a background lattice these rules
change: when the commensuration energy becomes large,
the long-range deformation ﬁelds associated with the dis-
locations become very large and eventually the disloca-
tions will get tightly bound, stabilizing the dislocation
gas and the supersolid. Accordingly, supersolids are an
ubiquitous theme in the main-stream condensed matter
literature dealing with (boson-)Hubbard models, since
these models can be viewed as dealing with the limit
of strong periodic background potentials [48, 163–168].
Obviously one would like to understand better how this
balance between dislocation quantum melting and su-
persolid formation develops as function of the potential
strength, degree of commensuration and so forth, but for
this purpose one needs the interstitial perturbation the-

94

ory. In this regard, we notice that the ‘stripy’ electronic
charge order as seen by scanning tunneling spectroscopy
(STS) in cuprate superconductors appears to be riddled
with dislocations [33].
In fact, the data seem to show
smooth, continuum-like long-range deformation ﬁelds as-
sociated with the dislocations. This is quite confusing
since this stripy charge order is supposed to be rooted
itself in the proximity to the Mott insulator which is in
turn the hallmark of strong lattice commensuration. As
we stressed early on, this is perhaps the best experimen-
tal indication that is currently available to take the idea
of dislocation melting serious in this context.

Another question that arises is: what to think about
the well-documented case of superﬂuid 4He? In a way
this is a quite strongly-correlated liquid. On the micro-
scopic scale it is basically a dense Van der Waals liq-
uid that is kept ﬂuid by the quantum zero-point mo-
tions [169, 170]. Historically it is also the instance where
the Bogoliubov weak-coupling treatment of the Bose gas
fails, among the highlights of quantum Monte Carlo cal-
culations [169]. The hallmark of the string-correlation
eﬀects is the roton minimum, as seen directly by inelastic
neutron scattering. Its essence was explained by Feyn-
man’s single-mode approximation linking it to the wig-
gles in the liquid structure factor. This in turn can be
viewed as the signal of solid-like correlations extending
over a distance of order of the lattice constant in the
liquid. The crystallization transition in 4He is actually
strongly ﬁrst order, and the shear penetration depth (in
our language) in the liquid is therefore short. Viewed
from the dual perspective the question that immediately
arises is: is there any relation between the roton and the
massive shear photons of Sec. VIII? One would expect
that in the presence of interstitials the propagating shear
modes should be destroyed at small momenta while per-
haps a remnant can survive at the roton momentum (in-
verse lattice constant). Conversely, from this perspective
one expects that the roton should light up in the dynam-
ical shear response. In principle this information can be
extracted from quantum Monte Carlo calculations but to
the best of our knowledge this has never been tried.

6. Translational disorder in the background: glassy stress

superconductivity

A closely related theme is, what to expect when the
dual stress superconductor lives in a background char-
acterized by a disorder potential? The central theme of
metallurgy is of course that dislocations pin easily to lat-
tice defects, rendering the metal to be more brittle or
malleable. The same principle of course applies to our
quantum dislocations and the question arises: what to
expect when the dual stress superconductor is exposed a
to a background with a disorder potential of increasing
strength? The quantum particles subjected to the disor-
der potential are now the delocalized dislocations form-
ing the condensate and one anticipates these will tend to

bind to the deepest minima in the potential landscape.
Thereby they will localize and the eﬀect is that a piece of
solid emerges surrounding the static dislocations, while
at the same time the superﬂuid density in this region is
suppressed. To the observer with eyes focused on the
density modulations this will appear as a glass-like sub-
stance, although strangely structured since the mediators
of the translational disorder (dislocations) appear to be
at the same time the agents that cause the crystalline
features in the ﬁrst place.

It would be interesting to explore this further, yet
again looking for unambiguous observational conse-
quences. Could it be that the rather mysterious disor-
der observed in the stripy electronic patterns observed by
scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) on cuprate super-
conductors are in fact of this kind [171, 172]. At the very
least, as we mentioned, these STS patterns in cuprate
appear to be littered with dislocations [33].

7. Relations to gravity

Let us ﬁnish this review with a subject matter that is
perhaps most appealing to the imagination of the physi-
cist: the multifaceted relations between ﬁeld theoretical
elasticity and gravitational physics [173–177].
In more
than one regard the theory of general relativity (GR) is
around the corner. By and large we have ignored this
aspect: it is complementary to the material we have dis-
cussed here and it deserves a thorough treatise by itself.
To quite a degree Kleinert was in ﬁrst instance fascinated
by this aspect in his development of the fundamentals of
the formalism [10, 11]. The idea underlying this pursuit
dates back in a way to Einstein himself: the notion that
the ‘fabric of spacetime’ is metaphorically not unlike an
elastic medium. But it is crucial regards yet completely
diﬀerent. Are there ways to make this metaphor more
literal?

The next step has also a long history, it seems to be
dating back to Landau: the theory of elasticity can be
geometrized and the resulting structure has several crit-
ical aspects in common with GR. This departs from the
notion that a crystal deﬁnes an internal geometry. The
crystal lattice is given the status of a coordinate system
that is explored by an internal observer that measures
distances by hopping from site to site. The metric rele-
vant to such an observer has the form ds2 = δab + uab fo-
cusing on space dimensions where uab = 1
2 (∂aub + ∂bua),
our familiar strain ﬁelds. One directly infers why space-
time is not a crystal: the diﬀeomorphisms (coordinate
transformations) have turned into the physical elastic
strain ﬁelds. The crystal is a manifold with a preferred
frame! Despite this disaster, this crystal geometry still
knowns about the geometrical properties of torsion and
curvature: the dislocation and disclinations precisely en-
capsulate these properties, be it in quantized form. A
ﬁnal aspect is the role of time. Real crystals are formed
from matter at a ﬁnite density and this caused the bad

95

breaking of Lorentz invariance that has been so impor-
tant in this review. In order to get anywhere with gravity,
this has to be restored. This can be done by hand by in-
sisting that the point of departure is the world crystal:
an elastic medium that is isotropic in (Euclidean) space-
time. One should be very aware that this is a strange
object, very diﬀerent from a normal crystal: since it is
immaterial (zero density), it does not carry sound when
the ‘liquid’ has formed. Neither does the corresponding
quantum liquid crystal carry rotational modes.

Let us ﬁrst zoom in on a less esoteric matter. Crys-
tals and liquid crystals can be sourced by curvature in
the background geometry. This is actually a ﬂourish-
ing subject in soft matter, dealing with matter living on
curved two-dimensional surfaces embedded in three ex-
ternal dimensions [178, 179]. What happens when one
tries to cover the surface of a sphere with a solid or ne-
matic layer? In a ﬂat background, the crystal curvature
is conﬁned: this is encapsulated by the conﬁned discli-
nations. However, the background curvature coerces the
crystal to curve, which causes a periodic array of disclina-
tions to be formed since Frank scalars are quantized. A
famous point in case is the football (or buckyball) which
can be viewed as a lattice of pentagons (disclinations) in
a hexagonal lattice background. In the language of stress
gauge ﬁelds this can be elegantly addressed [10, 11]. In
space directions the stress tensor is a symmetric tensor
and for this reason it can be parametrized in terms of
double-curl gauge ﬁelds hab as σaa(cid:48) = εabcεa(cid:48)b(cid:48)c(cid:48)∂b∂(cid:48)
bhcc(cid:48)
where h itself is a symmetric rank-2 tensor ﬁeld. But
this is precisely coincident with the form of the Einstein
tensor Gij in linearized gravity, where hab is identiﬁed
with the graviton!

Ignoring the dislocations, one now ﬁnds that hab is
sourced by the disclination current according to habΘab:
the Belifante form to enter stress energy in linearized
gravity.
It is a simple matter to demonstrate that the
background curvature enters as hab(Θab − Gab) where
Gab is the Einstein tensor of the background geometry.
The bad ‘net’ curvature Θab − Gab can now be expelled
from the conﬁning vacuum by matching the background
curvature with the disclination currents so that their sum
disappears.
In two space dimensions this becomes an
especially simple aﬀair since only scalar curvature enters,
which is easily matched with the Frank scalars of the
disclinations.

At the next stage, its is amusing to ask the question
what happens when the world crystal is melted into a rel-
ativistic world nematic [14]. Because the stress tensors
are now symmetric in relativistic spacetime this becomes
a very simple exercise that works out regardless the num-
ber of dimensions. Schematically the action of the crys-

tal is S ∝(cid:82) σµνσµν. Upon proliferating the dislocations

isotropically one ﬁnds in addition a Higgs term, in short
hand σµνσµν/∂2. Identifying σ with the linearized Ein-
stein tensor and expanding in the graviton ﬁeld hαβ, the
Higgs term is just the same as the Fierz–Pauli action of
linearized gravity! In the relativistic nematic curvature

is deconﬁned as the proper elastic rigidity, and in 3+1D
one will ﬁnd a pair of massless spin-2 modes, that now
mediate interactions between the stress-energy sources:
the disclinations with their quantized curvature that can
be identiﬁed with cosmic strings in the 3+1D setting. It
can actually be precisely argued that this is rooted in
the restoration of general covariance by the dislocation
condensate [19]. However, it fails badly with regard to
describing GR in its full glory. The rotations/Lorentz
boosts are still in the ﬁxed frame and only inﬁnitesi-
mal Einstein translations are restored. Therefore this
relativistic nematic is the vacuum of linearized gravity,
but there is nothing more: the theory cannot be boot-
strapped in its full non-linear glory. We notice that Klein-
ert himself has taken a qualitatively diﬀerent way is his
pursuit of the world crystal spacetime by postulating a
ﬂoppy world crystal space-time which has little in com-
mon with earthly crystals and has thereby the freedom
to overcome the diﬃculties we just noticed [10, 11].

Finally, ﬁeld-theoretical elasticity might be quite useful
in yet a very diﬀerent gravitational context: the descrip-
tion of matter by translating it into a gravitational holo-
graphic dual using the AdS/CFT correspondence. Only
very recently a proposal has appeared for the gravita-
tional dual of elasticity in terms of the “Stueckelberg
star” [180]. This is in a boundary language which is
closely related to the language we have been using. There
is yet another long standing, and deep mystery in holo-
graphic duality related to the description of liquid crys-
tals related to the deep problem that this has to be associ-
ated with spin-2 modes in the bulk that are already used
up by the stress energy in the boundary [181]. It might
well be the stress duality of this review can be translated
to the gravitational bulk, where it should reveal profound
structure.

Acknowledgments

We thank Dirk van der Marel for useful discussions
concerning Sec. XI. A.J.B. is partially supported by the
MEXT-Supported Program for the Strategic Research
Foundation at Private Universities “Topological Science”
(Grant No. S1511006) and by the Foreign Postdoctoral
Researcher program at RIKEN. This work was supported
by the Netherlands foundation for Fundamental Research
of Matter (FOM). The work of Z.N. has been supported
from the NSF grant DMR 1411229.

Appendix A: Fourier space coordinate systems

Throughout the text we often employ coordinate sys-
tems for the spacetime indices relative to the momentum
of the ﬁelds. Here we give explicit coordinate transfor-
mations between all these systems.

The point of departure is the real space imaginary
c τ and c a

time coordinate system (t, x, y), where t = 1

96

pµ

t

y

+1

t

0

T/ − 1

L

x

FIG. 32: Coordinate systems relative to momentum of the
ﬁelds. Pictorial explanation of the (τ, L, T) and (0, +1,−1)
systems.

y),

(cid:113)

q2
x + q2

(cid:113) 1

velocity, usually the shear velocity cT. The second sys-
tem (t, L, T) rotates the spatial coordinates into parallel
and orthogonal to the spatial momentum q = (qx, qy)
in other words, the longitudi-
(and q =
nal and transverse directions L resp. T.
In the third
system (0, +1,−1) the temporal and longitudinal com-
ponents are mixed so that the 0-component is parallel
to the spacetime momentum pµ = ( 1
c ωn, q) (and p =
n + q2), where c is the velocity of the medium (e.g.
the transverse phonon velocity cT); the +1-component is
also in the t–L plane but orthogonal to 0, and −1 is paral-
lel to the spatial-transverse direction T. Please note that
there is a sign diﬀerence between our −1-component and
that of Ref. 12, 13. Also note that the temporal com-
ponents have been rescaled At = 1
c Aτ to have the same
dimension as the other ﬁeld components (cf. Sec. I E).

c2 ω2

AL ∼ (cid:80)

Aµ and A(cid:48)

α is deﬁned by Aµ = eα

A general coordinate transformation between ﬁelds
α. For instance
L = (0, qx/q, qy/q). How-
ever, since these coordinate systems are deﬁned in Fourier
space only, we should insist on the condition for any ﬁeld

LAα where eα

α=t,x,y eα

µA(cid:48)

A(−p) = A†(p)

(A1)

so that the basis vectors are real-valued. Therefore we
are led to the following relation for µ ∈ (τ, x, y)

(cid:88)
µ A+1 + ie−1

µ AE

ieE

E=L,T

µ A−1.

(A2)

Aµ = et

µAt +

= ie0

µA0 + e+1

Below these factors of i are already incorporated. Note
that because of these relations qL = −iq. Also we have
∂mAm = −qAL while ∂mA†

†
m = qA
L etc.

The explicit coordinate transformations are:

0

q −i qy
q
i qx
q

0

0
0 −i qx
0 i qy

q −i qy
q −i qx

q

0

p
ωnqx

ωnqy
cpq

cpq −i qy
q
i qx
q
p −i qy
ωnqx
cpq
q −i qx
i qy

p
ωnqy
cpq

cp −i qx
− q
p
0

(i) At,x,y ↔ At,L,T

(ii) At,x,y ↔ A0,+1,−1

Ax
Ay

AL
AT

0
0 i qx
0 i qy
q

1
 =
At
1
 =
 At
i ωn
 =
At
−i ωn
 =
 A0
 At
i ωn
 =
 A0
−i ωn
 =

cp − q
i qx
p
i qy
p

A+1
A−1

AL
AT

Ax
Ay

cp

0

A+1
A−1

− q
p
0

(iii) At,L,T ↔ A0,+1,−1

cp − q
p −i ωn

q

0
p
cp 0
0
1

q
0
p
i ωn
cp 0
0
1

q

Ax
Ay

AL
AT

 ,
 At

 .
At

 ,
 A0

 .

At
 A0

 ,
 At

 .

A+1
A−1

A+1
A−1

Ax
Ay

q

AL
AT

(A3)

(A4)

(A5)

(A6)

(A7)

(A8)

Some useful relations are (for any ﬁelds Aµ and Bν),
A†
xBx + A†
d3x Aµ(x)Bν(x) =

†
LBL + A

yBy = A

(cid:90)

(cid:90)

†
TBT.
d3p
(2π)3 Aµ(−p)Bν(p) ≡
(cid:90)

(A9)
A†
µBν.
(A10)

(cid:90)
(cid:90)

d3x µκλ∂κAλµρσ∂ρBσ =
µ(p2δµν − pµpν)Bν =
A†

=

(cid:90)

p

d3p
(2π)3 µκλµρσpκpρA

†
+1B+1 + A

†
−1B−1

A

†
λBσ

(cid:17)

.

(cid:90)

(cid:16)

p

.

(A11)

Appendix B: Euclidean electromagnetism

conventions

The metric is “mostly plus” ηµν = diag(−1, +1, +1).
In imaginary time τ = it, all covariant tensors undergo
transformations. In particular, we deﬁne V ı = −iV and
m = −iEm and ρı
Q = −iρQ. This leads to the following
Eı

97

(B1)

(B2)

(B3)

(B4)

(B5)
tn, Fmn) ≡

three-vectors,

∂τ , ∂m)

V ı, Am),

cl

∂l
µ = (i 1
cl
Aµ = (−i 1
µ = (− 1
Aı,l
jµ = (−iclρı
µ = (−clρı
jı,l

cl

V ı, Am),

Q, jm),
Q, jm),

cl

∂τ , ∂m),

Aµ = (i

∂l,µ = (−i 1
1
cl
1
V ı, Am),
cl

V ı, Am),

Aı,l µ = (

jµ = (iclρı
jı,l µ = (clρı

Q, jm),
Q, jm).

Note that Aı
(−iFı,tn, Fmn) such that

m = Am. We also deﬁne F ı

µν = (F ı

tn = −F ı,tn = 1
F ı

cl

(∂τ An + ∂nV ı) = − 1

cl

Eı
n.

(B6)

The Euclidean Maxwell action SE, where only covariant
(lower) indices are used, is:

(cid:90)

= i

SMaxw = iSE,Maxw = i

dτ d2x

1
4µ0

F ı
µνF ı

µν − Aı,l

µ jı,l
µ

dτ d2x

1
2µ0

( 1
c2
l

m + B2) − V ıρı
Eı2

Q − Amjm.
(B7)

(cid:90)

The imaginary time deformation current is:
j = +ine∗cT∂tu.

t = −ine∗cT∇ · u,
jı

(B8)

Substituting back the various imaginary time quantities,
we correctly retrieve the real time deformation charge
current jµ.

Appendix C: Dual Kubo formula

In a spirit similar to Sec. VI G, we can also express the
conductivity directly in terms of the stress propagator G
from Eq. (306). In fact, since the actions are quadratic,
we can always replace ﬁelds with their equations of mo-
tion, which is equivalent to integrating them out.

The conductivity tensor ˆσab (not to be confused with
µ) is deﬁned by the relation in real

the stress tensor σa
time,

ja = ˆσabEb = ˆσab(−∂bV − ∂tAb) → ˆσabωnAb.

(C1)
In the last step, we adopted the radiation gauge ﬁx V ≡ 0
as we will do throughout this part of the appendix only.
If ˆσab is diagonal and constant then this is just Ohm’s
law, but in general the conductivity tensor is a function
of momentum and energy. Here ja is the electric current,
deﬁned by ja = −∂SE/∂Aa in Eq. (276). For the charged
crystal, it can be found from Eq. (285)

ja = − ∂SE
∂Aa

= ine∗cT∂tua.

(C2)

For dual variables, we use the inversion Eq. (294) or di-
rectly Eq. (296) to ﬁnd,

ja = − ne∗
µ
ne∗
µ

=

cTσa

t − ε0ω2
T − ε0ω2

pAa

pAı
a.

cTq ba
y − ∂yba

t = (∂xba

x) → −qba
Here we used σa
T. The ﬁrst
term is the so-called paramagnetic current jp
a while the
second term is the diamagnetic current, although these
are not gauge-invariant notions. To get this into a form
like Eq. (C1), we need to substitute ba
T for Aµ. This can
be done through the equation of motion, obtained from
varying the ﬁrst line of Eq. (306) with respect to ba†
µ :

(G−1)ab

(C4)
Using GG−1 = 1 as in Eq. (306) this can be inverted to

ν = 0.

ν + ga

µνAı

µνbb

µ = −Gab
ba

µνgb

νλAı
λ.

(C5)

In the radiation gauge ﬁx, from Eq. (308) the only non-
zero components of gb
TT, both of which
have value −ne∗cTq/µ. Inspecting Eq. (C3), we are only
interested in the case µ = T. Then we ﬁnd,

TL and gT

νλ are gL

(cid:90)

(C3)

98

(cid:90)

Here the additional factor of i in front of the current
Green’s function comes from its Fourier transform pre-
scription

dτ e−iωnτ(cid:104)ja(−ωn)jb(ωn)(cid:105) → i

dt eiωt(cid:104)ja(−ω)jb(ω)(cid:105)
(C11)
and the commutator comes from time ordering in the
retarded Green’s function. See for instance Refs. [128,
129] (but note they use a diﬀerent convention iωn →
ω + iδ).

Alternatively, if we have already integrated out the
stress gauge ﬁelds and obtained the stress Lagrangian in
the form

Lstress = 1

2 AµG−1

µν Aν,

(C12)
where the electromagnetic Green’s function Gµν should
be distinguished from stress Green’s function Gab
µν, then
the conductivity can be found directly from Eq. (C1) and
the deﬁnition of the current Ja = −∂SE/∂Aa, to be

ˆσab = − 1
ωn

G−1

ab

(radiation gauge).

(C13)

ba
T =

ne∗cT

µ

qGab

TTAı
b.

Substituting in Eq. (C3) we ﬁnally ﬁnd,

(C6)

If we have used the (photon ﬁeld) Coulomb gauge ﬁx
instead of the radiation gauge ﬁx, then the conductivities
are

(ne∗cT)2

ja =

µ
= − ε0ω2
p
ωn

q2Gab

TTAı

b − ε0ω2

pAı
a

1
µ

(δab − 1
µ

q2Gab

TT)ωnAı
b.

(C7)

Using the deﬁnition Eq. (C1) we ﬁnd the conductivity
tensor to be

ˆσab = − ε0ω2
p
ωn

(δab − 1
µ

q2Gab

TT)

(C8)

Keep in mind that µ is the shear modulus and not the
magnetic permeability. Note that we do not need to ad-
ditionally worry about the original Meissner contribution
Eq. (297), this is already implicitly incorporated through
Eq. (C3). Also note that in the tilde-coordinate system
with respect to the dislocation velocity, Gab
TT since
µν = (cid:104)ba†
ν(cid:105). Realizing that the
T = ˜ba
µ bb
ba
T. Recall that Gab
a = − ne∗
paramagnetic current is jp
µ cTq ba
T, from Eq. (C3),
we see that this is equivalent to

TT = ˜Gab

l q2G−1
tt , (Coulomb gauge)
G−1
tT ,

ˆσLL = − 1
ωn
ˆσLT = − 1
ωn
ˆσTL = − 1
ωn
ˆσTT = − 1
ωn

ω2
tt = − ωn
l q2G−1
n
c2
c2
tT = − −i
−iωn
G−1
clq
clq
G−1
G−1
Tt = − i
iωn
Tt ,
clq
clq
G−1
TT.

(C14)

Using Eq. (C8), we can ﬁnd the conductivity directly
from the dual stress propagator for the uncharged crystal.
The dielectric function is deﬁned as

ˆεab = ε0δab + i

ˆσab
ω

→ ε0δab − ˆσab
ωn

.

(C15)

This relation is found from the material Maxwell equa-
tions. Substituting Eq. (C8) we can derive the dielectric
function directly from the dual stress propagator:

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

ˆσab = −ε0

ω2
p
ωn

δab +

(cid:104)jp†
b (cid:105).
a jp

1
ωn

(C9)

ˆεab = ε0

(1 +

ω2
p
ω2
n

)δab − ω2
p
ω2
n

q2 1
µ

Gab
TT

.

(C16)

If we transform back to real time and real frequencies via
−iωn = ω + iδ, we retrieve the usual form of the Kubo
formula

ˆσab(ω, q) =

i
ω

ε0ω2

pδab +

1
ω

a (−ω,−q), jp

b (ω, q)(cid:3)(cid:105).

(C10)

(cid:104)(cid:2)jp

The DC conductivity is deﬁned as taking ﬁrst the low-

momentum and then the low-frequency limit

ˆσDC = lim
ω→0

lim
q→0

ˆσ(ω, q).

(C17)

99

[1] Y. Ando, K. Segawa, S. Komiya, and A. N. Lavrov,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 137005 (2002).

[2] M. Vojta, Advances in Physics 58, 699 (2009).
[3] V. Oganesyan, S. A. Kivelson, and E. Fradkin, Phys.

Rev. B 64, 195109 (2001).

[4] R. A. Borzi, S. A. Grigera, J. Farrell, R. S. Perry, S. J. S.
Lister, S. L. Lee, D. A. Tennant, Y. Maeno, and A. P.
Mackenzie, Science 315, 214 (2007).

[5] E. Fradkin, S. A. Kivelson, M. J. Lawler, J. P. Eisen-
stein, and A. P. Mackenzie, Ann. Rev. Cond. Mat. Phys.
1, 153 (2010).

[6] E. Fradkin, in Modern Theories of Many-Particle Sys-
tems in Condensed Matter Physics (Springer Berlin Hei-
delberg, 2012), vol. 843 of Lecture Notes in Physics, pp.
53–116.

[7] J.-H. Chu, H.-H. Kuo, J. G. Analytis, and I. R. Fisher,

Science 337, 710 (2012).

R. Liang, D. A. Bonn, W. N. Hardy, et al., Nature 463,
519 (2010).

[27] C. Howald, H. Eisaki, N. Kaneko, and A. Kapitulnik,
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 100,
9705 (2003).

[28] Y. Kohsaka, C. Taylor, K. Fujita, A. Schmidt,
C. Lupien, T. Hanaguri, M. Azuma, M. Takano,
H. Eisaki, H. Takagi, et al., Science 315, 1380 (2007).

[29] T.-M. Chuang, M. P. Allan, J. Lee, Y. Xie, N. Ni,
S. L. Bud’ko, G. S. Boebinger, P. C. Canﬁeld, and J. C.
Davis, Science 327, 181 (2010).

[30] J. A. Hertz, Phys. Rev. B 14, 1165 (1976).
[31] A. J. Millis, Phys. Rev. B 48, 7183 (1993).
[32] D. J. Scalapino, Physics Reports 250, 329 (1995).
[33] A. Mesaros, K. Fujita, H. Eisaki, S. Uchida, J. C. Davis,
S. Sachdev, J. Zaanen, M. J. Lawler, and E.-A. Kim,
Science 333, 426 (2011).

[8] R. M. Fernandes, A. V. Chubukov, and J. Schmalian,

[34] H. A. Kramers and G. H. Wannier, Physical Review 60,

Nat. Phys. 10, 97 (2014).

252 (1941).

[9] S. Kivelson, E. Fradkin, and V. Emery, Nature 393, 550

[35] V. L. Berezinskii, Soviet Journal of Experimental and

(1998).

[10] H. Kleinert, Gauge Fields in Condensed Matter, Vol.II
Stress and Defects (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1989),
ISBN 9971-50-210-9.

[11] H. Kleinert, Mulivalued Fields in Condensed Matter,
Electromagnetism, and Gravitation (World Scientiﬁc,
Singapore, 2008), ISBN 978-981-279-170-2.

Theoretical Physics 32, 493 (1970).

[36] J. M. Kosterlitz and D. J. Thouless, J. Phys. C 5, L124

(1972).

[37] J. M. Kosterlitz and D. J. Thouless, J. Phys. C 6, 1181

(1973).

[38] B. Halperin and D. Nelson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 41, 121

(1978).

[12] J. Zaanen, Z. Nussinov, and S. Mukhin, Ann. Phys. 310,

[39] D. Nelson and B. Halperin, Phys. Rev. B19, 2457

181 (2004).

(1979).

[13] V. Cvetkovic, Ph.D. thesis, Leiden University (2006),

http://hdl.handle.net/1887/4456.

[14] H. Kleinert and J. Zaanen, Phys. Lett. A 324, 361

(2004).

[40] A. Young, Phys. Rev. B19, 1855 (1979).
[41] J. Zaanen, Y. Liu, Y.-W. Sun, and K. Schalm, Holo-
graphic Duality in Condensed Matter Physics (Cam-
bridge University Press, 2015).

[15] V. Cvetkovic, Z. Nussinov, and J. Zaanen, Philosophical

[42] J. Burgers, Proc. Kon. Ned. Akad. Wetensch. 42, 293

Magazine 86, 2995 (2006).

(1939).

[16] V. Cvetkovic and J. Zaanen, Physical Review B74,

134504 (2006).

[43] F. Frank, Disc. Farad. Soc. 25, 19 (1958).
[44] J.-M. Park and T. C. Lubensky, Phys. Rev. E 53, 2648

[17] V. Cvetkovic and J. Zaanen, Physical Review Letters

(1996).

97, 045701 (2006).

[45] S. Ostlund and B. I. Halperin, Phys. Rev. B 23, 335

[18] V. Cvetkovic, Z. Nussinov, S. Mukhin, and J. Zaanen,

(1981).

EPL 81, 27001 (2008).

[46] M. C. Marchetti and D. R. Nelson, Phys. Rev. B 41,

[19] J. Zaanen and A. Beekman, Ann. Phys. 327, 1146

1910 (1990).

(2012).

[20] A. J. Beekman, K. Wu, V. Cvetkovic, and J. Zaanen,

Phys. Rev. B 88, 024121 (2013).

[47] P. Chaikin and T. Lubensky, Principles of Condensed
Matter Physics (Cambridge University Press, 2000),
ISBN 9780521794503.

[21] K. Liu, J. Nissinen, Z. Nussinov, R.-J. Slager, K. Wu,

[48] M. Fisher, P. Weichman, G. Grinstein, and D. Fisher,

and J. Zaanen, Phys. Rev. B 91, 075103 (2015).

Phys. Rev. B 40, 546 (1989).

[22] S. A. Kivelson, I. P. Bindloss, E. Fradkin, V. Oganesyan,
J. M. Tranquada, A. Kapitulnik, and C. Howald, Rev.
Mod. Phys. 75, 1201 (2003).

[23] S. Vig, A. Kogar, V. Mishra, L. Venema, M. S. Rak,
A. A. Husain, G. D. Gu, E. Fradkin, M. R. Norman,
and P. Abbamonte, arXiv:1509.04230 (2015).

[24] P. de Gennes and J. Prost, The Physics of Liquid Crys-
tals, International Series of Monographs on Physics
(Clarendon Press, 1995), ISBN 9780198517856.

[25] V. Hinkov, D. Haug, B. Fauqu´e, P. Bourges, Y. Sidis,
A. Ivanov, C. Bernhard, C. T. Lin, and B. Keimer, Sci-
ence 319, 597 (2008).

[26] R. Daou, J. Chang, D. LeBoeuf, O. Cyr-Choiniere,
F. Laliberte, N. Doiron-Leyraud, B. J. Ramshaw,

[49] M. Fisher and D. Lee, Phys. Rev. B 39, 2756 (1989).
[50] D. Lee and M. Fisher, Int. J. Mod. Phys. B 5, 2675

(1991).

[51] H. Kleinert, Gauge Fields in Condensed Matter, Vol.I
Superﬂow and Vortex Lines (World Scientiﬁc, Singa-
pore, 1989), ISBN 9971-50-210-9.

[52] A. K. Nguyen and A. Sudbø, Physical Review B60,

15307 (1999).

[53] J. Hove and A. Sudbø, Physical Review Letters 84, 3426

(2000).

[54] I. Herbut and Z. Teˇsanovi´c, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 4588

(1996).

[55] A. Beekman, D. Sadri, and J. Zaanen, New J. Phys. 13,

033004 (2011).

100

[56] S. Sachdev, Quantum phase transitions (Cambridge
University Press, 2011), 2nd ed., ISBN 978052151468-2.
in a Nutshell
(Princeton University Press, Princeton, 2010), ISBN
9781400835324.

[57] A. Zee, Quantum Field Theory

[58] L. D. Landau and E. Lifshitz, Course of Theoretical

Physics 7, 109 (1986).

[91] M. Henneaux and C. Teitelboim, Quantization of Gauge
Systems (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ,
1992), ISBN 0-0691-08775-X.

[92] J. Kogut and L. Susskind, Phys. Rev. D 11, 395 (1975).
[93] J. B. Kogut, Rev. Mod. Phys. 51, 659 (1979).
[94] S. Elitzur, Phys. Rev. D 12, 3978 (1975).
[95] T. Senthil and M. P. A. Fisher, Phys. Rev. B 62, 7850

[59] I. Low and A. V. Manohar, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 101602

(2000).

(2002).

[96] R. D. Sedgewick, D. J. Scalapino, and R. L. Sugar, Phys.

[60] H. Watanabe and H. Murayama, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110,

Rev. B 65, 054508 (2002).

181601 (2013).

[97] D. Podolsky and E. Demler, New Journal of Physics 7,

[61] W. Yang, Z.-M., Li, W. Shi, B.-H. Xie, and M.-B. Yang,

59 (2005).

J. Mater. Sci. 39, 3269 (2004).

[98] S. V. Isakov, R. G. Melko, and M. B. Hastings, Science

[62] W. H. Kleiner, L. M. Roth, and S. H. Autler, Phys. Rev.

335, 193 (2012).

133, A1226 (1964).

[99] D. F. Mross and T. Senthil, Phys. Rev. B 86, 115138

[63] E. Kittinger, J. Tich´y, and E. Bertagnolli, Phys. Rev.

(2012).

Lett. 47, 712 (1981).

[64] R. Lakes, Science 235, 1038 (1987).
[65] A. Ahsan, J. Rudnick, and R. Bruinsma, Phys. Rev. E

[100] J. Villain, J. Phys. France 36, 581 (1975).
[101] W. Janke and H. Kleinert, Nuclear Physics B 270, 135

(1986).

76, 061910 (2007).

[102] D. Horn, M. Weinstein, and S. Yankielowicz, Phys. Rev.

[66] N. Mermin, Reviews of Modern Physics 51, 591 (1979).
[67] J. Friedel, Dislocations (Pergamon, 1964).
[68] M. Kleman and J. Friedel, Rev. Mod. Phys. 80, 61

(2008).

[69] E. Kim and M. Chan, Nature 427, 225 (2004).
[70] Z. Nussinov, A. V. Balatsky, M. J. Graf, and S. A. Trug-

man, Phys. Rev. B 76, 014530 (2007).

[71] A. V. Balatsky, M. J. Graf, Z. Nussinov, and S. A. Trug-

man, Phys. Rev. B 75, 094201 (2007).

[72] N. Prokof’ev, Advances in Physics 56, 381 (2007).
[73] M. Boninsegni and N. V. Prokof’ev, Rev. Mod. Phys.

84, 759 (2012).

D 19, 3715 (1979).

[103] G. Bhanot and M. Creutz, Phys. Rev. D 21, 2892

(1980).

[104] O. Borisenko, V. Chelnokov, G. Cortese, M. Gravina,
A. Papa, and I. Surzhikov, Nuclear Physics B 879, 80
(2014).

[105] X. Wen, Quantum Field Theory of Many-Body Systems:
From the Origin of Sound to an Origin of Light and
Electrons, Oxford Graduate Texts (OUP Oxford, 2004),
ISBN 9780198530947.

[106] K. Gregor, D. A. Huse, R. Moessner, and S. L. Sondhi,

New Journal of Physics 13, 025009 (2011).

[74] F. A. Bais and C. J. M. Mathy, Phys. Rev. B 73, 224120

[107] E. Fradkin and S. H. Shenker, Phys. Rev. D 19, 3682

(2006).

(1979).

[75] C. Mathy and F. Bais, Annals of Physics 322, 709

[108] K. Fredenhagen and M. Marcu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 56,

(2007).

223 (1986).

[76] H. Kleinert, Physics Letters A 95, 381 (1983).
[77] P. E. Lammert, D. S. Rokhsar, and J. Toner, Phys. Rev.

[109] S. D. Geraedts and O. I. Motrunich, Phys. Rev. B 90,

214505 (2014).

Lett. 70, 1650 (1993).

[110] Z. Nussinov and J. Zaanen, J. Phys. IV France 12, 245

[78] P. E. Lammert, D. S. Rokhsar, and J. Toner, Phys. Rev.

(2002).

E 52, 1778 (1995).

[111] J. Zaanen and Z. Nussinov, Phys. Status Solidi B 236,

[79] D. R. Nelson, Phase transitions and critical phenomena

332 (2003).

7, 165 (1983).

[80] N. W. Ashcroft and N. D. Mermin, Solid State Physics

[112] P. Ehrenfest, Zeit. Phys. 45, 455 (1927).
[113] O. H. Nielsen and R. M. Martin, Phys. Rev. B 32, 3780

(1976).

(1985).

[81] T. F. Rosenbaum, S. E. Nagler, P. M. Horn, and

R. Clarke, Phys. Rev. Lett. 50, 1791 (1983).

[82] P. Keim, G. Maret, and H. H. von Gr¨unberg, Phys. Rev.

E 75, 031402 (2007).

[114] P. Dirac, Lectures on Quantum Mechanics, Dover
Books on Physics (Dover Publications, 2001), ISBN
9780486417134.

[115] R. A. Toupin, Archive for Rational Mechanics and Anal-

[83] S. C. Kapfer and W. Krauth, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114,

ysis 11, 385 (1962).

035702 (2015).

[116] R. A. Toupin, Archive for Rational Mechanics and Anal-

[84] E. P. Bernard and W. Krauth, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107,

ysis 17, 85 (1964).

155704 (2011).

[117] M. Kiometzis, H. Kleinert, and A. M. J. Schakel,

[85] G. M. Bruun and D. R. Nelson, Phys. Rev. B 89, 094112

Fortschr. Phys. 43, 697 (1995).

(2014).

[118] J. Hove, S. Mo, and A. Sudbø, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85,

[86] W. Lechner, H.-P. B¨uchler, and P. Zoller, Phys. Rev.

2368 (2000).

Lett. 112, 255301 (2014).

[119] K. Kasamatsu, M. Tsubota, and M. Ueda, International

[87] Z. Wu, J. K. Block, and G. M. Bruun, ArXiv e-prints

Journal of Modern Physics B 19, 1835 (2005).

(2015), 1509.02679.

[120] T. Brauner and H. Watanabe, Phys. Rev. D 89, 085004

[88] J. V. Jos´e, L. P. Kadanoﬀ, S. Kirkpatrick, and D. R.

(2014).

Nelson, Phys. Rev. B 16, 1217 (1977).

[121] T. Hayata and Y. Hidaka, Physics Letters B 735, 195

[89] R. Savit, Phys. Rev. B 17, 1340 (1978).
[90] K. Kajantie, M. Laine, T. Neuhaus, A. Rajantie, and

(2014).

[122] A. Nicolis, R. Penco, F. Piazza, and R. A. Rosen, J.

K. Rummukainen, Physics Letters B 482, 114 (2000).

High Energ. Phys. 2013 (2013).

101

[123] H. S. Seung and D. R. Nelson, Physical Review A 38,

1005 (1988).

[124] E. Fradkin and S. A. Kivelson, Phys. Rev. B 59, 8065

(1999).

[125] V. J. Emery, E. Fradkin, S. A. Kivelson, and T. C.

Lubensky, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 2160 (2000).

[126] R. Toupin, International Journal of Engineering Science

1, 101 (1963).

[152] B. Lake, H. Rønnow, N. Christensen, G. Aeppli, K. Lef-
mann, D. McMorrow, P. Vorderwisch, P. Smeibidl,
N. Mangkorntong, T. Sasagawa, et al., Nature 415, 299
(2002).

[153] T. Wu, H. Mayaﬀre, S. Kr¨amer, M. Horvati´c,
C. Berthier, W. Hardy, R. Liang, D. Bonn, and M.-H.
Julien, Nature 477, 191 (2011).

[154] S. Sachdev and R. La Placa, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111,

[127] J. D. Jackson, Classical electrodynamics (Wiley, New

027202 (2013).

York, NY, 1999), 3rd ed., ISBN 9780471309321.

[155] E. Fradkin, S. A. Kivelson, and J. M. Tranquada, Re-

[128] G. D. Mahan, Many-Particle Physics (Plenum, New

views of Modern Physics 87, 457 (2015).

York, N.Y., 1993), 2nd ed.

[129] P. Coleman, Introduction to Many-Body Physics (Cam-

bridge University Press, 2015).

[156] P. A. Lee, Phys. Rev. X 4, 031017 (2014).
[157] L. E. Hayward, D. G. Hawthorn, R. G. Melko, and

S. Sachdev, Science 343, 1336 (2014).

[130] L. D. Landau, L. Pitaevskii, and E. Lifshitz, Electrody-

[158] G. Y. Cho, O. Parrikar, Y. You, R. G. Leigh, and T. L.

namics of continuous media, vol. 8 (elsevier, 1984).

Hughes, Physical Review B 91 (2015).

[131] D. Pines, Elementary Excitations in Solids: Lectures on
Protons, Electrons, and Plasmons, Advanced book clas-
sics (Advanced Book Program, Perseus Books, 1999),
ISBN 9780738201153.

[132] D. Forcella, J. Zaanen, D. Valentinis, and D. Van

Der Marel, Physical Review B 90, 035143 (2014).
[133] M. E. Peskin, Annals of Physics 113, 122 (1978).
[134] C. Dasgupta and B. Halperin, Physical Review Letters

47, 1556 (1981).

[159] T. Can, M. Laskin, and P. B. Wiegmann, Annals of

Physics 362, 752 (2015).

[160] K. Liu, J. Nissinen, R.-J. Slager, K. Wu, and J. Zaanen,

arXiv:1512.07822 (2015).

[161] K. Wu and et al., in preparation.
[162] N. Prokof’ev and B. Svistunov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94,

155302 (2005).

[163] K.-S. Liu and M. E. Fisher, Journal of Low Temperature

Physics 10, 655 (1973).

[135] I. F. Herbut, Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and

[164] G. Batrouni, R. Scalettar, G. Zimanyi, and A. Kampf,

General 30, 423 (1997).

Physical review letters 74, 2527 (1995).

[136] S. Mo, J. Hove, and A. Sudbø, Phys. Rev. B 65, 104501

[165] S. Wessel and M. Troyer, Physical review letters 95,

(2002).

127205 (2005).

[137] J. Smiseth, E. Smørgrav, and A. Sudbø, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 93, 077002 (2004).

[138] J. Smiseth, E. Smørgrav, E. Babaev, and A. Sudbø,

Phys. Rev. B 71, 214509 (2005).

[166] R. Melko, A. Paramekanti, A. Burkov, A. Vishwanath,
D. Sheng, and L. Balents, Physical review letters 95,
127207 (2005).

[167] D. Heidarian and K. Damle, Physical review letters 95,

[139] E. Smørgrav, J. Smiseth, E. Babaev, and A. Sudbø,

127206 (2005).

Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 096401 (2005).

[140] Y. Saito, Phys. Rev. Lett. 48, 1114 (1982).
[141] Y. Saito, Phys. Rev. B 26, 6239 (1982).
[142] K. J. Strandburg, Rev. Mod. Phys. 60, 161 (1988).
[143] W. Janke and H. Kleinert, Physical Review B 41, 6848

(1990).

[168] P. Sengupta, L. P. Pryadko, F. Alet, M. Troyer, and

G. Schmid, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 207202 (2005).

[169] D. M. Ceperley, Reviews of Modern Physics 67, 279

(1995).

[170] B. K. Clark and D. M. Ceperley, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96,

105302 (2006).

[144] A. J. Beekman and J. Zaanen, Physical Review B 86

[171] O. Fischer, M. Kugler, I. Maggio-Aprile, C. Berthod,

(2012).

[145] J. Hoﬀman, E. Hudson, K. Lang, V. Madhavan,
H. Eisaki, S. Uchida, and J. Davis, Science 295, 466
(2002).

[146] K. Lang, V. Madhavan, J. Hoﬀman, E. Hudson,
H. Eisaki, S. Uchida, and J. Davis, Nature 415, 412
(2002).

[147] J. Chang, E. Blackburn, A. T. Holmes, N. B. Chris-
tensen, J. Larsen, J. Mesot, R. Liang, D. A. Bonn,
W. N. Hardy, A. Watenphul, et al., Nature Physics 8,
871 (2012).

[148] T. Wu, H. Mayaﬀre, S. Kr¨amer, M. Horvati´c,
C. Berthier, P. L. Kuhns, A. P. Reyes, R. Liang, W. N.
Hardy, D. A. Bonn, et al., Nature Communications 4,
2113 (2013).

[149] R. Comin, A. Frano, M. M. Yee, Y. Yoshida, H. Eisaki,
E. Schierle, E. Weschke, R. Sutarto, F. He, A. Soumya-
narayanan, et al., Science 343, 390 (2014).

[150] R. Comin, R. Sutarto, F. He, E. da Silva Neto,
L. Chauviere, A. Frano, R. Liang, W. Hardy, D. Bonn,
Y. Yoshida, et al., Nature materials 14, 796 (2015).

and C. Renner, Rev. Mod. Phys. 79, 353 (2007).

[172] E. Carlson, S. Liu, B. Phillabaum, and K. Dahmen,
Journal of Superconductivity and Novel Magnetism 28,
1237 (2015).

[173] K. Kondo, in Proc. 2nd Japan Nat. Congr. Applied Me-

chanics (1952), vol. 2, pp. 41–47.

[174] E. Kr¨oner, Archive for Rational Mechanics and Analysis

4, 273 (1959).

[175] B. Bilby, R. Bullough, and E. Smith, in Proceedings of
the Royal Society of London A: Mathematical, Physical
and Engineering Sciences (The Royal Society, 1955),
vol. 231, pp. 263–273.

[176] J. D. McCrea, F. W. Hehl, and E. W. Mielke, Interna-

tional Journal of Theoretical Physics 29, 1185 (1990).

[177] M. Katanaev and I. Volovich, Annals of Physics 216, 1

(1992).

[178] M. J. Bowick and L. Giomi, Advances in Physics 58,

449 (2009).

[179] V. Koning and V. Vitelli, arXiv:1401.4957 (2014).
[180] L. Alberte, M. Baggioli, A. Khmelnitsky, and O. Pujo-

las, arXiv:1510.09089 (2015).

[151] B. Keimer, S. Kivelson, M. Norman, S. Uchida, and

[181] B. W. Langley, G. Vanacore, and P. W. Phillips, JHEP

J. Zaanen, Nature 518, 179 (2015).

2015, 1 (2015).

