6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
4
1

 
 
]
c
q
-
r
g
[
 
 

1
v
4
7
2
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

  Abstract  Black hole entropy has been studied for the past forty years, but there is still a lack of clarity as to its meaning, and the various interpretations this term is given in the fields of thermodynamics, quantum information and geometry. In the hope of attaining understanding of the concept of entropy in black holes I study specific characteristics of this entropy, and compare these characteristics with respect to the various fields. In this research I focused on the following definitions of entropy: thermodynamic and statistical entropy, entropy of entanglement, Wald entropy as a Noether charge, and the entropy developed by Carlip from conformal symmetry. First I studied the question of divergence of entropy on the black hole horizon. It is known that the statistical entropy of a matter field in the black hole metric diverges on the horizon, whereas entanglement entropy does not diverge. Thus it appears that the two entropies differ. I show that it is possible that the divergence is the result of inappropriate treatment of the question, and so it may simply stem from quantum uncertainty between position and momentum, and is not an inherent characteristic of statistical entropy. Thus it is possible that statistical entropy and entanglement entropy are related to the same quantity. I then turned to the question of observer dependence of entropy. Wald’s entropy is defined in terms of intrinsic curvature. I clarify the definition of statistical entropy in curved relativistic space, and I find a transformation which laves the entropy invariant while the curvature changes. There is a subgroup in which the transformation of the number of states preserves invariant curvature, but the counter example presented here proves that it is not possible to assume that a given number of states and the statistical entropy derived from it relate to a space time with a given curvature. Finally, I examined a geometric variation of the statistical entropy of a matter field near a black hole, and compared this to the variation of Wald's entropy. I find that the statistical entropy contains terms that coincide with the variation of Wald's entropy but can have additional terms as well related to the energy momentum tensor.  Acknowledgments  First of all I would like to thank my adviser, Prof. Ramy Brustein: for introducing me to the wonderful field of black hole thermodynamics. For showing me that ideas are very important but that you must always look for a calculation to back them up. For the opportunity he granted me to work abroad as well. For his confidence in me right at the start, for his useful feedback and criticism. From Ramy I also learned not only to welcome criticism but to actively seek it out.  Profound thanks to Dr. Merav Hadad, adviser, friend and general guardian angel for her constant input, patience and support in all things theoretical, practical and moral. Thanks also to Dr. Frol Zapolsky for his brilliant mathematical insights and for always being there when needed.  I want to thank other physicists who took time to talk to me and offer their experience and advice: Prof. Aharon Davidson who reminded me at my lowest points that physics is wonderful fun, Dr. Oded Kenneth and Dr. Dmitri Melnikov who spent hours helping me understand things, and Dr. Joey Medved for his helpful comments and for sharing his extensive knowledge of the literature. I'm also grateful to my fellow students at Ben Gurion University and Tel Aviv University, whose company and input were a help and a pleasure, and above all: Nati Aharon, Eran Avraham, Ido Ben Dayan, Amir Erez, Uri Kol and Ben Yellin.  A Ph.D. is not only a scholastic but also a personal adventure. I owe deep thanks to my brother Dr. David Malkiel, and to Sharona, Jenny, Orna, Joe and Tali, for their constant faith in me and excellent practical advice. A special thank you to Prof. Aharon Eviatar who helped me from my very first steps in physics: helped me get into the university despite my lack of background, and for his friendship and help all along the way.  And finally I want to thank my mother, Ann Kupfermann, for her unflagging confidence in me, as well as her explanation of the logic on which this was based. For her energy, enthusiasm and practicality, which have been an inspiration and source of strength.     Dedicated to my father, Ted Kupfermann, who looked at everything in the world with curiosity and thoughtfulness, and who would have been so interested and pleased. Contents

I Aspects of entropy

1 Introduction

1.1 Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.2 Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.2.1 Thermodynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.2.2
Statistical mechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.2.3 Entanglement entropy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.2.4 Entropy as a Noether charge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.2.5 Entropy from conformal ﬁeld theory . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.2.6 The ﬁrst law of thermodyamics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2 The black hole boundary

9

10
10
11
11
13
15
17
19
19

21
23
25
26
26

2.1 Divergence on the horizon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2 Thermal and entanglement entropy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3 Momentum ﬂuctuations, energy and entropy for smooth partitions
2.3.1 Partitioning a subvolume . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3.2 Energy and momentum ﬂuctuations in a restricted non rel-
ativistic system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3.3 Relativistic smoothed restricted energy . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . .
2.4.1 The uncertainty principle in Rindler spacetime . . . . . . .
2.4.2 Momentum ﬂuctuations and redshift in Rindler spacetime
2.4.3 Momentum ﬂuctuations and entanglement entropy in Schwarzschild

2.4 Restricted energy and statistical entropy of the black hole

28
31
33
33
35

spacetime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.5 Summary of results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.6 Entropy from conformal ﬁeld theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

37
39
41

6

CONTENTS

2.6.1 Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.6.2 The horizon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.7 Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3 Curvature independence

3.1 Deﬁnition of number of states . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 Dependence of N on time-time component of metric . . . . . . . .
3.3 Calculation of N . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3.1 Calculation by the deﬁnition:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3.2 Calculation with the WKB approximation: . . . . . . . . .
Invariance of number of states under transformation of metrics . .
3.4.1 Characteristics of the transformation . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.4.2 Relation to curvature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.4.3 Examples in various dimensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.4.4 Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.4.3.1 Rindler vs Schwarzschild:

3.4

4 Entropy variation

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.2 Preliminaries
4.3 Variation of statistical entropy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.4 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5 Conclusions and discussion

II Supplementary Details and Calculations

6 Supplement to background

6.1
’t Hooft’s calculation of statistical entropy . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.2 Wald and Carlip . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.2.1 Canonical phase space formalism . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.2.2 Carlip’s implementation of this
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.2.3 Boundary conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.2.4 Decomposition of ξ: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.2.5 Central charge as function of T,DT: . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7

42
43
46

48
49
52
53
53
55
55
58
59
60
61
62

64
64
65
66
70

72

75

76
76
78
78
80
81
82
83

CONTENTS

6.2.6 Counting states: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.2.7 Extra term . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7 Boundary divergence

7.1 Smooth restricted operators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.2 Details of nonrelativistic smoothed momentum ﬂuctuations . . . .
7.3 Details of relativistic smoothed energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8

86
87

88
88
90
92

8 Number of states

8.1.1

8.2.2

8.1 Lorentz invariance of phase space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Special relativity: phase space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

94
94
94
8.2 Equivalence of WKB and formal calculations of the number of states 97
97
8.2.1 Photons in a cubic box . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
8.2.1.1 Formal method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
8.2.1.2 WKB method for a cubic box . . . . . . . . . . .
99
8.2.1.3 Phase space calculation for cubic box . . . . . . .
Spherical “box”
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
8.2.2.1 WKB calculation for spherical box . . . . . . . . 102
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
8.3 Phase space in 3+1 and in 4+1 dimensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
8.3.1 Proof in 3+1 dimensions: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
8.3.2 One more dimension: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
8.4 Number of states in Rindler space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109

8.4.1 Comparisons
8.4.2 Momentum only in ξ direction:

8.2.3 Comparisons

9 Variations of entropy

110
9.1 Variation of Wald’s entropy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110

Part I

Aspects of entropy

9

Chapter 1

Introduction

1.1 Overview

The ﬁeld of black hole thermodynamics was born forty years ago, when black
holes were shown to have entropy [1, 2]. However it is not clear just what this
entropy is. Entropy appears in various contexts and meanings. In thermodynam-
ics the change in entropy for a canonical ensemble is related to the change in
energy, if volume and other factors are constant. Statistical mechanics in treating
the microcanonical ensemble deﬁnes entropy as the number of accessible states.
In classical information theory entropy quantiﬁes the amount of information in a
message, while in quantum information theory, entanglement entropy is a mea-
sure of quantum correlations between parts of a system. Black hole entropy was
originally discussed in the thermodynamic context. However since then it has
been explored in other contexts, and to this day when referring to black hole en-
tropy there is still a lack of clarity as to what exactly the term refers to. If, as in
statistical mechanics, we are counting microstates, just what are we counting in
the black hole? If quantum correlations, between what? The vacuum within and
without the black hole? Hawking particles? Matter within and without?

In this thesis I focus on speciﬁc aspects of black hole entropy with the aim
of clarifying the similarities and diﬀerences in the various interpretations of the
term. After an introductory review of selected treatments of black hole entropy,
I examine the issue of divergence on the black hole horizon, in an attempt to
clarify the distinction between statistical and entanglement entropy. I then focus
on the treatment of the horizon as boundary, as a partition in space, and on the

10

CHAPTER 1.

INTRODUCTION

11

distinction between treatment that imposes boundary conditions and treatment
that does not do so. Another aspect is observer dependence: can entropy be a
function of an invariant such as scalar curvature or is it observer dependent? The
third part of the thesis examines a variation of entropy, in an eﬀort to clarify
the distinction between Wald entropy and statistical mechanical entropy. If the
variations were shown to be identical that could indicate that the two kinds of
entropy originate in a common source.

In focusing on these speciﬁc issues I ﬁnd that entanglement entropy and the
entropy of statistical mechanics may refer to the same phenomenon, but that
these diﬀer from geometrical concepts such as Wald’s Noether charge entropy and
Carlip’s derivation of entropy from conformal ﬁeld theory. A general conclusion
is that in determining the real meaning of black hole entropy, a careful and un-
ambiguous description of these aspects is necessary in order to dispel confusion
and to distinguish the particular theory under discussion.

Remark on notation: Throughout this work natural units are used, so that
, c, and the Newton and Boltzmann constants are taken as unity, except where
explicitly quoting previous work. The personal pronoun varies between “I” and
“we”, not the royal plural but rather due to discomfort at seeing one hundred
pages full of myself alone.

1.2 Background

Black hole entropy has had a rich and varied history over the past forty years.
Below I review only a few examples which are relevant to the work in this thesis.
These include examples of thermodynamic and statistical mechanical entropy,
entanglement entropy, the geometric formulations of Wald and Carlip, and the
mapping of the gravitational equations of motion to the ﬁrst law of thermody-
namics. In cases where extensive details of the calculations are relevant to what
follows, these can be found in Part II of the thesis.

1.2.1 Thermodynamics

Black hole entropy was ﬁrst discussed in the context of thermodynamics.
In
1973 Bardeen, Carter and Hawking [1] formulated the four laws of black hole
mechanics, analogous to the laws of thermodynamics, where the surface gravity

CHAPTER 1.

INTRODUCTION

12

played the role of temperature, and the horizon area that of entropy. They viewed
this strictly in terms of an analogy, taking pains to emphasize that “κ/8π and A
are distinct from the temperature and entropy of the black hole....In this sense a
black hole can be said to transcend the second law of thermodynamics.”1

Hawking had shown that the area of a black hole cannot decrease [3]. Beken-
stein [2] reasoned that just as area increases so does thermodynamic entropy, and
so the area of a black hole can be interpreted as its entropy. The generalized sec-
ond law of thermodynamics holds that the sum of the entropy of matter outside
a black hole together with the area of the black hole never decreases.

In [1] the authors had taken care to point out that the parallel between the
laws of black hole mechanics and thermodynamics is purely an analogy, but that
the two though similar are distinct. This approach underwent a startling change
in 1974, when Hawking showed that black holes emit radiation [4]. Using quantum
ﬁeld theory he showed that this radiation is thermal, and obtained the tempera-
ture, which could then be used in the thermodynamic formulation.

Gibbons and Hawking [5] used the path integral formalism to obtain the par-

tition function for a black hole. The partition function is taken as

ˆ

Z =

DgDφeiI[g,φ]

(1.2.1)

where Dg is a measure on the space of metrics, and Dφ on that of matter ﬁelds,
and I [g, φ] the action. The result gives the probability of the occurrence in the
vacuum state of a black hole with the relevant parameters that appear in the
action. The gravitational action has a surface term chosen so that variation of
the action gives the Einstein equations.

In order to avoid singularities the authors deﬁne a new coordinate, τ = it
so that the metric becomes Euclidean. This procedure can then be extended
to non Euclidean systems because the quantities in the integral, which include
the Ricci scalar, the electromagnetic ﬁeld tensor and the extrinsic curvature, are
holomorphic functions on the complexiﬁed spacetime except at the singularities.
Thus the action integral is in fact a contour integral, and it will have the same
value on any section of the complexiﬁed spacetime corresponding to the Euclidean
section even though the induced metric on this section may be complex.

In the path integral approach to quantization of a ﬁeld, going to a Euclidean

1[1], p.168.

CHAPTER 1.

INTRODUCTION

13

system gives the thermodynamic partition function. Thus

T r(cid:0)e−βH(cid:1) =

ˆ

DφeiI[φ]

(1.2.2)

where the integral is taken over all ﬁelds which are periodic with period β in
imaginary time. Gibbons and Hawking use this to obtain thermodynamic quan-
tities from the gravitational and matter action. Since the dominant contribution
to the path integral comes from metrics g and matter ﬁelds φ which are near
background ﬁelds g0 and φ0 they expand the action in a Taylor series around the
background ﬁelds, neglect higher order terms, and write the resulting partition
function Z. From this they obtain the free energy using the thermodynamic rela-
tion lnZ = −βF . In a speciﬁc example for a rotating black hole they identify the
temperature with the surface gravity, and write the free energy in terms of the
black hole mass, charge and angular rotation, obtaining

1
2

M = T S +

1
2

ΦQ + ΩJ

and plugging in the generalized Smarr formula [6]

they ﬁnd

1
2

M =

κ
8π

A +

1
2

ΦQ + ΩJ

S =

A
4

.

(1.2.3)

(1.2.4)

(1.2.5)

Thus the path integral is used in conjunction with a Wick rotation to give the ther-
modynamic partition function, and the entropy is derived from this by plugging
in thermodynamic relations.

1.2.2 Statistical mechanics

Statistical and thermodynamic entropy are of course interrelated, but here we use
the term statistical entropy when the computation is the number of accessible
states, while thermodynamics is used in the context of the canonical ensemble
and based on macroscopic properties of black holes.

A seminal work obtaining black hole entropy from the number of states was
that of ’t Hooft [7]. He calculates the number of states of a quantum matter ﬁeld

CHAPTER 1.

INTRODUCTION

14

in the region of a black hole, and from the number of states he obtains the free
energy and the entropy. To ﬁnd the number of states for a particle in the black
hole metric, t’Hooft uses a one dimensional WKB approximation. He takes the
contribution to energy of the transverse momenta as an eﬀective radial potential
Vef f = l(l + 1)/r2 , since it behaves as a centrifugal potential.

The one-dimensional WKB approximation gives the number of radial modes

n thus:

Rˆ

2M +h

nπ =

√

dr

grrk(r)

(1.2.6)

The integral ought to be taken from the horizon, but to avoid divergence ’t Hooft
goes a short distance h from the horizon, known as the “brick wall.”

From the wave equation one obtains the square of the radial eigenfunction

(cid:0)g00E2 − gθθ (k (θ))2 − gφφ (k (φ))2 − m2(cid:1)

(k(r))2 = grr

where k (θ) , k (φ) denote the eigenfunctions of the angular components of the
Laplacian. In the Schwarzschild metric this becomes

(cid:32)

(k(r))2 =

1

1 − 2M

r

1

1 − 2M

r

E2 − 1

(1.2.7)

(1.2.8)

(cid:33)

r2 (l (l + 1)) − m2
(cid:19)(cid:18)l(l + 1)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

E2 −

1 − 2M
r

r2 + m2

(1.2.9)

The number of radial modes is then summed over the angular degrees of freedom,

Rˆ

E2r2ˆ

N π =

dr

2M +h

1

1 − 2M

r

dl(2l + 1)

0

(cid:115)

where the upper limit of the second integral is in order to ensure a positive root.
Integration gives two terms. One is the contribution from the vacuum surrounding
the system at large distances and ’t Hooft discards it. The second term is the
horizon contribution, which diverges as h → 0. From this he obtains the free
energy and the entropy, which also diverge on the horizon. Further details of the
calculation appear in Sec.6.1.

The motivation for this work is to reconcile black hole physics with quantum
mechanics. At the time it was written black holes were understood to be in a

CHAPTER 1.

INTRODUCTION

15

quantum mechanically mixed state, and ’t Hooft attempted to describe them as
pure states resembling ordinary particles. Thus black holes inhabit an extension of
Hilbert space with an according Hamiltonian. This system is sensitive to observer
dependence: the free falling observer perceives matter, and ’t Hooft writes that it
is this matter which he considers in this paper. The distinction between vacuum
and matter is assumed to be observer dependent when considering coordinate
transformations with a horizon. The brick wall model is intended to show that
the horizon itself rather than the black hole as a whole determines its quantum
properties. This seems to have a relation to entanglement entropy, considered
in the following section, and that is not surprising since it is ’t Hooft’s explicit
intention to reconcile gravity and quantum mechanics.

The number of black hole microstates was computed much later using string
theory, beginning in 1996 when Strominger and Vafa computed the entropy of an
extremal supersymmetric black hole in string theory and obtained the Bekenstein
Hawking entropy [8]; this approach was extended to a wide variety of black holes.
Another approach in loop quantum gravity considers black hole states as spin
networks on the horizon. These treatments are interesting and productive, but
they are beyond the scope of this thesis.

1.2.3 Entanglement entropy

Several hints lead us to consider a relationship between quantum entanglement
entropy and the geometry of space-time. First, the fact that entanglement entropy
arises as a consequence of a partitioning of subsystems. Such a partition is located
in space in the case of a black hole horizon, for example:
if there were no such
barrier the entanglement entropy would be zero, and it is possible that barrier
width or extent determine the amount of entanglement entropy. Second, the fact
that entropy can be related to energy. Einstein’s equations point at a relationship
between geometry and energy, and it is clearly of interest whether and how this
relationship can be extended to entropy. A relation has been shown when the
entropy is thermodynamic (see Sec.1.2.6) but not for entropy as a measure of
the amount of entanglement. Third, it has been shown that entanglement aﬀects
the speed of evolution [9, 10], indicating that there is a relationship between
entanglement and time. In a relativistic context this too points to a relationship
between entanglement and geometry.

CHAPTER 1.

INTRODUCTION

16

Entanglement entropy diﬀers by deﬁnition and by characteristics from the en-
tropy deﬁned in statistical physics. The latter is the logarithm of the number of
states, and is extensive. Entanglement entropy is a measure of quantum correla-
tions between states which are part of a composite system, and has been found
to be proportional to area [11, 12]. Since Bekenstein showed that black hole en-
tropy is proportional to area, many people view this as a hint that BH entropy is
entanglement entropy [13, 14, 15]. Entanglement entropy is formally deﬁned as
−T r (ρlnρ) where ρ is the partial trace of the system, that is, the reduced density
matrix of part of the composite system. Tractable calculation of the entropy for

bipartite states is with eigenvalues (−(cid:80) λlnλ) in the Schmidt basis, in which the

reduced density matrices are diagonalized, and their eigenvalues are found to be
identical.

The ﬁrst major papers on entanglement entropy were by Bombelli et al.

in
1986 [11] and Srednicki in 1993 [12]2. Both showed entanglement entropy is pro-
portional to area by treating discrete coupled harmonic oscillators and then taking
the continuum limit. Srednicki’s result is more powerful for two reasons: ﬁrst, un-
like Bombelli he explicitly calculates it for a sphere and so it can be related to
a black hole. Second, and this is probably a reason for its greater impact, he
presents a convincing justiﬁcation for the area law: his logic is that surface area
is the only thing the inside and outside of the black hole have in common, so their
entanglement entropy, which is the same for inside and outside, must depend on
that. He assumes entropy depends on area and since entropy is dimensionless,
looks for a dimensionful parameter to cancel out area. He uses the square of the
lattice spacing. The area law is arrived at by numerical means.

Srednicki ﬁrst calculates the entropy for a pair of discrete harmonic oscillators

in the ground state. This is

S = −log(1 − ξ) − ξ
1 − ξ

logξ

(1.2.10)

where ξ = f (k1/k0) (the interaction potential of each oscillator is −kixi). When
summed over n, a number of haromonic oscillators, the entropy becomes a function
of n and thus of lattice length. He deﬁnes the radius of the region he has speciﬁed
as R = (n + 1
2)a, where a denotes the lattice spacing. He obtains the entropy as
2These widely cited papers generated much further work, but the idea and calculations were

ﬁrst given three years earlier in a talk by Sorkin[16].

CHAPTER 1.

INTRODUCTION

17

S = 0.30 M 2R2. This looks neatly proportional to area. However he has deﬁned
a . When writing the entropy explicitly with M, R in terms of a, the spatial
M = 1
component cancels out and we are left with a function only of the number of
2)2. That is really where the “area law” comes from. It
oscillators, S = 0.30(n + 1
is obtained numerically.

Srednicki’s entropy diverges because it sums over n, the number of lattice sites,
which is then taken to continuum. But there is no particular divergence at the
boundary of the sphere which he examines. This and other general treatments
of entanglement entropy [17] all calculate it for discrete lattices and then take it
to continuum. In all these cases the entropy does not diverge at the boundary
unless - since it is proportional to area - the boundary area is inﬁnite. Divergence
of entanglement entropy in the general treatment is a result of having an inﬁnite
number of modes, so that a UV cutoﬀ is necessary.

A diﬀerent treatment of black hole entropy as entanglement entropy was that of
Ryu and Taskayanagi [18], who calculate entropy in a d + 1 dimensional conformal
ﬁeld theory from the area of a d dimensional minimal surface in AdSd+2, and
show that the result reproduces the Bekenstein Hawking formula. This will not
be discussed in the thesis.

1.2.4 Entropy as a Noether charge

Wald [19, 20] obtains black hole entropy for generalized theories of gravity by re-
quiring diﬀeomorphism invariance in conjunction with the ﬁrst law of thermody-
namics. In accordance with Noether’s theorem that to every continuous symmetry
a conserved current and charge can be associated, diﬀeomorphism symmetry has
such a current and charge. Wald uses the abstract formalism of Hamiltonian me-
chanics [21], deﬁning the phase space of a linear dynamical system as a symplectic
vector space. The solutions of the equations of motion are mapped to points on
a symplectic manifold. This is done in the language of diﬀerential forms. The
advantage of this approach is that the equations of motion are independent of
choice of a coordinate system.

Wald sets out by writing the most general possible Lagrangian for diﬀeomor-
phism invariant theories. This is a function of the Riemann tensor and its deriva-
tives, as well as the metric and any other ﬁelds. A variation of the Lagrangian by
varying the ﬁelds gives the equations of motion as well as the exterior derivative

CHAPTER 1.

INTRODUCTION

18

of a symplectic potential form Θ. For ξa any smooth vector ﬁeld on the spacetime
manifold, that is ξa the inﬁnitesimal generator of a diﬀeomorphism, and for any
ﬁeld conﬁguration φ (not necessarily a solution to the equations of motion) the
Noether current is deﬁned by

J = Θ (φ,Lξφ) − ξ · L

(1.2.11)

where the dot denotes contraction of the vector ﬁeld ξ into the ﬁrst index of the
diﬀerential form of the Lagrangian L. One ﬁnds that dJ = −ELξφ where E is
the equations of motion. On shell one sees that J is a closed form and thus there
is a Noether charge Q such that J = dQ.

Wald applies this to a stationary black hole solution with bifurcate Killing
horizon, where ξa is the Killing ﬁeld vanishing on the bifurcation surface. A
variation of the ﬁelds away from the background solution provides an equation
relating the surface term at inﬁnity to a surface term on the horizon. The inﬁnity
terms give the mass and angular momentum. These are equated to the horizon
term. This equation has the form of the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics, where

ˆ

δ

Q (ξ) =

Σ

κ
2π

δS

(1.2.12)

(1.2.13)

where Σ is the bifurcation surface. He then shows that

ˆ

S = −2π

Eabcd

R abcd

Σ

R

where Eabcd
is a tensor ﬁeld obtained by taking the functional derivative of L
with respect to Rabcd (viewed as independent of gab) and ab is the binormal to
the bifurcation surface, cd is the area form. Thus the black hole entropy is
proportional to the Noether charge coming from the boundary at the black hole
horizon.

Wald’s entropy is sometimes referred to as geometric. It originates in diﬀeo-
morphism symmetry, but also from the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics. The purely
geometric derivation gives the energy at the horizon, in an equation corresponding
to the ﬁrst law. The entropy is obtained by assuming the relation between mass,
angular momentum, energy and temperature which is given by the ﬁrst law of

CHAPTER 1.

INTRODUCTION

19

thermodynamics. (Further details are in Sec.6.2.)

1.2.5 Entropy from conformal ﬁeld theory

Carlip [22, 23] attempted to obtain black hole entropy from considerations of
symmetry. General relativity is diﬀeomorphism invariant, and this symmetry is
expressed in an algebra, which, when space has a boundary, can be shown to
have a central extension.
In a diﬀerent context Cardy [24] obtained a formula
for statistical entropy as a function of the central charge of a conformal theory,
and Carlip makes use of the Cardy formula to obtain black hole entropy. He ﬁrst
did this using the ADM formalism. In this Hamiltonian form, general relativity
is constrained with constraints Hµ and these constraints generate the symmetries
of the theory. The generators obey an algebra, and if space has a boundary the
algebra has been shown to be isomorphic to a pair of Virasoro algebras, with a
central extension. The boundaries in the Schwarzschild metric, for example, are
taken, as with Wald, to be inﬁnity at one end, and the black hole horizon at
the other. In further work, Carlip uses Wald’s covariant phase space formalism
and concept of entropy as a Noether charge as a point of departure to write the
algebra for general relativity and compute the central charge. He plugs in Cardy’s
formula to obtain the entropy as a function of the central charge, and shows that
in the case of a black hole, this gives the known result. This is explained in detail
in Sections 2.6 and 6.2.

1.2.6 The ﬁrst law of thermodyamics

In contrast to the derivation by Bardeen et al. of the four laws of black hole me-
chanics from the equations of gravity, Jacobson [25] derived the Einstein equations
of state from the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics. This was done by taking the energy
ﬂow across a causal horizon - not necessarily a black hole - and arguing that the
entropy of the system beyond the horizon is proportional to horizon area. The
ﬁrst law is an equilibrium relation, whereas the horizon may not be in equilibrium
but rather contracting, expanding or shearing. Therefore Jacobson takes a small
neighborhood of a point on the horizon. This neighborhood is locally ﬂat by the
equivalence principle, and there is a Killing ﬁeld χa generating boosts orthogonal

CHAPTER 1.

INTRODUCTION

to the point P in question. The energy ﬂow across the horizon is

ˆ

δQ =

TabχadΣb

H

20

(1.2.14)

where the integral is over a “pencil” of generators of the inside past horizon of P .
Temperature is taken as the Unruh temperature, κ/2π where κ is the acceleration
of the Killing orbit. Taking the entropy variation δS as a variation of area δA,
he writes the area variation as an integral of the expansion θ of the horizon
generators. The Raychauduri equation relates this to the Ricci tensor, thus giving
δS as an integral over a quantity including the Ricci tensor. Plugging in the
ﬁrst law of thermodynamics, δQ = T δS, the Einstein equations are obtained.
This remarkable work was later generalized to higher order theories of gravity
([26, 27, 28] and see Sec.9.1).

Here I have detailed only a selection of a wide variety of treatments of black
hole entropy. The question remains: when discussing the entropy of a black hole,
what are we actually talking about? In the following chapters I examine speciﬁc
aspects of black hole entropy, in the hope that clarifying the similarities and
diﬀerences between the various treatments outlined above will shed some light
on this question. Part I of the thesis treats behavior at the boundary, observer
dependence and variations of entropy. Part II contains supplementary details,
proofs and calculations.

Chapter 2

The black hole boundary

If the universe is perceived as a pure state composed of the part within the black
hole and the part outside, then either of the parts will have entanglement en-
tropy since by themselves each is not pure but mixed. Therefore a black hole has
entanglement entropy by deﬁnition. A more physical understanding of entangle-
ment entropy in the black hole context may be entanglement of Hawking pairs.
This hints that entanglement entropy of a black hole may be the same as ther-
modynamic entropy, since Hawking radiation is primarily thermal. This idea is
strengthened by Bekenstein’s observation that black hole entropy is proportional
to area, just as is entanglement entropy. The question is whether the statistical
entropy of a black hole coincides with entanglement entropy.

In order to explore this we focus on behavior of entropy at the boundary. When
t’Hooft investigated black holes in a statistical mechanics framework he found
divergence on the horizon [7]. Later work [29, 30] assumed that the divergence
is a direct result of the black hole redshift. However entanglement entropy in
the general case does not show divergence at the barrier, but rather diverges as a
function of high momentum cutoﬀ . This might indicate a diﬀerence between black
hole entropy and entanglement entropy. The question is whether this divergence
is related to the horizon itself as a causal barrier, or whether it is due to simple
quantum uncertainty, in which case the divergence does not point to an essential
diﬀerence between the two entropies.

General calculations of entanglement entropy do not show divergence at the
barrier. In Bombelli’s calculation divergence comes from high frequency modes
and so he inserts a UV cutoﬀ, but there is no other cause of divergence. Srednicki

21

CHAPTER 2. THE BLACK HOLE BOUNDARY

22

deﬁnes R = (n + 1
2)a, where a is lattice spacing and n the number of discrete oscil-
lators. The expression for entropy which he obtains numerically is S = 0.30M 2R2
which does not diverge for a particular radius. In fact he has deﬁned M as the
inverse lattice spacing a−1 so that the actual expression is S = 0.30(n + 1
2)2 which
diverges for an inﬁnite number of oscillators, but again, not at a particular lo-
cation. Srednicki also performs a perturbative approximation for l (cid:29) N, where
l is the usual quantum number for angular momentum and N the total number
of lattice sites, it diverges for inﬁnite lattice sites but not at a particular loca-
tion. Plenio in his review of entanglement entropy in lattice systems [17] has no
divergence because an upper bound for entanglement entropy is known to be log-

arithmic negativity, En > S, En = ln(cid:13)(cid:13)ρP T(cid:13)(cid:13) , that is, the logarithm of the trace

normed partial transpose matrix. This would diverge if the matrix were inﬁnite,
but not with respect to any particular location.

In [31] divergence at the barrier subdividing a system is explored in a non-
relativistic context, rather than in the speciﬁc context of a black hole. Taking
a system and looking at a subvolume, energy ﬂuctuations in the subvolume are
proportional to the surface area of the subvolume. If the ﬂuctuations were ther-
mal they should have been extensive (proportional to volume) but they are not.
The claim is that they are not thermal but rather caused by the division into a
subvolume, and thus by entanglement.

A high momentum cutoﬀ is necessary to prevent divergence of ∆E2. Such a
cutoﬀ is equivalent to smearing the boundary which divides oﬀ the subvolume.
In [31] this was done explicitly for particles in a box. A more general treatment
appears in [13] where half of Minkowski space is treated as a thermal ensemble in
Rindler space. If a pure state is subdivided into two mixed states, ρA, ρB, then
ˆOA) =< ψAB| ˆOA|ψAB > allows to obtain expectation values
the equation T r(ρA
of operators in an entangled pure state by calculating expectation values of one
of the mixed states. In this way entanglement entropy of the pure state is found
to be the thermal entropy of the mixed state. It diverges at the horizon, scales as
area, and needs a UV cutoﬀ.

CHAPTER 2. THE BLACK HOLE BOUNDARY

23

2.1 Divergence on the horizon

Calculations of black hole entropy on the horizon give rise to divergence. We will
show that this divergence is not unique to a black hole, nor is it a UV divergence
found in ﬁeld theory which requires appropriate renormalization. Rather it can
be seen as a result of quantum x/p uncertainty because the horizon is deﬁned as a
perfectly sharp boundary dividing spacetime into an observable and an unobserv-
able region. A similar divergence arises for any quantum mechanical system when
a sharp boundary divides the whole system into an observed and an unobserved
regions. This is also the case with a coordinate system which truncates part of
ﬂat space, as with Rindler coordinates. The divergence is tamed by smoothing
over the boundary, rather than by renormalizing the theory. The same is true for
black hole entropy.

In quantum mechanics we know that there are questions which can, but should
not be asked.
If we insist on asking them, the theory itself lets us know in a
clear way by giving us a senseless answer. For example, if we ask “what is the
typical momentum of a perfectly localized particle?" the formal answer will be
inﬁnite because of the position/momentum uncertainty relation. Of course, this
just means that the momentum ﬂuctuations will become larger as the particle is
localized in a sharper way. Here the observer needs to change the question to
“what is the typical momentum of a particle whose wave function has a small
ﬁnite width in space?" and treat the concept of a sharply localized particle as a
limit.

In quantum ﬁeld theory we are familiar with questions involving inﬁnity. Some
of these indicate real problems with divergence, but others are meaningless just
as with momentum of a localized particle. An example of a real problem is to
ask “what is the charge of the electron?" where the answer comes out inﬁnite. In
this case the inﬁnite answer does not mean that we should not have asked the
question. Rather, it means that we have misidentiﬁed a microscopic parameter in
the theory and that this parameter should be “renormalized". After a redeﬁnition
of the “bare" (correct) microscopic theory we can ask the question and get a ﬁnite
answer. However, in other cases the divergence can not be corrected by modifying
the theory because the question itself does not make sense.

An example of this second type of divergence would be to look at a non-
relativistic particle in a ﬁnite box and ask: What is the energy in the left hand

CHAPTER 2. THE BLACK HOLE BOUNDARY

24

side of the box. If we approach this problem using second quantization and ﬁeld
operators, we will see that the problem may then be extended to relativistic ﬁelds,
and that there too the diﬃculty arises from an ill posed question. We ask “what
is a typical energy or momentum in the left half of the box." Note that this does
not involve putting a real partition into the box; that would simply give two
smaller boxes, with ﬁnite energy, of course. However if the partition is imposed
by limiting the possibility of observations to only half the box without imposing
new boundary conditions, then if the partition is sharp the answer will be inﬁnite
because the ﬂuctuations of momentum and energy are inﬁnite.

How should we interpret the inﬁnite answer when we know that in fact the
energy is ﬁnite? In [31] it was shown that the reason for the senseless answer is
that the question is inappropriate. The insistence on an inﬁnitely sharp division
between the (observable) left region and the (unobservable) right region is the
cause of the divergence.
In this case the sensible question should involved a
smoothed division of the box, allowing the boundary between the observable and
unobservable domains to be smoothed. If the resolution with which the box is
divided into the observable and unobservable halves is limited, then the answer
is ﬁnite and inversely proportional to the smoothing width, exactly as in the case
of the localized particle.

The distinction between the two classes of divergences is the distinction be-
tween an ultraviolet (UV) divergence and an ill posed question. We would like to
know to which of these two classes black hole entropy belongs. Are its divergences
inherent to the system and requiring some knowledge of the UV properties of the
theory, a theory of quantum gravity, or both? Or are they, rather, similar to those
one obtains when dividing space into two regions, one observable and the other
unobservable, and tracing over the unobservable region?

In this chapter we will consider some generic wave function and apply a
“window-function" to it, leaving the boundary conditions exactly the same as they
were initially. The window function will allow us to impose a smooth division be-
tween the observable and unobservable regions. When the width of the window
function is taken to zero, a sharp division between the regions is obtained. This
set up is diﬀerent than setting up the quantum system with boundary conditions
that would have made the wave function vanish outside a certain region.

We will show that the problem of divergence at the dividing boundary can be
resolved for a quantum mechanical system by asking the right question, namely

CHAPTER 2. THE BLACK HOLE BOUNDARY

25

smoothing the division between the two regions. We will then argue that the
origin of the divergences encountered for black holes is similar. This will allow
us to argue that such divergences are not a unique black hole characteristic but
rather a result of quantum uncertainty, and the correct expression must involve
smearing out the boundary. In fact Bekenstein noted in 1994 that if the boundary
of the region being traced out were absolutely sharp, the energy would be very
large due to the uncertainty principle, and so the boundary must be thought of
as "slightly fuzzy" [32], and we will show in detail that this is the case.

This chapter is organized as follows. First we brieﬂy review the behavior
of black hole entropy at the horizon. Then we show the relationship between
entropy and energy near the horizon of a black hole. Next, we clarify the concept
of partitioning and deﬁne an operator which may smooth a partition. This is
then used to examine behavior of energy at a boundary between two subsystems,
ﬁrst for the non-relativistic and then for the relativistic case, and to show that
in both cases energy diverges as the boundary becomes sharp. We extend this to
Rindler space, as a partitioning of Minkowski space. Finally, we examine ’t Hooft’s
calculation of black hole entropy, and ﬁnd that his relocation of the boundary to
avoid divergence is equivalent to smearing out the boundary. Therefore here too
the divergence is related to sharpness of the boundary and is not unique to a black
hole.

2.2 Thermal and entanglement entropy

’t Hooft calculated thermodynamic characteristics of a black hole, among them
entropy, and in doing so found a divergence of the density of states and hence
of the entropy density at the horizon. He overcame the problem by adjusting
the limits of integration to a “brick wall” a ﬁnite inﬁnitesimal distance from the
horizon. Entanglement entropy also diverges, but the divergence appears to be
an ultraviolet divergence that does not seem to diverge at any particular location.
For a BH in equilibrium, the space just outside the hole near the horizon can
be treated as a thermal state in Rindler space [13, 33].. In this case entanglement
entropy coincides with thermal entropy, as follows. To ﬁnd entanglement entropy
we take the trace of part of the system. If that part of the system is a thermal

CHAPTER 2. THE BLACK HOLE BOUNDARY

state, the partial trace is a thermal density matrix,

ρpart =

1
Z

Entanglement entropy is given by

(cid:88)

i

e−βEi|Ei(cid:105)(cid:104)Ei|.

S = −T r (ρpart ln ρpart)

and the energy is given by

(cid:104)E(cid:105) =

1
Z

Eie−βEi

It follows that

(cid:88)
(cid:32)

i

(cid:88)

S = − 1
Z

e−βEi ×

−β

i

= β(cid:104)E(cid:105) + ln Z.

(cid:33)

Ei − ln Z

(cid:88)

i

26

(2.2.1)

(2.2.2)

(2.2.3)

(2.2.4)

For a scalar ﬁeld at a ﬁnite temperature ln Z is a constant, so the entropy is
linear to the expectation value of the energy. Therefore in the case of a black hole
the entanglement entropy behaves as does the energy. Thus instead of examining
entropy at a barrier dividing the two subsystems, which is a complicated non-local
quantity, we can calculate the reduced density matrix of a subsystem and look at
the behavior of its energy which is a simpler local quantity.

2.3 Momentum ﬂuctuations, energy and entropy

for smooth partitions

2.3.1 Partitioning a subvolume

We will examine various examples of partitioning: ﬁrst we take a single non
relativistic particle in a box, then a relativistic ﬁeld, then an entire region of
Minkowski space and ﬁnally a black hole. The ﬁrst case is clearest but our claim
is that the others are essentially the same.

It is crucial to clarify that the partitioning corresponds to limiting the ob-

CHAPTER 2. THE BLACK HOLE BOUNDARY

27

servability to a subvolume. If we were to take a box and place an actual physical
partition in the middle, this would impose new boundary conditions and we would
simply have two smaller boxes with observables appropriate to the new boundary
conditions. Instead we leave the particle in the original box, but consider only a
subvolume of the box. An example of this would be to work out the probability
of ﬁnding the particle. Had we actually partitioned the box and looked for the
particle in the left half, we would ﬁnd a probability of one or zero to ﬁnd it there.
But we do not actually do this; rather than making the actual observation, we
just calculate the probability to ﬁnd the particle on the left, and then we will
obtain a probability of one half. Similarly in what follows we will calculate ex-
pectation values for part of a system without actually imposing a partition with
new boundary values.

This kind of partitioning is equivalent to tracing out part of the system. The
mathematical operation of tracing deﬁnes in a clear way the kind of partitioning
of the quantum system that we have in mind. We do not impose new boundary
conditions, but rather we restrict the domain of observability to a limited region
of the total volume. This will be implemented by a window operator, as described
below. If the partitioning is done at a sharply localized point we will see divergence
of momentum and energy, even though in fact obviously the particle itself has the
same ﬁnite energy it had initially. If the partition is not sharply localized we will
no longer see a divergence.

We are interested in the expectation value for the reduced energy in the case
where we look at a subvolume of the entire system. This can be expressed in two
ways. We can rewrite the state so that it is multiplied by a window function:
|ψ(cid:105)window = f ((cid:126)r, w)|ψ(cid:105). Thus the expectation value for the reduced energy in
this restricted system will be (cid:104)ψ| f Hf |ψ(cid:105). Rather than regarding the window
function as part of the state, we can treat as part of the operator, so that we
deﬁne the restricted Hamiltonian as H V = f Hf. A striking equation relates
quantum expectation values of operators that act on part of a system to the
statistical averages for a reduced density matrix of the subsystem. Writing the
density matrix for the subsystem as ρV ,

(cid:104)ψ|H V |ψ(cid:105) = T r(cid:0)ρV H V(cid:1) .

(2.3.1)

Therefore we can calculate the reduced energy in the subsystem by taking the

CHAPTER 2. THE BLACK HOLE BOUNDARY

28

expectation value of the restricted Hamiltonian in the entire system.

The restricted Hamiltonian may be smoothed so that the partition into sub-
systems is not completely sharp. This is equivalent to giving the window function
varying width. For details see Sec.7.1. It is possible to deﬁne a smoothing function
that is strictly zero on the left and continuous at any ﬁxed desired order at the
boundary. When we discuss the horizon in Rindler and Schwarzschild metrics, we
will see that this is the form which can be given to a smoothing function operating
on the redshift.

The function f ((cid:126)r, w) behaves as a window enclosing part of space, and thus it
mimics the horizon by “truncating” part of space for the ﬁeld. We provide it with
a varying width, and examine energy as a function of its width. Our aim is to see
how sharp localization aﬀects the reduced energy divergence.

2.3.2 Energy and momentum ﬂuctuations in a restricted

non relativistic system

We now write the reduced density matrix for nonrelativistic bosons restricted
(in the sense deﬁned above) to one part of space. We emphasize again: this
restriction is related to limiting the region in which observations can be made,
without imposing new boundary conditions.
In practical terms it could mean
adding a Heaviside step function as our window operator, thus integrating only
up to a deﬁned point. We calculate the energy we as observers will measure. We
take free spinless bosons and consider states that are created by the ﬁeld operator
Ψ acting on the vacuum:

|Ψ(cid:105) = Ψ†((cid:126)r)|0(cid:105) =

e−i(cid:126)p(cid:126)r√

Ω

g((cid:126)p) a

(cid:126)p |0(cid:105) .
†

(cid:88)

(cid:126)p

The function g((cid:126)p) is the wave function of the state in momentum space.1

The Hamiltonian is given by

H =

(cid:88)

(cid:126)p

p2
2m

†
(cid:126)pa(cid:126)p.
a

1The function g will not be particularly relevant for us and in most cases we will ignore it

by setting g((cid:126)p) = 1. All our results can be easily generalized for the case g((cid:126)p) (cid:54)= 1.

(2.3.2)

(2.3.3)

CHAPTER 2. THE BLACK HOLE BOUNDARY

The energy of a state |ψ(cid:105) is given by

In conﬁguration space the energy is given by

E = (cid:104)ψ|H|ψ(cid:105) = (cid:10)0|ΨHΨ†|0(cid:11) .
(cid:10)0|∇rΨ ((cid:126)r)∇rΨ† ((cid:126)r)|0(cid:11) .

∞ˆ

d3r

1
2m

E =

−∞

29

(2.3.4)

(2.3.5)

(cid:10)ψ|H V |ψ(cid:11) = T r(ρV H V ). We replace the restricted Hamiltonian H V by its smoothed

We calculate the energy corresponding to the restricted Hamiltonian EV

ψ =

counterpart with the help of a window function f ((cid:126)r, w), as discussed above. Al-
ternatively, we can use a restricted smoothed ﬁeld operator (here we set g = 1)

ˆ

ˆ

ΨV

smoothed =

d3r f ((cid:126)r) Ψ† ((cid:126)r) =

d3r f ((cid:126)r, w)

(cid:88)

(cid:126)p

(cid:88)

(cid:126)p

e−i(cid:126)p(cid:126)r√

V

†
(cid:126)p =
a

f ((cid:126)p, w) a

†
(cid:126)p,

(2.3.6)
with f ((cid:126)p, w) being the Fourier transform of f ((cid:126)r, w). Because f ((cid:126)r, w) is a smooth
function its Fourier transform suppresses large momenta and acts eﬀectively as
a high momentum cutoﬀ. The result of Eq.(2.3.6) is substituted into Eq.(2.3.4).
The creation operators on the vacuum give delta functions, resulting in

EV

smoothed =

1
2m

d3r (cid:126)∇f ((cid:126)r, w) · (cid:126)∇f ((cid:126)r, w)

(2.3.7)

∞ˆ

−∞

In Sec.7.2 we evaluate explicitly a related case, the restricted smoothed momentum

squared(cid:10)ψ|(P 2

smooth)V |ψ(cid:11).

For speciﬁc window functions the smoothed restricted energy can be evaluated

explicitly. Consider, for example, a one dimensional case with

f (x, w) =

1
2

+

1
π

arctan

.

(2.3.8)

The function is depicted by the dashed line in Fig.2.3.1.
(ignoring the singularity at p = 0)

In momentum space

f (p, w) =

1√
2π

1
p

e−|p|w.

(2.3.9)

(cid:16) x

(cid:17)

w

CHAPTER 2. THE BLACK HOLE BOUNDARY

30

So 1/w acts as a high momentum cutoﬀ suppressing any momentum components
of the smoothed wavefunction with |p| > 1
w.

The value of the restricted energy, the restriction being the positive half of the

x-axis, can be calculated analytically in this case

EV

smoothed =

1
2m

1

2πw

.

(2.3.10)

This is also shown in Fig.2.3.1, taking m = 1/2. As w → 0, so that the partition
becomes sharper, the energy increases, and it diverges for an inﬁnitely sharp
partition.2

Figure 2.3.1: Shown is a one dimensional example of a smooth window function
(left) and the corresponding restricted energy as a function of barrier width (right).

(cid:69)

=

Other smoothing functions yield very similar results. The restricted energy is
inversely proportional to the smoothing width w and diverges in the limit w → 0.

(cid:10)ψ|(P 2

smooth)V |ψ(cid:11). Since

(cid:68)

ψ|( (cid:126)Psmooth)V |ψ

0 it follows that(cid:10)ψ|(P 2

For the nonrelativistic case, EV

smooth)V |ψ(cid:11) = (∆P V

smoothed = 1
2m

smooth)2 so the divergence of the energy is
equal to the divergence of the momentum ﬂuctuations. The divergence should not
be confused with a UV divergence; the two are unrelated. The boundary behaves
as if it is a localized particle. Given a function describing barrier slope, energy
increases as the barrier grows sharper. That is, the more sharply the position of
the dividing barrier is speciﬁed, the larger the energy. In the limit that the width
tends to zero w → 0 the energy diverges. This is the same phenomenon found in
quantum mechanical uncertainty, where the more sharply we specify the position
2We note that this term represents the contribution of the partitioning to the energy. A full
calculation would include the wave function for the particle, g((cid:126)p) as explained in the previous
note.

CHAPTER 2. THE BLACK HOLE BOUNDARY

31

of a particle, the greater the uncertainty of its momentum. The energy in this case
is a simple function of momentum and linearly related to momentum uncertainty,
so that as the momentum ﬂuctuations diverge so will the energy. Thus the energy
divergence here is an indication of position/momentum uncertainty.

2.3.3 Relativistic smoothed restricted energy

We extend the previous computation from the case of non-relativistic ﬁelds to the
case of relativistic ﬁelds. It is not immediately clear what position uncertainty
means in the case of a relativistic ﬁeld because the position operator is not deﬁned
in a clear way for this case.

´

†
d3k
(2π)3 kja
(cid:126)k

The momentum operator, on the other hand, can be deﬁned in a straight-
a(cid:126)k taking
forward way from the energy-momentum tensor Pj = T0j =
c,  = 1. Using the momentum operator we can have a practical deﬁnition of
the uncertainty relations based on evaluation of the momentum ﬂuctuations in
a localized state corresponding to excitation of the ﬁeld in a limited region of
space. This is what we will use in the following, leaving the formal deﬁnitions
and the deeper meaning of this deﬁnition for more philosophical discussions. Let
d3xg((cid:126)x − (cid:126)x0, w)Ψ†((cid:126)x)|0(cid:105). The wavefunction
us consider a single particle state
of this state g((cid:126)x − (cid:126)x0, w) is localized at x = x0 with w being the scale on which
the state is spread. For example, we can take g(x − x0, w) ∝ e
. We then
evaluate the momentum ﬂuctuations in this state. They will grow in an inverse
proportionality to the localization scale w of the state. Similarly, if we have an n-
j( (cid:126)xj)|0(cid:105)and we evaluate the ﬂuctuations
†
particle state
Ψ
of the total momentum of the state, they will grow in an inverse proportionality to
the localization scale w. Obviously, the state can have several localization scales.
In that case the smallest one will be the most signiﬁcant. The generalization to
an arbitrary state should be clear by now.

xi − x0, w)

− (x−x0)2
2w2

´ n(cid:81)

1

d3xig(

(cid:126)

´

n(cid:81)

1

In this context, formally, the only diﬀerence between a relativistic ﬁeld and the
non-relativistic ﬁeld treated with second quantization is that both creation and
destruction operators appear in the ﬁeld operator. The formal analogy between
the relativistic case and the non-relativistic one is clear and must point to a real
correspondence between the two cases when considering the position/momentum
uncertainty relation despite the inability to deﬁne a covariant position operator
for the relativistic case.

CHAPTER 2. THE BLACK HOLE BOUNDARY

32

In a relativistic system the energy operator is taken from the energy momen-

tum tensor: H = T00 =

In order to look for the various expectation values we recall the relativistic

scalar product:

(cid:104)ϕ|φ(cid:105) = −i

d3x [ϕ∂tφ∗ − (∂t ϕ) φ∗]

(2.3.11)

and the expression for the expectation value of the Hamiltonian in a state |ϕ(cid:105)

´

†
d3k
(2π)3 k0a
(cid:126)k

a(cid:126)k.
ˆ

ˆ

(cid:104)ϕ|H| ϕ(cid:105) = −i

d3x [ϕ∂t (Hϕ)

∗ − (∂t ϕ) (Hϕ)∗] .

(2.3.12)

´

A smoothed state with window function, as before, can be deﬁned as before
d3r f ((cid:126)r) Ψ† ((cid:126)r)|0(cid:105) where the ﬁeld operator here is the relativistic one. The
resulting smoothed restricted energy is

smooth =(cid:10)ψ(cid:12)(cid:12)(Hsmooth)V(cid:12)(cid:12) ψ(cid:11) =

EV

ˆ
ˆ

d3p f ((cid:126)p, w) p f (−(cid:126)p, w)

(cid:112)(cid:126)∇2 f ((cid:126)r, w)

=

d3r f ((cid:126)r, w)

(2.3.13)

The details of the derivation are given in Sec.7.3. The result clearly has the
same behavior as in the non relativistic case. Alternately, since E2 ∼ P 2 we may
calculate (cid:104)P 2(cid:105) and obtain

∞ˆ

1
2

−∞

d3r (cid:126)∇f ((cid:126)r, w) · (cid:126)∇f ((cid:126)r, w)

(2.3.14)

This is identical to the non relativistic result, and equals (∆P V

smooth)2.

We saw that in the nonrelativistic treatment energy tends to diverge the more
sharply the boundary between the diﬀerent parts of space is speciﬁed. The rel-
ativistic case shows the same phenomenon. Here too, the smoothing function
f ((cid:126)r, w) acts as a momentum cutoﬀ.
In both cases the energy increases as the
barrier width becomes narrower, and diverges for a completely sharp barrier with
In the relativistic case E2 ∼ P 2 rather than E ∼ P 2 but we still
zero width.
obtain E ∼ ∆p . As before, the energy is proportional to the momentum uncer-
tainty, and just as in the previous section, it diverges when the barrier is made
sharp. This can be seen as an example of position/momentum uncertainty.

CHAPTER 2. THE BLACK HOLE BOUNDARY

33

2.4 Restricted energy and statistical entropy of

the black hole

So far we have discussed restricted operators in ﬂat spacetime. The restriction
was implemented in an ad-hoc way by a choice of a (smoothed) theta function. In
the case of the BH, spacetime is restricted in a diﬀerent way. For example, in the
Schwarzschild geometry, the metric ds2 = −(1 − rs
dr2 + r2dΩ2 is used
to treat the region of space outside the horizon r > rs . So all the operators used
in Schwarzschild geometry are restricted operators. One can view the redshift
as implementing the restriction by becoming inﬁnite at the horizon
factor
r = rs.

r )dt2 + 1
1− rs

r

1
1− rs

r

We will try to explain how the redshift, acting as a restriction, creates an
inﬁnitely sharp boundary that results in divergence of the reduced energy and
reduced entropy. We begin with the simpler case of Rindler spacetime, that is the
spacetime of an accelerated observer in Minkowski space. Rindler space has the
advantage that it is equivalent to a restriction to half of Minkowski space so this
example allows us to explicitly compare the two restriction mechanisms. We will
explain how we can implement the ideas of smoothing the boundary by restricting
the maximal value of the redshift, and show that when smoothing is implemented
all quantities are rendered ﬁnite with magnitude inversely proportional to the
smoothing parameter, exactly as in the cases that we have encountered before.
This will allow us to show that a similar phenomenon occurs for BH’s.

2.4.1 The uncertainty principle in Rindler spacetime

We use the Minkowski space metric:

ds2 = −dt2 + dz2 + d(cid:126)x2⊥,

(2.4.1)

where z is the coordinate that will be used to separate space into the left and
right halves z < 0 and z > 0 and (cid:126)x⊥ stands for the transverse coordinates. An
accelerated observer whose acceleration is a/2π lives in Rindler space whose metric
is

ds2 = −e2aξdη2 + e2aξdξ2 + d(cid:126)x⊥2.

(2.4.2)

CHAPTER 2. THE BLACK HOLE BOUNDARY

The Minkowski coordinates and Rindler coordinates are related by:

t(ξ, η) =

z(ξ, η) =

1
a
1
a

eaξ sinh aη

eaξ cosh aη

(cid:126)x⊥ = (cid:126)x⊥.

34

(2.4.3)

(2.4.4)

(2.4.5)

Choosing a ﬁxed Rindler time, for example, η = 0, we see that the ξ coordinate
only covers the z > 0 half of space. The restriction is implemented by the redshift
factor e−aξ which diverges for ξ → −∞, corresponding to z = 0.

As it stands, the restriction implemented by the redshift is inﬁnitely sharp.
The Rindler observer does not see the region z < 0 . We wish to understand
how to implement a smoothed restriction rather than an inﬁnitely sharp one. So
we analyze just how the redshift leads to divergence of (∆p)2 and vanishing of
(∆z)2, in order to consider how the divergence may be tamed. We consider a
non-relativistic particle whose wave function has some spread ∆z in Minkowski
space. For example,

− 1

2

z2
(∆z)2 .

(2.4.6)

1(cid:112)2π(∆z)2

e

ψ(z) =

In momentum space the spread of the wave function is inversely proportional to
∆z, (∆p)2 ∼ 1/(∆z)2. Viewed by an accelerated observer, the wave function at
the origin z = 0 corresponding to ξ → −∞ would be squeezed in the ξ direction:
∆ξ = eaξ∆z. As required by the uncertainty principle the spread in momentum
would increase, ∆pξ = e−aξ∆pz. Thus ﬁnite ∆z and ∆p in Minkowski space
are adjusted by the Rindler metric, so that to the Rindler observer the position
ﬂuctuations at the origin will vanish and momentum ﬂuctuations will diverge.

By our choice the particle is localized at the origin (any other choice would
simply require a shift in the Rindler time η), so in the limit ξ → −∞ the mo-
mentum ﬂuctuations diverge because the the wave function has been squeezed
in space. This divergence obviously does not signal a breakdown of physics. It
just means that considering the classical Rindler geometry when viewing a quan-
tum particle requires closer thought. Rindler geometry imposes a restriction on
Minkowski space. When the restriction is sharp, equivalent to localizing a particle
at the origin, the momentum ﬂuctuations diverge. Limiting the Rindler redshift
factor tames the divergence and increases position ﬂuctuations, thus softening the

CHAPTER 2. THE BLACK HOLE BOUNDARY

35

localization, and smoothing the restriction.

2.4.2 Momentum ﬂuctuations and redshift in Rindler space-

time

In view of the previous discussion, and in preparation for the reinterpration of the
’t Hooft calculation, let us consider a (massless) scalar ﬁeld φ that satisﬁes the
Klein-Gordon equation

(cid:0)∂µ

1√−g

(cid:1) φ = 0.

√−ggµν∂ν

(2.4.7)

In Minkowski spacetime there is an exact solution to the Klein-Gordon equa-

tion. The z dependent part of the solution is given by

φ(z) = e±ipz.

(2.4.8)

However, for the purpose of making the calculation more similar to the ’t Hooft
calculation we can rewrite the solution in a WKB form, where the WKB solution
is

φW KB (z) = e± z´

p(z)dz.

(2.4.9)

Obviously, in Minkowski space p(z) is a constant and the WKB solution reduces
to the exact solution. The WKB momentum can be expressed as

p2(z) = E2 − p2⊥.

In Rindler spacetime the WKB wave function is

with

φW KB (ξ) = e±i

ξ´

√

dξ

gξξp(ξ)

p2(ξ) = gηηE2 − p2⊥

which is space varying. So the WKB wave function is

φW KB (ξ) = e±i

ξ´

√

gξξ

dξ

√
gηηE2−p2⊥.

(2.4.10)

(2.4.11)

(2.4.12)

(2.4.13)

CHAPTER 2. THE BLACK HOLE BOUNDARY

Near the horizon p(ξ) diverges as(cid:112)gηηE2 = e−aξE and the proper length (cid:101)dξ =

√
gξξ = dξeaξ vanishes. This is a manifestation of the position/momentum

36

dξ
uncertainty relation caused by the redshift.

Rindler space implements a sharp division of Minkowski space. That is, the
Rindler observer sees a sharp cutoﬀ at the horizon ξ → −∞. Smoothing this cutoﬀ
in momentum space means restricting the momentum p(ξ) near the horizon. We
saw in the previous section that restricting the redshift widens ∆x and shrinks
∆p. Therefore restricting the redshift gηη, gξξ will smooth the cutoﬀ.

In ’t Hooft’s black hole calculation the energy and entropy diverge due to a
diverging density of states. In Rindler space too the density of states diverges,
and we will see that that this divergence is due to the uncertainty principle. We
deﬁne the density of states near energy E in Rindler space and evaluate it by
counting the number of WKB solutions

ˆ

ˆ

dξeaξ
ˆ

πn =

= 2π

dξeaξ

= −2
3

π
(2a)2 E3

d2p⊥
(cid:113)
(2a)2 p(ξ, E, p⊥)
ˆ
e−2aξE2 − p2⊥
ˆ

dp⊥
(2a)2 p⊥
dξe−2aξ

(2.4.14)

where we have performed ﬁrst the angular integral of p⊥ and then the radial part.
This integral diverges because of the diverging redshift factor at the horizon. So
the density of states, the entropy and energy are divergent for the same reason
and if the redshift factor is restricted, they all become ﬁnite.

We can smooth the partition by limiting the redshift, or alternately, by imple-
menting a smoothing function on states of the system. This equivalent procedure
will also tame the divergence. The smoothed functions that we need to count
are obtained by multiplying the original unsmoothed function by the smoothing
function, ψ(ξ) → ψ(ξ)f (ξ, w), or in Fourier space φ(p) → φ(p)f (p, w). Recall
that in momentum space the function f (p, w) acted as a high momentum cutoﬀ
for p > 1/w. Then for wavefunctions with energy E we need to eﬀectively re-
√
strict the Rindler momentum p(ξ) = e−aξ
E to be p(ξ) < 1/w. In this context
it simply means that the redshift factor is limited to some maximal value which
can always be expressed as e−aξmin. The “brick wall" model of ’t Hooft in this

CHAPTER 2. THE BLACK HOLE BOUNDARY

37

context amounts to a sharp cutoﬀ on the momentum p(ξ). However, clearly, any
other cutoﬀ schemes will do the same job. The density of states of smoothed
wavefunctions is of course ﬁnite,

ˆ

ˆ

πn =

dξeaξ

ˆ

ξmin

= 2π

dξeaξ

ξmin
π

=

2
3

(2a)3 E3e−2aξmin.

d2p⊥
(cid:113)
(2a)2 p(ξ, E, p⊥)
ˆ

dp⊥
(2a)2 p⊥

e−2aξE2 − p2⊥

(2.4.15)

This makes the energy and entropy ﬁnite and inversely proportional to the max-
imal redshift which determines the smoothing width of the division in Rindler
space.

2.4.3 Momentum ﬂuctuations and entanglement entropy in

Schwarzschild spacetime

’t Hooft solves the wave equation in the Schwarzschild metric, identiﬁes p, the
wave number, and using a WKB approximation he obtains the density of states.
However the redshift leads this to diverge at the horizon. The region near the
black hole horizon is a thermal state in Rindler space, and indeed just as in
Rindler space, limiting the redshift will prevent the divergence.

We recall the calculation in Schwarzschild coordinates. For simplicity we have
chosen the scalar ﬁeld to be massless. The Klein-Gordon equation in these coor-

dinates is(cid:18)

(cid:19)−1

1 − 2M
r

E2φ +

The wave number can be deﬁned as3

(cid:19)

(cid:18) l (l + 1)
(cid:19)

r2

φ = 0.

(2.4.16)

(2.4.17)

1

r2 ∂r (r (r − 2M ) ∂r) φ −
(cid:18) l (l + 1)

p2 = gttE2 −

r2

Using a WKB approximation the density of states for a massless scalar ﬁeld is

3This diﬀers by a a factor grr from ’t Hooft’s original deﬁntion.

CHAPTER 2. THE BLACK HOLE BOUNDARY

38

given by

πn =

(cid:88)
ˆ

l,m

ˆ

dr

2M

√

√
ˆ

grr p (r, l, m)

(cid:114)

=

dr

2M

grr

(2l + 1)dl

gttE2 − l (l + 1)

r2

(2.4.18)

where l, m are the angular parameters. Evaluating the integral over l we ﬁnd

πn = −2
3

2M

E3

= −2
3

ˆ

√

dr

ˆ

dr

grrr2(cid:0)gttE2(cid:1)3/2
(cid:1)2
(cid:0)1 − 2M

r2

r

2M

(2.4.19)

(2.4.20)

This integral diverges at the horizon.
If we were to limit the redshift, as we
did with Rindler space, there would be no divergence. Apparently ’t Hooft does
otherwise: he takes the lower limit a slight distance away from the horizon, his
well known “brick wall,” so that the lower limit becomes 2M + h. From this
expression he obtains the energy and entropy, which diverge as h → 0.

In fact ’t Hooft’s adjustment of the lower limit of the integral from 2M to
2M + h is equivalent to a change of variable which leaves the lower limit at 2M
but changes the redshift:

(cid:19)−2

1 − 2M(cid:101)r + h

=

dr

ˆ

ˆ

2M

2M +h

d(cid:101)r

(cid:19)−2

1 − 2M
r

(cid:18)
(cid:18)
and is limited by(cid:0)1 − 2M
(cid:1)−2 (cid:46) (2M/h)2 for h (cid:28) M.
the(cid:101)r system by a smoothing function:
(cid:19)−1
(cid:19)−1

(cid:18)

2M +h

(cid:18)
1 − 2M(cid:101)r

=

1 − 2M(cid:101)r + h

This clearly does not diverge at the horizon. The new expression is always ﬁnite

The altered redshift is equivalent to multiplication of the original redshift in

f ((cid:101)r, h)

(2.4.21)

CHAPTER 2. THE BLACK HOLE BOUNDARY

39

with

f ((cid:101)r, h) =

((cid:101)r + h) ((cid:101)r − 2M )
(cid:101)r ((cid:101)r − 2M + h)

.

(2.4.22)

Thus the change of variable implemented by the brick wall has the eﬀect of mul-
tiplying the redshift by a smoothing function.

The original divergent integral in eq.2.4.20 can be expressed in terms of a

2M dr(cid:0)1 − 2M
´
(cid:19)−2

r

0 dr Θ(r−2M )(cid:0)1 − 2M
ˆ

sharp step function
r
integral can be expressed in terms of a smoothed step function
ˆ

(cid:1)−2. The altered
(cid:19)−2(cid:101)Θ(r − 2M, h)
the step function to a new one (cid:101)Θ(r − 2M, h) = f 2(r, h) Θ(r − 2M ) with width

Thus we see that ’t Hooft’s changed lower limit is exactly equivalent to smoothing

dr

1 − 2M
r

0

f 2(r, h) Θ(r − 2M ) =

(cid:18)

dr

1 − 2M
r

0

(cid:1)−2 =

´

(cid:18)

(2.4.23)

h. Formally the brick wall can be seen as either changing the redshift or smooth-
ing the step function and thus modifying the sharp partitioning of the region.
Obviously, any other limiting procedure of the maximal redshift will render the
integral ﬁnite and make the energy and entropy ﬁnite.

Figure 2.4.1: Smoothed step function as function of r/2M. Curves have h = 0
(sharp step), h = 0.1 and h = 0.9 (lowest).

2.5 Summary of results

Energy has been shown to diverge as the boundary between two quantum subsys-
tems, an observable subsystem and an unobservable subsystem, becomes sharp.
The divergence is due to the fact that the energy is a simple function of the mo-

CHAPTER 2. THE BLACK HOLE BOUNDARY

40

mentum ﬂuctuations. These diverge in the presence of a sharp boundary because
of the uncertainty principle, much in the same way that they diverge for a sharply
localized particle. For the nonrelativistic case (cid:104)E(cid:105) = 1
2m(∆P )2. In the relativistic
case (cid:104)E(cid:105) = ∆P so in both cases energy divergence at an inﬁnitely sharp boundary
is clearly a consequence of position/momentum uncertainty.

In a coordinate system which implements a sharply localized boundary, the
density of states and thus energy and entropy diverge at the boundary. Limiting
the redshift tames this divergence. We have shown that limiting the redshift
smoothes the boundary by widening ∆x and limiting ∆p. Therefore the smoothing
cutoﬀ prevents the energy from diverging. This implies that the divergence of the
energy and entropy was a result of the sharp localization of the boundary, and
was due to the uncertainty principle.

The region near the boundary of a black hole is a thermal state, where the
entropy is linear to energy. Therefore black hole entropy will diverge at the bound-
ary as well. We have shown that regardless of any other cause, there would be
divergence at the inﬁnitely sharp boundary as a result of the uncertainty principle.
We have also shown that ’t Hooft’s divergence at the black hole is an example of
momentum/position uncertainty, as seen by the fact that the “brick wall” which
corrects it in fact smoothes the sharp boundary.

This result raises the question whether the entanglement and statistical me-
chanics deﬁnitions of black hole entropy might refer to the same quantity. Both
are proportional to area. The UV divergence may be tamed with a UV cutoﬀ,
and the boundary divergence by smearing out the boundary (both procedures
might turn out to be equivalent). So the two expressions could be expressing the
same quantity. If this is the case, then the microscopic counting of the number of
states becomes tantamount to counting the correlations between the observed and
unobserved regions of spacetime. Black hole entropy has also been shown, from
thermodynamic considerations as well as explicit calculations in string theory, to
equal one fourth of the horizon area. An open problem is to obtain the factor of
1/4 in either of these deﬁnitions of black hole entropy.

CHAPTER 2. THE BLACK HOLE BOUNDARY

41

2.6 Entropy from conformal ﬁeld theory

In the previous section we showed that the divergence of entropy at the hori-
zon may be due to quantum uncertainty. We explicitly refrained from imposing
boundary conditions at the horizon. The boundary served to trace out part of
the system by limiting the possibility of observations, but did not imposing new
boundary conditions on the system.

Carlip [22] derived black hole entropy from arguments of symmetry. This was
motivated by earlier work of Brown and Henneaux [34] showing that 2+1 dimen-
sional gravity with a negative cosmological constant has an asymptotic symmetry
consisting of a pair of Virasoro algebras, so that a microscopic quantum black
hole theory should be a conformal ﬁeld theory. In conformal theory entropy can
be obtained with the Cardy formula. Strominger [35] made use of this to obtain
entropy of a 2+1 dimensional black hole.

Carlip proposed a scheme applicable in any dimension. When the horizon is
treated as a boundary, the algebra of constraints in general relativity acquires a
central extension. With appropriate boundary conditions this extended algebra
contains a Virasoro subalgebra and the Cardy formula can be used to obtain
entropy. In [23] this was done using the ADM formula, and then in [22] using
covariant phase space methods. We focus on the second approach here. We note
that Carlip’s entropy does NOT diverge at the boundary, and discuss the reason.
Below we outline Carlip’s scheme and focus on his treatment of the boundary.
He works with a stretched horizon, such that χ2 =  where χ is a Killing vector
at the boundary, and at the end of the calculation he takes  → 0. He does so
in order to vary the Noether charge at the boundary. To do this he must go a
short distance away from the exact boundary. There he decomposes χ (no longer
a Killing vector at that point), into two orthogonal vectors, as the “r,t plane.”
It’s as if in order to wiggle something one needs to stretch it a bit. If one sits
exactly on the boundary there is no wiggle room. The question we examine is
- what happens to Carlip’s entropy when taking χ2 to 0, that is, exactly at the
boundary? Does it diverge as in the previous section? We ﬁnd that the scheme
breaks down at the boundary itself, and discuss the implications.

CHAPTER 2. THE BLACK HOLE BOUNDARY

42

2.6.1 Background

In 1986 Brown and Henneaux [34] showed that in the canonical (ADM) for-
malism general relativity has a central extension, so that {H [ξ1] , H2 [ξ2]} =
H {ξ1, ξ2} + K {ξ1, ξ2} where ξ is a surface deformation vector, H [ξ] is its sym-
metry generator and K is the central charge. In the ADM formalism the vector
ﬁelds ξ which preserve the spacetime metric under Lie transport become deforma-
tions of a spacelike surface described by the canonical variables gij, πij . Brown
and Henneaux show this symmetry group is isomorphic to the two dimensional
conformal group, its central charge is non trivial and its algebra a direct sum of
two Virasoro algebras. This was done for 2 + 1 dimensional gravity with a neg-
ative cosmological constant, but they write that it can easily be generalized to
higher dimensions. In 1991 Barnich, Henneaux and Schomblond showed that the
Hamiltonian Poisson bracket structure is equivalent to the covariant phase space
formalism which deals with the Lagrangian [38]. Therefore the latter too can be
used in the calculation of a central charge for the algebra of general relativity.

Cardy [24] studied statistical systems at a critical point, and the consequences
of their conformal invariance. He related the free energy of such a system to the
central charge of the Virasoro algebra. He thus obtained the partition function as
a function of the central charge. The number of states can be extracted from the
partition function [39], and the entropy is the logarithm of the number of states:

(cid:114)

S (∆) = 2π

cef f ∆

6

(2.6.1)

where ∆ is the eigenvalue of Virasoro generator L0, and the eﬀective central
charge takes diﬀerent forms depending on the particular conformal ﬁeld theory
under discussion.
In cases where the lowest eigenvalue of L0 does not vanish,
∆0 (cid:54)= 0, cef f = (c − 24∆0). For explicit examples see [39].

In [22] Carlip uses the covariant phase space formalism, and obtains the central
charge for general relativity. The scheme is detailed in Sec.6.2, but here we give a
brief outline. Since he is interested in the entropy associated with the black hole
horizon, he attempts to specify boundary conditions that will reﬂect the presence
of the horizon. He works with a stretched horizon. In that case the spacetime has
no Killing vector, so he requires boundary conditions which preserve the asymp-
totic horizon structure, that is, as χ2 → 0 they ensure that the boundary will be

CHAPTER 2. THE BLACK HOLE BOUNDARY

43

a null surface. He focuses on vector ﬁelds ξa which generate a diﬀeomorphism,
and decomposes them into a linear combination of orthogonal vectors in the “r-t
plane.”
ξa = Rρa + T χa. At the horizon ρa and χa coincide. One ﬁnds that
R ∼ χa∇aT , so that ξa = const · χb∇bT ρa + T χa, and that closure of the algebra
requires ρa∇aT = 0 at the horizon.

Writing χa∇aT ≡ DT, the central charge is shown to be

ˆ

(cid:0)DT1D2T2 − DT2D2T1

K [ξ1, ξ2] =

1

16πG

H

ˆa1...an−2

1
κ

(cid:1) .

(2.6.2)

(2.6.3)

The T are writen as periodic functions

(cid:0)ν, θi(cid:1) =

(cid:0)θi(cid:1)

1
κ

einkνfn

Tn

where ν is a parameter along the orbits of the Killing vector χ, and θi are angu-
lar coordinates. Implementing previously derived orthogonality constraints, the
central term is

K [Tm, Tn] = − iA
8πG

m3δm+n.0

(2.6.4)

and plugging this into the Cardy formula, with ∆ as a given eigenvalue of J [T0] ,
gives the black hole entropy with the known value of A
4G.

2.6.2 The horizon

Carlip’s derivation was done using the stretched horizon. To ﬁnd the entropy at
the horizon one then takes χ2 → 0. However this is problematic.

First, at the horizon the two orthogonal vectors to which the diﬀeomorphism
generator was decomposed coincide. Since ρ = χ at the horizon this means that
on the horizon the central charge vanishes. A key requirement for closure of the
algebra was ρa∇aT = 0. When ρ = χ then also χa∇aT = 0 and clearly eq.(2.6.2)
equals zero and the central charge vanishes, as does the entropy. Therefore either
the entropy at the horizon vanishes or the entire scheme is not valid exactly at
the horizon. This could be meshed with the previous section of this chapter, as
showing that it is not possible to calculate entropy at a deﬁned point in space.
Cardy’s entropy is in fact that of statistical mechanics and is proportional to
energy. The problem with this idea is that Carlip’s entropy does not diverge on

CHAPTER 2. THE BLACK HOLE BOUNDARY

44

the boundary if the central charge vanishes, but rather the entropy vanishes as
well.

To further investigate this we change to horizon crossing coordinates. Since
away from the horizon, χ, ρ are the “r,t plane,” then χ is in fact the timelike vector
∂t and ρ is the radial vector ∂r . To enforce closure of the algebra, the constraint
is ρa∇aT = 0 . So T is only a function of χ (that is, of t not of r) . Writing them
as Kruskal coordinates we will see that for T a function of t,

Then T = f(cid:0) u

v

T = f (t) → T = f

(cid:1) at the horizon will be either diverge or be trivial, depending

(2.6.5)

v

whether u or v goes to 0 faster. In detail: We write the vector ξ = ADT ˆρ + T ˆχ
where A ≡ 1

χ2

κ

(cid:16) u

(cid:17)

= f(cid:0)et/2M(cid:1) .

|

(2.6.6)

(cid:115)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) ADT − 2M

2M

= −

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)e−T /4M

(2.6.7)

(2.6.8)

(2.6.9)

at the horizon.

U = −exp

V = exp

So

ξ = −

2M

4M

2M

2M
4M

= −exp

| ≈ 2M log|r − 2M
(cid:41)

(cid:12)(cid:12) − T

ρ2 . We use tortoise coordinates:
r∗ = r + 2M log|r − 2M
(cid:27)

(cid:26) r∗ − t
(cid:27)
(cid:26) r∗ − t
(cid:115)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)ADT − 2M
(cid:115)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) ADT − 2M

(cid:40)
2M log(cid:12)(cid:12) ADT−2M
(cid:115)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) ADT − 2M
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)eT /4M .
(cid:115)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) ADT − 2M
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)e−T /4M ˆU +
(cid:115)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)ADT − 2M
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)e−T /4M ,

(cid:32)

2M

2M

2M

2M

=

4M

2M

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)eT /4M ˆV .
(cid:33)
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)eT /4M , 0

.

or in a basis of (U, V, x⊥)

ξ =

−

To work out the central charge we write the modes

CHAPTER 2. THE BLACK HOLE BOUNDARY

45

1
k

eikntfn(θ),

dT
dt

= −iknT,

d2T

(cid:21)−2M
dt2 = −k2n2T

(cid:20)

− U
V

Tn =
− U
V

= e−t/(2M ) → t = log

(cid:21)−ikn2M

T =

1
k

− U
V

(cid:20)

ˆ

Then the central charge works out to be

(cid:0)−inm2 + imn2(cid:1)(cid:20) U
(cid:0)−inm2 + imn2(cid:1)(cid:20) U
(cid:21)−i4kM (n+m)
(cid:0)in3(cid:1)(cid:20) U

V

V

1

16πG

H

ˆfnfm

A

16πG

δm+n,0

A

8πG

δm+n,0

(cid:21)−i4kM (n+m)
(cid:21)−i4kM (n+m)

V

K =

=

=

(2.6.10)

If the integration is done before going to the horizon, this term is ﬁnite thanks to
the delta function. However the calculation cannot be performed on the horizon
itself, where if V = 0, U (cid:54)= 0, the expression will vanish or diverge at the horizon.
The limiting process must be done at the end of the calculation.

The divergence seems to recall the divergence we found in the previous section,
in particular because it arises as the stretched horizon is taken back to the precise
location of the horizon. However it results from the constraint for closure of the
algebra rather than from quantum uncertainty.

We see that the very constraint which ensures the existence of the algebra
of diﬀeomorphism invariance prevents calculation of entropy at the horizon. This
makes intuitive sense, since the horizon limits diﬀeomorphism invariance by deﬁn-
ing a border beyond which no continuous translation is possible. In Chapter 4
we vary the entropy using a Lie derivative of the partition function, and we see
that in a space without a horizon it would vanish, as a result of diﬀeomorphism
invariance, but once the space is bounded it does not vanish. In Carlip’s scheme
the existence of a boundary of space gives rise to the central charge from which the
entropy is calculated; the weak point in this scheme is that the algebra itself does
not hold at the boundary, and thus the central charge itself cannot be calculated

CHAPTER 2. THE BLACK HOLE BOUNDARY

46

there.

This diﬀers from statistical and entanglement entropy in two aspects. First, in
statistical and entanglement entropy, the boundary is perceived as a “virtual wall”
allowing us to look at part of the system, rather than an actual wall imposing
boundary conditions. Second, problematic behavior at the boundary in statistical
entropy was shown to be a possible artifact of quantum uncertainty, whereas in
Carlip’s scheme it results from constraints on the classical algebra.

2.7 Discussion

Entanglement entropy does not necessarily diverge at the horizon, whereas ther-
modynamic entropy has been shown to do so. However this divergence can be seen
as a result of quantum uncertainty rather than related to some new unknown black
hole physics.

In this chapter I have looked at boundary behavior of diﬀerent treatments of
black hole entropy. In the ﬁrst part, I claimed that boundary conditions must not
be changed when tracing out part of the system: imposing new boundary condi-
tions would mean changing the subsystem itself. In contrast, Carlip’s treatment
imposes boundary conditions and his derivation of the entropy is a direct result
of the existence of the boundary, and of his imposition of boundary conditions.

Carlip’s entropy does not result from the state being thermal but rather from
conformal symmetry. His imposition of boundary conditions is related to this
symmetry. One eﬀect of this is that there is no horizon divergence. But the lack
of divergence is essentially related to the entropy’s source in symmetry, as opposed
to thermodynamic entropy which is proportional to energy and thus diverges from
x/p uncertainty. On the face of it horizon divergence appears to be related to
treatment of boundary conditions, but in fact it is related to the question whether
we deal with a thermal state or not, because in that case entropy is proportional
to energy, which was shown to diverge at a sharply localized boundary.

There is a possibility that a stretched horizon bears resemblance to ’t Hooft’s
brick wall, which we have here shown may be a method of delocalizing the horizon.
In neither case can the entropy be calculated exactly at the horizon. However the
source of the problem in these two cases is diﬀerent:
in statistical mechanics
it results from quantum uncertainty and in Carlip’s scheme it results from the

CHAPTER 2. THE BLACK HOLE BOUNDARY

47

classical algebraic constraint on diﬀeomorphism invariance.

Entanglement entropy and statistical entropy of a black hole may refer to the
same phenomenon. While entanglement entropy does not diverge at the horizon,
the divergence of statistical entropy may be due to x/p uncertainty. If they are
the same, the degrees of freedom that are entangled would be the Hawking pairs,
since it is they that lead to a thermal state at the horizon. In both cases boundary
conditions are not imposed at the border. This is essentially diﬀerent from Carlip’s
entropy from conformal symmetry. It is clear from all this that when considering
black hole entropy one must specify the treatment of boundary conditions in the
scheme under discussion.

Chapter 3

Curvature independence

In this chapter I focus on statistical entropy.
I examine the number of states,
as given by the volume of phase space. Statistical mechanical entropy is then
calculated from the number of states, following ’t Hooft. Inspired by ’t Hooft’s
treatment of a single particle in a black hole background, I consider whether statis-
tical entropy of a particle in a black hole background has any unique dependence
on curvature, for the following reason:

Wald entropy is deﬁned in terms of the curvature tensor. Since Wald used
the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics to obtain the entropy, it should be related to
the entropy deﬁned in statistical mechanics. However if one calculates statistical
entropy of a test particle in a region of Minkowski space and then Rindler space
one obtains two diﬀerent results (Sec.2.4.2 and see also [36]). Thus though the
curvature in both Minkowski and Rindler spaces is identical (and vanishes), the
statistical entropy will be diﬀerent. In a space with non vanishing curvature, could
statistical entropy be uniquely dependent on curvature?

For a stationary black hole solution in Einstein gravity, Wald entropy coincides
with the original Bekenstein/Hawking entropy and is proportional to area[19, 20].
The statistical entropy of a particle in a black hole background was also shown to
be dependent on area [36, 37]. This too leads one to wonder about a connection
between the two formulations of entropy.

We will show that the number of states is an explicit function of the metric.
Since the curvature derives from the metric, it would seem that the number of
states is related to curvature. However we ﬁnd that for certain transformations
of the metric, the number of states is preserved. These transformations do not

48

CHAPTER 3. CURVATURE INDEPENDENCE

49

preserve curvature. This is shown only for a diagonal metric, but it serves as a
counter example showing that in the most general case the number of states is not
uniquely dependent on the spacetime curvature scalar, although it may depend
on the curvature together with other factors that at times cancel the eﬀect of the
curvature.

This chapter is organized as follows. First we establish the deﬁnition of the
number of states. We then give an example that indicates observer dependence.
This is followed by a more thorough exploration of the number of states, and of
diﬀerent methods of calculating the volume of phase space. We then ask under
what conditions transformation of the metric will leave this volume invariant. We
obtain a general transformation of any metric which displays a clear constraint
on the preservation of the number of states. We examine characteristics of this
transformation and look for a possible relationship to curvature. We ﬁnd that in
general it need not preserve curvature. That is, the number of states and thus the
entropy will remain the same for systems with diﬀerent curvature.

The constraint in our proof holds for a conformal transformation, but in general
other transformations of the metric will not preserve the number of states. This
proves that the number of states, and the statistical entropy derived from it, are
observer dependent quantities.

In [40] numerical computation showed that for speciﬁc examples of curved
space entanglement entropy does not depend on curvature. This secton of the
thesis we prove analytically that statistical entropy is not uniquely dependent on
curvature. This gives further weight to the idea that statistical and entanglement
entropy represent the same entity.

3.1 Deﬁnition of number of states

The system we treat here is that of a classical, massless free particle, conﬁned
to a spatial volume V. We want to calculate the number of states up to a given
energy E. In statistical mechanics the number of states of a single particle in
a nonrelativistic system is deﬁned as follows: Take an integral over the volume
of phase space (d3xd3p), restrict it to values of momenta which ﬁt the energy

CHAPTER 3. CURVATURE INDEPENDENCE

50

eigenvalues of the system and to obtain
ˆ

ˆ

d3p
(2π)3

d3x
ˆ

N = g

= gV

d3p
(2π)3

(3.1.1)

where g is a numerical factor related to the degeneracy (eg., for spins with Dirichlet
boundary conditions g = 2 (1/8) for the positive octant and spin degeneracy).
This will be taken as 1 is the system under consideration, and in what follows
g will refer to the determinant of the metric.
Integration over the volume in
phase space gives V = (π/L)3 for a potential well, (2π/L)3for periodic boundary
conditions. Dividing by a unit of volume in momentum space, 2π, gives the
number of states in phase space with the given energy, per unit volume of phase
space. Since we do not limit ourselves to nonrelativistic thermodynamics, nor to
three space dimensions, a more general deﬁnition is necessary.

The number of states, that is, the phase space volume of a single particle, is

then deﬁned as

ˆ

N (E, V, 1) =

ddx

ddp

(2π)d dEδ(E − E(p)).

(3.1.2)

where d denotes the number of space dimensions1. Without loss of generality we
are taking a constant time hypersurface (Sec.8.1.1). For n particles

n(cid:89)

N (E, V, n) =

Ni

i

where Ni = N (E, V, 1), and the particles are bosons (this would be more compli-
cated for fermions). For n identical particles this is (Ni)n /n!, where the 1
n! comes
from Bose statistics, and the entropy for n particles is

S(E, V, n) = klogN (E, V, n)

where k is Boltzmann’s constant, and from here on we take k = 1. The number
of states is Lorentz invariant. For a proof see Sec.8.1.

1This integral is actually

ddxδ(t − t0)

ddp

(2π)d+1 dE [2πδ(E − E(p))].

´

CHAPTER 3. CURVATURE INDEPENDENCE

51

In order to apply this deﬁnition to curved space, we need to clarify what
momentum and energy refer to for a matter ﬁeld or gas of particles in curved space.
The discussion of the number of states assumes equilibrium or near equilibrium
thermodynamics.
Introducing time dependence involves complications on two
levels: the spacetime may not be stationary, and the number of states may be time
dependent. Here we dispense with these complications: we assume a stationary
spacetime and take a constant time slice. This is because our argument will depend
on showing counter examples to the claim that the number of states depends on
the scalar curvature. If a simpler case provides the counter example, it should
suﬃce.

There are (at least) two possible ways to approach the issue. One is that of
[7], who took ψ(x) a scalar wave function for a light spinless particle of mass m
in the Schwarzschild metric, m (cid:28) 1 (cid:28) M where M is the BH mass, used a WKB
approximation, wrote the wave equation and deﬁned the spatial momentum k(r)
in terms of the eigenvalues of the Laplacian operator while taking energy as the
eigenvalue of the time component of the Laplacian. He obtained the number of
states by calculating
k(r)dr and then summing over angular degrees of freedom.
Another possibility is that of [36, 37] who treated a relativistic gas of particles,
and rather than the wave equation, used the scalar invariance of the squared
momentum four-vector of the particle, while the covariant energy of a particle is
the projection of the timelike Killing vector on the four momentum, ξapa. Both
approaches give the same relationship between energy and momentum, which for
a static diagonal metric is

´

(cid:88)

g00E2 =

gii (pi)2

(3.1.3)

i

where we are taking a massless particle for simplicity.

Remark on notation: for simplicity of notation in this section, g00 refers to the
positive value of the time-time component of the metric, except where explicitly
stated otherwise. The minus sign appears in the form of the equation.

CHAPTER 3. CURVATURE INDEPENDENCE

52

3.2 Dependence of N on time-time component of

metric

As a warm up, we show heuristically that for constant volume and energy (for an
observer at inﬁnity) the number of states N depends on the time-time component
of the metric. For 3+1 dimensions we show that

ˆ

(cid:0)g00(cid:1)3/2

√
grr

dr

N ∼ V⊥E3

(3.2.1)

energy perceived by an observer at inﬁnity, while(cid:112)g00E is just the energy of a

where V⊥ refers to volume transverse to the radial coordinate. Here E refers to

local observer. Thus N is found to be observer dependent.

Proof of this is as follows: In general N ∼

d3xd3p ≡ VxVp, the product of the
volume of conﬁguration and momentum space for a given energy. We may write
this as |X|3 |P|3 where we take space as a box with sides of equal length |X| , and
analogously for momentum with length |P|. (This is just handwaving; a precise
treatment will be given later.)

´

Now

ˆ

√

Vx =

g3d3x = |X|3

where g3 is the determinant of the spatial metric, and similarly

ˆ (cid:114) 1

g3

Vp =

d3p = |P|3

(3.2.2)

(3.2.3)

since the metric in a cotangent space is given by the inverse matrix of that for
conﬁguration space.

To ﬁnd |P|3 we use the wave equation: (cid:3)φ = 0. Then

g00E2 − gxxp2

x − gyyp2

y − gzzp2

z = 0

(3.2.4)

and transferring the momenta to the RHS and taking the root of both sides

(cid:112)

(cid:113)

g00E2 =

gxxp2

x + gyyp2

y + gzzp2

z = |P|

(3.2.5)

CHAPTER 3. CURVATURE INDEPENDENCE

(cid:16)(cid:112)

(cid:17)3

g00E2

= |P|3 = Vp.

so that

53

(3.2.6)

Since we are interested in black holes, we assume that g00 depends on one space
coordinate x. This has no impact on the argument up till now. In that case

ˆ

N ∼ VxVp =
ˆ

= V⊥E3

√
giid3x
√
√
gxxdx (

ˆ (cid:112)

giid3p =

√

giid3x

g00E2

(cid:16)(cid:112)

(cid:17)3

ˆ

g00)3 .

(3.2.7)

This shows that the volume of phase space in this simple case is determined by
the energy as perceived by the observer in the speciﬁc metric background under
discussion.

3.3 Calculation of N

3.3.1 Calculation by the deﬁnition:

The number of states given by the volume of phase space is the product of the
volume of position and momentum space. The momentum component of the
number of states belongs to a constrained region in the cotangent space of the
region of conﬁguration space in question, obtained from the wave equation.For
example, in Cartesian coordinates in ﬂat space a Fourier transform of the wave
equation gives

E2 − p2

x − p2

y − p2

z = 0

and this deﬁnes a sphere of radius E:

1 =

p2
x
E2 +

p2
y
E2 +

p2
z
E2 .

(3.3.1)

(3.3.2)

In statistical physics we take all energies up to a given energy, and so we look for
the volume enclosed by this sphere, 4
3πE3. If the metric is not ﬂat, the volume
will be an ellipsoid.

CHAPTER 3. CURVATURE INDEPENDENCE

54

The wave equation for a general diagonal metric is

(cid:88)
(cid:88)

i

i

g00E2 =

1 =

gii (pi)2

gii (pi)2
g00E2 =

(cid:88)

p2
i

giig00E2

i

(3.3.3)

(3.3.4)

(3.3.5)

where pi the spatial momenta are summed in all space directions. This is the

formula for volume of an ellipsoid with axes (cid:112)giig00E, which encloses a region
(cid:17)3

√

(cid:16)(cid:112)g00E

whose volume in three space dimensions would be 4
d + 1 spacetime dimensions this becomes

3π

gxxgyygzz

. In

(cid:16)(cid:112)

(cid:17)d

√
gd

Cd

g00E

where gd denotes the determinant of the spatial part of the metric and Cd is
the volume enclosed by the d-dimensional unit ball. One then integrates over all
momentum space. Since the measure in the momentum integral includes the root
of inverse metric gd, that is,

ˆ

then the space determinant in eq.(3.3.4) cancels out, and the integral over mo-

mentum space gives the volume of a sphere with radius(cid:112)g00E.
(cid:0)g00(cid:1) d

dimensions) for a diagonal metric in a given volume V is

N (E, V, d, 1) = CEd

ddx

√

2

gd

Therefore the number of states of a test particle in d + 1 dimensions (d space

ddp√
gd

ˆ
Γ(cid:0) d
2 + 1(cid:1) .

V
π d

2

C =

(3.3.6)

and given n identical particles N (E, V, d, n) = (N (E, V, d, 1))n. An explicit proof
for 3 + 1 and 4 + 1 dimensions appears in Sec.8.3.1.For explicit calculations of this
quantity for a gas of particles in various spacetimes please see [36].

CHAPTER 3. CURVATURE INDEPENDENCE

55

3.3.2 Calculation with the WKB approximation:

Another method of calculating the number of states is with the WKB approxima-
tion, which for a free particle in one dimension is exact. WKB quantization gives
the number of modes in one dimension n as2

dxp(x).

(3.3.7)

n =

1
π

ˆ

ˆ

In ﬂat space the WKB term can be extended to d dimensions thus:

ni =

n ≡

1
π

(cid:34) d(cid:88)

dxip(x)

(cid:35)1/2

n2
i

(3.3.8)

i=1

and one then continues the calculation by relating n to the energy (see Sec.8.2).
In curved space problems arise.

In a spherical coordinate system relating n to the energy is problematic. For
a particle within sphere of radius R, k = βnl/R where βnl are the zeros of the
Bessel function: jl(kR) = 0. But unlike the Cartesian case one cannot extract
E(n) in neat analytical form, because the βn,l must be calculated numerically,
and each l has its own βn,l.3 Instead one follows ’t Hooft and obtains the radial
modes from the wave equation. Essentially this means incorporating energy of
transverse degrees of freedom into a radial potential. One then sums the radial
modes over angular degrees of freedom.

3.4 Invariance of number of states under transfor-

mation of metrics

We wish to examine a general transformation which changes the metric while
leaving the number of states invariant. We ﬁnd that such a transformation exists,
but does not preserve curvature. We give details of the transformation, followed
by examples of the relation to curvature.

2Note that for periodic BCs k = 2nπ/L whereas WKB used for a potential well has k = nπ/L.
3For example see [41].

CHAPTER 3. CURVATURE INDEPENDENCE

56

If a 3−dimensional metric changes by
We begin with conformal rescaling.
˜g = a(x)Ig, then the number of states is
ˆ

(cid:0)g00(cid:1)3/2 d3x.

g3d3xd3p =

√

ˆ
ˆ (cid:112)˜g3d3xd3p
ˆ
a3/2√
ˆ
√

4πE3

3

g

4πE3

g

3

N0 =

˜N =

=

=

√
g3

4πE3

3

(cid:19)3/2
(cid:18) 1
(cid:0)g00(cid:1)3/2 d3x = N

g00

a

d3x

since ˜g00 = a(x)g00 and so ˜g00 = 1
a(x) g00. This only works if the metric is uniformly
rescaled, so that a0 = ai. Thus conformal rescaling preserves the number of states.
We conclude that preservation of the number of states requires a constraint on
the relationship between the time and space components of the metric.

In search of a more general transformation we take a general diagonal metric

in 1 + 3 dimensions. Generalization to more space dimensions will be simple.

(3.4.1)

(3.4.2)

(3.4.3)

(3.4.4)



g00

gxx

gyy

gzz



The volume of space in this metric:ˆ
√
gxxgyygzzd3x

V

where the integral is over a given volume V. The volume of momentum space is

ˆ

Vp

√

d3p

gxxgyygzz

(3.4.5)

where Vp is the volume in momentum space. As explained above, from the wave
equation

which is the equation for volume of ellipsoid with axes(cid:112)gxxg00E,(cid:112)gyyg00E,(cid:112)gzzg00E.

gxxg00E2 p2

gyyg00E2 p2

gzzg00E2 p2

(3.4.6)

x +

y +

1 =

z

1

1

1

CHAPTER 3. CURVATURE INDEPENDENCE

57

The momentum volume is obtained by integration, or more simply by just plugging
in the formula for volume of ellipsoid in 3 dimensions: 4

√
gxxgyygzz (g00E2)3/2 .

3πabc = 4
3π

Phase space is given as4:

ˆ

V

N =

ˆ

d3x

d3p.

Vp

(3.4.7)

(3.4.8)

We now transform the metric in arbitrary way but keeping it diagonal:



a((cid:126)x)g00

b((cid:126)x)gxx

c((cid:126)x)gyy

d((cid:126)x)gzz



We plug this into the term for phase space. First we calculate the volume of
momentum space for the transformed metric. The wave equation is now

1

a((cid:126)x)

g00E2 =

1

b((cid:126)x)

gxxp2

x +

1

c((cid:126)x)

gyyp2

y +

1

d((cid:126)x)

gzzp2
z

(3.4.9)

and using eq.(3.4.6)

x +

a((cid:126)x)

c((cid:126)x)gyyg00E2 p2

y +

a((cid:126)x)

1 =

b((cid:126)x)gxxg00E2 p2
(cid:113)
so that the volume becomes

Vp =

b((cid:126)x)c((cid:126)x)d((cid:126)x)gxxgyygzz

4
3

π

a((cid:126)x)

z

d((cid:126)x)gzzg00E2 p2
(cid:19)3/2

(cid:18) g00

E2

.

a((cid:126)x)

(3.4.10)

(3.4.11)

This will equal the volume before the transformation if

b((cid:126)x)c((cid:126)x)d((cid:126)x) = a((cid:126)x)3.

(3.4.12)

Thus we have identiﬁed the constraint for an arbitrary transformation to preserve
the volume of phase space.

4This can have a prefactor of (2π)

−3 when calculating the density of modes per unit of phase

space.

CHAPTER 3. CURVATURE INDEPENDENCE

58

3.4.1 Characteristics of the transformation

We looked for some kind of general algebraic characterization for this kind of
matrix, but found none. It belongs to GL(n, R) but does not represent a particu-
lar symmetry. Conformal transformations are a subgroup of our transformation,
as shown in Sec.3.4.3. Certain non conformal transformations also preserve the
number of states. This holds if the determinants cancel out: That is, for d space
dimensions, the time part a(x) when raised to the dth power, has to equal the
determinant of the space part. Take



A =



a(x)

0

0
0
0

a(x)2

0
0

0
0

0
0
a(x) 0
1

0

(3.4.13)

(3.4.15)

As with the conformal transformation, we still have
˜N = N0.

So in general our constraint is:

√

˜g3 = a3/2√

g3 and and so

(g00)d = det gspace

(3.4.14)

where d is the number of space dimensions and gspace is the determinant of the
spatial part of the metric.

We can regard the transformation matrix, labeled A, as two blocks, separating

the time and space components:

A =

(cid:32)

(cid:33)

T

S

where T is a 1x1 matrix, and S is a diagonal matric of rank d where d is the
dimension of space (rank of A is the dimension of space-time, d + 1). Then the
constraint requires

det(S) = det(T )d

det(A) = det(T )2d.

(3.4.16)

CHAPTER 3. CURVATURE INDEPENDENCE

59

3.4.2 Relation to curvature
ˆ

In d + 1 dimensions

N ∼

(cid:114) gd

(g00)d

d3x

(3.4.17)

where gd denotes the determinant of the space part of metric. To preserve the
number of states we have to preserve the ratio gd/gd
00 , which entails the con-
straint on the determinant as detailed above. The question becomes: given a
change of metric for which this constraint holds, will such a constraint ensure
preservation of scalar curvature? If so preservation of the number of states would
entail preservation of curvature, which is an observer independent characteristic.
We take two matrices representing two possible transformations of a given 3-

dimensional metric:

A =

B =

1
L

 x
 √




2x
L

x

2

x

x2
L2

(3.4.18)

2x3 , the second has R = L√

where L is a constant with dimension of length. Both transformation matrices
preserve the constraint given above, while their intrinsic curvature diﬀers: the
2x3 . This is because the second one has
ﬁrst has R = 3L
fewer nonzero components of the Christoﬀel connection, since the derivative must
be ∂x, and ∂xgyy = 0 5. Therefore clearly imposing the constraint on a metric
transformation will not necessarily preserve the curvature of the original metric.
Curvature in these examples is aﬀected by the number of terms with an x
derivative, while the determinant is not. Thus the constraint on the determinant
does NOT preserve curvature. This is intuitively understandable: the determinant
indicates volume but gives no information as to the spatial distribution of the
volume.

5This reason is purely formal, in terms of the coordinates chosen here; R is not dependent on
coordinate system of course. Just for that reason, a diﬀerent choice of coordinates would also
involve diﬀerent scalar curvature for the two cases.

CHAPTER 3. CURVATURE INDEPENDENCE

60

3.4.3 Examples in various dimensions

In 1 + 1 dimensions a transformation that preserves N must be conformal: g00 =
gxx since det gspace = gxx. In 2+1 dimensions we give two examples of transforma-
tions that preserve N. One is conformal, the other non conformal but symmetric:
We give the matrices for the transformations, and the scalar curvature when they
are applied to a ﬂat Lorentzian metric:

 −x

x

y

x

x

2x3

 , R = − 3L
 , R = L
(cid:32)−6y2 + 5x

8 [xy]5/2

Conformal:

Symmetric:

A =

1
L

 −√

xy

B =

1
L

(3.4.19)

(3.4.20)

(cid:33)

.

xy

√

An asymmetric example is like the one given in the previous section for a Euclidean
metric.

Note that plugging in the value x = y after deriving R for matrix B does not
give the curvature of matrix A. This is because the derivation of R takes into
account the direction of each component as well as its numerical value. If one
plugs in y = x before deriving R all the derivatives ∂y vanish, giving the diﬀerent
result.

We next look at 3+1 dimensions. The constraint requires (cid:12)(cid:12)(g00)3(cid:12)(cid:12) = detg3.

Comparing several matrices that obey this constraint and inspecting their curva-

CHAPTER 3. CURVATURE INDEPENDENCE

61

ture:

B =

1
L

A =



C =

1
L

− x

L



− (xyz)

1
3

−x



 , R =
 , R =
 , R =

x3
L3

x

x

1

y

x

1

z

x

2L3
x5

(cid:18) 1

x3 +

4L
9

(cid:19)

1
y3 +

1
z3

3L
2x3

(3.4.21)

A few comments: 1) The curvature for the third transformation is the same as
for the conformal matrix in 1+2 dimensions. 2) As before, setting x = y = z
after calculating the curvature for matrix B does not give the same result as
the curvature for matrix C. Again, this is because the direction of the variable
contributes in calculating R, and not just its numeric value. This sheds light on the
fact that the number of states, which is proportional to the volume of phase space,
is diﬀerent from curvature, which incorporates information on the distribution of
that volume. A constraint on the determinant, representing Euclidean volume,
is not the same as that on Ricci curvature, which in fact represents the amount
by which the volume of a geodesic ball in a curved Riemannian manifold deviates
from that of the standard ball in Euclidean space.

3.4.3.1 Rindler vs Schwarzschild:

The transformation from Minkowski metric to Rindler metric is not diagonal.
Rindler coordinates mix time and space coordinates of the Minkowski metric,
and that is why N in the Rindler calculation is diﬀerent from ﬂat space. We
cannot conclude from this that curvature is irrelevant to statistical entropy. That
conclusion can only be drawn from the general proof given above.

The Schwarzschild calculation gives divergence at the boundary and we found
that the number of states (and thus the entropy) is diﬀerent from that of Minkowski
space as shown in the previous chapter. This is not the same as the diﬀerence be-
tween the number of states in Rindler and Minkowski spaces. The basic diﬀerence

CHAPTER 3. CURVATURE INDEPENDENCE

62

is that Schwarzschild and Minkowski spaces have diﬀerent geometry, whereas the
transformation to Rindler space is a coordinate change from Minkowski space.
In terms of the calculation given above,
in the Schwarzschild case the argu-
ment here given does apply, since the transformation metric from Minkowski to
Schwarzschild metric is diagonal. The Schwarzschild number of states diﬀers from
that of Minkowski because of the redshift on energy: g00(r).

3.4.4 Discussion

Our transformation leaves N invariant because it preserves the relationship be-
tween the volume of momentum space and of position space. (g00)3/2 is the variable
part of momentum space, and √
gd is the variable part of position space. N is
invariant so long as the relation between the two is preserved, so that if position
space shrinks, momentum space grows and vice verse: a(x)d multiplying √
gspace
equals 1/a(x)d multiplying momentum space.

It would seem that a proof of curvature independence must show that there
are no cases at all where curvature is preserved under a transformation that pre-
served the number of states. In fact it is quite possible that in some case curvature
might be preserved. We claim that this must be seen as a coincidence because
the constraint on preservation of the number of states relates to the determinant.
By deﬁnition, there is a diﬀerence between the determinant, which represents Eu-
clidean volume and does not depend on directions in space, and curvature which
does depend on directions in space. The number of states does not depend on
directions in space and so it can be preserved even if the directional characteristics
and thus the curvature are changed. There will be a subgroup where transfor-
mation of the number of states will indeed preserve curvature. But one cannot
assume that any given number of states, and the entropy derived from it, relate
in a unique manner to a spacetime with a given curvature. Curvature may aﬀect
the number of states but there is no one to one correspondence between the two.
We examined the question whether in curved space the number of states, and
the statistical entropy derived from this, is observer dependent or is related to a
physical quantity such as curvature. We found that - as with any measurement
of length - the result just depends on your ruler. Finding N is actually just
a generalization of ﬁnding a length:
it involves ﬁnding a volume in space and
momentum space. Obviously people with diﬀerent rulers will give you a diﬀerent

CHAPTER 3. CURVATURE INDEPENDENCE

63

answer for the length. The statistical number of states is essentially like a scaled
ruler and thus is observer dependent and not related to the intrinsic geometry.
This reﬂects the scheme in the previous chapter, in that boundary conditions are
imposed on the observer rather than on the state. This diﬀers from the work of
Wald and Carlip.

In addition, in [40] it was shown for explicit examples that entanglement en-
tropy does not depend on curvature. For a discretized region in curved space it
was found that even when the space is large enough for the eﬀects of curvature
to be noticeable, entropy remains proportional to area and is not aﬀected by the
curvature of the background. This qualitative similarity to our result reinforces
the idea that entanglement and statistical entropy are one and the same thing,
and that they possibly diﬀer from Noether charge entropy.

The results in this chapter apply to a diagonal metric only. A general metric
could only be diagonalized locally, and that would not be relevant to a discussion
of curvature. However since a diagonal metric is seen to be curvature independent,
and there is certainly at least one diagonal metric, this serves as a counter example
to the claim that the number of states is uniquely dependent on curvature.

In conclusion, we have shown that the number of states is a function of the
metric and is preserved under speciﬁc transformations of the metric, which do not
preserve curvature. Therefore the number of states calculated with the accepted
deﬁnition of phase space does not depend uniquely on curvature. In this it appears
to diﬀer from Wald entropy. However, as discussed in Sec.2.5, for general theories
of gravity a wider deﬁnition of phase space may be necessary.

Chapter 4

Entropy variation

4.1 Introduction

In this chapter we write the variation of the statistical entropy of matter ﬁelds
outside a black hole along a Killing vector, and we compare this to the variation
of Wald’s entropy. The calculation applies to any generalized theory of gravity. If
the variations are equivalent, this would imply a natural connection between the
two entropies, where one is derived from the presence of matter in the region of
a black hole and the other derived exclusively from spacetime geometry. Such a
connection would relate statistical mechanics to the gravity ﬁeld equations, with
profound implications for the idea of gravity as an emergent phenomenon. We
ﬁnd that under certain conditions for a stationary black hole the two entropy
variations do in fact coincide.

Wald [19, 20] has studied black holes in generalized theories of gravity and
proposed that the correct dynamical entropy of stationary black hole solutions
with bifurcate Killing horizons is a Noether charge entropy. The microphysical
understanding of Wald’s entropy is unknown.

Another approach to the calculation of black hole entropy is that of statistical
mechanics, as discussed above. Since statistical entropy is calculated using the
partition function of the ﬁelds outside the horizon, its microphysical origin is
understood. However, as statistical entropy is known to depend on the number
of ﬁelds in the theory, whereas Wald’s entropy does not, it seems that the two
entropies may be essentially diﬀerent.

We note that Wald’s calculation was for general (higher derivative) theories

64

CHAPTER 4. ENTROPY VARIATION

65

of gravity. Therefore we attempt to relate these two entropies for generalized
theories of gravity. A connection between the two entropies could indicate a
relationship between the entropy of microstates within the black hole and that
of matter outside. This would be similar to the concept of black hole entropy as
entanglement entropy between the states inside and outside the black hole.

The variation of Wald’s entropy was calculated in [26] (see also [27]). In [26]
the authors diﬀerentiate Wald’s entropy along a Killing vector to obtain δS. They
use the generalized gravitational ﬁeld equations to derive a term for the energy
ﬂow across the black hole horizon, and ﬁnd that the ﬁrst law δQ = T δS is fulﬁlled.
Thus the entropy variation along a Killing vector is:

ˆ

δSW ald = 2π

Tabχab

(4.1.1)

where χa is the Killing ﬁeld and b is a (D − 1) volume form. (Details of the
derivation are in Section 9.1). We here obtain a similar relationship for the varia-
tion of statistical entropy and Tab, where our variation will be along an arbitrary
vector, which on the horizon we will take to be a Killing vector. Thus we will
compare the variation of the two diﬀerent entropies along a Killing vector on the
black hole horizon.

Note: This chapter, unlike the rest of this thesis, is written using diﬀerential
forms because it follows the variation of Wald entropy [26] which was calculated
in that language.

4.2 Preliminaries

For the following treatment we will need the partition function.
In the path
integral approach the amplitude to go from a ﬁeld conﬁguration φ1 at a time t1
to a ﬁeld conﬁguration φ2 at time t2 is given
ˆ

(cid:104)φ2, t2|φ1, t1(cid:105) =

DφeiI[φ]

(4.2.1)

where the path integral is over all ﬁeld conﬁgurations which take the values φ1at
time t1 and φ2 at time t2. However if H is the Hamiltonian,

(cid:104)φ2, t2|φ1, t1(cid:105) =(cid:10)φ2|e−iH(t2−t1)|φ1

(cid:11) .

(4.2.2)

CHAPTER 4. ENTROPY VARIATION

66

One deﬁnes the time period t2 − t1 = −iτ, and in going to Euclidean time one
takes the time as periodic with period β, and one identiﬁes the ﬁelds φ1 = φ2 ,
sums over all φ1 and thus obtains the partition function for the canonical ensemble
of ﬁeld φ at inverse temperature β,

ˆ

Z = T r(e−βH) =

Dφe−IE [φ]

(4.2.3)

and IE [φ] is the matter action as deﬁned above, but now with Euclidean time.
(see for instance [45], Chap.9).

4.3 Variation of statistical entropy

The entropy is given by

Sst = β(cid:104)E(cid:105) + ln Z.

(4.3.1)

since, as discussed in Chapter 2, the region near a black hole is a thermal state.
We now perform a variation of the entropy. Since we are interested in comparing
to Wald entropy, we look for the eﬀect on the statistical entropy of a change in
the geometry. A natural way to vary the geometry is to push the metric forward
with the ﬂow of a vector ﬁeld ξ. The corresponding variation of the metric is
given by its Lie derivative along ξ, therefore it is this derivative that will appear
in the entropy variation below.

Since it has been shown [26, 27] that the variation of Wald’s entropy is related
to the energy momentum tensor, we would like to relate the variation of the
statistical entropy to Tab as well. We label by δgSst the variation of the entropy
we have just described. From eq.(4.3.1) we have

δgSst = δg (β(cid:104)E(cid:105)) + δg ln Z.

(4.3.2)

We want to examine the eﬀect of a change only in the metric on the expression
for the entropy. To do this, we take the variation as described above, where the
metric is varied by taking its Lie derivative along a vector ﬁeld ξ, as follows.

CHAPTER 4. ENTROPY VARIATION

We begin with the second term on the RHS.

ˆ

δglnZ =

=

=

1
Z
1
Z



ˆ
ˆ

δlnZ

δZ

δgab Lξgab
δgabLξgab
(cid:104)Tab(cid:105)Lξgab




2

67

(4.3.3)

(4.3.4)

(4.3.5)

where  is a D-dimensional volume form, and the last line was obtained as in [43],
Sec.6.1.1 Note that (cid:104)Tab(cid:105) is not normalized.

We express the Lie derivative of the metric in terms of ξa: Lξgab = ∇aξb +∇bξa

and the variation of the action becomes:

(cid:104)Tab(cid:105)(cid:2)∇aξb + ∇bξa(cid:3)


2
(cid:104)Tab(cid:105)∇aξb

δglnZ =

=

=

1
Z

1
Z

1
Z

ˆ
ˆ

V

V

ˆ

V

∇a(cid:2)(cid:104)Tab(cid:105) ξb(cid:3) −



∇a (cid:104)Tab(cid:105) ξb

ˆ

V

(4.3.6)

δglnZ =

1
Z

V

1
Z

where we have used symmetry of Tab and integration by parts. Since ∇a (cid:104)Tab(cid:105) = 0
we obtain

ˆ

∇a(cid:2)(cid:104)Tab(cid:105) ξb(cid:3)
´
V (∇cωc)  =

´

(4.3.7)

H ωcc and using ωc =

From the generalized Stokes law we have
ˆ
(cid:104)Tab(cid:105) ξb we have

δglnZ =

(cid:104)Tab(cid:105) ξab

(4.3.8)

H

where b is a (D-1) volume form and H denotes the boundary of V . The volume is
bounded by the black hole horizon and at inﬁnity. We assume space is asymptot-
ically ﬂat and so Tab vanishes at inﬁnity, and the contribution in eq.(4.3.8) comes
only from the black hole horizon.2

1In that text one obtains i(cid:104)Tab(cid:105) which here for Euclidean space time should become −(cid:104)Tab(cid:105).
We omit the minus sign in what follows, and note that in [20] the Noether charge has a minus
sign.

2Here we have used an IR cutoﬀ at inﬁnity, but this is so far away that Tab vanishes there.

CHAPTER 4. ENTROPY VARIATION

68

Eq.(4.3.8) gives part of the variation of the matter action of the ﬁelds found in
the volume outside the black hole when the metric changes along some arbitrary
vector ﬁeld. We now specialize to the horizon. At the horizon we require ξ → χ
to be a Killing vector which fulﬁlls χa∇aχb = χb. Since χ vanishes on the horizon,
we take a region just outside the horizon and take the limit to the horizon, as
Carlip does (Chap.2, and see [25, 26, 27]). The second term in the variation of
the matter action along the Killing vector is thus

ˆ

δglnZ =

1
Z

(cid:104)Tab(cid:105) χab.

(4.3.9)

H

If we had taken ξ to be a Killing vector throughout the volume in eq.(4.3.3),
eq.(4.3.9) would vanish as Lξgab would vanish. However eq.(4.3.3) is an integral
over volume, and ξ is a Killing vector only on the boundary of this volume, not
in the bulk. So eq.(4.3.3) does not vanish, and from Stokes’ law eq.(4.3.9) does
not vanish.3

We now turn to the ﬁrst term in eq.4.3.2. (cid:104)E(cid:105) = −∂lnZ/∂β. In this case
β is constant, as the period of Euclidean time (and as is the temperature for a
stationary black hole) and will not itself be varied. Thus using eq.(4.3.9) we ﬁnd

∂
∂β

ˆ

Z

 1
 +

H

δg (β(cid:104)E(cid:105)) = −βδg

lnZ = −β

δglnZ

∂
∂β
(cid:104)Tab(cid:105) χab

 .

= −β

∂
∂β

(4.3.10)

Eqs.(4.3.9),(4.3.10) give

δgSst = −β

∂
∂β

ˆ

 1

Z

(cid:104)Tab(cid:105) χab

ˆ

1
Z

(cid:104)Tab(cid:105) χab.

(4.3.11)

H

H

First we take (cid:104)Tab(cid:105) as well as Z as independent of Euclidean time, in this case the
ﬁrst term on the RHS vanishes. We deﬁne b = kbdτ dA where kb is the tangent
to the vectors generating the horizon for parameter τ, and dA is the area element
R − 1)dV . The
( r
integrand vanishes at the surface, but clearly the integral over the volume does not vanish, and
so the surface integral obtained by Stokes law will not vanish either.

3For example, take the following integral over a volume with radius R:

´

CHAPTER 4. ENTROPY VARIATION

69

of a cross section of the horizon. Then
ˆ

δgSst =

1
Z

(cid:104)Tab(cid:105) χab

H

τ1ˆ

τ2

dτ

ˆ

A

(cid:104)Tab(cid:105) χakbdA.

(4.3.12)

=

1
Z

Integration over Euclidean time gives

δgSst =

β
Z

ˆ

A

(cid:104)Tab(cid:105) χakbdA

(4.3.13)

We normalize (cid:104)Tab(cid:105) with the partition function, obtaining

ˆ

(cid:69)

(cid:68) ˜Tab

δgSst = β

A

χakbdA

(4.3.14)

where the tilde represents normalization, and taking β = 2π this is equal to the
variation of Wald entropy. If we do not integrate over the entire time period but
rather take a ﬁnite interval we obtain a term proportional to Wald entropy. In
either case it appears that for time independent
the variation of Wald’s en-
tropy is equivalent up to a constant to a purely geometric variation of statistical
entropy. The factor of 2π in the variation of Wald’s entropy comes from the orig-
inal term for Wald entropy, eq.1.2.13 and not from the variation, and represents
the temperature in the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics, rather than being inherent
to the derivation of the Noether charge for diﬀeomorphism invariance.

(cid:68) ˜Tab

(cid:69)

is not independent of time the ﬁrst term of eq.(4.3.11) does not vanish

(cid:69)

(cid:68) ˜Tab

If

and becomes

δg (β(cid:104)E(cid:105)) = −β

∂
∂β

 1

Z

ˆ

H

 .

(cid:104)Tab(cid:105) χab

(4.3.15)

where we have abandoned normalization in order to explore the role of the parti-
tion function. The next question is whether to take Z as a function of β. If not,
we obtain

ˆ

δg (β(cid:104)E(cid:105)) = − β
Z

(cid:104)Tab(cid:105) χab

∂
∂β

H

(4.3.16)

CHAPTER 4. ENTROPY VARIATION

70

for which one needs to know the precise dependence of the stress energy tensor
on the Euclidean time period. If Z is a function of β we obtain two terms,

ˆ

ˆ

ˆ

δg (β(cid:104)E(cid:105)) = − β
Z

∂
∂β

(cid:104)Tab(cid:105) χab +

β
Z 2

Dφ(−L)e−IE

(cid:104)Tab(cid:105) χab

(4.3.17)

H

H

This may also be written

δg (β(cid:104)E(cid:105)) = − β
Z

ˆ

H

∂
∂β

(cid:104)Tab(cid:105) χab − β

Z 2 (cid:104)L(cid:105)

ˆ

H

(cid:104)Tab(cid:105) χab

(4.3.18)

The expectation value of the Lagrangian is not normalized just as (cid:104)Tab(cid:105) is not (see
[43] Chap. 6). Normalization gives

ˆ

(cid:69)

(cid:68) ˜Tab

∂
∂β

(cid:68) ˜L
(cid:69)ˆ

(cid:69)

(cid:68) ˜Tab

χab − β

H

H

χab.

(4.3.19)

δg (β(cid:104)E(cid:105)) = −β

4.4 Summary

We have three possibilities for this variation: one is just the same as the variation
of Wald entropy, resulting from a Lie derivative of the metric, and the other two
contain additional terms which derive from time dependence of Tab and Z for
the matter ﬁelds in question. Thus the existence of matter ﬁelds are responsible
for the diﬀerence between even a purely geometric variation as above, and the
variation of Wald entropy.

The ﬁrst possibility is this: If the expectation value of the stress energy tensor
of the matter ﬁelds is time independent then we obtain a term proportional to the
variation of Wald’s entropy. Integration over all Euclidean time gives the exact
same term as the variation of Wald entropy. We are treating a stationary black
hole, so that it seems reasonable to assume time independence. (We recall that β
appears as inverse temperature in the partition function, but is also the period of
Euclidean time.)

If the expectation value of the stress energy tensor is time dependent, the

question then arises whether Z is as well. If not, then the entropy variation is

ˆ

(cid:69)

(cid:68) ˜Tab

δgS = β

χakbdA − β

A

H

ˆ

(cid:69)

(cid:68) ˜Tab

∂
∂β

χab

CHAPTER 4. ENTROPY VARIATION

71

which includes one term which is equal to the variation of Wald entropy, and a
second which is not. If Z is taken as dependent on the time period,

ˆ

(cid:69)

(cid:68) ˜Tab

δgS = β

χakbdA − β

ˆ

(cid:69)

(cid:68) ˜Tab

∂
∂β

χab − β
Z 2

(cid:68) ˜L
(cid:69)ˆ

(cid:69)

(cid:68) ˜Tab

χab.

A

H

H

In conclusion, if one assumes a stationary black hole with time independent
(cid:104)Tab(cid:105) and Z, one obtains a variation according to a change in the geometry which is
just that of the variation of Wald’s entropy. It is not surprising that the variation
of statistical entropy due to a slight change in the geometry should be similar to
the variation of the Noether charge for diﬀeomorphism invariance. If we were to
perform a complete variation of the statistical entropy including variation by the
ﬁelds, and not just by the geometry, the two terms would diﬀer.

If we do not make the above assumptions, the variation due to a change in the
geometry does not coincide with the variation of Wald entropy, but is aﬀected by
the nature of the stress energy tensor and the partition function, that is, by the
nature of the matter ﬁelds in the black hole metric.

Thus we have shown that along a Killing vector at the horizon, the variation
of the statistical entropy of the matter ﬁelds caused by variation of the matter
Lagrangian density due to a change of the metric diﬀers from the variation of
Wald’s entropy, which is derived from the diﬀeomorphism invariance of spacetime.
This is true for any generalized theory of gravity. In previous work, it is not clear
what Wald’s entropy counts: it could be quanta of Planck length, or Planck area,
some geometrical or other quantity. The statistical entropy term in our work is
explicitly taken only from the matter Lagrangian. In all the above possibilities
one ﬁnds that the two variations coincide in the purely geometrical aspect. The
variation itself must be only according to a change in the geometry and not in
the matter ﬁelds.
In addition, for the variations to coincide one must ignore
dependence of the matter ﬁelds and partition function on Euclidean time. This
makes it seem that the Wald’s entropy isolates the geometric characteristics of
space time at the black hole horizon, which also aﬀect the matter ﬁelds in its
vicinity, but do not consitute their statistical entropy.

Chapter 5

Conclusions and discussion

In this thesis we discussed several issues which diﬀerentiate between diﬀerent con-
ceptions of black hole entropy: divergence at the horizon, imposition of boundary
conditions, observer dependence and behavior under variation.

We saw that divergence at the boundary as in ’t Hooft’s model may result
from simple x/p uncertainty, since thermodynamic entropy is linear to energy and
energy diverges as ∆x vanishes. Therefore statistical entropy may be identiﬁed in
the case of the black hole with entanglement entropy even though entanglement
entropy does not diverge at the boundary, because this divergence may simply
be a result of quantum uncertainty. Entanglement entropy expresses correlations
between two diﬀerent parts of a system, while statistical entropy counts degrees
of freedom of one of those two parts. Counting correlations is thus the same as
counting the number of degrees of freedom in one of the subsystems, since each
degree of freedom in one subsystem is correlated with one in the other subsystem.
Another criterion for distinguishing between entropies is the imposition of
boundary conditions. Carlip’s treatment of entropy as resulting from symmetry
necessitates the imposition of boundary conditions and must be distinguished
from statistical/entanglement entropy for this reason. This is also true of Wald
entropy, which is derived from surface terms at the boundaries at inﬁnity and at
the horizon. In contrast, entanglement entropy traces out one part of a system,
that is, looks at only part of a system without imposing boundary conditions. In
the example given of a potential well, the probability to ﬁnd a particle in the left
side of the well would be one half, whereas if we imposed boundary conditions, it
would be either 1 or 0 because we would have two smaller wells. However we have

72

CHAPTER 5. CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION

73

not divided the system into two smaller wells, but rather we look only at one half
of the entire well.

It is possible that a stretched horizon, like ’t Hooft’s brick wall, is just a
method of delocalizing the horizon. In that case Carlip’s central charge would
not vanish despite the problem raised by imposing boundary conditions. Further
work is needed to test this possibility.

A third characteristic that must be taken into account is curvature indepen-
dence of the entropy. It has been shown that statistical entropy is not uniquely
related to the curvature scalar, although the curvature may be one of a number
of factors aﬀecting it. It is possible that the particular method used to explore
statistical entropy is not suﬃciently general. In particular it holds only for a diag-
onal metric. However since this method provides a counter example, it is diﬃcult
to see how in a more general framework statistical entropy would not be observer
dependent. Since statistical entropy is derived from the number of states, whereas
Wald’s entropy is deﬁned using the curvature tensor, this seems to indicate a dif-
ference between these two concepts of entropy. However the issue may not be so
simple. Phase space is deﬁned as the product of spatial volume and its canonical
conjugate. This deﬁnition arose in a context where the canonical conjugate of
the variable in the Lagrangian was its time derivative. However the gravitational
Lagrangian includes the Ricci scalar, and Ricci tensors as well in the generalized
theories of gravity with which Wald dealt. The Lagrangian of a particle in a grav-
itational background will include at least two terms, the matter Lagrangian and
the graviational term. Each will have a generalized momentum conjugate to the
dynamical variable in the Lagrangian. Therefore it may be necessary to redeﬁne
statistical entropy to take into account a more general formulation of phase space.
In conclusion, we have shown that the number of states is a function of the
metric and is preserved under speciﬁc transformations of the metric, which do not
preserve curvature. Therefore the number of states calculated with the accepted
deﬁnition of phase space does not depend on curvature. For general theories of
gravity it may be necessary to redeﬁne statistical entropy taking into account a
more general concept of phase space.

Variation of statistical entropy resulting from a change in the metric was shown
to diﬀer from the variation of Wald’s entropy. The two variations coincide only
in the purely geometrical aspect. To coincide, the variation of statistical entropy
must be only according to a change in the geometry and not a change in the

CHAPTER 5. CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION

74

matter ﬁelds. In addition, one must ignore dependence of the matter ﬁelds and
partition function on Euclidean time. This makes it seem that the Wald’s entropy
isolates the geometric characteristics space time at the black hole horizon, which
also aﬀect the matter ﬁelds in its vicinity, but do not consitute their statistical
entropy.

It appears from all the above that statistical entropy and entanglement entropy
may refer to the same thing, whereas Wald’s geometric entropy, as well as Carlip’s
attempt to obtain entropy from conformal symmetry, refer to a diﬀerent entity.
This does not explain what the entropy actually means, or what degrees of freedom
statistical entropy represents. But it does draw a signiﬁcant distinction between
these two basic types of entropy, and that is a necessary ﬁrst step in understanding
what black hole entropy refers to.

Further investigation is necessary to clarify these points. In particular it is
necessary to explore higher theories of gravity. The main objective of this thesis
was to implement the idea that in trying to understand what the various concepts
of black hole entropy refer to, and which of them coincide, one should focus on
speciﬁc aspects of this entropy. Here I have pointed out several crucial aspects:
behavior at the boundary, observer dependence, imposition of boundary condi-
tions, and behavior of a variation of this entropy. This investigation appears to
lead to the conclusion that statistical entropy and entanglement entropy may coin-
cide, and diﬀer from the entropy of Wald and Carlip which derives from spacetime
symmetry.

Part II

Supplementary Details and

Calculations

75

Chapter 6

Supplement to background

6.1 ’t Hooft’s calculation of statistical entropy

To ﬁnd the number of modes for a particle in the black hole metric, t’Hooft uses
a one dimensional WKB approximation. He takes the contribution to energy of
the transverse momenta as an eﬀective radial potential Vef f = l(l + 1)/r2 (since
it behaves as a centrifugal potential).

The wave equation for a free massive particle in a diagonal metric is

(cid:0)g00E2 − grrk2

φ − m2(cid:1) ψ = 0.

r − gθθk2

θ − gφφk2

The one-dimensional WKB approximation has

Rˆ

√

dr

grrk(r).

nπ =

0

From the wave equation we obtain the radial eigenfunction

for each eigenfunction kl. In the Schwarzschild metric this becomes

(cid:0)g00E2 − gθθk(θ)2 − gφφk(φ)2 − m2(cid:1)
(cid:33)
(cid:32)

1

1 − 2M

r

E2 − 1

r2 (l (l + 1)) − m2

k2
l (r) = grr

k2
l (r) =

1

1 − 2M

r

(6.1.1)

(6.1.2)

(6.1.3)

.

(6.1.4)

76

CHAPTER 6. SUPPLEMENT TO BACKGROUND

77

The number of radial modes is then summed over the angular degrees of freedom,

Rˆ

E2r2ˆ

N π =

dr

0

1

1 − 2M

r

dl(2l + 1)

0

E2 −

1 − 2M
r

(cid:115)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)(cid:18)l(l + 1)

(cid:19)

r2 + m2

(6.1.5)

where the upper limit of the second integral is in order to ensure a positive root.

The free energy is obtained from N as follows:

F = −T lnZ = (cid:104)E(cid:105) − T S
S = = β (cid:104)E(cid:105) + lnZ = −∂F
∂T
1

(cid:88)

e−βE = Πn,l,lz

e−βF =

1 − e−βE

(cid:88)

βF =

log(1 − e−βE).

Now, taking the sum to an integral
ˆ

πβF = π

dN log(1 − e−βE)

and πN = g(E) so integrating by parts
∞ˆ

πβF = −

0

dE

βg(E)
eβE − 1

(6.1.6)

(6.1.7)

(6.1.8)

(6.1.9)

because dN = dg(E), d

1−e−βE ,and plugging in πN = g(E) gives

∞ˆ

πβF = −β

dE log(1 − e−βE) = β
Lˆ

ˆ

(cid:114)

dE

eβE − 1

1

dr

1 − 2M

r

(2l+1)dl

E2 − (1 − 2M
r

)(m2 +

l(l + 1)

r2

(6.1.10)

(6.1.11)

0

2M +h

so

∞ˆ

0

F = − 1
π

dE

1 − e−βE N.

Integration gives two terms, one of which is the contribution from the vacuum
surrounding the system at large distances and ’t Hooft discards it. The second

CHAPTER 6. SUPPLEMENT TO BACKGROUND

78

term is the horizon contribution:

Fhorizon = − 2π3
45h
which diverges as h → 0. Then taking U = ∂

S = β (U − F ) =

8π3
45h

2M

(cid:18)2M

(cid:19)4

β

∂β (βF )

(cid:18)2M

β

(6.1.12)

(6.1.13)

(cid:19)3

Z

where Z is the total number of particle types.
’t Hooft then adjusts parameters
of the model, such that S = 4M 2/λ, in accordance with area dependence derived
previously. The main point of this derivation is that the entropy diverges on
approaching the horizon.

6.2 Wald and Carlip

Carlip has worked on obtaining black hole entropy from conformal theory over a
period of years, in the ADM formalism as well as Wald’s canonical phase space
formalism. This section is taken from [22].

6.2.1 Canonical phase space formalism

Wald [54] based his work on the abstract formalism of Hamiltonian mechanics
where states of a system with n degrees of freedom are represented by points in a
2n dimensional manifold referred to as phase space, on which a symplectic form is
deﬁned. Wald mapped the space of the solutions of the ﬁeld equations of motion
to phase space. Then variation of the Lagrangian is

δL = E · δφ + dΘ

(6.2.1)

where L is an n form Lagrangian and φ are ﬁelds (taken as scalar in this treatment,
but could be otherwise), E = 0 are the Euler-Lagrange equations, and Θ is an n−1
form given by surface terms. The symplectic current obtained from symplectic

CHAPTER 6. SUPPLEMENT TO BACKGROUND

79

variation of Θ is

ω [φ, δ1φ, δ2φ] = δ1Θ [φ, δ2φ] − δ2Θ [φ, δ1φ]

ˆ

Ω =

ω

C

(6.2.2)

where C is a Cauchy surface.1

Given a diﬀeomorphism generated by vector ﬁeld ξ we can deﬁne a Noether

current (n-1 form)

J [ξ] = Θ [φ,Lξφ] − ξ · L
dJ = dΘ − d [ξ · L] .

(6.2.3)

We have dΘ = δL − E · δφ but E = 0 on shell.

Note that δL = LξL and that the Lie derivative of a form Λ is given by

LξΛ = ξ · dΛ + d (ξ · Λ) . Plugging this in:

dJ = δL − d (ξ · L)

= ξ · dL + d (ξ · L) − d (ξ · L) .

ξ · dL = 0 since L is an n form, and so

dJ = 0,→ J = dQ.

(6.2.4)

(6.2.5)

Given ξa and a generator of diﬀeomorphism H [ξ], Hamilton’s equations are:

ˆ

δH [ξ] = Ω =

C

ω [φ, δφ,Lξφ] .

(6.2.6)

By deﬁnition, ω [φ, δφ,Lξφ] = δφΘ − LξΘ. Plug that in and we ﬁnd

ω = δJ [ξ] − d (ξ · Θ [φ, δφ])

ˆ

δJ − d (ξ · Θ)

(6.2.7)

δH =

C

1Θ is like

vectors.

∂L
∂∇µφa δφa, which is a vector quantity. So one then needs to integrate over all the

CHAPTER 6. SUPPLEMENT TO BACKGROUND

80

and since J = dQ

ˆ
ˆ

∂C

H [ξ] =

=

(Q [ξ] − ”undelta” of d (ξ · Θ))

(Q [ξ] − ξ · B)

(6.2.8)

where B is deﬁned so that δ
use of the term “undelta.”

∂C

´
∂C ξ·B =

´

∂C ξ·Θ, thus explaining the unprofessional

6.2.2 Carlip’s implementation of this

Using this formalism as his basis, Carlip writes out L, Θ, Q speciﬁcally for general
relativity.

The brackets of generators H [ξ] form an algebra.

If the spacetime has a
boundary we get a central term because a generator is unique up to a constant,
and if space has a boundary the constants of the Hi might not match (and won’t
be absorbed by inﬁnity if there is a deﬁned boundary). So

{H [ξ1] , H [ξ2]} = H [{ξ1, ξ2}] + K [{ξ1, ξ2}] .

(6.2.9)

Take 2 vector ﬁelds, ξ1, ξ2 and a ﬁeld φ that fulﬁlls the equations of motion.: The
diﬀeomorphism along ξ2 of J [ξ1] (of the Noether current generated by ξ1) is given
by the Lie derivative

δξ2J [ξ1] = Lξ2J [ξ1] = ξ2 · dJ [ξ1] + d (ξ2 · J [ξ1]) .

(6.2.10)

The ﬁrst term on the RHS vanishes so

Lξ2J [ξ1] = d (ξ2 · J [ξ1])

= d (ξ2 · (Θ − ξ1 · L)) .

(6.2.11)

CHAPTER 6. SUPPLEMENT TO BACKGROUND

81

Plug into δH:

δξ2H [ξ1] =

=

=

ˆ
ˆ
ˆ

C

c

∂C

δξ2J [ξ1] − d (ξ1 · Θ (φ,Lξ2φ))

d (ξ2 · (Θ (φ,Lξ1φ) − ξ1 · L)) − (ξ1 · Θ (φ,Lξ1φ))

ξ2 · Θ (φ,Lξ1φ) − ξ2ξ1L − ξ1 · Θ (φ,Lξ2φ)

(6.2.12)

(and L = 0 on shell). In the bulk δξ2H = 0 because constraints hold on shell.
Then δξ2H is the variation δξ2J [ξ1] where J is the boundary term (as in the δL
variation it’s the boundary term, and also Carlip shows this explicitly in Appendix
B of the paper).
By deﬁnition

δξ2J [ξ1] = {J [ξ1] , J [ξ2]} ,

(6.2.13)

the change in J [ξ1] under surface deformation generated by J [ξ2].

Using the algebra we get

{J [ξ1] , J [ξ2]} = J {ξ1, ξ2} + K {ξ1, ξ2}

(6.2.14)

where K the central term can be found. Carlip then plugs the general relativity
expressions into this.

6.2.3 Boundary conditions

For a Killing vector χa, χ2 = 0 on a Killing horizon. Carlip works with a stretched
horizon such that χ2 = , and at the end of the calculation takes  → 0. Near the
boundary he deﬁnes an orthogonal vector ρ :

∇aχ2 = −2κρa, χaρa = 0.

At the horizon χ is a Killing vector:

χa∇aχb = κχb

(6.2.15)

(6.2.16)

CHAPTER 6. SUPPLEMENT TO BACKGROUND

82

and then

κρa = −1
2

∇aχ2 = −1
2

(6.2.17)
so at the horizon ρa → χa (and thus the normal and tangent vectors are the same
at the horizon). Away from horizon they are orthogonal.

2χb∇aχb = χb∇bχa = κχb

If one varies the metric there is no Killing vector. But the scheme requires
boundary conditions such that χ2 = 0. He therefore imposes boundary conditions
:

δχ2 = 0, δρa = 0, χatbδgab = 0 f or χ2 = 0

(

χaχb
χ2 δgab = 0).

(6.2.18)

This guarantees a boundary where χ2 = 0 remains null, χa is a null normal vector.

6.2.4 Decomposition of ξ:

A crucial step in this scheme is the decomposition of ξa (which becomes χa at the
boundary) into components

ξa = Rρa + T χa

(6.2.19)
as Carlip says “deformations in r-t plane.” One ﬁnds that R ∼ χa∇aT ≡ DT . In
order for diﬀeomorphisms along such a ξa to form a closed algebra one requires
ρa∇aT = 0. (To see this work out: {ξ1, ξ2} = ξ3 , substituting the decomposition
into orthogonal components, and require that ξ3 too has the form DT ρ + T χ just
like ξ1, ξ2.)

There is an additional subtlety: these boundary conditions don’t guarantee

the existence of H [ξ]. You need another. Deﬁne

˜κ2 = − a2

χ2 , aa = χb∇bχa.

(6.2.20)

At horizon ˜κ → κ, as χ2 → 0. But away from the horizon ˜κ = κρ|χ| .

If you vary the metric ˜κ is not constant. We require an average value over the

CHAPTER 6. SUPPLEMENT TO BACKGROUND

83

cross section of the horizon:

(cid:18)

˜κ − κρ
|χ|

(cid:19)

= 0.

ˆ

δ

ˆ

∂C

This guarantees existence of H , AND in order to obtain it we require:

ˆ

D3T = 0

∂C

(this results from calculation of variation of the metric),

δ =

∂

∂gab

δgab

δgab = ∇(aξb) = ∇(a(DT ρ + T χ)b)

´

ei(a+b)kdk = δa+b.

If DT = λT then Ta ∼ eiλaT and

Result:

For such a ξ

(6.2.21)

(6.2.22)

(6.2.23)

{ξ1, ξ2}a = (T1DT2 − T2DT1) χa +

ρ2 D (T1DT2 − T2DT1) ρa (6.2.24)
or labelling the term in parenthesis A, this is Aχa + const· D (A) ρa, that is, some
other vector ξ3. This is isomorphic to the algebra of diﬀeomorphisms of S1 or R.

1
κ

χ2

Next we want to compute K.

K {ξ1, ξ2} = {J [ξ1] , J [ξ2]} − J [{ξ1, ξ2}] .

(6.2.25)

For general relativity Carlip had calculated:

ˆ

(cid:2)ξb

2∇d

(cid:0)∇dξc

1 − ∇cξ2

1

(cid:1) − [1 ↔ 2](cid:3) . (6.2.26)

{J [ξ1] , J [ξ2]}∗

=

1

16πG

bca1...an−2

∂C

6.2.5 Central charge as function of T,DT:

First he deals with the measure in eq.(6.2.26), bca1....an−2. The integral itself is
over the horizon (n− 2 dimensions) and the b, c contract with the integrand. The

CHAPTER 6. SUPPLEMENT TO BACKGROUND

84

aim is to obtain an expression written in terms of χ, ρ (that is, T, DT.) This is
done by writing the bc part as χ[bNc] where N is the other null normal to the

horizon besides χ , N aχa = −1 . The measure becomes ˆ(cid:0)χ[bNc]

(cid:1) where ˆ is the

´

measure over the horizon (a1....an−2). So the integral is
are the other indexed components in the integral.

ˆχ[bNc]AbBc whereA, B

After similar manipulations he obtains the term ξbbc decomposed into χ and ρ
components. That is, the integrand includes ξbbca1....an−2 expressed as the induced
metric ˆea1.....an−2 multiplied by a T ρc and an Rχc component. He plugs this into
the term for {J [ξ1] , J [ξ2]} and gets

{J [ξ1] , J [ξ2]} =

1

16πG

ˆ

∂C

ˆa1...an−2

(cid:20)

(cid:0)T1D3T2

− 1
κ

(cid:21)
(cid:1) + 2κ (T1DT2) − (1 ↔ 2)

where he omitted terms of O (χ2). Then

Qa1...an−2 =

1

16πG

ˆa1...an−2

(cid:18)

2κT − 1
κ

D2T

(cid:19)

(6.2.27)

(6.2.28)

´

(also up toO (χ2)).

He needs J[{ξ1, ξ2}], the ”surface term of H” where H =

∂C Q[ξ] − ξ · B, but
the B term doesn’t contribute (as shown in his appropriately named Appendix
B). Recall that J =

∂C Q. Thus the central term is

´

K {ξ1, ξ2} =

1

16πG

Measures

ˆa1...an−2

∂C

ˆ

´

(cid:0)DT1D2T2 − (1 ↔ 2)(cid:1) .
(cid:1) . Here we have K ∼

(cid:48)
2ξ”
1

(cid:0)ξ

(6.2.29)

´

ˆ(cid:0)T

(cid:1).

(cid:48)
2T ”
1

dz
2πi

2 − ξ
(cid:48)
1ξ”

2 − T
A Virasoro algebra has K = c
24
It’s the same form of integrand as Virasoro algebra, but the measures are diﬀerent.
ˆ that appears in Carlip’s K has dimension d− 2 (or 2d in R4). Integration is over
cross section of H (that is you integrate over all dimensions except the radial and
time directions.) Whereas the complex integral is only over one complex variable.
Carlip needs to reduce his integral to one variable.

(cid:48)
1T ”

Taking v as a parameter along χa, Dv = 1 , we have Ti as functions of v and

CHAPTER 6. SUPPLEMENT TO BACKGROUND

85

of horizon angular variable θ, we require
ˆ

ˆ

ˆT1 (v, θ) T2 (v, θ) = const

dvT1 (v, θ) T2 (v, θ) .

(6.2.30)

∂C

But there is a mismatch: LHS is over horizon. RHS is over parameter of Killing
orbits, which are NOT one of the angles of horizon. Since he can’t ﬁx this, he adds
variables to T so that he can integrate over horizon, and then use a Kronecker
delta to adjust the result.

Since χa are over the horion, he takes v, their parameter, as periodic with
period 2π/κ. (Writing it as an exponent with discrete coeﬃcient n means it’s
periodic. The only notable thing here is that as a period, he takes κ/2π as
natural to a BH horizon.)

He uses the orthogonality condition obtained earlier. The Ti are orthogonal
from before (the eq. DT = λT gives Ti as exponents) and are now given the
speciﬁc form

(cid:0)θi(cid:1) ,

ˆ
Tn(v, θi) =

einkvfn
ˆfmfn ∼ δm+n,0.

1
k

(6.2.31)

∂C

Thus the angles in the horizon will give a Kronecker delta times the horizon area.

´

Tm =

1
k

eimkvf (θ) ≡ ˜Tmfm(θ)

ˆfmfn ∼ δm+n,0. (the fs need a Kronecker delta because they are indeed
where
angular.) v is a parameter along χa and so DT = χa∇aT = ∂vT. Integral (4.21)

CHAPTER 6. SUPPLEMENT TO BACKGROUND

86

of his paper is over the horizon

ˆ
ˆ
H

ˆ
H

H

ˆa1....an−2

ˆa1....an−2

(cid:1)

(cid:0)DTmD2Tn − DTnD2Tm
(cid:0)∂v
(cid:0)fmeimkv(cid:1) ∂vv
(cid:0)fneinkv(cid:1) − [m ↔ n](cid:1)
(cid:19)
(cid:19)(cid:18)−n2k2
(cid:18)(cid:18) imk
(cid:0)mn2 − nm2(cid:1) ei(m+n)kv

eimkv

fmfn

einkv

k

1
k

1
k

1
k

k

ˆa1....an−2

δm+n

(cid:19)

− [m ↔ n]

δm+nm3.

(6.2.32)

K [ξm, ξn] =

=

=

=

=

1

16πG

1

16πG

1

16πG
−iA
16πG
−iA
16πG

Note that the integral is only over area. The exponents from the v depen-
dence of T vanish because the delta function makes them equal 1.

6.2.6 Counting states:

For a rotating BH, χa = ta +(cid:80) Ω(α)ψa
(cid:88)

(cid:110)

(cid:16)

exp

in

kv +

la

Tn =

1
k

angular velocity and ψa the rotational Killing vector. Then

(α), where ta is a time Killing vector, Ω

(cid:0)φ(α) − Ω(α)v(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:111)

.

(6.2.33)

Plug this into the commutation relations for {ξm, ξn}a and indeed it gives a new
vector ξa
Then:

m+n ∼ Tm+nχa + DTm+nρa.

{Tm, Tn} = −i (m − n) Tm+n

K {Tm, Tn} = − iA
8πG

δm+n,0

i{J [Tm] , J [Tn]} = (m − n) J [Tm+n] +

A

8πG

m2δm+n,0

c
12

=

A

8πG

.

Boundary term; J [T0] ≡ ∆ = A
8πG.

Cardy formula:

(cid:26)

(cid:114) c

(cid:16)

6

∆ − c
24

(cid:17)(cid:27)

.

ρ = exp

2π

(6.2.34)

(6.2.35)

CHAPTER 6. SUPPLEMENT TO BACKGROUND

87

Taking the log and plugging in c, ∆

(cid:115)

(cid:18) A

A

4πG

8πG

(cid:19)

=

A
4G

.

− A
16πG

(6.2.36)

S = 2π

6.2.7 Extra term

Later work [55, 56, 57] showed that an extra term was necessary in Carlip’s scheme.
The bracket of two Noether ﬁelds

[Jm, Jn] = δξmJn

(6.2.37)

gives the Lie derivative of Jn along vector ﬁeld ξµ
currrent associated with the diﬀeomorphism generated by ξm. In Carlip’s work

m (x), where Jm is the Noether

ˆ

√
g

[Jm, Jn] =

m∇ρ (∇ρξν
{ξµ
16πG
n∇ρ (∇ρξν
m − ∇νξρ

B

−ξµ

n − ∇νξρ

m) + ξµ

mξν

n) −
nL − (µ ↔ ν)}dSµν

(6.2.38)

where the integral is over the boundary. However Silva [56] gives this as

ˆ

√

g

[Jm, Jn] =

{∇µξν

n∇ρξρ

m +(cid:0)Rµν

m − ∇µξν
ρσ − 2δµ

B

16πG
−2∇ρξµ

n∇ρξν

m∇ρξρ

n −

(cid:1) ξρ

ρ Rν
σ

m − (µ ↔ ν)}dSµν.(6.2.39)
nξσ

The diﬀerence in these two terms up to a total derivative is

{∇µ (ξρ

m∇ρξν

n − ξρ

n∇ρξν

m) − (µ ↔ ν)}dSµν.

(6.2.40)

ˆ

√

g

16πG

B

This is actually J [{ξm, ξn}] where
√

ˆ

g

(∇µξν − ∇νξµ) dSµν.

(6.2.41)

J [ξ] =

16πG

B

Carlip varies the metric, not ξ: his variation acts on the metric but not on the
parameters. Therefore it is necessary to subtract this from his result.

Chapter 7

Boundary divergence

7.1 Smooth restricted operators

We will now deﬁne a smoothing function which, when applied to an operator
that is restricted to a sub-volume, will soften the sharp partition and serve as
a momentum cutoﬀ. Let us discuss a quantum system in a volume Ω which is
into some sub-volume V , and its complement (cid:98)V so that Ω = V ⊕(cid:98)V . The Hilbert
initially prepared in a pure state |ψ(cid:105) deﬁned in Ω. We divide the total volume
space inherits a natural product structure HΩ = HV ⊗ H(cid:98)V . We are interested in
states |ψ(cid:105) that are entangled with respect to the Hilbert spaces of V and (cid:98)V so
that they can not be brought into a product form |ψ(cid:105) = |ψ(cid:105)V ⊗ |ψ(cid:105)(cid:98)V in terms of
|ψ(cid:105)(cid:98)V that belongs to the Hilbert space of (cid:98)V .
a pure state |ψ(cid:105)V that belongs to the Hilbert space of V , and another pure state

The total density matrix is deﬁned in terms of the total state |ψ(cid:105)

ρ = |ψ(cid:105)(cid:104)ψ|.

The partition of the total volume of the system into two parts

Ω = V ⊕(cid:98)V

(7.1.1)

(7.1.2)

induces a product structure on the Hilbert space and allows deﬁning the reduced
density matrix by performing a trace over part of the Hilbert space

ρV = T r(cid:98)V ρ.

88

(7.1.3)

CHAPTER 7. BOUNDARY DIVERGENCE

89

Operators that act on part of the Hilbert space are deﬁned as integrals over

densities in a part of space

OV =

d3rO((cid:126)r)

or alternatively in terms of a theta function

1 (cid:126)r ∈ V
0 (cid:126)r ∈ (cid:98)V

,

d3rO((cid:126)r)ΘV ((cid:126)r).

ΘV ((cid:126)r) =
ˆ

OV =

Ω

(7.1.4)

(7.1.5)

(7.1.6)

(7.1.7)

(7.1.8)

ˆ

V



The relation between quantum expectation values of operators that act on part
of the Hilbert space to the statistical averages with a reduced density matrix is
given by

(cid:104)ψ|OV |ψ(cid:105) = T r(cid:0)ρV OV(cid:1) .

We can also deﬁne a smoothed operator

ˆ

OV

smooth =

Ω

d3rO((cid:126)r)ΘV

smooth((cid:126)r, w)

smooth((cid:126)r, w) represents a smoothed step function that rather than changing
where ΘV
in a discontinuous way from zero to unity on the boundary of V changes in a
smooth way over a region of width w near the boundary of V . Expressing ΘV
smooth
as the product of a step function and an auxiliary smoothing function (f ((cid:126)r, w))2
(the reason for the square will become clear in what follows):

ΘV

smooth((cid:126)r, w) = (f ((cid:126)r, w))2 ΘV ((cid:126)r) =

(cid:126)r ∈ V

→ 1
0 → 1 (cid:126)r ∈ ∂V with width w
→ 0

(cid:126)r ∈ (cid:98)V

(7.1.9)

The smooth theta function deﬁned in this way can be made continuous to any
ﬁxed desired order in derivatives. So if a class of operators has at most a given
order of derivatives it is possible to deﬁne a smooth theta function that will be

CHAPTER 7. BOUNDARY DIVERGENCE

90

eﬀectively analytic for this class. For example, the one dimensional function

 xn

0

ΘV

smooth(x, w) =

xn+wn

x ≥ 0
x ≤ 0

(7.1.10)

has n − 1 continuous derivatives at x = 0.

Rather than using the smoothed step function to modify the operators OV ,
we can view the smoothing function f ((cid:126)r, w) as modifying the wave function (or
state) in which the operator is being evaluated

(cid:104)ψ|OV

smooth|ψ(cid:105) = (cid:104)ψ| (f ((cid:126)r, w))2 OV |ψ(cid:105) = (cid:104)f ((cid:126)r, w)ψ|OV |f ((cid:126)r, w)ψ(cid:105).

(7.1.11)

Deﬁning

|ψsmooth(cid:105) = f ((cid:126)r, w)|ψ(cid:105)

(7.1.12)

we may express the expectation value of the smoothed operator in the original
state |ψ(cid:105) in terms of an expectation value of the original operator in a smoothed
state

(cid:1) = T r(cid:0)ρV

smoothOV(cid:1)

T r(cid:0)ρV OV

smooth

(7.1.13)

(7.1.14)

where

In momentum space

smooth = |ψsmooth(cid:105)(cid:104)ψsmooth|.
ρV

ˆ

|ψsmooth(cid:105) =

d3pf ((cid:126)p, w)ψ((cid:126)p)e−i(cid:126)p·(cid:126)r.

(7.1.15)

Here the smoothing function f ((cid:126)p, w) looks as if it is a UV cutoﬀ suppressing the
the high momentum components of the wave function.

7.2 Details of nonrelativistic smoothed momentum

ﬂuctuations

We now calculate the expectation value of the smoothed operators (P 2)V which
can be used to evaluate H V and other smooth operators. The partial volume V
is deﬁned by a window function as described in the text.

CHAPTER 7. BOUNDARY DIVERGENCE

91

The operator P 2 is given by

(cid:126)p

(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)

(cid:126)p,(cid:126)k

(cid:126)p,(cid:126)k

†
(cid:126)pa

(cid:126)p · (cid:126)k a
†
(cid:126)p

(cid:126)k

(cid:126)pa(cid:126)p ·(cid:88)
(cid:16)
(cid:16)
(cid:16)

†
†
(cid:126)pa
a
(cid:126)k

†
†
(cid:126)pa
a
(cid:126)k

†
a
(cid:126)k

(cid:126)p · (cid:126)k

(cid:126)p · (cid:126)k

(cid:105)(cid:17)
(cid:17)

a(cid:126)k

†
(cid:126)pa(cid:126)k

.

†
(cid:126)ka
(cid:126)k

a(cid:126)k

(cid:104)

a(cid:126)p +

†
a(cid:126)p, a
(cid:126)k

a(cid:126)pa(cid:126)k + δ(cid:126)p(cid:126)ka

(cid:17)

(cid:88)

a(cid:126)pa(cid:126)k

+

(cid:126)p,(cid:126)k

(cid:126)p

P 2 =

=

=

=

p2a

†
(cid:126)pa(cid:126)p.

(7.2.1)

(cid:16)

†
†
(cid:126)pa
a
(cid:126)k

(cid:126)p · (cid:126)k

(cid:88)

(cid:126)p,(cid:126)k

†
a(cid:126)pa(cid:126)k + δ(cid:126)p(cid:126)ka
(cid:126)pa(cid:126)k

(cid:88)

(cid:17)

f ((cid:126)r2, w) Ψ† ((cid:126)r2)|0(cid:105)

†
†
(cid:126)p · (cid:126)k a(cid:126)qa
(cid:126)pa
(cid:126)k

†
a(cid:126)pa(cid:126)ka
(cid:126)s +

†
†
(cid:126)s |0(cid:105) .
p2a(cid:126)qa
(cid:126)pa(cid:126)pa

(7.2.2)

Evaluating the expectation value:

smooth)V |ψ(cid:11) =

ˆ

(cid:10)ψ|(P 2
ˆ

=

d3r d3r2 f ((cid:126)r1, w) f ((cid:126)r2, w)

(cid:68)

Since

and

0

d3r1 d3r2 (cid:104)0| Ψ ((cid:126)r1) f ((cid:126)r1, w)

ei(cid:126)q(cid:126)r1√
Ω

(cid:126)q,(cid:126)s

(cid:88)
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)a(cid:126)qa

Ω

(cid:126)p,(cid:126)k

(cid:104)0|(cid:88)
e−i(cid:126)s (cid:126)r2√
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) 0
(cid:69)

†
†
(cid:126)pa(cid:126)pa
(cid:126)s

= δ(cid:126)p(cid:126)qδ(cid:126)p(cid:126)s

(cid:104)0| a(cid:126)qa

†
†
(cid:126)pa
(cid:126)k

a(cid:126)pa(cid:126)ka

(cid:126)s |0(cid:105) = 0,
†

the expectation value of the smooth operator is then

(cid:10)ψ|(P 2

smooth)V |ψ(cid:11) =

ˆ
ˆ
(cid:88)

(cid:126)p

d3r d3r2 f ((cid:126)r1, w) f ((cid:126)r2, w)

=

=

d3r (cid:126)∇f ((cid:126)r, w) · (cid:126)∇f ((cid:126)r, w)
p2f ((cid:126)p, w)f (−(cid:126)p, w) .

(cid:126)p

(7.2.3)

(7.2.4)

(cid:88)

(cid:126)q,(cid:126)s

ei(cid:126)q(cid:126)r1√
Ω

e−i(cid:126)s (cid:126)r2√

Ω

p2δ(cid:126)p(cid:126)qδ(cid:126)p(cid:126)s

(7.2.5)

CHAPTER 7. BOUNDARY DIVERGENCE

92

´

7.3 Details of relativistic smoothed energy

†
kak in mo-
In conﬁguration space, the expectation value of the smoothed

mentum space.
restricted hamiltonian is given by the relativistic scalar product,

In a relativistic theory the hamiltonian is given by (cid:98)H =
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)Ψ ((cid:126)r1, t1) f ((cid:126)r1, w) ∂t2
(cid:18)
(cid:10)ψ(cid:12)(cid:12)(Hsmooth)V(cid:12)(cid:12) ψ(cid:11) = −i
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)0
(cid:19)
(cid:29)(cid:21)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)t1=t2

H f ((cid:126)r2) Ψ† ((cid:126)r2)

Ψ ((cid:126)r1, t1) f ((cid:126)r1)

(cid:20)(cid:28)

d3k
(2π)3 k0a

d3r1 d3r2

−∂t1

(cid:18)

ˆ

0

H f ((cid:126)r2, w) Ψ† ((cid:126)r2, t2)

−

≡ A − B

(7.3.1)

(cid:19)

The ﬁrst term A is given by

ˆ

d3r1 d3r2 202f ((cid:126)r1, w) f ((cid:126)r2, w)

0

A =

ˆ

d3q

(2π)3 q0a†

qaq × −i∂t2

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)ˆ

(cid:28)
d3k(cid:113)

(2π)3 2k0

ˆ

(cid:16)

d3p(cid:113)
(cid:16)
(2π)3 2p0
a(cid:126)kei(cid:126)k·(cid:126)r2−ik0t2 + a

a(cid:126)pei(cid:126)p·(cid:126)r1−ip0t1 + a

e−i(cid:126)k·(cid:126)r2+ik0t2

†
(cid:126)k

(cid:17) ×

(7.3.2)

†
(cid:126)pe−i(cid:126)p·(cid:126)r1+ip0t1

(cid:17)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)0
(cid:29)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)t1,t2=0

0 = (cid:126)p2, k2

where p2
straightforward manner.

0 = (cid:126)k2. The second term B can be expressed in a similar

We ﬁrst perform the momentum integrals and evaluate the expectation value.

This integral includes the following sets of operators:

but only the second term yields a non-vanishing contribution,

(cid:16)

a(cid:126)kei(cid:126)k·(cid:126)r2 + a

†
(cid:126)k

e−i(cid:126)k·(cid:126)r2

(cid:17)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)0
(cid:29)

a(cid:126)pa†

qaqa(cid:126)k , a(cid:126)pa†
(cid:28)

†
qaqa
(cid:126)k

, a

†
(cid:126)pa†
qaqa(cid:126)k , a

†
†
(cid:126)pa†
qaqa
(cid:126)k

,

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:16)

0

a(cid:126)pei(cid:126)p·(cid:126)r1 + a

†
(cid:126)pe−i(cid:126)p·(cid:126)r1

a†
qaq

(cid:28)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)a(cid:126)p a†

ei(cid:126)p·(cid:126)r1−i(cid:126)k·(cid:126)r2

0

†
q aq a
(cid:126)k

(cid:17)
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)0
(cid:29)

ˆ
ˆ
ˆ

=

=

d3p
(2π)3
d3p
(2π)3
d3p
(2π)3

d3k
(2π)3 d3q
d3k
(2π)3 d3q
d3k
(2π)3 d3q

√

√

√

√
q0k0
2p0
2k0
√
q0k0
2k0
2p0
√
q0k0
2p0
2k0

ei(cid:126)p·(cid:126)r1−i(cid:126)k·(cid:126)r2δ((cid:126)p − (cid:126)q) δ((cid:126)k − (cid:126)q).

(7.3.3)

CHAPTER 7. BOUNDARY DIVERGENCE

93

Substituting the result of eq.(7.3.3) into eq.(7.3.2) we ﬁnd

ˆ

ˆ
ˆ

=

=

1
2

A =

d3r1 d3r2 f ((cid:126)r1, w) f ((cid:126)r2, w)

d3p
(2π)3

d3k
(2π)3 d3q

√

√
q0k0
2k0

2p0

ei(cid:126)p·(cid:126)r1−i(cid:126)k·(cid:126)r2δ((cid:126)p − (cid:126)q) δ((cid:126)k − (cid:126)q)

d3k
(2π)3 d3q

d3p
ˆ
(2π)3
2p0
d3p p f ((cid:126)p, w) f (−(cid:126)p, w),

√
√
q0k0
2k0

f ((cid:126)p, w) f (−(cid:126)k, w) δ((cid:126)p − (cid:126)q) δ((cid:126)k − (cid:126)q)

(7.3.4)

where p2 = (cid:126)p2, and f ((cid:126)p, w) is the Fourier transform of f ((cid:126)r, w). Repeating the
same steps for B we ﬁnd B = −A so that
ˆ
ˆ

(cid:10)ψ(cid:12)(cid:12)(Hsmooth)V(cid:12)(cid:12) ψ(cid:11) =

d3p p f ((cid:126)p, w) f (−(cid:126)p, w)

(cid:112)(cid:126)∇2 f ((cid:126)r, w).

=

d3r f ((cid:126)r, w)

(7.3.5)

Chapter 8

Number of states

8.1 Lorentz invariance of phase space
For simplicity of notation we take , c = 1.
In classical thermodynamics the
density of states is deﬁned for a non relativistic system as follows: Take an integral
over the volume of phase space (d3xd3p), restrict it to values of p which ﬁt the
energy eigenvalues that solve the Schroedinger equation: p2 = 2mE, and divide
by a unit of volume in momentum space: This gives the number of states in phase
space with the given energy, per unit volume of phase space, and one multiplies
this by g, a numerical factor related to the degeneracy (eg., for spins with Dirichlet
BCs g = 2 (1/8) for the positive octant and spin degeneracy), and integration over
the volume in phase space would giveV = (π/L)3 for a potential well, (2π/L)3for
periodic BCs.

We will show that the number of states is Lorentz invariant by explicit calcu-
lation. For simplicity we will calculate this in 1+1 dimensions, and assume the
transformed system moves in the x direction relative to original system. General-
ization to more dimensions is transparent. We take g = 1 and assume E = p2/2m :

ˆ

N =

dx

dp
dE

dE.

(8.1.1)

8.1.1 Special relativity: phase space

The question of invariance arises because we are restricting 8 dimensional space to
the product of two 3 dimensional hypersurfaces, in both volume and momentum,
by choosing t = 0 and E = p2/2m which is the energy that solves the Schroedinger

94

CHAPTER 8. NUMBER OF STATES

95

equation, or E2 = p2 for the relativistic wave equation. However we will impose
the restriction afterwards and ﬁrst perform the transformation.

If we were not restricting space to a hypersurface, the transformation would
be as follows (in 1+1 dimensions): Going to frame moving with velocity β relative
to the original one, the transformed momenta is

where

Λµ

ν =

˜pµ = Λµ

ν pν

(cid:33)

and so the diﬀerential of the new time component is

(cid:32)

γ
γβ

γβ
γ

0p0 + Λ0

d˜p0 = d(cid:0)Λ0
i βpi(cid:1) .
d˜p0 = d(cid:0)γp0 + γβpi(cid:1) .

and plugging in the explicit values of the transformation matrix elements this is

In what follows, for clarity, we write p0as E, pias (cid:126)p,(cid:112)pipi as p.

Volume elements
Recall that the volume form is invariant. Since dxdt actually refers to dx ∧ dt.

dx ∧ dt = (dxdt − dtdx) .
d˜x ∧ d˜t = ((γdx + γβdt) (γdt + γβdx) − (γdt + γβdx) (γdx + γβdt))

= γ2(cid:0)dxdt + β2dtdx + βdx2 + dt2(cid:1) −(cid:0)dtdx + β2dxdt + βdx2 + dt2(cid:1)
= γ2(cid:0)dxdt(cid:0)1 − β2(cid:1) + dtdx(cid:0)β2 − 1(cid:1)(cid:1) = γ2(1 − β2)(dxdt − dtdx)

= dx ∧ dt.

Energy momentum relation

In this case (cid:126)p = pi, p =(cid:112)(cid:126)p2 .

E2 = m2 + (cid:126)p2, p =

√
E2 − m2,

dp
dE

=

E
p

.

(8.1.2)

(8.1.3)

CHAPTER 8. NUMBER OF STATES

96

After imposing the restriction on energy we get

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

√

E2 − m2

γE + γβ

= γ(1 +

βE
p

)dE.

d ˜E = d

.Instead we can write

d˜p = d (γpx + γβE) = γ(1 + β

dE
dp

)dp = γ(1 +

βp
E

)dp.

Density of states

In original 4-dimensional frame, taking hypersurface t = 0 and the energy mo-
mentum relation, we have

ˆ
ˆ

ˆ
ˆ

N =

dx

dtδ(t)

=

dx

dtδ(t)

ˆ
ˆ

ˆ

dp

dp
2E

.

dEδ(p2 − E2)

(8.1.4)

First we deal with the space-time part. After Lorentz transformation, and taking
into account the invariance of dx ∧ dt, this becomes

ˆ

ˆ

ˆ

ˆ

δ(t)

γ

=

1
γ

d˜xd˜tδ(˜t) =

dxdtδ(γt + γβx) =

dxdt

˜Lˆ

0

1
γ

∞ˆ

dx =

˜L
γ

=

γL
γ

= L

Lˆ

∞ˆ

˜Lˆ

and so

dx.

(8.1.5)

(8.1.6)

d˜x

d˜tδ(˜t) =

dx

dtδ(t) = L.

(8.1.7)

0

−∞

0

−∞

For the momentum integral the delta function on the energy is scalars, so as we
know from ﬁeld theory, the form of the integral is invariant:

ˆ

ˆ

d˜p
2 ˜E

=

dp
2E

(8.1.8)

CHAPTER 8. NUMBER OF STATES

97

and writing the integrand explicitly:
ˆ

ˆ

ˆ

1
2

=

d˜p
2 ˜E
dE =

ˆ

dp + βdE
E + βp
d˜p
2 ˜E

=

=

γdp + γβdE
γE + γβp

=

dp + β p
E + βp

E dp

=

1
2

ˆ

1
2

ˆ

dp + βdE
E + βp

.

(E + βp)
E(E + βp)

dp

dp

ˆ

1
2
p
E
1
2

ˆ

dp
2E

.

(8.1.9)

Thereforeˆ

d˜xd˜tδ(˜t)d˜pd ˜Eδ( ˜E2 − ˜p2) =

ˆ

dxdtδ(t)dpdEδ(E2 − p2)

(8.1.10)

and the density of states is Lorentz invariant.

Extension to more space dimensions is simple but long. A general if somewhat

tricky proof can also be found in [58], p.36.

8.2 Equivalence of WKB and formal calculations

of the number of states

In this section we calculate the number of states for non relativistic massless
particles in a box in several diﬀerent ways and show the diﬀerent methods of
calculation are equivalent. We do this for a cube and a sphere, but one can see
that the result would be the same for other geometries.

8.2.1 Photons in a cubic box

8.2.1.1 Formal method

First we use the textbook method, obtained by solving wave equation:

Take a box with each side of length L, and Dirichlet boundary conditions. The

wave equation gives

π2
L2

(cid:0)n2

(cid:1) =

where ni are integers that index the modes, and of course one can generalize to

x + n2

y + n2
z

ω2
c2

(8.2.1)

CHAPTER 8. NUMBER OF STATES

more dimensions.

n ≡

(cid:35)1/2

(cid:34) d(cid:88)

i=1

n2
i

, ω =

nπc
L

.

Taking the sum to an integral in the space of mode indices

(cid:88)

n

∞ˆ

(....) → 1
8

4πn2dn

0

98

(8.2.2)

(8.2.3)

using only the positive octant. Usually one also multiplies by 2 for spin or polar-
ization but we don’t do so here for simplicity. Plugging in eq.(8.2.2) we get

∞ˆ

(cid:18) L

(cid:19)3

πc

0

N = =

π
2

ω2dω =

V

2π2c3

and since ω = E/,

N =

V

2π2c33

∞ˆ

0

E2dE

∞ˆ

ω2dω

0

(8.2.4)

(8.2.5)

which is dimensionless as it should be. For photons in ﬁnite temperature this will
be multiplied by the Bose Einstein distribution. The density of states is

g(E) =

V E2

2π2c33.

and number of states for ﬁxed energy is

N =

V E3
6π2c33 =

1

(2π)3 c33

4
3

πE3V 3.

8.2.1.2 WKB method for a cubic box

(8.2.6)

(8.2.7)

WKB is generally used in one dimension, so we begin with a one dimensional
system. For such a system the textbook method gives n = Lk/π and using
E = ω = kc we obtain dn = (L/πc)dE and g(E) = L/πc.

Using the WKB approximation nπ =

L
0 pdx =

L
0

kdx . This gives n =

´

´

kL/π, and taking E = pc = kc,

N =

E
c

L
π

,

dn
dE

=

L
πc

(8.2.8)

CHAPTER 8. NUMBER OF STATES

99

which is the same as the “textbook” result.

We get 1/π rather than 2/π as in the general deﬁnition of N because WKB

is deﬁned for Dirichlet boundary conditions rather than periodic.

Using WKB for a 3D system, solving the wave equation by separation of

variables, ψ(xyz) = X(x)Y (y)Z(z),

ψW KB ∼ ei(cid:126)k(cid:126)x/

= eikxx/

eikyy/

eikzz/

.

(8.2.9)

For each exponent we take the one dimensional calculation as above, and so for
each direction we get ki = niπ/L and

As before,

ni =

kiL
π

.

(cid:34) d(cid:88)

i=1

n ≡

(cid:35)1/2

n2
i

, ω =

nπc
L

(8.2.10)

and the rest of the calculation is identical to the exact one in the previous section,
eqs.(8.2.5),(8.2.6).

8.2.1.3 Phase space calculation for cubic box

We have

E2 − p2

x − p2

y − p2
z = 0
x = E2 − p2
y − p2
p2
Lˆ
Lˆ

z

Lˆ

ˆ

N =

dx

dy

dz

d3p =

0

0

0

1

(2π)3

ˆ

L3
(2π)3

d3p.(8.2.11)

CHAPTER 8. NUMBER OF STATES

100

Dealing with the momentum integral we have
√
Eˆ
ˆ
E2−p2

√
ˆ
E2−p2

√
ˆ
E2−p2

y−p2

y

z

z

dpy

−√

E2−p2

y

−E

dpz

(cid:113)

E2 − p2

z − p2

y

ˆ

dpz

dpx = 2

dpy

E2−p2

z

y−p2
E2 − p2

z ≡ A2

A2 − p2

y = 2A

0

Aˆ

(cid:114)

dpy

−√
Aˆ

(cid:113)

dpy

2
−A

1 − p2

y

A2 = A2

1ˆ

0

√
du

1 − u2 = 2A2 π
2

where we substituted u = cosθ. We need E2 − p2
be real, so the momentum integral is now

z ≥ 0 for the above equations to

Eˆ

(cid:0)E2 − p2

(cid:1) = π

z

dpzA2 π
2

= π

dpz

−E

E2pz − p3
z
3

−A

(cid:20)

(cid:21)E

−E

= π

4E3

3

(8.2.12)

(8.2.13)

(8.2.14)

ˆ

2

and so

as before.

N =

1

4πV E3

(2π)3

3

8.2.2 Spherical “box”

Deﬁnition of number of states:

N =

1

(2π)3

ˆ

d3xd3p.

This is the product of volume of two spheres, one with radius R and the other
with radius E, so it has to be

N =

1

4πR3

4πE3

(2π)3

3

3

=

2R3E3

9π

.

Solving in detail: The wave equation in its most general form is

− gttE2 − grrp2

r − g⊥⊥p2⊥ = 0.

(8.2.15)

(8.2.16)

CHAPTER 8. NUMBER OF STATES

101

For spherical coordinates we have gtt = −1, grr = 1, g⊥⊥ = r−2. and so the wave
equation is

r2 = 0.

E2 − p2

r − p2⊥
(cid:114)

pr =

ˆ
has a factor of(cid:112)g⊥⊥ = 1
where the space integral has a factor of √

d3xd3p = 4π

E2 − p2⊥
ˆ
ˆ
r2

drr2

dprd2p⊥

1
r2

g⊥⊥ = r2, and the momentum integral

r2 , these cancel and won’t appear in what follows.

√

ˆ
E2−p2⊥/r2
(cid:114)

E2−p2⊥/r2

dΩ
√
−

∞ˆ

dpr

d2p⊥

0

dr

d2p⊥2

E2 − p2⊥
r2

(cid:114)

E2 − p2⊥
r2

Rˆ

0

Rˆ

0

Rˆ

dr

4πˆ

0

∞ˆ

0

Erˆ

dr

0

Eˆ

1
8π3

1
2π2

1
2π2

2
π

0

Rˆ

N =

=

=

=

2πp⊥dp⊥2

(cid:114)

dr

dp⊥p⊥

0

0

E2 − p2⊥
r2 .

Substituting E2 − p2⊥ = u, the momentum integral is

ˆ

− 1
2

√
du

u = −1
3

u3/2

Plugging in the limits of the p⊥ integral
Rˆ

N =

2E3
3π

drr2 =

0

2E3R3

9π

.

(8.2.17)

(8.2.18)

(8.2.19)

CHAPTER 8. NUMBER OF STATES

102

In terms of volume

N =

E3V
6π2 =

1
(2π)3 V

(cid:18)4πE3

(cid:19)

3

=

1
(2π)3 VxVp.

(8.2.20)

8.2.2.1 WKB calculation for spherical box

´
R
To ﬁnd the number of modes we sum over the number of radial modes
0 drk(r, l)
where R is an IR cutoﬀ. This is multiplied by the sum over angular momentum
since each level is degenerate due to the angular momentum:.

(cid:114)

E2

c2 − l(l + 1)

r2

(8.2.21)

(cid:114)
Rˆ

E2

c2 − l(l + 1)
∞ˆ

r2

k(r, l, E) =

N π =

dr

d (l(l + 1))

0

0

The root has to be positive. This determines the upper limit for l(l + 1) :

(cid:114)

ˆ

E2r2/c2

d (l(l + 1))

0

E2r2

c2

= l(l + 1)max

(cid:32)(cid:20)E2
c2 − E2r2/c2

r2

E2

c2 − l(l + 1)

r2

= −2
3

r2

=

N π =

N =

2
3

2
3

2
9

E3
c3 r2.
Rˆ
E3
c3

0
R3E3
πc3

drr2.

(cid:33)

(cid:21)3/2 − E3

c3

(8.2.22)

as before.

8.2.3 Comparisons
Comparing the sphere to the calculation for a cube, setting  = 1:

g(E)sphere =

V E2
2π2c3 , , g(E)cube =

V E2
π2c33.

(8.2.23)

CHAPTER 8. NUMBER OF STATES

103

This is approximately the ratio of their volumes. Taking length of side of cube as
2R,

Vcube = 8R3, Vsphere =

and as expected, N ∼ VxVp.

π
3

4R3 ≈ 1
2

Vcube.

(8.2.24)

8.3 Phase space in 3+1 and in 4+1 dimensions

The number of states in d + 1 dimensions (d space dimensions) for a diagonal
metric works out to be

(cid:0)g00(cid:1) d

2

√

gd

N = CEd

ddx

ˆ
2 + 1(cid:1)
Γ(cid:0) d

V
π d

2

C =

and gd is the determinant of the spatial components of the metric.

8.3.1 Proof in 3+1 dimensions:

The wave equation:

(8.3.1)

dpx

g00E2 − gxxp2

y − gzzp2

z = 0

x − gyyp2
(cid:113)

√
gxx

px =

g00E2 − gyyp2

z

y − gzzp2
√
g00E2−gyyp2

√

gxx

ˆ

y−gzzp2

z

√

ˆ

gyyg00E

√

√

gzz

ˆ
g00E2−gyyp2

y

ˆ

d3p =

−

√

dpy

√

−√

gzz

gyyg00E

√

ˆ

gyyg00E

dpz

−√
g00E2−gyyp2
√
ˆ
√
g00E2−gyyp2

gzz

y

y

gxx

√

(cid:113)

dpy

−√

gzz

√
g00E2−gyyp2

y

dpz

gyyg00E

= 2

√
gxx
−

√

g00E2−gyyp2

y−gzzp2

z

g00E2 − gyyp2

y − gzzp2

z

CHAPTER 8. NUMBER OF STATES

104

We label g00E2 − gyyp2

y ≡ A2. Then the integral over pz becomes

(cid:112)A2 − gzzp2

gzzAˆ
√

dpz

−√

gzzA

gzzAˆ
√

(cid:115)

1 − p2
gzzA2

z

z = A

dpz

−√
= A2√

gzzA

1ˆ

gzz

−1

√
du

1 − u2 = A2√

gzz

π
2

.

(8.3.2)

Plugging this in we get

ˆ

d3p = 2

√

gxxgzz

√

ˆ

gyyg00E

(cid:0)g00E2 − gyyp2

(cid:1)

π
2

(cid:20)

dpy

√
−
√
2
gyy

gyyg00E

(cid:0)g00E2(cid:1)3/2 − 2
(cid:16)(cid:112)

(cid:17)3

3

g00E

.

√

√

=

=

gxxgzzπ

gxxgzzgyy

4
3

π

y

gyy(cid:16)(cid:112)gyyg00E

(cid:17)3(cid:21)

(8.3.3)

8.3.2 One more dimension:

(cid:113)

g00E2 − gxxp2
√
gww

x − gyyp2
g00E2 − gxxp2

y − gzzp2
x − gyyp2

z − gwwp2
y − gzzp2

z

pw =

w = 0

CHAPTER 8. NUMBER OF STATES

105

ˆ

√

ˆ

gyyg00E

√

gzz

√
ˆ
g00E2−gyyp2

y

√

√

gxx

ˆ

g00E2−gyyp2

y−gzzp2

z

d3p =

√

−

gyyg00E
√

√

gww

dpy

gzz

−√
ˆ

g00E2−gxxp2

√
g00E2−gyyp2
y−gzzp2
x−gyyp2

y

z

√
g00E2−gyyp2

y−gzzp2

z

dpz

−√

gxx

dpw

dpx ×

(8.3.4)

×
−√

gww

√

gww

= 2

√

gxx

×
−√

gxx

√
g00E2−gxxp2
√
ˆ

gyyg00E

x−gyyp2

z

y−gzzp2
√
ˆ
g00E2−gyyp2

y

gzz

√

dpy

√
−
√
gyyg00E
g00E2−gyyp2

ˆ

−√
gzz
y−gzzp2

z

√

g00E2−gyyp2

y

(cid:113)

dpz ×

y−gzzp2

z

√
g00E2−gyyp2
z − gyyp2

(cid:112)A2 − gxxp2

gxxAˆ
√

dpx

−√

gxxA

dpx

g00E2 − gxxp2

x − gyyp2

y − gzzp2

z(8.3.5)

gxxAˆ
√

(cid:115)

1 − p2
gxxA2

x

x = A

dpx

−√
= A2√

gxxA

1ˆ

gxx

−1

√
du

1 − u2 = A2√

gxx

π
2

.

(8.3.6)

We label g00E2 − gzzp2

y ≡ A2. Then the integral over px becomes

Plugging this in we get
ˆ

d3p = 2

gxxgww

√

π
2

−
Let us label g00E2 − gyyp2

√

ˆ

gyyg00E

√

gzz

√
ˆ
g00E2−gyyp2

y

√

dpy

−√

gzz

√
g00E2−gyyp2

y

dpz

gyyg00E

(cid:0)g00E2 − gyyp2

y − gzzp2

z

(cid:1)

y ≡ B2. Then the pzintegral becomes

(cid:0)B2 − gzzp2

(cid:1) =

z

gzzBˆ
√

dpz

−√

gzzB

√

4
3

gzzB3 =

√
gzz

4
3

(cid:0)g00E2 − gyyp2

(cid:1)3/2 .

(8.3.7)

y

(cid:0)g00(cid:1)2 E4

gxxgwwgyygzz

Plugging this back in,

ˆ

d3p =

=

ˆ

and so

(cid:18)3

(cid:19)

8
√

g4

4
3
π2
2

π2√
(cid:0)g00(cid:1)2 E4
(cid:0)g00(cid:1)2

CHAPTER 8. NUMBER OF STATES

Integrate over py:
ˆ

√

gyyg00E

dpy

√
−

gyyg00E

(cid:0)g00E2 − gyyp2

y

(cid:1)3/2 =

(cid:16)(cid:112)

(cid:17)4

.

g00E

√

gyy

3
8

π

106

(8.3.8)

(this was done with Mathematica, you get a result containing Arctan[∞] = π
2 ).

√
d4x
g4
ˆ

V

2 E4

(cid:32)

N = π2

2 + 1(cid:1)(cid:33)
Γ(cid:0) 4
integration: the integrand becomes(cid:0)g00E2 − g(d+1,d+1)pd+1
(cid:1)d/2 .

just as we claimed. It would be good to be able to prove by induction that if it’s
true for Nd it’s true for Nd+1 but (so far) I have not been able to generalize the

(cid:0)g00(cid:1) 4

(8.3.9)

2 ,

C =

CE4

d4x

g4

√

π 4

2

=

V

8.4 Number of states in Rindler space

We here explicitly calculate the number of states in Rindler space. The number
of states can be obtained by writing out the wave equation for Rindler space:

−e−2aξ∂ttψ + e−2aξ∂ξξψ + ∂⊥⊥ψ = 0

where ∂⊥⊥is the second derivative over transverse degrees of freedom.

e−2aξE2 − e−2aξp2

(cid:113)
ξ − p2⊥ = 0

pξ =

E2 − e2aξp2⊥.

(8.4.1)

CHAPTER 8. NUMBER OF STATES

107

ˆ

√
gξξ

d2x⊥dξ

N =

1

(2π)3

√

ˆ
E2−e2aξp2⊥.

ˆ

dpξ

dp⊥2πp⊥.

(8.4.2)

√
−

E2−e2aξp2⊥.

Integration of dpξ within these limits gives

√

ˆ
E2−e2aξp2⊥.

(cid:113)
E2 − e2aξp2⊥.

dpξ = 2

(8.4.3)

√

−

E2−e2aξp2⊥.

ˆ

ˆ

d2x⊥dξ

√

dξ

gξξ

N =

1

(2π)3

=

2V⊥
(2π)2

e−aξEˆ

gξξ

√
e−aξEˆ

0

dp⊥p⊥

0

(cid:113)

(cid:113)

dp⊥2πp⊥2

E2 − e2aξp2⊥

(8.4.4)

E2 − e2aξp2⊥

(8.4.5)

where we integrated over x⊥ and limits of p⊥are to ensure the root is positive.
(it can’t be −e−aξE because p⊥here is like a radial coordinate). To integrate over
p⊥we substitute u = E2 − e2aξp2⊥ and obtain

ˆ

e−2aξ

− 1
2

√
du

u = −1
3

e−2aξu3/2.

(8.4.6)

Putting back p⊥, we have

ˆ

√
gξξ

dξ

(cid:18)

e−2aξ(cid:104)

0 −(cid:0)E2(cid:1)3/2(cid:105)(cid:19)

−1
3

∞ˆ

−∞

=

2V⊥E3
3 (2π)2

√

dξ

gξξe−2aξ

(8.4.7)

N =

2V⊥
(2π)2
and since √

gξξ = eaξ, this becomes

N =

2V⊥E3
3 (2π)2

∞ˆ

−∞

dξe−aξ

CHAPTER 8. NUMBER OF STATES

108

which diverges at the lower boundary (as expected). Putting in a lower limit of
ξmin we have

N =

V⊥E3
6π2a

e−aξmin.

Checking units, this is dimensionless as it should be.

dN
dE

=

V⊥E2
2π2a

e−aξmin.

(8.4.8)

(8.4.9)

In that work we took V⊥ = (2a)−2 by
This diﬀers from the result in Sec.2.1.
comparing Unruh temperature with Hawking temperature and relating it to the
Schwarzschild radius.

TH =

1

8πM

, TRind =

1
2a

Rhorizon = 2M =

1
(2a)2 = ξ2⊥.

a
2π

→ 2a =

1
2M

(8.4.10)

This was then incorporated into a WKB approximation following ’t Hooft, rather
than the exact calculation presented here. However the dependence on energy is
the same, as is the divergence at the horizon.

8.4.1 Comparisons

Photons in a cube in Minkowski space are proportional to the entire volume.
Comparing the density of modes ot our result:

dN
dE (M ink cube)

dN
dE (Rind)

=

=

V E2
π2
V⊥E2

e−aξmin

π2

2a

.

The density of states in spherical and Schwarzschild metrics are

dN
dE (sphere)

2R3E2

3π

dN
dE (Schwarz)

=

2E2
π

Rˆ

dr

r9/2

(r − 2M )5/2 .

r0

(8.4.11)

(8.4.12)

CHAPTER 8. NUMBER OF STATES

109

8.4.2 Momentum only in ξ direction:

If there is no momentum in transverse directions we will have

n =

1
π

√
e−2aξE2 =

dξeaξ

1
π

∞ˆ

−∞

∞ˆ

−∞

dξE =

E
π

L

where L is the length of all space on the ξ axis. If we had a partition, the length
factor would be shorter accordingly, but the momentum still isn’t a function of ξ.
Thus we note that: for divergence at the boundary you need transverse
momenta as well.

Chapter 9

Variations of entropy

9.1 Variation of Wald’s entropy

In [26] the authors calculated the variation of Wald’s entropy. They write the
variation of energy as

ˆ

δQ =

Tabχad

H

(9.1.1)

where χa is a Killing vector and d a (D − 1) volume form. (See also [25]). The
generalized gravitational ﬁeld equations give

T ab = 2

−2∇p∇q

∂L
∂Rpabq

∂L
∂Rpqra

+

R b
pqr

− gabL.

(9.1.2)

(cid:20)

(cid:21)

This term for T ab is then substituted into δQ, thus writing it as a function of the
Riemann tensor and its derivatives.

SW = − 2
T

ˆ

∇c

H

110

Wald entropy is

˛
element. Since any W cd satisﬁes d(cid:0)W cdcd

SW = − 1
T

∂H

∂L
∂Rabcd

where cd is a (D − 2) volume form and ˆab is the binormal vector to the area

ˆabcd

(9.1.3)

(cid:1) = 2∇cW cdd this can be written
(cid:18) ∂L

(cid:19)

ˆab

d

∂Rabcd

(9.1.4)

CHAPTER 9. VARIATIONS OF ENTROPY

and then diﬀerentiated along a Killing vector to obtain δS

(cid:18) ∂L

(cid:19)

δSW = − 2
T

χm∇m∇c

ˆab

d.

∂Rabcd

ˆ

H

111

(9.1.5)

Using T = κ
and thus they show that

2π they ﬁnd that this fulﬁlls the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics, δQ = T δS

ˆ

δSW = 2π

Tabχab.

(9.1.6)

Bibliography

[1] J.M.Bardeen, B.Carter and S.W.Hawking, “The four laws of black hole me-

chanics,” Commun.Math.Phys.31,161 (1973).

[2] J.D.Bekenstein, “Black holes and entropy,” Phys. Rev. D 7, 2333 (1973).

[3] S.W.Hawking,

“Gravitational
Phys.Rev.Lett. 26, 1344 (1971).

radiation from colliding black holes,”

[4] S.W.Hawking, "Black hole explosions?" Nature, 248, 30 (1974)

[5] G.W. Gibbons and S.W. Hawking, “Action integrals and partition functions

in quantum gravity”, Phys. Rev. D. 15, 2752–2756, (1977).

[6] L.Smarr, “Mass Formula for Kerr Black Holes,” Phys.Rev.Lett.30,71(1973),

Erratum: Phys.Rev.Lett.30, 521 (1973).

[7] G.’t Hooft, “The Quantum Structure of a Black Hole,” Nucl. Phys. B256, 727

(1985).

[8] A.Strominger and C.Vafa, “Microscopic Origin of the Bekenstein-Hawking

Entropy,” Phys.Lett.B379, 99 (1996).

[9] V. Giovanetti, S. Lloyd and L. Maccone, “Quantum limits to dynamical evo-
lution”, Phys. Rev. A 67, 052109 (2003), see also V. Giovanetti, S. Lloyd
and L. Maccone, “The speed limit of quantum unitary evolution,” J. Opt. B:
Quantum Semiclass. Opt. 6, S807-S810 (2004).

[10] Judy Kupferman and Benni Reznik, “Entanglement and the Speed of Evolu-

tion in Mixed States,” Phys. Rev. A 78, 042305 (2008).

[11] Luca Bombelli, Rabinder K. Koul, Joohan Lee, and Rafael D. Sorkin, “Quan-

tum Source of Entropy for Black Holes”, Phys. Rev. D 34, 373 (1986).

112

BIBLIOGRAPHY

113

[12] Mark Srednicki, “Entropy and Area,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 666 (1993).

[13] R. Brustein, M. Einhorn and A. Yarom. “Entanglement interpretation of

black hole entropy in string theory,” JHEP 0601, 098, 2006.

[14] C. Callen and F. Wilzcek, “On Geometric Entropy”, Phys. Lett. B, 333,

55–61, (1994).

[15] C. Holzhey, F. Larsen and F. Wilzcek, “Geometric and Renormalized Entropy

in Conformal Field Theory”, Nucl. Phys. B, 424, 443–467 (1994).

[16] Rafael D. Sorkin, Tenth International Conference on General Relativity and
Gravitation (held Padova, 4-9 July, 1983), Contributed Papers, vol. II, pp.
734-736 arXiv:1402.3589 [gr-qc]

[17] M.B.Plenio, J. Eisert, J. Dreissig and M. Cramer, “Entropy, entanglement,
and area: analytical results for harmonic lattice systems,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
94, 060503 (2005). See also J. Eisert, M. Cramer, and M. B. Plenio, “Area
laws for the entanglement entropy - a review,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 82, 277
(2010).

[18] S. Ryu and T. Takayanagi, “Holographic Derivation of Entanglement Entropy

from AdS/CFT,” Phys.Rev.Lett.96, 181602 (2006).

[19] R. M. Wald, “Black hole entropy is the Noether charge," Phys. Rev. D 48,

3427 (1993).

[20] V. Iyer and R. M. Wald, “Some properties of Noether charge and a proposal

for dynamical black hole entropy," Phys. Rev. D 50, 846 (1994).

[21] V.I.Arnold, Mathematical Methods of Classical Mechanics, Springer-Verlag,

New York (1989).

[22] S. Carlip, “Entropy from Conformal Field Theory at Killing Horizons,”

Class.Quant.Grav.16, 3327 (1999).

[23] S. Carlip, “Black Hole Entropy from Conformal Field Theory in Any Dimen-

sion,” Phys.Rev.Lett. 82, 2828 (1999).

[24] J.A.Cardy, Nucl.Phys. B270, 186 (1986), H.W.J.Blote, J.A.Cardy and

M.P.Nightingale, Phys.Rev.Lett. 56, 742 (1986).

BIBLIOGRAPHY

114

[25] T. Jacobson, “Thermodynamics of space-time: The Einstein equation of

state,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 1260 (1995).

[26] Ram Brustein and Merav Hadad, “Einstein Equations for Generalized Theo-
ries of Gravity and the Thermodynamic Relation deltaQ=TdeltaS are Equiv-
alent,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 101301 (2009).

[27] Maulik K. Parikh and Sudipta Sarkar, “Beyond the Einstein Equation of
State: Wald Entropy and Thermodynamical Gravity,” arXiv:0903.1176v1
[hep-th] (2009).

[28] T. Padmanabhan, “Entropy density of spacetime and thermodynamic inter-
pretation of ﬁeld equations of gravity in any diﬀeomorphism invariant theory,”
arXiv:0903.1254v1 [hep-th] (2009).

[29] S.P. de Alwis and N. Ohta, “Thermodynamics of quantum ﬁelds in black hole

backgrounds,” 1995 Phys. Rev. D 52 3529.

[30] J. G. Demers, R. Lafrance, and R. C. Myers, “Black hole entropy without

brick walls,” Phys. Rev. D 52, 2245 (1995).

[31] R. Brustein and A. Yarom, “Entanglement induced ﬂuctuations of cold

bosons,” J. Stat. Mech. 0807 , P07025 (2008).

[32] J. D. Bekenstein,

“Do We Understand Black Hole Entropy?”

arXiv:9409015v2[gr-qc] (1994).

[33] D. Kabat and M.J. Strassler, “A comment on entropy and area,” Phys. Lett.

B. 329, 46 (1994).

[34] J. D. Brown and M. Henneaux, “Central charges in the canonical realiza-
tion of asymptotic symmetries: an example from three-dimensional gravity,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 104, 207 (1986).

[35] A. Strominger, “Black Hole Entropy from Near-Horizon Microstates,” J.High

Energy Phys. 9802, 009 (1998).

[36] T.Padmanabhan, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 25,1129 (2010); Phys. Rev. D 81

124040 (2010)

BIBLIOGRAPHY

115

[37] Sanved Kolekar, T.Padmanabhan, Phys. Rev.D 83, 064034 (2011)

[38] Glenn Barnich, Marc Henneaux, and Christiane Schomblond, “Covariant de-

scription of the canonical formalism,” Phys. Rev.D 44, R939 (1991).

[39] S.Carlip, “What We Don’t Know about BTZ Black Hole Entropy,” Class.

Quantum Grav. 15, 3609 (1998).

[40] Katja Ried, “Entanglement entropy of a scalar ﬁeld across a spherical bound-

ary in the Einstein universe,” arXiv:1309.7380v1[quant-ph] (2013).

[41] J.J. Sakurai and Jim Napolitano, Modern Quantum Mechanics, 2nd ed.,

Addison-Wesley, Boston (2011).

[42] L.D. Landau, E.M. Lifshitz, Statistical Physics, Vol. 5 (3rd ed.). Butterworth-

Heinemann, Oxford (1980).

[43] N. D. Birrell and P. C. W. Davies, Quantum ﬁelds in curved space, Cambridge

Univ. Press, New York (1982).

[44] .Solodukhin, “Entanglement Entropy of Black Holes,” Living Rev. Relativity

14, 8 (2011), arXiv:1104.3712 [hep-th]

[45] Michael E. Peskin, An Introduction to Quantum Field Theory, Addison-

Wesley, Reading, Mass. (1995).

[46] Rabin Banerjee and Bibhas Ranjan Majhi, “Statistical Origin of Gravity,”

Phys. Rev. D 81, 124006 (2010).

[47] S. Deser and O. Levin, “Mapping Hawking into Unruh thermal properties,”

Phys. Rev. D 59, 064004 (1999).

[48] Rabin Banerjee and Bibhas Ranjan Majhi, “A new global embedding ap-
proach to study Hawking and Unruh eﬀects,” Phys.Lett.B 690:1, 83 (2010).

[49] T. Padmanabhan, “Equipartition of energy in the horizon degrees of freedom

and the emergence of gravity,” Mod.Phys.Lett.A25, 1129 (2010).

[50] T. Padmanabhan, “Entropy of Static Spacetimes and Microscopic Density of

States,” Class.Quant.Grav.21, 4485 (2004).

BIBLIOGRAPHY

116

[51] Jarmo Mï¿œkelï¿œ,

“Area
arXiv:0605098v1[gr-qc] (2006).

and Entropy:

A New Perspective,”

[52] Aharon Davidson and Ben Yellin, “Thermal Hawking Broadening and Statis-

tical Entropy of Black Hole Wave Packet,” arXiv:1306.6403 [gr-qc] (2013).

[53] R.H. Fowler, in Statistical Mechanics, Cambridge, 1936; R.H. Fowler and
E.A. Guggenheim, in Statistical Thermodynamics, (Cambridge Univ. Press,
1939); G.S. Rushbrooke, Trans. Faraday Soc. 36, 1055 (1940); E.W. Elcock
and P.T. Landsberg, Proc. Phys. Soc. B70, 161 (1957).

[54] Joohan Lee and Robert M. Wald, “Local Symmetries and Constraints,”

J.Math.Phys. 31, 725 (1990).

[55] J.Koga,

“Asymptotic symmetries on Killing horizons,” Phys.Rev. D 64

124012, (2001).

[56] S. Silva,

“Black hole entropy and thermodynamics from symmetry,”

Class.Quant.Grav. 19, 3947 (2002).

[57] Geoﬀrey Compï¿œre, “Symmetries and conservation laws in Lagrangian
gauge theories with applications to the mechanics of black holes and to grav-
ity in three dimensions,” arXiv:0708.3153 [hep-th] (2007).

[58] T. Padmanabhan, Gravitation: Foundations and Frontiers, Cambridge Uni-

versity Press, Cambridge (2010).

[59] I. P.Neupane, “Eﬀective Lagrangian from higher curvature terms: Absence

of vDVZ discontinuity in AdS space,” Class.Quant.Grav.19, 1167 (2002)

[60] R. M. Wald, “The Thermodynamics of Black Holes,” Living Rev.Rel.4, 6,

(2001).

