6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
1

 
 
]

M

I
.

h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
8
7
2
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Spectroscopie théorique des quasars et loi de

Karlsson.

Jacques Moret-Bailly∗

15 mars 2016

∗email : jmo@laposte.net

1

Résumé

La loi de Karlsson introduite par la spectroscopie des quasars peu
rougis utilise le spectre Lyman de l’atome d’hydrogène. Il faudra com-
parer les concepts déduits de la spectroscopie classique des quasars,
développée ici, à ceux qui sont déduits du Λ-CDM. Une absorption
ﬁne et saturée d’une raie spectrale dans un gaz requiert un long par-
cours sans perturbation comme collisions ou rougissement cosmolo-
gique. Ainsi, les spectres de "forêts Lyman" des quasars obéissant à la
loi de Karlsson résultent essentiellement d’interactions de la lumière
thermique naturelle rayonnée par le quasar avec de l’hydrogène ato-
mique froid sous très basse pression. Ces raies sont produites par trois
processus : a) Une absorption usuelle produit un ensemble de raies ;
b) Ces raies sont multipliées par absorption après des rougissements
fondamentaux 3K (ou 4K), où K est la constante de Karlsson ; 3K (ou
4K) amènent exactement une raie Lyman beta (ou gamma) absorbée
sur une raie Lyman alpha : La coincidence d’une raie absorbée rougie,
avec Lyman alpha arrête donc quasiment le rougissement et les raies
du gaz sont absorbées intensément ; c) Les rougissements se produisent
dans des régions où la lumière à la fréquence alpha est faiblement ab-
sorbée en raison du rougissement permanent, sauf lorsque l’excitation
de l’hydrogène au niveau 2P est suﬃsante pour qu’un ﬂash super-
radiant éclate à la fréquence alpha, ce qui provoque une absorption
intense des rayons issus du quasar dont la radiance est grande, donc
l’inscription d’une raie à la fréquence Lyman alpha courante. Éclairs
et pompages produisent des oscillations de relaxation qui inscrivent
de nombreuses raies d’absorption. Les rougissements par les atomes H
dans les niveaux 2P sont dus à des interactions paramétriques com-
posées d’eﬀets Raman impulsionnels stimulés (ISRS) : Des atomes
d’hydrogène excités catalysent des échanges d’énergie entre le rayon
observé et des rayons froids du fond thermique, en accord avec la
thermodynamique. La description de l’univers devient beaucoup plus
simple mais moins merveilleuse.

2

Theoretical spectroscopy of quasars within Karlsson’s law.

Abstract.

The law introduced by Karlsson in spectroscopy of low-redshift
quasars involves the Lyman spectrum of hydrogen atoms. Thus, it ap-
pears necessary to study the concepts introduced by a standard spec-
troscopy of quasars, studied here, with those deducted from Λ-CDM.
A visible absorption of a sharp and saturated spectral line in a gas
requires a long path without perturbations as collisions or cosmologi-
cal redshift. Spectra of absorbed, saturated lines of quasars obeying
Karlsson’s law mainly result from interactions of natural, thermal light
radiated by quasar with relatively cold, low presure atomic hydrogen.
These lines are produced by three processes : a) A conventional ab-
sorption in a relatively cold gas produces a set of lines ; b) These
lines are multiplied by absorption after fundamental 3K or 4K red-
shifts, where K is Karlsson’s constant : Spectra show that redshifts
3K (or 4K) exactly bring absorbed Lyman beta (or gamma) line on
Lyman alpha : redshift almost disappears, and gas lines are inten-
sely absorbed in the absence of alpha absorption ; c) Redshifts occur
in regions where light at alpha frequency is poorly absorbed due to
permanent redshift, except when excitation of hydrogen to 2P level
is suﬃcient for a superradiant ﬂash emission at alpha frequency. This
causes an intense absorption of high radiance rays from quasar, so the
absorption of a line at current Lyman alpha frequency. Lightning and
pumping produce relaxation oscillations that write many absorption
lines. Redshifts by H atoms in 2P levels are due to parametric interac-
tions composed of Impulsive Stimulated Raman Scatterings (ISRS) :
excited hydrogen atoms catalyze energy exchanges between observed
ray and background cold thermal radiation, in agreement with ther-
modynamics. Description of Universe becomes much simpler, but less
marvelous.

Keywords : Line :formation. Radiative transfer. Scattering.

98.62.Ra Intergalactic matter ; quasar absorption and emission-line sys-

tems ; Lyman forest

290.5910 Scattering, stimulated Raman
190.2640 Nonlinear optics : Stimulated scattering, modulation, etc.

1

Introduction.
Karlsson [1] and Burbidge [2] used Karlsson’s constant K to represent
the so-called quantization of reddshifts of quasars : Most redshifts (relative

3

variations of frequencies of spectral lines) of quasars have a value Z(n) = nK,
where n is an integer from the strange serie : 3, 4, 6, ....

Note that, with the precision allowed by the calculation of K, deducted
from thousands of measures, 3K (resp. 4K) is redshift Z(β, α) (resp. Z(γ, α)
which converts frequency of β (resp. γ) line into frequency of α line [3].
Rewriting Karlsson’s formula :

Z(p, q) = pZ(β, α) + qZ(γ, α, ) (1)
where p and q are non-negative integers is justiﬁed by the absence, in
usual interpretation of quasars spectra, of sharp and saturated absorption
lines named "redshifted Lyman β (or γ) lines" [4, 5]. Calculation of such rays
from redshifted rays called "Lyman α" leads to other α lines. Overlay of lines
is so perfect that it products no broadning of the observed line.

Karlsson’s formula links astronomical redshift to properties of hydrogen
atom. The purpose of this study is allowing easy comparison of results de-
ducted from Λ-CDM to those given here by standard spectroscopy.

2 Karlsson-Burbidge model of a quasar sur-

rounded exclusively by hydrogen.

2.1 Generalities, conventions.

In Doppler frequency shifts, emitted and received frequencies verify equa-
tion which involves, as parameters, emission and reception speeds Vemission
and Vreception :

νreception = c−Vreception
c−Vemission
In a ﬁrst approximation we assume that frequency shifts at various light
frequencies obey an equation similar to equation (2), so that a single para-
meter is needed to compute frequency shifts at all frequencies, for instance
the ratio f1/f0 of a particular shifted frequency over initial frequency :

∗ νemission (2)

f0 νinitial (3)

νshif ted = f1
If this approximation appears too bad, it may be corrected by multipli-
cation of νshif ted by a dispersion function D(νshif ted), generally close to one.
Using Rydberg’s formula, compute redshifts which put Lyman νβ and νγ
Z(β,α) = (νβ − να)/να = [(1 − 1/32 − (1 − 1/22)]/(1 − 1/22)] ≈ 5/27 ≈
Z(γ,α) = (νγ − να)/να =[(1-1/42 -(1-1/22)]/(1-1/22) ] = 1/4 = 0,25 =

frequencies of H atom to να frequency :
0.1852 ≈ 3 ∗ 0.0617 ≈ 3 ∗ K; (4)
4*0.0625 ≈ 4K. (5)

Assuming that use of 3 lowest Lyman frequencies of H atom is better
than use of K, and that variation of shifts at various frequencies is obtained

4

from a particular shift as in a Doppler redshift, Karlsson’s formula becomes
simpler : shifted frequencies ν(p, q) depend only on absolute frequency ν0 ,
three well known frequencies and two any non-negative integers p and q :

ν(p, q) = (να/νβ)p ∗ (να/νγ)q ∗ ν0. (6)
Genuine Karlsson’s formula, applied, for instance, to Lyman beta line
with n=3 does not generate exactly Lyman alpha frequency, while formula
(6) does. We choose formula (6) because choice of possible values of p and q
seems more natural than extraction of n from a less natural serie. Is it only
aesthetics ?

2.2 Hypothesis and observations.

We assume that “Lyman forest” is built by absorption of a thermal emis-
sion of an extremely hot star by pure, relatively cold (2 000-50 000 K), low
pressure, unexcited, atomic hydrogen.

Following properties of many lines of “Lyman forest” are directly deduced

from Petitjean’s paper [4] :

pressure of gas must be very low.

-A- As lines are sharp, widening of lines by collisions must be negligible,

-B- To obtain absorption of Lyman lines at several frequencies, a redshift
process of electromagnetic waves is necessary. Here, we make only hypothesis
of formula (3) about this redshift.

-C- A single, unshifted Lyβ is observed ; no unshifted Lyγ appears because
it does not remain absorbable energy at high frequencies after redshifts of
thermal emission proﬁle.

Absence of an absorption line may result from :
-a- Absence of emitted energy around frequency of line.
-b- A permanent shift of light frequencies dilutes absorption, so that all
absorbed (or emitted) lines have width of shift and lines are weak, not ob-
servable. Accordingly, absorption (or emission) of sharp lines requires a stop
of frequency shifts.

-c- Accurate superposition of observed lines results from the choice of
redshift equations : Absence of shifted β and γ lines while sharp α lines are
observed, is due to superposition of these lines with α lines.

In Λ-CDM theory, sharpness of saturated absorbed lines requires contra-

dictory conditions :

- Column density of gas must be large for saturation ;
- Absorbing gas must be thin to avoid a broadening of lines by frequency

shift during absorption.

- Pressure of gas must be low to avoid collisional broadening of line.

5

Thus gas must be in ﬁlaments which are only detected on paths from

quasars.

Supposing that redshift is related to a physical property of gas, condition

- Light is redshifted except if an absorbed line is at Lyman α frequency.
Thus redshift requires a Lyman α absorption, that is generation of 2P atomic
hydrogen.

is :

2.3 Building a spectrum by Karlsson’s redshifts.

Figure 1 represents a canvas of atomic hydrogen spectrum for building
any absorption spectrum by addition of lines, in particular able to play the
role of Lyβ or Lyγ lines.

Rules used to build spectrum taking into account only hydrogen atoms

are simple :

absorbed.

- i - At start, close to star, we suppose that α, β and γ lines have been

- ii - It appears a frequency shift until an absorbed, shifted line of initial
frequency ν reaches να frequency. Thus all absorbed frequencies have been
multiplied by να/ν, coeﬃcent lower than 1. In pure atomic hydrogen ν may
be νβ or νγ, assuming that higher frequency lines are too weak.

- iii - During stop of frequency shift, the three main lines of H could be

absorbed, but there remain no energy at Lyα frequency.

- iv - Assume that Lyβ absorption produces a very weak redshift. During
this negligible redshift, gas lines are visibly absorbed. If weak redshift is able
to shift absorbed frequencies oﬀ Lyα absorption line before full absorption of
light at Lyβ frequency, fast redshift restarts, go to - ii -. Else there is no more
redshift, absorbed Lyβ line is visible, but Lyγ line is probably not because its
frequency is probably larger than the shifted high frequency limit of emission
of star.

In pure H, total redshift results from several relative shifts Zβ,α and Zγ,α

which correspond to multiplication of light frequencies by να/νβ or να/νγ.

Computed lower frequencies written on ﬁgure are not very good. They
can be corrected by use of an unique dispersion function D(ν) equal to ν at
and in neighborhood of να frequency.

Thus, formula 6 becomes :
ν(p, q) = D[(να/νβ)p ∗ (να/νγ)q ∗ ν0]. (7)
Determination of D function requires either study of a good spectrum or

calculation of dispersion of polarizability of H atom in state 2P.

6

Figure 1 – Generation of lines of Lyman forest of a quasar by coincidence
of line α of gas with previously absorbed, shifted β or γ. During stop of
redshift Lyβ and Lyγ lines are absorbed. Lines of other local gas may be also
absorbed and may later play the role of Lyβ and Lyγ lines if their frequencies
are larger than να. Written frequencies do not take into account dispersion
of hyperﬁne polarizability of H atom.

7

2.4

Introduction of other gas in spectrum building.

Lines found in ﬁgure 1 appear in real spectra, after a correction of their
frequencies by the chromatic dispersion factor F(ν). But many lines have an
other origin : various lines absorbed at frequencies larger than να may play
the role of Lyβ and Lyγ, multiplying density of lines.

Figures much more complex than ﬁg. 1 can be drawn.

2.5 Structuring space.

Redshifts stop if frequency of an absorbed line becomes να and, for ins-
tance, not if absorbed νγ frequency reaches νβ frequency. This shows that
redshift results on generation of 2P hydrogen atoms.

We have supposed that it exists redshifts in some places. Thus, assuming
that quasar is far from other stars, space is divided into spherical shells where
generated 2P atoms shift light frequencies, and shells in which there is no 2P
atoms and no frequency shifts.

As quasars are not alone in space, perturbation of generation of these
regions may result from pumpings of atoms by light of other stars. Thus
region in which quantized redshifts appear must be small enough to avoid
an important lighting by other stars : This explains Burbidge’s selection of
quasars.

To avoid diﬀerent pumpings by light coming from diﬀerent regions of
surface of the star, redshift must appear only at a distance much larger than
size of the star, that is in a region where pressure of gas is low.

These conditions are evidently not veriﬁed for a set of relatively close
stars as a galaxy. As the star must produce very high light frequencies, if
it is small it must be extremely hot. An hypothesis which seems valuable is
an accreting neutron star, a type of stars which were never found in nebulae
while they should be bright enough to be seen.

3 Dynamics of space structures : Absorption
of Lyman α frequency by competition of
modes.
In model described in 2, we obtained spherical shells of hydrogen atoms
either excited by absorption of Lyman να frequency, or in ground state. But
it is diﬃcult to obtain the large number of lines observed for instance between
Lyα and Lyβ lines ( Lyα forest ).

8

In 2.5, we took only ito account the lack of absorption at να frequency to
explain stops of redshifts. Let us consider a spherical shell in which Lyman
alpha line is absorbed, therefore light is redshifted.

The fraction of excited atoms grows without reaching the limit, not very
lower than 1/2, which corresponds to the very high temperature of spectral
radiance of star at Lyman α frequency. Einstein’s coeﬃcient B becomes large,
so that intense superradiant emissions can burst. Flash of-excites atoms bru-
tally and causes an intense absorption of other rays at α frequency by com-
petition of modes. Thus an absorption line appears at Lyman α frequency.
This process is in conformity with thermodynamics because spectral radiance
of stellar ray is higher than that in superradiant mode. After ﬂash, gas res-
tarts an excitation. Process absorption-ﬂash reproduces without any simple
computation of relaxation period, therefore of position of new absorbed lines.
It is diﬃcult to discuss on frequency and stability of relaxation oscillations
which generate these absorptions, thus on stability of spectra. However, the
medium is probably much more homogeneous and stable than the medium
which provides aurora borealis. Frequencies must be adjusted from observa-
tion. It is also diﬃcult to discuss geometry of ﬂashes, seen as ﬂares, probably
induced by rays emitted by the star into directions close to direction of ob-
servation of the star.

4 Physical interpretation.
4.1 Propagation of light in 1S and 2P atomic hydro-

gen.

In 1S state, hydrogen has 1420 MHz quadrupolar resonance frequency,

(period T = 0.7 ns ; wavelength λ = 21 cm).

In its ﬁrst excited state, hydrogen atom has quadrupolar resonance fre-
quencies : 178 MHz (T = 5.6 ns, λ = 1,7 m) in state 2S1/2, 59 MHz (T = 17
ns, λ = 5 m) in 2P1/2 and 24 MHz (T = 42 ns, λ = 12 m) in 2P3/2.

A qualitative diﬀerence between laboratory and space ISRS is that, in
labs, ISRS is observed using femtosecond laser pulses while ordinary inco-
herent light is made of longer, around 1 nanosecond pulses. For space co-
herence, hyperﬁne periods in excited states, must be longer than length of
pulses (1ns) in ordinary light as required by conditions of space coherence of
"Impulsive Stimulated Raman Scattering" (ISRS) : Length of pulses must be
shorter than all involved time constants [6].

Space coherence of incident and scattered light in ISRS allows an inter-
ference of exciting and scattered light, which produces an intermediate fre-

9

quency, that is shifts frequency of incident light and preserves the geometry
of light beams.

The other condition for ISRS is : Collisional time must be longer than 1
nanosecond, that is pressure must be very low, so that pressure broadening
of lines is low.

These conditions make ISRS in space very weak compared with ISRS in
labs of chemistry, which uses around 10 femtosecond laser pulses, around
k = 105 times shorter than light pulses of temporally incoherent light :

- Division of pressure by k divides the shift by k.
- Division of quadrupolar frequency by k divides the shift by k twice :
- - Once mixing incident and Raman frequency shifted of hyperﬁne fre-

quency ;

ming thermal equilibrium.

- - Once by division of diﬀerence of populations of hyperﬁne levels, assu-
Thus order of magnitude of path needed to observe ISRS is ≈ 1015 times
longer than in laboratory experiments : astronomical paths are needed for
observation.

4.2 De-excitation of hyperﬁne levels.

As pressure is very low, collisions between atoms are negligible. A radia-
tive process is necessary to de-excite hyperﬁne levels, thus obtain a permanent
Raman frequency shift.

Happily, there are cold background electromagnetic waves. Thus, the real
process is not a single ISRS, but a set of ISRS such that hyperﬁne levels of
2P atoms have a constant excitation. Excited atoms H catalyze an exchange
of energy between light beams, it is a parametric interaction. Variations of
energy produce frequency shifts of light beams such that entropy is increa-
sed. This parametric interaction is usually named "Coherent Raman Eﬀects
between Incoherent Light beams" (CREIL).

5 Main applications in astrophysics of Co-
herent Raman Eﬀects on Incoherent Light.
5.1 Blueshift of microwaves emitted by Pioneer probes.
Anomalous blueshifts of microwaves exchanged with Pioneer 10 and 11
probes [7] are explained by an "anomalous acceleration". Anomalous increase
of frequency happened between 10 and 15 AU from Sun, exactly where solar

10

wind cools into excited atomic hydrogen. It results from a transfer of energy
from solar light to weak microwaves.

5.2 Dispersion of multiplets emitted by dense regions

of quasars.

This dispersion results from dispersion of hyperﬁne polarizability of hy-

drogen atoms. There is no need of variation of ﬁne structure constant.

5.3 Redshifts of light by excited hydrogen.

Excited hydrogen atoms are abundant close to hot stars and galaxies.
Thus Hubble’s law exaggerates distances close to these hot objects. This
radial increase of distance produces, as angular distances are not changed,
an increase of transverse distances. Thus, it appears anisotropic bubbles, well
visible on maps of galaxies, bubbles which give a spongious appearance to
these maps.

As distances of spiral galaxies are increased, their size is increased and

celestial mechanics seems fail. It does not !

6 Conclusion.

Standard coherent spectroscopy is used to study spectra of quasars : Karl-
son’s formula on redshifts of quasars is demonstrated, widespread and applied
to study sets of sharp, saturated absorption spectral lines. Generation of other
sharp lines results from a competition of modes during ﬂash, superradiant
of-excitements of very low pressure 2P hydrogen atoms.

Interpretation of many astronomical frequency shifts is easy using co-
herent exchanges of energy between light beams, which increase entropy of
the beams. Excited atomic hydrogen, mainly in its 3P state is a powerful
catalyst of these exchanges. it is unnecessary to introduce, as in the theory
of expanding universe, new concepts to explain some observations.

An other coherent optical eﬀect should be used in astrophysics : Super-
radiance shows the limbs of Strömgren spheres as possibly dotted circles.
Strömgren’s sphere of supernova 1987A is strangulated into an hourglass by
absorption of energy by planets. Multiphotonic interactions, superradiance
and competition of modes explain that the star disappeared when the beau-
tiful rings appeared.

Astrophysicists should learn some coherent spectroscopy or collaborate

with spectroscopists.

11

Références
[1] Karlsson, K. G., Astron. Astrophys., 239, 50-56 (1990).
[2] Burbidge, G., ApJ., 154, L41-L48 (1968).
[3] Moret-Bailly, J., AIP conf. proc., 822, 226-238 (2006)
[4] Petitjean, P. , Ann. Physique, 24, 1-126 (1999).
[5] Rauch M. , Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys., 36, 267-316 (1998).
[6] Lamb G. L. Jr., Rev. Mod. Phys., 43, 99-124 (1971).
[7] Anderson J. D., Lau E. L., Turyshev S. G., Laing P. A. & Nieto M. M.,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 2858, (1998).

12

