Microscopic Statistical Characterisation of the Congested Traﬃc

Flow and Some Salient Empirical Features

Bo Yang, Ji Wei Yoon and Christopher Monterola

Complex Systems Group, Institute of High

Performance Computing, A*STAR, Singapore, 138632.

(Dated: March 15, 2016)

Abstract

We present large scale and detailed analysis of the microscopic empirical data of the traﬃc

ﬂow, focusing on the non-linear interactions between the vehicles when the traﬃc is congested.

By implementing a “renormalisation” procedure that averages over relatively unimportant fac-

tors, we extract the eﬀective dependence of the acceleration on the vehicle headway, velocity and

relative velocity, that characterises not just a few vehicles but the traﬃc system as a whole. Sev-

eral interesting features of the detailed vehicle-to-vehicle interactions are revealed, including the

stochastic distribution of human responses, relative importance of non-linear terms in diﬀerent

density regimes, symmetric response to the relative velocity, and the insensitivity of the accelera-

tion to the velocity within a certain headway and velocity range. The latter leads to a multitude

of steady-states without a fundamental diagram, showing strong evidence of the “synchronised

phase”, substantiated with additional microscopic details. We discuss the richness of the available

data for the understanding of the human driving behaviours, and its usefulness in construction and

calibration of both deterministic and stochastic microscopic traﬃc models.

PACS numbers: 05.40.-a, 05.20.-y

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
4
1

 
 
]

.

O
A
n
i
l
n
[
 
 

1
v
2
7
2
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Modelling the traﬃc ﬂow as an interacting physical system has been an active ﬁeld of

research for more than six decades[1–4]. The traﬃc system in general can be treated as a

one-dimensional many-body systems with non-linear anisotropic interactions. The compo-

nents in the system are non-identical. This crucial diﬀerence from the more conventional

many-body physical systems is usually circumvented by assuming the existence of a repre-

sentative agent: the traﬃc system can be modelled by identical components governed by the

same behaviour. Such “model vehicle” and its equations of motion, if they exist, should also

be obtained statistically in a rather non-trivial way. It is of fundamental interest both the-

oretically and empirically to understand what universal characteristics of the traﬃc system

can be captured by such simpliﬁcations, and how the equations of motion can be generated

from the empirical data.

Many phenomenological models with identical drivers have been proposed with simple

and eﬀective equations of motions that can successfully capture some of the most impor-

tant features of the traﬃc ﬂow. On the other hand, controversies still remain[5, 6] on the

nature of the dynamics of the traﬃc ﬂow, especially when the ﬂow is congested with emerg-

ing complex spatiotemporal patterns. The non-linear interactions, compounded with the

near impossibility of controlling the actual traﬃc ﬂow as an experimental system, make it

highly nontrivial to compare the numerical simulations of the models with the empirical

observations.

Most popular traﬃc models are tuned with empirical driving behaviours by observing the

dynamics of the vehicles either in an experimental setting or in the actual traﬃc ﬂow[7–12].

The parameters in the models are usually tuned from a relatively small number of vehicles,

and in general that is suﬃcient at least to estimate the right order of magnitude for the

parameters. One should note, however, since the tuning is done for speciﬁc models, the

ﬁdelity of the resulting models depends on the assumptions built into the model construc-

tions; certain detailed driving behaviours are already ﬁltered by the models themselves. It

is also important to realise that the dynamics of the a small number of individual vehicles

even in the actual traﬃc ﬂow may not characterise the interacting many-body traﬃc system

well. The traﬃc system is completely deﬁned by the distribution of the vehicle types, driver

demographics and the road conﬁguration, and a more thorough sampling may be needed

especially for the construction of a representative “model vehicle”.

In this Letter, we present and analyse the data from the empirical traﬃc ﬂows from a

2

stretch of expressway in Singapore. Microscopic empirical data including the individual

vehicle accelerations, headways, velocities and relative velocities are extracted from the

videos of such traﬃc ﬂow via image processing and machine learning, over a period of more

than six months.

In reality, the vehicle acceleration depends on the vehicle and driver

types and many other (possibly stochastic) factors. While it is not possible to measure all

the factors inﬂuencing the vehicles dynamics, we employ a “renormalisation” approach to

average over unimportant and rapidly ﬂuctuating factors, to obtain an eﬀective dependence

of the acceleration on the important dynamical variables. This leads to a characteristic

map of the acceleration a as a function of the headway h, velocity v and relative velocity

∆v. The map reveals some interesting features of the detailed driving behaviours, including

the speed synchronisation with certain range of the headway and velocity in the congested

traﬃc. It can also be used for the construction of a “master traﬃc model” and the validation

of diﬀerent types of the models being proposed in the literature.

We ﬁrst brieﬂy introduce the methodologies of our data extraction and aggregation[13].

Fig.(1) shows a snapshot of the video capturing part of a segment of the expressway of
∼ 50m, and we are able to accurately extract the position, velocity and acceleration of
every vehicle appearing in the video. The resulting ﬂow-density relation is also plotted,

which shows very consistent behaviours from one day to another. The morning peak traﬃc

has been captured, and since we are only interested in the congested traﬃc, we only analyse

the vehicle dynamics during the peak hours, which is reﬂected by the red part of the plots

in Fig.(1).

For each pair of vehicles passing through the video, we record the following vehicle’s

acceleration a, velocity v, bumper-to-bumper headway h and the relative velocity ∆v. The

technical details of the data extraction can be found in[13]. In general, for the same h, v

and ∆v , diﬀerent accelerations will be measured either from the same vehicle at diﬀerent

time/position, or from diﬀerent vehicles. Such temporal and vehicle dependences are because

of the many factors inﬂuencing the acceleration, and in Fig.(2) we show examples of the

distribution of the accelerations at h = 5m, 11m, with ∆v = 0 and diﬀerent velocities.

The distribution proﬁles of the accelerations depend on the particular traﬃc system

under study, and can be used to validate the stochastic terms in a stochastic microscopic or

cellular automata model, though we will not study this issue here. We focus on obtaining

the deterministic microscopic models with a representative model vehicle. Given the amount

3

FIG. 1. The top ﬁgure is a snapshot of part of the traﬃc lanes included in the video analysis. The

video is taken at 250 frames per second. Algorithms are implemented for accurate extraction of

the positions, velocities and accelerations of the vehicles, excluding the eﬀects of the shadows and

trees blocking the view. The boxed vehicles are identiﬁed by our machine learning algorithm. The

bottom left ﬁgure is the ﬂow-density plot of the traﬃc ﬂow of the fast lane traﬃc, measured over

an entire week; the bottom right ﬁgure is the measured velocities of each vehicles as a function of

the time. The red part of the plots come from the morning peak hours, during which the traﬃc is

congested.

of data we have, we consider our traﬃc system to be fully sampled, and the “renormalised”

or eﬀective model is obtained by averaging over all factors aﬀecting the acceleration other

than the dynamical parameters h, v, ∆v.

Formally, let the complete set of factors aﬀecting the acceleration to be {h, v, ∆v,{fi}},
where {fi} contains factors such as vehicle index, following vehicles or vehicles further down-
stream, as well as other stochastic factors. Averaging over {fi} can be achieved as follows[14]:

(cid:88)

{fi}

¯a (h, v, ∆v) =

1
N0

a (h, v, ∆v,{fi})

(1)

where N0 is some proper normalisation factor. This can be precisely achieved by aver-

4

FIG. 2. The probability density distribution of the acceleration at ∆v = 0 and a). h = 11m; b).

h = 5m. The black dots are the average acceleration at each velocity. The width of the density

distribution generally increases as the velocity v gets higher. c). The “renormalised”, or averaged

acceleration at ∆v = 0 as a function of the velocity at h = 8m. The average is done from data

collected over one month, three months and six months. The ﬂuctuation of the plot decreases

with more data available. On average 3000 vehicles are captured each day, and each vehicle yields

around 200 data points.

aging over all the accelerations measured at the same h, v, ∆v from the video, with the
proper sampling weight of {fi} intrinsically built in. Eq.(1) can be treated as the mas-
ter microscopic traﬃc model that is deterministic with identical drivers, by simply letting

an = ¯a (hn, vn, ∆vn), where n is the vehicle index increasing in the direction of the traﬃc
ﬂow and ∆vn = vn+1 − vn.

If the traﬃc system is under-sampled, the resulting Eq.(1) will be ﬂuctuating too much

5

to be useful for model construction or the understanding of the traﬃc system. With more

complete sampling, such ﬂuctuations dampen to yield a smoother relationship between the

renormalised acceleration and the dynamical parameters (see Fig.(2) c). One should also be

careful not to set the bin-size around h, v, ∆v to be too small. Not only does that reduce

the sample size for a particular set of the dynamical parameters, there are also fundamental

limitations on the resolution of headways and velocities from the driver perceptions.
In
this paper, the bin-size is 1m for headway and 1ms−1 for velocities, centered around the
particular set of h, v, ∆v.

We will now present the results of the renormalised acceleration of the representative

vehicle in the traﬃc system, as a function of its own velocity, the bumper-to-bumper headway

to the preceding vehicle, and its relative velocity to the preceding vehicle. It is clear that

the renormalised acceleration will only converge with enough data points within the bin of

the same set of h, v, ∆v. For the congested traﬃc, it is rare for two consecutive vehicles

to be more than 20m apart. In general, it is also rare for two consecutive vehicles to have
a velocity diﬀerence of more than ±2ms−1. We are also careful to ﬁlter out manoeuvres
involving lane changing. In general, we only plot the data at each h, v, ∆v when more than

5000 data points are observed, so that the uncertainty in the averaged acceleration is less
than ±0.02ms−2.

We ﬁrst look at the cases where ∆v = 0. These cases are important in understanding the

steady states of the traﬃc system, as well as in deciding if the system has a fundamental

diagram (which is crucial for the three-phase traﬃc theory[1]). The optimal velocity function

(at least in the density range when the fundamental diagram does exist) can also be extracted

by plotting the acceleration as a function of the velocity at diﬀerent headways. In Fig.(3a)

we can clearly see the general trend of the decrease in acceleration when the velocity of the

vehicle increases. The interception with the x-axis gives the optimal velocity that generally

increases with the headway as expected.

The most salient features of Fig.(3a) is the formation of plateaus close to zero acceleration,
for the range of 10m ≤ h ≤ 14m, where the acceleration is very weakly dependent on the
vehicle velocity. In that range, the drivers would rather just maintain the velocity as long

as ∆v = 0, and their velocities are not too small or too large. The empirical data are

reminiscent of the “synchronisation gap” postulated by Kerner[1].

It is now very clear

that the multitudes of states with non-unique ﬂow-density relationship does exist within

6

FIG. 3. a). Average acceleration as a function of velocity at diﬀerent headway with zero relative

velocity. The dotted plots intersect the x-axis only once, and the line plots have plateaus of near

zero accelerations within a certain velocity range. b). Averaged acceleration as a function of ∆v,

when the velocity is equal to the optimal velocity.

a certain density and (density dependent) velocity range, independent of stochasticity or

vehicle diversity. Due to the smallness of the accelerations, such states can last for a very

long time and may even be treated as steady-states for all practical purposes.

If such

detailed driving behaviours are important for certain spatial-temporal patterns of the traﬃc

ﬂow, Fig.(3a) can lead to more accurate three-phase traﬃc models[15, 16].

The dependence of the acceleration on the relative velocity is shown in Fig.(3b), when the

vehicles are travelling at their optimal velocities. The gradients of the plots are symmetric

about ∆v and only depends on the headways weakly, in contrast to the assumptions in some

of the car-following models[17]. When the vehicles are travelling at the optimal velocity (no

acceleration if ∆v = 0), there is on average an equal tendency to accelerate or decelerate if

the preceding vehicle starts pulling away or slowing down.

We will now present a more quantitative analysis of the empirical data, by ﬁrst noting

7

that the microscopic master model can be expanded as follows[20]:

(cid:88)

¯an =

λp, q (hn) (˜vn − Vop (hn))p ∆˜vq

n

p,q

λp, q (hn) =

1

∂p+q¯an

p!q!

∂p˜vn∂q ˜∆vn

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)˜vn=Vop(hn)

∆˜vn=0

(2)

(3)

Analyticity of ¯an is assumed, as evidenced in Fig.(3) and argued in[20]. The coeﬃcients of

expansion λp,q have the dimension of the acceleration; ˜vn = vn/V1 (hn) , ∆˜vn = ∆vn/V2 (hn),

where V1, V2 are two headway dependent characteristic velocities obtained from the empirical

data. We take V1 to be on the order of the average velocity deviation from the optimal

velocity, and V2 that of the average ∆v, respectively evaluated at each h. This makes sure

all powers in Eq.(2) are smaller than 1 in general, so that higher powers are less important

if their coeﬃcients are also small.

The empirical data is ﬁtted with a truncated master model by limiting p, q ≤ 3 in Eq.(2),
using least-square non-linear regression. The results in Fig.(4) show the dominant terms are

λ01 and λ10 of the lowest orders of expansion. There is a strong dependence of the coeﬃcients

on h, especially that of λ10, explains some of the unrealistic features of the conventional

optimal velocity model class[17–19]. Higher order coeﬃcients are generally much smaller

than the lower order coeﬃcients, justifying our truncated model and also making it possible

for simple eﬀective models to be constructed from the master model.

For vehicles with small headways h < 8m, the velocity dependence of the acceleration

is strongly non-linear on the vehicle velocity. The prominence of λ20 in this region shows

drivers are more eager to accelerate than to decelerate, when their velocities deviate from

the average optimal velocity. Such tendency seems to be reversed when the headways are

large h > 14m. In this region, drivers are much more cautious in accelerating even when

their velocities are slower than what is perceived as safe. These can lead to interesting

interpretation of the human driving psychology when the drivers are aware that the traﬃc

is busy and congested during the peak hours.

The vanishing of the leading order of λ10 as a function of h has been predicted in[14, 20],

to explain the possible onset of the “synchronised phase”. In the region 9m < h < 14m, the

only dominant coeﬃcient is λ01, indicating that the drivers are only sensitive to the relative

velocity. However, if the velocities are too high or too low, acceleration will deviate from

zero in a strongly non-linear way.

8

FIG. 4. Headway dependence of various coeﬃcients of expansion. The inset is the dependence of

the optimal velocity on the headway, where the ﬂuctuation between 9m < h < 14m is due to the

plateau of almost zero accelerations. All plots are obtained from the ﬁtting of the empirical data.

From the modelling perspective, the range of h > 14m is relatively easier; only the

linear terms with λ10 and λ01 are important, and the steady states have a unique ﬂow-

density relationship. The non-linear interactions between the vehicles are still strong, and

depending on the detailed proﬁle of the optimal velocity function, the traﬃc system can still

be unstable against the formation of traﬃc jams, though headway ﬂuctuations will generally

develop when the coeﬃcients are headway dependent. For densely populated roads where

most of the headways are smaller than 8m, the headway dependence of the coeﬃcients will

very likely lead to highly ﬂuctuating traﬃc ﬂows at high density (see Fig. 4e of [20]), agreeing

with the empirical observation[1]. While this shows strong evidence of what can be captured

by the proper deterministic microscopic models, further data collections for the full range

9

optimal velocity function is needed for the complete determination of such models.

In conclusion, we show for the ﬁrst time how the construction of the identical drivers

for a traﬃc system can be validated with the properly averaged microscopic empirical data.

We expect some of the important features from the expressway traﬃc system in Singapore

to be universal. They particularly show strong empirical evidence that the non-linear in-

teraction alone is responsible for the multitude of steady or long lasting states covering a

two-dimensional region of the ﬂow-density plane. The collective sensitivity of the drivers on

their own velocity and the relative velocity is also shown to be strongly headway dependent.

Our observation setup is less suitable for characterising the free-ﬂow traﬃc because of the

relatively short segment of the road we are monitoring, leading to the scarcity of the relevant

data. Free-ﬂow traﬃc during oﬀ-peak hours are relatively easier to understand, though one

should note that for the same h, v, ∆v, the averaged acceleration in the free ﬂow will be

rather diﬀerent, due to the diﬀerent group of drivers and diﬀerent driver expectations of the

traﬃc conditions. While we did not focus on model calibration in this paper, our analysis

can be useful for validating diﬀerent assumptions employed in diﬀerent traﬃc models, and

for the construction of more realistic traﬃc models (deterministic or stochastic).

It also

serves as a good starting point to understand which detailed driving behaviours need to be

modelled for the numerical simulations to be useful for practical applications.

This research was partially supported by Singapore A(cid:63)STAR SERC “Complex Systems”

Research Programme grant 1224504056.

[1] B.S. Kerner, Introduction to Modern Traﬃc Flow Theory and Control: The Long Road

to Three-phase Traﬃc Theory, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009, and the references

therein.

[2] M. Treiber and A. Kesting, Traﬃc Flow Dynamics, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013,

and the references therein.

[3] D. Helbing, Rev. Mod. Phys. 73, 1067 (2001).

[4] D. Chowdhury, L. Santen and A. Schadschneider, Phys. Rep. 329, 199 (2000).

[5] B.S. Kerner, Physica A, 392, 5261(2013).

[6] M. Treiber, A. Kesting and D. Helbing, Transport. Res. B. 44, 983 (2010). D. Helbing, M.

10

Treiber, A. Kesting and M. Schonhof, Eur. Phys. J. B. 69, 583 (2009).

[7] D. Shamoto, A. Tomoeda, R. Nishi and K. Nishinari, Phys. Rev. E. 83, 046105 (2011).

[8] D. Helbing and B. Tilch, Phys. Rev. E. 58, 133 (1998).

[9] L.Neubert,L.Sagten,A.Schafschneider and M.Schneckenberg, Phys. Rev. E. 60, 6480 (1999).

[10] S.H. Hamdar, H.S. Mahmassani and M. Treiber, Transport. Res. B. 78, 32 (2015).

[11] J. Tian, M. Treiber, S. Ma, B. Jia and W. Zhang, Transport. Res. B. 71, 138 (2014).

[12] W. Knospe, L. Santen, A. Schadschneider and M. Schreckenberg, Phys. Rev. E. 65, 056133

(2002).

[13] Bo Yang, Ji Wei Yoon and Christopher Monterola,Empirical veriﬁcation of microscopic traﬃc

models from the detailed acceleration patterns, Conference on Traﬃc and Granular Flow ’15,

Delft, Netherlands, 10/2015

[14] B. Yang, X. Xu, John Z.F. Pang, C. Monterola, arXiv: 1504.01256.

[15] B.S. Kerner and S.L. Klenov, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 35 L31-L43 (2002). B.S. Kerner and

S.L. Klenov, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 39 1775 (2006).

[16] B.S. Kerner and S.L. Klenov, Phys. Rev. E. 68, 036130 (2003).

[17] H. Gong, H. Liu and B. Wang, Phys. A. 387, 2595 (2008).

[18] M. Bando, K. Hasebe, A. Nakayama, A. Shibata, and Y. Sugiyama, Phys. Rev. E. 51, 1035

(1995).

[19] R. Jiang, Q. Wu and Z. Zhu, Phys. Rev. E. 64, 017101 (2001).

[20] B. Yang and C. Monterola, Phys. Rev. E 92, 042802 (2015).

11

