6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
4
1

 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
3
1
3
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Interactions between unidirectional quantized vortex rings

T. Zhu,∗ M. L. Evans,† R. A. Brown, P. M. Walmsley, and A. I. Golov

(Dated: March 15, 2016)

We have used the vortex ﬁlament method to numerically investigate the interactions between pairs
of quantized vortex rings that are initially traveling in the same direction but with their axes oﬀset
by a variable impact parameter. The interaction of two circular rings of comparable radii produce
outcomes that can be categorized into four regimes, dependent only on the impact parameter; the
two rings can either miss each other on the inside or outside, or they can reconnect leading to
ﬁnal states consisting of either one or two deformed rings. The fraction of of energy went into ring
deformations and the transverse component of velocity of the rings are analyzed for each regime. We
ﬁnd that rings of very similar radius only reconnect for a very narrow range of the impact parameter,
much smaller than would be expected from geometrical cross-section alone. In contrast, when the
radii of the rings are very diﬀerent, the range of impact parameters producing a reconnection is close
to the geometrical value. A second type of interaction considered is the collision of circular rings
with a highly deformed ring. This type of interaction appears to be a productive mechanism for
creating small vortex rings. The simulations are discussed in the context of experiments on colliding
vortex rings and quantum turbulence in superﬂuid helium in the zero temperature limit.

PACS numbers: 67.25.dk,47.32.cf,47.27.Cn

I.

INTRODUCTION

Vortex rings1,2 are a common feature of many diﬀerent
ﬂuid systems and can occur on a huge variety of length
scales ranging from nanometers to interstellar plasmas.
A circular ring moves forward due to its own self-induced
velocity. Vortex rings in superﬂuids and Bose-Einstein
condensates are perhaps the most ideal realization of vor-
tex rings in nature. This is due to the topological sta-
bility provided by the quantization of circulation which
means that there can be no gradual decay of vorticity as
the ring moves. In the case of superﬂuid helium, the very
small ﬁxed core size relative to the ring radii allows any
dynamics associated with the core to be neglected. This
means that vortex rings in a superﬂuid near zero tem-
perature, where there is very little dissipation, can travel
distances that are many orders of magnitude greater than
their radius. In contrast, vortex rings in classical ﬂuids,
which usually have relatively thick cores, tend to break
up due to greater dissipation and core instabilities.

There have been many investigations of interacting
and reconnecting vortex rings with the post-interaction
state consisting of either a single ring or several rings de-
pending on the initial conditions. The cases where two
rings are moving towards each other, either at an angle
or head-on but with their axes oﬀset, are the ones that
have been investigated in most detail in both classical3,4
and quantum ﬂuids5–8. The scenario where two rings
are initially traveling in the same direction has not been
studied in as much detail12,13 and this paper seeks to
address this issue. In this case, the relative velocity of
the rings is much lower, which allows a much longer time
for non-local eﬀects to act resulting in several novel out-
comes. It was recently suggested that interactions within
a turbulent vortex tangle between vortex loops traveling
in the same direction can lead to energy being trans-
ferred to larger length scales21,22. This paper focuses on

the interaction between isolated pairs of unidirectional
rings, our analysis is based on extracting the eﬀective
post-interaction radii of the rings and using these to cat-
egorize the outcomes of the interactions. The special case
of leapfrogging, that occurs when the rings are coaxial,
has already been studied extensively8,14 and is thus not
investigated any further here.

In the helium superﬂuids, it is possible to create a
beam containing a large number of vortex rings traveling
in the same direction and with almost identical radii15,16.
It is now well established experimentally that collisions
within a beam of unidirectional vortex rings can cause
the onset of quasi-classical quantum turbulence (tangles
of quantized vortex lines with instantaneous correlations
of orientation)17,18 which will have ﬂuctuations of coarse-
grained impulse over large length scales – in contrast to
uncorrelated tangles of vortices. The interactions be-
tween pair of unidirectional rings is highly relevant to this
strongly anisotropic vortex state and could shed some
light on the underlying microscopic processes such as
vortex reconnections and the transfer of energy to de-
formations of vortex lines (Kelvin waves) which can then
induce self-reconnections and the emission of small rings.
There have been several simulations that have looked at
the build-up of turbulent tangles by colliding many rings
together19–22 although these had relatively low resolution
such that the ﬁner details of ring-ring interactions are not
that apparent.

One recent experiment used time-of-ﬂight spectroscopy
to observe the eﬀect of reconnections within such a
beam23. One of the main observations of this work was
the frequent creation of small rings (with radii much
smaller than the incident rings). The exact mechanism
leading to the creation of these small rings is unknown
although the production of small rings is a common fea-
ture in many theoretical and computational works on
quantum turbulence near zero temperature24–33. Yet the

question of whether the interaction between a pair of
rings can produce rings of much smaller radii has not
yet been addressed, and this paper seeks to shed further
light on this issue by examining the eﬃciency for the cre-
ation of small rings when larger rings (both circular and
deformed) interact with each other.

The velocity, v0, energy, E0, and impulse I0, for a cir-
cular vortex ring of radius R0 with a thin hollow core at
constant pressure are2,

v0 =

Λ0κ
4π

R−1
0 ,

E0 =

(Λ0 − 1)ρκ2

2

R0 =

(Λ0 − 1)ρκ2

4π

L0,

I0 = πρκR2
0,

(1)

(2)

(3)

where Λ0 = ln(8R0/e1/2a0) ≈ 15 (for R0 ∼ 1 µm), a0 =
0.13 nm is the vortex core parameter, κ ≡ h/m = 1.00 ×
10−7 m2s−1 is the quantum of circulation (h is Plank’s
constant and m is mass of a 4He atom), ρ = 145 kg m−3
is the density of liquid 4He and L0 = 2πR0 is the ring’s
circumference.

The relationships in Eqs. 1-2 were veriﬁed in superﬂuid
helium by Rayﬁeld and Reif34 in 1964 when quantized
vortex rings were ﬁrst observed. The motion of the rings
could be controlled and detected by tagging each ring
with a trapped ion. The application of an electric ﬁeld
allowed R0 to be tuned to particular values. These equa-
tions have been used to extract values for superﬂuid 4He
of κ and a0 in the limit of zero temperature and pressure
from measurements of the time of ﬂight (and hence ve-
locity) as a function of the energy imparted to a beam of
rings34,35. Subsequently, charged vortex rings have de-
veloped into a powerful tool for generating and detecting
quantum turbulence36,37,51.

The paper is organized as follows.

In section II we
provide a brief overview of the commonly used vortex ﬁl-
ament method. The numerical results of the paper are
divided between sections III and V; the former describes
the interaction between initially unidirectional circular
rings, whilst the latter presents the scenario where one
of the rings is replaced with a deformed ring to see if
the presence of Kelvin wave excitations aﬀects the in-
teraction. In section IV we analyze some properties of
single deformed vortex rings. Finally, in section VI we
discuss the implications of these results for experiments
in superﬂuid 4He.

II. VORTEX FILAMENT METHOD

Due to the smallness of the core radius a0, on most
length scales of interest a quantized vortex can be treated
as a line vortex of constant strength κ – an oriented space
curve, r = s(σ) (where σ is the parameter specifying

2

|ds| = dσ).

the position along the line,
In the zero-
temperature limit, in the absence of dissipative forces,
as the mass associated with the vortex core can be ne-
glected, a point s on a vortex will move with the local
superﬂuid velocity (Helmholtz’s theorem) that is given
by the Biot-Savart law (for unbounded ﬂuid at rest at
inﬁnity),

v(s) =

κ

4π I (s1 − s)×ds1
|s1 − s|3

.

(4)

For the numerical simulations of the dynamics of vor-
tex lines of arbitrary shapes, we use the vortex ﬁlament
method, following the pioneering work of Schwarz38, to
approximate vortex lines as a sequence of connected dis-
crete points:

v =

κ
4π

ˆs′×ˆs′′ ln  2pξ+ξ−

e1/2a0 !+

κ

4π Z (s1 − s)×ds1
|s1 − s|3

, (5)

where ξ+ and ξ− are the lengths of the vortex segments
connected to point s, ˆs′ is a unit vector in the tangen-
tial direction and ˆs′′ is the principle normal unit vector.
We have utilized the standard way of desingularizing the
Biot-Savart integral which is to extract the local contri-
bution (the ﬁrst term on the right hand side) leaving the
non-local contribution as an integral over all the points
that are not connected to s (the second term). The lo-
cal induction approximation (LIA) results from ignoring
the contribution of non-local terms and is capable of de-
scribes the dynamics of isolated weakly-deformed vortex
rings. However, the LIA does not capture the long-range
interactions that can occur between vortex rings (such as
leapfrogging) nor is it suﬃcient for accurately describing
the eﬀect of large amplitude Kelvin wave excitations on a
ring, and thus we use the full Biot-Savart approach, Eq. 5,
for all of the simulations presented in this paper. The
typical distance between vortex mesh points, δ, is chosen
such that each ring consists of ≃ 100 points, meaning
that δ ≃ 80 nm for a ring of 1 µm radius which is typical
for the size of rings that occur in superﬂuid helium ex-
periments. If during a simulation the distance between
two points ξ changes such that it is no longer in the range
δ/2 < ξ < 2δ then new segments are either added (main-
taining the local curvature) or removed as required.

The Biot-Savart formalism is accurate for an ideal in-
compressible ﬂuid described by the Euler equation, which
does not allow vortex reconnections. However, at dis-
tances comparable to a0 this description breaks down
and vortex lines do reconnect, thus changing the topol-
ogy of the vortex conﬁguration. Reconnections need to
be added by hand to the vortex ﬁlament model. This
can be achieved in diﬀerent ways (further details are
given in Ref. 39). We have tried several diﬀerent re-
connection methods, but ﬁnd that the main details of
what we present in this paper do not depend on the pre-
cise method used (as was found in simulations of vortex
tangles39). In what follows, we reconnect ﬁlaments that

approach within a distance δ/2 of each other. The vor-
tex points that are involved in the close approach are re-
moved which ensures that reconnections produce a small
loss of line length (in the language of Ref. 39, these are
Type III reconnections). Further details of how to imple-
ment the vortex ﬁlament method are described in detail
elsewhere9,38,40.

The following useful properties of a vortex loop can be
easily calculated41: its length L, impulse I and angular
impulse A,

I =

1
2

L =I |ds|,
ρκI s × ds,
ρκI s2ds.

1
2

A = −

(6)

(7)

(8)

It is convenient to deﬁne the eﬀective radius R′ as the
radius of a circular vortex ring that has the same impulse
as the ring under question, using Eqs. 3,

R′ =(cid:18) I

πρκ(cid:19)1/2

,

(9)

The energy E of weakly-deformed vortex ring, according
to the LIA, is approximatelly proportional to its length
L,

E =

(Λ − 1)ρκ2

4π

L,

(10)

where Λ ≈ Λ0(R0) as in Eq. 2 with R0 ≈ R′. For large-
amplitude deformations, Eq. 10 gives a lower bound on
the total energy because it ignores the additional energy
of ﬂow induced by the non-local term in Eq. 5, and also
the eﬀective value of Λ ≈ ln(λ/a0) < Λ0, for deforma-
tions of length scale λ (λ < R0), is reduced.
A weakly-deformed vortex ring can thus be character-
ized by its (i) energy, i. e.
length L; (ii) impulse (i. e.
the eﬀective radius R′ and direction of propagation and
(iii) position of the geometrical centre r0(t) (and hence,
velocity dr0/dt). The diﬀerence on total energy E and
the energy E0(R′) of an eﬀective smooth ring of radius
R′ gives the energy and eﬀective amplitude of deforma-
tions (Kelvin waves). When deformations are small, the
smooth radius of the ring R0, position r0 and spectrum
of Kelvin waves can also be calculated approximately
by projecting the vortex line s(φ) (where φ is the az-
imuthal angle in the plane perpendicular to the direc-
tion of propagation), via a Fourier transform, on a cir-
cular ring with superimposed harmonic helical waves of
all allowed wavenumbers11. As we discuss in Section IV,
within the small range of ﬂuctuations of R0 due to stand-
ing Kelvin waves, R′ ≈ R0.
Strong deformations can lead to coiled structures9
that contribute a component of impulse in the opposite

3

direction46 and would cause our extracted value of R′
to underestimate the smoothed radius of the underlying
ring. For this reason, we only use values of R′ calcu-
lated for rings in their ﬁnal stable state with suﬃciently
small deformation (as the large-amplitude deformations
that can be created when two rings reconnect tend to
quickly produce a self-reconnection and the emission of
a small ring leaving behind rings with deformations that
are mainly helical in nature). This also means R′ is ex-
tracted for rings that have moved far away from each
other (typically > 10R′) where non-local eﬀects from
other vortices are negligible and they can thus be con-
sidered as stable independent entities.

III.

INTERACTIONS BETWEEN CIRCULAR

RINGS

We have simulated the interaction of two circular rings
with initial radii R1 and R2 that are traveling initially
in the z-direction but with their axes oﬀset by an impact
parameter, b. The larger ring (R1 ≥ R2) is always placed
a distance d in front of the smaller ring such that the
initial coordinates (x, y, z) for the centers of the rings
at time t = 0 are (0,0,d) and (b,0,0). The mean initial
radii of the rings was kept ﬁxed, Rm = (R1 + R2) /2 =
0.95 µm, but the diﬀerence in radii, ∆R = R1 − R2, was
the second parameter that was varied. The separation
d = 5 µm (≫ Rm) was used so that the rings can, as
a good approximation, be considered to be independent
non-interacting rings at t = 0. Using larger values of d
up to 10 µm barely makes any diﬀerence to the outcomes
described below. The ring conﬁgurations were allowed
to evolve for a total time of 1 − 2 ms, by which point
the rings had interacted and moved far away from each
other, and values of R′ could be reliably extracted.

Two examples of interacting rings are shown in Fig. 1
at three diﬀerent times. The smaller (and thus faster)
ring begins to catch up with the larger ring and the long-
range ﬂow ﬁelds of the rings cause them to begin inter-
acting. This non-local eﬀect causes the vortex ring in
front to increase in size while the ring at the back gets
smaller. They also tend to repel each other sideways.
The top panel of Fig. 1 shows an example of a small but
ﬁnite value of the impact parameter when the smaller
ring passes through the other ring without reconnecting.
Both rings acquire a transverse component of velocity
and they subsequently move apart with their axes no
longer aligned. In contrast, the bottom panel is an ex-
ample with a larger b that leads to the rings colliding and
reconnecting at t = 0.097 ms, resulting in the formation
of a large ring, which in this case, at t = 0.119 ms, emits
a small ring due to a self-reconnection. The large ring
is clearly non-circular, with the distorted shape arising
due to the propagation of large-amplitude Kelvin waves
around the ring from the sharp cusps created by the ini-
tial reconnection50.

In what follows, we will denote the ﬁnal eﬀective radii

t = 0.063 ms

t = 0.089 ms

t = 0.116 ms

4

z

b

t = 0.063 ms

t = 0.095 ms

t = 0.123 ms

FIG. 1. A sequence of snapshots of the vortex ﬁlaments for
two diﬀerent examples of vortex ring interactions with time
increasing from left to right.
In both cases, the rings are
initially moving vertically upwards (in the z-direction) with
initial radii R1 = 1.2 µm and R2 = 0.7 µm (Rm = 0.95 µm,
∆R = 0.5 µm) and a vertical separation of d = 5 µm. Top
panel: impact parameter, b = 0.4 µm. The smaller ring passes
through the center of the larger ring without reconnecting.
Bottom panel:
impact parameter, b = 0.95 µm. This time
the smaller ring clips the outside of the larger ring resulting
in a reconnection and the formation of a single ring. The
reconnection produces large deformations of the ring in the
form of Kelvin waves. A subsequent self-reconnection leads to
the emission of a very small ring. All rings continue to have
a positive z-component of velocity unless indicated otherwise
with an arrow (the small ring in the bottom right snapshot).
For each snapshot, the position in the z−direction is shifted
to maintain the larger ring in the same place.

of isolated post-interaction (daughter) rings as R′
i. The
values of R′ for ∆R = 0.5 µm are shown in the top panel
of Fig. 2 as a function of b. We note that R′(b) for the
smaller ring is qualitatively similar to that observed in
recent simulations of the interaction between a vortex
ring and an initially straight vortex line33,48. Further
insight is provided by the amount of energy converted
from translational motion of the ring into deformations.
As the total energy E is conserved (losses due to recon-
nections and numerical dissipation at length scale ∼ δ are
negligible, see Section IV) and if the translational energy
of the rings in their ﬁnal state is obtained by inserting
R′ into Eq. 2, then the fraction of energy associated with
deformations is

EKw

E ≈ 1 − Pi R′

i
R1 + R2

,

(11)

where the summation is over all rings in the ﬁnal state.
As the total impulse is conserved, we can relate the ef-
fective radii of initial and daughter (R′

i) vortex rings:

R2

1 + R2

2 =Xi

R′2
i .

(12)

FIG. 2. Top panel: The eﬀective ﬁnal post-interaction radii
of the rings, R′ versus impact parameter, b. The initial radii
of the rings were R1 = 1.2µm and R2 = 0.7µm with d = 5µm.
The vertical dashed lines denote the transitional impact pa-
rameters at the boundaries between the diﬀerent regimes de-
scribed in the main text. The solid horizontal line indicates
the maximum possible radius, Rmax = pR2
2, obtained
from the conservation of impulse (Eq. 9) when two rings merge
into a single ring. Bottom panel: The fraction of energy con-
verted into deformations (open red circles) and the sum of
the transverse components of impulse normalized by the to-
tal impulse (closed blue triangles) versus impact parameter.
The dashed horizontal line indicates the maximum possible
fraction of energy due to deformations when two rings merge
into a single ring.

1 + R2

As well as creating deformations, the interaction between
the rings can also produce transverse motion of the rings
(even without reconnections). This is quantiﬁed from the
sum of the magnitudes of the transverse components of
x + I 2
y .
The dependence on b of both Ixy and EKw is shown in
the bottom panel of Fig. 2.

impulse for each ring in their ﬁnal state, Ixy =qI 2

We have identiﬁed four diﬀerent regimes, each of which
is marked on Fig. 2, that depend on the impact parameter
as follows:

1. b < b1, the second ring passes through the ﬁrst ring
without reconnecting (as shown in the top panel of
Fig. 1). There is no signiﬁcant energy associated
with deformations of the rings (although there is
some slight quadrupolar distortion of both rings).

The values of R′ are comparable to the initial radii.
The rings tend to ﬂing each other sideways with
the amount of transverse motion increasing as b
increases.

2. b1 < b < b2, the rings reconnent twice in quick
succession, producing two rings that begin to have
noticeably dissimilar R′ as b increases, primarily
due to the large reduction in the size of the small
ring. The fraction of energy converted to defor-
mations begins to increase although the transverse
components of impulse now decreases (there is thus
a maximum at b1).

Outside miss

Reconnection:
single ring

5

Reconnection:
two rings

Inside miss

3. b2 < b < b3, the rings reconnect once and thus
merge together producing a large single deformed
ring which can sometimes emit a small ring at a
later time due to a self-reconnection (as shown in
the bottom panel Fig. 1). The eﬀective radius of
the large ring conﬁrms that impulse is conserved
in the merger: the radius of the ring is equal to

1 + R2

2 = √2Rmp1 + (∆R/Rm)2 (us-
Rmax = pR2
ing Eq. 9), which tends to ≈ √2Rm for ∆R →

0. The fraction of energy converted into defor-
mations reaches the maximum value, Emax
Kw /E =
1 − Rmax/2Rm.
Its largest value is in the limit
∆R/Rm → 0,
Emax
Kw /E = 1 − 2−1/2 = 0.29.

(13)

4. b > b3, the rings miss each other on the outside with
very little change in the shape, radii and direction
of the rings.

The range of impact parameters where the rings re-
connect is b1 < b < b3. The transitions at each of the
bounding limits are noticeably diﬀerent. There is a con-
tinuous variation of R′ for both rings at b1 whereas the
transition at b3 is nearly discontinuous. For the transi-
tion near b1, although the ﬁrst reconnection leads to the
formation of a single structure with two large lobes, the
impulse associated with each lobe then immediately leads
to a second reconnection and the splitting into two rings
– with both rings having partially maintained their iden-
tity during the collision. The large amplitude of the lobes
is such that the breakup into two rings is inevitable. In
contrast, collisions near b3 occur when the two rings only
just manage to clip each other, forming a large deformed
ring with both rings immediately losing their identity.
When the amplitude of a Kelvin wave deformation might
be comparable to the wavelength, it is expected that a
small ring will be emitted due to a self-reconnection24.
For these simulations, this only tends to happen when
b ≃ b2.
The outcomes described above, both in terms of ﬁnal
radii and re-distribution of energy, are features that are
common to all interactions between unidirectional circu-
lar rings irrespective of ∆R. However, the transitional
impact parameters (b1, b2 and b3) do vary with ∆R/Rm

FIG. 3. Transitional impact parameters versus the diﬀerence
in initial radii ∆R with both axes normalized by the mean
initial radii Rm. The dashed lines indicate the values b1,G and
b3,G based on geometric expectations of where a reconnection
should occur (i.e.
if the LIA were used). The solid lines
are guides to the eye. The cartoons illustrate the type of
interaction that occurs in each region.

as shown in Fig. 3 which is essentially the “phase dia-
gram”. All three transitional values of b increase as ∆R
increases. However, when the rings have nearly the same
initial radius (and hence a small relative velocity and long
interaction time), the ﬁrst three regimes are very narrow,
and only a small value of b3/Rm = 0.084 is required be-
fore the rings are able to repel each other suﬃciently
sideways so that there is no reconnection. This is in con-
trast to the interaction of strongly dissimilar rings where
there is thus a much broader range of impact parameters
resulting in a reconnection. The upper and lower values
of the impact parameter, b1,g and b3,g, where a reconnec-
tion would be expected from a geometrical extrapolation
of the trajectories of initial circular rings (which would
be the solutions of the LIA), are also shown in Fig. 3 by
dashed lines. It seems, the observed values b1 are close
to the geometrical ones, b1,g, at any ∆R/Rm. On the
other hand, b3(∆R/Rm) has two clear limits, roughly
separated at ∆R/Rm = 0.5. At larger ∆R/Rm > 0.5,
the borderline values of impact parameters b are close to
those expected from geometrical cross sections, while at
smaller ∆R/Rm < 0.5, these borderline values of b3 tend
to a very small value (perhaps, zero) in the limit ∆R → 0
– when the two rings have suﬃcient time to repel each
other sideways and thus avoid any reconnection.

The tendency to create vortex rings of highly unequal
size upon a collision of two unidirectional rings can be
attributed to constraints arising from the conservation
laws. First let us consider a head-on collision of two cir-
cular rings of equal radii R, which results in two daugh-
ter vortex rings of eﬀective radii R′
2. As the
total energy (Eq. 10) and impulse (Eq. 7) are conserved,

1 and R′

assuming Λ = const, we have

 

6

R ( m):

 
 
 

 0
 0.3
 0.5

 

1.0

0.9

0.8

0
v
 
/
 
v

0.7

and

2R > R′

1 + R′
2

0 = R′2

1 − R′2
2 .

(14)

(15)

The former inequality arises from the fact that some
part of energy becomes the energy of deformations of
the daughter rings (and another small part is lost dur-
ing the reconnection), while the latter equality indi-
cates that the center of mass remains at rest. Hence,
secondary rings of equal (albeit slightly smaller due to
Eq. 14, R′
2 < R) radii have to be created – propa-
gating in opposite directions.

1 = R′

For another limit, of the collision of two unidirectional
circular vortex rings of similar radii R1 ≈ R2 ≈ R, that
results in two daughter deformed vortex rings of eﬀective
radii R′

2, we have

1 and R′

and

2R > R′

1 + R′
2

2R2 ≤ R′2

1 + R′2
2 .

(16)

(17)

The latter becomes an equality if the secondary rings
propagate in the same direction as the primary ones.
These equations do not have solutions R′
1 = R′
2, thus only
allowing secondary rings of unequal size, e.g. R′
1 > R and
R′
2 < R. The more energy is transferred to Kelvin waves
in Eq. 16, the more unequal are the radii of the secondary
rings. Another possible outcome is the formation of just
one large secondary ring (i. e. R′
2 = 0); this
has the largest possible deformations that might cause
self-reconnections and the subsequent shedding-oﬀ of one
or more tiny secondary rings of radius R′ ≪ R in ar-
bitrary directions (which would not strongly aﬀect the
balance of total impulse due to their small size).

1 = √R, R′

We thus conclude that quick head-on collisions favor
the production of secondary vortex rings of similar size
and opposite direction of propagation (the vortex rings
“pass through each other”). In the opposite case of uni-
directional vortex rings, their collisions must become less
likely due to the long time of approach when ∆R ≪ R.
When unidirectional rings do reconnect, strongly unequal
daughter rings are favored; this includes the limiting case
of the rings merging to form one large deformed ring car-
rying the total impulse. Our numerical simulations of
interacting unidirectional rings revealed examples of all
of these features.

After interacting, the velocity of deformed rings v can
be substantially reduced below that given by inserting R′
into Eqn. 1, v0. The eﬀect of Kelvin waves reducing the
velocity of vortex rings has been studied extensively42–45.
In Fig. 4, the velocities of vortex rings for several diﬀerent
initial ∆R are plotted against the total line length of each
ring, L, scaled by the circumference of the equivalent cir-
cular ring, 2πR′. The main observation is the existence

0.6

1.0

1.1

1.2
L / 2 R'

1.3

1.4

FIG. 4. Ratio of the velocity of vortex rings post-interaction
to v0(R′) from Eq. (1) versus level of non-circular distortion
for all values of b and three diﬀerent values of ∆R. The open
(closed) symbols are for the smaller (larger) rings created fol-
lowing the interaction. Asterisks show the results of simula-
tions of the dynamics of a circular ring with one helical wave
of wavenumber N = 4 and variable amplitude.

of a universal curve that does not depend on b or ∆R. We
also conﬁrm that the velocity reduction is the greatest for
the most highly distorted rings (these are the large single
rings created when b2 ≤ b ≤ b3). Previous numerical and
analytical work42–45 focused on the change in velocity of
vortex rings when there is regular periodic arrangement
of Kelvin waves of large amplitude. Our own numerical
simulations of vortex rings with a single harmonic defor-
mation of amplitude A and wavelength 2πR0/N (with
integer N ≥ 2) resulted in velocities equal to those cal-
culated by Barenghi et al.43,44 We show some example
data for N = 4 in Fig. 4: there is reasonable agreement
with the velocities for arbitrarily deformed vortex rings
for the range of amplitudes of interest, 0 ≤ N A/R0 ≤ 1
(corresponding to 1 ≥ v/v0 > 0.6). As the excitation of
a single Kelvin-wave mode may prove diﬃcult to obtain
experimentally, we suggest that using the curve in Fig. 4
could prove to be the signature that could be observed
experimentally when searching for anomalously slow vor-
tex rings that can be relatively easily created by merging
rings together.

IV. PROPERTIES OF DEFORMED VORTEX

RINGS

The most strongly deformed but stable rings in our
simulations are those obtained after a merger of two rings
into one large ring, when b2 < b < b3. In this Section we
consider this interesting case.

The conservation of impulse ensures that the daugh-
ter ring travels in the z−direction with R′ = Rmax and
the fraction of energy associated with Kelvin wave defor-
mations, Emax
Kw /E ≈ 0.29 (Eq. 13). According to Eq. 10,
E/E0 ≈ L/(2πR0), so this value can be compared with

y

x0

z

x

x

FIG. 5.
The xy and xz projections of the distorted ring
created by colliding two circular rings, both initially in xy-
plane: one centered at (0, 0, 3 µm) with R1 = 1.0 µm (green)
and the other at (0.48 µm, 0, 0) with R2 = 0.8 µm (blue). The
dashed lines correspond to a ring with the smooth eﬀective
radius R′ = 1.28 µm, centred at (x0, 0, z0) with x0 = 0.19 µm
and z0 = 11.73 µm. The scales in all directions (x, y, z) are the
same. The approximate symmetry with respect to reversing
the y- component is evident: if point (x, y, z) belongs to the
deformed ring, the point (x, −y, z) also belongs to the ring.

FIG. 6. Spectrum of the Fourier amplitudes AN of the vortex
line s(φ) (where φ is the azimuthal angle in xy plane with
origin (x0, 0)), resulted from a reconnection of circular rings
with R1 = 1.2 µm, R2 = 0.8 µm and b = 1.5 µm. Time t =
0.741 ms. The dashed line AN ∝ N −2.1 guides the eye.

the relative increase in the length of the most strongly de-
formed rings in our simulations (as in Fig. 4 for ∆R → 0),
1 − L/(2πR′) = 0.4. We thus ﬁnd these two estimates
of the excess energy and line length are in reasonable
agreement; the fact that both are substantially smaller
than unity gives footing to the use of the small-amplitude
approximation for our analysis.

The conserved angular impulse gives the position
(x0, 0), in the xy plane, of the centre of the daughter
ring:

x0 =

R2
2
1 + R2
2

R2

b.

(18)

During the typical run of length ≃ 1 ms, the calcu-
lated impulse was constant, as expected. The mean to-

7

tal length L was also constant within our accuracy and
equal to 0.99× 2π(R1 + R2). This gives the lower bound
on the total energy E, which is hence not more than
only 1% smaller than the total energy of the two initial
rings. We thus conclude that, in our model, the energy
losses due to a single reconnection do not exceed 1%,
and the subsequent dissipation (apparently due to the
direct energy cascade through the non-linear interactions
of Kelvin waves without reconnections), if any, is much
smaller.

An example of the shape of such a deformed ring is
shown in Fig. 5. Because of an approximate mirror sym-
metry of the problem with respect to changing the sign of
the y-coordinate (which is only broken due to the small
inequality R1 > R2 and hence slightly asymmetric twist-
ing of vortex lines at short length scales just before and
after the reconnection), the resulting deformed ring un-
dergoes oscillations (see Fig. 5, in which the projections
of the vortex line for its two half-rings nearly coincide); in
other words, the deformations are standing waves com-
posed of equally-populated Kelvin-wave modes of oppo-
site directions of propagation. A Fourier transform re-
veals that for all N such that |N| <
∼ 20, the corresponding
components have nearly equal amplitudes, A|N | ≈ A−|N |
and are almost perfectly in-phase. In Fig. 6, the Fourier
transform11 of the shape of the ring, generated by the re-
connection of two rings with R1 = 1.2 µm, R2 = 0.8 µm
and b = 1.5 µm, shows the spectrum that generally fol-
low |AN| ∝ N −ǫ with ǫ ≈ 2 which is dominated by the
standing wave of the fundamental mode |N| = 2 of am-
plitude 2A2 = 0.61 µm, and hence the relative amplitude
of 2A2/R0 = 0.42. The zero-order (N = 0) Fourier com-
ponent yields the radius of the “backbone” circular ring,
R0, that oscillates between circa 1.38 µm and 1.52 µm
which overlap with R′ = 1.39 µm.

With a single helical wave of wavenumber N of small
amplitude A (A ≪ R0 and A2N 2 ≪ 2R2
0), superimposed
on a circular ring of radius R0, the total length L of the
vortex line is

L
2πR0 ≈ 1 +

A2
R2

0 (cid:18) 1

4

+

N 2

2 (cid:19) .

(19)

As for the most strongly deformed rings L/(2πR′) = 1.4
(Fig. 4), using the dominant N = 2, one arrives at the es-
timate A/R0 = (0.4/2.25)1/2 = 0.42, in good agreement
with the result of the Fourier-series analysis.

V.

INTERACTION WITH A DEFORMED RING

In section III we focused on the collision of two ini-
tially circular rings. However, experiments can often
consist of a cloud of many vortex rings. Thus, when
a large slowly-moving deformed ring is created through
the merger of two smaller rings, it is likely it will then
get hit from behind by faster-moving small rings.
It
may be that these secondary interactions, when at least
one of the colliding rings is already strongly deformed,

1 + R2

are more likely to produce small rings. We have simu-
lated this process by ﬁrstly merging two circular rings
(R1 = 1 µm, R2 = 0.8 µm, d = 3 µm and b = 0.48 µm) to
create a deformed ring of eﬀective radius R′ = Rmax =
2)1/2 = 1.28 µm (Eq. 12) with its center posi-
(R2
tioned at x0 = R2
b = 0.19 µm (Eq. 18), shown in
Fig. 5. We checked that this deformed ring was stable
by allowing it to evolve on its own for a further 10 ms;
during this time it traveled a distance of 350 R′ without
any self-reconnections taking place. The mean radius of
curvature of the ring was 0.38 µm.

1+R2

R2

2

2

We then place a circular ring, of radius 0.8 µm, a dis-
tance of 2 µm behind the deformed ring. The impact
parameter, relative to the center of mass of the larger de-
formed ring, was varied in two dimensions, b = (bx, by),
due to the lack of axial symmetry.

The values of R′ when b is varied along the x and y
axes are shown in Fig. 7(i) and (ii) respectively. There
are clear diﬀerences between the two plots because the
transitional impact parameters are now functions of both
x and y although many of the general features presented
in the previous section are still present. The most notable
diﬀerence is that the formation of a single merged ring
(regime 3) is now highly unlikely with a small ring being
a more likely result. Indeed, for bx ≃ 1µm and by = 0
(Fig. 7(i)) it is possible for two or three small rings to be
emitted following the collision.

In order to probe the probability of creating small
rings, the impact parameter was varied with both bx
and by chosen randomly in the range ±2.5 µm for 211
separate runs of the simulation with otherwise identical
parameters. The probability distribution of R′ of the
smaller rings is shown in Fig. 8. The large peak with
R′ ≃ 0.8 µm are rings that have not reconnected with
the deformed ring. There is broad distribution of rings
with smaller radii, produced by reconnections, with a
peak at ≃ 0.4µm. This length scale is clearly less than
the radius of the incoming ring but very close to the ini-
tial mean radius of curvature of the deformed ring. The
mechanism for the production of the small rings is essen-
tially that proposed by Svistunov24. When the incoming
ring reconnects with the deformed ring, the ring becomes
even more distorted. Some of the excitations then have
large enough amplitudes to produce a self-reconnection.
There are occasionally up to three small rings emitted
from diﬀerent parts of the deformed ring.

VI. COMPARISON WITH EXPERIMENT

The primary motivation of this paper was to seek to
understand why small rings are created with high prob-
ability in experiments on interacting unidirectional vor-
tex rings in superﬂuid 4He at very low temperatures23.
The experiments consists of an injected pulse of charged
rings with near identical radii each tagged by one elec-
tron trapped on the vortex core. Collisions could be
detected due to changes in the shape of the pulse of

8

‘

‘

FIG. 7. The eﬀective post-interaction radii versus impact
parameter for b = (bx, 0) (top panel) and b = (0, by) (bot-
tom panel) following an interaction of a circular ring of ra-
dius 0.8 µm that is initially placed 2 µm behind the large ring
shown in Fig. 5. The green open triangles indicate the produc-
tion of additional small rings. The arrows and dashed lines
indicate the range of impact parameters where reconnections
occur.

∼ b <

collected electrons with shorter times of ﬂight indicat-
ing the creation of small rings. The radii of the small
rings would need to be signiﬁcantly less than the radii
of the pre-interaction rings to make a discernible diﬀer-
ence to the time of ﬂight. Firstly, if we consider the
interactions between circular rings (a primary interac-
tion) then the impact parameter needs to be in the range
(b1 + b2)/2 <
∼ b2 to produce small rings (where the
radius of the smaller incoming ring is reduced by a factor
of two or more). For rings of identical radii (∆R → 0) the
mathematical expectation of producing such a small ring
is (cid:16)b2
1)(cid:1) ≈ 0.4, although this

decreases for increased values of ∆R due to the rapidly
increasing b3. Secondly, the collision of rings with the
slow-moving large rings left behind from a previous re-
connection (and thus a secondary interaction), will pro-
duce small rings that also has a probability of ≃ 0.4 per

2 − (b1 + b2)2 /4(cid:17) /(cid:0)b2

3 − b2

 

 

0.30

0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

0

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4
0.5
Reff ( m)

0.6

0.7

0.8

FIG. 8. Probability distribution for the eﬀective radii of
small rings after a circular ring (with initial radius 0.8 µm)
has interacted with the deformed ring shown in Fig. 5.
The impact parameter was randomly selected in the range
(−2.5 µm, −2.5 µm) ≤ (bx, by) ≤ (2.5 µm, 2.5 µm) and a total
of 211 realizations of the simulation were run. The red bar
on the left indicates the probability that a large single ring is
formed without the creation of a small ring. The diamonds
indicate the probability of the same process but for the inter-
action with a circular vortex ring of radius R′ with otherwise
identical parameters. In this case, the probability of a large
single ring forming is much larger at 0.64.

reconnection (compared to a probability of only 0.07 for
circular rings with nearly equal radii). We note that the
range of impact parameters that can produce a recon-
nection is much greater in the latter case compared to
the former due to the increased ∆R. Nevertheless, there
needs to be a primary interaction to create an initial slow
ring, but it seems that once this has happened the ma-
jority of small rings in the experiment are created though
secondary collisions as an avalanche like pile-up will oc-
cur. The stream of small rings can also catch-up with
and interact with any larger rings in front of them, with
a broader range of impact parameters leading to higher
probabilities of reconnection due to the diﬀerence in radii.
A third scenario that we have not considered here, is
that very small vortex rings are created in the vicinity
of each reconnection. Several works have shown that the
reconnection between anti-parallel lines can create a vor-
tex ring cascade24–26. The dissipative reconnection algo-
rithm used in this paper tends to prevent this from being
observed, although we note that high resolution simula-
tions of reconnecting rings49,50 found no evidence of this
process and it remains an open question as to whether
this cascade can occur for realistic vortex conﬁgurations.
Our observation that small rings are created with high
probability due to reconnections in the presence of strong
deformations reinforces the view that the emission of
small rings is likely to be a common feature in turbu-
lent vortex tangles at low temperatures24,28,31,33. The
time-dependent vortex line density L(t) during the free
decay of uncorrelated tangles (created through vortex

9

ring collisions)18,51 in the zero-temperature limit was ob-
served to be

L = 1.2κ−1ζ−1t−1,

(20)

where ζ ≈ 0.1. These observations were in good
agreement with values for ζ obtained from numerical
simulations27,32. In case the Kelvin-wave cascade of en-
ergy to smaller length scales is relatively ineﬃcient, one
can speculate that in these tangles the amplitude of
Kelvin waves is kept on the verge of self-reconnections
with A/R0 ∼ 0.5 (here R0 ∼ ℓ = L−1/2 is the typical
smoothed radius of curvature of vortex lines), i. e. a self-
organized critical state. Hence, every new reconnection,
that would further increase this amplitude, has a high
probability of provoking one or more self-reconnections
resulting in the emission of vortex rings of size ≪ ℓ. So,
if the reconnnections occur at the rate, per unit volume,
∼ χκL5/2 where χ ∼ 0.1,27 and each one eﬀectively re-
sults in the pinching-oﬀ of a vortex ring of radius R′
(removing energy ≈ κ2Λ0R′/2), the rate of energy re-
moval becomes ∼ κ3L5/2Λ0R′/2. This should be com-
pared with the measured rate of energy removal from the
tangle18,51, ζκ3L2. Hence, for the pinching-oﬀ of small
vortex rings to be the dominant mechanism of energy loss
in quantum turbulence, the average size of small rings
should be at least R′/ℓ ∼ 2ζ
χΛ ∼ 0.13 – which does not
seem unreasonable.
We have also obtained a conﬁrmation of the earlier
ﬁndings that, without further vortex reconnections or
interactions9,50,52, the Kelvin-wave cascade alone is ei-
ther slow (or absent) to account for the experimentally
observed decay rate of vortex tangles in the zero temper-
0)1/2, where
ature limit, Eq. 20. It implies ℓ = (βκt + ℓ2
ℓ0 = ℓ(0), where β ≈ 4πζ
ln(ℓ/a0) ≈ 0.1. With the initial
value of ℓ0 ∼ R0 = 1.4 µm, by the end of simulation time
t = 1.1 ms, one would then expect ℓ to increase to 3.6 µm,
while we haven’t observed any change in the length of
even the most highly-deformed vortex rings within accu-
racy better than 1%.

VII. SUMMARY

We have used the vortex ﬁlament model to investigate
the interactions between pairs of unidirectional vortex
rings with a variable impact parameter. It was found that
rings that have very similar initial radii, ∆R ≪ Rm, are
unlikely to reconnect; this is because the small relative
velocity of the rings leads to there being suﬃcient time
for non-local eﬀects to push the rings sideways and away
from each other. For those that do reconnect, the ratio
of the mathematical expectation of a merger into a single
3−b2
ring to that for two secondary rings, b2
1 ≈ 3 : 1, favors
2−b2
b2
a single large secondary ring. In contrast, when the dif-
ference in initial radii is large (and thus the relative veloc-
ity is high and the interaction time is short), the range of
impact parameters where reconnections occur is in good

2

agreement with a simple geometric model of straight tra-
jectories of undeformed circular rings, predicted by the
LIA without any non-local corrections; hence, the num-
ber of reconnection events resulting in either one or more
3−b2
daughter rings are nearly equal, b2
b2
2−b2

We have also considered the case where the larger ring
is replaced with a deformed ring. The main diﬀerence is
that the excess line length leads to more frequent self-
reconnections with the result that the emission of small
rings occurs with relatively high probability. It is likely
that this mechanism lies behind recent experimental ob-

2

1 ≈ 1 : 1.

servations of small vortex rings created in a beam of uni-
directional rings.

10

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Hongchao Xie for assistance in the early
stages of this project. This work was funded by the En-
gineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (grant
no. EP/I003738). We acknowledge useful discussions
and support from Manchester Research IT Services.

∗ Present address: Department of Physics and Astronomy,

Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

† Present address: Cavendish Laboratory, University of

Cambridge, Cambridge CB3 0HE, UK.

1 K. Shariﬀ and A. Leonard, “Vortex rings,” Annu. Rev.

Fluid Mech. 24. 235 (1992).

2 C. F. Barenghi and R. J Donnelly, “Vortex rings in clas-
sical and quantum systems,” Fluid. Dyn. Res. 41, 051401
(2009).

3 T. Kambe and T. Takao, “Motion of distorted vortex

rings”, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 31, 591 (1971).

4 T. Fohl and J. S. Turner, “Colliding vortex rings,” Phys.

of Fluids 18, 433 (1975).

5 K. Koplik and H. Levine, “Scattering of superﬂuid vortex

rings,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 4745 (1996).

6 M. Leadbeater, T. Winiecki, D. C. Samuels, C. F. Barenghi
and C. S. Adams, “Sound emission due to superﬂuid vortex
reconnection,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 1410 (2001).

7 P. Chatelain, D. Kivotides and A. Leonard, “Reconnec-
tion of colliding vortex rings,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 054501
(2003).

8 R. M. Caplan, J. D. Talley, R. Carretero-Gonz´alez and P.
G. Keverkidis, “Scattering and leapfrogging of vortex rings
in a superﬂuid,” Phys. Fluids 26, 097101 (2014).

9 A. W. Baggaley and C. F. Barenghi, “Spectrum of tur-
bulent Kelvin-waves cascades in superﬂuid helium,” Phys.
Rev. B 83, 134509 (2011).

10 R. H¨anninen, “Dissipation enhancement from a single vor-
tex reconnection in superﬂuid helium,” Phys. Rev. B 88,
054511 (2013).

11 R. H¨anninen and N. Hietala, “Identiﬁcation of Kelvin
Waves: Numerical Challenges,” J. Low Temp. Phys. 171,
485 (2013).

12 Y. Oshima and S. Asaka, “Interaction of two vortex rings
along parallel axes in air,” J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 42, 708-713
(1977).

13 M. Leadbeater, D. C. Samuels, C. F. Barenghi and C. S.
Adams, “Decay of superﬂuid turbulence via Kelvin-wave
radiation,” Phys. Rev. A 67, 015601 (2003).

14 D. H. Wacks, A. W. Baggaley and C. F. Barenghi, “Coher-
ent laminar and turbulent motion of toroidal vortex bun-
dles,” Phys. Fluids 26, 027102 (2014).

15 G. Gamota, A. Hasegawa, and C. M. Varma, “Evolution
of a pulse of charged vortex rings in superﬂuid helium,”
Phys. Rev. Lett., 26, 960-963 (1971).

16 B. M. Guenin and G. B. Hess, “ Observations of quantized
vorticity generated in superﬂuid 4He ﬂow through 2-µm-

diameter oriﬁcies,” J. Low Temp. Phys. 33, 243-254 (1978).
17 D. I. Bradley, D. O. Clubb, S. N. Fisher, A. M. Gu´enault,
R. P. Haley, C. J. Matthew, G. R. Pickett, V. Tsepelin
and K. Zaki, “Emission of discrete vortex rings by a vi-
brating grid in superﬂuid 3He-B : A precursor to quantum
turbulence,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 035302 (2005).

18 P. M. Walmsley and A. I. Golov, “Quantum and quasi-
classical types of superﬂuid turbulence,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
100, 245301 (2008).

19 C. F. Barenghi and D. C. Samuels, “Evaporation of a
packet of quantized vorticity,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 155302
(2002).

20 S. Fujiyama, A. Mitani, M. Tsubota, D. I. Bradley, S. N.
Fisher, A. M. Gu´enault, R. P. Haley, G. R. Pickett and
V. Tsepelin, “Generation, evolution, and decay of pure
quantum turbulence: A full Biot-Savart simulation,” Phys.
Rev. B 81, 180512(R) (2010).

21 A. W. Baggaley, C. F. Barenghi and Y. A. Sergeev, “Qua-
siclassical and ultraquantum decay of superﬂuid turbu-
lence,” Phys. Rev. B 85, 060501(R) (2012).

22 A. W. Baggaley, C. F. Barenghi and Y. A. Sergeev, “Three-
dimensional inverse energy transfer induced by vortex re-
connections,” Phys. Rev. E 89, 013002 (2014).

23 P. M. Walmsley, P. A. Tompsett, D. E. Zmeev and A. I.
Golov, “Reconnections of quantized vortex rings in super-
ﬂuid 4He at very low temperatures,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 113,
125302 (2014).

24 B. V. Svistunov, “Superﬂuid turbulence in the low-

temperature limit,” Phys. Rev. B 52, 3647 (1995).

25 R. M. Kerr, “Vortex stretching as a mechanism for quan-
tum kinetic energy decay,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 224501
(2011).

26 M. Kursa, K. Bajer and T. Lipniacki, “Cascade of vortex
rings initiated by a single reconnection of quantum vor-
tices,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 014515 (2011).

27 M. Tsubota, T. Araki and S. K. Nemirovskii, “Dynamics of
vortex tangle without mutual friction in superﬂuid 4He,”
Phys. Rev. B 62, 11751 (2000).

28 E. V. Kozik and B. V. Svistunov, “Theory of decay of su-
perﬂuid turbulence in the low-temperature limit,” J. Low
Temp. Phys. 156, 215-267 (2009).

29 J. Yepez, G. Vahala, L. Vahala and M. Soe, “Superﬂuid
turbulence from quantum Kelvin wave to classical Kolo-
mogorov cascades,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 084501 (2009).
30 H. Salman, “Breathers on quantized superﬂuid vortices,”

Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 165301 (2013).

31 S. K. Nemirovskii, “Probing of quantum turbulence with

the emitting vortex loops,” Low Temp. Phys. 40, 1116-
1118 (2014).

32 L. Kondaurova, V. L’vov, A. Pomyalov and I. Procaccia,
“Kelvin waves and the decay of quantum superﬂuid tur-
bulence,” Phys. Rev. B 90, 094501 (2014).

33 J. Laurie, A. W. Baggaley, “A note on the propagation
of quantized vortex rings through a quantum turbulence
tangle: energy transport or energy dissipation?” J. Low
Temp. Phys. 180, 95-108 (2015).

34 G. W. Rayﬁeld and F. Reif, “Quantized vortex rings in

superﬂuid helium,” Phys. Rev. 136, A1194 (1964).

35 M. Steingart and W. I. Glaberson, “Quantized vortex ring
dynamics and the vortex core radius in He II,” J. Low
Temp. Phys. 8, 61-77 (1972).

36 A. I. Golov and P. M. Walmsley, “Homogeneous turbulence
in superﬂuid 4He in the low temperature limit: experimen-
tal progress,” J. Low Temp. Phys. 156, 51 (2009)

37 P. M. Walmsley, D. E. Zmeev, F. Pakpour and A. I. Golov,
“Dynamics of quantum turbulence of diﬀerent spectra,”
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 111, 4691 (2014).

38 K. W. Schwarz, “Three-dimensional vortex dynamics in
superﬂuid 4He: line-line and line-boundary interactions,”
Phys. Rev. B 31, 5782 (1985).

39 A. W. Baggaley, “The sensitivity of the vortex ﬁlament
method to diﬀerent reconnection models,” J. Low Temp.
Phys. 168, 18 (2012).

40 D. C. Samuels, “Vortex ﬁlament methods for superﬂuids,”
in Quantized Vortex Dynamics and Superﬂuid Turbulence,
ed. by C.F. Barenghi, R. J. Donnelly and W. F. Vinen,
Springer, Berlin (2001).

41 P. G. Saﬀman, “Vortex dynamics,” Cambridge University

Press (1992).

11

42 L. Kiknadze and Yu. Mamaladze, “The waves on the vortex

ring in He-II,” J. Low Temp. Phys. 124, 321 (2002).

43 C. F. Barenghi, R. H¨anninen and M. Tsubota, “Anomalous
translational velocity of vortex ring with ﬁnite-amplitude
Kelvin waves,” Phys. Rev. E 74, 046303 (2006).

44 J. L. Helm, C. F. Barenghi and A. J. Youd, “Slowing down
of vortex rings in Bose-Einstein condensates,” Phys. Rev.
A 83, 045601 (2011).

45 E. B. Sonin, “Dynamics of helical vortices and helical-

vortex rings,” EPL 97, 46002 (2012).

46 R. L. Ricca, “Impulse of vortex knots from diagram pro-

jections”, Procedia IUTAM 21–28 (2013).

47 E. B. Sonin, “Dynamics of quantised vortices in superﬂu-

ids”, Cambridge University Press (2016).

48 A. Villois, H. Salman and D. Proment, “Scattering of line-
ring vortices in a superﬂuid”, J. Low Temp. Phys. 180, 68
(2015).

49 R. H¨anninen and N. Hietala, “Identiﬁcation of Kelvin
waves: numerical challenges,” J. Low Temp. Phys. 171,
485 (2013).

50 R. H¨anninen, “Kelvin waves from vortex reconnection in
superﬂuid helium at low temperatures,” Phys. Rev. B 92,
184508 (2015).

51 D. E. Zmeev, P. M. Walmsley, A. I. Golov, P. V. E. Mc-
Clintock, S. N. Fisher and W. F. Vinen,“Dissipation of
quasiclassical turbulence in superﬂuid 4He”, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 115, 155303 (2015).

52 M. Leadbeater, D. C. Samuels, C. F. Barenghi, and C. S.
Adams, “Decay of superﬂuid turbulence via Kelvin-wave
radiation”, Phys. Rev. A 67, 015601 (2003).

