6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
4
1

 
 
]

.

G
A
h
t
a
m

[
 
 

1
v
0
2
3
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Torsion points of sections of Lagrangian torus ﬁbrations

and the Chow ring of hyper-K¨ahler fourfolds

Claire Voisin

Abstract

Let φ : X → B be a Lagrangian ﬁbration on a projective irreducible hyper-K¨ahler
fourfold. Let M ∈ Pic X be a line bundle whose restriction to the general ﬁber Xb of
φ is topologically trivial. We prove that if the ﬁbration has maximal variation or is
isotrivial, the set of points b such that the restriction M|Xb is torsion is dense in B.
We give an application to the Chow ring of X. We prove a similar result for elliptic
ﬁbrations.

0

Introduction

Let X be an algebraic variety, X → B a projective morphism and let M ∈ Pic X be a line
bundle which is topologically trivial on the ﬁbers of φ. The line bundle M then determines
an algebraic section νM of the torus ﬁbration Pic0(X 0/B0) → B0 (which we will call the
normal function associated to M ), where X 0 → B0 is the restriction of φ over the open
set B0 ⊂ B of regular values of φ. The group of such sections is called the Mordell-Weil
group of the ﬁbration. The problem we investigate in this paper is: when do there exist
points b ∈ B0 where νM (b) is a torsion point? Are these points dense (for the usual or
Zariski topology) in B? This question is natural only when the codimension of the locus of
torsion points in Pic0(X/B), that is h1,0(Xb) = dim Pic0(X/B) − dim B, is not greater than
n = dim B, so that the section νM is expected to meet this locus. We will consider in this
paper the case where h1,0(Xb) = dim B, and more precisely we will work in the following
setting: Let X be a projective hyper-K¨ahler manifold of dimension 2n and let φ : X → B
be a Lagrangian ﬁbration. According to Matsushita [17], any morphism φ : X → B with
0 < dim B < dim X and connected ﬁbers is a Lagrangian ﬁbration. The smooth ﬁbers Xb
are then abelian varieties of dimension n, which are in fact canonically polarized, by the
following result of Matsushita (see [19, Lemma 2.2])

Proposition 0.1. In the situation above, the restriction map H 2(X, Q) → H 2(Xb, Q) has
rank 1.

Matsushita conjectured that the period map B 99K An,α from B to the moduli space
of abelian varieties with polarization of adequate type is either generically of maximal
rank n or constant (the isotrivial case). This conjecture was proved in [11] assuming
that the Mumford-Tate group of the Hodge structure on the transcendental cohomology
H 2(X, Q)tr ⊂ H 2(X, Q) is the full special orthogonal group of H 2(X, Q)tr equipped with
the Beauville-Bogomolov intersection form, and that b2(X)tr ≥ 5. In particular, it is satis-
ﬁed by general deformations of X with ﬁxed Picard lattice, assuming b2(X)tr ≥ 5.

Our main result in this paper is the following:

Theorem 0.2. Let X, φ be as above, and let M ∈ Pic X restrict to a topologically trivial
line bundle on the smooth ﬁbers Xb of φ. Assume that dim X ≤ 4 and the Lagrangian
ﬁbration on X satisﬁes Matsushita’s conjecture. Then the set of points b ∈ B0 such that
νM (b) = M|Xb is a torsion point in Pic Xb is dense in B0 for the usual topology.

1

Remark 0.3. In the locally isotrivial case, we will not need the condition on the dimension,
so the result holds under the slightly more general assumptions that either dim X ≤ 4 and
the period map is generically of maximal rank, or the ﬁbration is locally isotrivial.

Applying the main theorem of [11], we conclude:

Corollary 0.4. Let X, φ, M be as in Theorem 0.2. Assume b2(X) ≥ 8.Then the very
general deformation Xt of X preserving L, M , and an ample line bundle on X (so that
Xt is projective and has a deformed Lagrangian ﬁbration φt, see [19], [11]), satisﬁes the
conclusion of Theorem 0.2.

The restriction to dimension 4 is certainly not essential here and we believe that the
result is true in any dimension although the analysis seems to be very complicated in higher
dimension. The restriction to dimension 4 appears in the analysis of the constraints on
the inﬁnitesimal variation of Hodge structures imposed by contradicting the conclusion of
Theorem 0.2 (see the proof of Proposition 3.2 and its local version Proposition 3.8). These
constraints, that we describe in general in Section 3.3, are very strong.
In dimension 4,
three diﬀerent cases appear, and the number of cases to classify increases quickly with the
dimension.

In the general case of an elliptic ﬁbration over a curve, (and without any hyper-K¨ahler
condition) some of the ingredients used in the proof of Theorem 0.2 give the following result.

Theorem 0.5. Let φ : X → B be an elliptic ﬁbration, where B is a smooth projective curve
and X is smooth projective, and let B0 ⊂ B be the open set of regular values of φ. Let
M be a line bundle on X which is of degree 0 on the ﬁbers of φ. Then either the set of
points b ∈ B0 such that σM (b) = M|Xb is a torsion point in Pic Xb is dense in B0 for the
usual topology, or the restriction map H 1(X, Q) → H 1(Xb, Q) is surjective. In the second
case, the ﬁbration φ is locally isotrivial and the associated Jacobian ﬁbration is rationally
isogenous over B to the product J(Xb) × B.

In both cases, we will make ﬁrst an inﬁnitesimal analysis of the situation, which will
be completed by a monodromy argument: the local analysis in the case where the basis
and ﬁber dimensions are equal to 1 is extremely easy, which is why we do not need the
hyper-K¨ahler assumption. In the higher dimensional case, the main part of the proof will
be the local analysis.

One may wonder if one can prove a more general result. Let us give some examples
explaining the main diﬃculties encountered: Consider more generally any complex torus
ﬁbration φA : A → B with a section νA. The torus ﬁbration is canonically isomorphic, as
a real torus ﬁbration, to the locally constant ﬁbration H1,R,φA/H1,Z,φA, where H1,R,φA :=
(R1φA∗R)∗. A section νA thus admits local liftings ˜νA which are C∞ (in fact real analytic)
sections of the ﬂat vector bundle associated with the local system H1,R,φA.

Example 0.6. Assume that the section νA is locally the image of a constant section ˜νA ∈
Γ(H1,R,φA). Then if ˜νA is not rational, that is, does not belong to Γ(H1,Q,φA), νA has no
torsion point.

This case can be in general excluded by a monodromy argument. The following example

is slightly more subtle:

Example 0.7. Assume that the torus ﬁbration φA : A → B is a ﬁbered product

A = A′ ×B A′′,

where φ′ : A′ → B, φ′′ : A′′ → B are torus ﬁbrations. Choose a section ν′′ ∈ A′′ which is
as in Example 0.6 the image of a constant nonrational section of (R1φ′′
∗ R)∗. Then for any
section νA′ : B → A′ of φ′, νA = (νA′ , ν′′) does not have any torsion point.

In Example 0.7, there is a geometric explanation for the lack of transversality of the
section νA with respect to the torsion sections. An abstract version of Example 0.7 involving
variations of Hodge structures of weight 1 is now the following:

2

Example 0.8. Assume the real variation of Hodge structure with underlying local system
H1,R,φA = (R1φA∗R)∗ splits as the direct sum

H1,R = L′ ⊕ L′′.

(1)

Assume that the local liftings ˜νA can be written as ˜νA = ˜ν′ + ˜ν′′, where ˜ν′ is a locally
constant section of L′ (and ˜ν′′ is a C∞ section of L′′). Then νA is not transverse to the
torsion sections (or more generally to any section of the torus ﬁbration which locally lifts to
a constant section of H1,R,φA).

It turns out that in the situation of a Lagrangian polarized ﬁbration, we can prove by
an inﬁnitesimal analysis, assuming furthermore that the dimension is ≤ 4, that a section
of Pic0(X 0/B0) with a non dense set of torsion points is necessary locally as in Example
0.8, except for one “exotic” case (see Proposition 3.2). We can then conclude by global
monodromy and transcendence arguments.

Using the local structure results for Lagrangian torus ﬁbrations that we recall in Sec-
tion 3.2, the inﬁnitesimal analysis amounts to analyzing the 2n-uples (ai) appearing in the
equation (see (41))

df = X

aidfi,

i

(2)

where f1, . . . , f2n are 2n holomorphic functions on an open set U of Cn, such that the
Re fi give local real coordinates, f is holomorphic, the ai’s are real analytic functions and
satisfying the degeneracy condition that the map a· : U → R2n is nowhere of maximal
rank. This is a sort of complexiﬁed degenerate Monge-Amp`ere equation [14] (in fact, the
real part of (2) is a degenerate Monge-Amp`ere equation in the coordinates xi = Re fi) and
the analysis is done in Section 3.3, the solutions being classiﬁed only when n = 2.

Let us explain one consequence of Theorem 0.2 which was our motivation for this work.
Following the discovery made in [3] that a projective K3 surface S has a canonical 0-cycle oS
with the property that for any two divisors D, D′ on S, the intersection D · D′ is a multiple
of oS in CH0(S), Beauville conjectured the following:

Conjecture 0.9. (See [2]). Let X be a projective hyper-K¨ahler manifold. Then the coho-
mological cycle class restricted to the subalgebra of CH(X)Q generated by divisor classes is
injective.

This conjecture has been proved in [22] for varieties of the form S[n], where S is a
K3 surface and n ≤ 2b2(S)tr + 4, and in [8] for generalized Kummer varieties. It is also
proved in [22] for Fano varieties of lines of cubic fourfolds, which are well-known to be
irreducible hyper-K¨ahler fourfolds of K3[2] deformation type (see [1]). Finally, Conjecture
0.9 is proved by Riess [16] in the case of irreducible hyper-K¨ahler varieties of K3[n] or
generalized Kummer deformation type admitting a Lagrangian ﬁbration. Here the condition
that X is a deformation of a punctual Hilbert scheme of a K3 surface guarantees, according
to [20], that X satisﬁes the conjecture that any nef line bundle L on X which is isotropic for
the Beauville-Bogomolov quadratic form is the pull-back of a Q-line bundle on the basis B
of a Lagrangian ﬁbration on X. Note that, according to [4], the set of polynomial relations
between degree 2 cohomology classes on an irreducible hyper-K¨ahler 2n-fold X is generated
as an ideal of Sym H 2(X, R) by the relations

αn+1 = 0 in H 2n+2(X, R) if q(α) = 0.

This remains in fact true with Q-coeﬃcients if b2(X) ≥ 5 since then the quadric q = 0
has Zariski dense rational points. For the same reason, the cohomological relations between
divisor classes d ∈ NS(X)R ⊂ H 2(X, R) are generated by the relations

dn+1 = 0 in H 2n+2(X, R) if q(d) = 0,

(3)

3

and if ρ(X) ≥ 5, the same statement holds with Q-coeﬃcients. If furthermore X admits a
Lagrangian ﬁbration φ : X → B, there is a nonzero class l ∈ NS(X) which satisﬁes q(l) = 0,
namely l = c1(L), where L generate φ∗Pic B, so the quadric Q deﬁned by q in NS(X) has a
Zariski dense set of rational points and then the condition ρ(X) ≥ 5 is not needed anymore
to conclude that the cohomological relations between divisor classes d ∈ NS(X) ⊂ H 2(X, Q)
are generated by the relations (3).

If X is any projective hyper-K¨ahler manifold, let l ∈ H 2(X, R) be such that q(l) = 0.
Observe now that by diﬀerentiation of (3) along the tangent space to Q at l, namely l⊥q,
one gets the relations

lnh = 0 in H 2n+2(X, R) if q(l) = 0 and q(l, h) = 0.

(4)

One immediate consequence of Theorem 0.2 is the following result, proving that if l comes
from a Lagrangian ﬁbration and the dimension is 4, then (4) already holds in CH(X)Q. Let
φ : X → B be a Lagrangian ﬁbration on a projective irreducible hyper-K¨ahler fourfold and
let L generate φ∗Pic B.

Theorem 0.10. With the notation as above, let furthermore D ∈ Pic X satisfy the property
that L2 · D is cohomologous to 0 on X. Assume that a very general projective deformation of
X preserving the Lagrangian ﬁbration and the line bundle D satisﬁes Matsushita conjecture.
(This is satisﬁed for instance if b2(X) ≥ 8 by [11].) Then L2 · D = 0 in CH3(X)Q.

We refer to [12] for further applications of Theorem 0.10 to Conjecture 0.9. The paper
is organized as follows. In the very short section 1, we will show how Theorem 0.10 follows
from Theorem 0.2. We will prove Theorem 0.5 in Section 2. The proof of Theorem 0.2 will
be given in Section 3 in the non-isotrivial case and in Section 4 in the isotrivial case.

Thanks.

I thank Joseph Landsberg, Radu Laza and Fedor Zak for interesting and
helpful discussions related to Lemma 3.16. I also thank S´ebastien Boucksom and Jean-Pierre
Demailly for their help with references on the degenerate real Monge-Amp`ere equation.

1 Proof of Theorem 0.10

We prove in this section Theorem 0.10 assuming Theorem 0.2. Let φ : X → B be as
in the introduction, with dim X = 4 and let L generate φ∗Pic B (see [17]). We want to
prove that for any line bundle D on X such that D · L2 is cohomologous to 0 on X, then
D · L2 is rationally equivalent to 0 on X modulo torsion. Let us introduce a universal family
X → T of deformations of X preserving the line bundles L, D and an ample line bundle
on X. The very general ﬁber Xt of this family is projective and admits the deformed line
bundles Dt and Lt. It also admits a Lagrangian ﬁbration associated to Lt. The condition
that Dt · L2
t is rationally equivalent to 0 on Xt modulo torsion is satisﬁed on a countable
union of closed algebraic subsets of T , so if we prove it is satisﬁed at the very general point
t ∈ T , it will be also satisﬁed for any t ∈ T , hence for X. By assumption, the very general
deformation (Xt, φt, Lt, Dt) satisﬁes Matsushita’s conjecture, so we can apply Theorem 0.2.
It thus suﬃces to prove the result when (X, φ, D) satisﬁes the conclusion of Theorem 0.2,
which we assume from now on.

In the Chow ring CH(X)Q, the ﬁbers Xb, for b ∈ B0 are all rationally equivalent (if B
is smooth, then B ∼= Pn by [10], so this is obvious; if B is not smooth, we refer to [12] for a
proof of this statement). It follows that we have

L2 = µXb in CH2(X)Q,

(5)

for some nonzero µ ∈ Z. Let b ∈ B be a general point. The kernel of the map

[Xb]∪ =

1
µ

c1(L)2∪ : H 2(X, Q) → H 6(X, Q)

4

is equal to the kernel of the restriction map H 2(X, Q) → H 2(Xb, Q). This is a general fact
proved in [23]:

Lemma 1.1. (See [23]) Let j : Y → W be a generically ﬁnite morphism, where Y and
W are smooth projective varieties (in particular connected), and let dim W − dim Y = k,
dim W = m. Let α := j∗[Y ]f und ∈ H 2k(W, Q). Then the two Q-vector subspaces

K1 := Ker (j∗ : H 2(W, Q) → H 2(Y, Q)), K2 := Ker (α∪ : H 2(W, Q) → H 2k+2(W, Q))

of H 2(W, Q) are equal.

In our case, this also follows directly from Proposition 0.1. Indeed, the later is clearly
included in the former, and in the other direction, if [Xb] ∪ D is cohomologous to 0 in X,
D|Xb cannot be ample, hence it must have trivial ﬁrst Chern class by Proposition 0.1. Let
now D ∈ Pic X such that D · L2 is cohomologous to 0. Then c1(D) ∪ [Xb] = 0 by (5), and
thus c1(D)|Xb = 0 in H 2(Xb, Q), hence also in H 2(Xb, Z). As we assumed that (X, φ, D)
satisﬁes the conclusion of Theorem 0.2, there exist points in B0 such that D|Xb is a torsion
point in Pic0(Xb), so that D · Xb is a torsion cycle in CH3(X). This implies by (5) that
H · L2 vanishes in CH3(X)Q.

2 Proof of Theorem 0.5

We will use the same notation φ : X 0 → B for the restriction to B0 of the elliptic ﬁbration
φ : X → B. The associated Jacobian ﬁbration J → B0 is a complex manifold which is a
ﬁbration into complex tori, and its sheaf of holomorphic sections J is described in complex
analytic terms as the quotient

J = R1φ∗OX 0 /R1φ∗Z = R1φ∗C ⊗ OB/(H1,0 ⊕ R1φ∗Z),

(6)

where H1,0 = R0φ∗ΩX 0/B0. Formula (6) describes J as a holomorphic torus ﬁbration but
as a Cω real torus ﬁbration, the right formula is

JR = H1

B0,R

R/R1φ∗Z, H1

R := R1φ∗R ⊗ Cω

which uses the natural ﬁberwise isomorphisms

H 1(Xb, R) ∼= H 1(Xb, C)/H 1,0(Xb) ∼= H 1(Xb, OXb )

globalizing into the Cω

B0,R sheaf isomorphism

H1
R

∼= R1φ∗OX 0 ⊗OB Cω

B0,R

∼= H0,1 ⊗OB Cω

B0,R,

where

H0,1 := R1φ∗OX 0 = (R1φ∗C ⊗C OB0 )/H1,0.

(7)

(8)

(9)

Trivializing the locally constant sheaves R1φ∗Z, R1φ∗R on simply connected open sets U ⊂
B, (7) is the counterpart at the level of sheaves of sections of a local real analytic trivialization

JU = U × (H 1(X0, Z) ⊗ R/Z),

(10)

where 0 is a given point of U . Let now ν be a holomorphic section of J over U . Using the
trivializations (10), the section ν gives a diﬀerentiable (in fact real analytic) map

fν : U → H 1(X0, Z) ⊗ R/Z = J(X0),

and we will use the following easy criterion:

5

Proposition 2.1. (i) For a section ν of a torus ﬁbration with local associated map fν as
above, the points x of U where ν(x) is of torsion are dense in U for the usual topology if the
diﬀerential dfν is surjective at some point b ∈ U .

(ii) In the situation of an elliptic ﬁbration over a 1-dimensional base, the diﬀerential dfν

is surjective if and only if it is nonzero.

Proof. (i) Observe ﬁrst that fν being real analytic, if its diﬀerential is surjective at some
point b ∈ U , it is surjective on a dense set of points of U , hence it suﬃces to prove density
near a point b where the diﬀerential dfν,b is surjective. If the diﬀerential dfν,b is surjective,
fν is an open map in a neighborhood Ub of b. As the torsion points are dense in J(Xb0 ),
their preimages under fν are then dense in Ub.

(ii) This is a consequence of the following fact:

Lemma 2.2. The kernel of the diﬀerential dfν,b : TU,b → TJ(Xb) is a complex vector subspace
of TU,b.

Proof. Let us prove more generally that the ﬁbers of fν are analytic subschemes of U . Let
α ∈ J(X0) = H 1(X0, R)/H 1(X0, Z) and let ˜α ∈ H 1(X0, R) be a lifting of α (such a lift is
deﬁned up to the addition of an element β of H 1(X0, R)). The class ˜α extends as a constant
section also denoted ˜α of the sheaf R1φ∗R on U , which induces a holomorphic section ˜α0,1
of the sheaf H0,1 = R1φ0
∗OX 0 on U . On the other hand, the holomorphic section ν of J lifts
to a holomorphic section η of H0,1 and it is clear that

ν (α) = {b ∈ U, ˜α0,1
f −1

b = ηb in H0,1(Xb)/H 1(Xb, Z)}.

It follows that f −1
deﬁned as zero sets of the holomorphic sections

ν (α) is the countable locally ﬁnite union of the closed analytic subsets

of the bundle H0,1, over all sections β of H 1

Z on U .

˜α0,1 − η − β0,1 ∈ Γ(U, H0,1)

In the situation of (ii), the base U and the ﬁber J(X0) are both of real dimension 2 and
Lemma 2.2 implies that the kernel of dfν,b is of real dimension 0 or 2. So either dfν,b = 0 or
dfν,b is surjective.

Proof of Theorem 0.5. Let φ : X 0 → B0 be our elliptic ﬁbration and ν a section of J(X 0/B).
Assume that the points of B where ν is a torsion point are not dense for the usual topology
of B. Then by Proposition 2.1, it follows that dfν vanishes everywhere on any open set U of
B0 where it is deﬁned. Coming back to the sheaf theoretic language, this means equivalently
that ν, seen as a section of H1
Z via the isomorphism (7), is locally constant, or that our
section ν ∈ Γ(B0, H0,1/H 1
Z). Note
that, by assumption, ˜ν is not of torsion and thus, ﬁxing a base point 0 ∈ B, corresponds
to an element α0 ∈ H 1(X0, R) which is not rational but has the property that for any
γ ∈ π1(B0, 0),

Z) comes from a locally constant section ˜ν ∈ Γ(B0, H 1

R/H 1

R/H 1

ρ(γ)(α0) − α0 ∈ H 1(X0, Z),

(11)

where ρ : π1(B0, 0) → Aut H 1(X0, Z) denotes the monodromy representation of the smooth
ﬁbration φ : X 0 → B0. We use the following easy lemma.

Lemma 2.3. Let ρ : Γ → Aut VQ be a ﬁnite dimensional rational representation of a group
Γ. Then if the invariant space V inv

is trivial, the set

Q

{v ∈ VR, ρ(γ)(v) − v ∈ VQ for any γ ∈ Γ, }

is equal to VQ.

6

As the monodromy representation is rational, this lemma tells us that the set of classes

α ∈ H 1(X0, R) satisfying property (11) contains a nonrational class if and only if the set

H 1(X0, Q)inv := {α ∈ H 1(X0, Q), ρ(γ)(α) − α = 0, ∀γ ∈ π1(B0, 0)}

of monodromy invariant elements is nontrivial. By Deligne’s invariant cycles theorem [5], it
then follows from the existence of α0 that the restriction map

H 1(X, Q) → H 1(X0, Q)

is nontrivial, hence surjective since this a morphism of Hodge structures of weight 1 and
the right hand side has dimension 2. The conclusion that X is rationally isogenous to
J(X0) × B is then immediate since X is rationally isogenous to a projective completion of
the Jacobian ﬁbration J(X 0/B0) and the later is isogenous to J(X0) × B0 if the restriction
map H 1(X, Q) → H 1(X0, Q) is surjective.

3 Proof of Theorem 0.2 in the non-isotrivial case

3.1 First reduction

Let φ : X → B be a Lagrangian ﬁbration, where X is a projective irreducible hyper-K¨ahler
manifold of dimension 2n, and let B0 ⊂ X 0 be the Zariski open set of regular values of φ.
Denote by σ the holomorphic 2-form on X and by ω the ﬁrst Chern class of an ample line
bundle H on X. Let α be the type of the polarization H|Xb . We assume in this section
that the ﬁrst alternative in Matsushita’s conjecture is satisﬁed, that is, the period map
B0 → An,α is generically of maximal rank n = dim B and we are going to prove Theorem
0.2 in this case.

Over B0, the ﬁbration φ : X 0 → B0 is a ﬁbration into abelian varieties or rather a torsor
on the corresponding Albanese ﬁbration Alb(X 0/B0), which admits a multisection Z → B0
of degree d. Using these data, X 0 → B0 is isogenous to the associated Albanese ﬁbration
Alb(X 0/B0) via the map

iZ : X 0 → Alb(X 0/B0)

deﬁned by iZ (u) = albXb (d{u} − Zb), b = φ(u). Here the notation {u} is used to denote u
as a 0-cycle in the ﬁber Xb (in order to avoid the confusion between addition of cycles and
addition of points), so d{u} − Zb should be thought as a 0-cycle of degree 0 on Xb, giving
rise to an element albXb (d{u} − Zb) ∈ Alb(Xb). Next, using the polarisation H, the abelian
ﬁbration Alb(X 0/B0) and its dual ﬁbration Pic0(X 0/B0) are isogenous, the isogeny

iH : Alb(X 0/B0) → Pic0(X 0/B0)

(12)

being given by

iH(b, vb) = t∗

vb(H|Xb ) − H|Xb

for any b ∈ B0, vb ∈ Alb(Xb). Here the translation tvb acts on Xb. The isogeny (12) also
gives a dual isogeny

H : Pic0(X 0/B0) → Alb(X 0/B0).
i∗

(13)

M = i∗

An element νM of the Mordell-Weil group of X over B, that is a section of Pic0(X 0/B0),
H ◦ νM of Alb(X 0/B0) and the torsion points of νM and ν′
thus gives a section ν′
M
coincide. From now on we work with the section ν′
M . Note now that the (2, 0)-form σ on
X is the pull-back of a (2, 0)-form σA on Alb(X 0/B0) via the rational map iZ : X 99K
Alb(X 0/B0). This indeed follows easily from Mumford’s theorem [13], since for any two
points x, y of X 0 such that iZ(x) = iZ(y) the diﬀerence albXb ({x} − {y}) is a torsion point
in Alb (Xb), b = φ(x) = φ(y), hence the cycle {x} − {y} is a torsion cycle in CH0(Xb) and a
fortiori in CH0(X) (in fact it has to vanish in CH0(X) since the later group has no torsion).

7

By the above arguments, we reduced the situation to a polarized Lagrangian torus ﬁbration
ψ : A → B0 over B0 with a section ν (that is, we do not have to care anymore to the fact
that we have a nontrivial torsor).

Our analysis of the properties of the holomorphic section ν of the torus ﬁbration will
be inﬁnitesimal hence local, but we want ﬁrst to add one restriction which is global: Let
φ : X → B be a projective irreducible hyper-K¨ahler manifold with a Lagrangian ﬁbration
and let ν : B0 → A = Alb(X 0/B0) be the section associated as above to a section νM of
Pic(X 0/B0), where M is a line bundle on X which is topologically trivial on the ﬁbers.

Lemma 3.1. The section ν is Lagrangian for the holomorphic 2-form σA.
Proof. Let eB be a desingularization of B. Then H 0( eB, Ω2
2-form on eB would provide by pull-back via the rational map φ : X 99K eB a nonzero
holomorphic form on X which is not proportional to σ. So we just have to prove that ν∗(σA)
(which is a priori only deﬁned as a holomorphic 2-form on B0) extends to a holomorphic
2-form on eB. However, we can provide another construction of ν∗(σA) which will make clear
that it extends to eB: the subvariety Γ := i−1
Z (Im ν) is algebraic in X 0 and it is a multisection
of φ over B0. Its Zariski closure in eB × X will provide a correspondence Γ ⊂ eB × X. Then
as σ = i∗

) = 0 since a nonzero holomorphic

ZσA on X 0, we get that

eB

∗

Γ

σ = N ν∗(σA)

(14)

on B0, where N is the degree of iZ. This gives the desired extension of ν∗(σA).

The local part of the proof of Theorem 0.2 is the following result:

Proposition 3.2. Let (φ : A → U , σA ∈ H 0(Ω2
A), ω) be a polarized holomorphic Lagrangian
torus ﬁbration over a connected complex manifold U and ν be a holomorphic section of A
such that ν∗σA = 0. Assume the period map is generically of maximal rank on U . Then if
the torsion points of ν are not dense in B0 for the usual topology, one of the following three
situations holds:

(0’) The section ν ∈ Γ(U, H0,1/H 1

Z) admits a locally constant complex lift ˜ν ∈ H 1

C (which

is unique up to a section of H 1

Z under our assumptions).

of U is semi-algebraic (that is, an open set in an algebraic subvariety) and has an explicit

(1) The image of the period map P : eU → Grass(2, 4), where eU is the universal cover
description starting from a monodromy invariant identiﬁcation of eU with an open set in a
linear projection of the Veronese surface v2(P2) ⊂ P5 in P4.

(2) The local system

H1,R,A := (R1φ∗R)∗

admits a nontrivial local subsystem L which underlies a real subvariation of Hodge structures.
Furthermore, writing the real lift (see Section 1) of the section ν as a sum ˜νL + ˜νL⊥, where
L⊥ is the orthogonal variation of Hodge structures with respect to ω, then ˜νL is a locally
constant section of L.

Note that the proof of the local version of Proposition 3.2 (Proposition 3.8) will explain
better how the isomorphism in (2) is constructed using the periods. The proof of Theorem
0.2 will consist in excluding by global arguments possibilities (1), (2), (3) above, when our
Lagrangian torus ﬁbration comes from a hyper-K¨ahler fourfold.

3.2 Local structure results

In order to prepare the proof of Proposition 3.2, we recall in this section, following [6], the
local data determining a holomorphic Lagrangian polarized torus ﬁbration. We will also
add the data of our normal function (that is, holomorphic section of our torus ﬁbration)
satisfying the condition of Lemma 3.1. The holomorphic torus ﬁbration φ : A → U is

8

determined by a weight 1 (or rather −1) variation of Hodge structure, that is the data of a
local system H1,Z = (R1φ∗Z)∗ and a holomorphic subbundle

H1,0 ⊂ H1 := H1,Z ⊗ OU

determining a weight 1 Hodge structure at any point of U . The sheaf A of holomorphic
sections of A identiﬁes to

The holomorphic 2-form σA on A for which the ﬁbration φ : A → U is a Lagrangian

H0,1/H1,Z, H0,1 := H1/H1,0.

(15)

ﬁbration provides an isomorphism of vector bundles
TU ∼= R0φ∗ΩA/U ,

(16)

which by dualization provides an isomorphism (which is canonical, given the choice of σA)

H0,1 ∼= ΩU .

(17)

Using the isomorphism of (17), the surjective map of holomorphic vector bundles

H1 → H0,1

is thus given, on any simply connected open set U ′ where the ﬂat vector bundle H1 is
trivialized, by the evaluation morphism of 2n holomorphic 1-forms αi on U ′, which must
have the property that their real parts Re αi form a basis of ΩU ′,R at any point. We have
(see [6]):
Lemma 3.3. The forms αi are closed on U ′, hence we have, up to shrinking our local open
set U ′ if necessary, αi = dfi, where the fi’s are holomorphic and deﬁned up to a constant.

Proof. The proof will use a diﬀerent description of the forms αi. For any locally constant
section γ of H1,C, we get using the closed 2-form σA a closed 1-form φ∗(hγ, σAi) on U ′
(when γ is a section of H1,Z, γ is a combination of classes γi of oriented circle bundles
Γi ⊂ A, and φ∗(hγi, σAi) is deﬁned as (φ|Γi )∗(σA|Γi )). We conclude observing that for any
locally constant section γ of H1,C on an open set U ′ of U , with induced section γ0,1 of H0,1,
providing a holomorphic form αγ via the isomorphism (17), we have

thus proving that the forms αi are closed.

αγ = φ∗(hγ, σAi) in Γ(U ′, ΩU ′ ),

If we now choose the αi to form a basis of H1,R, the corresponding 2n holomorphic 1-
forms on U ′ have the properties that at any point b ∈ U ′, the forms αi,b are independent
over R. Another way to say it is that the functions Re fi give local real coordinates on U ′.

Remark 3.4. By deﬁnition, the functions Re fi, which are deﬁned up to a constant and
depend only on the choice of σA and of local basis αi of H1,R, provide a local real analytic
identiﬁcation

U ∼= H 1(Ab0 , R).

(18)

Globally, they provide an aﬃne ﬂat structure on U .

The last piece of information we need concerning the torus ﬁbration φ : A → U is the
polarization ω on the ﬁbers. It is given by a monodromy invariant skew-symmetric pairing
h , i on H1,R (we do not need here the fact that the polarization is integral), which has to
polarize the Hodge structure at any point, so that for any b ∈ U

h , i = 0 on H1,0,b ⊂ H1,C,b
ihα, αi > 0, ∀0 6= α ∈ H1,0,b.

(19)

This is as well a nondegenerate skew-symmetric form ω ∈ V2 H 1(Ab0 , R) which produces via
the diﬀeomorphism (18) a closed 2-form ω∗ on the open set U of the trivialization introduced
above. The 2-form ω∗ is constant in the aﬃne coordinates introduced above.

9

Lemma 3.5. The Hodge-Riemann bilinear relations (19) satisﬁed by h , i and the Hodge
structure on H1(Ab, R) at any point b ∈ U are equivalent to the fact that ω∗ is a K¨ahler
form on U .

Proof. The statement is local. Recall that by construction the holomorphic functions fi on
U ′ are chosen in such a way that the evaluation map

ev : C2n ⊗ OU ′ → ΩU ′
ei 7→ dfi

(20)

identiﬁes to the variation of Hodge structure of weight 1 of our torus ﬁbration, determined
by the quotient map

H1,C ⊗ OU → H0,1 → 0.

(21)

i ∧ α∗

Assume our chosen basis αi of H1(Ab, R) is a symplectic basis in the sense that the 2-form
n+i. The 2-form ω∗ on U ′ is then the form P1≤i≤n dxi ∧ dxi+n,
ω is equal to P1≤i≤n α∗
where xi := Re fi. The dfi’s, for 1 ≤ i ≤ n, have to generate ΩU ′,b for any b ∈ U ′, or
equivalently the αi’s, for 1 ≤ i ≤ n have to generate H0,1,b. Indeed, there exists otherwise
a nonzero element u ∈ H1,0,b which is a complex linear combination of the αi for 1 ≤ i ≤ n.
Then u is also a complex linear combination of the αi for 1 ≤ i ≤ n, and thus hu, ui = 0,
which contradicts the Hodge-Riemann bilinear relations (19). This fact allows us to write
for i > n

dfi+n = X

1≤j≤n

gjidfj in Γ(U ′, ΩU ′ ),

(22)

where the matrix gji is holomorphic on U ′. A basis of

is then given by the sections

H1,0 = Ker (H1,R ⊗ OU ′ → H0,1

βi := αi+n − X

1≤j≤n

gjiαj, i ≤ n.

The ﬁrst Hodge-Riemann bilinear relations say that hβi, βli = 0 for any i, l ≤ n, which says
equivalently that the matrix gil is symmetric. The second Hodge-Riemann bilinear relations
say similarly that the matrix Im gij is positive deﬁnite. Let us now compute ω∗: Recalling
that dxi = Re dfi, we have dxi = 1

2 (dfi + df i) and

ω∗ =

(dfi + df i) ∧ (dfi+n + df i+n).

1

4 X

1≤i≤n

Using (22), formula (23) becomes

ω∗ =

1

4 X

1≤i≤n,1≤j≤n

(dfi + df i) ∧ (gjidfj + gijdf j).

(23)

(24)

The symmetry of the matrix gij then shows that in the develoment of (24), the terms
involving dfi ∧ dfj or df i ∧ df j are 0, which proves that the form ω∗ is of type (1, 1). Finally,
the fact that Im gij is positive deﬁnite translates into the condition that ω∗ is a positive
(1, 1)-form on U ′.

Coming back to our Lagrangian torus ﬁbration A → U , we now add to the data described
above the normal function ν : U → A, which satisﬁes the property that ν∗σA = 0. This
normal function ν ∈ Γ(U, A) = Γ(U, H0,1/H1,Z) lifts locally to a section ˜ν of H0,1 ∼= ΩU ,
hence provides locally a holomorphic 1-form α on U .

10

Lemma 3.6. The form α is closed.

Proof. It is a general fact of the theory of integrable systems (see [6]) that the isomorphism
(17) is also constructed in such a way that the pull-back ˜σA of the holomorphic 2-form
σA to the total space of the bundle H0,1 identiﬁes with the canonical 2-form σcan on the
cotangent bundle ΩU , which has the property that for any holomorphic 1-form β on U , seen
as a section of ΩU , one has

dβ = β∗(σcan).

(25)

As the section ˜ν corresponds via this isomorphism to the 1-form α, the assumption that
ν∗(σA) = 0 says equivalently that

0 = ˜ν∗(˜σA) = α∗(σcan) = dα.

The closed holomorphic 1-form α thus provides us on simply connected open sets U ′ of

U with a holomorphic function f such that df = α.

Remark 3.7. From now on, the holomorphic 2-form on our Lagrangian ﬁbration will dis-
appear. It is hidden in the fact that we work with the cotangent bundle of the base, which
has a canonical holomorphic 2-form.

3.3 Proof of Proposition 3.2

The proof of Proposition 3.2 will be based on the following Proposition 3.8 that we ﬁrst
explain. We are in the local setting where the holomorphic functions fi, f constructed
in the previous section exist. Let thus V be a complex manifold, and let f1, . . . , f2n be
holomorphic functions on V such that the functions xi := Re fi provide real coordinates on
V , giving rise to a real variation of Hodge structures

R2n ⊗R OV

ev→ ΩV → 0,
ei 7→ dfi

(26)

with underlying local system R2n = TV,R and Hodge bundles H1,0 = Ker ev, H0,1 = ΩV .
Assume the variation of Hodge structure is polarized by the standard symplectic form ω on
R2n. Let f be a holomorphic function on V ; as the dfi’s are independent over R in ΩV,b at
any point b ∈ V , we can write

df = X

aidfi,

i

(27)

where the ai’s are real Cω functions on V , uniquely determined by (27).

Proposition 3.8. In the above setting, assume furthermore that n = 2 and the map TV →
Hom (H1,0, H0,1) describing the inﬁnitesimal variation of Hodge structure is injective. Let
V 0 be a connected open subset of V where the map

a· := (a1, . . . , a4) : V → R4

(28)

has constant rank r. Let Σ := Im a·, which is a submanifold of R4. Then r is even, r = 4−2k
and if r is not maximal, that is k > 0, either :

(0) k = 2 and then df is a combination of the dfi with real constant coeﬃcients, or;
(0’) df is a combination of the dfi with complex constant coeﬃcients, or;
(1) The image of V 0 in C5 via the map (f, f1, . . . , f4) is an open set of a complete

embedding of the Veronese surface v2(P2) ⊂ P5, or;

(2) The following three properties hold locally on V 0, modulo the action of Sp(2n, R)

acting on coordinates xi:

11

(i) With respect to the real aﬃne structure on V given by the coordinates xi = Re fi, the

ﬁbers Fσ are open sets in translates of a ﬁxed R2 ⊂ R4.

(ii) The constant system T given by this R2 ⊂ R4 is a subvariation of Hodge structure,
and its orthogonal complement is a subvariation of Hodge structure which is constant along
the ﬁbers of a·. In this case, Σ has a holomorphic structure and a· : V → Σ is holomorphic.
(iii) In the decomposition R4 = T ⊕ T ⊥, the diﬀerential df is a sum df = η1 + η2, where

η1 is constant, and η2 is holomorphic and pulled-back from Σ.
Remark 3.9. In the coordinates xi above, the subspace T of R4 is equal to the tangent
space to the ﬁbers of the map a· at any point of V 0.

Remark 3.10. Thinking in terms of the real variation of Hodge structures (26) via the
construction described in Subsection 3.2, the situation (2) can be equivalently rephrased in
the following form: there is a splitting

H = R4 = L′ ⊕ L′′, L′ = T, L′′ = T ⊥

which is orthogonal with respect to ω and is also a splitting as real variations of Hodge
structures, such that the section ˜ν = df of ΩV = H0,1 is a sum

˜ν = ˜ν1 + ˜ν2

where ν1 is the projection to L′
situation described in Example 0.8.

0,1 of a real constant section of L′. This is exactly the

The proof of Proposition 3.8 will use a sequence of lemmas which hold in the general case
where the dimension is 2n. We have a complex manifold V 0 of dimension n equipped with
holomorphic functions f1, . . . , f2n whose diﬀerentials generate ΩV 0,u over R at any point
u ∈ V 0. Denoting xi := Re fi, the xi’s thus provide locally real coordinates on V 0 and we
assume that the standard symplectic form on R2n is K¨ahler on V 0.

Furthermore we are given a holomorphic function f on V 0, and we write the equality

df = X

aidfi

i

(29)

of Cω forms of type (1, 0) on V 0, where the ai’s are real analytic.

Note that (29) is obviously equivalent, since the ai’s are real and the considered forms

are of type (1, 0), to the equality of real 1-forms:

d(Re f ) = X

aidxi.

i

(30)

We assume that the map a· = (a1, . . . , a2n) : V 0 → R2n is of constant rank 2n − 2k (the
rank is even by Lemma 2.2).

Lemma 3.11. The ﬁbers of a· are aﬃne in the coordinates xi.
Proof. As the map a· has locally constant rank near b ∈ V 0, it factors through a submersion
V 0 → Σ and an immersion Σ ֒→ R2n, where Σ is real manifold of dimension 2n − 2k.
Equation (30) says equivalently that for ﬁxed σ = (λ1, . . . , λ2n) ∈ Σ, the function Re f −
Pi λixi has vanishing diﬀerential on V 0 at any point of the ﬁber V 0
(λ1, . . . , λ2n).
The function Re f − Pi aixi on V 0 is thus the pull-back a∗
· ψ of a function ψ on Σ, that is

σ = a−1

·

Re f − X

aixi − a∗

· ψ = 0

(31)

on V 0. If u = (u1, . . . , u2n) ∈ TΣ,σ, we get for any b ∈ V 0
v ∈ TV 0,b such that a·∗(v) = u and applying (30)

σ , by diﬀerentiating (31) along any

i

0 = −X

i

uixi − dψ(u),

12

which says that the function Pi uixi is constant along the ﬁber V 0
real equations aﬃne in the xi’s vanishing along V 0
real submanifold of V of codimension 2n − 2k.

σ and they deﬁne V 0

σ . This provides 2n − 2k
σ is a

σ in V 0 since V 0

The following lemma was partially proved in the proof of Lemma 2.2.

σ is a complex submanifold of V 0, along which the functions

Lemma 3.12. The ﬁber V 0
Pi uifi are constant, for any u· ∈ TΣ,σ.
Proof. The fact that the functions Pi uifi are constant along V 0
exactly as the previous lemma, replacing (30) by (29). This implies that V 0
submanifold of V 0 since the real parts of these functions deﬁne V 0
V 0 by Lemma 3.11.

σ for any u· ∈ TΣ,σ is proved
σ is a complex
σ as a real submanifold of

The point σ ∈ Σ being ﬁxed, we now choose the aﬃne coordinates xi in such a way that
1) The ﬁber V 0
2) dx1, . . . , dx2k and dx2k+1, . . . , dx2n generate two orthogonal subspaces of ΩV 0,R for
the standard symplectic form ω∗. This is possible since the form ω∗, being K¨ahler, remains
nondegenerate after restriction to V 0
σ .

σ is deﬁned by the equations xi = cst for i > 2k.

Lemma 3.13. Along V 0

σ , one has

dfj = X

l>2k

bljdxl for j > 2k,

(32)

for C∞ complex valued functions blj, l > 2k, j > 2k, and the rank of the evaluation map

ev2k+1,...,2n : C2n−2k ⊗ OV 0

σ → ΩV 0|V 0

σ , ei 7→ dfi, i = 2k + 1, . . . , 2n

is equal to n − k. Similarly

dfj = X

l≤2k

bljdxl for j ≤ 2k.

(33)

for C∞ complex valued functions blj, l ≤ 2k, j ≤ 2k, and the rank of the evaluation map
ev1,...,2k : C2k ⊗ OV 0

σ is equal to k.

σ → ΩV 0|V 0

Remark 3.14. Using the construction described in Section 3.2, we can restate this decom-
position saying that, along the ﬁber V 0
σ , the real variation of Hodge structure given by the
evaluation map of the dfi’s splits as the orthogonal sum of two real variations of Hodge
structure.

Proof of Lemma 3.13. As V 0
σ is deﬁned by the equations xi = cst for i > 2k, and the fi’s
for i > 2k are constant along V 0
σ , the dfi’s for i > 2k must be combinations of the dxi for
i > 2k, which proves (32). The fact that the evaluation map ev2k+1,...,2n has rank n − k is
obvious since its image is the conormal bundle of the complex submanifold V 0
σ . We use now
the fact that ω∗ is K¨ahler on U . As the real subspace generated by the dxi’s for i > 2k is
a complex subspace of ΩV 0,R at any point of V 0
σ , so is its orthogonal complement, which is
generated by the dxi’s for i ≤ 2k. The R-linear map

Ω1,0

V 0 → ΩV 0,R, η 7→ Re η

is an isomorphism of real vector bundles which has for inverse the map η 7→ η − iI(η) where
I is the operator of complex structure acting on the bundle ΩV 0,R. As dfi is C-linear with
Re dfi = dxi, and the space generated by dxi, i ≤ 2k is a complex subspace of ΩV 0,R at any
point of V 0
σ , it is stable under I, hence we conclude that for j ≤ 2k, dfj = dxj − Iidxj is
a combination of the dxi’s for i ≤ 2k, which establishes (33). The fact that the evaluation
map ev1,...,2k has rank k follows from the fact that the restriction map ΩV 0,C|V 0
σ ,C is
injective on the space generated by the dxi’s for i ≤ 2k, and that the evaluation map ev1,...,2k
composed with the restriction map ΩV 0|V 0

σ is obviously of rank k = rank ΩV 0
σ .

σ → ΩV 0

σ → ΩV 0

13

We now assume n = 2 and prove Proposition 3.8.

Proof of Proposition 3.8. We can assume k = 1. By Lemma 3.12, the ﬁbers Fσ of the map
a· are complex submanifolds of dimension 1 of V 0 which satisfy 2 independent holomorphic
equations of the form

X

uifi = cst,

i

where u· ∈ TΣ,σ and the constant depends on σ. We now observe that if σ = (λi) ∈ R4,
we have by deﬁnition df = Pi λidfi along Fσ hence a fortiori f − Pi λifi is constant along
Fσ. This means that the curve Fσ ⊂ V ⊂ C5 satisﬁes three independent aﬃne equations
with real coeﬃcients, where the holomorphic embedding V ⊂ C5 is given by the functions
f, f1, . . . , f4.

Lemma 3.15. If neither (0’) nor (1) hold, that is, the surface V 0 ⊂ C5 is aﬃnely nonde-
generate and is not an open set in the complete embedding of the Veronese surface, there
exists a nontrivial relation Pi λidfi = 0 with constant coeﬃcients λi holding everywhere
along Fσ.

Proof. We complexify the situation and consider the complex manifold ΣC ⊂ C4 consisting
of 4-uples (λ1, . . . , λ4) such that df = Pi λidfi along a complex curve F (deforming a ﬁber
Fσ) in V . This must contains the complexiﬁcation of the real analytic surface Σ ⊂ R4.
We now argue by contradiction. Assuming that there is no nontrivial relation Pi λidfi = 0
with constant coeﬃcients λi holding everywhere along Fσ, then the curve F determines the
parameters λi and thus there is actually a 2-dimensional family of curves F . Note that by
complex analytic continuation, these curves F also satisfy 2 aﬃne equations in the fi’s, so
that they satisfy 3 aﬃne equations in f, fi. We now have the following statement:

Lemma 3.16. Let V 0 be a smooth connected complex surface in C5 which satisﬁes the
following three properties:

a) The Gauss map of V 0 is of maximal rank 2.
b) There is a 2-dimensional family Γ of curves F contained in V 0 whose aﬃne envelop

hF i has dimension 2.

c) V 0 is not contained in a proper aﬃne subspace in C5.
Then V 0 is an open set in the Veronese surface v2(P2) ⊂ P5.

Proof. As the surface V 0 satisﬁes b), there is an open subset V ′ of V 0 such that for any
x, y ∈ V ′, there exists a curve F in the family passing through x and y. But then, the aﬃne
line generated by x and y is contained in the aﬃne envelop hF i, hence is contained in the 4-
dimensional analytic subset of C5 deﬁned as ∪γ∈ΓhF i. Thus the surface V 0 has the property
that its secant variety has dimension ≤ 4. If V 0 satisﬁes a), its Gauss map has maximal
rank, hence by [9, (6.18)], it must be an open set of the Veronese variety v2(P2) ⊂ P5.

Lemma 3.16 can be applied in our case since the surface V 0 ⊂ C4 embedded by the
functions f1, . . . , f4 has Gauss map of maximal rank (using the construction of section 3.2,
this is equivalent to the assumption that the variation of Hodge structure has maximal rank),
hence so does a fortiori the surface V 0 ⊂ C5 embedded by the functions f, f1, . . . , f4. Hence
we conclude that either there is a nontrivial aﬃne relation between the functions f, fi, or
V 0 ⊂ C5 satisﬁes a), b) and c), hence is an open set in a complete Veronese embedding
v2(P2) ⊂ P5, which is property (1). In the ﬁrst case, either the relation involves f , which
means that df is a combination with constant complex coeﬃcients of the dfi, that is, we
are in the situation (0’) of Proposition 3.8, or it does not involve f and the aﬃne relation
involves the fi’s only. This however would provide a linear relation Pi λidfi = 0 with
constant complex coeﬃcients between the diﬀerentials dfi. Translated in terms of variations
of Hodge structure, this says that the constant section Pi λiei is of type (1, 0), and this

contradicts the fact that our period map has maximal rank, using the following lemma (or
rather its variation of Hodge structure translation):

14

Lemma 3.17. Let φ : A → V be a polarized Lagrangian torus ﬁbration, with V smooth and
connected. Assume that the associated period map has generically maximal rank. Then for
any open set U of V , no ﬂat section of H 1

C = R1φ∗C is of type (1, 0) on U .

Proof. Indeed, the inﬁnitesimal version of our assumption is that the map

TV,b → Hom(H 1,0(Xb), H 0,1(Xb))

is injective at a general point of B. In our situation, the existence of a Lagrangian ﬁbration
structure provides an extra duality which allows to identify this map with the map ∇b :
H 1,0(Xb) → Hom(TB,b, H 0,1(Xb). The injectivity of this last map exactly says that no
nonzero element of H 1,0(Xb) extends at ﬁrst order to a ﬂat section of H1,0 (see [24, Section
5.3]).

This concludes the proof of Lemma 3.15.

Coming back to the proof of Proposition 3.8, we conclude that if none of (0), (0’), (1)

holds, we have k = 1 and there exists a nontrivial relation Pi λidfi = 0 with constant
coeﬃcients λi holding everywhere along Fσ. We are now in case in (2) and prove (i), (ii)
and (iii). We now by Lemma 3.11 that the ﬁber Fσ is aﬃne, thus deﬁned by two aﬃne
equations which after a real change of variables fi can be assumed to be x3 = cst, x4 = cst,
xi = Re fi, and by Lemma 3.12, the two corresponding holomorphic functions f3, f4 are
constant along Fσ. We now apply Lemma 3.13. Choosing aﬃne coordinates xi on V in such
a way that ω∗ = dx1 ∧ dx2 + dx3 ∧ dx4, we get that along Fσ, df1, df2 are combinations of
dx1, dx2 and df3, df4 are combinations of dx3, dx4. It follows that we have along Fσ

df1 = hdf2, df3 = kdf4,

(34)

where h, k are holomorphic functions on Fσ and the equality holds in Γ(Fσ, ΩV |Fσ ). On the
other hand, we know that there exists along Fσ a linear relation with constant coeﬃcients
involving the dfi. As df1, df2 lie in T ∗ ⊗ C and df3, df4 belong to (T ⊥)∗ ⊗ C this is possible
only if either h is constant or k is constant along Fσ.

Lemma 3.18. The case df1 = hdf2 with h constant along Fσ is not possible.

Proof. If we have this extra relation, then we have an extra aﬃne equation f1 − hf2 = Cst
along Fσ, which means that via the embedding V → C4 given by f1, . . . , f4, the ﬁbers Fσ
are mapped to lines in C4. The family of lines Fσ is then a 1-parameter holomorphic family
(Ft)t∈C of (open sets in) lines in V 0 ⊂ C4. Let s denote a local holomorphic coordinate on
C, and let t be a linear function on C4, which restricts to a coordinate on the general line
Ft. The surface V 0 ⊂ C4 is then parameterized by (s, t), with a parameterization which
takes the form:

f·(s, t) = α·(s) + tβ·(s),

(35)

with f· = (f1, . . . , f4) and similarly for α· and β·. We now have the function f which is
aﬃne linear along the ﬁbers Fσ, hence writes

We get from (35) and (36)

f = f0(s) + tf1(s).

dfi = ( ˙αi(s) + t ˙βi(s))ds + βi(s)dt, df = ( ˙f0(s) + t ˙f1(s))ds + f1(s)dt.

We write now

df = X

i

λi(s)dfi

15

(36)

(37)

(38)

where the λi’s are real functions and hence uniquely deﬁned by (38), and depend only on s.
We then get:

˙f0(s) + t ˙f1(s) = X

i

λi(s)( ˙αi(s) + t ˙βi(s)),
f1(s) = X

λi(s)βi(s),

(39)

which also provides

i

˙f0(s) = X

i

λi(s) ˙αi(s),

˙f1(s) = X
f1(s) = X

i

i

λi(s) ˙βi(s),

λi(s)βi(s).

We now observe that the left hand side in each of the equations in (40) is a holomorphic
function of s, as are the functions ˙αi(s),
∂s to these
equations, we thus get:

˙βi(s), βi(s). Applying the operator ∂

0 = X

i

∂λi
∂s

˙αi(s), 0 = X
0 = X

i

i

∂λi
∂s

˙βi(s),

∂λi
∂s

βi(s).

These equations say that the three vectors (βi(s)), ( ˙βi(s)), ( ˙αi(s)) satisfy the linear equation
deﬁned by ( ∂λi
∂s ). Note now that these three vectors are generically linearly independent in
C4, as otherwise, the Gauss map of the surface V is not of maximal rank. Hence they
generate a hyperplane which varies holomorphically with s, and at the asme time is deﬁned
by the equation ( ∂λi
∂s ) = 0 or the hyperplane
is constant. The ﬁrst case says that the λi’s are in fact constant (since they are real), so
we are not in the situation (2). The second case say that the surface V 0 is contained in an
aﬃne space in C4, which we also excluded.

∂s ) which is antiholomorphic in s. So either ( ∂λi

We conclude from Lemma 3.18 that we must have df3 = kdf4 with k constant along Fσ,
and df1 = hdf2 with h nonconstant holomorphic. In particular, the only aﬃne equations
satisﬁed by Fσ in C4 are (in the given coordinates) z3 = Cst, z4 = Cst. Note that as
we assume that we are not in the situation (1), by Lemma 3.16, V 0 does not contain a
two-parameter family of curves whose aﬃne envelop is a plane, hence there is only a one-
parameter holomorphic family of such curves, which must be the family of ﬁbers Fσ. In
particular, Σ has a holomorphic structure for which a· : V → Σ is holomorphic. Each ﬁber
Fσ generates an aﬃne C2
af f . The corresponding linear space C2 ⊂ C4 is deﬁned by the
equations z3 = z4 = 0 and z3, z4 are real combinations of the original linear coordinates on
C4. If we have a holomorphic family of linear subspaces C2 ⊂ C4 which are all deﬁned over
R, this family must be constant. This proves property (i), and property (ii) is proved in the
equations (34).

The last statement (iii) follows easily from (i) and (ii). Indeed, by (i) we have coordinates
xi = Re fi in which all the ﬁbers Fσ are deﬁned by equations x3 = cst, x4 = cst. We now
write df = Pi λidfi with λi real and constant along the ﬁbers Fσ, which means that λi
depend only on the coordinates x3, x4. Let η1 = λ1df1 + λ2df2, and η2 = λ3df3 + λ4df4.
Then using (34), we see that the decomposition df = η1 + η2 is the decomposition of df
according to the orthogonal decomposition R4 = Rhdx1, dx2i ⊕ Rhdx3, dx4i. The dλi’s
involve only dx3 and dx4, and thus the equation df = 0 = Pi dλi ∧ dfi clearly implies that
dη1 = 0, dη2 = 0. In particular, these 1-forms are holomorphic, since they are of type (1, 0).
As the form η2 is a section of the subbundle a∗
· ΩΣ ⊂ ΩV 0, the fact that it is closed implies
that η2 is the pull-back of a holomorphic form on Σ. Finally the equation dη1 = 0 with

16

Re η1 = λ1dx1 + λ2dx2, the functions λ1, λ2 being independent of x1, x2, implies that η1 is
a form with constant coeﬃcients. The proof of Proposition 3.8 is ﬁnished.

We now conclude the proof of Proposition 3.2.

Proof of Proposition 3.2. Let φ : A → U be a polarized Lagrangian torus ﬁbration equipped
with its holomorphic 2-form σA and let ν be a holomorphic section of A such that ν∗σA = 0.
We assume furthermore that the corresponding inﬁnitesimal variation of weight 1 Hodge
structure TU → Hom (H1,0, H0,1) is generically of maximal rank and dim A = 4. We use the
same inﬁnitesimal criterion as in Proposition 2.1, (i). It says that if the set of points b ∈ U
such that ν(b) is a torsion point is not dense in U , then the locally associated map gν : V →
Ab0 deﬁned by composing ν with a real analytic local trivialization A ∼= V × Ab0 is nowhere
of maximal rank. Writing A as a quotient H0,1,A/H1,Z, such a real analytic trivialization
is obtained using the natural isomorphism (9) between the ﬂat real analytic vector bundle
H1,R = H1,Z ⊗ Cω(R) associated with the local system H1,R and the holomorphic vector
bundle H0,1, and by trivializing locally the local system H1,Z on small open sets V ⊂ U . Let
ν ∈ Γ(U, H0,1/H1,Z) with local lift ˜ν ∈ Γ(V, H0,1). Then the map gν is deﬁned by choosing
a trivializing basis α1, . . . , α4 of H1,R on V , which allows to write uniquely

˜ν = X

aiαi

i

(40)

for some real analytic functions ai, the equality being in H1,R ∼= H0,1. The map gν is then
given by

gν = (a1, . . . , a4) ∈ R4

(followed by the projection R4 → R4/Z4 if the basis αi is chosen to be integral). Next the
section ˜ν of H0,1 on V identiﬁes with a section αν of ΩV which is closed by Lemma 3.6,
hence can be written locally as αν = dfν. Similarly, recall from Lemma 3.3 that the forms
on B given by the holomorphic sections αi of H0,1 ∼= ΩV are closed, so that we can assume
up to shrinking V that they are exact: αi = dfi. Equality (40) thus rewrites on small open
sets V ⊂ U as

dfν = X

i

aidfi in Γ(V, ΩV ),

(41)

which is exactly the equation studied in Proposition 3.8. Furthermore, as we assumed
that the inﬁnitesimal variation of Hodge structure is generically of maximal rank on U ,
Proposition 3.8 can be applied. We know that the map gν = a· : V → R4 is nowhere of
maximal rank, hence by Proposition 3.8, on any open subset V 0 ⊂ V where gν is of locally
constant rank 4 − 2k < 4, one of the possibilities (0’) to (2) holds on V 0. Comparing with
the statement of proposition 3.2, we see that we only have to explain how to pass in each
of these three cases from the local statement to the global statement. There is a small
subtlety here since denoting by U 0 the union of the sets V 0 above, the complement U \ U 0
is a closed real analytic subset of U , so that U 0 could be disconnected and the natural map
π1(U 0) → π1(U ) could be nonsurjective.

Case (0’) of Proposition 3.8. In this case, there is a simply connected open subset V 0 ⊂ U
and a constant section φ of H1,C on V 0 such that ˜ν = φ0,1 in Γ(V 0, H0,1), where φ0,1 is the
projection of φ in H0,1 = H1,C ⊗ OV 0 /H1,0. Let eU be the universal cover of U . Then φ
extends to a section that we still denote φ of the constant (trivial) local system H1,C on eU
and the local lift ˜ν of ν also extends to a lift ˜ν of ν in Γ(eU , H1,0). The equality φ0,1 = ˜ν on
V 0 extends by analytic continuation to an equality φ0,1 = ˜ν in Γ(eU , H0,1), which gives us

case (0’) of Proposition 3.2.

Case (1) of Proposition 3.8. The local data fν, fi are globally deﬁned on eU . Indeed,
the fi’s were obtained locally, ﬁrst of all by integrating the (2, 0)-form on local sections of

17

H1,Z, thus getting sections of H0,1, then identifying these sections to closed holomorphic
forms, and ﬁnally choosing a primitive of these closed forms. Similarly fν was obtained
by choosing a lift of ν to a section of H0,1 ∼= ΩU , then taking a primitive of the closed
holomorphic form so obtained. As the (2, 0)-form is globally deﬁned on A, all this can be
done globally once we work on a simply connected manifold. It suﬃces then to observe that
if the image (fν, fi)(V 0) in C5 is contained in the (aﬃne part) of a Veronese surface in P5 for
some V 0 ⊂ eU , then (fν, fi)(eU ) is also contained by analytic continuation in this Veronese

surface.

Case (2) of Proposition 3.8. There exists now a simply connected open set V 0 ⊂ U where
the real analytic map gν = a· has constant rank 2, and properties (i), (ii), (iii) holds on V 0,
namely the ﬁbers Fσ of gν are aﬃne and parallel in the coordinates Re fi, and furthermore,
denoting by T ⊂ R4 the common tangent space of the Fσ’s, the orthogonal decomposition

R4 = T ⊕⊥ω T ⊥ω

is a decomposition of the real variation of Hodge structures on H1,R as a sum of two variations
of Hodge structures H1,R = L ⊕ L′, and L′ has trivial variation of Hodge structure along the
ﬁbers Fσ. Finally, in the induced decomposition of ˜ν as ˜ν = ˜νL + ˜νL′ , the term ˜νL comes
from a real constant section of L while ˜νL′ is only constant along Fσ. Let us see V 0 as an
open subset of eU . On eU , the subspace T ⊂ H1,R is globally deﬁned and the fact that it
is a real subvariation of Hodge structure L, as is its orthogonal complement T ⊥ giving rise
to the variation of Hodge structure L′, is a closed analytic property, which thus must hold
everywhere on eU by analytic continuation. As the real aﬃne coordinates xi are globally
deﬁned on eU , T also determines a foliation on eU whose ﬁbers intersect V 0 along the curves
Fσ. The fact that the variation of Hodge structure on L′ is constant along the ﬁbers of this
foliation is then a real (in fact complex) analytic property on eU , hence satisﬁed everywhere.
Finally the fact that ˜νL is constant is also real analytic, hence true everywhere. In order to
complete the proof in this case, we just have to explain why the vector space T determines
a local subsystem of H1,R on U , or equivalently, why it is invariant by monodromy. This is
however clear by uniqueness of the foliation determined by T and satisfying all the properties
above. The proof of Proposition 3.2 is now complete.

3.4 Proof of Theorem 0.2 in the nonisotrivial case

We explain in this section how Theorem 0.2 in the nonisotrivial case follows from Proposition
3.2 and its local version Proposition 3.8.

Proof of Theorem 0.2. The proof is by contradiction. Under the global assumptions of The-
orem 0.2, assume that the ﬁbration is not locally isotrivial (hence is generically of maximal
rank), but that the torsion points of the section νM are not dense in B. Then over B0, all
the assumptions of Proposition 3.2 are satisﬁed by Lemma 3.1. Proposition 3.2 thus applies
and we are in one of the three situations (0’), (1), (2) of Proposition 3.2, that we have to
exclude.

Case (0’). This case is easy to exclude. Indeed, (1) says that the section νM ∈ Γ(B0, J )
Z ⊂ J . The inclusion here is due to Lemma 3.17 which gives under our

is a section of H 1
asumptions the injectivity of the natural map of sheaves H 1

C/H 1

Denote by H 2(X, Z)Xb the kernel of the restriction map H 2(X, Z) → H 2(Xb, Z) and
similarly for X 0. Recall that the image of c1(M ) in H 1(B0, R1φ∗Z) by the composi-
tion of the restriction map H 2(X, Z)Xb → H 2(X 0, Z)Xb (whose kernel consists of divisor
classes supported over the discriminant locus) and the natural Leray map H 2(X 0, Z)Xb →
H 1(B0, R1φ∗Z), can be constructed as the image of νM ∈ Γ(B0, J ) by the connecting map
of the exact sequence

C → H0,1.

0 → H 1

Z → H0,1 → J → 0,

18

(see [24, 8.2.2]). It then follows that the cohomology class c1(M ) restricted to X 0 vanishes
in H 1(B0, R1φ∗C), so that a multiple N c1(M ) vanishes in H 1(B0, R1φ∗Z). Thus, looking
at the Leray spectral sequence, N c1(M )|X 0 is the pull-back φ∗α of a degree 2 cohomology
class on B0. It is then immediate that one can choose α to be a divisor class on B0, so
that ﬁnally N c1(M ) can be written as the sum of a divisor class pulled-back from B and a
divisor class supported on X \ X 0. This implies the same result in Pic X since Pic0 X = 0.
It follows that N νM vanishes, or νM is of torsion, a contradiction.

Case (1). We have to exclude by monodromy considerations the possibility that the
image of the locally deﬁned holomorphic map (f, f1, . . . , f4) : V → C5 is an open set in
(the aﬃne part of) a Veronese surface in P5. Assuming we are in this situation, it follows in
particular that the image of the period map V → D ⊂ G(2, 4)lag is an open set in an algebraic
subvariety of G(2, 4)lag (in the terminology of [7], it is semi-algebraic). Here G(2, 4)lag is the
Lagrangian Grassmannian parameterizing locally the polarized deformations of the abelian
surface.
It follows then from [7] or [21] that this image, being 2-dimensional, must be a
Noether-Lefschetz divisor, that is, there is (maybe after taking a ﬁnite cover) a second
global section ω′ ∈ V2 H ∗
1,Q such that ω′ is of type (1, 1) on any ﬁber Xb, or equivalently,
the period point H1,0,b ⊂ H1(Xb, C) is also Lagrangian for the form ω′. In our situation
(and forgetting about rational coeﬃcients), this is saying, using the translation described in
section 3.2, that our surface V ⊂ C4 is Lagrangian for two 2-forms with constant coeﬃcients
on C4.

Remark 3.19. This says in particular that our abelian surfaces Xb have ρ(Xb) ≥ 2. Un-
fortunately we cannot conclude simply by applying Matsushita’s result (Proposition 0.1),
because a nontrivial ﬁnite monodromy can act on the N´eron-Severi group of the geometric
generic ﬁber (or very general ﬁber), while Matsushita’s result concerns the N´eron-Severi
group of the generic ﬁber.

We use now the following easy result:

Lemma 3.20. Let V ⊂ C4 be (an open subset of ) the aﬃne part of the projection of a
Veronese surface in P5. Then, if there are two constant coeﬃcients 2-forms vanishing on
V , the curve at inﬁnity of V is a double line. Hence V has a canonical aﬃne structure.

Proof. This is an explicit computation. The aﬃne part V of a Veronese surface in C5 is
either the complement of a smooth conic, resp. the complement of a nodal conic, or the
complement of a double line. In the ﬁrst two cases, one easily shows that there is no nonzero
constant coeﬃcients 2-form on C5 vanishing on V , resp. there is only one nonzero constant
coeﬃcients 2-form on C5 vanishing on V (which is in fact of rank 2). So in both cases, an
aﬃne projection of V is not Lagrangian with respect to two constant coeﬃcients 2-forms on
C4, and thus only the last case is possible.

Lemma 3.20 can be rephrased saying that our surface V ⊂ C4 must be an aﬃne Veronese
surface embedded in C4 via (inhomogeneous) polynomials of degree ≤ 2 in two variables.
We next have the following:

Lemma 3.21. If an aﬃne Veronese surface in C4 is Lagrangian for at least one nonde-
generate constant coeﬃcients 2-forms on C4, the embedding is given by two homogeneous
quadratic polynomials and two linear polynomials.

Proof. Indeed, let s, t be aﬃne coordinates on C2. Consider 4 quadratic polynomials (mod-
ulo constants) f1, . . . , f4, three of which having independent quadratic homogeneous terms,
giving a morphism φ : C2 → C4. Then for a given choice of aﬃne coordinates s, t, we have
f1 = s2 + a1, f2 = t2 + a2, f3 = st + a3, f4 = a4, where the ai’s are aﬃne in s and t. Then
we have

φ∗(dz1 ∧ dz2) = (4st + l12)ds ∧ dt,
φ∗(dz1 ∧ dz3) = (2s2 + l23)ds ∧ dt,

19

φ∗(dz2 ∧ dz3) = (2t2 + l23)ds ∧ dt,

where the lij are aﬃne linear functions, and the other pull-backs φ∗dzi ∧dzj are 2-forms with
aﬃne coeﬃcients on C2. It follows that a 2-form ω with constant coeﬃcients vanishing under
φ∗ is a combination of dz1 ∧ dz4, dz2 ∧ dz4, dz3 ∧ dz4, hence is degenerate. This computation
shows that the quadratic parts of our polynomials generate only a 2-dimensional space,
hence that there are at least two aﬃne functions f1 = s, f2 = t in our system. Removing
the relevant aﬃne functions of s, t from the two remaining functions f3, f4, we may assume
they are quadratic homogeneous.

We now look at the monodromy acting on the space C4 = H1(Xb, C), which we can
also see as a space of functions f1, . . . , f4 on V , deﬁned modulo constants. Note ﬁrst of all
that since our family of abelian surfaces is a two-parameter family of abelian surfaces with
Picard number 2, there cannot be any line in C4 = H1(Xb, C) (or point in P(H1(Xb, C))
left invariant by a ﬁnite index subgroup of the monodromy group. On the other hand, by
Lemma 3.21, the monodromy acting on our space of functions preserves a rank 2 subspace
L consisting of aﬃne linear functions. Furthermore, the rank 2 system of quadratic homo-
geneous part found in Lemma 3.21 cannot have a base point, since this would distinguish
a point in P(L). It follows that for an adequate choice of aﬃne coordinates s, t on C2, our
functions can be written as φ = (s2, t2, s, t), where the subspace L is generated by s and
t. But then there are two natural subspaces in C4, namely the one generated by s2, s and
the one generated by t2, t. These subspaces are related to the two locally constant 2-forms
ω and ω′ as follows: the only 2-forms vanishing on C2 via φ∗ are dz1 ∧ dz3 and dz2 ∧ dz4.
Thus we must have hω, ω′i = hdz1 ∧ dz3, dz2 ∧ dz4i, and the two linear subspaces above
are the kernels of the two degenerate forms in the pencil hω, ω′i. These two subspaces can
be exchanged under monodromy but there is a ﬁnite index subgroup ﬁxing each of them.
This ﬁnite index subgroup then ﬁxes each of the lines generated by e3 or e4. This gives a
contradiction and excludes case (1).

Case (2). We now have a nontrivial local subsystem L ⊂ H1,R which is a subvariation

of Hodge structures. Let us recall the following lemma from [11].

Lemma 3.22. Let φ : X → B be a Lagrangian ﬁbration on a hyper-K¨ahler manifold. Then
there is no proper nontrivial real subvariation of Hodge structure of H1,R on B0.

Proof. According to Matsushita’s Proposition 0.1, the restriction map H 2(X, Q) → H 2(Xb, Q)
has rank 1. By Deligne’s invariant cycle theorem, this implies that the local system R2φ∗R
on B0 has only one global section (provided by the polarization ω and its real multiples).
If the local system (R1φ∗R)∗ contains a nontrivial local subsystem L which carries a real
variation of Hodge structures, the restriction of ω to L is nondegenerate and the orthogonal
complement L⊥ω with respect to ω is also a local subsystem of (R1φ∗R)∗ on which ω is
nondegenerate. Thus we have a decomposition

(R1φ∗R)∗ = L ⊕ L⊥

(42)

and if both L and L⊥ were nontrivial, we would get two independent sections of R2φ∗R =
V2(R1φ∗R)∗∗, namely π∗
L⊥(ω|L⊥), where πL and πL⊥ are the two projections
associated with the decomposition (42). This is a contradiction, hence a proper nontrivial
such L does not exist.

Lω|L and π∗

Thus Case (2) is also excluded.

4 Proof of Theorem 0.2 when the ﬁbration is isotrivial

Theorem 0.2 when the ﬁbration is isotrivial works in any dimension. It will be obtained as
a consequence of the following analogue of Proposition 3.2 in the isotrivial case.

20

Proposition 4.1. Let φ : A → B be a locally isotrivial Lagrangian torus ﬁbration, where A
is projective and has a generically nondegenerate holomorphic form σA. Let ν : B → A be
a section such that ν∗σA = 0. Then if the torsion points of ν are not dense in B0 for the
usual topology, the local system

H1,R,A := (R1φ∗R)∗

admits a nontrivial local subsystem L which underlies a real subvariation of Hodge structures.
Furthermore, writing the real lift (see Section 1) of the section ν as a sum ˜νL + ˜νL⊥, where
L⊥ is the orthogonal variation of Hodge structures with respect to ω, then ˜νL is a locally
constant section of L.

Proof. The local analysis made in Subsection 3.2 works similarly, but we are going to prove
directly that the ﬁbers V 0
σ of the map φν (with local form a·) are parallel, so that φν factors
through an aﬃne projection (in the local aﬃne coordinates described in 3.2). The local data
described in Section 3.2 take the following form: there are locally 2n holomorphic functions
f1, . . . , f2n on simply connected open subsets U ⊂ B, which are independent over R and
provide real coordinates x1, . . . , x2n, xi = Re fi. By isotriviality, modulo the constants, the
fi’s provide only n independent holomorphic functions independent over C. In particular
the open set B0 over which φ is smooth and σA is nondegenerate is endowed with a ﬂat
holomorphic structure.

Lemma 4.2. This ﬂat holomorphic structure, after passing to a generically ﬁnite cover B′
of B0, is induced by the choice of n holomorphic 1-forms on a smooth projective completion
B′ of B′.

Proof. Indeed, the ﬁbration φ : A → B is trivialized over a ﬁnite cover B′ of a Zariski open
set of B0 as

A′ := A ×B B′ ∼= B′ × J0,

where 0 ∈ B′ is a given point, and J0 is the ﬁber of φ′ : A′ → B′ over it. The local ﬂat
holomorphic coordinates on B0, pulled back to B′, come from the holomorphic 2-form on
B′ × J0 which is of the form

X

pr∗

B′ αi ⊗ pr∗

J0 βi,

i

for a basis βi of H 0(ΩJ0). The ﬂat structure on B0 is given by the holomorphic forms αi. We
now claim that the forms αi extend to holomorphic 1-forms on B′. This is seen as follows:
More generally, the transcendental cohomology H 2(A, Q)tr, pulled-back to B′ × J0 falls in
the (1, 1) part H 1(B′, Q) ⊗ H 1(J0, Q) of the K¨unneth decomposition of H 2(B′, Q), and this
implies that it is contained in the image of H 1(B′, Q) ⊗ H 1(J0, Q) in H 1(B′, Q) ⊗ H 1(J0, Q)
by Deligne’s strictness theorem for morphisms of mixed Hodge structures [5]): indeed, we
get from the above a morphism of mixed Hodge structures

α : H 2(X, Q)tr ⊗ H 1(J0, Q)∗ → H 1(B′, Q)

with image K ⊂ H 1(B′, Q) such that H 2(X, Q)tr, pulled-back to B′ × J0 is contained in
K ⊗H 1(J0, Q). By Deligne strictness theorem [5], this morphism α has its image contained in
the pure (smallest weight) part of H 1(B′, Q), namely H 1(B′, Q). This ﬁnishes the proof.

As a consequence, we get the following:

Corollary 4.3. Let (Ft)t∈Σ be a continuous family of complex submanifolds of an open set
V 0 of B0. Assume that each Ft is ﬂat for the ﬂat holomorphic structure described above,
and is algebraic, that is a connected component of the intersection of an algebraic subvariety
Ct of B with V 0. Then the Ft’s are parallel, that is, Ft being aﬃne in the ﬂat coordinates,
the linear part of their deﬁning equations is constant.

21

Proof. The linear part of the deﬁning equations for Ft is determined by Lemma 4.2 by the
vector space of holomorphic forms on B′ vanishing on Ft, or equivalently on Ct. On the
other hand, by desingularization and up to shrinking our family, we can assume that the Ct
form a family of smooth projective varieties mapping to B′. It is then clear that the space
of holomorphic forms on B′ vanishing on Ct does not depend on t.

The proof of Proposition 4.1 will ﬁnally use the following Lemma 4.4. We add to the
data of our locally isotrivial ﬁbration φ : A → B the section ν, which satisﬁes the condition
˜ν∗σA = 0. This section lifts locally on B0 to a section ˜νM of the sheaf H1,R ⊗ C∞
R where
H1,R is the the real local system (R1φ∗R)∗. This section is well-deﬁned up to translation by
a constant (integral) section of H1,R, and by Proposition 2.1, if the torsion points of νM are
not dense in B0 for the usual topology, then the map (deﬁned on simply connected open
sets V ⊂ B0)

˜νM : V → H1(J0, R)

via a trivialization of H1,R has positive dimensional ﬁbers Ft.

Lemma 4.4. In the isotrivial case, the ﬁbers Ft are algebraic.

Proof. Indeed, after passing to the ﬁnite cover B′ already introduced above, the normal
function νM gives a morphism of algebraic varieties

M : B′ → Pic0(J0) ∼=isog J0,
ν′

which to b′ ∈ B′ associates M|X ′
of ˜νM coincide with the ﬁbers of ν′
the adequate open sets.

b′ with X ′

b′ ∼= J0 canonically. It is imediate that the ﬁbers
M , via the morphism B′ → B0 and after restricting to

We can now apply Corollary 4.3 to the ﬁbers V 0

σ ⊂ V 0 of the local map a· restricted to
the open subset V 0 ⊂ V where a· has constant rank. These ﬁbers are both complex and
aﬃne by Lemmas 3.11 and 3.12. We thus conclude that they vary in a parallel way. The
properties (i), (ii), (iii) stated in (2) of Proposition 3.8 are then proved as in the general
case, which proves the proposition.

Proof of Theorem 0.2 in the isotrivial case. Let φ : X → B be a Lagrangian isotrivial ﬁ-
bration, X projective hyper-K¨ahler, and let νM be the normal function associated to a line
bundle M on X which is topologically trivial on the smooth ﬁbers of φ. Proposition 4.1
applies and shows that if the set of points b ∈ B where νM (b) is a torsion point is not dense
in B, there is a decomposition of the local system R1φ∗R on B0 as a direct sum of two
subvariations of Hodge structures L and L′, with L 6= 0, such that in the corresponding
decomposition ˜νM = ˜νM,L + ˜νM,L′, ˜νM,L is locally constant with real coeﬃcients.

Lemma 3.22 says that L must be equal to R1φ∗R and thus ˜ν is locally constant, so
that νM is a section of R1φ∗R/R1φ∗Z. But then Lemma 2.3 says that a nontorsion section
R1φ∗R/R1φ∗Z can exist only if the invariant part of H 1(Xb, R) is not trivial, which provides
a contradiction since H 1(X, R) = 0.

References

[1] A. Beauville, R. Donagi. La vari´et´e des droites d’une hypersurface cubique de dimension

4, C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris S´er. I Math. 301 (1985), 703–706.

[2] A. Beauville. On the splitting of the Bloch-Beilinson ﬁltration, in Algebraic cycles and
motives (vol. 2), London Math. Soc. Lecture Notes 344, 38-53; Cambridge University
Press (2007).

[3] A. Beauville, C. Voisin. On the Chow ring of a K3 surface, J. Algebraic Geom. 13

(2004), no. 3, 417–426.

22

[4] F. Bogomolov. On the cohomology ring of a simple hyper-K¨ahler manifold (on the

results of Verbitsky). Geom. Funct. Anal. 6 (1996), no. 4, 612-618.

[5] P. Deligne. Th´eorie de Hodge II, Inst. Hautes ´Etudes Sci. Publ. Math. No. 40 , 5-57

(1971).

[6] R. Donagi, E. Markman. Spectral covers, algebraically completely integrable, Hamilto-
nian systems, and moduli of bundles, in Integrable systems and quantum groups (Mon-
tecatini Terme, 1993), 1-119, Lecture Notes in Math., 1620, Springer, Berlin, 1996.

[7] R. Friedman, R. Laza. Semialgebraic horizontal subvarieties of Calabi-Yau type. Duke

Math. J. 162 (2013), no. 12, 2077-2148.

[8] L. Fu. Beauville-Voisin conjecture for generalized Kummer varieties, Int. Math. Res.

Not. IMRN 2015, no. 12, 3878-3898.

[9] Ph. Griﬃths, J. Harris. Algebraic geometry and local diﬀerential geometry. Ann. Sci.

´Ecole Norm. Sup. (4) 12 (1979), no. 3, 355-452.

[10] J.-M. Hwang. Base manifolds for ﬁbrations of projective irreducible symplectic mani-

folds. Invent. math. 174, 625-644 (2008).

[11] B. van Geemen, C. Voisin. On a conjecture of Matsushita, to appear in IMRN.

[12] H.-Y. Lin. Lagrangian constant

cycle

subvarieties

in Lagrangian ﬁbrations,

arXiv:1510.01437.

[13] D. Mumford. Rational equivalence of 0-cycles on surfaces. J. Math. Kyoto Univ. 9

(1968) 195-204.

[14] J. Rauch, B. Taylor. The Dirichlet problem for the multidimensional Monge-Amp`ere

equation. Rocky Mountain J. Math. 7 (1977), no. 2, 345-364.

[15] U. Riess. On the Chow ring of birational irreducible symplectic varieties, Manuscripta

Math. 145 (2014), no. 3-4, 473-501.

[16] U. Riess. On the Beauville conjecture, arXiv:1409.3484, to appear in IMRN.

[17] D. Matsushita. On ﬁbre space structures of a projective irreducible symplectic manifold,

Topology 38 (1999), no. 1, 79-83.

[18] D. Matsushita. On base manifolds of Lagrangian ﬁbrations. Sci. China Math. 58 (2015),

no. 3, 531-542.

[19] D. Matsushita. On deformations of Lagrangian ﬁbrations, arXiv:0903.2098.

[20] D. Matsushita. On isotropic divisors

on irreducible

symplectic manifolds,

arXiv:1310.0896.

[21] E. Ullmo, A. Yafaev. A characterization of special subvarieties. Mathematika 57 (2011),

no. 2, 263-273.

[22] C. Voisin. On the Chow ring of certain algebraic hyper-K¨ahler manifolds, Pure and

Applied Mathematics Quarterly, Volume 4, Number 3, (2008).

[23] C. Voisin. Sur la stabilit´e des sous-vari´et´es lagrangiennes des vari´et´es symplectiques
holomorphes, in Complex projective geometry (Trieste, 1989/Bergen, 1989), 294-303,
London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., 179, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1992.

[24] C. Voisin. Hodge theory and complex algebraic geometry II. Cambridge Studies in Ad-

vanced Mathematics, 77. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, (2003).

Institut de Math´ematiques de Jussieu Equipe Topologie et g´eom´etrie alg´ebriques 4, place
Jussieu 75252 Paris Cedex 05

claire.voisin@imj-prg.fr

23

