A little walk from physical to biological complexity:

protein folding and stability

Fabrizio Pucci, Marianne Rooman1

1BioModeling, BioInformatics & BioProcesses,

Universit´e Libre de Bruxelles, CP 165/61,
50 Roosevelt Ave, 1050 Brussels, Belgium

Abstract

As an example of topic where biology and physics meet, we present the issue of protein folding
and stability, and the development of thermodynamics-based bioinformatics tools that predict the
stability and thermal resistance of proteins and the change of these quantities upon amino acid
substitutions. These methods are based on knowledge-driven statistical potentials, derived from
experimental protein structures using the inverse Boltzmann law. We also describe an application
of these predictors, which contributed to the understanding of the mechanisms of aggregation of a
particular protein known to cause a neuronal disease.

To Philippe Spindel for his 65th birthday

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
 
4
1

 
 
]

.

M
B
o
i
b
-
q
[
 
 

1
v
6
3
3
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Contents

I. Introduction

II. Protein folding and stability

III. Statistical potentials

IV. Prediction of the stability curve of proteins

V. Prediction of the stability changes upon mutations

A. Thermodynamic stability
B. Thermal stability

VI. Application to a conformational disease protein

Acknowledgments

References

I.

INTRODUCTION

2

4

6

7

9
9
10

12

14

14

Molecular and cellular biology were traditionally purely experimental sciences, and it is
only recently that theoretical biology – including bioinformatics, biomodeling and biomath-
ematics – has started to develop. The need for informatics approaches has become essential
with the advent of high-throughput technologies, which generate a huge amount of data
in a single experiment, such as full genome sequences or the ensemble of transcribed RNA
molecules in a cell population. These technologies are at the basis of omics science, deﬁned
as the collective study and characterization of biomolecules: proteomics is the large-scale
study of proteins, genomics of genomes, transcriptomics of transcribed RNA, mutatomics of
all mutations in proteins or DNA, and so on.

In parallel to omics science, (computational) systems biology has started to attract a lot
of attention. It has become clear that the functioning of cells cannot be understood only
through the study of individual macromolecules, such as proteins, RNA, and DNA. Indeed,
the interactions between all biomolecules present inside and outside the cells are of prime
importance, and they are indispensable to understand and model cellular life. In other words,
the division of the cell into independent subsystems is a much too strong approximation.
Obviously, this has the consequence of dramatically increasing the complexity of the systems
to be studied.

An interesting feature of bioinformatics and biomodeling is that application is never
far. Computational approaches are increasingly exploited to rationalize existing data and to
develop knowledge-based predictors. These are unable to give a unique optimal solution – as
the systems are far too complex –, but propose valuable candidate hypotheses, which need to
be further analyzed and validated by experimental means. These targeted conjectures save

2

a lot of time as they allow focusing on a few relevant possibilities. In the medical sector,
computational approches are more and more used in rational drug [1], antibody [2] and
vaccine [3] design, or for identifying genome variants that cause human diseases [4, 5]. In the
very near future, therapies will be personalized for each patient on the basis of the variants
that appear in his genome. On the other hand, enzymes are used for their unique catalytic
properties in many biotechnology sectors, and their optimization is an important challenge
for setting up eﬃcient and environment-friendly bioprocesses [6–8]. Finally, synthetic biology
will certainly gain importance in the future, and modiﬁed or synthetic cells can be expected
to be used as little factories that produce speciﬁc compounds to be used for example as
energy source (e.g. bioethanol, biohydrogen) [9, 10].

We focus in this paper on a speciﬁc subdomain of structural bioinformatics, i.e. protein
folding and stability. Proteins are chains of amino acids and a large class of them fold into
a well-deﬁned 3-dimensional (3D) structure in physiological conditions (Fig. 1). Generally,
when correctly folded, they fulﬁll their biological role (catalysis, molecular transport, sig-
nal transduction, genome regulation, etc). Protein folding is (usually) a reversible process
basically ruled by classical physics, in which the 3D structure is stabilized by interactions
between the diﬀerent types of amino acids. The problem is thus well deﬁned and can be
tackled with physical methods, speciﬁcally through statistical mechanics. However, it is
extremely diﬃcult to actually predict the 3D structure from the amino acid sequence, for
two reasons: the conformational space of a protein is enormous and the energy functions
that describe inter-residue interactions are not perfectly accurate.

(a)

(b)

FIG. 1: (a) Part of a protein chain. Proteins are sequences of about 50 to more than 10,000 covalently

bound amino acids. These are of 20 types: the 20 amino acids that are encoded in the genome. They

share a common part (called main chain) and diﬀer by their side chains which carry molecular groups

with diﬀerent physicochemical properties (charged, aromatic, aliphatic, etc). They are represented

by uppercase letters. (b) Native (folded) structure of triose phosphate isomerase (Protein DataBank

(PDB) [11] code: 7tim). Helices are represented in blue, β-strands in red and loops in magenta.

3

We present some bioinformatics tools that were developed in our group in view of esti-
mating the thermodynamic and thermal stability of a protein, and the changes that occur
upon substitution of one amino acid into another [12–16]. Such tools are very helpful in
protein design, when aiming at rationally modifying or optimizing certain protein character-
istics, whether in biopharmaceutical, biomedical or biotechnological applications, or simply
when attempting to elucidate the complex relationships between protein sequence, structure,
stability, interactions and function.

II. PROTEIN FOLDING AND STABILITY

In general, proteins occur in two distinct structural states in their usual environment,
that is the intra- or extracellular medium, or the cellular membrane. These are the folded
and unfolded state, which correspond to two free energy minima. The folded, biologically
active, state has a low entropy but favorable enthalpy, while the unfolded state has a large
entropy but unfavorable enthalpy. The (un)folding transition is an equilibrium process,
where the folded structure is preferred for a range of conditions including the physiological
conditions (e.g. the living temperature and pH of the host organism), and the unfolded
structure is preferred for the other conditions. The transition is usually reversible, at least
if aggregation or post-translational modiﬁcations are overlooked and if large multidomain
proteins are not considered. Note that this is true for the class of proteins called structured
proteins. Another class consists of proteins that are intrinsically unstructured or only fold
in the presence of some biomolecular partner; we will not consider such proteins here.

Proteins play crucial roles in and outside the cells – they do most of the actual work
required for cellular life. Mutations in proteins deﬁne polymorphisms – which are at the
basis of the phenotypic variability between individuals. However, though the large majority
of mutations have a neutral eﬀect, some signiﬁcantly aﬀect the protein structure, stability,
interactions or function, and cause diseases.

The stability of a protein structure is deﬁned by its standard folding free energy:

∆G0 = G0(folded state) − G0(unfolded state)

,

(2.1)

which depends on all environmental parameters such as the solvent, pH, pressure and tem-
perature.
If we only consider the dependence on the temperature, the stability curve of
a protein [17] has a inverted bell-shape (Fig. 2) and is described by the Gibbs-Helmholtz
equation, which is valid for proteins that fold according to a two-state transition:

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(cid:20)

(cid:18) T

(cid:19)(cid:21)

Tm

∆G0(T ) = ∆H 0
m

1 − T
Tm

− ∆C 0

P

(Tm − T ) + T Log

,

(2.2)

m is the standard folding enthalpy measured at Tm and ∆C 0

where Tm is the melting temperature of the protein, i.e. the temperature at which ∆G0
vanishes, ∆H 0
P the folding heat
capacity assumed to be T -independent. Note that Tm is here the denaturation temperature
at high T ; there is also a denaturation temperature at low T which we do not consider here
as water usually freezes before the protein denatures.

4

Two complementary descriptions of protein stability are commonly used: the thermo-
dynamic stability is identiﬁed by ∆G0(Tr) at room temperature (Tr), whereas the thermal
stability is deﬁned by the melting temperature Tm.

Thermal and thermodynamic stabilities are not always correlated, which is obvious from
the Gibbs-Helmholtz equation (2.2) when T = Tr. The molecular reason of the lack of corre-
lation between the two stabilities is that the 20 amino acids are of diﬀerent physicochemical
types, and that their energetic contributions have diﬀerent temperature dependences.

(a)

(b)

FIG. 2: Stability curves of proteins belonging to the adenylate kinase family and identiﬁed by the

PDB [11] code 1aky (from Saccharomyces cerevisiae), 1s3g (from Sporosarcina globispora), 1ank (from

Escherichia coli) and 1zip (from Geobacillus stearothermophilus). Temperatures are measured in K

and folding free energies in kJ/mol. (a) Experimental stability curves; (b) Stability curves predicted

by SCooP [13].

Upon substitution of one amino acid into another, or of several amino acids, the so-called
wild-type protein is transformed into a mutant protein, and this has an impact on all its
biophysical properties. The folding free energy gets modiﬁed as: ∆∆G0 = ∆G0 mutant −
− T wild
∆G0 wild, the melting temperature as: ∆Tm = T mutant
m , and similarly for the changes
in folding heat capacity (∆∆C 0
m). The changes in thermodynamic
and thermal stabilities upon mutations are more – but still imperfectly – correlated than
the stabilities themselves, as can be deduced from the relation:

P ) and enthalpy (∆∆H 0

m

∆∆G0(Tr) (cid:39) ∆H 0
mTr
m )2 ∆Tm + ∆∆H 0
(T wild

m

(cid:20)

+∆∆C 0
P

Tr − T wild

m − Tr log

.

(2.3)

(cid:20)

(cid:21)
(cid:19)
Tr
m )2 ∆Tm
(T wild
+ O

(cid:18) ∆T 2

m
T wild 2

m

1 − Tr
T wild
m
Tr

+

(cid:21)

T wild

m

The linear correlation between ∆∆G0(Tr) and ∆Tm values was found to be equal to -0.7 on
about 450 experimentally characterized mutations [18].

5

III. STATISTICAL POTENTIALS

To estimate the energy of a protein, two types of energy functions are commonly used.
The semi-empirical force ﬁelds assume an analytic form for the diﬀerent types of interactions
with parameters that are transferred from experiments on small molecules or from quantum
chemistry calculations [19]. The statistical potentials do not assume any analytical form,
and are based on a coarse-grained representation of protein structure, which is a computa-
tional advantage if they have to be applied on an omics scale or in other time-consuming
calculations. They have moreover the advantage of considering implicitly the eﬀect of the
solvent (i.e. water for soluble proteins). They are obtained by deriving a potential of mean
force (PMF) from frequencies of associations of structure and sequence elements in a dataset
of known 3D protein structures, using the Boltzmann law [20, 21]. The simplest PMF can
be written as:

F (s, c)

F (s)F (c)

∆W (s, c) ∼= −kT ln

,

(3.1)

where c and s are structure and sequence elements respectively, F represent the relative
frequencies of c and/or s, and k is the Boltzmann constant. Sequence elements are sin-
gle amino acids, amino acid pairs, triplets, etc, and structure elements are inter-residue
distances, main chain torsion angle domains, solvent accessibility, etc. More complex poten-
tials can be constructed by considering more than two structure elements and/or sequence
elements. Examples of such potentials are given in Fig. 3.

(a)

(b)

FIG. 3: Examples of distance potentials obtained from sets of mesostable proteins (blue curves) and

thermostable proteins (red curves). The folding free energy (in kcal/mol) is given as a function of
inter-residue distance d (in ˚A). (a) ∆W (R, d, T ) potential based on the propensity of the amino acid

of type R (arginine) to be at distance d from any other amino acid. (b) ∆W (V, V, d, T ) potential

based on the propensity of two amino acids of type V (valines) to be separated by a distance d.

The derivation of these potentials is based on several assumptions. All the conformations
accessible to a given protein are known to follow the Boltzmann law, but here it is assumed

6

that the sequence-structure elements observed in the lowest free energy conformation of the
whole set of diﬀerent proteins follow the same law. Another strong assumption is that the
unfolded state may be modeled by conformations that are sequence-independent.

A property of these potentials that can be either inconvenient or interesting – according
to the issue – is that they depend on the dataset from which they are derived. Such a depen-
dence can lead to unduly biased potentials if the dataset is noisy, redundant, or unbalanced.
But it is also possible to take advantage of this dependence. For example, by dividing the
protein structure set into a subset of thermostable proteins (Tm ≥ 65◦C, average ¯Tm
labeled by (cid:52)) and a subset of mesostable proteins (Tm < 65◦C, ¯Tm
and deriving the potentials separately from both subsets, we obtain T -dependent potentials
[22]:

∼= 80◦C,
∼= 50◦C, labeled by (cid:53)),

∆W (s, c, T ) ∼= −kT ln

F (s, c, T )

F (s, T )F (c, T )

,

(3.2)

with T ∼= ¯Tm. The potentials derived from mesostable (thermostable) proteins yield energy

estimations at low (high) T . We would like to emphasize that this is currently the only way
of obtaining T -dependent free energy estimations. These potentials allowed us to get insight
into the T -dependences of speciﬁc interactions. For example, as shown in Fig. 3, the relative
propensity of the positively charged residue R (arginine) to be at a distance d from any other
amino acid is strongly T -dependent, whereas the relative weight of the eﬀective interactions
between two hydrophobic residues V (valines) is T -independent. Note also that, in principle,
one could deﬁne (overlapping) sets of protein structures with increasing Tm-values, to get
almost continuous T -dependence. However, this is currently impossible due to the limited
number of protein structures of experimental determined Tm, which do not ensure reliable
statistics.

IV. PREDICTION OF THE STABILITY CURVE OF PROTEINS

Using the standard and the T -dependent statistical potentials described above, we de-
veloped a method called SCooP to predict the Gibbs-Helmholtz ∆G0(T ) curve of a target
protein with known 3D structure [12, 13]. SCooP is thus able to predict all the thermody-
namic quantities that characterize the folding transition, namely the melting temperature
Tm as well as the folding heat capacity ∆C 0
m and free energy ∆G0(Tr) at
room temperature.

P , enthalpy ∆H 0

These thermodynamic descriptors were obtained from speciﬁc combinations of the sta-
tistical potentials described in Eqs (3.1,3.2) with other protein characteristics such as their
number of residues N and their total surface area ASA. In particular, the functional form
for the folding heat capacity ∆C 0

P was expressed as:

∆C 0

P = α0N +

α1N + β1

N

ASA +

ανN + βν

N

ν=2

5(cid:88)

(cid:0)∆W (cid:52)

ν − ∆W (cid:53)

ν

(cid:1)

,

(4.1)

where αν and βν are parameters to be optimized and the T -dependent potentials ∆W

(cid:52)/(cid:53)
ν

7

are deﬁned in Eq.(3.2)1. Analogous expressions with slightly diﬀerent combinations of fea-
tures were used for Tm and ∆H 0
m [13]. These functional forms were chosen on the basis of
biophysical insights and empirical evidence. For example, we considered the ﬁrst two terms
in the right hand side of expression (4.1) on the basis of the experimental observation that
∆CP , N and ASA are quite well correlated. The last terms in (4.1) come from the ∆CP
deﬁnition :

∆C 0

P = C 0

P (folded) − C 0

P (unfolded) =

∂∆H 0(T )

∂T

ν γν(N )∆Wν(T )

∂T

,

(4.2)

and the approximation consisting of expressing the folding entalphy ∆H 0(T ) as a speciﬁc
combination of the statistical potentials at temperature T weighted with parameters that
depend on the number of residues γν(N ) = αν + βν
N . Since the continuous T -dependence
of the potentials is not known, we replaced the derivative by the ﬁnite diﬀerence between
thermo- and mesostable potentials:

(cid:39) ∂(cid:80)

∂(cid:80)

ν γν(N )∆Wν(T )

∂T

γν(N )
∆T

(cid:39)(cid:88)

ν

(cid:0)∆W (cid:52)

ν − ∆W (cid:53)

ν

(cid:1)

,

(4.3)

where ∆T is a constant that was integrated in the parameters.
All the parameters that appear in the functional form of ∆C 0
P were optimized by minimiz-
ing the mean square error between the predicted and the experimental quantities of (cid:96) ≈ 220
proteins with known 3D structure and stability curve: σ2 = 1
.
(cid:96)
The same procedure was used to identify the parameters appearing in the functional forms
of Tm and ∆H 0
m were then used to
draw the full stability curve using the Gibbs-Helmholtz equation (2.2). The SCooP predictor
is freely available on the website http://babylone.ulb.ac.be/SCooP.

m (not shown). The predicted values of ∆C 0

P , Tm and ∆H 0

(cid:80)(cid:96)

∆C 0 pred

P k − ∆C 0 exp

P k

(cid:17)2

(cid:16)

k=1

One of the strengths of the SCooP method is the computation speed of the full T -
dependence of the folding free energy, which allows large-scale analyses of the entire struc-
turome. Another of its strengths is its good performance: the linear correlation coeﬃcients
between the experimental and the predicted values of Tm, ∆C 0
m for the dataset of
about 220 proteins are all three equal to 0.7, as computed with a leave-one-out cross valida-
tion procedure. The scores increase up to 0.8 after the exclusion of 10% outliers. Examples
of stability curves predicted by SCooP for proteins belonging to the adenylate kinase family
are given in Fig. 2b. As seen from the comparison with Fig. 2a in which the experimentally
determined stability curves are plotted, the SCooP predictions reproduce rather well the full
stability curves.

P and ∆H 0

1 The following combinations of potentials were used: ∆W2(T ) = [∆W (a, t, T ) + ∆W (a, a, t, T )],
∆W3(T ) = [∆W (a,A, T ) + ∆W (a, a,A, T )], ∆W4(T ) = [∆W (a, d, T ) + ∆W (a, a, d, T )], and ∆W5(T ) =
[∆W (a,A, d, T ) + ∆W (a, a,A,A, d, T )], where a stands for amino acid type, d for inter-residue distance,
t for main chain torsion angle domain, and A for solvent accessibility.

8

V. PREDICTION OF THE STABILITY CHANGES UPON MUTATIONS

A. Thermodynamic stability

It can be expected to be easier to predict changes in stability upon amino acid substitu-
tions than the actual stability of proteins. Indeed, the large majority of single-site mutations
do not aﬀect the structure of the protein, but simply modify its stability, solubility, aﬃnity
for biomolecular partners or function. The PoPMuSiC program [14, 15] , which is available
on http://www.dezyme.com, predicts changes in the thermodynamic stability of a protein
on the basis of its 3D structure and statistical potentials. The ∆∆G0(Tr) of a point mutation
is expressed as the sum of 16 terms :

∆∆G0(Tr) =

αν(A)∆∆Wν + α+(A)∆V+ + α−(A)∆V− + αI(A)

,

(5.1)

13(cid:88)

ν=1

where the 13 ∆∆Wν terms are changes in folding free energy upon mutation computed with
13 diﬀerent statistical potentials ∆W deﬁned in Eq.(3.1)2. The coeﬃcients αν are taken as
sigmoid functions of the solvent accessibility of the mutated residue:

αν(A) = ων[1 + exp−rν (A−bν )]−1 + φν,

(5.2)
where ων, rν, bν and φν ∈ R are parameters to be optimized. This A-dependence is justiﬁed
by the fact that the weight of the interactions vary continuously from the protein core to
the surface. The ∆V± are volume terms deﬁned by ∆V± = θ(±∆V )(cid:107)∆V (cid:107), where θ(V ) is
the Heaviside function. They are associated with the diﬀerence in volume of the mutant and
wild-type amino acids and provide a description of the impact of the creation of a cavity or
the accommodation of stress inside the protein structure.

(cid:16)

k=1

(cid:80)(cid:96)

The optimal (ων, rν, bν, φν) parameter values were determined on the basis a dataset
of (cid:96) = 2648 single-site mutations in 131 diﬀerent proteins with experimentally determined
3D structure and ∆∆G0(Tr). For that purpose, an artiﬁcial feedforward neural network
(ANN) was used, as shown in Fig.
4.a, with the mean square error between the ex-
perimental and predicted folding free energy changes upon mutation as cost function :
σ2 = 1
. The parameter identiﬁcation was particu-
(cid:96)
larly complex due to the size and roughness of the parameter space, which makes the search
for the global minimum complicated and yields a high probability of getting stuck in local
minima. Therefore, the initial values of the weights were chosen randomly, the initialization
and training processes were repeated 30 times, and the solution reaching the lowest σ-value
was chosen.

(Tr) − ∆∆G0 exp

∆∆G0 pred

k

(Tr)

k

(cid:17)2

The performance of PoPMuSiC was computed in 5-fold cross validation. The linear
correlation coeﬃcient between experimental and predicted ∆∆G0(Tr) values is equal to
r = 0.6 and increases to 0.8 with 10% outliers suppressed; the mean square error σ is equal

2 These are: ∆W (a, d), ∆W (a, t), ∆W (a,A), ∆W (a, a, d), ∆W (a, a, t), ∆W (a, t, t), ∆W (a,A,A),
∆W (a, t, d), ∆W (a,A, d), ∆W (a, a,A), ∆W (a, t,A), ∆W (a,A, a,A, d), ∆W (a, t, a, t, d).

9

(a)

(b)

FIG. 4: Schematic representation of the ANNs used for the parameter identiﬁcations. (a) PoPMuSiC

and HoTMuSiC: 2-layer ANN (perceptron) with sigmoid activation functions and input neurons en-

coding T -independent potentials, volume terms and an independent term; (b) Tm-HoTMuSiC: 3-layer

ANN, consisting of 3 perceptrons with sigmoid weights; the neurons of the ﬁrst (second) perceptron

encode the high-T (low-T ) potentials, and those of the third perceptron the volume and independent

terms. The outputs of these three perceptrons are the inputs of another perceptron with polynomial

weight functions.

to 1.1 kcal/mol and decreases to 0.9 kcal/mol without 10% outliers. This score is comparable
or better than that of other approaches. It must be emphasized that PoPMuSiC is extremely
fast, and predicts the ∆∆G0(Tr) of all possible point mutations in a medium-size protein in
a few minutes. It can thus be applied on a large, structuromics, scale. Of course this high
speed comes at the expense of some accuracy.

The distribution of ∆∆G0(Tr) values computed by PoPMuSiC for all possible amino acid
substitutions (about 105 mutations in total) in a set of 15 protein structures is shown in
Fig. 5 [23]. The large majority of the mutations have positive ∆∆G0(Tr) values and are
thus destabilizing with our conventions. This is of course expected, as protein sequences
are relatively well optimized for the stability of the native fold. Note, however, that natural
proteins are never perfectly optimal, because some residues are optimized for function rather
than for stability, but also, probably, because natural evolution has not had the time to reach
optimality.

B. Thermal stability

As thermodynamic and thermal stabilities are far from perfectly correlated, as clear from
Eq.(2.3), it is necessary to develop methods that predict directly ∆Tm values, instead of ap-
proximating them on the basis of ∆∆G0(Tr) predictions. This is the goal of HoTMuSiC [16],
which is available on http://www.dezyme.com. The ﬁrst version of this program uses the

10

FIG. 5: Distribution of the ∆∆G0(Tr) values for all possible amino acid substitutions in a set of 15

protein structures predicted by PoPMuSIC [14, 15].

relation:

∆T HoT

m =

1

aN + c

ν=1

(cid:32) 9(cid:88)

αν(A)∆∆Wν + α+(A)∆V+ + α−(A)∆V− + αI(A)

(cid:33)

,

(5.3)

where N is the number of residues in the protein, a, c ∈ R, and the coeﬃcients αν(A)
are sigmoid functions of A. This equation is inspired by Eq.(2.3) with all but the ﬁrst
term on the right hand side overlooked, and is thus very similar to Eq.(5.1) for ∆∆G0(Tr).
The 9 ∆∆Wν terms are computed from the ﬁrst 9 of the 13 statistical potentials used in
Eq.(5.1). The optimal parameter values appearing in this equation were identiﬁed on the
basis of (cid:96) = 1531 single-site mutations with known 3D structure and ∆Tm, the cost function
σ2 = 1
(cid:96)

(cid:1)2, and a feedforward ANN (Fig. 4a).

(cid:0)∆T pred

m − ∆T exp

(cid:80)(cid:96)

k=1

m

The second HoTMuSiC version is inspired by the full Eq.(2.3), and uses the T -dependent
statistical potentials of Eq.(3.2); it requires as input, in addition to the protein structure,
the melting temperature T wild

m of the wild-type protein:

∆T TmHoT

m

= β(cid:52)(T wild

5(cid:88)

5(cid:88)
m , N )
m , N ) [α+(A)∆V+ + α−(A)∆V− + αI(A)]

ν (A)∆∆W (cid:52)
α(cid:52)

ν + β(cid:53)(T wild

m , N )

ν=1

ν=1

+βV (T wild

ν (A)∆∆W (cid:53)
α(cid:53)

ν

.

(5.4)

The 5 ∆∆W (cid:52)
ν ) terms are folding free energy changes computed from the dataset of
thermostable (mesostable) proteins using Eq.(3.2)3. β(cid:52), β(cid:53) and βV are polynomial functions

ν (∆∆W (cid:53)

3 The following combinations were used: ∆W (a, t, d, T ), [∆W (a, d, T ) + ∆W (a, d, a, T )], [∆W (a,A, d, T ) +
∆W (a,A, d, s,A, T )], [∆W (a,A, T )+ 1
2 W (a, t, t, T )+
1
2 W (a, a, t, T )]

2 ∆W (a, a,A, T )], [∆W (a, t, T )+ 1

2 ∆W (a,A,A, T )+ 1

11

of T wild

m and the number of residues N . Their functional form guessed from Eq.(2.3) is:

βI(T wild

γI(T wild

m )2 + δIT wild

m + ξI

(5.5)
with I=(cid:52), (cid:53) or V . The dependence on the number of residues N comes from the enthalpy
factor ∆Hm in Eq.(2.3), as these two quantities show a good correlation.

m , N ) =

aIN + cI

,

To identify the parameters of this second method, a 3-layer ANN is used which is shown
schematically in Fig. 4b. The input layer consists of three sets of neurons that encode
the mesostable potentials, the thermostable potentials, and the volume and independent
terms, respectively. These three sets of neurons are the inputs of three perceptrons, whose
outputs are the three neurons of the hidden layer. These are the input neurons of yet another
perceptron, which yields a ∆Tm-prediction as output. This predicted ∆Tm is ﬁnally averaged
with the ∆Tm predicted by the ﬁrst HoTMuSiC method (Eq.(5.3)). The initialization and
identiﬁcation procedures of all parameters and the cross validation procedure are the same
as for the ﬁrst method.

The root mean square error between experimental and predicted ∆Tm-values is equal
to σ = 4.6◦C for HoTMuSiC and σ = 4.5◦C for Tm-HoTMuSiC; the associated Pearson
correlation coeﬃcients r are both equal to 0.6. When 10% outliers are excluded, σ decreases
to 3.3 and 3.2◦C and r rises to 0.7.

Finally note that, because of the two volume terms and the energy-independent term in

Eqs (5.1,5.3,5.4), the symmetry:

∆Tm(wild → mutant) = −∆Tm(mutant → wild)

(5.6)

is explicitly broken, and similarly for ∆∆G0(Tr) [23]. Due to these symmetry-breaking
terms and the fact that the large majority of experimentally characterized mutations in
the training dataset are destabilizing, the predictions of ∆∆G0(Tr) and ∆Tm are on the
average more accurate for destabilizing mutations, at the price of a decrease in the prediction
performance of stabilizing mutations. But actually, the stabilizing mutations are the most
interesting ones in most protein design and optimization applications. To solve this problem
and achieve higher prediction scores for stabilizing mutations, we are currently developing
new PoPMuSiC and HoTMuSiC versions that preserve the symmetry of Eq.(5.6).

VI. APPLICATION TO A CONFORMATIONAL DISEASE PROTEIN

To illustrate the power of the above described approaches, we describe one of their suc-
cessful applications in the context of conformational diseases [24]. Such disorders are caused
by the misfolding of speciﬁc proteins, which become inactive or toxic [25, 26]. Often these
proteins form soluble or insoluble aggregates. Creutzfeldt-Jakob and Alzheimer are well
known examples of this class of diseases. Misfolded conformations correspond to free energy
minima that diﬀer from those of the folded and unfolded states. They may be thermody-
namically or kinetically favored under certain conditions or for certain protein variants. The
precise mechanism by which misfolding is initiated and propagates to other proteins is only
partially known.

12

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 is a less known example of conformational disease [27, 28]. It
is characterized by progressive neuronal dysfunction and the presence of neuronal inclusions
containing ﬁbrillar aggregates of ataxin-3 proteins. Ataxin-3 contains a globular, structured
domain, called Josephin, and a ﬂexible polyglutamine (polyQ) domain whose repeat-length
modulates pathogenicity. It has been suggested that the ﬁbrillogenesis pathway of ataxin-3
starts with a polyQ-independent step mediated by Josephin domain interactions, followed
by a polyQ-dependent step. To test the involvement of the Josephin domain in ataxin-3
ﬁbrillogenesis, the isolated Josephin domain was in turn stabilized and destabilized, and the
consequences on the aggregation tendencies of this domain taken individually and of the full
ataxin-3 protein were analyzed. Two ataxin-3 variants were considered, a non-pathological
variant with a 15-residue-long polyQ tract (ataxin-3(Q15)), and a pathological variant with
a 64-glutamine tract (ataxin-3(Q64)) [24].

Mutants Prediction

wild-type

-

R103G
S81A

R103G/S81A

stabilizing

L169H

destabilizing

51.3
55.9
54.1
55.4
47.5

79.4
147.5
115.2
>150
4.0

Josephin

Experiment
Ataxin-3(Q15) Ataxin-3(Q64)
Tm (◦C) Agg (h) Tm (◦C) Agg (h) Tm (◦C) Agg (h)
11.7
25.3
26.3
40.6

51.0
52.1
50.8
52.4

49.2
52.9
50.6
53.4

24.0
48.9
32.2
50.0

-

-

-

-

TABLE I: Predicted stabilizing and destabilizing mutations in the Josephin domain and experimental

characterization of the thermal denaturation and aggregation midpoints (Tm and Agg) of the Josephin
domain and two ataxin-3 variants of diﬀerent polyQ length (Q15 and Q64). No results are shown for

the L169H mutant in the two ataxin-3 variants because soluble expression was not achieved.

To modify the stability of the Josephin domain, the PoPMuSiC software was used. Two
mutations were selected, which were predicted as the most stabilizing and are located suﬃ-
ciently far from the active site to avoid aﬀecting the protein’s function: R103G and S81A4.
Furthermore, four destabilizing mutations were chosen in silico, but only one resulted in
soluble protein expression: L169H. The Tm and aggregation propensities of the wild-type
and of these 3 protein mutants, as well as of the double mutant R103G/S81A, were experi-
mentally measured. As shown in Table I, the mutations predicted to stabilize the Josephin
domain actually do so. They also tend to stabilize the complete ataxin-3 protein. Moreover,
these mutants signiﬁcantly decrease the aggregation propensities: the aggregation midpoint
is increased both for the Josephin domain and the two ataxin-3 variants Q15 and Q64.
Moreover, the mutation predicted to destabilize the Josephin domain actually does so and
moreover drastically decreases the aggregation midpoint.

4 The ﬁrst letter denotes the wild-type amino acid and the second the mutant; the number indicates the

position in the sequence

13

These results show that changing the thermodynamic stability of the Josephin domain
modulates ataxin-3 ﬁbrillogenesis, and support the hypothesis that the ﬁrst stage of ataxin-3
ﬁbrillogenesis is caused by interactions involving the non-polyQ containing Josephin domain.
They also show that the use of in silico predictors such as PoPMuSiC is very helpful to detect
very rapidly relevant candidate mutations, which can be exploited to optimize a protein
system or to get insights into biological or biomedical issues.

Acknowledgments

This paper reminded of those unforgettable times spent by one of us (MR) with Philippe
Spindel and Fran¸cois Englert during the early days of 11D supergravity – and later with
some strange mathematician who insisted on drawing the time axis horizontally. Philippe,
thanks for all.

[1] T. Mavromoustakos, S. Durdagi, C. Koukoulitsa, and S.G. Grdadolnik, ”Strategies in the

rational drug design”, Curr. Med. Chem. 18 (2011) 2517-2530.

[2] D. Kuroda, H. Shirai, M.P. Jacobson, and H. Nakamura, ”Computer-aided antibody design”,

Protein Eng. Des. Sel. 25 (2012) 507-522.

[3] A.S. De Groot, A. Bosma, N. Chinai, J. Frost, B.M. Jesdale, M.A. Gonzalez, W. Martin,
and C. Saint-Aubin, ”From genome to vaccine: in silico predictions, ex vivo veriﬁcation”,
Vaccine 19 (2001) 4385-4395.

[4] D. Raimondi, A.M. Gazzo, M. Rooman, T. Lenaerts and W.F. Vranken, ”Multi-level

biological characterization of exomic variants at the protein level signiﬁcantly improves the
identiﬁcation of their deleterious eﬀects”, Bioinformatics (2016) in press.

[5] S.D. Mooney, V.G. Krishnan, and U.S. Evani, ”Bioinformatic Tools for Identifying Disease

Gene and SNP Candidates”, Methods Mol. Biol. 628 (2010) 307-319.

[6] G.A. Khoury, J. Smadbeck, C.A. Kieslich, and C.A. Floudas,”Protein folding and de novo

protein design for biotechnological applications”, Trends in Biotechnology 32 (2014) 99-109.

[7] L. Regan, D. Caballero, M.R. Hinrichsen, A. Virrueta, D.M. Williams, and C.S. O’Hern,

”Protein design: Past, present, and future ”, Biopolymers 104 (2015) 334-350.

[8] A. Zanghellini, ”De novo computational enzyme design”, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 29 (2014)

132-8.

[9] H. K¨onig, D. Frank, R. Heil, and C. Coenen, ”Synthetic genomics and synthetic biology

applications between hopes and concerns”, Curr. Genomics 14 (2013) 11-24.

[10] D.E. Cameron, C.J. Bashor, and J.J. Collins, ”A brief history of synthetic biology”, Nature

Rev. Microbiol. 12 (2014) 381-390.

[11] H.M. Berman, J. Westbrook, Z. Feng, G. Gilliland, T.N. Bhat, H. Weissig, I.N. Shindyalov,

P.E. Bourne, ”The Protein Data Bank”, Nucleic Acids Research 28 (2000) 235-242.

[12] F. Pucci, and M. Rooman, ”Stability Curve Prediction of Homologous Proteins Using

Temperature-Dependent Statistical Potentials.”, PLoS Comput Biol , 10 (2014) e1003689.

14

[13] F. Pucci, J.M. Kwasigroch, and M. Rooman, ”SCooP v1.0 : a fast and accurate method for

the prediction of the full protein stability curve”, Bioinformatics (2016) submitted.

[14] Y. Dehouck, A. Grosﬁls, B. Folch, D. Gilis, P. Bogaerts, M. Rooman, ”Fast and accurate

predictions of protein stability changes upon mutations using statistical potentials and
neural networks: PoPMuSiC-2.0”, Bioinformatics 25 (2009) 2537-43.

[15] Y. Dehouck, J.M. Kwasigroch, D. Gilis, M. Rooman, ”PoPMuSiC 2.1: a web server for the

estimation of protein stability changes upon mutation and sequence optimality”, BMC
Bioinformatics 12 (2011) 151.

[16] F. Pucci, R. Bourgeas, and M. Rooman, ”Predicting protein thermal stability changes upon

point mutations using statistical potentials: Introducing HoTMuSiC”, Scientiﬁc Reports,
(2016) in press.

[17] W/J. Becktel, and J.A. Schellman, ”Protein stability curves”, Biopolymers 26 (1987)

1859-77.

[18] F. Pucci, R. Bourgeas, and M. Rooman, ”High-quality thermodynamic data on the stability
changes of proteins upon single-site mutations”, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data (2016) submitted
[19] O. Guvench, A.D.Jr MacKerell, ”Comparison of protein force ﬁelds for molecular dynamics

simulations”, Methods Mol. Biol. 443 (2008) 63-88.

[20] M.J. Sippl, ”Knowledge-based potentials for proteins”, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 5 (1995)

229-235.

[21] Y. Dehouck, D. Gilis, and M. Rooman, ”A new generation of statistical potentials for

proteins”, Biophys J. 90 (2006) 4010-4017.

[22] B. Folch, Y. Dehouck, and M. Rooman, ”Thermo- and mesostabilizing protein interactions
identiﬁed by temperature-dependent statistical potentials”, Biophys J. 98 (2010) 667-677.

[23] F. Pucci, K. Bernaerts, F. Teheux, D. Gilis, and M. Rooman, ”Symmetry principles in

optimization problems : an application to protein stability prediction”, IFAC-PapersOnLine
48 (2015) 458-463.

[24] H.M. Saunders, D. Gilis, M. Rooman, Y. Dehouck, A.L. Robertson, and S.P. Bottomley,
”Flanking domain stability modulates the aggregation kinetics of a polyglutamine disease
protein”, Protein Sci. 20 (2011) 1675-1681.

[25] A. Naeem, and N.A. Fazili, ”Defective protein folding and aggregation as the basis of
neurodegenerative diseases: the darker aspect of proteins”, Cell Biochem. Biophys. 61
(2011) 237-250.

[26] M. Renner, and R. Melki, ”Protein aggregation and prionopathies”, Pathol. Biol. 62 (2014)

162-168.

[27] H.M. Saunders, and S.P. Bottomley, ”Multi-domain misfolding: understanding the

aggregation pathway of polyglutamine proteins.”, Protein Eng. Des. Sel. 22 (2009) 447-451.
[28] A.L. Robertson, and S.P. Bottomley, ”Towards the treatment of polyglutamine diseases: the

modulatory role of protein context”, Curr. Med. Chem. 17 (2010) 3058-3068.

15

