6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
4
1
 
 
]

.

O
C
h
t
a
m

[
 
 

1
v
7
3
3
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

On the structure of the power graph and
the enhanced power graph of a group ∗

Ghodratollah Aalipour†

Saieed Akbari‡

Peter J. Cameron§

Reza Nikandish¶

Farzad Shaveisik

Abstract

Let G be a group. The power graph of G is a graph with the vertex set G,
having an edge between two elements whenever one is a power of the other. We
characterize nilpotent groups whose power graphs have ﬁnite independence num-
ber. For a bounded exponent group, we prove its power graph is a perfect graph
and we determine its clique/chromatic number. Furthermore, it is proved that for
every group G, the clique number of the power graph of G is at most countably
inﬁnite. We also measure how close the power graph is to the commuting graph
by introducing a new graph which lies in between. We call this new graph as the
enhanced power graph. For an arbitrary pair of these three graphs we characterize
ﬁnite groups for which this pair of graphs are equal.

1

Introduction

We begin with some standard deﬁnitions from graph theory and group theory.

Let G be a graph with vertex set V (G). If x ∈ V (G), then the number of vertices
adjacent to x is called the degree of x, and denoted by deg(x). The distance between
two vertices in a graph is the number of edges in a shortest path connecting them.
The diameter of a connected graph G, denoted by diam(G), is the maximum distance
between any pair of vertices of G. If G is disconnected, then diam(G) is deﬁned to be

∗Key Words: Power graph, Clique number, Chromatic number, Independence number, Group.

2010 Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation: 05C25, 05C69, 20D60.

†Department of Mathematics and Computer Sciences, Kharazmi University, 50 Taleghani Avenue,
Tehran, Iran and and Department of Mathematical and Statistical Sciences, University of Colorado
Denver, CO 80217, USA (ghodrat.aalipour@ucdenver.edu)

‡Department of Mathematical Sciences, Sharif University of Technology (s akbari@sharif.edu)
§School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of St Andrews and School of Mathematical Sci-

ences, Queen Mary, University of London (pjc20@st-andrews.ac.uk)

¶Department of Basic Sciences, Jundi-Shapur University of Technology, Dezful, Iran. P.O. BOX

64615-334 (r.nikandish@ipm.ir)

kDepartment of Mathematics, Faculty of Sciences, Razi University, Kermanshah,

Iran

(f.shaveisi@razi.ac.ir)

1

inﬁnite. A star is a graph in which there is a vertex adjacent to all other vertices, with
no further edges. The center of a star is a vertex that is adjacent to all other vertices.
Let U ⊆ V (G). The induced subgraph on U is denoted by hU i. An independent set is
a set of vertices in a graph, no two of which are adjacent; that is, a set whose induced
subgraph is null. The independence number of a graph G is the cardinality of the largest
independent set and is denoted by α(G). A subset S of the vertex set of G is called a
dominating set if for every vertex v of G, either v ∈ S or v is adjacent to a vertex in S.
The minimum size of dominating sets of G, denoted by γ(G), is called the domination
number of G. A clique in a graph is a set of pairwise adjacent vertices. The supremum
of the sizes of cliques in G, denoted by ω(G), is called the clique number of G. By
χ(G), we mean the chromatic number of G, i.e., the minimum number of colours which
can be assigned to the vertices of G in such a way that every two adjacent vertices have
diﬀerent colours.

The cyclic group of order n is denoted by Cn. A group G is called periodic if every
element of G has ﬁnite order. For every element g ∈ G, the order of g is denoted by
o(g). If there exists an integer n such that for all g ∈ G, gn = e, where e is the identity
element of G, then G is said to be of bounded exponent. If G is of bounded exponent,
then the exponent of G is the least common multiple of the orders of its elements; that
is, the least n for which gn = e for all g ∈ G. A group G is said to be torsion-free if
apart from the identity every element of G has inﬁnite order. Let p be a prime number.
The p-quasicyclic group (known also as the Pr¨ufer group) is the p-primary component
of Q/Z, that is, the unique maximal p-subgroup of Q/Z. It is denoted by Cp∞. The
center of a group G, denoted by Z(G), is the set of elements that commute with every
element of G. A group G is called locally ﬁnite if every ﬁnitely generated subgroup of
G is ﬁnite. A group is locally cyclic if any ﬁnitely generated subgroup is cyclic.

Other concepts will be deﬁned when needed.

Now, we deﬁne the object of interest to us in this paper.

Let G be a group. The power graph of G, denoted by G(G), is the graph whose
vertex set is G, two elements being adjacent if one is a power of the other. This
graph was ﬁrst introduced for semigroups in [8] and then was studied in [6] and [7] for
groups. It was shown that, for a ﬁnite group, the undirected power graph determines
the directed power graph up to isomorphism. As a consequence, two ﬁnite groups which
have isomorphic undirected power graphs have the same number of elements of each
order. The authors in [7] have shown that the only ﬁnite group whose automorphism
group is the same as that of its power graph is the Klein group of order 4.

Our results about the power graph fall into four classes.

• In Section 2.1, we consider the independence number α(G(G)). We show that if
the independence number is ﬁnite then G is a locally ﬁnite group whose centre has
ﬁnite index. Using this we are able to give precise characterizations of nilpotent

2

groups G for which α(G(G)) is ﬁnite – such a group (if inﬁnite) is the direct
product of a p-quasicyclic group and a nilpotent p′-group.

• In Section 2.2, we show that the power graph of every group has clique number at
most countable. A group with ﬁnite clique number must be of bounded exponent.
Hence we obtain a structure theorem for abelian groups with this property, as
well as showing that it passes to subgroups and supergroups of ﬁnite index.

• We do not know whether the chromatic number of every group is at most count-
able; in Section 2.2.1, we prove this for periodic groups and for free groups. We
show that, if G has bounded exponent, then G(G) is perfect.

• Finally, in Section 2.3 there are some miscellaneous results. A group is periodic
if and only if its power graph is connected, and in this case its diameter must be
at most 2. Also we show that, if all vertex degrees in G(G) are ﬁnite, then G is
ﬁnite.

In the recent paper [10], the authors prove that the power graph of every ﬁnite group
is perfect. We acknowledge that our result on the perfectness along with all results in
the Section 2 were proved independently in 2011.

Another well-studied graph associated to a group G is the commuting graph of G.
This graph appears to be ﬁrst studied by Brauer and Fowler in 1955 in [5] as a part of
classiﬁcation of ﬁnite simple groups. As the elements of the centre are adjacent to all
other vertices, usually the vertices are assumed to be non-central. For more information
on the commuting graph, see [2, 14, 21] and the references therein.

In Section 3 we relate the power graph to the commuting graph and characterize
when they are equal for ﬁnite groups. A new graph pops up while considering these
graphs, a graph whose vertex set consists of all group elements, in which two vertices x
and y are adjacent if they generate a cyclic group. We call this graph as the enhanced
power graph of G and we denote it by Ge(G). The enhanced power graph contains
the power graph and is a subgraph of the commuting graph. We further study some
properties of this graph in the Section 3.

We characterize the ﬁnite groups for which equality holds for any two of these three
graphs, and the solvable groups for which the power graph is equal to the commuting
graph. Other results are as follows:

• If the power graphs of G and H are isomorphic, then their enhanced power graphs

are isomorphic.

• A maximal clique in the enhanced power graph is either a cyclic or a locally cyclic

subgroup.

• Ge(G) has ﬁnite clique number if and only if G has ﬁnite exponent; if this holds,
then the clique number of Ge(G) is equal to the largest order of an element of G.
Also, for any group G, the clique number of Ge(G) is at most countable.

3

2 Power graphs of groups

2.1

Independent sets in power graphs

In this section we provide some results on the ﬁniteness of the independence number of
the power graphs. In the proof of the our ﬁrst theorem, we need the following deﬁnition.
Let G be a group and associate with G a graph Γ(G) as follows: the vertices of Γ(G)
are the elements of G and two vertices g and h of Γ(G) are joined by an edge if and
only if g and h do not commute, see [1] and [16] for more details. Now, we have the
following result.

Theorem 1. Let G be a group and α(G(G)) < ∞. Then

(i) [G : Z(G)] < ∞.

(ii) G is locally ﬁnite.

(i) First we note that if x and y are adjacent in Γ(G), then x and y are not
Proof.
adjacent in G(G). Thus ω(Γ(G)) ≤ α(G(G)) < ∞. Hence [16, Theorem 6] implies that
[G : Z(G)] < ∞.
(ii) Let H be a ﬁnitely generated subgroup of G. Then by (i) and [17, 1.6.11], Z(H) is
ﬁnitely generated, too. So by the fundamental theorem for ﬁnitely generated abelian
groups we ﬁnd that Z(H) ∼= Zn × Cq1 × · · · × Cqk, where n and k are non-negative
integers and every qi, 1 ≤ i ≤ k, is a power of a prime number. Since α(G(Z)) = ∞,
we deduce that H is a ﬁnite group and so the proof is complete.
(cid:3)

Now, we characterize those abelian groups whose power graphs have ﬁnite indepen-

dence number. First we need the following theorem.

Theorem 2.([17, 4.3.11]) If G is an abelian group which is not torsion-free, then it has
a non-trivial direct summand which is either cyclic or quasicyclic.

Theorem 3. Let G be an abelian group such that α(G(G)) < ∞. Then either G is
ﬁnite or G ∼= Cp∞ × H, where H is a ﬁnite group and p ∤ |H|.

If G is torsion-free, then G contains Z and so α(G(G)) ≥ α(G(Z)) = ∞,
Proof.
a contradiction. Thus by Theorem 2, G = G1 ⊕ H1, where G1 is either cyclic or
quasicyclic. If H1 is trivial, then we are done. Otherwise, α(G(H1)) < ∞ implies that
H1 = G2 ⊕ H2, where G2 is either cyclic or quasicyclic. So G = G1 ⊕ G2 ⊕ H2. By
repeating this procedure and using α(G(G)) < ∞, we deduce that there exists a positive
i=1 Gi, where every Gi is either cyclic or quasicyclic. We
show that at most one Gi is quasicyclic. By the contrary, suppose that G contains

integer n such that G ∼= Ln

4

So either G ∼= Cp∞ ×Qn

the group Cp∞ × Cq∞.
It is not hard to see that for every positive integer n, In =
{(1/pi + Z, 1/qn−i+1 + Z) : 1 ≤ i ≤ n} is an independent set of size n, a contradiction.
, where p and pi are prime numbers.
Now, suppose that the ﬁrst case occurs. To complete the proof, we show that p 6= pi,
for every i, 1 ≤ i ≤ n. By contrary, suppose that p = pi, for some i. Then Cp∞ × Cp
is a subgroup of G. Since Cp∞ × {1} is an independent set in G(Cp∞ × Cp), we get a
contradiction. So, the proof is complete.
(cid:3)

or G ∼=Qn

i=1 Cp

αi
i

i=1 Cp

αi
i

Theorem 4. Let p be a prime number and G be a p-group such that α(G(G)) < ∞.
Then either G is ﬁnite or G ∼= Cp∞.

Proof. Since α(G(G)) < ∞, we deduce that α(G(Z(G))) < ∞. Thus by Theorem 3,
either Z(G) is ﬁnite or Z(G) ∼= Cp∞, for some prime number p. If Z(G) is ﬁnite, then
by Theorem 1, G is ﬁnite. Now, suppose that Z(G) ∼= Cp∞. To complete the proof, we
show that G is abelian. To the contrary, suppose that there exists a ∈ G \ Z(G). Let
H = hZ(G) ∪ {a}i. Clearly, H is an abelian p-subgroup of G and α(G(H)) < ∞. So,
by Theorem 3, H ∼= Cp∞ ∼= Z(G). Since every proper subgroup of Cp∞ is ﬁnite, we get
a contradiction. Hence G is abelian and G = Z(G) ∼= Cp∞.
(cid:3)

Now, we exploit Theorem 4 to extend Theorem 3 to nilpotent groups.

Remark 5. Let H and K be two subgroups of G. If H ∩ K = {e}, G = HK and
H ⊆ Z(G), then G ∼= H × K.

Theorem 6. Let G be an inﬁnite nilpotent group. Then α(G(G)) < ∞ if and only if
G ∼= Cp∞ × H, for some prime number p, where H is a ﬁnite group and p ∤ |H|.

Proof. First suppose that G ∼= Cp∞ × H, where H is a ﬁnite group and p ∤ |H|.
Suppose to the contrary, {(sn/pαn + Z, gn) : n ≥ 1, sn ∈ Z, p ∤ sn and gn ∈ H} is an
inﬁnite independent set of G(G). Since H is a ﬁnite group, there exists g ∈ H such
that the inﬁnite set

{(sn/pαn + Z, g) : n ≥ 1, sn ∈ Z and p ∤ sn}

forms an independent set. Since o(g) < ∞, there exist αi and αj such that pαi ≡
pαj (mod o(g)) and αi > αj. On the other hand, we know that gcd(si, p) = 1. So, let
ti be the multiplicative inverse of si in Cpαj . Thus by Chinese Reminder Theorem,
there exists a positive integer x such that x ≡ tisj(mod pαj ) and x ≡ pαj−αi(mod o(g)).
Therefore, we have

pαi−αj x

si
pαi

−

sj
pαj

=

six − sj

pαj

∈ Z,

gxpαi−αj = g.

Thus, (si/pαi + Z, g) and (sj/pαj + Z, g) are adjacent, a contradiction.

5

Conversely, suppose that α(G(G)) < ∞. Then by Theorem 1, [G : Z(G)] < ∞
and so G = Z(G)H, where H is a ﬁnitely generated subgroup of G. Now, Theorem 1
implies that H is ﬁnite. By Theorem 3, Z(G) = AB, where A ∼= Cp∞ and B is a ﬁnite
group such that p ∤ |B|. Also, since H is nilpotent, we have H ∼= HpHp1 · · · Hpt, where
Hp and Hpi (1 ≤ i ≤ t) are sylow p-subgroup and sylow pi-subgroup of H, respectively.
We show that Hp ⊆ A. To the contrary, suppose that x ∈ Hp \ A. Then hA, xi is a p-
group and so by Theorem 4, hA, xi ∼= Cp∞ ∼= hAi. Since every proper subgroup of Cp∞
is ﬁnite, we get a contradiction. Thus Hp ⊆ Z(G) and so G = ABHp1 · · · Hpt. Since
G is nilpotent, BHp1 · · · Hpt is a ﬁnite subgroup of G and p ∤ |BHp1 · · · Hpt|. Hence by
Remark 5, G ∼= A × BHp1 · · · Hpt, as desired.
(cid:3)

2.2 The colouring of power graphs

Let G be a group.
In this section, we ﬁrst show that the chromatic number of the
power graph of G is ﬁnite if and only if the clique number of the power graph of G is
ﬁnite and this statement is also equivalent to that the exponent of G is ﬁnite. Then it
is proved that the clique number of the power graph of G is at most countable. Finally,
it is shown that the power graph of every bounded exponent group is perfect.

Lemma 7. Let G be a group. If ω(G(G)) is ﬁnite, then G is of bounded exponent.

Proof. By the contrary, suppose that G is not of bounded exponent. Then for every
positive integer k, there is an element gk ∈ G such that o(gk) > 2k. So one can
easily show that {g2i
k | 0 ≤ i ≤ k} is a clique of size k + 1 in G(G). This implies that
ω(G(G)) = ∞, a contradiction. The proof is complete.
(cid:3)

Remark 8. The proof uses the Axiom of Choice for families of ﬁnite sets.

Corollary 9. Let G be an abelian group and ω(G(G)) < ∞. Then there are some
positive integers r and ni and sets Ii, 1 ≤ i ≤ r such that

G ∼=

r

Yi=1YIi

Cni.

Proof. Since ω(G(G)) < ∞, by Lemma 7, G is bounded exponent. So the assertion
follows from Pr¨ufer-Baer Theorem (see [17, 4.3.5]).
(cid:3)

Theorem 10. The clique number of the power graph of any group is at most countably
inﬁnite.

Proof. Let C be a clique in the power graph of G, and take x ∈ C. Then the
remaining vertices y of C are of two types:

6

• y = xn for some n;

• x = yn for some n.

Clearly, there are at most countably many of the ﬁrst type. We denote the set of
vertices of the second type by C(n). We show that C(n) is at most countably inﬁnite.
If there is only one y in C(n), then there is nothing to prove; so suppose there are
at least two elements in C(n). We claim that every element in C(n) has ﬁnite order.
Choose y, y′ ∈ C(n). With no loss of generality, one can assume that y′ = yk, for
some positive integer k. So y(k−1)n = 1. This implies that the orders of both y and
y′ are ﬁnite. Thus the claim is proved. Now, for every positive integer k, deﬁne

C(n, k) = {y ∈ C(n) | o(y) = k}. By the claim, C(n) =Sk≥1 C(n, k). It is not hard to

show that for every a, b ∈ C(n, k), hai = hbi and so C(n, k) is ﬁnite. Therefore, C(n) is
at most countably inﬁnite.
(cid:3)

We wonder if the same result holds for the chromatic number: Does the power graph
of every group have a countable chromatic number? A group is called a pcc-group if its
power graph has at most countable chromatic number. Free groups have this property
by the next theorem.

Theorem 11. Every free group is a pcc-group.

Proof. By [19, Corollary, p.51], in a free group, every non-identity element lies in a
unique maximal cyclic subgroup, generated by an element which is not a proper power
(when written as a reduced word). So, the power graph of a free group consists of
many copies of the power graph of an inﬁnite cyclic group, with the identity in all these
copies identiﬁed.
(cid:3)

Next, we show that every abelian group is a pcc-group. First, we need the following
result.

Lemma 12. Every periodic group is a pcc-group.

Proof. Suppose that G is a periodic group. For every positive integer n, let Gn be the
set of all elements of G of order n. If g, h ∈ Gn and g and h are adjacent in the power
graph, then g and h generate the same cyclic group. Hence, the induced subgraph on
Gn is a disjoint union of cliques of size φ(n). So one can colour the induced subgraph

on Gn with φ(n) colours. Clearly, G =Sn≥1 Gn and so the chromatic number of G(G)

is at most countable.

(cid:3)

Now, we prove that the class of pcc-groups contains the class of abelian groups.

7

Theorem 13. Every abelian group is a pcc-group.

Proof. Let G be abelian. Then G can be embedded in a divisible abelian group ([17,
Theorem 4.1.6, p.98]). It is known that every divisible abelian group is of the form
H × K, where H is a periodic group and K is a direct sum of many copies of Q, see
[17, Theorem 4.1.5, p.97]. By Lemma 12, H is a pcc-group. Now, the next two claims
prove the assertion of the theorem.

Claim 1.

If M and N are two pcc-groups, then M × N is a pcc-group.

Proof of Claim 1: Let f and g be the proper countable colouring G(M ) and G(N ),
respectively. Then the new map φ : M × N −→ Image(f ) × Image(g) deﬁned by
φ(x, y) = (f (x), g(y)) is a proper countable colouring for G(M × N ). This completes
the proof of Claim 1.

Claim 2. Every torsion-free abelian group is a pcc-group.

Proof of Claim 2: Let A be a torsion-free abelian group. We show that the connected
components of G(A) are at most countable. First, we show that the degree of any vertex
is at most countable. Now, the identity element 0 is an isolated vertex. Suppose that
x 6= 0. There are only countably many multiples of x. Also, for each natural number n,
there is at most one element y such that ny = x. For, if ny = nz = x, then n(y −z) = 0,
so y − z = 0 since A is torsion-free. So there are at most countably many elements of
which x is a multiple. Hence, the neighbourhood of x is countable. This implies that
the set of vertices of distance 2 from x is countable as well. By induction, we conclude
that the set of vertices of distance k from x is countable. So, the component of G(A)
which contains x is countable. Now, we can colour each connected component with
countably many colours. The proof of Claim 2 is complete.
(cid:3)

Other classes that could be looked at would include solvable groups. One could also

ask whether the class of pcc-groups is extension-closed.

2.2.1 Perfectness of the power graph

A graph G is called perfect if for every ﬁnite induced subgraph H of G, χ(H) = ω(H).
The Strong Perfect Graph Theorem states that a ﬁnite graph G is perfect if and only
if neither G nor G (the complement of G) contains an induced odd cycle of length at
least 5, see [4, Theorem 14.18]. However, this is a deep theorem, and we do not need
it to prove our results.

Utilizing Lemma 7 to colour the power graph with a ﬁnite set of colours we require
the group to be bounded exponent. Here we show that for such groups the resulting

8

power graph is always perfect and can be ﬁnitely coloured. To prove this result we
facilitate the concepts of comparability graph.

Let ≤ be a binary relation on the elements of a set P . If ≤ is reﬂexive and transitive,
then (P, ≤) is called a pre-ordered set. All partially ordered sets are pre-ordered. The
comparability graph of a pre-ordered set (P, ≤) is the simple graph Υ(P ) with the vertex
set P and two distinct vertices x and y are adjacent if and only if either x ≤ y or y ≤ x
(or both).

Theorem 14. Let m be a positive integer and P be a pre-ordered set (not necessarily
ﬁnite) whose maximum chain size is m. Then the comparability graph Υ(P ) is perfect
and

ω(Υ(P )) = χ(Υ(P )) = m.

Proof. The result is well known for comparability graphs of partial orders; our proof
is a slight extension of this. Since the class of comparability graphs is closed under
taking induced subgraphs, it is enough to prove that the comparability graph of P has
equal clique number and chromatic number. Clearly, a clique in a Υ(P ) is a chain in
P , while a colouring is a partition into antichains.

First we show that ω(Υ(P )) = m. Let C be a clique in Υ(P ). Then C is a chain in

P , and so |C| ≤ m. Thus ω(Υ(P )) = m.

Now, we show that χ(Υ(P )) ≤ m. We form a directed graph by putting an arc
from x to y whenever x ≤ y but y 6≤ x; and, if C is an equivalence class of the relation
≡ deﬁned by x ≡ y if x ≤ y and y ≤ x, then take an arbitrary directed path on the
elements of C. Clearly, the longest directed path contains m vertices. Let Pi be the
set of elements x for which the longest directed path ending at x contains i vertices. It
is easy to see that Pi is an independent set; these sets partition P into m classes. (cid:3)

Now, we show that the power graph of a group is the comparability graph of a pre-
ordered set. First, we deﬁne some notations. Let n be a positive integer and D(n) be
the set of all divisors of n in N. Deﬁne a relation (cid:22) on D(n) by r (cid:22) s if and only if r | s.
Clearly, (D(n), (cid:22)) is a partially ordered set. Denote the set of all chains of (D(n), (cid:22))
by C(n). Using this convention we are able to determine the clique/chromatic number
of the power graph of a group of bounded exponent (see Lemma 7).

Theorem 15. Let G be a group of exponent n. Then G(G) is a perfect graph and

χ(G(G)) = ω(G(G)) = max( Xd∈C

Gd6=∅

φ(d) : C ∈ C(n)) ≤ n,

where Gd is the set of elements of G of order d, for some divisor d of n.

9

Proof. First we consider two following facts:

Fact 1. Suppose that d is a divisor of n and Gd 6= ∅. If g, h ∈ Gd and g and h are
adjacent in the power graph, then g and h generate the same cyclic group. So hGdi is a
disjoint union of cliques of size φ(d). Therefore; if x is an element of a clique H of hGdi
adjacent to an element y of a clique K of hGd′ i, then every element of H is adjacent to
every element of K and moreover, d | d′ or d′ | d.

Fact 2. Note that if z is an element of order d, then for each divisor d′ of d, z

d
d′
is of order d′. So for each clique T of hGdi, every element of T is adjacent to every
element of a clique S of hGd′ i.

Since {Gd : G has an element of order d} forms a partition for G, Fact 1 implies
that every maximal clique of G(G) has the form Cl1 ∪ · · · ∪ Clm, where Cli is a clique of
hGdi i of size φ(di) and {d1, . . . , dm} is a chain of length m belonging to C(n). Moreover;
by Fact 2, we deduce that for every chain {d1, . . . , dm} in C(n), there exists a clique for
G(G) of this form. Now, by |Cli| = φ(di), we conclude that

ω(G(G)) = max( Xd∈C

Gd6=∅

φ(d) : C ∈ C(n)) ≤Xd|n

φ(d) = n.

Deﬁne a pre-ordering ≤ on G by x ≤ y if and only if x is a power of y. Clearly, the
power graph of G is the comparability graph of ≤ and so by Theorem 14, the power
graph of G is perfect. Thus χ(G(G)) = ω(G(G)) and the proof is complete.
(cid:3)

The next two corollaries are direct consequences of Lemma 7 and Theorem 15.

Corollary 16. For every group G, the following statements are equivalent:

(i) χ(G(G)) < ∞;

(ii) ω(G(G)) < ∞;

(iii) G is bounded exponent.

Moreover, the chromatic number of G(G) does not exceed the exponent of G.

Corollary 17. Let G be an abelian group of exponent n. Then

χ(G(G)) = ω(G(G)) = max(Xd∈C

φ(d) : C ∈ C(n)) .

10

Corollary 18. Let H be a subgroup of G and [G : H] < ∞. Then ω(G(H)) < ∞ if
and only if ω(G(G)) < ∞.

The following example shows that a similar assertion does not hold for the inde-

pendence number.

Example 19. Let G = C2 × C2∞ and H = {0} × C2∞ . Thus [G : H] = 2. Since
G(H) is a complete graph, α(H) = 1. Clearly, the set {1} × C2∞ is independent and
so α(G) = ∞.

2.3 Miscellaneous properties

We conclude this section with three miscellaneous properties of the power graph of a
group.

Theorem 20. If G(G) is a triangle-free graph, then G is isomorphic to a direct product
of C2 and G(G) is a star.

Proof. First we show that the order of every element of G is at most 2. Let a ∈ G.
If o(a) ≥ 3, then {e, a, a2} is a triangle, a contradiction. So G is an elementary abelian
2-group. Therefore, by Pr¨ufer-Baer Theorem, G is isomorphic to a direct product of
C2 and so G(G) is a star with the center e.
(cid:3)

The following theorem characterizes those groups whose power graphs are con-

nected.

Theorem 21. Let G be a group. The following statements are equivalent.

(i) G(G) is connected;

(ii) G is periodic;

(iii) γ(G(G)) = 1;

(iv) diam(G(G)) ≤ 2.

(i)=⇒(ii) Let x (x 6= e) be a vertex of G(G). We show that x is of ﬁnite order
Proof.
in G. Since G(G) is connected, there is a path from x to e. Let y be the adjacent vertex
to e in this path. So the order of y is ﬁnite. Now, suppose that t is the adjacent vertex
to y in this path. Then the order of t is ﬁnite, too. By repeating this procedure, we
deduce that the order of x is ﬁnite. So G is periodic.
(ii)=⇒(iii) Since every element in G has a ﬁnite order, {e} is a dominating set.
The parts (iii)=⇒(iv) and (iv)=⇒(i) are clear.

(cid:3)

11

Theorem 22. If deg(g) < ∞, for every g ∈ G, then G is a ﬁnite group.

Proof. Let g ∈ G. Since deg(g) < ∞, g has a ﬁnite order in G. Thus G is a periodic
group and so e is adjacent to every other vertices of G(G). Since deg(e) < ∞, we
deduce that G is ﬁnite.
(cid:3)

Remark 23. Let G ∼=Qi≥1 C2. Then G(G) is an inﬁnite star with the center 0. This

shows that in the previous theorem the condition deg(g) < ∞, for every g ∈ G is
necessary.

3 Power graph and commuting graph

Let G be a group. If the vertices x and y are joined in the power graph of G, then they
are joined in the commuting graph; so the power graph is a spanning subgraph of the
commuting graph.

Question 24. For which groups is it the case that the power graph is equal to the
commuting graph?

The identity is joined to all others in the commuting graph; so if the two graphs

are equal, then G is a periodic group.

Theorem 25. Let G be a ﬁnite group with power graph equal to commuting graph.
Then one of the following holds:

• G is a cyclic p-group;

• G is a semidirect product of Cpa by Cqb, where p and q are primes with a, b > 0,

qb | p − 1 and Cqb acts faithfully on Cpa;

• G is a generalized quaternion group.

Proof. Let G have power graph equal to commuting graph; that is, if two elements
commute, then one is a power of the other. Then G contains no subgroup isomorphic
to Cp × Cq, where p and q are primes, since this group fails the condition.

A theorem of Burnside [15, Theorem 12.5.2] says that a p-group containing no
Cp × Cp subgroup is cyclic or generalized quaternion. So all Sylow subgroups of G are
of one of these two types.

Suppose that all Sylow subgroups are cyclic. Then G is metacyclic [15, Theorem
9.4.3]. The cyclic normal subgroup of G has order divisible by one prime only, say p.

12

Its centraliser in G is a Sylow p-subgroup P of G, since it contains no elements of order
coprime to p. Hence G is a semidirect product of P and a cyclic group Q of order
coprime to p, necessarily a cyclic q-group for some prime q. If |Q| = qb, then we have
qb | p − 1.

So we may suppose that G has generalized quaternion Sylow 2-subgroups. By
Glauberman’s Z*-Theorem [11], G/O(G) has a central involution, where O(G) is the
maximal normal subgroup of G of odd order. This involution must act ﬁxed-point-
freely on O(G), so O(G) is abelian, and hence cyclic of prime power order. But a
generalized quaternion group cannot act faithfully on such a group. So O(G) = 1. Then
the involution in G is central, so G is a 2-group, necessarily a generalized quaternion
group.
(cid:3)

Remark 26. In the inﬁnite case, there are other examples, such as Tarski monsters,
which are inﬁnite groups whose non-trivial proper subgroups are all cyclic of prime
order p. Probably no classiﬁcation is possible.

In the next theorem, we extend Theorem 25 to solvable groups.

Theorem 27. Let G be a solvable group with power graph equal to commuting graph.
Then one of the following holds:

• G is a cyclic p-group;

• G is a semidirect product of Cpa by Cqb, where p and q are primes with a, b > 0,

qb | p − 1 and Cqb acts faithfully on Cpa;

• G is a generalized quaternion group;

• G is the p-quasicyclic group Cp∞;

• G is a semidirect product of p-quasicyclic group Cp∞ and a ﬁnite cyclic group.

Proof. We use this fact that every ﬁnitely generated periodic solvable group is ﬁnite.
We know that G is periodic. We show that there are no three elements whose order
are distinct primes. Suppose that o(a) = p, o(b) = q and o(c) = r, where p, q and r
are distinct primes. Let H be the subgroup generated by a, b and c. Then H is ﬁnite.
Clearly, the power graph and the commuting graph of H are equal. This contradicts
Theorem 25. Thus the order of every ﬁnite subgroup of G is pαqβ, for some non-
negative integers α and β. By the second part of Theorem 25, we may assume that
β is bounded, because qβ|p − 1. Also, by Theorem 25, the order of every element of
G is a p-power or a q-power, because every cyclic subgroup is a p-group or a q-group.
If α, β > 0, then by the second part of Theorem 25, ha, bi is semidirect product of hai
and hbi. So, hai and hbi are both cyclic (even in the case q = 2). Let N be the set

13

of all elements of G whose orders are p-power. We show that N is an abelian normal
subgroup of G. To see this ﬁrst we show that if x and y are two elements of N , then
xy = yx. Let S be the subgroup generated by x and y. Then S is a ﬁnite group of
order pαqβ. If β = 0, then by Theorem 25, S is a cyclic p-group and we are done. So
assume that β > 0. Let N1 and Q be Sylow p-subgroup and Sylow q-subgroup of S,
respectively. Then by Theorem 25 both are cyclic. Now, by [18, Theorem 6.2.11], Q
has a normal complement. So, N1 ⊳ S. This implies that x, y ∈ N1 and so xy = yx.
Thus we conclude that N is an abelian p-subgroup of G. Now, by the deﬁnition of N ,
N ⊳ G.

Now, let Q be a q-subgroup of G which has maximum size. We prove that G = N Q.

Let a ∈ G be an element of G whose order is q-power. Let M be the subgroup
generated by a and Q. Then M = P1Q1, where P1 and Q1 are Sylow p-subgroup and
Sylow q-subgroup of M , respectively and P1 ⊳ M . But Q1 is a conjugate of Q and so
M = P1Q. Since a ∈ M , we have a = bc, where b ∈ P1 and c ∈ Q. But P1 ⊆ P and
this implies that a ∈ P Q, as desired. So G = N Q.

Since N is an abelian group, the commuting graph of N and so the power graph of
(cid:3)

N is a complete graph. Now, Theorem 4 yields that N is ﬁnite or N = Zp∞.

4 The enhanced power graph

4.1 Deﬁnition and properties

In the Section 2 we investigated some properties of power graphs of groups. In The-
orem 25, we characterized ﬁnite groups for which the power graph is the same as the
commuting graph. Now, it is natural to ask if they are not equal, how close these
graphs are. To tackle this problem we introduce an intermediate graph. This graph
can be regarded as a measurement for this diﬀerence. Given a group G, the enhanced
power graph of G denoted by Ge(G) is the graph with vertex set G, in which x and y
are joined if and only if there exists an element z such that both x and y are powers of
z.

The power graph and commuting graph behave well on restriction to a subgroup
(that is, if H ≤ G, then the power graph of H is the induced subgraph of the power
graph of G on the set H, and similarly for the commuting graph). Because of the
existential quantiﬁer in the deﬁnition, it is not obvious that the same holds for the
enhanced graph. That this is so is a consequence of the fact that x and y are joined in
the enhanced power graph if and only if hx, yi is cyclic. Note that

• the power graph is a spanning subgraph of the enhanced power graph;

• the enhanced power graph is a spanning subgraph of the commuting graph.

14

In the next remark, we use the concept of graph squares. For a graph H, the square
of H is a graph with the same vertex set as H in which two vertices are adjacent if
their distance in H is at most two.

Remark 28. If we assume that the (undirected or directed) power graph has a loop
at each vertex, then the enhanced power graph lies between the power graph and its
square. We already saw that it contains the power graph (as a spanning subgraph).
Now, let x and y be two vertices joined by a path (x, z, y) of length 2 in the power
graph. There are four cases in the directed power graph D = ~G(G):

• (x, z), (z, y) ∈ E(D). Then x is a power of z, and z a power of y; so x is a power

of y, and (x, y) ∈ E(D).

• (z, x), (y, z) ∈ E(D). Dual to the ﬁrst case.

• (x, z), (y, z) ∈ E(D). Then x and y are powers of z, so they are joined in the

square of the power graph.

• (z, x), (z, y) ∈ E(D). In this case there is nothing we can say.

Also the following holds:

Theorem 29. Let G and H be ﬁnite groups. If the power graphs of G and H are
isomorphic, then their enhanced power graphs are also isomorphic.

Proof. Note that x and y are joined in the enhanced power graph if and only if there
is a vertex z which dominates both in the directed power graph. So the theorem follows
from the main theorem of [6].
(cid:3)

4.2 Comparing to the power graph and commuting graph

Question 30. For which (ﬁnite) groups is the power graph equal to the enhanced
power graph?

This question connects with another graph associated with a ﬁnite group, the prime
graph, deﬁned by Gruenberg and Kegel [13]: the vertices of the prime graph of G are the
prime divisors of |G|, and vertices p and q are joined if and only G contains an element
of order pq. To state the next result we need a deﬁnition. The group G is a 2-Frobenius
group if it has normal subgroups F1 and F2 such that F1 < F2, F2 is a Frobenius group
with Frobenius kernel F1, and G/F1 is a Frobenius group with Frobenius kernel F2/F1.

In the statement of the following theorem, p and q denote distinct primes.

Theorem 31. For a ﬁnite group G, the following conditions are equivalent:

15

(a) the power graph of G is equal to the enhanced power graph;

(b) every cyclic subgroup of G has prime power order;

(c) the prime graph of G is a null graph.

A group G with these properties is one of the following: a p-group; a Frobenius group
whose kernel is a p-group and complement a q-group; a 2-Frobenius group where F1 and
G/F2 are p-groups and F2/F1 is a q-group; or G has a normal 2-subgroup with quotient
group H, where S ≤ H ≤ Aut(S) and S ∼= A5 or A6.

All these types of group exist. Examples include S3 and A4 (Frobenius groups); S4

(a 2-Frobenius group); A5, A6 and 24 : A5.

Proof. Let p and q be distinct primes. The cyclic group of order pq does not have
property (a); so a group satisfying (a) must also satisfy (b). Conversely, suppose that
(b) holds. If x and y are adjacent in the enhanced power graph, then hx, yi is cyclic,
necessarily of prime power order; so it must be generated by one of x and y, and so x
and y are adjacent in the power graph.

Clearly, (b) and (c) are equivalent.

Now, let G be a group satisfying these conditions. Either G is a p-group for some
prime p, or the prime graph of G is disconnected. Now, we use the result of Gruenberg
and Kegel [13] (stated and proved in Williams [20]), asserting that a ﬁnite group with
disconnected prime graph is Frobenius or 2-Frobenius, simple, π1 by simple, simple by
π1-solvable, or π1 by simple by π1. Here π1 is the set of primes in the connected com-
ponent of the prime graph containing 2, assuming that |G| is even; and a 2-Frobenius
group is a group G with normal subgroups F1 < F2 such that F2 is a Frobenius group
with kernel F1, and G/F1 is a Frobenius group with kernel F2/F1.

It follows from the work of Frobenius that a Frobenius complement either has all
Sylow subgroups cyclic (and so is metacyclic) or has SL(2, 3) or SL(2, 5) as a normal
subgroup. These last two cases cannot occur, since the central involution commutes
with elements of order 3. In the ﬁrst case, the results of Gruenberg and Kegel (see
the ﬁrst corollary in Williams [20]) show that the Frobenius complement has only one
prime divisor.

In the case of a 2-Frobenius group, an element of the Frobenius complement in the
top group centralises some element of F1; so F1 and G/F2 must be p-groups for the
same prime p.

In the remaining cases, it can be read oﬀ from the tables in Williams [20] that the
simple group can only be A5 or A6, and the conclusions of the theorem follow since
π1 = {2}.
(cid:3)

16

Question 32. For which (ﬁnite) groups is the enhanced power graph equal to the
commuting graph?

Again, we have a lot of information about such a group.

Theorem 33. For a ﬁnite group G, the following conditions are equivalent:

(a) the enhanced power graph of G is equal to its commuting graph;

(b) G has no subgroup Cp × Cp for p prime;

(c) the Sylow subgroups of G are cyclic or (for p = 2) generalized quaternion.

A group satisfying these conditions is either a cyclic p-group for some prime p, or
satisﬁes the following: if O(G) denotes the largest normal subgroup of G of odd order,
then O(G) is metacyclic, H = G/O(G) is a group with a unique involution z, and
H/hzi is a cyclic or dihedral 2-group, a subgroup of PΓL(2, q) containing PSL(2, q) for
q an odd prime power, or A7.

An example of a group for the second case is the direct product of the Frobenius

group of order 253 by SL(2, 5).

Proof. The group Cp × Cp has commuting graph not equal to its enhanced power
graph, so cannot be a subgroup of a group satisfying (a); thus (a) implies (b). Con-
versely, suppose that (b) holds. Let x and y be elements of G which are adjacent in
the commuting graph. Then hx, yi is abelian, and hence is the direct product of two
cyclic groups, say Cr × Cs. Under hypothesis (b), we must have gcd(r, s) = 1, and so
hx, yi ∼= Crs; thus x and y are joined in the enhanced power graph.

Conditions (b) and (c) are equivalent by a theorem of Burnside [15, Theorem 12.5.2].

Suppose that a Sylow 2-subgroup P of G is cyclic or generalized quaternion.

If
P is cyclic, then by Burnside’s transfer theorem [15, Section 14.3], G has a normal
2-complement: that is, if O(G) is the largest normal subgroup of G of odd order, then
G/O(G) ∼= P .
If P is generalized quaternion, then by Glauberman’s Z ∗-Theorem,
H = G/O(G) has a unique central involution z. Put Z = hzi. Then the Sylow
2-subgroups Q of H/Z are dihedral; the Gorenstein–Walter theorem [12] shows that
H/Z is isomorphic to a subgroup of PΓL(2, q) containing PSL(2, q) (for odd q), or to
the alternating group A7, or to Q. For any such group H ∗ = H/Z, an argument of
Glauberman (which can be found in [3]) shows that there is a unique double cover H
with a single involution.
(cid:3)

Question 34. What can be said about the diﬀerence of the enhanced power graph and
the power graph, or the diﬀerence of the commuting graph and the enhanced power
graph? In particular, for which groups is either of these graphs connected?

17

4.3 Maximal cliques in the enhanced power graph

We will now look at maximal cliques in the enhanced power graph. This requires a
lemma which looks trivial, but we couldn’t ﬁnd an easier proof of it than the one below.

Lemma 35. Let x, y, z be elements of a group G, and suppose that hx, yi, hx, zi and
hy, zi are cyclic. Then hx, y, zi is cyclic.

Proof. The result clearly holds if one of x, y, z is the identity; so suppose not. Now,
a cyclic group cannot contain elements of both ﬁnite and inﬁnite order, so either all
three elements have ﬁnite order, or all three have inﬁnite order.

Case 1: x, y, z have ﬁnite order. Then they generate a ﬁnite abelian group A.

We ﬁrst note that it suﬃces to do the case where the orders of x, y, z are powers
of a prime p. For A is the direct sum of p-groups for various primes p; each p-group is
generated by certain powers of x, y, z; and if each p-group is cyclic, then so is A. With
this assumption, suppose that A is not cyclic. Since hx, yi is cyclic, A is the sum of
two cyclic groups, and so contains a subgroup Q ∼= Cp × Cp. Each of hxi, hyi and hzi
intersects Q in a subgroup of order p; let these subgroups be X, Y, Z. Since hx, yi is
cyclic, it meets Q in a subgroup of order p; so X = Y . Similarly X = Z. So hx, y, zi
meets Q in a subgroup of order p, contradicting the assumption that Q ≤ hx, y, zi.

Case 2: x, y, z have inﬁnite order.

Then they generate a free abelian group; since hx, yi is cyclic, we see that A =
hx, y, zi has rank at most 2. Consider the Q-vector space A ⊗Z Q, which has dimension
at most 2. Since hx, yi is cyclic, the 1-dimensional subspaces hxi ⊗Z Q and hyi ⊗Z Q
have non-empty intersection, and so are equal. Similarly for hzi ⊗Z Q. Thus A ⊗Z Q is
1-dimensional, so A is cyclic.
(cid:3)

Now, we have the following characterization of the maximal cliques in the enhanced

power graph.

Lemma 36. A maximal clique in the enhanced power graph is either a cyclic subgroup
or a locally cyclic subgroup.

Proof. Clearly, a cyclic or locally cyclic subgroup is a clique. Suppose that C is a
maximal clique. If x, y ∈ C, then by Lemma 35, every element of hx, yi is joined to
every element z ∈ C; so C ∪ hx, yi is a clique. By maximality of C, we have hx, yi ⊆ C;
so C is a subgroup. Now, a simple induction shows that any ﬁnite subset of C generates
a cyclic group, so that C is locally cyclic.
(cid:3)

18

Remark 37. Locally cyclic groups include the additive group of Q (or the subgroup
consisting of rationals whose denominators only involve primes from a prescribed set),
and direct sums of copies of the p-quasicyclic groups (the Pr¨ufer groups) Cp∞ for distinct
primes p.

Now, we have two immediate corollaries:

Corollary 38. Let G be a group. Then ω(Ge(G)) < ∞ if and only if G is a group of
ﬁnite exponent. If these conditions hold, then

ω(Ge(G)) = max{o(g) : g ∈ G}.

Remark 39. Note that this may be smaller than the exponent of G.

Proof. Clearly, if G is not a bounded exponent group, then G(G) as a subgraph of
Ge(G) has inﬁnite clique number by Lemma 7. Now, let G be a periodic group. Then
the subsets Gn = {g ∈ G : o(g) = n}, for n ∈ N, partition G into at most countably
many subsets. On each of these subsets the power graph and the enhanced power graph
coincide. In particular, if G is bounded exponent, then there are only ﬁnitely many
classes. It is clear that, if x and y have the same order and generate a cyclic group,
then each is a power of the other.
(cid:3)

Corollary 40. A clique in the enhanced power graph of a group is at most countable.

Proof. For a locally cyclic group is isomorphic to a subgroup of Q or Q/Z and hence
countable, see [17, Exercise 5, p.105].
(cid:3)

Open problems

This paper concerns several graph theoretical parameters of the power graph of a group.
In Section 2.1 we studied groups whose power graph has a ﬁnite independence number.
In Theorem 6, we proved that if G is a nilpotent group and α(G) < ∞, then either G
is a ﬁnite group or G ∼= Cp∞ × H, for some prime number p, where H is a ﬁnite group
and p ∤ |H|. This result motivates us to pose the following question.

Question 41. Let G be an inﬁnite group. Is it true that α(G(G)) < ∞ if and only if
G ∼= Cp∞ × H, where H is a ﬁnite group and p ∤ |H|.

In Section 2.2, we showed that the chromatic number of the power graph of G
is ﬁnite if and only if the clique number of the power graph of G is ﬁnite and this
statement is also equivalent to the ﬁniteness of the exponent of G. We proved that the
clique number of the power graph of G is at most countable. We also introduced the
concept of pcc groups and we posed the following question.

19

Question 42. Is it true that the chromatic number of the power graph of any group
is at most countably inﬁnite?

It might be interesting to ask how much of Lemma 7 can be proved without the
Axiom of Choice. Is there any way of showing that the chromatic number of a group of
ﬁnite exponent is ﬁnite? A good test case for this question would be an abelian group
of exponent 3. Colouring the non-identity elements with two colours requires choosing
one of each pair {x, x−1}, which requires AC (as Bertrand Russell famously pointed
out).

In the study of the commuting graph, it is normal to delete vertices which lie in
the centre of the group, since they would be joined to all other vertices. Similarly, in
the study of the generating graph of a 2-generator group, the identity is an isolated
vertex and is usually excluded. This convention is not used for the power graph. So
any problem we raise will have two diﬀerent forms, depending on which convention we
use. For the power graph, the question of whether to include or exclude the identity
is more interesting. Some of the results will be completely diﬀerent in the two cases
especially those dealing with connectedness. For example, if the identity is excluded,
Theorem 21 fails, since indeed the power graph of the inﬁnite cyclic group is connected
when the identity is discarded. The next question seems interesting.

Question 43. Which groups do have the property that the power graph is connected
when the identity is removed?

Or more generally:

Question 44. Which groups do have the property that the power graph is connected
when the set of vertices which dominate the graph is removed?

The following question is the second version for Question 24.

Question 45. For which groups, are the induced subgraphs of the power graph and
the commuting graph on G \ {e} are equal. Note that free groups have this property.

Question 46. Consider the diﬀerence of the power graph and commuting graph, the
graph in which x and y are joined if they commute but neither is a power of the other.
What can be said about this diﬀerence graph? In particular, for which groups is it
connected? Again this question can be asked with or without the identity. Note that
in a periodic group the identity is isolated in the diﬀerence graph, but this is not true
for arbitrary inﬁnite groups.

20

References

[1] A. Abdollahi, S. Akbari, H.R. Maimani, Non-commuting graph of a group, J. Algebra 298

(2) (2006), 468–492.

[2] J. Ara´ujo, W. Bentz, J. Konieczny, The commuting graph of the symmetric inverse semi-

group, Israel Journal of Mathematics 207 (1) (2015), 103-149.

[3] L. Babai, P.J. Cameron, Automorphisms and enumeration of switching classes of tourna-

ments, Electronic J. Combinatorics 7 (1) (2000), article #R38.

[4] J.A. Bondy, U.S.R. Murty, Graph Theory, Springer-Verlag, 2008.

[5] R. Brauer, K.A. Fowler, On groups of even order, The Annals of Mathematics 62 (3) (1955),

567–583.

[6] P.J. Cameron, The power graph of a ﬁnite group II, J. Group Theory 13 (2010), 779–783.

[7] P.J. Cameron, S. Ghosh, The power graph of a ﬁnite group, Discrete Math. 311 (13) (2011),

1220–1222.

[8] I. Chakrabarty, S. Ghosh, M.K. Sen, Undirected power graphs of semigroups, Semigroup

Forum 78 (2009), 410–426.

[9] N.G. De Bruijn, P. Erd¨os, A colour problem for inﬁnite graphs and a problem in the theory

of relations, Indagationes Math. 13 (1951), 369–373.

[10] M. Feng, X. Ma, K. Wang, The structure and metric dimension of the power graph of a

ﬁnite group, European Journal of Combinatorics 43 (2015), 82–97.

[11] G. Glauberman, Central elements in core-free groups, J. Algebra 4 (1966), 403–420.

[12] D. Gorenstein, J.H. Walter, The characterization of groups with dihedral Sylow 2-

subgroups, J. Algebra 2 (1965), 85–151, 218–270, 354–393.

[13] K.W. Gruenberg, O.H. Kegel, unpublished manuscript, 1975.

[14] M. Giudici, A. Pope, On bounding the diameter of the commuting graph of a group,

Journal of Group Theory 17 (1) (2014), 131–149.

[15] M. Hall, Jr., The Theory of Groups, Macmillan, New York, 1959.

[16] B.H. Neumann, A problem of Paul Erd¨os on groups, J. Austral. Math. Soc. 21 (4) (1976),

467–472.

[17] D.J.S. Robinson, A Course in the Theory of Groups, Second edition, Springer-Verlag, New

York, 1995.

[18] W.R. Scott, Group Theory, Dover Publ., New York, 1987.

[19] M. Takashi, On partitions of free products of groups, Osaka Math. J. 1 (1) (1949), 49–51.

[20] J.S. Williams, Prime graph components of ﬁnite groups, J. Algebra 69 (1981),

487–513.

21

[21] T.J. Woodcock, Commuting Graphs of Finite Groups. PhD thesis, University of

Virginia, 2010.

22

