Simple approach for calculating the binding free energy of a multivalent
particle

Nicholas B. Tito,1 Stefano Angioletti-Uberti,2 and Daan Frenkel1
1)Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, Lensﬁeld Road, Cambridge CB2 1EW,
UKa)
2)International Research Centre for Soft Matter, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing,
China

(Dated: 15 March 2016)

We present a simple yet accurate numerical approach to compute the free energy of binding of multivalent
objects on a receptor-coated surface. The method correctly accounts for the fact that one ligand can bind to
at most one receptor. The numerical approach is based on a saddle-point approximation to the computation
of a complex residue. We compare our theory with the powerful Valence-Limited Interaction Theory (VLIT)
(J. Chem. Phys. 137, 094108(2012), J. Chem. Phys. 138, 021102(2013)) and ﬁnd excellent agreement
in the regime where that theory is expected to work. However, the present approach even works for low
receptor/ligand densities, where VLIT breaks down.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
4
1

 
 
]
t
f
o
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
3
4
3
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

I.

INTRODUCTION

Multivalent particles are microscopic entities that can
bind to multiple ”receptors” via ﬂexible ligands. For ex-
ample, a multivalent particle can bind to receptors placed
on an membrane (e.g. a cell wall) or a hard surface (e.g.
a sensor).1–4 The particle might be an oligomeric pro-
tein complex, a star polymer, a virus, or a functionalised
nano-colloid.

When the particle diﬀuses over the surface, it samples
diﬀerent local arrangements and concentrations of recep-
tors. The binding free energy of the particle depends
on an average over the bound-state partition function in
each locality. In general, computing this partition func-
tion is non-trivial as it requires knowledge of the con-
ﬁgurational entropy of the ligands for all possible local
binding arrangements.5

To simplify matters, we consider a model where the
ligands are modelled as non-self-avoiding polymers on a
lattice, although the approach will also work oﬀ-lattice.
We derive a simple yet exact expression for the binding
free energy of a multivalent particle, incorporating an
analytical average over every possible local receptor con-
ﬁguration. To calculate the free energy in practice, we
employ a saddle-point approximation.

In what follows, we consider a multivalent object at
height h above a surface, represented in this example as a
two-dimensional lattice, although in general the receptors
need not be restricted to a plane.

For a ﬁxed position h, the ligands on the object are
able to access NA surface sites. We assume that the re-
ceptors are distributed randomly over the NA surface lat-
tice sites; the probability that NR of the surface sites are
receptors is deﬁned as P (NR). The distribution P (NR)
can take any form. The receptors are also assumed to
be immobile, as binding sites embedded in the surface;

however, our approach can be generalised to account for
oligomeric or polymeric receptors.

The probability that a ligand binds to a receptor site
j depends on the partition function qj, the Boltzmann-
weighted sum of all conformations of a ligand that bind
to site j. We deﬁne fj, the free energy of binding to re-
ceptor j through qj ≡ e−βfj . Importantly, no two ligands
can bind to the same receptor; this condition is enforced
strictly in our approach.

II. MODEL

We now show how to calculate the average binding free
energy of the multivalent object at distance h from the
surface. We start by considering the situation where NR
receptors are within the range that can be reached by
the NL ligands. Of course, these receptors can be dis-
tributed in many diﬀerent ways over the NA accessible
surface sites. Initially, we will consider only one speciﬁc
realisation. Subsequently, we will average over all possi-
ble receptor distributions.
Let us ﬁrst consider the case that λ out of the NL
ligands are bound to the receptors. Clearly, λ ≤ NL and
λ ≤ NR. We can consider the partition function Qb that
accounts for all possible ways to bind the λ ligands to
the accessible receptors:

Qb(NR, λ) =

qjqk(cid:54)=j...qλ(cid:54)=j,k...

(1)

The summation is over all possible subsets of λ surface
sites out of the available NR.

The number of possible ligand-receptor combinations
(i.e. the number of terms in Eq. 1) can be extremely
large even for moderate NR and λ. In order to calculate
Qb we employ the residue theorem of complex functions.
To begin, we deﬁne the auxiliary function

(cid:88)

{λ}NR

NR(cid:89)

j=1

a)Electronic mail: nicholas.b.tito@gmail.com

Z(z) =

(1 + zqj),

(2)

where z is a complex variable. This function is a poly-
nomial in z. The coeﬃcient on the zλ term is precisely

Qb(NR, λ); it is the sum of (cid:0)NR

(cid:1) products of the qj’s.
(cid:73) Z(z)

Qb(NR, λ) can be calculated using the residue theorem:

λ

Qb(NR, λ) =

1
2πi

zλ+1 dz ,

(3)

where the contour is around z = 0. To estimate this
integral, we employ the saddle-point approximation:

(cid:115)

Qb(NR, λ) ≈ 1
2πi

e−f (z0)

2π

f(cid:48)(cid:48)(z0)

,

is given by f (z) = (λ + 1) ln z −(cid:80)NR

where z0 is the (real) value of z at the location of the
saddle point of Z(z). From Eq. 3 it follows that f (z)
j=1 ln (1 + zqj). The
saddle point of Z(z) corresponds to the maximum of f (z)
along the real axis. The location of this maximum (z0)
can be easily computed numerically, allowing one to ob-
tain Qb(NR, λ).

This complex residue approach works well for most
cases, even when λ and NR are small (provided NR is
greater than approximately 5). There are, however, a
few special cases where the residue approach does not
work. However, these are typically the cases where the
bound-state partition function can easily be computed
exactly:

can immediately write:

1. When λ = 1 we

Qb(NR, λ = 1) =(cid:80)NR
Qb(NR, λ = NR) =(cid:81)NR

j=1 qj.

j=1 qj.

2. When λ = NR, we can immediately write

3. When λ = NR − 1, the function f (z) exhibits no
extremum. However, since this corresponds to the
case where all receptors but one are bound, it is
straightforward to compute Qb(NR, λ = NR − 1) =

Qb(NR, λ = NR) ×(cid:16)(cid:80)NR

(cid:17)

.

1
qj

j=1

When some of the qj are large, the saddle-point of f (z)
moves close to zero and the second derivative becomes ex-
tremely large. This can cause numerical errors. Dividing
all qj by the maximum weight qmax eliminates this prob-
lem. This has the eﬀect of keeping the largest weights
in the partition function function near one. The factor
qλ
max is then re-incorporated into Qb(NR, λ) afterwards.
Having found Qb(NR, λ) it is straightforward to write
down the partition function taking the (NL−λ) unbound
ligands into account. The contribution of the unbound
ligands is Qub(λ) = qNL−λ
, where qub is the partition
function for a single unbound ligand. The complete par-
tition function for λ out of NL ligands binding to λ out
of NR receptors, is:

ub

Q(NR, λ) =

λ!Qb(NR, λ)Qub(λ).

(4)

(cid:18)NL

(cid:19)

λ

2

λ

The combinatorial factor in this equation requires an ex-
planation. We consider the situation where λ out of NL

ligands bind to λ out of NR receptors. There are (cid:0)NR
(cid:1)
(cid:1) ways to choose λ ligands out of NL. However,
are(cid:0)NL

ways of choosing λ out of NR receptors. Similarly, there

λ

(cid:0)NL

the total number of distinct ligand-receptor connections
is not simply the product of these two binomial factors.
The reason is that, for a given choice of λ receptors and
λ ligands, there are still λ! ways to make the ligand-
receptor connections. We take this into account in the
combinatorial factor in Eq. 4, where we have multiplied

λ
Next, we consider the fact that the NR receptors can
be distributed over the NA accessible sites. The bound
partition function averaged over all distinct ways of con-
necting λ ligands to λ surface sites (out of the available

(cid:1) by λ!.
(cid:1). This eﬀective partition function
NA) is Qb(NA, λ)/(cid:0)NA
is now the binding weight for each of the (cid:0)NR
(cid:1) ways of
(cid:19)(cid:18)NL
(cid:18)NR
(cid:1)
(cid:0)NA

λ
binding λ ligands to NR receptors. Therefore,

¯Q(NR, λ) =

Qb(NA, λ)

λ!Qub(λ)

(cid:19)

λ

λ

λ

λ

Finally, we average over the probability distribution
P (NR) for observing NR receptors, and sum over the
possible number of bonds λ that varies between 0 and
min(NA, NL). This leads to

β ¯F = − ln

(cid:19)

(cid:34)(cid:18)NL
(cid:40)min (NA,NL)(cid:88)
(cid:1) (cid:32) NA(cid:88)
(cid:18)NR
(cid:19)

λ=0

λ

λ

NR=λ

Qb(NA, λ)

(cid:0)NA

λ

λ!Qub(λ)×

(cid:33)(cid:35)(cid:41)

P (NR)

.

(5)

III. RESULTS

To test our model, we compute multivalent free ener-
gies of binding for two cases. In the ﬁrst, we consider a
nanoparticle coated with mobile ligands, able to bind to
a surface with diﬀerent concentrations of receptors. The
second case consists of a particularly simple geometry of
NL ligands grafted to ﬁxed points on a plane, or “slab”,
that can bind to NR = NL receptors on the surface. Ev-
ery ligand has exactly one receptor binding partner, and
we can compute the binding free energy analytically. In
both cases, we compare to an existing theory of multi-
valent interactions: the “valence-limited interaction the-
ory” (VLIT)5,6. A derivation of VLIT for our purposes
is given in Appendix A.

A. Multivalent nanoparticle with mobile ligands

First, we consider a solid ligand-coated nanoparticle
adjacent to a surface. The ligands are assumed to be
mobile on the particle surface, and chemically identical.

The surface, particle core, and ligands are all contained
within a three-dimensional simple cubic lattice.

je−β, where q(cid:48)

The ligands are represented as non-self-avoiding lattice
walks of Npoly steps, beginning anywhere on the particle
surface. The weight for a ligand-receptor bond at j is
given by qj = q(cid:48)
j is the number of walks
that terminate at j, and the ligand-receptor bond energy
 is set to be the same for all receptors. The quantities q(cid:48)
j
for each surface site are calculated using lattice moment
propagation. The partition function qub per unbound
ligand is deﬁned to be the number of non-self-avoiding
walks beginning on the particle surface and ending any-
where in the system. Each qj as well as qub depend on
the particle position h above the receptor surface.

The particle itself is represented as a coarse-grained
impenetrable sphere in the lattice, with radius r, and
center located at (x∗, y∗, h∗). Impenetrability is enforced
by preventing any ligand segments from entering lat-
tice sites with coordinates (x, y, h) satisfying (x − x∗)2 +
(y − y∗)2 + (h − h∗)2 ≤ r2. The receptor surface is lo-
cated at h = 1, and is also impenetrable.

When the particle is at distance h from the surface,
there are NA sites available to the ligands; this also de-
pends on the choice of ligand length Npoly. Receptors
are placed randomly among the surface sites, and the
number NR placed is chosen from the binomial distribu-
R (1 − φR)NA−NR , where φR is the

tion P (NR) =(cid:0)NA

(cid:1)φNR

average receptor concentration.

NR

Our model contains an analytical average over all pos-
sible receptor conﬁgurations following P (NR). To cal-
culate the equivalent average free energy of binding in
VLIT, we average over many explicit receptor conﬁgura-

tions by β ¯FVLIT(h) = − ln(cid:2)(1/N )(cid:80)

n e−βFn(h)(cid:3). Here,

Fn(h) is the free energy calculated by VLIT (see Ap-
pendix A) for receptor conﬁguration n.

We can now directly compare our model results, ob-
tained by Eq. 5, to results from VLIT. This comparison
is given in Figure 1. Results are presented as a free en-
ergy change ∆F (h) = F (h) − F ◦ upon surface binding
relative to when the particle is inﬁnitely far from the
surface. The reference state free energy is given by

βF ◦ = −NL ln q◦,

(6)

where q◦ is the partition function for a single ligand in
the reference state.

Results from our model are compared to VLIT aver-
aged over N = 800 receptor conﬁgurations. For both low
and high values of receptor concentration, even when the
number of receptors is less than the number of ligands
on the particle, our model is in nearly perfect agreement
with VLIT. This consistency is encouraging, since for mo-
bile receptors (and/or ligands) VLIT has been proven to
become exact when the number of ligands plus receptors
grows large7.

3

FIG. 1. Free energy upon binding β∆ ¯F as a function of h
for φR = 0.01, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, and 1.0 (red to violet). Points
are VLIT results, and lines are ﬁts of our theory, Eq. 5.
Fixed parameters are: NL = 20, β = −3.5, particle radius
r = 2, and Npoly = 20 segments per ligand. Average number
of receptors at h = 4 for each dataset, equal to NA(h)φR, is
9.2, 184, 368, 552, 736, and 920.

B. Multivalent slab with diﬀuse ligands

Next, we consider the case where the density of ligands
and receptors is so low that one ligand can bind with
at most one receptor. This case would correspond to
the situation where two surfaces with a low degree of
functionalisation interact.
In practice, the ligands and
receptors would be distributed randomly over the surface.
However, to facilitate comparison with analytical theory,
we will consider the (trivial) case that each receptor and
ligand are directly opposite to each other.

Hence, we consider a model where NL ligands are
grafted to ﬁxed positions on a slab. The slab is placed
at a position h above a surface. A receptor is placed on
the surface directly opposite to the tether point of each
ligand. The ligands are spaced suﬃciently far apart so
that each may only bind to the receptor opposite to it.
Thus, each ligand is distinct, but has the same binding
statistics. As mentioned above: this simpliﬁcation facili-
tates comparison with theory, but the numerical method
could deal with arbitrary locations of the receptors. This
will be discussed shortly.

The ligands are represented by non-self-avoiding walks
as in the previous example; however, the partition func-
tion q = q(cid:48)e−β is now the same for each receptor-bound
ligand. The partition function for an unbound ligand,
qub, is the number of walks starting at the ligand tether
point and ending anywhere in the lattice.

Since we have assumed that q and qub are the same
for every ligand, we can immediately write an analytical
expression for the binding free energy of the slab per
ligand: βF (h)∗/NL = − ln (q + qub). We now compare
the predictions of our model with this analytical result.

4

ently with respect to the surface receptors. The unique
receptor binding weight qj for each ligand is inserted into
the auxillary function, Eq. 2, yielding the bound-state
free energy via Eq. 7.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

We have developed a simple approach for comput-
ing the binding free energy of a multivalent object on a
receptor-coated surface. Using complex residue integra-
tion aided by a saddle-point approximation to calculate
the bound-state partition function of the multivalent par-
ticle yields results that are in nearly exact quantitative
agreement with a previously-developed valence-limited
interaction theory (VLIT) for multivalent interactions,
while also incorporating an analytic average over all lo-
cal receptor conﬁgurations.

Our theory also extends beyond VLIT by providing an
accurate multivalent free energy for the case where lig-
ands and receptors have only one binding partner each,
even if each ligand-receptor interaction is chemically dis-
tinct. This scenario is a speciﬁc but non-trivial one, im-
portant for a wide range of emerging applications such
as interactions between viruses and cell surfaces, as well
as nanomedicine8.

The theory presented here holds promise as an easy
route to calculating binding free energies in these sce-
narios, so that large ranges of parameter space may be
sampled. It may also serve as a reference point for more
detailed simulations of multivalent interactions.

V. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work has been supported by MC-ITN FP7-People
Grant 607602 (“SASSYPOL”), and EPSRC Programme
Grant EP/I001352/1. S. A-U. acknowledges ﬁnancial
support from the Beijing Municipal Government Inno-
vation Center for Soft Matter Science and Engineering.
We wish to thank Tine Curk for helpful discussions on
this work.

Appendix A: Valence-limited interaction theory for a
multivalent particle with chemically-indistinct ligands

The valence-limited interaction theory5,6 (VLIT) con-
siders two surfaces coated with ligands. The ligands do
not interact with each other, with the exception that they
may form pairwise bonds with free energy β∆fjk (where
j and k are two ligands).

The theory does not make any assumptions on the
shapes of the two surfaces. Correlations between bonds
are introduced by the fact that two ligands cannot bind
to a third at the same time.

With these assumptions, the attractive part of the free
energy of binding between the two surfaces is given by

FIG. 2. Free energy change per ligand upon slab binding,
β∆F/NL, as a function of slab position h. Red points are
results from our theory, Eq. 7, and blue points are those from
VLIT. The analytical result, βF (h)∗/NL, is plotted as the
black dashed line. Receptor surface is located at h = 1.

Because the number and arrangement of receptors is
ﬁxed in this case, we can calculate the binding free en-
ergy from our model by simply summing Eq. 4 over all
possible values of bound ligands λ and taking the natural
logarithm:

(cid:32) NR(cid:88)
The combinatorial factors(cid:0)NL

βF (h) = − ln

λ=0

(cid:33)

.

Qb(NR, λ)Qub(λ)

(cid:1) and λ! are not present in

(7)

λ

this case, as each ligand is distinct. The change in free
energy upon binding, ∆F (h), is calculated relative to the
reference state free energy F ◦ when the slab is inﬁnitely
far from the surface (Eq. 6).
Figure 2 plots values of β∆F (h)/NL for several choices
of h, using NL = NR = 20, β = −7 and Npoly = 20 as
an example. Results from the VLIT theory (Appendix
A) are also given.
We see that our model agrees almost exactly with the
analytical result βF (h)∗/NL. Not surprisingly, the VLIT
theory does not correctly capture the binding free energy
in this particular case, as that theory assumes the prob-
ability for any ligand to be unbound is uncorrelated to
the probability of a receptor to be unbound. However,
when one ligand can only bind one receptor and vice-
versa, these probabilities are perfectly correlated, as the
two must be bound or unbound at the same time.

Lack of correlation between unbound ligands and re-
ceptors is not assumed in our present approach. It there-
fore applies to the very relevant case where ligands and
receptors both have few binding partners.

Importantly, our theory can also be applied to non-
trivial cases where each ligand has diﬀerent receptor
binding statistics. This may be because each ligand is
chemically diﬀerent, or because they are oriented diﬀer-

βFatt =(cid:80)
relation pj +(cid:80)

j [ln pj + (1/2) (1 − pj)], where pj is the prob-
ability that ligand j is unbound, and the sum is over all
ligands j on the two surfaces5,6.

For each pair of binders j and k, pj must satisfy the
k pjpkξjk = 1. This is a balance equation,
specifying that ligand j must be either unbound (with
probability pj), or bound to any of its possible partners
k with a free energy of β∆fjk = − ln ξjk. Note that pk
is the probability that ligand k is unbound.

(cid:80)NR

In our case, all ligands L are identical, while each
receptor j is unique, depending on its location on the
surface. The balance equations are therefore pL +
j=1 pLpjξj = 1 and pj + NLpjpLξj = 1. Here, pL is the
probability that one of the identical ligands is unbound,
and ξj is the binding weight for receptor j, relative to the
partition function qub of a ligand in the unbound state:
ξj = qj/qub.

Combining the two relations for pL yields pL +
j=1 (pLξj)/(1 + NLpLξj) = 1. This can be solved by
a root-ﬁnding algorithm. The attraction free energy is
then calculated by

(cid:80)NR

βFatt = NL

ln pL +

(1 − pL)

1
2

1 −

1
2

1

1 + NLpLξj

(cid:41)

− ln (1 + NLpLξj)

(cid:20)

(cid:40)

(cid:20)

(cid:18)

NR(cid:88)

j=1

+

(cid:21)
(cid:19)(cid:21)

To calculate the total free energy of binding, the repul-

5

sive part of the particle/surface interaction must be in-
corporated. This is equal to the (entropic) repulsion
of the ligands due to their proximity to the surface:
βFrep = −NL ln qub. The total binding free energy is
then F = Fatt + Frep.

1M. Mammen, S. K. Choi, and G. M. Whitesides, Angewandte
Chemie International Edition 37, 2754 (1998).
2F. J. Martinez-Veracoechea and D. Frenkel, Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
108, 10963 (2011).
3L. D. Michele and E. Eiser, Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics
15, 3115 (2013).
4C. T. Varner, T. Rosen, J. T. Martin, and R. S. Kane, Biomacro-
molecules 16, 43 (2015).
5P. Varilly, S. Angioletti-Uberti, B. M. Mognetti, and D. Frenkel,
The Journal of chemical physics 137, 094108 (2012).
6S. Angioletti-Uberti, P. Varilly, B. M. Mognetti, A. V. Tkachenko,
and D. Frenkel, The Journal of chemical physics 138, 021102
(2013).
7S. Angioletti-Uberti, P. Varilly, B. M. Mognetti, and D. Frenkel,
Physical Review Letters 113, 128303 (2014).
8J. Vonnemann, C. Sieben, C. Wolﬀ, K. Ludwig, C. Boettcher,
A. Herrmann, and R. Haag, Nanoscale 6, 2353 (2014).

