6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
4
1

 
 
]
l
l
a
h
-
s
e
m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
0
9
3
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Existence of nontrivial topologically protected states at grain boundaries in bilayer

graphene: signatures and electrical switching

Institute of Physics, Faculty of Physics, Astronomy and Informatics,
Nicolaus Copernicus University, Grudziadzka 5, 87-100 Toru´n, Poland

W. Jask´olski

Institute of Physics, Faculty of Physics, Astronomy and Informatics,

Nicolaus Copernicus University, Grudziadzka 5, 87-100 Toru´n, Poland and

M. Pelc

Centro de F´ısica de Materiales, CFM-MPC CSIC-UPV/EHU, Donostia International Physics Center (DIPC)

Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cient´ıﬁcas, C/ Sor Juana In´es de la Cruz 3, 28049 Madrid, Spain

Instituto de Ciencia de Materiales de Madrid (ICMM-CSIC),

Leonor Chico

Centro de F´ısica de Materiales, CFM-MPC CSIC-UPV/EHU,

Donostia International Physics Center (DIPC) and

A. Ayuela

Departamento de F´ısica de Materiales, Facultad de Qu´ımicas, UPV-EHU, 20018 San Sebasti´an, Spain

(Dated: March 15, 2016)

Recent experiments [L. Ju et al., Nature, 2015, 520, 650] conﬁrm the existence of gapless states at
domain walls created in gated bilayer graphene, when the sublattice stacking is changed from AB to
BA. These states are signiﬁcant because they are topologically protected, valley-polarized and give
rise to conductance along the domain wall. Current theoretical models predict the appearance of such
states only at domain walls, which preserve the sublattice order. Here we show that the appearance
of the topologically protected states in stacking domain walls can be much more common in bilayer
graphene, since they can also emerge in unexpected geometries, e.g., at grain boundaries with atomic-
scale topological defects. We focus on a bilayer system in which one of the layers contains a line of
octagon-double pentagon defects, that mix graphene sublattices. We demonstrate that gap states
are preserved even with pentagonal defects. Remarkably, unlike previous predictions, the number
of gap states changes by inverting the gate polarization, yielding an asymmetric conductance along
the grain boundary under gate reversal. This eﬀect, linked to defect states, should be detectable in
transport measurements and could be exploited in electrical switches.

PACS numbers: 73.63.-b, 72.80.Vp

I.

INTRODUCTION

valley physics in graphene.

Although graphene presents a record-high electron
mobility at room temperature, its application in next-
generation electronics requires the opening of an energy
gap [1]. This has triggered the quest for various physical
mechanisms capable of opening a substantial gap, includ-
ing external ﬁelds, quantum size eﬀects and the use of dif-
ferent substrates. Gated Bernal-stacked bilayer graphene
(BLG) shows a tunable band gap [2–4]. This setup is not
only an interesting candidate for novel electronic appli-
cations [5–8] but also for the study of fundamental phys-
ical phenomena[9–13]. The gate-induced gap in bilayer
graphene has a topological origin [10], linked to the exis-
tence of two inequivalent valley—K and K(cid:48)—which give
rise to chiral edge and boundary states. Provided there is
no-valley mixing, gated bilayer graphene presents topo-
logically protected gapless states when a domain wall is
introduced, either by an electric ﬁeld reversal [10] or by
an AB/BA stacking change [14–17]. Such states are of
high interest because they open a possibility of exploring

The existence of stacking boundaries in BLG has been
experimentally identiﬁed [14, 15]. Since the separation
in momentum space between graphene valleys is large,
topologically protected, valley-polarized gap states may
appear and localize at such domain walls; this fact has
been also conﬁrmed [16]. These states have been pre-
dicted so far at stacking boundaries created when one
layer is either stretched or corrugated [14–16, 18]. In both
cases the stacking change between graphene layers is in-
troduced keeping its hexagonal structure, without intro-
ducing topological defects. This implies that sublattice
symmetry is preserved. In these proposals, atomic-scale
defects are avoided because, intuitively, they may act as
sources of inter-valley scattering, which in principle can
destroy topological gapless states [16].

In this work we show that this intuition fails. We
demonstrate that robust gap states can exist in BLG de-
spite the presence of atomic-scale defects. Remarkably,
some of these gap states are topologically protected states
arising at stacking boundaries. We investigate a gated bi-
layer system, in which the top layer contains a defect line

along a zigzag direction, built of octagons and pentagon
pairs, and the bottom layer is pristine graphene. This
type of defect line has been experimentally identiﬁed in
monolayer graphene [19]. Our calculations reveal the ex-
istence of bands in the bulk gap, the number of which
depends on the gate polarization. One of these bands is
topologically protected, connecting the bulk valence and
conduction bilayer continua. The other states stem from
the mixture of the band induced by the defect line with
those originated by the stacking change. Remarkably,
despite the presence of pentagonal defects, which mix
graphene sublattices, topologically protected gap states
persist in this system, although sublattice symmetry is
not conserved. This means that topological phases in
BLG can be found also at grain boundaries, where they
are not expected to occur.

II. MODEL AND METHODS

The model system is schematically presented in Fig.
1. On the two sides of the grain boundary, we have bi-
layer graphene with the most stable Bernal stacking, i.e.,
the nodes of one sublattice in one layer fall into hexagon
centers of the other layer (unconnected sublattices), so
the atoms of the other sublattices are vertically aligned
(connected sublattices).

Away from the defect line, we identify the stackings
as AB and BA, as seen in Fig. 1. The two semiinﬁnite
graphenes in the top layer are joined by a line of oc-
tagons and double pentagon defects (8-55), forming the
grain boundary. The pentagonal rings mix graphene sub-
lattices. If one tries to label the two sublattices of the
top layer from the outer parts towards the defect line,
one ends up with two atoms in the unit cell which can-
not be uniquely assigned to any sublattice, so the sys-
tem presents geometrical frustration. These two bonded
atoms, at the sides shared by the adjacent pentagons,
are responsible for the sublattice mixing; we denominate
them mixing nodes, see Fig. 1 (b). The nodes closest
to the mixing ones are called zigzag or Z-nodes. This

FIG. 1.
(Color online). (a) Top view of bilayer graphene
with an AB/BA stacking boundary produced by an octagonal-
pentagonal defect line in the top layer (blue). (b) Detailed
view of the AB-BA stacking. Diﬀerent sublattices are colored
in blue and cyan. The nodes which mix the two sublattices
are depicted in grey color. Neighboring nodes at the defect
line in the top layer, called zigzag or Z-nodes, are also marked
with arrows.

2

name derives from one possible way of creating an 8-55
boundary, namely by joining a zigzag-terminated edge
[20]. Note that the mixing nodes belong to the uncon-
nected sublattice, whereas the Z-nodes belong to the con-
nected one.

We perform calculations in one-orbital tight-binding
approximation for nearest-neighbors, with intralayer
hopping parameter γ0 = −2.66 eV, and the interlayer
hopping parameter, given only for nodes that are directly
on top of each other, is set to γ1 = 0.1γ0 [2, 21]. Note that
the eﬀects of screening, which mainly lead to a reduction
of the energy gap, can be just seen as a scaling of V , but
do not aﬀect the global features of the gap states under
study [21]. A gate voltage V = ±0.3 V is applied to the
bottom layer. Based on this model, we calculate the local
density of states (LDOS) [22] using the Green function
matching approach [23–25]. As the system has transla-
tional symmetry along the grain boundary, the LDOS is
k-dependent in this direction. We have performed test
calculations for diﬀerent values of V and γ1, applying
also the gate voltage to the top layer, and we have ver-
iﬁed that the main results presented in Sec. IV do not
depend qualitatively on these parameters.

(Color online).

FIG. 2.
(a) LDOS(E, k) for monolayer
graphene with an 8-55 grain boundary. (b) LDOS(E, k) for
AB/BA stacked graphene with a minimal stacking bound-
ary for positive and negative gate voltages. Topological gap
states reverse the sign of their velocities when the voltage sign
is changed.

III.

INGREDIENTS

On the one hand, previous works show that an 8-55 de-
fect line in monolayer graphene yields a defect-localized
band [19, 20, 26–29]. In Fig. 2 (a) we show the LDOS as a
function of energy and wavevector k for an inﬁnite mono-
layer graphene with this type of boundary. A defect ﬂat
band (D) spans from the Fermi level at k = 0 to the Dirac
point and next it emerges up to 0.8 eV at the edge of the
BZ. The defect band to the left of the Dirac point is due
to the zigzag edges facing each other, connected by the
mixing nodes. These edge states appear at grain bound-
aries with topological defects, and we can relate them
to the zigzag components of the joined edges [20, 30–32].

zigzag Z-nodes mixing nodes (a) (b) AB BA A B A B (a)V=0V=-0.3 eV(b)V=+0.3 eVDDS1S2S3S43

stacking boundary, i.e., it joins the lower and the upper
bulk continua. Similarly to the topologically protected
band, the third band starts in the lower bulk continuum
(S2), but crosses the gap without merging in the con-
duction band continuum, running parallel and close to it
up to 0.8 eV, where it ends. Comparison of Fig. 3 (a)
and Fig. 2 allows us to infer that this band results from
hybridization of the D and S2 bands, so we label it as
S2-D.

For V < 0 the ﬂat band at 0 eV, labeled D-S3, bends
towards the lower bulk continuum, while the other band
(S4) joins the upper and lower continua as a topologi-
cally protected band. Comparing Figs. 2 and 3 (b), we
infer that there are strong hybridization and mixing be-
tween the defect band D and the S3 band arising from
the stacking change. Notice that despite this hybridiza-
tion, we can still identify the parts of the band with D
character. The band is again pinned at 0 V for low k
and ﬁxed at 0.8 eV at the edge of the BZ, although it is
now embedded in the continuum, which is shifted down
by V = −0.3 eV.

In order to understand the reasons why these diﬀerent
hybridizations take place, we present in Fig. 4 the LDOS
resolved in top and bottom layers (top panels) and in
connected/unconnected sublattices (lower panels). The
defect band D that for V > 0 joins the upper continuum
at k ≈ 2
π
a has the same type of localization as the upper
continuum, being both mostly in the top layer and in
the connected sublattice. Likewise, for k > 2
π
a , the S2
3
band hybridizes with the D band that runs parallel to
the conduction continuum, being both more localized in
the top layer and in the unconnected sublattices.

3

When the voltage is negative, the top/bottom local-
ization of the two bulk continua is reversed, and the hy-
bridization also changes. The D band, localized at the
top layer, now strongly anticrosses with the S3 band, to
the extent that we end up with a D-S3 band, which spans
from a localized D to stacking S3 character, ending at the
lower bulk continuum. As mentioned above, the higher k
portion of the defect band is buried in the upper contin-
uum, barely emerging at 0.8 eV. The other band related
to the change of stacking, S4, extends from the upper to
the lower continuum, closing the gap.

We verify that bands with similar localization, mostly
the same layer and preferentially in the same
at
interact more
(connected or unconnected) sublattices,
strongly and hybridize, yielding in both cases bands that
energetically close the gap, but they do not necessarily
end in two continua. Instead, bands with a mixed novel
character arise, that are D-like (defect-like) for some k
values and evolve into S-like (related to the stacking
change) due to strong hybridization. It is important to
note that for each sign of V , one of the bands originating
from the stacking change (S1 or S4) preserves its strong
and genuine topological character.

We further analyze the role of the sublattices by resort-
ing to the atom-resolved LDOS, plotted in Fig. 5. The
energy chosen corresponds to the middle of the gap for

(Color online). LDOS(E, k) calculated at the defect
FIG. 3.
line region of BLG. Gate voltage applied to the undefected
layer is V = 0.3 eV (a) and V = −0.3 eV (b). The wavevector
k corresponds to direction along the defect line in reciprocal
units where a is the unit cell width. Dashed lines mark the
center of the gated bilayer gaps.

Its localization changes from the Z-nodes of the pentagon
(see Fig. 1) to the mixing nodes at higher energies to
the right of the Dirac cone. On the other hand, stack-
ing boundaries have been shown to possess topological
gap states when a gate voltage is applied throughout the
system, if no-valley mixing symmetry holds. Fig. 2 (b)
shows these topological bands when a positive (S1, S2)
or a negative (S3, S4) voltage V is applied to the bottom
layer. These states can carry a current along the bound-
ary which is valley-polarized. The sign of their velocities
is changed by the reversal of the gate voltage [10].
In
this work we investigate the interplay between the states
produced by the octagon-double pentagon grain bound-
ary and the topological gapless states resulting from the
stacking change which, remarkably, persist after valley
mixing.

IV. RESULTS

In Fig. 3 we present the LDOS(E, k) at the boundary
for energies around the bandgap. We focus on the valley
with positive wavevectors near the Dirac point. For pos-
itive voltages, V = 0.3 eV in panel (a), there are three
bands in the energy gap. For negative voltages, V = −0.3
eV shown in panel (b), only two bands appear in the gap.
The velocities of these bands change from positive to neg-
ative with the voltage sign. We can relate these states to
the grain boundary band appearing in a single graphene
layer and the two bands in bilayer graphene produced by
the change of stacking (Fig. 2). The ﬂat band that is
pinned at 0 eV for both voltages is clearly related to the
defect line for low k. For positive V (Fig. 3 (a)) it fol-
lows closely another band, labeled S1, that has the same
behavior as a topologically protected band in a simple

(a)(b)DS1S2-DS4D-S3V=+0.3 eVV=-0.3 eV4

FIG. 5.
(Color online). Atom-resolved LDOS for the D, S1,
S2-D, D-S3 and S4 gap states at the grain boundary region
and surroundings. The LDOS is calculated for energies at the
center of the gaps. The radii of the circles at the bottom (red)
and top (blue) layers are proportional to the LDOS values.
The green rectangle marks the grain boundary region with
the 8-55 defects.

explains the strong hybridization between the D and S3
bands, that leads to a band of mixed D-S3 character, as
indicated in Fig. 3. The remaining state, S4, which pre-
serves its topological character, has a larger LDOS in the
bottom layer, with both sublattices having an apprecia-
ble weight.

If we focus on bilayer regions outside the green rect-
angle marking the grain boundary in Fig. 5, the LDOS
of the D, S2-D and D-S3 states is signiﬁcantly concen-
trated in the upper layer, and shifts from the connected
to unconnected nodes following the order D, D-S3, and
S2-D as the component of the defect state (that is, de-
gree of hybridization) decreases [33]. In contrast, S1 and
S4 topological states have a signiﬁcant LDOS in the un-
connected nodes of the bottom layer. Apparently, the S4
state, and to some extent also the S1 state, depicted in
Fig. 5, do not seem to be localized close to the grain
boundary. This is an artifact due to the length of the
plotted region.
In fact, at longer distances than those
shown in Fig. 5 they decay with slow oscillations. This
is an interesting feature of these states appearing in the
bulk gap and it is related to the fact that the decay is
oscillatory because the Dirac point is not at k = 0 [17].
Similarly to AB/BA stacking boundaries produced by
strain or a fold, the system presents a conductance gap
measured perpendicularly to the grain boundary, but is
conducting along it [16, 17]. This longitudinal current
is due to the gap states, and it is valley-polarized.
If
a local probe is used, such that only states along the
defect line are measured, a conductance proportional to
the number of states crossing the gap should be expected.

(Color online). (a) and (b):

ln(LDOSB/LDOST),
FIG. 4.
(c) and
where B/T refer to the bottom/top layers.
(d):
to uncon-
ln(LDOSU/LDOSC) where U/C refer
nected/connected sublattices. The large width of the D-like
portions of the bands at low and high k is due to their strong
localization.

both cases, marked with a dotted line in Fig. 3. For pos-
itive V the D state is mostly localized at the connected
sublattices, to which the Z-nodes belong. Although the
S1 state has important weight at the top layer, as the
defect state, it is mainly located at the unconnected sub-
lattices, so they do not hybridize and run closely in par-
allel towards the upper continuum. The sublattice and
layer distribution of S1 and S2-D are rather similar, and
they share a remarkable feature: both are mostly local-
ized at the mixing atoms. It is important to emphasize
that this type of localization at low energies is not pos-
sible in a monolayer grain boundary [20]; here it arises
because of the AB/BA bilayer stacking change. It results
in gap modes living at the unconnected sublattices, which
are frustrated at the nodes responsible for the sublattice
mixing.

For negative V , the D-S3 state is mostly located at
the connected sublattices, with a predominant weight at
the top layer, especially close to the topological defects.
. We have checked that the unperturbed states D and
S3 shown in Fig. 2 possess similar characteristics. This

(a)(b)(c)(d)V=+0.3 eVV=-0.3 eVV=+0.3 eVV=-0.3 eVToplayerBottomlayerConnectednodesUnconnectednodesDS1S2-DD-S3S4Therefore, in contrast to previously studied boundaries
[14–17], here we have an asymmetry due to the diﬀer-
ent number of channels for the two gate polarizations,
yielding a substantial change of one quantum of conduc-
tance (2e2/h) on the transport properties under gate re-
versal, that we have numerically veriﬁed. We propose
that this distinctive asymmetric feature in the conduc-
tance of grain boundaries with 8-55 defects in BLG could
be experimentally checked in a setup similar to the one
presented in Ref.
[16]. Furthermore, this characteristic
could be also of interest for applications such as elec-
trical switches, where the transport properties could be
easily controlled by the sign of the applied gate voltage.
Although the defect size is on the atomic scale in the di-
rection perpendicular to the domain wall, in the direction
of the boundary the defect is extended and periodic. So
along this line the two valleys are well separated in recip-
rocal space and propagating states could travel without
intervalley backscattering.

5

one of the states preserves its full topological character
for each gate polarization.
It means that topologically
protected states can be much more common in bilayer
graphene than so far predicted, since they can also ap-
pear at unexpected geometries, e.g., at grain boundaries
with atomic-scale defects. The other gap states stem
from the mixture of the band localized at the defect line
with those originating from the stacking change. All of
them provide conducting channels for the current ﬂow-
ing parallel to the defect line. More importantly, unlike
previous predictions for stacking domain walls preserving
the sublattice order, here the number of the gap states de-
pends on the gate polarization. The change of the num-
ber of channels under gate polarization reversal yields a
diﬀerence of conductance along the grain boundary that
should be experimentally detected and could be exploited
in electrical switches.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

V. CONCLUSIONS

In summary, we have shown that an AB/BA stack-
ing boundary in bilayer graphene can be achieved by in-
cluding a line of octagon and double-pentagon defects in
one of the layers. Under an applied voltage a gap opens
in the system and several robust gap states appear, un-
expectedly, despite the presence of atomic-scale defects.
We have elucidated the origin of these states, showing
that in spite of the sublattice mixing due to the defects,

This work was partially supported by the Polish Min-
istry of Science and Higher Education (The ”WZROST”
Program) and the Spanish Ministry of Economy and
Competitiveness under Grants No.
FIS2012-33521,
FIS2015-64654-P and FIS2013-48286-C2-1-P. We thank
Dr. Garnett Bryant (National Institute of Standards
and Technology, Gaithersburg MD, and The University
of Maryland) for critical reading of the manuscript and
many valuable comments.

[1] K. I. Bolotin, K. J. Sikes, J. Hone, H. L. Stormer, and

[13] Y. Barlas, R. Cˆot´e, J. Lambert, and A. H. MacDonald,

P. Kim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 101, 096802 (2008).

Phys. Rev. Lett., 104, 096802 (2010).

[2] T. Ohta, A. Bostwick, T. Seyller, K. Horn, and E. Roten-

berg, Science, 313, 951 (2006).

[3] J. B. Oostinga, H. B. Heersche, X. Liu, A. F. Morpurgo,
and L. M. K. Vandersypen, Nature Materials, 7, 151
(2008).

[4] Y. Zhang, T.-T. Tang, C. Girit, Z. Hao, M. C. Martin,
A. Zettl, M. F. Crommie, Y. R. Shen, and F. Wang,
Nature (London), 459, 820 (2009).

[5] F. Schwierz, Nature Nanotechnology, 5, 487 (2010).
[6] Y.-M. Lin and P. Avouris, Nano Letters, 8, 2119 (2008).
[7] S.-M. Choi, S.-H. Jhi, and Y.-W. Son, Nano Letters, 10,

3486 (2010).

[8] J. E. Padilha, M. P. Lima, A. J. R. da Silva,

and

A. Fazzio, Phys. Rev. B, 84, 113412 (2011).

[9] P. Maher, C. R. Dean, A. F. Young, T. Taniguchi,
and P. Kim,

K. Watanabe, K. L. Shepard, J. Hone,
Nature Phys., 9, 154 (2013).

[14] J. Lin, W. Fang, W. Zhou, A. R. Lupini, J. C. Idrobo,
J. Kong, S. J. Pennycook, and S. T. Pantelides, Nano
Lett., 13, 3262 (2013).

[15] J. S. Alden, A. W. Tsen, P. Y. Huang, R. Hovden,
L. Brown, J. Park, D. A. Muller, and P. L. McEuen,
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 110, 11256 (2013).

[16] L. Ju, Z. Shi, N. Nair, Y. Lv, C. Jin, J. Velasco Jr,
C. Ojeda-Aristizabal, H. A. Bechtel, M. C. Martin,
A. Zettl, and F. Analytis, J. Wang, Nature, 520, 650
(2015).

[17] M. Pelc, W. Jaskolski, A. Ayuela, and L. Chico, Phys.

Rev. B, 92, 085433 (2015).

[19] J. Lahiri, Y. Lin, P. Bozkurt,

[18] P. San-Jose, R. V. Gorbachev, A. K. Geim, K. S.
Novoselov, and F. Guinea, Nano Lett., 14, 2052 (2014).
and
M. Batzill, Nat. Nanotechnol., 5, 326 (2010), ISSN 1748-
3387.

I. I. Oleynik,

[10] I. Martin, Y. M. Blanter, and A. F. Morpurgo, Phys.

[20] M. Pelc, L. Chico, A. Ayuela, and W. Jaskolski, Phys.

Rev. Lett., 100, 036804 (2008).

Rev. B, 87, 165427 (2013).

[11] F. Zhang, A. H. MacDonald, and E. J. Mele, Proc. Natl.

Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 110, 10546 (2013).

[12] A. Vaezi, Y. Liang, D. H. Ngai, L. Yang, and E.-A. Kim,

Phys. Rev. X, 3, 021018 (2013).

[21] E. V. Castro, K. S. Novoselov, S. V. Morozov, N. M. R.
Peres, J. M. B. L. dos Santos, J. Nilsson, F. Guinea, A. K.
Geim, and A. H. C. Neto, Phys. Rev. Lett., 99, 216802
(2007).

6

[22] The LDOS is calculated in the region deﬁned by the de-
fect line in the top layer and the corresponding part of
the bottom layer.

[29] T. Hu, J. Zhou, J. Dong, and Y. Kawazoe, Phys. Rev.

B, 86, 125420 (2012).

[30] H. Santos, A. Ayuela, W. Jask´olski, M. Pelc,

and

[23] S. Datta, Electronic Transport in Mesoscopic Systems

L. Chico, Phys. Rev. B, 80, 035436 (2009).

(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1995).

[31] W. Jask´olski, A. Ayuela, M. Pelc, H. Santos,

and

[24] L. Chico, L. X. Benedict, S. G. Louie, and M. L. Cohen,

L. Chico, Phys. Rev. B, 83, 235424 (2011).

Phys. Rev. B, 54, 2600 (1996).

[32] A. Ayuela, W. Jask´olski, H. Santos, and L. Chico, New

[25] W. Jask´olski and L. Chico, Phys. Rev. B, 71, 155405

J. Phys., 16, 083018 (2014).

(2005).

[26] J. Song, H. Liu, H. Jiang, Q.-F. Sun, and X. C. Xie,

Phys. Rev. B, 86, 085437 (2012).

[27] J. Liwei, Y. Guodong, G. Wenzhu, L. Zhe, and Z. Yisong,

Phys. Rev. B, 86, 165433 (2012).

[28] M. Kan, J. Zhou, Q. Sun, Q. Wang, Y. Kawazoe, and

P. Jena, Phys. Rev. B, 85, 155450 (2012).

[33] Note that these gap states decay with slow oscillations
at much longer distances that those plotted in Fig. 5,
similar to the topological states in Ref. [17].

