6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
6
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
t
n
a
u
q
[
 
 

2
v
9
0
4
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Quantum thermalization through entanglement in an isolated many-body system

A. M. Kaufman, M. E. Tai, A. Lukin, M. Rispoli, R. Schittko, P. M. Preiss, and M. Greiner∗

Department of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA

(Dated: March 17, 2016)

The concept of entropy is fundamental to thermalization, yet appears at odds with basic principles
in quantum mechanics. While statistical mechanics relies on the maximization of entropy for a
system at thermal equilibrium, an isolated many-body system undergoing Schr¨odinger dynamics has
zero entropy because, at any given time, it is described by a single quantum state. The underlying
role of quantum mechanics in many-body physics is then seemingly antithetical to the success of
statistical mechanics in a large variety of systems. Here we observe experimentally how this conﬂict
is resolved: we perform microscopy on an evolving quantum state, and we see thermalization occur
on a local scale, while we measure that the full quantum state remains pure. We directly measure
entanglement entropy and observe how it assumes the role of the thermal entropy in thermalization.
Although the full state has zero entropy, entanglement creates local entropy that validates the
use of statistical physics for local observables.
In combination with number-resolved, single-site
imaging, we demonstrate how our measurements of a pure quantum state agree with the Eigenstate
Thermalization Hypothesis and thermal ensembles in the presence of a near-volume law in the
entanglement entropy.

When an isolated quantum system is signiﬁcantly per-
turbed, for instance due to a sudden change in the Hamil-
tonian, we can predict the ensuing dynamics with the
resulting eigenstate distribution induced by the pertur-
bation or so-called “quench” [1]. At any given time, the
evolving quantum state will have amplitudes that depend
on the eigenstates populated by the quench, and the en-
ergy eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian. In many cases, how-
ever, such a system can be extremely diﬃcult to simu-
late, often because the resulting dynamics entail a large
amount of entanglement [2–5]. Yet, surprisingly, this
same isolated quantum system can thermalize under its
own dynamics unaided by a reservoir (Figure 1) [6–8],
so that the tools of statistical mechanics apply and chal-
lenging simulations are no longer required. Under such
circumstances, a quantum system coherently evolving
according to the Schr¨odinger equation eventually looks
thermal: the average values of most observables can be
predicted from a thermal ensemble and thermodynamic
quantities. The equivalence of these observables implies
that a globally-pure, zero-entropy quantum state appears
nearly identical to a mixed, globally-entropic thermal
ensemble [6, 7, 9, 10]. Ostensibly the coherent quan-
tum amplitudes that deﬁne the quantum state in Hilbert
space are no longer relevant, even though they evolve in
time and determine the expectation values of observables.
The dynamic convergence of the measurements of a pure
quantum state to the predictions of a thermal ensemble,
and the physical process by which this convergence oc-
curs, is the experimental focus of this work.

On-going theoretical studies over

three
decades [6, 7, 9–13] have, in many regards, clariﬁed the
role of quantum mechanics in statistical physics. The co-
nundrum surrounding the agreement of zero entropy pure
states with extensively entropic thermal states is resolved

the past

∗ E-mail: greiner@physics.harvard.edu

Schematic of thermalization dynamics in
FIG. 1.
closed systems. An isolated quantum system at zero tem-
perature can be described by a single pure wavefunction |Ψ(cid:105).
Subsystems of the full quantum state appear pure, as long
as the entanglement (indicated by grey lines) between sub-
systems is negligible. If suddenly perturbed, the full system
evolves unitarily, developing signiﬁcant entanglement between
all parts of the system. While the full system remains in a
pure, zero-entropy state, the entropy of entanglement causes
the subsystems to equilibrate, and local, thermal mixed states
appear to emerge within a globally pure quantum state.

by the counter-intuitive eﬀects of quantum entanglement.
A canonical example of this point is the Bell state of two
spatially separated spins: while the full quantum state
is pure, local measurements of just one of the spins re-
veals a statistical mixture of reduced purity. This local
statistical mixture is distinct from a superposition, be-
cause no operation on the single spin can remove these
ﬂuctuations or restore its quantum purity. In such a way,
the spin’s entanglement with another spin creates local
entropy, called entanglement entropy. Entanglement en-
tropy is not a phenomenon restricted to spins, but exists
in all quantum systems that exhibit entanglement. And

T≈0globalunitary dynamicslocalthermalization01234560.00.20.40.60.81.0Observable AP(A)pure statepure statequantum  quench01234560.00.20.40.60.81.0Observable AP(A)T>0while probing entanglement is a notoriously diﬃcult ex-
perimental problem, this loss of local purity, or, equiva-
lently, the development of local entropy, establishes the
presence of entanglement when it can be shown that the
full quantum state is pure.

In this work, we directly observe a globally pure quan-
tum state dynamically lose local purity to entanglement,
and in parallel become locally thermal. Recent exper-
iments with few-qubit spin systems have demonstrated
analogies between the role of entanglement in quantum
systems and classical chaotic dynamics [14]. Further-
more, studies of bulk gases have shown the emergence
of thermal ensembles and the eﬀects of conserved quan-
tities in isolated quantum systems through macroscopic
observables and correlation functions [15–18]. We are
able to directly measure the global purity as thermal-
ization occurs through single-particle resolved quantum
many-body interference.
In turn, we can observe mi-
croscopically the role of entanglement in producing local
entropy in a thermalizing system of itinerant particles,
which is paradigmatic of the systems studied in classical
statistical mechanics.

In such studies, we will explore the equivalence be-
tween the entanglement entropy we measure and the ex-
pected thermal entropy of an ensemble [11, 12]. We fur-
ther address how this equivalence is linked to the Eigen-
state Thermalization Hypothesis (ETH), which provides
an explanation for thermalization in closed quantum sys-
tems [6, 7, 9, 10]. ETH is typically framed in terms of
the smooth variation of observables among energy eigen-
states [6, 7, 10], but the role of entanglement in these
eigenstates is paramount [12].
Indeed, fundamentally,
ETH is a statement about the equivalence of the local
reduced density matrix of a single excited energy eigen-
state and the local reduced density matrix of a globally
thermal state [19], an equivalence which is made possible
only by quantum entanglement and the impurity it pro-
duces locally within a global pure state. The equivalence
between these two seemingly distinct systems, the sub-
systems of a quantum pure state and a thermal ensemble,
ensures thermalization of most observable quantities af-
ter a quantum quench. Through parallel measurements
of the entanglement entropy and local observables within
a many-body Bose-Hubbard system, we are able to exper-
imentally study this equivalence at the heart of quantum
thermalization.

For our experiments, we utilize a Bose-Einstein con-
densate of 87Rb atoms loaded into a two-dimensional op-
tical lattice that lies at the focus of a high resolution
imaging system [20, 21]. The system is described by the
Bose-Hubbard Hamiltonian,

H =

U

2 (cid:88)x,y

nx,y(nx,y − 1) − Jx(cid:88)x,y

−Jy(cid:88)x,y

a†x,yax+1,y

a†x,yax,y+1 + h.c.,

(1)

(2)

where a†x,y, ax,y, and nx,y = a†x,yax,y are the bosonic cre-

2

FIG. 2. Experimental sequence (A) Using tailored optical
potentials superimposed on an optical lattice, we determin-
istically prepare two copies of a six-site Bose-Hubbard sys-
tem, where each lattice site is initialized with a single atom.
We enable tunneling in the x-direction and obtain either the
ground state (adiabatic melt) or a highly excited state (sud-
den quench) in each six-site copy. After a variable evolution
time, we freeze the evolution and characterize the ﬁnal quan-
tum state by either acquiring number statistics or measur-
ing the local and global purity. (B) We show site-resolved
number statistics right after the quench (ﬁrst panel, strongly
peaked about one atom with vanishing ﬂuctuations), or at
later times (second panel) to which we compare the predic-
tions of a canonical thermal ensemble. Alternatively, we can
measure the global many-body purity, and observe a static,
high purity. This is in stark contrast to the vanishing global
purity of a canonical thermal ensemble, yet this same ensem-
ble may be employed to predict the local number distribution
we observe. (C) To measure the atom number locally, we al-
low the atoms to expand in half-tubes along the y-direction,
while pinning the atoms along x.
In separate experiments,
we apply a many-body beam splitter by allowing the atoms
in each column to tunnel in a projected double-well potential.
The resulting atom number parity, even or odd, on each site
encodes the global and local purity.

ation, annihilation, and number operators at the site lo-
cated at {x, y}, respectively. Atoms can tunnel between
neighboring lattice sites at a rate Ji and experience a
pairwise interaction energy U when multiple atoms oc-
cupy a site. We have independent control over the tun-
neling amplitudes Jx and Jy through the lattice depth,
which can be tuned to yield J/U (cid:28) 1 to J/U (cid:29) 1.
In addition to the optical lattice, we are able to super-
impose arbitrary potentials using a digital micromirror
device (DMD) placed in the Fourier plane of our imaging
system [22].

To initiate the experiment, we isolate a 2 × 6 plaque-
tte from a larger low-entropy Mott insulator with unity

Quench1-11-1-1-1Expand and Measure Local and Global Purity1-11-111Expand and Measure Local Occupation Number102210210102~ 50 Sites~ 50 SitesMott insulatorEvenOdd680 nmInitializeMany-bodyinterference45 Er6 ErGlobal thermal state purityLocally thermalLocally pureGlobally pureOn-site StatisticsParticle number0time after quench (ms)00.20.40.60.810123456Entropy: -Log(Tr[ρ2])10010-24.62.301020ABCyxInitial statequenchPurity: Tr[ρ2]10-1P(n)00.20.40.60.81P(n)Particle number0123456On-site StatisticsMany-body purityt=0 mst=16 ms3

FIG. 3. Dynamics of entanglement entropy. Starting from a low-entanglement ground state, a global quantum quench
leads to the development of large-scale entanglement between all subsystems. We quench a six-site system from the Mott
insulating product state (J/U (cid:28) 1) with one atom per site to the weakly interacting regime of J/U = 0.64 and measure the
dynamics of the entanglement entropy. As it equilibrates, the system acquires local entropy while the full system entropy
remains constant and at a value given by measurement imperfections. The dynamics agree with exact numerical simulations
with no free parameters (solid lines). Error bars are the standard error of the mean (S.E.M.). For the largest entropies
encountered in the three-site system, the large number of populated microstates leads to a signiﬁcant statistical uncertainty
in the entropy, which is reﬂected in the upper error bar extending to large entropies or being unbounded. Inset: slope of the
early time dynamics, extracted with a piecewise linear ﬁt (see Supplementary Material). The dashed line is the mean of these
measurements.

ﬁlling as shown in Figure 2A (see Supplementary Mate-
rial). At this point, each system is in a product state of
single-atom Fock states on each of the constituent sites.
We then suddenly switch on tunneling in the x-direction
while the y-direction tunneling is suppressed. Each chain
is restricted to the original six sites by introducing a bar-
rier at the ends of the chains to prevent tunneling out
of the system. These combined steps quench the six-site
chains into a Hamiltonian for which the initial state rep-
resents a highly excited state that has signiﬁcant over-
lap with an appreciable number of energy eigenstates.
Each chain represents an identical but independent copy
of a quenched system of six particles on six sites, which
evolves in the quenched Hamiltonian for a controllable
duration.

In the data that follow, we realize measurements of
the quantum purity and on-site number statistics (Fig-
ure 2C). For measurements of the former, we append
to the quench evolution a beam splitter operation that
interferes the two identical copies by freezing dynam-
ics along the chain and allowing for tunneling in a pro-
jected double-well potential for a prescribed time [23]. In
the last step for both measurements, a potential barrier
is raised between the two copies and a one-dimensional
time-of-ﬂight in the direction transverse to the chain is
performed to measure the resulting occupation on each
site of each copy.

The ability to measure quantum purity is crucial to

assessing the role of entanglement in our system. To-
mography of the full quantum state would typically be
required to extract the global purity, which is particu-
larly challenging in the full 462-dimensional Hilbert space
deﬁned by the itinerant particles in our system. Fur-
thermore, while in spin systems global rotations can be
employed for tomography [24], there is no known anal-
ogous scheme for extracting the full density matrix of a
many-body state of itinerant particles. The many-body
interference described here, however, allows us to extract
quantities that are quadratic in the density matrix, such
as the purity [23]. After performing the beam splitter
operation, we can obtain the quantum purity of the full
system and any subsystem simply by counting the num-
ber of atoms on each site of one of the six-site chains
(Figure 2C). Each run of the experiment yields the par-
ity P (k) = Πip(k)
, where i is iterated over a set of sites of
interest in copy-k. The single-site parity operator p(k)
re-
turns 1 (-1) when the atom number on site-i is even (odd).
It has been shown that the beam splitter operation yields
(cid:104)P (1)(cid:105) = (cid:104)P (2)(cid:105) = Tr (ρ1ρ2), where ρi is the density ma-
trix on the set of sites considered for each copy [4, 23, 25].
Because the preparation and quench dynamics for each
copy are identical, yielding ρ1 = ρ2 ≡ ρ, the average par-
ity reduces to the purity: (cid:104)P (i)(cid:105) = Tr(ρ2). When the
set of sites considered comprises the full six-site chain,
the expectation value of this quantity returns the global
many-body purity, while for smaller sets it provides the

i

i

01234Renyi entropy S20510152001234time (ms)Renyi entropy S205101520time (ms)12300.511.5Subsystem sizeslope (ms-1)  local purity of an arbitrary subsystem.

By studying measurements with and without the beam
splitter, our data immediately illustrates the contrast be-
tween the global and local behavior and how thermaliza-
tion is manifest (Figure 2B). We observe that the global
many-body state retains its quantum purity in time, af-
ﬁrming the unitarity of its evolution following the quench.
This global measurement also clearly distinguishes the
quantum state we produce from a canonical thermal en-
semble with orders of magnitude smaller purity. Yet, we
observe that the number statistics locally converge to a
distribution of thermal character, which can be faithfully
modeled by that same thermal ensemble. In what follows,
we experimentally explore the question suggested by this
observation: how does a pure state that appears globally
distinct from a thermal ensemble possess local properties
that mirror this thermal state?

The growth of entanglement following a quench is key
to understanding how entropy forms within the subsys-
tems of a pure quantum state, thereby facilitating ther-
malization [2, 4, 5, 26]. When two parts of a system
are entangled, the full quantum state ρ cannot be writ-
ten in a separable fashion with respect to the Hilbert
spaces of the subsystems [27, 28]. As has been shown
theoretically [4, 25] and recently observed experimen-
tally [23], this causes the subsystems ρA and ρB to be
in an entropic mixed state even though the full many-
body quantum state is pure [28]. The mixedness of the
subsystem can be quantiﬁed by the second-order R´enyi
entropy SA = −Log(Tr[ρ2
A]), which is the logarithm of
the purity of the subsystem density matrix. While the
von Neumann entropy is typically used in the context
of statistical mechanics, both quantities grow as a sub-
system density matrix becomes mixed and increasingly
entropic. In the R´enyi case, the purity in the logarithm
quantiﬁes the number of states contributing to the sta-
tistical mixture described by the density matrix.

We ﬁrst study the dynamics of the entanglement en-
tropy immediately following the quench, for varying sub-
system sizes (Figure 3). At times shortly after the
quench, we observe an approximately linear rise in the
entropy, with similar slope among the subsystems con-
sidered (Figure 3 inset) [2]. After an amount of time
that depends on the subsystem size, the entanglement
entropy saturates to a steady-state value, about which
there are small residual temporal ﬂuctuations. An exact
numerical calculation of the dynamics with no free pa-
rameters shows excellent agreement with our experimen-
tal measurements. Crucially, the data indicate that while
the subsystems acquire entropy in time, the full system
entropy remains constant and is small throughout the dy-
namics (see Supplementary Material). The high purity of
the full system allows us to conclude that the dynamical
increase in entropy in the subsystems originates in the
propagation of entanglement between the system’s con-
stituents. Counterintuitively then, we directly observe in
a closed quantum system the growth of local entropy that
we associate with a classical system approaching thermal

4

equilibrium, but the mechanism responsible is the non-
classical phenomenon of entanglement.

When a system thermalizes, we expect that the satu-
rated values of local observables should correspond to the
predictions of a statistical ensemble. By analogy, if the
entanglement entropy plays the role of thermal entropy
for a quantum state, then we expect an extensive, linear
scaling in the entanglement entropy for the thermalized
state. When the entanglement entropy in a quantum
state scales linearly with the size of the subsystem con-
sidered, it is known as a volume law. Ground-breaking
theoretical work using conformal ﬁeld theory has shown
that indeed, at long times, a volume law is expected for
a quenched, inﬁnite, non-integrable, continuous system,
while only an area law with a log correction is expected
for the ground state [2, 29–31]. Characterizing the large
amount of entanglement associated with a volume law is
particularly challenging because it results in nearly every
entry of the density matrix having small, but importantly
non-zero magnitude.

Using the techniques outlined in this work, we show
measurements displaying a near volume law scaling in the
entanglement entropy (Figure 4A). Because the entangle-
ment entropy is SA = −Log(Tr[ρ2
A]), a linear scaling in
the entanglement entropy occurs when a subsystem in-
coherently populates a number of states that scales with
the size of the subsystem Hilbert space. For particles
on a lattice, the Hilbert space has dimension approxi-
mately exponential in the lattice size, implying a linear
growth in the logarithm of the purity, where the overall
slope depends on the average energy of the thermalized
pure state. By contrast, we can prepare the ground state
of the quenched Hamiltonian by adiabatically reducing
the lattice depth. Here, the superﬂuid ground state of
the Bose-Hubbard model has suppressed entanglement,
which is predicted to incur slow logarithmic growth in the
entanglement entropy [29]. Our measurements clearly
distinguish the two cases. The back-bending of the en-
tanglement entropy as the subsystem surpasses half the
system size indicates that the state is globally pure. In
the quenched state, the high global purity is striking in a
state that locally appears completely dephased, which is
behavior often associated with environmentally-induced
decoherence or other noise sources.

We further observe a quantitative agreement between
the exact dependence of the entanglement entropy with
subsystem volume and the prediction of a thermal ensem-
ble. We make this comparison by computing a canonical
thermal ensemble ρT with an average energy that is the
same as the quenched quantum state produced experi-
mentally [32]. The gray line in Figure 4A is the R´enyi
(thermal) entropy as a function of subsystem size for this
calculated thermal state. Although our limited system
size prevents comparison over a large range of subsystem
sizes, the initial rise of the entanglement entropy mimics
that of the thermal entropy. Despite their similarity, it is
worth emphasizing the disparate character of the thermal
and entanglement entropy. The entanglement entropy is

instantaneously present in the quantum state after coher-
ent unitary evolution, arising from the non-separability
of the quantum state between the subsystem and traced
out degrees of freedom. In the von Neumann formulation,
the thermal entropy within a subsystem is the thermo-
dynamic entropy in statistical mechanics, which could be
extracted from irreversible heat ﬂow experiments on the
subsystem [12]. Therefore, the similarity of the R´enyi
entropies we observe points to an experimental equiva-
lence between the entanglement and thermodynamic en-
tropy [31, 32].

The behavior of the entanglement entropy provides a
clean conceptual link between thermalizing classical and
quantum systems. However, one of the most famous fea-
tures of entanglement, the presence of non-local corre-
lations, appears inconsistent with what one expects of
thermalized systems. In particular, the massive amount
of entanglement implied by a volume law suggests a
large amount of correlation between disparate parts of
the system, while a key feature of a thermal state is the
very absence of these long-range correlations. A useful
metric for correlations, both classical and quantum, be-
tween two subsystems A and B is the mutual information
SA + SB − SAB [23, 33]. The mutual information demon-
strates that the amount of correlation in the presence of
a volume law is vanishing for subsystem volumes that
sample less than half the full system, which is where the
entropy growth is nearly linear (Figure 4B,C). Further-
more, even though the thermalized quantum state car-
ries more entanglement entropy than the ground state,
small subsystems display smaller correlations than in the
superﬂuid ground state. Once the subsystem volume is
comparable to the system size, which is where the en-
tanglement entropy deviates from the volume law, the
quantum correlations entailed by the purity of the full
system become apparent (Figure 4C). The mutual infor-
mation therefore illustrates how the volume law in the
entanglement entropy yields an absence of correlations
between suﬃciently local observables, even though the
quantum state retains a large amount of entanglement.
Our comparisons between the entanglement entropy
and thermal entropy suggest that the pure quantum state
we study possesses thermalized properties. We can fur-
ther examine the presence of thermalization by perform-
ing a series of measurements of local observables against
which we compare the predictions of various thermal en-
sembles. As with the entanglement entropy, we also con-
trast our observations of the quenched thermalized state
with the adiabatically prepared ground state.
In Fig-
ure 5A, we display the in-situ number density distribu-
tion on the six sites for the saturated quenched state and
the (superﬂuid) ground state. While the ground state ex-
hibits signiﬁcant curvature, the quenched state exhibits a
ﬂat density distribution. This ﬂat density distribution is
consistent with a picture in which the constituents of the
many-body system collectively thermalize, so that each
site is in equilibrium with its neighbors and physically
similar.

5

FIG. 4. Thermalized many-body systems. After the
quench, the many-body state reaches a thermalized regime
with saturated entanglement entropy. (A) In contrast to the
ground state, for which the R´enyi entropy only weakly de-
pends on subsystem size, the entanglement entropy of the
saturated, quenched state grows approximately linearly with
size. As the subsystem size becomes comparable to the full
system size, the subsystem entropy bends back to near zero,
reﬂecting the globally pure zero-entropy state. For small sub-
systems, the R´enyi entropy in the quenched state is nearly
equal to the corresponding thermal entropy. (B) The mutual
information IAB = SA + SB − SAB quantiﬁes the amount
of classical and quantum correlations between subsystems A
and B. For small subsystems, the thermalized quantum state
has SA + SB ≈ SAB due to the near volume law scaling (red
arrow), leading to vanishing mutual information. When the
volume of AB approaches the system size, the mutual infor-
mation will grow because SA + SB exceeds SAB. (C) We
study IAB vs the volume of AB for the ground state and
the thermalized quenched state. For small system sizes, the
quenched state exhibits smaller correlations than the adiabat-
ically prepared ground state, and is nearly vanishing. When
probed on a scale near the system size, the highly entangled
quenched state exhibits much stronger correlations than the
ground state. Throughout this ﬁgure, the entanglement en-
tropies from the last time point in Fig. 3 are averaged over
all relevant partitionings with the same subsystem volume; we
also correct for the extensive entropy unrelated to entangle-
ment (see Supplementary Material). All solid lines are theory
with no free parameters.

A012345600.511.522.533.5Volume ARenyi entropy S2  thermalground statequenchCB01345601234Combined Volume ABMutual information  ground statequench0123456012345Renyi entropy: S2  Mutual informationCombined Volume AB2AB,, ...AB6

the similarity of two mixed quantum states. After a
short time, we see a quantum ﬁdelity exceeding 99% and
a trace-distance that ﬂuctuates between 0 and 0.1, indi-
cating the similarity between the local density matrix of
a veriﬁed pure state with the local density matrix of a
thermal state. The correspondence between the observ-
ables of a pure state and thermal state depends on the
equivalence of their reduced density matrices within the
Hilbert space sampled by the observable. The measure-
ment of Figure 5B therefore shows that observables for
the single-site Hilbert space should agree with the pre-
dictions of thermal ensembles.

We now focus on direct comparisons of observables
with various thermal ensembles, and the theoretical jus-
tiﬁcation for doing so. While we have focused on the
role of entanglement entropy in producing thermal char-
acteristics, the eigenstate distribution resulting from a
quench (Figure 6A) determines the dynamics of observ-
ables, as well as their subsequent saturated values. It fol-
lows then that these populated eigenstates should clarify
the origin of thermalization, which is the goal of ETH.
The underlying explanation for ETH is that thermaliz-
ing, non-integrable systems possess excited eigenstates
that look like nearly random vectors, or, equivalently,
are described by a Hamiltonian that approximately con-
forms to random matrix theory [6, 13]. That is, for most
bases, each eigenvector projects onto each basis vector
with random quantum amplitude. This eigenstate diﬀu-
sion in Hilbert space is analogous to the chaotic dynamics
of a closed classical system passing through every allowed
point of phase space, and in the quantum case this has
several consequences. Surprisingly, this chaotic assump-
tion can be adapted to explain the saturation of mea-
surement observables, the agreement of these saturated
observables with thermal ensembles, and the presence of
a volume law in the entanglement entropy [6, 13, 34, 35].
And so, while in classical thermalizing systems it is the
chaos in the temporal dynamics that leads to classical en-
tropy, in quantum thermalizing systems it is chaos in the
energy eigenstates that generates entanglement entropy
and thermalization.

In Figure 6C,D, we compare our measurements to the
predictions of thermal ensembles that are illustrated in
Figure 6B. We also compare our results to a grand-
canonical ensemble truncated to our total atom num-
ber (see Supplementary Material):
this ensemble per-
haps most closely models how well the many-body state
can act as a reservoir for its constituent sub-subsystems,
but does not immediately follow from ETH like the mi-
crocanonical ensemble. For each single-site and three-
site observable, we show the atom number distributions
for two diﬀerent eﬀective temperatures of 3.8J and 11J,
which are achieved by quenching to J/U = 0.64 and
J/U = 2.6, respectively. The data is averaged in the
saturated regime over times between 10 and 20 ms, and
the error bars are the standard deviation in the measured
probabilities. The consistency within the the error bars
indicates that in this temporal range our observations re-

FIG. 5. Observation of local thermalization. (A) After
quenching to J/U = 2.6, the saturated average particle num-
ber on each site (density) is nearly equal among the sites of
the system, which resembles a system at thermal equilibrium.
By comparison, the ground state for the same Bose-Hubbard
parameters has signiﬁcant curvature. (B) In measuring the
probabilities to observe a given particle number on a single
site, we can obtain the local, single-site density matrix and
observe the approach to thermalization. Using two diﬀerent
metrics, we compare the mixed state observed to the mixed
state derived from the subsystem of a canonical thermal en-
semble, after a quench to J/U = 0.64. The trace distance pro-
vides an eﬀective distance between the mixed states in Hilbert
space, while the ﬁdelity is an overlap measure for mixed states.
The two metrics illustrate how the pure state subsystem ap-
proaches the thermal ensemble subsystem shortly after the
quench. The starting value of these quantities is given by the
overlap of the initial pure state with the thermal mixed state.
Solid lines connect the data points.

We can perform a more rigorous test of single-site
thermalization by comparing the measured density ma-
trix of each site with the reduced density matrix of a
canonical thermal ensemble ρT
A (Figure 5B). Our mea-
surements of probabilities to observe a given particle
number on a site completely characterize that single-
site density matrix, because there are no coherences
between diﬀerent number states due to super-selection
rules. With this measured density matrix, we can per-
form a quantitative comparison to a thermal ensemble
using the trace distance ( 1
A − ρA|)) and quantum

2 Tr(|ρT

A(cid:33)), both of which quantify

ﬁdelity (Tr(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:113)ρT

AρA(cid:113)ρT

05101500.20.40.60.81time(ms)Trace Distance  FidelityAUnitary evolution Hilbert spaceTrace distanceHilbert spacesite1site2site3site4site5site6B12345600.511.52sitedensity  ground statequench7

FIG. 6. Local observables in a globally pure quenched state.
(A) In a quench, the ground state of the initial
Hamiltonian is projected onto many eigenstates of the new Hamiltonian and undergoes unitary evolution. According to the
ETH, the expectation value of observables at long times can be obtained from a microcanonical ensemble comprised of such
eigenstates. (B) Along with the microcanonical ensemble, several other closely related ensembles are compared to the data.
(C) Thermalization of local observables. For the diﬀerent temperatures and subsystems shown, the measured number statistics
are in excellent agreement with microcanonical and canonical thermal ensembles, verifying the thermal character of the local
density matrix. A grand-canonical ensemble reproduces the data very well as long as the subsystem is small compared to the
full system. The error bars are the standard deviation of our observation over times between 10 and 20 ms. (D) Thermalization
occurs even for global quantities such as the full system interaction energy. The thermalization dynamics as calculated from
our number-resolved images are in close agreement with exact numerical simulation and a canonical prediction.

main near the thermal predictions despite the presence of
temporal ﬂuctuations. For the single site subsystem, the
data is in good agreement with all the ensembles consid-
ered. Despite the fact that the quenched state is in a large
distribution of eigenstates, surprisingly, we ﬁnd favorable
agreement for the case of a single eigenstate ensemble:
this illustrates a key principle of ETH, which holds that
the reduced density matrix, and associated observables,
vary slowly from eigenstate to eigenstate and are there-
fore relatively insensitive to breadth of the distribution of
populated states from the quench. We perform the same
comparisons to the three-site case in the bottom two pan-
els. Here we also observe agreement with most ensembles,
though, interestingly, there is relatively less agreement
with the single eigenstate and grand-canonical ensem-
bles, particularly for the lower temperature quench. This
variation in agreement may suggest that these ensembles
are more sensitive to the relative size of the traced out
reservoir compared to the subsystem, which indicates di-
rections of further experiments [11, 36].

The above measurements were on speciﬁc subsystems,
but our measurements also allow extraction of the av-
erage global interaction energy (Figure 6D). Since the

interaction term in Eq. 1 is diagonal in the Fock-state
basis, we can use our measurements of the ﬁnal particle
conﬁgurations to compute the expectation value (cid:104) ˆHint(cid:105).
For the T = 3.8J data, we show a time scan indicating
the initial growth in this quantity, which starts at zero
since the initial state is a single particle per site. These
observations, at long times, are in near agreement with
the canonical prediction, which suggests thermalization
also occurs between the tunneling and interaction degrees
of freedom of the Hamiltonian. Interestingly, this mea-
surement is “global” in the sense that it is sensitive to
the entire six-site system as opposed to some subset of
sites. Yet, it exhibits thermalizing behavior because it
is a sum of local operators which themselves thermalize.
The observed agreement is consistent with the idea that
only a small set of operators, such as the global purity
we measure or other speciﬁc ﬁne-tuned state projectors,
can truly distinguish the pure state we produce from a
thermal state.

Our observations speak to a natural translation be-
tween thermalizing quantum and classical systems com-
posed of itinerant particles. Classical statistical mechan-
ics relies on a fundamental assumption: a system in ther-

EnergyBefore quenchAfter quenchEnsemblesMicrocan.0100.14300.034Diagonal00.095Eigenstate01CanonicalC00.10.20.30.40.5P(n)    DiagonalMicrocanonicalCanonicalEigenstateGrand Canonical012345600.10.20.30.40.5nP(n)  0123456n  Temperature = 3.8 JTemperature = 11 J≈UUU0000221001DExactCanonical ATemperature = 3.8 JB0510152001234Time (ms)  8

mal equilibrium can be found in any microstate compat-
ible with the thermodynamic constraints imposed on the
system, and, as such, is described by an ensemble of max-
imal entropy [37, 38]. Although it is vastly successful,
classical statistical mechanics does not itself justify this
entropy maximization for closed systems [13, 37], and an
open systems approach only defers the question of ther-
malization to the union of the bath and system [6]. While
ergodicity and time-averaging can provide a justiﬁcation
for entropy maximization in closed classical systems, er-
godicity is not applicable on the same scale that sta-
tistical mechanics is successful, and time-averaging can
require exponentially long times [13, 37, 38]. The latter
also obscures the fact that there is in reality only one sys-
tem, which, nevertheless, is well-modeled by an entropic
ensemble [37]. Our studies, and beautiful recent theoreti-
cal work [11, 12, 32], hint towards a microscopic origin for
entropy maximization in a single quantum state, namely
that induced by the entanglement we measure.

Our measurements open up several avenues for fur-
ther investigation.
Instead of operating with ﬁxed to-
tal system size, we can study how thermalization and

ﬂuctuations depend on the size of the system consid-
ered [36]. Conversely, studying integrable Hamiltonians
where thermalization fails [39], and the structure of the
associated eigenstate spectrum of such systems, could
allow direct tests of the relationship between conserved
quantities and thermalization of a quantum state. Lastly,
applying these tools for characterizing the presence of
thermalization and entanglement entropy could be pow-
erful in studying many-body localization, where one of
the key experimental signatures is the logarithmic growth
of entanglement entropy at long times and suppression of
precisely the thermalization we measure here [19, 40–43].
Acknowledgments We acknowledge helpful discus-
sions with Soonwon Choi, Susannah Dickerson, Jens Eis-
ert, Michael Foss-Feig, Daniel Greif, Matthew Headrick,
David Huse, Maxim Olshanii, Cindy Regal, and Johannes
Schachenmayer. We are supported by grants from the
NSF, Gordon and Betty Moore Foundations EPiQS Ini-
tiative (grant GBMF3795), an Air Force Oﬃce of Sci-
entiﬁc Research MURI program, an Oﬃce of Naval Re-
search MURI program, and an NSF Graduate Research
Fellowship (M.R.).

[1] J. J. Sakurai, Modern Quantum Mechanics (Addison

Wesley Longman, 1993).

[2] P. Calabrese and J. Cardy, Evolution of entanglement
entropy in one-dimensional systems, Journal of Statisti-
cal Mechanics: Theory and Experiment 2005, P04010
(2005).

[3] L. Amico, R. Fazio, A. Osterloh, and V. Vedral, Entan-
glement in many-body systems, Rev. Mod. Phys. 80, 517
(2008).

[4] A. J. Daley, H. Pichler, J. Schachenmayer, and P. Zoller,
Measuring Entanglement Growth in Quench Dynamics
of Bosons in an Optical Lattice, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109,
020505 (2012).

[5] J. Schachenmayer, B. P. Lanyon, C. F. Roos, and A. J.
Daley, Entanglement Growth in Quench Dynamics with
Variable Range Interactions, Phys. Rev. X 3, 031015
(2013).

[13] L. D’Alessio, Y. Kafri, A. Polkovnikov, and M.
Rigol, From Quantum Chaos and Eigenstate Thermal-
ization to Statistical Mechanics and Thermodynamics,
arXiv:1509.06411v1 (2015).

[14] C. Neill et al., Ergodic dynamics and thermalization in

an isolated quantum system, arXiv:1601.00600 (2016).

[15] S. Trotzky et al., Probing the relaxation towards equilib-
rium in an isolated strongly correlated one-dimensional
Bose gas, Nat Phys 8, 325 (2012).

[16] T. Langen, R. Geiger, M. Kuhnert, B. Rauer, and J.
Schmiedmayer, Local emergence of thermal correlations
in an isolated quantum many-body system, Nat Phys 9,
640 (2013).

[17] R. Geiger, T. Langen, I. E. Mazets, and J. Schmiedmayer,
Local relaxation and light-cone-like propagation of corre-
lations in a trapped one-dimensional Bose gas, New Jour-
nal of Physics 16, 053034 (2014).

[6] J. M. Deutsch, Quantum statistical mechanics in a closed

[18] T. Langen et al., Experimental observation of a general-

system, Phys. Rev. A 43, 2046 (1991).

[7] M. Rigol, V. Dunjko, and M. Olshanii, Thermalization
and its mechanism for generic isolated quantum systems,
Nature 452, 854 (2008).

[8] J. Eisert, M. Friesdorf, and C. Gogolin, Quantum many-
body systems out of equilibrium, Nat Phys 11, 124 (2015).
[9] R. V. Jensen and R. Shankar, Statistical Behavior in De-
terministic Quantum Systems with Few Degrees of Free-
dom, Phys. Rev. Lett. 54, 1879 (1985).

[10] M. Srednicki, Chaos and quantum thermalization, Phys.

Rev. E 50, 888 (1994).

[11] L. F. Santos, A. Polkovnikov, and M. Rigol, Weak and
strong typicality in quantum systems, Phys. Rev. E 86,
010102 (2012).

[12] J. M. Deutsch, H. Li, and A. Sharma, Microscopic origin
of thermodynamic entropy in isolated systems, Phys. Rev.
E 87, 042135 (2013).

ized Gibbs ensemble, Science 348, 207 (2015).

[19] R. Nandkishore and D. A. Huse, Many-Body Localiza-
tion and Thermalization in Quantum Statistical Mechan-
ics, Annual Review of Condensed Matter Physics 6, 15
(2015).

[20] W. S. Bakr et al., Probing the Superﬂuid-to-Mott Insu-
lator Transition at the Single-Atom Level, Science 329,
547 (2010).

[21] J. F. Sherson et al., Single-atom-resolved ﬂuorescence
imaging of an atomic Mott insulator, Nature 467, 68
(2010).

[22] P. Zupancic, Ph.D. thesis, Harvard University, 2013.
[23] R. Islam et al., Measuring entanglement entropy in a

quantum many-body system, Nature 528, 77 (2015).

[24] C. A. Sackett et al., Experimental entanglement of four

particles, Nature 404, 256 (2000).

[25] R. N. Palmer, C. Moura Alves, and D. Jaksch, Detection

9

and characterization of multipartite entanglement in op-
tical lattices, Phys. Rev. A 72, 042335 (2005).

[26] K. R. A. Hazzard et al., Quantum correlations and en-
tanglement in far-from-equilibrium spin systems, Phys.
Rev. A 90, 063622 (2014).

[27] R. Horodecki, P. Horodecki, M. Horodecki, and K.
Horodecki, Quantum entanglement, Rev. Mod. Phys. 81,
865 (2009).

[28] R. Horodecki and M. Horodecki, Information-theoretic
aspects of inseparability of mixed states, Phys. Rev. A
54, 1838 (1996).

[29] P. Calabrese and J. Cardy, Entanglement entropy and
quantum ﬁeld theory, Journal of Statistical Mechanics:
Theory and Experiment 2004, P06002 (2004).

[30] J. Eisert, M. Cramer, and M. B. Plenio, Colloquium:
Area laws for the entanglement entropy, Rev. Mod. Phys.
82, 277 (2010).

[31] T. Grover and M. P. A. Fisher, Entanglement and the
sign structure of quantum states, Phys. Rev. A 92,
042308 (2015).

[32] J. R. Garrison and T. Grover, Does a single eigenstate

encode the full Hamiltonian?, arXiv:1503.00729 (2015).

[33] M. M. Wolf, F. Verstraete, M. B. Hastings, and J. I.
Cirac, Area Laws in Quantum Systems: Mutual Infor-
mation and Correlations, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 070502
(2008).

[34] D. N. Page, Average entropy of a subsystem, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 71, 1291 (1993).

[35] K. Hyungwon, Quantum Nonequilibrium Dynamics:
Transport, Entanglement, and Thermalization, Ph.D.
thesis (2014).

[36] Private communication Maxim Olshanii.
[37] S. K. Ma, Statistical Mechanics (World Scientiﬁc, Singa-

pore, 1985).

[38] K. Huang, Statistical Mechanics (John Wiley and Sons,

Inc., 1963).

[39] T. Kinoshita, T. Wenger, and D. S. Weiss, A quantum

Newton’s cradle, Nature 440, 900 (2006).

[40] M. ˇZnidariˇc, T. c. v. Prosen, and P. Prelovˇsek, Many-body
localization in the Heisenberg XXZ magnet in a random
ﬁeld, Phys. Rev. B 77, 064426 (2008).

[41] J. H. Bardarson, F. Pollmann, and J. E. Moore, Un-
bounded Growth of Entanglement in Models of Many-
Body Localization, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 017202 (2012).
[42] M. Serbyn, Z. Papi´c, and D. A. Abanin, Universal Slow
Growth of Entanglement in Interacting Strongly Disor-
dered Systems, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 260601 (2013).

[43] M. Schreiber et al., Observation of many-body localization
of interacting fermions in a quasirandom optical lattice,
Science 349, 842 (2015).

SupplementaryMaterialMarch16,20161EigenstateThermalizationHypothesisHereweprovideabriefsummaryoftheEigenstateThermalizationHypothesis(ETH)anditsrelationshiptoourexperiment.Generically,aquenchedquantumstateconsistsofasuperpositionofmany-bodyenergyeigenstates,eachofwhichevolvesaccordingtothefrequencyoftheassociatedeigenenergyEn.Forthestate|ψ(t)i=Pncne−iEnt|ni,theobservablehO(t)ievolvesaccordingto,hO(t)i=Xα,βc∗αcβei(Eα−Eβ)t/OαβhO(t)i=Xα|cα|2Oαα|{z}Sdiag+Xα,β6=αc∗αcβei(Eα−Eβ)t/Oαβ|{z}SoffwhereOαβ=hα|O|βifortheenergyeigenstates|αiand|βi.Weconsiderthesystemtothermalizeif1.theﬁrstterm,Sdiag,takesavalueOthatmatchesthemicrocanonicalprediction2.thesecondterm,Soﬀ,hasonlysmallﬂuctuationsaroundzeroforlongtimesRegardingcondition1,themicrocanonicalensemblepredictsavalueformacroscopicobservablesthatdependsonlyontheaverageenergyofthesystem.However,Sdiagexplicitlycontainstermsrelatedtotheinitialpopulationdistribution,whichsuggeststhesaturatedvalueoftheobservabledependsoninitialdetailsofthesystem,ratherthanjusttheaverageenergy.ETHresolvesthispuzzlebystatingthataquantumquenchpopulatesmostlytheeigenstatesfarfromtheedgeofthespectrum,andthattheseeigenstatesapproximatethoseofrandommatrixtheory.ETHproposesthattheseeigenstateslooklocallythermalandtheexpectationvalueoflocalobservablesvariessmoothlybetweeneigenstatescloseinenergy.ThisimpliesthattheexactprobabilitiesfromconditionSdiagarenotquantitativelyrelevantinthesum,sincetheOα,αcanbeapproximatelyfactoredout.Regardingcondition2,whilefortimesshortcomparedtothespreadinpopulatedeigenfrequenciestherelativephasesofeachcomponentinSoﬀareﬁne-tunedtomatchtheinitialstate,atlongtimestherelativephasesarerandomized.Ostensibly,thisdephasingensuresthatSoﬀ→0,butthetimescaleforthisprocessisgivenbythe“typical”valueofthesmallestgapinthespectrum.Inageneralmany-bodysystem,thisvaluecanbeexponentiallysmallwhichwouldleadtoaninﬁnitethermalizationtime,butforthesystemswhereETHapplieslevelrepulsionensuresthatthis“typical”gapvaluestaysﬁnite(1).Asimportant,ETHstatesthattheoﬀ-diagonalsofOintheeigenbasisarenegligiblecomparedtotheon-diagonals,sothatthissecondtermdampstoavaluewhichdoesnotinﬂuencethesteady-stateofhOi.ForamoredetailedsummaryofETH,wepointthereadertoRefs.(1,2).2ComputingexpectationvaluesinthermalizedsystemsETHimpliesanequivalencebetweenthelocalexpectationvaluesofaquenchedmany-bodystateandthoseofthethermaldensitymatrixwiththesameaveragetotalenergyasthemany-bodystate.Forthereportedexperiments,oursystemisinitializedintothegroundstate,|ψ0i,ofaninitialHamiltonian,H0,intheatomiclimit.Att=0,wequenchthesystemintoaHamiltonian,Hq,afterwhichthesystemisallowedto1evolveforavariableamountoftime.Comparingtothedataatlongstimes(10−20ms,whereweobservesaturation),wecancomputepredictionsfortheexpectationvaluesofvariouslocalobservablesbasedupondiﬀerentthermodynamicensembles.ThesepredictionsareshowninFIG.6andcomputedusingthefollowingprocedures.MicrocanonicalEnsembleThemicrocanonicalensembleisanequalprobabilitystatisticalmixtureofalltheeigenstatesthatliewithinanenergyintervalgivenbytheinitialstate|ψ0i.InthequenchedHamiltonian,theinitialstatehasanenergyE(0)≡hψ0|Hq|ψ0iwhiletheeigenstatesofHq,(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)φ(q)iE,haveenergiesE(q)i.ThemicrocanonicalensembleisthencomposedoftheNMCnumberofeigenstatesforwhich|E(q)i−E(0)|<δE.Forournumericaldata,wehavechosenδE=0.2J,buttheensemblepredictionsareinsensitivetotheprecisevalueofδE.ThemicrocanonicalensemblecanberepresentedbythethermaldensitymatrixρMCij=(1NMC,ifi=jand|E(q)i−E(0)|<δE0,else.CanonicalEnsembleThecanonicalensembleisastatisticalmixtureofalltheeigenstatesinthesystemweightedbyeachstate’sBoltzmannfactor,exp(−E(q)i/kBT).ThetemperatureintheBoltzmannfactorisﬁxedthroughthestipula-tionthattheaverageenergyofthisthermalensemblematchestheenergyoftheinitialstate,i.e.wechooseTsuchthatTr(HqρCE)=hψ0|Hq|ψ0i,wherethethermaldensitymatrixρCEhasthefollowingconstruction,ρCEij=e−E(q)ikBT,ifi=j0,else.SingleEigenstateEnsembleEnergyeigenstatesofsystemsconformingtoETHaresurmisedtoappearthermalinlocalobservables.WenumericallycalculatetheeigenstatesofthequenchedHamiltonianandcomparetheexperimentallyobservedlocalcountingstatisticstothepredictionfromthesinglefullsystemeigenstate(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)φ(q)iEthatisclosestinenergytotheexpectationvalueE(0).Theexpectationvalueinthiscaseisgivenby,hAiSE=Dφ(q)i(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)A(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)φ(q)iE.DiagonalEnsembleThediagonalensembleisastatisticalmixtureofalleigenstatesofthefullHamiltonianHq,withtheweightsgivenbytheiramplitudesafterquench.ρDij=(|Dψ0(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)φ(q)iE|2,ifi=j.0,elseItcarriesallinformationabouttheamplitudesoftheeigenstatesbutignoresalltheirrelativephases.2GrandCanonicalEnsembleThegrand-canonicalensemblerequirescalculatingthetemperatureandchemicalpotentialforthesubsystemassociatedtotheobservableofinterest.Forexample,thetop(bottom)rowofFIG.6Cpertainstothesubsystemconsistingofthethirdsite(theﬁrstthreesites)ofthechain.Wecalculatethetemperatureandchemicalpotentialforthesubsystemasfollows.Becausetheenergyandparticlenumberwithinthesubsystemarenotconservedduringthequenchdynamics,wemustcomputetheaverageenergyhEAiandaveragenumberhNAiwithinthesubsystemnumerically.Wetime-evolvethefullmany-bodystatetothethermalizedregime,thencomputethereduceddensitymatrixforthesubsystem,withwhichwecancalculatehNAiandhEAi.Wenotethattheaverageenergyofnearlyallthesubsystemsisveryclosetothatofthefullsystem(zero),whiletheaveragenumberisnearlyconsistentwithunityparticledensity.Forthesinglesitesubsystems,however,thereisnotunnelingtermtooﬀsettheinteractionenergy,andthereforethesesubsystemshavenon-zeroenergy.Weperformthisfullcalculationtoaccountforﬁnite-sizeeﬀectsthatcausesmalltemporalenergyandnumberﬂuctuations.Ifweneglecttheenergyﬂuctuations,thegrand-canonicalpredictions(describedbelow)arenegligiblydiﬀerent.Aftertheabovecalculations,wecancomputethechemicalpotentialandtemperature.UsingeachHNA,thesubsystemBose-HubbardHamiltonianwithNparticles,wecomputetheeigenstates(|EN,iAi,whereiindexestheeigenstate)andenergies(EN,iA)foreachparticlesector.WeseekTandµsuchthat,hNAi=hNGCEi=1ZXi,NNe−(EN,iA−µN)/kBTand,hEAi=hEGCEi=1ZXi,NEN,iAe−(EN,iA−µN)/kBT,whereforeachparticlenumberN,theindexiissummedoveralleigenstateswithinthatnumbersector.Thepartitionfunction,Z,istheoverallnormalization.TheseequationsarenumericallysolvedtoﬁndµandT.Withtheseinhand,wearriveatthegrand-canonicalensemble,ρGCE=1ZXi,N|EN,iAihEN,iA|e−(EN,iA−µN)/kBT.ObservablesForallstatisticalensemblesabove,expectationvaluesofanobservableAarecalculatedfromthedensitymatrixashAi=Tr(Aρ),whereρisthefullsystemdensitymatrixcorrespondingtotheappropriateensemble.3Entropies3.1R´enyiEntropyAllentanglemententropyvaluesdiscussedinthemaintextaredeﬁnedasafunctionofthereduceddensitymatrixofthesubsystem.Thisappliesalsoforthethermalentropiesquotedinthemaintext,whereweusethereduceddensitymatrixofthecanonicalensembledescribedabove.TheentropymetricusedforcomparisonbetweenthequantumsystemwemeasureandthecanonicalthermalensembleistheR´enyientropy.Ingeneral,then-thorderR´enyientropyisdeﬁnedforareduceddensitymatrixofsubsystemAasSn(ρA)=11−nlog(Tr[ρnA]),wherethereduceddensitymatrixρAisdeﬁnedbytracingoutalldegreesoffreedomofthesystemthatdonotincludesubsystemAρA=TrB(ρAB).3Experimentally,weinterferetwoidenticalquantumstatestoobtainsimultaneouslytheglobalandlocalpurity(Tr(ρ2A)).ThereforetherelevantorderR´enyientropyisthesecond-order(n=2)R´enyientropywhichisdeﬁnedforadensitymatrixofsubsystemasS2(ρA)=−log(Tr[ρ2A]),andisalsoimportantqualitativelyasalowerboundofthevonNeumannentropy.Whendiscussingtheglobalpurityasanentropy,weusetheR´enyiformulationintermsoftheglobaldensitymatrixρasopposedtoareduceddensitymatrixρA.Lastly,notethatweuselogarithmstobaseethroughout.ItisimportanttostressthatthethermodynamicrelationsdeﬁnedfromstatisticalmechanicswiththevonNeumanndeﬁnitiondonotdirectlyapplyfortheR´enyideﬁnition.However,bothquantitiesmeasuretheincoherentdiﬀusioninHilbertspaceassociatedwithentropy,andtheR´enyientropyisdirectlyaccessiblebyourmeasurements.3.2SimulationsAllsimulationsusemeasuredexperimentalparametersfromTableS2toconstructtheHamiltonian.TheshowntheorycurvesarecomputedthroughdirectdiagonalizationoftheHamiltoniangiventherelevantBose-Hubbardparameters.TheinitalstateistheexactMottinsulatinggroundstateofbothlatticesat45Er.The1-DquenchdynamicsarethensimulatedbyprojectingthisinitialstateontotheeigenstatesofthequenchedBose-HubbardHamiltonianandevolvedintimebytheircorrespondingeigenvalues.Thefulldensitymatrixcanthenbeconstructedatanytimetandtracedforeithertheon-sitenumberstatisticsorentanglemententropytobecomparedwiththedata.Theplottedtheoryhavezero-ﬁtparameters,andareonlycorrectedforoveralloﬀsetsduetothemeasuredresidualextensiveentropyinthedata(seeSection4).Wealsoincludeatemporaloﬀsetof0.5msthatisthesameforalltheorycalculations,whichisbasedonanindependentnumericalmodelofthe(nearlyperfectlydiabatic)rampthatrealizesthequench.Besidesthisoﬀset,wehaveconﬁrmednumericallythatthedegreetowhichthisrampisnotperfectlydiabaticdoesnotinﬂuencetheresults.4ExperimentalSequenceStatePreparationOurexperimentsstartwithaunityﬁlling,two-dimensionalMottinsulatorof87Rbatomsinadeeplattice(Vx=Vy=45Er)with680nmspacing.WeutilizeaDMDintheFourierplanetoinitializeaplaquetteof2×6atomsusingaprocedureoutlinedinpreviouswork(3).Weachieveasinglesiteplaquetteloadingﬁdelityof∼93%,whichislimitedbytheﬁdelityoftheinitialMottinsulatorandlossesduringthepreparationsequence.Tostudythedynamicsinthequenchedsystem,weprojectanopticalpotentialconsistingoftwonarrowGaussianpeaksseparatedby6latticesitesinthex-directionandaﬂat-topproﬁleinthey-direction.Thisconﬁnementprovidestheatomswitha“box”-likepotentialsuperimposeduponandregisteredtothelatticeposition.BychangingVxfrom45Erto6Erin0.75ms(70ms)whileretainingVy=45Erwerealizeidenticaldiabatic(adiabatic)evolutionin1-D6-sitechains.Aftersomeevolutiontimewerapidlyfreezethedynamicsbyrampingthelatticealongx-directionto20Er.Wecanthenconducttwotypesofexperimentsontheﬁnalstateofthesystem:performasinglesiteresolvedatomnumbercountingormeasuringtheentropyofthestatebymeansofabeamsplitteroperation.Single-siteresolvedatomnumbercountingInthissection,weoutlineourprocedureforcountingthetotalatomnumberoneachsiteofthe2x6plaquette.Afterfreezingtheatomdynamics,weprojectanarrow(alongthey-direction)Gaussianpotential.WethendropVy=0ErwhilekeepingVx=45Er,separatingtheatomsawayfromthepartitionwhilepreservingtheirpositioninthex-direction.After2msoffreeevolutioninthehalftubeswepintheatompositionswiththeimaginglattice(3000Er)andperformﬂuorescenceimagingoftheatoms.Thetotalpopulationofeachhalf410ms5ms10ms5ms40ms10ms5ms10ms5ms40ms0.75ms1ms0.75ms1ms0.5ms1ms0.5ms1ms Number state preparation(2x6-site)Many-body evolution(2 indep. 1x6)Beam-splitteroperationFluor.imagingMott insulatorpreparationLattice XLattice YDMD YDMD X45 Er0 Er0 Er~ 40 ErAdiabatic meltQuench0...20 ms0 Er45 Er~ 50 Er2...6 Er2 ErAlong XAlong YFull countingoperation0 Er2...6 Er20 Er0 Er~ 2 Er0.5ms0 Er45 Er0 Er~ 10 Er QuenchDuration2ms2ms~ 5 Er2msFigureS1:SchematicshowingtherampsofthelatticesandDMDpotentialsinthex-andy-directionsduringtheexperimentalsequence.TheprojectedDMDpotentialsaredrawninthelabeleddirectionwheretheorthogonaldirectionofthepotentialisasmooth,ﬂat-topproﬁle.Thebreakforthebeamsplitteroperationisshownasanoptionalsteptakenduringthesequence.Performingthisoperationresultsinthesequencemeasuringthelocalandglobalsystempuritywhilenotperformingthisstepresultsinthesequencemeasuringtheon-sitenumberstatistics.Allrampsareexponentialindepthasafunctionoftime.tubecorrespondstotheoriginalpopulationofaparticularlatticesiteineachofthetwocopies.Duringtheexpansionprocessatomsdelocalizeuniformlyover∼50latticesites.Themajorityofouroutcomes(∼96%)contain3orfewerparticlespersitewhichresultsinprobabilityofparticlelossduetoparityprojection<6%.Wedonotapplyacorrectionforthiseﬀectbecauseitissmallerthanthestatisticalerrorforthemajorityofdatapoints.EntanglemententropyWemeasureglobalpurityandentanglemententropybyapplyinganatomicbeamsplitterandinterferingthetwocopiesofthe6-sitesystem.Weperformthebeamsplitteroperationbyprojectingadouble-wellpotentialalongythatissuperimposedonthelattice.Thetunnel-couplingofthedouble-wellissetbyacombinationofboththeylatticeandthisprojectedpotential,whichisnearlyuniformalongthexdirection.AfterdiabaticallyreducingVy=2Er,theatomstunnelinthedouble-wellsfor0.33ms,whichcorrespondstothesingleparticlebalancedbeamsplittertime(3).Thisoperationresultsinatwo-particleoscillationcontrastof∼96%.WeinferthepurityofanygivensubsystembycomputingtheaverageparitygivenbyTr(ρ2A)=hPii=hQk∈Apiki,wherei=1,2denotesoneoftheoutputmodesofthedouble-wellandpik=±1denotestheparityofagivenmode(4).ExtensivebackgroundentropyTheimperfectﬁdelityofthebeamsplitteroperationreducestheinterferencecontrastbetweenthetwomany-bodysystems.Themeasuredpuritieshenceunderestimatethepurityofthemany-bodystatesproducedintheexperiment.Weverifyexperimentallythatthisentropybackgroundcontributedbyimperfectionsisextensive.Foraseparablemany-bodystate,suchasaMottinsulatorintheatomiclimit,weobserveanentropyof0.34forthefullsystem,or0.06persite.Fortherelevantcaseofsuperﬂuidgroundstatesandhighlyexcitedquenchedstates,themeasuredfullsystementropyisincreasedto0.63.WeattributethisincreaseinmeasuredentropytothesensitivityofsuchstatestodiﬀerencesintheHamiltonianbetweenthetwocopies:Duringtheshort3msholdtimebetweenthestatepreparationandthebeamsplitteroperation,potentialdiﬀerencesonthe5Hzlevelcanleadtoa50123456−0.200.20.40.60.81Length ARenyi entropy S2  ground statequenchFigureS2:ThediﬀerencebetweenthemeasuredR´enyientanglemententropyandtheoreticalcalculationasafunctionofsubsystemsize.WeusetheentanglemententropydataofFIG.4,averagedovercontiguousandnon-contiguoussub-systems;thesubtractedtheoryexhibitsthesameaveraging.Thelinearscalingindicatesthepresenceofanextensiveresidualentropybackgroundthatweattributetoimperfectionsinthemeasurementprotocol.diﬀerentialdephasingbetweenthetwocopiesandareducedinterferencecontrast.Wethereforeminimizetheholdtimeanduseanintermediatelatticedepth(20Er).Weconﬁrmtheadditive,extensivenatureofthisbackgroundentropybysubtractingthetheoreticalpredictedvalueofentropyfromthemeasuredoneasafunctionofthesystemsize,whichshowslineargrowthofthisquantitywithinourstatistics(seeFig.S2).Byﬁttingthedataweextracttheslopeofthecurveandapplythecorrectiongivenbythesubsystemsizetodiﬀerentplots(seeTable1).Withtheexceptionofveryshorttimes,thesedataaﬃrmthattheextensivecorrectionsaresubstantiallysmallerthantheentanglemententropywemeasure.TheoryDataFigure2BN/ANoCorrectionsFigure3OﬀsetAddedNoCorrectionsFigure4NoCorrectionsExtensiveEntropySubtractedTableS1:Listingofallﬁguresthatcontaindataandthenumericalcorrectionsappliedbaseduponresidualextensiveentropyinthesystemduetobeamsplitterinﬁdelity.Bose-HubbardparametersExperimentalparametersforthestatepreparationandquenchestodiﬀerenttemperaturesareshowninTableS2.Thetemperaturestabulatedcorrespondtothecanonicalensemble,asdescribedinSection2.Wecalibratelatticedepthsthroughmodulationspectroscopyinadeep45Erlatticewithatypicaluncertaintyof±2%andobtainJfromabandstructurecalculation.Uismeasuredthroughphoton-assistedtunnelingatalatticedepthofVx=16Erandnumericallyextrapolatedtolowerdepths,takingintoaccountcorrectionsduetohigherbands.Throughoutthemanuscript,themeasuredentanglemententropyandcountingstatisticsarecomparedtonumericalsolutionsoftheSchr¨odingerequationwiththeappropriateBose-Hubbardparameters.6Vx[Er]Vy[Er]Jx/(2π)[Hz]U/(2π)[Hz]T/(2π)[Hz]initialstate45450.071720quenchI64566103249quenchII245178681965TableS2:ExperimentalparametersfortheHubbardchains.TheinitialMottinsulatingstatedeepintheatomiclimitJx(cid:28)UisprojectedontoBose-HubbardchainswithlargervaluesofJx/U,correspondingtodiﬀerenteﬀectivecanonicaltemperaturesT.Allnumericalsimulationsinthemaintextusetheparametervalueslistedhere.5DataanalysisPost-selectionBeforeanalyzingthedata,wepost-selectontheoutcomescontaining6particlesineachcopyforthesite-resolvednumberdetection(FIG.5,6).Wepost-selectontotalof12atomsforinbothcopiesforexperimentsinwhichweperformthebeamsplitteroperation.Outcomescontaininglowerparticlenumberareattributedtotheinstancesofimperfectplaquetteloadingoratomlossduringtheexperimentalsequence.Wethusretainapproximately30%oftheoriginaldata.DataaveragingForallentanglemententropydataweaverageoverbothcopiesafterthebeamsplitteroperation.Additionally,wetakethemeanofequivalentsymmetricsubsystemsineachcopyforentanglemententropydynamics(FIG.3),forthevolumelawdata(FIG.4A)weaverageoverallcontiguoussubsystemsofthegivensize.Finally,forthedatainFIG.4B,C,weaverageoverallcontiguousandnon-contiguoussubsystemsofthegivenvolume,becausethemutualinformationcansamplecorrelationsbetweennon-contiguoussubsystems.Foralloftheentanglemententropydata,theerrorbarsareS.E.M.Forallofthenumbercounting,theerrorbarsareS.E.M.exceptwhenstatedotherwise.0510152001234time (ms)Renyi entropy S2  1 site2 sites3 sitesFigureS3:PiecewiselinearﬁtstoentanglemententropydynamicsforthethreedatasetsofFIG.3.QuantifyingtheearlytimetimedynamicsoftheentanglemententropyInaninsetofFIG.3,wequantifythegrowthofentanglemententropyintheearlytimedynamics.Weapproximatethisgrowthaslinear,whilethelongtimedynamicsasﬂat.Weﬁtthedatawithapiecewisefunction,S2(t)=(Sg·t,ift≤tsat.Sg·tsat.,else,7wheretheslopeSgandsaturationtimetsat.areleftasfreeparameters(Fig.S3).TheﬁttedvalueofSgisquotedinthetextfortheslope.References1.L.D’Alessio,Y.Kafri,A.Polkovnikov,M.Rigol,arXiv:1509.06411v1(2015).2.M.Rigol,V.Dunjko,M.Olshanii,Nature452,854(2008).3.R.Islam,etal.,Nature528,77(2015).4.A.J.Daley,H.Pichler,J.Schachenmayer,P.Zoller,Phys.Rev.Lett.109,020505(2012).8