Fermi surface evolution of Na-doped PbTe studied through density functional theory

calculations and Shubnikov-de Haas measurements

P. Giraldo-Gallo,1, 2, 3 B. Sangiorgio,4 P. Walmsley,1, 5 M. Fechner,4 S.

C. Riggs,3 T. H. Geballe,1, 5 N. A. Spaldin,4 and I. R. Fisher1, 5

1Geballe Laboratory for Advanced Materials, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA

2Department of Physics, Stanford University, CA 94305, USA

3National High Magnetic Field Laboratory, Tallahassee, Florida 32310, USA

4Materials Theory, ETH Zurich, Wolfgang-Pauli-Strasse 27, CH-8093 Z¨urich, Switzerland

5Department of Applied Physics, Stanford University, CA 94305, USA

(Dated: March 15, 2016)

We present a combined experimental and theoretical study of the evolution of the low-temperature
Fermi surface of lead telluride, PbTe, when holes are introduced through sodium substitution on the
lead site. Our Shubnikov-de-Haas measurements for samples with carrier concentrations up to 9.4×
1019cm−3 (0.62 Na atomic %) show the qualitative features of the Fermi surface evolution (topology
and eﬀective mass) predicted by our density functional (DFT) calculations within the generalized
gradient approximation (GGA): we obtain perfect ellipsoidal L-pockets at low and intermediate
carrier concentrations, evolution away from ideal ellipsoidicity for the highest doping studied, and
cyclotron eﬀective masses increasing monotonically with doping level, implying deviations from
perfect parabolicity throughout the whole band. Our measurements show, however, that standard
DFT calculations underestimate the energy diﬀerence between the L-point and Σ-line valence band
maxima, since our data are consistent with occupation of a single Fermi surface pocket over the entire
doping range studied, whereas the calculations predict an occupation of the Σ-pockets at higher
doping. Our results for low and intermediate compositions are consistent with a non-parabolic
Kane-model dispersion, in which the L-pockets are ellipsoids of ﬁxed anisotropy throughout the
band, but the eﬀective masses depend strongly on Fermi energy.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Lead telluride, PbTe, is a widely known thermoelec-
tric material and a narrow-gap semiconductor, which can
be degenerately doped by either Pb (hole-doping) or Te
(electron-doping) vacancies, or by introduction of accep-
tor or donor impurities1–3. Such impurity dopants have
been shown to enhance the thermoelectric ﬁgure of merit,
zT , from 0.8 to 1.4 for the case of sodium doping4–6, and
to 1.5 for doping with thallium4,7. Tl is also the only
dopant known to date that leads to a superconducting
ground state in PbTe; remarkably its maximum critical
temperature of Tc=1.5 K is almost an order of magni-
tude higher than other superconducting semiconductors
with similar carrier density8–12. Understanding the phys-
ical origin of these enhanced properties and their depen-
dence on the choice of dopant chemistry requires a de-
tailed knowledge of the electronic structure, in particular
its evolution with changes in dopant and carrier concen-
trations.

The valence band of PbTe has two maxima, located
at the L point and close to the mid-point of the Σ high-
symmetry line (we call this the Σm point) of the Brillouin
Zone (see Figure 1). The enhancement of zT with dop-
ing has been recently suggested to be at least in part
associated with a decrease in the eﬀective dimensionality
of parts of the Fermi surface as the Σm pockets connect
(Figure 2)13. For the case of superconductivity, an in-
crease of the density of states at the Tl concentration
for which superconductivity emerges, as a consequence
of the appearance of an additional band, has been in-

9.
voked as a possible explanation for the enhanced Tc
Such hypotheses can be tested by a direct experimen-
tal determination of the Fermi surface topology and its
evolution with carrier concentration. To date, such stud-
ies have been limited to quantum oscillation measure-
ments performed in the low carrier concentration regime

(p ≤ 1.1 × 1019cm−3 for full topology)14,15, although the

enhanced thermoelectric and superconducting properties
occur at considerably higher carrier concentrations. A
direct measurement of the Fermi surface characteristics
for these higher carrier densities is clearly needed.

In this paper we present the results of a detailed com-
putational and experimental study of the fermiology of
p-type Na-doped PbTe (Pb1−xNaxTe), with carrier con-
centrations up to 9.4 × 1019cm−3, obtained via density

functional theory (DFT) calculations of the electronic
structure, and measurements of quantum oscillations in
magnetoresistance for ﬁelds up to 35 T. These measure-
ments enable a direct characterization of the Fermi sur-
face morphology and quasiparticle eﬀective mass for val-
ues of the Fermi energy that far exceed those available
by self-doping from Pb vacancies. Our main ﬁndings are:
(i) At low temperatures, the Fermi surface is formed from
eight half ellipsoids at the L points (the L-pockets) with
their primary axes elongated along the [111] directions.
The Fermi surface is derived from a single band up to the

highest carrier concentration measured, 9.4 × 1019cm−3.
(ii) The L-pockets are well described by a perfect el-
lipsoidal model up to a carrier concentration of 6.3 ×
1019cm−3. For a carrier concentration of 9.4× 1019cm−3,
subtle deviations from perfect ellipsoidicity can be re-

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
4
1
 
 
]
i
c
s
-
l
r
t

m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
4
1
4
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

2

imental studies, based on magnetoresistance and Hall co-
eﬃcient measurements16, have indicated an appreciable
temperature dependence of both the band gap and the
band oﬀset (between L and Σ band maxima) in PbTe.
The current measurements provide a deﬁnitive determi-
nation of the morphology of the Fermi surface at low
temperatures, and hence provide an important point of
comparison for band structure calculations, but addi-
tional measurements based on a technique that is less
sensitive to the quasiparticle relaxation rate, such as an-
gle resolved photo emission Spectroscopy (ARPES), are
required in order to determine whether the Σ-pocket re-
mains unoccupied at higher temperatures.

II. FIRST-PRINCIPLES CALCULATIONS

To provide a baseline with which to compare our ex-
perimental data, we ﬁrst perform density functional the-
ory (DFT) calculations of the electronic structure of
PbTe with and without doping. An accurate descrip-
tion of this compound within DFT is very challenging;
in particular the computed properties are highly sensi-
tive to the choice of volume (as already reported in Refs.
17,18), the exchange-correlation functional, and whether
or not spin-orbit coupling is included. A change in lat-
tice constant of 1%, for example, can both change the
band oﬀset by 60% and generate a ferroelectric instabil-
ity. Moreover, when spin-orbit coupling is included, an
unusually ﬁne k-point mesh is needed to converge the
phonon frequencies, forces and Fermi energy. This un-
usual sensitivity to the input parameters in the calcula-
tion is of course related to the many interesting prop-
erties of PbTe, which is on the boundary between vari-
ous competing structural (incipient ferroelectricity19,20)
and electronic (superconductivity10–12 and topological
insulator21,22) instabilities.

A. Computational details

Our calculations were performed using the PAW
implementation23,24 of density functional theory within
the VASP package25. After carefully comparing struc-
tural and electronic properties calculated using the local
density approximation (LDA)26, PBE27 and PBEsol28
with available experimental data, we chose the PBEsol
exchange-correlation functional as providing the best
overall agreement. We used a 20 × 20 × 20 Γ-centered
k-point mesh and to ensure a convergence below 0.1 µeV
for the total energy used a plane-wave energy cutoﬀ of
600 eV and an energy threshold for the self-consistent
calculations of 0.1 µeV. We used valence electron conﬁg-
urations 5d106s26p2 for lead, 5s25p4 for tellurium, and
2p63s1 for sodium. Spin-orbit coupling was included.
The unit cell volume was obtained using a full struc-
tural relaxation giving a lattice constant of 6.44 ˚A(to be
compared with the experimental 6.43 ˚A29). Kohn-Sham

FIG. 1. (Color online) Energy dispersion for stoichiometric
PbTe along the high symmetry directions of the FCC Bril-
louin zone, calculated in this work using density functional
theory (DFT) (for details see text). A direct gap, underesti-
mated compared with experiment as is usual in DFT calcula-
tions, is observed at the L point, and a second valence band
maximum occurs along the Σ high-symmetry line. A repre-
sentative Fermi surface, which emerges as the Fermi energy is
shifted into the valence band by Pb vacancies or hole-dopant
impurities, is shown in the inset. For the choice of Fermi level
shown (green-dashed line), the Fermi surface contains eight
half-ellipsoids (shaded in red) centered at the L-point and
oriented along the [111] directions (L-pockets), and twelve Σ-
pockets (shaded in blue) centered closed to the mid-point of
the [110] Σ line and oriented along the [100] directions.

solved. These deviations are qualitatively consistent with
those predicted by the band structure calculations.
(iii) The eﬀective cyclotron masses increase monotoni-
cally with carrier concentration for all high-symmetry di-
rections, implying that the L band is not well described
by a perfect parabolic model for any carrier density. This
evolution is also consistent with the predictions from our
band structure calculations.
(iv) Although the qualitative evolution of the Fermi sur-
face topology with carrier concentration is correctly pre-
dicted by band structure calculations, these calculations
underestimate the band-oﬀset (between the top of the
L-band and the top of the Σm-band).

Before detailing our experiments, we emphasize that
our measurements are made in the low temperature
regime and caution should be exercised before extrapolat-
ing the results to diﬀerent temperature regimes. Quan-
tum oscillations characterize the low-temperature prop-
erties of a material, and due to the exponential damp-
ing factor, they cannot be observed above approximately
60 K in Na-doped PbTe. Hence, we do not claim that
our ﬁrst three ﬁndings outlined above necessarily remain
valid at higher temperatures. In particular, earlier exper-

3

FIG. 2. (Color online) Upper panel: Fermi surface of hole-doped PbTe calculated in this work using the rigid band approxi-
mation. Lower panel plots: The corresponding (110)-plane angle evolution of the cross-sectional areas (in frequency units) of
the calculated Fermi surface pockets. The four columns correspond to monovalent impurity concentrations of: (a) x = 0.02%
(pL = 0.27 × 1019cm−3 and pΣ = 0); (b) x = 0.81% (pL = 3.5 × 1019cm−3 and pΣ = 8.6 × 1019cm−3); (c) x = 1.56%
(pL = 6.1 × 1019cm−3 and pΣ = 17.4 × 1019cm−3); and (d) x = 2.61% (ptotal = 36.2 × 1019cm−3). The frequencies of the
L-pockets are shown in red, and compared with those expected in a perfect ellipsoidal model shown as black lines. The evo-
lution of the Σ-pockets is shown in blue. These pockets appear at a dopant concentration of x = 0.11% (pL ≈ 1019cm−3). In
column (d), the Σ and L-pockets have merged, forming a cube-shape Fermi surface; cross-sections that can not be identiﬁed
separately with Σ or L are shown in purple. We plot frequencies up to 600 T, noting, however, that frequencies up to 8 kT
occur, corresponding to the large-square Fermi surface orbits.

band energies were computed on a ﬁne (140× 140× 140)
three-dimensional grid covering the entire Brillouin zone
and used as an input for the SKEAF code30 which al-
lows for extraction of extremal cross-sectional areas of
the Fermi surface in diﬀerent spatial orientations.

B. Rigid-band approximation

First, we computed the Fermi-surface evolution as a
function of doping (shown in Fig. 2) by rigidly shifting
the Fermi energy in the pure PbTe structure and assum-
ing one hole per dopant. This rigid-band approximation
allows very ﬁne samplings of the Brillouin zone, which
are necessary to characterize the tiny Fermi surface of
hole-doped PbTe at low doping. We discuss its valid-
ity here, by comparing with calculations in which a Pb
ion is substituted explicitly with a Na ion. Many ﬁrst-
principles studies31–36 have already been carried out to
determine the eﬀect of diﬀerent dopant atoms on the elec-
tronic properties of PbTe, with some of them explicitly
assessing the validity of the rigid band approximation
in Na-doped PbTe: Takagiwa et al. 35 conﬁrmed from
KKR-CPA calculations that the density of states (DOS)
behaves as in a rigid band model, whereas Hoang et al. 37
and Lee and Mahanti 36 showed that a lifting of degen-
eracy occurs at the top of the valence band with explicit
Na doping (at a concentration of 3.125%), with the conse-
quence that the rigid band approximation overestimates
the thermopower36. Here we study how sodium impuri-
ties aﬀect the band structure of PbTe close to the Fermi
energy for the lower concentrations that we use in our

experiments (x (cid:46)1%).

We show here results for a 4 × 4 × 4 supercell of the
primitive cell containing 128 atoms (x ≈ 1.6%), with one
lead ion substituted by sodium. The unit cell volume was
kept the same as in pristine PbTe (it would be changed
by less than 0.1% by a full structural relaxation). We
checked also that our conclusions are qualitatively un-
changed for a larger 216 atom supercell (3 × 3 × 3 the
conventional cubic cell) in which one or two lead ions are
substituted by sodium (x ≈ 0.9% or x ≈ 1.6%). The k-
point mesh was accordingly scaled down and spin-orbit
coupling was not included because of computational cost;
the other computational settings were left unchanged.

Figure 3 (a) shows the partial density of states in the
region of the Fermi level (set to 0 eV) from the sodium
impurity for x ≈ 1.6%. Note the small value on the y
axis indicating that the contribution from the Na atom
is very small. It does, however, have an inﬂuence on the
electronic band structure which can be seen in Figure 3
(b), where we plot the diﬀerence in density of states with
and without the impurity. Here we see a distinct drop
in the DOS (note the higher values on the y axis) just
below the Fermi energy due to band shifts caused by the
presence of the Na atom; we analyze these next.

In Figure 4 we compare the calculated electronic band
structure with and without the sodium impurity.
In
Fig. 4 (a) we show both band structures on the same y
axis with the zero of energy set to the top of the valence
band. We see that the two band structures are close to
identical, except for a lifting of the eight-fold degeneracy
at the top of the valence band, indicated by black arrows,
in the case of the explicit Na doping. A consequence of

4

FIG. 3.
(Color online) Sodium contribution to the band
structure around the Fermi energy for the 128-atom super-
cell.
(a) Sodium projected density of states (pDOS). (b)
Diﬀerence in the total DOS with and without the impurity,
∆DOS = DOSwith Na − DOSundoped. Note the drop in DOS
just below the Fermi energy, consistent with a lifting in de-
generacy of the highest valence bands (see also Figure 4).

this shift in one of the valence bands is a shift of the
Fermi energy to lower energy relative to its position in
the rigid band approximation. We illustrate this in Fig. 4
(b) where we set the zero of energy to be the Fermi en-
ergy for each case. In contrast with earlier calculations
at a larger doping36,37, the lifted band does contribute to
the Fermi surface and aﬀects the quantitative evolution
of dHvA frequencies with hole density, giving rise to a
more complex Fermi surface having L-pockets with dif-
ferent sizes. The folding of wave vectors and states in the
supercell makes an estimation of the diﬀerent ellipsoidal
axes diﬃcult. In any case, the amplitude of the quantum
oscillations for the “lifted-degenerate” pockets would be
weaker. From these considerations we are conﬁdent that
our rigid-band calculations can be used to make qualita-
tive predictions about the evolution of the Fermi surface
with Na doping. Quantitative predictions are anyway dif-
ﬁcult because of the previously discussed sensitivity on
the parameters used for the calculations.

C. Calculated Fermi surface evolution and angle

evolution of Shubnikov-de Haas frequencies

Our calculated energy dispersion for PbTe, along the
high symmetry directions of the FCC Brillouin zone, is
plotted in Figure 1. As discussed above, we obtain a
direct gap at the L-point, followed by a second valence
band maximum at the Σm-point, 70 meV below the top
of the valence band. Figure 2 shows our calculated Fermi
surfaces, as well as the (110)-plane angle dependence of
the Fermi surface pocket cross-sectional areas, or equiv-
alently, Shubnikov-de Haas (SdH) frequencies (see ap-
pendix A), for four impurity concentrations. The (110)
plane is a natural plane to study the angle evolution of
the SdH frequencies for this material, given that, in a
perfect ellipsoidal scenario, it allows the determination
all the extremal cross-sectional areas of both, L- and Σ-
pockets. For low impurity concentrations, the Fermi sur-
face is formed only by L-pockets, which follow the angle
dependence expected for a perfect ellipsoidal model. At

FIG. 4. (Color online) Calculated band structure with and
without sodium impurity for the 128-atom supercell (x ≈
1.6%). (a) The zero of energy was set at the top of the va-
lence band for both cases. Note the lifting of the degeneracy
of the top valence bands (marked by arrows); apart from this,
the bands coincide almost perfectly. (b) The carrier density
for both cases was ﬁxed to a concentration corresponding to
x = 1.6%. The Fermi energy is moved more into the va-
lence band than expected from the rigid band approximation
because of the lifting of degeneracy.

intermediate concentrations, the Σ-pockets appear, and
clear deviations from the perfect ellipsoidal model for L-
pockets (and Σ-pockets) are observed. For impurity con-
centrations above x = 1.8%, Σ- and L-pockets merge
together to form the Fermi surface shown in Figure 2(d).
At this point, very high frequency (≈ 8 kT, correspond-
ing to the large-square Fermi surface pieces) and very low
frequency features are expected, and a whole new variety
of cross-sectional areas coming from diﬀerent sections of
the Fermi surface make the tracking of continuous angle
dependence curves more challenging.

For the L-pockets, we observe a progressive evolution
to non-ellipsoidicity, characterized by three main features
in the angle dependence plots: (i) an increasing split-
ting in the low frequency branch, indicative of deforma-
tions of the L-pockets around the minor semiaxis region;
(ii) a shifting to lower values of the angle at which the
maximum cross-sectional area (maximum frequency) is
found, indicative of L-pocket deformations around the
major-semiaxis region, and due to the formation of the
tips that will eventually join with the Σ-pockets at high
enough dopant concentration; (iii) some distortions of
the dispersion branch that goes from the [100] frequency
value to the maximum frequency value at 90◦, generating
a cusp at 90◦.

Figure 5 shows our calculation of three extremal cross-
sectional areas with density of holes in the L-pockets
(pL) computed from the Kohn-Sham band energies. The
dashed curves indicate the expected p2/3
behavior for
L
perfect ellipsoidal pockets. Deviations of the computed
cross-sectional areas from the perfect ellipsoidal depen-
dence become noticeable close to hole densities in the
L-pockets above which the Σ-pockets start to be popu-
lated, which is indicated by the vertical dotted lines in
Fig. 5. These deviations are characterized by a shift
toward lower frequencies from that expected in the per-
fect ellipsoidal model. Additionally, Figure 5(c) high-
lights the distortions in the L-pockets, which among oth-

00.030.06-4-2024pDOS[states/eV]E−EF[eV](a)NasNap-200-4-2024ΔDOS[states/eV]E[eV](b)-0.200.2WΓXLΓKE[eV](b)undopedNa-0.4-0.20WΓXLΓKE[eV](a)undopedNa5

FIG. 5. (Color online) Evolution of three cross-sectional areas (in frequency units) with density of holes in the L-pockets (pL).
The dashed curve in all the plots shows the functional dependence of p2/3
L expected for a perfect ellipsoidal model. The dotted
vertical line indicates the L-pocket hole density above which the Σ-pockets start to be populated. (a) Frequency associated with
the L-pockets minimum cross-sectional area, fmin; (b) Frequency associated with the L-pockets’ cross-sectional area in the [100]
direction, f[100]; (c) Frequencies associated with the L-pockets’ maximum cross-sectional area. The green circles correspond
to the orbits in the longitudinal direction of the L-pocket (f(cid:107)) – for perfect ellipsoidal L-pockets they would correspond to
the largest possible frequencies; the blue triangles correspond to the orbits associated with the largest cross-sectional area
fmax, which for large concentrations do not correspond anymore to longitudinal orbits on the L-pockets. The inset shows two
representative orbits (f(cid:107) in green and fmax in blue) on the distorted L-pocket (shown in red) for a concentration x = 1.56%
(pL = 6 × 1019 cm−3).

to note that although deviations from perfect ellipsoidic-
ity as seen in the calculated angle evolution (Figure 2(a))
and the calculated dHvA frequencies (Figure 5) are close
to zero for the low carrier concentration regime, the vari-
ation of the eﬀective masses at the lowest doping levels
already points to the non-parabolicity of the highest va-
lence bands. Note that this was already taken into ac-
count in some transport studies of PbTe to compute its
thermoelectric properties38,39.

In summary, our density functional calculations of the
evolution of the Fermi surface of PbTe with doping pro-
vide some guidelines for identifying signatures of devi-
ations from perfect ellipsoidicity and perfect parabolic-
ity in our quantum oscillation experiments, to be pre-
sented in the coming sections. As we mentioned previ-
ously, the main signatures in the angular dependence of
cross-sectional areas of L-pockets are:
(i) An increasing splitting in the low frequency branch,
indicative of deformations of the L-pockets around the
minor semiaxis region;
(ii) A shifting to lower values of the angle at which the
maximum cross-sectional area (maximum frequency) is
found, indicative of L-pocket deformations around the
major-semiaxis region, and due to the formation of the
tips that will eventually join with the Σ-pockets at high
enough dopant concentration;
(iii) Some distortions of the dispersion branch that goes
from the [100] frequency value to the maximum frequency
value at 90◦, generating a cusp at 90◦. These guidelines
will be used in determining deviations from perfect ellip-
soidicity in the data;
(iv) A monotonic increase of the cyclotron eﬀective mass
of holes as a function of carrier concentration.

Our computational ﬁndings will be used next in inter-
preting deviations from perfect ellipsoidicity in our ex-

FIG. 6. (Color online) Evolution of cyclotron eﬀective masses
(Eq. A5) as a function of density of holes in the L-pocket (pL)
at three high symmetry directions: (cid:107) or in the longitudinal di-
rection of the L-pocket, in the [100] direction, and ⊥ or in the
transverse direction of the L-pocket (corresponding to a mag-
netic ﬁeld oriented along the [111] direction). The variation
with pL provides striking evidence for the non-parabolicity of
the bands.

ers cause the shift in the maximum frequency from 35◦
(f(cid:107)) towards smaller angles in the angle-evolution curves
showed in Figures 2(b) and 2(c). Note that larger band
oﬀsets – obtained by changing the unit cell volume –
would not greatly aﬀect these considerations, in particu-
lar the density of holes at which the Σ-pockets appear.

Figure 6 shows our calculated evolution of cyclotron
eﬀective masses (Eq. A5) at three high symmetry direc-
tions as a function of the carrier content of the L-pockets.
A monotonic increase of cyclotron masses with carrier
concentration is observed, implying a non-parabolicity of
the L-band even at the top of the band. It is interesting

0500246fmin[T]pL[1019cm−3](a)0501000246f[100][T]pL[1019cm−3](b)01002003000246f[T]pL[1019cm−3](c)01002003000246f[T]pL[1019cm−3](c)fmaxf00.20.40.60246mcyc/m0pL[1019cm−3]mcyc[100]mcyc⊥mcyckperimental data.

component of the magnetoresistance) with temperature
and ﬁeld orientation held constant.

6

III. EXPERIMENTAL TECHNIQUES

A. Sample preparation

Pb1−xNaxTe single crystals were grown by an un-
seeded physical vapor transport (VT) method, similar
to that described in ref. 11, by sealing in vacuum poly-
crystalline pieces of the already doped compound, with
(or close to) the desired ﬁnal stoichiometry. The poly-
crystalline material was obtained by mixing high purity
metallic lead, tellurium and sodium in the appropriate
ratios. The source materials were placed in alumina cru-
cibles, sealed in evacuated quartz tubes, and heated up
to 1000 ◦C, holding this temperature for 7 hours, fol-
lowed by a rapid quench in water. A subsequent sinter
at 700 ◦C for 48 hours was performed with the material
contained in the same evacuated tube40. After this pro-
cess, the material was removed from the crucible, ground
into ﬁne powders, and then cold-pressed into a pellet.
The pellet was sealed in a quartz tube, with a small ar-
gon pressure to prevent mass transport. The pellet was
then sintered again at 500 ◦C for 24 hours, and ﬁnally
it was broken into small pieces to be used in the VT
stage. After the VT, mm-sized single crystals, with clear
cubic facets, were obtained. The ﬁnal sodium content
was estimated through the determination of the carrier
concentration via Hall coeﬃcient (pH ) measurements, as-
suming one hole per Na dopant. Direct determination of
the dopant concentration is challenging for the low Na
concentrations studied in this work (< 0.62%) which are
below the weight % resolution of the available electron
microprobe analysis tools.

B. Magnetoresistance measurements

High-ﬁeld magnetoresistance measurements

of
Pb1−xNaxTe single crystal samples with diﬀerent x
values between 0 and 0.62% (carrier concentrations
up to pH = 9.4 × 1019cm−3) were taken at the DC

facility of the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory
(NHMFL), in Tallahassee, FL, USA, for magnetic ﬁelds
up to 35 T. Pb1−xNaxTe single crystals were cleaved in
rectangular shapes with faces along the [100] directions.
Typical sizes of the resulting crystals were 1 mm in the
longest side. Four gold pads were evaporated on one
of the faces in order to improve electrical contact with
the crystal. Gold wires were attached to each of the
pads using silver epoxy, and the other end of each wire
was pasted to a glass slide. Twisted pairs coming from
the 8-pin dip socket were connected to the glass slide,
with special care taken to minimize the loop areas of
the wires. Four-point resistance curves for diﬀerent ﬁeld
orientations and temperatures were taken for plus and
minus ﬁeld sweeps (in order to extract the symmetric

IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

We divide the results section into two parts: In sub-
section A we show the angle dependence of the mag-
netoresistance as the magnetic ﬁeld is rotated within a
high symmetry crystallographic plane, and temperature
is held ﬁxed at (1.5± 0.2) K. This allows us to obtain in-
formation about the topology of the Fermi surface and its
evolution with carrier concentration. In subsection B we
present measurements of the temperature dependence of
the amplitude of oscillations in magnetoresistance along
diﬀerent high symmetry directions, in order to extract in-
formation about the eﬀective cyclotron masses, and their
evolution with carrier concentration.

A. High-ﬁeld magnetoresistance measurements

All data presented in this section were taken at a tem-
perature of (1.5 ± 0.2) K. For all the samples measured,
large Shubnikov-de Haas (SdH) oscillations in magne-
toresistance were observed starting at a ﬁeld of approxi-
mately 4T for most samples. The ﬁrst column of Fig-
ure 7 shows symmetrized measurements of resistivity,
ρ, as a function of magnetic ﬁeld for Pb1−xNaxTe with
(a) x=0 (pH = 1.9 × 1018cm−3), (b) x=0.13% (pH =
2.1 × 1019cm−3), (c) x=0.26% (pH = 4.1 × 1019cm−3),
(d) x=0.4% (pH = 6.3 × 1019cm−3) and (e) x=0.62%
(pH = 9.4 × 1019cm−3), for diﬀerent ﬁeld orientations

in the (110) plane. As mentioned in section II C, the
(110) plane is a natural plane to study the angle evolu-
tion of the SdH frequencies for this material, given that,
in a perfect ellipsoidal scenario, it allows the determi-
nation of all the extremal cross-sectional areas of both,
L- and Σ-pockets. The second column of Fig. 7 shows
the oscillating component of the respective magnetore-
sistance curves, as a function of inverse ﬁeld, extracted
after the following background elimination procedure: for
such low carrier densities, which imply low frequencies
of oscillation, the determination of the frequencies and
the tracking of their evolution with angle is challenging,
given that only a few periods of oscillations are observed
for the ﬁeld range used, and additionally, several artifacts
coming from background subtractions have characteris-
tic frequencies that are comparable to the frequencies
of interest.
In our data analysis, several methods for
background subtraction were tested. The method that
generated the best resolution in the fast Fourier trans-
form (FFT) for all the Na-doped samples, and that we
use here, was a cubic-spline ﬁtting of the non-oscillating
component. For the self-doped x=0 sample, which is the
sample with the lowest characteristic frequencies (as low
as 8 T), the method that allowed the best resolution of
the evolution of fundamental frequency branches was the

7

(Color online) Magnetoresistance measurements for Pb1−xNaxTe samples of diﬀerent Na concentrations (row (a)
FIG. 7.
x =0, row (b) x =0.13%, row (c) x =0.26%, row (d) x =0.4% and row (e) x =0.62%) as a function of magnetic ﬁeld, as
rotated along the (110) plane. The ﬁrst column shows the measured resistivity as a function of applied magnetic ﬁeld. The
second column shows the background-free resistivity, obtained as explained in the main text, as a function of inverse ﬁeld. The
third column shows the amplitude of the normalized FFT, represented by the color scale, as a function of the angle of the
magnetic ﬁeld from the [100] direction (horizontal axis), and the frequency (vertical axis). The last column replots column
three, with a comparison to a perfect ellipsoidal model calculation superimposed (solid-lines for fundamental frequencies, and
dashed-lines for higher-harmonics). The parameters used for the perfect ellipsoidal model calculation for each set of data are
summarized in table I. For samples with x =0.13%, 0.4% and 0.62%, small deviations from the (110) plane of rotation are
evidenced in the splitting of the angle evolution of the intermediate branch, and they were considered in the perfect ellipsoidal
model comparison. For the two highest concentrations, combination frequency terms due to magnetic interaction eﬀects are
observed. These are identiﬁed in the fourth column plots by the light-blue dotted-lines (sum of fundamental branches) and
gray dotted-lines (diﬀerence of fundamental branches).

8

FIG. 8.
(Color online) (a) Longitudinal magnetoresistance for a Na-doped PbTe sample with x =0.4% and Hall number
pH = 6.3× 1019cm−3, for diﬀerent directions of the applied magnetic ﬁeld, with respect to the [100] crystalline axis, as the ﬁeld
is rotated in the (100) plane. (b) As in (a), as a function of inverse magnetic ﬁeld, after eliminating the background, therefore
only preserving the oscillatory part. (c) The color scale in both plots represents the amplitude of the Fourier transform of the
data shown in (b), as a function of the angle from the [100] direction (horizontal axis), and the frequency (vertical axis). For
these plots, the ﬁeld is rotated in the (100) plane. The right hand side ﬁgure replots the ﬁgure in the left, but with a perfect
ellipsoidal model calculation superimposed on the data, up to the third harmonic (black lines). For the model, the plane of
rotation is oﬀset by 5.5◦ (about the [100] axis). The parameters used for the calculations are the same as those used for the
(110) plane of rotation data in Fig. 7(d): fmin = 81.4T and fmax = 307T.

can be identiﬁed. For the x=0 sample, the second har-
monic seems to be stronger in amplitude than the funda-
mental, for all three branches. This eﬀect is likely associ-
ated with the diﬃculty of resolving low frequency signals.
For all samples, the branch that lies in the low frequency
region for all angles contributes the dominant frequency
in the magnetoresistance, which is associated with its
higher mobility with respect to the other two branches.
For the higher concentration samples, the high frequency
contributions are weaker, and a logarithmic scale in the
contour plots is used in order to highlight their angle
evolution. In order to determine the characteristic fre-
quencies of oscillation, and the possible deviations of the
Fermi surface from a perfect ellipsoidal model, a com-
parison of these plots with the frequency evolution for
a Fermi surface containing eight half-ellipsoids at the L
point (perfect ellipsoidal model) is shown in the fourth
column plots of Fig. 7. The fundamental frequencies, as
well as the second and third harmonics are shown for each
sample. The splitting seen in the intermediate frequency
branch for most of the samples can be successfully ac-
counted for by a small oﬀset in the plane of rotation. For
the x=0 sample, an oﬀset of 12◦ about the [001] axis was
considered in the perfect ellipsoidal model. For samples
with x =0.13%, the oﬀset is 3◦ about the [110] axis; and
for x =0.4% and 0.62%, the oﬀset is 4◦ about the [110]
axis.

The parameters of minimum and maximum cross-
sectional areas (fmin and fmax) used in the perfect el-
lipsoidal model comparison for each sample are summa-
rized in Table I. The minimum cross-sectional area of the
L-pockets, associated with fmin, can be determined very
accurately from the value of the fundamental frequency
of oscillation at 55◦ from the [100] direction in the (110)
plane, which is clearly observed for all the samples mea-
sured. Additionally, the maximum cross sectional area of
the L-pockets, associated with fmax, can be directly ob-
served in the FFT plots of samples with Na concentration

FIG. 9. (Color online) FFT of the background-free resistivity
data of Fig. 7(e), as a function of the angle from the [100]
direction and the frequency. A perfect ellipsoidal model calcu-
lation has been superimposed on the data, up to the third har-
monic (black lines). In order to better guide the comparison
with the perfect ellipsoidal model, the exact frequencies of the
local maxima of the FFT for each angle (labeling only FFT
peaks with amplitude 1% or more of the largest peak for each
angle) are indicated by black-dots. The parameters used in
the perfect ellipsoidal model for each plot are: (a) fmin = 97
T, fmax = 370 T; and (b) fmin = 97 T, fmax = 460 T. For
both plots, an oﬀset of 4o from the (110) plane of rotation
(about the [110] axis) is considered, to account for the split-
ting seen in the middle branch. Additionally, the combination
frequency terms are shown in light-blue-dotted lines (sum of
fundamental branches) and gray-dotted lines (diﬀerence of
fundamental branches). None of the ﬁts presented here give
a satisfactory description of the data, suggesting deviations
from perfect ellipsoidicity.

computation of the ﬁrst derivative.

The evolution with angle of the frequencies of oscilla-
tion is shown in the contour plots of the third and fourth
columns of Fig. 7. The color scale for these plots rep-
resents the amplitude of the FFT of the corresponding
curves in the second column, normalized by the maxi-
mum value of the FFT at each angle, as a function of
the angle from the [100] direction, and frequency. For all
samples, the fundamental frequency of the three expected
branches of frequency evolution is clearly observed, and
for some of the branches, the second and third harmonic

TABLE I. Fermi surface parameters for Na-doped PbTe, obtained from comparison between our measured data and a perfect
ellipsoidal model.

9

x(at.%)

0

0.04
0.13
0.26
0.4
0.62

pH (×1019cm−3)
0.19 ± 0.001
0.75 ± 0.01
2.09 ± 0.01
4.1 ± 0.06
6.3 ± 0.6
9.4 ± 0.6

fmin (T)
8 ± 1
17 ± 5
39 ± 4
60 ± 8
81 ± 4
97 ± 12

f[100] (T)
12.5 ± 2
34 ± 7
63 ± 5
97 ± 10
132 ± 13
157.5 ± 16

-

fmax (T)
25 ± 2
145 ± 7
230 ± 7
307 ± 6
370 ± 90

K

-

10 ± 4
14 ± 3
15 ± 4
14 ± 2
15 ± 8

pF S−V ol (×1019cm−3)

-

0.16 ± 0.02
2.1 ± 0.2
4.0 ± 0.3
6.3 ± 0.2
8.3 ± 2.1

up to 0.4%. Also, up to this concentration, the matching
between the angle evolution of the frequencies of oscilla-
tion with that expected for a perfect ellipsoidal model is
satisfactory. Nevertheless, for this last concentration, the
maximum frequency of the ellipsoids is resolvable close to
90◦ from [100], but becomes blurred close to 35◦. There-
fore, although the value of the maximum frequency can
be determined from the 90◦ area, possible deviations from
ellipsoidal model that could be identiﬁed around 35◦ can-
not be resolved. However, given the round shape of the
upper-branch around 90◦, we can say that features asso-
ciated with possible departures from the ellipsoidal model
are not observed (see Fig. 2(c)). This last statement is
conﬁrmed by magnetoresistance measurements in an ad-
ditional sample of the same batch as the ﬁeld is rotated
along the (100) plane, as shown in Fig. 8. The compari-
son of the FFT angle evolution and the perfect ellipsoidal
model, using the same extremal cross-sectional area pa-
rameters as for the measurements with ﬁeld along the
(110) plane, conﬁrms the matching of the data with the
perfect ellipsoidal model for samples of this Na composi-
tion (x=0.4%). For the highest Na concentration sample
measured, x=0.62%, possible deviations from perfect el-
lipsoidicity are observed, and will be discussed later in
this section.

As can be seen in the third and fourth columns of Figs.
7(d) and (e), additional features in the angle dependence
plots occur for the two highest Na-doped samples. Nev-
ertheless, all of these features can be identiﬁed as the
sum and diﬀerence of the fundamental frequencies of the
L-pockets, as can be observed in the light-blue and gray
curves in the fourth column plots of Figs. 7(d) and 7(e).
The presence of such combination frequencies can be at-
tributed to magnetic interaction (MI) eﬀects, expected
when the amplitude of the oscillating component of the
magnetization, ˜M is comparable to H 2/f , in such a way
that the total magnetic ﬁeld (cid:126)B = (cid:126)H + 4π (cid:126)M and not just
(cid:126)H, needs to be considered in the Lifshitz-Kosevich (LK)
formalism of quantum oscillations41 (see appendix A).

As was suggested above, the sample with the highest
Na concentration studied in this work, x =0.62%, shows
possible indications of deviations from perfect ellipsoidic-
ity. For this sample the high frequency components of
the oscillations are blurred, and the evolution of the dif-
ferent branches can be observed only up to 400 T. As

we mentioned previously, the determination of fmin for
all samples has a very low uncertainty, particularly for
this sample, given that we can clearly observe up to the
third-harmonic of the lower branch (see ﬁg. 7(e)). Fixing
this value to fmin = 97 T, Figure 9 shows a comparison
between the angle evolution of the frequencies of oscilla-
tion for this sample, and a perfect ellipsoidal model using
two diﬀerent values of fmax. In order to guide the com-
parison better, both plots in this ﬁgure show the exact
frequency positions of the maxima of the FFT peaks for
all angles (in black-ﬁlled circles). Around the angle of
90◦ we observe some weight in the FFT (yellow color)
around 350-370 T, which we could interpret as an indi-
cation of the value of fmax. This value is the one used
in the perfect ellipsoidal model in Fig. 9(a) (as well as
Fig. 7(e)).
In this ﬁgure, we can see that the match-
ing between the data and the perfect ellipsoidal model
is not satisfactory, especially close to the 0◦ area of the
plot. Interestingly, the 90◦-370 T area overlaps with the
region at which the third harmonic of the lower branch
passes. This could indicate that the weight observed at
this region belongs to this third harmonic, and not to
fmax. Figure 9(b) shows a comparison between the data
and a perfect ellipsoidal model using the same fmin = 97
T, but now using a larger value of fmax = 460 T. These
values provide a better matching between the data and
a perfect ellipsoidal model for the region of 0◦. How-
ever, the combination frequency terms, due to magnetic-
interaction eﬀects, suggest that this ﬁt is not satisfac-
tory, as the evolution of the combination frequency data
points around 60◦-350 T seems to be less steep, being
better matched by the ﬁt using fmax = 370 T, as shown
in Fig. 9(a). The lack of a satisfactory perfect ellipsoidal
model to describe the data can be interpreted as devia-
tions from perfect ellipsoidicity of the L-pockets for this
Na concentration. The mismatch of the data and the el-
lipsoidal model is observed in the intermediate branch,
which is consistent with the guidelines given by the DFT
calculations.

For all the samples measured, the only features ob-
served in the angle evolution of the frequencies of oscilla-
tions come from the L-pockets. Furthermore, the carrier
concentration calculated from Luttinger’s theorem and
the volume in k-space of the L-pockets, obtained through
the comparison of the FFT evolution and the perfect
ellipsoidal model, which we label as pF S−V ol, matches

10

FIG. 11. (Color online) Temperature dependence of the am-
plitude of the oscillating component of magnetoresistance for
a Pb1−xNaxTe sample with x =0.24%, and magnetic ﬁeld
oriented close to 35◦ from the [100] direction, along the
(110) plane. For this orientation, the cross-sectional area of
two of eight L-pockets corresponds to the maximum cross-
sectional area of the ellipsoids. The left-column plot shows the
background-free data at diﬀerent temperatures. The right-
column plot shows the ﬁt of the data to the LK-formula in
equation 1, using the ﬁve most dominant frequencies observed
in the FFT of the lowest temperature curve. From this ﬁt, the
values of cyclotron eﬀective mass and Dingle temperature, for
each frequency term, are obtained.

B. Temperature dependence of Quantum

Oscillations

In order to determine the eﬀective cyclotron mass of
holes in Na-doped PbTe, and their evolution with carrier
concentration, the temperature dependence of the oscil-
lation amplitude was measured for samples of diﬀerent
Na concentrations, with the ﬁeld oriented along or close
to high symmetry crystallographic directions. The cy-
clotron eﬀective masses were obtained by simultaneous
ﬁtting of the curves for all temperatures to the Lifshitz-
Kosevich (LK) formula (in SI units)41

ρ(H) − ρ0

ρ0

=

×

(cid:26)

(cid:18)

Ci

exp

(cid:88)
(cid:26)
(cid:20)

i

T /H
sinh (14.7(mcyc

× cos

2π

fi
H

(cid:19)(cid:27)

i /me)ΘD,i)
H

(cid:27)

−14.7(mcyc
(cid:21)

i /me)T /H)

+ φi

(1)

FIG. 10. (Color online) Temperature dependence of the am-
plitude of the oscillating component of magnetoresistance for
Pb1−xNaxTe samples, with magnetic ﬁeld along the [111] di-
rection (55◦ from the [100] direction, in the (110) plane). The
left-column plots show the background-free data at diﬀerent
temperatures. The right-column plots show the ﬁts of the
data to the LK-formula in equation 1, using the four most
dominant frequencies observed in the FFT of the lowest tem-
perature curve. From this ﬁt, the values of cyclotron eﬀective
mass and Dingle temperature, for each frequency term, are
obtained.

perfectly (within the error bars) with the Hall number
(equivalent to the carrier concentration for a single band
compound) for all Na-doped samples up to x =0.4%, as
shown in table I. This fact conﬁrms that the only band
contributing to conduction in this compound up to this
Na-concentration is the L band. Moreover, the small
mismatch between the L-pocket Luttinger volume and
the Hall number for the highest Na concentration sam-
ple, x =0.62% presumably comes from deviations from
perfect ellipsoidicity, as discussed.

where the sum is over the frequencies observed in the
data, and for which a separate cyclotron eﬀective mass,
mcyc
i /me and Dingle temperature, ΘD,i can be obtained
for each frequency term. This method of extracting the
cyclotron eﬀective mass, through direct ﬁtting to the
LK formula, is required for an accurate determination
of these quantities for such a low carrier density mate-
rial. For low frequency oscillations, the number of peri-
ods observed in the given ﬁeld range is limited, resulting
in FFTs with amplitudes highly dependent on window-
ing eﬀects, variations in ﬁeld range or variations in signal
sampling. In contrast to the ﬁtting of the FFT ampli-
tudes to the LK formula, the method widely used for the

TABLE II. Cyclotron eﬀective masses for Pb1−xNaxTe samples along diﬀerent high symmetry directions. These parameters
were obtained through ﬁtting of the curves in Figs. 10, 11 and A1 to the LK-formula in equation 1.

x(at.%)

0.04
0.13
0.26
0.4
0.62

pH (×1019cm−3)
0.75 ± 0.007
2.09 ± 0.006
4.1 ± 0.06
6.3 ± 0.6
9.4 ± 0.6

ΘD,⊥ (K)

-

9 ± 4
10 ± 3
9.9 ± 0.2
9.5 ± 0.8

mcyc⊥ /me

-

0.068 ± 0.007
0.089 ± 0.002
0.14 ± 0.03
0.13 ± 0.02

mcyc
[100]/me
0.098 ± 0.001
0.085 ± 0.001
0.15 ± 0.01
0.172 ± 0.004
0.225 ± 0.006

mcyc(cid:107) /me

-
-

0.29 ± 0.04

-
-

11

determination of eﬀective masses of higher carrier con-
centration metals, the values of eﬀective masses obtained
though a direct ﬁtting of the data to the LK formula are
robust to such variations.

Figure 10 shows the temperature dependence of
the oscillating component of magnetoresistance for
Pb1−xNaxTe samples of diﬀerent Na concentrations, for
ﬁeld oriented along the [111] direction, which provides
direct access to the transverse cyclotron eﬀective mass,
mcyc⊥ , associated with the minimum cross-sectional area
of the L-pockets. Least-squares ﬁts to equation 1, includ-
ing up to the fourth strongest frequency component, for
each Na doping, and for a ﬁeld range of 5 T to 34 T, are
shown in the right-column plots of this ﬁgure. The cy-
clotron masses and Dingle temperatures obtained for the
fundamental frequency, i.e., mcyc⊥ and ΘD,⊥, as a func-
tion of carrier concentration, are summarized in Table
II, and plotted in Fig. 16 and Fig. 17, in the discussion
section.

Additionally, Fig. 11 shows magnetoresistance curves
at diﬀerent temperatures for a sample with Na concen-
tration of 0.26%, with the magnetic ﬁeld oriented close to
35◦ from the [100] direction, in the (110) plane. For such
ﬁeld orientation, one of the Fermi surface cross-sectional
areas corresponds to the maximum cross sectional area
of the ellipsoids (in a perfect ellipsoidal model), associ-
ated with the maximum or longitudinal cyclotron mass,
mcyc||
. From this measurements, cyclotron masses along
intermediate directions can also be found, and these are
presented in Fig. 15 of the discussion section.

V. DISCUSSION

A. Fermi surface topology

Having presented the data and the analysis performed
to obtain the various Fermi surface parameters for dif-
ferent Na-doping levels, we now summarize them and
present their evolution as a function of depth in the va-
lence band. The parameters obtained in the previous
section are summarized in table I, where we also include
data from an additional Na composition (x = 0.04%) for
which measurements in a more limited ﬁeld range (up to
14 T) were taken.

Figure 12 shows the L-pockets’ Luttinger volume as a

FIG. 12. (Color online) Carrier concentration calculated from
Luttinger’s theorem and the volume of the L-pockets ex-
tracted from the comparison between the data and a per-
fect ellipsoidal model, as a function of the Hall number, for
Na-doped PbTe (black squares), and obtained using the ellip-
soid parameters from previous studies in refs. 14 and 15 (blue
stars). The dashed line shows the expected behavior for a
single-parabolic band, for which the carrier density enclosed
by the Fermi surface, as determined through Luttinger’s the-
orem matches the carrier density measured using the Hall
eﬀect. All the measured samples lie on this line, and the
deviations seen for the highest Na doping are attributed to
deviations from perfect ellipsoidicity.

function of Hall number for the Na-doped PbTe samples
studied, plus self-doped (by Pb vacancies) samples mea-
sured in previous SdH studies by other groups14,15. For
a single-parabolic-band model, these two quantities are
expected to exactly match with each other, and to lie
on the dashed line shown in the ﬁgure. This is indeed
the case for all the samples studied, including the self-
doped ones. The deviations seen for the last Na doping
can be attributed to deviations from perfect ellipsoidic-
ity of the pockets, as discussed above. The matching
between the L-pockets’ Luttinger volumes and Hall num-
bers implies that PbTe, up to a carrier concentration of

pH = (9.4± 0.6)× 1019cm−3, is single band, that is, all

the carriers contributing to conduction belong to the L
band. This result implies that the band oﬀset between
the L and Σ valence band maxima is underestimated in

024681012024681012   Na-doping Pb-vacanciespFS-Volume (x1019cm-3)pH (x1019cm-3)12

FIG. 13.
(Color online) Evolution of the characteristic frequencies of the L-pockets with Hall number, for Na doping, as
determined from this study, and for self-doped samples from the works in refs. 14 and 15: (a) Frequency associated with the
L-pockets’ minimum cross-sectional area, fmin, (b) Frequency associated with the L-pockets’ cross-sectional area in the [100]
direction, f[100], and (c) Frequency associated with the L-pockets’ maximum cross-sectional area, fmax. The blue-star symbols
are data points obtained by previous quantum oscillation studies from other authors14,15, in self-doped PbTe with diﬀerent
levels of Pb vacancies (the last star in fmin, in green, was obtained by Na doping). The dashed line in all the plots is the
functional dependence of p2/3 expected for a perfect ellipsoidal model with ﬁxed anisotropy.

ﬁrming the departure from perfect ellipsoidicity of the
pockets for this high carrier concentration. However, for

carrier concentrations below pH = 6.3 × 1019cm−3, we

can say that the L-pockets are well described by a per-
fect ellipsoidal model, within the experimental resolution.
For the highest Na concentration studied, the deviation
from the perfect ellipsoidal behavior follows the expected
trend predicted by our DFT calculations, as presented in
Fig. 5.

FIG. 14. Anisotropy parameter of the L-pockets, K =
(fmax/fmin)2, extracted from the data, as a function of the
Hall number for Na-doped samples, as determined from this
study, and for self-doped samples from the works in refs. 14
and 15. The horizontal gray-line shows the average value of
K = 14.3 ± 0.4 for this range of concentrations.

our DFT calculations, as well as all previously published
band-structure calculations8,13,33,34,42–46, which predict
the appearance of the Σ band at a hole concentration of

the order of p ≈ 1 × 1019cm−3.

The evolution of the three high symmetry L-pocket
cross-sectional areas, in frequency units (fmin, fmax and
f[100]), with Hall number is plotted in ﬁgure 13. For
a perfect ellipsoidal model, all the cross-sectional areas
are expected to scale with carrier concentration as p2/3
H .
This is in fact the functional form followed by most cross-
sectional areas in ﬁg. 13, as shown by the dashed line.
The last Na-doped sample deviates from this line, con-

Additionally, the anisotropy of the L-pockets, K =
(fmax/fmin)2,
is approximately constant with carrier
concentration (K = 14.3 ± 0.4), for the range of carrier
concentrations of interest, as shown in Fig. 14. The
observation of a constant anisotropy of the L-pockets
with carrier concentration conﬁrms previous results by
Burke et al.15 for p-type self doped PbTe with carrier

in Fig. 14), and contrasts the results by Cuﬀ et al.47
in self-doped samples with carrier concentrations up to

concentrations below 1 × 1019cm−3 (shown as blue stars
3 × 1018cm−3, in which a decrease in K with increasing

carrier concentration is observed. The K values reported
by Burke et al. are slightly less than the average value
of 14.3±0.4 found in this work. However as discussed
previously, an accurate estimation of the Fermi surface
parameters for the low carrier concentration regime is
challenging given the few periods of oscillation observed
in a limited ﬁeld range. This could be the reason for the
lower K value obtained for the x = 0 sample measured
in this work. A constant value of K with carrier concen-
tration is expected in a perfect parabolic band model,
in which the L-pocket anisotropy is equivalent to the
band mass anisotropy, K = m(cid:107)/m⊥, where m(cid:107) is the
eﬀective band mass along the ellipsoidal L-pocket major
semi-axis (longitudinal band mass), and m⊥ is the ef-
fective band mass along the ellipsoidal L-pocket minor
semi-axis (transverse band mass) (in terms of the cy-

024681012020406080100120 Na-doping Pb-vacancies(a)fmin(T)pH (x1019cm-3)024681012050100150200(b) f[100] (T)pH (x1019cm-3) Na-doping Pb-vacancies0246810120100200300400500(c) Na-doping Pb-vacanciesfmax(T)pH (x1019cm-3)024681012051015202530 Na-doping Pb-vacanciesKpH (x1019cm-3)13

FIG. 15. (Color online) Cyclotron eﬀective mass, mcyc, along
diﬀerent directions with respect to the (L-pocket) ellipsoid
major semiaxis, for a Pb1−xNaxTe sample with x =0.24%.
The data points were obtained through ﬁts to the LK-formula
of the oscillating components of magnetoresistance along
three diﬀerent crystallographic directions: [111] (Fig. 10(b)),
(100) (Fig. A1(d)), and 35◦ from [100] in the (110) plane
(Fig. 11). The dashed lines represent the angle dependence
of the cyclotron mass (fundamental and higher harmonics) for
a perfect parabolic dispersion and perfect ellipsoidal model,
as presented in Eqn. B7, and using an anisotropy parameter
K = 14.3 ± 0.4 (which implies mcyc(cid:107) /mcyc⊥ =3.78±0.05). The
shadowed region around the dashed lines represents the error
bar in mcyc(θ) estimated from propagation of errors in K, θ
and mcyc⊥ .

clotron eﬀective masses, K = (mcyc(cid:107) /mcyc⊥ )2, as shown
in appendix B). However, a constant K value can also
be obtained for speciﬁc models with dispersion relations
in which corrections for non-parabolicity of the band are
considered, as we will present in the next section.

B. Eﬀective cyclotron masses and relaxation time

As we presented in section IV B, eﬀective cyclotron
masses along diﬀerent high symmetry directions were ob-
tained through direct ﬁtting of the curves shown in Figs.
10, 11 and A1 to the LK-formula in equation 1. For all
the Na compositions studied, the cyclotron masses along
the transverse direction, mcyc⊥ , and [100] direction, mcyc
[100],
were determined through this method. Additionally, for
samples with a Na concentration of x = 0.26%, the lon-
gitudinal cyclotron mass, mcyc||
, was also found. Supple-
mentary to these highly symmetric masses, others along
less symmetric directions of the ellipsoid can be found
from the diﬀerent frequency terms in the measurements.
Figure 15 shows the cyclotron eﬀective masses found for
all frequency terms taken into account in the LK ﬁts of
the x = 0.26% sample (Figs. 10(b), Fig. 11 and Fig.
A1(c)), as a function of the angle from the L-pocket lon-
gitudinal direction. The corresponding angle for the mass

FIG. 16. (Color online) Eﬀective cyclotron mass, mcyc, along
three high symmetry directions for Pb1−xNaxTe samples, as a
function of the Hall number. Cyclotron eﬀective masses were
determined through ﬁtting the curves in ﬁgures 10, 11 and
A1 to the LK-formula in equation 1. mcyc⊥ is the cyclotron
mass in the transverse direction of the L-pocket ellipsoid, or
[111] direction; mcyc(cid:107)
is the cyclotron mass in the longitudinal
direction of the L-pocket ellipsoid; and mcyc
[100] is the cyclotron
mass in the [100] direction of the crystal lattice. The red
dashed line represents a guide to the eye for the trend observed
in the longitudinal cyclotron mass. The blue dashed-line is
the trend expected for the longitudinal cyclotron mass given
the anisotropy parameter of mcyc(cid:107) /mcyc⊥ =

√
K = 3.78.

of each frequency term, with respect to the longitudinal
direction of the ellipsoids, was found by identifying each
frequency in the angle dependence curves, such as that
presented in Fig. 7(c). Fig. 15 also shows the expected
angular dependence of the cyclotron eﬀective mass (fun-
damental and higher harmonics) in a perfect ellipsoidal
model (for more details, see appendix B), using the av-
erage K value from Fig. 14 (K = 14.3 ± 0.4, which
gives mcyc(cid:107) /mcyc⊥ = √K = 3.78± 0.05). Most data points

lie on this curve, conﬁrming the good agreement of the
topology of the Fermi surface with the perfect ellipsoidal
model for this Na concentration.

In spite of the good agreement of the anisotropy of
the cyclotron eﬀective mass with the perfect ellipsoidal
model, intriguingly, the masses are not constant through-
out the band. Fig. 16 shows the evolution of the lon-
gitudinal, transverse and [100] direction cyclotron eﬀec-
tive masses with carrier concentration. All of them show
a monotonic increase with increasing carrier concentra-
tion, consistent with the predictions of the DFT band-
structure calculations presented in section II C. Previ-
ous SdH measurements in p-type self-doped PbTe by
Burke et al.14,15 (pH < 1 × 1019), and by Cuﬀ et al.47
(pH < 6 × 1018), found a similar tendency for the trans-
verse cyclotron mass. The observation of a varying eﬀec-
tive mass with carrier concentration implies deviations
from perfect parabolicity, starting from the top of the

01530456075900.100.150.200.250.300.35  mcyc(q) / meAngle from ellipsoid major-semiaxis, q (deg)0246810120.00.10.20.30.40.50.6 mcycllmcyc[100]mcyc/mepH (x1019cm-3)mcyc^14

sult in a Dingle temperature as a strong ﬁtting param-
eter. Fig. 17 shows the Dingle temperature associated
with the longitudinal direction, ΘD,⊥, as a function of
carrier concentration. This quantity is constant for the
range of concentrations studied, with an average value of
ΘD,⊥=(9.7±0.4) K. This average value of ΘD,⊥ results in
a value of the carrier relaxation time along the transverse
direction of τ⊥ = /2πkBΘD,⊥ =(0.125±0.005) ps.

VI. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

In summary, we have presented a numerical and ex-
perimental study of the low-temperature (1.3 K to 60
K) topology and properties of the Fermi surface of
Pb1−xNaxTe, and its evolution with carrier concentra-
tion, for Na dopings up to x=0.62%. We have found
that:
(i) Although the band oﬀset is underestimated by the
DFT calculations, all the qualitative features of the evo-
lution of the Fermi surface topology and eﬀective mass
are correctly predicted by our calculations. The under-
estimation of the band oﬀset is related to the high sen-
sitivity of the resulting band structure to variations of
parameters in the calculation, such as lattice spacing or
spin-orbit coupling. This fact is presumably related to
the fact that PbTe is on the boundary between various
competing structural (incipient ferroelectricity) and elec-
tronic (superconductivity and topological insulator) in-
stabilities.
(ii) The Fermi surface of Pb1−xNaxTe up to a carrier con-
centration of p = 9.4× 1019cm−3 (x = 0.62% - maximum

studied) is formed solely by eight half ellipsoids at the
L-points. The Σ-pockets predicted to contribute at such
high carrier concentrations in our calculation and those
of other groups13,42,55–57, are not observed. Additionally,
the measured Hall number, and the Luttinger volume of
the L-pockets calculated from our quantum oscillation
measurements, match exactly, indicating that this is the
only set of pockets that contribute to conduction in this
compound at low temperatures.
(iii) The topology of the Fermi surface, formed by eight
half pockets at the L-points, is well described by a per-
fect ellipsoidal model for carrier concentrations up to

ellipsoidicity were resolved for the highest carrier concen-

p = 6.3 × 1019cm−3 (x = 0.4%). Deviations from perfect
tration studied, p = 9.4 × 1019cm−3 (x = 0.62%).

(iv) The anisotropy of the L-pockets is constant for the
range of concentrations studied, and has an average value
of K =14.3±0.4.
(v) The anisotropy of the cyclotron eﬀective mass of the
L-pockets follows the angular dependence expected in a
perfect ellipsoidal model.
(vi) The eﬀective cyclotron masses along all high sym-
metry directions increase monotonically with increasing
carrier concentration, implying deviations from perfect
parabolicity of the band. The observation of constant
geometric and mass anisotropy with carrier concentra-

FIG. 17. (Color online) Dingle temperature in the transverse
direction, ΘD,⊥, obtained through ﬁtting of the curves in Fig.
10 to the LK formula in eq. 1, as a function of carrier concen-
tration pH . We ﬁnd that the Dingle temperature is indepen-
dent of carrier concentration, with a value of ΘD,⊥=(9.7±0.4)
K, indicated by the dashed-gray line. This value of ΘD,⊥ re-
sults in a value of τ =(0.125±0.005) ps for the carrier relax-
ation time along the transverse direction.

band.

A Kane model dispersion relation has been proposed
before to describe the valence band of PbTe33,48–51. In
this model the non-parabolicity of the band is introduced
as E −→ γ(E) = E(1 + E/Eg) in the dispersion relation,
where Eg is the band gap. For such a model, the longi-
tudinal and transverse eﬀective masses depend on energy
in the same way49, implying that, although the eﬀective
masses evolve as the Fermi energy is changed, the band
anisotropy parameter, K = (A(cid:107)/A⊥)2 = (mcyc(cid:107) /mcyc⊥ )2
is constant. Additionally, in this model, the constant
energy surfaces for any Fermi energy are ellipsoids of
revolution49, which is consistent with our observations

for carrier concentrations up to p = 6.3× 1019cm−3. The

Kane model has been successful at describing the band
structure near the gap of small band-gap semiconduc-
tors, for which the relevant Fermi energies are smaller
than or of the same order as the band gap52. Our ex-
perimental results are in line with the predictions of the
Kane model, ruling out other proposed models such as
the Cohen model49,53,54, at least for the low temperature
regime.

Additional to the cyclotron eﬀective masses, we have
found the Dingle temperature in the transverse direction,
ΘD,⊥, through a ﬁtting of the data to the LK-formula,
as presented in section IV B. In contrast to the cyclotron
mass, ﬁnding this quantity along directions other than
the longitudinal axis of the L-pocket ellipses is chal-
lenging, given that the oscillatory part of magnetoresis-
tance is dominated by the lowest frequency component.
For this dominating part of the signal, the exponential
damping in 1/H is the only one strong enough to re-

02468101205101520 QD,^ (K)pH (x1019cm-3)tion, but an increasing eﬀective mass, is consistent with
a Kane model of non-parabolic dispersion relation for the
valence band of PbTe.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The high-ﬁeld magnetoresistance measurements were
performed at the National High Magnetic Field Lab-

15

oratory (NHMFL), which is supported by NSF DMR-
1157490 and the State of Florida. PGG, PW and IRF
were supported by AFOSR Grant No. FA9550-09-1-
0583. BS, MF and NAS acknowledge support from ETH
Z¨urich, ERC Advanced Grant program (No. 291151),
and the Swiss National Supercomputing Centre (CSCS)
under project ID s307.

1 Y. I. Ravich, B. A. Eﬁmova, and I. A. Smirnov, Semi-
conducting Lead Chalcogenides (Plenum Press, New York,
1970).

2 R. Dornhaus, G. Nimtz,

and B. Schlicht, Narrow-Gap
Semiconductors, Springer Tracts Mod. Phys., vol. 98
(Springer-Verlag, New York, 1983).

3 D. Khokhlov, Lead Chalcogenides: Physics and applica-

26 J. P. Perdew and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B 23, 5048 (1981).
27 J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 77, 3865 (1996).

28 J. P. Perdew, A. Ruzsinszky, G. I. Csonka, O. A. Vydrov,
G. E. Scuseria, L. A. Constantin, X. Zhou, and K. Burke,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 136406 (2008).

29 K. Hummer, A. Gr¨uneis, and G. Kresse, Phys. Rev. B 75,

tions (Taylor and Francis books, New York, 2003).

195211 (2007).

4 Y. Pei, A. LaLonde, S. Iwanaga, and G. J. Snyder, Energy

30 P. M. C. Rourke and S. R. Julian, Comput. Phys. Com-

Environ. Sci. 4, 2085 (2011).

mun. 183, 324 (2012).

5 Y. Pei, X. Shi, A. LaLonde, H. Wang, L. Chen, and G. J.

31 S. Ahmad, K. Hoang, and S. D. Mahanti, Phys. Rev. Lett.

Snyder, Nature 473, 66 (2011).

6 M. G. Kanatzidis, Energy Environ. Sci. 22, 648 (2010).
7 J. P. Heremans, V. Jovovic, E. S. Toberer, A. Saramat,
K. Kurosaki, A. Charoenphakdee, S. Yamanaka, and G. J.
Snyder, Science 321, 554 (2008).

8 V. I. Kaidanov and Y. I. Ravich, Sov. Phys. Usp. 28, 31

(1985).

9 J. E. Lewis, Phys. Stat. sol (b) 42, K97 (1970).
10 Y. Matsushita, H. Bluhm, T. H. Geballe, and I. R. Fisher,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 157002 (2005).

96, 056403 (2006).

32 I. Hase and T. Yanagisawa, Phys. C Supercond. 445-448,

61 (2006).

33 S. Ahmad, S. D. Mahanti, K. Hoang,

and M. G.

Kanatzidis, Phys. Rev. B 74, 155205 (2006).

34 K. Xiong, G. Lee, R. P. Gupta, W. Wang, B. E. Gnade,

and K. Cho, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 43, 405403 (2010).

35 Y. Takagiwa, Y. Pei, G. Pomrehn, and G. Jeﬀrey Snyder,

APL Mater. 1, 011101 (2013).

36 M.-S. Lee and S. D. Mahanti, Phys. Rev. B 85, 165149

11 Y. Matsushita, P. A. W. A. T. Sommer, T. H. Geballe,

(2012).

and I. R. Fisher, Phys. Rev. B 74, 134512 (2006).

12 M. Dzero and J. Schmalian, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 157003

(2005).

37 K. Hoang, S. D. Mahanti, and M. G. Kanatzidis, Phys.

Rev. B 81, 115106 (2010).

38 S. Venkatapathi, B. Dong, and C. Hin, J. Appl. Phys.

13 D. Parker, X. Chen, and D. J. Singh, Phys. Rev. Lett.

116, 013708 (2014).

110, 146601 (2013).

39 D. Bilc, S. Mahanti, and M. Kanatzidis, Phys. Rev. B 74,

14 J. R. Burke, B. Houston, and H. T. Savage, Phys. Rev. B

125202 (2006).

2, 1977 (1970).

40 S. A. Yamini, T. Ikeda, A. L. Y. Pei, S. Doua, and G. J.

15 J. D. Jensen, B. Houston, and J. R. Burke, Phys. Rev. B

Snyder, J. Mater. Chem. A 1, 8725 (2013).

18, 5567 (1978).

41 D. Shoenberg, Magnetic Oscillations in Metals (Cam-

16 H. Sitter, K. Lischka, and H. Heinrich, Phys. Rev. B 16,

bridge University Press, 1984).

680 (1977).

42 G. Martinez, M. Schl¨uter, and M. L. Cohen, Phys. Rev.

17 J. An, A. Subedi, and D. Singh, Solid State Commun.

B 11, 651 (1975).

148, 417 (2008).

18 Y. Zhang, X. Ke, C. Chen, J. Yang, and P. Kent, Phys.

Rev. B 80, 024304 (2009).

19 E. S. Boˇzin, C. D. Malliakas, P. Souvatzis, T. Proﬀen, N. a.
Spaldin, M. G. Kanatzidis, and S. J. L. Billinge, Science
330, 1660 (2010).

20 A. S. Erickson, J. H. Chu, M. F. Toney, T. H. Geballe,

and I. R. Fisher, Phys. Rev. B 79, 024520 (2009).

21 P. Barone, T. Rauch, D. Di Sante, J. Henk, I. Mertig, and

S. Picozzi, Phys. Rev. B 88, 045207 (2013).

22 P. Barone, D. Di Sante, and S. Picozzi, Phys. status solidi

- Rapid Res. Lett. 7, 1102 (2013).

23 P. E. Bl¨ochl, Phys. Rev. B 50, 17953 (1994).
24 G. Kresse and D. Joubert, Phys. Rev. B 59, 1758 (1999).
25 G. Kresse and J. Furthm¨uller, Phys. Rev. B 54, 11169

(1996).

43 B. Wiendlocha, Phys. Rev. B 88, 205205 (2013).
44 S. A. Nemov and Y. I. Ravich, Sov. Phys. Usp. 41, 735

(1998).

45 Y. I. Ravich, A. Eﬁmova, and V. I. Tamarchenkov, Phys.

Stat. sol (b) 43, 11 (1971).

46 Y. I. Ravich, A. Eﬁmova, and V. I. Tamarchenkov, Phys.

Stat. sol (b) 43, 453 (1971).

47 K. F. Cuﬀ, M. R. Ellett, C. D. Kuglin, and L. R. Williams,
Proceedings of the international conference on the physics
of semiconductors in Exeter , 316 (1962).

48 E. O. Kane, Semiconductors and Semimetals, Vol. 1,

Chapter 3 (Academic, New York, 1975).

49 Y.

I. Ravich,
(Springer, 1970).

Semiconducting Lead Chalcogenides

50 D. I. Bilc, S. D. Mahanti, and M. G. Kanatzidis, Phys.

Rev. B 74, 125202 (2006).

APPENDIX

× cos

2π

+ φi

(A6)

Appendix A: Quantum oscillations formalism

as presented in Eqn. 1.

51 H. Kong, Ph.D. Thesis: Thermoelectric Property Studies
on Lead Chalcogenides, double-ﬁlled cobalt tri-antimonide
and rare earth-ruthenium-germanium (University of Michi-
gan, 2008).

52 E. O. Kane, J. Phys. Chern. Solids 1, 249 (1956).
53 M. H. Cohen, Phys. Rev. 121, 387 (1961).
54 J. R. Dixon and H. R. Riedl, Phys. Rev. 138, A873 (1965).
55 P. J. Lin and L. Kleinman, Phys. Rev. 142, 478 (1966).
56 J. O. Dimmock and G. B. Wright, Phys. Rev. 135, A821

(1964).

57 Y. W. Tung and M. L. Cohen, Phys. Rev. 180, 823 (1969).

In this section we brieﬂy outline the concepts needed
to understand quantum oscillation experiments in met-
als. For a detailed treatment see the excellent book by
Shoenberg 41. It is well known that in a magnetic ﬁeld
H the allowed electronic states lie on quantized tubes in
k-space (Landau tubes). The tube quantization is de-
scribed by the Onsager equation

a(En,kH , kH ) =

n +

2πeH/c

,

(A1)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

1
2

where a is the cross-sectional area of the Landau tube
in a plane perpendicular to H, and n is an integer. As
a consequence, an oscillatory behavior with the inverse
magnetic ﬁeld 1/H can be observed in, for example the
magnetization – the de Haas-van Alphen (dHvA) eﬀect
– or the resistance – the Shubnikov-de Haas eﬀect. The
period of such oscillations, ∆1/H , is given by

∆1/H = 2πe/(cA)

,

(A2)

A being an extremal cross-sectional area of the Fermi
surface in a plane perpendicular to H. One can also
deﬁne a frequency for these oscillations as
f = 1/∆1/H = (c/2πe)A .

(A3)

By determining the oscillations in, e.g., the resistivity for
varying orientations of the magnetic ﬁeld one can even-
tually reconstruct the Fermi surface.

In the semi-classical picture the electrons move along
(open and closed) orbits on the Fermi surface in a plane
perpendicular to H. The time taken to traverse a closed
(cyclotron) orbit is given by

tc =

2π
ωc

=

2c
eH

∂a
∂E

,

(A4)

16

where one can rewrite the cyclotron frequency ωc in terms
of a cyclotron mass

mcyc =

2
2π

∂a
∂E

.

(A5)

For a free-electron gas the cyclotron mass is equal to the
electron mass. Experimentally the cyclotron masses are
extracted using the Lifshitz-Kosevich (LK) formula (in
SI units)

ρ(H) − ρ0

ρ0

=

×

(cid:19)(cid:27)

(cid:26)

(cid:18)

Ci

exp

(cid:88)
(cid:26)
(cid:20)

i

T /H
sinh (14.7(mcyc

fi
H

i /m0)ΘD,i)
H

(cid:27)

−14.7(mcyc
(cid:21)

i /m0)T /H)

Appendix B: Cyclotron eﬀective mass anisotropy

For a given dispersion relation one can, in principle,
ﬁnd the relation between the geometric anisotropy of
the Fermi surface and the anisotropy of the cyclotron
eﬀective mass. For a perfect parabolic band, the general
anisotropic dispersion relation is given by,

2k2
x
2mx

2k2
y
2my

2k2
z
2mz

+

+

= E

(B1)

where mx, my and mz are the band masses. For an
ellipsoidal Fermi surface with the major semiaxis of the
ellipse oriented along the z-axis, the band masses are
mx = my = m⊥ and mz = m(cid:107). For such systems, the
minimum and maximum cross sectional areas are

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)kz=0
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)kz=0

A⊥ = πk2

x,y

A(cid:107) = πkx,y

areas is

A(cid:107)
A⊥

kz

=

=

2 E

2πm⊥

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)kx,y=0
(cid:114) m(cid:107)

=

m⊥

(B2a)

(B2b)

2π

2 √m⊥m(cid:107)E

= √K

(B3)

and the ratio of maximum-to-minimum cross sectional

where K = m(cid:107)/m⊥ is deﬁned as the ratio of band
masses, and it directly represents the anisotropy of the
ellipsoidal pocket. As our experiment is a direct probe of
cyclotron masses, we can ﬁnd a relation between K and
the extremal cyclotron masses. For a perfect parabolic

band, with dispersion of the form given in Eqn. B1, the

cyclotron eﬀective mass, mcyc = e| (cid:126)B|/ωc, for a magnetic
ﬁeld of the general form (cid:126)B = Bx ˆx + By ˆy + Bz ˆz can be
found from the dynamic equations and the dispersion
relation, resulting in the expression

(cid:118)(cid:117)(cid:117)(cid:116)

(cid:17)2

(cid:16) Bx|B|

mx

mcyc =

(cid:17)2

(cid:16) By|B|

(cid:17)2

(cid:16) Bz|B|

+ mz

(B4)

mxmymz

+ my

17

For an ellipsoid of revolution, therefore, the transverse
and longitudinal cyclotron eﬀective masses, in terms of
the band masses, are

mcyc⊥ = m⊥
mcyc(cid:107) = √m⊥m(cid:107)

(B5a)
(B5b)

And with this,

(cid:114) m(cid:107)

m⊥

mcyc(cid:107)
mcyc⊥

=

= √K

(B6)

For the case of Pb1−xNaxTe, in which K =14.3±0.4
for a wide range of dopings, mcyc(cid:107) /mcyc⊥ =3.78±0.05. Ad-
ditionally, from Eqn. B4, we can ﬁnd a general expres-
sion for the angle dependence of cyclotron mass of an
ellipsoid of revolution, with respect to the main axis of
the ellipsoid, and as a function of the transverse cy-
clotron mass, by writing the components of the mag-
netic ﬁeld in spherical coordinates as Bx = | (cid:126)B| sin θ cos ϕ,
By = | (cid:126)B| sin θ sin ϕ and Bz = | (cid:126)B| cos θ:

(cid:115)

mcyc (θ)
mcyc⊥

=

K

(K − 1) cos2 θ + 1

(B7)

Appendix C: Eﬀective cyclotron mass along the

[100] orientation

Figure A1 shows the temperature dependence of
the oscillating component of magnetoresistance for
Pb1−xNaxTe samples of diﬀerent Na concentrations, for
ﬁeld oriented along the [100] direction, which provides di-
rect access to the mcyc
[100] cyclotron eﬀective mass. Least-
squares ﬁts to equation 1, including up to the second
strongest frequency component, for each Na doping, and
for a ﬁeld range of 3-5 T to 14 T, are shown in the right-
column plots of this ﬁgure. The obtained [100] cyclotron
masses are summarized in Table II, and plotted as a func-
tion of carrier concentration in Fig. 16, in the discussion
section.

FIG. A1. (Color online) Temperature dependence of the am-
plitude of the oscillating component of magnetoresistance for
Pb1−xNaxTe samples, with magnetic ﬁeld oriented in or close
to the [100] direction. The left-column plots of each com-
position show the background-free data at diﬀerent temper-
atures. The right-column plots show the ﬁts of the data to
the LK-formula in equation 1, using the two most dominant
frequencies observed in the FFT of the lowest temperature
curve (three most dominant for the x=0.62% sample). From
these ﬁts, the values of cyclotron eﬀective mass and Dingle
temperature, for each frequency term, are obtained.

