6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
0
3

 
 
]
h
p
-
t
n
a
u
q
[
 
 

2
v
7
1
4
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Controlling open quantum systems: Tools, achievements, and limitations

Christiane P. Koch1, ∗

1Theoretische Physik, Universit¨at Kassel, Heinrich-Plett-Str. 40, 34132 Kassel, Germany

(Dated: March 31, 2016)

The advent of quantum devices, which exploit the two essential elements of quantum physics,
coherence and entanglement, has sparked renewed interest in the control of open quantum systems.
Successful implementations face the challenge to preserve the relevant nonclassical features at the
level of device operation. A major obstacle is decoherence which is caused by interaction with
the environment. Optimal control theory is a tool that can be used to identify control strategies
in the presence of decoherence. We review here recent advances in optimal control methodology
that allow for tackling typical tasks in device operation for open quantum systems and discuss
examples of relaxation-optimized dynamics. Optimal control theory is also a useful tool to exploit
the environment for control. We discuss examples and point out possible future extensions.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Control refers to the ability to steer a dynamical sys-
tem from an initial to a ﬁnal state with a desired accu-
racy; optimal control does so with minimum expenditure
of eﬀort and resources. A famous example is the Apollo
space mission where optimal control was used to safely
land the spacecraft on the moon. The essence of this
control task can be stripped down to a textbook example
where students calculate the change in acceleration, that
is, the rate of burning fuel, required to reach the moon’s
surface with zero velocity. This example highlights the
central role of optimal control in any type of engineering,
its importance being rivaled only by feedback, a subject
not covered in this review.

In quantum optimal control [1], Newton’s equations
governing the motion of the spacecraft are replaced by
the quantum mechanical laws of motion, of course.
In
contrast, the control, corresponding for example to a
radio-frequency (RF) amplitude or the electric ﬁeld of a
laser, is assumed to be classical. Quantum optimal con-
trol represents one variant of quantum control [2] and is
closely related to coherent control [3]. The latter requires
exploitation of quantum coherence, i.e., matter wave in-
terference. In contrast, quantum control could also refer
to inducing a desired dynamics, for example by ampli-
tude modulations that avoid driving certain transitions,
without matter wave interference.

Despite of its prominence in mathematics and engi-
neering [4, 5], optimal control was introduced to NMR
spectroscopy [6, 7] and to the realm of matter wave dy-
namics [8–10] only in the 1980s. In the latter case, the
idea was to calculate, via numerical optimization, laser
ﬁelds that would steer a photoinduced chemical reaction
in the desired way [8–13]. It was triggered by the advent
of femtosecond lasers and pulse shaping capabilities that
opened up seemingly endless possibilities to create intri-
cate laser pulse trains. While a controlled breaking of

∗Electronic address: christiane.koch@uni-kassel.de

chemical bonds was indeed demonstrated soon after [14],
the pulses were obtained by closed-loop optimizations in
the experiments [15] rather than from theoretical cal-
culations.
In experimental closed-loop optimization, a
shaped pulse is applied to the sample, and the outcome
is measured. Based on the outcome, the pulse shape is
modiﬁed, typically by a genetic algorithm. However, even
for a chemical reaction as simple as breaking the bond in
a diatomic alkali molecule, the calculated optimized laser
ﬁeld cannot directly be used in the experiment [16]. The
reason for this is two-fold: The way how the optimized
laser ﬁelds are obtained is rather diﬀerent in theory and
experiment. Whereas the ﬁeld in calculations is shaped
as a function of time [13, 17], experiments employ spec-
tral shaping [18]. As a result, calculated pulses are often
incompatible with experimental pulse shaping capabili-
ties. Second, the theoretical modeling is simply not ac-
curate enough. This results in pulses which are optimal
for the ’wrong’ dynamics and which can therefore not
directly be applied in the experiments.

These obstacles are not present, or at least much
less severe, in other ﬁelds of application [1]. Once the
timescale of the relevant dynamics is nanoseconds or
slower, pulse shaping in the experiment is also done in
time domain [19]. While device response might still be
an issue [20, 21], the overall approaches in theory and
experiment are similar in spirit. Moreover, Hamiltonians
and relaxation parameters may be known much more ac-
curately than is currently the case in photoinduced chem-
ical reactions. A prominent example is NMR where the
development of optimal control in theory and experiment
went hand in hand, yielding beautiful results, for example
on arbitrary excitation proﬁles [22], or robust broadband
excitation [23, 24].

Given these observations, quantum information pro-
cessing (QIP) and related technologies oﬀer themselves
as an obvious playground for quantum optimal control:
In these applications, typically the quantum system to be
controlled is well characterized, and timescales are suﬃ-
ciently slow to use electronics for pulse shaping. Not sur-
prisingly, quantum optimal control has attracted much
interest in these ﬁelds over the last decade. This included

the adaptation of optimal control tools, for example to
gate optimization [25–27], creation of entanglement [28–
30], or measurement [31]. Gate optimizations were car-
ried out for almost all QIP platforms, notably comprising
ions [32], atoms [33–35], nitrogen vacancy (NV) centers
in diamond [36, 37], and superconducting qubits [38, 39].
Other QIP tasks, such as state preparation [40–44], trans-
port [45–47], and storage [48], have also been the subject
of optimal control studies. These tasks are not only rel-
evant for quantum computing and communication but
also for related applications that exploit coherence and
entanglement, for example quantum sensing or quantum
simulation. Protocols derived with optimal control have
by now reached a maturity that allows them to be tested
in experiments. Examples include the crossing of a phase
transition studied with trapped, cold atoms [49, 50]; the
improvement of the imaging capabilities of a single NV
center [51]; and the creation of spin entanglement [52],
quantum error correction [37] and matter wave interfer-
ometry [50, 53].

All of these examples share a generic feature that is
typical for quantum engineering: Control over the sys-
tem, which inevitably also brings about noise, needs to be
balanced with suﬃcient isolation of the desired quantum
features. This sets the theme for controlling open quan-
tum systems. Traditionally, a quantum system is deﬁned
to be open when it interacts with its environment [54, 55].
This interaction results in loss of energy and phase infor-
mation.
It can be modeled phenomenologically within
the semigroup approach or microscopically, by embed-
ding the system in a bath. Besides coupling to a bath,
the dynamics of a quantum system becomes eﬀectively
dissipative also when the system is subject to measure-
ments or noisy controls.

Dissipative processes pose a challenge to quantum con-
trol. At the same time, desired dissipation may act as an
enabler for control. We will review control strategies in
both cases and then explain how optimal control theory
can be used to adapt them to more complex quantum
systems.

This topical review is organized as follows: Section II
brieﬂy recalls the basic concepts in the theory of open
quantum systems, introducing the distinction between
Markovian and non-Markovian dynamics in Sec. II A and
addressing the issue of gauging success of control for open
quantum systems in Sec. II B. The problem of analyzing
controllability of open quantum systems, an important
prerequisiste to synthesizing control ﬁelds, is introduced
in Sec. III A. Progress in the control of open quantum sys-
tems is reviewed in Sections III B and IV with Sec. III B
dedicated to control strategies that were constructed with
analytical methods and Sec. IV covering numerical opti-
mal control.
In Sec. IV A, the numerical methodology
is explained in detail for a simple example, followed by
a discussion of the modiﬁcations required to adapt it to
more advanced control targets. The remainder of Sec. IV
reviews applications of numerical optimal control to open
quantum systems, starting with examples for ﬁghting or

avoiding decoherence in Sec. IV B. Control strategies that
rely on the presence of the environment are discussed in
Secs. IV C and IV D. Section V concludes.

2

II. OPEN QUANTUM SYSTEMS

The state of an open quantum system is described by
the density operator ˆρS which is an element of Liouville
space. Any theory that aims at the control of an open
quantum system is faced with two basic prerequisites –
the ability to calculate the system’s dynamics, ˆρS(t), and
the ability to quantify success of control.

A. Markovian vs non-Markovian dynamics

Formally, the time evolution of any open quantum
system can be described by a dynamical map, ˆρS(t) =
Dt,0 ( ˆρS(0)) which is completely positive and trace pre-
serving (CPTP) [55]. The dynamical map is divisible if
it can be written as the composition of two CPTP maps
Dt,0 = Dt,t′ Dt′,0 ∀t′ ≤ t. If the dynamical map is divisi-
ble, the open system’s time evolution is memoryless and
called Markovian. Various scenarios can lead to Marko-
vian dynamics, weak coupling between system and envi-
ronment together with a decay of environmental correla-
tions much faster than the timescales of the system dy-
namics being the most common case [55]. However, open
systems often exhibit pronounced memory eﬀects, in par-
ticular in condensed matter experiments, which reﬂect
characteristic features of the environment. The dynam-
ics are then called non-Markovian. Memory eﬀects are
caused by structured spectral densities, nonlocal correla-
tions between environmental degrees of freedom and cor-
relations in the initial system-environment state [56, 57].
In the Markovian case, the dynamics can be described
by a master equation in Lindblad form [55]. In general,
it needs to be solved numerically to determine ˆρ(t). This
can be done with arbitrarily high precision [58]. However,
the computational eﬀort may quickly become challenging
due to the exponential scaling of the size of Hilbert and
Liouville space. To date, room for improvement seems to
be limited [59, 60].

The situation is worse for non-Markovian dynamics,
where a uniﬁed framework such as the master equation
in Lindblad form does not exist. A variety of methods
has been developed [61], each with diﬀerent assumptions
and hence a diﬀerent range of applicability. They in-
clude time-local non-Markovian master equations [55],
stochastic unravellings [62–64], and an auxiliary density
matrix approach [65]. A common feature of these meth-
ods is their ability to correctly describe thermalization of
the system. Slightly diﬀerent in philosophy are methods
which attempt to solve the dynamics of both system and
environment [66, 67]. Key is to account only for that part
of the environment that is relevant for the system’s dy-
namics, i.e., for the ’eﬀective modes’, which can be spins

or harmonic oscillators. The underlying idea is that of
quantum simulation on a classical computer [68], where
the true environment is replaced by a surrogate one that
generates the same dynamics. If one is interested in short
times, the number of modes in the surrogate Hamiltonian
can be truncated with a prespeciﬁed error [69]. Longer
propagation times than those computationally aﬀordable
with exact dynamics of system and environment become
possible by separating the environment into two baths,
one that is responsible for the memory eﬀects and that is
modeled by eﬀective modes as explained above, and a sec-
ond one that by itself would lead to Markovian dynamics
only. The secondary bath can be accounted for in terms
of a Markovian master equation in Lindblad form [38, 70]
or via a stochastic unravelling using a single secondary
bath mode [71]. A more comprehensive overview over
methods to tackle non-Markovian dynamics is found in
Ref. [61].

Understanding the inﬂuence of memory eﬀects requires
the ability to quantify them. An obvious way to deﬁne
a measure of non-Markovianity is to quantify deviation
from divisibility [72, 73]. Interestingly, this corresponds
to an increase of correlations if the system is bi- or mul-
tipartite [73, 74]. Other measures to capture memory ef-
fects focus on speciﬁc features such as recoherence and in-
formation backﬂow. These can be characterized in terms
of distinguishability between quantum states [75–77], re-
expansion of the volume of accessible states [78], or the
capacity to reliably transmit quantum information [79].
A comprehensive overview over the diﬀerent measures is
found in Ref. [56], and an illustrative comparison for a
toy model is presented in Ref. [80].

The proposed non-Markovianity measures can be clas-
siﬁed in a hierarchy by generalizing the notion of divis-
ibility [81, 82]. While this is gratifying from a theoret-
ical perspective, it is still an open question how non-
Markovianity can be measured in a condensed phase ex-
periment. Although some of the measures have been eval-
uated in experiment [83, 84], dissipation in these exam-
ples was either engineered or artiﬁcial, in the sense that
diﬀerent degrees of freedom within one particle were con-
sidered to play the role of system and bath. A true con-
densed phase setting is more challenging due to limited
control and thus limited access to measurable quantities.

Current interest in non-Markovian dynamics is fu-
eled by the revival of genuine quantum properties
such as quantum coherence and correlations that non-
Markovianity entails. It has sparked the hope to exploit
non-Markovianity as a resource. Quantum control in
particular, which relies on properties such as coherence,
should be more powerful in the non-Markovian compared
to the Markovian regime.

3

B. Measuring success of control in open quantum

systems

When the goal is to control an open quantum sys-
tem, the ability to gauge success of control
is even
more important than that to measure the degree of non-
Markovianity. Any suitable ﬁgure of merit needs to fulﬁll
two conditions: (i) It should take its optimum value if
and only if the control target is reached. (ii) It needs to
be computable. An obvious control target is to drive a
given initial state to a desired target state. The corre-
sponding ﬁgure of merit is the projection onto the target
state. For open quantum systems, this is given in terms
of the Hilbert Schmidt product of the state of the system
at the ﬁnal time and the target state,

(1)

FT = Tr(cid:8)DT,0 ( ˆρinitial) ˆρtarget(cid:9)

This ﬁgure of merit has been used for example in control
studies of cooling where the timescales of the dissipative
process and the coherent system dynamics are compara-
ble [85, 86]. Typically, the target for cooling is a pure
state. Sometimes the timescale of dissipation is much
slower than that of the coherent dynamics. This situ-
ation is encountered when using femtosecond lasers for
laser cooling [87]. In order to avoid the very long prop-
agation times for repeated cooling cycles consisting of
coherent excitation and spontaneous emission as well as
the expensive description in Liouville space, one can ex-
pand ˆρinitial in a basis of Hilbert space vectors and tailor
the dynamics of the Hilbert space vectors such that the
target will be reached irrespective of the initial state [88].
The construction of the proper ﬁgure of merit in that case
will be discussed below in Section IV C.

An important control target in the context of quantum
information processing is the implementation of unitary
operations, or quantum gates. This corresponds to si-
multaneous state-to-state transitions for all states in the
logical basis [25–27]. A straightforward way to express
this control target in Liouville space is given by [89, 90]

FT =

1
d

d2

Xj=1

+

ˆO

Trn ˆO ˆρj

DT,0(cid:0) ˆρj(cid:1)o ,

(2)

where ˆO denotes the desired target operation, deﬁned on
the logical subspace of dimension d. The set of ˆρj forms
a suitable orthonormal basis of the d2-dimensional Liou-
ville (sub)space or, more simply, all d2 matrices for which
one entry is equal to one and all other zero. The Hilbert
Schmidt product in Eq. (2) checks how well the actual
+
.
The scaling of Eq. (2) with system size d restricts its use
to examples with very few qubits.

evolution, DT,0(cid:0) ˆρj(cid:1), matches the desired one, ˆO ˆρj

ˆO

If the target is the implementation of a unitary oper-
ation, and not an arbitrary dynamical map, much less
resources are required to gauge success of control. This
observation is at the basis of all current proposals to es-
timate the average gate ﬁdelity [91–95] which forego the

full knowledge of DT,0 that is obtained in quantum pro-
cess tomography in favor of eﬃciency. One way to un-
derstand the reduction in eﬀort is to start from Eq. (2)
and ask how many states are required in the sum to have
a well-deﬁned ﬁgure of merit, i.e., a ﬁgure of merit that
takes its optimum value if and only if the target opera-
tion is realized. Surprisingly, the answer to this question
is three, independent of system size [39, 96]:

possible at all, before starting to search for controls that
lead to the target. Section III A brieﬂy reviews the cur-
rent state of the art in controllability analysis of open
quantum systems, whereas Sec. III B summarizes strate-
gies for control synthesis that are based on certain prop-
erties of the system’s interaction with its environment,
and optimal control theory as a tool for control synthesis
will be presented in Sec. IV.

4

FT =

1
3

3

Xj=1

+

ˆO

Trn ˆO ˆρj

DT,0(cid:0) ˆρj(cid:1)o .

(3)

One state in Eq. (3) measures the departure from unitar-
ity or, more precisely, from unitality in the logical sub-
space, and two more states are necessary to distinguish
any two unitaries [211]. The latter requires two states
because one needs to determine the basis in which the
unitary is diagonal and then check whether the phases
on the diagonal are identical. Only two states are re-
quired because it is possible to construct one density
operator that ’ﬁxes’ the complete Hilbert space basis,
i=1 λi|ϕiihϕi|, using one-dimensional orthogo-
nal projectors, |ϕiihϕi|, with non-degenerate eigenvalues,
λi
6= λj. A variant of Eq. (3) is obtained by replac-
ing the two states for the basis and phases by d states
ρj = |ϕiihϕi|. This is still a reduction compared to the
d2 states in Eq. (2) and was found to lead to faster con-
vergence in control calculations than Eq. (3) [39]. Evalu-
ation of both Eq. (3) and its d + 1 state variant are much
more eﬃcient than that of Eq. (2) [39].

ˆρ2 = Pd

Both Eqs. (2) and (3) target implementation of a spe-
ciﬁc unitary ˆO. For diﬃcult control problems, where a
numerical search can easily get stuck, it is desirable to
formulate the control target in the most ﬂexible way. For
example, instead of implementing a speciﬁc two-qubit
gate such as CNOT, it may be suﬃcient to realize a gate
that is locally equivalent to CNOT, i.e., that diﬀers from
CNOT by local operations. The corresponding ﬁgure of
merit is based on the so-called local invariants [29, 97].
Similarly, one can formulate a ﬁgure of merit for target-
ing an arbitrary perfect entangler [98, 99]. Since these
ﬁgures of merit are based on the local invariants which
in turn are calculated from the unitary evolution, exten-
sion to non-unitary dynamics requires to ﬁrst determine
the unitary part of the overall evolution. This is possible,
using the same mathematical concepts that have led to
Eq. (3) [100].

III. CONTROL OF OPEN QUANTUM

SYSTEMS

The theory of controlling open quantum system can
be divided into two main questions—analysis of control-
lability and synthesis of controls (called motion planning
in the classical automatic control community): When the
goal is to realize a certain desired dynamics, it is worth-
while to check ﬁrst whether performance of the task is

A. Controllability of open quantum systems

Controllability analysis provides the mathematical
tools for answering the question whether the target is
reachable [101]. In particular, a complete framework ex-
ists for ﬁnite-dimensional systems undergoing unitary dy-
namics: Separating the Hamiltonian into drift and con-
trol terms,

ˆH = ˆH0 +Xj

uj(t) ˆHj ,

(4)

the system is controllable provided the Lie algebra
spanned by the nested commutators of ˆH0 and ˆHj is full
rank [2, 102, 103]. The elements of the Lie algrebra can
be interpreted as tangential vectors, i.e., as the direc-
tions, of the unitary evolution (which is an element of a
Lie group). If evolution into all directions can be gener-
ated, the system is controllable. Controllability can also
be viewed in terms of connectivity between Hilbert space
basis states [104]; it then corresponds to presence of the
respective matrix elements.

For open quantum systems, the evolution is not unitary
anymore, and analysis of the Hamiltonian alone is not
suﬃcient to decide controllability: The dissipative part
of the evolution may prevent or enable certain states to
be reached. For example, even if the full rank condition
for the Lie algebra of the Hamiltonian is fulﬁlled, fast de-
coherence will inhibit transitions between pure states by
turning any pure state into a mixed one. Merely the pres-
ence of non-vanishing matrix elements in the Hamiltonian
is thus not suﬃcient to decide controllability. Their mag-
nitude matters as well, in particular of those in the drift
Hamiltonian ˆH0 that cannot be tuned by external con-
trols uj. To date, rigorous controllability analysis does
not take such a dependence on operator norms, or com-
peting time scales into account.

As a result, one needs to turn to numerical search for
most open quantum systems, even for an example as sim-
ple as the central spin model [105]. This is rather unsatis-
factory since a numerical search cannot provide rigorous
answers to controllability, in particular lack thereof (in
the sense of reachability of the target with a predeter-
mined error ǫ), due to its local character. An extension
of controllability analysis to the needs of open quantum
systems would address this issue but remains an open
problem to date.
It would be particularly relevant for
open quantum systems with almost unitary dynamics,

which are often encountered e.g. in quantum technology
applications.

B. Control strategies for open quantum systems

5

2

S(t)(cid:3).

As an example where the dissipative part of the over-
all evolution enables certain states to be reached, con-
sider cooling which turns mixed states into pure ones.
Obviously, controllability analysis based on the Lie rank
condition for the Hamiltonian alone cannot provide any
information on time evolutions which change the purity

of the system’s state, P = Tr(cid:2) ˆρ

By and large, controllability of open quantum systems
still remains uncharted territory to date [1]. This refers
in particular to dynamic controllability where the anal-
ysis accounts for available dynamical resources such as
coupling to external ﬁelds and environmental degrees of
freedom, or measurements, in contrast to kinematic con-
trollability. The latter implies existence of a dynami-
cal map that transforms any initial state into the tar-
get state. While this existence can be proven for ﬁnite-
dimensional systems [106], it is of limited relevance for
practical applications since, in general, one cannot derive
any dynamical information from the proof.

To tackle controllability of open quantum systems, two
routes can be followed: Either one starts from a complete
description of the system and its environment, or one
considers the reduced description of the system alone. In
the ﬁrst case, the tools of controllability analysis for uni-
tary dynamics can be employed. This way it was possible
to show, for example, that even for completely control-
lable system-environment dynamics, cooling is possible
only if the environment contains a suﬃciently large vir-
tual subsystem which is in a state with the desired pu-
rity [107]. While exact solution of the combined system-
environment dynamics is extremely challenging (and im-
possible in many cases), controllability analysis from this
perspective is expected to signiﬁcantly advance our un-
derstanding already for simple models and for generic
questions, as in the example of Ref. [107]. Moreover, it
appears to be promising for two reasons – it does not
rely on a priori assumptions on the reduced dynamics,
and most likely it will beneﬁt from recent progress in the
controllability of inﬁnite-dimensional systems [108–111].
Rigorous controllability analyses for reduced dynamics
have been limited to date to the Markovian case [112–
117]. In particular, the sets of reachable states were char-
acterized [112], and the Lindblad operators were shown
to form a Lie wedge [114]. While the Lie wedge provides
a suﬃcient, but not necessary condition for controllabil-
ity, necessary but not suﬃcient criteria can be identiﬁed
by considering isotropy of the generator of the dissipa-
tive motion [117]. Numerically, non-Markovian dynamics
were shown to lead to SU (N ) controllability (in the sense
of reachability of the target with a predetermined error ǫ)
for a system whose Hamiltonian allows for realization of
SO(N ) operations only [70]. However, no rigorous anal-
ysis of controllability for non-Markovian dynamics has
been performed to date; and it is not yet clear whether
and under which conditions non-Markovian eﬀects can
improve controllability of an open quantum system.

Control strategies that are obtained by analytical
methods can be roughly divided into two classes – those
that exploit symmetries in the system-bath interaction
and those that make assumptions on the timescale of this
interaction. In the ﬁrst case, protection from decoherence
is achieved by keeping the system’s state in a so-called
decoherence-free subspace [118, 119]: If the system-bath
interaction contains a symmetry, for example qubits cou-
ple indistinguishably to their environment, it is possible
to construct a set of system states that are invariant un-
der the system-bath interaction. These states form a
decoherence-free subspace in the system’s total Hilbert
space [118, 119]. Stimulated Raman Adiabatic Passage
(STIRAP) and electromagnetically induced transparency
represent examples for decoherence-free subspaces [119].
In the context of quantum information, two or more phys-
ical qubits, carried for example by atoms, can be used to
encode one logical qubit that is decoherence-free [120].
Decoherence-free subspaces have been demonstrated, for
example, in liquid-state nuclear magnetic resonance [121]
and with trapped ions [122]. Numerical methods can be
employed to identify (approximate) decoherence-free sub-
spaces [123] and to ﬁnd an external control that drives the
system dynamics into a decoherence-free subspace [124].
More generally, in physics the presence of a symmetry
implies existence of a conserved quantity.
In the con-
text of decoherence, a symmetry in the system-bath in-
teraction leads to a quantum number which is preserved
under this interaction. The eigenstates belonging to the
preserved quantum number deﬁne a noiseless subsystem,
i.e., a logical subsystem that is intrinsically protected
from noise [125, 126]. The main limitation of this set
of approaches is imposed by the existence of a suitable
symmetry which is not necessarily available.

In the second case of control strategies that are built on
assumptions on the timescale of the system-bath interac-
tion, a trivial strategy is obtained for slow decoherence:
One simply needs to perform the desired operation on a
time scale much faster than that of decoherence. But this
may not always be possible, and slow decoherence also
allows for eliminating the eﬀects of decoherence based on
average Hamiltonian theory [127] or, in more intuitive
terms, spin echo techniques from nuclear magnetic reso-
nance and generalizations thereof. This set of strategies
is often referred to as dynamical decoupling [128–131].
It relies on many quasi-instantaneous actions of control
ﬁelds that do not allow the system to interact with its en-
vironment, creating an eﬀective dynamics of the system
alone.

Extensive work over the last two decades has allowed
to account for e.g. pulse imperfections [132] and ex-
tend the technique beyond spin dynamics for which it
was originally developed, for example to ions [133], and
superconducting circuits [134]. The main limitation of
the dynamical decoupling approach is the ﬁnite duration
of any control ﬁeld which cannot always be made suﬃ-

ciently short. By now dynamical decoupling has grown
into a ﬁeld of its own which has been covered by several
reviews [129–131], and the reader is referred to these for
a more in-depth analysis.

The time-dependent perspective used in dynamical de-
coupling can be translated into a frequency-space pic-
ture using the generalized transfer ﬁlter function ap-
proach [135, 136]. This allows to eﬃciently predict ﬁ-
delities, at least for weak noise [137], and provides a con-
nection to control strategies that decouple the system
from its environment by engineering a spectral separa-
tion [138]. In particular, it was shown that the system-
bath interaction can be cancelled, at least to second
order, by choosing the time-dependence of the control
ﬁeld such that its spectrum becomes orthogonal to the
bath or noise spectrum [138]. Such an approach requires
weak coupling and negligible initial system-bath correla-
tions. Moreover, the bath spectrum needs to be known.
Another example of engineering a spectral separation is
given by the protection of so-called edge states in topo-
logical insulators via band Liouvillians [139, 140].

In addition to clarifying the relation between time-
domain based and frequency-domain based control
strategies, the transfer ﬁlter function perspective also
provides a practical tool for characterizing the noise
spectral density [141].
Its applicability to a variety of
physical platforms has already been demonstrated [141–
143]. Noise spectroscopy provides an excellent starting
point for deriving microscopic models for the system-
environment interaction and thus a more thorough un-
derstanding of noise at the quantum mechanical level.
It also allows for tailoring control synthesis to speciﬁc
spectral features of the noise, either, if possible, by us-
ing the transfer ﬁlter function approach directly [136], or
by exploiting knowledge of these features using optimal
control theory, in Sec. IV below.

IV. OPTIMAL CONTROL OF OPEN

QUANTUM SYSTEMS

Quantum optimal control theory refers to a set of
methods that synthesize external control ﬁelds from
knowledge of the control target, including constraints,
and the time evolution of the quantum system [1].
It
is based on the calculus of variations, i.e., on formulat-
ing the control target as a functional of external controls
that realize the desired dynamics. Knowledge of the sys-
tem’s time evolution enters implicitly via evaluation of
the target functional and, possibly, its derivatives.

For a few exceptional cases,

for example one or
two spins (or qubits) [144–149], a harmonic oscilla-
tor [150, 151], or a sequence of Λ-systems subject to de-
cay [152, 153], the external controls can be determined
using geometric techniques based on Pontryagin’s maxi-
mum principle [4]. Typically, however, the control prob-
lem cannot be solved in closed form, and one needs to
resort to numerical optimization.

6

Most often, controlling open quantum systems is a dif-
ﬁcult control task such that eﬃciency of the optimization
algorithm is important. Therefore, mainly algorithms
based on the target functional’s gradient have been em-
ployed for open quantum systems to date. They will be
reviewed in Sec. IV A. The remainder of this section is
dedicated to control strategies that were developed using
numerical optimization, starting with strategies avoiding
decoherence in Sec. IV B, followed by strategies exploit-
ing presence of the environment in Sec. IV C and IV D.

A. Optimal control theory applied to open

quantum systems

Conceptually the simplest control problem is repre-
sented by state-to-state transfer: Given a known initial
state, ˆρini, at time t = 0, ﬁnd the external ﬁeld that
drives this state at ﬁnal time t = T into the target state,
ˆρtarget, with prespeciﬁed error, ǫ. The corresponding tar-
get functional is found in Eq. (1) where dependence on
the set of external controls {uj} is implicit in the time
evolution, DT,0 = DT,0[{uj}].

This control problem was ﬁrst stated in the context
of laser cooling molecular vibrations [85, 154, 155]. The
time evolution was modeled by a Markovian master equa-
tion in Lindblad form, and later extended to a non-
Markovian example [86, 156]. For the sake of conceptual
clarity, we present here the algorithm for a Markovian
master equation,

d ˆρ
dt

= L( ˆρ) = −ih ˆH [u(t)] , ˆρi + LD( ˆρ) ,

(5)

with the Hamiltonian of the form (4). For simplicity,
we assume a single control u1(t) = u(t) in Eq. (4). In
the example of laser cooling molecular vibrations, u(t)
would be the electric ﬁeld of a short laser pulse, and ˆH1
in Eq. (4) the transition dipole moment of the molecule.
The dissipative part of Eq. (5) is given by [55]

LD( ˆρ) =Xk

γk(cid:18) ˆAk ˆρ

ˆA

+
k −

+
k

1

2n ˆA

ˆAk, ˆρo(cid:19) ,

(6)

where the Lindblad operators ˆAk model the various dis-
sipative channels. For example, ˆAk = |0ihk| for sponta-
neous decay from a level k to the ground state with rate
γk, inversely proportional to the level’s lifetime.

Optimization algorithms are obtained by seeking an
extremum of FT , cf. Eq. (1), with respect to the control,
u(t). This can be done by direct evaluation of the ex-
tremum condition [157, 158] or by building in monotonic
convergence a priori using Krotov’s method [85, 97]. The
resulting set of coupled equations are, surprisingly, rather
similar. The main diﬀerence is in the update of the con-
trol which can be performed concurrently [158], i.e., for
all times t at once, or sequentially in time [85, 97, 157].
Guaranteed monotonic convergence is only obtained with

a sequential update of the control. In this case, the equa-
tion for determining the control reads

control. Consequently, Eq. (7) becomes

(7)

∆u(t) =

S(t)

λ

Im( Tr" ˆσ

(i)
j (t)

∂L(cid:0) ˆρj(cid:1)

∂u

M

Xj=1

7

,u(i+1)#) ,

(i+1)
j

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)ρ

∆u(t) = u(i+1)(t) − u(i)(t)

=

S(t)

λ

Im(cid:26) Tr(cid:20) ˆσ

(i)(t)

∂L ( ˆρ)

∂u (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)ρ(i+1) ,u(i+1)(cid:21)(cid:27) .

S(t) denotes a shape function that can be used to switch
the control on and oﬀ smoothly [159] or to impose an
initial or ﬁnal ramp [70]; and λ is a parameter of the
algorithm whose choice determines the step size in the
change of the control. Its optimal value can be estimated
in an automated way, similarly to a line search in quasi-
Newton methods [160]. ˆσ(t) denotes the so-called co-
state or adjoint state, and the derivative with respect to
the control is given by the commutator

, ˆρ

∂L ( ˆρ)

(i+1)# .

= −i" ∂ ˆH[u(t)]

∂u

∂u (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)ρ(i+1) ,u(i+1)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)u(i+1)
the commutator simply becomes h ˆH1, ˆρ
(i+1)i. Nonethe-

For the common case of linear coupling to the control, as
in Eq. (4), the explicit dependence on u(i+1) vanishes and

less, the right-hand side of Eq. (7) depends on u(i+1) via
(i+1)(t), i.e., it is an implicit equation. Solution of the
ˆρ
implicit equation can usually be avoided by a low order
approximation in the iterative algorithm, employing two
shifted time discretizations to represent the time depen-
dence of states and control, ˆρ(ti) and u(ti + ∆t/2) [27].
Equation (7) also depends on the state of system at
time t, ˆρ(t), and the co-state, ˆσ(t). These are obtained
by solving

(i)

d ˆρ
dt

= −ih ˆH[u(i)(t)], ˆρ

(i)i + LD( ˆρ

(i))

with initial condition

(i)(t = 0) = ˆρini ,
ˆρ

(8a)

(8b)

and

(i)

d ˆσ
dt

= −ih ˆHhu(i)(t)i , ˆσ

(i)i − LD( ˆσ

(i)) ,

(9a)

which is solved backward in time. The ’initial’ condition
is derived from the target functional at ﬁnal time FT ,

(i)(t = T ) = ˆρ

(i)
target .

ˆσ

(9b)

This coupled set of equations needs to be solved itera-
tively, starting with some guess for the control, u(i=0)(t),
where the index (i) denotes iteration.

The algorithm represented by Eqs.(7), (8) and (9) is
straightforwardly extended from targeting a single state
to targeting a unitary operation [39, 89, 90]: A unitary
operation ˆU can be viewed as several simultaneous state-
to-state transfers [26, 27] which are all driven by the same

(10)
and Eqs. (8) and (9) need to be solved for M states ˆρj(t)
(i)
j (t) simultaneously. As explained in
and M co-states ˆσ
Sec. II B, it was ﬁrst believed that the sum in Eq. (10)
has to run over M = d2 states where d is the dimension
of the space on which the desired operation is deﬁned [89,
90]. The initial conditions ˆρj(t = 0) are then given by
orthogonal basis states spanning this space. Recently it
was shown that M can be reduced all the way down to
3 in which case the states discussed in Sec. II B need to
be taken as initial conditions ˆρj(t = 0) [39]. The initial
conditions for the co-states are always given in terms of
+
the desired target operation, ˆσj(t = T ) ∼ ˆU ˆρj(t = 0) ˆU
,
up to a suitable normalization [39]. Moreover, weights
may be introduced in ˆσj(t = T ) to speed up convergence
by attaching diﬀerent importance to diﬀerent basis states
ˆρj(t = 0) [39].

Extension of the optimization algorithm to more ﬂex-
ible control targets, such as an arbitrary perfect entan-
gler [98, 99] instead of a speciﬁc unitary, requires two
steps. First, a modiﬁed target functional results in a
modiﬁcation of Eq. (9b): The right-hand side of Eq. (9b)
will be replaced by the derivative of the new target func-
tional with respect to the states, ˆρj, evaluated at time
t = T . For a target functional based on the local in-
variants, this requires, in particular, to determine the
unitary part of the overall actual evolution, as explained
in Sec. II B. Second, dependence of the functional on the
states ˆρj may be non-convex. In this case, Eq. (10) needs
to be amended by a second term in its right-hand side [97]
which depends additionally on the change in the states,
(i)
(i+1)
j . While the additional computational eﬀort
ˆρ
j
for evaluating the control update is negligible, storage of
(i)
is necessary and may become a limiting factor
all ˆρ
j
when scaling up the system size. Such extensions of the
optimization algorithm to control targets other than a
speciﬁc state or unitary have been applied to coherent
dynamics [29, 97–99]. For open quantum systems, they
are still under exploration.

− ˆρ

Typically, more than one solution exists to a quan-
tum control problem. When using the basic optimization
algorithm presented above, it will then depend on the
initial guess u(0)(t) which solution u⋆(t) the algorithm
identiﬁes. Two strategies can be employed in order to
ﬁne-tune the iterative search and guide it toward a so-
lution with certain desired properties – careful selection
of the initial guess by scanning or preoptimization [161]
or use of additional constraints [162, 163].
In the ﬁrst
case, the initial guess needs to be parametrized in a suit-
able form, for example in terms of amplitudes and phases
of Fourier components, or amplitudes, widths and posi-
tions of Gaussians. These parameters can easily be pre-
optimized within a prespeciﬁed range employing a stan-

dard gradient-free optimization method [161]. When the
result is used as initial guess in the optimization algo-
rithm presented above, the ensuing ﬁne-tuning will usu-
ally not lead to drastic changes in the ﬁeld, keeping it
close to the parametrized form [161].

A more stringent way to enforce certain desired prop-
erties of the control solution is obtained by employing
additional constraints [162, 163]. This comes at the ex-
pense of a modiﬁed optimization algorithm. An explicit
description for deriving the modiﬁed algorithms is avail-
able when using Krotov’s method [97]. It allows for for-
mulating constraints as a functional of the control, with
the only condition that the functional be positive (or neg-
ative) semideﬁnite [163]. This requirement is necessary
to ensure monotonic convergence. As an example, con-
sider a spectral constraint on the control [163],

Jspec[u(t)] =

1

∆u(t)K(t − t′)∆u(t′)dt′dt ,

2π Z T

0 Z T

0

(11)
where K(t − t′) is the Fourier transform of a spectral
ﬁlter ˜K(ω) ≥ 0. As a result, the update equation for
the control becomes a Fredholm equation of the second
kind [163]. A judicious choice of the shape function S(t)
allows for analytically solving the Fredholm equation in
frequency domain such that the additional numerical ef-
fort for including the spectral constraint consists merely
in two additional Fourier transforms [164]. More than
one constraint may be employed at a time, with dif-
ferent weights allowing to emphasize importance of one
compared to another [162, 164]. While additional con-
straints provide information that guides the optimization
algorithm, they also restrict the space of admissible so-
lutions [165, 166]. Therefore care needs to be taken to
balance their beneﬁts and their disadvantages.

B. Fighting and avoiding decoherence

While it is probably the dream of every control engi-
neer to discover unthought of control schemes, a more
realistic scenario starts from known a control strategy,
as those described in Sec. III B, and extends it to a wider
range of conditions, new types of systems, or new types
of dissipative processes using the optimization techniques
described above.

One of the most popular control strategy in the area
of quantum technologies currently is dynamical decou-
pling [130, 131]. While already powerful in itself, dy-
namical decoupling can be made more robust by nu-
merical optimization that targets speciﬁc noise features
that were previously unaccounted for, using, for exam-
ple, the gradient-ascent technique [167] or genetic algo-
rithms [168].
In these examples, optimization did not
compromise feasibility of the pulse sequences. More-
over, the length of dynamical decoupling sequences can
be minimized [169]. Dynamical decoupling and numeri-
cally optimized pulses can also complement each other, as

8

recently demonstrated for entanglement generation and
distribution in NV centers in diamonds [52].

A second successful control strategy described in
Sec. III B is based on decoherence-free subspaces and
noiseless subsystems. These are somewhat less often
used than dynamical decoupling, mainly due to the dif-
ﬁculty of identifying them for more complex systems.
While direct identiﬁcation of decoherence-free subspaces
is hampered by presence of numerous traps in the search
space [123], quantum optimal control may be used to
dynamically identify them.
Indeed, optimization of an
open system’s dynamics for targets that rely on quan-
tum coherence is intrinsically biased toward those sub-
spaces in Hilbert (or Liouville) space that are least af-
fected by decoherence [170]. For example, transfer of co-
herence and polarization between coupled heteronuclear
spins was improved by cross-correlated relaxation opti-
mized pulse (CROP) sequences and relaxation optimized
pulse elements (ROPE) [144, 145, 171, 172]. Optimiza-
tion can take both longitudinal and transveral relaxation
into account [171]. The underlying mechanism was re-
vealed to consist in tuning cross-correlated to autocor-
related relaxation rates [144]. Counterintuitively, max-
imum polarization transfer between coupled spins was
achieved with sequences that are longer than conven-
tional ones [145], highlighting the importance to include
the dissipative dynamics in the optimization.

Finally, if all regions in Hilbert space are similarly af-
fected by decoherence, an obvious control strategy con-
sists in beating decoherence by the fastest possible op-
eration. This strategy is faced, however, with the so-
called quantum speed limit, i.e., a fundamental bound
on the shortest operation time [173, 174]. For a two-
level system, it can be estimated analytically [175]. For
more complex systems, optimal control theory can be
used as a tool to both identify the quantum speed limit
and determine controls that drive the system at the quan-
tum speed limit [46]. For example, the shortest possible
duration of entangling quantum gates was determined
for cold, trapped atoms [34] and for superconducting
qubits [39, 176]. In quantum dots, phonon-assisted de-
coherence was minimized [177, 178]. Interestingly, pres-
ence of the environment may improve the quantum speed
limit [179, 180]. This has not yet been explored systemat-
ically but could be done, using quantum optimal control.

C. Cooling and quantum reservoir engineering

The example of cooling [85, 86, 88, 148, 149, 155, 156,
181, 182] was already taken as reference to introduce
optimal control of open quantum systems in Sec. IV A.
Since cooling changes the purity of the state, it relies on
the presence of the environment. When using the algo-
rithm outlined in Sec. IV A, the control that drives the
cooling process is determined for each initial state sep-
arately. Alternatively, one may seek a control that will
lead to cooling irrespective of the initial state [88]. Such

an approach is particularly useful if the timescales of the
coherent and the dissipative dynamics is diﬀerent, as in
the case of optical pumping [87] which consists of many
repeated cycles of excitation and spontaneous emission.
The theoretical framework lends itself to generalization
to quantum reservoir engineering which is why it is out-
lined in more detail in the following.

The idea is to start from an orthogonal basis for the
space on which the initial states are deﬁned and ensure
transitions favorable to cooling for every basis state [88].
In the case of optical pumping, these are transitions into
states from which spontaneous emission preferrably oc-
curs to the cooling target. As is usual in quantum opti-
mal control, this control task is stated in terms of a yield
functional. Additionally, the control should not excite
any population which has already been accumulated in
the cooling target state. In other words, the cooling tar-
get should remain a steady state of the evolution. This
requirement is translated into a second term in the op-
timization functional, besides the yield. Moreover, it is
often not possible to cool arbitrary initial states, due to
limitations on control bandwidth. Instead, one can seek
to cool states which are deﬁned on a certain subspace.
This results in an additional term in the optimization
functional that suppresses leakage from this subspace
in order to keep the cooling cycle closed. Finally, one
needs to guarantee that for all basis states cooling occurs
with the same eﬃciency; otherwise the cooling might get
stuck. This can be achieved either by imposing symmet-
ric excitation of all basis states or by having all basis
states form an ’assembly line’, i.e., enforce one speciﬁc
excitation pathway for all states. All requirements need
to be met simultanously and, consequently, the optimiza-
tion functional consists of four terms – one for the yield,
one of the steady state, one to suppress leakage and one
to ensure symmetric excitation or enforce a speciﬁc exci-
tation pathway for all states [88].

Application of this optimization framework showed
that laser cooling of molecular vibrations is possible even
in cases where the molecular structure favors heating
rather than cooling [88].
It also answers the question
about the minimal requirement on the molecular struc-
ture to realize, with shaped pulses, cooling instead of
heating, assuming no constraints on the control – exis-
tence of one state which undergoes spontaneous emission
with moderate probability into the cooling target.

If the molecular structure is favorable to cooling vi-
brations, an optimized laser pulse results in a substan-
tially smaller number of cooling cycles than an unshaped
pulse [88]. A similar speed up of the cooling due to
pulse sequences obtained from quantum optimal con-
trol theory has also been reported for an optomechani-
cal resonator [181] and for trapped, quasi-condensed cold
atoms [182].

Laser cooling can be viewed as a particular example
of quantum reservoir engineering [183–185], where a de-
sired state becomes the ’ground state’ of a driven dis-
sipative system.
It holds the promise of a particularly

9

robust control strategy. However, applications of quan-
tum reservoir engineering have been limited to quantum
optics to date. In a condensed phase settings, both de-
sired and undesired dissipative channels come into play,
and non-Markovian eﬀects may occur. Thus, quantum
reservoir engineering in the condensed phase represents
a challenging control problem.

As with any control problem, two questions need to
be tackled – that of controllability and that of control
synthesis, i.e., what states are attainable and how can
the necessary driving be realized. The ﬁrst question has
been answered for generic models, such as a two- and
a four-level system and a harmonic oscillator, that un-
dergo Markovian dynamics [186]. The obtained under-
standing of controllability can be exploited to construct
dissipative channels that allow for the robust generation
of long-distance entanglement [187]. The question which
states are attainable in the presence of additional unde-
sired dissipative channels, a generic feature of any con-
densed phase setting, has not yet been tackled to date. A
possible inﬂuence of non-Markovian eﬀects on the reach-
able states has also not yet been addressed.

Control synthesis may be achieved in several ways.
First,
incoherent control by the environment, for ex-
ample, via certain population distributions in the en-
vironmental modes, may be used to control the sys-
tem [188]. However, this contradicts the assumption that
the environment by deﬁnition is uncontrollable. Alter-
natively, measurements eﬀectively lead to dissipative dy-
namics and may thus be used to generate desired dissipa-
tion [189–191]. They may be augmented by suitably tai-
lored coherent excitation for more eﬀective control [192].
Quantum reservoir engineering may also be formulated
as an optimization problem where the target is a cer-
tain desired steady state. An optimization algorithm is
obtained by generalizing the theoretical framework for
laser cooling [88] outlined above. However, the search
space is even larger than for a standard quantum control
problem; and the eﬃcient numerical implementation is
an open challenge. Meeting this challenge would allow
for exploring quantum reservoir engineering in the pres-
ence of undesired dissipation typical for condensed phase
settings and in the non-Markovian regime.

D. Exploiting non-Markovianity for quantum

control

It was shown already several years ago that non-
[38, 193], and
Markovian evolution may ease control
cooperative eﬀects of dissipation and driving were re-
ported [86]. However, a more thorough understanding of
the nature of non-Markovianity was required to under-
stand its interplay with quantum control. As described
in Sec. II A, non-Markovianity has in the meantime been
characterized in terms of information ﬂow from the envi-
ronment to the system [75], increase of correlations in a
bipartite system [73], or re-expansion of the volume of ac-

cessible states [78], among others. The important point
in the context of quantum control is that each of these
measures holds a promise for better control: Correlations
between system and environment may improve ﬁdelities
of single qubit gates [38], cooperative eﬀects of control
and dissipation may allow for entropy export and thus
cooling [86, 149]; and harnessing non-Markovianity may
enhance the eﬃciency of quantum information processing
and communication [79, 194].

A ﬁrst example of exploiting non-Markovianity for
quantum control was reported in Ref. [70], showing that,
for an anharmonic ladder system, the environment may
be utilized to extend possible operations from SO(N ) to
SU (N ). Presence of at least one two-level defect in the
environment that is suﬃciently isolated and suﬃciently
strongly coupled to the system was identiﬁed as pre-
requisite for the observed controllability enhancement.
Such conditions are found in current experiments with
superconducting circuits and other systems which are im-
mersed in a small, ’natural’ spin bath, for example color
centers in diamond.

The limited number of optimal control studies of open
quantum systems with non-Markovian dynamics [38, 70,
86, 149, 193] testiﬁes to the fact that control of these
systems remains largely uncharted territory. The full
potential of the speciﬁc features of non-Markovian dy-
namics for quantum control remains yet to be explored.
Open questions include, for example, how the build-up
of memory inﬂuences control; whether speciﬁc features
of the spectral density can be exploited for control, and
if so, how. The tools for performing these studies, both
in terms of simulating non-Markovian dynamics [61] and
carrying out optimal control calculations, cf. Sec. IV A,
have been developed and are there to be used.

V. CONCLUSIONS

The present review has been focused on control of open
quantum systems as they are encountered in the ﬁeld of
quantum technologies.
It will be concluded by brieﬂy
mentioning examples from other ﬁelds of current interest:
Quantum optimal control for open systems has been em-
ployed in the context of quantum thermodynamics, in or-
der to determine the optimal eﬃciency of a noisy heat en-
gine [195]; biological chromophore complexes, in order to
maximize exciton transfer [196, 197]; molecules immersed
in dissipative media, in order to maximally align them
with respect to a laboratory axis [198–200]; molecular
junctions, in order to control the current, shot noise and
Fano factors [201]; as well as chemical reaction dynam-
ics [202–204], including charge transfer in molecules [205],
and surface photochemistry [206–208]. The numerous ap-
plications attest to the maturity as well as versatility of
the quantum control toolbox [1].

At this stage, three rules for controlling open quantum

systems may tentatively be formulated:

1. If the desired operation shall keep pure states pure,

10

Markovian dynamics are unwanted. The eﬀect of
the environment in this case is detrimental. A suit-
able strategy is then to perform any desired oper-
ation as fast as possible. Quantum optimal con-
trol theory is a viable tool to determine both the
shortest operation time and the control that drives
the desired dynamics. The actual dissipative pro-
cesses may be neglected during the optimization for
computational simplicity. Explicit account of the
dissipative processes comes at a signiﬁcantly larger
numerical cost but allows for identifying subspaces
which are less aﬀected by or even immune to deco-
herence.

2. If the desired operation changes the purity of the
system’s state, presence of the environment is nec-
essary for realizing the control target. In this case,
Markovian dynamics may be desired: The control
target is reachable if it is a ﬁxed state of the Liouvil-
lian. External control ﬁelds may be used to ensure
that this is the case. The corresponding control
strategy is referred to as quantum reservoir engi-
neering. If the Liouvillian has several ﬁxed points,
external ﬁelds may also be used to drive the dynam-
ics to the desired one. The role of non-Markovian
eﬀects in this type of desired dissipation has not
been explored to date.

3. Non-Markovian dynamics in general may have both
beneﬁcial and detrimental eﬀects on controlled
quantum dynamics.
Improved controllability is a
ﬁrst example of a beneﬁt. It requires presence of
a few strongly coupled and suﬃciently isolated en-
vironmental modes which can eﬀectively act as an-
cillas [212], and use of quantum optimal control
for properly exploiting these modes. An improved
quantum speed limit is a second example.

While the number of examples for successful con-
trol of open quantum systems is growing, our current
understanding of controllability and the most promis-
ing control strategies for open quantum systems is still
rather limited. In particular, a thorough understanding
of the role of non-Markovian eﬀects is lacking to date,
and it is currently still unknown which features of non-
Markovianity can be exploited for quantum control.

Investigation of a larger range of models, with both
small and large baths, consisting of harmonic modes and
spins, and a systematic analysis of non-Markovianity may
elucidate this question. Such an improved understanding
would not only be crucial for advancing quantum tech-
nologies but would also be beneﬁcial for adjacent ﬁelds
such as condensed matter physics or chemical reaction
dynamics.

Acknowledgments

I would like to thank Ugo Boscain, Steﬀen Glaser, Do-
minique Sugny, and David Tannor for their comments on

the manuscript. Recent advances in the control of open
quantum systems in my own group were made possible
by the work of Michael Goerz, Giulia Gualdi and Daniel

Reich whom I would like to thank for their dedication
and perserverance.

11

[1] S. J. Glaser, U. Boscain, T. Calarco, C. P. Koch,
W. K¨ockenberger, R. Kosloﬀ,
I. Kuprov, B. Luy,
S. Schirmer, T. Schulte-Herbr¨uggen, et al., Eur. Phys.
J. D 69 (2015).

[25] J. P. Palao and R. Kosloﬀ, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 188301

(2002).

[26] C. Tesch and R. de Vivie-Riedle, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89,

157901 (2002).

[2] D. D’Alessandro, Introduction to Quantum Control and

[27] J. P. Palao and R. Kosloﬀ, Phys. Rev. A 68, 062308

Dynamics (Chapman & Hall/CRC, 2007).

(2003).

[3] M. Shapiro and P. Brumer, Quantum Control of Molec-

[28] F. Platzer, F. Mintert, and A. Buchleitner, Phys. Rev.

ular Processes (Wiley Interscience, 2012), 2nd ed.

Lett. 105, 020501 (2010).

[4] L. S. Pontryagin, V. G. Boltyanskii, R. V. Gamkrelidze,
and E. F. Mishchenko, The Mathematical Theory of Op-
timal Processes (Wiley, New York, 1962).

[29] M. M. M¨uller, D. M. Reich, M. Murphy, H. Yuan,
J. Vala, K. B. Whaley, T. Calarco, and C. P. Koch,
Phys. Rev. A 84, 042315 (2011).

[5] V. F. Krotov, Global Methods in Optimal Control (Mar-

[30] T. Caneva, T. Calarco, and S. Montangero, New J.

cel Dekker, New York, 1996).

Phys. 14, 093041 (2012).

[6] S. Conolly, D. Nishimura, and A. Macovski, IEEE

[31] D. J. Egger and F. K. Wilhelm, Phys. Rev. A 90, 052331

Trans. Med. Imaging MI-5, 106 (1986).

(2014).

[7] J. Mao, T. H. Mareci, K. N. Scott, and E. Andrew, J.

[32] U. V. Poulsen, S. Sklarz, D. Tannor, and T. Calarco,

Magn. Reson. 70, 310 (1986).

Phys. Rev. A 82, 012339 (2010).

[8] D. Tannor and S. Rice, J. Chem. Phys. 83, 5013 (1985).
[9] A. P. Peirce, M. A. Dahleh, and H. Rabitz, Phys. Rev.

A 37, 4950 (1988).

[33] P. Treutlein, T. W. H¨ansch, J. Reichel, A. Negretti,
M. A. Cirone, and T. Calarco, Phys. Rev. A 74, 022312
(2006).

[10] R. Kosloﬀ, S. Rice, P. Gaspard, S. Tersigni, and D. Tan-

[34] M. H. Goerz, T. Calarco, and C. P. Koch, J. Phys. B

nor, Chem. Phys. 139, 201 (1989).

44, 154011 (2011).

[11] D. Tannor, V. Kazakov, and V. Orlov,

in Time-
dependent quantum molecular dynamics, edited by
J. Broeckhove and L. Lathouwers (Plenum, 1992), pp.
347–360.

[12] P. Gross, D. Neuhauser, and H. Rabitz, J. Chem. Phys.

96, 2834 (1992).

[13] J. Soml´oi, V. A. Kazakovski, and D. J. Tannor, Chem.

Phys. 172, 85 (1993).

[14] A. Assion, T. Baumert, X. Bergt, T. Brixner, X. Kiefer,
V. Seyfried, X. Strehle, and G. Gerber, Science 282,
919 (1998).

[15] R. S. Judson and H. Rabitz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 1500

(1992).

[16] B. Sch¨afer-Bung, R. Mitri´c, V. Bonaˇci´c-Kouteck´y,
A. Bartelt, C. Lupulescu, A. Lindinger, v. Vajda, S. M.
Weber, and L. W¨oste, J. Phys. Chem. A 108, 4175
(2004).

[17] W. Zhu, J. Botina, and H. Rabitz, J. Chem. Phys. 108,

1953 (1998).

[18] A. M. Weiner, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 71, 1929 (2000).
[19] M. J. Wright, P. L. Gould, and S. D. Gensemer, Rev.

Sci. Instrum. 75, 4718 (2004).

[20] F. Motzoi, J. M. Gambetta, S. T. Merkel, and F. K.

Wilhelm, Phys. Rev. A 84, 022307 (2011).

[21] G. J¨ager and U. Hohenester, Phys. Rev. A 88, 035601

(2013).

[22] K. Kobzar, B. Luy, N. Khaneja, and S. J. Glaser, J.

Magn. Reson. 173, 229 (2005).

[23] T. E. Skinner, K. Kobzar, B. Luy, M. R. Bendall,
W. Bermel, N. Khaneja, and S. J. Glaser, J. Magn. Re-
son. 179, 241 (2006).

[24] M. Nimbalkar, B. Luy, T. E. Skinner, J. L. Neves, N. I.
Gershenzon, K. Kobzar, W. Bermel, and S. J. Glaser,
J. Magn. Reson. 228, 16 (2013).

[35] M. H. Goerz, E. J. Halperin, J. M. Aytac, C. P. Koch,

and K. B. Whaley, Phys. Rev. A 90, 032329 (2014).

[36] J. Scheuer, X. Kong, R. S. Said, J. Chen, A. Kurz,
L. Marseglia, J. Du, P. R. Hemmer, S. Montangero,
T. Calarco, et al., New J. Phys. 16, 093022 (2014).

[37] G. Waldherr, Y. Wang, S. Zaiser, M. Jamali, T. Schulte-
Herbr¨uggen, H. Abe, T. Ohshima, J. Isoya, J. F. Du,
P. Neumann, et al., Nature 506, 204 (2014).

[38] P. Rebentrost, I. Serban, T. Schulte-Herbr¨uggen, and

F. K. Wilhelm, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 090401 (2009).

[39] M. H. Goerz, D. M. Reich, and C. P. Koch., New J.

Phys. 16, 055012 (2014).

[40] J. Grond, J. Schmiedmayer, and U. Hohenester, Phys.

Rev. A 79, 021603 (2009).

[41] X. Wang, A. Bayat, S. Bose, and S. G. Schirmer, Phys.

Rev. A 82, 012330 (2010).

[42] S. Machnes, U. Sander, S. J. Glaser, P. de Fouqui`eres,
A. Gruslys, S. Schirmer, and T. Schulte-Herbr¨uggen,
Phys. Rev. A 84, 022305 (2011).

[43] P. Doria, T. Calarco, and S. Montangero, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 106, 190501 (2011).

[44] K. Rojan, D. M. Reich, I. Dotsenko, J.-M. Raimond,
C. P. Koch, and G. Morigi, Phys. Rev. A 90, 023824
(2014).

[45] G. De Chiara, T. Calarco, M. Anderlini, S. Montangero,
P. J. Lee, B. L. Brown, W. D. Phillips, and J. V. Porto,
Phys. Rev. A 77, 052333 (2008).

[46] T. Caneva, M. Murphy, T. Calarco, R. Fazio, S. Mon-
tangero, V. Giovannetti, and G. E. Santoro, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 103, 240501 (2009).

[47] H. A. F¨urst, M. H. Goerz, U. G. Poschinger, M. Mur-
phy, S. Montangero, T. Calarco, F. Schmidt-Kaler,
K. Singer, and C. P. Koch., New J. Phys. 16, 075007
(2014).

12

[48] A. V. Gorshkov, T. Calarco, M. D. Lukin, and A. S.

A 88, 020102 (2013).

Sørensen, Phys. Rev. A 77, 043806 (2008).

[79] B. Bylicka, D. Chru´sci´nski, and S. Maniscalco, Sci. Rep.

[49] S. Rosi, A. Bernard, N. Fabbri, L. Fallani, C. Fort,
M. Inguscio, T. Calarco, and S. Montangero, Phys. Rev.
A 88, 021601 (2013).

[50] S. van Frank, M. Bonneau, J. Schmiedmayer, S. Hild,
C. Gross, M. Cheneau, I. Bloch, T. Pichler, A. Negretti,
T. Calarco, et al., arXiv:1511.02247 (2015).

[51] T. H¨aberle, D. Schmid-Lorch, K. Karrai, F. Reinhard,
and J. Wrachtrup, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 170801 (2013).
[52] F. Dolde, V. Bergholm, Y. Wang, I. Jakobi, B. Nayde-
nov, S. Pezzagna, J. Meijer, F. Jelezko, P. Neumann,
T. Schulte-Herbr¨uggen, et al., Nat. Commun. 5, 3371
(2014).

[53] S. van Frank, A. Negretti, T. Berrada, R. B¨ucker,
S. Montangero, J.-F. Schaﬀ, T. Schumm, T. Calarco,
and J. Schmiedmayer, Nat. Commun. 5, 4009 (2014).

[54] U. Weiss, Quantum dissipative systems (World Scien-

tiﬁc, Singapore, 2012), 4th ed.

[55] H.-P. Breuer and F. Petruccione, The theory of open

quantum systems (Oxford University Press, 2007).

4, 5720 (2014).

[80] C. Addis, B. Bylicka, D. Chru´sci´nski, and S. Maniscalco,

Phys. Rev. A 90, 052103 (2014).

[81] H.-B. Chen, J.-Y. Lien, G.-Y. Chen, and Y.-N. Chen,

Phys. Rev. A 92, 042105 (2015).

[82] J. Bae and D. Chruscinski, arXiv:1601.05522 (2016).
[83] B.-H. Liu, L. Li, Y.-F. Huang, C.-F. Li, G.-C. Guo, E.-
M. Laine, H.-P. Breuer, and J. Piilo, Nature Phys. 7,
931 (2011).

[84] M. Gessner, M. Ramm, T. Pruttivarasin, A. Buchleit-
ner, H.-P. Breuer, and H. H¨aﬀner, Nature Phys. 10, 105
(2014).

[85] A. Bartana, R. Kosloﬀ, and D. J. Tannor, J. Chem.

Phys. 106, 1435 (1997).

[86] R. Schmidt, A. Negretti, J. Ankerhold, T. Calarco, and
J. T. Stockburger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 130404 (2011).
[87] M. Viteau, A. Chotia, M. Allegrini, N. Bouloufa,
O. Dulieu, D. Comparat, and P. Pillet, Science 321,
232 (2008).

[56] H.-P. Breuer, E.-M. Laine, J. Piilo, and B. Vacchini,

[88] D. M. Reich and C. P. Koch, New J. Phys. 15, 125028

arXiv:1505.01385 (2015).

(2013).

[57] A. Rivas, S. F. Huelga, and M. B. Plenio, Rep. Prog.

[89] S. Kallush and R. Kosloﬀ, Phys. Rev. A 73, 032324

Phys. 77, 094001 (2014).

(2006).

[58] R. Kosloﬀ, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 45, 145 (1994).
[59] F. Lucas and K. Hornberger, Phys. Rev. A 89, 012112

(2014).

[90] T. Schulte-Herbr¨uggen, A. Sp¨orl, N. Khaneja, and S. J.

Glaser, J. Phys. B 44, 154013 (2011).

[91] A. Bendersky, F. Pastawski, and J. P. Paz, Phys. Rev.

[60] R. Sweke, I. Sinayskiy, D. Bernard, and F. Petruccione,

Lett. 100, 190403 (2008).

Phys. Rev. A 91, 062308 (2015).

[92] M. P. da Silva, O. Landon-Cardinal, and D. Poulin,

[61] I. de Vega and D. Alonso, arXiv:1511.06994 (2015).
[62] J. Piilo, S. Maniscalco, K. H¨ark¨onen, and K.-A. Suomi-

Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 210404 (2011).

[93] S. T. Flammia and Y.-K. Liu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106,

nen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 180402 (2008).

230501 (2011).

[63] W. Koch, F. Großmann, J. T. Stockburger, and

[94] E. Magesan, J. M. Gambetta, and J. Emerson, Phys.

J. Ankerhold, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 230402 (2008).

Rev. Lett. 106, 180504 (2011).

[64] L. Di´osi and L. Ferialdi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 200403

[95] D. M. Reich, G. Gualdi, and C. P. Koch, Phys. Rev.

(2014).

Lett. 111, 200401 (2013).

[65] C. Meier and D. J. Tannor, J. Chem. Phys. 111, 3365

[96] D. M. Reich, G. Gualdi, and C. P. Koch, Phys. Rev. A

(1999).

88, 042309 (2013).

[66] C. P. Koch, T. Kl¨uner, H.-J. Freund, and R. Kosloﬀ,

[97] D. M. Reich, M. Ndong, and C. P. Koch, J. Chem. Phys.

Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 117601 (2003).

136, 104103 (2012).

[67] K. H. Hughes, C. D. Christ, and I. Burghardt, J. Chem.

Phys. 131, 024109 (2009).

[68] I. M. Georgescu, S. Ashhab, and F. Nori, Rev. Mod.

Phys. 86, 153 (2014).

[69] G. Gualdi and C. P. Koch, Phys. Rev. A 88, 022122

(2013).

[70] D. M. Reich, N. Katz, and C. P. Koch, Sci. Rep. 5,

[98] P. Watts, J. Vala, M. M. M¨uller, T. Calarco, K. B.
Whaley, D. M. Reich, M. H. Goerz, and C. P. Koch,
Phys. Rev. A 91, 062306 (2015).

[99] M. H. Goerz, G. Gualdi, D. M. Reich, C. P. Koch,
F. Motzoi, K. B. Whaley, J. Vala, M. M. M¨uller, S. Mon-
tangero, and T. Calarco, Phys. Rev. A 91, 062307
(2015).

12430 (2015).

[100] D.

M.

Reich,

Ph.D.

thesis,

Uni-
URL

[71] G. Katz, D. Gelman, M. A. Ratner, and R. Kosloﬀ, J.

Chem. Phys. 129, 034108 (2008).

[72] M. M. Wolf, J. Eisert, T. S. Cubitt, and J. I. Cirac,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 150402 (2008).

[73] A. Rivas, S. F. Huelga, and M. B. Plenio, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 105, 050403 (2010).

versit¨at
http://nbn-resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:hebis:34-2015061948576.

(2015),

Kassel

[101] V. Jurdjevic, Geometric Control Theory, Cambridge
Studies in Advanced Mathematics (Cambridge Univ.
Press, Cambridge, 1997).

[102] V. Jurdjevic and H. J. Sussmann, J. Diﬀ. Eqns. 12, 313

[74] H. S. Dhar, M. N. Bera, and G. Adesso, Phys. Rev. A

(1972), ISSN 0022-0396.

91, 032115 (2015).

[103] G. M. Huang, T. J. Tarn, and C. W. Clark, J. Math.

[75] H.-P. Breuer, E.-M. Laine, and J. Piilo, Phys. Rev. Lett.

Phys. 24, 2608 (1983).

103, 210401 (2009).

[104] T. Polack, H. Suchowski, and D. J. Tannor, Phys. Rev.

[76] E.-M. Laine, J. Piilo, and H.-P. Breuer, Phys. Rev. A

A 79, 053403 (2009).

81, 062115 (2010).

[105] C. Arenz, G. Gualdi, and D. Burgarth, New J. Phys.

[77] R. Vasile, S. Maniscalco, M. G. A. Paris, H.-P. Breuer,

16, 065023 (2014).

and J. Piilo, Phys. Rev. A 84, 052118 (2011).

[106] R. Wu, A. Pechen, C. Brif, and H. Rabitz, J. Phys. A

[78] S. Lorenzo, F. Plastina, and M. Paternostro, Phys. Rev.

40, 5681 (2007).

13

[107] F. Ticozzi and L. Viola, Sci. Rep. 4, 5192 (2014).
[108] T. Chambrion, P. Mason, M. Sigalotti, and U. Boscain,

Ann. Inst. Henri Poincar´e 26, 329 (2009).

[137] A. Soare, H. Ball, D. Hayes, J. Sastrawan, M. C. Jar-
ratt, J. J. McLoughlin, X. Zhen, T. J. Green, and M. J.
Biercuk, Nature Phys. 10, 825 (2014).

[109] K. Beauchard, J.-M. Coron, and P. Rouchon, Commun.

[138] J. Clausen, G. Bensky, and G. Kurizki, Phys. Rev. Lett.

Math. Phys. 296, 525 (2010).

104, 040401 (2010).

[110] N. Boussaid, M. Caponigro, and T. Chambrion, IEEE

[139] O. Viyuela, A. Rivas, and M. A. Martin-Delgado, Phys.

Trans. Automat. Control 58, 2205 (2013).

Rev. B 86, 155140 (2012).

[111] U. Boscain, J.-P. Gauthier, F. Rossi, and M. Sigalotti,
Commun. Math. Phys. 333, 1225 (2015), ISSN 0010-
3616.

[112] C. Altaﬁni, J. Math. Phys. 44, 2357 (2003).
[113] S. Lloyd and L. Viola, Phys. Rev. A 65, 010101 (2001).
[114] G. Dirr, U. Helmke, I. Kurniawan, and T. Schulte-

[140] A. Rivas, O. Viyuela, and M. A. Martin-Delgado, Phys.

Rev. B 88, 155141 (2013).

[141] L. Cywi´nski, R. M. Lutchyn, C. P. Nave, and

S. Das Sarma, Phys. Rev. B 77, 174509 (2008).

[142] S. Kotler, N. Akerman, Y. Glickman, A. Keselman, and

R. Ozeri, Nature 473, 61 (2011).

Herbr¨uggen, Rep. Math. Phys. 64, 93 (2009).

[143] S. Kotler, N. Akerman, Y. Glickman, and R. Ozeri,

[115] C. O’Meara, G. Dirr, and T. Schulte-Herbruggen, IEEE
Trans. Automatic Control 57, 2050 (2012), ISSN 0018-
9286.

Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 110503 (2013).

[144] N. Khaneja, B. Luy, and S. J. Glaser, Proc. Natl. Acad.

Sci. USA 100, 13162 (2003).

[116] C. Altaﬁni and F. Ticozzi, IEEE Trans. Automatic Con-

[145] N. Khaneja, T. Reiss, B. Luy, and S. J. Glaser, J. Magn.

trol 57, 1898 (2012), ISSN 0018-9286.

Reson. 162, 311 (2003).

[117] B. Dive, D. Burgarth, and F. Mintert, arXiv:1509.07163

[146] M. Lapert, Y. Zhang, M. Braun, S. J. Glaser, and

(2015).

D. Sugny, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 083001 (2010).

[118] D. A. Lidar, I. L. Chuang, and K. B. Whaley, Phys.

[147] M. Lapert, E. Ass´emat, S. J. Glaser, and D. Sugny,

Rev. Lett. 81, 2594 (1998).

Phys. Rev. A 88, 033407 (2013).

[119] D. A. Lidar and K. B. Whaley, in Irreversible Quantum
Dynamics, edited by F. Benatti and R. Floreani (Berlin,
2003), vol. 622 of Springer Lecture Notes in Physics, pp.
83–120.

[120] L.-M. Duan and G.-C. Guo, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 1953

(1997).

[148] V. Mukherjee, A. Carlini, A. Mari, T. Caneva, S. Mon-
tangero, T. Calarco, R. Fazio, and V. Giovannetti, Phys.
Rev. A 88, 062326 (2013).

[149] V. Mukherjee, V. Giovannetti, R. Fazio, S. F. Huelga,
T. Calarco, and S. Montangero, New J. Phys. 17,
063031 (2015).

[121] E. M. Fortunato, L. Viola, J. Hodges, G. Teklemariam,

[150] Y. Rezek, P. Salamon, K. H. Hoﬀmann, and R. Kosloﬀ,

and D. G. Cory, New J. Phys. 4, 5 (2002).

Europhys. Lett. 85, 30008 (2009).

[122] T. Monz, K. Kim, A. S. Villar, P. Schindler, M. Chwalla,
M. Riebe, C. F. Roos, H. H¨aﬀner, W. H¨ansel, M. Hen-
nrich, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 200503 (2009).

[123] X. Wang, M. Byrd, and K. Jacobs, Phys. Rev. A 87,

[151] K. H. Hoﬀmann, P. Salamon, Y. Rezek, and R. Kosloﬀ,

Europhys. Lett. 96, 60015 (2011).

[152] S. E. Sklarz, D. J. Tannor, and N. Khaneja, Phys. Rev.

A 69, 053408 (2004).

012338 (2013).

[153] H. Yuan, C. P. Koch, P. Salamon, and D. J. Tannor,

[124] X. X. Yi, X. L. Huang, C. Wu, and C. H. Oh, Phys.

Phys. Rev. A 85, 033417 (2012).

Rev. A 80, 052316 (2009).

[154] A. Bartana, R. Kosloﬀ, and D. J. Tannor, J. Chem.

[125] E. Knill, R. Laﬂamme, and L. Viola, Phys. Rev. Lett.

Phys. 99, 196 (1993).

84, 2525 (2000).

[155] D. J. Tannor and A. Bartana, J. Phys. Chem. A 103,

[126] L. Viola, E. M. Fortunato, M. A. Pravia, E. Knill,
R. Laﬂamme, and D. G. Cory, Science 293, 2059 (2001).
[127] J. S. Waugh, Average Hamiltonian Theory (John Wiley

& Sons, Ltd., 2007).

10359 (1999).

[156] R. Schmidt, S. Rohrer, J. Ankerhold, and J. T. Stock-

burger, Physica Scripta 2012, 014034 (2012).

[157] Y. Ohtsuki, W. Zhu, and H. Rabitz, J. Chem. Phys.

[128] L. Viola, E. Knill, and S. Lloyd, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82,

110, 9825 (1999).

2417 (1999).

[129] L. Viola, J. Mod. Opt. 51, 2357 (2004).
[130] A. M. Souza, G. A. ´Alvarez, and D. Suter, Phil. Trans.

R. Soc. A 370, 4748 (2012), ISSN 1364-503X.

[131] D. Suter and G. A. ´Alvarez, Rev. Mod. Phys. p. in press

(2016).

[132] K. Khodjasteh and D. A. Lidar, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95,

180501 (2005).

[133] M. J. Biercuk, H. Uys, A. P. VanDevender, N. Shiga,
W. M. Itano, and J. J. Bollinger, Nature 458, 996
(2009).

[134] J. Bylander, S. Gustavsson, F. Yan, F. Yoshihara,
K. Harrabi, G. Fitch, D. G. Cory, Y. Nakamura, J.-S.
Tsai, and W. D. Oliver, Nature Phys. 7, 565570 (2011).
[135] T. Green, H. Uys, and M. J. Biercuk, Phys. Rev. Lett.

109, 020501 (2012).

[136] G. A. Paz-Silva and L. Viola, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113,

250501 (2014).

[158] N. Khaneja, T. Reiss, C. Kehlet, T. Schulte-
Herbr¨uggen, and S. J. Glaser, J. Magn. Reson. 172,
296 (2005).

[159] K. Sundermann and R. d. Vivie-Riedle, J. Chem. Phys.

110, 1896 (1999).

[160] R. Eitan, M. Mundt, and D. J. Tannor, Phys. Rev. A

83, 053426 (2011).

[161] M. H. Goerz, K. B. Whaley, and C. P. Koch, EPJ Quan-

tum Technology 2, 21 (2015), ISSN 2196-0763.

[162] J. P. Palao, D. M. Reich, and C. P. Koch, Phys. Rev. A

88, 053409 (2013).

[163] D. M. Reich, J. P. Palao, and C. P. Koch, J. Mod. Opt.

61, 822 (2014).

[164] R. E. Goetz, A. Karamatskou, R. Santra, and C. P.

Koch, Phys. Rev. A 93, 013413 (2016).

[165] K. W. Moore and H. Rabitz, J. Chem. Phys. 137,

134113 (2012).

[166] G. Riviello, K. Moore Tibbetts, C. Brif, R. Long, R.-B.
Wu, T.-S. Ho, and H. Rabitz, Phys. Rev. A 91, 043401

14

(2015).

[167] D. J. Gorman, K. C. Young, and K. B. Whaley, Phys.

Rev. A 86, 012317 (2012).

netti, H. Nakazato, S. Pascazio, and K. Yuasa,
arXiv:1601.01212 (2016).

[192] F. Shuang, A. Pechen, T.-S. Ho, and H. Rabitz, J.

[168] G. Quiroz and D. A. Lidar, Phys. Rev. A 88, 052306

Chem. Phys. 126, 134303 (2007).

(2013).

[193] F. F. Floether, P. de Fouquieres, and S. G. Schirmer,

[169] G. A. Paz-Silva and D. A. Lidar, Sci. Rep. 3, 1530

New J. Phys. 14, 073023 (2012).

(2013).

[194] E.-M. Laine, H.-P. Breuer, and J. Piilo, Sci. Rep. 4,

[170] G. Katz, M. A. Ratner, and R. Kosloﬀ, Phys. Rev. Lett.

4620 (2014).

98, 203006 (2007).

[171] D. Stefanatos, N. Khaneja, and S. J. Glaser, Phys. Rev.

A 69, 022319 (2004).

[172] N. I. Gershenzon, K. Kobzar, B. Luy, S. J. Glaser, and

T. E. Skinner, J. Magn. Reson. 188, 330 (2007).

[173] V. Giovannetti, S. Lloyd, and L. Maccone, Phys. Rev.

A 67, 052109 (2003).

[195] D. Stefanatos, Phys. Rev. E 90, 012119 (2014).
[196] B. Br¨uggemann, T. Pullerits, and V. May, J. Pho-

tochem. Photobiol. A 190, 372 (2007).

[197] S. Hoyer, F. Caruso, S. Montangero, M. Sarovar,
T. Calarco, M. B. Plenio, and K. B. Whaley, New J.
Phys. 16, 045007 (2014).

[198] A. Pelzer, S. Ramakrishna, and T. Seideman, J. Chem.

[174] L. B. Levitin and T. Toﬀoli, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103,

Phys. 129, 134301 (2008).

160502 (2009).

[199] D. Zhdanov and H. Rabitz, Phys. Rev. A 83, 061402

[175] G. C. Hegerfeldt, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 260501 (2013).
Uni-
[176] M.
URL

versit¨at
http://nbn-resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:hebis:34-2015052748381.

(2015),

Goerz,

Kassel

(2011).

H.

Ph.D.

thesis,

[200] T. Vieillard, F. Chaussard, F. Billard, D. Sugny,
O. Faucher, S. Ivanov, J.-M. Hartmann, C. Boulet, and
B. Lavorel, Phys. Rev. A 87, 023409 (2013).

[177] U. Hohenester and G. Stadler, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92,

[201] G.-Q. Li and U. Kleinekath¨ofer, Eur. Phys. J. B 76, 309

196801 (2004).

(2010).

[178] U. Hohenester, J. Phys. B 40, S315 (2007).
[179] S. Deﬀner and E. Lutz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 010402

(2013).

[180] A. D. Cimmarusti, Z. Yan, B. D. Patterson, L. P. Cor-
cos, L. A. Orozco, and S. Deﬀner, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114,
233602 (2015).

[181] S. Machnes, J. Cerrillo, M. Aspelmeyer, W. Wieczorek,
M. B. Plenio, and A. Retzker, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108,
153601 (2012).

[202] D. Sugny, M. Ndong, D. Lauvergnat, Y. Justum, and
M. Desouter-Lecomte, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A 190,
359 (2007), ISSN 1010-6030, theoretical Aspects of Pho-
toinduced Processes in Complex Systems.

[203] A. Chenel, G. Dive, C. Meier, and M. Desouter-

Lecomte, J. Phys. Chem. A 116, 11273 (2012).

[204] A. Chenel, C. Meier, G. Dive, and M. Desouter-

Lecomte, J. Chem. Phys. 142, 024307 (2015).

[205] J. C. Tremblay and P. Saalfrank, Phys. Rev. A 78,

[182] A. Rahmani, T. Kitagawa, E. Demler, and C. Chamon,

063408 (2008).

Phys. Rev. A 87, 043607 (2013).

[206] K. Mishima and K. Yamashita, J. Chem. Phys. 131,

[183] J. F. Poyatos, J. I. Cirac, and P. Zoller, Phys. Rev. Lett.

014109 (2009).

77, 4728 (1996).

[207] E. Asplund and T. Kl¨uner, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 140404

[184] S. Pielawa, G. Morigi, D. Vitali, and L. Davidovich,

(2011).

Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 240401 (2007).

[208] J. C. Tremblay, G. F¨uchsel, and P. Saalfrank, Phys. Rev.

[185] S. Diehl, A. Micheli, A. Kantian, B. Kraus, H.-P.

B 86, 045438 (2012).

B¨uchler, and P. Zoller, Nature Phys. 4, 878 (2008).

[209] G. Gualdi, D. Licht, D. M. Reich, and C. P. Koch, Phys.

[186] S. G. Schirmer and X. Wang, Phys. Rev. A 81, 062306

Rev. A 90, 032317 (2014).

(2010).

[210] D. M. Reich, G. Gualdi, and C. P. Koch, J. Phys. A:

[187] F. Motzoi, E. Halperin, X. Wang, K. B. Whaley, and

Math. Theor. 47, 385305 (2014).

S. Schirmer, arXiv:1512.03415 (2015).

[188] A. Pechen and H. Rabitz, Phys. Rev. A 73, 062102

(2006).

[189] A. Pechen, N. Il’in, F. Shuang, and H. Rabitz, Phys.

Rev. A 74, 052102 (2006).

[190] D. K. Burgarth, P. Facchi, V. Giovannetti, H. Nakazato,
S. Pascazio, and K. Yuasa, Nature Commun. 5, 5173
(2014).

[191] C. Arenz, D. Burgarth, P. Facchi, V. Giovan-

[211] The problem is slightly more involved if one seeks an
estimate of the error instead of a simple yes-no answer.
It is addressed in Refs. [95, 209, 210]. For control appli-
cations, however, Eq. (3) and variants are suﬃcient[39].
[212] An important diﬀerence to true ancilla systems is con-
trollability: Environmental modes are by deﬁnition un-
controllable and can only be accessed via their coupling
to the system.

