The Road to Popularity: The Dilution of Growing Audience on Twitter

Przemyslaw A. Grabowicz

MPI-SWS, Germany

Mahmoudreza Babaei

MPI-SWS, Germany

Juhi Kulshrestha
MPI-SWS, Germany

Ingmar Weber

Qatar Computing Research Institute, HBKU, Qatar

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
4
1

 
 
]
I
S
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
3
2
4
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

On social media platforms, like Twitter, users are often in-
terested in gaining more inﬂuence and popularity by grow-
ing their set of followers, aka their audience. Several stud-
ies have described the properties of users on Twitter based
on static snapshots of their follower network. Other studies
have analyzed the general process of link formation. Here,
rather than investigating the dynamics of this process itself,
we study how the characteristics of the audience and follower
links change as the audience of a user grows in size on the
road to user’s popularity.
To begin with, we ﬁnd that the early followers tend to be more
elite users than the late followers, i.e., they are more likely to
have veriﬁed and expert accounts. Moreover, the early fol-
lowers are signiﬁcantly more similar to the person that they
follow than the late followers. Namely, they are more likely
to share time zone, language, and topics of interests with the
followed user. To some extent, these phenomena are related
with the growth of Twitter itself, wherein the early followers
tend to be the early adopters of Twitter, while the late follow-
ers are late adopters. We isolate, however, the effect of the
growth of audiences consisting of followers from the growth
of Twitter’s user base itself. Finally, we measure the engage-
ment of such audiences with the content of the followed user,
by measuring the probability that an early or late follower be-
comes a retweeter.

1

Introduction

Politicians are sometimes accused of abandoning principles
from their earlier days as they rise to power. However, one
might argue that they simply adapt their message to be in
line with their growing – and evolving – target audience.
Similarly, as a once unknown actor reaches stardom, their
audience changes from a few “niche” fans and personal
friends, to millions worldwide. In this paper, we study how
an average Twitter user’s audience, and her engagement with
this audience, changes as she accumulates followers.

We start from an observation by Chen et al. that “the
pope is not a scaled up bishop” (Chen, Weber, and Okulicz-
Kozaryn 2014). They observed that same-religion linkage
preference on Twitter is lower for users with lots of follow-
ers, such as the pope, than it is for less visible users. This
Copyright c(cid:13) 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

led us to hypothesize that as a user grows her audience, the
level of topical interest and engagement of the audience de-
cays – or as we will say “dilutes”. Understanding if such
an effect exists has important consequences, because gen-
eral alignment between audience and message is fundamen-
tal for successful communication (Grabowicz, Ganguly, and
Gummadi 2016), not only on Twitter.

For instance, changing properties of a growing audi-
ence may have an inﬂuence on information diffusion. Pre-
vious studies show that pieces of topical information spread
more readily among users interested in the topic of such
memes (Grabowicz, Ganguly, and Gummadi 2016) and that
the retweeting behavior is inﬂuenced by the posting time of
information (Yang et al. 2010). These results suggest that in-
formation diffusion is less efﬁcient if a growing audience be-
comes less topically aligned with the messages or less syn-
chronized in time.

Studying the change in audience composition and its di-
lution for a given Twitter user is challenging, as many con-
founding factors have to be taken into account. First of all, a
random new Twitter user today will be different from a ran-
dom new Twitter user eight years ago. In fact, Liu et al. (Liu,
Kliman-Silver, and Mislove 2014) show that the distribution
of location and language of new Twitter users changes over
time. Second, existing users also continue to evolve. Gar-
cia et al. (Garca-Gavilanes et al. 2014) observe that “ma-
ture users evolve to adopt Twitter as a news media rather
than a social network”. Third, the links in the social net-
work evolve as the network grows (Leskovec et al. 2008).
Though an evolving network will surely effect information
diffusion, it is less clear how information diffusion relates to
the changes in audience composition.

Here, we distinguish between two different hypotheses.
Namely, we hypothesize that an audience, as it grows, it di-
lutes its properties, such as: elitness or the coherence of time
zone, language, and topics of expertise. We deﬁne as an au-
dience: (i) Twitter’s internal audiences, where each audience
is deﬁned as all followers of an expert, and (ii) the user base
of Twitter itself. We would like to learn if any of these audi-
ences or both of them dilute their properties as they grow.

In our analysis, we isolate the effects induced by the di-
lution of a growing audience of a particular expert user and
the dilution of Twitter’s growing user base itself. To this end,
as a control variable we use the time when a given follower

joined Twitter, i.e., the age of that user in the system. This
allows us to measure both effects of the growing number of
followers and Twitter’s user base on the composition of such
audiences. We ﬁnd that:
• As the number of followers grows for a given expert user,
the composition of these followers dilutes. We ﬁnd ex-
amples of this rule in the eliteness of followers and their
topical coherence.
• The composition of Twitter’s user base also dilutes.
Namely, the eliteness of users joining Twitter drops and
so does their time zone and language coherence.

In what follows, we ﬁrst describe the dataset that illus-
trates our ﬁndings. Then, we introduce the random shufﬂing
method that is used to distinguish between the growth of the
number of followers and Twitter’s user base (Section 3.1).
Next, we measure the properties of these growing audiences
(Section 3) and their engagement estimated as the fraction
of followers diffusing information (Section 3.3).

2 Description of the dataset

(A) Veriﬁed

(B) Expertise

Figure 1: The eliteness of sub-groups of followers of equal
size ordered by the time of link formation from the earliest to
the latest for real (black circles) and reshufﬂed (red squares)
followers. The plot is prepared for each user separately and
then averaged over all users from our set of experts. The er-
ror bars are 95% conﬁdence intervals computed on the set
of followers and averaged over experts; such estimate is an
upper bound of the error bars. The remaining plots are pre-
pared in the same way.

In this work, we analyze followers of expert users. We de-
ﬁne an expert as a user that was included in multiple Twit-
ter lists (Ghosh et al. 2012).1 For each of the expert users,
we know the topics of their expertise as they have been ex-
plicitly “tagged” by the list curators. Also, we represent ex-
pertise of each user as a normalized topical distribution over
her topics of expertise (Kulshrestha et al. 2015). Expert users
tend to produce more high-quality content and less spam and
they are more engaged than random Twitter users (Ghosh et
al. 2013). We choose to focus on random expert users instead
of all users, due to these qualities.

In total, we identiﬁed around 1.6M experts in Twitter as
of November 2015. Note that users with many followers are
likely to be included in this set.2 For the purpose of this
study, we sample a set of 1K random expert users. More
speciﬁcally, we select random experts from ﬁve different
bins of the number of followers. Namely, we select 200 ex-
perts that each had 100 to 1K, 1K-10K, 10K-100K, 100K-
1M, or 1M-10M followers in the end of November 2015.

Then, using Twitter’s REST API, we retrieve all follow-
ers of our expert users and the proﬁle information of these
followers. In total, we gather information about 241M users.
Furthermore, we collect all tweets of our expert users that
were posted during three months between September and
October 2015 and all retweets of these tweets, amounting to
1M tweets and 23M retweets.

3 The dilution of growing audience

In this section, for each user from our expert set, we look at
the properties of their followers as a function of the recency
of these followers. This way, we measure how the early au-
diences differ from the later ones.

1A list is a set of users tagged by the creator of the list. See

https://blog.twitter.com/2009/theres-a-list-for-that for details.

2For comparison, Followerwonk listed 824k Twitter users
with at least 10,000 followers as of 5th of January 2016, see
https://moz.com/followerwonk/bio/?ﬂmin=10000.

3.1 The eliteness of followers
First, we quantify the eliteness of followers of our expert
users. To this end, we use two different metrics of eliteness
by checking whether (i) the accounts of followers are veri-
ﬁed by Twitter3 and (ii) whether they are collectively tagged
as expert accounts (Ghosh et al. 2012). We aim to measure
how the eliteness of followers changes as the number of fol-
lowers grows over time. To this end, we split the followers
of each expert user into ten chronological bins: the ﬁrst bin
contains the 10% earliest followers, whereas the last bin con-
tains the 10% latest followers. We name these chronological
bins as the recency of followers. Next, we average the mea-
surements over followers in each bin, and then over our set
of expert users.

We ﬁnd that the earlier followers tend to be more elite
than the later followers (Figure 1), both in the terms of ver-
iﬁed and expert accounts. Later followers are around half
as likely to have veriﬁed accounts and over three times less
likely to be expert users (compare the leftmost and the right-
most black circles in Figure 1A and 1B).

We note here, that these results can be explained by at
least two processes: either (i) the dilution of growing audi-
ences of followers or (ii) the dilution of Twitter’s user base
itself, because later followers are users who joined Twitter
more recently and soon after joining started forming their
follower links (Figure 2). To separate the impact of these
two related processes on our results, we randomly reshuf-
ﬂe all follower links of expert users while ﬁxing the age of
follower users in the system. Namely, for each expert, every
follower is exchanged with a random follower of another ex-
pert, under the crucial constraint that an actual follower who
joined Twitter in year Y can only get replaced by a random

3A veriﬁcation badge is granted to accounts that corre-
spond to authentic identities of individuals or brands. More at
https://support.twitter.com/articles/119135.

0.00.20.40.60.81.0Percentileoffollowers0.000.010.020.03Fractionveriﬁed0.00.20.40.60.81.0Percentileoffollowers0.00.10.20.30.4FractionofexpertsFigure 2: The account’s age for real (black circles) and
reshufﬂed (red squares) followers versus their recency.

(A) TZ match

(B) Difference in TZ offset

Figure 3: Time zone match between a user and her followers
ordered from the earliest to the latest.

follower who also joined Twitter in year Y. Therefore, for
each given expert we preserve the distribution of ages of her
followers, up to variations within year Y. Furthermore, we
assume that these reshufﬂed links for each expert were cre-
ated in the same chronological sequence as the real follower
links that got replaced. Thus, this reshufﬂing purposely pre-
serves the correlation between age and recency of followers
(compare red and black lines in Figure 2), while destroy-
ing the correlations between recency and other properties
that are not implied by their correlation with age. In such
a reshufﬂed network, existence of a correlation between re-
cency and a given property signiﬁes that this correlation is
due to the age of followers in the whole Twitter system, in-
stead of their recency among the given set of followers.

We plot the metrics of eliteness for the reshufﬂed follow-
ers as red squares in Figure 1. Noticeably, the values of elite-
ness drop with the recency of reshufﬂed followers in a sim-
ilar way to real followers, so the dilution of eliteness of the
growing user base of Twitter is present. In other words, it is
likely that “tech-savy” experts joined Twitter early on and
since that time the user base of Twitter is diluting to a more
casual population. In the case of veriﬁed accounts, we do
not ﬁnd evidence for the dilution among followers of a user
(curves in Figure 1A are nearly parallel). However, in the
case of expertise, we ﬁnd that the fraction of expert users
drops down faster with the recency among real followers
than among reshufﬂed followers (the two curves meet at the
rightmost point in Figure 1B, but the black curve is steeper
than the red curve). This ﬁnding means, that the fraction of
expert users among followers drops down with the recency
of these followers, providing an evidence for the dilution of
expertise among growing audience at the level of followers
of individual expert users.
3.2 Time zone, language, and topical congruence
Next, we measure audience characteristics and compare
them to the expert they follow. To this end, we extract the
time zone and the language of each user from the self-
reported ﬁelds speciﬁed by each user in their proﬁle.

Having this information, we measure if the expert and
their audience are in the same time zone (Figure 3) and if
they report the same language (Figure 4). We ﬁnd that the
earlier followers are more likely to be in the same time zone
as the person they follow (Figure 3). The average absolute
difference between the time zone of the expert and her fol-

(A) Language

(B) Topic

Figure 4: The language match and the topical similarity be-
tween a user and her followers ordered from the earliest to
the latest.

lowers is 3 hours for the earliest followers and above 3.5
for the latest followers; that is a nearly 20% increase in the
difference between the time zones. An increased desynchro-
nization of time zones may lead to a coverage bias, if the
experts produce certain type of content in the evening, when
some of their followers are already asleep.

Also, we note that the earlier followers are more likely
than the later followers to use the same language as the per-
son they follow (Figure 4A). This result is followed by a
related ﬁnding showing that the earlier followers are more
likely to share topics of expertise with the person they fol-
low (Figure 4B). We compute the topical similarity of exper-
tise between users as the cosine similarity of their expertise
distributions (Kulshrestha et al. 2015). Note that this calcu-
lation can be done only for followers who are experts them-
selves, for whom expertise distributions are known.

Again, we compare these results against the results for
the randomly shufﬂed followers. Interestingly, the dilution
of language is more pronounced for the reshufﬂed followers.
This is an intriguing result that can be explained by the fact
that initially almost all tweets were in English, while nowa-
days there exist large non-English communities on Twit-
ter (Liu, Kliman-Silver, and Mislove 2014). On the other
hand, we note that the topical similarity between an expert
and her followers is twice larger than between the user and
her reshufﬂed followers (compare the black and red lines in
Figure 4B). Most importantly, the topical alignment of Twit-

0.00.20.40.60.81.0Percentileoffollowers3456Age[years]0.00.20.40.60.81.0Percentileoffollowers0.000.050.100.150.200.25Sametimezone0.00.20.40.60.81.0Percentileoffollowers2.53.54.55.5TZoffset[hours]0.00.20.40.60.81.0Percentileoffollowers0.50.60.70.80.9Samelanguage0.00.20.40.60.81.0Percentileoffollowers0.00.20.40.6Topicalsimilaritydiffusion. We show initial measurements in this respect, but
further rigorous studies of the dynamics of the latent prop-
erties of users, such as the language or topics of expertise,
shall explore this question.

Finally, we note that our measurements are platform-
speciﬁc. Thus, is the law of dilution of organically growing
audiences present in other systems, also ofﬂine social collec-
tives? Furthermore, what is the importance of this law with
respect to recommender systems? Oftentimes, recommender
systems suggest content that is topically aligned to our in-
terests. What minimalist recommender system leads to the
dilution of growing audiences? Addressing these questions
will shed more light on this intriguing phenomenon.

References

[Chen, Weber, and Okulicz-Kozaryn 2014] Chen, L.; Weber,
I.; and Okulicz-Kozaryn, A. 2014. U.s. religious landscape
on twitter. In SocInfo, 544–560.
[Garca-Gavilanes et al. 2014] Garca-Gavilanes,
R.;
Kaltenbrunner, A.; Sez-Trumper, D.; Baeza-Yates, R.;
Aragn, P.; and Laniado, D. 2014. Who are my audiences? a
study of the evolution of target audiences in microblogs. In
SocInfo, 561–572.
[Ghosh et al. 2012] Ghosh, S.; Sharma, N.; Benevenuto, F.;
Ganguly, N.; and Gummadi, K. 2012. Cognos: Crowd-
sourcing Search for Topic Experts in Microblogs. In SIGIR,
575–590.
[Ghosh et al. 2013] Ghosh, S.; Zafar, M. B.; Bhattacharya,
P.; Sharma, N.; Ganguly, N.; and Gummadi, K. 2013. On
In Proc. 22nd ACM Int.
sampling the wisdom of crowds.
Conf. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manag. - CIKM ’13, 1739–1744.
New York, New York, USA: ACM Press.
[Grabowicz, Ganguly, and Gummadi 2016] Grabowicz, P.;
Ganguly, N.; and Gummadi, K. P. 2016. Distinguishing
between Topical and Non-topical Information Diffusion
Mechanisms in Social Media. ICWSM ’16: Proceedings of
the 10th International AAAI Conference on Webl and Social
Media.
[Kulshrestha et al. 2015] Kulshrestha,
J.; Zafar, M. B.;
Noboa, L. E.; Gummadi, K. P.; and Ghosh, S. 2015. Char-
acterizing Information Diets of Social Media Users.
In
ICWSM.
[Leskovec et al. 2008] Leskovec, J.; Backstrom, L.; Kumar,
R.; and Tomkins, A. 2008. Microscopic evolution of so-
cial networks. In Proceeding 14th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf.
Knowl. Discov. data Min. - KDD ’08, 462–470. Las Vegas,
Nevada, USA: ACM.
[Liu, Kliman-Silver, and Mislove 2014] Liu, Y.; Kliman-
Silver, C.; and Mislove, A. 2014. The Tweets They are
a-Changin: Evolution of Twitter Users and Behavior. Proc.
Eighth Int. AAAI Conf. Weblogs Soc. Media 305–314.
[Yang et al. 2010] Yang, Z.; Guo, J.; Cai, K.; Tang, J.; Li, J.;
Zhang, L.; and Su, Z. 2010. Understanding Retweeting Be-
haviors in Social Networks. Idea 1633–1636.

(A) The fraction of retweeters among followers
Figure 5:
ordered from the earliest to the latest. (B) The average num-
ber of tweets produced per day by a follower versus the se-
quence of followers ordered from the earliest to the latest.

ter’s user base does not decrease, while it visibly decreases
for the growing audiences of followers (compare the slopes
of red and black lines in Figure 4B, respectively), suggest-
ing that the dilution is present at the level of followers of
individual users, but it is not at the level of whole Twitter.
3.3 The engagement of followers
Finally, we would like to understand how the diluted prop-
erties of a growing audience inﬂuence engagement metrics.
Among such metrics we distinguish different types of inter-
actions between a follower and the expert that they follow,
for instance: retweets, favorites, replies. Here, we focus on
the results for retweets.

We measure the engagement of followers with respect
to the user that they follow, by measuring the fraction
of retweeters among the followers of given recency (Fig-
ure 5A). This fraction initially drops by around 30% for
early followers and then it grows 3-fold for late followers.

On the one hand, we expect that the fraction of retweeters
among early followers should be higher, because they are
more synchronized with the person that they follow in terms
of time zone, language, and topics of expertise. On the other
hand, the tweeting rate of the followers increases with their
recency (Figure 5B), because some users get bored and cease
using Twitter, while other users are spam bots. This may be
the reason why the fraction of retweeters increases with the
recency of the followers.

4 Discussion

Our results show that the composition of growing audiences
tends to get diluted. First, we ﬁnd that the eliteness of fol-
lowers of an expert and their topical coherence decreases
with their recency. Second, we show that the composition
of Twitter’s user base also dilutes. For example, the elite-
ness and the time zone and language congruence of the users
joining Twitter drops with their recency. We hypothesize that
these phenomena are the effect of a common dilution pro-
cess that happens for growing audiences.

Future studies may want to understand how global evolv-
ing trends are affected and interact with the rule of dilution
of growing audiences. Furthermore, it is unclear what is the
impact of the growing and diluted audiences for information

0.00.20.40.60.81.0Percentileoffollowers0.0050.0150.0250.035Fractionofretweeters0.00.20.40.60.81.0Percentileoffollowers2345Tweetsperday