Distinguishing between Topical and Non-topical Information Diffusion

Mechanisms in Social Media

Przemyslaw A. Grabowicz

MPI-SWS, Germany

Niloy Ganguly
IIT Kharagpur, India

Krishna P. Gummadi

MPI-SWS, Germany

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
4
1

 
 
]
I
S
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
5
2
4
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

A number of recent studies of information diffusion in social
media, both empirical and theoretical, have been inspired by
viral propagation models derived from epidemiology. These
studies model the propagation of memes, i.e., pieces of infor-
mation, between users in a social network similarly to the way
diseases spread in human society. Importantly, one would ex-
pect a meme to spread in a social network amongst the people
who are interested in the topic of that meme. Yet, the impor-
tance of topicality for information diffusion has been less ex-
plored in the literature.
Here, we study empirical data about two different types of
memes (hashtags and URLs) spreading through the Twitter’s
online social network. For every meme, we infer its topics
and for every user, we infer her topical interests. To analyze
the impact of such topics on the propagation of memes, we
introduce a novel theoretical framework of information diffu-
sion. Our analysis identiﬁes two distinct mechanisms, namely
topical and non-topical, of information diffusion. The non-
topical information diffusion resembles disease spreading as
in simple contagion. In contrast, the topical information dif-
fusion happens between users who are topically aligned with
the information and has characteristics of complex contagion.
Non-topical memes spread broadly among all users and end
up being relatively popular. Topical memes spread narrowly
among users who have interests topically aligned with them
and are diffused more readily after multiple exposures. Our
results show that the topicality of memes and users’ inter-
ests are essential for understanding and predicting informa-
tion diffusion.

2011). As such, the phenomenon of information diffusion in
social networks is predominantly modeled by building paral-
lels with the viral spread of diseases (Kempe, Kleinberg, and
Tardos 2003), or by using graph-based methods (Granovet-
ter 1978; Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003). However, in-
formation diffusion involves intelligent individuals exhibit-
ing complex behaviors, hence one can expect that it includes
mechanisms beyond viral spreading via social exposures. An
important mechanism that may drive such spread is the top-
ical alignment between the interests of individuals and the
pieces of information, which in the language of epidemi-
ology is expressed as the genetic susceptibility to a certain
disease (Burgner, Jamieson, and Blackwell 2006).

However,

it

is difﬁcult

to empirically observe this
phenomenon for information diffusion. First, large-scale
datasets of information that are not inﬂuenced by recom-
mender systems and contain enough information for topic
modeling are scarce. Second, topic models have matured
and have become viable for large datasets only in recent
years. We overcome these issues thanks to the increasing
availability of data characterizing users and content in online
social networks (Cha et al. 2010) and the development of re-
liable topic modeling methods (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003;
McCallum 2002). Third, information diffusion within a
given system may be caused by the exposures external to
that system, which we are not aware of. Thus, it is chal-
lenging to isolate the effect of the external exposures from
the effect of the internal social exposures on the information
diffusion (Bakshy et al. 2012).

1

Introduction

The process of information diffusion is crucial for viral mar-
keting (Leskovec, Adamic, and Huberman 2007), spreading
of political movements (Strang and Soule 1998) and inno-
vations (Rogers 1962), and opinion formation (Holley and
Liggett 1975). Numerous studies have shown that informa-
tion and behaviors propagate virally over online social net-
works via social exposures, deﬁned as the number of friends
or acquaintances of a user that have exposed the meme to
her (Backstrom et al. 2006; Cosley, Huttenlocher, and Klein-
berg 2010; Crandall et al. 2008; Gomez-Rodriguez, Gum-
madi, and Sch¨olkopf 2014; Romero, Meeder, and Kleinberg
Copyright c(cid:13) 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Here, to separate internal exposures from external ex-
posures and to analyze the effect of topics on information
diffusion, we introduce a theoretical framework that mod-
els topics of memes and users as latent variables and the
probability of diffusion as a function of these variables.
Diffusion processes are usually described statistically with
the so-called adoption probability (Backstrom et al. 2006;
Cosley, Huttenlocher, and Kleinberg 2010; Crandall et al.
2008; Gomez-Rodriguez, Gummadi, and Sch¨olkopf 2014;
Romero, Meeder, and Kleinberg 2011), deﬁned as the proba-
bility of adopting a meme by a person who has been exposed
to this meme by exactly κ social exposures. Our theoreti-
cal framework allows us to extend the deﬁnition of adoption
probability by accounting for the topical alignment between
a meme and interests of each user and to estimate the infor-

mation diffusion from both internal and external sources.

Furthermore, we hypothesize that there exist two different
mechanisms of information propagation, namely, a topical
and non-topical information diffusion. Under this hypothe-
sis, topical information would start to spread from the enthu-
siasts or experts of that topical domain. Then, it would dif-
fuse narrowly to other members of this domain. Non-topical
information would not be limited by its topical domain. If
such hypothesis is correct, then one can expect that topical
and non-topical information diffusion have different proper-
ties. Here, we aim to identify characteristics speciﬁc to each
of these two mechanisms. Finally, having the two mecha-
nisms identiﬁed and characterized, it is crucial to relate them
to existing theories of information diffusion. The sociolog-
ical theory of complex contagion suggests that multiple so-
cial exposures are important for the diffusion of novel and
controversial information (Centola and Macy 2007), while
the theory of simple contagion posits viral spreading after
the initial exposure. How these theories relate to topical and
non-topical information diffusion? These are some of the
questions that we address in this study.

1.1 Present work
Note that, to understand the importance of topicality for in-
formation diffusion, we require (i) a closed social system
that does not implement any personalized recommendation
algorithm1, (ii) a comprehensive and independent annotation
of topicality of users and diffused pieces of information, and
(iii) a theoretical framework that is able to estimate the ef-
fect of internal and external social exposures on information
diffusion and to quantify topicality of memes and users.

To this end, we analyze a dataset from Twitter containing
all public tweets that were messaged during the observation
period of three months in mid-2009 and a full snapshot of
the follower graph from the end of that period. During that
time, there were no personalized recommendations in Twit-
ter and no other mechanisms than follower links to subscribe
to other users. Hence, we are able to measure information
diffusion in a natural setting, namely in an online social net-
work that is hardly affected by any recommender system. We
consider two distinct types of information that diffuse over
the follower graph, namely hashtags and URLs, which for
simplicity we jointly call memes. We say that a user diffuses
or adopts a meme if she writes it in one of her tweets.

Next, we split the dataset chronologically into two parts
(see Figure 1). We process the prior part to infer the top-
ics of memes and users’ interests, whereas we use the latter
part to perform an independent analysis of information dif-
fusion. More speciﬁcally, using nouns extracted from past
tweets we infer with an unsupervised method, namely with
Latent Dirichlet Allocation, i.e., LDA (Blei, Ng, and Jordan
2003), the topical distributions of active users and popular
memes (Section 3). As such, in our theoretical framework,
topics are mixtures of words that frequently appear together.
Each user and meme is represented by a topical distribu-

1At the time of data collection, all follower links were created
by users themselves without the inﬂuence of any personalized rec-
ommendation algorithm.

tion over a constant number of topics. To evaluate how topi-
cally narrow are memes and users’ interests, we compute the
entropy of their corresponding topical distributions. Thanks
to this procedure, we distinguish between topical and non-
topical memes and users. We say that a meme is topical if
it is strongly associated with a topic, whereas a non-topical
meme is weakly and equally associated with all topics. Im-
portantly, we deﬁne the topical alignment between a meme
and interests of a user as a cosine similarity of their respec-
tive topical distributions. We exploit this topical alignment
to compute the probability of adoptions triggered either via
sources internal or external to Twitter (Section 4). We ﬁnd
that topical memes are likely to be topically aligned with
the interests of people who adopt them, either via internal or
external exposures. We leverage out theoretical framework
further, ﬁnding that:
• A considerable fraction of memes are topical. (Section 3)
• We show that adoptions of topical memes are easier to
predict than the adoptions of non-topical memes. (Sec-
tion 5.1)

• For the topical information diffusion, the probability of
adoption steadily increases with the topical alignment
between user’s interests and a meme, whereas for non-
topical information diffusion the probability stays ﬂat or
increases considerably less. (Section 5.1)

• Topical

information diffusion proﬁts more than non-
topical diffusion from multiple exposures to a meme;
thus, it resembles complex contagion. We capture it by
introducing a novel metric of spreading persistence. (Sec-
tion 5.2)

• A large fraction of adoptions happens via seed adopters
exposed to external sources. The seed adopters of top-
ical memes are relatively more aligned with the meme
than other adopters and the seed adopters of non-topical
memes. (Section 5.3)

• The diffusion of URLs is about twice more intense via ex-
ternal rather than internal sources, whereas the diffusion
of hashtags has similar intensity both for external and in-
ternal exposures. (Section 5.3)

1.2 Related work
Some of our results can be interpreted with the socio-
logical theory of complex contagion (Centola 2010; Cen-
tola and Macy 2007). This theory posits that “high-risk”,
“novel”, “unproven”, or “controversial” information spreads
via “wide bridges”, namely via multiple social exposures
or strong ties. As we show later, topical memes convey
such information. Romero et al. report that successive so-
cial exposures to political hashtags tend to increase adop-
tion probability more than multiple social exposures to
idioms (Romero, Meeder, and Kleinberg 2011). The au-
thors explain these diffusion classes with complex conta-
gion mechanism. Our work generalizes their analysis and
methodology, in the sense that we do not focus on a set
of speciﬁc topics (e.g., politics and idioms), but instead we
study a quantiﬁable and robust topical space, which repre-
sents such speciﬁc topics, yielding consistent results. Our

ﬁndings suggest that topical information diffusion is related
to complex contagion.

It is intuitive that human behavior is largely related to
multi-dimensional personal characteristics of people, such
as topical interests or private traits (Kosinski, Stillwell, and
Graepel 2013). For instance, some of the recently proposed
models suggest that latent factors impact information diffu-
sion (Barbieri, Bonchi, and Manco 2012; Du et al. 2013)
and measure topical social inﬂuence (Weng et al. 2010;
Bi et al. 2014). Moreover, recommender systems exploit-
ing the premise of latent factors predicting content con-
sumption are widely deployed (Ricci, Rokach, and Shapira
2011). However, empirical studies of information diffu-
sion in social media tend to focus either on predictions
of the size of social cascades (Ma, Sun, and Cong 2013;
Weng and Menczer 2014), analysis of the structure of the
cascades (Goel, Watts, and Goldstein 2012), or detecting
inﬂuential spreaders (Cha et al. 2010), which are macro-
scopic and mesoscopic properties of information diffusion.
A few empirical works study the information diffusion at the
microscopic level. These studies explore, for instance, the
classes of information diffusion for speciﬁc topics (Romero,
Meeder, and Kleinberg 2011), the impact of activity similar-
ity on the probability of interaction (Crandall et al. 2008),
and the predictiveness of limited content-based features for
future adoptions (Yang et al. 2012; Yuan et al. 2016). Thus,
to our knowledge, our work is the ﬁrst large-scale empirical
study systematically analyzing the relation between topical-
ity and mechanisms of information diffusion and the extent
to which topical alignments affect information diffusion.

2 Dataset

We analyze a dataset from Twitter that is nearly com-
plete and contains all public tweets produced by users until
September 2009 and a snapshot of the social graph crawled
in September 2009 (Cha et al. 2010). In Twitter, a user can
post short messages, called tweets, that are delivered to all
her followers, namely all the users who follow her in the fol-
lower graph. (The users who are followed by the user are
her followees.) Such messages can contain memes, so the
memes can diffuse over the follower graph. Importantly, at
the time period when our dataset was gathered, there were
no other ways than the follower links to directly receive con-
tent from other users. We study the diffusion of two types of
memes: hashtags and URLs. We say that a user becomes an
adopter of a meme and starts to spread it once she posts it

Figure 1: Timeline of the dataset illustrating the design of
the study. The gray area marks the period of analysis.

Iran election
British election
Well-being
Viral marketing marketing, business, twitter, media, blog, site
Smart devices

mousavi, basij, khamenei, ppl, protesters, rally
bbc, london, bnp, news, brown, bit
success, happiness, einstein, albert, john, failure

iphone, apple, app, mac, macbook, wwdc

Table 1: An example of ﬁve topics detected by LDA and
words associated with each of them. The words are ordered
by their relevance to the topic. (Words “albert” and “ein-
stein” are associated with one of the topics because his say-
ings are quoted several times within that topic.)

at least in one tweet. Naturally, at the moment of posting the
meme, the adopter becomes an exposer of the meme to all
her followers.

We analyze adoptions that happened during the period
of three months, from June to August 2009. During this
time users posted nearly a billion of tweets. We consider
only the memes that emerged during that period, speciﬁ-
cally during June. In other words, we do not consider memes
that were born before that period. This constitutes a differ-
ence from the prior works (Gomez-Rodriguez, Gummadi,
and Sch¨olkopf 2014), which tracked also the memes that
emerged before the observation period, hence underestimat-
ing the number of social exposures.2 We focus on memes
that were used predominantly in English tweets. Speciﬁ-
cally, we analyze the memes for which at least 90% of tweets
were in English. To detect the language of tweets we use
a state-of-the-art language detection tool for Twitter data
(Nakatani 2012). Furthermore, we report results only for the
memes that have been adopted by at least 100 unique users.3
Overall, we analyze 704 hashtags adopted 480k times by a
total of 330k unique users and 3745 URLs adopted 1.2m
times by a total of 610k unique users.

We divide the three-months long dataset into two parts.
The ﬁrst part consists of all tweets from June, while the sec-
ond part consists of all tweets from July and August (Fig-
ure 1). We use the ﬁrst part of the dataset solely to infer
topical distributions of users’ interests and memes emerging
during that month. This partition allows us to keep the topic
modeling independent from the statistical analysis, which is
performed solely on the second part of the dataset.

3 Topicality of memes and users

Here, we describe how we obtain the topical distributions of
memes and users’ interests. Then, we introduce the notion
of topicality to distinguish between topical and non-topical
memes and user’s interests based on their respective topi-
cal distributions. Finally, we introduce the topical alignment
between a meme and user’s interests.

2The user could have been exposed to the meme before the ob-
servation period. If this happens and one does not have knowledge
about it, then the real social exposure is higher than the one es-
timated based solely on the observation period. Our dataset cov-
ers all previous months apart from the three-months long period of
observation. Thus, we can accurately estimate the real number of
exposures.

3We obtain qualitatively the same results for lower thresholds.

Hashtag
#ashraf

Topic

Iran election

Examples of tweets hand-picked from 30 chronological tweets from the beginning of June 2009
1. canadian friends of a democratic iran urge us president to ensure ashraf residents treated according international law #iran #ashraf #rajavi
2. suppressive forces heavily present in streets of iran capital to prevent protests #iran #iranelection #tehran #neda #rajavi #ashraf
3. how u can help iranians http://tinyurl.com/m8fun4 #iranelection #tehran #azadi #ashraf #rajavi #neda #basij #iran #gr88 rt rt rt

The most topical hashtags

#electionstudio

British election

1. bnp is a left wing party. so were the german national socialists. #electionstudio
2. #electionstudio this bnp guy is a lunatic frankly. indigenous population? if it weren’t for immigration britain would not exist at all.
3. #electionstudio i got very excited last night when purnell resigned but now can’t see a leadership challenge coming from anywhere

#vene2ia

Well-being

1. without freedom of choice there is no creativity kirk, star trek #vene2ia
2. it wasn’t until quite late in life that i discovered how easy it is to say ”i don’t know!” somerset maugham #vene2ia (via @vene2ia)
3. rt @vene2ia: children are the living messages we send to a time we will not see john w. whitehead #vene2ia

#smum

Viral marketing

1. learn how to blog your way to success at social media university milwaukee http://ow.ly/g83u (last day for early bird pricing) #smum
2. lrt @philgerb: rt @dnewman:great article on beneﬁts of audience tweeting during your presentation http://bit.ly/rdgsl good 2 know 4 #smum!
3. l@backseatgaffer glad you found it. you can sign up even if you’re not going to #smum. details: http://bit.ly/3qyhot reg: http://bit.ly/zvpeh

#mytouch

Smart devices

1. mytouch3g ordering starts tomorrow, very excited #tmobile #android #mytouch3g
2. im thinking of getting the tmobile #mytouch phone, i want to know, what do you all think of the phone? should i get it?
3. if you’re using a #bold, #curve, #g1, #mytouch or an #iphone you should download @loopt an amazing lbs networking app

Hashtag

Topic

#uknowyouugly

#unala2009

#skiphop

#sexisbetter

#besthead

-

-

-

-

-

The least topical hashtags

Examples of tweets hand-picked from 30 chronological tweets from the beginning of June 2009
1. #uknowyouugly when you’re at the zoo and the monkeys run from you
2. #uknowyouugly when u gota get fresh to go to the grocery store
3. #uknowyouugly when they ban you from the mac store

1. getting ready for my ﬁrst unconference... the ﬁrst one might as well be a big one! very excited. #ala2009 #unala2009
2. got new business cards designed by my son. unconference tag #unala2009 per conference wiki. ala facebook meetup: http://tinyurl.com/loayhl
3. just for clariﬁcation, friday’s unconference is at the chicago hilton, not the palmer house hilton. hth #ala2009 #unala2009

1. i just entered to #win a #skiphop bag with a #beautyﬁx kit in the #99daysofsummer #contest at #modernmom! http://bit.ly/wetvi
2. modernmom i just entered to #win a #skiphop bag with a #beautyﬁx kit in the #99daysofsummer #contest at #modernmom! http://bit.ly/p29uz
3. i just entered to #win a #skiphop bag with a #beautyﬁx kit in the #99daysofsummer #contest at #modernmom! http://bit.ly/7ap8x #trackle

1. #sexisbetter wen your drunk
2. #sexisbetter with a scorpio! (guess what sign i am) ;-)
3. #sexisbetter when its anywhere but a bed

1. #besthead when dey don’t expect it baq.. lol
2. #besthead is when u black out and just pass out now dats da best
3. #besthead was in the morning right after she brushed her teeth,she went to work!! u heard me (master p voice)

Table 2: The top ﬁve most and least topical hashtags. For each hashtag, we show three exemplary tweets and a topic corre-
sponding to this hashtag. The least topical hashtags are not associated with a speciﬁc topic. In this list, we omit all hashtags that
co-appear with the listed hashtags.

3.1 Topical distributions

We deﬁne topical distributions for each meme and user
based on all tweets posted in June. First, we ﬁlter out the
tweets that are not written in English. Second, we extract
from remaining tweets all nouns and proper nouns using a
state-of-the-art POS-tagger for Twitter data (Owoputi et al.
2013). We choose nouns and proper nouns, because they en-
capsulate the semantics of tweets. We represent each meme
as a bag of unique nouns that appeared in tweets contain-
ing this meme and each user as a bag of unique nouns that
were tweeted by this user. Next, we model the topics of users
and memes with LDA performed for 100 topics and 1000
iterations (McCallum 2002).4 Hence, the topics of user’s
interests and a meme are represented by distributions over
100 topics. Examples of topics inferred with this method are
shown in Table 1. Note that each such topic gathers related
terms. We discuss these topics further in the following para-
graphs.

4We also tested lower and higher numbers of topics, ﬁnding

similar results both qualitatively and quantitatively.

3.2 Topicality
To measure how much topical a meme or a user’s interests
are, we compute the entropy H of their respective topical
distributions. The higher the entropy, the less topical the
meme or the user are, and vice versa. It follows that the most
topical would be a meme that is associated only with a sin-
gle topic, whereas the least topical would be a meme that is
equally associated with all topics, i.e., has a uniform distri-
bution over all topics. Most of memes is between these two
extreme examples. The distributions of entropy resemble a
normal distribution (Figure 2). We refer to the 25% most top-
ical memes and users as topical, whereas to the 25% least
topical as non-topical. We establish this distinction for the
sake of clarity, however, other thresholds (e.g., at 50%) give
qualitatively the same results. In the remainder, we present
results both for topical and non-topical memes and users.

We list the most and the least topical memes in Ta-
ble 2. For instance, hashtags #ashraf and #electionstudio
correspond to political elections in Iran and Great Britain,
#vene2ia represents a motivational website, #smum is about
a newly-established viral marketing school, and #mytouch
corresponds to a newly released smartphone. Note these

hashtags

l
a
c
i
p
o
t
-
n
o
n

A

l
a
c
i
p
o
t

C

URLs

B

D

Figure 2: The distribution of entropy of topical distributions
of (A-B) memes and (C-D) user’s interests. The memes or
Users’ interests with the lowest entropy are the most topi-
cal, while the memes with the highest entropy are the least
topical.

hashtags correspond closely to the categories of information
that is predicted to spread via complex contagion, namely
novel, unproven, high-risk, and controversial information.

On the contrary, the least topical hashtags are mostly
Twitter idioms and neologism that can be understood di-
rectly from their names, i.e., #uknowyouugly, #sexisbetter,
#besthead, or are related to a popular lottery, i.e., #skiphop.
These idioms have a generic entertainment value. The hash-
tag #unala2009 corresponds to an un-conference, which is a
conference without agenda.

Strikingly, the distinction between topical, e.g., political,
hashtags versus idioms corresponds very closely to the cat-
egories of hashtags exhibiting complex and simple conta-
gions described in (Romero, Meeder, and Kleinberg 2011)
(see Section 1.2). This indicates that the topical information
diffusion is related to complex contagion.

Finally, we note that topical memes are (42 ± 2)% more
likely to be adopted by a topical user than by a non-topical
user. This is in a sense the tip of the iceberg, because here we
do not take into account topical alignments between memes
and users, which increase the probability of adoption much
further.
3.3 The topical alignment between a meme and a

user

Once we have the topical distributions of memes and users,
we measure the topical alignment between a user and a
meme, denoted as S(user, meme), by computing the cosine
similarity of the corresponding topical distributions. The
topical alignment assumes values from 0 to 1, where 1 corre-
sponds to the maximum possible alignment. The alignment
can be 1 both for topical and non-topical memes and users.
Even if a meme is perfectly non-topical (has a uniform dis-

tribution over topics), its topical alignment with a user that
has interests distributed uniformly over topics will be 1.

4 The theory of adoption probability

In this section, we formally introduce adoption probability
and extend its deﬁnition to cover topical alignment. To this
end, we deﬁne the fundamental random events correspond-
ing to the adoptions and exposures of memes. Then, we
exploit these events to deﬁne the adoption probability as a
function of social exposure and topical alignment. Also, we
show that the two channels of social inﬂuence, namely inﬂu-
ence internal and external to Twitter, can be separated within
our model of information diffusion. We close this section
by introducing a new metric of spreading persistence that
quantiﬁes the effect of multiple exposures on the probability
of adoption. The methods and deﬁnitions that we introduce
here can be used for studying information diffusion in var-
ious systems. In the remainder of this study, we apply this
theoretical framework to our Twitter dataset.

4.1 Extending the deﬁnition of adoption

probability

One can reason about information diffusion by deﬁning ex-
posure event as a tuple (user, meme, exposers, adoption
state) that represents a user being exposed by a given set
of exposers to a meme that she has not adopted yet. Natu-
rally, the set of exposers may be empty, if the user has not
been exposed to the given meme yet by anybody. The set of
exposers can only grow in time, as more people adopt the
given meme. The adoption state tells us if the meme will be
adopted before the appearance of a new exposer. If it gets
adopted, then we call such exposure event as an adoption
event, to distinguish it from all other exposure events. Note
that each exposure event can be characterized by the topical
alignment between a meme and a user. Some users in our
dataset do not have topical distributions deﬁned. Thus, we
ﬁlter out all exposure events for such users.

Next we focus on exposure events with κ exposers.
Namely, we say that a user is κ-exposed to a meme at a
certain time, if κ distinct users that she follows adopted
the meme prior to this time and she has not adopted the
meme yet. The probability of adoption is deﬁned (Cosley,
Huttenlocher, and Kleinberg 2010), as the probability that a
κ-exposed user will adopt the meme before getting (κ + 1)-
exposed to it, namely

Pa(κ) = Na(κ)/Ne(κ),

(1)

where Ne(κ) is the number of users who were κ-exposed to
the information, and Na(κ) is the number of users that were
κ-exposed and adopted the meme before becoming (κ + 1)-
exposed. In other words, Ne(κ) and Na(κ) are the numbers
of exposure events and adoption events with κ exposers, re-
spectively.5

5To decrease the impact of noise, we sum up the numbers of
events over all memes and then compute Pa(κ). Thus, in com-
parison with the traditional deﬁnition of adoption probability, we
weight popular hashtags proportionally more.

We extend the above standard deﬁnition of adoption prob-
ability to include a topical alignment. Namely, we deﬁne the
conditional probability that a κ-exposed user will adopt the
meme before getting (κ+1)-exposed when the topical align-
ment is S, namely

Pa(κ, S) = Na(κ, S)/Ne(κ, S),

(2)
where Ne(κ, S) and Na(κ, S) are the numbers of ex-
posure events and adoption events with the social expo-
sure κ and the topical alignment S. One can obtain one-
dimensional adoption probabilities Pa(κ) or Pa(S) by inte-
grating Pa(κ, S) over κ or S, respectively, which gives

Pa(S) = Na(S)/Ne(S).

(3)
The adoption probability versus social exposure Pa(κ) has
been measured in multiple studies. In contrast, to our knowl-
edge, the adoption probability versus a topical alignment
Pa(S) is measured for the ﬁrst time in this study.
4.2 Diffusion via internal and external sources
Information can spread from sources that are internal or ex-
ternal to a given system (in our case, to Twitter). In general,
it is difﬁcult to distinguish between internal and external ex-
posures and to estimate their impact on information diffu-
sion (Bakshy et al. 2012). Even if we know that a user fol-
lows a person that tweeted some meme and that this person
adopted this meme afterwards, we still do not know whether
this adoption was caused by the exposures via Twitter fol-
lowers or via some other external sources. Furthermore, in
the next section we show that external adoptions are frequent
for information diffusion on Twitter.

Fortunately, our theory of adoption probability allows us
to differentiate between information diffusion via internal
and external sources, i.e.,

a (κe, S).

a(κi, S) + P e

Pa(κi, κe, S) = P i

(4)
In this study, the internal exposures are via the follower net-
work of Twitter and we can estimate the number of such
exposures. By contrast, exposures via external sources are
opaque to us. In other words, we do not know κe, so we
marginalize it out from the last equation obtaining

a (S),

a(κ, S) + P e

Pa(κ, S) = P i

(5)
a (κe, S)P (κe|S)dκe. Next,
where κ ≡ κi and P e
we note that, if no internal exposures are present, i.e., κi =
0 and P i
a(0, S) = 0, then the only inﬂuence remaining is
external, thus

Pa(0, S) = P e

(6)
This simple formula shows how to estimate the probability
of adoption via external exposures as a function of topical
alignment. Combining Equations 5 and 6 allows us to esti-
mate the joint adoption probability via internal exposures,
namely

(7)
Finally, we compute the marginalized internal adoption
probabilities P i

P i
a(κ, S) = Pa(κ, S) − Pa(0, S).
a(κ) and P i
a(S), as follows:
P i
a(S) = Pa(S) − Pa(0, S),
Pa(0, S)P (S|κ)dS.

P i
a(κ) = Pa(κ) −

(8)

(9)

(cid:90)

a (S) =(cid:82) P e

a (S).

These two formulas subtract the probability of adoption
caused by external sources from the probability of any adop-
tions. Interestingly, Equation 9 subtracts the expected value
of adoption probability given that the conditional probability
distribution of similarity is P (S|κ). Intuitively, even if an in-
dividual is exposed to a meme on Twitter via κ > 0 internal
social exposures, he may adopt the meme from another top-
ically related external source; we estimate and subtract the
impact of such external phenomena on adoption probability

via the term(cid:82) Pa(0, S)P (S|κ)dS.

4.3 Persistence of spreading
We deﬁne the persistence of information diffusion as the
ability of multiple exposures to boost information adop-
tion. We introduce a new metric of spreading persis-
tence (Romero, Meeder, and Kleinberg 2011) to capture this
complex contagion effect. We deﬁne this persistence as the
ratio between the average internal adoption probability at
several exposures and the adoption probability at one expo-
sure, namely Persistence = (cid:104)P i
a(κ = 1), where
(cid:104)·(cid:105) is an average. Intuitively, our persistence metric captures
if multiple exposures boost information diffusion in compar-
ison with a single exposure.

a(κ)(cid:105)κ>1/P i

5

Impact of topicality on adoption

probability

Here, we characterize topical and non-topical mechanisms
of information diffusion by studying the adoption probabil-
ity versus social exposure and topical alignment. We analyze
separately the probability of adoption caused by internal and
external exposures. Among others, we show that the laws of
topical information diffusion apply both to internal and ex-
ternal information diffusion.

5.1 Topicality of memes vs adoption probability
We begin by measuring the distribution of social exposure
κ and topical alignment S(user, meme) for adoption and
exposure events of topical and non-topical memes (Fig-
ure 3). Prior works show that information cascades tend to
be shallow and have multiple seed adopters who learn about
the memes not from their friends, but from some external
sources (Goel, Watts, and Goldstein 2012). Here, we con-
ﬁrm that over 30% of hashtag adoptions and over 40% of
URL adoptions happened without a direct exposure through
follower links (see y-value at κ = 0 in Figures 3A-B). Fur-
thermore, we notice that the distribution of S(user, meme)
differs for topical and non-topical memes. In particular, the
distributions of topical alignment S(user, meme) are skewed
to higher values for topical memes than non-topical memes.
For instance, about 40% of topical hashtags get adopted
when the topical alignment is higher than 0.4, whereas only
2% of non-topical hashtags are adopted when the alignment
is higher than 0.4 (compare blue and red solid lines in Fig-
ure 3C). Similar difference is present between topical and
non-topical URLs (Figure 3D). This signiﬁes that topical
memes spread differently than non-topical memes.

Also, there exists a large difference between the cumula-
tive distributions of adoption and exposure events for topical

hashtags

A

URLs

B

hashtags

C

URLs

D

Figure 3: The cumulative distribution of: (A-B) social exposure κ and (C-D) topical alignment S(user, meme) of adoption events
(solid line) and exposure events (dashed line) of hashtags and URLs. The blue lines correspond to topical memes, whereas the
red lines correspond to non-topical memes. The ﬁlled area marks the difference between the distributions for adoption and
exposure events.

hashtags

A

URLs

B

hashtags

C

URLs

D

Figure 4: The adoption probability of hashtags and URLs as a function of: (A-B) social exposure κ, (C-D) topical alignment
S(user, meme) for topical (blue circles) and non-topical (red squares) memes. The error bars mark 95% conﬁdence intervals
(from BCA bootstrap).

memes (compare solid and dashed blue lines in Figure 3).
This difference can be quantiﬁed with Kolmogorov-Smirnov
distance between the cumulative distributions, which is
equivalent to the maximal vertical width of the correspond-
ing ﬁlled area in Figure 3. Because the K-S distance is high
for topical memes both for social exposure κ and topical
alignment S(user, meme), one can expect that both these
properties can act as important discriminators for predicting
whether an exposure event will lead to adoption or not. By
contrast, for non-topical memes the K-S distance between
the distributions of the topical alignment is almost zero (red
lines in Figures 3C-D). This signiﬁes that the topical align-
ment cannot predict the adoption of non-topical memes.

Next, we measure the probability of adoption via inter-
nal sources P i
a(κ), ﬁnding that it sharply increases with so-
cial exposure, reaching a maximum for hashtags and a maxi-
mum or a plateau for URLs (Figures 4A-B). The probability
decreases for higher number of exposures, because a user
who does not adopt a meme after being exposed to it once
or twice, will likely not adopt it, even if she is exposed to
it by other people. Interestingly, the adoption probability is
at least twice higher for non-topical memes than for topi-
cal memes. This indicates that non-topical memes are more
viral and reach larger audiences than topical memes (Weng
and Menczer 2014). In fact, non-topical hashtags have on av-
erage 934 adopters and topical hashtags have 500 adopters
(signiﬁcant difference, Mann-Whitney U test, p = 0.04). In
other words, non-topical memes spread broadly, while topi-

cal memes diffuse more narrowly.

Finally, we measure the adoption probability as a func-
tion of the topical alignment between user’s interests and the
meme, namely P i
a(S(user, meme)). We ﬁnd that the adop-
tion probability curve has different shapes depending on
meme’s topicality (Figures 4C-D). For topical memes, the
adoption probability increases remarkably steadily with the
topical alignment, both for hashtags and URLs. In stark con-
trast, the adoption probability remains ﬂat for non-topical
memes. To summarize, topical memes tend to diffuse nar-
rowly among users who are interested in them, while non-
topical memes spread broadly among all users.

5.2 Topicality of users vs adoption probability
Here, we describe the diffusion among users with topically
narrow and topically diverse interests, i.e., among users
with topical and non-topical interests (Figures 5 and 6).
Overall, we observe the same tendencies as for topical and
non-topical memes. However, these tendencies are less pro-
nounced for topical and non-topical users. For instance,
the adoption probability P i
a(S(user, meme)) is signiﬁcantly
higher for topical users than for non-topical users (Fig-
ures 6C-D); however, here the adoption probability for non-
topical users is not ﬂat, but instead increases gradually. Thus,
in the remainder of this study, we focus on the results for
topical and non-topical memes, because they show a cleaner
distinction between the characteristics of topical and non-
topical mechanisms of information diffusion.

048Socialexposureκ0246Pia×10−3048Socialexposureκ012Pia×10−30.00.40.8S(user,meme)012Pia×10−30.00.40.8S(user,meme)0246Pia×10−4TopicalNon-topicalhashtags

A

URLs

B

hashtags

C

URLs

D

Figure 5: The cumulative distribution of: (A-B) social exposure κ and (C-D) topical alignment S(user, meme) of adoption
events (line) and exposure events (dashed line) of hashtags and URLs. The blue lines correspond to topical users, whereas the
red lines correspond to non-topical users.

hashtags

A

URLs

B

hashtags

C

URLs

D

Figure 6: The adoption probability of hashtags and URLs as a function of: (A-B) social exposure κ, (C-D) topical alignment
S(user, meme) for topical (blue circles) and non-topical (red squares) users.

hashtags

URLs

A

B

Figure 7: Spreading persistence measured separately for top-
ical and non-topical memes, as well as for topical and non-
topical users. The errors bars are 95% conﬁdence intervals.

Finally, we note that multiple social exposures to a meme
boost topical diffusion more than non-topical diffusion. To
this end, the adoption probability P i
a(κ) drops with social
exposures more slowly for topical users than for non-topical
users (Figures 6A-B). This is much more evident for the
spread of topical hashtags, for which the adoption proba-
bility increases with social exposure and reaches a maxi-
mum at eight exposures, much more than two social expo-
sures needed to reach the maximum for non-topical hashtags
(Figure 4A). To our knowledge, it has not yet been observed
that the maximum of adoption probability (aggregating over
various hashtags) can be reached at such a high number of
social exposures. Using our deﬁnition of spreading persis-
tence, we ﬁnd that the diffusion of topical hashtags is sig-
niﬁcantly boosted by multiple exposures (compare left bars
of Figure 7A). One could expect this result, given the fact

that many of topical hashtags contain novel, unproven, or
controversial meaning. Furthermore, we ﬁnd that the spread
of URLs among users with topical interests is also signiﬁ-
cantly enhanced by multiple exposures (compare right bars
of Figure 7B). We note here that the other two cases are in-
signiﬁcant due to the noise in the measurements of the adop-
tion probability (evident in the Figure 6D). It is interesting
to see that the complex contagion effect is present not only
for topical memes, but also for users with topical interests.
A plausible interpretation is that experts or enthusiasts of a
given topical domain who decide to spread a certain infor-
mation risk their topical reputation by doing so. Thus, they
are more likely to diffuse information if multiple other peo-
ple in their social network did so already.

5.3 Seed adopters and the probability of external

adoption

Earlier in this section, we noted that a large fraction of users
adopt memes without being exposed to these memes by any
of their followees. We call such users seed adopters. Seed
adopters are the initiators of cascades propagating memes in
a social network. Importantly, seed adopters at the moment
of adoption are not inﬂuenced by social exposures internal
to Twitter, but instead are inﬂuenced by external exposures.
We measure the adoption probability for seed adopters
(described be Equation 6) by accounting only for adoption
and exposure events at κ = 0. As before, we split memes

048Socialexposureκ0123Pia×10−3048Socialexposureκ0123Pia×10−30.00.40.8S(user,meme)0123Pia×10−30.00.40.8S(user,meme)048Pia×10−4TopicalNon-topical0	  1	  2	  Memes	  Users	  Persistance	  Topical	  Non-­‐topical	  0	  0.5	  1	  1.5	  Memes	  Users	  Persistance	  Topical	  Non-­‐topical	  into topical and non-topical. Essentially, we obtain the same
shapes of the adoption probability curve for seed adopters as
for all adopters (compare Figures 8A-B against Figures 4C-
D). For topical memes the adoption probability increases
with the topical alignment, whereas for non-topical memes
it stays nearly constant. We present two explanations of this
ﬁnding. First, a seed adopter may have stumbled on the
meme through her sources external to Twitter, which likely
are also homophilous and topically similar to that adopter.
Second, the user may have actively searched for the memes
that are topically aligned with her interests via search or
by browsing proﬁles of other users or co-appearing hash-
tags. Note that this type of exposure can be also considered
as external, because it happens via methods external to the
follower network of Twitter; essentially, this is how we de-
ﬁne external exposures in this study. Finally, the compari-
son of ﬁgures reveals that the diffusion of URLs is nearly
twice more intense via external sources rather than internal
sources (the probability is twice higher in Figure 8B than in
Figure 4D). By contrast, the diffusion of hashtags has similar
intensity for external and internal sources. It is easy to inter-
pret this result, knowing that URLs have the global scope
of the Internet, whereas hashtags are speciﬁc to Twitter.6
Because of this distinction, the diffusion of URLs is about
twice more intense via external exposures than internal ex-
posures. Note that the diffusion of hashtags via “external”
sources may correspond to the exposures that happen within
Twitter via ways different that the follower network.

Furthermore, we ﬁnd that in the domain of topical in-
formation diffusion seed adopters are relatively more topi-
cally aligned with the adopted memes than other adopters.
To compute the relative alignment we divide the align-
ment averaged over adoption events by the alignment av-
eraged over exposure events, to account for homophily,
namely (cid:104)S(user, meme)(cid:105)a/(cid:104)S(user, meme)(cid:105)e. We ﬁnd that
the relative topical alignment is signiﬁcantly higher for seed
adopters than for other adopters, both for topical hashtags
and topical URLs (Figure 9). Intuitively, seed adopters are
more interested in the topic of a meme than other adopters,
similar to early adopters being more enthusiastic about an
innovation than other people (Rogers 1962). This sheds new
light on the reason why memes have multiple seed adopters
(Goel, Watts, and Goldstein 2012). Naturally, this effect is
not present for non-topical memes.

6 Discussion

The ﬁndings presented in this study create the following
schematic of topical information diffusion in Twitter. Top-
ical memes start to spread from the enthusiasts or experts of
the corresponding topic. Then, they diffuse narrowly to other
users whose interests are topically aligned with the topics of
the memes. Multiple exposures to the same meme tend to
boost topical information diffusion, as predicted by the the-
ory of complex contagion, since many topical memes con-
tain novel or controversial information. Restarts of informa-

6Twitter is the ﬁrst platform where hashtags emerged, initially
as a social convention in 2007, and then were implemented by Twit-
ter as a part of the system in 2009.

hashtags

A

URLs

B

Figure 8: The probability of external adoption (κ = 0) as
a function of topical alignment between a user and a meme
for topical (blue) and non-topical (red) memes. The error
bars mark 95% conﬁdence intervals.

hashtags

A

URLs

B

Figure 9: The relative topical alignment for seed and other
adopters. The error bars are 99% conﬁdence intervals.

tion cascades are frequent and are initiated by seed adopters
who tend to be relatively more topically aligned with the
given information than other adopters. Overall, we have
shown that topical information diffusion differs from non-
topical information diffusion in several meaningful ways.

Our work explores the gap between the studies of infor-
mation diffusion and recommender systems by showing that
users even without personalized recommendations adopt in-
formation that is topically related to them. Clearly, recom-
mender systems may strengthen or weaken the natural hu-
man tendency to spread topically aligned information. How
recommender system affect information diffusion? Could
we deﬁne a recommender system that facilitates informa-
tion diffusion without causing a ﬁltering bubble? This is a
set of questions that could be addressed in future studies.
Furthermore, in this study, rather than proposing and train-
ing a supervised model predicting information diffusion, we
use a state-of-the-art unsupervised topic modeling method
and analyze the impact of topicality on information diffu-
sion independently. As such, our results provide an empiri-
cal lower estimate of the impact of topicality on diffusion.
Future studies could propose a topic model merged with a
diffusion model as an effective recommender system.

To conclude, we note that information diffusion is a fun-
damental building block of many collective processes hap-
pening in social networks, e.g., viral marketing, spreading of
political movements and innovation, and opinion formation.
Thus, our ﬁndings have wide implications for understand-
ing, predicting, and controlling such processes.

0.00.40.8S(user,meme)0123Pea×10−30.00.40.8S(user,meme)0.00.81.6Pea×10−30	  2	  4	  6	  8	  10	  Topical	  Non-­‐topical	  Seeds	  Other	  0	  2	  4	  6	  Topical	  Non-­‐topical	  Seeds	  Other	  Acknowledgments
We thank Komal Agrawal for her initial work on this project,
Robert West for his valuable suggestions, Vlad Niculae for
his insights into the classiﬁcation problem, and Vlad Nic-
ulae, Manuel Gomez-Rodriguez, and Juhi Kulshrestha for
their feedback on early versions of this study. Finally, we
thank the anonymous reviewers for helping to improve this
work. Also, we acknowledge the support of project IMPECS
“Understanding, Leveraging and Deploying Online Social
Networks”.

References

[Backstrom et al. 2006] Backstrom, L.; Huttenlocher, D.;
Kleinberg, J.; and Lan, X. 2006. Group formation in large
In Proc. 12th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf.
social networks.
Knowl. Discov. data Min. - KDD ’06, 44. New York, New
York, USA: ACM Press.
[Bakshy et al. 2012] Bakshy, E.; Rosenn, I.; Marlow, C.; and
Adamic, L. 2012. The role of social networks in information
diffusion. In Proc. 21st Int. Conf. World Wide Web - WWW
’12, 519. New York, New York, USA: ACM Press.
[Barbieri, Bonchi, and Manco 2012] Barbieri, N.; Bonchi,
F.; and Manco, G. 2012. Topic-Aware Social Inﬂuence
Propagation Models. 2012 IEEE 12th Int. Conf. Data Min.
81–90.
[Bi et al. 2014] Bi, B.; Tian, Y.; Sismanis, Y.; Balmin, A.;
and Cho, J. 2014. Scalable topic-speciﬁc inﬂuence anal-
ysis on microblogs. Proc. 7th ACM Int. Conf. Web search
data Min. - WSDM ’14 513–522.
[Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003] Blei, D.; Ng, A.; and Jordan, M.
2003. Latent Dirichlet Allocation. J. Mach. Learn. Res.
[Burgner, Jamieson, and Blackwell 2006] Burgner,
D.;
Jamieson, S. E.; and Blackwell, J. M.
2006. Genetic
susceptibility to infectious diseases: big is beautiful, but will
bigger be even better? Lancet Infect. Dis. 6(10):653–663.
[Centola and Macy 2007] Centola, D., and Macy, M. 2007.
Complex Contagions and the Weakness of Long Ties. Am.
J. Sociol. 113(3):702–734.
[Centola 2010] Centola, D. 2010. The Spread of Behavior
in an Online Social Network Experiment. Science (80-. ).
329(5996):1194–1197.
[Cha et al. 2010] Cha, M.; Haddadi, H.; Benevenuto, F.; and
Gummadi, K. P. 2010. Measuring user inﬂuence in twitter:
The million follower fallacy. In Proc. ICWSM, 10–17.
[Cosley, Huttenlocher, and Kleinberg 2010] Cosley, D.; Hut-
tenlocher, D.; and Kleinberg, J. 2010. Sequential Inﬂuence
Models in Social Networks. ICWSM ’10 Proc. 4th Int. AAAI
Conf. Weblogs Soc. Media 26–33.
[Crandall et al. 2008] Crandall, D.; Cosley, D.; Huttenlocher,
D.; Kleinberg, J.; and Suri, S. 2008. Feedback effects be-
tween similarity and social inﬂuence in online communities.
Proceeding 14th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov.
data Min. - KDD 08 160.
[Du et al. 2013] Du, N.; Song, L.; Woo, H.; and Zha, H.
2013. Uncover Topic-Sensitive Information Diffusion Net-
works. In AISTATS’13, volume 31, 229–237.

[Goel, Watts, and Goldstein 2012] Goel, S.; Watts, D. J.; and
Goldstein, D. G. 2012. The structure of online diffusion
In Proc. 13th ACM Conf. Electron. Commer. -
networks.
EC ’12, volume 1, 623. New York, New York, USA: ACM
Press.
[Gomez-Rodriguez, Gummadi, and Sch¨olkopf 2014]
Gomez-Rodriguez, M.; Gummadi, K.; and Sch¨olkopf, B.
2014. Quantifying Information Overload in Social Media
and its Impact on Social Contagions. In ICWSM ’14 Proc.
8th Int. AAAI Conf. Weblogs Soc. Media.
[Granovetter 1978] Granovetter, M. 1978. Threshold Models
of Collective Behavior. Am. J. Sociol. 83(6):1420–1443.
[Holley and Liggett 1975] Holley, R. A., and Liggett, T. M.
1975. Ergodic theorems for weakly interacting inﬁnite sys-
tems and the voter model. Ann. Probab. 643–663.
[Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003] Kempe, D.; Klein-
berg, J.; and Tardos, ´E. 2003. Maximizing the spread of
In Proc. ninth ACM
inﬂuence through a social network.
SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. data Min. - KDD ’03,
137. New York, New York, USA: ACM Press.
[Kosinski, Stillwell, and Graepel 2013] Kosinski, M.; Still-
well, D.; and Graepel, T.
2013. Private traits and at-
tributes are predictable from digital records of human be-
havior. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2–5.
[Leskovec, Adamic, and Huberman 2007] Leskovec,
Adamic, L. A.; and Huberman, B. B. A.
Dynamics of Viral Marketing. ACM Trans. Web 1(1).
[Ma, Sun, and Cong 2013] Ma, Z.; Sun, A.; and Cong, G.
2013. On predicting the popularity of newly emerging hash-
tags in Twitter. J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol. 64(7):1399–
1410.
[McCallum 2002] McCallum, A. K. 2002. MALLET: A Ma-
chine Learning for Language Toolkit.
[Nakatani 2012] Nakatani, S. 2012. Language Detection
with Inﬁnity Gram.
[Owoputi et al. 2013] Owoputi, O.; O’Connor, B.; Dyer, C.;
Gimpel, K.; Schneider, N.; and Smith, N. A. 2013. Improved
Part-of-Speech Tagging for Online Conversational Text with
Word Clusters. In Proc. NAACL-HLT 2013.
[Ricci, Rokach, and Shapira 2011] Ricci, F.; Rokach, L.; and
Introduction to Recommender Systems
Shapira, B. 2011.
Handbook. Boston, MA: Springer US.
[Rogers 1962] Rogers, E. M. 1962. Diffusion of innovations.
Simon and Schuster.
[Romero, Meeder, and Kleinberg 2011] Romero, D. M.;
Meeder, B.; and Kleinberg, J. 2011. Differences in the
mechanics of information diffusion across topics. In Proc.
20th Int. Conf. World wide web - WWW ’11, 695. New
York, New York, USA: ACM Press.
[Strang and Soule 1998] Strang, D., and Soule, S. A. 1998.
Diffusion in organizations and social movements: From hy-
brid corn to poison pills. Annu. Rev. Sociol. 265–290.
[Weng and Menczer 2014] Weng, L., and Menczer, F. 2014.
Topicality and Social Impact: Diverse Messages but Focused
Messengers. 9.

J.;
2007. The

[Weng et al. 2010] Weng, J.; Lim, E.-p.; Jiang, J.; and He,
Q. 2010. TwitterRank: ﬁnding topic-sensitive inﬂuential
twitterers. In Proc. third ACM Int. Conf. Web search data
Min. - WSDM ’10, 261. New York, New York, USA: ACM
Press.
[Yang et al. 2012] Yang, L.; Sun, T.; Zhang, M.; and Mei, Q.
2012. We Know What @You #Tag: Does the Dual Role Af-
fect Hashtag Adoption? In Proc. 21st Int. Conf. World Wide
Web, WWW ’12, 261–270. New York, NY, USA: ACM.
[Yuan et al. 2016] Yuan, N. J.; Zhong, Y.; Zhang, F.; Xie, X.;
Lin, C.-y.; and Rui, Y. 2016. Who Will Reply to/Retweet
This Tweet?: The Dynamics of Intimacy from Online So-
cial Interactions. In Proc. Ninth ACM Int. Conf. Web Search
Data Min. - WSDM ’16, 3–12. New York, New York, USA:
ACM Press.

