Fermion Parity Flips and Majorana Bound States at twist defects in Superconducting

Fractional Topological Phases

Mayukh Nilay Khan,1 Jeﬀrey C. Y. Teo,2 Taylor L. Hughes,1 and Smitha Vishveshwara1

1Department of Physics and Institute of Condensed Matter Theory,

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, IL 61801, USA

2Department of Physics, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904 USA

In this paper we consider a layered heterostructure of an Abelian topologically ordered state (TO),
such as a fractional Chern insulator/quantum Hall state with an s-wave superconductor in order
to explore the existence of non-Abelian defects. In order to uncover such defects we must augment
the original TO by a Z2 gauge theory sector coming from the s-wave SC. We ﬁrst determine the
extended TO for a wide variety of fractional quantum Hall or fractional Chern insulator heterostruc-
tures. We prove the existence of a general anyon permutation symmetry (AS) that exists in any
fermionic Abelian TO state in contact with an s-wave superconductor. Physically this permutation
corresponds to adding a fermion to an odd ﬂux vortices (in units of h/2e) as they travel around the
associated topological (twist) defect. As such, we call it a fermion parity ﬂip AS. We consider twist
defects which mutate anyons according to the fermion parity ﬂip symmetry and show that they can
be realized at domain walls between distinct gapped edges or interfaces of the TO superconducting
state. We analyze the properties of such defects and show that fermion parity ﬂip twist defects are
always associated with Majorana zero modes. Our formalism also reproduces known results such
as Majorana/parafermionic bound states at superconducting domain walls of topological/Fractional
Chern insulators when twist defects are constructed based on charge conjugation symmetry. Fi-
nally, we brieﬂy describe more exotic twist liquid phases obtained by gauging the AS where the
twist defects become deconﬁned anyonic excitations.

I.

INTRODUCTION

the ﬁeld of TQC.

Recent years have seen an explosion of interest in solid-
state systems having excitations that obey non-Abelian
statistics. These non-Abelian excitations are sought-after
because of their potential for decoherence free topolog-
ical quantum computation (TQC)1–7. Early theoretical
proposals of non-Abelian zero excitations include quasi-
particles in the 5/2 Pfaﬃan quantum Hall state,8–12 half
quantum vortices in p + ip superconductors13,14, and the
boundary modes modes of a one-dimensional p-wave su-
perconducting wire15.

While the verdict is still out on the presence of these
excitations in the aforementioned systems, one focus of
the ﬁeld has moved to the study of semiclassical de-
fects having non-Abelian statistics in engineered super-
conducting heterostructures. Beginning with the seminal
work of Fu and Kane16, there has been an intense interest
in understanding the properties of layered heterostruc-
tures of topological (and some non-topological) phases
and proximity-coupled superconductors. In fact, one ex-
perimental realization of an eﬀective 1D Kitaev p-wave
wire has been proposed, and experimentally sought-after,
in spin-orbit coupled materials in superconducting prox-
imity to an s-wave superconductor.17–26. Additionally,
in higher dimensions, one of the seminal and promis-
ing proposals is the ability to realize non-Abelian Ma-
jorana bound states (MBS) localized on vortex defects
in a superconductor placed on the surface of a 3D time-
reversal invariant topological insulator (TI)16.
In gen-
eral, the ability to combine two simpler phases without
non-Abelian excitations, and as a result allow for defects
with non-Abelian statistics, is an important discovery for

Along the lines of the focus of our article, Fu and Kane
also proposed that MBS could appear in a 2D quantum
spin Hall insulator (QSH) at an edge where a domain
wall between superconductor and magnetic coatings is
formed27. Knowing this,
it was natural to generalize
these results to the study of proximity eﬀects in other
2D interacting topological phases. Remarkably, sev-
eral groups have predicted that similar domain walls in
fractional quantum Hall (FQHE)/Chern Insulator (FCI)
states can trap generalized MBS (or parafermions)28,29

with a quantum dimension d = (cid:112)2/ν that depends on

the underlying topological phase30–33. As an example, if
one takes a ν = 1/3 Laughlin state as a starting point,
then such domain-wall defects trap Z6 parafermions with
d =

√

6.

The main results of our article rely on our generaliza-
tion of these results to large classes of Abelian FQHE
states of fermions.
In particular, we show that for all
such FQHE states, proximity-induced non-Abelian zero
modes (NAZM) could give rise to just an ordinary MBS
instead of a more exotic parafermionic mode. The out-
come of which NAZM is stabilized depends on the de-
tails of the interactions near the defect. Hence, even
though one may optimistically hope for parafermions,
non-universal interactions might drive a MBS to be sta-
bilized. This prediction is a consequence of a previously-
ignored anyonic symmetry transformation that exists in
every Abelian topological phase with local fermions. In
addition to this experimentally motivated prediction, we
also develop a theory that describes the interplay between
fermionic FQHE states and superconductivity (through
its connection with fermion parity symmetry) at an in-

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
4
1
 
 
]
l
e
-
r
t
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
7
2
4
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

creasingly exotic level, which will be discussed further
below.

A. Motivation for Our Approach

In parallel with current developments on proximity-
induced defects, a rich literature has developed on the
subject of general types of semiclassical defects in topo-
logical phases34–51, some examples being dislocations and
disclinations in lattice or bilayer/trilayer systems.
In
each case, the properties of the defects in question are
determined by the nature of the topological properties
of the bulk. However, often the structure of the defects
is uncovered from the edge properties since a defect can
be represented as a mass domain wall on a correspond-
ing gapped edge or a seam/interface that has been glued
back together. A defect forms when the edge or seam
is gapped out in two distinct ways, hence leading to a
domain wall with a possible NAZM. For example, on the
edge of the QSH insulator there exists a free, massless
Dirac fermion, and this can be gapped out via magnetic
or superconductor proximity coupling. An interface be-
tween the two gaps is exactly what was mentioned above,
and binds a MBS. Other topologically ordered phases will
have more general edge conformal ﬁeld theories (CFTs),
and the types of defects can be classiﬁed by the allowed
gapping terms of CFTs ( if they form a non-chiral edge),
or these CFTs combined with a time-reversed partner
(say at a seam or interface).

Some types of defects act to permute orbiting anyons
that exist in a parent topologically ordered state. We
will call these twist defects, and the associated discrete
permutation symmetry of the anyonic excitations of the
underlying topologically ordered (TO) phase we will call
an anyonic symmetry (AS). Semiclassical twist defects
are attached to branch cuts across which anyon labels
are acted upon by the action of the AS group. These
permutations exchange diﬀerent anyons, but leave their
fusion and statistical properties invariant. Interestingly,
due to their unusual nature, a twist defect traps a NAZM
at its core, and indeed the MBS discussed above can be
thought as sitting at the core of a twist defect.

Since it is usually the NAZM at the defect core that is
of interest for TQC, it is important to be able to iden-
tify their fusion properties, e.g., their quantum dimen-
sion. Recently, a wide variety of general techniques has
been developed to understand the nature of NAZM at
twist defects, without resorting to arguments based on
the edge CFT.43,45,47.
In particular, a clear algorithm
was developed:

TO media

AS group

−−−−−−→ Twist defects

−−−−−−−−−−→
Quantum dimension of NAZM at defect.

Fusion category

In this diagram we begin with some topologically ordered
phase and then identify the possible AS operations that
permute anyons. To each non-trivial permutation ele-
ment there corresponds (at least) one twist defect. If the

2

fusion structure of fusing a twist defect with other de-
fects (including ones similar to itself) can be calculated,
then the details of the NAZM core can be extracted. For
example, if a twist defect fuses with a defect of the same
type to give two anyons, each with quantum dimension
1, then a single twist defect will carry a NAZM with
quantum dimension

2, i.e., a MBS.

√

Gauged versions of these semiclassical defects, where
the defects are deconﬁned and become fully evolved
quasiparticles were also considered50,52–54. When decon-
ﬁned, the twist defects also generate a modular braiding
structure, not just a fusion structure as beﬁts semiclassi-
cal defects, thus enriching the original topological phase
by becoming genuine (non-Abelian) quantum excitations
of a new phase with enhanced topological order.

Before moving on to the summary of results, let us
make some comments about our approach in order to
avoid possible confusion. The goal of our article is to pre-
dict phenomena in FQHE/Superconductor heterostruc-
tures.
It is known that parafermionic NAZMs can ex-
ist in these systems. Interestingly, we will show that if
the FQHE has fermionic local quasiparticles then it can
also host just conventional MBS as well. Unfortunately,
since FQHE states are strongly interacting systems, de-
termining the nature of defect bound states is challeng-
ing, unlike the case of a non-interacting Chern insulator
which can be handled using single-particle exact diago-
nalization. Hence, in order to ﬁnd the properties of su-
perconducting proximity-induced bound states, we will
have to use a bit of an indirect method. Our method
essentially involves treating the superconductor itself as
a system with deconﬁned anyons55 (Z2 topological order
analogous to the toric code) and considering the inter-
play between those anyons (Z2 charges and ﬂuxes) and
the proximity coupled FQHE state. From here we will
show that this combination of both the Z2 and the FQHE
anyons has a new AS connected to fermion parity, which
directly corresponds to a twist defect having a MBS. We
also show that the general existence of a charge conjuga-
tion anyonic symmetry predicts the existence of the usual
parafermionic twist defects. In the end, our predictions
only rely on features available in ordinary superconduc-
tors when coupled to FQHE states. This is somewhat in
the same spirit as Refs. 56–58 where the authors gauge
a global symmetry to glean additional information about
the un-gauged, symmetry-protected theory. Here we end
up gauging a symmetry to learn about hidden twist de-
fect structure that still survives in the un-gauged theory.

Fermionic FQH

gauge Z2
−−−−−→ Extended bosonic TO
AS−−→ Twist defects

A side-eﬀect of this approach is that on the way to our
ﬁnal goal we will derive properties of some more exotic
topologically ordered states, which are of interest, but are
not immediately experimentally relevant. These results
include the study of gauging the Z2 fermion-parity sym-
metry of a wide variety of Abelian FQHE states, iden-

tifying the resulting AS operations of these gauged the-
ories, and then working out the anyon content of the
non-Abelian topologically ordered phase resulting from
gauging the AS (deconﬁning the twist defects).

B. Summary of main results

While there is a clear way to understand NAZM in TO
media using the technology of twist defects and anyonic
symmetries, a well deﬁned theory for twist defects in the
aforementioned superconducting TO heterostructures is
yet to be formulated. The excitations of the supercon-
ductor (vortices, quasi-particles) are not deconﬁned exci-
tations, and thus the premise on which the usual theory
of twist defects is based does not apply. Showing how one
can overcome this problem is one of the main objectives
of this paper. While there has been some progress to this
end in Ref. 43, we provide a more thorough way to treat
the problem by considering the full AS in a system with
topological order augmented by a Z2 gauge theory sector
coming from the superconductor. In fact, ignoring this
kind of extended TO due to the presence of the s-wave su-
perconductor obscures a particular AS group operation,
the fermion parity ﬂip, which is a generic anyonic symme-
try in fermionic systems, similar to charge conjugation.
In short, we provide a uniﬁed approach to understanding
twist defects in layered superconductor/TO heterostruc-
tures.

In particular, we focus on layered heterostructures
of a superconductor and an Abelian TO state with
local fermion excitations, e.g., the ν = 1/3 Laugh-
lin state formed in a 2D electron gas or fractional
Chern insulator. The superconductor can harbor con-
ﬁned defects/excitations including vortices, Bogoliubov
de-Gennes (BdG) quasiparticles, and their composites.
We determine the fusion structure of the anyon quasipar-
ticles (qps) with these conﬁned objects, and show that it
is identical to that of the original TO phase, but with
its Z2 fermion parity symmetry gauged (i.e., equivalent
to the phase with deconﬁned h/2e ﬂuxes of the super-
conductor). Crucially, we note that the nature of twist
defects in such heterostructures depends only on the fu-
sion structure (i.e., not braiding) of the qps and con-
ﬁned objects. Thus even though we will often use the
fermion parity gauged theory for our description of the
twist defects, the resulting properties hold true in the
original heterostructure with an ordinary (“un-gauged”)
superconductor. Throughout our article we develop the
theory of these fermion-parity gauged systems and their
extended TO. We give a ﬁeld theoretic description of this
procedure and several examples relevant to spin singlet
states, the Jain series at observed ﬁlling fractions, and
quantum Hall hierarchy states derived from ADE Lie
algebras59–63.

Given this theory with Z2-extended TO we can then
apply the usual twist defect formalism to this new the-
ory. As mentioned, one of our main results is that we

3

ﬁnd that any fermionic Abelian TO state with a su-
perconductor proximity eﬀect has a fermion parity ﬂip
anyon relabeling symmetry. To our knowledge this sym-
metry has been ignored to date. One manifestation of
this symmetry is in terms of a new class of twist defects
which can host MBS. We place this result in the con-
text of aforementioned previous work30–33 where defects
between superconducting and normal media in Laugh-
lin ν = 1/m states harbor Z2m parafermions. We show
that the parafermionic twist defects can also be gener-
ally understood in our formalism, but using another AS:
charge conjugation. Importantly, our results imply that
non-universal interaction terms near the defects can fa-
vor MBS over parafermions in the same heterostructure.
In other words, they may favor the fermion parity ﬂip
symmetry over charge conjugation. We explicitly con-
struct examples of such interaction terms in the case of
the ν = 1/3 state. We note that our results also hold for
Chern insulators, and even non-chiral TIs, even though
they are not TO. In particular Ref. 64 previously con-
sidered the fermion parity ﬂip symmetry for the CI and
QSH cases in detail. In some respects this paper may be
considered as a generalization of those results to inter-
acting systems.

The AS groups referred to above are global (but
unconventional65) symmetries of the system. The twist
defects act as ﬂuxes of an AS group which act on the
topological charge labels of the anyons (via an AS group
element), thus permuting them. One can gauge the AS,
thus deconﬁning the twist defects and leading to an ex-
otic non-Abelian state called a twist liquid. To complete
our discussion, we use the procedure outlined in Refs.
44, 52, and 53 to determine the structure of two result-
ing families of twist liquids derived from gauging either
the fermion parity ﬂip or charge conjugation symmetries
in any one-component Laughlin state.

Our paper is organized as follows. In section II we il-
lustrate our main results for systems with the same TO
as one-component fermionic Laughlin states. We deter-
mine the anyonic fusion structure that results from the
presence of a proximity-coupled superconductor, paying
close attention to the fact that the h/2e ﬂux vortex is not
deconﬁned in real superconductors. We then determine
the AS/twist defects of the heterostructure are eﬀectively
the same as that of the original theory but with gauged
fermion parity symmetry, where the h/2e vortex is de-
conﬁned. Focusing on the fermion parity ﬂip AS, we end
the section with a discussion of the corresponding twist
defects in these Laughlin states.

In Section III we construct a gauge theory where we
couple the Chern Simons action of a TO state with a
Z2 gauge theory of a dynamical superconductor and we
determine the properties of the resulting ﬁeld theory.
We enumerate some important physical properties and
consistency checks that this theory satisﬁes, and show
the calculation speciﬁcally for the Laughlin states; we
give many other examples in Appendix C. In Section
IV we show the existence of a fermion parity ﬂip any-

onic symmetry for any Abelian TO state having local
fermions. In Section V we consider a quasi-one dimen-
sional edge/interface of a TO state and show how this
AS can be actually realized at the gapped edge/interface
via backscattering terms. Section VI introduces twist de-
fects more systematically and computes the non-Abelian
quantum dimension and multichannel fusion rules for the
fermion parity ﬂip twist defect. Finally, we end with
Section VII which describes how to gauge the AS associ-
ated with the twist defects. There are several appendices
which explicitly show how to determine the fermion par-
ity gauged theory for a wide variety of fractional quantum
Hall hierarchy states, discuss issues of relevance of gap-
ping terms at the quasi-one dimensional edge/interface,
and provide alternative perspectives on the emergence of
the fermion parity gauged theory.

II. LAUGHLIN STATE IN PROXIMITY TO AN

S-WAVE SUPERCONDUCTOR

In this Section we provide an illustration of the meth-
ods and results of our article using the simplest set of
TO states, the one-component Laughlin states. We will
carry through the full program for these states (except
for gauging the AS which we do in Sec. VII) as a helpful
example to keep in mind when reading through the more
technical sections afterward.

Let us begin with the eﬀective theory of either a FQHE
2DEG or fractional Chern insulator (FCI) (with the same
TO as the Laughlin FQH state) at ﬁlling ν = 1
2n+1 . It
is described by the K-matrix K = 2n + 1, and a charge
vector t = 166 (for a review of the K-matrix formalism
see Appendix A). Laughlin’s argument dictates that the
fundamental quasiparticle excitation, which we denote by
E, is bound to an h/e ﬂux, and hence carries an electric
charge of e∗ = ν (in units of e)67,68. Its spin-exchange
statistics are given by hE = ν/2, or equivalently a sta-
tistical angle of δE = 2πhE = πν69, which in this case
can be determined purely from Aharonov-Bohm physics.
An electron can be written as the composite of 2n + 1 E
qps: ψ = E 2n+1. Additionally, since we are considering a
TO state built from local fermions, all qps braid trivially
around the electron.

Now let us add another component to our system by
considering the Laughlin state placed in proximity to an
s-wave superconductor (s-SC), e.g., by depositing a su-
perconductor on a 2DEG or FCI material. Since, for
simplicity, we are only considering an s-wave supercon-
ductor one might worry about the eﬀect of spin polar-
ization on the strength of a proximity eﬀect. To combat
this we must either consider something like engineered
domains with oppositely signed g-factors, as was recently
exploited in Refs. 30 to allow for a proximity eﬀect in
a 2DEG Laughlin state, or consider an FCI where the
Chern band degrees of freedom are spin. In both cases
an interface, or a pair of counter-propagating edge states,
can be designed such that it will contain the necessary

4

degrees of freedom to support an s-wave proximity ef-
fect. For simplicity we will usually consider the FCI case
as shown in Fig. 1.

Heuristically we can imagine that the presence of the
superconductor leads to an eﬀective additional fraction-
alization as there are “smaller” fundamental excitations
given by the h/2e vortex (henceforth referred to as m),
which carry a charge of only qm = e∗/2 = ν/2 (modulo
2). The vortex m braids around the electron ψ with a
phase of −1, thus an electron is no longer a local parti-
cle and can be topologically distinguished from the triv-
ial vacuum by its braiding with m. Thus the vacuum
consists of Cooper pairs of charge 2e, which form the
new local, and bosonic, particles. With this in mind,
the full qp content of the combined systems (modulo
local Cooper pairs) is generated by m and given by
1(≡ m8n+4), m, m2 ≡ E, m3, . . . , m8n+3. The Laughlin
qp E ≡ m2 and the electron ψ ≡ m4n+2.
We now have a theory with a well-deﬁned qp fusion
group Z8n+4; ma × mb = ma+b mod (8n+4), but we have
gotten a bit ahead of ourselves. In a real SC the h/2e
vortices are not strictly deconﬁned excitations and actu-
ally interact with each other, and thus do not have well
deﬁned exchange statistics. Hence, they cannot serve as
conventional anyons. However, the subset of qps gener-
ated by the h/e ﬂux (m2) E a ≡ m2a, a ∈ Z of the original
Laughlin state are still deconﬁned with well deﬁned ex-
change and braiding. Additionally, fusion between the
original qps and the vortices in the s-SC is also well-
deﬁned and, in fancier terms, we have a partially braided
fusion category. At this stage we could consider gaug-
ing the Z2 fermion parity symmetry that would allow for
a deconﬁned m qp, along with the other anyons of the
Z2 topological order. In this case we would have a full
braided fusion category and a new TO order would arise
described by the K-matrix Ksc = 8n + 4. Let us hold oﬀ
on doing this for now and we will discuss it in more detail
later.
Now, we search for permutations P of the full qp set
A = {1(≡ m8n+4), m, m2, . . . , m8n+3} such that the
map A → PA preserves the fusion algebra and the braid-
ing statistics (of the deconﬁned particles). As P pre-
serves fusion, and A is generated by m alone, then P
can be completely speciﬁed by its action on m. Hence,
without loss of generality, let Pm ≡ mp; p ∈ Z+. Fur-
ther, bijectivity of P (permutations are always bijec-
tive) requires that p and 8n + 4 are mutually prime, i.e.,
gcd(p, 8n + 4)=1. Thus, p is odd.

Now, let us consider the constraints imposed in order
to have invariance of the braiding statistics. We have
δE = π
2n+1 . We want
to impose the constraint:

2n+1 , and under P we ﬁnd δPE = p2π

δE = δPE (mod) 2π
=⇒ p2 = 1 (mod) 4n + 2
p is odd =⇒ p2 = 1(mod) 16n + 8

(1)

where the last line is the simpliﬁed form of the constraint.

We will give some examples of p satisfying this con-
straint below, but let us make some important com-
ments. Suppose that we were to treat m as a gen-
uine deconﬁned qp with well deﬁned exchange statis-
tics. Then using E = m2, the statistical phase of m
8n+4 =⇒ hm = πν/8. This is con-
is δm = πν/4 = π
sistent with the Abelian topological state Ksc = 8n + 4
mentioned above, with charge vector tsc = 2 (charge of
a Cooper pair), and with the same fusion group Z8n+4 of
our partially braided fusion theory. Importantly, we see
that the constraint (1) automatically ensures δm = δPm.
Thus, m → mp with p obeying (1) is an Anyonic Sym-
metry (AS) of the fully braided fusion category obtained
by deconﬁning the h/2e ﬂux vortices as well. This means
that the AS m → mp preserves the braiding of the qps
(in both the original theory and the new theory with h/2e
deconﬁned).70 We will discuss AS in greater detail in Sec.
V.

Let us mention one more important aside. The Gauss-
Milgram formula34,71 relates the chiral central charge c−
– a quantity that dictates the thermal Hall conductance
– to the statistics of the qps. Before adding the super-
conductor each Laughlin state has c− = 1. This same
relationship is also satisﬁed in the theory with the aug-
mented TO if we include the full set of 8n + 4 qps:

(cid:88)

8n+3(cid:88)

eiπc−/4 =

θa =

ei π

4

j2
2n+1 = eiπ/4

(2)

a

j=0

Thus, with gauged Z2 fermion parity symmetry, the SC-
FCI has an extended bosonic TO which can be described
by a U (1)-Chern-Simons theory at level 4n + 2 with
Ksc = 8n + 4. We also note that this theory ensures
that the electron ψ (qp vector 4n+2) always braids with
a phase of −1 around m (qp. vector 1), and the central
charge of the edge theory is unmodiﬁed.

Now let us consider some explicit solutions to Eq.
(1). Remarkably, Eq.
(1) is always satisﬁed irrespec-
tive of n for the two choices ma → m−a ≡ m8n+4−a or
ma → ma × ψa = ma+4n+2. Hence, these are quite
general anyonic symmetries, and physically they cor-
respond to charge conjugation and the aforementioned
fermion parity ﬂip symmetry respectively. i) Charge con-
jugation ma → m−a is well-known and transmutes qps
into quasiholes and vice-versa.
ii) On the other hand,
the fermion parity ﬂip symmetry is the main subject of
this paper, and corresponds to an even (odd) number of
fermions ψ = m4n+2 being pumped into a vortex with
even (odd) vorticity. For example, the action of the sym-
metry changes the local fermion parity of a single vortex
m, and since ψ2 = 1, the same is true for any m2p+1 for
integer p. Even-vorticity objects retain their fermion par-
ity during such a process. Also, since adding a fermion
twice does nothing (modulo a Cooper pair) this symme-
try generates a Z2 group.
iii) A third AS corresponds
to a composition of these symmetries and is also always
present in fermionic Laughlin states and corresponds to

ma →(cid:0)m4n+2+a(cid:1)−1

= m−(4n+2+a) ≡ m4n+2−a.

5

In particular, for the Laughlin ν = 1/3 state with
n = 1 the theory has 12 qps, all of which are generated by
m. These anyonic symmetries translate to i) m → m11
(charge conjugation), ii) m → m7(Fermion parity ﬂip),
and iii) m → m5 (composition of conjugation and parity
ﬂip) respectively. Since all qps are generated by m for
the Laughlin series, one can determine the action of the
AS on the rest of the qps from the relations above. We
caution that for a general Laughlin state with arbitrary n
there can be more anyonic symmetries which obey equa-
tion (1) than these three mentioned above. These addi-
tional AS are not generic and must be determined on a
case by case basis.

A. Description of defects in Laughlin states

In this subsection we will give a heuristic description
of the twist defects corresponding to the AS operations
mentioned above. For a more technical discussion see
Sec. VI. To develop intuition about the non-Abelian
nature of twist defects in our context, consider the ge-
ometry in Figure 1. A (blue) s-wave superconducting
substrate lies beneath the (green) FCI layer. Addition-
ally, there is a trench hollowed out in the FCI layer with
counter-propagating edge modes as shown by the grey
arrows.72 One can include backscattering terms between
the edges which correspond to tunneling terms across the
trench. The net eﬀect of these terms is to gap out the
edge modes, however, these tunneling terms can be such
that they permute the bulk anyon qps by the action of
an AS as they tunnel across the trench.34,35,39,43,45,47,48.
We will demonstrate this explicitly in Section V. The two
AS mentioned in the previous subsection, charge conju-
gation and fermion parity ﬂip, are shown in the diagram
1. The trench acts like a branch cut and the ends play
the role of twist defect cores (shown by the red stars).

We can argue for the quantum dimension of the NAZM
on a twist defect core as follows. The charge Q of the
superconducting trench is deﬁned modulo 2e. However,
Q can change during a qp tunneling process. First, let
us suppose the edge couplings are such that the trench
enacts the charge conjugation operation as qps tunnel
across. A single particle m tuneling across the trench
changes Q by 2qm = eν = e/(2n + 1) (recall that
m is the qp with the smallest charge in the system
qm = eν/2 = e
4n+2 ). Thus, it is possible for Q to change
in increments of e/(2n + 1) mod 2e. This leads to a
ground state degeneracy of 4n + 2 labelled by the diﬀer-
ent values of Q, 0,
ground state degeneracy can be attributed to the pres-
ence of the two NAZM at the ends of the trench which are
generalized Z4n+2 MBS/parafermion twist defects with
quantum dimension

2n+1 ,··· , 2e.. The increase in

4n + 2.

√

e

2n+1 ,

2e

On the other hand, we can let the edge couplings enact
the fermion parity ﬂip symmetry operation as qps tunnel
across. Now, however the charge of the trench can only
change in increments of e. Thus, there are just 2 ground

6
gets conjugated c = γ1 + iγ2 → γ1 − iγ2 = c†. Thus, the
change in fermion parity in the vortex is compensated
by the change in fermion parity encoded in the two MBS
twist defects at the ends of the trench. In fact, c → c†
encodes the change in total fermion parity of the super-
conducting trench and just reﬂects the addition/removal
of the electron from it, i.e., the switch in the value of Q
for the trench ground state.

We have now completed a thorough discussion of the
Laughlin states. For more examples of Abelian, fermionic
FQH states with gauged fermion parity we point the
reader to Appendix C. In the following sections we
present the general form of the theory beginning with
gauging fermion parity and then moving on to generic
AS and the associated twist defects.

III. GAUGING THE FERMION PARITY OF AN

ABELIAN TO STATE

In the previous section we have seen an important pat-

tern:

i) A Laughlin state in proximity to an s-wave super-
conductor has the same fusion structure as the more
exotic system with extended TO where the fermion
parity is gauged and the h/2e ﬂux vortices are de-
conﬁned.

ii) The twist defects associated to an anyonic symme-
try of the fermion parity gauged theory can also exist
in the original proximity-coupled Laughlin state sys-
tem.

Interestingly, this pattern applies for general Abelian
states built from local electrons.To show this, we will
ﬁrst develop the eﬀective topological ﬁeld theory for a
fermion parity gauged Abelian TO state. Similar anal-
ysis has been done to couple a fermionic state to a Z2
gauge ﬁeld to obtain a bosonic theory73, and in classify-
ing symmetry enriched phases65. After we have the ef-
fective theory for the gauged TO system, we will analyze
it to determine the AS and corresponding twist defects
that can appear in the ungaged theory, and hence are
relevant for experimental realizations of superconductor-
TO heterostructures.

A general Abelian TO state is described by the bulk

Chern Simons action

Lbulk =

µνλαIµ∂ναJλ − 1
2π

KIJ
4π
I, J = 1, 2,··· , N.

tI λµνAλ∂µαIν,

(3)

Here, t is the charge vector which determines how the ex-
ternal electromagnetic gauge ﬁeld A couples to the gauge
ﬁelds αI .

If we treat the s-SC as being TO55,74, then the h/2e
vortex m is deconﬁned. This represents the deconﬁned
phase of a Z2 gauge theory, and there are four distinct qp
sectors: 1 (the superconducting vacuum condensate), m

FIG. 1. (color online) Layered heterostructure of a Laughlin
state and an s-wave superconductor. Blue superconducting
substrate with green FCI layer. Counterpropagating edges on
the substrate are shown by the black arrows. A ﬂux vortex m
orbiting around the twist defect (red stars) gets mutated by
the anyon permutation symmetry of the system. The two AS
considered are shown schematically with the superconducting
trench behaving like a branch cut. MBS γ1 and γ2 at the
edges of the trench which realizes fermion parity ﬂip. When,
charge conjugation symmetry is realized the corresponding
bound states α1/2 are parafermionic.

states of the system which are labelled by Q = 0, e. This
implies the existence to two NAZMs at the ends of the
√
trench that are simply MBS with quantum dimension
2. To see this another way, let us consider dragging
m around one end of the trench. As m morphs into
m × ψ the ground state of the trench switches between
the two degenerate sectors and indicates a change in its
local fermion parity. This transition on the trench is nat-
urally accompanied by a level crossing among the Caroli-
de Gennes-Matricon bound states in the vortex core. In-
deed, this was veriﬁed numerically for a Chern insulator
with unit Chern number placed in contact with an s-wave
superconductor in Ref. 47.

From a simple analysis we can verify that the total
fermion parity of the system is conserved. To see this
let us consider the two MBS γ1 and γ2 located at the
two ends of the trench. Together, they form a complex
fermion c = γ1 + iγ2. As the h/2e ﬂux (m qp) is dragged
around γ2, the phase of the superconducting order pa-
rameter (bilinear in fermion operators) winds by 2π, and
hence the enclosed Majorana fermion picks up a phase
of π and changes sign: γ2 → −γ2. The fermion c now

(the bosonic h/2e vortex), ψ (the fermionic Bogoliubov-
de Gennes quasiparticle), and e an excited Caroli-de
Gennes-Matricon vortex state, e = m × ψ. The TO
is identical to the toric code model1, and is captured by
a two-component Chern-Simons theory with K matrix
Ks-sc = 2σx in the basis (a, b)T of U (1) gauge ﬁelds. The
corresponding topological part of the action takes the
form

Ls-sc =

1
π

µνλaµ∂νbλ

(4)

and m and e carry unit charge under b and a respec-
tively. In this basis of gauge ﬁelds, the charges carried by
e, m, ψ are (1, 0), (0, 1), and (1, 1) respectively. By itself,
this TO carries an electric-magnetic anyonic symmetry,
e ↔ m. It eﬀectively interchanges ﬂuxes with opposite
fermion parities, while keeping the BdG fermion ψ in-
variant. This permutation of the qp sectors leaves the
topological information–the spin and braiding statistics–
unchanged and, hence is an AS of the theory.

Now we can put the two pieces together to ﬁnd:
a ∧ db

a ∧ dαI +

Lsc =

αI ∧ dαJ − tI
2π

KIJ
4π

1
π

(5)

where A has now been replaced by the dynamical U (1)
gauge ﬁeld a, since we are treating the s-SC as having
dynamical gauge ﬂuctuations. Integrating out a leads to
the constraint (neglecting large gauge transformations)

2b = tI αI .

(6)

This constraint encodes the interplay between the super-
conducting ﬂux and the quantum Hall eﬀect; in partic-
ular, it is just an alternative statement of E = m2. To
see this we note that m2 carries a charge of 2 under b,
while the h/e ﬂux E is described by the charge vector t
in the basis of gauge ﬁelds α. Hence, we see that the
eﬀective Lagrangian of the fermion parity gauged theory
has precisely captured the fusion rule E = m2 that we
expect to hold true for any Abelian TO system. Fusion
for the fermion parity gauged theory is hence just the
original fusion theory of Eq. 3 augmented by the fusion
rule E = m2. Thus, the fusion structures for both the
fermion parity gauged system (which is fully braided) and
the original system plus the inclusion of the semiclassical
h/2e ﬂuxes (partially braided), are identical.

Thus, the main result of this Section is that the eﬀec-
tive theory is obtained via Eq. 5 with the constraint Eq.
6. Alternatively, the emergence of this new theory can be
understood using ideas of stable equivalence as we show
in Appendix B. Let us now comment on a number of
properties that our fermion parity gauged theory obeys
in the following subsection.

A. General Properties of the Gauged Theory

7
angle δE = πν. As our contraint implies, m2 = E in gen-
eral, and we have qm = ν/2 and δm = πν/4. Also, the
electron ψ should naturally obtain a -1 statistical phase
when it braids around an m.

Now let us consider the particle content of the gauged
theory. All qps in the original Abelian theory have quan-
tum dimension d = 1 by deﬁnition. Since the new qps
in the fermion parity gauged theory are formed by fu-
sion of m with the original excitations, then all qps in
the new theory also have d = 1, and hence the TO will
be Abelian. Using general results from Refs. 52 and 53
which relate the total quantum dimension of a system be-
fore and after a discrete symmetry is gauged we should
have that

Dgauged = D0|G|

topological phase determined as D = (cid:112)(cid:80)

(7)
where D denotes the total quantum dimension of the
i , D0 de-
notes the quantum dimension of the original theory, and
|G| is the order of the discrete symmetry group being
gauged. For our case |Z2| = 2 and d = 1 for all qps in
the original as well as the gauged theory. Hence, using
Eq. (7)

i d2

DSC = 2D0

di = 1∀i =⇒ |ASC| = 4|A0|

(8)
where A is the set of topologically distinct qps in the
theory. Thus, the total number of quasiparticles always
increases 4 fold.
In fact, we already saw this for the
Laughlin state in the previous section where the number
of qps increased from 2n + 1 to 8n + 4.

Also, we should ﬁnd that during the gauging process
the chiral central charge c− which determines the number
of chiral edge modes in the system should not change.

In summary,

eiθψ,m = −1;
δm = πν/4;

c− = c−,SC

qm = ν/2
|ASC| = 4|A0|

(9)

Let us see how these considerations hold for the Laughlin
states.

B. Laughlin States

Laughlin states at ﬁlling ν = 1
µνλαµ∂ναλ − 1
2π

L =

2n + 1

4π

2n+1 have the action

µνλAµ∂ναλ

before coupling to the s-SC. Here K = 2n + 1 and the
charge vector t = 1. When gauging the fermion parity
symmetry we need to ﬁnd the solution to Eq. (6). In this
1 component case this is simply 2b = α. Re-expressing
the theory in terms of b yields

Let us consider a state at ﬁlling ν. By Laughlin’s ar-
gument, the h/e ﬂux E has charge qE = ν and statistical

L =

8n + 4

4π

µνλbµ∂νbλ.

Thus the new state is characterized by Ksc = 8n + 4.
Using 2b = α, we eﬀectively have tsc = 2. The presence
of the superconductor implies that charges are conserved
modulo 2. Hence, the charge vector tsc is also deﬁned
modulo 2 and t the topological properties of the qps are
invariant under the addition of a charge 2e Cooper pair.

This theory satisﬁes all the constraints in III A:

δm = π/(8n + 4) = πν/4
c− = 1 (chiral central charge is preserved).

IV. FERMION PARITY FLIP ANYONIC

SYMMETRY IN A GENERAL ABELIAN STATE

Previously we have seen that the topologically ordered
phase of the s-SC when fermion parity is gauged has an
electromagnetic AS m ↔ m × ψ = e. A more general
version of this symmetry, which connects qps having dif-
ferent fermion parity, exists in a general fermionic TO
state in contact with an s-SC. We will now demonstrate
this.

For convenience let us deﬁne the vorticity of a qp x as
the charge of x under the gauge ﬁeld b. Thus, m has a
charge of 1, the h/e ﬂux has a charge of 2, and so on.
We will denote a qp x with vorticity p as xp. Physically,
the vorticity just counts the number of m excitations in
the qp. The general deﬁnition of the fermion parity ﬂip
anyonic symmetry is

xp → xp × ψp.

(10)
In particular, m → m × ψ, and since ψ2 ≡ 1, i.e., the
vacuum then

8

xy is deﬁned by the fusion rule x × y = N z

where N z
xyz.
For Abelian phases dz = 1 and N z
xy = 1 only when
z = x × y, otherwise it is 0. Thus for an Abelian sys-
tem this simpliﬁes to

Sx,y =

1
D

eiδxy

eiδxeiδy

.

(14)

To reduce clutter we will assume x has vorticity p and
y has vorticity q without explicitly indicating them via
subscripts. We note that vorticity is additive under fu-
sion and in the expressions below, θa,b is the braiding
phase of qp a around b. Under the fermion parity ﬂip
symmetry

(As x has vorticity p)

eiδPx = eiδxψp = eiδx (−1)peiθx,ψp
eiθx,ψp = eiθmp ,ψp = (−1)p2

= (−1)p

=⇒ eiδPx = eiδx (−1)p(−1)p = eiδx.
(15)

Thus the exchange statistics and hence the T matrix is
preserved. Proving invariance of braiding is now straight-
forward:

SPx,Py =

=

1
D
1
D

eiδPxPy
eiδPxeiδPy

=

1
D

eiδP(xy)
eiδPxeiδPy

eiδxy

eiδxeiδy

.

(16)

Thus, under very general conditions we have shown that
our fermion parity ﬂip symmetry is an AS. This is one
of the primary results of this article. Now that we have
such a symmetry we will try to use it to generate possible
twist defects.

xp →xp for even p
xp →xp × ψ for odd p.

(11)

V. REALIZING ANYON PERMUTATION AT A

GAPPED INTERFACE

To show this is an AS we need to analyze the braiding

phases, which we will do using the ribbon formula34.

eiδz =

=

= eiθz

xy eiδxeiδy

(12)

where eiθz
xy is the gauge-independent (2π) monodromy
phase between x and y with a ﬁxed overall fusion channel
z and δz is the exchange phase of qp z. Indeed, we will
show that the modular S and T matrices are left invariant
under fermion parity ﬂip symmetry in Eq. 11. The S
matrix can be written as

Sx,y =

1
D

N z
xy

eiδz

eiδx eiδy

dz

(13)

(cid:88)

z

In this section we brieﬂy review47,48,75,76 for complete-
ness how an anyon permutation symmetry can be real-
ized at the gapped interface between two edges of a TO
medium. This interface region is comprised of counter-
propagating edge states on both sides of the interface,
and tunneling processes across the interface. Since there
is a natural connection between the K-matrix bulk the-
ory and an edge theory, let us ﬁrst present how an AS
in Abelian TO states can be understood within the K-
matrix formalism, and then we will connect this back to
the physics at a quasi-1D interface. At that point we
will give an example that shows how the various diﬀer-
ent AS, including the fermion parity ﬂip, can be realized
in a ν = 1/3 state.

It is well known that the choice of a K-matrix that
describes an Abelian TO is not unique, but is only deter-
mined up to GL(N, Z) basis transformations. Thus, K →
W KW T W ∈ GL(N, Z)(| det W| = 1) where the quasi-
particles [l] ∈ ZN , are transformed to [W l], leaves the

9
only AS realizable is m → m−1 ≡ m11, corresponding
to W = −1. Thus, to realize the other two AS, we must
enlarge the K matrix to, e.g., 12 ⊕ σx as is appropriate
for bosonic states. Now we see that all the AS can be
realized, in particular

 7

12 −24
2 −3
8

1
−2 −3

 ; W5 =

 5 −12 12

1 −2
−1

3
3 −2



W7 =

(17)

(20)

physical content of the theory invariant. Braiding and ex-
change are determined by the K-matrix alone, and these
transformations must leave the topological properties of
the quasiparticles unchanged. Thus, Sa,b = SWa,W b,
δa = δW a.

The subset of all transformations W which leave the
K-matrix identically unchanged form the group of auto-
morphisms of the K matrix

Aut(K) =(cid:8)W ∈ GL(N ; Z) : W KW T = K(cid:9) .

Some W act trivially on the anyon labels a, i.e., they
preserve the anyon vector up to a local particle addition
of the form KZN . This set forms a normal subgroup
Inner(K) of inner automorphisms

Inner(K) =(cid:8)W0 ∈ Aut(K) : [W0a] = [a] = a + KZN(cid:9) .

(18)

Instead, we are interested in the non trivial anyon rela-
belings that represent anyonic symmetries. These form
the set of outer automorphisms

Outer(K) =

Aut(K)
Inner(K)

.

(19)

Thus, Outer(K) is the AS group of the Abelian topolog-
ical phase characterized by K.

Unfortunately, this classiﬁcation misses some possible
AS operations because we have ignored another equiva-
lence, i.e., stable equivalence48,76–78. Stable equivalence
is the statement that a K-matrix is equivalent to another
K-matrix if they diﬀer only by the addition of a trivial,
decoupled sector (one might argue about the deﬁnition
of “trivial”, but we will not worry about that for now).
Thus, while each element of Outer(K) represents a possi-
ble AS, it is not always suﬃcient to capture all of the AS
of a given set of anyons. This insuﬃciency is essentially
true because the braiding and exchange statistics θ and
δ that must be preserved by an AS are complex phases
and are only deﬁned modulo 2π. Thus, an AS only needs
to preserve the scaling dimension modulo integers.

Interestingly, it appears that given a particular AS, one
can ﬁnd a representative element for each AS as an outer
automorphism, but it sometimes becomes necessary to
consider an enlarged K-matrix which is stably equiva-
lent to the original one. In fact, one could argue from
the results of Ref. 77, although it has not been precisely
proven, that we need only add an additional 2 × 2 ma-
trix and consider K ⊕ σz or K ⊕ σx (corresponding to
adding topologically trivial fermionic or bosonic modes
to the system) to realize all anyonic symmetries P using
W matrices as outlined in equations (17),(19). With this
in mind, let us consider the ν = 1/3 Laughlin state repre-
sented by K=3. We have already seen that when placed
in proximity to an s-SC and deconﬁning the m qp, the
emergent TO phase is the bosonic state K = 12. We have
also discussed that this theory has 3 AS m → m5, m7,
or m11 respectively.
In the 1 component picture, the

realize m7 and m5 respectively. These non trivial outer
automorphisms are realized up to inner automorphisms,
thus, two possible realizations for m → m11 are

 −1 0

12
−1 −1 6
0 −1
0



−13

and

(21)

FIG. 2. (color online) Reproduced from Ref. 47. The term
LW gaps out counterpropagating edge modes and mutates qp
a to W a.

Now let us consider a one-dimensional interface be-
tween two identical TO states as in Figs. 1 and 2. The
realizations for the AS above are important because they
will enter our construction. There are counter propagat-
ing edge modes are represented via
Ltop
edge + Lbottom
I ∂tφσ(cid:48)
J +

tσ
I µν∂µφ σ

IJ ∂xφσ

edge =

K σσ(cid:48)

1
2π

1
4π

I Aν
(22)

where σ = 0, 1 = R, L labels right and left moving modes,
φR
I (φL
I ) are the boson ﬁelds living along the top (bottom)
edge, and K σσ(cid:48)

IJ = (−1)σδσσ(cid:48)

KIJ .

Corresponding to every element W of the AS group we

can write down a gapping term for the edge

I cos(cid:2)KIJ

(cid:0)φL

δLW = −gW

J + WJ(cid:48)J φR

(23)

J(cid:48)(cid:1)(cid:3) .

J and eiKIJ WJ(cid:48)J φR

This term represents local boson tunneling between
e−iKIJ φL
J(cid:48) during which an anyon a
transforms to W a as it crosses the interface (for a bulk
qp a the vertex operators on the left and right edges are
a = e−ia.φL
ψL
respectively in our con-
vention). The gapped interface is characterized by the
vacuum expectation value

a = eia.φR

and ψR

(cid:104)φL

I + WJI φR

J (cid:105) = 2π(K−1)IJ λJ ,

for λ ∈ ZN

(24)

or alternatively,

(cid:68)(cid:0)ψW a

R

(cid:1)†

(cid:69)

ψa
L

= (cid:104)e−i(a·φL+(W a)·φR)(cid:105) = e−2πiaT K−1λ.
(25)

This represents a transforming into W a across the inter-
face and picking up a crossing phase e−2πiaT K−1λ at the
interface due to the possible presence of a qp λ localized
at the defect. The ends of the interface mark the pres-
ence of a twist defect from which the branch cuts across
which qps transform emanate.

We can see that for our particular interest in the
fermion parity ﬂip symmetry there is no clear microscopic
representation of an anyon transformation by this sym-
metry unless we augment the K-matrix in a stably equiv-
alent way. This leaves many interesting possibilities open
for future studies of defects in stably equivalent theories.

VI. TWIST DEFECTS

Now that we have seen how we can represent our
fermion parity ﬂip symmetry in the K-matrix formalism
(at least for Laughlin states), we are ready to classify the
properties of the associated twist defects. Twist defects
are semiclassical defects which act as static ﬂuxes that
permute the anyon labels as they encircle the defect. In
contrast to the anyons, they are not dynamical excita-
tions of a quantum Hamiltonian (at least at this stage).
Twist defects are attached to physical branch cuts along
which anyon quasiparticles get permuted. The precise
location of the twist defects and branch cuts depend on
the microscopic details of the system in question. For
example, in Fig. 1, the twist defects reside at the ends of
the trench, and the gapped trench plays the role of the
branch cut. In other examples,35,39,41,45 twist defects lie
at the site of lattice dislocations and the branch cut is a
line of lattice mismatch. Our treatment in this section
will primarily focus on the eﬀective theory without wor-
rying about the microscopic details. A recent review79
covers many twist defect types and contains more math-
ematical details than this present article.
We saw in Sec. V that the action of an AS in N -
component Abelian systems can be expressed as an N×N
matrix W acting on the N -component vector of topolog-
ical charges of a qp a. (see Fig. 3(a)). In this section we
will be working mostly with fermion parity ﬂip symmetry,
(c.f., Eq. 10) as illustrated in Fig. 3(b).

From Eq. 25 we inferred that twist defects can be
decorated with anyon labels representing a qp localized
at the defect. These qps can be detected by a braiding
measurement, but not all qp attachments give diﬀerent
measurements. The intuition that defect species labels
are synonymous with the full set of qps. Let us consider
the Z2 fermion parity ﬂip symmetry for a Laughlin state
at ﬁlling
2n+1 . Now, the half-quantum ﬂux m must be
dragged twice around a defect before it can close in on
itself, this corresponds to the double loop Θλ
m where λ

1

10

(a)Twist defect σ with a

branch cut emanating from

it. A passing anyon a is

mutated to W a according to

an Anyonic Symmetry W .

(b) Fermion Parity Flip

symmetry acting on a qp. a
with vorticity p. p fermions

are pumped into it as it
crosses the branch cut.

FIG. 3. (a) General picture of the action of a twist defect (b)
Twist defect for fermion parity ﬂip anyonic symmetry.

is the anyon string attached to the twist defect (see Fig.
4(a)). However, it is easy to see that

Θλma

m = Θλ
= Θλ

m exp i (θm,ma + θmψ,ma )
m exp i (2θm,ma ) (−1)a
(−1)a

(cid:18) πia

(cid:19)

m exp

2n + 1

= Θλ

=⇒ Θλ

m = Θλm2n+1

m

(26)

so that a λ or λm2n+1 qp attached to the defect cannot
be topologically distinguished by the double loop Θm and
hence yield identical defect species.
Since the Laughlin qp E = m2 is invariant under the
AS, it does not mutate after a single cycle around the
defect and one can form the single loop ΩλE . This obeys

Ωλmb

E = ΩλE eiθmb ,m2 = ΩλE exp

.

(27)

(cid:18) 2πib

(cid:19)

4n + 2

The smallest b that leaves the single loop ΩE invariant is
4n + 2, which corresponds to the electron ψ = m4n+2.
The twist defect label λ is thus deﬁned up to an electron,
λψ ≡ λ in the case of the fermion parity gauged Laughlin
state at ﬁlling ν = 1/(2n + 1), described by K = 8n + 4.
Thus, we assign species labels µ = 0, 1,··· , 4n + 1 to the
twist defects, each species label identifying two qp labels
with diﬀering fermion parity.

σµ = σµ × ψ

σµ = σ0 × mµ = σ0 × mµψ

(28)

where σ0 indicates the bare defect.

In any Abelian TO state, the species labels can be
worked out for a twist defect45,47. The nature of a twist
defect leads to important constraints that must be satis-
ﬁed if a qp is to successfully fuse with the defect. This
constraint is shown in Fig. 4(b). Essentially, the twist
defect σ transforms an attached qp a to W a, hence it
must have an internal structure which allows it absorb
the diﬀerence. Hence, we can write this as

σ × λ = σ × (λ + (W − 1)a) ;∀a ∈ A; λ ∈ A.

(29)

(a) Double loop Θλ
m
measurement of the

species label associated
with the fermion parity

ﬂip AS in a Laughlin

state at ν = 1/(2n + 1).

(b) Self-consistency conditions

which determine the species labels

associated with an arbitrary AS

W .

FIG. 4. Diagrams used for determining defect species.

This interpretation of the twist defect having internal
structure provides a useful way to understand why twist
defects have quantum dimension d > 1. The allowed
defect species µ are classiﬁed by the quotient group

µ ∈

A

(W − 1)A

(30)

(see Ref. 53 for more details).

In the case of the fermion parity ﬂip symmetry we can

just calculate this to ﬁnd
(W − 1)ap =1 or ψ;

µ =

{1, ψ} .

11

FIG. 5. (color online) Twist defect conﬁguration and Wilson
loops W corresponding to fermion parity ﬂip. The algebra
generated by the Wilson loops determines the ground state
degeneracy in the presence of twist defects.

where θ(ap, bq) is the braiding phase of the qps ap and
bq. Thus, if both p and q are odd W(aodd)W(bodd) =
(−1)W(bodd)W(aodd).

Since the Wilson lines map the ground state (manifold)
onto itself, the states that span the ground state manifold
must form an irreducible representation of the Wilson
line algebra. The smallest representation of the above
algebra is 2 dimensional

W(aodd)|i(cid:105) = (−1)i |i(cid:105) , i ∈ [0, 1]
W(bodd)|i(cid:105) = |i + 1; mod 2(cid:105) .

(33)

erated by m. This follows because vorticity is addi-

The algebra generated by W(aodd) is essentially gen-
tive under fusion and hence ∀ W(aodd) ∃ W(aeven) :
W(aodd) = W(aeven × m). For 2n such twist defects
on a closed sphere there are n − 1 copies of the Wilson
line algebra. Hence, as n → ∞ we get the quantum
dimension dσ =

√

2.

A

for vorticity p even/odd

A quantum dimension larger than 1 is generally as-
sociated with multichannel fusion. To show this let us
consider Fig. 6. which involves the fusion of a defect as-

(31)

√

Hence we conclude that the number of defect species is
equal to the number of conjugacy classes [µ], i.e., |A|/2.
To precisely calculate the twist defect quantum dimen-
sions we will calculate the increase in ground state de-
generacy associated with a twist defect σ and hence infer
its quantum dimension dσ using methods borrowed from
Refs. 45 and 76. For example, for an MBS the expected
value of dσ is
2, and we hope to recover this from the
algebra of Wilson-loop observables.
In particular, con-
sider the twist defect conﬁguration in Fig. 5. There are
in general n independent branch cuts and 2n twist de-
fects at which the branch cuts terminate. We consider
the Wilson line algebra of W(ap) and W(bq), where the
subscripts p and q denote the vorticities of a and b re-
spectively

W(ap)W(bq) = W(bq)W(ap)

exp i [θ(ap, bq) − θ(ap, bq) + θ(ψp, bq)]
= W(bq)W(ap)(−1)pq

(32)

FIG. 6. (color online)Fusion of conjugate defects leading to
Abelian fusion channels. As we go farther away from the twist
defects ignoring the microscopic details, we just see the qp.
strings terminating at the site of defect fusion.

sociated with an anyonic symmetry operation W with its
conjugate defect W −1, so that the branch cuts can cancel
each other. Since fermion parity ﬂip is a Z2 symmetry,
the inverse defect is the same as the original defect. The

fusion outcome of a pair of conjugate defects must be
a trivial defect in the sense that there is no remaining
qp permutation. However, the overall fusion outcome
depends upon how qp strings are attached between the
defects, in eﬀect, taking into account the defect species.
Fig. 6 shows how the overall open string contributes
(1 − W )A to the defect fusion pair. As we zoom fur-
ther and further away from the defect pair and gradually
ignore the details of the action of the defects on the encir-
cling qps it seems as if the a string comes and terminates
at the defect. Thus, this represents an Abelian fusion
channel outcome.

To determine the possible fusion outcomes when we
fuse conjugate defects, we need to determine the distinct
quasiparticle strings that can be hung between the defect
pair. For example, consider Fig. 6 with the fermion par-
ity ﬂip AS. If the quasiparticle b has odd/even vorticity,
the outcome string a = (1−W )b is ψ or 1(vacuum). This
determines the outcomes for bare defects.
If there are
additional defect species, their fusion diﬀers by the cor-
responding attached qps that mutated the defect species
from the bare defect species. These attached qps need to
be fused into the outcome for the bare defect to ﬁnd the
result for non-trivial defect species. This is summarized
in the following fusion rules:

σ0 × σ0 = 1 + ψ
σµ × σν = µ × ν × (1 + ψ).

(34)

Thus, we see that the fusion is the same as that of non-
Abelian Ising defects, and the overall fusion always re-
sults in two possible outcomes with opposite fermion par-
ities. Also, as a useful check to see if all the possible
fusion channels have been accounted for, we note that
quantum dimension on both sides of Eq. 34 matches up,
i.e.,
2 = 1 + 1. As a check, we note that (34) is
independent from the ambiguity in the choices of defect
labels µ ≡ µ× ψ, ν ≡ ν × ψ because ψ × (1 + ψ) = 1 + ψ,
i.e., independent of which anyon we choose to act as a
species label.

2 × √

√

A. Charge Conjugation Defect

For completeness, we also reproduce some of the re-
sults for charge conjugation defects that were presented
in Refs. 30–33 in the context of a Laughlin state in prox-
imity so an s-SC. The resulting state after fermion parity
gauging is K = 8n+4, and we can work out the details of
the twist defects of the ungauged theory from this more
exotic emergent phase. A charge conjugation twist defect
acts as m → −m. Using Eq. 29, we ﬁnd for the defect
species the rule

σµ = σµ × m2

(35)

which implies that there are only two defect species, σ0
and σ1,

12

σ0 = σ0 × m2 = σ0 × m4 = σ0 × m6 ···
σ1 = σ0 × m =σ0 × m3 = σ0 × m5 ···

√

These twist defects have quantum dimension
and give rise to fusion rules

σ0 × σ0 = σ1 × σ1 = 1 + m2 + m4 ···

σ0 × σ1 = m + m3 + m5 + ···

4n + 2

(36)

We will use these results at the end of the next section
when we discuss gauging the charge-conjugation AS.

B. Experimental Consequences

√

4n + 2 =(cid:112)2/ν. In Laughlin state-s-SC het-

From this analysis we arrive at another main re-
sult of our work, i.e., the two general AS available in
fermionic FQH states give rise to very diﬀerent twist de-
fect NAZMs. For fermion parity ﬂip AS we always ﬁnd
MBS, and for charge conjugation, the NAZM depends
on the parent state. For the Laughlin states we recover
the family of parafermion NAZMs with quantum dimen-
sion dσ =
erostructures it is possible to ﬁnd both types of defects,
and which defects are stabilized depends on the local in-
teractions near the defect. As a proof of principle, we
show in Appendix D that it is possible to tune the inter-
actions for the ν = 1/3 Laughlin state such that MBS
are stabilized instead of a Z6 parafermion. Hence, it will
be interesting to see which NAZM appears in possible
experimental realizations.

VII. GAUGING THE ANYONIC SYMMETRY

We will now move on to investigate something more
theoretical in nature that is a natural extension of our
work so far. Until now we have treated an AS as a global,
discrete symmetry of the qp set A of a given topologi-
cal phase. The twist defects that we have identiﬁed are
semiclassical, static ﬂuxes that were put into the system
by hand. Gauging the AS promotes the twist defects
to deconﬁned quantum excitations of a new topological
phase, which is non-Abelian. We now move on to iden-
tifying the resulting set of topological qps after gauging
the AS. We will denote this phase as a twist liquid, and
such phases have been treated comprehensively recently
in Refs. 52 and 53. A treatment of the full structure of
twist liquids that can emerge from fermionic FQHE states
is beyond our scope. We have narrowed our focus on just
gauging the fermion parity ﬂip symmetry or the usual
charge-conjugation symmetry, and furthermore, we only
enumerate the emergent qp structure without deriving
the full braiding matrices and F-matrices of the resultant
braided fusion category. In this section we will review the

algorithm for gauging a conventional discrete symmetry
and an AS, and then we will enumerate the twist liquid
qps for gauging the fermion parity ﬂip symmetry and the
charge-conjugation symmetry for the Laughlin series.

Let us begin with a discussion of gauging a discrete
symmetry with a trivial background vacuum. We will
denote a discrete gauge theory in 2+1 dimensions based
on the group G as D(G); it is also called the quantum
double of G3,80–84. The excitations are called anyons and
are denoted by the 2-tuple

χ = ([W ], ρ) .

The ﬂux component [W ] is given by a conjugacy class
[W ] of an element W in G deﬁned as

[W ] = {W (cid:48) : W (cid:48) = N W N−1, N ∈ G}.

Given the ﬂux [W ], the second component gives an as-
sociated value of the charge which is labeled by the irre-
ducible representations ρ of the centralizer CG([W ])

CG([W ]) = {N ∈ G : N W = W N}.

Note that the deﬁnition of the centralizer is independent
(up to adjoint isomorphism) of which representative of
the conjugacy class [W ] is chosen. The allowed charged
components are thus characterized by an irreducible rep-
resentation ρ : CG([W ]) → U (Nρ). Enumerating all pos-
sible combinations of [W ] and ρ yields the full set of ﬂux,
charge, and dyonic qps of the deconﬁned phase of the
discrete G gauge theory.

Now, consider a more complicated scenario where we
have a parent Abelian topological state with an initial
quasiparticle set A and a discrete, global AS group G.
The anyon excitations of the G twist liquid obtained by
gauging the global AS group G are composites of the ﬂux
and charge of the gauged AS G and qps of the parent
Abelian theory; but there are requisite constraints that
must be satisﬁed by the composites. The twist liquid has
anyons χ which can be labeled using a 3-tuple

χ = ([W ], λλλ, ρ).

The ﬂux label [W ] is speciﬁes a conjugacy class of G.
Given W , a representative element of the conjugacy class
[W ], we form the set of defect species AW =
(W−1)A . λλλ is
an orbit of the anyon labels λ drawn from AW . Precisely,
λλλ is the CG([W ]) orbit in AW . Thus

A

λλλ = λ1 + λ2 + λ3 + ··· + λl, λi ∈ AW .

(37)

Thus, the elements in CG([W ]) can permute the elements
λi while keeping λλλ unchanged.
The charge component ρ is characterized by an Nρ di-
mensional, irreducible representation of a restricted cen-
tralizer of the ﬂux W and orbit λλλ Cλλλ

G([W ]).

G([W ]) = {N ∈ CG([W ]) : N λ1 = λ1}.
Cλλλ

(38)

13

One might worry that Eqs. 37 and 38 are dependent
on the choice of species label λ1, but diﬀerent choices
are related by adjoint isomorphisms and lead to identical
anyon content53.

While these mathematical deﬁnitions might seem a bit
opaque, they are simple to apply for our cases of interest.
Let us now use the above formalism to determine the
qp content of the gauged fermion-parity ﬂip or charge
conjugation theories when starting from a Laughlin state
at ν = 1/(2n + 1) with gauged fermion parity, i.e., the
theory ultimately described by K = 8n + 4 as described
in the main text.

A. Fermion parity ﬂip

The fermion parity ﬂip acts on the qp set as mp →
mp × ψp. As this is a Z2 symmetry, the AS group to
be gauged is G = Z2. This group has two conjugacy
classes: [1] (the trivial conjugacy class) and [σ] (the non-
trivial ﬂux/twist defect around which anyon labels get
permuted).
For the trivial ﬂux, [1], the species labels are taken as
orbits from the set A[1] = A = {1, m, m2,··· , m8n+3}.
The appropriate Z2 orbits of this set of qps can be sum-
marized as

Z2m2a = m2a; a ∈ [0, 1,··· , 4n + 1]

Z2(m2a+1 + m2a+1ψ) = (m2a+1 + m2a+1ψ); a ∈ [0,··· , 2n]

(39)

That is, even powers of m form an orbit by themselves,
and odd powers form an orbit with itself fused with a
fermion. For an Abelian group the centralizer of each
element is the whole group so the choice of ﬂux does not
restrict the possible charge representations. However, the
choice of species does restrict the charges and we have the
restricted centralizer subgroups

Cm2a
C (m2a+1+m2a+1ψ)

Z2

Z2

([1]) = Z2
([1]) = Z1

where by Z1 we mean the group containing only the iden-
tity. The group Z2 has two representations ρ+ and ρ−
which can be held by qps which are even powers of m,
whereas odd powers of m (that form orbits) cannot hold
any non-trivial charge.
For the non-trivial ﬂux sector [σ] there are 4n + 2
species labels λi = 0, 1, 2,··· , 4n + 1, where λi can im-
ply either mi or mi × ψ. Each λi is invariant under the
Z2 action and forms a Z2 orbit by itself. As such, the
restricted centralizer group is C iZ2

([σ]) = Z2.

The full set of qps, along with their quantum dimen-

sions are

(cid:0)[1], m2a, ρ+
(cid:1) ; d = 1
(cid:0)[1], m2a, ρ−(cid:1) ; d = 1
(cid:0)[1], m2a+1 + m2a+1ψ, ρ+

(cid:1) ; d = 2

(40)

√
2
√

2.

([σ], λi, ρ+) ; d =
([σ], λi, ρ−) ; d =
√
χ = 2

(cid:113)(cid:80)

χ d2

Adding up the total quantum dimension we ﬁnd D =
8n + 4, which is exactly what we expect
when a 2 fold symmetry is gauged in a topological phase
with initial quantum dimension

8n + 4.

√

This theory is non-Abelian as well since some qps have
d > 1. It can be identiﬁed with the tensor product theory

SO(N1)1 ⊗ SO(N2)1 ⊗ Z(2)

2n+1

(41)

for N1, N2 odd and N1 + N2 = 4n + 2.

Here the SO(N )1
is an Ising-like state with chi-
ral central charge c−(SO(N )1) = N/2.
It contains
anyons {1, ψ, σ}, where ψ is identiﬁed with one of the
fermions ([1], m4n+2, ρ±), and σ is identiﬁed with ei-
ther ([σ], λ0, ρ+) or ([σ], λ2n+1, ρ+). They have spins
hψ = −1/2 and hσ = N/16 respectively, and follow
the fusion rules σ × ψ = ψ and σ × σ = 1 + ψ. The
Z(2)
2n+1 state85,86 is Abelian with chiral central charge
It has qps {1 = E0, E1, . . . , E2n},
c−(Z(2)
where Ej is identiﬁed with ([1], m4j, ρ+). They have
spins hEj = 2j2/(2n + 1) and follow the fusion rules
Ei × Ej = Ei+j mod 2n+1.

2n+1) = −2n.

Let us compare this result to what we would ﬁnd by

gauging charge-conjugation symmetry.

B. Charge conjugation symmetry

The charge conjugation symmetry acts as ma → m−a.
Again, this discrete symmetry group is Z2. For the trivial
ﬂux sector [1] the orbits constructed from the full anyon

set A are(cid:8)1,{ma, m−a}, ψ(cid:9) ; a ∈ [1, 2,··· , 4n + 1]

(42)

The restricted centralizer groups are

C

{1}
Z2
{ma+m−a}
Z2

C

{ψ}
Z2

([1]) = Z2

([1]) = C
([1]) = Z1; a ∈ [1, 2,··· , 4n + 1].

For the ﬂux component [σ], the relevant species labels

Hence the lone qp orbits can hold either charge, while
the two-particle orbits can only hold trivial charge.
(σ−1)A = {0, 1}. The species 0 can represent
are Aσ = A
any qp m2a while 1 could be any qp labelled by m2a+1
(c.f., Sec. VI A). The restricted centralizer groups are

{0/1}
Z2

C

([σ]) = Z2.

Hence, the full set of twist liquid qps are

14

([1], 1, ρ+) ; ([1], 1, ρ−) ; d = 1
([1], ψ, ρ+) ; ([1], ψ, ρ−) ; d = 1

(cid:0)[1], ma + m−a, ρ+(cid:1) ; a = 1, 2,··· , 4n + 1; d = 2

([σ], i, ρ+) ; ([σ], i, ρ−) ; i ∈ [0, 1]; d =

4n + 2.

(43)

√

√

This agrees with the conformal ﬁeld theory content of
the U (1)4n+2/Z2 orbifold.87,88 Again, the net quantum
8n + 4 because charge conjugation is also
dimension is 2
a Z2 symmetry. However, the net anyon content of the
twist liquid is very diﬀerent as we now see non-Abelian
objects with much higher quantum dimensions.

VIII. CONCLUSIONS

In this paper we have provided a framework from
which the exotic non-Abelian zero modes at domain walls
in superconductor-topological phase heterostructures can
be understood. The main idea is the consideration of an
extended TO due to coupling of the original state with a
(somewhat artiﬁcial) Z2 gauge theory from the s-wave su-
perconductor. This new theory reveals the presence of an
extra, general anyonic symmetry, the fermion parity ﬂip
symmetry which had been overlooked beforehand. The
fermion parity ﬂip symmetry reveals itself in the form
of MBS at corresponding twist defects. Remarkably, we
can extract hidden information about the structures of
defects in the experimentally accessible un-gauged the-
ory by appealing to the fermion parity gauged version.
As already remarked, this is similar to the recent trend
of investigating ungauged SPT states by looking at their
gauged versions56–58. Finally, we determined the struc-
ture of two families of exotic non-Abelian twist liquids
obtained by deconﬁning the twist defects and promoting
them to genuine quantum excitations of the system.

These results

shed new light on predictions of
parafermions in superconductor/FQH heterostructures
since we have shown that experimental geometries where
parafermions can exist might harbor MBS instead. The
outcome depends on the details of the interactions at
the interface, and we have explicitly constructed cases
where one non-Abelian object or the other can be sta-
bilized. Some details about the s-wave proximity eﬀect
have been mostly ignored since our treatment has been
at the level of gauge ﬁelds. However, gapping out an
edge and realizing the fermion parity ﬂip symmetry as in
Eq. 23 requires inducing a proximity eﬀect in oppositely
propagating edges at the trench using an s-wave super-
conductor. Hence, this requires them to have opposite
spin polarization and it is unlikely that such TO will
arise in the case of spin-polarized Laughlin states. Such
twist defects should be observable in fractional Chern in-
sulators where counter-propagating edges have opposite
spin polarization, or in FQH 2DEGs with carefully engi-
neered g-factors. We optimistically note that the fermion

parity ﬂip symmetry is viable in all the geometries pro-
posed to date in superconducting heterostructures where
parafermions have been predicted to exist due to charge
conjugation symmetry.30–33 The remaining open question
is then a determination of experimentally viable methods
of tuning forward scattering terms so that diﬀerent non-
Abelian modes are favored over each other.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to thank V. Chua for discussions. We
thank the National Science Foundation under the grants
DMR 1351895-CAR (TLH) and DMR 0644022-CAR
(SV) for support.

Appendix A: K-Matrix theory

The K-matrix formalism66,89 provides a concise way of
describing the eﬀective ﬁeld theory of any Abelian TO
state using 2+1 D Chern Simons (CS) theory. The bulk
action takes the form

Lbulk =

µνλαIµ∂ναJλ − 1
2π

KIJ
4π
I, J = 1, 2,··· , N.

tI λµνAλ∂µαIν,

(A1)

Here we have assumed that there are N U (1) gauge ﬁelds
αI , thus the K matrix is N × N, and the gauge group
is U (1)N . The K matrix is symmetric and has integral
entries. The charge vector t ∈ ZN details how the gauge
ﬁelds α couple to the external electromagnetic ﬁeld A.

In this formalism the quasiparticle excitations carry
integral gauge charge lI under the gauge ﬁelds αI . Thus,
we will describe a quasiparticle by an integral vector l
in the lattice Γ = ZN . The number of topologically
distinct quasiparticles in the theory is the same as the
ground state degeneracy on a torus and is |detK| (since
the theory is Abelian). The local particles in the theory
braid trivially around all other excitations, and belong to
the lattice Γ∗ = KZN . The fusion of two quasiparticles
in this theory amounts to adding lattice vectors. Thus,
a × b = a + b. Quasiparticles (qps) are considered to be
equivalent if they diﬀer only by the addition/fusion of
local quasiparticles:

15

matrices. By deﬁnition Sa,b = 1√
|A| eiθa,b, where θa,b
is the braiding phase of a around b, and T is speciﬁed
by the exchange phase δ of the qps: Ta,b = eiδa δa,b =
e2πihaδa,b, where ha is the topological spin of the qp a
(and which corresponds to the scaling dimension of the
corresponding primary ﬁeld in the edge conformal ﬁeld
theory).

The electromagnetic charge of the quasiparticle l is

ql = lT K−1t

(in units of e).

(A3)

The ﬁlling fraction takes the form
ν = tT K−1t.

The expression for the braiding angle θl,m is

θl,m = 2πlT K−1m

while the exchange phase of the quasiparticle l is

δl = πlT K−1l.

(A4)

(A5)

(A6)

We note that there are diﬀerent K matrices which en-
code the same information. These diﬀerent K matrices
are deﬁned by a GL(N, Z) transformations of the original
K matrix. Thus,
K → W KW T ; t → W t W ∈ GL(N, Z), |detW| = 1
(A7)

leaves the physical content of the theory in Eq.
(A1)
invariant and is simply a basis change implemented by
redeﬁning the U (1) gauge ﬁelds α → W T α.

Finally, a natural edge theory corresponding to Eq.

(A1) has Lagrangian density

Ledge =

KIJ
4π

∂xφI ∂tφJ +

µνtI ∂µφI Aν−

e
2π

VIJ ∂xφI ∂xφJ .

(A8)

89 and VIJ is a non-universal positive-
Here, ∂µφI = αIµ
deﬁnite “velocity” matrix which encodes
forward-
scattering interactions between the edges. Corresponding
to every anyon a in the bulk there is a vertex operator
eia.φ in the edge conformal ﬁeld theory.

a ≡ a + KZN .

(A2)

Appendix B: Gauging Fermion Parity in Laughlin
States Coupled to Superconductors, an approach

We denote an equivalence class of qps by the symbol [a].
Thus, distinct qps are just the diﬀerent equivalence
ZN
classes Γ/Γ∗ =
KZN . Equivalent qps have the same topo-
logical characteristics (exchange and braiding statistics),
but might not share some non-topological characteristics
(such as charge, which exists due to symmetry not topol-
ogy).
The topological character of the theory is speciﬁed by
the set A of distinct qps, and their braiding and exchange
properties, which are contained in the modular S and T

inspired by stable equivalence

In this section we provide an alternative interpretation
of the emergence of Ksc = 8n + 4 state from a Laughlin
2n+1 using ideas of stable equivalence.77.
state at ﬁlling
From Eq. 5, we have the relevant action for a Laughlin
state in contact with a topological s-wave superconduc-
tor:

1

L =

2n + 1

4π

α ∧ dα − 1
2π

a ∧ dα +

a ∧ db.

1
π

(B1)

16

Using Sylvester’s law of inertia, we see that since W is
invertible, the chirality of the system (n+ − n−), i.e., the
diﬀerence between the positive and negative eigenvalues
of K, is preserved under the gauging process. Hence, the
chiral central charge c− is preserved as expected.

The number of quasiparticles in the system is given
by det(K). Since, det(W ) = 2 and Ksc = W KW T ,
det(Ksc) = 4 det(K). Thus, as expected from Eq. (8),
and the fact that the resulting theory is Abelian, the
number of qps have increased by a factor of 4. The new
charge vector (of the now local bosonic state), is

(C4)

tsc = W t
tsc = (2, 0,··· , 0)T .
(cid:19)

(cid:18)k0 kT

Following Haldane75, we rewrite the K matrix of the
, where K is an N×N
fermionic FQHE as K =
matrix, k is an N − 1 dimensional column vector, and K0
is an (N − 1)× (N − 1) matrix. The charge vector t takes
the form (t0, 0,··· , 0)T . Hence for the gauged system we
have

k K0

(cid:18)4k0 2kT

(cid:19)
tsc = W t = (2t0, 0,··· , 0)T .

2k K0

;

Ksc = W KW T =

(C5)
In the new basis α(cid:48), the electron vector is W Kt, and m
is (1, 0,··· , 0)T , i.e., m has unit charge under b ≡ α(cid:48)
1.

We can also check for the requisite properties of m and

the electron:

θψ,m = 2πlT

ψ K−1
= 2πtT W −1t

sc lm = 2π(W Kt)T (W KW T )−1t

qm = (W t)T (W KW T )−1t = tT K−1W −1t

δm = πtT (W KW T )−1t = π(W −1t)T K−1W −1t

= 2π

= π

1
2

tT K−1t

=

2

= ν/2

tK−1t

4

=π

= πν/4

One can construct a basis transformation W of the form
(c.f., Eq. A7)

We can rewrite the above Lagrangian in a K-matrix form
using the full basis β = (α, a, b)T :

L =

1
4π

KIJ βI ∧ dβJ ; K =

 2 2(1 + 2n) 1

1
0
−1 −(1 + n) 0

n

W =

K → W KW T =

−1
0

0 2
2 0

2n + 1 −1 0
 .
 ; W ∈ GL(3, Z)
8n + 4 0 0



0
0

1 0
0 −1

(B2)

(B3)

(B4)

which reveals this theory to be equivalent to the state
K = 8n + 4. We see that this reproduces the action
we found for Laughlin states with K = 8n + 4 modulo
two fermion modes which can be gapped and lifted to
higher energies. This also hints at how the fermionic TO
was converted to a bosonic TO as the fermions can be
trivially gapped.

Appendix C: Examples of Gauged Fermion Parity in

FQHE States

In this Appendix we explicitly gauge the Fermion par-
ity symmetry for a large class of fermionic FQHE states.

1. Hierarchy states

Abelian quantum hall states at a large number of ob-
served ﬁlling fractions ν can be described using hier-
archy schemes90–92. The general form of the K-matrix
and charge vector of an electronic hierarchy state in the
Haldane-Halperin description takes the form

K11 = 1 mod 2; Kii = 0 mod 2; i > 1

tT = (1, 0,··· , 0).

(C1)
The electron ψ and h/e ﬂux E are given by the vectors
Kt and t respectively (this choice ensures that the h/e
ﬂux quantum E has a charge of ν and statistical angle
πν).

The constraint, equation from our gauging procedure

(Eq. (6)) translates to

2b = tI αI = α1.

(C2)

This implies that the bulk Lagrangian can be written as

L =

I ∧ dα(cid:48)
(Ksc)IJ α(cid:48)
2α(cid:48)
1 = α1
(cid:48)
Ksc = W KW T ; W = δij + δi1δj1; α = W α

α(cid:48)
I = αI , (I > 1);

1
4π

J

W = diag(2, 1, 1,··· , 1).

where la is the qp vector for the qp a. From this we see
that our physical expectations about the gauged theory,
as outlined in Sec. III A, are satisﬁed.

For an explicit example, consider the ν = 2/5 state

described by the K matrix and charge vector

(cid:19)

(cid:18) 3 −1

−1 2

(cid:18)1

(cid:19)

0

K =

; t =

.

(C6)

Placing it in contact with an s-wave superconductor and
gauging the fermion parity we ﬁnd an emergent state
described by

(cid:19)

(cid:18) 12 −2

−2 2

(cid:18)2

(cid:19)

0

(C3)

Ksc =

;

tsc =

.

(C7)

W (cid:48) =

.

(C8)

K =

2. Spin singlet state at ν = 2/3

W =

The anyon fusion structure is better elucidated after a
basis transformation,(c.f. Eq. (A7))

Ksc → W (cid:48)KscW (cid:48)T =

; tsc → W (cid:48)tsc =

(cid:18)2
(cid:19)

0

;

(cid:19)
(cid:19)

(cid:18) 10 0
(cid:18) 1 1

0 2

0 1

From this we see that the fusion structure is clearly Z10×
Z2.
The Z2 sector is neutral and the charged Z10 sector is
generated by the m quasiparticle with qm = e/5. The
original fermionic state had another e/5 qp to begin with
(denoted by a) with δ = 3π/5. The neutral sector is
generated by the composite qp a − m which has trivial
statistics with m (i.e., the neutral qp made from a fused
with the anti-particle of m).

(cid:18)1 2
(cid:19)

2 1

The spin singlet state at ﬁlling 2/3 is described by

K =

;

t = (1, 1).

(C9)

The qp fusion group is Z3, and is generated by the
quasiparticle (1, 0)T with charge e/3 and statistical angle
δ = 2π/3. This state was considered in the nice paper
Ref. 93 in the context of twist defects.

The application of Eq. (6) leads to

2b = α1 + α2.

(C10)

It is not immediately clear how to simultaneously solve
this constraint and obey the physical conditions in Sec.
III A. To do so we note that m does not distinguish be-
tween spin up and spin down species as far as braiding
is concerned, as both carry a Z2 fermion parity charge
1. Now we implement a basis transformation Eq. (A7)
which separates the system into a sector that is charged
under fermion parity and another sector which is neutral:

K → W KW T =

W =

;t → W t = (1, 0)T ;

.

(C11)

(cid:19)
(cid:19)

(cid:18) 1 1
(cid:18) 0 1

1 −2

1 −1

In this representation, the new superconducting state can
be easily written down using our hierarchy state prescrip-
tion:

Ksc =

;

tsc = (2, 0)T .

(C12)

(cid:19)

(cid:18) 4 2

2 −2

By a basis transformation, as in Eq.
shown that its fusion is Z6 × Z2.

(C8), it can be

The Jain state at ν = 3/7 can be expressed using

17

3.

3/7 Jain state

 3 2 2

2 3 2
2 2 3

 ; t =

1
 .

1
1

To consider the emergent state in proximity contact with
an s-wave superconductor after gauging fermion parity,
we perform a basis change into sectors which are fermion
parity charged and neutral

 ; t → W t =

1


0
0

 3 −1 0
 .
 0 0

−1 2 −1
0 −1 2

1
0 1 −1
1 −1 0

K → W KW T =

Now, following our prescription for gauging fermion par-
ity for hierarchy states we can write down the eﬀective
state easily

 12 −2 0

−2 2 −1
0 −1 2

 ; tsc =

 .
2

0
0

Ksc =

(C13)

(C14)

(C15)

4. More Examples- the ADE states

In this section we will work with K matrices of the

following form:

K(r+1)×(r+1) =

0

. . . 0

±Cr×r




t =(cid:0)1, 0, 0,··· , 0(cid:1)T

2p ± 1 −1
−1
0
...
0

(C16)
Here C is a r×r Cartan matrix corresponding to a rank r
Lie Algebra (see Appendix E). Since C must be symmet-
ric, the corresponding Lie Algebra must be simply laced,
hence we are restricted to the An, Dn, or En series.

The A series is most relevant from the point of view
of experimental signiﬁcance, as these states directly re-
late to a number of stable quantum Hall states that
have been observed at ﬁlling fractions
2np±1 . They have
u(1) × su(n)1 symmetry in the K matrix, where su(n)
corresponds to the n − 1 dimensional Cartan matrix of
the A series. These states have been studied thoroughly
in the literature59–63. The D series has been proposed in
the context of even denominator quantum Hall states59,
and the E series is perhaps the least experimentally rel-
evant currently.

n

We should add some comment to avoid confusion with
some recent literature. The K-matrices in Eq. C16
have a fermionic block and a bosonic Lie algebra Car-
tan matrix. If we just considered the bosonic K-matrix
by itself then we ﬁnd another set of interesting bosonic
FQHE states. The bosonic D series has been in focus
recently in the context of 16 fold periodic classiﬁcation34
of topological superconductors, and represents various
versions of the toric code and semion/anti-semion topo-
logical order. Additionally, the bosonic FQHE given by
the so(8) state relates to the surface states of some time
reversal symmetric SPTS94–96 and non-Abelian anyonic
symmetries.47 Finally, the bosonic E8 state in particular
is a bosonic short-range entangled phase with no TO.97
Despite these interesting connections, our focus is purely
on the fermionic hierarchy states in Eq. C16.

a. The Jain sequence at ﬁlling

n

2np±1 ; the A series

n

Quantum Hall states at ﬁlling

2np±1 . are described
by an n-dimensional K-matrix (in the Jain construction
n would correspond to the number of ﬁlled Landau lev-
els of the composite fermions/holes formed by attaching
2p ﬂux quanta to the bare electron). The anyon fusion
group is Z2np±1, and is generated by the n-dimensional
quasiparticle vector (0,··· , 1)T with charge

e

2np±1 .

Upon gauging the fermion parity symmetry, the result-
ing fusion group depends upon n. If n is odd, the fusion
is Z4(2np±1), and is generated by the half quantum ﬂux
m. If n is even, the fusion is given by Z4np±2 × Z2. The
Z4np±2 sector is charged and generated by ψ−4pm (with
a charge of
(2np±1) ), and the neutral sector is generated
by (2np ± 1)m − n
2 ψ. However, note that these two sec-
tors are not completely decoupled in the sense that they
braid around each other with a phase of −1.

1

If n = 2 mod 4, the sectors can be completely decou-
pled in the sense of braiding too by using m to generate
the charged Z4np±2 sector. This is what we saw for ex-
ample in the 2/5 state which decoupled completely (the
K-matrix had no oﬀ diagonal entries) into a Z10 and a
Z2 sector (c.f., Eq. (C8)).

b. D series

18
The sector Dr is completely neutral and has fusion Z4 or
Z2 × Z2 depending on whether r is odd/even. The sector
D−r can be understood as having time reversed braiding
with respect to Dr.
If r is odd Dr is generated by (∓1,··· , 1)T which is
neutral and has h = ±r
8 . If r is even there are two neu-
8 ) and 4pm − ψ
tral generators (∓1,··· , 1)T (with h = ± r
(with fermionic statistics).
The charged sector Z8p is a U (1)4p theory. It can be
expressed by a single component K-matrix with K = 8p,
and t = 2. It decouples completely from the Dr sector,
and is generated by the half quantum ﬂux m.

Interestingly, in the D series there is spin and charge
separation, i.e., the topological state splits up into two
parts, a bosonic U (1)4p sector which carries all the elec-
tric charge, and a neutral Dr sector that contains a
fermionic particle f which supports the statistics/spin
of the electron.
f can be represented by a vector
(∓2, 1, 0,··· , 0), and the electron ﬁeld decomposes into
ψ = 4pm + f , where 4pm is the bosonic charged part.

c. E series

3

In the case of E7, the ﬁlling fraction is ν = 1

Here the dimension of the full K-matrix is 7, 8, or 9
depending on whether the Cartan matrix in Eq. (C16)
is E6, E7, or E8.
For E6, before gauging fermion parity the fusion group
is Z6p∓1, the ﬁlling fraction is
6p∓1 , and the qps are gen-
erated by the h/e ﬂux. Upon gauging fermion parity,
the fusion group is Z4(6p∓1) and is generated by the half
quantum ﬂux m.
2p∓1 ,
and the fusion group is Z2 × Z2p∓1. The Z2p∓1 sector
is charged and is generated by the h/e ﬂux, the Z2 sector
is neutral and is generated by the the quasiparticle vector
(0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0,−1)T . The generator of the neutral sec-
tor has h = ± 3
4 as well. The two sectors are completely
decoupled from each other. After gauging fermion parity
the fusion group becomes Z4(2p∓1)×Z2. The Z2 sector is
still neutral and stays unaﬀected. Only the charge sector
gets quadrupled and is now generated by m.

For E8 the ﬁlling fraction is

2p∓1 . The fusion group
is Z2p∓1 and is generated by h/e. After gauging fermion
parity, the theory is now Z4(2p∓1) and is generated by m.

1

Let us now consider the r + 1 dimensional K-matrix
of the form Eq. C16 where now C is the Cartan matrix
corresponding to Dr ≡ so(2r). The fermionic theory
with the above K-matrix has ﬁlling fraction ν = 1
2p .
The anyonic fusion group is Z8p, and it is generated
by (0,··· , 0, 1)T . Upon gauging fermion parity symme-
try the resulting theory has the anyonic fusion structure
Z8p ×D±r (the ± sign refers to the element K11 = 2p± 1
with the corresponding change in the sign of the Cartan
matrix, as in Eq. C16). D±r refers to the fusion structure
of a purely bosonic theory with Cartan matrix ±Dr.47,98.

Appendix D: Making the fermion parity ﬂip more

relevant

This Appendix focuses on interactions at a non-chiral
quasi-one dimensional interface appropriate to a trench
(see Figures 1 & 2 ) in a TO state-s-wave SC heterostruc-
ture device. We have seen that a MBS or a parafermion is
localized at a twist defect depending on whether fermion
parity ﬂip AS m → m × ψ is more relevant than the
charge conjugation symmetries m → m−1 and m → m5

for the case of the Laughlin 1/3 state. The main objective
of this section is to show that the nature of the NAZM de-
pends on the interactions near the cut. In particular the
scaling dimension of the backscattering/gapping term in
Eq. 22 depends on the velocity matrix V which encodes
the forward-scattering between the edges. In particular
we show the existence of a velocity matrix V which favors
MBS over parafermions. Finding precise speciﬁcations
for experimentally accessible regions of forward scatter-
ing interactions that meet this criterion is a much more
diﬃcult task and we leave that for future investigations.
We ﬁrst set up conventions and outline the procedure
to calculate the scaling dimensions of a backscattering
term in a general TO state using the method in Refs. 99
and 100. We begin with the Lagrangian density at the
edge, from Sec. V:

L = Ledge + Lgap

(cid:104)
I cos(cid:2)KIJ

(K ⊕ −K)αβ

Ledge =
1
4π
Lgap = −gW

IJ ∂xφI

(cid:0)φφφb + W T φφφt

α∂tφJ

(cid:3)
(cid:1)
β − V αβ

J

IJ ∂xφI

α∂xφJ
β

(cid:105)

(D1)

(cid:18)XRXRXR

(cid:19)

XLXLXL

where, α, β run over t, b denoting the edge modes at the
top and bottom sides of the interface respectively and
I, J = 1,··· , N (note that there are a total of 2N modes
at the interface, N from the top/bottom). The bold sym-
bols denote the column vector φφφ with elements φI .

We now implement a basis transformation φφφ = M1XXX,
so that the K matrix at the edge is transformed to the
pseudo-identity IN ⊕ −IN .
In this basis, the ﬁrst N
modes with signature + are right moving and the last
N with signature − are left moving. This is appropri-
ate since we will eventually specialize to a Laughlin state
which is fully chiral on a single edge. We will decompose

the 2N dimensional vector XXX =

density takes the form

. The Lagrangian

Ledge =

1
4π

L = Ledge + Lgap
β − V X

[(IN ⊕ −IN )IJ ∂xX I ∂tX J

(cid:1)
1 V M1 = V X ;(cid:0)RT LT(cid:1) =(cid:0)W −1K K(cid:1) M1

IJ ∂xX I ∂xX J ]
I XR + LT

I cos(cid:0)RT

Lgap = −gW

I XL

M T

(D2)

where we have added possible gapping terms, and RI /LI
corresponds to the I-th column of the matrix R/L. Note
that R, L, W, K are N × N matrices while M1 and V are
2N × 2N . Haldane’s null vector criterion75 for gapping
terms implies that

RT R = LT L.

(D3)

V X = exp

Now, let us assume that the matrix V X can be diagonal-
ized by another basis change without aﬀecting the pseu-
doidentity K-matrix IN ⊕ −IN using the transformation
X = O ˜X.
In this new basis, the forward scattering is
encoded in ˜V = OT V X O. The gapping term cos[aT XXX]

It is diagonalized by the transformation OT V X O using
O = B, with B from Eq. (D7).

Now, we will make a particular set of gapping terms
(characterized by the matrices R and L) relevant. We

19

is now cos[˜aT ˜XXX] where ˜a = OT a. The scaling dimension
of the operator ei ˜aT XXX is
(cid:104)ei ˜aT XXX e−i ˜aT XXX(cid:105) = (cid:104)ei ˜aT

LXXX L(cid:105)(cid:104)ei ˜aT

RXXX R e−i ˜aT

LXXX Le−i ˜aT

RXXX R(cid:105)

3(cid:89)

j=1

=

3(cid:89)

1

(˜vJ,Rt − x)˜a2

R,J

1

(˜vJ,Lt + x)˜a2

L,J

j=1

(D4)

where, ˜vJ,R/L denote the velocities of the right/left mov-
ing modes. Thus, the scaling dimension is

∆(aaa) =

˜aaaT ˜a˜a˜a =

1
2

1
2

aaaT OOT aaa.

(D5)

Now, we write O = BR using the result from Refs. 99
and 100 that any matrix O ∈ SO(N, N ) can be written
as the product of a symmetric positive boost B and a
rotation R, such that B, R are both in SO(N, N ). Hence,
B2 = OOT . Thus, the scaling dimension becomes i

∆(aaa) =

1
2

aaaT OOT aaa =

1
2

aaaT B2aaa,

(D6)

and we see the scaling dimension depends only on the
boost. The physical picture is that the scaling dimensions
are independent of the velocities of the eigenmodes and
the interactions between co-propagating modes. They
are dependent only on the interactions between counter-
propagating modes. We now parametrize the boost B as
i

(cid:18) 0

(cid:19)

B = exp

b/2
0

bT /2

(D7)

where, b is an N × N dimensional real-valued matrix.
Note now, that B has been parametrized by the N 2 pa-
rameters of the matrix b. This is just an N + N dimen-
sional generalization of Lorentz boosts in 1 + 1-d. At
the interface with 2N edge modes, there are N gapping
terms. Now, given a gapping term W, and hence corre-
sponding matrices R and L, and using Eq. D6, we see
that their scaling dimensions can be obtained from the
diagonal elements of the matrix product

(cid:20)(cid:0)RT LT(cid:1) B2

(cid:18)R

(cid:19)(cid:21)

L

iδI =

1
2

.

II

(D8)

Before going further, we give an example of a veloc-
ity matrix V X which is diagonalized by elements O in
SO(N, N ). Let us consider, the positive deﬁnite velocity
matrix

(cid:18) 0 −b
(cid:19)

−bT

0

;

borrow the ansatz of Ref. 101 and take b = αRL−1.
In the following equation we make this choice for b, and
denote the corresponding value of B2 as B2(b = αRL−1).
Using Eq. D3,

∞(cid:88)

n=0

B2 =

α2n
(2n)!

I +

α2n

(2n + 1)!

(cid:18) 0 b

(cid:19)

bT 0

.

exp(α)(cid:2)LT L(cid:3)

Finally, with the help of Eq. D8 we get the scaling
dimensions of the gapping terms δI (b = αRL−1) =
II . Thus, by choosing α large and nega-
tive we can make all three gapping terms simultaneously
relevant. In 1+1-d this happens when ∆I is less than 2
for each of the gapping terms.

Now, we specialize to the Laughlin ν = 1/3 state along
with a proximity-coupled s-wave superconductor and a
trench interface. We have seen in Sec. V that realizing
the fermion parity ﬂip symmetry in the K-matrix formal-
ism requires extending the usual K matrix to consider
8n + 4 ⊕ σx instead. Since the K-matrix is 3 × 3, there
should be 3 gapping terms at the interface. Since we only
want to show a proof of principle, we have freedom in our
choice of forward scattering interactions. Let us choose
B of the form Eq. D7 with b = −6R−1L, i.e. α = −6,
where R and L are determined using Eq. D2 using Wfpf
appropriate to fermion parity ﬂip from Eq. 20. With
this form of the velocity matrix, we ﬁnd that the fermion
parity ﬂip AS m → m7 is relevant, as designed, while the
charge conjugation symmetries m → m5 and m → m−1
are irrelevant. The numerical values of the scaling dimen-
sions of the 3 gapping terms for the fermion parity ﬂip
are {1.63598, 0.151204, 0.0322238}, and are all less than
2, whereas those for the charge conjugation symmetry
are {3025.73, 302.572, 302.572}. For the composite sym-
metry m → m5 it is {4842.75,554.862,252.174}, making
the latter two very irrelevant. Hence, we have found an
interaction which would prefer to have MBS twist defects
instead of parafermion twist defects.

Appendix E: Cartan Matrices for the ADE series

20

Here we provide the Cartan matrices of the ADE series
used in the construction of quantum Hall states outlined
in the main text.
The Lie algebras Ar = su(r + 1), for r ≥ 2, and Dr =
so(2r), for r ≥ 4, can be used to form inﬁnite series of
Abelian states, each with a Cartan matrix of rank r:
(KAr )IJ = 2δIJ − (δI,J+1 + δI,J−1)
(KDr )IJ = 2δIJ − (δI,J+1 + δI,J−1)+

(E1)

(δI,rδJ,r−1 + δI,r−1δJ,r − δI,rδJ,r−2 − δI,r−2δJ,r) .
(E2)

There are three exceptional simply-laced Lie algebra

KEr=6,7,8 with Cartan matrices
2 −1 0
0
0
−1 2 −1 0
0
0 −1 2 −1 0 −1
0 −1 2 −1 0
0
0
0
0
0 −1 0
0
2

0 −1 2
0

KE6 =

0
0



 ,
 ,
 .

(E3)

(E4)

(E5)



2 −1 0
0
0
−1 2 −1 0
0
0 −1 2 −1 0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0 −1
0 −1 2 −1 0
0
0 −1 2 −1 0
0
0 −1 2
0
0
0
0 −1 0
0
2

0

2 −1 0
0
0
−1 2 −1 0
0
0 −1 2 −1 0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0 −1 2 −1 0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0 −1 2 −1 0 −1
0 −1 2 −1 0
0
0
0
0
0 −1 0
0
2

0 −1 2
0

0
0
0
0

KE7 =



KE8 =

1 A. Kitaev, Ann. Phys. 303, 2 (2003).
2 R. W. Ogburn and J. Preskill, Comp. Sci. 1509, 341

374, 567 (1992).

11 A. Stern, F. von Oppen, and E. Mariani, Phys. Rev. B

(1999).

70, 205338 (2004).

3 J. Preskill, Topological quantum computation (2004).
4 M. Freedman, A. Kitaev, M. Larsen,

and Z. Wang,

arXiv:quant-ph/0101025 (2001).

12 C. Nayak and F. Wilczek, Nucl. Phys. B 479, 529 (1996).
13 D. A. Ivanov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 268 (2001).
14 M. Stone and S.-B. Chung, Phys. Rev. B 73, 014505

5 Z. Wang, Topological Quantum Computation (American

(2006).

Mathematics Society, 2010).

6 C. Nayak, S. H. Simon, A. Stern, M. Freedman,

and

S. Das Sarma, Rev. Mod. Phys. 80, 1083 (2008).

7 A. Stern and N. H. Lindner, Science 339, 1179 (2013).
8 N. Read and G. Moore, Nucl. Phys. B 360, 362 (1991).
9 N. Read and D. Green, Phys. Rev. B 61, 10267 (2000).
10 M. Greiter, X.-G. Wen, and F. Wilczek, Nucl. Phys. B

15 A. Y. Kitaev, Phys.-Usp. 44, 131 (2001).
16 L. Fu and C. L. Kane, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 096407

(2008).

17 J. D. Sau, R. M. Lutchyn, S. Tewari, and S. Das Sarma,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 040502 (2010).

18 Y. Oreg, G. Refael, and F. von Oppen, Phys. Rev. Lett.

105, 177002 (2010).

19 V. Mourik, K. Zuo, S. Frolov, S. Plissard, E. Bakkers,

and L. Kouwenhoven, Science 336, 1003 (2012).

20 M. Sato, Y. Takahashi, and S. Fujimoto, Phys. Rev. Lett.

53 J. C. Teo, T. L. Hughes,
Physics 360, 349 (2015).

54 N. Tarantino, N. Lindner,

and E. Fradkin, Annals of

and L. Fidkowski, arXiv

103, 020401 (2009).

preprint arXiv:1506.06754 (2015).

21 M. T. Deng, C. L. Yu, G. Y. Huang, M. Larsson, P. Caroﬀ,

55 T. H. Hansson, V. Oganesyan, and S. L. Sondhi, Ann.

and H. Q. Xu, Nano Lett. 12, 6414 (2012).

22 A. Das, Y. Ronen, Y. Most, Y. Oreg, M. Heiblum, and

H. Shtrikman, Nat. Phys. 8, 887 (2012).

Phys. 313, 497 (2004).

56 M. Levin and Z.-C. Gu, Phys. Rev. B 86, 115109 (2012).
57 C. Wang and M. Levin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 080403

23 L. P. Rokhinson, X. Liu, and J. K. Furdyna, Nat. Phys.

(2014).

21

8, 795 (2012).

24 W. Chang, V. E. Manucharyan, T. S. Jespersen,
J. Nyg˚ard, and C. M. Marcus, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110,
217005 (2013).

25 A. D. K. Finck, D. J. Van Harlingen, P. K. Mohseni,
K. Jung, and X. Li, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 126406 (2013).
26 S. Nadj-Perge, I. K. Drozdov, J. Li, H. Chen, S. Jeon,
J. Seo, A. H. MacDonald, B. A. Bernevig, and A. Yaz-
dani, Science 346, 602 (2014).

27 L. Fu and C. L. Kane, Phys. Rev. B 79, 161408(R) (2009).
28 P. Fendley, J. Stat. Mech. , P11020 (2007).
29 E. Fradkin and L. P. Kadanoﬀ, Nuclear Physics B 170, 1

(1980).

30 D. J. Clarke, J. Alicea, and K. Shtengel, Nature Commun.

4, 1348 (2012).

31 N. H. Lindner, E. Berg, G. Refael, and A. Stern, Phys.

Rev. X 2, 041002 (2012).

32 M. Cheng, Phys. Rev. B 86, 195126 (2012).
33 A. Vaezi, Phys. Rev. B 87, 035132 (2013).
34 A. Kitaev, Ann. Phys. 321, 2 (2006).
35 H. Bombin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 030403 (2010).
36 H. Bombin, New J. Phys. 13, 043005 (2011).
37 A. Kitaev and L. Kong, Commun. Math. Phys. 313, 351

(2012).

38 L. Kong,

the XVII

in Proceedings of

International
Congress on Mathematical Physics, 2012 (World Scien-
tiﬁc, Singapore, 2014) pp. 444–455, arXiv:1211.4644.

39 Y.-Z. You and X.-G. Wen, Phys. Rev. B 86, 161107(R)

(2012).

40 Y.-Z. You, C.-M. Jian, and X.-G. Wen, Phys. Rev. B 87,

045106 (2013).

41 M. Barkeshli and X.-L. Qi, Phys. Rev. X 2, 031013 (2012).
42 M. Barkeshli and X.-L. Qi, “Synthetic Topological Qubits
in Conventional Bilayer Quantum Hall Systems,” (2013),
arXiv:1302.2673.

43 M. Barkeshli, C.-M. Jian, and X.-L. Qi, Phys. Rev. B 87,

045130 (2013).

44 A. Mesaros, Y. B. Kim, and Y. Ran, Phys. Rev. B 88,

035141 (2013).

45 J. C. Y. Teo, A. Roy, and X. Chen, Phys. Rev. B 90,

115118 (2014).

46 J. C. Y. Teo, A. Roy, and X. Chen, Phys. Rev. B 90,

155111 (2014).

47 M. N. Khan, J. C. Y. Teo, and T. L. Hughes, Phys. Rev.

B 90, 235149 (2014).

48 M. Levin, Phys. Rev. X 3, 021009 (2013).
49 J. C. Y. Teo, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 28,

143001 (2016).

50 M. Barkeshli and X.-G. Wen, Phys. Rev. B 81, 045323

(2010).

51 O. Petrova, P. Mellado, and O. Tchernyshyov, Phys. Rev.

B 90, 134404 (2014).

52 M. Barkeshli, P. Bonderson, M. Cheng, and Z. Wang,
“Symmetry, Defects, and Gauging of Topological Phases,”
(2014), arXiv:1410.4540.

58 C. Wang and M. Levin, Phys. Rev. B 91, 165119 (2015).
59 N. Read, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 1502 (1990).
60 J. Frohlich and A. Zee, Nuclear Physics B 364, 517

(1991).

61 J. Frohlich and E. Thiran, J. Stat. Phys. 76, 209 (1994).
62 J. Frohlich, U. M. Studer, and E. Thiran, J. Stat. Phys.

86, 821 (1997).

63 A. Cappelli, C. A. Trugenberger, and G. R. Zemba, Nu-

clear Physics B 448, 470 (1995).

64 J. C. Teo, M. N. Khan,

and S. Vishveshwara, arXiv

preprint arXiv:1502.01029 (2015).

65 Y.-M. Lu

and A. Vishwanath,

arXiv

preprint

arXiv:1302.2634 (2013).

66 X.-G. Wen and A. Zee, Phys. Rev. B 46, 2290 (1992).
67 R. B. Laughlin, Phys. Rev. B 23, 5632 (1981).
68 R. B. Laughlin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 50, 1395 (1983).
69 D. Arovas, J. R. Schrieﬀer, and F. Wilczek, Phys. Rev.

Lett. , 722 (1984).

70 Actually the constraint δE = 22δm (mod 2π) does not
necessarily pin down δm = π
8n+4 . For instance, it could
also be δm = (4n+3)π
8n+4 . However, this ambiguity does not
matter in the end because we can always reshuﬄe our m
so that the new m has δm = π
8n+4 . To see this, suppose
i ≡ 1 mod
there are two integers p1 and p2 so that p2
16n + 8 and δE = 22δpi These two integers are related by
p1 ≡ p2(p1p2) and p2 ≡ p1(p1p2), and the multiplication
by p1p2 is always an AS.

71 J. Fr¨ohlich and F. Gabbiani, Rev. Math. Phys. 2, 251

(1990).

72 We consider the FCI here for convenience so that we do

not have to worry about spatial-dependent g-factors.

73 Y.-Z. You, Z. Bi, A. Rasmussen, M. Cheng, and C. Xu,

New Journal of Physics 17, 075010 (2015).

74 P. Bonderson and C. Nayak, Phys. Rev. B 87, 195451

(2013).

75 F. D. M. Haldane, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 2090 (1995).
76 M. Barkeshli, C.-M. Jian, and X.-L. Qi, Phys. Rev. B 88,

235103 (2013).

77 J. Cano, M. Cheng, M. Mulligan, C. Nayak, E. Pla-
madeala, and J. Yard, Phys. Rev. B 89, 115116 (2014).
78 Y.-M. Lu and L. Fidkowski, Phys. Rev. B 89, 115321

(2014).

79 J. C. Teo, arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.00912 (2015).
80 F. A. Bais, P. van Driel, and M. de Wild Propitius, Phys.

Lett. B 280, 63 (1992).

81 M. Freedman, C. Nayak, K. Shtengel, K. Walker, and

Z. Wang, Annals of Physics 310, 428492 (2004).

82 M. de Wild Propitius and F. A. Bais, ArXiv High Energy

Physics - Theory e-prints (1995), hep-th/9511201.

83 M. d. W. Propitius, arXiv preprint hep-th/9511195

(1995).

84 C. Mochon, Phys. Rev. A 69, 032306 (2004).
85 G. Moore and N. Seiberg, Comm. Math. Phys. 123, 177

(1989).

22

86 P. H. Bonderson, Non-Abelian Anyons and Interferom-
etry, Ph.D. thesis, California Institute of Technology
(2007).

87 P. Ginsparg, Nuclear Physics B 295, 153 (1988).
88 R. Dijkgraaf, E. Verlinde, and H. Verlinde, Comm. Math.

Phys. 115, 649 (1988).

89 X.-G. Wen, Advances in Physics 44, 405 (1995).
90 F. D. M. Haldane, Phys. Rev. Lett. 51, 605 (1983).
91 B. I. Halperin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 52, 1583 (1984).
92 J. K. Jain, Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 199 (1989).
93 D. J. Clarke, J. Alicea, and K. Shtengel, Nature Physics

10, 877 (2014).

95 C. Wang and T. Senthil, Phys. Rev. B 87, 235122 (2013).
96 C. Wang, A. C. Potter,
and T. Senthil, Science 343,

629631 (2014).

97 Y.-M. Lu and A. Vishwanath, Phys. Rev. B 86, 125119

(2012).

98 P. Mathieu and D. Senechal, Conformal ﬁeld theory (New

York: Springer, 1997).

99 J. E. Moore and X.-G. Wen, Phys. Rev. B 57, 10138

(1998).

100 J. E. Moore and X.-G. Wen, Phys. Rev. B 66, 115305

(2002).

101 J. Cano, T. L. Hughes, and M. Mulligan, Phys. Rev. B

94 F. J. Burnell, X. Chen, L. Fidkowski, and A. Vishwanath,

92, 075104 (2015).

Phys. Rev. B 90, 245122 (2014).

