6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
3
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
t
n
a
u
q
[
 
 

1
v
0
3
4
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Probing a gravitational cat state: Experimental
Possibilities

M. Derakhshani
New York, New York.

E-mail: maaneliD@yahoo.com

C. Anastopoulos
Department of Physics, University of Patras, 26500 Patras, Greece.

E-mail:

anastop@physics.upatras.gr

B. L. Hu
Maryland Center for Fundamental Physics and Joint Quantum Institute,
University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland 20742-4111 U.S.A.

E-mail: blhu@umd.edu

Abstract. This is a progress report on a preliminary feasibility study of experimental setups
for preparing and probing a gravitational cat state [1].

1. Introduction
As a follow-up to the theoretical studies of [1], this short note opens the explorations for the
best suited schemes for the making and probing of a gravitational cat (g-cat) state, using the
currently available experimental proposals. In the nature of a progress report, we aim here to
share our thoughts for further discussions, leaving plenty of room for improvements and broader
collective wisdom.

1.1. Gravitational cat states
Consider the quantum description of a stationary point mass M localized around x = 0 with
spread σ, described by a Gaussian wave function with zero mean momentum.

ψ0(x) =

1

(2πσ2)3/4

− x2
e

4σ2 .

(1)

The position x of the particle is a random variable described by the probability distribution
|ψ0(x)|2. According to Newton’s law, a probability distribution for x deﬁnes a probability
distribution for the Newtonian force acted on a particle of mass m located at R

F = − GM m

|R − x|3 (R − x).

(2)

For |R| >> σ the ﬂuctuations of the Newtonian force are negligible, which leads one to view it
as a deterministic variable.

Now consider a cat state, i.e., a superposition of two Gaussians, each located at ± 1

2 L and

− (x+L/2)2
e

4σ2 + e

− (x−L/2)2

4σ2

(3)

with zero mean momentum,

ψ(x) =

1√
2

1

(2πσ2)3/4

(cid:20)

(cid:21)

If L is of the order of magnitude of R, the ﬂuctuations of the Newtonian force (2) are non-
negligible. Since the force is a function of x, and x is described by an operator in quantum
mechanics, the Newtonian force should also be described as an operator. But then, so would be
the gravitational potential. In this sense, the cat state for the point mass has generated a cat
state for the gravitational ﬁeld.

The model presented in [1] for a gravitational cat state involves a quantum particle of mass
M conﬁned in a symmetric potential, as in Fig. 1. The potential has two local minima located
at r = ± 1
2 L. We label the minima as + and −. (At a macroscopic level of observation, the
particle only lies in the + region or in the −region.) With |+(cid:105) and |−(cid:105) as the states localized
around the minima + and − respectively, the most general state is given by

|ψ(cid:105) = c+|+(cid:105) + c−|−(cid:105).

(4)

We assume a Hamiltonian ˆH = ν ˆσ1, where ν is a small, but non-vanishing, tunneling rate
between the two minima.

Figure 1. Force on a probe exerted by a massive particle in a gravitational cat state,
c+|+ > +c−|− >.

Then we consider two ways of probing the gravitational ﬁeld generated by the massive object

in a g-cat state.

1.2. A classical probe
We consider a test mass m located near the conﬁning potential, in a geometry described by
Fig. 1. Assuming that the probe/detector is not allowed to move, the force F in the horizontal

direction takes only two values f0 and −f0, where

where D =(cid:112)y2 + L2/4 is the distance between the potential minimum and the location of the

f0 =

2D3

(5)

GM mL

,

probe; y is shown in Fig. 1.

We found that for an initial |+(cid:105) state, the expectation value of F and its two-time correlation

function are given by

(cid:104)F (t)(cid:105) = −f0e−Γt
0 e−Γ|t(cid:48)−t|.

(cid:104)F (t(cid:48))F (t)(cid:105) = f 2

The decay constant Γ is deﬁned as

where τ is the temporal resolution of the probe.

Γ =

ν2τ
2

,

(6)

(7)

(8)

1.3. A quantum probe
The quantum probe invoked in [1] is a harmonic oscillator of mass m and frequency ω that is
constrained to move along the horizontal axis of Fig. 1. If the amplitude of the oscillations is
much smaller than L, the length scale of the cat state, the force acted upon the oscillator along
the x direction equals ±f0. Thus, the total Hamiltonian of the quantum massive object in a
g-cat state interacting with the quantum oscillator probe is
ˆH = ν ˆσ1 + ωˆa†ˆa + gˆσ3(ˆa + ˆa†),

(9)

where

g = − f0√

2mω

.

We note that this is the Hamiltonian of a single-mode Jaynes-Cummings model.

The oscillator can act as a probe of the gravitational cat only if

(cid:18) f0

(cid:19)2 m

m

ω3 >> 1.

(10)

(11)

This corresponds to the ultra-strong coupling limit of the Jaynes-Cummings model, which is the
physically relevant regime. In this limit, the oscillator probe may undergo two types of quasi-
classical oscillatory motion centered either at x0 = f0
mω2 . The non-vanishing
tunneling rate induces transitions between the two oscillatory motions and thus generates Rabi-
type oscillations with frequency ν.

mω2 or at x0 = − f0

2. Preparing a GravCat State
In what follows, we consider the best proposals in preparing a g-cat state. In the next section,
we discuss the experimental schemes best suited to the detection of a g-cat state.

In our present assessment, the most promising experimental proposal for the preparation of a
g-cat state is Romero-Isart et al.’s superconducting microsphere trapped in a harmonic potential
created by a magnetic quadrupole ﬁeld [2]. Having considered various sources of environmental

decoherence in their set up, they suggest that this trapping method should make it possible to
isolate a lead (Pb) microsphere of

mass M ∼ 1014amu and radius R = 2µm

(12)

to a degree suﬃcient enough to place the microsphere in a coherent superposition of two position
eigenstates. The protocol they propose for creating this microsphere cat state is parametric
coupling to a qubit state.

The estimate of the mass and radius of the microsphere by Romero-Isart et al. is obtained
as follows. The (superconducting) microsphere is trapped in a 3-D harmonic oscillator potential
of the form

where the trapping frequency

Vtrap =

M
2

ω2
t ˆx2 + ω2⊥(ˆy2 + ˆz2)

(cid:104)

(cid:105)

(cid:16)(cid:112)µ0/ρ

(cid:17)

l2

I

,

ωt (cid:39)

,

(13)

(14)

and ω⊥ = ωt
2 , because the potential is created by a quadrupole magnetic ﬁeld that traps the
microsphere via the Meissner eﬀect. The mass density ρ is assumed to be a constant. The
parameter l is the radius of and separation between the anti-Helmholtz coils surrounding the
microsphere as illustrated in Figure 2-a of [2], and I is the current through the coils.

The microsphere can be trapped if the magnetic ﬁeld at any point of the sphere is smaller
than the critical ﬁeld, Bcrit, in order to allow superconductivity. This yields an upper bound on
the radius of the sphere as

R < Rmax (cid:39) Bcrit
√
µ0ρ

ωt

.

(15)

The radius R must also be much larger than the sphere’s penetration length λ and the
coherence length ξ. The estimate (12) is obtained from the following choice of parameters:
ρ = 11, 360 kg
m3 , λ = 30.5nm, ξ = 96nm (at T = 0), Bcrit = 0.08T , l = 25µm, I = 10A, and
ωt (cid:39) 2π × 28kHz. With these parameters, the maximum radius Rmax is about 3.7µm.

With this they show that parametric coupling to a qubit state puts the microsphere in a

spatial superposition described by the wave function

(cid:104) ˆT (−2χ)| ↑, 0 > + ˆT (2χ)| ↓, 0 >
(cid:105)

|Ψs >=

1√
2

,

(16)

where χ is a dimensionless parameter that characterizes the parametric coupling, and ˆT (...) is
the usual translation operator. The distance L between the two superposed wave packets is
L = 4χxzp, where xzp is the zero-point motion of the microsphere in the trap. From the values
Romero-Isart et al. give for χ and xzp, it can be readily conﬁrmed that L ∼ 10−12m.

3. Probing a GravCat state
One of us (MD) has examined the leading state-of-the-art proposals in the past ﬁve years for
ultrasensitive force measurement. A survey of which is contained in the Appendix. Our analysis
below will focus on classical probes.

3.1. Classical Probe
For the role of the classical probe, the most promising experimental proposal appears to be
Reinhardt et al.’s ”trampoline” resonator [4] made of Si3N4, with eﬀective mass m = 4.0ng,
width 100µm, and projected force sensitivity of ∼ 14zN at cryogenic temperatures (14mK).

While the resonator is a square-like membrane rather than a point particle, the latter assumed
in the model of [1], we can employ Eq. (5) for an order of magnitude estimate of the force. For
a resonator of mass m = 4.0ng, a microsphere of mass M = 0.38ng, L = 1pm and D = 3µm
(1µm larger than the radius of the microsphere of [2]), we obtain

f0 =

GmM L

2D3 ∼ 2 × 10−30N,

(17)

which is about ten orders of magnitude out of reach from the projected force sensitivity range
of the resonator.

In order to examine possible ways to enhance the resonator–microsphere gravitational
interaction, we write the distance D as R + a, where R is the radius of the microsphere, which
can be made variable, and a is a ﬁxed distance between the surface of the sphere and the
resonator—we will consider a to be of the order of one micrometer. Then

f0 (cid:39) (2)

GρmmL
(1 + a/R)3 ,

(18)

where ρm = M/( 4

3 πR3) is the density of the microsphere.

(i) The most important parameter for increasing the gravitational interaction f0 is the size L
of the cat state, since f0 is directly proportional to L. Note, however, that in the scheme of
[2], L is indirectly constrained by other variables, including the radius R of the microsphere.
(ii) There is also a more modest increase of f0 with the radius R of the microsphere (and hence
with the mass M of the microsphere). However, the value of R is constrained from the
experimental set-up, because the magnetic ﬁeld at any point on the sphere must be smaller
than the critical ﬁeld, Bcrit, so that the Meissner state is preserved. The corresponding
gradient bmax = Bcrit
R is proportional to the trapping frequency ωt. The latter must be
at least of the order of tens of kHz, in order to allow cooling of the center of mass to the
ground state [2]. Taking these constraints into account, it can be readily conﬁrmed that
the absolute upper limit to Rmax for a Pb microsphere is about 8µm.

(iii) Decreasing a would slightly increase the force, but below a certain value, Casimir forces
may become non-negligible. For example, Mohideen and Roy [5] measured the Casimir
force on the pN scale between a metallized sphere of radius ∼ 100µm and a ﬂat plate of
diameter 1.25cm, with sphere-surface separations from 0.9 to 0.1 µm. Thus, even though
the microsphere (made of Pb) and membrane (made of Si3N4) are much smaller in size than
the sphere and plate used in [5] , the microsphere-membrane Casimir force (to whatever
extent present) may be many orders of magnitude greater than the microsphere-membrane
gravitational force, when D − R becomes smaller than 1µm. If so, this would seem to put
a practical lower bound on a ≥ 1µm.

(iv) Choosing a superconducting element with a much larger density may increase the force by
a factor of about 2. A good choice is the (Type-I superconductor) Tantalum with density
16.7 g
cm3 , and a critical ﬁeld slightly larger than Pb (thus a slightly larger value of Rmax).
Assuming that we can increase the size of the cat L by one order of magnitude, and expecting

that R = 5µm is feasible for a Tantalum microsphere we obtain

f0 = 0.6 × 10−28N,

(19)

which is still about eight orders of magnitude from present level of detector sensitivities.

An obvious possibility would be to increase the mass of the probe m. However, this would
mean increasing the area of the membrane and other factors would have to be taken into account.
In particular, the gravitational self-energy of the probe may be of the same order of magnitude as
the interaction energy between the g-cat and the probe. The eﬀects of gravitational self-energy
in this setting is an issue worthy of more careful considerations.

3.2. Quantum Probe
In
A quantum probe of the gravitational cat state has to satisfy the constraint (11).
considering possible experimental implementations of this probe, one of us (MD) found that the
most promising candidate seems to be the state-of-the-art optomechanical harmonic oscillator
described in [6].
Such an oscillator has a mass m = 100ng, and would experience a
Newtonian gravitational force of 10−21 Newtons from a Pb microsphere cat state. However,
the dimensionless quantity of Eq. (11) is of the order of 10−53. This means that even with state-
of-the-art optomechanical oscillators, we are still a long way oﬀ from experimentally realizing
the quantum probe of a gravitational cat state.

4. Conclusions
Here we discuss the key ﬁndings of this report and related (theoretical) questions under study.

4.1. Appraisal
In this report we have examined the possibility of realizing and detecting a gravitational cat at
the lab. From existing experimental proposals based on current and reachable technology we
have identiﬁed a set-up which can best create a superposition of macroscopically distinct states
and can best measure the ultraweak gravitational force involved.

In our preliminary assessment the measurement of a gravitational cat state is ten orders of
magnitude from present capabilities, a diﬀerence that can perhaps be trimmed to eight orders
of magnitude with relatively small improvement. More promising, perhaps, is an impending
proposal by Romero-Isart and his collaborators [3] to use free wave packet expansion in a
”skatepark” potential to create coherent microsphere cat states (of the same mass) with an L on
the order of hundreds of nanonmeters. With this increase in L the above force estimates would
increase by ﬁve orders of magnitude or more, i.e., ∼ 10−25N for the preliminary assessment and
∼ 10−23N with small improvement. Of course, these are optimistic estimates, as the combination
of two set-ups, one for the creation of a cat state and one for the measurement of the force, will
probably create unforeseen constraints on the main parameters of the experiment. What we
have not examined is how to reproduce the speciﬁc predictions in the gravitational cat models
of Ref.
[1], which involve the crucial feature of tunneling between the distinct macroscopic
conﬁgurations of the cat.

The preliminary estimates we presented above seem to suggest that the quantum eﬀects of a
matter source manifested through its gravitational ﬁeld interactions could become measurable
in the next (or next-next) generation of experiments. Hence, it is worth exploring improved
designs built upon our simple theoretical prototype. The aim is to maximize the strength of
the interaction between matter in the cat state and the probe, in order to make g-cat eﬀects
measurable.

4.2. Open theoretical issues
There are many additional theoretical issues related to both the gravitational cat state and the
probes, e.g., 1) how intact a gravcat state could remain, how long it could exist, in the presence
of massive objects (such as the Earth); 2) why the gravitational force interaction with a classical

probe should necessarily collapse the cat state wave function (in contrast to other massive bodies
in nature, such as the Earth).

4.3. Implications for alternative quantum theories
In the theoretical model of the cat state used in [1], i.e., standard GR+QFT, it was not assumed
that gravity is fundamentally quantum, but it was assumed that force measurements by a
classical probe cause the gravitational ﬁeld of the cat state to undergo quantum jumps (via
quantum jumps of its mass density). Do alternative quantum theories of the objective collapse
[7, 8, 9, 10], hidden-variables [11, 12], and many-worlds [13, 14] type agree with or contradict
this assumption, when extended to the domain of semi-classical gravity? This requires a detailed
discussion, to be given elsewhere.

Appendix: Experimental Schemes for Classical Probes of a GravCat State
This Appendix contains a summary of the search by one of us (MD) for the best experimental
schemes which can function as classical probes of gravitational cat states. Amongst the handful
of state-of-the-art proposals in the past ﬁve years for ultra-sensitive force measurements listed
below he was able to to identify only one ultra-sensitive force measurement scheme that can play
the role of a classical probe of suﬃciently large mass and suﬃciently high force-measurement
sensitivity which,
in combination with Romero-Isart et al.’s superconducting microspheres
proposal [2], could lead to an experimental scheme for measuring g-cat eﬀects..

The six candidate proposals were:

(i) Schreppler et al.’s scheme involving an ultra-cold atom cloud in a high ﬁnesse cavity [15]

which, to date, produced the smallest externally applied force measured of 42yN .

(ii) Moser et al.’s scheme involving carbon nanotube mechanical resonators with quality factors

greater than a million [16, 17], which yields force measurements on the zN scale.

(iii) Tao et al.’s scheme using single-crystal diamond nanomechanical resonators with quality
factors exceeding one million [18], which produces force sensitivities of a few hundred zN.
(iv) Ranjit et al.’s scheme involving laser-cooled silica microspheres as force sensors in a dual
beam optical dipole trap in high vacuum [19], which yields force measurement sensitivity
at the aN scale.

(v) Kleckner et al.’s [20] and Reinhardt et al.’s [4] schemes involving the use of optomechanical
trampoline resonators, which yield projected maximum force sensitivities on the aN and zN
scales, respectively.

(vi) Wagner et al.’s use of state-of-the-art torsion balance pendulums to test for violations of

the weak equivalence principle with a precision of one part in 1013 [21].

Of all these, proposal 5 seems the most promising for our purpose. The justiﬁcation for this

is the following.
Proposal 1 yields the greatest force sensitivity, but the atom cloud used has a miniscule
mass of only 1.8× 10−22kg. Using the center of mass of this atom cloud in place of the resonator
in Eq. (5) (and keeping the other parameters the same as those used in Eq. (17) of subsection
3.1), one obtains a gravitational force of ∼ 10−40N , which is seventeen orders of magnitude
smaller than the force sensitivity of Schreppler et al.’s scheme. In addition, the scheme requires
that the measured force be an externally applied force that oscillates at the natural frequency
of the center of mass motion of the atom cloud in the cavity (∼ 12kHz). It is unclear how this
could be done with the gravitational force from a cat state, even if it were somehow possible to
fashion an atom cloud with a center of mass of ∼ 90mg.
Proposal 2 has a similar obstacle in that the mass of these carbon nanotube mechanical
resonators is only ∼ 10−20kg. Using this mass in Eq. (5), under the point mass approximation,

yields a gravitational force of ∼ 10−39N , or eighteen orders of magnitude smaller than the force
sensitivity of the Moser et al. scheme.
Proposal 3 used several diﬀerent kinds of single-crystal diamond nanomechanical
resonators, the largest of which has a mass of ∼ 10−12kg. When the largest resonator is used in
place of the resonator in Eq. (5), under the point mass approximation, it yields a gravitational
force of ∼ 10−31N . Since this resonator has a force sensitivity of only 540zN , the expected
gravitational force is around twelve orders of magnitude smaller.
Proposal 4 uses silica microspheres of 3 micron diameter, with an estimated mass of at
most ∼ 10−12kg. Thus these microspheres yield a gravitational force around thirteen orders of
magnitude smaller than the force sensitivity of Ranjit et al.’s scheme.

Proposal 6 is, of course, a diﬀerent force measurement scheme than all the others in that the
goal of a torsion balance is to detect a diﬀerence in the directions of the external force vectors
applied to the test bodies, rather than the absolute magnitudes of the forces. The scheme
described in Wagner et al. uses eight test bodies of masses 5g each and has a force sensitivity
of one part in 1013 (for the E¨otv¨os parameter), with a diﬀerential acceleration resolution
of ∼ 10−15m/s2. To compute the hypothetical (horizontal) gravitational force/acceleration
between one of these test bodies and the Romero-Isart et al. microsphere cat state (i.e., using
the latter as the attractor for the torsion balance), we need to know the size of one of these
test bodies so that we can calculate the D variable in Eq. (5). Although Wagner et al. do not
specify the size or geometry of the test bodies, we can approximate the bodies as spherical mass
distributions and deduce their radii from knowing what elements (hence mass densities) compose
them. They state that four of the test bodies are made of element Be, the other four made of
either Ti or Al. Let us consider a test body made of the element with the largest mass density
(since, for ﬁxed surface separation, a, this will give the smallest R value hence the largest force).
Among the three, Ti has the largest mass density with ρT i = 4.5g/cm3. The corresponding
radius is then RT i = 0.24cm. Assuming a = 1µm, then D = RT i + Rsphere + a ∼ 10−3m.
Using this D value in Eq. (5), we obtain a force ∼ 10−29N , or a horizontal acceleration of
∼ 10−28m/s2 for one test body. This is around thirteen orders of magnitude smaller than the
maximum sensitivity of the torsion balance. Of course, for such macroscopic test bodies, it seems
implausible that experimentalists could arrange a = 1µm; the experimental setup in Romero-
Isart et al. [2] (Figure 1-a therein) involves surrounding the microsphere by an anti-Helmholtz
coil conﬁguration only 25 microns in width. Much more experimentally feasible, it seems, is a
surface separation on the order of a centimeter or possibly a millimeter, either of which only
further decrease the magnitude of the force/acceleration.

Why then does proposal 5 seem the most promising for our purpose? First, the largest
trampoline resonator used in the Kleckner et al. proposal has a mass of 110ng, diameter of 80
microns (see Figure 2 in [20]), and a projected force sensitivity on the aN scale at cryogenic
temperatures. To be more precise about this last feature, Kleckner et al. write:

Trampoline resonators are also suitable for use as ultra-high resolution force sensors.
Assuming the quality factor increase is also seen for the lowest frequency devices [i.e.,
the resonator with m = 110 ng], it should be possible to obtain a thermal force noise in
the aN/Hz regime at demonstrated [cryogenic] temperatures. This is comparable to or
better than the single crystal Si resonators currently used in magnetic resonance force
microscopy (MRFM) experiments... Furthermore, the rear side optical access can be
used to provide extremely precise position sensitivity while leaving the front side free
for surface modiﬁcations required for use as sensors. (Last page)

Now, for the gravitational force between the 110ng trampoline resonator (approximated as
(5) gives ∼ 5 × 10−29N . By comparison to the
a point mass) and the microsphere, Eq.
previous proposals, this is ’only’ ten to eleven orders of magnitude away from the projected

force sensitivity range of their resonator. Second, the largest trampoline resonator used in the
Reinhardt et al. proposal [4] has a mass of 4.0ng, width of 100 microns (Figure 1 therein), and a
projected force sensitivity of ∼ 14zN at cryogenic temperatures (14mK). For the gravitational
force between the 4.0ng resonator and the microsphere, Eq. (5) gives ∼ 2 × 10−25N , or about
ten orders of magnitude away from the projected force sensitivity range of the resonator.

Because the Reinhardt et al. resonator yields a force closest to its projected maximum force
sensitivity (for the assumed parameters), and because Reinhardt et al. are more speciﬁc than
Kleckner et al. in regards to the magnitude and conditions of maximum force sensitivity, their
resonator was chosen as the most promising force probe to combine with Romero-Isart et al.’s
proposal.

Acknowledgment BLH and MD wish to thank Gerhard Gr¨ossing and Jan Walleczek for
their regal Viennese receptions at the EmQM (Emergent Quantum Mechanics) 2015 meeting.
BLH also wishes to thank Philip Stamp and organizers of the second PITP- Galiano Island
meeting (Probing the mystery: Theory & Experiment in Qunatum Gravity) in August 2015
for their eco-immersed Paciﬁc-Northwest hospitality. The Galiano discussions amongst leading
experimentalists working at the interface of quantum and gravitation physics provided a good
stimulus for us to explore the experimental possibilities in the realization of the theoretical
scheme proposed in [1]. We are particularly grateful to Oriol Romero-Isart for the many valuable
correspondences about his proposed superconducting sphere experiment.

References
[1] Anastopoulos C and Hu B L 2015 Class. Quantum Grav. 32 165022
[2] Romero-Isart O, Clemente L, Navau C, Sanchez A and Cirac J I 2012 Phys. Rev. Lett. 109 147205
[3] Romero-Isart O 2016 private communication
[4] Reinhardt C, Mueller T, Bourassa A and Sankey J C Ultralow-Noise SiN Trampoline Resonators for Sensing

and Optomechanics 2015 (Preprint cond-mat.mes-hall/1511.01769)

[5] Mohideen U and Roy A 1998 Phys. Rev. Lett. 21 4549
[6] M. Aspelmeyer, T. J. Kippenberg and F. Marquardt 2014 Rev. Mod. Phys. 86 1391
[7] Bassi A, Lochan K, Satin S, Singh T P and Ulbricht H 2013 Rev. Mod. Phys. 85 471
[8] Adler S L 2013 Class. Quantum Grav. 30 195015
[9] Derakhshani M 2014 Phys. Lett. A 378 14
[10] Tilloy A and Diosi L 2016, Phys. Rev. D 93, 024026
[11] Goldstein S 2013 (plato.stanford.edu/entries/qm-bohm)
[12] Struyve W 2015 Semi-classical approximations on Bohmian mechanics (Preprint quant-ph/1507.04771)
[13] Vaidman L 2014 (plato.stanford.edu/entries/qm-manyworlds)
[14] Page D N and Geilker C D 1981 Phys. Rev. Lett. 47 979
[15] Schreppler S, Spethmann N, Brahms N, Botter T, Barrios M and Stamper-Kurn D M 2014 Science 344 1486
[16] Moser J, Guettinger J, Eichler A, Esplandiu M J, Liu D E, Dykman M I and Bachtold A 2013 Nature

Nanotechnology 8 493

[17] Moser J, Guettinger J, Eichler A, Esplandiu M J, Liu D E, Dykman M I and Bachtold A 2014 Nature

Nanotechnology 9 1007

[18] Tao Y, Boss J M, Moores B A and Degen C L 2005 Nature Communications 5 3638
[19] Ranjit G, Atherton D P, Stutz J H, Cunningham M and Geraci A A 2015 Phys. Rev. A 91 051805
[20] Kleckner D, Pepper B, Jeﬀrey E, Sonin P, Thon S M and Bouwmeester D 2011 Opt. Express 19 19708
[21] Wagner T A, Schlamminger S, Gundlach J H and Adelberger E G 2012 Class. Quantum Grav. 29 184002

