Fracton Topological Order, Generalized Lattice Gauge Theory and Duality

Department of Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

Sagar Vijay, Jeongwan Haah, and Liang Fu

We introduce a generalization of conventional lattice gauge theory to describe fracton topological
phases, which are characterized by immobile, point-like topological excitations, and sub-extensive
topological degeneracy. We demonstrate a duality between fracton topological order and interacting
spin systems with symmetries along extensive, lower-dimensional subsystems, which may be used
to systematically search for and characterize fracton topological phases. Commutative algebra and
elementary algebraic geometry provide an eﬀective mathematical toolset for our results. Our work
paves the way for identifying possible material realizations of fracton topological phases.

Topological phases of matter are currently attracting
tremendous interest from diverse disciplines such as theo-
retical physics, quantum information and quantum mate-
rials. Gauge theory provides a uniﬁed framework for un-
derstanding several important topological phases, from
quantum Hall states to quantum spin liquids [1–11]. The
fractional statistics of topological excitations [12, 13], or
anyons, can be understood from the Aharanov-Bohm
phase of a charge moving around a ﬂux. The topolog-
ical degeneracy of the ground state is characterized by
the holonomy of a locally ﬂat gauge connection around
non-contractible loops.

Recently, a new kind of topological phase which does
not ﬁt into the framework of gauge theory has been dis-
covered in exactly solvable lattice models in three dimen-
sions [14–18]. A remarkable property of this new phase is
the existence of point-like fractional excitations termed
“fractons” [18], which can only be created at the corners
of membrane- or fractal-like operators, unlike anyons that
are created at the ends of Wilson lines. The creation of
anyons at the two ends of a Wilson line immediately im-
plies that anyons can move by repeated application of
a local, line-like operator.
In contrast, the absence of
any operator that can create a pair of fractons implies
that a single fracton cannot move without creating addi-
tional excitations, i.e. fractons are fundamentally immo-
bile. Thus far, two broad classes of fracton topological
orders have been found:

Type I fracton phases, such as the Chamon-Bravyi-
Leemhuis-Terhal (CBLT) model [14, 15] and the
Majorana cubic model [18], have fracton excitations
appearing at the corners of membrane operators;
composites of fractons form topological excitations
that are only mobile within lower-dimensional sub-
systems.

Type II fracton phases, such as Haah’s code [16] and
related models [17], have fracton excitations that
appear at the corners of fractal operators. All topo-
logical excitations are strictly localized and there
are no mobile topological quasiparticles.

Fracton topological order provides an exciting devel-
opment in the search for new quantum phases of matter,
for new schemes for quantum information processing [21],

and in the investigation of glassy dynamics in interact-
ing quantum systems [20]. Fractons enable new forms of
electron fractionalization [18], and provide an alternative
to Fermi or Bose statistics in three dimensions. Fractons
may be used to build a robust, ﬁnite-temperature quan-
tum memory, as theoretically demonstrated for Haah’s
code [16, 19]. The innately slow dynamics of fractons
provides an intriguing connection with quantum glasses,
many-body localization, and a new testing ground for the
postulates of quantum statistical mechanics.

Research on fracton topological phases is in its early
stages and has been based on studies of speciﬁc lat-
tice models.
It is thus highly desirable to ﬁnd a
more uniﬁed theoretical framework for fracton topolog-
ical order.
In this work, we demonstrate that frac-
ton topological phases can be obtained as the quan-
tum dual of d-dimensional systems that possess “sub-
system symmetries”, namely a set of symmetries associ-
ated with subsystems of dimension 2 ≤ ds < d. Speciﬁ-
cally, we establish an exact duality relating both type-
I and type-II fracton topological orders to symmetry-
breaking order in quantum systems with subsystem sym-
metries along planes and fractals, respectively. This du-
ality between fracton topological order and subsystem
symmetry-breaking, hereafter referred to as the “F-S ”
duality, is naturally obtained from a generalized lattice
gauge theory which we introduce. Instead of placing a
gauge ﬁeld on links between neighboring sites as in a
standard lattice gauge theory, we introduce a new ﬁeld
to mediate multi-body interactions between matter ﬁelds
on a cluster of neighboring sites. This yields an interact-
ing quantum system with a generalized Gauss’ law that
characterizes the fracton topological phase.

Before describing our construction in generality, we
present a concrete example that yields a new class of
type-I fracton topological phases. Consider a model of
Ising spins at the sites of a three-dimensional cubic lat-
tice, whose Hamiltonian (Hplaq) is deﬁned to be a sum of
four-spin interactions at each plaquette, as shown in Ta-
ble I. This classical “plaquette Ising model” is invariant
under a spin-ﬂip τ → −τ along any xy, yz or xz-plane of
the cubic lattice. The plaquette Ising model has a rich
history of study, attracting interest as a model for the
statistical mechanics of smooth surfaces, and as a lattice
regularization of string theory [27–32].

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
4
1
 
 
]
l
e
-
r
t
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
2
4
4
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

2

quette Ising Hamiltonian, in terms of the σ ﬁelds, exhibits
fracton topological order. The resulting fracton Hamil-
tonian has a solvable limit, analogous to the deconﬁned
phase of a conventional gauge theory, which is given by
a Hamiltonian for the Ising ﬁelds (σ), now placed at the
links of the dual cubic lattice. As shown in Table I, this
fracton Hamiltonian consists of two types of terms: (1)
a twelve-spin σx interaction for the spins surrounding a
dual cube and (2) four-spin σz-interactions at each vertex
of the dual cubic lattice that are aligned along the xy,
yz and xz-planes. The cubic and cross-like geometries
of the interactions motivate the name “X-cube” model.
The ground-state is topologically-ordered, as the ground-
states are locally indistinguishable, and one of the funda-
mental excitations – obtained by ﬂipping the eigenvalue
of the cubic interaction term – is a fracton. This can
be seen by observing that there is no local operator that
can create a single pair of cube excitations. For example,
the operator σz
n creates four cube excitations when act-
ing on the ground-state. Repeated application of σz
n over
a membrane separates the four cube excitations to each
corner as shown in Figure 1a. Therefore, a single cube
excitation is fundamentally immobile, and cannot move
without creating additional cube excitations. Pairs of
cube excitations, however, can be moved by sequentially
applying a local, membrane-like operator.

The quasiparticle content of the X-cube model is sum-
marized in Table I, along with other fracton phases such
as Haah’s code, the CBLT model, and a new spin model
which we introduce and term the “checkerboard model”.
All of these phases are obtained by applying our general-
ized lattice gauge theory prescription to spin models with
subsystem symmetries. As we will demonstrate, a simple
property of the classical spin model, that no product of
interaction terms acts exclusively on a pair of isolated
spins, guarantees that its quantum dual exhibits fracton
topological order.

More generally, consider a classical Hamiltonian for
Ising spins (τi) at the sites of a three-dimensional Bravais
lattice. We assume, for simplicity of presentation, that
there is a single spin at each lattice site; the case where
the unit cell is larger is explained in the Appendix. The
Hamiltonian consists of (cid:96) types of interactions at each
lattice site i, and may be written in the form:

H0 = −t(cid:88)i (cid:16)O(1)

i

[τ ] + ··· + O((cid:96))

i

[τ ](cid:17) .

(1)

with the constant t > 0. We demonstrate that a classical
spin Hamiltonian (1) satisfying certain simple properties
may be used to build a topologically-ordered, quantum
system with fracton excitations. First, we require that
the spin Hamiltonian (1) has a subsystem symmetry un-
der which the spin-ﬂip transformation τ → −τ along non-
local subsystems of the lattice – i.e. subsystems that scale
with the system size – leaves H0 invariant. We further
require that H0 has no local symmetries. In this sense,
a subsystem symmetry is “intermediate” between local
and global symmetries [22, 23]. For the remainder of this

(a)

(b)

FIG. 1. The fundamental excitations of the X-cube model
are shown in (a) and (b). Acting on the ground- state of
the X-cube model with a product of σz operators along the
colored red links that lie within a ﬂat, rectangular region M
generates four fracton cube excitations (e(0)
a ) at the corners
of the region. A straight Wilson line of σx operators acting
on the blue links in (b) isolates a pair of quasiparticles (m(1)
a
or m(1)
b ) at the ends, that are only free to move along the
line. Attempting to move these quasiparticles in any other
direction by introducing a corner in the Wilson line, creates
a topological excitation at the corner as shown in (b).

We introduce a generalized lattice gauge theory to con-
struct the quantum dual of the plaquette Ising model
in a transverse ﬁeld. This generalizes Wegner’s dual-
ity [1] between the d-dimensional transverse-ﬁeld Ising
model and Ising lattice gauge theory [2]. Wegner’s dual-
ity is motivated by the observation that a conﬁguration
of Ising spins may be speciﬁed by the locations of the
domain walls between symmetry-breaking states of the
Ising model. As a result, a dual representation of the
Ising matter is given by Ising “domain wall” ﬁelds on
the links of the lattice. Furthermore, since domain walls
form closed, (d− 1)-dimensional surfaces, physical states
in the domain wall Hilbert space must satisfy a local
“zero-ﬂux” condition, that the lattice curl of the domain
wall spins vanishes around each plaquette. In this way,
the d-dimensional transverse-ﬁeld Ising model is dual to
Z2 lattice gauge theory.

Our duality between fracton topological order and sub-
system symmetry-breaking is obtained by a similar obser-
vation. A conﬁguration of Ising spins may, equivalently,
be speciﬁed by the eigenvalue of each interaction term in
the Hamiltonian [33]. For example, to obtain the dual of
the plaquette Ising model, we are naturally led to intro-
duce the Ising ﬁelds {σ} at the center of each plaquette.
Physically, the σ ﬁeld labels the presence or absence of a
domain wall between the subsystem symmetry-breaking
ground-states of the plaquette Ising Hamiltonian. While
domain walls in the ordinary Ising model form closed sur-
faces, the σ ﬁelds in our model must satisfy more exotic
local constraints due to the geometry of the plaquette
interactions to ensure a one-to-one correspondence with
the physical space of domain walls in Hplaq.

As we demonstrate below, the quantum dual of the pla-

)e(0)aˆMm(1)am(1)bˆWClassical Spin System

Subsystem Symmetry

Fracton Topological Phase

3

X-Cube Model

Type I : e(0)

a , m(1)

a , m(1)

b

(cid:105)

Checkerboard Model

Plaquette Ising Model

Planar

(cid:104)

Tetrahedral Ising Model

Planar

Fractal Ising Model

Fractal

(cid:104)

(cid:104)

(cid:105)

(cid:105)

Type I : e(0)

a , m(0)
a

Haah’s Code

Type II : e(0)

a , m(0)
a

TABLE I. Representative examples of fracton topological orders built from classical spin systems with subsystem symmetry.
The classical models shown above are the plaquette, tetrahedral, and fractal Ising models (Hplaq, Htetr, and Hfrac, respectively).
In the plaquette Ising model, spins are placed on the sites of a simple cubic lattice as shown, and the Hamiltonian is a sum of
four-spin interactions at the face of each cube. In the tetrahedral Ising model, spins are arranged on an fcc lattice, and each
spin participates in four-spin interactions coupling neighboring spins that form a tetrahedron, as indicated. Finally, the fractal
Ising model consists of two types of four-spin interactions at each cube. The model has a fractal symmetry, and is invariant
under a spin-ﬂip along a three-dimensional Sierpinski triangle, as elaborated in Appendix A. The X-cube, checkerboard, and
Haah’s code fracton models (HX-Cube, Hcheck, and HHaah, respectively) are solvable limits of fracton phases that are obtained by
promoting the subsystem symmetry of the indicated spin models to a local symmetry. The fracton model HX-Cube is naturally
represented by placing spins σ on links of the cubic lattice, and is a sum of a twelve-spin σx-operator at each cube and the
indicated planar, four-spin σz-operators. The checkerboard model is a sum of eight-spin σx- and σz- interactions over cubes
arranged on an fcc lattice and is self-dual under the exchange σx ←→ σz. Only the fundamental excitation types are indicated
above. Here, we have adopted the notation e(j)
a ) to refer to a dimension-j excitation – i.e. an excitation that is only
a
free to move within a dimension-j subsystem without creating additional excitations – that is obtained by ﬂipping a σx-type
(σz-type) interaction. For type-I fracton phases, bound-states of fracton excitations can form mobile quasiparticles; these
mobile composite excitations are not indicated in the table.

(m(j)

ijkm=⌧zi⌧zj⌧zk⌧zmijkmnpB(xz)s= zi zp zn zkB(xy)s= zi zj zk zmB(yz)s= zj zn zm zpAc=Yn2@c xnijkmpqrs=⌧zi⌧zj⌧zk⌧zm=⌧zp⌧zq⌧zr⌧zsAc=Yn2@c xnBc=Yn2@c znijkmpqri=⌧zi⌧zj⌧zk⌧zm=⌧zi⌧zp⌧zq⌧zrijk`nmpqAc=µzi zjµzkµzm znµzp zp zqBc=µxi xjµxk x`µx`µxm xnµxp xqwork, we will refer to the plaquette Ising model (Hplaq)
and the tetrahedral Ising Hamiltonian (Htetr) as concrete
examples. As shown in Table I, the Hamiltonian Htetr is
deﬁned on the face- centered cubic (fcc) lattice and con-
sists of nearest-neighbor four-spin interactions that form
elementary tetrahedra. The tetrahedral Ising model has
two interaction terms per site on the fcc lattice. Both
the tetrahedral and plaquette Ising models have a sub-
system symmetry, as they are invariant under spin-ﬂips
along orthogonal planes (xy, yz or xz).

An important consequence of the subsystem symmetry
of the spin Hamiltonian H0 is that the resulting ground-
state has sub-extensive classical degeneracy D, taking
the form log D ∼ O(L) on the length-L three-torus.
Since the degeneracy is classical in nature, each ground-
state may be distinguished by a local order parameter.
Transitioning between ground-states, however, requires
performing a spin-ﬂip along a subsystem. While a local
perturbation can lift the classical degeneracy, no local
operator can connect distinct ground-states.

I. GENERALIZED LATTICE GAUGE THEORY

AND THE F-S DUALITY

We now build a quantum Hamiltonian with fracton
topological order by promoting the subsystem symmetry
of the spin system (1) to a local symmetry. We begin
by adding a transverse ﬁeld at each lattice site to allow
the classical spins to exhibit quantum ﬂuctuations. Next,
we introduce additional Ising spins (σi,a) at the center of
each multi-spin interaction appearing in H0; these spins
appear at the sites of a lattice with an (cid:96)-site basis. We
introduce a minimal coupling Hc between the σ spins
and the Ising matter ﬁelds, by coupling each σ to its
corresponding multi-spin interaction:

Hc ≡ −t(cid:88)i (cid:16)σz

i,1 O(1)

i

[τ z] + ··· + σz

i,(cid:96) O((cid:96))

i

[τ z](cid:17) .

(2)

After this minimal coupling, the Hamiltonian describing
both σ and Ising matter ﬁelds is given by

H = Hc − h(cid:88)i

τ x
i .

(3)

We refer to σ as the nexus ﬁeld, as each σ is placed at
the center of an elementary multi-spin interaction of the
classical spin Hamiltonian. We will soon observe that the
nexus ﬁeld provides a natural generalization of a gauge
ﬁeld in a conventional lattice gauge theory. In contrast
to our construction, applying the standard gauging pro-
cedure to any of the spin models shown in Table I by
introducing a gauge ﬁeld on the links of the cubic lat-
tice would result in a Hamiltonian with conventional Z2
topological order. Our procedure is also distinct from
discretizations of “higher-form” gauge theories, in which
interactions between (n − 1)-form matter ﬁelds are me-
diated by an n-form gauge ﬁeld [34, 35].

4

The subsystem symmetry of the classical spin system
(1) has now been promoted to a local spin- ﬂip symmetry
of the Hamiltonian (3). While τ x
n – the generator of a
single spin-ﬂip – anti-commutes with several multi-spin
interactions in (1), this can be compensated by acting
with the nexus ﬁeld σx
j,a on the lattice sites associated
with these interactions. As a result, the operator

where

Gi = τ x

i Ai

Ai ≡ (cid:89)(j,a)∈P (i)

σx
j,a

(4)

(5)

generates a local symmetry of the Hamiltonian ([Gi, H] =
0). The set P (i) speciﬁes the locations of multi-spin in-
teractions that anti-commute with τ x
i .

We proceed to add all other interaction terms involving
the nexus ﬁeld and the Ising spins that are consistent
with this local spin-ﬂip symmetry. To lowest-order, we
include a transverse ﬁeld for the matter and nexus ﬁelds:

H = −t(cid:88)i,a

i,a O(a)
σz

i

[τ z] − h(cid:88)i

τ x

i − J(cid:88)i,a

σx
i,a

(6)

Since the operator Gi generates a local symmetry of the
Hamiltonian, we may impose the condition Gi |Ψ(cid:105) = |Ψ(cid:105)
on the Hilbert space, which amounts to a generalized
Gauss’s law. In analogy with conventional gauge theory,
we will refer to Ai as the nexus charge operator. As an
example, the nexus charge operator in the X-code model
is given by the product of σz on twelve spins sitting at
the links surrounding a cube, as shown in Table I.

Since the generalized Gauss’s law condition commutes
with the spin-nexus Hamiltonian (6), it is possible to
choose a “gauge” that completely eliminates the Ising
matter ﬁelds, and yields a Hamiltonian exclusively for the
nexus spins. First, we impose the generalized Gauss’s law
τ x
i |Ψ(cid:105) = Ai |Ψ(cid:105) to obtain a Hamiltonian acting within
the constrained Hilbert space

H = −t(cid:88)i,a

i,aO(a)
σz

i

[τ z] − h(cid:88)i

Ai − J(cid:88)i,a

σx
i,a

(7)

Since each τ z
i operator commutes with the Hamiltonian,
we may restrict our attention to states in the constrained
Hilbert space that satisfy τ z
i = +1. This yields the gauge-
ﬁxed Hamiltonian

H = −t(cid:88)i,a

σz

i,a − h(cid:88)i

Ai − J(cid:88)i,a

σx
i,a

(8)

When t/h (cid:28) 1, it is convenient to identify an eﬀective
Hamiltonian that takes the form

Heﬀ = −K(cid:88)i,k

B(k)

i − h(cid:88)i

Ai − J(cid:88)i,a

σx
i,a

(9)

where we have introduced operators B(k)
at each lattice
site i. These operators are determined in perturbation

i

theory by computing the simplest product of σz terms
near a given lattice site that commute with the nexus
charge [B(k)
operators
obtained by applying this construction to the plaquette
Ising model are shown in Table I.

, Aj] = 0. As an example the B(k)

i

i

Our proposal bears resemblance to the construction of
a conventional lattice gauge theory. First, the Hamilto-
nian for Z2 gauge theory is recovered from the general
form of the Hamiltonian for the Ising matter and nexus
ﬁelds (6) if the matter ﬁelds couple through nearest-
neighbor two-body interactions, so that O(a)
i τ z
ia
where ia is nearest-neighbor to site i. This is in con-
trast to the multi-body interactions that are present in
our models with subsystem symmetry. In the gauge-ﬁxed
Hamiltonian (8), Ai then becomes the familiar Z2 charge
operator, while the operator Bn, appearing in the ef-
fective Hamiltonian Heﬀ , precisely measures the Z2 ﬂux
through an elementary plaquette.

i = τ z

i

i

Within our construction, the B(k)

operators provide
the natural generalization of the ﬂux in a lattice gauge
theory. As the excitation obtained by ﬂipping the eigen-
value of a B(k)
operator is often point-like, we will refer
to the excitation as a “generalized monopole”. While the
ﬂux is always a line-like excitation in a three-dimensional
Abelian lattice gauge theory, the behavior of the “gen-
eralized monopole” can be quite varied. As an example,
the generalized monopole is a fracton in both the checker-
board spin model and in Haah’s code, but is free to move
along a line without creating additional excitations in
the X-cube model. We refer to such an excitation as a
dimension-1 quasiparticle [18], as the excitation is only
mobile along a line. As shown in Figure 1b, a straight
Wilson line can create an isolated pair of the generalized
monopole excitations in the X-cube model, which can
only move along the line without creating additional ex-
citations. Within type-I fracton topological order, com-
posites of the fracton charge excitations that are mobile
in two dimensions can have non-trivial mutual statistics
with the generalized monopole. This is true in both the
checkerboard and X-cube models, where an anyon formed
from a composite of two fracton charges has π-statistics
with a generalized monopole in its plane of motion.

We now consider the generalized lattice gauge theory
(8) when J = 0, so that the nexus ﬁeld (deﬁned in the
σz-basis) has no dynamics. The resulting Hamiltonian

Hnexus = −t(cid:88)i,a

σz

i,a − h(cid:88)i

Ai

(10)

has a local symmetry, as the B(k)
operators commute
with each term in (10). We refer to the emergent local
constraints on the Hilbert space

i

B(k)

i

|Ψ(cid:105) = |Ψ(cid:105)

(11)

as the generalized “ﬂatness” condition, analogous to a
ﬂat connection in a continuum gauge theory, as these
constraints are obtained in the limit that there is zero
“ﬂux” of the nexus ﬁeld.

5

FIG. 2. A “domain wall” in the ground-state of the plaque-
tte Ising model (Hplaq) is depicted, by coloring the plaquette
interactions that have been ﬂipped by the action of a spin-
ﬂip transformation along a planar region Σ. The F-S duality
implies that the ground-state for the X-code fracton phase is
given by an equal superposition of a dual representation of
these domain-walls.

Our construction of a generalized lattice gauge theory
implies that the quantum dual of the Ising matter in the
presence of a transverse ﬁeld:

Hspin = −t(cid:88)i,a

O(a)

i

[τ z] − h(cid:88)i

τ x
i .

(12)

is precisely given by the nexus Hamiltonian (10), com-
bined with the generalized ﬂatness condition (11).

i

Without appealing to the generalized lattice gauge the-
ory, the duality can be obtained directly from the Hamil-
tonian Hspin. A dual representation is constructed by
placing the nexus spins at the centers of the interactions
O(a)
. The nexus spins are now interpreted as domain
wall variables for the ordered phase (t/h (cid:29) 1) of the
spin model Hspin. The nexus spins must satisfy local
constraints due to the geometry of the multi-spin interac-
tions O(a)
[τ ] in order to correspond to the physical space
of domain walls between ground-states of H0. These local
constraints are precisely given by the generalized ﬂatness
condition (11). As an example, the generalized monopole
operators B(k)
for the plaquette Ising model are obtained
by noting that the product of four plaquette interactions
that wrap a cube is equal to the identity. Our F-S dual-
ity implies a map between local operators in the Hilbert
spaces of the Ising matter and nexus ﬁelds, as summa-
rized in Table II. As an example, a domain wall in the
ground-state of the plaquette Ising model is shown in
Figure 2.

i

i

II. FRACTON TOPOLOGICAL ORDER

We now invoke the F-S duality to demonstrate that

the commuting Hamiltonian

Hfracton = −(cid:88)i,k

B(k)

i −(cid:88)i

Ai

(13)

exhibits fracton topological order. We argue that (i) the
spectrum of Hfracton has sub-extensive topological degen-

⌃Yi2⌃⌧xi)Hspin

O(a)

i

τ x
i

Hnexus

σz
i,a

Ai

Explanation

6

A classical conﬁguration of Ising spins (τ ) may be speciﬁed by spins (σ) placed at the
centers of each of the interaction terms O(a)

for the Ising matter.

i

The dual representation of τ x
i
of σx

i terms that correspond to the interactions ﬂipped by τ x
i .

is given by the nexus charge Ai, deﬁned as the product

(i,a)∈Q(j)

(cid:89)
(cid:102)W ≡ (cid:89)

(i,a)∈Σ

O(a)
i = 1 B(1)

j

|Ψ(cid:105) = |Ψ(cid:105)

A local product of interactions for the Ising matter ﬁelds that yields the identity
corresponds to a constraint on the dual Hilbert space. The constraint restricts the
Hilbert space of {σ} to that of domain wall conﬁgurations in the ordered phase of H0.

i W ≡ (cid:89)

O(a)

(i,a)∈Σ

σz
i,a

A product of σz operators is dual to a product of interaction terms for the matter
ﬁelds. As a result, the nexus charge is a fracton only if there is no product of
interaction terms that can create an isolated pair of spin-ﬂips.

TABLE II. Correspondence between operators in the Hilbert spaces of the Ising matter ﬁelds and the nexus spins, obtained
from the F-S duality.

eracy and that (ii) the nexus charge is fundamentally im-
mobile. We provide rigorous proofs of these statements in
the Appendix using techniques in commutative algebra
and elementary algebraic geometry, which provide eﬀec-
tive mathematical tools to study the subsystem symme-
tries of classical spin models, as well as the ground-state
degeneracy and excitation spectrum of fracton topolog-
ical phases. An algebraic representation of a classical
Ising system deﬁnes an algebraic variety over the ﬁeld of
characteristic 2 (F2), deﬁned by Z2 addition and multi-
plication [25]. Two conditions on this variety, as derived
in the Appendix from the Buchsbaum-Eisenbud criterion
[36, 37] for the exactness of a complex of free modules,
guarantee that the quantum dual exhibits fracton topo-
logical order.

We begin by using the F-S duality to demonstrate
that the sub-extensive degeneracy of the classical, h =
0 ground-state of Hspin implies that the Hamiltonian
Hfracton has sub-extensive topological ground-state de-
generacy on the torus. Recall that a product of τ x
i op-
erators along an appropriate subsystem Σ generates a
symmetry of the Hamiltonian Hspin. When t/h (cid:29) 1, the
ground-state exhibits classical, sub-extensive degeneracy
since there are O(L) independent subsystems along which
a spin-ﬂip commutes with all of the interaction terms
O(a)
. The plaquette Ising model, for example, commutes
with the product of τ x
i along a plane, and the ground-
state has sub-extensive, classical degeneracy since there
are O(L) independent planes along which a spin-ﬂip may
be performed.

i

From the operator dictionary for the F-S duality, the
dual representation of this spin-ﬂip operator is given by
a product of nexus charges Ai along the same subsystem
Σ. Furthermore, each interaction term O(a)
is dual to
a single-spin operator σz
i,a. Since the F-S duality pre-
serves the commutation relations between operators, we

i

conclude that due to the subsystem symmetry of Hspin,
the operators in the dual theory satisfy:

(cid:34)σz
i,a, (cid:89)i∈Σ

Ai(cid:35) = 0

(14)

for all i, a. This commutation relation can only be sat-
isﬁed if the product of nexus charges along Σ yields the

identity, so that(cid:81)i∈Σ Ai = 1. This relation implies that

not all of the nexus charge operators are independent on
the torus. Each of the O(L) independent subsystems as-
sociated with the subsystem symmetry of Hspin reduces
the number of independent nexus charge operators by
one. We denote the total number of such independent
subsystems by kA.

In the ground-state of the fracton Hamiltonian, the
2N -dimensional Hilbert space of N nexus spins is con-
strained by the M nexus charge and monopole operators
that appear in the Hamiltonian. However, only M − k
of the operators are independent on the torus, where
k = kA + kB is the number of “dependency relations”
on both the nexus charge and monopole operators. The
topological ground-state degeneracy on the torus is given
by D = 2k+(N−M ). When the number of interactions
appearing in Hfracton is identical to the total number
of nexus spins (N = M ), as is the case for all of the
fracton models considered in this work, the topological
degeneracy is precisely D = 2k.
In this case, the sub-
extensive degeneracy of the h = 0 ground-state of the
spin model Hspin provides a lower bound on the topo-
logical degeneracy of Hfracton. For example, the checker-
board spin model has topological ground-state degener-
acy log2 D = 6L − 6 on the length-L three-torus, as we
compute in the Appendix, while the tetrahedral Ising
model only has classical degeneracy log2 Dc ∼ O(3L)
since the model has subystem symmetries along three
orthogonal planes.

In addition to the sub-extensive, topological degener-
acy of Hfracton, we also wish to show that that there
is no degeneracy in the spectrum of Hamiltonian due
to the presence of local observables.
In the absence of
local observables, the local reduced density matrix will
be identical for any degenerate states in the spectrum
of the Hamiltonian, and the topological degeneracy, as
computed by constraint-counting, will be stable to local
perturbations [26]. As we demonstrate in the Appendix,
the ground-states of Hfracton are guaranteed to be locally
indistinguishable, provided that the classical spin system
H0 has no lower-dimensional symmetries along subsys-
tems of dimension ds < 2 (e.g. line-like symmetries). We
prove this by using an algebraic representation of Hfracton
and also argue this as a consequence of the F-S duality.
sub-
extensive topological degeneracy and that the degener-
ate ground-states are locally indistinguishable, we now
demonstrate that the nexus charge is indeed a fracton
excitation, provided that the spin model (12) satisﬁes a
simple condition. Consider acting on the ground-state of
Hfracton with the operator

Having demonstrated that Hfracton exhibits

W ≡ (cid:89)(i,a)∈Σ

σz
i,a

(15)

where Σ is some subset of the lattice. The operator W
will create nexus charge excitations by anti-commuting
with a collection of Ai operators. Invoking the F-S dual-
ity, we observe that the pattern of excitations created by
W is precisely given by the location of spin-ﬂips created
[τ z] when act-
ing on the paramagnetic state |Ψpara(cid:105) ≡ |→ ··· →(cid:105). The
spectrum of Hfracton contains fractons only if there is no

by the dual operator (cid:102)W ≡ (cid:81)(i,a)∈Σ O(a)
operator of the form (cid:102)W that can create a single pair of

spin-ﬂip excitations. If such an operator did exist, then it
would be possible to move a single nexus charge without
any energy cost and the charge would be mobile.

i

Our condition for the existence of fracton excitations is
simple to demonstrate for the plaquette Ising and tetra-
hedral Ising Hamiltonians. Here, it is evident that any
product of the four-spin interactions shown in Table I
creates at least four spin-ﬂip excitations when acting on

the paramagnetic state |(cid:101)Ψ(cid:105). Therefore, the nexus charge

for each of the corresponding Hfracton Hamiltonians is a
fracton. In fact, if any Ising Hamiltonian H0 has a sub-
system symmetry along three orthogonal planes, and two
or more independent interactions per lattice site, then
the quantum dual will always exhibit fracton topological
order, as we demonstrate in the Appendix. All Type-I
fracton topological phases that have been discovered thus
far ﬁt into this framework.

We now summarize the precise conditions on the clas-
sical spin system H0, as derived in the Appendix using
the algebraic representation of the classical spin system,
that guarantee that Hfracton exhibits fracton topological
order:

1. Hspin contains more than one independent interac-

7

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

FIG. 3. The nexus charge is a fracton only if there is no op-
erator W that can create an isolated pair of excitations when
acting on the ground-state of Hfracton, as in (a). Equivalently,
a dual representation of the operator, given as a product of
the interaction terms in the quantum dual as shown in (b),
cannot create an isolated pair of spin-ﬂips when acting on
the paramagnetic state |Ψpara(cid:105) ≡ |→ ··· →(cid:105). An example
is given in (c) and (d); a straight Wilson line acting on the
ground-state of HX-Cube in (c) admits a dual representation
as a product of four-spin plaquette interactions along a line,
as shown in (d). No product of interaction terms in the pla-
quette Ising model can produce an isolated pair of spin-ﬂips.
As a result, the nexus charge in HX-Cube must be a fracton.

tion term per lattice site

2. No product of the interaction terms (O(a)

erate an isolated pair of spin-ﬂips

i

) can gen-

III. PHASE DIAGRAM

We discuss the phase diagram of the spin-nexus Hamil-
tonian (6). In the limit t (cid:28) h, the nexus ﬁeld decouples
from the Ising matter; τ x
is set to 1, and the eﬀective
i
Hamiltonian for the nexus ﬁeld is

Ht(cid:28)h = −˜t(cid:88)i,k

B(k)

i − J(cid:88)i

σx
i .

(16)

i

The generalized Gauss’ law becomes Ai = 1. Here, ˜t is
some power of t as B(k)
is obtained from perturbation
theory. When J (cid:28) ˜t, the nexus ﬁeld forms a fracton
phase that is described by Hamiltonian Hfracton. The
topologically-ordered fracton phase and the Ising param-
agnet survive up to a ﬁnite t/h and J/h, as both phases
are gapped and stable to perturbations [26].

Conﬁnement: From the topologically-ordered fracton
phase, we may proceed in two directions. First, we con-
sider increasing J/h while keeping t/h (cid:28) 1, a constant.
Above a critical value (J/h) ≥ (J/h)∗, the ground-state
will be a condensate of nexus ﬂux excitations and the

8

each other, and the line of phase transitions must meet
at a self-dual point of the phase diagram. It is unknown
whether any of the indicated phase transitions in Fig. 4
are continuous.

IV. CONCLUDING REMARKS

Translationally-invariant,

commuting Hamiltonians
built from interacting qubits [25] and fermions [18] ad-
mit a convenient algebraic representation as a collection
of polynomials over a ﬁnite ﬁeld. The translation group
of the lattice is ZD, whose group algebra happens to be
the polynomial algebra. The polynomials conveniently
keep track of the support of various operators. Remark-
ably, this algebraic characterization of the Hamiltonian
terms enable us to decide whether the given Hamiltonians
is commuting, degenerate, topologically ordered, and the
nature of the excitations [18, 25]. Also, it gives a unique
method to calculate the ground-state degeneracy of our
exotic models. In the context of our nexus theory, the
polynomial representation has a natural physical inter-
pretation, as it precisely speciﬁes the generalized Gauss’
law Gn that deﬁnes the spin-nexus Hamiltonian (6). In
this way, the polynomial representation encodes the local
symmetry that deﬁnes a fracton topological phase. We
elaborate on these method in the appendix, which we aim
to be pedagogical.

With the identiﬁcation of a generalized Gauss’s law
that characterizes a fracton topological phase, our work
provides an important step towards searching for mate-
rial realizations of fracton topological order. Such a local
conservation law can, in principle, appear in physical sys-
tems such as frustrated magnets, where our generalized
gauge theory can emerge as an eﬀective description at
low energies, leading to fracton topological order.

Note Added: Near the completion of this work, we were

informed that a related work is being written up [38].

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by the David and Lucile
Packard Foundation (LF and SV) and the Pappalardo
Fellowship in Physics at MIT (JH).

(a)

(b)

FIG. 4. Schematic phase diagram of (a) the spin-nexus Hamil-
tonian (6). The ‘Higgs’ phase for the nexus ﬁeld is smoothly
connected to the phase reached by condensing the nexus
charge. The checkerboard model coupled to Ising matter
ﬁelds admits an additional self-duality under the exchange
of the nexus charge and ﬂux; as a result, the phase diagram
is as shown in (b).

fracton topological order will be destroyed. The nature
of the transition between the fracton phase and the triv-
ial (conﬁned) phase is currently unknown.

i

‘Higgs’ Phase: We now consider the region of the phase
diagram where t (cid:29) h, keeping J (cid:28) h at a ﬁxed con-
stant. Here, the matter ﬁelds enter an ordered state with
i O(a)
(cid:104)σz
[τ z](cid:105) = 1. This may be seen as the analog of a
‘Higgs’ phase, as the Ising order gives the nexus ﬁeld
a mass m ∼ O(t) that destroys the fracton topological
phase. The ground-state in this region of the phase dia-
gram is non-degenerate, even though the ordered phase
of the pure spin model (12) has sub-extensive degener-
acy. We may demonstrate this by observing that in the
gauge-ﬁxed Hamiltonian (8), increasing t/h destroys the
fracton topological order by condensing the nexus charge,
and produces a non-degenerate ground-state. We also
observe from Heﬀ that the conﬁned and Higgs regions of
the spin-nexus phase diagram are smoothly connected,
as in the Ising lattice gauge theory. We summarize our
schematic phase diagram in Fig. 4a.

In passing, we observe that the checkerboard fracton
Hamiltonian in Table I in the presence of two transverse
i,a) has
a symmetry under σz ⇔ σx. This implies that the phase
diagram should be symmetric under K ↔ h and J ↔ t.
The conﬁnement and ‘Higgs’ transition must be dual to

ﬁelds H = −K(cid:80)c Bc−h(cid:80)c Ac−(cid:80)i,j(J σx

i,a +t σz

[1] F. Wegner, “Duality in Generalized Ising Models and
Phase Transitions without Local Order Parameters”, J.
Math Phys. 12, 2259 (1971).

[2] E. Fradkin and S. Shenker, “Phase diagrams of lattice
gauge theories with Higgs ﬁelds”, Phys. Rev. D 19, 3682
(1979).

[3] S. C. Zhang, T. H. Hansson, and S. Kivelson, “Eﬀective-
Field-Theory Model for the Fractional Quantum Hall Ef-
fect”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 82 (1989).

[4] X. G. Wen and Q. Niu, “Ground-state degeneracy of the
fractional quantum Hall states in the presence of a random
potential and on high-genus Riemann surfaces”, Phys.
Rev. B 41, 9377 (1990).

[5] S. Sachdev and N. Read, “Large-N expansion for frus-
trated quantum antiferromagnets”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 66,
1773 (1991).

[6] X. G. Wen, “Mean-ﬁeld theory of spin-liquid states with
ﬁnite energy gap and topological orders”, Phys. Rev. B

J/ht/hFractonPhase‘Higgs’/ConﬁnedPhase(TrivialParamagnet)(t/h)⇤9

44, 2664 (1991).

11 1379-1396 (1996).

[7] T. Senthil and M. P. A. Fisher, “Z2 gauge theory of
electron fractionalization in strongly correlated systems”,
Phys. Rev. B 62, 7850 (2000).

[8] R. Moessner, S. L. Sondhi, “Resonating Valence Bond
Phase in the Triangular Lattice Quantum Dimer Model”,
Phys. Rev. Lett 86, 1881 (2001).

[9] A. Yu. Kitaev, “Fault-tolerant quantum computation by

anyons”, Annals Phys. 303, 2 (2003).

[10] M. Hermele, M. P. A. Fisher, L. Balents, “Pyrochlore
photons: The U (1) spin liquid in a S = 1
2 three-
dimensional frustrated magnet”, Phys. Rev. B 69, 064404
(2004).

[11] X. G. Wen, Quantum Field Theory of Many-Body Sys-

tems. Oxford University Press, Oxford (2004).

[12] B. I. Halperin, “Statistics of Quasiparticles and the Hi-
erarchy of Fractional Quantized Hall States”, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 52, 1583 (1984).

[13] D. Arovas, J. R. Schrieﬀer, and F. Wilczek, “Fractional
Statistics and the Quantum Hall Eﬀect”, Phys. Rev. Lett.
53, 722 (1984).

[14] C. Chamon, “Quantum Glassiness in Strongly Correlated
Clean Systems: An Example of Topological Overprotec-
tion”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 040402 (2005).

[15] S. Bravyi, B. Leemhuis, and B. Terhal, “Topological or-
der in an exactly solvable 3D spin model”, Ann. Phys.
326, 839 (2011).

[16] J. Haah, “Local stabilizer codes in three dimensions with-
out string logical operators”, Phys. Rev. A 83, 042330
(2011).

[17] B. Yoshida, “Exotic topological order in fractal spin liq-

uids”, Phys. Rev. B 88, 125122 (2013).

[18] S. Vijay, J. Haah and L. Fu, “A New Kind of Topological
Quantum Order: A Dimensional Hierarchy of Quasiparti-
cles Built from Stationary Excitations”, Phys. Rev. B 92,
235136 (2015).

[19] S. Bravyi and J. Haah, “Quantum Self-Correction in the
3D Cubic Code Model”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 200501
(2013).

[20] I. H. Kim and J. Haah, “Localization from Superselection
Rules in Translationally Invariant Systems”, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 116, 027202 (2016).

[21] B. M. Terhal, “Quantum error correction for quantum

memories”, Rev. Mod. Phys. 87, 307 (2015).

[22] C. D. Batista and Zohar Nussinov, Phys. Rev. B 72,

045137 (2005).

[23] Z. Nussinov and E. Fradkin, “Discrete Sliding Symme-
tries, Dualities, and Self-dualities of Quantum Orbital
Compass Models and (p + ip) Superconducting Arrays”,
Phys. Rev. B 71, 195120 (2005).

[24] N. Read, “Topological phases and quasiparticle braid-

ing”, Physics Today, 65, 38 (2012);

[25] J. Haah, “Commuting Pauli Hamiltonians as maps be-
tween free modules”, Commun. Math. Phys. 324 351-399
(2013)..

[26] S. Bravyi, M. Hastings and S. Michalakis, “Topological
quantum order: stability under local perturbations”, J.
Math. Phys. 51 093512 (2010).

[27] G. K. Savvidy and F. J. Wegner, “Geometrical string and

spin systems ”, Nucl. Phys. B 413, 605 (1994).

[28] G. K. Savvidy and K. G. Savvidy, “Self-avoiding surfaces

and spin systems”, Physics Letters B 324 72-77 (1994).

[29] G. K. Savvidy and K. G. Savvidy, “Interaction hierarchy:
string and quantum gravity”, Modern Physics Letters A

[30] R. Pietig and F. J. Wegner, “Low temperature expansion
of the gonihedric Ising model”, Nucl. Phys. B 525 549-570
(1998).

[31] A. Lipowski, D. Johnston and D. Espriu, “Slow dynamics
of Ising models with energy barriers”, Phys. Rev. E 62,
3404 (2000).

[32] P. Dimopoulos, D. Espriu, E. Jan and A. Prats, “Slow dy-
namics in the three-dimensional gonihedric model”, Phys.
Rev. E 66, 056112 (2002).

[33] More precisely, a conﬁguration of Ising spins may be spec-
iﬁed exactly by the eigenvalues of interaction terms in the
Hamiltonian, only up to spin-ﬂips performed along sub-
systems that leave all of the interaction terms invariant.

[34] A. E. Lipstein, R. A. Reid-Edwards, “Lattice Gerbe The-

ory”, JHEP 09 (2014).

[35] D. A. Johnston, “Z2 Lattice Gerbe Theory”, Phys. Rev.

D 90, 107701 (2014).

[36] D. Eisenbud, Commutative algebra with a view toward
algebraic geometry, Grad. Texts in Math. 150, Springer-
Verlag, (1994).

[37] D. A. Buchsbaum and D. Eisenbud, “What Makes a
Complex Exact?”, Journal of Algebra 25, 259-268 (1973).

[38] D. Williamson, Private Communication (2016).

Appendix A: Algebraic Construction of a Fracton

Hamiltonian from a Classical Spin System

Commutative algebra and elementary algebraic geom-
etry provide an indispensable machinery for demonstrat-
ing the results summarized in the main text. Start-
ing from a purely algebraic representation of commuting
Pauli Hamiltonians, as originally introduced in Ref. [2],
we demonstrate that certain classical spin systems with
subsystem symmetry may be used to construct a com-
muting Hamiltonian with fracton topological order. Only
the data contained in the classical spin model is required
as input to generate the topologically-ordered fracton
Hamiltonian. This map between a classical spin system
and a topologically-ordered Hamiltonian may be used to
construct a wide variety of topological orders, ranging
from conventional ZN gauge theory to the type-I and
type-II fracton topological orders presented in the main
text. Our presentation of this correspondence in this sec-
tion, while mathematically inclined, is self-contained and
includes a rigorous and precise statement of the results
summarized in the main text.

Given a translationally-invariant Pauli Hamiltonian
(also called stabilizer or additive code Hamiltonian) it
is possible to write a purely algebraic representation of
the Hamiltonian, known as the stabilizer map [2]. For a
Hamiltonian deﬁned on a d-dimensional lattice with an (cid:96)-
site basis, and containing m distinct operators per lattice
site, the stabilizer map will be a 2(cid:96)×m matrix of Laurent
polynomials over the ﬁnite ﬁeld F2. The prescription to
obtain the stabilizer matrix is as follows. Given a Pauli
operator (a tensor product of Pauli matrices), write it as
a product of two Pauli operators, where one entirely con-
sists of σx and the other of σz, using σy = iσxσz. Select a

reference site s0. Relative to s0, an arbitrary site where a
Pauli matrix acts on will be given by an integer displace-
ment vector, e.g., (a, b, c) in three dimensions, and one
writes it as xaybzc. Thus, every nontrivial factor σx or
σz gives a monomial xaybzc. Collect all monomials corre-
sponding to σz that act on a-th spins in the unit cell, and
combine them with +. This give a Laurent polynomial
that goes into a-th component in a column vector. The
sum of monomials corresponding to σx goes into (a + (cid:96))-
th component. This way, one obtains a column vector
of Laurent polynomials associated with the Pauli opera-
tor. For each type of term in the Hamiltonian, repeat the
process to obtain a collection of column vectors, that is a
matrix. Note that the overall sign of the Pauli operator
is dismissed. We denote by p(O) the Laurent polynomial
vector corresponding to the Pauli operator O.

and that in zx-plane is by 1 + x + z + xz. The stabilizer
map is

10

Splaq =(cid:18)1 + x + y + xy 1 + y + z + yz 1 + x + z + xz

0

0

0

(cid:19) .

(A3)

Below, we will often omit the zero rows, which will not
cause any confusion when it is clear from the context
whether the operator is of σz or σx type.

We now summarize our main results using algebraic
language. Given the stabilizer map of the form Sc for a
classical spin Hamiltonian in d spatial dimensions, con-
sider the ideal I(Sc) ≡ (cid:104)f1, . . . , fn(cid:105), deﬁned as the set of
all linear combinations of the polynomials f1, . . . , fn in
the stabilizer map:

From the stabilizer map S, we may then deﬁne the
excitation map E, deﬁned so that E · p(O) yields the
pattern of excitations created by O when acting on the
ground-state of the stabilizer Hamiltonian. As shown
in [2], the excitation map is given by E ≡ S†λ(cid:96) with
S† ≡ (S)T and where

λ(cid:96) ≡(cid:18) 0

1(cid:96)×(cid:96)

1(cid:96)×(cid:96)

0 (cid:19) .

Here, S indicates that each monomial in the stabilizer
map has been inverted, e.g. for the polynomial f (x, y, z)
we have f (x, y, z) = f (x, y, z) with x ≡ x−1, y ≡ y−1,
z ≡ z−1. The following are necessary conditions for the
stabilizer map to correspond to a topologically-ordered
stabilizer Hamiltonian. First, all terms in the Hamilto-
nian commute if and only if S†λ(cid:96)S = E · S = 0 [2]. Sec-
ond, we require that any degenerate ground-states on the
torus are locally indistinguishable, so that the degener-
acy is topological in nature. This is guaranteed if, on an
inﬁnite system, ker E = im S. This means that any local
operator commuting with the stabilizer Hamiltonian is
always a product of operators already appearing in the
Hamiltonian.

Consider the classical spin Hamiltonian H0, deﬁned on
a Bravais lattice with a single spin per lattice site. The
stabilizer map for this classical spin Hamiltonian takes
the form

Sc ≡(cid:18) f1 f2 ··· fn
0 ··· 0 (cid:19)

0

(A2)

As the Hamiltonian is classical and contains only τ z-type
terms, the second row in the stabilizer map is identically
zero.

As an example, consider the plaquette Ising model.
There are three plaquette terms depending on their ori-
entation. The plaquette in the xy-plane couples spins
at (0, 0, 0), (1, 0, 0), (0, 1, 0), and (1, 1, 0) by τ z opera-
tors. The position coordiantes are translated into the
monomials as 1, x, y, xy, respectively, and thus the the
plaquette term is mapped to 1 + x + y + xy. Likewise, the
plaquette term in yz-plane is represented by 1+y+z+yz,

I(Sc) ≡(cid:40) n(cid:88)i=1

cifi (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) ci ∈ F2[x±1 , . . . , x±d ](cid:41) .

(A4)

If the ideal I(Sc) constructed from the stabilizer map
satisﬁes the following conditions, then the quantum dual
obtained by our prescription in the main text exhibits
fracton topological order.

(A1)

1. Co-dimension Condition: The stabilizer ideal
must have a suﬃciently large co-dimension (height)

codim I(Sc) ≥ 2.

(A5)

Physically, this means that the classical spin Hamil-
tonian must have at least two independent interac-
tions per lattice site. This condition alone ensures
that the quantum dual of the classical model with
transversal ﬁeld is topologically ordered.

2. Fracton Condition: The stabilizer ideal I(Sc) ≡

(cid:104)f1, . . . , fn(cid:105) does not contain binomial terms,

1 + xn1

1 ··· xnd

d /∈ I(Sc)

(A6)

for all n1, . . . , nd > 0. Physically, this guaran-
tees that, in the topologically-ordered Hamiltonian
built from the algebraic data in the classical spin
model, the elementary topological excitations are
immobile.

3. Planar symmetries imply the fracton con-
dition: Planar symmetries on xy, yz, and zx
planes imply fi(1, 1, z) = 0, fi(x, 1, 1) = 0, and
fi(1, y, 1) = 0 for all i, respectively. The latter con-
ditions combined imply the fracton condition.

If the ﬁrst two conditions are satisﬁed, then we may
build a commuting Hamiltonian with fracton topological
order from the data in the classical stabilizer map Sc.
The topological ground-state degeneracy of this Hamil-
tonian will take the general form log2 D ∼ c1Ld−2 on
the length-L torus.

1. Symmetries

inﬁnite sum h(O) = (cid:80)(cid:126)s xs1 ys2zs3 where (cid:126)s ranges over

An operator O, given by a product of τ x terms, gen-
erates a subsystem symmetry if O commutes with the
classical Hamiltonian H0. In the polynomial representa-
tion, the non-local operator O is expressed by a formal
all spins where O acts on by τ x. The commutativity of
O with the Hamiltonian is equivalent to the requirement
that O does not create any excitations when acting on
the ground-state. This is the case if and only if the im-
age of h(O) under the excitation map E = S†λ1 is zero:
E h(O) = 0, or equivalently, h(¯x, ¯y, ¯z)S = 0.
As an example, consider an operator Oxy that ﬂips
all spins on an xy-plane. The polynomial representation
reads

11

(cid:81)

i∈∂p τ z

FIG. 5. Dual representation of the plaquette Ising model in
the presence of a transverse ﬁeld. We place nexus spins at the
p ≡
center of each four-spin plaquette interaction, so that σx
i . The product of four adjacent four-spin interactions
that wrap around the cube is equal to the identity (e.g. the
product of plaquette interactions p, q, r and u). In the dual
representation, this leads to the indicated constraints at each
cube. Only two of the three constraints are independent.

hxy = (cid:88)n,m∈Z

xnym = hxy.

(A7)

sponds to a nontrivial relation

This formal inﬁnite series has a property that xhxy =
hxy = yhxy, which is just another expression of the fact
that Oxy is translation invariant within the xy-plane.
Consequently, for any Laurent polynomial f (x, y, z) we
have f (x, y, z)hxy = f (1, 1, z)hxy. We observe that this
is a symmetry of the plaquette Ising model, whose stabi-
lizer map is found in (A3), since

hxy · (1 + x + y + xy) = hxy · (1 + 1 + 1 + 1) = 0,
hxy · (1 + y + z + yz) = hxy · (1 + 1 + z + z) = 0,
hxy · (1 + x + z + xz) = hxy · (1 + 1 + z + z) = 0.

Due to the translation invariance of the model, the op-
erator Oxy at any xy-plane is a symmetry. In the poly-
nomial representation, the operator Oxy at z = c-plane
is expressed as zchxy and the above equation is trivially
satisﬁed. We leave it to readers to verify that similar
operators on yz- and zx-planes are symmetries of the
plaquette Ising model.

2. F-S duality

Recall that the local symmetry operator Gi = τ x

i Ai
was deﬁned by Ai =(cid:81)a∈P (i) σx
i,a where P (i) is the set of
all classical interaction terms O(a)
that anti-commutes
with τ x
In the polynomial formulation, P (i) is ex-
i .
actly the image of p(τ x
i ) (the polynomials representing
τ x
i , which is a unit vector) under the excitation map
S†c λ1. This means that the polynomial representation
of the operator Ai is the conjugate transpose of the ﬁrst
row of Sc.

i

The “ﬂatness” constraint operator Bk is obtained by
considering the nontrivial local product of O(a)
that be-
comes the identity. Since the identity is a zero vector in
the polynomial representation, Each Bk operator corre-

i

bap(O(a)

i

) = 0

(A8)

(cid:96)(cid:88)a=1

i

where p(O(a)
) = (Sc)a is the polynomial representing
the τ z-type classical interaction term. The collection
of vectors b in the relation is the kernel of the matrix
Sc. There are ﬁnitely many generators G(k) of ker Sc,
where G(k) ∈ F2[x±, y±, z±](cid:96). (The fact that there are
only ﬁnitely many generators is a property of the ring
F2[x±, y±, z±] being Noetherian.) These generators are
nothing but the polynomial representation of Bk.

For the plaquette Ising model, ker Splaq has two gen-

erators

G(1) = (1 + z, 1 + x, 0)T
G(2) = (0, 1 + x, 1 + y)T .

(A9)

(A10)

Each generator encodes the product of the appropriate
plaquette interactions at each cube that yield the iden-
tity, as shown in Fig. 5.

Summarizing, given a classical Hamiltonian repre-
sented by a row matrix Sc of Laurent polynomials,
we have obtained a quantum model whose Hamiltonian
terms corresponds to the columns of the following stabi-
lizer map.

Sf = S†c ⊕ G =(cid:18)S†c 0
0 G(cid:19)

where

is a matrix enumerating generators of ker Sc
columns. The excitation map is then

··· G(m)(cid:1)
G =(cid:0)G(1)
Ef = S†f λ(cid:96) =(cid:18) 0 Sc
G† 0 (cid:19) .

(A11)

(A12)

in its

(A13)

 xp xq xr xs xt xu⌧zi xp xq xr xu| i=| i xp xt xr xs| i=| i xq xs xu xt| i=| iPhysically, this Hamiltonian is deﬁned on a Bravais lat-
tice with an (cid:96)-site basis. At each lattice site, the Hamil-
tonian has a single “σx-type” (nexus charge) interaction
and m “σz-type” (nexus ﬂux) interactions.

A wide range of conventional and fracton topological
orders are described by stabilizer maps of the form Sf =
S†c ⊕ G. Physically, this means that these topologically
ordered states are built by “gauging” the symmetry of a
classical spin system, which can be easily read oﬀ from
the stabilizer map Sf for the topologically ordered state.
First, the stabilizer map built from the plaquette Ising

model (see (A3)) is given as

SX-Cube =

(A14)



1 + x + y + xy
1 + y + z + yz
1 + x + z + xz

0
0
0

0
0
0

1 + z
1 + x 1 + x
1 + y

0

0
0
0
0



This stabilizer map corresponds to the topologically or-
dered “X-Cube” fracton Hamiltonian presented in the
main text. Second, all commuting Hamiltonians for ZN
topological order in two- and three-dimensions are de-
scribed by stabilizer maps of this form. The stabilizer
Hamiltonian for three-dimensional Z2 topological order
is given by

1 + x
1 + y
1 + z

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

1 + y 1 + z
1 + x

0

1 + z
1 + x 1 + y

0

0
0
0
0

.

(A15)



0
0

SZ2 =


SHaah =

Furthermore, the Haah’s code, a topologically ordered
state with only immobile topological excitations is de-
scribed by the stabilizer map

1 + xy + yz + xz

1 + x + y + z

0
0

1 + x + y + z

1 + xy + yz + xz

 .

(A16)

We may immediately read oﬀ the classical spin systems
whose symmetries have been “gauged” to obtain these
topologically ordered states, since the stabilizer map Sf
contains the classical excitation map Ec = S†c λ1. For
example, from the stabilizer map for 3D Z2 topological
order, we identify the stabilizer map

SIsing = (1 + x, 1 + y, 1 + z)

(A17)

which precisely describes the classical 3D Ising model on
the simple cubic lattice. A more exotic example is given
by the classical spin system

Sfractal = (1 + xy + yz + xz

, 1 + x + y + z

)

(A18)

(cid:124)

f

(cid:123)(cid:122)

(cid:125)

(cid:124)

g

(cid:123)(cid:122)

(cid:125)

12

FIG. 6. The classical spin model deﬁned on the cubic lattice
with fractal subsystem symmetry that corresponds to Haah’s
code. The spin model may be conveniently written as a sum of
two types of four-spin interactions at each cube, as indicated
above.

which is used to build Haah’s code. A schematic repre-
sentation of this classical spin Hamiltonian is shown in
Fig. 6 as a sum of two types of four-spin interactions at
each cube on the three-dimensional cubic lattice. The
precise subsystem symmetry in this classical spin model
is highly sensitive to the boundary conditions imposed
on the system. For simplicity, we consider the length-L
three-torus with L = 2n for positive integers n. Using
the fact that f 2n
∈ bL = (xL + 1, yL + 1, zL + 1), we
ﬁnd a symmetry generator

, g2n

h = f 2n−1g2n−1.

(A19)

This symmetry generator, which corresponds to a spin-
ﬂip transformation on a fractal conﬁguration on the
three-dimensional cubic lattice that resembles a Sierpin-
ski triangle, is quite diﬀerent from the planar symmetry
for the plaquette Ising model. It is this fractal subsystem
symmetry that is “gauged” to obtain the corresponding
topologically-ordered state, known as Haah’s code [6].

3. The codimension condition implies topological

order

The codimension of an ideal of polynomials fi is the
codimension of the algebraic variety (zero-locus) deﬁned
by the system of polynomial equations fi = 0. The
variety may be neither smooth nor connected. One
has to look at the component of the largest geomet-
ric dimension and take the diﬀerence of that dimen-
sion from the ambient dimension, in order to obtain the
correct codimension. For instance, the codimension of
((x−1)(y−1), (x−1)(z−1)) is 1 since the zero-locus con-
tains a plane x = 1 in three-dimensional space, whereas
the codimension of (z − 1, y − 1) is 2 since the zero-locus
is the line given by z = 1 = y. Although this codimen-
sion criterion can never be met in one spatial dimension,
the codimension criterion is fairly mild in higher dimen-
sions. For example, it is satisﬁed by the standard Ising
model with nearest neighbor interaction on two or higher
dimensional lattices, and the ideal I(Sc) has codimension

O(2)i[⌧]=⌧zi⌧zm⌧zn⌧zpO(1)i[⌧]=⌧zi⌧zj⌧zk⌧z`ijk`f(x,y,z)=1+x+y+zg(x,y,z)=1+xy+yz+xznmpithat is equal to the spatial dimension, the maximum pos-
sible value. In fact, the exotic topological phases that we
investigate exploits this mild requirement, and all our
examples have the property that I(Sc) has codimension
exactly two, saturating the inequality in the criterion
codim I(Sc) ≥ 2.
We now return to the stabilizer map Sf = Ec ⊕ G
and show that Sf indeed corresponds to a topologically
ordered and commuting Hamiltonian. First, Sc · G = 0
implies that G†·S†c = 0, and hence Ef·Sf = 0; the Hamil-
tonian corresponding to the stabilizer map Sf consists of
all commuting terms. In addition, we have ker Sc = im G
by deﬁnition. As a result, the local indistinguishability
condition for any degenerate ground-states of the stabi-
lizer Hamiltonian on the torus, given by ker Ef = im Sf ,
is satisﬁed if and only if ker G† = im S†c . Said diﬀerently,
the complex

†

†

0 → R1 S

c−→ R(cid:96) G

−→ Rm

(A20)

where Rn is a free module of rank n over the Laurent
polynomial ring R = F2[x±, y±, z±], must be exact. The
equivalent condition for this to be true is our condition
codim I(Sc) ≥ 2. The proof of this is purely algebraic,
and a general reader might want to skip the rest of this
subsection.

A criterion for the exactness of a complex of free

modules is provided by the following [4, 5]:

Theorem [Buchsbaum-Eisenbud] A chain complex of
free modules over R = F2[x±, y±, z±]

0 → Fn

φn−→ Fn−1

φn−1−→ ··· F2

φ2−→ F1

φ1−→ F0

(A21)

is exact if and only if

• rank(Fi) = rank(φi) + rank(φi+1) for i = 1, . . . , n

and

• codim I(φi) ≥ i for i = 1, . . . , n.

Here, I(φi) is the k-th determinantal ideal Ik(φi) with
the largest k such that Ik(φi) (cid:54)= 0.

The k-th determinantal ideal is one that generated by
all determinants of k×k submatrices. It is important that
the complex is terminated with 0 at the left end. (The
original theorem is more general than we state here, and
is given in terms of depth of the determinantal ideal. In
general, the codimension only upper bounds the depth,
and the two notions are not equal. However, our Laurent
polynomial ring is suﬃciently nice, i.e., Cohen-Macaulay,
that the two quantities are equal for any ideal; our ring
is obtained from a polynomial ring over a ﬁeld followed
by localization by a single element xyz.)

We apply the Buchsbaum-Eisenbud criterion to our
complex (A20). Since ker Sc = im G, we know by the
theorem that rank Sc + rank G = (cid:96) and codim I(G) ≥ 2.
Since the conjugation is an automorphism of R, the rank

13

is invariant under conjugate transpose. This implies that
rank S†c + rank G† = (cid:96) and codim I(G†) ≥ 2. Since S†c
has one column, we have rank S†c = 1. These implies
the ﬁrst condition. All we need is the second condition,
codim I(G†) ≥ 1 and codim I(S†c ) ≥ 2. The former is
already shown, and the latter is exactly our requirement.
An example of a classical spin system that violates our
codimension condition is given by the stabilizer map Sc =
(f, g), with f = 1+x and g = 1+x+y +z +xy +yz +xz +
xyz. This classical spin system has a linear subsystem
symmetry as the symmetry generator

hx =(cid:88)n∈Z

xn

(A22)

satisﬁes hxf = 0 = hxg. We see that codim I(Sc) = 1,
since the zero-locus of the polynomials f and g contains
a plane given by x = 1. Therefore, the stabilizer map
Sf = S†c ⊕ G for this classical spin model corresponds
to a commuting Hamiltonian with degeneracy due to lo-
cal observables (order parameter) and does not exhibit
topological order.

i

While we have provided an algebraic condition on the
classical spin model that guarantees that the dual Hamil-
tonian with stabilizer map Sf , has no local observables,
we may also argue for the local indistinguishability of the
ground-states using the F-S duality. Ground-states of
the Hamiltonian Hfracton, using the notation presented
in the main text, satisfy B(k)
|Ψ(cid:105) = Ai |Ψ(cid:105) = |Ψ(cid:105), and
will be locally indistinguishable if any local operator that
commutes with Hfracton can be written as a product of
nexus charges Ai or generalized monopole operators B(k)
.
Recall that the generalized monopole operators are de-
ﬁned as the set of all local, σz-type operators that com-
mute with the nexus charges. Therefore, by construction,
the only σz-type operators that commute with Hfracton
are products of B(k)

.

i

i

We now invoke the F-S duality to argue that any lo-
cal, σx-type operator that commutes with Hfracton can
be written as a product of nexus charges, provided that
the classical spin model H0 has no lower-dimensional
(ds < 2) subsystem symmetries. Assume that such a
σx-type operator OX does exist, that can distinguish the
ground-states of Hfracton. Since this operator commutes
with all of the generalized monopole operators, OX cor-
responds to a valid domain wall conﬁguration that can be
created by acting on the ground-state of the spin model
H0. Therefore, we may invoke the F-S duality to con-
struct a dual representation of OX in terms of the Ising
matter ﬁelds. Since OX is a σx-type operator that cannot
be written as a local product of nexus charges, however,

product of τ x
i operators. Physically, this duality implies
that performing spin-ﬂips along a this non-local by act-

its dual representation (cid:103)OX will be given by a non-local
ing with (cid:103)OX on the classical ground-state of H0 will ﬂip
a local set of interaction terms O(a)
at a point at the
boundary of the region, as speciﬁed by the support of
the operator OX . By taking products of the OX opera-

i

tors, it is possible to reduce the dimension ds along which

the dual operator (cid:103)OX has support to ds < 2. However,

this immediately implies that on the torus, the classical
spin system H0 has a subsystem symmetry along a region
that is of smaller dimension than a plane. Therefore,
by requiring that H0 has no lower-dimensional ds < 2
subsystem symmetries, we guarantee the local indistin-
guishability of the ground-states of Hfracton.

4. The Fracton Condition

We now consider the excitation map Ef for the com-
muting, topologically-ordered Hamiltonian built from the
data contained in the classical spin model. We show that
the topological excitations of this model are fractons if
and only if the stabilizer ideal I(Sc) ≡ (cid:104)f1, . . . , fn(cid:105) con-
tains no binomial terms (the fracton condition above).
From the excitation map Ef (A13), we observe that one
of the excitations (the nexus charge) lives on the sites of
the lattice. An operator O that is a product of σz terms,
when acting on the ground-state, generates a pattern of
nexus charge excitations. The possible nexus charge con-
ﬁgurations by ﬁnitely supported operators are in one-to-
one correspondence with the image of the excitation map;
this is the deﬁning property of the excitation map. The
submatrix of the excitation map that is responsible for
the nexus charge consists of one row, which is the same
as Sc, and therefore the image is equal to the I(Sc).

A topological excitation is a fracton if it is impossi-
ble to create an isolated pair of such excitations from
the ground-state. Hence, the stabilizer Hamiltonian Sf
exhibits fracton topological order if and only if I(Sc) con-
tains no binomial terms

1 + xn1 ··· xnd /∈ I(Sc)

(A23)

for all n1, . . ., nd ∈ Z. This is a condition on the classi-

cal spin Hamiltonian that no product of any interactions
h(i)[τ ] can simply be a product of a pair τ z terms. For
example, the classical Ising model, with nearest-neighbor
spin-spin interactions, trivially violates this condition in
any dimension. It is not always obvious to test whether
an ideal contains a binomial. We explain one test tech-
nique with examples shortly.

The fracton condition cannot be satisﬁed if the codi-
mension of I(Sc) is equal to the spatial dimension, the
maximum value [2]. In the latter is true, then any point-
like excitation appears at the tip of some string like op-
erator, which can be freely bent in the system, and it
behaves as an ordinary particle.

5. Classical Spin Models with Planar subsystem

Symmetry

In this section, we show that applying our construction
to classical spin models with spin-ﬂip symmetries along

14

planes always yields a fracton topological phase. Con-
sider a stabilizer map Sc = (f1, . . . , fn) for a classical
spin Hamiltonian, where f1, . . . , fn are Laurent polyno-
mials. As we have shown in Appendix A 1, the symmetry
generators

hxy = (cid:88)n,m∈Z
hyz = (cid:88)n,m∈Z
hxz = (cid:88)n,m∈Z

xnym,

ynzm,

xnzm

hxyfi = 0
hyzfi = 0
hxzfi = 0

satisfy

(A24)

for all i = 1, . . . , n. We also have seen that hxyg(x, y, z) =
g(1, 1, z), etc.,
for any Laurent polynomial g. The
symmetry condition then implies that the polynomials
fi(1, 1, t), fi(1, t, 1), fi(t, 1, 1) are identically zero for all
i. That is, (1, 1, t), etc., are roots of the polynomials
fi. Geometrically, this means that the variety deﬁned
by fi(x, y, z) = 0 contains three lines parametrized by
t (cid:55)→ (1, 1, t), (1, t, 1), (t, 1, 1).
We can use this observation to show the fracton condi-
tion. Suppose on the contrary that the ideal I(Sc) con-
tains a binomial term.

1 + xaybzc ∈ I(Sc).

(A25)

Since any member of the ideal is a linear combination of
generators, we have

gi(x, y, z)fi(x, y, z).

(A26)

1 + xaybzc =(cid:88)i
1 + tc =(cid:88)i

Let us substitute x, y, z with the solution (1, 1, t):

gi(1, 1, t)fi(1, 1, t) = 0.

(A27)

Since this has to be true as a polynomial in t, we deduce
that c = 0. Likewise, the solution (1, t, 1) implies b = 0,
and (t, 1, 1) implies a = 0. Therefore, our binomial was
actually 1 + x0y0z0 = 0, and the ideal I(Sc) does not
contain any binomial.

It has to be noted that the fracton condition (the ab-
sence of binomial) alone does not imply that the F-S dual
of the classical spin model is topologically ordered; the
codimension condition should be checked separately. If
the initial classical model had line-like symmetries, then
we would have solutions of form e.g. (t1, t2, 1). This has
a codimension 1, and the hence codim I(Sc) ≤ 1, and the
F-S dual would not be topologically ordered.
We conclude that for any classical spin system with
spin-ﬂip symmetries along all three orthogonal planes

and no “lower dimensional” symmetries, our construc-
tion for gauging this symmetry will give rise to a fracton
topological phase.

Let us demonstrate that the nexus charge in the “X-
Cube” Hamiltonian is a fracton excitation using the
above technique. Recall that I(Sc) = (cid:104)1 + x + y + xy, 1 +
y + z + yz, 1 + x + z + xz(cid:105) for the plaquette Ising model.
The symmetry generators hxy, hyz, hxz of (A24) is in-
deed the symmetries of the X-Cube model, and there-
fore I(Sc) does not contain any binomial. By solving the
equation 1 + x + y + xy = 0, 1 + y + z + yz = 0, and
1 + x + z + xz = 0, we see that (1, 1, t), (1, t, 1), and
(t, 1, 1) are the only solutions, which are lines of geomet-
ric dimension 1, and therefore the codimension of I(Sc)
is equal to 2. Therefore, X-Cube model has fracton (im-
mobile) topological excitations. This derivation provides
a formal proof of the simple physical statement that no
product of the four-spin interactions in the classical pla-
quette Ising model can act exclusively on an isolated pair
of spins.

We can adapt the above argument to construct another
spin model with fracton topological order. Consider the
classical spin system

Sc = (1 + x + z + xz, 1 + x + y + xy)

(A28)

Observe that f1 = 1 + x + z + xz = z(1 + z)(x + z) and
f2 = 1 + x + y + xy = y(1 + y)(x + y). Thus we identify
the three planar symmetries of this classical spin model

h1 = (cid:88)n,m∈Z
h2 = (cid:88)n,m∈Z
h3 = (cid:88)n,m∈Z

xnym,

(x + z)n(x + y)m,

xn(x + z)m.

(A29)

(A30)

(A31)

It is routine to check that hifj = 0. Since f1(x, y, z)
and f2(x, y, z) do not have any common factor, the ideal
I(Sc) = (cid:104)f1, f2(cid:105) has codimension 2, satisfying our codi-
mension condition. The set of relations between f1 and
f2 (the kernel of Sc), is generated by G = (1 + x + y +
xy, 1 + x + z + xz)T . Through our F-S duality, we obtain
a stabilizer map

SCBLT =

1 + x + z + xz
1 + x + y + xy

0
0

0
0

1 + x + y + xy
1 + x + z + xz

 ,

(A32)

which corresponds to a stabilizer Hamiltonian with frac-
ton topological order. In fact, this stabilizer map has an
extra property that f1 ¯f2 + ¯f1f2 = 0, which allow us to
consider a simpler stabilizer map

SCBLT = ST

c =(cid:18) 1 + x + z + xz
1 + x + y + xy(cid:19)

(A33)

corresponding to a fracton phase with “half” of the topo-
logical degeneracy. This stabilizer map is precisely the

15

CBLT Model

(a)

(b)

FIG. 7. The (a) CBLT model represented on an fcc lattice.
The model consists of a single, six-spin interaction term per
lattice site. This model may be constructed from the inter-
acting spin model shown in (b) on the fcc lattice, with two
four-spin interactions per lattice site.

CBLT model [14, 15], which has a single type of frac-
ton excitation, and degeneracy D given by log2D = 8L
[2, 15] on the length-L three-torus. The CBLT model is
conveniently represented on the face-centered cubic (fcc)
lattice as shown in Figure 7a.

6. Planar Symmetry and Classical Spin Models

with an m-Site Unit Cell

So far we have assumed that a classical spin model had
a single spin per Bravais lattice site. When the unit cell
has m spins (m ≥ 1), our duality construction and crite-
ria for topological order directly carry over. However, the
fracton condition and its relation to planar symmetries
require some extra attention.

The stabilizer map Sc for the classical spin (τ z) system
is an m × (cid:96) matrix of Laurent polynomials (omitting the
lower half-block representing τ x), where (cid:96) is the number
of interactions per unit cell.

Sc =

(A34)



f (1)
1
f (2)
1
...
f (m)
1

f (1)
2
f (2)
2
...
f (m)
2

(cid:96)

(cid:96)

··· f (1)
··· f (2)
. . .
··· f (m)

(cid:96)



Our generalized gauge theory prescription produces a
(quantum) stabilizer Hamiltonian described by Sf ≡
S†c ⊕ G where S†c = (Sc)T and G is a matrix of the gen-
erators of ker Sc. The matrix G is nonzero if and only
if k = rank Sc < (cid:96). This condition is satisﬁed when
Sc is a row matrix and there are two or more interac-
tions per spin, as is the case in all the examples in this
paper with a single site per unit cell. The Buchbaum-
Eisenbud criterion for exact sequence can be applied,
and, if G (cid:54)= 0, we see that the only nontrivial condition
is that codim I(Sc) ≥ 2 where I(Sc) = Ik(Sc) is the k-th
determinantal ideal with the largest k such that Ik(Sc) is
nonzero. Summarizing, the topological order is realized
in Sf if and only if

 xp xq zr zs yt yv xp xq zr zs yt yv⌧zi⌧zj⌧zk⌧z`⌧zm⌧zn⌧zi⌧zkh(1)i[⌧]=⌧zi⌧zj⌧zk⌧z`h(2)i[⌧]=⌧zi⌧zm⌧zk⌧zn• k = rank Sc < (cid:96), and
• codim Ik(Sc) ≥ 2.

We now assume that the classical system has planar
subsystem symmetry. The three independent generators
of spin-ﬂip transformations along orthogonal planes are
denoted hxy, hyz and hxz. The classical system on a lat-
tice with an m-site basis has planar subsystem symmetry
if and only if

hj ·

m(cid:88)i=1

f (i)
k (x, y, z) = 0

(A35)

for all j = xy, yz, zx and k = 1, . . . , (cid:96). As before, this
implies that

f (i)
k (1, 1, t) = 0,

f (i)
k (1, t, 1) = 0,

f (i)
k (t, 1, 1) = 0.

m(cid:88)i=1
m(cid:88)i=1
m(cid:88)i=1

Suppose the nexus charge exists for the moment. The
condition that the nexus charges, the excitation of S†c
terms in Sf , are all fractons is that im Sc does not contain
any two-term element of form

1 + xaybzc

.

...
0

0
...






.



If there is such a two-term element, then

...

(x, y, z)gk(x, y, z)

f (i−1)
k

...
0

1 + xaybzc

0
...





(cid:96)(cid:88)k=1
(cid:96)(cid:88)k=1
(cid:96)(cid:88)k=1

=

f (i)
k (x, y, z)gk(x, y, z)

f (i+1)
k

(x, y, z)gk(x, y, z)

...

Summing all the components, we get

1 + xaybzc =(cid:88)k,i

f (i)
k gk(x, y, z).

(A36)

Evaluating the polynomial at (1, 1, t), etc., we conclude
that a = b = c = 0. That is, there is no two-term.

16

The existence of the nexus charge might seem mun-
dane, but we do not know whether this is true even as-
suming the various conditions we have discussed.
It is
however known that in three spatial dimensions any topo-
logically ordered stabilizer Hamiltonian has a point-like
excitation [2]. This implies that either the nexus charge
sector or the nexus ﬂux sector admits isolated point-like
excitations.
If this point-like excitation happens to be
a nexus charge, then the symmetry of the classical side
implies that this charge is immobile (fracton). We note
that when the unit cell consists of a single spin in the
classical side (m = 1), the existence of the nexus charge
was immediate since coker Sc is a torsion module. We
conclude this section by summarizing our discussion.

• Given an aribitrary classical spin model with planar
symmetries, with the number of interaction terms
per Bravais lattice site is greater than the size of the
unit cell, any nexus charge, if exists, is a fracton.

Appendix B: Ground-State Degeneracy of the

Checkerboard and X-Cube Models

Here, we derive the ground-state degeneracy of the
checkerboard and X-cube model, constructed from the
tetrahedral Ising and plaquette Ising models, respec-
tively.

Let us brieﬂy review the properties of the checker-
board model. Consider a three-dimensional cubic lattice
of spin-1/2 degrees of freedom. Each spin sits at the ver-
tex of a cube, with the cubes arranged in a checkerboard
conﬁguration, so that any pair of neighboring cubes over-
lap on exactly two spins as shown in Table I. We deﬁne
the Hamiltonian

H0 = −(cid:88)c (cid:89)n∈∂c

σx

n −(cid:88)c (cid:89)n∈∂c

σz
n.

(B1)

where each product is taken over the eight spins sitting at
the vertex of cube c, while the sum is taken over cubes
in the checkerboard conﬁguration. The topological ex-
citations in this model are similar to that of the Majo-
rana cubic model [1]. The fundamental fracton excitation
may be isolated at the corners of a membrane operator,
given by the product of spin operators along a ﬂat, two-
dimensional surface. Composites of fracton excitations,
however, are topological excitations that are free to move
along one- and two-dimensional subsystems without any
energy cost. Wilson line operators, given by the prod-
uct of spin operators along straight lines, create pairs of
fracton excitations at each end; these composite excita-
tions are “dimension-1” particles, which are only free to
move along the Wilson line. A pair of parallel Wilson
lines in adjacent layers, however, maybe used to create
excitations that are free to move within the plane. These
topological excitations are anyons with well-deﬁned mu-
tual and self-statistics.

The stabilizer map for the checkerboard model is given

duces to that of

by the expression

17

Scheck =

(B2)

f 0

f 0

0 f

0 f





where f = 1 + x + y + z ∈ F2[x±, y±, z±].
For a topologically ordered stabilizer Hamiltonian with
the stabilizer map S and excitation map E = S†λ(cid:96), the
ground state degeneracy D on a length-L torus is given
by

2 log2 D = dimF2 ker E/ im S
over F2[x, y, z]/(cid:104)xL + 1, yL + 1, zL + 1(cid:105).

(B3)

If the number of spins in the unit cell, (cid:96), is equal to the
number of interaction types (the number of columns in
S), then

log2 D = dimF2 coker S†.

(B4)

This is applicable for all examples in this paper, except
for the Z2 gauge theory in three-dimensions. In our ex-
amples where S† = Sc⊕G† is block-diagonal, the formula
further decomposes as

log2 D = dimF2 coker Sc + dimF2 coker G†.

(B5)

log2 Dcheck = 2 dimF2

F2[x, y, z]/(cid:104)xL + 1, yL + 1, zL + 1(cid:105)
(cid:104)1 + x + y + z, xyz + xy + yz + zx(cid:105)
[18], and the answer is

.

This was calculated in Ref.
log2 Dcheck = 6L − 6.
The X-Cube model has diﬀerent blocks in S†X-Cube.
Here we calculate the degeneracy of HX-Cube for odd L
only. One component reads

F2[x, y, z]/(cid:104)xL + 1, yL + 1, zL + 1(cid:105)

(cid:104)(1 + x)(1 + y), (1 + y)(1 + z), (1 + x)(1 + z)(cid:105)

. (B6)

One may extend the coeﬃcient ﬁeld to the algebraic clo-
sure F, and since L is odd, xL + 1 = 0 has L distinct
roots, one of which is x = 1. Localizing at the maximal
ideal (cid:104)x + t, y + 1, z + 1(cid:105), we see that the factor ring be-
comes just F of dimension 1. Using the cyclic symmetry
x → y → z → x, we see that the factor ring has di-
mension 3(L − 1) + 1 = 3L − 2. The other component
is

(F[x, y, z]/(cid:104)xL + 1, yL + 1, zL + 1(cid:105))2

(cid:18)z + 1 1 + x

1 + x 1 + y(cid:19)

0

0

(B7)

The second determinantal ideal of the matrix in the de-
nominator is the same as I(Sc), so we only have to con-
sider localization at points (1, 1, t), (1, t, 1), and (t, 1, 1).
Localization at (1, 1, t (cid:54)= 1) amounts to evaluating the
matrix at that point due to the boundary conditions, and
the factor module becomes F1. At (1, 1, 1), the matrix be-
comes zero, and the factor module becomes F2. Hence,
the factor ring has dimension 3(L− 1) + 2 = 3L− 1. The
degeneracy DX-Cube is thus given by

Since the checkerboard stabilizer map has an extra
structure that Sc = G†, the degeneracy calculation re-

log2 DX-Cube = 6L − 3 for odd L.

(B8)

[1] S. Vijay, J. Haah and L. Fu, Phys. Rev. B 92, 235136

Verlag, (1994).

(2015).

[2] J. Haah, Commun. Math. Phys. 324 351-399 (2013).
[3] E. Fradkin and S. Shenker, Phys. Rev. D 19, 3682 (1979).
[4] D. Eisenbud, Commutative algebra with a view toward al-
gebraic geometry, Grad. Texts in Math. 150, Springer-

[5] D. A. Buchsbaum and D. Eisenbud, Journal of Algebra

25, 259-268 (1973).

[6] J. Haah, Phys. Rev. A 83, 042330 (2011).
[7] C. Chamon, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 040402 (2005).
[8] S. Bravyi, B. Leemhuis, and B. Terhal, Ann. Phys. 326,

839 (2011).

