The systematic spectral analysis of radio surveys

Jeremy J. Harwood∗
ASTRON, The Netherlands Institute for Radio Astronomy, Postbus 2, 7990 AA, Dwingeloo, The
Netherlands
E-mail: Jeremy.Harwood@physics.org

Raffaellla Morganti
ASTRON, The Netherlands Institute for Radio Astronomy, Postbus 2, 7990 AA, Dwingeloo, The
Netherlands

Current and future continuum surveys being undertaken by the new generation of radio telescopes
are now poised to address many important science questions, ranging from the earliest galaxies,
to the physics of nearby AGN, as well as potentially providing new and unexpected discoveries.
However, how to efﬁciently analyse the large quantities of data collected by these studies in order
to maximise their scientiﬁc output remains an open question. In these proceedings we present de-
tails of the surveys module for the Broadband Radio Astronomy Tools (BRATS) software package
which will combine new observations with existing multi-frequency data in order to automati-
cally analyse and select sources based on their spectrum. We show how these methods can been
applied to investigate objects observed on a variety of spatial scales, and suggest a pathway for
how this can be used in the wider context of surveys and large samples.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
4
1

 
 
]

M

I
.

h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
9
4
4
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

EXTRA-RADSUR2015 (*)
20–23 October 2015
Bologna, Italy

(*) This conference has been organized with the support of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation, Directorate General for the Country Promotion (Bilateral Grant Agreement
ZA14GR02 - Mapping the Universe on the Pathway to SKA)

∗Speaker.

c(cid:13) Copyright owned by the author(s) under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0).

http://pos.sissa.it/

The systematic spectral analysis of radio surveys

Jeremy J. Harwood

1. Introduction

The ability of modern radio telescopes to undertake high sensitivity, broad-bandwidth surveys
has raised an important question: how do we systematically characterize and investigate sources
and populations in these vast volumes of data? Past surveys have led to the discovery of a range of
unusual and previously unexplored objects, such as giant and remnant radio galaxies [1, 2], but so
far these have usually been found serendipitously during investigations of nearby objects and the
analysis of their spectrum has remained a largely manual process. As the observations required to
discover such objects become more common, a more systematic method is required for both the
discovery and analysis of these sources. This is key for not only optimising the scientiﬁc output of
individual objects, but also for the study of source populations where the volume of data produced
means that a manual analysis is not viable.

The Broadband Radio Astronomy Tools software package (BRATS1) already provides a range
of tools for the analysis of radio sources and has successfully been applied to various source types
including radio galaxies [3, 4, 5], cluster relics [6, 7] and a non-thermal superbubble [8]. However,
these studies have mainly been limited to well resolved, high ﬁdelity, targeted observations where
matched data are available over a wide frequency range, which is unlikely to be the case for both
current and future surveys. Development of a surveys module for BRATS is therefore currently
underway with the aim of providing a simple to use, direct route from source selection through
to a detailed spectral analysis which can be applied to both surveys and large samples of radio
sources (e.g. wide-ﬁeld images from low-frequency observations). In the following sections we
will discuss how the issues of analysing such large quantities of data will be resolved and how it
will be applied to observations at varying resolutions.

2. The BRATS survey module

BRATS was originally designed as a user friendly way for determining the age of optically
thin radio sources emitting via the synchrotron process through ﬁtting of spectral ageing models
[9, 10, 11, 12, 13] on small spatial scales [3, 5]. However, it has since expanded in to a much wider
suite of analysis tools which, amongst other features, includes spectral index ﬁtting, parameter
determination, image manipulation and adaptive region selection. This existing infrastructure is
therefore the ideal framework to build upon to efﬁciently identify and analyse interesting sources
in large data volumes.

Fig. 1 gives a basic overview of the process that will be applied by the BRATS surveys module,
using processing of Low Frequency Array (LOFAR) wide-ﬁeld images and surveys as an example.
Survey data are initially transferred from the long-term archive to a local processing machine (e.g.
a local cluster) either in the form of a catalog, or as calibrated images depending on the type of
analysis to be performed. At this stage, an optional initial cut may be applied to the data based on
a source’s basic properties such as ﬂux density, position on the sky or whether a source is resolved.
For each remaining source, the surveys module performs model ﬁtting (spectral index, spectral
age, or another project speciﬁc model) using the standard BRATS ﬁtting procedures [3, 5], making
on-the-ﬂy calls to cross-match with complementary archival data. For the initial release, this will

1http://www.askanastronomer.co.uk/brats

2

The systematic spectral analysis of radio surveys

Jeremy J. Harwood

comprise of a local catalog of complementary observations (e.g. NVSS and FIRST) but will later
be expanded to search for these values automatically via Virtual Observatory (VO) services. Where
complementary data are not available the source can either be ﬂagged or, where possible, an upper
limit used for the model ﬁtting. Once ﬁtting is complete, the results and any properties determined
during the ﬁtting process are then fed back in to the long-term archive (or other speciﬁed location)
and the cycle repeated for the next source. The surveys module will be both multithreaded and
multiprocess meaning that this cycle can be run simultaneously on multiple sources and ﬁelds on
multi-core machines and distributed clusters, making it a highly scalable and time efﬁcient analysis
tool for a wide range of sample sizes and computing environments. It should be noted that while
Fig. 1 uses the processing of LOFAR data as an example, this same processing cycle will be
applicable to any radio survey or sample.

While the process cycle described above is relatively straight forward to implement, one of
the main hurdles which must be overcome in the selection and spectral analysis of sources in
interferometric radio surveys is that they are usually only carried out at a single frequency and in
a ﬁxed array conﬁguration. The advent of broad-bandwidth observations has meant that spectral
index maps can be produced for a source within any single observation; however, these in-band
spectra require a high signal to noise ratio and still only cover a relatively small range of frequency
space. Uncertainties due to absolute ﬂux calibration errors and the thermal noise therefore make in-
band spectra alone unsuitable for source selection, particularly in cases where identifying possible
curvature in a spectrum is required. These problems are further compounded by the fact that the
varying resolution, UV coverage and sensitivity between surveys mean it is difﬁcult to ensure that
the complementary data are comparable to that of the new observations in an automated way. A
multistage approach is therefore required if one is to reliably identify potentially interesting sources
and maximise the level of analysis performed for a source given the available data. In the following

Figure 1: Preliminary process diagram for the analysis of LOFAR data using the BRATS survey module.

3

The systematic spectral analysis of radio surveys

Jeremy J. Harwood

sections we discuss how BRATS will approach these problems, ranging from unresolved sources
and upper limits up to the detailed analysis of well resolved sources over a wide frequency range.
While here we discuss this process in the context of established and remnant radio galaxies, BRATS
is designed in such a way that any model (e.g. models with a thermal component, CSS/GPS models)
can be easily added to this framework for use with a wide range of potential science projects.

2.1 Integrated ﬂux

The limited resolution of many surveys performed both historically (e.g. NVSS, WENSS)
the LOFAR Multifrequency Snapshot Sky Survey,
and more recently at low-frequencies (e.g.
MSSS [14]; the Galactic and Extragalactic MWA survey, GLEAM [15]), means that the major-
ity of sources are at least partially, and in many cases fully, unresolved. Even for higher resolution
surveys such as FIRST, the complementary data at a comparable resolution required to perform a
resolved spectral analysis is often not available. For upcoming and future surveys (e.g. LOFAR
tier-1 survey, Shimwell et al., in prep), and for individual targeted wide-ﬁeld observations (e.g. the
Bootes ﬁeld [16]), this problem is further compounded by the fact that they will be much more sen-
sitive than current archival data and so in many cases upper limits, rather than detections, must be
used. An initial selection and analysis based on the integrated ﬂux of potential targets is therefore
vital for any survey or large sample.

For radio galaxies, the standard models of spectral ageing used when dealing with integrated
ﬂuxes (Fig. 2) are the continuous injection (CI) model for active sources [10] and the CI off model
for remnant galaxies (also known as the KGJP model, [13]), and have been successfully applied
to small samples of galaxies in the past (e.g. [17, 18, 19]). Both of these models are available in
BRATS2 and have been well tested against both historic and recent studies (e.g. Fig. 3). The main

Figure 2: Example CI off (KGJP) model of spectral ageing [13] with an off time between 0 and 100 Myr at
10 Myr intervals. The active phase is ﬁxed at 30 Myr with an arbitrary normalisation. Note that the red line
where to f f = 0 is equivalent to the standard continuous injection model [10].

2Version 2.5 onwards

4

The systematic spectral analysis of radio surveys

Jeremy J. Harwood

advantages of this form of ﬁtting are that these models are computationally inexpensive (usually
less than a few seconds per source), do not require the original radio maps to be available, and can
also handle limited data quality such as upper limits, but this quick ﬁtting and ﬂexibility in data
quality comes at a cost. Along side being unable to determine variations as a function of position,
for large samples generic assumptions must be made about the model parameters, such as magnetic
ﬁeld strength and injection index (a parameter which describes the initial electron distribution of
the source). Even if these parameters can be well constrained or approximated for a given sample,
the ability of these models to reliably recover physical parameters such as its age has been called
in to question. One of the underlying assumptions made for these models is that parameters such
as magnetic ﬁeld and jet power, remain approximately constant over the lifetime of the source;
however, simulations of radio galaxies have suggest that this is unlikely to be the case [20], with
properties such as the the low-frequency spectral index of the source varying non-linearly as a
function of source length (Hardcastle et al., in prep).

Even with these draw backs, ﬁtting of spectral ageing models to the integrated ﬂux can still
prove a powerful source selection tool. While they may not currently be able to determine a highly
accurate age for a source, there remains a distinct difference between the spectrum of an active
source described by the CI model, and a remnant source describe by the CI off model. Therefore
if, for example, one wishes to search a sample or survey for remnant radio galaxies it provides an
invaluable method of identifying potential sources. Through the BRATS survey module this form
of integrated ﬁtting, whether using models of spectral ageing, spectral index or models describing
other source types, will therefore form the starting point for most survey searches, reducing the
large number of observed sources down to a list of likely candidates in an automated manner that
is suitable for a more detailed follow up analysis or, where a robust model and selection criteria
exists, allow population studies to be undertaken. Determination of the required criteria for these
type of systematic searches are already currently being undertaken for LOFAR ﬁelds in the search
for remnant radio galaxies (see Brienza et al., these proceedings) which will soon be applied using

Figure 3: Left: 137 MHz LOFAR image of the remnant radio galaxy BLOB1 [2]. Right: BRATS ﬁtting of
the CI off model to BLOB1 using 116 and 155 MHz LOFAR, 327 MHz WENSS, 1.4 GHz WSRT, and 4.85
GHz GB6 (upper limit) data. The best ﬁtting model provides a characteristic lower limit on the age of 76
Myr (ton = 16 Myr, to f f = 60 Myr), in agreement with previous results [2].

5

The systematic spectral analysis of radio surveys

Jeremy J. Harwood

BRATS on a variety of observed ﬁelds (e.g. the Lockman hole, Bootes ﬁedl) and subsequently to
the LOFAR tier-1 survey.

2.2 Resolved sources

While selection based on an analysis of the integrated ﬂux of a source forms a good starting
point, the ﬁtting of models on smaller spatial scales can provide much greater insight in to the
underlying physics of individual sources and populations as a whole. The automation of such ﬁtting
is a non-trivial process requiring factors such as the availability of well aligned images matched in
resolution and UV coverage to be considered. However, over the next few years the availability of
high resolution, high image ﬁdelity surveys are set to become more common place meaning that
well matched, high resolution ancillary data will exist over a wide frequency range (e.g. 120-200
MHz: LOFAR tier-1; 1-2 GHz: MeerKAT MIGHTEE, APERTIF; 2-4 GHz: VLASS).

Fitting of spectral ageing models, such as the JP and KP models [9, 10, 11] on which the CI
(off) models are based, to well resolved sources is a well established function of the BRATS software
package but usually requires a manual alignment of the images on sub-pixel scales. Fortunately,
the BRATS adaptive regions function, which automatically creates regions based on a set of user
parameters such as signal to noise ratio, can help negate this problem. For any given source, the
surveys module will allow regions to be allocated based on both the standard user parameters, and
an assumed alignment error which can be determined based on checking only a small subset of the
survey sample. Assuming the images are at least reasonably well aligned (i.e. an alignment error
much smaller than the beam size), models can be ﬁt without the need for the high, sub-pixel levels
of accuracy. Such moderately resolved ﬁtting will form an important part of the next generation
of radio surveys allowing the identiﬁcation and analysis of populations (e.g. recently switched off
radio galaxies) that cannot be be selected based on the integrated ﬂux alone.

The computational requirements needed to run this form of moderately resolved analysis are,

Figure 4: Left: Well resolved, 6 GHz VLA image of 3C438 using combined A, B and C-conﬁgurations with
4 GHz bandwidth. The beam size, shown in the bottom left corner, is 0.3 arcsec with an off-source RMS of
8 m Jy beam−1. Right: Spectral age map of 3C438 on small spatial scales using new, broad-bandwidth 4 to
8 GHz VLA observations and archival 1.4 GHz data. The maximum age of the source for the JP model of
spectral ageing (shown here) is 3 Myr [5].

6

The systematic spectral analysis of radio surveys

Jeremy J. Harwood

unsurprisingly, greater than those for the integrated ﬂux, but ﬁtting of spectral ageing models in
this way still only requires between 1 and 5 minutes per source depending on the number of ﬁtted
regions and the number of data points available3. Given current computing facilities, running such
an analysis over an entire whole sky survey, although possible, is less than desirable (and in most
cases, unnecessary). For most science cases, moderately resolved ﬁtting will therefore form the
second stage of selection an analysis using a sample initially selected through integrated ﬁtting, or
the ﬁrst stage of individual, targeted wide-ﬁeld observations.

Fitting of models on small, pixel by pixel, scales (an example of which is shown in Fig. 4) is
also likely to play a major role in the analysis of survey data. In allowing variations as a function
of position to be accurately determined and reducing the detrimental effects associated with ﬁtting
over large areas of a source such as the superposition of spectra [3, 5], this small scale analysis
can provide much deeper insight in to the underlying physical processes of a source. Details of
model ﬁtting on very small scales is discussed at length in papers by Harwood et al. [3, 5] and
the BRATS user manual, and so we do not repeat it here; however, we note that for the foreseeable
future this step will require manual intervention for the alignment of images on the sub-pixel scales
and signiﬁcant computational overheads. This type of highly detailed study is therefore likely to
form the ﬁnal stage of a survey in order to further explore the underlying physics in a handful of
interesting or archetypal sources for which targeted follow up observations have been made over a
large frequency range.

3. Conclusions

In these proceedings we have presented an overview of the BRATS surveys module and a
pathway using these techniques from an initial selection process of unresolved sources through to
a highly detailed analysis on small scales for recent and upcoming radio surveys and samples. The
key points made are as follows:

1. The large number of potentially interesting sources found in current and future surveys re-

quires an automated approach to source selection and analysis.

2. The BRATS surveys module will provide tools allowing the selection and analysis of sources

based on their spectral properties on relatively short timescales.

3. Such automation is required if one is to fully explore the properties of any given population

as a whole.

4. BRATS and the surveys module is designed such that new and additional models can be easily

included to maximise the range of possible science goals.

5. Optimising the science obtained from surveys and large samples will require a multi-stage

approach; progressing from large to small scales.

Model ﬁtting and region selection of individual sources using BRATS is now a well established
process [3, 4, 6, 5, 7]. Phase 1 of the surveys module will provide a method of automatically

3Here we assume a single, 12 core computing node

7

The systematic spectral analysis of radio surveys

Jeremy J. Harwood

performing model ﬁtting from a local database, with phase 2 expanding this capability to include
the automated retrieval of complementary data using VO services. While this will likely prove
invaluable in the short to medium term for the selection and analysis of sources in ongoing and
planned surveys, we foresee development of these techniques continuing based on the needs of
users well into the SKA era.

4. Acknowledgements

We wish to thank Marisa Brienza for her helpful comments on these proceedings. The re-
search leading to these results has received funding from the European Research Council under
the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP/2007-2013) / ERC Advanced Grant
RADIOLIFE-320745.

References

[1] Shulevski A. et al., 2015, A&A, 579, 27

[2] Brienza, M. et al., 2016, A&A, 585, 29

[3] Harwood, J. J., Hardcastle, M J., Croston, J. H. and Goodger, J. L., 2013, MNRAS, 435, 3353

[4] Heesen, V., Croston, J. H., Harwood, J. J., Hardcastle, M. J. and Hota, A., 2014, MNRAS, 439, 1364

[5] Harwood, J. J., Hardcastle, M J., and Croston, J. H., 2015, MNRAS, 454, 3454

[6] Stroe, A., Harwood, J. J., Hardcastle, M. J. and Röttgering, H. J. A., 2014, MNRAS, 445, 1213

[7] de Gasperin, F., Intema, H. T., van Weeren, R. J., Dawson, W. A., Golovich, N., Wittman, D.,

Bonafede, A. and Brüggen, M., 2015, MNRAS, 453, 3483

[8] Heesen, V., Brinks, E., Krause, M. G. H., Harwood, J. J., Rau, U., Rupen, M. P., Hunter, D. A., Chy˙zy,

K. T. and Kitchener, G., 2015, MNRAS, 447, 1

[9] Kardashev N., 1962, AJ, 6, 317

[10] Pacholczyk, A. G, Radio astrophysics: Nonthermal processes in galactic and extragalactic sources,

San Francisco, Freeman, 1970

[11] Jaffe, W. and Perola, G., 1973, A&A, 26, 423

[12] Tribble, P., 1993, MNRAS, 261, 57

[13] Komissarov, S. S. and Gubanov, A. G., 1994, A&A, 285, 27

[14] Heald et al., 2015, A&A, 582, 123

[15] Wayth, R. B. et al., 2015, 32, 25

[16] Williams, W. L., LOFAR 150 MHz observations of the Bootes Field: Catalogue and Source Counts,

MNRAS, Submitted

[17] Carilli, C. L., Perley, R. A., Dreher, J. W. and Leahy, J. P., 1991, ApJ, 383, 554

[18] Slee, O. B., Roy, A. L., Murgia, M., Andernach, H. and Ehle, M., 2001, AJ, 122, 1172

[19] Parma, P., Murgia, M., de Ruiter, H. R., Fanti, R., Mack, K.-H. and Govoni, F., 2007, A&A, 470,875

[20] Kapinska, A. D., Hardcastle, M., Jackson, C., An, T., Baan, W. and Jarvis, M., Unravelling lifecycles

and physics of radio-loud AGN in the SKA Era, Proceedings of Advancing Astrophysics with the
Square Kilometre Array, PoS(AASKA14)173, 2015

8

