6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
4
1

 
 
]
n
n
-
s
i
d
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
8
4
4
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Regimes of heating and dynamical response in driven many-body localized systems

Sarang Gopalakrishnan

Department of Physics and Walter Burke Institute,

California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA

Department of Physics, Walter Schottky Institute, and Institute for Advanced Study,

Technical University of Munich, 85748 Garching, Germany

Michael Knap

Department of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA

Eugene Demler

We explore the response of many-body localized (MBL) systems to periodic driving of arbitrary
amplitude, focusing on the rate at which they exchange energy with the drive. To this end, we
introduce an inﬁnite-temperature generalization of the eﬀective “heating rate” in terms of the spread
of a random walk in energy space. We compute this heating rate numerically and estimate it
analytically in various regimes. When the drive amplitude is much smaller than the frequency, this
eﬀective heating rate is given by linear response theory with a coeﬃcient that is proportional to
the optical conductivity; in the opposite limit, the response is nonlinear and the heating rate is
a nontrivial power-law of time. We discuss the mechanisms underlying this crossover in the MBL
phase, and comment on its implications for the subdiﬀusive thermal phase near the MBL transition.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Isolated quantum systems in the many-body localized
(MBL) phase do not approach local thermal equilibrium
starting from generic initial conditions [1–5]. Instead, in
the MBL phase, transport and relaxation are absent, and
a system retains memory of its initial conditions at arbi-
trarily late times. At present, there is strong evidence—
from numerical studies [6–10], rigorous mathematical ap-
proaches [11], and experiments [12–16]—that the MBL
phase exists in strongly disordered one-dimensional spin
and fermion systems. Moreover, a phenomenological de-
scription exists for systems deep in the MBL phase [17–
23], and can be used to explore aspects of dynamics
and response [24–31]. Recently, the transition between
MBL and thermal phases has also been explored, using
general arguments [32–36], mean-ﬁeld theory [37], and
renormalization-group schemes [38–40]. The nature of
this transition, and the MBL phase, is of particular in-
terest because equilibrium statistical mechanics fails at
the transition and does not apply in the MBL phase.
Thus, we might expect various features of dynamics and
response in the MBL phase to diﬀer dramatically from
equilibrium expectations.

The present work addresses one such exotic feature of
MBL systems: namely, that in these systems, the d.c.
limit of response functions is ill-deﬁned. For concrete-
ness, consider the conductivity of the system, i.e., its
response to periodic driving by an electric ﬁeld of ampli-
tude A and frequency ω. In a typical thermalizing phase,
this response is linear in A, for small enough A, regardless
of the drive frequency: the linear response limit A → 0
limit ω → 0 commute. However, in the
and the d.c.
MBL phase, these limits do not commute [41]. Taking
the limit A → 0 at ﬁxed ﬁnite frequency gives rise to the

linear-response optical conductivity σ(ω) ∼ ωα discussed
in Ref. [30], which vanishes as ω → 0. On the other hand,
taking the ω → 0 limit at ﬁxed A gives rise to a drive-
induced many-body delocalization transition [42, 43], and
therefore a breakdown of linear response theory [41].

The objective of this work is to study response in the
MBL phase beyond these two limits, for general A/ω
(but provided these are small compared with the in-

FIG. 1. Heating regimes and dynamical response to peri-
odic driving in the many-body localized phase as a function
of driving strength A and time t, at ﬁxed driving frequency
ω. At time t < 1/ω, the response is in the “ultrashort-time”
regime: the driving frequency cannot be resolved and the
heating rate of the system is protocol-dependent. At times
such that 1/ω < t < 1/A, resonant transitions govern heating
and the rate is given by linear response. At times t > 1/A,
the resonant transitions are saturated but slower processes
(Sec. VI) still contribute to heating. When A > ω, the linear-
response window vanishes and heating is given by Landau-
Zener transitions. We ﬁnd numerically and argue analytically
that response in this regime is nonlinear in time; we further-
more predict that its amplitude-dependence is inconsistent
with linear response theory.

11ultra-shortlinear-response regimenonlinear regime B:saturated responsenonlinear regime A: Landau-Zener transitionstrinsic energy scales of the system; the opposite case
is addressed in Ref. [44, 45]). Our main results are
as follows. We identify an observable—speciﬁcally, a
generalized heating rate—that can be numerically ex-
tracted from the dynamics of the driven isolated sys-
tem. This heating rate allows us to characterize dy-
namical response without relying on linear response the-
ory (which breaks down as ω → 0). We then identify
the processes that dominate heating and response for
various regimes of A/ω, arguing that linear response is
due to absorption from resonant conﬁguration-pairs [30]
and occurs in a time-window 1/ω (cid:46) t (cid:46) 1/A (start-
ing from when the drive is turned on). These pro-
cesses give rise to the expected Joule-heating behavior,
in which the energy absorbed (or, equivalently, the dissi-
pated power) ∼ A2σ(ω). Linear-response processes satu-
rate on timescales t (cid:38) 1/A, but subleading processes still
contribute slow dynamics. For stronger drive, we iden-
tify Landau-Zener transitions (and, potentially, thermal
Griﬃths inclusions) as the dominant contributor to re-
sponse. These mechanisms cause heating that is a non-
trivial power-law of both time and drive amplitude. The
associated exponents vary continuously through the MBL
phase. The various regimes are sketched in Fig. 1. We
support our heuristic analytical estimates with numerical
evidence.

This work is organized as follows. First, we introduce
a scheme for computing the heating rate in Sec. II. Then
we review the eﬀective spin model describing the MBL
phase in Sec III, and discuss the various regimes of heat-
ing and their relevant scales in Sec. IV. The transient
linear-response regime is studied analytically in Sec. V
and the non-linear dynamics in Sec. VI. In Sec. VII we nu-
merically demonstrate the various regimes of linear and
non-linear response. Finally, in Sec. VIII, we comment
on experimental implications and possible extensions of
our analysis.

II. MEASUREMENT OF DYNAMICAL

RESPONSE

In this work, we are interested in understanding the
regime of validity of linear response theory and the
crossover to non-linear response. For this reason, we can-
not compute the conductivity using the Kubo formula,
as done previously [30], because this relies on linear re-
sponse: our objective, in other words, is to determine
where the Kubo formula works and how the system re-
sponds beyond that regime. Hence, identifying the right
observable to extract the generalized nonlinear response
requires a diﬀerent approach.

In general, one determines the conductivity of a sys-
tem by applying a perturbatively small, time-dependent
electric ﬁeld and measuring the response of the current
to that perturbation.
Implicitly, this standard deﬁni-
tion assumes that the perturbed system has reached a
steady state, e.g., because it is coupled to a heat bath

2

that dissipates energy. Applying this standard notion to
the MBL context raises the following diﬃculty: we are
interested in systems that are isolated from the environ-
ment on the timescales of interest, so there is no external
source of dissipation to bring the system to its steady
state. Thus, one must instead extract the conductivity
from a transient: speciﬁcally, one can use the relation be-
tween conductivity and dissipated power (the dissipated
power P = V 2G, where G is the conductance and V
the applied voltage), and extract the conductivity from
the dissipated power, i.e., the Joule heating rate, when
a system is driven starting at some time t = 0. A prac-
tical challenge with this approach, however, is that the
regime of interest is typically one of high or even inﬁnite
temperature of the system. In this inﬁnite-temperature
limit, the amount of heating is necessarily small, which
makes direct numerical extraction of heating rates chal-
lenging [46].

One can sidestep this diﬃculty by thinking about the
mechanics of the heating process. Suppose the system
is initially in an eigenstate in the middle of the many-
body spectrum. During a particular drive cycle, the sys-
tem is equally likely to absorb or to emit a quantum
of the drive. Thus, the energy of the system undergoes
a random walk, with a step set by the drive frequency
ω. When the system is instead initialized near inﬁnite
temperature (i.e., at a temperature T greater than the
intrinsic system scales and drive frequency), then the ini-
tial occupation of an eigenstate (in the eigenbasis of the
undriven Hamiltonian) is given by ≈ 1−E/T , where E is
the energy. As states with lower energy are slightly more
likely to be initially occupied, on average the random
walk causes energy to be gained and the system heats up;
i.e., the energy space initially has a “concentration gra-
dient” (proportional to 1/T ) and “heating” results from
the dynamics relaxing this initial gradient (see App. A).
Thus, it is plausible that, up to a factor of T , the heat-
ing rate in the high-temperature limit is related to the
ﬁctitious diﬀusion constant in energy space.

Crucially,

this ﬁctitious diﬀusion constant has a
nonzero limit at inﬁnite temperature, and is easy to mea-
sure numerically, by initializing the system in an eigen-
state (or a wavepacket with narrow energy spread) and
measuring the energy spread of the wavepacket as a func-
tion of time. Speciﬁcally, we introduce the energy spread
(∆E)2, as

(∆E)2 ≡ (cid:104)m(t)| ˆH 2|m(t)(cid:105) − (cid:104)m(t)| ˆH|m(t)(cid:105)2.

(1)
Here, |m(t)(cid:105) = ˆU (t)|m(cid:105) is the time evolved state, with
|m(cid:105) being an eigenstate of the unperturbed Hamiltonian
ˆH and ˆU (t) the unitary time evolution operator gener-
ated by ˆH + ˆHdrv.(t). We emphasize that this “ﬁcti-
tious” diﬀusion constant is distinct from, and not di-
rectly related to, the “true” energy diﬀusion constant
of the undriven system. The ﬁctitious diﬀusion constant
(i.e., heating rate) governs the motion of probability in

conﬁguration space; the “true” energy diﬀusion constant
governs the motion of energy in real space. For a driven
system, energy is not conserved (and thus the true energy
diﬀusion constant is not physically meaningful) whereas
probability is conserved, so the ﬁctitious diﬀusion con-
stant remains meaningful.

In this work we shall be primarily interested in comput-
ing the dynamics of the observable (∆E)2 in Eq. (1). We
conjecture that for local systems this quantity is quite
generally proportional to the high-temperature limit of
the heating rate. We show this explicitly for an MBL
system driven very weakly at a nonzero frequency (i.e.,
A/ω (cid:28) 1): as the correspondence between the energy
spread and the heating rate would suggest, the energy
spread grows linearly with time t, with a coeﬃcient that
is ∼ T σ(ω)A2, where σ(ω) is the linear-response a.c. con-
ductivity [30], i.e., (∆E)2 ∼ T σ(ω)A2t. This corresponds
precisely to the Joule heating rate of a system with con-
ductivity σ(ω). The correspondence between heating
rates and energy spread can also be shown generally for
systems in which heating is due to isolated two-level sys-
tems (App. A); numerical studies in the thermal phase
support the correspondence there as well.

The linear response regime can fail either through vio-
lations of the A2 dependence or because the t-dependence
ceases to be linear, for example because of saturation ef-
fects. We shall discuss these eﬀects in more detail below
but ﬁrst we introduce the eﬀective-spin model describing
the many-body localized phase.

III. EFFECTIVE-SPIN MODEL IN THE

MANY-BODY LOCALIZED PHASE

We consider one-dimensional systems, described by
local Hamiltonians (e.g., the random-ﬁeld Heisenberg
chain, see Eq. (18) below) and focus on the regime where
all many-body eigenstates are in the MBL phase. In this
regime, a phenomenological description of the system ex-
ists, in terms of eﬀective spins-1/2 labeled τ z
i (also known
as local integrals of motion or l-bits [17–20]):

(cid:88)

ˆH =

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

hiτ z

i +

Jijτ z

i τ z

j +

Kijkτ z

i τ z

j τ z

k + . . . (2)

i

ij

ijk

The eﬀective degrees of freedom τ z
i are related to the
microscopic ones (denoted ˆSα
i ) by a ﬁnite-depth unitary
transformation [47], up to exponential tails. For nota-
tional simplicity (and to make contact with numerics) we
shall work in one dimension, with open boundary condi-
tions; none of our considerations relies crucially on these
assumptions. Then the time-varying electric ﬁeld can be

written as ˆHdrv. = A sin ωt(cid:80)

i xi ˆSz
i .

The expansion of a particular ˆS operator, e.g., ˆSx, in
terms of τ operators, has the form ˆSx
j +
F 2,αβ
ijk τ α
k + . . .. The F coeﬃcients fall oﬀ exponentially
with the furthest distance between the τ spins involved,

ij τ α

j τ β

i (cid:39) (cid:80) F 1α

3

p=1 τ x,y
ip

(cid:81)n

(cid:81)m

and also fall oﬀ exponentially with the number of oﬀ-
diagonal τ operators (i.e., τ x or τ y) involved [30, 37].
For example, the coeﬃcient of a term of the form
would fall oﬀ as exp(−x/ξ− m/ζ),
where x ≡ max(|ip − ip(cid:48)|). Stability of the MBL phase at
inﬁnite temperature requires that sζ < 1 [2, 30, 37] as the
available phase space for m spin-ﬂips grows as exp[sm].
At inﬁnite temperature the entropic factor s ∼ log 2.

q=m+1 τ z
iq

IV. REGIMES OF HEATING AND RELEVANT

SCALES

In this section, we qualitatively introduce the two
primary heating mechanisms: resonant transitions and
Landau-Zener transitions. We then identify regimes in
which each mechanism is dominant, and explore the im-
plications for heating in those regimes.

A. Resonant transitions

We ﬁrst consider what happens when one drives the
Hamiltonian (2) very weakly at relatively high frequency,
A/ω (cid:28) 1. We assume that the drive is turned on instan-
taneously at time t = 0, and that the system is initialized
in a many-body eigenstate, i.e., in a product state of the
eﬀective spins τi. The drive is diagonal in the physi-
cal spin basis; thus, in the eﬀective spin basis, the drive
generically has oﬀ-diagonal matrix elements for rearrang-
ing multiple eﬀective spins. These typically fall oﬀ expo-
nentially with order and inter-spin distance (as discussed
in the previous section). However, there are rare pairs
of eﬀective-spin conﬁgurations between which the drive
has a large matrix element. For an illustrative exam-
ple, consider a well-localized Anderson insulator. Most
(single-particle) eigenstates in the Anderson insulator are
localized on single sites; however, rare eigenstates are de-
localized across a resonant pair of accidentally degenerate
sites [48]. The eigenstates in this resonant pair of sites
consist of symmetric and antisymmetric combinations of
the single-site orbitals, i.e., |ψ±(cid:105) = |a(cid:105) ± |b(cid:105) where a and
b are the two orbitals. The electric ﬁeld (which in this
basis is ∼ |a(cid:105)(cid:104)a| − |b(cid:105)(cid:104)b|) has matrix elements between
|ψ+(cid:105) and |ψ−(cid:105) that grow with the distance between the
two sites. Such resonant pairs exist at all scales, and
dominate the linear-response conductivity in both single-
particle [48] and MBL systems [30, 49, 50]. However, the
number of resonances at scale x falls oﬀ exponentially
with x whenever the MBL phase is stable. In the MBL
phase, such resonant pairs exist not just between diﬀer-
ent sites, but also between diﬀerent pairs of conﬁgura-
tions [30, 49, 50]; thus the number of resonant pairs is
parametrically larger, but their qualitative physics is not
greatly modiﬁed.

In the initial eigenstate of the undriven system, each
of these resonant pairs is in either its symmetric or anti-
symmetric state. When the drive is turned on, it induces

transitions between these two states provided the transi-
tion is resonant with the drive frequency ω; the associated
Rabi frequency is set by Axω, where xω is the size of the
resonant pair (i.e., the dipole moment of the transition).
Thus, on a timescale set by the drive amplitude A, these
resonant pairs are saturated (i.e., each resonant pair is
precessing), and beyond this point there is very little ab-
sorption. Note that the saturation of resonant pairs is
analogous to the phenomenon of spectral hole-burning in
glasses [51]. To make contact with the eﬀective-spin lan-
guage of Sec. III, the occupations of the symmetric and
antisymmetric orbitals count as conserved quantities, τ z±.
The drive mixes the two orbitals, and therefore has an
oﬀ-diagonal matrix element of the form (τ +

− + h.c.).

+ τ−

We now brieﬂy review the counting [30] of these reso-
nant pairs in the MBL phase, when the system is driven
at frequency ω. For brevity we shall quote and use the
result of Ref. [30] that (at high temperature) the most
common resonances at low frequencies involve ﬂipping a
substantial fraction (∼ 1/2 at inﬁnite temperature) of the
eﬀective spins within a region of length x. Thus, we shall
take n ∼ x in what follows. Now, resonances that ﬂip n
eﬀective spins have matrix elements M ∼ W exp(−n/ζ).
Thus, such resonances also have splittings (owing to hy-
bridization) δ ∼ W exp(−n/ζ), and do not contribute
at lower frequencies. By contrast, when two conﬁgura-
tions are separated by an energy ω, but the matrix el-
ement is W exp(−n/ζ) (cid:28) ω, then these conﬁgurations
will not be resonant. Consequently, resonant transi-
tions at frequency ω are predominantly those for which
W exp(−n/ζ) (cid:39) ω. Taking n ∼ x, this sets a length-scale
for resonant transitions

xMott ∼ ζ log(W/ω).

(3)

One might intuitively expect linear-response theory to
hold when resonant transitions are dominant, because
the transition rate is proportional to A2 owing to the
Golden Rule. We shall see below that this is indeed the
case.

4

between conﬁgurations (as opposed to a diabatic transi-
tion, in which the system maintains its initial conﬁgu-
ration). The matrix element for an adiabatic transition
depends on the real-space and conﬁguration-space dis-
tance between the conﬁgurations (Sec. III). At longer dis-
tances, there are more crossings, but they are less likely
to be adiabatic (because the matrix element decreases).
Quantitatively, the probability of an adiabatic transition
at distance x in the many-body case is given by Pad(x) ∼
1 − exp[−M 2/(Axω)], where M ∼ W exp(−x/ζ) is the
matrix element between the conﬁgurations

Pad(x) ∼ 1 − exp[−W 2e−2x/ζ/(Axω)].

(4)

To get the contribution of these LZ crossings to the heat-
ing rate, we must identify the conditions under which
they cause heating. During each drive cycle, a given LZ
crossing occurs twice. If it is crossed adiabatically or dia-
batically on both attempts, the system deterministically
returns to its initial conﬁguration at the end of a drive
cycle. This does not cause heating. Rather, the rate at
which a particular transition causes heating is given by
Pad(1 − Pad): thus, transitions that cause heating are
those that have an appreciable probability of happening
diabatically and also an appreciable probability of hap-
pening adiabatically [53].

We now estimate Pad for the crossings that typically
occur when the system is driven with amplitude A. Let
us consider a segment of size x. An electric ﬁeld of am-
plitude A shifts energy levels by an amount ∼ Ax. The
number of conﬁgurations of the eﬀective spins in this seg-
ment is exp(sx) [speciﬁcally, 2x at inﬁnite temperature],
and their energy bandwidth is W x. Thus, if the initial
conﬁguration covers an energy window Ax, it will typi-
cally cross exp(sx)A/W conﬁgurations. Thus, in order
for at least one LZ transition to typically occur, one needs
to look at segments of size

xLZ ∼ (1/s) log(W/A).

(5)

B. Landau-Zener crossings

In addition to resonant pairs, a second class of pro-
cesses that contribute to heating are Landau-Zener tran-
sitions [52], which we now discuss. Suppose the sys-
tem begins in a many-body eigenstate, i.e., a product
state, or particular conﬁguration, of the eﬀective τ spins.
The drive has matrix elements that are diagonal in the
eﬀective-spin basis, and thus change the energies of the
various conﬁgurations (Sec. III); in addition, it has oﬀ-
diagonal matrix elements that can cause transitions be-
tween τ -spin eigenstates. During a typical drive cycle,
various conﬁgurations cross each other in energy. When
such a crossing occurs, there is some probability of an adi-
abatic transition, i.e., one in which the system switches

There are two regimes of behavior depending on
whether Pad(xLZ) (cid:28) 1 (i.e., most LZ crossings are di-
In the limit that Pad(xLZ) (cid:28) 1/2, the
abatic) or not.
density of adiabatic LZ transitions per cycle is low. In
this case, LZ transitions do not destabilize the MBL
phase, but simply provide an additional heating chan-
nel in addition to resonant transitions. In the opposite
limit, Pad(xLZ) ∼ O(1), adiabatic LZ transitions become
dense; thus, delocalization takes place through a series of
adiabatic LZ hops. This corresponds to a drive-induced
many-body delocalization phase transition [43]. The re-
sulting delocalized phase is presumably thermal (in the
sense that it heats up to inﬁnite temperature), but its
properties (such as response functions) are not adiabati-
cally connected to those of the undriven system.

5

FIG. 2. Behavior of the length-scales xMott, xLZ, xad (deﬁned
in text) as the drive amplitude A is varied at ﬁxed frequency
ω. We assume A, ω (cid:28) W (where W is the single-particle
bandwidth) and set sζ = 1/2, so the system is relatively deep
in the MBL phase. Thus there are two separate crossovers as
linear-response fails when xad (cid:39) xMott, and
A is increased:
Landau-Zener transitions percolate when xad (cid:39) xLZ. These
crossovers are separated by an intermediate regime (shaded
region) in which rare Landau-Zener transitions dominate the
response. As sζ increases, the intermediate regime shrinks
and disappears when sζ = 1 (i.e., at the MBL transition).

C. Length-scales and regimes of response

The previous discussion suggests that there are three
separate length-scales governing the response of the sys-
tem. One of these is the “Mott” length-scale, xMott ∼
ζ log(W/ω), which is the length-scale on which resonant
transitions take place [Eq.(3)]. The second is the Landau-
Zener crossing scale, xLZ (cid:39) (1/s) log(W/A), which is the
distance (in real and/or conﬁguration space) to the near-
est Landau-Zener crossing [Eq. (5)]. Finally, there is a
length-scale, which we call the “adiabatic” scale, xad,
determined by the condition that Pad(xad) ∼ 1/2. An
approximate formula for this scale is

xad ∼ (ζ/2) log[W 2/(Aω)],

(6)

which is obtained by inverting Eq. (4). The arguments of
Ref. [43] can be rephrased as saying that when xad (cid:39) xLZ,
a drive-induced delocalization transition takes place. The
behavior of these three length-scales is shown in Fig. 2.
Note that if A is increased at ﬁxed ω in the MBL phase,
the ﬁrst crossing that occurs is xad (cid:39) xMott when ω = A.
At this drive amplitude, xLZ > xMott, xad because of the
above deﬁnitions combined with the condition sζ < 1,
which is required for the stability of the MBL phase, as
discussed in Sec. III.

Even before the drive causes delocalization, it causes
the breakdown of linear response. The crossover between
linear and nonlinear response can be understood as fol-
lows (see Fig. 3, top): When the drive amplitude is very
small xMott (cid:46) xad. In that regime, resonant transitions
(whose density is set by ω) dominate the response. But

FIG. 3. Regimes of transient (top) and steady-state behav-
ior (bottom) in driven MBL systems. As the drive strength
A is increased at constant frequency ω, there is a crossover
between linear and nonlinear response in the transient dy-
namics, set by the failure of the rotating-wave approximation
to the driven two-level systems (TLS’s) that govern the re-
sponse of the system. This crossover happens when these
TLS’s transition from a drive-resonant regime (top-left) to a
Landau-Zener regime (top-right). There is a separate steady-
state phase transition between MBL and thermal Floquet
Hamiltonians (bottom). This is determined not by the na-
ture of TLSs, but rather by the density of the dominant type.
When TLSs percolate, the steady state is thermal; otherwise
it is MBL. The steady-state transition is set by the condition
A1−sζ/2 ∼ ωsζ/2W 1−sζ. In summary, there are three steady-
state regimes for a driven MBL system: (i) MBL long-time
behavior with isolated resonant transitions; (ii) MBL long-
time behavior with isolated Landau-Zener transitions; (iii)
thermal long-time behavior because of percolating Landau-
Zener transitions.

as A is ramped up, eventually the phase space for LZ
crossings (whose density is set by A) dominates that for
resonant transitions (even though these LZ crossings have
relatively small adiabatic rates). This corresponds to a
breakdown of linear response, which is accompanied by
a breakdown of the rotating-wave approximation for the
driven resonant pairs (cf.
top-left and top-right illus-
trations in Fig. 3). In addition to the crossover in the
the transient dynamical response, a steady state transi-
tion transition from localized to thermal eﬀective Floquet
Hamiltonians can be introduced, which is solely set by
the density of TLS and not by their character.

There are thus in total three distinct regimes (Fig. 3):
(i) linear response due to isolated resonant TLS’s with
Floquet steady states that are many-body localized; (ii)
nonlinear response due Landau-Zener TLS’s, which are
nevertheless isolated from one another and hence the
steady state remains many-body localized as well (in-
termediate regime in Fig. 2 and 3); (iii) nonlinear re-
sponse due to percolation between TLS’s accompanied
with thermal steady states induced by strong drive.

xadxLZxMott12345675101520driving strength AωωAResonant TLSLinear responseωLandau-Zener TLSNonlinear responsepercolating TLS's:thermal steady stateisolated TLS's:Floquet-MBL steady statesteady-state transitionresponse crossoverAV. TRANSIENT LINEAR RESPONSE

THROUGH RESONANT TWO-LEVEL SYSTEMS

In this section we analyze a simpliﬁed version of the
eﬀective-spin model in Sec. III, in which we neglect all
degrees of freedom that are not resonant pairs. The two
states of each resonant pair can be treated as a two-
level system. Note that these resonant two-level systems
(RTLS’s) are not the same as the eﬀective τ spins in
Sec. III, but are much more sparse: most eﬀective τ -
spins are not involved in resonances [54]. To emphasize
the distinction, we shall denote the RTLS’s as Tα. Be-
cause of their sparseness, we neglect interactions among
RTLS’s.

We now discuss the dynamics of this ensemble of non-
interacting RTLS’s. We work in the eﬀective spin repre-
sentation of the undriven system; in the associated nat-
ural eigenbasis, each TLS points along z in the absence
of drive. The full Hamiltonian of the driven RTLS α can
be written as

HRTLS(α) = εαT z

α + 2Aζ log(W/εα) cos(2ωt)Θ(t)T x
α .
(7)
Here, we have used the result (from Sec. IV A) that a
RTLS with splitting ε is typically one of size x(ε) ∼
ζ log(W/ε), and that the corresponding dipole matrix el-
ement of the electric ﬁeld is Ax ∼ Aζ log(W/ε). The
density of these RTLS’s is also given by similar reason-
ing. The number of available states at scale x goes as
exp(sx), and the corresponding many-body level spacing
is W x exp(−sx) [since W x is the energy bandwidth of a
region of size x]. Substituting x(ε) into this expression,
we immediately arrive at the result

ρ(ε) ∼ ε−sζ

(8)

Note that this is the density of states of RTLS’s, not
necessarily that of eﬀective τ spins.

With these assumptions, we can apply the rotating
wave approximation to Eq. (7) and the dynamics of
RTLS’s becomes exactly solvable.
In what follows we
shall further simplify by neglecting the logarithmic cor-
rection due to the dipole moment. Now one can use the
Rabi formula to ﬁnd that at time t, the energy variance
of a single RTLS is given by

(∆Eα)2 (cid:39) 4A2ζ 2ε2

where Ωα ≡(cid:112)(Aζ)2 + (|εα| − |ω|)2 is the Rabi frequency

Ω2
i

α

sin2(Ωαt)

(9)

of RTLS α.

To get the response of the full system, one ensemble-
averages the response of the RTLS’s. This gives the ex-
pression

(∆E)2(t) = W sζ−1

dε

sin2(Ωt)

.

(10)

(cid:90)

(cid:20) 4A2ε2−sζ

Ω2

(cid:21)

6

FIG. 4. Energy spread in the linear response regime.
Time evolution of the energy spread calculated numerically
for a driven and disordered Heisenberg model, Eq. (18), of
size L = 12 with open boundary conditions, driving ampli-
tude A = 0.001J, disorder W = 4J, and two diﬀerent driving
frequencies ω = 0.1J and ω = 0.2J. In a considerably large
time regime, the energy spread is linear, as indicated by the
reference curve with linear slope, dashed line. The linear re-
sponse regime separates the ultrashort time regime, t (cid:46) 1/ω,
in which the driving frequency cannot be resolved from the
regime in which the TLS are saturated, t (cid:38) 1/A. Inset: Expo-
nent α obtained from the scaling energy spread with the drive
frequency (cid:104)(∆E)2(cid:105) ∼ A2ωαt, blue stars and diamonds, com-
pared to the exponent of the optical conductivity obtained
directly from the Kubo formula [30].

This integral has four regimes. At short times compared
with 1/W it goes as A2t2. At long times compared with
t (cid:38) 1/A (cid:38) 1/Ω, it saturates. There are two intermediate
regimes: 1/W (cid:28) t (cid:28) 1/ω and 1/ω (cid:28) t (cid:28) 1/A. The for-
mer regime is not of interest to us: at these timescales,
the frequency ω cannot be resolved. Thus, we can spe-
cialize to 1/ω (cid:28) t (cid:28) 1/A. Here, the integral (10) splits
into three parts: from 0 to ω−1/t, from ω−1/t to ω+1/t,
and from ω + 1/t to W . In the “outer” regimes, we can
approximate sin2 x (cid:39) 1/2, and in the “inner” regime, we
can expand it as sin2 x (cid:39) x2. Using these results, we ﬁnd
that the leading t-dependence in this regime is given by

(∆E)2

LR(t) ∼ W sζ−1A2ω2−sζt

(11)

This is, as expected, proportional to the linear response
conductivity σ(ω) ∼ ω2−sζ ≡ ωα [30], cf. Fig. 4.

VI. REGIMES OF NONLINEAR RESPONSE

The perturbative resonances discussed in the previous
section saturate on a timescale ∼ 1/A. When A (cid:38) ω,
these resonances are essentially saturated within the ﬁrst
drive cycle. Thus, any heating that occurs after the ﬁrst

time tJenergy spread disorderexponent KuboL=10L=12L=14ultrashort time responselinearresponsesaturationdrive cycle is due to slower, more collective processes.
We now consider various types of such processes: (A)
perturbative resonances that are slow compared with the
main Mott transitions, and thus give rise to slower heat-
ing; (B) perturbative resonances that are higher-order in
the drive amplitude; (C) thermal Griﬃths inclusions; and
(D) Landau-Zener transitions.

A. Anomalously distant resonant pairs

First, we extend the analysis of Sec. V to times that
are long compared with 1/A; at these times, the dom-
inant Mott resonances have saturated. However, rare
Mott pairs with anomalously small Rabi frequency still
exist, as do pairs of states with splitting ω at larger scales
than xMott. We expect the latter to dominate, as they
are more abundant, so we shall focus on them. Unlike
the Mott pairs, these subleading resonances are induced
by the drive: i.e., although the pairs are split by ω, this
splitting is due to detuning rather than hybridization.
Thus they are hybridized by the oﬀ-diagonal matrix el-
ements of the drive. The hybridization is given (at dis-
tances x (cid:29) xMott) by ˜A(x) ∼ Ax exp(−x/ζ). Moreover
the number of these resonances increases with distance as
exp(sx). Now let us consider the dynamics on a timescale
t. On this timescale, resonances with ˜A(x) (cid:38) 1/t will
have saturated and do not contribute any further to heat-
ing. However, further-out drive-induced resonant pairs
will still be absorbing linearly. The absorption at time t
is thus dominated by resonances with ˜A(x) (cid:39) 1/t. Plug-
ging this into Eq. (11), the contribution from these reso-
nances to heating goes as

(∆E)2

Anom.-Mott(t) ∼ ˜A(x)2esxω2t/W ∼ Asζω2tsζ−1/W.
(12)
Stability of the MBL phase entails sζ < 1, so that these
processes give rise to a slow, power-law approach to sat-
uration on timescales t (cid:38) 1/A even when the drive is
weak.

B. Resonances from higher-order processes in the

drive

In the previous sections we considered one way in
which the drive can induce n-particle rearrangements:
namely, that the expansion of the electric ﬁeld in terms
of eﬀective spins has matrix elements for rearranging n
spins. For large n such a process is suppressed because
it falls oﬀ as exp(−n/ζ) [see Sec. III]. Nevertheless, it
is still leading-order in the drive amplitude A. When
the drive amplitude is large, one must also consider res-
onant n-particle rearrangements that are higher-order in
the drive amplitude. For instance, one can rearrange n
eﬀective spins by going to nth order in the drive. The

7

amplitude for such a process can be estimated in pertur-
bation theory as ˜An ∼ An/W n−1 (up to a combinatorial
factor) because the typical energy change upon ﬂipping
an eﬀective spin is W . To see which type of n spin rear-
rangement is more important, one must compare ζ with
1/ log(W/A); the bigger of these will dominate. We have
considered the former type (ﬁrst-order in A) above; now
we consider the latter (high-order in A).
The resonances that go as An saturate only on
timescales t ∼ 1/ ˜An; thus nth order processes can dom-
inate response once all lower-order processes have sat-
urated. At a time t, the dominant unsaturated reso-
nances are of order n such that ˜An ∼ 1/t, and thus
n(t) ∼ log t/ log(W/A). These nth order processes can
be analyzed in terms of the Rabi formula, precisely as in
Sec. V but replacing A with the renormalized Rabi fre-
quency ˜An ∼ 1/t. Thus, (∆E)2
n ∼ ˜A2
nesnt. Substituting
for ˜An and n(t), we arrive at the result

(∆E)2

Hi.-Res. ∼ t−1+const.s/[log(W/A)]

(13)

up to an overall constant due to the combinatorics of nth
order processes. Thus, higher-order processes give rise to
a power law that is (a) sensitive to the drive amplitude A,
and (b) can be either positive or negative. In the limit
A, ω → 0, we expect these processes to be subleading
(since A/W → 0) but for numerically accessible frequen-
cies, it is plausible that these processes will be relevant
for the late-time dynamics.

C. Thermal Griﬃths inclusions

So far, we have focused on heating processes involv-
ing isolated two-level systems inside the MBL phase. A
separate channel for response and heating comes from
thermal “inclusions,” or locally thermalizing islands em-
bedded in a localized bulk. We expect this channel to
be particularly important near the delocalization tran-
sition. To explore it, we ﬁrst discuss the response due
to a single deeply thermal segment of length L. The
matrix elements of the drive between eigenstates of this
segment will be ∼ AL exp(−sL/2), while the many-
body level spacing is ∼ W L exp(−sL). The exponen-
tial factors cancel out when computing the Golden Rule
rate γ ∼ A2/W , but do aﬀect saturation timescales:
speciﬁcally, saturation eﬀects for such a ﬁnite block be-
come important on timescales t (cid:38) 1/[AL exp(−sL/2)],
in the limit A/W → 0 [55]. Consider the response
at a timescale t. At this time, thermal inclusions for
which AL exp(−sL/2) (cid:46) 1/t will not have saturated.
The density of such highly thermal segments goes as
exp(−gL). Each inclusion contributes a constant energy
spread ∼ A2σinc.(ω)t. Combining these results, we ﬁnd
that the Griﬃths contribution (from strongly thermal in-
clusions) to the heating rate is given by

(∆E)2

Griﬀ ∼ t1−g/(2s).

(14)

where g is expected to be small near the MBL transition.
This is the contribution from thermal inclusions. How-
ever, it is possible that fractal critical inclusions could
give an even faster heating rate: in particular, it seems
that the probability of critical inclusions might vanish
as exp(−g(cid:48)Ldf ), where df < 1 [40]. This might lead
to a parametrically faster energy spread than the com-
pact thermal inclusions we are considering: however, at
present the heating behavior of such critical inclusions is
unclear.

D. Landau-Zener transitions

In addition to the perturbative resonances discussed
above, one expects that absorption due to Landau-Zener
processes should also be important in the low-frequency
limit. The Landau-Zener contribution has two regimes,
depending on the scale xad, which separates mostly adia-
batic resonances from mostly diabatic ones: when xad (cid:28)
xLZ [i.e., A1−sζ/2 (cid:46) ωsζ/2W 1−sζ] the “active” Landau-
Zener transitions—i.e., those that have an appreciable
probability of being both diabatic and adiabatic—are
rare and isolated, and can thus be treated individually.
In the opposite limit xad (cid:29) xLZ, the Landau-Zener tran-
sitions form a percolating network, and the system delo-
calizes.

1.

Isolated Landau-Zener transitions

We now estimate the heating rate due to isolated
Landau-Zener transitions. In general, a transition that is
always adiabatic or always diabatic does not contribute
to energy spread (see Sec. IV B); rather, the timescale
on which a given Landau-Zener transition acts dissipa-
tively (or, equivalently, loses memory of its initial state)
is given by

T (x) (cid:39) 1/[ωPad(x)(1 − Pad(x))].

(15)

In the regime we are considering, Landau-Zener transi-
tions are isolated. Thus on timescales long compared
with T (x), all Landau-Zener transitions at a length-
scale x are saturated and do not contribute to heat-
ing. Let us consider the response at time t. Then, the
leading contribution to heating will be from transitions
with T (x) (cid:39) t. At long times, this means the transi-
tions that have not yet saturated are mostly adiabatic
or mostly diabatic. The phase space for mostly dia-
batic transitions, x (cid:38) xad., is larger (because these cor-
respond to larger-scale rearrangements, of which there
are more) so we focus on those. For such transitions,
Pad (cid:28) 1, so we can simplify Eq. (15) by approximating
Pad ∼ W 2 exp(−2x/ζ)/(Axω) to write

x(t) (cid:39) (ζ/2) log[W 2t/(Ax)].

(16)

8
At a length-scale x(t), there are (A/W ) exp[sx(t)] ∼
A1−sζ/2tsζ/2 Landau-Zener crossings. Each of these con-
tributes ∼ Ax(t) of energy. Thus, up to logarithmic
factors, the total Landau-Zener contribution to energy
spread is

(∆E)2

LZ ∼ A2−sζ/2tsζ/2

(17)

This analysis is incomplete because it ignores interference
between subsequent Landau-Zener transitions. Thus, it
would naively suggest that any degree of freedom al-
ways delocalizes at suﬃciently long times, because a
Landau-Zener crossing inevitably takes place.
Inter-
ference eﬀects qualitatively modify this picture at long
distances, as discussed in App. B, ensuring the stabil-
ity of the MBL phase.
In a simple model where the
Landau-Zener transitions can be treated as entirely iso-
lated, this approach gives us the late-time asymptotic
result is (∆E)2
It is not
clear, however, that this result is correct for the setup
we have in mind, in which the drive is suddenly turned
on at time t = 0. In this setup, even the typical eﬀec-
tive spins (which are not involved in resonant or Landau-
Zener transitions) nevertheless exhibit weak precessional
dynamics (as discussed, e.g., in Ref. [29]). Thus, the en-
vironment of a given Landau-Zener transition is never
perfectly ω-periodic, which complicates a full analysis of
interference between Landau-Zener transitions.

LZ,int ∼ A2−(sζ/2)ωsζ/2tsζ−1.

2. Percolating network of Landau-Zener transitions

When the drive amplitude is large enough that xad ≈
xLZ, then a chain of Landau-Zener transitions percolates
through the system. This leads to a delocalized steady
state in which the system heats up to inﬁnite temper-
ature. It seems plausible (as discussed below) that the
delocalized state near the percolation transition exhibits
anomalous transport [56]. Even in such an anomalous-
transport phase, however, the long-time heating behav-
ior, for ﬁnite-frequency driving, is expected to be lin-
ear in time:
i.e., the ﬁnite-frequency linear response
coeﬃcients are well-deﬁned in this phase in the high-
temperature limit [see Ref. [57], Sec. 5.4]. Neverthe-
less, close to the drive-induced delocalization transition,
the typical relaxation timescales are very long; absorp-
tion on much shorter timescales is dominated by single
Landau-Zener transitions, as discussed in the previous
section. We emphasize that this “physical” charge diﬀu-
sion is not to be confused with the “ﬁctitious” diﬀusion
process discussed in Sec. II.

E. Summary and Floquet perspective

In this section, we have discussed various mechanisms
that cause heating on timescales t (cid:38) 1/A—anomalously

9

FIG. 5. Entering the non-linear regime. (a) In the regime of weak drive A = 0.001J the energy spread (cid:104)(∆E)2(cid:105)(t) is linear
in a large time window irrespective of the disorder strength, while in the strong drive regime, (b), the response is sub-linear
with an exponent that strongly decreases with increasing disorder strength, see insets for the respective dynamical exponents
extracted from a powerlaw ﬁt to the data. In all cases the driving frequency ω = 0.1J and systems of size L = 12 with open
boundary conditions have been used. The dashed line in (a) indicates a growth that is linear in time.

large-scale (and therefore slow) Mott resonances, higher-
order processes in the drive amplitude, thermal Griﬃths
inclusions, and Landau-Zener transitions. We have ar-
gued that all these eﬀects give rise to nonlinear heating
characterized by continuously varying power-laws in time
(owing to a wide distribution of saturation timescales),
but the exponent can be negative, e.g., with anomalously
large Mott resonances, or positive, as with Griﬃths inclu-
sions and Landau-Zener crossings (in the intermediate-
time window where interference eﬀects are not impor-
tant).

These results are relevant for intermediate times. How-
ever, at asymptotically late times, these behaviors all re-
duce to two types: power-law approach to a saturated
value as (∆E)2∞ − (∆E)2(t) (cid:39) t−φ, or linear growth
in case the Landau-Zener transitions percolate. These
can be understood from the following complementary
perspective. One can regard the protocol we have dis-
cussed as being a quantum quench into an eﬀective Flo-
quet Hamiltonian ˆHF , deﬁned via exp[−i2π ˆHF /ω] ≡
ˆU (2π/ω), which is itself either MBL or delocalized. The
late-time behavior after such quenches is well under-
stood in both the MBL and thermal phases. When the
Floquet Hamiltonian is itself localized, local operators
approach their eventual expectation values with a slow
power law [28, 30]. On the other hand, when the Floquet
Hamiltonian is deep in its thermal phase, one naively
expects essentially linear heating at times (cid:29) 1/A.

This Floquet perspective also suggests that near
the drive-induced delocalization transition, the system
should be in a Griﬃths phase with anomalous charge dif-
fusion and associated slow dynamics. The delocalization
transition point depends on ζ, which is spatially ﬂuctu-
ating. Thus, in the delocalized phase near the transition,
there will be regions of the system, e.g., with anomalously
small ζ, that are locally still in the Floquet-MBL phase,

and these will presumably act as transport bottlenecks.
Late-time dynamics after a quench into such a Floquet
Hamiltonian with anomalous charge diﬀusion (note that
charge, unlike energy, is conserved by the drive) has not
been explored in detail. A simple estimate is that the
heating at late times t is governed by the density of lo-
cally insulating regions at time t (as these take a long
time to heat up). This would then suggest [36] that the
late-time approach to saturation should go as t−1/z, and
thus should go logarithmically at the critical point. This
is consistent with what is seen numerically (see below,
and Ref. [45]).

VII. NUMERICAL RESULTS

To support our analytic estimates, we perform numeri-
cal simulations on the random-ﬁeld XXZ chain, described
by the Hamiltonian

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:104)ij(cid:105)

ˆH =

J
2

( ˆS+
i

ˆS−
j + h.c.) + Jz

ˆSz
i

ˆSz
i+1 +

hi ˆSz
i ,

i

i

(18)
where hi is a local random ﬁeld drawn from a uniform
distribution of range [−W, W ], J is the spin exchange
scale, and Jz the spin-spin coupling strength, which we
set equal and use as energy unit throughout this work.
The monochromatic drive

ˆHdrv.(t) = A sin ωt

xi ˆSz
i

(19)

i

is switched on for t ≥ 0. For our purposes it is nec-
instead of the
essary to use a monochromatic drive,
square-wave drives in Refs.
[42, 58]. While imple-
menting a square-wave drive is numerically simpler, it

(cid:88)

time tJtime tJ(a)(b)10010110210310-310-210-110010010110210310-710-610-510-4W=2JW=3JW=4JW=5JW=6Jenergy spread energy spread W/J0246dynamical exponent01W/J0246dynamical exponent0110

open boundary conditions. We ﬁnd that the two sets
of exponents are largely consistent, see inset of Fig. 4.
Near the MBL transition and on the ergodic side a di-
rect comparison gets complicated by ﬁnite size eﬀects
which are diﬀerent for the Kubo conductivity and the
energy spread. However, deep in the localized phase, the
exponents agree reasonably.

B. Nonlinear response and amplitude dependence

We now turn to the nonlinear response of larger drive
amplitudes.
In Fig. 5 we show the energy spread for
diﬀerent values of disorder strength W , ranging from
the ergodic to the localized phase for ﬁxed driving fre-
quency ω = 0.1J and drive strength A that is weak in
(a) A = 0.001J and strong in (b) A = 0.1J. In the weak
drive limit the response is linear in a wide time window
irrespective of the disorder strength W , cf. inset which
shows the exponent as a function of disorder strength.
By contrast, for strong drive, the powerlaw exponent of
the energy spread decreases signiﬁcantly with disorder
strength (inset), indicating that the sublinear regime has
been entered. This behavior has been predicted by all
the mechanisms discussed in Sec. VI. For even stronger
drive, a percolating network of Landau-Zener transition
forms, and the energy spread changes from power-law
slow heating to logarithmically slow heating, Fig. 6, con-
sistent with the ﬁndings of Ref. [44, 45]. This logarith-
mic growth of the energy spread in time is characteristic
for the crossover regime to the thermal phase [45] and
is slower than the naively expected linear growth for a
Floquet Hamiltonian being deep in the thermal phase.

We now study the drive amplitude dependence at
strong disorder W = 6J, Fig. 7 (a). For intermediate
driving amplitudes A (cid:38) 0.01J, the energy spread grows
sublinearly in time, with a power law that increases
weakly with the amplitude. We conjecture that this de-
pendence on the drive amplitude arises from higher oder
resonances as discussed in Sec. VI B. The frequency de-
pendence of the energy spread (cid:104)(∆E)2(cid:105) for intermediate
driving amplitude A = 0.01J transitions from sublinear
growth at low driving frequency to an intermediate linear
growth at higher frequency, see Fig. 7 (b), in agreement
with the picture of saturating two-level systems.

C. Additional probe: Edwards-Anderson

parameter and von Neumann entanglement entropy

A complementary perspective to switching on the pe-
riodic modulation is to regard it as a quantum quench
from the original Hamiltonian to the Floquet Hamilto-
nian. From this perspective, a key question is whether
the corresponding Floquet Hamiltonian is localized or de-
localized. We have explored this issue by looking at the
evolution of the Edwards-Anderson parameter (or Ham-

FIG. 6. Response of percolating Landau-Zener tran-
sitions. In the strong drive limit, Landau-Zener transitions
form a percolating network and the eﬀective Floquet Hamil-
tonian is delocalized. In the crossover to that regime, we ﬁnd
that the energy spread grows slower than naively expected as
a logarithm in time (in contrast to the powerlaw growth which
we predict in the linear-response and the intermediate non-
linear regime), consistent with the ﬁndings of Ref. [44, 45].
The data is shown for driving frequency ω = 0.1J, drive am-
plitude A = J, and system size L = 12, for diﬀerent values of
the disorder strength W as stated in the legend.

complicates the extraction of frequency-dependent re-
sponse, because the higher harmonics of the drive (corre-
sponding to larger ω) have higher conductivity and thus
dominate the heating at short to intermediate times.
tion operator ˆU (t) = Tt exp[−i(cid:82) t
We initialize the dynamics by an eigenstate of ˆH and
(cid:81)N
propagate it in time by discretizing the time evolu-
0 dt(cid:48)( ˆH + ˆHdrv.(t(cid:48)))] ≈
n=1 exp[−i∆t( ˆH + ˆHdrv.(n∆t))], where ∆t = t/N . The
stepwise propagation is performed by Lanczos time evo-
lution which allows us to eﬃciently update the instanta-
neous Hamiltonian ˆH + ˆHdrv.(n∆t). All data is taken for
systems with open boundary conditions in order to avoid
the jump of the electric ﬁeld in space.

A. Linear response regime

First, we check for the validity of linear response the-
ory, which should apply for any ﬁxed frequency when
the amplitude goes to zero. We ﬁnd, indeed, that for
small-amplitude driving there is a considerable regime
where the energy spread is linear (as linear-response the-
ory would predict), see Fig. 4.
In this regime, increas-
ing the drive strength does not change the exponent, but
causes saturation to set in sooner.

In order to further benchmark this dynamical regime
against linear response theory, we extract the rate of en-
ergy spread (i.e., the prefactor of the linear regime) as a
function of frequency, and compare it with the linear re-
sponse exponents obtained in Ref. [30] for systems with

time tJenergy spread 1001011021030246810W=3JW=4JW=5JW=6J11

FIG. 7. Amplitude and frequency dependence of the energy spread. Energy spread in time (cid:104)(∆E)2(cid:105)(t) for (a) diﬀerent
values of the driving amplitude A and ﬁxed frequency ω = 0.1J and (b) driving amplitude A = 0.01J and diﬀerent values of
the frequency ω. In both cases the disorder is W = 6J and the system size L = 12. The dashed line indicates a linear slope,
which corresponds to linear response. Linear response occurs at relatively low amplitudes and large frequencies: thus, in panel
(a), a linear slope is evident only for small drive amplitude; in panel (b), for ﬁxed amplitude, a linear-response regime emerges
as the drive frequency is increased (black curve). The latter behavior is a distinctive feature of the MBL phase.

FIG. 8. Edwards-Anderson order parameter and von Neumann entanglement entropy. The Edwards-Anderson
order parameter (or Hamming distance), top row, and entropy, bottom row, for (a) weak drive A = 0.001J and (b) strong drive
A = J, driving frequency ω = 0.1J, and three values of disorder strength W = {4, 5, 6}J. The system size is L = 12, solid
lines, and L = 16, dashed lines. For weak drive, the system and hence the eﬀective Floquet Hamiltonian remains localized,
while for strong drive, it delocalizes manifesting in a decay in the Edwards-Anderson parameter and a strong increase of the
entanglement entropy.

time tJ10010110210310-810-610-410-2100A=0.001JA=0.01JA=0.1JA=1Jtime tJ(a)(b)energy spread energy spread (a)(b)0.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91W=4JW=5JW=6JL=12L=16Edwards-Anderson parameter0.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91Edwards-Anderson parameter100101102103entanglement entropy00.511.522.5time tJtime tJentanglement entropy10010110210300.20.40.60.8ming distance [59])

χ(t) =

4
L

(cid:88)

i

(cid:104)p| ˆU†(t)Sz

i

ˆU (t)Sz

i |p(cid:105) ,

(20)

where |p(cid:105) is an arbitrary product state which we take as
a random initial state. A special case of the Edwards-
Anderson order parameter is the decay of contrast of an
initial staggered magnetization, which has been used as
an order parameter in recent experiments [14–16]. In the
MBL phase and for a drive in linear-response regime A (cid:28)
ω, the Edwards-Anderson order parameter saturates in
the inﬁnite time limit to a ﬁnite value, since at weak
drive the eﬀective Floquet Hamiltonian remains to be
localized, Fig. 8 (a), top. By contrast, in the strong drive
limit A (cid:29) ω, it decays to zero, since the eﬀective Floquet
Hamiltonian is thermal, Fig. 8 (b), top, which conﬁrms
that for the strong drive considered in Fig. 6 a percolating
network of Landau-Zener transitions has been formed.

In addition, we have computed the von Neumann en-
tanglement entropy growth due to the drive, Fig. 8 bot-
tom row. Well in the localized regime, W = 6J and for
weak driving amplitude A = 0.001J, the entanglement
entropy does not exhibit any ﬁnite size eﬀects, as the
eﬀective localization length of the Floquet Hamiltonian
ˆHF is expected to be much smaller than the system size,
while closer to the transition W = {4J, 5J} the simulated
system sizes are too small for the entanglement entropy
to refrain from ﬁnite size eﬀects. By contrast, for strong
drive A = J, a substantial system size dependence is ob-
served for all values of the disorder strength, which also
conﬁrms the delocalized nature of the eﬀective Floquet
Hamiltonian. In the strong drive limit, the entanglement
entropy starts to grow abruptly after approximately half
of a driving cycle t ∼ π/ω, corresponding to the Landau-
Zener crossing time scale.

VIII. DISCUSSION

Our objective in this work was to identify regimes for
which linear response theory correctly predicts the dy-
namics of a driven MBL system, and those for which the
response is essentially nonlinear. Our key results are that
heating in the ﬁnite-frequency, weak-drive regime is es-
sentially conventional (corresponding to linear response
theory with the appropriate conductivity), whereas the
behavior at larger drive amplitudes (or lower frequencies)
is not. It seems that in this regime neither the amplitude-
dependence nor the time-dependence of the heating cor-
respond to linear response predictions. Rather, as we
discussed, both are characterized by continuously vary-
ing power laws. The predicted nonlinear behavior in time
is clearly seen in numerical simulations; these simula-
tions also suggest nonlinear dependence on the ampli-
tude, although we could not extract the precise form of
the amplitude-dependence. A feature that is distinctive
to the MBL phase is the existence of a broad parameter

12

regime in which linear-response theory breaks down—i.e.,
the transient response to driving changes its character—
although the eigenstates of the Floquet Hamiltonian re-
main localized. This intermediate regime shrinks to a
point as the MBL transition is approached (Fig. 2, in-
set): there, the breakdown of linear response coincides
with the breakdown of the Floquet-MBL steady state.
(We are assuming here that sζ = 1 at the MBL transi-
tion, as conjectured in Ref. [30]. It is also possible that
the transition occurs for sζ < 1, in which case a small
intermediate regime would persist at the transition.)

Although,

for reasons of numerical tractability, we
worked in the inﬁnite-temperature limit and with one-
dimensional systems, we expect that the same regimes of
heating should exist throughout the MBL phase regard-
less of temperature or of dimensionality. We emphasize
that since most of our discussion has concerned the dy-
namics relatively deep in the MBL phase, it is not ex-
pected to be sensitive to ﬁnite-size eﬀects until very late
times (speciﬁcally, times on the order of exp(L/ζ) where
L is the linear dimension of the system). Thus, in exper-
iments ﬁnite-time eﬀects, such as dissipation, are likelier
to pose a challenge for our schemes than ﬁnite-size eﬀects.
Because the distinction between the Landau-Zener and
Mott regimes is a generic feature of response in MBL sys-
tems, we expect that alternative time-dependent probes,
such as modulation spectroscopy [60], will also be able to
see the diﬀerences between the various regimes.

It is natural to ask about the fate of this linear-to-

FIG. 9. Schematic phase diagram showing regimes of dy-
namical response in a driven disordered system, at a ﬁxed
drive frequency, as a function of drive amplitude and disorder
strength. Both frequency and amplitude are taken to be small
relative to the characteristic energy scales (e.g., bandwidths)
of the system. Solid lines indicate steady-state transitions be-
tween a diﬀusive thermal phase, a subdiﬀusive Griﬃths phase
and an MBL phase. The MBL phase is destabilized as the
drive amplitude increases [42, 43]. Dashed curve shows the
crossover between linear and nonlinear response in the tran-
sient dynamics of a driven system. This crossover is in general
distinct from the steady-state phase transitions.

diffusive MBL linear response works 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 disorder strength drive amplitude / frequencyGriffithslinear response workslinear response failsnonlinear response crossover beyond the MBL transition,
i.e., in the subdiﬀusive thermal Griﬃths phase. We now
brieﬂy discuss this at a qualitative level. Suppose the
undriven system is in its Griﬃths phase. Then its trans-
port is bottlenecked by rare regions that are locally “in
the MBL phase”. However, when one drives the system
at large A/ω, some fraction of these rare regions become
delocalized by the drive (because they locally satisfy the
condition that A1−sζ/2 ∼ ωsζ/2W 1−sζ). Thus, they cease
to act as bottlenecks unless their local sζ is suﬃciently
small. As one continues to increase A/ω, an increasing
fraction of rare regions delocalize, until eventually the re-
maining bottlenecks become too sparse to prevent regular
diﬀusion. Thus our results directly imply that the A → 0
and ω → 0 limits fail to commute in the thermal Griﬃths
phase as well as the MBL phase: taking A → 0 ﬁrst gives
anomalous diﬀusion whereas taking ω → 0 ﬁrst gives reg-
ular diﬀusion. Our ﬁndings thus suggest the schematic
phase diagram of Fig. 9, which shows the linear and non-
linear response regimes as a function of disorder strength
and the ratio of the drive amplitude and frequency. Driv-
ing a system in the MBL phase with increasingly strong
ﬁelds leads to a transient crossover from linear to non-
linear response (dashed lines), which need not coincide
with the dynamical steady-state transitions of the Flo-
quet Hamiltonian from a localized phase, to a subdiﬀu-
sive Griﬃths phase, and ﬁnally a diﬀusive phase (solid
lines). Up to logarithmic corrections, our analysis sug-
gests that the crossover from linear to nonlinear response
should occur at A ∼ ω throughout the MBL phase, in-
cluding at the critical point and in the thermal Griﬃths
phase. This result for the critical behavior is natural [61]
if we take the critical point to be an inﬁnite-randomness
one, as suggested in Refs. [9, 38, 39]: the voltage typically
has the scaling dimension of frequency [62], and given
inﬁnite-randomness scaling (which suggests the charac-
teristic length-scale for frequency ω goes as log ω), the
electric ﬁeld has the same scaling dimension.

An important question for future work is how dissipa-
tion aﬀects the dynamical regimes we have identiﬁed. In
the presence of dissipation, the system is always “ther-
mal” at suﬃciently long times, in the sense that localiza-
tion is destroyed [26]. In general, the system will reach a
steady state, in which the energy gained from the drive is
balanced by the energy lost to the bath [63]. We expect
that this steady state will have a highly inhomogeneous
temperature proﬁle in the linear-response regime (with
hot spots near resonances), but become relatively homo-
geneous at strong drive when the Floquet Hamiltonian is
thermal. Understanding the associated crossovers is an
important step for a full dynamical characterization of
the MBL phase.

Note added.—As this manuscript was being prepared,
we became aware of other studies of the dynamical
response in strongly driven many-body localized sys-
tems [44, 45].

13

IX. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank D. Abanin, I. Bloch, P. Bordia, B. DeMarco,
M. Heyl, D. Huse, H. L¨uschen, I. Martin, R. Nandkishore,
V. Oganesyan, S. Parameswaran, F. Pollmann, and U.
Schneider for helpful discussions. We thank D. Huse for
a critical reading of the manuscript. S.G. acknowledges
support from the Walter Burke Institute at Caltech and
from the National Science Foundation under Grant No.
NSF PHY11-25915. M.K. acknowledges support from
Technical University of Munich - Institute for Advanced
Study, funded by the German Excellence Initiative and
the European Union FP7 under grant agreement 291763.
E.D. acknowledges support from the Harvard-MIT CUA,
NSF Grant No. DMR-1308435, AFOSR Quantum Sim-
ulation MURI, the ARO-MURI on Atomtronics, ARO
MURI Quism program, the Simons foundation, the Hum-
boldt Foundation, Dr. Max R¨ossler, the Walter Haefner
Foundation, and the ETH Foundation.

Appendix A: Diﬀusion across concentration

gradients

The most commonly considered case of biased diﬀusion
is that in which particles are subjected to noise (which
causes diﬀusion) as well as a deterministic force, such as
an electric ﬁeld (which causes drift). The situation con-
sidered here is somewhat diﬀerent. We are concerned
with the random walk of a “particle” (i.e., an initial
conﬁguration) in a high-dimensional conﬁguration space.
The random walk itself is unbiased, in the sense that the
rates for energy-increasing and energy-decreasing transi-
tions mediated by the drive are identical. However, the
gradient comes in via the initial conditions: lower-energy
conﬁgurations are slightly more likely to be occupied at
t = 0, when the drive is switched on. Since the driven
dynamics itself is “unbiased” it is equally likely to heat
or cool the system on any cycle; thus over time the driven
system tends to “forget” its initial gradient. (When the
Floquet Hamiltonian is thermal this causes heating to
inﬁnite temperature; when the Floquet Hamiltonian is
localized, most degrees of freedom are unaﬀected by the
drive, but the few responsive degrees of freedom precess
with random phases.)

To make this idea more concrete, we assume that heat-
ing occurs via local processes, and that each region of
the system (above a certain characteristic size L) heats
up independently. This assumption is manifestly valid
in the MBL phase; we also believe it to be valid deep
in the thermal phase. We take the temperature T to be
greater than LW , where W is the single-particle band-
width. This allows us to linearize the Boltzmann factors
for the various states in the system as exp(−Em/T ) (cid:39)
1 − Em/T . This linear energy-dependence of Boltzmann
factors maps onto a linear concentration gradient in the
energy-space diﬀusion problem. Note that the bounded-
ness of the energy spectrum maps on to the ﬁnite extent

of space over which the concentration gradient is present.
A straightforward application of these ideas is to a
generic two-state system, with states labeled 1 and 2
(having energies E1 and E2 and occupation probabil-
ities P1 and P2). The master equation for P1 reads
˙P1 = Γ21P2−Γ12P1, where the Γ’s are intrinsic transition
rates. Since these rates are unbiased (as discussed above),
we have ˙P1 = Γ(P2 − P1), and similarly ˙P2 = Γ(P1 − P2).
Subtracting these rates, we have that

d(P1 − P2)

dt

(cid:39) −Γ(P1 − P2).

(A1)

so the initial concentration gradient decays at a rate Γ,
which is also evidently the rate of “energy spread” in this
two-site example, as it is the rate at which the system
undergoes transitions between conﬁgurations (“sites”) of
deﬁnite energy.

Appendix B: Theory of mostly diabatic

Landau-Zener crossings

For a given crossing one can rewrite the time-
dependent Hamiltonian in a rotating frame in the form
(see App. C of Ref. [52])

(cid:88)

n

H(cid:48) =

∆(cid:112)ω/A[exp(−inωt)σ+ + h.c.] + 0σz

14

(B1)

The sum over n is cut oﬀ on a scale n (cid:39) A/ω. The matrix
element ∆ is the bare hopping at the scale of the partic-
ular TLS, ∆ ∼ W exp(−n/ζ). We have assumed ω (cid:28) A
as Landau-Zener transitions are important chieﬂy in this
regime. At a large distance x, the ﬁrst term in Eq. (B1)
can be treated perturbatively in the spirit of the rotating-
wave approximation. The bandwidth of states involved
in LZ transitions at this distance ∼ Ax, and there are
n(x) ∼ Ax/ω harmonics within this window. States that

lie within ∆(x)(cid:112)ω/A of one of these n(x) harmonics
∆(x)(cid:112)ω/A (cid:38) Ax/n(x) = ω. Thus, diﬀerent harmonics

of the drive frequency are resonant in the Floquet pic-
ture, and cause transport. When x is relatively small,

overlap, and any transition within the drive bandwidth
Ax occurs (as the LZ picture would predict). However,
when x is large and ∆(x) is correspondingly small, the
inequality is ﬂipped, and most transitions that are “al-
lowed” on a naive LZ analysis are in fact oﬀ-resonant and
do not contribute to transport. Thus, the MBL phase
is stable against extremely long-distance LZ transitions.
These transitions can instead be treated using a straight-
forward generalization of the Rabi-formula approach in
the main text, with the matrix element ∼ A replaced by

∆(cid:112)ω/A.

[1] P. W. Anderson, “Absence of diﬀusion in certain random

[9] Arijeet Pal and David A. Huse, “Many-body localization

lattices,” Phys. Rev. 109, 1492–1505 (1958).

[2] D.M. Basko, I.L. Aleiner, and B.L. Altshuler, “Metal-
insulator transition in a weakly interacting many-electron
system with localized single-particle states,” Annals of
Physics 321, 1126 – 1205 (2006).

[3] I. Gornyi, A. Mirlin, and D. Polyakov, “Interacting elec-
trons in disordered wires: Anderson localization and low-
t transport,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 206603 (2005).

[4] Rahul Nandkishore and David A. Huse, “Many-body lo-
calization and thermalization in quantum statistical me-
chanics,” Annual Review of Condensed Matter Physics
6, 15–38 (2015).

[5] Ehud Altman and Ronen Vosk, “Universal dynamics and
renormalization in many body localized systems,” An-
nual Review of Condensed Matter Physics 6, 383–409
(2015).

[6] Vadim Oganesyan and David A. Huse, “Localization of
interacting fermions at high temperature,” Phys. Rev. B
75, 155111 (2007).

[7] Marko ˇZnidariˇc, Tomas Prosen, and Peter Prelovˇsek,
“Many-body localization in the heisenberg xxz magnet
in a random ﬁeld,” Phys. Rev. B 77, 064426 (2008).

[8] C´ecile Monthus and Thomas Garel, “Many-body lo-
calization transition in a lattice model of interacting
fermions: Statistics of renormalized hoppings in conﬁgu-
ration space,” Phys. Rev. B 81, 134202 (2010).

phase transition,” Phys. Rev. B 82, 174411 (2010).

[10] Timothy C. Berkelbach and David R. Reichman, “Con-
ductivity of disordered quantum lattice models at inﬁnite
temperature: Many-body localization,” Phys. Rev. B 81,
224429 (2010).

[11] John Z Imbrie, “On many-body localization for quantum

spin chains,” arXiv:1403.7837 (2014).

[12] M. Ovadia, D. Kalok, I. Tamir, S. Mitra, B. Sac´ep´e, and
D. Shahar, “Evidence for a ﬁnite-temperature insulator,”
Scientiﬁc Reports 5, 13503.

[13] S. S. Kondov, W. R. McGehee, W. Xu, and B. DeMarco,
“Disorder-induced localization in a strongly correlated
atomic hubbard gas,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 083002
(2015).

[14] Michael Schreiber, Sean S. Hodgman, Pranjal Bordia,
Henrik P. L¨uschen, Mark H. Fischer, Ronen Vosk, Ehud
Altman, Ulrich Schneider, and Immanuel Bloch, “Obser-
vation of many-body localization of interacting fermions
in a quasirandom optical lattice,” Science 349, 842–845
(2015).

[15] Jacob Smith, Aaron Lee, Philip Richerme, Brian Neyen-
huis, Paul W Hess, Philipp Hauke, Markus Heyl, David A
Huse, and Christopher Monroe, “Many-body localiza-
tion in a quantum simulator with programmable random
disorder,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.07026 (2015).

[16] Pranjal Bordia, Henrik P L¨uschen, Sean S Hodgman,
Michael Schreiber, Immanuel Bloch, and Ulrich Schnei-

der, “Coupling identical 1d many-body localized sys-
tems,” arXiv:1509.00478 (2015).

[17] Maksym Serbyn, Z. Papi´c, and Dmitry A. Abanin, “Lo-
cal conservation laws and the structure of the many-body
localized states,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 127201 (2013).

[18] David A. Huse, Rahul Nandkishore,

Oganesyan,
localized systems,” Phys. Rev. B 90, 174202 (2014).

“Phenomenology

and Vadim
fully many-body-

of

[19] V Ros, M Mueller, and A Scardicchio, “Integrals of mo-
tion in the many-body localized phase,” Nuclear Physics
B 891, 420–465 (2015).

[20] Louk Rademaker and Miguel Ortu˜no, “Explicit local in-
tegrals of motion for the many-body localized state,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 010404 (2016).

[21] Frank Pollmann, Vedika Khemani, J Ignacio Cirac, and
SL Sondhi, “Eﬃcient variational diagonalization of fully
many-body localized hamiltonians,” arXiv:1506.07179
(2015).

[22] Vedika Khemani, Frank Pollmann, and SL Sondhi, “Ob-
taining highly-excited eigenstates of many-body local-
ized hamiltonians by the density matrix renormalization
group,” arXiv:1509.00483 (2015).

[23] Xiongjie Yu, David Pekker,

and Bryan K Clark,
“Finding matrix product state representations of highly-
excited eigenstates of many-body localized hamiltoni-
ans,” arXiv:1511.06389 (2015).

[24] Jens H. Bardarson, Frank Pollmann, and Joel E. Moore,
“Unbounded growth of entanglement in models of many-
body localization,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 017202 (2012).
and Dmitry A. Abanin,
“Universal slow growth of entanglement in interacting
strongly disordered systems,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 110,
260601 (2013).

[25] Maksym Serbyn, Z. Papi´c,

[26] Rahul Nandkishore, Sarang Gopalakrishnan,

and
David A. Huse, “Spectral
features of a many-body-
localized system weakly coupled to a bath,” Phys. Rev.
B 90, 064203 (2014).

[27] M. Serbyn, M. Knap, S. Gopalakrishnan, Z. Papi´c, N. Y.
Yao, C. R. Laumann, D. A. Abanin, M. D. Lukin, and
E. A. Demler, “Interferometric probes of many-body lo-
calization,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 147204 (2014).

[28] Maksym Serbyn, Z. Papi´c, and D. A. Abanin, “Quantum
quenches in the many-body localized phase,” Phys. Rev.
B 90, 174302 (2014).

[29] R. Vasseur, S. A. Parameswaran,

and J. E. Moore,
“Quantum revivals and many-body localization,” Phys.
Rev. B 91, 140202 (2015).

[30] Sarang Gopalakrishnan, Markus M¨uller, Vedika Khe-
mani, Michael Knap, Eugene Demler,
and David A.
Huse, “Low-frequency conductivity in many-body local-
ized systems,” Phys. Rev. B 92, 104202 (2015).

[31] Canran Xu and Maxim G Vavilov, “Response to a local
quench of a system near many body localization transi-
tion,” arXiv:1509.05158 (2015).

[32] T. Grover, “Certain General Constraints on the Many-
Body Localization Transition,” (2014), arXiv:1405.1471
[cond-mat.dis-nn].

[33] Yevgeny Bar Lev, Guy Cohen, and David R. Reichman,
“Absence of diﬀusion in an interacting system of spinless
fermions on a one-dimensional disordered lattice,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 114, 100601 (2015).

[34] Kartiek Agarwal, Sarang Gopalakrishnan, Michael Knap,
Markus M¨uller, and Eugene Demler, “Anomalous diﬀu-
sion and griﬃths eﬀects near the many-body localization

15

transition,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 160401 (2015).

[35] A Chandran, CR Laumann, and V Oganesyan, “Finite
size scaling bounds on many-body localized phase tran-
sitions,” arXiv:1509.04285 (2015).

[36] Sarang Gopalakrishnan, Kartiek Agarwal, David A.
Huse, Eugene Demler, and Michael Knap, “Griﬃths ef-
fects and slow dynamics in nearly many-body localized
systems,” arXiv:1511.06389.

[37] Sarang Gopalakrishnan and Rahul Nandkishore, “Mean-
ﬁeld theory of nearly many-body localized metals,” Phys.
Rev. B 90, 224203 (2014).

[38] Ronen Vosk, David A. Huse, and Ehud Altman, “The-
ory of the many-body localization transition in one-
dimensional systems,” Phys. Rev. X 5, 031032 (2015).

[39] Andrew C. Potter, Romain Vasseur,

and S. A.
Parameswaran, “Universal properties of many-body de-
localization transitions,” Phys. Rev. X 5, 031033 (2015).
and D. A. Huse,

[40] L. Zhang, B. Zhao, T. Devakul,

“arxiv:1603.02296,” (2016).

[41] Vedika Khemani, Rahul Nandkishore, and S. L. Sondhi,
“Nonlocal adiabatic response of a localized system to lo-
cal manipulations,” Nat Phys 11, 560–565 (2015).

[42] Achilleas Lazarides, Arnab Das, and Roderich Moessner,
“Fate of many-body localization under periodic driving,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 030402 (2015).

[43] Dmitry Abanin, Wojciech De Roeck, and Fran¸cois Hu-
veneers, “A theory of many-body localization in period-
ically driven systems,” arXiv:1412.4752 (2014).

[44] Maciej Kozarzewski, Peter Prelovsek,

and Marcin
Mierzejewski, “Distinctive response of many-body local-
ized systems to strong electric ﬁeld,” arXiv:1602.06055.
[45] Jorge Rehn, Achilleas Lazarides, Frank Pollmann, and
Roderich Moessner, “How periodic driving heats a disor-
dered quantum spin chain,” arXiv:1603.03054 .

[46] Heating from the ground state is considered in Refs. [44,
45]. Note that the linear-response conductivity at zero
temperature is the same for MBL and noninteracting
systems [30], and that the discussion of Ref. [41] is also
greatly modiﬁed in this limit.

[47] Bela Bauer and Chetan Nayak, “Area laws in a many-
body localized state and its implications for topological
order,” Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Ex-
periment 2013, P09005 (2013).

[48] N. F. Mott, “Conduction in non-crystalline systems,”

Phil. Mag. 170, 1259–1268 (1968).

[49] A. L. Burin, Yu. Kagan, L. A. Maksimov, and I. Ya. Pol-
ishchuk, “Dephasing rate in dielectric glasses at ultralow
temperatures,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 2945–2948 (1998).

[50] N. Y. Yao, C. R. Laumann, S. Gopalakrishnan, M. Knap,
M. M¨uller, E. A. Demler, and M. D. Lukin, “Many-body
localization in dipolar systems,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 113,
243002 (2014).

[51] J. L. Black and B. I. Halperin, “Spectral diﬀusion,
phonon echoes, and saturation recovery in glasses at low
temperatures,” Phys. Rev. B 16, 2879–2895 (1977).

[52] SN Shevchenko, Sahel Ashhab,

and Franco Nori,
“Landau–zener–st¨uckelberg interferometry,” Physics Re-
ports 492, 1–30 (2010).

[53] Here we have assumed that only two levels are involved,
as this is the case of most interest to us. However, one can
generalize the principle that dissipation is governed by
the probability of the system not returning to its original
conﬁguration after a drive cycle.

16

[54] Operationally, a distant or many-spin “resonant pair” is

a pair of eﬀective spin conﬁgura.

[55] This is related to the standard distinction between the
optical conductivity of Anderson insulators and that of
metals. The former is governed by rare resonant transi-
tions with a large matrix element, whereas the latter is
governed by common resonant transitions with a small
matrix element; hence the large diﬀerence in saturation
timescales.

[56] Note that although energy is not conserved in the driven
system, there might be other conserved quantities (such
as σz in the XXZ model we studied numerically), so that
it is meaningful to discuss transport.

[57] Jean-Philippe Bouchaud and Antoine Georges, “Anoma-
lous diﬀusion in disordered media:
statistical mecha-
nisms, models and physical applications,” Physics reports
195, 127–293 (1990).

[58] Pedro Ponte, Anushya Chandran, Z. Papi´c,

and
Dmitry A. Abanin, “Periodically driven ergodic and
many-body localized quantum systems,” 353, 196–204
(2015).

[59] Philipp Hauke and Markus Heyl, “Many-body localiza-
tion and quantum ergodicity in disordered long-range
ising models,” Phys. Rev. B 92, 134204 (2015).

[60] Akiyuki Tokuno and Thierry Giamarchi, “Spectroscopy
for cold atom gases in periodically phase-modulated op-
tical lattices,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 205301 (2011).

[61] D.A. Huse, private communication.
[62] Daniel S. Fisher, Matthew P. A. Fisher, and David A.
Huse, “Thermal ﬂuctuations, quenched disorder, phase
transitions, and transport in type-ii superconductors,”
Phys. Rev. B 43, 130–159 (1991).

[63] Bernd Rosenow and Thomas Nattermann, “Nonlinear ac
conductivity of interacting one-dimensional electron sys-
tems,” Phys. Rev. B 73, 085103 (2006).

