Space group constraints on weak indices in topological insulators

D´aniel Varjas,1 Fernando de Juan,1, 2 and Yuan-Ming Lu3

1Department of Physics, University of California, Berkeley, California 94720, USA

2Instituto Madrile˜no de Estudios Avanzados en Nanociencia (IMDEA-Nanociencia), 28049 Madrid, Spain

3Department of Physics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA

Lattice translation symmetry gives rise to a large class of “weak” topological insulators (TIs),
characterized by translation-protected gapless surface states and dislocation bound states. In this
work we show that space group symmetries lead to constraints on the weak topological indices
that deﬁne these phases.
In particular we show that screw rotation symmetry enforces the Hall
conductivity along the screw axis to be quantized in multiples of the screw rank, which generally
applies to interacting systems. We further show that certain 3D weak indices associated with
quantum spin Hall eﬀects (class AII) are forbidden by the Bravais-lattice and by glide or even-
fold screw symmetries. These results put a strong constraints on candidates of weak TIs in the
experimental and numerical search for topological materials, based on the crystal structure alone.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The discovery of topological insulators and supercon-
ductors is one of the most important breakthroughs of
condensed matter physics in the past decades1–3. The
key principle underlying the existence of these novel topo-
logical phases is that the presence of a symmetry, such as
time reversal symmetry (T ), can lead to a quantized bulk
topological invariant and robust gapless surface states. In
a gapped fermion system, this invariant cannot change
unless the gap closes, deﬁning a stable quantum phase
and protecting the existence of gapless boundary states.
After the discovery of three dimensional topological in-
sulators, which are protected by (T ), it was realized that
other global symmetries in the Altland-Zirnbauer (AZ)
classes4, such as charge conjugation (C) and spin rota-
tional symmetries, also give rise to topological phases,
leading to the periodic table5,6 of topological insulators
and superconductors.

It was realized early on that additional topological
phases can be obtained from invariants deﬁned on a lower
dimensional slice of the Brillouin Zone7 (BZ). Since this
deﬁnition requires the discrete translational symmetry
of the lattice, it was initially thought that these phases
would not survive generic disorder and thus termed
“weak” topological insulators. The lower-dimensional
topological invariants are therefore known as weak in-
dices. However, further eﬀorts then showed that weak
topological phases have many robust features emerging
from topology8–11, in particular the fact that lattice dislo-
cations host protected gapless modes that originate from
the weak indices12,13. Recently it was also proposed that
strong interactions can lead to novel topological orders
on the surface of weak TIs14,15. Most of these theoretical
predictions remain untested due to the diﬃculty of ﬁnd-
ing materials realizing these weak topological phases16,
though several candidates have been predicted in ab-
initio studies17–20

The consideration of a perfect lattice with translational
symmetry immediately raises the question of whether the
space group symmetries of this lattice may also have an

impact on the topological properties. The addition of
space group often leads to the emergence of novel phases,
generally termed topological crystalline insulators21–31,
with diﬀerent properties from weak TIs. Here we ad-
dress a complementary question: what are the restric-
tions brought by space group symmetries on possible
topological phases, in particular, the weak topological
phases?

In this work, we show that the non-symmorphic ele-
ments of the space group lead to unexpected constraints
for the weak indices beyond those derived from the point
group. First, we show that for three dimensional (3D)
magnetic insulators in class A there is nontrivial quanti-
zation condition of Hall conductivity tensor in the pres-
ence of non-symmorphic screw symmetry. We derive this
condition from band theory, and then provide a general
proof of its applicability to interacting systems. Second,
we turn to time-reversal-invariant insulators in class AII
and show how nonsymmorphic screw and glide symme-
tries can make the weak indices vanish in a particular
direction. While enumerating every AZ symmetry class
and dimensionality is beyond the scope of this paper, we
present the necessary formalism to generalize our results
to topological superconductors with a few examples in
Appendix E.

II. CHERN NUMBER AND HALL

CONDUCTIVITY (CLASS A)

A. Hall conductivity of a 3D insulator

A simplest example of weak indices in a three dimen-
sional system is the quantized Hall conductivity of an in-
sulator, which in proper units is given by integer-valued
Chern numbers of 2D slices of the BZ. As oﬀ-diagonal el-
ements of the conductivity tensor, these Chern numbers
transform like an axial vector under point group opera-
tions. Here we show that a non-symmorphic screw sym-
metry further imposes an important constraint on the
integer-valued Hall conductivity. This constraint holds

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
4
1
 
 
]
l
e
-
r
t
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
0
5
4
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

generally for interacting and disordered systems, as long
as the ground state is a non-fractionalized 3D insulator
which preserves the screw symmetry.

2

(cid:90)

(cid:90)

In a 2D system, the Hall conductance (or conductiv-
ity) σxy characterizes the transverse current response to
an in-plane electric ﬁeld: jx = σxyEy. Using the Kubo
formula one ﬁnds32,33 that the Hall conductivity in unit
of e2/h is given by the integral of Berry curvature for the
occupied bands over the BZ:

σxy =

C,

e2
h

C =

1
2π

d2k Tr
occ.

Fk

(1)

BZ

where Trocc. is the trace over occupied bands and F is the
Berry curvature matrix. In an insulator with a bulk gap
between valence and conduction bands, the total Berry
ﬂux over the BZ is quantized to be an integer, known as
the Chern number C, and hence σxy is also quantized.

In a 3D insulator the Hall conductivity becomes an
antisymmetric tensor and can be cast in terms of an axial
vector33 Σ in the form of

σij =

e2
2πh

ijlΣl, Σi =

ijl
4π

d3k Tr
occ.

F jl

k

(2)

BZ

lattice vector34 and can be expressed as Σ =(cid:80)3

In
where repeated indices are summed over implicitly.
band insulators this “Hall vector” is always a reciprocal
i=1 GiCi
where Gi are an independent set of primitive reciprocal
lattice vectors, and Ci ∈ Z is the Chern-number for a cut
of the BZ oriented towards Gi and spanned by the other
two reciprocal lattice vectors. The weak topological in-
variant associated with 3D insulators in symmetry class
A is such a “Chern vector” (cid:126)C ∈ Z3. In Appendix B we
prove that the “Hall vector” vector transforms as an axial
vector even for nonsymmorphic symmetries. This shows
that lattice symmetry severely constrains the allowed val-
ues, as it has to stay invariant under every orthogonal
transformation in the point group. Nonzero values are
only allowed with low enough symmetry, two intersecting
axes of (improper) rotations is suﬃcient to force vanish-
ing Hall conductance22.

For a ﬁnite 3D insulator with lattice translational sym-
metry, the Hall conductance normal to a certain direction
ˆm is given by

mnlσnl =

e2
2πh

Σ · (Lm ˆm) =

e2
h

(cid:88)

Lm ˆm · Gi

Ci

(3)

2π

i

where Lm is the linear size of the periodic system along
ˆm direction.
If this 3D system has a gapped bulk, its
Hall conductance must also be an integer in units of e2/h
along any direction. Adding one extra unit cell along
Gi direction will increase the Hall conductance along Gi
direction by exactly the Chern number Ci in units of e2/h.
In an anisotropic limit the 3D insulator can be viewed as
a stack of 2D layers with a quantized Hall conductance
σL
xy each. Therefore the Hall conductivity tensor (2) is
nothing but the Hall conductance per unit cell layer, σL
xy,

FIG. 1. (a) Brillouin zone of an insulator with 4-fold screw
symmetry. The perpendicular plane through the BZ center
(blue) contains four high symmetry points (red spheres), we
use the formula relating the chern number to rotation eigen-
values at these 4 points. In the direction of the screw, along
the four invariant lines (dashed red) the screw eigenvalues
evolve into each other, illustrated by spirals and color code.
Note that at lines that are only invariant under twofold screw
there are only two diﬀerent eigenvalues, but the total number
of occupied bands is still a multiple of 4. (b) Intuitive real
space picture of the screw symmetric insulator as a stack of
integer Chern insulator layers related by the screw. The unit
cell contains four layers, so the Hall conductance per trans-
verse unit cell is a multiple of 4.

which can be deﬁned as the diﬀerence between the Hall
conductance of Nz and Nz + 1 layers along a certain
direction. As will become clear later, this diﬀerence σL
xy
does not depend on Nz as long as Nz is much larger than
the correlation length, so we adopt this deﬁnition for our
interacting proof.

In the following we show that, with a non-symmorphic
n-fold screw symmetry, the Hall conductance per unit cell
layer along the screw-axis direction cannot be an arbi-
trary integer (in units of e2/h) for a gapped 3D insulator
without fractionalization. Instead it must be a multiple
of n, as enforced by the screw symmetry.

B. Screw symmetry enforced constraints

Consider an essential n-fold screw in the z direction.
Below we will show the Chern number for a cut perpen-
dicular to the screw direction is quantized to a multiple of
n. By essential screw we mean a SG operation that leaves
no point in space invariant up to lattice translations35. In
an appropriately chosen basis the translation part is 1/n
of the primitive lattice vector parallel to the n-fold rota-
tional axis, g = {Cn|az/n}. For this we invoke results22
(also see Appendix D) that allow calculation of the Chern
number in the presence of n-fold rotational symmetry in
2D as a product of rotation eigenvalues of occupied bands
at high symmetry points of the BZ. For example with C4
symmetry (Fig. 1 (a))

exp

2πi

=

ξΓ
m (C4) ξM

m (C4) ξX
m

(4)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

C
4

(cid:89)

m∈occ.

(cid:0)C−2

4

(cid:1)

3

which results in a screw symmetric bulk without bound-
aries (Fig. 2 (a)). To take the thermodynamic limit we
assume the size of the system is much larger than the
correlation length of the gapped bulk. To deﬁne the Hall
conductance σxy in this geometry we invoke the Streda
formula37, whereby the Hall conductance is given by the
charge bound to a localized 2π ﬂux threaded through the
system. Unless the charge captured is an integer, the sys-
tem is fractionalized and has a non-unique ground state,
contradicting our initial assumption.

xy. σS

Next we cut the system open in the z direction. During
this process we change the Hall conductance by a surface
contribution of −σS
xy can depend on the thickness,
but should saturate to a thickness-independent constant,
as long as Nz is much larger than the correlation length
of the gapped bulk. We then take n copies of this open
system and arrange them along the z direction related
by C m
n rotations so that all the interfaces are symme-
try related (Fig. 2 (b)). Gluing the surfaces together by
restoring the screw symmetric bulk Hamiltonian changes
the Hall conductance by σS
xy at each interface, as the
separation between them is much larger than the bulk
correlation length. The resulting system (Fig. 2 (c)) has
periodic boundary conditions in all three directions with
a thickness of nN + m unit cells and Hall conductance
xy = nσxy. Thus we proved that a
sample with arbitrary integer thickness has a Hall con-
ductance which is a multiple of n times the conductance
quantum.

of n(cid:0)σxy − σS

(cid:1) + nσS

xy

III. WEAK TI INDICES (CLASS AII)

A. Bravais lattice

Point group symmetry can put stringent constraints
on the allowed values of the weak indices. To calculate
the weak Z2 invriants we evaluate7

(cid:73)

(cid:33)

(cid:32)(cid:90)

νi =

1
2π

Tr
occ.

Fkd2k −

1
2 T 2

∂ 1

2 T 2

Ak · dk

mod 2

(6)
where A and F are the Berry curvature and connection
and the integral is over the interior and boundary of half
of the time-reversal invariant 2D cut of the BZ spanned
by the two reciprocal lattice vectors other than Gi and
displaced from the Γ point by Gi/2. This deﬁnes a k-
space vector characterizing the weak indices, pointing to
one of the 8 TR invariant momenta:

Gν =

1
2

νiGi.

(7)

This vector transforms under space group operations as
k-space vectors (see Appendix B). One can enumerate
the allowed values of Gν by inspecting tables for Wyckoﬀ-
positions of the reciprocal space groups: Gν can only take
values at points with half-integer Miller indices that are
invariant under the point group up to reciprocal lattice

FIG. 2. The process used in the general proof for the Hall
conductance constraint (5), illustrated in the case of a 2-fold
screw. (a) A thick slab with half-integer thickness and twisted
periodic boundary condition in the z direction. As we open
the boundary condition in the z direction, the Hall conduc-
tance may change by a surface contribution −σS
xy. (b) We
combine two slabs, the screw axis allows to arrange these
such that the interfaces are guaranteed to be identical, a top
surface (F) meets a bottom surface (G) with the same orien-
tation. Glueing the two interfaces together each contributes
+σS
xy. (c) The resulting system has periodic boundary condi-
tions in all three directions with odd thickness while the Hall
conductance is an even multiple of the conductance quantum.

where ξk
m (O) is the rotation eigenvalue of O in band m
at momentum k. Similar formulae can be derived for
rotations C2, C3 and C6.

When restricted to the 2D cut of the BZ through Γ,
a screw acts the same way as a symmorphic Cn rota-
tion, so the formula can be applied. Now consider the
screw-invariant lines in BZ, parallel to the screw axis
(dotted vertical lines in FIG. 1). As the n-th power of
the screw gn = (−1)F {1|az} is a pure translation up
to fermion parity, the eigenvalues of screw g take values
of exp (ik · az/n + 2πim/n + πiF/n) for m ∈ Zn. When
restricted to the perpendicular plane with k · az = 0 the
eigenvalues are simply the n-th roots of fermion parity
(−1)F . Increasing kz by 2π will change g eigenvalue by
a factor of e2πi/n, leading to a n-multiplet of occupied
bands at each screw-invariant momentum (Fig. 1 (a)).
This shows that the product of screw eigenvalues at high-
symmetry points is always 1. This immediately proves
that

σL
xy
e2/h

= Cz ≡ 0 mod n.

(5)

In the following we show that this result is not a pecu-
liarity of band theory for free electrons, but holds for any
gapped unique ground state preserving n-fold screw sym-
metry, even in the presence of interactions and disorders.
The proof is based on the following cut and glue proce-
dure. We start with a slab containing Nz +m/n unit cells
along the z direction which is parallel to the screw axis.
While this number of unit cells is not integer, screw sym-
metry allows us to identify the top and bottom surfaces
using a boundary condition twisted by a Cn rotation36,

Xvectors. This means that a face-centered cubic lattice (for
example the common cubic diamond structure38) can not
support nontrivial weak indices without breaking point
group symmetries. To see this, consider the BCC recip-
rocal lattice. It is easy to see that there is no maximal
symmetry k-point other that the Γ point that represents
trivial weak indices. The constraints only depend on the
type of Bravais-lattice39, listed in Table I.

These results can also be rationalized from the band
inversion point of view. To get a weak TI, we need an odd
number of band inversions among the four TR invariant
momenta located on one plane oﬀset from the origin. But
point group symmetry relates some of these TR invariant
momenta, and band inversion can only occur simultane-
ously on all symmetry related points. It is easy to see for
example that in the BCC reciprocal crystal TR invariant
momenta are symmetry equivalent in such a fashion that
there is an even number of related points in any of the
oﬀset planes, explaining the lack of nontrivial weak TI’s.
On the other hand, a strong TI is possible with any SG,
because since the Γ point is always of maximal symme-
try, it is possible to have a band inversion only at the Γ
point (see Appendix F).

TABLE I. Constraints on possible weak indices based on space
group symmetry in time reversal invariant insulators. The
allowed values of Gν are labeled as in ITA40. “all” means all
the 8 possible values are allowed, while if only Γ appears no
nontrivial weak indices are allowed by symmetry.

Crystal system Centering Allowed values of Gν

Triclinic

Monoclinic

Orthorhombic

Tetragonal

Trigonal

Hexagonal

Cubic

P
P
C
P
C
I
F
P
I
P
I
P
P
I
F

all
all
Γ, Y , A, M
all
Γ, Y , T , Z
Γ, X
Γ, Y , T , Z
Γ, Z, M , A
Γ, M
Γ, A
Γ, T
Γ, A
Γ, R
Γ, H
Γ

4

sult to evaluate the weak index by counting inversion
eigenvalues21. The index is given by the product of the
inversion eigenvalues at the four invariant momenta for
each Kramers pair among occupied bands, note that in
this plane Kramers partners have the same screw eigen-
values, as required.

However, this situation at kz = π in a 3D system is
diﬀerent from a 2D system with a symmorphic inversion
symmetry in that the screw requires an equal number
of both screw eigenvalues below the gap, as shown ear-
lier. Speciﬁcally at kz = π at each high symmetry point
the number of occupied +1 and −1 eigenvalues must be
equal, and as the total number of occupied bands is con-
stant, the number of occupied +1 (−1) bands is a multi-
ple of 4, leading to a trivial Z2 index in this plane.

To cast the statement in a more general form appli-
cable to all lattices, consider that the above calculation
requires a choice of basis in k-space where two of the
primitive reciprocal lattice vectors are perpendicular to
the screw axis. Such a choice is always possible, as for
an essential 2-fold screw in a basis that removes any per-
pendicular translation, the translational part t is half of a
lattice vector, so there exists a set of primitive real space
lattice vectors such that one of them is parallel to the
screw axis, a3 = 2t. The corresponding reciprocal lattice
vectors satisfy the above properties, and the statement is
about the third component G3 that has nonzero projec-
= −1 to
tion onto the screw axis. We need
get an eﬀective inversion, in this case ν3 = 1 is forbidden.
So a vector weak index is forbidden if

2 G3·t(cid:17)2

(cid:16)

ei 1

2 (Gν · t) = π mod 2π.

(8)

We analogously argue that an essential glide forbids
nontrivial weak index in the direction parallel to the the
translational part of the glide. Consider a glide trans-
lating in the z direction and reﬂecting x, {mx|az/2}2 =
{−1|az}, we ﬁnd that at kz = π it acts like a mirror that
squares to +1 and commutes with T . This 2D system has
trivial topological classiﬁcation25,26, thus the weak index
in this direction is zero. The general statement is that
an essential glide that only contains in-plane translation
t forbids a weak vector if 2Gν · t = π (mod 2π).

IV. CONCLUSION

B. Nonsymorphic symmetries

The presence of non-symmorphic symmetries leads to
further constraints on the weak indices. We now show
that in the presence of an essential 2-fold screw in the z
direction, the weak index must be trivial in this direction.
First we note that a 2-fold screw {C2|az/2} squares to
{−1|az}, represented at kz = π as +1, which commutes
with T . Thus, in the kz = π plane it acts like a proper
inversion in a 2D system and we can use the known re-

In summary, we derived a set of constraints on
indices in 3D insulators from non-
weak topological
symmorphic and symmorphic point-group symmetries.
We show that in the presence of n-fold screw rotation,
Hall conductivity must be quantized as a multiple of n
for any 3D non-fractionalized insulator preserving screw
symmetry. This condition is generally proved for inter-
acting systems. We also show certain 3D weak indices
for TIs (class AII) are forbidden by glide or even-fold
screw symmetries. These results put strong constraints

on the candidates for weak topological phases in the on-
going experimental and numerical eﬀorts to ﬁnd physical
realizations of this novel topological phases.

The authors are grateful to Takahiro Morimoto and
Hoi Chun Po for helpful conversations. This work is sup-

ported by NSF Grant No. DMR-1206515 (DV and FdJ),
the European Research Council Advanced Grant (Con-
tract No. 290846) (FdJ) and startup funds at Ohio State
University (YML).

5

1 M. Z. Hasan and C. L. Kane, Rev. Mod. Phys. 82, 3045

arXiv:1403.5558 [cond-mat.mes-hall].

(2010).

2 M. Z. Hasan and J. E. Moore, Annual Review of Condensed
Matter Physics, Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys. 2, 55
(2011).

3 X.-L. Qi and S.-C. Zhang, Rev. Mod. Phys. 83, 1057

(2011).

4 A. Altland and M. R. Zirnbauer, Phys. Rev. B 55, 1142

(1997), cond-mat/9602137.

5 A. P. Schnyder, S. Ryu, A. Furusaki, and A. W. W. Lud-

wig, Phys. Rev. B 78, 195125 (2008).

6 A. Kitaev, in American Institute of Physics Conference
Series, American Institute of Physics Conference Series,
Vol. 1134, edited by V. Lebedev and M. Feigel’Man (2009)
pp. 22–30, arXiv:0901.2686 [cond-mat.mes-hall].

7 J. E. Moore and L. Balents, Phys. Rev. B 75, 121306

(2007), cond-mat/0607314.

8 R. S. K. Mong, J. H. Bardarson, and J. E. Moore, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 108, 076804 (2012).

9 Z. Ringel, Y. E. Kraus, and A. Stern, Phys. Rev. B 86,

045102 (2012).

28 C. Fang and L. Fu, Phys. Rev. B 91, 161105 (2015).
29 K. Shiozaki and M. Sato, Phys. Rev. B 90, 165114 (2014),

arXiv:1403.3331 [cond-mat.mes-hall].

30 R. S. K. Mong, A. M. Essin, and J. E. Moore, Phys. Rev.
B 81, 245209 (2010), arXiv:1004.1403 [cond-mat.mes-hall].
31 C.-X. Liu, R.-X. Zhang, and B. K. VanLeeuwen, Phys.
Rev. B 90, 085304 (2014), arXiv:1308.4717 [cond-mat.mes-
hall].

32 D. J. Thouless, M. Kohmoto, M. P. Nightingale,

and

M. den Nijs, Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 405 (1982).

33 N. Nagaosa, J. Sinova, S. Onoda, A. H. MacDonald, and

N. P. Ong, Rev. Mod. Phys. 82, 1539 (2010).

34 B. I. Halperin, Japanese Journal of Applied Physics 26,

1913 (1987).

35 S. A. Parameswaran, A. M. Turner, D. P. Arovas,
and A. Vishwanath, Nature Physics 9, 299 (2013),
arXiv:1212.0557 [cond-mat.str-el].

36 H. Watanabe, H. C. Po, A. Vishwanath, and M. P. Zaletel,
ArXiv e-prints (2015), arXiv:1505.04193 [cond-mat.str-el].
37 P. Streda, Journal of Physics C: Solid State Physics 15,

10 Y. Yoshimura, A. Matsumoto, Y. Takane, and K.-I. Imura,

L1299 (1982).

Phys. Rev. B 88, 045408 (2013).

38 L. Fu, C. L. Kane, and E. J. Mele, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98,

11 T. Morimoto and A. Furusaki, Phys. Rev. B 89, 035117

106803 (2007).

(2014).

12 Y. Ran, Y. Zhang, and A. Vishwanath, Nature Physics 5,

298 (2009).

13 Y. Ran, arXiv preprint arXiv:1006.5454 (2010).
14 Y. Qi and L. Fu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 236801 (2015).
15 D. F. Mross, A. Essin, J. Alicea, and A. Stern, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 116, 036803 (2016).

16 B. Rasche, A. Isaeva, M. Ruck, S. Borisenko, V. Zabolot-
nyy, B. B¨uchner, K. Koepernik, C. Ortix, M. Richter, and
J. van den Brink, Nat. Mater. 12, 422 (2013).

17 B. Yan, L. M¨uchler, and C. Felser, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109,

116406 (2012).

18 P. Tang, B. Yan, W. Cao, S.-C. Wu, C. Felser,

and

W. Duan, Phys. Rev. B 89, 041409 (2014).

19 G. Yang, J. Liu, L. Fu, W. Duan, and C. Liu, Phys. Rev.

B 89, 085312 (2014).

20 C.-C. Liu, J.-J. Zhou, Y. Yao, and F. Zhang, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 116, 066801 (2016).

21 L. Fu and C. L. Kane, Phys. Rev. B 76, 045302 (2007).
22 C. Fang, M. J. Gilbert, and B. A. Bernevig, Phys. Rev. B

86, 115112 (2012).

23 W. A. Benalcazar, J. C. Y. Teo, and T. L. Hughes, Phys.

Rev. B 89, 224503 (2014).

24 R.-J. Slager, A. Mesaros, V. Juriˇci´c, and J. Zaanen, Nature
Physics 9, 98 (2013), arXiv:1209.2610 [cond-mat.mes-hall].
25 C.-K. Chiu, H. Yao, and S. Ryu, Phys. Rev. B 88, 075142

(2013), arXiv:1303.1843 [cond-mat.mes-hall].

39 A priori the constraints depend on the arithmetic crystal
class that is determined by the point group (geometric
crystal class) and its action on the translations (Bravais
lattice). There are 73 arythmetic crystal classes in 3d in
one-to-one correspondence to symmorphic space groups.
The reciprocal space group has the same point group as the
space group, but the reciprocal Bravais lattice may have
diﬀerent centering. Direct enumeration40–42 reveals that
the result in fact only depends on the Bravais-lattice, this
can be rationalized noting that a Bravais-lattice contains
arithmetic crystal classes that have a large enough point
group to force certain relations among lattice vectors by
mapping them to each other. As Gν takes values on the
same reciprocal Bravais-lattice with half the spacing, the
constraints are the same for every arithmetic crystal class
in a Bravais-lattice.

40 H. Wondratschek and U. M¨uller, International Tables for
Crystallography,Volume A1, Edited by H. Wondratschek,
and U. M¨uller. Berlin: Springer, 2008. ISBN: 978-1-4020-
8208-5 (2008).

41 M. I. Aroyo, J. M. Perez-Mato, C. Capillas, E. Kroumova,
and H. Won-
S. Ivantchev, G. Madariaga, A. Kirov,
dratschek, Zeitschrift fur Kristallographie 221, 15 (2006).
42 M. I. Aroyo, D. Orobengoa, G. de la Flor, E. S. Tasci, J. M.
Perez-Mato, and H. Wondratschek, Acta Crystallograph-
ica Section A 70, 126 (2014).

43 D. Varjas, F. de Juan, and Y.-M. Lu, Phys. Rev. B 92,

26 T. Morimoto and A. Furusaki, Phys. Rev. B 88, 125129

195116 (2015).

(2013), arXiv:1306.2505 [cond-mat.mes-hall].

44 A. Alexandradinata, X. Dai, and B. A. Bernevig, Phys.

27 Y.-M. Lu and D.-H. Lee, ArXiv e-prints

(2014),

Rev. B 89, 155114 (2014).

45 F. de Juan, A. R¨uegg, and D.-H. Lee, Phys. Rev. B 89,

Appendix B: Proof for transformation properties of

161117 (2014).

weak indices

6

Appendix A: Conventions for Bloch functions

k

k

k = W ab

k(cid:105) =(cid:80)

convention where we deﬁne Bloch basis functions |(cid:101)χa
There are two widely used conventions to deﬁne the
terms of the orbitals of the unit cell |(cid:101)χa
Bloch basis functions. When appropriate we use the
k(cid:105) in
R eikR |φa
R(cid:105)
where R is the unit cell coordinate and a the orbital in-
dex. Note the absence of phase factors corresponding to
the position of the orbitals within the unit cell, so the ba-
sis functions are strictly periodic in the BZ. While in this
convention the information about the position of the or-
bitals is lost, thus the polarizations computed via Berry
vector potential integrals do not equal the true Wannier
center positions, the Bloch Hamiltonian is BZ periodic,
making some derivations more transparent.

(cid:80)
In the
other
R eik(R+ra) |φa

k (cid:101)nab

convention we deﬁne

(cid:1)ab(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:101)χb

k(cid:105) =(cid:0)W −1

(cid:11) so the coeﬃcients of of Bloch

|χa
k(cid:105) =
R(cid:105) where ra is the position of the
a-th orbital in the unit cell. The two conventions are
k = δabe−ikra such
related by the operator Wk with W ab
that |χa
wavefunctions transform as na
k . Consequently,
operators expanded in this basis (including the Bloch
Hamiltonian) satisfy Ok+G = WGOkW −1
G where G is a
primitive reciprocal lattice vector. WG : Hk → Hk+G is
acting between the Hilbert spaces of the coeﬃcients of
the wavefunctions in this basis. This convention, using
the coeﬃcients only (e.g. Anm = in† dm), is usually
assumed in formulae for electromagnetic response, as
the naive Peierls substitution k → k + A only gives
the correct phase factor for hopping in this case. The
two conventions give equivalent results for quantized
topological indices in most symmorphic cases, provided
there is a continuous, symmetry preserving deformation
of the lattice, such that all the orbitals are brought to the
same point in the unit cell. In nonsymmorphic lattices
however, this is never possible, as the shortest orbit of a
point in the unit cell under the symmetry group modulo
lattice vectors is longer than one, there is no crystal
with one site per unit cell obeying a nonsymmorphic
symmetry. For example with an n-fold screw translating
in the z direction one needs at least n lattice sites that
can be arranged such that the positions are ra = aza/n
for a = 1. . . n, so W ab
= δabe2πia/n and WG = 1 for
Gz
perpendicular directions.

First we review the representations of space group op-
erations in k-space. We use the convention (Appendix A)

with Bloch basis functions(cid:12)(cid:12)χxl

R eik(R+x)(cid:12)(cid:12)φl

(cid:11) =(cid:80)

(cid:11),

where we split the orbital index a = (x, l), x labels the
sites of the unit cell by their real space position and l is
an on-site orbital index accounting for spin, orbital an-
gular momentum, etc. (the values l can take may depend
on x). A useful property of this basis is that it is periodic

R+x

k

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)χ(x+R)l

k

(cid:69)

= (cid:12)(cid:12)χxl

(cid:11) for

k

in the real space coordinate, i.e.
any lattice vector R. We emphasize that our treatment
is not speciﬁc to tight-binding models, the same can be
told in the continuum, there x is the continuous index
for position in the unit cell and l stands for the spin only.
To go to the tight-binding approximation, we restrict the
Hilbert-space to a ﬁnite set of orbitals per unit cell, the
only assumption we make is that orbitals centered on
diﬀerent sites span orthogonal subspaces.
Consider a general space-group operation g = {O|t}

acting on one of the basis states

g(cid:12)(cid:12)φl

(cid:11) = U ll(cid:48)

x

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)φl(cid:48)

(cid:69)

= U ll(cid:48)

x

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)φl(cid:48)

R+x

g(R+x)

O(R+x)+t

(B1)

(cid:69)

k

g(cid:12)(cid:12)χxl
k(cid:105) = e−i(gk)tU ba(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)χb

where U is the site and g-dependent unitary represen-
tation on the local orbitals, a double representation if
the model is spinful. Applying this to the Bloch basis
functions, with simple algebra we ﬁnd

(cid:11) = e−i(gk)tU ll(cid:48)

x

(cid:69)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)χgx,l(cid:48)

gk

(B2)

with gk = Ok and gx = Ox + t that is understood
as a permutation of sites at the same Wyckoﬀ position.
Grouping indices back together, this can be written as
g |χa

(cid:69)

gk

k |χa

The key observation is that in this basis the k-
dependence decouples as a single factor proportional to
the identity. Consider the transformation of a Bloch
eigenstate in the n-th band |nk(cid:105) = na
k(cid:105). The sym-
metry transformation results in a state at gk, the co-
eﬃcients transform as (gn)a
k or in a
compact notation g (nk) = (gn)gk = e−i(gk)tU nk. As g
is a symmetry operation, the transformed state is again
an eigenstate of the Bloch Hamiltonian with the same
energy, but at gk. As a consequence, the transformation
†
n∈occ. nkn
k

of occupied band projector operator Pk =(cid:80)

gk = e−i(gk)tU abnb

reads

(gP)gk =

(gn)gk(gn)

†
gk = UPkU†.

(B3)

(cid:88)

n∈occ.

them same as other operators, (cid:101)T = W−kT W −1

We remark that in both bases global antiunitary trans-
formations, such as T = Kσy act as constant operators
in k-space. To switch conventions, one must transform
k = T ,
k as W is diagonal

where we used that W −1
and proportional to the identity in spin space.

k = W−k = W ∗

So if g is a symmetry, such that (gP)k = Pk, any gauge
invariant quantity that can be expressed through Pk
is invariant if the k-space coordinates are transformed
accordingly. Examples include43 the Berry curvature
F = iP dP ∧ dPP and closed loop integrals of the Berry
connection A (see below).

Σ =

1
2π

in a coordinate free form, as

The “Hall vector” as deﬁned in Eqn. (2) may be cast

(cid:90)
To see that it is equal to (cid:80)3

TrF ∧ dk.
(B4)
i=1 GiCi, it is suﬃcient to
check that ai · Σ is the same in the two cases for all lat-
tice vectors. Simple substitution shows that this vector
transforms as an axial vector under all SG operations (i.e.
even under inversion, Σ → (det O) OΣ) as stated in the
main text.
For completeness we derive the transformation prop-
erties of A and F under the basis change corresponding
to switching between conventions and show that invari-
nection for the Bloch basis |(cid:101)χa
ants calculated in either convention give the same result.
We feel this is necessary because, while the Berry con-
k(cid:105) vanishes and one can
safely use the coeﬃcients, for the basis |χa
k(cid:105) it is nonzero,
Aab
χ = i(cid:104)χa
one may worry that the formulae in terms of the com-
ponents in this basis may be missing some terms coming
from the derivatives of the basis vectors.

(cid:11) = iδabeikta ta dk. This means that

k| d(cid:12)(cid:12)χb

k

For generality, we consider a transformation Uk acting
on the coeﬃcients, it may either be a basis transforma-
tion, or a physical one and let n(cid:48)

k = Uknk. We ﬁnd

A + i Tr(cid:0)PU† dU(cid:1)
F + i dTr(cid:0)PU† dU(cid:1)

occ.

Tr
occ.

A(cid:48) =
F(cid:48) = Tr

n

in(cid:48)† dn(cid:48) = Tr
dA(cid:48) = Tr

occ.

(B6)

Tr
occ.

where Trocc.(.) = (cid:80)
bands, while Tr(.) = (cid:80)

occ.
n(.)nn is the trace over occupied
a(.)aa is the trace over the en-
k = δabeikra if P = (cid:101)P (BZ
tire Hilbert-space of the unit cell. We see that as long as
PU† dU is unit cell periodic, which is the case for the ba-
(cid:82)
sis transformation U ab
S F is fully
periodic convention). The change in Trocc.
(cid:72) A along a non-
∂S A in the formula
compensated by the change in Trocc.
for the Z2 invariants and vanishes for Chern-numbers.
k0−G(cid:89)

contractible loop in terms of the projector is modiﬁed in
the |χ(cid:105) basis,

We note that the expression for Trocc.

k = W ab

(cid:32)

(cid:33)

(cid:73)

(cid:82)

Tr
occ.

A = i log det

+

W−G

Pk

(B7)

(cid:88)

(B5)

k=k0

where det+ is the pseudo-determinant of the matrix,
which is deﬁned as the product of all nonzero eigenval-
ues. This is equivalent to calculating the determinant of
the restriction to the local occupied space at k0, i.e. we
evaluate −i log det+ as the sum of the complex phases of
the nonzero eigenvalues. The reason WG appears is the
mismatch of the basis at k0 and k0 + G.

Appendix C: Wilson Loop Invariants

Here we review symmetry properties of Wilson loop
(WL) eigenvalues. As a natural consequence of our for-

7

malism we ﬁnd constraints SG symmetry imposes on WL
eigenvalues and resulting new topological invariants in
topological crystalline insulators. Similar results were
obtained in Refs 22 and 44, those we generalize for all
SG symmetries.
We deﬁne Wilson line operators as maps from the unit
cell Hilbert space at the start of line C at k0 to the end
at k1, WC : Hk0 → Hk1 . We use the deﬁnition in terms
of an ordered discretization of C, {ki}N
i=1 with k1 = k0
and kN = k1:

1(cid:89)

i=N

WC = lim
N→∞

Pki.

(C1)

We use the projector operators P expanded in the |χ(cid:105)
convention, as in this convention it contains all the in-
formation about the positions of the sites in the unit cell
and is invariant under the choice of the unit cell besides
some other useful properties we will prove later. Note
that WC only takes nonzero values on the occupied sub-
space at k0 and its image is the occupied space at k1. Its
restriction to the local occupied spaces is unitary, this is
seen by checking that W†
CWC = WC−1WC = Pk0 + O (dk)
with dk → 0 the typical distance between the discretized
k points. This means that all of its eigenvalues are either
zero or a unit magnitude complex number, with the num-
ber of nonzero eigenvalues equal to the number of occu-
pied bands. Moreover, Wilson loop operators restricted
to the local occupied spaces form a unitary representa-
tion of the groupoid of curves under concatenation as
WC2WC1 = WC1+C2 where the end point of C1 is the same
as the starting point of C2.

This deﬁnition is consistent with the deﬁnition in terms

of the Berry connection as

(cid:18)

(cid:88)

n,m∈occ.

(cid:18)

(cid:90)

(cid:19)(cid:19)nm

A

C

P exp

i

†
nk0 m
k1

= WC

(C2)

where nk is the coeﬃcients of an orthonormal set of oc-
cupied eigenstates in the |χ(cid:105) convention at k22,44.
In
general WC is gauge-dependent, however, as we show in
the following, for a closed loop its spectrum σ (WC) (with
multiplicities) is well deﬁned.

For a closed loop C we deﬁne

(cid:32)k0−G(cid:89)

(cid:33)

Pk

WC = W−G

(C3)

k=k0

where G is a nonzero reciprocal lattice vector if the loop
is non-contractible and the overall displacement along it
is G. We use this deﬁnition to make WC a mapping from
Hk0 onto itself, as in our convention the Hilbert spaces
at k and k + G are not identical, but related through
the unitary mapping WG. Using the groupoid prop-
erty we can check that with this deﬁnition Wilson loops
along the same oriented loop but with diﬀerent start-
ing points are unitarily related. Furthermore, a gauge

transformation or a shift by a reciprocal lattice vector
also acts as a unitary transformation, showing that the
spectrum is insensitive to these choices, meaning we can
consider closed loops C as directed curves on the BZ
torus in the following. Finally, consider a shift of the
real space origin by t acting on the coeﬃcients as eikt. P
does not change, but the BZ boundary condition changes
WG → WGeiGt, resulting in WC → WCe−iGt, meaning
a simple shift in all the phases of the nonzero eigenval-
ues, {φC} → {φC − Gt} with {φC} = −i log (σ (WC) \ 0).
This result is easily understood if we regard the curve
C as the BZ of a 1d system with isolated bands. The
phases of the Wilson loop eigenvalues can be identiﬁed
as the Wannier center positions for occupied bands, and
as we showed they indeed transform as real space coor-
dinates in the G direction under a shift of the spatial
origin.

In the following we establish some symmetry properties
of the WL operators, starting with the well known case
of time-reversal symmetry. TR symmetry with T = σyK
implies Pk = T P−kT −1 = σyP∗
−kσy, plugging this in
(C3) for a TR invariant line (such that −C = C−1) we
ﬁnd

WC = (W2k0T )W†

C (W2k0T )

−1

(C4)

where we used the fact that Wk is a diagonal unitary that
commutes with σy. The antiunitary operator (W2k0T )
squares to −1 same as T , direct calculation shows that
the eigenvectors |λ(cid:105) and (W2k0T )|λ(cid:105) are orthogonal,
both with eigenvalues λ, proving the Kramers-degeneracy
of WL eigenvalues.

Next we move on to the action of SG symmetries on
WL operators, in particular we consider SG operation
{O|t} represented by Rk = e−i(Ok)tU : Hk → HOk. As
we did so far, we keep track of the absolute (not BZ
reduced) positions, and transition to a BZ reduced con-
vention when necessary. Using the symmetry property
POk = UPkU† of the projector we see for any open Wil-
son line operator

WOC = UWCU†

(C5)

where OC is the image of C.

As discussed before, the great advantage of our for-
malism is that the atomic positions are encoded in the
boundary conditions obeyed by operators and symmetry
operators take the above simple form. Symmetry opera-
tors satisfy the same boundary conditions leading to con-
sistency relations. Consider Rk+G : Hk+G → HO(k+G),
leading to Rk+G = WOGRkW −1
G which imposes the
constraint on the constant unitary part e−i(OG)tU =
WOGU W −1

G . As a result, for closed Wilson loops

WOC = ei(OG)tUWCU†

(C6)

with the reciprocal lattice vector G describing the wind-
ing of the loop C. So the set of phases of the eigenvalues
is related as {φOC} = {φC + (OG) t}. This property is

8

identical to the symmetry requirement for the projections
of the atomic (Wyckoﬀ) positions. The set of atomic
positions has to be invariant under the SG symmetry,
{x} = {Ox + t}. Now consider the projection onto OG,
{(OG) x} = {(OG) (Ox + t)} = {Gx + (OG) t}, same
requirement as for the phases if we identify phases along
a loop with winding G with the projections of atomic
coordinates along G. This picture is further supported
by considering an atomic insulator with P (x,l),(x(cid:48),l(cid:48))
=
δx,x(cid:48)
is the projector onto the occupied
atomic levels at each site, same for all symmetry related
sites. In this case WC = PW−GP whose eigenvalues are
exactly the list of the projections of the atomic positions
of the occupied orbitals onto G.

P l,l(cid:48)
x where P l,l(cid:48)

x

k

Nevertheless, we emphasize that the WL eigenvalues
are not the same as the projections of the Wannier cen-
ter position, the latter are obtained integrating the sum
of the WL phases for all parallel lines in a given direction,
thus contain less information. The Wannier center posi-
tions for individual bands are in general ill deﬁned as WL
eigenvalues can cross as moving the line C in the perpen-
dicular direction. On the other hand, the above symme-
try constraints on WL eigenvalues are weaker than those
on Wyckoﬀ positions, a symmetry preserving preimage of
the projections as a set of 3D points may not exist, such
a situation signals a crystalline topological phase distinct
from the trivial (atomic insulator) phase.

Appendix D: Alternative derivation of the Chern

number formula with Cn symmetry

We brieﬂy review the results of Ref. 22 constraining
the Chern number of insulators with discrete rotational
symmetry. We use our formulation for Wilson loop in-
variants (Appendix C) and arrive at the same results in
a slightly diﬀerent, but perhaps more transparent way.

rized as exp(cid:0) 2πi

4 C(cid:1) = det+ WC. We can break up the

As an example we detail the derivation for fourfold
(C4) rotations, the other cases can be obtained analo-
gously. We are going to examine the Wilson loop oper-
ator along the contractible curve C = ΓXM Y . As this
curve is contractible, the enclosed Berry ﬂux modulo 2π
is given by the pseudodeterminant of WC, and because of
the symmetry properties of F this is exactly one quarter
of the total ﬂux through the BZ. This can be summa-
loop into 4 parts as WC = WΓ←Y WY ←MWM←XWX←Γ
and analyze symmetry properties of its parts. We ﬁnd
WΓ←Y = UWΓ←X U = UW−1
X←ΓU† as they are related
by C4 represented by U and reversal of the direction.
Here and in the following by ()−1 we mean the Moore-
Penrose pseudoinverse of singular operators, which in this
case is the same as the inverse if we restrict both the
domain and codomain to the occupied subspace. Simi-
larly WY ←M = U†W−GxW−1
M←X WGx U as now the nec-
essary transformation is a rotation in the opposite direc-
tion combined with a translation by a reciprocal lattice
vector and reversal of direction.

Substituting this we rearrange the WL operator as
WC = (PΓUPΓ)W−1
M←X×
X←Γ
(D1)

(PM WGx UPM )WM←XWX←Γ.

(cid:0)PX U−2W−GxPX

(cid:1)W−1

We inserted band projectors at the end points of the lines
without changing the results and introduced parentheses
to emphasize the structure. Every term in the product
is a unitary when restricted to the occupied subspace at
its domain and codomain. Thus the determinant multi-
plication theorem applies to the pseudodeterminant,

(cid:0)PX U−2W−GxPX

(cid:1)×

det
+

WC = det
+
det
+

(PΓUPΓ) det
(PM WGx UPM ) .

+

(D2)

Each of these determinants is exactly the product of the
occupied eigenvalues of a C4 or C2 rotation at a given
point of the BZ,
WC =

(cid:0)C−2

(cid:89)

ξΓ
m (C4) ξM

m (C4) ξX
m

(D3)

(cid:1)

4

det
+

m∈occ.

where ξk
m (O) is the rotation eigenvalue of O in band m
at momentum k. Thus we reproduced the result for C4 in
Ref. 22 and Eqn. 4, results for C2, C3 and C6 symmetry
follow analogously:

(cid:89)
(cid:89)
(cid:89)

m∈occ.

m∈occ.

m∈occ.

e2πi C

2 =

e2πi C

3 =

e2πi C

6 =

m

2

(cid:0)C−1
(cid:1) ξY
(cid:1)
(cid:0)C−2
(cid:1) .
(cid:0)C−3

3

6

(cid:0)C−1

2

(cid:1)

(D4)

(D5)

(D6)

ξΓ
m (C2) ξM

m (C2) ξX
m

ξΓ
m (C3) ξK

ξΓ
m (C6) ξK
m

m (C3) ξK(cid:48)

m

(cid:0)C 2

6

(cid:1) ξM

m

Appendix E: Generalization to topological

superconductors

i

Weak indices are also present in other symmetry
classes12,45 and we extend our considerations to other
cases with d − 1 dimensional weak indices. In 3D there
are analogous 2D Z and 2Z indices in classes D and C
respectively, these are Chern numbers of the Bogoliubov-
de Gennes Hamiltonians and the same reasoning applies
as in class A. In other cases, however, the presence of
charge conjugation symmetry (C) has a more important
role, in the following we review one example and present
the relevant formalism.
In class D we have 1D Z2 indices that serve as d − 1

dimensional weak indices in a 2D system:
TrA (mod 2)

νi =

(cid:73)

1
π

9

invariant line through the Γ point is not independent, it
is related through the 2d strong index C ∈ Z such that
C ≡ (νi + ν(cid:48)
i) (mod 2). It can be shown that the weak
vector Gν = 1/2νiGi again transforms as k-space vectors
under space-group operations, showing that rhombic and
square lattices only allow (1/2, 1/2) (in primitive basis)
and 3 or 6-fold rotational symmetry does not allow any
nontrivial weak vector.

(cid:72) A is only quantized in

In order to prove the transformation properties of the
1d weak Z2 indices in class D, we have to switch to the
BZ periodic convention, as Trocc.
a periodic basis and gauge. A space group operation g in
0 δcbe−ikδRb where
this basis is represented as U ab = U ac
δRa is the lattice vector of the unit cell in which site a of
the unit cell with at R = 0 ends up after the application
of g. U0 is k-independent and we set it to the identity
without loss of generality. The set δRa depends on the
choice of the unit cell, and a basis transformation redeﬁn-
ing the unit cell has the same form with δRa showing the
change of unit cell position to which site a is assigned.
Now we are in a position to prove two things at once: the
1D Z2 indices in class D transform in a simple fashion
under SG operations and are insensitive to the choice of
the real space unit cell.
We introduce the band-ﬂattened Hamiltonian, Q =
1 − 2P,
it has the same properties as H except all
particle/hole-like bands have energy ±1. Charge conju-
gation symmetry C = τxK imposes Qk = −τxQ∗
−kτx, for
P it means Pk = 1− τxP∗
−kτx. The particle and hole-like
states are related by Hermitian conjugation, this in gen-
eral implies Uk = τxU∗
−kτx, for the diagonal form we use
this means every Ra has to appear twice. This is a con-
sequence of double-counting degrees of freedom, the cre-
ation and annihilation operators of the same state must
live one the same lattice site. We emphasize that this as-
sumption is not always valid in insulators with eﬀective
particle-hole symmetry? . We ﬁnd

(cid:73) G

Tr(cid:0)PU† dU(cid:1) = − i

(cid:73) G

(cid:88)

(cid:73) G

2

0

0

= − 1
2

dkδRa = − 1
2

Tr(cid:0)U† dU(cid:1) =
(cid:88)

GδRa

a

0

a

where G is the reciprocal lattice vector along which the
integration contour for Trocc.
the doubling of orbitals the right hand side of the equa-
tion is always an integer multiple of 2π. Comparing with
(B5) we see that a change of the unit cell or a space
group operation (with the appropriate transformation on
k-space) does not change the value of Trocc.
only deﬁned modulo 2π.

(cid:72) A is oriented. Because of
(cid:72) A which is

(E2)

(E3)

(E1)

Appendix F: No Constraints on Strong TI’s

where the integration contour is along an invariant line
on the edge of the BZ Gi/2 + tijGj, t ∈ [0, 1]. Similarly
to the weak Z2 in 3D TI’s, the value ν(cid:48)
i on a parallel

In general, a topological phase from Kitaev’s peri-
odic table, protected by a global symmetry of the 10
AZ classes is robust against breaking lattice symmetry,

10

such as strong TI in 3D. If a phase is compatible with a
group G, then it is also compatible with any space group
that is a subgroup of G. This is simply true because the
topological protection doesn’t rely on G, all the symme-
try restrictions in G can do is to rule out certain phases
in the original classiﬁcation. A subgroup can’t rule out
more phases, as it poses less restrictions. Of course it
is possible to have phases that are protected by G (and
the global symmetry), then breaking G down to a sub-
group can either allow more phases or protect less. For
example, as we saw, nonsymmorphic symmetry can give
interesting results about weak indices, as they rely on the
translation part of the space group for protection.

As every crystallographic space group is a subgroup of
either SG #229 (Im3m) or #191 (P6/mmm), ﬁnding ex-
amples of strong TI’s in both of these crystal structures
proves that crystal symmetry cannot forbid strong TI’s:
starting from either of these maximally symmetric exam-
ples weakly breaking some of the lattice symmetries one
can produce a system with any SG without leaving the
strong TI phase.

In our tight-binding examples we have a single site
per unit cell with two orbitals, four bands in total. One
of the orbitals is a spinful s-orbital, transforming under
rotations with the canonical SU(2) representation and
even under inversion. The other orbital transforms the

same way under proper rotations, but odd under inver-
sion, such orbitals naturally arise through crystal-ﬁeld
splitting of p-orbitals in a spin-orbit coupled ion. We in-
troduce the Pauli matrices τ to act on the space of the
two orbitals, now proper rotations by angle n are repre-
as T = σyK. Both minimal models have the same form
that guarantees that they are invariant under the full
symmetry group:

2 n · σ(cid:1), inversion as τz and time-reversal

sented as exp(cid:0) i
(cid:88)

H(k) =

{sin (k · δ) (δ · σ) τx + (m − cos (k · δ)) τz}

δ

(F1)
where the sum runs over nearest neighbor vectors. By
tuning m we can enter the strong TI phase, this can be
easily checked by counting inversion eigenvalues.

This result is expected based on the band inversion
picture, the Γ point is always of maximal symmetry, it is
possible to have a band inversion only at the Γ point, re-
sulting in a strong TI with trivial weak indices. We can
also rationalize this result from the eﬀective ﬁeld the-
ory point of view. The strong TI phase is characterized
by the topological θ term in the long wavelength elec-
tromagnetic action, a theory that possesses continuous
translation an rotation symmetries. While a microscopic
theory with full Galilean invariance is not possible, we
showed that the maximally symmetric crystal structures
are all compatible with this emergent behavior.

