6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
4
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
5
5
4
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Laser Accelerated Ions from a Shock Compressed Gas Foil

M. H. Helle,∗ D. F. Gordon, D. Kaganovich, Y. Chen,† J. P. Palastro, and A. Ting

(Dated: March 16, 2016)

We present results of energetic laser-ion acceleration from a tailored, near solid density gas target.
Colliding hydrodynamic shocks compress a pure hydrogen gas jet into a 70 µm thick target prior
to the arrival of the ultra-intense laser pulse. A density scan reveals the transition from a regime
characterized by a wide angle, low energy beam to one of a more focused beam with a high energy
halo. In the latter case, three dimensional simulations show the formation of a Z-pinch driven by the
axial current resulting from laser wakeﬁeld accelerated electrons. Ions at the rear of the target are
then accelerated by a combination of space charge ﬁelds from accelerated electrons and Coulombic
repulsion as the pinch dissipates.

High-energy ions have been accelerated by means of
laser interactions with over-dense or tenuous plasmas for
over a decade[1, 2]. These investigations relied on vary-
ing accelerating mechanisms, the most prominent being
Laser Hole Boring, Target Normal Sheath Acceleration
(TNSA)[3], Laser Blowout Acceleration (BOA), and Ra-
diation Pressure Acceleration (RPA). All of these mech-
anisms primarily rely on accelerating ﬁelds produced by
charge separation between the massive ions and laser ac-
celerated hot electrons. While progress continues to be
made, these experiments have relied on solid targets that
can limit repetition rate and purity of the accelerated
ions.

Recently long-wave infrared laser acceleration of ions
by means of electro-static shock acceleration in gas tar-
gets has become a reality[4, 5]. These experiments take
advantage of short pulse CO2 lasers (λ0 =10.6 µm) that
have a critical plasma density within the operational
range of gas jets (1018-1020 cm−3), where the critical den-
sity (ncrit = (2πc)2 me0/e2λ2
0) is the cutoﬀ density at
which electromagnetic waves no longer propagate within
the plasma.

While this type of acceleration technique may be dif-
ﬁcult to achieve for ultrashort pulse near-infrared lasers
since it requires strong electron heating, the advantages
of gas targets remain; namely they are relatively simple,
produce high purity targets with variable densities, and
can be operated at high repetition rates. Unfortunately,
current gas jets produce densities well below the critical
density for near-infrared wavelengths, where most of the
world’s terawatt and petawatt lasers operate.

In this letter, we report the acceleration of protons
form a new type of target, a “gas foil”, that has been
developed at the Naval Research Laboratory[6, 7]. The
target is based on the propagation of strong hydrody-
namic shocks in gas. The shock front acts to increase
the local density to values near critical density for near-
infrared wavelengths (∼1021 cm−3) and steepen the den-
sity gradients. Gradients at both the front and rear of the
target are important in that they reduce deleterious laser
propagation eﬀects, including ionization defocusing and
ﬁlamentation, while at the same aiding the production of
energetic particles as they are accelerated out of the rear

FIG. 1.
Illustration of the acceleration process. a) An intense
laser pulse drives a self-modulated wakeﬁeld, injecting and
accelerating a high energy electron beam from the ambient
plasma. A Z-pinch of the trailing electrons and ions is driven
by the high current beam. b) The high magnetic ﬁeld and ﬁeld
gradients lead to a axial guiding center drift for a secondary
electron beam moving out of the plasma. c) The space charge
ﬁelds of the exiting electrons accelerate ambient plasma ions.
The Z-pinched compressed ions explode out radially, while
cold ions collectively escape with the electron beam.

of the target. Additionally, the target can be operated at
various densities and at high repetition rates. In previous
work[8], it was observed that the gas ﬂow returns to its
pre-shocked state in ∼µs. Thus repetition rates in excess
of 10 kHz are possible. Here, we will present results of
∼2MeV proton acceleration from this target using only
500mJ of laser energy as well as a discussion of the rele-
vant mechanisms, including TNSA and Magnetic Vortex
Acceleration.

Magnetic Vortex Acceleration is a recently proposed
and as of yet experimentally conﬁrmed acceleration tech-
nique that exhibits a myriad of physical processes[6, 9–
13]. In particular, this scheme relies on intense magnetic
ﬁeld gradients produced at a plasma gradient to drive
acceleration, ﬁg. 1. Using a gas foil target to access this
mechanism provides a route to generate high-energy ions

2

FIG. 2. A schematic of the experimental setup including the
CR-39 detector stack. A 1mm supersonic gas jet delivers the
neutral gas while laser ignited strong hydrodynamic shocks
act to shape it. The accelerated ions are then detected by
CR-39 plates with varying Al ﬁlters.

at high repetition from a high purity source that lever-
ages compact solid-state lasers.

The experimental set-up is shown in ﬁg. 2. Strong hy-
drodynamic shockwaves are ignited in a standard gas jet
in vacuum using nanosecond frequency doubled Nd:YAG
pulses. The individual shocks produce a proﬁle that con-
sists of a sharp leading edge, followed by a slow falling
edge, with a peak value that is (γ+1)/(γ-1), where γ is
the ratio of speciﬁc heat. This value can range from 4 to
10 dependent on the degree of excitation of the internal
degrees of freedom of the gas. When two shocks are al-
lowed to collide, the resulting peak density is the sum of
the individual shock densities. This technique provides
the density increase necessary to approach critical den-
sity. For these acceleration experiments two blastwaves
were used to tailor the hydrogen gas ﬂow into a 75 µm
thick gas “foil” with 30 µm gradients and tunable peak
densities from 2.5 - 5×1020 molecules cm−3. This pro-
vides a pure hydrogen target at densities and gradients
previously unexplored. The formation of the target is
monitored using a 400nm, 50fs laser probe that goes to
shadowgraphic and interferometric diagnostics [Supple-
mental].

The interaction is driven by a 500 mJ, 800 nm, 50
fs laser pulse generated by the TFL laser system at
NRL. The pulse is focused, using an f/2 oﬀ-axis parabola
(OAP), to a vacuum spot size of 2.6 µm, 1/e2, reach-
ing a peak intensity of 1×1020 W cm−2. We focused the
beam at the front edge of the “foil” to allow the beam to
relativistically self-focus within the density ramp. This
allows the beam to reach higher intensities. The energy
and spatial distribution of the ions is measured using a 1
mm thick CR-39 plate with aluminum ﬁlters of varying
thickness spaced perpendicular to the laser polarization
axis. The stack was placed 13 cm from the gas jet to

FIG. 3.
False color image of a 10cm x 5cm CR-39 plates
for the cases of 0.3 ncrit (left) and 0.6 ncrit (right). The
dashed lines represent the location of the ﬁlters and their
lower energy bound is listed on the left. On the bottom are
plots of simulated test particles projected out to the plane of
the detector color-coded to the experimental energy buckets.

prevent laser damage of the plate.
A density scan was performed over the operational
range of our gas jet at intervals of 0.5×1020 molecules
cm−3. Assuming fully ionized hydrogen, this corresponds
to peak plasma densities of ne = 0.3-0.6 ncrit It was ob-
served that at densities above 0.4 ncrit, a proton beam
contained within the length of detector was accelerated in
the forward direction. The beam was unable to penetrate
even a single ﬁlter layer (9 µm) and thus had peak energy
of <700 keV. Upon closer examination of the tracks pro-
duced, the pit diameters were <10µm corresponding to
the proton energies <200 keV [14]. An example detector
image is given in ﬁg. 3.

At a density of 0.3 ncrit, we observed protons pene-
trating through the 9µm, 18µm, and 27µm thick ﬁlters
with no proton penetrating the 36µm thick ﬁlter (ﬁg.
3). This indicates a broad energy distribution of protons
with a maximum energy between 1.5-1.9 MeV. Unlike
the higher density cases, the spatial distribution of the
protons within the unshielded region extends beyond the
length of the detector. It is characterized by an intense
beam near the left boundary with a highly nonuniform
distribution to the right of that. These uniformities are
consistent with the distribution of higher energy protons
observed in the shielded regions above and below.

The origin of these accelerated protons was investi-
gated using the TurboWAVE 3D particle-in-cell code.
The simulation was initialized using the experimental pa-
rameters and density proﬁles. Test particles were placed
within the simulation box, their orbits were tracked, and
projected to the detector plane. The projected ion test
particles for the cases of 0.3ncrit and 0.6ncrit are given in
ﬁgs. 3 and 4. In ﬁg. 3 the test particle spatial distribu-
tions are ﬁltered to match the experimental conditions
and show excellent agreement. To understand the un-
derlying process, the full simulated distribution with the

3

FIG. 4. Plots of the full test particles spatial distribution as
projected out to the plane of the detector for 0.3ncrit (left)
and 0.6 ncrit (right).
Inset are proton density plots taken
along the polarization plane for each case. Note that for the
0.3ncrit case the cavitation region extends entire length of the
plasma while it only extend halfway through for the 0.6 ncrit.

corresponding proton density proﬁles are given in ﬁg. 4.
For the 0.6ncrit case, the protons are contained within a
beam width of 8 cm FWHM and have a peak energy of
140 keV, consistent with the experimental track diame-
ters. Examining the results of the PIC simulation, we
see that the laser pulse is unable to penetrate the target,
ﬁg. 4. The protons that are accelerated in the forward
direction originate from the rear side of the target. They
are accelerated by space-charge ﬁelds produced from hot
electrons generated by the laser-target interaction exiting
the rear of the target. This is consistent with the Target
Normal Sheath Acceleration mechanism (TNSA)[3].

Examining the 0.3ncrit case, we see a vastly diﬀerent
situation. The forward accelerated protons are character-
ized by a low energy beam on-axis with a halo of high-
energy protons with energies (cid:46)2MeV. When examining
the proton density plot, we observe that at these den-
sities the laser pulse is able to penetrate through the
entire plasma. The Z-pinch is also clearly seen extend-
ing through the plasma. To better illustrate the dynamic
process that is occurring, 3D renderings showing the evo-
lution of the electron plasma density, magnetic ﬁeld lines,
and proton test particles are given in ﬁg. 5. Initially, the
intense laser pulse undergoes self-focusing and modula-
tion instability in the density up ramp of the plasma re-
gion. The pondermotive force of the pulse drives electron
cavitations. Plasma electrons become trapped and accel-
erated within these cavitations. Due to the slow plasma
wave phase velocity and short dephasing length, electrons
are easily injected, accelerated, and then stream out of
the trapping region of the wakeﬁeld. These fast electrons
trail behind the laser front, forming an axial fast current.
To maintain plasma quasi-neutrality, a cold electron re-
turn current is formed to balance the fast current. The
two oppositely signed currents repel one another, forming

FIG. 5. 3D volumetric renderings of the electron density and
azimuthal ﬁelds with proton test particles included. The test
particles are color coded by their kinetic energy. Note that
test particles have a radial energy distribution with lowest
energy on-axis and the highest oﬀ-axis. A movie of these
simulation results are provided as supplemental material.

an axial fast current and a cylindrical-shell cold return
current. The on-axis fast current has an average current
of 22kA. This process leads to the generation of a large
(∼50MG) azimuthal magnetic ﬁeld contained within the
region. During this process, the mobile ions pinch on-axis
and an electron-ion pinch is formed with ne≈ni≈.3ncrit
and radius of ∼1µm. This whole process trails the intense
laser pulse until it exits the plasma region.

At the exit, the laser pulse ponderomotively expels the
ambient electrons from the density ramp. After the in-
tense laser pulse exits the plasma, the fast electron cur-
rent and large azimuthal magnetic ﬁelds begin to ﬂow
out, and a situation reminiscent of the Magnetic Vortex
acceleration mechanism occurs. The protons at the in-
terface undergo the same inward pinch as those inside
the main plasma region, however the magnitude of pinch
rapidly drops oﬀ due to the drop in density. The fast cur-
rent eventually leaves the plasma. At this point the mag-
netic ﬁelds begin to dissipate and the protons, no longer
conﬁned, explode outward radially. At the same time
they acquire longitudinal momentum from the space-
charge ﬁelds setup by the escaping fast current. These
protons are those observed in the high-energy halo. Ad-
ditionally, there exist a low-density population of protons
outside the ramp. These are accelerated collectively by
the fast electrons leaving the plasma region. These pro-
tons are the source of low energy protons on axis. Ex-
amining the test particle energy in the ﬁnal rendering,
it can be seen that the proton beam exhibits an energy
distribution that is radially dependent as in the experi-
ments.

Using the test particle results, we directly compared
the proton energy spectrum to that observed in the ex-
periments. The results are plotted in ﬁg. 6. Pit count-
ing of the CR-39 plate was preformed by producing a
composite image from a motorized scanning microscope.
The pits were then counted using the cell counting al-
gorithm within the image analysis software, ImageJ. In
the analysis of the experimental proton energy spectrum,

We would like to acknowledge helpful discussions with B.
Haﬁzi, S. Bulanov, J. Penano, and A. Zingale.

4

∗ U.S. Naval Research Laboratory, 4555 Overlook Ave.,
SW, Washington, DC 20375; Corresponding author:
mike.helle@nrl.navy.mil
† Research Support Instruments, 4325-B Forbes Boule-

vard, Lanham, MD 20706

[1] A. Macchi, M. Borghesi, and M. Passoni, Reviews of

Modern Physics 85, 751 (2013).

[2] B. Albright, L. Yin, K. J. Bowers, B. Hegelich, K. Flippo,
T. Kwan, and J. Fernandez, Physics of Plasmas (1994-
present) 14, 094502 (2007).

[3] J. Fuchs, P. Antici, E. d’Humi`eres, E. Lefebvre,
M. Borghesi, E. Brambrink, C. Cecchetti, M. Kaluza,
V. Malka, M. Manclossi, et al., Nature physics 2, 48
(2006).

[4] C. A. Palmer, N. Dover, I. Pogorelsky, M. Babzien,
G. Dudnikova, M. Ispiriyan, M. Polyanskiy, J. Schreiber,
P. Shkolnikov, V. Yakimenko, et al., Physical review let-
ters 106, 014801 (2011).

[5] D. Haberberger, S. Tochitsky, F. Fiuza, C. Gong, R. A.
Fonseca, L. O. Silva, W. B. Mori, and C. Joshi, Nature
Physics 8, 95 (2012).

[6] D. F. Gordon, M. H. Helle, D. Kaganovich, A. Ting,
and B. Haﬁzi, in SPIE Optics+ Optoelectronics (Inter-
national Society for Optics and Photonics, 2013), pp.
877902–877902.

[7] D. Kaganovich, D. Gordon, M. Helle, and A. Ting, Jour-

nal of Applied Physics 116, 013304 (2014).

[8] D. Kaganovich, M. Helle, D. Gordon, and A. Ting, Ap-

plied Physics Letters 97, 191501 (2010).

[9] S. Bulanov, T. Z. Esirkepov, F. Califano, Y. Kato, T. Li-
seikina, K. Mima, N. Naumova, K. Nishihara, F. Pego-
raro, H. Ruhl, et al., Journal of Experimental and Theo-
retical Physics Letters 71, 407 (2000).

[10] L. Willingale, S. P. Mangles, P. M. Nilson, R. J. Clarke,
A. E. Dangor, M. C. Kaluza, S. Karsch, K. L. Lancaster,
W. B. Mori, J. Schreiber, et al., Plasma Science, IEEE
Transactions on 36, 1825 (2008).

[11] T. Nakamura, S. V. Bulanov, T. Z. Esirkepov, and

M. Kando, Physical review letters 105, 135002 (2010).

[12] Y. Sentoku, T. Liseikina, T. Z. Esirkepov, F. Cali-
fano, N. Naumova, Y. Ueshima, V. Vshivkov, Y. Kato,
K. Mima, K. Nishihara, et al., Physical Review E 62,
7271 (2000).

[13] S. S. Bulanov, V. Y. Bychenkov, V. Chvykov,
G. Kalinchenko, D. W. Litzenberg, T. Matsuoka, A. G.
Thomas, L. Willingale, V. Yanovsky, K. Krushelnick,
et al., Physics of Plasmas (1994-present) 17, 043105
(2010).

[14] F. S´eguin, J. Frenje, C. Li, D. Hicks, S. Kurebayashi,
J. Rygg, B.-E. Schwartz, R. Petrasso, S. Roberts,
J. Soures, et al., Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 74,
975 (2003).

[15] M. Helle, D. Gordon, D. Kaganovich, Y.-H. Chen, and
A. Ting, in SPIE Optics+ Optoelectronics (International
Society for Optics and Photonics, 2015), pp. 951409–
951409.

FIG. 6. Plot comparing experimental to simulated proton
energy spectrum. Proton distribution asymmetries, simulated
experimental parameters, or sampling statistics with PIC
macroparticles may be the cause of discrepancies at higher
energies.

we assumed that the proton distributions were symmet-
ric about the beam axis. Additionally, we subtracted
out higher energy totals from from lower energy bands
to prevent double counting. The results show general
agreement between experiment and simulations. The
simulations do predict higher energy protons, however
this maybe due to proton distribution asymmetries, dis-
crepancies in the simulated experimental conditions, or
sampling statistics with PIC macroparticles.

The overall agreement between the experiments, simu-
lations, and theory aids in validating our results. Scaling
these results to existing simulation work, we observed
much lower ion energies[6, 9–13]. This disagreement is
directly due to the highly 3D nature of the process.
Namely, reducing the process to one transverse dimension
constrains the degrees of freedom aﬀorded to the pinch.
This was observed when 2D simulations with identical
initial conditions to the ones above were preformed[15].
While predicting a lower peak density, these simulations
produced a peak proton energy of 13MeV, much higher
than what was observed in experiment and 3D simula-
tions. The momentum that would normally go into the
second transverse dimension is instead distributed be-
tween the other two dimensions resulting in a higher
overall kinetic energy.
It’s interesting to note that the
2D simulations were able to produce the same energy for
the on-axis beam. This is due to the longitudinal accel-
erating force produced by the forward directed electrons.
The presented acceleration mechanism is directly con-
trolled by the laser and plasma parameters. By tailor-
ing the plasma peak density, thickness, and gradients it
could be possible to explore regions of higher magnetic
ﬁelds and produce even higher energy beams. The target
provides a potential route to high repetition operation as
new, rep-rated laser systems are developed.

This work was supported by the Department of En-
ergy and the Naval Research Laboratory Base Program.

