6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
4
1

 
 
]

.

A
G
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
4
7
4
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 000, 1–?? (2013)

Printed 16 March 2016

(MN LATEX style ﬁle v2.2)

The IAC Stripe 82 Legacy Project: a wide-area survey for faint
surface brightness astronomy

J¨urgen Fliri1,2 ⋆ and Ignacio Trujillo1,2
1Instituto de Astrof´ısica de Canarias, c/ V´ıa L´actea s/n, E-38205, La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain
2Departamento de Astrof´ısica, Universidad de La Laguna, E-38206, La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain

ABSTRACT

We present new deep co-adds of data taken within Stripe 82 of the Sloan Digital Sky
Survey (SDSS), especially stacked to reach the faintest surface brightness limits of this data
set. Stripe 82 covers 275 deg2 within –50◦6 RA 6 +60◦and –1.◦25 6 Dec. 6 +1.◦25. We dis-
cuss the steps of our reduction which puts special emphasis on preserving the characteristics
of the background (sky + diﬀuse light) in the input images using a non-aggressive sky sub-
traction strategy. Our reduction reaches a limit of ∼28.5 mag arcsec−2 (3σ, 10×10 arcsec2)
in the r band. The eﬀective surface brightness limit (50% completeness for exponential light
distribution) lies at < µe(r) >∼25.5 mag arcsec−2. For point sources, we reach 50% com-
pleteness limits (3σ level) of (24.2, 25.2, 24.7, 24.3, 23.0) mag in (u, g, r, i, z). This is be-
tween 1.7 and 2.0 mag deeper than the single-epoch SDSS releases. The co-adds show point
spread functions (PSFs) with median full width at half-maximum values ranging from 1 arc-
sec in i and z to 1.3 arcsec in the u band. The imaging data are made publicly available at
http://www.iac.es/proyecto/stripe82. The release includes deep co-adds and representations
of the PSF for each ﬁeld. Additionally, we provide object catalogues with stars and galaxies
conﬁdently separated until g∼23 mag. The IAC Stripe 82 co-adds oﬀer a rather unique pos-
sibility to study the low surface brightness Universe, exempliﬁed by the discovery of stellar
streams around NGC0426 and NGC0936. We also discuss further science cases like stellar
haloes and disc truncations, low surface brightness galaxies, the intra-cluster light in galaxy
clusters and the diﬀuse emission of Galactic dust known as Galactic Cirrus.
Key words: atlases - catalogues - surveys - stars: general - galaxies: general - galaxies:
interactions

1 INTRODUCTION

There is a huge amount of astrophysical phenomena that remain
still barely studied due to the lack of large (several hundreds of
square degrees), multiwavelength and deep (µV >28 mag arcsec−2)
optical surveys. These unexplored astrophysical events are those
which are very subtle and extend over large areas of the sky. For
instance, little is known about the connection of the so-called ‘op-
tical cirrus’ or diﬀuse light of our Galaxy (de Vries & Le Poole
1985; Paley et al. 1991) and the dust ﬁlamentary structure ob-
served in the far-infrared full-sky surveys (i.e. Low et al. 1984).
Also, only a relative small number of nearby galaxies have
been probed with enough depth (e.g. Ferguson et al. 2002;
Mouhcine et al. 2005; McConnachie et al. 2006; Mouhcine et al.
2007; Mart´ınez-Delgado et al. 2008; Radburn-Smith et al. 2011;
Bakos & Trujillo 2012; Trujillo & Fliri 2015) to explore the cos-
mological predictions (e.g. Bullock & Johnston 2005; Cooper et al.
2010; Font et al. 2011; Tissera et al. 2013) about the formation

⋆ E-mail: jﬂiri@iac.es; trujillo@iac.es

of the faint stellar haloes, tidal streams and ultra-faint satellites
surrounding these objects. Similarly, only a handful of nearby
galaxy clusters (e.g. Rudick et al. 2010; Giallongo et al. 2014;
Montes & Trujillo 2014) have been observed with enough depth
to start understanding the intracluster light (ICL) expected from
a hierarchical assembly (e.g. Contini et al. 2014) of these cosmic
structures.

In the last few years there have been a few dedicated surveys
designed to explore some of the above astronomical questions. To
name a few: (1) a survey to explore stellar tidal streams in spi-
ral galaxies of the Local Volume (Mart´ınez-Delgado et al. 2010).
This survey uses small (d=0.1-0.5m) robotic telescopes to observe
stellar streams down to µV ∼28.5 mag arcsec−2, establishing a ﬁrst
classiﬁcation scheme for the tidal features. (2) The Pan-Andromeda
Archaeological Survey (PAndAS; McConnachie et al. 2009) con-
ducted at the 3.6m Canada–France–Hawaii Telescope whose main
aim is the exploration of the stellar halo surrounding our neighbour-
ing Andromeda galaxy. This survey explores 400 square degrees
reaching the following optical depth for point sources: g=25.5 and
i=24.5 mag (S/N=10). (3) Using the same telescope, another deep

2

J¨urgen Fliri and Ignacio Trujillo

and large (104 square degrees) survey is the Next Generation Virgo
Cluster Survey (NGVS; Ferrarese et al. 2012). Among its observa-
tional goals is the exploration of the ICL in our closest galaxy clus-
ter. The depth reached with this survey is the following: u=26.3
(S/N=5), g=25.9 (S/N=10), r=25.3 (S/N=10), i=25.1 (S/N=10),
z=24.8 mag (S/N=5) [point sources]. (4) The Dragonﬂy telescope
has joined recently in the initiative of exploring large areas of the
sky to faint surface brightness limits. This telescope uses an ar-
ray of telephoto cameras reaching a surface brightness limit of
µg∼29.5 mag arcsec−2 on scales of 10×10 arcsec2 (Merritt et al.
2014). However, there has not been yet a plan for a general mul-
tipurpose deep survey expanding over a large area of the sky that
allows a systematic analysis of the phenomena stated in the pre-
vious paragraph1. Nonetheless, many of the above issues could be
addressed with a proper reduction of the data collected along the
celestial equator in the Southern Galactic Cap of the Sloan Digi-
tal Sky Survey (SDSS; York et al. 2000), known popularly as the
‘Stripe 82’ survey (Jiang et al. 2008; Abazajian et al. 2009).

The Stripe 82 survey is a 2.◦5 wide region along the celes-
tial equator (–50◦ 6 RA 6 +60◦, –1.◦25 6 Dec. 6 +1.◦25 for a
total of 275 square degrees). This region of the sky has been im-
aged repeatedly approximately 80 times in all the ﬁve SDSS ﬁlters:
ugriz. The Stripe 82 area is a perfect piece of the sky for explor-
ing many of the astrophysical phenomena described above. First,
is accessible for the vast majority of ground-based facilities, help-
ing to create ancillary spectroscopic and photometric observations
if needed. Secondly, for analysing the optical emission of the dust
of our own Galaxy, it covers regions from low to high Galactic ex-
tinction (Schlegel et al. 1998).

Around a third of all the available SDSS data in the Stripe 82
area (123 of 303 runs2) were originally combined by Annis et al.
(2014). The goal of that co-addition was ‘to use this deep sur-
vey to understand the single pass data at its limits and to do sci-
ence at fainter magnitudes or correspondingly higher redshifts’
(Annis et al. 2014). This stack produced the following depths (50%
completeness limit for point sources): u=23.6, g=24.6, r=24.2,
i=23.7, z=22.3 mag with a median seeing of ∼1.1 arcsec. De-
pending on the band, this is around 1–2 mag deeper than SDSS
single-pass data. In a second reduction of the Stripe 82 data,
Jiang et al. (2014) combined all available runs; the major diﬀer-
ences to Annis et al. (2014) were the amount of data used and a
diﬀerent treatment of the sky background using a 2D background
modelling. Depending on the band, Jiang et al. (2014) used be-
tween 75 and 90 per cent of the data for their co-adds, reporting
a gain of 0.3–0.5 mag in depth compared to the Annis et al. (2014)
reduction.

The science foreseen for the previous co-additions of the
Stripe 82 survey has been focused on ‘point sources science’ (i.e.
Galactic structure, photometric redshift computation, cluster ﬁnd-
ing, etc). However, the real treasure of the Stripe 82 survey is not
only related to the detection of ‘point-like’ sources but in a dif-
ferent unique aspect: the exquisite surface brightness depth that a

1 A survey that potentially could have been used for the above pur-
poses would be the Canada-France-Hawaii Legacy Survey (CFHTLS;
Cuillandre et al. 2012), in particular with its Wide Synoptic branch (155
square degrees with the following depth: u=25.3, g=25.5, r=24.8, i=24.4,
z=23.5 mag; 50% completeness for point sources). Unfortunately,
the
pipeline used for the reduction of this data set removes the low surface
brightness features, producing obvious ‘holes’ around the brightest ex-
tended galaxies in the images.
2 An SDSS run is a single continuous drift scan obtained on a single night.

proper combination of this sub-project of the SDSS can reach over
a wide area. In fact, one of the particular aspects of the SDSS sur-
vey is that it has been conducted using drift-scan mode. This obser-
vational technique has proved to be very eﬃcient avoiding many
of the artefacts aﬀecting the quality of the imaging. Consequently,
the single-pass SDSS imaging is superb for studies of low surface
brightness features (reaching down to ∼26.5 mag arcsec−2 through
direct detection (3σ, 10×10 arcsec2) and ∼28 mag arcsec−2 through
proﬁle averaging techniques; Pohlen & Trujillo 2006). These are
remarkable numbers taking into account that the SDSS survey has
been obtained with exposure integrations of 53.9s using a 2.5m
telescope. Considering that, on average, any region of the sky in
the Stripe 82 area has been observed 80 times, a simple calculation
shows that an optimal combination (i.e. assuming all single passes
were of the same quality) of the Stripe 82 would be able to reach
∼2.4 mag deeper than the regular SDSS. In practice, as we will
show, only around 2/3 of the full available Stripe 82 data are useful
(i.e. with reasonable seeing and darkness) for our purposes.

The goal of this paper is to provide to the entire astronomi-
cal community with a new reduction of the Stripe 82 data, espe-
cially designed to prevent the destruction of the low surface bright-
ness features in the co-addition of the data set. Moreover, our new
co-addition takes advantage of the full useful data available in the
Stripe 82 area, closely doubling the one third used by Annis et al.
(2014). This allows us to go around 0.1–0.3 mag deeper than be-
fore. Our data release includes not only ugriz images and cata-
logues of the Stripe 82 but also some ancillary products as stacked
point-spread function (PSF) stamps along the survey area plus an
‘ultra-deep r-band’ image of the survey obtained by the stacking
of the g, r and i co-added images. All our data are fully avail-
able for the astronomical community through a dedicated webpage
at http://www.iac.es/proyecto/stripe82. Through the paper, we will
show some examples of the quality of the new reduction and some
of the science that can be conducted with this co-addition. The pa-
per is structured as follows: in Sec. 2 we introduce the data used in
our reduction of Stripe 82 while the reduction pipeline is presented
in Sec. 3. We assess the quality of the co-added data in Sec. 4 and
describe the contents of the data release in Sec. 5. Section 6 oﬀers
some science cases which can be explored with the Stripe 82 data.
We end the paper with the conclusions in Sec. 7.

2 DATA

Reduced images for all 303 runs covering Stripe82 are available
as part of the SDSS DR7 (Abazajian et al. 2009) in a data base
called Stripe 82. We have accessed these data through the Data
Archive Server (DAS). The quality of the 303 runs changes from
optimal seeing, sky brightness and photometric conditions for 84
runs obtained between 1998 and 2004 to 219 additional runs where
the conditions were poorer including worst seeing, bright moon-
light and/or non-photometric skies. These last runs were obtained
from 2005 to 2007 as part of the SDSS-II Supernovae Survey
(Frieman et al. 2008).

SDSS data are taken in scans along lines of constant survey
latitude deﬁning an SDSS strip. Two strips called strip ‘north’ and
‘south’ are needed to ﬁll the 2.◦5 width of an SDSS stripe. The run
coverage of Stripe 82 is inhomogeneous over the survey area, but
generally rises from west to east. For the observations in the Stripe
82 southern strip, the diﬀerence in coverage between the western
and the eastern limit of the survey is about 25 per cent. The diﬀer-
ence is smaller for the northern strip with about 15 per cent. The

co-addition that we present in this paper uses all the data (i.e. the
303 available runs) explained above after removal of some very bad
data as we will explain later on in Sec. 3.5. This is a major diﬀer-
ence compared to Annis et al. (2014). In fact, they combined only
the data taken until 2005 (mostly because that data were not avail-
able when they were doing their co-addition). Annis et al. (2014)
co-addition includes a total of 123 runs with every piece of the
Stripe 82 area observed between 15 and 34 times. For comparison,
any region of the Stripe82 in our co-addition is observed ∼50 times.

3 REDUCTION

3.1 Field layout

We process the Stripe 82 data in patches of 0.25 square degrees,
covering 0.5 degrees both in right ascension and declination. Each
declination interval of Stripe 82 is covered by ﬁve bins, centred at
Dec. = –1◦, –0.◦5, 0◦, 0.◦5, 1◦. The numbering scheme in right as-
cension starts in the western part of the survey, with the ﬁrst ﬁelds
centred at RA = 310.◦25. With this general layout we assign each
ﬁeld a unique identiﬁer fxxxy, where the ﬁrst three digits mark the
running number of the ﬁeld in right ascension (with xxx=001 cor-
responding to a ﬁeld centre at RA = 310.◦25), using a step size of
0.5 deg between diﬀerent ﬁelds. The last digit refers to the decli-
nation bin with the declination moving from –1◦to +1◦in 0.5 deg
steps when moving from y=1 to y=5. Field f0164 therefore refers
to a ﬁeld centre at (RA, Dec.) = (317.◦75, 0.◦5).

Data are downloaded from the SDSS DAS using the sql ser-
vice casjobs to select all available images in the selected region.
To avoid boundary eﬀects, we chose a large enough search radius
of 20 arcmin around each ﬁeld centre in the selection. Data from
the northern and southern strips of Stripe 82 are not processed sep-
arately but combined using the fpC images of all available runs
for our co-adds. These ‘corrected’ images have been bias cor-
rected, ﬂatﬁelded and largely removed from instrumental artefacts.
A soft bias of 1000 counts has been added to allow the archival
storage as unsigned integer. All fpC images have been astrometri-
cally calibrated within SDSS, with an accuracy better than 45 mas
rms (Pier et al. 2003). Each fpC image within the Stripe 82 data
base has a tsField ﬁts binary table associated with it, containing
amongst other metadata, calibration parameters and information on
the width of the PSF in the images.

3.2 Photometric calibration

We use the information contained in the tsField tables for the
photometric calibration of the corrected fpC images. The values of
the photometric zeropoint (‘aa’), extinction coeﬃcient (‘kk’) and
airmass (‘airmass’) were extracted for all ﬁve bands, yielding the
photometric calibration of the fpC images according to

f
f0

=

DN
texp

× 100.4×(aa+kk×airmass)

(1)

with f being the ﬂux in the image, DN its corresponding count rate
and f0 the zero-point ﬂux. Pogson magnitudes in the AB system are
then calculated by

mag = −2.5 × log

f
f0

(2)

Before deriving appropriate values for the sky brightness and cor-
responding gradients in each image, the fpC images have to be

The IAC Stripe 82 Legacy Project

3

aligned photometrically. This is achieved by correcting each im-
age for the eﬀects of atmospheric extinction and setting all images
to a common zero-point of aa′=–24.0 mag, irrespective of obser-
vation date or waveband. After subtraction of the soft bias of 1000
counts, we multiply each image by a correction factor c deﬁned as

c = 100.4×[(aa+24)+kk×airmass]

(3)

For the ﬂuxes f ′=c× f and count rates DN′=c×DN in the corrected,
photometrically aligned frames the calibration equations take the
following form:

f ′
f0

=

DN′
texp

× 100.4×aa′

and

mag = −2.5 × log

f ′
f0

with a unique zeropoint aa′=-24.0 mag.

(4)

(5)

3.3 PSF information

The SDSS photometric pipeline PHOTO ﬁts various proﬁles for
point and extended sources to objects detected in the fpC frames.
All this information is used to obtain values for the shape and width
of the PSF and its corresponding errors. As we use the PSF infor-
mation primarily to discard certain images with large PSF widths
from the individual stacks, we extract the PSF information from the
tsField calibration tables (parameter ‘psf width’).

3.4 Sky subtraction

To reach the very low surface brightness values we aim to achieve
with our Stripe 82 co-adds, we have to determine the sky back-
ground in the single images to a high accuracy. Having measured
sky values and their dispersion in the images, we are then able to
discard images with large background values – taken under bad ob-
serving conditions with bad sky transparencies or during grey to
bright time. In addition, we reject images with large variations of
the sky background from the stacks. To get rid of point and ex-
tended sources which would aﬀect the calculation of the sky back-
ground, we use SExtractor (Bertin & Arnouts 1996) to create ob-
ject masks which include the background map subtracted count
rates of all objects detected in the SExtractor run. By applying
a growth radius of 5 pixels to each pixel masked as object, we
make sure that the faint wings of sources do not aﬀect the esti-
mation of the sky background. Finally, the soft bias-subtracted and
ﬂux-corrected fpC′ images and corresponding object masks (trans-
ferred to binary images comprised of pixels with values equal 1
‘=sky’ and 0 ‘=object’) are combined, yielding the input frames
for the determination of the sky background. We obtain the sky
values by placing 105 square apertures with side lengths of 21 pix-
els (or 8.3 arcsec) randomly in the images and measuring the me-
dian of the count rates in each box. The size of the apertures is
chosen large enough to allow a robust measure of the median, but
small enough to be aﬀected by gradients in the sky background. κ-
σ clipping of these 105 values yields a ﬁrst determination of the sky
value in the image and its dispersion. By repeating this procedure
ﬁve times and averaging over the results, we ﬁnally obtain a very
robust measurement of the sky background B in the images. De-
pending on the observing conditions, the background in the images
is not completely ﬂat but can show gradients in both the scanning

4

J¨urgen Fliri and Ignacio Trujillo

Figure 1. Distribution of PSF FWHM values along the Stripe 82 co-adds.
The FWHM shows a strong dependence on the declination of the ﬁeld cen-
tre. The median values in each band are indicated by vertical dashed lines.

(RA) and perpendicular (Dec.) direction. However, as our main in-
tent is on low surface brightness features, we subtract just a single
value for the sky background and do not try to model it in 1D or 2D.
In this way, we preserve as much as possible the characteristics of
the low surface brightness objects. This is one of the major diﬀer-
ences to previous reductions of Stripe 82 by Annis et al. (2014) and
Jiang et al. (2014) which both apply background modelling in their
reduction pipelines. For larger gradients and high background val-
ues, we apply several selection cuts which eliminate the data from
the ﬁnal stack and ensure that the data used in the co-addition have
well-deﬁned sky backgrounds.

3.5 Co-addition

Images with large sky backgrounds, notable sky gradients, large
PSF widths, but also observations aﬀected by clouds or bad trans-
parency will degrade the quality and reduce the achievable depths
of the co-added images. We therefore apply a couple of selection
criteria to the images entering the stack. These criteria are based on
the information gathered from the calibration tables (the width of
the PSF and throughput information collected in the ﬂux correction
parameter c) and on information resulting from the sky determina-
tion (sky background B and its dispersion σB). Using the informa-
tion from all the images, we calculate the κ-σ clipped mean and
dispersion of the PSF (PS F, σPS F,s) and sky (B, σB,s) in the image
samples. For all the frames taken during the photometric runs until
2004, we also calculate the κ-σ clipped mean of the ﬂux correction
factors c, and impose the following selection criteria for images
entering the stack:

• B < B + 2 × σB,s
• PS F < PS F + 2 × σPS F,s

Band

FWHM (arcsec)

u
g
r
i
z

rdeep

1.31
1.24
1.10
1.02
1.04

1.08

Table 1. Median values of the PSF FWHM of the co-added data.

• σB < σlim
• c < 1.30 × c

with σlim = (0.5, 1.0, 1.2, 1.2, 0.5)×c for (u, g, r, i, z). This last crite-
rion ensures that images whose throughput values deviate by more
than 30% from the mean of the photometric runs are discarded
from the ﬁnal stack. In this way, we eliminate non-photometric data
taken under bad observing conditions. The criteria eliminate on av-
erage one third of the data with the fraction of bad data decreasing
for redder wavebands. The median fractions of eliminated bad data
are (39,41,34,26,23) per cent in (u, g, r, i, z), roughly constant over
the survey area. This means that compared to Jiang et al. (2014),
we only use ∼ 80 per cent of the data which passed their quality
criteria for our co-adds.

All sky-subtracted and photometrically aligned images which
pass the criteria are fed to SWarp (Bertin et al. 2002) for co-
addition. SWarp takes the information on the World Coordinate
System provided in the image header and projects the images on
a regular grid with a pixel size of 0.396 arcsec before co-adding the
images on a pixel per pixel basis. As we have already subtracted
the sky from the images, we run SWarp without the sky subtraction
option, choosing Lanczos3 as interpolation kernel during the re-
gridding process which produces a tangent plane projection centred
on the ﬁeld centres. As output, SWarp yields the co-added image,
calculated as unweighted median of the pixel values of all selected
images, and a weight image providing the number of input frames
contributing to the ﬁnal stack on a pixel-per-pixel basis. The me-
dian ensures a robust removal of outliers and image defects.

4 DATA QUALITY

4.1 PSF values

We determined full width at half maximum (FWHM) values of
the PSF for all our co-adds using the PSFex software (Bertin
2011). Image representations of the calculated PSFs are included
in the data release (see Sec. 5.3). They can be plugged in easily
to be used e.g. for model convolution within GALFIT (Peng et al.
2002), IMFIT (Erwin 2015) or similar applications. PSFex relies
on SExtractor catalogues in combination with small vignettes of
detected objects in the images. Point sources are selected automat-
ically by their determined half-light radius and brightness proper-
ties. We omitted any ﬁtting or oversampling of the PSF to obtain its
natural shape in the SDSS Stripe 82 ﬁelds, using the information of
the whole 0.25 square degree co-add for the creation of deep PSFs
in all bands.

In Table 1 we list the median values of the FWHM. As ex-
pected the PSF is narrower in the redder bands with r, i, and z
showing values below 1.1 arcsec. The combination of the g, r and
i bands (what we call rdeep) has a value of 1.08 arcsec. The u band
has the broadest PSF. Still, with 1.3 arcsec, its value is suﬃciently

The IAC Stripe 82 Legacy Project

5

Figure 2. Detection map (recovery fraction as a function of input magnitude and eﬀective radius) in the r band for simulated de Vaucouleur (left-hand panel)
and exponential (right-hand panel) proﬁles with log(RE[arcsec]) ranging from –1.0 and +2.0. For the exponential proﬁles, we include the lines of equal
eﬀective surface brightness < µe >=25, 26, 27 mag arcsec−2 (from bottom to top). The 50% completeness level lies at < µe(r) > ∼25.5 mag arcsec−2.

small for most ground-based astronomical studies. However, there
is a strong dependence of the median width of the PSFs on the dec-
lination of the ﬁeld centres, the dependence on right ascension is
only mild (see Fig. 1). The ﬁelds centred at Dec.=+1◦show similar
PSF widths in all bands which could be up to 30 per cent larger
than the respective median values. In these oﬀ-centre ﬁelds close to
the northern limit of Stripe 82, the optics determine the PSF width.
Also the ﬁelds at the opposite side of Stripe 82, centred at Dec.=–
1◦, are aﬀected by the optics, albeit to a smaller degree than the
northern ﬁelds. Here only the PSFs in the u and z bands show dis-
tributions shifted towards signiﬁcantly larger values than the ones
of the central ﬁelds close to Dec.=0◦.

4.2 Photometric accuracy

We investigated the accuracy of our photometric calibration by
comparing aperture photometry of stars in our source catalogues
with the SDSS standard star catalogue for Stripe 82 (Ivezi´c et al.
2007). The source catalogues are based on SExtractor photom-
etry on our co-added images. They are described in more detail in
Sec. 5.4. For the comparison, we used aperture magnitudes derived
in ﬁxed apertures of 30 pixels (11.88 arcsec) and required clean
photometry ﬂags which eliminate blended objects. From the stan-
dard star catalogue we selected stars with photometric errors below
0.01 mag, i.e. stars brighter than (19.5, 20.5, 20.5, 20.0, 18.5) mag
in (u,g,r,i,z). The quoted spatial variation of its photometric zero-
points is not larger than ∼0.01 mag (rms). For each of the co-added
images, we cross-correlated the catalogues with a search radius of 1
arcsec and ﬁtted Gaussians to the magnitude diﬀerences. The zero-
point oﬀsets determined in this way were then applied individu-
ally to the co-added images. Median values of the corrections were
(0.03, 0.02, 0.02, 0.03, 0.03) mag in (u,g,r,i,z), i.e they range be-
tween two and three times the zero-point accuracy of the standard
star catalogue. These small zero-point variations can be ascribed to
the accuracy of the calibration information provided for each fpC
input image and the inclusion of images whose throughput factors

deviate up to 30 per cent from the mean of the photometric runs
(see Sec. 3.5).

4.3 Completeness simulations

To estimate the depth of our co-added images we performed com-
pleteness simulations, adding point sources and extended sources
of diﬀerent proﬁle shapes and eﬀective radii to the co-added images
and deriving the recovery fraction. We generated deep PSFs using
the PSFex software package which represent the input objects for
the point source simulation. PSF convolved frames of the extended
sources were constructed using GALFIT. To avoid crowding eﬀects,
single simulation runs consisted in adding between 250 and 500 ob-
jects to the images depending on the eﬀective size of the objects.
These runs were repeated multiple times to a total number of 5000
objects being injected in the images per ﬁlter and size-brightness
combination.

Input objects were detected and measured by SExtractor,
requiring 3σ detections with 3 connected pixels lying a factor of
1.74 above the rms value of the background for each pixel. For the
background determination we used a mesh size of 20 pixels and a
background ﬁlter of 3 pixels width. Input objects were counted as
detected if input coordinate and the SExtractor detection agreed
within 1 arcsec.

Figure 2 shows the detection maps (recovery fraction as a
function of input magnitude and eﬀective radius) for extended
sources with deVaucouleur and exponential surface brightness
proﬁles and eﬀective radii ranging from log(RE[arcsec])=–1.0 to
log(RE[arcsec])=+2.0. For the exponential proﬁles we include the
lines of equal eﬀective surface brightness <µe>, calculated as

< µe >= mT + 5 × log(RE) + 1.995

(6)

for galaxies with a total luminosity mT and an eﬀective radius
RE. As Fig. 2 shows, we reach <µe>∼25.5 mag arcsec−2 at the
50 per cent completeness level in the r band. The 50% complete-
ness values for the other bands are (25, 26, 25, 24) mag arcsec−2 in
(u, g, i, z).

6

J¨urgen Fliri and Ignacio Trujillo

Figure 3. Left-hand panel: recovery fraction of point sources as a function of input magnitude derived in a typical ﬁeld of the Stripe 82 co-adds. The solid lines
show the completeness curves for the IAC Stripe 82 co-adds. The comparison with the Annis et al. (2014) data is shown as dashed lines. The IAC reduction
reaches between 0.1 mag and 0.3 mag deeper than the Annis et al. (2014) co-adds. Compared to the single-epoch DR7 release (dotted lines), the gain in depth
for the detection of points sources ranges between 1.7 and 2.0 mag. Right-hand panel: recovery fraction of point sources as a function of input magnitude. The
solid lines show the completeness curves for the IAC Stripe 82 co-adds; the comparison with the Jiang et al. (2014) data is shown as dashed lines. The depth
of both reductions is similar in all bands.

We compared the depth of the IAC co-adds with the Stripe
82 co-adds of the same area of Annis et al. (2014), available as
runs 10006 and 20006 from the SDSS data archive, as well as with
the SDSS DR7 single-epoch images. Both the Annis et al. co-adds
and the DR7 data were aligned photometrically to the IAC co-adds
using the information provided in the tsField calibration tables.
PSFs have been created in the same way as for the IAC co-adds.
Fig. 3 shows the recovery fraction of point sources as a function of
input magnitude, derived in a typical ﬁeld of the Stripe 82 co-adds.
The gain in depth relative to the single epoch DR7 observations is
around 1.7 magnitudes in r and i and 1.9–2.0 magnitudes in the u,
g and z bands. In the g band, we reach a 50% completeness limit
of 25.2 mag. Compared to the Annis et al. (2014) data, the IAC co-
adds reach deeper; the gain in depth ranges from 0.1 mag in the r, i
and z bands to 0.3 mag in the u band. The g band lies between these
values with a gain of 0.2 mag (see Fig. 3, left-hand panel).

For the comparison with the Jiang et al. (2014) data, we pro-
ceeded slightly diﬀerently. As their reduction included a 2D mod-
elling of the sky background by ﬁtting a hyperplane to the data, the
rms in their images and hence the detection threshold are biased
towards smaller count rates, making a comparison of the recov-
ery rate diﬃcult. We therefore decided to apply the 3σ threshold
as determined by SExtractor for the IAC co-adds also for the
SExtractor runs on the Jiang et al. (2014) co-adds which allows
a one-to-one comparison of the detection eﬃciency. For these com-
pleteness simulations we again aligned the Jiang et al. (2014) data
photometrically to the IAC co-adds using the provided zero-points
and created PSFs in the same way as for the IAC co-adds.

The depth of the IAC and Jiang et al. (2014) co-adds is simi-
lar in all bands, i.e. 0.1–0.3 mag deeper than the Annis et al. (2014)
data (see Fig. 3, right-hand panel). Interestingly, we did not notice
the 0.3–0.5 mag diﬀerence in depth between Jiang et al. (2014) and
Annis et al. (2014) as reported in Jiang et al. (2014), derived as the
magnitude at which the magnitude error exceeds 0.22 mag. We list
our determined 50% completeness values of all three Stripe 82 re-
ductions and the DR7 single epoch data in Table 2.

Simulations of extended objects follow the same trend as
shown for the point sources, i.e. the data of Annis et al. (2014) be-
ing slightly shallower than the IAC and Jiang et al. (2014) data.
Note, however, that this comparison gives only a lower limit on the
diﬀerence in depth for extended objects between our and previous
reductions. As the simulated objects are ingested in the ﬁnal co-

Band

DR7

Annis et al.

Jiang et al.

IAC

Gain

u
g
r
i
z

22.3
23.2
23.0
22.6
21.1

23.9
25.0
24.6
24.2
22.9

24.2
25.1
24.7
24.2
23.0

24.2
25.2
24.7
24.3
23.0

1.9
2.0
1.7
1.7
1.9

Table 2. 50% completeness limits for points sources, derived for all three
reductions of the Stripe 82 data set. For reference, we give also the deter-
mined values for the single epoch SDSS DR7 release and the gain in depth
of the IAC co-adds presented in this work.

adds, the results only reﬂect the diﬀerences in the noise properties
between the co-added images. They do not account however for
diﬀerences in the reduction process which could aﬀect the charac-
teristics of extended objects, especially at the low surface bright-
ness limit. This is exempliﬁed in Fig. 4 which shows a ﬁeld with
intense emission of Galactic Cirrus (see Sec. 6.5) in our reduction
and the reduction by Jiang et al. (2014). Both images show large
diﬀerences in the brightness of the dust clouds. In the regions with
maximum emission, the intensity in the Jiang et al. (2014) data is
reduced by roughly a factor of 2 compared to our data. This reduc-
tion in ﬂux originates presumably from diﬀerences in the treatment
of the sky background in the input images. Our reduction subtracts
just a single background value and therefore preserves the char-
acteristics of the background composed of sky and diﬀuse light.
Jiang et al. (2014) on the other hand subtract a 2D model of the
background which can potentially misidentify faint astronomical
objects as sky background and eliminate them from the reduced
images or alter their ﬂuxes.

5 DATA RELEASE

The data products of the Stripe 82 reduction are released through a
dedicated webpage at http://www.iac.es/proyecto/stripe82. The re-
lease contains the co-added data in 5+1 bands, sky-rectiﬁed ver-
sions of the co-adds, corresponding exposure time maps, image
representations of the PSF for each co-add and catalogues of point
and extended sources.

The IAC Stripe 82 Legacy Project

7

Figure 4. Comparison of a ﬁeld showing intense emission of Galactic Cirrus in Jiang et al. (2014) (left-hand panels) and our data (right-hand panels). The top
panels show the co-adds in the r band in the same dynamic range. Both images were photometrically aligned to the same zeropoint. Additionally, we applied
corrections of +0.16 and +0.34 DN to the Jiang et al. (2014) and our image, respectively. These values correct for a slight negative oﬀset of the background
in pure sky regions. They have been determined as the median of the count rates in selected empty regions in the ﬁeld. The bottom panels show the surface
brightness distribution of the Galactic Cirrus in both images. Contour values are 25, 26 and 27 mag arcsec−2. Compared to our images, the cirrus emission is
largely reduced in the Jiang et al. (2014) data, presumably due to diﬀerences in the background treatment in the reduction process.

5.1 Co-adds

The co-added data are provided in patches of 0.5×0.5 square de-
grees. In this way, 5 images cover the full range of declination (–
1.25◦ to +1.25◦) at a certain right ascension in the Stripe 82 region.
The data are calibrated to a common zero-point of 24 mag for all
bands. AB magnitudes can be derived from the data via

mag = −2.5 × log (cid:16)

DN
texp

(cid:17) + 24.0

(7)

where texp = 53.907456 s refers to the exposure time of a single
SDSS image and DN to the counts measured in the co-add.

Each co-added image has an exposure time map attached to
it which yields for each pixel the number of single images n(x, y)
entering the stack. The eﬀective exposure time in each part of the
image is given by the product n(x, y) × texp.

Additionally, we provide images representing the average of
the g, r and i co-adds which, for a ﬂat object spectral energy distri-
bution, can be regarded as deep r-band co-adds. As the calibration
gets destroyed during this process, above equations are invalid for
the deep r-band (rdeep) images. Nevertheless, the gain in depth of
0.2–0.3 mag compared to the single co-adds can give valuable in-
sights into low surface brightness features close to the detection
limit of the survey.

5.2 Sky-rectiﬁed co-adds

Small gradients in the background of similar shape and amplitude
are still apparent in the co-adds from Annis et al. (2014) and our
work, predominantly along the Dec. direction. As the reduction of
Jiang et al. (2014) included a 2D modelling of the sky background

8

J¨urgen Fliri and Ignacio Trujillo

Figure 5. Example of the sky rectiﬁcation method. Left-hand panel: the original co-add in rdeep shows small gradients along the Dec. direction. Middle panel:
sky-rectiﬁed version of the same image. Right panel: correction applied to the data; the frame shows the expected pattern of vertical and horizontal lines, but
no imprints of objects.

inhomogeneities in the perpendicular direction, we calculate the κ-
σ clipped mean of the rows and subtract it; this step uses the al-
ready column-corrected image from the previous step as input. As
example resulting from this method we show in Fig. 5 the origi-
nal co-add, the sky-rectiﬁed version and the diﬀerence of both, i.e.
the correction applied to the data. The correction frame shows the
expected pattern of vertical and horizontal lines with no additional
features related to objects in the ﬁeld of view. Our tests have shown
that the method is ﬂux-conserving and preserves the quantities of
low surface brightness features like Galactic Cirrus.

5.3 Deep PSFs

Representations of the PSF are provided for each co-add in the ﬁve
SDSS bands plus the rdeep images. The PSFs are calculated using
the PSFex software which selects point sources from SExtractor
catalogues, normalizes and combines them to a robust mean PSF
for a particular ﬁeld. The selection of point sources is done in an
automatic way using the half light radius and luminosity informa-
tion included in the SExtractor catalogues. Depending on the ﬁl-
ter and the location of the ﬁeld within Stripe 82, between 300 and
2000 point sources are used for the determination of the PSF, with
the smallest numbers applying to the u band, as expected. The rms
variation of the FWHM of the PSF across our 0.25 square degrees
ﬁelds ranges between 1 per cent (median value) in the central ﬁelds
close to the optical axis and up to 5 per cent (median value) in the
northern ﬁelds at Dec.=+1◦, with the spread being largest in the i
band and smallest in the u and g bands. The rms is mostly domi-
nated by the variation of the PSF along the Dec. direction, causing
generally broader PSFs in the oﬀ-centre ﬁelds (see Sec. 4.1 and
Fig. 1). As each portion of the Stripe 82 co-adds is composed of
images sampling the whole range in positions on the CCD along
the scanning (RA) direction, the PSF dependence on the RA in the
individual co-adds is weak.

The properties of stellar haloes and the faint outskirts of galac-
tic discs can be largely inﬂuenced by the wings of the stellar PSF
(e.g. Zibetti et al. 2004; Sandin 2014; Trujillo & Fliri 2015). To es-
timate this eﬀect in the Stripe 82 data, we provide ultra-deep PSFs
reaching out to 8 arcmin in radius and extending over 20 mag in
dynamical range. The ultra-deep PSFs were created by combin-
ing the PSFs of bright saturated stars and PSFex-generated PSFs
of certain ﬁelds. For the saturated part, we selected 102 bright stars

Figure 6. Ultra-deep PSF in the rdeep band. The PSF was created by com-
bining the PSF of bright saturated stars for the outer part with PSFex created
high-S/N PSF for the inner part. The dynamical range of the PSF extends
over 20 mag.

in the input SDSS images their co-adds show the smallest gradi-
ents. To preserve as much as possible the intensity and shape of ob-
jects at low surface brightness, we decided to characterize the sky
properties of the input SDSS images by a single value and tackle
larger gradients by the measured variance of the sky background
over the image. Remaining small gradients are treated in the co-
adds at much higher signal-to-noise (S/N) than in the input SDSS
images. In this way, the probability of confusing sky background
and astrophysical objects at low surface brightness is reduced.

For sky-rectiﬁed versions of our co-adds, we proceed as fol-
lows. Object masks are created independently for the co-adds in
each ﬁlter. Here, we put large emphasis on conservatively mask-
ing the haloes of stars and galaxies but also the areas with Galactic
Cirrus or diﬀuse low surface brightness emission. The masks also
include the extended PSF wings of bright stars and ghost artefacts.
We then calculate the κ-σ clipped mean of the lines perpendicular
to the direction of the gradient, i.e. the RA direction, and subtract
the value from the count rates in these columns. To eliminate small

The IAC Stripe 82 Legacy Project

9

Figure 7. [g, g − r] colour–magnitude diagrams of 10 adjacent IAC Stripe
82 ﬁelds covering 2.5 square degrees in total. Various sequences can be
attributed to diﬀerent Galactic populations like thin and thick disc or the
stellar halo. The contamination by extended sources is small until g∼23
mag.

Figure 8. [g − r, r − i] colour–colour diagrams for point-like sources in 10
square degrees of Stripe 82, split in diﬀerent bins in g-band magnitude. For
the contours a Gaussian smoothing of three times the binning size in colour
(0.01 mag) has been applied. The contour levels mark two, three, four, ﬁve
sources per binning interval. The stellar locus is well deﬁned with only a
small contamination by QSOs and extended sources until g∼23 mag.

with 6<R<8 mag within the Stripe 82 region from the United States
Naval Observatory B1.0 catalogue (Monet et al. 2003). The stellar
images were aligned to a common grid based on the catalogue po-
sitions and normalized to a common ﬂux by using their catalogue
magnitudes: B was used for the u and g bands, R for the r band,
and I for i and z bands. In every band, the ﬁnal PSF was obtained
by median-combining each stack of images. For the central satu-
rated part of the PSF, we use a high S/N PSF created by PSFex on a
frame covering several Stripe 82 ﬁelds. After matching the proﬁles
of saturated and non-saturated PSFs to align the ﬂux scaling, both
PSFs were combined to the ultra-deep PSF. As example, we show
the ultra-deep PSF in rdeep in Fig. 6.

5.4 Catalogues

We created catalogues of point and extended sources for the whole
survey area which are included in the release of the Stripe 82 data
products. The catalogues are based on SExtractor photometry,
they include the positions, matched aperture luminosities, eﬀective
radii and structural parameters like the moments of the brightness
distribution.

The catalogues contain objects being detected at least at the
3σ level in g, r and i, requiring 3 connected pixels showing a 1.74σ
excess above the background in all three bands. Objects are de-
tected in each band separately; detections within a search radius of
1 arcsec are merged to a common detection later on. Kron aper-
tures and structural parameters of the common detections in g, r,
and i are determined in the deep r-band image which yields a ro-
bust measurement of these parameters. To obtain the object ﬂuxes
in matched apertures, SExtractor is rerun in double-image mode
for each band on the Kron apertures measured in rdeep. We also pro-
vide the object ﬂuxes in ﬁxed apertures of 5, 10, 20 and 30 pixels in

diameter (1.98,3.96,7.92,11.88 arcsec), useful to estimate the aper-
ture correction for point sources. The correction between the Kron
magnitudes and the magnitude measured in an inﬁnite aperture de-
pends on the waveband and the ﬁeld within Stripe 82, but usually
is of the order of a few hundredth of a magnitude between 0.02 and
0.05 mag.

To separate point

combination of SExtractor runs

from extended sources, we rely on
a
in (g, r, i, z, u)
and
DAOPHOT II/ALLSTAR (Stetson 1987) runs on the rdeep
im-
ages. Although of slightly broader PSF than the i or z bands, the
rdeep images are best suited for this task as the gain in depth allows
to enhance the magnitude limit for a proper separation of stars and
galaxies. Whereas SExtractor has its advantages in the photom-
etry of extended sources, the DAOPHOT package is optimized for
point sources. The combination of both methods allows, especially
at fainter magnitudes, a cleaner separation between extended
and point-like objects than one based on the CLASS STAR or
FLUX RADIUS parameters returned by SExtractor. The DAOPHOT
runs yield an estimate of stellarity or point-likeness encoded in the
two parameters which are output for each source, SHARP (providing
an estimate of the concentration of the source) and CHI (providing
an estimate of the goodness of ﬁt of the object’s proﬁle to the
stellar PSF). For point-like sources we require |SHARP| < 0.5 and
CHI< 7.5. Objects which fulﬁl these criteria in rdeep are assigned
to the catalogue of point-like sources. All other objects from the
combined g, r, and i catalogue are assigned to the extended object
catalogue.

Fig. 7 shows colour–magnitude diagrams (CMDs) of point-
like sources for 10 adjacent ﬁelds. The CMDs show the signatures
of diﬀerent Galactic populations like stellar halo and thick disc at
g − r ∼ 0.4 or M stars in the thin disc, thick disc or the halo at

10

J¨urgen Fliri and Ignacio Trujillo

Figure 10. Size–luminosity relation for extended objects in the g band.
Shown in blue are objects classiﬁed as non-point-like in the Stripe 82 cat-
alogue. The labels ‘A’ and ‘B’ mark the main relation and the sequence
of partially resolved galaxies, respectively. The sources are overlaid on the
completeness map for the simulation of exponential proﬁles, representing
the recovery fraction based on recovered sizes and luminosities of the input
objects.

Figure 9. Number counts of point and extended sources for 100 ﬁelds cov-
ering 25 square degrees in total. The ﬁelds are grouped around two diﬀerent
Galactic coordinates, (l,b)=(50◦,–30◦) (black lines, right-hand panel) and
(l,b)=(70◦,-50◦) (red lines, right-hand panel ).

g − r ∼ 1.5. The separation between stars and galaxies works well
until g ∼ 23 mag. At fainter magnitudes the contamination by ex-
tended objects is starting to get larger. To assess the quality and the
limit of the star/galaxy separation more closely, we created colour–
colour plots of the stellar catalogues. In Fig. 8, we show (g − r)
plotted against (r − i) for the point-like sources, split into diﬀer-
ent bins in g-band magnitude. The stellar sequences get broader for
fainter magnitude bins due to larger photometric errors. They are
well deﬁned until g ∼ 23 mag with only a small fraction of outliers,
the majority of them presumably being mis-classiﬁed galaxies. Be-
yond this limit, the contamination of the point source catalogue gets
worse.

5.5 Number counts

5.5.1 Point dources

In Fig. 9, we show the number counts of point- and extended
sources for 100 ﬁelds covering 25 square degrees in total. The
ﬁelds are grouped around two diﬀerent Galactic coordinates at
(l,b)=(50◦,–30◦) (black lines, right-hand panel) and (l,b)=(70◦,–
50◦) (red lines, right-hand panel). In the stellar counts, this is re-
ﬂected as overall decline in density for higher latitudes. The stellar
counts are well described by a power-law rise towards fainter mag-
nitudes until the turn-over when incompleteness starts to set in. The
bump-like excess of counts seen in all bands, with its maximum at
e.g. g∼25 mag, is due to galaxies being mis-identiﬁed as stars. The
values of the turn-over magnitudes in the ﬁve bands agree with the
results of the completeness simulations. In these simulations we
used the same detection criteria. However, we did not require de-
tections in multiple bands nor included colours for the simulated
objects.

5.5.2 Extended sources

The number counts of galaxies are shown in the left-hand panel
of Fig. 9. The broadness of the number counts distribution shows
the ﬁeld to ﬁeld variations one can expect from the Stripe 82 cata-
logues. The presence of bright, saturated stars and/or large galaxies
aﬀects the number counts in some co-adds. These brighter objects
aﬀect the normalized counts in two ways, sometimes by reducing
the accessible area in the ﬁeld, the other time by enhancing the de-
tection limit in their surroundings. Depending on the brightness of
the object, the aﬀected areas could be several square arcminutes in
size. Due to smaller number densities at the bright end, the variance
of the galaxy counts is larger than the ones of the stellar counts.

Another way to look at the galaxy populations is to plot their
eﬀective radii against their luminosities. In Fig. 10, we show the
measured size–luminosity relation in the g band. Most of the galax-
ies fall on the main relation. A second, sparsely populated sequence
(labelled ‘B’ in Fig. 10) shifted towards larger radii is populated by
two classes of objects. The ﬁrst class consists of partially resolved
nearby spiral galaxies which have been split into multiple objects.
The measured apertures trace spiral arms or brighter knots like star-
forming regions in these galaxies rather than the galaxy as a whole.
The second class populating this sequence is made of faint galaxies
in the haloes of brighter stars which have both their size and lu-
minosity been aﬀected by the presence of the bright object nearby.
The main relation (labelled ‘A’ in Fig. 10) follows the known cor-
relation that brighter galaxies tend to have larger eﬀective radii. At
small eﬀective radii, the relation saturates as the measured eﬀective
radii are limited by the size of the PSF. This is also reﬂected in the
completeness map from our simulations, which is underlaid on the
distribution of measured galaxies. The completeness map gives the
fraction of recovered sources based not only on recovered position
but also on recovered sizes and luminosities. Comparing the com-
pleteness map with the detection maps in Fig. 2 shows that larger
objects tend to be measured with smaller eﬀective radii and fainter
magnitudes, a result of their lower surface brightness and the eﬀect
of the noise in the images. The prominent row at log(RE)=–0.1 in
the completeness map is due to input sources with eﬀective radii
smaller than the PSF size.

The IAC Stripe 82 Legacy Project

11

Figure 11. The eﬀect of increasing the depth at observing nearby galaxies. The ﬁgure shows the galaxy NGC0936 (the so-called Darth Vader’s galaxy) in the
r band. The galaxy is shown at two diﬀerent surface brightness limiting depths: µr(3σ; 10 arcsec × 10 arcsec) = 26.5 and 28.5 mag arcsec−2. The emergence
of a faint tidal stream (27.µr .28 mag arcsec−2) in the stellar halo of this galaxy exempliﬁes the need of ultra-deep observations to explore the substructure
prediction by the ΛCDM model.

6 SCIENCE SHOWCASES

As indicated in the introduction, a survey like Stripe 82 allows us
to address a number of astrophysical phenomena. In what follows,
we will illustrate some speciﬁc scientiﬁc cases that can be explored
with the reduction of the Stripe 82 we have conducted. These and
other questions will be fully analysed in forthcoming papers: stel-
lar haloes of disc and elliptical galaxies, tidal streams and satellite
populations, low surface brightness galaxies, ICL, optical cirrus,
etc.

6.1 Stellar haloes and disc truncations

Truncations in edge-on galaxies are known for a long time (e.g.
van der Kruit 1979), but have been proven elusive in face-on galax-
ies. Two main families of models have been proposed for the ori-
gin of truncations: suppression of star formation below a certain
gas density threshold for local instability (Fall & Efstathiou 1980;
Kennicutt 1989; Schaye 2004); and one in which the truncation
corresponds to a maximum in the speciﬁc angular momentum dis-
tribution of the present disk, and might correspond to that in the
protogalaxy (van der Kruit 1987).

The absence of stellar disc truncations in low-inclination
spiral galaxies has been a matter of debate in the last decade.
Mart´ın-Navarro et al. (2014) argue that stellar haloes outshine the
galaxy disc at the expected position of the truncations, forcing their
studies to highly inclined (edge-on) orientations. Using a simple
exponential disc plus stellar halo model based on current observa-
tional constraints they show that truncations in face-on projections
occur at surface brightness levels comparable to the brightness of
stellar haloes at the same radial distance.

This view is supported by a recent study of halo truncations in

22 nearby, face-on to moderately inclined spiral galaxies, making
use of the rdeep co-adds of our Stripe 82 reduction (Peters et al.
2016). Truncations are found in only three galaxies, an additional
15 galaxies are found to have an apparent extended stellar halo.
Their simulations show that the scattering of light from the inner
galaxy by the PSF can produce faint structures resembling stellar
haloes, but in general this eﬀect is insuﬃcient to fully explain the
observed haloes.

There is a long debate about whether stellar haloes are formed
in situ during a monolithic collapse at early times (Eggen et al.
1962) or are built up by the remnants of accreted substructures
(Searle & Zinn 1978). Both models give very diﬀerent predictions
on halo mean age and metallicities, age and metallicity gradients
and the overall density gradient. The deep Stripe 82 data reach
depths which allow, for the ﬁrst time, to detect and characterize stel-
lar haloes for a statistically meaningful (∼100) sample of galaxies
of diﬀerent types. Studies like this will have immediate and impor-
tant consequences for our understanding of galaxy formation and
evolution.

6.2 Stellar streams

Λ cold dark matter (ΛCDM) models predict an increasing amount
of substructure (stellar streams, shells, ﬁlaments) within the stellar
haloes of galaxies when lowering the surface brightness threshold
to values below 30 mag arcsec−2 (e.g. Bullock & Johnston 2005;
Cooper et al. 2010; Font et al. 2011; Tissera et al. 2013). Conse-
quently, the brightest streams will be in the reach of the surface
brightness limits of µr ∼28.5 mag arcsec−2 we acquire in our Stripe
82 co-adds. Here we show two exciting examples of the possibili-
ties and new discoveries Stripe 82 oﬀers in this regard: an extended

12

J¨urgen Fliri and Ignacio Trujillo

Figure 12. Left-hand panel: real colour composite image of NGC0426 and its stream system . The main body of the dwarf satellite is still undergoing the
disruption event. Two compact objects are located close to the suspected centre of the dwarf (marked by white horizontal lines). The colours of the compact
sources diﬀer signiﬁcantly, with one having a colour quite similar to the one of the stream. The second one is much redder, suggesting it being a background
galaxy or a globular cluster. Right-hand panel: NGC0426 in the i band, ﬁltered with a median kernel of 3 arcsec sidelength. The stream is fully embedded in
the stellar halo and the shell system around the galaxy.

faint stellar stream around NGC0936 (also known as the Darth
Vader’s galaxy) and the ongoing disruption of a dwarf satellite by
the elliptical galaxy NGC0426.

The stream around NGC0936 (distance 19.8 Mpc) is seen as
a huge loop surrounding one third of the galaxy and extending ∼
30 kpc from the galaxy centre. With 27.µr .28 mag arcsec−2 and
(g − i) ∼ 1.1, the stream is close to the surface brightness limit of
our co-adds. In Fig. 11, we show the stream, comparing the depth
of the single-pass SDSS DR7 imaging (left-hand panel) versus the
Stripe 82 r band (right-hand panel), smoothed with a boxcar av-
erage of 3 arcsec width. The surface brightness depth of the im-
ages has been estimated using the rms of the images in boxes of
10×10 arcsec2 (i.e. around 10 × FWHM) and corresponds to 3σ
detections. At its visible end, the loop emerges into a diﬀuse ob-
ject, presumably a dwarf galaxy undergoing tidal disruption and the
progenitor of the stream. The galaxy has a bright core and seems
quite extended, if the connection of the dwarf and NGC0936 is con-
ﬁrmed its distance would imply a size of ∼6 kpc in diameter. Its
central surface brightness is µ(r, 0)=21.4 mag arcsec−2, the surface
brightness just outside the core is around µr∼26.3 mag arcsec−2
with (g − i) ∼ 1.0. These properties match some of the charac-
teristics of the recently discovered class of ultra-diﬀuse galaxies
(UDGs, see Sec. 6.3). However, as this system is presumably tidally
disturbed, a relation to this type of objects is not straightforward.

As second example we show the stellar stream around
NGC0426, a redshift z = 0.017 elliptical galaxy hosting an AGN
(see Fig. 12). The stream is relatively bright reaching µg ∼24.9 mag
arcsec−2. In the Stripe 82 images, it is traced from the centre of
NGC0426 until projected distances of ∼ 45 kpc. The system is
seen in the state of ongoing disruption, towards the centre of the
presumed progenitor (at x = 18 kpc, y = −21 kpc in galactocentric
coordinates) the images show two dense cores with largely diﬀer-
ent colour characteristics. One of the compact cores has a colour

Figure 13. Surface brightness proﬁles of NGC0426 in the g (black line) and
i (red line) bands.

(g − i) ∼ 1.1, only slightly redder than the colour of the stream
(g − i) ∼ 1.0. The second core is much redder with (g − i) > 2
which could point to a globular cluster or a background galaxy seen
projected on the stream.

We calculated surface brightness proﬁles for NGC0426 us-
ing the IRAF/ELLIPSE task. The proﬁles are shown in Fig. 13,

outside a radius of 2 arcsec (0.7 kpc) the colour is constant with
(g − i) ∼ 1.3. At an isophotal radius r=31 arcsec (11 kpc), the pro-
ﬁles steepen; beyond this radius, the ellipticity values decline from
their maximum at ǫ=0.3 close to ǫ=0 at r=60 arcsec (21 kpc). The
mean colour shows subtle changes after the break, however remains
redder than the main part of the stellar stream throughout the pro-
ﬁle. It is worth noting that a comprehensive analysis of the colour
gradient will require an exploration of the eﬀect of the PSF on the
galaxy light distribution. In Fig. 12 (right-hand panel), we show the
i-band image of NGC0426 which impressively reveals the extent of
the stellar halo, reaching to distances of ∼ 45 kpc and fully enclos-
ing the stellar stream and the disrupting dwarf galaxy. The halo is
asymmetric with a shell-like cut-oﬀ at its more extended right side.
At least two further objects could be connected to the NGC0426
system. The galaxy located at (x = 19 kpc, y = −19 kpc), slightly
oﬀset from the presumed centre of the dwarf, seems to be too blue
to act as progenitor of parts of the material in the stellar halo. Also
the low surface brightness galaxy at (x = 10 kpc, y = −29 kpc)
shows a bluer colour than the stellar halo ((g − i) ∼ 0.8), although
the diﬀerence in colour is not too large. At this stage we cannot
conﬁrm nor rule out a connection of those objects with NGC0426
and its stream system. Spectroscopic follow-up observations pro-
viding information on distances and stellar populations will help to
disentangle the components and derive the recent accretion history
of NGC0426.

6.3 Low surface brightness galaxies

Recently, a population of extremely diﬀuse galaxies with central
surface brightness 246µ(g, 0)626 mag arcsec−2 has been identiﬁed
in the Coma cluster (Koda et al. 2015; van Dokkum et al. 2015).
One third of these roughly 1000 UDGs are Milky Way sized with
large eﬀective radii of RE > 1.5 kpc, however small stellar masses
of only few 107 − 108 M⊙. The UDGs have exponential light pro-
ﬁles, eﬀective radii RE ∼ 0.8 − 5 kpc and eﬀective surface bright-
ness 25 6 <µe(R)> 6 28 mag arcsec−2. Roughly, 8 per cent have
compact nuclei at their centres. As they show a distribution concen-
trated around the cluster centre it is very likely that the great major-
ity are indeed cluster members. This is also supported by the fact
that the objects are unresolved into stars in agreement with them
being at Coma’s distance. The UDGs lie along the red sequence in
the CMD, consistent with a passively evolving population, which
may have lost their gas supply at early times, possibly resulting in
very high dark matter fractions (Yozin & Bekki 2015).

The number density of UDGs in diﬀerent environments is still
unknown, possibly most of these galaxies are conﬁned to galaxy
clusters where several processes could help to remove the gas
and quench star formation. Indeed, ﬁrst identiﬁcations of similar
objects were obtained in the Virgo cluster (Sandage & Binggeli
1984). The galaxies which were classiﬁed as ‘Huge Im or dE’
are of huge size (up to 10 kpc in diameter) and very low central
surface brightness of about µ(B, 0)=25 mag arcsec−2. Also the 20
Virgo UDGs show a concentration towards the centre suggesting
a cluster membership. Only a small number of large, low surface
brightness galaxies are known in the ﬁeld (Dalcanton et al. 1997;
Burkholder et al. 2001; Impey et al. 2001). Another newly detected
UDG recently reported in Mart´ınez-Delgado et al. (2016) could re-
side in the ﬁeld as well, although this object most probably is as-
sociated with a ﬁlament of the Pisces-Perseus supercluster and not
located in isolation. The object lies at a redshift distance of 78 Mpc,
implying an extremely large size (RE ∼ 4.7 kpc) for its stellar mass
of only s few 108 M⊙. Its properties are consistent with those found

The IAC Stripe 82 Legacy Project

13

Figure 14. Abell cluster 2631 at z=0.273 as seen in our Stripe 82 r-band
co-add. The dashed line encircles a radius of 350 kpc. The image shows
the extended ICL of the cluster observed down to the limit of the survey
µr∼28.5 mag arcsec−2.

for UDGs; it shows a red colour (V − I = 1.0), shallow S´ersic in-
dex (nV =0.68), and no emission in H α, typical of dwarf spheroidal
galaxies and suggesting that it is mainly composed of old stars.

Low surface brightness UDGs are well within the detectability
limit of the co-added Stripe 82 data, also proven by the detection
of the presumed progenitor galaxy of the stream around NGC0936.
This will allow one to probe their frequency in ﬁeld environments
for a signiﬁcant area, and will give new insights into their forma-
tion and evolution. The large Stripe 82 area will further shed some
light on the abundance of predicted ‘dark galaxies’ with surface
brightness even below the one of UDGs (µV >27 mag arcsec−2).
These objects have been predicted within the ΛCDM framework
(e.g. Ricotti & Gnedin 2005) but have never been observationally
sought, thus possibly remaining hidden from our current surveys of
the sky. Galaxies with such extreme low surface brightness will be
ideal tracers to explore the properties of almost pure dark matter
galaxies.

6.4 Intra cluster light

Little is known about the properties of the ICL in galaxy clusters,
the diﬀuse light component extending several hundred kpc from
the cluster centre with typical surface brightness µV ∼26.5 mag
arcsec−2 (e.g. Mihos et al. 2005; Zibetti et al. 2005; Rudick et al.
2006). The ICL is thought to be made up primarily by stars
which were tidally stripped from their parent galaxy during in-
teractions and mergers with other cluster galaxies. The forma-
tion time-scales of the ICL are pretty much unconstrained; mea-
sured metallicities show a wide spread from metal poor to super-
solar (e.g. Durrell et al. 2002; Krick et al. 2006; Montes & Trujillo
2014). The Stripe 82 co-adds oﬀer the possibility to address these
questions and characterize with an unparalleled quality the ICL
properties: the quantity of stars in this diﬀuse component, typi-

14

J¨urgen Fliri and Ignacio Trujillo

cal shapes and extensions, and its relation to the entire mass of
the galaxy cluster. ΛCDM simulations predict around ﬁve mas-
sive clusters (MClu > 1014 M⊙) per square degree up to z ∼0.3
(Hallman et al. 2007). That means that within Stripe 82 it will be
possible to precisely derive the characteristics of the ICL in a sam-
ple of around 1300 massive nearby galaxy clusters. Fig. 14 exem-
pliﬁes the power of our Stripe 82 data for this kind of studies. This
ﬁgure shows the ICL in the Abell cluster 2631 at z = 0.273. The
extension of the ICL is clearly visible up to a radius of ∼350 kpc
from the cluster centre.

6.5 Diﬀuse Galactic light

First noticed in the late 1930s (e.g. Elvey & Roach 1937;
Henyey & Greenstein 1941), the diﬀuse Galactic light or optical
cirrus is starlight scattered oﬀ by dust grains in the diﬀuse interstel-
lar medium (ISM). Reprocessed light is emitted at infrared wave-
lengths. The comparison between the dust cirrus both in the optical
and the infrared would give a powerful tool for probing the dust
properties as well as the interstellar radiation ﬁeld in the ISM (e.g.
Beichman 1987; Guhathakurta & Tyson 1989). The Stripe 82 area
covers a large contiguous ﬁeld of the sky ranging from Galactic
latitudes -65◦ .b.-25◦. This allows one to explore in large detail
the optical variation of the dust properties from regions closer to
the Galactic plane to high Galactic latitudes. Fig. 15 shows a 32
arcmin × 32 arcmin Stripe 82 ﬁeld located at intermediate Galactic
latitude (l=60◦.83, b=–43◦.18). This r-band image shows obvious
dust ﬁlaments. The depth and resolution of the Stripe82 are com-
parable with current optical studies focused on this astrophysical
phenomena (e.g. Ienaka et al. 2013) but the area covered by the
survey surpasses by a factor of ∼100 the explored area in previous
works. Undoubtedly, the analysis of the Stripe82 data will become
a major step forward in the understanding of the ISM. Combin-
ing the optical emission with measurements in the UV (GALEX;
Niemack et al. 2009) and infrared (Herschel; Viero et al. 2014) will
establish the spectral energy distribution of the cirrus for a large
wavelength range. Its shape and its dependences from both the
emission strength and the intensity of the radiation ﬁeld will pro-
vide new insights into the emission and heating mechanisms of the
Galactic dust clouds. A closer insight into the properties and char-
acteristics of the Galactic dust emission is urgently needed as its
range in surface brightness intersects in large parts with the bright-
ness of the aforementioned science cases, from stellar haloes and
streams to the ICL. Indeed, Arp’s loop, a suspected stream-like ring
around M81 suggesting an interaction between M81 and M82, re-
cently turned out to be likely a superposition of a few recent star-
forming regions located close to M81, M81’s extended disc and
Galactic Cirrus emission (Davies et al. 2010; Sollima et al. 2010),
the latter being responsible for the diﬀuse appearance of the fea-
ture.

7 CONCLUSIONS

The low surface brightness Universe only recently gathered more
attention and started to be investigated in greater detail. Stel-
lar streams around galaxies are now identiﬁed and character-
ized on a regular basis using small- to medium-sized tele-
scopes (e.g. Mart´ınez-Delgado et al. 2008, 2010; Duc et al. 2014;
van Dokkum et al. 2014) . Most of these surveys use pointed obser-
vations of pre-selected targets and are restricted to a limited ﬁeld of
view.

Figure 15. A Stripe82 ﬁeld of 32 arcmin × 32 arcmin size showing dust
ﬁlamentary structure of our Galaxy in the r band. The depth and resolution
of our imaging allow us to explore faint optical cirrus with exquisite detail.

The Stripe 82 data cover 275 square degrees and reach surface
brightness limits µr∼28.5 mag arcsec−2 (3σ, 10 arcsec × 10 arcsec),
comparable to the one’s acquired in the aforementioned studies. In
this way, it can be used as a blind survey allowing statistical tests
of the frequency and characteristics of low surface brightness phe-
nomena like UDGs, stellar streams, extended discs or tidal interac-
tions for diﬀerent types of galaxies.

In our

reduction of

the Stripe 82 data, we put spe-
cial emphasis on preserving the characteristics of the low sur-
face brightness structures on all spatial and intensity scales.
Our eﬀort
is made publicly available through a webpage at
http://www.iac.es/proyecto/stripe82. The data release includes the
co-added data in 5+1 bands (u, g, r, i, z, rdeep=<g+r+i>), corre-
sponding exposure time maps and image representations of the
PSF. We also provide separate source catalogues for point and ex-
tended objects with stars and galaxies conﬁdently separated until
g ∼ 23 mag. Our completeness simulations showed that for ex-
ponential proﬁles the data are 50 per cent complete at the 3σ level
for an eﬀective surface brightness <µe(r)>∼25.5 mag arcsec−2. The
50% completeness limits for point sources are (24.2, 25.2, 24.7,
24.3, 23.0) mag in (u, g, r, i, z), reaching between 0.1 and 0.3 mag
deeper than the reduction of Annis et al. (2014) while being at the
same depth as Jiang et al. (2014).

Discoveries like the faint stellar streams around NGC0936 and
NGC0426 in our data give a glimpse of the prospects of deep wide-
ﬁeld surveys like Stripe 82 for the study of the, until now almost
hidden, low surface brightness Universe. The full exploration of
the Stripe 82 data set, including its extensions to wavebands from
the UV to the infrared, will have the possibilities to add signiﬁcant
pieces of new insights to this relatively new research ﬁeld.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank the anonymous referee for helpful comments. We fur-
ther thank Lee Kelvin, Mauricio Cisternas, Mar´ıa Cebri´an, Mireia
Montes and Javier Rom´an for tests of the data base. This work has
been supported by the Programa Nacional de Astronom´ıa y As-
trof´ısica of the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation under
grant MINECO AYA2013-48226-03-1-P.

Funding for SDSS-III has been provided by the Alfred P.
Sloan Foundation, the Participating Institutions, the National Sci-
ence Foundation and the US Department of Energy Oﬃce of Sci-
ence. The SDSS-III web site is http://www.sdss3.org/. SDSS-III is
managed by the Astrophysical Research Consortium for the Partici-
pating Institutions of the SDSS-III Collaboration including the Uni-
versity of Arizona, the Brazilian Participation Group, Brookhaven
National Laboratory, University of Cambridge, Carnegie Mellon
University, University of Florida, the French Participation Group,
the German Participation Group, Harvard University, the Instituto
de Astrof´ısica de Canarias, the Michigan State/Notre Dame/JINA
Participation Group, Johns Hopkins University, Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory, Max Planck Institute for Astrophysics, Max
Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics, New Mexico State
University, New York University, Ohio State University, Pennsyl-
vania State University, University of Portsmouth, Princeton Uni-
versity, the Spanish Participation Group, University of Tokyo, Uni-
versity of Utah, Vanderbilt University, University of Virginia, Uni-
versity of Washington and Yale University.

REFERENCES

Abazajian, K. N. et al. 2009, ApJS, 182, 543
Annis, J. et al. 2014, ApJ, 794, 120
Bakos, J., & Trujillo, I. 2012, ApJ, arXiv 1204.3082
Beichman, C. A. 1987, ARAA, 25, 521
Bertin, E. 2011, in Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc Confer-
ence Series, Vol. 442, Astronomical Data Analysis Software and
Systems XX, ed. I. N. Evans, A. Accomazzi, D. J. Mink, & A. H.
Rots, 435
Bertin, E., & Arnouts, S. 1996, A&AS, 117, 393
Bertin, E., Mellier, Y., Radovich, M., Missonnier, G., Didelon, P.,
& Morin, B. 2002, in Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc Con-
ference Series, Vol. 281, Astronomical Data Analysis Software
and Systems XI, ed. D. A. Bohlender, D. Durand, & T. H. Han-
dley, 228
Bullock, J. S., & Johnston, K. V. 2005, ApJ, 635, 931
Burkholder, V., Impey, C., & Sprayberry, D. 2001, AJ, 122, 2318
Contini, E., De Lucia, G., Villalobos, ´A., & Borgani, S. 2014,
MNRAS, 437, 3787
Cooper, A. P. et al. 2010, MNRAS, 406, 744
Cuillandre, J.-C. J. et al. 2012, in Society of Photo-Optical Instru-
mentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, Vol. 8448, Soci-
ety of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Confer-
ence Series, 0
Dalcanton, J. J., Spergel, D. N., Gunn, J. E., Schmidt, M., &
Schneider, D. P. 1997, AJ, 114, 635
Davies, J. I. et al. 2010, MNRAS, 409, 102
de Vries, C. P., & Le Poole, R. S. 1985, A&A, 145, L7
Duc, P.-A., Paudel, S., McDermid, R. M., Cuillandre, J.-C., Serra,
P., Bournaud, F., Cappellari, M., & Emsellem, E. 2014, MNRAS,
440, 1458
Durrell, P. R., Ciardullo, R., Feldmeier, J. J., Jacoby, G. H., &
Sigurdsson, S. 2002, ApJ, 570, 119

The IAC Stripe 82 Legacy Project

15

Eggen, O. J., Lynden-Bell, D., & Sandage, A. R. 1962, ApJ, 136,
748
Elvey, C. T., & Roach, F. E. 1937, ApJ, 85, 213
Erwin, P. 2015, ApJ, 799, 226
Fall, S. M., & Efstathiou, G. 1980, MNRAS, 193, 189
Ferguson, A. M. N., Irwin, M. J., Ibata, R. A., Lewis, G. F., &
Tanvir, N. R. 2002, AJ, 124, 1452
Ferrarese, L. et al. 2012, ApJS, 200, 4
Font, A. S. et al. 2011, MNRAS, 417, 1260
Frieman, J. A. et al. 2008, AJ, 135, 338
Giallongo, E. et al. 2014, ApJ, 781, 24
Guhathakurta, P., & Tyson, J. A. 1989, ApJ, 346, 773
Hallman, E. J., O’Shea, B. W., Burns, J. O., Norman, M. L., Hark-
ness, R., & Wagner, R. 2007, ApJ, 671, 27
Henyey, L. G., & Greenstein, J. L. 1941, ApJ, 93, 70
Ienaka, N., Kawara, K., Matsuoka, Y., Sameshima, H., Oyabu, S.,
Tsujimoto, T., & Peterson, B. A. 2013, ApJ, 767, 80
Impey, C., Burkholder, V., & Sprayberry, D. 2001, AJ, 122, 2341
Ivezi´c, ˇZ. et al. 2007, AJ, 134, 973
Jiang, L. et al. 2008, AJ, 135, 1057
—. 2014, ApJS, 213, 12
Kennicutt, Jr., R. C. 1989, ApJ, 344, 685
Koda, J., Yagi, M., Yamanoi, H., & Komiyama, Y. 2015, ApJ, 807,
L2
Krick, J. E., Bernstein, R. A., & Pimbblet, K. A. 2006, AJ, 131,
168
Low, F. J. et al. 1984, ApJ, 278, L19
Mart´ın-Navarro, I., Trujillo, I., Knapen, J. H., Bakos, J., & Fliri,
J. 2014, MNRAS, 441, 2809
Mart´ınez-Delgado, D. et al. 2010, AJ, 140, 962
Mart´ınez-Delgado, D., Pe˜narrubia, J., Gabany, R. J., Trujillo, I.,
Majewski, S. R., & Pohlen, M. 2008, ApJ, 689, 184
McConnachie, A. W., Chapman, S. C., Ibata, R. A., Ferguson,
A. M. N., Irwin, M. J., Lewis, G. F., Tanvir, N. R., & Martin, N.
2006, ApJ, 647, L25
McConnachie, A. W. et al. 2009, Nature, 461, 66
Merritt, A., van Dokkum, P., & Abraham, R. 2014, ApJ, 787, L37
Mihos, J. C., Harding, P., Feldmeier, J., & Morrison, H. 2005,
ApJ, 631, L41
Montes, M., & Trujillo, I. 2014, ApJ, 794, 137
Mouhcine, M., Ferguson, H. C., Rich, R. M., Brown, T. M., &
Smith, T. E. 2005, ApJ, 633, 821
Mouhcine, M., Rejkuba, M., & Ibata, R. 2007, MNRAS, 381, 873
Niemack, M. D., Jimenez, R., Verde, L., Menanteau, F., Panter,
B., & Spergel, D. 2009, ApJ, 690, 89
Paley, E. S., Low, F. J., McGraw, J. T., Cutri, R. M., & Rix, H.-W.
1991, ApJ, 376, 335
Peng, C. Y., Ho, L. C., Impey, C. D., & Rix, H.-W. 2002, AJ, 124,
266
Pier, J. R., Munn, J. A., Hindsley, R. B., Hennessy, G. S., Kent,
S. M., Lupton, R. H., & Ivezi´c, ˇZ. 2003, AJ, 125, 1559
Pohlen, M., & Trujillo, I. 2006, A&A, 454, 759
Radburn-Smith, D. J. et al. 2011, ApJS, 195, 18
Ricotti, M., & Gnedin, N. Y. 2005, ApJ, 629, 259
Rudick, C. S., Mihos, J. C., Harding, P., Feldmeier, J. J.,
Janowiecki, S., & Morrison, H. L. 2010, ApJ, 720, 569
Rudick, C. S., Mihos, J. C., & McBride, C. 2006, ApJ, 648, 936
Sandage, A., & Binggeli, B. 1984, AJ, 89, 919
Sandin, C. 2014, A&A, 567, A97
Schaye, J. 2004, ApJ, 609, 667
Schlegel, D. J., Finkbeiner, D. P., & Davis, M. 1998, ApJ, 500,
525

16

J¨urgen Fliri and Ignacio Trujillo

Searle, L., & Zinn, R. 1978, ApJ, 225, 357
Sollima, A., Gil de Paz, A., Martinez-Delgado, D., Gabany, R. J.,
Gallego-Laborda, J. J., & Hallas, T. 2010, A&A, 516, A83
Stetson, P. B. 1987, pasp, 99, 191
Tissera, P. B., Scannapieco, C., Beers, T. C., & Carollo, D. 2013,
MNRAS, 432, 3391
Trujillo, I., & Fliri, J. 2015, MNRAS, arXiv 1510.04696
van der Kruit, P. C. 1979, A&AS, 38, 15
—. 1987, A&A, 173, 59
van Dokkum, P. G., Abraham, R., & Merritt, A. 2014, ApJ, 782,
L24
van Dokkum, P. G., Abraham, R., Merritt, A., Zhang, J., Geha,
M., & Conroy, C. 2015, ApJ, 798, L45
Viero, M. P. et al. 2014, ApJS, 210, 22
York, D. G. et al. 2000, AJ, 120, 1579
Yozin, C., & Bekki, K. 2015, MNRAS, 452, 937
Zibetti, S., White, S. D. M., & Brinkmann, J. 2004, MNRAS, 347,
556
Zibetti, S., White, S. D. M., Schneider, D. P., & Brinkmann, J.
2005, MNRAS, 358, 949

