Cerenkov-Like Emission of Pions by

Photons in a Lorentz-Violating Theory

Brett Altschul1

Department of Physics and Astronomy

University of South Carolina

Columbia, SC 29208

Abstract

In the presence of Lorentz violation, the Cerenkov-like process γ → γ +π0 may become
allowed for suﬃciently energetic photons. Photons above the threshold would lose energy
rapidly through pion emission. The fact that propagating photons with energies of up to
80 TeV survive to be observed on Earth allows us to place a one-sided constraint on an
isotropic Lorentz violating parameter at the 7 × 10−13 level; this is more than an order of
magnitude better than best previous result.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
4
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
p
e
h
[
 
 

1
v
1
9
4
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

1baltschu@physics.sc.edu

One interesting possibility for new physics beyond the standard model is that there
might be violations of Lorentz and CPT symmetries. So far, these are strictly theoretical
possibilities; there has been no compelling evidence to suggest that these symmetries are
not truly exact in nature. However, if these symmetries turn out not to hold exactly,
that would certainly be a discovery of great importance. The discovery would open up a
window onto a completely new regime of physics.

The fundamental physical theories that we currently understand—the standard model
and general relativity—are both fully invariant under Lorentz symmetry and CPT. How-
ever, the machinery of eﬀective ﬁeld theory can be used to describe modiﬁed versions
of these theories that do not respect the symmetries exactly. The most general eﬀective
ﬁeld theory that is used to describe such symmetry violations is known as the standard
model extension (SME). The SME action contains all the possible translation-invariant
but Lorentz-violating operators that could be constructed out of standard boson and
fermion ﬁelds. The operators that have residual tensor indices violate Lorentz symmetry,
and they may break CPT symmetry as well. The coupling constants of the theory are
vector- and tensor-valued; their Lorentz indices are contracted with the free indices found
on the ﬁeld operators [1, 2]. If the origin of the Lorentz violation is spontaneous symmetry
breaking, these tensors, which represent preferred directions in spacetime, are related to
the vacuum expectation values of dynamical vector and tensor ﬁelds.

One of the virtues of the SME is its generality; it contains operators of arbitrarily
high mass dimension. However, a speciﬁc restricted version of the SME has become the
standard framework for parameterizing the results of most empirical Lorentz and CPT
tests. The restricted version is known as the minimal SME, and it contains only local,
gauge-invariant operators of renormalizable mass dimension. With these restrictions in
place, the minimal SME contains only a ﬁnite number of undetermined parameters, and
radiative corrections ar systematically calculable [3, 4, 5]. This makes the minimal SME
framework well suited for comparing the results of diﬀerent experiments, and experiments
in many diﬀerent areas of physics have been used to constrain the minimal SME coeﬃ-
cients. The best current constraints are summarized in [6].

Many of the tightest constraints on the Lorentz-violating operators of the SME come
from analyses of astrophysical data. Two particular things are available in extraterrestrial
environments that can make astrophysical tests of Lorentz symmetry extremely sensitive:
very large distances and very high energies. Observations of photons that have traversed
cosmological distances can be exquisitely sensitive to the tiniest changes in electromagnetic
wave propagation. The strongest constraints on other eﬀects come from looking at the
emissions from extremely energetic astronomical sources, in which individual particles
may have energies at up to the PeV scale.

By studying the photons emitted by such sources, we may learn a great deal about the
energy-momentum relations not just for the photons themselves, but other particles as
well. The observation of a photon with a TeV-scale energy coming from an extraterrestrial
source can tell us things in two diﬀerent ways.
If the process that is responsible for

1

the photon emission at the source is understood, the energies of the emitted photons
can reveal important information about the energy-momentum relations for the other
particles involved in the emission process. The typical processes that produce ultra-
high-energy γ-rays are inverse Compton scattering, e− + γ → e− + γ (in which a low-
energy photon is upscattered by an extremely energetic electron); and neutral pion decay,
π0 → γ + γ. When we observe photons that we know to originate from one or the other
of these processes, we learn a substantial amount about the energy-momentum relations
for the massive particles involved. This has made it possible to place strong constraints
on Lorentz violation in the electron sector of the SME [7, 8, 9] and somewhat weaker
constraints in the pion sector [10].

Moreover, observations of cosmic ray γ-rays can also tell us interesting things about
Lorentz violation in the electron and pion sectors, even when the processes by which the
photons were produced is unknown. The reason is that, while photons in the Lorentz-
invariant standard model are absolutely stable in vacuum, suﬃciently energetic photons
may actually decay if there is Lorentz violation present. For a photon from a distant
source to survive long enough to reach Earth, photon decay processes such as pair creation,
γ → e−+e+, or Cerenkov-like pion emission, γ → γ+π0, must be forbidden (or exceedingly
slow) at the observed photon energy. This provides a complementary way of constraining
Lorentz violation outside the photon sector using γ-ray observations.

Previously, the survival of TeV photons has been used to place complementary con-
straints on electron-sector Lorentz violation. The fact that these photons live long enough
to be seen ensures that γ → e− + e+ is not occurring [11]. Of course, an electron and a
positron are not the only particle pair that might be produced in such a reaction. The
fact that photons do not decay via γ → π+ + π− allows us to place bounds on the SME
coeﬃcients for charged pions [12]. These bounds are weaker than the electron-sector
bounds, because the typical strength of a bound derived from a high-energy astrophysical
process is ∼ m2/E2, where m is the mass of the heaviest particle involved in the process
and E is the energy scale of the process. Yet while this means that the constraints in the
charged pion sector are orders of magnitude worse that the equivalent constraints in the
electron sector, the pion bounds are still important. The reason is that bounds on pion
Lorentz violation are typically rather diﬃcult to obtain. In fact, it is generally true that
the constraints on Lorentz violation for unstable species are frequently quite weak, and
the goal of this paper will be to improve the constraints on Lorentz violation for the even
shorter lived neutral pioin.

Lorentz violation in the SME is decribed by tensor-valued coeﬃcients contracted with
tensor operators constructed out of the particle ﬁelds. The minimal SME Lagrange density
for the free neutral pion ﬁeld is

Lπ =

1
2

(∂µπ0)(∂µπ0) +

1
2

kµν(∂µπ0)(∂νπ0) −

m2
π
2

(π0)2.

(1)

The Lorentz violation in the pure pion sector is governed by the nine small coeﬃcients
contained in the traceless, symmetric kµν tensor. These coeﬃcients, which appear in the

2

action for the composite pion ﬁeld, must ultimately be related to the SME coeﬃcients for
the more fundamental quark and gluon ﬁelds.

The pions are coupled to photons, and the Lagrange density for the pure photon sector

and the pion-photon coupling is

LA = −

1
4

F µνFµν −

1
4

kµνρσ
F FµνFρσ +

1
2

kµ
AF ǫµνρσF νρAσ − gπ0ǫµνρσFµνFρσ.

(2)

The electromagnetic action may also contain Lorentz violation, governed by the kF and
kAF coeﬃcients. However, we shall consider only theories with vanishing kF = 0 and
kAF = 0. Photon Lorentz violation is comparatively easy to constrain; some of the
coeﬃcients have been bounded extremely tightly using cosmological searches for photon
birefringence [13, 14, 15], while the remainder have been bounded at a far less stringent
(but still quite respectable) level using direct Michelson-Morley tests of the isotropy of
photon propagation [16]. In contrast, bounds on the SME coeﬃcients for unstable massive
particles like the π0 are much weaker. So we shall focus on the sensitivity of various
observables to the less well constrained pion kµν parameters.

The key to using photon observations to constrain π0 Lorentz violation is, of course,
the pion-photon coupling. The coupling, which is normally responsible for the π0 → γ + γ
decay, is dominated by the chiral anomaly g ≈ Nce2
, where Nc = 3 is the number of
96π2fπ
colors and fπ the pion decay constant. In a Lorentz-violating theory, the Cerenkov-like
process γ → γ + π0, which is ordinarily forbidden by energy-momentum conservation,
may become allowed above a certain energy threshold.

The Lorentz-violating dispersion relation for an ultrarelativistic particle with mass m

typically takes the form

E = pm2 + [1 + 2δ(ˆp)]~p 2.

(3)

The parameter δ(ˆp) determines the maximum achievable velocity (MAV) for the particle
type in question. The MAV 1 + δ depends on the direction ˆp of the momentum (and for a
fermionic particles, δ would also depend on the helicity). In general, δ is a function of the
dimensionless coeﬃcients multiplying the dimension-four operators in the relevant sector
of the minimal SME. There may be additional terms in the energy-momentum relation
derived from dimension-three operators, but their importance diminishes with increasing
energies, and so they have relatively little impact on highly relativistic processes.

For the π0 the MAV is set by

δ(ˆp) = −

1
2 (cid:2)k00 + k(0j) ˆpj + kjk ˆpj ˆpk(cid:3) ,

(4)

where k(0j) = k0j + kj0. With observations of photons coming from a suﬃcient number of
diﬀerent directions, it could be possible to place separate bounds on all nine of the kµν
parameters. However, we shall restrict our attention to the case of an isotropic theory
with constant δ = − 2

3 k00 (taking into account the tracelessness of kµν).

3

We shall now look in detail at how the the γ → γ + π0 process behaves in the presence
of a nonzero pion δ. The most obvious fact is that the process can only occur if δ < 0. In
the standard theory, the photon carries insuﬃcient energy to create the pion. However,
with a negative δ, the pion will have less energy than it would in the standard theory at
the same momentum. Although a low-energy photon will still not have suﬃcient energy
to emit a pion, the Cerenkov-like emission will become allowed above a certain photon
threshold energy.

The kinematics of the pion emission are fairly straightforward. The initial photon has
momentum qµ = (E, 0, 0, E). The outgoing photon loses energy and is deﬂected by an
angle θ; it carries momentum q′µ = (E′, E′ sin θ, 0, E′ cos θ). This leaves the pion carrying
momentum pµ = (Eπ, −E′ sin θ, 0, E − E′ cos θ). The pion energy-momentum relation (3)
dictates that

(E − E′)2 = E2

π = m2

π + (E2 + E′2 − 2EE′ cos θ)(1 + 2δ),

so the relationship among the various quantities can be expressed

sin2(2θ) ≈ −

m2
π
4EE′

−

δ
2

(E − E′)2

EE′

,

(5)

(6)

m

provided E and E′ are both large compared with m (so that θ may be taken to be small).
However, it turns out that the explicit restriction on E (although not E′) is actually
superﬂuous. The pion emission process can only occur above the threshold energy ET =
If δ is negative, then for suﬃciently large E > ET , the Cerenkov-like emission
−2δ .
√
becomes possible. In the threshold conﬁguration, the pion carries away all the energy,
and the outgoing photon energy E′ drops to zero. Note that there is, in priciple, no
maximum photon deﬂection angle θ; angles of up to π are allowed when E′ is small.
However, when E′ is a substantial fraction on E, (6) dictates that the outgoing particles
are beamed into a narrow pencil of angles of characteristic angular size p|δ| ∼ mπ/ET .
The matrix element for the process is quite straightforward to calculate. The Feynman
rule for the pion-photon-photon vertex, derived from the Lagrange density (2), has a factor
8igǫαµβνq1αq2β, where q1 and q2 are the photon momenta directed into the vertex. The
matrix element for the Cerenkov-like process is then

iM = 8igǫαµβνqα(−q′β)ε(q)ε∗(q′),

(7)

where the ε are the appropriate polarization vectors. So the matrix element squared
(summed over ﬁnal polarizations) for the process is

X |M|2 = 32g2ǫαµβνǫγρδσqαqγq′βq′δgµρgνσ

= −64g2[q2q′2 − (q · q′)2]
= 256g2E2E′2 sin4 θ.

(8)

(9)
(10)

4

The fact that the matrix element M is proportional to θ2 for small deﬂection angles
has a relatively straightforward explanation, tied to the involvement of the totally anti-
symmetry Levi-Civita ǫ-tensor. The initial photon has four-momentum qµ = (E, 0, 0, E),
and after the emission, the outgoing photon has q′µ = (E′, E′ sin θ, 0, E′ cos θ). For soft
emission, E′ ≈ E − p3, and so

q′µ ≈ (E − p3, 0, 0, E − p3) + (0, −p1, 0, 0).

(11)

The vectors q and q′ are both contracted with an ǫ-tensor. The ﬁrst term on the right-
hand side of (11) therefore makes no contribution, because it is proportional to qµ. This
leaves the whole matrix element proportional to −p1 = E′ sin θ.

This accounts for the presence of one factor of sin θ. The second factor arises in a
similar fashion from the contraction of the incoming and outgoing polarization vectors
with the ǫ-tensor. The possible polarization vectors for the incoming photon are ε1 =
(0, 1, 0, 0) and ε2 = (0, 0, 1, 0). However, only the polarization vector ε2 pointing along the
y-direction can occur for the kinematics we are considering; only if the initial polarization
is along the y-direction, will the photon be deﬂected in the xz-plane. The reason is
that ε1 is (approximately) a linear combination of q and q′ [as given by (11)], and thus
there cannot be a nonvanishing contribution when all three vectors are contracted with a
common ǫ-tensor.

For the outgoing photon, there are also two possible polarization vectors. One of them
is the unchanged, out-of-plane ε2. However, this vector is obviously impossible, since
one factor of ε2 must already be contracted with the ǫ-tensor. Therefore, the outgoing
polarization must be ε′1 ≈ (0, cos θ, 0, − sin θ), which is the other unit vector perpendicular
to ~q ′; and only the z-component of this ε′1 contributes to the contraction, providing the
second factor of sin θ in M.

For the conventional decay π0 → γ+γ, there is an analogous θ2 suppression factor in M
when the angle between the decay photons is small. The derivation of this factor follows
along essentially the same lines in that case. The fact that the small-angle behaviors of the
matrix elements for the two decays are similar will enable us to estimate the γ → γ + π0
rate from the well-known π0 → γ + γ rate.

Of course, the rate for the novel Cerenkov-like process can be evaluated directly from
the matrix element and the Lorentz-violating kinematics. However, the kinematical part
of the calculation turns out to be extremely awkward. Instead, it is possible to estimate
the rate using what is known about the rate for the ordinary two-photon decay of the
π0. This might initially seem problematic, since the pion lifetime is normally calculated
the in the pion’s rest frame, and the parent photon in γ → γ + π0 has no equivalent rest
frame. However, an unstable particle’s decay rate can certainly be calculated in a frame
in which the initial particle is moving, and we know that in a Lorentz-invariant theory,
the decay rate will be diminished (relative to the rest frame rate) by the Lorentz factor
γ. Moreover, it is actually fairly straightforward how this factor arises in the calculation.
In the frame in which the parent particle is moving, the decay products are preferentially

5

emitted along the direction of that motion.
In an ultrarelativistic process, the decay
products are beamed into a narrow pencil of angles, of characteristic size ∼ m/E (where
m and E are the mass and energy of the parent particle), rather than covering the full
4π steradians. The limits the phase space available for the decay, and the rate is reduced
by precisely the time dilation factor γ−1 = m/E.

The same kind of dilation occurs in the photon decays that may be allowed in Lorentz-
violating theories. While the parent particle in γ → γ + π0 has no rest frame, the
daughter particles are overwhelmingly bunched into an angular range ∼ mπ/ET . The
characteristic lifetime for a single particle decaying into two ultrarelativistic daughters,
when the interaction is governed by the anomaly term from (2), is given by the π0 lifetime
of τπ ≈ 8.4 × 10−17 s. So except very close to threshold, the rate of the γ → γ + π0 is
Γ ∼ mπ/ET τπ.

The θ4 suppression of the |M|2 at small angles does not befuddle this result, since
the same suppression is present in the ordinary π0 → γ + γ process. However, there is a
puzzling aspect to this. With increasingly relativistic energies, the decay photons (in the
π0 decay) are beamed into a narrowing pencil of angles, but in spite of the θ4 factor in
|M|2, the rate decreases only quite slowly. (The time dilation makes the rate proportional
to a single power of the separation angle θ.) Of course, the change in the decay rate with
energy is entirely dictated by Lorentz symmetry in this case. The resolution of this puzzle
is that the matrix element also grows with energy as |M| ∝ E4, and E4θ4 ∝ E4(mπ/E)4
is independent of the energy. The same characteristic argument applies in the Lorentz-
violating Cerenkov-like photon decay process.

If the transit time for a photon of energy E > αET from its source to the Earth is
much longer than |δ|τπ, the photon will lose most of its energy through Cerenkov-like
pion emission on its journey. The factor α is present to ensure that the energy is not
too close to threshold; right above threshold, the pion emission angle falls to zero, and
the decay time diﬀers signiﬁcantly from ∼ |δ|τπ. For the speciﬁc observations we shall
consider below, α = 1.01 turns out to be more than suﬃcient.

Conversely, the observation of a photon from a suﬃciently distant source indicates
that its energy E must be less than αET ; otherwise it would not have survived. This
places a bound on δ:

δ > −

α2m2
π
2E2 .

(12)

Note that even for a 1 PeV photon, mπτπ/E ∼ 10−9 s, so eﬀectively any astrophysical
source is distant enough that the observation of an emitted photon should produce a
reliable bound. Since the γ-ray spectrum of the Crab nebula extends up to at least 80
TeV [17], we can conclude that

δ > −7 × 10−13.

(13)

This represents an improvement of more than an order of magnitude over the best previous
bound.

6

The best previous constraint on a negative δ for the π0 ﬁeld came from observations
of γ-rays that were known to originate from the π0 → γ + γ process. That was a major
limitation, since many of the highest-energy γ-rays appear to be produced by inverse
Compton scattering instead. The current method is much more widely applicable. The
survival of any γ-ray, regardless of how it originated, over long astrophysical distances,
allows us to place a useful bound. The bound derived from this technique is the strongest
presently available, since it is be based on the very highest energy γ-ray observations. In
the not-so-distant future, it may be possible to observe photons with PeV energies (since
there is already evidence of individual particles with PeV energies in the Crab nebula [18]);
that would lead to another two orders of magnitude improvement in the constraint (12).
So the observed absence of photon decay processes gives a powerful way to constrain
Lorentz violation. However, this method does have a drawback. Any photon decay process
is generally only going to become allowed if the particles produced in the decay have less
energy than they would in the standard Lorentz-violating theory. In other words, only
negative values of δ can be constrained this way. This also makes it diﬃcult to study
more general theories, in which the Lorentz violation includes anisotropy as well as boost
invariance violation. The observation of photons coming from diﬀerent directions would
allow us to place bounds on the δ(ˆp) parameters corresponding to diﬀerent directions.
However, with only one-sided bounds, it is not possible to disentangle these bounds to get
bounds on the individual kµν coeﬃcients. The only available bounds on a positive δ for
the π0 are at the 2 × 10−9 level, and this limits how tightly the individual kµν parameters
may be constrained.

Ultimately, the best future constraints on Lorentz violation in the π0 sector may
come from a clearer understanding of the relationships between the fundamental SME
coeﬃcients for the quark and gluon ﬁelds and the coeﬃcients for composite ﬁelds like the
pion. However, at present, the best bounds on dimension-four Lorentz-violating operators
for the π0 ﬁeld come from observations of TeV γ-rays. In this paper, we have given an
improved one-sided constraint, derived from the observed absence of the Cerenkov-like
emission process γ → γ + π0 for Crab nebula γ-rays with up to 80 TeV energies. This
represents an order of magnitude improvement over the best previous bounds.

References

[1] D. Colladay, V. A. Kosteleck´y, Phys. Rev. D 55, 6760 (1997).

[2] D. Colladay, V. A. Kosteleck´y, Phys. Rev. D 58, 116002 (1998).

[3] V. A. Kosteleck´y, C. D. Lane, A. G. Pickering, Phys. Rev. D 65, 056006 (2002).

[4] D. Colladay, P. McDonald, Phys. Rev. D, 75, 105002 (2007).

[5] A. Ferrero, B. Altschul, Phys. Rev. D 84, 065030 (2011).

7

[6] V. A. Kosteleck´y, N. Russell, Rev. Mod. Phys. 83, 11 (2011); updated as

arXiv:0801.0287v9.

[7] T. Jacobson, S. Liberati, D. Mattingly, Nature 424, 1019 (2003).

[8] B. Altschul, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 201101 (2006).

[9] B. Altschul, Phys. Rev. D 75, 041301 (R) (2007).

[10] B. Altschul, Phys. Rev. D 77, 105018 (2008).

[11] F. W. Stecker, S. L. Glashow, Astropart. Phys. 16, 97 (2001).

[12] B. Altschul, Astropart. Phys. 28, 380 (2007).

[13] S. M. Carroll, G. B. Field, R. Jackiw, Phys. Rev. D 41, 1231 (1990).

[14] V. A. Kosteleck´y, M. Mewes, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 140401 (2006).

[15] V. A. Kosteleck´y, M. Mewes, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 011601 (2007).

[16] M. Nagel, S. R. Parker, E. V. Kovalchuk, P. L. Stanwix, J. G. Hartnet, E. N. Ivanonv,

A. Peters, M. E. Tobar, Nature Comm. 6, 8174 (2015).

[17] F. Aharonian, et al., Astrophys. J. 614, 897 (2004).

[18] F. A. Aharonian, A. M. Atoyan, in Neutron Stars and Pulsars, edited by N. Shibazaki,
N. Kawai, S. Shibata, T. Kifune (Universal Academy Press, Tokyo, 1998), p. 439
[astro-ph/9803091].

8

