6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
4
1

 
 
]

.

G
D
h
t
a
m

[
 
 

1
v
0
9
4
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

GEOMETRY ON LIE ALGEBROIDS I:

COMPATIBLE GEOMETRICAL STRUCTURES ON THE BASE

ALEXEI KOTOV AND THOMAS STROBL

Abstract. The object of our study is a Lie algebroid A or a Cartan-Lie algebroid (A, ∇)
(a Lie algebroid with a compatible connection) over a base manifold M equipped with
appropriately compatible geometrical structures. The main focus is on a Riemannian
base (M, g), but we also consider symplectic and generalized Riemannian structures.

For the Riemannian case, we show that the compatibility implies that the foliation
induced by the Lie algebroid is a Riemannian foliation; thus, in particular, if the leaf
space Q = M/ ∼ is smooth, Q permits a metric such that the quotient projection is a
Riemannian submersion. For other structures on M with a smooth leaf space Q, the
reduced geometrical type on Q can be diﬀerent: for example, (M, ω) symplectic provides
in general only a symplectic realization of a Poisson manifold (Q, P).

Building upon a result of del Hoyo and Fernandes, we prove that any Lie algebroid
integrating to a proper Lie groupoid admits a compatible Riemannian base. We also
show that, given an arbitrary connection on an anchored bundle, there is a unique
Cartan connection on the corresponding free Lie algebroid.

Key words and phrases: Lie algebroids, Riemannian foliations, symplectic realization,
generalized geometry, symmetries, gauge theories, reduction.

Contents

Introduction

1.
2. Motivation via Mathematical Physics
3. Connections on Lie algebroids
4. Lie algebroids over Riemannian manifolds
5. Lie algebroids over manifolds with other geometric structures
6. Anchored bundles and free Cartan-Lie algebroids
Appendix A: Flat Killing Lie algebroids, simple examples and facts
References

1
4
9
14
22
24
29
30

Date: February 11, 2016.

0

GEOMETRY ON THE BASE OF A LIE ALGEBROID

1

1. Introduction

Lie algebroids were introduced in the 1960s by Pradines [22] as a formalization of ideas
going back to works of Lie and Cartan. By deﬁnition it is a Lie algebra structure on the
sections of a vector bundle A → M which in turn is equipped with a bundle map ρ : A →
T M such that for every pair of sections s, s′ ∈ Γ(A) and every function f ∈ C ∞(M) one
has the Leibniz rule [s, f s′] = f [s, s′] + (ρ(s)f )s′. They combine usual geometry and Lie
algebra theory below a common roof, interpolating between tangent bundles and foliation
distributions on the one hand and Lie algebras and their actions on manifolds on the other
hand.1 Correspondingly, Lie algebroids provide a particular way to generalize notions of
ordinary geometry to geometry on them: Typical examples include the generalization of
the de Rham diﬀerential, Ad : Γ(Λ•A∗) → Γ(Λ•+1A∗), Lie algebroid covariant derivatives
A∇, where sections ψ of another vector bundle V over the same base can be diﬀerentiated
along sections s of A, A∇sψ ∈ Γ(V ), together with a notion of its curvature or torsion,
or the fact that any ﬁber metric Ag on A induces a unique A-torsion-free, metrical A-
connection on A. Likewise, notions from standard Lie theory generalize to this setting:
For example, representations of a Lie algebra on a vector space are replaced here by ﬂat
A-connections on vector bundles.

Most importantly, however, there is a relation of Lie algebroids to Lie groupoids that
reduces to the one of Lie algebras to Lie groups for the case of a pointlike base. But

s

t

while any Lie groupoid G

/ M gives rise to a Lie algebroid A → M by identifying
sections of A with left-invariant vector ﬁelds in the kernel of dt on G, the reverse direction,
Lie third theorem, does not hold in all generality: not any Lie algebroid integrates to a
Lie groupoid. The necessary and suﬃcient conditions of integrability were found by
Crainic and Fernandes in [6]. In this case, there then is a unique s-simply connected,
connected Lie algebroid integrating the given Lie algebroid. For A = T M, e.g., which is
always integrable, this is its fundamental groupoid G = Π1(M), whose elements consist
of homotopy classes of paths with ﬁxed endpoints.

The purpose of the present paper is to investigate the interplay between Lie algebroids
and additional ordinary geometrical structures deﬁned on them. These structures to-
gether with the appropriate compatibilities are inspired by mathematical physics, where
they appear naturally in the context of gauge theories, cf. [15, 16] for the corresponding

1For a foliation F in M , one puts A = T F , the tangent distribution to the foliation, the anchor ρ
is the natural embedding and the bracket the Lie bracket of vector ﬁelds. In the case of only one leaf,
one obtains the standard Lie algebroid A = T M . Given the action of a Lie algebra g on a manifold M ,
one puts A = M × g, ρ results from the restriction of the fundamental vector ﬁeld of a given Lie algebra
element to the respective point in the base, and the Lie bracket of constant sections is extended to all
sections by the Leibniz rule. For M reducing to a point, this, as well as in fact the general deﬁnition,
reduces to an ordinary Lie algebra. A rather generic example of a Lie algebroid is given by the cotangent
bundle of a Poisson manifold, where the anchor is given by contraction with the bivector ﬁeld and the
bracket [df, dg] := d{f, g} is extended by means of the Leibniz rule. We will assume acquaintance to
Lie algebroids and Lie groupoids throughout this paper, cf., e.g., [7, 17, 19] for the necessary background
material. Except if otherwise stated, we work with ﬁnite dimensional vector bundles in the smooth
category always.

/
/
/
2

ALEXEI KOTOV AND THOMAS STROBL

papers in physics as well as the subsequent section, Sec. 2, for a summary in a purely
mathematical language. There are diﬀerent options of interest in this context. All of
them have in common that A is equipped with an ordinary connection ∇.

One of the natural questions posing itself is thus the one of a good compatibility of ∇ with
a Lie algebroid structure on A. An evident option is that ∇ should preserve the bracket.
This is too restrictive, however: Suppose, for example, that A = T ∗M for a Poisson
manifold (M, Π).2 Then such a condition corresponds to ∇Π = 0, restricting Π to have
constant rank and thus excluding most of the interesting examples of Poisson manifolds.
Another natural option is the following one: Any ordinary connection on A gives rise to
a very trivial A-connection by A∇· = ∇ρ(·). This does not yet contain information about
the Lie bracket on A. However, there is a notion of a duality of A-connections on a Lie
algebroid (cf. [2]), A∇ 7→ A∇∗, where A∇∗
ss′ = [s, s′] − A∇s′s. One then may ask the
A-curvature of A∇∗ to vanish. This is too weak now, however, since for a bundle of Lie
algebras, A with ρ ≡ 0, this conditions becomes vacuous, where here we would very much
like to preserve the bracket.

As we will explain in Sec. 3, the searched-for good notion is the following one: Any
connection in A gives a splitting of J 1(A) → A, where J 1(A) denotes the ﬁrst jet bundle
of sections of A. Since J 1(A) carries a natural Lie algebroid structure induced by A, we
require the ∇-induced splitting to be a Lie algebroid morphism. This condition implies
indeed that ARA∇∗ = 0, reduces still to the wished-for constancy of the bracket for bundles
of Lie algebras, and, as we will show, reproduces the mathematically much less transparent
formulation as found in the context of mathematical physics. We call a compatible couple
(A, ∇) a Cartan-Lie algebroid. We refer the reader to [2, 3] for more details concerning
Cartan connections on Lie algebroids and to [9] for the role of A-connections.

In the applications, the bundle A will then equipped with additional geometric structures,
like a Riemannian metric g on the base or a ﬁber metric Ag on the bundle. In the present
paper, we will focus on geometrical structures deﬁned on M, starting in Sec. 4 with
Riemannian ones. The compatibility that a metric g on the base of a Lie algebroid A is
required to satisfy will be of the form

(1)

τ ∇g = 0 ,

where τ ∇ is an A-connection on T M, intertwined by ρ with A∇∗ introduced above. Since
the transition to T M implies also replacing the Lie bracket on A by the canonical bracket
of vector ﬁelds, the condition (1) does in fact only depend on the anchor ρ : A → T M and
thus can be formulated for any anchored bundle already. While some of the statements
in this paper will be formulated for this enlarged setting, one of the main results of the
present paper requires a Lie algebroid that is even integrable to a proper Lie groupoid.
Proper here means that the map s × t : G × G → M is proper, i.e. compact subsets of M
have compact pre-images, thus these are those Lie algebroids which generale compact Lie
algebras. Building on a result of del Hoyo and Fernandes [8], we show that any such a
Lie algebroid admits a metric g satisfying Eq. (1).

2For simplicity, we sometimes write simply A for the Lie algebroid data (A, ρ, [·, ·]). Depending on

the context, A either denotes a Lie algebroid or only its underlying vector bundle.

GEOMETRY ON THE BASE OF A LIE ALGEBROID

3

We call a metric g compatible with a Lie algebroid A in the sense of Eq. (1) a Killing Lie
algebroid. Although this name is diﬃcult to generalize to other geometrical structures,
it expresses the close relation of it to symmetries of the geometric structure on the base,
here the metric: Indeed, the image with respect to the anchor of any (locally) covariantly
constant section is rather easily seen to be a (local) Killing vector ﬁeld of g. Be there
Killing vectors of the metric g on M or not, the notion also guarantees good quotients
whenever the leaf-space of the Lie algebroid permits a good quotient; in this case the
natural projection map becomes a Riemannian submersion. A natural generalization
of Riemannian submersions to singular foliations are Riemannian foliations [20]. We will
show that the natural foliation of M induced by any Killing Lie algebroid is a Riemannian
foliation. If the reverse is true, i.e. if any Lie algebroid A equipped with a Riemannian
metric g on its base can be equipped with a connection ∇ so that the data become those
of a Killing Lie algebroid, is an interesting problem left open in this article. Some simple
examples and facts about Killing Lie algebroids where the connection ∇ on A is ﬂat, are
deferred to an appendix, App. A.

In Sec. 5 we brieﬂy consider other geometrical structures on the base, without developing
this subject in the present paper to much of a depth. The reason for this is two-fold: First,
while also for other compatible geometrical structures on the base of a Lie algebroid with
a smooth leaf space Q = M/F permit the geometric structure to descend to the quotient
in some way, the resulting structure on Q can be of a diﬀerent type. We will illustrate
this with a symplectic structure, where on the quotient one induces a Poisson structure,
so that (M, ω) → (Q, ΠQ) provides a symplectic realization of this quotient. The second
reason is that some considerations in string theory suggest a more general compatibility
condition than Eq. (1) induced by a single connection ∇ on A. We want to show how these
structures can be hosted as well in the present framework and related in this particular
context to what is called now generalized geometry [11].

While some of the examples of Sec. 4 will have mutual compatibility of A, ∇, and g, thus
forming a Killing Cartan Lie algebroid, for the main part of them ∇ will not be Cartan
also; in particular this is not guaranteed for those Killing Lie algebroids integrable to
proper Lie groupoids obtained here. On the other hand, as mentioned already above,
the compatibility requirement Eq. (1) is already well-deﬁned for any anchored bundle,
i.e. any bundle E → M together with a bundle map ρ : E → T M. In Sec. 6 we thus
prove the following theorem: Given any anchored bundle (E, ρ) over a Riemannian base
(M, g), equipped with a connection ∇ on E such that Eq. (1) holds true, there exists an
inﬁnite-rank free Cartan Killing Lie algebroid (F R(E), ∇, g) extending these data.

Every vector space gives naturally rise to a free inﬁnite-dimensional Lie algebra. Applying
the same strategy to a vector bundle needs some more care due to compatibility with the
anchor map ρ, which, as a simple consequence of the Lie algebroid axioms, is required
to become a morphism of the brackets. This implies in particular that in general the
image of the anchor map will increase within this process. Calling the resulting Lie
algebroid F R(E) → M we then show that the initial connection on E ⊂ F R(E) can be
extended to all of F R(E) such that it now becomes Cartan and, moreover, the metric g
stays compatible with this extended connection in the sense of Eq. (1) again. Moreover,
this construction is universal: Every connection-preserving morphism from (E, ∇, g) to

4

ALEXEI KOTOV AND THOMAS STROBL

a Cartan Killing Lie algebroid (A, ∇, g) such that the base map is the identity factors
through this free Cartan Killing Lie algebroid.

There are two important questions which we leave open in this ﬁnal section: ﬁrst, what
are conditions such that the Lie algebroid F R(E), which is ﬁnitely ﬁltered, but of inﬁnite
rank, can be truncated to a ﬁnite rank Cartan Killing Lie algebroid (A, ∇, g). And second,
under which conditions does the (unmodiﬁed ﬁnite dimensional) base M of F R(E) carry
a singular foliation: in the inﬁnite rank setting, involutivity of the image of the anchor
map ρF R(E) is easily seen to not be suﬃcient for integrability of the singular distribution
on the base.

Acknowledgements. We are grateful to Matias del Hoyo, Rui Fernandes, Camille
Laurent-Gengoux, Llohann Speran¸ca and Alan Weinstein for their interest and useful dis-
cussions. Likewise we thank Anton Alekseev, Jim Stasheﬀ and Marco Zambon for remarks
on the manuscript. This research was partially supported by Projeto P.V.E. 88881.030367/
2013-01 (CAPES/Brazil), the project MODFLAT of the European Research Council
(ERC), and the NCCR SwissMAP of the Swiss National Science Foundation. We are
grateful for this support.

2. Motivation via Mathematical Physics3

Physics often points to new, mathematically interesting notions, worth being studied in
their own right, and selecting the “right choice” out of a variety of otherwise conceivable
options. The present article implicitly pursues such a study, suggested by a generalization
of gauge theories of the Yang-Mills type where the structure group or Lie algebra is
replaced by a structural Lie groupoid/algebroid. While keeping the main text below as
well as eventual sequels to this article mathematically self-contained without it, we provide
a short summary of this motivation here (for more details cf. our previous, more physics
oriented articles [15, 16] as well as [18, 5]).

Standard sigma models are deﬁned after selecting a source (pseudo) Riemannian manifold
(Σ, h) and a target Riemannian manifold (M, g). This gives rise to a functional S0[X] on
the space of maps X from Σ to M, the Euler-Lagrange equations of which are harmonic
maps. The isometry/symmetry group G of (M, g) lifts to S0. “Gauging” of this symmetry
group G then amounts to the following procedure: One considers a G-principal bundle P
over Σ. For simplicity, we restrict to a trivial and trivialized bundle P := Σ × G. Gauging
is eﬀectuated by introducing a connection in P as an additional “ﬁeld”, which we may
identify with a g-valued 1-form A on Σ, where g = Lie(G). Replacing the tangent map
dX of X by its covariantization DX := dX −ρ(A) in the original functional S0, where the
bundle map ρ : M × g → T M encodes the g-action on M, one obtains a new functional
S1[X, A]. This “gauged theory” S1 has the enhanced symmetry group C ∞(Σ, G), which
is called the group of gauge transformations.

3One may omit reading this section without loss of the mathematical content of the present article.
This section is just meant to indicate, in a mathematical language, from where some of the notions
considered here originate, simultaneously giving them additional meaning.

GEOMETRY ON THE BASE OF A LIE ALGEBROID

5

Both of the “ﬁelds” together, the maps X ∈ C ∞(Σ, M) called scalar ﬁelds, as well as
the connection 1-forms A ∈ Ω1(Σ, g), called gauge ﬁelds, can be reinterpreted as a vector
bundle morphism a : T Σ → A, where A = M × g may be viewed as an action Lie
algebroid. The Killing equation expressing the isometry of g on M with respect to the
Lie algebra g can be rewritten as follows: Consider the action Lie algebroid (A, ρ, [·, ·])
over the Riemannian manifold (M, g) together with the canonical ﬂat connection ∇ on A
such that

(2)

(∇(ιρg))sym = 0.

Here ιρg = g(ρ, ·) ∈ Γ(A∗ ⊗ T ∗M) and for the T M-part of ∇ one uses the Levi-Civita
connection of g. The main observation coming from mathematical physics of relevance for
the present article is that one can introduce a gauged theory of scalar ﬁelds for the triple
(A, ∇, g) of a general Lie algebroid A equipped with a connection ∇ and deﬁned over a
Riemannian base (M, g) provided the compatibility equation (2) is satisﬁed [15]. We call
such a triple a Killing Lie algebroid, since for any constant section s ∈ Γ(A), ∇s = 0, the
vector ﬁeld ρ(s) generates an inﬁnitesimal isometry of g.

Let us be more speciﬁc here. “Gauging” in this generalized context, i.e., in particular,
without necessarily isometries of g, applies to the following situation: One is given a
functional S0 depending on X : Σ → M as described above. Assume that there is a Lie
algebroid (A, ρ, [·, ·]) over M equipped with a connection such that Eq. (2) is satisﬁed. In
fact, for what follows it is suﬃcient to have an anchored bundle (A, ρ) over M, with an
integrable singular distribution ρ(A) ⊂ T M. Important is only that Eq. (2) holds true.
Then there exists a functional S1 depending on a : T Σ → A with the following properties:

(1) S1 restricted to such maps a that map to the 0-section in A coincides with S0.
(2) Vector ﬁelds along the foliation of M tensored by functions over Σ can be lifted

to inﬁnitesimal symmetries of S1 (gauge transformations).

(3) Whenever the quotient space Q = M/ ∼ is smooth and Σ is contractible, the equiv-
alence classes of solutions to the Euler-Lagrange equations of S1 modulo gauge
symmetries are in one-to-one correspondence with solutions of an “ungauged”
theory S0 where (M, g) is replaced by the quotient (Q, gQ).

In the last item, the leaf space is given by the orbits generated by ρ(A); Eq. (2) then en-
sures that for smooth quotient Q there is a unique metric gQ such that the projection from
M to Q is a Riemannian submersion [15]. We also remark that the inﬁnite-dimensional
group of gauge symmetries is essentially deﬁned already once the functional S1 is given,
cf., e.g., [10]. While the third condition or property makes sense only for smooth quotients
M/ ∼, the gauge theory is particularly interesting or useful precisely when this quotient
is not smooth (otherwise one would not need the concept of the gauge theory).

Let d be the dimension of the source manifold Σ, then the functional S0 can be extended
naturally, if one is given some B ∈ Ωd(M), namely by adding its pullback by X : Σ → M
In this way, by gauging one is led to consider (A, ∇, g, B),
to the original functional.
which, in addition to Eq. (2), has to satisfy

(3)

(ιρ ◦ D + D ◦ ιρ) B = 0 .

(4)

(5)

Lρ(s)g = 2 Sym(cid:0)ι(id⊗ρ)∇(s)g(cid:1) ,
Lρ(s)B = d Alt(cid:0)ι(id⊗ρ)∇(s)B(cid:1) ,

6

ALEXEI KOTOV AND THOMAS STROBL

Here ιρ denotes contraction with the T M-part of ρ ∈ Γ(A∗ ⊗ T M) and D is the exterior
covariant derivative induced by ∇. The similarity of the two equations (2) and (3) becomes
more transparent, when rewritten in the following way:

which has to hold true for arbitrary sections s ∈ Γ(A). Here on the r.h.s. the map
ρ : Γ(A) → Γ(T M) is applied to the second factor in ∇(s) ∈ Γ(T ∗M ⊗ A) and Sym and
Alt denote the symmetrization and antisymmetrization projectors of the tensor prod-
uct, respectively. Again, for constant sections s ∈ Γ(A), the vector ﬁelds ρ(s) generate
symmetries of B.

Eq. (3) can be used to motivate deﬁnitions in the context of (higher pre-) symplectic
structures and reductions, and in fact so in potentially two diﬀerent ways. We can either
identify the (higher) symplectic form ω directly with B. Then, Eq. (3) suggests the form
of an “covariantized (higher) symplectic equation” as [D, ιρ]ω = 0, or, ω being closed, as

(6)

D(ιρω) = 0 .

Note that for ∇ ﬂat and ea a covariantly constant basis, this equation reduces to Lρaω = 0,
stating that the collection of vector ﬁelds ρa is symplectic and higher symplectic for d = 2
and d > 2, respectively. This is e.g. the case for the action Lie algebroid with its canonical
ﬂat connection. One certainly may also drop the non-degeneracy condition on ω, replacing
“symplectic” by “pre-symplectic” in the above.

Another option, more natural from the sigma model perspective, is to identify ω with
H = dB. Eq. (3) then is best reinterpreted as suggesting a “covariantized (higher)
Hamiltonian equation” of the form:

ιρω = Dh ,

cl

(M) non-degenerate, and h ∈ Ωd−1

(7)
where ω is a (higher) symplectic form, ω ∈ Ωd+1
(M, A)
a “covariantized (higher) Hamiltonian”. For d = 1, (M, ω) is a symplectic manifold in
the usual sense and the section h : M → A∗ a “covariantized moment map”. Again,
this reduces to the ordinary deﬁnition of a moment map h : M → g∗ for the case of
A = M × g. More generally, whatever A and ∇, if one has a constant sections s, then ρ(s)
is a Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld with Hamiltonian h(s) ≡ hh, si. Note that, in contrast to
standard symplectic geometry, the covariantized Hamiltonian equation, Eq. (7), does not
imply and is not a special case of the covariantized symplectic equation, Eq. (6) (except
for zero curvature D2 = 0).
In the present article we will consider the covariantized
symplectic equation, postponing the Hamiltonian version to possibly later work.4

cl

There is yet another option of interpreting the couple of equations (4) and (5) for d = 2
of relevance for the present paper. This is related to the notion of a generalized metric,
cf., e.g., [11]: An ordinary metric g on M together with a not further restricted 2-form
B ∈ Ω2(M) can be viewed as a generalized metric Φ = g + B on M. It was seen in several
instances already that strings are intimately related to generalized geometries, cf, e.g.,

4A. Weinstein informed us, on the other hand, that he and C. Blohmann have work in progress on the
Hamiltonian case with d = 1. They call (A, ∇, ω) for d = 1 satisfying Eq. (7) Hamiltonian Lie algebroids.

GEOMETRY ON THE BASE OF A LIE ALGEBROID

7

[26, 27, 1, 13]. This corresponds to a theory with a worldsheet Σ of two dimensions, d = 2.
It is also precisely this dimension where the Hodge dual of a 1-form gauge ﬁeld A is again
a 1-form. Thus, in d = 2, and only there, the equations (4) and (5) admit a generalization,
corresponding precisely to the additional freedom in the choice for gauge transformations
(cf. [5] for the details). While given a Lie algebroid A over M, the compatibility for g and
B required in Eq. (4) and Eq. (5) is parameterized by a connection ∇ in A, now there is
in addition a section ψ ∈ Γ(T ∗M ⊗ End(A)) in the correspondingly weakened conditions,
which then read as follows:

(8)

Lρ(s)g = 2 Sym(cid:0)ι(id⊗ρ)∇(s)g + ι(id⊗ρ)ψ(s)B(cid:1) ,
Lρ(s)B = 2 Alt (cid:0)ι(id⊗ρ)∇(s)B ± ι(id⊗ρ)ψ(s)g(cid:1) ,

to hold true for all sections s ∈ Γ(A). The sign in the last term in the second line
corresponds to the signature of the metric h on Σ: one has a plus sign, if h has a Lorentzian
signature and a minus sign, if the string theory is of Euclidean signature. In the main
text below, we will interpret the coupled equations (8) geometrically, using ideas from the
realm of generalized geometry on M.

Except for maybe this last, more involved system (8), the guiding principle behind the
notion one is tempted to introduce by the study of gauge theories should be clear by now:
One always has a Lie algebroid A with a connection ∇. The base M of A is equipped
with a geometrical structure G = {g, ω, . . .}. Then there is a compatibility condition
which implies that constant sections generate symmetries of G by means of the anchor ρ
(Eqs. (2), (6) or (3), (7), etc). Moreover, in the case that A = M × g is the action Lie
algebroid with its canonical ﬂat connection, one gets back the usual notions of Killing,
(higher) symplectic, Hamiltonian, . . . vector ﬁelds or the notion of a moment map. But
even if one does not deal with such symmetries of G in the strict sense, the gauge theory
formulation suggests that in such cases still a reduction is meaningful—mathematically
certainly with the additional assumption of a smooth quotient, or, more contemporary,
interpreting the data as describing a quotient stack. i.e. a particular smooth description
of an otherwise singular quotient.

Let us return to the logic immanent to gauge theories again. Physically one is compelled
to add also a “kinetic term” for the gauge ﬁelds, at least if they should correspond to
propagating interaction particles. In the standard setting with the isometry Lie algebra
g, one needs an ad-invariant metric on g in this context. In the generalization of M × g
to arbitrary Killing Lie algebroids A, this becomes a ﬁber metric Ag on the vector bundle
A satisfying

(9)

(10)

with respect to the Lie algebroid or A-covariant derivative5

Ae∇(cid:0)Ag(cid:1) = 0

Ae∇ss′ := [s, s′] + ∇ρ(s′)s .

5In the body of the paper, this A-connection is mostly denoted by α∇, or by A∇∗, so as to express
that it is dual to the evident A-connection A∇· = ∇ρ(·) in a precise way, cf. Eq.(28) below. The A-torsion

AeT of Ae∇ used below is the negative of the one of A∇, denoted by AT in the main text; this diﬀerence

in sign is important for comparison of formulas in this section with those in the rest of the paper.

8

ALEXEI KOTOV AND THOMAS STROBL

Note that the second term in Eq. (10) induced by the ordinary connection ∇ on A renders
the left-hand side C ∞(M)-linear in s, as it has to be for an A-connection. On the other
hand, for A = M × g with its canonical ﬂat connection ∇, this term vanishes for constant
sections and one recognizes the ordinary adjoint action of g on itself (mimicked by the
constant sections of M × g).

It is certainly to be expected that gauge invariance restricts the ﬁber metric Ag in a
natural way generalizing ad-invariance: and this turns out to be as described above.
However, gauge invariance of the new kinetic term for the gauge ﬁelds yields also additional
constraints on the previous data for the scalar ﬁelds,6 in particular on the Lie algebroid

structure of A and the connection ∇ [18, 16, 5]: Denoting by AeT ∈ Γ(A ⊗ Λ2A∗) the

A-torsion of Eq. (10), the required compatibility condition can be cast into the form:

(11)

where F ∈ Γ(A ⊗ A∗ ⊗ Λ2T ∗M) denotes the curvature of ∇.

∇(cid:16)AeT(cid:17) = 2Alt(ιρF ) ,

Despite obtained in a very speciﬁc context, the compatibility condition (11) is natural
to consider for any Lie algebroid A equipped with a connection—as we will demonstrate
also in the body of the paper below from a purely geometrical prespective. We will thus
consider this compatibility of the Lie algebroid structure with the connection also for
other geometric structures G in (A, ∇, G).

Eqs. (9), (10), and (11) were found already quite some time ago [18] in the context of
sigma models. However, they came together with another condition, namely that ∇
should be ﬂat, F = 0. Together with Eq. (11) this would imply that locally A has to be
isomorphic to an action Lie algebroid; indeed, AT is a tensorial version of the Lie bracket
of A and, if covariantly constant, it implies that the Lie bracket of constant sections is
constant. This led the authors of [18] to exclude a further study of this type of theories,
since, together with F = 0 and Eq. (11), such theories would boil down to just the well-
known standard Yang-Mills gauge theories (coupled to scalar ﬁelds). Only recently [16]
a way to circumvent this restriction was found, relaxing the condition on F : Consider
an A-valued 2-form b ∈ Γ(Λ2T ∗M ⊗ A); its pull-back by X : Σ → M can be added to
the (covariantized) curvature 2-form of the gauge ﬁeld A. Then, gauge invariance of the
correspondingly modiﬁed kinetic term for A requires, in addition to Eq. (9) and Eq. (11),
the following interesting condition:

(12)

F + (ιρ ◦ D + D ◦ ιρ) b − AeT (b, ·) = 0 .

The terms involving b are reminiscent of Eq. (4); just since b also has an A-component, the
covariantized Lie derivative is accompanied by a covariant version of the adjoint action.
In particular, for A = M × g with its ﬂat connection, this equation implies simply that b
is g-invariant, b ∈ Ω2(M, g)g. We intend to come back to a geometric meaning of Eq. (12)
elsewhere.

6This is related to the fact that without the kinetic term for the gauge ﬁelds, one does not need the
Lie algebroid structure and can live with just an anchored bundle. For the kinetic term of the 1-form
gauge ﬁelds, we need (A, ∇) to carry a Lie algebroid structure, or at least to have an extension in terms
of a Lie∞ algebroid.

GEOMETRY ON THE BASE OF A LIE ALGEBROID

9

3. Connections on Lie algebroids

Every vector bundle E over M gives rise to the short exact sequence [4]

(13)

0 −→ T ∗M ⊗ E −→ J 1(E) −→ E −→ 0 ,

where J 1(E) is the bundle of ﬁrst jets of smooth sections of E. The embedding of T ∗M ⊗E
into J 1(E) is determined for every f, h ∈ C ∞(M) and s ∈ Γ(E) by the following formula:7

(14)

f dh ⊗ s 7→ f (hj1(s) − j1(hs)) ,

where s ∈ Γ(E), j1(s) ∈ Γ(J 1(E)) is the ﬁrst jet-prolongation of s. Every connection ∇
on E is in one-to-one correspondence with a splitting σ : E → J 1(E) of (13):

(15)

σ(s) = j1(s) + ∇s ,

where ∇s ∈ Γ(T ∗M ⊗ E) is identiﬁed with its image in Γ(J 1(E)).

Let (A, ρ, [·, ·]) be a Lie algebroid over M. Now (13) becomes even an exact sequence of Lie
algebroids. The bracket in J 1(A) is deﬁned such that taking the Lie brackets commutes
with the prolongation of sections,

(16)

[j1(s), j1(s′)] = j1([s, s′])

for all sections s, s′ ∈ Γ(A), while its anchor is ﬁxed by the morphism property to obey

(17)

ρ(j1(s)) = ρ(s) .

For later purposes, we introduce an A-Lie derivative Ls along sections s ∈ Γ(A) acting
on sections of tensor powers of A, A∗, T M, and T ∗M in the following way: Lss′ := [s, s′],
LsX := Lρ(s)X ≡ [ρ(s), X] for all s′ ∈ Γ(A) and X ∈ Γ(T M), extended by the Leibniz
rule and the requirement to commute with contractions. Then in particular on T ∗M ⊗ A
one has

(18)

Ls(ω′ ⊗ s′) := Lρ(s)(ω′) ⊗ s′ + ω′ ⊗ [s, s′] ,

where s, s′ ∈ Γ(A) and ω′ ∈ Ω1(M). It follows from (14), (16), and (17) that one has

(19)

[j1(s), ω′ ⊗ s′] = Ls(ω′ ⊗ s′) .

The Lie algebroid structure on T ∗M ⊗ A is induced by this; it is a bundle of Lie algebras
since it belongs to the kernel of the anchor map and

(20)

[ω ⊗ s, ω′ ⊗ s′] = hω, ρ(s′)i ω′ ⊗ s − hω′, ρ(s)i ω ⊗ s′ .

Note that in the case of the the standard Lie algebroid T M, the kernel in (13) becomes
isomorphic to End(T M) and the above formula Eq. (20) reduces merely to the commutator
of endomorphisms.

7There is a choice of sign made here, which we ﬁnd convenient to ﬁx as follows for later purposes.

10

ALEXEI KOTOV AND THOMAS STROBL

The anchor map ρ : A → T M admits the ﬁrst order prolongation ρ(1) : J 1(A) → J 1(T M),
commuting with the jet prolongation of sections, which makes (21) commutative

(21)

Γ(J 1(A))

ρ(1)

/ Γ (J 1(T M))

j1

Γ(A)

j1

ρ

/ Γ(T M)

and which is also a Lie algebroid morphism. Moreover, every Lie algebroid morphism
ϕ : (A1, ρ1) → (A2, ρ2) of Lie algebroids over the same base and the base map being a
diﬀeomorphism admits the ﬁrst jet prolongation ϕ(1) : J 1(A1) → J 1(A2), which is again a
Lie algebroid morphism and which commutes with the prolongation of sections, such that
the following diagrams are commutative:8

(22)

Γ(J 1(A1))

ϕ(1)

/ Γ (J 1(A2))

j1

Γ(A1)

j1

ϕ

/ Γ(A2)

J 1(A2)

ϕ(1)

J 1(A1)

ρ(1)
2

(1)
ρ
1

/ J 1(T M)

Id

/ J 1(T M)

Deﬁnition 1. (A, ∇) is called a Cartan Lie algebroid over M, if A is a Lie algebroid,
∇ a connection on A → M, and its induced splitting σ : A → J 1(A) is a Lie algebroid
morphism.

The compatibility of a Lie algebroid structure with a connection in the above sense is
governed by the vanishing of the compatibility tensor S, the curvature of the splitting
(15), deﬁned by the formula S(s, s′) = [σ(s), σ(s′)] − σ ([s, s′]), where s, s′ ∈ Γ(A). Given
that ρ (S(s, s′)) = 0, it follows from (13) for E ∼ A that S can be identiﬁed with a section
of T ∗M ⊗ A ⊗ Λ2A∗. The next formula appears in [2], Section 2.3 in a slightly diﬀerent
notation.

Proposition 1.

(23)

S(s, s′) = Ls (∇s′) − Ls′ (∇s) − ∇ρ(∇s)s′ + ∇ρ(∇s′)s − ∇[s, s′] .

Proof. From (15) we obtain

S(s, s′) = [j1(s) + ∇s, j1(s′) + ∇s′] − j1 ([s, s′]) − ∇[s, s′] .

Combining (16) and (18) we conclude that

S(s, s′) = Ls (∇s′) − Ls′ (∇s) + [∇s, ∇s′] − ∇[s, s′] .

We ﬁnally compute [∇s, ∇s′] using (20). This accomplishes our proof. (cid:3)

Corollary 1. Let {ea} be a local frame for A, such that ρ(ea) = ρa and ∇ea = ωb
where ρa and ωb
(24)

a are local vector ﬁelds and 1-forms, respectively. Then

b) − Lρb (ωc

aeb,

S(ea, eb) = (cid:0)Lρa (ωc

+ ωq

a) −(cid:0)ιρq ωc

b(cid:1) ωq

a +(cid:0)ιρq ωc

b(cid:1) ec
a(cid:1) ωq

b [ea, eq] − ωq

a[eb, eq] − ∇[ea, eb] .

8The ﬁrst diagram is a straightforward generalization of diagram (21) to which it reduces for ϕ :=
ρ : A → T M . The second diagram results from a likewise diagram for Lie algebroid morphisms over the
identity and the fact that the anchor commutes with the prolongation, as is expressed by diagram (21).

/
O
O
/
O
O
/
O
O
/
O
O
/
O
O
/
O
O
GEOMETRY ON THE BASE OF A LIE ALGEBROID

11

Proof. By Proposition 1, formula (23), we have

S(ea, eb) = Lea (ωc

bec) − Leb (ωc

aec) − ωq

a∇ρq (eb) + ωq

b ∇ρq(ea) − ∇[ea, eb] .

From the explicit expression of the A-Lie derivative (18) we immediately obtain (24). (cid:3)

Deﬁnition 2. An A-connection on a vector bundle V is a C ∞(M)-linear map A∇ on
sections of A with values in 1st order diﬀerential operators on V , which obeys the condition

(25)

A∇s(f v) = ρ(s)(f )v + f A∇s(v)

for every s ∈ Γ(A) and v ∈ Γ(V ). The curvature of an A-connection is deﬁned as

(26)
where s, s′ ∈ Γ(A). An A-connection is called ﬂat if its A-curvature vanishes. A ﬂat
A-connection on V gives us a Lie algebroid representation of A on V .

AR(s, s′) = [A∇s, A∇s′] − A∇[s,s′] ,

Given a vector bundle V , the Atiyah algebroid of V , denoted by L(V ), is a bundle over M,
whose sections are inﬁnitesimal automorphisms of V ; L(V ) is a transitive Lie algebroid,
the kernel of the anchor map of which coincides with the bundle of endomorphisms of V .
It is easy to verify that an A-connection on V is a vector bundle map A → L(V ) which
commutes with the corresponding anchor maps. An A-connection is ﬂat if and only if, in
addition, this bundle map is a Lie algebroid morphism.

Deﬁnition 3. Given an A-connection A∇ on the vector bundle A itself, the A-torsion of
A∇ is a section of Λ2A∗ ⊗ A ≃ Hom(Λ2A, A) deﬁned at all s, s′ ∈ Γ(A) according to

(27)
The dual A-connection A∇∗ is determined at all s, s′ ∈ Γ(A) by the formula

AT (s, s′) = A∇ss′ − A∇s′s − [s, s′] .

(28)

A∇∗

ss′ = [s, s′] + A∇s′s .

Remark 1. An easy computation shows that the duality (28) is a reﬂexive operation, i.e.
= A∇. From (27) and (28) it follows that the dual A-connection has the opposite

A-torsion; thus, A∇ coincides with its dual if and only if AT vanishes identically.

(cid:0)A∇∗(cid:1)∗

Let us observe that the Lie derivative of any tensor ﬁeld χ along a vector ﬁeld X depends
on the ﬁrst jet-prolongation of X only, which allows us to introduce a natural Lie algebroid
representation of J 1(T M) on arbitrary tensor ﬁelds, such that j1(X) acts by the Lie
derivative. The preceding observation, when looked at from a more general point of view,
leads to the representation α of J 1(A) on the tensor powers of A and A∗ for any Lie
algebroid A, such that for all s ∈ Γ(A) one has on the one hand

(29)
and on the other hand, as follows from (14), for all s, s′ ∈ Γ(A), ω ∈ Ω1(M)

α ◦ j1(s) = Ls ,

(30)
Correspondingly, α(ω ⊗ s) acts by −ρ∗(ω) ∨ ιs on Sym•(A∗) and by −ρ∗(ω) ∧ ιs on Λ•(A∗).

α(ω ⊗ s)s′ = hω, ρ(s′)is .

Example 1. J 1(T M) is isomorphic to the Atiyah algebroid of T M by means of Eqs. (29)
and (30). The Bott-sequence (13) specializes here to

(31)

0 −→ End(T M) −→ J 1(T M) −→ T M −→ 0 .

12

ALEXEI KOTOV AND THOMAS STROBL

Combining ρ(1) : J 1(A) → J 1(T M) with the isomorphism from Example 1, we obtain a
canonical representation τ of J 1(A) on the tensor powers of T M and T ∗M, so that for all
s ∈ Γ(A), X ∈ Γ(T M), ω ∈ Ω1(M) one has

(32)
Likewise, τ (ω ⊗ s) acts by −ω ∨ ιρ(s) on Sym•(T M ∗) and by −ω ∧ ιρ(s) on Λ•(T ∗M).

τ (ω ⊗ s)X = hω, Xiρ(s) .

τ ◦ j1(s)X = [ρ(s), X] ,

A more general statement is contained in the next proposition:

Proposition 2. Let µ be a representation of J 1(A) on a vector bundle V and let ∇ be a
connection on A → M. If we identify ∇ with a splitting σ by (15), then the composition
µ ◦ σ gives us an A-connection on V , denoted by µ∇, which is ﬂat if and only if the
compatibility tensor S obeys the condition µ◦S(s, s′) = 0 for all s, s′ ∈ Γ(A). In particular,
if ∇ is a Cartan connection, so that S ≡ 0, then µ∇ is ﬂat for every µ. The representations
(29) and (32), combined with a connection ∇ on A, give us A-connections α∇ and τ ∇ on
A and T M, respectively, such that for all s, s′ ∈ Γ(A), X ∈ Γ(T M) one has

(33)
(34)

α∇ss′ = [s, s′] + ∇ρ(s′)s
τ ∇sX = [ρ(s), X] + ρ (∇Xs)

The anchor map ρ : A → T M obeys the property τ ∇ ◦ ρ = ρ ◦ α∇.

Proof. It follows from the deﬁnition of µ∇ and the compatibility tensor S along with the
explicit formulas (29)(30) for the representation α, (32) for the representation τ and (15)
for the splitting σ. We leave the details to the reader. (cid:3)

A connection ∇ induces another A-connection A∇· = ∇ρ(·), the A-torsion of which will be
denoted by AT . From (33) we see that A∇ is dual to α∇. Denoting by F ∈ Γ(Λ2T ∗M ⊗
A ⊗ A∗) the curvature of ∇, we obtain another expression for the compatibility tensor9.

Proposition 3. Let A be a Lie algebroid and ∇ a connection on A → M. Then the
compatibility tensor S admits the following expression:

(35)

S := ∇(cid:0)AT(cid:1) + 2Althρ, F i .

Here the anchor ρ : A → T M is viewed as a section of A∗⊗T M, the contraction is taken by
the natural pairing T M ⊗ Λ2T ∗M → T ∗M, v ⊗ α 7→ α(v, ·), and the anti-symmetrization
is taken over A∗ ⊗ A∗

Proof. Our proof starts with the observation that for every s, s′ ∈ Γ(A) one has

∇(cid:0)AT(cid:1) (s, s′) = ∇(cid:0)AT (s, s′)(cid:1) − AT (∇s, s′) − AT (s, ∇s′) .

The ﬁrst term of the r.h.s. of the above formula reads as follows

∇(cid:0)AT (s, s′)(cid:1) = ∇(cid:0)∇ρ(s)s′ − ∇ρ(s′)s − [s, s′](cid:1) = ∇(cid:0)∇ρ(s)s′(cid:1) − ∇(cid:0)∇ρ(s′)s(cid:1) − ∇[s, s′] ,

while the second and the third terms can be expressed in the form

− AT (∇s, s′) = −∇ρ(∇s)s′ + ∇ρ(s′) (∇s) − Ls′ (∇s)
−AT (s, ∇s′) = ∇ρ(∇s′)s − ∇ρ(s) (∇s′) + Ls (∇s′) .

9It is worth noting that S has appeared in this form in [18].

GEOMETRY ON THE BASE OF A LIE ALGEBROID

13

Here the covariant derivative ∇ is extended to diﬀerential forms with values in sections
of A by the Leibniz rule. Therefore, combining the above formulas and using (23), we get

∇(cid:0)AT(cid:1) (s, s′) = S(s, s′) + ∇(cid:0)∇ρ(s)s′(cid:1) − ∇ρ(s) (∇s′) − ∇(cid:0)∇ρ(s′)s(cid:1) + ∇ρ(s′) (∇s) .

On the other hand, for every vector ﬁeld X and section s one has

ιX F (s) = ιX∇2s = (ιX∇ + ∇ιX ) ∇s − ∇ (ιX∇s) = ∇X (∇s) − ∇ (∇Xs) .

Finally we obtain

or, equivalently,

∇(cid:0)AT(cid:1) (s, s′) = S(s, s′) − ιρ(s)F (s′) + ιρ(s′)F (s)
S(s, s′) = ∇(cid:0)AT(cid:1) (s, s′) + ιρ(s)F (s′) − ιρ(s′)F (s) .

This accomplishes the proof. (cid:3)

Corollary 2. (A, ∇) is a Cartan Lie algebroid iﬀ S = 0, i.e. iﬀ (A, ∇) satisﬁes Eq. (11).10

Let us specify the compatibility of a connection with a Lie algebroid structure for some
typical cases.

Example 2. Let A = M ×g be an action Lie algebroid. Then the canonical ﬂat connection
∇ is compatible. Furthermore, every ﬂat Cartan Lie algebroid (A, ∇) is locally an action
Lie algebroid; in fact, one even has:

Proposition 4. Let (A, ∇) be a ﬂat Cartan Lie algebroid. Then every point x ∈ M
permits a neighborhood x ∋ U ⊂ M over which there exists an action Lie algebroid
C = U × gU such that (A|U , ∇, g) and (C, ∇canonical, g) are isomorphic as Cartan Lie
algebroids. Moreover, within a connected component Mi of M, the Lie algebra gU does
not depend on the choice of U, gU

∼= gi.

Proof. By Eq. (23) and Corollary 2, the Lie bracket of constant sections is constant as
well; choosing a covariantly constant frame ea over some U ∋ x, ∇ea = 0, the above
mentioned property implies that d(C a
bc) = 0. This proves the ﬁrst part, i.e. the local
∼= U × gU . For any other neighborhood U ′ with
isomorphism of Killing Lie algebroids A|U
constant frame e′
a) are related by an
R-linear basis change, which does not change the Lie algebra they generate. (cid:3)

a and non-trivial intersection U ∩ U ′ 6= ∅, (ea) and (e′

Example 3. If A is a bundle of Lie algebras, i.e. if ρ ≡ 0, then ∇ on A is compatible if
and only if it preserves the ﬁber-wise Lie algebra bracket: ∇X[µ, ν] = [∇X µ, ν] + [µ, ∇Xν]
for all X ∈ Γ(T M) and µ, ν ∈ Γ(A).

Example 4. If A = T M is the standard Lie algebroid, a connection ∇ on T M is compat-
ible if and only if its dual connection ∇∗ is ﬂat. So, (T M, ∇) being a Cartan Lie algebroid
implies that M is the quotient of a parallelizable manifold by a properly discontinuously
acting discrete group. If, in addition, ∇ is torsion-free, it is self-dual, ∇ = ∇∗, and thus
it needs to be ﬂat itself.

Example 5 ([3]). Any torsion-free connection on T M gives rise to a compatible (Cartan)
connection on J 1(T M).

10We recall that AeT = −AT .

14

ALEXEI KOTOV AND THOMAS STROBL

For what will come in the subsequent section, the following adaptations of Example 1 will
be of interest: Consider a manifold M equipped with a Riemannian metric g. Denote
by L(g) the Lie subalgebroid of J 1(T M) whose sections preserve g by means of the
representation of J 1(T M) on tensors. Into the bargain, L(g) ⊂ J 1(T M) is to be viewed
as the diﬀerential equation whose solutions are Killing vector ﬁelds on (M, g), that is,
for any section X ∈ Γ(T M), j1(X) ∈ L(g) if and only if LX(g) = 0. Even though a
Riemannian manifold may not possess any Killing vector ﬁeld, the algebroid L(g) still
exists. In this case only there are no ﬁrst jet prolongations j1(X) that lands inside the
subbundle L(g) ⊂ J 1(T M).

L(g) is naturally isomorphic to the Lie algebroid of inﬁnitesimal bundle isometries of
(T M, g). Therefore, L(g) is a transitive Lie algebroid, the kernel of the anchor map of
which coincides with the bundle of skew-adjoint operators in T M, canonically identiﬁed
with Λ2(T ∗M) by use of the metric g, i.e. one has the following short exact sequence of
Lie algebroids:

(36)

0 −→ Λ2(T ∗M) −→ L(g) −→ T M −→ 0 .

Lemma 1. The Levi-Civita connection g∇ provides a splitting of (36).

Proof. Let σg be the splitting of the Bott exact sequence (31), determined by the Levi-
Civita connection as in (15), then for all vector ﬁelds X, Y, Z on M one has

α ◦ j1(X)(g)(Y, Z) = (LXg) (Y, Z) = LX (g(Y, Z)) − g([X, Y ], Z) − g(Y, [X, Z]) .

Given that g∇ is a torsion-free connection, [X, Y ] = g∇X Y − g∇Y X, and since by formula
(30) being applied to the standard Lie algebroid −α (g∇X) (g)(Y, Z) = g (g∇Y X, Z) +
g (Y, g∇ZX), we obtain

α ◦ j1(X)(g)(Y, Z) = g∇X (g)(Y, Z) − α (g∇X) (g)(Y, Z) .

On the other hand, g∇(g) = 0, thus

α ◦ σg(X)(g) = α (j1(X) + g∇X) (g) = 0 .

Hence it follows that σg takes values in L(g), which is the desired conclusion. (cid:3)

4. Lie algebroids over Riemannian manifolds

Deﬁnition 4. Let (A, ρ, [·, ·]) be a Lie algebroid over a Riemannian manifold (M, g) and
∇ a connection on A. Then (A, ∇) and (M, g) are called compatible, if

(37)

τ ∇(g) = 0 ,

where the A-connection τ ∇ is deﬁned as in Eq. (34). We call the triple (A, ∇, g) a Killing
Lie algebroid, and, if in addition, also A and ∇ are compatible in the sense of Deﬁnition
1 (cf. also Corollary 2), a Killing Cartan Lie algebroid.

Remark 2. Eqs. (34) and (37) are meaningful also for merely anchored bundles:

Deﬁnition 5. (E, ρ) is called an anchored bundle over M, if E → M is a vector bundle
and ρ : E → T M a vector bundle morphism. We call (E, ρ, g) a Killing anchored bundle
if Eq. (37) holds true.

GEOMETRY ON THE BASE OF A LIE ALGEBROID

15

In some cases of what will follow in this and the subsequent section, we will assume
the bundle to carry a Lie algebroid structure, although sometimes weaker conditions are
suﬃcient for the statement. On the other hand, we will not require the compatibility of
this Lie algebroid structure with the connection except if otherwise stated. One option for
a passage from a Killing anchored bundle to a Killing Cartan Lie algebroid is explained
in the ﬁnal section, Sec. 6.

Lemma 2. By means of g, we can view the anchor ρ ∈ Γ(A∗ ⊗ T M) as a section of
A∗ ⊗ T ∗M, which we denote by ¯ρ. The connection on A and the Levi-Civita connection
on T M induce a connection on A∗ ⊗ T ∗M, which we also denote simply by ∇. Then
Eq. (37) holds true if and only if

(38)

Sym (∇¯ρ) = 0 .

Proof. One may verify this either by a direct calculation or proceed by the more concep-
tual consideration that follows: Using the canonical isomorphism between skew-symmetric
bilinear forms and skew-adjoint operators by means of the Riemannian metric g, we de-
duce that Eq. (38) is satisﬁed if and only if g∇ρ(s) − ρ (∇s) is a skew-adjoint operator in
T M for any s ∈ Γ(A) and, consequently, is a section of L(g). From (15) and (21) we have

σg ◦ ρ(s) − ρ(1) ◦ σ(s) = g∇ρ(s) − ρ (∇s)

(39)
since ρ(1)(∇s) = ρ(∇s), where ρ is extended to act on sections of T ∗M ⊗A as id ⊗ρ. Thus
the l.h.s. of Eq. (39) is also a section of L(g). By Lemma 1, the image of σg is contained
in L(g), therefore Eq. (38) is seen to be equivalent to the requirement ρ(1) ◦ σ : A → L(g),
which in turn is equivalent to τ ∇ annihilating the metric g; the latter fact follows from
the construction of τ ∇ and L(g). (cid:3)

Lemma 3. Suppose there exists a section s ∈ Γ(A) which is covariantly constant, ∇s = 0.
Then v := ρ(s), provided non-zero, is a Killing vector ﬁeld of the metric g, Lvg = 0.

Proof. Clearly, Eq. (38) implies Sym (∇¯v) = 0 where ¯v ≡ hs, ¯ρi ∈ Γ(T ∗M). Rewriting
this in terms of v, ¯v = g(v, ·), this equation is known to become Lvg = 0. (cid:3)

Remark 3. Using notations from Corollary 1, we can rewrite (37) as

(40)

Lρag − ωb

a ∨ ιρbg = 0

for all a = 1, . . . , rkA; this expression coincides with the original form of the extended
Killing equations found in [15]. This fact, as well as the observation in the previous
Lemma, led us to use the term “Killing Lie algebroid”. While this nomenclature reﬂects
well the relation to symmetries of the geometric structure on the base here, its generaliza-
tion to other appropriately compatible geometric structures on the base (cf. the subsequent
section) is not obvious (for example if the Killing vectors are replaced by symplectic ones).

Since equations such as (40) are of the form how they appear in the context of their
original appearance, and henceforth we will turn to a reformulation such as in Eq. (37),
using the A-connection τ ∇ also in more general context, we consider it illustrative to show
equivalence of these two formulations by an explicit calculation:
Proof (equivalence of (37) with the local expression (40)). Let X ∈ Γ(T M) be a vector
ﬁeld on M and s a section in A. τ ∇s acting on the function g(X, X) agrees, by deﬁnition
of an A-Lie derivative, with Lρ(s) acting on it. On the other hand, evidently we have

16

ALEXEI KOTOV AND THOMAS STROBL

τ ∇s (g(X, X)) = (τ ∇sg)(X, X) + 2g(τ ∇sX, X). Since by the deﬁning equation (34),
τ ∇sX = Lρ(s)X + ρ(∇Xs), we obtain (τ ∇sg)(X, X) = (Lρ(s)g)(X, X) − 2g(ρ(∇Xs), X).
Using ρ(∇X ea) = (ιX ωb

a) ρ(ea) for any local frame ea in A then yields Eq. (40). (cid:3)

Example 6. Let g be the isometry Lie algebra of a metric g on M. Then the action Lie
algebroid M × g, its canonical ﬂat connection, together with g form a Killing Cartan Lie
algebroid. Furthermore, as remarked in Example 2 and Proposition 4, every ﬂat Cartan
Lie algebroid (A, ∇) is locally an action Lie algebroid, (A|U , ∇) ∼= (U × gi, ∇canonical),
where the Lie algebra gi is the same for any connected component Mi of M. Adding the
preﬁx “Killing” then implies that now the image hi of gi by the anchor map ρ, a morphism
of Lie brackets, is necessarily a sub-Lie algebra of the local isometry Lie algebra isoi of
(Mi, g): ρ(gi) = hi ⊂ isoi. The Lie algebras gi of the local action Lie algebroids are thus
extensions of local isometry Lie algebras: 0 → ker(ρ) → gi

−→ hi → 0 in this case.

ρ

Example 7. The standard Lie algebroid T M of a Riemannian manifold (M, g) is a
Killing Lie algebroid with respect to any metrical connection ∇ (e.g. w.r.t. the Levi-Civita
connection g∇). Indeed, in this case ¯ρ = g and Equation (38) holds true even without
the symmetrization. (T M, g∇, g) is a Killing Cartan Lie algebroid iﬀ g is a ﬂat metric,
i.e. iﬀ Rg∇ = 0. (T M, ∇, g) is a Killing Cartan Lie algebroid iﬀ ∇ is metrical and its
jkl − Ri
curvature R and torsion T satisfy the equation T i
kjl, written for clarity in
index notation, the semi-colon denoting the covariant derivative.

jk;l = Ri

Example 8 ([15]). A characteristic example results from (regular) foliations F of a man-
ifold M with a smooth quotient Q = M/F . There exists a connection ∇ on A = T F
such that (T F , ∇, g) forms a Killing Lie algebroid, iﬀ (M, F , g) provides a Riemannian
submersion, i.e. iﬀ Q can be equipped with a metric gQ such that for any point p ∈ M the
natural projection (TpF )⊥ → T[p]Q is an isometry.

While on the one hand Killing Lie algebroids (and their generalizations to other geometric
structures) encompass symmetries in terms of a connection such that locally ﬂat sections
(with non-trivial image w.r.t. the anchor) reproduce inﬁnitesimal, local symmetries, on
the other hand, even in the absence of symmetries, if the leaf space Q := M/F is smooth,
the conditions ensure that there is some kind of quotient construction (of the same kind
in the Riemannian case, i.e. (Q, gQ) is the quotient of (M, g) by the foliation F ). This
aspect is in its spirit closely related to the gauge theories where the notion arose from,
cf. [15] as well as the Introduction; and in both cases, the geometrical as well as the
gauge theoretical context, the notion becomes particularly interesting when there is no
smooth quotient, providing a smooth description of it. Evidently, the connection contains
information about the metric on the leaves of the foliation factored out in the previous
example, cf., e.g., Eq. (40). It permits a partial reconstruction of the metric on the total
space. More precisely, formulated for a regular foliation with smooth quotient, this looks
as follows:

Proposition 5. Let π : M → Q be a bundle over a Riemannian manifold (Q, gQ) with
connected ﬁbers, let ∇M be an Ehresmann connection on π, i.e. a splitting TxM = Hx ⊕Vx
with Vx ≡ TxF , and σ ∈ Γ(π) a section such that for all x in its image, x ∈ σ(Q), one is
given a smoothly varying metric ηx on the vertical subspace Vx. Denote by T F ⊂ T M the
foliation Lie algebroid over M corresponding to π. For every choice of a T F −connection

GEOMETRY ON THE BASE OF A LIE ALGEBROID

17

(a connection along the ﬁbers) T F∇ on T F , the holonomy of which at T F |σ(Q) preserves
the metric η, there is a unique connection ∇ on T F and a unique metric g on M, such
that (T F , ∇, g) is a Killing Lie algebroid, Hx is orthogonal to Vx w.r.t. gx for all x ∈ M,
the restriction of gx on Vσ(q) agrees with ησ(q) for each q ∈ Q, and the restriction of ∇ on
ﬁbers coincides with T F∇∗, the dual T F −connection deﬁned by Eq. (28).

Proof. The connection ∇ is deﬁned by the requirement that ∇X (s′) = [X, s′]V , ∇ss′ =
ss′ for every X ∈ Γ(H) and s, s′ ∈ Γ(T F ), where [−, −]V is the vertical component
T F∇∗
of the corresponding Lie bracket. Use Eq. (37) and the holonomy property, noting that
τ ∇ is a partially deﬁned covariant derivative, permitting one to transport ησ(q) to the
metric g|T F. By Eq. (34), for every connection ∇′ on T F → M, the vertical subbundle
T F is τ ∇′−invariant. Moreover, the induced connection τ ∇′/T F on the normal bundle
T M/T F gives rise to the canonical normal transversal action of T F , thus it is ﬂat and
it does not depend on the choice of ∇′. On the other hand, by the construction of ∇,
both subbundles H and V = T F are τ ∇−invariant, so that (H, τ ∇|H) is canonically
isomorphic to the transversal representation of T F . This allows us to deﬁne a unique
τ ∇−invariant metric on H, such that πx : Hx → Tπ(x)Q is an isometry for all x ∈ M. The
metrics on H and T F determine a unique metric on M, such that H is orthogonal to V
(and thus π : M → Q is a Riemannian submersion). Since the obtained metric on M is
τ ∇−invariant, (T F , ∇, g) is a Killing Lie algebroid. (cid:3)

Example 9. That one may encounter simple obstructions in the search for further ex-
amples of Killing Lie or even Killing anchored algebroids is illustrated by the following:

Proposition 6. Let E = R2 × R with ρ(x, y, u) = uxn ∂
for some n ∈ N. There exists no
∂x
connection ∇ on E and metric g on M = R2 such that (E, g, ρ) forms a Killing anchored
algebroid.

Remark 4. Note that every anchored line bundle L → M is compatible with one and
only one Lie algebroid structure, i.e. the anchor ρ : L → T M determines the Lie algebroid
structure already completely and there exists one for every choice of the map ρ. Indeed,
∼= U × R. The unit section 1 of this trivial
consider a local chart U ⊂ M over which L|U
bundle is mapped to a vector ﬁeld v = ρ(1) ∈ Γ(T U). Any other local section s ∈ Γ(L|U )
then satisﬁes s = f · 1 for some f ∈ C ∞(U). For two such sections s, s′, the bracket takes
necessarily the form: [s, s′] = (f v(f ′) − f ′v(f )) · 1. Since, on the other hand, one veriﬁes
that this satisﬁes all axioms of a Lie algebroid over U, and that the bracket is equivariant
with respect to a change of basis over U, one may extend it also to all of M by a partition
of unity; this also proves existence.

Proof (of Proposition 6). For the constant section s = 1 with v := ρ(1) = xn∂x and
∇(1) = ω ⊗ 1, Equation (4) becomes

(41)

Lvg = ω ∨ ιvg ,

where ω ∨ ιvg ≡ ω ⊗ ιvg + ιvg ⊗ ω. Comparing the components of dx ⊗ dx on both sides
for the given vector ﬁeld v, yields the equation

xn∂x(gxx) + 2gxxnxn−1 = 2ωxgxxxn

18

ALEXEI KOTOV AND THOMAS STROBL

or, since gxx > 0, equivalently

n = x(cid:18)ωx −

∂x ln(gxx)(cid:19) .

1
2

For whatever the choice of g and ω, i.e. ∇, this last equation yields a contradiction upon
evaluation at x = 0. (cid:3)

All the more it is important to provide further, non-trivial examples of Killing Lie alge-
broids. That a very large class of them exists follows from the following theorem.

Theorem 1. Any Lie algebroid A which is integrable to a proper Lie groupoid permits a
metric g and a connection ∇ to turn (A, ∇, g) into a Killing Lie algebroid.

This Theorem is corollary of the result of M. de Hoyo and R. Fernandes [8], which states
that any proper Lie groupoid admits what they call a 2-metric, as well as Lemma 4 and
Lemma 5 below; the second of those lemmas asserts that the Lie algebroid of any Lie
groupoid with 1-metric admits a canonical Killing Lie algebroid structure.11

Let π : ( ˜M , ˜g) → (M, g) be a Riemannian submersion. Denote by V (π) the subbundle
of π−vertical vectors and by H its orthogonal complement with respect to ˜g, such that
every vector ﬁeld ˜X on ˜M admits the canonical decomposition into the horizontal and
vertical parts, ˜XH and ˜XV , respectively. Denote by X h the unique horizontal lift of a
base vector ﬁeld X, such that dπ(X h) = X. The following 3-tensor ﬁeld O, introduced
by O’Neill in [21],12 associates to a pair of vector ﬁelds ˜X, ˜Y on ˜M a vector ﬁeld O ˜X
˜Y ,
where, by deﬁnition,

(42)

O ˜X

˜Y =(cid:16)˜g∇ ˜XH

˜YH(cid:17)V

+(cid:16)˜g∇ ˜XH

˜YV(cid:17)H

.

Lemma 4 (O’Neill, [21]).
1. At each point, O ˜X is a skew-symmetric linear operator on the tangent space of ˜M
interchanging the horizontal and vertical subspace.
2. If ˜X and ˜Y are horizontal vector ﬁelds on ˜M , then O ˜X

3. For H−horizontal lifts X h, Y h of basic vector ﬁelds X, Y : (cid:0)˜g∇X hY h(cid:1)H = (g∇X Y )h.

Corollary 3. If ˜X, ˜Y are horizontal vector ﬁelds on ˜M and ξ a vertical vector ﬁeld, then
˜Y , ξ), which is evidently equal to −˜g(˜g∇ ˜Xξ, ˜Y ), is skew-symmetric with respect to
˜g(˜g∇ ˜X
˜X and ˜Y . If X h, Y h, and Z h are H−horizontal lifts of vector ﬁelds X, Y , and Z on M,
respectively, then

˜Y = 1

2 [ ˜X, ˜Y ]V .

˜g(˜g∇X hY h, Z h) = g(g∇XY, Z) .

(43)
Finally, for X, Y vector ﬁelds on M and X h, ˜Y vector ﬁelds on ˜M, such that X h is the
horizontal lift of X and ˜Y is any π−projectible lift of Y , i.e. a vector ﬁeld on ˜M such
that dπ( ˜Y ) = Y , one has

(44)

˜g(cid:16)˜g∇X h ˜Y , X h(cid:17) = g (g∇X Y, X) .

11The latter fact was found ﬁrst by Camille Laurent-Gengoux and Sylvain Lavau (communicating it

to us without showing us their proof).

12In [21], this tensor was called A; we refrained from this notation here, since A already denotes the

Lie algebroid throughout this paper.

GEOMETRY ON THE BASE OF A LIE ALGEBROID

19

Proof. To see the skew-symmetry, use the deﬁning equation for the O’Neill’s tensor O,
Eq. (42), and the second item in O’Neill’s Lemma 4. Similarly, Eq. (43) follows from
the third part of the Lemma and the deﬁnition of a Riemannian submersion. The ﬁnal
equation, Eq. (44), then results from Eq. (43) and the before-mentioned skew-symmetry.(cid:3)

Lemma 5. Let G be a Lie groupoid over M with the source map s, target map t, and the
identity bisection e. Assume that G is endowed with a Riemannian metric η, such that
both s and t are Riemannian submersions s : (G, η) → (M, g) and t : (G, η) → (M, g′) for
some metrics g and g′ on M, respectively.13 Then the Lie algebroid A of G, identiﬁed with
left invariant t-vertical vector ﬁelds on G, is a Killing Lie algebroid over (M, g).

Proof. Let ξ be a section of A, identiﬁed with the corresponding vector ﬁeld on G, such
that ρ(ξ) = ds(ξ), X be a vector ﬁeld on M, and X h be the horizontal s-lift of X,
orthogonal to the s-ﬁbers. From (44) we obtain

η(cid:0)η∇X hξ, X h(cid:1) = g (g∇Xρ(ξ), X) .

(45)
Consider now the following symmetric 2-form C( ˜X, ˜Y ) = η(η∇ ˜Xξ, ˜Y ) on G. Using metric
η, we identify C with a section of T G ⊗ T G; the latter decomposes into the direct sum of
orthogonal components according to the orthogonal decomposition T G = V (t) ⊕ V (t)⊥,
where V (t) = Ker dt. By the the ﬁrst part of Corollary 3 being applied to the Riemannian
submersion t, we get that C = C0 + C1 + C2, where C0, C1 and C2 are sections of Λ2V (t)⊥,
ξ, ˜Y ), where ∇pr
T G ⊗ V (t), and V (t) ⊗ V (t)⊥, respectively. Obviously, C1( ˜X, ˜Y ) = η(∇pr
˜X
is the orthogonal projection of the Levi-Civita connection onto sections of V (t). Besides,
there exists a unique section ψpr of the bundle of endomorphisms T G → End (V (t)), which
factors through the orthogonal projection onto V (t)⊥, such that C2( ˜X, ˜Y ) = η( ˜X, ψpr
ξ).
˜Y
Since C0 is a skew-symmetric 2-form, we conclude that C( ˜X, ˜X) = η(∇tot
˜X ξ, ˜X), where
∇tot = ∇pr + ψpr. Now (45) reads as follows:

(46)

g (g∇Xρ(ξ), X) = η(cid:0)∇tot

X hξ, X h(cid:1) .

Given that the l.h.s. of (46) is constant along s-ﬁbers, we can evaluate the r.h.s. at the
identity bisection e. Thus

g (g∇Xρ(ξ), X) = η(cid:0)(cid:0)∇tot

X hξ(cid:1) |e, X h|e(cid:1) = g (ρ ◦ ∇Xξ, X) ,

where ∇X is deﬁned on sections of A as the composition of ∇tot
X h and the evaluation at
the identity bisection e. In this way, we have obtained a connection on A such that the
identity (38) holds. This concludes the proof of Lemma 5 and, at the same time, of
Theorem 1. (cid:3)

Remark 5. Note that Theorem 1 does not give any information about an eventual com-
patibility of the Lie algebroid structure on A with the connection ∇. On the other hand,
using averaging methods by ﬁber-integration developed on proper groupoids, the Theorem
does not only have an existence part, it also permits one to construct non-trivial examples
of Killing Lie algebroids. We intend to come back to such examples elsewhere.

13The base metrics g and g ′ do not need to coincide. This condition is weaker than a 1−metric on
G in the original notations from [8], where g and g ′ must coincide. Thus we essentially prove a stronger
statement. A proper Lie groupoid admits even a 2-metric which contains far more information than what
we need for the existence of a Killing Lie structure; we shall develop this subject in the next paper.

20

ALEXEI KOTOV AND THOMAS STROBL

We now turn to some properties one may show to hold for Killing Lie algebroids. For
example, we claimed before that Example 8 is in some sense characteristic, although
the regular foliation and the smooth quotient seem very restrictive for a Lie algebroid. A
generalization of Riemannian submersions to the non-smooth setting and for also singular
foliations is given by Riemannian foliations [20]. It is thus comforting to ﬁnd

Proposition 7. The base M of any Killing Lie algebroid (A, ∇, g) carries a canonical
(possibly singular) Riemannian foliation. (The leaves are generated by the Lie algebroid
structure A and the leaf-wise metric is induced by g).

Proof. Let p be a point of M and let γ be a geodesic curve with the natural parameter
s ∈ [0, 1] such that ˙γ(0) ∈ (TpF )⊥, where ˙γ is the derivation along s. Consider the
pullback bundles γ∗(A) and γ∗T M together with the corresponding pullback connections
and the pullback of the anchor map regarded as a bundle morphism ρ : γ∗A → γ∗T M.
Given that γ is a 1−dimensional manifold, the pullback connection is ﬂat, thus we can
choose a ﬂat trivialization {ea} of γ∗(A) in some neighborhood of p ∈ γ. Now we have:
(47)

∂sg( ˙γ, ρ(ea)) = g(g∇ ˙γ ˙γ, ρ(ea)) + g( ˙γ, g∇ ˙γρ(ea)) .

The ﬁrst term of (47) is identically zero since γ is a geodesic curve, while the second term
vanishes because of the extended Killing equation, Eq. (38) being applied to the ﬂat frame
{ea}. Indeed, g∇ ˙γ ¯ρ(ea) = (∇ ˙γ ¯ρ) (ea) and thus g( ˙γ, g∇ ˙γρ(ea)) = Sym ((∇¯ρ) (ea)) ( ˙γ, ˙γ) =
0. Therefore g( ˙γ, ρ(ea)) does not depend on s, thus it must be zero as ˙γ(0) ∈ (TpF )⊥.
This proves that the geodesic remains orthogonal to the foliation for all s, which is a
possible characterization of a Riemannian foliation, cf. [20]. (cid:3)

Let us for the rest of the section consider a ﬁxed Riemannian base (M, g) and determine
some conditions under which this can be the base of a Killing Lie algebroid. Remember
that the Lie algebroid L(g), ﬁtting into the sequence (36), exists for any metric g. We
will use below the germ version of the pre-image of a vector sub-bundle by a bundle map:
namely, given a vector bundle map φ : V → W between two vector bundles over M and
a vector subbundle W ′ ⊂ W , we deﬁne φ−1(W ′) at x ∈ M as the set of vectors v ∈ Vx
which admit prolongations to local sections of V with the image in W ′.

Proposition 8. Let (A, ρ, [·, ·]) be a Lie algebroid over a Riemannian manifold (M, g).
Then A admits a connection which satisﬁes the equation (37), if and only if the preimage
of L(g) by ρ(1) is surjective over A. The choice of such a compatible connection ∇ is in

one-to-one correspondence with the choice of a splitting of (cid:0)ρ(1)(cid:1)−1

Proof. By the above (germ) deﬁnition, the pre-image of L(g) by ρ(1) is surjective over A
if and only if for any point x in M there exists an open neighborhood U of x and a local
connection on A|U , the restriction of A to U, which is compatible with g. Let us choose
an open cover of M together with a local connection on A over each open subset from the
cover, which is compatible with g. Using a partition of unity subordinated to the chosen
open cover and taking the corresponding linear combination of the local connections, we
construct a global connection on A compatible with g on M. (cid:3)

(L(g))) → A.

Given existence of the Killing Lie algebroid (A, ∇) over (M, g), one may ask for the
ambiguity in the choice for ∇. Let us for this purpose consider the following Koszul

complex of vector bundles: eC q := SymT ∗M ⊗ ΛqA, q = 0, . . . , rkA, with the diﬀerential

GEOMETRY ON THE BASE OF A LIE ALGEBROID

21

˜δ obtained by the natural extension of ¯ρ, where the latter is regarded as a section of
A∗ ⊗ T ∗M ≃ Hom(A, T ∗M). More precisely, ˜δ acts on ΛqA by contraction with the ﬁrst
factor of ¯ρ and on SympT ∗M by symmetric multiplication on the second one. Now we

k := Γ (C q

take the twisted complex C • = eC • ⊗ A∗ with the diﬀerential δ = ˜δ ⊗ id. This complex is
k =Lp+q=k SympT ∗M ⊗ ΛqA ⊗ A∗, k = 0, . . . , dim M + rkA.

graded by sub-complexes C •
Let Cq
k) with the induced diﬀerential δ : Cq
δ with the underlying operator acting on sections).
Proposition 9. Let (A, ∇, g) be a Killing Lie algebroid. Then ∇ + ψ for some ψ ∈
Γ(T ∗M ⊗ EndA) deﬁnes another connection compatible with g, if and only if δ(ψ) = 0.
Proof. Since Sym(∇¯ρ) = 0, the equation (38) for ∇ + ψ implies that

(we identify the bundle map

k → Cq−1

k

Sym ⊗ id ((id ⊗ ¯ρ ⊗ id)(ψ)) = 0 ,

where ¯ρ is regarded as a section of Hom(A, T ∗M) and ψ as a section of T ∗M ⊗ A ⊗ A∗,
so that ¯ρ is applied to the second factor of ψ. Let us think of ψ as an element of C1
2 . By
the deﬁnition of the Koszul diﬀerential δ the following diagram is commutative

T M ∗ ⊗ A ⊗ A∗

T ∗M ⊗ T ∗M ⊗ A∗

id⊗¯ρ⊗id

*❱❱❱❱❱❱❱❱❱❱❱❱❱❱❱❱❱❱

δ

Sym⊗id

Sym2T ∗M ⊗ A∗

This proves the proposition. (cid:3)

We ﬁnally return to the aspect of the relation of Killing Lie algebroids to Killing vectors. It
is well-known that the space of Killing vectors on an n-dimensional, connected manifold M
is a vector space of dimension at most n(n+1)/2. There is a straightforward generalization
of this fact: Starting from Eq. (38), one derives an equation expressing the two-fold
covariant derivatives of ¯ρ ≡ ιρg in terms of itself and its ﬁrst covariant derivative in the
standard way; the only diﬀerence now is that the curvature appearing in this equation
now is the total curvature F∇ + Rg ∇. Since in this context we never refer to the Lie
algebroid structure on the bundle, one obtains a statement for Killing anchored bundles:

Proposition 10. Let E be a rank r vector bundle over an n-dimensional, connected
Riemannian manifold (M, g) and ∇ a connection on E. Denote by Vg the vector space of
Killing vector ﬁelds on (M, g). Then the following facts hold true: Anchors ρ ∈ Γ(A∗ ⊗
T M) satisfying (2) form a ﬁnite-dimensional vector space W , whose dimension is bounded
by dimW ≤ r·n(n+1)
. For a metric g of constant curvature and A = M ×Rr with its natural
ﬂat connection, W ∼= (Vg)⊗r, attaining the above bound. In general, the dimension of W
can be greater than r times the dimension of Vg.
The last sentence is proven, e.g., by Example 8 with M = Q × F for a metric g = gQ + gF
with no isometries: dim Vg = 0 and dim W ≥ 1.

2

While ﬂat Killing Cartan Lie algebroids are locally action Lie algebroids with ρ being
a (Cartan) Lie algebroid morphism into M × iso(g), where iso(g) denotes the isometry
Lie algebra of the metric g, cf. Example 6, the relation of the more general ﬂat Killing
Lie algebroids to isometries of g is more intricate. We defer some further aspects of ﬂat
Killing Lie algebroids, Cartan and not Cartan, to Appendix A.

/
/
*


22

ALEXEI KOTOV AND THOMAS STROBL

5. Lie algebroids over manifolds with other geometric structures

Deﬁnition 6. Let (A, ρ, [·, ·]) be a Lie algebroid over (M, Φ), where Φ ∈ Γ(T ∗M ⊗ T ∗M)
is a non-degenerate bilinear form on M, ∇ be a connection on A, and ψ a section of
T ∗M ⊗ End(A). Then (A, ∇, ψ) and (M, Φ) are called compatible, if

(48)
where τ ∇comb = τ ∇+ ⊗ Id + Id ⊗ τ ∇− corresponding to ∇± = ∇ ± ψ and τ ∇ corresponding
to a connection ∇ was deﬁned in Eq. (34).

τ ∇comb(Φ) = 0 ,

Remark 6. Since the diﬀerence of any two connections on a bundle A is a section in
T ∗M ⊗ End(A), one may consider ∇+ =: ∇1 and ∇− =: ∇2 as two independent con-
nections, with ∇i acting on the i-th slot or factor of Φ ∈ Γ(T ∗M ⊗ T ∗M), where here
i ∈ {1, 2}. So, the data (A, ∇, ψ) can be also replaced by (A, ∇1, ∇2) in the above deﬁni-
tion. The reason for using the parametrization with ψ becomes clear from the following:

Remark 7. Let us decompose Φ into the sum of symmetric and skew-symmetric parts,
Φ = Φsym + Φskew. Using the deﬁning equations, it is easy to verify that for all X, Y ∈
Γ(T M) and s ∈ Γ(A) one has

(cid:0)τ ∇comb

s Φ(cid:1) (X, Y ) = (τ ∇sΦ) (X, Y ) − Φ(hρ(ψs), Xi, Y ) + Φ(X, hρ(ψs), Y i) ;

here ψs ≡ ψ(s) ∈ Ω1M, A) and ρ(ψs) ∈ Γ(T ∗M ⊗ T M) ∼= Γ(End(T M)). Note that
τ ∇comb does not map symmetric 2-tensors into symmetric ones, while τ ∇ does. As a
consequence, Eq. (48) mixes Φsym and Φskew; in detail, it decomposes into

(49)

τ ∇s(Φsym) = Symhρ(ψs), Φskewi ,
τ ∇s(Φskew) = Althρ(ψs), Φsymi

for all s ∈ Γ(A). Here the contraction is taken by the natural pairings T M ⊗ Λ2(T ∗M) →
T ∗M and T M ⊗ Sym2(T ∗M) → T ∗M, respectively, extending the pairing between T M
and T ∗M by the Leibniz rule.14 Using Eq. (34), this in turn can be rewritten in the form
of Eqs. (8) with the upper sign (Φsym := g, Φskew := B) as found in the string-physics
applications (cf. also [5]). More explicitly, let (ea)rkA
a=1 be a local basis of sections, such that
∇ea = ωb

aeb, and ρa = ρ(ea), then the Eqs. (49) read as follows:

aeb, ψea = ψb

(50)

Lρag = ωb
LρaB = ωb

a ∨ ιρbg + ψb
a ∧ ιρbB + ψb

a ∨ ιρbB ,
a ∧ ιρbg .

We will come back to this example further below again.

The following construction extends that of Example 8 (cf. [15]). Before stating the propo-
sition to be proven, we set up some noations and terminology. A bilinear form b on a vector
space T uniquely corresponds to a linear map ˆb : T → T ∗ by b(v1, v2) = hˆb(v1), v2i for all
v1, v2 ∈ V ; the bilinear form is non-degenerate if and only if ˆb is invertible. It is obvious
that every bilinear form with a positive (or negative) deﬁnite symmetric part is non-
degenerate. Whenever the inverse map ˆb−1 exists, it determines a bilinear form on T ∗ by
means of b−1(λ1, λ2) := hλ1, ˆb−1(λ2)i for λ1, λ2 ∈ T ∗. We call a map λ : (T1, b1) → (T2, b2)

14If, alternatively, the contraction of T M is deﬁned to be taken with the ﬁrst factor of the respective

2-tensor only, there is a factor of 2 to insert on the r.h.s. of each equation.

GEOMETRY ON THE BASE OF A LIE ALGEBROID

23

such that b1(u, v) = b2(λ(u), λ(v)) for all u, v ∈ T1 a generalized isometry. With the
above deﬁnitions and for a non-degenerate b, ˆb : (T, b) → (T ∗, b−1) is such a generalized
isometry. For every vector subspace V ⊂ T the left-orthogonal subspace is deﬁned as
V ⊥ = {v ∈ T | b(v, V ) = 0}. It follows immediately that V and V ⊥ are complimentary
if and only if the restriction of b onto V is non-degenerate; e.g. this is always satis-
ﬁed if the symmetric part of b is positive (or negative) deﬁnite. An easy computation
shows that an invertible ˆb gives rise to a generalized isometry between (V ⊥, b|V ⊥) and
(Ann(V ), b−1|Ann(V )), where Ann(V ) ⊂ T ∗ is the annihilator of V .
Proposition 11. Given a (regular) foliation F of a smooth manifold M equipped with
a non-degenerate bilinear form Φ, then its co-normal bundle N ∗F with the canonically
induced bilinear form is invariant with respect to leaf-preserving diﬀeomorphisms on M if
and only if there exist connections ∇± on A = T F such that (48) holds true.

Corollary 4. If the foliated manifold has, in addition, a smooth quotient Q = M/F , then
T ∗Q can be equipped with a bilinear form such that for any point p ∈ M the natural linear
isomorphism N ∗

[p]Q is a generalized isometry.

p M → T ∗

Proof (of Proposition 11). Let β1, β2 be sections of N ∗F , the annihilator of T F , which
are transversally invariant, i.e. invariant under the action of “vertical” vector ﬁelds (vector
ﬁelds parallel to T F ; this allows to identify β1 and β2 with 1-forms on the quotient space
Q whenever it is smooth). As soon as we prove that Φ−1(β1, β2) is transversally invariant
if and and only if (48) is fulﬁlled for some ∇±, the assertion of Proposition 11 follows.
Indeed, since the above 1-forms are invariant under the Lie derivative along any section
s of A = T F , we must require that Ls (Φ−1) (β1, β2) = 0. Therefore the restriction
of Ls (Φ−1) to N ∗F vanishes at every point, which is true if and only if Ls (Φ−1) ∈
Γ(T F ⊗ T M + T M ⊗ T F ). Taking into account that Φ is non-degenerate, we get that for
any locally deﬁned basis of vector ﬁelds (ρa)r
a=1 of T F , r = dim F , there exist two local
r × r matrices ω± such that the following identity holds true:

where the second and the third terms of the l.h.s. are left and right contractions of a
contravariant 2-tensor with a 1-form, respectively. By formula (34), extended to sections
of T M ⊗ T M, we conclude that the identity (51) is equivalent to the existence of local
connections on A such that τ ∇comb(Φ−1) = 0 and thus (48) is satisﬁed. Using a partition
of unity, we obtain global connections on A with the same property. (cid:3)

Remark 8. If the restriction of Φ onto T F is non-degenerate, then so is the induced
bilinear form on T F ⊥ and, by the canonical generalized isometry, on N ∗F . Hence the
bilinear form on T ∗Q, obtained under the assumptions of Proposition 11, has an inverse,
which we will denote by ΦQ.

Example 10. A generalized Riemannian structure on an n−dimensional manifold M is a
rank n subbundle of the exact Courant algebroid T M ⊕T ∗M on which the inner product is
positive deﬁnite; this construction has been used in several occasions already, but explicitly
introduced in particular by N. Hitchin ([11], cf. also [14] for an exposition of generalized
geometry). A generalized Riemannian structure is in one-to-one correspondence with a
bilinear form Φ = g + B, where g is a Riemannian metric tensor and B is a skew-
symmetric 2-form; the correspondence is given by the graph of Φ considered as a bundle

(51)

Lρa(cid:0)Φ−1(cid:1) + ρb ⊗ h(cid:0)ω+(cid:1)b

a , Φ−1i + hΦ−1,(cid:0)ω−(cid:1)b

ai ⊗ ρb = 0 ,

24

ALEXEI KOTOV AND THOMAS STROBL

map T M → T ∗M. Then (A, ∇±) is compatible with (M, g, B) if τ ∇comb(g + B) = 0,
rewritten in other ways also in Remark 7 above. Let us notice that the restriction of
a generalized Riemannian structure on any subbundle of T M is non-degenerate as its
symmetric part is positive deﬁnite. Thus under the assumptions of Proposition 11, Remark
8 permits us to conclude that we obtain a generalized Riemannian structure ΦQ ≡ gQ +BQ
on the quotient space Q = M/F .

If a bilinear form is totally skew-symmetric, Φ = B ∈ Ω2(M), and setting ψ = 0, the
equations (50) reduce to τ ∇(B) = 0, a compatibility condition similar in spirit to (37);
locally this equation takes the form LρaB = ωb
a ∧ ιρaB (cf. Remark 7). We now consider
B to be a symplectic form:

Deﬁnition 7. Let (A, ρ, [·, ·]) be a Lie algebroid over a symplectic manifold (M, Ω) and
∇ be a connection on A. Then (A, ∇) and (M, Ω) are called compatible, if

(52)

τ ∇(Ω) = 0 .

Example 11. Given a (regular) foliation F on a symplectic manifold (M, Ω) with a
smooth quotient Q = M/F and a connection ∇ on A = T F , such that the compatibility
condition (52) is fulﬁlled, we immediately get a canonical bivector ﬁeld on the quotient
space. This follows by the same method as in Proposition 11. The bivector ﬁeld on Q
obtained above is clearly Poisson and so is the quotient map. In addition, the quotient
Poisson structure is symplectic if and only if the restriction of Ω on the ﬁbers of F is
non-degenerate.

Deﬁntion 7 and Example 11 admit a straightforward generalization to the Poisson case: a
Lie algebroid A with a connection ∇ over M is compatible with a Poisson structure P if
τ ∇(P) = 0. Under the assumptions of Example 11, we get a canonical Poisson structure
on the quotient space Q = M/F such that the quotient map is Poisson.

Remark 9. For a regular foliation F , transversal invariance of a tensor ﬁeld is equiva-
lent to the existence of a connection ∇ on T F such that τ ∇ annihilates this tensor ﬁeld.
However, for non-regular foliations, annihilation by some τ ∇ is a stronger requirement
than transversal invariance: The standard metric g on R2 is transversally invariant with
respect to the singular foliation determined by the Lie algebroid from Proposition 6. How-
ever, we proved in Proposition 6 that there is no connection ∇ such that Eq. (37) is
satisﬁed.

6. Anchored bundles and free Cartan-Lie algebroids

The main idea of this part of our paper was inspired by the observation written in the last
paragraph of Section 4. So far we have talked only about Lie algebroids, although some
of the formulas make sense already for anchored bundles. The natural question arises
whether it is possible to extend an anchored bundle supplied with a connection which is
compatible with a geometric structure on the base to a Lie algebroid with a connection
which obeys the same compatibility conditions. It is shown by M. Kapranov in [12] that
any anchored module, a module over a commutative algebra together with a morphism of
modules with values in the module of derivations of the algebra, gives rise in a canonical

GEOMETRY ON THE BASE OF A LIE ALGEBROID

25

way to a free inﬁnite-dimensional Lie-Rinehart algebra.15 A free Lie-Rinehart algebra
admits a natural ﬁltration the associated graded algebra to which is the free Lie algebra
in the category of modules over the same algebra generated by this module.

We will adapt the construction of Kapranov to the category of smooth real manifolds
(the original paper operates with Lie-Rinehart algebras over arbitrary ground ﬁelds).
Our Theorem 2, to be proven below, is a reﬁnement of the above-mentioned result: given
any anchored bundle with a connection (E, ∇) there is a unique Cartan connection ∇f ree
on the corresponding free Lie algebroid Af ree(E) which extends the one on E; we call it
the free Cartan-Lie algebroid generated by an anchored bundle with connection. Albeit
we deal only with smooth manifolds, a pure algebraic version in the spirit of [12] is quite
obvious. Furthermore, if (E, ∇) is compatible with a geometric structure on the base, so
is (Af ree(E), ∇f ree). Although it would be desirable to ﬁnd conditions under which the
free Cartan-Lie algebroid admits a ﬁnite-dimensional reduction, for the moment we leave
this problem open.

Let us denote by Anchc(M) the category whose objects are anchored bundles with con-
nections and morphisms are connection-preserving bundle morphisms commuting with
the anchor maps. Let CLie(M) be the category of Cartan-Lie algebroids over M. Every
Cartan-Lie algebroid is an anchored bundle and every connection-preserving Lie algebroid
morphism is a morphism of the underlying anchored bundle structures, thus there is a
natural forgetful functor

(53)

CLie(M) → Anchc(M) .

Theorem 2. The functor (53) admits a left-adjoint functor

(54)

F R : Anchc(M) → CLie(M)

whose value at an anchored bundle with connection (E, ρ, ∇) is a Lie algebroid F R(E)
together with a Cartan connection and an embedding of anchored bundles ı : E → F R(E),
called the free Lie algebroid generated by E. Thus we have a natural isomorphism

(55)

HomCLie(M )(F R(E), A) = HomAnchc(M )(E, A)

for every Cartan-Lie algebroid A.

In other words, for every connection-preserving morphism of anchored bundles φ : E →
A there exists a unique Cartan-Lie algebroid morphism ˜φ : F R(E) → A such that the
following diagram is commutative:

7♥

♥

ı
♥
♥

♥

♥

♥

♥

♥

♥

♥

φ

♥

♥

E )

F R(E)

˜φ

/ A

Proof. The proof will consist of several consequential steps. First, we construct the free
almost Lie algebroid F Ralm(E) generated by an anchored bundle E. This follows by the
same method as in [12]. By an almost Lie algebroid we shall mean an anchored bundle
with a skew-symmetric bilinear operation which obeys all Lie algebroid properties but

15A Lie-Rinehart algebra is an algebraic counterpart of a Lie algebroid, cf. [23].



	
7
/
26

ALEXEI KOTOV AND THOMAS STROBL

for the Jacobi identity, i.e. the bracket is antisymmetric, it satisﬁes the Leibniz rule with
respect to the anchor map, and the anchor is a morphism of brackets.

We start with F Lalm(E/R), the free almost Lie R−algebra generated by the real vector
space of sections of E, along with F Lalm(E), the bundle of free almost Lie algebras
generated by E as a bundle over M. Recall that an almost Lie algebra is alike a Lie
algebra except that the bracket operation does not necessarily respect the Jacobi identity.
Both F Lalm(E/R) and F Lalm(E) are naturally graded, such that their degree d factors

of F Lalm(E/R) and Γ(cid:0)F Lalm(E)(cid:1) are spanned by brackets involving exactly d elements.
It is easily seen that all homogeneous factors of Γ(cid:0)F Lalm(E)(cid:1) are ﬁnite-rank projective

modules, hence we obtain the required grading of F Lalm(E) as a vector bundle whose
degree d factors are ﬁnite-dimensional vector bundles, so that the ﬁber at x ∈ M is
naturally isomorphic to the free almost Lie algebra generated by Ex. The free almost Lie
algebroid F Ralm(E) is the union of an increasing sequence of anchored ﬁnite-rank bundles

(56)

F Ralm

≤1 (E) ⊂ F Ralm

≤2 (E) ⊂ . . . ,

which are deﬁned inductively starting from F R≤1(E) = E, q1 = id. Suppose F R≤d(E) is
constructed as an anchored bundle with the anchor ρd together with a surjective homo-
morphism of real vector spaces

F Lalm

≤d (E/R) =

dMi=1

F Lalm

d

(E/R)

qd−→ Γ(F Ralm

≤d (E)) ,

then we deﬁne F Ralm
of F Lalm

d+1(E/R) by the following relations:

≤d+1(E) as an anchored bundle whose space of sections is the quotient

[s, r] = 0 , s ∈ Γ(E) , r ∈ Ker(qd) ,

[f s, s′] − [s, f s′] = ρ(s)(f )s′ − ρd(s′)(f )s , s ∈ Γ(E) , s′ ∈ Γ(F R≤d(E)) .

≤d (E/R) descends to a bracket on smooth sections of F Ralm(E). The
The bracket on F Lalm
anchor map is uniquely determined by requiring the morphism property. The multiplica-
tion on smooth functions is given by the formula

f [s, s′] = [f s, s′] + ρd′(s′)(f )s = [s, f s′] − ρd(s)(f )s′ ,

where s and s′ are arbitrary sections of F Ralm
tion {F Ralm
graded almost Lie algebroid is isomorphic to F Lalm(E) with trivial anchor map.

≤d′ (E), respectively. The ﬁltra-
≤d (E)} makes F Ralm(E) into a ﬁltered almost Lie algebroid, and the associated

≤d (E) and F Ralm

It is worth mentioning that in the end the image of the anchor becomes involutive and
although the original anchored bundle does not necessarily carry a (singular) foliation,
one now obtains an involutive (singular) tangent distribution which contains the image
of ρ of the original E.

Now we extend the connection on E to the free almost Lie algebroid obtained above. For
any s, s′ ∈ Γ(E) we claim

(57)

∇[s, s′] = Ls (∇s′) − Ls′ (∇s) − ∇ρ(∇s)s′ + ∇ρ(∇s′)s ,

GEOMETRY ON THE BASE OF A LIE ALGEBROID

27

where Ls is determined by (18). The expression (57) is well-deﬁned as

∇ ([s, f s′] − ρ(s)(f )s′ − f [s, s′]) = 0

for any smooth function f . This gives rise to the connection on F Ralm
≤d (E) for d = 2. Now
we proceed by induction for all d. Let us notice that in each step we automatically obtain
S = 0, where S is deﬁned by the same formula (23) as in the case of a Lie algebroid.

The last task is to obtain a Cartan structure on the free almost Lie algebroid and ﬁnally
on the associated free Lie algebroid.

Given an almost Lie algebroid L, there is a unique almost Lie algebroid structure on J 1(L)
compatible with prolongations in the sense of formulas (16) and (17). The construction of
the brackets jet prolongation is straightforward; also there is a (sophisticated) description
of the canonical almost Lie algebroid structure on the bundle of k−jets of L in terms of
supergeometry, see Remark 10 below. The notion of a Cartan connection along with the
formula for the compatibility tensor does not need the bracket to obey the Jacobi identity,
thus starting with a connection ∇ which satisﬁes S = 0, we obtain a morphism of almost
Lie algebroids L → J 1(L) determined by the corresponding splitting σ as in (15). The
Jacobiator, which values the bracket’s failure to satisfy the Jacobi identity, is deﬁned by
Jac (s1, s2, s3) = [s1, [s2, s3]] + c.p. for every triple of sections of L. From the deﬁnition of
an almost Lie algebroid it follows that Jac is totally anti-symmetric and C ∞(M)−linear
in all its arguments. Since σ is a morphism of the brackets, one has

(58)

σ ◦ Jac = Jac ◦ σ ⊗ σ ⊗ σ .

Lemma 6. Jac is a covariantly constant map.

Proof. From (16) we obtain

Jac (j1(s1), j1(s2), j1(s3)) = j1 (Jac (s1, s2, s3))

for all s1, s2, s3 ∈ Γ(L). On the other hand, from the almost Lie algebroid counterpart of
(19) and using that ρ is a morphism of the brackets we have for all ω ∈ Ω1(M)

(59)

Jac (j1(s1), j1(s2), ω ⊗ s3)) = ω ⊗ Jac (s1, s2, s3) .

From (19) and (20) we conclude that for all sectons s1, s2, s3 and 1-forms ω1, ω2, ω3

Jac (j1(s1), ω2 ⊗ s2, ω3 ⊗ s3)) = 0 ,
Jac (ω1 ⊗ s1, ω2 ⊗ s2, ω3 ⊗ s3) = 0 .

So we see that the only non-vanishing term of (58) is of the form (59); this implies
∇(Jac) = 0 or, equivalently, that the following diagram is commutative:

Γ (Λ3(L))

Jac

∇

/ Γ(L)

∇

Γ (T ∗M ⊗ Λ3(L))

id⊗Jac

/ Γ (T ∗M ⊗ L)

Here the connection on Λ3(L) is extended by the Leibniz rule. This completes the proof
of Lemma 6. (cid:3)



/


/
28

ALEXEI KOTOV AND THOMAS STROBL

Corollary 5. Any Cartan connection on an almost Lie algebroid preserves the Jacobi
ideal of L, i.e. the ideal of sections generated by the image of the Jacobiator, thus it gives
rise to a Cartan connection on the quotient Lie algebroid whenever it exists.

Let us come back to the free almost Lie algebroid generated by E; it is obvious that the
Jacobi ideal of F Ralm(E) inherits the ﬁltration from the free almost Lie algebroid, such
that the degree d factors are ﬁnite-rank modules over the algebra of smooth functions.
Hence the quotient of F Ralm(E) by the Jacobi ideal is a Lie algebroid, which we denote
by F R(E). In [12] it is called the free Lie algebroid generated by E. By Lemma 6 and
Corollary 5, we obtain the unique Cartan connection on F R(E) which is compatible with
the inclusion E ֒→ F R(E). We leave it to the reader to verify functorial properties of
this construction. (cid:3)

Remark 10. Let L be an almost Lie algebroid. Consider L[1] → M as a graded su-
perbundle with the degree 1 odd ﬁbers. In the way similar to the Lie algebroid case [25],
an almost Lie algebroid structure is in one-to-one correspondence with a degree 1 vector
ﬁeld Q on L[1], deﬁned by the Cartan’s formula, such that Q2 commutes with all smooth
functions on the base M. However, in contrast to Lie algebroids, the odd vector ﬁeld Q is
not necessarily homological, as Q2 = 0 is equivalent to the Jacobi identity for the almost
Lie algebroid structure on L. Now the canonical prolongation of Q to the total space of
J k(L[1]) = J k(L)[1] determines an almost Lie algebroid structure on the space of k−jets
of L compatible with the given one on L.

A possible adaptation of Proposition 2 is to take E to be an anchored bundle and ∇ to
be a connection on E. In this setting, the formula (34) still makes sense and the operator
τ ∇ is well-deﬁned, although is is not an A-connection any more.

Deﬁnition 8. Let (E, ρ) be an anchored bundle on M and ∇1, . . . , ∇m be vector bundle
connections on E which give rise to τ ∇1, . . . , τ ∇m on tensor forms on M. An m−linear
form χ is called compatible with (E, ∇1, . . . , ∇m) if τ ∇comb(χ) = 0, where ∇comb is con-
structed in the same manner as in Deﬁnition 6 and Remark 6.

Proposition 12. Let (E, ρ, ∇1, . . . , ∇m) be an anchored bundle with m connections and χ
be an m−linear form on the base M, such that the compatibility condition τ ∇comb(χ) = 0
holds true. Let us extend ∇1, . . . , ∇m to the corresponding Cartan connections ˜∇1, . . . , ˜∇m

on F R(E). Then (cid:16)F R(E), ˜∇1, . . . , ˜∇m)(cid:17) and (M, χ) are also compatible.

Proof. Given that each ˜∇i on F R(E) =: A respects the Lie algebroid structure in the
sense of S = 0, we can apply Proposition 2:
it follows that all A-connections obtained
in this way are Lie algebroid representations of F R(E), hence so is the combined A-
connection. Since the free Lie algebroid is generated by E, i.e. the space of its sections
is spanned over smooth functions by all multiple brackets of sections of E, the identity
τ ∇comb
(χ) = 0 for all sections ξ of F R(E), which
gives the proof of the desired property. (cid:3)

(χ) = 0 for all s ∈ Γ(E) implies τ ∇comb

s

ξ

GEOMETRY ON THE BASE OF A LIE ALGEBROID

29

Appendix A: Flat Killing Lie algebroids, simple examples and facts

A typical example of a ﬂat Killing Cartan Lie algebroid, i.e. a Killing Cartan Lie algebroid
as deﬁned in Deﬁnition 4 such that ∇ is ﬂat but which is not just an action Lie algebroid
mapping into isometries by means of ρ, but locally so only (cf. also Example 6), is the
following one:16

Example 12. Consider the unit square [0, 1]×[0, 1] ∈ R2 with an identiﬁcation of opposite
sides so as to yield a Klein bottle M. Equipping M with the natural metric g and its Levi-
Civita connection ∇, we get another example of a ﬂat Killing Lie algebroid. Similarly,
the foliation of R2 by vertical lines induces a foliation F on M and (T F ,∇,g) forms
a sub-Killing Lie algebroid of the previous one. In both cases, locally constant sections
correspond to local Killing vectors, while some of them do not extend to globally constant
(non-zero) sections due to the non-triviality of the bundles.

For the same reason, T M and T F cannot be action Lie algebroids in the last example,
while locally they are, corresponding to the fact that some of the local isometries of the
Klein bottle do not extend to global ones.

Note that one cannot expect to necessarily always ﬁnd all Killing vectors as coming from
constant sections, also not locally. Here two examples, both of which are in fact also (ﬂat
Killing) Cartan Lie algebroids:

Example 13. Let M = Rn with its standard ﬂat metric g, A the standard Lie algebroid
A := T M ∼= Rn ×Rn, equipped with its standard ﬂat connection of a vector space. It shows
that there are Killing vectors which do not arise from ﬂat sections: While the generators
of translations, ∂i, are constantly covariant and Killing vectors by the above argument, the
generators of rotations, mij := xi∂j − xj∂i, i 6= j, are Killing vectors of g without being
covariantly constant. In fact, there is no (globally deﬁned) connection ∇ on T M making
these generators covariantly constant.

Example 14. Let M0 = S2 ⊂ R3 equipped with its standard metric of constant curvature.
Denote by e1, e2, and e3 a basis of the three-dimensional isometry Lie algebra so(3).
Consider a region M ⊂ M0 where e1 and e2 are non-zero everywhere. Let A = T M be the
standard Lie algebroid over this M. Deﬁne a connection on A by requiring ∇e1 = 0 = ∇e2.
Now since on M one has e3 = f1e1 + f2e2 for non-constant functions f1 and f2, ∇e3 6= 0,
while still ρ(e3) = [ρ(e1), ρ(e2)] is a Killing vector ﬁeld.

In both of these examples, the bundle has smaller rank than the dimension of isometry
group of the Riemannian base manifold. But the situation in this context here can be
also reversed easily: There is a simple procedure to construct ﬂat Killing Lie algebroids of
higher rank from any given: Let (A0, ∇0, g) be a ﬂat Killing Lie algebroid over a manifold
M. Choose any Lie algebroid extension A,

0 → B → A → A0 → 0 ,

of A0 by a bundle of Lie algebras B over M. Assume that A admits a ﬂat connection ∇
projecting to ∇0 on A0. Then the triple (A, ∇, g) also deﬁnes a ﬂat Killing Lie algebroid.
Note that here the image of ρ and of ρ0 coincide at each x ∈ M.

16This example was suggested to us by A. Weinstein.

30

ALEXEI KOTOV AND THOMAS STROBL

In general, the relation of a ﬂat Killing Lie algebroid to an action Lie algebroid with
identically induced foliation can be intricate. What always holds true, however, is stated
in the following

Proposition 13. Let (A, ∇, g) be a ﬂat Killing Lie algebroid over M, i.e. a Killing Lie
algebroid where ∇ is ﬂat. Then every point x ∈ M permits a neighborhood x ∋ U ⊂ M
over which there exists a ﬁnite-rank action Lie algebroid the induced singular foliation of
which is identical to the one of A|U . This action Lie algebroid is canonically a ﬂat Killing
Cartan Lie algebroid.

Proof. For every x ∈ M we may choose a neighborhood with a covariantly constant
basis (ea)rkA
a=1 of sections ea ∈ Γ(A|U ) satisfying ∇ea = 0. Its image by ρ provides a set of
Killing vectors which, over C ∞(U), generates the image of ρ|U —the integral surfaces of
this (possibly singular) distribution provides the (possibly singular) foliation of U. Taken
over R, the same set of Killing vectors generates a ﬁnite-dimensional Lie algebra gU acting
on U. U × gU is the searched-for action Lie algebroid. (cid:3)

Remark 11. In both examples Example 13 and Example 14, the action Lie algebroid con-
structed along the above lines glues together to globally ﬂat Killing Cartan Lie algebroids
M ×iso(g) where iso(g) is the full isometry Lie algebra of g. In Example 14, e.g., M ×so(3)
(equipped with its canonical ﬂat connection). There now is a Lie algebroid morphism from
this action Lie algebroid into the original (ﬂat Killing Cartan) Lie algebroid A = T M, by
mapping the standard so(3)-basis to e1, e2, e3. However, this morphism does not respect
the connection ∇, and thus is not a morphism in the category of Killing Lie algebroids.
In Example 12, on the other hand, we found a local isomorphism as (ﬂat Cartan) Killing
Lie algebroids.

References

[1] A. Alekseev, T. Strobl. Current Algebras and Diﬀerential Geometry. JHEP 0503, 035, 2005.
[2] A. D. Blaom. Geometric structures as deformed inﬁnitesimal symmetries. Trans. Amer. Math.Soc.

358, 3651–3671, 2006.

[3] A. D. Blaom. Lie algebroids and Cartan’s method of equivalence. Trans. Amer. Math.Soc. 364, 3071–

3135. 2012.

[4] R. Bott. Notes on the Spencer resolution. Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass., 1963.
[5] A. Chatzistavrakidis, A. Deser, L. Jonke and T. Strobl, Strings in Singular Space-Times and Their

Universal Gauge Theory. In preparation.

[6] M. Crainic, R. L. Fernandes. Integrability of Lie brackets. Ann. of Math. 157(2), 575–620, 2003.
[7] A.C. da Silva, A. Weinstein. Geometric Models for Noncommutative Algebras. Berkeley Mathematics

Lecture Notes 10, 184pp., 1999.

[8] M. del Hoyo, R. L. Fernandes. Riemannian metrics on Lie groupoids. arXiv:1404.5989
[9] R. L. Fernandes. Lie algebroids, holonomy and characteristic classes. Adv. Math., 170(1), 119–179,

2002.

[10] M. Henneaux, C. Teitelboim. Quantization of Gauge Systems. Princeton University Press, 1992.
[11] N. Hitchin. Generalized Calabi-Yau manifolds. Q. J. Math. 54 (3), 281–308, 2003.
[12] M. Kapranov. Free Lie algebroids and the space of paths. Selecta Mathematica 13, 277–319, 2007.
[13] A. Kotov, V. Salnikov and T. Strobl. 2d Gauge Theories and Generalized Geometry. JHEP 21, 2014.
[14] A. Kotov, T. Strobl. Generalizing Geometry - Algebroids and Sigma Models. Handbook on Pseudo-
Riemannian Geometry and Supersymmetry, IRMA Lectures in Mathematics and Theoretical Physics
16, 209–262, 2010.

[15] A. Kotov, T. Strobl. Gauging without Initial Symmetry. J. Geom. Phys. 99, 184-189, 2016.

GEOMETRY ON THE BASE OF A LIE ALGEBROID

31

[16] A. Kotov, T. Strobl. Curving Yang-Mills-Higgs Gauge Theories. Phys.Rev.D 92 085032, 2015.
[17] K. Mackenzie. General Theory of Lie Groupoids and Lie Algebroids. Cambridge University Press,

501 pp., 2005.

[18] C. Mayer, T. Strobl. Lie Algebroid Yang Mills with Matter Fields. J. Geom. Phys. 59, 1613–1623,

2009.

[19] I. Moerdijk, J. Mrcun. Introduction to Foliations and Lie Groupoids. Cambridge University Press,

184pp., 2003.

[20] P. Molino. Riemannian Foliations. Progress in Mathematics 73, Birkh¨auser, Boston, 344 pp., 1988.
[21] B. O’Neill. The fundamental equations of a submersion. Michigan Math. J. 13(4), 459–469, 1966.
[22] J. Pradines. Th´eorie de Lie pour les groupoides diﬀ´erentiables. Calcul diﬀ´erentiel dans la cat´egorie

des groupoides inﬁnit´esimaux. Comptes rendus Acad. Sci. Paris 264 A, 245–248, 1967.

[23] G. Rinehart. Diﬀerential forms for general commutative algebras. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 108,

195–222, 1963.

[24] T. Strobl. Algebroid Yang-Mills Theories. Phys.Rev.Lett. 93 211601, 2004.
[25] A. Vaintrob. Lie algebroids and homological vector ﬁelds. Russian Math. Surveys 52, 428–429, 1997.
[26] U. Lindstrom, M. Rocek, R. von Unge, M. Zabzine. Generalized Kaehler manifolds and oﬀ-shell

supersymmetry. Commun. Math. Phys. 269, 833, 2007.

[27] M. Zabzine. Lectures on Generalized Complex Geometry and Supersymmetry. Archivum mathe-

maticum (supplement) 42, 119–146, 2006.

Alexei Kotov: Departamento de Matem´atica, Universidade Federal do Paran´a C.P.

019081, 81531-990 Curitiba - Paran´a, Brazil

E-mail address: oleksii.kotovATuit.no

Thomas Strobl: Institut Camille Jordan, Universit´e Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Univer-

sit´e de Lyon, 43 boulevard du 11 novembre 1918, 69622 Villeurbanne Cedex, France

E-mail address: stroblATmath.univ-lyon1.fr

