Human judgment vs. models for management

This is the pre-peer reviewed version of the following article:

Holden, M. H., and Ellner, S. P. (2016). Human judgment vs. quantitative models for

the management of ecological resources. Ecological Applications. DOI:10.1890/15-1295.

which has been published in ﬁnal form at

http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1890/15-1295/full

For the most up to date version which includes results on how well the human subjects

learned and improved their harvest strategy as the game advanced, a discussion that better

reﬂects the authors’ current views about the results presented in this study, and many mi-

nor corrections, please see the article at the above link or email the corresponding author,

Matthew Holden, m.holden1.@uq.edu.au, to request the post-peer reviewed version of the

manuscript.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
5
1

.

 
 
]
E
P
o
i
b
-
q
[
 
 

1
v
8
1
5
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Human judgment vs. theoretical models for the

management of ecological resources

Matthew H. Holden1,2, Stephen P. Ellner1,3

1: Center for Applied Mathematics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, 14853. USA.

2: ARC Centre of Excellence for Environmental Decisions, University of Queensland, 523

Goddard, St Lucia, 4072. Australia.

3: Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, 14853.

USA.

Corresponding Author: Matthew H Holden, m.holden1@uq.edu.au, ARC Centre of Ex-

cellence for Environmental Decisions, University of Queensland, 523 Goddard, St Lucia,

4072. Australia.

Abstract

Despite major advances in quantitative approaches to natural resource manage-

ment, there has been resistance to using these tools in the actual practice of managing

ecological populations. Given a management problem and a set of ecological and eco-

nomic assumptions, translated into a model, optimization methods can be used to

solve for the most cost eﬀective management actions. However, when the underlying

assumptions are not met, such methods can potentially lead to decisions that harm

the environment and economy. Managers who develop decisions based on past experi-

ence and judgment, without the aid of theoretical models, can potentially learn about

the system, constantly modifying their mental models to develop ﬂexible management

strategies. However, these strategies are often based on subjective criteria and equally

invalid and often unstated assumptions. Therefore it is unclear which approach works

best for managing biological populations. In this paper, we explore how well humans,

2

Human judgment vs. models for management

using their experience and judgment, manage simulated ﬁshery populations in an on-

line computer game and compare their management outcomes to the performance of

a variety of mathematical models. We consider harvest decisions generated using four

diﬀerent theoretical models: (1) the exact same model used to simulate the population

dynamics observed in the game, with the values of all parameters known [as a con-

trol], (2) the same model, but with unknown parameter values that must be estimated

from observed data during the game, (3) models that are structurally diﬀerent from

those used to generate the game dynamics and (4) a model that ignores age struc-

ture. Humans on average perform much worse than the models in cases 1 - 3, but

in a small minority of scenarios, models produce worse outcomes than those resulting

from humans making decisions based on experience and judgment. When the models

ignore age structure, they generated poorly performing management decisions, but still

outperformed humans using experience and judgment 66 percent of the time.

keywords: adaptive management, bioeconomics, conservation, ﬁsheries management, opti-

mal harvest, natural resource management, expert opinion, ecological modeling

Introduction

In the past 50 years, environmental management has beneﬁted from major advances

in decision science. Perhaps the most inﬂuential concept amongst these advances is adaptive

management, the iterative process of modeling, hypothesis testing, optimization, acting, and

monitoring to reduce uncertainty and maximize net beneﬁts (Holling, 1978; Walters, 1986).

Government agencies, scientists and theoreticians widely agree that adaptive management is

the best way to manage a biological population in cases where the beneﬁt of diﬀerent actions

strongly depends on uncertain ecological processes that can be learned through observing

system changes in response to management. (Possingham et al., 2001; Stankey et al., 2005;

Nichols and Williams, 2006; Walters, 2007; Williams and Brown, 2012; Game et al., 2014).

While managers often do practice some components of adaptive management by col-

lecting data and making decisions based on their ﬁndings, with the exception of a few large

scale management programs in ﬁsheries, waterfowl, forestry and conservation (e.g. Sainsbury,

3

Human judgment vs. models for management

1988; Moore and Conroy, 2006; Nichols et al., 2015; Johnson et al., 2015), managers rarely

use dynamic modeling and optimization, and instead use their experience, intuition and best

judgment as a substitute for formal system analysis (Johnson and Williams, 2015). This is

despite the fact that many scientists have proposed management plans based on dynamic

optimization methods, for a variety of ecological systems, which in theory oﬀer managers

substantial cost savings and improved environmental outcomes (e.g. McCarthy et al., 2001;

Westphal et al., 2003; Gerber et al., 2005; Wilson et al., 2006; Asano et al., 2008; Martin

et al., 2011; Johnson et al., 2011; Probert et al., 2011; Rout et al., 2014; Hughes et al., 2014;

Helmstedt et al., 2014).

One potential reason for the resistance to using mathematical modeling in manage-

ment is that it’s unclear how much modeling and optimization actually improve management

outcomes over expert opinion. This is especially a concern when model-based decisions are

calculated using passive dynamic optimization (Johnson and Williams, 2015). The deﬁning

feature of passive optimization is that the method does not consider the value of information

while solving for the optimal action, meaning a manager never sacriﬁces expected gains,

given current information, in order to learn about the system and potentially improve long

term beneﬁts.

When the value of improved system knowledge resulting from each action is incor-

porated explicitly into the objective, the optimization is referred to as active adaptive man-

agement. In other words, while both passive and active adaptive management incorporate

learning based on observations during system monitoring, only active adaptive manage-

ment values the future beneﬁt of knowledge resulting from decisions made in the present.

Unfortunately, unless a manager is willing to drastically simplify their description of the

management problem (e.g. Hauser and Possingham, 2008), active adaptive management is

computationally infeasible, and hence passive optimization is the predominant method for

solving theoretical management problems (Johnson and Williams, 2015).

Humans can possibly use intuition and past experience to incorporate the beneﬁt

of learning into decision making, without the aid of mathematical models. However, such

decisions are subjective. Can humans use their ﬂexibility to learn about the system to out-

perform a model-based, passive adaptive management program? Unfortunately, it is diﬃcult

4

Human judgment vs. models for management

to answer this question because experiments in management are, in general, not repeatable.

That is, once a manager makes a decision based on their expertise, it is usually impossible to

compare the outcome to how well an alternative decision, aided by a mathematical model,

would have done.

In this paper we take a ﬁrst step towards quantifying the economic beneﬁts of using

simple dynamic models and passive optimization methods, rather than human judgment,

to manage biological populations, by comparing the outcomes from humans and models

managing simulated populations. To do this, students in multiple college classes played an

online game where they managed a simulated ﬁshery. The data from each game was saved

on a server, and therefore we were able to compare exactly how mathematical models would

have played, compared to how the students actually played, for each unique instance of the

game.

Methods

Experiments

Students played two online “games”, accessed using a web browser, where they earned

“points” corresponding to the proﬁts from managing a simulated herring and a simulated

paciﬁc salmon ﬁshery. Below we describe the experiment for the herring ﬁshery game and

then explain how the salmon game was diﬀerent.

The students played the game using their laptops during the lecture period of two

courses, “Environmental Conservation” at Cornell University and “Principles of Biology” at

Ithaca College, and at the “Graduate Student Science Colloquium” at Cornell University.

Prior to managing each ﬁshery, the students ﬁlled out a multiple choice survey that asked

them their major, educational experience, ﬁshing experience, and environmental manage-

ment experience. See S1 in the online supplementary information for a copy of the survey.

After the survey, each game showed a page of directions describing the ﬁsh stock’s

population dynamics. In addition, Matthew Holden, the game facilitator, read a standard-

ized script aloud to each class, reiterating the points listed on the page. This included

5

Human judgment vs. models for management

statements about the existence of a ﬁshery carrying capacity, measurement error, environ-

mental randomness out of the managers control and how their performance would be scored.

See the online supplementary information for a copy of the game directions. Before starting

the game each student was randomly assigned a σ between 0 and 0.25. Students with high σ

experienced large random variation in stock biomass unrelated to their management actions.

Before playing the game the students played an 8 turn practice game. This served three

purposes: (1) they developed experience with the ﬁshery (2) we used the data from the

practice game to identify students who didn’t understand the directions and (3) it provided

a set of “past data” for the models and students to use as a basis for making decisions in

the future.

Before the user entered their ﬁrst harvest decision in the practice game, they were

presented with 3 harvest data points, and the resulting biomasses from the deterministic

version of the model underlying the simulated population dynamics, to give them some

context of the range of harvest values they could potentially enter. We chose to use the

deterministic model for this purpose so that all users saw the exact same past data before

playing the game. A description of the models used to simulate the biomass data observed

during the game is presented in the next section, titled “Simulated population dynamics.”

The game showed the user plots of harvest, estimated remaining biomass in the

ﬁshery, and cumulative proﬁt at each time step. See Fig. S1 in the online supplementary

information for a picture of the game display. At the beginning of each turn of the game, the

user entered an amount of biomass they wanted to harvest into a textbox, clicked enter, and

then the remaining biomass, post-harvest, grew according to the models that governed the

simulated ﬁshery, and the result was displayed on the screen numerically. In addition, all

plots updated, adding the player’s harvest choice to the harvest plot, the resulting biomass

to the biomass plot and the new accumulated proﬁt to the total proﬁt plot.

The user’s score was the discounted net proﬁt accumulated over the game, with a

discount rate of 0.03 and a constant proﬁt of 10,000 dollars per ton of biomass caught. In

addition, the user received a bonus added to their score at the end of the game, which was

the discounted proﬁt that would have been generated by harvesting all of the remaining

biomass left in the ﬁshery after the game was over. The bonus prevents optimal users from

6

Human judgment vs. models for management

harvesting everything on the last turn. Without adding the bonus, the user’s score would

be highly sensitive to their last harvest decision. This bonus is explained to the user in the

game directions (see S3 in the online supplementary information for a copy of the directions).

After a student completed their last turn, the game displayed their score in addition

to a leaderboard, which included the scores and initials of the top players in the class, up to

that point in time. The leaderboard provided an external incentive to play well. However,

the students did not receive a course grade or monetary incentives based on performance.

Throughout the game, data were stored locally on the user’s computer using browser

cookies. Upon exiting the game, these anonymous data was then sent to a server, using PHP

(a server-side programing language for web development, Welling and Thomson, 2003), and

stored in a database. These data included the time the user ﬁnished playing the game, an

anonymous user ID number, the student’s answers to the survey questions, the environmen-

tal noise variable σ, total proﬁt (i.e. “points”) and their time series of harvest decisions,

resulting biomasses, realizations of environmental noise and measurement error, and in ad-

dition the analogous data from their practice game. By recording the environmental noise

and measurement error values, experienced by the user, we were able to compare how any

strategy (in our case strategies generated by optimization models) would have performed

playing that user’s exact instance of the game.

After playing the unstructured herring game, the student was directed via a link to

the salmon game. Using cookies, the anonymous user ID number from the herring game was

saved and recorded along with a unique user ID number for the salmon game as well. In the

salmon game, the ﬁshery population dynamics were age-structured, so the game directions

also included information on the salmon’s life cycle, which consisted of juvenile (1 year-old)

and immature (2 year-old) ﬁsh survival and growth and adult ﬁsh (3 year-old) reproduction.

On each turn of the game, the user entered the biomass of adult and immature ﬁsh they

chose to harvest in two side-by-side textboxes. Plots of the student’s harvest and biomass

time series data were the same as for the herring ﬁshery, except now each plot had two

curves, one for immature ﬁsh and one for adult ﬁsh. The user could not observe or harvest

juvenile biomass. See Fig. S2 for a picture of the game display in the age-structured game.

The user’s score in the age-structured game was similar to the unstructured game,

7

Human judgment vs. models for management

except discounted net proﬁt was summed over both adult and immature harvest, and the

bonus was the discounted proﬁt that would have been generated by harvesting all of the

remaining adult biomass for three years after the game was over (it takes 3 years for the

recruits at the end of the game to return to be harvested as adults).

Another goal of this study was to collaborate with instructors to incorporate the game

into their curriculum to facilitate active learning. Therefore, while the students played each

version of this game multiple times, for pedagogical reasons, students were only asked to

try their hardest to score the most amount of points possible during their ﬁrst game. After

everyone had ﬁnished their ﬁrst game, they were allowed to collaborate and experiment, to

facilitate students learning the principles of conservation biology, and therefore we did not

include the students’ latter turns in the analysis.

Simulated population dynamics

The herring ﬁsh game was governed by a simple unstructured, one dimensional model, where

the manager chooses to harvest ht tons of biomass in year t, and the resulting biomass in year
t + 1, Bt+1, is a nonlinear function of the biomass that escaped harvest in year t, R(Bt − ht),
times a log-normally distributed random number, zt, with mean one and standard deviation

σ.

Bt+1 = ztR(Bt − ht).

(1)

We choose R to be the Beverton-Holt recruitment function, to exclude the possibility of

complicated chaotic and periodic dynamics in the absence of harvest,

R(B) =

b1B

1 + b2B

,

(2)

where b1 is recruitment per unit biomass at low densities and b2 controls the carrying capacity

of the population.

The student managing the population observes a stock biomass of mtBt, in year

t, where mt is a log-normally distributed random variable with mean one and standard

deviation 0.025. The small random variation in mt represents measurement error in assessing

8

Human judgment vs. models for management

the current ﬁsh abundance.

The age-structured ﬁsh game is based on the life cycle of Coho Salmon, including

three independent cohorts that undergo a three stage life cycle. Juvenile ﬁsh live in the

river and survive and grow into small ﬁsh which swim downstream to the ocean where they

mature, and ﬁnally they swim up stream to spawn and die. The manager sets a total catch of

h2,t for immature ﬁsh and h3,t for adult ﬁsh. Adult ﬁsh harvest occurs prior to recruitment,

giving population dynamics

B1,t+1 = ztR(B3,t − h3,t)

B2,t+1 = zta21B1,t
B3,t+1 = zta32(B2,t − h2,t),

(3)

where aij is the per unit biomass contribution, from age j biomass that escaped harvest, in

year t, to age i biomass, in year t + 1.

We parameterized the two models by starting with rough estimates from the literature

and then adjusted the values so that the growth rate of our hypothetical herring (unstruc-

tured) and coho salmon (age-structured) populations were equal. The reason for using equal

growth rates is that when comparing a user’s score from managing the population in the

unstructured game to the score from the age-structured game, we wanted to make sure that

any observed diﬀerence was due to demographic structure and not due to diﬀerences in the

absolute growth rate.

The average 3 year old coho salmon weighs 8.0 pounds and the average 2 year old

salmon weighs about 3.1 pounds (Marr et al., 1944). A typical survival probability for paciﬁc

salmon populations is 0.8 in good years and 0.28 in bad years (Worden et al., 2010). Hence,
we ﬁxed a32 = (8lbs/3.1lbs)(0.8 + 0.28)/2 ≈ 1.4. Coho salmon are more productive than
Herring at low densities, hence we chose to lower salmon recruitment as much as “believably”

possible so that the growth rate in our salmon and herring ﬁsheries matched. To do this, we

assumed the average survival probability of juvenile salmon was equal to the estimate for bad

years. Therefore, with the composite parameter of recruitment at low densities estimated in

(Worden et al., 2010) of 60 juveniles per spawner, we let the product of maximum recruitment
and juvenile survival be b1a21 = (0.28)(60recruits/spawner)(spawner/8lbs)(3lbs/recruit) ≈

9

Human judgment vs. models for management

6.6. Because juvenile ﬁsh are not harvested or observed, the exact value of a21 and b1 are

unimportant individually, as they only aﬀect the observed immature biomass through their

product, and therefore we arbitrarily let them equal 4.4 and 1.5, respectively, so that their

product was 6.6.

Our salmon parameters imply that at low density, the population will grow by a

factor of b1a21a32 = (6.6)(1.4) = 9.24 over 3 years. We therefore set herring maximum
population growth rate at b1 = 2.1 because 2.13 ≈ 9.24. The growth rate reported for
herring population dynamics ranges from 1.4− 1.8 (Bjørndal and Conrad, 1987; Nøstbakken
and Bjørndal, 2003), so while our herring growth rate is high, it is not unreasonably so.

Carrying capacity is arbitrarily set to 5, 400 tons, which determines b2 for both models.

Optimal strategies and statistical analysis

Explicit formulas for the optimal harvest strategy, as a function of the parameters, is well

known for the unstructured model, and presented in Reed (1979). A similar optimal harvest

rule for the age-structured model is given by Holden and Conrad (2015). In both cases the

optimal harvest rule is a ﬁxed escapement strategy, where escapement is the biomass that

escapes harvest.

In other words, the manager leaves a ﬁxed amount of ﬁsh in the ocean

and this ﬁxed amount of ﬁsh is called the escapement. For the parameters in the game, the

optimal escapement is 2049 tons of ﬁsh, in the unstructured game, and 556 tons of adult ﬁsh

(and all immature ﬁsh, i.e. no immature harvest) in the age-structured game (see case 1 in

Holden and Conrad, 2015).

The ﬁrst goal of the experiments was to compare the performance of users to ﬁtted

models playing the exact same instance of the game. As a control, we compared both the

ﬁtted models’ and users’ performance to the net discounted proﬁt generated by the optimal

constant escapement rule speciﬁed above (i.e. the optimal strategy with the true parameters

known).

For all ﬁtted models, parameters were initially estimated using the data generated

from the users’ eight turn practice game.

In the computer’s ﬁrst turn of the game, it

follows the optimal strategy (i.e., harvests the population down to the optimal escapement)

assuming these parameter estimates are true. After observing the stock biomass resulting

10

Human judgment vs. models for management

from its previous harvest, it re-estimates the parameters using the previous data along with

this new data point. It then harvests using the optimal escapement strategy based on the

new parameter estimates, and the process is continued until the game is over.

The parameter estimation for the unstructured game is performed by minimizing

sum of squared errors between the log transformed recruitment data, log [mt+1Bt+1], and log
transformed predicted recruitment under the model, log[R(mtBt − ht)], using the function
lsqcurvefit, an implementation of the trust-region-reﬂective algorithm, in MATLAB (MAT-

LAB, 2010). For the age-structured game, because juvenile biomass is unobservable, the
procedure is the same as above, except predicted recruitment is a21R(m3,tB3,t − h3,t) and
observed recruitment is m2,t+2B2,t+2. The transition between immature and adult biomass is

estimated similarly. It should be noted that because the mean of the lognormal measurement

error is not exactly zero, the above regression is slightly biased. However, correcting for this

small bias did not aﬀect the results presented in this paper.

We consider ﬁtted models with the same functional form (Beverton-Holt recruit-

ment) as the model underlying the simulated population dynamics, and in addition models

that incorrectly specify the functional form (discrete logistic and Ricker recruitment). For

the age-structured game we also considered escapement rules based on an unstructured

Beverton-Holt recruitment model (as in (1)). To estimate the parameters for this model, the

computer minimizes the sum squared error between the log transformed aggregate biomass
data, log[m2,t+1B2,t+1 + m3,t+1B3,t+1], and the predicted biomass, log[R(m2,tB2,t + m3,tB3,t −
h2,t − h3,t)]. It then harvests the two age classes in proportion to their respective observed
biomasses.

To test whether the percent of optimal proﬁt achieved by the user was correlated with

the answers to the survey questions, the standard deviation of environmental stochasticity,

and net proﬁt generated during the practice game, not including the bonus, we ﬁtted a linear

regression model, using the function lm in R (R Core Team, 2012).

Another goal of the experiments was to analyze what strategies the users were deploy-

ing and how well diﬀerent strategies performed compared to others. We compared the user’s

behavior to three idealized candidate strategies: constant harvest, proportional harvest and

constant escapement. Constant harvest means the user enters the same harvest at every

11

Human judgment vs. models for management

time step (harvest = β, where β is the user’s mean harvest). Under a proportional harvest
strategy the user harvests a constant proportion of the biomass (harvest = β· biomass, where
β is their harvest proportion). Constant escapement, means the user lets a constant amount
of biomass escape harvest (harvest = 0 if biomass ≤ β, harvest = biomass −β if biomass
> β, where β is the biomass they let escape harvest). After ﬁtting these three models to

the harvest vs. biomass data generated by each user during their game play, the users were

categorized into the three strategy classes based on which model ﬁt had the lowest sum of

squared errors. For the age-structured game we repeated the above analysis on adult harvest,

for simplicity (because exclusive adult harvest is optimal), but the results reported below

are similar if total harvest is used instead.

Results

Unstructured population game

All human subjects achieved less discounted net proﬁt than would be achieved using the

optimal constant escapement strategy with known parameters (Fig. 1a). This was not 100

percent certain to occur, because the optimal strategy is only optimal in expectation, and

therefore is not necessarily the most proﬁtable strategy during a run of atypical years. On

average, humans scored 65.4 percent of the discounted net proﬁt generated using the optimal

constant escapement strategy, and only 11.0 percent of humans achieved over 90 percent of

this optimal expected net proﬁt.

Most users performed worse than the escapement rules generated from the models

with parameters estimated from the historical harvest data (Fig. 1bcd) even if the model

made incorrect assumptions about the underlying recruitment function (Fig. 1cd).

The only signiﬁcant predictor of the user’s performance was their performance in the

practice game (p < 0.001). Simple linear regression of the user’s percent optimal proﬁt

on practice game score explained 28 percent of the variation in the user’s optimal proﬁt,

(R2 = 0.28, see Fig. S6).

When the practice score was removed as a predictor, the user’s level of study (fresh-

12

Human judgment vs. models for management

Figure 1: The percent of the mathematical model’s total proﬁt achieved by the user, in the
unstructured game, when the mathematical model is (a) Beverton-Holt with true parameters,
i.e. perfect information (b) Beverton-Holt but with parameters estimated from the data, (c)
discrete logistic with parameters estimated from the data and (d) Ricker with parameters
estimated from the data. For example, a value of 50 percent means the user generated half
the proﬁt the mathematical model did managing the exact same instance of the game. A
value of 200 percent means the user generated twice as much proﬁt as the model.

man, senior, PhD etc.), academic ﬁeld of study, and standard deviation of the observed

environmental stochasticity, still did not signiﬁcantly correlate with the user’s performance.

Two predictors were signiﬁcant in this model. The ﬁve students who responded “I am consid-

ering a career in ﬁsheries management, but have no experience” generated more proﬁt than

students that responded “I am not considering a career in ﬁsheries management” (p = 0.033)

and students in Cornell’s “Environmental Conservation” course scored signiﬁcantly higher

13

Perfect Information10203040(a)Fitted Beverton−Holt(b)Fitted Logistic5010015010203040(c)Fitted Ricker50100150(d)% of model profit achieved by usersFrequencyHuman judgment vs. models for management

than the students in Ithaca College’s “Principles of Biology” course (p = 0.041). However,

a linear model with just these two predictor variables only explained four percent of the

variation in user performance. It should also be noted that if we group the two students who

responded that they actually had ﬁsheries management experience with those ﬁve students

who indicated a career interest but no experience, the answer to the management experience

question does not signiﬁcantly correlate with the users’ scores. This suggests that the sample

size for students who were considering careers in ﬁsheries management may be too small to

draw any meaningful conclusions.

Classifying the humans’ harvest strategies into the three categories: constant harvest,

proportional harvest and constant escapement, people harvested a constant proportion (129

users) much more often than allowing a constant escapement (30 users) (Fig. 2). Only

39 users were classiﬁed as constant harvesters. Many users repeated their harvest decision

from the previous turn and the average user only entered 10 unique harvest values over

the course of the 21 turn game (Fig. S7). All ﬁve users who indicated a career interest in

ﬁsheries management were classiﬁed as proportional harvesters. Of the two users with actual

management experience, one was a constant harvester and the other was a proportional

harvester. The optimal policy type (constant escapement) was the only strategy not used

by students with ﬁsheries interests or experience.

Forty-ﬁve percent of humans allowed less ﬁsh to escape harvest, on average, than the

optimal value (Fig. 3a). In other words 45 percent of users over-ﬁshed the population while

55 percent of users under-ﬁshed the population. If we were to re-classify users whose median

escapement was within q percent of the optimal value as neither under nor over-ﬁshing,

the result that there are roughly the same number of over and under-ﬁshers holds for all

q < 70. So while many humans harvested sub-optimally, over and under-ﬁshing mistakes

were equally likely.

Students who used constant escapement strategies (circles in Fig. 3a) were more

likely to over-ﬁsh than to under-ﬁsh. Proportional harvesters (triangles in Fig. 3a) both

over and under-ﬁshed and constant harvesters (pluses in Fig. 3a) were much more likely to

under-ﬁsh. Note that constant harvesters really can only under-ﬁsh, because if they were to

over-ﬁsh, the biomass would eventually decrease to the point where their constant harvest

14

Human judgment vs. models for management

would crash the ﬁshery, at which point they would have to abandon the constant harvest

strategy.

When harvest rules generated by the ﬁtted Beverton-Holt recruitment model per-

formed poorly, this was most often due to over-ﬁshing rather than under-ﬁshing (Fig. 3b).

Poor model performance was due to a combination of two reasons: (1) during the practice

game the user allowed similar amounts of biomass to escape harvest on every turn, generat-

ing poor data for model ﬁtting, and (2) the standard deviation of the environmental noise

was high (Fig. 4). When both of these conditions are true, the data can misrepresent the

recruitment function (Fig. 4b compared to 4c) and lead to a poor escapement strategy.

Despite the poor escapement strategies that sometimes resulted from the ﬁtted models, they

still were less frequent and generated more long term discounted proﬁt than the worst users

(compare the low points in Fig. 3a to 3b).

In the supplementary information we show how quickly the parameter estimates,

during the Beverton-Holt model ﬁtting, converged to the true values governing the game

dynamics. In general, poor model ﬁts were rather common. For example, when decisions

were made based on the Beverton-Holt model with parameters estimated from biomass

observations during the game, even after all 21 turns, the estimated value for b2 was oﬀ by

more than 25 percent over 40 percent of the time (see turn 21 in S8a). Parameter estimation

of b1 was more accurate (S8b), and for both parameters the poor estimates improved as time

moved forward (S8ab). Still, in many of the cases where parameter estimates were oﬀ, the

ﬁtted models made more proﬁtable decisions than the users, despite the poor model ﬁt (1b).

15

Human judgment vs. models for management

Figure 2: (a-c) An example user’s harvest decisions vs. the biomass they observed prior
to making those decisions in the unstructured game. The black line is the best model ﬁt,
which for user 13 (a) is a proportional harvest strategy (PH), for user 120 (b) is a constant
escapement strategy (CE), for user 138 (c) is a constant harvest strategy (CH). (d) The sum
of squared error when ﬁtting each user’s harvest data, in the unstructured game, to a constant
escapement model vs. ﬁtting a proportional harvest model on a log-log scale. Points to the
right of the 1:1 line represent users whose variation in harvest is better explained by constant
escapement than proportional harvest. The blue triangle and red circle in (d) correspond to
the proportional harvester and constant escaper in (a) and (b) respectively.

16

biomassharvest20090016002009001600PH(user 13)(a)lllllllllllllllllllllbiomassharvest20090016002009001600CE(user 120)(b)biomassharvest100032505500100500900CH(user 138)(c)lllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllog(SSE) PH modellog(SSE) CE model8121681216(d)Human judgment vs. models for management

Figure 3: (a) The proﬁt generated by each user, in the unstructured game, relative to the
net proﬁt the optimal strategy with perfect information would generate in the corresponding
instance of the game, as a function of the median amount of ﬁsh the user let escape harvest.
The red circles, blue triangles and green pluses are for users who used constant escapement
(CE), proportional harvest (PH), and constant harvest (CH) strategies, respectively. (b)
the analogous proportion of optimal proﬁt generated by the ﬁtted model vs. the median of
escapements chosen by the model after it ﬁt a recruitment function to the data during each
turn of the game. The dotted line is optimal escapement under perfect information.

17

llllllllllllllllllllllllllllll0.00.20.40.60.81.0(a) UserslPHCECHllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll(b) Fitted Modelsoverfishingunderfishing0100020003000400050000.00.20.40.60.81.0Median escapement Profit / Optimal profitHuman judgment vs. models for management

Figure 4: (a) The proﬁt generated from the strategies using the ﬁtted Beverton-Holt model
relative to the optimal proﬁt under perfect information, as a function of the standard de-
viation in practice game escapement, generated by the user. Dark and light circles are for
instances of the games with low and high levels of environmental stochasticity respectively.
(b-c) The true recruitment function (dashed line) and ﬁtted recruitment function (solid line)
for two instances of the game, [these examples are highlighted by a red circle and blue triangle
in (a)], where the ﬁtted model generates unproﬁtable escapement strategies (b - red circle)
and proﬁtable ones (c - blue triangle). The open symbols are recruitment data generated by
the user in the practice game, whereas the smaller ﬁlled points are generated by the ﬁtted
model when playing the actual game.

18

llllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll050010001500200025000.20.40.60.81.0lEscapement standard deviationFitted profit / Optimal profit(a)110.00.10.2slllllllllllllllllllllllllllllRecruits(b)0200040001000200030004000lllllllllllllllllllllEscapement1000200030004000(c)Human judgment vs. models for management

Age-structured population game

In the age-structured model, the average user achieved 63.6 percent of the optimal proﬁt

achieved by a model with perfect information. The most proﬁtable user scored only 84.3

percent of the optimal proﬁt, in comparison to the best performer in the unstructured pop-

ulation game who scored over 95 percent of optimal proﬁt. On the opposite end of the

spectrum the worst users in the unstructured population game only scored 7.2 percent of

optimal proﬁt, while in the age-structured game the worst user scored 11.8 percent of op-

timal proﬁt. A full distribution of the relative performance of the users compared to the

optimal policy in the age-structured game is given in Fig. 5. The improved performance by

the worse players, despite the age-structured game being more complex, was due to the fact

that this game includes three independent cohorts. Even if one or two cohorts were driven

to low levels, some harvest could be achieved in the remaining turns as long as one cohort

was still abundant. A player could make one very bad decision, and learn from it, without

collapsing the entire ﬁshery.

The user’s performance in the age-structured game was mainly determined by their

overall ﬁshing pressure and not their decision of which age class to ﬁsh (compare Fig. 6a to

6b). The majority of users harvested more immature biomass than adult biomass, despite

exclusive adult harvest being the optimal strategy (6b). Similar to the simple unstructured

game, users who deployed a constant escapement strategy (for adults) were more likely to

over-ﬁsh (6a).

19

Human judgment vs. models for management

Figure 5: The percent of the mathematical model’s total proﬁt achieved by the user, in
the age-structured game, when the mathematical model is (a) age-structured with true
parameters, i.e. perfect information (b) age-structured but with parameters estimated from
the data, and (c) unstructured with parameters estimated from the aggregated (immature
+ adult) biomass data. For example, a value of 50 percent means the user generated half
the proﬁt the mathematical model did, managing the exact same instance of the game. A
value of 200 percent means the user generated twice as much proﬁt as the model.

20

103050PerfectInformation(a)Fitted,age structured100200300(b)103050Fitted,unstructured100200300(c)% of model profit achieved by usersFrequencyHuman judgment vs. models for management

Figure 6: (ac) The proportion of optimal proﬁt, in the age-structured game, generated by (a)
the user and (c) ﬁtted unstructured model, with parameters estimated from the aggregated
(immature + adult) biomass data, for each game as a function of the median escapement
chosen. (b) The proportion of optimal proﬁt generated by the user as a function of the
median proportion of harvest allocated to adult biomass during the game.

21

lllllllllllllllllllll0.10.40.71.0(a)     UserslPHCECHlllllllllllllllllll(b)     Users0.10.30.50.70.9Median adult harvest /total harvestllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll0.10.40.71.0(c)  1D model5001000150020002500Median adultescapement Profit / Optimal profitHuman judgment vs. models for management

The average escapement strategies resulting from the age structure model with pa-

rameters estimated from historical data (ﬁtted age structure model) achieved 98.4 percent

of the optimal proﬁt, even better than in the unstructured game. Even in the ﬁtted model’s

lowest performing game, it achieved 78.9 percent of optimal discounted net proﬁt, far better

than even the median user. This is for two reasons (1) users in the practice game tended

not to let the same amount of adult ﬁsh escape harvest every turn, producing good data for

model ﬁtting, and (2) the transition rate from immatures to adults was always estimated

well, because it is a single parameter that can be estimated independently from recruitment,

whereas the recruitment function requires two parameters to be estimated simultaneously.

The result of point (2) is that the models always ﬁshed from the correct age class.

The average escapement strategy, generated by ﬁtting a one dimensional unstructured

population model to the aggregate age-structured data, achieved 72.3 percent of the optimal

proﬁt. This represents a 13.5 percent gain in proﬁt over the average human operating solely

on intuition. Only 58 users, out of 172, generated more proﬁt than would have been obtained

by harvesting based on the ﬁtted unstructured model. However, for instances of the game

where the unstructured model generated low discounted net proﬁt, the model’s proposed

escapement rule crashed the ﬁshery, by letting very little biomass escape harvest. These

strategies generated less discounted net proﬁt than the least proﬁtable users (compare the

lowest points in Fig. 6a to 6c).

Discussion

Many mathematical tools exist to improve decision making in environmental management,

including methods from optimization and optimal control. Yet managers are still resistant to

using these tools to develop management plans, and instead rely mainly on their experience

and intuitive judgment (Johnson and Williams, 2015). At least one reason for this is that it

is often unclear what a manager may gain by using quantitative methods, especially if the

dynamics of the managed system are not well understood.

In this paper we studied optimal escapement strategies for the management of sim-

ulated ﬁsheries, developed using simpliﬁed models of ﬁsh stock dynamics, and tested their

22

Human judgment vs. models for management

performance compared to humans managing the simulated population using only their expe-

rience and judgment. The models performed better than the users, on average, even when the

models mis-speciﬁed recruitment or state variables. However, in the age-structured game,

the worst outcomes produced by the simpliﬁed unstructured model were worse than the

worst outcomes generated by the users.

Each quantitative model-based approach to managing the simulated ﬁshery used a

single equation or system of equations with unknown parameters. Alternatively, a manager

could develop a set of candidate models representing alternative hypotheses about the sys-

tem (e.g. an age-structured and unstructured model) and then require quantitative methods

resolve structural uncertainty (Williams, 2001; Nichols et al., 2015). Our results on using

unstructured models to manage age-structured populations are an example of a worse case

scenario where the a manager’s candidate model set does not contain a model that approxi-

mates the system well. Even in such a case, on average, quantitative methods out performed

human judgment in our experiment.

Users and ﬁtted models tended to make diﬀerent types of mistakes. An equal number

of users over-ﬁshed vs. under-ﬁshed the stock. However, when management based on ﬁtted

models failed, it was almost always due to overﬁshing.

We found that even when the model is perfectly speciﬁed, and only needs parameter

estimates from the data, it still can perform worse than a human using intuition alone,

especially when environmental stochasticity is high and prior management decisions have

all been similar. The lack of data with suﬃcient variability in stock abundance to estimate

parameters well is likely common in ﬁsheries management because overexploited populations

are ubiquitous, and therefore the time series data of ﬁsh stock abundances may often contain

only population sizes well below carrying capacity. In such cases, recruitment curves may

often be incorrectly estimated and our simple models will naively suggest that it is optimal

to keep overﬁshing. This suggests that passive adaptive management, choosing the best

strategy, based on the current knowledge of the system, to optimize some objective, without

any regards to the information gained by deploying that action can potentially lead to poor

performance even when model structure is correctly speciﬁed.

Our results suggest that probing the system by performing an action that is subop-

23

Human judgment vs. models for management

timal given the manager’s current belief about the system, but that will reveal information

that improves management in the future might be desirable in such scenarios. Incorporating

the economic beneﬁts of learning from experimentation explicitly into the optimal decision

problem, known as active adaptive management, has been studied within the context of har-

vested populations. However, due to computational limitations solutions are always limited

to cases with one of the three following assumptions: (1) both the probability distribution

specifying environmental stochasticity and all parameters in the recruitment function are

perfectly known, except for a single parameter to be estimated from the data (Walters,

1981; Ludwig and Walters, 1982), (2) there is a small number of candidate models, with

all parameters ﬁxed within each model (Williams, 2001), or (3) only a small number of ac-

tions and system states are admissible (e.g. action = harvest or not, ﬁshery state = robust,

vulnerable, or collapsed, Hauser and Possingham, 2008).

Unfortunately, the problem of choosing an optimal escapement level in our game, us-

ing the principles of active adaptive management, is computationally infeasible given current

algorithms and computing power because our game allows for an inﬁnite set of possible ac-

tions and states, governed by unknown parameters and unknown variability in environmental

noise.

It is rather alarming that even in the most optimistic case, where the underlying

dynamic model is known and parameters have to be estimated from the data, passive adaptive

management can fail to achieve desirable results. However, the alternative of letting humans

manage our simulated ﬁshery based solely on their experience and judgment typically led

to much worse outcomes. Because mathematical models usually improved management

outcomes in our experiment, we would recommend modeling be more widely adopted in

management. However, models should not necessarily be considered as a replacement for

manager expertise. Our results show that in some cases human intervention may be required

when models appear to recommend risky management decisions.

24

Human judgment vs. models for management

REFERENCES

Acknowledgments

This project was funded by the National Science Foundation grant “Computational Sus-

tainability: Computational Methods for a Sustainable Environment, Economy, and Society”

(award number 0832782). We especially thank our web developer Mikhail Yahknis for build-

ing the ﬁsheries game website and Jon Conrad and Jan Nyrop for helpful comments on the

manuscript.

References

Asano, E., L. J. Gross, S. Lenhart, and L. A. Real (2008). Optimal control of vaccine

distribution in a rabies metapopulation model. Mathematical biosciences and engineering:

MBE 5 (2), 219–238.

Bjørndal, T. and J. M. Conrad (1987). The dynamics of an open access ﬁshery. Canadian

Journal of Economics, 74–85.

Game, E. T., E. Meijaard, D. Sheil, and E. McDonald-Madden (2014). Conservation in a

wicked complex world; challenges and solutions. Conservation Letters 7 (3), 271–277.

Gerber, L. R., M. Beger, M. A. McCarthy, and H. P. Possingham (2005). A theory for

optimal monitoring of marine reserves. Ecology Letters 8 (8), 829–837.

Hauser, C. E. and H. P. Possingham (2008). Experimental or precautionary? adaptive

management over a range of time horizons. Journal of Applied Ecology 45 (1), 72–81.

Helmstedt, K. J., H. P. Possingham, K. E. Brennan, J. R. Rhodes, and M. Bode (2014).

Cost-eﬃcient fenced reserves for conservation: single large or two small? Ecological Ap-

plications 24 (7), 1780–1792.

Holden, M. H. and J. M. Conrad (2015). Optimal escapement in stage-structured ﬁsheries

with environmental stochasticity. Mathematical Biosciences 269, 76–85.

Holling, C. S. (1978). Adaptive environmental assessment and management. Wiley. Chinch-

ester, USA.

25

Human judgment vs. models for management

REFERENCES

Hughes, M. J., E. G. Johnson, and P. R. Armsworth (2014). Optimal spatial management

of an invasive plant using a model with above-and below-ground components. Biological

invasions 16 (5), 1009–1020.

Johnson, F. A., G. S. Boomer, B. K. Williams, J. D. Nichols, and D. J. Case (2015). Multi-

level learning in the adaptive management of waterfowl harvests: 20 years and counting.

Wildlife Society Bulletin 39 (1), 9–19.

Johnson, F. A., D. R. Breininger, B. W. Duncan, J. D. Nichols, M. C. Runge, and B. K.

Williams (2011). A markov decision process for managing habitat for ﬂorida scrub-jays.

Journal of Fish and Wildlife Management 2 (2), 234–246.

Johnson, F. A. and B. K. Williams (2015). A decision-analytic approach to adaptive resource

management. In C. R. Allen and A. S. Garmestani (Eds.), Adaptive Management of Social-

Ecological Systems, pp. 61–84. Springer.

Ludwig, D. and C. J. Walters (1982). Optimal harvesting with imprecise parameter esti-

mates. Ecological Modelling 14 (3), 273–292.

Marr, J. C. et al. (1944). Age, length and weight studies of three species of Columbia River

salmon (Oncorhynchus keta, O. gorbuscha and O. kisutch). Technical report, Salem, Or.:

Department of Research, Fish Commission of the State of Oregon.

Martin, J., P. L. Fackler, J. D. Nichols, M. C. Runge, C. L. McIntyre, B. L. Lubow, M. C.

McCluskie, and J. A. Schmutz (2011). An adaptive-management framework for optimal

control of hiking near golden eagle nests in denali national park. Conservation Biol-

ogy 25 (2), 316–323.

MATLAB (2010). version 7.10.0 (R2010a). Natick, Massachusetts: The MathWorks Inc.

McCarthy, M. A., H. P. Possingham, and A. Gill (2001). Using stochastic dynamic pro-

gramming to determine optimal ﬁre management for banksia ornata. Journal of Applied

Ecology 38 (3), 585–592.

26

Human judgment vs. models for management

REFERENCES

Moore, C. T. and M. J. Conroy (2006). Optimal regeneration planning for old-growth

forest: addressing scientiﬁc uncertainty in endangered species recovery through adaptive

management. Forest Science 52 (2), 155–172.

Nichols, J. D., F. A. Johnson, B. K. Williams, and G. S. Boomer (2015). On formally

integrating science and policy: walking the walk. Journal of Applied Ecology.

Nichols, J. D. and B. K. Williams (2006). Monitoring for conservation. Trends in Ecology

& Evolution 21 (12), 668–673.

Nøstbakken, L. and T. Bjørndal (2003). Supply functions for north sea herring. Marine

Resource Economics 18 (4).

Possingham, H., S. Andelman, B. Noon, S. Trombulak, and H. Pulliam (2001). Making

smart conservation decisions. In M. E. Soul´e and G. Orians (Eds.), Conservation biology:

research priorities for the next decade, pp. 225–244. Island Press.

Probert, W. J., C. E. Hauser, E. McDonald-Madden, M. C. Runge, P. W. Baxter, and

H. P. Possingham (2011). Managing and learning with multiple models: objectives and

optimization algorithms. Biological Conservation 144 (4), 1237–1245.

R Core Team (2012). R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. Vienna,

Austria: R Foundation for Statistical Computing. ISBN 3-900051-07-0.

Reed, W. J. (1979). Optimal escapement levels in stochastic and deterministic harvesting

models. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 6 (4), 350 – 363.

Rout, T. M., J. L. Moore, and M. A. McCarthy (2014). Prevent, search or destroy? a partially

observable model for invasive species management. Journal of applied ecology 51 (3), 804–

813.

Sainsbury, K. (1988). The ecological basis of multispecies ﬁsheries, and management of a

demersal ﬁshery in tropical australia. Fish population dynamics 2, 349–382.

27

Human judgment vs. models for management

REFERENCES

Stankey, G. H., R. N. Clark, and B. T. Bormann (2005). Adaptive management of natu-

ral resources: theory, concepts, and management institutions, Volume 654. US Dept. of

Agriculture, Forest Service, Paciﬁc Northwest Research Station.

Walters, C. (1986). Adaptive management of renewable resources. MacMillan Pub. Co., New

York, NY.

Walters, C. J. (1981). Optimum escapements in the face of alternative recruitment hypothe-

ses. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 38 (6), 678–689.

Walters, C. J. (2007). Is adaptive management helping to solve ﬁsheries problems? AMBIO:

A Journal of the Human Environment 36 (4), 304–307.

Welling, L. and L. Thomson (2003). PHP and MySQL Web development. Sams Publishing.

Westphal, M. I., M. Pickett, W. M. Getz, and H. P. Possingham (2003). The use of stochastic

dynamic programming in optimal landscape reconstruction for metapopulations. Ecological

Applications 13 (2), 543–555.

Williams, B. K. (2001). Uncertainty, learning, and the optimal management of wildlife.

Environmental and Ecological Statistics 8 (3), 269–288.

Williams, B. K. and E. D. Brown (2012). Adaptive management: The US Department of

the Interior applications guide. US Department of the Interior, Adaptive Management

Working Group.

Wilson, K. A., M. F. McBride, M. Bode, and H. P. Possingham (2006). Prioritizing global

conservation eﬀorts. Nature 440 (7082), 337–340.

Worden, L., L. W. Botsford, A. Hastings, and M. D. Holland (2010). Frequency responses

of age-structured populations: Paciﬁc salmon as an example. Theoretical population biol-

ogy 78 (4), 239–249.

28

Human judgment vs. models for management

1 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION

1 Supplementary Information

29

Human judgment vs. models for management

1 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION

Table S1: Below is a copy of the survey.

How many times have you played this game before?

• possible answers: “0”,“1”, “2”,... “15”, “more than 15”, “I’ve only played a diﬀerent

version of this game”

What best describes your education level?

• possible answers: “No college”, “Some college or associates degree, but not currently in
college”, “Freshman (1st year)”, “Sophomore (2nd year)”, “Junior (3rd year)”, “Senior
(4th year or greater)”, “completed Bachelor’s degree”, “In PhD, MS, MA, or MEng
program”, “In other post-bachelor program (e.g. JD, MBA, MD, MFA)”, “completed
MS, MA, or MEng degree”, “completed PhD degree”, “completed other post-bachelor
degree (e.g. JD, MBA, MD, MFA)”

What best describes the ﬁeld of study for your highest degree?

• possible answers: “No college”, “Math, Statistics, or Computation”,“ Ecology, Natu-
ral Resources, or Environmental Biology”, “Economics”, “Political Science or Govern-
ment”,“ Environmental Engineering”, “Other Engineering”, “Other Biology”, “Physi-
cal Sciences”, “Social Sciences”, “Humanities”, “undecided”

What best describes your experience ﬁshing?

• possible answers: “I have never ﬁshed”,“I ﬁsh or have ﬁshed, but less than once per
year”, “I ﬁsh recreationally, at least once per year, but not for a living”, “I ﬁsh or have
ﬁshed for a living”

What best describes your experience managing ﬁsheries?

• possible answers: “I have work/intern experience managing ﬁsheries, more than 10
years”, “I have work/intern experience managing ﬁsheries, between 10 and 2 years”, “I
have work/intern experience managing ﬁsheries, less than 2 years”, “ I am considering
a career in ﬁsheries management, but have no experience”, “ I am not considering a
career in ﬁsheries management”

Do you have work experience managing any (non-human) biological population outside of
ﬁsheries?

• possible answers: “I have work/intern experience managing game (hunted popula-
tions)”, “I have work/intern experience in conservation biology”, “I have work/intern
experience in forestry”, “I have work/intern experience in agricultural management”,
“I have work/intern experience managing other biological populations”, “I am consid-
ering careers in managing biological populations, but have no experience”, “I am not
considering careers in managing biological populations”

30

Human judgment vs. models for management

1 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION

Figure S1: Game play for the unstructured herring ﬁsh game.

31

Human judgment vs. models for management

1 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION

Figure S2: Game play for age-structured salmon ﬁsh game.

32

Human judgment vs. models for management

1 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION

Figure S3: Directions for unstructured herring ﬁsh game.

33

Human judgment vs. models for management

1 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION

Figure S4: Directions for age-structured salmon ﬁsh game.

34

Human judgment vs. models for management

1 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION

Figure S5: A histogram of percent of optimal proﬁt achieved by the users for each class.
Note the histograms are overlaid rather than stacked.

35

0.00.20.40.60.81.00510152025Game performanceFrequenceyIntro Conservation Bio, CornellIntro Bio, Ithaca CollegeSTEM Colloquium, CornellHuman judgment vs. models for management

1 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION

(a)

(b)

Figure S6: Proportion of optimal proﬁt generated by the user in the actual game vs. Pro-
portion of optimal proﬁt generated by the user in the practice, not including the bonus, for
(a) the one dimensional game and (b) the age-structured game.

36

llllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll0.00.20.40.60.81.01.20.00.20.40.60.81.0Game performancePractice game performancellllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll0.00.51.01.50.00.20.40.60.81.0Game performancePractice game performanceHuman judgment vs. models for management

1 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION

Figure S7: (a) A histogram of the number of times the user entered same harvest value, in
the one dimensional game, as they did on the previous turn. (b) A histogram of the number
of unique harvest entries they made over the course of the entire game.

37

(a)1020304051015Number of next turnharvest repetitionsFrequency of users(b)51015Number of uniqueharvest entriesHuman judgment vs. models for management

1 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION

Figure S8: Percent of curve ﬁts where (a) the estimate for b2 was within 25 percent of the
true value and (b) the estimate for b1 was within 15 percent of the true value, for each turn
during the game.

38

lllllllllllllllllllll354045505560Percent of b2 estimates within 25% of true value(a)lllllllllllllllllllll246810121416182068707274767880Percent of b1 estimates within 15% of true value(b)Number of game turns completedHuman judgment vs. models for management

1 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION

Figure S9: (a) The error in the estimate for b1, |b1,estimate − b1,actual|/b1,actual, on log base
ten scale when ﬁtting a Beverton-Holt curve through the observed biomass data. A value of
zero means the error is the same order of magnitude as the true parameter value. A value
of negative one means the estimate is within ten percent of the true value. The red line
corresponds to the error being within 25 percent of the true value. (b) The error in the b1
estimate on log 10 scale. (c) The error in the chosen escapement value with the estimates
for b1 and b2 relative to optimal escapement.

39

lllllllllllllllllllll−4−3−2−1012log10( b2 error )lllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll(a)lllllllllllllllllllll−4−3−2−1012log10( b1 error )lllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll(b)lllllllllllllllllllll5101520−4−3−2−1012log10( escapement error )lllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll(c)Number of game turns completed