epl draft

Fidelity, entropy, and Poincar´e sections as tools to study the
polyad breaking phenomena

M. Berm´udez-Monta˜na1, R.Lemus1 and O.Casta˜nos1

1 Instituto de Ciencias Nucleares, Universidad Nacional Aut´onoma de M´exico,
Apartado Postal 70-543, 04510 M´exico, DF, M´exico.

PACS 33.20.-t – Molecular spectra
PACS 33.20.Tp – Vibrational analysis
PACS 05.45.Mt – Quantum chaos, semiclassical methods

Abstract –The correlation diagram of the vibrational energy spectra associated with the stretch-
ing modes of triatomic molecules such as CO2 and H2O is analyzed by means of two interact-
ing Morse oscillators. By considering a linear dependence of the structure and force constants
(xg = go
rr, xf = frr(cid:48) /frr) going from the water parameters to the carbon dioxide, it is shown
that the ﬁdelity, entropy and Poincar´e sections detect the polyad breaking process manifested
in the transition from local to normal mode behaviors. Additionally Poincar´e sections show a
transition to chaos where the polyad cannot be deﬁned.

rr(cid:48) /go

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
5
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
t
n
a
u
q
[
 
 

1
v
1
1
5
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Introduction. – In the description of molecular vi-
brational excitations the normal modes (NM) picture has
played a fundamental role. At ﬁrst only diagonal interac-
tions are considered but latter on resonances may be in-
cluded through the use of the concept of polyad, a pseudo
quantum number that encompass all the eigenstates con-
nected with the relevant interactions [1]. This analysis
is conveniently treated in an algebraic scheme introduc-
ing bosonic operators associated with the NM [2, 3]. The
patterns may be modiﬁed either by low potential barriers
[2, 4], or by the appearance of nearly degenerate states, a
signature of molecules with local character [5–8].

In a local model (LM) the Hamiltonian is expressed in
terms of a set of interacting local oscillators, a model that
provides a reasonable description when large mass diﬀer-
ences are present with the remarkable property that a
polyad can be deﬁned. Even in molecules with LM be-
havior a NM description is feasible. The study of local-
to-normal mode transition (LNT) is of interest because
of their connection to intramolecular vibrational energy
transfer and their possible role in facilitating or inhibiting
reactivity. This fact has stimulated quantum mechanical
studies, but incorporating also modern methods of nonlin-
ear classical mechanics [9–12].

If we start considering a molecule with an extreme LM
behavior (e.g. H2O) in the medium energy range and al-
lows the interaction strength to be increased, group of lev-

els belonging to a polyad multiplet previously split because
of the anharmonicity start approaching together, leading
to the normal behavior (e.g. SO2) in the traditional lan-
guage [6–8]. Eventually the splitting may become so im-
portant that levels of diﬀerent polyads approach and even
cross, leading to NM scheme where the polyad deﬁned in
terms of local quantum numbers stop being preserved e.g.
CO2 and CS2. In this contribution we study such situa-
tion. In some way the algebraic counterpart of this study
corresponds to the shape phase transitions in U(3) model,
although focusing only upon the bending-rotation mode
involved in the change of geometry [13].

There are several concepts that may be used to identify
sudden changes in a quantum state. The probability den-
sity for instance reﬂect the degree of locality, but a more
sensitive functions are ﬁdelity and entropy. The ﬁdelity
and Shannon entropies are concepts introduced in the clas-
sical information theory. The ﬁrst measures the accuracy
of a transmission message while the second one is related
with the coding theorems, i.e., how much can be com-
pressed a message without losing information [14]. These
concepts were extended to quantum information theory.
The ﬁdelity is used to compare quantitatively two proba-
bility distribution functions which for pure states is related
to the overlap of two quantum states. The von Neumann
entropy plays an analogous role to the Shannon entropy
for quantum channels. Additionally for bipartite systems

p-1

R.Lemus et al.

it measures the degree of entanglement of the components
of the system. The ﬁdelity concept has also been used
to determine the quantum phase transitions of the ground
state of a quantum system when a parameter of the Hamil-
tonian is changed continuously [15,16]. As in the quantum
phase transition there is a sudden change in the proper-
ties of the ground state; it has been found that the von
Neumann entropy takes extremal values [15]. In addition
to the ﬁdelity and Shannon entropy, modern methods of
non linear classical mechanics may also be helpful in the
identiﬁcation of the phase transition.
In particular the
Poincar´e sections will be used in order to identify chaos,
corresponding to regions where polyads are not preserved
and representing possibly unstable situations.

In this work we address the problem of studying the
LNT. A fundamental issue consists in identifying the rel-
evant physical parametrization. This is accomplished by
considering two interacting harmonic oscillators. As a ref-
erence we consider the limit systems H2O and CO2, whose
transition involves a polyad breaking process in the local
representation. In our analysis the concepts of probability
density, ﬁdelity, entropy as well as Poincare sections rep-
resent our tools to identify the transition, which is studied
for a speciﬁc set of eigenstates.

The present work is organized as follows. First the basic
features of LM and NM behaviors are revisited, providing
the relevant parameters that allow the identiﬁcation of
the LNT. Thereafter we study the LNT using interacting
Morse oscillators as a model for the molecular vibrational
excitations. This transition is analyzed with assistance
of quantum mechanical concepts as well as with aid of
classical mechanics through Poincar´e sections. Finally a
summary and concluding remarks are presented.

0

int

int

Relevant parameters involved in the local-to-
normal mode transition. – The vibrational Hamilto-
nian for a set of two equivalent oscillators presenting LM
behavior can be written in the form ˆHL = ˆH (loc)
0 + ˆV (loc)
,
where ˆH (loc)
corresponds to two non interacting local oscil-
lators, while V (loc)
involves interactions presumably play-
ing the role of a perturbation, yet fundamental in the
physical description. A sensible way to construct ˆV (loc)
involved in HL consists in identifying resonances preserv-
ing the polyad PL = n1 + n2, which consists in the total
number of local quanta associated with each oscillator.
This is justiﬁed by the fact that the general feature of the
spectrum consists of a well separated set of closed levels
characterized by PL. In contrast, when the masses are sim-
ilar or the central atom is lighter than the ending atoms
the NM behavior dominates and a more convenient start-
+ ˆV (nor)
ing point for the Hamiltonian is ˆHN = ˆH (nor)
,
where now ˆH (nor)
corresponds to the set of non interacting
harmonic oscillators associated with the NM and ˆV (nor)
involves diagonal interactions as well as resonant interac-
tions preserving the polyad PN = ν1 + ν3, which is deﬁned
as the sum of the number of quanta associated with the

int

int

int

0

0

symmetric and antisymmetric NM, respectively.

The analysis of the vibrational spectroscopy starts by
identifying the fundamentals, from which the polyad PN is
determined. The polyad is expected to be a good quantum
number as we remain in the low region of the spectrum. As
the energy increases anharmonic eﬀects become manifest
breaking the polyad. Although in general PL (cid:54)= PN , for
molecules with local character the transformation reduces
to a canonical transformation preserving the polyads and
consequently PL = PN . In practice this permits to write
down the polyad preserving Hamiltonian in a local rep-
resentation in a straightforward way. From the spectro-
scopic point of view such situations are present because the
energy splitting due to the interaction between the local
oscillators is considerable lesser than the distance between
groups of levels associated with diﬀerent polyads PL. As
we move toward a molecule with normal character, a mix-
ing of states with diﬀerent polyads PL appears, ending
with only PN as a good quantum number. The lost of the
quantum number PL suggest a transition region based an
a polyad breaking process.

According to our knowledge, LNT has not been stud-
ied from the perspective we are proposing. The tradi-
tional analysis is only concerned with molecules present-
ing a LM behavior (PL = PN ) and the degree of locality
ξ = (2/π) arctan λ
ωx refers to the splitting of the levels
due to the interaction of the oscillators (parameter λ) rel-
ative to the intensity of the anharmonicity (parameter ωx)
[6–8]. Hence the analysis is focused upon the splitting of
a multiplet characterized by PL = n1 + n2, and which in-
duce LM or NM features in the wave functions. Because
of the identity PL = PN , the same Hamiltonian can be
described to a NM scheme, which makes the descriptions
to be equivalent through the x-K relations and classical
trajectories in phase space [11, 17].

We present now a novel analysis in which we con-
sider the transition between two molecular systems strictly
characterized by LM and NM behaviors, water and car-
bon dioxide, for instance. Because PL is preserved only
in H2O, the transition to CO2 involves a polyad break-
ing process with sudden changes in the molecular prop-
erties. A fundamental ingredient for this analysis is the
parametrization used to connect the systems. This is
taken from previous works whose goal was to estimate the
potential energy surface from algebraic methods [18–21].
The parametrization comes from the analysis of two inter-
acting harmonic oscillators up to quadratic terms, whose
description in second quantization takes the form

ˆH =

¯hω
2

where ˆH H.O = (cid:80)2
(cid:16) frr(cid:48)
(cid:17)

†
†
†
†
2) + λ(cid:48)(ˆa
ˆH H.O + λ(ˆa
2 + ˆa1ˆa2),
1ˆa
1ˆa2 + ˆa1ˆa
(cid:16) frr(cid:48)

†
†
i ), with ω =
i ˆai + ˆaiˆa
i=1(ˆa

√
frrgo

go
rr(cid:48)
go
rr

, and λ(cid:48) = ¯hω

rr, λ =
¯hω
. The Hamilto-
2
nian (1) does not preserve the local polyad PL, but when
the last term in (1) is negligible PL is preserved and the
system is identiﬁed with a LM behavior. Hence when

− go
rr(cid:48)
go
rr

(cid:17)

(1)

frr

frr

+

2

p-2

Tools to study the polyad breaking phenomena

λ(cid:48) = 0 the Hamiltonian becomes the basic model to de-
scribe molecules like water although anharmonicities must
be incorporated in order to reproduce the experimental en-
ergy splitting [5]. Since the Hamiltonian (1) is integrable it
may be put in the form ˆH = ¯hωg ˆν1 + ¯hωu ˆν3 with frequen-

cies ωg = ω(cid:112)(1 + xf )(1 + xg), ωu = ω(cid:112)(1 − xf )(1 − xg),

rr(cid:48)/go

and deﬁnitions xf = frr(cid:48)/frr and xg = go
rr. The
Hamiltonian in terms of NM is diagonal in the normal
basis |ν1ν3(cid:105). The Hamiltonian preserve the polyad PN
in both representations, but PL is preserved only by (1)
when λ(cid:48) = 0. A ﬁt of experimental energy levels may be
achieved with any of the two Hamiltonians providing the
same results, and from them we may extract the force con-
stants. The question which arises is concerned with appro-
priate values of the structure and force constants (xf ,xg)
that allows the Hamiltonian (1) to be used with λ(cid:48) = 0
for computing the force constants. This is equivalent to
establish the limit values of (xf ,xg) for a molecule to be
considered local. It has been proved that this condition is
[20, 21]

ζ ≡ 1
8

(xf + xg)2 << 1.

(2)
For example, ζH2O (cid:39) 1.4 × 10−4 and ζCO2 (cid:39) 3.0 × 10−2 ,
which is in accordance with the local, normal behavior of
these systems [19].

For a molecule of type BAB making an angle θ, the geo-
metrical parameter xg is given by xg = cos θ/(µ + 1), with
µ = mA/mB, where mA is the mass of the central atom.
On the other hand, the dynamical parameter xf may be
estimated through the fundamentals or extracted directly
from a complete vibrational description. In Fig. 1 we have
displayed the location of several triatomic molecules in the
two dimensional diagram (xg, xf ). We claim that this di-
agram allows the molecular character to be identiﬁed. All
nonlinear molecules fall in the local behavior region, while
the two linear molecules have normal character. This fact
suggests that geometry determines the local-normal char-
acter of a triatomic molecule. We then study the LNT
as a parametric change in this diagram. In the same Fig.
1 we indicate with an arrow the parametrization. Along
this line we expect to identify a transition region, albeit
considering two interacting Morse oscillators.

Local-to-Normal mode transition. – In this sec-
tion we shall analyze the LNT through the study of the
stretching modes of a triatomic molecule modelled with
a Hamiltonian of two interacting Morse oscillators. The
Morse potential can be expressed as VM (q) = Dy2 with
y = 1 − e−βq. The number of quanta vi for each oscilla-
tor takes the values vi = 0, 1, . . . , j − 1 with κ = 2j + 1
related with the depth of the potential D [19]. We intro-
duce a linear parametrization in the {xg ≡ t, xf (t)} space
f = −0.012)
from the water parameters (x(L)
to the ones associated with the carbon dioxide (x(N )
g =
−0.571, x(N )
f = 0.047). This parametrization induces the
linear t-dependence for the frequency ω(t) = mωt+w(N )and
the Morse parameter κ(t) = mκt+κ(N ), where mω = (ω(N )−

g = −0.015, x(L)

Fig. 1: Location of several molecules in the framework of an xg vs xf
diagram. The LM-NM behavior is determined by xg, which splits the
plot in two parts, the case of linear molecules (normal region) and non
linear systems (local region). The limits with µ = 1 and µ = 0 are
indicated. The transition zone is indicated with squares along the arrow
connecting the molecules.

g

g − x(N )

g

), mκ = (κ(N ) − κ(L))/(x(L)

g − x(N )

ω(L))/(x(L)
), with
k(L) = 48, k(N ) = 160, and ω(L) = 1853 cm−1, ω(N ) = 959
cm−1, which were chosen in order to reproduce the funda-
rr(t)].
Then the Hamiltonian for the two interacting Morse oscil-
lators takes the form

mentals. The β(t) is given by β(t) =(cid:112)[2w(t)]/[¯hκ(t)g◦
(ˆvi + 1/2)2(cid:3)
(cid:27)

(cid:2)(ˆvi + 1/2) − 1

(cid:26) 2(cid:88)

ˆH(t) =¯hω(t)

κ(t)

i=1

+

2 t
κ(t)

ˆ¯p1 ˆ¯p2 +

κ(t) xf (t)

2

ˆy1 ˆy2

,

(3)

where here the momenta ˆ¯pi are dimensionless. Here we
should stress that the space |jv1v2(cid:105) is divided into two
subspaces, the one belonging complete polyads and the
rest belonging to the continuum [22].

The parametrization κ(t) implies diﬀerent dimensions
for the Hamiltonian matrix representation. Since we are
interested in the low lying region of the spectrum we have
kept the dimension constant (consistent with κ = 10), al-
beit changing κ in accordance with κ(t) in the calculation
of the matrix elements. In this way we simplify the numer-
ical description without losing physical content. In Fig. 2
we display the energy correlation diagram for the ﬁrst 42
symmetric eigenstates provided by the Hamiltonian (3).
The left hand side corresponds to the local limit (H2O),
where a clear polyad preserving pattern is evident up to
polyad 6. In this limit the polyad in terms of local and
normal number operators coincide PN = PL. As |t| in-
creases the polyads PL break, a fact manifested in Fig. 2
by the apparent crossing of levels, an eﬀect ending to the
NM spectrum of carbon dioxide. As we know, the param-
eter xg = t determines the LM-NM character through the
condition (2), which implies that a transition region is ex-
pected to exist. There are several sensitive properties that
provide a precise information for the transition region, on
which we base our strategy:

a) Components. The analysis of the dominant com-
ponents of the eigenkets in both local and normal basis

p-3

0.10.10.20.3--0.2-0.4-0.6-0.8-1.0H OR.Lemus et al.

should reﬂect the transition. The normal basis, however,
deserves some discussion since strictly speaking a normal
basis does not exist in a set of Morse oscillators. In or-
der to extract from the eigenstates the components of the
normal basis we construct the normal states diagonalizing
the number operators {ˆν1, ˆν3} in the harmonic local basis
|n1n2(cid:105). The resulting transformation matrix is inverted to
substitute the local basis in the Morse eigenstates with the
following identiﬁcation |n1n2(cid:105) → |jv1v2(cid:105). This approach
is feasible as long as the maximum component of the eigen-
states is located in the subspace of complete polyads.

b) Fidelity. Another property to extract information
about the transition is through the ﬁdelity Fα(t) associ-
ated with a given eigenstate |Ψα(cid:105), and deﬁned as the over-
lap between consecutive eigenstates parametrically sepa-
rated by δt: Fα(t) = |(cid:104)Ψα; t|Ψα; t + δt(cid:105)|2.

deﬁned as [14]: Sα = −(cid:80)
erator ρα = |Ψα(cid:105)(cid:104)Ψα|, while T r2ρα =(cid:80)

c) Entropy. The transition may also be manifested
through the entanglement between the two oscillators, a
quantitative property measured calculating the entropy
i λi ln λi, where λi is the i-th
1|T r2ρα|jv1(cid:105)|| with density op-
(cid:104)jv2|Ψα(cid:105)(cid:104)Ψα|jv2(cid:105).
In the local limit the entropy vanishes, and it increases as
the coupling appears.

eigenvalue of the matrix ||(cid:104)jv(cid:48)

v2

d) Probability density. We may also see the tran-
sition by plotting the probability density ρα associated
with the eigenstate |Ψα(cid:105) in the coordinate representation:
ρα(q1, q2) = |(cid:104)q1q2|Ψα(cid:105)|2. This property has proved to be
useful in reﬂecting the local-normal character [7].

e) Poincar´e sections. Since during the LNT the polyads
PL and PN are not preserved, chaos is expected to appear
[23, 24]. Consequently chaotic phase spaces in the polyad
breaking regions should be manifested. In order to identify
the transition, Poincar´e sections will be relevant.

Fig. 2: Energy correlation between the local and normal limits for the
symmetric states for two interacting Morse oscillators. Only the ﬁrst 42
states are displayed. Particular attention is paid in state 27, which is
stand out with broad black line.

Analysis of the results. – We have chosen the states
{26, 27, 28} as a representative set displaying the main
features of the energy spectrum by the set of interact-

Fig. 3: Properties of the set of states {26, 27, 28} in the interval
t[−0.014, −0.2]: (a) Energies, (b) Fidelity, (c) Entropy and (d) Max-
imum local and normal components. Here full ﬁgures corresponds to
maximum local components, while the corresponding empty ﬁgure refers
to the normal component.

ing Morse oscillators. These states can be located in Fig.
2, where the state 27 stands out in black. Although the
whole range of the transition from water to carbon dioxide
is displayed, we shall constraint our analysis in the upper
left part of the spectrum in the interval |t| ∈ [0.0147, 0.2],
since it is in this region that the LNT is expected to be
clearly manifested. In Fig. 3a a zoom of the three levels is
shown. Although at ﬁrst sight crossing of levels appears, a
more detailed analysis shows that they are avoided cross-
ings. This result is certainly expected because the levels
belong to the same symmetry.

The approaching of levels in the spectrum suggests a
polyad breaking eﬀect, but it does not provide a precise
information about the region where it takes place.
In
Fig. 3b the ﬁdelity is displayed for the three states. The
avoided crossings are marked with vertical lines in gray.
While states 27 and 28 show a sensitive behavior under

p-4

35101520253035|t|SymmetryANormalLocalóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóéééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííí0.050.100.150.200.99860.99880.99900.99920.99940.99960.99981.0000FidelityEntropy0.050.100.150.20240002500026000270002800029000Maximum Component0.12210.12220.12230.12240.122526051.026051.526052.026052.526053.026053.526054.00.18700.18720.18740.18760.18780.18802527025275252802528525290Energystate 26state 27state 28éóíH.Limitóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóóéééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééééííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííííí0.050.100.150.200.81.01.21.41.61.82.02.2state 26state 27state 28éóíH.Limit|t|state 27éstate 26óstate 28í(a)(b)(d)c)(this property, state 26 present a small change, very close
to the harmonic limit. We also notice that beyond the
range depicted, the behavior is practically harmonic. At
the locations of avoided crossings, an unexpected situa-
tion appears: crossing of eigenstates. The ﬁdelity curves
of the states 26 and 27 are interchanged at the same point
where the corresponding energies do. A similar situation
appears at the second point, where the states 27 and 28
are interchanged.

In Fig. 3c the entropy is exhibited for the three states.
In the pure local limit the entanglement is expected to van-
ish, but for H2O we notice small but ﬁnite entropy values.
As we move to the CO2 parameters there is an increasing
of entropy associated with the LNT. Notice that during
the transition the entropy of the states 27 and 28 increases
over the harmonic limit, which corresponds to constant
values of the entropy.
In contrasts, state 26 presents a
smooth change, in accordance with the ﬁdelity. As for the
ﬁdelity analysis the crossing of states is manifested by the
interchange of the curves.

In Fig. 3d we present the square of the maximum com-
ponent in both basis local and normal. The local compo-
nents correspond to ﬁlled ﬁgures. The state 27 starts with
an almost purely local character (0.95). As the interac-
tion increases the local character rapidly diminishes while
the normal character increases, and around |t| = 0.08 the
dominance crosses and the states acquires a dominant nor-
mal character. A similar situation appears in the state
28, although in this case two crossing points appear, the
ﬁrst one around |t| = 0.032, while the second one around
|t| = 0.08. In contrasts the state 26 does not present such
change, it starts with dominant normal character which
slightly increases, while the local character diminishes in
the same way. Notice that this feature is also reﬂected in
the ﬁdelity and entropy. We may interpret that the ex-
tremes of the curves in ﬁdelity and entropy are attributed
to the dominance crossings in Fig. 3d. Hence the state
26 does not presents such crossings and consequently both
the ﬁdelity and entropy changes smoothly.

A picture of the studied states can be obtained by plot-
ting the probability density distribution in the coordinate
representation. In Fig. 4 the probability density is shown
for the three states as a function of the parameter t. We
have paid particular attention to the crossing points, indi-
cated with full circles. Except for the state 26, the other
two states present an evident local character with the pa-
rameters of water molecule. The state 26 contains a mixed
character, a feature reﬂected by the components in Fig.
3d. As |t| increases, the transformation to NM character
becomes evident. The analysis of the plots before and af-
ter the red circles (crossing points) shows clearly that a
crossing of states takes place, even having avoided cross-
ings in energy. At the crossing points a small change in
the probability densities is revealed, although in general
it will depend on the energy region as well as on the value
of the parameter t.

Finally in Fig. 5, the Poincar´e sections for the state

Tools to study the polyad breaking phenomena

Fig. 4: Probability densities for the set of states {26, 27, 28} as a function
of the parameter xg. The avoided energy crossings are indicated with a
red circles.

27 are shown for diﬀerent values of the parameter. Each
plot is associated with the corresponding energy in Fig.
2, in such a way that it changes as we move to the nor-
mal limit represented by CO2.
In these plots we notice
that the LNT is manifested by a chaotic behavior. This is
reasonable because the appearance of chaos has been asso-
ciated with lacking of preserved quantities like the polyad
number [26, 27]. In the local limit we have integrable tra-
jectories as well as in the normal limit. In the former case
the polyad PL is preserved, while in the latter PN is a
good quantum number. Hence it is in between, where the
transition takes place, manifested with the appearance of
chaos. This transition region is displayed in Fig. 1. In
Fig. 5 only the state 27 is analyzed because the other two
states are so close in energy that classically they do not
provide additional information. For the states with signif-
icant eigenenergy values from state 27, Poincar´e sections
also manifested a chaotic transient regime, so that we can
establish that a global chaotic regime indicates the LNT
in more precise terms, something that we cannot say just
with the condition (2). While the analysis to derive in the
relevant parameters (xg, xf ) was based on the harmonic
limit, the study in terms of Morse oscillators display the
transition regime suggested by (2).

Appearance of chaos in a system of interacting Morse
oscillators has been detected previously by considering a
coupled system with diﬀerent coupling strengths. Since
working with exact interacting Morse oscillators involves
the appearance of all the resonances [25], Poincar´e sec-
tions are displayed in Ref. [26] to elucidate the appropri-
ate approximation which preserve the essential features
of the system. Considering particular couplings leading
to polyad preservation in the harmonic limit, it has been
shown as a consequence of polyad breaking the transition
to chaos with increasing values of energy and interaction
strength. In Ref. [27] a system of Morse oscillators coupled
with only the kinetic term is analyzed ﬁxing the strength
of the parameter to maximize the polyad breaking phe-
nomena. The provided spectrum is ﬁtted using a Hamil-
tonian in terms of bosonic operators and a classical analy-
sis in action-angle variables shows that the appearance of
chaos is due to the polyad breaking terms. Both of these

p-5

t=-0.0147t=-0.108262728t=-0.0612t=-0.08t=-0.122228t=-0.154t=-0.187t=-0.2