6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
5
1

 
 
]

.

A
G
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
3
2
5
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

DRAFT VERSION MARCH 16, 2016
Preprint typeset using LATEX style emulateapj v. 01/23/15

TOWARD PRECISION BLACK HOLE MASSES WITH ALMA:

NGC 1332 AS A CASE STUDY IN MOLECULAR DISK DYNAMICS

AARON J. BARTH1, JEREMY DARLING2, ANDREW J. BAKER3, BENJAMIN D. BOIZELLE1,

DAVID A. BUOTE1, LUIS C. HO4, JONELLE L. WALSH5

Draft version March 16, 2016

ABSTRACT

We present ﬁrst results from a program of Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA) CO(2–
1) observations of circumnuclear gas disks in early-type galaxies. The program was designed with the goal of
detecting gas within the gravitational sphere of inﬂuence of the central black holes. In NGC 1332, the 0.′′3-
resolution ALMA data reveal CO emission from the highly inclined (i ≈ 83◦) circumnuclear disk, spatially
coincident with the dust disk seen in Hubble Space Telescope images. The disk exhibits a central upturn in
maximum line-of-sight velocity reaching ±500 km s- 1 relative to the systemic velocity, consistent with the ex-

pected signature of rapid rotation around a supermassive black hole. Rotational broadening and beam smearing
produce complex and asymmetric line proﬁles near the disk center. We constructed dynamical models for the
rotating disk and ﬁtted the modeled CO line proﬁles directly to the ALMA data cube. Degeneracy between
rotation and turbulent velocity dispersion in the inner disk precludes the derivation of strong constraints on
the black hole mass, but model ﬁts allowing for a plausible range in the magnitude of the turbulent dispersion

imply a central mass in the range ∼ (4 - 8)× 108 M⊙. We argue that gas-kinematic observations resolving the

black hole’s projected radius of inﬂuence along the disk’s minor axis will have the capability to yield black hole
mass measurements that are largely insensitive to systematic uncertainties in turbulence or in the stellar mass
proﬁle. For highly inclined disks, this is a much more stringent requirement than the usual sphere-of-inﬂuence
criterion.
Subject headings: galaxies: nuclei — galaxies: bulges — galaxies: individual (NGC 1332) — galaxies: kine-

matics and dynamics

1. INTRODUCTION

Direct measurement of the mass of a supermassive black
hole (BH) in the center of a galaxy generally requires spa-
tially resolved observations of tracer particles close enough
to the BH that their orbits are dominated, or at least heav-
ily inﬂuenced, by the gravitational potential of the BH. The
“gold standards” of BH mass determinations are measure-
ments for the Milky Way’s BH based on resolved stellar or-
bits (Ghez et al. 1998; Genzel et al. 2000; Ghez et al. 2008)
and for the BH in NGC 4258 based on motions of H2O
megamasers resolved by very long-baseline interferometry
(Miyoshi et al. 1995). There are two primary factors that
make these the best measurements of BH masses. First,
the observations are able to resolve kinematics at such small
scales that the gravitational potential is overwhelmingly dom-
inated by the BH itself. Second, the observations are able
to measure the kinematics of individual test particles in orbit
about the BH, rather than the combined and blended kinemat-
ics of a population of tracers having different orbital trajecto-
ries.

1 Department of Physics and Astronomy, 4129 Frederick Reines Hall,

University of California, Irvine, CA, 92697-4575, USA; barth@uci.edu

2 Center for Astrophysics and Space Astronomy, Department of Astro-
physical and Planetary Sciences, University of Colorado, 389 UCB, Boul-
der, CO 80309-0389, USA

3 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Rutgers, the State University

of New Jersey, Piscataway, NJ 08854-8019, USA

4 Kavli Institute for Astronomy and Astrophysics, Peking University,
Beijing 100871, China; Department of Astronomy, School of Physics,
Peking University, Beijing 100871, China

5 George P. and Cynthia Woods Mitchell Institute for Fundamental
Physics and Astronomy, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Texas
A&M University, College Station, TX 77843-4242, USA

Aside from the special cases of the Milky Way, NGC
4258, and a small number of other megamaser disk galax-
ies (e.g. Kuo et al. 2011), most of the ∼ 100 dynamical de-
tections of BHs come from observations and modeling of
spatially resolved stellar or gas kinematics, mostly from the
Hubble Space Telescope (HST) or large ground-based tele-
scopes equipped with adaptive optics; for a review of meth-
ods and results see Kormendy & Ho (2013). Due to the lim-
itations of angular resolution, these observations do not iso-
late individual test particles; rather, they rely on the com-
bined line-of sight kinematics of stars in the galaxy’s bulge,
or of gas clouds in a rotating disk, in both cases modiﬁed
by the blurring effect of the instrumental point-spread func-
tion. The stellar-dynamical method is most widely appli-
cable, in that stars are always present as dynamical trac-
ers in galaxy nuclei, but the construction of orbit-based dy-
namical models is a formidable challenge. Models have re-
cently evolved toward greater complexity due to a growing
recognition that the derived BH masses can be sensitive to
the treatment of the dark matter halo (Gebhardt & Thomas
2009), triaxial structure (van den Bosch & de Zeeuw 2010),
and stellar mass-to-light ratio gradients in the host galaxy
(McConnell et al. 2013).

Measurements of BH mass from ionized gas kinematics
are conceptually and technically simpler since the method re-
lies on modeling circular rotation of a thin disk rather than
modeling the full stellar orbital structure of an entire galaxy,
and early measurements done with HST spectroscopy demon-
strated the potential of this technique (Harms et al. 1994;
Ferrarese et al. 1996). In contrast to stellar dynamics, the dy-
namics of a thin circular disk at small radii are relatively in-
sensitive to the galaxy’s dark matter halo or to stellar mass-

2

to-light gradients. However, ionized gas-dynamical measure-
ments suffer from a separate and signiﬁcant set of systematic
uncertainties. Ionized gas disks often have a substantial tur-
bulent velocity dispersion (σturb), sometimes up to hundreds
of km s- 1 (van der Marel & van den Bosch 1998; Barth et al.
2001b; Verdoes Kleijn et al. 2006; Walsh et al. 2010), which
must be accounted for in modeling the disk dynamics.
In
some cases, the dynamical effect of this turbulence can af-
fect the estimated BH mass at the factor of ∼ 2 level com-
pared with masses inferred from thin disk modeling if tur-
bulent pressure support is neglected. Incorporating turbulent
pressure support has been done using approximations based
on point-particle dynamics, either by applying the formalism
of asymmetric drift (Barth et al. 2001b) or by applying the
Jeans equation to model a kinematically hot, vertically ex-
tended rotating disk (Neumayer et al. 2007). These methods
are not intrinsically well-suited to gas-dynamical systems, but
more rigorous approaches are still lacking.

Another source of systematic uncertainty is the extended
mass distribution of stars: when the BH’s gravitational radius
of inﬂuence (rg; the radius within which MBH > 0.5Mtotal) is
not highly resolved, errors in determination of the stellar mass
proﬁle can strongly impact the accuracy of MBH measure-
ments. In many gas-dynamical measurements done with HST,
rg has been just marginally resolved, and only in the very best
cases such as M87 (Macchetto et al. 1997; Walsh et al. 2013)
is rg so highly resolved that the BH dominates the mass proﬁle
at the smallest observed scales. This problem is exacerbated
by the very optically thick dust present in most gas-dynamical
targets, which impedes the measurement of the intrinsic stel-
lar luminosity proﬁle. Despite much early enthusiasm and a
large number of HST orbits invested in the method, ionized
gas dynamics has not produced a very large number of robust
BH masses, in part due to the fact that many galaxies targeted
for HST observations did not exhibit clean rotational kine-
matics in the circumnuclear gas (Ho et al. 2002; Hughes et al.
2003; Noel-Storr et al. 2007; Walsh et al. 2008).

In some galaxies, near-infrared ro-vibrational H2 emission
lines from circumnuclear disks of warm molecular gas can
be detected. With adaptive optics, it is possible to map the
kinematics of H2 disks at high resolution and constrain BH
masses (e.g., Neumayer et al. 2007; Hicks & Malkan 2008;
Scharwächter et al. 2013; den Brok et al. 2015). However, the
warm molecular gas in active galactic nuclei often appears to
be somewhat kinematically disturbed or irregular, even when
the gas is in overall rotation about the BH (Mazzalay et al.
2014), and it has not generally been possible to derive highly
precise constraints on BH masses using it as a tracer.

Cold molecular gas has the potential to emerge as an impor-
tant new dynamical tracer for BH mass measurement, enabled
largely by the recent construction of the Atacama Large Mil-
limeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA). The basic principles of
BH mass measurement via molecular gas dynamics are essen-
tially identical to those used for ionized gas-dynamical mea-
surements, but cold molecular gas offers several key advan-
tages in terms of the physical structure of circumnuclear disks
and the practical aspects of carrying out a dynamical measure-
ment. Similar to ionized gas disks, the dynamics of rotating
molecular disks close to and within rg are essentially unaf-
fected by the host galaxy’s large-scale dark matter halo or pos-
sible triaxial structure, thus avoiding two of the most signif-
icant uncertainties associated with stellar-dynamical BH de-
tection in early-type galaxies (ETGs). Crucially, cold molec-

ular gas tends to have a smaller turbulent velocity dispersion
than the ionized gas in the same galaxy, making it a better
tracer of the circular velocity (Young et al. 2008; Davis et al.
2013a) and more amenable to accurate dynamical modeling.
About 10% of ETGs contain well-deﬁned, regular, ﬂat,
and round circumnuclear dust disks that can be seen easily
in HST images (e.g., van Dokkum & Franx 1995; Tran et al.
2001; Laine et al. 2003; Lauer et al. 2005).
In cases where
these disks have associated ionized components, they have
been targets for gas-dynamical BH mass measurements with
HST, but some dust disks have very weak or undetectable op-
tical line emission. The optical morphology can provide a
clear indication of dense gas in rotation about the galaxy cen-
ter, and such disks are potentially the best and most promis-
ing targets for measurement of BH masses with ALMA. Pre-
ALMA CO observations of molecular gas disks in ETGs il-
lustrated that well-deﬁned, round dust disks are generally
associated with regular, circular rotation in the molecular
gas, although interferometric observations were not generally
able to probe angular scales as small as rg in nearby galax-
ies (e.g., Okuda et al. 2005; Young et al. 2008; Alatalo et al.
2013). The ﬁrst proof of concept for BH mass measurement
via CO kinematics was presented by Davis et al. (2013b), who
used the Combined Array for Research in Millimeter-wave
Astronomy (CARMA) to observe NGC 4526 at 0.′′25 resolu-
tion, just sufﬁcient to resolve rg. ALMA now offers the pos-
sibility of routinely carrying out molecular-line observations
that resolve rg, opening up a major new avenue for determi-
nation of BH masses in galaxy nuclei.

While it has long been anticipated that ALMA will en-
able BH mass measurements based on spatially resolved
molecular-line kinematics (e.g., Maiolino 2008), it is not yet
clear how widely applicable this new method will prove to be.
The potential of the method depends crucially on the ability
to identify targets having cleanly rotating gas within rg, with
a high enough surface brightness for molecular line emission
on these scales to be detected and mapped in reasonable ex-
posure times.
In ALMA Cycle 2, we began a program of
observations of ETGs in order to pursue the goal of obtain-
ing BH mass measurements. The ﬁrst stage of this program
involves observations of the CO(2–1) line at ∼ 0.′′3 resolu-
tion to search for evidence of rapid rotation within the BH
sphere of inﬂuence. Targets were selected based on the pres-
ence of well-deﬁned, round circumnuclear dust disks as seen
in HST images. For galaxies showing regularly rotating disks
with high-velocity CO emission from within rg, deeper and
higher-resolution observations can then be proposed in order
to obtain highly precise measurements of MBH.

A total of seven ETGs were observed in our Cycle 2 pro-
grams, and observations for the full sample will be presented
in a forthcoming paper. Here, we present the ﬁrst results
from this project, an examination of the circumnuclear disk
kinematics in NGC 1332. NGC 1332 is an S0 or E galaxy
with a bulge stellar velocity dispersion of 328 km s- 1 (for
a detailed description of its morphology and classiﬁcation
see Kormendy & Ho 2013).
It contains a highly inclined
and opaque circumnuclear dust disk that is visible in HST
images. The BH mass in NGC 1332 has previously been
measured using two different techniques. Rusli et al. (2011)
found MBH = (1.45 ± 0.20) × 109 M⊙ (at 68% conﬁdence)
from stellar-dynamical modeling of VLT adaptive-optics data.
Humphrey et al. (2009) modeled the hydrostatic equilibrium
of the X-ray emitting gas in NGC 1332 using data from

the Chandra X-ray Observatory and derived a smaller cen-
tral mass of MBH = 0.52+0.41
- 0.28 × 109 M⊙ (at 90% conﬁdence).
The discrepancy between these two measurements provides
additional motivation to attempt to measure MBH via molec-
ular gas dynamics. While the nearly edge-on disk inclina-
tion makes NGC 1332 a challenging target for gas-dynamical
studies, it is a rare example of a galaxy that can serve as a test
case for comparison of three independent methods to measure
its BH mass, making it a compelling target for ALMA obser-
vations. Following the detection of CO emission from within
rg in these Cycle 2 data, higher-resolution (0.′′04) observa-
tions of NGC 1332 have been approved for ALMA’s Cycle 3.
This paper provides an initial look at the circumnuclear disk
kinematics in this galaxy at the 0.′′3 resolution of the Cycle 2
data. This resolution is sufﬁcient to resolve the BH’s radius
of inﬂuence if MBH > 8× 108 M⊙.
The recession velocity of NGC 1332 as measured from op-
tical data is 1550 ± 29 km s- 1 (da Costa et al. 1991). We

adopt a distance of 22.3 Mpc for consistency with Rusli et al.
(2011), while Humphrey et al. (2009) used a slightly smaller
distance of 21.3 Mpc.

2. OBSERVATIONS

As part of Program 2013.1.0229.S, ALMA observed NGC
1332 on 2014 September 1 in a frequency band centered on
the redshifted 12CO(2-1) 230.538 GHz line at νobs = 229.37
GHz (in ALMA Band 6). The minimum and maximum base-
lines of the array were 33.7 m and 1.1 km, respectively, and
the on-source integration time was 22.7 min. Observations
were processed using version 4.2.2, r30721 of the Common
Astronomy Software Application (CASA; McMullin et al.
2007) package and version 31266 of the standard ALMA
pipeline. This produced a data cube spanning a ﬁeld of view
of 21′′×21′′ with 0.07′′ spatial pixels (corresponding to 7.6
pc pixel- 1), and a separate continuum image having the same
pixel scale. Use of Briggs weighting with robustness param-
eter 0.5 yields a synthesized beam with major and minor axis
FWHM sizes of 0.′′319 and 0.′′233 and major axis position
angle 78.◦4, giving a geometric mean resolution of 0.′′27 cor-
responding to 29.2 pc in NGC 1332. The data cube con-
tains 60 frequency channels with spacing 15.4 MHz, or ve-
locity spacing 20.1 km s- 1 relative to the frequency of the
CO(2–1) line at the NGC 1332 systemic velocity. The RMS
noise level as measured in line-free regions of the data cube
is 0.4 mJy beam- 1 per channel. The overall ﬂux scale for the
data was set by an observation of the quasar J0334- 4008, for
which we adopt a 10% uncertainty (see, e.g., the Appendix of
ALMA Partnership et al. 2015) in the pipeline-reported value
of 0.76 Jy at 234.2 GHz.
Line emission is visible in 52 channels in the data cube,
spanning a full velocity width of 1040 km s- 1. Figure 1 shows
the ALMA CO image of NGC 1332, summed over all fre-
quency channels of the data cube. CO emission originates
from a region corresponding closely to the optically thick
dust disk with 2.′′2 angular radius, as seen in an archival HST
WFPC2 F814W (I-band) image. There is no signiﬁcant CO
emission detected above the level of the background noise at
any location outside the circumnuclear disk. The disk’s CO
surface brightness distribution exhibits a dip within the inner-
most r . 0.′′2, but even in this region CO emission is clearly
detected. The continuum image reveals a marginally resolved
source at the disk center with ﬂux density 8.75± 0.04 mJy;
we assume an additional 10% uncertainty in this value based

on the uncertainty in the overall ﬂux calibration.

3. CO EMISSION PROPERTIES AND DISK KINEMATICS

3

Figure 2 illustrates the integrated CO emission proﬁle over
this region, which exhibits a symmetric double-horned shape
with peaks separated by 840 km s- 1. To examine the spatially
resolved kinematics, we ﬁt the line proﬁle at each spatial pixel
using a sixth-order Gauss-Hermite function (van der Marel
1994). The S/N was sufﬁcient to obtain successful ﬁts at
each pixel over an elliptical region having major and minor
axis lengths of 4.′′3 and 0.′′7. Outside this region, the CO ﬂux
drops rapidly to below the level of the noise.

Figure 3 shows the spatially resolved kinematic moment
maps for the line-of-sight velocity centroid (vLOS, measured
relative to the systemic velocity), the dispersion σLOS, and
the higher-order Gauss-Hermite moments h3 through h6. The
odd-numbered moments h3 and h5 describe asymmetric de-
partures from a Gaussian proﬁle, while the even-numbered
moments h4 and h6 quantify symmetric deviations from a
Gaussian shape. The vLOS map illustrates the fact that the
NGC 1332 disk is in orderly rotation overall. Beam smear-
ing of the disk’s velocity ﬁeld is particularly severe given
the disk’s nearly edge-on inclination. At 0.′′3 resolution, the
disk’s projected semi-minor axis is essentially unresolved,
and low-velocity emission “piles up” into the line proﬁles
along the disk major axis. Consequently, high-velocity emis-
sion from gas in rotation near the disk center is spatially
blended with a substantial amount of low-velocity emission
from foreground and background regions along the disk sur-
face.

The vLOS map for NGC 1332 shows a relatively steep ve-
locity gradient across the nucleus from the southeastern (red-
shifted) to northwestern (blueshifted) side of the disk, but
without central high-velocity emission. High-velocity emis-
sion is present near the disk center, but as a sub-dominant
contribution to the line proﬁles. The primary signature of the
disk’s central rise in rotation speed is in the h3 map, which
shows very strong blueward and redward asymmetries on op-
posite sides of the disk center. The σLOS map has an “X” shape
typical of inclined rotating disks, with peak line-of-sight ve-
locity dispersion ∼ 120 km s- 1. This “X” shape comes from

rotational broadening and beam smearing in regions of the
disk exhibiting a steep gradient in line-of-sight velocity. It is
also possible that a portion of the spatial variation in observed
line width could be due to a radial gradient in the disk’s in-
trinsic turbulent velocity dispersion, but dynamical modeling
is required to distinguish the separate contributions of beam
smearing and turbulent velocity gradients. The h5 and h6
maps are noisy but still contain coherent structure tracing the
same features as h3 and h4.

To examine the kinematic position angle (PA) as a func-
tion of radius in the disk, we used the kinemetry method of
Krajnovi´c et al. (2006), applying kinemetry to the measured
vLOS map. The kinemetry routine ﬁts a harmonic expansion
to vLOS along elliptical annuli.
Its output includes, at each
semi-major axis distance R, the kinematic position angle Γ,
the axis ratio q of the kinematic ellipse, the ﬁrst harmonic co-
efﬁcient k1 (equivalent to the major axis line-of-sight velocity
amplitude), and the ratio k5/k1. The k5 coefﬁcient quanti-
ﬁes deviations from pure rotation, and the presence of strong
features in the k5/k1 map can indicate the existence of mul-
tiple kinematic components. The kinematic PA Γ refers to
the kinematic major axis and is deﬁned here such that PA=0◦
would correspond to a north-south orientation for the disk ma-

4

FIG. 1.— Left: HST WFPC2 F814W (I-band) image of the NGC 1332 nucleus and dust disk, displayed with logarithmic stretch. Right: ALMA CO(2-1)
image, summed over all frequency channels of the data cube and displayed with linear stretch. The ellipse at lower right illustrates the FWHM size of the ALMA
synthesized beam.

gaseous disks.)

As described by Krajnovi´c et al. (2008), galaxies having
multiple kinematic components are typically characterized by
either abrupt changes in q or Γ (with ∆q > 0.1 or ∆Γ > 10◦),
or a double-peaked k1 proﬁle, or the presence of a distinct
peak in the k5 proﬁle at which k5/k1 > 0.02. A kinematic twist
is identiﬁed if Γ varies smoothly with radius with a rotation
of > 10◦.

The kinemetry results are shown in Figure 4. The kine-
matic PA Γ ranges from 128◦ at r = 0.′′22 (within one resolu-
tion element of the galaxy nucleus) to 117◦ at the outer edge
of the disk, which can be characterized as a mild kinematic
twist. The k5/k1 ratio is below 0.02 at all radii and does not
contain any strong features. Overall, the modest radial varia-
tion in Γ and q, and the ﬂat k5/k1 proﬁle with magnitude of
∼ 1%, indicate that the NGC 1332 disk kinematics are con-
sistent with coherent disk rotation as the dominant kinematic
structure. If rg were well resolved, k1 would exhibit a central
quasi-Keplerian (v ∼ r- 0.5) decline with increasing distance
from the nucleus, but instead we see a smooth monotonic rise
in k1 as a function of R. This is an indication that vLOS does not
in itself provide direct evidence for a compact central mass;
beam smearing hides the central high-velocity emission in the
higher-order velocity moment maps.

FIG. 2.— CO(2–1) line proﬁle integrated over an elliptical region having
major and minor axis lengths of 4.′′3 and 0.′′7. The error bar at lower left
shows the background noise level summed in quadrature over this integration
region.

jor axis with the northern side of the disk redshifted. We use
the term kinematic major axis to refer to the locus of points
of maximum line-of-sight velocity amplitude on each ellipti-
cal annulus, which is equivalent to the line of nodes for an
inclined, ﬂat circular disk seen in projection. The kinematic
minor axis refers to the locus of points at which vLOS is equal
to the systemic velocity vsys. In a ﬂat circular disk, the kine-
matic major and minor axes will be seen as orthogonal straight
lines on the sky, but in the presence of warping, radial ﬂows,
or elliptical orbits, this is in general no longer the case. (See
Wong, Blitz, & Bosma 2004 for a detailed discussion of the
observable signatures of noncircular or warped kinematics in

We also extract a position-velocity diagram (PVD) as an-
other method to visualize the kinematics. We constructed the
PVD by rotating each frequency slice of the data cube clock-
wise by 27◦ so that the kinematic PA at the largest measured
radius was oriented horizontally, and then extracting a four-
pixel wide swath through the data cube (corresponding to one
resolution element) along the disk major axis. Figure 5 shows
the PVD, which illustrates a smooth and continuous distribu-
tion of emission across the full range of velocities present in
the disk. The central high-velocity emission is clearly seen in
the form of a slight upturn in the locus of maximum line-of-
sight speed on either side of the nucleus. This central velocity
upturn is relatively faint and only seen within ±0.′′8 of the
nucleus, it only spans 3–4 velocity channels above the level
of the ﬂat outer envelope in rotation velocity, and it is spa-

5

FIG. 3.— Maps of CO intensity, vLOS, σLOS, h3, h4, h5, and h6 measured from Gauss-Hermite ﬁts to the data and model cubes. The left panels show kinematic
moment maps of the ALMA data, and the right panels show the best-ﬁtting model for the ﬂat σturb proﬁle having MBH = 6.0 × 108 M⊙, as described in §5.2.
The model CO intensity map gives the integral of the CO line proﬁle at each spatial pixel in the modeled data cube. Units for the CO surface brightness map are
Jy beam- 1 km s- 1, and units for the vLOS and σLOS maps are km s- 1. In this and subsequent ﬁgures, line-of-sight velocities are shown relative to the systemic
velocity 1559 km s- 1 determined from the best-ﬁtting model. The higher-order moment coefﬁcients h3 through h6 are dimensionless.

6

FIG. 4.— Kinemetry for the NGC 1332 line-of-sight velocity (vLOS) map.
From top to bottom, the panels illustrate the kinematic PA Γ, the ﬂattening q,
the k1 coefﬁcient (equivalent to the amplitude of vLOS along the disk major
axis), and the ratio k5/k1.

tially blended with a much larger amount of emission span-
ning the entire velocity range present in the disk. This PVD
structure may be contrasted with the case of an observation
in which rg is well resolved: in that situation, the central ve-
locity upturn would be seen as a narrow locus of emission,
rather than as the outer envelope of a broad distribution of
velocities extending down to zero. Nevertheless, the velocity
rise seen within the innermost ∼ 0.′′5 is the expected signa-
ture of a compact central massive object that dominates the
gravitational potential at small radii. Although the CO sur-
face brightness map shows a central dip in brightness within
the innermost r < 0.′′2, the observed velocity structure pro-
vides evidence that the intrinsic CO-emitting region extends
to scales within the black hole’s sphere of inﬂuence.

From the PVD, we can extract an estimate of the enclosed
gravitating mass within one resolution element of the galaxy
nucleus. At a distance of four pixels (0.′′28) from the galaxy
center, corresponding to r = 30 pc, the maximum velocity seen
in the PVD is ≈ 480 km s- 1.
If this maximum velocity is
equated with the circular speed at r = 30 pc, the implied en-
closed mass is M(r) ≈ 1.6× 109 M⊙, which can then be taken
as an upper limit to MBH since it includes both the BH and the
stellar mass enclosed within this radius. A caveat to this sim-
ple estimate is that the CO line proﬁles may be broadened by
turbulence in the molecular gas disk, in which case the outer-
most velocity envelope seen in the PVD would give an upper
limit to the line-of-sight circular velocity.

The PVD structure also helps to clarify why the integrated
CO line proﬁle in Figure 2 is so strongly double peaked. The

ﬂat outer velocity envelope to the PVD at r ∼ 0.′′8 - 2.′′2 in-

dicates that the galaxy’s rotation curve is fairly ﬂat over this
range of radii. As a result, there is a large amount of CO emis-
sion at line-of-sight velocities in a narrow range around ±400
km s- 1 from gas along the disk’s major axis.
The total CO(2-1) ﬂux of the disk is 37.7± 0.3 Jy km s- 1,

with an additional 10% uncertainty in the ﬂux scale. We can
use this ﬂux value to obtain an estimate of the total molecular

FIG. 5.— Position-velocity diagram along the disk major axis, from a four-
pixel extraction width. Data are displayed with a linear stretch.

CO(2- 1)/L′

gas mass of the disk by applying a CO-to-H2 conversion fac-
tor αCO (e.g., Bolatto et al. 2013). Following Carilli & Walter
(2013), we convert from observed ﬂux to luminosity to ob-
CO(2- 1) = (1.14± 0.11)× 107 K km s- 1 pc2. The CO-
tain L′
to-H2 conversion is most reliably calibrated in terms of the
luminosity of the CO(1–0) emission line, which we do not
have for NGC 1332. Following Sandstrom et al. (2013), we
assume an intensity ratio R21 ≡ L′
CO(1- 0) = 0.7. For
the sample of 18 ETGs studied by Crocker et al. (2012), the
median CO intensity ratio is R21 = 0.76 with standard devia-
tion of 0.23, consistent with our adopted value of 0.7. Then, a
standard value of αCO = 3.1 M⊙ pc- 2 (K km s- 1)- 1 derived
for nearby galaxies and including a factor of 1.36 correc-
tion for helium (Sandstrom et al. 2013) leads to an estimated
CO(1- 0) = (5.0± 0.5)× 107
molecular gas mass of Mgas = αCOL′
M⊙. Sandstrom et al. (2013) ﬁnd that within the central kpc
of galaxies, αCO is typically a factor of ∼ 2 below this adopted
standard value, however, and in some cases the value of αCO
in galaxy centers is an order of magnitude lower than the aver-
age. If this trend applies to ETGs as well, then the actual gas
mass in the disk could be several times lower than this sim-
ple estimate. The circumnuclear disk of NGC 1332 may have
physical conditions very different from the environments in
which αCO has been calibrated, and in regions of high density
and high optical depth the standard assumptions of the CO-
to-H2 conversion method may be invalid (Bolatto et al. 2013).
We therefore consider the gas mass derived above as merely a
rough estimate.

4. DYNAMICAL MODELING

4.1. Method

We modeled the kinematics of a ﬂat circular disk following
the same approach used for ionized gas disks observed with
HST (Macchetto et al. 1997; Barth et al. 2001b; Walsh et al.
2010). The calculation begins with a mass model consisting
of the central point mass MBH and the extended mass proﬁle of
stars in the host galaxy M⋆(r), representing the mass enclosed
within radius r. The mass proﬁle M⋆(r) is determined from
an empirically measured and deprojected luminosity proﬁle,
with the stellar mass-to-light ratio Υ as a free parameter.

We neglect the possible contribution of dark matter, which
is expected to be extremely small relative to stellar mass on
scales comparable to the circumnuclear disk radius. The mass
model of NGC 1332 from Humphrey et al. (2009) indicates
a total enclosed dark matter mass of ≈ 108 M⊙ within r <

250 pc, two orders of magnitude lower than the stellar mass
enclosed at this scale. Our model does not include the mass
of the gas disk itself, since our estimate of the total molecular
gas mass is ∼ 5× 107 M⊙ within r < 250 pc.
A circular, ﬂat disk in rotation about the galaxy center has
rotation speed given by vrot(r) = [GM(r)/r]1/2 where M(r) =
MBH + M⋆(r). The line-of-sight velocity at each point in the
model disk is then determined for a given inclination an-
gle i and a major axis orientation angle Γ (for details see
Macchetto et al. 1997; Barth et al. 2001b). The model is con-
structed on a spatial grid that is highly oversampled relative
to the ALMA spatial pixel size, because a given pixel near
the disk center can contain gas spanning a substantial velocity
range. In the models, each ALMA pixel is subdivided into an
s × s grid of sub-pixel elements. At each sub-pixel element
in the grid, we model the emergent line proﬁle as a Gaussian,
with central velocity given by the projected rotation velocity
at that point, and with some turbulent linewidth σturb. We dis-
cuss the possible radial variation of σturb in §4.3.

The line proﬁles at each location must be weighted by the
CO surface brightness at the corresponding point in the disk.
The available information on the CO surface brightness dis-
tribution of the disk is simply the velocity-integrated CO im-
age as shown in Figure 1. However, this is an image of the
disk modiﬁed by beam smearing, and the model requires an
image of the intrinsic surface brightness distribution. Ideally
one would want a CO surface brightness map at the same res-
olution as the s× s sub-pixel sampling of the model grid, but
such information is not available. Lacking knowledge of the
CO surface brightness distribution on subpixel scales, the line
proﬁles at each sub-pixel grid point contributing to a given
ALMA spatial pixel were normalized to have equal ﬂuxes.
Then, the subsampled data cube was rebinned to the spatial
pixel scale of the ALMA data by averaging each s× s set of
sub-pixel line proﬁles to form a single proﬁle. The line pro-
ﬁles are calculated on a grid of 20.1 km s- 1 pixel- 1, corre-
sponding to the velocity sampling of the ALMA data cube.

In order to scale the line proﬁle of each spatial pixel to
its appropriate ﬂux level, we used a deconvolved CO surface
brightness map. We deconvolved the CO image shown in Fig-
ure 1 using ﬁve iterations of the Richardson-Lucy algorithm
(Richardson 1972; Lucy 1974) implemented in IRAF6, where
the deconvolution was carried out with an elliptical Gaussian
point-spread function (PSF) matching the speciﬁcations of the
ALMA synthesized beam. The choice of ﬁve iterations of
the deconvolution algorithm is somewhat arbitrary: this pro-
duced an adequately sharpened image, and larger numbers of
iterations began to produce noticeable artifacts by amplifying
background noise. In the model calculation, the line proﬁle
at each pixel was then normalized to match the ﬂux at the
corresponding pixel in the deconvolved ﬂux map. To allow
for any possible mismatch in ﬂux normalization between the
deconvolved ﬂux map and the original ALMA data cube, we
multiply the ﬂux map by a scaling factor f0 that is a free pa-
rameter in the model ﬁts. In practice, the best-ﬁtting value of
f0 is very close to unity.

Each frequency slice of the modeled cube is then convolved
with the ALMA synthesized beam, modeled as an elliptical
Gaussian, producing a simulated data cube analogous to the

6 IRAF is distributed by the National Optical Astronomy Observatories,
which are operated by the Association of Universities for Research in As-
tronomy, Inc., under cooperative agreement with the National Science Foun-
dation.

7

ALMA data. Since we rebin the high-resolution model cube
to the ALMA pixel resolution prior to carrying out the PSF
convolution, there is little time penalty for carrying out the
initial computation of line proﬁles on an oversampled pixel
grid with s as high as 10, and it is feasible to carry out model
optimizations with the line proﬁles computed at much ﬁner
spatial sampling (s = 50 for example). PSF convolution is
often the most time-consuming step of gas-dynamical model
calculations, particularly if the convolution is carried out on
an oversampled pixel grid.

Free parameters in the model include MBH and Υ, the x and
y centroid positions of the BH, the systemic velocity vsys, the
inclination and orientation angles of the disk i and Γ, the ﬂux-
normalization factor f0 applied to the CO ﬂux map, and the
parameters describing the run of σturb as a function of radius
in the disk (see §4.3; this requires up to three parameters de-
pending on the choice of σturb model).

4.2. Stellar Mass Proﬁle

The stellar mass proﬁle M⋆(r) is an essential ingredient in
the dynamical modeling, and is determined by measuring and
deprojecting the galaxy’s surface brightness proﬁle. Ideally,
this should be measured from imaging data having angular
resolution at least as high as the spectroscopic data. Near-
infrared observations are strongly preferred, especially for
galaxies having dusty nuclei. The only available HST image
of NGC 1332 is the WFPC2 F814W image shown in Figure
1, and the dust disk is extremely optically thick in the I band.
Rusli et al. (2011) used a combination of seeing-limited R-
band data on large scales, and K-band AO data on small scales
(< 4.′′5), to measure the stellar luminosity proﬁle of NGC
1332; they masked out the central dust disk in extracting the
galaxy’s light proﬁle. Their model was then deprojected un-
der the assumption of axisymmetric structure and an inclina-
tion of 90◦. We used this same mass proﬁle (kindly provided
by J. Thomas) in order to carry out a direct comparison be-
tween our gas-dynamical modeling and the stellar-dynamical
results of Rusli et al. (2011). The version of the mass pro-
ﬁle provided (which we denote MR⋆) was the average of the
best-ﬁtting stellar-dynamical models over the four quadrants
of the VLT integral-ﬁeld kinematic data, and corresponds to a
stellar mass-to-light ratio in the R band of ΥR = 7.35. In our
models, we incorporated this mass proﬁle directly, multiplied
by a mass-to-light scaling factor γ (a free parameter in the
model ﬁts), such that M⋆(r) = γMR⋆(r) and the resulting mass-
to-light ratio is ΥR = 7.35γ. As described below, our best ﬁts
converged on values of γ very close to unity, indicating that
our gas-dynamical model ﬁtting ﬁnds close agreement with
the stellar mass distribution measured by Rusli et al. (2011).
As a consistency check, we also measured a stellar luminos-
ity proﬁle from the archival HST data. The HST observation
was taken as two individual 320 s exposures with the galaxy
nucleus on the PC chip of the WFPC2 camera (0.′′0456 arc-
sec pixel- 1), and we combined the two exposures using the
IRAF/STSDAS task crrej. We measured the galaxy’s sur-
face brightness proﬁle from the PC image, ﬁrst masking point
sources, globular clusters, and the dust disk. The disk was
masked over the radial range 0.′′1–2.′′3. The central four pix-
els, where dust extinction appears less severe, were retained in
order to anchor the radial proﬁle measurement at the galaxy’s
nucleus, but the measurement then gives a lower limit to the
central surface brightness due to dust extinction along the nu-
clear line of sight.

The surface brightness proﬁle was ﬁt using a 2D multi-

8

FIG. 6.— Enclosed stellar mass proﬁles M⋆(r) as measured by Rusli et al.
(2011) (solid curve) and as measured from the HST WFPC2 F814W image
(dashed curve). The mass-to-light ratio in each case is based on the best-
ﬁtting dynamical model with a spatially uniform value of the turbulent veloc-
ity dispersion σturb. The vertical dotted line corresponds to the 0.′′27 resolu-
tion of the ALMA data.

Gaussian expansion (MGE) using the MGE_FIT_SECTORS
package (Cappellari 2002), using eight Gaussian components.
The MGE expansion requires a PSF model, and we modeled
the PC F814W PSF using an MGE ﬁt to a synthetic PSF gen-
erated using Tiny Tim (Krist et al. 2011). Deprojection of
the MGE model was done assuming that the galaxy bulge
is an oblate spheroid with inclination 83◦ (based on ﬁts to
the ALMA kinematics described below). CCD counts were
converted to I-band solar units accounting for a Galactic fore-
ground extinction of AI = 0.049 mag (Schlaﬂy & Finkbeiner
2011) to give the I-band luminosity proﬁle LI(r). The mass
proﬁle is then given by M⋆(r) = ΥILI(r), where ΥI is the I-
band mass-to-light ratio.

Figure 6 shows the enclosed stellar mass proﬁle M⋆(r) from
Rusli et al. (2011) and the proﬁle measured from the HST
F814W image. In both cases, the mass-to-light ratio normal-
ization is based on the best-ﬁtting result for models assuming
a spatially uniform value of σturb, as described in §4.3. The I-
band stellar mass proﬁle implies a lower stellar mass than the
R+K band proﬁle from Rusli et al. (2011). The most plausible
explanation is that this mass deﬁcit is the result of dust ab-
sorption by the circumnuclear disk in the I-band HST image,
which could not be entirely masked out. We therefore choose
to use the Rusli et al. (2011) proﬁle for our ﬁnal model ﬁts.
At the outer edge of the disk at r = 240 pc, the enclosed stellar
mass reaches 1010 M⊙, so the BH is expected to make a small
contribution to the total enclosed mass at this scale.

4.3. Turbulent Velocity Dispersion Proﬁle

To model the CO line proﬁles, some assumption must be
made regarding the intrinsic velocity dispersion of the gas.
The thermal contribution to the linewidth for cold molecular
gas will be extremely small: Bayet et al. (2013) ﬁnd kinetic

temperatures of typically ∼ 10 - 20 K for molecular gas in

ETG disks. Ideally, with angular resolution high enough to
resolve individual giant molecular clouds (GMCs) within the

disk, the turbulent velocity dispersion of individual GMCs
can be measured.
In a range of environments, the high-
est linewidths observed in individual GMCs correspond to

σturb ≈ 30 - 40 km s- 1 (Leroy et al. 2015). The closest ana-

log to NGC 1332 having observations of high enough resolu-
tion to isolate individual GMCs is NGC 4526, where CO(2–1)
observations from CARMA were able to resolve 103 individ-
ual GMCs (Utomo et al. 2015). In NGC 4526, most of the

individual GMCs were found to have σturb ≈ 5 - 10 km s- 1,
and the highest-dispersion clouds have σturb ≈ 25 km s- 1. For
NGC 1332, the 0.′′3 resolution of our ALMA data shows a
very smooth distribution of CO emission across the disk sur-
face, and much higher angular resolution would be required in
order to identify individual clouds within the disk or measure
their velocity dispersions directly.

In the outer regions of the NGC 1332 disk, the CO emis-
sion proﬁles are very narrow. At the largest radii along the
disk major axis, the lines are unresolved as observed in the
20 km s- 1 velocity channels, with measured linewidths of
σ ≈ 10 - 20 km s- 1 from the Gauss-Hermite ﬁts. Toward the
inner regions of the disk, the linewidths rise to a maximum
of σ = 120 km s- 1, with the largest widths observed at loca-
tions about 0.′′3–0.′′4 on either side of the nucleus along the
disk major axis. In this central region, the line proﬁles are ex-
tremely asymmetric with broad, extended wings. As will be
shown below, most or all of this rise in observed linewidth can
be explained by beam smearing of unresolved rotation. There
remains the possibility, however, of a genuine increase in the
gas turbulent velocity dispersion toward the disk center. One
issue in the model construction is that if the pixel oversam-
pling factor s is too low, the models can have a tendency to
require a spuriously high value of σturb to compensate for in-
adequate spatial sampling of rotational velocity gradients. It
is crucial, therefore, to ensure that the models are computed
on a grid with sufﬁcient spatial sampling that σturb is not bi-
ased toward higher values than actually occur in the disk.

Exponential: Following a typical prescription used in ion-
ized gas dynamics, we used a model of the form σturb =
σ0 exp(- r/r0) + σ1, where σ0, σ1, and r0 are free parameters.
Model ﬁts consistently drove the value of σ1 to zero, so this
parameter was discarded from ﬁnal ﬁts. To prevent the line
proﬁle widths from becoming arbitrarily narrow, we enforced

If the molecular gas in the NGC 1332 disk is arranged in
unresolved discrete clouds then the CO line width from an in-
dividual cloud is the result of the internal turbulent velocity
dispersion within the cloud, rotation of the cloud as a whole,
and shear due to galactic differential rotation. Additionally,
random motions of clouds (either in-plane or vertical) will
contribute to the observed line widths. Since our observations
do not resolve individual clouds, our data cannot distinguish
among these contributions, and we use the term “turbulence”
to refer to the combination of all processes responsible for the
emergent line width from a given location at the disk surface.
In their study of the NGC 4526 GMC population, Utomo et al.
(2015) found that the energy in turbulent motion dominated
over internal rotational energy for nearly all of the resolved
clouds.

To explore how the model ﬁts depend on the assumed tur-
bulent velocity dispersion proﬁle and allow for possible radial
gradients in turbulence, we ran models using the following
prescriptions for σturb(r).

Flat: The simplest parameterization is σturb = constant, al-

lowing σturb to be a free parameter in the model ﬁts.

a minimum value of σturb = 1 km s- 1.

Gaussian: The largest observed linewidths are seen at lo-
cations slightly offset from the disk center, suggesting that
a σturb model with a central depression could provide a bet-
ter ﬁt to the data. As a simple model allowing for a central
plateau or dip in σturb, we used a Gaussian proﬁle: σturb =
σ0 exp[- (r - r0)2/(2µ2)] + σ1, where σ0, σ1, r0, and µ are free
parameters. Again, we found that model ﬁts drove σ1 to zero
and we removed this parameter from the ﬁnal model runs, and
enforced a minimum value of σturb = 1 km s- 1. The parameter
r0 was allowed to vary over positive and negative values for
maximum freedom in ﬁtting the data. Positive values were
preferred by the ﬁts, producing a central dip in the turbulent
velocity dispersion.

In §5, we present a comparison of model ﬁtting results us-
ing each of these parameterizations for σturb. We emphasize
that none of these prescriptions for σturb represents a physi-
cally motivated model. The disk’s actual σturb proﬁle could
be considerably different from any of these prescriptions (and
might not be axisymmetric), but the data do not provide suf-
ﬁcient information to justify modeling σturb with anything
much more complex than these simple parameterizations.

4.4. Model Optimization

The output of each model computation for a given param-
eter set is a simulated data cube having the same spatial and
velocity sampling as the ALMA data. Thus, the models can
be ﬁtted directly to the ALMA data cube to optimize the ﬁt by
χ2 minimization. We ﬁt models using the amoeba downhill
simplex method implemented in IDL.

For model ﬁts to the observed data cube, we ﬁt models only
to the spatial pixels within the elliptical region illustrated in
Figure 3, using 52 frequency channels at each spatial pixel
spanning the full width of the CO emission line. To deter-
mine χ2 by direct comparison of the modeled cube with the
data, an estimate is required for the ﬂux uncertainty at each
pixel in the data. The simplest way to estimate the noise level
would be to determine the standard deviation of pixel values
in emission-free regions of the data cube. However, the back-
ground noise in the data exhibits strong correlations among
neighboring pixels, on angular scales similar to the synthe-
sized beam size. A proper calculation of χ2 in the presence of
strongly correlated errors requires the computation and inver-
sion of the covariance matrix of the data uncertainties (e.g.,
Gould 2003). We attempted to construct a covariance ma-
trix by using “blank”, emission-free regions of the data cube
to determine the pixel-to-pixel correlations in the background
noise. Within the elliptical ﬁtting region, there are 523 indi-
vidual spatial pixels. We found that numerical errors in con-
structing and inverting the covariance matrix rendered the χ2
calculation highly unstable.

We then opted for a simpliﬁed approach to computing χ2.
The background noise correlations are strong on scales com-
parable to the synthesized beam, of size ∼ 0.′′3, while the
pixel size is 0.′′07. We rebinned the data by spatially aver-
aging the ﬂux over 4× 4 pixel blocks within each frequency
channel, yielding approximately one rebinned pixel per syn-
thesized beam. This process averages over the mottled pat-
tern in the background noise seen at the original pixel resolu-
tion, producing a data cube in which the background noise is
nearly uncorrelated among neighboring pixels. In this block-
averaged data cube, we measured the standard deviation of
pixel values in blank regions to determine the noise level for

9

FIG. 7.— Best-ﬁtting values of MBH and σturb, and the corresponding χ2
values, for models with ﬂat σturb and oversampling factor s ranging from 1 to
50. The number of degrees of freedom in the ﬁt is 2540.
use in measuring χ2. The RMS noise level in the 4× 4 block-
averaged data is 0.3 mJy beam- 1 (compared with 0.4 mJy
beam- 1 in the original data). The fact that the noise in the
block-averaged data is nearly as large as in the full-resolution
data (rather than scaling as 1/√n where n is the number of
binned pixels) reﬂects the strong local correlations in the pixel
values of the full-resolution data. Then, for each model iter-
ation, the calculated model at the original ALMA pixel scale
was similarly block-averaged over 4× 4 pixel regions to com-
pare with the block-averaged data. In the rebinned data, we
calculate χ2 over 49 block-averaged spatial pixels and 52 fre-
quency channels at each pixel, for a total of 2548 data points.

5. MODELING RESULTS

5.1. Initial tests

As an initial test to examine the impact of different values
of the oversampling factor s, we ran ﬁts with models having
a ﬂat turbulent velocity dispersion and oversampling factors
of s = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, 20, and 50. All model parameters
were free in these initial ﬁts. Figure 7 illustrates the results of
varying s. An oversampling factor of s = 2 was the bare mini-
mum required in order to obtain modeled P–V diagrams hav-
ing smooth structure similar to the observed PVD. The models
converged on consistent results for χ2 and for the free param-
eters when the oversampling factor was greater than s = 4. We
choose s = 10 for our ﬁnal model ﬁts since there appears to be
no discernible beneﬁt to using higher values of s, while using
s > 10 signiﬁcantly increases the time for model computation.
For s = 10, the ﬁts converged on MBH = 6.0 × 108 M⊙, with
σturb = 24.7 km s- 1 and ΥR = 7.25.
We also ran a model ﬁt in which χ2 was computed us-
ing the full-resolution ALMA data cube and model, rather
than the 4 × 4 pixel block-averaged version. With s = 10,
the results for the best-ﬁtting parameters were virtually iden-
tical to the block-averaged ﬁts: we found best-ﬁt values of
MBH = 6.0×108 M⊙, σturb = 24.3 km s- 1, and ΥR = 7.26. In all
subsequent models ﬁtted to the data cube, we apply the 4× 4
block averaging to the data and models when calculating χ2

10

FIG. 8.— Contours of constant ∆χ2 as a function of MBH and σturb, for
the ﬂat σturb proﬁle. The minimum χ2 value of 11173.4 (for 2540 degrees of
freedom) is obtained at MBH = 6 × 108 M⊙ and σturb = 25 km s- 1. The two
innermost contours correspond to ∆χ2 = 10 and 100. Models were calculated
over a grid with increments of 108 M⊙ and 5 km s- 1.
in order to alleviate any possible issues related to correlated
errors in the background noise, but the block averaging does
not appear to have an appreciable impact on the best-ﬁtting
parameter values.

5.2. Model ﬁts with ﬂat σturb

With oversampling ﬁxed to s = 10, we ran initial model opti-
mizations for a two-dimensional grid over a range of ﬁxed val-
ues of MBH (from 0 to 2× 109 M⊙ in increments of 108 M⊙)
and σturb (from 5 to 50 km s- 1 in increments of 5 km s- 1). All
other parameters were allowed to vary freely. Figure 8 shows
contours of constant ∆χ2 relative to the best-ﬁtting model at
MBH = 6.0× 108 M⊙ and σturb = 25 km s- 1, where the mini-
mum χ2 was 11173.4. The value of χ2 climbs very steeply as
the parameters depart from these best-ﬁtting values.

For a closer examination of the parameter space around the
best ﬁt, we then ran a grid of models with ﬁner sampling in
MBH ranging from 0 to 2× 109 M⊙ in which σturb and other
parameters were left free. We found that the disk orientation
parameters i and Γ converged to very narrow ranges that were
insensitive to the ﬁxed MBH values in these ﬁts, with incli-
nation i = 83◦ - 84◦, and kinematic PA Γ = 117.◦44 - 117.◦67,
consistent with the kinematic PA determined by kinemetry for
the outer disk. The disk’s centroid velocity and position pa-

rameters also converged tightly, with vsys = 1559± 1 km s- 1,
and the best-ﬁtting x and y positions for the disk’s dynamical
center remaining constant to within ±0.1 ALMA pixels over
the range of MBH values tested.
For these model ﬁts, the best-ﬁtting value for σturb ranged
from 23 to 27 km s- 1, slightly larger than one velocity channel
in the ALMA data cube. The R-band mass-to-light ratio is
anticorrelated with MBH, and for MBH ranging from 0 to 2×
109 M⊙, ΥR ranged from 8.10 to 5.31.
The best-ﬁtting model with ﬂat σturb is found at MBH =
6.02× 108 M⊙. In this model ﬁt, ΥR = 7.25 and σturb = 24.7
km s- 1. With 2540 degrees of freedom, the model has χ2 =
11171.8 and χ2
ν = 4.40, indicating a poor ﬁt to the data over-

all. Figure 9 shows χ2 as a function of MBH for these model
ﬁts. If we were to adopt the usual criterion of ∆χ2 = 6.63 cor-
responding to a 99% conﬁdence range, we would obtain an
extremely narrow range of (5.66 - 6.34)× 108 corresponding
to an uncertainty of ±6% about the best-ﬁtting value of MBH.
However, since χ2
ν is much greater than unity for the best ﬁt,
standard ∆χ2 intervals are not directly applicable and we do
not consider these conﬁdence intervals to be meaningful. If
we were to inﬂate the noise uncertainties by a factor of 2 in
order to achieve χ2
ν ≈ 1 for the best ﬁt, the ∆χ2 = 6.63 in-
terval would correspond to a slightly broader mass range of
(5.3 - 6.7)× 108 M⊙.

Figure 3 illustrates the kinematic moment maps for this
model ﬁt, which reproduce the overall features of the ob-
served moment maps reasonably well although there are
clearly systematic differences in detail. The model h3 map
approximately matches the sign reversal in h3 seen on either
side of the nucleus: the line proﬁles at small radii have very
extended high-velocity tails, while at large radii along the disk
major axis the line proﬁles have extended low-velocity tails.
Since the modeled line proﬁles are assumed to be intrinsically
Gaussian at each location in the disk before beam smearing,
the departures from Gaussian proﬁles in the modeled data
cube can only result from blending of line proﬁles originat-
ing from different locations in the disk. The close match be-
tween the observed and modeled moment maps conﬁrms that
the complex line proﬁle shapes in the data are predominantly
the result of rotational broadening and beam smearing.

Figure 10 shows the best-ﬁtting model PVDs for models
calculated with MBH ﬁxed to 0, 6.0× 108, and 1.45× 109 M⊙;
the last value is equal to the best-ﬁtting mass from Rusli et al.
(2011). The model with MBH = 0 clearly fails in that it does
not have a central upturn in maximum rotation velocity. At
MBH = 6× 108 M⊙, the model has a central velocity upturn
similar to that seen in the data, and at MBH = 1.45× 109 M⊙
the central upturn is too prominent to match the data.
One noticeable aspect of these model PVDs is that the CO
linewidths in the outer disk are broader than in the data. This
can also be seen in Figure 11, which illustrates line proﬁles
extracted from the PVD at eight spatial locations. The models
follow the overall shapes of the observed line proﬁles fairly
well, even near the disk center at ±0.′′21 (or ±3 pixels) where
the proﬁles are extremely broad and asymmetric. In the out-
ermost slices through the PVD, the modeled CO proﬁles are
clearly broader than the observed proﬁles.

To examine the possibility that the model optimization is
somehow biased towards high values of σturb, we created a
PVD for the best-ﬁtting model having σturb = 10 km s- 1; at this
value, the intrinsic CO linewidths would be unresolved by the
ALMA data. For σturb = 10 km s- 1, the best-ﬁtting BH mass is
8.0× 108 M⊙. The value of χ2 for this model is 16063.5, dra-
matically worse than the best-ﬁtting model at MBH = 6.0× 108
M⊙ (as can be seen in Figure 8). Figure 12 compares the PVD
of this model with the model having MBH = 6.0× 108 M⊙ and
σturb = 24.7 km s- 1. It is somewhat striking that the σturb = 10
km s- 1 model appears to match some aspects of the observed
PVD distinctly better than does the best-ﬁtting model. In par-
ticular, the σturb = 10 km s- 1 model appears to more closely
match the observed narrow linewidths in the outer disk, and
the shape of the inner velocity upturn at small radii. The
model is, however, a much worse match to the observed PVD
overall, as clearly indicated by its much larger χ2 value. The

11

FIG. 9.— Curves of χ2 as a function of MBH for models calculated with the ﬂat, exponential, and Gaussian σturb proﬁles.
line-proﬁle cuts through the modeled PVD, shown in Figure
11, help to clarify how this model fails to match the data. At
positions of ±0.′′7 from the disk center, there is a “pile-up”
of emission at vLOS = ±420 km s- 1 causing a spike in emis-
sion that is not present in the data at these locations. Larger
values of σturb in the inner regions of the disk tend to reduce
the amplitude of this emission peak, matching the data more
closely.

5.3. Model ﬁts with other σturb proﬁles

Since the best-ﬁtting model with σturb = 24.7 km s- 1 clearly
overpredicts the CO linewidths in the outer disk, while mod-
els with smaller values of σturb lead to dramatically poorer ﬁts
to the data overall, we conclude that the ﬂat σturb proﬁle is not
a sufﬁcient description of the disk’s turbulent velocity disper-
sion proﬁle. To allow for radial gradients in σturb and attempt
to achieve more satisfactory ﬁts with lower χ2, we ran grids
of models using the exponential and Gaussian σturb proﬁles.
As before, models were run over a set of ﬁxed values of MBH,
with all other parameters allowed to vary freely.

Figure 9 shows χ2 as a function of MBH for both the expo-
nential and Gaussian σturb proﬁles. The most basic result is
that the more complex σturb proﬁles lead to better ﬁts overall
with signiﬁcantly lower χ2, but taken at face value they imply
a BH mass much lower than the value derived from the ﬂat
σturb ﬁts.

For the exponential σturb proﬁle, when all parameters were
allowed to vary freely, the model ﬁts converged on a best-
ﬁtting BH mass of zero (Figure 9, middle panel), with ΥR =
7.94. For this best-ﬁtting model (χ2 = 7790.8 for 2539 de-
grees of freedom) the central value of σturb becomes quite
high, with σ0 = 268 km s- 1 and r0 = 60.7 pc. The PVD for this
model, shown in Figure 14, helps to illustrate why this model
produces a much lower χ2 than models with ﬂat σturb. At radii
between 1′′ and 2′′, the PVD of the exponential σturb model is
a much better match to the observed PVD structure than any
of the ﬂat σturb models. At the same time, the ﬁt with MBH = 0
does not have a central velocity upturn. Instead, the smallest
radii in the PVD are characterized by an increase in linewidth
due to the high central σturb value. In effect, the model ﬁt is
unable to distinguish between rotation and dispersion in the
inner disk, while in the outer disk the ﬁts clearly prefer hav-
ing a gradient in σturb allowed by the exponential model, as
opposed to the ﬂat σturb models. Qualitatively, the structure of
the PVD is a very poor match to the central velocity upturn

ity dispersions seen in resolved GMCs in nearby galaxies, the

of the data, but the χ2 minimization result is dominated by
structure at larger radii in the PVD.
While a central turbulent velocity dispersion of 268 km s- 1
is probably unphysically high for molecular gas, it is not clear
whether any speciﬁc prior constraint on σ0 would be justiﬁ-
able. To examine the interplay between MBH and constraints
imposed on the central value of σturb, we ran a grid of models
over a range of ﬁxed values of MBH and of the central turbu-
lent velocity dispersion σ0. The results are shown in Figure
13. We ﬁnd that when σ0 is restricted to low values in the
range ∼ 10- 30 km s- 1, similar to the range of turbulent veloc-
model ﬁts converge on MBH in the range ∼ (6 - 8)× 108 M⊙.
However, higher ﬁxed values of σ0 produce ﬁts with signiﬁ-
cantly lower BH masses. Additionally, restricting σ0 to low
values produces much worse ﬁts overall in comparison with
the free σ0 ﬁts: for example, when σ0 is ﬁxed to 25 km s- 1,
the best ﬁt is found for MBH = 6.0× 108, with χ2 = 11083.0.
This illustrates the most severe problem in ﬁtting models
to the NGC 1332 data: once we allow for the possibility of a
radial gradient in σturb, the inferred value of MBH is directly
dependent upon the assumed upper limit to σturb in the cen-
tral region of the disk. There does not appear to be any clear
way to circumvent this problem, since the line proﬁles are so
strongly affected by rotational broadening that σturb cannot be
directly measured or constrained independently of a dynami-
cal model for the disk rotation. Larger values of σturb directly
lead to signiﬁcantly lower χ2 for the overall model ﬁt, and by
the χ2 criterion the model ﬁts strongly prefer a model with
no BH but with a central σturb that is probably unphysically
large. It is also important to note that for the highest values of
σturb reached in these models, the thin disk assumption would
break down, invalidating the basic premises of our dynamical
modeling. If the disk were actually highly turbulent in its cen-
tral regions, the turbulent pressure support would have to be
accounted for in determining MBH. This would raise MBH to
a non-zero value.

We also ran a separate grid of models with the exponential
σturb proﬁle and s = 25, to test whether the high central σturb
values might be the result of insufﬁcient model resolution of
the disk’s central kinematics at s = 10. The model ﬁtting re-
sults were essentially identical to the s = 10 case.

As an attempt to examine a model in which σturb possesses
a radial gradient without a central peak, we ran model ﬁts us-
ing the Gaussian σturb proﬁle. Since the Gaussian centroid can

12

FIG. 10.— PVDs for models with ﬂat σturb proﬁles compared with the
ALMA data. The three models displayed are the best-ﬁtting models with ﬂat
σturb for MBH ﬁxed to 0, 6.0 × 108, and 1.45 × 109 M⊙. The best-ﬁtting σturb
values are 27.7, 24.7, and 24.0 km s- 1, respectively.

be radially offset from the disk center, this model allows for a
central depression in σturb. For a grid of model ﬁts over ﬁxed
values of MBH, Figure 9 (right panel) shows the best-ﬁtting
χ2 as a function of MBH. Similar to the exponential proﬁle
models, we ﬁnd that the best ﬁt with the Gaussian σturb proﬁle
is obtained for MBH = 0 and ΥR = 7.96, and the best-ﬁtting
χ2 value in this case is 7499.7 for 2538 degrees of freedom.
In this model, the Gaussian σturb parameters are σ0 = 100.3
km s- 1, µ = 78.9 pc, and r0 = 14.5 pc. This small value of r0
indicates that the Gaussian peak is very close to the disk cen-

ter, and the central dip in σturb is essentially unresolved. Trial
ﬁts demonstrated that if σ0 is restricted to values well below
100 km s- 1, the inferred MBH value from χ2 minimization is
directly determined by the constraint imposed on σ0, similar
to the situation for the exponential σturb proﬁle. The PVD for
this model is displayed in Figure 14, and Figure 11 shows the
CO line proﬁles at several locations along the disk major axis
for the best-ﬁtting exponential and Gaussian σturb models.

The best-ﬁtting models with the exponential or Gaussian
σturb proﬁles also converged on values of i between 83◦ and
84◦, and Γ between 117◦ and 118◦, consistent with results
from the ﬂat σturb models.

5.4. Stellar Mass Proﬁle

As a test to assess the sensitivity of MBH to the inner mass
proﬁle of the galaxy, we ran a model ﬁt using the mass proﬁle
measured from the HST F814W image with Υ as a free pa-
rameter, using the ﬂat σturb proﬁle. The model converged on
a best-ﬁtting mass of MBH = 9.85× 108 M⊙ and σturb = 25.0
km s- 1, and the stellar mass proﬁle for the best ﬁt is illustrated
in Figure 6. The best ﬁt has χ2 = 11690.8, compared with the
value 11171.8 for the best ﬁt using the Rusli et al. (2011) mass
proﬁle and ﬂat σturb.

It is reasonable to assume that the stellar luminosity proﬁle
measured from K-band data is a more accurate representation
of the galaxy structure, having less sensitivity to dust extinc-
tion, and the K-band galaxy proﬁle gives a lower χ2 value for
the dynamical model ﬁt. The difference in BH masses mea-
sured with the two proﬁles illustrates the importance of using
a mass proﬁle measured from near-IR imaging whenever pos-
sible, to minimize the impact of extinction. Higher-resolution
kinematic data would also lessen the impact of extinction on
the derived MBH; when the central, nearly Keplerian region of
the disk is better resolved, the impact of errors in M⋆(r) on the
derived MBH will become smaller.

5.5. Fits to the PVD

Another option for model ﬁtting is to carry out ﬁts to the
PVD rather than to the full data cube. This may have an ad-
vantage in that the PVD describes the major axis kinematics
of the disk, and ﬁtting models to the PVD rather than to the
full data cube could have better sensitivity to the central ve-
locity upturn and lead to better constraints on MBH. However,
ﬁts to the PVD would not be able to constrain the disk incli-
nation, kinematic PA, or centroid position as well as ﬁts to the
data cube, and these parameters would need to be constrained
or ﬁxed.

We carried out a ﬁt to the PVD using the ﬂat σturb model,
with the values of i, Γ, and the x and y centroid positions ﬁxed
to their best-ﬁtting values from the corresponding ﬁt to the
full data cube. Free parameters included MBH, Υ, σturb, vsys,
and f0. For each model iteration, we extracted a PVD follow-
ing the same procedures used on the data, with a four pixel
extraction width. For the calculation of χ2, we measured the
background noise as the standard deviation of pixel values in
blank regions of the PVD. We note that the PVD still exhibits
strongly correlated noise among pixels along the position axis
over a scale of ∼ 4 pixels.
This model run gave best-ﬁtting values of MBH = 6.5× 108
M⊙, ΥR = 7.18, and σturb = 21.6 km s- 1. Thus, in this case
ﬁtting to the PVD rather than to the data cube altered the best-
ﬁtting value of MBH by just 8%. This can be attributed to
the fact that the disk is so highly inclined that a 4-pixel wide

13

FIG. 11.— Line proﬁles measured by extracting single-column cuts through the PVD at eight spatial locations. The PVD is based on a four pixel wide extraction
along the disk major axis. The observed PVD is shown in black. Modeled proﬁles are as follows. Red: The best-ﬁtting model with ﬂat σturb. Blue: Model with
ﬂat σturb = 10 km s- 1. Magenta: Best-ﬁtting model with exponential σturb. Cyan: Best-ﬁtting model with Gaussian σturb. The models with exponential and
Gaussian σturb proﬁles are closely overlapping at most locations. Numerical labels in each panel show the offset in arcseconds from the galaxy nucleus along the
major axis.
extraction of the PVD already contains much of the kinematic
information of the disk as a whole.

The ﬁts to the full data cube demonstrated that χ2 mini-
mization has a tendency to optimize the model ﬁt to the outer
disk, with relatively low sensitivity to the small number of
pixels in the central velocity upturn region. We therefore
carried out another model run in which χ2 was calculated
only over a restricted set of pixels in the PVD correspond-
ing to the spatial and velocity region sensitive to the central
upturn. For this model run, we ﬁxed Υ to its best-ﬁtting value
from the previous ﬁt to the full PVD, leaving MBH, σturb, vsys,
and f0 as free parameters. The calculation of χ2 was carried
out only for pixels in the PVD corresponding to r < 1′′ and
vLOS > 300 km s- 1. This model run gave MBH = 5.7× 108 M⊙

and σturb = 37.7 km s- 1. As in the case of ﬁtting to the full
PVD, ﬁtting models with σturb restricted to lower values led
to higher values of MBH (but higher χ2): enforcing an upper
limit of σturb = 10 km s- 1 gave MBH = 8.0× 108 M⊙. Since the
best-ﬁtting MBH values were very similar to the values derived
from ﬁts to the full data cube, we conclude that for this dataset
there is no clear advantage to ﬁtting models to either the full
PVD or to the central high-velocity region of the PVD.

5.6. Final Results

The dynamical model ﬁts do not lead to a deﬁnitive deter-
mination of MBH, primarily because the inferred value of MBH
depends very directly on the speciﬁc choice of some parame-
terized model for σturb(r) or on any upper limit imposed on the

14

FIG. 13.— Contours of constant ∆χ2 for models with the exponential σturb
proﬁle, as a function of MBH and the central turbulent velocity dispersion σ0.
For σ0 ≤ 50 km s- 1, the best-ﬁtting BH mass is ∼ (4 - 8) × 108 M⊙, but
higher ﬁxed values of σ0 result in model ﬁts with lower MBH. If σ0 is left as
a free parameter, the best-ﬁtting model has σ0 = 268 km s- 1, and χ2 = 7790.8
for 2539 degrees of freedom; the ∆χ2 values plotted in this ﬁgure are relative
to that best-ﬁtting value.

kinematic moment maps (Figure 3). While the models repro-
duce the overall structure of the kinematic maps reasonably,
even up to h5 and h6, there are obvious differences in detail,
which can plausibly be attributed to an inadequate model for
the spatial distribution of σturb in the disk.

Models in which σturb is allowed to vary with radius give
much lower values of χ2
ν, although still well above unity. Fits
carried out with the exponential and Gaussian σturb proﬁles
drive MBH to zero, substituting dispersion for rapid rotation
in the inner region of the disk. These models are formally
more successful than the ﬂat σturb models because they ﬁt the
outer disk much better while matching the inner high-velocity
envelope of the PVD relatively poorly. The lowest χ2 value is
found for the Gaussian σturb model ﬁt, which gives χ2
ν = 2.95
at MBH = 0. The appearance of the PVDs for the exponential
and Gaussian σturb models gives a fairly clear indication that
the high central dispersions are spurious, however. These ﬁts
imply central values of σturb that are probably unphysically
large (over 250 km s- 1 in the case of the exponential proﬁle),
but restricting the maximum σturb amplitude to lower values
produces signiﬁcantly worse ﬁts with much higher χ2 (Figure
13). With the exponential proﬁle, a limit on the maximum
value of σturb (< 50 km s- 1) based on observations of resolved
GMCs in other environments leads to MBH in the range (4 -
8)× 108 M⊙.
These difﬁculties in constraining MBH appear to be driven
by a combination of factors: the models systematically devi-
ate from the data in some locations of the disk by amounts
much larger than the observational uncertainties; the beam-
smeared line proﬁles near the disk center are so broad that the
model ﬁts are unable to distinguish clearly between rotation
and turbulence as the source of the broadening; a relatively
small number of data pixels are located in spatial and velocity
regions of the data cube that are highly sensitive to MBH; and

FIG. 12.— PVDs for models with ﬂat σturb proﬁles. The middle panel
shows the overall best-ﬁtting model with ﬂat σturb, having MBH = 6.0 × 108
M⊙ and σturb = 24.7 km s- 1. The lower panel shows the best ﬁtting model
having a ﬁxed σturb = 10 km s- 1. For this model, MBH = 8.0 × 108 M⊙.
value of σturb(r). The simplest model, with the ﬂat σturb pro-
ﬁle, converges tightly to MBH = 6.0×108 M⊙. The best-ﬁtting
model has χ2
ν = 4.4, however, and the line proﬁles shown in
Figure 11 demonstrate that χ2 is dominated by localized re-
gions where the modeled proﬁles deviate systematically from
the data, indicating that the models are failing to capture some
essential structure in the disk’s velocity ﬁeld, turbulent ve-
locity dispersion proﬁle, or surface brightness proﬁle. In the
outer disk, the observed line proﬁles are clearly narrower than
the best-ﬁtting overall value of σturb = 24.7 km s- 1, but when
σturb is ﬁxed to lower values, the line proﬁles at intermediate
radii in the disk deviate even more strongly from the data (also
visible in Figure 11). The central high-velocity envelope of
the PVD appears qualitatively to be better matched by a model

with σturb ﬁxed at 10 km s- 1 (implying MBH = 8 × 108 M⊙)
than with σturb = 24.7 km s- 1, but the model with σturb = 10
km s- 1 is a much worse ﬁt overall in terms of χ2. Restrict-
ing the model ﬁt to a small sub-region of the PVD at small
radius and high velocity does not alter these results substan-
tially, compared with ﬁts to the full data cube. The systematic
deviations between models and data can also be seen in the

15

(and probably spurious) values of σturb in the inner portion
of the disk. With no clear way to determine σturb(r) inde-
pendently or to constrain its maximum possible value, a ﬁrm
lower limit on MBH cannot be derived from the Cycle 2 data.
In all of our models, χ2 rises steeply at MBH > 109 M⊙; the
disk kinematics do not appear to be compatible with the value
MBH = (1.45± 0.20)× 109 M⊙ found by Rusli et al. (2011).

6. DISCUSSION

The 0.′′3 resolution ALMA observation of NGC 1332 per-
mits an instructive case study for gas-dynamical BH detec-
tion. With this dataset, we are working in the regime where
the BH sphere of inﬂuence may be marginally resolved, in that
the central velocity upturn is visible as the upper envelope to
the PVD at small radii, but the central high-velocity rotation is
badly blurred with low-velocity emission due to beam smear-
ing and the disk’s nearly edge-on inclination. In essence, rg
appears to be nearly resolved along the disk major axis, but it
is badly unresolved along the disk’s minor axis. This makes it
difﬁcult to derive strong constraints on MBH from the informa-
tion contained in the central velocity upturn. The difﬁculties
in modeling the NGC 1332 disk dynamics described here are
particularly acute since the disk is very close to edge-on, but
we anticipate that these same issues will arise in any situation
in which the BH sphere of inﬂuence is not well resolved.

6.1. The BH sphere of inﬂuence in gas-dynamical

measurements

The “radius of inﬂuence” for BHs is generally deﬁned as
the radius within which the BH is the dominant contribu-
tion to the galaxy’s mass proﬁle. In the absence of a mass
model for the galaxy, rg is taken to be the radius within which
the circular velocity due to the gravitational potential of the
BH rises above the surrounding bulge velocity dispersion σ⋆:
rg = GM/σ2
⋆. Since σ⋆ is not spatially constant within a galaxy
bulge, and its central value is affected by the BH itself, this
deﬁnition does not give a uniquely well-deﬁned value of rg,
but it does provide a useful general guideline for the radius
that should be resolved in order to detect the dynamical effect
of the BH. The gravitational inﬂuence of the BH can be de-
tected at radii beyond rg, but at progressively larger radii the
enclosed mass becomes dominated by stars. Measuring MBH
when rg is unresolved then becomes an exercise in detecting
a small fractional contribution to the total gravitating mass on
unresolved spatial scales, and the results can be highly suscep-
tible to systematic errors in determination of the stellar mass
proﬁle or in other aspects of the model construction.

The criterion of resolving rg as the minimal requirement for
clear detection of the dynamical effect of the BH ignores one
crucial factor, highlighted by the NGC 1332 data. Along the
minor axis of an inclined disk, the projected distance from
the nucleus to a point at distance rg from the nucleus is com-
pressed by a factor of cosi. This is an important effect for
In an
highly inclined disks: for NGC 1332, cosi ≈ 0.11.
observation just sufﬁcient to resolve rg along the disk ma-
jor axis in NGC 1332, rg along the disk’s projected minor
axis would be unresolved by an order of magnitude. In the
ALMA data described here, the poor spatial resolution along
the disk’s minor axis direction leads directly to severe beam
smearing, causing the line proﬁles to be dominated by low-
velocity emission even at small radii along the disk major
axis.

Our examination of the NGC 1332 disk dynamics suggests

FIG. 14.— PVDs for models with the exponential and Gaussian σturb pro-
ﬁles. Compared with PVDs for the ﬂat σturb model (Figure 12), these PVDs
ﬁt the data much better at large radii in the disk (r > 1′′) and give much lower
χ2 values, but are a poor match to the central velocity upturn.

the S/N in those MBH-sensitive pixels is relatively low.

Fortunately, the disk inclination and orientation parameters,
centroid position, and systemic velocity are well constrained
by the model ﬁts, and we obtain consistent values for these pa-
rameters regardless of the σturb prescription that is used. The
stellar mass-to-light ratio in the best-ﬁtting models is consis-
tent with the value of ΥR = 7.35 from Rusli et al. (2011). For
the models with ﬂat, exponential, and Gaussian σturb, we ob-
tain best-ﬁtting values of ΥR = 7.25, 7.94, and 7.96, respec-
tively. The two latter cases should be considered effectively as
upper limits on ΥR, however, since these model ﬁts converged
on MBH = 0.
The ﬂat and exponential σturb models together point to a BH
mass that is likely to be in the range ∼ (4 - 8)× 108 M⊙, un-
der the assumption that a plausible maximum value for σturb
in the inner disk is ∼ 50 km s- 1. We adopt this as a provi-

sional and preliminary conclusion, but we emphasize that this
is not a quantitatively rigorous result. We are unable to de-
rive meaningful conﬁdence limits on MBH owing to the high
χ2 values for our models as well as the fact that the best χ2
values (by far) are found for models with extremely large

16

that for gas-dynamical BH mass measurements, the key cri-
terion for whether the BH sphere of inﬂuence is resolved
should be whether rg is resolved along the disk’s projected
minor axis, not along its major axis as is usually assumed.
In other words, to ensure that the central velocity upturn is
clearly resolved and not severely spatially blended with low-
velocity emission, the observations should resolve an angular
scale corresponding to rg cosi. For highly inclined disks such
as NGC 1332, the requirements on angular resolution for dy-
namical detection of BHs are thus much more stringent than
for disks at moderate inclination angles. BH mass measure-
ments from disks observed at very low inclination angles will
present a different set of challenges, and will be particularly
difﬁcult if sin i is so small that that the line-of-sight compo-
nent of the disk’s rotational velocity is not much larger than
the turbulent or random velocities in the disk. All else be-
ing equal, gas-dynamical BH mass measurements will require
higher velocity resolution for disks of lower inclination, and
higher angular resolution for high inclinations.

To what extent is rg resolved in NGC 1332 with the Cycle
2 ALMA observation? Assuming MBH = 6× 108 M⊙ and us-
ing σ⋆ = 328 km s- 1 (Kormendy & Ho 2013), the kinematic
deﬁnition of the radius of inﬂuence gives rg = 24 pc. This is
equivalent to an angular radius of 0.′′22, indicating that the BH
radius of inﬂuence along the disk major axis would be slightly
unresolved. In contrast, rg cosi = 0.′′027, so the radius of inﬂu-
ence is unresolved by an order of magnitude in the minor-axis
direction. We can also use the dynamical modeling results to
estimate the size of rg as the radius of the sphere within which
M⋆(r) = MBH. For MBH = 6.0× 108 M⊙, our best-ﬁtting model
with the ﬂat σturb proﬁle also gives rg = 24 pc, so the two def-
initions of rg give identical results in this case. For the model
having σturb = 10 km s- 1 and MBH = 8× 108 M⊙, rg is slightly
larger at 29.5 pc or 0.′′27 along the disk major axis, similar to
the 0.′′27 resolution of the ALMA data. The stellar-dynamical
value of MBH = 1.45× 109 M⊙ from Rusli et al. (2011) im-
plies a larger sphere of inﬂuence, rg = 58 pc or 0.′′54.
Figure 15 illustrates the severity of the beam-smearing ef-
fect for the NGC 1332 data. This ﬁgure presents the modeled
circular velocity curve vcirc(r) for the best-ﬁtting model hav-
ing ﬂat σturb and MBH = 6.0 × 108 km s- 1, including curves
showing vcirc(r) due to the BH alone, the stars alone, and
the combined gravitational potential of the BH and stars.
For comparison with the data, we take the k1(r) proﬁle from
kinemetry and divide by sin i to produce an observed proﬁle
of mean rotation velocity along the disk major axis, and we
also display the k1(r) proﬁle measured from a kinemetry ﬁt
to the vLOS map of the dynamical model. (With i ≈ 83◦, sin i
is so close to unity that it can be essentially ignored.) In the
limit of extremely high angular resolution, the k1 curve would
closely follow the curve of vcirc for the combined mass proﬁle
of the BH and stars. As a consequence of beam smearing and
the high disk inclination, the observed line-of-sight centroid
velocity k1 falls far below the actual major-axis vcirc proﬁle
at nearly all radii in the disk, even at radii signiﬁcantly larger
than one resolution element from the galaxy nucleus. One
might naively expect that k1 would closely track vcirc from
large radii down to approximately the resolution limit of the
data, but in fact k1 begins to deviate below vcirc at a radius
roughly ﬁve times larger than the angular resolution limit.

This analysis further reinforces the conclusion that, al-
though rg is likely to be nearly resolved along the disk’s ma-
jor axis, the mean or centroid velocities measured at locations

FIG. 15.— Plot of circular velocity vcirc as a function of radius, to illustrate
the impact of beam smearing on the major axis velocity proﬁle. Model pro-
ﬁles are calculated for the best-ﬁtting model with MBH = 6.0 × 108 M⊙ and
σturb = 24.7 km s- 1. Dotted Curve: vcirc(r) for the BH alone. Short-dashed
curve: vcirc(r) for the host galaxy stellar mass alone. Solid curve: vcirc(r) for
the combined proﬁle of the BH and stars. Long-dashed curve: The major-
axis velocity proﬁle k1/ sin(i) measured from the observed ALMA vLOS map
using kinemetry, where sin(i) = 0.994. Dot-dashed curve: Kinemetry proﬁle
of k1/ sin(i) measured from the vLOS map of the model, which closely follows
that of the data. The dotted vertical line gives the radius corresponding to the
resolution limit of the ALMA data (θ), and the solid vertical line denotes rg
for MBH = 6.0 × 108 M⊙. Beam smearing and the disk’s high inclination
result in an observed major-axis velocity curve that falls far below the disk’s
circular velocity at nearly all radii in the disk.

For our ﬁducial mass model displayed in Figure 15, the

along the disk major axis have essentially no sensitivity to
MBH. When the information about MBH is contained primar-
ily in the shapes of the beam-smeared line proﬁles rather than
in the centroid velocity vLOS measured from the line proﬁle
at each position, it becomes extremely challenging to derive
accurate constraints on MBH.
presence of emission out to ±500 km s- 1 from the systemic
velocity (as observed in the PVD) implies that the disk emis-
sion extends down to r ≈ 15 pc, well inside rg (provided that
this outermost velocity is primarily the result of rotation rather
than turbulence). The upper limit to the observed rotation
speed could be due to the presence of a “hole” in the molecu-
lar disk at r < 15 pc, or simply from a central surface bright-
ness at r < 15 pc too low to detect in this observation. This
scale is well inside the r ≈ 29 pc angular resolution of our
data.
Davis (2014) proposed a new ﬁgure of merit for gas-
dynamical BH mass measurements as an alternative to the cri-
terion of resolving rg for planning future observations. This
approach deﬁnes vobs(r) as the line-of-sight rotation velocity
of a parcel of gas at some radius r in a galaxy, and vgal(r) as
the rotation speed that parcel would have in the absence of a
central BH (which can be determined from M⋆(r), account-
ing for uncertainty in Υ). The ﬁgure of merit ΓFOM is deﬁned
in terms of the conﬁdence level at which vobs can be distin-
guished from vgal sin i using spatially resolved observations of
disk kinematics, if the uncertainty in measured velocity at a
given location is δv. The appropriate distance r to compute

this ﬁgure of merit is described as the smallest resolvable dis-
tance from the galaxy center, corresponding to the telescope’s
beam size, since this is the radius within which the BH mass
is most dominant in the data.

Our NGC 1332 data highlight a particular issue with this
ﬁgure of merit deﬁnition. Along the disk major axis at a
distance of one resolution element from the center in NGC
1332, beam smearing and rotational broadening make the ob-
served line proﬁles extremely broad and asymmetric, break-
ing the one-to-one correspondence between position and line-
of-sight rotation velocity that would be observed in data of
much higher angular resolution. If vobs(r) is identiﬁed with
the mean or centroid of the line-of-sight velocity proﬁle, it
will be subject to the beam-smearing effect illustrated in Fig-
ure 15, in which case vobs(r) can deviate strongly from the
disk’s intrinsic vsin i out to radial scales signiﬁcantly larger
than the angular resolution of the observations. The deﬁni-
tion of ΓFOM does not account for the confounding effects of
beam smearing and disk inclination on the line proﬁles, an ef-
fect that becomes increasingly important at higher disk incli-
nations.7 Using the ΓFOM criterion, Davis (2014) argues that
BH masses can be determined even when the observational
resolution is ∼ 2 times larger than the angular size of rg. We
suggest that observations with such low resolution would not
generally have the power to constrain MBH accurately.

We propose that the best criterion to plan future observa-
tions is simply whether rg is resolved along the disk’s pro-
jected minor axis for the anticipated value of MBH. The ideal
situation is one in which the observations provide several in-
dependent resolution elements across rg, even along the minor
axis of the disk. Such high resolution observations will have
the capability to fully lift degeneracies between MBH, Υ, and
σturb, and yield highly accurate (and precise) measurements
of MBH. Deriving a more rigorous ﬁgure of merit criterion for
gas-dynamical BH detection would require a comprehensive
suite of simulations incorporating beam smearing, to test the
impact of angular resolution, disk inclination, S/N, and other
parameters on the accuracy of BH mass determination.

6.2. Model ﬁtting methods and sources of error

In past gas-dynamical measurements of BH masses using
HST data, models were ﬁt to quantities measured from the
data, speciﬁcally to the line-of-sight velocity at each spa-
tial pixel, and sometimes to the line-of-sight velocity disper-
sion as well. This is a relatively time-consuming technique,
because it requires measurements of vLOS and σLOS at each
point in the modeled velocity ﬁeld for each model realiza-
tion so that the models and data can be compared. In princi-
ple, the modeled emission-line proﬁles could be compared di-
rectly with the data instead of going through the intermediate
step of measuring kinematic moments from each model iter-
ation. However, despite some initial attempts (Bertola et al.
1998; Barth et al. 2001a), direct ﬁtting of modeled line pro-
ﬁles has not proved to be a successful approach for BH mass
measurements based on optical emission-line data. Obsta-
cles to direct line-proﬁle ﬁtting for optical data include the
blending of multiple emission lines such as Hα and the [N II]

7 The Davis (2014) ﬁgure of merit is maximized at i = 90◦ because this ori-
entation maximizes the line-of-sight projection of the disk rotation velocity.
By this measure, the ﬁgure of merit approach predicts that BH mass mea-
surements would be most accurate for disks oriented exactly edge-on, all else
being equal. In fact, the progressive loss of information at higher inclination
due to beam smearing represents a key limiting factor for mass measurement,
but the ﬁgure of merit ΓFOM does not explicitly incorporate this effect.

17

λλ6548,6583 lines, the presence of broad emission-line com-
ponents blended with the resolved narrow-line emission, and
the difﬁculty of measuring or modeling the emission-line sur-
face brightness proﬁle to sufﬁciently high accuracy for direct
line-proﬁle ﬁtting to succeed.

The ALMA data, on the other hand, are much more
amenable to direct ﬁtting of models to the observed data cube.
Fitting models to the data cube makes use of all available in-
formation in the data and should therefore be preferred when-
ever it is feasible. We found that for this dataset, ﬁtting to the
PVD (either in whole or over restricted regions) did not lead
to substantial changes in the inferred MBH, compared with ﬁt-
ting to the full information in the data cube. Furthermore,
ﬁtting models directly to the data cube is the most efﬁcient
approach, in that it avoids the additional steps of extracting a
PVD or kinematic moment maps from each individual real-
ization of a modeled data cube for a particular parameter set.
Gas-dynamical model ﬁts can lead to very high-precision
constraints on MBH, as discussed by Gould (2013). However,
in the regime of very precise model ﬁtting results, it becomes
very important to explore potential systematic uncertainties
that might affect the measurement, including uncertainty in
the slope or shape of the extended mass proﬁle and uncer-
tainty in the turbulent velocity dispersion proﬁle. These prob-
lems are compounded when the BH’s sphere of inﬂuence is
not well resolved, or when models are ﬁtted to a spatial re-
gion in which most pixels are at locations well outside of rg.
Neglecting these systematics could lead to catastrophic errors
in determining MBH– that is, errors far larger than the for-
mal model-ﬁtting uncertainties. The ideal situation is one in
which the data quality (resolution and S/N) are sufﬁcient to
allow model parameters to be constrained by ﬁtting models
only to spatial regions within r < rg, the region in which the
kinematics are maximally sensitive to MBH.

In this work, we have focused on modeling uncertainties
due to the degeneracy between rotation and turbulent motion,
since this problem is particularly severe at high disk inclina-
tion; in other cases, uncertainty in the stellar mass proﬁle may
be the dominant contribution to the error budget. Often, in
gas-dynamical model ﬁtting, the stellar luminosity proﬁle is
taken to be a ﬁxed proﬁle, with just a single scaling factor Υ
as a free parameter. This procedure is, however, prone to un-
derestimate the uncertainty in MBH, because model ﬁts can
converge tightly on a best-ﬁtting value of MBH even if the
measured stellar luminosity proﬁle deviates from the actual
extended mass proﬁle of the galaxy. When rg is not well re-
solved, it is particularly important to incorporate a realistic
level of uncertainty in the slope or shape of the deprojected
stellar luminosity proﬁle into the model ﬁtting process. We
have not explored this uncertainty in detail in this work, but
our simple experiment of measuring MBH using the galaxy
proﬁle measured from the HST F814W image illustrates the
nature of the problem. For molecular gas-dynamical MBH
measurements, the central light proﬁle of the host galaxy will
most often be severely impacted by dust absorption, and ex-
tinction may still be an issue even in the K band, as illustrated
by the VLT SINFONI image of NGC 1332 from Rusli et al.
(2011). This problem can be alleviated to some extent by
masking out the most heavily obscured regions of the disk
when measuring the stellar luminosity proﬁle, or by using
multi-color data to model and remove the effects of extinc-
tion.

Additionally, radial gradients in the stellar mass-to-light
if present, would lead to errors in inferring M⋆(r)

ratio,

18

from the galaxy’s light proﬁle. The impact of Υ gradi-
ents on stellar-dynamical measurements has been investi-
gated by McConnell et al. (2013), who found that plausi-
ble Υ gradients could bias BH mass measurements in el-

liptical galaxies by ∼ 20 - 30%. The inﬂuence of Υ gradi-

ents on gas-dynamical measurements should be less severe
since gas-dynamical data only samples the stellar mass pro-
ﬁle within the region enclosed by the disk’s radius, but past
gas-dynamical work has not directly tested or simulated the
contribution of Υ gradients to uncertainty on MBH. The best
and most secure approach to circumvent these difﬁculties is
to obtain kinematic data that highly resolve rg, so that M⋆(r)
is much smaller than MBH over the innermost resolution ele-
ments of the data. Then, uncertainty in the stellar mass proﬁle
will not have a large impact on MBH.

Another potential source of systematic error in the model
ﬁts is the CO surface brightness map. Beam smearing (both in
the data and the models) mixes information on rotation veloc-
ity, turbulent linewidth, and surface brightness near the disk
center, and errors in the assumed surface brightness map can
lead directly to errors in MBH. The high inclination of the
NGC 1332 disk makes it much more difﬁcult to discern any
surface brightness substructure that may be present. In gen-
eral, resolving the emission-line surface brightness structure
on small radial scales is a key requirement for accurate model-
ing, along with resolving the kinematic structure. Ideally, the
disk’s surface brightness proﬁle should be resolved on scales
of rg cosi or smaller. Given the other large sources of system-
atic uncertainty in modeling the NGC 1332 data, we have not
explored the impact of surface brightness errors on our model
ﬁts, but unresolved surface brightness substructure could be
responsible for a portion of the high χ2 values we obtain.

As noted by Gould (2013), it is also the case that distance
uncertainty contributes directly to uncertainty in MBH, be-
cause the value of MBH inferred from dynamical modeling
scales linearly with the assumed distance. Most BH mass
measurements have not incorporated distance uncertainties
into their error analysis, but this should be borne in mind in
situations where the formal model-ﬁtting precision on MBH
is so high that distance uncertainty becomes a major com-
ponent of the error budget on MBH. For NGC 1332, re-
cent distance measurements listed in the NASA/IPAC Ex-
tragalactic Database (NED) are between 21.9 and 24.6 Mpc
(Kundu & Whitmore 2001; Tully et al. 2013), and the contri-
bution of distance uncertainty to the error budget on MBH is
much smaller than the other sources of systematic uncertainty
associated with the dynamical modeling.

6.3. Disk structure

A major issue for gas-dynamical BH mass measurements is
the treatment of the turbulent velocity dispersion. The disk’s
physical thickness will depend on σturb/vrot, where vrot is the
disk’s rotational velocity, and if the turbulent velocity disper-
sion contributes an effective dynamical pressure that supports
the disk against gravity, then this must be accounted for in the
dynamical modeling. Enclosed mass scales with v2
rot for a dy-
namically cold disk or σ2 for a purely dispersion-supported
+ σ2 if both rotation and ran-
system, or (very roughly) v2
rot
dom motions provide dynamical support for the disk. Thus, if
(σturb/vrot)2 ≪ 1, then the disk can be treated as dynamically
cold. In our model calculations, we have included σturb merely
as an empirical broadening to the emergent CO linewidths
from the disk, but we have not ascribed any dynamical impor-

FIG. 16.— Radial proﬁle of σturb/vcirc for the model with σturb = 24.7

km s- 1 and MBH = 6.0 × 108 M⊙.

tance to σturb. These models effectively assume a dynamically
cold, ﬂat disk in which vrot = vcirc.

Figure 16 illustrates the radial variation of σturb/vcirc for the
best-ﬁtting model with the ﬂat σturb proﬁle having σturb = 24.7
km s- 1 and MBH = 6.0×108 M⊙. The maximum value reached
by σturb/vcirc is 0.058, at r = 125 pc. This is a sufﬁciently low
value to justify the treatment of the disk as thin and dynami-
cally cold.
In the models with turbulent velocity dispersion gradients,
the peak σturb values are much higher: 268 km s- 1 for the ex-
ponential σturb proﬁle and 100 km s- 1 for the Gaussian proﬁle.
For reasons described previously, these high σturb values are
probably spurious, since they fail to reproduce the shape of
the PVD at small radii and high velocities. In these models,
σturb/vrot reaches very high values near the disk center, be-
cause with no BH, vrot goes to zero at very small radii. This
would imply that the inner disk becomes very thick and dis-
persion dominated, and if this were the case our model as-
sumptions would break down badly. While this is an extreme
and unlikely scenario, we do not actually have a strong con-
straint on the maximum value of σturb in the NGC 1332 disk.
A deﬁnitive measurement of σturb/vrot across the disk can only
be done using data of higher angular resolution. For now,
we consider the σturb/vrot proﬁle shown in Figure 16 to be a
reasonable estimate, providing some reassurance that the disk
can be modeled as thin and dynamically cold.

Future high-resolution ALMA observations will likely be
able to constrain BH masses tightly by resolving kinematics
within rg. In the regime of extremely high-precision BH mass
measurement with well-controlled systematics, the impact of
turbulent pressure support on the derived BH mass might not
be negligible in comparison with other sources of error, in
which case other approaches such as Jeans equation model-
ing or application of the asymmetric drift formalism might be
necessary.

In this work as in most gas-dynamical BH detections, the
disk has been treated as essentially a surface of zero thickness.
In a highly inclined disk of nonzero thickness, any line of
sight through the disk will pass through regions having differ-

ent line-of-sight rotation velocities. If the disk were optically
thin but geometrically thick, it would be important to model
the full line-of-sight velocity proﬁles through the disk rather
than treating the disk as a thin surface. The NGC 1332 molec-
ular disk is likely to be optically thick to CO(2–1) emission,
as is generally the case in molecular clouds (e.g., Bolatto et al.
2013), and if it is as thin as suggested by the σturb/vrot proﬁle,
modeling it as a thin surface should be a reasonable approxi-
mation to its structure.

The disk also exhibits a mild kinematic twist that signals the
likely presence of a warp, probably similar to the warp in the
maser disk of NGC 4258 (Herrnstein et al. 2005). In this ﬁrst
examination of the NGC 1332 disk kinematics, we have not
attempted to model the warp, but we plan to explore warped-
disk models in future work. One approach to modeling a
warped disk is to use a tilted-ring model in which the radial
variation of the ring inclination and orientation angles is set by
the disk’s measured kinemetry proﬁles (e.g., Neumayer et al.
2007).

The high values of χ2 found for our best-ﬁtting models,
and the systematic deviations between the modeled line pro-
ﬁles and the data (Figure 11) indicate that there are real and
important aspects of the NGC 1332 disk structure and/or dy-
namics that are not incorporated in the models. The largest
of these systematic problems are likely to be the inadequacy
of our σturb models and CO surface brightness model, and the
fact that the warp is neglected in our dynamical models. It
is also possible, however, that there may be real departures
from circular rotation in the disk such as m = 2 perturbations
to cloud orbits (e.g., Wong et al. 2004), or localized depar-
tures from circular orbits due to star formation or other pro-
cesses within the disk. The line proﬁles shown in Figure 11
show that the largest deviations of the models from the data
are systematic and roughly symmetric on the blueshifted and
redshifted sides of the disk, suggesting that localized random
velocity irregularities are not the dominant contribution to the
large χ2.

Observations of other transitions from the 12CO rotational
ladder, as well as 13CO lines and lines of other molecular
species such as HCN and HCO+, can provide much more in-
formation on the temperature and density conditions in ETG
disks (e.g., Crocker et al. 2012; Bayet et al. 2013), and disks
such as the one in NGC 1332 will be important targets for
further ALMA observations. Additionally, it would be inter-
esting to compare the kinematics and turbulent velocity dis-
persion proﬁle of the molecular gas with the kinematics of
ionized gas on the same angular scales. This can be done
with HST STIS observations of the Hα+[N II] spectral region
or other optical lines, or with adaptive optics observations in
cases where Brγ, [Fe II], or other near-infrared lines are strong
enough to enable kinematic mapping. Direct comparisons of
BH mass measurements using ionized and molecular gas dy-
namics in the same galaxy would be worth pursuing as well,
to test whether molecular gas is indeed a more accurate tracer
of circular velocity than ionized gas within the close environ-
ments of supermassive BHs.

6.4. Comparison with previous MBH measurements

Since our models do not provide quantitatively satisfactory
ﬁts to the ALMA data cube, we cannot compare our results
with the previous MBH measurements from Humphrey et al.
(2009) and Rusli et al. (2011) in a rigorous fashion. How-
ever, it is clear that models with MBH in the range found by

19
Rusli et al. (2011), MBH = (1.45 ± 0.20) × 109 M⊙, lead to
far higher χ2 values than our best-ﬁtting models. This is the
case for all of the σturb prescriptions that we have examined,
so our provisional MBH estimate appears to be incompatible
with their result. The discrepancy is particularly intriguing in
that we are using the same stellar mass proﬁle measured by
Rusli et al. (2011) for their mass modeling.

The mass model from Rusli et al. (2011) implies a total en-
closed mass of ≈ 2.4× 109 M⊙ within r = 30 pc, based on
their best-ﬁtting BH mass and their stellar mass proﬁle with
ΥR = 7.35. This gives a circular velocity of 580 km s- 1 at
r = 30 pc, much larger than the maximum speed of ≈ 480
km s- 1 seen in the ALMA PVD at r = 30 pc. Adopting the 1σ
lower bound to MBH from Rusli et al. (2011), 1.25× 109 M⊙,
we would obtain vcirc(30 pc) = 550 km s- 1, still much higher
than the observed outer envelope to the PVD at this radius. In
our model ﬁt with MBH ﬁxed to 1.45× 109 M⊙, the mass-to-
light ratio converged to a much lower value of ΥR = 6.02 in
order to attempt to ﬁt the disk kinematics at large radii, but
still gave a very poor ﬁt, clearly over-predicting the amplitude
of the central velocity upturn as seen in the lower panel of
Figure 10.
The Humphrey et al.
(2009) measurement of MBH =
0.52+0.41
- 0.28 × 109 M⊙ was based on constructing a mass model
for NGC 1332 using the hydrostatic equilibrium of the X-ray
emitting gas as a probe of the gravitational potential. The
model includes components describing the stellar mass dis-
tribution of the galaxy (based on a combination of 2MASS
data at large scales and the HST F814W image at small radii,
with the dust disk masked out), the hot gas proﬁle as mea-
sured from Chandra observations, the dark matter halo, and
the BH. This method requires the presence of an X-ray emit-
ting hot interstellar medium in hydrostatic equilibrium, and to
date it has only been applied to a small number of ETGs in-
cluding NGC 4261, NGC 4472, and NGC 4649 in addition to
NGC 1332 (Humphrey et al. 2008, 2009). The X-ray derived
BH masses for NGC 4261 and NGC 4649 are in agreement
with masses measured for these galaxies from ionized gas dy-
namics (NGC 4261; Ferrarese et al. 1996) and stellar dynam-
ics (NGC 4649; Shen & Gebhardt 2010). For NGC 4472, the
X-ray hydrostatic equilibrium method gives 0.64+0.61
- 0.33 × 109
M⊙ (Humphrey et al. 2009) while a stellar-dynamical anal-
ysis ﬁnds MBH = (2.4 - 2.8) × 109 M⊙ for model ﬁts that
include a dark matter halo (Rusli et al. 2013). A deﬁnitive
measurement of MBH in NGC 1332 using higher-resolution
ALMA data can provide a critical test of the X-ray and stellar-
dynamical results.

As a fast-rotating ETG with a high central stellar veloc-
ity dispersion, NGC 1332 bears some similarities to galaxies
such as NGC 1277 and NGC 1271 which have been found
to contain extremely massive BHs that are outliers falling
well above the MBH - Lbulge correlations of the general popula-
tion of ETGs (van den Bosch et al. 2012; Walsh et al. 2015a,
2016; Scharwächter et al. 2015). Assuming the BH mass
from Rusli et al. (2011) for NGC 1332, Kormendy & Ho
(2013) discuss whether the galaxy is an outlier or not rela-
tive to the MBH - Mbulge relationship. The answer hinges on
whether NGC 1332 is treated as a ﬂattened, single-component
elliptical galaxy, or a two-component S0 with bulge and disk.
If it is a two-component bulge+disk system in which the elon-
gated portion of the galaxy is considered to be a disk compo-
nent, then the BH would be moderately over-massive relative
to its small bulge, but if the galaxy is instead a ﬂattened el-

20

liptical with a dominant bulge component accounting for the
majority of the light, then the BH–bulge mass ratio is within
the normal range for ellipticals. Kormendy & Ho (2013) ar-
gue that NGC 1332 is a highly ﬂattened elliptical, in which
essentially all of the light can be ascribed to the bulge com-
ponent. Savorgnan & Graham (2016) also support the bulge-
dominated interpretation. If the BH mass is close to our provi-
sional estimate and the value determined by Humphrey et al.
(2009), then the galaxy would lie closer to the normal BH–
bulge mass ratio for ETGs, and it would even fall in the low-
mass tail of the scatter distribution in the MBH - σ relation for
ETGs (Figure 15 of Kormendy & Ho 2013).

6.5. Future prospects for BH mass measurements with ALMA
ALMA observations have an exciting potential for enabling
gas-dynamical BH mass measurements, but it remains to be
seen how widely applicable this method will be for exploring
BH demographics. For ETGs, the available pool of targets
for precision measurement of MBH will be a small fraction of
the overall population of ETGs. Well-deﬁned circumnuclear
dust disks are only seen in ∼ 10% of ETGs. Measuring ac-
curate BH masses in these galaxies will be most successful
when (a) the gas kinematics are dominated by simple disklike
rotation, (b) ALMA observations can resolve rg cosi, and (c)
the molecular emission-line surface brightness is high enough
that the gas kinematics can be mapped on scales well within
rg. This last requirement could prove to be a major limit-
ing factor for ALMA measurements of BH masses; it is not
yet known what fraction of circumnuclear disks will have de-
tectable emission extending inward to r < rg. In NGC 1332,
the high-velocity emission provides evidence that the disk ex-
tends inward to at least r ≈ 15 pc. However, if there had
been a central “hole” in the molecular disk with a radius much
larger than ∼ 25 pc then there would be no high-velocity up-
turn in the data and accurate measurement of the BH mass
would not be possible even with higher resolution observa-
tions. Molecular clouds may be easily disrupted in the im-
mediate environments of massive BHs as a result of the ex-
treme shear (Utomo et al. 2015) or due to winds or irradiation
from intermittent accretion-powered nuclear activity. Tidal
disruption of molecular clouds in the close environments of
supermassive BHs has also been suggested as an explanation
for the lack of young stellar populations seen in the inner-
most few parsecs of typical S0 and early-type spiral galax-
ies (Sarzi et al. 2005). As ALMA observes larger numbers
of ETGs having circumnuclear disks, it will be possible to
determine the inner structures of these objects and search for
any connections with BH mass, nuclear activity level, or other
properties.

Accurate measurements of host galaxy luminosity proﬁles
in the near-infrared will be a critically important component
of future gas-dynamical MBH measurements.
Ideally, these
observations should have angular resolution at least as high
as the ALMA data, and next-generation extremely large tele-
scopes equipped with adaptive optics will bring greatly im-
proved capabilities for these measurements.

Several targets for MBH measurement have already been
observed by ALMA in Cycles 0–2, and additional programs
have been approved for Cycle 3, so the number of galaxies
with detections of high-velocity rotation within rg should be-
gin to increase rapidly in the near future. The most efﬁcient
way to pursue BH mass measurements with ALMA will be
to continue carrying out initial, quick observations of galax-
ies with resolution just sufﬁcient to test for the presence of

rapidly rotating gas within rg. Finding evidence of high-
velocity rotation within rg will then justify deeper and higher-
resolution observations that can potentially provide exquisite
sampling of the gas kinematics within rg. Galaxies for which
MBH can be measured to high accuracy using data that highly
resolve rg are extremely valuable, providing ﬁrm anchors to
local BH demographics and the BH-host galaxy correlations,
in addition to providing strong evidence that the central mas-
sive objects are indeed likely to be supermassive BHs (Maoz
1998).

In our ALMA programs, we are selecting ETG targets
based on the presence of well-deﬁned circumnuclear dust
disks, which give morphological evidence for dense gas in
rotation about the galaxy center. ALMA will likely be an
important tool for gas-dynamical detection of BHs in spiral
galaxies as well, but it is not yet known what fraction of spi-
ral galaxies contain molecular gas in clean disk-like rotation
on scales of r < rg. The dust-disk selection method we have
used to identify ETG targets for ALMA would not be appli-
cable to spirals, which typically have more complex, ﬁlamen-
tary, or spiral dust-lane structure (e.g., Martini et al. 2003),
but the growing number of high-resolution ALMA observa-
tions of nearby spirals will make it possible to examine molec-
ular gas kinematics in galaxy nuclei in far greater detail than
has previously been possible. Recently, Onishi et al. (2015)
presented dynamical modeling of ALMA HCN and HCO+
kinematics in the SBb galaxy NGC 1097, deriving a BH mass
of 1.40+0.27
- 0.32 × 108 M⊙. We note that for a stellar velocity dis-
persion of 196 km s- 1 (Lewis & Eracleous 2006), the gravi-
tational radius of inﬂuence of the NGC 1097 BH would be
15.6 pc or 0.′′22, while the Cycle 0 data used by Onishi et al.
(2015) had a beamsize of 1.′′6× 2.′′2. This is an order of mag-
nitude too coarse to resolve rg, and the observed PVD does
not show any hint of a central velocity upturn. However, the
ALMA PVD does exhibit velocity structure consistent with
regular rotation within the inner r < 10′′, an encouraging sign
that higher-resolution observations would have the capability
to measure MBH accurately if the disk kinematics continue to
be dominated by regular rotation down to scales within rg.

7. CONCLUSIONS

This paper presents an ALMA CO(2-1) observation of the
center of NGC 1332 at 0.′′3 resolution. We ﬁnd evidence for
a disk in orderly rotation with evidence for a mild kinematic
twist, and a central upturn in maximum line-of-sight velocity
consistent with the expected signature of rapid rotation around
a compact central mass. Although the quality of the Cycle 2
ALMA data is excellent and the central upturn in maximum
rotation speed provides evidence for a compact central mass
in NGC 1332, the value of the BH mass cannot be tightly con-
strained due to severe degeneracies between MBH and other
parameters. These degeneracies stem primarily from beam
smearing and rotational broadening of the line proﬁles, be-
cause the BH sphere of inﬂuence is slightly unresolved along
the disk major axis and very unresolved along the minor axis.
We ﬁnd that the BH mass is degenerate with the turbulent ve-
locity dispersion proﬁle of the disk. Any chosen prescription
for the functional form of the disk’s turbulent velocity disper-
sion proﬁle can lead to formally tight constraints on the BH
mass, but different choices for how to model the turbulent ve-
locity dispersion can lead to widely divergent conclusions for
the value of the BH mass.

While we are unable to constrain MBH deﬁnitively with

the present ALMA data, models with a ﬂat or exponentially
declining σturb(r) proﬁle and σturb limited to values of ≤ 50
km s- 1 point to a BH mass in the range ∼ (4 - 8) × 108
M⊙. The model ﬁts strongly disfavor a BH mass as high
as the value determined by Rusli et al. (2011) from stellar-
dynamical modeling, 1.45× 109 M⊙, but agree well with the
value obtained from a hydrostatic analysis of X-ray emission
from the diffuse interstellar medium (Humphrey et al. 2009).
When the BH sphere of inﬂuence is not highly resolved,
gas-dynamical model ﬁts can have a tendency towards high-
precision formal constraints on MBH that are not necessarily
matched by correspondingly high accuracy, but which sim-
ply reﬂect the speciﬁc choices and assumptions made in con-
structing models. This can potentially result in catastrophic
errors in determining MBH (i.e., errors that are much larger
than the uncertainties in MBH derived from the usual ∆χ2 cri-
teria). To obtain gas-dynamical measurements of MBH that
are both precise and accurate, there is no substitute for obser-
vations that highly resolve the BH sphere of inﬂuence.

We argue that the appropriate criterion for quantifying the
feasibility of carrying out a gas-dynamical mass measurement
is whether the BH’s radius of inﬂuence is resolved along the
disk’s minor axis– in other words, the angular resolution of
the observation should be smaller than the angular size of
rg cosi. Observations satisfying this criterion (or better) will
resolve both the essential kinematics and the emission-line
surface brightness substructure in the BH environment, and
will lift the degeneracy seen in this dataset between turbu-
lent and rotational motion in the inner disk. When rg cosi is
highly unresolved, dynamical models can suffer from poten-
tially large systematic uncertainties in deriving MBH due to
uncertainties in the disk’s σturb proﬁle and sub-resolution sur-
face brightness structure, and due to errors in measurement of
the shape of the galaxy’s spatially extended mass distribution.
This initial observation was designed primarily to test
for the presence of high-velocity emission from within rg.
ALMA is capable of achieving much higher angular resolu-
tion than the 0.′′3 beamsize of these data, and new observa-

21

tions of NGC 1332 at 0.′′04 resolution have been scheduled for
ALMA’s Cycle 3. These new observations will enable much
more detailed ﬁtting of dynamical models on scales r < rg
along the disk’s major axis, and will nearly or fully resolve
rg cosi (depending on the value of MBH). We anticipate that
the new data will provide ﬁrm constraints on MBH, demon-
strating the full potential of ALMA for dynamical measure-
ment of BH masses.

This paper makes use of data from ALMA program
2013.1.00229.S. ALMA is a partnership of ESO (represent-
ing its member states), NSF (USA) and NINS (Japan), to-
gether with NRC (Canada) and NSC and ASIAA (Taiwan),
in cooperation with the Republic of Chile. The Joint ALMA
Observatory is operated by ESO, AUI/NRAO and NAOJ. The
National Radio Astronomy Observatory is a facility of the Na-
tional Science Foundation operated under cooperative agree-
ment by Associated Universities, Inc. This research is based
in part on observations made with the NASA/ESA Hubble
Space Telescope, obtained from the Data Archive at the Space
Telescope Science Institute, which is operated by the Associ-
ation of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc., under
NASA contract NAS 5-26555. This research has made use of
the NASA/IPAC Extragalactic Database (NED), which is op-
erated by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute
of Technology, under contract with the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration. We thank Timothy Davis and Mar-
tin Bureau for very stimulating discussions on ALMA gas
kinematics during a workshop at Wadham College, Oxford,
in March 2015, Jens Thomas for providing the published stel-
lar mass proﬁle from Rusli et al. (2011), and the anonymous
referee for a helpful report.

LCH acknowledges support from the Chinese Academy
of Science through grant No. XDB09030102 (Emergence of
Cosmological Structures) from the Strategic Priority Research
Program, and from the National Natural Science Foundation
of China through grant No. 11473002.

Facilities: ALMA, HST (WFPC2)

REFERENCES

Alatalo, K., Davis, T. A., Bureau, M., et al. 2013, MNRAS, 432, 1796
ALMA Partnership, Fomalont, E. B., Vlahakis, C., et al. 2015, ApJ, 808, L1
Barth, A. J., Sarzi, M., Ho, L. C., et al. 2001a, in The Central Kiloparsec of
Starbursts and AGN: The La Palma Connection (ASP Conference Series
Vol. 249), 370

Barth, A. J., Sarzi, M., Rix, H.-W., et al. 2001b, ApJ, 555, 685
Bayet, E., Bureau, M., Davis, T. A., et al. 2013, MNRAS, 432, 1742
Bertola, F., Cappellari, M., Funes, S. J., José G., et al. 1998, ApJ, 509, L93
Bolatto, A. D., Wolﬁre, M., & Leroy, A. K. 2013, ARA&A, 51, 207
Carilli, C. L., & Walter, F. 2013, ARA&A, 51, 105
Cappellari, M. 2002, MNRAS, 333, 400
Crocker, A., Krips, M., Bureau, M., et al. 2012, MNRAS, 421, 1298
da Costa, L. N., Pellegrini, P. S., Davis, M., et al. 1991, ApJS, 75, 935
Davis, T. A. 2014, MNRAS, 443, 911
Davis, T. A., Alatalo, K., Bureau, M., et al. 2013a, MNRAS, 429, 534
Davis, T. A., Bureau, M., Cappellari, M., Sarzi, M., & Blitz, L. 2013b,

Nature, 494, 328

den Brok, M., Seth, A. C., Barth, A. J., et al. 2015, ApJ, 809, 101
Ferrarese, L., Ford, H. C., & Jaffe, W. 1996, ApJ, 470, 444
Gebhardt, K., & Thomas, J. 2009, ApJ, 700, 1690
Genzel, R., Pichon, C., Eckart, A., Gerhard, O. E., & Ott, T. 2000, MNRAS,

317, 348

Ghez, A. M., Klein, B. L., Morris, M., & Becklin, E. E. 1998, ApJ, 509, 678
Ghez, A. M., Salim, S., Weinberg, N. N., et al. 2008, ApJ, 689, 1044
Gould, A. 2003, arXiv:astro-ph/0310577
Gould, A. 2013, arXiv:1303.0834
Harms, R. J., Ford, H. C., Tsvetanov, Z. I., et al. 1994, ApJ, 435, L35

Herrnstein, J. R., Moran, J. M., Greenhill, L. J., & Trotter, A. S. 2005, ApJ,

629, 719

Hicks, E. K. S., & Malkan, M. A. 2008, ApJS, 174, 31
Ho, L. C., Sarzi, M., Rix, H.-W., et al. 2002, PASP, 114, 137
Hughes, M. A., Alonso-Herrero, A., Axon, D., et al. 2003, AJ, 126, 742
Humphrey, P. J., Buote, D. A., Brighenti, F., Gebhardt, K., & Mathews,

Humphrey, P. J., Buote, D. A., Brighenti, F., Gebhardt, K., & Mathews,

W. G. 2008, ApJ, 683, 161

W. G. 2009, ApJ, 703, 1257

Kormendy, J., & Ho, L. C. 2013, ARA&A, 51, 511
Krajnovi´c, D., Cappellari, M., de Zeeuw, P. T., & Copin, Y. 2006, MNRAS,

366, 787

Krajnovi´c, D., Bacon, R., Cappellari, M., et al. 2008, MNRAS, 390, 93
Krist, J. E., Hook, R. N., & Stoehr, F. 2011, Proc. SPIE, 8127, 81270J
Kundu, A., & Whitmore, B. C. 2001, AJ, 122, 1251
Kuo, C. Y., Braatz, J. A., Condon, J. J., et al. 2011, ApJ, 727, 20
Laine, S., van der Marel, R. P., Lauer, T. R., et al. 2003, AJ, 125, 478
Lauer, T. R., Faber, S. M., Gebhardt, K., et al. 2005, AJ, 129, 2138
Leroy, A. K., Bolatto, A. D., Ostriker, E. C., et al. 2015, ApJ, 801, 25
Lewis, K. T., & Eracleous, M. 2006, ApJ, 642, 711
Lucy, L. B. 1974, AJ, 79, 745
Macchetto, F., Marconi, A., Axon, D. J., et al. 1997, ApJ, 489, 579
Maiolino, R. 2008, New Astronomy Reviews, 52, 339
Maoz, E. 1998, ApJ, 494, L181
Markwardt, C. B. 2009, Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems

XVIII, 411, 251

22

353

Martini, P., Regan, M. W., Mulchaey, J. S., & Pogge, R. W. 2003, ApJS, 146,

Mazzalay, X., Maciejewski, W., Erwin, P., et al. 2014, MNRAS, 438, 2036
McConnell, N. J., Chen, S.-F. S., Ma, C.-P., et al. 2013, ApJ, 768, L21
McMullin, J. P., Waters, B., Schiebel, D., Young, W., & Golap, K. 2007,

Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems XVI, 376, 127
Miyoshi, M., Moran, J., Herrnstein, J., et al. 1995, Nature, 373, 127
Neumayer, N., Cappellari, M., Reunanen, J., et al. 2007, ApJ, 671, 1329
Noel-Storr, J., Baum, S. A., & O’Dea, C. P. 2007, ApJ, 663, 71
Okuda, T., Kohno, K., Iguchi, S., & Nakanishi, K. 2005, ApJ, 620, 673
Onishi, K., Iguchi, S., Sheth, K., & Kohno, K. 2015, ApJ, 806, 39
Richardson, W. H. 1972, Journal of the Optical Society of America

(1917-1983), 62, 55

Rusli, S. P., Thomas, J., Erwin, P., et al. 2011, MNRAS, 410, 1223
Rusli, S. P., Thomas, J., Saglia, R. P., et al. 2013, AJ, 146, 45
Sandstrom, K. M., Leroy, A. K., Walter, F., et al. 2013, ApJ, 777, 5
Sarzi, M., Rix, H.-W., Shields, J. C., et al. 2005, ApJ, 628, 169
Savorgnan, G. A. D., & Graham, A. W. 2016, MNRAS, 457, 320
Scharwächter, J., McGregor, P. J., Dopita, M. A., & Beck, T. L. 2013,

Scharwächter, J., Combes, F., Salomé, P., Sun, M., & Krips, M. 2015,

MNRAS, 429, 2315

arXiv:1507.02292

Schlaﬂy, E. F., & Finkbeiner, D. P. 2011, ApJ, 737, 103

Shen, J., & Gebhardt, K. 2010, ApJ, 711, 484
Tran, H. D., Tsvetanov, Z., Ford, H. C., et al. 2001, AJ, 121, 2928
Tully, R. B., Courtois, H. M., Dolphin, A. E., et al. 2013, AJ, 146, 86
Utomo, D., Blitz, L., Davis, T., et al. 2015, ApJ, 803, 16
van den Bosch, R. C. E., & de Zeeuw, P. T. 2010, MNRAS, 401, 1770
van den Bosch, R. C. E., Gebhardt, K., Gültekin, K., et al. 2012, Nature,

van der Marel, R. P. 1994, MNRAS, 270, 271
van der Marel, R. P., & van den Bosch, F. C. 1998, AJ, 116, 2220
van Dokkum, P. G., & Franx, M. 1995, AJ, 110, 2027
Verdoes Kleijn, G. A., van der Marel, R. P., & Noel-Storr, J. 2006, AJ, 131,

Walsh, J. L., Barth, A. J., Ho, L. C., et al. 2008, AJ, 136, 1677
Walsh, J. L., Barth, A. J., & Sarzi, M. 2010, ApJ, 721, 762
Walsh, J. L., Barth, A. J., Ho, L. C., & Sarzi, M. 2013, ApJ, 770, 86
Walsh, J. L., van den Bosch, R. C. E., Gebhardt, K., et al. 2015, ApJ, 808,

491, 729

1961

183

Walsh, J. L., van den Bosch, R. C. E., Gebhardt, K., et al. 2016, ApJ, 817, 2
Wong, T., Blitz, L., & Bosma, A. 2004, ApJ, 605, 183
Young, L. M., Bureau, M., & Cappellari, M. 2008, ApJ, 676, 317

