Observation of gap-closing in single Josephson junctions

constructed on Bi2Te3 surface

Yuan Pang,1, ∗ Junhua Wang,1, ∗ Zhaozheng Lyu,1, ∗ Guang Yang,1 Jie Fan,1

Guangtong Liu,1 Zhongqing Ji,1 Xiunian Jing,1, 2 Changli Yang,1, 2 and Li Lu1, 2, †

1Beijing National Laboratory for Condensed Matter Physics,

Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences,

Beijing 100190, People’s Republic of China

2Collaborative Innovation Center of Quantum Matter,

Beijing 100871, People’s Republic of China

(Dated: March 16, 2016)

Abstract

On the road of searching for Majorana fermions in condensed matter systems, a highly-sought

signature is full gap-closing, as a condition for hosting the Majorana zero modes, in Josephson

devices constructed on the surface of topological insulators.

In this Letter, we present direct

experimental evidence of gap-closing in single Josephson junctions constructed on Bi2Te3 surface

via local contact-resistance measurement.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
5
1

 
 
]
l
l
a
h
-
s
e
m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
0
4
5
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Recently, much attention has been paid to search for Majorana zero modes in condensed

matter systems [1–4]. Majorana zero modes are expected to occur at the boundaries of

p-wave-like superconductors, causing a number of peculiar phenomena. So far, a zero-bias

conductance peak (ZBCP) has been observed in the conductance spectrum of interfacial

junctions between p-wave-like superconductors and normal metals [5–12]. Signs of frac-

tional Josephson eﬀect has been observed in certain parametric region on topological insu-

lator (TI)-based Josephson devices [13–15]. And a 4π-periodic component of current-phase

relation (CPR) has been resolved in Josephson devices constructed on TI surface [16–19].

Also, dominant signals of 4π-period-like energy-phase relations (EPRs), yet being truncated

to fully skewed 2π-periodic ones, have been observed on radio-frequency superconducting

quantum interference devices (rf-SQUIDs) constructed on the surface of three-dimensional

(3D) TI Bi2Te3 [20].

For Josephson junctions constructed on TI surface, the full transmission and perfect

Andreev reﬂection of helical electrons lead to the formation of two branches of 4π-periodic

EPRs [21–27]. These two branches have opposite parities, and evolve oppositely with the

variation of the phase diﬀerence across the junction. The energy separation between the two

branches deﬁnes the minigap of the junction. At π phase diﬀerence, the two branches cross

with each other at the fermi energy, so that the minigap is closed and the Majorana zero

modes are expected [28–32]. Recently, we have employed the rf-SQUID structure to realize

the π phase diﬀerence by threading half ﬂux quantum into the ring of the rf-SQUID, and

observed fully skewed EPRs truncated from 4π-periodic trends [20]. Along this direction,

however, what is missing is the veriﬁcation of the same scenario directly on single Josephson

junctions, based on which the idea was ﬁrstly proposed [29] and further details were discussed

[32].

In this Letter, we report investigations, through local contact resistance measurement,

on the evolution of the minigap in single Josephson junctions constructed on the surface of

Bi2Te3. Our results reﬂect the existence of topologically-protected gap-closing and perfect

transmission of quasiparticle transport in the junctions, which are in line with the scenario

that Majorana zero modes could be hosted in this type of devices.

The Pb-Bi2Te3-Pb single Josephson junctions were fabricated on exfoliated Bi2Te3 ﬂakes
of ∼100 nm in thickness, with normal-metal Pd electrodes attached to diﬀerent places in
the junction area to detect the local minigap. An over-exposed poly(methyl methacrylate)

2

FIG. 1:

(color online) (a) SEM image of a typical device. It contains two “T”-like Pb electrodes

deposited on top of a Bi2Te3 ﬂake, forming a Josephson junction via superconducting proximity

eﬀect at low temperatures. Three additional Pd electrodes are attached to the Bi2Te3 surface in the

junction area at positions A, B and C marked by the dashed red, blue and green circles, respectively,

with the help of an insulating mask of over-exposed PMMA layer (in black) to prevent the rest part

of the Pd electrodes to contact with the Pb and Bi2Te3. (b) The Fraunhofer diﬀraction pattern
of the Josephson junction measured at T ≈ 20 mK. The white area represents the zero-resistance

state.

(PMMA) layer with windows of ∼600 nm in diameter was used to isolate the rest of the Pd
electrodes from touching the ﬂake and the Pb ﬁlms. Figure 1(a) shows the scanning electron

microscope (SEM) image of a typical device with Pd electrodes A, B and C located at the left

side, the right side and the center of the junction, with the contacting points marked with

red, blue and green dashed circles, respectively. The contact resistance of these electrodes

was measured by using a three-terminal measurement conﬁguration [33] and lock-in ampliﬁer
technique, down to a low temperature of ∼20 mK in a dilution refrigerator.

Before presenting the results of the contact resistance, let us ﬁrst show in Fig. 1(b)

the diﬀerential resistance dV /dIJJbias of the Pb-Bi2Te3-Pb Josephson junction, which was

measured between the two Pb electrodes as a function of magnetic ﬁeld B and bias cur-
rent IJJbias at the base temperature of T ≈ 20 mK. The white-colored area represents the
zero-resistance state. Standard Fraunhofer diﬀraction pattern was obtained. The slight

asymmetry of the pattern between positive and negative directions of IJJbias is caused by

3

FIG. 2:
(color online) (a), (b) and (c) The 2D plots of contact resistance dV /dIb at position A,
B and C, respectively, as a function of magnetic ﬁeld and bias current, at T ≈ 20 mK. (d), (e)

and (f ) The horizontal line cuts of dV /dIb at Ib = 0 in (a), (b) and (c), respectively. (g), (h) and

(i) The vertical line cuts of dV /dIb in (a), (b) and (c), respectively, at positions indicated by the

arrows of the same color in the corresponding 2D plots. The numbers in the legends are in the

unit of Gauss.

the hystersis of IJJbias − V characteristics, which is frequently seen in TI-based Josephson
junctions. The period of the Fraunhofer pattern is ∆B = 2.8 ± 0.2 G. It corresponds to
an eﬀective area of Seﬀ = φ0/∆B = 7.14 µm2 (where φ0 = h/2e is ﬂux quantum, e is the

electron charge, and h is the Planck constant). This estimated Seﬀ is in good agreement
with 4µm × 1.8µm = 7.2 µm2, the geometric area of the junction after considering ﬂux
compression [34].

Shown in Figs. 2(a), 2(b) and 2(c) are the 2D color plots of the contact resistance dV /dIb

measured at positions A, B and C, respectively, as a function of B and bias current Ib. The

dV /dIb shows a peak around zero bias current/voltage (Figs. 2(g), 2(h) and 2(i)). As will

be explained later, this peak structure correlates to the local minigap in Bi2Te3.

The most peculiar feature in Fig. 2 is the abrupt jumps in dV /dIb, which happens

simultaneously at positions A, B and C, when the ﬂux reaches the nodes of the Fraunhofer

4

pattern. Despite that the peaks in the Fraunhofer pattern are sinusoidal-like, the dV /dIb

at positions A and B shows a skewed ﬂux dependence followed by abrupt jumps, i.e., the

minigap gradually changes from its most pronounced state at zero ﬂux to the gap-closing

state as the ﬂux is ramped to the nodes of the Fraunhofer pattern, then suddenly jumps to

the pronounced state again as passing the nodes. The skewed behavior can be more clearly

seen from the horizontal line cuts of the 2D plots at Ib = 0, which are shown in Figs. 2(d)

and 2(e).

The ﬂux-dependent evolution of minigap can also be clearly seen from the vertical line

cuts of the 2D plots. The black and orange curves shown in Figs. 2(g) and 2(h) are the

vertical line cuts taken from the corresponding 2D plots at B = 2.6 G and 5.5 G, respectively.

The minigap on these curves is largely suppressed. In the supplementary materials, we will

present more evidence of gap-closing observed on additional device [34]. We note, as will

be shown later, that the remaining shape of the gap in Figs. 2(g) and 2(h) is presumably

caused by the ﬁnite size eﬀect of the Pd contact, as well as their misalignment to the ends

of the junction.

Also very unusual is the ﬂux dependence of the minigap at position C, where abrupt

jumps between gap-opening and gap-closing states were observed (Figs. 2(c), 2(f) and 2(i)).

From Fig. 2(c), the minigap can be clearly resolved in the ﬂux ranges of even numbered

Fraunhofer peaks, whereas it disappears in the ﬂux range of the ﬁrst Fraunhofer peak. Such

an even-odd behavior would hint that each jump is accompanied by a π phase shift.

The fact that the dV /dIb and the Fraunhofer pattern share the same oscillation periods

reﬂects that the dV /dIb is correlated to the CPR/EPR of the junction. For a proximity-

eﬀect-type of S-N-S Josephson junction, it is known that the energies of the Andreev bound

states in the junction, thus the minigap in Bi2Te3, shall oscillate with the ﬂux [29]. Since the

contact resistance in this experiment is higher than the quantum unit h/2e2 = 12.9kΩ, the

measurement was in the tunneling regime, revealing mostly the information of the electron

density of states in Bi2Te3. Therefore, we believe that the oscillation of dV /dIb is caused

by the oscillation of the minigap in Bi2Te3, and that the dV /dIb peak is a reﬂection of the

minigap.

The minigap can be calculated as follows. Firstly, in the absence of IJJbias, the local phase

5

diﬀerence across the junction can be expressed as:

(1)
where x is deﬁned from −W/2 to W/2, W is the width of the junction, H is the eﬀective
distance between the two Pb electrodes of the junction after considering ﬂux compression

ϕ(B, x) = 2π

φ0

φ
φ0

)

BHx

± π int(

[34], and φ is the total ﬂux in the junction. The ﬁrst term in Eq. 1 is the phase diﬀerence

caused by magnetic ﬂux. The second term represents a π phase jump whenever the ﬂux in

the junction is varied across the nodes of the Fraunhofer pattern.

For the mechanism of the π phase jump, it is known that the phase diﬀerence constant,

θ, in a single Josephson junction can be self-adjusted according to the criteria of minimizing

the total energy. As can be seen in the supplementary materials [34], in the ﬂux range of

the 0th Fraunhofer peak, the lowest-energy state corresponds to the θ = 0 state, but in the
ﬂux range of the 1st Fraunhofer peak, the lowest-energy state corresponds to the θ = ±π
state. A π phase shift will thus take place at the nodes of the Fraunhofer pattern.

The minigap is the energy separation between the two lowest-energy branches of Andreev
bound states whose EPRs are [35–37]: En = ±∆0[1 − Dn sin2(ϕ/2)]1/2 (where En and Dn
are the energy and the transmission coeﬃcient of the nth allowed mode of the quasiparticles,

respectively). It can be seen that only in the fully transparent limit (i.e., Dn = 1 for all

modes) can the minigap be fully closed, and thus the observed gap-closing phenomenon be

interpreted. In this limit, the minigap can be simpliﬁed as:

∆ ∝ | cos(ϕ/2)|

(2)

The minigap will be obviously open even if the transmission coeﬃcient is as high as 0.99,

as illustrated in the supplementary materials [34] and demonstrated experimentally in a

Josephson junction using a single atomic layer of graphene as the barrier [38]. For the Pb-

Bi2Te3-Pb junctions in this experiment, which contain two Pb-Bi2Te3 interfaces and a Bi2Te3

part of 1µm in length, the total transmission coeﬃcient is expected to be much less than

1 if without a mechanism to protect the full transparency. The observed full gap-closing,

therefore, reﬂects the existence of topologically-protected full transparency of quasiparticle

transport in our devices. This is actually expected on the TI surface where the helical states

are topologically protected from backscattering, resulting in perfect Andreev reﬂections and

the gap-closing. We note that it is these surface states that are most likely detected in our

contact resistance measurement, despite the existence of the bulk states in Bi2Te3.

6

FIG. 3:
(color online) (a) and (b) The local phase diﬀerence of the junction as a function of
position x at ﬂux of φ0 and 2φ0, respectively. The left edge of the plots corresponds to x = −W/2
and the right edge to x = W/2. The phase distribution line undergoes a global π phase shift

at these ﬂux, as indicated by the gray arrows. The red circles highlight the positions where a π

phase diﬀerence is reached, therefore the local minigap is closed. (c) The calculated minigap ∆ at
x = ±W/2 (black) and x = ±W/2 ± 100 nm (red). (d) The calculated ∆ at x = 0 (black) and
±100 nm (red).

In a control experiment on similar devices constructed on topologically-trivial metal (Au

ﬁlm) instead of Bi2Te3 [34], we show that, without protected full transparency, the minigap

will not be fully closed with varying magnetic ﬂux, resulting in only a faint and jumpless

oscillatory pattern of dV /dIb.

With Eqs. 1 and 2, the local minigap can be calculated. Figures 3(a) and 3(b) show the

phase distribution line across the junction near the ﬁrst and the second Fraunhofer nodes,

respectively. This line changes its slope with varying magnetic ﬂux, rotating about the center

7

of the junction. The red circles represent where ϕ(x) reaches odd multiples of π, so that the

local minigap is closed and Majorana zero mode is presumably hosted [32]. The positions

of the red circles located near the ends of the junction move with the rotation of the phase

distribution line, so that a skewed pattern of dV /dIb is detected at positions A and B (Figs.

2(d) and 2(e)). When the ﬂux is varied across the Fraunhofer nodes, a π phase jump occurs

(indicated by the gray arrows). The positions of gap-closing jump accordingly. At position

C, the center of the junction, however, the dV /dIb behaves diﬀerently. It seems that the

minigap either keeps opening within the ﬂux ranges of the even numbered Fraunhofer peaks,

or keeps closing within the ﬂux ranges of the 1st Fraunhofer peaks. In the latter range the

gap-closing point is pinned at the center of the junction while the phase distribution line

rotates about the center of the junction with varying ﬂux.

Shown in Figs. 3(c) and 3(d) are the calculated minigap at positions A/B and C, re-

spectively. The black curves represent the minigap strictly at positions A/B or C, and the

red curves represent the minigap at positions that deviate from that of the black curves
by an amount of d = ±100 nm. Since the overall amplitude of the minigap decays rapidly
in magnetic ﬁeld, we have phenomenologically imposed a Gaussian-like envelope e−γ(φ/φ0)2
(where γ = 0.2 is a ﬁtting parameter) to the minigap shown in Figs. 3(c) and 3(d), in order

to compare with the experimental data.

From the diﬀerence between the black and the red curves in Figs. 3(c) and 3(d), it can be

seen that the gap-closing point is very sensitive to x. However, the position of gap-closing will
be thermally smeared, having an uncertainty of ∼ 200 nm at the measurement temperature
of ∼20 mK [20]. On the other hand, the alignment accuracy of the Pd electrodes in our
experiment is around d = ±100 nm. The nominal contact area of the Pd electrodes has a
diameter of 600 nm (the eﬀective contacting area might be smaller). Due to these factors,

it is natural that there will be some tiny feature of gap remaining on the black and orange

curves in Figs. 2(g) and 2(h). We believe that within the accuracy of this experiment we

have already observed gap-closing.

To further test our model, we have measured the dV /dIb as a function of B and IJJbias

at Ib = 0. The data obtained at positions A and B are presented in Figs. 4(a) and 4(b),

respectively. These data are compared with the calculated minigap shown in Figs. 4(c) and

4(d), respectively. Good agreements were obtained.

It is known that the phase distribution line in Figs. 3(a) and 3(b) can be shifted upwards

8

FIG. 4:

(color online) (a) and (b) Contact resistance measured at positions A and B, respectively,

as a function of magnetic ﬁeld and IJJbias, the bias current to the Pb-Bi2Te3-Pb Josephson junction,
at T ≈ 20 mK. During the measurements the dc bias current to the Pd contacts was set to zero

(Ib = 0), and the ac excitation current was 0.5 nA. (c) and (d) The calculated dV /dIb at positions

A and B, respectively, as a function of normalized ﬂux and normalized IJJbias in arbitrary units of

color scale.

or downwards by IJJbias, in addition to being rotated by magnetic ﬂux.

In the presence

of IJJbias and thus the upwards or downwards shift, the distribution of local supercurrent

density is no longer symmetrical at the center of the junction (x = 0). This makes the dV /dIb

at position A and B to behave diﬀerently, so that their 2D plots become distinguishable.

[39]: Is = I

The additional phase shift caused by IJJbias can be estimated via the Josephson equation
| is the Fraunhofer
envelope, and Ic is the total critical supercurrent of the junction at zero ﬁeld. With this

(cid:48)
c sin ϕ, where Is is the total supercurrent, I

(cid:48)

c = Ic| sin(πφ/φ0)

πφ/π0

additional phase shift, Eq. 1 can be rewritten as:

ϕ(B, x) = 2π

BHx

φ0

± π int(

φ
φ0

) + arcsin(

IJJbias

Ic

|

πφ/φ0

sin(πφ/φ0)

|)

(3)

It can be proven that the ﬂux at which the π phase jump happens does not change with

9

IJJbias, as has been assumed in Eq. 3. The minigap ∆ in the presence of IJJbias can be

calculated by using Eqs. 2 and 3. And the dV /dIb can further be mapped via the relation
dV /dIb ∝ e∆/kBT , where ∆/kBT = 0.5e−0.2(φ/φ0)2| cos(ϕ/2)| has been assumed. The results
are shown in Figs. 4(c) and 4(d), mimicking reasonably well the experimental data.

To summarize, we have performed contact resistance measurement on single Joseph-

son junctions constructed on Bi2Te3 surface. The observed behavior of full gap-closing at

ultralow temperatures can only be interpreted within a scenario when the quasiparticle

transport is fully transparent in the devices. Our results are consistent with the theoretical

predictions that Majorana zero modes can be formed in S-TI-S type of Josephson junctions.

Acknowledgments We would like to thank L. Fu, Z. Fang, X. Dai, T. Xiang, X. C. Xie,

Q. F. Sun, R. Du, G. M. Zhang and X. Hu for fruitful discussions. This work was supported

by the National Basic Research Program of China from the MOST under the grant No.

2009CB929101 and 2011CB921702, by the NSFC under grant No. 91221203, 11174340,

11174357, 91421303 and 11527806, and by the Strategic Priority Research Program B of the

Chinese Academy of Sciences under the grant No. XDB07010100.

∗ These authors contribute equally to this work.
† Corresponding authors: lilu@iphy.ac.cn

[1] E. Majorana, Nuovo Cimento 14, 171-184 (1937).

[2] F. Wilczek, Nature Phys. 5, 614-618 (2009).

[3] R. F. Service, Science 332, 193-195 (2011).

[4] M. Franz, Physics 3, 24 (2010); M. Franz, arXiv: 1302.3641v1.

[5] V. Mourik, K. Zuo, S. M. Frolov, S. R. Plissard, E. P. A. M. Bakkers, and L. P. Kouwenhoven,

Science 336, 1003-1007 (2012).

[6] M. T. Deng, C. L. Yu, G. Y. Huang, M. Larsson, P. Caroﬀ, and H. Q. Xu, Nano Lett. 12,

6414-6419 (2012).

[7] A. Das, Y. Ronen, Y. Most, Y. Oreg, M. Herblum, and H. Shtrikman, Nature Phys. 8, 887-895

(2012).

[8] H. O. H. Churchill, V. Fatemi, K. Grove-Rasmussen, M. T. Deng, P. Caroﬀ, H. Q. Xu, and

10

C. M. Marcus, Phys. Rev. B 87, 241401 (2013).

[9] A. D. K. Finck, D. J. Van Harlingen, P. K. Mohseni, K. Jung, and X. Li, Phys. Rev. Lett.

110, 126406 (2013).

[10] S. Nadj-Perge, I. K. Drozdov, J. Li, H. Chen, S. Jeon, J. Seo, A. H. MacDonald, B. A.

Bernevig, and A. Yazdani, Science 346, 602-607 (2014).

[11] S. Sasaki, M. Kriener, K. Segawa, K. Yada, Y. Tanaka, M. Sato, and Y. Ando, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 107, 217001 (2011).

[12] F. Yang, Y. Ding, F. Qu, J. Shen, J. Chen, Z. Wei, Z. Ji, G. Liu, J. Fan, C. Yang, T. Xiang,

and L. Lu, Phys. Rev. B 85, 104508 (2012).

[13] L. P. Rokhinson, X. Liu, and J. K. Furdyna, Nature Phys. 8, 795-799 (2012).

[14] V. S. Pribiag, A. J. Beukman, F. Qu, M. C. Cassidy, C. Charpentier, W. Wegscheider, and

L. P. Kouwenhoven, Nature Nanotechnology 10, 593-597 (2015).

[15] J. Wiedenmann, E. Bocquillon, R. S. Deacon, S. Hartinger, O. Herrmann, T. M. Klapwijk, L.

Maier, C. Ames, C. Br¨une, C. Gould, A. Oiwa, K. Ishibashi, S. Tarucha, H. Buhmann, and

L. W. Molenkamp, Nature Commun. 7, 10303 (2016).

[16] C. Kurter, A. D. K. Finck, P. Ghaemi, Y. S. Hor, and D. J. Van Harlingen, Phys. Rev. B 90,

014501 (2014).

[17] S. P. Lee, K. Michaeli, J. Alicea, and A. Yacoby, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 197001 (2014).

[18] I. Sochnikov, L. Maier, C. A. Watson, J. R. Kirtley, C. Gould, G. Tkachov, E. M. Hankiewicz,

C. Br¨une, H. Buhmann, L. W. Molenkamp, and K. A. Moler, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 066801

(2015).

[19] C. Kurter, A. D. K. Finck, Y. S. Hor, and D. J. Van Harlingen, Nature Commun. 6, 7130

(2015).

[20] Y. Pang, J. Shen, F. Qu, Z. Lyu, J. Wang, J. Feng, J. Fan, G. Liu, Z, Ji, X. Jing, C. Yang,

Q. Sun, X. C. Xie, L. Fu, and L. Lu, arXiv:1503.00838v2.

[21] A. Yu Kitaev, Phys.-Usp. 44, 131 (2001).

[22] H. J. Kwon, V. M. Yakovenko, and K. Sengupta, Low Temp. Phys. 30, 613 (2004).

[23] L. Fu and C. L. Kane, Phys. Rev. B 79, 161408 (2009).

[24] R. M. Lutchyn, J. D. Sau, and S. Das Sarma, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 077001 (2010).

[25] M. Diez, I. C. Fulga, D. I. Pikulin, M. Wimmer, A. R. Akhmerov, and C. W. J. Beenakker,

Phys. Rev. B 87, 125406 (2013).

11

[26] B. J. Wieder, F. Zhang, and C. L. Kane, Phys. Rev. B 89, 075106 (2014).

[27] C. W. J. Beenakker, D. I. Pikulin, T. Hyart, H. Schomerus, and J. P. Dahlhaus, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 110, 017003 (2013).

[28] N. Read and D. Green, Phys. Rev. B 61, 10267 (2000).

[29] L. Fu and C. L. Kane, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 096407 (2008).

[30] Y. Oreg, G. Refael, and F. von Oppen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 177002 (2010).

[31] T. D. Stanescu, R. M. Lutchyn, and S. Das Sarma, Phys. Rev. B 84, 144522 (2011).

[32] A. C. Potter and L. Fu, Phys. Rev. B 88, 121109 (2013).

[33] We note that when the contact resistance is much larger than the sample resistance, which is

the case in this experiment, the signal obtained in a three-terminal measurement conﬁguration

is dominated by the contact resistance of the electrode that shared by the current loop and

the voltage loop.

[34] See Supplemental Material at [URL will be inserted by publisher] for more data and discus-

sions.

[35] C. W. J. Beenakker, Transport phenomena in Mesoscopic Systems, H. Fukuyama and T. Ando,

eds. Springer, Berlin (1992).

[36] T. M. Klapwijk, Journal of Superconductivity: Incorporating Novel Magnetism 17, 593 (2004).

[37] A. A. Golubov, M. Y. Kupriyanov, and E. Il’ichev, Rev. Mod. Phys. 76, 411 (2004).

[38] G. H. Lee, S. Kim, S. H. Jhi, and H. J. Lee, Nature Commun. 6, 6181 (2015).

[39] A. Barone, Physics and Application of the Josephson Eﬀect. John Wiley and Sons, Inc. (1982).

Supplementary Materials for  “Observation of gap‐closing on single Josephson junctions constructed on Bi2Te3 surface”  Yuan Pang1,*, Junhua Wang1,*, Zhaozheng Lyu1,*, Guang Yang1, Jie Fan1, Guangtong Liu1, Zhongqing Ji1, Xiunian Jing1,2, Changli Yang1,2 and Li Lu1,2† 1 Beijing National Laboratory for Condensed Matter Physics, Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, People's Republic of China 2 Collaborative Innovation Center of Quantum Matter, Beijing 100871, People's Republic of China * These authors contributed equally to this work. † Corresponding authors: lilu@iphy.ac.cn       Contents: 1. Contact resistance obtained on another device with three Pd electrodes 2. Control experiment on Pb‐Au‐Pb Josephson devices 3. The mechanism of  phase shift in a single Josephson junction  4. The minigap in S‐N‐S Josephson junctions with different transparency to quasiparticle process 5. Estimation of effective junction area after considering flux compression  1. Contact resistance obtained on another device with three Pd electrodes  We have fabricated several devices with three contact positions in the junction area. Figure S1a shows the SEM image of one such device (named by device #S1). Figure S1b shows the differential resistance of contact position B and C. The blue curve (position B) shows a skewed oscillation against magnetic field, and the green curve (position C) shows an on/off‐like oscillation. And all the curves are accompanied with abrupt jumps whenever flux passes the Fraunhofer nodes, in agreement with the data shown in the main manuscript. Shown in Fig. S1c and d are the color plots of contact resistance measured at positions C and B, respectively, as functions of magnetic field and bias current. And shown in Fig. S1e and f are the line cuts of Fig. S1c and d respectively, as a function of bias current injected from the contact position. The results are similar to the ones presented in the main manuscript.  From Fig. S1e and f we can see that the red/pink curve shows clearly an enhanced resistance peak (a superconducting mini‐gap structure), whereas the black/orange curve is gapless.  FIG. S1 | (a) SEM image of device #S1. (b) Differential resistance of position C (green curve) and B (blue curve), respectively, as a function of magnetic field. (c), (d) Color plots of contact resistance measured at positions C and B, respectively, as functions of magnetic field and bias current. (e) The differential resistance curves of position C as a function of bias current before/after jumping. Thecolored curves are line cuts at the fields marked by the arrows of the same color in Fig. S1c. (f) The differential resistance curves of position B as a function of bias current before/after jumping. Thecolored curves are line cuts at the fields marked by the arrows of the same color in Fig. S1d. All the measurements were performed at ~20 mK.  2. Control experiment on Pb‐Au‐Pb Josephson devices   We have fabricated several Pb‐Au‐Pb proximity‐effect Josephson junctions, each with two point contact‐like Pd electrodes to the two ends of the junction area on Au film, and performed transport measurements down to ~20 mK or 200 mK. The results are similar. In the following we present the results obtained on one of such devices measured at 200 mK. The SEM picture of the device is shown in Fig. S2a. The supercurrent of this device demonstrates a standard Fraunhofer pattern for small Josephson junctions, as shown in Fig. S2b, with a critical supercurrent of up to ~100 A. Figures S2c and S2d show the contact resistance dV/dIb of the Pd electrodes at the upper and lower ends of the junction, respectively. Un‐skewed sinusoidal patterns are obtained, with no sign of jumps. Figures S2e and S2f show the line cuts in Figs. S2c and S2d at Ib=0, respectively. No oscillatory structure can be resolved within the resolution limit, indicating that the gap is never closed at zero bias. FIG. S2 | (a) SEM image of the Pb‐Au‐Pbdevice, with two point contact‐like Pd electrodes connecting to the two ends of the junction. (b) Fraunhofer diffraction pattern of the Pb‐Au‐Pb Josephson junction, as functions of magnetic field B and current IJJbiasflowing through the junction. The red colored area represents the zero‐resistance state. (c) and (d) The measured contact resistance by the Pd electrodes at the upper and lower ends of the junction, respectively, as functions of magnetic fieldand the bias current injected into each contact. (e) and (f) the line cuts (c) and (d) at Ib=0, respectively. The transport measurements were performed at ~200 mK.  The dV/dIb of Au‐Pd point contacts has a low‐resistance state near the zero bias. There the conductance enhancement is caused by Andreev reflection at the S‐N interface, and can be explained within the BTK theory (G. E. Blonder, M. Tinkham, M. T. Klapwijk, Phys. Rev. B 25, 4515 (1982)). The envelope of the low‐resistance state in Figs. S2c and S2d is related to a characteristic critical current, which is not but the local excess current of the S‐N interface: Ie  (/eR) tanh(V/2kBT), where R is the normal‐state resistance of the point contact, and  is the local minigap in superconducting Au (see A. Barone, Physics and application of the Josephson effect. John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 1982). In the large‐V limit, the shape of the envelope is determined by . The shape of the low‐resistance state in Figs. S2c and S2d is similar to the Fraunhofer pattern shown in Fig. S2b. However, it has to be pointed out that the measured pattern by each Pd contact only probes the local S‐N‐like transition with increasing Ib, not the Fraunhofer pattern which is a globally integrated feature. This conclusion is reasonable because the bias current used in the contact resistance measurements is significantly smaller than the total critical supercurrent of the Pb‐Au‐Pb junction.    3. The mechanism of  phase shift in a single Josephson junction  In the following we will show that near the node fields of the Fraunhofer pattern the phase constant of a single Josephson junction can be freely adjusted between 0 and , both states have the same total energy and carry zero net current. The total energy of the two states is: where 0 is a constant, BHx is the flux in the junction area, H is the effective length and W the width of the junction.   Shown in Fig. S3 is the calculated EJ of the two states with (red) and without (blue) the  phase shift. In order for the system to trace the lowest energy state, a  phase shift will happen at the node fields of the Fraunhofer pattern, accompanied with the reverse of the screening supercurent against the Josephson vortex.  It should be noted that the  phase shift in a single Josephson junction as discussed above is different from the  phase shift in a rf‐SQUID constructed on the surface of TI (Y. Pang et..al., arXiv:1503.00838v2). In the rf‐SQUID structure, there is no adjustable phase different constant, since the two superconducting pads are connected by the superconducting ring. The  phase shift observed there could only be attributed to a topologically nontrivial mechanism – quasiparticle‐poisoning‐mediated inter‐branch switching between two 4‐periodic EPRs with opposite parities.  FIG. S3 |Two branches of energy‐flux relation of the Josephson junction.   4. The minigap in S‐N‐S Josephson junctions with different transparency to quasiparticle process   The minigap is the energy separation between the two lowest‐energy branches of Andreev bound states whose EPRs are:    En=±0[1‐Dnsin2(/2)]1/2  where En and Dn are the Josephson energy and the transmission coefficient of the nth allowed mode of the quasiparticles in the junction, respectively. The curves plotted in Fig. S4 are the calculated En at several different Dn. It can be seen that the minigap is significantly not fully closed even if the transmission coefficient is as high as 0.99. Full gap closing only happens when Dn=1. FIG. S4 |The energy‐phase relation of the lowest‐energy Andreev bound states at several different transmission coefficient.       5. Estimation of the effective junction area after considering flux compression  In Fig. S5 we illustrate how the effective junction area of the device shown in Fig. 1 of the main manuscript is calculated after considering flux compression and stray supercurrent distribution. As illustrated in the upper left panel of Fig. S5, below Hc1 the magnetic field cannot penetrate into the bulk of superconducting Pb film other than within the penetration depth. The flux lines will therefore be pushed away from the Pb electrodes and focused in the junction area, making the effective junction area larger. On the other hand, we know that superconductivity will be induced on the TI surface by proximity effect, spreading away to a distance of micron (Qu, F. et al., Sci. Rep. 2, 339 (2012); Yang, F. et al., Phys. Rev. B 86, 134504 (2012)). Therefore, the TI surface near Pb electrodes will be able to carry stray supercurrents.  After taking into consideration of the above facts, we employed an empirical method of estimating the effective junction area as shown in the right panel of Fig. S5. By comparing with the effective area drawn from the Fraunhofer pattern measurements, the effective area estimated by this method turns out to be accurate, with an error less than 20%.  FIG. S5 | Upper left panel: Side view for flux compression. Lower left panel: Top view for flux compression. The flux in each area defined by white dashed lines will be compressed away alongthe arrowed directions. Right panel: Our empirical method of estimating the effective junction area after considering flux compression and stray supercurrent distribution.     20

