Low-energy eﬀective action for pions and a dilatonic meson

Maarten Goltermana and Yigal Shamirb

aDepartment of Physics and Astronomy, San Francisco State University,

San Francisco, CA 94132, USA

bRaymond and Beverly Sackler School of Physics and Astronomy,

Tel Aviv University, 69978, Tel Aviv, Israel

Numerical simulations of QCD-like theories in which the number of ﬂavors
is adjusted so that the beta function is very small, but conﬁnement and chiral
symmetry breaking nevertheless take place, appear to reveal the presence of
a ﬂavor-singlet scalar meson which can be as light as the pions. Because the
breaking of dilatation symmetry, quantiﬁed by the beta function, is small relative
to QCD, a possible explanation is that the scalar meson is a pseudo Nambu-
Goldstone boson associated with the approximate dilatation symmetry. We
use this observation to systematically develop a low-energy eﬀective action that
accounts for both the pions and the “dilatonic” scalar meson. In order to justify
the power counting that controls the couplings of the dilatonic meson we invoke
the Veneziano limit, in which the number of fundamental-representation ﬂavors
Nf grows in proportion with the number of colors Nc, while the ratio Nf /Nc
is kept close to, but below, the critical value where the conformal window is
entered.

6
1
0
2

 
r
p
A
2

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
p
e
h
[
 
 

2
v
5
7
5
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

A non-abelian gauge theory with Nc colors and Nf ﬂavors of massless Dirac fermions can
be in one of three phases. For small Nf , the renormalized coupling becomes strong toward
the infrared, leading to conﬁnement and chiral symmetry breaking. As Nf is increased
the running slows down until eventually an infrared-attractive ﬁxed point (IRFP) develops
[1, 2]. The long-distance theory is then conformal, exhibiting neither conﬁnement nor chiral
symmetry breaking. Finally, if Nf gets too large, asymptotic freedom is lost.

In this paper we consider “walking” theories, where conﬁnement and chiral symmetry
breaking still occur, but Nf has become so large that the theory is on the verge of developing
an IRFP. This is manifested in a non-perturbative beta function that is much smaller than
in QCD.1 Recent lattice studies of some candidate walking theories reveal the presence of
a ﬂavor-singlet, parity-even scalar meson that can be as light as the pions at the fermion
masses used in those simulations, and much lighter than any other hadronic states in the
theory. A light scalar meson was found in the SU(3) theory with Nf = 8 Dirac fermions in
the fundamental representation [4, 5], which current evidence favors to be chirally broken and
conﬁning [6–10]. A light scalar was also found in the SU(3) theory with two Dirac fermions
in the sextet (two-index symmetric) representation [11]. Because the non-perturbative study
of the beta function is very diﬃcult [12], it is still not entirely certain whether this model is
chirally broken or conformal. While the results of Ref. [13] favor the chirally broken option,
other recent studies are inconclusive [14, 15].

The standard low-energy eﬀective theory for the pions—the pseudo Nambu-Goldstone
bosons (pNGBs) of spontaneously broken chiral symmetry—is the chiral lagrangian [16–
18].2 But when the scalar meson is as light as the pions, a consistent, unitary low-energy
eﬀective theory must accommodate this scalar state as well. Moreover, if the scalar is much
lighter than all other states apart from the pions, it is natural to ask for an eﬀective ﬁeld
theory description of this scalar, even if fermion masses are taken so small that the pions
become lighter than this scalar.

A natural question is whether, like the pions, the light scalar meson can be interpreted
as a pNGB associated with the spontaneous breaking of another approximate symmetry.
In this paper we will attempt to provide such a framework, where the new approximate
symmetry is the invariance under dilatations, or scale transformations. For this reason, we
will refer to the scalar meson in this paper as the dilatonic meson.3
It is far from obvious that such an interpretation makes sense.

In the case of chiral
symmetry, the fermion mass m is a parameter that can be tuned continuously such that,
for m → 0, exact chiral symmetry is recovered, and the pions become massless. By con-
trast, while scale invariance is broken softly by the fermion mass, its breaking by the scale
dependence of the renormalized coupling constitutes a hard breaking. Even if we dial the
fermion mass to zero, we do not have another parameter that would allow us to continuously
control the explicit breaking of scale invariance encoded in the beta function. Moreover, if
ultimately conﬁnement and chiral symmetry breaking are to take place, it is unavoidable

1 For a recent review of lattice results, see Ref. [3].
2 For a recent review of chiral perturbation theory with applications to lattice QCD, see Ref. [19].
3 For a previous treatment of this problem, see Ref. [20]. For a discussion of the eﬀective theory for a light
dilatonic scalar in theories with approximate scale invariance, but without spontaneously broken of chiral
symmetry, see Ref. [21].

2

that the coupling will keep growing as the energy scale is lowered. The hard breaking of di-
latation symmetry by the running (or walking) of the coupling is therefore of a very diﬀerent
nature than the soft breaking of chiral symmetry by a fermion mass term.

A hint is provided by the eﬀective low-energy treatment of the anomalous axial symmetry
U(1)A. In this case, too, there is no way to “turn oﬀ” the anomaly within a given theory. In
order to overcome this problem one takes the familiar large-Nc limit: the number of colors
Nc is taken to inﬁnity, while the number of ﬂavors is held ﬁxed [22–25]. In this limit the axial
anomaly becomes vanishingly small, and the ﬂavor-singlet pseudoscalar meson eventually
becomes as light as the pions. A large-Nc extension of the standard chiral lagrangian that
accommodates the U(1)A symmetry was systematically developed in Refs. [18, 26].

Here we will invoke a diﬀerent large-N limit [27]. Considering SU(Nc) gauge theories
with Nf Dirac fermions in the fundamental representation, the so-called Veneziano limit is
deﬁned as the limit N → ∞, in which we take Nc = N, while the ratio

nf =

Nf
Nc

,

(1.1)

is held ﬁxed. Asymptotic freedom imposes the restriction nf < 11/2. For each Nc, we let
N ∗
f (Nc) be the largest number of ﬂavors such that the theory conﬁnes, and chiral symmetry
is broken spontaneously in the chiral limit m → 0. The conformal window, in which the
coupling runs into an IRFP and the long-distance theory is conformal, thus corresponds to
Nf values in the range

(1.2)

(1.3)

(1.4)

N ∗

f (Nc) < Nf < (11/2)Nc .

In the Veneziano limit, the conformal window becomes

where

n∗

f < nf < 11/2 ,

n∗

f = lim
Nc→∞

N ∗

f (Nc)
Nc

.

In this paper we are interested in chirally broken theories, and thus we will only consider

theories for which

nf < n∗

f .

(1.5)

Since Nc and Nf are integers, the increments one can make in nf are steps of size 1/N. It
follows that, in the Veneziano limit, nf eﬀectively becomes a continuous parameter. For the
fundamental representation, the increments in the coeﬃcients of the two-loop beta function
also come in steps of size 1/N, suggesting that nf − n∗
f is the parameter controlling the
smallness of the beta function, or the “walking” nature of the theory.

Our analysis will be based on the conjecture that dilatation symmetry is recovered in a
triple limit: the chiral limit m → 0; the Veneziano large-N limit; and ﬁnally the limit nf ր
n∗
f . We will assume that in this triple limit the trace anomaly becomes vanishingly small
towards the infrared, both inside and outside of the conformal window. Correspondingly,
the eﬀective low-energy theory developed in this paper aims to provide the broken phase
with a systematic expansion in three small parameters: the fermion mass, 1/N, and nf − n∗
f .
As usual, it involves a derivative expansion as well.

This paper is organized as follows.

In Sec. II we discuss the microscopic theory. We
brieﬂy review the trace anomaly, and show how it can be encoded in the coupling of the

3

microscopic theory to an external dilaton source σ(x). In addition, we introduce the familiar
external sources for scalar and pseudoscalar fermion bilinears. As usual, the external ﬁelds
allow us to match correlation functions between the microscopic and the eﬀective theory,
and ultimately, to determine the coupling constants of the eﬀective theory order by order in
the low-energy expansion.

In Sec. III we begin with a more detailed discussion of the triple limit which is the starting
point of our low-energy expansion. We specify the assumptions, or conjectures, that must
be made in order to justify the expansion.

Having introduced the power counting, we proceed to address a complication in the
construction of the low-energy theory that was previously encountered in treatment of the
U(1)A symmetry in large Nc [18, 26]. In principle, each term in the eﬀective low-energy
lagrangian can be multiplied by an arbitrary invariant potential V (τ − σ), where τ (x) is the
eﬀective ﬁeld that represents the dilatonic meson. Like the U(1)A symmetry, the dilatation
symmetry is abelian. As a result, it does not impose any algebraic constraints on these
potentials, and the coeﬃcients of their power-series expansion in τ − σ are independent
parameters of the low-energy theory.
If nothing further could be done, the power-series
coeﬃcients would constitute an inﬁnitely large set of low-energy parameters, and our eﬀective
ﬁeld theory ends up having no predictive power. Fortunately, however, the matching of the
microscopic and the eﬀective theories for nf ր n∗
f imposes a power-counting hierarchy on
the coeﬃcients of the invariant potentials. As a consequence, out of the four potentials that
we encounter a-priori in the leading-order lagrangian, three are eliminated altogether. The
remaining potential, denoted Vd, gets truncated to a linear function

Vd(τ − σ) = c0 + c1(τ − σ) .

(1.6)

In Sec. IV we proceed to study the classical ground state, which turns out to have some
delicate features. In the chiral limit, the classical vacuum is controlled by the potential of the
dilatonic meson, which in turn is proportional to e4τ Vd(τ ). The parameter c1, introduced in
Eq. (1.6) above, is the only parameter of the leading-order lagrangian that accounts for the
hard breaking of scale invariance via the walking of the coupling in the microscopic theory.
We ﬁnd that the c1 term is crucial for the existence of a stable classical vacuum. We also
study the tree-level masses, the dilatation current, and the fermion condensate.

As an application, we study in Sec. V the one-loop eﬀective potential. This provides a
concrete example that the renormalization of the eﬀective theory works in essentially the
same way as in standard chiral perturbation theory. We summarize our results in Sec. VI.
Various technical details are relegated to several appendices.

II. THE MICROSCOPIC THEORY

In this section we discuss the relevant properties of the microscopic theory. We begin
in Sec. II A with a brief review of the dilatation current and the trace anomaly. As a
further gearing up, we recall in Sec. II B the basic steps in the construction of the chiral
lagrangian. Apart from the obviously needed dynamical eﬀective ﬁelds, a set of source ﬁelds
with appropriate transformation properties, or spurions, is needed to match the eﬀective
theory to the low-energy sector of the microscopic theory. We also review how the anomalous
U(1)A symmetry of QCD can be accommodated in the eﬀective ﬁeld theory framework, since
this provides us with a useful lesson. In Sec. II C we return to dilatation symmetry, and

4

discuss how the operatorial trace of the energy-momentum tensor can be encoded in the
coupling of the microscopic theory to an external source with the transformation properties
of a dilaton.

A. Dilatation current and trace anomaly

The dilatation current is given by

Sµ = xνTµν .

(2.1)

where Tµν is the symmetric, gauge-invariant energy-momentum tensor. Being a conserved
current, Tµν does not renormalize.4 In the asymptotically-free gauge theories that we will
study in this paper the dilatation current is not conserved. Its divergence is given by the
trace of the energy-momentum tensor,

On shell, the trace of the energy-momentum tensor is [30]

∂µSµ = Tµµ ≡ −T .

T = Tcl + Tan ,
Tcl = m[ψψ] ,
Tan = ˜β [F 2] + γm m [ψψ] .

(2.2)

(2.3a)
(2.3b)

(2.3c)

µνF a

µν, where F a

The operatorial trace divides into a classical part Tcl and a quantum part Tan. We use the
shorthand F 2 = F a
µν is the non-abelian ﬁeld strength, while [· · · ] denotes
renormalized operators. Since Tµν is renormalization-group invariant, so is Sµ, and thus T .
Moreover, m[ψψ] is invariant by itself, and hence Tcl and Tan are separately renormalization-
group invariant.5 The renormalization-group evolution of the renormalized coupling and
fermion mass is controlled by

˜β =

β(g)
2g

,

β(g) = µ

∂g
∂µ

,

γm = γm(g) = −

µ
m

∂m
∂µ

.

(2.4)

(2.5)

B. Chiral symmetry and spurions

The explicit breaking of dilatation symmetry must be incorporated into the low-energy
eﬀective theory that we will construct in the following sections. We can learn how to do this
from the conceptually similar problem of extending the chiral lagrangian to accommodate
the anomalous U(1)A symmetry in the ’t Hooft large-Nc limit.

We ﬁrst recall the key steps in the construction of the standard chiral lagrangian [16–18].
We introduce a dynamical eﬀective ﬁeld Σ(x) taking values in the Nambu–Goldstone-boson

4 This would not be true in the presence of elementary scalar ﬁelds, because of the existence of an “im-

provement term” with which Tµν can mix [28, 29].

5 For an explicit veriﬁcation, see Ref. [31].

5

manifold, and endow it with appropriate transformation properties under chiral symmetry.
For Nf Dirac fermions, the chiral symmetry is SU(Nf )L × SU(Nf )R. The eﬀective ﬁeld is
unitary, Σ(x) ∈ SU(Nf ), and transforms according to

Σ(x) → gLΣ(x)g†
R ,

gL,R ∈ SU(Nf )L,R .

(2.6)

The order-by-order construction of the eﬀective lagrangian is dictated by the power count-

ing

δ ∼ m/ΛIR ∼ p2/Λ2

IR .

(2.7)

Here δ is a generic name for the small expansion parameter of the eﬀective theory, m is
the fermion mass, and p2 is a characteristic momentum(-squared) of the pNGBs. ΛIR is the
non-perturbative dynamical scale of the theory which we will discuss later on (see Sec. III A).
At leading order the eﬀective lagrangian consists of terms of order δ in the power counting,
the next to leading order consists of terms of order δ2, and so on.

The eﬀective lagrangian at each order is ﬁxed by matching correlation functions calcu-
lated in the microscopic theory with the corresponding correlation functions calculated in
the eﬀective theory. In order to facilitate this matching, a common set of source ﬁelds is
introduced in both the microscopic and eﬀective theories. In the matching process we can
make use of any correlation function obtained by multiple diﬀerentiations of the (micro-
scopic and eﬀective) partition functions with respect to the external sources. For the basic
chiral lagrangian, one needs a scalar source SAB(x), A, B = 1, 2, . . . , Nf , which couples to
the bilinear ψA(x)ψB(x); and a pseudoscalar source PAB(x) that couples to the bilinear
ψA(x)iγ5ψB(x). The chiral transformation properties are

ψ → (gRPR + gLPL)ψ ,
R + PRg†
ψ → ψ(PLg†
L) ,
χ → gLχ g†
R ,

where we have promoted the external sources to spurions, and

This allows us to add the invariant

χ = S + iP .

Lm = ψ(χPR + χ†PL)ψ ,

(2.8a)

(2.8b)

(2.8c)

(2.9)

(2.10)

to the microscopic lagrangian, thus coupling the theory to the sources S and P.

The actual theory is recovered by setting the source ﬁelds to their “expectation values,”

S(x) = m ,

P(x) = 0 .

(2.11)

For simplicity, we assume in this paper that all fermions have a common mass m. Thus,
chiral symmetry is softly broken for m 6= 0. By dialing m → 0 exact chiral symmetry is
recovered, and the pions become massless.
In general, any dependence of the eﬀective theory on the expectation value of a spu-
rion ﬁeld encodes some explicit breaking of a symmetry, because the eﬀective lagrangian is
only invariant under the simultaneous transformation of the dynamical and spurion (source)

6

ﬁelds. In the standard chiral lagrangian, this manifest itself as the breaking of chiral sym-
metry by the fermion mass, as we have just discussed. Let us next see how this comes into
play when dealing with the anomalous U(1)A symmetry.

The axial anomaly can be formally cancelled by augmenting the lagrangian of the micro-

scopic theory with a new term

− cg2Nf θ(x) trF (x) ˜F (x) .

(2.12)

Here θ(x) is the axion ﬁeld, which couples to (minus) the anomalous divergence of the singlet
axial current. Under a U(1)A transformation the axion ﬁeld transforms by a shift, and this
allows us to cancel the anomaly generated by the dynamical fermions against the variation
of the axion-dependent term, Eq. (2.12).

The low-energy theory will now depend on the axion ﬁeld θ(x). As long as we treat
the axion ﬁeld as a spurion, which transforms under the U(1)A symmetry, the eﬀective
lagrangian will maintain U(1)A invariance. But once we assign to the axion ﬁeld a ﬁxed
expectation value, the axial anomaly will manifest itself in the eﬀective theory.

The expectation value of the axion ﬁeld is the vacuum angle θ0. The eﬀective theory fails
to be invariant under U(1)A even if we set the vacuum angle to zero. The eﬀective theory now
includes an additional dynamical ﬁeld η(x) associated with the ﬂavor-singlet pseudoscalar
meson, which couples to the U(1)A current. Algebraically, the η(x) ﬁeld is similar to the
axion, in that they both transform by a shift under U(1)A. Any function of the diﬀerence
η − θ is invariant under the abelian U(1)A transformations. As discussed in Refs. [18, 26],
already at leading order the eﬀective low-energy theory depends on several such arbitrary
non-derivative functions, or potentials VI(η − θ).6 When we set θ(x) = θ0 = 0, all that
happens is that VI(η − θ) becomes VI(η). The presence in the eﬀective theory of the VI(η)
potentials represents an explicit breaking of U(1)A. The question of how this arbitrariness
can be controlled is postponed to Sec. III.

C. Encoding the explicit breaking of dilatations

As explained in the previous subsection, the construction of the low-energy eﬀective
theory begins with the identiﬁcation of the dynamical eﬀective ﬁelds and the external source
ﬁelds. The latter are then promoted to spurions. The new eﬀective ﬁeld that describes the
dilatonic meson will be introduced in the next section. Here we discuss how to encode the
anomalous divergence of the dilatation current by coupling the microscopic theory to an
external dilaton ﬁeld σ(x).

We consider an asymptotically free gauge theory with Nf Dirac fermions in the funda-
mental representation. After a rescaling of the bare gauge and fermion ﬁelds by the bare

6 Because of parity, VI (η − θ) is an even function of its argument.

7

coupling, we express the bare action in d dimensions as

Sev(σ) = Z ddx e(d−4)σ(x)L0(x) ,

1
g2
0

L0 =

(Lk + Lsrc) ,
Xi=1
Lk =
Lsrc = ψ(S + iPγ5)ψ ,

F a
µνF a

µν +

1
4

Nf

ψi /Dψi ,

(2.13)

(2.14)

(2.15)

(2.16)

where the covariant derivative is Dµ = ∂µ + iAµ, and the ﬁeld strength is Fµν = F a
−i[Dµ, Dν].
The dilaton ﬁeld σ(x) has been introduced in Eq. (2.13) via an overall factor multiplying
the entire bare lagrangian. We have denoted the action by Sev(σ), with a subscript “ev” to
indicate that the dependence on σ(x) comes from the evanescent part of the bare lagrangian.
Sev(σ) is manifestly invariant under the d-dimensional dilatation

µνT a =

Aµ(x) → λAµ(λx) ,
ψ(x) → λ3/2ψ(λx) ,
S(x) → λS(λx) ,
σ(x) → σ(λx) + log λ ,

g0 → g0 .

ψ(x) → λ3/2ψ(λx) ,
P(x) → λP(λx) ,

(2.17a)

(2.17b)
(2.17c)
(2.17d)
(2.17e)

With the obvious exception of σ(x), which plays a special role, in this setup the (dynamical
and external) bare ﬁelds transform according to their canonical mass dimension in d = 4
dimensions. The bare parameter g0 is dimensionful in d 6= 4 dimensions, but the anticipated
transformation of 1/g2
In order to see how the σ dependence encodes the anomalous trace of the energy-
momentum tensor, Tan, we proceed to consider the renormalized lagrangian. Diﬀerentiating
the bare action once with respect to σ(x) and then setting it to zero we have

0 has been taken up by the factor of e(d−4)σ(x).

∂

∂σ(x)

Sev(σ)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)σ(x)=0

= (d − 4)L0(x) .

(2.18)

It was shown in Ref. [30] that the evanescent operator on the right-hand side occurs in
the d-dimensional trace of the energy-momentum tensor, alongside with the classical (four-
dimensional) trace, and with terms proportional to equations of motion. Taking the d → 4
limit and discarding terms proportional to equations of motion then yields Tan(x). Hence

Sev(σ) = Sren(σ) + O(σ2) ,

Sren(σ) = Z ddx(cid:16)Lren

k + Tcl(S,P) + σ Tan(S,P)(cid:17) ,

(2.19)

(2.20)

where Lren
and the renormalization scale µ. Here (compare Eq. (2.3))

0 Lk reexpressed in terms of the renormalized ﬁelds and coupling,

is equal to g−2

k

Tcl(S,P) = [ψSψ] + [ψ iPγ5ψ] ,
Tan(S,P) = ˜β [F 2] + γm(cid:16)[ψSψ] + [ψ iPγ5ψ](cid:17) .

8

(2.21a)

(2.21b)

Chiral symmetry constrains the renormalization of the sources S(x) and P(x) to be the
same as that of the fermion mass m. The operators Tcl(S,P) and Tan(S,P) are therefore
renormalization-group invariant, too.
The O(σ2) terms in Eq. (2.19) are needed to ensure exact dilatation invariance of the
regularized action in d dimensions. However, our derivation of the low-energy action will
not depend on these terms, and therefore we do not consider them any further.

III. POWER COUNTING AND THE LEADING-ORDER LAGRANGIAN

In QCD, exact chiral symmetry is restored when the fermion mass m tends to zero. The
chiral lagrangian is a low-energy expansion around the chiral limit. The systematic nature
of the low-energy expansion derives from the fact that m is a parameter of the microscopic
theory that can be varied continuously. When the fermion mass vanishes, so does the mass
of the pions.

As mentioned in the introduction, the anomalous U(1)A symmetry, and its associated
ﬂavor-singlet pseudoscalar meson, can be incorporated into the framework of the low-energy
expansion by invoking the ’t Hooft large-Nc limit, in which the number of colors Nc tends
to inﬁnity, while the number of ﬂavors is held ﬁxed. For m = 0, the anomalous divergence
of the singlet axial current is

∂µJ5µ = cg2Nf trF ˜F ,

(3.1)

where the numerical constant c depends on the representation in which the fermions trans-
form. The axial anomaly is proportional to g2, which scales as 1/Nc, because in large-Nc
counting the product g2Nc is O(1). As a result, for Nc → ∞ (and ﬁxed Nf ) the mass of the
ﬂavor-singlet pseudoscalar meson tends to zero.7
The starting point of the systematic low-energy expansion then involves a double limit:
the chiral limit m → 0, together with the limit Nc → ∞. The power-counting suppression
of the axial anomaly in the microscopic theory is communicated to the low-energy eﬀective
theory by matching correlation functions obtained by diﬀerentiating both partition functions
with respect to the axion source θ(x). Using this, one can show that the coeﬃcients of
the power-series expansion of the VI(η − θ) potentials, introduced in Sec. II B, adhere to a
natural power-counting hierarchy. This limits the number of linearly independent low-energy
constants occurring at each order of the expansion to be ﬁnite [18, 26].

In our case, we are interested in the diﬀerent limit already introduced in Sec. I, in which
the dilatation current is eﬀectively conserved in the infrared, while the axial current of
Eq. (3.1) remains anomalous. In Sec. III A we will discuss this triple limit and the assump-
tions on which it depends in more detail, and use it to control the low-energy expansion.
We then proceed in Sec. III B to write down the leading-order lagrangian of the eﬀective
theory. Much like in the case of the U(1)A symmetry, using only symmetry considerations
and the usual chiral power counting allows the leading-order lagrangian to depend on four
arbitrary potentials VI(τ − σ). Using a strategy similar to that followed in Refs. [18, 26],
we then match correlation functions obtained by diﬀerentiating with respect to the dilaton
source σ(x) between the microscopic and the eﬀective theories, and use this to establish a
power-counting hierarchy for the power-series coeﬃcients of these potentials.

7 The actual argument involves a comparison of the large-Nc scaling of hJ5µ(x)J5(y)i and of h trF ˜F (x)J5(y)i
where J5 = ψγ5ψ.

9

The result is a leading-order lagrangian that depends only on a ﬁnite (and rather small)
number of low-energy parameters. In Sec. III C we show that dilatation invariance can be
maintained even after we set σ(x) = 0, at the price of promoting the power-series coeﬃcients
of the VI(τ ) potentials to (global) spurions. We also determine the transformation properties
of the renormalized chiral sources, which ﬁxes the dependence of the leading-order lagrangian
on the mass anomalous dimension.

A. Nature of the expansion

As explained in the introduction, we conjecture that the eﬀective low-energy theory can
be constructed as a systematic expansion around a triple limit. One of these limits is just
the chiral limit, m → 0. The other two limits, namely, the Veneziano large-N limit and the
limit nf ր n∗
First, we need to deﬁne a reference scale against which to measure dimensionful quantities
in the eﬀective theory. We will set the reference infrared scale using one of the decay
constants, the pion decay constant ˆfπ or the dilatonic-meson decay constant ˆfτ , in the chiral
limit. The decay constants are deﬁned by8

f , are more subtle.

h0|J a
h0|Tµν(x)|τi =

ˆfτ
3

5µ(x)|πbi = ipµ ˆfπ δab eipx ,

(−δµν p2 + pµpν) eipx ,

(3.2)

(3.3)

which implies (see Sec. IV C below)

(3.4)
Here |·i denotes a single-particle state of momentum p. These states can be labeled by
the eﬀective ﬁelds of the low-energy theory: πa(x) is the pion ﬁeld, which is related to the
non-linear ﬁeld as

h0|Sµ(x)|τi = ipµ ˆfτ eipx .

Σ = exp(2iπ/ ˆfπ) = exp(2iπaT a/ ˆfπ) ,

(3.5)
while τ (x) is a new eﬀective ﬁeld for the dilatonic meson. The indices a, b = 1, . . . , N 2
f − 1
label the adjoint representation of SU(Nf ). Both the non-singlet axial currents J a
5µ and the
energy-momentum tensor Tµν are renormalization-group invariant, and the same applies to
the decay constants ˆfπ and ˆfτ .9

The large-N scaling of the decay constants follows from considering the two-point func-

tions of J a

5µ or Tµν, which gives

Equation (3.6) is recognized as the familiar scaling law of the decay constant of any meson
made of fundamental-representation fermions.10 With these scaling laws in mind we may

ˆfπ ∼ pNc ,
ˆfτ ∼ Nc .

(3.6)

(3.7)

8 To avoid confusion, we note that Eqs. (3.2) and (3.3) are used to deﬁne the decay constants for any m.

However, we will reserve the notation ˆfπ, ˆfτ for the decay constants in the chiral limit.

9 By contrast, the U (1)A current is not renormalization-group invariant because of the mixing of ∂µJ5µ
with trF ˜F . This complicates the dependence of the eﬀective theory on the renormalization scale of the
microscopic theory [26].

10 ˆfπ is independent of Nf because the ﬂavor index in Eq. (3.2) is held ﬁxed.

10

thus set the dynamical infrared scale ΛIR to be

ΛIR ∼

4π ˆfπ√Nc ∼

4π ˆfτ
Nc

.

(3.8)

Here we use that 4π ˆfπ is usually taken to be the ultraviolet cutoﬀ of the chiral lagrangian,
it being the typical scale for the masses of non-Nambu–Goldstone mesons. The ∼ symbol in
Eq. (3.8) serves to indicate that either expression can be used as the deﬁnition of ΛIR. The
two options are equally good, because in the Veneziano limit we expect the dimensionless
ratio √Nc ˆfπ/ ˆfτ to smoothly approach a non-zero value. We recall that meson masses are
O(1) in the large-N counting, and hence, with the exception of pNGBs, we expect all meson
masses to scale like ΛIR.

Turning to the light-meson sector, the three small parameters of the low-energy expansion

will be

m/ΛIR ,
1/N ,
nf − n∗
f .

(3.9a)
(3.9b)
(3.9c)

As already mentioned, while m/ΛIR and 1/N (equivalently, 1/Nc) can be taken arbitrarily
small independent of each other, the same is not true for nf − n∗
f , which cannot be para-
metrically smaller than 1/N. In the case where the expansion parameters are comparable in
size, we will again use δ as a generic name for any one of them. For example, the behavior
of the pion mass mπ is

m2

π/Λ2

IR ∼ (m/ΛIR)1 (1/N)0 (nf − n∗

f )0 ∼ m/ΛIR ∼ δ .

(3.10)

In addition to the expansion in the input parameters of Eq. (3.9), the eﬀective theory
involves, as usual, a derivative expansion, with pi · pj/Λ2
limit, reads

We next reexamine the anomalous divergence of the dilatation current, which, in chiral

IR ∼ δ.

(3.11)

(3.12)

(3.13)

∂µSµ = − ˜β [F 2] ,

where, in terms of the ’t Hooft coupling

we have (compare Eq. (2.4))

α =

g2Nc
4π

,

µ
4α
Both α and ˜β(α) are O(1) in large-N counting.

˜β =

∂α
∂µ

.

We will assume that the trace anomaly can be made arbitrarily small by approaching
the sill of the conformal window from below. More speciﬁcally, we will assume that, in the
chiral limit (compare Eq. (2.3c)),

˜β[F 2] ∼ (nf − n∗

f )η ,

nf ր n∗
f ,

(3.14)

for some η > 0, in the sense that all matrix elements of the operator on the left-hand side
f )η when probed on the infrared scale ΛIR. The main motivation for
vanish like (nf − n∗

11

conjecturing Eq. (3.14) is the ever slower running of the coupling as Nf is increased towards
the conformal window, evidence for which comes from numerous lattice studies (see Ref. [3]
and references therein).

Further heuristic support for Eq. (3.14) comes from modeling chiral symmetry breaking
by the gap equation. According to this analysis, chiral symmetry breaking in a walking
theory sets in when the coupling has reached a critical value g2
c = 4π2/(3C2) [32–35]. For
the fundamental representation, C2 = (N 2
c − 1)/(2Nc), and in the large-Nc limit the critical
value of the ’t Hooft coupling (3.12) is αc = 2π/3. In order to determine when the conformal
window is entered, αc is compared with the (putative) value of the IRFP, α∗ [36–38].11 The
latter is inferred, for example, from the two-loop beta function, while ignoring the possible
onset of spontaneous symmetry breaking (see App. A). It follows that, if α∗ > αc, the IRFP
is not reached, and the theory exists in a chirally broken (and conﬁning) phase; whereas if
α∗ < αc, the running comes to a halt as α(µ) ր α∗, and the infrared theory is conformal.
In the Veneziano limit, α∗ is a function of nf , and the conformal window is entered when
α∗(nf ) = αc. Therefore, when the boundary separating the broken and conformal “phases”
is reached from within the broken phase, chiral symmetry breaking occurs at a coupling
where the beta function tends to zero.

We stress that we have no way of rigorously establishing the correctness of Eq. (3.14).
This is the main weakness of our treatment.12 In addition, unlike the parameters m and
1/Nc, in which we expand around zero, we do not know the critical value n∗
f around which we
are to expand in nf . In practice, one would have to determine both η and n∗
f empirically. One
way to do that is by treating η and n∗
f as additional parameters of the low-energy eﬀective
theory, which, together with the rest of the low-energy constants, are to be determined by
the usual procedure of comparing the correlation functions of the microscopic theory with
the predictions of the low-energy theory.

In order to avoid cumbersome notation, we will henceforth assume that η = 1 in
f )η, nothing else would

Eq. (3.14). Except for the trivial replacement of nf − n∗
f by (nf − n∗
change in our analysis in case that the actual value of η is diﬀerent.13
We conclude this subsection with several comments.
First, the reason why we consider only the fundamental representation is that, for any
other representation, the relative increments one can make in the beta function ˜β(α) re-
main O(1) in the Veneziano limit, leaving us with no parameter to continuously control the
smallness of the beta function.

Second, the one-loop mass anomalous dimension is γm = 6g2C2/(16π2). Since C2 =
(N 2
c − 1)/(2Nc) for the fundamental representation, the mass anomalous dimension is O(1)
in large-N counting. Unlike the beta function, there is no reason that the mass anomalous
dimension will become parametrically small near the bottom of the conformal window.
Indeed, numerical simulations of, e.g., the Nf = 8 theory, suggest that it is large [8] (see
also Ref. [3]). A simpliﬁcation that does take place is that, since the running comes to a
halt, γm(α(µ)) is hardly changing over many energy decades. This has implications for the
eﬀective low-energy theory, which we will discuss in Sec. III C below.

11 For a diﬀerent approach to this problem, see Ref. [39].
12 We would like to point out that the results of Ref. [40] are in disagreement with our main assumption (3.14).
However, the analysis of Ref. [40] involves a number of ingredients that do not constitute a systematic
approximation, and, therefore, we believe that it does not disprove our assumption.

13 For the two-loop beta function, as well as for a crude model estimate of Eq. (3.14), see App. A.

12

Finally, we recall that unlike in the usual large-Nc limit, in the Veneziano limit the axial
anomaly does not vanish, because we now have g2Nf ∼ 1 in Eq. (3.1). For this reason, the
ﬂavor-singlet pseudoscalar meson does not become light, and will not be considered in the
rest of this paper.

B.

Invariant potentials at tree level and the power counting

The ﬁelds of the eﬀective low-energy theory include the non-linear ﬁeld Σ(x) introduced
in Sec. II B, and the dilatonic meson ﬁeld τ (x). The latter is inert under chiral transforma-
tions. Imposing for the time being only the usual chiral power counting, the leading-order
lagrangian consists of terms of order p2 ∼ m ∼ δ, and is given by14

where

˜L = ˜Lπ + ˜Lτ + ˜Lm + ˜Ld ,

(3.15)

(3.16)

(3.17)

(3.18)

f 2
˜Lπ =
π
4
f 2
˜Lτ =
τ
2
˜Lm = −
˜Ld = f 2

Vπ(τ − σ) e2τ tr(∂µΣ†∂µΣ) ,
Vτ (τ − σ) e2τ (∂µτ )2 ,
f 2
π Bπ
2

VM (τ − σ) eyτ tr(cid:16)χ†Σ + Σ†χ(cid:17) ,

τ Bτ e4τ Vd(τ − σ) .

(3.19)
˜Lπ and ˜Lτ are the kinetic terms for pions and for the dilatonic meson, respectively. ˜Lm is a
generalized chiral mass term, whereas ˜Ld accounts for the self-interactions of the dilatonic
meson. Actually, ˜Ld is O(δ0), and not O(δ1), in apparent violation of the rules of the
eﬀective theory. We will see later on how this is resolved. The relation of fπ and fτ to the
physical decay constants ˆfπ and ˆfτ in the chiral limit will be discussed below. Bπ and Bτ are
additional low-energy constants of mass dimension one and two, respectively. As we will see
below (see Sec. IV B), the dependence of the tree-level masses on the B parameters implies
that they are O(1) in large-N counting.

The eﬀective action ˜S = R d4x ˜L(x) is invariant under dilatations. The transformation

rules of the dynamical ﬁelds are

Σ(x) → Σ(λx) ,
τ (x) → τ (λx) + log λ .

(3.20a)
(3.20b)

The transformation rule of σ(x) is given in Eq. (2.17d). Notice the similarity of the trans-
formation rules of the dynamical ﬁeld τ (x) and the source ﬁeld σ(x). The transformation
rule of the chiral source χ(x) that follows from Eq. (3.18) is

The transformation rule of the bare chiral source, given in Eq. (2.17c), reﬂects its engineering
In fact, the
dimension. Compatibility of Eqs. (3.21) and (2.17c) would require y = 3.

χ(x) → λ4−yχ(λx) .

(3.21)

14 We work in euclidean space.

13

eﬀective theory must be constructed using the renormalized chiral source, because it is
the diﬀerentiation with respect to this renormalized source that produces ﬁnite correlation
functions of the microscopic theory. The dilatation transformation rule of the renormalized
chiral source is diﬀerent from that of the bare source. We will derive it in Sec. III C below.
Because the shifts of σ(x) and τ (x) cancel each other, the invariant potentials VI, I =

π, τ, M, d, undergo only a coordinates transformation

VI(τ (x) − σ(x)) → VI(τ (λx) − σ(λx)) .

(3.22)

This transformation places no algebraic constraints on the coeﬃcients of the power-series
expansion,

VI =

∞

Xn=0

cI,n
n!

(τ − σ)n .

(3.23)

The coeﬃcients cI,n therefore amount to inﬁnitely many, linearly independent low-energy
parameters.

In this subsection, we will establish a power-counting hierarchy

cI,n ∼ (nf − n∗

f )n ∼ δn .

(3.24)

This will allow us to set the potentials Vπ, Vτ and VM equal to one in the leading-order
lagrangian, because they multiply terms that are already O(δ); and to truncate Vd to a
linear function, as in Eq. (1.6).

When writing down the chiral lagrangian, it is customary to keep explicit the m depen-
f dependence can be made explicit by performing the further

dence. Similarly, the nf − n∗
expansion15

cI,n =

˜cI,nk(nf − n∗

f )k .

(3.25)

∞

Xk=0

The new coeﬃcients ˜cI,nk are independent of all three expansion parameters m, 1/N and
nf − n∗

f . The power counting (3.24) can be equivalently stated as

˜cI,nk = 0 ,

k < n .

(3.26)

Below, we will mostly refer to the cI,n coeﬃcients, but we will keep in mind that each of
them is a function of nf − n∗
f .
The hierarchy (3.24) is analogous to the one established in Refs. [18, 26] for the coeﬃcients
of the invariant potentials V (η − θ) discussed in Sec. II B, which occur in the low-energy
eﬀective theory that accommodates the U(1)A symmetry. The main diﬀerence is that the
power-series coeﬃcients of V (η − θ) are suppressed by powers of 1/Nc in the usual large-
Nc limit. By contrast, here the power-series coeﬃcients of the VI(τ − σ) potentials are
suppressed by powers of nf − n∗
f , which is a new small parameter that is present in the
Veneziano limit but not in the usual large-Nc limit.

We will derive Eq. (3.24) by matching judiciously chosen correlation functions of the
low-energy theory to the corresponding correlation functions of the microscopic theory, in
In order to understand the physical origin of Eq. (3.24), we begin by
the chiral limit.

15 Recall that we are assuming η = 1 in Eq. (3.14), see Sec. III A.

14

considering correlations functions of the microscopic theory obtained by diﬀerentiating n
times with respect to the σ(x) source ﬁeld. As usual, the role of the external sources is to
generate operator insertions, and thus in the microscopic theory we will assume that no two
diﬀerentiations are done at coinciding points. We thus have

ΓMIC

n

(x1, . . . , xn) = (−1)n

∂

∂

∂σ(x1) · · ·

∂σ(xn)
= hTan(x1) · · · Tan(xn)im=0
= ˜βn(cid:10)F 2(x1) · · · F 2(xn)(cid:11) .

W

(3.27a)

(3.27b)

(3.27c)

Here W = log Z. It is understood that all source ﬁelds are set to zero after the diﬀerentiations
are done (since we work in the chiral limit, this includes setting S(x) = P(x) = 0, cf.
Eq. (2.11)). Allowing also for diﬀerentiations with respect to the scalar and pseudoscalar
sources SAB and PAB gives us access to

ΓMIC

nkℓ (x1, . . . , xn; y1, . . . , xk; z1, . . . , zℓ) =
∂

∂

∂

∂σ(x1) · · ·

= (−1)n+k+ℓ
∂P(zℓ)
= ˜βn(cid:10)F 2(x1) · · · F 2(xn) ψψ(y1) · · · ψψ(yk) ψiγ5ψ(z1) · · · ψiγ5ψ(zℓ)(cid:11) ,

∂P(z1) · · ·

∂S(y1) · · ·

∂S(yk)

∂σ(xn)

where we have suppressed the ﬂavor indices. We see that, by Eq. (3.14),

∂

∂

∂

(3.28)

W

ΓMIC
nkℓ = O(δn) .

(3.29)

f )n). In Eq. (3.28),
Here and in the rest of this subsection, O(δn) will always mean O((nf − n∗
all the operators are renormalized ones.16 Correspondingly, the chiral sources used to gen-
erate ΓMIC

nkℓ are renormalized, too.

Turning to the low-energy eﬀective theory, in order to probe the potentials VI(τ − σ),
we will carry out multiple diﬀerentiations at the same spacetime point. This immediately
raises the issue of reconciling this procedure with the avoidance of the limit of coinciding
points in the correlation functions of the microscopic theory. There is in fact no conﬂict.
The point is that coinciding spacetime points do not have the same physical signiﬁcance in
the microscopic and the eﬀective theories. While the pNGBs are represented in the eﬀective
theory as point particles, in reality they have a ﬁnite size, roughly of order 1/ΛIR. We
will thus choose to consider operator insertions in the microscopic theory at non-coinciding
points, but at distances much smaller than 1/ΛIR, such that they collapse to insertions
at coinciding points in the eﬀective low-energy theory. In addition, asymptotic states are
obtained from operator insertions at large distances, in the same way in the microscopic
and the eﬀective theories. This will allow us to enforce the power counting of Eq. (3.29) on
the eﬀective theory’s correlation functions that we will need in order to probe the VI(τ − σ)
potentials.
Among the correlation functions obtained in the eﬀective theory by diﬀerentiating multi-
ple times with respect to σ(x) at the same spacetime point, there is a special subset, in which
all the diﬀerentiations are applied to the same potential VI. This gives rise to a diagram

16 To avoid cumbersome notation, we have omitted the square brackets used in Sec. II to denote renormalized

operators.

15

containing the n-th derivative of VI, which, when evaluated at σ = 0, is simply (compare
Eq. (3.23))

(cid:18)−

∂

∂σ(cid:19)n

cI,n+k

k!

τ k = V (n)

I

(τ ) .

(3.30)

∞

Xk=0

=

VI(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)σ=0

The natural way for the correlation functions of the eﬀective theory to satisfy Eq. (3.14), is
that the power-series coeﬃcients of VI satisfy

cI,k = O(δn) ,

k ≥ n ,
(τ ) = O(δn) in its entirety.

(3.31)

because this implies that V (n)
It is easy to see that condi-
tions (3.24), (3.26) and (3.31) are mathematically equivalent. As it turns out, it is convenient
to establish the power-counting hierarchy in the form of Eq. (3.31).

I

There are a few more technical points we need to address before turning to the actual
derivation. First, the zeroth-order term in the double expansion of each potential, ˜cI,00, is
redundant, because each term in the lagrangian (3.15) is already multiplied by a low-energy
constant. We will use this freedom to set ˜cM,00 = ˜cπ,00 = ˜cτ,00 = 1. The role of ˜cd,00, the
leading-order term in the expansion of Vd, is more subtle. The ˜cd,00-dependent term is the
only part in the entire lagrangian which is O(1). All other terms start at O(δ), which is how
the leading-order lagrangian normally scales according to the low-energy power counting.
As we will show in Sec. IV B below, when we develop the diagrammatic expansion for each
theory, there is a redeﬁnition of the τ ﬁeld that allows us to set cd,0 = −cd,1/4. This is
equivalent to setting ˜c00 = 0 and ˜c01 = −˜c11/4, so that, after the redeﬁnition, the entire
leading-order lagrangian is O(δ).

For the diagrammatic expansion, we split the dilatonic meson ﬁeld as

τ (x) = v + ˜τ (x)/(evfτ ) ≡ v + ˜τ (x)/ ˆfτ ,

(3.32)

where v = hτi is the classical solution, and the quantum ﬁeld ˜τ (x) has a canonically nor-
malized kinetic term. Applying the τ ﬁeld redeﬁnition of Sec. IV B to Eq. (3.32) shifts the
classical solution to v = 0 in the chiral limit, and the dependence on the original value of v
gets absorbed into the decay constants,

ˆfπ = evfπ ,
ˆfτ = evfτ ,

and into the two other low-energy constants,

ˆBπ = e(y−2)vBπ ,
ˆBτ = e2vBτ .

(3.33a)

(3.33b)

(3.34a)

(3.34b)

In these equations, v is the classical solution in the chiral limit before the ﬁeld redeﬁnition,
given by Eq. (4.6) below. After the τ ﬁeld redeﬁnition, which sets v = 0 in the chiral limit, it
can moreover be shown that the ground state is stable against the inclusion of higher-order
terms in the classical potential.17

17 In fact, for what we need here it would be enough to set ˜cd,00 = 0, leaving ˜cd,01 free; see Sec. V A.

16

As for the non-linear Σ ﬁeld, in this paper we assume that m > 0 (or, if the chiral limit
has been taken, that it was approached as m ց 0), hence its classical vacuum expectation
value is hΣi = 1. The diagrammatic expansion is then generated as usual by expanding Σ
in terms of the pion ﬁeld, Eq. (3.5).

We will prove the power-counting hierarchy (3.31) using the diagrammatic expansion
described above. The proof of Eq. (3.31) proceeds by induction. We assume that Eq. (3.31)
has been proved up to n − 1, so that cI,k = O(δk) for all k ≤ n − 1, and cI,k = O(δn−1) for
k ≥ n − 1. In the induction step we must therefore improve the bound to cI,k = O(δn) for
k ≥ n.
In the eﬀective theory, the n diﬀerentiations with respect to the σ(x) source will all be
done at the same point. We will be interested in the special subset of diagrams mentioned
above, in which all n diﬀerentiations have been applied to a single VI, so that the diagram
involves a single vertex

(3.35)
We claim that the sum of diagrams with a single such vertex must be O(δn) by itself. When
we apply the σ diﬀerentiations, we will also obtain diagrams with the factorizable form

(τ (x)) .

V (n)
I

V (k1)
I1

(τ (x)) · · · V (kℓ)

Iℓ

(τ (x)) ,

k1 + · · · + kℓ = n ,

(3.36)

where at least two ki’s are larger than zero, and therefore all ki < n. Now, the factorizable-
form diagrams may be obtained by ﬁrst using ℓ non-coinciding points to obtain

V (k1)
I1

(τ (x1)) · · · V (kℓ)

Iℓ

(τ (xℓ)) ,

(3.37)

and then taking the limit where all the ℓ spacetime points are brought together. Since
ki < n, the induction hypothesis implies V (ki)
(τ (xi)) = O(δki) for all i. The diagrams
with the point-split structure (3.37) are thus O(δn), and the same is true in the limit of
coinciding points. Therefore, the left-over part, which is the (sum of) diagrams with the
non-factorizable vertex (3.35), must be O(δn) by itself.

Ii

The rest of the argument is more technical, and requires a case-by-case study. We will
give here the proof of Eq. (3.31) for the power-series coeﬃcients of Vd, which is the potential
that is easiest to handle. The demonstration of Eq. (3.31) for the other three potentials VM ,
Vπ and Vτ makes use of the same ingredients, but is slightly more involved, and is relegated
to App. B. The reader who is not interested in these details may skip to the next subsection.
Let us carry out no additional diﬀerentiations except for the n derivatives with respect
to the σ(x) ﬁeld, and isolate the diagrams with a non-factorizable vertex. After dividing by
ˆf 2
τ

ˆBτ we obtain the eﬀective theory’s correlation function

where

d,n = ( ˆf 2
ΓEFT

τ

ˆBτ )−1 hΩd,n + Ωπ,n + Ωτ,ni ,

ˆBτ V (n)

d

(τ ) e4τ ,

Ωπ,n =

Ωd,n = ˆf 2
τ
ˆf 2
π
4
ˆf 2
τ
2

Ωτ,n =

V (n)
π

(τ ) e2τ tr(∂µΣ†∂µΣ) ,

V (n)
τ

(τ ) e2τ (∂µτ )2 .

17

(3.38)

(3.39)

(3.40)

(3.41)

The generalized mass term ˜Lm does not contribute, because we did not diﬀerentiate with
respect to the chiral source χ(x), but we did set χ(x) = m = 0. The division by ˆf 2
ˆBτ
τ
in Eq. (3.38) makes ΓEFT
d,n dimensionless, and, in addition, it removes the leading large-N
dependence, so that ΓEFT
d,n is O(1) in large-N counting.

Our ﬁrst step is to establish that cd,n = O(δn). Considering the expansion

Ωd,n =

cd,n+k

k!

∞

Xk=0

ˆf 2
τ

ˆBτ τ ke4τ ,

(3.42)

we need to ﬁnd a suitable limit where ΓEFT
side of Eq. (3.42). If we can do so, we will have

d,n is dominated by the ﬁrst term on the right-hand

ΓEFT
d,n = cd,n + O(δn+1) ,

(3.43)

and the desired result will follow from the matching to the microscopic theory.

We will derive Eq. (3.43) by working in the parameter region

m/ΛIR ∼ 1/N ∼ pi · pj ∼ ǫn ,
f ∼ δ ,

nf − n∗

where pi · pj denotes the product of any two external momenta, and where

ǫn ≪ δn .

(3.44a)
(3.44b)

(3.44c)

We begin with the observation that hΩπ,ni contains a pion loop, which, including the nor-
malization factor from Eq. (3.38), is

ˆf 2

π(cid:10) tr(∂µΣ†∂µΣ)(cid:11)

ˆBτ

ˆf 2
τ

∼ h tr(∂µπ∂µπ)i

ˆBτ

ˆf 2
τ

N 2m4
π
ˆf 2
τ

ˆBτ ∼

m4
π
IR ∼ ǫ2
n ,
Λ4

∼

(3.45)

f ∼ N 2, the large-N scaling of
where we have used that the number of pions scales like N 2
ˆfτ and ˆBτ , and Eq. (3.5). It follows that hΩπ,ni can be neglected. We next consider hΩτ,ni.
Since we have shifted the classical vacuum to v = 0, we may substitute τ = ˜τ / ˆfτ . The
contribution of hΩτ,ni thus involves the dilatonic meson tadpole18

D ˆf 2
τ (∂µτ )2E

ˆf 2
τ

ˆBτ

= h(∂µ ˜τ )2i

ˆBτ ∼

ˆf 2
τ

m4
τ
ˆBτ ∼
ˆf 2
τ

m4
τ
N 2Λ4
IR

.

(3.46)

As we will see in Sec. IV B below, m2
f| in the chiral limit, and so, generically,
the suppression of dilatonic meson loop comes from the smallness of both |nf − n∗
f| and 1/N.
Here we invoke the parameter region (3.44), because we must maintain the freedom to vary
nf − n∗
f . Therefore, we cannot neglect hΩτ,ni on the grounds of its mτ dependence. However,
Eq. (3.46) also involves a factor of 1/N 2 ∼ ǫ2

n, and this does justify the neglect of hΩτ,ni.

IR|nf − n∗

τ ∼ Λ2

18 Note that h˜τ ∂µ ˜τi = 0.

18

At this stage we are left with hΩd,ni. The last step is to observe that, besides cd,n, all
other contributions to hΩd,ni involve some number of dilatonic meson tadpoles hτ 2i, each
of which provides an additional suppression factor of 1/N 2. This completes the proof that
cd,n = O(δn).

In the above argument, loop diagrams were always subleading. This is an example of a
general result, ﬁrst derived by Weinberg in the context of the chiral lagrangian [16], that
the loop expansion of every correlation function in the eﬀective theory obeys the standard
power counting. Thus, every loop diagram is always suppressed relative to the tree diagrams
that contribute to a given correlation function. Weinberg’s result was generalized to the case
where a dilatonic meson is present in Ref. [20]. While our setup is diﬀerent from Ref. [20],
both in terms of the expansion parameters (3.9) and the particular parameter range (3.44),
the argument remains essentially the same. Henceforth, it will thus suﬃce to consider tree
diagrams only.

In order to extend Eq. (3.31) to cd,k for k > n, we will need ℓ = k − n external τ legs.
These external legs must be generated by diﬀerentiating with respect to one of the source
ﬁelds, since Eq. (3.28) gives the complete set of correlation functions of the microscopic
theory that can be matched to the eﬀective theory. We will diﬀerentiate with respect to
(the ﬂavor trace of) the scalar source S(y). Including a suitable normalization factor and a
trivial subtraction, we let

∂ ˜L
∂S

1
ˆf 2
ˆBπ
π
VM (τ ) eyτ tr(Σ + Σ†) ,

ΩS = −
1
2

=

˜ΩS = ΩS − Nf
y˜τ
ˆfτ /Nf −

=

2
ˆf 2
π

tr(π2) + · · · ,

(3.47a)

(3.47b)

where we have used Eq. (3.18) and ˜cM,00 = 1. This shows that ˜ΩS can be used as an
interpolating ﬁeld for the dilatonic meson. As a generalization of Eq. (3.38), we will consider
˜ΓEFT
d,n,ℓ(p1, . . . , pℓ), the Fourier transform of

d,n,ℓ = ( ˆf 2
ΓEFT

τ

ˆBτ )−1D(Ωd,n(x) + Ωπ,n(x) + Ωτ,n(x)) ˜ΩS(y1) · · · ˜ΩS(yℓ)E .

(3.48)

The demonstration that cd,k = O(δn) for k > n will proceed by an “inner” induction. Before
turning to the general case, let us examine the two simplest cases.

We start with ℓ = k − n = 1. The leading contribution to ΓEFT

d,n,1 is a tree diagram
with a single dilatonic meson line connecting Ωd,n(x) with ˜ΩS (y1). Expanding V (n)
(τ ) e4τ =
cd,n + τ (4cd,n + cd,n+1) + O(τ 2) we ﬁnd that, after amputation, the contribution to ˜ΓEFT
d,n,1 is
equal to 4cd,n + cd,n+1 up to an O(1) factor. Since we already know that cd,n = O(δn), the
conclusion is that we must have cd,n+1 = O(δn) as well.

d

Proceeding to ℓ = k − n = 2, now DΩd,n(x) ˜ΩS(y1) ˜ΩS(y2)E receives contributions from

three topologically distinct tree diagrams, each containing two dilatonic meson lines. The
tree diagram we need is the one in which Ωd,n(x) is connected by a line to each of ˜ΩS (y1)
and ˜ΩS (y2).
In one case, the two

In addition, there two more tree-diagram topologies.

19

lines emanate from ˜ΩS(y1), and connect it to Ωd,n(x) and to ˜ΩS(y2). In the other case, the
roles of ˜ΩS(y1) and ˜ΩS(y2) are interchanged. At this point we use the external momenta
as probes. Each tree-diagram topology has a unique dependence on the external momenta,
and this allows us to isolate the tree diagram that we are after, the one in which the two
lines emanate from Ωd,n(x). After amputation, the result involves a linear combination of
cd,n, cd,n+1 and cd,n+2, and, since we already know that cd,n and cd,n+1 are O(δn), it follows
that the same is true for cd,n+2.

The structure of the induction step is now clear. Having established that cd,k = O(δn)
for n ≤ k ≤ n + ℓ − 1, we will in the next step consider ˜ΓEFT
d,n,ℓ(p1, . . . , pℓ). By Weinberg’s
theorem (and its generalizations), tree diagrams make the leading contribution. It is easily
seen that Ωπ,n cannot contribute to any tree diagram, and can thus be neglected.19 The case
of Ωτ,n is diﬀerent. For ℓ ≥ 2, there are tree diagrams that receive contributions from both
Ωd,n and Ωτ,n. However, due to the presence of two derivatives, in all cases the contribution
of Ωτ,n will be suppressed by a relative factor pi · pj ∼ ǫn. We are left with the tree diagrams
constructed only from Ωd,n. Once again using the diﬀerent momentum dependence we isolate
the tree diagram in which the ℓ lines all emanate from Ωd,n, and, ﬁnally, using the induction
hypothesis we conclude that cd,n+ℓ = O(δn).

For the generalization of Eq. (3.31) to the other leading-order potentials VM , Vπ and Vτ ,
as well as for a brief discussion of the potentials encountered at the next-to-leading order
and beyond, the reader is referred to App. B.

C. The leading-order lagrangian

Having established the power counting for the coeﬃcients of the invariant potentials, we
are done with the σ(x) source ﬁeld, and we set it equal to zero. The power counting (3.31)
allows us to replace VM , Vπ and Vτ by one in the leading-order lagrangian, and to truncate
Vd to a linear function, as in Eq. (1.6). The result is the following leading-order eﬀective
lagrangian,

where20

L = Lπ + Lτ + Lm + Ld ,

f 2
π
Lπ =
4
f 2
τ
Lτ =
2
Lm = −
Ld = f 2

f 2
πBπ
2

e2τ tr(∂µΣ†∂µΣ) ,

e2τ (∂µτ )2 ,

eyτ tr(cid:16)χ†Σ + Σ†χ(cid:17) ,

τ Bτ e4τ (c0 + c1τ ) .

(3.49)

(3.50)

(3.51)

(3.52)

(3.53)

In spite of the absence of the σ ﬁeld, the eﬀective action S =R d4xL(x) is invariant under

a diﬀerent scale transformation, where the dynamical eﬀective ﬁelds transform in the same

19 Note that ˜ΩS produces at least two pions.
20 In the rest of this paper we reserve the abbreviations cn and ˜cnk for cd,n and ˜cd,nk, respectively.

20

way as before, and, in addition,

c0 → c0 − c1 log λ ,
c1 → c1 ,

(3.54a)
(3.54b)

where we have promoted the coeﬃcients of Vd(τ ) to global spurions. [As shown in App. C,
this invariance can be generalized to the case that we set σ(x) = 0 in the lagrangian (3.15)
while keeping the potentials VI(τ ) completely arbitrary.]

There is one more issue to address. As already mentioned, the eﬀective theory must be
constructed using the renormalized chiral source. We will now derive the dilatation, or scale,
transformation of the renormalized chiral source ﬁeld χ. As we will see, this ﬁxes the value
of y in Eq. (3.21) in terms of the mass anomalous dimension.

We start by reexamining the bare microscopic partition function in the presence of the σ
ﬁeld. This partition function is in fact invariant under a family of scale transformations that
depend on a continuous parameter ζ. The transformation rules of the dynamical and source
bare ﬁelds, Eqs. (2.17a) though (2.17c), remain the same as before, whereas Eqs. (2.17d)
and (2.17e) are generalized to

σ(x) → σ(λx) + ζ log λ ,

µ → λ(1−ζ)µ ,
˜g0 → ˜g0 .

(3.55a)
(3.55b)
(3.55c)

The new, dimensionless, parameter ˜g0 is deﬁned in terms of the bare coupling g0 and the
renormalization scale µ, according to

˜g0 = µd/2−2g0 .

(3.56)

The invariance of the microscopic partition function under this family of scale transforma-
tions follows from the fact that

µeσ(x) → λµeσ(λx) ,

(3.57)

independent of ζ. The transformation (2.17) is recovered for the special case ζ = 1. Once
we set σ(x) = 0, the only consistent choice in Eq. (3.55) is ζ = 0. The entire scale transfor-
mation (3.57) is then “carried” by the renormalization scale µ, which transforms according
to its engineering dimension, µ → λµ. This is the ﬁrst ingredient we need.
Our ζ = 0 scale transformation has something in common with a renormalization group
transformation, because the renormalization scale µ changes under it in the same way. What
distinguishes this scale transformation from a renormalization-group transformation, is that,
in a renormalization-group transformation, the bare ﬁelds and parameters are kept invariant;
whereas under our scale transformation all bare ﬁelds and parameters transform according
to their engineering dimension.

In particular, the bare coupling g0 transforms non-trivially under our scale transforma-
tion, in accordance with the fact that it is dimensionful for d 6= 4. The dimensionless ˜g0 is
invariant. Because Z(g)g = µd/2−2g0 = ˜g0, it follows that the renormalized coupling g, too,
is held ﬁxed. Postponing momentarily which value of the renormalized coupling we should
choose, the very fact that it is kept invariant allows us to obtain the transformation rule of
the renormalized fermion mass m and chiral source χ(x), which is

χ(x) → λ1+γmχ(λx) .

21

(3.58)

We see that the scale transformation now involves both the engineering and the anomalous
dimension. The mass anomalous dimension is to be evaluated at the ﬁxed value of the
coupling, γm = γm(g), and we thus arrive at the simple power in Eq. (3.58) above. Requiring
compatibility of this new transformation rule with Eq. (3.21) we conclude that

y = 3 − γm .

(3.59)

The ﬁnal remaining question is then what value of γm, or, equivalently, g, we should
choose to ﬁx y in the eﬀective theory. By construction, the eﬀective low-energy theory is
f .21 The starting point of the expansion is therefore nf = n∗
an expansion in m and nf − n∗
f
(and m = 0). Let αc
∗ be the location of the infrared ﬁxed point, expressed in terms of the
’t Hooft coupling (3.12), as the conformal window is entered. Assuming that the beta and
gamma functions depend continuously on nf , at nf = n∗
f the right choice for the argument
of γm is α = αc

∗, and thus,

γm = γm(αc

∗) ≡ γ∗
m .

(3.60)

The physical picture behind this choice is that, when nf tends to n∗
f from below, chiral
symmetry breaking will set in at a scale where, ﬁrst, the beta function has become vanish-
ingly small, and second, the value of the renormalized coupling tends to αc
∗. Corrections to
Eq. (3.60) can be expanded in nf − n∗
f , and thus they are subsumed in the VI potentials
that fully account for the dependence of the low-energy theory on nf − n∗
f .
in the range (see Ref. [3] and references therein)

Numerical simulations ﬁnd that the mass anomalous dimension is, within error, always

suggesting that the actual value of y should be somewhere in the range

0 ≤ γm <

∼ 1 ,

2 <
∼ y ≤ 3 .

(3.61)

(3.62)

For theoretical work supporting a value of γm near the upper bound in Eq. (3.61) for walking
theories, see Refs. [33–35, 41, 42].

IV. THE EFFECTIVE THEORY AT TREE LEVEL

In this section we study the classical vacuum and the tree-level spectrum. When writing
down the leading-order lagrangian (3.49) we have already set σ(x) = 0. The last preparatory
step is to set the chiral source to its “expectation value” χ(x) = m. We will assume that
either m > 0, or else the chiral limit has been taken as m ց 0, so that, in all cases, the
classical pion vacuum is Σ = 1 or, equivalently, hΣi = Nf .
The vacuum of the dilatonic meson is determined by minimizing the classical potential

Vcl(τ ) = f 2

τ Bτ U(τ ) ,

(4.1a)

21 For this discussion, the expansion in 1/N only plays the role of allowing nf−n∗

f to tend to zero continuously.

22

where

f 2
π BπNf m

eyτ + Vd(τ )e4τ

f 2
τ Bτ
eyτ + Vd(τ )e4τ ,

U(τ ) = −
= −

M ≡

m
M
f 2
τ Bτ
f 2
πBπNf

.

(4.1b)

(4.1c)

Here M has the dimensions of mass. The rescaled potential U(τ ) is dimensionless, and is
O(1) in large-N counting. This follows from the scaling laws of the decay constants (see
Sec. III A) and the fact that Bπ and Bτ are themselves O(1) in large-N counting. The
latter property follows from the dependence of the pion and dilatonic meson masses on
these parameters (see Sec. IV B below), taking into account that meson masses are O(1) in
large-N counting. The pion mass is parametrically small in m, and dilatonic meson mass is
parametrically small in nf − n∗
f and m combined, while neither mass is parametrically small
in 1/N.22

The function Vd(τ ) is linear. If we make use of Eq. (3.25) and the power-counting hier-

archy (3.26) to keep only the O(nf − n∗

f ) term in its expansion, we get

Vd(τ ) = c0 + c1τ = ˜c00 + (nf − n∗

f )(˜c01 + ˜c11τ ) ,

(4.2)

where the low-energy constants ˜c00, ˜c01, and ˜c11 are independent of all three expansion
parameters in Eq. (3.9).

This section is organized as follows.

In Sec. IV A we study the classical ground state
approximating Vd by its leading constant term. We ﬁnd that this truncation does not give
rise to a consistent starting point for the diagrammatic expansion. In Sec. IV B we study
the linear Vd of Eq. (4.2). We establish that a stable classical ground state exists, and
derive expressions for the masses of the pion and of the dilatonic meson. In Sec. IV C we
study the dilatation current and its anomalous divergence at the level of the leading-order
eﬀective theory. Finally, in Sec. IV D we discuss the limit nf ր n∗
f , where the “phase
boundary” between chirally broken and conformal theories is approached from within the
chirally broken phase.

A. Constant Vd

An unusual feature of the classical potential (4.1) is that it contains both an O(1) term,
and terms which are O(δ). The ˜c00 term in Vd is O(1), while the terms linear in nf − n∗
f or
in m are O(δ) in the power counting of Sec. III A. If we consider the O(1) part all by itself,
the classical potential is U(τ ) = ˜c00 e4τ . Boundedness from below then requires ˜c00 > 0, for
which the classical vacuum corresponds to hτi → −∞, or, equivalently, heτi = 0.
In order to better understand this behavior, let us take into account also the mass term,
while still neglecting the linear term in Vd. In order to avoid unboundedness below we must

22 As discussed in Sec. III A, the Veneziano large-N limit is needed in order to enable us to treat nf − n∗

f as

a continuous parameter that can be made arbitrarily small.

23

now also require 0 < y < 4 (compare Eq. (3.62)). The classical potential then has a unique
minimum hτi = v given by

(4.3)

e(4−y)v =

ym
4˜c00M

.

Now v is ﬁnite for m > 0, while in the chiral limit v → −∞ is recovered.
The “runaway” solution (4.3) is not a consistent starting point for the low-energy expan-
sion. In the case at hand, the physical decay constants are the rescaled decay constants in
Eq. (3.33), except that v is the solution of Eq. (4.3). Since ev ∝ m
4−y , we see that the phys-
ical decay constants vanish in the chiral limit, which is unacceptable: by the very deﬁnition
of n∗
f exists in a chirally broken phase,
which means that in the chiral limit m → 0 (at ﬁxed nf < n∗
f ) there are exactly massless
pions, with a ﬁnite decay constant. Likewise, we expect fτ to remain ﬁnite, as there is no
reason that the dilatonic meson would cease to exist in the chiral limit.

f (Eq. (1.4)), every theory with Nf /Nc = nf < n∗

1

Equation (4.2) would naively suggest that the term linear in τ can be neglected in the
f| ≪ m/ΛIR. But, as we have seen, the outcome is inconsistent. In the next

range |nf − n∗
subsection, we turn our attention to the role of the linear term in Vd.

B. Linear Vd

In this subsection we show that the linear Vd of Eq. (4.2) gives rise to a well-behaved
classical solution. Since we will be considering a ﬁxed theory, the nf dependence of c0 and
c1 does not come into play. We will revisit the role of this nf dependence in Sec. IV D below.

We begin by considering the classical potential for m = 0, where

U(τ ) = e4τ (c0 + c1τ ) .

This potential is bounded from below provided that

c1 > 0 .

The saddle-point equation has a unique solution, the global minimum, given by

v = −1/4 − c0/c1 .

(4.4)

(4.5)

(4.6)

Although we are considering here a theory with ﬁxed nf , the question arises whether some-
thing might still go wrong if the selected theory corresponds to a very small nf −n∗
f , because,
according to Eq. (4.6), |v| will diverge if we keep selecting theories with ever smaller nf − n∗
f .
We will now show that this is not the case.

Consider shifting the dilatonic meson ﬁeld,

A glance at Eq. (4.2) reveals that this ﬁeld redeﬁnition induces a corresponding redeﬁnition
of c0,

τ → τ + ∆ .

(4.7)

We can use this “gauge freedom” to set c0 to any value we like, and we will thus set

c0 → c0 + c1∆ .

c0 = −c1/4 .

24

(4.8)

(4.9)

This corresponds to shifting the τ ﬁeld by ∆ = v, where v is given by Eq. (4.6), so that,
after the shift, the classical solution becomes

v = 0 .

(4.10)

The remaining dependence of the tree-level lagrangian (3.49) on ∆ is absorbed into a redef-
inition of the decay constants fπ and fτ , and the low-energy constants Bπ and Bτ . Since ∆
is by construction equal to the original value of v in Eq. (4.6), the values of the redeﬁned
f ’s and the B’s are those given in Eqs. (3.33) and (3.34). Unlike in Sec. IV A, here we
are working in the chiral limit, and the expansion around the chiral limit is therefore well
behaved.

It is easy to check that the solution v = 0 is stable. Indeed, if we add higher-order terms,

Vd generalizes to

Vd = c1(τ − 1/4) + τ 2f (τ ) ,

(4.11)
f )2), making it a
where we have used Eq. (4.9). According to Sec. III B, f (τ ) = O((nf − n∗
small correction for any given theory for which |nf − n∗
f| ≪ 1. First, one can easily check
that v = 0 remains a saddle point for any f (τ ). Moreover, since |f (τ )| ≪ c1, it follows that
v = 0 always remains a minimum. The shifted classical solution v = 0 is therefore a good
starting point for the diagrammatic low-energy expansion.

We next consider the tree-level masses. In the chiral limit, the pion is massless. The
tree-level mass mτ of the dilatonic meson is obtained from the second derivative of U(τ )
evaluated at the saddle point,

m2

τ = 4c1 ˆBτ .

(4.12)

In large-N counting, all meson masses are O(1). This implies that the low-energy constant
ˆBτ is O(1) in large-N counting (a similar reasoning applies to ˆBπ). Equation (4.12) also
f|1/2 ∼ δ1/2, which resembles the familiar behavior of the pion
implies that mτ ∼ |nf − n∗
mass in ordinary chiral perturbation theory, mπ ∼ m1/2.

Proceeding to the case m > 0, we cannot solve for v in closed form any more. The

classical vacuum is now the solution of

ym
Mc1

= h(v) ≡ 4ve(4−y)v .

(4.13)

We keep c0 = −c1/4 as in Eq. (4.9). M is now deﬁned in terms of the rescaled low-energy
parameters of Eqs. (3.33) and (3.34). In order for the classical potential (4.1) to remain
bounded below for m > 0, we need 0 < y < 4. As follows from Eq. (3.62), the actual value
of y appears to be comfortably within this range. Since both c1 and m are generically O(δ),
the left-hand side of Eq. (4.13) is O(1), and so is the solution v. The function h(v) is positive
if and only if v is. Furthermore, for v > 0, h(v) is a monotonically increasing function. Since
we are assuming m > 0, it follows that v itself is a monotonically increasing function of m.
Taking into account that the kinetic terms now get rescaled by e2v, the tree-level dilatonic

meson mass is given by

It is easy to see that mτ increases monotonically with v, and thus with m. The tree-level
pion mass is given by

τ = 4c1 ˆBτ e2v(1 + (4 − y)v) .
m2

(4.14)

m2

π = 2 ˆBπme(y−2)v =

25

8c1M ˆBπ

y

ve2v .

(4.15)

From the rightmost expression we learn that mπ, too, is monotonically increasing with v,
and thus with m.

this ratio, obtaining

If we consider the limit where m/(Mc1) ≪ 1, we can solve Eq. (4.13) to ﬁrst order in
(4.16)

v =

.

ym
4Mc1

The correction to the dilatonic meson mass is

m2
τ

m2

τ (m = 0)

= 1 + (6 − y)v ,

(4.17)

whereas the pion mass is given by

(4.18)
This is the familiar result from ordinary chiral perturbation theory. However, when m/M ∼
c1, the leading-order dependence of m2
π on the quark mass, given by Eq. (4.15), is more
complicated, and not linear.

m2

π = 2 ˆBπm .

C. Dilatation current in the leading-order eﬀective theory

In this subsection we explore the basic properties of the dilatation current and its diver-
gence to leading order in the eﬀective theory. The actual derivation of the dilatation current
is relegated to App. D. The result can be expressed as (see Eq. (D5))

Sµ = xνΘµν = xν(Tµν + Kµν/3) ,

(4.19)

where Tµν and Θµν are, respectively, the canonical and improved energy-momentum tensors
of the eﬀective theory at the leading order.23

As expected, Sµ contains a term linear in the dilatonic meson ﬁeld. Its origin is in the

improvement term

Kµν =

f 2
τ
2

(δµν ✷ − ∂µ∂ν)e2τ

= fτ ev(δµν ✷ − ∂µ∂ν)˜τ + · · · .

where on the second line we have used Eq. (3.32). Plugging this into Eq. (4.19) gives

Sµ = fτ ev∂µ˜τ + · · · ,

(4.20)

(4.21)

showing that the leading-order decay constant of the dilatonic meson is fτ ev. [Note that, ac-
cording to Eq. (D2a), the oﬀ-shell divergence ∂µSµ contains ∂µ(xνKµν/3) = (∂µxν)Kµν/3 =
Kµµ/3 = (f 2

τ /2)✷e2τ , which is equivalent to Eq. (4.21).]

The anomalous conservation equation may be read oﬀ from Eqs. (D2) and (D3). Using

also Eqs. (3.59) and (3.60), it takes the form

∂µSµ = c1f 2

τ Bτ e4τ + (1 + γ∗
m)

f 2
πBπm

2

eyτ tr(Σ + Σ†) .

(4.22)

23 Since the ﬁelds of the eﬀective theory are Lorentz scalars, the existence of an improvement term is to be

expected [28].

26

If we now introduce

ψψ(EFT) ≡

f 2
π Bπ
2

= −

eyτ tr(Σ + Σ†) ,

∂L
∂S

with L given by Eq. (3.49), we may rewrite Eq. (4.22) as

∂µSµ = c1f 2

τ Bτ e4τ − (1 + γ∗

m)mψψ(EFT) .

A comparison to the microscopic theory (Sec. II A) leads to the identiﬁcation

˜βF 2(EFT) = −c1f 2

τ Bτ e4τ .

(4.23)

(4.24)

(4.25)

If we take the expectation value of Eq. (4.25), and demand consistency with the microscopic
theory, we obtain

τ Bτ e4v .

˜βhF 2i = −c1f 2

(4.26)
Since in the eﬀective theory we were led to require that c1 > 0, and we have that ˜β < 0, it
follows that hF 2i > 0, for nf ∼< n∗
f . We recall that F 2 can mix with the identity operator.
Diﬀerent prescriptions to subtract the identity part of hF 2i can vary, and, as a result, even
the sign of the subtracted hF 2i is not uniquely deﬁned. Interestingly, the eﬀective theory
appears to provide a natural framework to deﬁne the (subtracted) expectation value hF 2i,
which, as we have seen, implies that it is positive.
Finally, another interesting consequence is that, in the chiral limit, we may use Eq. (4.12)

(as well as (3.33) and (3.34)) to rewrite Eq. (4.26) as

− 4 ˜βhF 2i = ˆf 2
This result closely resembles the GMOR relation24

τ m2

τ .

−

2m

Nf (cid:10)ψψ(cid:11) = ˆf 2

πm2

π ,

(4.27)

(4.28)

which is reproduced using Eqs. (4.18) and (4.23). The existence of a GMOR-like relation
for the dilatonic meson is not entirely obvious. The original GMOR relation is derived from
the partial conservation of the axial current by making use of the fact that the pion pole
is isolated from the 3-pion cut. By contrast, for any ﬁnite Nc and Nf , we expect that the
mass of the dilatonic meson will remain non-zero in the chiral limit. Therefore, for m = 0
the dilatonic meson is unstable, and can decay into two pions. The τ → ππ vertex comes
from expanding the pion kinetic term (3.50), and is given by ∼ f −1
τ tr(∂µπ∂µπ), showing
that f −1

τ plays the role of the coupling constant. The resulting decay rate satisﬁes

τ

Γτ
mτ ∼

τ N 2
m2
f
τ ∼
ˆf 2

m2
τ
IR ∼ |nf − n∗
f| ,
Λ2

(4.29)

where in the ﬁrst equality we have used that the number of pions is ∼ N 2
f . We see that,
thanks to the derivative interaction of the pions in the chiral limit, the ratio Γτ /mτ is
parametrically small, and so the dilatonic meson is a narrow resonance for nf close to n∗
f .

24 Note that ψψ is summed over ﬂavors.

27

f

D. The limit nf ր n∗
In the previous subsections we have studied the tree-level structure of a single theory
with speciﬁc values of Nc and Nf , and, thus, a ﬁxed value of nf . In this subsection, we
explore the limit nf ր n∗
f , which necessarily involves the comparison of diﬀerent theories.
Having in mind that we will now be varying nf requires us to revisit two elements of
the discussion of Sec. IV B. First, reinstating the nf dependence (and remembering that we
always consider nf < n∗

f ) the bound (4.5) reads

˜c11 < 0 .

(4.30)

Second, in Sec. IV B, the “gauge freedom” of shifting the τ ﬁeld has allowed us to set its
expectation value to zero in the chiral limit. In order to facilitate the comparison of diﬀerent
theories we may still shift the τ ﬁeld, but the shift must now be uniform across these theories,
that is, independent of nf . Parametrically, this shift is O(1), so that it does not mix diﬀerent
orders in the expansion in nf − n∗
f . Comparing Eqs. (4.2) and (4.8), we see that the eﬀect
of an allowed shift is now

˜c00 → ˜c00 ,
˜c01 → ˜c01 + ˜c11∆ .

(4.31a)
(4.31b)

It follows that the value of the low-energy constant ˜c01 is arbitrary. We will henceforth
use the freedom to perform a uniform shift to set ˜c01 = 0. By contrast, the leading-order
coeﬃcient ˜c00 is invariant under the shift, and thus, it can have physical consequences.

The role of ˜c00 is best illustrated by considering a concrete example. Starting from the

rescalings in Eqs. (3.33) and (3.34), we consider the dimensionless ratio25

m ˆBπ
ˆf 2
π

=

mBπ
f 2
π

e−(1+γ ∗

m)v ,

(4.32)

where we have used Eqs. (3.59) and (3.60) to trade y with the mass anomalous dimension
γ∗
m at the sill of the conformal window, Eq. (3.60). The left-hand side of Eq. (4.32) can be
determined in terms of the pion mass close to the chiral limit and the (physical) pion decay
constant

m ˆBπ
ˆf 2
π

m2
π
2 ˆf 2
π

=

,

(4.33)

where we have used Eq. (4.18). By plugging Eq. (4.2) into Eq. (4.6), we reexpress the
classical solution as

v = −

1
4 −

˜c00

˜c11(nf − n∗
f )

,

(4.34)

where we have used the new “gauge choice” ˜c01 = 0. We see that the dimensionless ratio
m2
π depends (exponentially) on ˜c00/˜c11. If we measure this ratio for suﬃciently many

π/ ˆf 2

25 Here we are, in eﬀect, using the reference infrared scale ΛIR = 4π ˆfπN

(compare Eq. (3.8)). The
ratio (4.32) allows us to track the nf dependence at ﬁxed N . The N -dependence can easily be divided
out for the purpose of comparing theories with diﬀerent N .

−1/2
c

28

walking theories (and close enough to the chiral limit), we will be able to extract from it the
value of

=

Bτ ˜c00
Bτ ˜c11

˜c00
˜c11

.

(4.35)

A linearly independent relation is obtained by measuring the mass of the dilatonic meson,
which, in the present context, becomes (compare Eq. (4.12))

m2
τ = 4˜c11(nf − n∗

f )Bτ e2v .

(4.36)

Using both measurements for a series of theories in the limit of small nf − n∗
should thus be able to separately determined ˜c00Bτ and ˜c11Bτ .

f and m, we

A technical comment is that, since the leading-order lagrangian depends on Bτ Vd, we only
have access to products such as cnBτ or ˜cnkBτ . This behavior is familiar from the standard
chiral lagrangian, where only the product mBπ has an invariant meaning. In both cases, the
separate determination of the B parameter requires an additional extraneous prescription.

Returning to Eq. (4.34) we ﬁnd in the limit nf ր n∗

f the asymptotic behavior

v →( −∞ ,
+∞ ,

˜c00 > 0 ,
˜c00 < 0 .

(4.37)

We conclude that ˆfπ(nf ), ˆfτ (nf ) and ˆBτ (nf ) vanish in this limit when ˜c00 > 0, or, alter-
natively, blow up when ˜c00 < 0.26 Intuitively, the correct behavior is that all dimensionful
low-energy parameters will vanish as the conformal window is approached. This would im-
ply that the “phase boundary” between chirally broken and conformal theories is smooth.
We thus speculate that the correct sign is ˜c00 > 0. However, this is merely a speculation.
The reason is that when we look at, e.g., the nf dependence of ˆfπ, we are comparing the
pion decay constants of diﬀerent theories. Unless we have a common dimensionful reference
scale, such a comparison is meaningless. Taking a low-energy parameter, such as fπ, as the
common reference scale would only work if we have a way to determine fπ itself, and not
just ˆfπ, from the microscopic theory. This requires insight into the microscopic theory not
provided by the low-energy eﬀective theory.

In order to avoid confusion, we note that in Sec. IV A we have considered a ﬁxed theory,
and the conclusion that the classical solution (4.3) is not a consistent starting point followed
from the requirement that the chiral limit of that particular theory must not be singular.
Once we take into account the linear term in Vd, the sign of ˜c00 becomes unconstrained, and
we need instead the constraint (4.5), or, equivalently, (4.30).

The description in terms of the eﬀective low-energy theory developed in this paper neces-
sarily breaks down inside the conformal window. The reason is that meson states no longer
exist in the chiral limit, where, instead, all correlation functions obey power laws with non-
trivial exponents. In view of Eq. (4.30), the product c1 = ˜c11(nf − n∗
f ) will be negative for
nf > n∗
f , and, as a result, the tree-level potential will become unbounded from below. It is
reassuring to see that, through this classical behavior, the low-energy theory “knows” that
it must cease to be valid as the conformal window is entered.

To conclude this section, we consider another dimensionless ratio, which, through the
GMOR relation, directly inﬂuences the pion mass. This is the value of the ﬂavor-singlet

26 The same conclusion applies to ˆBπ(nf ) provided that γ ∗

m < 1.

29

fermion condensate, expressed in units of the pion decay constant,

hψψi
ˆf 3
π

Bπ
fπ

= −

e−γ ∗

mv .

(4.38)

m is expected to be positive, too), we have that e−γ ∗

mv > 1.
If indeed ˜c00 is positive (and since γ∗
This result then predicts a condensate enhancement that depends on the mass anomalous
dimension, as well as, through Eq. (4.34), on the low-energy constants ˜c00 and ˜c11. While
condensate enhancement was predicted long ago within the gap-equation treatment [32–35,
39, 41], here we obtain it as a quantitative prediction within the framework of a systematic,
low-energy expansion, provided that ˜c00 > 0.

V.

EFFECTIVE FIELD THEORY AT ONE LOOP

In this section we study the eﬀective theory at the next-to-leading order (NLO). In
Sec. V A we write down the NLO lagrangian. Then, as an example, we work out in Sec. V B
the one-loop eﬀective potential from a dilatonic meson loop, and conﬁrm that the NLO
lagrangian contains the necessary counterterms to renormalize it.

A. Next to leading order lagrangian

Like the standard chiral lagrangian, our low-energy expansion involves a derivative ex-
pansion, as well as an expansion in the fermion mass m, or, more generally, in the chiral
source χ. As we will shortly see, the systematic expansion in ∂µ and χ provides the main
organizing principle for the successively higher orders in the eﬀective theory.

Our setup contains two additional small parameters: 1/N, and nf − n∗

f . The systematic
expansion in nf − n∗
f is realized in a very simple way: each operator that we encounter while
expanding in ∂µ and χ will be multiplied by its own invariant potential VI(τ − σ), which,
after setting σ = 0, reduces to VI(τ ). The invariance property of these potentials under the
dilatation (3.20b), namely, the transformation rule VI(τ (x)) → VI(τ (λx)), is maintained by
promoting the power-series coeﬃcients of the potentials to (global) spurions, whose trans-
formation properties are derived in App. C. At each order in the expansion deﬁned by the
power counting of Sec. III A the potentials VI(τ ) can be truncated consistent with that order,
and the eﬀective theory thus contains a ﬁnite number of low-energy constants.

As for 1/N, the reason why we invoke the Veneziano limit is to justify the treatment of
nf − n∗
f as a continuous parameter. The only explicit N-dependence is that the Σ ﬁeld takes
values in SU(Nf ). In addition, the decay constants scale with N, as discussed in Sec. III A.
The parameter 1/N does not play any direct role in organizing the eﬀective lagrangian.

Before we turn to the construction of the NLO lagrangian, let us reconsider the freedom
to shift the τ ﬁeld and its eﬀect on the LO lagrangian. In order to develop the low-energy
expansion of a given theory, in this section we will choose to shift the τ ﬁeld by ∆ =
−˜c00/(˜c11(nf − n∗
f )). This shift sets ˜c00 = 0, thereby eliminating the only O(1) term present
in the LO lagrangian, and the entire LO lagrangian becomes O(δ). This new “gauge choice”
leaves ˜c01 intact. Recall that, in Sec. IV D, we made use of an nf -independent shift to argue
that the value of ˜c01 is unphysical. Nevertheless, here it is advantageous to keep it free,
because this manifestly maintains dilatation invariance of the O(nf − n∗
f ) part of Vd (see
Eq. (4.2) and App. C).

30

The classical vacuum is now given by v = −1/4 − ˜c01/˜c11, which is O(1), and hence
any factors of ev which arise from the expansion of the τ ﬁeld, Eq. (3.32), are O(1) too.27
The classical solution will now be modiﬁed by higher-order terms of the kind studied in
Eq. (4.11). But the corresponding change in v will be O(nf − n∗
f ), so that the systematic
nature of the low-energy expansion is respected.

The NLO lagrangian consists of four kinds of operators. The ﬁrst kind comes from picking
the O(δ2) terms from the LO lagrangian of Eq. (3.15) while setting σ = 0. This amounts to
picking the terms (nf−n∗
f )(˜cI,01+˜cI,11τ ) from the expansions of VM , Vπ and Vτ , because these
potentials multiply operators that are O(δ) by themselves. The role of Vd is again special,
because ˜Ld is the only part of the eﬀective theory which involves no small parameters other
than nf − n∗

f . The O(δ2) terms coming from Vd give rise to the NLO operators

f )2f 2
Qd
1 = ˜c02 (nf − n∗
Qd
f )2f 2
2 = ˜c12τ (nf − n∗
Qd
3 = ˜c22(τ 2/2)(nf − n∗

τ Bτ e4τ ,
τ Bτ e4τ ,
f )2f 2

τ Bτ e4τ .

(5.1a)

(5.1b)

(5.1c)

The dilatation transformation properties of the low-energy constants ˜cnk, given in App. C,
ensure that the spacetime integral of Qd

3 is invariant.

1 + Qd

2 + Qd

The remaining terms in the NLO lagrangian arise from the expansion in ∂µ and χ, which
we will refer to as the “chiral expansion.” Since these terms are already O(δ2) on account
of their dependence on derivatives and on the chiral source χ, it follows that the invariant
potentials multiplying all these terms may be set equal to 1. At the next-to-next to leading
f )2) parts of VM ,
order (NNLO), we will need the O((nf − n∗
Vπ and Vτ , and the O(nf − n∗
f ) parts of invariant potentials that multiply NLO operators
arising from the chiral expansion.

f )3) part of Vd, the O((nf − n∗

The ﬁrst kind of chiral-expansion NLO operators comes in one-to-one correspondence

with the NLO operators of standard chiral perturbation theory [18]. Each NLO operator

˜Qi = ˜Qi(Σ, χ, ∂µ) ,

appears in the lagrangian in the form

Qπ

i = e4τ ˜Qi(Σ, e(y−4)τ χ, e−τ ∂µ) .

(5.2)

(5.3)

The NLO action constructed from the operators Qπ
is dilatation invariant. A second set of
i
chiral-expansion NLO operators consists of operators that depend on the dilatonic meson
ﬁeld only. There are three of them,28

Qτ
Qτ
Qτ

1 = [(∂µτ )2]2 ,
2 = (✷τ )2 ,
3 = ✷τ (∂µτ )2 .

(5.4a)
(5.4b)
(5.4c)

27 This reduces to the solution v = 0 of Eq. (4.10) in the special case that ˜c01 = −˜c11/4.
28 We omit the low-energy constants that multiply each operator in Eqs. (5.4) and (5.5).

31

Finally, there are operators that depend on both Σ and derivatives of τ ,

1 = ∂µτ ∂ντ tr(∂µΣ†∂νΣ) ,
2 = (∂µτ )2 tr(∂νΣ†∂νΣ) ,
3 = ✷τ tr(∂νΣ†∂νΣ) ,

Qmix
Qmix
Qmix
Qmix

4 = e(y−2)τ (∂µτ )2 tr(cid:16)χ†Σ + Σ†χ(cid:17) ,
✷τ tr(cid:16)χ†Σ + Σ†χ(cid:17) .

5 = e(y−2)τ

Qmix

(5.5a)
(5.5b)
(5.5c)

(5.5d)

(5.5e)

B. Eﬀective potential at NLO

In this subsection we calculate, as an example, the one-loop eﬀective potential coming
from a dilatonic meson ﬁeld in the loop.29 As in the previous subsection, we use the τ shift
to set ˜c00 = 0 while leaving ˜c01 free. The easiest way to obtain the eﬀective potential is
via the background ﬁeld method. Instead of a constant classical vacuum v, we introduce a
background ﬁeld u(x), assumed to be slowly varying, and replace Eq. (3.32) by

τ (x) = u(x) + ˜τ (x)/fτ ,

(5.6)

where, as before, ˜τ (x) is the quantum part.30 We will be applying an adiabatic approxima-
tion, where derivatives of the background ﬁeld are neglected. The result of the calculation
is a functional of the background ﬁeld u(x), in which we are eventually to replace u(x) by
the full ﬁeld τ (x).

We start by expanding S to quadratic order in ˜τ ,

S(2) =

µd−4f 2
τ

2

where now (compare Eq. (4.1))

Z ddx (cid:0)e2u(∂µ˜τ )2 + V ′′(u)˜τ 2(cid:1) ,
eyu tr(cid:16)χ†Σ + Σ†χ(cid:17) ,

f 2
πBπ
2f 2
τ

V(u) = Bτ Vd(u)e4u −

and, integrating over ˜τ , we ﬁnd
ddp

1

V1 =

(2π)d (cid:0)e2up2 + V ′′(u)(cid:1)−α(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)α=0

d
2

∂

ddp

1
2
1
2

2Z
= −

(2π)d log(cid:0)e2up2 + V ′′(u)(cid:1)
∂αZ
Γ(− d
2)
(4π)d/2 (cid:0)e−2uV ′′(u)(cid:1)
64π2 (cid:0)e−2uV ′′(u)(cid:1)2
= −
×(cid:18) 2
4 − d − γ +

= −

1

3

2 − log(cid:18)e−2uV ′′(u)

4πµ2 (cid:19) + O(d − 4)(cid:19) .

(5.7)

(5.8)

(5.9a)

(5.9b)

(5.9c)

(5.9d)

29 We did not calculate the contribution to the eﬀective potential coming from a pion loop, for which the

power counting should work in the usual way.

30 Because the classical background is not constant, we normalize the quantum part only by the original fτ .

32

We conﬁrmed this result by a diagrammatic calculation, see App. E. The eﬀective potential
is thus given by Eq. (5.9d) with the replacement u(x) → τ (x).
The divergence of the eﬀective potential is proportional to (e−2τV ′′(τ ))2. It is straight-
forward to check that the counterterms needed to remove it are a linear combination of the
NLO operators of Sec. V A. As an example, if we set χ = 0 then the required counterterms
are the three NLO operators in Eq. (5.1). This calculation provides a non-trivial check of
the constraints that follow from the power counting and from the symmetries of the eﬀective
theory.

VI. DISCUSSION

We begin this concluding section with a summary of the main technical ingredients of
our work. We have proposed a low-energy eﬀective action that accommodates dilatation
symmetry into the framework of the chiral lagrangian. Previously, the chiral lagrangian
was extended to accommodate the anomalous U(1)A symmetry. What these two extensions
have in common is that the new symmetry, be it dilatations or U(1) axial transformations,
is abelian. In both cases, the dependence of the low-energy theory on the singlet dynamical
ﬁeld associated with the abelian symmetry is virtually unconstrained at the algebraic level.
For the low-energy theory to have any predictive power, we must be able to establish a
power-counting hierarchy that will suppress interactions with increasingly large number of
singlet particles.

For the U(1)A symmetry, the needed hierarchy was established in usual large-Nc limit,
in which the axial anomaly vanishes [18, 26]. The low-energy expansion is then a double
expansion: in the fermion mass m, and in 1/Nc. In the case of dilatations, we are able to
propose a suitable starting point only for fermions in the fundamental representation. The
low-energy expansion involves a triple limit: the chiral limit m → 0; the Veneziano large-N
limit in which the ratio nf = Nf /Nc eﬀectively becomes a continuous parameter; and the
limit in which nf approaches the sill of the conformal window n∗

f from below.

The main hypothesis underlying our derivation is that, when we increase both Nc and
Nf such that nf tends to n∗
f from within the chirally broken phase, the trace of the energy-
momentum tensor in the chiral limit tends to zero when probed at the scale at which
spontaneous chiral symmetry breaking sets in. This hypothesis is compatible with the notion
of a smooth “conformal phase transition,” and with the existence of an infrared ﬁxed-point
as the conformal window is entered. While the low-energy theory is not directly sensitive
to the ﬁxed-point value of the coupling, it depend explicitly on the corresponding value of
mass anomalous dimension.

For nf ր n∗

f , conservation of the dilatation current in the chiral limit is in eﬀect recovered.
However, instead of the dilatonic meson becoming a true Nambu-Goldstone boson, this
limit is at the edge of the region of validity of the eﬀective theory. The eﬀective theory
breaks down through a diverging vacuum expectation value v = hτi at nf = n∗
f , leading
to unphysical values of the decay constants fπ and fτ . For nf > n∗
f , the classical potential
of the eﬀective theory becomes unbounded from below. This singular behavior suggests
that pions cease to exist as the conformal window is entered, consistent with the absence of
chiral symmetry breaking inside the conformal window. It also suggests the absence of a true
Nambu-Goldstone boson for dilatation symmetry inside the conformal window. However,
we emphasize that as the eﬀective theory breaks down at the conformal sill, it does not tell
us anything about the physics on the other side of the sill.

33

An external dilaton source σ(x) which, in the microscopic theory, is coupled to the trace
anomaly, i.e., to the quantum part of the operatorial trace of the energy-momentum tensor,
communicates information about the operatorial trace to the eﬀective theory. By matching
σ-dependent correlation functions between the microscopic and the eﬀective theory we were
able to establish the desired power-counting hierarchy. Successive powers of τ − σ in the
expansion of the invariant potentials VI(τ − σ) are suppressed by equal powers of nf − n∗
f .
In comparison to the low-energy framework that includes the U(1)A symmetry, a simpli-
ﬁcation that occurs in our case is that all relevant currents are renormalization-group invari-
ant. This includes the energy-momentum tensor, the dilatation current, and the non-singlet
axial currents. A related choice we have made is that we opted to avoid the introduction
of external gauge ﬁelds of any kind. In particular, we derived the dilatation current in the
eﬀective theory directly using the Noether procedure.

In the microscopic theory, we have avoided multiple operator insertions at coinciding
points. As a result, we did not probe any c-number trace anomalies. In ﬂat space, these
c-number anomalies reduce to four-derivative terms. Whether the four-derivative terms of
the next-to-leading order lagrangian may be constrained via matching conditions similar to
those of Refs. [43, 44] we leave as an open question. Studying this question requires the
promotion of the global dilatation symmetry to local Weyl invariance, which involves the
introduction of the metric tensor [45], and perhaps also Weyl gauging [46].

The anomalous conservation law of the dilatation current in the eﬀective theory suggests
that, up to a suitable proportionality constant, the ﬁeld strength operator of the microscopic
theory, F 2, is represented in the low-energy theory by e4τ , where τ is the dilatonic meson
ﬁeld. Now, the classical potential of the eﬀective theory is e4τ (c0 + c1τ ) in the chiral limit.
If we make use of the above identiﬁcation, it takes the form F 2(c0 + (c1/4) log F 2). This
eﬀective lagrangian was proposed long ago as a phenomenological lagrangian for Yang-Mills
theory [47, 48]. The diﬀerence is that, in our case, the classical potential arises in an eﬀective
theory that provides a systematic low-energy expansion of gauge theories near (but below)
the bottom of the conformal window.

Among the notable predictions of the tree-level eﬀective theory is the result that the
masses of both the dilatonic meson and the pion are monotonically increasing with the
fermion mass m. In the region where mπ ∼ mτ , the dependence of the pion mass on m is
more complicated than the standard GMOR relation. We have also derived a GMOR-like
relation for the dilatonic meson in the chiral limit. The reason why such a relation exists,
in spite of the fact that the dilatonic meson can decay into two pions, is that the pions
have a derivative coupling in the chiral limit, and, as a result, the ratio of the dilatonic
meson’s decay rate to its mass tends to zero when nf tends to n∗
f . Finally, we obtained
a quantitative prediction for the enhancement of the fermion condensate,31 which, at the
leading order, depends on the mass anomalous dimension at the sill of the conformal window,
as well as on two other low-energy constants.

Returning to the lattice results that have motivated this work, any given theory which
exhibits a light ﬂavor-singlet scalar meson has speciﬁc numbers of colors Nc and ﬂavors Nf .
For fermions in the fundamental representation, we expect that one should be able to choose
suitably large values of Nc and Nf , so that our low-energy expansion is valid. Of course,
one may hope that the low-energy expansion will provide a good approximation already at
relatively low values of Nc and Nf . Whether or not this is true can in principle be tested

31 See, however, the discussion of the sign of ˜c00 in Sec. IV D.

34

by comparing numerical results of concrete models with the predictions of the low-energy
theory.

For fermions in any higher representation [11], and physical, integer values of Nc and
Nf , there is no large-N limit which keeps us in the chirally broken phase, while, at the
same time, achieving a vanishingly small trace anomaly at the infrared scale of the theory.
We note, however, that n∗
f is a parameter of the low-energy theory. Thus, one might still
attempt to use the low-energy expansion, treating n∗
f as a real parameter whose value is to
be determined from ﬁtting lattice data.

The GMOR-like relation for the dilatonic meson gives rise to a deﬁnition of the expec-
tation value hF 2i within the low-energy theory. The deﬁnition of this expectation value in
the microscopic theory is ambiguous, because of the power-divergent mixing of F 2 with the
identity operator; we leave the implications of a deﬁnition through the low-energy theory
as an open question. For related discussions in the context of a lattice deﬁnition of the
energy-momentum tensor, see, e.g., Refs. [49, 50]. The behavior of hF 2i also plays a role in
the ﬁnite-temperature phase transition, see for example Refs. [39, 51].

Acknowledgments

We thank Adam Schwimmer and Ben Svetitsky for discussions. We also thank the Centro
de Ciencias de Benasque Pedro Pascual, where this work was started, for hospitality. MG
is supported in part by the US Department of Energy, and YS is supported by the Israel
Science Foundation under grant no. 449/13.

Appendix A: Two-loop beta function in the Veneziano limit

In terms of an ’t Hooft coupling with a slightly diﬀerent normalization (compare

Eq. (3.12))

˜α = g2Nc/(16π2) ,

(A1)

the two-loop beta function for Nf Dirac fermions in the fundamental representation takes
the form

β( ˜α) ≡

∂ ˜α

∂ log µ

= −b1 ˜α2 − b2 ˜α3 ,
b1 = 11/3 − 2nf /3 ,
b2 = 34/3 − nf (13/3 − 1/N 2

c ) ,

(A2a)

(A2b)
(A2c)

where nf was deﬁned in Eq. (1.1). In the Veneziano limit we may drop the last term on the
right-hand side of Eq. (A2c). In the two-loop approximation, an IRFP exists for nf values
in the following range

For nf > 5.5, asymptotic freedom is lost. The two-loop prediction for the value of the IRFP
is

Of course, Eq. (A4) is not reliable when nf is close to 34/13. Moreover, the two-loop
prediction is oblivious to the possible onset of spontaneous chiral symmetry breaking. As

2.61 ≃ 34/13 < nf < 5.5 .

˜α∗(nf ) = (11 − 2nf )/(13nf − 34) .

(A3)

(A4)

35

discussed in Sec. III A, for walking theories we may combine the gap equation and the two-
loop beta function to postulate that chiral symmetry breaking sets in when the running
coupling reaches αc, provided that αc < α∗. The critical value of the rescaled coupling is
˜αc = αc/(4π) = 1/6. Substituting this value into Eq. (A2) provides a model estimate for
Eq. (3.14) (dividing out [F 2]), given by

β( ˜αc) = β(1/6) =

25
648

(nf − 4) ,

(A5)

which corresponds to n∗
window in the Veneziano limit is n∗

f = 4 < nf < 5.5.

f = 4 and η = 1. In other words, the estimated range of the conformal

Appendix B: Details of the inductive proof

In this appendix we complete the proof of Eq. (3.31) by considering the remaining leading-
order potentials VM , Vπ and Vτ . We will also brieﬂy discuss the potentials encountered at
the next-to-leading order and beyond.

We start with VM . In order to probe this potential we add to the n diﬀerentiations with
respect to σ one more diﬀerentiation with respect to the scalar source S, all at the same
spacetime point. We obtain

ΓEFT
M,n = hΩM,n(x) + ΩM,0(x) (Ωd,n(x) + Ωπ,n(x) + Ωτ,n(x))i ,

where

ΩM,n =

1
2Nf

V (n)
M (τ ) eyτ tr(Σ + Σ†) .

(B1)

(B2)

Note that ΩM,0 = ΩS/Nf . The additional normalization factor of 1/Nf relative to Eq. (3.47)
is introduced in order that ΓEFT
M,n will be O(1) in large-N counting. The ΩM,n term in Eq. (B1)
is obtained by applying all σ-derivatives to VM . The other term is obtained when only the
S diﬀerentiation is applied to ˜Lm, while the σ-derivatives are applied to some other term in
the lagrangian.
For the parameter range (3.44) we may neglect all contributions of Ωπ,n and Ωτ,n relative
to the leading contribution of Ωd,n, for the same reasons as in Sec. III B. As for Ωd,n itself, at
this point we have already established that Vd satisﬁes the power-counting hierarchy (3.31).
Therefore, the contribution coming from ΩM,n must also be O(δn). It is easily seen that this
requires cM,n = O(δn). The proof that cM,k = O(δn) for k > n works in the same way as in
Sec. III B, by adding k − n external τ legs.
The next potential to consider is Vπ. Probing it requires an operator that can serve as an
interpolating ﬁeld for a pion state, which may be obtained by diﬀerentiating with respect
to the pseudoscalar source P. Keeping the (suppressed) ﬂavor indices open, and using the
same normalization factor as in Eq. (3.47), we have

ΩP = −
i
4

∂ ˜L
∂P

1
2 ˆf 2
ˆBπ
π
VM (τ ) eyτ (Σ† − Σ)

=
= VM (τ ) eyτ (π/ ˆfπ + · · · ) .

36

(B3)

The basic correlation function we now consider involves the n diﬀerentiations with respect
to σ(x), plus two diﬀerentiations with respect to P at spacetime points which are far apart.
We thus start by considering ˜ΓEFT

π,n (q1, q2) which is the Fourier transform of

ΓEFT

π,n (x, z1, z2) =D(cid:16)Ωd,n(x) + Ωπ,n(x) + Ωτ,n(x)(cid:17) ΩP(z1) ΩP(z2)E .

(B4)

Once again we may ignore Ωd,n, for which we have already proved Eq. (3.31). The only way
to construct a tree diagram out of the remaining terms is to connect Ωπ,n by two pion lines
to ΩP (z1) and ΩP (z2) (with a spacetime derivative acting on each line, see Eq. (3.40)). Since
Weinberg’s theorem ensures that loop diagrams are subleading, we conclude that the leading
contribution to ˜ΓEFT
π,n (q1, q2) is proportional to cπ,n, implying that cπ,n satisﬁes Eq. (3.31). As
usual, in order to probe cπ,k for k > n we add k − n additional τ legs generated by insertions
of ˜ΩS.
d,n,2(p1, p2) (see
Eq. (3.48)). The contribution of Ωπ,n can be dropped since it will necessarily involve loops.
Based on its momentum dependence, we isolate the tree diagram in which Ωd,n + Ωτ,n is
connected by a τ line to each of the two insertions of ˜ΩS . After amputation, the leading-order
result is proportional to

Finally we consider Vτ . The ﬁrst correlation function we consider is ˜ΓEFT

8 ˆBτ cd,n + p1 · p2 cτ,n ,

(B5)

(where, in the case of Ωd,n, the two powers of τ are obtained by expanding e4τ to second
order). We may now use the momentum dependence once more to isolate the cτ,n term,
which must therefore satisfy Eq. (3.31). The generalization to cτ,k for k > n is similar.

Invariant potentials VI(τ − σ) occur not only at the leading order, but also at all higher
orders. Every higher-order term that arises from what we have referred to in Sec. V A as the
chiral expansion will be multiplied by its own invariant potential. The proof of Eq. (3.31)
generalizes to all these potentials, too.

A concrete example illustrates how this works. Consider once again ˜ΓEFT

d,n,2(p1, p2), which
we have used in order to study the n-th order term in the potential Vτ occurring in the
leading-order lagrangian. We have isolated the relevant (amputated) tree diagram, and
calculated it up to second order in the external momenta, see Eq. (B5). If we extend the
calculation of this correlation function to O(p4), there will be two new kinds of contributions.
First, there will be one-loop diagrams involving the LO vertices, and thus the LO potentials.
An additional O(p4) contribution will come from the NLO operator Qτ
2 of Eq. (5.4b), which
serves as a counterterm. Since we already know that the LO potentials satisfy Eq. (3.31),
we can now isolate the contribution of Qτ
2, and thus, prove that the invariant potential by
which Qτ
2 is multiplied must satisfy Eq. (3.31) too. When we consider more external τ legs,
the other two NLO operators in Eq. (5.4) will in general contribute as well. But, the fact
that these operators are linearly independent means that we must always be able to isolate
the contribution of each one of them, and thus, enforce the power-counting hierarchy on the
corresponding invariant potential.

Appendix C: Transformation properties of the potentials VI (τ )

Here we show that the invariance of a potential V (τ − σ) under the dilatation transfor-
mation of Eqs. (2.17d) and (3.20b) can be maintained when we set σ = 0. The invariance of

37

V (τ ), or, more precisely, the transformation rule V (τ (x)) → V (τ (λx)), is achieved by pro-
moting the power-series coeﬃcients to global spurions, whose transformation rules will be
derived below. Dropping the coordinates dependence, we start by rearranging the expansion
of V (τ − σ) in powers of τ ,

V =

=

=

where we have introduced

∞

∞

Xn=0
Xn=0
Xk=0

∞

cn
n!

n

(τ − σ)n
cn
Xk=0

k!(n − k)!

ˆck(σ)

τ k ,

τ k(−σ)n−k

ˆck(σ) =

cm+k
m!

(−σ)m .

(C1)

(C2)

k!

∞

Xm=0

∞

Xm=0

Note that cn = ˆcn(0). Under the transformation σ → σ + ∆ (where ∆ = log λ) we have,
trivially, ˆcn(σ) → ˆcn(σ + ∆). The spurionic transformation of cn is derived by interpreting
it as ˆcn(0),

cn = ˆcn(0) →

cm+n
m!

(−∆)m .

(C3)

The shift by ∆ = log λ is parametrically O(1), i.e., it does not mix diﬀerent orders in the
f , see Eq. (3.25). Noting that the double-expansion

expansion of the cn’s in powers of nf − n∗
coeﬃcients ˜cnk vanish for k < n, we ﬁnd that their spurionic transformation rule is

˜cnk →

k−n

Xm=0

˜cm+n,k

m!

(−∆)m ,

k ≥ n ,

(C4)

which now involves only a ﬁnite number of terms on the right-hand side.

Appendix D: Derivation of the leading-order dilatation current

In this appendix we derive the expression for the dilatation current to leading order in
the eﬀective theory. For more generality, we start from Eq. (3.15), where we set σ(x) = 0
and χ(x) = m. The inﬁnitesimal transformations are (compare Eqs. (2.17) and (3.20))

δτ = θ(xν∂ντ + 1) ,
δΣ = θxν∂νΣ .

(D1a)
(D1b)

38

Promoting θ to a local parameter we ﬁnd (allowing for integration by parts since we may
choose θ(x) to vanish at inﬁnity)

f 2
τ
2

e2τ (∂µτ )2V ′

τ ,

µν) + θ

e2τ tr[(∂µΣ†)(∂µΣ)]V ′

π ,

Kµν(cid:19)(cid:21) + θ

µν +

1
3
f 2
π
4

δθ ˜Lτ = −θ∂µ(cid:20)xν(cid:18)T τ
δθ ˜Lπ = −θ∂µ(xνT π
δθ ˜Ld = θf 2
τ Bτ [∂ν(xνe4τ Vd) + e4τ V ′
θf 2
δθ ˜Lm = −

πBπm
2

d] ,

+eyτ ((y − 4)VM + V ′

h∂ν(cid:16)xνeyτ VM tr(Σ + Σ†)(cid:17)
M ) tr(Σ + Σ†)i ,

where

T τ
µν =

T π
µν =

τ e2τ Vτ
f 2

2

πe2τ Vπ
f 2

4

(cid:0)2(∂µτ )(∂ντ ) − δµν(∂ρτ )2(cid:1) ,
tr[(∂µΣ†)(∂νΣ) + (∂νΣ†)(∂µΣ) − δµν(∂ρΣ†)(∂ρΣ)] ,

(D2a)

(D2b)

(D2c)

(D2d)

(D3a)

(D3b)

(D3c)

(D4)

Kµν = f 2

τ (δµν ✷ − ∂µ∂ν)Υ ,

and Υ(τ ) is deﬁned by

∂Υ
∂τ

= e2τ Vτ .

Note that Kµν is transversal by construction. From these results we read oﬀ the expression
for the dilatation current,

Sµ = xνΘµν ,

Θµν = T τ

µν − δµν( ˜Ld + ˜Lm) +
µν + T π
1
Kµν ,
3

= Tµν +

1
3

Kµν

(D5)

(D6)

where Tµν and Θµν are the canonical and improved energy-momentum tensors, respectively.
In order to obtain the leading-order expression for Sµ, we substitute in the above results
VM = Vπ = Vτ = 1, and use Eq. (4.2) for Vd. The solution of Eq. (D4) is then Υ = e2τ /2,
and the ﬁnal expression for Kµν may be found in Eq. (4.20).

Appendix E: Resummation of one-loop diagrams

Here we calculate the one-loop eﬀective potential by resumming diagrams. As in Sec. V
we set ˜c00 = 0, but keep ˜c01 free. The quantum ﬁeld ˜τ is deﬁned by Eq. (3.32). We
encounter two types of vertices. The ﬁrst possibility is that the vertex comes from the
kinetic term (3.51), in which case both derivatives must act on the internal lines. The rest
of this vertex is given by

(E1)

A = e2˜τ / ˆfτ − 1 .

39

The other type of vertex comes from expanding Ld or Lm, and, apart from the two internal
lines, it is given by
(E2)
where V was deﬁned in Eq. (5.8). The one-loop diagram with n insertions of A and ℓ
insertions of B can be obtained as
1

B = e−2v(V ′′(v + ˜τ / ˆfτ ) − V ′′(v)) ,

Γn,ℓ =

where in d 6= 4 dimensions,

Summing over n and ℓ, and using m2

(E3)

(E4)

(E5)

,

ℓ!

n!

∂n

2(cid:18)An

∂ℓ
∂(m2

∂λn(cid:19)(cid:18)Bℓ

τ )ℓ(cid:19) I0(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)λ=1
4πλ(cid:19)d/2
τ = e−2vV ′′(v), we ﬁnd

I0 = Γ(−d/2)(cid:18) m2

.

τ

∞

V1 = −

= −

= −

1
2

Γn,ℓ

Xn,ℓ=0
exp(cid:18)B
Γ(−d/2)

2

= −

Γ(−d/2)

2

∂

∂

∂(m2

τ )(cid:19) exp(cid:18)A

∂λ(cid:19) I0(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)λ=1
!d/2
  e−2(v+˜τ / ˆfτ )V ′′(v + ˜τ / ˆfτ )
(cid:18)e−2τV ′′(τ )

(cid:19)d/2

4π

4π

,

in agreement with Eq. (5.9). The role of the ﬁrst exponential on the second line is to replace
m2
τ in Eq. (E4) by B + m2
τ = e−2vV ′′(τ ), while the role of the second is to replace λ by
e−2ve2τ . The factors of e2v then cancel out, leading to the ﬁnal result which depends only
on the full τ (x) ﬁeld. The (minimally subtracted) renormalized eﬀective potential may be
obtained from Eq. (5.9d) by discarding the pole part, and substituting u(x) → τ (x).

[1] W. E. Caswell, Asymptotic behavior of nonabelian gauge theories to two loop order, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 33, 244 (1974).

[2] T. Banks and A. Zaks, On The Phase Structure Of Vector-Like Gauge Theories With Massless

Fermions, Nucl. Phys. B 196, 189 (1982).

[3] T. DeGrand, Lattice tests of beyond Standard Model dynamics, arXiv:1510.05018 [hep-ph].
[4] Y. Aoki et al. [LatKMI Collaboration], Light composite scalar in eight-ﬂavor QCD on the

lattice, Phys. Rev. D 89, 111502 (2014) [arXiv:1403.5000 [hep-lat]].

[5] T. Appelquist et al., Strongly interacting dynamics and the search for new physics at the LHC,

arXiv:1601.04027 [hep-lat].

[6] Y. Aoki et al. [LatKMI Collaboration], Walking signals in Nf = 8 QCD on the lattice, Phys.

Rev. D 87, 094511 (2013) [arXiv:1302.6859 [hep-lat]].

40

[7] T. Appelquist et al. [LSD Collaboration], Lattice simulations with eight ﬂavors of domain wall
fermions in SU(3) gauge theory, Phys. Rev. D 90, 114502 (2014) [arXiv:1405.4752 [hep-lat]].
[8] A. Cheng, A. Hasenfratz, G. Petropoulos and D. Schaich, Scale-dependent mass anomalous

dimension from Dirac eigenmodes, JHEP 1307, 061 (2013) [arXiv:1301.1355 [hep-lat]].

[9] A. Hasenfratz, D. Schaich and A. Veernala, Nonperturbative β function of eight-ﬂavor SU(3)

gauge theory, JHEP 1506, 143 (2015) [arXiv:1410.5886 [hep-lat]].

[10] Z. Fodor, K. Holland, J. Kuti, S. Mondal, D. Nogradi and C. H. Wong, The running coupling

of 8 ﬂavors and 3 colors, JHEP 1506, 019 (2015) [arXiv:1503.01132 [hep-lat]].

[11] Z. Fodor, K. Holland, J. Kuti, S. Mondal, D. Nogradi and C. H. Wong, Toward the minimal
realization of a light composite Higgs, PoS LATTICE 2014, 244 (2015) [arXiv:1502.00028
[hep-lat]].

[12] T. DeGrand, Y. Shamir and B. Svetitsky, Running coupling and mass anomalous dimension
of SU(3) gauge theory with two ﬂavors of symmetric-representation fermions, Phys. Rev. D
82, 054503 (2010) [arXiv:1006.0707 [hep-lat]].

[13] Z. Fodor, K. Holland, J. Kuti, S. Mondal, D. Nogradi and C. H. Wong, The running coupling
of the minimal sextet composite Higgs model, JHEP 1509, 039 (2015) [arXiv:1506.06599 [hep-
lat]].

[14] A. Hasenfratz, Y. Liu and C. Y. H. Huang, The renormalization group step scaling function

of the 2-ﬂavor SU(3) sextet model, arXiv:1507.08260 [hep-lat].

[15] J. B. Kogut and D. K. Sinclair, The chiral phase transition for lattice QCD with 2 color-sextet

quarks, Phys. Rev. D 92, 054508 (2015) [arXiv:1507.00375 [hep-lat]].

[16] S. Weinberg, Phenomenological Lagrangians, Physica A 96, 327 (1979).
[17] J. Gasser and H. Leutwyler, Chiral Perturbation Theory to One Loop, Annals Phys. 158, 142

(1984).

[18] J. Gasser and H. Leutwyler, Chiral Perturbation Theory: Expansions in the Mass of the

Strange Quark, Nucl. Phys. B 250, 465 (1985).

[19] M. Golterman, Applications of chiral perturbation theory to lattice QCD, arXiv:0912.4042

[hep-lat].

[20] R. J. Crewther and L. C. Tunstall, ∆I = 1/2 rule for kaon decays derived from QCD infrared
ﬁxed point, Phys. Rev. D 91, 034016 (2015) [arXiv:1312.3319 [hep-ph]]; Status of Chiral-Scale
Perturbation Theory, arXiv:1510.01322 [hep-ph].

[21] Z. Chacko and R. K. Mishra, Eﬀective Theory of a Light Dilaton, Phys. Rev. D 87, 115006

(2013) [arXiv:1209.3022 [hep-ph]].

[22] G. ’t Hooft, A Planar Diagram Theory for Strong Interactions, Nucl. Phys. B 72, 461 (1974);

A Two-Dimensional Model for Mesons, Nucl. Phys. B 75, 461 (1974).

[23] E. Witten, Current Algebra Theorems for the U(1) Goldstone Boson, Nucl. Phys. B 156, 269

(1979); Large N Chiral Dynamics, Annals Phys. 128, 363 (1980).

[24] P. Di Vecchia and G. Veneziano, Chiral Dynamics in the Large n Limit, Nucl. Phys. B 171, 253
(1980). P. Di Vecchia, F. Nicodemi, R. Pettorino and G. Veneziano, Large n, Chiral Approach
to Pseudoscalar Masses, Mixings and Decays, Nucl. Phys. B 181, 318 (1981).

[25] C. Rosenzweig, J. Schechter and C. G. Trahern, Is the Eﬀective Lagrangian for QCD a Sigma
Model?, Phys. Rev. D 21, 3388 (1980). K. Kawarabayashi and N. Ohta, The Problem of η in
the Large N Limit: Eﬀective Lagrangian Approach, Nucl. Phys. B 175, 477 (1980). P. Nath
and R. L. Arnowitt, The U(1) Problem: Current Algebra and the Theta Vacuum, Phys. Rev.
D 23, 473 (1981).

[26] R. Kaiser and H. Leutwyler, Large N(c) in chiral perturbation theory, Eur. Phys. J. C 17, 623

41

(2000) [hep-ph/0007101].

[27] G. Veneziano, Some Aspects of a Uniﬁed Approach to Gauge, Dual and Gribov Theories, Nucl.

Phys. B 117, 519 (1976); U(1) Without Instantons, Nucl. Phys. B 159, 213 (1979).

[28] C. G. Callan, Jr., S. R. Coleman and R. Jackiw, A new improved energy-momentum tensor,

Annals Phys. 59, 42 (1970).

[29] J. C. Collins, The Energy-Momentum Tensor Revisited, Phys. Rev. D 14, 1965 (1976).
[30] J. C. Collins, A. Duncan and S. D. Joglekar, Trace and Dilatation Anomalies in Gauge The-

ories, Phys. Rev. D 16, 438 (1977).

[31] R. Tarrach, The Renormalization of F F , Nucl. Phys. B 196, 45 (1982).
[32] B. Holdom, Techniodor, Phys. Lett. B 150, 301 (1985).
[33] K. Yamawaki, M. Bando and K. i. Matumoto, Scale Invariant Technicolor Model and a Tech-

nidilaton, Phys. Rev. Lett. 56, 1335 (1986).

[34] T. Akiba and T. Yanagida, Hierarchic Chiral Condensate, Phys. Lett. B 169, 432 (1986).
[35] T. W. Appelquist, D. Karabali and L. C. R. Wijewardhana, Chiral Hierarchies and the Flavor
Changing Neutral Current Problem in Technicolor, Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 957 (1986). T. Ap-
pelquist and L. C. R. Wijewardhana, Chiral Hierarchies from Slowly Running Couplings in
Technicolor Theories, Phys. Rev. D 36, 568 (1987).

[36] T. Appelquist, J. Terning and L. C. R. Wijewardhana, The Zero temperature chiral phase

transition in SU(N) gauge theories, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 1214 (1996) [hep-ph/9602385].

[37] V. A. Miransky and K. Yamawaki, Conformal phase transition in gauge theories, Phys. Rev.

D 55, 5051 (1997) [Phys. Rev. D 56, 3768 (1997)] [hep-th/9611142].

[38] D. D. Dietrich and F. Sannino, Conformal window of SU(N) gauge theories with fermions in

higher dimensional representations, Phys. Rev. D 75, 085018 (2007) [hep-ph/0611341].

[39] J. Braun and H. Gies, JHEP 0606, 024 (2006) [hep-ph/0602226].
[40] S. Matsuzaki and K. Yamawaki, Dilaton Chiral Perturbation Theory: Determining the Mass
and Decay Constant of the Technidilaton on the Lattice, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 082002 (2014)
[arXiv:1311.3784 [hep-lat]]; Walking on the ladder: 125 GeV technidilaton, or Conformal
Higgs, JHEP 1512, 053 (2015) [arXiv:1508.07688 [hep-ph]].

[41] A. G. Cohen and H. Georgi, Walking Beyond the Rainbow, Nucl. Phys. B 314, 7 (1989).
[42] K. D. Lane and E. Eichten, Two Scale Technicolor, Phys. Lett. B 222, 274 (1989).
[43] A. Schwimmer and S. Theisen, Spontaneous Breaking of Conformal Invariance and Trace

Anomaly Matching, Nucl. Phys. B 847, 590 (2011) [arXiv:1011.0696 [hep-th]].

[44] Z. Komargodski and A. Schwimmer, On Renormalization Group Flows in Four Dimensions,

JHEP 1112, 099 (2011) [arXiv:1107.3987 [hep-th]].

[45] J. F. Donoghue and H. Leutwyler, Energy and momentum in chiral theories, Z. Phys. C 52,

343 (1991).

[46] A. Iorio, L. O’Raifeartaigh, I. Sachs and C. Wiesendanger, Weyl gauging and conformal in-

variance, Nucl. Phys. B 495, 433 (1997) [hep-th/9607110].

[47] J. Schechter, Eﬀective Lagrangian with Two Color Singlet Gluon Fields, Phys. Rev. D 21,
3393 (1980). A. Salomone, J. Schechter and T. Tudron, Properties of Scalar Gluonium, Phys.
Rev. D 23, 1143 (1981). H. Gomm and J. Schechter, Goldstone Bosons and Scalar Gluonium,
Phys. Lett. B 158, 449 (1985).

[48] A. A. Migdal and M. A. Shifman, Dilaton Eﬀective Lagrangian in Gluodynamics, Phys. Lett.

B 114, 445 (1982).

[49] L. Giusti and M. Pepe, Energy-momentum tensor on the lattice: Nonperturbative renormal-

ization in Yang-Mills theory, Phys. Rev. D 91, 114504 (2015) [arXiv:1503.07042 [hep-lat]].

42

[50] L. Del Debbio and R. Zwicky, Renormalisation group, trace anomaly and Feynman-Hellmann

theorem, Phys. Lett. B 734, 107 (2014) [arXiv:1306.4274 [hep-ph]].

[51] B. Svetitsky and F. Fucito, Latent Heat of the SU(3) Gauge Theory, Phys. Lett. B 131, 165

(1983).

43

