6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
 
5
1

 
 
]

.

G
D
h
t
a
m

[
 
 

1
v
3
7
5
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Groups acting on spaces of non-positive

curvature
Bruno Duchesne∗

Abstract

In this survey article, we present some panorama of groups acting on metric spaces
of non-positive curvature. We introduce the main examples and their rigidity prop-
erties, we show the links between algebraic or analytic properties of the group and
geometric properties of the space. Finally, we conclude with a few conjectures in
the subject.

2000 Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation: 20F65, 53C23, 20F67.

Keywords and Phrases:
Group actions, spaces of non-positive curvature,
CAT(0) spaces, rigidity, superrigidity, amenability, Haagerup property, rank rigid-
ity conjecture, ﬂat closing conjecture.

Contents

1 Introduction

2 Spaces of non-positive curvature

2.1 CAT(0) spaces
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2 Convexity and weaker notions of non-positive curvature . . . . . .
2.3 The proper case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.4 Boundary at inﬁnity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.5 Some simple geometric questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

3
3
5
6
7
8

3 Examples of CAT(0) spaces and groups

11
11
3.1 Symmetric spaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2 Euclidean Buildings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
∗Institut ´Elie Cartan de Lorraine, Universit´e de Lorraine, B.P. 70239, F-54506 Vandoeuvre-
l`es-Nancy Cedex, France. E-mail: bruno.duchesne@univ-lorraine.fr. Supported in part by Projet
ANR-14-CE25-0004 GAMME and R´egion Lorraine.

3.3 CAT(0) cube complexes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.4 Cubulating hyperbolic 3-manifold groups
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 Rigidity properties of the above examples

4.1 Bieberbach theorems and the solvable subgroup theorem . . . . . .
4.2 Superrigidity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Isometries of proper CAT(0) spaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.3

5 Amenability and non-positive curvature

5.1 Amenability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2 Amenability at inﬁnity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.3 Haagerup property and property (T) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6 Rank rigidity and ﬂat closing conjectures

6.1 Rank Rigidity Conjecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.2 Flat Closing Conjecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Acknowledgements

1

Introduction

17
20

21
21
22
23

25
25
28
30

32
32
33

34

According to the so-called Erlangen Program of Felix Klein [Kle08, JP15], a ge-
ometry is a set and a group that preserves some invariants. On the other way,
groups are actors and they are better understood via the study of their actions.
In this paper, we aim to present the strong links between algebraic or analytic
properties of groups and geometric properties of spaces of non-positive curvature
on which the groups act. This is actually a part of Geometric Group Theory and
we recommend the survey [Can02] for a panoramic view on that larger subject.

The metric spaces of non-positive curvature we have in mind are the so-called
CAT(0) spaces. Those are spaces with a metric condition meaning that the space
is at least as non-positively curved as the Euclidean plane. The deﬁnition goes
back to Alexandrov in the 1950’s (after the work of Busemann) and where pop-
ularised by Gromov who coined the name CAT(0) after Cartan, Alexandrov and
Toponogov.

There are very good books about spaces of non-positive curvature. The current
quite comprehensive reference is [BH99]. The books [Bal95] and [BGS85] are a bit
older but still interesting and useful. For the study of convexity in non-positive
curvature beyond CAT(0) spaces, [Pap05] is a good reference.

This paper is not another introduction to the subject but the aim is to guide
the reader toward the main examples, some important results in the ﬁeld and
directions of current research.

We present the leading examples of CAT(0) spaces and groups acting on them:
symmetric spaces, Euclidean buildings and CAT(0) cube complexes. After the
basics about CAT(0) spaces and the description of these examples, we aim to
give a ﬂavour of the subject by treating a few topics. The ﬁrst topic deals with
the question of generality/rigidity of the spaces associated to linear groups (that

2

are symmetric spaces and Euclidean buildings). The second one deals with some
analytic properties of groups: amenability, the Haagerup property, property (T)
and exactness. Finally we discuss two conjectures: the rank rigidity conjecture
and the ﬂat closing conjecture.

The choice of topics is not exhaustive and deﬁnitely subjective. We apologise
for the important facts we may have missed. We do not enter into details of each
topic but we encourage the reader to continue his reading with references in the
quite long bibliography.

2 Spaces of non-positive curvature

2.1 CAT(0) spaces

A metric space (X, d) is geodesic if there is a geodesic segment joining any two
points: For any x, y ∈ X, there exists γ : [0, d(x, y)] → X such that for any
t, t(cid:48) ∈ [0, d(x, y)], d(γ(t), γ(t(cid:48))) = |t − t(cid:48)|, γ(0) = x and γ(d(x, y)) = y. A priori,
geodesic segments between two points are not unique. For two points x, y, a
midpoint for x and y is a point γ(d(x, y)/2) for some geodesic segment γ between
x and y. Let us now deﬁne CAT(0) spaces via the so-called CAT(0) inequality

Deﬁnition 2.1. A complete geodesic metric space is CAT(0) if for any triple of
points x, y, z and a midpoint m between y and z, one has

d(x, m)2 ≤ 1
2

(d(x, y)2 + d(x, z)2) − 1
4

d(y, z)2.

(1)

Remark 2.2. We use completeness and geodesicness in the deﬁnition of CAT(0)
spaces. This is not a completely standard choice but the metric completion of
metric space X satisfying the following list of hypotheses is automatically CAT(0).
• For any two points x, y ∈ X, there is m ∈ X with d(x, m) = d(y, m) =

1
2

d(x, y),

• for any triple x, y, z ∈ X and m ∈ X such that d(x, m) = d(y, m) =

the CAT(0) inequality holds.

1
2

d(x, y),

For a Euclidean space, the parallelogram law yields equality in Inequality (1).
So, the CAT(0) inequality means that X is as least as non-positively curved as
a Euclidean plane. There is an other equivalent way to express the same idea of
non-positive curvature: geodesic triangles are thinner than Euclidean ones (see
[BH99, Proposition II.1.7]).

It is a simple consequence of the CAT(0) inequality that two points x, y are
linked by a unique geodesic segment that we denote by [x, y]. Moreover it is easy
to see that a CAT(0) space X is contractible. Fix a point x0 ∈ X and deﬁne h(x, t)
to be the point tx0 + (1− t)x in an isometric parametrisation of the segment [x, x0]
where t ∈ [0, 1]. The CAT(0) inequality (actually convexity is suﬃcient) shows
that h is continuous and h is a retraction from X to {x0}.

3

y

y

x

z

x

z

Figure 1: A geodesic triangle in a CAT(0) space is thinner than a triangle in the
Euclidean plane with same side lengths.

A metric space is locally CAT(0) if any point is the center of a ball of positive
radius which is CAT(0). Simple connectedness and the local CAT(0) condition is
suﬃcient to recover the CAT(0) globally.

Theorem 2.3 (Cartan-Hadamard theorem). A complete metric space is CAT(0)
if and only if it is locally CAT(0) and simply connected.

Examples 2.4. These are examples of CAT(0) spaces.

1. Euclidean and more generally Hilbert spaces.

2. Trees with the length metric and more generally real trees.

3. Complete simply connected Riemannian manifolds of non-positive sectional

curvature. Such manifolds are called Hadamard manifolds.

Let us comment these examples. It is clear that Hilbert spaces are CAT(0)
spaces because of the parallelogram law. For Banach spaces, the CAT(0) implies
actually the parallelogram law. From that point, one can recover that the norm
comes from a scalar product and thus the only Banach spaces that are CAT(0)
are actually Hilbert spaces.

For Riemannian manifolds, non-positivity of the sectional curvature is equiva-
lent to the CAT(0) inequality for small balls. This is the seminal works of Buse-
mann and Alexandrov [BH99, II.1.17]. The Cartan-Hadamard theorem allows to
go from local to global.

Let us see a ﬁrst simple consequence of the CAT(0) condition for group acting

by isometries.

Theorem 2.5 (Cartan ﬁxed point theorem). Let G be a group acting by isometries
on a CAT(0) space. If G has a bounded orbit then G has ﬁxed point.

The proof of Cartan ﬁxed point theorem relies that any bounded subset B has a
circumcenter which the center the unique closed ball of minimal radius containing
B. In particular, a group with a bounded orbit ﬁxes the circumcenter of its orbit.
This gives a proof that any compact subgroup of GLn(R) lie in the orthogonal
group of some scalar product of Rn. The set of scalar products on Rn may be
endowed with a CAT(0) metric such that GLn(R) acts by isometries on it.

4

Flat subsets, that are subsets isometric to some Euclidean space, in CAT(0)

spaces are limit case of non-positive curvature and thus play a particular role.

Deﬁnition 2.6. Let X be a CAT(0) space. A subspace of X is a ﬂat if it is
isometric to some Euclidean space. The rank of X is the supremum of dimensions
of ﬂats in X.

The rank of a CAT(0) space is an important invariant of CAT(0) spaces. For

examples, it appears in two conjectures discussed in Section 6.

Isometries of CAT(0) may have very diﬀerent dynamical behaviour

Deﬁnition 2.7. Let X be a CAT(0) and g ∈ Isom(X). The translation length
d(gx, x). If this inﬁmum is achieved, g is said to be semi-simple and
of g is inf
x∈X

parabolic otherwise.

The semi-simple isometries are the understood ones. The parabolic ones are
more or less mysterious. If g is semi-simple with vanishing translation length then
g has ﬁxed points. If g is semi-simple with positive translation length then there
is a geodesic line which is g-invariant and g by translation on that geodesic line.

2.2 Convexity and weaker notions of non-positive curvature

The CAT(0) inequality implies strong convexity consequences that we shortly de-
scribe.
Deﬁnition 2.8. Let (X, d) be a geodesic metric space. A function f : X → R
is convex if for any geodesic segment [x, y] ⊂ X, the restriction of f to [x, y] is
convex (as a function on a real interval).

In CAT(0) spaces, the distance to a point is a convex function. More gener-
ally, for two parametrisations with constant speeds γ, γ(cid:48) : [0, 1] → X of geodesic
segments, the distance function t (cid:55)→ d(γ(t), γ(cid:48)(t)) is convex.
A subspace of a CAT(0) space is convex if it contains the geodesic segment
between any two of its points. For closed convex subset C, any point x ∈ X has
a unique point pC(x) ∈ C minimising the distance to x. The map pC : X → C is
1-Lipschitz and is called the projection onto C. Let dC be the distance function to
C: for any x ∈ C, dC(x) = d(x, pC(x)). This distance function dC is also convex.
We have seen that the CAT(0) condition gives a notion of non-positive cur-
vature for metric spaces. Comparing to Banach spaces, one may see the CAT(0)
inequality as a (very strong) uniform convexity notion. Concentrating on convex-
ity of the distance, let us introduce two weaker notions of non-positive curvature
for metric spaces.

Deﬁnition 2.9. Let (X, d) be a geodesic metric space. The space X is Buse-
mann non-positively curved if for any geodesic triangle [x, y], [y, y(cid:48)] and [y(cid:48), x], the
midpoints m of [x, y] and m(cid:48) of [x, y(cid:48)], one has

d(m, m(cid:48)) ≤ 1
2

d(y, y(cid:48)).

5

This deﬁnition has diﬀerent equivalent formulations (see [Pap05, Proposition
8.1.2]) and it implies uniqueness of geodesic segments between two points. For
example, a normed space is Busemann non-positively curved if and only if it is
strictly convex.

A normed space which is not strictly convex may have many geodesics between
two points (think to R2 with the sup norm) but some geodesics are distinguished:
the aﬃne geodesics. Actually, if you forget the linear structure and remind only
the metric you can recover the linear structure. The famous Mazur-Ulam theorem
tells you that the isometries are aﬃne because isometries remind aﬃne midpoints.
In particular, aﬃne geodesics are very special because they are preserved by isome-
tries. With this idea that some speciﬁc geodesics may be more important than
others, one has the following even weaker notion of non-positive curvature.

Deﬁnition 2.10. Let (X, d) be a metric space. A geodesic bicombing is a choice
of a geodesic segment σx,y between x and y in X for any two points x, y ∈ X.
That is σx,y : [0, 1] → X and

• σx,y(0) = x,
• σx,y(1) = y,
• for any t, t(cid:48) ∈ [0, 1], d(σx,y(t), σx,y(t(cid:48))) = |t − t(cid:48)|d(x, y).

A geodesic bicombing is said to be convex if for any quadruple x, y, x(cid:48), y(cid:48),

is convex.

t (cid:55)→ d(σx,y(t), σx(cid:48),y(cid:48)(t))

For example, in any normed space, the geodesic bicombing given by aﬃne

segments is convex.
Example 2.11. The space GLn(R)/ On(R) is a symmetric space of non-compact
type (see §3.1) and thus a CAT(0) space. Leaving ﬁnite dimension, the natural
analog in inﬁnite dimension is GL(H)/ O(H) where GL(H) is the group of all
bounded invertible operators of the Hilbert space H and O(H) is the orthogonal
group. This space is no more CAT(0) but there is a convex geodesic bicombing.
This bicombing comes from the fact that GL(H)/ O(H) is a manifold of inﬁnite
dimension that can be identiﬁed with the space of symmetric deﬁnite positive
operators. The tangent space at Id is the space of symmetric bounded operators.
This vector space with the operator norm is a Banach space and the exponential
map sends linear geodesics to geodesics belonging to the geodesic bicombing. The
action of GL(H) is isometric and moreover preserves the geodesic bicombing.

2.3 The proper case

The CAT(0) inequality (and more generally convex bicombings) yields a notion
of non-curvature beyond manifolds.
In particular, CAT(0) spaces may be not
locally-compact. However, locally compact CAT(0) spaces have more enjoyable
properties.

6

Deﬁnition 2.12. A metric space is said to be proper if closed balls are compact.

For CAT(0) spaces, properness is equivalent to local compactness. For proper

CAT(0) spaces, there is a natural and pleasant topology on the isometry group.

Proposition 2.13. Let (X, d) be a proper CAT(0) space. Its isometry group en-
dowed with the compact-open topology is a locally compact second countable group.

In particular, such groups have Haar measures and may have lattices (that are

discrete subgroups of ﬁnite covolume).

Let G be a topological group acting by isometries on a metric space (X, d).
The action is continuous if the map (γ, x) (cid:55)→ γx from Γ × X to X is continuous.
It is proper if for any compact subsets K1, K2 ⊂ X, {g ∈ G| gK1 ∩ K2 (cid:54)= ∅} is
compact. In case X is proper and G is discrete, the action is proper if and only
if it is properly discontinuous, that is for any x, y ∈ X, there are neighbourhoods
Ux, Uy of x and y such that {g ∈, gUx ∩ Uy (cid:54)= ∅} is ﬁnite. The action is cocompact
if the topological quotient G\X is compact.

The interplay between the algebraic properties of a group acting on a CAT(0)
space and the geometry of the space is expected to be richer when the action is
proper and cocompact. This idea leads to the following deﬁnition.

Deﬁnition 2.14. Let G be a group acting by isometries on a CAT(0) space
X. The action is geometric (or the group acts geometrically) if it is proper and
cocompact. A countable group Γ is CAT(0) if acts geometrically on a proper
CAT(0) space.

2.4 Boundary at inﬁnity

There is a nice geometric object associated to any CAT(0): its boundary at inﬁnity.

Deﬁnition 2.15. Let X be CAT(0) space. The boundary at inﬁnity ∂X of X is
the set of all geodesic rays (with any base point) and two of them are identiﬁed if
and only if there are at bounded Hausdorﬀ distance one from the another.

If one ﬁx a base point x0 ∈ X, there is exactly one geodesic ray starting
from x0 in each class and thus ∂X can be identiﬁed with the set of geodesic rays
starting from x0. This boundary is sometimes called the visual boundary because
it corresponds to the vision of inﬁnity from x0. There is a natural way to topologize
X = X ∪ ∂X. Fix a point x0 ∈ X. One can identify X with the inverse limit of
the system of balls of radius r > 0 around x0. That way X embeds as an open
set in X. A sequence of points xn ∈ X converges to some point ξ ∈ ∂X if for
all r > 0 the point xn(r) at distance r from x0 on [x0, xn] converges to the point
x(r) ∈ [x0, ξ) at distance r from x0.

7

ξ

xn

xn(r)

x0

x(r)

For any simply connected complete Riemannian manifold X of non-positive
curvature and dimension n, the boundary ∂X is homeomorphic to a sphere of
dimension n − 1. In particular, for Euclidean spaces the boundary at inﬁnity is
a Euclidean sphere. This statement can be made metric endowing this boundary
with the angular metric [BH99, II.9.4].

The construction of this boundary is functorial: if a group acts by isometries

on a CAT(0) space it also acts by homeomorphisms on its boundary.

This boundary is particularly convenient for proper CAT(0) spaces.

Proposition 2.16. If X is a proper CAT(0) space then X is compact.

For example, this proposition shows that any parabolic isometry g on a proper
CAT(0) space has a ﬁxed point at inﬁnity. Choose a minimising sequence for the
function x (cid:55)→ d(gx, x). This sequence has a subsequence that converges to a point
at inﬁnity which is ﬁxed.

2.5 Some simple geometric questions

Despite CAT(0) spaces became more and more popular in the last decades, some
elementary (in their statement) questions are still completely open. Let us state
and comment two of them. These questions are particular cases of the following
theme: what results of geometric functional analysis also hold for metric spaces
of non-positive curvature? By geometric functional analysis we mean the study
of metric, probabilistic questions or questions about convexity for Banach spaces
or more generally Fr´echet spaces. Fr´echet spaces are locally convex vector spaces
metrizable by a complete and translation invariant metric.

Let X be a CAT(0) space and Y a subset of X, the closed convex hull of
Y is the smallest closed and convex subset of X that contains Y . This is the
intersection of all closed and convex subspaces of X containing Y . We denote it
by Conv(Y ).

Question 2.17. Let X be a CAT(0) space.
compact?

Is the closed convex hull of X still

For convenience, let us say that the space X has Property (CH) if the closed
convex hull of any compact subset of X is compact. This question appeared in
[Jos94, Section 4] (where the name of the property is coined) and is discussed in
[Pet]. Observe it is not diﬃcult to ﬁnd compacta with non-closed convex hulls.

If the CAT(0) space is proper then the answer is obviously positive because
any compact subset is contained in some closed ball and thus the closed convex

8

hull, which is included in this ball, is compact. The following lemma shows it is
suﬃcient to answer Question 2.17 for ﬁnite subsets.

Lemma 2.18. Let X be a CAT(0) space such that the closed convex hull of a
ﬁnite number of points is compact. Then X has Property (CH).

Proof. Let K be a compact subset of X. We will show that for any sequence
of K and ε > 0, one can extract a subsequence of diameter less than ε. A di-
agonal extraction yields a Cauchy subsequence and thanks to completeness, this
subsequence converges.

So, let K be a compact subspace, ε > 0 and (ki) be a sequence of Conv(K), the
closed convex hull of K. There is a ﬁnite number of points x1, . . . , xn such that
K ⊂ ∪n
j=1B(xj, ε/3). Let C be Conv(x1, . . . , xn) which is compact. By convexity
of the distance function dC, Conv(K)is contained in the ε/3-neighborhood of C. In
particular, for any i ∈ N there is li ∈ C such that d(ki, li) < ε/3. By compactness
of C, one can extract a subsequence of (lϕ(i)) of diameter less than ε/3. By the
triangle inequality, (kϕ(i)) is a subsequence of (ki) of diameter less than ε.

For two points the answer is clearly positive since the convex hull of two points
is merely the segment between them. Actually the same questions for three points
is open and seems to be as hard as the original question.

Question 2.19 ([Gro93, 6.B1(f)]). Is the closed convex hull of three points in a
CAT(0) space, still compact?

Thanks to Lemma 2.18 and the fact that a ﬁnite number of points in a Hilbert
lies in a ﬁnite dimensional subspace, one knows that Hilbert spaces have Property
(CH). Actually the question holds also for Busemann non-positively curved space
and is also open in this context (to our knowledge). For linear convexity, the result
holds true for Banach spaces see [KR07, Theorem 2.10] and relies on an analog of
Lemma 2.18.

We do not have a plethora of well understood examples non proper CAT(0)
spaces. One class of such examples is given by inﬁnite dimensional symmetric
spaces of non-positive curvature (See §3.1).
In [Jos94, Section 4], it is stated
without proof that inﬁnite dimensional symmetric spaces have property (CH). Let
us give a precise statement and a proof.

Proposition 2.20. Simply connected Hilbertian symmetric spaces with non-positive
curvature operator have Property (CH).

Proof. It follows from the classiﬁcation [Duc15a, Theorem 1.8] that any such sym-
metric space is obtained as the closure of an increasing union of ﬁnite dimensional
symmetric spaces. In particular, for any ε > 0 any compact subspace K lies in the
ε-neighbourhood of a ﬁnite number of points lying in a ﬁnite dimensional subspace.
As in Lemma 2.18, K lies in the ε-neighbourhood of a convex compact space and
thus its closed convex hull is compact.

Remark 2.21. Proposition 2.20 is not straight forward because a ﬁnite number of
points (even three points) are not necessarily included in some ﬁnite dimensional
totally geodesic subspace.

9

Deﬁnition 2.22. Let Y be a convex subspace of a CAT(0) space. An extremal
point of Y is a point y ∈ Y such that if x, x(cid:48) ∈ Y and y ∈ [x, x(cid:48)] then x = y or
x(cid:48) = y.

Observe that in this deﬁnition, it suﬃces to consider points x, x(cid:48) such that
y is the midpoint of [x, x(cid:48)]. The classical Krein-Milman theorem asserts that a
compact convex subset C of a locally convex topological vector space has extremal
points and actually this is equivalent (via Hahn-Banach theorem) to the fact that
C is the closed convex hull of its extremal points.

If one think to the geometry of Banach spaces as a leading source of intuition
for the geometry of metric spaces of non-positive curvature, it is natural to ask
if the same is true for metric spaces with a convex bicombing. In that case the
answer is positive, as it has been shown in [Bue]. Moreover, a convex compact
subset is the closed convex hull of its extremal points.

Hilbert spaces are the only Fr´echet spaces which are CAT(0) (for any com-
plete, invariant by translations compatible distance). In that case, closed convex
bounded subspaces are compact for the weak topology and the Krein-Milman for
the weak topology implies that closed convex bounded subsets are the convex hull
of their extremal points. So it is natural to ask the following question.

Question 2.23. Let Y be a non-empty closed convex bounded subspace of a CAT(0)
space. Is it true that X has extremal points?

This question was asked by Nicolas Monod in the Master class ”Geometric and
Cohomologic Group Theory: Rigidity and Deformation” held at CIRM in 2006.
Let us give a very short proof in the compact CAT(0) case.

Proposition 2.24. Let X be (non-empty) a compact CAT(0). Then X has ex-
tremal points and X is the closed convex hull of its extremal points.
Proof. Let x0 ∈ X and thanks to compactness, choose x ∈ X such that d(x0, x) =
d(x0, y). Let y, z ∈ X such that x is the midpoint of [y, z]. By the CAT(0)
max
y∈X
inequality,

d(x0, x)2 ≤ 1/2(d(x0, y)2 + d(x0, z)2) − 1/4d(y, z)2 ≤ d(x0, x)2 − 1/4d(y, z)2

and thus y = z = x. Once one knows there are extremal points, an argument of
the same spirit shows that X is the convex hull of its extremal points [Bue].

Of course, it is also natural to ask if the full result of Krein-Milman theorem

holds for CAT(0) spaces.

Question 2.25. Is true that a closed convex bounded subsets of a CAT(0) space is
the closure of the convex hull of its extremal points?

Questions 2.25 and 2.23 have been answered negatively during the writing
of that paper. Nicolas Monod gave a counterexample to Question 2.23 called the
rose. The rose of Monod is a mere 2-dimensional simplicial complex with Euclidean
pieces [Mon16].

10

3 Examples of CAT(0) spaces and groups

3.1 Symmetric spaces

Deﬁnition 3.1. A riemannian manifold X is symmetric if for any point x, there
is a global isometry σx ﬁxing x such that its diﬀerential at x is − Id. A symmetric
space of non-compact type is a symmetric riemannian manifold with non-positive
sectional curvature and no local Euclidean factor.

Since we will not consider symmetric spaces which are not of compact type,
we will use symmetric space as a shortcut for symmetric spaces of non-compact
type. It is not a priori obvious that these spaces are simply connected but this is
actually the case and thus these spaces are CAT(0).

Standard references for symmetric spaces are [Hel01] and [Ebe96] but for a more
friendly introduction one may read [Mau09, Par09] with two diﬀerent approaches:
a diﬀerential one and algebraic one. Symmetric spaces are strongly related to
semi-simple Lie groups. Let us describe the dictionary between symmetric spaces
of non-compact type and semi-simple Lie groups without compact factor.

Let X be a symmetric space of non-compact type. Then:
• The connected component of the identity in the isometry group G = Isom◦(X)

is a semi-simple Lie group with trivial center and no compact factor.

• The stabilizer K of a point x ∈ X is a maximal compact subgroup. Any two

such subgroups are conjugated.

• The action G (cid:121) X is transitive, thus W (cid:39) G/K.

Conversely, If G is a semi-simple Lie group with ﬁnite center and no compact
factor then G has a maximal compact subgroup K and X = G/K has structure
of symmetric space of non-compact type.

This dictionary emphasises that there is a classiﬁcation of symmetric spaces
parallel to the classiﬁcation of semi-simple Lie groups (see [Bor01, Chapter IV] for
historical considerations on Cartan’s work).

In particular, there is a unique way (up to permutation of the factors) to write

any symmetric space X as a product of irreducible factors:

X (cid:39) X1 × ··· × Xn

In this splitting, which coincides with the de Rham decomposition, each Xi is
an irreducible symmetric space, that is Xi (cid:39) Gi/Ki where Gi is a simple Lie
group (with trivial center and no compact factor) and Ki is a maximal compact
subgroup. So Isom(X1) × ··· × Isom(Xn) is a ﬁnite index subgroup of Isom(X).
The ﬁnite index corresponding to the ﬁnite possibilities to permute the possible
isometric factors.

On a homogeneous space G/K where G is a simple Lie group and K a maximal
subgroup, there is a unique G-invariant Riemannian metric up to scaling. So two
symmetric spaces with same isometry groups are isometric up to scaling the metric
on the irreducible factors.

11

Deﬁnition 3.2. A CAT(0) space is symmetric if for each point x ∈ X, there is
an involutive isometry σx such that x is the unique ﬁxed point of σx.

With this deﬁnition, one can easily see that symmetric CAT(0) spaces are
geodesically complete (any geodesic segment is included in some geodesic line)
and homogeneous.

The following theorem shows that the diﬀerential structure of symmetric space

of non-compact type is completely contained in its metric structure.

Theorem 3.3 ([Duc11, Th´eor`eme 8.4]). Let X be a proper symmetric CAT(0)
space then X has an isometric splitting

X (cid:39) E × Y

where E is a Euclidean space and Y is a symmetric space of non-compact type.

The proof of this theorem essentially relies on the following consequence of the
solution of the Hilbert ﬁfth problem: a connected locally compact group with triv-
ial amenable radical is a semi-simple Lie group without compact factors ([Mon01,
Theorem 11.3.4(ii)]).

Since the manifold structure can be recover from the data of the metrics, it is
natural to ask for a purely metric approach of symmetric spaces of non-compact
type. In particular, how to prove the CAT(0) inequality without relying on dif-
ferential geometry? See [Cap14, Exercise 1.4.(iii)]). The hyperbolic space is the
simplest example of a symmetric space. Let us prove, it is CAT(0) without using
diﬀerential geometry.

Proposition 3.4. The hyperbolic space is CAT(0).

To prove this proposition, we use the following characterisation of CAT(0)
spaces that relies on the Alexandrov angle which is notion of angle for geodesic
segments with a common end point. See [BH99, Deﬁnition I.12].

Lemma 3.5 ([BH99, Exercise II.1.9(c)]). Let (X, d) be geodesic metric space.
Then X is CAT(0) if and only if for any triple of points A, B, C ∈ X with distance
a = d(B, C), b = d(A, C), c = d(A, B) and Alexandrov angle γ at vertex C, one
has

c2 ≥ a2 + b2 − 2ab cos(γ).

(2)

Observe that the equality case is the so-called (Euclidean) law of cosines.

n(cid:88)

Proof of Proposition 3.4. We use the hyperboloid model [BH99, Chapter I.2]. Let
En,1 be the vector space Rn+1 with the non-degenerate quadratic form (cid:104)u|v(cid:105) =
−un+1vn+1 +
uivi. The hyperbolic space Hn is then {u = (u1, . . . , un+1) ∈
En,1 | (cid:104)u, v(cid:105) = −1, un+1}. The distance between two points A, B ∈ Hn, is deﬁned
by cosh(d(A, B)) = −(cid:104)A|B(cid:105). To show this is a metric, the only non-trivial fact
to check is the triangle inequality. This is a consequence of the hyperbolic law of

i=1

12

cosines. This law is a simple consequence of the model [BH99, I.2.7]. For any triple
of points A, B, C ∈ Hn with distance a = d(B, C), b = d(A, C), c = d(A, B),

cosh(c) = cosh(a) cosh(b) − sinh(a) sinh(b) cos(γ)

where γ is the angle at vertex C (which coincides with the Alexandrov angle thanks
to [BH99, Proposition I.2.9]). We aim now to show Inequality (2).
We consider ﬁrst the case 0 ≤ γ ≤ π/2. Fix sides lengths a, b, c, deﬁne f (γ) =
cosh(a) cosh(b) − sinh(a) sinh(b) cos(γ) and g(γ) = cosh
.
Thus, our goal is to show that ϕ(γ) = f (γ) − g(γ) ≥ 0. One has ϕ(0) = 0. For

(cid:17)
(cid:16)(cid:112)a2 + b2 − 2ab cos(γ)
convenience, set c0 =(cid:112)a2 + b2 − 2ab cos(γ) (that is the length of the third side

in a Euclidean triangle with sides a, b and angle γ).

f(cid:48)(γ) = sinh(a) sinh(b) sin(γ) =

g(cid:48)(γ) =

sinh(c0)

ab sin(γ) =

(cid:88)
(cid:0)a2 + b2 − 2ab cos(γ)(cid:1)k

a2n+1b2m+1

(2n + 1)!(2m + 1)!

n,m≥0

(cid:88)

k≥0

(2k + 1)!

sin(γ)

ab sin(γ)

c0

≤(cid:88)
≤(cid:88)

k≥0

(a2 + b2)k
(2k + 1)!

(cid:88)

k≥0

0≤i≤k

ab sin(γ)

k!

i!(k − i)!(2k + 1)!

a2i+1b2(k−i)+1 sin(γ)

.

(n + m)!

1

≥

(n + m)!

n!m!(2(n + m) + 1)!

In the last double sum, the coeﬃcient in front of a2n+1b2m+1 is
n!m!(2(n + m) + 1)!
Since (n + m)! ≥ n!m! and (2(n + m) + 1)! ≥ (2n + 1)!(2m + 1)!, one has
. Thus ϕ(cid:48) ≥ 0 on [0, π/2] and ϕ(γ) ≥ 0

(2n + 1)!(2m + 1)!
on [0, π/2].
Now, let us consider the case γ ≥ π/2. Choose D ∈ [A, B] such the an-
gles γ(cid:48) = ∠([C, A], [C, D]) and γ(cid:48)(cid:48) = ∠([CD, CB]) are at most π/2. Let c(cid:48) =
d(A, D), c(cid:48)(cid:48) = d(D, B) and c(cid:48)
0 the corresponding Euclidean lengths (that is
0 and c(cid:48)(cid:48) ≥ c(cid:48)(cid:48)
c∗
0 .
0 ≥ c0 and ﬁnally c = c(cid:48) + c(cid:48)(cid:48) ≥
Moreover, in the Euclidean plane, one has c(cid:48)
c(cid:48)
0 + c(cid:48)(cid:48)

0 =(cid:112)a2 + b2 − 2ab cos(γ∗)). The former case shows that c(cid:48) ≥ c(cid:48)

0 ≥ c0.

0 + c(cid:48)(cid:48)

0, c(cid:48)(cid:48)

Proper symmetric CAT(0) spaces are understood and one can ask what are the
symmetric CAT(0) spaces outside the proper world. One can consruct inﬁnite di-
mensional analogs of the symmetric spaces of non-compact type that remain in the
CAT(0) world. These are manifolds modelled on Hilbert spaces with a Rieman-
nian metric. They can be classiﬁed in a way analogous to the ﬁnite dimensional
case [Duc15a, Theorem 1.8]. There are also symmetric CAT(0) spaces that are
not Riemannian manifolds [Duc15a, §4.3].

13

C

(cid:48)

γ

(cid:48)(cid:48)

γ

A

D

B

Figure 2: Point D and angles γ(cid:48), γ(cid:48)(cid:48)

3.2 Euclidean Buildings

Buildings were introduced by Jacques Tits to get a geometry to understand prop-
erties of algebraic groups. In some sense, this is a converse of Klein’s Erlangen Pro-
gram. Such a geometry was already existing for semi-simple Lie groups. It is given
by symmetric spaces. Euclidean buildings are analogs in the non-Archimedean
world.

Here we use Kleiner-Leeb axiomatisation of Euclidean buildings [KL97]. This
axiomatisation starts from a CAT(0) space and thus is more geometric than the
original deﬁnition due to Tits.
It is a priori not completely clear that one can
recover Tits deﬁnition from the one of Kleiner and Leeb. Anne Parreau proved
this is actually the case [Par00, §2.7]. Her deﬁnition is a bit more general to cover
the case of non complete spaces.
Let E be a Euclidean space. Its boundary at inﬁnity ∂E endowed with the
angular metric is a Euclidean sphere of dimension dim(E)− 1. Since isometries of
E are aﬃne and translations act trivially on ∂E, one obtain a homomorphism

ρ : Isom(E) → Isom(∂E)

that associates its linear part to every Euclidean isometry. A subgroup WAﬀ ≤
Isom(E) is called an aﬃne Weyl group if it is generated by reﬂections through
hyperplanes and if W := ρ(WAﬀ ) is a ﬁnite subgroup of Isom(∂E).

The group W is called the spherical Weyl group associated with WAﬀ . If WAﬀ
is an aﬃne Weyl group then (E, WAﬀ ) is called a Euclidean Coxeter complex and
(∂E, W ) is the associated spherical Coxeter complex at inﬁnity.
Its anisotropy
polyhedron is the spherical polyhedron

∆ := ∂E/W.

An oriented segment (not reduced to a point) xy of E determines a unique
point of ∂E and the projection of this point to ∆ is called the ∆-direction of xy.
Let π be the projection ∂E → ∆. If δ1, δ2 are two points of ∆, we introduce the
ﬁnite set

D(δ1, δ2) = {∠(ξ1, ξ2))|ξ1, ξ2 ∈ ∂E, π(ξ1) = δ1, π(ξ2) = δ2}.

Deﬁnition 3.6. Let (E, WAﬀ ) be a Euclidean Coxeter complex. A Euclidean
building modelled on (E, WAﬀ ) is a complete CAT(0) space (X, d) with

(i) a map θ from the set of oriented segments not reduced to a point to ∆;

14

Figure 3: Reﬂections hyperplanes for the discrete aﬃne Weyl group B2 (cid:110) Z2.

(ii) a collection, A, called atlas, of isometric embeddings ι : E → X that preserve
∆-directions. This atlas is closed under precomposition with isometries in
WAﬀ . The image of such isometric embedding ι is called an apartment.

Moreover the following properties must hold.
(1) For all x, y, z ∈ X such that y (cid:54)= z and x (cid:54)= z,

d∆(θ(xy), θ(xz)) ≤ ∠x(y, z).

(2) The angle between two geodesic segments xy and xz is in D(θ(xy), θ(xz)).

(3) Every geodesic segment, ray or line is contained in an apartment.

(4) If A1 and A2 are two apartments with a non-empty intersection then the
(A1 ∩ A2) is the restriction of

(A1 ∩ A2) → ι−1

A2

transition map ι−1
A2
an element of WAﬀ .

◦ ιA1 : ι−1

A1

Euclidean subspaces of a Euclidean building are including in some apartment
and thus the rank of a Euclidean building is the dimension of any apartment that
is the dimension of the model Euclidean space E. When the rank is 1, that is E
is the real line, one recover (in a cumbersome way) real trees with no leave.

Remark 3.7. A Euclidean building is called discrete if the translation part of WAﬀ
is discrete. If X is an irreducible discrete Euclidean building such that WAﬀ acts
cocompactly then X has simplicial structure. Deﬁnition 3.6 allows non-discrete
buildings in a similar way that real trees are generalisations of simplicial trees.

15

Figure 4: The sphere at inﬁnity ∂E with the trace of reﬂection hyperplanes for
the spherical Weyl group B3.

The purpose of Kleiner-Leeb deﬁnition is to be stable under asymptotic cones.
Recall that the asymptotic cone of a metric space (X, d) is a limit of a sequence
n d) with λn → +∞. For example, ideal triangles (that
of metric spaces (X, λ−1
are triangles with vertices at inﬁnity) in the hyperbolic plane become thinner and
thinner when λn → +∞ and the limit is actually a real tree. Asymptotic cones
of Euclidean buildings are Euclidean buildings of same rank and same spherical
Weyl group [KL97, Theorem 5.1.1]. Moreover asymptotic cones of symmetric
spaces X are Euclidean buildings of same rank [KL97, Theorem 5.2.1]. In that
case, the spherical Weyl group is the classical Weyl group of the semi-simple group
Isom(X). This result holds also in inﬁnite dimension: The asymptotic cone of a
symmetric space of inﬁnite dimension and ﬁnite rank is a Euclidean building of
same rank [Duc13, Theorem 1.3].

There is a correspondance between Euclidean buildings and algebraic groups
over ﬁelds with non-Archimedean valuation (when the rank is at least 3). Eu-
clidean buildings associated to algebraic groups are called Bruhat-Tits buildings.
To prove the correspondance Tits showed how to reconstruct the group from the
building [Tit74, Tit86]. See [AB08, §11.9] and references therein for an overview.
Euclidean buildings and symmetric spaces share a common feature at inﬁnity:
their boundaries endowed with the Tits metric are spherical buildings. We do not
aim to give a deﬁnition but a taste of their geometric and combinatorial nature.
Spherical buildings can be deﬁned as metric object with a condition of curvature
bounded above [KL97, §3.2] and some more combinatorial properties. They are
union of Euclidean spheres of the same dimension and those spheres are glued
together according to the action of a ﬁnite Coxeter group. For a soft introduction,
we recommend [BH99, II.10.71]. Spherical buildings encode algebraic data. For
example, let us consider B the spherical building associated to SL(V ) where V
is some ﬁnite vector ﬁeld. This building B has a structure of simplicial complex
where simplices are in bijection with ﬂags in V . Inclusion of ﬂags corresponds to
inclusion of simplices.

The presence of this spherical building at inﬁnity is the essential source of

16

rigidity phenomena detailed in Section 4.

3.3 CAT(0) cube complexes

Besides symmetric spaces and Euclidean buildings, CAT(0) cube complex provide
a very nice class of CAT(0) space with interesting actions. They are suﬃciently
well understood to obtain very strong results like Tits Alternative (Theorem 5.3)
or a proof of the Rank Rigidity conjecture (Section 6). CAT(0) cube complexes
have both a geometric structure (CAT(0) inequality) and a more combinatorial
one: there are spaces with walls. This latter structure allows to understand prop-
erties of group with analytic ﬂavour like the Haagerup property and Property (T).
Moreover, the combinatorics of spaces with walls allow to construct CAT(0) cube
complexes. This is the so-called cubulation process and we will see some remark-
able applications of that construction. For an introduction paper to the subject
of CAT(0) cube complexes, we recommend [Sag14].

Roughly speaking, a CAT(0) cube complex is a collection of cubes glued to-
gether isometrically along faces in such a way that the resulting length space is
CAT(0).

A cube is a metric space isometric to [0, 1]n for some n (thus n is called the
dimension of the cube). A face of a cube C is subset corresponding to ﬁx k
coordinates equal to 0 or 1. In particular, a face of C is itself a cube of dimension
n − k where n is the dimension of C and k is the number of ﬁxed coordinates. An
attaching map between two cubes is an isometry between two faces of two diﬀerent
cubes. A cubical complex is the space obtained from a collection of cubes and a
collection of attaching maps where a point and its image via an attaching map are
identiﬁed. See [BH99, Deﬁnition 7.32] for details.

A cubical complex X is naturally endowed with the length metric obtained
by minimising length of continuous paths between two points where the distance
between two points in a common cube is the Euclidean one. A vertex (or a cube
of dimension 0) is a vertex of some cube. The link Lk(v) at a vertex v ∈ X is the
simplicial complex whose vertices are edges with one end v. Edges e0, e1, . . . , en ∈
Lk(v) are the vertices of n-simplex in Lk(v) if there is a cube C in X such that v
is a vertex of C and the ei’s are edges of C.

A simplicial complex is a ﬂag complex if for any ﬁnite collection of vertices
v0, . . . , vn such that for any i, j, vi and vj are are linked by an edge then there is
a n-simplex with vertices v0, . . . , vn.

The dimension of a cubical complex X is the supremum of the dimensions of

its cubes. It may be inﬁnite otherwise one say that X has ﬁnite dimension.

Gromov gave a local characterisation of cubical complexes that are CAT(0).
Such cubical complexes are called CAT(0) cube complexes. A proof in ﬁnite di-
mension can be found in [BH99, Theorem II.5.20]. The general case is treated in
[Lea13, Theorem B.8].

Theorem 3.8 (Gromov link condition). A cubical complex X is CAT(0) if and
only if X is simply connected and for any vertex the associated link is a ﬂag
complex.

17

In dimension 1, CAT(0) cube complexes are exactly simplicial trees with the

metric where any edge has length 1.

Deﬁnition 3.9. Let C be cube. A mid-cube is the subset of C where one coordi-
nate has been ﬁxed to 1/2.

It is a remarkable theorem of Sageev that mid-cubes of CAT(0) cube complexes
can be extended along the whole complex. Let us describe that construction. We
deﬁne an equivalence relation on the set of mid-cubes. For two mid-cubes M1, M2
in cubes C1, C2, we deﬁne M1 (cid:39) M2 if C1 and C2 have a common edge e such that
Mi ∩ e is the mid-point of e for i = 1, 2. The equivalence relation we consider is
the one generated by this relation.

Deﬁnition 3.10. An hyperplane H of a CAT(0) cube complex is the union of
mid-cubes in a equivalence class. The carrier C(H) of H is the union of cubes
intersecting H.

Theorem 3.11 ([Sag95]). Let H be an hyperplane of some CAT(0) cube complex
X.

• H is a closed convex subspace of X,
• H has a structure of CAT(0) cube complex of dimension at most dim(X)−1,
• C(H) is isometric to H × [−1/2, 1/2],
• X \ H has two connected components which are convex subsets of X.

H

Figure 5: An hyperplane H in some ﬁnite CAT(0) cube complex.

The two connected components of X \ H are called half-spaces. Two points
of X are separated by H if they lie in diﬀerent components of X \ H. The 1-
skeleton of X is a connected graph an thus has a graph metric where all edges have
length 1. Actually the distance between two vertices coincides with the number
of hyperplanes that separate them. This metric can be extended to the whole

18

complex in a unique way such that each cube of dimension n becomes isometric
to [0, 1]n with the (cid:96)1-metric. This metric on X is called the (cid:96)1-metric. If X has
ﬁnite dimension then the CAT(0)-metric and the (cid:96)1-metric are quasi-isometric (see
[BCG+09, Section 1]).

The non-positive curvature of CAT(0) cube complexes is very important but
the combinatorics of cubes is also very important and sometimes the CAT(0)-
metric forgot the combinatorics. Let us illustrate that with a simple example.
The Euclidean space Rn has a natural cube complex structure where vertices are
points with integral coordinates. The isometry group does not at all preserve this
structure but if one endow Rn with the (cid:96)1, the space become much more rigid and
the isometry group of the (cid:96)1-metric preserves the cubical structure.

Let us give another example. Salajan exhibited some elements of the Thompson
group F acts via parabolic isometries (for the CAT(0)-metric) [Sal12, Proposition
2.4.1] on the CAT(0) cube complex constructed by Farley. But one the other hand,
Haglund proved that isometries of CAT(0) cube complexes are semi-simple in a
combinatorial sense (up to consider the barycentric subdivision) [Hag07, Theorem
1.4]. Observe existence of parabolic elements may appear only in inﬁnite dimen-
sion. In ﬁnite dimension, there are only ﬁnitely many types of simplices and in
that case, all isometries are semi-simple [BH99].

Deﬁnition 3.12. Let V be a set. A wall W is a partition of V in two non-empty
subsets W−, W+. Two points u, v ∈ V are separated by a wall W if u, v does not
belong to the same subset W− or W+. The two subsets W+ and W− are called
half-spaces associated to the wall W . A space with walls is a set V with a collection
of walls where any two points are separated by a ﬁnite positive number of walls.

If V is a space with walls then one has a metric associated to the collection
of walls. The distance between u, v ∈ V is the number of walls separating them.
There is a duality between CAT(0) cube complexes and spaces with walls. Let X
be a CAT(0) cube complex and let V be the set of vertices of X. Any hyperplan H
induces a wall on V since any vertex is exactly in one component of X \ H. Thus
the collection of hyperplanes gives a structure of space with walls on V . Observe
that a vertex v of X gives a choice of an half-space for any hyperplane: simply
choose the one containing v !
Conversely, if V is a space with walls, An ultraﬁlter on the set of walls W is a
consistent choice of an half-space for any wall. More precisely, an ultraﬁlter α is a
map from W to the set of half-spaces such that for any W ∈ W, α(W ) = W± and
if W, W (cid:48) ∈ W and W+ ⊂ W (cid:48)
+. An ultraﬁlter
α satisﬁes the Descending Chain Condition if any non-increasing (for inclusion)
chain of half-spaces in the image of α is eventually constant. As before any point
v yields an ultraﬁlter by choosing the hyperplane containing v. This ultraﬁlter
satisﬁes the descending chain condition.

+ then α(W ) = W+ =⇒ α(W (cid:48)) = W (cid:48)

Now, if V is a space with walls then on can deﬁne a CAT(0) cube complex
whose vertex set is the set of ultraﬁlters with the descending chain condition.
Two vertices are joined by an edge if the corresponding ultraﬁlters give an diﬀerent
choice for exactly one wall. We just constructed the 0 and 1-skeletons. The higher
dimensional cubes are constructed inductively: If one see a complex isomorphic

19

to the n − 1 skeleton of an n-cube, one simply ﬁlls it with an n-cube. For more
details, see [CN05, Rol98] or the original construction [Sag95].

This duality between CAT(0) cube complexes and spaces with walls is actually
equivariant: If a group acts on one of the structure it acts also on the other. See
for example [CN05, Theorem 3].

The process of constructing a CAT(0) cube complex from a space with walls
(or more generally from a pocset [Rol98]) is called cubulation. The construction of
a CAT(0) cube complex on which a group acts nicely (e.g. properly, cocompactly
or both) is also called a cubulation of the group. For a nice survey about cubulated
groups and their properties, we recommend [HW14].
Examples 3.13. Let us list a few groups that have been cubulated:

• Right angle Artin groups [Cha07],
• Coxeter groups [NR03],
• Small cancellation groups [Wis04].
We will see in Section 4 some very strong rigidity results for symmetric spaces
and Euclidean buildings. It is natural to ask if similar phenomena happen in the
world of CAT(0) cube complexes.
The Roller boundary of CAT(0) cube complex X is is deﬁned in the following
way. Let H be the set of hyperplanes of X. Any hyperplane deﬁned two half-spaces
{H+, H−}.
H+ and H−. Any vertex of X can be identiﬁed with a point in

(cid:89)

H∈H

R

R \ X 0.

the closure of the image of the vertex set X 0 in this product.

Let us denote by X
The Roller boundary ∂RX is X
Question 3.14. Are there suitable hypothesis for rigidity in the world of CAT(0)
cube complexes? First there is no similar statement to Mostow rigidity (see Section
4.2). Actually one can cubulate surface groups in diﬀerent ways. Thus one may
construct quasi-isometric cube complexes with a proper and cocompact action of
the same group such the complexes have diﬀerent Roller boundaries. Nonetheless,
one can ask how (under suitable hypotheses), the Roller boundary determines the
complex.
Question 3.15. Trees with edges of length 1 have a continuous analog: real trees.
Since trees are CAT(0) cube complexes of dimension 1, it is natural to ask if there
are analogs of real trees. Is there a good notion of real CAT(0) cube complexes?
For example, one can construct a CAT(0) cube complex form a space with walls.
There is a more general notion of space with measured walls (see references in
Section 5.3). Can one construct a CAT(0) space associated to a space with mea-
sured walls in an equivariant way? The natural generalisations of trees (working
well with spaces with measured walls) are median spaces. There are not CAT(0)
in general.

3.4 Cubulating hyperbolic 3-manifold groups

Let us describe a bit a recent and very fruitful cubulation of certain groups. A
hyperbolic 3-dimensional group is the fundamental group of a closed 3-dimensional

20

manifold which admits an hyperbolic metric; that is a Riemannian metric of sec-
tional curvature -1. In particular, such a group acts properly cocompactly on the
hyperbolic space of dimension 3. So the group is quasi-isometric to this hyper-
bolic space and thus hyperbolic in the sense of Gromov (see e.g. [BH99, III.2] or
[GdlH90]).

A combination of results of Bergeron-Wise [BW12] and Kahn-Markovich [KM12]

implies a cubulation of hyperbolic 3-dimensional groups.

Theorem 3.16. Every hyperbolic 3-manifold group acts properly and cocompactly
on a CAT(0) cube complex.

After Perelman’s proof of Thurston geometrization conjecture. One of the
few remaining conjectures was the virtual Haken conjecture (stated by Wald-
hausen): Any closed and aspherical 3-dimensional manifold has a ﬁnite cover
which is Haken. A manifold M is Haken if it contains an embedded surface S
such that the inclusion S (cid:44)→ M induces an embedding for fundamental groups
Π1(S) (cid:44)→ Π1(M ).

Building on Theorem 3.16 and the theory of special cube complexes [HW08],
Agol was able to show that any hyperbolic group that acts properly cocompactly
on a CAT(0) cube complex is virtually special. Eventually, he proved the virtual
Haken conjecture. For details, see [Wis12].

Theorem 3.17 ([Ago13]). Every hyperbolic 3-manifold is virtually Haken.

4 Rigidity properties of the above examples

4.1 Bieberbach theorems and the solvable subgroup theo-

rem

We aim to show in that section how the above examples are rigid. Let us start
with the simplest example given by Euclidean spaces. A group acting discretely
cocompactly by isometries on Rn is called a crystallographic group of Rn.
Theorem 4.1 (Bieberbach theorems). Any crystallographic group of Rn contains
an Abelian group Zn of ﬁnite index. This Abelian subgroup is generated by n
linearly independent translations.

There are ﬁnitely many isomorphism classes of crystallographic groups of Rn.
Accounts on those theorems may be found in [Aus65, Bus85] and [Thu97, §4.2].
Theorem 4.1 implies existence of a free abelian subgroup acting properly by semi-
simple isometries. One has the following converse.

Theorem 4.2 (Flat torus theorem). Let A be a free abelian group of rank n acting
properly by semi-simple isometries on a CAT(0) space X. Then there is a closed
convex subspace Y ⊂ X which is A-invariant and splits as a product Z × Rn. The
action of A on Y is diagonal, being trivial on Z and by translations on Rn.

From that ﬁrst result of rigidity, one can show that solvable subgroups of groups
acting geometrically are very restricted. A group has virtually some property if
there is a subgroup of ﬁnite index which has the property.

21

Theorem 4.3 (Solvable subgroup theorem). Let Γ be CAT(0) group. Then any
solvable subgroup of Γ is virtually an Abelian free group of ﬁnite rank.

4.2 Superrigidity

In this section, we are interested in rigidity of lattices (discrete subgroups of ﬁnite
covolume) of semi-simple algebraic groups over local ﬁelds. Recall that a local
ﬁeld is a topological ﬁeld which is locally compact. There is a short list of such
ﬁelds: ﬁnite ﬁelds Fq, R, C, ﬁnite extensions of Qp (p-adic numbers) and ﬁnite
extension of Fq((T )) (Laurent series over a ﬁnite ﬁeld).

The idea here under the term rigidity is the fact that a lattice determines
the group where it lives. Thanks to the dictionary between semi-simple algebraic
groups over local ﬁelds and their symmetric spaces or Euclidean buildings, we state
all results using the action on the associated CAT(0) space.

Theorem 4.4 (Mostow Strong Rigidity [Mos73]). Let X, Y be two symmetric
spaces and Γ be a group acting freely cocompactly by isometries on both X, Y via
two homomorphisms α : Γ → Isom(X) and β : γ → Isom(Y ). If X has no factor
isometric to H2 then there is an isomorphism ϕ : Isom(X) (cid:39) Isom(Y ) such that
β = ϕ ◦ α.

Let us explain why the hyperbolic plane has to be excluded. If S a Riemann
surface of genus at least 2, it can be endow with an hyperbolic metric and thus its
universal cover is H2 (this is a uniformization of the surface). But there are many
non-isometric ways to endow S with an hyperbolic metric (the diﬀerent possibilites
are parametrised by the Teichm¨uller space of S). Two non-isometric ways give two
non-conjugated embeddings of Π1(S) in H2 as a lattice.

A few years after Mostow proved his rigidity theorem, Margulis proved a very
stronger result [Mar91]. The name superrigidity for that result was coined by
Mostow. Margulis stated the result purely in group theoretic terms. It was an
intermediate result to obtain arithmeticity of lattices. We use a more geometric
rephrasing [GP91, Pan09].

Theorem 4.5 (Geometric Superrigidity). Let X and Y be proper symmetric
CAT(0) spaces or Euclidean buildings of rank at least 2. If Γ is a lattice of Isom(X)
and Γ acts by isometries on Y without ﬁxed point in Y then there is closed convex
subspace Z ⊂ Y which is isometric to a product of irreducible factors of X and the
action Γ (cid:121) Z factorises via a quotient of Isom(X).

The similar result for symmetric spaces of rank 1 which are not the real of
complex hyperbolic space were obtained later [Cor92, GS92]. This superrigidity
result inspired a lot of diﬀerent works in many diﬀerent directions. Let us just
mention [Mon06] for lattices in products, [Duc15b] for symmetric spaces of inﬁ-
nite dimension and ﬁnite rank and [GKM08] for Busemann non-positively curved
targets.

Let us introduce a weakening of being isometric for two metric spaces. Roughly
speaking, two metric spaces are quasi-isometric if they are homothetic at large
scale.

22

Deﬁnition 4.6. Let (X, d) and (X(cid:48), d(cid:48)) be two metric spaces. A map f : X → X(cid:48)
is a quasi-isometry if there are constants L, C > 0 such that for any x, y ∈ X,

1/L d(x, y) − C ≤ d(cid:48)(f (x), f (y)) ≤ Ld(x, y) + C

and for any x(cid:48) ∈ X(cid:48) there is x ∈ X with d(cid:48)(x(cid:48), f (x)) ≤ C.

It is a simple computation to show that if f : X → X(cid:48) is a quasi-isometry
then there is g : X(cid:48) → X which also a quasi-isometry such that for any x ∈ X,
d(x, g(f (x))) ≤ 2LC. In that sense g is a quasi-inverse to f .

In Mostow theorem (Theorem 4.4), the two actions of the common cocompact
lattice gives an equivariant quasi-isometry between the two symmetric spaces X, Y .
Mostow showed that this quasi-isometry lies at bounded distance from a isometry
(up to rescaling of the metric on each factor). Margulis conjectured that if X, Y
are irreducible symmetric spaces of higher rank then the conclusion should also
hold without the equivariance of the quasi-isometry.

Theorem 4.7 ([KL97, Theorem 1.1.3]). Let X be an irreducible symmetric space
of higher rank or an irreducible higher rank Bruhat-Tits building and let Y be a
product of Euclidean spaces, symmetric spaces and Euclidean thick buildings. If
X and Y are quasi-isometric then Y has only one factor which is isometric (after
rescaling) to X and the quasi-isometry is at bounded from that isometry.

Kleiner and Leeb proved that for products of Euclidean spaces, symmetric
spaces and Euclidean buildings, the splitting as a product of irreducible factors
is an invariant of quasi-isometry. In particular they were able to prove Margulis
conjecture.

Corollary 4.8. If X is an irreducible higher rank symmetric space and Y is a
symmetric space quasi-isometric then X and Y are homothetic.

The symmetric spaces of rank 1 are hyperbolic spaces over R, C, the quaternions
or Cayley octonions. In the last two cases, Corollary 4.8 holds but for the ﬁrst
two ones, there are much more quasi-isometries than the ones at bounded distance
from homotheties.

4.3 Isometries of proper CAT(0) spaces

Semi-simple algebraic groups over local ﬁelds (and their subgroups) are leading
examples of groups acting on proper CAT(0) spaces. As soon as the CAT(0) space
X is proper, the isometry group is locally compact. The structure theory of locally
compact is quite well understood and in particular, the solution of the Hilbert ﬁfth
problem tell us when a connected locally compact group is actually a Lie group
and in particular the connected component of the isometry group of a symmetric
space.

In a series of two papers [CM09a, CM09b], Caprace and Monod developed
a structure theory for group acting on proper CAT(0) spaces. The settings are
cocompact actions of groups acting on a CAT(0) space or merely that the action of
the full group of isometry is cocompact. The two motivating questions are: What

23

are the properties the general properties of these pairs of groups and spaces?
How to characterise Euclidean buildings and symmetric spaces? One main theme
underlying this question is spliting canonically the space into irreducible pieces
(de Rham decompositions).

They prove a lot of theorems and we emphasise just a few of them. These are
maybe not the strongest but they illustrate well the general ideas. The ﬁrst one can
be seen as a solution of the Hilbert ﬁfth problem for CAT(0) spaces. Recall that
a locally compact group G has a connected component of the identity G0 which
is a normal closed subgroup such that G/G0 is totally disconnected. Moreover G0
has a unique maximal normal subgroup A (the amenable radical) such G0/A is a
semi-simple Lie group without compact factors.

A CAT(0) space is geodesically complete if any segment is included in some
geodesic line. Under geodesic completeness, the understanding of the relation
between splitting and these normal subgroups leads to the following theorem.

Theorem 4.9 ([CM09b, Theorem 1.1]). Let X be a proper geodesically complete
CAT(0) space such that Isom(X) acts cocompactly without ﬁxed point at inﬁnity.
Then X splits as a product

X (cid:39) M × Rn × Y

where M is a symmetric space, Isom(Y ) is totally disconnected and acts by semi-
simple isometries.

Moreover, this splitting is preserved by any isometry.

Under a supplementary assumption on stabilisers of points at inﬁnity, one gets

the following characterisation of symmetric spaces and Euclidean buildings.

Theorem 4.10 ([CM09b, Theorem 1.3]). Let X be a geodesically complete proper
CAT(0) space. Suppose that the stabiliser of every point at inﬁnity acts cocom-
pactly on X. Then X is isometric to a product of symmetric spaces, Euclidean
buildings and Bass–Serre trees.

Discrete subgroups of semi-simple algebraic groups over local ﬁelds have been
studied intensively (see e.g. [Mar91]). In particular, for lattices, that are discrete
subgroup of ﬁnite covolume, two important theorems are Borel density theorem
and Margulis arithmeticity theorem. Roughly speaking, the ﬁrst one proves Zariski
density of lattices and the second proves arithmeticity of lattices in higher rank.
Since isometry groups of proper CAT(0) spaces have a Haar measure, one has

also a notion of lattice.

Deﬁnition 4.11. Let X be a proper CAT(0) space with cocompact isometry
group. A CAT(0) lattice is a lattice of Isom(X).

Observe that a CAT(0) lattice is in particular a CAT(0) group. For connected
semi-simple Lie group without compact factors, Zariski density of a subgroup is
understood on the action on the associated symmetric space: Let X be a symmetric
space. A subgroup Γ ≤ Isom(X)0 is Zariski-dense if and only if Γ (cid:121) X is minimal
and Γ does not ﬁx any point at inﬁnity.

Here is an analog for general proper CAT(0) spaces.

24

Theorem 4.12 ([CM09a, Theorem 1.1]). Let X be a proper CAT(0) space, G a
locally compact group acting continuously by isometries on X and Γ < G a lattice.
Suppose that X has no Euclidean factor. If G acts minimally on X without ﬁxed
point at inﬁnity, so does Γ.

Surprisingly, the mere existence of a parabolic isometry in the full isometry
group can lead to a very strong result like the following arithmeticity statement.

Theorem 4.13 ([CM09a, Theorem 1.5]). Let (Γ, X) be an irreducible ﬁnitely
generated CAT(0) lattice where X is geodesically complete and possesses some
parabolic isometry.
If Γ is residually ﬁnite, then X is a product of symmetric
spaces and Bruhat-Tits buildings. In particular, Γ is an arithmetic lattice unless
X is a real or complex hyperbolic space.

5 Amenability and non-positive curvature

5.1 Amenability

Recall that a topological group is amenable if for any compact G-space, there
is a ﬁxed point. First examples of amenable groups are given by Abelian and
compact groups and amenability is stable under group extension and passing to
closed subgroups. For example, virtually solvable groups are amenable. For a
reference on amenability we recommend [BdlHV08, Appendix G] which is concise
and contains full proofs of the equivalence between the most useful deﬁnitions of
amenability.

One main obstruction to amenability is the existence of a closed free subgroup.
Free groups are not amenable because of paradoxical decompositions (See for ex-
ample [Wag85]).

In the realm of CAT(0) spaces, the ﬁrst occurence of amenability is due to
ﬂatness. Recall that the isometry group of the Euclidean space Rn is O(n) (cid:110) Rn
which is amenable as an extension of a compact group by an Abelian one.

Since linear groups are one of our main sources of groups acting on spaces of

non-positive curvature, it is natural to concentrate ﬁrst on that case.

Theorem 5.1 (Tit’s Alternative [Tit72, Theorem 1]). Let Γ be a subgroup of
GL(n, k) where k is a ﬁeld of characteristic 0 and n ∈ N. Then Γ is virtually
solvable or contains a non-abelian free subgroup.

In positive characteristic, there is a slightly more general statement [Tit72,
Theorem 2]. This alternative has many interesting consequences. For example,
any ﬁnitely generated linear (in any characteristic) contains a free or is virtually
solvable. In particular, it has exponential growth or polynomial growth.

Corollary 5.2. A ﬁnitely generated amenable linear group is virtually solvable.

The original proof uses the dynamics of the action of linear groups on the
projective space where a ping-pong argument produces non-Abelian free groups.
So it did not use the action of Γ on the symmetric space or the Euclidean building
(when k is a valued ﬁeld) X associated to GL(n, k).

25

Because of the importance of Tits alternative for linear groups, it this natural
to try to extend the result for other classes than linear groups. For example, there
is a version of the alternative for hyperbolic groups [GdlH90, Th´eor`eme 38]. See
the introduction of [SW05] for other classes. Let us give two examples where the
action on some CAT(0) space leads to an analog of Tits alternative. We start with
groups acting on CAT(0) cube complexes (see also [CS11, Fer15]).

Theorem 5.3 ([SW05]). Let G be a group with a bound on the orders of ﬁnite
subgroups. If G acts properly on a ﬁnite dimensional CAT(0) cube complex then G
contains a non-Abelian free subgroup or G is a ﬁnitely generated virtually abelian
group.

The ﬁnite dimension assumption on the complex is very important. For the
example the Thompson group F has no non-Abelian free subgroups, is not virtually
solvable but acts on a proper (inﬁnite dimensional) CAT(0) cube complex [Far08].
It’s an open problem to decide wether Thompson group F is amenable or not.

An other example is given by [Can11, Th´eor`eme C] which shows that the group
of birational transformations of a compact K¨ahler complex surface satisﬁes the
Tits alternative. This means that any ﬁnitely generated subgroup contains a non-
abelian free subgroup or is virtually solvable. The proof relies on a construction
of an action of the group of birational transformations on the inﬁnite dimensional
hyperbolic space.

Since the Tits alternative holds true for linear groups and groups acting on
CAT(0) cube complexes, which two main sources of groups acting on CAT(0)
spaces, it is natural to try to know if it holds more generally (see [SW05, Problem
1.3] and [CM13, Introduction]).
Question 5.4. Is there a version of Tits Alternative for groups acting on proper
cocompact CAT(0) spaces?

After the Flat Torus and Solvable Subgroup Theorems, the main tool to under-
stand amenable groups is Adams-Ballmann Theorem which generalises previous
results for manifolds of non-positive curvature. See [BS87a, Theorem 2] and ref-
erences in [AB98].

Theorem 5.5 ([AB98]). Let X be a proper CAT(0) space. If G is an amenable
group acting continuously by isometries on X then G stabilises a ﬂat subspace
(possibly of dimension 0, that is a point) or ﬁxes a point at inﬁnity.

The theorem has been also proved when the space has ﬁnite telescopic dimen-
sion instead of being proper [CL10]. Observe that the conclusion cannot hold
without any assumption on the CAT(0) space. Edelstein exhibits an isometry of
an Hilbert space of inﬁnite dimension with no ﬁxed point at inﬁnity nor invariant
(ﬁnite dimensional) Euclidean subspace [Ede64, §2].

Tits alternative gives a complete description of amenable linear groups. For
suﬃciently homogenous CAT(0) spaces, a description of amenable subgroups has
been obtained. A locally compact group is locally elliptic if it is an increasing
union of compact subgroups. A locally compact group H has a unique maximal
normal locally elliptic subgroup, its locally elliptic radical. Let us denote it by
R(H).

26

Theorem 5.6 ([CM13, Theorem A]). Let X be a proper cocompact CAT(0) space.
A closed subgroup H ≤ Isom(X) is amenable if and only if the following equivalent
conditions hold:

1. The identity component H◦ is solvable by compact,
2. H◦R(H) is open in H,
3. H/(H◦R(H)) is virtually solvable.
This algebraic statement has also a geometric counterpart. To state it, let us
introduce the transverse space to a point at inﬁnity. Let ξ be a point at inﬁnity
of some CAT(0) space X, one introduces a pseudo-metric on geodesic rays ρ such
that ρ(+∞) = ξ. For two such rays ρ1, ρ2,

d(ρ1, ρ2) = inf
t,s>0

d(ρ1(t), ρ2(s)).

After identifying rays at distance 0, one gets a metric space whose completion Xξ
is a new CAT(0) space on which the stabiliser of ξ in Isom(X) acts by isometries.
This space is called the transverse space associated to ξ [Lee00, Cap09].

Let us illustrate this concept in some simple cases. If X is a Euclidean space,
a point at inﬁnity is given by parallel geodesic rays and two rays ρ1, ρ2, satisfy
d(ρ1, ρ2) = 0 if and only if there is t0 ∈ R such that ρ1(t) = ρ2(t + t0) for t
In particular, the transverse space to ξ ∈ ∂X can be identiﬁed
large enough.
with an orthogonal space to some geodesic ray in the class of the point ξ. If X
is the hyperbolic plane, any two geodesic rays ρ1, ρ2 with a common end point at
inﬁnity satisfy d(ρ1, ρ2) = 0 and the transverse associated to any point at inﬁnity
is reduced to a point.

For symmetric spaces, the construction goes back to Karpelevich [Kar67] and
can be express in the following way. If ξ is a point at inﬁnity of a symmetric space
X, the stabiliser of ξ is a parabolic group Pξ and the transverse space Xξ is the
product of a Euclidean space and an other symmetric space which is the symmetric
space associated to the semi-simple part of Pξ in a Levi decomposition (see [Ebe96,
§2.217] for the background required). The space Xξ can be isometrically embedded
If ξ(cid:48) ∈ ∂X is opposite to ξ (that means ξ, ξ(cid:48) are the ends of a common
in X.
geodesic line) then the union of geodesic lines with ends ξ and ξ(cid:48) is a totally
geodesic subspace which splits as R× Xξ. The R-factor is given by any line joining
ξ and ξ(cid:48).

In that case the space Xξ strongly depends on ξ (actually on the minimal cell
of the spherical building at inﬁnity containing it). For example, if Pξ is a minimal
parabolic, Xξ is a Euclidean of dimension rank(X) − 1. Let G be any semi-simple
group of non-compact type. Then G can be embedded (via the adjoint action)
in SLn(R) for n large enough and by Mostow-Karpelevich theorem [Mos55], the
symmetric space of G embeds isometrically in the one of SLn(R). Actually, it lies
as a factor in some transverse space at inﬁnity (as soon as G (cid:54)= SLn(R)).
This construction of transverse space can be repeated and by induction, one
construct Xξ1,...,ξi where ξi ∈ ∂Xx1,...,xi−1. A reﬁned ﬂat of X is ﬂat in some
Xξ1,...,ξi. With that reﬁned construction, one has a geometric characterisation of
amenable subgroups of Isom(X).

27

Theorem 5.7 ([CM13, Corollary G]). Let X be a proper cocompact CAT(0) space.
A closed subgroup of Isom(X) is amenable if and only if it preserves a reﬁned fat.

5.2 Amenability at inﬁnity

Even if a group is not amenable, it may have amenable actions. There are diﬀerent
notions of amenable actions. Here is the one we use, which is sometimes called
topological amenability. The space Prob(G) of probability measures on a Hausdorﬀ
locally compact group G is endowed with the weak*-topology as a subspace of the
dual space of continuous functions with compact support on G (see e.g.
[Fol99,
Chapter 7]).

Deﬁnition 5.8. Let B be a locally compact space and G be a locally com-
pact group acting continuously by homeomorphims on B. The action G (cid:121) B
is amenable if there is sequence of continuous maps µn : B → Prob(G) such that
for any b ∈ B,

(cid:107)µn(gb) − µn(cid:107) → 0.

The norm used above is the dual norm on Cc(G)∗. This coincides with the

norm of total variation.

The case we are interested in is when B is compact. We refer to [AD02,

ADR00].

Deﬁnition 5.9. A group is amenable at inﬁnity if there is a compact space B
and an amenable G-action on B.

For example the action of an amenable group on a point is amenable and thus
amenable groups are amenable at inﬁnity. For semi-simple algebraic groups over
local ﬁelds G, a minimal parabolic group is amenable is and G/P is compact thus G
is amenable at inﬁnity. The amenability is at inﬁnity because G/P can be identiﬁed
with the set of maximal simplices of the spherical building at inﬁnity. For a survey
on this speciﬁc subject one can read [Oza06a]. For discrete groups amenability at
inﬁnity is equivalent to exactness and Property A. An other example is given by
groups acting on trees: The action on the boundary at inﬁnity is amenable. This
is the origin of examples of amenability at inﬁnity that we see in the remaining
of this section.
In rank less than 3, Euclidean buildings are not necessarily of
algebraic origin but one still has amenability at inﬁnity.

Theorem 5.10 ([L´ec10]). Let X be a locally ﬁnite building. The action of Aut(X)
on the combinatorial compactiﬁcation of X is amenable.

We denote by ∂RX the Roller boundary of a CAT(0) cube complex X.

In
[BCG+09] it is proved that discrete groups acting metrically properly on a ﬁnite
dimensional CAT(0) cube complex are amenable at inﬁnity. Actually the proof
leads to the following slightly more general statement.

Theorem 5.11. Let X be a ﬁnite dimensional CAT(0) cube complex and G be a
discrete group acting on X by automorphisms with ﬁnite vertex stabilisers. The
action of G on the compact space ∂RX is amenable.

28

Proof. We use notations from [BCG+09] and we adapt the proof of Theorem 4.2
there. First we make the notation of fn,x dependant of z ∈ ∂RX thus we denote
by f z

n,x the function deﬁned by

(cid:18)n − d(x, y) + δz(y)

(cid:19)



f z
n,x(y) =

δz(y)

0

if y ∈ [x, z]
if y /∈ [x, z]

where δz(y) = N −|Nz(y)| (N is the dimension of the complex). As in [BCG+09],
this function is ﬁnitely supported and thus (cid:96)1. For g ∈ Aut(X), the equivariance
relation is g · f z

n,gx. It is proved that

n,x = f gz

n,x(cid:48)(cid:107)

(cid:107)f z

n,x − f z
(cid:107)f z
n,x(cid:107)

≤ 2d(x, x(cid:48))N

.

n + N

Moreover, it is shown that if zi → z then f zi

n,x coincides with f z

n,x for i large
for ﬁxed n, x, the map

enough and we get the following continuity property:
z (cid:55)→ f z

n,x is locally constant.
f z
n,x0

(gx)

(cid:88)

n =

Now, deﬁne φz

vertex set of X) and Gx ≤ G the isotropy group of x. One has that φz
supported and (cid:107)φz

|Gx|
n is ﬁnitely
(cid:107) (which actually does not depend on z nor on x0).

where T is a transversal of G (cid:121) X 0 (X 0 is the

x∈T
n(cid:107) = (cid:107)f z
For z ∈ ∂RX and g ∈ G,

n,x0

(cid:107)g · φz

n − φgz

n (cid:107) =

|φz
n(g−1h) − φz

n(h)|

|f z

n,x0

(g−1hx) − fn,x0(hx)|

|Gx|

|f gz

n,gx0

(hx) − fn,x0(hx)|

h∈G

(cid:88)
≤ (cid:88)
≤ (cid:88)
≤ (cid:88)

h∈G, x∈T

h∈G, x∈T
|f z

n,x0

(x) − f gz

n,x0

|Gx|
(x)|

x∈X
≤ (cid:107)f z
− f gz
≤ 2 d(x0, gx0)

n,x0

n,x0

(cid:107)
N

(cid:107)φz
n(cid:107)

n + N

Deﬁning mz

φz
n(cid:107)φz
n(cid:107) , all properties of the deﬁnition 2.1 are satisﬁed and
G (cid:121) ∂RX is amenable.

n =

More generally in the spirit of [Oza06a, Corollary 2.9] (and also [Oza06b]):

Theorem 5.12. Let X be a ﬁnite dimensional CAT(0) cube complex and G be a
countable group acting on X by automorphisms with amenable vertex stabilisers.
The action of G on the compact space ∂RX is amenable.

29

Proof. Up to considering a G-invariant convex subcomplex of X, we assume that
X has countably vertices. We directly use [Oza06a, Proposition 2.7] where the
countable G-space is the space of vertices of X and the compact G-space is the
Roller boundary ∂RX. Fix a base vertex x0 and for z ∈ ∂RX, deﬁne µz
n to be
(cid:107). A similar computation as in the proof of
the probability measure f z
Theorem 5.11 shows that (cid:107)gµz
and thus we can apply
directly [Oza06a, Proposition 2.7] with Y being a point (which is a G-space with
trivial action and an amenable space for any stabiliser of point in X) and we get
that G (cid:121) ∂RX is amenable

n (cid:107) ≤ 2 d(x0, gx0)

n + N

N

n,x0

/(cid:107)f z
n − µgz

n,x0

Corollary 5.13. The Higman group acts amenably on the Roller boundary of its
square complex.

Remark 5.14. The Higman group is known to be exact because it has ﬁnite asymp-
totic dimension. Corollary 5.13 yields another proof of that fact. Observe that
[BCG+09] is not suﬃcient because the action of the Higman group on its complex
is not metrically proper (vertices have inﬁnite stabilisers).

5.3 Haagerup property and property (T)

There is an another weakening of amenability related to actions on some CAT(0)
spaces: the Haagerup property.

Deﬁnition 5.15. A locally compact group has the Haagerup property if it admits
a continuous and metrically proper action by isometries on a Hilbert space.

Any continuous action of group Γ on a Hilbert space H is given by continuous
homomorphisms α : Γ → O(H) and a continuous cocycle b : Γ → H (that is b(gh) =
α(g)b(h) + b(g) for all g, h ∈ Γ). The action is metrically proper if (cid:107)b(g)(cid:107) goes to
inﬁnity when g leaves all compacta of Γ.

With the convient characterisation of amenability, it is not diﬃcult to show
that amenable groups have Haagerup property [BCV95]. Originally, the Haagerup
property was deﬁned in terms of mixing unitary representations. It was shown that
for second countable groups, the Haagerup property is equivalent to Gromov’s a-
(T)-menability, that is the deﬁnition we gave. For a panorama and characterisa-
tions of groups with the Haagerup property see [CCJ+01].

The name that Gromov gave to this property comes from the strong opposition
of Haagerup property to property (T). Actually, a group with both properties is
compact.

Deﬁnition 5.16. A second countable locally compact group has property (T) if
any continuous isometric action on a Hilbert space has ﬁxed points.

A good reference about property (T) is [BdlHV08]. In the algebraic world, the

situation is well understood.

Theorem 5.17. Let k be a local ﬁeld and G be the k-points of a connected almost
simple algebraic group k. Let r be the k-rank of G.

30

• If r ≥ 2 then G as property (T) ([BdlHV08, Theorem 1.6.1]).
• If r = 1 and k is non-Archimedean then G has Haagerup property.
• If r = 1 and k = C then G is locally isomorphic to PSL2(C) (cid:39) SO+(3, 1)

and have Haagerup property.

• If r = 1 and k = R, the two properties occur: SO(n, 1) and SU(n, 1) have

Haagerup property but Sp(n, 1) and F−20

4

have property (T).

This theorem shows that knowing that G act on a symmetric space or a Eu-
clidean building does not suﬃce to conclude it has one or the other property.
Nonetheless, one can explain how the Haagerup property occur. If the rank is 1
and k is non-Archimedean, G acts properly on the associated Euclidean building
which is a tree thus a space with walls. The groups SO(n, 1) acts on the real hy-
perbolic space of dimension which has a natural structure of space with measured
walls. Walls are given by totally geodesic hypersurfaces and a Crofton formula
show that the distance between two points is proportional to the measure of walls
separating them [BdlHV08, Proposition 2.6.4]. The role of spaces with measured
walls is explained below.

The deﬁnitions of the two properties involve Hilbert spaces which are com-
pletely ﬂat spaces. Nevertheless these properties can be characterised by actions
on negatively curved spaces.

Proposition 5.18. Let X be the real or complex hyperbolic space of inﬁnite di-
mension and let Γ be a second countable locally compact group.

• Γ has the Haagerup property if and only if Γ has a metrically proper action

by isometries on X.

• Γ has property (T) if and only if any action of Γ on X has ﬁxed points.

The two properties are stable under passing to lattices: if Γ is a lattice in G
then G has Haagerup property (respectively property (T)) if and only if Γ has the
same property (see [BdlHV08, Theorem 1.7.1] and [CCJ+01, Proposition 6.1.5])
but the Haagerup property nor property (T) are geometric, that is invariant under
quasi-isometries. See [CAPV14] and [BdlHV08, 3.6]. Nonetheless, one can give
combinatoric/geometric characterisations using actions on spaces with measured
walls. We have seen what is a space with walls where points are separated by a
ﬁnite number of walls. There is a generalisation of this notion where there is a
measure on the set of walls and points are separated by a set of walls of ﬁnite
measure.

Theorem 5.19 ([CDH10, Theorem 1.3]). Let G be a locally compact second count-
able group.

1. The group G has property (T) if and only if any continuous action by auto-

morphisms on a space with measured walls has bounded orbits.

2. The group G has the Haagerup property if and only if it admits a proper

continuous action by automorphisms on a space with measured walls.

31

Let us explain a bit that theorem in a simple case: groups acting on trees. If a
group G acts on a tree T then one gets an isometric action on a associated Hilbert
space H. If G has a ﬁxed point on H then G has a ﬁxed point in T . If the action
on T is metrically proper then the action on H is also metrically proper.
Let E be the set of oriented edges of T and let H = L2(E) that is the Hilbert
space with orthonormal basis {δe}e∈E. If G acts on E, it permutes edges and thus
one gets an orthogonal representation of G on H. Fix a vertex v0 and for any
vertex v denote by [v, v0] the ﬁnite set of edges between v0 and v. Now deﬁne
εg(e)δe where εg(e) = ±1 being positive if e points from gv0 to v0
b(g) =

(cid:88)

e∈[gv0,v0]

and negative otherwise. It is not diﬃcult to check that b is actually a cocycle and
that the associated isometric action on H has the above properties.

If you remove an edge from a tree you get two connected components and
thus a partition of the set of vertices in two parts. So the set of unoriented edges
yields a structure of space with walls on the set of vertices of a tree. The distance
between two vertices is exactly the number of walls separating them.

One can generalise this construction from trees to spaces with (measured) walls.

The relevant Hilbert space is the L2-space on half-spaces.

6 Rank rigidity and ﬂat closing conjectures

6.1 Rank Rigidity Conjecture

An hyperbolic isometry is a semi-simple isometry with positive translation length.

Deﬁnition 6.1. Let X be a CAT(0) space. A rank one isometry is an hyperbolic
isometry such that none of its axes is the boundary of an isometrically embedded
Euclidean half-plane.

Rank one isometries are very interesting because of the dynamics at inﬁnity
they induce. There is a so-called north-south dynamics. If g is a rank-one isometry
and X is proper then g has exactly two ﬁxed points at inﬁnity ξ−, ξ+ ∈ ∂X and for
any pair of neighbourhoods V± of ξ±, there is k ∈ N such that gk(∂X \ V−) ⊂ V+
[Ham09, Lemma 4.4].

Conjecture 6.2 (Rank Rigidity Conjecture [BB08]). Let X be an irreducible
geodesically complete and proper CAT(0) space. If Γ is a countable group acting
properly and cocompactly on X then X is a symmetric space of non-compact type
and rank at least 2, a Euclidean building of dimension at least 2 or Γ contains a
rank one isometry.

This conjecture comes from the following theorem for Hadamard manifolds.

Theorem 6.3 (Rank Rigidity Theorem [BS87b, Bal85]). Let X be an irreducible
Hadamard manifold with a countable group Γ acting properly and cocompactly by
isometries. Either M is a symmetric space of non-compact type and rank at least
2 or Γ contains a rank one isometry.

32

For a more detailed discussion about the rank rigidity theorem, we refer to
[Bal95, Theorem C]. Beyond the world of manifolds, the conjecture has been proved
for a large class of singular CAT(0) spaces.

Theorem 6.4 (Rank Rigidity for CAT(0) cube complexes [CS11, Theorem A]).
Let X be a ﬁnite dimensional CAT(0) cube complex and Γ a group acting minimally
by isometries on X. If Γ has no ﬁxed point in X then X splits as the product of
two cube sub-complexes or Γ contains a rank one isometry.

Remark 6.5. If one remove the minimality hypothesis, then the lack of ﬁxed points
implies the existence of a convex Γ-invariant subcomplex Y ⊂ X such that the
action Γ (cid:121) Y is minimal. If Y does not split as a product then Γ contains an
element which acts as a rank one isometry on Y .

Having the Rank Rigidity in mind, the rank one case appears to be the generic
case and thus it is natural to try to understand rank one isometries on one side
[Ham09] and the possibility for spaces to have rank one isometries [Ham12].

6.2 Flat Closing Conjecture

There is another conjecture related to the presence of ﬂats in a CAT(0) space.
Recall that the ﬂat torus theorem allows to construct ﬂats in a CAT(0) space X
from the data of an Abelian free subgroup of Isom(X). The ﬂat closing conjecture
asks for a kind of converse. Let Γ be a group of isometries of X. A ﬂat F ⊂ X
is Γ-periodic if there is a subgroup Γ0 ≤ Γ preserving F and such that Γ0\X is
compact. Observe that if Γ is discrete, Theorem 4.1 implies that Γ0 is virtually a
free abelian group of rank dim(F ).

Conjecture 6.6 (Flat Closing Conjecture [Gro93, 6.B3]). Assume X is a proper
CAT(0) space with a proper cocompact action of a discrete group Γ. Assume that
X contains a ﬂat of dimension n. Is it true that X contains a Γ-periodic ﬂat of
dimension n?

Observe that a positive answer to that question would imply that Γ contains
Zn as a subgroup thanks to Theorem 4.1. The conjecture is known to be true
for n = 1. Actually, the proof does not even use the existence of a geodesic. It
only uses that some inﬁnite discrete group acts geometrically on a proper CAT(0)
[Swe99, Theorem 11].

The conjecture also holds for subgroups for discrete subgroups of isometry
groups of symmetric spaces. Recall that the real rank of this isometry groups
coincides with the rank of its symmetric space.

Proposition 6.7 ([PR72]). Let X be symmetric space and Γ a discrete subgroup
of Isom(X) acting cocompactly. Then Γ contains a free Abelian subgroup Zr where
r = rank(X).

Proof. Let G be the isometry group of X. This is a semi-simple Lie group with
trivial center and no compact factor. The subgroup Γ is a lattice in G and by Borel
density theorem, the Zariski closure of Γ is G itself. The set of regular elements

33

(elements with centralizer of minimal dimension) in G is Zariski open and thus Γ
contains a regular element γ. The centralizer ZG(γ) of γ contains ZG(γ) ∩ Γ as
a lattice. Since ZG(γ) is virtually Rr, Bieberbach theorem (Theorem 4.1) implies
that Γ contains an free Abelian group of rank r.

One has to be aware that without properness, the conjecture is false. The
Higman group acts cocompactly on a CAT(0) cube complex of dimension 2. This
complex contains a lot of ﬂats of dimension 2 but the Higman group does not
contain any subgroup isomorphic to Z2 [Mar15, Proposition G]. Neither the space
nor the action is proper. More generally for manifolds, one has the following result
in the special where the ﬂat is actually the Euclidean de Rham factor.

Theorem 6.8 ([Ebe83]). Let X be a simply-connected Riemannian manifold of
non-positive curvature and Γ be a group acting freely and properly discontinuously
If Γ\X has ﬁnite volume then the rank of the maximal normal abelian
on X.
subgroup coincides with the dimension of the Euclidean de Rham factor.

Actually, it is shown that this maximal normal abelian subgroup coincides with
Cliﬀord translations in Γ. Thus this theorem implies that the Euclidean de Rham
factor is Γ-periodic and any subﬂat is so.

For more general CAT(0) spaces, one has the following generalisation of Eber-

lein’s result still dealing with Γ-periodicity of the Euclidean de Rham factor.

Theorem 6.9 ([CM09a, Theorem 1.3(i)]). Let X be a proper CAT(0) space such
that Isom(X) acts minimally and cocompactly. If Γ is a ﬁnitely generated lattice
then Γ virtually splits as Zr × Γ(cid:48) where r is the rank of the Euclidean de Rham
factor.

Acknowledgements

I would like to thank Athanase Papadopoulos who proposed me to write this survey
article. It was a great opportunity to try to circumnavigate the subject of groups
acting on CAT(0) spaces and gather the important (in my mind and to the best of
my knowledge) facts about this domain of group actions. I was happy to extract
some structure from the many papers in this very active ﬁeld since a few decades.
I would like to thank Indira Chatterji and Michah Sageev for answering a few

questions about CAT(0) cube complexes.

References

[AB98]

[AB08]

Scot Adams and Werner Ballmann. Amenable isometry groups of
Hadamard spaces. Math. Ann., 312(1):183–195, 1998.

Peter Abramenko and Kenneth S. Brown. Buildings, volume 248 of
Graduate Texts in Mathematics. Springer, New York, 2008. Theory
and applications.

34

[AD02]

Claire Anantharaman-Delaroche. Amenability and exactness for dy-
namical systems and their C∗-algebras. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc.,
354(10):4153–4178 (electronic), 2002.

[ADR00] C. Anantharaman-Delaroche and J. Renault. Amenable groupoids,
volume 36 of Monographies de L’Enseignement Math´ematique
[Monographs of L’Enseignement Math´ematique].
L’Enseignement
Math´ematique, Geneva, 2000. With a foreword by Georges Skandalis
and Appendix B by E. Germain.

[Ago13]

[Aus65]

[Bal85]

[Bal95]

[BB08]

Ian Agol. The virtual Haken conjecture. Doc. Math., 18:1045–1087,
2013. With an appendix by Agol, Daniel Groves, and Jason Manning.

Louis Auslander. An account of the theory of crystallographic groups.
Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., 16:1230–1236, 1965.

Werner Ballmann. Nonpositively curved manifolds of higher rank.
Ann. of Math. (2), 122(3):597–609, 1985.

Werner Ballmann. Lectures on spaces of nonpositive curvature, vol-
ume 25 of DMV Seminar. Birkh¨auser Verlag, Basel, 1995. With an
appendix by Misha Brin.

Werner Ballmann and Sergei Buyalo. Periodic rank one geodesics in
Hadamard spaces. In Geometric and probabilistic structures in dynam-
ics, volume 469 of Contemp. Math., pages 19–27. Amer. Math. Soc.,
Providence, RI, 2008.

[BCG+09] J. Brodzki, S. J. Campbell, E. Guentner, G. A. Niblo, and N. J. Wright.
Property A and CAT(0) cube complexes. J. Funct. Anal., 256(5):1408–
1431, 2009.

[BCV95] M. E. B. Bekka, P.-A. Cherix, and A. Valette. Proper aﬃne isometric
actions of amenable groups. In Novikov conjectures, index theorems
and rigidity, Vol. 2 (Oberwolfach, 1993), volume 227 of London Math.
Soc. Lecture Note Ser., pages 1–4. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge,
1995.

[BdlHV08] Bachir Bekka, Pierre de la Harpe, and Alain Valette. Kazhdan’s prop-
erty (T), volume 11 of New Mathematical Monographs. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 2008.

[BGS85] Werner Ballmann, Mikhael Gromov, and Viktor Schroeder. Mani-
folds of nonpositive curvature, volume 61 of Progress in Mathematics.
Birkh¨auser Boston Inc., Boston, MA, 1985.

[BH99]

Martin R. Bridson and Andr´e Haeﬂiger. Metric spaces of non-
positive curvature, volume 319 of Grundlehren der Mathematischen
Wissenschaften [Fundamental Principles of Mathematical Sciences].
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1999.

35

[Bor01]

Armand Borel. Essays in the history of Lie groups and algebraic
groups, volume 21 of History of Mathematics. American Mathematical
Society, Providence, RI, 2001.

[BS87a] M. Burger and V. Schroeder. Amenable groups and stabilizers of
measures on the boundary of a Hadamard manifold. Math. Ann.,
276(3):505–514, 1987.

[BS87b]

[Bue]

[Bus85]

[BW12]

[Can02]

[Can11]

[Cap09]

[Cap14]

Keith Burns and Ralf Spatzier. Manifolds of nonpositive curvature
and their buildings. Inst. Hautes ´Etudes Sci. Publ. Math., (65):35–59,
1987.

Theo Buehler. The krein-mil’man theorem for metric spaces with a
convex bicombing. math/0604187.

Peter Buser. A geometric proof of Bieberbach’s theorems on crystal-
lographic groups. Enseign. Math. (2), 31(1-2):137–145, 1985.

Nicolas Bergeron and Daniel T. Wise. A boundary criterion for cubu-
lation. Amer. J. Math., 134(3):843–859, 2012.

J. W. Cannon. Geometric group theory.
topology, pages 261–305. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 2002.

In Handbook of geometric

Serge Cantat. Sur les groupes de transformations birationnelles des
surfaces. Ann. of Math. (2), 174(1):299–340, 2011.

Pierre-Emmanuel Caprace. Amenable groups and Hadamard spaces
with a totally disconnected isometry group. Comment. Math. Helv.,
84(2):437–455, 2009.

Pierre-Emmanuel Caprace. Lectures on proper CAT(0) spaces and
their isometry groups.
In Geometric group theory, volume 21 of
IAS/Park City Math. Ser., pages 91–125. Amer. Math. Soc., Provi-
dence, RI, 2014.

[CAPV14] Mathieu Carette, Sylvain Arnt, Thibault Pillon, and Alain Valette.
The haagerup property is not invariant under quasi-isometry. 03 2014,
1403.5446.

[CCJ+01] Pierre-Alain Cherix, Michael Cowling, Paul Jolissaint, Pierre Julg,
and Alain Valette. Groups with the Haagerup property, volume 197
of Progress in Mathematics. Birkh¨auser Verlag, Basel, 2001. Gromov’s
a-T-menability.

[CDH10]

Indira Chatterji, Cornelia Drut¸u, and Fr´ed´eric Haglund. Kazhdan
and Haagerup properties from the median viewpoint. Adv. Math.,
225(2):882–921, 2010.

[Cha07]

Ruth Charney. An introduction to right-angled Artin groups. Geom.
Dedicata, 125:141–158, 2007.

36

[CL10]

Pierre-Emmanuel Caprace and Alexander Lytchak. At inﬁnity of ﬁnite-
dimensional CAT(0) spaces. Math. Ann., 346(1):1–21, 2010.

[CM09a]

Pierre-Emmanuel Caprace and Nicolas Monod.
Isometry groups of
non-positively curved spaces: discrete subgroups. J. Topol., 2(4):701–
746, 2009.

[CM09b] Pierre-Emmanuel Caprace and Nicolas Monod.

Isometry groups of
non-positively curved spaces: structure theory. J. Topol., 2(4):661–
700, 2009.

[CM13]

[CN05]

[Cor92]

[CS11]

[Duc11]

[Duc13]

Pierre-Emmanuel Caprace and Nicolas Monod. Fixed points and
amenability in non-positive curvature. Math. Ann., 356(4):1303–1337,
2013.

Indira Chatterji and Graham Niblo. From wall spaces to CAT(0) cube
complexes. Internat. J. Algebra Comput., 15(5-6):875–885, 2005.

Kevin Corlette. Archimedean superrigidity and hyperbolic geometry.
Ann. of Math. (2), 135(1):165–182, 1992.

Pierre-Emmanuel Caprace and Michah Sageev. Rank rigidity for
CAT(0) cube complexes. Geom. Funct. Anal., 21(4):851–891, 2011.

Bruno Duchesne. Des espaces de Hadamard sym´etriques de dimension
inﬁnie et de rang ﬁni. PhD thesis, Universit´e de Gen`eve, Juillet 2011.

Bruno Duchesne. Inﬁnite-dimensional nonpositively curved symmetric
spaces of ﬁnite rank. Int. Math. Res. Not. IMRN, (7):1578–1627, 2013.

[Duc15a] Bruno Duchesne.

Inﬁnite dimensional riemannian symmetric spaces
with ﬁxed-sign curvature operator. Annales de l’institut Fourier,
65(1):211–244, 2015.

[Duc15b] Bruno Duchesne. Superrigidity in inﬁnite dimension and ﬁnite rank

via harmonic maps. Groups Geom. Dyn., 9(1):133–148, 2015.

[Ebe83]

[Ebe96]

[Ede64]

[Far08]

[Fer15]

Patrick Eberlein. Euclidean de Rham factor of a lattice of nonpositive
curvature. J. Diﬀerential Geom., 18(2):209–220, 1983.

Patrick B. Eberlein. Geometry of nonpositively curved manifolds.
Chicago Lectures in Mathematics. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, IL, 1996.

Michael Edelstein. On non-expansive mappings of Banach spaces.
Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc., 60:439–447, 1964.

Daniel Farley. The action of Thompson’s group on a CAT(0) boundary.
Groups Geom. Dyn., 2(2):185–222, 2008.

Talia Fern´os. The furstenberg poisson boundary and cat(0) cube com-
plexes, 07 2015.

37

[Fol99]

[GdlH90]

Gerald B. Folland. Real analysis. Pure and Applied Mathematics
(New York). John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, second edition, 1999.
Modern techniques and their applications, A Wiley-Interscience Pub-
lication.

´E. Ghys and P. de la Harpe, editors. Sur les groupes hyperboliques
d’apr`es Mikhael Gromov, volume 83 of Progress in Mathematics.
Birkh¨auser Boston Inc., Boston, MA, 1990. Papers from the Swiss
Seminar on Hyperbolic Groups held in Bern, 1988.

[GKM08] Tsachik Gelander, Anders Karlsson, and Gregory A. Margulis. Su-
perrigidity, generalized harmonic maps and uniformly convex spaces.
Geom. Funct. Anal., 17(5):1524–1550, 2008.

[GP91]

[Gro93]

M. Gromov and P. Pansu. Rigidity of lattices: an introduction. In
Geometric topology: recent developments (Montecatini Terme, 1990),
volume 1504 of Lecture Notes in Math., pages 39–137. Springer, Berlin,
1991.

M. Gromov. Asymptotic invariants of inﬁnite groups. In Geometric
group theory, Vol. 2 (Sussex, 1991), volume 182 of London Math. Soc.
Lecture Note Ser., pages 1–295. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge,
1993.

[GS92]

Mikhail Gromov and Richard Schoen. Harmonic maps into singular
spaces and p-adic superrigidity for lattices in groups of rank one. Inst.
Hautes ´Etudes Sci. Publ. Math., (76):165–246, 1992.

[Hag07]

Fr´ed´eric Haglund. Isometries of cat(0) cube complexes are semi-simple.
05 2007, 0705.3386.

[Ham09] Ursula Hamenst¨adt. Rank-one isometries of proper CAT(0)-spaces.
In Discrete groups and geometric structures, volume 501 of Contemp.
Math., pages 43–59. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2009.

[Ham12] Ursula Hamenst¨adt. Isometry groups of proper CAT(0)-spaces of rank

one. Groups Geom. Dyn., 6(3):579–618, 2012.

[Hel01]

[HW08]

[HW14]

[Jos94]

Sigurdur Helgason. Diﬀerential geometry, Lie groups, and symmet-
ric spaces, volume 34 of Graduate Studies in Mathematics. American
Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2001. Corrected reprint of the
1978 original.

Fr´ed´eric Haglund and Daniel T. Wise. Special cube complexes. Geom.
Funct. Anal., 17(5):1551–1620, 2008.

G. C. Hruska and Daniel T. Wise. Finiteness properties of cubulated
groups. Compos. Math., 150(3):453–506, 2014.

J¨urgen Jost. Equilibrium maps between metric spaces. Calc. Var.
Partial Diﬀerential Equations, 2(2):173–204, 1994.

38

[JP15]

[Kar67]

[KL97]

[Kle08]

[KM12]

[KR07]

[Lea13]

[L´ec10]

[Lee00]

Lizhen Ji and Athanase Papadopoulos, editors. Sophus Lie and Fe-
lix Klein: the Erlangen program and its impact in mathematics and
physics, volume 23 of IRMA Lectures in Mathematics and Theoretical
Physics. European Mathematical Society (EMS), Z¨urich, 2015.

F. I. Karpeleviˇc. The geometry of geodesics and the eigenfunctions of
the Beltrami-Laplace operator on symmetric spaces. Trans. Moscow
Math. Soc., 1965:51–199. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, R.I., 1967,
1967.

Bruce Kleiner and Bernhard Leeb. Rigidity of quasi-isometries for
symmetric spaces and Euclidean buildings. Inst. Hautes ´Etudes Sci.
Publ. Math., (86):115–197 (1998), 1997.

Felix C. Klein. A comparative review of recent researches in geometry.
07 2008, 0807.3161.

Jeremy Kahn and Vladimir Markovic.
Immersing almost geodesic
surfaces in a closed hyperbolic three manifold. Ann. of Math. (2),
175(3):1127–1190, 2012.

Eva Kopeck´a and Simeon Reich. Nonexpansive retracts in Banach
spaces. In Fixed point theory and its applications, volume 77 of Banach
Center Publ., pages 161–174. Polish Acad. Sci. Inst. Math., Warsaw,
2007.

Ian J. Leary. A metric Kan-Thurston theorem. J. Topol., 6(1):251–284,
2013.

Jean L´ecureux. Amenability of actions on the boundary of a building.
Int. Math. Res. Not. IMRN, (17):3265–3302, 2010.

Bernhard Leeb. A characterization of irreducible symmetric spaces
and Euclidean buildings of higher rank by their asymptotic geometry.
Bonner Mathematische Schriften [Bonn Mathematical Publications],
326. Universit¨at Bonn Mathematisches Institut, Bonn, 2000.

[Mar91]

G. A. Margulis. Discrete subgroups of semisimple Lie groups, vol-
ume 17 of Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete (3) [Re-
sults in Mathematics and Related Areas (3)]. Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
1991.

[Mar15]

Alexandre Martin. On the cubical geometry of higman’s group. 06
2015, 1506.02837.

[Mau09]

Julien Maubon. Symmetric spaces of the non-compact type: diﬀer-
ential geometry. In G´eom´etries `a courbure n´egative ou nulle, groupes
discrets et rigidit´es, volume 18 of S´emin. Congr., pages 1–38. Soc.
Math. France, Paris, 2009.

39

[Mon01]

[Mon06]

[Mon16]

[Mos55]

[Mos73]

Nicolas Monod. Continuous bounded cohomology of locally compact
groups, volume 1758 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, 2001.

Nicolas Monod. Superrigidity for irreducible lattices and geometric
splitting. J. Amer. Math. Soc., 19(4):781–814, 2006.

Nicolas Monod. Extreme points in non-positive curvature. 02 2016,
1602.06752.

G. D. Mostow. Some new decomposition theorems for semi-simple
groups. Mem. Amer. Math. Soc., 1955(14):31–54, 1955.

G. D. Mostow. Strong rigidity of locally symmetric spaces. Prince-
ton University Press, Princeton, N.J., 1973. Annals of Mathematics
Studies, No. 78.

[NR03]

G. A. Niblo and L. D. Reeves. Coxeter groups act on CAT(0) cube
complexes. J. Group Theory, 6(3):399–413, 2003.

[Oza06a] Narutaka Ozawa. Amenable actions and applications. In International
Congress of Mathematicians. Vol. II, pages 1563–1580. Eur. Math.
Soc., Z¨urich, 2006.

[Oza06b] Narutaka Ozawa. Boundary amenability of relatively hyperbolic

groups. Topology Appl., 153(14):2624–2630, 2006.

[Pan09]

[Pap05]

[Par00]

[Par09]

[Pet]

[PR72]

Pierre Pansu. Superrigidit´e g´eom´etique et applications harmoniques.
In G´eom´etries `a courbure n´egative ou nulle, groupes discrets et
rigidit´es, volume 18 of S´emin. Congr., pages 373–420. Soc. Math.
France, Paris, 2009.

Athanase Papadopoulos. Metric spaces, convexity and nonpositive cur-
vature, volume 6 of IRMA Lectures in Mathematics and Theoretical
Physics. European Mathematical Society (EMS), Z¨urich, 2005.

Anne Parreau. Immeubles aﬃnes: construction par les normes et ´etude
des isom´etries.
In Crystallographic groups and their generalizations
(Kortrijk, 1999), volume 262 of Contemp. Math., pages 263–302. Amer.
Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2000.

Paul-´Emile Paradan. Symmetric spaces of the non-compact type: Lie
groups. In G´eom´etries `a courbure n´egative ou nulle, groupes discrets et
rigidit´es, volume 18 of S´emin. Congr., pages 39–76. Soc. Math. France,
Paris, 2009.

Anton Petrunin.
http://mathoverﬂow.net/q/6627.

Convex hull

in CAT(0).

MathOverﬂow,

Gopal Prasad and M. S. Raghunathan. Cartan subgroups and lattices
in semi-simple groups. Ann. of Math. (2), 96:296–317, 1972.

40

[Rol98]

[Sag95]

[Sag14]

[Sal12]

[SW05]

[Swe99]

Martin A. Roller. Poc sets, median algebras and group actions. an
extended study of dunwoody’s construction and sageev’s theorem. Ha-
bilitationschrift, Regensberg, 1998.

Michah Sageev. Ends of group pairs and non-positively curved cube
complexes. Proc. London Math. Soc. (3), 71(3):585–617, 1995.

Michah Sageev. CAT(0) cube complexes and groups. In Geometric
group theory, volume 21 of IAS/Park City Math. Ser., pages 7–54.
Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2014.

Dan-Titus Salajan. Cat(0) geometry for the thompson group. 03 2012,
1203.5749.

Michah Sageev and Daniel T. Wise. The Tits alternative for CAT(0)
cubical complexes. Bull. London Math. Soc., 37(5):706–710, 2005.

Eric L. Swenson. A cut point theorem for CAT(0) groups. J. Diﬀer-
ential Geom., 53(2):327–358, 1999.

[Thu97] William P. Thurston. Three-dimensional geometry and topology. Vol.
1, volume 35 of Princeton Mathematical Series. Princeton University
Press, Princeton, NJ, 1997. Edited by Silvio Levy.

[Tit72]

J. Tits. Free subgroups in linear groups. J. Algebra, 20:250–270, 1972.

[Tit74]

[Tit86]

[Wag85]

[Wis04]

[Wis12]

Jacques Tits. Buildings of spherical type and ﬁnite BN-pairs. Lecture
Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 386. Springer-Verlag, Berlin-New York,
1974.

Jacques Tits. Immeubles de type aﬃne. In Buildings and the geometry
of diagrams (Como, 1984), volume 1181 of Lecture Notes in Math.,
pages 159–190. Springer, Berlin, 1986.

Stan Wagon. The Banach-Tarski paradox, volume 24 of Encyclope-
dia of Mathematics and its Applications. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1985. With a foreword by Jan Mycielski.

D. T. Wise. Cubulating small cancellation groups. Geom. Funct. Anal.,
14(1):150–214, 2004.

Daniel T. Wise. From riches to raags: 3-manifolds, right-angled Artin
groups, and cubical geometry, volume 117 of CBMS Regional Confer-
ence Series in Mathematics. Published for the Conference Board of
the Mathematical Sciences, Washington, DC; by the American Math-
ematical Society, Providence, RI, 2012.

41

