6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
5
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
t
n
a
u
q
[
 
 

1
v
3
8
5
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Observing The Observer

Vlatko Vedral

Clarendon Laboratory, University of Oxford, Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PU, United Kingdom

Centre for Quantum Technologies, National University of Singapore, 3 Science Drive 2, Singapore 117543

Department of Physics, National University of Singapore, 2 Science Drive 3, Singapore 117542

Center for Quantum Information, Institute for Interdisciplinary

Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China

I present a simple variant of the Schr¨odinger cat meets Wigner’s friend thought experiment. If
you are shocked by it, you have not understood quantum physics (no words are missing from this
sentence).

The idea that quantum mechanics applies to everything in the universe, even to us humans, can lead to some

interesting conclusions [1].

Consider Deutsch’s variant [2] of the iconic Schr¨odinger cat thought experiment that builds on Wigner’s ideas [3].
I will try to use as interpretation-free language as possible and let you draw your own conclusions. I’ve personally
witnessed all sorts of reactions from physicists upon hearing this. I’ve seen a conversion from Copenhagen to Many-
Worlds (which is the quantum equivalent of a religious conversion from, say, Christian Orthodoxy to Buddhism).
At the other extreme, I’ve heard colleagues say: “so what’s the big deal with this stuﬀ?” (The latter reply, in my
experience, typically comes either from those who truly understand quantum physics or those who completely missed
the point).

Suppose that a very able experimental physicist, Alice, puts her friend Bob inside a room with a cat, a radioactive
atom and cat poison that gets released if the atom decays. The point of having a human there is that we can
communicate with him. (Getting answers from cats is not that easy - believe me, I’ve tried.) As far as Alice is
concerned, the atom enters into a state of being both decayed and not decayed, so that the cat is both dead and alive
(that’s where Schr¨odinger stops).

Bob, however, can directly observe the cat and sees it as one or the other. This is something we know from everyday
experience: we never see dead and alive cats. To conﬁrm this, Alice slips a piece of paper under the door asking Bob
whether the cat is in a deﬁnite state. He answers, “Yes, I see a deﬁnite state of the cat”.

At this point, mathematically speaking, the state of the system has changed from the initial state

|Ψii = |no-decay > |poison in the bottle > |cat alive > |Bob sees alive cat > |blank piece of paper >

(1)

to the state (from Alice’s global perspective):

|Ψ1/2i = (|decay > |poison released > |cat dead > |Bob sees dead cat > +

|no-decay > |poison still in the bottle > |cat alive > |Bob sees alive cat >) ⊗
|paper says: yes, I see a deﬁnite state of the cat >

(2)

I am assuming that, because Alice’s laboratory is isolated, every transformation leading up to this state is unitary.
This includes the decay, the poison release, the killing of the cat and Bob’s observation - Alice has a perfect quantum
coherent control of the experiment.

Note that Alice does not ask whether the cat is dead or alive because for her that would force the outcome or, as
some physicists might say, collapse the state (this is exactly what happens in Wigner’s version, where he communicates
the state to a friend, who communicates to another friend and so on...). She is content observing that Bob sees the
cat either alive or dead and does not ask which it is. Because Alice avoided collapsing the state, quantum theory
holds that slipping the paper under the door was a reversible act. She can undo all the steps she took since each of
them is just a unitary transformation. In other words, the paper does not get entangled to the rest of the laboratory.
When Alice reverses the evolution, if the cat was dead, it would now be alive, the poison would be in the bottle,
the particle would not have decayed and Bob would have no memory of ever seeing a dead cat. If the cat was alive,
it would also come back to the same state (everything, in other words, comes back to the starting state where the
atom has not decayed, the poison is in the bottle, the cat is alive and Bob sees alive cat and has no memory of the
experiment he was subjected to).

And yet one trace remains: the piece of paper saying “yes, I see a deﬁnite state of the cat”. Alice can undo Bob’s
observation in a way that does not also undo the writing on the paper. The paper remains as proof that Bob had
observed the cat as deﬁnitely alive or dead. (Note that I am still remaining interpretation neutral. A Many Worlds
supporter would say that there are two copies of Bob, one that observes a dead cat and one that sees alive cat;
a Copenhagen or Quantum Bayesian supporter could say that relative to one state of Bob the cat is dead, while,

2

relative to the other, it is alive - either way, supporters of any interpretation ought to make the same predictions in
this experiment).

That leads to a startling conclusion for someone who believes that measurements have deﬁnite irreversible outcomes.
Alice was able to reverse the observation because, as far as she was concerned, she avoided collapsing the state; to
her, Bob was in just as indeterminate a state as the cat. But the friend inside the room thought the state did collapse.
That person did see a deﬁnite outcome; the paper is proof of it.
In this way, the experiment demonstrates two
seemingly contradictory principles. Alice thinks that quantum mechanics applies to macroscopic objects: not just
cats but also Bobs can be in quantum limbo. Bob, halfway through the experiment and before Alice’s reversal, thinks
that cats are only either dead or alive.

I deliberately avoided interpretational jargon because this experiment cannot distinguish between diﬀerent interpre-
tations (nothing can, that’s why they are called interpretations). What it does is tell the diﬀerence between quantum
physics being valid at macroscopic scales and there being a genuine collapse due to observation. If Bob genuinely
collapsed the quantum state inside by seeing one outcome or the other (deﬁnitely “dead” or deﬁnitely “alive”), then
the reversal would not be possible with unit probability. Namely, both outcomes would occur at the end of the
experiment, the atom could also be found decayed and the cat dead (with one half probability). Therefore repeating
this experiment a few times would tell us if the observation leads to a deﬁnitive collapse or not.

Doing such an experiment with an entire human being would be daunting, but physicists can accomplish much
the same with simpler systems. We can take a photon and bounce it oﬀ a mirror. If the photon is reﬂected, the
mirror recoils, but if the photon is transmitted, the mirror stays still. The photon plays the role of the decaying
atom; it can exist simultaneously in more than one state. The mirror, made up of many atoms, acts as the cat and
as Bob. Whether it recoils or not is analogous to whether the cat lives or dies and is seen to live or die by Bob.
The process can be reversed by reﬂecting the photon back at the mirror. If the photon always comes out the way it
came in, we conﬁrmed that it was in a superposition after the mirror and before the reversal. Otherwise, there was a
collapse somewhere along the way (needless to say, there is no collapse if things are done properly in actual photonic
experiments of this kind).

We can do similar experiments with (collections of) atoms and molecules, where we entangle them and subsequently

disentangle them. Again, no collapse recorded.

In developing this devious thought experiment, Wigner and Deutsch followed in the footsteps of Schr¨odinger,
Einstein, Bell and other theorists who argued that physicists have yet to grasp quantum mechanics in a deep way.
For decades most physicists scarcely cared because the foundational issues had no eﬀect on practical applications of
the theory. But now that we can perform these experiments for real, the task of exploring the full extent of quantum
mechanics has become all the more urgent.

Disclosure of potential CoI: to me personally, the validity of quantum physics at the macroscopic level naturally
suggests the Many Worlds picture. The Many Worlds interpretation is not without problems, such as the (lack of
a convincing) derivation of the Born rule and (in my opinion much less of an issue, but still...) the basis problem.
However, other interpretations have much the same concerns (which they avoid by calling the Born rule a postulate
and saying that the coupling to the environment selects the basis, therefore eliminate the need for explanation).
The simple fact demonstrated here, however, namely that from one perspective (Bob’s above) we can have deﬁnite
outcomes, while, at the same time, from a higher perspective (Alice’s above) everything remains in a quantum coherent
state, seems to me to be spiritually leaning towards Many Worlds.

And now, I will stop, shut up and (continue to) experiment.
Acknowledgments: The author acknowledges funding from the National Research Foundation (Singapore), the
Ministry of Education (Singapore), the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (UK), the Templeton
Foundation, the Leverhulme Trust, the Oxford Martin School, and Wolfson College, University of Oxford. This
research is also supported by the National Research Foundation, Prime Ministers Oﬃce, Singapore under its Com-
petitive Research Programme (CRP Award No. NRF- CRP14-2014-02) and administered by Centre for Quantum
Technologies, National University of Singapore.

[1] A much less formal exposition of the same was presented in V. Vedral, “Living in a Quantum World”, Scientiﬁc American,

June 2011.

[2] D. Deutsch, “Three experimental implications of the Everett interpretation” in R. Penrose and C.J. Isham (eds.), Quantum

Concepts of Space and Time, Oxford: The Clarendon Press, pp. 204214 (1986).

[3] E.P. Wigner, ”Remarks on the mind-body question”, in: I.J. Good, “The Scientist Speculates”, London, Heinemann (1961).

