6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
 
5
1

.

 
 
]
P
E
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
0
8
5
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

A sound nebula: the origin of the Solar System in

the ﬁeld of a standing sound wave

S. Beck1, V. Beck1,*

1Alfa-Carbon R(cid:13) Beck, Berlin, Germany
*Correspondence: v.beck@alfa-carbon.de

Abstract

According to the planetary origin conceptual model proposed in this paper, the protosun
centre of the pre-solar nebula exploded, resulting in a shock wave that passed through it
and then returned to the centre, generating a new explosion and shock wave. Recurrent
explosions in the nebula resulted in a spherical standing sound wave, whose antinodes
concentrated dust into rotating rings that transformed into planets. The extremely small
angular momentum of the Sun and the tilt of its equatorial plane were caused by the
asymmetry of the ﬁrst, most powerful explosion. Diﬀerences between inner and outer
planets are explained by the migration of solid matter, while the Oort cloud is explained
by the division of the pre-solar nebula into a spherical internal nebula and an expanding
spherical shell of gas. The proposed conceptual model can also explain the origin and
evolution of exoplanetary systems and may be of use in searching for new planets.

1 Introduction

The classical theory of the origin of the Solar System is based on the Kant – Laplace nebular
hypothesis [1, 2] suggesting that the Sun and the planets condensed out of a spinning nebula
of gas and dust. During the condensation process, the spin of the nebula accelerated (the
’pirouette’ eﬀect), and the resulting distribution of angular momentum caused it to form a
disc. The center of the nebula evolved into a hot, highly compressed gas region – the protosun.
Concentration and coalescence of dust particles in the remainder of the spinning disc led to
the formation of planets orbiting the Sun.

This theory accounts for the general nature of the origin of the Solar System, but it cannot
explain many of the observed facts. One problem is the angular momentum distribution: the
Sun has more than 99.8% of the entire system mass, but only about 0.5% of the total angular
momentum, with the remaining 99.5% residing in the orbiting planets. The hypothesis also
fails to explain the 7◦ tilt of the Sun’s equatorial plane relative to the average orbital plane
of the planets. Another serious problem is the distinction between small solid-surface inner
planets and outer gas giants. Moreover, the observed regularity in planetary distances from
the Sun – the so-called Titius-Bode law – has no explanation.

It is diﬃcult to explain the existence of the Oort cloud beyond the Solar System’s planets.

1

It consists of trillions of small objects composed of dust and water, ammonia and methane ice
and it is believed that these objects were scattered outwards by the gas giants at the planetary
formation stage and then acquired distant circular orbits (out to about one light year) as a
result of gravitational forces due to nearby stars. Such an Oort cloud emergence scenario seems
very unlikely for such a large number of bodies.

Neptune is the most distant gas planet. Based on the decreasing series of giant planet
masses Jupiter: 318 earth masses (M⊕); Saturn: 95.3 M⊕; Uranus: 14.5 M⊕ we could expect
Neptune’s mass to be several times smaller than that of Uranus. Such a mass distribution can
be explained by decreasing density of the gas nebula from the centre to the periphery, so that
each planet has less gaseous substance than the previous one. In reality, Neptune has a mass
of 17.5 M⊕, which is greater than the mass of Uranus.

Authors, such as for example, Chamberlin [3], Moulton [4] , Schmidt [5], von Weizscker [6],
McCrea [7], Woolfson [8] and Safronov [9] have oﬀered a variety of scenarios for the Solar
System’s formation. However, none of the existing theories is able to give a comprehensive
picture of the emergence and development of the planetary system. A large number of recently
discovered exoplanets (1955 conﬁrmed planets by February 2016, NASA Exoplanet Archive1)
allows us to estimate the number of planets in our galaxy as many billions, so that a compre-
hensive understanding of the processes leading to the emergence of planetary systems becomes
critically important. In this article, we present a new conceptual model of the Solar System’s
formation from a pre-solar gas and dust nebula in the ﬁeld of a standing sound wave.

2 Theoretical construction

2.1 A spherical standing sound wave

It is generally accepted that during a suﬃciently strong process of heating, gravitational
contraction in the centre of the pre-solar nebula started thermonuclear fusion of hydrogen
into helium. A large amount of energy was emitted and radiation pressure prevented the
further contraction of the gas nebula. However, thermonuclear fusion could not start quietly;
the process resulted in an explosion that caused a spherical shock wave originating from the
central region. The speciﬁc explosion mechanism accompanied by the thermonuclear fusion
processes is beyond the scope of this article; we note here only that the power of the explosion
would have been large enough for the shock wave to spread all over the pre-solar nebula2. A
long time observed active processes, such as jets and outﬂows associated with star formation,
e.g. [10]-[18], suggests that the explosions fundamentally inherent in the birth of stars and can
start the emergence of planetary systems as described in our model.

As the wave propagated, the gas particles in the pre-solar nebula oscillated radially, for two
reasons: ﬁrst, the diﬀerence in gas pressure; and secondly, the gravitational pull toward the
centre of the nebula. The second factor began to play a crucial role at large distances from
the central attracting mass concentrations: at some point, the accelerated gas particles at the

1http://exoplanetarchive.ipac.caltech.edu
2Appendix A outlines some arguments that allow us to make some assumptions about the evolution of

protostars.

2

wave front would no longer return under the inﬂuence of gravity. Gas density at this distance
from the centre would have been so low that the pressure diﬀerence could no longer cause the
return movement of gas particles. The peripheral part separated, and the pre-solar nebula was
thus divided into a central spherical region and an expanding spherical shell of gas (Figure 1).

Figure 1: Separation of the pre-solar nebula into (1) a central spherical gas nebula and (2) an expanding
spherical shell.

Gas particles at the boundary of the central spherical nebula fell under gravity towards the
centre then stopped when the pressure of the lower gas layers exceeded the gravitational pull,
and began to move in the opposite direction. As a result of the interaction between gravity and
contracting gas back-pressure, the boundary of the spherical nebula began to oscillate radially
and a reverse spherical wave propagated from the periphery towards the centre. The sound
wave would have appeared to reﬂect from the gravitational pause – a spherical shell where the
gas particles velocities were not high enough to overcome the gravitational pull from the centre
of the nebula and the gas particles that had moved outwards returned due to oscillations; that
is, their velocities were lower than the escape velocity:

(cid:115)

νe =

2GM

r

,

(1)

where G is the gravitational constant, M is the mass of the attraction centre and r is the
distance of the gravitational pause from the centre.

The centre of the pre-solar nebula became quiescent after the ﬁrst massive explosion: the
central part expanded, since the gravitational ﬁeld was not yet intense enough to resist the much
increased gas pressure, and the thermonuclear fusion of hydrogen combustion diminished. A
large mass of gas was ejected into the surrounding space while the compact region of compressed
and heated gas – the protosun – remained at the nebula’s core. Several hundred years after
this, the wave returning from the boundary of the spherical nebula reached the protosun,

3

concentrated in the centre, and then began to propagate towards the periphery again: a rapid
pressure increase resulted in a dramatic rise in temperature at the centre of the protosun,
generating a new hydrogen explosion, much weaker than the ﬁrst one but still strong enough
to give extra energy to the wave reﬂected from the central region. The reﬂected wave travelled
all the way from the centre to the periphery of the spherical nebula, was reﬂected from the
gravitational pause and then returned to the centre again, causing another explosion. This
process, repeated several times, eventually established regular oscillations: the wave propagated
from the centre to the edge, was reﬂected from the boundary of the spherical nebula, and
returned, causing another explosion that compensated for wave energy loss. Thus, the wave
caused explosions while acquiring the energy it needed, establishing a self-sustaining process
whose period, deﬁned by the free oscillations of the spherical nebula boundaries, equalled many
tens of years.

The acoustic radiation pressure prevented gravitational contraction of the pre-solar nebula
and compensated for deviations from the spherical shape3 that might result, for example, from
the gas turbulence. Waves travelling from the centre and from the periphery interfered with
each other to form a giant spherical acoustic cavity resonator the size of the modern Solar
System, including the Kuiper belt and the scattered-disc (Figure 2). This resonator contained
a standing sound wave with nodes and antinodes, the number of which would have been at
least 10 for the pre-solar system: 8 planets + the asteroid belt + the scattered-disc region.

Figure 2: The standing wave in the pre-solar nebula: (1) nodes, (2) antinodes (gas compression and
expansion), (3) protosun, (4) real-scale wave. Nodes and antinodes are evenly spaced for illustration
purposes; in reality, separations would increase dramatically with increasing distance from the centre.

This article does not include a calculation of exact distances between the antinodes of the

3Here and below, for simplicity, we are talking about a spherical shape. Needless to say, a rotating nebula
takes the form of an ellipsoid of revolution; it can be shown that all the derivations for spherical sound waves
retain also for the rotating nebula in the form of an ellipsoid.

4

standing wave; we may simply state that the wavelength increases with increasing distance from
the centre of attraction. Section [3.4] outlines some regularities that allow us to make some
observations about the physical reasons underlying planetary positions in the Solar System.

2.2 Dust concentration in the antinodes

In our model, the pre-solar system can keep ’sounding’ for many millions of years, as the
periodic central explosions signiﬁcantly retard the gravitational contraction of the protosun
and the acoustic radiation pressure stabilizes the gas nebula, preventing its collapse. The
dust present in the pre-solar nebula gradually concentrates in the antinodes of the acoustic
oscillating system. Apart from gas viscosity, the process of solid particle concentration in the
standing wave also relies on attraction from the large gas masses that periodically emerge in the
antinodes of the standing wave. This attractive force makes the dust particles move towards
the gas clusters in the antinodes and collide with each other, causing redistribution of their
velocity vectors in such a way that the dust particles come to rest in the centre of the antinode
(Figure 3).

Figure 3: Dust concentration in the antinodes of the standing wave during four successive phases
of compression and expansion. Dark areas stand for gas compression in the antinodes, light areas for
expansion.

During the gas expansion phase, dust particles in each antinode are gravitationally attracted
towards two neighbouring antinodes. The two gravitational sources in these antinodes largely
cancel each other out and, moreover, are remote, so that the dust particles in the gas expansion
phase mostly remain in the same place. The next phase of compression attracts new dust
particles to the antinode, which also come to rest due to collisions with each other and to the
viscosity of the compressed gas.

2.3 Migration of solid matter and formation of rings

A certain period of time after the standing wave was established, most of the dust would have
been concentrated in the regions of spherical antinodes. Due to increased dust concentration,
the number of particle collisions signiﬁcantly increased, causing their coalescence and increase

5

in size and mass. The gravitational ﬁeld within the antinodes and the centrifugal force together
caused dust to concentrate and form equatorial rings, with radii corresponding to the antinodes
of the standing sound wave (Figure 4).

Figure 4: Migration of solid matter in the spherical nebula. Fg represents the gravitational pull toward
the centre and Fc represents the centrifugal force. (1) spherical dust clusters in the antinodes, (2) dust
clusters in the equatorial rings, (3) protosun, (4) nebula rotational axis, (5) direction of dust migration
in the antinodes, (6) direction of massive dust cluster migration across the antinodes under the inﬂuence
of the resultant force F.

The model predicts that the increase in mass of the solid particles clusters also makes it
increasingly diﬃcult for them to stay at the antinodes of the standing sound wave as at the same
time that they are aﬀected by attraction from the central gas masses, principally the protosun.
The largest clusters of dust fall toward the centre; this results in migration of solid matter from
the outer regions of the pre-solar nebula towards the internal zones, while the centrifugal force
does not allow the clusters to fall directly onto the protosun. The gravitational attraction of
the gas masses in the antinodes directs the matter falling towards the spinning rings forming
in the equatorial plane, where the solid matter comes to rest. A signiﬁcant amount of solid
matter collected in the region of the orbits of Venus and Earth, as it was concentrated here
from most of the pre-solar nebula volume.

This dust, gathered in compact rings, is thousands of times more concentrated here than in
the primary gas and dust nebula, greatly accelerating the coalescence of particles and leading
to the emergence of increasingly massive dust clusters.

Agglomerated clusters of dust in narrow spinning rings move in almost identical circular
orbits around the protosun and have very small relative velocities. Since their collisions do
not result in fragmentation, they form massive planetesimals relatively quickly, which in turn
agglomerate to form planets and their satellites. In this model, are no catastrophic collisions

6

between the nascent planets, their satellites or other massive objects; the planets keep the
circular orbits and planes of the equatorial dust rings.

2.4 Birth of the Sun

Gravitational contraction of the protosun, which had been signiﬁcantly slowed as a result of
regular explosions in the centre, still continued, and millions of years after the establishment
of the standing sound wave gas temperature at the centre of the protosun became suﬃciently
high for thermonuclear fusion of hydrogen into helium to continue between explosions, resulting
in the birth of a new star – the Sun. The newborn Sun stopped augmenting the sound wave
by periodic explosions, and the standing wave diminished. The gas shell previously supported
by acoustic pressure began to shrink, forming gas-giant planets around already existing solid
nuclei. Jupiter acquired the greatest share of mass, as it was located in the region of highest
gas density. All the other gas planets were situated in a lower density environment and thus
obtained smaller masses. Jupiter also received large amounts of gas from the inner-planet
region, blown outwards by the strong solar wind in the ﬁrst few millions of years after the birth
of the Sun.

2.5 The Oort cloud

The expanding shell that separated from the spherical part of the nebula during the passage
of the wave front from the ﬁrst explosion (see Figure 1) moved faster than the escape velocity νe
and could not return to the centre, as the pull of gravity from the central masses was too weak
at such distance. With its expansion, this shell accumulated increasing quantities of highly
rareﬁed gas from the primary nebula at its edge, while its expansion rate gradually slowed and
eventually stopped at a distance of about 1 light year from the centre. This formed a giant
spherical region containing dust, ice and frozen gases particles in addition to gaseous hydrogen
and helium. Over time, the gas component of the shell dissipated in space, while solid particles
were concentrated in increasingly large chunks of ice and dust – the cometary bodies – to form
the Oort cloud [19] which has a weak gravitational connection with the central part of the
system.

2.6 Neptune, the Kuiper belt and scattered-disc objects

After expansion of the gas shell ceased in the region of the Oort cloud, a weak reverse
wave formed within the shell and moved towards the central spherical nebula of gas, where
planetary nuclei had already emerged. Hundreds of thousands of years later the reverse wave
from the Oort cloud collided with the outer boundary of the central spherical nebula, causing
a redistribution of matter on the edge of the Solar System. Large gas and ice masses from
the outer antinodes of the standing sound wave were shifted, and the planet Neptune formed
a little closer to the Sun relative the original position of the 9th antinode, while its mass
increased several times by capture of gas and ice from the reverse wave from the Oort cloud
and from the outer antinodes. Scattered-disc objects such as the minor planet Eris acquired
highly elongated orbits, as there was a long period under the inﬂuence of gravitational pull

7

from the gas masses transported by the reverse wave from the Oort cloud. Minor planets in
the Kuiper belt also gained signiﬁcant eccentricity. The orbits of the low-mass objects in the
scattered disc region and in the Kuiper belt have been changed so dramatically, that they had
become to reach Neptune and Uranus, and under the inﬂuence of their gravity even began to
go into the central region of the solar system and possibly caused the late heavy bombardment
of the inner planets, in which was also attended cometary bodies from the Oort cloud, that
have had unstable orbits in the ﬁrst time after the formation.

The periphery processes were very slow, developing over many millions of years, and were
relatively weak in their eﬀect on the central region of the pre-solar system. The reverse wave
from the Oort cloud only caused the formation of the Kuiper belt, an oﬀset of Neptune’s
formation and its mass increase. The rest of the Solar System was and is still aﬀected by the
region of the Oort cloud only through comets.

3 Discussion

3.1 Terrestrial and giant planets

The diﬀerence in chemical composition of the inner and outer planets is explained in our
model by the migration of solid matter from the outer spherical dust shells to the internal
ones (see Figure 4). Before concentrating in stable spinning dust rings, the heavy chemical
elements, such as iron and silicate travelled farther towards the centre of the system and were
incorporated by the inner planets, with Earth and Venus having more matter, and Mercury
and Mars having less. The composition of the closest to the Sun Mercury at the same time has
obtained a signiﬁcant amount of iron. The region between Mars and Jupiter had insuﬃcient
solid matter left for a proper planet, so only the minor planets of the asteroid belt were
formed. Lighter and more volatile chemical compounds, such as water, methane or ammonia
remained in signiﬁcant quantities in the colder regions beyond the asteroid belt, and became
the compositional basis of the giant planets.

3.2 Angular momentum distribution and dust structure

If we assume that the ﬁrst powerful explosion in the centre of the protosun was not absolutely
symmetrical, slight asymmetry in the explosion led to a redistribution of the angular momentum
in the pre-solar nebula, with the less massive peripheral zone beginning to rotate faster. In
addition, an initial asymmetry could produce the observed 7◦ equatorial plane tilt relative to
the Sun’s plane of rotation.

Currently the Sun has more than 99.8% of the entire Solar System mass but only about 0.5%
of the total angular momentum. If the rotational kinetic energy were evenly distributed over
the original pre-solar nebula, the resulting rotation (taking into account the pirouette eﬀect)
would be thousands or millions of times slower than the current rotation of the planets. The
angular momentum was initially distributed evenly in the pre-solar nebula, and this means
that such weak rotation cannot result in the process of dust disc formation as described by the
nebular hypothesis.

8

Figure 5: An image of a protoplanetary dust nebula around HL Tauri received by ALMA (The Atacama
Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array). Credit: ALMA (ESO/NAOJ/NRAO).

However, these discs are visible in images of some young stars (Figure 5), and in some cases
their internal structure can be identiﬁed. If a spherical dust cluster such as described in this
model were observed from one side, it would be impossible to observe any individual spheres
as they would overlap in the line of sight.

Figure 6: The averaged in the line of sight distribution of dust in the spherical antinodes. Closer
to centre the dust has already reached the equatorial plane, on the periphery it need to pass a much
greater way, so formed a cup-shaped dust distribution structure around the protostar.

The stage at which a signiﬁcant amount of dust has already accumulated in the equatorial
plane would give such a system the appearance of a disc (Figure 6), despite the fact that there
are signiﬁcant gaps between individual dust clusters.

Figure 7 shows images from the NASA Hubble Space Telescope, showing the complex three-
dimensional structure of the dust around young stars that are similar to the structure, which
should be observed according to the proposed model (for more images see also Schneider et
al.
[20]). On these images we see the light reﬂected from the inner part the near side of the
cup-shaped dust structure. In contrast to the images in visible light the image of HL Tauri on
the Figure 5 received in submillimetre radiation can show the ring structures of dust around

9

Figure 7: The images from a NASA Hubble Space Telescope visible-light survey of the architecture of
dust systems around young stars. Credit: STScI/Hubble, NASA & ESA.

the less than 100000 years young star.

3.3 Exoplanetary systems

Generally speaking, the explosion in a protostellar nebula centre according to our model can
either accelerate the gas shell rotation around the future star, slow it down or even give it a
spin in the opposite direction. The latter case has been observed in some exoplanetary systems,
e.g. [21]-[27], and the standard nebular hypothesis cannot explain it, since it implies that the
central star and its planets should always rotate and revolve in the same direction, following
the rotation of the protostellar nebula.

In this model, an asymmetry in the initial explosion in the centre of the protostar can also
lead to a very strong tilt of the equatorial plane of the planetary system, with tilts of 45◦ or

10

even 90◦ not impossible, e.g. [28]-[31].

Based on the data from the Kepler mission McQuillan et al. have measured the periods of
the rotation of stars that have planets [32] and stars without planets [33]. Figure 8 shows a
comparison of the distributions of rotation of these stars.

Figure 8: The normalized distribution of rotation of stars with planets (blue) and without planets
(orange). The horizontal axis represents the rotational period in days and the vertical axis the number
of stars with periods in the range of one day, divided by the total number of stars (762 stars with planets
and 34030 stars without planets). The inset shows the smoothed diﬀerence of these distributions.

One can see that the stars with planets rotate slower; according to our model these stars have
slowed down its rotation as a result of an asymmetric explosion, which led to the formation of
the planetary system. If the central protostar after the explosion accelerate its rotation and the
rotation of the protostellar nebula slows down signiﬁcantly or stops completely, the formation
of planets is impossible and only a lone star would be formed from this protostellar nebula. It
can also turn out that the nebula begins to rotate in the opposite direction, and in this case,
the planets will have retrograde orbits.

In their work McQuillan et al.

[32] showed that planets with a short orbital period are
available only around slowly rotating stars and noted that the reason for this is unclear. The
proposed model explains this fact by saying that closed to their stars planets, e.g. the so-
called Hot Jupiters, were formed after a very strong asymmetric explosion, so the separation
of the protostellar nebula (see Figure 1) has occurred in the immediate vicinity of the central
protostar: the spherical nebula with a standing sound wave began spinning very rapidly and
the central protostar at the same time began to rotate slowly.

3.4 Background for a physical and mathematical model of the Solar System

Oscillations occur in an environment where gravitational ﬁeld intensity and gas pressure
change substantially within a wavelength. It can be assumed that the wavelength is inversely
proportional to the product of average values of gravitational acceleration g, which is inversely
proportional to the square of the distance to the centre of attraction, and gas pressure p, which

11

in turn depends directly on g:

or, supposing that p ∼ g:

λ ∼ 1
g · p

λ ∼ r4,

(2)

(3)

where λ is the acoustic wavelength, g and p are the average values of gravitational acceleration

and gas pressure as function of r, the distance from the centre.

Figure 9: Distribution of planetary distances from the Sun. The vertical axis shows the fourth root of
distance in kilometres.

Figure 9 shows the distribution of planetary distances from the Sun. The planet Neptune is
not shown on the ﬁgure for the reasons outlined in Section [2.6], its place being taken by Pluto,
the main asteroid belt and the scattered disk are represented by the minor planets Ceres and
Eris. The planets originated in the antinodes, so the ﬁgure also shows the distribution of the
standing wave in the pre-solar gas nebula. We can see that the points on the graph may be
approximated by two straight lines, supporting our hypothesis that locations of the standing
wave antinodes depend on r4. Closer to the Sun, the constant of proportionality determining
the wavelength increases, which may be explained by the fact that the speed of the sound wave
λ of the

increases with rising gas temperature: c ∼ √

T ; consequently, with the frequency f = c

sound wave constant,

λ(T ) ∼

√

T ,

(4)

where c is the speed of the sound wave, λ is its wavelength and T is the temperature. The
dependence hypothesis λ ∼ r4 provides a background for developing a more complex physical
and mathematical model for the Solar Systems origin, as well as for planetary systems around
other stars.

12

4 Conclusions

According to the proposed model of planetary origin from the gas and dust nebula in the
ﬁeld of a standing sound wave, only single stars or multiple stars with large distances between
individual components can have planetary systems. Systems with closely located multiple star
components cannot sustain the reverse wave after the explosion in the centre of one of the stars
causes further periodic explosions due to the motion of the stars, so that it will fade out, while
a gas-dust nebula that is not stabilized by the ﬁeld of a standing sound wave will relatively
swiftly accrete to the central stars without any planet formation. However, we do not claim
that all the planetary systems must originate on the proposed model. In some rare cases, the
planets can be formed, for example, as a result of a close passage of two or more stars and
gas-dust nebulae, so may occur planetary systems around closely located multiple stars, e.g.
Orosz et al. [34].

Jensen and Akeson [35] describe the case of a binary young stars with components separated
by about 386 AU, each of which is surrounded by a cloud of dust, and the plane of rotation of
these clouds are strongly tilted relative to each other. The classical theory cannot explain this
tilt, the proposed model explains this because the explosions in the centre of each of protostars
occur independently of each other, and the dust clouds get their individual tilts.

The classical theory suggests that rotation of the protostellar cloud is essential for the for-
mation of planets around the central star. The proposed model does not require such an
assumption. If a gas-dust nebula does not rotate, after a ﬁrst asymmetric explosion the central
protostar and the peripheral gas masses will gain equal angular momentum, but opposite in
sign. The gas-dust nebula will start spinning and at the same time a standing sound wave will
emerge, beginning the process of planet formation. The resulting planetary system will have
the central star and planets rotating in opposite directions, planetary orbits will be retrograde.

The model predicts that the planetary systems with retrograde orbits can also be formed
from a rotating protoplanetary nebula, when after an asymmetric explosion (i)the spherical
nebula or (ii)the central protostar starts to rotate in opposite direction. In the ﬁrst case, the
planets will have wide orbits around rapidly rotating stars. In the second case, will be formed
planets with short orbital periods, such as Hot Jupiters, around slowly rotating stars.

The Titius-Bode relation is not based on any physical laws and is only a mathematical
formula to a series of numbers. Despite this, the fact that a simple formula with good accuracy
describes the actual distances of the planets from the sun, suggesting, that behind it are
standing certain physical regularities. Bovaird and al. [36, 37] have analysed a large number
of exoplanet systems, consisting of at least from 4 planets, and found that in many of them
distances of the planets from the centre correspond to the generalized Titius-Bode relation.
The authors predicted the existence of 141 new planets in these systems. Huang and Bakos
[38] performed an extensive search in the Kepler data for 97 of the predicted planets in 56
systems and have conﬁrmed ﬁve of predictions. Our model provides a physical explanation of
the distances of the planets from the central stars and we are conﬁdent that it will be able
to more accurately predict the new planet in the already open exoplanetary systems. For this
purpose, is necessary to develop a mathematical model of a standing wave in the protoplanetary

13

nebula, which is our future target.

A theory of the formation of the planetary systems must explain all or at least most of
the known facts, but many of the current models consider only some of the facts, leaving all
other ignored. There is, for example, abundant recent literature concerning transport of mass
and angular momentum in turbulent, magnetized, diﬀerentially rotating disks. Measurements
made in November 2014 by Rosetta spacecraft and Philae lander on comet 67P/Churyumov-
Gerasimenko shown that the comets nucleus is not magnetised (e.g. Auster et al.
[39]. This
suggests that the magnetic ﬁeld was absent at the stage of growth of the cometary nucleus and
magnetism do not have played a role in the formation of the Solar System. From measurements
of the gravitational ﬁeld P¨atzold et al. [40] found that the comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko
is low-density, highly porous (72-74 per cent) and homogeneous dusty body without large
internal cavities. Massironi et al. [41] showed that the comet was merged from two kilometer-
sized objects collided at very low relative speeds. This implies that the comet was formed from
particles, coalesced at very low relative velocities, and never experienced deforming its structure
collisions with other bodies. This in turn means that the formation of the solar system did not
occur under the conditions of turbulence and chaos, as described in many models.

The proposed scenario of the planetary system origin answers many open questions related
to the origin and evolution of the Solar System. Several known facts and their explanations
within the framework of this model are listed below:

4.1 Planetary distances to the Sun are not random – there are certain regularities (Titius-

Bode law).

– Planets are formed in the antinodes of a giant standing sound wave, emerging after a
powerful thermonuclear explosion in the centre of the protosun and repeated passage of forward
and backward sound waves through the spherical protoplanetary gas-dust nebula.

4.2 There are internal silicate planets and outer gas giant planets. The hypothesis of a
rotating protoplanetary disk cannot explain such distribution, as the rotating disk has the whole
mass of dust inﬂuenced by the centrifugal force, which prevents migration of the matter.

– Distinction between inner and outer planets is explained by migration of the solid matter

from the spherical dust concentration zones in the antinodes of the standing wave.

4.3 The Sun contains 99.8% of the mass, but only 0.5% of the angular momentum of the

Solar System.

– Asymmetry of the ﬁrst explosion in the protosun centre resulted to redistribution of angular
momentum: the rotation of the peripheral portion of the gas-dust nebula was signiﬁcantly
accelerated, acquiring an increment of angular momentum from the large gas mass emitted
from the protosun during explosion.

4.4 There is a 7◦ tilt of the Sun equatorial plane in relation to the average plane of the

planetary orbits.

14

– The equatorial plane of the planetary system tilted during the ﬁrst powerful explosion in

the centre of the pre-solar nebula because of the small asymmetry of the explosion.

4.5 The Oort cloud is a source of comets visiting the inner Solar System. Its existence is not

conﬁrmed by direct observations, but is very likely.

– The expanding shell that separated from the interior part of the pre-solar nebula during
the passage of the shock wave from the ﬁrst explosion concentrates large masses of rareﬁed gas
in front of it and stops at a distance of about 1 light year from the Sun, forming a spherical
region where comets are formed the Oort cloud.

4.6 Neptune is closer to the Sun than what is implied by the Titius-Bode distribution.

– Neptune was shifted towards the Sun by a backward wave from the Oort cloud.

4.7 The mass of Neptune (17.5 M⊕) is signiﬁcantly greater than what could be expected based
on the decreasing sequence of giant planet masses: Jupiter (318 M⊕), Saturn (95.3 M⊕) and
Uranus (14.5 M⊕).

– Neptune gained a signiﬁcant (a number of times) mass increase from the backward wave

of the Oort cloud.

4.8 The Kuiper Belt contains unexpectedly high quantities of wide binary objects (e.g. Petit

et al. [42], Parker et al. [43]).

– The growing clumps of matter in rotating rings of dust had very small relative velocities and
formed of them in the Kuiper belt large objects approaching at low speeds form gravitationally
bound wide binary systems. In our model, the planets retain their orbits unchanged throughout
all time of existence solar system; therefore binaries in the Kuiper belt were not destroyed by
any approaching massive bodies.

Acknowledgments: This research has made use of the NASA Exoplanet Archive, which is
operated by the California Institute of Technology, under contract with the National Aeronau-
tics and Space Administration under the Exoplanet Exploration Program.

Appendix A

Currently there are no detailed models of the evolution of protostars in the period from the
beginning of thermonuclear reactions to sustainable hydrogen burning and the formation of
convective energy transfer zone. When in the process of gravitational contraction temperature
in the center of the protostar reaches 10 million Kelvin, start the fusion reactions of hydrogen
into helium. These reactions, however, are very slow with the characteristic time millions of
years, so a relatively small amount of released energy cannot stop the gravitational contraction
of a protostar and the temperature in the central region continues to rise. With an increase in

15

temperature increases the rate of fusion reactions and the amount of released energy, and at
some point the contraction of the protostars centre stops. The central region of the protostar
at this time is in a very unstable state; the hydrogen burning begins to occur explosively and
from the centre to the periphery begins to spread the shock wave. After the ﬁrst explosion
the central region expands and cools, the rapid hydrogen burning stops, then the compression
process is repeated and the next explosion occurs.
If a standing sound wave arises in the
protostellar nebula, the formation of a planetary system begins, as described in our model.
If the standing wave does not appear, the explosions would continue regularly or irregularly
until a stable burning of hydrogen be established, at the same time from the surface of the
protostar can occur a signiﬁcant ejection of matter, which in some cases can be observed as a
jets, outﬂows or outbursts, e.g. [10]-[18].

During the passage of the shock wave from the ﬁrst explosion through the central region of
protostar are produced so large pressures and temperature that at the wave front can begin
nucleosynthesis of elements heavier than helium, including the elements heavier than iron.
Authors, who examined the live in the early solar system short-lived isotopes such as, for
example, 26Al, 41Ca (e.g. [44, 45]) or 247Cm [46], presume that they were injected in the solar
system by supernova explosions within a very short, not more than a few millions of years,
time before the formation of the solar system. This, in turn, requires the existence of some
particular conditions for the emergence of the solar system. Our model eliminates the need for
any special preconditions and does not put the solar system in a unique position among other
planetary systems, because the short-lived isotopes can be produced during the formation of
the sun.

References

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

Kant, I. Allgemeine Naturgeschichte des Himmels. Johann Friderich Petersen, Knigs-
berg und Leipzig, 1755. (English translation: W. Hastie, 1968, in Kants Cosmology,
Universal Natural History and Theories of the Heavens. Greenwood Publishing, New
York).

de Laplace, P.S.M. Expositions du systme du monde (Paris, Imprimerie du Cercle
Social ), 1796.

Chamberlin, T.C. On a Possible Function of Disruptive Approach in the Formation of
Meteorites, Comets, and Nebulae. ApJ 1901, 14, 17-40.

Moulton, F.R. On the Evolution of the Solar System. ApJ 1905, 22, 165.

Schmidt, O.Y. Meteoritic theory of the origin of the Earth and planets. Dokl. Akad.
Nauk SSSR 1944, 45 (6), 245-249.

von Weizs¨acker, C. F. ¨Uber die Entstehung des Planetensystems. Z. Astrophys. 1944,
22, 319. Translation, ”On the origin of the planetary system” Report No. RSIC-138
[=AD-4432290] Huntsville AL: Redstone Scientiﬁc Information Center.

McCrea, W.H. The origin of the solar system. Proc. Roy. Soc. London 1960, Ser. A
256, 245-266.

16

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

Woolfson, M.M. A capture theory of the origin of the solar system. Proc. Roy. Soc.
London 1964, Ser. A 282, 485-507.

Safronov, V.S. Evolution of the Protoplanetary Cloud and Formation of the Earth
and Planets. Evolution of the protoplanetary cloud and formation of the earth and
planets., by Safronov, VS. Translated from Russian. Jerusalem(Israel): Israel Program
for Scientiﬁc Translations, Keter Publishing House 1972, 212 p.

Bally, J.; Devine, D.; Fesen, R.A. & Lane, A.P. Twin Herbig-Haro jets and molecular
outows in L1228. ApJ 1995, 454, 345-360.

Bally, J.; Reipurth, B. & Davis, C.J. Observations of Jets and Outows from Young
Stars. In Protostars and Planets V ; Reipurth, B., Jewitt, D. and Keil, K. (eds.),
University of Arizona Press, Tucson, 2007, 215-230.

Eisl¨oﬀel, J. Parsec-scale molecular H2 outﬂows from young stars. Astronomy and As-
trophysics 2000, 354, 236-246.

Frank, A. et al. Jets and outﬂows from star to cloud: Observations confront theory. In
Protostars and Planets VI ; Beuther, H., Klessen, R. S., Dullemond, C. P., Henning,
University of Arizona Press, Tucson, 2014, 451-474.

Busquet, G. et al. The CHESS survey of the L1157-B1 bow-shock: high and low exci-
tation water vapor. A&A 2014, 561, A120.

Nisini, B. et al. Mapping water in protostellar outﬂows with Herschel-PACS and HIFI
observations of L1448-C. A&A 2013, 549, A16.

Santangelo, G. et al. Herschel-PACS observations of shocked gas associated with the
jets of L1448 and L1157. A&A 2013, 557, A22.

Safron, E.J. et al. HOPS 383: An Outbursting Class 0 Protostar in Orion. ApJ 2015,
800, L5.

Stanke, T. Observations of molecular jets in Orion A. Astrophysics and Space Science
2003, 287, 149-160.

Oort, J.H. The Structure of the Cloud of Comets Surrounding the Solar System and a
Hypothesis Concerning its Origin. Bull. Astron. Inst. Neth. 1950, 11, 91-110.

Schneider, G. et al. Probing for Exoplanets Hiding in Dusty Debris Disks: Disk Imag-
ing, Characterization, and Exploration with HST/STIS Multi-Roll Coronagraphy. The
Astronomical Journal 2014, 148, 59.

Narita, N. et al. First evidence of a retrograde orbit of a transiting exoplanet HAT-P-7b.
PASJ 2009, 61, L35-L40.

[22] Winn, J.N. et al. HAT-P-7: a retrograde or polar orbit, and a third body. ApJ 2009,

703, L99.

17

[23] Winn, J.N. et al. ORBITAL ORIENTATIONS OF EXOPLANETS: HAT-P-4b IS
PROGRADE AND HAT-P-14b IS RETROGRADE. The Astronomical Journal 2011,
141, 63.

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

Triaud, A. et al. Spin-orbit angle measurements for six southern transiting planets-New
insights into the dynamical origins of hot Jupiters. A&A 2010, 524, A25.

Queloz, D. et al. WASP-8b: a retrograde transiting planet in a multiple system. A&A
2010, 517, L1.

Bayliss, D. et al. Conﬁrmation of a retrograde orbit for exoplanet WASP-17b. ApJ
2010, 722, L224.

H´ebrard, G. et al. The retrograde orbit of the HAT-P-6b exoplanet. A&A 2011, 527,
L11.

Pont, F. et al. The spin-orbit angle of the transiting hot Jupiter CoRoT-1b. MNRAS
2010, 402, L1-L5.

Simpson, E.K. et al. The spin-orbit angles of the transiting exoplanets WASP-
1b,WASP-24b,WASP-38b and HAT-P-8b from Rossiter-McLaughlin observations. MN-
RAS 2011, 414, 3023-3035.

[30] Winn, J.N. et al. The oblique orbit of the super-Neptune HAT-P-11b. ApJ 2010, 723,

L223.

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

Hirano, T. et al. A Possible Tilted Orbit of the Super-Neptune HAT-P-11b. PASJ
2011, 63, 531-536.

McQuillan, A., Mazeh, T., & Aigrain, S. Stellar rotation periods of the Kepler objects
of interest: A dearth of close-in planets around fast rotators. The Astrophysical Journal
Letters 2013, 775(1), L11.

McQuillan, A., Mazeh, T., & Aigrain, S. Rotation periods of 34,030 Kepler main-
sequence stars: the full autocorrelation sample. The Astrophysical Journal Supplement
Series 2014, 211(2), 24.

Orosz, J.A., et al. Kepler-47: a transiting circumbinary multiplanet system. Science
2012, 337.6101 1511-1514.

Jensen, E.L. & Akeson, R. Misaligned protoplanetary disks in a young binary star
system. Nature 2014, 511, 567-569.

Bovaird, T. and Lineweaver, C.H. Exoplanet predictions based on the generalized
Titius-Bode relation. MNRAS 2013, 435: 11261138.

Bovaird, T.; Lineweaver, C.H. and Jacobsen, S.K. Using the inclinations of Kepler
systems to prioritize new Titius-Bode-based exoplanet predictions. MNRAS 2015, 448:
36083627

Huang, C.X. & Bakos, G.. Testing the TitiusBode law predictions for Kepler multi-
planet systems. MNRAS 2014, 442(1), 674-681.

18

[39]

[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46]

Auster, H-U. et al. The nonmagnetic nucleus of comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko.
Science 2015, 349.6247, aaa5102, doi:10.1126/science.aaa5102.

P¨atzold, M. et al. A homogeneous nucleus for comet 67P/ChuryumovGerasimenko from
its gravity ﬁeld. Nature 2016, 530, 6365, doi:10.1038/nature16535.

Massironi, M. et al. Two independent and primitive envelopes of the bilobate nucleus
of comet 67P. Nature 2015, 526(7573), 402-405, doi:10.1038/nature15511.

Petit, J-M. et al. The extreme Kuiper belt binary 2001 QW322. Science 2008, 322.5900,
432-434.

Parker, A.H. and Kavelaars, J.J. Destruction of binary minor planets during Neptune
scattering. The Astrophysical Journal Letters 2010, 722.2, L204.

Boss, A.P., & Foster, P.N. Injection of short-lived isotopes into the presolar cloud. The
Astrophysical Journal Letters 1998, 494(1), L103.

Meyer, B.S., & Clayton, D.D. Short-lived radioactivities and the birth of the Sun. In
From Dust to Terrestrial Planets. Springer Netherlands, 2000, 133-152.

Tissot, F.L., Dauphas, N., & Grossman, L. Origin of uranium isotope varia-
tions in early solar nebula condensates. Science Advances 2016, 2(3), e1501400,
doi:10.1126/sciadv.1501400.

19

