6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
2
 
 
]

.

V
C
h
t
a
m

[
 
 

2
v
9
2
6
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

GROUP ACTIONS AND NON-K ¨AHLER COMPLEX MANIFOLDS

MAINAK PODDAR AND AJAY SINGH THAKUR

Abstract. New constructions of non-K¨ahler complex manifolds are presented.
Let G be a complex reductive Lie group and let K be a maximal compact Lie
subgroup of G. Let E be a smooth principal K-bundle EK → M over a complex
manifold M . If E can be obtained by a smooth reduction of structure group from a
holomorphic principal G-bundle over M , then EK (respectively, EK × S 1) admits
an integrable complex structure if K has even dimension (respectively, odd dimen-
sion). As a consequence, the total space of the unitary frame bundle associated to
any holomorphic vector bundle of even rank admits a complex analytic structure
which is not K¨ahler. New complex manifolds are also constructed using proper
actions of reductive complex Lie groups on complex manifolds. In particular, non-
K¨ahler complex manifolds associated to eﬀective complex analytic orbifolds are
constructed.

1. Introduction

Let K be a compact connected Lie group, and let G be the universal complexiﬁ-
cation of K. Then G is a reductive complex Lie group and K is a maximal compact
subgroup of G (cf. Chapter XVII, Section 5, [9]). Furthermore, G is diﬀeomorphic
to K × Rs for some integer s (cf. Theorem 3.4, Chapter 4, [13]).

We say that a smooth principal K-bundle EK → M over a complex manifold
M admits a complexiﬁcation if the associated principal G-bundle EK ×K G → M
admits a holomorphic principal G-bundle structure. If the bundle EK → M admits a
complexiﬁcation, then the natural transversely holomorphic foliation induced by the
K-action on EK admits a complexiﬁcation in the sense of Haeﬂiger-Sundararaman
(cf. Remark 4.3, [7]).

Any holomorphic principal G-bundle EG → M over a complex manifold M, when
considered as a smooth bundle, admits a smooth reduction of the structure group
from G to K. The smooth principal K-bundle EK → M, corresponding to this
reduction, admits a complexiﬁcation.

Let EK → M be a smooth principal K-bundle which admits a complexiﬁcation.
Suppose K is even dimensional. Then we show that EK → M has a holomorphic
ﬁber bundle structure. In addition, if K is a compact torus then the bundle EK → M
has a holomorphic principal K-bundle structure. Similarly, if K is odd dimensional,
the bundle EK × S1 → M admits a holomorphic ﬁber bundle structure with ﬁber

2010 Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation. Primary: 32L05, 32M05, 32Q55, 57R22; Secondary:

32V05, 57R30.

Key words and phrases. Non-K¨ahler complex manifolds, CR-structure, foliations, principal bun-

dles, orbifolds.

1

2

M. PODDAR AND A. S. THAKUR

K × S1. In particular, the space EK admits a CR-structure of hypersurface type (cf.
Example 7.3, [6]). Moreover, in most cases, the space EK or EK ×S1 is a non-K¨ahler
complex manifold. In this way we construct new examples of non-K¨ahler complex
manifolds; see Corollary 2.5 and Examples 2.6, 2.10 and Remark 2.12.

The above construction of non-K¨ahler complex manifolds generalizes some well-
known constructions in the literature. For example, Hopf [10] and Calabi-Eckmann
[4] constructed compact non-K¨ahler complex manifolds by obtaining complex ana-
lytic structures on the product of odd dimensional spheres, S2m−1 × S2n−1. These
manifolds can be viewed as the total space of a principal S1×S1-bundle which admits
a complexiﬁcation. To see this, consider the holomorphic principal C∗ × C∗-bundle,

(Cm \ {0}) × (Cn \ {0}) → CPm−1 × CPn−1.

(1.1)

Here, the projection map is the component-wise Hopf map. The above principal
bundle, when considered as a smooth bundle, admits a smooth reduction of structure
group from C∗ × C∗ to S1 × S1 to yield a smooth principal S1 × S1-bundle

S2m−1 × S2n−1 → CPm−1 × CPn−1 .

(1.2)
Hence, the smooth principal S1 × S1-bundle (1.2) has a complexiﬁcation, and it
admits the structure of a holomorphic principal bundle with an elliptic curve as the
structure group. The complex structures thus obtained on S2m−1 × S2n−1 are those
of Hopf and Calabi-Eckmann manifolds.

Recently, there have been many interesting generalizations of Hopf and Calabi-
Eckmann manifolds, giving new classes of non-K¨ahler compact complex manifolds.
Bosio [2] obtained such a class of manifolds which are now known as LVMB mani-
folds. These manifolds were obtained by generalizing earlier constructions (of LVM
manifolds) by L´opez de Madrano-Verjovsky [16] and Meersseman [17]. Bosio and
Meersseman observed that the underlying smooth manifolds of a large class of these
are polytopal moment angle manifolds [3]. Complex analytic structures were then
constructed on a more general class of moment angle manifolds by Panov and Usti-
novsky [21]. In [22], inspired by Loeb-Nicolau’s construction [14], a family of complex
structures was obtained on S(L1) × S(L2), where S(Li) is the smooth principal S1-
bundle associated to a holomorphic principal C∗-bundle Li over a complex manifold
Xi, i = 1, 2.

By the description of Cupit-Foutou and Zaﬀran [25], an LVMB manifold satisfying
a certain rationality condition (K) admits a Seifert principal ﬁbration over an orbifold
toric variety. If the base of the Seifert principal ﬁbration is a nonsingular toric variety
then the corresposnding LVMB manifold can viewed as the total space of a smooth
principal bundle which admits a complexiﬁcation. Hence, we recover these LVMB
manifolds as a special case of the construction described above.

It is possible to look at all LVMB manifolds that satisfy condition (K) as part of
a more general phenomenon. It is shown in [25] that any such LVMB manifold can
be identiﬁed to an orbit space X/L, where X is a complex manifold that admits a
proper holomorphic action of (C∗)2m with ﬁnite stabilizers, and L is a torsion-free
closed co-compact subgroup of (C∗)2m. In section 3, we consider the more general
situation of any proper holomorphic action of a reductive complex Lie group G on a

GROUP ACTIONS AND NON-K ¨AHLER COMPLEX MANIFOLDS

3

complex manifold X with ﬁnite stabilizers. Then G has a closed torsion-free complex
subgroup L which acts freely on X. This yields new, possibly non-K¨ahler, complex
manifolds X/L. In particular, given an even dimensional eﬀective complex analytic
orbifold V 2n, we can take X to be the manifold of frames of the holomorphic tangent
(or cotangent) bundle of V 2n, and G to be GL(2n, C). Then, there exists L such
that G/L is diﬀeomorphic to U(2n), and X/L is a non-K¨ahler complex manifold.
Analogous results are obtained in the case of odd dimensional Calabi-Yau orbifolds.

2. Principal bundles

Let K be a compact connected Lie group of even dimension. Suppose that K is
a real Lie subgroup of a complex Lie group G. Further, assume that L is a closed,

complex subgroup of G such that K T L = 1G, KL = G. Consider the left G-

invariant foliation on G with leaf L, given by the right translation action of L on G.
Note that this foliation is transverse to K. Then the following holds.

Proposition 2.1. Let K, G and L be as deﬁned above. Let EG → M be a holo-
morphic principal G-bundle over a complex manifold M . Assume that EG → M
admits a smooth reduction of structure group to give a smooth principal K-bundle,
EK → M . Then the total space EK admits a complex structure such that EK → M
is a holomorphic ﬁber bundle with ﬁber K. Further, if G is abelian then EK → M
is a holomorphic principal K-bundle.

Proof. Since the foliation on G corresponding to the right action of L is left G-
invariant, it induces a foliation on EG with leaf L. This foliation is complex analytic
as EG is a holomorphic bundle. Similarly, there is an induced smooth foliation with
leaf L on EK ×K G.

Let i : EK ֒→ EK ×K G be the canonical inclusion deﬁned by i(e) = [e, 1G]. Since
EK → M is obtained by a smooth reduction of structure group from EG → M, there
exists a smooth isomorphism of principal G-bundles, ρ : EK ×K G → EG. Then ρ ◦ i
is a smooth embedding of EK in EG.

The image of i is transversal to the L-foliation in EK ×K G. By G-equivariance, the
map ρ respects the ﬁberwise L-foliations on EK ×K G and EG. Being a (ﬁberwise)
diﬀeomorphism, ρ preserves transversality. Therefore, the L-foliation in every ﬁber
of EG is transversal to the image of corresponding ﬁber of EK under ρ ◦ i. This
is enough to conclude that the L-foliation on EG is transversal to the image of EK

under ρ◦i. Since L is closed and K T L = 1G, this implies that the map EK → EG/L

is a diﬀeomorphism. Hence the holomorphic ﬁber bundle structure on EG/L → M
can be pulled back to give a holomorphic ﬁber bundle structure on EK → M.

Finally, if G is abelian, then G/L inherits the structure of a complex Lie group.
This induces a complex Lie group structure on K. With respect to this structure
EK is a holomorphic principal K-bundle.
(cid:3)

Samelson [11] and Wang [24] proved the existence of a family of invariant complex
analytic structures on an even dimensional compact Lie group. Recently a more geo-
metric construction of such structures appeared in [15]. In the following proposition,
we assert a technical fact about the foliation associated to the construction in [15].

4

M. PODDAR AND A. S. THAKUR

Proposition 2.2. Let G be a reductive complex Lie group and let K be a maximal
compact subgroup of G. Assume that the real dimension of K is even. Then there
exists a torsion-free closed complex Lie subgroup L of G such that the associated
complex analytic L-foliation on G, corresponding to the right translation action of
L, is transverse to K. In particular, K is diﬀeomorphic to the homogeneous complex
manifold G/L.

Proof. It is enough to obtain a torsion-free closed complex Lie subgroup L of G such
that K ∩ L = 1G and G = KL.

First note that K has a ﬁnite covering group which is the product of a semi-simple
compact Lie group K1 with a torus (S1)m. Also, G is the universal complexiﬁcation
of K. Suppose G1 is the universal complexiﬁcation of K1. Then we have the following
commuting diagram (cf. Proposition 1.33 of [23]), where the horizontal arrows are
inclusions.

eK = K1 × (S1)m ֒→ G1 × (C∗)m = eG

↓
K

֒→

↓ σ
G

with ﬁnite kernel Γ. By the construction in Theorem 3.4, [15], there exists a closed

The map σ : eG → G is a covering group homomorphism of complex Lie groups
subgroup eL of eG such that eK T eL = 1 eG and eG = eKeL. Note that eL is a semi-direct
product of a torsion free abelian group and an unipotent group. So eL is torsion-free.
Let L = σ(eL). Then clearly G = KL. Since σ is a covering group map with ﬁnite
kernel, and eL is torsion-free, the restricted map σ : eL → L is an isomorphsim. Hence

L is torsion-free.

Note that

σ−1(K ∩ L) = [

γ∈Γ eK ∩ γeL.

As eK ∩ eL = 1 eG, the intersection eK ∩ γeL is singleton for each γ ∈ Γ. Since Γ is a

ﬁnite group, the intersection K ∩ L is a ﬁnite subgroup of L. But L is torsion-free.
Hence, we have K ∩ L = 1G.

As eL is a closed subgroup of eG, and a ﬁnite covering map is a closed map, L is a

closed subgroup of G. The proposition follows.

(cid:3)

Theorem 2.3. Let K be an even dimensional compact connected Lie group. Let
EK → M be a smooth principal K-bundle over a complex manifold M , which admits
a complexiﬁcation. Then the total space EK admits a complex structure such that
EK → M is a holomorphic ﬁber bundle with ﬁber K. Further, if K is abelain then
EK → M has the structure of a holomorphic principal K-bundle.

Proof. The result follows by applying Propositions 2.1 and 2.2. Note that if K is
abelian, then its universal complexiﬁcation is also abelian.
(cid:3)

Next we show that in most of the cases the complex manifold EK is non-K¨ahler.
First assume that K is a non-abelain compact Lie group. Then, it is shown in
Example 2.10, [19] that K is non-K¨ahler with respect to any complex structure. We

GROUP ACTIONS AND NON-K ¨AHLER COMPLEX MANIFOLDS

5

reproduce the argument given there: Any compact connected Lie group K can be
written as

K = K1 × (S1)r/Γ

where K1 is a semi-simple compact Lie group, Γ is a ﬁnite subgroup of the center
Z(K1 × (S1)r) of K1 × (S1)r and r ≥ 0. Since the ﬁrst and the second Betti numbers
[12, p. 29]), we have H 2(K1 × (S1)r; C) = H 2((S1)r; C). This
of K1 are zero (cf.
implies that there does not exist a class [ω] ∈ H 2(K1 × (S1)r; C) such that

[ω]dim(K1×(S 1)r) 6= 0.

Hence K1×(S1)r is non-K¨ahler. From here one easily concludes that any non-abelian
even dimensional compact Lie group K is not K¨ahler.

Theorem 2.4. Assume that K is a non-abelain compact Lie group of even dimen-
sion. Then the complex manifold EK of Theorem 2.3 is non-K¨ahler.
(cid:3)

Proof. Any ﬁber of the holomorphic ﬁber bundle EK → M is a complex submanifold
of the total space of EK. As each ﬁber is diﬀeomorhic to the compact Lie group K,
and the latter is non-K¨ahler, the theorem follows from the fact that a closed complex
submanifold of a K¨ahler manifold is K¨ahler.
(cid:3)

The following yield new classes of non-K¨ahler complex manifolds.

Corollary 2.5. Let E → M be a holomorphic vector bundle of rank 2n over a
complex manifold M . Let U(E) → M denote the unitary frame bundle associated to
the vector bundle E → M . Then U(E) is a non-K¨ahler complex manifold. Moreover,
U(E) → M has the structure of a holomorphic ﬁber bundle.

Proof. The frame bundle associated to the vector bundle E → M is a holomorphic
principal GL(2n, C)-bundle. Then the unitary frame bundle U(E) → M is a smooth
principal U(2n)-bundle corresponding to the smooth reduction of structure group
from GL(2n, C) to U(2n). As GL(2n, C) is the universal complexiﬁation of U(2n),
by Theorem 2.3, the bundle U(E) → M has the structure of a holomorphic ﬁber
bundle. The total space U(E) is not K¨ahler as U(2n) is not K¨ahler.
(cid:3)

Example 2.6. Let M be a complex n-dimensional Calabi-Yau manifold, where n
is odd. Therefore, M is a K¨ahler manifold that admits a nowhere vanishing, holo-
morphic n-form Ω. This implies that the hololmorphic cotangent bundle T ∗(1,0)M
of M admits a holomorphic reduction of structure group to SL(n, C). Since SU(n)
is a maximal compact subgroup of SL(n, C), T ∗(1,0)M admits a smooth reduction
of structure group to SU(n). Note that SU(n) is even dimensional when n is odd.
Let G = SL(n, C) and K = SU(n). Let EG → M be the bundle of those frames
of T ∗(1,0)M, the wedge product of whose components equals Ω. Then EG → M
is a holomorphic principal G-bundle. Let EK → M be the asscociated principal
K-bundle corresponsing to the smooth reduction of structure group from G to K.
Then by Theorems 2.3 and 2.4, the total space EK is a non-K¨ahler complex mani-
fold. Note that EK is smoothly isomorphic to the bundle of special unitary frames
of T ∗(1,0)M.

6

M. PODDAR AND A. S. THAKUR

By duality, the form Ω induces a holomorphic trivialization of ∧nT (1,0)M. There-
fore T (1,0)M admits holomorphic reduction of structure group to SL(n, C). So, by
a similar argument as above, the space of special unitary frames of T (1,0)M admits
the structure of a non-K¨ahler complex manifold.

When K is an even dimensional compact torus, we observe that the complex man-
ifold EK is again non-K¨ahler under certain conditions. In this case, the universal
complexiﬁcation G of K is a complex torus (C∗)2r. Then the rank 2r vector bun-
dle, corresponding to any holomorphic principal G-bundle EG → M, is the direct
sum of 2r holomorphic line bundles, L1, . . . , L2r. The following result follows from
Proposition 11.3 [8] and Corollary 11.4 [8].

Theorem 2.7 (H¨ofer). Assume that K is an even dimensional, compact torus and
M is a simply-connected compact complex manifold. If the Chern classes c1(L1), . . . ,
c1(L2r) ∈ H 2(M, R) are R-linearly independent then EK is not symplectic, and hence
not K¨ahler.

In the case when M is K¨ahler, Blanchard [1] (cf. Section 1.7, [8]) gives the following

necessary and suﬃcient condition.

Theorem 2.8 (Blanchard). Assume that K is an even dimensional, compact torus
and M is a compact K¨ahler manifold. Then the complex manifold EK is K¨ahler if
and only if c1(Li) ∈ H 2(M, R) is zero for each i.
(cid:3)

If K is an elliptic curve, the following gives a suﬃcient condition without assuming
the compact complex manifold M to be simply-connected or K¨ahler (cf. Corollary
1, [26]).

Theorem 2.9 (Vuletescu). Assume that K is an elliptic curve and at least one of
the Chern classes c1(Li) ∈ H 2(M, R) is non-zero. Then EK is a non-K¨ahler complex
manifold.

Example 2.10. Consider a nonsingular toric variety M of complex dimension n.
Assume that the one dimensional cones in the fan Σ of M are generated by primitive
integral vectors λ1, . . . , λk. Let Λ be the matrix [λ1 . . . λk]. Let Ej, j = 1, . . . , k,
denote the line bundles corresponding to the torus-invariant, prime, eﬀective divisors
of M. Then any holomorphic line bundle over M is of the form N E aj
j where each

aj is an integer.

The ﬁrst Chern class of such a line bundle is given by

c1(O E aj

j ) = X ajc1(Ej) .

It is nonzero if the vector (a1, . . . , ak) does not belong to the row space of the matrix
Λ.

Consider a holomorphic vector bundle E → M which is the direct sum of an
even number, namely 2r, of line bundles. Let K = (S1)2r. Let EK → M denote
the smooth principal K-bundle obtained by reduction of structure group from the
principal holomorphic (C∗)2r-bundle associated to E. The total space EK of this
bundle admits a family of complex analytic structures by Theorem 2.3.

GROUP ACTIONS AND NON-K ¨AHLER COMPLEX MANIFOLDS

7

If M is projective, then Theorem 2.8 gives a suﬃcient condition for the total space
EK to be non-K¨ahler. The moment angle manifold corresponding to the fan Σ (cf.
[21]) is an example of such an EK.

Now, we discuss the case when the compact Lie group K is odd dimensional.

Corollary 2.11. Let K be an odd dimensional compact connected Lie group. If a
smooth principal K-bundle EK → M over a complex manifold M admits a complex-
iﬁcation, then the bundle EK × S1 → M has the structure of a holomorphic ﬁber
bundle. In particular, the space EK has a CR-structure of hyperspace type.

Proof. Let EG → M denote the complexiﬁcation of EK → M. Then EG × C∗ → M
is the complexiﬁcation of the principal (K ×S1)-bundle EK ×S1 → M. Since K ×S1
is even dimensional, the result follows from Theorem 2.3.
(cid:3)

Remark 2.12. Let K and EK be as in Corollary 2.11. If K is non-abelian, then
EK × S1 is a non-K¨ahler complex manifold. On the other hand, if K is a compact
torus, then Theorems 2.8 and 2.9 give some conditions for EK ×S1 to be non-K¨ahler.

3. Proper action of reductive group

Consider any proper holomorphic right action of a complex Lie group G on a
complex manifold X with ﬁnite stabilizers. The quotient X/G has the structure of
a complex analytic orbifold. If L is a torsion-free closed complex Lie subgroup of
G then the induced action of L on X is proper and free. Then the quotient X/L
has the structure of a complex manifold such that the projection X → X/L is a
holomorphic map.
If the G-action on X is also free, we get a holomorphic ﬁber
bundle X/L → X/G with ﬁber G/L. Further, if G is abelian then the holomorphic
ﬁber bundle X/L → X/G has the structure of a principal (G/L)-bundle.
The following result may also be deduced from the description in [15].

Lemma 3.1. A complex reductive Lie group G has a nontrivial torsion-free closed
complex subgroup L.

Proof. This is clear from Proposition 2.2 if a maximal compact subgroup K of G is
even dimensional. Otherwise, note that K × S1 is a maximal compact subgroup of
the reductive group G×C∗ of even dimension. Then by Proposition 2.2, G×C∗ has a
torsion-free closed compact subgroup L such that G × C∗ = (K × S1)L. This implies
GT L is a torsion-free closed complex Lie subgroup of G. Moreover, by dimension
counting, GT L is nontrivial.

(cid:3)

By the above lemma, any proper holomorphic action of a complex reductive group
G on a complex manifold X with ﬁnite stabilizers yields a complex manifold X/L.
Any LVMB manifold satisfying condition (K) (cf.
[25]), and all the examples in
section 2 are special cases of this phenomenon.

Now consider any n-dimensional, eﬀective, complex analytic orbifold V . Then V is
the quotient of a complex manifold X by a proper, holomorphic action of GL(n, C).
This follows from the so-called frame bundle construction: Suppose {Vi : i ∈ I} is
an open cover of V . Let {(Ui, Γi, qi)} be an orbifold atlas for V corresponding to this

8

M. PODDAR AND A. S. THAKUR

cover. Here we may assume that Ui ⊂ Cn, Γi is a ﬁnite subgroup of complex analytic
isomorphisms of Ui (in fact, it can be assumed to be a ﬁnite subgroup of GL(n, C)
by [5]), and qi
: Ui → Vi is a continuous map that induces a homeomorphism

Γi\Ui → Vi. Let eXi be the space of frames of the holomorphic tangent bundle of Ui.
Deﬁne Xi = Γi\ eXi. Then the Xi glue together naturally to give a complex manifold

X. For details, we refer to [27] where an analogous construction is described in the
presence of a hermitian metric. There is a natural right action of GL(n, C) on X,
which is holomorphic and proper (but not free unless V is a manifold). The quotient
X/GL(n, C) is isomorphic to V as a complex orbifold.

Assume n is even. Then U(n) has even dimension. Since U(n) is a maximal
compact subgroup of GL(n, C), by Proposition 2.2 there exists a closed and torsion-
free complex subgroup L of GL(n, C) such that GL(n, C)/L is diﬀeomorphic to
U(n).
In this case, the complex manifold X/L is diﬀeomorphic to the space of

unitary frames, eV , of [27]. The ﬁber of the map p : X/L → V at a regular point

of V is biholomorphic to GL(n, C)/L. The ﬁber is indeed a complex submanifold of
X/L. Since U(n) is not K¨ahler, X/L cannot be K¨ahler.

is a subgroup of SL(n, C). We deﬁne eX ∗

Now, assume n is odd. Then SU(n) is even dimensional. Suppose the complex
orbifold V is Calabi-Yau. This means there is a holomorphic volume form Ω on V .
So each local chart Ui has a holomorphic volume form Ωi which is invariant under Γi,
and these forms are compatible under gluing of orbifold charts. In particular each Γi
i to be the space of those frames of T ∗(1,0)Ui
the wedge product of whose components equals Ωi. Let X ∗
i . Then the X ∗
i
glue together to produce a complex manifold X ∗ which admits a proper holomorphic
action of SL(n, C). By a similar argument as above, there exists a complex subgroup
L of SL(n, C) such that SL(n, C)/L ∼= SU(n) and X ∗/L is a complex non-K¨ahler
manifold. Note that, by duality, Ω induces a holomorphic trivialization of ∧nT (1,0)V .
Here T (1,0)V denotes the holomorphic tangent bundle of V whose sections over Vi are
the Γi-invariant sections of T (1,0)Ui. Therefore, there exists an invariant, nowhere
vanishing, holomorphic poly-vector ﬁeld η of degree n on V . Therefore, an analo-
gous construction can be made with tangent frames whose components have wedge
product η.

i = Γi\ eX ∗

Remark 3.2. If we consider V to be an orbifold toric variety, then the manifolds
X/L and X ∗/L are diﬀerent from the LVMB manifolds associated to V .

Acknowledgement. The authors are grateful to Arijit Dey, Shengda Hu, Alberto
Medina, M. S. Narasimhan, Marcel Nicolau and Parameswaran Sankaran for useful
comments and discussions. They also thank the Indian Institute of Technology-
Madras, where the initial part of the work was done, for its hospitality. The research
of the ﬁrst-named author is supported by a FAPA grant from the Universidad de
los Andes, and an SRP grant from the Middle East Technical University, Northern
Cyprus Campus. The research of second-named author is supported by DST-Inspire
Faculty Scheme(IFA-13-MA-26).

GROUP ACTIONS AND NON-K ¨AHLER COMPLEX MANIFOLDS

9

References

[1] A. Blanchard: Vari´et´es k¨ahl´eriennes et espaces ﬁbr´es. (French) C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris

234, (1952). 284-286.

[2] F. Bosio: Vari´et´es complexes compactes: une g´en´eralisation de la construction de
Meersseman et L´opez de Medrano-Verjovsky. Ann. Inst. Fourier (Grenoble) 51 (2001),
no. 5, 1259-1297.

[3] F. Bosio and L. Meersseman: Real quadrics in Cn, complex manifolds and convex

polytopes. Acta Math. 197 (2006), no. 1, 53-127.

[4] E. Calabi and B. Eckmann: A class of compact, complex manifolds which are not

algebraic. Ann. of Math. (2) 58, (1953), 494-500.

[5] H. Cartan: Quotient d’un espace analytique par un groupe d’automorphismes.
(French) A symposium in honor of S. Lefschetz, Algebraic geometry and topology.
pp. 90-102. Princeton University Press, Princeton, N. J. 1957.

[6] M. Djori´c and M. Okumura: CR submanifolds of complex projective space. Develop-

ments in Mathematics, 19. Springer, New York, 2010.

[7] A. Haeﬂiger and D. Sundararaman: Complexiﬁcations of transversely holomorphic

foliations. Math. Ann. 272 (1985), no. 1, 23-27.

[8] T. H¨ofer: Remarks on torus principal bundles, J. Math. Kyoto Univ. 33 (1993), no. 1,

227-259.

[9] G. Hochschild: The structure of Lie groups. Holden-Day, Inc., San Francisco-London-

Amsterdam 1965.

[10] H. Hopf: Zur Topologie der komplexen Mannigfaltigkeiten, Courant Anniversary Vol-

ume, New York, (1948), p. 168.

[11] H. Samelson: A class of complex-analytic manifolds, Portugaliae Math. 12 (1953),

129-132.

[12] H. Samelson: Topology of Lie groups. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 58, (1952), 2-37.
[13] E. B. Vinberg, V. V. Gorbatsevich and A. L. Onishchik: Structure of Lie groups and
Lie algebras. (Russian) Current problems in mathematics. Fundamental directions,
Vol. 41 (Russian), 5-259, Itogi Nauki i Tekhniki, Akad. Nauk SSSR, Vsesoyuz. Inst.
Nauchn. i Tekhn. Inform., Moscow, 1990.

[14] J. J. Loeb and M. Nicolau: Holomorphic ﬂows and complex structures on products of

odd-dimensional spheres. Math. Ann. 306 (1996), no. 4, 781-817.

[15] J. J. Loeb, M. Manjarin, and M. Nicolau: Complex and CR-structures on compact
Lie groups associated to abelian actions. Ann. Global Anal. Geom. 32 (2007), no. 4,
361-378.

[16] S. L´opez de Medrano and A. Verjovsky: A new family of complex, compact, non-

symplectic manifolds. Bol. Soc. Brasil. Mat. (N.S.) 28 (1997), no. 2, 253-269.

[17] L. Meersseman: A new geometric construction of compact complex manifolds in any

dimension. Math. Ann. 317 (2000), no. 1, 79-115.

[18] I. Moerdijk and J. Mrcun: Introduction to foliations and Lie groupoids. Cambridge
Studies in Advanced Mathematics, 91. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2003.
[19] M. Manjarin: Normal almost contact structures and non-K¨ahler compact complex

manifolds. Indiana Univ. Math. J. 57 (2008), no. 1, 481-507.

[20] L. Meersseman and A. Verjovsky: Holomorphic principal bundles over projective toric

varieties. J. Reine Angew. Math. 572 (2004), 57-96.

[21] T. Panov, and Y. Ustinovsky: Complex-analytic structures on moment-angle mani-

folds. Mosc. Math. J. 12 (2012), no. 1, 149-172, 216.

[22] P. Sankaran and A. S. Thakur: Complex structures on product of circle bundles over

complex manifolds. Ann. Inst. Fourier (Grenoble), 63 (2013), no. 4, 1331-1366.

10

M. PODDAR AND A. S. THAKUR

[23] D. N. Lee: The structure of complex Lie groups. (English summary) Chapman &
Hall/CRC Research Notes in Mathematics, 429. Chapman & Hall/CRC, Boca Raton,
FL, 2002.

[24] H.-C. Wang: Closed manifolds with homogeneous complex structure. Amer. J. Math.

76, (1954). 1-32.

[25] S. Cupit-Foutou and D. Zaﬀran: Non-Khler manifolds and GIT-quotients. Math. Z.

257 (2007), no. 4, 783-797.

[26] V. Vuletescu: LCK metrics on elliptic principal bundles, arXiv:1001.0936 [math.DG].
[27] Z. Z. Wang and D. Zaﬀran: A remark on the hard Lefschetz theorem for K¨ahler

orbifolds. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 137 (2009), no. 8, 2497-2501.

Departamento de Matem´aticas, Universidad de los Andes, Bogot´a, Colombia;
Department of Mathematics, Middle East Technical University, Northern Cyprus
Campus, KKTC, Mersin 10, Turkey
E-mail address: mainakp@gmail.com

Stat-Math Unit, Indian Statistical Institute, Bangalore, India
E-mail address: ajaysinghthakur@gmail.com

