6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
5
1

.

 
 
]
E
H
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
8
3
6
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Instability of Non-uniform Toroidal Magnetic Fields in Accretion Disks

Kota Hirabayashi and Masahiro Hoshino

Department of Earth and Planetary Science, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku,

Tokyo 113-0033, Japan

hirabayashi-k@eps.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp

ABSTRACT

A new type of instability that is expected to drive magnetohydrodynamic (MHD)
turbulence from a purely toroidal magnetic ﬁeld in an accretion disk is presented. It is al-
ready known that in a diﬀerentially rotating system, the uniform toroidal magnetic ﬁeld
is unstable due to a magnetorotational instability (MRI) under a non-axisymmetric and
vertical perturbation, while it is stable under a purely vertical perturbation. Contrary
to the previous study, this paper proposes an unstable mode completely conﬁned to the
equatorial plane, driven by the expansive nature of the magnetic pressure gradient force
under a non-uniform toroidal ﬁeld. The basic nature of this growing eigenmode, to which
we give a name “magneto-gradient driven instability”, is studied using linear analysis,
and the corresponding nonlinear evolution is then investigated using two-dimensional
ideal MHD simulations. Although a single localized magnetic ﬁeld channel alone cannot
provide suﬃcient Maxwell stress to contribute signiﬁcantly to the angular momentum
transport, we ﬁnd that the mode coupling between neighboring toroidal ﬁelds under
multiple localized magnetic ﬁeld channels drastically generates a highly turbulent state
and leads to the enhanced transport of angular momentum, comparable to the eﬃciency
seen in previous studies on MRIs. This horizontally conﬁned mode may play an impor-
tant role in the saturation of an MRI through complementray growth with the toroidal
MHDs and coupling with magnetic reconnection.

Subject headings: accretion, accretion disks — instabilities — magnetohydrodynamics
— methods: numerical — turbulence

1.

INTRODUCTION

Accretion disks are one of the most ubiquitous astrophysical objects, comprising dynamics
such as astrophysical jets, disk winds, and particle acceleration. It is widely believed that these
dynamical phenomena are driven by the anomalous transport of angular momentum and the subse-
quent release of gravitational binding energy. Several mechanisms have been proposed in attempts
to explain the origin of this angular momentum transport. Examples include magnetic braking

– 2 –

by external, large-scale magnetic ﬁelds (e.g., Blandford & Payne 1982; Stone & Norman 1994),
non-axisymmetric wave excitation (e.g., Fragile & Blaes 2008), and hydrodynamic/hydromagnetic
turbulence (e.g., Papaloizou & Pringle 1984; Balbus & Hawley 1998). In this paper, we consider a
mechanism related to the third example, which is the sole candidate that possesses a high correlation
with conventional, α-disk models (Shakura & Sunyaev 1973). In the α-disk models, the eﬃciency
of angular momentum transport, which is determined by the Rφ-component of the stress tensor, is
determined as the product of the pressure and a given parameter α. The value of α depends signif-
icantly on viscosity physics, but the simple molecular viscosity in an accretion disk cannot provide
a high eﬃciency of angular momentum transport suggested by observations (Cannizzo et al. 1988).
Since the astrophysical importance of magnetorotational instability (MRI) as the origin of required
turbulence was pointed out (Balbus & Hawley 1991, 1998), a number of authors have investigated
the nature of MRIs and the resultant turbulence in accretion disks over a wide range of plasma pa-
rameters (e.g., Stone et al. 1996; Sano & Stone 2002; Kunz & Lesur 2013; Hoshino 2015; Bai 2015;
Zhu et al. 2015; Simon & Hawley 2009; Simon et al. 2012).

In order to study the basic behavior behind the non-linear time evolution of MRIs, most
numerical studies on the local properties of MRI-induced turbulence have adopted the shearing
box model (Hawley et al. 1995; Sano & Inutsuka 2001; Sharma et al. 2006), which can capture
the wave vector toward an arbitrary direction in a diﬀerentially rotating plasma. Since an MRI
with a vertical wave vector has the maximum growth rate for an axisymmetric perturbation when
the background magnetic ﬁeld is purely poloidal, fully three-dimensional simulations, or at least
two-dimensional ones including a vertical axis, are necessary. (Note that the ﬁnal states in two-
and three-dimensional cases are rather diﬀerent from each other, and that the three-dimensional
simulations are required to investigate the saturation stage.)

The situation is similar when the unperturbed magnetic ﬁeld is purely toroidal. For exapmle,
Balbus & Hawley (1992) investigated the linear stability of an accretion disk threaded by a uni-
form toroidal magnetic ﬁeld assuming three-dimensional wavevectors in the cylindrical coordinates,
whose x-component varies with time because of the background shear velocity. They showed that
the perturbation satisfying k · VA . Ω can become unstable, in the sense that the amplitude of
oscillation increases with time. Moreover, a ﬁnite vertical wavenumber, kz, is required for the in-
stability to occur, and the larger kz leads to the faster ampliﬁcation. The non-linear evolution of
this oscillatory instability was also examined by Hawley et al. (1995) using three-dimensional ideal
MHD simulations, and the contribution to turbulence generation was conﬁrmed.

Other examples include linear eigenvalue analyses and the corresponding MHD simulations
by Matsumoto & Tajima (1995). They revealed that purely growing eigenmodes can exist in a
shearing plasma, in contrast to the above oscillatory unstable modes. For a Keplerian disk, only
the non-axisymmetric perturbations with k2
z < 0.015 become purely growing modes, where ky
and kz are the azimuthal and vertical wavenumbers, respectively. The vertical waves, therefore,
again contribute to the unstable modes most signiﬁcantly, although a ﬁnite azimuthal wavenumber
is required.

y/k2

– 3 –

Such a situation, where the toroidal magnetic ﬁeld is dominant, is thought to appear easily
in the non-linear stage of an MRI even when starting from a poloidal ﬁeld. For understanding
the dynamics and the nature of turbulence in well-developed disks, therefore, it is important to
investigate a plasma stability under a purely toroidal ﬁeld. In this paper, we provide the results of
linear and non-linear analyses on this issue, focusing particularly on an initially non-uniform toroidal
ﬁeld, and suggest another possible path leading to turbulence generation. Unstable modes proposed
here, which we will call “magneto-gradient driven instability (MGDI)“ reﬂecting its driving source
as shown in the suceeding sections, are conﬁned within the equatorial plane, i.e., kz = 0, in contrast
to the previous studies that required k2
y. An instability bound to the equatorial plane may
play a crucial role in plasma transport, as it could potentially couple with magnetic reconnection
occurring in the plane and contribute to the saturation mechanism of MRIs.

z > k2

The outline of this paper is as follows.

In Section 2, we brieﬂy introduce the setup of our
theoretical study and show the existence of unstable eigenmodes by linear analysis. Section 3
discusses the results of the fully-non-linear two-dimensional numerical simulations. The non-linear
calculations corresponding to the linear study and ones which can lead to more turbulent states
are presented. Finally, Section 4 is devoted to the summary and conclusion of our results.

2. LINEAR ANALYSIS

In this section we investigate the linear stability of a non-uniform toroidal magnetic ﬁeld in
In particularly, a simpliﬁed situation with a localized toroidal

a diﬀerentially rotating system.
magnetic ﬁeld channel is considered to extract the physical essence of possible unstable modes.

2.1. Equilibrium State and Linearized Equations

The ideal MHD equations incorporated with the standard shearing box model are employed

as the basic equations throughout this paper (Stone & Gardiner 2010):

∂ρ
∂t

+ v · ∇ρ = −ρ∇ · v,

ρ(cid:18) ∂v

∂t

+ v · ∇v(cid:19) = −∇(cid:18)p +

B 2

2 (cid:19) + B · ∇B − 2ρΩ × v − 2ρΩxv′

y0ˆex,

∂B
∂t

= ∇ × (v × B) ,

∂p
∂t

+ v · ∇p = −γp∇ · v.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

The radial and azimuthal directions are then interpreted as the x- and y-axes in the local Cartesian
coordinate system, where the diﬀerential rotation is described by a linearly changing background
velocity deﬁned as vy0 (x) = −qΩx, using an angular velocity at the center of the computational

– 4 –

domain, Ω, and a positive constant, q. The speciﬁc heat ratio, γ, is set to be 5/3, and the other
notations are standard.

When a purely toroidal magnetic ﬁeld is imposed, the background shearing plasma is kept in
an equilibrium state as long as the total pressure is spatially constant. We can, therefore, choose
an arbitrary magnetic structure with a ﬁnite gradient. Here, we focus on the idealized case with a
simple localized toroidal ﬁeld,

By0 (x) = B0 cosh−2 (x/d) ,

(5)

where B0 is the ﬁeld strength at x = 0 and d is the typical width of the localized ﬁeld. The gas
pressure is determined so as to satisfy the total pressure balance, and the background density is
distributed so as to keep the temperature uniform.

Next, we linearize the MHD equations around this equilibrium state, assuming the functional

form of a small perturbation as

f1 (x, y, t) = f1 (x) exp (−iωt + ikyy) .

(6)

The vertical dependence is ignored so as to pick up horizontally conﬁned modes. Using the vector
potential instead of the magnetic ﬁeld, the linearization of the basic equations leads to the following
eigenvalue problem:

(7)
where U1 = (vx1 vy1 Az1 p1)T is a ﬁrst-order perturbation vector, and M is a coeﬃcient matrix
whose components are given as follows,

ωU1 = MU1,

M = kyvy0I + D,

2iΩ

0
0

0

D21
iBy0
D41

D13
−kyB ′
y0/ρ0
0
0

D =

D13 = (i/ρ0)(cid:2)By0(cid:0)∂ 2

D21 = −iv′

γkyp0

y0 − 2iΩ,
0 − iγp0∂x.

D41 = −ip′

− (i/ρ0) ∂x

ky/ρ0

,

0
0



y0∂x(cid:3) ,

x − k2

y(cid:1) + B ′

Here, I is the identity matrix, and ∂x and ·′ indicate diﬀerentiation operators by x. Note that
the equations for vz1 and Bz1 are decoupled as usual shear Alfv´en waves. Although the density
perturbation, ρ1, appears to have disappeared from the basic equations, compressional modes
remain in the system and ρ1 can be obtained from ∇ · v1.

Finally, equation (7) is discretized in the computational domain |x/Lx| ≤ 1 with 400 grid points
using a fourth-order central diﬀerence. The width of the localized ﬁeld is set to be d = 0.05Lx. As
a boundary condition, a conducting wall is assumed at |x/Lx| = 1. The eigenvalues, ω, and the
eigenvectors, U1, are then computed numerically.

– 5 –

2.2. Growth Rates

From our calculations of the eigenvalue problem described above, we obtained one growing
mode for the MGDI at most for each particular wavenumber value. The results are summarized
in Figure 1, where the color contour shows the imaginary parts of the eigenvalues as a function of
the wavenumber, normalized by the width of the localized ﬁeld, and the plasma beta, β = 2p/B 2,
measured at x = 0. Note that the real parts are zero in a machine precision.

Fig. 1.— The color contour of growth rates as a function of the plasma beta and the wavenumber
normalized by d, which is the width of the localized toroidal ﬁeld. The gradient of the angular
velocity, q, is set to unity.

Figure 1 indicates that the purely growing mode appears if β is lower than about 100, and that
the growth rate becomes larger as the initial magnetic ﬁeld strength increases. When β is equal to
unity, the maximum growth rate reaches 0.765Ω, which is comparable to that of the axisymmetric
MRI, i.e., 0.75Ω, as far as the linear approximation is appropriate. We should emphasize here that
the magnitude of the velocity shear, q, is assumed to be unity in Figure 1 for theoretical simplicity,
which is smaller than in the case of Keplerian rotation, where q = 1.5. In the Keplerian rotation
case, we expect more unstable eigenmodes due to the stronger shear motion.

A physical picture of the MGDI can be explaind as follows. Let us consider an outward going
perturbation in vx1 away from x = 0, i.e., positive for x > 0 and negative for x < 0. Since a
linearized equation for the azimuthal magnetic ﬁeld can be written as

dB1y

dt

= −By0

∂vx1
∂x

− B ′

y1vx1 − qΩBx1,

(8)

where d/dt = ∂/∂t + v0 · ∇ is a Lagrangian derivative, such outward vx1 directly induces the
increment in By1 through the second term in the right-hand side. This term comes from the

– 6 –

linearized advection eﬀect, which represents the fact that a ﬂuid element brings the frozen-in
magnetic ﬁeld line from the original position with the stronger magnetic ﬁeld. On the other hand,
a lienarized version of the equation of motion for the radial velocity is as follows,

ρ0

dvx1
dt

= −

∂p1
∂x

−

∂
∂x

(By0By1) + By0

∂Bx1

∂y

+ 2ρ0Ωvy1.

(9)

The second and third terms in the right-hand side represent the magnetic pressure gradient and the
magnetic tension force, respectively. The magentic pressure can be further decomposed into two
contribution from −B ′
y0By1 and −By0∂xBy1. The increase in By1, then, leads to further expansion
force via the ﬁrst component of the magnetic pressure, which implies a positive feedback. This
feedback process will continue to work as long as the ﬁnite gradient in the background magnetic
ﬁeld is available.

As well as the growth rates, the range of unstable wavenumbers also tends to broaden as the
plasma beta decreases, especially toward the long-wavelength side. The smallest scale, on the other
hand, seems to always be limited roughly by kyd < 0.5, which corresponds to the wavelength one
order of magnitude larger than d. This bound could be understood qualitatively by the competition
between the magentic pressure gradient force, which is a driver here, and the magnetic tension force
working as a restoring force. For the feedback mechanism described above to occur, it is clear that
the expansive nature of the magnetic pressure needs to be greater than the tension eﬀect. These
promoting and restoring eﬀetcs can be rearranged into the form of the Lorentz force, J1 × B0 and
J0 × B1. The schematic view of the situation is illustrated in Fig.2. Thenm the condition that the
expansive term outpaces the restoring force is roughly estimated as

∂By0
∂x

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

.

By0(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

∂Bx1
∂y

By1(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

>(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

Replacing the derivatives by typical scales like 1/d and ky, we obtain the estimate, 1/d > ky, which
is consistent with the unstable range in Figure 1.

The destabilization mechanism described above seems not to be related to the nature of the
diﬀerential rotation. For the purpose of comparison, growth rates in a rigid-rotating plasma are
shown in Figure 3 with the same format as in Figure 1. This panel indicates the existence of
unstable modes over a similar range to that in the diﬀerentially-rotating case. The qualitative
dependence on ky and β also resembles that in Figure 1, but the magnitude of the growth rate
becomes smaller by a factor of 2 for β = 1, and much more for larger β. Therefore, it can be
concluded that this instability arises originally from the gradient of the magnetic ﬁeld, and can
attain a large growth rate comparable to that of the standard MRI only when combined with the
shearing motion.

– 7 –

Fig. 2.— Schematic view of ﬁrst-order Lorentz forces. In the left panel, the background current (J0;
gray circles) makes expansive Lorentz force (black arrows) combined with the perturbed magnetic
ﬁeld (B1; black lines). The resultant force works to increase the purturbation, like shown by the
red arrows. In the right panel, on the other hand, a cross product of the ﬁrst-order current (J1;
black circles), which is generated by the perturbed magnetic ﬁeld, and the background magnetic
ﬁeld (B0; gray lines) makes the inward Lorentz force, which always works as the restoreing force.

Fig. 3.— The color contour of growth rates in a rigid-rotating plasma, q = 0, with the same format
as in Figure 1.

– 8 –

2.3. Eigenfunctions

Let us discuss the structure of the eigenfunctions. Figure 4 shows two-dimensional represen-
tations of the Fourier decomposed eigenfunction, U1, superposed on the background equilibrium
state, U0, where U1 is normalized to satisfy |U1| = 1. Based on the normalized case in panel (b),
the states before and after twice the e-folding time are shown in panels (a) and (c), respectively.
The plasma beta and the wavenumber are chosen to be β = 100 and kyd=0.223, respectively, and
the corresponding point on the ky-β diagram is plotted in Figure 1 by an outlined circle. In each
panel, the color contour, the solid lines, and the vector ﬁeld show the gas pressure distribution, the
lines of magnetic force, and the bulk velocity, respectively.

Fig. 4.— Two-dimensional views of an unstable eigenfunction with the wavenumber kyd = 0.223,
superposed on the background plasma with β = 100. The corresponding growth rate is 0.039Ω.
The color contour, the solid lines, and the vector map indicate the gas pressure, the magnetic ﬁeld
lines, and the velocity, respectively. The ﬁrst-order eigenfunction U1 is normalized by |U1| = 1.
From left to right, the amplitude of the eigenfunction increases 2e-fold.

Figure 4 shows that bending of the ﬁeld line broadens with time, and eventually spreads out
beyond the typical width of the equilibrium ﬁeld, d = 0.05Lx. This broadening of the ﬁeld line
is explained by the destabilization process described in the previous subsection, i.e., the outward
magnetic pressure gradient exceeding the inward magnetic tension force may further expand the
magnetic ﬁeld explosively. In addition to the expansion in the x-direction, the ﬁeld lines are also
stretched in the y-direction by the so-called Ω-eﬀect due to the background shear motion, and
thus the magnetic ﬁeld lines become inclined downward to the right.
In other words, Bx and
By tend to have negative correlation. Therefore, it can be expected that the MGDIs have the

– 9 –

potential to contribute to powerful angular momentum transport, making the averaged Maxwell
stress, h−BxByi, once developing to non-linear turbulence.

Other important features include vortex structures around the nodes of the magnetic ﬁeld
lines in panel (c).
In particular, the clockwise vortices at every other node, which align with
the diﬀerential rotation, are selectively enhanced. Since the Coriolis force works rightward to the
direction of motion, the inside of the clockwise vortex is compressed, and the other is expanded.
On the other hand, the selective enhancement makes the magnetic ﬁeld lines loosened around the
clockwise vortex, as if a tightly stretched rope is reeled up. This leads to the negative correlation
between the gas pressure and the magnetic pressure, which implies that the present unstable mode
essentially arises from slow-magnetosonic waves.

Looking at Figure 4, one may associate the MGDIs with current-driven instabilities (CDIs),
which are thought to contribute fast dissipation of magnetic energy in various astrophysical contexts
(e.g., Mignone et al. 2010; O’Neill et al. 2012; Mizuno et al. 2014). Although the characteristic that
both unstable modes are driven by magnetic non-uniformity is common, we consider the MGDI as a
fundamentally diﬀerent mode from the CDI. To make the diﬀerence clear, for example, notice that
the wavevector in the CDI is essentially parallel to the background electric current, which drives
the instability. In the case of the MGDI, on the other hand, the background current has only an
out-of-plane component, which is obviously perpendicular to wavevector of the perturbation.

Figures 5 and 6 show the eigenfunctions for the cases with β=10 and 1, respectively, in the
same format as in Figure 4. The wavenumber is again assumed to be kyd=0.223. Since the magnetic
tension force, working as a restoring force, becomes stronger with an increase in the magnetic ﬁeld
strength, it becomes more and more diﬃcult to bend the magnetic ﬁeld lines signiﬁcantly, and
the unstable mode seems to be localized around the initial localized channel. It should be noted
that the localization of the eigenfunction and its growth rate is a diﬀerent matter. The growth
rate actually becomes greater with the background magnetic ﬁeld strength increased, as shown in
Figure 1, due to a large gradient of the ﬁeld.

This localization implies a small Bx1 compared with the initial By, but how it aﬀects the
average value of the Maxwell stress is not trivial. The estimate of the eﬃciency of the angular
momentum transport is tightly connected with the non-linear behavior and the problem of the
saturation mechanism.
In the next section, we will discuss the signiﬁcant contribution of the
present instability to the stress tensor, using non-linear simulations.

3. NONLINEAR SIMULATIONS

This section provides the results of fully-non-linear MHD simulations designed to validate
the presence of MGDIs suggested in the previous section and to investigate the non-linear time
evolution. Speciﬁcally, we focus on the eﬃciency of angular momentum transport.

– 10 –

Fig. 5.— Unstable eigenfunction with β = 10 and kyd = 0.223. The format is same as in Figure 4.
The growth rate is 0.430Ω.

Fig. 6.— Unstable eigenfunction with β = 1 and kyd = 0.223. The format is same as in Figure 4.
The growth rate is 0.675Ω.

– 11 –

3.1. Basic Equations and Simulation Codes

We solve the same equations as used in the previous section, i.e., from equation (1) to (4), but

rewritten in the semi-conservative form:

∂ρ
∂t

+ ∇ · (ρv) = 0,

∂ (ρv)

∂t

+ ∇ ·(cid:20)ρvv +(cid:18)p +

B 2

2 (cid:19) I − BB(cid:21) = −2ρΩ × v − 2ρΩxv′

0yˆex,

∂B
∂t

= ∇ × (v × B) ,

∂e
∂t

+ ∇ ·(cid:20)(cid:18)e + p +

B 2

2 (cid:19) v − (v · B) B(cid:21) = −2ρΩxv′

0yvx,

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

where e = ρv2/2 + p/(γ − 1) + B 2/2 is the total energy density, and the other notation is same as
in the linear analysis. The speciﬁc heat ratio is again set to be γ = 5/3. All quantities are spatially
discretized by using the ﬁnite diﬀerence approach in a computational domain, −1 ≤ x/Lx ≤ 1 and
0 ≤ y/Lx ≤ 2π, which is resolved with 200×600 grid points.

We calculate the ﬂux with the help of the HLL approximate Riemann solver (Harten et al.
1983) at the face center, where the primitive variables, i.e., ρ, v, B, and p, are evaluated as
point values by combining a 5th-order weighted essentially non-oscillatory (WENO) interpola-
tion (Liu et al. 1994; Jiang & Shu 1996) and the monotonicity preserving limiter (Suresh & Huynh
1997). The point-value ﬂux is then converted to the appropriate numerical ﬂux with a 6th-order
formula (Shu & Osher 1988). The cell-centered conservative variables are ﬁnally updated using the
3rd-order TVD Runge-Kutta method (Shu & Osher 1988). To avoid a spurious magnetic monopole,
the HLL-upwind constrained transport (UCT; Londrillo & Del Zanna (2004)) treatment is em-
ployed for updating the face-centered magnetic ﬁeld, in which the edge-centered electric ﬁeld is
evaluated using WENO interpolation and the HLL average. Note that the results to be shown in
this section will not largely change, even if the HLLD Riemann solver, which is more accurate than
the HLL Riemann solver especially in high-β plasmas (Mignone et al. 2007, 2009), is employed in-
stead. The quantitative behavior of statistics, however, slightly diﬀers due to the higher resolution
of each wave mode. In particular, less diﬀusivity is preferable to larger stress related to turbulent
motion in small scales.

3.2. A Single Localized B-Field

Our initial condition is set to be a superposition of exactly the same equilibrium state con-
sidered in our linear analysis and a random perturbation of the in-plane velocity, the amplitude of

– 12 –

which is ﬁxed to 1% of the sound speed measured in an unmagnetized region. Without the random
perturbation, the system would remain in the initial equilibrium state. To calculate the long time
evolution of the system, we implement the standard shearing periodic boundary condition. Even
if one adopts a conducting wall boundary, the results do not change in the early stage, before the
distorted magnetic ﬁelds approach the radial boundary.

From left to right in Figure 7, snapshots of the simulations with β=100, 10, and 1 taken at
time Ωt/2π = 20 are shown. The format of each panel is same as in Figures 4 to 6 except for the
range of the y-coordinates. All of these cases show the negative correlation between Bx and By
reﬂected as the downward-sloping magnetic ﬁeld lines, which contributes to angular momentum
transport. While the linear theory discussed in the previous section predicts broadband growth for
a stronger initial ﬁeld, the typical scale of the bending of the ﬁeld line is clearly larger for smaller
β, which suggests that the magnetic tension force works more eﬃciently in non-linear evolution
and then the growth of short waves is suppressed. In larger β cases, on the other hand, the bent
mean structure and other small-scale magnetic structures appear. Such structures ﬁrst grow along
the both sides of the initial ﬁeld, where the large gradient |∂By/∂x| exists, and then they are torn
oﬀ from the mean ﬁeld by magnetic reconnection. (Note that magnetic reconnection occurs via
numerical resistivity, but the non-linear evolution does not change by assuming a ﬁnite resistivity.)
In any case, the non-linear growth up to torsion of the localized magnetic ﬁeld is ascertained. Note
that the stage where the linear theory is applicable ﬁnishes instantly, since the growing perturbed
ﬁeld quickly breaks the background structure of the initial magnetic ﬁeld.

Figure 8 summarizes the box-averaged stress as a function of time. The xy-components of
the Reynolds stress and the Maxwell stress normalized by the initial gas pressure, or the so-called
α-parameters, are plotted in each panel. The instantaneous Reynolds stress generally ﬂuctuates
signiﬁcantly with time, but the temporal average over the interval 15 ≤ Ωt/2π ≤ 20 takes a positive
value of the order of 10−3. The Maxwell stress, on the other hand, remains positive during the
non-linear evolution, which is still smaller by one to two orders of magnitude compared with the
local three-dimensional simulations of MRIs (Hawley et al. 1995, 1996, etc.). Note that the case of
β = 100 shows a remarkably small value in spite of a more broken structure, due to the weakness
of the initial ﬁeld.

To put it another way, however, once the magnetic ﬁeld lines are stretched to the point of
crossing the radial boundary, much stronger azimuthal ﬁelds could be expected. The point is a
stretching term in the governing equation for the azimuthal magnetic energy,

d

y

dt  B 2

2 ! = BxBy

∂vy
∂x

− B 2
y

∂vy
∂x

,

(14)

where the ﬁrst and the second terms in the right-hand side represent the energy change by stretching
and compressive motions, respectively. Especially, the energy increase through the background
velocity shear, BxByv′
y0, is called the Ω-dynamo. In a radially periodic system like the shearing
box, if a ﬂuid element moves largely across the radial boundaries, the total velocity shear the

– 13 –

Fig. 7.— Snapshots of the MHD simulations at twenty times the orbital period. The color contours,
solid lines, and arrows represent the gas pressure, the lines of magnetic force, and the in-plane
velocity, respectively.

Fig. 8.— Time histories of the box-averaged stress. The left and right panels show the xy-
components of the Reynolds stress and the Maxwell stress normalized by the averaged initial gas
pressure, that is, the α parameters.

– 14 –

element feels can become much larger than the shear just inside one simulation domain, qΩLx.
The larger radial ﬂuctuation, therefore, leads to the stronger azimuthal magnetic energy. The next
subsection is devoted to suggesting such a possible path leading to a more ampliﬁed magnetic ﬁeld
and a resultant large Maxwell stress.

3.3. Multiple Localized B-ﬁelds

As a phenomenon expected to occur in accretion disks, let us consider the situation where a
toroidal magnetic ﬁeld has multiple structures rather than a single localized ﬁeld. The motivation
of this idealized setup comes from, for example, the existence of parasitic instabilities occurring on
a current sheet, which induce periodic variation of plasma parameters along an equatorial plane
(Goodman & Xu 1994; Pessah & Goodman 2009; Rembiasz et al. 2016). The physical mechanism
driving the instability in the linear stage does not change even in this case, but a more turbu-
lent state could be expected in the non-linear stage as a result of coupling between neighboring
ﬁelds. This section shows a possible path through which the MGDIs may contribute to turbulence
generation and anomalous angular momentum transport.

The simulation setup is the same as described in the previous subsection except for the initial
proﬁle of the magnetic ﬁeld. Here we assume the functional form of the toroidal magnetic ﬁeld as
follows:

Lx (cid:19) ,
By0 (x) = Bc cos4(cid:18) 3πx

(15)

which reproduces both the locality within 0.05Lx and the periodicity of the localized structure.
The pressure and density proﬁles are also modiﬁed to keep dynamical and thermal equilibrium.
The plasma beta is deﬁned using the peak value of the magnetic ﬁeld, Bc, and the gas pressure at
the same site.

Figures 9, 10, and 11 show snapshots at characteristic stages in the cases with β=100, 10, and
1, respectively. The three panels in each ﬁgure are taken at times Ωt/2π=5, 10, and 20 from left
to right, and the format of each panel is the same as in Figure 7. In the leftmost panel in Figure 9,
we can see that the discrete magnetic ﬁeld lines are distorted individually in the early stage by the
non-linear growth, just as demonstrated in the simulations with a single localized ﬁeld. The bending
of the ﬁeld lines grows as time goes on, and before ten orbital periods they drastically overlap and
merge with the neighboring magnetic ﬁelds. The mixing of the magnetic ﬁeld is completed by 20
orbital periods, and the simulation domain is ﬁlled with a lot of magnetic islands as a result of
the repetitive reconnection process. Recall that, in a single channel case, the reconnected ﬁeld
simply gets torn oﬀ the background ﬁeld and shows no further turbulent development. At this
stage, the energy contained in the magnetic ﬁeld increases to about 10% of the kinetic energy of
the background diﬀerential rotation. Even if the diﬀerence of the initial magnetic energy is taken
into account, this ratio is rather large compared with the case of a single localized ﬁeld, where the
magnetic energy at the saturated stage is smaller by three orders of magnitude.

– 15 –

Fig. 9.— Snapshots of the simulation started from a wavy toroidal ﬁeld with β = 100, taken at 50,
100, and 200 orbits. The format of each panel is the same as in Figure 7.

Fig. 10.— Snapshots of the case of β = 10, with the same format as in Figure 9.

– 16 –

Fig. 11.— Snapshots of the case of β = 1, with the same format as in Figure 9.

The detailed time history of the box-averaged energy is summarized in Figure 12(a), which
shows that the dynamo process works eﬃciently on both Bx and By at an early stage before 20
orbital periods, and roughly speaking, an equipartition is eventually attained between the kinetic
energy in the x-direction and the magnetic energy in the x- and y-directions. The production of
the strong azimuthal ﬁeld is understood as a natural conseqence from equation (14), which tells
the eﬀect of Ω-dynamo. A similar relation holds with regard to the radial ﬁeld energy as

d

x

dt(cid:18) B 2

2 (cid:19) = BxBy

∂vx
∂y

− B 2
x

∂vy
∂y

,

(16)

which shows that shear motion in the radial velocity newly generates the radial magnetic ﬁeld. It
is clear that in the MGDI this radial velocity is driven by the magnetic pressure gradient force,
while the gravity-related terms play the same role in the case of MRI. In this sense, the dynamo
process working here looks quite similar to that in the MRI not only in the azimuthal ﬁeld, but also
in the radial ﬁeld. At the saturated stage, the gas pressure gradually increases through magnetic
reconnection, creating many magnetic islands.

Even when the initial magnetic energy is ten times as large, that is, β = 10, the same instability
grows as shown in Figure 10. Compared with the case of β = 100, it can be seen that the typical
scale of the growing mode becomes larger, as does the size of the magnetic islands in the ﬁnal stage.
The gas pressure at 20 orbital periods increases about twofold, which implies that the total amount
of energy input into the system across the boundaries is enhanced and continuously converted to
the internal energy of the plasma through magnetic reconnection. In other words, the total stress

– 17 –

Fig. 12.— Temporal development of the box-averaged energy divided into the contribution from
the x and y directions, all of which are normalized by the gas pressure measured in a magnetized
region. Each panel shows the results for (a) β = 100, (b) β = 10, and (c) β = 1, respectively.

– 18 –

integrated along the radial boundary gets larger, since the time variation of the total energy, e, can
be described as follows:

∂

∂tZ e dV = 2 |v0y(Lx)|Zx=Lx

Wxydy −Z 2ρΩxv′

0yvxdV,

(17)

where Wxy = ρvxδvy − BxBy is the total stress. The second term on the right-hand side of equation
(17), which represents the change in the total gravitational potential in the simulation domain,
becomes nearly zero on average. The detailed time history of each energy component is plotted in
Figure 12(b). As in the case of β = 100 shown in panel (a), the growing mode is saturated before
20 orbital periods, after which the kinetic energy related to vx and the magnetic energy reach a
level comparable to the background diﬀerential rotation, but slightly larger than those in the case
with a weaker initial ﬁeld.

However, this situation changes signiﬁcantly for the strong magnetic ﬁeld with β = 1 shown
It is
in Figure 11. The initial equilibrium state holds and no growing mode can be observed.
interesting to note that the non-linear evolution is accomplished in the single ﬁeld case discussed in
the previous subsection. The energy history in Figure 12(c) also shows a quite calm variation. The
suppression of the growing mode is indeed the result of the non-linear magnetic tension force, since
we conﬁrmed the presence of unstable modes in linear analyses under the initial magnetic proﬁle
described here.

We summarize the time histories of the Reynolds and Maxwell stresses in Figures 13(a) and
13(b), respectively. The result of β = 1, denoted by the red line, shows no stress for either the
Reynolds or Maxwell components, because the initial equilibrium state is almost conserved. In the
cases with β = 10 and 100, denoted by the green and blue lines, the Reynolds and Maxwell stresses
averaged after 20 orbital periods are -0.00109 and 0.0235 for β = 100, and -0.0164 and 0.126 for
β = 10, respectively. The Maxwell stress, therefore, is larger by about two orders of magnitude
than the results in the single ﬁeld case, which means a qualitative change in the non-linear behavior,
rather than the simple quantitative superposition due to an increase in the initial total magnetic
ﬂux. In addition, the result for a stronger shear motion with q = 1.5, which corresponds to the
Kepler rotation, is also plotted as a cyan line. The basic mechanism driving the instability is same
as in the case with q = 1.0, but thanks to the more powerful Ω-dynamo eﬀect, the MGDI can grow
more quickly non-linearly and a larger Maxwell stress can be attained at the saturated stage.

The β-dependence of the Maxwell stress averaged during the saturated stage between 30 ≤
Ωt/2π ≤ 50 is summarized in Figure 14. It can be clearly seen that the results are well ﬁtted by
a power law of β−1/2 as long as β > 2, which indicates the proportionality to the initial magnetic
ﬂux rather than magnetic energy density, while the cases starting with β < 2 result in almost no
stress.

The suppression of instabilities for a small β is highly relevant to the large characteristic spatial
scale under the strong magnetic tension force, which works less eﬃciently for longer waves. Although

– 19 –

Fig. 13.— The xy-components of the (a) Reynolds and (b) Maxwell stress tensors as functions of
time.

Fig. 14.— The Maxwell stress averaged during the saturated stage as a function of the initial β.

– 20 –

this mode has a broad unstable range in wavelength with respect to the linear theory around a
single channel, the nonlienar growth is actually quenched in the mutiple channel case. Once the
simulation box is extended double in the azimuthal direction, however, the drastic growth in the
Maxwell stress via channel merging process is activated even for β = 1. This certainly heppens
because the extended box allows the growth of the ﬂuctuations with the scale larger than the
original domain size. Figure 15 shows the time histories of the Reynolds and Maxwell stress for
β=1, 10, and 100, respectively, normalized by the volume averages of the instantaneous thermal
pressure, hp (t)i. From the right panel, we can clearly observe the enhancement of the Maxwell
stress by the nonlienar growth after 50 orbits for β = 1. Except for the shifted time this drastic
merging is switched on, the statistical behavior is quite similar in all cases, which implies that the
MGDI works as the common underlying mechanism to drive the turbulence.

Fig. 15.— Time histories of the Reynolds and Maxwell stress normalized box averages of the
instantaneous gas pressure in the elongated simulation box, (x, y) ∈ (2Lx, 4πLx), for deﬀerent
initial β.

4. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

In the present paper, we have proposed a new plasma instability, MGDI, which can generate
a highly turbulent state in an accretion disk and contribute to the enhanced transport of angular
momentum. Driven by the spatial non-uniformity of a toroidal magnetic ﬁeld, an unstable mode
completely conﬁned within the equatorial plane can be realized, in contrast to the previous studies
on the toroidal MRI, in which a vertical wavenumber always dominates over a ﬁnite azimuthal
component.

The growth rates and eigenfunctions of this instability are calculated by linear eigenvalue
analysis, and the corresponding non-linear evolution is then demonstrated using two-dimensional
MHD simulations. While the simulations beginning with a single localized toroidal ﬁeld reveal
the non-linear growth of the MGDIs, it is shown that the angular momentum transport does not

– 21 –

work so eﬃciently in the saturated stage. If the instabilities occur in the neighboring ﬁeld lines
under the multiple localized magnetic ﬁelds rather than in an isolated situation, however, they
drastically overlap with each other and a well-developed turbulent state can be realized. In such a
case dynamo action by diﬀerential rotation begins to work eﬃciently on magnetic ﬁeld lines crossing
the radial boundaries, which contributes to a large Maxwell stress. Furthermore, we have shown
that a toroidal ﬁeld with a larger magnetic ﬂux is favorable for the Maxwell stress to reach a large
value, but this drastic transition does not occur for a magnetic ﬁeld that is too strong with β < 2,
as long as we employ the box size (x, y) ∈ (2Lx, 2πLx). Once the simulation domain is elongated,
the transition is reactivated, but it takes much longer time to switch on the drastic merging. It is
worth noting that the situation with 1 ≤ β ≤ 10, which is favorable to the growth of the MGDI,
often appears during a non-linear phase in a local simulation of the MRI for a relatively small initial

beta, β ∼ O(cid:0)102(cid:1). In the cases with larger initial β values, like β ∼ O(cid:0)103−6(cid:1), the ﬁnal states still

seem to be in the unstable regime (e.g., Hawley et al. 1995; Sharma et al. 2006; Minoshima et al.
2015).

Although the proﬁle of the toroidal magnetic ﬁeld discussed here is one of the most idealized
situations, the physical essence to drive the instability does not change even under a diﬀerent
structure, as long as an enough radial gradient of the magnetic ﬁeld is available. There is, therefore,
possibility that the present unstable mode will arise around various kinds of ﬂuctuation in the
toroidal ﬁeld, like via parasitic modes including the Kelvin-Helmholtz instabitlity and the tearing
instability.

It should be emphasized again that the eﬃciency of the anglar momentum transport obtained
here is comparable to that obtained in evaluation in three-dimensional simulations of MRIs as-
suming an initial toroidal ﬁeld, in spite of the low dimensionality, and therefore, the MGDIs are
capable of driving strong turbulence alone. One might expect not just the sole contribution, but
also coupling with magnetic reconnection occurring parallel to the equatorial plane during the
nonlinear phase of MRI, and with the toroidal MRIs as considered in previous studies if vertical
variation is also taken into account. It is still not obvious that how large contribution the insta-
bilities have in fully three-dimensional shearing boxes. Nevertheless, since they provide new paths
toward turbulence without any ﬁnite kz in contrast to the conventional toroidal MRIs, the com-
plementary growth between toroidally and vertically propagating waves, rather than competitive
growth, should be expected. The present instability could possess the ability to play a wide variety
of crucial roles in the mechanism of turbulence generation in diﬀerentially rotating systems.

We thank T. Amano and T. Saito for their useful discussion. This work was supported by

JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 26·394.

Bai, X-N. 2015, ApJ, 798, 84

REFERENCES

– 22 –

Balbus, S. A., & Hawley, J. F. 1991, ApJ, 376, 214

Balbus, S. A., & Hawley, J. F. 1992, ApJ, 400, 610

Balbus, S. A., & Hawley, J. F. 1998, Rev. Mod. Phys., 70, 1

Balsara, D., & Spicer, D. S. 1999, J. Comp. Phys., 149, 270

Blandford, R. D., & Payne, D. G. 1982, MNRAS, 199, 883

Borges, R., Carmona, M., Costa, B., & Don, W. S. 2008, J. Comp. Phys., 227, 3191

Cannizzo, J. K., Shafter, A. W., & Wheeler, J. C. 1988, ApJ, 333, 227

Fragile, P. C., & Blaes, O. M. 2008, ApJ, 687, 757

Goodman, J., & Xu, G. 1994, ApJ, 432, 213

Harten, A., Lax, P. D., & van Leer, B. 1983, SIAM Rev., 25, 35

Hawley, J. F., Gammie, C. F., & Balbus, S. A. 1995, ApJ, 440, 742

Hawley, J. F., Gammie, C. F., & Balbus, S. A. 1996, ApJ, 464, 690

Hoshino, M. 2015, Phys. Rev. Lett., 114, 6

Jiang, G. S., & Shu, C-W. 1996, J. Comp. Phys., 126, 202

Kunz, M. W., & Lesur, G. 2013, MNRAS, 434, 2295

Liu, X-D., Osher, S., & Chan, T. 1994, J. Comp. Phys., 115, 200

Londrillo, P., & Del Zanna, L. 2004, J. Comp. Phys., 195, 1

Matsumoto, R., & Tajima, T. 1995, ApJ, 445, 767

Mignone, A., Bodo, G., Massaglia, S., Matsakos, T., Tesileanu, O., Zanni, C., & Ferrari, A. 2007,

ApJS, 170, 228

Mignone, A., Ugliano. M., & Bodo, G. 2009, MNRAS, 393, 1141

Mignone, A., Rossi, P., Bodo, G., Ferrari, A., & Massaglia, S. 2010, MNRAS, 402, 7

Minoshima, T., Hirose, S., & Sano, T. 2015, ApJ, 808, 54

Mizuno, Y., Hardee, P. E., & Nishikawa, K. I. 2014, ApJ, 784, 167

O’Neill, S. M., Beckwith, K., & Begelman, M. C. 2012, MNRAS, 422, 1436

Papaloizou, J. C. B., & Pringle, J. E. 1984, MNRAS, 208, 721

– 23 –

Pessah, M., & Goodman, J. 2009, ApJ, 698, 72

Rembiasz, T., Obergaulinger, M., Cerd´a-Dur´a, P., M¨uller, E., & Aloy, M. A. 2016, MNRAS, 456,

3782

Sano, T., & Inutsuka, S, 2001, ApJ, 561, 179

Sano, T., & Stone, J. M, 2002, ApJ, 570, 314

Shakura, N. I., & Sunyaev, R. A. 1973, A&A, 24, 337

Sharma P., Hammett, G. W., Quataert, E., & Stone, J. M. 2006 ApJ, 637, 952

Shu, C-W., & Osher, S. 1988, J. Comp. Phys., 77, 439

Simon, J. B., Beckwith, K., & Armitage, P. J. 2012, MNRAS, 442, 2685

Simon, J. B., & Hawley, J. H. 2009, ApJ, 707, 833

Stone, J. M., & Gardiner, T. A. 2010, ApJS, 189, 142

Stone, J. M., Hawley, J. F., Gammie, C. F., & Balbus, S. A. 1996, ApJ, 463, 656

Stone, J. M., & Norman, M. L. 1994, ApJ, 433, 746

Suresh, A., & Huynh, H. T. 1997, J. Comp. Phys., 136, 83

Zhu, Z., Stone, J. M., & Bai, X-N. 2015, ApJ, 801, 81

This preprint was prepared with the AAS LATEX macros v5.2.

