A Universal Approach Towards Computational Characterization of Dislocation

Microstructure

Dominik Steinberger1 and Stefan Sandfeld1, 2

1Friedrich-Alexander University of Erlangen-Nuremberg,

Department of Materials Science, Dr.-Mack-Str. 77, 90762 F¨urth, Germany

2corresponding author’s email address: stefan.sandfeld@fau.de

(Dated: March 16, 2016)

Dislocations – linear defects within the crystal lattice of, e.g., metals – already have been di-
rectly observed and analyzed for nearly a century. While experimental characterization methods
can nowadays reconstruct three-dimensional pictures of complex dislocation networks, simulation
methods are at the same time more and more able to predict the evolution of such systems in great
detail. Concise methods for analyzing and comparing dislocation microstructure, however, are still
lagging behind. We introduce a universal microstructure “language” which could be used for direct
comparisons and detailed analysis of very diﬀerent experimental and simulation methods.

Keywords: Advanced Materials; ICME; Materials Informatics; Data Curation

INTRODUCTION

During most of the 20th century materials science
mostly relied on the interplay between theory and experi-
ment in a hypothesis-driven manner. Although numerical
tools already contributed in some ﬁelds (e.g., atomistic
simulations were used from the 1960s on), simulations
were not considered as separate discipline due to strongly
limited models and computational power. The last two
decades brought a dramatic paradigm shift to materials
science with the advent and easy accessibility of powerful
computational concepts and reﬁned simulation methods
which build the basis of today’s computational materials
science: while predictive computational models are more
and more able to approach time and length scales simi-
lar to those observed in experiments, novel data-driven
approaches are able to guide experiments, to discover
previously unknown mechanisms and to help designing
advanced materials.

To accelerate and direct these eﬀorts of Integrated
Computational Materials Engineering (ICME) a number
of initiatives recently came to life, as, e.g., the European
Materials Modelling Council (EMMC) and the U.S. Ma-
terials Genome Initiative (MGI), whose goal is “to de-
crease the time and cost of the materials discovery to de-
ployment process” [2]. All initiatives emphasize – in line
with demands from fundamental research – the following
key aspects for design and discovery of new materials:
(i) the requirement of dedicated simulation codes and
community-driven software; (ii) novel integration tech-
niques of experimental and theoretical data throughout
research, development, design and manufacturing; (iii)
the faithful bridging of models across length and time
scales, e.g., within a multi-scale simulation framework;
(iv) innovative data-based bridging between diﬀerent ex-
perimental, theoretical and simulation models by a (one-
way) information transfer for, e.g., validation purposes or
for use as physical initial values from lower scale methods.
Metal plasticity on the micro scale is a typical case
where processes on multiple time and length scales in-
teract with each other, e.g., phenomena on small scales
may determine properties on the larger device scale: dis-
locations – linear defects within the crystal
lattice –
are the carrier of plastic deformation and are responsi-

ble for a large variety of emergent properties, as, e.g.,
self-organization of dislocations into complex microstruc-
tures, size-dependent mechanical behavior or hardening.
Therefore, during the last century signiﬁcant eﬀort has
been dedicated to experimentally observing and char-
acterizing dislocations, as well as to understanding the
evolution of interacting systems of dislocations. To-
day, experimental microscopy methods can reconstruct
three-dimensional
images of complex dislocation net-
works. Concise methods for further analysis and quan-
titative characterization of those networks, however, are
still lagging behind. This makes the linkage to simulation
methods diﬃcult.

Nowadays, a number of well-established simulation
methods are able to take the dislocation microstruc-
ture (directly or indirectly) into account. As a stan-
dard method on the nano-scale molecular dynamics (MD)
predicts the trajectory of atoms which interact through
forces due to a given potential function. Dislocation
lines can be reconstructed in a post-processing step,
which allows MD to reveal details of dislocation mi-
crostructures (e.g., [18]). The mesoscale, discrete disloca-
tion dynamics (DDD) method does not resolve separate
atoms, but represents dislocations as polygons or splines
[4, 7, 13, 17, 28, 31] that move and interact according to
the elastic theory of dislocations [16]. Both methods, al-
though very powerful and physically detailed, are limited
by the number of interacting objects. Furthermore, di-
rect comparison between dislocation microstructures ob-
tained by the two methods, by alternative methods, or
with experimental data cannot be done satisfyingly.

Continuum models of dislocations, on the other hand,
do not aim at resolving separate dislocations. Thus,
by representing an averaged picture of these linear de-
fects they can operate on larger length scales than MD
or DDD. Conceptually, one may roughly separate these
models into two classes: local models that are not able to
represent ﬂuxes of dislocations, and non-local continuum
methods which govern the ﬂow of dislocations through
transport equations [3, 6, 10, 19, 22, 29].

While the ﬁrst class plays an important role in the en-
gineering community, its predictive power is limited since
only strongly averaged details of systems of dislocations
can be represented, and dynamical aspects due to dislo-

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
5
1
 
 
]
i
c
s
-
l
r
t

m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
5
3
6
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

cation motion can not be captured at all. Members of the
second class of continuum models are rather designed in
a bottom-up approach utilizing (statistical) averaging of
discrete dislocations and can, as a consequence, include
many signiﬁcant information about the dynamics of sys-
tems of dislocations, i.e., how dislocations move and in-
teract. These “continuum dislocation dynamics” (CDD)
models are able to simulate arbitrary dislocation densi-
ties and large time spans, and make good candidates for
complementing MD or DDD simulations.

Direct validation of continuum methods on the level
of dislocation microstructure could up to now only be
done for simpliﬁed two-dimensional DDD simulations
with point-like edge dislocations [8, 23, 30]. Comparisons
with experimental data have been done based on EBSD
measurements from which “geometrically necessary dislo-
cation” (GND) densities can be inferred [20]. Systematic
comparisons and validations of continuum methods with
lower scale methods or experiments that take all, possi-
bly curved, dislocations into account and consider spatial
details of the microstructure were not possible until re-
cently. One of the reasons is that no appropriate contin-
uum description of systems of curved dislocations existed
before. Using data from lower scale methods or exper-
iments either as initial values, for veriﬁcation purposes,
or, via data mining, as parameters for other simulations,
however, is a highly desirable goal. To achieve this two
prerequisites must be met:

(i) A methodology consistent with the underlying
physics for systematic data extraction from lower
scale models and/or experiments is required.

(ii) A data format is needed that is “rich” enough to
represent even complex microstructures and that
allows for detailed analysis and direct comparisons.

In principle, one could use dislocation data from DDD
or possibly even from CDD models for determining posi-
tions of atoms (a dislocation is the boundary of a slipped
area within which atoms are displaced by the size of the
Burgers vector b). Comparing dislocation microstruc-
tures on the level of single atoms, though, is neither prac-
tical nor reasonable since in general it is not clear how to
deﬁne when atomic structures are “similar” (e.g., what is
a “large” deviation? Should it be measured in number of
atoms that are not in place or is it the cumulative mis-
placement of single atoms?). The main problem here is
rather a conceptual problem: although dislocations con-
sist of regions of displaced atoms, they are objects whose
main characteristics become visible on the “mesoscale”,
i.e., the scale intermediate between the scale of single
atoms and the scale where concepts of continuum me-
chanics are applicable. On this scale, dislocations need
to be treated as mathematical lines together with the
respective energy density ﬁelds as, e.g., in DDD simula-
tions. On this scale, the collective behavior is responsible
for many emergent properties as, e.g., size eﬀects, hard-
ening or dislocation pattern formation.

Therefore, we propose a diﬀerent approach towards
characterizing, validating, and data mining of disloca-
tion data based on one of the information-richest CDD
models that resulted from the theory by Hochrainer

2

[9, 10, 12, 22]. Although this CDD model is able to de-
scribe the evolution of dislocations in great detail [24],
we only will use the underlying ﬁeld variables consist-
ing of density and line curvature data (and possibly
higher-order moments thereof). Together with converting
data from lower scale methods or experiments into these
mesoscale ﬁeld variables we arrive at a description that is
– unlike discrete dislocation data – deﬁned in each point
of the volume under consideration, which, e.g., allows to
simply “take the diﬀerence” between two data sets. The
variables of this CDD model are additionally well suited
for statistical averaging and representing ensemble aver-
ages, which is an important prerequisite for systematic
data mining. For converting properties of discrete lines
to continuous ﬁeld data we use the recently introduced
discrete-to-continuum (D2C ) methodology [24]. Among
the unique properties of CDD is the hierarchical structure
of the theory, where based on the respective requirements
diﬀerent numbers of ﬁeld variables can be included. This
allows for a tailored information content which we view
as a physically based approach towards compressing dis-
location data.

In the following we ﬁrst introduce the relevant ﬁeld
variables of the CDD theory, followed by a brief sum-
mary of the D2C methodology for converting discrete
dislocations into a continuous ﬁeld description. Subse-
quently, the theoretical concepts are applied to a number
of numerical examples and benchmark test that show how
dislocation conﬁgurations of diﬀerent complexity can be
represented and analyzed. We conclude with a detailed
discussion and outlook.

METHODS

Field Variables of the CDD Theory

Hochrainer’s CDD theory was derived based on sta-
tistical averaging of systems of discrete dislocations. In
the original, higher-dimensional theory (hdCDD) the re-
sulting continuous ﬁeld quantities were two density-like
ﬁeld variables [11, 21, 25]: the total density ρ(r, ϕ) and
curvature density q(r, ϕ) (or alternatively: mean disloca-
tion curvature k(r, ϕ)), deﬁned in a higher-dimensional
space, which, besides the spatial points r, also contains
the line orientation ϕ as extra-dimension. This makes
the important information about an average line direc-
tion l(ϕ) := [cos ϕ(r), sin ϕ(r)] available. Due to the high
computational cost of this detailed formulation most nu-
merical computations were only possible in “2.5D” con-
ﬁgurations [21, 25, 26]. To overcome this limitation, a
number of so-called simpliﬁed CDD formulations were
derived, where a reduced amount of information is con-
tained in additional ﬁeld variables [10, 12, 15, 22].

Every CDD theory variant also contains the corre-
sponding evolution equations for the ﬁeld variables. How-
ever, in this work the goal is to use only the ﬁeld variables
for representing dislocation microstructure as static con-
ﬁgurations in time. Therefore, the evolution equations
will not be introduced here. A convenient property of
CDD is that formulations with diﬀerent degrees of in-
formation content can be derived within a hierarchical

framework of equations, either based on Fourier series
of ρ(r, ϕ) and q(r, ϕ) [10] or based on alignment ten-
sors [9, 14]. In the following we introduce the ﬁrst order
CDD(1) in more detail and note how higher order theories
may be constructed.
The ﬁrst order theory CDD(1) contains three variables
[9, 10]: the total density ρt ≡ ρ(0), the ﬁrst order dis-
location density alignment tensor ρ(1) and the curvature
density qt ≡ q(0). Without loss of generality we assume
that the (local) coordinate system is aligned with the edge
and screw directions. Then, the alignment tensor consists
of the signed edge and screw excess (geometrically neces-
sary) dislocation densities, ρ(1) = [ρe, ρs]. The variables
can be obtained from hdCDD as

(cid:90) 2π
(cid:90) 2π
(cid:90) 2π

0

0

ρ(0)(r) =

ρ(1)(r) =

q(0)(r) =

ρ(r, ϕ) dϕ

ρ(r, ϕ)l(ϕ) dϕ

q(r, ϕ) dϕ

(1)

(2)

(3)

(cid:90) 2π
(cid:90) 2π

0

0

From (2) the classical Kr¨oner-Nye dislocation density ten-
sor can be obtained as α = ρ(1)⊗b (where ⊗ is the tensor
product), the total GND density is ρG = |ρ(1)|. The line
curvature can be obtained from k = q(0)/ρ(0).

Higher order theories CDD(n) include ﬁelds with addi-
tional information, e.g., about orientations of dipole and
anisotropic dislocation conﬁgurations. They can be ob-
tained in a systematic manner using
⊗n dϕ,

ρ(n)(r) =

ρ(r, ϕ)l(ϕ)

(4)

0

q(n)(r) =

q(r, ϕ)[ε · l(ϕ) ⊗ l(ϕ)⊗n−1]s dϕ,

(5)
where (•)⊗m denotes the m-times tensor product of (•),
the superscript s denotes the symmetric part of a ten-
sor, “·” is the contraction of two tensors, ε is the second
order Levi-Civita tensor in the slip plane coordinate sys-
tem, with components εij = εijknk, and the nk are the
components of the slip system normal n, where the Ein-
stein summation convention applies. For further details
please refer to [9, 14].

The Discrete-to-Continuum (D2C ) Method

For obtaining the above introduced ﬁeld variables from
discrete simulation methods or experiments one may as-
sume that dislocations have already been identiﬁed and
their data is available in form of parametrized lines. Fol-
lowing the strategy introduced by one of the authors in
[24], CDD ﬁelds can be obtained by

(i) discretizing the domain into voxels of volume ∆V

(ii) computing the line length Li, the average line ori-
entation ξi and the average curvature ki for each
line segment i within each voxel

(iii) computing CDD quantities for each segment i, e.g.,

ρ(0)
i = Li/∆V , (ρ(1))i = ρ(0)

i ξi and q(0)

i = ρ(0)

i ki

(iv) integrating or averaging over all N line segments

within a voxel, e.g., ρ(1) =(cid:80)N

i=1(ρ(1))i.

3

If the data is intended for use in simulations this may
be followed by a convolution of the whole domain with,
e.g., a Gaussian function for numerically smoothing the
voxel data such that numerical derivatives can be easily
obtained.

RESULTS

To explain the information content of the CDD(1) ﬁelds
we will now set up three quasi-2D test conﬁgurations,
which represent thin slices of a volume. This is then
followed by a realistic 3D example where the beneﬁt of
ensemble averaging is explained.

Basic Test Conﬁgurations

We apply the D2C framework to three dislocation con-
ﬁgurations, exhibiting a number of key features: a dis-
tribution of statistically stored dislocation (SSD) loops,
wall and channel dislocations within an idealized persis-
tent slip band (PSB) and an idealization of dislocations
in a γ/γ(cid:48) superalloy. All systems exhibit periodic bound-
ary conditions and the continuum ﬁelds are regularized
using a Gaussian function with a standard deviation of
5 % of the system size. The dislocation conﬁguration of
these systems as well as the resulting ﬁelds used by the
CDD(1) theory are shown in Figure 1. In the following
the generation of the structures are outlined and relevant
features of the CDD ﬁelds are discussed.

The SSD conﬁguration consists of a random distribu-
tion of 20 circular dislocation loops with radii ranging
from 1/50 to 4/5 of the system size within the same glide
system. Varying radii were chosen to demonstrate the
resulting ﬂuctuations of the curvature density and the
curvature in otherwise relatively homogeneous systems.
The system exhibits spatial ﬂuctuations in the total den-
sity as well as in the GND density. There, the distinction
between SSDs and GNDs depends on the chosen resolu-
tion:
if the size of the averaging voxels equals the size
of the whole system, the GND density will be zero be-
cause opposite loop segments cancel each other out per-
fectly. A smaller averaging size, on the other hand, re-
veals more local features, which shows in ﬂuctuation of
the density ﬁelds. Here, the actual resolution is given by
the width of the regularization function (for an example
of how the regularization width inﬂuences the details of
the microstructure see [27]). Curvature density and mean
curvature show a distinct maximum as well as ﬂuctua-
tions. The maximum is due to the combination of a high
curvature with a higher than average dislocation density.
Curvature ﬂuctuations are due to the fact that loops have
diﬀerent radii, and the curvature density is additionally
weighted with the respective total density inside each av-
eraging volume. Therefore, it may not be inferred that
a high curvature density generally also results in a high
mean curvature at the exact same site.

4

FIG. 1: Field variables of the ﬁrst level of the CDD theory, CDD(1), for diﬀerent periodic dislocation structures. Density
measures are scaled with the mean of the total density, the curvature density is scaled with the mean of the total density and
the mean curvature of the system, and the curvature is scaled with the mean curvature of the system. The gray area in the
right column represents the precipitate.

An idealized PSB structure was constructed by ran-
domly placing 30 straight edge dislocations with positive
and 30 with negative line direction into a wall-like struc-
ture. The mean x positions for the two dislocation char-
acters inside one wall was shifted to result in a mean
distance of 3 % of the system size to capture the dipo-
lar character of the dislocation wall within PSBs. “Pill”
shaped dislocations were placed between the walls to rep-
resent threading screw dislocations.

The system has a large total dislocation density, which
is mainly located inside the dislocation wall structure,
while by comparison, the contribution of threading screw
dislocations is relatively small. The edge component of
the GND density ρ(1)
reveals the polarized character of
1
the dislocation walls with a “neutral” axis in the mid-
dle of the dislocation wall. The screw component of the
GND density ρ(1)
2 between the dislocation walls is smaller
than the edge component by two orders of magnitude
and outlines the position of the quasi-discrete threading
screw dislocations. Both the structure of the total as well
as the GND density are within the expectation of phys-
ical intuition. As the threading screw dislocations are
the only non-straight segments, their shape is reﬂected
in the curvature density of the system. Contrary to the
SSD system, mean curvature and curvature density look
quite diﬀerently. The curvature exhibits a lens-like shape
in the middle of the channels with a symmetry axis par-
allel to the wall structure. This can be explained based
on the inﬂuence of the straight segments with zero curva-
ture that form the dislocation walls: due to the regular-
ization width used during the D2C procedure they also
contribute to the mean curvature outside of the disloca-
tion wall and decrease the mean curvature in the chan-
nels close to the dislocation walls. As this inﬂuence de-
creases the high curvature of the threading dislocations
becomes the sole contributing factor to the mean curva-
ture and a maximum is reached. This eﬀect is caused
by the speciﬁc choice of parameters. Moreover, the PSB
structure may also be used to outline one of the short-
comings of the CDD(1) theory: Within CDD(1) ﬁelds the
exact composition of SSD densities is unknown, i.e., the
theory can not diﬀerentiate whether the SSDs of the dis-
location walls consists of statistically stored edge or of
statistically stored screw dislocations. The next higher
order theory, CDD(2), is able to capture this due to the
second order alignment tensor [14]

(cid:90) 2π

ρ(2)(r) =

ρ(r, ϕ)l(ϕ) ⊗ l(ϕ) dϕ,

(6)

0

11 and ρ(2)

whose components ρ(2)
22 correspond to total edge
and screw dislocation density, respectively. For the PSB
system these density measures are shown in Figure 2.
Comparing them to ρ(0) and ρ(1) it can be inferred that
the complete dislocation wall comprises edge dislocations,
which in the inside of the wall form dipole conﬁgurations
and further away form polarized edge GND conﬁgura-
tions.
An idealization of dislocation structure within a γ/γ(cid:48)
superalloy is represented by a square precipitate which
is impenetrable for dislocations, surrounded by γ chan-
nels in which dislocation are located. The width of the

5

FIG. 2: Total edge density ρ(2)
for the PSB system.

11 and total screw density ρ(2)

22

channels amounts to 20 % of the system size, and four
dislocations of the same line character are placed in the
channels around the precipitate. It can be seen that the
total dislocation density is concentrated at the interface
between matrix and precipitate. The edge component of
the GND density is high at the vertical interface (i.e., per-
pendicular to the Burgers vector), and the density of the
screw GND component is concentrated at the horizon-
tal interfaces. The curvature density exhibits extrema at
the corners of the precipitate and is zero at the straight
edges further away from the corners.
It may, however,
be counter intuitive that the mean curvature exhibits a
maximum in the center of the crossing of the channels,
while the curvature density is largest close to the corners
of the precipitate. The reason for this is the same as the
one given for the PSB system. Due to the regulariza-
tion width straight segments still contribute to the mean
curvature at the precipitate corners. Their contribution,
however, is negligible in the center of the crossing – the
point furthest away from the straight dislocation sections,
which is still fairly close to the corners.

Realistic Conﬁgurations

The test cases introduced before are useful for eluci-
dating which geometrical properties of systems of dis-
locations can be described by CDD. We now turn to a
more realistic, three-dimensional system, where disloca-
tions evolve and interact, and we show how D2C can
be used together with ensemble averaging to diﬀerentiate
between emergent and random dislocation structures.
The system is a periodic 3D simulation box with a size
of 3712× 4096× 4912 Burger’s vector lengths. It contains
an impenetrable, pillar-like precipitate along the z-axis.
As initial values for each simulation we place two dipolar
loops (consisting only of dislocation segments with edge
character) on diﬀerent slip systems at random positions.
The simulation was evolved with a constant shear strain
rate of 20 s−1 using the microMegas DDD code [5]. Ma-
terial parameters were taken from copper. After a sim-
ulated time of 10 µs the simulation was stopped and the
ﬁnal conﬁguration converted into continuum ﬁelds on a
38 × 42 × 50 mesh. The dislocation structure and the
corresponding dislocation density of an example system,
and the density of an averaged system of 133 simulations
are shown in Figure 3.

It can be seen that discrete dislocations align with the
precipitate and also form regular structures in the ma-

6

FIG. 3: The D2C -based ensemble averaging of statistically equivalent DDD simulations reveals intrinsic structure. The precip-
itate is shown in red.

trix. Along the precipitate pair-like dislocation arrange-
ments, single dislocations and a dislocation free zone can
be observed. The continuum description of this system
resembles this as well. From just this one system it might
be assumed that the characteristics of this ensemble are
dislocations forming structures across the matrix and dis-
locations being irregularly arranged close to the precipi-
tate. To investigate this, 133 simulations are conducted
and ensemble averages of the respective CDD ﬁelds were
computed. Due to periodic boundary conditions special
care has to be taken when averaging the systems. Con-
sider a sine-wave like pattern along the precipitate. Due
to periodic boundaries the phase of the pattern may be
arbitrarily distributed along the precipitate as there is no
characteristic “pinning point” for the pattern. Thus, if
an average of sine-waves with randomly distributed phase
shifts were made, the result would be zero. To circum-
vent this the dislocation density ﬁeld of each system was
ﬁrst shifted along the precipitate so that all density max-
imums coincide as far as possible.
In the near vicinity
of this pinning point a clear maximum can be seen fol-
lowed by a regular sequence of low and high density with
decreasing amplitude. Thus it follows that the irregular
arrangements of the dislocations around the precipitate
seen in 3a is not characteristic for this ensemble. In the
matrix itself the density is low compared to the vicinity
of the precipitate. This also means that the dislocations
crossing the channel do not form regular structures but
are arranged randomly.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

that this and similar strategies will become indispensable
for simulations in the future.

In the previous section we showed that the information
contained in CDD(1) is already high enough to properly
characterize many relevant physical properties of given,
idealized microstructures, such that they can be, e.g, used
as initial values. But we also found, that there may be sit-
uations where the information content of CDD(1) is not
suﬃcient and we included extra information only con-
tained in the next higher order theory, CDD(2). Includ-
ing more and more information, say from CDD(n), we are
able to approximate the real, discrete microstructure in
all details – which is nice but of course computationally
undesirable. Reversing this direction, i.e., starting from a
(virtual) CDD(n) and decreasing n one can also think of
this as a type of data compression. Of course one looses
information, but for each order reduction n (cid:55)→ n − 1 the
amount of data that needs to be stored is reduced, e.g.,
while CDD(2) requires 7 scalar ﬁelds to be stored in the
computer (ρ(0), ρ(1)
22 and q(0)), the
amount of data required for CDD(1) is reduced by ≈ 40 %
(ρ(0), ρ(1)
2 , and q(0)). Since one has complete control
over which details are lost, we call this order reduction
a “physical” compression of dislocation microstructure
data. Note, that so far only q(0) (and no higher order
terms of q) was used as independent ﬁeld variable within
the evolution equations of CDD(1) and CDD(2). Since
D2C only uses the ﬁeld variables and not the evolution
equations of CDD, it might be interesting to study which
microstructural details can be included by additionally
considering, e.g., q(1).

2 , ρ(2)

1 , ρ(1)

11 , ρ(2)

12 , ρ(2)

1 , ρ(1)

With simulations becoming more realistic and getting
closer to experiments the complexity of required initial
conditions increases. If these are constructed in a wrong
manner (e.g., not consistent with the underlying theory)
simulation results might be completely wrong or even
the numerical scheme might fail. The D2C framework
is a way for converting discrete dislocation structures
obtained from experiments or DDD simulations, which
guarantees physically correct initial values. We anticipate

Sandfeld and Po showed in [24] how the D2C strategy
can be used to directly validate CDD evolution equations:
running a DDD simulation alongside with a CDD simu-
lation (with initial values from D2C ) the former can be
taken as a reference solution, where converting multiple
time steps of the discrete system to the corresponding
continuum ﬁelds via D2C allows a quantitative compar-
ison with the system evolved by the CDD framework.
This is particularly useful in situations where no analyti-

cal solution is available or where complex behavior might
lead to counter intuitive results. D2C is a useful tool for
the validation of a CDD model and its implementation.
Dislocation-based plasticity in the micro meter regime
is strongly interconnected with size-dependent and inter-
mittent behavior together with scatter of, e.g., the ﬂow
curves during plastic deformation. Responsible is the het-
erogeneous dislocation microstructure.
In general, the
spatial or temporal ﬂuctuations can not be seen in contin-
uum simulations, since a density-based continuum model
can be envisaged as representing an ensemble average of
statistically equivalent simulations. Our 3D conﬁgura-
tion nicely shows that D2C is also useful for computing
and analyzing ensemble averaging, when one tries to de-
cide whether a speciﬁc realization shows behavior that is
or is not characteristic or typical for the ensemble. Fur-
thermore, in many situations an ensemble average might
already be suﬃcient such that one does not need to store
all data from all separate simulations, which might not be
admissible due to limited storage memory. For example,
the ﬁle holding all snapshots in time of the single system
shown in Figure 3a, which is a system with very few dislo-
cations, requires 11 MB of hard disk space. More complex
systems result even in ﬁles of several GB in size. CDD(1)
ﬁle are roughly around 10 MB, but do not increase regard-

7

less how many dislocations are contained. Additionally,
averages over many simulations can be done successively:
instead of storing discrete data of all systems and time
steps before averaging them, only the average of each
time step is stored and “improved” with each additional
discrete simulation.

Our vision is to extend the interfaces of the D2C frame-
work such that it can easily read data from most common
open source DDD and MD codes – possibly even 3D TEM
dislocation data. Furthermore, we plan to extend the ca-
pabilities of D2C in order to allow the computation of
internal stress ﬁelds of dislocation structures within arbi-
trarily shaped, ﬁnite domains, which will allow to charac-
terize, analyze and compare various details of dislocation
microstructures, which even may be obtained from very
diﬀerent methods. Following the progress is possible on
[1].

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Financial support by the German Research Founda-
tion (DFG) through the European M.ERA-NET project
FASS, grant no. SA2292/2, is gratefully acknowledged.

[1] D2C (2016). URL www.dd2cd.com. [accessed 14-March-

87(8–9), 1261–1282 (2007)

2016]

[2] Materials genome initiative (2016). URL www.mgi.gov.

[accessed 4-January-2016]

[3] Arsenlis, A., Parks, D.M., Becker, R., Bulatov, V.V.: On
the evolution of crystallographic dislocation density in
non-homogeneously deforming crystals. J. Mech. Phys.
Solids 52(6), 1213–1246 (2004)

[4] Devincre, B., Condat, M.: Model validation of a 3D sim-
ulation of dislocation dynamics: Discretization and line
tension eﬀects. Acta Metall. Mater. 40(10), 2629–2637
(1992)

[5] Devincre, B., Madec, R., Monnet, G., Queyreau, S.,
Gatti, R., Kubin, L.: Modeling crystal plasticity with dis-
location dynamics simulations: The ‘microMegas’ code,
pp. 81–100. Presses de l’Ecole des Mines de Paris (2011)
[6] El-Azab, A.: Statistical mechanics treatment of the evo-
lution of dislocation distributions in single crystals. Phys.
Rev. B 61, 11,956–11,966 (2000)

[7] Ghoniem, N.M., Amodeo, R.J.: Computer Simulation
of Dislocation Pattern Formation. Solid State Phenom.
3&4, 377–388 (1988)

[8] Hirschberger, C.B., Peerlings, R.H.J., Brekelmans,
W.A.M., Geers, M.G.D.: On the role of dislocation con-
servation in single-slip crystal plasticity. Modell. Simul.
Mater. Sci. Eng. 19, 085,002 (2011)

[9] Hochrainer, T.: Multipole expansion of continuum dislo-
cations dynamics in terms of alignment tensors. Philos.
Mag. 95(12), 1–47 (2015)

[10] Hochrainer, T., Sandfeld, S., Zaiser, M., Gumbsch, P.:
Continuum dislocation dynamics: towards a physical the-
ory of crystal plasticity. J. Mech. Phys. Solids 63, 167–178
(2014)

[11] Hochrainer, T., Zaiser, M., Gumbsch, P.: A three-
dimensional continuum theory of dislocation systems:
kinematics and mean-ﬁeld formulation. Philos. Mag.

[12] Hochrainer, T., Zaiser, M., Gumbsch, P.: Dislocation
Transport and Line Length Increase in Averaged Descrip-
tions of Dislocations. AIP Conf. Proc. 1168(1), 1133–
1136 (2009)

[13] Lepinoux, J., Kubin, L.P.: The Dynamic Organization
of Dislocation-Structures: A Simulation. Scr. Metall.
Mater. 21(6), 833–838 (1987)

[14] Monavari, M., Sandfeld, S., Zaiser, M.: Continuum Rep-
resentation of Systems of Dislocation Lines: A General
Method for Deriving Closed-Form Evolution Equations.
submitted to J. Mech. Phys. Solids – (2015)

[15] Monavari, M., Zaiser, M., Sandfeld, S.: Comparison
of closure approximations for continuous dislocation dy-
namics.
In: Symposium KK – Dislocation Plasticity,
MRS Proceedings, vol. 1651 (2014)

[16] Peach, M., Koehler, J.S.: The Forces Exerted on Dislo-
cations and the Stress Fields Produced by Them. Phys.
Rev. 80(3), 436–439 (1950)

[17] Po, G., Ghoniem, N.M.: A variational formulation of con-
strained dislocation dynamics coupled with heat and va-
cancy diﬀusion. J. Mech. Phys. Solids 66, 103–116 (2014)
[18] Prakash, A., Gu´enol´e, J., Wang, J., M¨uller, J., Spiecker,
E., Mills, M.J., Povstugar, I., Choi, P., Raabe, D., Bitzek,
E.: Atom probe informed simulations of dislocation–
precipitate interactions reveal the importance of local in-
terface curvature. Acta. Mater. 92, 33–45 (2015)

[19] Reuber, C., Eisenlohr, P., Roters, F., Raabe, D.: Dis-
location density distribution around an indent in single-
crystalline nickel: Comparing nonlocal crystal plasticity
ﬁnite-element predictions with experiments. Acta Mater.
71, 333–348 (2014)

[20] Ruggles, T.J., Fullwood, D.T., Kysar, J.W.: Resolving
geometrically necessary dislocation density onto individ-
ual dislocation types using EBSD-based continuum dis-
location microscopy. International Journal of Plasticity

76, 231–243 (2016)

[21] Sandfeld, S., Hochrainer, T., Zaiser, M., Gumbsch, P.:
Numerical Implementation of a 3D Continuum Theory of
Dislocation Dynamics and Application to Microbending.
Philos. Mag. 90(27–28), 3697–3728 (2010)

[22] Sandfeld, S., Hochrainer, T., Zaiser, M., Gumbsch, P.:
Continuum modeling of dislocation plasticity: Theory,
numerical implementation and validation by discrete dis-
location simulations.
J. Mater. Res. 26(5), 623–632
(2011)

[23] Sandfeld, S., Monavari, M., Zaiser, M.: From systems
of discrete dislocations to a continuous ﬁeld description:
stresses and averaging aspects. Modell. Simul. Mater. Sci.
Eng. 21(8), 085,006 (2013)

[24] Sandfeld, S., Po, G.: Microstructural Comparison of the
Kinematics of Discrete and Continuum Dislocations Mod-
els. Modell. Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng. 23(8), 085,003 (2015)
[25] Sandfeld, S., Thawinan, E., Wieners, C.: A link be-
tween microstructure evolution and macroscopic response
in elasto-plasticity: formulation and numerical approxi-
mation of the higher-dimensional Continuum Dislocation
Dynamics theory. Int. J. Plast. 72, 1–20 (2015)

[26] Sandfeld, S., Verbeke, V., Devincre, B.: Orientation-
dependent Pattern Formation in a 1.5D Continuum

8

Model of Curved Dislocations. In: Symposium RR – Scal-
ing Eﬀects on Plasticity – Synergy between Simulations
and Experiments, MRS Proceedings, vol. 1755 (2015)

[27] Steinberger, D., Leimberger, M., Sandfeld, S.: D2C –
Converting and Compressing Discrete Dislocation Mi-
crostructure Data. In: TMS 2016: 145th Annual Meeting
& Exhibition: Supplemental Proceedings, pp. 531–538
(2016)

[28] Weygand, D., Friedman, L.H., Van der Giessen, E.,
Needleman, A.: Aspects of boundary-value problem solu-
tions with three-dimensional dislocation dynamics. Mod-
ell. Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng. 10(4), 437–468 (2002)

[29] Xiang, Y.: Continuum approximation of the Peach-
Koehler force on dislocations in a slip plane. J. Mech.
Phys. Solids 57(4), 728–43 (2009)

[30] Yeﬁmov, S., Groma, I., Van der Giessen, E.: A compari-
son of a statistical-mechanics based plasticity model with
discrete dislocation plasticity calculations. J. Mech. Phys.
Solids 52(2), 279–300 (2004)

[31] Zbib, H.M., Rhee, M., Hirth, J.P.: On plastic deforma-
tion and the dynamics of 3D dislocations. Int. J. Mech.
Sci. 40(2–3), 113–127 (1998)

