6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
5
1

 
 
]
t
f
o
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
4
4
6
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Membrane-mediated interactions between colloid induced

deformations

Casper van der Wel1, Doris Heinrich1, and Daniela J. Kraft1, *

1Biological and Soft Matter Physics, Huygens-Kamerlingh Onnes Laboratory, Leiden

University, PO Box 9504, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands

*To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: kraft@physics.leidenuniv.nl

March 16, 2016

Abstract

Many cellular processes rely on a speciﬁc membrane
shape induced by membrane-associated proteins. Re-
sults from theoretical models and simulations pre-
dict that proteins interact if they induce a deforma-
tion in the membrane. However, quantitative exper-
imental measurements have proven elusive. In order
to separate the membrane-mediated interaction from
other protein-speciﬁc interactions, we here employ
a dedicated model system consisting of membrane-
adhesive colloidal particles and giant unilamellar vesi-
cles. Using confocal microscopy, we are able to estab-
lish that an adhered colloidal particle is either com-
pletely wrapped by the membrane or not wrapped at
all. Wrapping occurs above a critical adhesion en-
ergy and only for low membrane tensions. We ﬁnd
that the state of wrapping determines the possible
assembly pathways and observe a rich variety of re-
versible and irreversible membrane-mediated parti-
cle structures. Between particles that deform the
membrane we observe and quantify a long-ranged re-
versible attraction using particle tracking. This at-
traction has a strength of three times the thermal
energy (−3 kBT) and extends over several microme-
ters. Our results provide experimental evidence for
membrane-mediated interactions as predicted by the-
oretical models and point towards a common phys-
ical origin of the interactions between membrane-

associated proteins.

Introduction

Interactions between membrane proteins are vital for
the survival of cells as they are involved in many dy-
namical processes. The organization of membrane
proteins into complexes and their eﬀect on membrane
shape enables for instance cellular transport, cell divi-
sion, cell migration, and signal transduction [1]. Un-
derstanding the underlying principles of protein orga-
nization is therefore crucial to unravel processes such
as cell-cell signalling in the brain [2] or membrane-
associated protein aggregation in amyloid diseases
[3]. Insights into membrane-mediated processes are
also relevant for improving targeted drug delivery [4],
reducing nanoparticle toxicity [5], and the develop-
ment of biomimetic materials [6] and biosensors [7].
Besides speciﬁc protein-protein interactions and in-
teractions with the cytoskeleton, protein organization
in membranes is thought to be driven by a univer-
sal interaction force arising from membrane deforma-
tions caused by the proteins themselves. Theoretical
models [8, 9, 10] and simulations [11, 12, 13] predict
that by deforming the membrane locally, membrane
proteins can self-assemble into complex structures
such as lines, rings, and ordered packings [14, 15].
Observations in living cells [3, 16] support the exis-

1

is expected to be the dominant factor. In fact, lipid
membranes pose a unique system in that they are
liquid while also having a bending rigidity. The ex-
perimental quantiﬁcation of interface-mediated inter-
actions in lipid membranes thus requires a dedicated
model system.

In this article, we ﬁrst develop such a specialized
model system and characterize the eﬀect of an adhe-
sive colloidal particle on the local membrane shape
using confocal microscopy. We ﬁnd that the colloidal
particles are either fully wrapped by the membrane
or not at all. Next, we systematically describe the
possible assembly pathways of membrane deforming
particles. Finally, we extract for the ﬁrst time the in-
teraction potential between membrane-wrapped col-
loidal particles and we show that this attraction is
only caused by the membrane deformation they in-
duce.

Description of the model system

system for

dedicated model

Our
studying
membrane-mediated interactions consists of colloidal
(0.98 ± 0.03 µm diameter)
polystyrene particles
connected to Giant Unilamellar Vesicles (GUV,
diameters ranging from 5–100 µm) as shown in
Figure 1. The GUVs are produced by electroswelling
[24] and consist of DOPC1 lipids ensuring a liquid
bilayer at room temperature [25, p. 549]. Therefore,
the particles are mobile on the two-dimensional
curved membrane surface.

We control the membrane deformation by coating
the particles with varying amounts of avidin, a pro-
tein that binds strongly and speciﬁcally to biotin [26].
The biotin is included in the membrane via a poly-
mer spacer2, to ensure a suﬃcient distance from the
membrane (≈ 3 nm [27]) and therefore negligible elec-
trostatic repulsion.

1DOPC: 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine
2DOPE-PEG-biotin:

1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-
phosphoethanolamine-N-[biotinyl(polyethylene glycol)-2000].
Note that we do not use the more easily available DSPE
equivalent
(1,2-distearyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-
N-[biotinyl(polyethylene glycol)-2000]), because we observed
aggregation of these lipids inside the DOPC membrane.

2

Figure 1: Model system for membrane-mediated in-
teractions: a) three-dimensional confocal image of a
typical Giant Unilamellar Vesicle (GUV, in magenta)
with attached colloidal particles (in green). The cor-
responding movie can be found in Movie S1. b) The
particles are connected strongly to the membrane
through an avidin-biotin linkage, as can be depicted
in the schematic. By varying the avidin concentration
on the particles we control the adhesion strength.

tence of such membrane-mediated interactions, but
have yet to provide conclusive experimental proof
of their common physical origin, because separation
from contributions by speciﬁc protein-protein inter-
actions and interactions with the cytoskeleton is ex-
tremely challenging.

Further experimental indications for a universal
membrane-mediated interaction stem from simpliﬁed
model systems: phase-separated membrane domains
are known to repel each other [17] while attractions
have been observed between colloidal particles in-
teracting with lipid membranes [18, 19, 20]. How-
ever, because even the most basic interaction between
a pair of purely curvature-inducing objects has not
been quantiﬁed to date, theoretical and numerical
models have essentially not been tested and even the
sign of the force is still under debate.

systems

for

Existing model

studying surface-
mediated interactions are typically based on defor-
mations of liquid-liquid or liquid-air interfaces, for
example in references [21, 22, 23]. In these systems,
interactions are governed by surface tension or grav-
ity, while on lipid membranes elastic surface bending

To be able to single out the membrane-mediated
force, we exclude all relevant other forces on the par-
ticles. Firstly, electrostatic interactions are screened
up to a Debye-H¨uckel screening length of 1 nm by
adding 50 mM of salt. Secondly, gravity is compen-
sated with buoyancy by carefully increasing the water
density with heavy water (D2O). Thirdly, wall inter-
actions are suppressed by coating the coverglass with
polymer [28]. Finally, we ensure that particles do not
attract via Van der Waals forces by grafting a high
density of poly(ethylene) glycol (PEG) to the parti-
cle surface, which acts as a steric stabilizer [29]. We
conﬁrm in a pair correlation measurement of a 3D
confocal image (Figure S1) that particles indeed do
not interact or sediment.

We vary the membrane tension σ by adjusting the
salt concentration in the surrounding medium to ob-
tain one of the following two states: a tense GUV
that has a spherical shape and no visible ﬂuctuations
(σ > 1 µN/m) or a ﬂoppy GUV that exhibits ﬂuc-
tuations around a spherical shape (σ < 10 nN/m).
The values of surface tension are estimated from the
spectrum analysis of the ﬂuctuating vesicle contour
according to [30].

Imaging is done with a 60x water immersion objec-
tive on a Nikon confocal microscope scanning lines at
15 kHz. A 488 nm laser excites a BODIPY dye, which
is mixed in during particle synthesis, and a 561 nm
laser excites a rhodamine-coupled lipid that is in-
cluded in the lipid membrane. In Figures 1-3, the ﬂu-
orescence signals are displayed in green (500–550 nm
emission) and magenta (565–625 nm emission).

Particle adhesion

Particles adhere to lipid membranes via biotin-avidin
bonds. The equilibrium deformation that particles
induce on lipid membranes is described in the follow-
ing expression for the total energy for the deforma-
tion, derived from the Canham-Helfrich energy func-
tional [31]:

(cid:16) 2κ
R2 + σ − n

(cid:17)

E =

A

(1)

Here, κ denotes the membrane bending rigidity, R
the particle radius, σ the membrane tension, A the

3

contact area, n the linker surface density, and  the
binding energy per linker. From this equation, we ex-
pect that particles will either be completely wrapped
or not wrapped at all, depending on the sign of the
prefactor, which depends on the tunable parameters
membrane tension and linker density.

Figure 2: Non-wrapped and wrapped states of
particle-membrane adhesion. In (a) the ﬂuorescence
signal of a non-wrapped particle is shown together
with that of the membrane. The separate ﬂuores-
cence signals of the membrane and particle are dis-
played respectively in (b) and (c).
In (d)-(f) the
wrapped state is displayed in an analoguous way. The
scale bar is 1 µm. In (g) it is shown (blue triangles)
that the fraction of wrapped particles on ﬂoppy mem-
branes increases sharply with increasing linker den-
sity. On tense membranes (red disks), particles are
not wrapped. Horizontal error bars show the stan-
dard deviation in linker density. Vertical error bars
are the standard error of the wrapped particle frac-
tion.

For particles adhered to a GUV, we indeed ﬁnd
either completely wrapped particles or non-wrapped
particles in our experiments (Figure 2). Partial wrap-
ping is only observed as a transient situation from the
non-wrapped to the completely wrapped state. Non-
wrapped particles are located on the outside of the
vesicle without deforming the membrane (Figure 2a-
c), while wrapped particles are protruding into the in-
side of the vesicle. Co-localization of the membrane
ﬂuorescence with the particle ﬂuorescence conﬁrms
the fully wrapped state.

On ﬂoppy membranes we observe that the frac-
tion of wrapped particles increases with increasing
avidin linker density, while on tense membranes we
never observe wrapping of particles. Note that while
wrapping requires ﬂoppy membranes, it is irreversible
and aﬀects the membrane tension: an initially ﬂoppy
membrane becomes gradually more tense upon wrap-
ping particles due to the eﬀective removal of mem-
brane surface area. In this way, a tense membrane
with wrapped particles can be obtained. The two-
state particle wrapping is in line with simulations by
Bahrami et al. [32] in the limit where the linker size
is small compared to the particle size. Since our par-
ticles have an inherent distribution of the linker den-
sity (denoted with error bars in Figure 2g), we ﬁnd a
more gradual increase in the wrapped fraction than
the predicted step function by Bahrami.
From Figure 2g, we estimate the minimum linker
density for wrapping to be 5 × 102 µm−2. Surpris-
ingly, this number is much larger than expected:
considering the binding energy associated with one
avidin-biotin bond ( ≈ 17 kBT [26]) and the mem-
brane bending rigidity (κ = 19 kBT [25, p. 474]),
it follows from Equation 1 that a linker density of
n ≈ 101 µm−2 should already completely wrap the
particles. We therefore suspect that a repulsion due
to overlap between polymers on the membrane and
on the particles eﬀectively decreases the adhesion en-
ergy in our system.

We furthermore note that the mobility of the par-
ticles is reduced by linkage to the membrane. With
3D particle tracking, we measure single-particle dif-
fusion coeﬃcients of non-wrapped particles that are
attached to membranes and ﬁnd that the parti-
cle self-diﬀusion coeﬃcient of 0.48 µm2 s−1 drops to
0.30 ± 0.07 µm2 s−1 when the particle is bound to a
membrane. The spread in diﬀusion coeﬃcients of
membrane-bound particles is related to the number
of linkages between membrane and particle. With a
larger number of links between the membrane and
particle, the drag coeﬃcient increases and thus the
diﬀusion coeﬃcient decreases.

In our colloidal model system for studying mem-
brane mediated interactions, we ﬁnd that particle
wrapping by lipid membranes occurs in an “all or
nothing” manner. Above a critical linker density, par-

ticles are fully wrapped if suﬃcient membrane area is
available. We can control the linker density and the
initial membrane tension and therefore we can switch
between the two states.

Spontaneous tubulation

Besides the two states of single-particle adhesion,
we observe spontaneous tubulation starting from the
neck of a wrapped particle onwards (see also Movie
S2). The pathway towards a membrane tube is shown
in Figure 3a-c. The particle remains wrapped by and
connected to the GUV membrane, but it can freely
diﬀuse in the vesicle interior (see Movie S2).

Previously, spontaneous tube formation has been
observed in vesicles and cells [33, 34] upon a change
in osmotic pressure. In our model system, tube for-
mation always arises from sites of wrapped particles.
The large energy barrier usually required for this pro-
cess [35] is apparently reduced by the high-curvature
region of the neck imposed by the wrapped particle.
The wrapping neck therefore serves as a nucleation
site for tube formation. Furthermore, the tube shape
ﬂuctuates strongly on a length scale of 1 µm, which
excludes that tensile forces play a major role in re-
tracting the particle.

Thus, the only way to explain the observed stabil-
ity of micrometer-long membrane tubes is a preferred
curvature of the lipid bilayer [33].
In our system,
preferred curvature may be imposed by the design
of the membrane adhesion: the DOPE-PEG-biotin
lipids are depleted locally from the outer membrane
leaﬂet by binding to particles or steric hindrance in-
side the wrapping neck. After a tube is formed, the
large PEG-lipids are excluded from the narrow tube
interior. This creates a local leaﬂet asymmetry that
leads to a preferred inwards curvature, which pro-
motes tube formation. Together with the free energy
gain from the additional translational entropy of the
particle, this local phase-separation of lipids may sta-
bilize the membrane tube and induce the spontaneous
tubulation.

4

Figure 3: Membrane-mediated irreversible assembly pathways of colloidal particles, displayed in confocal
images (left, scale bars: 1 µm) and sketches (right). A membrane-adhered particle (a) can be wrapped for
large linker density and low membrane tension (b). This particle can spontaneously form a membrane tube
(c, see also Movie S2). Two non-wrapped particles can stick via a smaller vesicle (d). A non-wrapped
particle can stick to a wrapped particle and form a dimer (e) that subsequently can be fully wrapped (f).
Clusters of non-wrapped particles form via smaller vesicles (g). A tetramer can form from two dimers (h).
The end result is a complex random structure of membrane-mediated clusters (i).

Irreversible assembly pathways

Employing confocal microscopy enables us to not
only distinguish between the state of wrapping but
also to establish its inﬂuence on the subsequent self-
assembly mediated by membrane adhesion. We ﬁnd
a variety of pathways that lead to stable membrane-
mediated structures, depicted in Figure 3.

While non-wrapped particles generally do not in-
teract with each other because they do not deform
the membrane, they can still aggregate in the pres-
ence of small (R < 1 µm) lipid vesicles. These vesicles
are invisible to bright ﬁeld microscopy and can irre-
versibly bind two non-wrapped particles due to the
strong interactions between membrane and particles
(Figure 3d). Subsequently, these aggregates can fur-
ther accumulate single or multiple particles to form
larger particle clusters (Figure 3g).

Furthermore, wrapped particles can serve as a
binding site for non-wrapped particles through their
local deformation of the membrane. Non-wrapped
particles are captured irreversibly due to the in-
creased circular contact area on top of the wrapped

particle. After binding, the wrapped and non-
wrapped particles diﬀuse together as a membrane-
mediated dimer. (Figure 3e).

Rarely, a two-step cooperative wrapping occurs:
after initial capture, the second particle gets wrapped
on top of the ﬁrst wrapped particle resulting in a tube
containing two fully wrapped spheres (Figure 3f). It
is unclear whether this “cooperative wrapping” oc-
curs because the cost of membrane deformation per
particle is lowered through the presence of the ﬁrst
wrapped particle (as described in [36]), or, because
the second particle has simply not undergone wrap-
ping yet for kinetic reasons.

Of course,

further interactions between single
particles and dimers are possible.
For instance,
two dimers can assemble into membrane-mediated
tetramers (Figure 3h). Depending on the particle
concentration, the particles assemble into large ag-
gregates of 5-20 particles (Figure 3i).

In summary, by using confocal microscopy we can
discriminate a rich variety of assembled structures
mediated purely by an adhesive lipid membrane and
correlate it with the state of wrapping of the individ-

5

ual particles. For a system consisting of non-wrapped
particles only, the aggregates are all caused by small
(R < 1 µm) lipid vesicles. In the presence of wrapped
particles, collisions with non-wrapped particles and
other membrane-mediated structures result in parti-
cle aggregates gradually increasing in size.

Membrane shape mediated in-
teractions

In contrast to these membrane-mediated aggregation
pathways, we observe a reversible, long-ranged in-
teraction between pairs of wrapped particles (Movie
S4). Excitingly, this interaction is absent for parti-
cles that are only adhered but not wrapped by the
membrane (Movie S3). This implies that the inter-
action observed between wrapped particles is purely
caused by the local deformation stemming from par-
ticle wrapping.

In order to quantify this membrane shape medi-
ated interaction, we track the particles using confo-
cal microscopy at a frame rate of 57 Hz. We are able
to extract the 3D particle coordinates using the fact
that the particles are conﬁned to a vesicle, which we
track simultaneously (see SI for details). The pair in-
teraction energy can be inferred from direct measure-
ment of the transition probability matrix Pij, which
describes the probability for particles to move from
separation distance si to separation distance sj [37].
Here, the distance s is the geodesic distance between
the points where the particles connect to the mem-
brane. From Pij a stationary probability distribution
for s can be obtained, which is equal to the equilib-
rium distribution under the assumption that the hy-
drodynamic drag forces on the particle do not depend
on s. From the Boltzmann distribution we then de-
termine the energy of two interacting particles, u(s).
Using this method, we inferred the pair interaction
for wrapped and non-wrapped particles (see Figure
4). Clearly, wrapped particles show a short-ranged
repulsion and a long-ranged attraction, while non-
wrapped particles do not signiﬁcantly interact. The
interaction potential for wrapped particles is qualita-
tively the same, independent of the membrane ten-

Figure 4:
Interaction energy u as a function of
geodesic particle separation distance s for (a) non-
wrapped particles and (b) wrapped particles. For
non-wrapped particles (a) there is no signiﬁcant in-
teraction on both tense and ﬂoppy membranes in a
vesicle radius range of 8.4–20 µm. For wrapped parti-
cles (b) the interaction potential shows a long-ranged
attraction as well as a short-ranged repulsion. The
curve for tense vesicles is obtained from particle tra-
jectories on a single tense membrane with a radius
of 18 µm, while the curve for ﬂoppy vesicles is ob-
tained from an average transition probability matrix
of particle trajectories on 3 ﬂoppy membranes with
vesicle radii of 7–20 µm. Every measurement point
is based on 20–1400 independent pair measurements.
Error bars denote one standard deviation.

sion3 as can be seen in Figure 4b. We ﬁnd that the in-
teraction strength is −3 kBT and that the attraction
extends over a range of 2.5 µm which is equivalent to
2.5 particle diameters. As the interaction is larger
than kBT, it can be observed from the relative move-
ment of membrane-wrapped particles in Movie S4.
As the interaction is only present for particles that
deform the membrane, we conclude that the reason
for the interaction is the deformation only and that
it is mediated by the membrane.

The formation of irreversible membrane-mediated

3Although a tense membrane does not wrap particles, it is
possible to obtain a tense membrane with wrapped particles
by ﬁrst attaching the particle on a ﬂoppy membrane and then
increasing the membrane tension with osmotic pressure.

6

dimers and aggregates seems very similar to the
membrane-mediated colloidal interactions observed
by Koltover et al. [18] and Ramos et al. [19]. How-
ever, the author were previously not able to distin-
guish between the state of wrapping or observe the
presence of smaller vesicles, because they employed
bright ﬁeld microscopy. With our insights from confo-
cal microscopy we can now hypothesize that these ir-
reversible interactions were mediated by either small
vesicles that bound non-wrapped particles, or by the
described wrapped-non-wrapped dimerization pro-
cess. As shown above, attractions between mem-
brane adhered particles are only reversible between
wrapped particles.

What membrane property mediates the observed
attraction? Apparently, the eﬀect of the variation of
membrane tension σ on the interaction is small as can
be seen from the small diﬀerence between tense and
ﬂoppy membranes in Figure 4b. Therefore, we con-
clude that the interaction is dominated by the bend-
ing rigidity κ = 19 kBT [25]. Analytic approxima-
tions for a membrane-bending mediated interaction
in the weakly curved limit predict a ﬂuctuation me-
diated attraction as well as a bending mediated re-
pulsion [38, 39], at least in the case of isotropic defor-
mations. Our attractive interaction, however, cannot
be caused by ﬂuctuations since such an attraction
is negligible compared to kBT at this length scale.
Therefore, we conclude that our deformations cannot
be described by linearized theory and that non-linear
theory is necessary to understand the measured at-
traction.

Non-linear ﬁeld theory is only able to predict the
interaction potential with detailed knowledge of the
exact membrane shape [9]. Without this informa-
tion, not even the sign of the interaction is known.
Numeric solutions of the membrane shape by Reyn-
war et al. [40] enabled calculation of the interaction
energy in the limit of asymptotically ﬂat membranes.
The thereby found interaction potential has a well
depth on the same order of magnitude as in our ex-
periments, −3 kBT, but we do not observe the pre-
dicted energy barrier at longer range. We speculate
that this diﬀerence originates from either of the fol-
lowing two causes: ﬁrstly, we employed membranes
with curved geometry in the experiments while the

referenced simulations considered asymptotically ﬂat
membranes [40]. Secondly, this and other simula-
tions as well as theory on bending-mediated interac-
tions [41, 11] often assume a partially wrapped parti-
cle, whereas we observed that particles with isotropic
membrane adhesion can only exist in either the fully
wrapped or non-wrapped state.

Conclusion

We have developed and characterized an experimen-
tal system showing colloidal interactions mediated by
lipid membranes.

For single particles, we observed two states us-
ing confocal microscopy: a non-wrapped and fully
wrapped state. This “all or nothing” behavior agrees
with a simple model based on bending, tension and
adhesion energies. Fully wrapped particles may sub-
sequently nucleate the formation of a membrane
tube, stabilized by hydrodynamic drag force on the
particle.

Particles can be kinetically trapped in irreversible
states by membranes in two ways: non-wrapped par-
ticles can aggregate via smaller vesicles or become
trapped in the deformation created by a wrapped par-
ticle. Subsequently, these clusters may aggregate in
complex random structures.

In contrast, two membrane-wrapped particles ex-
hibit a reversible attraction over a distance of sev-
eral microns. Because this interaction is absent for
non-wrapped particles, we conclude that this interac-
tion is mediated by the lipid membrane and originates
solely from the particle-induced membrane deforma-
tion. The shape of the observed attraction agrees
with the interaction energies simulated by Reynwar
et al. [40] based on non-linear theory. Linearized the-
ory on membrane shape does not describe our system,
because our particle induced deformations are in the
limit of strong curvature.

The common physical origin of these membrane-
mediated interactions will
further our quantita-
tive understanding of cellular processes that involve
membrane-shaping proteins, such as endocytosis, cell
division, and cell migration. To more closely mimic
the complex deformation proﬁles of proteins, colloidal

7

particles with anisotropic shapes and site-speciﬁc ad-
sorption patches may be employed in the future. This
will open up the controlled modulation of the mem-
brane deformation and thus the interaction shape.

biotin) from Avanti Polar Lipids. Unless stated
otherwise, chemicals were used as received. Deion-
ized water is used with 18.2 MΩ resistivity, obtained
using a Millipore Filtration System (Milli-Q Gradient
A10).

Acknowledgement

This work was supported by the Netherlands Organ-
isation for Scientiﬁc Research (NWO/OCW), as part
of the Frontiers of Nanoscience program. We thank
Timon Idema, Afshin Vahid, and Benny van Zuiden
for helpful discussions; Jeroen Appel, Pau Guilla-
mat Bassedas, Biswajit Pradhan, and Wim Pomp
for advise on the protocol design; Marcel Winter and
Ruben Verweij for experimental support.

Materials and Methods

Chemicals

(ACVA),

(Sulfo-NHS),

glycol

amine

N-hydroxysulfosuccinimide

itaconic acid, 4,4’-Azobis(4-cyanovaleric
Styrene,
1,3,5,7-tetramethyl-8-phenyl-4,4-
acid)
(BODIPY), methoxy-
diﬂuoroboradiazaindacene
(mPEG-NH2, Mw
poly(ethylene)
sodium
= 5000),
sodium phosphate, D-glucose,
salt
ethanol, acetic acid, ammonium hy-
methanol,
droxide
28-30%w/w (NH4OH), Hellmanex III,
and Pluronic F-127, deuterium oxide 70% (D2O),
3-(trimethoxysilyl)propyl methacrylate (TPM), and
Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA) were purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich; sodium chloride, sodium azide,
hydrogen peroxide 35%w/w (H2O2), acrylamide,
N,N,N’,N’-tetramethylethylenediamine
(TEMED),
from Acros
and ammonium persulfate
(APS)
Organics;
car-
bodiimide (EDC) from Carl Roth; NeutrAvidin
from Thermo Scientiﬁc; DNA oligonucleotides
(biotin-5’-TTTAATATTA-3’-Cy3) from Integrated
DNA Technologies; ∆9-cis 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-
3-phosphocholine (DOPC), 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-
3-phosphoethanolamine-N-(lissaminerhodamine
B
and
dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-
[biotinyl(polyethylene glycol)-2000]

1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)

(DOPE-PEG-

sulfonyl)

(DOPE-rhodamine),

1,2-

Probe particles

Polystyrene particles are synthesized from styrene,
itaconic acid, ACVA, and BODIPY in water using
a surfactant-free radical polymerization described in
[42], resulting in monodisperse spheres with a di-
ameter of 0.98 ± 0.03 µm (see Figure S3 for a scan-
ning electron microscopy image). Resulting particles
are coated with NeutrAvidin and PEG using an a
protocol adjusted from [43]. All subsequent reac-
tions are done at 4 ◦C to slow down NHS hydroly-
sis. 1 mL 20%w/w particles are mixed with 80 µmol
EDC and 25 µmol Sulfo-NHS in 10 mL water at pH
= 5.3 and stirred for 30 min. The pH of the result-
ing NHS-activated particles is brought to 8.6 using
0.2 M NaOH. 750 µL of the 2%w/w activated parti-
cles is then mixed with 0.5–50 µg NeutrAvidin. After
30 min, 4 mg mPEG-NH2 is added and the reaction
proceeds for 40 h. Then the pH is brought to 12 with
1 M NaOH, the particles are ultrasonicated for 5 min
and then washed 1x with 0.01 M HCl and 3x with wa-
ter. Finally, sodium azide is added to a concentration
of 3 mM to prevent bacterial growth.

Biotin binding sites assay

In order to quantify the number of biotin binding
sites on each particle, we measure ﬂuorescence of
biotin- and dye-functionalized DNA strands. DNA
strands have the advantage that they are well solu-
ble in water, so that there is no non-speciﬁc adhe-
sion to the particle surface. 10 µL 6µM DNA (in wa-
ter) is mixed with 10 µL 0.5%w/w particles in a total
volume of 310 µL 50 mM PBS buﬀer with 0.5%w/w
Pluronic F-127. The mixture is heated to 55 ◦C for
30 min and washed 3 times with water. The sample
is diluted 10 times in a PBS buﬀer inserted into an
untreated rectangular glass capillary, which immobi-
lizes the particles. The ﬂuorescence intensity is quan-
tiﬁed using ﬂuorescence microscopy (Nikon Intensi-

8

light) with reproducible settings and using a calibra-
tion curve obtained from commercial particles with
a known amount of avidin (Spherotech PC-S-1.0) we
can obtain a distribution of avidin linkers per parti-
cle.

Coverglass treatment

We employed a polymerization of acrylamide onto
TPM-coated glasses [28], as follows: coverslips are
cleaned for 30 min in a 2%v/v Hellmanex solu-
tion, rinsed 3 times with water, immersed in 5:1:1
H2O:NH4OH:H2O2 for 30 min at 70 ◦C, rinsed 3 times
with water, and 2 times with ethanol. Methacry-
late functionalization is done by immersing 15 min in
ethanol with 1%v/v acetic acid and 0.5%v/v TPM,
rinsing 3 times with ethanol and incubating for 1 h
at 80 ◦C. Polymerization is done in a 2%w/w solu-
tion of acrylamide (evacuated in vacuum for 30 min
to remove oxygen), with 0.035%v/w TEMED and
0.070%w/w APS for 2 h. Resulting coverslips were
kept inside the polymerization solution at 4 ◦C until
use. Directly before use, a coverslip is rinsed with
water and blow-dried with nitrogen.

GUV preparation

Vesicles are prepared using the standard elec-
troswelling technique [24].
A lipid mixture of
97.8%w/w DOPC, 2%w/w DOPE-PEG-biotin, and
0.2%w/w DOPE-rhodamine is used. 2x20 µg of the
lipids in chloroform are dried on two 25x25 mm ITO-
coated glass slides (15–25 Ω, Sigma-Aldrich), placed
in 1.8 mL of a solution with 100 mM glucose and
0.3 mM sodium azide in 49:51 (mass) D2O:H2O. The
cell is subjected to 1.1 V (rms) at 10 Hz for 2 h, with
the ﬁrst 2 min a linear increase from 0 V. GUVs are
stored in a BSA-coated glass vial at room temper-
ature. To remove small lipid vesicles, 100 µL GUV
solution is pipetted on a Whatmann 5.0 µm pore size
cellulosenitrate ﬁlter and slowly ﬂushed with 5.0 mL
of glucose solution. 100 µL puriﬁed GUVs are har-
vested from the ﬁlter and used the same day. All
handling is done with care not to mechanically shock
the solution.

Density matching

A density-matched PBS stock buﬀer of 200 mOsm
is prepared containing 10.0 mM sodium phosphate,
82.0 mM sodium chloride, and 3.0 mM sodium azide.
Density-matching was done by gradually adding
D2O until no sedimentation or creaming occurred at
10 000 g for 1 h. The mass ratio D2O:H2O for water
is roughly 51:49; for the buﬀer it is roughly 45:55 be-
cause the solutes increase the density. Using ratios
between the stock buﬀer and density-matched water,
buﬀers at diﬀerent osmolarities are obtained. Density
matching is conﬁrmed for each mixture seperately.

Sample preparation

Samples are prepared on pretreated coverglasses.
2 µL 2%w/w particles, 4 µL 150 mOsm PBS buﬀer,
and 20 µL ﬁltered GUVs are incubated for 10 min
in a plastic microtube. Then 10 µL of this mix-
ture is slowly distributed into the sample holder with
50 µL 100 mOsm PBS buﬀer already inside. For
tense GUVs, the sample holder is closed with vacuum
grease; for ﬂoppy GUVs, the sample holder is kept
open to air for 30 min so that evaporation leads to an
increase in osmotic pressure, and consequentially a
decrease of membrane tension. All experiments were
done at a room temperature of 19–22 ◦C.

Imaging

Imaging is done with an inverted Nikon TiE micro-
scope equipped with a Nikon A1R confocal scanhead
with both galvano and resonant scanning mirrors.
Trajectory imaging is done with a horizontal resonant
mirror scanning lines at 15 kHz; single-particle close-
ups are done with the galvano mirror. We use a 60x
water immersion objective (NA = 1.2) to reduce axial
aberration due to index of refraction mismatch. At
the objective, the (linearly polarized) laser is passed
through a quarter wave plate to mitigate polarization
eﬀects of bilayer-attached dye molecules. Excitation
(at 488 nm and 561 nm) and detection are done simul-
taneously (for trajectory imaging) or sequentially (for
closeups) using a dichroic mirror splitting the emis-
sion signal onto 500–550 nm and 565–625 nm ﬁlters.

9

vesicle perimeter measurements are then transformed
into Cartesian coordinates. Finally, an algebraic ﬁt
to a circle is used to obtain the circle center and ra-
dius. Tests on artiﬁcially generated circles prove that
with 20% of added random noise, a circle can be ﬁt-
ted within an error of 1% in radius and an error of
0.1px in the center coordinate.

Reﬁned coordinates of three-dimensional vesicle
images can be obtained in the same way. We then
employ an algebraic ﬁt to an ellipsoid to ensure that
the radii in X and Y directions are the same. The
Z principle axis is allowed to have an angle with the
image Z-axis to account for a tilt of the microscope
stage. From the ratio between Z and XY radii, the
z-stage calibration can be obtained; from the tilt of
the ellipsoid, the tilt of the z-stage can be obtained.
Tests on artiﬁcially generated ellipsoids prove that
with 20% of added random noise, a circle can be ﬁt-
ted within an error of 5% in radius and an error of
0.5px in the center coordinate.

The vesicle tracking procedure is available online

at [45].

The sample is mounted on an MCL NanoDrive stage
to enable fast Z stack acquisition. All images are con-
volved with a Gaussian kernel with an rms width of
1 pixel to reduce random noise.

Tracking

The raw images of the interaction measurements con-
tain image sequences in two channels: one with the
GUV signal (which is a circle) and one with the par-
ticle signals (which is a collection of Gaussian-like
features). In a second measurement, a 3D confocal
image (z-stack) is made to quantify the vesicle ra-
dius R. From these two sets of measurements, the
three-dimensional coordinates of the particles are de-
termined. As particles are adhered with constant dis-
tance h to a vesicle with known radius R and center
(yc, xc), their 3D coordinates relative to the vesicle
can be obtained as follows: xrel = x−xc; yrel = y−yc;
rel = (R + h)2 − x2
z2
Particles are tracked using a widely employed
center-of-mass particle tracking algorithm in a
Python implementation [44]. All particle trajecto-
ries are checked manually for missing coordinates and
corrected if necessary. Because the center-of-mass re-
ﬁnement technique systematically ﬁnds coordinates
of overlapping features too close together, we reﬁne
overlapping signals additionally by least-squares ﬁt-
ting to a sum of Gaussians.

rel − y2
rel.

The vesicles are tracked in 2D as follows: we use
a rough estimate of the vesicle radius and center to
draw n radial from the center outwards. The num-
ber n is chosen such that the lines are 1 pixel apart
on the estimated circle perimeter. On each of these
lines, the image is interpolated (third order spline)
onto points with a spacing of 1 pixel. The maximum
value on each of these lines provides a more reﬁned
estimate of the circle perimeter. Around each max-
imum, a ﬁt region of 5 pixels is deﬁned for further
reﬁnement. Linear regression on the discrete deriva-
tive then provides the position of the circle perimeter
with sub-pixel resolution. Points are discarded when
a) the ﬁt region falls outside of the image, b) the
mean of the ﬁt region is lower than 10% of the global
intensity maximum, c) the regression failed, or d) the
reﬁned point is outside of the ﬁt region. The reﬁned

10

References

[1] Harvey T. McMahon and Jennifer L. Gallop. Membrane curvature and mechanisms of dynamic cell

membrane remodelling. Nature, 438(7068):590–596, 2005.

[2] Dominik Freche, Ulrike Pannasch, Nathalie Rouach, and David Holcman. Synapse geometry and re-

ceptor dynamics modulate synaptic strength. PLoS ONE, 6(10):e25122, 2011.

[3] Candace M. Pfeﬀerkorn, Zhiping Jiang, and Jennifer C. Lee. Biophysics of alpha-synuclein membrane

interactions. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta, 1818(2):162–171, 2012.

[4] Yogeshkumar Malam, Marilena Loizidou, and Alexander M. Seifalian. Liposomes and nanoparticles:
nanosized vehicles for drug delivery in cancer. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences, 30:592–599, 2009.

[5] Bo Wang, Liangfang Zhang, Sung Chul Bae, and Steve Granick. Nanoparticle-induced surface recon-
struction of phospholipid membranes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America, 105(47):18171–18175, 2008.

[6] Odeta Limaj, Dordaneh Etezadi, Nathan J. Wittenberg, Daniel Rodrigo, Daehan Yoo, Sang-Hyun Oh,
Infrared Plasmonic Biosensor for Real-Time and Label-Free Monitoring of Lipid

and Hatice Altug.
Membranes. Nano lLtters, 16(2):1502–1508, 2016.

[7] Erik Reimhult and Karthik Kumar. Membrane biosensor platforms using nano- and microporous sup-

ports. Trends in Biotechnology, 26(2):82–89, 2008.

[8] K. S. Kim, John Neu, and George Oster. Curvature-Mediated Interactions Between Membrane Proteins.

Biophysical Journal, 75(5):2274–2291, 1998.

[9] Martin Michael M¨uller, Markus Deserno, and Jemal Guven. Interface-mediated interactions between

particles: A geometrical approach. Physical Review E, 72(6):061407, dec 2005.

[10] Cem Yolcu, Robert C. Haussman, and Markus Deserno. The Eﬀective Field Theory approach towards
membrane-mediated interactions between particles. Advances in Colloid and Interface Science, 208:89–
109, jun 2014.

[11] Benedict J. Reynwar, Gregoria Illya, Vagelis A. Harmandaris, Martin M. M¨uller, Kurt Kremer, and
Markus Deserno. Aggregation and vesiculation of membrane proteins by curvature-mediated interac-
tions. Nature, 447(7143):461–465, may 2007.

[12] Andela ˇSari´c and Angelo Cacciuto. Self-assembly of nanoparticles adsorbed on ﬂuid and elastic mem-

branes. Soft Matter, 9(29):6677–6695, 2013.

[13] Mijo Simunovic, Anand Srivastava, and Gregory. A. Voth. Linear aggregation of proteins on the mem-
brane as a prelude to membrane remodeling. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 110(51):20396–20401, 2013.

[14] Josep C. P`amies and Angelo Cacciuto. Reshaping elastic nanotubes via self-assembly of surface-adhesive

nanoparticles. Physical Review Letters, 106(4):045702, 2011.

[15] Afshin Vahid and Timon Idema. Point-like inclusion interactions in tubular membranes. arXiv, page

1510.03610v2, 2015.

11

[16] Brian J. Peter, Helen M. Kent, Ian G. Mills, Yvonne Vallis, P. Jonathan G. Butler, Philip R. Evans,
and Harvey T. McMahon. BAR domains as sensors of membrane curvature: the amphiphysin BAR
structure. Science, 303(January):495–499, 2004.

[17] Stefan Semrau, Timon Idema, Thomas Schmidt, and Cornelis Storm. Membrane-Mediated Interactions

Measured Using Membrane Domains. Biophysical Journal, 96(12):4906–4915, 2009.

[18] Ilya Koltover, Joachim O. R¨adler, and Cyrus R. Saﬁnya. Membrane Mediated Attraction and Ordered
Aggregation of Colloidal Particles Bound to Giant Phospholipid Vesicles. Physical Review Letters,
82(9):1991–1994, 1999.

[19] Laurence Ramos, T.C. Lubensky, Nily Dan, Philip Nelson, and D.A. Weitz. Surfactant-Mediated Two-

Dimensional Crystallization of Colloidal Crystals. Science, 286(5448):2325–2328, 1999.

[20] Adriana M. Mihut, Aleksandra P. Dabkowska, J´erˆome J. Crassous, Peter Schurtenberger, and Tommy
Nylander. Tuneable Adsorption of Soft Colloids on Model Biomembranes. ACS Nano, 7(12):10752–
10763, 2013.

[21] J. C. Loudet, A. M. Alsayed, J. Zhang, and A. G. Yodh. Capillary Interactions Between Anisotropic

Colloidal Particles. Physical Review Letters, 94(1):018301, 2005.

[22] Marcello Cavallaro, Jr., Lorenzo Botto, Eric P. Lewandowski, Marisa Wang, and Kathleen J. Stebe.
From the Cover: Curvature-driven capillary migration and assembly of rod-like particles. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 108(52):20923–20928, 2011.

[23] Dominic Vella and L. Mahadevan. The Cheerios eﬀect. American Journal of Physics, 73(9):817, 2005.

[24] Miglena I. Angelova and Dimiter S. Dimitrov. Liposome Electroformation. Faraday Discussions of the

Chemical Society, 81:303–311, 1986.

[25] Derek Marsh. Handbook of Lipid Bilayers. CRC Press, second edition, 2013.

[26] Vincent T. Moy, Ernst-Ludwig Florin, and Hermann E. Gaub.

Intermolecular Forces and Energies

Between Ligands and Receptors. Science, 266(5183):257–259, 1994.

[27] D. R. Beech and C. Booth. Unperturbed Dimensions of Poly (ethylene oxide). Journal of Polymer

Science: Part A-2, 7:575–586, 1969.

[28] A. W. C. Lau, A. Prasad, and Z. Dogic. Condensation of isolated semi-ﬂexible ﬁlaments driven by

depletion interactions. EPL (Europhysics Letters), 87(4):48006, 2009.

[29] Srigokul Upadhyayula, Timothy Quinata, Stephen Bishop, Sharad Gupta, Noah Ray Johnson, Baharak
Bahmani, Kliment Bozhilov, Jeremy Stubbs, Pamela Jreij, Pratima Nallagatla, and Valentine I. Vullev.
Coatings of polyethylene glycol for suppressing adhesion between solid microspheres and ﬂat surfaces.
Langmuir, 28(11):5059–5069, 2012.

[30] J. P´ecr´eaux, H. G. D¨obereiner, J. Prost, J. F. Joanny, and P. Bassereau. Reﬁned contour analysis of

giant unilamellar vesicles. European Physical Journal E, 13(3):277–290, 2004.

[31] W. Helfrich. Elastic properties of lipid bilayers: theory and possible experiments. Zeitschrift f¨ur

Naturforschung C, 28(11-12):693–703, 1973.

12

[32] Amir H. Bahrami, Michael Raatz, Jaime Agudo-Canalejo, Raphael Michel, Emily M. Curtis, Carol K.
Hall, Michael Gradzielski, Reinhard Lipowsky, and Thomas R. Weikl. Wrapping of nanoparticles by
membranes. Advances in Colloid and Interface Science, 208:214–224, 2014.

[33] Yanhong Li, Reinhard Lipowsky, and Rumiana Dimova. Membrane nanotubes induced by aqueous
phase separation and stabilized by spontaneous curvature. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 108(12):4731–4736, 2011.

[34] Doris Heinrich, Mary Ecke, Marion Jasnin, Ulrike Engel, and G¨unther Gerisch. Reversible membrane
pearling in live cells upon destruction of the actin cortex. Biophysical Journal, 106(5):1079–1091, 2014.

[35] Gerbrand Koster, Angelo Cacciuto, Imre Der´enyi, Daan Frenkel, and Marileen Dogterom. Force barriers

for membrane tube formation. Physical Review Letters, 94(6):16–19, 2005.

[36] Amir Houshang Bahrami, Reinhard Lipowsky, and Thomas R. Weikl. Tubulation and Aggregation of

Spherical Nanoparticles Adsorbed on Vesicles. Physical Review Letters, 109(18):188102, oct 2012.

[37] John C. Crocker and David G. Grier. Microscopic measurement of the pair interaction potential of

charge-stabilized colloid. Physical Review Letters, 73(2):352–355, 1994.

[38] M. Goulian, R. Bruinsma, and P. Pincus. Long-range forces in heterogeneous ﬂuid membranes. Euro-

physics Letters, 22(2):145–150, 1993.

[39] Paul G Dommersnes and Jean-Baptiste Fournier. The many-body problem for anisotropic membrane in-
clusions and the self-assembly of ”saddle” defects into an ”egg carton”. Biophysical journal, 83(6):2898–
2905, 2002.

[40] Benedict J. Reynwar and Markus Deserno. Membrane-mediated interactions between circular particles

in the strongly curved regime. Soft Matter, 7(18):8567, 2011.

[41] Thorsten Auth and Gerhard Gompper. Budding and vesiculation induced by conical membrane inclu-

sions. Physical Review E, 80(3):1–10, 2009.

[42] Jeroen Appel, Sabine Akerboom, Remco G. Fokkink, and Joris Sprakel. Facile One-Step Synthesis of
Monodisperse Micron-Sized Latex Particles with Highly Carboxylated Surfaces. Macromolecular Rapid
Communications, 34(16):1284–1288, 2013.

[43] Fenghua Meng, Gerard H. M. Engbers, and Jan Feijen. Polyethylene glycol-grafted polystyrene particles.

Journal of Biomedical Materials Research Part A, 70(1):49–58, 2004.

[44] Dan Allan, Thomas Caswell, Nathan Keim, and Casper van der Wel. Trackpy v0.3.0. Zenodo, page

10.5281/zenodo.34028, nov 2015.

[45] Casper van der Wel. Circletracking v1.0. Zenodo, page 10.5281/zenodo.47216, 2016.

13

Figure S1: a) Three-dimensional radial distribution function g(r) and b) vertical density proﬁle of particles
suspended at a volume fraction of 0.0011 in a 50 mM density matched PBS solution. The radial distribution
shows no interaction between particles. The red line indicates particle contact. The sharp peak at a distance
of 1 diameter is due to the presence of a few dimers originating from the particle synthesis. The density
proﬁle shows that there is no gradient in concentration due to gravity.

14

Figure S2: Mean squared displacement (MSD) of 250 individual non-wrapped particles attached to several
tense vesicles (blue shaded lines). The two-dimensional MSD of non-attached, freely diﬀusing particles is
plotted for comparison (red circles). Each particle is located at least 5 µm away from the wall. Each particle
trajectory consists of more than 200 frames. Inset: histogram of individual diﬀusion coeﬃcients obtained by
least-squares ﬁtting the MSD to 4Dt. The dashed red line shows the diﬀusion coeﬃcient of freely diﬀusing
particles. Clearly, diﬀusion is slowed down by attachment to the membrane. The diﬀusion coeﬃcients have
a spread pointing towards a spread in number of links between particle and membrane. The used particles
have a slightly diﬀerent stabilization than described in the materials and methods:
instead of a covalent
PEG5000 stabilization, they have a non-covalent block-copolymer surfactant (Pluronic F-127).

15

Figure S3: Scanning Electron Microscopy image (obtained with FEI nanoSEM 200 at 15 kV) of the 0.98 µm
polystyrene colloidal particles used in this work. From the 2D crystallization, it is clear that the size
polydispersity is very small (0.03 µm). The inset shows the smooth surface of the particles.

16

Movie S1: Three-dimensional confocal image of a Giant Unilamellar Vesicle (magenta) with attached non-
wrapped 1 µm colloidal particles (green). On the left, a three-dimensional rendering is shown. On the right,
the particle tracking is shown in an overlay on three maximum intensity projections (center: xy, bottom:
xz, right: yz). The scale bar denotes the pixel size of the xy projection. Z axes are compressed because the
physical size of one voxel is larger in the z-dimension than in the xy dimensions. Label -1 denotes the vesicle
center.

17

Movie S2: Spontaneous tubulation induced by a 1 µm colloidal particle wrapped by a lipid membrane. The
movie shows an image sequence of confocal slices of a spherical vesicle (in magenta) with colloidal particles
(in green), displayed in real time.

Movie S3: Non-wrapped 1 µm particles adhered to a vesicle. The movie shows a confocal image sequence of
the top part of a spherical vesicle (in magenta) with colloidal particles (in green), displayed in real time.

18

Movie S4: Three 1 µm particles wrapped by a tense vesicle. The movie shows an image sequence of confocal
slices of a spherical vesicle (in magenta) with colloidal particles (in green), displayed in real time. By using
information from the particle-vesicle distance and the vesicle radius, the full three-dimensional coordinates
of the particles can be reconstructed. This is shown on the right in a three-dimensional rendering.

19

