6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
5
1

 
 
]

.

A
G
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
6
5
6
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Chapter 1
Stellar Tidal Streams in External Galaxies

Jeffrey L. Carlin, Rachael L. Beaton, David Mart´ınez-Delgado, and R. Jay Gabany

Abstract In order to place the highly substructured stellar halos of the Milky Way
and M31 in a larger context of hierarchical galaxy formation, it is necessary to un-
derstand the prevalence and properties of tidal substructure around external galaxies.
This chapter details the current state of our observational knowledge of streams in
galaxies in and beyond the Local Group, which are studied both in resolved stellar
populations and in integrated light. Modeling of individual streams in extragalac-
tic systems is hampered by our inability to obtain resolved stellar kinematics in the
streams, though many streams contain alternate luminous kinematic tracers, such
as globular clusters or planetary nebulae. We compare the observed structures to
the predictions of models of galactic halo formation, which provide insight in the
number and properties of streams expected around Milky Way like galaxies. More
speciﬁcally, we discuss the inferences that can be made about stream progenitors
based only on observed morphologies. We expand our discussion to consider hier-
archical accretion at lower mass scales, in particular the observational evidence that
substructure exists on smaller mass scales and the effects accretion events may have
on the evolution of dwarf galaxies (satellite or isolated). Lastly, we discuss poten-
tial correlations between the presence of substructure in the halo and the structural
properties of the disk. While many exciting discoveries have been made of tidal sub-
structures around external galaxies, the “global” questions of galaxy formation and
evolution via hierarchical accretion await a more complete census of the low surface
brightness outskirts of galaxies in and beyond the Local Group.

Jeffrey L. Carlin: Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York, USA, and Earlham College,
Richmond, Indiana, USA; e-mail: jeffreylcarlin@gmail.com
Rachael L. Beaton: The Observatories of the Carnegie Institution for Science, Pasadena, CA, USA;
e-mail: rachael.l.beaton@gmail.com
David Mart´ınez-Delgado: Astronomisches Rechen-Institut (ARI) am Zentrum fuer Astronomie der
Universitaet Heidelberg (ZAH), Germany; e-mail: delgado@ari.uni-heidelberg.de
R. Jay Gabany: Black Bird Observatory II, Alder Springs, California, USA; e-mail: rj2010@
cosmotography.com

1

Jeffrey L. Carlin, Rachael L. Beaton, David Mart´ınez-Delgado, and R. Jay Gabany

2
1.1 Introduction

Low surface brightness features, including “tails” and “bridges,” are visible in
highly disturbed galaxies that result from a major merger or strong encounter (Arp,
1966; Toomre & Toomre, 1972). Similarly, diffuse stellar streams and shells around
massive elliptical galaxies have been known for decades, and are attributed either to
the accretion of smaller disk galaxies (Quinn, 1984) or to recent, “in-situ” star for-
mation from gas that was already contained within the galaxy (Fabian et al., 1980).
Schweizer & Seitzer (1988) extended these observations to early spiral galaxies,
and suggested that the “ripples,” as they called the shell-like features, were formed
through mass transfer from nearby galaxies, in addition to wholesale mergers.

It has only been in recent years, with the advent of wide-area, deep photometric
surveys, that the number and variety of stellar substructures (resulting from the tidal
disruption of dwarf galaxies and globular clusters in “minor mergers”) threading the
halos of the Milky Way and Andromeda (M31) galaxies has become apparent. These
stellar substructures can be studied in detail and together describe the hierarchical
merging history of the two dominant galaxies in the Local Group. However, placing
them in the broader context of cosmological galaxy formation models requires a
more general picture of halo substructure only feasible via the exploration of a large
number of more distant systems. Only with such a dataset in hand is it possible to
determine whether the Milky Way and M 31 have experienced ‘typical’ or ‘atypical’
merging histories (e.g., Mutch et al., 2011).
Models (e.g., Johnston et al., 2008; Cooper et al., 2010) predict that a survey
reaching a surface brightness of ∼29 mag arcsec−2 around ∼100 galaxies outside
the Local Group should reveal many tidal features, perhaps as much as one de-
tectable stream per galaxy. However, a suitably deep data set that is sensitive to low
surface brightness features in a large number of galaxies does not yet exist, leaving
the observational evidence needed to test these predictions incomplete. In the sec-
tions that follow, we will discuss the isolated discoveries of tidal debris structures in
external galaxies and their overall utility for elucidating general stellar tidal features.

1.2 Stellar streams: detection methods and examples

Local Group galaxies, including the Milky Way and M31, can be dissected star
by star, and thus provide a laboratory for understanding the details of hierarchical
galaxy formation. However, it is unclear whether the Local Group galaxies represent
typical evolution histories. To understand the place of the Milky Way and M31 in
the larger context requires studying tidal substructures in galaxies beyond the Local
Group, where resolving individual stars is difﬁcult. In this section, we detail some of
the methods used to discover tidal debris features, including resolved and unresolved
stellar populations, and discuss the unique insights gleaned from some examples of
these structures.

1 Stellar Tidal Streams in External Galaxies
1.2.1 Resolved stellar structures in the Local Group

3

The era of massive, deep photometric surveys has enabled the detection of tidal de-
bris structures within the Milky Way as stellar overdensities of carefully selected
tracers. The famous “Field of Streams” image from SDSS (Belokurov et al. 2006;
reproduced in Chapter 1) mapped substructure using main sequence turnoff (MSTO)
starcounts to surface brightness limits of fainter than ∼ 32 mag arcsec−2. The iden-
tiﬁcation of individual members of stellar streams enables extremely low surface
brightness features to be detected. This can be achieved by kinematical selection
of stream members (for example, via spectroscopic velocities), allowing features in
the Galactic halo containing fewer than ∼ 1 red giant branch (RGB) star per square
degree to be identiﬁed.

Likewise, in M 31, photometric selection of metal-poor RGB candidates removes
much of the contaminating background, and has allowed detections of features as
faint as ∼ 30 mag arcsec−2, including the “giant stream” (Ibata et al., 2001) and
other low surface brightness features (e.g., Ferguson et al. 2002; see Chapter 8
for more about M31). When individual stars can be resolved and spectroscopi-
cally vetted in M 31, the measurement of surface brightnesses as faint as ∼ 32
mag arcsec−2 is possible (see, e.g., Gilbert et al. 2012 and other results from the
SPLASH survey). Thus, we are able to probe both the Milky Way and M 31 to
depths of ∼ 32 mag arcsec−2, which is deep enough to sample most of the simu-
lated halo substructures seen in simulations (discussed further in Section 1.4).

1.2.2 Detection methods in and beyond the Local Group

Current ground-based telescopes are unable to resolve stellar tidal streams around
most galaxies beyond the Local Group into individual stars. Most of the streams that
have been found in external galaxies thus appear as elongated, diffuse-light regions
extending over several arcminutes on the sky. To map such tidal streams requires
deep imaging that is also sensitive to extremely faint surface brightness features;
the typical surface brightness of known stellar tidal streams is 27 mag arcsec−2 or
fainter, depending both on the luminosity of the progenitor and the time they were
accreted (Johnston et al., 2008).

Faint tidal features can be identiﬁed on sky-limited archival photographic plates
using a process called photographic ampliﬁcation; the surface brightness limit is
even fainter if photographically ampliﬁed derivatives of several plates are combined
together (Malin, 1981). Using these techniques (photographically or digitally) it is
possible to detect extended features to 28 mag arcsec−2 from existing photographic
surveys (Malin & Hadley, 1997). This depth is comparable to that achievable with
SDSS in Figure 1.1.

Small, fast (i.e., low focal-ratio) telescopes (e.g., Mart´ınez-Delgado et al. 2010;
van Dokkum et al. 2014) and modern CCD cameras are capable of imaging un-
resolved structures in external galaxies to ΣR ∼29 mag arcsec−2. Detecting these

4

Jeffrey L. Carlin, Rachael L. Beaton, David Mart´ınez-Delgado, and R. Jay Gabany

Fig. 1.1 Left panels: images from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey of the nearby galaxies NGC 4013
(top) and M 63 (bottom). These images do not show any obvious signs of tidal streams in the halos
of these galaxies at the surface brightness limit of SDSS. Deep images of these same galaxies
reveal a low-latitude stellar stream around NGC 4013 (upper right panel; Mart´ınez-Delgado et al.
2009) and a giant tidal stream around the spiral galaxy M 63 (lower-right; Chonis et al. 2011).
For reference, a color inset of each galaxy’s central regions has been inserted atop the deeper
images. These images illustrate the value of deep, sensitive imaging (i.e., beyond that of SDSS) for
detecting the faint debris structures predicted by theoretical models in external galaxies.

faint features requires very dark sky conditions and images taken with exquisite ﬂat-
ﬁeld quality over a relatively large angular scale. More speciﬁcally, stellar streams
are typical found at large galactocentric distances (15 kpc < R < 100 kpc, or far-
ther) and could be found out to a signiﬁcant portion of the virial radius of the par-
ent galaxy (for the Milky Way or M 31, Rvirial ∼ 300 kpc). Thus, surveys for stel-
lar debris must produce images over large angular scales (from > 30(cid:48) for systems
< 10 Mpc to ∼15(cid:48) for systems ∼50 Mpc away). As an example, the survey strategy
employed by Mart´ınez-Delgado et al. (2010) uses stacks of multiple deep exposures
of each target taken with high throughput clear “luminance” ﬁlters (transmitting
4000 ˚A < λ < 7000 ˚A with a near-IR cut-off) with typical exposure times of 7-8
hours.

Recent deep, wide-ﬁeld imaging surveys have focused on nearby spiral galax-
ies that were suspected (based on existing data from, e.g., surveys such as POSS-
II or SDSS, or from amateur astronomical imaging) to contain diffuse-light over-

1 Stellar Tidal Streams in External Galaxies

5

Fig. 1.2 Luminance ﬁlter images of nearby galaxies from the pilot survey of Mart´ınez-Delgado
et al. (2008, 2010) showing large, diffuse light structures in their outskirts. These include tidal
streams similar to Sagittarius (upper right panel), giant plumes (middle panels in the top row),
partially disrupted satellites (top row, third panel from left), umbrella-shaped tidal debris structures
(middle two panels in the bottom row), enormous stellar clouds, prominent spikes, and large scale,
complex inner halos sprinkled with several debris features. A color inset of the disk of each galaxy
has been overplotted for reference. An illustrative comparison of these features to the surviving
structures visible in cosmological simulations is given in Martinez-Delgado et al. 2010, their Fig
2.

densities. To date, the combined observational efforts have revealed more than 50
previously undetected stellar structures in galaxies as distant as 80 Mpc. Figure 1.2
shows eight such galaxies from the survey of Mart´ınez-Delgado et al. (2010), il-
lustrating the variety of tidal debris features – both in their morphologies and in
their projected radii. The central disks of the galaxies shown in Figure 1.2 are of
similar overall physical size, but the debris features can span large galactocentric
distances. The morphologies of the features include great circle streams resembling
the Sagittarius stream around our Galaxy (upper right panel of Figure 1.2; Sagit-
tarius is discussed in Chapter 2 of this volume), isolated shells, giant clouds of de-
bris ﬂoating within galactic halos, jet-like features emerging from galactic disks,
and large-scale diffuse structures that may be related to the remnants of ancient,
already thoroughly disrupted satellites. The diversity in observed substructure mor-
phology parallels that seen in simulations (e.g., Johnston et al., 2008; Cooper et al.,

6

Jeffrey L. Carlin, Rachael L. Beaton, David Mart´ınez-Delgado, and R. Jay Gabany

2010). In addition to the remains of satellites that are likely completely destroyed,
there are a few examples (e.g., Mart´ınez-Delgado et al. 2012, 2014; Amorisco et
al. 2015) of surviving satellites caught in the act of tidal disruption, displaying long
tails departing from the progenitor satellite (i.e., similar in spirit to observations in
the Local Group). The extraordinary variety of morphological specimens provides
strong evidence to support the hierarchical galaxy formation scenarios predicted by
cosmological models (e.g., Cooper et al., 2010).

1.2.3 Unresolved features beyond the Local Group

Prior to recent dedicated CCD searches, only a few cases of extragalactic stellar tidal
streams have been reported in nearby spiral galaxies. Malin & Hadley (1997) found
two possible tidal streams surrounding the galaxies M 83 and M 104 by using special
contrast enhancement techniques on plates obtained for wide-ﬁeld photographic sur-
veys. Shortly thereafter, a study of the nearby, edge-on galaxy NGC 5907 by Shang
et al. (1998) employed deep CCD images to reveal an elliptical loop in the halo of
this galaxy, which they believed to be the remains of a tidally disrupted galaxy sim-
ilar in size to the Sagittarius dwarf galaxy (Sagittarius was at that time a recent dis-
covery in the Milky Way halo). Shang et al. also identiﬁed another Sagittarius-like
dwarf galaxy that they suggested might be interacting with the disk of NGC 5907,
causing the observed warp in HI. Their photometry reached surface brightnesses of
28.6 and 26.9 mag arcsec−2 in R and I-bands, respectively.

More recently, NGC 5907 was imaged by Mart´ınez-Delgado et al. (2008, Fig-
ure 1.3), revealing even fainter features of the stream. As shown in Figure 1.3,
this stream is prominently visible as an interwoven, rosette-like structure travers-
ing nearly 720◦ around NGC 5907. Detailed N-body modeling suggests that all of
the features can be reproduced from the accretion of a single, low-mass satellite
galaxy, with the stream tracing two full orbits of its progenitor. The presence of
such a long stream conﬁrms that a stellar substructure can survive several gigayears,
which though predicted by N-body simulations of tidally disrupted stellar systems
around the Milky Way (e.g., Law et al., 2005; Pe˜narrubia et al., 2005) lacked direct
conﬁrmation. Interestingly, the N-body model of Figure 1.3 was created using a pro-
genitor with orbital parameters similar those found for Sagittarius in the Milky Way
(Chapter 2). The model suggests that the fainter, outer loop material (blue points in
Figure 1.3) became unbound from its progenitor at least 3.6 Gyr ago. The substruc-
ture in NGC 5097 is one of the most striking examples of an external great-circle
tidal stream to date.

While some galaxies have great-circle tidal streams that resemble the Sagittarius
stream surrounding our Galaxy (e.g., in NGC 5907: Figure 1.3, or NGC 4013 and
M63: Figure 1.1), others have enormous structures that resemble open umbrellas,
and that extend over tens of kiloparsecs (e.g., the middle two panels in the bottom
row of Figure 1.2). These structures are often located on both sides of the host
galaxy, and display long narrow shafts that terminate in a giant shell of debris (e.g.,

1 Stellar Tidal Streams in External Galaxies

7

Fig. 1.3 Left: deep image of the stellar tidal stream around NGC 5907 obtained with the 0.5-meter
BBO telescope (Mart´ınez-Delgado et al., 2008). The great-circle morphology of this system is
likely very similar to that of the Sagittarius stream in the Milky Way. Right: N-body model of the
NGC 5907 stellar stream. The satellite is realized as a King model with an initial mass, King core
and tidal radii of M = 2× 108M(cid:12), rc = 0.39 kpc and rt = 2.7 kpc, respectively. Different colors
denote particles that became unbound after different pericentric passages, whereas black particles
are those that remain bound. The fainter, outer loop material (blue points) became unbound at least
3.6 Gyrs ago. For this particular model the orbital period is Tr = 0.9 Gyr.

NGC 4651; Foster et al., 2014). Another umbrella-like feature, dubbed the “dog
leg stream” (Amorisco et al., 2015), has a long narrow spoke (with an embedded
progenitor) that stretches to a radius of ∼ 150 kpc beyond the center of NGC 1097,
terminating in a “dog-leg” that appears like an umbrella feature with one half of the
shell missing (note that this system has other narrow plumes visible as well). With
such examples, we are beginning to see real streams around galaxies in the local
universe that resemble the menagerie of morphological features predicted by Λ-
CDM hierarchical structure formation models (e.g., Johnston et al., 2008; Cooper
et al., 2010, ; see also Chapter 6 of this volume).

While there have been numerous isolated discoveries of debris features around
external galaxies, there have been few large-scale systematic surveys to build a com-
prehensive census of halo substructures. Only such a survey can inform simulations
by providing estimates of the prevalence of streams of different morphologies, and
thus different progenitor masses, orbits, and infall times. One systematic search

8

Jeffrey L. Carlin, Rachael L. Beaton, David Mart´ınez-Delgado, and R. Jay Gabany

by Miskolczi et al. (2011) analyzed 474 galaxies in SDSS and found clear tidal
features around 6% of the galaxies, with 19% exhibiting some features above the
surface brightness limit of ∼ 28 mag arcsec−2. From imaging data in the Canada-
France-Hawaii Telescope Legacy Survey, Atkinson et al. (2013) ﬁnd tidal features
(including both minor and major merger events) around 12% of the galaxies im-
aged. Given that the Λ-CDM paradigm predicts that we should see accretion relics
around all Milky Way-sized galaxies, this ∼ 10% fraction from the SDSS/CFHT
studies would seem to suggest a signiﬁcant deﬁcit of detected accretion events rel-
ative to predictions. However, as illustrated in Figure 1.1 (see also Figure 1.6), the
surface brightness limits for most large scale surveys are simply too shallow to re-
veal the complex webs of substructure both predicted in simulations (e.g., Bullock
& Johnston, 2005) and observed locally in the Milky Way and M 31 (i.e., where
µ > 28 mag arcsec−2 can be attained using resolved stellar populations). However,
it is puzzling that no tidal stream currently known in the Milky Way or M31 is re-
motely as bright as the “faint limits” of these large scale searches (Sagittarius – by
far the brightest stream in the Milky Way – is only ∼30 mag arcsec−2 at about 30-40
deg. from the core, according to Mateo et al. 1998).

1.2.4 Resolved structures beyond the Local Group

With large aperture facilities equipped with wide-ﬁeld detectors, it is possible to
resolve individual stars in some tidal debris structures beyond the Milky Way and
M31. Perhaps the most spectacular example of this from ground-based observations
is the Milky Way analog NGC 891, at a distance of ≈ 10 Mpc, which was surveyed
by Mouhcine et al. (2010) with Suprime-Cam on the 8.2m Subaru telescope. With
very long (> 11-hr) exposures, this study resolved stars to ∼ 2 magnitudes below
the RGB tip in NGC 891, covering a ∼ 90× 90 kpc area around the galaxy down
to i-band magnitudes fainter than 28th mag (see Figure 1.4). Surface density maps
of RGB stars show a complex of features looping throughout the halo of NGC 891,
suggesting that the halo of this galaxy contains numerous accretion remnants. The
disk of NGC 891 also appears to be “super-thick” (Mouhcine et al., 2010), providing
further evidence of recent accretion. Another recent example of deep, ground-based
observations is the study by Greggio et al. (2014), who mapped the density of RGB
stars in the halo of the spiral galaxy NGC 253 at a distance of 3 Mpc using deep Z-
and J-band imaging from the VISTA telescope. As a whole, Greggio et al. found that
the halo of NGC 253 is fairly homogeneous out to ∼ 50 kpc, with the exception of a
∼20 kpc wide shell roughly 28 kpc from the plane that is interpreted to be the result
of a recent tidal interaction. While these ground-based studies are spectacular, the
extremely deep, large-area observations required to resolve individual RGB stars
in the accretion relics highlight the difﬁculty (or perhaps impossibility) of doing
similar work for large numbers of Milky Way analogs.

Alternatively, space based telescopes can provide the necessary spatial resolu-
tion and depth to trace extra-galactic substructures with individual stars, albeit over

1 Stellar Tidal Streams in External Galaxies

9

Fig. 1.4 Stellar density map of RGB stars with magnitudes 25.8 ≤ i0 ≤ 27.0 over a ∼ 90× 90 kpc
region surrounding the Milky Way analog galaxy NGC 891. Multiple interlocking loops and arc-
like (“great circle”) features are visible over vast regions of the NGC 891 halo. [Figure reproduced
by permission from Mouhcine et al. (2010).]

signiﬁcantly smaller angular scales than those on the ground (the HST+ACS ﬁeld
of view is ∼ 4(cid:48)). The HST+ACS GHOSTS survey (Radburn-Smith et al., 2011) re-
solved stars at the RGB tip and used them to map low surface brightness features
(to ΣV ∼ 30 mag arcsec−2) in the outer regions of 14 disk galaxies out to distances
of ∼17 Mpc. Bailin et al. (2011) began with GHOSTS images from HST for the
spiral galaxy NGC 253, and supplemented these with imaging over a much wider
ﬁeld of view with Magellan/IMACS, reaching well below the RGB tip. They esti-
mated the total stellar luminosity of the NGC 253 halo to be roughly twice that of
the Milky Way or M31, and ﬁt proﬁles to stellar densities out to ∼ 30 kpc from the
galaxy center. The shelf-like feature to the south that had been seen by Malin &

10

Jeffrey L. Carlin, Rachael L. Beaton, David Mart´ınez-Delgado, and R. Jay Gabany

Hadley (1997) in photographic plates is clearly visible, as well as other substructure
at the ∼kpc level. Thus, targeted follow-up, ground-based or space-based, for stellar
streams discovered in integrated light has the potential to build datasets complemen-
tary to those generated en masse for the Milky Way and M 31, reaching appropriate
physical spatial scales and surface brightnesses.

1.3 N-body modeling of streams

We now turn to discussion of what can be learned from the identiﬁcation and sub-
sequent theoretical modeling of tidal streams in galaxies beyond the Local Group.
In many of the examples illustrated in this chapter, we have shown N-body mod-
els of disrupting satellites that roughly reproduce the observed morphology of de-
tected streams. For example, for the great-circle tidal stream around NGC 5907
(Figure 1.3), an N-body model that best replicates the morphology of the observed
stream requires a massive Sgr-like galaxy that has spread debris over at least three
orbits. If this is the case, then the complex stream structure seen around this galaxy
can be entirely explained by a single accretion event. However, due to the difﬁ-
culty in measuring kinematics for low surface brightness tidal streams (and, indeed,
the impossibility of measuring kinematics of individual stars) at several Mpc away,
models must be constrained solely by the observed morphology and the stellar den-
sity along the stream. While the panoramic perspective we are afforded of these
systems offers many constraints on the properties of the progenitors and their orbits,
kinematics will ultimately be needed to fully characterize each accretion event.

It is possible that carefully chosen spectroscopic observations can derive bulk
kinematics of some tidal debris features around external galaxies. For example,
Sanderson & Helmi (2013) outlined a method to do this for tidal caustics (or
“shells”) via careful choice of spectroscopic ﬁber positioning and identiﬁcation of
the tell-tale velocity signature. A much more promising avenue is to use intrinsi-
cally brighter point-like tracers such as globular clusters, planetary nebulae, or HII
regions to elucidate debris structures. The densities of globular clusters have been
used (D’Abrusco et al., 2015) to show large structures in the halos of Virgo cluster
galaxies that may be evidence of recent accretion events.

An example of a stream in a distant galaxy for which kinematics have been mea-
sured and an orbit derived is that of the Umbrella Galaxy (NGC 4651). Foster et al.
(2014) followed up the low surface-brightness imaging of Mart´ınez-Delgado et al.
(2010) with even deeper imaging from the Subaru/Suprime-Cam instrument. Fig-
ure 1.5 shows images from this study, which reveal a “stick” feature extending out
to its terminus at a broad arc to the left of the main galaxy. On the opposite side of
the disk (right side of the upper panel in Figure 1.5), additional shell-like features
are clearly seen. Foster et al. (2014) estimated the total stellar mass in the tidal de-
bris to be ∼ 4× 108M(cid:12), constituting about 1/50th the stellar mass of NGC 4651. In
addition, Foster et al. (2014) obtained spectra of candidate globular clusters, plan-
etary nebulae, and HII regions that are spatially coincident with the substructures,

1 Stellar Tidal Streams in External Galaxies

11

Fig. 1.5 The stellar stream in NGC4651. Top: color image of the extensive tidal features in
NGC4651, including an “umbrella” and several shells of material. The stream has an exceptionally
blue color. Bottom left: several globular clusters (yellow circles), planetary nebulae (cyan dia-
monds), and HII regions (black triangles) are found along the debris. These bright tracers permit
kinematical probes that greatly enhance the ability of N-body modeling (bottom right) to elucidate
the physical parameters of the accretion event. [Reproduced from Foster et al. (2014).]

and distinguished the kinematical signature of the accreted debris (including a pos-
sible progenitor core) from the underlying galactic disk motions. The orbit derived
from these is rather radial (as expected for an umbrella-like remnant; see Chapter 6
of this volume), with pericenter of only a few kpc, apocenter of ∼ 40 kpc, and pe-
riod of ∼ 350 Myr. This implies that the ratio of total mass of the progenitor and
the whole of NGC 4651 is ∼ 0.15, making this minor merger event analogous to the
Sgr accretion in the Milky Way (see Chapter 2) and the Giant Stellar Stream in M31
(Chapter 8). While detailed exploration of parameter space has yet to be achieved
for this system, Foster et al. (2014) did adapt an existing N-body model to show that
some inferences can be made from analysis of the surface brightness and velocities
of the visible features and associated tracers.

As discussed in Chapter 7, the widths and surface brightnesses of streams that are
traced over a long portion of their orbits provide constraints on the number and sizes
of dark matter subhalos in the host galaxy’s halo (see, e.g. Ibata et al., 2002; John-
ston et al., 2002; Pe˜narrubia et al., 2006; Siegal-Gaskins & Valluri, 2008). These

12

Jeffrey L. Carlin, Rachael L. Beaton, David Mart´ınez-Delgado, and R. Jay Gabany

authors show that the presence of dark matter subhalos in spiral galaxies would re-
sult in progressive heating of tidal streams as a result of close encounters, and in fact
gaps may be swept out of streams by interactions with subhalos (e.g., Yoon et al.
2011; Carlberg 2013; Erkal & Belokurov 2014; Ngan et al. 2014). As Pe˜narrubia et
al. (2006) pointed out, the average number of dark matter substructures (and, thus,
the likelihood of encounters) in a Milky Way-like galaxy decreases monotonically
from z ∼ 2 to the present, implying that “old” stream pieces like the ones visible in
external galaxies are more likely to reveal perturbations than recently stripped ones.
Tidal debris structures can also be used as kinematical tracers of the underlying
gravitational potential in which they are produced (e.g., Johnston et al., 2001, ; see
Chapter 7 for detailed discussion). This has been attempted in the Milky Way us-
ing the Sgr streams (e.g., Law et al. 2005; Pe˜narrubia et al. 2005; Law & Majewski
2010a; see Chapter 2 of this volume for more discussion of Sagittarius). The use of
streams beyond the Local Group may ultimately become fruitful for this purpose, as
they can be traced over multiple wraps, providing much stronger constraints on the
level of stream precession due to the ﬂattening of the halo. Finally, old stream pieces
stretching over multiple orbital wraps allows us to study metallicity gradients in the
stream (and thus within the progenitor galaxy), as has been done for the Sgr tidal
stream (e.g., Bellazzini et al., 2006; Chou et al., 2007, Chapter 2 of this volume).
All of these techniques, and likely many others, applied to external galaxies pro-
vide valuable constraints on the hierarchical process of galaxy growth and evolution
beyond what can be gleaned from our embedded perspective in the Milky Way.

1.4 Stellar tidal streams as a galactic formation diagnostic

One of the main objectives of stream surveys in nearby spiral galaxies is to compare
the observations with cosmological simulations to ascertain whether the frequency
and surface brightness of the detected stellar streams are consistent with those pre-
dicted by models. Observational modeling and theoretical understanding of such
diffuse and intricate features requires speciﬁcally tailored cosmological numerical
simulations. There are two main difﬁculties for these models: i) sufﬁciently ﬁne
mass and spatial resolution is needed to recover complex and delicate tidal features
around Milky Way mass halos; and ii) a sufﬁcient volume is required to build a
statistically meaningful sample of host galaxies. To simultaneously meet these two
requirements, state-of-the-art cosmological simulations are needed. For this reason,
there are still a limited number of models of the stellar halos of Milky Way-like
galaxies. Examples include the models by Bullock & Johnston (2005, also described
in Chapter 5 of this volume) and high resolution models of individual stellar halos
for Milky Way-like galaxies based on the (dark matter only) Aquarius suite of sim-
ulations.

Numerical simulations (e.g., Johnston et al., 2008; Cooper et al., 2010) can be
used as a guide to what we may expect; models suggest that remnants of recent
(0-8 Gyr ago) accretion events, which correspond to the last few tens of percent of

1 Stellar Tidal Streams in External Galaxies

13

Fig. 1.6 Bottom row: externally-viewed snapshots showing the surface brightness of individual
accretion relics in models of Milky Way-like stellar halos by Johnston et al. (2008). The three
main morphological types identiﬁed in this study are illustrated: “great circle” streams (or “arcs”;
left panel) arise from satellites accreted ∼6-10 Gyr ago on nearly circular orbits; “cloudy” mor-
phologies (also dubbed “shells” or “plumes”; middle panel) arise from accretion events within the
past ∼ 8 Gyr that fell in on eccentric orbits; and “mixed”-type tidal remnants (right) arise from
ancient (more than 10 Gyr ago) accretion events that have had ample time to fully mix along their
orbits. Top row: observational archetypes of each type of tidal debris from the survey by Mart´ınez-
Delgado et al. (2010): great circle stream in NGC 5907 (left), shell-like features around NGC 4651
(middle); and “mixed” debris near NGC 5866 (right panel).

mass accretion for a Milky Way-like spiral, should remain visible as substructures in
presently observable stellar halos. These models also make predictions about what
can be physically inferred from an external, “global” view of stellar halos. For exam-
ple, from the shapes of debris remnants, we can infer the basic dynamical properties
of the progenitor – Johnston et al. (2008) demonstrates that tidal debris of differ-
ent morphologies each occupy different regions in the time of accretion vs. orbital
eccentricity/energy plane (see their Fig. 3), and that surface brightness also gives
evidence of both the time of accretion and the luminosity of a remnant’s progenitor
(see Fig. 4 of Johnston et al.). While this gives some general insight into properties
of the accretion events, there is considerable degeneracy in the inference of such
properties, which may best be thought of as providing reasonable estimates upon
which to base speciﬁc modeling of the accretion events.

14

Jeffrey L. Carlin, Rachael L. Beaton, David Mart´ınez-Delgado, and R. Jay Gabany

Figure 1.6 compares the predicted morphologies of model debris structures from
Johnston et al. (2008) to observed structures in external galaxies, demonstrating that
we see examples of the remnants predicted by the models in the local Universe. The
classiﬁcations of debris structures suggested by Johnston et al. include: “great cir-
cles” – streams that arise from satellites on nearly circular orbits that were accreted
∼ 6− 10 Gyr ago; “cloudy” morphologies (also known as “shells” or “plumes”) re-
sulting from recently-accreted (less than ∼ 8 Gyr ago) satellites that were on rather
destructive, radial orbits; and “mixed”-type tidal remnants from ancient accretion
events (more than ∼ 10 Gyr ago) that have had time to phase mix and become non-
descript. While these simulations make detailed predictions about the total num-
ber, frequencies, and speciﬁc properties of halo substructures, there is no analogous
observational data set to which these simulations can be compared en masse. As
demonstrated in Figure 1.6, some observational examples of different stream mor-
phologies have been identiﬁed in the local Universe, including “great circles” in
NGC 5907 (Shang et al., 1998; Mart´ınez-Delgado et al., 2008) and M 63 (Cho-
nis et al., 2011, see also Figure 1.1), the “plume”-like feature (or “umbrella”) in
NGC 4651 (Mart´ınez-Delgado et al., 2010), and a feature of “mixed” morphology
around NGC 1055 (Mart´ınez-Delgado et al., 2010).

Generally, it is easiest to infer the physical properties of great circle streams, as
the great circle is a reasonable tracer of the progenitor’s orbit. Analytical relation-
ships derived by Johnston et al. (2001) may be used to estimate the accretion time
and total (dark matter+stellar+gas) initial mass of the progenitor of a stream on a
great circle. Surface photometry across streams in multiple ﬁlters can be used to
infer the stellar populations and total stellar mass for the stream (similarly to inte-
grated light mapping of stellar mass surface density in external galaxies; e.g., Zibetti
et al. 2009). Variations in the optical colors along the stream can be used to infer
changes in the mean properties of the stellar populations, but are on the whole less
diagnostic than similar studies using resolved stars in the Local Group. However,
extraction of meaningful properties from the integrated light of streams requires
S/N>5-10 above the local background ﬂuctuations over a sufﬁciently wide area to
cover the full stream. Thus, not only must the image be deep, but the backgrounds
need to be well characterized. This can be seen in Figure 1.1, which shows that
while hints of debris may be identiﬁable in SDSS imaging (e.g., Beaton et al. 2014),
extraction of physical properties requires deep, well-characterized imaging.

Cooper et al. (2010) coupled the Aquarius simulations to a state-of-the-art semi-
analytic model known as GALFORM, which computes the properties (mass, size,
star formation history and chemical abundance) of the galaxy forming in each dark
matter halo. The GALFORM model is constrained through statistical comparisons
to collective properties of the cosmological galaxy population (for example, optical
and infrared luminosity functions), and by requiring that the surviving counterparts
reproduce the observed size-luminosity relationship for Milky Way dwarfs. To meet
these constraints, this technique demands ﬁne-grained simulations such as Aquarius
in order to adequately resolve the star-forming cores of satellite halos. This approach
results in a set of dynamically self-consistent N-body realizations of stellar halos
and their associated tidal streams at a resolution beyond the reach of current hydro-

1 Stellar Tidal Streams in External Galaxies

15

Fig. 1.7 Expected halo streams around a Milky Way-like galaxy from a simulation (Bullock &
Johnston, 2005). The ﬁgure shows an external perspective of one realization of a simulation within
the hierarchical framework, with streams resulting from tidally disrupted satellites. The snapshot
on the left is 300 kpc on a side (the virial radius for a Milky Way sized galaxy), and illustrates the
result of a typical accretion history for a Milky Way-like galaxy. Right panels: theoretical predic-
tions for the detectable tidal features in the same halo as the left panel, but assuming three different
surface brightness (SB) detection limits: A: µlim=28, B:µlim=29 and C: µlim= 30 mag arcsec−2.
Each snapshot is 100 kpc on a side. No discernible substructure is predicted for surveys with SB
limits brighter than ∼27–28 mag arcsec−2 (e.g., POSS-II and SDSS). This result also shows as the
number of tidal features visible on the outskirts of spirals depends dramatically on the SB limit of
the observations. Moreover, the brightest substructures tend to be from the most massive satellites,
which sample relatively rare accretion events (Johnston et al., 2008; Gilbert et al., 2009).

dynamical simulations (e.g., Abadi et al., 2006), and without the need to invoke
many of the approximations required by previous models (e.g., Bullock & Johnston,
2005). The individual star formation history of each satellite (and hence properties
such as stellar mass, luminosity and net metallicity) can be studied alongside the
full phase-space evolution of its stars.

Current models have sufﬁcient numbers of particles to resolve the main contrib-
utors of bright, coherent substructures that are similar to tidal features detected in
the current imaging surveys (e.g., Mart´ınez-Delgado et al., 2010). Thus it is pos-
sible to make sky-projected snapshots of these stellar halos from different viewing
angles and a selected photometric band. Each model halo has experienced a unique

16

Jeffrey L. Carlin, Rachael L. Beaton, David Mart´ınez-Delgado, and R. Jay Gabany

merging history and provides predicted surface brightness, morphologies and over-
all distribution of the observable streams, survival of the progenitors and stellar
populations (or mean colors), that can be compared with observational data. These
snapshots can be used as the input source for creating a mock catalogue of synthetic
images, which can be generated by adding simulated streams to real images includ-
ing all the observational effects of the telescopes (e.g., typical sky noise, ﬂat-ﬁeld
corrections, surface brightness limits, etc.) and contamination from other galactic
substructures (e.g., the stellar disk that is not directly simulated by models of this
type). An example of this technique using the Bullock & Johnston (2005) models as
input is shown in Figure 1.7. These mock observations give preliminary predictions
for the level of substructure detectable in the stellar halo of a nearby spiral for the
typical surface brightness limits of current imaging surveys. Moreover, additional
observational properties, like chemical compositions (both [Fe/H], [α/Fe]), can be
explored as they relate to the other properties of substructure, the most signiﬁcant
being the time since accretion and luminosity (or stellar mass), as was done by, e.g.,
Font et al. (2006).
The Bullock & Johnston (2005) halos all have some structure visible at surface
brightnesses of ∼27-28 mag arcsec−2. To surface brightnesses of ∼29 mag arcsec−2
there is ∼1 visible stream in each simulated halo, and typically about 2 vis-
ible streams above ∼30 mag arcsec−2. The majority of the substructure, and
thus the majority of the accretion history, is at surface brightnesses fainter than
∼30 mag arcsec−2. The degeneracy between the luminosity of the satellite, its ac-
cretion time, and its surface brightness is studied in depth by Johnston et al. (2008).
Our inability to see the fainter streams, which were either accreted earlier or come
from lower luminosity progenitors, implies that our view of halo substructure be-
yond the Local Group will be dominated by the most recent and/or most massive
accretion event, and, in either case, the most metal rich populations (Johnston et al.,
2008; Gilbert et al., 2009). Moreover, more massive accretion events tend to pref-
erentially populate the innermost regions of the halo (Rproj < 30 kpc), as dynamical
friction, which is more effective for more massive satellites, will cause the orbit of
the progenitor to degrade (Johnston et al., 2008). Thus, our view of extragalactic
tidal streams at relatively shallow surface brightness limits (i.e., those of POSS and
SDSS) is highly biased to a speciﬁc subset of accretion events that are relatively rare
for Milky Way sized galaxies.

1.5 The role of interactions within dwarf galaxy halos

Hierarchical formation models predict substructure should exist on all scales, not
just around relatively massive galaxies like the Milky Way. Thus, exploration of
the extended stellar structures of dwarf galaxies should reveal similar tidal features
to those previously discussed. We ﬁrst discuss the observational evidence for ha-
los around dwarf galaxies and, in particular, for substructure in dwarf galaxy ha-
los. Second, we discuss the impact that the creation of such substructures would

1 Stellar Tidal Streams in External Galaxies

17

have on dwarf galaxies. Understanding the formation and evolution of dwarf galax-
ies is particularly vital to form realistic “initial conditions” for simulations and
to make highly detailed predictions of substructure properties. For many reasons,
extra-galactic systems are best suited for these explorations.

1.5.1 Observational evidence for substructure at dwarf galaxy

scales

In the process of hierarchical structure formation, it is likely that some of the most
massive satellite dwarf galaxies themselves host their own, even smaller satellites
(dwarf spheroidals –“dSphs” – or globular clusters). In the Milky Way, we know
that the most massive classical dwarf galaxies have globular clusters associated with
them – speciﬁcally the Large Magellanic Cloud, the Small Magellanic Cloud, and
the Fornax dSph (e.g., Forbes et al., 2000), as well as the Sagittarius tidal stream
(e.g., Law & Majewski, 2010b). The most massive Milky Way satellite, the Large
Magellanic Cloud (LMC), is itself part of a bound pair of dwarf irregular galaxies
(with the Small Magellanic Cloud, or SMC). Thus, we would expect to ﬁnd evidence
of tidal interaction around dwarf galaxies, analogous to the features we see in halos
of more massive galaxies. The majority of the dwarf galaxies in the Local Group are
satellites, which have experienced interactions with their more massive host. Thus, it
can be difﬁcult to disentangle effects on the dwarf created during the accretion by its
parent from those it experienced before falling in. Studying external, isolated dwarf
galaxies may prove a more effective means of understanding the role of hierarchical
formation, including the role interactions may have in forming the Hubble sequence
at low masses.
In fact, many of the unique features of the LMC-SMC pair can be explained
by their binary interaction (e.g., Besla et al., 2012), including the spectacular 200◦
Magellanic Stream in HI (Nidever et al., 2010). Binary pairs are somewhat rare,
as Robotham et al. (2012) ﬁnd only two MW+LMC+SMC analog systems among
the Galaxy Mass Assembly (GAMA) galaxies. While only 3.4% percent of GAMA
galaxies are MW+LMC+SMC analogs, 12% of SDSS galaxies have LMC-like com-
panions (i.e., luminous satellite within 75 kpc; Tollerud et al., 2011), which sug-
gests that about one in four LMC-like satellites have a smaller SMC-like compan-
ion. The relatively low fraction of LMC-SMC binary satellite systems supports a
“transient” nature, as detailed numerical simulations of the LMC-SMC suggest they
may not remain a bound pair for long (Besla et al., 2012). In fact, it has been sug-
gested (e.g., D’Onghia & Lake 2008) that satellites should often fall in as pairs
or in groups, rather than individually, and the dwarf galaxies found at the edge of
the Local Group (representing future accretions) are grouped (e.g., Mateo, 1998;
McConnachie, 2012). Thus, we would expect to ﬁnd evidence of tidal interaction
around dwarf galaxies, analogous to the features we see in halos of more massive
galaxies.

18

Jeffrey L. Carlin, Rachael L. Beaton, David Mart´ınez-Delgado, and R. Jay Gabany

Wide-ﬁeld optical and near-infrared imaging has revealed stellar halos around
many star-forming dwarf galaxies in and beyond the Local Group (see Stinson et
al. 2009 for an extensive listing of many of these). While Stinson et al. determined
that these extended stellar envelopes are not likely to arise due to tidal interactions
with the (larger) host galaxies, it has not been determined whether they are the
result of interactions with smaller satellites. Large area surveys of the most massive
dwarf galaxies in the Local Group also indicate the presence of extended, “halo-
like” stellar populations at large effective radii, including M 33 (McConnachie et
al., 2009), the LMC (Nidever et al., 2007), and the SMC (Nidever et al., 2011).
Further characterization, including full kinematic proﬁles, is necessary to determine
if these extended structures are lower mass versions of the halos found around Milky
Way sized galaxies.

One of the many probable dwarf galaxies discovered by Karachentsev et al.
(2007) was an elongated feature near the dwarf irregular galaxy NGC 4449 in Dig-
itized Sky Survey (POSS-II) plates (denoted as object “d1228+4358” in their cat-
alog). NGC 4449 is a dwarf starburst galaxy with an irregular morphology, with
luminosity (MV = 18.6) similar to that of the LMC, but with much stronger and
more widespread ongoing star-formation activity. Its cold gas and HII regions ex-
hibit peculiar kinematics (Hartmann et al., 1986; Hunter et al., 1998), suggesting
that it may have recently interacted with another galaxy. Using deep, wide-ﬁeld
imaging around NGC 4449, Mart´ınez-Delgado et al. (2012) deﬁnitively identiﬁed
the Karachentsev et al. feature as a dwarf galaxy undergoing accretion by NGC 4449
(see Figure 1.8). This new dwarf galaxy was also seen by Rich et al. (2012) in a sim-
ilar deep-imaging survey, which revealed the dwarf (dubbed NGC 4449B) and its
S-shaped morphology that is characteristic of disrupting satellites. After ﬁtting and
subtracting a halo model, Rich et al. showed additional arcs and possible disk rip-
ple features in the residual stellar surface brightness maps, along with evidence for
a break in the surface brightness proﬁle of the NGC 4449 stellar halo. The mor-
phology, size, luminosity, and surface brightness proﬁle of the newly discovered
stream/dwarf, along with evidence of tidal features in the NGC 4449 halo and outer
disk, was suggested by Rich et al. (2012) to result from a dwarf (NGC 4449B) that
is on its ﬁrst passage, and passed near the center of its host ∼ 108 yr ago. Thus,
NGC 4449 is the ﬁrst direct evidence of hierarchical structure formation similar to
that seen in Milky Way-type galaxies, but on the mass scale of dwarf galaxies.

1.5.2 Implications of dwarf-dwarf interactions

It is worth noting that the ﬁrst stream from a dwarf-galaxy accretion event was found
around one of the most intensely star-forming nearby galaxies. This leads one to
wonder whether such accretion events are common among dwarf galaxies in recent
epochs. It is possible that exact analogs to this stream have not been noticed in POSS
or SDSS images because they are uncommon. However, another explanation is that
the majority of such structures are fainter, more diffuse, or at a larger radius than

1 Stellar Tidal Streams in External Galaxies

19

Fig. 1.8 The stellar stream around the dwarf galaxy NGC 4449. Left: greyscale image from
Mart´ınez-Delgado et al. (2012) with a color inset for the galaxy, which clearly indicates the pres-
ence of an S-shaped tidal stream approximately 7 kpc in length. There is no clear association
with any of the existing HI gas features (Hunter et al., 1998). Right: Subaru telescope sub-arcsec
resolution image of the stellar stream (Mart´ınez-Delgado et al., 2012). This is one of the few extra-
galactic stellar streams that has been resolved into individual stars, which provides direct probes
of its stellar populations.

the NGC 4449 stream, and thus await future detection. If streams as in NGC 4449
are common around dwarfs, they re-ignite classic ideas about galaxy interactions
triggering starbursts. Given the high rates of star formation in dwarf galaxies, it is
natural to ask if satellites are responsible. Surveys along these lines have produced
mixed results (Noeske et al., 2001; Brosch et al., 2004; Li et al., 2008), but these
studies were not looking for objects like the detected dwarf satellite of NGC 4449 –
a gas poor, low-surface brightness analog to the Local Group dSphs – and did not
probe appropriate depths to ﬁnd these objects. Regardless of the implications for
starbursts, evidence from NGC 4449 and the Fornax dSph, which shows traces of
having swallowed a smaller dSph (Coleman et al., 2005), suggests that accretion of
even smaller building blocks is a viable avenue for direct assembly of dwarf galaxy
stellar halos.

It has been proposed that dSphs orbiting massive galaxies such as the Milky Way
may be the result of “pre-processing” which is a term for the effects of interactions
within groups of dwarf galaxies (e.g., D’Onghia et al., 2009). More speciﬁcally, it
has been suggested that the dSphs were once gas-rich, rotationally supported objects
like the ﬁeld galaxies (i.e., similar to NGC 4449) whose properties were modiﬁed

20

Jeffrey L. Carlin, Rachael L. Beaton, David Mart´ınez-Delgado, and R. Jay Gabany

into the gas-free, dispersion supported dSphs via interactions with companions. This
is a compelling scenario for the class of dwarf galaxies in the Local Group known
as “dwarf Transition” objects (see Mateo, 1998; Grebel, 1999, among others),
whose properties are intermediate between those of dIrrs and dSphs. Evidence of a
dwarf-dwarf interaction in NGC 4449, in conjunction with the known HI streams
around this dwarf galaxy, may thus demonstrate such a process in action. More-
over, Nidever et al. (2013) identiﬁed an HI ﬁlament associated with the M 31 dwarf
satellite IC 10. The dynamics and orientation of the stream are inconsistent with the
orbital parameters of IC 10, and Nidever et al. (2013) suggest that the stream and
other atypical HI features in the IC 10 disk could be explained via interaction with
a “stealth” companion.

Wetzel et al. (2015) used the ELVIS simulations to explore the frequency of
“pre-processing” for satellites within a simulated Milky Way host and found that
nearly half of all satellites with stellar masses less than 106 solar masses were pre-
processed in a more massive satellite halo. More generally, satellites with lower
stellar masses or those closer to their host are more likely to have undergone pre-
processing. Recent observational work for the Milky Way and M 31 also provides
hints of associated satellites or debris, including potential satellites with similar line-
of-sight velocities (e.g., Chapman et al., 2007; Martin et al., 2009; Tollerud et al.,
2012) and potential kinematic associations between substructures (e.g., Deason et
al., 2014). While these initial probes are tantalizing, full phase space realizations of
these objects that are only permitted via precision distances and proper motions are
required to fully explore these associations locally. Moreover, though it is tempting
to explain morphological transitions with dwarf-dwarf interactions, there is signiﬁ-
cant degeneracy with other physical processes that can alter HI morphologies even
at large radius in a group environment, for instance the effects of ram pressure from
the hot gaseous halo can be quite dramatic (see case studies in McConnachie et al.,
2007; Kenney et al., 2014) and many isolated gas-poor dwarfs could be the result
of “ﬂy-by” interactions with their host (see Teyssier et al., 2012). However, the HI
debris created by dwarf-dwarf interactions and ram pressure are different, and ﬁnd-
ing more dwarf galaxies in “distress” will reveal the relative importance of these
processes, which also have implications for their halo substructures.

A dramatic example of an ongoing dwarf-dwarf interaction was seen by Paudel et
al. (2015), who found a pair of dwarf galaxies connected by a 15 kpc stellar bridge.
The HI disk for one of the galaxies is “completely destroyed” and there are several
knots of star formation that have global properties similar to either young globu-
lar clusters or ultra-compact dwarf galaxies. The Paudel et al. (2015) dwarf-dwarf
merger bears a striking resemblance to a scaled down version of equal mass mergers
at larger total masses. The importance of dwarf interactions in shaping stellar popu-
lations of low-mass galaxies is highlighted in a recent systematic, multi-wavelength
study of the relative star formation rates in interacting pairs of dwarf galaxies (TiNy
Titans, or TNTs) by Stierwalt et al. (2014). This work found clear evidence of star
formation enhancement (by a factor of ∼ 2.3± 0.7) among paired dwarfs relative
to their unpaired counterparts. This enhancement occurs even in interacting pairs
that are isolated by D > 1.5 Mpc from their nearest massive neighbor, showing that

1 Stellar Tidal Streams in External Galaxies

21

galaxy interactions are a frequent driver of enhanced star formation even outside
the inﬂuence of larger galaxies. The Stierwalt et al. 2014 study also ﬁnds a factor
of ∼ 3 increase in the fraction of paired dwarfs that are starbursting relative to sin-
gle dwarfs, further highlighting the role of interactions in triggering star forming
episodes. Thus far, though, stellar tidal debris signatures of these dwarf-dwarf inter-
actions have not been identiﬁed. [Note that this study is limited to pairs of mass ratio
(M1/M2)∗ < 10, while the disrupting companion to NGC 4449 has about 1/50th its
stellar mass (Mart´ınez-Delgado et al., 2012).]

1.6 Induced star formation, disk structure, and tidal streams

Simulations of structure formation on galactic scales in the prevailing ΛCDM
paradigm predict that Milky Way-sized host galaxies should accrete several mas-
sive satellites from z (cid:39) 1 to the present. We now consider the effects of these inter-
actions on the disk of the parent galaxy. Given the signiﬁcantly shorter dynamical
timescales in the disk, the potential effects of a even a minor accretion event could
be profound. In particular, such events could incite abnormal structures in dissipa-
tional HI disks, either creating features after a pass through or creating large scale,
global distortions in the HI structure. In the stellar component of the disk, the effects
could be both more subtle and more long lived.

One example of a burst of star formation in a Milky Way-like galaxy with an
associated recent accretion event is seen in NGC 5387 (Beaton et al., 2014, note
that NGC 5387 can be considered a Milky Way analog based on its properties, but
contains about an order of magnitude less mass than the MW). This system shows
a low surface-brightness feature in SDSS imaging, that was explored with deeper
imaging by Beaton et al., who found a stellar stream extending over at least an en-
tire orbital wrap, with median surface brightness of ∼24.5 mag arcsec−2 in R-band
(see Figure 1.9). This stream has a redder color than the typical stellar populations
of NGC 5387, and contains a total stellar mass of ∼ 6× 108M(cid:12). Coincident with
the position of the stream’s crossing of the NGC 5387 disk is a “blue overdensity”
that is not only blue in optical colors, but is producing a large FUV ﬂux as well.
Evidence from the FUV ﬂux as well as follow-up spectra obtained by Beaton et
al. (2014) suggests a very recent (∼ 8 Myr ago) star formation event of total stel-
lar mass 2.5± 1.3× 107M(cid:12). Beaton et al. conclude that this blue overdensity is a
complex of multiple HII regions produced by star formation either induced in the
disk by the minor merger event, or in the dwarf galaxy progenitor of the stream
itself. Whichever scenario is shown to be true, it is clear that the blue overdensity
and its associated tidal stream represent star formation induced by the accretion of
a satellite about 1/50th the mass of its host.

The presence of tidal streams encircling galaxies with warped disks (see, e.g.,
Mart´ınez-Delgado et al. 2008) may suggest satellite galaxy perturbations as the ori-
gin of those disk features (e.g., Velazquez & White 1999; Weinberg & Blitz 2006).
This suggests that promising galaxies to search for extragalactic tidal streams are

22

Jeffrey L. Carlin, Rachael L. Beaton, David Mart´ınez-Delgado, and R. Jay Gabany

Fig. 1.9 Images of the stream and associated blue overdensity in NGC 5387. The left panel is the
R-band image from the VATT, with the SDSS color image inlaid in the central regions, and clearly
shows a full wrap of tidal debris about the disk of NGC 5387. The right panel shows a merged
image composed of the SDSS, VATT, and GALEX FUV images, which more clearly highlights
the blue overdensity near the northernmost edge of the disk of NGC 5387. The inset in the right
panel is a schematic highlighting the disk in dark gray, the stream as a lighter gray loop, the blue
overdensity as a blue circle, and two foreground stars. [Reproduced from Beaton et al. (2014).]

those that display disk asymmetries in optical or HI images that may result from
gravitational interaction with the tidally disrupting companions. One striking case

1 Stellar Tidal Streams in External Galaxies

23

of such a system is NGC 4013, an isolated spiral galaxy with a prominent HI warp
(Bottema et al., 1987) that has been revealed by deep imaging (Mart´ınez-Delgado et
al., 2009) to contain a faint loop-like stellar tidal stream at fairly low inclination to
the disk (see the upper panels of Figure 1.1). The sky-projected morphology of this
structure displays a remarkable resemblance to an edge-on view of models of the
Monoceros Ring feature (see Chapter 3) in the Milky Way as a tidal debris structure
(Pe˜narrubia et al., 2005). This suggests that the progenitor system of the NGC 4013
stream may have been a low-mass satellite on a low-inclination, nearly-circular or-
bit that was accreted approximately ∼ 2.8 Gyr ago. Stellar streams have also been
discovered in the warped spiral galaxies NGC 5907 (Mart´ınez-Delgado et al., 2008,
see also Figure 1.3) and M 63 (Chonis et al., 2011, see also Figure 1.1), showing
that disks that are apparently undisturbed as seen in the optical, but warped in HI
maps, may reveal signatures of recent accretion events in deep imaging surveys

It has been shown that such accretion events should lead to strong warping, ﬂar-
ing, and thickening of an initially cold stellar disk (Kazantzidis et al., 2008), and to
the generation of bars and spiral structure (e.g., Toomre & Toomre 1972; Gauthier
et al. 2006; Dubinski & Chakrabarty 2009; Purcell et al. 2011). Such perturbations
may also lead to the formation of long-lived, ring like stellar features in the outer
reaches of the disk that may extend several kiloparsecs from the disk plane, and have
surface brightnesses in the range of 25-30 mag arcsec−2 (see Fig. 6 of Kazantzidis
et al. 2008). Indeed, observations in the Milky Way are uncovering wave like pertur-
bations in the disk in stellar densities (Widrow et al., 2012; Yanny & Gardner, 2013;
Xu et al., 2015) and velocities (G´omez et al., 2012a,b; Carlin et al., 2013; Williams
et al., 2013), with an accompanying array of simulations predicting the formation
of such features (e.g., Chakrabarti & Blitz 2009; Michel-Dansac et al. 2011; Purcell
et al. 2011; G´omez et al. 2013; Faure et al. 2014; Widrow et al. 2014). Evidence
for dynamically heated populations is not unique to the Milky Way – Dorman et al.
(2013) have identiﬁed a kinematically cold population in the halo of M31.

1.7 Future prospects

While the study of tidal streams from major mergers/encounters (1:3 mass ratio)
or even minor encounters (1:3 to 1:10 mass ratio) is an old ﬁeld, the extension of
these studies to those streams formed by satellite galaxies, a.k.a., micro-mergers
(mass ratio < 1:10), is a relatively new area of exploration. Study of mergers on
this mass scale provide a direct way of addressing some open questions on galac-
tic formation and evolution. In the last decade, the observational effort has yielded
an unprecedented sample of bright stellar streams in nearby spiral galaxies, includ-
ing the discovery of observational analogs to the canonical morphologies found in
N-body models of stellar halos (Johnston et al. 2008; see chapter 6). This offers
a unique opportunity to study in detail the apparently still dramatic last stages of
galaxy assembly in the local universe and to probe the anticipated estimates of fre-
quency of tidal stellar features from the Λ-CDM paradigm for MW-sized galaxies.

24

Jeffrey L. Carlin, Rachael L. Beaton, David Mart´ınez-Delgado, and R. Jay Gabany

spiral galaxies?

and are tidal streams as common as predicted by cosmological models?

Moreover, these discoveries demonstrate the need for deep, wide-ﬁeld imaging that
pushes fainter than current surveys in order to visualize external galaxy halos on
par with the highly substructured portrait of our own Milky Way and M 31. Such
studies will address the following key questions (among others) on several aspects
of hierarchical galaxy formation:
• How many tidal debris features still exist as recognizable substructures in nearby
• Is the abundant number of stellar streams exceptional in the Local Group spirals,
• At what rate are stellar streams still forming in the local Universe?
• Are the tidal stream properties (e.g., mean surface brightness) observed in the
• What can we learn about baryonic processes within dark matter halos from ob-
• What is the (stellar) mass spectrum of the streams, and hence the mass spectrum
• What is the fraction of halo stars attributable (within data limitations) to distinct
• Do all dwarf galaxies contain evidence of hierarchical accretion, and what is the
role of such interactions in forming the progenitors of streams in larger galaxies?
• Do streams (or their progenitor satellites) contribute to disk heating and the for-
• What is the incidence of low-inclination streams and what is their role in re-

local Universe consistent with predictions from Λ-CDM simulations?

of the progenitor satellites?

structures?

servations of these stellar halo substructures?

mation of morphological perturbations observed in nearby galaxies?

shaping the outer disks of nearby spiral galaxies?

The study of external tidal streams also has the potential to tackle a signiﬁcant
number of other topics that are the focus of current astrophysical research (e.g.,
stellar populations of halos, the resilience of the disks involved with minor mergers,
accretion of globular clusters, induced star formation in streams, near-ﬁeld cosmol-
ogy, satellite dynamics, dark matter halo shapes, etc.). In particular, the interpre-
tation of global properties of galaxy halos and outer disks from resolved stellar
populations (from, e.g., the Hubble Space Telescope survey GHOSTS; Radburn-
Smith et al. 2011, or the CALIFA high-resolution spectroscopy survey of nearby
stellar systems; S´anchez et al. 2013) requires understanding the role and prevalence
of tidal debris in galaxy halos. In addition, studying stellar population gradients
along tidal streams via deep HST photometric data (see, e.g., Aloisi et al. 2005) will
render important constraints on the effect of tides on the stellar formation history
of dwarf galaxies. The panoramic view of tidal streams in external galaxies also
offers an excellent opportunity to demonstrate tidal stripping of globular clusters
formed in satellite galaxies, which may correspond to an important fraction of the
globular cluster population of the host, as earlier proposed by Searle & Zinn (1978).
Ultimately, the ideal scenario would require resolving stellar populations in large
numbers of galaxies at distances of 10-20 Mpc, which will be feasible in the next
one or two decades with thirty-meter class ground-based telescopes or the proposed
suite of space-based instrumentation.

1 Stellar Tidal Streams in External Galaxies

25

Finally, the future census of tidal streams and their properties will also provide
an essential framework for exploring whether the Milky Way is a template for the
archetypal spiral galaxy. The next generation of galactic surveys (LSST) and fu-
ture astrometric space missions (Gaia) will dissect the structure and formation of
the Milky Way with unprecedented detail, leading to a revolutionary improvement
of our understanding of the Galaxy. In this regard, the study of these structures in
external systems will be complementary in interpreting this local Galactic archae-
ological data in the context of galaxy formation and evolution, providing unique
data in order to quantify how typical the Milky Way is with respect to other nearby
galaxies of its type.

Acknowledgements JLC gratefully acknowledges support from the NSF under grants AST 09-
37523 and AST 14-09421.

References

Abadi, M. G., Navarro, J. F., & Steinmetz, M. 2006, MNRAS, 365, 747
Aloisi, A., van der Marel, R. P., Mack, J., et al. 2005, ApJ Lett, 631, L45
Amorisco, N. C., Martinez-Delgado, D., & Schedler, J. 2015, arXiv:1504.03697
Arp, H. 1966, ApJ Supp, 14, 1
Atkinson, A. M., Abraham, R. G., & Ferguson, A. M. N. 2013, ApJ, 765, 28
Bailin, J., Bell, E. F., Chappell, S. N., Radburn-Smith, D. J., & de Jong, R. S. 2011,

ApJ, 736, 24

A&A, 457, L21

Beaton, R. L., Mart´ınez-Delgado, D., Majewski, S. R., et al. 2014, ApJ, 790, 117
Bellazzini, M., Newberg, H. J., Correnti, M., Ferraro, F. R., & Monaco, L. 2006,

Belokurov, V., Zucker, D. B., Evans, N. W., et al. 2006, ApJ Lett, 642, L137
Besla, G., Kallivayalil, N., Hernquist, L., et al. 2012, MNRAS, 421, 2109
Bottema, R., Shostak, G. S., & van der Kruit, P. C. 1987, Nature, 328, 401
Brosch, N., Almoznino, E., & Heller, A. B. 2004, MNRAS, 349, 357
Bullock, J. S., & Johnston, K. V. 2005, ApJ, 635, 931
Carlberg, R. G. 2013, ApJ, 775, 90
Carlin, J. L., DeLaunay, J., Newberg, H. J., et al. 2013, ApJ Lett, 777, LL5
Chakrabarti, S., & Blitz, L. 2009, MNRAS, 399, L118
Chapman, S. C., Pe˜narrubia, J., Ibata, R., et al. 2007, ApJ Lett, 662, L79
Chonis, T. S., Mart´ınez-Delgado, D., Gabany, R. J., et al. 2011, AJ, 142, 166
Chou, M.-Y., Majewski, S. R., Cunha, K., et al. 2007, ApJ, 670, 346
Coleman, M. G., Da Costa, G. S., Bland-Hawthorn, J., & Freeman, K. C. 2005, AJ,

129, 1443

Cooper, A. P., Cole, S., Frenk, C. S., et al. 2010, MNRAS, 406, 744
D’Abrusco, R., Fabbiano, G., & Zezas, A. 2015, ApJ accepted (arXiv:1503.04819)
Deason, A. J., Belokurov, V., Hamren, K. M., et al. 2014, MNRAS, 444, 3975
D’Onghia, E., & Lake, G. 2008, ApJ Lett, 686, L61

26

Jeffrey L. Carlin, Rachael L. Beaton, David Mart´ınez-Delgado, and R. Jay Gabany

D’Onghia, E., Besla, G., Cox, T. J., & Hernquist, L. 2009, Nature, 460, 605
Dorman, C. E., Widrow, L. M., Guhathakurta, P., et al. 2013, ApJ, 779, 103
Dubinski, J., & Chakrabarty, D. 2009, ApJ, 703, 2068
Erkal, D., & Belokurov, V. 2014, arXiv:1412.6035
Fabian, A. C., Nulsen, P. E. J., & Stewart, G. C. 1980, Nature, 287, 613
Faure, C., Siebert, A., & Famaey, B. 2014, MNRAS, 440, 2564
Ferguson, A. M. N., Irwin, M. J., Ibata, R. A., Lewis, G. F., & Tanvir, N. R. 2002,

AJ, 124, 1452

Font, A. S., Johnston, K. V., Bullock, J. S., & Robertson, B. E. 2006, ApJ, 646, 886
Forbes, D. A., Masters, K. L., Minniti, D., & Barmby, P. 2000, A&A, 358, 471
Foster, C., Lux, H., Romanowsky, A. J., et al. 2014, MNRAS, 442, 3544
Gauthier, J.-R., Dubinski, J., & Widrow, L. M. 2006, ApJ, 653, 1180
Gilbert, K. M., Font, A. S., Johnston, K. V., & Guhathakurta, P. 2009, ApJ, 701, 776
Gilbert, K. M., Guhathakurta, P., Beaton, R. L., et al. 2012, ApJ, 760, 76
G´omez, F. A., Minchev, I., Villalobos, ´A., O’Shea, B. W., & Williams, M. E. K.

2012a, MNRAS, 419, 2163

G´omez, F. A., Minchev, I., O’Shea, B. W., et al. 2012b, MNRAS, 423, 3727
G´omez, F. A., Minchev, I., O’Shea, B. W., et al. 2013, MNRAS, 429, 159
Grebel, E. K. 1999, The Stellar Content of Local Group Galaxies, 192, 17
Greggio, L., Rejkuba, M., Gonzalez, O. A., et al. 2014, A&A, 562, AA73
Hartmann, L. W., Geller, M. J., & Huchra, J. P. 1986, AJ, 92, 1278
Hunter, D. A., Wilcots, E. M., van Woerden, H., Gallagher, J. S., & Kohle, S. 1998,

ApJ Lett, 495, L47

49

Ibata, R., Irwin, M., Lewis, G., Ferguson, A. M. N., & Tanvir, N. 2001, Nature, 412,

Ibata, R. A., Lewis, G. F., Irwin, M. J., & Quinn, T. 2002, MNRAS, 332, 915
Johnston, K. V., Sackett, P. D., & Bullock, J. S. 2001, ApJ, 557, 137
Johnston, K. V., Spergel, D. N., & Haydn, C. 2002, ApJ, 570, 656
Johnston, K. V., Bullock, J. S., Sharma, S., et al. 2008, ApJ, 689, 936
Karachentsev, I. D., Karachentseva, V. E., & Huchtmeier, W. K. 2007, Astronomy

Letters, 33, 512

2008, ApJ, 688, 254

Kazantzidis, S., Bullock, J. S., Zentner, A. R., Kravtsov, A. V., & Moustakas, L. A.

Kenney, J. D. P., Geha, M., J´achym, P., et al. 2014, ApJ, 780, 119
Law, D. R., Johnston, K. V., & Majewski, S. R. 2005, ApJ, 619, 807
Law, D. R., & Majewski, S. R. 2010a, ApJ, 714, 229
Law, D. R., & Majewski, S. R. 2010b, ApJ, 718, 1128
Li, C., Kauffmann, G., Heckman, T. M., Jing, Y. P., & White, S. D. M. 2008, MN-

RAS, 385, 1903

Malin, D. F. 1981, AAS Photo Bulletin, 27, #....4
Malin, D., & Hadley, B. 1997, PASA, 14, 52
Martin, N. F., McConnachie, A. W., Irwin, M., et al. 2009, ApJ, 705, 758
Mart´ınez-Delgado, D., Pe˜narrubia, J., Gabany, R. J., et al. 2008, ApJ, 689, 184
Mart´ınez-Delgado, D., Pohlen, M., Gabany, R. J., et al. 2009, ApJ, 692, 955
Mart´ınez-Delgado, D., Gabany, R. J., Crawford, K., et al. 2010, AJ, 140, 962

1 Stellar Tidal Streams in External Galaxies

27

Mart´ınez-Delgado, D., Romanowsky, A. J., Gabany, R. J., et al. 2012, ApJ Lett, 748,

Mart´ınez-Delgado, D., D’Onghia, E., Chonis, T. S., et al. 2014, arXiv:1410.6368
Mateo, M. L. 1998, ARA&A, 36, 435
Mateo, M., Olszewski, E. W., & Morrison, H. L. 1998, ApJ Lett, 508, L55
McConnachie, A. W., Venn, K. A., Irwin, M. J., Young, L. M., & Geehan, J. J. 2007,

ApJ Lett, 671, L33

McConnachie, A. W., Irwin, M. J., Ibata, R. A., et al. 2009, Nature, 461, 66
McConnachie, A. W. 2012, AJ, 144, 4
Michel-Dansac, L., Abadi, M. G., Navarro, J. F., & Steinmetz, M. 2011, MNRAS,

Miskolczi, A., Bomans, D. J., & Dettmar, R.-J. 2011, A&A, 536, AA66
Mouhcine, M., Ibata, R., & Rejkuba, M. 2010, ApJ Lett, 714, L12
Mutch, S. J., Croton, D. J., & Poole, G. B. 2011, ApJ, 736, 84
Ngan, W., Bozek, B., Carlberg, R. G., et al. 2014, arXiv:1411.3760
Nidever, D. L., Majewski, S. R., Munoz, R. R., et al. 2007, Bulletin of the American

Astronomical Society, 39, #113.01

Nidever, D. L., Majewski, S. R., Butler Burton, W., & Nigra, L. 2010, ApJ, 723,

LL24

414, L1

1618

Nidever, D. L., Majewski, S. R., Mu˜noz, R. R., et al. 2011, ApJ Lett, 733, L10
Nidever, D. L., Ashley, T., Slater, C. T., et al. 2013, ApJ Lett, 779, L15
Noeske, K. G., Iglesias-P´aramo, J., V´ılchez, J. M.,Papaderos, P., & Fricke, K. J.

2001, A&A, 371, 806

Paudel, S., Duc, P. A., & Ree, C. H. 2015, AJ, 149, 114
Pe˜narrubia, J., Mart´ınez-Delgado, D., Rix, H. W., et al. 2005, ApJ, 626, 128
Pe˜narrubia, J., Benson, A. J., Mart´ınez-Delgado, D., & Rix, H. W. 2006, ApJ, 645,

240

Nature, 477, 301

Purcell, C. W., Bullock, J. S., Tollerud, E. J., Rocha, M., & Chakrabarti, S. 2011,

Quinn, P. J. 1984, ApJ, 279, 596
Radburn-Smith, D. J., de Jong, R. S., Seth, A. C., et al. 2011, ApJ Supp, 195, 18
Rich, R. M., Collins, M. L. M., Black, C. M., et al. 2012, Nature, 482, 192
Robotham, A. S. G., Baldry, I. K., Bland-Hawthorn, J., et al. 2012, MNRAS, 424,

1448

S´anchez, S. F., Rosales-Ortega, F. F., Jungwiert, B., et al. 2013, A&A, 554, AA58
Sanderson, R. E., & Helmi, A. 2013, MNRAS, 435, 378
Schweizer, F., & Seitzer, P. 1988, ApJ, 328, 88
Searle, L., & Zinn, R. 1978, ApJ, 225, 357
Shang, Z., Zheng, Z., Brinks, E., et al. 1998, ApJ Lett, 504, L23
Siegal-Gaskins, J. M., & Valluri, M. 2008, ApJ, 681, 40
Stierwalt, S., Besla, G., Patton, D., et al. 2014, arXiv:1412.4796
Stinson, G. S., Dalcanton, J. J., Quinn, T., et al. 2009, MNRAS, 395, 1455
Teyssier, M., Johnston, K. V., & Kuhlen, M. 2012, MNRAS, 426, 1808
Tollerud, E. J., Boylan-Kolchin, M., Barton, E. J., Bullock, J. S., & Trinh, C. Q.

2011, ApJ, 738, 102

28

Jeffrey L. Carlin, Rachael L. Beaton, David Mart´ınez-Delgado, and R. Jay Gabany

Tollerud, E. J., Beaton, R. L., Geha, M. C., et al. 2012, ApJ, 752, 45
Toomre, A., & Toomre, J. 1972, ApJ, 178, 623
van Dokkum, P. G., Abraham, R., & Merritt, A. 2014, ApJ Lett, 782, LL24
Velazquez, H., & White, S. D. M. 1999, MNRAS, 304, 254
Weinberg, M. D., & Blitz, L. 2006, ApJ Lett, 641, L33
Wetzel, A. R., Deason, A. J., & Garrison-Kimmel, S. 2015, arXiv:1501.01972
Widrow, L. M., Gardner, S., Yanny, B., Dodelson, S., & Chen, H.-Y. 2012, ApJ Lett,

750, LL41

Widrow, L. M., Barber, J., Chequers, M. H., & Cheng, E. 2014, MNRAS, 440, 1971
Williams, M. E. K., Steinmetz, M., Binney, J., et al. 2013, MNRAS, 436, 101
Xu, Y., Newberg, H. J., Carlin, J. L., et al. 2015, ApJ, 801, 105
Yanny, B., & Gardner, S. 2013, ApJ, 777, 91
Yoon, J. H., , K. V., & Hogg, D. W. 2011, ApJ, 731, 58
Zibetti, S., Charlot, S., & Rix, H.-W. 2009, MNRAS, 400, 1181

