Extending the Learning by Teaching Canvas

System: Maximising Academic Learning Time

Alexander Berntsen
alexander@plaimi.net

16th March 2016

Abstract

Time plays an integral role in the realm of e-learning modules. plaimi previously described a
canvas for composing e-learning modules. By transitivity, time needs to play an integral role
in this canvas. This paper investigates some of the ways it can play said role. Four angles
are considered: insights oﬀered by viewing a module composition as a chronicle of modules, the
importance of length estimation in time allocation, heightening retention via spaced repetition,
and synchronisation attempts at facilitating collaborative learning. The features discovered by
this investigation are discussed in a principled learning context, which particularly emphasises
academic learning time. Some concrete suggestions are made; to implement: order-awareness,
user estimation of module length, spaced-repetition-awareness, and post-module self-assessment.
Suggestions for further research are also given.

Contents

1 Introduction

2 Motivation

3 Ideas

3.1 Chronicling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3 Repetition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.4 Synchronisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 Further research

5 Conclusion

List of Figures

1
2

An imagined popular canvas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A canvas optimised for collaboration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

2

3

3
4
6
6

9

9

3
9

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
5
1

 
 
]

Y
C
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
8
3
7
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

1.

Introduction

In an eﬀort to foster learning by teaching,
plaimi have previously described a canvas for in-
tuitively composing e-learning modules[1]. This
system indirectly emphasises chronology, which
plaimi previously explored in the tempuhs
system[2].

The canvas system lets users drag and drop
e-learning modules onto it, and then arrange
the data ﬂow of the system, thereby eﬀect-
ively arranging the modules into a chronology of
modules (a composition of modules). By look-
ing at the modules as a chronology, and consid-
ering the role time plays in principled learning,
there are several insights available to us.

This paper describes some such insights. It
motivates the insights, and explore them in
some detail. This includes elaborating and elu-
cidating the concepts, as well as giving some
notes on their potential implementation. There
are numerous challenges that the papers elects
to not ignore, and seeks to mitigate.

Since we are designing a system for learning,
it is important that any features we consider
for inclusion have a sound scientiﬁc foundation.
The insights oﬀered and features discussed are
thus considered in a scientiﬁc context.

There are four angles explored by the pa-
per. Insights aﬀorded by chronicling and order-
ing are presented in Section 3.1. Estimation,
both by way of users estimating their modules’
time frame, and by the system automatically es-
timating it, is discussed in Section 3.2. Spaced
repetition as a way of improving retention is ex-
plored in Section 3.3. Finally, features related
to synchronous collaboration and timeslot syn-
chronisation are described in Section 3.4. We
also take the time to make a few remarks re-
garding future research in Section 4.

2. Motivation

When designing a learning experience, it is es-
sential to consider time. This includes an aware-
ness of allocated, engaged, and academic learn-
ing time (ALT), lest dead time incurs for want
of understanding. Allocated time is the amount

of time allocated for learning. Engaged time is
time spent actively attempting to learn. ALT
is time spent engaged in appropriate learning
that leads to high levels of success[3]; i.e. time
spent in the ﬂow. Flow is the state of being
fully immersed and focused on an activity[4].

There is a very slight but persistent correla-
tion between allocated time and achievement[5,
6, 3]. Engaged time is modestly correlated
with achievement[5, 7, 3]. ALT leads to more
learning[6], and the rate of ALT is highly cor-
related with achievement[5, 7, 6, 3]. Related to
our canvas system we also take note that inter-
active engaged time lead to higher achievement
than non-interactive engaged time[7, 3].

Pre-laptop era research demonstrates un-
equivocally that
school pupils only spend
roughly half of their in-class time engaged in
learning[3]. Laptop era research shows that stu-
dents with laptops, compared to those without,
spend more time engaged in learning, develop
better critical thinking skills, and are more self-
reliant. Additionally,
laptop users are signi-
ﬁcantly higher-achieving than their non-laptop-
using counterparts[8]. There is no indication
that this research should not extend to today’s
era of laptops coexisting with tablets and soph-
isticated mobile phones in the classroom.

When considering the canvas system, we
need to seek not only to maximise engaged time,
but also to allow e-learning modules authors
to think about how their module will ﬁt into
allocated time. Furthermore, situated learn-
ing environment professionals, e.g. teachers at
primary schools, necessarily need consider alloc-
ated classroom time when choosing which mod-
ules to use.

Moreover, and more importantly, the sys-
tem must strive for the maximisation of ALT
by eliminating material that is either too easy
or too diﬃcult, or otherwise unsuitable to the
learner. The system admits the possibility of
non-linear adaptive compositions of e-learning
modules — and it would not be unfaithful to
the original concept to attach the utmost im-
portance to this goal — leading to a great op-
portunity to further elevate the present ALT
ratio both in and out of classrooms.

2

In addition to maximising learning, we also
seek to maximise motivation (willingness to en-
gage) and minimise procrastination (unwilling-
ness to engage; the absence of (self-regulated)
performance[9]). First, we suppose that our
canvas system is a gamiﬁed system, and thus
it is inherently comparable to a game in several
ways[10]. This is intended design[1]. Further-
more, designing e-learning modules is a subset
of instructional design, which is fundamentally
similar to game design[4]. Then we accept that
ALT in our system is a form of ﬂow. This is a
reasonable conjecture, because ﬂow state works
by precisely the same mechanics as ALT: per-
forming at the edge of one’s competency, guided
by feedback[11]. This is altogether the point of
ALT, as designed and desired to manifest in our
gamiﬁed system. From this follows several in-
sights.

Flow has a number of diﬀerent desirable
properties.
It is intrinsically linked to motiv-
ation and widely accepted as one of the fun-
damental reasons people play games[4], and
thus an emphasis on ﬂow might cause people
to use our canvas system.
It follows immedi-
ately from the law of readiness (and indirectly
from the law of eﬀect) that learners learn best
when motivated[4], and the whole point of our
system is for our users to learn. Additionally,
presence of ﬂow is signiﬁcantly negatively cor-
related with procrastination, and absence of
ﬂow is signiﬁcantly positively correlated with
procrastination[9].

Consequently, we must conclude that ALT
— and by extension time — as a concept is in-
trinsic to our system.

3.

Ideas

3.1. Chronicling

The canvas system may be aware of the chro-
nology in a composition. After all, it is already
there indirectly. As a motivation, let’s consider
an imagined popular canvas. Let m, n, o, p,
and q be modules. Let m → n, n → o, n → p,
o → p, and p → q be possible ﬂows, where →
is a binary operator signifying that the user is

sent from the module given as its left-hand side
argument (lhs) to the module given as its right-
hand side argument (rhs). This canvas is shown
in Figure 1.

m

n

o

p

q

Figure 1: An imagined popular canvas

Some self-evident properties here include
that the successor of m = n, and the successor
of n = o|p. Module relations are transitive with
respect to order, so the successor of n = q via
the successor of o = q, and the successor of
p = q — all the way down to the successor of
m = q. Alternatively, by symmetry, we can say
that the predecessor of q = m.

Ordering is trivial

to store in module
metadata, and via very simple mathematical op-
erations we are aﬀorded a lot of useful insights.
Just from the above, several concrete features
are easily imagined.

• We can suggest that authors of compos-
itions that contain e.g. module m might
be interested in modules n, o, p, and q.

• Authors with modules m and q on the can-
vas could be recommended to insert mod-
ules n and o in-between them. This is
particularly interesting if the system has
other useful metadata. E.g. if q is gener-
ally considered to be very diﬃcult, and n
and o is considered to augment m signiﬁc-
antly in preparing for q, n and o should
be strongly recommended to the author
of a canvas with m and q in them.

• Authors with modules m, n, o, and p, on
their canvas could have p recommended as
a supplement for o — or as an alternative

3

to o. The latter would be extra useful if
we have useful time estimates, forthy it
may e.g. be that p ﬁts the desired com-
position estimate better than o.

• Authors that have module o may be re-
commended p irrespective of the other
modules in their composition, e.g. in the
aforementioned time constraint scenario.

As touched on above, combining chronology
insights with other metadata, we may make sev-
eral observations.

As an example, let n : T , q : U , and o, p : V ,
where : can be read “has-type”, i.e. lhs is a
module, and rhs is the type of module (e.g.
news article, scientiﬁc paper, video, game, or
quiz). Then let t be a function that takes a
module as its input, and returns the module’s
type metadata as its output.
If a user has n
and q, we can recommend o and p as above.
But to = tp means that V is potentially inter-
esting. Thus we can safely recommend the set
of other modules with the same type as o and
p, i.e. {tm = V |m ∈ M }, where M is the set of
all modules.

If we let p : W , and arrive at the conclusion
that p should be suggested from another metric
— we have that the successor of n = o|p in the
imagined popular canvas, so o and p are sim-
ilar in other ways than to and tp — we could
recommend {tm = to, or tm = tp|m ∈ M }, i.e.
the set of all modules with either V or W as
their type.

These insights hold for other things than
types. As an example take : to be “has-topic”,
and t to be a function from a module to its topic.
The system could also look at a combination
of diﬀerent metadata to work out heuristics for
how to suggest modules.

Satisﬁed with a suﬃcient motivation for
chronology-awareness, we now turn to the im-
plementation of it. The core idea of plaimi’s
tempuhs system seems to be tailored to our use
case. The cons are that it needs extended ex-
pressiveness for the relationships of chronology
elements (called timespans in tempuhs), and
that it has not been put to the test for produc-
tion use when several users are considered. The
pros are that it is known to deal with a lot of

data, and that it oﬀers good guarantees of rep-
resenting our data logically, and preserving said
logic. Using tempuhs would allow us to distil
canvases into timespans, which lets us consider
the time aspect carefully.
It is reasonable to
think that several new insights are attainable if
we go this route.

3.2. Estimation

In Section 3.1, modules are considered in rela-
tion to each other. Thus everything is happy
days. However, in this section we consider es-
timating the time a module takes, which proves
to be a quite complicated endeavour.

Being able to estimate the time a module
takes to complete is useful for the author of the
module and the module users both. This would
be a conservative augmentation both in terms
of technical and philosophical impact, making
it perhaps less interesting than other prospects
explored in this paper, but at the same time
perhaps all the more immediately useful.

It is easy to conceive of the practical aspects
of this idea. There are two levels to it. First,
let authors of modules estimate the amount of
time a module will take, and store it as mod-
ule metadata. The design changes involved are
quite small, the programming required is minus-
cule.

There is some beneﬁt to this, but the obvi-
ous issue is that the estimator might be wrong.
It may be wrong in several ways for several reas-
ons. Conceivably the estimation reﬂects what
the author is aiming for rather than what the
author has actually achieved. To put it simply:
they might be wrong.

The next logical step then becomes to ac-
cumulate how much time users actually spend.
This is more complicated to implement, but not
too complicated. We will require client-side ex-
ecutable code to achieve this, which means that
any prevention of such code will prevent us from
gathering useful data. This is not too worrying
as there will be little reason for users to pre-
vent this code from running, meaning that few
users will do so. When viewed in isolation, the
performance penalties of this code will be neg-

4

ligible.

But there are several weaknesses to the met-
ric itself. Na¨ıvely accumulating how long a user
spends on a particular website results in a pleth-
ora of useless data. Two easily imagined ex-
trema are users leaving a website up for a very
long time, and users immediately leaving the
website.
It is similarly easy to imagine why
this would happen. As one example of each:
1. Consider a primary school pupil visiting a
website during the very end of instruction time,
and leaving it up until the next instruction time
(e.g. visiting it at the end of Friday, and leav-
ing it up through the weekend). 2. Consider
a user visiting the wrong website and immedi-
ately leaving it.

Accounting for those speciﬁc problems is
non-trivial. Normally, a standard deviation cut-
oﬀ would suﬃce adequately, but in our case
we are faced with something like a tri-modal
distribution. Maybe it’s a leptokurtic distribu-
tion. That would be nice. But unfortunately,
it might be, or it might not be. That’s a lot
worse. And it’s about to get worse. Because it
might be leptokurtic, and then it might change
into a fat-headed distribution. And then it
might reverse back again. And then it might
become heavy-tailed. Etc. The modules might
even have diﬀerent distributions (that change as
more people visit them.) If you have a leptokur-
tic distribution in two modules, a heavy-tailed
distributed module, and two fat-headed and fat-
tailed distributions, what then of the composi-
tion of these ﬁve modules? What then when
the third becomes leptokurtic and the fourth
becomes heavy-tailed? Doing this properly is
not going to be trivial.

Are we having fun yet? Because it’s about
to get even more fun. Consider having a quiz
about monoids in semigroup theory. The au-
thor estimates it to take n minutes. A primary
school student and a maths postgraduate go
through the quiz. The estimation can in this
situation be wrong in two ways — too short
and too long. This raises the question — is the
estimation in general useful at all?

So then the next step is to tie estimation to
knowledge. I.e. we need to know how much the

user knows about something, and derive estim-
ations based on how much similarly knowledge-
able users know about the same thing. This
is non-trivial enough to not warrant any more
examples. The observant reader “gets the pic-
ture”, as it were.

Let’s take a step back before we end up with
a horror story instead of a paper. Let’s look at
the beneﬁts and opportunities aﬀorded to us by
implementing this.

Authors may receive useful analytics regard-
ing their modules. Some banal analytics are
“users are spending longer on this module than
you thought they would”, and “these modules
in your composition are approximately of the
same length, but this fourth one takes a lot
longer”. The former suﬀers from the context
problem, but the latter is actually rather pleas-
ant. Indeed most things we can say about one
module in relation to some other modules in the
same composition is usually immediately useful
without a Ph.D in statistics.

While module authors are rewarded with
feedback, module users are provided with use-
ful
information on how they want to spend
their time, which makes our system interrupt
ﬂow more seldom. Users may search for mod-
ules and compositions based on time estimates.
The same beneﬁt applies to indirect users. E.g.
classroom teachers might search for the compos-
itions that yields the highest ALT to allocated
time ratio.

Module authors can be said to be module
users as well, in that they will often remix mod-
ules, and they beneﬁt in a similar manner to
module users. They can e.g. search for modules
that ﬁt their estimated composition length.

To make estimates useful for users (includ-
ing indirect users and remixers) the program-
mer needs a statistics Ph.D or so to deal with
transforming the data, and then contextualising
it. To make estimates useful for authors, they
will likely need a Ph.D themselves. We should
however try our best to help them make sense
of it. Perhaps authors should have to complete
an introduction to statistics composition before
being able to access their analytics.

5

3.3. Repetition

The law of recency states that learning degrades
over time, and the law of exercise says that
learning is increased through repetition[4]. A
common solution to this problem is discussed in
the paper that initially proposed the canvas[1],
namely spaced repetition (combined with test-
ing); i.e. studying across several separated ses-
sions in time rather than spending the same
amount of time in a single session.

This often leads to higher retention, and is
one of the most reliable ﬁndings in human learn-
ing research (echoed in hundreds of studies, the
ﬁrst of which dating to the 1800s). It has been
predictably demonstrated in both children and
adults, and for both trivial knowledge (simple
facts) as well as advanced concepts[12]. It has
also been shown to be beneﬁcial in realistic (ap-
plied) contexts[13, 12].

As we’ve already discussed[1], spaced repeti-
tion with testing is a credible learning method,
and thus appealing feature to include in our can-
vas. The initial canvas system was nevertheless
designed without an emphasis on spaced repeti-
tion, in order to provide a more general frame-
work. Spaced repetition is usually provided
for rather speciﬁc and well-deﬁned knowledge
(translate this word to German, solve this equa-
tion for x, etc.), and arguably makes less sense
for a news article leading up to a discussion.
The canvas is merely a way to glue things
together, where “things” is an ever so broad
term. Another issues is that ﬁnding the op-
timal spacing gap is notoriously diﬃcult, and
inherently contextual (there is no “one-size-ﬁts-
all” solution)[12].

As it stands, centering the entirety of the
canvas’s design on spaced repetition is unlikely.
But it is altogether conceivable to augment it
with a separate system specialising in spaced re-
petition. As an example, there is nothing that
precludes the canvas from facilitating a system
which focusses on spaced repetition.

The modules and compositions

thereof
would need metadata tailored to the spaced re-
petition model of learning, but this is not in

1https://ankiweb.net/about

itself a diﬃcult task. The amount of work to
at the very least be natively spaced-repetition-
aware is very low, and the beneﬁts may be dis-
proportionately high for systems that may want
to use the canvas system. Consequently, it is
likely a good idea to make at least that much
eﬀort.

The next level of eﬀort would be to include
a way for learners to self-assess retention, in a
manner similar to what Anki1 and similar pro-
grams do. There must be a way to mark a
module as spaced-repetition-aware, which will
then let the user self-assess its learning eﬀect at
the end of it. This is a feature which is useful
regardless of spaced repetition, as we are now
able to say something about our users’ reten-
tion level based on self-assessment. By exten-
sion we can say something about the retention
success of modules. It trivially also follows that
we may say something about assessment, both
from the perspective of a user, and of a mod-
ule. Assessment can be made into an interactive
and engaging aﬀair through our system’s avatar
feature[1].

The ﬁnal step is to actually encourage re-
peating somehow. This is likely out of scope
for our system for now. There is however, as
mentioned, nothing precluding an external sys-
tem from augmenting our system with this.

3.4. Synchronisation

The canvas system is part of a project dubbed
“Learning by Teaching”, and was originally con-
ceived as a stepping stone towards cultivating
learning by teaching, which fosters advantages
that do not manifest if the learner relies exclus-
ively on an external teacher in a situated learn-
ing environment[14]. Additionally, the canvas
was designed to oﬀer an intuitive way of graph-
ically composing e-learning modules[1].

The stepping stone satiated by the canvas
is authoring. As such, the canvas can be said
to achieve “learning by authoring”, a process
that covers gathering of learning material, and
organising. As a result, the canvas software fo-
cusses on authors.

6

However, the compositions that are made
on the canvas are only interesting insofar as
they are used. We must therefore not neglect
the end-users of e-learning in favour of the au-
thors. Although we wish to encourage a learn-
ing eﬀect from authoring modules, there will
be some pure end-users that do not author any-
thing. When focussing our attention on these
end-users, we must consider collaborative learn-
ing, as discussion is shown to foster the devel-
opment of critical thinking[15].

In the interest of collaboration, mechanisms
for synchronising users are desirable. Three sug-
gestions are discussed here;

• realtime (synchronous) collaboration,
• wait-for-me collaboration,
• and timeslot collaboration.

Exploring realtime collaboration oﬀers sev-
eral speciﬁc features. The collaboration may
take place on two levels — using the modules,
discussing the modules, or both.

First,

let’s talk about collaboratively us-
ing and discussing modules in realtime. The
immediate idea here is akin to Twitch Plays
Pok´emon, where over a million users for over
two weeks voted on what to do at every step
of the game ポケットモンスター 赤 (Poketto
Monsut¯a Aka, known as Pok´emon Red out-
side of Japan), in a strictly egalitarian manner,
whilst discussing the game in a live chat[16].
The experiment is a signiﬁcant phenomenon
that demonstrates that social groups are able
to unite in social contexts where obstacles are
presented[17]. The experiment is largely trans-
ferable to users of our canvas system, in that
there are several modules for which it is pos-
sible to have a group of people using them at
the same time with e.g. the majority vote de-
ciding how they progress. More sophisticated
voting mechanisms such as Condorcet may be
desirable to provide better overruling heurist-
ics. Discussion may be directly transfered; i.e.
a regular realtime chat is provided.

There are several ways of making this idea
more sophisticated. Users may need to discuss
and argue their views as to why e.g. one answer
in a quiz is correct and others are not, in order

to achieve a satisfactory outcome (per some vot-
ing heuristic), lest they be prevented from pro-
gressing. Discussion may be augmented with
features that make it easy to refer to informa-
tion within a composition. As an example, in
a composition where the users are on module
three, a quiz, they may wish to refer to module
two, an article, to strengthen their argument.
In this example the user needs a simple way of
accessing previous modules, and a way of easily
using them in a discussion.

If the reader is concerned that the idea has
become too sophisticated now, fear not; there
are equally many ways of distilling it down into
simpler components. E.g. A chat by itself. This
modest feature would be a rather large exten-
sion of the canvas system. Especially as it was
argued against in the original implementation
to avoid abusive behaviour[1].

Instead of each participant actively inﬂuen-
cing module outcomes, a seat mode may be
used. There are several conceivable implement-
ations of this. One is that there is one (some-
how elected) person in control all the time, that
needs to act on behalf of the group. Another
is a hot seat solution in which the seat holder
changes based on some heuristic.

Modules that are merely articles or videos
or other non-interactive learning material argu-
ably beneﬁt the least from realtime collabora-
tion — fast readers must wait for slow readers,
and that’s about it. This is where wait-for-me
collaboration becomes useful. The general idea
is that there are several synchronisation points
where users must become synchronised. In the
example above, it would be natural that if mod-
ule one and two were reading material, these
may be pursued independently. There is noth-
ing precluding the joint existence of wait-for-
me and realtime mechanics, so that once the
users are synchronised, they may use a module
— such as the quiz in module three — in collab-
orative realtime. Another useful combination
is wait-for-me synchronisation at certain inter-
vals, after which realtime discussion takes place.
But wait-for-me mechanics have useful proper-
ties when viewed independently as well. One
concrete example that is easy to imagine use-

7

ful is in a largely situated learning environment
where it is desirable that all learners possess
roughly the same information.

Timeslot collaboration is another useful idea
It is ad-
for situated learning environments.
ditionally also useful
for learners that want
to collaborate across timezones, or following
some self-imposed schedule. A timeslot mechan-
ism would entail completing modules in certain
timeslots. Teachers often set learning material
per class per week in school, and gives home-
work based on rather tight timeslots, so this is
a familiar concept. Again, it may be combined
freely with the other two synchronisation meth-
ods. It may also be nested. E.g. a timeslot to
do a module composition wherein wait-for-me
mechanics are used for non-interactive learning
material, culminating in a real-time quiz and
subsequent discussion.

Where na¨ıve wait-for-me moves in the pace
of the slowest participant at the risk of alien-
ating the quicker participants, na¨ıve timeslot
synchronisation moves at a set pace and risks
leaving the slower participants behind. These
problems mean that the features may have ex-
actly the opposite of our intended eﬀect, max-
imising ALT, for some subset of users. Wait-for-
me synchronisation needs to consider a method
of progressing if one (or more) participants are
slowing the group down, whilst timeslots need
to consider a way of ensuring that participants
are actually learning. Realtime in turn risks
virtually all known problems with online social
interaction. . .

Collaborative learning is most eﬀective with
an instructor that facilitates learning[15].
It
then follows that we should seek to foster learn-
ing by instruction in addition to learning by
authoring. Marrying the two (i.e. users acting
as instructors of material they have themselves
authored) gets us much closer to learning by
teaching proper.

Consequently synchronisation should be ex-
tended to encompass instructors as well. There
are several ways of achieving this. Instructors
may provide realtime feedback whilst a group is
going through a module, or discussing it. They
may also act as the seat holder, thereby oﬀering

a potential solution to any social problems.

This entire section has a certain latent con-
jecture hanging over it: Synchronous collabor-
ation is mostly interesting in a (semi) situated
learning environment. However, this environ-
ment needn’t be a classroom setting.
It just
needs to be facilitated in the system that sur-
rounds the canvas. Study groups or a similar
mechanism in which learners may organise may
be added, including potentially a matchmaking
system, and a forum for getting in touch with
potential collaborators. All of which are ma-
jor undertakings and nigh-complete transform-
ations of the original concept — this isn’t to be
taken lightly.

Another problem with uncoordinated collab-
orators is the possibility of upsetting the pre-
carious ALT by eﬀectively making each collab-
orator adapt to each other. This could poten-
tially result in every single collaborator follow-
ing a sub-optimal pace, thereby harming the
chances of achieving ALT, making this a neg-
ative feature rather than positive. Well put-
together study groups alleviate this slightly, but
not completely.

We elect not to explore potential implement-
ation problems in detail in this section. Just
like the core repetition idea discussed in Sec-
tion 3.3, the ideas presented here are of such a
magnitude as to warrant completely new user
experience research. However, it is noteworthy
that nothing discussed in this section is funda-
mentally diﬃcult from a technological perspect-
ive. The user-interface and -experience design
challenges are far greater (though not insur-
mountable).

Like we concluded with spaced repetition, it
is entirely plausible that synchronous collabor-
ation is best left to another system which aug-
ments the canvas. It may also be suitable as a
special part of some expanded system, wherein
the learning material itself is optimised for a
collaborative premise. Collaborative material
which enables critical thinking and discussion
are likely to be more successful than users at-
tempting to collaborate on material not de-
signed with collaboration in mind.

With learning material optimised for collab-

8

oration, it is possible to approximate real world
tasks to a higher degree. As an example, con-
sider the software engineering composition visu-
alised in Figure 2. Let A and B be the parti-
cipants of this canvas. Let a, b, c, and d, be
modules. Let a → b and b → d be ﬂows unique
to A, and a → c and c → d unique to B. The
topic might be compilers. a might be an intro-
duction to compilers, then b can be an intro-
duction to frontend (lexing, parsing, etc.), and
c an introduction to backend (assembling, code-
generation, etc.), and ﬁnally d can be a quiz
about both front- and backend fundamentals.
This models real world collaboration in a sense.
It is not unusual to divide up tasks like this in
software engineering. The quiz might now be a
realtime collaborative task in which the A and
B must rely on each others’ knowledge in order
to pass it. Through this process, it is plausible
that A will learn about compiler backends, and
that conversively B will learn about compiler
frontends.

a

b

c

d

Figure 2: A canvas optimised for collaboration

The interactive nature of our canvas makes
collaborative learning a natural ﬁt. But the
original design did not consider collaborative
learning, and as such the augmentation must
be considered too great to be done recklessly.
User experience research is thus thoroughly re-
commended, and indeed necessary.

4. Further research

There are ideas worth exploring related to ALT
that emphasise interactivity and assessment.

9

The law of exercise emphasises that in order to
achieve the best learning results, practice and
feedback must coexist[4].

An integral part to ALT is that the learner
experiences high levels of success[3, 4]. Facilit-
ating ALT is in principle straight forward, but
for the balancing of diﬃculty of skill. Success re-
quires a delicate balance in which tasks are chal-
lenging yet achievable. Feedback (the manner
in which the learner perceives their progress) is
intrinsically entangled with achieving this bal-
ance, and assessment is in turn intrinsically en-
tangled with feedback[4].

It would be worthwhile further investigat-
ing augmenting non-linearity as a means to
achieve the diﬃculty balance. There are numer-
ous angles to investigate. For instance, modules
may be interactively rearranged or hot-swapped
based on diﬃculty.

In Section 3.3, na¨ıve self-assessment is sug-
gested. More sophisticated methods of assess-
ment are worthy of investigation. One novel
approach to interactively tutoring learners is
Ask-Elle, a programming tutor for the Haskell
programming language which provide students
with feedback on incomplete programs, and give
hints on how to proceed in order to solve a
programming exercise[18]. The avatars of our
extended system help the system to achieve a
more human touch[1], and are practical candid-
ates for such a tutoring system, which might
double up as an assessment tool.

In Section 3.4,

instructor-integration is
brieﬂy mentioned. Presently, module authors
are primarily involved pre-learning. Attempts
at involving them during learning in an in-
structor role would be worthwhile.

5. Conclusion

Time as a concept is intrinsic to the canvas sys-
tem proposed by plaimi, as we want to maxim-
ise ALT. There are several promising insights
available to us by viewing compositions as chro-
nologies. This simple exercise in perspective
oﬀers insights that particularly manifest as sug-
gestions we may oﬀer the users based on chro-
nology metadata. Knowing which modules tend

to follow others is simply extremely useful. It
is also rather conceptually trivial. It does how-
ever not directly improve the ALT capabilities
of our system per se.

Oﬀering estimation mechanisms in module
metadata may alleviate some time-management
burdening for our users.
It makes it easier
for authors to ﬁnd modules to ﬁt their com-
position — particularly if they are making the
composition for a situated learning environment
in which allocated time must be carefully con-
sidered — and it makes it easier for module
end-users to ﬁnd suitable learning material. Al-
lowing authors to embed man-made estimations
as module metadata is a very modest but good
extension, but the estimations are educated
guesses at best. Furthermore, learning mater-
ial time estimations depend heavily on the end-
user. Therefore an even better extension would
be to gather data and do contextual estimation
for each user. This is however a very diﬃcult
problem.

Spaced repetition is accepted as often lead-
ing to higher retention and thus better learning.
We could encode spaced repetition metadata
in modules and compositions thereof, making
our system spaced-repetition-aware, thereby
further extending its usefulness and area of
application. We could also implement an in-
sight aﬀorded from spaced repetition software
— the notion of self-assessment immediately
post-learning. This lets us say useful things re-
lated to retainment and assessment regardless
of spaced repetition.

Collaborative learning can oﬀer a positive
learning eﬀect, but if not done properly this
might be antithetical to ALT. Synchronisation
for collaboration may be done in realtime, in
wait-for-me time, or by timeslots. Realtime
collaboration in interactive learning material is
an interesting prospect. So is synchronising
users at given intervals, especially when com-
bined with a realtime module, e.g. evaluation
(a quiz or similar) after synchronising the users.
Timeslots may be a useful way for especially
teachers in classroom settings to ensure that

learners have similar progress. These ideas all
present diﬃcult problems due to their invas-
ive nature. Further investigation is encouraged
to take place in a separate system with learn-
ing material optimised for collaboration, which
might to some extent marry the advantages of
ALT and collaborative learning.

To sum up, the following features should be

implemented:

• order-awareness for chronology insights,
• author estimation of module length,
• a metadata framework for spaced repeti-

tion,

• and post-module self-assessment capabil-

ities.

These are, not coincidentally, the most mod-

est features proposed in the paper.

The following more invasive changes were

discussed:

• system estimation of module length,
• contextualised (user-customised) estima-

tion of module length,

• spaced-repetition encouraging,
• collaborative realtime module use,
• easy referring to modules and speciﬁc ele-

ments therein,

• wait-for-me collaboration in which users
are periodically synchronised to the same
module,

• timeslot collaboration to ensure that

users are somewhat synchronised,

• various combinations and nesting of the

proposed synchronisation methods,

• instructor-integration mechanics for col-

laborative learning,

• and a sub-system optimised for collabor-

ative learning.

Further research is encouraged for all of
these more invasive features. Collaborative
learning is particularly interesting due to the
weight of its potential augmentation. It is also
particularly diﬃcult due to its potential negat-
ive impact on ALT.

10

References

[1] Alexander Berntsen, Stian Ellingsen, and Emil Henry Flakk. Enabling learning by teaching:

Intuitive composing of e-learning modules. arXiv preprint arXiv:1510.09093, 2015.

[2] Alexander

Berntsen.

tempuhs:

Chronology

visualisation.

https://secure.plaimi.net/presentations/2014-08-20-tempuhs-chronology-visualisation.pdf,
2014. Presentation.

[3] Kathleen Cotton and K Wikelund. Educational time factors. Northwest Regional Educational

Laboratory Portland, OR, 1990.

[4] Curtiss Murphy. Why games work and the science of learning. In Interservice, Interagency

Training, Simulations, and Education Conference, pages 260–272. Citeseer, 2011.

[5] Kathleen Cotton and W Gr Savard. Time factors in learning. research on school eﬀectiveness

project: Topic summary report. 1981.

[6] Herbert J Walberg. Synthesis of research on time and learning. Educational

leadership,

45(6):76–85, 1988.

[7] Julie P Sanford and Carolyn M Evertson. Time use and activities junior high classes. The

Journal of Educational Research, 76(3):140–147, 1983.

[8] James Cengiz Gulek and Hakan Demirtas. Learning with technology: The impact of laptop

use on student achievement. The journal of technology, learning and assessment, 3(2), 2005.

[9] Eunju Lee. The relationship of motivation and ﬂow experience to academic procrastination in

university students. The Journal of Genetic Psychology, 166(1):5–15, 2005.

[10] Sebastian Deterding, Dan Dixon, Rilla Khaled, and Lennart Nacke. From game design elements
In Proceedings of the 15th International Academic

to gamefulness: deﬁning gamiﬁcation.
MindTrek Conference: Envisioning Future Media Environments, pages 9–15. ACM, 2011.

[11] Pamela

Rutledge.

The

positive

side

of

video

games:

Part

III.

http://en.paperblog.com/the-positive-side-of-video-games-part-iii-294723/.

[12] Shana K Carpenter, Nicholas J Cepeda, Doug Rohrer, Sean HK Kang, and Harold Pashler.
Using spacing to enhance diverse forms of learning: Review of recent research and implications
for instruction. Educational Psychology Review, 24(3):369–378, 2012.

[13] Hailey S Sobel, Nicholas J Cepeda, and Irina V Kapler. Spacing eﬀects in real-world classroom

vocabulary learning. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 25(5):763–767, 2011.

[14] Claudio G Cortese. Learning through teaching. Management Learning, 36(1):87–115, 2005.

[15] Anuradha A Gokhale. Collaborative learning enhances critical thinking. 1995.

[16] twitch.

TPP

victory!

The

thundershock

heard

http://blog.twitch.tv/2014/03/twitch-prevails-at-pokemon/,
2015-12-25.

around
2014.

the world.
Accessed

[17] Michael Margel. Twitch plays Pokemon: An analysis of social dynamics in crowdsourced

games.

[18] Johan Jeuring, Alex Gerdes, and Bastiaan Heeren. Ask-Elle: A Haskell tutor. In 21st Century

Learning for 21st Century Skills, pages 453–458. Springer, 2012.

11

