6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
5
1

 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
6
5
7
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Commentary to article Spatiotemporal optical solitons, by B. A. Malomed, D.

Mihalache, F. Wise, and L.Torner, J. Opt. B: Quantum Semiclass. Opt. 7, R53-R72

(2005)

This review article (RA) was a brief but comprehensive survey of the general area of multidimensional solitons, i.e.,
two- and three-dimensional (2D and 3D) modes self-trapped as a result of the competition between the linear eﬀects
of diﬀraction and dispersion, which tend to stretch any wave packet in spatial and temporal directions, and nonlinear
self-compression of the wave ﬁeld. The RA has produced an appreciable impact, having been cited 526 times (Google
Scholar, as of Febr. 12, 2016).

Multidimensional solitons draw continuously renewed interest in many branches of physics, ﬁnding especially impor-
tant realizations in nonlinear photonics (optics and plasmonics) and Bose-Einstein condensates (BECs); in particular,
spatiotemporal optical solitons are also known as “light bullets”. The solitons are classiﬁed as fundamental ones,
which carry no topological structure, and various topological modes, including 2D and 3D solitons with embedded
vorticity, and more sophisticated 3D states, such as hopﬁons, i.e., vortex tori with intrinsic twist, which carry two
independent topological numbers.

Unlike 1D solitons, which are normally stable, their multidimensional counterparts are vulnerable to severe insta-
bilities. Indeed, the ubiquitous cubic self-attractive nonlinearity, which readily creates solitons, simultaneously gives
rise to the critical and supercritical collapse, i.e., spontaneous formation of a singularity after a ﬁnite propagation
distance or time, in the 2D and 3D geometries, respectively. The collapse destabilizes fundamental solitons, while their
vortex solitons are subject to a still stronger splitting instability against perturbations breaking the axial symmetry
of the vortices. Accordingly, a challenging problem is search for physically relevant settings which admit stabilization
of the solitons, the settings being categorized according to the underlying stabilization mechanisms. Several generic
mechanisms have been identiﬁed in the RA and developed in subsequent works: (i) the use of quadratic (second-
harmonic-generating) or saturable nonlinearities, which do not lead to the collapse, and thus make fundamental
solitons automatically stable, but failing to stabilize vortices; (ii) eﬀective trapping potentials (in particular, spatially
periodic ones, such as photonic lattices in optics, or optical lattices in BEC), which may stabilize 2D and 3D solitons
of all types (lattice potentials create stable vortex solitons in the form of multipeak complexes, with the vorticity
represented by phase shifts between adjacent peaks); (iii) competing nonlinearities, such as combinations of attractive
cubic and repulsive quintic terms, which secure partial stabilization of vortices; (iv) management techniques, which
impose periodic switch of the nonlinearity between attraction and repulsion, making it possible to stabilize 2D funda-
mental solitons. Following the review provided in the RA, these techniques, as well as their combinations, have been
developed in a large number of works, revealing many possibilities for the creation of stable solitons of diﬀerent types.
An essential peculiarity of this research area, which was stressed in the RA, and remains obvious presently, is
disbalance between a very large number of theoretical predictions and few experimental results. Nevertheless, in the
course of 10 years since the publication of the RA, several essential experimental ﬁndings have been published. These
include, in particular, a soliton in the BEC of 85Rb atoms with aspect ratio 2.5 of the trapping potential, which
makes the soliton’s shape close to isotropic [1]; fundamental [2] and vortex [3] “optical bullets” created in arrays of
optical ﬁbers, which may be considered as semi-discrete media; the creation of (2+1)D spatial fundamental solitons
in bulk optical media with a cubic-quintic [4] competing nonlinearity; 2D exciton-polariton gap solitons (supported
by a lattice potential) in a microcavity [5]; direct observation of ﬁlamentation of ultrashort laser pulses in a Kerr
medium in the case of negative group-velocity dispersion (which is necessary for the formation of “bullets”) [6], and
the observation of a characteristic structure of the self-compressing “bullet”, composed of a high-density core and a
surrounding ring pattern [7]. The creation of truly stable multidimensional vortex solitons in continuous media has
not been reported yet (solitary vortices, whose limited stabilization is supported by nonlinear loss, were observed very
recently [8]).

The theoretical work in the area has been developing in many directions since the publication of the RA, being, to
a large extent, stimulated by results summarized in it. In particular, completely new settings allowing the creation
of multidimensional solitons have been elaborated. One of them is the use of D-dimensional media with repulsive
nonlinearity, whose local strength grows from the center to periphery, as a function of distance r, at any rate faster
than rD. This setting supports a variety of robust 2D and 3D solitons, including quite sophisticated ones, such as
soliton gyroscopes and hopﬁons [9]. This direction is related to a still broader area of studies of solitons in media
with eﬀective potentials induced by spatial modulation of the nonlinearity [10]. Further, recent considerations of BEC
with linear spin-orbit coupling between its components give rise to objects which were assumed impossible: stable
solitons in free 2D [11] and 3D [12] space, supported by the attractive cubic nonlinearity, without the help of any
trapping potential. They are built of mixed fundamental and vortical components, see the ﬁgure. These ﬁndings help
to understand the profound diﬀerence between the stabilization in 2D and 3D settings: in the former case, the system

creates stable solitons as ground states, while in 3D a ground state cannot exist in the presence of the supercritical
collapse, the solitons being metastable modes.

2

FIG. 1: (Color online) Examples of metastable three-dimensional solitons produced by the two-component BEC model with
spin-orbit coupling, as per Ref. [12]: (a1,a2) density (p) proﬁles of the fundamental and vortex components; (b1,b2) the same
in a soliton with the fundamental and vortex terms mixed in each component.

[1] S. L. Cornish, S. T. Thompson, and C. E. Wieman, Formation of bright matter-wave solitons during the collapse of

attractive Bose-Einstein condensates, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 170401 (2006).

[2] S. Minardi, F. Eilenberger, Y. V. Kartashov, A. Szameit, U. R¨opke, J. Kobelke, K. Schuster, H. Bartelt, S. Nolte, L.
Torner, F. Lederer, A. T¨unnermann, and T. Pertsch, Three-dimensional light bullets in arrays of waveguides, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 105, 263901 (2010).

[3] F. Eilenberger, K. Prater, S. Minardi, R. Geiss, U. R¨opke, J. Kobelke, K. Schuster, H. Bartelt, S. Nolte, A. T¨unnermann,

and T. Pertsch, Observation of discrete, vortex light bullets, Phys. Rev. X 3, 041031 (2013).

[4] E. L. Falc˜ao-Filho, C. B. de Ara´ujo, G. Boudebs, H. Leblond, and V. Skarka, Robust two-dimensional spatial solitons in

liquid carbon disulﬁde, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 013901 (2013).

[5] E. A. Cerda-M´endez, D. Sarkar, D. N. Krizhanovskii, S. S. Gavrilov, K. Biermann, M. S. Skolnick, and P. V. Santos,

Exciton-polariton gap solitons in two-dimensional lattices, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 146401 (2013).

[6] M. Durand, A. Jarnac, A. Houard, Y. Liu, S. Grabielle, N. Forget, A. Dur´ecu, A. Couairon, and A. Mysyrowicz, Self-
guided propagation of ultrashort laser pulses in the anomalous dispersion region of transparent solids: A new regime of
ﬁlamentation, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 115003 (2013).

[7] D. Majus, G. Tamoˇsauskas, I. Graˇzuleviˇci¯ut˙e, N. Garejev, A. Lotti, A. Couairon, D. Faccio, and A. Dubietis, Nature of

spatiotemporal light bullets in bulk Kerr media, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 193901 (2014).

[8] A. S. Reyna, G. Boudebs, B. A. Malomed, and C. B. de Ara´ujo, Robust self-trapping of vortex beams in a saturable optical

medium, Phys. Rev. A 93, 013840 (2016).

[9] O. V. Borovkova, Y. V. Kartashov, L. Torner, and B. A. Malomed, Bright solitons from defocusing nonlinearities, Phys.
Rev. E 84, 035602 (R) (2011); R. Driben, Y. V. Kartashov, B. A. Malomed, T. Meier, and L. Torner, Soliton gyroscopes in
media with spatially growing repulsive nonlinearity, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 020404 (2014); Y. V. Kartashov, B. A. Malomed,
Y. Shnir, and L. Torner, Twisted toroidal vortex-solitons in inhomogeneous media with repulsive nonlinearity, ibid. 113,
264101 (2014).

[10] Y. V. Kartashov, B. A. Malomed, and L. Torner, Solitons in nonlinear lattices, Rev. Mod. Phys. 83, 247 (2011).
[11] H. Sakaguchi, B. Li, and B. A. Malomed, Creation of two-dimensional composite solitons in spin-orbit-coupled self-

attractive Bose-Einstein condensates in free space, Phys. Rev. E 89, 032920 (2014).

[12] Y.-C. Zhang, Z.-W. Zhou, B. A. Malomed, and H. Pu, Stable solitons in three dimensional free space without the ground

state: Self-trapped Bose-Einstein condensates with spin-orbit coupling, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 253902 (2015).

