The Illusory Appeal of Decoherence in the Everettian Picture:

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
5
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
t
n
a
u
q
[
 
 

1
v
5
4
8
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Aﬃrming the Consequent

R. E. Kastnera 1
14 March 2016

aFoundations of Physics Group, University of Maryland, College Park,

USA

ABSTRACT. The idea that decoherence in a unitary-only quantum theory
suﬃces to explain emergence of classical phenomena has been shown in the peer-
reviewed literature to be seriously ﬂawed due to circularity. However, claims con-
tinue to be made that this approach, also known as “Quantum Darwinism,” is
the correct way to understand classical emergence. This Letter reviews the basic
problem and points out an additional logical problem with the argument. It is
concluded that the “Quantum Darwinism” program fails.

1. Introduction.

The idea that unitary-only dynamics can lead naturally to
preferred observables, such that decoherence suﬃces to explain
emergence of classical phenomena (e.g., Zurek 2003) has been
shown in the peer-reviewed literature to be problematic. How-
ever, claims continue to be made that this approach, also known
as ’Quantum Darwinism,’ is the correct way to understand clas-
sical emergence.

The problem of basis ambiguity in the unitary-only theory is
laid out particularly clearly by Bub, Clifton and Monton (1996),
and the diﬃculty highlighted by them is not resolved through
decoherence arguments alone. This is because decoherence is
relational rather than absolute (Dugi´c and Jekni´c-Dugi´c 2012;
Zanardi et al 2004). In order to get oﬀ the ground with a partic-
ular structure, “Quantum Darwinism”-type arguments depend
on assuming special initial conditions of separable, localizable
degrees of freedom, along with suitable interaction Hamiltoni-
ans, which amount to “seeds” of classicality from the outset.

1Email: rkastner@umd.edu

1

Under these circumstances, the purported explanation of clas-
sical emergence becomes circular (Kastner, 2014a, 2015). But
circularity is not the only problem with the decoherence-based
attempt to explain the emergence of classicality. In what fol-
lows we examine the logical structure of the argument and ﬁnd
a further, serious ﬂaw: aﬃrming the consequent.

2. The logical ﬂaws of “Quantum Darwinism”

The structure of the Quantum Darwinism argument is as fol-

lows:

If 1. the quantum dynamics is unitary-only, and
if 2. the universe has initially separable, localizable degrees of
freedom such as distinguishable atoms, and
if 3. those degrees of freedom interact by Hamiltonians that do
not re-entangle them, then
4. classicality emerges.

For decoherence to account for the emergence of classical-
ity under the assumption of unitary-only (U-O) evolution (ap-
proximately and only in a “FAPP” sense, see below), all three
premises must hold. However, classicality is implicitly contained
in 2 and 3 through the partitioning of the universal degrees of
freedom into separable, localized substructures interacting via
Hamiltonians that do not re-entangle them, so (given U-O) one
has to put in classicality to get classicality out. Premises 2 and
3 are special initial conditions on the early universe that may
not hold–certainly they are not the most general case for an ini-
tially quantum universe. Yet it seems common for researchers
assuming U-O to assert that 2 and 3 also must hold without
question. This actually amounts to the fallacy of aﬃrming the
consequent, as follows: one observes that we have an apparently

2

classical world (aﬃrm 4), and then one asserts that 1, 2 and 3
therefore must hold.

The insistence on 2 appears, for example, in Wallace’s in-
vocation of “additional structure on the Hilbert Space” as os-
tensibly part of the basic formalism (Wallace 2012, p. 14-15).
Such additional structure–preferred sets of basis vectors and/or
a particular decomposition of the Hilbert space–is imposed when
quantum theory is applied to speciﬁc situations in the labora-
tory. However, what we observe in the laboratory is the already-
emergent classical world, in which classical physics describes our
macroscopic measuring instruments and quantum physics is ap-
plied only to prepared quantum systems that are not already
entangled with other (environmental) degrees of freedom.

If the task is to explain how we got to this empirical situ-
ation from an initially quantum-only universe, then clearly we
cannot assume what we are trying to explain; i.e., that the uni-
verse began with quasi-localized quantum systems distinguish-
able from each other and their environment, as it appears to us
today. Yet Wallace includes this auxiliary condition imposing
structural separability under a section entitled “The Bare For-
malism” (by which he means U-O), despite noting that we assign
the relevant Hilbert space structures “in practice” to empirical
laboratory situations. The inclusion of this sort of auxiliary con-
dition in the “bare formalism” cannot be legitimate, since such
imposed structures are part of the application of the theory to a
particular empirical situation. They thus constitute contingent
information, and are therefore not aspects of the “bare formal-
ism,” any more than, for example, ﬁeld boundary conditions
are part of the bare theory of electromagnetism. These sepa-
rability conditions are auxiliary hypotheses to which we cannot
help ourselves, especially since the most general state of an early
quantum universe is not one that comes with preferred basis vec-
tors and/or distinguishable degrees of freedom. Thus, the addi-

3

tion of this condition amounts to asserting (2), and becomes (at
best) circular reasoning, or (at worst) outright aﬃrming of the
consequent, illicitly propping up the claim that quasi-classical
world “branches” naturally appear in an Everettian (unitary-
only) picture.

Now, to be charitable: perhaps unitary-only theorists are
tacitly assuming that (1) is not subject to question; i.e. they
take it as a “given.” If one presumes the truth of (1) in this
way, then (2) and (3) seem required in order to arrive at our
current apparently classical world. If (1) were really known to
be true, the logical structure of the argument would be: 2 and
3 iﬀ 4. So, rather than reject the argument based on its cir-
cularity, such researchers seem to assume that the consequent
is evidence for the truth of premises 2 and 3 (i.e., 2 and 3 to-
gether are seen as the only way that we could have arrived at
the classical macro-phenomena we now experience). The possi-
bility that the dynamics may not be wholly unitary–the falsity
of the unitary-only premise (1)–does not seem to be considered.
However, the need to use a circular argument in order to pre-
serve the claims of Quantum Darwinism should prudently be
taken as an indication that the U-O assumption (1) may well
be false, and that non-unitary collapse is worth exploring for
a non-circular account of how classically well-deﬁned structures
arise in a world described fundamentally by quantum theory.2

3. Conclusion.

2Such an account is proposed in Kastner (2012) and (2014b). In that account (’possi-
bilist transactional interpretation’ or PTI), decoherence can of course occur under circum-
stances discussed in Zurek (2003), as a deductive consequence of quantum theory under
certain speciﬁed conditions; but decoherence alone is neither necessary nor suﬃcient as an
explanation for everyday classical phenomena such as the observed determinacy of macro-
scopic objects. Decoherence is not necessary because classical emergence can arise through
a speciﬁc collapse process in PTI, and decoherence is not suﬃcient because it does not
solve the measurement problem (cf. Bub 1997, p. 231).

4

Everettian unitary-only quantum theory seems to have be-
come so “mainstream” that in many quarters it now appears
to be considered the “standard” theory, replacing the theory
consisting of Schr¨odinger unitary evolution plus von Neumann
non-unitary measurement transition. Yet the only way to ar-
rive at the world of classical phenomena we experience in the
unitary-only theory is to assume classicality at the outset–and
even this is only approximate and “FAPP,” since it fails to solve
the measurement problem, as noted in Bub 1997, Section 8.2.
The “decoherence” process as invoked in service of “Quantum
Darwinism” is at best circular and at worst amounts to the log-
ical fallacy of aﬃrming the consequent. The alleged utility of
decoherence is greatly overstated and illusory. It is time to con-
sider the possibility that Everett might have been wrong.

5

References

Bub J, Clifton R, Monton B, 1998, The Bare Theory Has No
Clothes.
In Quantum Measurement: Beyond Paradox,
eds. Healey R A, Hellman G, Minnesota Studies in the
Philosophy of Science 17, 32-51.

Dugi´c M., Jekni´c-Dugi´c J., 2012, Parallel decoherence in com-

posite quantum systems, Pramana 79, 199

Dugi´c M., Arsenijevi´c M., Jekni´c-Dugi´c J., 2013, Quantum
correlations relativity, Sci. China Phys., Mech. Astron.
56, 732

Jekni´c-Dugi´c J.. Dugi´c M., Francom A., 2014, Quantum
Structures of a Model-Universe: Questioning the Everett In-
terpretation of Quantum Mechanics, Int. J. Theor. Phys.
53, 169

Kastner, R.E., 2012. The Transactional Interpretation
of Quantum Mechanics: The Reality of Possibillty. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.

Kastner R. E., 2014a, Einselection of pointer observables:
The new H-theorem?, Stud. Hist. Phil. Mod. Phys. 48,
56

Kastner R. E., 2014b, The Emergence of Spacetime: Transac-
tions and Causal Sets, forthcoming in Beyond Peaceful Coex-
istence, I, Licata, ed.; Preprint version http://arxiv.org/pdf/1411.2072v1.pdf.

Kastner R. E., 2015, Classical selection and quantum Dar-

winism, Phys. Today 68, 8

Wallace, D., 2012, The Emergent Multiverse: Quantum
Theory according to the Everett Interpretation. Oxford
University Press, Oxford

Zanardi P., Lidar D. A., Lloyd S., 2004, Quantum Tensor
Product Structures are Observable Induced, Phys. Rev. Lett.
92, 060402

Zurek W. H., 2003, Decoherence, einselection, and the quan-

6

tum origins of the classical, Rev. Mod. Phys. 73, 715

7

