Mechanically Ampliﬁed Piezoelectric Tunable 3D Microwave
Superconducting Cavity

N. C. Carvalho,1, 2, a) Y. Fan,1 and M. E. Tobar1, 2
1)School of Physics, The University of Western Australia, 35 Stirling Hwy, 6009 Crawley,
Western Australia.
2)ARC Centre of Excellence for Engineered Quantum Systems (EQuS), 35 Stirling Hwy, 6009 Crawley,
Western Australia.

(Dated: 17 March 2016)

In the context of hybrid quantum systems, there is a demand for superconducting tunable devices able to
operate in the single-photon regime. In this work, we developed a 3D microwave reentrant cavity with such
characteristics ready to provide a very ﬁne-tuning of a high-Q resonant mode over a large dynamic range. This
system has an electronic tuning mechanism based on a mechanically ampliﬁed piezoelectric actuator, which
can set the cavity resonance with a large dynamic range of order 1 GHz at 10 mK. At elevated microwave
power, nonlinear thermal eﬀects were observed to destroy the superconductivity of the cavity due to the large
electric ﬁelds generated in the small gap of the reentrant cavity.

I.

INTRODUCTION

A reentrant cavity is a device able to provide a very
sensitive microwave mode. Consisting of a cylindrical
shape with a narrow gap between a reentrant post and
the cavity lid, such a device presents an interesting elec-
tromagnetic ﬁeld conﬁguration with an azimuthal mag-
netic component around the post and an intense axial
electric ﬁeld in the gap spacing. Electrical quality factors
(Q-factors) up to 108 have already been reported when
operated in the superconductive regime and under gone
an intense cleaning process1. Without the intense clean-
ing process Q-factors above 105 is regularly achieved.
Such a cavity design can be highly advantageous for
a series of experiments.
In fact, microwave reentrant
cavities were ﬁrst developed to be used as transducers
in resonant-mass gravitational wave detectors2 and have
also ﬁnd applicability in diﬀerent research areas over the
past 50 years, such as solid state microwave oscillators3,
particle accelerators4, dielectric characterization5, elec-
tron spin resonance spectroscopy6 and test of fundamen-
tal physics experiments7.

Most of the aforementioned applications would beneﬁt
from a microwave cavity with a tunable superconduct-
ing mode, ﬁne tunability and large dynamic range. The
reentrant cavity was tuned over ranges of several hun-
dreds of MHz at dilution fridge temperatures and with a
Q-factor higher than 105. Since the resonant frequency
of reentrant microwave cavities depends on the cavity
gap spacing, this tunable system is based on a movable
cavity lid attached to an Ampliﬁed Piezoelectric Actu-
ator (APA) manufactured by Cedrat Technologies S.A.,
which is controlled through the application of a DC volt-
age. Tunable cavities coupled to piezoelectric actuators
have been developed previously8–10. However, this new
system developed in this work oﬀers an improved dy-
namic range due to the mechanically ampliﬁed tuning,

a)natalia.docarmocarvalho@research.uwa.edu.au

and is shown to operate with high-Q in the single-photon
regime, a necessary feature when designing a cavity for a
hybrid quantum system experiment.

Aside from the tunability properties of the sys-
tem, microwave nonlinear eﬀects due superconducting-
to-normal-state transition were observed to disﬁgure the
cavity resonance. Such behavior can be associated to hot
surface regions formation when the resonator is subject
to high microwave power driving.

II. EXPERIMENTAL

The detailed tunable system design is shown in Fig. 1
(a). The cylindrical reentrant cavity is 3.7 mm high and
its radius is equal to 6.4 mm with a central post whose
diameter is 1 mm. The cavity is made of niobium and
is located at the bottom of the system, where two mag-
netic probes can be coupled to the cavity ﬁeld. Around
the cavity there is a choke: a cut ring with inner radius
equal to one quarter of the resonant mode wavelength
and whose function is to reduce the energy leakage be-
tween the cavity top and bottom.

The cavity lid is movable and not connected to the
bottom structure, then in order to tune the gap spac-
ing between the post and the top wall the APA is at-
tached to the lid. Then, by exciting the piezoelectric
material through a diﬀerence of potential it has its length
increased in the horizontal direction deforming the APA
frame as in Fig. 1 (b) and supplying mechanical ampli-
ﬁcation of the piezoelectric displacement. Because the
top of the frame is held by a ﬁxed support, its opposite
extremity pulls the cavity lid up adjusting the gap as
required.

In Fig. 1 (c) the diagram presents the tunable system
located in the mixing chamber of the dilution fridge. Very
thin power cables connect the APA to a high voltage
power supply outside the fridge, providing up to 150 V
to the system. According to the APA properties, it is
able to cause a frame vertical retraction from 189 to 279

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
5
1

 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
8
4
8
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

2

FIG. 2. Measured dynamic range of frequency tuning as a
function of the mechanically set initial frequency for room
temperature and cryogenic measurements. Inset: cavity dis-
placement sensitivity (microwave resonant frequency versus
cavity gap spacing).

experiments as a function of the initial frequency me-
chanically set. In this plot ∆f is the frequency change
only due the electronic tuning when the maximum volt-
age is applied to the APA. Also, RT simulated data was
calculated from Eq. 1, where ∆fsim is the simulated tun-
ing range, ∆x is the APA frame vertical displacement for
150 V and (∆f /∆d)f em is the cavity displacement sen-
sitivity.

(cid:18) ∆f

(cid:19)

(1)

∆fsim = ∆x ×

∆d

f em

FIG. 1. (a) Schematic of the superconducting microwave tun-
able cavity. Inset: three-dimensional illustration of the sys-
tem. (b) APA frame deformation when a DC voltage is ap-
plied to the device. (c) Schematic diagram of the experiment
setup for cryogenic measurements (HV: high voltage power
ampliﬁer; VNA: Vector Network Analyzer; PZT: piezoelec-
tric device).

µm when it not carrying any load. Such displacement
can be translated into the cavity gap tuning.

To set the initial frequency before tuning, the tunable
cavity was also designed to allow the mechanical gap to
be set by adding spacers between the APA frame and its
holder. This enables the setting of the initial frequency
between 6 GHz to 9 GHz. Once, the initial frequency is
set, additional ﬁner tuning with a dynamic range of up
to a GHz is provided by the electronic system.

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Fig. 2 shows the measured frequency tuning range
(∆f ) for room temperature (RT) and cryogenic (mK)

A ﬁnite element method (FEM) model was used to cal-
culate (∆f /∆d)f em ; the relationship between the cavity
frequency (f ) and the gap spacing (d ) in this model is
presented in Fig. 2 inset. The ∆x was estimated by
neglecting the cavity lid weigh and adopting the frame
vertical retraction as 189 µm.

According to10 the piezoelectric actuator must work at
nearly 18% of its RT eﬃciency when in very cold temper-
atures. Therefore, cryogenic simulated data were taken
as this percentage of the RT simulated performance.

Experimental data were taken at RT and 10 mK and
they demonstrate reasonable consistence with the simula-
tions. Small random ﬂuctuations in the measured tuning
range can be observed and their cause is attributed to the

3

possibly increase the material surface resistance destroy-
ing the superconductivity in some hot regions and leading
to the normal-state transition. As a consequence, this ef-
fect will degrade the resonator Q-factor and may change
its resonance frequency11,12.

The narrow gap spacing of the reentrant cavity is an
excellent candidate to host these non-superconducting re-
gions. Its intense local electric ﬁeld can easily induce a
temperature rising, explaining the ﬂattening and broad-
ening of the resonance peak when the cavity is overdriven
by a high power. Hence, only away from the nonlineari-
ties a Q-factor about 105 can be achieved Fig. 3 (b)).

Another interesting feature this superconducting tun-
able cavity oﬀers is its capability to work at high Q-factor
with a small amount of photons. Theoretical calculations
have demonstrated that, at achievable low power oper-
ation, the system is able to engage in a single-photon
regime as shown in the Fig. 3 (c). Measurements were
undertaken at 10 mK nearly at critical coupling and with
an input power of -127 dBm; such conditions combined
to a Q-factor of 105 implicates that a cavity storing ap-
proximately 40 microwave photons was experimentally
achieved. Then, according to the theory behinds Fig. 3
(c), an extra attenuation of less than 20 dB would allow
single-photon operation.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

In this work we presented a ﬁne-tunable microwave
three-dimensional cavity based on a reentrant design and
able to be electronically controlled over a range of sev-
eral megahertz. This system demonstrated eﬀective per-
formance at dilution fridge temperatures and capability
of operation in the superconducting regime, leading to
the achievement of high-Q microwave modes. The res-
onator also presented thermal nonlinear eﬀects associ-
ated to the breakdown of the superconductivity due high
power microwave driving. In contrast, its low power op-
eration illustrated the high-Q operation with few pho-
tons in the cavity. A superconducting ﬁne-tunable 3D
microwave cavity with such characteristics is a desirable
device for quantum-enabled experiments and can oﬀer
practical contribution to research area.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research is supported by the Australian Research
Council grant no. CE110001013 and by the Conselho Na-
cional de Desenvolvimento Cientco e Tecnolgico (CNPq
Brazil).

1M. Bassan, R. Ballantini, A. Chincarini, G. Gemme, M. Iannuzzi,
A. Moleti, R. F. Parodi, and R. Vaccarone, “New parametric
transducer for resonant detectors: advances and room temper-
ature test,” Journal of Physics: Conference Series 122, 012031
(2008).

3.

response
due
(b) Resonator
(c) Calculated

(a) Nonlinear

FIG.
resonance
superconducting-to-normal-state transition.
Q-factor for diﬀerent cavity input power.
cavity photon number for diﬀerent input power.

APA frame unwanted deformation during the assembling
process.

The best tuning performance of the cryogenic trials
shows that the cavity resonance frequency can be tuned
over a range as large as 1 GHz. The aim, however, is to
achieve a large tuning range combined to a high electrical
Q-factor. From this perspective the best overall perfor-
mance is when the initial frequency is 6.1 GHz, where the
tuning range is about 500 MHz and the measured quality
factor is equal to 105. Such result can be easily justiﬁed
using the fact that as an open cavity, leakage is propor-
tional to the gap between cavity top and bottom. In this
sense, lower frequencies having narrower gaps implies the
cavity having higher electromagnetic ﬁlling factor and,
therefore, less losses.

Nonlinear eﬀects were also observed when the res-
onator set at 6.1 GHz was operated at relatively high
microwave powers. Fig.
3 (a) has the transmission
measurement of the cavity resonance for diﬀerent input
powers showing a clear deformation of resonance shape
with increasing power. This eﬀect besides distorting the
Lorentzian curve, also shifted the resonance peak to lower
frequencies.

Such behavior is often associated to the breakdown of
the superconductivity regime in the resonator surface.
The heating caused by the elevated power intensity can

2N. P. Linthorne and D. G. Blair, “Superconducting reentrant
cavity transducer for a resonant bar gravitational radiation an-
tenna,” Rev. Sci. Instrum. 63, 4154 (1992).
3A. G. Williamson, “The resonant frequency and tuning character-
istics of a narrow-nap reentrant cylindrical cavity,” IEEE Trans.
Microwave Theory Tech. 24, 182 (1976).
4T. L. Grimm, A. Aizaz, M. Johnson, W. Hartung, F. Marti,
D. Meidlinger, M. Meidlinger, J. Popielarski, and R. C. York,
“New directions in superconducting radio frequency cavities for
accelerators,” IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 15, 2393 (2005).
5J. Baker-Jarvis, R. G. Geyer, J. H. J. Grosvenor, M. D. Janezic,
C. A. Jones, B. Riddle, C. M. Weil, and J. Krupka, “Dielec-
tric characterization of low-loss materials a comparison of tech-
niques,” IEEE Trans. Dielectr. Electr. Insul. 5, 571 (1998).
6M. Giordano, F. Momo, and A. Sotgiu, “On the design of a
re-entrant square cavity as resonator for low-frequency esr spec-
troscopy,” 16, 774 (1983).

4

7B. T. McAllister, S. R. Parker,
and M. E. Tobar, “Axion
dark matter coupling to resonant photons via magnetic ﬁeld,”
arXiv:1512.05547.
8R. E. Klotz, “Tunable microwave cavity using a piezoelectric de-
vice,” U.S. patent 3,471,811.
9H. T. Buscher, W. F. Kolbe, and B. Leskovar, “Piezoelectric-
tuned microwave cavity for absortion spectrometry,” U.S. patent
4,110,686.

10N. C. Carvalho, Y. Fan, J.-M. Le Floch, and M. E. Tobar, “Piezo-
electric voltage coupled reentrant cavity resonator,” Rev. Sci. In-
strum. 85.

11S. M. Anlage, W. Hu, C. P. Vlahacos, D. Steinhauer, B. J. Feen-
stra, S. K. Dutta, A. Thanawalla, and F. C. Wellstood, “Mi-
crowave nonlinearities in high-tc superconductors: The truth is
out there,” Journal of superconductivity 12, 353 (1999).

12C. Kurter, A. P. Zhuravel, A. V. Ustinov, and S. M. Anlage,
“Microscopic examination of hot spots giving rise to nonlinearity
in superconducting resonators,” Physical Review B 84, 104515
(2011).

