Space Science Reviews manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

Insights into planet formation from debris disks
II. Giant impacts in extrasolar planetary systems

Mark C. Wyatt · Alan P. Jackson

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
 
5
1

.

 
 
]
P
E
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
7
5
8
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Received: date / Accepted: date

Abstract Giant impacts refer to collisions between two objects each of which
is massive enough to be considered at least a planetary embryo. The putative
collision suﬀered by the proto-Earth that created the Moon is a prime example,
though most Solar System bodies bear signatures of such collisions. Current
planet formation models predict that an epoch of giant impacts may be in-
evitable, and observations of debris around other stars are providing mounting
evidence that giant impacts feature in the evolution of many planetary sys-
tems. This chapter reviews giant impacts, focussing on what we can learn
about planet formation by studying debris around other stars. Giant impact
debris evolves through mutual collisions and dynamical interactions with plan-
ets. General aspects of this evolution are outlined, noting the importance of the
collision-point geometry. The detectability of the debris is discussed using the
example of the Moon-forming impact. Such debris could be detectable around
another star up to 10 Myr post-impact, but model uncertainties could reduce
detectability to a few 100 yr window. Nevertheless the 3% of young stars with
debris at levels expected during terrestrial planet formation provide valuable
constraints on formation models; implications for super-Earth formation are
also discussed. Variability recently observed in some bright disks promises to
illuminate the evolution during the earliest phases when vapour condensates
may be optically thick and acutely aﬀected by the collision-point geometry.
The outer reaches of planetary systems may also exhibit signatures of giant
impacts, such as the clumpy debris structures seen around some stars.

M. C. Wyatt
Institute of Astronomy, University of Cambridge, Madingley Road, Cambridge CB3 0HA,
UK
Tel.: +44 1223 337 517, Fax: +44 1223 337 523
E-mail: wyatt@ast.cam.ac.uk

A. P. Jackson
School of Earth and Space Exploration, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA

2

Mark C. Wyatt, Alan P. Jackson

Keywords Circumstellar Disks · Planet Formation

1 Introduction

The majority of the processes that contribute to the formation of a planetary
system are thought to take place in the massive circumstellar disks that sur-
round young stars called protoplanetary disks. Such disks last for up to around
10 Myr before dispersing through mechanisms that are still debated, leaving
a planetary system and a debris disk (Wyatt et al. 2015). The debris disk
is made up of the components of the planetary system that are not massive
enough to be classed as planets, i.e., planetesimals, dust and gas (see Matthews
et al. 2014). For example, the Asteroid Belt and Kuiper Belt account for the
majority of Solar System’s debris disk, along with the Zodiacal Cloud and the
Oort Cloud (see e.g., Matthews and Kavelaars 2016).

The motivation for saying that planet formation processes are largely com-
plete by the time the protoplanetary disk is dispersed is based on the absence
of large quantities of gas and dust at later stages from which to form planets
(e.g., Haisch et al. 2001). However, while the disappearance of the protoplane-
tary gas disk does make the formation of gas giant planets like Jupiter rather
problematic, this does not necessarily prevent the continued growth of solid
rocky or icy planets. From an observational perspective we can only say that
the mass present in less than cm-sized dust cannot be signiﬁcant after the
protoplanetary disk has dispersed (Pani´c et al. 2013). The majority of the
solid mass in the system could instead be locked up in planets (or planetary
embryos) that continue to grow. Indeed this is the basis of some models for
planetary system formation and evolution that aim to explain some debris disk
observations (Kenyon and Bromley 2008).

Isotopic compositions indicate that the parent bodies of many of the mete-
orites formed within the ﬁrst few Myr of the Solar System’s history (e.g. Kleine
et al. 2009), i.e., while the protoplanetary disk would have still been present.
However, a lengthier timescale for the formation of solid rocky planets is in-
ferred from isotopic measurements of the terrestrial planets, which shows that
they formed over a range of timescales, with Earth taking up to ∼ 100 Myr to
reach its ﬁnal mass (e.g. Halliday 2008). The long formation timescale for the
Earth is readily understood within the context of favoured models for planet
formation. In such models, the protoplanetary disk is suﬀused with planetes-
imals that grow via mutual collisions to eventually become planets, with a
system of terrestrial planets that bears many similarities to our own inner So-
lar System a likely outcome for the right initial conditions (e.g., Hansen 2009;
Walsh et al. 2011). Of relevance to the current discussion is that planetesimal
growth results in many planetary embryos (Kokubo and Ida 1998), and in the
ﬁnal stage the number of embryos is whittled down to a few as they undergo
repeated chaotic close encounters and eventually giant collisions, until the few
that remain are suﬃciently separated to be dynamically stable (e.g., Goldreich
et al. 2004; Kenyon and Bromley 2006). One consequence of this scenario is

Giant impacts in extrasolar planetary systems

3

that the formation of the Earth’s moon in a giant impact ∼ 100 Myr after the
Solar System formed is not an atypical occurrence.

The detailed structures of other inner Solar System bodies also bear witness
to a past epoch of giant (i.e., planetary scale) impacts in the inner Solar Sys-
tem (e.g., Benz et al. 1988; Marinova et al. 2011). There are more uncertainties
about the exact formation mechanism of the outer Solar System (Goldreich
et al. 2004; Helled and Bodenheimer 2014), but there are several lines of ev-
idence to suggest that giant impacts were also a feature of the more distant
reaches of the Solar System (e.g., Safronov 1972; Canup 2005). There is also
growing evidence for giant impacts having occurred recently in some extraso-
lar planetary systems, from observations of what could be impact-generated
debris (Song et al. 2005; Rhee et al. 2008). Stars with anomalously high levels
of dust in their regions that would be analogous to the location of terrestrial
planets in the inner Solar System are often interpreted within the context of
terrestrial planet formation (e.g., Lisse et al. 2008; Melis et al. 2010), particu-
larly if they are at an age at which planet formation models predict such giant
impacts to be taking place (i.e., (cid:28) 100 Myr). Clearly, studying this debris and
how frequently it is detected around nearby stars has the potential to inform
about terrestrial planet formation processes more generally, as well as the frac-
tion of stars that host such planets (Jackson and Wyatt 2012). Some stars also
show evidence that could point to recent giant impacts in the more distant
reaches of their planetary systems (Telesco et al. 2005; Dent et al. 2014; Stark
et al. 2014), but conclusions remain tentative for now.

The aim of this chapter is to review the topic of giant impacts, focussing
on the potential of observations of giant impact debris to inform on planet
formation processes. It starts with evidence for giant impacts in the Solar Sys-
tem (§2) before discussing the various possible observable consequences of such
impacts in extrasolar systems (§3). Generic aspects of the evolution of impact-
generated debris are then discussed in §4. The observability of debris from the
Moon-forming giant impact is considered in §5 and then compared with obser-
vations of extrasolar debris disks (§6). Giant impacts at larger distances from
the star are discussed in §7, followed by a discussion of the implications from
debris observations for the formation of the ubiquitous super-Earth class of
planetary system (§8). Conclusions are given in §9.

2 Giant impacts in the Solar System

In discussing the role of giant impacts in the formation of planets it is beneﬁcial
to turn ﬁrst to our own Solar System, as here we have detailed information
about the ﬁnal end products – the planets and satellites themselves. Aside
from Jupiter and possibly Saturn, true twins for the Solar System planets (in
both size and orbital location) remain tantalisingly outside detection limits of
searches for extrasolar planets at present. While future missions will certainly
extend these detection limits and allow us to begin detecting true Solar Sys-
tem twins, we will presumably always have more information about our own

4

Mark C. Wyatt, Alan P. Jackson

backyard than other star systems. As is common in discussions of planet for-
mation we divide our overview of the evidence for giant impacts in the Solar
System into the inner Solar System (interior to Jupiter) and the outer Solar
System (exterior to and including Jupiter).

2.1 Inner Solar System

The inner Solar System is replete with evidence for giant impacts. Each of the
terrestrial planets has features for which a giant impact explanation has been
suggested, with the exception of Venus, and it is probably no coincidence that
Venus is also the terrestrial planet whose surface and geological history are
least well understood.

Mercury In comparison with the other terrestrial planets Mercury is unusu-
ally rich in iron, with a very large core. This extreme iron enrichment can be
reproduced by a collision between a roughly 2.25 MMercury chondritic com-
position proto-Mercury and a roughly 0.4 MMercury impactor at speeds of
around 30 km s−1 (e.g. Benz et al. 1988; Cameron et al. 1988; Anic 2006;
Benz et al. 2007). This impact speed is around 6 times the escape velocity of
proto-Mercury and the resulting impact is extremely violent, almost destroy-
ing the planet. While commonly thought of as a ‘mantle-stripping’ event, in
physical terms it is gravitational re-accumulation that is responsible for bring-
ing the core of the former planet back together, rather than the outer layers
being peeled away to reveal the exposed core. It is also notable that proto-
Mercury in this scenario is very similar in mass to Mars, being around 16 per
cent more massive.

Debris is a key component of the formation of Mercury via a giant impact,
accounting for a larger fraction of the initial mass than the ﬁnal planet. As
noted by Gladman and Coﬀey (2009) the fate of this debris, and in particular
the fraction that is re-accreted, is essential to the ﬁnal success or failure of a
giant impact model to reproduce Mercury.

Earth-Moon system Perhaps the most striking thing about Earth (from a
dynamical perspective) is the large mass of the Moon. At 1.2 per cent of
Earth’s mass the Moon is, by a substantial margin, the largest satellite relative
to the size of its parent planet in the Solar System.

To ﬁnd a comparable system one must look to the dwarf planet binary
Pluto-Charon with a mass ratio of 0.12, and which is also believed to be the
result of a giant impact (§ 2.2). The angular momentum of the Earth-Moon
system is also unusually high – equivalent to a 4 hour rotation period in
an isolated Earth, much faster than the other terrestrial planets. Meanwhile
tracing back the tidal evolution of the Moon suggests that it would have been
much closer to Earth in the early Solar System, and compositionally the Moon
is substantially depleted in both iron and volatile elements relative to Earth.

Giant impacts in extrasolar planetary systems

5

All of these factors led to the suggestion that the Moon might be the prod-
uct of a giant impact between proto-Earth and another body (e.g. Cameron
and Ward 1976; Canup 2004a). Continued work on the giant impact hypoth-
esis eventually resulted in what has become known as the Canonical model
(e.g. Canup and Asphaug 2001; Canup 2004b,a), in which a roughly Mars
mass body (known as Theia) collides with a nearly fully formed proto-Earth
at an oblique angle of ∼ 45◦ and a speed near the mutual escape velocity. Such
impacts would have been quite common in the late stages of terrestrial planet
formation (e.g. Agnor et al. 1999), and the Canonical model is very successful
at reproducing many aspects of the Earth-Moon system.

In recent years the Canonical model has faced something of a crisis in
the near indistinguishability of Earth and Moon in isotope ratios, which has
spawned a re-think of the giant impact scenario (Asphaug 2014). Some have
invoked the evection resonance to permit the Moon to be created with collision
parameters that are quite diﬀerent to the Canonical model, satisfying both
the dynamical and isotopic constraints (e.g. Canup 2012; ´Cuk and Stewart
2012; Reufer et al. 2012), while others have argued that the Canonical model
parameters still satisfy the isotopic constraints, e.g., if some equilibriation of
the accreted material occurs in the protolunar disk (Pahlevan and Stevenson
2007; Salmon and Canup 2012) or if the impactor formed suﬃciently close to
the Earth (Mastrobuono-Battisti et al. 2015), but the basic idea of the origin
of the Moon in a giant impact does not seem to be in doubt.

Martian hemispheric dichotomy The largest topographic feature on Mars is
the diﬀerence in elevation by ∼5 km between the lower northern and higher
southern hemispheres (e.g. Smith et al. 1999) commonly referred to as the
hemispheric dichotomy. The possibility of the northern lowlands representing
a massive impact basin was ﬁrst suggested by Wilhelms and Squyres (1984).
With more recent work (e.g. Andrews-Hanna et al. 2008; Nimmo et al. 2008;
Marinova et al. 2008, 2011) this suggestion has become more concrete, and a
giant impact appears to be the best explanation for the hemispheric dichotomy.
A giant impact is also suggested as a possible origin for the Martian moons
Phobos and Deimos (e.g. Rosenblatt 2011; Rosenblatt and Charnoz 2012; Cit-
ron et al. 2015). The Borealis basin impact might thus be responsible for both
the hemispheric dichotomy and the formation of the Martian moons.

Asteroid families and (4) Vesta The Hirayama asteroid families are the result
of large collisions within the asteroid belt (e.g. Durda et al. 2007). Though
material strength begins to play an important role in asteroid sized bodies
large impacts between asteroids share many of the features of giant impacts
between planetary bodies (e.g. Jutzi 2015). In the case of (4) Vesta and the
associated Vesta family asteroids there is particularly strong link. The second
largest asteroid (mean diameter 525 km), Vesta is believed to be diﬀerentiated
and possess a largely intact crust, and has been suggested as an intact proto-
planet, or even ‘the smallest terrestrial planet’ (e.g. Keil 2002; Russell et al.
2012). In addition the numerous Vesta family asteroids can be traced to the

6

Mark C. Wyatt, Alan P. Jackson

formation of the massive Rheasilvia basin, which together with the underlying
Veneneia basin dominate the southern hemisphere of Vesta. Models of the
formation of Rheasilvia indicate a ∼66 km diameter impactor (Jutzi et al.
2013). The formation of the Rheasilvia basin can thus be thought of in some
senses as a recent ((cid:46)1 Gyr ago, Binzel et al. e.g. 1997) ‘mini’ giant impact.

2.2 Outer Solar System

Pluto-Charon As mentioned above the Pluto-Charon system is the closest
analogue to the Earth-Moon system, despite lying on average over 40 times
further from the Sun and having a substantially diﬀerent composition, being
rich in icy material. Pluto-Charon is well described as a binary, having a mass
ratio of around 8.5:1, both bodies being tidally locked to one another, and
with the system barycentre lying outside Pluto. The angular momentum in
the Pluto-Charon system is larger than could be contained in a single body,
suggesting a collisional origin (e.g. McKinnon 1989) and Canup (2005) showed
that a giant impact is indeed a good explanation for the Pluto-Charon binary.
The smaller satellites in the Pluto-Charon system may also have formed in
the giant impact that produced Charon (e.g. Canup 2011), but explaining the
complex resonant structure of the small satellites presents some diﬃculties
(e.g. Showalter and Hamilton 2015).

Haumea collisional family Analogous to the Hirayama families in the asteroid
belt there is presently one collisional family known in the Kuiper belt, that
associated with the dwarf planet Haumea (Brown et al. 2007). This collisional
family has a signiﬁcantly lower velocity dispersion than the escape velocity
of Haumea, and it has thus been suggested that the collisional family may
have been created in an impact with a precursor of the current two satellites
of Haumea (Schlichting and Sari 2009; ´Cuk et al. 2013) rather than Haumea
itself.

Middle-sized moons of Saturn It has been suggested that the formation of
satellites around the gas giant planets is in many ways like a miniature ver-
sion of the formation of the Solar System (Canup and Ward 2002, 2006).
This would include giant impacts between proto-satellites, and such impacts
may explain the origin of the otherwise mysterious middle-sized moons (those
∼500-1500 km in diameter) of Saturn (Sekine and Genda 2012; Asphaug and
Reufer 2013). In this scenario Saturn would have started out with a system
of larger satellites like the Galilean moons of Jupiter, but whereas in the Jo-
vian system these moons remained locked in a stable Laplace resonance, in the
Saturnian system they became unstable and collided, with the present middle-
sized moons representing the remnants of this former satellite population.

Giant impacts in extrasolar planetary systems

7

Obliquity of Uranus One of the important features of both the Earth-Moon
and Pluto-Charon systems that is well explained by a giant impact scenario is
their large angular momentum. Given the large amount of angular momentum
that can be imparted by a giant impact, if the impact orientation is substan-
tially diﬀerent to the spin axis of the planet it is possible for the impact to
lead to a large change in the planet’s obliquity. It has long been recognised
that an impact, involving an impactor around the size of Earth, represents
a possible explanation for the large obliquity of Uranus (e.g. Safronov 1972;
Parisi and Brunini 1997). An impact is not the only means by which Uranus
can be tilted; tidal evolution of a massive retrograde satellite has also been
proposed (Greenberg 1974; Kubo-Oka and Nakazawa 1995), though the moon
required would have had to be greater than 1.5 times the mass of Mars and
thus within an order of magnitude of the mass of proposed impactors.

3 Giant impact extrasolar observables
One conclusion from §2 is that there is abundant evidence for giant impacts
occurring in the Solar System. Indeed, the majority of the planets show some
evidence for giant impacts. It is also the case that evidence for the impacts
is manifested in many diﬀerent ways, in terms of the physical or dynamical
properties of the planets and their environments. The various consequences of
giant impacts are summarised in Table 1, along with the evidence in the Solar
System for these outcomes and the potential for observing them in extrasolar
systems which is discussed further below.

Table 1 Summary of the consequences of a planetary system being subjected to giant
impacts: the evidence for this from the Solar System and the possible manifestation in the
observable properties of extrasolar systems.

What do giant impacts do?

Evidence in Solar System

Potential extrasolar observ-
able

Formation of moons

Modify internal composi-
tion

Modify planet surface and
atmosphere

Modify planet spin

Create debris

Pluto-

Earth-Moon,
Charon, Saturn?
Mercury’s Fe-rich composi-
tion

hemispheric

di-
past magma

Mars’
chotomy,
ocean
Uranus tilt

Hirayama asteroid families;
dust bands; craters on small
bodies

densities

timing variations

Transit
from exomoons
Exoplanet
in-
ferred from radial velocities
and transits
Surface eﬀects subtle, but
hot planet spectrum

Exoplanet spins are mea-
surable
Infrared signature

The formation of moons is one of the most obvious lines of evidence for
giant impacts, since this has emerged as the favoured explanation for our own

8

Mark C. Wyatt, Alan P. Jackson

Moon, with other Solar System moons also explained in this way. Given the
small mass of any extrasolar moon, it seems like an impossible task to iden-
tify them. However, planets as small as 0.066M⊕ have been detected in orbit
around nearby stars (Jontof-Hutter et al. 2015). The mechanism to ﬁnd such
low mass planets involves looking for small perturbations to the timing of the
transit of another large planet in front of the star due to the dynamical per-
turbation of the smaller object (so-called transit timing variations, or TTVs).
This may be the most promising way of detecting extrasolar moons, although
none are known yet (Kipping et al. 2014). The formation of a moon through
giant impact requires an intermediate stage of a circumplanetary disk. There
may be evidence for the passage of a circumplanetary ring system in front of
its host star 1SWASP J140747.93-394542.6 (Mamajek et al. 2012; Kenworthy
and Mamajek 2015). While the nature of that object remains unsure, this may
provide evidence for satellite formation processes similar to those discussed in
§2.2 for Saturn’s moons. The thermal emission from circumplanetary disks
may also enhance the brightness of an extrasolar planet, as has been sug-
gested as the explanation for the spectrum of the Fomalhaut-b planet (Kalas
et al. 2013), and it is suggested that rings may also be detectable in transit
observations (Zuluaga et al. 2015).

A moon is not always an outcome of a giant impact, since in some cases
very little material is placed into orbit around the planet, one example being
the loss of Mercury’s mantle in a violent collision to leave a high density planet
(§2.1). The number of extrasolar planets for which densities have been mea-
sured has increased dramatically recently due to the combination of high sen-
sitivity transit observations with Kepler (that measure the size of the planet)
and radial velocity observations (that determine the mass of the planet). In
some cases the transit measurements also determine the mass of the planet,
providing there are nearby planets from which to measure the TTVs as men-
tioned above. Such densities are used to infer the composition of the planets,
with densities possibly as high as 14 g/cm3 being recorded (Marcy et al. 2014).
This is a promising avenue, but one which has yet to be used to infer a colli-
sional history for the planets, rather this information has been used to assess
the presence or absence of an atmosphere.

The eﬀect on the planetary surface is more subtle. For example, the Mar-
tian hemispheric dichotomy is only apparent to us because its surface height
has been measured at high precision; the level of diﬀerence is 0.07% the diam-
eter of Mars. Variations in surface height may be measured from the shape of
the transit of an exoplanet, but the precision required is beyond current in-
strumentation. However, if the collision is energetic enough, the surface would
be melted in the collision resulting in a magma ocean at 1000-3000 K for rocky
planets. This molten surface would only be temporary since the heat would be
radiated away (e.g., Earth’s magma ocean may have survived 2 Myr; Zahnle
et al. 2007), but could have a dramatic eﬀect on the emission spectrum of the
planet. Whether the hot surface itself is observable depends on the planet’s
atmospheric properties, which would in turn be modiﬁed by the impact; e.g.,
the early nebula atmosphere could be stripped by impacts (Schlichting et al.

Giant impacts in extrasolar planetary systems

9

2015; Inamdar and Schlichting 2015), and the atmosphere could also be re-
plenished by magma ocean outgassing. However, it is clear that the excess
energy must be radiated somehow, and this can increase the detectability of
the planets following impacts (Miller-Ricci et al. 2009; Lupu et al. 2014). Such
impact afterglows would be easier to detect at larger distance from the star
due to favourable contrast with the stellar emission. This lead to the sugges-
tion that the companion found at 55 au from 2M1207 was in fact the result
of an impact between a 7M⊕ and 74M⊕ planets (Mamajek and Meyer 2007).
While more detailed analysis shows that the properties of this system are bet-
ter explained by the atmospheric properties of a low mass companion without
any collision required (Barman et al. 2011), this at least demonstrates that
impact afterglows are in the realm of current observational capabilities.

Conservation of angular momentum requires a planet’s spin to be modiﬁed
as a result of a giant impact. In some cases this can be signiﬁcant, perhaps
explaining the tilt of Uranus’ spin relative to its orbital plane. Exoplanet spins
are already measurable in observations of the velocity proﬁle from lines in
their atmospheres (Snellen et al. 2014). For now such observations have been
applied to one of the most massive known extrasolar planets (∼ 8Mjup β Pic-
b), showing it to spin much faster than its Solar System counterparts, likely
due to its higher mass as opposed to its collisional history. There are also
prospects to measure the orientation of an exoplanet’s spin axis with respect
to its orbital plane using observations of its radial velocity during secondary
eclipse in a manner analogous to the Rossiter-McLaughlin eﬀect (Nikolov and
Sainsbury-Martinez 2015).

It is a general outcome of a collision that some fraction of the mass of the
two bodies does not remain bound to either one at the end of this process.
Indeed, the loss of Mercury’s mantle in a giant collision not only modiﬁed
the composition of that planet, but also released large quantities of debris.
That debris, made up of solid material ranging in size from µm-sized dust
grains to km-sized planetesimals, as well as vaporised rock if the collision was
energetic enough, ended up orbiting the Sun. There is abundant evidence for
the creation of debris in collisions in the asteroid belt, ranging from witnessing
dust released in an impact which occurred in the last few years (Jewitt et al.
2011), to clustering in asteroid orbital elements showing these to have been
created in an event a few Myr in the past (Nesvorn´y et al. 2002), evidence
for which is also present in the dust bands in the inner Solar System (Grogan
et al. 2001), to the Hirayama asteroid families which may have been much
more violent events Gyr-ago (Hirayama 1918). Evidence for debris released in
the giant impacts proposed to have shaped the Solar System’s planets is harder
to ﬁnd since these collisions likely occurred long ago, shortly after the Solar
System formed. Nevertheless such evidence may exist in the cratering record
and chemical composition of asteroids and meteorites (Bottke et al. 2015).

From an extrasolar perspective, giant impact debris is expected to be read-
ily detectable, because even relatively small quantities of dust (e.g., that cor-
responding to an asteroid of a few 10s of km in diameter ground into µm-sized
dust) can be detected around nearby stars due to its thermal emission. The

10

Mark C. Wyatt, Alan P. Jackson

dust is heated by the star and then re-radiates that emission in the infrared
at levels that can exceed the star’s own photospheric ﬂux (Wyatt 2008). Some
20% of nearby stars show evidence for circumstellar dust originating in the
break-up of planetesimals. While a large fraction of this dust is likely pro-
duced in the steady state grinding down of extrasolar analogues to the Kuiper
belt, since such an interpretation explains the statistics of disk detection as a
function of age (Wyatt et al. 2007a), some fraction of these may instead be
the signature of a recent giant impact, since giant impact debris is expected
to emit at potentially detectable levels (e.g., Jackson and Wyatt 2012).

To summarise, there are many ways in which evidence for giant impacts
may be found in extrasolar systems. While there has been much progress in
identifying these signatures, for now the most promising evidence for giant
impacts in extrasolar systems lies in the creation of debris, and it is to this
aspect that the remainder of this chapter will be devoted.

4 Evolution of debris from giant impacts
As noted in §3, one of the key observable features produced by a giant impact
around another star is debris. Though the character of the observable features
will vary somewhat depending on the nature of the impact, for example the
mass of the colliding bodies, or the orbital distance at which the impact oc-
curs, the underlying processes which shape these features and how they evolve
possess many similarities. Here we brieﬂy outline a general framework within
which the evolution of giant impact debris may be understood (for a more
detailed discussion see Jackson et al. 2014).

4.1 Dynamics of giant impact debris

The dynamical evolution of debris released in a giant impact can be considered
as beginning from a single point with velocities relative to the star given by
the progenitor’s Keplerian orbital velocity vk plus some velocity dispersion.
While the velocity dispersion is likely to be asymmetric, it is convenient to
model this as isotropic given that the orientation of any asymmetry would be
speciﬁc to a given impact, and is likely to be random. The velocity dispersion
of debris in giant impact simulations is approximately Gaussian with a width
of σv (e.g. Jackson and Wyatt 2012), where σv is comparable to the escape
velocity of the progenitor vesc. The subsequent dynamical evolution and mor-
phology of the debris depends on the ratio σv/vk which is shown in Fig. 1 for
diﬀerent progenitors as a function of orbital distance, using the assumption
that σv ≈ 0.46vesc as found for the Moon-forming impact (Jackson and Wyatt
2012). Note that the velocities of the debris being comparable to the escape
velocity of the progenitor (regardless of the progenitor mass) holds largely in-
dependently of the velocity distribution of the debris particles. This is because
to go into heliocentric orbit the debris must have suﬃcient energy to escape

Giant impacts in extrasolar planetary systems

11

the progenitor body, and once the energy required to escape is exceeded the
resulting relative speed post-escape then rapidly becomes comparable to the
escape velocity. For example a particle that exceeds the escape velocity by
only 5% at launch will then have a relative speed post-escape of 0.32vesc.

Fig. 1 The scaled velocity dispersion imparted to giant impact debris, σv/vk, as a function
of orbital distance of the progenitor for a selection of Solar System bodies ranging in mass
from Neptune to the asteroid (3) Juno, under the assumption that σv = 0.46vesc. This ratio
is important for the morphology and subsequent evolution of the debris; e.g., much of the
debris may be placed onto orbits that are unbound from the star if σv/vk (cid:29) 1.

To understand the evolution and morphology of the debris it is important
to remember that immediately after the impact the debris occupies what is
essentially, on the scale of the wider planetary system, a single point at the
location of the impact, which we will refer to as the collision-point (Jackson
and Wyatt 2012; Jackson et al. 2014). This geometry means that the orbits
of all debris fragments must pass through this point, which thus has a high
density. A small density enhancement is also found on the opposite side of
the star from the collision-point, since all debris orbits must pass through
the plane of the progenitors’ orbit somewhere along what we will refer to as
the anti-collision line (Jackson and Wyatt 2012; Jackson et al. 2014). Since
debris passes through the collision-point once per orbit, the resulting repeat
encounters can also have implications for the rate at which debris encounters
the progenitor and indeed other debris.

Common to the dynamical evolution of all (bound) giant impact debris are
four key morphological phases: (i) After the impact, both the debris and the
progenitor move away from the collision-point. The debris initially forms an
expanding clump that moves with the progenitor body around its orbit (see
upper left panel of Fig. 2). (ii) Since fragments that have been placed onto or-

12

Mark C. Wyatt, Alan P. Jackson

bits with smaller semi-major axes than the progenitor will have shorter orbital
periods than those with larger semi-major axes, the clump will be sheared as
it continues around the orbit. Once the shearing has progressed enough that
fragments on smaller orbits have reached the collision-point before those on
larger orbits have left it, the clump will become a spiral structure, which then
continues to coil as Keplerian shearing continues (see upper right panel of
Fig. 2). (iii) Eventually the spiral structure of the debris is no longer visible
and the debris forms a smooth but highly asymmetric disk, with a strong pinch
at the collision-point (see bottom left panel of Fig. 2). The density enhance-
ment at the collision-point, as well as how spread out the disk is away from
the collision-point, both increase with velocity dispersion (i.e., with σv/vk,
for more detail see Jackson et al. 2014). (iv) The orbits of debris fragments
precess due to interactions with massive bodies, including the progenitor, at
a rate that depends on the semi-major axis of the fragments. The resulting
diﬀerential precession eventually smears out the asymmetry producing an ax-
isymmetric disk (see bottom right panel of Fig. 2).

The timescale for the shearing process, and so for the evolution from clump
to asymmetric disk, depends on σv/vk. The shearing is quite rapid in Fig. 2
since σv/vk = 0.18; the early spiral stage is visible after 1 progenitor orbit,
and after 100 orbits the spiral is no longer distinguishable. In the case of an
impact with a smaller σv/vk the rate of Keplerian shearing is slower, since the
velocity diﬀerence across the debris distribution is smaller. While this would
result in slightly longer clump and spiral phases, in general the clump phase is
expected to end within ten orbits, and the spiral phase within a few hundred
orbits after the impact. Since the morphology of the disk, and the rate at
which the disk progresses through the early phases of the evolution, depend
on σv/vk, this means that impacts involving progenitors of the same mass can
have substantially diﬀerent morphologies and diﬀerent early stage evolution if
they occur at diﬀerent orbital distances (see Fig. 1).

The smooth asymmetric phase lasts much longer, since it is determined
by the precession timescale, rather than by the dynamical timescales that set
the clump and spiral phases. Precession rates depend on the system architec-
ture, i.e., the masses and orbits of other planets in the system, although the
progenitor itself may also be massive enough to set the precession period. In
general the collision-point may be expected to have been smeared out after
a few thousand orbits and the disk to have achieved total axisymmetry after
a few tens of thousands of orbits, timescales that apply to precession due to
a Jupiter mass planet 5 times more distant than the impact (see eq. 23 of
Jackson et al. 2014), or due to an Earth-mass progenitor (Jackson and Wyatt
2012).

The morphological evolution shown in Fig. 2 will occur whatever the wider
architecture of the planetary system in which the progenitor and debris reside.
However, the progenitor and other planets play a potentially much more im-
portant role beyond setting the precession timescale of the debris, since close
debris-planet approaches can lead to the debris being accreted onto the planet
or ejected from the system. Which of these outcomes is more likely depends on

Giant impacts in extrasolar planetary systems

13

Fig. 2 Snapshots of the distribution of debris ejected by a giant impact with σv/vk = 0.18,
showing the four key stages of its dynamical evolution: (top left) clump, (top right) spiral,
(bottom left) asymmetric disk and (bottom right) axisymmetric disk. For each stage the top
left panel shows a face-on view of the disk with the star at the origin and the collision-point
at (1,0), while the panels to the right and below this show edge-on views. The axis scale
is in units of the progenitor semi-major axis, a, while the snapshot times are in units of
the progenitor’s orbital period. The colour corresponds to the disk density normalised to an
integrated value of 1 at time zero.

the ratio of the escape velocity of the planet to its Keplerian velocity, vesc/vk:
ejection is more likely for vesc/vk (cid:29) 1 and accretion more likely for vesc/vk (cid:28) 1
(see Fig. 1). The rate at which debris is accreted onto a planet of radius Rp
can be estimated as

Rcol = nσcolvrel,

(1)

14

Mark C. Wyatt, Alan P. Jackson

where n is the density of debris in the vicinity of the planet, vrel is the relative
velocity of encounters between the planet and the debris, and σcol = πR2
p[1 +
(vesc/vrel)2] is the collision cross-section.1 However, note that this rate may be
signiﬁcantly underestimated at early times for re-accretion onto the progenitor
if the geometrical eﬀect of the collision-point is not taken into account; during
the early phases of dynamical evolution, most re-accretion onto the progenitor
will occur when it passes through the collision-point, and the accretion rate
will be substantially raised during this early period (Jackson and Wyatt 2012,
see also discussion in §4.2).

4.2 Collisional evolution

In addition to evolving through dynamical interactions with massive bodies in
the system, the debris will also evolve as a result of mutual collisions within the
debris population. Such collisions lead to the break-up of larger fragments into
smaller ones, redistributing mass down the debris size distribution. Eventually
the debris is ground down into dust grains that are small enough to be removed
by radiation pressure on orbital timescales. The size at which this occurs is
called the blow-out size and for dust of density ρ is given approximately by
(e.g. Wyatt 2008)

(cid:18) L∗

(cid:19)(cid:18) M(cid:12)

(cid:19)(cid:18) 2700 kg m−3

(cid:19)

Dbl = 0.8

L(cid:12)

M∗

ρ

µm.

(2)

The rate at which debris fragments collide with each other is determined
by an equation that is analogous to eq. 1. This calculation is complicated
by the fact that any given debris particle will interact with particles with a
range of sizes, with the outcomes of such collisions ranging from cratering
to complete pulverisation. For this reason the collisional evolution of debris
populations is often studied numerically (Th´ebault et al. 2003; Krivov et al.
2005; Bottke et al. 2005). However, this is not necessary to understand what
happens, because for most common assumptions about collisional outcomes,
once the size distribution has reached steady state it tends to a shape that
can be readily calculated (O’Brien and Greenberg 2003; Wyatt et al. 2011). If
it can be assumed that the strength of a debris fragment is independent of its
size, the size distribution tends to a power law
n(D) ∝ D−α,

(3)

where α = 7/2. Such a size distribution has most of the mass in the largest
objects, while most of its cross-sectional area is in the smallest objects (i.e.,
those close to the blow-out limit in eq. 2).

It is important to understand how both mass and cross-sectional area
evolve within the debris distribution. It is the cross-sectional area to which the

1 Note that the gravitational focussing factor for re-accretion onto the progenitor is inde-
pendent of the progenitor’s properties, since vrel scales with σv and so vesc. This factor is
found to be close to 10 for the Moon-forming giant impact debris.

Giant impacts in extrasolar planetary systems

15

observations discussed in §3 are sensitive (Wyatt 2008). However that cross-
section resides in small grains that are relatively short-lived, and so must be
replenished from the larger debris fragments which make up the majority of
the mass and have longer collisional lifetimes. The discussion is simpliﬁed if
the size distribution has a ﬁxed shape, because this implies that cross-sectional
area scales with mass by a constant ratio, though this is only true at all times
if the debris size distribution starts with the size distribution it will tend to
in steady state. Typically the total mass of debris created in a giant impact is
well known. For example, for large bodies (those with σv/vk > 0.1), impacts
generally fall in the hit-and-run or partial accretion/erosion regimes with de-
bris releases of around 3 − 5% of the colliding mass (Leinhardt and Stewart
2012; Stewart and Leinhardt 2012). This is because for large σv/vk, the impact
speed must be a larger fraction of the orbital speed to push the impact into a
violent outcome state. Smaller bodies (those with σv/vk (cid:28) 0.1) are more likely
to undergo violent impacts where debris masses can be a much higher fraction
of the colliding mass, but if the impact parameters are fairly well constrained
the debris mass can also be determined with reasonable conﬁdence. On the
other hand the size distribution is not well constrained, as discussed further in
§5.2. This is unfortunate, as for a ﬁxed mass of giant impact debris, both its
cross-sectional area and (as we will see below) the timescale of its evolution,
are strongly dependent on the size of object where most of the mass is created.
Nevertheless, the above discussion motivates a simple prescription with
which to predict the evolution of cross-sectional area of the giant impact debris.
It is only necessary to consider the evolution of the mass, which will deplete
due to the dynamical processes discussed in §4.1, and due to the collisional
erosion of the largest fragments. A quick estimate for the rate at which the
largest fragments deplete by collisions can be made using eq. 1 and assuming
that all the debris is in fragments of the same size. While more accurate
calculations are readily available (see Wyatt et al. 2007b), this illustrates how
the collisional depletion rate is proportional to the mass of largest fragments.
This leads to the mass remaining constant until the largest objects have come
to collisional equilibrium, following which the mass decays inversely with time,
with dynamical processes further accelerating the depletion process.

There are several caveats to the above picture. For example, it is known
that the strength of a debris fragment is dependent on its size, and the debris
size distribution may not be expected to start with the shape it tends to in
steady state. Both are valid criticisms, but their consequences can be readily
accounted for (L¨ohne et al. 2008; Wyatt et al. 2011). Furthermore, it is found
that the simple prescription given above is usually accurate to within a factor
of a few and so is acceptable for many applications.

A more complicated caveat to address is the geometrical eﬀect of the
collision-point. In the early phases of the dynamical evolution of the disk
(prior to axisymmetrisation) the number density varies substantially around
the orbits of the debris fragments; in particular the collision-point is a region
of exceptionally high density. Fig. 3 shows how this results in the collision-
point having a collision rate that is many orders of magnitude higher than

16

Mark C. Wyatt, Alan P. Jackson

Fig. 3 Image showing how the rate of mutual debris collisions varies with position during the
asymmetric phase of evolution of the debris produced by a giant impact with σv/vk = 0.3.
The rates are normalised such that the maximum collision rate is 1. Orbital motion is in
the anti-clockwise sense. The geometry of the debris orbits results in an increased density
along y = 0 (see Fig. 2), and so a higher collision rate at the collision point and along the
anti-collision line.

elsewhere. This eﬀect is such that, to a ﬁrst approximation, all collisions that
a debris particle experiences occur close to the collision-point. It is also such
that the collision rate averaged over the particle’s orbit is around two orders
of magnitude higher than would be the case for an axisymmetric disk; i.e., the
rate of collisional evolution will be raised during the early phases of dynamical
evolution. The density enhancement along the anti-collision line also leads to a
slightly increased collision rate there, though this is much less dramatic. These
geometrical eﬀects can only be accounted for using numerical techniques (e.g.,
Kral et al. 2015), and have further implications which will be discussed in §7.

5 Observability of debris from the Moon-forming giant impact

Though recent work has put the Canonical model in some doubt (see §2.1),
the Moon-forming giant impact remains the most well studied example of a
giant impact, and thus provides a good starting point for discussions of the
behaviour and observability of debris released by giant impacts (for more detail
see Jackson and Wyatt 2012).

Giant impacts in extrasolar planetary systems

17

Fig. 4 The fates of particles in a 100 Myr 105 particle N -body simulation of debris from
the Moon-forming giant impact. Debris particles are massless test particles, and no account
is made for collisional erosion. The present day Solar System architecture is used. Lines for
diﬀerent planets indicate the fraction of particles accreted onto that planet.

5.1 Dynamical evolution

From smoothed-particle hydrodynamics simulations conducted by Marcus et al.
(2009) the velocity dispersion of the debris released by the Moon-forming giant
impact is well ﬁt by a Gaussian with a width of σv = 5.2 km s−1. At an orbital
distance of 1 au this corresponds to σv/vk = 0.18 (the value used in Fig. 2).
Once it has been launched from Earth the debris goes into heliocentric orbit
and the debris distribution then evolves dynamically as described in § 4.1, with
the proviso that the general discussion therein only gave brief consideration
to planets in the system other than the progenitor, which were not included
in Fig. 2.

The wider architecture of the planetary system becomes important as the
giant impact debris leaves the asymmetric stage. The two most important
planets aside from Earth in determining the dynamical evolution of the debris
are Venus and Jupiter. Venus draws the debris inwards such that, rather than
being narrowly peaked around the orbit of Earth, the debris occupies a broad
band encompassing the orbits of both Earth and Venus. Jupiter meanwhile
truncates the outer edge of the disk by ejecting fragments that encounter it
from the Solar System. The diﬀering eﬀects of Venus and Jupiter are in line
with expectations from Fig. 1, since Venus has vesc/vk (cid:28) 1 while Jupiter has
vesc/vk (cid:29) 1. Fig. 4 shows the ultimate fate of debris created in the Moon-
forming impact, which shows that the three fates of accretion by Earth, accre-
tion by Venus, and ejection (mostly by Jupiter) account for the overwhelming
majority of the dynamical losses of the debris. The next most likely fate, col-

18

Mark C. Wyatt, Alan P. Jackson

lision with the Sun, is in fact also a secondary eﬀect of Jupiter; in systems
lacking Jupiter the quantity of debris which impacts the Sun is much lower.
In total half of the dynamical particles have been lost after 13 Myr, while just
5% of the dynamical particles remain after 100 Myr.

While of course other planetary systems may have very diﬀerent orbital
architectures to the Solar System, we can expect that some general features
of the evolution of the debris from Moon-formation will apply to all systems.
In particular we can expect that the most important other bodies in the sys-
tem will be nearby terrestrial planets of comparable (or larger) mass than the
progenitor, and the nearest giant planet. More distant giant planets have lim-
ited inﬂuence, since the nearest one will almost always eject particles before
they have a chance to interact with more distant giant planets (i.e., as long as
vesc/vk (cid:29) 1).

5.2 Predicted brightness evolution
As discussed in § 4.2, the brightness of giant impact debris depends on the
quantity of small dust present, which in turn depends on how the debris size
distribution evolves due to collisions. Several issues with calculating the col-
lisional evolution were discussed in § 4.2, where it was noted that there may
be inherent uncertainties arising from how well the initial size distribution is
known, and most collision rate calculations also suﬀer from an inaccurate treat-
ment of the geometry of the collision-point. For this reason Fig. 5, which shows
the predicted brightness evolution of giant impact debris at two wavelengths
12 and 24 µm at which stars are commonly observed, shows that evolution
for two diﬀerent initial size distributions and two diﬀerent treatments of the
collisional evolution.

There are additional uncertainties involved in translating dust cross-sectional

area into the emergent emission spectrum. In all cases on Fig. 5 the emission
from the dust is calculated assuming the grains to act like simple blackbodies
at the orbital distance of the progenitor. This has the beneﬁt of resulting in a
constant ratio between the 12 and 24 µm emission so that both can be shown
on the same plot. However, the small grains that dominate the emission are
expected to be hotter than black body, while at the same time emitting inef-
ﬁciently, and potentially exhibiting spectral features due to their composition
(e.g., §6.2). These eﬀects can be properly accounted for, but require additional
assumptions (e.g., about the grain composition). For simplicity these are not
included in Fig. 5, which should thus be considered to have additional factors
of a few or more uncertainty.
As mentioned in § 4.2 the size distribution of debris released by a giant
impact is poorly constrained. SPH simulations of giant impacts are unable to
resolve anything but the largest debris fragments ((cid:29)100 km for Earth-mass
impactors; Genda et al. 2015). The main constraint from such simulations
is the total mass of the debris, which is around 0.016 M⊕ (∼ 1023 kg) in the
Canonical model. However, SPH simulations of giant impacts do indicate that,

Giant impacts in extrasolar planetary systems

19

Fig. 5 Evolution of the fractional excess of debris released by a Moon-forming impact
around a Sun-like star for diﬀerent assumptions about its initial size distribution and about
its collisional evolution. The fractional excess is deﬁned as the ﬂux from the debris relative
to the ﬂux from the stellar photosphere, shown at 12 µm on the left axis and 24 µm on the
right axis; the dotted lines show typical detection limits at fractional excesses of 10% at
both wavelengths. The black lines show the evolution of a two component size distribution
with 30% vapour condensates up to 1 cm in size and 70% boulders up to 500 km in size.
The red lines show the evolution of a three component size distribution with 30% vapour
condensates up to 1 cm in size, 50% intermediate material up to 7.5 km in size and 20%
large boulders up to 500 km in size. Solid lines calculate collision rates assuming the debris
to be axisymmetric at all times, while dashed lines show the results incorporating some
aspects of the collision-point geometry in this calculation (see text for details).

due to the enormous energy involved in the collision of two planetary-sized
bodies, a signiﬁcant fraction of the debris material is released in the form of
vapour. As the cloud of vapour expands it cools and condenses, forming small
droplets with typical sizes in the mm-cm range (e.g., Melosh and Vickery 1991;
Johnson et al. 2012; Johnson and Melosh 2014). For impacts involving Earth-
sized bodies, typically a few tens of percent of the debris is released in the form
of vapour; Canup (2008) estimated ∼10-30% for the Canonical Moon-forming
impact, though Kraus et al. (2012) suggest that the equations of state in use
in current hydrodynamical codes may underestimate vapour production. The
production of vapour alongside material that is not vaporised suggests that
the size distribution should consist of (at least) two components, the vapour
condensates and unvaporised boulder material that extends to larger sizes.

The simplest assumption for the initial boulder size distribution is that it
starts with the shape it would tend to in steady state (e.g., eq. 3) and extends

20

Mark C. Wyatt, Alan P. Jackson

up to some maximum size Dmax. This was the assumption made in Jackson
and Wyatt (2012), which is reproduced in Fig. 5 for Dmax = 500 km with
the solid black line. This illustrates the properties common to all models for
the brightness evolution. In the early phases the vapour condensates shine
brightly at readily detectable levels. However, these are rapidly depleted by
collisional evolution to non-detectable levels within a few hundred years. Dust
arising from the break-up of the boulders starts at a lower level, but is main-
tained for much longer, eventually starting to deplete after a few Myr due to
a combination of collisional erosion and dynamical erosion (see Fig. 4). Taken
at face value, the boulder distribution remains undetectable throughout the
evolution, and the total emission from both vapour condensates and boulders
drops below the typical 12 µm detection threshold after a few hundred years.
However, the predicted excess level is so close to the typical detection thresh-
old that, given the various factor of a few uncertainties mentioned elsewhere,
the giant impact debris could be detectable at 12 µm up to 10 Myr, which is
its duration of detectability at 24 µm.

An alternative choice for the initial size distribution of the boulder material
is that of Bottke et al. (2015), basing it instead on the size distribution of the
Vesta family asteroids, with additional constraints from Lunar cratering. The
size distribution of the Vesta family is considerably steeper than a self-similar
cascade, with more mass in smaller bodies. 2 Bottke et al. (2015) suggest that
the boulder material may itself have two components, one a steep power law
(α ∼ 5 in eq. 3) extending to a largest size of ∼80-100 km and an additional less
massive population of larger bodies. The red lines in Fig. 5 show the predicted
brightness evolution for a three-component size distribution intended to mimic
that of Bottke et al. (2015). The resulting evolution is very similar to that
of the two-component distribution considered in Jackson and Wyatt (2012).
In particular, it is noticeable that the brightness evolution exhibits just two
rather than three distinct phases (i.e., a drop over ∼ 100 years followed by
another after ∼ 10 Myr), which is because the emission from the grinding
of intermediate-sized (∼ 10 km) material overlaps with the peak from the
vapour condensates (since this population is both bright and has a very short
collisional lifetime). The relatively low mass in the largest boulders with this
assumption makes it less likely that the debris remains detectable up to 10 Myr
after the impact event, but any such conclusion would bear the caveat of the
factors of few uncertainty in brightness.

The solid lines on Fig. 5 made the same assumption as Jackson and Wyatt
(2012) in calculating the collision rate in assuming the debris to be distributed
in an axisymmetric torus. The assumption of axisymmetry is common in calcu-

2 It is unclear how appropriate it is to extrapolate the Vesta family size distribution to
planetary scale giant impacts. For example, the Rheasilvia impact speed of ∼ 15vesc is much
faster than typical giant impact speeds, while at ∼0.1% of the mass of Vesta the 66 km im-
pactor is unusually small (Jutzi et al. 2013). The largest of the Vesta family asteroids (aside
from (4) Vesta itself) is only ∼8 km in size, and gravitational re-accumulation may become
more eﬃcient at larger sizes. Additionally, the size distribution of Vesta family asteroids may
have undergone collisional evolution in the ∼1 Gyr since the Rheasilvia impact. Nevertheless,
it may be the only observable example of a giant impact-like debris distribution.

Giant impacts in extrasolar planetary systems

21

lations of collision rates (Wetherill 1967; Wyatt et al. 2010), since precession
causes orbits to precess on long timescales. However, in the early phases of
evolution the orbital planes and pericentres have yet to be randomised due
to precession, and moreover in the clump phase it is incorrect to assume that
particles are evenly distributed along their orbits. While such eﬀects are au-
tomatically accounted for in the N-body simulations for accretion of debris
onto planets, these simulations do not follow debris-debris collisions due to
the large number of particles that would be required. It is possible to make
a more accurate calculation of the collision rates using the output of the N-
body simulations. The dashed lines on Fig. 5 show the evolution using collision
rates calculated from the output of the N-body simulations in which the or-
bital planes and pericentre orientations are no longer assumed to be random
(see Fig. 3 and Jackson et al. 2014). As expected from the discussion in §4.2,
the decay in brightness occurs much faster due to the geometry of the collision-
point. However, there is a caveat in that this calculation still assumed that
particles are evenly spread around their orbits. This means that the collision
rate is overestimated during the clump phase, and the true evolution is likely
to lie somewhere between the solid and dashed lines on Fig. 5.

A further caveat that applies during the earliest clump and spiral phases
is the prospect for the debris to have high optical depth. All of the brightness
calculations discussed so far assumed the debris to be optically thin, whereas
in fact the dust arising from the break-up of vapour condensates is predicted
to be so abundant that its distribution may be optically thick. This could
have several consequences, by changing the detectable cross-sectional area,
the dust temperature, and whether it is removed from the system by radiation
pressure. These eﬀects would also vary on orbital timescales. Clearly further
work is needed to improve our understanding of the evolution of giant impact
debris during the ﬁrst tens of orbits. Progress has been made in incorporating
collisional evolution into N -body simulations of the evolution of giant impact
debris (Kral et al. 2015), however the small volume of the collision-point means
that it remains a challenge to accurately model its eﬀect due to the spatial
resolution required to do so.

6 Comparison with observed systems

6.1 Photometric ﬂuxes
From §5.2 it is clear that if we were observing another star shortly after its
growing terrestrial planets had undergone an impact similar to that which
created the Earth-Moon system, then this event would have had a signiﬁcant
eﬀect on the level of infrared emission observed. Moreover, with multiple such
events occurring, it seems that the Solar System would have shone brightly
in the mid-IR throughout its infancy. Given the other evidence for collisions
occurring throughout the history of the Solar System (see §2), Rieke et al.
(2005) suggested that the scatter in levels of 24 µm emission seen in their

22

Mark C. Wyatt, Alan P. Jackson

Spitzer survey of nearby A stars (i.e., stars slightly more massive and luminous
than the Sun), and their higher levels in the ﬁrst 150 Myr of the stars’ lives,
could be a result of recent collisions. In that interpretation, high levels of
mid-IR emission are attained stochastically following a giant impact, with
levels fading back to quiescent levels thereafter. A similar interpretation of
24 µm emission levels was applied to a Spitzer survey of Sun-like stars (Meyer
et al. 2008), wherein it was assumed that this emission is indicative of ongoing
terrestrial planet formation processes.

However, the situation is complicated, because 24 µm emission can arise
for a number of reasons unconnected with collisions or planet formation. It
was later shown that both the scatter seen in the Rieke et al. (2005) observa-
tions and the decay in emission levels could be explained by the steady state
erosion of extrasolar Kuiper belts (Wyatt et al. 2007a); the level observed sim-
ply reﬂects the initial mass in the belt and its distance from the star, which
was far enough that the emission was generally cold and so also explained
the observations at 70 µm toward the same stars (Su et al. 2006). The same
issue aﬀected the interpretation of Sun-like stars, since it was found that the
emission spectrum for the majority of these stars was rising toward longer
wavelengths implying that the 24 µm emission arises in a belt far enough from
the star (> 10 au) to be explained by steady state processes (Carpenter et al.
2009). That is, while recent giant impacts are not ruled out as the origin of the
24 µm emission, a steady state interpretation is more likely for most systems,
and regardless the relatively cool temperature of the emission implies that this
arises from a location outside that typically associated with the formation of
terrestrial planets.

The problem is simply that while 24 µm emission should accompany a giant
impact (see Fig. 5), it is a ﬂawed proxy for such an impact. Nevertheless, the
large samples of young stars observed by Spitzer mean that the evolution of
a star’s (or more accurately a population of stars’) 24 µm emission is well
characterised (e.g., Siegler et al. 2007), and as such has often been used to
assess the frequency of giant impacts (Jackson and Wyatt 2012). More recently
it has become clear that a better proxy for such collisions is a star’s excess
12 µm emission. Such hot emission is seen less frequently and cannot arise
from a more distant Kuiper belt, rather the requisite temperature to emit at
such short wavelengths places the dust at a temperature compatible with the
location of the terrestrial planets in the Solar System. This does not preclude
the presence of a more distant cold dust belt in the system, and indeed there
are many examples of debris disks with both cold outer belts and hot inner
dust (Su et al. 2013; Kennedy and Wyatt 2014); the hot dust in some of
the younger such systems has been attributed to ongoing planet formation
processes (Smith et al. 2009).

Early searches for 12 µm emission from dust around nearby stars with IRAS
were not particularly successful (Aumann and Probst 1991), though several
good candidates were rediscovered in the last decade and followed up with
higher resolution instruments to conﬁrm the emission was associated with the
star and to characterise its spectrum (e.g., Rhee et al. 2008; Melis et al. 2010).

Giant impacts in extrasolar planetary systems

23

These hot excesses were picked out on a case-by-case basis, and interpreted
again within the context of terrestrial planet formation, based on the fact that
the stars with bright emission were predominantly found around < 100 Myr
stars.

A signiﬁcant advance in the statistical analysis of the frequency of stars
exhibiting excess 12 µm emission came with WISE, which surveyed the whole
sky at that wavelength with a spatial resolution and sensitivity far superior to
IRAS. This enabled Kennedy and Wyatt (2013) to quantify the rarity of bright
excesses by correlating Sun-like stars in the Hipparcos database with WISE.
They found that detectable excesses (those for which 12 µm dust emission is
at levels above ∼ 10% that of the stellar photosphere) occur around 1:1000
stars. While it is not feasible to derive the ages of all Hipparcos stars, an age
dependence for the excess emission was evident because the majority of the 22
stars with excess were known to be members of young associations. To make a
rough estimate of the age dependence, Kennedy and Wyatt (2013) made the
assumption that stars in the Hipparcos catalogue have ages that are randomly
distributed up to the main sequence age for their spectral type. This led to
the conclusion that for stars in the 10-120 Myr age range, the frequency of
detectable emission is closer to 3%; i.e., the excess rate declines with age, just
as it does at other wavelengths.

Eventually the WISE data should be mined to determine the excess dis-
tributions in all young clusters, similar to the analysis carried out for Spitzer.
For now, this has been applied to a few regions such as 10-20 Myr Upper Sco
(Luhman and Mamajek 2012) and 3-5 Myr Taurus (Esplin et al. 2014). The
interpretation is complicated by the presence of long-lived protoplanetary disk
systems among the excess candidates. However, based on this work we esti-
mate the fraction of Sun-like stars in Upper Sco with detectable 12 µm excesses
is ∼ 10%, in broad agreement with the ﬁndings of Kennedy and Wyatt (2013),
particularly if one considers that the fraction is likely to decrease over the 10-
120 Myr age range (and noting that some of the Upper Sco excesses are from
protoplanetary disks).

The 12 µm excesses are plotted on Fig. 6 as a function of stellar age for a
number of Sun-like stars. Some of these were identiﬁed in statistical samples
from which the rate of excesses was determined above, but others were simply
excess detections reported in the literature such that care should be taken
with the interpretation of this plot. Nevertheless, this illustrates the level at
which excess is detected, and how that level is typically higher around younger
stars. In fact the level of emission around main sequence stars can reach the
level seen around T Tauri stars, meaning that the full emission spectrum needs
to be considered when interpreting a 12 µm excess, as it is not always clear
whether this should be interpreted as evidence for a recent collision or for a
protoplanetary disk (Schneider et al. 2013; Kennedy et al. 2014).

24

Mark C. Wyatt, Alan P. Jackson

Fig. 6 Evolution of 12 µm emission around Sun-like stars. Large circles are those for which
an excess above photospheric levels are detected, while small circles are those for which no
excess is discernable; the approximate detection threshold is given by the horizontal yellow
line, though this varies from star to star. The diﬀerent colours indicate diﬀerent surveys:
green is Taurus (Esplin et al. 2014), light blue are young moving groups such as Sco Cen
(Rizzuto et al. 2012) and our SED ﬁtting of bona ﬁde members from Malo et al. (2013),
brown are our SED ﬁts of nearby members from the DEBRIS sample (Phillips et al. 2010).
Individually identiﬁed 12 µm excess sources are also included from Kennedy and Wyatt
(2013). The vertical dashed lines show the level of variability for sources discussed in §6.3
(Melis et al. 2012; Meng et al. 2014, 2015).

6.2 Compositional constraints

The information provided by a detection of excess emission extends beyond
the photometric measurement of the level of excess. For those systems with
detections, the mid-IR spectrum provides information about the composition
of the dust (e.g., Chen et al. 2006). A prime example of this is the 12 Myr
A5V star HD172555 at 29 pc for which the mid-IR spectrum is dominated
by emission from amorphous silica dust (Lisse et al. 2009). Dust of diﬀerent
compositions leaves signatures in the spectrum at speciﬁc wavelengths; e.g.,
the silica feature at ∼ 9.3 µm allows its presence to be picked out by eye
for HD172555. However, extracting more detailed information about the dust
composition is not trivial, since the spectral features are relatively broad so
that those from diﬀerent compositions overlap, and the exact shape of the
spectrum depends on the dust size distribution and the temperatures attained
by diﬀerent sizes.

Debris disk modellers commonly employ Mie theory for interpretation of
debris disk observations (e.g., Lebreton et al. 2013), however the approxima-

Giant impacts in extrasolar planetary systems

25

tions in this approach mean that such detailed spectra are often interpreted
using optical properties obtained from laboratory measurements of astrophys-
ical materials (Lisse et al. 2009). In the case of HD172555 it was the latter
approach which was used, resulting in the conclusion that around half of the
dust is composed of silica, with a total dust mass equivalent to a 150-200 km as-
teroid. Since silica is produced in high energy impacts, this points to an origin
for the dust in a recent collision at > 10 km/s between two massive protoplan-
ets each at least the mass of Mercury. This interpretation was supported by a
feature in the spectrum at 8 µm. While this was originally believed to indicate
the presence of SiO gas created in the collision (Lisse et al. 2009), the short
lifetime of such gas due to photodissociation suggested an alternative origin
for the feature in solid SiO created by condensing vaporised silicate (Johnson
et al. 2012). In summary, the composition is similar to that which would have
been anticipated following the Earth-Moon forming collision. This analogy is
reinforced by the dust temperature which places it at a distance of ∼ 6 au from
the star, in keeping with spatial constraints from imaging and interferometry
(Smith et al. 2012), a location that is comparable in terms of incident energy
to the Solar System’s terrestrial planets given the higher luminosity of this
star.

One puzzling aspect of the dust orbiting HD172555 is its inferred size
distribution, since the prominence of the silica feature requires there to be
abundant sub-µm dust, whereas such dust is small enough that it would be
expected to be blown away from the star by radiation pressure on orbital
timescales of a few years (see eq. 2). This is in contrast to the persistence of
the mid-IR emission at the same level to within 4% over 27 years (from IRAS to
WISE), suggesting that the dust is created more rapidly than it is removed, or
that radiation pressure is somehow ineﬀective. Johnson et al. (2012) preferred
the latter explanation, and found that for certain compositions it is possible
for this star to retain a long-lived population of (cid:28) 0.1 µm grains even if those
0.1 − 1 µm are signiﬁcantly depleted; this is because the eﬀect of radiation
pressure is strongest for 0.1 − 1 µm grains, and for certain compositions such
grains can have β > 1 (and so must be unbound) while smaller (and larger)
grains have β < 0.5 (and so can be bound). However, the origin of the size
distribution remains unclear, and may be related to the issues discussed in §6.3,
and may also aﬀect the assumed detectability of giant impact debris discussed
in §5.2. Another relevant aspect of this system that we are just beginning to
learn about is its gas content; for now it is known that OI is present (Riviere-
Marichalar et al. 2012), but its location relative to the hot silica dust is not
yet known, as are its origin and impact on the hot dust.

While this section has focussed on just one system, there are many other
systems for which compositional constraints exist, not all of which exhibit the
same silica composition, even if they are interpreted within the framework of
giant collisions (Lisse et al. 2008; Currie et al. 2011; Ballering et al. 2014).

26

Mark C. Wyatt, Alan P. Jackson

6.3 Time variability

Whereas the hot dust emission toward HD172555 was concluded to not be
variable (see §6.2), the same is not true for all stars with hot dust mid-IR
emission. For example, that of BD+20307 brightened by 7% over the course
of the 6 months between two WISE observations (Kennedy and Wyatt 2013).
The case of TYC8241 is particularly interesting, because the emission persisted
at a high level of excess (∼ 10 times brighter than the star at 12 µm) for
around 25 years before dropping by an order of magnitude to a negligible level
over the course of 2 years (Melis et al. 2012). A good explanation for the
disappearance of the hot dust is lacking. One of the ideas proposed is that
the dust was removed in a collisional avalanche, a runaway process wherein
the input of large quantities of small grains that get blown out by radiation
pressure break-up larger debris on their way out (Grigorieva et al. 2007). If
so, the previously high levels of excess will return once the population of small
dust is replenished in collisions between the bigger debris that was unaﬀected
by the avalanche.
However, given the discussion in §6.2, perhaps it is not the disappearance
of the dust which is surprising, rather it is the earlier persistence of the dust
in the face of the star’s radiation pressure which is more surprising. Indeed, a
two year timescale for the emission to decline is compatible with the orbital
removal timescale expected for radiation pressure. The question then would
be why radiation pressure was ineﬀective for so long, and what then caused it
to turn on so suddenly?

Another case that is particularly illuminating is that of 35 Myr-old Sun-
like (G6V) star ID8 for which the 24 µm emission was noted to be variable
in Meng et al. (2012). Later observations showed that the near-IR (3-5 µm)
emission to this star underwent a substantial brightening followed by decay
on a year timescale, with quasi-periodic modulations (with period ∼ 30 days)
in the disk ﬂux (Meng et al. 2014). This was interpreted as the result of a
giant collision in which silicate vapour is created out of which small particles
condense and subsequently collisionally deplete. The geometry of the collision-
point during the early phases of the debris evolution explains the periodic
modulation (see §5.1), implying that the collision was located at ∼ 0.33 au.
Subsequent monitoring of 5 other systems with large levels of mid-IR emission
showed that 5/6 of the full sample show signiﬁcant variations on timescales
less than a year (Meng et al. 2015).

Regardless of the origin of this variability, there is an empirical implication
for how bright mid-IR emission is interpreted, since its level does not evolve
in the manner that the colder dust in debris disks is thought to evolve. That
is, the evolution is more complicated than that outlined in §4.2 and §5.2, in
which the dust emission was assumed to decay slowly as the largest objects
are ground into dust that is removed by radiation pressure (eq. 2). Indeed,
the shape of what Kennedy and Wyatt (2013) called the exozodi luminosity
function, that is the fraction of stars with 12 µm excess levels above a given
level, may already bear witness to that; the luminosity function is relatively

Giant impacts in extrasolar planetary systems

27

ﬂat compared with the expectation that the brightest known excesses will
decay due to collisions such that their brightness scales inversely with time.

6.4 How common are late giant impacts?

In Jackson and Wyatt (2012) the predicted evolution of 24 µm emission from
the debris following the Moon-forming impact was compared with the statistics
for nearby stars to estimate the fraction of stars that form terrestrial planets.
This section carries out a similar calculation, but for the reasons described
in §6.1 is based on the evolution of the 12 µm emission. The question is also
framed slightly diﬀerently, so that we seek to determine the fraction of stars
that undergo late giant impacts

fgi = f12 ∗ f12gi/f12gidet.

(4)

That is simply the fraction of 10-120 Myr stars with bright 12 µm excess, f12,
multiplied by the fraction of those bright excesses that originate in giant im-
pacts rather than bright asteroid belts, f12gi, divided by the fraction of the
10-120 Myr timeframe that it would be expected the giant impact debris would
be at a detectable level, f12gidet.
One of these parameters is well constrained, since §6.1 showed that f12 ≈
3%, though this may be around a factor of 3 higher at the youngest end of
the age range. While f12gi is not well known, it can be said to be constrained
to be less than 100%. One might be mistaken for thinking that this is close
to 100% from the literature, since mid-IR emission is usually interpreted as
the result of giant impacts, but there are not many cases where it is possible
to rule out that the dust is simply the bottom end of the collisional cascade
of a massive asteroid belt, at least for systems that are in this age range for
which collisional processes have yet to have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on depleting
any remnant asteroid belt (Wyatt et al. 2007b).

The hardest parameter to estimate is f12gidet. The most pessimistic as-
sumption would be that there is just one giant impact following the disper-
sal of the protoplanetary disk (i.e., the Moon-forming impact), and that the
dust created from the grinding of boulders is below the detection threshold.
This would result in f12gidet ≈ 10−5 (i.e., the impact debris is detectable for
around 1000 years out of the ∼ 100 Myr timeframe). In this case, the only
way to explain the high detection rate of 12 µm excesses would be for the
majority of these to originate in asteroid belts rather than giant impacts (i.e.,
f12gi < 3 × 10−4). However, the conclusion is quite diﬀerent if the dust from
boulders starts out bright enough to be detectable, since the debris from a
single impact would remain detectable for ∼ 10 Myr, and so f12gidet ≈ 0.1.
This would mean that fgi < 0.3. This calculation starts to become more con-
straining if one considers that terrestrial planet formation simulations predict
that multiple giant impacts occur in the 10-100 Myr timeframe. Indeed, it is
usually assumed that f12gidet = 0.5 − 1 (Kenyon and Bromley 2004; Jackson
and Wyatt 2012; Genda et al. 2015). If this is the case, then the fraction of

28

Mark C. Wyatt, Alan P. Jackson

systems that undergo a late giant impact must be less than 6%. This would
provide a useful constraint for planet formation models, by indicating that
either the formation of Solar System-like terrestrial planets is relatively rare,
or that planet growth is usually complete by the time the protoplanetary disk
disperses; i.e., terrestrial planet formation is not normally accompanied by a
late Moon-forming impact, which means planet formation models need to be
revised. However, given the caveats on the brightness evolution in §5.2, strong
conclusions cannot yet be drawn.

7 Collisions at larger separations

While giant impacts are perhaps most associated with terrestrial planet forma-
tion, there is substantial evidence from the Solar System that such events can
take place in the outer reaches of planetary systems too (§ 2.2). Debris from
giant impacts at larger separations undergoes the same evolution as described
in §4. The one point of note is that, for a given progenitor, σv/vk will be higher
(and so the debris ends up in a broader annulus) for impacts at larger separa-
tions (see Fig. 1). However, the considerations for the detectability of debris
from large separation impacts are slightly diﬀerent than for impacts closer to
the star (see Jackson et al. 2014).

One obvious diﬀerence is that dust is colder at larger separations, and so it
is much more diﬃcult to detect its emission at 12 µm. This is compounded by
the more general point that a larger mass of dust (and so a larger progenitor
mass) is required for a detectable level of emission at larger separations. The
emission from giant impact debris at 10s of au would be most readily detected
in the far-IR. Cold dust is quite commonly detected around nearby stars,
with ∼ 20% of nearby Sun-like stars having far-IR emission from circumstellar
debris (e.g., Eiroa et al. 2013). However, this is not interpreted as giant impact
debris. Rather, this dust is believed to be the product of steady state collisional
grinding of planetesimal belts that are analogous to the Kuiper Belt in the
Solar System (Wyatt et al. 2007a; L¨ohne et al. 2008; G´asp´ar et al. 2013). At the
large orbital separations inferred for these belts, collisional lifetimes are long
enough that their dust can persist several Gyr above the detection threshold.
Since observations of how debris levels vary with stellar age are consistent
with the collisional erosion of Kuiper belt analogues, this interpretation is
favoured over a giant impact origin for the dust (Wyatt et al. 2007a). Thus
it is not possible to use the presence of cold dust from photometry to infer a
recent giant impact as it was for hot dust found closer to the star (Kenyon
and Bromley 2005).

However, as is evident in Fig. 2, the asymmetric morphology of a debris
disk may be used to point to a recent giant impact. The detectability of such
asymmetries is favoured at large separations, because the orbital timescales
there are much longer than those in the terrestrial planet region, which means
that the early asymmetric phases of the disk evolution last much longer. For
example, while in the terrestrial planet region the typical lifetime of the asym-

Giant impacts in extrasolar planetary systems

29

metric disk is a few thousand years, this lifetime may rise to of order a million
years at 10s of au. In addition it is easier to resolve the morphology of debris
in the outer reaches of a system due to its larger angular size (notwithstanding
the longer wavelength of the emission). The most intuitive evidence of a giant
impact would be the detection of an expanding clump (e.g., Wyatt and Dent
2002). However, the clump phase is so short-lived that it is much less likely to
be witnessed than the asymmetric disk phase which is much longer lived.

In addition to the asymmetry in the distribution of debris seen in Fig. 2,
the dominance of the collision-point in setting the collision rate of the debris
means it plays a further important role in enhancing the asymmetry observed
during the asymmetric disk phase at wavelengths that trace the distribution of
certain collision products. Such products include the very smallest dust grains
that are placed on orbits that are signiﬁcantly modiﬁed by radiation pressure
(i.e., those close to or below the blow-out limit given by eq. 2). This is because
such grains are put on orbits with pericentres that are close to the site of their
production, which means that when such grains are closest to the star they are
predominantly found close to the collision-point (see Fig. 3). This leads to an
excess of hot emission at this point, which may stand out further because such
grains are also heated to temperatures above black body equilibrium (and so
are much hotter than the rest of the debris); their apocentre distribution also
means that their spatial distribution extends to much larger distance on the
side of the star opposite the collision-point.

Another collision product with an enhanced asymmetry due to the collision-
point is carbon monoxide (CO) gas. Cold bodies at large distances from their
host star may contain CO ice (e.g., Solar System comets are typically ∼1-
10% CO by mass), and when they are broken up in collisions this might be
released as gas, promptly through vaporisation of the ice in the collision, or
perhaps delayed through desorption from freshly exposed surfaces. CO gas has
a comparatively short lifetime of around 150 years to photo-dissociation by in-
terstellar ultraviolet radiation (e.g. Visser et al. 2009). This is comparable to
the orbital timescale at tens of au from the host star, and thus the CO will un-
dergo substantial decay over the course of the orbit after its production, which
is predominantly at the collision-point (see Fig. 3). Thus the asymmetry in
the CO distribution will be enhanced relative to the parent body population,
since not only does the disk geometry reduce the CO density away from the
collision-point, but so does the photo-dissociation.

One system in which this eﬀect might be visible is the well known edge-
on disk of β Pic. Telesco et al. (2005) revealed a large brightness asymmetry
in the SW portion of the disk at a projected separation of 52 au in the mid-
infrared, and Dent et al. (2014) showed that this asymmetry is also present at
a lower level in sub-millimetre continuum images. Dent et al. (2014) also found
that an asymmetry is present in CO line observations at the same location,
but with a signiﬁcantly greater contrast. The CO line observations also provide
information on the line-of-sight velocity of the gas, allowing the edge-on images
of the gas distribution to be de-projected to get a face-on view of the disk,
under the assumption that the gas is in Keplerian rotation. Fig. 7 shows one

30

Mark C. Wyatt, Alan P. Jackson

Fig. 7 Image of the face-on distribution of CO gas in the β Pic disk, derived from spatial
and velocity information in ALMA observations of this edge-on disk (Dent et al. 2014). Note
this is just one possible de-projection, since the observations are insensitive to reﬂections in
the x-axis (i.e., the gas has the same line-of-sight velocity whether it is in front or behind the
star). The dashed circles denote the inner and outer radii of the gas disk at 60-130 au, and
the asterisk represents the location of the star. The distance along the line of sight (l.o.s.)
is relative to the stellar position and is positive for gas on the far side of the star; orbital
motion is clockwise. Overlaid on the colour map of the observed CO are contours of a model
for CO produced at the collision-point of a giant impact involving Mars-size embryos at
85 au (Jackson et al. 2014). The solid contours show the model distribution after being run
through the same de-projection process as the ALMA data, while the dotted contours show
the true distribution.

possible de-projection in which most of the CO is in a clump at around 85 au
from the star, with a tail extending 1/3 of an orbit in front of the clump (Dent
et al. 2014). In optical scattered light the asymmetry is reversed, with the dust
extending around 25% farther in the NE compared with the SW (Larwood and
Kalas 2001).

While it is possible that the clump in β Pic was created in the break-up
of a planetesimal within the last 50 years (Telesco et al. 2005), we are many
orders of magnitude more likely to witness the same impact in the asymmetric
disk phase than in the clump phase. Moreover the morphology, and in partic-
ular its wavelength dependence outlined above, are exactly that expected if
the asymmetry in the clump is the result of a giant impact witnessed in the
asymmetric disk phase; e.g., Fig. 7 shows contours corresponding to a model
for CO gas produced in a giant impact onto a Mars-sized progenitor occur-
ring at 85 au from the star (based on the model presented in Jackson et al.
2014). However, an alternative explanation exists for the asymmetry in the

Giant impacts in extrasolar planetary systems

31

β Pic disk that invokes a population of debris trapped in resonance with an
unseen planet (Dent et al. 2014). Such resonant populations have a clumpy
distribution (e.g. Wyatt 2003), and the collision rates would be enhanced in
the clumps (Wyatt 2006), leading to similar asymmetries in the distributions
of both CO and small grains to those of the asymmetric disk phase of a giant
impact.

One way to distinguish between the two interpretations is to look for mo-
tion of the clump relative to the star, since the collision-point in the giant
impact model is stationary on orbital timescales (only moving on much longer
precession timescales), whereas resonant clumps would move with the planet.
Li et al. (2012) re-imaged the mid-infrared clump and found tentative evi-
dence for motion, but further observations are needed to deﬁnitively conﬁrm
or reject its motion. If the clump were found to be stationary, and so the
giant impact interpretation favoured, this would have signiﬁcant implications
for our understanding of planet formation processes in the outer reaches of
planetary systems. This would imply that suﬃcient Mars-sized embryos exist
at a time of ∼ 20 Myr after the star formed for us to be likely to witness a
collision between them in a ∼ 10 Myr timeframe. This would set constraints
on the total mass of such embryos and how they are distributed in the disk
and could be compared with models for the formation of such embryos (e.g.,
Kenyon and Bromley 2008). It would also boost the prospects for observing
such collisions in other disks, as has been already been proposed for HD181327
(Stark et al. 2014).

8 Giant collisions in super-Earth systems
As pointed out in § 7, while giant impacts are an integral part of the process
of forming bodies like our own terrestrial planets, they are not exclusive to the
formation of Solar System-like terrestrial planets. One of the most interesting
outcomes of exoplanet searches in recent years is the emergence of a new class
of super-Earth planets. Such planets lie between roughly Earth and Neptune
in size and/or mass and orbit in the inner regions of their planetary systems.
There are no analogues to these planets in our Solar System, and yet they
make up a substantial portion of the population of exoplanets discovered to
date, thought to exist around 30-50% of stars (Howard et al. 2010; Mayor et
al. 2011). As such the formation mechanism of these planets is the subject of
intense study and debate.
The key question regarding the origin of super-Earths is whether they
formed in-situ at (cid:28) 1 au (Hansen and Murray 2012, 2013; Chiang and Laugh-
lin 2013) or at larger distance then migrated in through interaction with the
protoplanetary disk (Alibert et al. 2006; Lopez et al. 2012; Kenyon and Brom-
ley 2014). Knowing the internal composition of the planets would help, e.g.
with a more distant formation location favoured for volatile-rich planets. A
signiﬁcant question is thus whether these planets are ‘super-Earths’ that are
largely rocky, or ‘sub-Neptunes’ that are rich in volatile elements. It is be-

32

Mark C. Wyatt, Alan P. Jackson

coming clear that planets with radii larger than around 1.5 R⊕ cannot be
purely rocky (e.g. Weiss and Marcy 2014; Rogers 2015), however the nature
and quantity of the lighter component of planets inferred to have low density
is unclear. Planets with radii of around 2-3 R⊕ can be well ﬁt by a rocky core
with a hydrogen-helium envelope that comprises ∼0.1-5 per cent of the planet
mass (e.g. Wolfgang and Lopez 2015), however they could equally well have
less hydrogen and helium, but be predominantly composed of water (e.g. Sea-
ger et al. 2007; Howe et al. 2014). Thus far atmospheric studies of such planets
have been inconclusive (e.g. Knutson et al. 2014; Kreidberg et al. 2014).

This section explores the possibility that constraints can be set on the origin
and evolution of super-Earth planets by considering the debris released in giant
impacts involving such planets. If rocky super-Earths form in situ in the same
way as smaller terrestrial planets, they would be expected to undergo giant
impacts with concomitant debris releases during their formation. A super-
Earth planetary system formed by inward migration may also undergo a late
phase of giant impacts after the protoplanetary disk dispersed, for example
if this promoted instability in the system. Regardless of its origin a super-
Earth planetary system may also undergo late giant impacts with any remnant
planetary embryos in the system. While the rate of giant impacts experienced
by a super-Earth system has yet to be discussed in the literature, the discussion
in §6.4 shows that it should at least possible to set constraints on that rate
from observations.

To focus the discussion of giant impact debris in super-Earth systems,
here we consider the HD 69830 system. This system contains three super-
Earth planets with minimum masses of 10.2, 11.8 and 18.1 M⊕ at orbital
distances of 0.079, 0.19 and 0.63 au respectively (Lovis et al. 2006) as well as a
bright hot debris disk (Beichman et al. 2005). Modelling of the dust emission
spectrum suggests that the debris is centred at around 1 au (Lisse et al. 2007),
though this indirect constraint on its radial location has a factor of a few
uncertainty; direct measurements of the radial location are consistent with a
1 au location, but again have a factor of a few uncertainty (Smith et al. 2009).
This system is particularly interesting as collisional modelling indicates that
the dust cannot be produced by the steady-state grinding of a planetesimal
belt that has existed at 1 au since the formation of the system ∼2 Gyr ago,
but rather must have been created more recently (Wyatt et al. 2007a; Heng
and Tremaine 2010). The fact that the predicted location of the debris disk is
very close to, and could be coincident with, the outermost planet HD 69830d
also points to the possibility that the two are related.

While there are other explanations for the dust that do not involve HD 69830d,

such as a recent collision within a stable asteroid belt at 1 au (Wyatt et al.
2010) or a super-comet (Beichman et al. 2005), consideration of giant impact
debris from HD 69830d will highlight the diﬀerences and similarities to terres-
trial planet giant impact debris that will be useful for a more general discussion
of the detectability of super-Earth giant impact debris. Fig. 8 shows results
from a simulation of the dynamical evolution of debris released by a hypothet-
ical impact involving HD 69830d. For the purposes of determining the velocity

Giant impacts in extrasolar planetary systems

33

Fig. 8 Fate of particles in a 50,000 particle N -body simulation of debris released in a giant
impact onto the planet HD 69830d. Time is given in terms of d orbital periods (197 days).
By 107 d orbits after the impact >95 per cent of the debris has been lost. Both dashed
and solid grey lines correspond to particles that are ejected, however for the dashed line
the prompt ejections (i.e., those particles placed on unbound orbits in the impact itself) are
removed to make the longer term evolution more visible. The black line shows the number
of particles remaining in the simulation.

dispersion of the debris it was assumed that the planet has the same density as
Neptune (1.64 g/cm3), which leads to σv/vk = 0.32. This shows that accretion
onto all of the planets (b, c and d) is rapid, as is ejection, with around 98% of
the particles having been lost by 107 d orbits (5 Myr) after the impact (with
roughly twice as many lost to accretion as to ejection). This contrasts with
the Solar System case of debris from Moon-formation where only 44% of the
particles had been lost to dynamical eﬀects at 10 Myr (see Fig. 4).

A substantial part of this diﬀerence is due to the larger radii of the HD 69830
planets, since a Neptune-like HD 69830d has a radius of almost 4 R⊕ which
would result in an accretion rate 16 times larger than Earth (Eq. 1, noting
that re-accretion onto progenitors has a similar gravitational focussing factor).
A more Earth-like composition, with a higher bulk density, would result in a
smaller radius and a lower accretion rate, and so a longer dynamical evolution
than shown in Fig. 8. Another diﬀerence with debris from the Moon-forming
impact is that the accretion curves of all three planets around HD 69830
are roughly parallel. This is because the larger mass (and escape velocity) of
HD 69830d compared with Earth leads to the debris being much more broadly
distributed across the system. As a result, and due to the relatively closely-

34

Mark C. Wyatt, Alan P. Jackson

packed nature of the system, all three planets interact strongly with the debris
from the beginning of the simulation. A higher density for HD 69830d would
enhance this eﬀect due to the corresponding increase in σv.

In addition to the more rapid dynamical evolution for super-Earth impact
debris, the collisional evolution will also be faster, since the launch (and so
collision) velocities will be higher than for debris from an Earth-like planet. A
larger fraction of the debris may also be released as vapour, since the larger
escape velocities of super-Earths imply that material ejected in their giant
impacts will have been subject to more violent shocks. Both of these eﬀects
would add to the tendency for debris from a super-Earth giant impact to last
for less time than one involving an Earth-size planet. While the initial mass
of debris released from a more massive planet will be larger, this cannot oﬀset
the more rapid collisional evolution of debris from a super-Earth giant impact
and so the duration of detectability would be unaﬀected, though this would
mean that the disk is brighter while it is present.

This section only scratches the surface of the topic of giant impacts in sys-
tems of super-Earths. However, it is clear that there are potential implications
for our understanding of the formation and composition of these worlds. For
example, eq. 4 can be rewritten as

tgise12 = 100 Myr ∗ f12 ∗ f12gise/fse,

(5)
where fse ≈ 0.3 is the fraction of stars that form super-Earths, f12 ≈ 0.03
is the fraction of 10-120 Myr stars that have 12 µm excess, f12gise < 1 is the
fraction of those 12 µm excesses that arise from giant impacts onto super-
Earths, and tgise12 is the duration of detectability of giant impact debris in the
10-100 Myr window from super-Earths at 12 µm. This calculation beneﬁts from
several parameters being well constrained, leading to tgise12 < 10 Myr. This
excludes a long period of late giant impacts which make long-lived detectable
debris, which could suggest most of the formation processes takes place in the
protoplanetary disk, and/or that only a small fraction of the impact-generated
debris is in the form of boulders. However, some systems with infrared excess
have already been interpreted as originating in super-Earth giant impact debris
(Zuckerman et al. 2012), which if conﬁrmed could indicate that such debris
persists for a non-negligible duration (e.g., tgise12 > 0.1 Myr).

9 Conclusions

There is abundant evidence for giant impacts in the history of the Solar Sys-
tem. There are many ways in which such impacts could be manifested in
observations of extrasolar systems, including in the properties of any extraso-
lar planets (e.g., their spin, surface, density, atmosphere, and moons), but the
most promising method at the moment for detecting giant impacts is through
debris released in the collisions and the resulting infrared emission from dust
that is heated by the star. This dust is likely to be readily detectable long af-
ter the event, up to 10-40 Myr in the case of the Earth-Moon forming impact.

Giant impacts in extrasolar planetary systems

35

However, there remain signiﬁcant uncertainties in the duration of detectability
because of the unknown size distribution of impact-generated debris.

There are 10s of candidate young Sun-like stars with bright mid-IR emis-
sion from dust at levels expected following a giant collision like that which
created the Moon. One of the best candidates for giant impact debris is around
the star HD172555, since its spectrum shows dust with a silica composition
that suggests an origin in a hypervelocity impact. Other systems also show
complex variability in their emission, similar to that expected due to the dy-
namical and physical evolution of impact generated debris, which could provide
a valuable window into these events. Despite the growing number of examples
of potential giant impact debris, the occurrence rate of such emission is rela-
tively low, at a few %, which either implies that late stage giant impacts are
rare (i.e., planet formation is largely complete by the time the protoplanetary
disk has dispersed), or that the debris from impacts rapidly grinds itself down
to undetectable levels.

Giant impacts in terrestrial planet forming regions are those most readily
identiﬁed, since these inner regions are usually clear of dust following the dis-
persal of the protoplanetary disk. However, giant impacts may also occur at
larger distances from the stars (at 10s of au). At such distances, larger quan-
tities of debris are required to be detected photometrically, not least because
emission from cold debris is relatively common at this distance (∼ 20% for
Sun-like stars), so evidence for giant impacts must rest on the morphology of
the disk. A clump observed in the β Pictoris debris disk may be evidence of
a collision between icy Mars-sized embryos. If so this would require the outer
regions of this system to be host to multiple such embryos to give a reasonable
chance of witnessing a collision. The ubiquitous class of super-Earth planetary
system may also be subject to giant impacts. This chapter provides an initial
exploration of this topic by showing how the dynamical evolution diﬀers from
that of Moon-forming debris, and it is shown that studying such impacts could
provide important clues to the formation of super-Earth systems.

Acknowledgements MCW is grateful for support from the European Union through ERC
grant number 279973.

References

C.B. Agnor, R.M. Canup, H.F. Levison, On the Character and Consequences of Large
Impacts in the Late Stage of Terrestrial Planet Formation. Icarus 142, 219–237 (1999)
Y. Alibert, I. Baraﬀe, W. Benz, G. Chabrier, C. Mordasini, C. Lovis, M. Mayor, F. Pepe,
F. Bouchy, D. Queloz, S. Udry, Formation and structure of the three Neptune-mass
planets system around HD 69830. Astron. Astrophys 455, 25–28 (2006)

J.C. Andrews-Hanna, M.T. Zuber, W.B. Banerdt, The Borealis basin and the origin of the

martian crustal dichotomy. Nat. 453, 1212–1215 (2008)

A. Anic, Giant Collisions in the Early Solar System, PhD thesis, Univ. Bern, 2006. http:

//space.unibe.ch/fileadmin/media/pdf/taps/diss-augustina.pdf

E. Asphaug, Impact Origin of the Moon? Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences

42, 551–578 (2014)

E. Asphaug, A. Reufer, Late origin of the Saturn system. Icarus 223, 544–565 (2013)

36

Mark C. Wyatt, Alan P. Jackson

H.H. Aumann, R.G. Probst, Search for Vega-like nearby stars with 12 micron excess. As-

trophys. J. 368, 264–271 (1991)

N.P. Ballering, G.H. Rieke, A. G´asp´ar, Probing the Terrestrial Regions of Planetary Systems:

Warm Debris Disks with Emission Features. Astrophys. J. 793, 57 (2014)

T.S. Barman, B. Macintosh, Q.M. Konopacky, C. Marois, The Young Planet-mass Object
2M1207b: A Cool, Cloudy, and Methane-poor Atmosphere. Astrophys. J. Lett. 735, 39
(2011)

C.A. Beichman, G. Bryden, T.N. Gautier, K.R. Stapelfeldt, M.W. Werner, K. Misselt, G.
Rieke, J. Stansberry, D. Trilling, An Excess Due to Small Grains around the Nearby K0
V Star HD 69830: Asteroid or Cometary Debris? Astrophys. J. 626, 1061–1069 (2005)
W. Benz, W.L. Slattery, A.G.W. Cameron, Collisional stripping of Mercury’s mantle. Icarus

74, 516–528 (1988)

W. Benz, A. Anic, J. Horner, J.A. Whitby, The Origin of Mercury. Space Sci. Rev. 132,

189–202 (2007)

R.P. Binzel, M.J. Gaﬀey, P.C. Thomas, B.H. Zellner, A.D. Storrs, E.N. Wells, Geologic
Mapping of Vesta from 1994 Hubble Space Telescope Images. Icarus 128, 95–103 (1997)
W.F. Bottke, D.D. Durda, D. Nesvorn´y, R. Jedicke, A. Morbidelli, D. Vokrouhlick´y, H.
Levison, The fossilized size distribution of the main asteroid belt. Icarus 175, 111–140
(2005)

W.F. Bottke, D. Vokrouhlick´y, S. Marchi, T. Swindle, E.R.D. Scott, J.R. Weirich, H. Lev-
ison, Dating the Moon-forming impact event with asteroidal meteorites. Science 348,
321–323 (2015)

M.E. Brown, K.M. Barkume, D. Ragozzine, E.L. Schaller, A collisional family of icy objects

in the Kuiper belt. Nat. 446, 294–296 (2007)

A.G.W. Cameron, W.R. Ward, The Origin

Lunar
Planet. Sci. Inst. Conf. Abstr.. Lunar and Planetary Inst. Technical Report, vol.
7, 1976, p. 120

in

of

the Moon,

A.G.W. Cameron, W. Benz, B. Fegley Jr., W.L. Slattery, The strange density of Mercury
- Theoretical considerations, ed. by F. Vilas, C.R. Chapman, M.S. Matthews 1988, pp.
692–708

R.M. Canup, Dynamics of Lunar Formation. Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 42, 441–475

(2004a)

R.M. Canup, Simulations of a late lunar-forming impact. Icarus 168, 433–456 (2004b)
R.M. Canup, A Giant Impact Origin of Pluto-Charon. Science 307, 546–550 (2005)
R.M. Canup, Lunar-forming collisions with pre-impact rotation. Icarus 196, 518–538 (2008)
R.M. Canup, On a Giant Impact Origin of Charon, Nix, and Hydra. Astron. J. 141, 35

(2011)

R.M. Canup, Forming a Moon with an Earth-like Composition via a Giant Impact. Science

338, 1052 (2012)

R.M. Canup, E. Asphaug, Origin of the Moon in a giant impact near the end of the Earth’s

formation. Nat. 412, 708–712 (2001)

R.M. Canup, W.R. Ward, Formation of the Galilean Satellites: Conditions of Accretion.

Astron. J. 124, 3404–3423 (2002)

R.M. Canup, W.R. Ward, A common mass scaling for satellite systems of gaseous planets.

Nat. 441, 834–839 (2006)

J.M. Carpenter, J. Bouwman, E.E. Mamajek, M.R. Meyer, L.A. Hillenbrand, D.E. Back-
man, T. Henning, D.C. Hines, D. Hollenbach, J.S. Kim, A. Moro-Martin, I. Pascucci,
M.D. Silverstone, J.R. Stauﬀer, S. Wolf, Formation and Evolution of Planetary Sys-
tems: Properties of Debris Dust Around Solar-Type Stars. Astrophys. J. Suppl. Ser.
181, 197–226 (2009)

C.H. Chen, B.A. Sargent, C. Bohac, K.H. Kim, E. Leibensperger, M. Jura, J. Najita, W.J.
Forrest, D.M. Watson, G.C. Sloan, L.D. Keller, Spitzer IRS Spectroscopy of IRAS-
discovered Debris Disks. Astrophys. J. Suppl. Ser. 166, 351–377 (2006)

E. Chiang, G. Laughlin, The minimum-mass extrasolar nebula: in situ formation of close-in

super-Earths. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 431, 3444–3455 (2013)

R.I. Citron, H. Genda, S. Ida, Formation of Phobos and Deimos via a giant impact. Icarus

252, 334–338 (2015)

Giant impacts in extrasolar planetary systems

37

M. ´Cuk, S.T. Stewart, Making the Moon from a Fast-Spinning Earth: A Giant Impact

Followed by Resonant Despinning. Science 338, 1047 (2012)

M. ´Cuk, D. Ragozzine, D. Nesvorn´y, On the Dynamics and Origin of Haumea’s Moons.

Astron. J. 146, 89 (2013)

T. Currie, C.M. Lisse, A. Sicilia-Aguilar, G.H. Rieke, K.Y.L. Su, Spitzer Infrared Spectro-
graph Spectroscopy of the 10 Myr Old EF Cha Debris Disk: Evidence for Phyllosilicate-
rich Dust in the Terrestrial Zone. Astrophys. J. 734, 115 (2011)

W.R.F. Dent, M.C. Wyatt, A. Roberge, J.-C. Augereau, S. Casassus, S. Corder, J.S. Greaves,
I. de Gregorio-Monsalvo, A. Hales, A.P. Jackson, A.M. Hughes, A.-M. Lagrange, B.
Matthews, D. Wilner, Molecular Gas Clumps from the Destruction of Icy Bodies in the
β Pictoris Debris Disk. Science 343, 1490–1492 (2014)

D.D. Durda, W.F. Bottke, D. Nesvorn´y, B.L. Enke, W.J. Merline, E. Asphaug, D.C. Richard-
son, Size-frequency distributions of fragments from SPH/ N-body simulations of asteroid
impacts: Comparison with observed asteroid families. Icarus 186, 498–516 (2007)

C. Eiroa, J.P. Marshall, A. Mora, B. Montesinos, O. Absil, J.C. Augereau, A. Bayo, G.
Bryden, W. Danchi, C. del Burgo, S. Ertel, M. Fridlund, A.M. Heras, A.V. Krivov,
R. Launhardt, R. Liseau, T. L¨ohne, J. Maldonado, G.L. Pilbratt, A. Roberge, J. Rod-
mann, J. Sanz-Forcada, E. Solano, K. Stapelfeldt, P. Th´ebault, S. Wolf, D. Ardila, M.
Ar´evalo, C. Beichmann, V. Faramaz, B.M. Gonz´alez-Garc´ıa, R. Guti´errez, J. Lebre-
ton, R. Mart´ınez-Arn´aiz, G. Meeus, D. Montes, G. Olofsson, K.Y.L. Su, G.J. White,
D. Barrado, M. Fukagawa, E. Gr¨un, I. Kamp, R. Lorente, A. Morbidelli, S. M¨uller, H.
Mutschke, T. Nakagawa, I. Ribas, H. Walker, DUst around NEarby Stars. The survey
observational results. Astron. Astrophys 555, 11 (2013)

T.L. Esplin, K.L. Luhman, E.E. Mamajek, A WISE Survey of Circumstellar Disks in Taurus.

Astrophys. J. 784, 126 (2014)

A. G´asp´ar, G.H. Rieke, Z. Balog, The Collisional Evolution of Debris Disks. Astrophys. J.

768, 25 (2013)

H. Genda, H. Kobayashi, E. Kokubo, Warm Debris Disks Produced by Giant Impacts During

Terrestrial Planet Formation. Astrophys. J. 810, 136 (2015)

B. Gladman, J. Coﬀey, Mercurian impact ejecta: Meteorites and mantle. Meteoritics and

Planetary Science 44, 285–291 (2009)

P. Goldreich, Y. Lithwick, R. Sari, Final Stages of Planet Formation. Astrophys. J. 614,

497–507 (2004)

R. Greenberg, Outcomes of tidal evolution for orbits with arbitrary inclination. Icarus 23,

51–58 (1974)

A. Grigorieva, P. Artymowicz, P. Th´ebault, Collisional dust avalanches in debris discs. As-

tron. Astrophys 461, 537–549 (2007)

K. Grogan, S.F. Dermott, D.D. Durda, The Size-Frequency Distribution of the Zodiacal

Cloud: Evidence from the Solar System Dust Bands. Icarus 152, 251–267 (2001)

K.E. Haisch Jr., E.A. Lada, C.J. Lada, Disk Frequencies and Lifetimes in Young Clusters.

Astrophys. J. Lett. 553, 153–156 (2001)

A.N. Halliday, A young Moon-forming giant impact at 70-110 million years accompanied by
late-stage mixing, core formation and degassing of the Earth. Royal Society of London
Philosophical Transactions Series A 366, 4163–4181 (2008)

B.M.S. Hansen, Formation of the Terrestrial Planets from a Narrow Annulus. Astrophys. J.

703, 1131–1140 (2009)

B.M.S. Hansen, N. Murray, Migration Then Assembly: Formation of Neptune-mass Planets

inside 1 AU. Astrophys. J. 751, 158 (2012)

B.M.S. Hansen, N. Murray, Testing in Situ Assembly with the Kepler Planet Candidate

Sample. Astrophys. J. 775, 53 (2013)

R. Helled, P. Bodenheimer, The Formation of Uranus and Neptune: Challenges and Impli-

cations for Intermediate-mass Exoplanets. Astrophys. J. 789, 69 (2014)

K. Heng, S. Tremaine, Long-lived planetesimal discs. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 401, 867–

889 (2010)

K. Hirayama, Groups of asteroids probably of common origin. Astron. J. 31, 185–188 (1918)
A.R. Howe, A. Burrows, W. Verne, Mass-radius Relations and Core-envelope Decomposi-

tions of Super-Earths and Sub-Neptunes. Astrophys. J. 787, 173 (2014)

38

Mark C. Wyatt, Alan P. Jackson

N.K. Inamdar, H.E. Schlichting, The formation of super-Earths and mini-Neptunes with

giant impacts. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 448, 1751–1760 (2015)

A.P. Jackson, M.C. Wyatt, Debris from terrestrial planet formation: the Moon-forming

collision. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 425, 657–679 (2012)

A.P. Jackson, M.C. Wyatt, A. Bonsor, D. Veras, Debris froms giant impacts between plan-
etary embryos at large orbital radii. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 440, 3757–3777 (2014)
D. Jewitt, H. Weaver, M. Mutchler, S. Larson, J. Agarwal, Hubble Space Telescope Obser-

vations of Main-belt Comet (596) Scheila. Astrophys. J. Lett. 733, 4 (2011)

B.C. Johnson, H.J. Melosh, Formation of melt droplets, melt fragments, and accretionary

impact lapilli during a hypervelocity impact. Icarus 228, 347–363 (2014)

B.C. Johnson, C.M. Lisse, C.H. Chen, H.J. Melosh, M.C. Wyatt, P. Thebault, W.G. Hen-
ning, E. Gaidos, L.T. Elkins-Tanton, J.C. Bridges, A. Morlok, A Self-consistent Model
of the Circumstellar Debris Created by a Giant Hypervelocity Impact in the HD 172555
System. Astrophys. J. 761, 45 (2012)

D. Jontof-Hutter, J.F. Rowe, J.J. Lissauer, D.C. Fabrycky, E.B. Ford, The mass of the

Mars-sized exoplanet Kepler-138 b from transit timing. Nature 522, 321–323 (2015)

M. Jutzi, SPH calculations of asteroid disruptions: The role of pressure dependent failure

models. Planet. Space Sci. 107, 3–9 (2015)

M. Jutzi, E. Asphaug, P. Gillet, J.-A. Barrat, W. Benz, The structure of the asteroid 4 Vesta

as revealed by models of planet-scale collisions. Nat. 494, 207–210 (2013)

P. Kalas, J.R. Graham, M.P. Fitzgerald, M. Clampin, STIS Coronagraphic Imaging of Fo-
malhaut: Main Belt Structure and the Orbit of Fomalhaut b. Astrophys. J. 775, 56
(2013)

K. Keil, Geological History of Asteroid 4 Vesta: The ”Smallest Terrestrial Planet”. Asteroids

III, 573–584 (2002)

G.M. Kennedy, M.C. Wyatt, The bright end of the exo-Zodi luminosity function: disc evo-
lution and implications for exo-Earth detectability. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 433,
2334–2356 (2013)

G.M. Kennedy, M.C. Wyatt, Do two-temperature debris discs have multiple belts?

Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 444, 3164–3182 (2014)

G.M. Kennedy, S.J. Murphy, C.M. Lisse, F. M´enard, M.L. Sitko, M.C. Wyatt, D.D.R.
Bayliss, F.E. DeMeo, K.B. Crawford, D.L. Kim, R.J. Rudy, R.W. Russell, B. Sibthorpe,
M.A. Skinner, G. Zhou, Evolution from protoplanetary to debris discs: the transition
disc around HD 166191. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 438, 3299–3309 (2014)

M.A. Kenworthy, E.E. Mamajek, Modeling Giant Extrasolar Ring Systems in Eclipse and

the Case of J1407b: Sculpting by Exomoons? Astrophys. J. 800, 126 (2015)

S.J. Kenyon, B.C. Bromley, Detecting the Dusty Debris of Terrestrial Planet Formation.

Astrophys. J. Lett. 602, 133–136 (2004)

S.J. Kenyon, B.C. Bromley, Prospects for Detection of Catastrophic Collisions in Debris

Disks. Astron. J. 130, 269–279 (2005)

S.J. Kenyon, B.C. Bromley, Terrestrial Planet Formation. I. The Transition from Oligarchic

Growth to Chaotic Growth. Astron. J. 131, 1837–1850 (2006)

S.J. Kenyon, B.C. Bromley, Variations on Debris Disks: Icy Planet Formation at 30-150 AU

for 1-3 Msolar Main-Sequence Stars. Astrophys. J. Suppl. Ser. 179, 451–483 (2008)

S.J. Kenyon, B.C. Bromley, Coagulation Calculations of Icy Planet Formation around 0.1-

0.5 M Stars: Super-Earths from Large Planetestimals. Astrophys. J. 780, 4 (2014)

D.M. Kipping, D. Nesvorn´y, L.A. Buchhave, J. Hartman, G. ´A. Bakos, A.R. Schmitt, The
Hunt for Exomoons with Kepler (HEK). IV. A Search for Moons around Eight M Dwarfs.
Astrophys. J. 784, 28 (2014)

T. Kleine, M. Touboul, B. Bourdon, F. Nimmo, K. Mezger, H. Palme, S.B. Jacobsen, Q.-Z.
Yin, A.N. Halliday, Hf-W chronology of the accretion and early evolution of asteroids
and terrestrial planets. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 73, 5150–5188 (2009)

H.A. Knutson, B. Benneke, D. Deming, D. Homeier, A featureless transmission spectrum

for the Neptune-mass exoplanet GJ436b. Nat. 505, 66–68 (2014)

E. Kokubo, S. Ida, Oligarchic Growth of Protoplanets. Icarus 131, 171–178 (1998)
Q. Kral, P. Th´ebault, J.-C. Augereau, A. Boccaletti, S. Charnoz, Signatures of massive
collisions in debris discs. A self-consistent numerical model. Astron. Astrophys 573, 39

Giant impacts in extrasolar planetary systems

39

(2015)

R.G. Kraus, S.T. Stewart, D.C. Swift, C.A. Bolme, R.F. Smith, S. Hamel, B.D. Hammel,
D.K. Spaulding, D.G. Hicks, J.H. Eggert, G.W. Collins, Shock vaporization of silica and
the thermodynamics of planetary impact events. J. Geophys. Res. (Planets) 117, 9009
(2012)

L. Kreidberg, J.L. Bean, J.-M. D´esert, B. Benneke, D. Deming, K.B. Stevenson, S. Seager, Z.
Berta-Thompson, A. Seifahrt, D. Homeier, Clouds in the atmosphere of the super-Earth
exoplanet GJ1214b. Nat. 505, 69–72 (2014)

A.V. Krivov, M. Sremˇcevi´c, F. Spahn, Evolution of a Keplerian disk of colliding and frag-
menting particles: a kinetic model with application to the Edgeworth Kuiper belt. Icarus
174, 105–134 (2005)

T. Kubo-Oka, K. Nakazawa, Gradual increase in the obliquity of Uranus due to tidal inter-

action with a hypothetical retrograde satellite. Icarus 114, 21–32 (1995)

J.D. Larwood, P.G. Kalas, Close stellar encounters with planetesimal discs: the dynamics of

asymmetry in the β Pictoris system. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 323, 402–416 (2001)

J. Lebreton, R. van Lieshout, J.-C. Augereau, O. Absil, B. Mennesson, M. Kama, C. Do-
minik, A. Bonsor, J. Vandeportal, H. Beust, D. Defr`ere, S. Ertel, V. Faramaz, P. Hinz,
Q. Kral, A.-M. Lagrange, W. Liu, P. Th´ebault, An interferometric study of the Fo-
malhaut inner debris disk. III. Detailed models of the exozodiacal disk and its origin.
Astron. Astrophys 555, 146 (2013)

Z.M. Leinhardt, S.T. Stewart, Collisions between Gravity-dominated Bodies. I. Outcome

Regimes and Scaling Laws. Astrophys. J. 745, 79 (2012)

D. Li, C.M. Telesco, C.M. Wright, The Mineralogy and Structure of the Inner Debris Disk

of β Pictoris. Astrophys. J. 759, 81 (2012)

C.M. Lisse, C.A. Beichman, G. Bryden, M.C. Wyatt, On the Nature of the Dust in the

Debris Disk around HD 69830. Astrophys. J. 658, 584–592 (2007)

C.M. Lisse, C.H. Chen, M.C. Wyatt, A. Morlok, Circumstellar Dust Created by Terrestrial

Planet Formation in HD 113766. Astrophys. J. 673, 1106–1122 (2008)

C.M. Lisse, C.H. Chen, M.C. Wyatt, A. Morlok, I. Song, G. Bryden, P. Sheehan, Abundant
Circumstellar Silica Dust and SiO Gas Created by a Giant Hypervelocity Collision in
the ˜12 Myr HD172555 System. Astrophys. J. 701, 2019–2032 (2009)

T. L¨ohne, A.V. Krivov, J. Rodmann, Long-Term Collisional Evolution of Debris Disks.

Astrophys. J. 673, 1123–1137 (2008)

E.D. Lopez, J.J. Fortney, N. Miller, How Thermal Evolution and Mass-loss Sculpt Popu-
lations of Super-Earths and Sub-Neptunes: Application to the Kepler-11 System and
Beyond. Astrophys. J. 761, 59 (2012)

C. Lovis, M. Mayor, F. Pepe, Y. Alibert, W. Benz, F. Bouchy, A.C.M. Correia, J. Laskar, C.
Mordasini, D. Queloz, N.C. Santos, S. Udry, J.-L. Bertaux, J.-P. Sivan, An extrasolar
planetary system with three Neptune-mass planets. Nat. 441, 305–309 (2006)

K.L. Luhman, E.E. Mamajek, The Disk Population of the Upper Scorpius Association.

Astrophys. J. 758, 31 (2012)

R.E. Lupu, K. Zahnle, M.S. Marley, L. Schaefer, B. Fegley, C. Morley, K. Cahoy, R. Freed-
man, J.J. Fortney, The Atmospheres of Earthlike Planets after Giant Impact Events.
Astrophys. J. 784, 27 (2014)

L. Malo, R. Doyon, D. Lafreni`ere, ´E. Artigau, J. Gagn´e, F. Baron, A. Riedel, Bayesian
Analysis to Identify New Star Candidates in Nearby Young Stellar Kinematic Groups.
Astrophys. J. 762, 88 (2013)

E.E. Mamajek, M.R. Meyer, An Improbable Solution to the Underluminosity of 2M1207B:

A Hot Protoplanet Collision Afterglow. Astrophys. J. Lett. 668, 175–178 (2007)

E.E. Mamajek, A.C. Quillen, M.J. Pecaut, F. Moolekamp, E.L. Scott, M.A. Kenworthy, A.
Collier Cameron, N.R. Parley, Planetary Construction Zones in Occultation: Discovery
of an Extrasolar Ring System Transiting a Young Sun-like Star and Future Prospects
for Detecting Eclipses by Circumsecondary and Circumplanetary Disks. Astron. J. 143,
72 (2012)

R.A. Marcus, S.T. Stewart, D. Sasselov, L. Hernquist, Collisional Stripping and Disruption

of Super-Earths. Astrophys. J. Lett. 700, 118–122 (2009)

G.W. Marcy, H. Isaacson, A.W. Howard, J.F. Rowe, J.M. Jenkins, S.T. Bryson, D.W.

40

Mark C. Wyatt, Alan P. Jackson

Latham, S.B. Howell, T.N. Gautier III, N.M. Batalha, L. Rogers, D. Ciardi, D.A. Fis-
cher, R.L. Gilliland, H. Kjeldsen, J. Christensen-Dalsgaard, D. Huber, W.J. Chaplin, S.
Basu, L.A. Buchhave, S.N. Quinn, W.J. Borucki, D.G. Koch, R. Hunter, D.A. Caldwell,
J. Van Cleve, R. Kolbl, L.M. Weiss, E. Petigura, S. Seager, T. Morton, J.A. Johnson,
S. Ballard, C. Burke, W.D. Cochran, M. Endl, P. MacQueen, M.E. Everett, J.J. Lis-
sauer, E.B. Ford, G. Torres, F. Fressin, T.M. Brown, J.H. Steﬀen, D. Charbonneau,
G.S. Basri, D.D. Sasselov, J. Winn, R. Sanchis-Ojeda, J. Christiansen, E. Adams, C.
Henze, A. Dupree, D.C. Fabrycky, J.J. Fortney, J. Tarter, M.J. Holman, P. Tenenbaum,
A. Shporer, P.W. Lucas, W.F. Welsh, J.A. Orosz, T.R. Bedding, T.L. Campante, G.R.
Davies, Y. Elsworth, R. Handberg, S. Hekker, C. Karoﬀ, S.D. Kawaler, M.N. Lund, M.
Lundkvist, T.S. Metcalfe, A. Miglio, V. Silva Aguirre, D. Stello, T.R. White, A. Boss, E.
Devore, A. Gould, A. Prsa, E. Agol, T. Barclay, J. Coughlin, E. Brugamyer, F. Mullally,
E.V. Quintana, M. Still, S.E. Thompson, D. Morrison, J.D. Twicken, J.-M. D´esert, J.
Carter, J.R. Crepp, G. H´ebrard, A. Santerne, C. Moutou, C. Sobeck, D. Hudgins, M.R.
Haas, P. Robertson, J. Lillo-Box, D. Barrado, Masses, Radii, and Orbits of Small Kepler
Planets: The Transition from Gaseous to Rocky Planets. Astrophys. J. Suppl. Ser. 210,
20 (2014)

M.M. Marinova, O. Aharonson, E. Asphaug, Mega-impact formation of the Mars hemi-

spheric dichotomy. Nat. 453, 1216–1219 (2008)

M.M. Marinova, O. Aharonson, E. Asphaug, Geophysical consequences of planetary-scale

impacts into a Mars-like planet. Icarus 211, 960–985 (2011)

A. Mastrobuono-Battisti, H.B. Perets, S.N. Raymond, A primordial origin for the composi-

tional similarity between the Earth and the Moon. Nat. 520, 212–215 (2015)

B.C. Matthews, J.J. Kavelaars, Insights into planet formation from debris disks. I. The solar

system as an archetype for planetesimal evolution. This Volume (2016)

B.C. Matthews, A.V. Krivov, M.C. Wyatt, G. Bryden, C. Eiroa, Observations, Modeling,

and Theory of Debris Disks. Protostars and Planets VI, 521–544 (2014)

W.B. McKinnon, On the origin of the Pluto-Charon binary. Astrophys. J. Lett. 344, 41–44

(1989)

C. Melis, B. Zuckerman, J.H. Rhee, I. Song, The Age of the HD 15407 System and The
Epoch of Final Catastrophic Mass Accretion onto Terrestrial Planets Around Sun-like
Stars. Astrophys. J. Lett. 717, 57–61 (2010)

C. Melis, B. Zuckerman, J.H. Rhee, I. Song, S.J. Murphy, M.S. Bessell, Rapid disappearance

of a warm, dusty circumstellar disk. Nat. 487, 74–76 (2012)

H.J. Melosh, A.M. Vickery, Melt droplet formation in energetic impact events. Nat. 350,

494–497 (1991)

H.Y.A. Meng, G.H. Rieke, K.Y.L. Su, V.D. Ivanov, L. Vanzi, W. Rujopakarn, Variability of

the Infrared Excess of Extreme Debris Disks. Astrophys. J. Lett. 751, 17 (2012)

H.Y.A. Meng, K.Y.L. Su, G.H. Rieke, D.J. Stevenson, P. Plavchan, W. Rujopakarn, C.M.
Lisse, S. Poshyachinda, D.E. Reichart, Large impacts around a solar-analog star in the
era of terrestrial planet formation. Science 345, 1032–1035 (2014)

H.Y.A. Meng, K.Y.L. Su, G.H. Rieke, W. Rujopakarn, G. Myers, M. Cook, E. Erdelyi, C.
Maloney, J. McMath, G. Persha, S. Poshyachinda, D.E. Reichart, Planetary Collisions
Outside the Solar System: Time Domain Characterization of Extreme Debris Disks.
Astrophys. J. 805, 77 (2015)

M.R. Meyer, J.M. Carpenter, E.E. Mamajek, L.A. Hillenbrand, D. Hollenbach, A. Moro-
Martin, J.S. Kim, M.D. Silverstone, J. Najita, D.C. Hines, I. Pascucci, J.R. Stauﬀer,
J. Bouwman, D.E. Backman, Evolution of Mid-Infrared Excess around Sun-like Stars:
Constraints on Models of Terrestrial Planet Formation. Astrophys. J. Lett. 673, 181–184
(2008)

E. Miller-Ricci, M.R. Meyer, S. Seager, L. Elkins-Tanton, On the Emergent Spectra of Hot

Protoplanet Collision Afterglows. Astrophys. J. 704, 770–780 (2009)

D. Nesvorn´y, W.F. Bottke Jr., L. Dones, H.F. Levison, The recent breakup of an asteroid

in the main-belt region. Nat. 417, 720–771 (2002)

N. Nikolov, F. Sainsbury-Martinez, Radial velocity eclipse mapping of exoplanets. ArXiv

e-prints (2015)

F. Nimmo, S.D. Hart, D.G. Korycansky, C.B. Agnor, Implications of an impact origin for

the martian hemispheric dichotomy. Nat. 453, 1220–1223 (2008)

Giant impacts in extrasolar planetary systems

41

D.P. O’Brien, R. Greenberg, Steady-state size distributions for collisional populations:. an-

alytical solution with size-dependent strength. Icarus 164, 334–345 (2003)

K. Pahlevan, D.J. Stevenson, Equilibration in the aftermath of the lunar-forming giant

impact. Earth and Planetary Science Letters 262, 438–449 (2007)

O. Pani´c, W.S. Holland, M.C. Wyatt, G.M. Kennedy, B.C. Matthews, J.F. Lestrade, B.
Sibthorpe, J.S. Greaves, J.P. Marshall, N.M. Phillips, J. Tottle, First results of the
SONS survey: submillimetre detections of debris discs. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 435,
1037–1046 (2013)

M.G. Parisi, A. Brunini, Constraints to Uranus’ Great Collision - II. Planet. Space Sci. 45,

181–187 (1997)

N.M. Phillips, J.S. Greaves, W.R.F. Dent, B.C. Matthews, W.S. Holland, M.C. Wyatt, B.
Sibthorpe, Target selection for the SUNS and DEBRIS surveys for debris discs in the
solar neighbourhood. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 403, 1089–1101 (2010)

A. Reufer, M.M.M. Meier, W. Benz, R. Wieler, A hit-and-run giant impact scenario. Icarus

221, 296–299 (2012)

J.H. Rhee, I. Song, B. Zuckerman, Warm Dust in the Terrestrial Planet Zone of a Sun-
like Pleiades Star: Collisions between Planetary Embryos? Astrophys. J. 675, 777–783
(2008)

G.H. Rieke, K.Y.L. Su, J.A. Stansberry, D. Trilling, G. Bryden, J. Muzerolle, B. White, N.
Gorlova, E.T. Young, C.A. Beichman, K.R. Stapelfeldt, D.C. Hines, Decay of Planetary
Debris Disks. Astrophys. J. 620, 1010–1026 (2005)

P. Riviere-Marichalar, D. Barrado, J.-C. Augereau, W.F. Thi, A. Roberge, C. Eiroa, B.
Montesinos, G. Meeus, C. Howard, G. Sandell, G. Duchˆene, W.R.F. Dent, J. Lebreton,
I. Mendigut´ıa, N. Hu´elamo, F. M´enard, C. Pinte, HD 172555: detection of 63 µm [OI]
emission in a debris disc. Astron. Astrophys 546, 8 (2012)

A.C. Rizzuto, M.J. Ireland, D.B. Zucker, WISE circumstellar discs in the young Sco-Cen

association. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 421, 97–101 (2012)

L.A. Rogers, Most 1.6 Earth-radius Planets are Not Rocky. Astrophys. J. 801, 41 (2015)
P. Rosenblatt, The origin of the Martian moons revisited. Astron. Astrophys. Rev. 19, 44

(2011)

P. Rosenblatt, S. Charnoz, On the formation of the martian moons from a circum-martian

accretion disk. Icarus 221, 806–815 (2012)

C.T. Russell, C.A. Raymond, A. Coradini, H.Y. McSween, M.T. Zuber, A. Nathues, M.C. De
Sanctis, R. Jaumann, A.S. Konopliv, F. Preusker, S.W. Asmar, R.S. Park, R. Gaskell,
H.U. Keller, S. Mottola, T. Roatsch, J.E.C. Scully, D.E. Smith, P. Tricarico, M.J. Toplis,
U.R. Christensen, W.C. Feldman, D.J. Lawrence, T.J. McCoy, T.H. Prettyman, R.C.
Reedy, M.E. Sykes, T.N. Titus, Dawn at Vesta: Testing the Protoplanetary Paradigm.
Science 336, 684 (2012)

V.S. Safronov, Evolution of the protoplanetary cloud and formation of the earth and planets.

1972

J. Salmon, R.M. Canup, Lunar Accretion from a Roche-interior Fluid Disk. Astrophys. J.

760, 83 (2012)

H.E. Schlichting, R. Sari, The Creation of Haumea’s Collisional Family. Astrophys. J. 700,

1242–1246 (2009)

H.E. Schlichting, R. Sari, A. Yalinewich, Atmospheric mass loss during planet formation:

The importance of planetesimal impacts. Icarus 247, 81–94 (2015)

A. Schneider, I. Song, C. Melis, B. Zuckerman, M. Bessell, T. Huﬀord, S. Hinkley, The

Nearby, Young, Isolated, Dusty Star HD 166191. Astrophys. J. 777, 78 (2013)

S. Seager, M. Kuchner, C.A. Hier-Majumder, B. Militzer, Mass-Radius Relationships for

Solid Exoplanets. Astrophys. J. 669, 1279–1297 (2007)

Y. Sekine, H. Genda, Giant impacts in the Saturnian system: A possible origin of diversity

in the inner mid-sized satellites. Planet. Space Sci. 63, 133–138 (2012)

M.R. Showalter, D.P. Hamilton, Resonant interactions and chaotic rotation of Pluto’s small

moons. Nat. 522, 45–49 (2015)

N. Siegler, J. Muzerolle, E.T. Young, G.H. Rieke, E.E. Mamajek, D.E. Trilling, N. Gorlova,
K.Y.L. Su, Spitzer 24 µm Observations of Open Cluster IC 2391 and Debris Disk Evo-
lution of FGK Stars. Astrophys. J. 654, 580–594 (2007)

D.E. Smith, M.T. Zuber, S.C. Solomon, R.J. Phillips, J.W. Head, J.B. Garvin, W.B.

42

Mark C. Wyatt, Alan P. Jackson

Banerdt, D.O. Muhleman, G.H. Pettengill, G.A. Neumann, F.G. Lemoine, J.B. Abshire,
O. Aharonson, D. Brown C., S.A. Hauck, A.B. Ivanov, P.J. McGovern, H.J. Zwally, T.C.
Duxbury, The Global Topography of Mars and Implications for Surface Evolution. Sci-
ence 284, 1495 (1999)

R. Smith, M.C. Wyatt, C.A. Haniﬀ, Resolving the hot dust around HD69830 and η Corvi

with MIDI and VISIR. Astron. Astrophys 503, 265–279 (2009)

R. Smith, M.C. Wyatt, C.A. Haniﬀ, Resolving the terrestrial planet forming regions of HD
113766 and HD 172555 with MIDI. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 422, 2560–2580 (2012)
R. Smith, L.J. Churcher, M.C. Wyatt, M.M. Moerchen, C.M. Telesco, Resolved debris disc
emission around η Telescopii: a young solar system or ongoing planet formation? As-
tron. Astrophys 493, 299–308 (2009)

I.A.G. Snellen, B.R. Brandl, R.J. de Kok, M. Brogi, J. Birkby, H. Schwarz, Fast spin of the

young extrasolar planet β Pictoris b. Nat. 509, 63–65 (2014)

I. Song, B. Zuckerman, A.J. Weinberger, E.E. Becklin, Extreme collisions between planetes-

imals as the origin of warm dust around a Sun-like star. Nat. 436, 363–365 (2005)

C.C. Stark, G. Schneider, A.J. Weinberger, J.H. Debes, C.A. Grady, H. Jang-Condell, M.J.
Kuchner, Revealing Asymmetries in the HD 181327 Debris Disk: A Recent Massive
Collision or Interstellar Medium Warping. Astrophys. J. 789, 58 (2014)

S.T. Stewart, Z.M. Leinhardt, Collisions between Gravity-dominated Bodies. II. The Diver-
sity of Impact Outcomes during the End Stage of Planet Formation. Astrophys. J. 751,
32 (2012)

K.Y.L. Su, G.H. Rieke, J.A. Stansberry, G. Bryden, K.R. Stapelfeldt, D.E. Trilling, J.
Muzerolle, C.A. Beichman, A. Moro-Martin, D.C. Hines, M.W. Werner, Debris Disk
Evolution around A Stars. Astrophys. J. 653, 675–689 (2006)

K.Y.L. Su, G.H. Rieke, R. Malhotra, K.R. Stapelfeldt, A.M. Hughes, A. Bonsor, D.J. Wilner,
Z. Balog, D.M. Watson, M.W. Werner, K.A. Misselt, Asteroid Belts in Debris Disk
Twins: Vega and Fomalhaut. Astrophys. J. 763, 118 (2013)

C.M. Telesco, R.S. Fisher, M.C. Wyatt, S.F. Dermott, T.J.J. Kehoe, S. Novotny, N. Mari˜nas,
J.T. Radomski, C. Packham, J. De Buizer, T.L. Hayward, Mid-infrared images of β
Pictoris and the possible role of planetesimal collisions in the central disk. Nat. 433,
133–136 (2005)

P. Th´ebault, J.C. Augereau, H. Beust, Dust production from collisions in extrasolar plane-

tary systems. The inner beta Pictoris disc. Astron. Astrophys 408, 775–788 (2003)

R. Visser, E.F. van Dishoeck, J.H. Black, The photodissociation and chemistry of CO iso-
topologues: applications to interstellar clouds and circumstellar disks. Astron. Astrophys
503, 323–343 (2009)

K.J. Walsh, A. Morbidelli, S.N. Raymond, D.P. O’Brien, A.M. Mandell, A low mass for

Mars from Jupiter’s early gas-driven migration. Nat. 475, 206–209 (2011)

L.M. Weiss, G.W. Marcy, The Mass-Radius Relation for 65 Exoplanets Smaller than 4 Earth

Radii. Astrophys. J. Lett. 783, 6 (2014)

G.W. Wetherill, Collisions in the Asteroid Belt. J. Geophys. Res. 72, 2429 (1967)
D.E. Wilhelms, S.W. Squyres, The martian hemispheric dichotomy may be due to a giant

impact. Nat. 309, 138–140 (1984)

A. Wolfgang, E. Lopez, How Rocky Are They? The Composition Distribution of Kepler’s

Sub-Neptune Planet Candidates within 0.15 AU. Astrophys. J. 806, 183 (2015)

M.C. Wyatt, Resonant Trapping of Planetesimals by Planet Migration: Debris Disk Clumps

and Vega’s Similarity to the Solar System. Astrophys. J. 598, 1321–1340 (2003)

M.C. Wyatt, Dust in Resonant Extrasolar Kuiper Belts: Grain Size and Wavelength Depen-

dence of Disk Structure. Astrophys. J. 639, 1153–1165 (2006)

M.C. Wyatt, Evolution of Debris Disks. Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 46, 339–383 (2008)
M.C. Wyatt, W.R.F. Dent, Collisional processes in extrasolar planetesimal discs - dust

clumps in Fomalhaut’s debris disc. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 334, 589–607 (2002)

M.C. Wyatt, C.J. Clarke, M. Booth, Debris disk size distributions: steady state collisional
evolution with Poynting-Robertson drag and other loss processes. Celestial Mechanics
and Dynamical Astronomy 111, 1–28 (2011)

M.C. Wyatt, R. Smith, K.Y.L. Su, G.H. Rieke, J.S. Greaves, C.A. Beichman, G. Bryden,
Steady State Evolution of Debris Disks around A Stars. Astrophys. J. 663, 365–382
(2007a)

Giant impacts in extrasolar planetary systems

43

M.C. Wyatt, R. Smith, J.S. Greaves, C.A. Beichman, G. Bryden, C.M. Lisse, Transience of

Hot Dust around Sun-like Stars. Astrophys. J. 658, 569–583 (2007b)

M.C. Wyatt, M. Booth, M.J. Payne, L.J. Churcher, Collisional evolution of eccentric plan-

etesimal swarms. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 402, 657–672 (2010)

M.C. Wyatt, O. Pani´c, G.M. Kennedy, L. Matr`a, Five steps in the evolution from proto-

planetary to debris disk. Astrophys. Space Sci. 357, 103 (2015)

K. Zahnle, N. Arndt, C. Cockell, A. Halliday, E. Nisbet, F. Selsis, N.H. Sleep, Emergence

of a Habitable Planet. Space Sci. Rev. 129, 35–78 (2007)

B. Zuckerman, C. Melis, J.H. Rhee, A. Schneider, I. Song, Stellar Membership and Dusty

Debris Disks in the α Persei Cluster. Astrophys. J. 752, 58 (2012)

J.I. Zuluaga, D.M. Kipping, M. Sucerquia, J.A. Alvarado, A Novel Method for Identifying

Exoplanetary Rings. Astrophys. J. Lett. 803, 14 (2015)

