6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
5
1

 
 
]
s
a
g
-
t
n
a
u
q
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
4
6
8
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Dark-soliton-like excitations in the Yang-Gaudin gas
of attractively interacting fermions

Sophie S. Shamailov, Joachim Brand
Dodd-Walls Centre for Photonics and Quantum Technology, Centre for Theoretical
Chemistry and Physics, New Zealand Institute for Advanced Study, Massey
University, Private Bag 102904 NSMC, Auckland 0745, New Zealand

E-mail: J.Brand@massey.ac.nz

Abstract. Yrast states are the lowest energy states at given non-zero momentum
and provide a natural extension of the concept of dark solitons to strongly-interacting
one-dimensional quantum gases. Here we study the yrast states of the balanced spin- 1
2
Fermi gas with attractive delta-function interactions in one dimension with the exactly
solvable Yang-Gaudin model. The corresponding Bethe-ansatz equations are solved for
ﬁnite particle number and in the thermodynamic limit. Properties corresponding to
the soliton-like nature of the yrast excitations are calculated including the missing
particle number, phase step, and inertial and physical masses. The inertial to physical
mass ratio, which is related to the frequency of oscillations in a trapped gas, is found to
be unity in the limits of strong and weak attraction and fall to ≈ 0.78 in the crossover
regime. This result is contrasted by one-dimensional mean ﬁeld theory, which predicts a
ratio larger than one that diverges to +∞ in the weakly attractive limit. The prospects
for experimental observations are brieﬂy discussed.

PACS numbers: 03.75.Lm, 05.30.Fk, 03.75.Kk, 74.20.Fg

Keywords: dark solitons, yrast states, attractive interactions, one-dimensional Fermi
gas, Bethe ansatz, Yang-Gaudin, type-II excitations

1. Introduction

Solitons are ubiquitous nonlinear wave phenomena that appear in many diﬀerent ﬁelds
of physics [1]. They often appear in the context of ﬂuid dynamics or the nonlinear
mean-ﬁeld theories of quantum systems [2]. A very interesting open question is to what
degree solitary wave phenomena can survive in low-dimensional and strongly correlated
quantum systems, where mean-ﬁeld theories or ﬂuid-dynamic-like descriptions are
inappropriate due to the dominance of quantum eﬀects.

Being characterized by a localized and non-dispersing depression in the particle
number density and a step variation in the superﬂuid phase, dark solitons [3] have

Dark-soliton-like excitations in the Yang-Gaudin gas of attractively interacting fermions2

been observed in Bose-Einstein condensates (BECs) of repulsively-interacting ultra-cold
atoms [4–6]. Ultra-cold gases of fermionic atoms [7–11] have extended the physics of
gaseous superﬂuids beyond weakly-interacting BECs by realizing the crossover from a
BEC of tightly-bound molecules to fermionic superﬂuid with long-range pair correlations
described by BCS theory [12, 13]. Dark solitons have been predicted [14–19] and
observed [20] in the crossover regime. In one-dimensional (1D) Fermi superﬂuids with
strong spin-orbit coupling, dark solitons have been predicted to carry Majorana fermions
as quasiparticles [21–23].

An interesting feature of dark solitons is that they exhibit oscillatory motion around
the position of maximum density in a trapped gas. The frequency of oscillation Ω is
universally related to the ratio of the inertial mass mI and the physical mass mP under
the condition of small oscillations [16, 17, 24]

,

(1)

(cid:16) ωtrap

(cid:17)2

mI
mP

=

Ω

where ωtrap is the frequency of the harmonic trapping potential. The mass ratio mI/mP
is a non-trivial characteristic of the underlying many-body physics of the medium.
For (tightly conﬁned) atomic BECs the ratio mI/mP = 2 was predicted from the
Gross-Pitaevskii equation in the nonlinear Thomas-Fermi limit [24, 25], and measured
experimentally in [6, 26]. In the BEC to BCS crossover in a Fermi superﬂuid, the ratio
was predicted to increase from 2 in the BEC regime to 3 in the unitary regime and
grow even larger towards the BCS regime in [16, 17]. Unfortunately, the dark solitons
observed in experiments decayed before their oscillation frequency could be measured
by means of the snaking instability due to the three-dimensional (3D) nature of the
trapped gas [20, 27, 28]. Instead, a solitonic vortex [29–31] was observed [32, 33], that
owes its large mass ratio mI/mP (in the hundreds) to hydrodynamic eﬀects [33, 34].

A natural way to stabilize the dark soliton is to reduce the dimensionality by
conﬁning the gas to a tight wave-guide-like trap [35]. In order to suppress the snaking
instability for the crossover Fermi superﬂuid, a transverse conﬁnement length scale
comparable to the mean particle spacing is required [27, 28], which means entering a
1D regime. An analytically solvable 1D mean-ﬁeld model for moving dark solitons in
the BCS regime predicts that the mass ratio mI/mP diverges to +∞ in the BCS limit of
weak attractive interactions [36]. These results are consistent with the predictions from
3D mean-ﬁeld theory [16, 17], where mI/mP increases towards the BCS regime. As we
will show in this work, however, exact solutions of the Yang-Gaudin model predict that
mI/mP approaches unity in the weakly-coupled BCS limit for a 1D Fermi gas. The
validity of mean-ﬁeld theory is generally questionable in strongly-correlated regimes
where no small parameter exists ‡, and in the strongly-conﬁned 1D regime where phase
ﬂuctuations prevent true long-range superﬂuid order according to the Mermin-Wagner
Hohenberg theorem [37, 38]. Nevertheless, the use of BCS-like mean-ﬁeld theory in the
‡ Note that the initial discrepancy between the experiment [32] and theory [16, 17] has since been
resolved [20, 33]

Dark-soliton-like excitations in the Yang-Gaudin gas of attractively interacting fermions3

weakly-attractive 1D Fermi gas had previously been supported by the comparison of
bulk properties with exact solutions of the Yang-Gaudin model [39].

Here we approach the tightly conﬁned 1D Fermi gas from the exactly solvable Yang-
Gaudin model [40, 41] of spin- 1
2 fermions with attractive δ-function interactions. Using
a purely 1D model with contact interactions is well justiﬁed for an ultra-cold Fermi gas
in the low density regime, where the relevant energy scale, e.g. the Fermi energy of the
1D gas, is small compared to the spacing of transverse excitations levels of the wave-
guide trap [42–45]. While the two-particle problem in a wave-guide trap always has a
bound state [46], the many-body problem of spin- 1
2 fermions knows two distinct regimes
that are separated by a conﬁnement-induced resonance, where the 1D scattering length
a1D passes through zero. The regime of a1D < 0 is well described by the Yang-Gaudin
model of spin- 1
2 fermions with attractive contact interactions while positive scattering
lengths a1D > 0 lead to gas of repulsively interacting bosonic dimers described by the
Lieb-Liniger model [47, 48]. The situation is sketched in ﬁgure 1 with reference to the
relevant dimensionless coupling parameter γ = 2/a1Dn0 of the Yang-Gaudin model.
Here, n0 = N/L is the particle number density, N the total number of fermions and L
the length of the system.

Figure 1. Schematic of the spin– 1
2 Fermi gas with attractive interactions in a
one-dimensional wave guide. The physical regimes of the many-body physics are
determined by the dimensionless coupling parameter γ = 2/a1Dn0 = gm/n02 = c/n0.

0

The Yang-Gaudin model with attractive interactions (γ < 0) has two-particle bound
states, dimers, with length scale ∼ |a1D|. The coupling constant γ = 2/a1Dn0 thus
to the dimer size and |γ| (cid:28) 1 is
provides the ratio of the mean particle spacing n−1
a regime of Cooper-pair-like large dimers. An interesting crossover regime appears at
γ ≈ 1, where the length scales are comparable, while the dimers are tightly bound for
γ → −∞. This is the position of the conﬁnement-induced resonance, where the dimers
are tightly bound but also the dimer-dimer interactions diverge [45]. The many-body
physics becomes that of gas of impenetrable bosons, known as a Tonks-Girardeau gas
[49, 50]. In this regime, the energy spectrum becomes that of N/2 spinless fermions with
mass 2m, where m is the mass of the original fermionic atoms. In fact, there is a one-
to-one mapping between the impenetrable Bose gas (here referring to dimers) and non-
interacting spinless fermions (of mass 2m) [50]. In this sense both limits of the attractive
Yang Gaudin model are non-interacting fermions and the interesting correlated physics
is expected around γ ≈ 1.

There is a close relation between the attractively interacting Fermi gas with a
balanced population of spin-up and -down fermions and the repulsively interacting Bose

-∞-10γYang GaudinLieb LinigerBosegas ofdimersTonks-Girardeaugas of dimerscrossoverBCS - like gasof long rangepaired fermionsFreeFermigasDark-soliton-like excitations in the Yang-Gaudin gas of attractively interacting fermions4

gas. The 1D Bose gas with repulsive δ-function interactions is known as the Lieb-Liniger
model and its ground state energy and excitation spectrum were solved for in [47, 48].
An important ﬁnding was a gapless branch of excitations with lower energy than the
gapless branch of phonon excitations (similar to the Bogoliubov phonons of the 3D Bose
gas). Lieb called these type-II elementary excitations [48]. They are part of the set of
yrast states, which refers to the lowest energy state at given momentum §.

By now there is mounting evidence for the association of the yrast excitations
of the Lieb-Liniger model to dark solitons known to exist in the 3D BEC and found
mathematically in the nonlinear Schr¨odinger equation [3]. References [52, 53] ﬁrst
identiﬁed the energy–momentum dispersion relation of dark solitons with Lieb’s type-II
branch in the weak coupling limit, which was later extended to multi-soliton solutions
[51, 54, 55]. Reference [56] further strengthened the connection by establishing how the
localized dark solitons of mean-ﬁeld theories (and experimental observations) emerge
from a superposition of the translationally invariant yrast states. Syrwid and Sacha
went on to demonstrate that localized density depressions typical of dark solitons emerge
at random positions from the translationally invariant yrast states under a single-shot
measurement procedure, where the position of the atoms is detected one-by-one [57].

The association between dark solitons and yrast excitations in the Lieb-Liniger
model opens the door to a deeper investigation of solitonic properties of yrast states in
the more strongly-interacting regimes of 1D quantum gases, outside the validity of mean-
ﬁeld theory. Astrakharchik and Pitaevskii have studied the (type-II) dispersion relation
of yrast excitations in the Lieb-Liniger model throughout the crossover from a weakly-
interacting Bose gas to the strongly-correlated Tonks-Giradeau regime and deduced a
number of quantities of interest [58]. These include the inertial and physical masses,
as well as the closely-related missing particle number Ns, i.e. the number of atoms
that have to be removed from the background density to create the observed density
depression. One important ﬁnding is that the missing particle number Ns diverges, and
thus becomes macroscopic, in the limit of small coupling constant γ, while corresponding
to a single boson hole in the Tonks-Girardeau regime of large γ. Another is that the
inertial-to-physical mass ratio mI/mP , which relates to the oscillation frequency of the
soliton in a harmonically trapped gas, smoothly decreases from the value of 2 in the
weak coupling limit (where it agrees with the mean-ﬁeld prediction), to 1 in the Tonks-
Girardeau regime.

In this work we extend the study of yrast excitations to the spin- 1

2 Fermi gas with
attractive interactions within the Yang-Gaudin model. We identify yrast excitations in
the ﬁnite system as dimer-hole excitations in the strongly-attractive regime and clarify
their continuous connection to single fermion holes in the non-interacting limit by solving
the Bethe-ansatz equations directly and with the aid of a string hypothesis for fermion
pairs in the strongly attractive regime. We then solve the integral equations for dimer
§ The term yrast (Swedish for “dizziest”) was originally used in nuclear physics to refer to high-spin
but low energy nuclear states. In the present context, where momentum in a periodic box is equivalent
to angular momentum on a ring, the term was ﬁrst used in [51].

Dark-soliton-like excitations in the Yang-Gaudin gas of attractively interacting fermions5

holes, which govern the yrast dispersion relation in the thermodynamic limit. From
these, a number of physical quantities including the missing particle number, the phase
step, and the inertial and physical masses are calculated. We ﬁnd that the missing
particle number varies from one to two missing fermions as we tune from the Tonks-
Girardeau gas of dimers to the BCS limit, while both the physical and the inertial
masses correspondingly change from −2m to −m. Interestingly, the mass ratio mI/mP
is 1 in both limits and reaches a minimum value of about 0.78 in the crossover regime
γ ≈ −1.3 (see ﬁgure 9). This contrasts sharply with the results of 1D mean ﬁeld theory
[36], where the mass ratio diverges in the BCS limit.

This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the Yang-Gaudin model and
the corresponding Bethe ansatz equations for ﬁnite particle number. The structure of
the ground and yrast exctited states, as well as the methods for solving the equations, are
discussed in both the strongly and weakly interacting regimes, and the excitation spectra
are computed. Section 3 then deals with the thermodynamic limit dispersion relations.
After discussing the ground state thermodynamic-limit equations in section 3.1, the
equations for the yrast dispersion relations are given in section 3.2, the missing particle
number and phase step are calculated in section 3.3 and the inertial and physical masses
insection 3.4. Conclusions are drawn in section 4 and three appendices provide technical
details regarding the numerical solution of the ﬁnite-system Bethe ansatz equations
(Appendix A), an outline of the derivation of the excited-state thermodynamic limit
integral equations (Appendix B), and details pertaining to the numerical computation
of the missing particle number (Appendix C), respectively.

2. Yang-Gaudin model for ﬁnite fermion number

The Yang-Gaudin model describes a gas of spin-1/2 fermions, conﬁned to a 1D box with
periodic boundary conditions and interacting via a two-body δ-function potential. The
Hamiltonian takes the form

N(cid:88)

j=1

(cid:88)

(cid:104)i,j(cid:105)

H = − 2

2m

d2
dx2
j

+ g

δ (xi − xj) ,

(2)

where in the second term the sum is over all pairs counted once. There are N fermions in
total, M ≤ N/2 of which are spin-up and the rest are spin-down. Furthermore, m is the
mass of each particle, and L is the length of the box. The model is relevant to ultra-cold
fermionic atoms in two hyperﬁne states conﬁned to a 1D wave guide in the low density
limit [42–45]. The 1D interaction constant g can be related to the 3D scattering length

a of the atoms and the wave guide trap frequency ω⊥ and length scale a⊥ =(cid:112)/mω⊥

by g = 2ω⊥a(1 − Aa/a⊥)−1 with A ≈ 1.0326 [49]. The coupling constant diverges
and changes sign at a conﬁnement-induced resonance where a/a⊥ = A−1. We are here
It is convenient to write
considering the case of attractive interaction where g < 0.
the interaction constant as g =
and a1D is the 1D scattering length

2
m c where c = 2
a1D

Dark-soliton-like excitations in the Yang-Gaudin gas of attractively interacting fermions6

[59]. Let us also introduce the 1D density, n0 = N/L, and γ = c/n0 which is a useful
dimensionless parameter both in the ﬁnite system and in the thermodynamic limit.

2.1. Bethe ansatz equations in exponential form

The Bethe-ansatz solution of the Yang-Gaudin model (2) consists of superpositions of
plane waves for the many-body wave function [60]. These are subject to boundary
conditions where particles interact and at the box boundaries, as well as fermionic
symmetry constraints. The solutions are uniquely determined by a set of quantum
numbers with the dimension of wave numbers known as rapidities. They have to satisfy
the Bethe ansatz equations in exponential form [40, 41]:
kj − αn + ic/2
kj − αn − ic/2
αm − αn + ic
αm − αn − ic

M(cid:89)
= − M(cid:89)

αm − kj + ic/2
αm − kj − ic/2

N(cid:89)

exp(ikjL)

,

.

(3)

(4)

=

n=1

j=1

n=1

The charge rapidities kj can be thought of as the quasi-momenta of the fermions. They
completely determine the total momentum and energy of the system

(5)

(6)

N(cid:88)
N(cid:88)

j=1

kj,

2
2m

k2
j .

j=1

Ptot = 

Etot =

The spin rapidities αm are auxiliary variables and are present due to the spin degree of
freedom. The αm’s do not contribute to the energy or momentum but must be solved
for as they are coupled to the kj’s. There are inﬁnitely many diﬀerent sets of rapidities
that solve (3) and (4) and each one corresponds to an eigenstate of the Hamiltonian (2).
In this work we are interested in the yrast states, i.e. the states with the lowest energy
Etot at given momentum Ptot. We also restrict ourselves to balanced populations of
spin-up and -down particles, i.e. N = 2M . The rapidities for yrast states can be easily
identiﬁed in the weak and strong interaction limits, where simple analytic solutions to
(3) and (4) are known. The yrast solutions for ﬁnite interaction strength can then be
found by continuity. Examples of rapidities for yrast states are shown in ﬁgure 2.

A particular feature due to the periodic boundary conditions is that a new set of
rapidities solving (3) and (4) can be generated from an existing one by adding 2π/L
(or an integer mutiple) to every kj and αm, as is easily seen from the equations. This
changes the momentum to P (cid:48)
tot = Ptot + 2πn0, where n0 = N/L and the energy to
E(cid:48)
tot = Etot + (2πn0)2/2mN . Physically this corresponds to a Galilean boost of the
whole system by the umklapp momentum 2πn0 ≡ 4pF , while the internal structure of
the many-body state is unchanged [47]. Here, pF = πn0/2 is the Fermi momentum of
the non-interacting spin- 1
2 Fermi gas. It is thus suﬃcient to consider yrast state in the
interval 0 ≤ P < 4pF .

Dark-soliton-like excitations in the Yang-Gaudin gas of attractively interacting fermions7

Figure 2. A schematic representation of the rapidities on the complex plane for
particular yrast states with N = 10 spin- 1
2 fermions and a balanced spin population
(M = 5). Charge rapidities {kj} are shown on top and spin rapidities {αm} on
the bottom, while the left panels refer to weak (c (cid:46) 0) and the right panels to
strong attractive interactions (c → −∞). Empty symbols show to the ground state
(Ptot = 0) and resemble ﬁlled Fermi spheres. Filled-in symbols show an excited state
with Ptot = 8π/L.
In the strongly attractive case (right), this yrast excitation is
obtained by creating a hole in the “Fermi-sphere” of dimers, i.e. moving the set of
two charge and one spin rapidities from quasi-momentum −π/L to the outside of
the sphere, at 3π/L. In the weekly-interacting regime (left), the corresponding yrast
excitation is obtained by taking a single fermion at −2π/L out of the Fermi sphere.
Note that this state is a non-degenerate singlet excitation while the related triplet
excitations have higher energy for nonzero c.

The Bethe ansatz equations (3) and (4) can be solved directly by numerical
methods. However it is only practical to do so for small particle number and in a
regime of very weak interactions. The situation is similar to that in the Lieb-Liniger
model with attractive interactions, where bound states are formed as well [61]. Technical
details regarding the numerical solutions are given in Appendix A.

2.2. Weak interactions
In the case of weak interactions |γ| (cid:28) 0, an analytical result is available for the rapidities
of the ground state [62]. Deﬁne the set of integers qm as

+ m

+

, m = 1, 2, . . . , M,

(7)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

1
2

qm = −M + 1

2

L qm±(cid:112) c

where the term in brackets is only included for even M . Then αm = 2π
L qm and
k2m,2m−1 = 2π
L. An illustration of the rapidities for the case of a non-degenerate
ground state with odd M is shown in ﬁgure 2 (left, empty symbols). For c < 0 pairs of

00 Im(kj)Re(kj)0−|c|/20|c|/2Re(kj)Im(kj)00Re(αm)Im(αm)0−|c|/20|c|/2Re(αm)Im(αm)-p|c|/L-6πL-4πL-2πL2πL4πL6πL-6πL-4πL-2πL2πL4πL6πL-6πL-4πL-2πL2πL4πL6πL6πL4πL2πL-2πL-4πL-6πLp|c|/L-p|c|/Lp|c|/LDark-soliton-like excitations in the Yang-Gaudin gas of attractively interacting fermions8

kj’s are complex conjugates and there is a limited range where the exponential equations
can be solved in practice.

The energy for weak interactions can be obtained by explicit evaluation of the sum
(6) [63]. In terms of the dimensionless coupling parameter γ = c/n0 we obtain (assuming
odd M )

(cid:18)

2n0
2m

(cid:19)

N 2 − 4

N

π2
12

Eweak

GS =

M γ +

.

(8)

This approximation is compared to the exact results in the bottom panel of Fig. 3. For
c = 0 this becomes simply the expression for the energy of a gas of non-interacting
spin- 1

2 fermions.
Yrast excitations in the small |c| limit are obtained by creating a single-fermion

L qm ±(cid:112)c/L out
from each other by ±(cid:112)c/L. An illustrative example of this type of excitation is given

hole, which has further implications. When a single kj is moved from 2π
of the Fermi spheres to 2π
L qm and
αm shifts to half-way between its associated kj’s. For half of the excitations, this means
αm becomes a half-integer multiple of 2π/L and for the other half, αm is expelled to
a position already occupied by another α. In the latter case, these two α’s split away

L qm ∓(cid:112)c/L to 2π

L (qM + 1), its partner moves from 2π

in the left column of ﬁgure 2, where we use N = 10, M = 5 and qm = −1.

2.3. String hypothesis

For stronger attractive interaction, as the value of c becomes increasingly negative, the
real part of pairs of kj values may become equal to the value of αm while the imaginary
parts become exponentially close to ±i c
2. This causes divergent terms in (3) and (4)
through vanishing denominators and provides a complication for numerical root ﬁnding.
In this case, approximate equations can be derived using the so-called string-hypothesis,
where the imaginary parts are replaced by the limiting values [62]. Speciﬁcally for the
ground state, 2M of the kj’s are taken to be αm±i c
are left as unknown variables. The paired charge rapidities can be eliminated from the
equations by substitution, with all remaining variables (the αm’s and the unpaired kj’s)
being real and distinct. It is then possible to take the logarithm of the Bethe-ansatz
equations. Assuming that all fermions are paired, which is adequate for the balanced
ground state and spin-conserving yrast excitations, this leads to [60]:

2, and the remaining N −2M real kj’s

2αmL = 2π(cid:96)m +

where

M(cid:88)

θ(αm − αn),

n=1

θ(k) = −2 tan−1

(cid:18) k

(cid:19)

c

(9)

(10)

is the two-body phase-shift function of the δ-function potential. The (cid:96)m’s are quantum
numbers that specify the state. These are either integers or half-integers, depending on
the parity of N and M , and they must be distinct. Since we know the relation between

Dark-soliton-like excitations in the Yang-Gaudin gas of attractively interacting fermions9

the αm’s and the kj’s associated with them, it is easy to write the momentum and energy
as

Ptot = 

M(cid:88)
M(cid:88)

m=1

2αm,

(cid:18)

2
2m

Etot =

m − c2
2
Note the total binding energy of − 2
ground state are

2α2

m=1

(cid:96)m = −M + 1

2

(cid:19)

.

(11)

(12)

2m M c2

2 . The quantum numbers for the balanced

+ m (+1), m = 1, 2, . . . , M,

(13)

L in order to converge to the solution.

with the term in brackets only included for even M . In order to solve the logarithmic
string hypothesis equations it is easier to start from the c → −∞ limit where it suﬃces
to guess αm = π(cid:96)m
The structure of the ground state rapidities in the strongly attractive regime
(c → −∞) is illustrated in ﬁgure 2 on the right by empty symbols.
Indeed, it can
be seen from the logarithmic equation (9) that the αm’s approach π
L(cid:96)m where the (cid:96)m’s
are given by (13) (and the corresponding charge rapidities approach π
2). The
structure of the ground state is now that of a Tonks-Girardeau gas of dimers: The
distribution of the αm rapidities is that of a Fermi sphere with M spinless fermions,
each corresponding to a bound pair of elementary fermions.

L(cid:96)m ± i c

The ground state energy can be obtained from (12) using the expressions for the
rapidities in the case of strong interactions. We obtain the energy for a Tonks-Girardeau
gas of N/2 bosonic dimers of mass 2m and binding energy − 2c2

(cid:18)

4m , as

(cid:19)

Estrong

GS =

2n0
2m

−γ2 N
4

+

π2
48

N 2 − 4

N

.

(14)

This expression is plotted in the top panel of ﬁgure 3 which shows the ground state
energy as a function of coupling strength across the range −100 < γ < 0 for a system
with N = 14, M = 7.
In particular, the bottom panel allows us to compare the
performance of the string hypothesis equations to the exact exponential equations in
the region where c < 0 and |γ| ≈ 1 or less. We see that the energy of the ground state
is captured very well indeed, which validates the use of the string hypothesis in cases
when all particles of opposite spins are paired up into dimers.

In the strongly attractive regime, yrast excitations are easily obtained by moving
a dimer from the inside of the Fermi sphere to the edge, as illustrated in ﬁgure 2 on the
right by the ﬁlled symbols. For the rapidities this means omitting one element from the
set of ground-state (cid:96)m quantum numbers of (13) and adding (cid:96)M +1. This operation shifts
one of the αm values and with it, the corresponding pair of charge rapidities with values
αm ± i c
2. The logarithmic form (9) of the Bethe ansatz equations can be used, since no
dimer has been broken. With strong interactions, it is easy to see that breaking a dimer

Dark-soliton-like excitations in the Yang-Gaudin gas of attractively interacting fermions10

Figure 3. Ground state energy as a function of coupling strength γ for a system
with N = 14, M = 7. Panel (b) shows a magniﬁed version of the data from panel
(a) around the region where exact results from the exponential equations are available
in the attractive regime, and demonstrates that the string-hypothesis results compare
well to the exact energy. Red circles show string-hypothesis results (labeled SH), black
diamonds – exact, green square – free system. Shown as dashed blue lines are the
approximate expressions (14) in (a) and (8) in (b).

pair would cost a large amount of energy, and thus the yrast states of lowest energy for
given momentum will be the ones where all fermions are paired.

It is not yet obvious from the asymptotic representations shown in ﬁgure 2, whether
and how the dimer hole excitations are connected to the single fermion holes we
have discussed in the context of weak attractive interactions. For both to be the
yrast excitations of the respective regime, it is necessary that they are continuously
connected through a change in the interaction parameter. That this is indeed the case
is demonstrated in ﬁgure 4 where the real and imaginary values of the rapidities are
shown as a function of γ for N = 6 particles. Note that the real parts of the charge
rapidities converge to the values of the spin rapidities and the imaginary parts become
linear in c for strongly negative c, as required by the string hypothesis. In addition,
we observe that the pair of kj’s that are separated to form the single fermion hole at
weak interactions always merge to form a dimer at more negative values of c. Another
observation is that the spacing of rapidities on the real axis changes from the single-
particle quantization condition 2π/L at c = 0 to the π/L at c → −∞, which is the
appropriate momentum quantization for dimers with mass 2m.

The dispersion relation for the yrast excitation energy E = Etot − EGS vs.
momentum is shown in ﬁgure 5.
It is seen that the excitation energy of each yrast
state decreases as the interaction strength changes from noninteracting to strongly
attractive within a well deﬁned interval. The limits of the interval are indicated by

−100−90−80−70−60−50−40−30−20−100−4−202x 1042m¯h2n20EGS  −1.6−1.4−1.2−1−0.8−0.6−0.4−0.20−1001020γ2m¯h2n20EGS  freeSHexactapprox.|γ|≫1SHfreeexactapprox|γ|≪1Dark-soliton-like excitations in the Yang-Gaudin gas of attractively interacting fermions11

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 4. The real and imaginary parts of charge and spin rapidities for the yrast
excitations with N = 6, M = 3. The momentum values for the yrast states are (a)
Ptot = 3n0π/L, (b) Ptot = 2n0π/L, and (c) Ptot = 1n0π/L. These solutions
were obtained by numerical root ﬁnding from the exponential form of the Bethe-
ansatz equations (3) and (4) starting from the known approximate rapidities for weak
interaction.

the full parabolic lines drawn from (15) and (16) below, respectively. The excitation
at momentum 2pF = πn0 = M × 2π/L deserves special attention. This value is
half of the umklapp momentum 4pF discussed in section 2.1 and is also the momentum
value obtained by adding the unit value 2π/L to every single-particle wavenumber of
half the fermions, e.g. to only the spin-up fermions.
In the noninteracting case, the
corresponding yrast excitation is obtained by taking a spin-up fermion from the left side
of the Fermi sphere and attaching it to the right side, which is equivalent to shifting
the Fermi sphere by one unit wavenumber while the spin-down Fermi sphere remains
ﬁxed. As can be expected, the energy of this excitation (for γ = 0) lies on the parabola
P 2/2mM , which we refer to as the half-system translation parabola. It is shown as a

−3−2−10−1012Re(kj)/n0−3−2−10−2−1012γIm(kj)/n0−3−2−10−0.500.511.5Re(αm)/n0−3−2−10−1−0.500.51γIm(αm)/n0−3−2−10−2−10123Re(kj)/n0−3−2−10−2−1012γIm(kj)/n0−3−2−10−1012Re(αm)/n0−3−2−10−1−0.500.51γIm(αm)/n0−3−2−10−1012Re(kj)/n0−3−2−10−2−1012γIm(kj)/n0−3−2−10−2−1012Re(αm)/n0−3−2−10−1−0.500.51γIm(αm)/n0Dark-soliton-like excitations in the Yang-Gaudin gas of attractively interacting fermions12

dash-dotted line in ﬁgure 5. For ﬁnite attractive interaction strength γ < 0, the energy
of this excitation decreases and eventually moves to the full system translation parabola
P 2/2mN , which is shown as a dashed line. This is to be expected, since we know that
the system dimerizes for γ → −∞, and an umklapp excitation of a Tonks-Girardeau gas
of M = N/2 dimers can be obtained at momentum 2pF with energy P 2/(2× 2m× M ).

Figure 5. Excitation energy vs. momentum for the yrast states shown as symbols
for diﬀerent values of the interaction strength γ and for N = 14, M = N/2. The
results for γ = 2 demonstrate continuity between the exact Bethe-ansatz equations
in exponential form (3) and (4) (blue diamonds) and the approximate logarithmic
equation (9), which is based on the string hypothesis (SH, green crosses). Full lines
show the limiting dispersion relations for γ = 0 from (15) in black and for γ → ∞ from
(16) in red. The dashed line shows the full-system translation parabola P 2/2mN and
the dash-dotted line shows the half-system translation parabola P 2/2mM .

Since we know the ground- and excited-state rapidities in both limits, it is possible

to ﬁnd the asymptotic dispersion relations for weak and strong interactions

− 2γ
π2N

,

,

(15)

(16)

(cid:34)
(cid:34)

−

−1
2

(cid:18) P
(cid:18) P

2pF

(cid:19)2
(cid:19)2

pF

Eweak =

Estrong =

4p2
F
2m

p2
F
2m

(cid:35)

(cid:18)
(cid:18)

+

+

P
2pF

P
pF

1 +

1 +

2
N

(cid:19)
(cid:19)(cid:35)

2
N

where pF = πn0/2 is the Fermi momentum of the free system. These dispersions are
added to ﬁgure 5 as solid lines.
Moreover, Fig. 5 compares the exact and string hypothesis dispersions at γ = −2,
roughly the lowest c value that can be tackled by the exact exponential equations at the
given number of particles. The small diﬀerence visible between the dispersions is due
to the fact that we have M complex kj pairs, which directly contribute to the energy
and their imaginary parts in the exact and approximate equations are diﬀerent.

00.20.40.60.811.21.41.61.8200.511.522.533.52Pπ¯hn02m¯h2n20E  exact γ=−2SH γ=−2SH γ=−100γ=0Dark-soliton-like excitations in the Yang-Gaudin gas of attractively interacting fermions13

3. Yrast dispersion in the thermodynamic limit
In the thermodynamic limit where N, L → ∞ while n0 = N/L remains ﬁxed, the unit of
momentum discretization 2π/L becomes inﬁnitesimally small while the full- and half-
system umklapp momenta, 4pF and 2pF , remain ﬁnite and meaningful quantities with
pF = πn0/2. The yrast dispersion is therefore replaced by a continuous function and
the sets of rapidities are replaced by continuous distributions. The interaction strength,
γ = c
2 for the purpose of this work),
n0
are the only two dimensionless parameters characterizing the ground state, while the
yrast states, in addition, are determined by the momentum P/pF .

, and the polarization, M/N (kept at a value of 1

In the ﬁnite-system case we saw that the string hypothesis works when |c|L (cid:29) 1
and the exact Bethe ansatz equations can be replaced by logarithmic form (9) for fully
dimerized states. In the thermodynamic limit, this condition is fulﬁlled for any value
of the interaction strength γ since L → ∞, and thus we only need to consider the
logarithmic equations. These coupled algebraic equations become Fredholm integral
equations of the second kind, ﬁrst derived by Gaudin [62]. The ground state integral
equations can be found in [64] and there is some earlier work examining excitations in
the Yang-Gaudin model [62, 65–67], often focusing on spin-changing excitations. In the
following we present the integral equations that are appropriate for the ground state
and yrast excitations. These are solved numerically using the Fie package for MATLAB
[68].

3.1. Ground state

The balanced (fully-dimerized) ground state properties can be found by introducing the
density distribution function r(α) for the dimer rapidities, and rewriting (9) into the
integral equation [62, 64]

1
π

= r(α) − c
π

r(α(cid:48))

c2 + (α − α(cid:48))2 dα(cid:48),

b(cid:90)

−b

with the constraint

b(cid:90)

−b

r(α)dα =

M
L

,

where b is the boundary of the rapidity distribution. We will follow the common
convention [64] to redeﬁne the reference point for energy measurements by subtracting
the divergent binding energy of the total system − 2
2m M c2/2. This does not aﬀect the
dispersion relation, which reports the energy diﬀerence between excited and ground

(17)

(18)

Dark-soliton-like excitations in the Yang-Gaudin gas of attractively interacting fermions14

state. The ground state energy and momentum then become

b(cid:90)
b(cid:90)

−b

EGS =

2
2m

L

2α2r(α)dα,

PGS = 2L

αr(α)dα = 0.

−b

In order to solve the integral equation numerically we scale the equations, introducing
the dimensionless rapidity x and the parameter λ:

We thus obtain

x =

α
b

,

λ =

c
b

1 = πg(x) − λ

with the normalization condition

λ = 2γ

=

1(cid:90)

−1

n0γ
b

,

g(x) ≡ r(bx).

g(x(cid:48))

λ2 + (x − x(cid:48))2 dx(cid:48),
1(cid:90)

g(x)dx,

−1

where M = N/2 has been used. The parameter λ has a monotonic relationship to the
dimensionless interaction strength γ, as is shown in ﬁgure 6. For numerical calculations
it is practical to set λ ﬁrst and then obtain the value of γ from (23).

The ground state energy now can be written as

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

(23)

(24)

(25)

(26)

(27)

EGS = N

e(γ),

where e(γ) is deﬁned by

(cid:16) γ

λ

e(γ) = 2

(cid:17)3

x2g(x)dx.

2n2
0
2m

1(cid:90)
(cid:18)

−1

(cid:19)

,

µ ≡ dEGS
dN

=

3e − γ

de
dγ

2
2m

n2
0

(cid:114) n0

m

vc =

dµ
dn0

.

and the speed of sound obtained through the compressibility [48]

Knowing the ground state energy provides us with access to the chemical potential

Note that the chemical potential as deﬁned here does not contain the contribution
−2c2/4m from the binding energy of the dimer that has to be broken in order to
remove a single fermion. The chemical potential for the (bosonic) dimers is 2µ.

Dark-soliton-like excitations in the Yang-Gaudin gas of attractively interacting fermions15

Figure 6. The dependence of the physical dimensionless interaction strength γ = c/n0
on the computational parameter λ (full line). The dashed line shows the asymptotic
relation (37) for the strongly attractive regime.

3.2. Yrast dispersion relation

The yrast excited states are characterized by a single hole in the set of dimer rapidities
but the rapidities are shifted from their ground state positions. An integral equation
can then be derived for a function J(α), which quantiﬁes the shift [48, 62]. Appendix
B provides some further details on this derivation. The integral equation has a similar
structure to that of the ground state but contains the hole rapidity Q as an additional
parameter with −b < Q < b:

2πJ(α) = 2c

J(α(cid:48))

c2 + (α − α(cid:48))2 dα(cid:48) + π − θ (α − Q) .

(28)

The energy and momentum of the excitation relative to the ground state are found from

b(cid:90)

−b

 ,

P = 

J(α)dα

−Q + 2
b(cid:90)
−2Q2 + 4

−b

b(cid:90)

−b

E =

2
2m

 + 2µ.

(29)

(30)

αJ(α)dα

The equations can be made dimensionless by a similar rescaling as for the ground state
with the additional dimensionless quantities

q =

Q
b

,

h(x) ≡ J(bx).

(31)

−102−101−100−10−1−10−2−102−101−100−10−1−10−2λγDark-soliton-like excitations in the Yang-Gaudin gas of attractively interacting fermions16

The integral equation becomes

πh(x) = λ

h(x(cid:48))

λ2 + (x − x(cid:48))2 dx(cid:48) +

π
2

− tan−1

(cid:18) q − x

(cid:19)

λ

,

(32)

1(cid:90)

−1

and the excitation energy and momentum are obtained from the dimensionless function
h(x) by

 ,

−q +
1(cid:90)
−q2 + 2

−1

2b2

h(x)dx

1(cid:90)

−1

P = 2b

E =

2
2m

 + 2µ.

(33)

(34)

xh(x)dx

Figure 7 shows example dispersions for this excitation branch. Limiting expressions for
weak and strong interactions are easily obtained from the ﬁnite particle number results
(15) and (16), respectively, by taking the limit N → ∞. Note that the translation
parabolas ∝ P 2/N m move to the P -axis in the thermodynamic limit as N → ∞. Thus
both the umklapp and half-umklapp excitations have zero energy and the dispersion
relation E(µ, P ) is periodic in momentum with period 2pF .

The yrast dispersion relation is gapless and, as demanded from general principles,

the slope at the origin is the speed of sound

lim
P→+0

∂E(µ, P )

∂P

= vc,

(35)

as in the Lieb-Liniger model [48]. A dispersion relation for phonon-like “particle”
excitations with the same slope at the origin but higher energy than the yrast excitations
can also be obtained from the Bethe ansatz [62].
In addition there is a triplet of
elementary excitations that involve breaking a single dimer pair. The corresponding
dispersion relations are gapped for γ < 0 and also have higher energy than the yrast
excitations.

An explicit form of the dispersion relation can be obtained in the strongly attractive
regime by solving the integral equations to leading order in λ−1. Neglecting (x − x(cid:48))2
compared to λ2 in the kernel, we ﬁnd g = (π − 2/λ)−1, a constant independent of x.
Expanding the inhomogeneous term in the excited-state equation to ﬁrst order about
zero, naturally leads to a linear ansatz for h(x): h(x) = α(λ, q) + β(λ, q)x.
Indeed,
α(λ, q) = πλ−2q
πλ satisfy the resulting equation. We can now evaluate all

2(πλ−2) and β(λ) = 1

Dark-soliton-like excitations in the Yang-Gaudin gas of attractively interacting fermions17

Figure 7. Yrast dispersion relation (dimer hole excitations) in the thermodynamic
limit from (33) and (34). Blue solid line: λ = −0.02 (γ ≈ −0.031), red dashed
line: λ = −1 (γ ≈ −1.1), black dash-dotted line: λ = −50 (γ ≈ −40). The yrast
dispersion relation is periodic in momentum with period 2pF = πn0. Only one
period is shown. For the whole range of interactions, the dispersion relation relates
to a negative-eﬀective-mass quasiparticle and is reminiscent of dark solitons in the
nonlinear Schr¨odinger equation [69].

the ground state properties:

1
2

(cid:19)
(cid:19)2

,

πλ − 2

,
− 1

4λ

(cid:18) πλ
(cid:18)
(cid:20)π2

2
π − 2
λ
− π
3λ

16

,

1
48
2n2
0
2m

b =

γ =

e =

µ =

+

(cid:20)

P = 2b [−q + 2α] ,
−q2 +

E =

2b2

2
2m

4β
3

(cid:21)

.

3πλ3

7

12λ2 − 1
(cid:21)

+ 2µ.

The excitation energy and momentum can also be obtained, giving

(36)

(37)

(38)

(39)

(40)

(41)

(42)

Eliminating q and substituting for λ in terms of γ, the dispersion relation becomes

(cid:18) P

pF

E =

p2
F
2m

− P 2
2p2
F

(cid:19)(cid:18) 2γ

(cid:19)2

1 + 2γ

+ O(cid:0)γ−3(cid:1) .

This result agrees with (16) for γ → −∞ and N → ∞, as it should.

00.20.40.60.811.21.41.61.8200.511.522.52Pπ¯hn02m¯h2n20E  λ=−1λ=−50λ=−0.02Dark-soliton-like excitations in the Yang-Gaudin gas of attractively interacting fermions18

3.3. Missing particle number and phase step

The dispersion relations discussed in the previous section give us access to a number of
quantities that deﬁne the character of soliton-like excitations, and that can be derived
assuming the existence of a localized quasiparticle. In the following we will consider
E = E(µ, P ) as a function of the two variables µ and P . Note that both the density n0
and γ = c/n0 depend on the chemical potential µ while parameters of the Hamiltonian,
in particular c, are kept ﬁxed. The particle number Ns associated with the excitation
is then obtained from [70] (cid:107)

(cid:18)∂E

∂µ

Ns = −

+

vs
n0

dn0
dµ

P

(cid:19)(cid:18)

1 − mv2
n0

s

dn0
dµ

(cid:19)−1

.

(43)

For dark solitons as well as for the yrast excitations considered here, Ns < 0 and thus is
also referred to as the missing particle number, i.e. the number of particles that make up
the diﬀerence between the soliton’s density proﬁle and a constant background density.
Strictly speaking, we are using the term only by analogy to classical solitons, e.g. in the
nonlinear Schr¨odinger equation, since the physical meaning of Ns for yrast excitations
in general is not fully understood. Likewise is it possible to assign to the states on the
yrast dispersion a phase step ∆φ. As a well-known characteristic of dark solitons in the
nonlinear Schr¨odinger equation [3], the phase step becomes relevant in a system with
periodic boundary conditions, where it determines the size of the backﬂow current. It
can be calculated from [17]

P = Ps +

n0∆φ,

1
2

(44)

where P is the canonical or total momentum in the periodic box and Ps = mvsNs is the
physical momentum of the soliton. The phase step ∆φ is thus well deﬁned, even though
1D quantum gases are thought to possess at most a ﬂuctuating condensate phase [72].
The missing particle number Ns and the phase step ∆φ along the dispersion relation
are shown for diﬀerent values of the interaction strength in ﬁgure 8. Details about
evaluating (43) are presented in Appendix C. The limiting cases of weak and strong
interactions are easy to interpret, as Ns becomes constant as a function of momentum
and assumes the values -2 for a dimer hole in the Tonks-Girardeau gas of dimers
(γ → −∞) and -1 for a single fermion hole in the non-interacting limit (γ = 0). Also the
phase step assumes the constant value of π in both limits. A most interesting behaviour
is found in the crossover regime, where both Ns and ∆φ show signiﬁcant momentum
dependence.

For the Lieb-Liniger model, A. Campbell [73] derived convenient equations for
Ns and ∆φ that avoid numerical derivatives completely and are thus very eﬃcient to
evaluate. With trivial adaption to the current case of the Yang-Gaudin model they read
(cid:107) This formula for Ns in general diﬀers from the formula −dE/dµ|vs that appeared in [17]. A derivation
of (43) based on the Hellman-Feynman theorem will be published elsewhere [71].

Dark-soliton-like excitations in the Yang-Gaudin gas of attractively interacting fermions19

(a)

(b)

Figure 8. Missing particle number (a) and phase diﬀerence (b) for single fermion holes
in the γ → 0 limit, which become single dimer holes in the γ → −∞ limit. Black:
λ = −0.02, γ = −0.030815, red: λ = −1, γ = −1.1363, blue: λ = −50, γ = −39.770.
Direct evaluation of (43) yields the results plotted as squares, while those from
Campbell’s formulas (45) and (46) are shown as solid lines.

¶:

Ns = − 2πg(1) [h(1) − h(−1)] − 2,
∆φ =

[h(1) + h(−1)] ,

1

g(1)

(45)

(46)

where the functions g(x) and h(x) were introduced in sections 3.1 and 3.2 and still
depend on the interaction parameter γ (and the momentum in the case of h(x)). The
excellent agreement with the direct evaluation of (43) is seen by the overlapping curves
in ﬁgure 8.

In the strongly-interacting limit, using the approximate analytical solutions of the
Bethe ansatz integral equations and Campbell’s formulae, we ﬁnd the following limiting
expressions:

Ns = −2 − 1
γ

(cid:20)

+ O(cid:0)γ−2(cid:1) ,
(cid:18) P
(cid:19)

− 1

pF

∆φ = π

1 +

(1 + 2γ)−1

(cid:21)

+ O(cid:0)γ−2(cid:1)

(47)

(48)

3.4. Quasiparticle dynamics in a harmonic trap

Konotop and Pitaevskii have argued that the motion of solitons on a slowly varying
background is governed by the principles of Landau’s quasiparticle dynamics, which
leads to simple classical equations of motion [24]. Here we apply these ideas to yrast
¶ The constant -2 in (45) was missing in [73] but is needed to achieve consistency with (43). For the
Lieb-Liniger model it should be replaced by -1 and ∆φ should have an additional factor of 1/2.

00.511.52−2−1.8−1.6−1.4−1.2−12Pπ¯hn0Ns00.511.520.60.70.80.911.11.21.31.42Pπ¯hn0∆φ/πDark-soliton-like excitations in the Yang-Gaudin gas of attractively interacting fermions20

excitations in the inhomogeneous 1D Fermi gas. The crucial point is to assume that
localized quasiparticles can be formed from the yrast excitations, e.g. by wave-packet
formation, which move with a velocity vs = ∂E(µ, P )/∂P . There is good reason to
expect this to happen given the evidence connecting yrast excitations to dark solitons
in the closely related Lieb-Liniger model as discussed in the introduction.

Suppose now the background variations happen on a length scale RTF that is large
compared to the quasiparticle length scale (cid:96)s and the Fermi wavelength ξF = 4/n0. Since
the quasiparticle velocity vs is bounded by the speed of sound vc ∼ vF = πn/2m, we
can also suppose that the acceleration of the quasiparticle moving over the slowly varying
background is small enough to suppress the radiation of energy. In the local density
approximation, the chemical potential µ(X) = µ0−V (X) varies locally with position and
adjusts to the value of the external potential. Requiring the energy of the quasiparticle
E = E(µ, P ) to be conserved during the motion then leads to a Hamiltonian equation
of motion for the position X(t) of the quasiparticle

0 = − mP
m

dµ
dX

˙X + vsmI

dvs
dt

where we have identiﬁed the inertial mass

mI =

=

dP
dvs

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)µ
(cid:18) ∂E

∂µ

(cid:18) ∂2E

(cid:19)−1

∂P 2

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)µ

,

1
vs

dE
dvs

=

(cid:19)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)vs

.

= −m

dE
dµ

and the physical mass [34] (see also [16, 17, 32])

mP = −m

− mI vs

∂2E
∂µ ∂P

At zero velocity it is closely related to the missing particle number

mP = mNs

at vs = 0,

(49)

(50)

(51)

(52)

as can be seen from (43). It takes on negative values and plays the role of a buoyancy
parameter, or bubble mass, as it determines the value of the buoyancy force

mP
m

dµ
dX

= −mP
m

dV
dX

(53)

Assuming a harmonic trapping potential V (x) = 1
of motion ﬁnally takes the form

2mω2

trapx2, the quasiparticle equation

mI

¨X + mP ω2

trapX = 0.

(54)

Since both mass parameters are negative and approximately constant at small velocities,
(54) is solved by harmonic oscillations with a frequency Ω given by (1).

The inertial and the physical masses at vs = 0 can be calculated from the dispersion
relation and are shown in ﬁgure 9 along with their ratio, mI/mP . The limiting value of 1

Dark-soliton-like excitations in the Yang-Gaudin gas of attractively interacting fermions21

for mI/mP in the weakly and strongly interacting regimes means that quasiparticles will
oscillate in the harmonically trapped gas with the same frequency as a single fermion
would, or, indeed, as the centre-of-mass coordinate of an interacting cloud would if dipole
oscillations were initiated +. This is not unexpected, since both limits correspond to
2 fermions and γ → −∞
that of non-interacting fermions: γ = 0 is a free gas of spin- 1
is a Tonks-Girardeau gas of dimers, which maps to a gas of spinless fermions by the
Bose-Fermi mapping [50]. The yrast excitations become free single particle holes in
these limits, single fermion holes for γ = 0 and single dimer holes for γ → −∞, and
thus should oscillate with the trap frequency. The interesting regime is the crossover
around γ ≈ −1 where the mass ratio drops below 1. Our numerical results indicate that
the physical mass monotonically decreases from a value of −m in the weakly interacting
to −2m in the strongly attractive regime. The inertial mass, even though it takes
the same limiting values, appears to have faint maximum, reaching values of −0.990m
around γ ≈ −0.7.

In the strongly attractive regime we can obtain expressions for the masses and their

ratio from the analytical solutions of the integral equations in the limit γ → −∞:

,

2γ + 1

(cid:18)2γ + 1

2γ

(cid:19)2

,

(55)

(56)

mP = − 2m

mI = − 2m
2γ + 1
mI
mP

2γ

=

2γ

.

(57)
These are shown in ﬁgure 9 as dash-dotted lines and good agreement is seen for γ (cid:46) −5.
mP /m and mI/m range from −1 to −2 as a function of interaction strength and their
ratio remains below unity.

4. Discussion and conclusions

In this work we have identiﬁed the yrast excitations of the spin- 1
2 Fermi gas with
attractive δ interactions in the crossover from the dimerized regime of strong attraction
to the non-interacting limit. We have further examined properties of the yrast dispersion
relation in the thermodynamic limit obtained from the exact Bethe ansatz solutions of
the Yang-Gaudin model. The yrast dispersion relations very much resemble those of
dark solitons in the nonlinear Schr¨odinger equation and the yrast dispersion of the
Lieb-Liniger model of the one-dimensional Bose gas.
Indeed, by the nature of the
yrast states being the lowest energy state at given momentum, we can expect these
excitations to be robust and long lived. Yet there are important quantitative diﬀerences
between the results of the current work and the Bose gas. For example, the missing
particle number for yrast excitations in the Bose gas can be macroscopically large as
Ns ∼ −2γ−1/2 diverges for small values of the interaction parameter γ (cid:38) 0 of the
+ Due to the separability of centre-of-mass and relative motion in a harmonic trapping potential, this
is true regardless of the strength of the inter-particle interaction.

Dark-soliton-like excitations in the Yang-Gaudin gas of attractively interacting fermions22

Figure 9. Physical and inertial masses (a) and their ratio (b) for yrast excitations of
the balanced spin- 1
2 Fermi gas with attractive interactions. The dash-dotted lines are
the approximate equations, top panel: (55) in magenta, (56) in black and bottom panel:
(57) in black. These are in excellent agreement with the exact results for γ (cid:46) −5.

Lieb-Liniger model [58]. Also, in contrast to the Bose gas where the eﬀective mass
ratio mI/mP is always larger than unity [58], the ratio falls below one for the Yang-
Gaudin gas, which means that yrast quasiparticles would oscillate with a frequency that
is slightly faster than the trap frequency. These interesting eﬀects are challenging to
observe in experiments, since a one-dimensional Fermi gas would have to be realized
and manipulated at the level of single atoms. Important steps have already been taken
by realizing one-dimensional Fermi gases [74–76] and single-particle-level detection with
high-numerical aperture imaging [77, 78].

A possible route towards measuring the oscillation frequency of the yrast
quasiparticles in the Yang-Gaudin regime might be provided by the connection of
the Yang-Gaudin with the Lieb-Liniger regimes in the one-dimensional gas across the
conﬁnement-induced resonance [42–44] following loosely the procedure applied in [32]:
Yrast excitations could be excited by phase imprinting [5] or combined phase and density
imprinting [79] and detected through a visible density depletion in the weakly-interacting
Lieb-Liniger regime for tightly-bound dimers where dark solitons become macroscopic.
A rapid ramp of interaction strength through the conﬁnement-induced resonance would
then adiabatically transform the dark solitons into the yrast states of the Yang-Gaudin
model, thus allowing them to be probed this way.

Acknowledgments

The authors thank Martin Zwierlein, Victor Galitski, Xia-Ji Liu, and Hui Hu for helpful
discussions and in particular Dimitri Gangardt for pointing out [70] and the thesis [73].

−102−101−100−10−1−10−2−2−1.5−1mass/m  −102−101−100−10−1−10−20.80.91γmI/mPmPmIDark-soliton-like excitations in the Yang-Gaudin gas of attractively interacting fermions23

Appendix A. Finite system equations: technical details

In this appendix we provide all the details on how the Bethe ansatz equations were
solved numerically. We used the MATLAB environment, and in particular the fsolve
function, included in the optimization toolbox.

In order to solve any of the logarithmic equations (where all variables are necessarily
real and distinct), we always begin from the strong-coupling limit, taken as |γ| = 100. In
this regime, one can use 2π/L-multiples of the quantum numbers as an initial guess, and
the solver easily picks up the correct solution. Now, usually this guess is suﬃcient at any
γ (with the logarithmic equations), but we ﬁnd it is better to follow the solutions from
|γ| = 100 down to whatever value one needs. This is done with an adapting step of γ/10,
since in the strong-coupling regime the solutions change very little and large steps can
be taken, while in the weak-coupling regime the converse is true. At each consecutive
γ-step, the guess is taken as the solution at the previous step. This following-in-γ
procedure greatly improves eﬃciency and accuracy for large systems (N ∼ 100 − 1000)
but is optional for small systems (N ∼ 10).

Now, solving the exact exponential Bethe ansatz equations with complex rapidities
is a somewhat more involved task. Here there are two possibilities: either the structure
of the solution changes with γ (for example, distinct real rapidities may merge into a
complex-conjugate pair), or it does not. In the latter case, the situation is simpler, so
we start there. The simplest of all cases is the ground state, due to the symmetry of the
solution. As such, we can track the solution somewhat further than for excited states.
For the ground state we begin from the known approximate solutions at γ ≈ 0 and
track in γ using a ﬁxed step of 0.01. Once again, we use a linear interpolation based on
the previous two points as a guess for the next. Whenever the solver fails to converge
to a valid solution, we call the solver a maximum of ﬁve times more, at each attempt
adding a vector of (real) random numbers to the initially-used guess of order 10−4. If
all ﬁve attempts are exhausted unsuccessfully, the program aborts.

For the single fermion branch, the structure of the solution changes as a function of
γ. As always, we begin from γ = −0.01 where solutions are approximately known, use
a ﬁxed step of 0.01 (unless we are in the vicinity of a merging – see below) and linear
interpolation for predictive guessing. At each step, the solver is called once and the
solutions are inspected. The Bethe ansatz equations must have distinct roots, so that
no two kj’s and no two αm’s are equal. At points where two real rapidities merge into a
complex-conjugate pair, the solver often fails to automatically split up these roots along
the imaginary axis, so this must be tested for and corrected.

Thus, having made an initial attempt to solve at a given γ value, we test whether
any of the kj’s have been returned equal (in this case they will also necessarily be real).
If so, we modify the guess by splitting up these rapidities by ±0.1in0. Having modiﬁed
the guess to help the solver pick up the correct solution, we call it again and reduce step
size to 0.001 in a γ-interval of 0.01 immediately following the merging point. The step
is reduced because usually variables change very rapidly in the vicinity of a merging

Dark-soliton-like excitations in the Yang-Gaudin gas of attractively interacting fermions24

and in order for our linear guess to be eﬀective, the γ-step must be smaller. Once we
perform 10 of these reduced steps, the step size is returned to normal.

Regardless of whether a merging takes place at any given γ value, if the solver
fails to converge, we make a maximum of ten further attempts to solve by adding small
(real) random numbers of order 10−4n0 to the initial guess (which may have already
been “manually” modiﬁed due to a merging). If all ten attempts fail, the program is
aborted.

Appendix B. Thermodynamic limit equations: outline of derivation

Since the ground state thermodynamic limit equations of the attractive Yang-Gaudin
model are available in the literature (e.g. [64]), we will not explain how these are to be
obtained from the ﬁnite-system discrete equations. However, we will indicate how one
can obtain the excited-state equations starting from the ground state.

In the case of single fermion holes (which in the thermodynamic limit are dimer
holes), we begin from the most convenient ground state, that of a system with M + 1
dimers. This chosen initial ground state is then perturbed by explicitly removing a dimer
to create a hole excitation. This perturbation to the system shifts all other rapidities,
and this shifted ground state will be denoted by an asterisk. The explicit removal of
a dimer, together with the shift of all other rapidities, will yield the excited state of
interest. This excited state must be compared to the initial ground state from which
we constructed it, which is not be the ground state of interest (which has M dimers).
We must then correct for the “wrong” ground state explicitly, which is a much simpler
task then beginning from the correct but inconvenient ground state.

In our notation, the equations for the single fermion hole branch are derived by

following the recipe:

{[E∗(M + 1) − 1α] − E(M + 1)} + {E(M + 1) − E(M )} .

(B.1)

This means we must take the ﬁnite-system Bethe ansatz equations ∗ of M + 1 dimers,

remove one charge rapidity (denoted here by 1α) with the other rapidities shifted from
their true ground state values (denoted by the asterisk) and compare the resulting system
to the true ground state of M + 1 dimers. Finally, we add a ground state correction that
ensures that both the excited and the ground states have N = 2M fermions (in practice,
the ground state correction simply contributes a 2µ term to the excitation energy since
the energy cost of adding/removing two fermions to the ground state is precisely 2µ).
Now let us outline in more detail how the equations are derived: the shift in αm
due to the perturbation is written as δαm L. We write down the ﬁnite-system Bethe
ansatz equations for the chosen initial ground state, shifting all the rapidities. Then
we explicitly subtract any interaction terms that are associated with the rapidities that
must be removed, which are themselves not shifted. Next, we expand the interaction
∗ Note that one must use the equations in logarithmic form and if applicable, under the string

hypothesis.

b(cid:90)

(cid:88)

→ L

Dark-soliton-like excitations in the Yang-Gaudin gas of attractively interacting fermions25

terms [in the case of the δ-function potential, the two-body phase-shifts are given by
the θ function of (10)] as a ﬁrst order Taylor expansion about the unshifted rapidities,
with the ﬁrst order terms proportional to the shifts.

We now subtract the Bethe ansatz equations of the unperturbed, conveniently-
chosen ground state. At this point we may pass to the continuous limit by using
the ground state quasi-momenta density function that appear in the ground state
thermodynamic limit equations with the following rule:

r(α)dα.

(B.2)

m

−b

Some of the terms appearing under the integrals in the equations can be simpliﬁed by
substituting for them from the ground state thermodynamic limit integral equations.
Finally, we deﬁne a new function that is the product of L, the ground state distribution,
and the shift: in particular J(α) = L δα r(α).

It remains to compute the energy and momentum. This is done according to our
recipe, by writing down the ﬁnite-system total P and E of the excited state (shifted and
with an explicit rapidity removed), subtracting those of the convenient ground state, and
adding the ground state correction. The resulting quantities can be expressed through
the “shift function” of the integrals equations (i.e. J(α)), the explicit rapidity removed
and the chemical potential.

Appendix C. Evaluating Ns

Here we give details on how we evaluate (43) for the yrast excitation in the attractive
Yang-Gaudin model directly. We ﬁrst write this equation in the equivalent form

where momentum was replaced by the velocity vs as an independent variable. Deﬁne

,

(C.1)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)vs

− dE

dµ

Ns =

− vs

n0

dn0
dµ P

dP
dµ

+ vs
1 − mv2

s
n0

dn0
dµ

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)vs
2

,

−1

 1(cid:90)
1(cid:90)
1(cid:90)

−1

−1

f1(γ) =

g(x)dx

f2(γ, q) = 2

xh(x)dx,

f3(γ, q) =

h(x)dx,

(C.2)

(C.3)

(C.4)

Dark-soliton-like excitations in the Yang-Gaudin gas of attractively interacting fermions26

and write the excitation energy and momentum through the scaled variables as

(cid:2)−q2 + f2(γ, q)(cid:3) + 2µ,

[−q + f3(γ, q)] .

E =

P = 

2
2m

n2
0

2f1(γ)

n0(cid:112)f1(γ)

(C.5)

(C.6)

(C.7)

(C.8)

(C.9)

(C.10)

(C.11)

(C.12)

(C.13)

(C.14)

The velocity is deﬁned as

vs ≡ dE
dP

=

dE
dq

dq
dP

=


m

√
n0
2
f1

(cid:40)−2q + df2

dq

−1 + df3

dq

(cid:41)

.

To begin with, we need to take the derivative of E with respect to µ:

df1
dn0

(cid:3)

(cid:2)−q2 + f2
(cid:19)

dq
dn0

+

df2
dn0

+ 2

dµ
dn0

,

dE
dn0

dE
dµ

=

+

=

2
2m
2
2m
dE
dn0

0

2n0f1 − n2
2f 2
1
−2q

(cid:18)

n2
0
2f1
dn0
dµ

.

Diﬀerentiating the chemical potential, we get
[2n0α(γ) − cβ(γ)] ,

2
2m

=

dµ
dn0
α(γ) = 3e(γ) − γ

β(γ) = 2

de(γ)

− γ

de(γ)

,

dγ
d2e(γ)

.

dγ2

dγ
The derivatives we need are
dγ
dn0
dγ
dn0

df1
dn0
df2
dn0

df1
dγ
df2
dγ

=

=

,

+

df2
dq

dq
dn0

.

Next, we need dq/dn0 keeping vs constant and we have no closed analytical expression
for q. Still, this derivative can be done. Deﬁning ˜vs = vs/n0 and going back to (C.7):

˜vs =

vs
n0

=


m

1√
2f1

(cid:41)

(cid:40)−2q + df2

dq

−1 + df3

dq

.

(C.15)

The right hand side only explicitly depends on q and γ. Therefore, there exists some
relation linking ˜vs, q, γ which can in principle be solved to give q(˜vs, γ). In this case, we
have

dγ
dn0
The diﬃcult derivative appearing here is dq
function of γ and q, we can write

dq
dn0

dq
dγ

=

+

dq
d˜vs

d˜vs
dn0

.

(C.16)

dγ keeping vs constant. Since ˜vs is only a

d˜vs =

∂˜vs
∂γ

dγ +

∂˜vs
∂q

dq.

(C.17)

Dark-soliton-like excitations in the Yang-Gaudin gas of attractively interacting fermions27

We want to keep ˜vs constant, so d˜vs must be zero, from which we get

All together, we have

dq
dγ

dq
dn0

=

1
n2
0

(cid:18)

= −∂˜vs
∂γ

∂q
∂˜vs

c

− vs

∂˜vs
∂γ

.

(cid:19) ∂q

∂˜vs

.

∂˜vs
∂q and ∂˜vs
of (C.15), this can be done. We now have all the necessary equations to compute dE
dµ

∂γ are to be found numerically, but since ˜vs is deﬁned by the right hand side
.

Next, we need to compute dP
dµ

. Taking the derivative of (C.6):

(C.18)

(C.19)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)vs

(C.20)

(C.21)

(C.22)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)vs

dP
dn0

dP
dµ

=

+

=

√
n0√

f1

f1
dP
dn0

(f3 − q) − n0
(cid:19)
(cid:18) df3

2

− dq
dn0

dn0

dn0
dµ

.

−3/2
1

f

df1
dn0

(f3 − q)

,

The only new derivative appearing here is

df3(γ, q)

dn0

=

df3
dγ

dγ
dn0

+

df3
dq

dq
dn0

.

We now have everything we need to calculate Ns from (C.1) directly.

References

[1] Dauxois T and Peyrard M 2006 Physics of Solitons (Cambridge University Press)
[2] Kevrekidis P G, Frantzeskakis D J and Carretero-Gonz´alez R (eds) 2008 Emergent Nonlinear
Phenomena in Bose-Einstein Condensates (Atomic, Optical, and Plasma Physics vol 45) (Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg)
[3] Tsuzuki T 1971 J. Low Temp. Phys. 4 441
[4] Burger S, Bongs K, Dettmer S, Ertmer W and Sengstock K 1999 Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 5198–5201
[5] Denschlag J, Simsarian J E, Feder D L, Clark C W, Collins L A, Cubizolles J, Deng L, Hagley
E W, Helmerson K, Reinhardt W P, Rolston S L, Schneider B I and Phillips W D 2000 Science
287 97–101

[6] Becker C, Stellmer S, Soltan-Panahi P, D¨orscher S, Baumert M, Richter E M, Kronj¨ager J, Bongs

K and Sengstock K 2008 Nat. Phys. 4 496–501

[7] Kinast J, Turlapov A, Thomas J E, Chen Q, Stajic J and Levin K 2005 Science 307 1296–1299
[8] Zwierlein M W, Abo-Shaeer J R, Schirotzek A, Schunck C H and Ketterle W 2005 Nature 435

1047–1051

[9] Liao Y a, Rittner A S C, Paprotta T, Li W, Partridge G B, Hulet R G, Baur S K and Mueller E J

2010 Nature 467 567–9

[10] Navon N, Nascimb`ene S, Chevy F and Salomon C 2010 Science 328 729–32
[11] Joseph J A, Thomas J E, Kulkarni M and Abanov A G 2011 Phys. Rev. Lett. 106 150401
[12] Giorgini S and Stringari S 2008 Rev. Mod. Phys. 80 1215–1274
[13] Zwerger W (ed) 2012 The BCS - BEC Crossover and the Unitary Fermi Gas vol 836 (Springer

Berlin / Heidelberg,)

Dark-soliton-like excitations in the Yang-Gaudin gas of attractively interacting fermions28

[14] Dziarmaga J and Sacha K 2004 Soliton in BCS superﬂuid Fermi gas (Preprint arXiv:0407585)
[15] Antezza M, Dalfovo F, Pitaevskii L and Stringari S 2007 Phys. Rev. A 76 043610
[16] Liao R and Brand J 2011 Phys. Rev. A 83 041604(R)
[17] Scott R, Dalfovo F, Pitaevskii L and Stringari S 2011 Phys. Rev. Lett. 106 185301
[18] Spuntarelli A, Carr L D, Pieri P and Strinati G C 2011 New J. Phys. 13 035010
[19] Scott R G, Dalfovo F, Pitaevskii L P, Stringari S, Fialko O, Liao R and Brand J 2012 New J.

Phys. 14 023044

[20] Ku M J H, Mukherjee B, Yefsah T and Zwierlein M W 2016 Phys. Rev. Lett. 116 045304
[21] Xu Y, Mao L, Wu B and Zhang C 2014 Phys. Rev. Lett. 113 130404
[22] Liu X J 2015 Phys. Rev. A 91 023610
[23] Zou P, Brand J, Liu X j and Hu H 2015 arXiv Prepr. (Preprint 1509.01803) URL

http://arxiv.org/abs/1509.01803

[24] Konotop V V and Pitaevskii L 2004 Phys. Rev. Lett. 93 240403
[25] Busch T and Anglin J R 2000 Phys. Rev. Lett. 84 2298–2301
[26] Weller A, Ronzheimer J P, Gross C, Esteve J, Oberthaler M K, Frantzeskakis D J, Theocharis G

and Kevrekidis P G 2008 Phys. Rev. Lett. 101 130401

[27] Cetoli A, Brand J, Scott R G, Dalfovo F and Pitaevskii L P 2013 Phys. Rev. A 88 043639
[28] Mu˜noz Mateo A and Brand J 2014 Phys. Rev. Lett. 113 255302
[29] Brand J and Reinhardt W P 2001 J. Phys. B At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 34 L113–L119
[30] Brand J and Reinhardt W P 2002 Phys. Rev. A 65 043612
[31] Komineas S and Papanicolaou N 2003 Phys. Rev. A 68 043617
[32] Yefsah T, Sommer A T, Ku M J H, Cheuk L W, Ji W, Bakr W S and Zwierlein M W 2013 Nature

499 426–30

[33] Ku M J H, Ji W, Mukherjee B, Guardado-Sanchez E, Cheuk L W, Yefsah T and Zwierlein M W

2014 Phys. Rev. Lett. 113 065301

[34] Mu˜noz Mateo A and Brand J 2015 New J. Phys. 17 125013
[35] Muryshev A E, van Linden van den Heuvell H B and Shlyapnikov G V 1999 Phys. Rev. A 60

R2665–R2668

[36] Eﬁmkin D K and Galitski V 2015 Phys. Rev. A 91 023616
[37] Mermin N D and Wagner H 1966 Phys. Rev. Lett. 17 1133–1136
[38] Hohenberg P C 1967 Phys. Rev. 158 383–386
[39] Liu X J, Hu H and Drummond P D 2007 Phys. Rev. A 76 043605
[40] Yang C N 1967 Phys. Rev. Lett. 19(23) 1312–1315
[41] Gaudin M 1967 Physics Letters A 24 55–56
[42] Fuchs J N, Recati A and Zwerger W 2004 Phys. Rev. Lett. 93 090408
[43] Tokatly I V 2004 Phys. Rev. Lett. 93 090405
[44] Astrakharchik G, Blume D, Giorgini S and Pitaevskii L 2004 Phys. Rev. Lett. 93 050402
[45] Mora C, Komnik A, Egger R and Gogolin A O 2005 Phys. Rev. Lett. 95 080403
[46] Bergeman T, Moore M G and Olshanii M 2003 Phys. Rev. Lett. 91 163201
[47] Lieb E H and Liniger W 1963 Phys. Rev. 130(4) 1605–1616
[48] Lieb E H 1963 Phys. Rev. 130(4) 1616–1624
[49] Olshanii M 1998 Phys. Rev. Lett. 81 938–941
[50] Girardeau M 1960 J. Math. Phys. 1 516–523
[51] Kanamoto R, Carr L and Ueda M 2008 Phys. Rev. Lett. 100 060401
[52] Kulish P P, Manakov S V and Faddeev L D 1976 Theor. Math. Phys. 28 615–620
[53] Ishikawa M and Takayama H 1980 J. Phys. Soc. Japan 49 1242
[54] Kanamoto R, Carr L and Ueda M 2009 Phys. Rev. A 79 1–12
[55] Kanamoto R, Carr L D and Ueda M 2010 Phys. Rev. A - At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 81 023625
[56] Fialko O, Delattre M C, Brand J and Kolovsky A 2012 Phys. Rev. Lett. 108 250402
[57] Syrwid A and Sacha K 2015 Phys. Rev. A 92 032110
[58] Astrakharchik G E and Pitaevskii L P 2012 EPL (Europhysics Lett. 102 30004

Dark-soliton-like excitations in the Yang-Gaudin gas of attractively interacting fermions29

[59] Batchelor M T, Bortz M, Guan X W and Oelkers N 2006 Journal of Physics: Conference Series

42 5

[60] Sutherland B 2004 Beautiful Models: 70 Years of Exactly Solved Quantum Many-body Problems

(Singapore: World Scientiﬁc)

[61] Sykes A G, Drummond P D and Davis M J 2007 Phys. Rev. A 76(6) 063620
[62] Gaudin M 1967 Etude d’un modele a une dimension pour un systeme de fermions en interaction

Ph.D. thesis Centre d’Etudes Nucleaires de Saclay

[63] Guan X W W, Batchelor M T and Lee C 2013 Rev. Mod. Phys. 85 1633–1691
[64] Guan X W and Ma Z Q 2012 Phys. Rev. A 85(3) 033632
[65] Krivnov V and Ovchinnikov A 1975 Soviet Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Physics 40

781

[66] Schlottmann P 1994 Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 6 1359
[67] Zhou L, Xu C Y and li Ma Y 2012 Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment 2012

L03002

[68] Atkinson K E and Shampine L F 2008 ACM Trans. Math. Softw. 34 21
[69] Pitaevskii L and Stringari S 2003 Bose-Einstein Condensation (Oxford: Clarendon)
[70] Schecter M, Gangardt D M and Kamenev A 2012 Ann. Phys. (N. Y). 327 639–670
[71] Shamailov S S and Brand J 2016 unpublished
[72] Petrov D S, Shlyapnikov G V and Walraven J T M 2000 Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 3745–3749
[73] Campbell A S 2013 Mobile impurities in one-dimensional quantum liquids Phd thesis University

of Birmingham

[74] Pagano G, Mancini M, Cappellini G, Lombardi P, Sch¨afer F, Hu H, Liu X j, Catani J, Sias C,

Inguscio M and Fallani L 2014 Nat. Phys. 10 198–201

[75] Z¨urn G, Wenz A N, Murmann S, Bergschneider A, Lompe T and Jochim S 2013 Phys. Rev. Lett.

111 175302

[76] Serwane F, Z¨urn G, Lompe T, Ottenstein T B, Wenz a N and Jochim S 2011 Science 332 336–338
[77] Cheuk L W, Nichols M A, Okan M, Gersdorf T, Ramasesh V V, Bakr W S, Lompe T and Zwierlein

M W 2015 Phys. Rev. Lett. 114 193001

[78] Haller E, Hudson J, Kelly A, Cotta D A, Peaudecerf B, Bruce G D and Kuhr S 2015 Nat. Phys.

11 738–742

[79] Carr L, Brand J, Burger S and Sanpera a 2001 Phys. Rev. A 63 051601(R)

