6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
6
1
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
5
2
9
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Physics of a toy geyser

Martin Brandendourger, St´ephane Dorbolo, and Baptiste Darbois Texier

GRASP, Physics Dept., ULg, B-4000 Li`ege, Belgium.

Abstract

A geyser can be reproduced by a toy experiment composed of a water pool located above a water
reservoir, the two being connected by a long and narrow tube. When the bottom reservoir is heated,
the system experiences periodic eruptions of hot water and steam at the top similarly to the geyser
eﬀect occurring in nature. The eruption frequency of a toy geyser is inspected experimentally as a
function of the heating power and the height of the set-up. We propose a thermodynamic model of
this system which predicts the time between eruptions. Besides, the geometric and thermodynamic
conditions required to observe a geyser eﬀect are discussed. The study of the toy geyser is then
extended to the case of two reservoirs connected to the same tube.
In such a conﬁguration, an
eruption in a reservoir may entrain the eruption of the other. Such a coupled system adopts a
complex time-evolution which reﬂects the dynamics of natural geysers. We analyze the behavior of a
toy geyser with two reservoirs by the way of statistical tools and develop a theoretical model in order
to rationalize our observations.

Introduction

A geyser can be deﬁned as a periodically eruptive spring resulting from Earth’s thermal activity. One of
the most famous geyser is the Old Faithful [Fig. 1(a)] in the Yellowstone National park in the United
States. It erupts about every 90 minutes and projects hot water up to 56 m high [1,2]. Probably the ﬁrst
scientist to describe the principle of a geyser was Robert Bunsen in 1845 after the Danish government
sponsored him to study the eruption of Mount Hekla in Iceland [3]. He lowered a thermometer into geyser
depths and discovered that they had at their base a reservoir of “superheated”water. He understood that
when the water in the reservoir boils, the liquid in the vent is ejected upwards and produces an eruption
of hot water and steam. Bunsen and his student Tyndall built a toy geyser based on the same principle
as illustrated in Fig. 1(b) [4]. Such a demonstrative experiment showed eruptions regularly spaced
in time that conﬁrmed their intuitions on the fundamental principles underlying natural geysers. The
realization of a geyser at reduced scale contributed to promote the Bunsen’s theory for geyser among the
geophysical community [5, 6]. Nowadays, similar set-ups are present in various Science Museum like the
Exploratorium in San Francisco (USA) and Source-o-Rama in Chaudfontaine (BE) and are also currently
used for research purpose in order to understand mechanisms underlying a geyser eruption [7, 8].

In nature, the dynamics of a geyser can be much more complex time series that the one of a toy
geyser as revealed by in situ data collection in Yellowstone USA [1, 2, 9] or at El Tatio in Chile [10, 11].
Such a complexity can be attributed to a high sensitivity of geysers dynamics towards water and steam
inﬂow [11], barometric pressure, tidal forces, tectonic stresses [12] or reservoirs interconnection [13]. Over
the past decades, crucial steps in the theoretical modelling of geyser eruptions have been achieved [5,14,15]
but an extensive description of the problem is still to uncover.

Throughout this paper we aim at studying and predicting the dynamics of a toy geyser and under-
standing its similarities with natural geysers. First, we reproduced a model geyser similar to the one

1

of Tyndall. The erupting dynamics of such a geyser has been inspected as a function of the injected
heat power and its geometrical characteristics. The diﬀerent stages of a geyser life and the evolution of
the reservoir temperature over time are described in Section 1. Afterwards, we develop in Section 2 a
theoretical model based on thermodynamic notions and ﬂuid dynamics in order to rationalize our obser-
vations. Besides, we observed that the geyser eﬀect can vanish because of intense vaporization or thermal
convection in the vent. The required conditions to produce a geyser eﬀect are inspected in Section 3 and
compared with conditions occurring in nature. Finally, we showed that the complex dynamics of natural
geysers can be approached by interconnecting two reservoirs to a single vent as detailed in Section 4.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: (a) People watching Old Faithful erupt from geyser cone, Yellowstone National Park, 1948. (b)
Toy model of a geyser by Tyndall [16]. (c) Sketch of the experimental set-up. A glass reservoir containing
a mass M of water at a temperature Tr was connected to a pool by a long vent of radius R. The water in
the pool was maintained at a constant temperature Tp. The system was completely ﬁlled with a column
of water of height H chosen between 1.6 and 11.5 m and the pool has a depth h. A heating plate provided
a speciﬁc heat power P to the water of the reservoir.

1 Experiments

1.1 Primary observations

A toy geyser was realized with a glass reservoir connected to a pool through a long and narrow vertical
vent as sketched in Fig. 1(c). The system was completely ﬁlled with water. The total height of the liquid
column from the bottom of the reservoir to the liquid surface is denoted H. The depth of the pool was h
and the vent radius R. The reservoir, which contained a mass of water M , was heated from below by a
hot plate maintained at a constant temperature. Thus, the water of the reservoir received a speciﬁc heat
power P. When heated continually, the toy geyser undergoes periodic erupting events spaced between
quiet phases. This periodic behavior is illustrated by the evolution of the temperature Tr measured in
the middle of the reservoir as shown in Fig. 2(a) for a geyser height H = 1.60 m and a speciﬁc heating
power P = 130 W/kg. After a ﬁrst heating phase, the temperature in the reservoir follows a saw-tooth
evolution between about 93 ◦C and 102 ◦C. A single period of the temperature of the reservoir is reported
typically in Fig. 3 and consists of several steps. First, the water in the reservoir is heated up to the
boiling point Tb(H) at a pressure corresponding to the water column of height H [stage (a) in Fig. 3].
The boiling temperature of water as a function of the height of the overlying column is recalled in Fig
2(b) and is equal to 102 ◦C for H = 1.60 m. When the water in the reservoir reaches the corresponding
boiling point, an intense production of vapor bubbles occurs. Buoyancy induces the upward motion of

2

reservoirpoolventhot platevapor bubbles in the vent which entrains the water above and produces an eruption of hot water and
steam at the top of the toy geyser [stage (b) in Fig. 3]. After the ejection of the liquid in the vent, the
water in the reservoir keeps on boiling and the vapor continues to escape throughout the vent toward the
pool [stage (c) in Fig. 3]. The total amount of water transferred from the reservoir to the pool at this
stage is denoted ∆M . As the boiling goes on, the vapor production cools down the water remaining in
the reservoir. When this latter reaches the boiling temperature Tb(h) corresponding to the pressure of a
water column of height h, the vapor emission decreases till the vapor ﬂow can not sustain the water in
the pool which ﬁnally falls back into the reservoir [stage (d) in Fig. 3]. At this moment, the eruption
phase is ﬁnished. The eruption has last a time τe. The temperature in the reservoir reaches Tr,i, which is
the equilibrium temperature resulting from the mixture of a mass of water M − ∆M at the temperature
Tb(h) and a mass of water ∆M coming from the pool maintained at a constant temperature Tp [stage (e)
in Fig. 3]. After that, the temperature in the reservoir increases from Tr,i to Tb(H) in a time τ before an
other eruption starts. Meanwhile, the temperature of the pool is thermalized to Tp = 30◦C throughout
the duration of the experiment.

(a)

(b)

Figure 2: (a) Evolution of the temperature Tr in the reservoir over time for a toy geyser of height H = 1.60
m, speciﬁc heating power P = 130 W/kg, pool height h = 4.0 cm and vent radius R = 3.0 mm. Dots
indicate the time of eruptions. (b) Boiling temperature Tb of water as a function of the height H of the
overlying column extracted from [17]. Symbols show the parameters of the experiments presented in this
study.

1.2 Measurements

The two characteristics time τ , τe and the exchanged mass ∆M were measured as a function of the
parameters of the experiments: the speciﬁc heating power P and the geyser height H. The speciﬁc
heating power received by the water in the reservoir is estimated during the ﬁrst heating step throughout
the relation

(1)
where c is the speciﬁc thermal capacity of water (c = 4.18 kJ.K−1.kg−1). One remarks that P takes into
account the heat transfer lost by the reservoir toward its environment. In our experiments the speciﬁc
heating power could be varied between 30 and 220 W/kg. Also, we inspected two diﬀerent geyser heights
in this study, H = 1.60 m and H = 11.50 m, for which the boiling temperatures of water are respectively

P = c

dTr
dt

3

4060801001201401601802009092949698100102t(min)Tr(◦C)10011012013002468101214Tb(◦C)H(m)Figure 3: Sketch showing the diﬀerent stages of the life of a toy geyser: (a) Heating of the reservoir up
to the boiling temperature Tb(H); (b) Water boiling in the reservoir provokes an eruption; (c) Vapor
emission throughout the vent; (d) End of the eruption, the water from the pool reﬁlls the reservoir; (e)
The system returns to its initial state. The typical evolution of the reservoir temperature Tr over time
is shown by the way of the red solid line in the graphic at the top. The pool temperature is maintained
at Tp = 30◦C. Bottom and top pictures correspond to the reservoir and the pool at diﬀerent times of the
geyser cycle.

102 ◦C and 120 ◦C for a standard outside atmospheric pressure. The mean values of τ , τe and ∆M were
determined over more than 10 events and the experimental results are shown in Fig. 4 and 5.

One observes in Fig. 4(a) that the elapsed time τ between two eruptions lasts from 2 to 30 min in
our experiments. Also, this characteristic time increases with the geyser height H and decreases with the
speciﬁc heating power P. The logarithmic scale diagram in the inset of Fig. 4(a) reveals that the time τ
between eruptions is inversely proportional to P. Besides, the erupting time τe is between one and two
minutes in the present set of experiments reported in Fig 4(b). This characteristic time increases with

4

(a)(b)(c)(d)(e)(a)(b)(c)(d)(e)(a)

(b)

Figure 4: Mean values of the time between geyser eruptions τ as a function of the speciﬁc heat power P
for diﬀerent heights of the water column H. The blue dots and purple squares correspond to H = 1.6 m
and H = 11.5 m. The inset presents the data with logarithmic scales. Solid lines show the predictions of
Eq. (4). (b) Mean erupting time τe as a function of the speciﬁc heat power P for diﬀerent heights of the
water column H. The blue dots and purple squares correspond to H = 1.6 m and H = 11.5 m. Solid
lines show the predictions of Eq. (5).

Figure 5: Mean mass fraction ∆M/M of the reservoir exchanged with the pool during an eruption as a
function of the speciﬁc heating power P for diﬀerent water column heights H. The blue dots and purple
squares correspond respectively to H = 1.60 m and H = 11.50 m. Solid lines show the predictions of Eq.
(6).

the geyser height H and shows a small dependency with the speciﬁc heating power P. One notices in
Fig. 5 that the exchanged mass fraction ∆M/M increases with the speciﬁc heating power and the water
column height.

5

0501001502002500500100015002000P(W/kg)τ(s)101102103102103104P(W/kg)τ(s)050100150200250050100150P(W/kg)τe(s)  H=1.6mH=11.5m05010015020025000.050.10.150.20.25P(W/kg)∆M/M  H=1.6mH=11.5m2 Model

2.1 Geyser frequency

The duration between two successive geyser eruptions is approached by estimating the time needed
to heat the water in the reservoir from the initial temperature Tr,i to the boiling temperature Tb(H)
corresponding to a water column of height H [Fig. 2(b)]. If a speciﬁc heat power P is transferred to the
reservoir, its temperature increases from Tr,i to Tb(H) in a time

τ =

c

P [Tb(H) − Tr,i]

(2)

During an eruption, a mass of water ∆M moves from the reservoir to the pool. The eruption stops
when the temperature of the water remaining in the reservoir is close to the boiling temperature Tb(h)
corresponding to the pressure imposed by a water column of height H and vaporization weakens. At this
moment, the exchanged mass ∆M moves from the pool to the reservoir and ﬁlls it completely. Thus, the
temperature Tr,i of the reservoir at this particular time is

Combining Eqs. (2) and (3) yields

τ =

c
P

(M − ∆M ) Tb(h) + ∆M Tp

M

(Tb(h) − Tp) + (Tb(H) − Tb(h))

(cid:21)

Tr,i =

(cid:20) ∆M

M

(3)

(4)

One observes that Eq. (4) gives two contributions for the characteristic time between geyser eruptions.
The ﬁrst contribution corresponds to the cool down of the reservoir by the entry of a mass ∆M of water
coming from the pool maintained at a temperature Tp. The second contribution is the time required to
reach the boiling temperature Tb(H) below a water column of height H. These contributions imply that
the geyser height H, the pool temperature Tp and the geometry of the plumbing system impact the time
between eruptions. In our experiments, all quantities involved in Eq. (4) are known except ∆M/M which
has been measured, thus an estimation of the time between eruptions τ can be deduced. Such predictions
are plotted by the way of solid lines in Fig. 4(a) for the two geyser heights inspected experimentally
(H = 1.60 m and H = 11.50 m). The good agreement between experiments and predictions validate the
approach considered above.

2.2 Erupting time

After the beginning of an eruption, the temperature of the reservoir is Tb(H) whereas the overlying
pressure is close to the atmospheric one and imposes an equilibrium temperature Tb(h). The erupting
time is associated with the time needed to cool down the reservoir from Tb(H) to Tb(h) by vaporizing
water [stage (c) in Fig. 3].
In our situation, we assume that this process is limited by the thermal
transfer occurring in the reservoir with bubbles formation on nucleation sites, their growth and their
ascension. Such a thermal transfer depends on the diﬀerence between the temperature of the water in
the reservoir and the boiling temperature corresponding to the imposed pressure. To our knowledge,
such a phenomenon has never been described quantitatively. Thus, we assume empirically a power
law dependency for the power rate lost by the superheated water, i.e.
In ﬁrst
approximation, the power lost by the vaporization is balanced by the temperature variation of the reservoir
M c ˙Tr = −α(Tr − Tb(h))β. Solving the previous equation from a reservoir temperature Tb(H) to a
threshold temperature Tr,t, for which an eruption stops, provides the following prediction for the time of
eruptions

˙Q = α(Tr − Tb(h))β.

6

(cid:2)(Tb(H) − Tb(h))1−β − (Tr,t − Tb(h))1−β(cid:3)

τe =

α

M c(1 − β)

(5)

One notices that if β < 1, the erupting time predicted by Eq. (5) increases with the geyser height
as observed experimentally in Fig. 4(b). More quantitatively, the previous model can be adjusted on
experimental data. Solid lines in Fig. 4(b) correspond to the prediction of Eq. (5) for β = 0.66, α = 38
SI and Tr,t − Tb(h) = 0.1 ◦C. The deviation of experimental data from the theoretical predictions at large
heating power (P > 150 W/kg) can be attributed to the omission of the energy injected by the heating
plate in the energy balance of the model. Indeed, the speciﬁc heating power P delays the cooling of the
water in the reservoir by vaporization.

2.3 Exchanged mass

When an eruption has occurred and water has left the vent, the vaporization in the reservoir results
from both the injected heat power PM and the heat ﬂux ˙Q coming from the water superheat. Thus,
the power balance in such a situation provides: L ˙M = PM + α(Tb(H) − Tb(h))β where ˙M is the mass
ﬂow rate of vapor produced in the reservoir and L the latent heat of water. The vaporization generates
bubbles which grow and rise in the reservoir. Due to the conical shape of the reservoir, the bubble
volume fraction φb(z) increases along the vertical axis z as sketched in Fig. 6. When the volume fraction
reaches a critical value φb,c, the bubbles coalesce and ﬁnally form the vapor phase. Considering that the
critical bubble volume fraction corresponds to the fraction for which a single bubble cannot be added to
a cubic close-packed arrangement of monodispered bubbles, we estimate that φb,c = 0.33. Thereby, the
equilibrium position ze of the liquid/vapor interface during an eruption can be deduced from the critical
bubble volume fraction in the liquid. Introducing the bubbles upwards velocity Ub in the reservoir, the
vapor density ρv and R(z) is the radius of the reservoir at the altitude z relatively to the bottom of the
reservoir, we get: L ρv φb(z) πR2(z) Ub = PM + α(Tb(H) − Tb(h))β. Haberman and Morton showed that
the terminal velocity of vapor bubbles in water is between 20 cm/s and 30 cm/s for bubble of radius
comprised between 0.5 mm and 15 mm [18]. For the sake of simplicity, we consider that all the bubbles
in the vent rise at the same velocity Ub (cid:39) 25 cm/s, a fact which is consistent with our observations. The
critical bubble volume fraction φb,c is reached for a reservoir radius

(cid:115)PM + α(Tb(H) − Tb(h))β

π L ρv φb,c Ub

R(ze) =

(6)

We deduce from Eq. (6) and geometrical considerations, the mass of water ∆M ejected out of the
reservoir during an eruption for the parameters corresponding to the experiments of section 1 (M = 1.2
kg, ρv = 0.9 kg/m3, L = 2.6 × 106 J/kg, β = 0.66 and α = 38 SI) and a critical bubble volume fraction
φb,c = 0.33. The prediction of the theory is show in Fig. 5 by the way of solid lines. One observes the
relative agreement between the theory and experimental data.

3 Conditions for geysers existence

The aim of this section is to inspect under which conditions a toy geyser can lead to periodic eruptions.
First, we inspect the physical origin of toy geyser eruptions, and second we consider the domain of
existence of three non-periodic regimes: the fumarole regime, the hot springs regime and the boiling pool
regime.

7

Figure 6: Deﬁnition of the parameters used in the model developed in section 2.3. All the vapor bubbles
have the same upwards velocity Uv. Due to the reduction of the reservoir radius R(z) with increasing
height z, the bubble volume fraction φb(z) increases along this direction up to a critical volume fraction
φb,c which deﬁnes the equilibrium position ze of the liquid/gas interface.

3.1 Geyser’s birth: bubble clogging

First, we investigate the eﬀect of the vent radius on the toy geyser. Experimentally, we observed that if
the vent radius is too large (R > 20 mm), the vapor bubbles produced by the boiling in the reservoir are
able to rise without entraining the surrounding water and no eruptions occur. Thus, the birth of a geyser
eruption is caused by the transition from a dispersed ﬂow regime to an annular ﬂow regime in the vent.
The regimes of a two-phase ﬂow in a vertical pipe have been studied extensively by Mishima et al. [19].
The transition between a dispersed and an annular ﬂow in the vent can be approached with a critical air
volumic fraction above which bubbles clog and entrain the surrounding water. In the present situation,
the vapor volumic fraction in the vent φb can be estimated by assuming that when the reservoir reaches
its boiling temperature Tb(H), all the speciﬁc heating power P is used to vaporize water. The balance
between the vapor departure through the vent and the vapor production in the reservoir yields

φbUbπR2 =

PM
L ρv

(7)

Using the critical vapor volume fraction φb,c introduced in section 2.3, we predict the critical vent

radius Rc below which eruptions occur

Rc =

(cid:115) PM

πLρvUbφb,c

(8)

For P = 220 W/kg, M = 1.2 kg, L = 2.3 × 106 J/kg, ρv = 0.9 kg/m3, Ub = 0.25 m/s and φb,c = 0.33,
we get Rc = 17 mm. The vent radius used in the experiments presented in section 1 (R = 3.0 mm) is
smaller than Rc which explains why periodic eruptions were observed. In order to verify the previous
criteria, we built a model geyser with the same reservoir and the same height but a diﬀerent vent radius
R = 20 mm and no eruptions have been observed, consistently with our approach. Such a regime is called
the “hot spring”regime because only tiny and hot vapor bubbles reach the pool.

Beyond the case of a toy geyser, bubble clogging in a vertical constriction is a phenomenon observed
in a large variety of situations such as volcanic eruptions [20], cold CO 2 geysers [21], mentos in diet
coke [22] and beer taping [23]. In the particular case of volcanic eruptions, the elevation of the internal
pressure in the volcano and thus the explosiveness of the eruption depend on possibility for gas to escape.
Depending on the volatile content of the magma, its viscosity and the conﬁguration of the magmatic
chamber, diﬀerent types of eruption occur from Hawaiian to Plinian eruptions [24, 25].

8

3.2 Geyser’s death: transition to fumarole
For large speciﬁc heating power P, we observed a ﬁrst eruption followed by a continuous vaporization of
the water in the reservoir. In such a case, the liquid in the pool is unable to go down into the reservoir.
Because of permanent emission of vapor through the vent, this situation is called the “fumarole”regime.
Besides, we have noticed that a toy geyser working in a fumarole regime can be brought back to a periodic
regime by increasing the height h of the water in the pool. The minimal pool height which leads to a
periodic regime can be discussed quantitatively. During an eruption, when the water in the reservoir has
reached its equilibrium temperature Tb(h), the speciﬁc heating power P only induces water vaporization.
Thus, the mass of water vapor produced per unit time is ˙M = PM/L and imposes a mean gas velocity in
the vent Uv = PM/πR2Lρv. If the dynamic pressure ρvU 2
v /2 associated to the vapor ﬂow at the exit of
the vent is larger than the hydrostatic pressure ρlgh (where ρl is the water density) at the bottom of the
pool, the water will not re-entry in the vent and the system will stay in a fumarole regime. The critical
speciﬁc heating power Pc above which the system does not follows periodic eruptions is

(9)
For R = 3.0 mm, h = 40 mm, L = 2.3 × 106 J/kg, ρv = 0.9 kg/m3, ρl = 960 kg/m3 and M = 1.2 kg,
this relation gives a critical value of Pc (cid:39) 1000 W/kg. In the experiments presented in section 1, the
maximal speciﬁc heat power is P = 220 W/kg which explains why a geyser regime was always observed.
In order to test the validity of Eq. (9), we decrease the height h of the water in the pool till the transition
towards a fumarole regime occur. For P = 220 W/kg, we found a critical height of water h = 30 mm
which is consistent with the previous law.

Pc = πLR2(cid:112)ρvρl g h/M

3.3 Geyser’s death: convection

In the description of the toy geyser done previously, we have considered that the heat power injected in
the system is entirely transferred to the reservoir. Actually, thermal convection can transfer a part of
the injected heat power from the reservoir to the vent and to the pool. The thermal energy per unit
time conveyed in the vent can be expressed as k(Tr − Tb)πR2 with k the heat transfert coeﬃcient in the
case of vertical natural convection in a vertical pipe heated from below. This coeﬃcient depends on the
Rayleigh number and the Grashof number but stays between 100 and 1000 W.K−1.m−2 in the range of
parameter encountered in our experiments [26]. The limit case where the convective ﬂux is equal to the
injected heat power PM occurs for a critical vent radius

(cid:115) PM

πk(Tr − Tp)

R(cid:48)
c =

(10)

For P = 220 W/kg, M = 1.2 kg, k = 500 W.K−1.m−2 and Tr − Tp = 70 ◦C we get R(cid:48)

c = 41 mm. This
approach explains why thermal convection in the vent has been neglected in the experiments presented
in section 1 for which R = 3.0 mm. Indeed, in such a situation the convective ﬂux is about 200 times
smaller than the injected heat power. Finally, one expects that for a vent radius larger than R(cid:48)
c, the
injected heat power will be transferred to the entire volume of water and boiling will occur everywhere.
This regime of the toy geyser is called the “boiling spring”regime in the following of this paper.

3.4 Phase diagram

The three transitions discussed previously between the diﬀerent regimes of a toy geyser can be gathered
on a single diagram which is presented in Fig. 7. Such a diagram shows the behavior of a toy geyser
depending on the injected heat power PM and the vent radius R. If the speciﬁc heating power is larger
than the critical one Pc corresponding to Eq. (9), the set-up exhibits a fumarole regime. Diﬀerently, if the

9

vent radius is between the two critical radii Rc and R(cid:48)
c predicted by Eq. (8) and (10), the system behaves
as a hot spring. Finally, if R > R(cid:48)
c than the water in the reservoir convects and the toy geyser adopts a
boiling spring regime. In between these regimes, lies the regime corresponding to geyser periodic eruptions
which required R < Rc and P < Pc. Also, we report in Fig. 7 the range of experimental parameters used
for the experiments detailed in Section 1 and Section 3.2 where a geyser regime and a hot spring regime
have been reported.

Figure 7: Phase diagram of the behavior of a toy geyser as sketched in Fig. 1(c) as a function of the vent
radius R and the injected heat power PM . The white solid line represents transition between a fumarole
and a geyser regime as predicted by Eq. (9). The dashed line indicates the limit between the geyser
and the hot spring regimes according Eq. (8). The dotted line corresponds to the transition between
a hot spring and a boiling spring regime as predicted by Eq. (10). The white vertical stripe indicates
the range of parameter inspected experimentally in Section 1 where a geyser regime has been reported.
On the contrary, the dark stripe shows the range of parameter inspected experimentally in section 3.2
and for which a hot spring regime has been observed. Also, the estimations of the mean heating power
and minimal radius of the constriction for the Old Faithful are reported in the diagram by the way of a
diamond.

As underlined in the introduction, most of natural geysers adopt a complex dynamics rather than a
precise frequency of eruption. Such behavior may be attributed to a change in external parameters such
as the water inﬂow, the atmospheric temperature and pressure, tidal forces and tectonic stress [12] or
be the result of the internal mechanism of geysers. Indeed, the interconnection between the plumbing
systems of diﬀerent geysers is known to induce a chaotic and complex dynamics of eruptions [27]. Despite
the numerous diﬀerences that distinguish toy geysers from natural ones, it is interesting to observe where
natural geysers are located in the previous phase diagram. For this purpose, we collected in the literature
estimations of the minimal radius of constriction and the mean injected heat power of the Old Faithful
in Yellowstone [28, 29] and report them in Fig. 7. One notices that the parameters corresponding to
this natural geyser is in the domain where a toy geyser adopts a periodic regime. We hope that future
characterizations of geothermal systems will allow to compare more rigorously this theoretical phase
diagram with experimental facts. Such a procedure can be a way to determine if natural geysers work
on the same principle than toy geysers.

10

10−310−210−1100100102104106Old FaithfulFumarolesGeysersHot springsBoiling springsR(m)PM(W)Old FaithfulFumarolesGeysersHot springsBoiling springs4 A step toward the complexity of natural geysers

A way to approach the complexity of natural geysers is to build a set-up with two interconnected reser-
voirs. Both reservoirs received a diﬀerent speciﬁc heating power and they are connected to a single pool
as sketched in Fig. 8. The connection between the vents of the two reservoirs is made at a fraction α of
the total height H of the water column.

Figure 8: Sketch of a toy geyser experiment with two interconnected reservoirs. The speciﬁc heating
power received by each reservoir is respectively Pl and Pr. The two vents are connected at a height αH
proportional to the total height H of the system.

4.1 Experimental data

Figure 9(a) shows the evolution over time of the temperature in each reservoir of an interconnected toy
geyser. One notices that the saw-tooth evolution of the temperature in a reservoir is not periodic anymore
diﬀerently from the case of a geyser with a single reservoir inspected in section 1. The lost of regularity
is underlined in Fig. 9(b) where the times between eruptions for each reservoir and for the total system
are presented as a function of time. The aim of this section is to describe and rationalize the dynamics
of toy geyser with two coupled reservoirs.
A diﬀerent way to present the data of Fig. 9(b) is to plot the time between eruption of an event
numbered N as a function of the previous time between eruption (numbered N − 1). Such a procedure
allows to visualize the correlation between successive eruptions and is done in Fig. 10 for three diﬀerent
coupling parameters α. The ﬁgure shows the correlation for each reservoir (red dots and blue squares for
left and right reservoirs respectively) and for the total system (gray diamonds). One observes in Fig. 10(a)
that even for small coupling parameter α = 0.20, the time between eruptions in each reservoir undergoes
a large dispersion (about two minutes of dispersion while the mean period is about six minutes). Besides,
the data for the whole system (gray diamonds) occupy a trapezoidal shaped domain. When the coupling
parameter increases to α = 0.70 [Fig. 10(b)], the dispersion for each reservoir increases and the domain
of the global eruption adopt a “banana”shape. Finally, for large coupling parameter α = 0.90, Fig. 9(c)
indicates a reduction of the dispersion of the time between eruptions in each reservoir and for the whole
system.

4.2 Model

In order to rationalize the previous observations, we develop a theoretical modeling of an interconnected
geyser. The model is based on the idea that when a reservoir reaches its boiling temperature and erupts,

11

reservoirpoolventhot plate(a)

(b)

Figure 9: Evolution over time of an interconnected toy geyser as sketched in Fig. 8. The total height of
the geyser is H = 1.60 m and α = 0.20. The speciﬁc heat power injected in the left and right reservoirs
are respectively Pl = 110 W/kg and Pr = 100 W/kg. (a) Measured temperatures as a function of time
in each reservoir. Symbols indicate the time of eruptions. (b) Times τ between eruptions over time for
each reservoir (red dots and blue square) and for the global system (gray diamonds).

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 10: Correlation of time between eruptions of the event numbered N and the previous event
numbered N − 1. Red dots and blue squares indicate the time between eruption in each reservoir whereas
gray dots represent the time between eruptions for the total system. (a) α = 0.20. (b) α = 0.70. (b)
α = 0.90. The dashed rectangles show the predictions for the dispersion for the time between eruptions
based on the model introduced in Section 4.2.

it empties partially the vent and reduces the height of the water column for the other reservoir. Thus,
depending on the temperature of the second reservoir, the eruption of the ﬁrst reservoir may entrain the
second one. In the model, we assume that the temperature of each reservoir follows a perfect saw-tooth
evolution which is governed successively by the equations: dTr/dt = MP/c and dTr/dt = −MPd/c in
order to stay in the range of temperature Tr,i < Tr < Tb(H). We consider that the evolution of the
temperature in both reservoirs are independent unless the temperature of one reservoir is larger than a
temperature threshold Tt = Tb((1− α)H) when the other erupts. In such case, the eruption of a reservoir
provokes the eruption of the other one. This approach provides a prediction of times between eruptions
for each reservoir. Figure 11 shows the correlation plot of the times between eruptions for the three values
of the coupling parameters inspected experimentally in paragraph 4.1.

One notices in Fig. 11 that despite the large spreading of the experimental data is not reproduced by
the model, the general trends are similar to the ones observed in section 4.1. Indeed, the times between

12

1001101201301401501609092949698100102104t(min)Tr(◦C)  LeftRight05010015020025030035001234567891011t(min)τ(min)  LeftRightBoth01234567890123456789τN−1(min)τN(min)  LeftRightBoth01234567890123456789τN−1(min)τN(min)  LeftRightBoth01234567890123456789τN−1(min)τN(min)  LeftRightBoth(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 11: Correlation between the time between eruptions of the event denoted N and the previous
event denoted N − 1. (a) α = 0.2. (b) α = 0.7. (b) α = 0.9.

eruptions of the total system occupy a trapezoidal domain which vanishes at large coupling parameters
α. Moreover, the spreading of the times between eruptions for each reservoir increases with α up to a
critical value where the two reservoirs act as a single one.

Besides, the dispersion observed in Fig. 10 for τ can be approached by the theory developed in Section
2 for a toy geyser with a single reservoir. Indeed, Eq. (4) and (5) yield the time between two eruptions of
a reservoir if the other one does not experience any eruption. The substitution in Eq. (4) and (5) of the
boiling temperature Tb(H) by its value Tb((1 − α)H) when the other reservoir has erupted, provides the
minimal time between eruptions that a reservoir can follow. The diﬀerence between these two extreme
cases provides an estimation of the dispersion observed for τ . We delimited in Fig. 10 the domain in
which the time between eruptions is supposed to be conﬁned according this approach. The discrepancy
observed between the experimental dispersions and the theoretical ones may come from the variability of
boiling processes.

Conclusions

The study of a toy geyser reveals the successive operations which lead to periodic eruptions of steam and
hot water. In a geyser, a geometrical constriction prevents thermal convection of water from a heated
reservoir toward a temperated pool. Thus, the water in the reservoir slowly accumulates heat energy
by being superheated relatively to the pool level. Such a situation holds till the water in the reservoir
boils and the vaporization ejects the water in the vent, a phenomena which generates a large release of
energy in a short period of time. The slow accumulation of energy and its fast release is characteristic of
catastrophic natural events such as earthquakes, volcanic eruptions or thunderbolts. We showed with the
example of a toy geyser that the conditions to get such an accumulation of thermal energy and a periodic
release are strict. This may explain why geysers are rare objects among other geothermal sources such as
fumaroles, hot springs and boiling springs. Moreover, toy models of geyser allow us to understand their
sensitivity towards external parameters such as water inﬂow, barometric pressure or pool temperature.

However, a major diﬀerence exists between toy geysers and natural ones: the latter generally adopt
a complex dynamics which strongly diﬀers from the clock-like precision of toy geysers. The complexity
of real geysers has been approached with a toy geyser having two interconnected reservoirs. Such a set-
up showed a complex time behavior which has been studied statistically and rationalized theoretically.
The rareness of faithful geysers in nature reveals that very few of them have a single and independent
reservoir. Interconnected and complex plumbing systems seem to prevail in nature leaving room for the
complexity rather than simplicity.

Besides, the present study lets several open questions such as the deep understanding of the phe-
nomenon of bubble clogging, the geyser operation for large vent radius or the exact description of heat

13

01234567890123456789τN−1(min)τN(min)  LeftRightBoth01234567890123456789τN−1(min)τN(min)  LeftRightBoth01234567890123456789τN−1(min)τN(min)  LeftRightBothtransfer during a boiling process in a superheated liquid. Also, this work opens new perspectives of re-
search such as geysers made with a liquid diﬀering from water or with a liquid ables to let solid deposition
in order to study the stability of the plumbing systems over time.

Acknowledgments

This research has been funded by the Inter-university Attraction Poles Programme (IAP 7/38 Micro-
MAST) initiated by the Belgian Science Policy Oﬃce. SD thanks the FNRS for ﬁnancial supports. MB
acknowledges support as a FNRS-FRIA Fellow. We are grateful to Alice Dubus who realised the glass
reservoirs we dreamed about. Tadd Truscott and Zhao Pan are thanked for their fascinations concerning
this subject and the excellent idea of interconnecting two reservoirs. The authors acknowledge Herv´e
Caps, Christophe Clanet, Laurent Maquet, Julien Schokmel, Alexis Duchesne for eruption of ideas and
precious comments concerning this work.

References

[1] J.S. Rinehart. Old faithful geyser performance 1870 through 1966. Bulletin Volcanologique,

33(1):153–163, 1969.

[2] A. Azzalini and A.W. Bowman. A look at some data on the old faithful geyser. Applied Statistics,

pages 357–365, 1990.

[3] R. Bunsen. Gesammelte Abhandlungen von Robert Bunsen:

im auftrage der Deutschen Bunsen-

gesellschaft f¨ur angewandte Physikalische Chemie hrsg, volume 1. W. Engelmann, 1904.

[4] J. Tyndall. Heat considered as a mode of motion: being a course of twelve lectures delivered at the
Royal Institution of Great Britain in the season of 1862. Longman, Green, Longman, Roberts, &
Green, 1865.

[5] J. Dowden, P. Kapadia, G. Brown, and H. Rymer. Dynamics of a geyser eruption. Journal of

Geophysical Research: Solid Earth (1978–2012), 96(B11):18059–18071, 1991.

[6] N. Saptadji. Modeling of geysers. PhD thesis, ResearchSpace, Auckland, 1995.

[7] A. Toramaru and K. Maeda. Mass and style of eruptions in experimental geysers. Journal of

Volcanology and Geothermal Research, 257:227–239, 2013.

[8] E. Adelstein, A. Tran, C. Mu˜noz-Saez, A. Shteinberg, and M. Manga. Geyser preplay and eruption
in a laboratory model with a bubble trap. Journal of Volcanology and Geothermal Research, 285:129–
135, 2014.

[9] R.A. Hutchinson, J.A. Westphal, and S.W. Kieﬀer.

In situ observations of old faithful geyser.

Geology, 25(10):875–878, 1997.

[10] A. Namiki, C. Mu˜noz-Saez, and M. Manga. El cobreloa: A geyser with two distinct eruption styles.

Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 119(8):6229–6248, 2014.

[11] C. Munoz-Saez, M. Manga, S. Hurwitz, M. L. Rudolph, A. Namiki, and C.-Y. Wang. Dynamics
within geyser conduits, and sensitivity to environmental perturbations: Insights from a periodic
geyser in the el tatio geyser ﬁeld, atacama desert, chile. Journal of Volcanology and Geothermal
Research, 292:41–55, 2015.

14

[12] J.S. Rinehart. Fluctuations in geyser activity caused by variations in earth tidal forces, barometric

pressure, and tectonic stresses. Journal of Geophysical Research, 77(2):342–350, 1972.

[13] S. Rojstaczer, D.L. Galloway, S.E. Ingebritsen, and D.M. Rubin. Variability in geyser eruptive timing

and its causes: Yellowstone national park. Geophysical research letters, 30(18), 2003.

[14] M.L. Rudolph, M. Manga, S. Hurwitz, M. Johnston, L. Karlstrom, and C.-Y. Wang. Mechanics of

old faithful geyser, calistoga, california. Geophysical Research Letters, 39(24), 2012.

[15] K.D. OHara and E.K. Esawi. Model for the eruption of the old faithful geyser, yellowstone national

park. GSA Today, 23(6):4–9, 2013.

[16] J. Tyndall. Heat: a mode of motion. D. Appleton, 1881.

[17] D.R. Lide. CRC handbook of chemistry and physics. CRC press, 2004.

[18] W.L. Haberman and R.K. Morton. An experimental investigation of the drag and shape of air

bubbles rising in various liquids. Technical report, DTIC Document, 1953.

[19] K. Mishima and T. Hibiki. Some characteristics of air-water two-phase ﬂow in small diameter vertical

tubes. International Journal of Multiphase Flow, 22(4):703–712, 1996.

[20] S. Vergniolle and M. Mangan. Hawaiian and strombolian eruptions. Encyclopedia of volcanoes, pages

447–461, 2000.

[21] W.S. Han, M. Lu, B.J. McPherson, E.H. Keating, J. Moore, E. Park, Z.T. Watson, and N.-H. Jung.
Characteristics of co2-driven cold-water geyser, crystal geyser in utah: experimental observation and
mechanism analyses. Geoﬂuids, 13(3):283–297, 2013.

[22] T.S. Coﬀey. Diet coke and mentos: What is really behind this physical reaction? American Journal

of Physics, 76(6):551–557, 2008.

[23] J. Rodr´ıguez-Rodr´ıguez, A. Casado-Chac´on, and D. Fuster. Physics of beer tapping. Physical review

letters, 113(21):214501, 2014.

[24] G. P-L. Walker. Explosive volcanic eruptions, a new classiﬁcation scheme. Geologische Rundschau,

62(2):431–446, 1973.

[25] L. Wilson. Relationships between pressure, volatile content and ejecta velocity in three types of

volcanic explosion. Journal of Volcanology and Geothermal Research, 8(2-4):297–313, 1980.

[26] J.D. Jackson, M.A. Cotton, and B.P. Axcell. Studies of mixed convection in vertical tubes. Inter-

national journal of heat and ﬂuid ﬂow, 10(1):2–15, 1989.

[27] M.J. Nicholl, S.W. Wheatcraft, S.W. Tyler, and B. Berkowitz. Is old faithful a strange attractor?

Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth (1978–2012), 99(B3):4495–4503, 1994.

[28] J. Vandemeulebrouck, P. Roux, and E. Cros. The plumbing of old faithful geyser revealed by

hydrothermal tremor. Geophysical Research Letters, 40(10):1989–1993, 2013.

[29] J.S. Rinehart. Geysers and geothermal energy, volume 223. Springer, 1980.

15

