6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
6
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
2
4
9
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

THz based phase space manipulation in a zero-slippage IFEL∗

E. Curry†, S. Fabbri, P. Musumeci, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90049, USA

A. Gover, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv 69978, Israel

March 17, 2016

Abstract

We describe an IFEL interaction driven by a guided broadband THz source to compress a relativistic
electron bunch and synchronize it with an external laser pulse. A high ﬁeld near single-cycle THz pulse,
generated via optical rectiﬁcation from the external laser source, is group velocity-matched to the electron
bunch inside a waveguide, allowing for a sustained interaction in a magnetic undulator. We present mea-
surements of the THz waveform before and after a curved parallel plate waveguide with varying aperture
size and estimate the reduced group velocity. For a proof-of-concept experiment at the UCLA PEGASUS
laboratory, a 6 MeV, 100 fs electron bunch with an initial 3 × 10−4 energy spread can be readily produced.
Given these parameters and a projected THz peak ﬁeld of 10 MV/m, our simulation model predicts a phase
space rotation of the bunch distribution that compresses the electron bunch by nearly an order of magnitude
and reduces any initial timing jitter within the phase acceptance window. We also discuss the application
of this guided-THz IFEL experimental set-up towards a THz streaking diagnostic with the potential for
femtosecond scale temporal resolution.

Introduction

The unique properties of the radiation in the THz frequency regime have made it an invaluable tool for imaging
and spectroscopy [1]. Until recently, the progress of research on further THz applications in the accelerator
community has been limited by the available power, but with improved generation techniques, such as pulse-
front tilted optical rectiﬁcation [2] [3] and photoconductive terahertz optoelectronics [4], THz sources have
become an attractive tool for accelerator science. In particular, for beam phase space manipulation, the THz
frequency range oﬀers a unique middle ground between the high accelerating gradients of laser frequencies
and the broad phase-acceptance window of radio frequency (RF) waves. For example, the strong energy chirp
imparted to an electron bunch in an X-band structure, like the one used for phase space linearization at LCLS [5],
could be accomplished by a THz ﬁeld that is over ﬁfty times smaller because of the higher frequency. At the
same time, where laser coupling in a typical free electron laser (FEL) results in a train of microbunches, a
THz-driven FEL interaction would capture and compress the entire beam in a single ponderomotive bucket.

To couple the THz wave to the longitudinal beam momentum, one can induce a longitudinal component
in the ﬁeld or a transverse component in the electron trajectory. Given excitation of the appropriate mode, a
dielectric or corrugated waveguide structure can provide a longitudinal ﬁeld for direct coupling to the beam, as
demonstrated in ref. [6] for low energy electrons. In an inverse free electron laser (IFEL), a series of alternating
polarity dipole magnet pairs (an undulator) is used to produce transverse oscillations in the beam trajectory to
enable ponderomotive coupling with a transverse THz ﬁeld. While the peak power available from today’s THz
sources continues to improve, it remains the limiting factor for most THz accelerator applications. The IFEL
coupling scheme has unique advantages which allow it to harness the available power more eﬀectively, as we will
see below, and is the basis for our THz-based beam manipulation technique.

At the UCLA PEGASUS laboratory, we intend to demonstrate the compression of a low charge electron
bunch in a magnetic undulator using ponderomotive coupling with a THz pulse. A single Ti:Sapph laser
source will be used to generate an intense, nearly single-cycle THz wave through optical rectiﬁcation while
simultaneously driving a 1.6 cell S-band photocathode gun. The ponderomotive force produced by the THz and

∗Work supported by DOE grant DE-FG02-92ER40693 and NSF grant PHY-1415583.
†ejcurry@physics.ucla.edu

1

undulator ﬁelds induces a strong energy chirp on the electron bunch, which can be converted into longitudinal
compression after a drift section. To sustain the IFEL-type interaction over the length of the undulator, the
group velocity of the THz pulse will be matched to the propagation of the beam using a curved parallel plate
waveguide to produce a ”zero-slippage” resonance condition.

In addition to strong compression, the interaction reduces the time-of-arrival jitter of the electron bunches
relative to the laser pulse used to generate them. When the phase of the ponderomotive bucket is centered
on the average arrival time of the electron bunches, the induced energy chirp works to accelerate late bunches
and decelerate early bunches towards the optimal timing as the bunch is compressed. This eﬀect is relevant
for all applications involving laser-electron interactions which have tight timing tolerances such as pump-probe
techniques [7], Inverse Compton Scattering sources [8] and external injection into advanced accelerators [9].

This paper is organized as follows. We begin with a discussion of the advantages of the IFEL ponderomo-
tive coupling and of the zero-slippage interaction for beam compression. We then present experimental results
demonstrating the dispersive properties of the curved parallel plate waveguide, suitable for group-velocity match-
ing of the THz pulse with the electron beam. An electro-optic sampling technique is used to characterize the
dispersed radiation pulse proﬁle. We include simulation results of the guided-THz IFEL interaction using the
beam parameters at PEGASUS laboratory, and conclude with a discussion of an opportunity oﬀered by the
guided-THz IFEL setup to perform high-streaking-speed THz-based temporal diagnostics.

Zero-slippage IFEL interaction

The main advantage of transverse ponderomotive coupling using an undulator magnetic ﬁeld (commonly referred
to as FEL or IFEL coupling) with respect to longitudinal ”slow-wave” (Cherenkov Smith-Purcell) coupling in
a dielectric or corrugated waveguide structure is related to the transverse acceptance of the interaction region.
This has been discussed in detail in the extensive comparison of laser to beam coupling schemes compiled in
ref. [10] which we brieﬂy review here to highlight the result.

In order to enable eﬃcient energy transfer in an IFEL interaction between the electrons and a wave of

frequency ω and wavenumber kz, the phase synchronism condition

ω
cβz

= kz + ku

(1)

must be satisﬁed, where βz is the normalized longitudinal component of the electron velocity in the undulator,
ku is the wavenumber describing the periodicity of the undulator, and for free-space propagation kz = ω/c.
For longitudinal coupling, the dielectric or the structure corrugation period are chosen so that there exists one
waveguide mode that satisﬁes the phase synchronism condition ω
cβz
For both IFEL and longitudinal coupling schemes, the periodic magnetostatic ﬁeld or slow radiation mode
decays, in terms of the distance, x, away from the magnetic ﬁeld source or slow wave structure wall, like e−k⊥x.
The decay constant, k⊥, is determined by the geometry of the periodic ﬁeld source or slow wave structure and
by the interaction frequency c/λ. Comparing the cases of transverse coupling in an undulator and longitudinal
coupling with the TM mode in a guiding structure we have

= kz.

(cid:40)

k⊥ =

(cid:16)

(cid:17)1/2

ku ,
z − ω2
k2

c2

transverse coupling

,

longitudinal coupling.

(2)

For the case of transverse ponderomotive coupling in an undulator, k⊥ must be equivalent to the undulator
wavenumber ku to satisfy the magnetostatic Laplace equation. In the case of longitudinal coupling with a TM
1
mode, k⊥ should satisfy the Helmholtz equation. We can deﬁne an interaction range,
2k⊥ , in which there is
strong coupling for beam-wave interaction. Under the condition of phase synchronism (1), this interaction range
can be expressed in terms of the beam Lorentz factor and normalization by the wavelength for both schemes:

(cid:40) βz

1
2k⊥

=

λ
4π

,
1−βz
βzγz ,

transverse coupling

longitudinal coupling.

(3)

In the non-relativistic limit, the interaction ranges have equivalent magnitudes for both manipulation tech-
z for the

niques, but as one approaches the highly relativistic limit the interaction range is proportional to 2γ2

2

transverse coupling technique and to γz for the longitudinal technique. This is an important point when the
wavelength of the accelerator is shrunk by two or three orders of magnitude from conventional radiofrequency to
the THz range. From this analysis, we ﬁnd that, for relativistic beams, the cross-section of the beam accelerated
by the THz wave can be signiﬁcantly larger in the undulator coupling case.

These considerations assumed dispersion-free vacuum propagation of the radiation for the undulator coupling,
but yield equivalent results if one chooses to use a waveguide TE mode for the radiation in the undulator
coupling. Note also that the TE modes used for transverse coupling typically suﬀer from less attenuation within
the guiding structure than the TM modes in a dielectric or corrugated waveguide structure [10, 11]. For these
reasons the use of a wiggler structure interaction scheme (IFEL) is advantageous over a slow wave structure
interaction for the purpose of bunching relativistic beams.

The IFEL resonance condition for free-space interaction assumes that the radiation slips ahead of the particles
by an integer number of wavelengths for every undulator period to maintain phase synchronism along the
undulator. The near single-cycle THz pulse produced by optical rectiﬁcation precludes the use of this slippage
mechanism to keep phase synchronism. Therefore, in order to sustain an interaction between a near single-
cycle THz pulse and electron beam in the undulator, one must operate in the ”zero-slippage” condition, in
which a waveguide is used to match the THz group velocity to the average longitudinal speed of the electron
bunch [12] [13].

Figure 1: The dispersion curves for the waveguide (blue) and electron beam (dashed red). The ”zero-slippage”
condition occurs when their slopes, corresponding to radiation group velocity and average longitudinal bunch
velocity, are equal.

Group and phase velocity synchronism occur simultaneously when the dispersion curve of a waveguide
mode, k = kzq(ω) with mode index q, and the displaced dispersion relation of the e-beam modulation wave,
−ku, intersect tangentially at the THz frequency, ω0, as shown in Fig. 1. The group velocity synchronism
kz = ω
cβz
condition, stated as

= cβz,

(4)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)ω0

vg =

dω
dkz

(cid:113)

ω2 − ω2

cq

kzq =

c

is satisﬁed for frequencies at which the curves in Fig. 1 have the same slope, while the phase synchronism
condition is satisﬁed for frequencies at which the curves intersect. For the case of tangential intersection, group
and phase velocity synchronism is achieved at ω = ω0, and nearly so in a wide range of frequencies around ω0.
Simultaneous solution of both conditions, (1) and (4), can be found explicitly when the dispersion equation

is expressed in terms of the waveguide cutoﬀ frequency, ωcq.

Substitution into Eq. (1) produces a quadratic equation with two solutions, corresponding to two intersec-
tions of the beam line with the mode dispersion relation curve of Fig. 1. In conventional FEL conﬁgurations,
there are always two intersections, and one usually operates at the higher frequency intersection point. For the

3

(5)

tangential intersection point satisfying conditions (1) and (4), the two solutions of the quadratic equation must
be degenerate. This results in [14]

where

ω0 = γzωcq = γ2

z βzcku

γz =(cid:0)1 − β2

z

(cid:1)− 1

2 =

γ(cid:112)1 + K 2/2

(6)

(7)

Here βz = vz/c is the average axial velocity of the beam, and K = eBu

kumc is the undulator parameter, where

Bu is the magnetic ﬁeld amplitude of a periodic linear undulator. Note that in the relativistic limit,

ω0 = γ2

z cku

(8)

is exactly half the frequency of the FEL synchronism frequency in free space propagation.

To summarize, in order to maximize the eﬃciency of the energy exchange between the near single-cycle THz
wave and the electron beam, it will be necessary to choose the undulator and waveguide parameters to meet
the ”zero-slippage” condition (satisfying both Eq. (4) and Eq. (1)) which will keep the beam in contact with
the maximum available driving ﬁeld for the entire length of the interaction.

As the broad spectrum, near single-cycle THz pulse undergoes dispersion within the guide, the amplitude
envelope may become less sharply peaked, relaxing this velocity-matching condition. This eﬀect needs to be
carefully considered when looking at the frequency-dependent radiation pulse evolution in the waveguide.

To be more quantitative, we start by assuming the incident ﬁeld to be well matched to the waveguide so that
only a single mode is excited. We can then write the ﬁeld as a Fourier integral in order to explicitly account for
the disparate evolution of the spectral components.

E(r, t) =

1
2π

cq(z, ω)εq(x, y, ω)eikzq(ω)z−iωtdω

(9)

εq(x, y, ω) is the transverse proﬁle of mode q and the cq(z, ω) coeﬃcients are determined by the Fourier transform
of the ﬁeld at the entrance, z = 0. For a smooth waveguide, such as the parallel plates with which we will
be working, we may assume the transverse proﬁle is dispersionless, eliminating the frequency dependence in
εq(x, y, ω). Because E(r, t) is real, the expression then simpliﬁes to

(cid:35)

(cid:90) ∞

−∞

(cid:34)

(cid:90) ∞

0

(cid:12)(cid:12)ω0

E(r, t) =

1
π

Re

εq(x, y)

cq(0, ω)eikzq(ω)z−iωtdω

(10)

Using the expanded expression for the propagation wavenumber around the peak frequency of our source,

(cid:12)(cid:12)ω0

kzq(ω) = kzq(ω0) +

dkzq
dω

(ω − ω0) + ∆kz(ω, ω0)

(11)

where dkzq
is deﬁned to be the inverse of the group velocity, 1/vg, we can gain insight into the evolution of
dω
the pulse envelope. ∆kz(ω, ω0) represents terms of second order and higher in ω − ω0. Inserting this expansion
into Eq. (10) and factoring the ω-independent terms out of the integrand, we have

E(r, t) =

1
π

Re

εq(x, y) eikzq(ω0)z−iω0t

−i(ω−ω0)

cq(0, ω)e

+i∆kz(ω,ω0)zdω

.

(12)

(cid:34)

(cid:124)

(cid:123)(cid:122)

carrier wave

(cid:90) ∞
(cid:124)

0

(cid:125)

(cid:17)

t− z

vg

(cid:16)
(cid:123)(cid:122)

time-dependent envelope

(cid:35)

(cid:125)

We can interpret the form of this description of the THz pulse in terms of a sinusoidal carrier wave that
accumulates phase kz0z, propagates with constant phase velocity ω0/kzq (ω0), and is modulated by a time-
dependent envelope. Only the higher order terms in the envelope function are time dependent, as t − z/vg
reduces to an initial time constant. When the higher order terms are negligible, the envelope function becomes

4

time-independent, indicating that the pulse propagates without distortion. We will refer to this envelope function
as fenv(t − z/vg) in our discussion of a THz streaking application.

For a guide of length L, we can estimate a range of frequencies in which the higher orders of the phase

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) (cid:28) π. Using the assumption that only

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)∆kz(ω, ω0)L
(cid:114) 2π
(cid:12)(cid:12) (cid:28)
(cid:12)(cid:12)ω − ω0
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)ω0

d2kzq
dω2

DL

expansion can be neglected by enforcing the condition
the second order term in the Taylor expansion makes a signiﬁcant contribution, the range of frequencies that
satisﬁes the condition is

(13)

where D is the curvature parameter, D =

. For the waveguide used to produce the tunable group-

velocity results presented below, the frequency limit for distortionless propagation is 0.27 THz from the peak
frequency. The spectrum of the THz pulse produced at UCLA includes a wider range of frequencies, as shown in
Fig. 2, requiring numerical integration to track the dispersion of the higher order terms in the time-dependent
envelope description.

Figure 2: Spectrum of the THz pulse from EOS measurements with the limits of the distortionless propagation
regime marked in blue.

From this calculation, we see that waveguide-moderated beam manipulation oﬀers not only the enhanced
eﬃciency of a zero-slippage interaction, but also the potential for distortionless propagation for frequencies
within the range deﬁned by Eq. (13). With distortionless propagation, the available chirping gradient for beam
manipulation is not attenuated by dispersive pulse broadening, thereby extending the interaction length over
which strong coupling is possible.

Phase space manipulation

In principle, the previous considerations could apply to the design of a THz-based accelerator. Nevertheless,
the eﬃciency of THz power generation is still relatively low (on the order of a percent in the non-linear down-
conversion process from the laser) and further hindered by low (also below a few percent) wall-plug eﬃciency of
short pulse laser systems. Multiple groups are working towards optimizing the optical rectiﬁcation process in
order to increase the THz wall-plug eﬃciency by a few orders of magnitude and promote THz as a viable source
for particle accelerators [15–17]. On the other hand, state-of-the-art laser-driven THz sources already have a
lot to oﬀer to accelerator science wherever eﬃciency is not a concern, as with beam phase space manipulations
such as longitudinal compression, energy dechirping, and, as we will discuss in the last section of the paper,
transverse streaking.

A THz IFEL oﬀers the possibility of total capture of the electron beam within a single ponderomotive bucket
which can result in compression ratios exceeding 10x. For optimum compression, the electron beam should be
injected in the interaction at the zero crossing of the THz waveform, so that it will receive a nearly linear energy
chirp which a subsequent drift can transform into strong bunching. In practice, the relative phase of the electron
bunches will be distributed throughout the ponderomotive bucket because of the inherent timing jitter at the

5

injection. Within the bucket, all electrons with negative phases will increase in energy, while all electrons with
positive phases will decrease in energy.

To determine the resonant phase for injection of the bunch into the ponderomotive bucket, we can examine
the distribution of the zero crossings of the THz waveform as it evolves inside the waveguide. In Fig. 3b, the
relative temporal positions, ∆t, of each zero crossing within the THz pulse proﬁle are plotted as a function of
longitudinal position as the waveform propagates within the waveguide. ∆t is calculated in the rest frame of a
6 MeV bunch, so that the trajectory of the bunch, indicated by the pink line, appears stationary in time, while
the zero crossings slip past. This plot gives a visual description of what it means to satisfy the phase resonance
condition and the zero-slippage condition. The intersections between the trajectory of the electron bunch and
the zero crossings of the pulse give the periodicity of the resonant interaction. The green markers show the
time stamp of the peak ﬁeld magnitude; an electron trajectory that stays within the range of the peak ﬁeld
maintains group velocity matching. For optimal performance of the IFEL interaction, we choose an injection
phase for the electron bunch that keeps the trajectory close to the peak ﬁeld.

(a)

(b)

Figure 3: (a) The initial THz pulse waveform with the peak ﬁeld amplitude marked in green, and the zero
crossings marked in red (positive slope) and blue (negative slope). ∆t on the vertical axis corresponds to the
time interval over which the respective point on the THz waveform would propagate before reaching the current
longitudinal position of the electron bunch. (b) The zero crossing and peak ﬁeld markers are plotted, in the
rest frame of a 6 MeV electron bunch, as a function of longitudinal position as the pulse propagates inside the
ﬁrst 10 cm of the guide. The trajectory of the electron bunch is indicated by the pink line. An example of
the correspondence between the initial snapshot at left and the beginning of the marker evolution at right is
indicated by the gray arrows.

Two snapshots in the evolution of this process for a ”late” (red) and ”early” (green) bunch can be seen in
Fig. 4. With the increase in energy, the ”late” electrons will travel faster, catching up towards the equilibrium
phase over a drift section. Similarly, ”early” electrons will travel slower, slipping back towards the equilibrium
phase over a drift section. An electron bunch arriving within π/2 of the equilibrium phase will experience an
energy chirp that accelerates the particles at the back towards the front of the bunch or decelerates the particles
at the front towards the back of the bunch. Farther from the resonant phase the energy chirp becomes less
linear. If the phase space distribution of a bunch is far from the resonant phase, it will fall out of the longitudinal
acceptance of the compressor and the beam will acquire energy spread without decreasing the bunch length.

Fluctuations of the input energy from the resonant condition would also displace the bunch from optimal
positioning within the ponderomotive bucket. Phase space rotation of a bunch with a small energy deviation
would result in only slightly less eﬀective bunching and a slight increase in the mean energy oﬀset. In practice
however, the arrival time of the electrons would also be aﬀected by the electron beam energy. The phase space
rotation within the ponderomotive bucket may then work to reduce the timing jitter in this case, but it can also
over-correct the mean energy of the bunch, increasing the ﬁnal energy deviation.

6

(a)

(b)

Figure 4: Phase space plots showing (a) the initial distributions of an ”early” (green) and ”late” (red) electron
bunch within the ponderomotive bucket, indicated in blue, and (b) their chirped phase space distributions after
evolving under the ponderomotive force. The normalized electron energy is deﬁned by γ−γ0
, where γ0 is the
mean Lorentz factor of the bunch.

γ0

THz waveguide

Although higher frequencies can oﬀer larger acceleration gradients, the size of the guiding structures necessary
for a waveguide-controlled interaction becomes prohibitively small for co-propagation of electrons and laser.
The length scales necessary for a THz guiding structure are large enough to permit alignment of the electron
beam without clipping. For reasonably low charge, wakeﬁeld eﬀects in the guiding structure are negligible. The
guided propagation has the added beneﬁt of preserving the ﬁeld intensity over the length of the guide rather
than operating in the diﬀraction limited regime where high intensity would be particularly diﬃcult to maintain
for THz frequencies.

Figure 5: Diagram showing cross section of CPPWG, with plate spacing b, and the orientation of THz polar-
ization to excite the TE01 mode.

We have adopted the curved parallel plate waveguide (CPPWG), shown in Fig. 5, to control the propagation
of the THz pulse. This choice was motivated by the investigation of guiding structures for a THz FEL oscillator
in ref. [11] and [18]. The parallel plate structure has small ohmic losses relative to more conventional waveguides
and oﬀers the unique advantage of variable plate spacing. This dynamic control of the waveguide parameters
allows for tuning of the guide’s dispersive properties to optimize the group velocity of the THz pulse for our
application. The gap between plates results in some attenuation due to diﬀraction, but this eﬀect is mitigated
by adding a curvature to the plates which focuses the THz within the waveguide channel. Attenuation due
to diﬀraction diminishes with increasing frequency, as shown in Fig. 6a. This feature results in a decrease in

7

x     ETHz                                 b           z             y total attenuation with increasing frequency, unlike conventional waveguides. While decreasing the plate spacing
reduces the group velocity to match the propagating beam, it also increases the cut-oﬀ frequency within the
waveguide, see Fig. 6b, and increases the rate of pulse broadening within the guide. The utility of the THz pulse
is eventually limited by the dispersive pulse broadening that reduces the available ﬁeld gradient for chirping the
beam as the pulse propagates down the length of the guide.

(a)

(b)

Figure 6: Plots of (a) the attenuation due to diﬀraction and (b) the dispersion relation for the waveguide
parameters, shown in Table 1, that are used in simulations of the guided-THz IFEL interaction.

The THz mode proﬁle in the CPPWG is determined by the dispersion relation giving the transverse wavenum-

ber, kmn, and longitudinal wavenumber, kz,

(cid:18)
(cid:113)

1
b

kmn =

kz =

nπ + (2m + 1) tan−1
0 − k2
k2

mn .

(cid:19)

b√
2Rb − b2

(14)

The form of the longitudinal ﬁeld, Φmn, corresponding to Hz for TE modes and Ez for TM modes, is given

in terms of the Hermite polynomials, He n, as follows [19]

−β2
mnx2
αmn(y)

4(cid:112)αmn(y)

e

He n

Φmn =

where

(cid:32)

(cid:33)(cid:18)cos

(cid:19)(cid:34)

sin

2βmnx(cid:112)αmn(y)

kmny +

mnyx2
2β4
kmnαmn(y)

−

and R and b are the plate curvature and spacing of the CPPWG. The transverse E-ﬁeld components are then
given by

(cid:18)

m +

(cid:19)

1
2

tan−1 2β2
mny
kmn

(cid:35)

e±ikzz

(15)

(16)

(17)

αmn(y) = 1 + 4

(cid:115)

β4
mny2
k2
mn

√

kmn
2Rb − b2

βmn =

(cid:18)
(cid:18)

kz

kz

Ex =

Ey =

−i
k2
mn
−i
k2
mn

(cid:19)
(cid:19)

∂Ez
∂x
∂Ez
∂y

+ ωµ0

− ωµ0

∂Hz
∂y
∂Hz
∂x

8

The TE01 mode of the curved CPPWG is optimal for ponderomotive coupling to the beam. The transverse
proﬁle, shown in Fig. 7, has a peak ﬁeld on-axis with polarization parallel to the long axis of the CPPWG cross-
section. This orientation allows maximum clearance for the parallel wiggle of the electron trajectory within
the guide. For the simulation parameters listed in Table 1, the maximum amplitude of the oscillating electron
bunch trajectory is 457 µm. At this distance, the THz ﬁeld magnitude has decreased by only 6.5% from the
on-axis maximum. When the E-ﬁeld is linearly polarized in the direction parallel to the plate surfaces, direct
coupling of a THz pulse with a bi-Gaussian proﬁle, as shown in Fig. 7a, excites the TE01 mode of the CPPWG
with 82% eﬃciency.

(a)

(b)

Figure 7: Plots of (a) the incoming THz ﬁeld proﬁle matched to (b) the transverse proﬁle of the TE01 mode
within the CPPWG cross section. The CPPWG plates are shown in gray.

Figure 8: Diagram showing the path of the THz pulse as it is collimated then focused into the CPPWG and
the path of the IR for the EOS measurement. The planned electron trajectory is shown in pink.

9

sLN IR filter Pellicle BS ZnTe  Quarter Waveplate Photodiode Detectors Wollaston Prism Iris  PPWG  IR probe IR  OAP   OAP  E beam (a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 9: EOS measurements of the THz proﬁle after a 15 cm CPPWG with plate spacings of (a) 1.5 mm, (b)
2.5 mm, and (c) 3.5 mm. The red dashed line shows the simulated THz proﬁle based on an EOS measurement
of the pulse waveform at the entrance of the CPPWG, see Fig. 16. The timing oﬀset of the simulated pulse has
been adjusted to overlap with EOS measurements.

Guided THz propagation

Measurements of the temporal ﬁeld proﬁle of the THz pulse produced at PEGASUS laboratory are conducted
using electro-optic sampling (EOS). An IR probe pulse is brought into collinear propagation with the THz using
a pellicle that is transparent to THz, as shown in Fig. 8. We focus the THz pulse into the entrance of the
CPPWG using an oﬀ-axis parabolic mirror (OAP). When this conﬁguration is adapted for bunch compression,
a small hole will be drilled through the center of the OAP to allow electrons to pass through and co-propagate

10

with the THz pulse. Because the spot size of the THz on the surface of the mirror is large relative to the electron
window, the power loss will be minimal.

The IR probe is aligned to the THz focus using a pyroelectric detector to ensure spatial overlap within the
ZnTe. The CPPWG plates are then aligned to the IR probe line, to ensure coupling of the focused THz pulse
into the CPPWG entrance. For measurements of the THz proﬁle after the waveguide, the IR probe travels
within the guide, before interacting with the THz in the ZnTe crystal placed at the exit. The IR probe pulse is
undistorted in the guide, because its wavelength is much smaller than the waveguide dimensions.

In Fig. 9, we show the THz longitudinal pulse proﬁle after a 15 cm CPPWG for three diﬀerent plate spacings.
The plates, made from aluminum with a 3 mm radius of curvature and 4.25 mm thickness, were manufactured
at UCLA using conventional machining techniques. The predicted pulse proﬁle for each plate spacing, shown
as the red dashed line in Fig. 9, was evolved from an initial pulse waveform determined by EOS measurements
at the entrance to the guide and neglects losses due to diﬀraction. To account for imperfect coupling eﬃciency,
the magnitude of the initial ﬁeld used for the simulations was scaled to match the 1.5 mm spacing measurement.
For the 1.5 mm plate spacing, where attenuation due to diﬀraction is minimal, there is good agreement between
the measured and predicted waveforms. For wider plate spacings, the increased attenuation due to diﬀraction
results in a greater discrepancy between the measured and predicted ﬁeld magnitudes and waveforms.

Figure 10: Group velocity estimates for three plate spacings determined from EOS measurements before and
after the waveguide (blue squares) and simulated propagation of the initial pulse proﬁle (red circles). The
theoretical group velocity at the peak frequency of the pulse, .84 THz, is shown by the black dashed line.

Using EOS measurements of the THz pulse proﬁle at the entrance and exit of the CPPWG, a direct estimate
of the group velocity of the pulse within the waveguide can be obtained from the IR probe delay between the
peaks of the initial and ﬁnal pulse envelops. The envelope of the pulse is extracted from the raw data by factoring
out the sinusoidal carrier wave determined by a least-squares ﬁt in the region of the peak ﬁeld. Experimental
results for the group velocity determined using this method are shown in Fig. 10, along with the corresponding
estimates found via application of this method to the simulated pulse propagation. The theoretical group velocity
at the peak frequency of the pulse, shown by the black dashed line in Fig. 10, provides a reasonable estimate
for the expected group velocity for the case of 2.5 mm and 3.5 mm plate spacings. For the 1.5 mm plate spacing,
both measurement and simulation deviate from the group velocity at the peak frequency. This behavior may
be explained by the highly nonlinear dispersion at low frequencies which causes a frequency chirp that reduces
the contribution of the low frequency components to the pulse envelop peak. The speed of the envelop peak is
then determined by the high frequency components, with their correspondingly high group velocities. For the
larger plate spacings, the region of near-linear dispersion extends to lower frequencies, making the eﬀect less
signiﬁcant.

Guided-THz IFEL simulations

A layout of the guided-THz IFEL compressor is shown in Fig. 11. The undulator and waveguide parameters
used for simulation of the guided-IFEL interaction are shown in Table 1. The chosen waveguide parameters
correspond to a theoretical group velocity of βg = .994 at the measured peak frequency of the PEGASUS
THz source, within the range that has been experimentally demonstrated using our tunable CPPWG. The
simulated electron bunch parameters are well within the range that can be routinely generated at PEGASUS

11

Figure 11: Diagram of the guided-THz IFEL compressor set-up. Optical rectiﬁcation within the sLN crystal,
cooled by liquid nitrogen, produces the THz pulse which is collimated into the vacuum box with an OAP. The
path of the e− beam (shown in pink) passes through the OAP to come into co-propagation with the THz before
entering the CPPWG nested inside the undulator. The THz source set-up will remain outside of the vacuum
box to facilitate independent testing and optimization.

laboratory [20] [21]. With these constraints, the undulator parameters have been calculated from Eq. (1),
the resonance condition modiﬁed for interaction within a waveguide, such that the average longitudinal beam
velocity matches the THz group velocity. In Fig. 12, we show the co-propagation of the simulated THz pulse
and electron beam for this resonant interaction.

Table 1: Simulation Parameters

Bunch energy
Bunch charge
Energy spread
Bunch length
Undulator period
Undulator parameter, K
# of undulator periods
CPPWG spacing, b
Plate curvature radius
Peak frequency
Peak THz ﬁeld

6 MeV
1 pC
3 × 10−4
100 fs rms

3 cm
1.12

8

2.06 mm

2 mm

.84 THz
10 MV/ m

Ponderomotive coupling with a near single-cycle THz pulse cannot be well-described by the single frequency
approximation used by most FEL simulation codes because of the broad spectral content of the THz pulse.
We are currently developing a multi-frequency simulation code, similar to MUFFIN [22], which will track the
evolution of the THz pulse, described by Eq. (10). The calculation does not rely on the slowly varying envelope
approximation or period averaging and includes the waveguide-induced dispersion of the THz pulse.

For very low beam charges one can neglect the beam current term in the radiation ﬁeld evolution (frozen
ﬁeld approximation). Preliminary results from our multi-frequency code are shown in Fig. 13, using the design
parameters in Table 1. For these results, the THz pulse was modeled by a Gaussian frequency spectrum peaked
at 0.84 THz with a FWHM of .75 THz and simulated by 101 spectral points. The peak ﬁeld was 10 MV/ m,
based on predictions for the cooled sLN conversion eﬃciency of the PEGASUS optical rectiﬁcation set-up. The
sample electron beam with rms bunch length 100 fs, shown in Fig. 13, is compressed to 12 fs.

In Figure 14, we show the comparative compression and timing jitter of this same bunch distribution for
a range of initial mean energy deviations, and the corresponding accrued timing jitter when the bunch enters
the IFEL. Even with a relatively large energy deviation of 0.2% and timing error of 100 fs, interaction in the
THz-driven IFEL achieves a compression ratio of better than 3 and cuts the timing jitter by more than half.

12

Vacuum Box Undulator LN2 Cooling Chamber Beamline Diagnostics  IR   CPPWG THz OAP OAP sLN Figure 12: Snapshots of the simulated THz pulse propagation within the waveguide, after 0.5λu, 1λu, 3.5λu,
4λu, 7.5λu, 8λu, with electron bunch position shown in red. As the system is evolved in terms of the longitudinal
position coordinate, the time marked on the x-axis indicates the time required for the corresponding point on
the THz waveform to cross the current longitudinal coordinate. The plot window tracks with propagation at the
speed of light, therefore the THz pulse and the electron bunch appear to slip further back with each snapshot
as they propagate at .994c. Note that at the half period intervals the sign of the THz ﬁeld gradient ﬂips.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 13: Simulation results showing the longitudinal phase space distribution (a) before the undulator, (b) at
the exit of the undulator, and (c) after a 1.03 m drift period.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 14: (a) Initial timing error, (b) ﬁnal timing error and (c) ﬁnal bunch compression after varying the mean
energy deviation of the initial bunch distribution shown in Fig. 13.

The compression results discussed above are limited primarily by the THz peak ﬁeld and available space
on the PEGASUS beamline. Obviously, increasing the THz ﬁeld would increase the chirping gradient of the
IFEL interaction. Direct improvement of generated THz power is an active area of research. The maximum

13

ﬁeld attainable via optical rectiﬁcation in lithium niobate is predicted to be on the order of 100 MV/cm, in
the range of 0.3 − 1.5 THz [15]. Even larger THz ﬁelds, on the order of GV/m, have been generated using a
partitioned organic DSTMS crystal [17]. Practical improvements can be made by eliminating absorptive media
along the THz transport path from the sLN to the waveguide. The size of the vacuum box at the PEGASUS
facility prevents cooling the sLN within the chamber, necessitating two transmission windows with intermediate
transport through air. However, keeping the sLN outside of the vacuum box does simplify optimization of the
alignment for THz generation. The box size places a practical constraint on the number of undulator periods
that can ﬁt inside, thereby limiting the duration of the interaction. The pulse frequency spectrum also plays a
signiﬁcant role in constraining the linearity of the energy chirp imparted to the bunch phase space. A longer
peak wavelength would allow a larger phase acceptance window and extend the duration over which a 100 fs
bunch receives a linear chirp as it rotates in phase space. Unfortunately, while cooling the sLN signiﬁcantly
increases the conversion eﬃciency of optical rectiﬁcation, it also results in a slightly blue-shifted THz pulse [16].

THz streak diagnostic

The THz compressor setup could easily be re-purposed to perform a diﬀerent THz-driven beam phase space
manipulation. With the excitation of an odd symmetric waveguide mode it will be possible to use the THz
ﬁeld to streak the beam, that is, to impart to the electrons a transverse kick correlated with their longitudinal
coordinate. After a drift section, the transverse kick maps the longitudinal proﬁle of the beam to the transverse
plane, which can then be imaged using a standard ﬂuorescent screen. The use of an odd mode interaction
within an undulator was ﬁrst proposed by Zholents and Zolotorev [23] and recently discussed by Andonian et
al. ref. [24]. Preliminary experimental results have conﬁrmed the interaction using a CO2 laser. The wavelength
of the CO2 laser is generally small relative to the length of the electron beam, resulting in an alternating
transverse kick along the length of the beam. If left to drift unaltered, this snake-like pattern would project
onto itself, destroying the imprinted longitudinal information at the diagnostic screen. To discern the diﬀerent
streaks along the length of the beam, ref. [24] incorporates a transverse kick in the orthogonal direction using
an RF deﬂector. The longer wavelength of THz radiation would drastically increase the acceptance of the
individual transverse streaks, long enough to capture the entire bunch in one streak when its length is shorter
than half a wavelength.

To calculate the transverse deﬂection imparted by a guided-THz IFEL interaction in a linear undulator with

magnetostatic ﬁeld in the y-direction, we begin from the force equation

The THz ﬁelds are described in terms of the carrier wave and envelope, fenv(t − z/vg), as

dp⊥
dt

= −e

E⊥(re(t), t) + vz0ˆez × B⊥(re(t), t) + v⊥ × ˆezBz(re(t), t)

(cid:16)
E(r, t) = Re(cid:2)E q(x, y)fenv(t − z/vg)e−iω0t+ikzqz+iφ0(cid:3)
H(r, t) = Re(cid:2)Hq(x, y)fenv(t − z/vg)e−iω0t+ikzqz+iφ0(cid:3)

(cid:17)

.

(18)

The magnetic ﬁeld proﬁle in the waveguide is related to the electric ﬁeld proﬁle by

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

For the case of deﬂection within the plane of the wiggling electron trajectory, the resulting expression is

dpx
dt

where

(cid:40)

ˆez × Bq⊥ =

−E q⊥

c

kzq/k0 , TE mode
k0/kzq , TM mode.

= −eα Re(cid:2)E q(re(t))fenv(t − z/vg)e−iω0t+ikz0z+iφ0(cid:3)

(cid:40)

1 − βz
1 − βz

α =

kzq
k0
k0
kzq

, TE mode
, TM mode.

14

The velocity matching condition requires βz ≈ βg, and the group velocity in the waveguide is given by kzq

,

as follows from the waveguide property vgvph = c2. Eq. (22) then evaluates to

α =

, TE mode
γ2
z
0 , TM mode.

(cid:110) 1

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)0

(cid:34)

We see that, when sustaining a zero-slippage interaction for deﬂection in the x-direction, a TE mode is required
for the mode-dependent parameter α.

For the antisymmetric mode proﬁle necessary for transverse deﬂection in the x-direction, we can approximate

the proﬁle near the axis as

E q(xe, ye) ≈ ˆex

∂Eqx
∂x

xe(t) = −ˆexE(cid:48)

qx

iKe−ikuz
βzγku

.

Taking only the phase-synchronous term, the change in px becomes

dpx
dt

=

eαK

2βzγku

Re

iE(cid:48)
qxfenv(t − z/vg)e−iω0t+ikzqz−ikuz+iφ0

(cid:35)

.

(24)

(25)

Substituting z = vz(t − t0) for an electron entering the wiggler on-axis with velocity vz at initial time t0, we
have

(cid:104)E(cid:48)

(cid:18)(cid:18)

(cid:90) L/vz

0

px(t0, tr) =

eαK

2βzγku

Re

qxe−i(ω0t0−φ0−π/2)

fenv

1 − vz
vg

t + t0

ei((kz0+ku)vz−ω0)tdt

for an interaction of length L. In the zero-slippage case, where vz ≈ vg, the resulting angular deﬂection is

(cid:105)

k0

(23)

(26)

(27)

(28)

(cid:19)

sinc θL

2 sin

ω0t0 − φ0 +

θL
2

(cid:19)
(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

∆Θx(t0) =

px(t0, L/vz)

mcγβz

=

eαKLE(cid:48)

qxfenv(t0)

2β3

z γ2mc2ku

− (k0 + ku) which is very similar to [23].

where θ = ω0
vz

By a similar method we can calculate the deﬂection in the plane perpendicular to the wiggling electron

trajectory from the longitudinal coupling in the third term of Eq. (18). The resulting angular deﬂection

∆Θy(t0) =

eKLBqzfenv(t0)

2β2

z γ2mc

sinc θL

2 sin

ω0t0 − φ0 +

θL
2

From both Eq.

is optimized for an on-axis B-ﬁeld.
(27) and Eq.
(28) we can see that, for a streaking application, the angular spread is
maximized when θ = 0, which is the condition for phase synchronism, and ω0t0 − φ0 = 2πm for integer m,
which indicates that the particles are injected at the proper phase in the waveform. Around this point a short
bunch of duration τ (cid:28) 2π

will be angularly spread to

ω0

φstreak {x,y} = ∆Θ{x,y}ωτ

(29)

If this spread is large relative to the intrinsic angular spread in the electron beam, viewing the projected

beam spot on a viewer screen reveals the temporal (or axial) distribution of the bunch charge.

The TE11 mode of the CPPWG provides an ideal antisymmetric mode proﬁle for deﬂection in the x-direction,
while both the TE20 and TE02 modes are excellent candidates for deﬂection in the y-direction using the longi-
tudinal B-ﬁeld, peaked on-axis. The TE11 and TE20 modes could be excited by creating a phase shift in the
THz ﬁeld using two mirror halves shifted by 1/4 of the wavelength in a similar way as employed by Andonian
et al.
in the CO2 streaking experiments [24]. A specialized THz waveplate could be employed to excite the
TE02 mode or improve the coupling eﬃciency into the TE11 mode. With either of these simple modiﬁcation
techniques, the experimental hardware from the compression project could be readily adapted for the THz
streaking application.

Selection of the optimal streaking method depends on the coupling eﬃciency of each mode and the corre-
sponding deﬂection parameter calculated from Eq’s (27) and (28). A comparison of these values for transverse

15

coupling with the TE11 mode and longitudinal coupling with the TE20 and TE02 mode can be found in Table
2. These calculations were performed using the undulator parameters ﬁxed by the compression experiment, as
shown in Table 1. For each mode, the coupling eﬃciency was calculated over a range of incoming THz proﬁles
that could be produced through a combination of THz waveplate, mirror oﬀset, or non-reﬂective coating. The
incident THz proﬁle oﬀering the maximum coupling eﬃciency is shown next to the corresponding mode proﬁle
in Fig. 15.

Table 2: THz streaking parameters

Coupling technique
Coupling eﬃciency
Resonant plate-spacing
Resonant energy
Angular deﬂection
Eﬀective angular deﬂection
Timing resolution
(for n,x = .1 mm-mrad, σx = 45 ,µm)

TE11 mode TE11 mode TE02 mode TE20 mode
oﬀset mirror

oﬀset mirror

waveplate

waveplate

0.552

2.65 mm
7.703 MeV
3.3 mrad
1.8 mrad

15 fs

0.278

2.65 mm
7.703 MeV
3.3 mrad
0.9 mrad

30 fs

0.635

3.95 mm
6.148 MeV
13.9 mrad
8.8 mrad

4 fs

0.638

1.95 mm
6.225 MeV
7.9 mrad
5.0 mrad

7 fs

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 15: Plots of the transverse mode proﬁle for the (a) TE11 mode, coupled using a waveplate, (b) TE11
mode, coupled using displaced mirror halves, (c) TE02 mode, and (d) TE20 mode, showing, from left to right,
the incident THz pulse, electric ﬁeld of the excited mode, and magnetic ﬁeld of the excited mode.

Assuming no position-angle correspondence in the initial beam distribution, the eﬀective timing resolution

16

is deﬁned, for deﬂection in the x, or y, direction, as [24]

∆t =

n,{x,y}

γσ{x,y}∆Θ{x,y},maxckz

(30)

where n,{x,y} is the normalized emittance and σ{x,y} is the beam size. Despite the low ﬁeld magnitude from our
THz source, we can achieve high temporal resolution, because it scales with the wavelength of the modulating
ﬁeld. Our THz streaking method would be comparable to current femtosecond-scale timing diagnostics, like the
X-band transverse deﬂector at LCLS [25], with the added advantage of timing synchronization to an external
laser pulse. Further improvements, such as an increase in THz peak ﬁeld or an extension of the IFEL interaction
length, could push this THz streaking diagnostic to sub-femtosecond resolution.

From the comparison in Table 2, we see that the greatest angular deﬂection for our current beam and
undulator parameters is provided by the TE02 mode. However, the simple fabrication of the oﬀset mirror
halves, as opposed to a THz waveplate, for coupling into the desired mode makes the TE20 the most attractive
method for implementing this THz-streaking concept at the PEGASUS laboratory.

Conclusion

As the development of THz sources pushes towards higher power, the accelerator community eagerly looks to
the potential of THz technology. To eﬃciently harness the power of a near single-cycle THz pulse for beam
manipulation, the problem of extending the interaction region must be solved. Group velocity matching between
a THz pulse and an electron bunch can allow for a sustained ”zero-slippage” IFEL interaction. We intend to
demonstrate this guided-THz IFEL technique at the PEGASUS laboratory to compress an electron bunch and
reduce its time-of-arrival jitter with respect to the laser pulse generating the THz. Towards this end, we have
achieved tunable control of the group velocity of a THz pulse inside a CPPWG. Initial predictions of the 1-D
multifrequency simulation code that we are developing show bunch compression of up to an order of magnitude.
The ”zero-slippage” interaction that we utilize for compression can be extended to a transverse deﬂection
mechanism, like the one discussed in ref. [24], without the need for an additional RF deﬂecting cavity. A
THz streaking technique based on ponderomotive coupling in a guided-THz IFEL could provide unprecedented
resolution for longitudinal bunch diagnostics. Looking forward, an FEL interaction driven by the guided-THz
seed could prove to be a powerful tool for ampliﬁcation of the THz source.

Acknowledgment

We are grateful for the support of the U.S. Department of Energy through grant DE-FG02-92ER40693 and the
National Science Foundation through grant PHY-1415583 and acknowledge partial support from the U.S.-Israel
Binational Science Foundation.

Appendix

THz source
We use optical rectiﬁcation in stoichiometric lithium niobate (sLN) to generate picosecond scale THz pulses from a Ti:Sapph laser
centered at 800 nm with 30 nm bandwidth. To enhance the conversion eﬃciency from IR to THz, the intensity front of the laser
pulse is tilted using a diﬀraction grating and imaged onto the sLN with a focusing lens [2] [3]. With 0.1% conversion eﬃciency, we
have 1.2 µJ pulses with a peak ﬁeld of 3 MV/m after the diverging THz pulse is collimated and focused by a pair OAP’s. A sample
pulse proﬁle is shown in Fig. 16. By increasing the laser spot size along with laser power, we can stay below the sLN damage
threshold. Using 2.3 mJ of IR power with doubled spot area, we produce a peak ﬁeld of 4.6 MV/m. We are currently developing
a cooling chamber to further improve the conversion eﬃciency at the sLN crystal. With this modiﬁcation and optimized focusing,
we can expect the peak ﬁeld to increase by at least a factor of two [26].

EOS measurements
Measurements of the temporal ﬁeld proﬁle are conducted with electro-optic sampling (EOS) in 0.5 mm thick zinc telluride. Within
this nonlinear optical crystal, a THz induced rotation of the fast and slow axes changes the relative intensity between the horizontal
and vertical polarization components of an IR probe pulse. A balanced detection scheme, shown in Fig. 8, utilizes a quarter
waveplate and Wollaston prism to separate these components onto two photodiodes. The original THz ﬁeld is then calculated in
terms of the intensity diﬀerence [27].

17

Figure 16: EOS measurement of the THz pulse at the entrance to the CPPWG.

References

[1] P. U. Jepsen, D. G. Cooke, and M. Koch. Laser and Photonics Reviews, 5(1):124–166, 2011.

[2] A. G. Stepanov, J. Hebling, and J. Kuhl. Applied physics letters, 83(15):3000–3002, 2003.

[3] J. Hebling, A. G. Stepanov, G. Alm´asi, B. Bartal, and J. Kuhl. Applied Physics B, 78(5):593–599, 2004.

[4] C. W. Berry, N. Wang, M. R. Hashemi, M. Unlu, and M. Jarrahi. Nature communications, 4:1622, 2013.

[5] P. Emma. SLAC, Stanford, CA, USA, Rep. ILCLS-TN-01-1, 2001.

[6] E. A. Nanni, W. R. Huang, K. Ravi, A. Fallahi, G. Moriena, R. J. Miller, and F.X. K¨artner. Nature communications, 6, 2015.

[7] J. M. Glownia, J. Cryan, J. Andreasson, A. Belkacem, N. Berrah, C. I. Blaga, C. Bostedt, J. Bozek, L. F. DiMauro, L. Fang,

et al. Optics express, 18(17):17620–17630, 2010.

[8] F. V. Hartemann, W. J. Brown, D. J. Gibson, S. G. Anderson, A. M. Tremaine, P. T. Springer, A. J. Wootton, E. P. Hartouni,

and C. P. J. Barty. Phys. Rev. ST Accel. Beams, 8(10):100702, 2005.

[9] E. Esarey and C. B. Schroeder, 2003.

[10] A. Gover and P. Sprangle. IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics, 17(7):1196–1215, 1981.

[11] I. M. Yakover, Y. Pinhasi, and A. Gover. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators,

Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment, 375(1):260–263, 1996.

[12] A. Doria, G. P. Gallerano, and A. Renieri. Optics communications, 80(5):417–424, 1991.

[13] A. Gover, F. V. Hartemann, G. P. Le Sage, N. C. Luhmann, R. S. Zhang, and C. Pellegrini. Physical review letters, 72:1192–

1195, 1994.

[14] E. Jerby and A. Gover. Quantum Electronics, IEEE Journal of, 21(7):1041–1058, 1985.

[15] J. A. F¨ul¨op, L. P´alfalvi, M. C. Hoﬀmann, and J. Hebling. Optics express, 19(16):15090–15097, 2011.

[16] S.-W. Huang, E. Granados, W. R. Huang, K.-H. Hong, L. E. Zapata, and F. X. K¨artner. Optics letters, 38(5):796–798, 2013.

[17] C. Vicario, B. Monoszlai, and C. P. Hauri. Physical Review Letters, 112(21):213901, 2014.

[18] I. M. Yakover, Y. Pinhasi, and A. Gover. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators,

Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment, 358(1):323–326, 1995.

[19] T. Nakahara and N. Kurauchi. Microwave Theory and Techniques, IEEE Transactions on, 15(2):66–71, 1967.

[20] P. Musumeci, J. T. Moody, R. J. England, J. B. Rosenzweig, and T. Tran. Physical review letters, 100(24):244801, 2008.

[21] J. T. Moody, P. Musumeci, M. S. Gutierrez, J. B. Rosenzweig, and C. M. Scoby. Physical Review Special Topics-Accelerators

and Beams, 12:070704, 2009.

[22] N. Piovella. Physics of Plasmas (1994-present), 6(8):3358–3368, 1999.

[23] A. A. Zholents and M. S. Zolotorev. New Journal of Physics, 10(2):025005, 2008.

[24] G. Andonian, E. Hemsing, D. Xiang, P. Musumeci, A. Murokh, S. Tochitsky, and J. B. Rosenzweig. Physical Review Special

Topics-Accelerators and Beams, 14(7):072802, 2011.

[25] C. Behrens, F.-J. Decker, Y. Ding, V. A. Dolgashev, J. Frisch, Z. Huang, P. Krejcik, H. Loos, A. Lutman, T. J. Maxwell, et al.

Nature communications, 5, 2014.

[26] B. Bartal, I. Z. Kozma, A. G. Stepanov, G. Alm´asi, J. Kuhl, E. Riedle, and J. Hebling. Applied Physics B, 86(3):419–423,

2007.

[27] M. Brunken, H. Genz, P. G¨ottlicher, C. Hessler, M. H¨uning, H. Loos, A. Richter, H. Schlarb, P. Schm¨user, S. Simrock, et al.

Technical report, 2003.

18

