GUITAR SOLOS AS NETWORKS

Stefano Ferretti

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Bologna

Mura A. Zamboni 7, I-40127 Bologna, Italy

s.ferretti@unibo.it

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
6
1

 
 
]

D
S
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
9
7
9
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT

This paper presents an approach to model melodies (and mu-
sic pieces in general) as networks. Notes of a melody can be
seen as nodes of a network that are connected whenever these
are played in sequence. This creates a directed graph. By
using complex network theory, it is possible to extract some
main metrics, typical of networks, that characterize the piece.
Using this framework, we provide an analysis on a set of gui-
tar solos performed by main musicians. The results of this
study indicate that this model can have an impact on mul-
timedia applications such as music classiﬁcation, identiﬁca-
tion, and automatic music generation.

Index Terms— Media Analysis, Musical Scores, Com-

plex Networks

1. INTRODUCTION

Nowadays, there is a common trend in research to model ev-
erything as a network. In particular, complex network theory
is a mathematical tool that connects the real world with theo-
retical research, and is employed in many ﬁelds, ranging from
natural and physical sciences to social sciences and humani-
ties [1]. Technological, biological, economic systems, disease
pathologies can be modeled in the same way. Focusing on
(multi)media contents, it has been proved that language, for
instance, can be seen as a complex network [2, 3]. In this pa-
per, we show that musical pieces can be treated as complex
networks as well.

When dealing with audio, the main concern has been on
the issue of digitalizing it or to synthesize, represent, repro-
duce sounds, by employing a variety of sound generation
techniques. Attention has been paid on transmitting, index-
ing, classifying, clustering, summarizing music [4, 5]. How-
ever, the idea of capturing some general characteristics of a
melody (and harmony) is somehow an overlook aspect. In lit-
erature, there are works in the ﬁeld of computer science that
focus on musical scores [6], as well as works on the auto-
matic transcription of the melody and harmony [7]. As con-

This paper appears in the Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE International
Conference on Multimedia and Expo (ICME 2016), IEEE, Seattle, 2016, pp.
1-6.

cerns music information retrieval, techniques worthy of men-
tion are acoustic-based similarity measures [8], compression-
based methods for the classiﬁcation of pieces of music [9],
statistical analyses and artiﬁcial neural networks [10]. Finally,
in [11] artiﬁcial intelligence is employed to capture statisti-
cal proportions of music attributes, such as pitch, duration,
melodic and harmonic intervals, etc.

Studies on music can be based on symbolic data (music
scores) or on audio recordings. Symbolic music data eases
the analysis in several music application domains. For exam-
ple, ﬁnding the notes of a melody in an audio ﬁle can be a
difﬁcult task, while with symbolic music, notes are the start-
ing point for the analysis. Thus, in general traditional mu-
sicological concepts such as melodic and harmonic structure
are easier to investigate in the symbolic domain, and usually
more successful [12].

In this paper, we develop a model that allows capturing
some essential features of a musical performance (a music
track). We will focus on melodies, and speciﬁcally on “so-
los”, which are a part of a song where a performer plays
(quite often improvises) a melody with accompaniment from
the other instruments. It is quite common in music theory as-
serting that solos performed by musicians are bound to their
technical and artistic skills. Indeed, musicians are recognized
for their own “style” in playing a solo over a music piece, that
identiﬁes a sort of musical “language”, typical of that musi-
cian. It is not by chance that an artist can be recognized from
others, and that we can classify artists in categories and hier-
archies. The goal of this work is to make a step further toward
the identiﬁcation of the rules and characteristics of the music
style of a certain performer. If a music line is conceived of
as a complex network of musical units (notes, rests) and their
relations, it is expected to exhibit emergent properties due to
the interactions between such system elements. Complex net-
works provide appropriate modeling for music as a complex
system and powerful quantitative measures for capturing the
essence of its complexity.

As a proof of concept, we retrieved and analyzed differ-
ent solos of some main guitar players. Namely, the artists
are Eric Clapton, David Gilmour, Jimi Hendrix, BB. King,
Eddie Van Halen. The selection of guitar as instrument and
these particular artists is motivated by the fact that there is a

quite active community of guitar enthusiasts that share musi-
cal scores on the Web. Scores are published and formatted,
usually, by employing description schemes that are alterna-
tive, easier and more intuitive to read, with respect to the
classic musical sheets. These schemes are based on guitar
tablatures, and there is a wide list of software applications
and libraries to handle digital representations of such scores.
This simpliﬁed the creation of the database.

During the analysis, different measures are calculated,
typical of complex network theory. We measure the length
of solos, the dimensions of the networks, the degree distribu-
tion, distance metrics, clustering coefﬁcient and, ﬁnally, we
identify that the network representations of certain solos are
small worlds. The paper discusses how these metrics are re-
lated to the “style” of the performer.

The outcomes of such study can have an impact on mul-
timedia applications and on studies of music classiﬁcation
and identiﬁcation, in general. While probably a music track
cannot be fully described via mathematical measurements,
nonetheless, these measures can help in discriminating among
the main features of a performer and a music track. Such
results can be employed as building blocks inside media ap-
plications for the automatic generation of digital music with
certain speciﬁc characteristics (e.g., the generation of a solo
“`a la” Miles Davis). Such applications could be extensively
exploited in didactic scenarios, automatic music generation
applications, and multimedia entertainment.

The reminder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion 2 describes the network model for music solos. Section
3 discusses on an assessment on a list of guitar solos. Section
4 presents the obtained results. Finally, Section 5 provides
some concluding remarks.

2. A NETWORK MODEL FOR MUSIC TRACKS

Before dealing with the model, a brief terminology is intro-
duced to avoid potential ambiguities. A song is a musical
piece, which is composed of multiple, simultaneous sounds
played by different instruments. The part of the song played
by a single instrument is referred as a track. Notice that an
instrument can play different tracks in the song (e.g. there are
multiple instruments of the same type, or the tracks have been
overdubbed).

The solo is a part of a track where a performer is playing
with unobtrusive accompaniment from the other instruments.
It is employed quite often in jazz, blues, rock songs, where
the solo has, usually, the twofold role of: i) creating a melody
(in certain cases an improvised melody), which is alternative
to the main melody of the song, and ii) showing off the skills
of the performer, due to the technical difﬁculties to play that
solo, or due to the ability of the performer to create an in-
tense, touching melody. Needless to say, solos are melodies
composed of notes (or groups of simultaneous notes). A note
can be a pitched sound or a rest, lasting for a certain duration.

We can represent a track as a directed network, whose
nodes are the notes played by the performer. When a per-
former plays a note x, followed by a subsequent note y, we
add the two nodes x, y in the network and a directed link
(x, y) from x to y. If, for instance, the player subsequently
plays another note z followed by the note x, we add another
node z and a link (z, x) leaving from z to the already exist-
ing node x. Networks can have cycles, i.e a performer can
play two subsequent notes of the same type. Weights can be
associated to links (x, y), depending on how many times that
link (x, y) is present in the network, i.e. how many times the
performer plays a sequence of the two x, y notes in his solo.

As concerns the amount of possible nodes in a network,
in the occidental music, an octave (the interval between one
musical pitch and another with half or double its frequency,
which is the same note but lower or higher in pitch) is com-
posed of twelve sounds. Focusing on electric guitar, as an
example, it is usually possible to create sounds belonging to
four octaves. (Actually, this is a simpliﬁed measure, just to
give an idea on the amount of possible nodes). Then, each
note has an associated duration. Two notes of the same pitch
with different durations are considered as two different net-
work nodes. Rests and chords are other possible nodes of a
network. In fact, it is quite usual to hear performers playing
multiple simultaneous notes to create multiple voices in the
melody they are composing in the solo. Therefore, according
to this model a guitar solo (and, in general, a track) network
can be composed of hundreds of nodes.

Figure 1 depicts four examples of networks derived from
four famous blues/rock guitar solos. It is interesting to ob-
serve that these networks are quite different one from the
other. Figure 1a shows a simple network, with some nodes
that have higher in/out degrees (i.e., number of links entering
or leaving a node). Figure 1b has a more linear structure, sug-
gesting that the melodic line was “simple”, with poor repe-
titions of single notes. Figure 1c appears to be a clustered
network, with some few nodes connecting the two clusters.
Finally, Figure 1d has a quite complex structure, with many
nodes and with the presence of several hubs. This suggests
that it might be interesting to assess if different artists do
have different characteristics that, statistically, produce dif-
ferent types of networks.

It is worth noticing that usually a melodic line is strongly
inﬂuenced by the underlying harmonic, chord progression.
Modulations and chords’ alterations are quite common in jazz
compositions, where improvisations use and outline the har-
mony as a foundation for melodic ideas. In this study we do
not focus on the harmonic aspects, just taking the melodic
line to create the networks. This can be regarded as a fur-
ther work. Actually, the considered songs were all blues/rock
ones, without any important modulation in the harmonic pro-
gression during the solo.

3. AN ASSESSMENT ON GUITAR SOLOS

While the study is applicable to all music tracks, regardless
on the musical instrument, this study focuses on guitar solos.
The reason is quite simple: guitar is probably the most popu-
lar musical instrument and there is a vast amount of informa-
tion available on the Web. Besides classic musical sheets, al-
ternative notation systems have been devised (e.g. guitar tab-
lature) and a wide set of software tools is available. This al-
lowed creating a wide database of guitar solos.

A main clariﬁcation is that, even if these measures are
quantitative, they do not aim at ranking the ability of perform-
ers or the “beauty” of a solo with respect to another. These are
(subjective) opinions which are not under investigation here.
The aim of these measurements is to extract some main char-
acteristics of performers and their solos, that may serve to
perform classiﬁcations, build applications for the automatic
matching, identiﬁcation or even automatic generation of me-
dia compositions respecting some musical genre or style.

A database was created by downloading guitar scores
available in several dedicated Web sites (e.g. A-Z Guitar Tabs,
The Ultimate Guitar Tabs). It is important noting that these
scores are typically cooperatively provided by users; thus,
these sources might have some minor errors (that neverthe-
less, do not alter the general scope of this study). Retrieved
scores were available in Guitar Pro or Power Tab formats.
Through the use of an existing python library, named py-
Guitar (http://pyguitarpro.readthedocs.org), these scores have
been manipulated so as to isolate the solo guitar part, extract
the guitar solo and export it in a musicXML format. Such
a process was (mostly) automatic. MusicXML is a standard
open format for exchanging digital sheet music, that can be
easily managed my means of an XML parser.

Solos were isolated from the rest of the track, when usu-
ally the guitar plays a rhythmic role. The idea was to extrapo-
late the melodic line played by the guitar from the rest of the
song. In certain cases, the track was completely instrumental
with the melodic line played by the performer, entirely. In
other cases, the performer was continuously playing melodic
lines during the song, in alternation with the main melodic
line (i.e. voice). In both these cases, a supervised process was
performed in order to isolate the “solo” parts.

We consider aggregate measures involving the whole so-
los, that have different durations. The different durations of
solos have an impact on some of the considered quantitative
measures (e.g. amount of played notes and number of nodes
in the networks). This allows obtaining a general view of the
solo, that considers its duration as a main feature. An alter-
native option might be to normalize these values by dividing
them over the duration of the solo.

The selection of artists was based on the ”importance“ of
the performer and the amount of songs available in the Web
for that performer. The idea was to consider a wide range
of different musical styles, to see if there are any differences

(a) B.B. King – Rock me baby

(b) David Gilmour (Pink Floyd) – Comfortably numb (ﬁrst solo)

(c) Eric Clapton (Cream) – Crossroads (second solo)

(d) Jimi Hendrix – Red House

Fig. 1: Four examples of networks from different scores

in the corresponding obtained networks. We thus selected
those musicians that, according to the general music criticism,
have a unique playing style. Brieﬂy, the artists are: i) Eric
Clapton, a rock-blues guitar legend (the slogan “Clapton is
God” testiﬁes this); ii) David Gilmour, singer and guitarist
of the famous Pink Floyd rock group, known for his melodic
and intense guitar solos; iii) Jimi Hendrix, which is consid-
ered the most important electric guitar player of all times; iv)
B.B. King, a blues master, quite often referred as “The King of
the Blues” that inspired several generations of artists; v) Ed-
die Van Halen, which is considered one of the most inﬂuential
hard-rock guitarists of the 20th century.

4. RESULTS

In this section, we report some aggregate measures for the
considered performers.
In each ﬁgure, concerning a given
metrics, a column refers to a performer. For each performer,
results for his considered tracks are reported as dots in the
column, together with the mean value and standard deviation.

4.1. Length of solos, number of nodes

Figure 2 shows the length of solos for different tracks, mea-
sured as the amount of notes or rests composing the solo. This
metric is different to the duration time of the solo, even if they
are related. In fact, during a bar, one might play a fast se-
quence of notes with short duration (e.g. a set of 16 sixteenth
notes) that would occupy the same temporal time of a single
whole note.

This metric might express how much a performer is in-
clined to elaborate the melodic line he is creating during the
solo. But it is also strongly related to the music genre. For
instance, solos in jazz compositions are usually quite longer
than modern pop-rock ones.

Fig. 2: Length of solos

The metric above can be analyzed together with the num-
ber of nodes, reported in Figure 3, that measures the number
of different notes played during a solo. Results suggest that
Hendrix has a richer vocabulary with respect to others (in the
considered database, he has longer solos and a higher average
number of nodes). Moreover, they capture perfectly the style

Fig. 3: Number of Nodes

of B.B. King, noted for his simpler (yet “touching”) solos.
In fact, his solos have a lower average amount of nodes (and
lower lengths), with respect to others.

4.2. Degree distribution

Figure 4 reports the average degrees of solos of the considered
performers. In particular, degrees and weighted degrees are
shown. Speciﬁcally, the degree of a node n is the amount of
links that connect n with other nodes in the network (included
n itself, in this case a loop would be performed). The degree
counts how many times the performer decides playing a note,
after (and before) playing another one. Since the graph is
directed, one should consider not only degrees, but also the in-
degrees (number of links arriving at a certain node) and out-
degrees (number of links leaving a certain node); the degree
of a node is the summation between its in-degree and out-
degree. In this study, in-degrees and out-degrees have been
measured but they are not shown since trends are similar to
those obtained for degrees.

As concerns weighted degrees, a weight was assigned to
each link, measuring the amount of times the solo “traverses”
that link (i.e., how many times the performer played those two
notes in sequence). Thus, the weighted degree is the sum of
the weights of links of a given node.

These measures provide slightly different results. In gen-
eral, we can say that Eddie Van Halen has lower average de-
grees, testifying his inclination to create various and complex
solos. Again, results conﬁrm that B.B. King was used playing
and repeating speciﬁc combinations of notes.

4.3. Distances

The average distance is the average shortest path length in a
network, i.e. the average number of steps along the shortest
paths for all possible pairs of nodes. The distance between
two nodes x, y is the shortest sequence of notes played in a
solo starting with x and ending with y.
It is worth noting
that when considering distances in most directed networks
obtained from the considered solos, the average path length
is inﬁnite, since such directed networks are not strongly con-
nected, i.e. in these networks it is not possible to create a

 0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600Eric ClaptonDavid GilmourJimi HendrixBB KingEddie Van HalenLength of Solo 0 50 100 150 200 250Eric ClaptonDavid GilmourJimi HendrixBB KingEddie Van HalenNumber of Nodes4.4. Clustering coefﬁcient

The clustering coefﬁcient is a measure assessing how much
nodes in a graph tend to cluster together. It measures to what
extent friends of a node are friends of one another too. When
two connected nodes have a common neighbor, this triplet of
nodes form a triangle. The clustering coefﬁcient is deﬁned as

C =

3 × number of triangles in the network
number of connected triplets of nodes

where a “connected triple” consists of a single node with links
reaching a pair of other nodes; or, in other words, a connected
triple is a set of three nodes connected by (at least) two links
[1]. A triangle of nodes forms three connected triplets, thus
explaining the factor of three in the formula.

In this context, a triangle of nodes means that the per-
former played in a solo the corresponding three notes in se-
quence, but in different orders. In other words, the presence
of many triangles (i.e. high clustering coefﬁcient) indicates
that the performer is used to play different clusters of notes
in a whatever order. Conversely, a low clustering coefﬁcient
might indicate that the performer prefers following a speciﬁc
melodic line with a speciﬁc order on triplets.

Fig. 6: Clustering coefﬁcient

Figure 6 shows the measured clustering coefﬁcient for the
considered performers. In this case, there no big differences
among performers; David Gilmour has a lower average clus-
tering coefﬁcient, but with a high standard deviation.

4.5. Is there any small world property?

Small world networks are networks that are “highly clustered,
like regular lattices, yet have small characteristic path lengths,
like random graphs” [1]. In a small world, most nodes are
not linked with each other, but most nodes can be reached
from every other by a small number of hops.
Indeed, in a
small-world network the typical distance between two ran-
domly chosen nodes grows proportionally to the logarithm of
the number of nodes. Given a network, it is possible to verify
if it is a small world, by comparing it with a random graph of
the same size (i.e. a network with links randomly generated,
based on a simple probabilistic model). Random graphs ex-
hibit a small average distance among nodes (varying typically

Fig. 4: Degree distributions

path from a node to another, for all possible pair of nodes,
by employing their directed links. Thus, we report the dis-
tance by considering the corresponding undirected networks
(i.e. removing the direction information and considering links
as bidirectional ones). In this application domain, a higher
distance reveals a higher complexity of the solo, in terms of
amount of notes and how these are connected during the solo
construction.

Fig. 5: Distance (undirected network)

Figure 5 shows results for the considered performers.
Outcomes conﬁrm the claims reported for the degrees.
In
general, classic blues performers (B.B. King) have lower dis-
tances with respect to rock virtuoso performers (Eddie van
Halen). Indeed, this outcome is in complete accordance with
the common opinions of music experts.

 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9Eric ClaptonDavid GilmourJimi HendrixBB KingEddie Van HalenDegree 0 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1 0.12Eric ClaptonDavid GilmourJimi HendrixBB KingEddie Van HalenWeighted Degree 2 3 4 5 6 7 8Eric ClaptonDavid GilmourJimi HendrixBB KingEddie Van HalenDistance (Undirected Graph) 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45 0.5 0.55Eric ClaptonDavid GilmourJimi HendrixBB KingEddie Van HalenClustering CoefficientTable 1 Small world property: comparison between solo networks and corresponding random graphs.
avg distance

clus coeff (RG)

clus coeff

avg distance (RG)

Solo
B.B. King – Rock me baby
D. Gilmour (Pink Floyd) – Comfortably numb (1st solo)
E. Clapton (Cream) – Crossroads (2nd solo)
J. Hendrix – Red House

0.41
0.06
0.40
0.24

0.11
0.03
0.04
0.02

2.17
4.30
3.68
3.37

3.26
4.03
4.29
5.00

as the logarithm of the number of nodes) along with a small
clustering coefﬁcient. In practice, one can assess whether a
network has a small average distance as for a random graph,
but a signiﬁcantly higher clustering coefﬁcient. In this case,
the network is a small world.

Table 1 reports results of this comparison for the four net-
works (solos) shown in Figure 1. For each solo, column “clus
coeff” of the table reports the clustering coefﬁcient measured
for the corresponding network; column “clus coeff (RG)”
shows the clustering coefﬁcient for a random graph of the
same size; column “avg distance” provides the average dis-
tance among nodes in the networks (i.e. the average shortest
path); ﬁnally, column “avg distance (RG)” reports the average
distance for a random graph of the same size.

It is possible to observe that two solos can be classiﬁed as
small worlds, namely “Crossroads” by E. Clapton and “Red
House” by J. Hendrix. In fact, these two solos have a cluster-
ing coefﬁcient signiﬁcantly higher than their corresponding
random graphs, and the average distances are lower but com-
parable to those obtained for random graphs. As to “Rock me
baby”, by B.B. King, its clustering coefﬁcient is lower than
that of its corresponding random graph (and its average dis-
tance is lower as well), but this difference is not evident as for
the other two solos mentioned above. Finally, a small world
property is not evident for “Comfortably numb (1st solo)” by
D. Gilmour. Indeed, this solo is a (touching) linear melody,
without an intricate structure, and this is evident by the picto-
rial representation of the network reported in Figure 1b.

5. CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, a novel approach has been presented to model
melodies (and music pieces in general) as networks. We have
analyzed a database of solos and extracted some main me-
trics. Outcomes are in complete accordance with the com-
mon opinions of music experts. We argue that the use of a
mathematical modeling of a solo (or a music track in general)
provides a general and compact way to analyze music.

Results of this study can be exploited to build novel me-
dia applications related to music classiﬁcation and categoriza-
tion. Moreover, one might employ this framework as a main
tool during the automatic generation of music. If we are able
to harness the main characteristics of a musician, it would
be possible to combine this approach to some artiﬁcial intel-
ligence tool and generate, for example, a solo “`a la” Miles

Davis. As an example, these results suggest that a “bluesy”
solo should have a high clustering coefﬁcient and low dis-
tance; a “modern rock” solo should have high distance and
an average degree lower than other genres, while a “melodic”
solo should have a simpler structure. This might have inter-
esting applications in music didactics, multimedia entertain-
ment, and digital music generation.

6. REFERENCES

[1] Mark E. J. Newman, “Random graphs as models of networks,”
in Handbook of Graphs and Networks, pp. 35–68. Wiley-VCH
Verlag, 2005.

[2] Jin Cong and Haitao Liu, “Approaching human language with
complex networks,” Physics of Life Reviews, vol. 11, no. 4, pp.
598 – 618, 2014.

[3] Iwona Grabska-Gradzi´nska, Andrzej Kulig,

Jaroslaw
Kwapien, and Stanislaw Drozdz,
“Complex network
analysis of literary and scientiﬁc texts,” International Journal
of Modern Physics C, vol. 23, no. 07, 2012.

[4] Am´elie Anglade, Queen Mary, Rafael Ramirez, Simon Dixon,
and Queen Mary, “Genre classiﬁcation using harmony rules in-
duced from automatic chord transcriptions,” in In 10th Int. So-
ciety for Music Information Retrieval Conference, 2009.

[5] Braja Gopal Patra, Dipankar Das, and Sivaji Bandyopadhyay,
“Unsupervised approach to hindi music mood classiﬁcation,”
in Proc. of the 1st Int. Conf. on Mining Intelligence and Knowl-
edge Exploration. 2013, MIKE 2013, pp. 62–69, Springer.

[6] R. E. Prather, “Harmonic analysis from the computer repre-
sentation of a musical score,” Commun. ACM, vol. 39, no. 12,
Dec. 1996.

[7] Matti P. Ryyn¨anen and Anssi P. Klapuri, “Automatic transcrip-
tion of melody, bass line, and chords in polyphonic music,”
Comput. Music J., vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 72–86, Sept. 2008.

[8] Adam Berenzweig, Beth Logan, Daniel P. W. Ellis, and Brian
P. W. Whitman, “A large-scale evaluation of acoustic and sub-
jective music-similarity measures,” Comput. Music J., vol. 28,
no. 2, pp. 63–76, June 2004.

[9] Rudi Cilibrasi, Paul Vit´anyi, and Ronald De Wolf, “Algorith-
mic clustering of music based on string compression,” Comput.
Music J., vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 49–67, Dec. 2004.

[10] Bill Manaris, Juan Romero, Penousal Machado, Dwight Kre-
hbiel, Timothy Hirzel, Walter Pharr, and Robert B. Davis,
“Zipf’s law, music classiﬁcation, and aesthetics,” Comput. Mu-
sic J., vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 55–69, Feb. 2005.

[11] Bill Manaris, Juan Romero, Penousal Machado, Dwight Kre-
hbiel, Timothy Hirzel, Walter Pharr, and Robert B. Davis,
“Zipf’s law, music classiﬁcation, and aesthetics,” Computer
Music Journal, vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 55–69, Mar 2005.

[12] Ian Knopke and Frauke J¨urgensen, Symbolic Data Mining in
Musicology, pp. 327–345, Chapman & Hall/CRC Data Mining
and Knowledge Discovery Series. CRC Press, July 2011.

