Microscopic ﬂows of suspensions of the green non-motile Chlorella micro-alga

at various volume fractions: applications to intensiﬁed photo bio reactors

Antoine Souli`es1, J´er´emy Pruvost2, Cathy Castelain,1, Teodor Burghelea 1,∗

Abstract

An experimental study of ﬂows of the green non-motile Chlorella micro-alga in a plane microchannel is presented.
Depending on the value of the cell volume fraction, three distinct ﬂow regimes are observed. For low values of the
cell volume fraction a Newtonian ﬂow regime characterised by a Poiseuille like ﬂow ﬁeld, absence of wall slip and
hydrodynamic reversibility of the ﬂow states is observed. For intermediate values of the cell volume fraction, the ﬂow
proﬁles are consistent with a Poiseuille ﬂow of a shear thinning ﬂuid in the presence of slip at the channel’s wall. For
even larger cell volume fractions, a yield stress like behaviour manifested through the presence of a central solid plug
is observed. Except for the Newtonian ﬂow regime, a strong hydrodynamic irreversibility of the ﬂow and wall slip are
found. The calculation of the wall shear rate and wall stress based on the measured ﬂow ﬁelds allows one to identify
the mechanisms of wall slip observed in the shear thinning and yield stress regimes.

Keywords: microﬂuidics, Chlorella microalga, yield stress, wall slip, nonlinear ﬂow resistance, rheological
hysteresis, intensiﬁed photobioreactor

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
6
1

 
 
]
t
f
o
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
3
8
9
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Corresponding Author: Teodor Burghelea , Tel.: + (33) - (0)2 40 68 31 85; Fax: + (33) - (0)2 40 68 31 41
Email address: Teodor.Burghelea@univ-nantes.fr (Teodor Burghelea )
1Universit´e de Nantes, CNRS, Laboratoire de Thermocin´etique, UMR 6607, La Chantrerie, Rue Christian Pauc, B.P. 50609, F-44306 Nantes

2Universit´e de Nantes, CNRS, Genie des Proc´ed´es - Environnement Agroalimentaire, UMR 6144, 37 boulevard de l’Universit´e, BP 406, 44602

Cedex 3, France

Saint-Nazaire Cedex, France

Preprint submitted to Journal of Non-Newtonian Fluid Mechanics

Contents

1 Introduction

2 Experimental setup and methods

2.1 Microscopic ﬂow control and investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2 Preparation of the Chlorella micro-algae suspensions . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3 Rheological characterisation of the suspensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3 Results

3.1 Rheological properties of Chlorella suspensions at various volume fractions . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 Microscopic ﬂow behaviour of Chlorella suspensions at various volume fractions . . . . . . . . . . .

4 Conclusions

5 Acknowledgments

4

6
6
7
8

8
8
10

17

18

2

List of Figures

.

8

.

.

1

2

3
4

5

6

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

. . . .

Images of gas bubbles raising within a ﬂat panel PBR ﬁlled with a suspension of Chlorella microalaga
at two diﬀerent concentrations: (a) Cx ≈ 0.5g/l (b) Cx ≈ 5g/l. The closed curve in panel (b) high-
lights a dead ﬂow zone. The animated versions of the pictures are available online as a supplemental
material.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(a) Schematic representation of the experimental setup: M - micro channel, I - micro-channel inlet,
O - micro-channel outlet, MO - microscope objective, EP - eye piece, EC - epiﬂuorescent cube, L -
light emitting diode (LED) panel, LD - light diﬀuser, CCD - digital camera, PC - personal computer
(b) Schematic representation of the controlled pressure ramp. t0 is the characteristic forcing time (the
averaging time per pressure value, see the explanation in the text) and N is the total number of steps
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
of the ramp.
Rheological characterisation of the Chlorella suspensions . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Time averaged velocity proﬁles measured with a Φv = 0.02 suspension at various pressure drops:
∆p = 8.3Pa ((cid:78),(cid:52)), ∆p = 25Pa (•,◦), ∆p = 50Pa ((cid:4), (cid:3)). The full/empty symbols refer to the
increasing/decreasing branch of the pressure ramp, respectively.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Time averaged velocity proﬁles measured with a Φv = 0.12 suspension at various pressure drops:
∆p = 10Pa ((cid:78),(cid:52)), ∆p = 16.7Pa (•,◦), ∆p = 46.7Pa ((cid:4), (cid:3) ). The full/empty symbols refer to the
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
increasing/decreasing branch of the pressure ramp, respectively.
Time averaged velocity proﬁles measured with a Φv = 0.57 suspension at various pressure drops:
∆p = 25Pa ((cid:78),(cid:52)), ∆p = 41.7Pa (•,◦), ∆p = 116.8Pa ((cid:4), (cid:3)). The full/empty symbols refer to the
increasing/decreasing branch of the pressure ramp, respectively.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(a) Bright ﬁeld micrograph of a concentrated Chlorella suspension with Φv = 0.57 ﬂowing in a mi-
crochannel. The driving presssure was ∆p = 41.7Pa. The closed curve highlights a large agglomerate
of micro-algae. (b) Flow ﬁeld averaged during t0 = 6 s. The right edge of the ﬁeld of view corresponds
to a channel boundary and the left one to the centreline of the channel. The colormap relates to the
magnitude of the ﬂow velocity. For clarity of the presentation, the vector ﬁeld has been down-sampled
by a factor of 2 along each axis.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dependence of the normalised size of the plug Wp/W on the driving pressure drop measured for a
suspension with Φv = 0.57. The full/empty symbols distinguish between the data acquired on the
increasing/decreasing branch of the stepped pressure ramp, respectively. The full line is a guide for
the eye, Wp/W ∝ ∆p−0.1.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
Dependence of the mean ﬂow speed and of the ﬂow resistance on the pressure drop. . . . . . . . . . .
10 Dependence of the wall shear rate on the pressure drop. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11 Dependence of the wall shear stress on the pressure drop.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12 Dependence of the slip velocity on the wall shear stress. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . .

. . .

. .

.

.

.

.

.

.

7

.

.

5

6
9

10

11

11

12

13
14
14
15
16

3

1. Introduction

Micro-algae are a large and biologically diverse group of aquatic micro-organisms with a relatively simple uni-
cellular structure that can be found in various environments ranging from freshwater for some species to sea water for
others. Most micro-algae species are photoautotrophic which means they convert solar energy into chemical forms
through photosynthesis.

During the past several decades the micro-algae have received a considerable amount of interest due to their
potential use in several key industries related to food, cosmetics and ”green” energy. From an economical perspective
their most appealing application is undoubtedly that as a potential feedstock for the biofuel production. This is
because micro-algae may generally produce polysaccharides (sugars) and triacylglycerides (fats) which are the raw
materials for producing bioethanol and biodiesel fuels. Whether the micro-algae can make it as a viable ”green”
energy alternative in the near future is an intricate matter of both economic and energetic eﬃciency, [1].

Among a variety of species of micro-algae, Chlorella Vulgaris (CCAP 211-19) is a good candidate for the large
scale production of biofuels and, for this reason, it has been intensively studied, [2, 3, 4, 5]. It is a non-motile alga (it
has no ﬂagellum) with a average diameter of roughly 4 µm. Its membrane is quite rigid due to the presence of chitin-
like glycan in the cell wall, [6]. Thus, the Chlorella micro-alga can sustain relatively high hydrodynamic stresses
without any cellular damage, [7].

There currently exist two main technologies for the cultivation of the micro-algae: raceway pond systems and
photobioreactors (PBRs). A typical raceway pond is a closed and shallow (with depth varying from 0.2 m to 0.5 m)
loop, open to the air. The large open surface allows an optimal exposure to light but it may also favour the formation
of superﬁcial ﬁlms. In PBRs the culture medium is enclosed in a container with optically transparent walls and the
micro-algal suspension is circulated from a central reservoir. Thus, the PBR systems allow for a better control culture
environment but, in turn, are getting more expensive than the traditional raceway pond systems. In addition to that,
the energy consumption may also be higher than in the case of the raceway ponds, [8, 1, 9, 10].

However, due to a high degree of control of the culture conditions, the intensiﬁed PBR technology allows a
higher productivity. With an appropriate engineering and operating protocol, a high cell density culture (biomass
concentration) can be obtained. Hydrodynamics is one of the key aspects when working in high cell density culture.
High cell density cultures are indeed obtained in systems having a very high ratio between the illuminated surface
and the culture volume, which translates into a shallow depth, typically smaller than 0.01m, [11, 12, 13]. The high
degree of geometric conﬁnement combined with a high biomass concentration typically leads to a decrease of the
mixing performances which can have several negative impacts on the process: a decrease of the eﬃciency of the
mass transfer (mixing), an increase in the risk of bioﬁlm formation and an overall less eﬃcient light conversion in the
systems due to smaller displacement of ﬂowing cells along the light gradient in the culture volume. In this context,
optimising the hydrodynamic conditions is of paramount practical importance.

A comprehensive review of the progress in the theoretical/numerical work dealing with the optimisation of the
hydrodynamic conditions in intensiﬁed PBRs has been recently presented in Ref. [14]. As most ﬂows in intensiﬁed
PBRs are characterised by a large Reynolds numbers (Re), a ﬁrst diﬃculty encountered in the CFD studies of ﬂows in
PBRs is related to the proper choice of a turbulence model. Many authors chose the k−  model which is implemented
in commercially available CFD software packages such as FLUENT or Comsol Multiphysics, [15, 16].

The numerical studies of ﬂows of micro-algae suspensions in PBRs may be challenging even at low Re (i.e. no
inertial nonlinearity in the momentum equation), however. Whereas a dilute micro-algae suspension may be well
approximated by a Newtonian ﬂuid characterised by a linear stress-rate of strain relationship, semi-dilute and con-
centrated suspensions which are relevant to many industrial processes [17] are characterised by a strongly nonlinear
constitutive relationship.

To better understand the impact of the rheological properties of the micro-algae suspensions on their ﬂow be-
haviour we illustrate in Fig. 1 two photographs of a ﬂat panel PBR containing a dilute (left panel) and a concentrated
(right panel) suspension of the Chlorella micro-alga being stirred by injection of gas bubbles from the bottom.

The dimensions (height, width, depth) of the PBR illustrated in Fig. 1 are 25 cm X 15 cm X 7 mm. The PBRs are
illuminated from behind by a LED panel. The animated version of each snapshot is available online as a supplemental
material. The stirring ﬂow is generated by controlled injection of gas bubbles through oriﬁces machined within the
bottom plate of the container at equidistant locations. Due to their large buoyancy, the evenly injected gas bubbles
raise and create local mixing which allows an optimal exposure of the micro-algae to the illuminated regions of the

4

Images of gas bubbles raising within a ﬂat panel PBR ﬁlled with a suspension of Chlorella microalaga at two diﬀerent concentrations:
Figure 1:
(a) Cx ≈ 0.5g/l (b) Cx ≈ 5g/l. The closed curve in panel (b) highlights a dead ﬂow zone. The animated versions of the pictures are available online
as a supplemental material.

PBR located in the proximity of the optically transparent walls. In the case of the dilute suspension (Cx ≈ 0.5g/l), the
gas bubbles raise at locations which are more or less evenly distributed along the horizontal direction although their
trajectories are not perfectly linear but show some oscillatory (swirling) behaviour (see the supplemental material).
A fundamentally diﬀerent motion of the gas bubbles is observed in the case of the concentrated solution (Cx ≈
5g/l) in the form of a dead ﬂow zone located around the central part of the PBR. As the gas bubbles are uniformly
injected through the bottom plate of the PBR through equidistant oriﬁces, the sole interpretation of this observation is
that the rheological behaviour of the suspension is spatially non uniform (along the horizontal direction) and strongly
non Newtonian (with a larger apparent viscosity) around the central part of the PBR. This very simple experimental
observation performed in conditions which are relevant to the intensiﬁed PBR technology indicates that in a range of
large micro-algae concentrations (which is the range of practical interest) both the rheology and the hydrodynamics
signiﬁcantly depart from the Newtonian behaviour.

To our best knowledge, there exist only few previous studies of the rheological properties of suspensions of
Chlorella micro-alga. The rheological study by Wu and his coworker indicates that as the volume fraction is increased
the rheological behaviour of suspensions of Chlorella pyrenoidosa micro-alga changes from Newtonian like to non-
Newtonian, [18]. A more recent study of the rheological behaviour of suspensions of Chlorella Vulgaris with volume
fractions spanning a wide range was reported in Ref. [19].

In the context of the intensiﬁed PBR’s, however, the relevance of rheometric ﬂows is somewhat hard to deﬁne.
The present study concerns with a systematic characterisation of ﬂows of suspensions of Chlorella Vulgaris in a
plane micro-channel. As the actual tendency is to decrease the characteristic size of intensiﬁed PBR’s down to a
millimetre scale, we believe that a microscopic ﬂow investigation would bring valuable insights that could contribute
to an optimised designed of the PBR’s. The central aim of this study is to provide a systematic description of the
microscopic ﬂow behaviour in a wide range of cell volume fractions and correlate the results with the rheological
properties of the suspensions. The paper is organised as follows.

The experimental setup, the experimental methods and the preparation of the micro-algae suspensions are detailed
in Sec. 2. The experimental results are presented in Sec. 3. A brief reminder of the rheological properties of Chlorella
suspensions at various volume fractions is presented in Sec. 3.1. A systematic description of the microscopic ﬂows is

5

(a) Schematic representation of the experimental setup: M - micro channel, I - micro-channel inlet, O - micro-channel outlet, MO -
Figure 2:
microscope objective, EP - eye piece, EC - epiﬂuorescent cube, L - light emitting diode (LED) panel, LD - light diﬀuser, CCD - digital camera,
PC - personal computer (b) Schematic representation of the controlled pressure ramp. t0 is the characteristic forcing time (the averaging time per
pressure value, see the explanation in the text) and N is the total number of steps of the ramp.

presented in Sec. 3.2. The paper closes with a brief discussion of the main ﬁndings and their possible impact on the
design of hydrodynamic optimisation of the intensiﬁed PBR’s, Sec. 4.

2. Experimental setup and methods

2.1. Microscopic ﬂow control and investigation

The experimental setup is schematically illustrated in Fig. 2(a). Our experiments have been conducted in a
borosilicate glass made micro-channel (from Micronit, Holland) with a rectangular cross section. The width of the
micro channel is W = 150 µm its depth is H = 50 µm and its length is L = 4 cm. The corresponding hydraulic
diameter is Dh = 2WH(W + H)−1 = 75 µm. Based on the hydraulic diameter one can estimate the Reynolds number
as Re = ρUDh/η where U denotes the velocity scale and η the viscosity scale. All the experiments discussed herein
have been conducted at very low Reynolds numbers, Re < 2.2 · 10−2. The suspensions feeding the micro-channel and
collected at the outlet were held in plastic containers rigidly mounted on vertical rails. Each experimental campaign
lasted less than 30 min so no signiﬁcant evaporation took place at the level of the free surface within the inlet ﬂuid
container.

The microscopic ﬂows were driven at a constant pressure drop ∆p controlled by controlling the elevation diﬀerence
between the inlet and outlet ﬂuid containers. To mimic the rheological procedure employed during our previous study
reported in Ref.
[19], we have performed controlled pressure drop linear ramps as represented schematically in
Fig. 2(b). To modify the pressure drop, the elevation diﬀerence was modiﬁed by gently adding precise volumes of
suspension to either the inlet or the outlet ﬂuid container. Corresponding to each step of the ramp, the pressure drop
has been kept constant for a ﬁnite time interval t0. After reaching a maximum value the pressure drop is gradually
decreased through the same intermediate steps. This allows one to probe the hydrodynamic reversibility of the ﬂow
and detect the possible emergence of hysteresis eﬀect related to the competition between structuring and de-structuring
of the micro-algal suspension. By choosing t0 = 6 s for all the experiments reported herein, we have deliberately
placed ourselves in an unsteady ﬂow condition. The reason behind this choice may be easily understood bearing in
mind that the actual ﬂows within the intensiﬁed PBR’s are genuinely unsteady in the sense that the hydrodynamic
stresses are locally exerted onto the volume elements of the suspension during times shorter than the characteristic
times needed to reach a steady state deformation.

The micro channel is mounted on an up-right microscope (Zeiss Axioscope A1) as schematically illustrated in Fig.
2(a). The microscope is equipped with a 20X magniﬁcation objective (Zeiss EC Plan Neoﬂuar) and a depth of ﬁeld of
5.8 µm.

6

Two distinct illumination schemes have been employed through our micro-ﬂuidic experiments. To visualise the
spatial distribution and the possible aggregation of individual Chlorella cells during ﬂow, a traditional bright ﬁeld
illumination has been used. For a quantitative investigation of velocity ﬁelds, the micro ﬂows have been illuminated
in an epiﬂuorescent mode. The excitation light is emitted by a LED panel L through a light diﬀuser, Fig. 2(a). The
ﬂuorescent emission is directed via an epiﬂuorescent cube to a digital CCD camera (Chameleon from Point Grey).
The ﬂows were seeded with a minute amount (≈ 100ppm) of ﬂuorescent microspheres (Fluoresbrite multiﬂuorescent
from Polisciences) 0.9 µm in diameter. A signiﬁcant diﬃculty in imaging concentrated suspensions of micro-algae is
related to the light absorption. The attenuation of a monochromatic light beam traversing the suspension along the
z direction follows I(z) = I0exp(−z/za). The characteristic attenuation length za depends on both the wave length of
the incoming light λ and the biomass concentration Cx, za = (EaCx)−1 where Ea is the mass absorption coeﬃcient
which, for the Chlorella micro-alga and λ ≈ 488nm is Ea ≈ 300 m2 kg−1. For the largest biomass concentration we
have used, Cx = 143.7g/l, one can estimate xa ≈ 23µm which roughly corresponds to half of the distance between the
bottom and the top of the micro-channel indicating that ﬂow visualisation is possible over the entire range of biomass
concentrations explored. The main tool we have used to quantitatively describe the ﬂow ﬁelds was the Digital Particle
Image Velocimetry (DPIV) implemented in the house under Matlab R(cid:13), [20, 21]. For this purpose, a sequence of ﬂow
images has been acquired at half distance between the bottom and the top plate z ≈ H/2 and a frequency of 30
frames per second (fps) during the hydrostatic pressure ramp illustrated in Fig. 2(b). Corresponding to low values
of the driving pressure, several ﬂow images have been skipped in order to increase the inter-frame and maintain the
average displacement of the tracer particles in the optimal range of 5 to 15 pixels, [21, 20]. Together with this, the size
of the smallest interrogation window has been adapted to the mean ﬂow velocity corresponding to each step of the
pressure ramp. The spatial resolution of the measured ﬂow ﬁelds (as deﬁned by the size of the smallest interrogation
window and the interrogation window overlap) varied (depending on the signal to noise of the DPIV correlation)
between 3.75µm and 7.5µm. The overall instrumental accuracy of our DPIV measurements (assessed via the standard
deviation of the temporal ﬂuctuations of the velocity) was about 4% of the mean ﬂow speed in the bulk of the ﬂow
and about 6% near the boundary. Exceptionally, the accuracy was lower when very dilute micro-algae solutions were
used at the largest driving pressure drops but it never exceeded 10% of the mean ﬂow speed. This limitation of our
measurements is solely related to the modest image acquisition speed. The ﬂow ﬁelds have been averaged during the
entire duration of each step of the controlled pressure ramp schematically illustrated in Fig. 2(b). This procedure
equally allows one to estimate the level of ﬂuctuations of the ﬂow ﬁelds by calculating the corresponding root mean
square deviation (rms).

2.2. Preparation of the Chlorella micro-algae suspensions

We present below the main steps followed for the preparation of the micro-algae suspensions used through this
study. For a more detailed description of the protocol the reader is referred to Ref. [22]. Chlorella micro-algae were
grown in a bubble column PBR. The volume of the PBR was 0.12 m3 its diameter of 0.40 m and the speciﬁc illuminated
area was 3.5 m2/m3). The micro-algae cultures were illuminated with an incident photon ﬂux density (PFD) of roughly
150 µmolehνm2 s−1 (white light). The culture medium was composed of (in g/l) NH4Cl, 1.45, MgS O4.7H2O, 0.28,
CaCl2.2H2O, 0.05, KH2PO4, 0.61, NaHCO3, 1.68 and 0, 5ml l−1 of Hutner solution (trace elements, see Ref. [23]
for a complete description). Once collected, the micro-algal suspensions were artiﬁcially concentrated by means of
centrifugation at 5000 g during 15 minutes. The dry biomass concentration Cx of the concentrate was then measured.
Filters (glass micro-ﬁber ﬁlters, GF/F Whatman) with 0.22 micrometer pore size were dried during 24 hours in a
100oC oven. They were then weighted and used to ﬁlter a known volume of algal suspension. The ﬁlters were ﬁnally
placed for 24 hours in a 100oC oven and re-weighted. This duration was suﬃcient to obtain a complete drying. The
weight diﬀerence was ﬁnally used to calculate the dry biomass concentration of the concentrate. A range of samples
of known concentration (here expressed in volume fraction, Φv) was then prepared by diluting the concentrated wet
suspension with the supernatant previously removed. The volume fraction (Φv) was calculated from the dry weight
concentration according to the equations below:

Cx
ρWwD
ρW = xW ρ0 + (1 − xW) ρD

Φv =

7

(1)

(2)

Solution Cx(g/l)
1
2
3

4.54
29.74
143.7

x

Crms
0.17
1.15
4.68

(g/l) Φv Φrms

v

0.02 0.0005
0.12 0.004
0.57 0.017

Behaviour
(N)
(ST)
(YS)

Table 1: Details of the Chlorella suspensions used in the experiments. The superscripts ”rms” stand for the root mean square deviation. The letters
in the last column refer to the rheological behaviour of the suspension (see text for description): (N) - Newtonian, (ST) - shear thinning and (YS) -
yield stress.

Here ρW and ρD stand for the density of the wet and dry biomass, respectively and ρ0 is density of the water and
wD = (1−xW )ρD
stands for the mass content in dry solid in the micro-algae and xW is the water content in wet micro-
algae. The water mass content xw and density of dry biomass ρD necessary for the calculation were measured 0.82
and 1400 kgm−3, respectively.

ρW

The relevant parameters of the suspensions used in this study are given in Table 1.
Note the largest volume fraction we have investigated is relatively close to the maximum packing fraction corre-

sponding to a maximally random jammed state, Φv = 0.637 (Cx = 159.25 g/l).

2.3. Rheological characterisation of the suspensions

The rheological behaviour of the micro-algae solutions has been investigated using a Haake Mars III rotational
rheometer (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Germany). The rheometer is equipped with a nano-torque module which allows
accurate measurements of dilute samples in a range of low applied stresses. The measurements have been performed
with a cone-plate geometry (60 mm radius and 2 deg truncation angle). Prior to each test, the samples have been
carefully loaded paying attention to the reproducibility of the shape of the free meniscus in subsequent experiments.
To prevent the evaporation of the sample during long tests, the ﬂuid meniscus has been covered by a protective
thin ﬁlm of silicone oil. Additionally, the entire geometry has been enclosed in a bell-shaped chamber made of a
thermally insulating material (teﬂon). All the rheological tests have been performed at room temperature, T = 20oC.
The Reynolds number was of order of unity (or smaller) during each of the rheological tests reported in the paper so
inertial eﬀects were absent. The rheological behaviour of the micro-algae suspensions has been assessed by controlled
stress ﬂow ramps. To probe the reversibility of the deformation states, both increasing and decreasing stress ramps
have been performed. Corresponding to each value of the applied stress, the rheological response of the suspension
has been averaged during a ﬁnite time interval t0 = 5 s.

3. Results

3.1. Rheological properties of Chlorella suspensions at various volume fractions

Prior to describing the microscopic ﬂows of Chlorella suspensions with various volume fractions Φv and for vari-
ous driving pressure drops ∆p we recall below several important rheological properties of the Chlorella suspensions.
For a more comprehensive and systematic discussion, the reader is referred to our recent rheological investigation,
[19].

The dependence of the apparent shear viscosity η on the applied stress τ measured for three distinct volume
fractions Φv (see Table 1 for details) is presented in Fig. 3(a). The full/empty symbols refer to the data acquired on the
increasing/decreasing branch of the controlled stress ramp respectively. For the lowest volume fraction investigated,
Φv = 0.08, the viscosity is independent on the applied stress and a Newtonian behaviour is observed (the squares in
Fig. 3(a)). As the data acquired for increasing/decreasing stresses overlap nearly perfectly, one can conclude that no
thixotropic eﬀects are present.

A fundamentally diﬀerent rheological behaviour is observed at larger volume fractions, Φv = 0.12. Corresponding
to the increasing branch of the stress ramp (the full triangles in Fig. 3(a)) we observe a shear thinning rheological
behaviour that can be well described by the Cross model. Based on in-situ observation of individual Chlorella cells
during the rheological tests, we have shown in Ref. [19] that this behaviour is related to the presence of ﬂocs of
cells. As the applied stresses are increased, these ﬂocs are gradually destroyed which translates into a decrease of

8

(a)

(b)

Figure 3: (a) Measurements of the apparent viscosity during an increasing/decreasing controlled stress ramp performed with suspensions at several
volume fractions: ((cid:4), (cid:3)) - Φv = 0.08, ((cid:78),(cid:52)) - Φv = 0.12, (•,◦) - Φv = 0.57. The full/empty symbols refer to the increasing/decreasing branches of
the stress ramp, respectively. The full lines are nonlinear ﬁtting functions (see the text for the explanation). The labels indicate the experimentally
observed rheological regimes: N - Newtonian, ST - shear thinning, YS - yield stress. (b) Dependence of the relative viscosity of the micro-algae
suspension ηr on the volume fraction of the microalgue ΦV. The dashed line is a ﬁt according to the Quemada model [24] and the full line is a ﬁt
according to the Simha model, [25]. The labels indicate the experimentally observed rheological regimes: N - Newtonian, ST - shear thinning, YS
- yield stress. Within the ST and YS regimes, the relative viscosity has been measured at a ﬁxed stress, τ = 1Pa.

the apparent viscosity from a ﬁrst plateau visible at low applied stresses down to a (second) plateau at high applied
stresses. Unlike for the Newtonian regime observed at low volume fractions, the intermediate deformation states are
no longer recovered upon increasing/decreasing the applied stresses and a rheological hysteresis is observed. As the
applied stresses are decreased, the individual cells re-aggregate at a faster rate than the initial cell ﬂocs were destroyed
along the increasing branch of the stress ramp which ultimately translates into an apparent viscosity divergence at
low applied stresses. Corresponding to the largest volume fraction investigated through our microﬂuidic experiments
Φv = 0.57, a divergence of the apparent viscosity in a range of low applied stresses is observed on the increasing
branch of the controlled stress ramp (the full circles in Fig. 3(a)). This is consistent with a yield stress behaviour.
By direct visualisation of individual Chlorella cells within the gap of the cone and plate geometry, we have shown in
Ref. [19] that the yield stress behaviour is related to the presence of large scale aggregates of cells (reaching 100µm
in size), see Fig. 7 in Ref. [19]. At large applied stresses the apparent viscosity measurements may by formally ﬁtted
by the Herschel - Bulkley model, [26], which gives an estimate for the yield stress τy = 0.47 ± 0.1. In a range of low
applied stresses (around the yield point), however, the rheological behaviour signiﬁcantly departs from the Herschel
- Bulkley model. We note that the deformation states are reversible only after the suspension is fully yielded, i.e. at
large applied stresses.

The various rheological regimes observed when the volume fraction Φv is increased brieﬂy described above may be
summarised by plotting the dependence of the relative eﬀective viscosity ηr = η
of Chlorella micro-algae suspensions
measured at a constant applied stress τ = 1 Pa on the volume fraction Φv, Fig. 3(b). Here η0 ≈ 2 mPas stands for
η0
the viscosity of the culture medium. The value of the applied stress is chosen such as the rheological measurements
are reversible upon increasing/decreasing stresses. We have veriﬁed that choosing any stress value within this range
would lead to the same qualitative behaviour.

Within the Newtonian volume fraction regime observed for dilute Chlorella suspensions (N) the volume fraction

dependence of the relative viscosity ηr is often modelled by the Quemada model, [24]:

The equation above with Φm

(3)
v = 0.637 can reliably describe the viscosity measurements in the range Φv ≤ 0.115
Within the concentrated and the highly concentrated regimes (ST, YS) the volume fraction dependence of the
relative viscosity is no longer accurately predicted by the Quemada model. According to the Simha’s cellular model

(the dotted line in Fig. 3(b)).

ηr =

(cid:33)−2

(cid:32)
1 − Φv
Φm
v

9

Figure 4: Time averaged velocity proﬁles measured with a Φv = 0.02 suspension at various pressure drops: ∆p = 8.3Pa ((cid:78),(cid:52)), ∆p = 25Pa (•,◦),
∆p = 50Pa ((cid:4), (cid:3)). The full/empty symbols refer to the increasing/decreasing branch of the pressure ramp, respectively.

[25] which has proven its ability to describe the rheological behaviour of the highly concentrated suspensions, the
relative viscosity of the suspension should satisfy:

lim
Φv→Φm

v

ηr = 1 +

54
5

f 3

(cid:17)3

(cid:16)

Φ2
v
1 − Φv

Φm
v

(4)

(5)

where f is a semi-empirical parameter of order of unity.

The dependence of the relative viscosity measured at a constant applied stress τ = 1Pa within the ST and YS
v = 0.637 (the full line in Fig. 3(b)). This value of the maximum

regimes can be ﬁtted by Eq. 4 with f = 1.2 and Φm
packing fraction Φm

v matches closely the theoretical prediction for a maximally random jammed state.

3.2. Microscopic ﬂow behaviour of Chlorella suspensions at various volume fractions

We focus in the following on the experimental characterisation of the microscopic ﬂow proﬁles of Chlorella
suspensions with various concentrations driven at several pressure drops. The measurements have been performed at
a position located roughly 2 cm downstream. As the Reynolds numbers are very small (see the discussion presented
in Sec. 2.1), the laminar ﬂow is fully developed at this position.
Measurements of the time averaged (over t0 = 6 s) transversal proﬁles of the axial velocity U = (cid:104)u(y, t)(cid:105)t performed
with a very dilute Chlorella suspension (Φv = 0.02) for several values of the driving pressure drop ∆p on both the
increasing and the decreasing branch of the pressure ramp are presented in Fig. 4.

The analytical solution of a low Reynolds number laminar ﬂow of a Newtonian ﬂuid in a rectangular channel is:

U(y, z = H/2) = −4H2∆p
π3ηL

∞(cid:88)

n,odd

1
n3

1 − cosh

cosh

(cid:16) nπy
(cid:16) nπW

H

(cid:17)
(cid:17)

H

Within this dilute regime and regardless the value of the driving pressure drop ∆p the velocity proﬁles are con-
sistent with a Poiseuille ﬂow and may be ﬁtted by Eq. 5, the full lines in Fig. 4. As the series involved in the right
hand side of Eq. 5 converges rather fast, retaining only three terms was suﬃcient to obtain a reliable ﬁt. The velocity
proﬁles measured on the increasing/decreasing branches of the controlled pressure ramp coincide indicating that the
ﬂow states are fully reversible. This ﬁnding is consistent with the reversibility of the rheological ﬂow curves upon
increasing/decreasing stresses, the squares in Fig. 3(a).

We note that the apparent velocity slip at the wall is negligible and solely related to the instrumental error of the
micro-PIV measurements (the full lines in Fig. 4). This observation is consistent with the visual assessment of the
wall slip performed in a rheometric ﬂow for low values of the cell volume fraction within the Newtonian regime N,
[19].

10

-1.0-0.50.00.51.00100200300400500600700800U(m/s)2y/WFigure 5: Time averaged velocity proﬁles measured with a Φv = 0.12 suspension at various pressure drops: ∆p = 10Pa ((cid:78),(cid:52)), ∆p = 16.7Pa
(•,◦), ∆p = 46.7Pa ((cid:4), (cid:3) ). The full/empty symbols refer to the increasing/decreasing branch of the pressure ramp, respectively.

Figure 6: Time averaged velocity proﬁles measured with a Φv = 0.57 suspension at various pressure drops: ∆p = 25Pa ((cid:78),(cid:52)), ∆p = 41.7Pa
(•,◦), ∆p = 116.8Pa ((cid:4), (cid:3)). The full/empty symbols refer to the increasing/decreasing branch of the pressure ramp, respectively.

Similar measurements of the time averaged transversal proﬁles of the axial velcity performed for several driving
pressures with mildly concentrated suspension (Φv = 0.12) corresponding to the shear thinning rheological regime
(see the triangles in Fig. 3(a)) are presented in Fig. 5.

Corresponding to the largest values of the driving pressure, ∆p = 46.7 Pa (the squares in Fig. 5) the velocity
proﬁles are no longer accurately described by a classical Poiseuille correlation as given by Eq. 5 but by an Ostwald
de Waele type equation with slip, [27]:

(cid:34)

1 −

U = Us + U0

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)2y

W

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:35) n+1

n

(6)

Here Us stands for the slip velocity which, unlike in the Newtonian case, is positive and signiﬁcantly larger than
the magnitude of the error bars. At this driving pressure the ﬂow proﬁles are reversible upon increasing/decreasing
pressure drops, see the full/empty squares in Fig. 5. This corresponds to the reversible rheological regime visible in
Fig. 3(a) (the triangles) in the range τ ≥ 3 Pa.

Corresponding to lower values of the driving pressure (the circles and the triangles in Fig. 5) the hydrodynamic
reversibility is broken: the proﬁles measured on the increasing/decreasing branches of the pressure ramp no longer
coincide, particularly in the vicinity of the channel boundaries. This corroborates with the observation of a rheological
hysteresis during the controlled stress ramp in the range τ < 3 Pa. We also note that the velocity proﬁles acquired on
the increasing branch of the controlled pressure ramps (the full circles and triangles in Fig. 5)) may be still ﬁtted by
Eq. 6.

11

-1.0-0.50.00.51.0050100150200U (m/s)2y/W-1.0-0.50.00.51.0110U(m/s)2y/W(a) Bright ﬁeld micrograph of a concentrated Chlorella suspension with Φv = 0.57 ﬂowing in a microchannel. The driving presssure
Figure 7:
was ∆p = 41.7Pa. The closed curve highlights a large agglomerate of micro-algae. (b) Flow ﬁeld averaged during t0 = 6 s. The right edge of the
ﬁeld of view corresponds to a channel boundary and the left one to the centreline of the channel. The colormap relates to the magnitude of the ﬂow
velocity. For clarity of the presentation, the vector ﬁeld has been down-sampled by a factor of 2 along each axis.

Measurements of the time averaged transversal proﬁles of the axial velocity performed with the highly concen-
trated suspension with Φv = 0.57 at three values of the driving pressure drop are presented in Fig. 6. Regardless the
value of the pressure drop, the velocity proﬁles exhibit a central plug region typically observed during viscoplastic
ﬂows and wall slip. As in the shear thinning case, the ﬂow states are reversible only for the largest driving pres-
sure drop, the squares in Fig. 6. The ﬂow proﬁles acquired at lower driving pressures are, as in the shear thinning
case, irreversible upon increasing/decreasing pressures, (the circles and the triangles in Fig. 6). This hydrodynamic
irreversibility is equally related to the rheological hysteresis observed in Fig. 3(a) (the circles) in the range τ ≥ 1Pa.
To gain further insights into the physical origins of the yield stress behaviour observed through the experiments
performed with the concentrated suspensions, we present in Fig. 7(a) a bright ﬁeld micrograph acquired during the
ﬂow of a Φv = 0.57 suspension at a driving pressure ∆p = 41.7 Pa. The micrograph was acquired at a downstream
position that was several mm closer to the inlet than the position where the velocity proﬁles presented in Figs. 4, 5,
6 were measured. One can observe a static large aggregate (nearly 60 µm in size) of Chlorella cells formed in the
vicinity of the ﬂow channels’s wall (the highlighted region in Fig. 7(a)). Whereas around this large aggregate one
can still clearly distinguish individual Chlorella cells, much fewer details can be distinguished within the aggregate.
This indicates that the cells forming the aggregate are the smallest ones which, at this volume fraction and optical
magniﬁcation, makes them indistinguishable.

The corresponding velocity ﬁeld averaged during t0 = 6 s conﬁrms the presence of the solid plug in the ﬂow, Fig.
7(b)). One can conclude at this point that, as in the case of the rheometric ﬂow (see Fig. 7 in Ref. [19]), the yield
stress behaviour originates from the aggregation of individual cells in solid structures with sizes comparable to the
size of the ﬂow channel.

A ﬁrst insight into the physics behind the formation of such large scale aggregates of small Chlorella cells was
given in Ref. [19] in terms of the superﬁcial electrical charge of the individual cells which has been observed experi-
mentally, [28]. By identifying the centroids and contours of each individual cells and subsequent Voronoi triangulation
analysis which allowed one to correlate the spatial distribution of cells with their sizes we have concluded that the
largest cells (carrying the largest superﬁcial charge) repel the smaller ones forcing them to organise themselves in
large scale aggregates, see Fig. 5 in Ref. [19]. Another factor that may promote the aggregation of individual cells
may be related to the secretion of polysacharides [29].

The evolution of the size of the rigid plug Wp deﬁned by the extent of the ﬂat central region of the time averaged
velocity proﬁles (see Fig. 6) on the driving pressure droop is illustrated in Fig. 8. Whereas at low driving pressures

12

Figure 8: Dependence of the normalised size of the plug Wp/W on the driving pressure drop measured for a suspension with Φv = 0.57. The
full/empty symbols distinguish between the data acquired on the increasing/decreasing branch of the stepped pressure ramp, respectively. The full
line is a guide for the eye, Wp/W ∝ ∆p−0.1.

the plug size decreases gradually with increasing pressures as one would expect for a gradual yielding process, a
plateau is observed in the range ∆p ≥ 70 Pa. By analysis of individual ﬂow images similar to that illustrated in Fig.
7(a) we could conﬁrm that an aggregate of cells with an average size accounting for roughly 46% of the width of
the channel ”survives” even at highest value of the pressure drop we have explored. It is also interesting to note that
before reaching the plateau the normalised width of the plug scales as Wp/W ∝ ∆p−0.1. This scaling is roughly an
order of magnitude slower than that observed for a Carbopol gel, [30, 31, 32], Wp/W ∝ ∆p−1.

The dependencies of the ﬂow velocity averaged in both time and along the x direction Uav = (cid:10)u((cid:126)r, t)(cid:11)

(cid:126)r,t on the
driving pressure drop ∆p are presented in Fig. 9(a). For the lowest volume fraction corresponding to the Newtonian
rheological regime (the full/empty squares) the dependence is linear which is consistent with the Poieseuille type ﬂow
proﬁles illustrated in Fig. 4. The slope of the linear dependence is consistent with the Newtonian viscosity of the
suspension. The measurements performed on the increasing/decreasing branches of the controlled pressure ramp (the
full/empty symbols) overlap which demonstrates the hydrodynamic reversibility of the ﬂow. This is consistent with
the lack of a rheological hysteresis illustrated in Fig. 3(a) (the squares) within this volume fraction regime.

For the intermediate value of the volume fraction Φv = 0.12 corresponding to the shear thinning rheological
regime the dependence of the mean ﬂow speed on the driving pressure is no longer linear (the triangles in Fig. 9(a)).
Upon increasing/decreasing driving pressures the hydrodynamic reversibility is preserved only at large pressure drops,
∆p ≥ 30 Pa. The irreversible ﬂow behaviour observed for low values of the driving pressure is also fully consistent
with the rheological hysteresis illustrated in Fig. 3(a).

As the volume fraction is increased even further within the yield stress regime Φv = 0.57 a similar hydrodynamic
irreversibility is observed in a range of small driving pressures. Like in the shear thinning case, the hydrodynamic
reversibility is restored only at larger driving pressures, ∆p > 30 Pa.

The emergence of the hysteresis of the ﬂow states observed within the shear thinning and the yield stress regimes is
typically associated to a thixotropic bulk rheological behaviour and observed in various other complex ﬂuids (micellar
solutions, physical and colloidal gels) subjected to an external forcing. Thus, these experimental observations are of
a broader fundamental interest and deserve a separate discussion. As already discussed above, the Chlorella cells are
superﬁcially charged which leads to formation of aggregates via electrostatic repulsions. In the presence of a time
varying external forcing such as the hydrostatic pressure employed in our experiments (Fig. 2(b)), the dynamics of the
system is governed by a competition between structuring of the microscopic constituents and their break-up triggered
by the local shear. It has been recently shown that a plausible cause underlying the emergence irreversibility is related
to the presence of interactions among microscopic constituents, [33, 34]. Thus it is shown by both microscopic Gibbs
ﬁeld simulations in [33] and by a nonlinear dynamical system approach in [34] that in the presence of weak interactions
among the microscopic constituents (e.g. the case of a Carbopol gel, [35]) the deformation states are recoverable upon
increasing/decreasing forcing only in the asymptotic limit of a steady state forcing (the applied stress is maintained
constant for a period of time t0 signiﬁcantly longer than any characteristic time associated to the microstructure). On
the other hand, if the magnitude of the interactions exceeds a critical threshold, a hysteresis of the deformation states

13

101000.450.50.550.60.650.7Wp/Wp(Pa)  (a)

(b)

Figure 9: (a) The dependence of the average ﬂow speed Uav on the driving pressure drop ∆p measured for Chlorella suspensions at various volume
fractions: ((cid:4), (cid:3) ) - Φv = 0.02, ((cid:78),(cid:52)) - Φv = 0.12, (•,◦) - Φv = 0.57. The labels (N), (ST), (YS) stand for Newtonian, shear thinning and yield
stress, respectively. The full/empty symbols distinguish between the data acquired on the increasing/decreasing branch of the stepped pressure
ramp, respectively. The full line is a linear ﬁt. (b) Dependence of the ﬂow resistance R on the driving pressure drop ∆p. The symbols are the same
as in panel (a).

will always be observed (e. g. the case of laponite, bentonite, carbon black suspensions). In a qualitative agreement
with these theoretical predictions, in the case of Chlorella suspensions with concentrations within the range of the
shear thinning a yield stress regimes, due to the interactions among neighbouring cells, a rheological hysteresis is
observed in range of small applied stresses even during steady state ﬂow ramps.

From an energetic standpoint it is instructive to monitor the dependence of the ﬂow resistance deﬁned as R = ∆p
Uav
on the driving pressure drop, Fig. 9(b). An increase of the cell volume fraction from the Newtonian regime to the yield
stress regime is accompanied by a sharp increase of the ﬂow resistance which, at moderate driving pressure drops,
may reach a value 220 times larger than the Newtonian value. This indicates that eﬃcient stirring of concentrated
suspensions of micro-algae in intensiﬁed PBR’s comes at a non negligible energetic cost that should be accounted for
in the context of optimisation of the micro-algae production.

We present in the following a more in depth analysis of the wall slip behaviour observed within the shear thinning
and yield stress volume fraction regimes illustrated in Figs. 5, 6. The slip behaviour may be described by focusing on
the dependence of the slip velocity Us on the wall shear stress τw.

(a)

(b)

Figure 10: Dependence of the wall shear rate ˙γw on the driving pressure drop ∆p for two volume fractions of the suspension: (a) Φv = 0.12. (b)
Φv = 0.57. In both panels the full/empty symbols refer to the increasing/decreasing branch of the controlled pressure ramp. The deﬁnition of the
error bars is given in the text.

The slip velocity may be obtained by extrapolating the time averaged velocity proﬁles at the positions of the
channel’s walls, y = ±W/2. An estimate of the error may be obtained by extrapolating the root mean square deviation

14

101102100101102Uav(m/s)p(Pa)(N)(ST)(YS)101000.10.20.30.40.510203040(N)(ST)p (Pa)R(106 Pa s/m)(YS)  10110p (Pa)w (s-1)  101000.010.1p (Pa)w (s-1)  (rms) of the velocity measurements (see the error bars in Figs. 4, 5, 6) at the level of the channel’s walls as well.
The wall shear stress is often calculated using the pressure drop, the hydraulic diameter and the length of the channel
as τw = Dh∆p
In the presence of wall slip, however, this procedure may lead to an underestimation of the true
4L .
Indeed, corresponding to the largest pressure drop explored (∆p = 116.8 Pa) with the highly
stress at the wall.
concentrated solution with the volume fraction Φv = 0.57, this estimate would give τw = 0.071Pa which, according
to the rheological measurements presented in Fig. 3(a), is roughly an order of magnitude below the yield point. This
conclusion is at odds with the measurements of the time averaged proﬁle of the axial velocity presented in Fig. 6
(the squares), the direct visualisation of the ﬂow (data not shown here) and the measurements of the mean ﬂow speed
presented in Fig. 9(a) which indicate that, corresponding to this pressure drop, the suspension is partially yielded.

(a)

(b)

Figure 11: Dependence of the wall shear rate ˙γw on the driving pressure drop ∆p for two volume fractions of the suspension: (a) Φv = 0.12. (b)
Φv = 0.57. In both panels the full/empty symbols refer to the increasing/decreasing branch of the controlled pressure ramp. The deﬁnition of the
error bars is given in the text.

To avoid a systematic underestimation of the wall stress we calculate it using the time averaged velocity proﬁles
and the rheological measurements. The wall shear rate ˙γw is obtained by ﬁtting linearly the velocity proﬁles near the
wall, Fig. 10. As compared to the measurements performed with the shear thinning suspension illustrated in Fig.
10(a) which exhibit a clearly irreversible behaviour upon increasing/decreasing driving pressures, the measurements
performed with the yield stress suspension are, within the level of instrumental accuracy indicated by the error bars,
reversible Fig. 10(b). This is a ﬁrst indicator of diﬀerent wall slip mechanisms in the shear thinning and the yield
stress cases.
Using the rheological measurements presented in Fig. 3(a) the wall shear stress may be calculated as τw =
η (˙γw) · ˙γw. The error in the assessment of the wall shear stress may be calculated as δτw = ˙γw · δη + η · δ˙γw where δη
is the instrumental error of the viscosity measurement which never exceeded 0.5% of the measured value and δ˙γw is
the error of the calculation of the wall shear rate deﬁned by the error of the linear ﬁt of the velocity proﬁle near the
wall. The largest contribution to the error in the calculation of the wall stress comes from the error in the calculation
of the wall shear rate, particularly at low driving pressure drops.

The dependence of the calculated wall stress on the pressure drop is presented in Fig. 11. For the shear thinning
suspension (Fig. 11(a)) a clear hysteresis is observed upon increasing/decreasing pressure drops (the full/empty
symbols). Due to the rather large instrumental errors, this eﬀect is less obvious for the yield stress suspension (note
the overlap of the error bars associated to the full/empty symbols) illustrated in Fig. 11(b)). It is interesting to compare
the measurements of the wall stress performed with the shear thinning and the yield stress suspensions. For the shear
thinning case a monotonic increase of the wall stress with the pressure drop is observed up to ∆p ≈ 25 followed by a
plateau, Fig. 11(a). To understand the underlying physics behind the wall shear stress plateau, we ﬁrst note that slope
d∆p where ηw = η|˙γ=˙γw is
of the dependence τw = τw(∆p) on the pressure drop may be written as dτw
d∆p
the viscosity of the suspension in the vicinity of the wall which may be readily obtained from the bulk rheological
measurements presented in Fig. 3(a). In this range of wall shear stresses (τ ≈ 1.5 Pa), the viscosity exhibits a plateau
d∆p ≈ ηw
d ˙γw
(see the triangles in Fig. 3(a)), dηw
d∆p. The slope of the dependence of the wall shear
d∆p ≈ 1.61s−1Pa−1 and the corresponding viscosity is
rate on the driving pressure may be estimated from Fig. 10(a) as d ˙γw

d∆p ≈ 0 which leads to dτw

+ ˙γw

= ηw

d ˙γw
d∆p

dηw

15

100.511.52w(Pa)p (Pa)  10100123w(Pa)p (Pa)  d∆p ≈ 0.0161. Within the instrumental error of the measurements presented
ηw ≈ 10−2Pas. Finally, one can estimate dτw
in Fig. 11(a) (note the magnitude of the error bars) this slope is too small to be measured which ultimately explains
the observation of wall stress the plateau. Like for the wall shear rate data, a clear hysteresis of the wall shear stress is
observed upon increasing/decreasing pressure drops.
pressure drop ∆p0 ≈ 30 Pa.

In the yield stress case a monotonic increase of the wall stress is observed only beyond a critical value of the

(a)

(b)

Figure 12: Dependence of the slip velocity Us on the wall stress τw for two volume fractions of the suspension: (a) Φv = 0.12. (b) Φv = 0.57. The
full line is a power law ﬁt Us ∝ τα
w in panel (a) and a nonlinear ﬁt Us ∝ (τw − τ0)α in panel (b). In both panels the full/empty symbols refer to the
increasing/decreasing branch of the controlled pressure ramp. The deﬁnition of the error bars is given in the text.

The dependence of the slip velocity on the calculated wall shear stress is presented in Fig. 12. For the shear
thinning case illustrated in Fig. 12(a) a large hysteresis is observed in a range of wall stresses τw ≤ 1.5 Pa.
It
is interesting to note that beyond this value of stress the bulk rheological measurements presented in Fig. 3(a) are
reversible upon increasing/decreasing stresses (the full/empty triangles). This indicates that in the case of the shear
thinning suspension the irreversibility of the slip behaviour is related to the irreversibility of the bulk rheological
properties of the suspension. In the reversible range of stresses the slip velocity scales as Us ∝ τα
w with α = 8.5± 0.25.
This unexpectedly steep scaling may be explained by the observation of a plateau of the wall shear stress in this range
of driving pressures, the inset in Fig. 10(a).

A substantially diﬀerent slip behaviour is observed for the yield stress suspension, Fig. 12(b). First and unlike in
the shear thinning case, the wall slip data is practically reversible upon increasing/decreasing pressure drop over the
entire range of pressures. At a ﬁrst glance this observation seems to be at odds with the strong irreversibility of the
bulk rheological properties illustrated in Fig. 3(a) (the full/empty circles). In an attempt to understand this apparent
discrepancy we refer to the phenomenological picture of wall slip in concentrated suspensions which exhibit yield
stress proposed by Kalyon, [36]. According to Kalyon, in the case of a concentrated suspension of rigid particles,
the particles can not occupy eﬃciently the volume elements adjacent to the wall of the channel and thus a particle
free layer is formed near the wall. In the case of a concentrated Chlorella suspension this layer consists of the culture
medium which may be assumed Newtonian. The reversibility of the slip velocity upon increasing/decreasing the
wall stress indicates that in the case of a concentrated suspension the slip behaviour is controlled by the Newtonian
lubricating layer formed at the wall and not by the bulk dynamics. This conclusion seems to be consistent with
the invariance of the plug size Wp with the driving pressure drop observed in Fig. 8 in the range ∆p > 70 Pa. A
second interesting observation is that an increase of the slip velocity with the wall stress is observed only beyond
a critical value of the wall stress τ0
w = 0.56 ± 0.045 and α = 1.77 ± 0.3. The value of the critical stress τ0
τ0
w obtained from the nonlinear ﬁt practically
coincides with the yield stress of the suspension obtained via a ﬁt of the rheological measurements presented in Fig.
3(a) by the Herschel-Bulkley model, τy ≈ 0.47 Pa.

w. This prompts us to ﬁt the slip velocity data by Us ∝ (cid:16)

(cid:17)α which gives

τw − τ0

w

To sum up, based on the results presented in Figs. 10(b), 12(b) and the discussion above, the following phe-
nomenological picture for the ﬂow of the yield stress suspension may be suggested. Corresponding to low pressure

16

0.511.520.1110100Us(m/s)w(Pa)  1231Us(m/s)w(Pa)  drops at which the wall stress does not exceed the bulk yield stress the ﬂow consists of a fully unyielded plug that
”slides” on a thin lubricating layer formed by the culture medium along the channel walls. Within this regime, the
slip velocity is insensitive to an increase of the wall shear stress. Corresponding to pressure drops suﬃciently large
so the wall stress exceeds the bulk yield stress a partial yielding of the rigid plug is observed which translates into a
monotonic increase of the slip velocity with wall stress.

4. Conclusions

A systematic experimental investigation of the microscopic ﬂows of suspensions of Chlorella micro-alga is pre-
sented. Depending on the volume fraction of the suspension, three ﬂow regimes have been observed. Within a dilute
volume fraction regime (Φv < 0.12) a Newtonian ﬂow behaviour is observed. The transversal velocity proﬁles can
be accurately ﬁtted by the analytical solution of a Poiseuille ﬂow in a rectangular channel Fig. 4 and the ﬂow states
are reversible upon increasing/decreasing driving pressures, Figs. 9(a), 9(b) (the full/empty squares). Moreover, no
signiﬁcant slip was observed near the walls of the micro-channel. This ﬂow behaviour is fully consistent with the
rheological measurements we have recently reported in Ref. [19] within this range of volume fractions.

As the volume fraction is increased corresponding to the ST rheological regime, signiﬁcant changes are observed
in the ﬂow behaviour. For the largest driving pressures investigated the hydrodynamic reversibility observed in the
Newtonian regime is preserved and the transversal velocity proﬁles can be well described by the Ostwald de Waele
law, the full/empty squares in Fig. 5. In a range of low driving pressures, however, the hydrodynamic reversibility
is broken and the velocity proﬁles are no longer described by the Ostwald de Waele law, the full/empty triangles
and circles in Fig. 5.
In addition to these new ﬂow features, a clear slip is observed at the walls of the micro-
channel and its magnitude gradually increases with the driving pressures. For the highest volume fraction investigated
corresponding to the YS rheological regime a plug-like microscopic ﬂow consistent with a yield stress rheological
behaviour is observed, Fig. 6. As for the ST rheological regime, the ﬂow is reversible only for large values of the
driving pressures and wall slip is observed in the entire range of pressure drops. The plug ﬂow behaviour may be
explained by the formation of a large (comparable in size to the width of the channel) aggregate of small cells, Fig.
7. The size of the plug decreases with the pressure drop much slower than 1/∆p reaching a plateau corresponding to
∆p ≈ 70Pa, Fig. 8. Corresponding to the ST and YS rheological regimes, the microscopic ﬂows are characterised
by strongly nonlinear and irreversible ﬂow curves Fig. 9(a) and a large ﬂow resistance, Fig. 9(b). This microscopic
ﬂow behaviour corroborates well with the bulk rheological behaviour probed via increasing/decreasing controlled
stress ramps, Fig. 3(a). Measurements of the velocity gradients and stresses near the channel wall revealed a highly
nontrivial wall slip behaviour corresponding to the ST and YS rheological regimes. In the ST regime the irreversibility
of the ﬂow curves visible in Fig. 9(a) (the up/down triangles) is fully inherited by the walls slip dynamics, Figs. 10(a),
12(a). Bearing in mind that the hydrodynamic irreversibility in this case primarily originates from the irreversibility
of the bulk rheological properties upon increasing/decreasing forcing one can conclude at this point that the wall
slip dynamics is driven by the bulk ﬂow behaviour. Within the YS rheological regime the wall slip dynamics is
substantially diﬀerent, however. Whereas the bulk rheological properties and the ﬂow curves are irreversible upon
increasing/decreasing stresses, the wall slip dynamics is reversible, Fig. 10(b), 12(b). A possible explanation for this
rather unexpected result may be given in terms of the formation of a cell-free Newtonian ﬂuid layer near the channel
walls which controls the slip behaviour. In this case, the bulk of the microscopic ﬂow occupied by a large aggregate of
cells plays no signiﬁcant role in the wall slip dynamics. Another important result concerning the slip dynamics in the
YS regime is that the onset of the slip behaviour practically coincides with the apparent yield stress measured by bulk
rheometry, Fig. 12(b). This result indicates that the yielding transition is directly coupled to the wall slip behaviour.
In closing, our ﬁndings bring several interesting insights that might be worth being considered by future studies.
We have shown that, in spite of an apparently simple cellular structure (particularly the lack of ﬂagella and rigidity of
the cellular membrane), the addition of Chlorella micro-alga cells to a Newtonian ﬂuid may lead to a rather complex
microscopic ﬂow behaviour if the cell volume fraction is suﬃciently large, Φv > 0.1. We believe that, in the context
of the hydrodynamic optimisation of intensiﬁed PBR’s which is the crucial step for the eﬃcient biofuel production at
an industrial scale, this conclusion can not be ignored and there are few directions worth being pursued. First, a better
understanding of the coupling between macroscopic rheological properties of the suspensions and microscopic scale
interactions/organisations is needed. Second and based on this macroscopic rheological models able to describe the

17

thixotropic like behaviour observed at low applied stresses and/or the shear thinning and yield stress behaviour ob-
served at larger stresses need to be formulated in direct connection with the evolution of the microstructure. Realistic
numerical simulations of ﬂows in intensiﬁed PBR’s and their role in optimising the radiative properties for various
lightning conditions (which should ultimately result in maximising the production of biomass) should be implemented
rather than using the commercial CFD tools available on the market. At a more fundamental level, our systematic
experimental observations of hydrodynamic irreversibility upon increasing/decreasing external forcing bear a certain
degree of universality and might turn useful in understanding the behaviour of other complex ﬂuids subjected to a
varying external stress.

5. Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the PERLE 2 (Pˆole d’Excellance pour la Recherche Lig`erienne en ´Energie) program

generously funded by the Pays de la Loire district.

References

[1] R. Slade, A. Bauen, Micro-algae cultivation for biofuels: Cost, energy balance, environmental impacts and future prospects, Biomass and

Bioenergy 53 (2013) 29 – 38. 20th European Biomass Conference.

[2] C. Saﬁ, B. Zebib, O. Merah, P.-Y. Pontalier, C. Vaca-Garcia, Morphology, composition, production, processing and applications of chlorella

vulgaris: A review, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 35 (2014) 265 – 278.

[3] S. H. Al-lwayzy, T. Yusaf, R. A. Al-Juboori, Biofuels from the fresh water microalgae chlorella vulgaris (fwm-cv) for diesel engines, Energies

7 (2014) 1829.

[4] Y. Liang, N. Sarkany, Y. Cui, Biomass and lipid productivities of chlorella vulgaris under autotrophic, heterotrophic and mixotrophic growth

conditions, Biotechnology Letters 31 (2009) 1043–1049.

[5] A. Converti, A. A. Casazza, E. Y. Ortiz, P. Perego, M. D. Borghi, Eﬀect of temperature and nitrogen concentration on the growth and
lipid content of nannochloropsis oculata and chlorella vulgaris for biodiesel production, Chemical Engineering and Processing: Process
Intensiﬁcation 48 (2009) 1146 – 1151.

[6] E. Kapaun, W. Reisser, A chitin-like glycan in the cell wall of a chlorella sp. (chlorococcales, chlorophyceae), Planta 197 (1995) 577–582.
[7] M. Scarsella, G. Torzillo, A. Cicci, G. Belotti, P. D. Filippis, M. Bravi, Mechanical stress tolerance of two microalgae, Process Biochemistry

[8] Y. Chisti, Biodiesel from microalgae, Biotechnology Advances 25 (2007) 294 – 306.
[9] O. Pulz, Photobioreactors: production systems for phototrophic microorganisms, Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology 57 (2001)

47 (2012) 1603 – 1611.

287–293.

[10] P. Schenk, S. Thomas-Hall, E. Stephens, U. Marx, J. Mussgnug, C. Posten, O. Kruse, B. Hankamer, Second generation biofuels: High-

eﬃciency microalgae for biodiesel production, BioEnergy Research 1 (2008) 20–43.

[11] J.-F. Cornet, Calculation of optimal design and ideal productivities of volumetrically lightened photobioreactors using the constructal ap-

proach, Chemical Engineering Science 65 (2010) 985 – 998.

[12] A. Pandey, C. Larroche, S. C. Ricke, C. Dussap, Biofuels: Alternative Feedstocks and Conversion Processes, Academic Press.
[13] J. Doucha, F. Straka, K. Livansky, Utilization of ﬂue gas for cultivation of microalgae Chlorella sp.) in an outdoor open thin-layer photo-

bioreactor, Journal of Applied Phycology 17 (2005) 403–412.

[14] J. Bitog, I.-B. Lee, C.-G. Lee, K.-S. Kim, H.-S. Hwang, S.-W. Hong, I.-H. Seo, K.-S. Kwon, E. Mostafa, Application of computational ﬂuid
dynamics for modeling and designing photobioreactors for microalgae production: A review, Computers and Electronics in Agriculture 76
(2011) 131 – 147.

[15] J. Pruvost, L. Pottier, J. Legrand, Numerical investigation of hydrodynamic and mixing conditions in a torus photobioreactor, Chemical

Engineering Science 61 (2006) 4476 – 4489.

111–117.

[16] J. Doucha, K. Livansky, Outdoor open thin-layer microalgal photobioreactor: potential productivity, Journal of Applied Phycology 21 (2009)

[17] W. Xiong, X. Li, J. Xiang, Q. Wu, High-density fermentation of microalga chlorella protothecoides in bioreactor for microbio-diesel produc-

tion, Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology 78 (2008) 29–36.

[18] Z.-Y. Wu, X.-M. Shi, Rheological properties of Chlorella pyrenoidosa culture grown heterotrophically in a fermentor, Journal of Applied

[19] A. Souli`es, J. Legrand, J. Provost, C. Castelain, T. Burghelea, Rheological properties of suspensions of the green micro-alga chlorella vulgaris,

Phycology 20 (2008) 279–282.

Rheologica Acta (2013).

Springer; 2nd edition, September 2007.

University of Nantes, 2014.

- Applied Physics 1 (1997) 119–127.

[20] F. Scarano, M. L. Rhiethmuller, Advances in iterative multigrid piv image processing, Exp. Fluids 29 (2001).
[21] M. Raﬀel, C. E. Willert, S. T. Wereley, J. Kompenhans, Particle Image Velocimetry: A Practical Guide (Experimental Fluid Mechanics),

[22] A. Souli`es, Contribution l´etude hydrodynamique et `a la mod´elisation des photobior´eacteurs haute productivit´e volumique, Ph.D. thesis,

[23] E. Harris, The Chlamydomonas Sourcebook : a comprehensive guide to biology and laboratory use, Academic Press Inc. San Diego., 1989.
[24] D. Quemada, Rheological modelling of complex ﬂuids. i. the concept of eﬀective volume fraction revisited, The European Physical Journal

18

[25] R. Simha, A treatment of the viscosity of concentrated suspensions, Journal of Applied Physics 23 (1952) 1020 – 1024.
[26] W. H. Herschel, R. Bulkley, Konsistenzmessungen von gummi-benzollsungen, Kolloid Z. 39 (1926) 291–300.
[27] R. S. Schechter, On the steady ﬂow of a non-newtonian ﬂuid in cylinder ducts, AIChE Journal 7 (1961) 445–448.
[28] H. Kumar, P. Yadava, J. Gaur, Electrical ﬂocculation of the unicellular green alga chlorella vulgaris beijerinck, Aquatic Botany 11 (1981)

187 – 195.

[29] F. Hadj-Romdhane, X. Zheng, P. Jaouen, J. Pruvost, D. Grizeau, J. Crou, P. Bourseau, The culture of chlorella vulgaris in a recycled

supernatant: Eﬀects on biomass production and medium quality, Bioresource Technology 132 (2013) 285 – 292.

[30] P. Coussot, Rheometry of pastes, suspensions and granular materials, John Willey & Sons, 2005.
[31] J. Prez-Gonzlez, J. Lpez-Durn, B. Marn-Santibez, F. Rodrguez-Gonzlez, Rheo-piv of a yield-stress ﬂuid in a capillary with slip at the wall,

[32] A. Poumaere, M. Moyers-Gonzlez, C. Castelain, T. Burghelea, Unsteady laminar ﬂows of a carbopol gel in the presence of wall slip, Journal

Rheologica Acta 51 (2012) 937–946.

of Non-Newtonian Fluid Mechanics 205 (2014) 28 – 40.

ﬂuid, Soft Matter 11 (2015) 5531–5545.

http://arxiv.org/pdf/1603.04636 (2016).

[33] R. Sainudiin, M. Moyers-Gonzalez, T. Burghelea, A microscopic gibbs ﬁeld model for the macroscopic yielding behaviour of a viscoplastic

[34] R. Sainudiin, M. Moyers-Gonzalez, T. Burghelea, A nonlinear dynamical system approach for the yielding behaviour of a viscoplastic ﬂuid,

[35] A. M. V. Putz, T. I. Burghelea, The solid-ﬂuid transition in a yield stress shear thinning physical gel, Rheologica Acta 48 (2009) 673–689.
[36] M. Kalyon, Dilhan, Apparent slip and viscoplasticity of concentrated suspensions, Journal of Rheology 49 (2005) 621–640.

19

