6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
6
1

 
 
]

.

A
G
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
8
8
9
4
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Research in Astron. Astrophys. Vol.0 (200x) No.0, 000–000
http://www.raa-journal.org

http://www.iop.org/journals/raa

Researchin
Astronomyand
Astrophysics

Observational evidence for the evolution of nuclear metallicity and
star formation rate as the merger stage

Rui Guo1,2,3, Cai-Na Hao3, Xiao-Yang Xia3, Peng Wei2,4 and Xin Guo3

1 National Astronomical Observatories, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 20A Datun Road,

Chaoyang District, Beijing 100012, China

2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3 Tianjin Astrophysics Center, Tianjin Normal University, Tianjin 300387, China; E-mail:

cainahao@gmail.com

4 School of Astronomy and Space Science, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China

Abstract We investigate the evolution of nuclear gas-phase oxygen abundance
and star formation rate (SFR) of local far-infrared selected star-forming galaxies
along the merger sequence, as traced by their optical morphologies. The sample
was drawn from a cross-correlation analysis of the IRAS Point Source Catalog
Redshift Survey and 1 Jy ultraluminous infrared galaxies sample with the Sloan
Digital Sky Survey Data Release 7 database. The investigation is done by compar-
ing our sample to a control sample matched in the normalized redshift distribution
in two diagnostics, which are the nuclear gas-phase metallicity vs. stellar mass and
the nuclear SFR vs. stellar mass diagrams. Galaxies with different morphological
types show different mass-metallicity relations (MZR). Compared to the MZR
deﬁned by the control sample, isolated spirals have comparable metallicities with
the control sample at a given stellar mass. Spirals in pairs and interacting galaxies
with projected separations rp > 20 kpc show mild metallicity dilution of 0.02-0.03
dex. Interacting galaxies with rp < 20 kpc, pre-mergers and advanced mergers are
under-abundant by ∼ 0.06, ∼ 0.05 and ∼ 0.04 dex, respectively. This shows an
evolutionary trend that the metallicity is increasingly depressed as the merging
proceeds and it is diluted most dramatically when two galaxies are closely inter-
acting. Afterwards, the interstellar medium (ISM) is enriched when the galaxies
coalesce. This is the ﬁrst time that such ISM enrichment at the ﬁnal coalescence
stage is observed, which demonstrates the importance of supernova explosion in
affecting the nuclear metallicity. Meanwhile the central SFR enhancement relative

2

Guo et al.

to the control sample evolves simultaneously with the nuclear gas-phase oxygen
abundance. Our results support the predictions from numerical simulations.

Key words: galaxies: abundances — galaxies: evolution — galaxies: interactions
— galaxies: starburst — galaxies: star formation — infrared: galaxies

1 INTRODUCTION

Chemical abundance is a record of the history of galaxy formation. Stellar mass and chemical
abundance, two of the most fundamental properties of galaxies, were found to be correlated:
for star-forming galaxies, the correlation between stellar mass and nuclear gas-phase oxygen
abundance exists from z=0 up to z > 3, with more massive galaxies being more metal rich (e.g.,
Lequeux et al. 1979; Garnett & Shields 1987; Tremonti et al. 2004, T04 hereafter; Erb et al.
2006; Sanders et al. 2015; Maiolino et al. 2008; Mannucci et al. 2009). Galaxy interactions and
mergers, however, may not follow the trend because tidal interactions can change the chemical
properties of galaxies signiﬁcantly. In the past decade, several studies have found that the cen-
tral metallicities of local interacting and merging systems are under-abundant by ∼ 0.05 dex
on average or even up to 0.3-0.4 dex for merging systems with high star formation rates such as
1> 1012L⊙), compared
ultraluminous infrared galaxies (ULIRGs; with infrared luminosity LIR
to isolated galaxies with comparable stellar masses (e.g., Kewley et al. 2006, Michel-Dansac et
al. 2008; Rupke et al. 2008; Ellison et al. 2008; Peeples et al. 2009; Alonso et al. 2010). This
chemical dilution was interpreted as a result of gas inﬂows from the outer part of the galaxy
induced by galaxy interactions and mergers.

To understand the inﬂuence of galaxy interactions and mergers on the nuclear metallicity
in depth, numerical simulations were employed (Rupke et al. 2010; Montuori et al. 2010; Perez
et al. 2011; Torrey et al. 2012). These simulations demonstrated that inﬂows of gas triggered
by tidal interactions can dilute the central metallicity. But they also revealed that other physical
processes, such as chemical enrichment from star formation, outﬂows of gas triggered by stellar
and AGN feedback etc, take effect as well. Although different authors used different prescrip-
tions of star formation, metal enrichment, feedback, model galaxy set-up etc, a coherent picture
was obtained. When two gas-rich galaxies approach, tidal torques remove the angular momen-
tum of gas in the outer part of the galaxy and funnel it into the galaxy center. The inﬂows of
these metal-poor gas dilute the central metallicities, as well as enhance the central star forma-
tion activities. Afterwards, the following stellar winds and supernova explosion eject metals
into the interstellar medium (ISM) and make the ISM enriched. Meanwhile, stellar winds and
supernova explosion prevent gas cooling and blow away gas and metals, which depress star for-
mation activities and metal enrichment. These authors found that there are two dilution peaks,

1 LIR is the integrated infrared luminosity between 8-1000 µm.

Evolution of Nuclear Metallicity and SFR

3

one following the ﬁrst pericentric passage and the other preceding the ﬁnal coalescence. The
under-abundance of the dilution peaks is signiﬁcant, ∼ 0.2 − 0.4 dex. For evolutionary stages
in between, the metallicity depression is mild. The ISM enrichment is most pronounced at the
ﬁnal coalescence stage, within physical separations less than 4 kpc (Montuori et al. 2010). Star
formation rate (SFR) enhancement follows a similar variation pattern, and the SFR peaks are
almost synchronous with the dilution peaks, with a delay no more than 108 yr.

To ﬁnd observational evidences for the variations of metallicity and star formation rate as
the merger stages, Scudder et al. (2012) studied the metallicity dilution and star formation rate
enhancement as a function of the projected separations rp, based on a sample of 1899 galaxies
in pairs drawn from Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) Data Release 7 (DR7). By comparing to
the control sample matched in stellar mass, redshift and density for each galaxy in a pair, they
found that the gas-phase oxygen abundances of galaxies in pairs are depressed by 0.02 dex on
average within rp = 60 h−1
70 kpc and the amplitude of depression increases as rp decreases. The
SFRs are found to be enhanced out to rp = 80 h−1
70 kpc with a trend of increasing enhancement
at decreasing separations, by an amount of 0.21 dex within rp = 30 h−1
70 kpc and 0.11 dex
in the range of 30 − 80 h−1
70 kpc on average. Such trends are demonstrated to be qualitatively
consistent with the simulations except for the ISM enrichment after the ﬁnal coalescence stage
which was not covered in their study. Ellison et al. (2013) added post-mergers, which are galax-
ies at the ﬁnal coalescence stage, to the merger sequence. But they found that the metallicity in
post-mergers is even more depressed than that in the closest pairs. We note that the projected
separation was used as an indicator of the merger stages in Scudder et al. (2012) and Ellison et
al. (2013), whereas galaxies with the same projected separations may be experiencing different
merger stages (Montuori et al. 2010). As pointed out by Scudder et al. (2012), apart from the
projected separation, morphological disturbance of a galaxy can be used to trace the merger
phase as well. Despite its drawbacks as an observable indicator of merger states (Scudder et
al. 2012), the morphology can serve as a complement to the projected separation. Moreover,
Torrey et al. (2012) suggested that morphologically classiﬁed merger stages or IR luminos-
ity/SFR divided samples may be more suitable for such studies. Most recently, Kilerci Eser et
al. (2014) studied the metallicity and SFR distributions as a function of morphologically clas-
siﬁed evolutionary stages for a sample of ULIRGs but they did not ﬁnd signiﬁcant difference
in the distributions of both gas-phase oxygen abundances and SFRs for galaxies at different
merger stages. They ascribed this to the statistics that may smooth out the evolution of oxygen
abundances and SFRs of individual ULIRGs. We suspect that ULIRGs may not consist of the
whole merger sequence of galaxies since most galaxies involved in interactions or mergers are
not so luminous as ULIRGs in the IR. The incomplete merger sequence probed by ULIRGs
only may account for the ﬁndings that ULIRGs at different stages do not show considerable
differences in the distributions of oxygen abundances and SFRs. Therefore galaxy samples with

4

Guo et al.

a wider range of IR luminosities and morphological information may provide a better testbed
for such studies.

In this paper, we select a galaxy sample from a cross-correlation between the Infrared
Astronomical Satellite (IRAS) Point Source Catalog Redshift (PSCz) survey (Saunders et al.
2000) and 1 Jy ULIRGs sample (Kim & Sanders 1998) with SDSS DR7 (York et al. 2000;
Abazajian et al. 2009). Our galaxy sample covers a broad range of IR luminosity (1010 −
1012.5 L⊙) and is classiﬁed morphologically based on the optical images provided by SDSS
to trace the interaction stages. Using this sample, the variations of nuclear gas-phase oxygen
abundances and SFRs along the merger sequence are re-visited. The paper is organized as
follows. In Sections 2 and 3, we describe our sample selection and parameter estimations,
respectively. We present the results in Section 4. The ﬁndings are discussed in Section 5 and
summarized in Section 6. Throughout this paper, we adopt the Kroupa (2001) initial mass
function (IMF) and a cosmology with H0 = 70 km s−1Mpc−1, Ωm = 0.3 and ΩΛ = 0.7.

2 SAMPLE

2.1 Selection of the Working Sample

The aim of this paper is to investigate the possible evolution of the nuclear gas-phase oxygen
abundance and SFR as merger stages, based on a sample of galaxies with optical imaging and
spectroscopic data along with measurements of IR luminosities. In this subsection we describe
the selection procedure for our working sample.

To minimize the probability of mismatching, we used the IRAS PSCz catalog and 1 Jy
ULIRGs sample, both of which provide spectroscopic redshifts and optical positions, to cross-
correlate with the spectroscopic catalog of SDSS DR7 for the selection of our working sample.
The selection criteria are described below.

Firstly, we searched the spectroscopic catalog of SDSS DR7 for counterparts of objects
with optical positions in IRAS PSCz using a 5′′ matching radius and 0.001 redshift dif-
ferences. In consideration of reliable morphological classiﬁcation and sample completeness
(Fukugita et al. 2004, Kauffmann et al. 2003b), we constrained our sample galaxies to a r-band
Petrosian magnitude range of 14.5 to 15.9 mag after corrections for foreground Galactic ex-
tinction (Schlegel et al. 1998) following Wang et al. (2006). This yielded 644 galaxies2 with
LIR > 1010L⊙. We note that for a galaxy in a pair or interacting system, the observed IRAS far-
infrared (FIR) ﬂuxes are probably contributed by the whole system because of the large IRAS
beam size of ∼ 3′. However, companions with separations larger than 5′′ have been missed by
our 5′′ matching radius. To maximize our sample size, we searched for companions of these

2 The r-band image of Q08510+0055 has several columns of bad pixels across the galaxy, making it difﬁcult to
be morphologically classiﬁed. The [NII] and Hα ﬂux measurements of Q12116+5448 have some problems. So we
removed them from our sample.

Evolution of Nuclear Metallicity and SFR

5

644 galaxies from the spectroscopic Catalog of SDSS DR7 by requiring a projected separation
rp < 80 kpc and ∆v < 500 km s−1. Only the nearest companion was selected. This resulted
in 98 companions, out of which 30 companions have r-band Petrosian magnitudes within the
range of 14.5-15.9 mag. We added these 30 galaxies to our sample. In addition, we note that
only three ULIRGs are included in the r-band magnitude constrained sample. In order to in-
clude more ULIRGs in our sample, we performed a cross-correlation between the IRAS 1Jy
sample and the spectroscopic catalog of SDSS DR7. From this cross-identiﬁcation, we ob-
tained another 37 ULIRGs3 and added them to our sample. Since these ULIRGs are obvious
interacting or merging systems, we did not restrict their r-band magnitudes to the magnitude
range of 14.5-15.9 mag. In total we obtained 711 FIR-selected galaxies.

Secondly, we examined the location of SDSS ﬁbers on the optical images for our sample
galaxies. For 32 galaxies, the spectra were taken for the off-center regions of the galaxies.
To ensure the reliability of the central metallicity and SFR measurements, we excluded these
galaxies. This reduced our sample to 679 galaxies.

Finally, we separated star-forming galaxies from AGNs. To ensure a reliable spectral type
classiﬁcation, we removed galaxies with emission line signal-to-noise ratios (S/N) less than 5.
According to the commonly used BPT diagnostic diagram (Baldwin et al. 1981) developed by
Kauffmann et al. (2003a) based on [OIII] λ5007/Hβ versus [NII] λ6584/Hα, we selected 343
star-forming galaxies, among which ﬁve are ULIRGs.

Figure 1 shows the distributions of redshifts and total infrared luminosities4 of the 343 FIR-
selected star-forming galaxies. The majority of the sample has z < 0.1 and 1010L⊙ < LIR <
1012.5L⊙.

2.2 Morphological Classiﬁcation

To characterize the merger stages of our FIR-selected star-forming galaxies, we classiﬁed them
into the following seven morphological categories:

– S: Isolated normal spiral galaxies without bars.

– SB: Isolated barred spiral galaxies.

– Edge-on: Isolated galaxies with high-inclination angles.

– Pair: Galaxies with companions within rp < 80 kpc, ∆v < 500 km s−1 but not disturbed

morphologically.

3 Two 1Jy ULIRGs are already included in the IRAS PSCz catalog. So they are not counted here.
4 For galaxies with companions, we cannot distinguish their contributions to the IR emission. So we simply
assigned the IR luminosities of the system to both of them and keep in mind that their intrinsic IR luminosities are
lower than those we plotted.

6

Guo et al.

Fig. 1 Redshift and infrared luminosity distributions. The black histograms denote
the 343 FIR-selected star-forming galaxies from the cross-correlation analysis (see
Section 2.1), while the gray shaded histograms represent the 216 sample galaxies
with morphological types of isolated spirals, spirals in pairs, close interacting, wide
interacting, pre-merger and adv-merger used in this work (see Section 2.2).

– Interacting: Galaxies with companions within rp < 80 kpc, ∆v < 500 km s−1 and mor-

phologically disturbed.

– Pre-merger: Galaxies with two or more nuclei and sharing a common envelope.

– Adv-merger: Galaxies with only one nucleus but with some merger features, such as tidal

tails.

In practice, we ﬁrst classiﬁed pair and interacting galaxies. They are deﬁned as systems
that consist of two galaxies with a projected separation rp < 80 kpc and ∆v < 500 km s−1.
For the galaxies that do not have a companion in the spectroscopic catalog, as described in
Section 2.1, we searched for their companions from the photometric Catalog of SDSS DR7.
If a galaxy has a companion in the photometric catalog with rp < 80 kpc, we retrieved the
redshift of the companion from the NED website5 to identify physical pairs with a criterion of
∆v < 500 km s−1. For all galaxies with a true companion that was identiﬁed either from the
spectroscopic or the photometric catalog, we classiﬁed them into pairs or interacting galaxies
judging by their morphological disturbances in the SDSS r-band images. Galaxies in pairs were
then further classiﬁed into spirals, barred-spirals and edge-on galaxies. Interacting galaxies
were divided into wide interacting and close interacting galaxies using the projected separation

5 http://ned.ipac.caltech.edu/

Evolution of Nuclear Metallicity and SFR

7

Table 1 Morphological classiﬁcation of FIR-selected star-forming galaxies as a func-
tion of LIR

log LIR/L⊙

Morphology

10.0-10.5

10.5-11.0

11.0-11.5

11.5-12.0

12.0-12.5 Total

S
pair S
inter>20kpc
inter<20kpc
pre-merger
adv-merger
Total

4
0
3
3
5
4
19

40
17
12
6
2
40
117

14
6
10
10
5
20
65

1
2
2
1
0
4
10

0
0
0
1
2
2
5

59
25
27
21
14
70
216

of 20 kpc as the dividing point6 according to Kewley et al. (2006; see also Montuori et al. 2010).
For the remaining sample galaxies, we visually classiﬁed them into the other ﬁve categories
judging by their appearances in the SDSS r-band images. The composite (g-, r-, i- band) true
color images (Lupton et al. 2004) were used as cross-check.

In order to estimate the reliability of our morphological classiﬁcations, we examined the
consistency of our results with the classiﬁcations from Galaxy Zoo 17. The Galaxy Zoo project
performed visual morphological classiﬁcations for SDSS galaxies (Lintott et al., 2008; Lintott
et al., 2011). For each galaxy, people are asked to vote for the most likely morphological cat-
egory of this galaxy, out of Elliptical, ClockWise spirals, AntiClockWise spirals, Edge-on spi-
rals, Merger and Combined Spiral (CS=Edge+CW+ACW). According to the vote fractions of
each category, the galaxy is divided into one of the three broad classes: elliptical, spiral and
unknown. To compare with the classiﬁcations from Galaxy Zoo, we considered our isolated
S and SB as Spiral, our interacting, pre-merger and adv-merger as Merger. The comparison
shows that our classiﬁcations for spiral galaxies are consistent with those of Galaxy Zoo but
36 (10%) mergers in our sample are denoted as spiral or elliptical galaxies by Galaxy Zoo.
However, these 36 galaxies do show signs of disturbances, except one galaxy that we have not
come to an agreement. After discussion, we modiﬁed the classiﬁcation of this galaxy according
to the result of Galaxy Zoo, and kept our results for the rest ones.

There are also 37 galaxies with morphologies not belonging to any categories deﬁned
above. They are ellipticals, blue compact drawfs, irregulars or have morphologies that we can-
not classify without doubt. We do not consider them in the following analyses. In addition, we

6 We tested with 30 kpc and 10 kpc as the dividing point to separate the wide from the close interacting galaxies
and found that the median metal under-abundance and median SFR enhancement only change by a small amount.
Therefore, our results are not sensitive to the selection of the dividing point.

7 http://data.galaxyzoo.org/

8

Guo et al.

removed barred-spirals in both isolation and pairs from our sample since bar instabilities can
change both metallicity and star formation rate (e.g., Ellison et al. 2011 and references therein;
Martel et al. 2013; Cacho et al. 2014). On the other hand, dust attenuation in edge-on galax-
ies cannot be corrected well, so we further excluded the edge-on galaxies from the following
analysis. This resulted in a total number of 216 sample galaxies with morphological types of
isolated spiral, spiral in pairs, wide interacting galaxy, close interacting galaxy, pre-merger and
adv-merger making up an evolutionary sequence of galaxy mergers. The numbers of galaxies
within each morphological category and IR luminosity range for our ﬁnal sample are listed in
Table 1. As can be seen from Table 1, the number of pre-mergers is 14. Results shown by pre-
mergers may be biased due to the small sample size and thus will not be taken seriously. The
shaded histograms in Figure 1 show the distributions of redshift and total infrared luminosities
of the ﬁnal galaxy sample.

2.3 Selection of the Control Sample

Apart from exploring the variations of the nuclear gas-phase oxygen abundance and SFR as
merger stages within the FIR-selected sample, we need to determine their absolute offsets with
respect to non-FIR-selected galaxies with comparable stellar mass. So a control sample of star-
forming galaxies without IR constraints is also required.

The control sample was selected from the spectroscopic catalog of SDSS DR7. We ﬁrst
constrained the foreground Galactic extinction corrected Petrosian r-band magnitudes to the
range of 14.5 < r < 17.77 to meet the completeness limit of the spectroscopic selection
(Strauss et al. 2002; Kauffmann et al. 2003b; Brinchmann et al. 2004). Star-forming galaxies
were then extracted according to the BPT diagram, as mentioned in Section 2.1. Finally, we
selected our control sample galaxies randomly from these star-forming galaxies by requiring
their normalized redshift distribution to match with that of the working sample as shown in
the left panel of Figure 1. The purpose of matching the normalized redshift distribution is
to minimize the aperture effect caused by the ﬁxed 3′′ ﬁber aperture adopted by the SDSS
spectroscopic observations (Kewley et al. 2005). Our ﬁnal control sample is composed of 44484
star-forming galaxies.

3 ESTIMATION OF PHYSICAL PARAMETERS

In this section we describe our methods of estimating the total stellar masses, the nuclear gas-
phase oxygen abundances and SFRs.

The stellar masses were retrieved from the Max Planck Institute for Astrophysics-Johns
Hopkins University (MPA/JHU8) stellar mass catalog. A Bayesian analysis was employed to
estimate the stellar masses by comparing a large number of stellar population synthesis models

8 http://www.mpa-garching.mpg.de/SDSS

Evolution of Nuclear Metallicity and SFR

9

with the ﬁve broad-band u, g, r, i, z photometry of SDSS. The stellar population synthesis
models include both bursting and continuous star formation histories, which properly sampled
the real star formation histories of galaxies (Kauffmann et al. 2003b). We note that the stellar
masses of pre-mergers are probably under-estimated because the photometry performed by the
SDSS pipeline only measures the ﬂuxes of part of the system.

The nuclear gas-phase oxygen abundances were retrieved from the MPA/JHU gas-phase
metallicity catalog. As described in T04, the gas-phase oxygen abundances were determined
by ﬁtting the stellar population synthesis and photo-ionization models developed by Charlot &
Longhetti (2001; see also Brinchmann et al. 2004) to optical nebular emission lines in SDSS
spectra.

Instead of extracting nuclear SFRs directly from the MPA/JHU catalog, Hα luminosities
were used to calculate the instantaneous nuclear SFRs. We ﬁrst extracted the Hα emission line
ﬂuxes in the SDSS 3′′ ﬁber aperture from the MPA/JHU catalog. We then performed internal
extinction corrections for the Hα ﬂuxes by assuming the case B recombination value of in-
trinsic Hα/Hβ as 2.86 and using O’Donnell (1994) Milky Way extinction curve. The internal
extinction corrected Hα luminosities were then used to calculate the central SFRs following
Kennicutt (1998). Kennicutt (1998)’s prescription was built on a Salpeter (1955) IMF. To de-
rive SFRs under an assumption of a Kroupa IMF, we divided the SFRs by a factor of 1.5. We
note that the dust attenuations derived from Balmer decrement may be under-estimated for
galaxies with very dusty star formation (e.g., Kennicutt et al. 2009; Kilerci Eser et al. 2014).
So the dust-corrected SFRs for these galaxies may be under-estimated, which should be kept
in mind when the variations of SFRs as merger states are examined (Section 4.2).

4 RESULTS

4.1 Metallicity Dilution

We ﬁrst examine the location of our FIR-selected galaxies in the mass-metallicity diagram by
comparing them with the mass-metallicity relation deﬁned by the control sample of non-FIR-
selected star-forming galaxies.

The mass-metallicity relation deﬁned by our control sample is derived using a method
similar to the bisector of linear ﬁtting. We ﬁrst divide the control sample into 25 subgroups
by their stellar masses with binwidth of 0.1 dex from 8.5 < log M∗ < 11.0 and obtain the
median metallicity of galaxies in each subgroup. Then these 25 pairs of data points (log M∗,
12 + log(O/H)) are ﬁtted to a polynomial with the form:

12 + log(O/H) = a + b(log M∗) + c(log M∗)2.

(1)

Afterwards, a similar ﬁtting is performed for the median stellar masses of galaxies in subgroups
split by their metallicities with a binwidth of 0.05 dex from 8.2 < 12 + log(O/H) < 9.2. We

10

Guo et al.

then generate a list of data points from these two curves and ﬁt these data points to a polynomial
with the form of Equation (1). The derived bisector-like mass-metallicity relation is

12+log(O/H) = −5.588(±0.514)+2.586(±0.107)(log M∗)−0.11283(±0.00561)(log M∗)2,
(2)
and it is extrapolated to log M∗ = 11.2 to cover the stellar mass range probed by our FIR-
selected star-forming galaxies.

Figure 2(a) shows the distributions of our FIR-selected star-forming galaxies in the gas-
phase oxygen abundance vs. stellar mass diagram. The data points are color-coded by their
IR luminosities. The black solid curve represents the mass-metallicity relation deﬁned by the
control sample, i.e., Equation (2). The contours indicate the 68%, 95% and 99% level number
densities of the control sample galaxies. From this panel, we can see that the FIR-selected star-
forming galaxies roughly follow the mass-metallicity relation of normal star-forming galaxies
with a majority (87%) of them lying within the 95% (∼ 2σ) level number density contour, but
show a slight systematic shift towards lower abundance. We further ﬁnd that the galaxies with
IR luminosities greater than 1011L⊙ (the orange, magenta and red points) are more massive
and more metal-poor than those with lower IR luminosities. It is expected that IR more lumi-
nous galaxies are more massive according to the well-known stellar mass – total SFR relation,
i.e., the star-forming “main sequence” (e.g., Brinchmann et al. 2004; Elbaz et al. 2007). The
trend that IR more luminous galaxies are more metal-poor was also reported in Rupke et al.
(2008). They suggested that this trend is related to the large fractions of later-stage mergers
and higher SFRs in LIRGs and ULIRGs. In Figure 2(b)-(g), we plot our sample galaxies with
different morphologies separately. Speciﬁcally, we show isolated spirals, spirals in pairs, wide
and close interacting galaxies, pre-mergers and adv-mergers. To our surprise, the systemati-
cally larger under-abundance of LIRGs and ULIRGs is not caused by the larger fractions of
interacting galaxies and mergers in them. Except for close interacting galaxies, within all the
other morphological categories, LIRGs and ULIRGs are more metal-poor than IR less lumi-
nous galaxies with the same morphological type, including isolated spirals. We speculate that
larger amount of gas in LIRGs and ULIRGs (e.g., Gao & Solomon 2004) is responsible for
the larger under-abundance, which is also expected in numerical simulations (e.g., Perez et
al. 2011). The panels (b)-(g) of Figure 2 show that the positions of our FIR-selected galax-
ies evolve with the merger stages, as probed by the optical morphologies, in the metallicity
vs. stellar mass diagram. Compared to the control sample, isolated spirals and wide interacting
galaxies are around the relation. But spirals in pairs, close interacting galaxies, pre-mergers and
adv-mergers show obvious under-abundance and the amount of the under-abundance evolves
with the merger phase.

In order to measure the evolution of the under-abundance more quantitatively, we plot the
histograms of the offsets in the gas-phase oxygen abundances from the mass-metallicity rela-
tion in Figure 3. The distribution of the offsets for all 216 FIR-selected star-forming galaxies

Evolution of Nuclear Metallicity and SFR

11

Fig. 2 Nuclear gas-phase oxygen abundance versus stellar mass relation. Symbols
with different colors represent our sample galaxies within different infrared luminos-
ity ranges. The black solid curves indicate the mean MZR deﬁned by the control sam-
ple. The contours enclose 68%, 95% and 99% control sample galaxies, respectively.
All the 216 sample galaxies are shown in panel (a). Isolated spirals, spirals in pairs,
interacting galaxies with rp < 20 kpc, rp > 20 kpc, pre-mergers and adv-mergers
are shown in panels (b)-(g) respectively. Morphological types and the corresponding
galaxy numbers are indicated in each panel. The error bars show the median uncer-
tainties.

12

Guo et al.

is shown in Figure 3(a). On average, it shows an under-abundance of ∼ 0.03 dex. The his-
togram for isolated spirals is shown in Figure 3(b) and it is plotted in the other panels as a
reference (the gray shaded histogram). The panels (c)-(g) show the distributions of the offsets
for galaxies with morphologies of spiral in pairs, wide interacting, close interacting, pre-merger
and adv-merger, respectively. The median and mean values of the offsets, as labeled in each
panel, provide consistent results for each morphological type within one rms scatter. The FIR-
selected isolated spirals show no systematic offset from the mass-metallicity relation deﬁned
by the control sample. The systematic shifts of the empty histograms relative to the shaded
histogram shown in the panels (b)-(g) tell a clear picture of metallicity evolution as galaxies
interact and merge. Spirals in pairs and galaxies involved in wide interacting systems show
a mild nuclear metallicity depression, ∼ 0.02-0.03 dex. As the merger progresses, the metal-
licities of galaxies in close interacting systems are diluted most dramatically, by ∼ 0.06 dex
in median. When two galaxies merge together, the gas is enriched by ∼ 0.02 − 0.03 dex, as
can be seen from the comparison of the close interacting galaxies (dashed histogram) with the
adv-mergers (the solid histogram) in Figure 3(g). Although the gas is enriched relative to the
close interacting galaxies, the metallicity is still lower than the control sample, which is con-
sistent with the predictions from numerical simulations (e.g., Torrey et al. 2012; Scudder et
al. 2012). This is the ﬁrst time that such relative enrichment at the ﬁnal merger stage is seen
from observations, which demonstrates the importance of the supernova feedback to the ISM
enrichment at the coalescence stage of mergers. Apart from the evolutionary trend, we note the
broad distribution of the offsets, which implies that the amount of metallicity dilution is also
affected by many other factors, such as the orbital parameters, gas fractions etc, as suggested
by numerical simulations (e.g., Montuori et al. 2010; Perez et al. 2011; Torrey et al. 2012).

Consistent with previous works, the amplitude of metallicity dilution or enrichment in this
study is small. At the end of this subsection, we examine the statistical signiﬁcance of the
metallicity evolution by comparing the offsets with the error bars and via the K-S test with
the distribution of isolated spirals. Since the method used to calculate the gas-phase metallicity
for the working sample is the same as that for the comparison sample, systematic errors in
different metallicity estimators are not important in our study. We only consider the mean
random error of the gas-phase oxygen abundance measurements, which is ∼ 0.01 dex. The
spirals in pairs and wide-interacting galaxies are under-abundant at 2σ levels while the K-S
tests show insigniﬁcant difference from the isolated spirals with probabilities drawn from the
same distribution of 37% and 11%, respectively. By contrast, the under-abundances in close-
interacting galaxies and adv-mergers are signiﬁcant at > 3σ levels. Furthermore, the K-S tests
indicate that the difference of the under-abundance of the close-interacting galaxies and the
adv-mergers with respect to the isolated spirals is signiﬁcant with probabilities drawn from
the same distribution of 0.1% and 0.7%, respectively. The mean/median difference between
close-interacting galaxies and adv-mergers is 0.03/0.02 dex, which is statistically signiﬁcant

Evolution of Nuclear Metallicity and SFR

13

at ∼ 3σ/2σ levels. Therefore, the evolutionary trend of the metallicity under-abundance we
saw above is statistically signiﬁcant at > 2σ levels, although the amplitude of the metallicity
dilution is small.

4.2 Star Formation Rate Enhancement

Galaxy interactions and mergers not only affect the nuclear metallicity as shown in Section 4.1,
but also inﬂuence the nuclear SFR. In this subsection, we examine the variation of the central
SFR with the IR luminosity and morphology. Similar to what we performed for the study of
the nuclear metallicity, we investigate the variation of the nuclear SFR in terms of the stellar
mass – nuclear SFR relation.

We ﬁrst obtain the stellar mass – nuclear SFR relation by an ordinary least squares bisector

linear regression ﬁtting based on our control sample. The best-ﬁtting relation gives

SFR = −11.67(±0.034) + 1.11(±0.004)(log M∗).

(3)

We show the distributions of galaxies in the nuclear SFR vs. stellar mass diagram in Figure
4(a). Equation (3) is plotted as the straight solid line. The contours denote the 68%, 95% and
99% level number densities of the control sample galaxies. This panel shows that the galaxies
follow the trend deﬁned by the control sample but have systematically higher nuclear SFRs.
It is also seen that IR more luminous galaxies are more massive, as we have seen in Figure
2(a). However, in contrast to the offsets in the gas-phase oxygen abundance, the nuclear SFR
offsets with respect to the control sample do not vary with the IR luminosities. This seems to be
conﬂicting with the studies on stellar mass – global SFR relation, which found that LIRGs and
ULIRGs have much higher global SFRs than normal star-forming galaxies with comparable
stellar mass (e.g., Elbaz et al. 2007; Kilerci Eser et al. 2014). However, considering that the
dust-corrected SFRs for LIRGs and ULIRGs are possibly more severely under-estimated than
the galaxies with lower IR luminosities because of their extremely dusty environment in the
central regions (Sanders & Mirabel 1996; Lonsdale et al. 2006), as we have emphasized in
Section 3, it is understandable that the IR more luminous galaxies do not show larger nuclear
SFR offsets. For each morphological type, we examine the distributions of galaxies in the
nuclear SFR vs. stellar mass diagram in Figure 4(b)-(g). We can see that regardless of their IR
luminosities, isolated spirals and spirals in pairs follow the stellar mass – nuclear SFR relation
deﬁned by the control sample. The systematic enhancement exhibited in Figure 4(a) is caused
by the obvious SFR enhancement in interacting galaxies and mergers, as shown in panels (d)-
(g) of Figure 4.

Similar to Figure 3, we plot the histograms of the nuclear SFR offsets relative to the stellar
mass – nuclear SFR relation deﬁned by the control sample in Figure 5. The histogram for all
216 sample galaxies is plotted in Figure 5(a). They show a SFR enhancement of ∼ 0.2 dex
on average. Figure 5(b) shows the histogram for isolated spirals and this histogram is plotted

14

Guo et al.

in the remaining panels as a reference. The panels (c)-(g) show the histograms of SFR en-
hancement for spirals in pairs, wide interacting, close interacting, pre-merger and adv-merger
galaxies, respectively. The median and mean values of the enhancements, labeled in each panel,
are coincident for each morphological type within one rms scatter except for the close inter-
acting galaxies. The FIR-selected isolated spirals show a marginal SFR enhancement relative
to the control sample by 0.07 dex in median. In contrast, spirals in pairs and wide interacting
galaxies show a minor systematic shift (∼ 0.1 dex) towards SFR enhancement while close in-
teracting galaxies and adv-mergers show systematic shift towards the right most signiﬁcantly
by ∼ 0.4 dex on average. K-S tests show that the distributions of SFR enhancement for spirals
in pairs and wide interacting galaxies are not signiﬁcantly different from the isolated spirals
while close interacting galaxies and adv-mergers differ from the isolated spirals at signiﬁcance
levels greater than 99.9%. The SFR enhancement in pre-mergers may be biased due to the
small sample size. We note that the enhancement in adv-mergers is slightly milder than close
interacting galaxies in median but it is comparable to close interacting galaxies on average. K-S
test suggests that these two distributions are similar at a signiﬁcance level of 27.9%. Although
the average offsets suggest SFR enhancements in our galaxies, the range of the offsets is large,
varying from SFR depression (negative values) to SFR enhancement (positive values).

5 DISCUSSION

5.1 Sample Selection Biases

Our sample is obtained via a FIR-optical cross-correlation analysis and several criteria have
been used to obtain the ﬁnal sample (see Section 2.1). So it is worth investigating possible
sample selection biases and their impact on the ﬁnal results.

The goal of this paper is to explore the evolution of the nuclear gas-phase oxygen abun-
dances and SFRs along the FIR-selected merger sequence by investigating their positions on the
gas-phase oxygen abundance and SFR versus stellar mass diagrams. Therefore, any selection
biases would not affect the ﬁnal results as long as no biases are introduced into the morpho-
logical types and objects with certain values of stellar masses, gas-phase oxygen abundances
and SFRs are not preferentially selected or missed. In other words, a representative sample for
each morphological type is sufﬁcient for this work.

During the sample selection process, three selection criteria could introduce biases into the
sample. The ﬁrst is the cross-identiﬁcation of the IRAS PSCz and the spectroscopic catalog of
SDSS DR7, from which galaxies under the IR detection limit are missed. And it is well known
that a ﬂux-limited sample misses objects with lower luminosities at higher redshift (i.e., the
Malmquist bias), which results in a sample with more luminous galaxies occupying the higher
redshift distribution and less luminous galaxies dominating the lower redshift distribution. The
Malmquist bias would not affect our results due to the small coverage in redshift (z < 0.1

Evolution of Nuclear Metallicity and SFR

15

mostly; see Figure 1). FIR-selected samples are biased to galaxies which are more massive and
are undergoing more rigorous star formation. However, this bias behaves similarly towards all
morphological types in the sample. As a result, the evolutionary trend of the nuclear metallicity
and SFR along the merger sequence, as characterized by morphological types, is not affected
by this selection bias, although the absolute amplitudes of metal under-abundance and SFR
enhancement relative to the control sample may be changed.

The second is the r-band magnitude cut – only galaxies with r-band Petrosian magnitudes
within the range of 14.5-15.9 mag are included. As Wang et al. (2006) concluded, such mag-
nitude cut does not introduce signiﬁcant biases into the morphological types. The exclusion
of galaxies with fainter r-band Petrosian magnitudes tends to remove galaxies with larger red-
shifts, higher IR luminosities and higher nuclear SFRs. However, similar to the ﬁrst selection
effect, this selection bias affects all morphological types in a similar way. Consequently, it may
only affect the absolute amplitudes of metal depression and SFR enhancement but does not
change the evolutionary trend with the merger stages.

The third is the requirement of the redshift measurements to identify objects within pairs.
Apart from the spectroscopic catalog of SDSS DR7, NED was used to search for redshifts for
candidate companions identiﬁed from the SDSS photometric catalog (see Section 2.2). There
are ﬁfteen isolated spirals with photometric companions that do not have spectroscopic red-
shift information. The r-band images of these ﬁfteen companions show that most of them (12
out of 15) are probably background galaxies, suggested by their small sizes and faint bright-
ness. So the requirement of the redshift measurements only affects the classiﬁcation of three
isolated spirals at most and it does not have selection effects in terms of stellar masses, metal
abundances and SFRs.

To summarize, our sample is composed of representative samples of galaxies within each
morphological type although it is not a complete sample. As a result, the sample selection
biases mentioned above do not affect our main results signiﬁcantly.

5.2 Comparisons with the Literature

Recently, Scudder et al. (2012) and Ellison et al. (2013) investigated the evolution of central
metallicity and SFR along the merger sequence. Speciﬁcally, Scudder et al. (2012) studied
galaxy pairs with stellar mass ratios of 0.1-10 and did not include galaxies at the ﬁnal coa-
lescence stage, while Ellison et al. (2013) studied major mergers (with stellar mass ratio of
0.25-4) and added post-mergers to the merger sequence. Given that our interacting galaxies
and mergers are FIR-selected, which are expected to be mostly involved in major mergers, it
is straightforward to compare our results with Ellison et al. (2013). Since the projected separa-
tion was used as an indicator of the merger states in Ellison et al. (2013), we cannot compare
our results shown by each morphological type with those shown in their work. However, we
can compare our close interacting galaxies with their pairs with rp < 20h−1kpc and our wide

16

Guo et al.

interacting galaxies with their pairs with rp > 20h−1kpc. Our adv-mergers can be compared
directly with their post-mergers.

In terms of gas-phase oxygen abundance, our results are consistent with Ellison et al. (2013)
for both close pairs (rp < 20h−1kpc) and wide pairs (rp > 20h−1kpc). However, for galaxies
at the ﬁnal coalescence stage, Ellison et al. (2013) obtained different results from ours. They
found that post-mergers are even more metal-poor than the closest pairs by ∼ 0.02 dex in
median while we found a relative metallicity enrichment of 0.02-0.03 dex in our adv-mergers
with respect to the close interacting galaxies.

Regarding to SFR, our median SFR enhancement of wide interacting galaxies is smaller
than that of wide pairs in Ellison et al. by ∼ 0.1 dex. For close interacting galaxies, the average
SFR enhancement shown by our sample are comparable to Ellison et al. but our median SFR
enhancement is larger by an additional amount of ∼ 0.2 dex. The SFR enhancement for post-
mergers obtained by Ellison et al. are ∼ 0.2 dex higher than our adv-mergers. In summary,
Ellison et al. obtained an evolutionary trend that SFR enhancement increases all the way to
the ﬁnal coalescence stage as the merger proceeds, while we found that SFR ﬂattens or even
decreases when galaxies evolve to the adv-merger stage.

The difference between the evolutionary trend from close pairs to post-mergers found by
Ellison et al. (2013) and that from interacting galaxies to the adv-mergers found in this work
may imply that our adv-mergers are more evolved than the post-mergers in Ellison et al. (2013).
So the ISM have more time to be enriched and the gas content is more consumed, which leads
to a decrease in the SFR.

5.3 Co-evolution of Metallicity and SFR

As we have shown in Sections 4.1 and 4.2, both nuclear gas-phase oxygen abundance and SFR
evolve along the merger sequence and the pattern of the evolution is consistent with numerical
simulations. Montuori et al. (2010; see also Fig 8 of Torrey et al. 2012; Fig 11 of Scudder
et al. 2012) pointed out that the maximum metallicity dilution occurs almost simultaneously
with the most intensive star formation enhancement, with a delay of 100 Myrs at most. To
compare with this theoretical prediction, we examine the evolution of the median metallicity
dilution (top panel) and SFR enhancement (bottom panel) along the merger sequence in Figure
6. Since we could not trace each evolutionary stage as the simulations did, we only compare
the evolutionary trend with that predicted by simulations in a broad sense. Figure 6 shows
that the metallicity dilution and SFR enhancement evolve synchronously. As the merger pro-
ceeds, metallicity decreases and SFR increases and they reach their minimum and maximum
respectively when the two galaxies are within 20 kpc. After the peaks, metallicity increases
and SFR decreases. This evolutionary trend of both nuclear gas-phase oxygen abundance and
SFR supports the predictions from numerical simulations (e.g., Torrey et al. 2012; Scudder et
al. 2012).

Evolution of Nuclear Metallicity and SFR

17

6 SUMMARY

We have selected a sample of FIR-selected star-forming galaxies from a cross-correlation anal-
ysis of IRAS PSCz and 1 Jy sample with the spectroscopic catalog of SDSS DR7 and classiﬁed
them into different morphological types. Only a sub-sample of 216 galaxies with morphologies
of isolated spiral, spiral in pairs, wide interacting, close interacting, pre-merger and adv-merger
is considered in this study. To re-visit the evolution of the nuclear metallicity dilution and SFR
enhancement along the merger sequence, we examine the relative positions of the 216 galaxies
with respect to a redshift-matched control sample on the stellar mass-metallicity and stellar
mass-central SFR diagrams. We summarize our main results as follows.

1. We ﬁnd that, compared to normal star-forming galaxies with comparable stellar mass,
galaxies with larger infrared luminosities are more depressed in the gas-phase oxygen abun-
dance, which may be resulted from the larger gas content in these galaxies.

2. When the optical morphologies are used as tracers of evolutionary stages, galaxies show
evolution in their nuclear metallicities along the merger sequence. The central metallicities
of isolated spirals are similar to the normal star-forming galaxies, while spirals in pairs and
wide interacting galaxies with rp > 20 kpc show mild metallicity dilution, ∼ 0.02-0.03 dex.
As the merging proceeds, close interacting galaxies show the most depressed metallicity, ∼
0.06 dex in median and the amplitude of the depression decreases when the galaxies merge
together. This is the ﬁrst time that such ISM enrichment in the ﬁnal coalescence stage is
seen from observations.

3. The central SFR enhancement shows a coherent evolutionary trend with the nuclear metal-
licity. SFR enhancement increases as the merger proceeds and reaches its maximum when
two galaxies are closely interacting. Afterwards, the SFR ﬂattens or decreases.

Our results support the evolutionary trend predicted by numerical simulations that the cen-
tral metallicity will be diluted by the inﬂow gas during the interacting/merging process accom-
panied with the SFR enhancement and the ISM will be enriched by the supernova feedback at
the ﬁnal coalescence stage (Montuori et al. 2010; Perez et al. 2011; Torrey et al. 2012).

Acknowledgements We thank Dr. Gang Chen for helpful discussion. This project is supported
by the NSF of China 11373027 and 11003015. The Project-sponsored by SRF for ROCS,
SEM. Funding for the creation and distribution of the SDSS Archive has been provided by the
Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the Participating Institutions, the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, the National Science Foundation, the U.S. Department of Energy, the Japanese
Monbukagakusho, and the Max Planck Society. The SDSS Web site is http://www.sdss.org/.
The SDSS is managed by the Astrophysical Research Consortium (ARC) for the Participating

18

Guo et al.

Institutions. The Participating Institutions are The University of Chicago, Fermilab, the
Institute for Advanced Study, the Japan Participation Group, The Johns Hopkins University,
the Korean Scientist Group, Los Alamos National Laboratory, the Max-Planck-Institute for
Astronomy (MPIA), the Max-Planck-Institute for Astrophysics (MPA), New Mexico State
University, University of Pittsburgh, Princeton University, the United States Naval Observatory,
and the University of Washington.

References

Abazajian, K. N., Adelman-McCarthy, J. K., Ag¨ueros, M. A., et al. 2009, ApJS, 182, 543

Alonso, M. S., Michel-Dansac, L., & Lambas, D. G. 2010, A&A, in press (arXiv:1001.4605)

Baldwin, J. A., Phillips, M. M., & Terlevich, R. 1981, PASP, 93, 5

Brinchmann, J., Charlot, S., White, S. D. M., et al. 2004, MNRAS, 351, 1151

Cacho, R., S´anchez-Bl´azquez, P., Gorgas, J., & P´erez, I. 2014, MNRAS, 442, 2496

Charlot, S., & Longhetti, M. 2001, MNRAS, 323, 887

Elbaz, D., Daddi, E., Le Borgne, D., et al. 2007, A&A, 468, 33

Ellison, S. L., Mendel, J. T., Patton, D. R., & Scudder, J. M. 2013, MNRAS, 435, 3627

Ellison, S. L., Nair, P., Patton, D. R., et al. 2011, MNRAS, 416, 2182

Ellison, S. L., Patton, D. R., Simard, L., & McConnachie, A. W. 2008, AJ, 135, 1877

Erb, D. K., Shapley, A. E., Pettini, M., et al. 2006, ApJ, 644, 813

Fukugita, M., Nakamura, O., Turner, E. L., Helmboldt, J., & Nichol, R. C. 2004, ApJ, 601,

L127

Gao, Y., & Solomon, P. M. 2004, ApJ, 606, 271

Garnett, D. R., & Shields, G. A. 1987, ApJ, 317, 82

Kauffmann, G., Heckman, T. M., Tremonti, C., et al. 2003a, MNRAS, 346, 1055

Kauffmann, G., Heckman, T. M., White, S. D. M., et al. 2003b, MNRAS, 341, 33

Kennicutt, R. C., Jr. 1998, ARA&A, 36, 189

Kennicutt, R. C., Jr., Hao, C.-N., Calzetti, D., et al. 2009, ApJ, 703, 1672-1695

Kewley, L. J., Geller, M. J., & Barton, E. J. 2006, AJ, 131, 2004

Evolution of Nuclear Metallicity and SFR

19

Kewley, L. J., Jansen, R. A., & Geller, M. J. 2005, PASP, 117, 227

Kilerci Eser, E., Goto, T., & Doi, Y. 2014, ApJ, 797, 54

Kim, D.-C., & Sanders, D. B. 1998, ApJS, 119, 41

Kroupa, P. 2001, MNRAS, 322, 231

Lequeux, J., Peimbert, M., Rayo, J. F., Serrano, A., & Torres-Peimbert, S. 1979, A&A, 80, 155

Lintott, C., Schawinski, K., Bamford, S., et al. 2011, MNRAS, 410, 166

Lintott, C. J., Schawinski, K., Slosar, A., et al. 2008, MNRAS, 389, 1179

Lonsdale, C. J., Farrah, D., & Smith, H. E. 2006, Astrophysics Update 2 (Praxis Publishing

Ltd, Chichester, UK), 285

Lupton, R., Blanton, M. R., Fekete, G., et al. 2004, PASP, 116, 133

Maiolino, R., Nagao, T., Grazian, A., et al. 2008, A&A, 488, 463

Mannucci, F., Cresci, G., Maiolino, R., et al. 2009, MNRAS, 398, 1915

Martel, H., Kawata, D., & Ellison, S. L. 2013, MNRAS, 431, 2560

Michel-Dansac, L., Lambas, D. G., Alonso, M. S., & Tissera, P. 2008, MNRAS, 386, L82

Montuori, M., Di Matteo, P., Lehnert, M. D., Combes, F., & Semelin, B. 2010, A&A, 518, A56

O’Donnell, J. E. 1994, ApJ, 422, 158

Peeples, M. S., Pogge, R. W., & Stanek, K. Z. 2009, ApJ, 695, 259

Perez, J., Michel-Dansac, L., & Tissera, P. B. 2011, MNRAS, 417, 580

Rupke, D. S. N., Kewley, L. J., & Barnes, J. E. 2010, ApJ, 710, L156

Rupke, D. S. N., Veilleux, S., & Baker, A. J. 2008, ApJ, 674, 172

Salpeter, E. E. 1955, ApJ, 121, 161

Sanders, D. B., & Mirabel, I. F. 1996, ARA&A, 34, 749

Sanders, R. L., Shapley, A. E., Kriek, M., et al. 2015, ApJ, 799, 138

Saunders, W., Sutherland, W. J., Maddox, S. J., et al. 2000, MNRAS, 317, 55

Schlegel, D. J., Finkbeiner, D. P., & Davis, M. 1998, ApJ, 500, 525

20

Guo et al.

Scudder, J. M., Ellison, S. L., Torrey, P., Patton, D. R., & Mendel, J. T. 2012, MNRAS, 426,

549

Strauss, M. A., Weinberg, D. H., Lupton, R. H., et al. 2002, AJ, 124, 1810

Torrey, P., Cox, T. J., Kewley, L., & Hernquist, L. 2012, ApJ, 746, 108

Tremonti, C. A., Heckman, T. M., Kauffmann, G., et al. 2004, ApJ, 613, 898

Wang, J. L., Xia, X. Y., Mao, S., et al. 2006, ApJ, 649, 722

York, D. G., Adelman, J., Anderson, J. E., Jr., et al. 2000, AJ, 120, 1579

Evolution of Nuclear Metallicity and SFR

21

Fig. 3 Histograms of the nuclear metallicity offset with respect to the MZR relation
deﬁned by the control sample. In each panel, the black histogram denotes galaxies
within each morphological category while the gray shaded histogram represents the
histogram of isolated spiral galaxies for comparison. Morphological types, the cor-
responding galaxy numbers, the mean and median of the offsets are labeled in each
panel. The dashed histogram in panel (g) represents the distribution for the close in-
teracting galaxies.

22

Guo et al.

Fig. 4 Nuclear SFR versus stellar mass relation. The symbols are the same as in
Figure 2 except that the black solid lines represent the nuclear SFR versus stellar
mass relation deﬁned by the control sample.

Evolution of Nuclear Metallicity and SFR

23

Fig. 5 Histograms of the nuclear SFR offset relative to the nuclear SFR versus stellar
mass relation deﬁned by the control sample. The histograms and legends are the same
as in Figure 3 but for the nuclear SFR offset.

24

Guo et al.

Fig. 6 Nuclear metallicity offsets (top panel) and SFR offsets (bottom panel) as
a function of morphologies. Diamonds are the median offsets for galaxies within
each morphological category. Error bars show the median random errors. Horizontal
dashed lines indicate the line of zero offset.

