The melting of stable glasses is governed by nucleation-and-growth dynamics

Robert L. Jack1 and Ludovic Berthier2
1)Department of Physics, University of Bath, Bath BA2 7AY, United Kingdom
2)Laboratoire Charles Coulomb, UMR 5221 CNRS-Universit´e de Montpellier, 34095 Montpellier,
France

We discuss the microscopic mechanisms by which low-temperature amorphous states, such as ultrastable
glasses, transform into equilibrium ﬂuids, after a sudden temperature increase. Experiments suggest that
this process is similar to the melting of crystals, thus diﬀering from the behaviour found in ordinary glasses.
We rationalize these observations using the physical idea that the transformation process takes place very
close to a ‘hidden’ equilibrium ﬁrst-order phase transition, which is observed in systems of coupled replicas.
We illustrate our views using simulation results for a simple two-dimensional plaquette spin model, which is
known to exhibit a range of glassy behaviour. Our results suggest that nucleation-and-growth dynamics, as
found near ordinary ﬁrst-order transitions, is also the correct theoretical framework to analyse the melting
of ultrastable glasses. Our approach provides a uniﬁed understanding of multiple experimental observations,
such as propagating melting fronts, large kinetic stability ratios, and ‘giant’ dynamic lengthscales.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Recent experiments using vapor deposition methods
have produced stable glass states with very low en-
thalpy1–5, oﬀering a new route for production of amor-
phous materials with controllable properties6. Simulta-
neously, the discovery of such new amorphous materials
raises exciting theoretical challenges7, because they open
a new observational window on the behaviour of glassy
materials.

In particular, these novel glassy states are kinetically
‘ultrastable’1,8. On heating at constant rate, they recover
back to equilibrium at a higher temperature than conven-
tional glasses. Alternatively, if the stable glasses are held
at a ﬁxed temperature above the glass transition, their
relaxation to equilibrium is much slower than that of con-
ventional glasses. Some stable glasses retain their glassy
structure over periods up to 105 times longer than the
equilibrium structural relaxation time of the equilibrium
ﬂuid8. In addition, the mechanism by which thin ﬁlms of
stable glasses transform into the equilibrium liquid ap-
pears strongly heterogeneous, accompanied by melting
fronts that sweep through the system9. This process is
reminiscent of the melting of crystalline materials, and
is diﬀerent from the behavior of ordinary glasses. For
thicker ﬁlms of vapor-deposited glasses, the transforma-
tion mechanism is diﬀerent again, and remains poorly
understood. The crossover between thin-ﬁlm and bulk
behaviour deﬁnes a dynamic lengthscale characterizing
the melting process, and experiments report a crossover
length in the micrometer range2. Such a ‘giant’ dy-
namic lengthscale is unexpected in supercooled liquids,
in which the dynamic correlation lengthscales associated
with equilibrium relaxation near the glass transition are
typically a few nanometers10,11.

These experimental observations remain poorly under-
stood and are currently the subject of intense experimen-
tal investigations1–5,8,9,12,13. They raise several interest-
ing questions. For example, what structural features are
responsible for the stability of these materials? How do
deposition conditions aﬀect their properties? What is the

microscopic mechanism for the recovery back to equilib-
rium of these stable states? In this work, we concen-
trate on this last question, comparing the transforma-
tion kinetics of these amorphous materials with the melt-
ing of crystalline solids. We argue that this process has
a universal (material-independent) character, because of
the presence of a nearby ﬁrst-order phase transition14,15,
with associated nucleation-and-growth phenomenology.
The phase transition that we invoke to rationalise the ob-
served behaviours takes place when two physical copies
of the system are coupled to each other by a ﬁeld ε.
This phase transition is therefore ‘hidden’, because it
cannot directly be accessed in experiments. However,
we show that this theoretical construction is nevertheless
extremely useful for understanding the physical dynam-
ics of a single stable glass, as it transforms back into the
liquid.

To illustrate this theoretical picture, we use computer
simulations of a simple spin model – the triangular pla-
quette model (TPM). This system does not capture
the molecular details of supercooled liquids, but it does
mimic many features of glassy materials, such as dynam-
ical slowing down and spatially heterogenous dynamics,
linked to growing dynamic and static correlation length-
scales16–21. In particular, the existence of growing static
correlations in this model is accompanied by ﬁrst-order
phase transitions associated with coupled replicas22–24,
as also seen in molecular glass-formers15,25–27. The idea
that simple plaquette spin models of this type can be
useful for describing glass-forming liquids is at the root
of dynamical facilitation theory16,28. We show here that
the TPM exhibits the universal features that we expect
of stable glasses: kinetic stability, nucleation-and-growth
phenomena associated with melting close to ﬁrst-order
phase transitions, and giant dynamic lengthscales. Since
these features are associated with a phase transition, we
expect that results for this simple system also apply to
atomistic models that have similar phase diagrams, and
by extension, to experiments.

The TPM is particularly well-suited for the present
study because it is relatively cheap to simulate compu-

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
6
1

 
 
]
h
c
e
m

-
t
a
t
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
7
1
0
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

tationally, compared with atomistic liquids. More im-
portantly, a formidable advantage over oﬀ-lattice liquids
is the possibility to prepare directly – and at no com-
putational cost – equilibrium conﬁgurations with arbi-
trarily low energy, without the need for simulating the
vapor deposition process, or achieving brute force equi-
libration at low temperatures. By construction, there-
fore, our results can say nothing about the preparation
of ultrastable glasses (this problem has been addressed
computationally29–31), but we can shed light on their be-
haviour upon sudden heating. Other strategies have been
used to achieve similar eﬀect, including a random pinning
procedure32, or simulations with kinetically constrained
models33, which all permit to ‘plant’34 low-temperature
conﬁgurations at no cost.

In comparing our results with those of kinetically con-
trained models (KCMs)35, we note that while both pla-
quette models and KCMs are representative of dynamical
facilitation theory, the KCMs do not undergo the thermo-
dynamic phase transitions described here, because they
are deﬁned explicitly as models of excitations (or defects)
that lack any static interactions. By contrast, the TPM
is deﬁned in terms of spin variables with simple local in-
teractions – the low temperature behaviour of this model
is characterised by long-ranged many-body spin correla-
tions (amorphous order), as well as low energy excitations
without static interactions, similar to those that appear
in KCMs. The static many-body spin correlations in the
TPM are essential for the analogy that we draw here with
nucleation-and-growth. Earlier simulations of atomistic
liquids have invoked a similar analogy with melting pro-
cesses based on empirical observation32. Here, we show
how to make these ideas concrete, and, how they may be
used to make quantitative predictions for the observed
behaviour.

The structure of the paper is as follows. Section II out-
lines our general theoretical setting, and Section III de-
scribes the model that we consider. Section IV describes
the kinetics of the transformation process from stable
glass back to equilibrium, and Section V investigates the
mechanism of this process using spatio-temporal corre-
lation functions. In Section VI we discuss the main im-
plications of our results, before concluding with a short
outlook in Section VII.

distribution Pst. For example, we might take

Pst(C) ∝ e

−E(C)/T0,

2

(1)

which corresponds to a thermal equilibrium distribution
at some low temperature T0. In Eq. (1) we have set the
Boltzmann constant to unity. In experiments performed
with ultrastable glasses, thermalisation at low tempera-
ture is not guaranteed by the vapor deposition process,
and the distribution Pst is not known.

At time t = 0, we couple this initial conﬁguration to a
heat bath at temperature T ≥ T0 for which the average
energy (cid:104)E(cid:105)T is larger than its average in the stable glass
state (cid:104)E(cid:105)st.
If the system has any kind of ideal glass
transition then we also assume that T is higher than this
temperature. After some (possibly very long) time, the
system will recover back to equilibrium at temperature T .
The time τrec taken for this process quantiﬁes the kinetic
stability of the original state. It is natural to measure
this time relative to the equilibrium α-relaxation time
τeq of the system measured at the same temperature T .
This suggests that the appropriate adimensional measure
of the kinetic stability of the glass is8,32

S =

τrec
τeq

,

(2)

which we call the kinetic stability ratio. In experiments,
S = 103 − 105. In previous simulations using oﬀ-lattice
supercooled liquids, stability ratios of at most S ≈ 102
were reported32,36.

B. Link with an equilibrium ﬁrst-order transition for
coupled replicas

We now introduce the coupled replica setting originally
devised by Franz and Parisi14. They deﬁned the overlap
(cid:48)) which measures the similarity between conﬁgu-
Q(C,C
(cid:48). For identical conﬁgurations we have
rations C and C
(cid:48)) = 1 while for independent random conﬁgura-
Q(C,C
(cid:48)) ≈ 0. For a spin system, it
tions one expects Q(C,C
is conventional to take Q = 1
i where si is the
N
state of spin i in conﬁguration C containing N spins, and
similarly s(cid:48)
For a ﬁxed stable glass conﬁguration C0, we then con-
sider a biased thermal distribution for conﬁguration C at
temperature T :

i is the state of spin i in conﬁguration C

(cid:48).

(cid:80)

i sis(cid:48)

II. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND

A. Basic process: Bulk transformation of stable glasses

To describe our general theoretical setting, we use C
to denote a conﬁguration of some glassy system (for ex-
ample, this might represent the positions of N particles
within a liquid, or the states of N spins in the TPM). The
potential energy of conﬁguration C is E(C). We prepare a
stable glass state, which is associated with a probability

Pε(C|C0) ∝ e

−[E(C)−εN Q(C,C0)]/T .

(3)

Here, a positive value of the ﬁeld ε biases the conﬁgura-
tion C to be similar to the reference conﬁguration C0.
If C0 is a low temperature stable glass state and the
temperature T is not too high, one expects14 a ﬁrst-order
phase transition to occur at some ε∗ = ε∗(T, T0). The
expected phase diagram in the plane (ε, T ) is sketched
in Fig. 1(a). At this transition, the average value of the
overlap (cid:104)Q(cid:105)ε jumps from a small to a large value, as ε
is increased through ε∗. For ε > ε∗, the conﬁguration

3

tally relevant.

The central point of our paper is that the case ε < ε∗
includes the physical melting dynamics which occurs at
ε = 0. In this case, our thought experiment corresponds
to the natural (unbiased) dynamics of C, which is in-
dependent of C0, except for the transient eﬀect of this
initial condition. The existence of the ﬁrst-order tran-
sition at ε∗ becomes physically relevant for the melting
process when ∆ε = (ε∗
− ε) is small, because the sys-
tem is then very close to a ﬁrst-order phase boundary.
In this case, the system can be expected to relax into
the low-overlap stable phase by a nucleation-and-growth
mechanism. The range of ε over which this condition ap-
plies is discussed in Sec. II C below. The result is that
if the critical ﬁeld ε∗ itself is suﬃciently small, the natu-
ral melting process for stable glasses occurs close to this
ﬁrst-order phase boundary, so the nucleation-and growth
phenomenology should be at play. The qualitative dif-
ference between ordinary and ultrastable glasses is then
very clear, as ε(T, T0) for a given T decreases rapidly as
T0 becomes smaller, implying that the melting of more
stable glasses occurs closer to the phase boundary than
the one of ordinary glasses. Note ﬁnally that this ar-
gument is fully independent of the existence of a ﬁnite
temperature ideal glass transition TK.

C. Transformation kinetics near ﬁrst-order transitions

If the transformation of a stable glass into a liquid
occurs near a ﬁrst-order phase transition, this immedi-
ately suggests that behaviour similar to ordinary ﬁrst-
order melting should be observed. We brieﬂy summarize
the features of these processes that are relevant for the
present situation.

1. Classical nucleation theory

Close enough to the phase boundary, the transforma-
tion from conﬁguration C0 will take place via the nucle-
ation of a droplet of the low-overlap phase, as depicted
in Fig. 1(b). Applying classical nucleation theory (CNT)
to this physical situation, we express the free energy to
grow a droplet of the new (low-overlap) state of size R
inside the old (high-overlap) phase as37,38

∆F (R) ≈ γRd−1 − ∆µRd,

(4)

where γ is an interfacial energy cost and ∆µ > 0 the
free energy diﬀerence between the two phases, which is
expected to scale as the distance to the phase transition,
∆µ ∝ (ε∗
− ε). Maximising ∆F then gives the size of
the critical nucleus, R∗
∼ γ/∆µ, and of the free energy
∼ γd/∆µd−1. Both R∗ and
barrier to be crossed, ∆F ∗
∆F ∗ diverge at the phase boundary where ∆µ → 0.
In the coupled-replica system, this picture is slightly
more complicated since the reference conﬁguration C0 en-
ters the problem as a source of quenched disorder15,39,40.

FIG. 1.
(a) Phase diagram for coupled replicas. There is
a ﬁrst-order phase boundary between high- and low-overlap
phases. Depending on the model, this phase boundary may
intersect the ε = 0 axis at a ﬁnite temperature TK (as hap-
pens in mean-ﬁeld models14) or at T = 0 (as in plaquette
models22–24). (b) Schematic ﬁgure illustrating nucleation and
growth of a single droplet of a new state, within an origi-
nal (reference) state. (c) Schematic ﬁgure showing nucleation
and growth in a large system, where multiple nuclei form and
grow. There is a large length scale (cid:96)nuc which is the typical
spacing between nuclei.

C becomes trapped in the same metastable state as the
reference conﬁguration C0. We emphasize that the ﬁeld
ε is a thermodynamic quantity that appears directly in
the energy function (3), so that the transition at ε∗ is
an ordinary thermodynamic phase transition, not a non-
equilibrium one.

What is the connection with the bulk melting of a sin-
gle stable glass conﬁguration? To see this, consider the
following thought-experiment (or computer simulation).
We generate a stable glass conﬁguration C0, and we ini-
tialise the system in this state by setting C = C0. Then,
at time t = 0, we connect the system to a thermal bath
at temperature T , as in the usual setting of Sec. II A. For
t > 0 we run the dynamics as usual, except that the sys-
tem energy is now biased, as Eε(C) = E(C)−εN Q(C,C0),
so that the system will eventually converge to the dis-
tribution function in Eq. (3). This distribution diﬀers
in general from an equilibrium state at temperature T ,
which is recovered only for ε = 0.
If we choose the ﬁeld strength ε such that ε > ε∗ then
Eq. (3) means that C will remain forever in the same
metastable state as C0, so the overlap Q(C,C0) will remain
close to unity. This implies that the system remains in
a conﬁguration close to the initial stable glass state for
arbitrary long times: the glass never melts!
If instead
one has ε < ε∗, then the system will eventually relax to
a state whose overlap with the initial glass conﬁguration
is low. In this case, it should sample conﬁgurations sim-
ilar to the equilibrium ﬂuid at temperature T . In other
words, the ﬁeld ε gives an additional handle to control
the kinetic stability ratio S of the glass when heated to
a temperature T ≥ T0. The ratio S can then be tuned
from the physical value obtained at ε = 0, up to S → ∞
when ε → ε∗. We argue that this new handle, which
allows us to produce glasses with arbitrary-large kinetic
stability ratio, provides a key to a deeper understanding
of the melting process and makes our study experimen-

Critical pointBias"Low overlap(a)Original (single) stateNew state(b)growthFirst-order line(c)TTKHigh overlapv`nucPhysically, this means that (i) the system is no longer
translationally invariant, so nucleation events might take
place preferentially in particular regions of the system
where the free energy barrier is particularly low, and
(ii) there will be important sample-to-sample ﬂuctuations
of γ and ∆µ, which means that these parameters will de-
pend on the speciﬁc reference conﬁguration C0. While
these two eﬀects are certainly relevant for the melting
of real stable glasses, we shall neglect them in the fol-
lowing. Our strategy is to ﬁrst obtain a robust general
picture of the physical process, leaving for future work a
more careful study of how quenched disorder aﬀects the
simple description oﬀered here. This represents a signif-
icant, but certainly worthwhile, additional eﬀort.

2. Avrami kinetics

We can use the phase diagram in Fig. 1a to rationalise
the giant length scale and the heterogeneous relaxation
observed in experiments. The idea is that when ε∗ is
small, then the natural dynamics of the system at ε = 0
still corresponds to the regime where (ε∗
− ε) is small
and positive.
In this case the system is dominated by
nucleation-and-growth, where large length scales and het-
erogeneous relaxation are expected.

To see this, let us recall the Avrami picture of nucle-
ation kinetics38,41. In a large system, the nucleation rate
per unit volume is

−∆F ∗/T .

knuc ∼ e

(5)

That is, starting from a system of volume V that is en-
tirely in the high-overlap phase, the droplets of the low-
overlap phase appear at random positions in the system,
with total rate knucV , as sketched in Fig. 1(c). These
droplets grow with a characteristic velocity v, until such
time as they encounter each other and start to overlap.
Thus, paraphrasing Avrami’s derivation41, the fraction f
of material in the original (high-overlap) state evolves as

∂f
∂t

= −f · knuct · cdvdtd−1

(6)

where cd is a dimensionless constant that depends only
on the spatial dimension, such that the factor cdvdtd−1 is
the mean rate of growth of new material due to a single
droplet whose radius is randomly (uniformly) distributed
between 0 and vt. The factor knuct is the number of nu-
cleation events that have occurred up to time t, and the
factor of f takes care of the fact that if new material is
generated in a place where the system has already trans-
formed then this has no eﬀect on the amount of the old
phase that remains. The resulting time dependence is

favr(t) = e

−(t/τavr)d+1

,

(7)

where the characteristic time for formation of the new
phase is

(cid:0)knucvd(cid:1)−1/(d+1)

τrec = τavr (cid:39)

4

The characteristic compressed exponential shape of the
relaxation function in Eq. (7) appears because droplets
grow with a ﬁxed velocity, so the rate of production of the
new phase increases with time and is proportional to the
surface area of these droplets. The transformation time
τrec in Eq. (8) has a strong dependence on both T and T0
as it involves both the velocity v of the front propagation
(which presumably decreases rapidly as T is decreased),
and the nucleation rate knuc, which varies exponentially
with control parameters, see Eq. (5).

Note also that if quenched disorder in the system leads
to heterogeneous nucleation, the factor knuct in (6) will
only be linear in time for small t, and will cross over to a
sublinear increase for larger times. This may lead to an
apparent reduction of the exponent d + 1 that appears in
the compressed exponential in (7), as found in Ref. 42.

3. Emergence of a ‘giant’ dynamic lengthscale

There is an important length scale associated with this
process, which is much larger than the size of the critical
nucleus R∗ discussed above. The physical picture is that
phase transformation of a large system involves many in-
dependent nucleation events, followed by growth of the
resulting droplets of the new phase, until they coalesce.
This situation is sketched in Fig. 1(c). The typical num-
ber of nucleation events that happen during the transfor-
mation is N (cid:39) knucV τavr so the typical distance between
the independent nucleation events is

(cid:96)nuc = (V /N )1/d (cid:39) (v/knuc)1/(d+1).

(9)

tremely small, log knuc ∼ −1/(ε∗
ity v ∼ (ε∗

Near the phase boundary, the nucleation rate is ex-
− ε), whereas the veloc-
− ε) vanishes much more slowly. This means
that (cid:96)nuc can become very large, or ‘giant’, as it scales
exponentially with the distance from the phase boundary,

(cid:20) ∆F ∗

(cid:21)

(cid:96)nuc∼ exp

T (d + 1)

∼ exp (A/|ε − ε|α) ,

(10)
where ∆F ∗ is the free energy barrier within CNT, so
A is a constant that depends on the surface tension γ
between the phases and α is a constant (equal to d − 1
within CNT).
The scale (cid:96)nuc appears as a sort of dynamical hetero-
geneity in the non-equilibrium transformation process. It
also leads to strong ﬁnite-size eﬀects in the transforma-
tion kinetics. If the system size is less than (cid:96)nuc then the
Avrami picture breaks down and the system transforms
by a single nucleation event, followed by a droplet that
quickly grows and takes over the system.
In this case
the compressed exponential relaxation of Eq. (7) is re-
placed by simple exponential relaxation associated with
the waiting time for the ﬁrst nucleation event to occur.
That is, for system sizes L (cid:38) (cid:96)nuc, one expects relaxation
to follow (7) but for L (cid:46) (cid:96)nuc one expects instead

.

(8)

f (t) = e

−t/τ1 ,

(11)

with τrec = τ1 ∼ 1/(knucV ) the volume-dependent mean
waiting time for the ﬁrst nucleation event. (Notice that
this relation implies that smaller samples are more stable
than larger ones.) Therefore, the exponentially diverging
lengthscale (cid:96)nuc in Eq. (10) is also the crossover length-
scale controlling ﬁnite-size eﬀects.

We note that this picture, of nucleation followed by
front propagation at ﬁnite velocity, requires two impor-
tant assumptions. First, it only makes sense if nucle-
ation is rare enough (that is, knuc small enough) that
the growing nuclei can be identiﬁed and observed be-
fore they start to overlap. This condition can be in-
terpreted as the ﬁnite-dimensional signature of a spin-
odal line – roughly speaking, the spinodal is the point
where the nucleation barrier is of the same order as the

thermal energy, ∆F ∗/T ≈ 1, so that nucleation is no
longer rare, and the system becomes locally unstable to
phase transformation37.
In terms of stable glass melt-
ing, this criterion sets an upper limit on (ε∗
In
addition, to observe Avrami-like nucleation-and-growth
kinetics, one also requires that the growth velocity v is
large enough that nuclei of the new phase grow quickly
once they are formed. Equivalently, the length scale (cid:96)nuc
should be much larger than the critical nucleus size R∗,
since otherwise the arguments leading to (7) break down.
As ε → ε∗, the critical nucleus R∗ diverges as a power
law in (ε∗
− ε) while (cid:96)nuc diverges exponentially, so this
condition is surely satisﬁed. However, if this condition
breaks down for smaller ε (including the case of unbiased
dynamics, ε = 0), then one expects the transformation
by nucleation-and-growth to be replaced by an alterna-
tive mechanism with diﬀerent kinetics. This might be
what happens in the melting of ordinary glasses.

− ε).

4. Relation to stable glass melting

Assuming that the picture of Fig. 1 applies to sta-
ble glass melting, we arrive at the following predictions.
(i) We expect Avrami kinetics as in Eq. (7) for the trans-
formation of large systems, with a crossover to simple ex-
ponential kinetics in smaller systems. For systems close
to phase boundaries, the length scale (cid:96)nuc associated with
this crossover may become very large. (ii) The transfor-
mation process should be strongly heterogeneous, involv-
ing fronts moving with a typical velocity v, and dynami-
cal correlations over length scales up to (cid:96)nuc. (iii) If it is
possible to introduce (in simulations) a bias ε, length and
time scales should grow rapidly as ε increases towards ε∗.
The ﬁrst two of these predictions are consistent with
observed experimental data2,8,43. In the following, we il-
lustrate all three of these eﬀects in the TPM. We also
discuss some behaviour in this model that may be diﬀer-
ent from the experimental situation, and we discuss the
reasons for these eﬀects.

III. THE TRIANGULAR PLAQUETTE MODEL

5

The TPM is deﬁned on a two-dimensional triangu-
lar lattice16,44.
In our computer simulations we use a
rhombus-shaped system of L2 = N sites, with peri-
odic boundaries. The spins are located on lattice sites
and are denoted by si = ±1 with i = 1 . . . N . We
also identify upward-pointing triangular plaquettes on
the lattice: each plaquette µ is associated with three
spins siµ, sjµ, skµ. We deﬁne plaquette variables nµ =
(1 − siµ sjµskµ)/2, with nµ = 0, 1. The energy of the
system is

(12)

(13)

(cid:88)

µ

E = −

J
2

siµsjµskµ

(cid:88)

µ

= −N J/2 + J

nµ

Hence plaquettes with nµ = 1 are excitations (or excited
plaquettes), which carry energy J.

At equilibrium (and for large systems), excited pla-
quettes are distributed as an ideal gas, so the plaquette
variables are independently identically distributed with
(cid:104)nµ(cid:105) = c = 1/(1 + eJ/T ). In the following we ﬁx the en-
ergy scale J = 1, which also sets the temperature scale.
In ﬁnite periodic systems, it is convenient to take the
size L as an integer power of two, in which case ther-
modynamic properties of the model are free from ﬁnite-
size eﬀects44.
In this case, for any given conﬁguration
of the plaquette variables nµ, there is exactly one possi-
ble conﬁguration of the spin variables si, which may be
constructed directly23,44.

The model evolves in time by ﬂipping spins accord-
ing to Metropolis rates: spin i ﬂips with rate given by
min(1, e∆Ei/T ), where ∆Ei is the change in energy re-
quired to ﬂip the spin. The ensures that the system con-
verges a Boltzmann distribution p(C) ∝ e−E(C)/T . The
dynamical evolution is implemented using a continuous
time Monte Carlo (MC) method45.
(cid:80)
tween conﬁgurations with spins si and s(cid:48)
is pst(C) ∝ e−E(C)/T0 with T0 < T . For T0 = 0, this

When considering coupled replicas, the overlap be-
is Q =
i. The distribution of initial (stable glass) states

means that the initial state always has all spins with
si = +1, since this is the ground state of the model,
which is unique since we take periodic boundaries and
the system size is an integer power of two.

i sis(cid:48)

1
N

i

Since the model is deﬁned in two spatial dimensions,
the phase diagram in Fig. 1(a) applies only for the spe-
cial case T0 = 0. The ﬁrst-order phase transition meets
the ε = 0 axis at T = 0, since the thermodynamic prop-
erties of the model for ε = 0 are trivial for all T > 0
(the system maps to an ideal gas of excited plaquettes).
The critical temperature in Fig. 1a is then Tc = 0.38 (see
Ref. 23). For T0 > 0, the phase transitions in Fig. 1 are
destroyed by the quenched disorder that enters the prob-
lem through the random conﬁguration C0. In this case,
the ﬁrst-order transition in Fig. 1 is replaced by a smooth

6

at temperature T , and eventually equilibrates at that
temperature. For ﬁxed T = 1
3 , Fig. 2 shows the time-
dependence of this process for various T0, through the
time-dependent average overlap q(t) = (cid:104)Q(Ct,C0)(cid:105) and
the average energy per spin (cid:104)E(t)/N(cid:105). The system size
is L = 64, which is large enough that these results are
representative of the large-L limit (for this speciﬁc exam-
ple). Finite-size eﬀects will be discussed in more detail
below.

For T0 = 0 the initial conﬁguration has all spins up.
Both the overlap and the energy are ﬁtted in the long-
time regime by Avrami (compressed exponential) form
given in Eq. (7), with τavr = 1.1 × 104. At very early
times, there are small ﬂuctuations within the stable glass
state that reduce Q and increase E – these are not ﬁtted
by the Avrami form, which describes only the nucleation-
and-growth process. For this reason the ﬁtting function
is q(t) = afavr(t) with favr(t) given by (7) and a = 0.925
a ﬁtting parameter.

Another special situation is when T0 = T = 1

3 in which
case the average energy does not depend on time, by def-
inition, and the overlap shows the equilibrium relaxation
of the TPM. In this case the overlap has a stretched ex-
ponential form, as is typical in glassy systems at equil-
brium. We show a ﬁt to a exp[−(t/τeq)α] with τeq = 857,
α = 0.74 and a = 0.978: note this is a three-parameter
ﬁt, in contrast to the two-parameter Avrami ﬁt shown for
T0 = 0 where the compression exponent is ﬁxed by the-
ory. As T0 increases from 0 to T , the system crosses over
from compressed exponential (Avrami-like) kinetics, in-
dicative of nucleation-and-growth, to stretched exponen-
tial (glassy) kinetics, indicative of heterogeneous relax-
ation with a broad range of time scales. In the language
of Fig. 1 this crossover takes place because increasing T0
moves the relaxation dynamics at ε = 0 further away
from the ﬁrst-order phase boundary until its inﬂuence is
no longer felt when T0 = T .

B. Kinetic stability ratio

It is clear that the stable glass state with T0 = 0 re-
quires a long time to recover to equilibrium, compared
with equilibrium relaxation at T = 1
3 . We extract the
time for recovery to equilibrum as q(τrec) = 1/e, and we
identify S = τrec/τeq as a stability ratio. We measure S
for various pairs (T0, T ) and report our results in Fig. 3.
These results depend both on the stable glass state itself
(through the temperature T0) and on the transformation
temperature T . For a ﬁxed melting temperature T , lower
energy stable glasses are always more stable, as might be
physically expected, but the dependence on the transfor-
mation temperature is non-monotonic. Large stability
ratios appear in a range of intermediate transformation
temperatures T .

To understand this last result, note that for very high
T , the rate for any spin to ﬂip in the TPM approaches
1, and all glassy behavior is lost. Hence τrec (cid:39) τeqm (cid:39) 1,

5 , 1

FIG. 2. Overlap q(t) for stable glass recovery at T = 1/3,
varying T0. (Temperatures are quoted to 2 signiﬁcant ﬁgures
6 , 1
throughout, the precise values used were T0 = 0, 1
4 , 1
3 .)
Points are simulation results and lines are ﬁts:
for T0 = 0
the late-time relaxation (t ≥ 2000) is ﬁtted to an Avrami
form q(t) = ae−(t/τ )3
. For T0 = T (equilibrium relaxation)
the ﬁt is a stretched exponential q(t) = ae−(t/τ )α
with ﬁtted
α = 0.74. The system size is L = 64, which is large enough
that the behaviour is representative of the limit L → ∞.
(b) Energy per spin, (cid:104)E(t)/N(cid:105), for the same process. The
dashed line is the equilibrium energy (cid:104)E(cid:105)T = N (1 + e1/T )−1,
and the results for T0 = 0 have been ﬁtted with an Avrami
form E(t) = (cid:104)E(cid:105)T − ae−(t/τ )3

.

crossover46,47, but the behaviour near this crossover can
still resemble what happens near a phase transition: this
eﬀect will be demonstrated below. To observe a phase
transition using a ﬁnite preparation temperature T0 > 0,
one should study a three-dimensional generalisation of
the model23, which would then allow detailed theoreti-
cal analysis of the eﬀect of the quenched disorder on the
melting dynamics.

IV. KINETICS OF STABLE GLASS MELTING

A. Bulk melting in large systems

As described above, we initialise a TPM in an equilib-
rium conﬁguration at temperature T0 and time t = 0.
The system then evolves for t > 0 by MC dynamics

101102103104t00.20.40.60.81q(t)T0 = 0.00T0 = 0.17T0 = 0.20T0 = 0.25T0 = 0.33 (a)101102103104t00.020.04E(t) / N(b)hE(t)/Ni7

nature of the coupling of the stable glass to the ther-
mal bath is rather diﬀerent in experiments, compared
to this kind of model, where all spins are strongly and
directly coupled to the heat bath. As discussed above,
we expect this strong coupling to lead to S ≈ 1 at high
temperatures. Experimentally, such a trivial eﬀect has
not been reported, even after temperature jumps to rela-
tively high-temperatures in the mode-coupling regime48.
Of course, in experiments, each molecule is not directly
coupled to a stochastic heat bath, and the calorimetric
process following a sudden temperature change is less
trivial than in simulations: this might explain the dis-
crepancy with our results in this regime, which is anyway
not very relevant.

C. System size dependence of transformation dynamics

As discussed in Sec. II C, the nucleation-and-growth
picture of stable glass transformation predicts strong
ﬁnite-size eﬀects in the transformation kinetics. Figure 4
shows this eﬀect, for the case T = 1
3 and T0 = 0 dis-
cussed above. Fig. 4(a) shows a signiﬁcant ﬁnite-size
eﬀect in systems of linear sizes L = 32 and L = 16,
whereas L = 64 seems to have converged to the inﬁnite
system size limit. This may be compared with the be-
havior shown in Fig. 4(b), which shows similar results for
equilibrium relaxation at T = 1
3 . In this case, ﬁnite-size
eﬀects are signiﬁcant only for L = 8 and L = 4. This in-
dicates that the non-equilibrium melting is characterised
by a lengthscale that is of order four times larger than
its equilibrium counterpart. At equilibrium, the typi-
cal length scale for many-body spin correlations and dy-
namical heterogeneity in the TPM scales as ξ (cid:39) e1/(T df )
where df = log2(3) ≈ 1.585 is the fractal dimension of
Sierpinski’s triangle17. While the prefactor (proportion-
ality constant) in the scaling relation for ξ is not known,
assuming that this factor is close to unity yields ξ ≈ 7
for T = 1
Returning to the non-equilibrium relaxation of low-
temperature initial states [Fig. 4(a)], the behaviour of
q(t) in the smaller system (L = 16) is close to exponen-
tial, consistent with the theoretical prediction in Eq. (11)
and in contrast to the compressed exponential found for
Avrami kinetics in large systems. Finally, Fig. 4(c) shows
that while the average relaxation is exponential in a small
system size, the individual trajectories relax with a sim-
ple two-state mechanism, where a single rare event leads
to immediate transformation of the whole system. The
physical idea is that once nucleation has occured, the
growth of the droplet of the new phase is so fast that it
quickly takes over the whole system, so the system trans-
forms by a single nucleation event. The exponential form
is recovered by performing averages over diﬀerent sam-
ples, because the instant of the melting ﬂuctuates from
one sample to another, presumably in a Poisson manner.
We again emphasise that while the length scale in
Fig. 4 is still relatively modest, and not comparable with

3 , consistent with Fig. 4(b).

FIG. 3. Stability ratio S = τrec/τeq as a function of inverse
temperature T −1 where melting occurs, for various prepara-
tion temperature T0.

so that when the melting temperature belongs to the
non-glassy high-temperature regime, one necessarily has
S ≈ 1. Physically, this eﬀect may be attributed to the
MC dynamics of the system, which implies that all spins
are directly coupled to a stochastic heat bath, and this
coupling is strong enough to melt the glass locally, with-
out requiring any collective dynamics. Another trivial
limit, on the other hand, is for T = T0 where the re-
covery time extracted from the time-dependent overlap
τrec is equal, by deﬁnition, to the equilibrium relaxation
time τeqm. Hence one must again have S = 1 at T = T0.
Therefore, for a given low T0 value, S ≈ 1 both at very
high T and when T approaches T0: the stable glass be-
havior becomes apparent only for intermediate T values,
which results in a non-monotonic temperature depen-
dence. The only exception is when T0 = 0 in which
case we expect S to increase monotonically on reduc-
ing T without turning down again, because τeq → ∞ as
T0 → 0 and the position of the maximum of S has shifted
to T = 0.
We note that kinetic stability ratios S found in ex-
periments are often much larger than the values shown
here, and they also tend to increase with temperature
T , which is the opposite trend to the data for T0 = 0
in Fig. 3.
In comparing absolute values of S with ex-
periments, we note that the temperatures T considered
here are relatively high, in the sense that equilibrium re-
laxation in the TPM at temperature T = 1
3 is only 2-3
decades slower than high-temperature (liquid-like) relax-
ation times. The stability ratio increases rapidly (faster
than an Arrhenius-law) on reducing T so we might easily
imagine reaching much larger stability ratios if we were
able to perform simulations on the very long time scales
comparable with experiment. It is indeed hard to imagine
having a ‘more stable’ glass than a perfectly thermalised
T0 = 0 initial conﬁguration.

From our results, it is not so easy to rationalize the ap-
parent experimental ﬁnding that stability ratios S tend
to increase with T over a wide temperature range (and
not just for T close to T0). However, we note that the

123451 / T110100ST0 = 0.00T0 = 0.17T0 = 0.18T0 = 0.208

(a) Overlap q(t) showing stable glass recovery for
FIG. 5.
(T0, T ) = (0, 1
3 ), varying ε (increasing left to right). The
values of ε are (0, 0.01, 0.0133, 0.0150, 0.0157), as indicated in
panel (b) with open circles. Solid lines show the behaviour
that we ﬁnd in the limit of large system size. For the largest
values of ε, convergence of this limit requires system sizes of
L = 512, 1024. To illustrate these strong ﬁnite-size eﬀects, nu-
merical results for smaller systems are also shown. (b) Phase
behavior of a TPM, coupled by the ﬁeld ε to a conﬁguration
C0 at T0 = 0. The solid line indicates a ﬁrst-order phase tran-
sition, which separates high-overlap and low-overlap phases,
and ends at a critical point (black dot). The state points
considered in (a) are indicated by open circles. (c) The trans-
formation times τrec obtained from panel (a) grow rapidly
as ε approaches the ﬁrst-order transition, which occurs at
ε∗ ≈ 0.0166.

exploiting the coupled-replica construction described in
Sec. II B, producing both large stability ratio and, indeed,
giant dynamic lengthscales.

D. Transformation dynamics for coupled replicas

The ﬁts to Avrami theory in Fig. 2 indicate a
nucleation-and-growth mechanism associated with a
ﬁrst-order phase transition. We now show that this phase
transition is the one anticipated by Franz and Parisi14,
as discussed for the TPM in Refs. 22 and 23, and for a
three-dimensional generalisation of this model in Ref. 24.
To this end, we now consider melting from T0 to T in
the presence of a positive biasing ﬁeld ε > 0, as discussed
in Sec. II B. We show results in Fig. 5(a) for the transfor-
mation kinetics of a stable glass with T0 = 0 at T = 1
3 ,

FIG. 4. (a) System size dependence of stable glass recovery
at (T, T0) = ( 1
3 , 0). For large systems, one observes com-
pressed exponential (Avrami-like) kinetics, as in Fig. 2. For
smaller systems, the long-time relaxation is close to exponen-
tial (dashed line), which we attribute to the exponentially-
distributed waiting time for the ﬁrst nucleation event. (b) Fi-
nite size eﬀects for equilibrium relaxation at T = T0 = 1
3 are
visible only for small systems L = 4, 8. (c) The average over-
lap during stable glass recovery at L = 16 (data repeated from
(a)), compared with three realisations of the time-dependent
overlap Q(C0,Ct). In each individual trajectory, the system
makes a rapid transformation between two states, involving
a slow nucleation step followed by a very rapid growth of the
new phase, which leads to an abrupt decay of the overlap.

the giant length scales observed in experiments, the sta-
bility ratio for this case is also relatively low (S ≈ 13).
For lower transformation temperatures T , we expect
much larger stability ratios accompanied by much larger
lengthscales – the diﬃculty is that the long time scales
for these processes make simulations diﬃcult.
In Sec-
tion IV D, we show how this diﬃculty can be avoided by

103104105t00.20.40.60.81q(t)L = 16L = 32L = 64L = 128 (a)100101102103104t00.20.40.60.81q(t)L = 4L = 8L = 16L = 32(b)103104105t00.20.40.60.81q(t)(c)103104105106107t00.20.40.60.81q(t)large LL = 128L = 256L = 512(a)00.020.04ε00.20.4T(b)low-Qhigh-Qcritical point-0.02-0.010ε − ε*104105106107τrec(c)as the biasing ﬁeld ε is slowly increased. Concentrating
ﬁrst on the bulk (large-system) behaviour, one observes
an increase of almost three orders of magnitude in the
transformation time. To rationalise this eﬀect, Fig. 5(b)
shows the phase diagram of the TPM in the presence of
the coupling ﬁeld ε for a reference temperature T0 = 0.
Note that since T0 = 0, the reference conﬁguration C0
has si = 1 for all i. Due to this simple reference conﬁgu-
ration, the bias ε simply behaves as a magnetic ﬁeld, and
so this model belongs to the 2d Ising universality class23
and there is no quenched disorder, in contrast to cases
with T0 > 0. The ﬁrst-order phase boundary is known
exactly due to a duality symmetry of the model49,50, the
position of the critical point was obtained numerically
in Ref. 23 as Tc ≈ 0.38. The path followed in Fig. 5(a)
is represented in the phase diagram shown in Fig. 5(b),
which explains the rapid growth of the transformation
time τrec as the transition is approached, as expected for
ﬁrst-order transitions.

The growth of the (bulk) transformation time τrec with
ε is shown in Fig. 5(c), in a representation which clearly
indicates that it should diverge exponentially fast as ε →
ε∗
≈ 0.0166. Because the temperature is constant in this
ﬁgure, the increase of τrec translates into a an increase
of the kinetic stability ratio S from S ≈ 13 at ε = 0
to S ≈ 5500 at ε = 0.0157. The very large stability
ratio reached near ε∗ is comparable to the experimental
measurements reported for ultrastable glasses, and we
hypothesise that the melting process in both cases should
be very similar.

It is therefore experimentally relevant to demonstrate
that such a large stability ratio is also associated with
very strong ﬁnite-size eﬀects in the transformation kinet-
ics, as predicted in Sec. II C. These results are also shown
in Fig. 5(a). For the largest ﬁeld considered (ε = 0.0157),
there is a signiﬁcant ﬁnite-size eﬀect in melting dynam-
ics even for L = 512. For ε = 0.0150, the behaviour for
L = 512 is consistent with the large-L limit, but there is a
signiﬁcant ﬁnite-size eﬀect for L = 256. Comparing with
equilibrium relaxation at this temperature [Fig. 4(c)], the
stability ratio of S ≈ 5500 is accompanied by a giant
length scale, in the sense that it is around two orders
of magnitude larger than the length scales characterising
equilibrium behaviour of the simple liquid at the same
temperature.

For T0 > 0 the fact that the TPM is a two-dimensional
model means that the ﬁrst-order phase transition shown
in Fig. 5(b) is destroyed by the quenched disorder that
comes from the randomness contained in the ﬁnite tem-
46,47. (The same reasoning also
perature conﬁguration C0
explains the absence of a phase transition in the random
ﬁeld Ising model in two dimensions.) Nevertheless, one
can still observe vestiges of this phase transition on ﬁnite
length and time scales. Indeed, Fig. 2 shows that the sta-
ble glass transformation for T0 > 0 is qualitatively very
similar to that for T0 = 0, at least when T0 is low enough.
To illustrate this eﬀect more clearly, Fig. 6 shows results
for T0 = 1
6 , for increasing bias ε. For small ﬁelds ε,

9

FIG. 6. Overlap q(t) showing stable glass recovery at T = 1
6 ≈ 0.17, for ε = 0, 0.0133, 0.0167, 0.0183 (increas-
3
and T (cid:48) = 1
ing from left to right). As in Fig. 5, solid lines show the
behaviour in the large size limit, while symbols show data in
smaller systems, to illustrate ﬁnite size eﬀects. For the largest
ε, we have veriﬁed that the large-L limit is converged by com-
paring data for L = 256, 512, 1024, which all agree to within
statistical error (not shown).

these results resemble the ones in Fig. 5(a), with a trans-
formation time that increases by nearly two orders of
magnitude, with compressed exponential (Avrami-like)
transformation kinetics. We again attribute these results
to nucleation-and-growth kinetics. As long as the critical
nucleus is not too large, it is not apparent that the ﬁrst-
order phase transition has been destroyed by quenched
disorder, since the eﬀect of the disorder operates on large
length scales46,47. However, as ε is increased, the critical
nucleus grows and the eﬀects of the quenched disorder
become apparent as a change in transformation kinetics,
crossing over from a compressed to a stretched exponen-
tial form. This shows that the eﬀects of the (avoided)
transition can still be felt, particularly when ε is not too
close to ε∗.

In three dimensions, phase transitions survive24 for
T0 > 0, so one would expect nucleation-and-growth ki-
netics with a diverging time scale in that case too.
It
would be interesting to investigate these eﬀects in a three-
dimensional model such as the square-pyramid model
(SPyM), which is a three-dimensional generalisation of
the TPM. In particular, it would be useful to under-
stand the inﬂuence of quenched disorder on nucleation
and growth near the ﬁrst-order transition in that case,
but we postpone that investigation for a future study.

V. NUCLEATION-AND-GROWTH DYNAMICS

A. Qualitative observations

In this section, we show images of the heterogeneous
nucleation-and-growth dynamics that takes place in the
TPM as it transforms from an initial state at T0 = 0 to
an equilibrium state at temperature T . To investigate

103104105106107t00.20.40.60.81q(t)large LL = 64L = 12810

FIG. 7. Time-dependent local overlap qi(t) during nucleation and growth for (T0, T ) = (0, 1
3 ). Pale blue indicates sites
where qi(t) = +1, so Ct matches the initial conﬁguration C0; black sites are where the conﬁgurations diﬀer. (a) System size
L = 64 and ε = 0.007. The conﬁgurations are equally spaced in log(time) between 0.15τrec and 1.06τrec, with τrec ≈ 28000.
Two independent growing nuclei of the low overlap phase are highlighted in red. At the ﬁnal time, the system has reached
equilibrium and approximately half of the spins match the initial condition, so the overlap is small (q(t) ≈ 0.02). (b) System size
L = 1024 and ε = 0.015 for times (t/τrec) = (0.36, 0.52, 0.75) with τrec = 1.1 × 106. There are multiple nucleation events, and
the growing clusters merge and eventually percolate. At the merging time, the ‘giant’ lengthscale of the dynamic heterogeneity
is about two orders of magnitude larger than in equilibrium at the same T .

this, we consider the local time-dependent overlap

qi(t) = si(t)si(0),

(14)

which is equal to +1 if spin i is in the same state as it
was in the initial (reference) conﬁguration C0. Similar
snapshots have been produced in earlier simulations of
ultrastable glasses produced by random pinning32.

3 , ε = 0.007.

We show in Fig. 7(a) how the overlap evolves as a sys-
tem transforms from a low energy initial condition to
an equilibrium state, for a representative trajectory at
T = 1
In that case, the system size is
L = 64. As time increases, we see the emergence of a
ﬁrst nucleation event (highlighted in red), followed by a
second one at a later time (also highlighted). These two
droplets then rapidly expand and ﬁll the entire system.
At the time when the growing domains merge, the dy-
namic heterogeneity seems to be maximal, as the system
is half relaxed in a spatially heterogeneous manner. At
very long times, the system is homogeneous again, and
resembles a typical equilibrium liquid conﬁguration at
that same temperature.

In Fig. 7(b) we show a similar time series of spin con-

ﬁgurations for the same temperature T = 1
3 but a larger
ﬁeld value ε = 0.0150, much closer to the transition point
at ε∗
≈ 0.0166. There is clearly a large length scale asso-
ciated with this dynamical relaxation, which is accompa-
nied by the much larger stability ratio shown in Fig. 5(c).
To construct these images, we have used a system size
L = 1024. The large length scale that is apparent in
these snapshots is consistent with Fig. 5(a) above, which
showed that ﬁnite-size eﬀects are signiﬁcant for this pro-
cess even for system sizes up to L = 256. We see multiple
nucleation events, followed by a rapid growth of the ﬂuid
phase invading the glass. These images provide a vivid
visual demonstration of the melting process taking place
in the present model.

B. Dynamic lengthscales via four-point functions

To analyse this behaviour quantitatively, we use the
machinery of four-point correlation functions, which have
been used extensively to discuss dynamical heterogeneity
in glassy systems at equilibrium11,51. Similar correlation

Time(a)(b)L=64L=1024"=0.007"=0.01511

FIG. 9. Four-point correlation function g4(r, t) for (T0, T ) =
(0, 1
3 ) and ε = 0, for times t/τrec = 0.16, 0.24, 0.36, 0.54, 0.81
(increasing from bottom to top). The lines (for selected
times only) are ﬁts to g4(r, t) = a(t)e−r/ξ4(t). (b) The time-
dependence of the length ξ4(t) can be ﬁtted as ξ4(t) = ξ0 + vt,
indicating growth at a constant velocity.

size should be of order (cid:96)2
nuc, which diverges exponentially
fast as the phase boundary is approached. Because the
transformation time τrec also diverges exponentially, we
expect a power law relation between χ∗
4 and τrec, consis-
tent with the simulation results in Fig. 8. Such power
law indicates a direct correlation between the stability
ratio S quantifying the kinetic stability to the relevant
dynamic lengthscale controlling the melting process, as
suggested before32.

To investigate this behaviour in more detail, we con-
sider the four-point correlation function g4,ij(t). This
function depends only on the relative positions of sites i
and j. For simplicity, we take a circular average of this
function, arriving at a function g4(r, t), where r is the
distance between sites i and j. (There is ﬁne structure
in the dependence g4,ij on the orientation relative to the
lattice of the vector connecting sites i and j, but this is
unimportant for the behavior considered here.) For nu-
cleation and growth, we expect domains to be compact,
and hence

g4(r, t) (cid:39) n(t)e

−r/ξ4(t)

(18)

where ξ4(t) is the typical size of a growing domain of the
new phase, and the prefactor n(t) should be proportional
to the number density of critical nuclei, at least in the
early-time regime where droplets do not overlap. Assum-
ing as in Sec. II C that droplets of the new phase grow
with velocity v, we expect

ξ4(t) ∼ vt + ξ0.

(19)

Results for a representative state point (with ε = 0)
are shown in Fig. 9, including ﬁts to Eqs. (18, 19). The
agreement is good, with a maximal domain size ξ∗
4 ≈ 11,
consistent with the observation of Fig. 4 that a system
size L = 16 is not large enough to recover bulk behaviour
at this state point.

We emphasise also that the linear growth with time of
the (non-equilibrium) dynamic heterogeneity length in

FIG. 8. Four-point susceptibility χ4 for (T0, T ) = (0, 1
3 ) as ε
is varied from 0 to 0.013 (increasing from left to right). The
increasing recovery time is accompanied by an increase in dy-
namical heterogeneity. The dashed line indicates χ4 ∼ t0.85,
showing that the dynamic heterogeneity lengthscale increases
algebraically with the kinetic stability of the glass.

functions were calculated for nucleation and growth pro-
cesses52,53, and were measured also during the melting of
randomly pinned glasses32.

Four-point correlation functions are constructed from

the overlap qi(t) as

g4,ij(t) = (cid:104)qi(t)qj(t)(cid:105) − q(t)2.

(15)

i qi(t)(cid:105) = q(t).

We emphasise that these averages run over both the
random initial condition and the stochastic dynamics of
(cid:80)
the model. This means that g4,ij depends only on the
relative positions of sites i and j, and that (cid:104)qi(t)(cid:105) =
N−1(cid:104)
The function g4,ij measures the correlations of the
overlap between sites so it characterises the correlated
regions shown in the snapshots of Fig. 7. For a simpler
characterisation of the strength of these correlations (or
the size of the correlated domains), we also consider the
four-point susceptibilty

(cid:35)2

(cid:43)

qi(t)

− N q(t)2

(cid:42)

(cid:34)(cid:88)
(cid:88)

i

1
N

χ4(t) =

=

1
N

g4,ij(t).

ij

(16)

(17)

Fig. 8 shows results for χ4(t) for T0 = 0, T = 1

3 , and
increasing ε. As expected for a system undergoing dy-
namically heterogeneous relaxation, the four-point sus-
ceptibility is non-monotonic in time, with a peak close
to τrec, where q(t) ≈ 1/e. The maximum value of χ4,
which we denote by χ∗
4, reﬂects the volume of domains
of high (or low) overlap, as seen in Fig. 7. The signiﬁ-
cant result from Fig. 8 is that χ∗
4 increases strongly as ε
is increased, providing a quantitative comparison of the
increased heterogeneity associated with nucleation-and-
growth as the phase boundary is approached. We expect
χ∗
4 to be comparable with the maximal volume of cor-
related domains in Fig. 7. Comparing with Fig. 1, this

104105106t1001000χ4(t)00.51t / τrec0510ξ4(t)0102030r0.0010.010.11g4(r,t)(a)(b)Eq. (19) again diﬀers strongly from the subdiﬀusive be-
haviour found in equilibrium studies of dynamic hetero-
geneity51. This result shows that the propagation of mo-
bility from rare nucleation sites is qualitatively similar to
the heterogeneous melting taking place from the interface
in experimental work on ultrastable glasses, even though
we observe the analog of ‘homogeneous’ melting38, i.e.
nucleation initiated from the bulk rather than from an
interface. For the present model, we expect the velocity
v to scale roughly as

v (cid:39)

ξeq
τeq

,

(20)

where ξeq is the equilibrium correlation length (of or-
der e1/(T df ) as discussed above), and τeq is the equilib-
rium relaxation time. The physical reasoning leading to
Eq. (20) is that on the low-overlap side of the front, the
system has a near-equilbrium structure, so its dynam-
ics are equilibrium-like. At equilibrium, regions of linear
size ξeq take a time of order τeq to equilibrate. Hence the
front moves through the system by successive equilibra-
tion of regions of size ξeq, each taking a time τeq, leading
to Eq. (20); see also the discussion in Ref. 54.

This scaling relation indicates that the velocity should
only depend on the ﬁnal temperature T , and should scale
essentially as 1/τeq, since the temperature dependence
of ξeq is much weaker than that of τeq. The scaling in
Eq. (20) is very much consistent with experiments55. The
temperature dependence of v(T ) has also been addressed
in the context of RFOT theory56–58. Together with the
snapshots in Fig. 7, the linear time dependence of ξ4(t) is
strong evidence that this system is exhibiting nucleation-
and-growth behaviour, consistent with Avrami’s theory.
We emphasise that this dynamical behaviour is taking
place for the natural (unbiased, ε = 0) behavior, even
if the only phase transitions that occurs in this model
happen for ﬁnite bias ε. This is a sense in which avoided
phase transitions such as the one shown in Fig. 1 can still
provide explanatory behaviour for the natural dynamical
behaviour of glass-forming systems.

VI. DISCUSSION

A. Connection to experimental results

There are three principal aspects of our results for the
TPM that are relevant for the mechanism of transforma-
tion of stable glasses in experiments. Since the simula-
tions use periodic boundaries, the relevant comparison is
with bulk stable glasses, or thick ﬁlms.

(1) The transformation of stable glasses in experiments
has been observed to be similar to crystal melting. The
TPM reproduces this eﬀect and we have explained this
phenomenology by reference to the ﬁrst-order transition
shown in Fig. 5. In two dimensions the transition is de-
stroyed for T0 > 0, but its signature can still be seen

12

in the transformation kinetics.
In the experimentally-
relevant three-dimensional case, the transition will sur-
vive for T0 > 0 so the mapping to ﬁrst-order phase trans-
formation should remain precise, and our interpretation
should hold.

(2) We predict the emergence of a ‘giant’ length scale
(cid:96)nuc from Eq. (9) that is essentially the spacing between
independent nucleation events. This length scale diverges
at the ﬁrst-order transition between high-overlap (stable
glass) and low-overlap (ﬂuid) states, but this transition
is present only for ε > 0.
In general, the length scale
is controlled by the nucleation rate knuc, which depends
strongly on the free energy diﬀerence ∆µ between the
stable glass and equilibrium ﬂuid states. For the physi-
cal case ε = 0, we expect ∆µ ≈ T sconf (T )− u(T ) + u(T0)
where sconf is the conﬁgurational entropy density that is
gained by the liquid during the transformation59, while
u(T )− u(T0) is the increase in internal energy due to the
temperature diﬀerence. At ﬁxed T , more stable glasses
have lower u(T0), and these will therefore be associated
with larger length scales. (More strictly, u would be a free
energy that includes the entropy associated with intra-
state ﬂuctuations and enthalpic contributions from vol-
ume changes during the tranformation process.)

Our interpretation of the giant length scales observed
as ﬁnite-size eﬀects in experiments is that for thin ﬁlms,
critical nuclei are so rare that propagating fronts coming
from the boundaries of the system can travel through the
entire ﬁlm before any nucleation event takes place. The
thick-ﬁlm (bulk) limit sets in only when homogeneous
nucleation and growth has a signiﬁcant eﬀect on relax-
ation. We expect this crossover to take place at the point
where the ﬁlm thickness becomes comparable to the typi-
cal spacing between nucleation events. For a ﬁnite ﬁlm of
thickness W , one should compare the time for a mobility
front to spread from the boundary through the system,
W/v, with the time τavr for homogeneous transforma-
tion given in Eq. (8). One ﬁnds that the homogeneous
transformation mechanism operates only if W (cid:38) (cid:96)nuc.
For this reason, we identify the large length scale (cid:96)nuc
with the giant crossover length scale measured in exper-
iments2, which is characterised through the dependence
on the ﬁlm thickness W . Our results suggest that this
large length scale could be observed directly in bulk sta-
ble materials, and would appear as a giant dynamic het-
erogeneity lengthscale.

(3) The length scales and stability ratios observed in
this work are much smaller, for ε = 0, than those in ex-
periments. We attribute this to the relatively high trans-
formation temperatures T considered here. As noted
above, equilibrium relaxation at these temperatures is
only 2-3 decades slower than relaxation at the onset of
glassy dynamics, in contrast to the experimental case
where relaxation is typically studied close to the experi-
mental glass temperature. For the TPM, we expect that
the stability ratio S and the length scale (cid:96)nuc should
increase signiﬁcantly as T is reduced, and are likely to
diverge as T → 0, taking always T0 (cid:28) T , or perhaps

more precisely τeq(T0) (cid:29) τeq(T ). For this reason, we
expect that the modest length and time scales that we
have found in this work are due to our restriction to state
points where computer simulations are tractable – our
theoretical arguments are applicable to the large length
and time scales found in experiments. We have supported
this claim using the biasing ﬁeld ε at constant (T, T0) to
promote by more than two orders of magnitude both the
kinetic stability ratio and the dynamic lengthscale of the
melting process.

In addition to these three points, a potentially im-
portant factor that we have not considered here is the
heterogeneous nature of the nucleation process, given
that realistic initial conditions in experiments are not
translational invariant (in contrast to the special case
T0 = 0 for the TPM). This leads to the possibility that
nucleation will occur preferentially at particular starting
points within the stable glass phase. It would be interest-
ing to investigate this eﬀect further, either in the TPM or
in its three-dimensional generalisation (the SPyM). We
also note that in kinetically constrained models such as
those considered in Ref. 33, the coupled replica construc-
tion does not induce any kind of phase transition.
In
that case, one expects melting of stable glasses to start
at pre-existing defects, or ‘soft spots’, where spins are
able to ﬂip – this situation may be related to the pres-
ence of preferred sites for nucleation-and-growth in the
scenario considered here, but seems to diﬀer in that there
will be no slow nucleation step before relaxation starts.
This comparison also merits further investigation.

B. Crossover between stable glass melting and equilibrium
relaxation

Before ending, we return to a question that arises from
Fig. 2(a): can the equilibrium relaxation itself occurring
for T0 = T be explained by a similar nucleation argument
to the transformation of the stable glass? The shape
of the relaxation function is diﬀerent, but the general
RFOT-like description of Bouchaud and Biroli60 would
seem applicable in both cases (see also Ref. 17). We oﬀer
a scaling argument as to how these two regimes might be
smoothly connected.

Starting with transformation from a stable glass with
T0 = 0, the usual CNT predicts that the free energy cost
for a droplet of the new phase is

∆F ≈ γRd−1 − ∆µRd

(21)

∼ γ/∆µ and a barrier F ∗

with a critical nucleus R∗
∼
γd/∆µd−1. Both diverge at the phase boundary where
∆µ → 0.
For equilibrium relaxation, we imagine that the phase
boundary is still present (as would be the case in d = 3).
However, the relevant state for equilibrium relaxation
is much further from the phase boundary and so the
critical nucleus is much smaller. Also, the form of the

13

‘droplets’ that mediate relaxation at equilibrium is dif-
ferent – the droplets are fractal objects of size R that
contain Ndrop ∼ Rdf spins and have an energetic cost
that scales as J log2 R.
(For the TPM, df = log2 3 is
the fractal dimension of Pascal’s triangle; for the three-
dimensional square-pyramid model, it is believed that
df = log2 5. In both cases df < d.) The free energy gain
on relaxing such an object is purely entropic (the idea
is that the initial state is localised in a single metastable
minimum while the ﬁnal state can choose from many sim-
ilar states). The conﬁgurational entropy per site in the
TPM is comparable with the total entropy, which scales

as s ∼ (J/T )e−J/T . Considering the growing droplet we

therefore estimate

∆F ≈ J log R − sRdf .

(22)

This free energy barrier is maximal at R∗
Substituting for s, the barrier height is therefore F ∗
J 2/(T df ), leading to a relaxation time that scales as

∼ (J/s)1/df .
∼

log τ ∼ J 2/(T 2df ).

(23)

This result coincides with the relaxation-time scaling
for the TPM that is predicted and observed in numer-
ics16,17, subject to numerical prefactors in (23) which are
rather hard to establish, both in numerics17 and analyt-
ically (consider for example the simpler case of the East
model35,61). We note that the length scale R∗ obtained
from this argument is also of the same order as the four-
point correlation length at equilibrium, and the cavity
point-to-set length, both of which scale as (e−J/T )−1/df :
see Ref. 17.

The resulting picture is that the interfacial costs for nu-
cleation of relaxation of localised droplets can be under-
stood in terms of a crossover formula, ∆Fint ∼ J log R +
γRd−1, with the logarithmic term being relevant for the
relatively small droplets that control equilibrium relax-
ation, while the surface tension term (γRd−1) is relevant
for large droplets, such as those found in nucleation close
to ﬁrst-order phase boundaries. Similarly, the bulk free
energy gain from a droplet of size R can be approximated
as ∆Fbulk ∼ sRdf + ∆µRd where again the ﬁrst term is
relevant for smaller droplets and equilibrium relaxation,
and the second term applies to larger droplets, as found
in nucleation and growth.

Of course, these arguments are based on several con-
jectures: it would be interesting to test them using fur-
ther numerical studies. However, they do seem to oﬀer a
coherent picture of the TPM dynamics and of its static
many-body correlations (at least at the level of point-to-
set). In general, the idea that nucleation-and-growth of
relatively small droplets might occur with a non-classical
free energy such as (22) follows the arguments in Ref. 60,
but with the additional generalisation that even the bulk
term might not scale as Rd.

VII. OUTLOOK

We have used the TPM to illustrate how phase
transitions that occur in systems of coupled replicas
can be used to rationalise the experimental behaviour
of ultrastable glasses, constructing a direct connection
with nucleation-and-growth dynamics. This provides a
theoretical explanation for the compressed exponential
Avrami kinetics and the giant length scales that are ob-
served in experiments.

The TPM is a schematic model and does not describe
the experimental system in detail, but these results show
how predictions based on phase transitions and univer-
sal behaviour can be useful in practical settings. The
TPM combines facilitated dynamics of point-like excita-
tions with static many-body spin correlations that can
be long-ranged and lead to signﬁcant amorphous order.
By combining these two ingredients, the model can cap-
ture many qualitative features of glass-forming systems,
including non-trivial aging behaviour, dynamical hetero-
geneity, and both static and dynamic phase transitions.
More generally, the present results should serve as use-
ful guides to interpret future work dealing with the dy-
namics of stable glasses.
In particular, our approach
suggests that spatially resolved analsyis of the melting
dynamics of in-silico stable glasses, or experimental ma-
terials would be very valuable in validating the present
picture. Equilibrium dynamic heterogeneity is so short-
ranged that direct measurements of dynamic correlation
lengthscales remain scarce for molecular liquids. We sug-
gest that direct measurements of the non-equilibrium
lengthscales discussed here could be much easier, as these
lengthscales may be larger by orders of magnitude, and
potentially more easily accessible to experimental work.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank M. D. Ediger for helpful discussions. The
research leading to these results has received funding
from the European Research Council under the European
Unions Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-
2013)/ERC Grant Agreement No. 306845.

1S. F. Swallen, K. L. Kearns, M. K. Mapes, Y. S. Kim, R. J.
McMahon, M. D. Ediger, T. Wu, L. Yu, and S. Satija, Science
315, 353 (2007).
2K. L. Kearns, M. D. Ediger, H. Heiko and C. Schick, J. Phys.
Chem. Lett. 1, 388 (2010).
3K. Dawson, L. A. Kopﬀ, L. Zhu, R. J. McMahon, L. Yu,
R. Richert and M. D. Ediger, J. Chem. Phys. 136, 094505 (2012).
4S. S. Dalal and M. D. Ediger, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 3, 1229 (2012).
5Y. Guo, A. Morozov, D. Schneider, J. W. Chung, C. Zhang, M.
Waldmann, N. Yao, G. Fytas, C. B. Arnold, and R. D. Priestley,
Nat. Mater. 11, 337 (2012).
6L. Berthier and M. D. Ediger, Phys. Today 69, 40 (2016).
7L. Berthier and G. Biroli, Rev. Mod. Phys. 83, 587 (2011).
8A. Sep´ulveda, M. Tylinski, A. Guiseppi-Elie, R. Richert, and M.
D. Ediger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 045901 (2014).
9S. F. Swallen, K. Traynor, R. J. McMahon, M. D. Ediger, and
T. E. Mates, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 065503 (2009).

14

10M. D. Ediger, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 51, 99 (2000).
11Dynamical heterogeneities in glasses, colloids and granular ma-
terials, Eds. L. Berthier, G. Biroli, J.-P. Bouchaud, L. Cipelletti,
W. van Saarloos (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2011).

12T. P´erez-Castaneda, C. Rodriguez-Tinoco, J. Rodriguez-Viejo,
and M. A. Ramos, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 111, 11275 (2014).
13H. B. Yu, M. Tylinski, A. Guiseppi-Elie, M. D. Ediger, and R.

Richert, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 185501 (2015).

14S. Franz and G. Parisi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 2486 (1997).
15L. Berthier and R. L. Jack, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 205701 (2015).
16J. P. Garrahan, J. Phys.: Cond. Matt. 14, 1571 (2002).
17R. L. Jack and J. P. Garrahan, J. Chem. Phys. 123, 164508

(2005).

18R. L. Jack, L. Berthier, and J. P. Garrahan Phys. Rev. E 72,

016103 (2005).

19R. L. Jack, L. Berthier, and J.P. Garrahan, J. Stat. Mech. P12005

(2006).

20R. L. Jack and L. Berthier, Phys. Rev. E 85, 021120 (2012).
21C. Cammarota and G. Biroli, EPL 98, 36005 (2012).
22J. P. Garrahan, Phys. Rev. E 89, 030301 (2014).
23R. M. Turner, R. L. Jack, and J. P. Garrahan, Phys. Rev. E 92,

022115 (2015).

24R. L. Jack and J. P. Garrahan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 055702

(2016).

25S. Franz, M. Cardenas, and G. Parisi, J. Chem. Phys. 110, 1726

(1999).

26C. Cammarota, A. Cavagna, I. Giardina, G. Gradenigo, T. S.
Grigera, G. Parisi, and P. Verrocchio, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105,
055703 (2010).

27L. Berthier, Phys. Rev. E 88, 022313 (2013).
28D. Chandler and J. P. Garrahan, Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem. 61, 191

(2010).

29S. Singh, M. D. Ediger, and J. J. de Pablo, Nature Mat. 12, 139

(2013).

30I. Lyubimov, M. D. Ediger, and J. J. de Pablo, J. Chem. Phys.

139, 144505 (2013).

31P.-H.Lin, I. Lyubimov, L. Yu, M. D. Ediger and J. J. de Pablo,

J. Chem. Phys. 140, 204504 (2014).

32G. M. Hocky, L. Berthier and D. R. Reichman, J. Chem. Phys.

141, 224503 (2014).

33S. L´eonard and P. Harrowell, J. Chem. Phys. 133, 244502 (2010).
34F. Krzakala and L. Zdeborova, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 238701

(2009).

35J. P. Garrahan, P. Sollich and C. Toninelli, Kinetically con-
strained models, Ch. 10 in Dynamical heterogeneities in glasses,
colloids, and granular media, Eds.: L. Berthier, G. Biroli, J-P
Bouchaud, L. Cipelletti and W. van Saarloos (Oxford University
Press, Oxford 2011).

36H. Staley, E. Flenner, and G. Szamel, J. Chem. Phys. 142,

244508 (2015).

37P. G. Debenedetti, Metastable liquids: Concepts and principles

(Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1996).

38R. P. Sear, J. Phys.: Condensed Matt. 19, 033101 (2007).
39S. Franz and G. Parisi, J. Stat. Mech. P11012 (2013).
40G. Biroli, C. Cammarota, G. Tarjus, and M. Tarzia, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 112, 175701 (2014).

41M. Avrami, J. Chem. Phys. 7, 1103 (1939).
42M. Castro, Phys. Rev. B 67, 035412 (2003).
43K. Dawson, L. A. Kopﬀ, L. Zhu, R. J. McMahon, L. Yu, R.
Richert, and M. D. Ediger, J. Chem. Phys. 136, 094505 (2012).
44M. E. J. Newman and C. Moore, Phys. Rev. E 60, 5068 (1999).
45A. B. Bortz, M. H. Kalos and J. L. Lebowitz, J. Comp. Phys.

17, 10 (1975).

46Y. Imry and S.-K. Ma, Phys. Rev. Lett. 35, 1399 (1975).
47M. Aizenman and J. Wehr, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 2503 (1989).
48C. Rodriguez-Tinoco , M. Gonzalez-Silveira, J. Rafols-Ribe , A.
F. Lopeandia and J. Rodriguez-Viejo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.
17, 31195 (2015).

49S.-i. Sasa, J. Phys. A 43, 465002 (2010).
50J. R. Heringa, H. W. Bl¨ote and A. Hoogland, Phys. Rev. Lett.

63, 1546 (1989).

51C. Toninelli, M. Wyart, L. Berthier, G. Biroli, and J.-P.

Bouchaud, Phys. Rev. E 71, 041505 (2005).

M. D. Ediger, J. Chem. Phys. 137, 204508 (2012).

56P. G. Wolynes, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106, 1353 (2009).
57A. Wisitsorasak and P. G. Wolynes, Phys. Rev. E 88, 022308

52F. Krzakala and L. Zdeborova, J. Chem. Phys. 134, 034512

(2013).

(2011).

58A. Wisitsorasak and P. G. Wolynes, J. Phys. Chem. B 118, 7835

53F. Krzakala and L. Zdeborova, J. Chem. Phys. 134, 034513

(2014).

(2011).

59L. Berthier and D. Coslovich, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 111,

54M. Tylinski, A. Sepulveda, D. M. Walters, Y. Chua, C. Schick

11668 (2014).

and M .D. Ediger, J. Chem. Phys. 143, 244509 (2015).

55A. Sepulveda, S. F. Swallen, L. A. Kopﬀ, R. J. McMahon, and

60J.-P. Bouchaud and G. Biroli, J. Chem. Phys. 121, 7347 (2004).
61P. Sollich and M. R. Evans, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 3238 (1999)

15

