6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
6
1

 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
1
1
0
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Time-Harmonic Optical Chirality in Inhomogeneous Space

Philipp Gutschea, Lisa V. Poulikakosb, Martin Hammerschmidta, Sven Burgera,c, and

Frank Schmidta,c

aZuse Institute Berlin, Takustr. 7, 14195 Berlin, Germany

bOptical Materials Engineering Laboratory, ETH Zurich, Leonhardstr. 21,

cJCMwave GmbH, Bolivarallee 22, 14050 Berlin, Germany

8092 Zurich, Switzerland

This paper will be published in Proc. SPIE 9756, Photonic and Phononic Properties of Engineered Nanostruc-
tures VI, 97560X (March 14, 2016), doi:10.1117/12.2209551 and is made available as an electronic preprint
with permission of SPIE. Copyright 2016 Society of Photo Optical Instrumentation Engineers. One print or
electronic copy may be made for personal use only. Systematic electronic or print reproduction and distribution,
duplication of any material in this paper for a fee or for commercial purposes, or modiﬁcation of the content of
the paper are prohibited.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1117/12.2209551

ABSTRACT

Optical chirality has been recently suggested to complement the physically relevant conserved quantities of the
well-known Maxwell’s equations. This time-even pseudoscalar is expected to provide further insight in polar-
ization phenomena of electrodynamics such as spectroscopy of chiral molecules. Previously, the corresponding
continuity equation was stated for homogeneous lossless media only. We extend the underlying theory to ar-
bitrary setups and analyse piecewise-constant material distributions in particular. Our implementation in a
Finite Element Method framework is applied to illustrative examples in order to introduce this novel tool for the
analysis of time-harmonic simulations of nano-optical devices.

Keywords: electrodynamics, optical simulations, optical chirality, helicity, conservation law, Finite Element
Method (FEM)

1. INTRODUCTION

Polarization is an important degree of freedom of light. While many natural light sources such as the sun emit
unpolarized light, both nature and technology tailor polarization of electromagnetic waves. Applications range
from animals using polarization as means of communication1 to advanced quantum communication protocols
such as quantum-key-distribution.2

Especially, circularly polarized light (CPL) is of major interest because many chiral structures are very
sensitive to right- and left-handed polarized light. The term chirality describes geometrically that these structures
are not super-imposable with their mirror image.3 Chiral shapes are ubiquitous in nature and can be found in
e.g. biological photonic crystals within butterﬂy wings.4

In order to quantify the handedness or helicity of arbitrary electromagnetic ﬁelds Tang and Cohen5 introduced
the concept of optical chirality and showed that circularly polarized plane waves are optically chiral. Based on
the concept of Lipkin’s zilch,6 they stated a continuity equation for optical chirality in vacuum and motivated
its physical relevance by deriving this quantity from the excitation rate of chiral molecules. Since then it has
been shown that the optical chirality density is related to the enhancement of circular dichroism (CD),7 i.e. the
spectroscopy of small particles with the help of CPL. Recently, the conservation law of helicity or optical chirality
has been extended to polarizable particles surrounded by lossless media8 and absorbing media.9

Further author information: (Send correspondence to P.G.)
P.G.: E-mail: gutsche@zib.de

1

It is expected that e.g. chiral plasmonic particles enhance CD signals of chiral molecules.10 This expectation
is supported by recent experiments claiming to measure the chirality of optical near-ﬁelds.11 Additionally, there
have been various studies of the enhancement of optical chirality in the context of time-harmonic simulations12
as well as theory.13–15 These theoretical analyses have been mostly limited to homogeneous media16 or vacuum
only.

In this study, we extend the well-known concept of polarization of propagating plane waves in the far-
ﬁeld to optical near-ﬁelds in arbitrary setups. We show that with the help of a generalized optical chirality
density, electromagnetic energy can be decomposed into right- and left-handed parts at each spatial point.13
This accomplishes the concept of metamaterials, wherein eﬀective, i.e. spatially averaged, constitutive material
equations can be derived from chiral far-ﬁeld eﬀects.17–19

In section 2, we start by stating our notation for the derivation of the theory of conservation of time-harmonic
optical chirality. In the third section, we give an overview of optical chirality, its relation to energy and derive
its point-wise continuity equation for arbitrary, including anisotropic, media. Subsequently, we illustrate the
concept of chirality conversion, i.e. change of polarization, with the help of simple examples. We identify loss,
anisotropy and gradients in the material parameters as generators of converted chirality.

Finally, we establish the applicability of our theory with the help of a numerical example similar to recent
experiments which illustrates both the close connection of chirality and energy as well as the new perspectives
gained with our approach. We conclude this analysis with a summary and possible further applications of our
results.

In order to introduce notation, we state brieﬂy Maxwell’s equations20 for the time-harmonic electric and magnetic
ﬁelds E and H, respectively, as well as the electric ﬂux density D and the magnetic ﬂux density B at angular
frequency ω:

2. NOTATION

∇ × E = iωB
∇ × H = −iωD + J ,

(1)
(2)
where ∇ · B = 0 and for charge-free space ∇ · D = 0, which we assume in the following. The constitutive
equations are D = εE = ε0εrE and B = µH = µ0µrH with the parameters permittivity ε and permeability µ
which consist of material-dependent relative permittivity εr and vacuum permittivity ε0 and, respectively, the
permeabilities µr and µ0. J is the impressed electric current density which is assumed to be zero throughout
this study, although the results hold for J 6= 0 as well.

The electromagnetic ﬁeld energy U = Ue + Um consists of an electric and a magnetic part, Ue = 1/4E · D∗
and Um = 1/4B · H∗, respectively. Together with the Poynting vector S = 1/2E × H∗, it is part of the central
continuity equation of electromagnetics (8).

The physical relevant real-valued and time-dependent ﬁelds X are reconstructed from the time-harmonic

ﬁelds X with the help of

X = Re [X exp (−iωt)] .

(3)

In order to obtain real, time-averaged values of physical quantities from the time-harmonic computation, the
following rules20 are used: X · Y = 1
2 Re (X × Y ∗) for cross
products, respectively.

2 Re (X · Y ∗) for scalar products and X × Y = 1

Furthermore, we use integral values of locally deﬁned scalar densities Y(x) and vectorial ﬂux densities Z(x)

at spatial positions x. When integrated over a volume Ω or surface ∂Ω, we write in the following

This work focuses on the optical chirality rather than e.g. geometrical deﬁnitions related to chiral shapes. That
is why we often use the short term chirality referring solely to optical chirality in this context.

Y (Ω) =ZΩ Y(x) dV
Z (∂Ω) =Z∂Ω

Z(x) · df .

and

2

3. CONCEPT AND BASICS

We start by introducing the concept of optical chirality and its relation to energy13 and polarization with the
help of a numerical example. In section 3.2, we give an overview of the conservation of integrated quantities, i.e.
optical chirality and optical chirality ﬂux, in a general electromagnetic scattering problem. Finally, we derive
the continuity equation of optical chirality in arbitrary space, including lossy media.9

3.1 Chirality, Energy and Polarization
Intuitively, optical chirality X at the spatial position x is proportional to the diﬀerence of left (UL) and right
(UR) circularly polarized electromagnetic ﬁeld energy:13

X(x) =

ωn
c0

[UL(x) − UR(x)]

U(x) = UL(x) + UR(x),

(4)

(5)

where n is the refractive index, c0 is the speed of light in vacuum and the deﬁnition of the optical chirality X
will be discussed in more detail in section 3.3. The electromagnetic ﬁeld energy U can be split into left and right
circularly polarized parts, respectively. This decomposition is well understood in the far-ﬁeld, where polarization
is deﬁned with respect to the propagation direction. Here, we show that with the help of optical chirality, circular
polarization can be deﬁned in the near-ﬁeld as well.

We analyse a twisted photonic crystal ﬁbre which has recently been found to exhibit enhanced optical activ-
ity.21 The cross section of such a device is depicted in Fig. 1 (a). Along the out-of-plane propagation direction,
the ﬁbre is twisted around its central axis yielding modes with preferred circular polarization. The twist of the
analysed setup is 5 · 104 rad/m and the vacuum wavelength λ0 = 1.55µm ﬁxes the out-of-plane wave vector kz
of the propagating mode problem. The pitch of the hexagonal lattice of air holes is p = 6.75µm and the silica
ﬁbre with refractive index n = 1.444 is modelled inﬁnitely large using Perfectly Matched Layers (PMLs).22

In Fig. 1 (b) and (c), we show the decomposition of electromagnetic ﬁeld energy density into parts of right

(RPL) and left (LPL) circularly polarized light. From (4) and (5), it follows

The chosen propagation mode in Fig. 1 with neﬀ = 1.44965 + 0.0017i shows clearly preferred right circular
polarization. Previously, the classiﬁcation of modes with respect to their polarization has been done from the
near-ﬁelds directly.23 The analysis with the help of optical chirality complements these ﬁndings and generalizes
concepts such as local circular polarization24 and degree of circular polarization25 which depend on the choice
of a speciﬁc propagation direction. This generalization will be introduced in the following sections.

UR =
UL =

c0
ωn
c0
ωn

X(cid:17)
X(cid:17) .

(6)

(7)

1

2(cid:16)U −
2(cid:16)U +

1

3

(a) setup

(b) right polarized energy density

(c) left polarized energy density

Figure 1: Relation of optical chirality and energy of a guided mode in a twisted photonic crystal ﬁbre made
out of silica and air holes (a). The common electromagnetic ﬁeld energy density is decomposed with the help
of the optical chirality into right and left circularly polarized parts (6)-(7). These are scaled with the maximal
total ﬁeld energy density Umax. This speciﬁc mode shows clearly preferred right circular polarization (b) while
the left circularly polarized part is distinctively suppressed (c).

3.2 Chirality Conservation of Integrated Quantities

In this section, we provide an overview of the concept of conservation of time-harmonic optical chirality in
piecewise-constant media.9 In the following sections, it will be shown that our results are valid for any material
distribution.

In Fig. 2, a general setup for scattering problems is depicted: an incident energy ﬂux density S in is integrated
over the incidence surface ∂Ωref of the computational domain Ω. For source-free media (J = 0), this quantity
equals the sum of the reﬂected Sref, the transmitted energy ﬂux S trans and the absorbed energy Uabs in the
scatterer Θ:

S (∂Ωref)

in

= S (∂Ωref)

ref

+ S (∂Ωtrans)

trans

+ U (Θ)
abs .

(8)

In the case of optical chirality, the incoming chirality ﬂux Sin is distributed into reﬂected Sref and transmitted
Strans chirality ﬂux. As outlined in the following, the scatterer’s interface ∂Θ as well as its volume Θ might lead
to a change in and conversion of chirality Xconv. Summarizing the conservation law of optical chirality reads:

S

(∂Ωref)
in

= S

(∂Ωref )
ref

+ S

(∂Ωtrans)
trans

+ X(Θ)

conv + X(∂Θ)
conv .

(9)

The diﬀerent terms of this result will be derived and motivated in detail in the following sections.

Note that this conservation law of integrated quantities can also be formulated for the scattered ﬁeld, yielding:
(∂Ω)
(Θ)
ext = S(∂Ω)
conv,tot, where Sext is the extinction of optical chirality analogous to extinction of energy.26
S
Ssc is the scattered optical chirality ﬂux and Xconv,tot is the total converted chirality, consisting of surface and
volume contributions.

sc + X

surrounding in order to obtain the total converted chirality X
(∂Ω)
ext and scattered ﬂux S(∂Ω)

Assuming that Ω \ Θ is lossless and isotropic, it is suﬃcient to analyse the conservation law for the lossless
(Θ)
conv,tot of the arbitrary, including lossy, scatterer:
of optical chirality on the outer boundary ∂Ω of
One computes the extinction S
the whole domain. The diﬀerence of these two terms, i.e. the violation of conservation of optical chirality in
(Θ)
a lossless medium, determines the total converted chirality X
conv,tot. Accordingly, the continuity equation of
densities (11) valid at all spatial points in arbitrary media is not required for the conservation law of integrated
(∂Θ)
conv is of
quantities (9), if only the overall inﬂuence of the scatterer on optical chirality X
interest.

sc

(Θ)
conv,tot = X

(Θ)
conv + X

4

Figure 2: Conceptual illustration of the conservation of energy and optical chirality for the scatterer Θ located
in the surrounding Ω\ Θ which is lossless for simplicity. The boundary ∂Ω is divided into upper ∂Ωref and lower
∂Ωtrans part. This separation is arbitrary for isolated but straightforward for periodic setups. The well-known
incident energy ﬂux S in is absorbed in the scatterer (Uabs), reﬂected (S ref) and transmitted (S trans) yielding
the energy conservation (8). Energy conservation holds for inhomogeneous media, i.e. there is no change of this
general law introduced at the interface of the scatterer ∂Θ which is indicated by the value 0.0 on this interface.
In the case of optical chirality, the incident chirality ﬂux Sin is distributed into converted chirality Xconv in the
scatterer or at its interface, the reﬂected chirality ﬂux Sref and the transmitted chirality ﬂux Strans. In contrast
(∂Θ)
conv ). The conservation law of chirality reads
to energy, chirality is changed at the interface of the scatterer (X
as (9).

Since optical chirality is proportional to helicity in time-harmonic formulation, the recently introduced con-

(Θ)
servation law of helicity for lossless media8 yields an equal result as (9) for the total converted chirality X
conv,tot
of a polarizable particle embedded in a non-absorbing surrounding. Nieto-Vesperinas calls the converted chi-
rality absorbed helicity.8 However, we prefer the term conversion, since optical chirality can be both generated
and annihilated. Furthermore, the formalism outlined in the following introduces the extension of the spatially
dependent optical chirality density X(x) to arbitrary, including lossy, media.9 This enables the further investi-
gation of the conservation of optical chirality, e.g. the distinction of surface and volume contributions of chirality
conversion.

3.3 Chirality Continuity Equation of Spatially Dependent Densities

In the case of conservation of energy, the standard derivation of the time-harmonic continuity equation of energy
starts with the rate at which the electromagnetic ﬁelds do work on a charged object J ∗ · E, where J is the free
current density.20 With the help of (20), it follows

2iω(Ue − Um) + ∇ · S = −

1
2

J ∗ · E

(10)

for homogeneous as well as inhomogeneous space. The real part of this equation represents conservation of
energy.

For the derivation of the continuity equation of the time-dependent optical chirality density, it was suggested
to study the time-dependent quantity [J · (∇ × E) + E · (∇ × J )].5 The corresponding time-harmonic optical
chirality density has been derived by using the well-known relation between physically relevant and time-harmonic
quantities (3).12

5

However, we use a diﬀerent approach and start with the time-harmonic quantity [J ∗·(∇ × E)+E·(∇ × J ∗)].9
By using this starting point, we neither require homogeneity nor isotropy to obtain the continuity equation of
time-harmonic optical chirality (App. A)

2iω(Xe − Xm) + ∇ · S = −

1
4

[J ∗ · (∇ × E) + E · (∇ × J ∗)] .

(11)

Here, we distinguish between electric chirality density Xe and magnetic chirality density Xm for arbitrary media
in analogy to electric and magnetic energy density in (10). These quantities and the electromagnetic chirality
ﬂux density S are deﬁned as9

Xe =

Xm =

S =

1
8
1
8
1
4

[D∗ · (∇ × E) + E · (∇ × D∗)]
[H∗ · (∇ × B) + B · (∇ × H∗)]
[E × (∇ × H∗) − H∗ × (∇ × E)] .

(12)

(13)

(14)

The total optical chirality is X = Xe + Xm. The corresponding time-dependent chirality density χ = χe + χm
following from these time-harmonic deﬁnitions is similar to the literature for homogeneous media.16 It has units
of a force density and both the densities and the ﬂux are constant for circularly polarized propagating plane
waves, i.e. the latter are eigenstates of optical chirality. Since for CPL these chiral quantities diﬀer in sign, they
enable us to distinguish between RPL and LPL in the far- and near-ﬁeld.

Furthermore, they vanish for linearly polarized plane waves and have accordingly a well deﬁned interpretation
in the far-ﬁeld, where it exists a clear propagation direction given by the wave vector k. The presented continuity
equation (11), however, does not require the speciﬁcation of any propagation direction and is purely based on
the near-ﬁeld. Furthermore, there is no limitation to neither homogeneous nor isotropic media.

It was stated that Lipkin’s zilch, or optical chirality, are higher-order versions of helicity.27 Nevertheless,
the above given quantities are easily accessible in common time-harmonic numerical simulations and provide
valuable tools for analysing the behaviour of a wide range of nanophotonic setups in e.g. ﬁnite element method28
(FEM) computations. This is because of the fact that the helicity quantities derived from the suggested vector
potentials of the dual electromagnetism27 involve rotations of these potentials. This means the deﬁnition of
helicity using dual vector potentials is not as easily accessible as the proposed optical chirality based on E, D, H
and B.

4. CHIRALITY CONVERSION

While energy conservation predicts a change of the total energy only in lossy media, chirality might be changed by
various mechanisms. We call this variation the conversion of chirality or converted chirality. From the formalism
above, this quantity follows as

Xconv = −2ω Im (Xe − Xm)

comparable to absorbed energy Uabs = −2ω Im (Ue − Um). In the following, we analyse three kinds of material
distributions yielding chirality conversion with simple examples. For simplicity we analyse mostly non-magnetic
media (µr = 1), although our results are valid directly for µ 6= 0 as well. Loss, anisotropy and a gradient of
the real part of the permittivity ε might introduce a non-vanishing imaginary part of X in (12), i.e. converted
chirality.

4.1 Chirality Conversion in Isotropic Media

In order to discuss the novel quantities, we state the general chirality densities (12, 13) for isotropic homogeneous
media, i.e. ε, µ ∈ C, and name them as

1
8
1
8

eXe =
eXm =

iω [D∗ · B − (εB)∗ · E]
iω [D∗ · B − H∗ · (µD)] .

6

(15)

(16)

Two important ﬁndings can be deduced from this. First, for isotropic lossless media, i.e. ε, µ ∈ R, the averaged
time-dependent chirality χ is the herein introduced time-harmonic chirality as expected:

χ = X = −

1
2

ω Im (D∗ · B) .

(17)

This is in accordance to previous deﬁnitions for solely free space of time-harmonic optical chirality
C = −ε0ω/2 Im (E ∗ · B).12 Additionally, one can show that the magnitude of optical chirality is bounded.13
In our notation this yields (App. B)

|X(x)| ≤

ωn
c0 U(x),

which is easily understood with the help of (4): chirality takes its extremal value if the energy is purely circularly
polarized.

Second, the time-averaged chirality is real-valued for lossless media. However, for electrical absorbing
[Im (ε) > 0] and magnetic absorbing [Im (µ) > 0] media, a non-vanishing imaginary part of X might exist.
(Θ)
conv in lossy media in (9) and further stresses the close
This introduces conversion of chirality in volumes X
relation between optical chirality and electromagnetic energy13 in homogeneous isotropic space.

In conclusion, a change of chirality in isotropic homogeneous media can only occur for lossy media. The case
of piecewise constant media will be dealt with in section 4.3. In the next section, we analyse anisotropic media.

4.2 Chirality Conversion in Anistropic Media

In the previous section, we analysed homogeneous isotropic media for which the electric and magnetic chiralities
are (15) and (16). For general material parameters ε and µ, these quantities are given by (12) and (13). Since
in the previous case we identiﬁed lossy media as being capable of changing chirality, we restrict the analysis to
lossless anisotropic media [Im (ε) = Im (µ) = 0], here.

Due to the close connection of optical chirality and circular polarization (Sec. 3.1), we analyse a quarter-wave
plate. It is well-known that this simple device is used to convert linear into circular polarization.29 In Fig. 3 (c)

(a) setup

(b) optical chirality

(c) converted chirality

Figure 3: Chirality conversion in anisotropic media: a quarter-wave plate with anisotropic refractive index n is
illuminated from above (a). The incident plane wave is linearly polarized with a polarization angle of 45◦ and
exhibits optical chirality X = 0. Circularly polarized light exhibiting optical chirality X 6= 0 is generated through
the anisotropy (b). The spatially resolved converted chirality Xconv ∝ Im (X) is visible in (c). Note that there is
no conversion in isotropic lossless media surrounding the slab, i.e. Im (X) = 0 in the sub- and super-space. The
chirality densities are scaled with the magnitude of CPL in vacuum X0.

7

the conversion of chirality proportional to Im[X(x)] in the anisotropic slab is clearly visible. Additionally, the
out-going plane wave carries optical chirality Re[X(x)], i.e. it possesses elliptical polarization.

Not only the anisotropy of the slab, but also the discontinuities at the air-plate and plate-air interface
(∂Θ)
conv will be further analysed in the

introduce changes, i.e. conversion, of chirality. This interface contribution X
next section.

4.3 Chirality Conversion on Interfaces
As derived in the previous two sections conversion of chirality, i.e. Im (X) 6= 0, can either be achieved by loss or
anisotropy in homogeneous space. Here, we show that conversion of chirality also occurs for spatially dependent
material parameters. We restrict the analysis to isotropic space and non-magnetic media (µr = 1), here.

Generalizing the results of section 4.1 to spatially varying ε, we obtain for the imaginary part of the electric

chirality (App. C)

8 Im (Xe) = 2ω Im (ε) Im (E ∗ · B) + [∇ Re (ε)] · Im (E ∗ × E) .

(18)

Similar results can be obtained for the magnetic chirality with µr 6= 1. The ﬁrst term corresponds to the ﬁndings
in section 4.1. The second term shows that a gradient of the real part of the permittivity yields a change in
chirality. Again, from the close connection of chirality and polarization this fact is well-known: specially designed
prisms are used to convert linear into circular polarization similar to the previously analysed quarter-wave plate.

In a Fresnel rhomb, linearly polarized light is twice reﬂected under an angle larger than the critical angle of
total internal reﬂection.30 Choosing the angle of this prism in such a way that a 45◦ phase change between s-
and p polarization is introduced at each reﬂection yields the transformation of linearly polarized to circularly
polarized light. The spatial variation of the according optical chirality is depicted in Fig. 4 (c) for an incident
beam.

For piecewise constant ε, the gradient of the permittivity vanishes everywhere except at domain interfaces
where it is ill-deﬁned due to a discontinuity of ε. Nevertheless, we can compute the chirality density (12) for
each domain with constant ε. Here, the change of conservation of the integrated optical chirality occurs only at
interfaces and is therefore associated with a conversion of chirality X

(I)
conv due to the interface I.

(a) setup

(b) intensity

(c) optical chirality

Figure 4: Chirality conversion on lossless interfaces: Fresnel rhomb with refractive index n = 1.5 and angle α
chosen in such a way that both total internal reﬂection and a π/4 phase shift between x- and z-components is
introduced (a). The incident beam is approximated by a superposition of plane waves and its polarization angle is
45◦. The dimensions of the rhomb support constructive interference along the beam path. The resulting intensity
distribution (b) is scaled with the vacuum intensity I0 of the sum of the plane waves. The appropriate angle
α yields elliptically polarized light at the ﬁrst total internal reﬂection (c). Together with the second reﬂection,
CPL is generated at the lower output of the rhomb which is indicated by non-vanishing optical chirality Re (X).
The ﬁeld is scaled with the plane wave chirality Xn(x) = 0.5I0ωε0/c0n(x)3 depending on the refractive index at
the spatial position x.

8

Since chirality conservation for homogeneous media is valid separately in domain Dk and domain Dj, which

share the interface I, the converted chirality at the interface is

X(I)

conv =Z∂Dk

S +Z∂Dj

S,

(19)

where the interfaces are I = ∂Dk = ∂Dj and the plus sign is due to a change of the surface normal of Dk and
Dj, respectively. The integration of the chirality ﬂux (14) from domain Dk to Dj [ﬁrst summand in (19)] and
from domain Dj to Dk [second summand in (19)] yield diﬀerent results due to the unconserved homogeneous
chirality densities (15, 16).

This surface attributed conversion of chirality is shown in Fig. 5. A change in the real part of the permittivity
(I)
conv (19) at the randomly shaped interface I. However, if only the imaginary
(I)
conv = 0.

introduces the non-vanishing term X
part of ε varies over the interface, the optical chirality ﬂux is equal in domain D1 and D2 yielding X
Within D2, Xconv(x) 6= 0 as discussed in section 4.1.

Note that if the interface is dual symmetric, i.e. the ratio ε/µ is constant for both adjacent domains, there
(I)
is no chirality conversion.31 This is due to the fact that the contribution to X
conv from ∇ε cancels with the one
due to ∇µ. This is related to a redistribution of energy between electric and magnetic parts by a dual symmetric
interface.

(a) setup

(b) lossless medium

(c) lossy medium

Figure 5: Chirality conversion through a discontinuity of the permittivity ε: a random interface is illuminated
from above with CPL rotated by 20◦ around the z-axis (a). The arrows on the left-hand side indicate the two
terms for the conversion of chirality at material parameter discontinuities (19): S(i,j) is the chirality ﬂux from
domain i to domain j and S0 is the chirality ﬂux in vacuum over the speciﬁc interface. The substrate material
is either lossless (b) or lossy (c). Due to the gradient in the real part of the relative permittivity εr,2, the lossless
case introduces chirality conversion [cf. (18)]. On the other hand, a change solely in the imaginary part of ε, i.e.
the lossy case, does not convert chirality on the interface. Accordingly, the ﬂuxes from one interface to another
and vice versa are equal.

9

5. NUMERICAL APPLICATION

In order to establish the conservation of optical chirality (9) as a practical numerical tool, we analyse an array
of gold helices in a design similar to the experiment of Gansel et al.32 in the infra-red wavelength range. The
general setup and our geometry parameters are shown in Fig. 6 (a). The gold helix is surrounded by air (n = 1)
and placed in a hexagonal unit cell which yields a slab of the array of helices. The used refractive index of gold
is given by the literature.33 The height of the helix is h = 2µm, the wire diameter equals d = 0.2µm and the
radius is chosen as r = 0.2µm. The lattice constant is √3a = 2µm. The substrate is omitted.

For this as well as for all simulations of this study, we use the FEM solver JCMsuite 34, 35 wherein the chirality
densities for isotropic media (15, 16) as well as for anisotropic media (12, 13) and the chirality ﬂux density (14)
are readily implemented and in which we use ﬁnely tuned numerical parameters to ensure well converged results.
For the stated results, we use locally adapted polynomial degrees p of the ﬁnite elements, so-called hp-FEM,36
to both model the spatial discretization of the helix ﬁne enough and reduce computational resources. Using

(a) setup

(b) transmission for CPL

(c) chiral vs. energy quantities for RPL

Figure 6: Gold helix surrounded by air in hexagonal lattice with lattice constant √3a (a). The helix is illuminated
by a plane wave from above. The geometrical parameters h, r and d are chosen in such a way that the helix is
sharply resonant for RPL and very close to transparent for LPL. This is visible in the transmission spectrum (b,
top) and the conversion from RPL to LPL and vice versa (b, bottom). RPL (blue) exhibits a transmission dip
while LPL (red) is nearly fully transmitted over the given wavelength range. Note the scaling of the y-axis in the
conversion plot: there is nearly no conversion from one circular polarization to another. In the spectra for RPL (c,
top) the transmitted (black) and reﬂected (grey) energy ﬂux S (∂Ω) are proportional to the transmitted (dashed
red) and reﬂected (dashed blue) chirality ﬂux S(∂Ω). The simple relation of energy and chiral quantities is due
to the low polarization conversion (b). This is also reﬂected in the comparison of energy absorption and chirality
conversion (c, bottom). The shown graphs correspond to: absorbed energy (black), converted chirality in the
(∂Θ)
volume X
conv (dashed blue) and the total converted
chirality as sum of the two latter (dashed red). Again, the proportionality of the summed converted chirality
and the absorbed energy is clearly visible. The presented formalism introduces the decomposition of conversion
of chirality into surface X

(Θ)
conv (dashed green), converted chirality at the interface X

(∂Θ)
conv and volume X

(Θ)
conv terms.

10

this approach, we chose the numerical parameters such that violations of conservation of chirality (9) due to
numerical discretization errors are of less than 1% for each point of a wide wavelength scan.

We optimize the device to be sharply resonant only for one circular polarization, namely right polarized light
[Fig. 6 (b)]. Note that there is nearly no conversion from RPL to LPL and vice versa in transmission direction.
Accordingly, this device is an approximation of an electromagnetically chiral object which would be completely
transparent to one circular polarization.15 Since there is only one diﬀraction order in this setup, the conversion
can, on the one hand, be computed conventionally by projecting the obtained Fourier coeﬃcients onto the right
and left circular polarization basis. Nevertheless, this requires a speciﬁed propagation direction of the far-ﬁeld
propagating plane waves.

On the other hand, one can use the decomposition of the electromagnetic energy ﬂux into right and left
circularly polarized components with the help of chirality ﬂux analogous to the decomposition of energy (4, 5).
This near-ﬁeld decomposition does not require any propagation direction and yields equal results to the Fourier
polarization basis for this periodic setup with one diﬀraction order. Furthermore, in contrast to the simple
Fourier basis of circular polarization this concept is generally valid for non-periodic structures as well as for
arbitrary number of diﬀraction orders.

We use the given setup to illustrate the proportionality of energy and chirality,13 however, our ﬁndings are
also valid for the general case with arbitrary conversion between incident, reﬂected and transmitted polarizations.
Since there is low polarization conversion, transmitted and reﬂected chirality ﬂux and electromagnetic energy
ﬂux are proportional for e.g. RPL which is shown in Fig. 6 (c, top).

Although the energy is purely absorbed within the helix (Θ), the optical chirality is converted at both the
interface (∂Θ) via the gradient of the real part of permittivity as well as within the helix through non-vanishing
imaginary part of the permittivity. With our formalism, we are able to attribute the conversion of chirality
separately to the shape and the volume of the scatterer [Fig. 6 (c, bottom)]. To the best of our knowledge, this
has not been formulated in the literature before and further deepens the understanding of the quantity of optical
chirality. This point of view might be applicable for further analysis of the angular momenta of light, namely
orbital and spin angular momenta.39

(a) chirality conservation

(b) near-ﬁeld chirality

Figure 7: Conservation of optical chirality in the helix array of Fig. 6 for illumination with x-polarized light (a).
Since the incoming chirality ﬂux of the linearly polarized plane wave is zero, conservation of chirality predicts that
the sum of the transmitted (black), reﬂected (red) chirality ﬂux, chirality conversion on the interface (green) and
chirality conversion in the volume (blue) is zero as well. There exists a distinct change of sign for the converted
(Θ)
conv similar to RPL illumination [cf. Fig. 6 (c, bottom)]. In (b), we show the near-ﬁeld
chirality in the volume X
chirality in the xz-plane for the same linearly polarized illumination and λ0 = 4.6µm. The point-wise or averaged
optical chirality in the near-ﬁeld is expected to enhance CD measurements of chiral molecules.9, 37, 38

11

Again, since our numerical example exhibits nearly no conversion from RPL to LPL, the total conversion of
chirality consisting of surface and volume contributions is proportional to the absorbed energy. Small deviations
are due the small conversion from RPL to LPL which has its maximum at the resonance dip of transmittance
[Fig. 6 (b)].

With the herein given conservation law of time-harmonic optical chirality, we can also analyse linearly polar-
ized light and its chiral quantities (Fig. 7). Most importantly the picture of this conservation law is implicitly
generalized for every setup with arbitrary material parameters and incident illuminations.
It enables us to
compare chiral far-ﬁeld [Fig. 7 (a)] as well as near-ﬁeld [Fig. 7 (b)] quantities: the resonances of the chirality
conversions in the near-ﬁeld are slightly red-shifted with respect to the far-ﬁeld chirality ﬂux resonances. Fur-
thermore, linearly polarized light generates homogeneous optical chirality of opposite handedness in the lower
and the upper part of the helix, respectively.

Especially, the proportionality between chirality ﬂux and energy ﬂux for this helix sample is not always
given. The conservation law, however, is valid in all circumstances, i.e. also for structures with high conversions
between circular polarization states, for incident linear polarization as well as non-periodic structures in which
the well-known concept of extinction in the case of energy conservation can be translated to chiral extinction8
straightforwardly.

6. CONCLUSION

We study a novel conservation law of optical chirality in inhomogeneous isotropic (9) and arbitrary space (11).9
This has been achieved by ﬁrst deriving the well-known point-wise continuity equation5 for arbitrary media
including anisotropic material parameters yielding a converted chirality density in analogy to absorbed energy.
Second, we identiﬁed loss, anisotropy and gradients in the real part of the material parameters permittivity and
permeability as generators of conversion of chirality.

We expect that chirality conversion of piecewise homogeneous media provides insights to the inﬂuence of
geometry in order to optimize structures for high local chirality density and applications such as CD spec-
troscopy.10 Furthermore, the chirality conversion on interfaces might be illustrative for the analysis of angular
momenta of light and its decomposition into spin and orbital parts.39 The given conservation law of optical
chirality establishes an additional tool for the analysis of these eﬀects within numerical simulations such as FEM
simulations.

In a numerical example, we showed the close connection of chirality and energy.13 Furthermore, our formalism
provides insight in the conversion of chirality by discriminating surface and volume terms which is impossible
without chiral and with solely conventional electromagnetic energy quantities. Additionally, the presented theory
is also valid for an arbitrary number of diﬀraction orders and non-periodic setups. Due to its generality, the
formalism can be extended in analogy to extinction energy to the far-ﬁeld eﬀects of scattered and converted
chirality.

This paves the way for the analysis and rigorous deﬁnition of chiral analogues to the Purcell factor and the

mode volume40 as well as scattering and absorption cross-sections.8

12

APPENDIX A. CHIRALITIY CONTINUITY EQUATION

For the derivation of the chirality continuity equation (11), we use the vector identity

and equivalent identities for the rotation of the ﬁelds

∇ · (E × H) = H · (∇ × E) − E · (∇ × H)

∇ · [(∇ × E) × H] = H · [∇ × (∇ × E)] − (∇ × E) · (∇ × H)
∇ · [E × (∇ × H)] = (∇ × H) · (∇ × E) − E · [∇ × (∇ × H)].

(20)

(21)

(22)

Using the time-harmonic analogue of the suggested time-dependent quantity5 to derive the continuity equation
of optical chirality, we obtain

(2)

J ∗ · (∇ × E) + E · (∇ × J ∗)
= (∇ × H∗) · (∇ × E) − iωD∗ · (∇ × E) + E · [∇ × (∇ × H∗)] − iωE · (∇ × D∗)
= H∗ · [∇ × (∇ × E)] − iωD∗ · (∇ × E) + E · [∇ × (∇ × H∗)] − iωE · (∇ × D∗)−∇ · [(∇ × E) × H∗]
= H∗ · [∇ × (∇ × E)] − iωD∗ · (∇ × E) + (∇ × H∗) · (∇ × E) − iωE · (∇ × D∗)

(22)

(21)

−∇ · [(∇ × E) × H∗]−∇ · [E × (∇ × H∗)]

s.r.= H∗ · [∇ × (∇ × E)] − iωD∗ · (∇ × E) + (∇ × H∗) · (∇ × E) − iωE · (∇ × D∗)

−∇ · [E × (∇ × H∗) − H∗ × (∇ × E)]

(1)

= iωH∗ · [∇ × B] − iωD∗ · (∇ × E) + iω(∇ × H∗) · B − iωE · (∇ × D∗)

− ∇ · [E × (∇ × H∗) − H∗ × (∇ × E)]

(12−14)

= 8iωXm − 8iωXe − ∇ · 4S,

where s.r. is the common sum rule of derivatives and the terms involved in each step are marked in red or
underlined, respectively. Scaling similar to the energy continuity equation yields (11)

2iω(Xe − Xm) + ∇ · S = −

1
4

[J ∗ · (∇ × E) + E · (∇ × J ∗)] .

APPENDIX B. UPPER BOUND OF CHIRALITY

Here, we restate the upper bound of chirality13 within our formalism to obtain (4) for isotropic lossless media,
i.e. ε, µ ∈ R+. We start with Young’s inequality for the special case of an electric e ∈ {Im (E) , Re (E)} and a
magnetic h ∈ {Im (H) , Re (H)} ﬁeld, where the impedance Z =pµ/ε is required:

0 ≤(cid:18)e −r µ
2(cid:18)r ε

h(cid:19)2
e2 +r µ

µ

1

ε

ε

e · h ≤

= e2 +

h2(cid:19) .

µ
ε

h2 − 2r µ

ε

e · h

(23)

(24)

(25)

Furthermore, we use

√εµ =

n
c0

.

13

Starting from (17), we obtain (4):

ω |εµ Im (E ∗ · H)| =

1
2

ω |εµ [Re (E) · Im (H) − Im (E) · Re (H)]|

Re (H)2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:21)

|X| =(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

1
2
1
2
(24)

≤

≤

(25)

1
4
ωn
c0

≤

≤

ω |εµ| [|Re (E) · Im (H)| + |Im (E) · Re (H)|]
1
4

µ

1
2

ω Im (D∗ · B)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) =
Re (E)2 +r µ
ω |εµ|(cid:20)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)r ε
"(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)r ε
+(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)r µ
E(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
ω(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
√εµ(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

[Ue + Um] =

µ
ωn
c0 U.

n
c0

ε

ε

2

µ

Im (H)2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) +(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)r ε
2# =
H(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

Im (E)2 +r µ
c0 hε |E|2 + µ|H|2i

ωn

1
4

ε

APPENDIX C. CHIRALITY CONVERSION ON INTERFACES

In order to derive the inﬂuence of spatial varying isotropic ε ∈ C, we use
∇ × (ε∗E) = ε (∇ × E) + (∇ε∗) × E.

Furthermore, we use the invariance under a circular shift of the triple product

as well as the fact that

E · [(∇ε∗) × E ∗] = (∇ε∗) · (E ∗ × E) ,

E ∗ × E = i Im (E ∗ × E) .

For the electric optical chirality, we obtain from (12)

(26)

(27)

(28)

8Xe = D∗ · (∇ × E) + E · (∇ × D∗)

(26)

(27)

(28)

= ε∗E ∗ · (∇ × E) + ε∗E · (∇ × E ∗) + E · [(∇ε∗) × E ∗]
= 2ε∗ Re [E ∗ · (∇ × E)] + (∇ε∗) · (E ∗ × E)
= 2ε∗ Re [E ∗ · (∇ × E)] + i (∇ε∗) · Im (E ∗ × E)
= 2ωε∗ Re (iE ∗ · B) + i (∇ε∗) · Im (E ∗ × E)
= −2ωε∗ Im (E ∗ · B) + i (∇ε∗) · Im (E ∗ × E)

(1)

and, accordingly, for the conversion of chirality at interfaces (18)

8 Im (Xe) = 2ω Im (ε) Im (E ∗ · B) + [∇ Re (ε)] · Im (E ∗ × E)

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Lin Zschiedrich for many fruitful discussions. We acknowledge the support of BMBF through project
13N13164 (SolarNano) and of the Einstein Foundation Berlin through projects ECMath-OT5 and -SE6, as well
as support from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) through SFB 787 ’Semiconductor Nanophotonics:
Materials, Models, Devices’ and from the Zuse Institute Berlin through bridge project ’Parameter-dependent
parallel block sparse Arnoldi and D¨ohler algorithms on distributed systems’.

14

REFERENCES

[1] Gagnon, Y. L., Templin, R. M., How, M. J., and Marshall, N. J., “Circularly polarized light as a communi-

cation signal in mantis shrimps,” Current Biology (2015).

[2] Vallone, G., Bacco, D., Dequal, D., Gaiarin, S., Luceri, V., Bianco, G., and Villoresi, P., “Experimental

satellite quantum communications,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 040502 (2015).

[3] Thomson, W. B. K., [Baltimore Lectures on Molecular Dynamics and the Wave Theory of Light ], Cambridge

Library Collection - Physical Sciences, Cambridge University Press (2009).

[4] Saba, M., Wilts, B. D., Hielscher, J., and Schr¨oder-Turk, G. E., “Absence of circular polarisation in re-
ﬂections of butterﬂy wing scales with chiral gyroid structure,” Materials Today: Proceedings 1, 193–208
(2014).

[5] Tang, Y. and Cohen, A. E., “Optical chirality and its interaction with matter,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 163901

(2010).

[6] Lipkin, D. M., “Existence of a new conservation law in electromagnetic theory,” Journal of Mathematical

Physics 5, 696 (1964).

[7] Garc´ıa-Etxarri, A. and Dionne, J. A., “Surface-enhanced circular dichroism spectroscopy mediated by

nonchiral nanoantennas,” Physical Review B 87(23), 235409 (2013).

[8] Nieto-Vesperinas, M., “Optical theorem for the conservation of electromagnetic helicity: Signiﬁcance for
molecular energy transfer and enantiomeric discrimination by circular dichroism,” Physical Review A 92(2),
023813 (2015).

[9] Poulikakos, L. V., Gutsche, P., McPeak, K. M., Burger, S., Niegemann, J., Hafner, C., and Norris, D. J.,
“The optical chirality ﬂux as a useful far-ﬁeld probe of chiral near ﬁelds,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1601.06716
(2016).

[10] McPeak, K. M., van Engers, C. D., Blome, M., Park, J. H., Burger, S., Goslvez, M. A., Faridi, A., Ries,
Y. R., Sahu, A., and Norris, D. J., “Complex chiral colloids and surfaces via high-index oﬀ-cut silicon,”
Nano Letters 14(5), 2934–2940 (2014).

[11] Meinzer, N., Hendry, E., and Barnes, W. L., “Probing the chiral nature of electromagnetic ﬁelds surrounding

plasmonic nanostructures,” Physical Review B 88(4), 041407 (2013).

[12] Sch¨aferling, M., Dregely, D., Hentschel, M., and Giessen, H., “Tailoring enhanced optical chirality: Design

principles for chiral plasmonic nanostructures,” Phys. Rev. X 2, 031010 (2012).

[13] Bliokh, K. Y. and Nori, F., “Characterizing optical chirality,” Physical Review A 83, 021803–1–3 (2011).
[14] Barnett, S. M., Cameron, R. P., and Yao, A. M., “Duplex symmetry and its relation to the conservation of

optical helicity,” Physical Review A 86(1), 013845 (2012).

[15] Fernandez-Corbaton, I. and Rockstuhl, C., “Objects of maximum electromagnetic chirality,” arXiv preprint

arXiv:1508.04049 (2015).

[16] Philbin, T. G., “Lipkin’s conservation law, noether’s theorem, and the relation to optical helicity,” Physical

Review A 87(4), 043843 (2013).

[17] Condon, E., “Theories of optical rotatory power,” Reviews of modern physics 9(4), 432 (1937).
[18] Tellegen, B. D., “The gyrator, a new electric network element,” Philips Res. Rep 3(2), 81–101 (1948).
[19] Kong, J., [Theory of electromagnetic waves], A Wiley-Interscience publication, Wiley (1975).
[20] Jackson, J. D., [Classical Electrodynamics], John Wiley and Sons, 3rd ed. (1998).
[21] Wong, G., Xi, X., Frosz, M., and Russell, P. S. J., “Enhanced optical activity and circular dichroism in

twisted photonic crystal ﬁber,” Optics Letters 40(20), 4639–4642 (2015).

[22] Sch¨adle, A., Zschiedrich, L., Burger, S., Klose, R., and Schmidt, F., “Domain decomposition method for
maxwells equations: scattering oﬀ periodic structures,” Journal of Computational Physics 226(1), 477–493
(2007).

[23] Wong, G., Kang, M., Lee, H., Biancalana, F., Conti, C., Weiss, T., and Russell, P. S. J., “Excitation
of orbital angular momentum resonances in helically twisted photonic crystal ﬁber,” Science 337(6093),
446–449 (2012).

[24] Naruse, M., Tani, T., Inoue, T., Yasuda, H., Hori, H., and Naya, M., “Local circular polarizations in

nanostructures induced by linear polarization via optical near-ﬁelds,” JOSA B 32(9), 1797–1803 (2015).

15

[25] Saba, M., Thiel, M., Turner, M. D., Hyde, S., Gu, M., Grosse-Brauckmann, K., Neshev, D. N., Mecke,
K., and Schr¨oder-Turk, G. E., “Circular dichroism in biological photonic crystals and cubic chiral nets,”
Physical Review Letters 106(10), 103902 (2011).

[26] Bohren, C. F. and Huﬀman, D. R., [Absorption and scattering of light by small particles], John Wiley &

Sons (1998).

[27] Bliokh, K. Y., Bekshaev, A. Y., and Nori, F., “Dual electromagnetism: Helicity, spin, momentum and

angular momentum,” New Journal of Physics 15(3), 033026 (2013).

[28] Monk, P., [Finite Element Methods for Maxwell’s Equations], Numerical Mathematics and Scientiﬁc Com-

putation, Clarendon Press (2003).

[29] Hecht, E., [Optics], Addison-Wesley (2002).
[30] Fresnel, A. J., [M´emoire sur la loi des modiﬁcations que la r´eﬂexion imprime `a la lumi`ere polaris´ee], De

l’Imprimerie de Firmin Didot Fr´eres (1832).

[31] Fernandez-Corbaton, I., Zambrana-Puyalto, X., Tischler, N., Vidal, X., Juan, M. L., and Molina-Terriza,
G., “Electromagnetic duality symmetry and helicity conservation for the macroscopic maxwells equations,”
Physical review letters 111(6), 060401 (2013).

[32] Gansel, J. K., Thiel, M., Rill, M. S., Decker, M., Bade, K., Saile, V., von Freymann, G., Linden, S.,
and Wegener, M., “Gold helix photonic metamaterial as broadband circular polarizer,” Science 325(5947),
1513–1515 (2009).

[33] Palik, E. D., [Handbook of Optical Constants of Solids], vol. 3, Academic Press (1998).
[34] Pomplun, J., Burger, S., Zschiedrich, L., and Schmidt, F., “Adaptive ﬁnite element method for simulation

of optical nano structures,” physica status solidi (b) 244(10), 3419–3434 (2007).

[35] JCMsuite. http://www.jcmwave.com (2016).
[36] Burger, S., Zschiedrich, L., Pomplun, J., Herrmann, S., and Schmidt, F., “hp-ﬁnite element method for
simulating light scattering from complex 3d structures,” in [SPIE Advanced Lithography], 94240Z–94240Z,
International Society for Optics and Photonics (2015).

[37] Sch¨aferling, M., Yin, X., Engheta, N., and Giessen, H., “Helical plasmonic nanostructures as prototypical

chiral near-ﬁeld sources,” ACS Photonics 1(6), 530–537 (2014).

[38] Tian, X., Fang, Y., and Sun, M., “Formation of enhanced uniform chiral ﬁelds in symmetric dimer nanos-

tructures,” Scientiﬁc Reports 5, 17534– (2015).

[39] Bliokh, K. Y. and Nori, F., “Transverse and longitudinal angular momenta of light,” Physics Reports 592,

1 – 38 (2015).

[40] Yoo, S. and Park, Q.-H., “Chiral light-matter interaction in optical resonators,” Physical Review Let-

ters 114(20), 203003 (2015).

16

