Assembly and Phase Transitions within Colloidal Crystals

Bo Li,1 Di Zhou,1,2 and Yilong Han1,∗

1, Department of Physics, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong, China.

2, Multi-disciplinary Materials Research Center, Frontier Institute of Science and Technology,

Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China.

(Dated: March 17, 2016)

Micrometre-sized colloidal particles can be viewed as large atoms with tailorable size, shape and
interactions. These building blocks can assemble into extremely rich structures and phases, in
which the thermal motions of particles can be directly imaged and tracked using optical microscopy.
Hence, colloidal particles are excellent model systems for studying phase transitions, especially for
poorly understood kinetic and non-equilibrium microscale processes. Advances in colloid fabrication,
assembly and computer simulations have opened up numerous possibilities for such research. In this
Review, we describe recent progress in the study of colloidal crystals composed of tunable isotropic
spheres, anisotropic particles and active particles. We focus on advances in crystallization, melting
and solidsolid transitions, and highlight challenges and future perspectives in phase-transition studies
within colloidal crystals.

Micrometre-sized colloidal particles can assemble into numerous structures and phases (FIG.1), and are excellent
model systems for the study of phase transitions [1–6] because their thermal motions can be directly visualized by
optical video microscopy [7] and tracked by image processing [8]. By contrast, the small spatial and timescales of
atomic motions make the microscopic kinetics during phase transitions diﬃcult to resolve.

Phase transitions are ubiquitous in nature and industry, and have an important role in materials science, statistical
physics, cosmology, biophysics, chemistry and earth science. They depend strongly on dimensionality, surface prop-
erties, defects, heating and cooling rates, and external ﬁelds. Phase transitions can be classiﬁed into ﬁrst-, second-
and inﬁnite-order (in which the free energy is an inﬁnitely diﬀerentiable exponential function such as the Koster-
litzThouless (KT) transition). The equilibrium behaviour of continuous phase transitions, including second- and
inﬁnite-order transitions, can be well described theoretically; however, the fundamental theory to describe ﬁrst-order
phase transitions is lacking. The kinetics of ﬁrst-order and continuous phase transitions are diﬃcult to predict [9].

Colloidal particles can be viewed as large atoms with tailorable size, shape and interactions [6]. Although colloids
and atoms diﬀer in some aspects (BOX 1), their phase transitions share many similarities; for example, they both follow
classical nucleation theory (CNT) at weak supersaturations [10] and deviate from CNT at strong supersaturations
[11]. Hence, colloids can provide general information about phase transitions [4–6]. Besides being important as
micrometre-scale analogues of atoms, colloids are interesting in their own right. In the past two decades, colloidal
model systems have provided vital insights into the microscopic kinetics of melting, crystallization, glass transitions
and solid solid transitions. Recent breakthroughs in colloidal fabrication, assembly and computer simulations open
new opportunities for phase-transition studies.

Comparison between colloidal particles and atoms:
Both colloidal particles and atoms experience strong thermal motions, which enable them to form thermally
equilibrated phases. The phase behaviour of colloids with weak interactions, such as hard spheres, is mainly
determined by the volume fraction, φ, which is analogous to the eﬀective inverse temperature, 1/T , in atomic
systems. Both a colloidal particle and an atom have ∼ kBT thermal energy according to the equipartition
theorem, but their diameters are very diﬀerent (by a factor of 103 or more). Consequently, the energy density
and elastic moduli of 3D colloidal crystals are 109 times smaller than those of atomic crystals (that is, they
are ‘soft’ materials). Unlike atoms, which exhibit ballistic motion in vacuum, colloidal particles undergo over-
damped Brownian diﬀusion without a well-deﬁned velocity. Colloidal particles dispersed in liquid have complex
long-range hydrodynamic interactions in 3D, which inﬂuence the kinetics but not the equilibrium behaviour
[12–15]. Note that a liquid solution is needed; otherwise microparticles form powders without Brownian
motion. Quantum eﬀects are usually negligible in colloids. Finally, colloidal particles can be made active with
self-propelled motions, whereas atoms are passive.

In the ﬁrst part of the Review, we describe conventional colloidal crystals composed of isotropic spheres that mimic
simple atomic crystals, non-conventional colloidal crystals composed of anisotropic particles that resemble atoms with
directional interactions or molecules, and crystals of active particles that have no counterpart in atomic systems. In
the second part of the Review, we discuss recent studies of crystallization, melting, solidsolid transitions and other
phase transitions in crystals composed of isotropic particles. Transitions within crystals composed of anisotropic or
active particles are also brieﬂy discussed. Owing to the limited space, we have highlighted only a limited number of

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
6
1

 
 
]
t
f
o
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
1
2
0
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

2

FIG. 1: Phase diagrams of monodispersed colloids. (a) Hard spheres. (b) Repulsive disks with pair potential U (r) ∼ r−n.
The liquidhexatic coexistence is a signature of ﬁrst-order phase transitions. (c) Spheres with long-range repulsions for ionic
colloidal crystals. (d) Spheres with repulsive Hertz potentials show an inﬁnite number of cycles of 2D crystal phases. (e) Spheres
with diﬀerent attraction ranges. (f) Janus spheres with diﬀerent patch sizes θ and interaction strengths. φ, volume fraction;
φhexatic, volume fraction at the onset of the hexatic phase; bcc, body-centred cubic; bco, body-centred orthorhombic; fcc, face-
centred cubic. Panel b adapted with permission from REF.154, American Physical Society. Panel c adapted with permission
from REF.19, American Physical Society. Panel d adapted with permission from REF.21, Royal Society of Chemistry. Panel e
adapted with permission from REF.5, American Association for the Advancement of Science. Panel f adapted with permission
from REF.92, Royal Society of Chemistry.

examples of this rapidly expanding research ﬁeld and focus on micrometre-sized particles.

I. COLLOIDAL CRYSTALS

A. Crystals composed of isotropic spheres

3

Diﬀerent particle shapes and interactions give rise to diﬀerent packing entropy, S, and interaction energy, U , in

minimizing the free energy, F = U T S, where T is temperature, thus resulting in diﬀerent phases at equilibrium.

As the simplest colloid, monodisperse (that is, uniform size and properties) hard spheres can pack into face-centred
cubic (fcc), hexagonal close packed (hcp) and random hexagonal close packed (rhcp) crystals and glasses in 3D [16–18].
Face-centred cubic packing makes most eﬃcient use of the 3D space, and thus spheres have more eﬀective room to
move; that is, they have greater free-volume entropy, which can compensate for the extra conﬁgurational entropy of
random packing. Consequently, the fcc crystal is the equilibrium phase with the maximum S (that is, minimum F
[19]) because U = 0 for hard spheres (FIG. 1a). In practice, however, hard spheres can be trapped in a supercooled
liquid or a glassy state because the 3D locally favoured packing is a tetrahedron of four spheres that cannot tile the 3D
space. In general, such frustration between locally and globally favoured packing can dynamically arrest the system
into a disordered structure [4]. By contrast, hard or soft repulsive disks can form crystal and hexatic phases (FIG. 1b),
but can not form a glassy phase in 2D even under fast quenching because the local optimal packing is an equilateral
triangle of three disks which, can fully tile the 2D space. Crystals in lower dimensions have more long-wavelength
ﬂuctuations [20], fewer neighbours to bind each particle on its lattice site and fewer interparticle ‘springs’ connected in
parallel rather than in series. Hence, crystals are too soft to exist in 1D unless there are long-range interactions; 2D is
the critical dimensionality in which crystals are very soft with only quasi-long-range translational order and long-range
orientational order. Between 2D crystals and liquids, there may exist a hexatic phase characterized by short-range
translational order and quasi-long-range orientational order [20]. Hard spheres under quasi-2D conﬁnement can form
triangular, square and buckled thin-ﬁlm crystals [21, 22].

Soft particles that is, particles with long-range repulsions can form fcc, body-centred cubic (bcc) or other lattices
[23, 24] (FIG. 1c). Interestingly, continuously compressing soft Hertz-potential spheres can induce not only quasicrys-
tals with ﬁve-fold symmetry but also inﬁnite cycles of hexagonal and square crystals in 2D [25] (FIG. 1d), and inﬁnite
cycles of fcc, bcc, hexagonal, simple cubic and body-centred tetragonal (bct) crystals in 3D [26]. Pressure can further
deform particle shape and induce new forms of crystals [27]. Experimentally, particles can be softened by grafting
long polymers, reducing the crosslinker density in microgels [28] or reducing the ionic strength to increase the Debye
length of the screened Coulomb interaction for charged particles [23, 24, 29]. Complex repulsions involving two or
more length scales can result in various superlattices [30] and quasicrystals [31–33].

Attractive colloidal particles can better mimic atoms. Attractive van der Waals forces universally exist among
colloidal particles. The van der Waals force is strong over short distances (< 100 nm) for microparticles and induces
aggregation. To avoid such coagulation, van der Waals attractions are usually weakened below kBT by grafting
polymers or surfactants to form a low-density surface (steric stabilization) or screened by electrostatic repulsions for
charged particles (charge stabilization) [34]. Beyond the van der Waals attraction range, typical interparticle attrac-
tions include depletion attraction induced by adding small particles [35–38], and Casimir-like or wetting attraction
induced by the ﬂuctuation of either the two-component liquid near its critical point or percolation clusters of small
particles [39–42]. Both the strength and range of attraction aﬀect the phase behaviour (FIG. 1e). For example, when
the range of attraction is much smaller than the repulsive core, particles form a ﬂuid without distinguishable liquid
and gas phases in colloida [5] and molecular systems such as buckyballs [43].

Unlike repulsive or long-range attractive colloidal spheres, which can easily form large crystals, shortrange attractive
colloids often form disordered aggregates or gels [4] (FIG. 1e), indicating a rugged free-energy landscape. This can
be explained in terms of the competition between locally and globally favoured structures [44]. When a liquid-like
particle crystallizes, its neighbours must move to make way for new neighbours. Neighbours moving radially under
short-range attraction require high energy, and tangential movement is often forbidden because of the constraints
from neighbours’ neighbours. Hence, the system tends to be deeply trapped in a disordered state.

Unlike atoms, colloidal particles cannot be perfectly identical in size or other properties. This polydispersity is a
generic feature of colloids that can hinder crystallization and even induce new types of crystals [45–48]. Hard spheres
with 6% polydispersity can fractionate into crystallites with diﬀerent mean diameters and undergo a re-entrant
melting transition [45]. Hertz spheres with a polydispersity < 6% can form normal crystals at high volume fractions,
φ, and distinct disordered crystals at low φ [46]. Uniformsized spheres with diﬀerent softnesses can pack into another
type of disordered crystal with perfect lattices and glassy behaviour [47, 48].

Compared with nanoparticles, microparticles do not self-assemble into high-quality crystals as easily, and defects
are common. Hence, it is necessary to direct assembly by using an external force [49–52] (FIG. 2ad) or diﬀerent
liquid solvents (FIG. 2eg), or, in the case of more complex crystals, by using bidisperse spheres [29, 53] (FIG. 2hj),
competing interactions [30] (for example, short-range attraction versus long-range repulsion) (FIG. 2k), templating
[54] or a combination thereof. After assembly, defects can be eﬀectively annealed away by cycling tunable colloidal

4

FIG. 2: Strategies used to assemble isotropic particles into crystals.
(e-g)
Adjustment of the liquid solution. (h-j) Use of bidisperse spheres. (k) Competing interactions. Image a adapted with permission
from REF.43, American Physical Society. Image b adapted with permission from REF.45, Optical Society of America. Image
c from REF.44, Nature Publishing Group. Image d adapted with permission from REF.46, Optical Society of America. Image
e from REF.32, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. Image f from REF.143, Nature Publishing Group. Image g
from REF.34, Nature Publishing Group. Image h from REF.25, Nature Publishing Group. Image i adapted with permission
from REF.47, WileyVCH. Image j adapted with permission from REF.95, American Association for the Advancement of
Science. Image k adapted with permission from REF.26, American Physical Society.

(a-d) Application of external ﬁelds.

crystals near their melting points [10, 55], by shaking crystals in external ﬁelds [55–57] or with holographic optical
tweezers [58].

B. Crystals composed of anisotropic particles

Much of the interest in colloidal assembly comes from its potential applications for photonic crystals [59], and
recent progress made in fabricating crystals composed of anisotropic particles is particularly valuable in this respect.
Particle synthesis techniques have been used for the past three decades to produce micrometre-sized, non-spherical
colloidal particles, such as rods, platelets, convex and concave polyhedrons, and spheres with bulges or dents [60–
63]; however, the phase-transition behaviour of such particles has rarely been studied. Recently, progress has been

5

made in producing active particles [64, 65], anisotropic particles [63, 65, 66] and particles with tunable interactions
[34–36, 39, 67, 68]. These experimental breakthroughs have greatly expanded our knowledge of anisotropic-particle
assembly, and led to the computational prediction of diverse structures [69–71], although many of these have yet to
be realized experimentally. Recent reviews of colloid fabrication are available in the literature [65, 66]; in this Review
we focus on crystal assembly [71–74].

Hard ellipsoids are a simple type of anisotropic particle, which can be stretched from spheres and can assemble
into rotator crystals (that is, plastic crystals), liquid-crystal phases and crystals in 2D [75] and 3D [76]; however,
experimental realization remains challenging because micrometre-sized ellipsoids tend to be trapped in glassy states
[77]. By contrast, using an electric ﬁeld, long-range repulsive rods can be tuned from a liquid to a rotator crystal
[78] (FIG. 3a) to a crystal without vitriﬁcation because of their abundant free space. Photolithography can produce
numerous platelets with arbitrarily designed 2D shapes [79–82], which suﬃces for assembly in 2D but not in 3D.
Monodispersed squares, triangles, pentagons and square crosses (FIG. 3b) were assembled into various 2D crystals
by slightly tilting samples under gravity [80–82]. For example, square platelets form a hexagonal rotator phase and
a rhombic crystal as density increases, but do not form any phase with four-fold symmetry [80]. Non-chiral triangles
can form a crystal with left-handed and right-handed chiralities either mixed locally in experiments [80] or separated
into two large domains in simulations [83]. These platelets do not have tunable sizes or interactions; hence, it remains
a challenge to drive a phase transition and study its kinetics.

Polyhedra [84, 85] have been fabricated and assembled into crystals (FIG. 3c) [86]. The experimental study of
colloidal crystals is more challenging in 3D than in 2D because it requires many more particles and because refractive-
index matching between particles and the liquid solution is required for 3D confocal imaging. Hence, simulations
take the leading role in studies of 3D assembly of anisotropic particles [71, 72]. Numerous types of crystals, plastic
crystals, liquid crystals and amorphous phases were revealed in simulations for 145 types of hard polyhedrons by
systematically varying their shapes [69]. This demonstrates that a purely entropic eﬀect can give rise to almost any
structure observed in atomic systems, even for simple hard polyhedrons.

FIG. 3: Colloidal crystals composed of anisotropic or active particles. (a) Rods with long-range repulsions form
a rotator crystal with random orientations. (b) A 2D crystal assembled from square crosses. (c) Octahedra packing in 3D.
(d) Hierarchical assembly of nano-octapods. (e) Self-propelled Janus spheres self-assemble into crystallites. (f) Spherical self-
rotating Thiovulum majus bacteria self-assemble into a crystal with global random rotation. (g) Paramagnetic Janus spheres
spin under a rotating magnetic ﬁeld and form a crystallite. Panel a from REF.74, Nature Publishing Group. Panel b adapted
with permission from REF.77, Institute of Physics. All rights reserved. Panel c from REF.185, Nature Publishing Group.
Panel d from REF.82, Nature Publishing Group. Panel e adapted with permission from REF.111, American Association for
the Advancement of Science. Panel f adapted with permission from REF.109, American Physical Society. Panel g reproduced
with permission from REF.110, Royal Society of Chemistry.

Compared with convex particles, concave particles can form more complex and even hierarchical structures [87].
For example, octapod-shaped nanoparticles interlock to form chains, which in turn stack to form a 3D super lattice
with high porosity and rigidity [87] (FIG. 3d). Such hierarchical assembly greatly expands the possible structures.

Besides shape anisotropy, interaction anisotropy can give rise to richer crystalline structures [71, 72, 74], which

6

in recent years have been made accessible by breakthroughs in the fabrication of patchy spheres [88] and DNA-
coated particles [68]. A simple type of particle with anisotropic interactions is the Janus sphere, which comprises two
hemispheres with diﬀerent properties, for example, half latex and half metal [89]. In the past three decades, various
coating methods for making Janus [89] and multipatch spheres [90] have been developed. Patch-induced anisotropic
interactions and diﬀerent responses to external ﬁelds give rise to complex behaviour; however, novel lattices have
only been experimentally achieved using triblock spheres with attractive hydrophobic patches. Surprisingly, these
spheres formed a kagome lattice [91] rather than a typical hexagonal lattice because of the rotational entropy of the
spheres [92]. Simulations of various patchy particles have led to the discovery of new crystals [93–95] and new phase
diagrams [94–96] (FIG. 1f), and the extraction of some general features; for example, directional interactions can
promote hierarchical assembly [97, 98].

Base-pair sequences in DNA can be programmed in biotechnology, allowing single-strand DNA to be used as
glue with programmable base-pair binding sites. Although programmable anisotropic interactions are promising,
micrometre-sized spheres have only been uniformly coated with DNA and thus have isotropic attractions. Colloidal
spheres coated with complementary DNA sequences have temperature-sensitive attractions and can form crystallites
[99, 100] (FIG. 2j). DNA-coated nanospheres can form large 3D crystals [101], but DNA-coated microspheres usually
form aggregates or small crystallites [99, 100] because their attraction ranges relative to the repulsion cores are
extremely short [99, 100]. In addition, directional binding lowers both energy and entropy, resulting in an abnormal
free-energy minimum corresponding to small crystallites; further crystallite growth is prohibited by the higher free-
energy barrier [102]. Hence, the global free-energy minimum of large crystals is kinetically inaccessible. Quantitative
analysis [102, 103] has led to the development of important protocols to fabricate large crystals, and experimental
techniques are reaching maturity after two decades of [178]. Consequently, DNA-coated spheres now have great
potential to be assembled into new, designer structures (see REF.[178] for a recent review on this subject).

Modern simulation techniques can be used for eﬃciently exploring the large parameter space of anisotropic building
blocks and their packing structures [69, 71, 72, 96, 104], and, in turn, could reveal general rules governing their assembly
and structure.
In the past decade, simulations have played an important part in, and provided an indispensable
understanding of, anisotropic particle assembly [71, 72].

Besides colloids with anisotropic interactions, topological colloids in liquid crystals, such as rings [105] or spheres
with topological interacting knots [106], represent a new class of interaction and assembly, and could form new
crystalline structures [106].

C. Crystals composed of active particles.

‘Active matter’ contains self-driven units by converting stored or ambient energy into systematic movement, and
includes animal groups, energy-consuming polymers and active colloids [64]. Active particles are diﬀerent from atoms:
they can exhibit new phenomena and new states of matter. Active matter is a rapidly expanding area as a new platform
to study non-equilibrium physics. In the past decade, colloids have been made active with translational or rotational
self-propulsion by adding local chemical, temperature, electric or force gradients around individual particles. Examples
include chemical-reaction-driven Janus particles, thermophoretic Janus particles, and the use of force gradients induced
by surface tension or polymerization [74, 107]. Self-propelled spheres can spontaneously form 2D triangular lattices
(FIG. 3e) because a newly crystallized particle is buried by subsequently deposited particles before its rotation can
align it in the direction needed to escape from the crystal [108]. This self-trapping mechanism is distinct from the
crystallization of passive particles. In addition, self-rotating bacteria [109] (FIG. 3f) and Janus paramagnetic spheres
under a rotating magnetic ﬁeld [110] (FIG. 3g) can assemble into a rotating crystal via hydrodynamic interactions.
Current active-particle studies mainly focus on low-density 2D gases and small crystallites [111], whereas dense [112]
and 3D active systems are desirable for phase-transition studies in the future.

II. PHASE TRANSITIONS

The kinetics of a phase transition can aﬀect the transition rate, the intermediate state and even the ﬁnal structure;
however, kinetic pathways are diﬃcult to predict, owing to the complex high-dimensional free-energy landscape.
Measurable kinetic pathways only exist near equilibrium, where a small number of collective coordinates are suﬃcient
to describe the kinetic process. Quasi-equilibrium can be expected to hold if bond breaking and formation are much
shorter than the nucleation timescale. First-order phase transitions typically follow the nucleation mechanism, which
can be roughly divided into three stages: incubation, critical nucleus formation and growth of the post-critical nucleus.
The small scales of the ﬁrst two stages require measurement using optical microscopy (representative images of the
diﬀerent transitions are shown in FIGS. 4,5), whereas the third stage was often studied by light scattering in earlier

7

colloid experiments [1, 113]. First-order transitions can be identiﬁed, for example, from the coexistence of two phases
at equilibrium, a van der Waals loop in the free energy, hysteresis, an order-parameter jump or diﬀerent asymptotic
behaviours of susceptibility [9]. Strictly speaking, phase transitions are deﬁned at the thermodynamic limit. Most
colloidal crystals in phase-transition studies contain millions of particles, thousands of which are in the ﬁeld of view.
Transitions within small colloidal crystallites can cast light on nanocrystal transformations, which are interesting in
their own right.

Gibbs free energy of nucleation:
In classical nucleation theory, the Gibbs free energy of nucleation is expressed as:

∆G = −V ρ∆µ + Aγ + Estrain − Edefect,

where V : volume
A: area
γ: surface tension
ρ: number density of particles in the nucleus
∆µ (> 0): chemical potential diﬀerence between the parent phase and the nucleus
Estrain: strain energy caused by volume change of the nucleus; zero for ﬂuid parent phase and ﬁnite for solid
parent phase
Edefect (> 0): energy of preexisting defects in volume V of a crystalline parent phase

CNT is most widely used to interpret experimental and simulation data [114]. In CNT (BOX 2), competing terms
with opposite signs give rise to a barrier in ∆G (the Gibbs free energy of nucleation) that is a function of the nucleus
size. Thus, small nuclei tend to shrink rather than grow, unless their size exceeds a critical value related to the barrier
height of ∆G (red curve in FIG. 5a). The energy of pre-existing defects or surfaces (Edef ect) reduces ∆G. Thus,
nucleation tends to start heterogeneously from defects or surfaces.

CNT is based on certain assumptions. For example, it is assumed that the nucleus surface is rough and that growth
takes place without the existence of preferential sites; that nuclei grow through monomer attachment rather than
collective attachment of multiple particles; and that growth occurs about a single nucleus without coalescence of
nuclei or precursors. These assumptions usually hold at weak super saturation; however, the deviations that occur
at strong supersaturation11 are less clear. One research focus in nucleation is non-CNT behaviour, such as in the
following three cases. First, the parent phase develops certain structures or dynamics before nuclei form. Second,
the nucleus can evolve through intermediate metastable states with lower free-energy barriers rather than by directly
transforming into the product phase [97, 115] (blue curve in FIG. 5a), which is called Ostwald’s step rule. This
rule, in principle, can be generally applied to any barrier-crossing process in a rugged landscape, such as protein
folding and chemical reactions. In general, the intermediate metastable state is more likely to appear if particles have
appropriate interaction ranges or possess diﬀerent types of interactions that stabilize the diﬀerent phases [97]. Third,
instead of ∆G(n) for a nucleus with n particles in CNT, the nucleation may have additional collective coordinates,
m (for example, crystallinity, number of particles in the intermediate phase [116], space curvature [117]), which fall
within multidimensional reaction-rate theory. The kinetics follows the steepest pathway through the saddle point of
the free-energy surface ∆G(n, m) (FIG. 5b). Multiple paths can occur simultaneously [118] if their barrier heights
are similar. More collective coordinates often yield a high-dimensional rugged landscape with many basins, similar
to those shown in FIG. 5c. Note that basins may not be fully surrounded by barriers in higher dimensions; that is,
they have narrow barrier-free channels connected to lower-energy states. Such morphology should be more prevalent
for larger systems that have extremely high-dimensional landscapes. In addition to CNT, alternative theories can
describe nucleation and provide diﬀerent predictions [119, 120].

Tunable colloids enable us to drive a phase transition quasi-statically and cycle through the transition multiple times
for better statistics. Temperature on a microscope stage usually cannot be tuned far from 300 K to change the thermal
energy kBT ; hence, colloids are usually tuned by changing the particle interaction. Fabricating tunable colloids is one
of the key breakthroughs of the past decade: examples are repulsive poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (pNIPAM, NIPAM
or NIPA) spheres with temperature-sensitive diameters [10, 11, 55, 67, 121]; paramagnetic spheres [56] or non-magnetic
spheres in ferroﬂuids, for which dipolar interactions can be tuned by the magnetic ﬁeld [122]; temperature-sensitive
DNA-binding [99–101, 123, 124]; ﬂuctuation-induced [39–42] attractions; and depletion [35–37] or surface absorption
induced by temperature-sensitive polymers [36]. NIPA shells on latex cores create ellipsoidal, faceted or bowl-shaped
particles with tunable size and shape [125]. Magnetic particles are ideal for assembling crystals in 2D but not in 3D,
because the attractions along the magnetic ﬁeld induce chains rather than crystals. Depletion-induced or ﬂuctuation-
induced attraction strength is often not ﬁnely tunable in the useful range of 0-1kBT for phase transitions. Adding a
fraction of non-temperature-sensitive depletant can induce more ﬁnely tuned depletion attractions [37].

Most experiments and simulations have been focused on colloidal phase transitions in either quasi-static processes
or systems abruptly changed to a supersaturated state to observe the equilibration process. These results can be
compared with CNT, which describes the evolution of a supersaturated system under ﬁxed conditions. However,
phase-transition kinetics has not been well studied while changing a thermodynamic variable, such as the heating
or cooling rate, and the related dynamical theories are limited for ﬁrst-order [126] and second-order [127] phase
transitions.

8

FIG. 4: Phase-transition studies within colloidal crystals in the past two decades. (a,b) Condensation and sub-
limation by tuning inter-particle attractions. (c,d) Transition from square to triangular lattice within a crystalline domain
(panel c) and at a grain boundary (panel d). (e) 2D crystal melting. (f) Five-layer thin ﬁlm melted from a dislocation and
a grain boundary. (g) Melting in a defect-free region inside a 3D crystal. (h) Melting near a grain boundary inside a 3D
crystal. (i) Crystallization of monodisperse hard-sphere glass. (j) Electric-ﬁeld-induced fcc to bct transition. (k) Magnetic
spheres crystallized to a polycrystal. (l) Crystallization on a droplet surface. (m) Crystallization inside 3D bulk supercooled
liquid. (n) Crystallization from the surface of a large spherical seed. Image a from REF.64, Nature Publishing Group. Image
b adapted with permission from REF.31, American Association for the Advancement of Science. Images c,d from REF.121,
Nature Publishing Group.
Image g adapted
with permission from REF. 10, American Association for the Advancement of Science. Image h adapted with permission from
REF.62, American Association for the Advancement of Science. Image i adapted with permission from REF.145, American
Physical Society. Image j adapted with permission from REF.43, American Physical Society. Image k adapted with permission
from REF.142, Proceedings of the National Academy of Science. Image l adapted with permission from REF.117, American
Association for the Advancement of Science. Image m adapted with permission from REF.127, American Association for the
Advancement of Science. Image n from REF.137, Nature Publishing Group.

Image e adapted with permission from REF.154, American Physical Society.

A. Crystallization

Crystallization is the most intensively studied phase transition in colloids (see reviews on this subject [128, 129]
and references therein). Homogeneous crystallization (that is, crystallization without any preferential sites) of a 3D
supercooled liquid can be observed deep inside the bulk, which avoids heterogeneous crystallization at walls. In a
ground-breaking confocal microscopy experiment, the ﬁrst in situ observation of 3D crystallization was achieved at
the single-particle level by using hard-sphere colloids, thereby allowing measurements of the nucleus structure, size
distribution, nucleation rate and surface tension to be taken [130]. The measured homogeneous nucleation rate was
very diﬀerent from the simulated values [131], which could be attributed to nucleation precursors [132] or other factors
[34, 129]. Various nucleation precursors, such as the predicted bcc nucleus in transitions towards arbitrary product
lattices [133], intermediate-range ordered liquids [132], dense liquid droplets [134] and ordered clusters [118], have

9

been observed in diﬀerent repulsive colloids. Crystallization in attractive colloids has been experimentally explored
recently using DNA-coated spheres [135].

Heterogeneous crystallization in 3D has been studied on ﬂat walls [136, 137] and patterned substrates [138], and
for seed particles with diﬀerent curvatures [139, 140]. The seed can be a large sphere [140] or an array of optical traps
[141]. Small seeds suppress crystallization, whereas large seeds promote it [139, 140]. In particular, when the seed
diameter is appropriate (several times that of the colloidal spheres), crystallites nucleate on the seed surface before
detaching [139, 140] (FIG. 5d).

2D freezing has been much less studied than 2D melting, although it can be easily observed by reversing the tuning
parameters in 2D melting experiments. Note that melting and freezing share the same equilibrium phases, but their
kinetics are diﬀerent and beyond the scope of 2D melting theories [142–144]. The kinetic KibbleZurek mechanism in
cosmology [127] successfully describes the scaling of the generation rates of topological defects, and the dynamical
length scales at various quenching rates as a monolayer of paramagnetic colloidal spheres freezes [145]. This remarkable
similarity between cosmology and soft-matter systems shows that certain features of the non-equilibrium kinetics of
phase transitions are universal.

Phase transitions in curved spaces are of basic interest, but they are diﬃcult to study in atomic systems. They can,
however, easily be observed in colloidal particles trapped at a ﬂuid/ﬂuid interface [117, 146]. Unlike crystallization in
ﬂat space, colloidal spheres on a liquid droplet surface nucleate into fractal-like crystalline patches (FIG. 5e) rather
than a large crystal, because of curvature-induced strain [117] (FIG. 5b).

Deeply supercooled liquids have dynamic heterogeneity, in which the viscosity can diﬀer by orders of magnitude
in neighbouring mesoscopic regions. Such inhomogeneity would certainly aﬀect crystallization, but has rarely been
considered in nucleation theories. Simulations have revealed that crystallization and dynamic heterogeneity enhance
each other in 3D hard-sphere supercooled liquids and glasses [147, 148].

B. Melting

Although crystallization has been intensively studied, melting deserves separate investigation because the two pro-
cesses diﬀer in the following crucial aspects. First, melting and freezing points are usually diﬀerent in colloids; for
example, φmelt = 54.5% and φfreeze = 49.4% for hard-sphere crystals [16] (FIG. 1a). At 49.4% < φ < 54.5%, crystals
with φ = 54.5% and liquids with φ = 49.4% coexist at equilibrium. Second, tunable colloids are required when the
metastable parent phase is ordered (for example, during melting [10, 67]), but not for a disordered parent phase (for
example, brute force can break crystals into supercooled liquids, which can equilibrate back via crystallization without
tuning [130]). Third, defects are important in melting [20, 55, 67], but are generally insigniﬁcant in crystallization.
Fourth, small nuclei can have various ordered structures in crystallization [118, 128, 129, 132, 133], but only disor-
dered liquid exists in melting. Fifth, supercooled liquids are common in nature because crystallization can be easily
suppressed below the freezing temperature, but superheated crystals [10] are rare because crystals will melt from free
surfaces (that is, solid/vapour interfaces) once they reach the melting point. Sixth, the melting speed monotonically
increases with the degree of superheating [11], whereas the crystallization rate is non-monotonic as the temperature
decreases towards the vitriﬁcation point because of the increasing driving force of crystallization and the decreasing
diﬀusivity of the particles [129, 131]. Seventh, nucleus expansion can induce strain in the parent lattice during melt-
ing, but crystallization induces no strain in the parent liquid phase. A larger liquid nucleus in melting causes more
parent-lattice deformation and gives rise to a higher energy barrier. Hence, there is no kinetic pathway for melting
when the driving force is weak under mild superheating [149] (black curve in FIG. 5a). This forbidden gap does not
exist in crystallization. Last, after the liquid has fully crystallized, small polycrystalline grains coalesce into large
ones [145]. Such a ripening process in crystallization does not exist in melting.

Crystals tend to melt heterogeneously from pre-existing defects. The ‘defect strength’ in terms of inducing melting
decreases roughly in the following order: free surface (that is, solid/vapour interface) ¿ bulk triple junction ¿ high-
angle grain boundary ¿ ﬂat substrate ¿ low-angle grain boundary ¿ dislocation ¿ partial dislocation ¿ point defects
(vacancy and interstitial). Stronger defects may also pre-empt melting at weaker defects. This expected trend has
not, however, been well studied in colloidal systems. Heterogeneous melting at grain boundaries [67] and hard walls
[150] has been experimentally observed in repulsive colloidal crystals. In nature, crystals are composed of attractive
particles with free surfaces. Thus, they always melt from free surfaces because the pre-melted surface liquid serves as
a huge post-critical nucleus. Surface pre-melting exists in almost all crystals [151] and has been recently observed at
the single-particle level using tunable attractive colloids [152].

Homogeneous melting only occurs in defectfree crystalline regions if melting is avoided from surfaces and defects
outside the region of interest. Homogeneous 3D melting was observed at the single-particle level for the ﬁrst time
by focusing a beam of light to superheat the interior of a NIPA colloidal crystal while the ambient crystal remained
below the melting point[10]. During the incubation stage, particles swap positions with neighbours, and this triggers

10

nucleation of melting. Such a nucleation precursor, rather than defects as is commonly assumed, keeps the lattice
intact[10]. Particle swapping has also been observed in 2D crystals [153]. The nucleus growth kinetics agrees with
CNT predictions under mild superheating, but deviates under strong superheating owing to non-CNT eﬀects, such
as nucleus shape ﬂuctuations, nuclei coalescence and multimer attachment11. At the superheat limit where the
superheated crystal crosses over from a metastable to an unstable state (blue dashed curve in FIG. 5a), the lattice
becomes mechanically unstable and catastrophically breaks down[10] (FIG. 5g). This transition at the superheat limit
is similar to the spinodal decomposition of crystallization at the supercool limit [154] and remains poorly understood.
The predominant theory used to describe 2D melting is the KosterlitzThoulessHalperinNelson Young (KTHNY)
theory, which predicts that 2D crystals melt via two continuous KT transitions through an intermediate hexatic phase
[142, 143]. An alternative 2D melting scenario is the one-step ﬁrst-order transition associated with the formation of
grain boundaries [144]. These theories do not exclude other melting scenarios. Many molecular monolayers exhibit
one-step ﬁrst- order melting [20], but grain boundaries have not been reported in such systems in which the substrate
eﬀects are strong. By contrast, 2D colloidal monolayers conﬁned between two ﬂat walls [155] or at a ﬂuid/ﬂuid
interface [56] have negligible substrate eﬀects, and defects can be directly observed. Melting of 2D colloidal crystals
with tunable long-range [56] or short-range [155] repulsions exhibits an intermediate hexatic phase, but the order
of the two transitions cannot be well resolved experimentally. Simulations reveal that the melting behaviour can
be correctly resolved only for systems containing more than 106 particles in 2D [156–158]. Large-scale simulations
show that disks with various repulsion ranges follow the KTHNY melting scenario except that the liquidhexatic phase
transition is weakly ﬁrst-order for short-range repulsive disks [157, 158] (FIG. 1b).

Although 2D melting has been intensively studied in molecular and colloidal systems, the following three aspects
are still poorly understood. First, the kinetics is beyond the scope of 2D melting theories [20] and has been poorly
studied experimentally [145]. Second, 2D melting in attractive colloidal crystals has not been well studied [152]. Last,
both KTHNY and grain-boundary- mediated melting theories are developed for inﬁnitely large defect-free crystals
without surfaces [151]. Both 3D and 2D crystals with free surfaces are expected to premelt and melt from surfaces
[151], although surface melting in 2D has only been indirectly measured in molecular monolayers by calorimetry [159].
Thin ﬁlms are extremely valuable in technological applications, but their melting behaviour has not been thor-
oughly studied either theoretically or experimentally. A study of NIPA colloids conﬁned between two walls [55, 160]
showed that crystals comprising fewer than 5 layers melt catastrophically and homogeneously, 5- to 12-layer crystals
melt heterogeneously from grain boundaries and dislocations (FIG. 5g), and ¿12-layer crystals only melt from grain
boundaries, as is the case for 3D crystals.

C. Solid-solid Transitions

Solidsolid transitions between crystals prevail in the Earth’s mantle and in metallurgy. They are more diverse,
complex and less understood than crystalliquid transitions. For example, water has 17 known crystalline structures
but only one or two liquid phases. Solidsolid transitions are usually ﬁrst-order phase transitions featuring an abrupt
density change. Their kinetics typically follows either a diﬀusive nucleation or a martensitic transformation with
concerted motion of particles. The microscopic kinetics and eﬀect of dimensionality remain poorly understood.
Most solidsolid transitions involve interparticle bond-breaking. Such reconstructive transitions are one of the least
understood structural phase transitions because they are diﬃcult to describe in theory (the diﬃculty lies in deﬁning
an order parameter because of the lack of a groupsubgroup relation in the lattice symmetries) [161]; in simulations,
owing to sluggish dynamics; or in experiments, owing to the lack of single-particle observations in the bulk. Hence,
colloids are ideal for the study of solidsolid transitions.

Solidsolid transitions have been far less studied than crystallization and melting in colloids, with most studies
focused on structural properties either because the crystals were not tunable or the martensitic kinetics were too
fast [49, 100, 122, 162]. Solidsolid transitions in colloids have been driven by electric [49] and magnetic ﬁelds [122]
and temperature-sensitive DNA attractions [100]. These systems show martensitic transformations with fast kinetics,
promoted by global stretching of external ﬁelds or by small crystal size. Apart from these transitions with lattice
symmetry changes, isostructural solidsolid transitions by abrupt lattice shrinking or dilation maintain the same lattice
symmetry and often occur in metallic and multiferroic systems. Such transitions were discovered in simulations of
attractive colloids [163] and have been experimentally conﬁrmed [152].

Diﬀusive solidsolid nucleation has recently been observed in superheated thin-ﬁlm NIPA colloidal crystals under
local optical heating. A new type of two-step nucleation process was discovered [121]: 5-layer square lattice to liquid
nucleus to 4-layer triangular lattice (FIG. 5hk). The initial nucleus is liquid because small nuclei are dominated by
surface tension, which is lower at the liquid/solid interface than at the solid/solid interface. This two-step nucleation
occurs in defect-free regions, near dislocations and in grain boundaries, because the constant Edefect (BOX 2) does
not change the shape of ∆G. This provides a clear illustration of Ostwald’s step rule (blue solid curve in FIG. 5a).

11

FIG. 5: Phase-transition kinetics and free-energy barriers. (a) Schematics of possible free-energy barriers. (b) Free-
energy surface as a function of two collective coordinates (such as averaged width and length of crystalline arms in panel e). (c)
Short-range attractive systems often have a rugged free-energy landscape with many local minima in basins depicted by closed
contours. At low temperature, the system tends to be trapped in one of the basins (producing a disordered structure) rather
than reaching the global minimum (crystal). (d) A crystallite (red particles) heterogeneously nucleates from the surface of a
seed (large blue sphere) and then detaches from the seed. The image is reconstructed from particle positions. (e) Homogeneous
crystallization in a curved 2D space (emulsion-droplet surface) results in a fractal-like crystal. (f) Heterogeneous melting from
a grain boundary and a dislocation in a ﬁve-layer thin-ﬁlm crystal. (g) Catastrophic melting at the superheat limit of a 3D
crystal. (h-k) The transition from a square to a triangular lattice initially develops a metastable liquid nucleus, then a triangular
lattice nucleates from within the liquid nucleus. CNT, classical nucleation theory; ∆G, the change in Gibbs free energy. Panel
d from REF.137, Nature Publishing Group. Panel e adapted with permission from REF.117, American Association for the
Advancement of Science. Panel f adapted with permission from REF.157, American Physical Society. Panel g adapted with
permission from REF.10, American Association for the Advancement of Science. Panels (h-k) from REF.121, Nature Publishing
Group.

The intermediate liquid has been observed in simulations of solidsolid transitions of hardsphere thin ﬁlms [116] and 2D
ice [164], and may exist in other atomic systems because the liquid/solid surface tension is smaller than the solid/solid
surface tension for most metals and alloys. Another diﬀusive transition was observed when the fcc lattice of soft
NIPA spheres transforms into a bct lattice driven by an electric ﬁeld; however, the reverse bct to fcc transition is
martensitic [165]. These kinetics have not previously been proposed in atomic solidsolid systems, and thus cast new
light on solidsolid transition pathways.

D. Other phase transitions

Other phase transitions have been signiﬁcantly less studied in colloids. Crystal sublimation [35, 166] and reverse
condensation [38, 40] occur only in attractive colloids. By weakening the attraction, 2D colloidal crystals sublimate
from surfaces. As the size decreases to 30 particles, the whole crystallite disintegrates [35].

All the phase transitions described in the previous sections were studied in isotropic colloids. Anisotropic particles

12

exhibit rich phases, but studies of their phase transitions are limited; these include the crystallization of polyhedrons
[167], self-propelled particles [168], and solidsolid transitions between square and canted cubic crystallites [37]. Active
colloids show unique transitions [169–171] that do not exist in conventional passive thermal systems. For example, a
transition from a resting to a travelling crystal in self-propelled spheres was predicted in simulations [169]. In active
colloids, 2D melting does not generate topological defects [170] and involves much stronger dynamic heterogeneities
than do thermal systems. It was found through simulations that adding hydrodynamic interactions induces a hexatic
phase, rotator crystal or glass for active rotating disks [171]. Activecolloid experiments are crucial because it is
challenging to take complex hydrodynamic interactions into account in simulations [171, 172].

Non-equilibrium phase transitions that feature a breakdown of detailed balance [173] are of great importance for
both basic science and technology, yet are poorly understood. In colloids, non-equilibrium phase transitions have been
brieﬂy explored, including melting [174] and crystallization under ﬂuid ﬂow [175, 176] or temperature gradients [177].
Moreover, there have been a few studies of phase transitions in active colloids [108, 168, 170]. Quantitative study of
non-equilibrium phase transitions requires well-controlled conditions with a small number of collective coordinates.

III. PERSPECTIVE

Over the past two decades, colloidal crystals have provided remarkable insight into the microscopic kinetics of phase
transitions. Studies have mainly been focused on bulk colloidal crystals composed of isotropic repulsive spheres, and
on equilibrium and non-equilibrium behaviour at a ﬁxed eﬀective temperature. Thus, many aspects remain to be
examined, for instance, the eﬀects of surfaces, pre-existing defects and the small system size. In particular, phase
transitions of surfaces and defects themselves, such as roughening transitions of free surfaces and grain boundaries,
have not been explored. These aspects can be experimentally studied using currently available colloids and techniques.
In metallurgy, controversies abound regarding defect dynamics, microstructure evolution and phase-transition kinetics
because of the lack of single-particle resolution in the bulk. These can be studied in ‘colloidal metallurgy’ because
metallic atoms have relatively simple interactions.

Many important processes remain to be explored in colloidal systems, including the kinetics during heating and
cooling, transitions near critical points with strong ﬂuctuations, transitions in anisotropic colloids and non-equilibrium
transitions. Recent breakthroughs in fabricating anisotropic and active particles, tunable interactions and new assem-
bly techniques provide vast possibilities for phase-transition studies. Currently, simulations take the leading role in
the study of colloidal crystals composed of anisotropic or active particles, and more experimental studies are needed
in the future. Researchers should try to derive general rules for how a particle’s shape, interactions and activity aﬀect
crystal assembly and phase transitions. These general rules would help to achieve the goal of reverse engineering,
that is, creating building blocks that will self-assemble into a prescribed structure [178], which is of fundamental
importance for materials science.

Compared with the commonly used bottom-up assembly, which inevitably results in defects in crystals, more
powerful top-down fabrication can directly ‘print’ crystals without defects or with defects in any designed pattern.
Micro-platelets can be printed in ordered 2D arrays by lithography [79], but washing platelets away from the substrate
disrupts the crystalline structure. Non-destructive washing would be particularly desirable in the future. In addition,
current 3D printing can be performed in a liquid environment at 50-µm resolution [179]. The rapidly evolving
3D printing and etching technologies may give rise to a revolutionary top-down approach to fabricating colloids
and colloidal crystals. New particle-tracking algorithms [180], super-resolution microscopy [181], liquid-environment
transmission-electron microscopy [182] and, in particular, fast light-sheet microscopy [183, 184] could also greatly
beneﬁt phase-transition studies if implemented in colloid experiments.

This work was supported by rgc-grf16301514 and ANR/RGC-A-HKUST616/14 grants.

[1] B. J. Ackerson, Phase transitions in colloidal suspensions, CRC Press, 1990.
[2] H. L¨owen, Melting, freezing and colloidal suspensions, Phys. Rep. 237, 249–324 (1994).
[3] C. A. Murray and D. G. Grier, Video microscopy of monodisperse colloidal systems, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 47, 421–462

(1996).

[4] V. J. Anderson and H. N. Lekkerkerker, Insights into phase transition kinetics from colloid science, Nature 416, 811–815

(2002).

[5] D. Frenkel, Materials science, colloidal encounters: a matter of attraction., Science 314, 768 (2006).
[6] D. Frenkel, Playing tricks with designer “atoms”, Science 296, 65–66 (2002).
[7] A. Kose, M. Ozaki, K. Takano, Y. Kobayashi, and S. Hachisu, Direct observation of ordered latex suspension by

metallurgical microscope, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 44, 330–338 (1973).

13

[8] J. C. Crocker and D. G. Grier, Methods of digital video microscopy for colloidal studies, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 179,

298–310 (1996).

[9] K. Binder, Theory of ﬁrst-order phase transitions, Rep Prog Phys. 50, 783 (1987).

[10] Z. Wang, F. Wang, Y. Peng, Z. Zheng, and Y. Han, Imaging the homogeneous nucleation during the melting of superheated

colloidal crystals, Science 338, 87–90 (2012).

[11] Z. Wang, F. Wang, Y. Peng, and Y. Han, Direct observation of liquid nucleus growth in homogeneous melting of colloidal

crystals, Nature Communications 6, 6942 (2015).

[12] A. Furukawa and H. Tanaka, Key role of hydrodynamic interactions in colloidal gelation, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 245702

(2010).

[13] I. C. Jenkins, M. T. Casey, J. T. McGinley, J. C. Crocker, and T. Sinno, Hydrodynamics selects the pathway for displacive

transformations in DNA-linked colloidal crystallites, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 111, 4803–4808 (2014).

[14] M. Radu and T. Schilling, Solvent hydrodynamics speed up crystal nucleation in suspensions of hard spheres, Europhys.

Lett. 105, 26001–26005 (2014).

[15] D. Roehm, S. Kesselheim, and A. Arnold, Hydrodynamic interactions slow down crystallization of soft colloids, Soft

Matter 10, 5503–5509 (2014).

[16] P. Pusey and W. Van Megen, Phase behaviour of concentrated suspensions of nearly hard colloidal spheres, Nature 320,

340–342 (1986).

[17] B. Alder and T. Wainwright, Phase transition for a hard sphere system, J. Chem. Phys. 27, 1208 (1957).
[18] V. N. Manoharan, Colloidal matter: packing, geometry, and entropy, Science 349, 729–735 (2015).
[19] P. G. Bolhuis, D. Frenkel, S.-C. Mau, and D. A. Huse, Entropy diﬀerence between crystal phases, Nature 388, 235–236

(1997).

[20] K. J. Strandburg, Two-dimensional melting, Rev. Mod. Phys. 60, 161–207 (1988).
[21] A. Fortini and M. Dijkstra, Phase behaviour of hard spheres conﬁned between parallel hard plates: manipulation of

colloidal crystal structures by conﬁnement, J. Phys. Cond. Matt. 18, L371 (2006).

[22] M. Schmidt and H. L¨owen, Freezing between two and three dimensions, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 4552 (1996).
[23] D. Gottwald, C. Likos, G. Kahl, and H. L¨owen, Phase behavior of ionic microgels, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 068301 (2004).
[24] A. Yethiraj and A. van Blaaderen, A colloidal model system with an interaction tunable from hard sphere to soft and

dipolar, Nature 421, 513–517 (2003).

[25] W. L. Miller and A. Cacciuto, Two-dimensional packing of soft particles and the soft generalized Thomson problem, Soft

Matter 7, 7552–7559 (2011).

[26] J. C. P`amies, A. Cacciuto, and D. Frenkel, Phase diagram of Hertzian spheres, J. Chem. Phys. 131, 044514 (2009).
[27] V. M. Batista and M. A. Miller, Crystallization of deformable spherical colloids, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 088305 (2010).
[28] D. Heyes and A. Bra´nka, Interactions between microgel particles, Soft Matter 5, 2681–2685 (2009).
[29] M. E. Leunissen, C. G. Christova, A.-P. Hynninen, C. P. Royall, A. I. Campbell, A. Imhof, M. Dijkstra, R. Van Roij, and

A. Van Blaaderen, Ionic colloidal crystals of oppositely charged particles, Nature 437, 235–240 (2005).

[30] A. D. Law, M. Auriol, D. Smith, T. S. Horozov, and D. M. A. Buzza, Self-assembly of two-dimensional colloidal clusters

by tuning the hydrophobicity, composition, and packing geometry, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 138301 (2013).

[31] K. Barkan, M. Engel, and R. Lifshitz, Controlled self-assembly of periodic and aperiodic cluster crystals, Phys. Rev. Lett.

113, 098304 (2014).

[32] M. Engel, P. F. Damasceno, C. L. Phillips, and S. C. Glotzer, Computational self-assembly of a one-component icosahedral

quasicrystal, Nature Materials 14, 109–116 (2015).

[33] T. Dotera, T. Oshiro, and P. Ziherl, Mosaic two-lengthscale quasicrystals, Nature 506, 208–211 (2014).
[34] A. Yethiraj, Tunable colloids: control of colloidal phase transitions with tunable interactions, Soft Matter 3(9), 1099–1115

(2007).

[35] J. Savage, D. Blair, A. Levine, R. Guyer, and A. Dinsmore, Imaging the sublimation dynamics of colloidal crystallites,

Science 314, 795–798 (2006).

[36] L. Feng, B. Laderman, S. Sacanna, and P. Chaikin, Re-entrant solidiﬁcation in polymer–colloid mixtures as a consequence

of competing entropic and enthalpic attractions, Nature Materials 14, 61–65 (2014).

[37] L. Rossi, V. Soni, D. J. Ashton, D. J. Pine, A. P.

, P. M. Chaikin, M. Dijkstra, S. Sacanna, and W. T. Irvine, Shape-

sensitive crystallization in colloidal superball ﬂuids, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 112, 5286–5290 (2015).

[38] J. Savage and A. Dinsmore, Experimental evidence for two-step nucleation in colloidal crystallization, Phys. Rev. Lett.

102, 198302 (2009).

[39] C. Hertlein, L. Helden, A. Gambassi, S. Dietrich, and C. Bechinger, Direct measurement of critical Casimir forces, Nature

451, 172–175 (2008).

[40] S. Faber, Z. Hu, G. H. Wegdam, P. Schall, et al., Controlling colloidal phase transitions with critical Casimir forces,

Nature Communications 4, 1584 (2013).

[41] J. R. Edison, N. Tasios, S. Belli, R. Evans, R. van Roij, and M. Dijkstra, Critical casimir forces and colloidal phase
transitions in a near-critical solvent: a simple model reveals a rich phase diagram, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 038301 (2015).
[42] N. Gnan, E. Zaccarelli, and F. Sciortino, Casimir-like forces at the percolation transition, Nature Communications 5,

3267 (2014).

[43] M. Hagen, E. Meijer, G. Mooij, and D. Frenkel, Does C60 have a liquid phase?, Nature 365, 425–426 (1993).
[44] C. P. Royall, S. R. Williams, T. Ohtsuka, and H. Tanaka, Direct observation of a local structural mechanism for dynamic

arrest, Nature Materials 7, 556–561 (2008).

[45] M. Fasolo and P. Sollich, Equilibrium phase behavior of polydisperse hard spheres, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 068301 (2003).

14

[46] H. Tong, P. Tan, and N. Xu, From Crystals to Disordered Crystals: A Hidden Order-Disorder Transition, Scientiﬁc

reports 5, 15378 (2015).

[47] D. Kaya, N. Green, C. Maloney, and M. Islam, Normal modes and density of states of disordered colloidal solids, Science

329, 656–658 (2010).

[48] K. Chen, T. Still, S. Schoenholz, K. B. Aptowicz, M. Schindler, A. Maggs, A. J. Liu, and A. Yodh, Phonons in two-

dimensional soft colloidal crystals, Phys. Rev. E 88, 022315 (2013).

[49] A. Yethiraj, A. Wouterse, B. Groh, and A. van Blaaderen, Nature of an electric-ﬁeld-induced colloidal martensitic

transition, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 058301 (2004).

[50] A. F. Demir¨ors, P. P. Pillai, B. Kowalczyk, and B. A. Grzybowski, Colloidal assembly directed by virtual magnetic

moulds, Nature 503, 99–103 (2013).

[51] Y. Roichman and D. Grier, Holographic assembly of quasicrystalline photonic heterostructures, Optics Express 13,

5434–5439 (2005).

[52] H.-D. Deng, G.-C. Li, H.-Y. Liu, Q.-F. Dai, L.-J. Wu, S. Lan, A. V. Gopal, V. A. Troﬁmov, and T. M. Lysak, Assembling
of three-dimensional crystals by optical depletion force induced by a single focused laser beam, Optics Express 20,
9616–9623 (2012).

[53] N. Vogel, L. De Viguerie, U. Jonas, C. K. Weiss, and K. Landfester, Wafer-scale fabrication of ordered binary colloidal

monolayers with adjustable stoichiometries, Adv. Func. Mater. 21(16), 3064?073 (2011).

[54] T. Neuhaus, M. Marechal, M. Schmiedeberg, and H. L¨owen, Rhombic preordering on a square substrate, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 110, 118301 (2013).

[55] Y. Peng, Z. Wang, A. M. Alsayed, A. G. Yodh, and Y. Han, Melting of colloidal crystal ﬁlms, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104,

205703 (2010).

[56] K. Zahn, R. Lenke, and G. Maret, Two-stage melting of paramagnetic colloidal crystals in two dimensions, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 82, 2721 (1999).

[57] Q. Wei and X. Wu, Grain boundary dynamics under mechanical annealing in two-dimensional colloids, Phys. Rev. E 70,

020401 (2004).

[58] W. T. Irvine, A. D. Hollingsworth, D. G. Grier, and P. M. Chaikin, Dislocation reactions, grain boundaries, and
irreversibility in two-dimensional lattices using topological tweezers, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110, 15544–15548
(2013).

[59] J. D. Joannopoulos, S. G. Johnson, J. N. Winn, and R. D. Meade, Photonic crystals: molding the ﬂow of light, Princeton

University Press, 2011.

[60] E. Matijevic, Monodispersed metal (hydrous) oxides-A fascinating ﬁeld of colloid science, Acc. Chem. Res. 14, 22–29

(1981).

[61] M. Okubo, M. Ando, A. Yamada, Y. Katsuta, and T. Matsumoto, Studies on suspension and emulsion. XLVII. Anomalous
composite polymer emulsion particles with voids produced by seeded emulsion polymerization, J. Polym. Sci. 19, 143–147
(1981).

[62] K. J. Lee, J. Yoon, and J. Lahann, Recent advances with anisotropic particles, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci. 16,

195–202 (2011).

[63] S. Sacanna and D. J. Pine, Shape-anisotropic colloids: building blocks for complex assemblies, Curr. Opin. Colloid

Interface Sci. 16, 96–105 (2011).

[64] M. C. Marchetti, J. F. Joanny, S. Ramaswamy, T. B. Liverpool, J. Prost, M. Rao, and R. A. Simha, Hydrodynamics of

soft active matter, Rev. Mod. Phys. 85(3), 1143–1189 (2013).

[65] G.-R. Yi, D. J. Pine, and S. Sacanna, Recent progress on patchy colloids and their self-assembly, J. Phys. Cond. Matter

25, 193101 (2013).

[66] M. Sindoro, N. Yanai, A.-Y. Jee, and S. Granick, Colloidal-sized metal–organic frameworks: synthesis and applications,

Acc. Chem. Res. 47, 459–469 (2013).

[67] A. M. Alsayed, M. F. Islam, J. Zhang, P. J. Collings, and A. G. Yodh, Premelting at defects within bulk colloidal crystals,

Science 309, 1207–1210 (2005).

[68] C. Zhang, R. J. Macfarlane, K. L. Young, C. H. J. Choi, L. Hao, E. Auyeung, G. Liu, X. Zhou, and C. A. Mirkin, A

general approach to DNA-programmable atom equivalents, Nature Materials 12, 741–746 (2013).

[69] P. F. Damasceno, M. Engel, and S. C. Glotzer, Predictive self-assembly of polyhedra into complex structures, Science

337, 453–457 (2012).

[70] A. P. Gantapara, J. de Graaf, R. van Roij, and M. Dijkstra, Phase diagram and structural diversity of a family of

truncated cubes: Degenerate close-packed structures and vacancy-rich states, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 015501 (2013).

[71] S. A. Rice, A. R. Dinner, and M. Dijkstra, Entropy-driven phase transitions in colloids:

from spheres to anisotropic

particles, Adv. Chem. Phys. 156, 35 (2015).

[72] S. C. Glotzer and M. J. Solomon, Anisotropy of building blocks and their assembly into complex structures, Nature

Materials 6, 557–562 (2007).

[73] F. Li, D. P. Josephson, and A. Stein, Colloidal assembly: the road from particles to colloidal molecules and crystals,

Angew. Chem. Inter. Edit. 50, 360–388 (2011).

[74] J. Zhang, E. Luijten, and S. Granick, Toward design rules of directional janus colloidal assembly, Annual review of

physical chemistry 66, 581–600 (2015).

[75] G. Bautista-Carbajal and G. Odriozola, Phase diagram of two-dimensional hard ellipses, J. Chem. Phys. 140, 204502

(2014).

[76] G. Bautista-Carbajal, A. Moncho-Jord´a, and G. Odriozola, Further details on the phase diagram of hard ellipsoids of

15

revolution, J. Chem. Phys. 138, 064501 (2013).

[77] Z. Zheng, F. Wang, and Y. Han, Glass transitions in quasi-two-dimensional suspensions of colloidal ellipsoids., Phys.

Rev. Lett. 107, 065702 (2011).

[78] B. Liu, T. H. Besseling, M. Hermes, A. F. Demir¨ors, A. Imhof, and A. van Blaaderen, Switching plastic crystals of

colloidal rods with electric ﬁelds, Nature Communications 5, 3092 (2014).

[79] C. J. Hernandez and T. G. Mason, Colloidal alphabet soup: monodisperse dispersions of shape-designed lithoparticles,

J. Phys. Chem. C 111, 4477–4480 (2007).

[80] K. Zhao, R. Bruinsma, and T. G. Mason, Entropic crystal–crystal transitions of Brownian squares, Proc. Natl. Acad.

Sci. U.S.A. 108, 2684–2687 (2011).

[81] K. Zhao and T. G. Mason, Self-organized chiral colloidal crystals of Brownian square crosses, J. Phys. Cond. Matter 26,

152101 (2014).

[82] K. Zhao, R. Bruinsma, and T. G. Mason, Local chiral symmetry breaking in triatic liquid crystals, Nature Communications

, 801 (2012).

[83] A. P. Gantapara, W. Qi, and M. Dijkstra, A novel chiral phase of achiral hard triangles and an entropy-driven demixing

of enantiomers, Soft Matter 11, 8684–8691 (2015).

[84] L. Rossi, S. Sacanna, W. T. Irvine, P. M. Chaikin, D. J. Pine, and A. P. Philipse, Cubic crystals from cubic colloids, Soft

Matter 7, 4139–4142 (2011).

[85] H. R. Vutukuri, A. Imhof, and A. Van Blaaderen, Fabrication of Polyhedral Particles from Spherical Colloids and Their

Self-Assembly into Rotator Phases, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 53, 13830–13834 (2014).

[86] J. Henzie, M. Gr¨unwald, A. Widmer-Cooper, P. L. Geissler, and P. Yang, Self-assembly of uniform polyhedral silver

nanocrystals into densest packings and exotic superlattices, Nature Materials 11, 131–137 (2012).

[87] K. Miszta, J. de Graaf, G. Bertoni, D. Dorfs, R. Brescia, S. Marras, L. Ceseracciu, R. Cingolani, R. van Roij, M. Dijkstra,
et al., Hierarchical self-assembly of suspended branched colloidal nanocrystals into superlattice structures, Nature
Materials 10, 872–876 (2011).

[88] S. Jiang, Q. Chen, M. Tripathy, E. Luijten, K. S. Schweizer, and S. Granick, Janus particle synthesis and assembly, Adv.

Mater. 22, 1060–1071 (2010).

[89] A. Walther and A. H. Muller, Janus particles: synthesis, self-assembly, physical properties, and applications, Chem. Rev.

113, 5194–5261 (2013).

[90] Y. Wang, Y. Wang, D. R. Breed, V. N. Manoharan, L. Feng, A. D. Hollingsworth, M. Weck, and D. J. Pine, Colloids

with valence and speciﬁc directional bonding, Nature 491, 51–55 (2012).

[91] Q. Chen, S. C. Bae, and S. Granick, Directed self-assembly of a colloidal kagome lattice, Nature 469, 381–384 (2011).
[92] X. Mao, Q. Chen, and S. Granick, Entropy favours open colloidal lattices, Nature Materials 12, 217–222 (2013).
[93] A. W. Wilber, J. P. Doye, A. A. Louis, E. G. Noya, M. A. Miller, and P. Wong, Reversible self-assembly of patchy

particles into monodisperse icosahedral clusters, J. Chem. Phys. 127, 085106 (2007).

[94] F. Romano, E. Sanz, P. Tartaglia, and F. Sciortino, Phase diagram of trivalent and pentavalent patchy particles, J. Phys.

Cond. Matter 24, 064113 (2012).

[95] F. Romano and F. Sciortino, Patterning symmetry in the rational design of colloidal crystals, Nature Communications

3, 975 (2012).

[96] H. Shin and K. S. Schweizer, Theory of two-dimensional self-assembly of Janus colloids: crystallization and orientational

ordering, Soft Matter 10, 262–274 (2014).

[97] S. Whitelam and R. L. Jack, The statistical mechanics of dynamic pathways to self-assembly, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem.

66, 143–163 (2015).

[98] T. Vissers, Z. Preisler, F. Smallenburg, M. Dijkstra, and F. Sciortino, Predicting crystals of Janus colloids, J. Chem.

Phys. 138, 164505 (2013).

[99] W. B. Rogers and V. N. Manoharan, Programming colloidal phase transitions with DNA strand displacement, Science

347, 639–642 (2015).

[100] M. T. Casey, R. T. Scarlett, W. B. Rogers, I. Jenkins, T. Sinno, and J. C. Crocker, Driving diﬀusionless transformations

in colloidal crystals using DNA handshaking, Nature Communications 3, 1209 (2012).

[101] E. Auyeung, T. I. Li, A. J. Senesi, A. L. Schmucker, B. C. Pals, M. O. de La Cruz, and C. A. Mirkin, DNA-mediated

nanoparticle crystallization into Wulﬀ polyhedra, Nature 505, 73–77 (2014).

[102] W. M. Jacobs, A. Reinhardt, and D. Frenkel, Rational design of self-assembly pathways for complex multicomponent

structures, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 112, 6313–6318 (2015).

[103] A. Reinhardt and D. Frenkel, Numerical evidence for nucleated self-assembly of DNA brick structures, Phys. Rev. Lett.

112, 238103 (2014).

[104] J. de Graaf, R. van Roij, and M. Dijkstra, Dense regular packings of irregular nonconvex particles, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107,

155501 (2011).

[105] B. Senyuk, Q. Liu, S. He, R. D. Kamien, R. B. Kusner, T. C. Lubensky, and I. I. Smalyukh, Topological colloids, Nature

493, 200–205 (2013).

[106] U. Tkalec, M. Ravnik, S. ˇCopar, S. ˇZumer, and I. Muˇseviˇc, Reconﬁgurable knots and links in chiral nematic colloids,

Science 333, 62–65 (2011).

[107] Y. Hong, D. Velegol, N. Chaturvedi, and A. Sen, Biomimetic behavior of synthetic particles: from microscopic randomness

to macroscopic control, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 12, 1423–1435 (2010).

[108] I. Buttinoni, J. Bialk´e, F. K¨ummel, H. L¨owen, C. Bechinger, and T. Speck, Dynamical clustering and phase separation

in suspensions of self-propelled colloidal particles, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 238301 (2013).

16

[109] A. P. Petroﬀ, X.-L. Wu, and A. Libchaber, Fast-moving bacteria self-organize into active two-dimensional crystals of

rotating cells, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 158102 (2015).

[110] J. Yan, S. C. Bae, and S. Granick, Rotating crystals of magnetic Janus colloids, Soft Matter 11, 147–153 (2015).
[111] J. Palacci, S. Sacanna, A. P. Steinberg, D. J. Pine, and P. M. Chaikin, Living crystals of light-activated colloidal surfers,

Science 339, 936–940 (2013).

[112] F. Ginot, I. Theurkauﬀ, D. Levis, C. Ybert, L. Bocquet, L. Berthier, and C. Cottin-Bizonne, Nonequilibrium equation of

state in suspensions of active colloids, Phys. Rev. X 5, 011004 (2015).

[113] D. J. Aastuen, N. A. Clark, L. K. Cotter, and B. J. Ackerson, Nucleation and growth of colloidal crystals., Phys. Rev.

Lett. 57(14), 1733–1736 (1986).

[114] R. P. Sear, Nucleation: theory and applications to protein solutions and colloidal suspensions, J. Phys. Cond. Matt. 19,

033101 (2007).

[115] A. Samanta, M. E. Tuckerman, T.-Q. Yu, and E. Weinan, Microscopic mechanisms of equilibrium melting of a solid,

Science 346, 729–732 (2014).

[116] W. Qi, Y. Peng, Y. Han, R. K. Bowles, and M. Dijkstra, Nonclassical Nucleation in a Solid-Solid Transition of Conﬁned

Hard Spheres, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 185701 (2015).

[117] G. Meng, J. Paulose, D. R. Nelson, and V. N. Manoharan, Elastic instability of a crystal growing on a curved surface,

Science 343, 634–637 (2014).

[118] P. Tan, N. Xu, and L. Xu, Visualizing kinetic pathways of homogeneous nucleation in colloidal crystallization, Nature

Physics 10, 73–79 (2014).

[119] N. M. Dixit and C. F. Zukoski, Kinetics of crystallization in hard-sphere colloidal suspensions, Phys. Rev. E 64, 041604

(2001).

[120] J. F. Lutsko and M. A. Dur´an-Olivencia, Classical nucleation theory from a dynamical approach to nucleation, J. Chem.

Phys. 138, 244908 (2013).

[121] Y. Peng, F. Wang, Z. Wang, A. M. Alsayed, Z. Zhang, A. G. Yodh, and Y. Han, Two-step nucleation mechanism in

solid–solid phase transitions, Nature Materials 14, 101–108 (2015).

[122] Y. Yang, L. Fu, C. Marcoux, J. E. Socolar, P. Charbonneau, and B. B. Yellen, Phase transformations in binary colloidal

monolayers, Soft Matter 11, 2404–2415 (2015).

[123] W. B. Rogers and J. C. Crocker, Direct measurements of DNA-mediated colloidal interactions and their quantitative

modeling, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 108, 15687–15692 (2011).

[124] Z. Zeravcic, V. N. Manoharan, and M. P. Brenner, Size limits of self-assembled colloidal structures made using speciﬁc

interactions, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 111, 15918–15923 (2014).

[125] J. J. Crassous, A. M. Mihut, L. K. M˚ansson, and P. Schurtenberger, Anisotropic responsive microgels with tuneable

shape and interactions, Nanoscale 7, 15971–15982 (2015).

[126] E. Canovi, P. Werner, and M. Eckstein, First-order dynamical phase transitions, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 265702 (2014).
[127] A. Del Campo and W. H. Zurek, Universality of phase transition dynamics: Topological defects from symmetry breaking,

Inter. J. Mod. Phys. A 29, 1430018 (2014).

[128] U. Gasser, Crystallization in three-and two-dimensional colloidal suspensions, J. Phys. Cond. Matter 21, 203101 (2009).
[129] T. Palberg, Crystallization kinetics of colloidal model suspensions: recent achievements and new perspectives, J. Phys.

Cond. Matter 26, 333101 (2014).

[130] U. Gasser, E. R. Weeks, A. Schoﬁeld, P. Pusey, and D. Weitz, Real-space imaging of nucleation and growth in colloidal

crystallization, Science 292, 258–262 (2001).

[131] S. Auer and D. Frenkel, Prediction of absolute crystal-nucleation rate in hard-sphere colloids, Nature 409, 1020–1023

(2001).

[132] T. Kawasaki and H. Tanaka, Formation of a crystal nucleus from liquid, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107, 14036–14041

(2010).

[133] S. Alexander and J. McTague, Should all crystals be bcc? Landau theory of solidiﬁcation and crystal nucleation, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 41, 702 (1978).

[134] T. Schilling, H. Sch¨ope, M. Oettel, G. Opletal, and I. Snook, Precursor-mediated crystallization process in suspensions

of hard spheres, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 025701 (2010).

[135] Y. Wang, Y. Wang, X. Zheng, ´E. Ducrot, J. S. Yodh, M. Weck, and D. J. Pine, Crystallization of DNA-coated colloids,

Nature Communications 6, 7253 (2015).

[136] S. Auer and D. Frenkel, Line tension controls wall-induced crystal nucleation in hard-sphere colloids, Phys. Rev. Lett.

91, 015703 (2003).

[137] M. Dijkstra, Capillary freezing or complete wetting of hard spheres in a planar hard slit?, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 108303

(2004).

[138] G. I. T´oth, G. Tegze, T. Pusztai, and L. Gr´an´asy, Heterogeneous crystal nucleation: the eﬀect of lattice mismatch, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 108, 025502 (2012).

[139] A. Cacciuto, S. Auer, and D. Frenkel, Onset of heterogeneous crystal nucleation in colloidal suspensions, Nature 428,

404–406 (2004).

[140] E. Allahyarov, K. Sandomirski, S. Egelhaaf, and H. L¨owen, Crystallization seeds favour crystallization only during initial

growth, Nature Communications 6, 7110 (2015).

[141] M. Hermes, E. Vermolen, M. Leunissen, D. Vossen, P. van Oostrum, M. Dijkstra, and A. van Blaaderen, Nucleation of

colloidal crystals on conﬁgurable seed structures, Soft Matter 7, 4623–4628 (2011).

17

[142] B. Halperin and D. R. Nelson, Theory of two-dimensional melting, Phys. Rev. Lett. 41, 121 (1978).
[143] A. Young, Melting and the vector Coulomb gas in two dimensions, Phys. Rev. B 19, 1855 (1979).
[144] S. Chui, Grain-boundary theory of melting in two dimensions, Phys. Rev. Lett. 48, 933 (1982).
[145] S. Deutschl¨ander, P. Dillmann, G. Maret, and P. Keim, Kibble–Zurek mechanism in colloidal monolayers, Proc. Natl.

Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 112, 6925–6930 (2015).

[146] W. T. Irvine, V. Vitelli, and P. M. Chaikin, Pleats in crystals on curved surfaces, Nature 468, 947–951 (2010).
[147] E. Zaccarelli, C. Valeriani, E. Sanz, W. Poon, M. Cates, and P. Pusey, Crystallization of hard-sphere glasses, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 103, 135704 (2009).

[148] E. Sanz, C. Valeriani, E. Zaccarelli, W. C. Poon, P. N. Pusey, and M. E. Cates, Crystallization mechanism of hard sphere

glasses, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 215701 (2011).

[149] X.-M. Bai and M. Li, Nature and extent of melting in superheated solids: Liquid-solid coexistence model, Phys. Rev. B

72, 052108 (2005).

[150] Y. Peng, Z. Wang, and Y. Han, Melting of microgel colloidal crystals, J. Phys. Conf. Seri. 319, 012010 (2011).
[151] J. Dash, A. Rempel, and J. Wettlaufer, The physics of premelted ice and its geophysical consequences, Rev. Mod. Phys.

78, 695 (2006).

[152] B. LI, F. Wang, Y. Peng, R. Ni, and Y. Han, Modes of surface premelting in colloidal crystals composed of attractive

particles, Nature , doi:10.1038/nature16987 (2016).

[153] B. Van Der Meer, W. Qi, R. G. Fokkink, J. Van Der Gucht, M. Dijkstra, and J. Sprakel, Highly cooperative stress

relaxation in two-dimensional soft colloidal crystals, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 111, 15356–15361 (2014).

[154] A. Cavagna, Supercooled ciquids for pedestrians, Phys. Rep. 476, 51?24 (2009).
[155] Y. Han, N. Ha, A. Alsayed, and A. Yodh, Melting of two-dimensional tunable-diameter colloidal crystals, Phys. Rev. E

77, 041406 (2008).

[156] C. Mak, Large-scale simulations of the two-dimensional melting of hard disks, Phys. Rev. E 73, 065104 (2006).
[157] S. C. Kapfer and W. Krauth, Two-dimensional melting: from liquid-hexatic coexistence to continuous transitions, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 114, 035702 (2015).

[158] E. P. Bernard and W. Krauth, Two-step melting in two dimensions: ﬁrst-order liquid-hexatic transition, Phys. Rev. Lett.

107, 155704 (2011).

[159] D.-M. Zhu, D. Pengra, and J. Dash, Edge melting in two-dimensional solid ﬁlms, Phys. Rev. B 37, 5586 (1988).
[160] Y. Peng, Z.-R. Wang, A. M. Alsayed, A. G. Yodh, Y. Han, et al., Melting of multilayer colloidal crystals conﬁned between

two walls, Phys. Rev. E 83, 011404 (2011).

[161] P. Tol´edano and V. Dmitriev, Reconstructive phase transitions: in crystals and quasicrystals, World Scientiﬁc, 1996.
[162] J. A. Weiss, D. W. Oxtoby, D. G. Grier, and C. A. Murray, Martensitic transition in a conﬁned colloidal suspension, J.

Chem. Phys. 103, 1180–1190 (1995).

[163] P. Bolhuis and D. Frenkel, Prediction of an expanded-to-condensed transition in colloidal crystals, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72,

2211 (1994).

[164] J. Bai, C. A. Angell, and X. C. Zeng, Guest-free monolayer clathrate and its coexistence with two-dimensional high-density

ice, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107, 5718–5722 (2010).

[165] P. S. Mohanty, P. Bagheri, S. N¨ojd, A. Yethiraj, and P. Schurtenberger, Multiple path-dependent routes for phase-

transition kinetics in thermoresponsive and ﬁeld-pesponsive ultrasoft Colloids, Phys. Rev. X 5, 011030 (2015).

[166] A. E. Larsen and D. G. Grier, Melting of metastable crystallites in charge-stabilized colloidal suspensions, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 76, 3862 (1996).

[167] V. Thapar and F. A. Escobedo, Localized orientational order chaperones the nucleation of rotator phases in hard

polyhedral particles, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 048301 (2014).

[168] J. Bialk´e, T. Speck, and H. L¨owen, Crystallization in a dense suspension of self-propelled particles, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108,

168301 (2012).

[169] A. M. Menzel and H. L¨owen, Traveling and resting crystals in active systems, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 055702 (2013).
[170] C. A. Weber, C. Bock, and E. Frey, Defect-mediated phase transitions in active soft matter, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 168301

(2014).

[171] Y. Goto and H. Tanaka, Purely hydrodynamic ordering of rotating disks at a ﬁnite Reynolds number, Nature Commu-

nications 6, 5994 (2015).

[172] A. Z¨ottl and H. Stark, Hydrodynamics determines collective motion and phase behavior of active colloids in quasi-two-

dimensional conﬁnement, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 118101 (2014).

[173] H. H. Malte Henkel, Non-equilibrium phase transitions, Springer, 2014.
[174] Y. L. Wu, D. Derks, A. van Blaaderen, and A. Imhof, Melting and crystallization of colloidal hard-sphere suspensions

under shear, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 106, 10564–10569 (2009).

[175] X. Cheng, X. Xu, S. A. Rice, A. R. Dinner, and I. Cohen, Assembly of vorticity-aligned hard-sphere colloidal strings in

a simple shear ﬂow, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109, 63–67 (2012).

[176] K.-Q. Zhang and X. Y. Liu, In situ observation of colloidal monolayer nucleation driven by an alternating electric ﬁeld,

Nature 429, 739–743 (2004).

[177] Z. Hu, P. Schall, et al., Single crystal growth and anisotropic crystal-ﬂuid interfacial free energy in soft colloidal systems,

Phys. Rev. E 84, 011607 (2011).

[178] M. R. Jones, N. C. Seeman, and C. A. Mirkin, Programmable materials and the nature of the DNA bond, Science 347,

840–842 (2015).

[179] J. R. Tumbleston, D. Shirvanyants, N. Ermoshkin, R. Janusziewicz, A. R. Johnson, D. Kelly, K. Chen, R. Pinschmidt,

J. P. Rolland, A. Ermoshkin, et al., Continuous liquid interface production of 3D objects, Science 347, 1349–1352 (2015).
[180] A. P´erez-Escudero, J. Vicente-Page, R. C. Hinz, S. Arganda, and G. G. de Polavieja, idTracker: tracking individuals in

a group by automatic identiﬁcation of unmarked animals, Nature Methods 11(7), 743–748 (2014).

[181] W. E. Moerner, Single-molecule spectroscopy, imaging, and photocontrol: foundations for super-resolution microscopy

(nobel lecture), Ang. Chem. Inter. Edit. 54, 8067–8093 (2015).

[182] J. Park, H. Elmlund, P. Ercius, J. M. Yuk, D. T. Limmer, Q. Chen, K. Kim, S. H. Han, D. A. Weitz, A. Zettl, et al., 3D

structure of individual nanocrystals in solution by electron microscopy, Science 349, 290–295 (2015).

[183] Editorial, Method of the Year 2014, Nature Methods 12, 1 (2015).
[184] B.-C. Chen, W. R. Legant, K. Wang, L. Shao, D. E. Milkie, M. W. Davidson, C. Janetopoulos, X. S. Wu, J. A. Hammer,
Z. Liu, et al., Lattice light-sheet microscopy: Imaging molecules to embryos at high spatiotemporal resolution, Science
346, 125–132 (2014).

18

