6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
6
1

 
 
]
T
G
h
t
a
m

.

[
 
 

1
v
6
2
0
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

A COMMENTARY ON TEICHM ¨ULLER’S PAPER ¨UBER

EXTREMALPROBLEME DER KONFORMEN GEOMETRIE (ON

EXTREMAL PROBLEMS IN CONFORMAL GEOMETRY)

NORBERT A’CAMPO AND ATHANASE PAPADOPOULOS

Abstract. We comment on the paper ¨Uber Extremalprobleme der konformen
Geometrie (On extremal problems in conformal geometry) [12] by Teichm¨uller,
published in 1941. This paper contains ideas on a wide generalization of his
previous work on the solution of extremal problems in conformal geometry.
The generalization concerns at the same time the ﬁelds of function theory,
topology and algebra.

AMS Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation:30F60, 32G15, 30C62, 30C75, 30C70.

Keywords: Quasiconformal map, length-area method, extremal problem, Rie-
mann surface, quadratic diﬀerential, Bieberbach coeﬃcient problem, Riemann-
Roch theorem.

The ﬁnal version of this paper will appear as a chapter in Volume VI of the
Handbook of Teichm¨uller theory. This volume is dedicated to the memory of
Alexander Grothendieck.

References

5

Contents

We comment on the paper ¨Uber Extremalprobleme der konformen Geometrie (On
extremal problems in conformal geometry) [12] by Teichm¨uller, published in 1941.
This paper may be considered as a collection of thoughts that generalize some of the
ideas expressed in Teichm¨uller’s paper [11] (see also the commentary in [1]) where
he uses quadratic diﬀerentials to solve an extremal problem about quasiconformal
mappings, which is a substantial extension of the problem on extremal quasiconfor-
mal mappings between rectangles solved by Gr¨otzsch. In the present paper, [12],
Teichm¨uller expresses the idea that quadratic diﬀerentials may be used to provide
solutions to other extremal problems in conformal geometry. This idea involves the
introduction of a new structure at distinguished points of a surface. An “order”
for series expansions of the local coordinate charts is ﬁxed at a distinguished point.
In this setting, if a point is distinguished without further requirements, then the
associated quadratic diﬀerential has a simple pole at that point. But sometimes, at
the distinguished point, the extremal problem requires a function which has a ﬁxed
value for its n ﬁrst derivatives. Then, the quadratic diﬀerential has a pole of order
n + 1 at that point. In the geometric language introduced later on by Ehresmann,
the jet structure of a certain order at a distinguished point is ﬁxed. At the end
of this commentary, we shall mention some of Strebel’s works that further develop
this point of view.

The paper [12] is diﬃcult to read, because the ideas are formulated vagely. This
makes the reviewing of this article a laborious task. A note by the editors of the

Date: March 17, 2016.

1

2

N. A’CAMPO AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

journal where the paper was published, on the ﬁrst page of the paper, informs the
reader that this paper is “obviously unﬁnished,” and warns him that “unreasonably
high demands are made on the reader’s cooperation and imagination,” that “the
assertions are not even stated precisely with rigour, neither proofs nor even any
clues are given,” that some things “not of fundamental importance [...] occupy
a broad space for something almost unintelligible, while far too scarce hints are
provided for fundamentally important individual examples.” The editors declare
that if they decided to publish the paper, “despite all lack that distinguishes the
work against the other papers in this journal [Deutsche Mathematik], it is to bring
up for discussion the thoughts contained therein relating to the theme of estimates
for schlicht functions.” In turn, the author declares at the beginning of the paper:
“Because I only have a limited vacation time at my disposal, I cannot give reasons
for many things, but only assert them.”

Teichm¨uller’s aim is to show how some of his ideas expressed in his previous
papers – some of them in the papers on moduli, and others in papers on algebra –
are related to each other, that they may lead to general concepts, and that they are
applicable to various situations, in particular to the coeﬃcient problem for univalent
functions.

Teichm¨uller starts by commenting on the fact that function theory is closely
related to topology and algebra. For instance, one is led, in dealing with function-
theoretic questions, to prove new generalizations of the Riemann-Roch theorem.
He describes a situation where one needs for that Lie theory, rather than diﬀer-
ential geometry. He then explains his choice of the notion of “principal domain”
(Hauptbereich), used in a previous paper [11], to denote a Riemann surface with
distinguished points. This notion is given a more general meaning here, and the
stress now is on the marked points rather than on the supporting surface. The
author makes an analogy with a situation in algebra, that has already considered
in [9]. To say things more precisely, one is given three objects, A, A1, A2. In the
geometric case, A is a principal domain, A1 is the support of the principal domain,
that is, the underlying Riemann surface (with no distinguished points) and A2 the
set of distinguished points. In the algebraic context, A is a normal (Galois) ex-
tension of a ﬁeld, A1 is a cyclic ﬁeld extension and A2 is the set of generators of
the Galois group. Teichm¨uller considers the following situation: At a distinguished
point on a Riemann surface, one chooses a local coordinate z, and assumes that
the other local coordinates ˜z are of the form

˜z = z + am+1zm+1 + am+2zm+2 + . . .

where m is an integer. This implies (by using the chain rule) that, at such a point,
the ﬁrst m derivatives of a map, computed in local coordinates, are well deﬁned,
that is, they do not depend on the choice of the admissible local coordinates. Such
a distinguished point is said to be of order m. Using a modern language, the author
is ﬁxing, at a ﬁnite number of distinguished points, the order-m jets of maps at
each such point. Teichm¨uller further states that it is practical to think of such a
point of oder m as m + 1 points which are inﬁnitely close together. (Recall that in
order to compute the m-th derivative, one may consider certain quotients of values
of the function at m + 1 points and then takes limits.)

There is an analogous description of distinguished points at the boundary of the
surface. The author mentions such a description without going into any speciﬁc
details. He then explains how surfaces with distinguished points transform under
appropriate maps. (Recall that holomorphic functions are diﬀerentiable, therefore
they act on jets.) In fact, Teichm¨uller considers the case of maps of a collection of
disjoint subdomains (with distinguished points) of a Riemann surface to a collection
of disjoint subdomains (with distinguished points) of another Riemann surface. The

A COMMENTARY ON TEICHM ¨ULLER’S PAPER

3

maps under consideration are subject to some topological requirements. The reader
may think of these subdomains as obtained through a decomposition of the surface
deﬁned by the trajectory structure of a quadratic diﬀerential. Teichm¨uller mentions
applications to the Bieberbach coeﬃcient problem. He mentions some explicit ones,
and he refers to his previous papers [15] (see also the commentary [2]).

Later on, Lie theory is used. At each point, there is a continuous inﬁnite-

dimensional group G0 of local parameter transformations, and a ﬁltration

G0 ⊃ G1 ⊃ G2 ⊃ . . .

where Gm is a normal subgroup of G0 whose elements are transformations A of the
form

˜z = Az = z + am+1zm+1 + am+2zm+2 + . . .

Then, Lie algebras are deﬁned.
The notion of “topological determination” (an expression which the author as-
signs in [11] to an object we call today a marking) is given a much more general
meaning. A generalized version of the Riemann-Roch theorem, which takes into
account the new notion of distinguished points, including points on the boundary, is
also given. The formula involves sums over these points of the relative dimensions
of some quotients of Lie algebras. A notion of “extremal problem in conformal
geometry” is formulated in such a wider setting.

Then there is a long discussion on conformal embeddings of annuli (which he
calls ring domains) on general surfaces (“higher principal domains”).1 Teichm¨uller
believes that the idea of studying embeddings of cylinders is hidden in the papers
of Gr¨otzsch.

Teichm¨uller notes that the results apply to abstract function ﬁelds instead of
Riemann surfaces, and that estimates on the coeﬃcients of a univalent function
may be obtained through a method involving extremal mappings associated with
quadratic diﬀerentials with some prescribed poles. He states that the proof is more
complicated than the usual proof of the area problem, but that it has the advantage
of admitting generalizations to higher degree coeﬃcient problems. Teichm¨uller is
alluding here to the famous Bieberbach conjecture, which was one of his main ob-
jects of interest. We state the problem and some developments below. In the same
paper, he makes relations with several classical problems, including the question
of ﬁnding the Koebe domain of a family of holomorphic functions deﬁned on the
disk, that is, the largest domain contained in the image of every function in the
family, and the so-called “Faber trick.” Faber, in a paper published in 1922 [4],
found an early application of the length-area method to the question of boundary
correspondence of conformal mappings.

A translation of the paper [15] in which the length-area method and geometric
methods, such as properties of conformal moduli, are applied to the study of quasi-
conformal mappings and Riemann surfaces, and, in which, the length area method
is used, will appear in Volume VII of this Handbook. (See also the commentary
[2].) The length-area method is also used by Teichm¨uller in the papers [11], [13]
and [14].

1The reader familiar with the theory of pseudo-holomorphic curves, and especially with Floer
homology, will recognize one of the basic ideas of this theory (in dimension two), where the
embeddings of annuli control all the situation. In the theory of pseudo-holomorphic curves the
study of embeddings of cylinders, in particular those that interpolate the Lagrangian submanifolds,
are of fundamental importance.

4

N. A’CAMPO AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

A few words are now in order for the Bieberbach conjecture, also known as the
Coeﬃcient Problem for schlicht functions.2 These are univalent (that is, holomor-
phic and injective) functions deﬁned on the unit disc D = {z ∈ C| |z| < 1} by a
Taylor series expansion:

f (z) =

∞

X

n=0

anz n

normalized by a0 = 0 and a1 = 1. The Bieberbach conjecture, formulated by
Bieberbach in 1916 and proved fully by Louis de Branges in 1984, says that the
coeﬃcients of such a series satisfy the inequalities

|an| ≤ n

for any n ≥ 2. In fact, Bieberbach proved in his paper [3] the case n = 2, that is,
he proved |a2| ≤ 2. He also showed that equality is attained for the functions of
the form Kθ(z) = z/(1 − eiθz)2 for θ ∈ R. This is the so-called “Koebe function”

k(z) = z/(1 − z)2 = z + 2z2 + 3z3 + . . .

composed with a rotation.
In a footnote ([3] p. 946), Bieberbach suggested,
without apparent motivation, that the value n = |an(Kθ)| might be an upper
bound for all the functions satisfying the given assumptions. This is how the
Bieberbach conjecture originated. Before its ﬁnal proof by de Branges, a long list
of good mathematicians worked on this problem, including L¨owner, Nevanlinna,
Goluzin, Grunsky, Littlewood-Paley, Milin, Garabedian-Schiﬀer, Pederson-Ozawa,
Pederson-Schiﬀerand and Jenkins. Important advances were made and results to-
wards solving the conjecture were obtained. In particular, L¨owner proved in 1923
the second (and diﬃcult) step that |a3| ≤ 3, Garabedian and Schiﬀer proved in 1955
that |a4| ≤ 4, Pederson and Ozawa proved in 1968 that |a6| ≤ 6, and Pederson and
Schiﬀer proved in 1972 that |a5| ≤ 5. De Branges’ proof, published in 1984, was a
result of a new approach that uses operator theory. The proof was simpliﬁed, later
on, and operator theory removed.

Bieberbach’s result is related to the so-called “area theorem,” which is referred
to by Teichm¨uller in the present paper, a theorem which gives the so-called “Koebe
quarter theorem,” saying that the image of any univalent function f from the unit
disc of C onto a subset of C contains the disc of center f (0) and radius |f ′ (0) |/4.
In this geometric form of the Bieberbach conjecture, Teichm¨uller introduced the
techniques of extremal quasiconformal mappings and quadratic diﬀerentials. This
is the content of the last part of this paper.

Now we come to some developments of Teichm¨uller’s theory. In a series of works,
Jenkins (cf. [5], [6],[7], [8] and others) developed an approach to the coeﬃcient theo-
rem that uses quadratic diﬀerentials and which is based on the works of Teichm¨uller
and Gr¨otzsch. In a 1962 ICM talk [7], Jenkins writes: “Teichm¨uller enunciated the
intuitive principle that the solution of a certain type of extremal problem for uni-
valent functions is determined by a quadratic diﬀerential for which the following
prescriptions hold.
If the competing mappings are to have a certain ﬁxed point
the quadratic diﬀerential will have a simple pole there. If in addition ﬁxed values
are required for the ﬁrst n derivatives of competing functions the quadratic diﬀer-
ential will have a pole of order n + 1 at the point. He proved a coeﬃcient result
which represents a quite special case of the principle but did not obtain any gen-
eral result of this type. The General Coeﬃcient Theorem was presented originally
as an explicit embodiment of Teichm¨uller’s principle, that is, the competing func-
tions were subjected to the normalizations implied by the above statement.” In [5],

2The German word “schlicht” is sometimes used in the English literature, and, of course, it is

the word used by Teichm¨uller.

A COMMENTARY ON TEICHM ¨ULLER’S PAPER

5

Jenkins has a similar quote concerning Teichm¨uller’s result from [10]: “Teichm¨uller
enunciated the principle that the solution of a certain type of extremal problem
in geometric function theory is in general associated with a quadratic diﬀerential.
[...] Teichm¨uller was led to this principle by abstraction from the numerous results
of Gr¨otzsch [...] and by his considerations on quasiconformal mappings [11]. He
applied this principle in certain concrete cases, the most important of which was
his coeﬃcient theorem [10] which is the most penetrating explicit result known in
the general coeﬃcient problem for univalent functions.”

In [7], Jenkins states a theorem, which is in the spirit of the results stated by
Teichm¨uller in the paper which we review here, but in a precise form. The result
concerns a Riemann surface of ﬁnite type equipped with a quadratic diﬀerential
with a decomposition of the surface into subdomains deﬁned by the trajectory
structure of this diﬀerential. There is a mapping from each of these subdomains
onto non-overlapping subdomains of the surface, and these mappings are subject to
conditions on preservation of poles, certain coeﬃcients, and also to some topological
conditions. The conclusion of the theorem is then an inequality that involves the
coeﬃcients of the quadratic diﬀerential at poles of order greater than one and those
of the mapping, with a condition for the inequality to be an equality. This condition
states that the function must be an isometry for the metric induced on the surface
by the quadratic diﬀerential. It is followed by a detailed analysis of the equality
case. Jenkins also refers to numerous speciﬁc applications of such a result and this
is in line with what Teichm¨uller has envisioned. (See [5], p. 278-279.)

In conclusion, let us note for the readers of this Handbook that Thurston also
thought about the Coeﬃcient Problem, with an approach involving tools which are
familiar to Teichm¨uller theorists: M¨obius transformations, the Schwarzian deriva-
tive, quasiconformal mappings and the universal Teichm¨uller space, cf. [16].

Acknowledgements The authors thank M. Brakalova-Trevithick for her sugges-
tions on this commentary. The second author acknowledges the support of the
Max-Plank-Institute for Mathematics (Bonn) where this work was done.

References

[1] V. Alberge, A. Papadopoulos and W. Su, A commentary on Teichm¨uller’s paper Extremale
quasikonforme Abbildungen und quadratische Diﬀerentiale. In Handbook of Teichm¨uller theory
(A. Papadopoulos, ed.), Volume V, EMS Publishing House, Zurich 2015, 485–531.

[2] V. Alberge, M. Brakalova-Trevithick and A. Papadopoulos, A commentary on Teichm¨uller’s
paper Untersuchungen ¨uber konforme und quasikonforme Abbildungen. In Handbook of Te-
ichm¨uller theory (A. Papadopoulos, ed.), Volume VII, EMS Publishing House, Zurich, to
appear in 2017.

[3] L. Bieberbach, ¨Uber die Koeﬃzienten derjenigen Potenzreihen, welche eine schlichte Abbildung

des Einheitskreises vermitteln. Sitz. K¨onig. Preuss. Akad. Wiss. (1916), 940–955.

[4] G. Faber, ¨Uber den Hauptsatz aus der Theorie der konformen Abbildung. M¨unich. Ber. (1922),

91–100.

[5] J. A. Jenkins, A general coeﬃcient theorem. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 77 (1954), 262–280.
[6] J. A. Jenkins, Univalent functions and conformal mapping. Erg. Math. Grenzgeb. 18, Springer-

Verlag, Berlin-G¨ottingen-Heidelberg, 1958.

[7] J. A. Jenkins, On normalization in the general coeﬃcient theorem. In Proceedings of the

International Congress of Mathematicians Stockholm 1962, Djursholm 1963, 347–350.

[8] J. A. Jenkins, The method of extremal length, In The Bieberbach conjecture. Proceedings of
the Symposium of the Occasion of the Proof (West Lafayette, IN, 1985), Math. Surveys and
Mono. 21, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, R.I., 1986, 95–104.

[9] O. Teichm¨uller, Multiplikation zyklischer Normalringe. Deutsche Math. 1 (1936), 197–238.
[10] O. Teichm¨uller, Ungleichungen zwischen den Koeﬃzienten schlichter Funktionen. Sitzungsber.

Preuss. Akad. Wiss., Phys.-Math. Kl. (1938), 363–375.

[11] O. Teichm¨uller, Extremale quasikonforme Abbildungen und quadratische Diﬀerentiale. Abh.
Preuss. Akad. Wiss., Math.-Naturw. Kl. 22 (1940), 1–197. English translation by G. Th´eret,

6

N. A’CAMPO AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

Extremal quasiconformal mappings and quadratic diﬀerentials. In Handbook of Teichm¨uller
theory (A. Papadopoulos, ed.), Volume V, EMS Publishing House, Zurich 2015, 321–483.

[12] O. Teichm¨uller, ¨Uber Extremalprobleme der konformen Geometrie. Deutsche Math. 6 (1941),
50–77. English translation by M. Karbe, On extremal problems in conformal geometry. In
Handbook of Teichm¨uller theory (A. Papadopoulos, ed.), Volume VI, EMS Publishing House,
Zurich 2016, 567–594.

[13] O. Teichm¨uller, Bestimmung der extremalen quasikonformen Abbildungen bei geschlosse-
nen orientierten Riemannschen Fl¨achen. Abh. Preuss. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl. 4 (1943),
1–42. English translation by A. A’Campo Neuen, Determination of extremal quasiconformal
mappings of closed oriented Riemann surfaces. In Handbook of Teichm¨uller theory (A. Pa-
padopoulos, ed.), Volume V, EMS Publishing House, Zurich 2016, 533–567.

[14] O. Teichm¨uller, Ein Verschiebungssatz der quasikonformen Abbildung. Deutsche Math. 7
(1944), 336–343. English translation by M. Karbe, A displacement theorem for quasiconfor-
mal mapping. In Handbook of Teichm¨uller theory (A. Papadopoulos, ed.), Volume VI, EMS
Publishing House, Zurich 2016, 601–608.

[15] O. Teichm¨uller, Untersuchungen ¨uber konforme und quasikonforme Abbildungen, Deutsche
Math. 3 (1938), 621–678. English translation by M. Brakalova-Trevithick and M. Weiss, In-
vestigations on Conformal and Quasiconformal Mappings. In Handbook of Teichm¨uller theory
(A. Papadopoulos, ed.), Volume VII, EMS Publishing House, Zurich 2017, to appear.

[16] W. P. Thurston, Zippers and univalent functions. In The Bieberbach conjecture. Proceedings
of the Symposium of the Occasion of the Proof (West Lafayette, IN, 1985), Math. Surveys
and Mono. 21, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, R.I., 1986, 185–197.

N. A’Campo: Universit¨at Basel, Mathematisches Institut,, Spiegelgasse 1, 4051 Basel,

Switzerland, email: norbert.acampo@gmail.com

A. Papadopoulos:

Institut de Recherche Math´ematique Avanc´ee, UMR 7501, Uni-
versit´e de Strasbourg and CNRS,, 7 rue Ren´e Descartes, 67084 Strasbourg Cedex,
France,, And: Max Planck Institute for Mathematics,, Vivatsgasse 7, 53111 Bonn,
email: papadop@math.unistra.fr

