6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
6
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
t
n
a
u
q
[
 
 

1
v
6
3
0
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Photonic Quantum Information Processing

Department of Physics & Astronomy, The University of Sheﬃeld

Pieter Kok

Abstract

Information processing with light is ubiquitous, from communication,
metrology and imaging to computing. When we consider light as a
quantum mechanical object, new ways of information processing be-
come possible. In this review I give an overview how quantum infor-
mation processing can be implemented with single photons, and what
hurdles still need to be overcome to implement the various applications
in practice. I will place special emphasis on the quantum mechanical
properties of light that make it diﬀerent from classical light, and how
these properties relate to quantum information processing tasks.

1

Information processing with light

From gestures and smoke signals to books, paintings, telecom and high-
capacity optical ﬁbres connecting continents, light is one of the main in-
formation carriers that has been driving human civilisation since antiquity.
Aside from the cultural aspect of communicating ideas with pictures, opti-
cal information processing is an important economic engine. In 2020, the
market volume of the photonics industry will be 650 billion euro and is ex-
pected to continue to outperform GDP [1]. Light is the ideal medium for
fast, reliable and high-bandwidth communication. The amount of data that
can be transmitted through optical ﬁbres continues to grow, and we are ap-
proaching the limit for the capacity of single-mode ﬁbres. To increase the
capacity, multi-mode ﬁbres can be employed to achieve a data transmission
rate of 255 Terabits per second over a distance of one kilometre [2]. For
comparison, this is similar to streaming one hundred thousand full length
HD movies each second.

Similarly, imaging is fundamentally an optical task, and it has been
known for a long time that the wave nature of light places a limit on how
well we can make out small details using microscopes and telescopes. The
resolution limit for imaging is called the Abbe limit, and depends on the

1

opening angle of the aperture of the imaging device, called the numerical
aperture. The bigger the numerical aperture, the higher the resolution. This
is why telescopes are made in larger and larger sizes. In microscopy, where
one can have more control over the object that is to be imaged, several tech-
niques have been developed that can beat the Abbe limit (e.g., STED [3],
STORM [4], PALM [5, 6]). These techniques use prior information about the
source and selective activation of photo-emitters to achieve so-called super-
resolution.

Finally, conventional computing faces some important barriers, such as
heat generation and bandwidth limitations. Classical optics can help heat
reduction by using passive elements and reversible computing, and optics
also allows us to handle complex calculations by using fan-in and fan-out,
in addition to parallelisation [7]. These techniques are expected to become
more prevalent in the near future.

All of the above examples are using classical optics. However, light is
not classical. From a fundamental physics point of view, optical information
processing must be extended to take quantum eﬀects into account. These
eﬀects do not just add noise to existing techniques, but enable dramatic
improvements in information processing with light, from communication,
metrology and imaging to full-scale quantum computing.

In this review, I will sketch the physical principles and phenomena that lie
at the heart of optical quantum information processing. I place special em-
phasis on the quantum mechanical properties of light that make it diﬀerent
from classical light, and how these properties relate to information process-
ing tasks. In section 2 I introduce the concepts of coherence, anti-bunching
and the Hong-Ou-Mandel eﬀect, and in section 3 I give a brief introduction
how photons as quantum information carriers are described mathematically.
Section 4 is devoted to quantum communication, covering the no-cloning the-
orem, quantum key distribution, teleportation and repeaters. In section 5 I
introduce the idea of precision metrology with classical and quantum light
and show how similar techniques can be used for high resolution imaging.
Section 6 starts with a discussion about optical entanglement and introduces
the famous KLM protocol for quantum computing. I also sketch the most
recent ideas for creating a quantum computer architecture based on linear
optics. Finally, in section 7 I give an overview of the practical challenges
that still remain in implementing the ideas presented in this review.

2

2 From classical light to quantum light

As we continue to improve the information processing capabilities of our
computer processors and networks, everything is being made smaller and
more eﬃcient.
In miniaturizing and squeezing all the information out of
every last bit of light, we will be coming up against a fundamental limit of
nature, namely the fact that light comes in discrete quanta called photons.
Entirely new laws of physics come into play that have a profound eﬀect
on our capabilities for information processing. Before we can explore these
new capabilities, however, we need to establish in some more detail what
makes quantum light diﬀerent from classical light. To this end we will brieﬂy
describe the idea of coherence, anti-bunching, and two-photon interference.

2.1 Coherence
Classical light exists in roughly two categories, namely thermal and coherent
light. Thermal light is the type that is emitted by sources like stars, light
bulbs and LEDs, while coherent light is typically associated with the output
of a laser. The two types should not be seen as completely distinct, but
rather as the extremes of a whole spectrum that spans from coherent, via
partially coherent, to thermal (or incoherent) light. A key concept in this
regard is the coherence length of a beam of light.

The coherence length is most easily explained by ﬁrst looking at the
coherence time. Consider a wave of constant frequency ω, as shown in ﬁgure
1 on the left. The phase of the wave at time t will be given by φ. We can
calculate the diﬀerence between the phases at diﬀerence times. For example,
φB − φA is the diﬀerence in the phase of the wave for the time interval
∆t = tB − tA. Since the frequency of the wave is constant over time, the
phase diﬀerence φB − φA between two points in time separated by ∆t will
be constant as well. In addition, given a third phase φC at time tC much
later than tA we have again a constant phase diﬀerence φC − φA for a time
interval ∆T = tC − tA:

φB − φA = constant

and

φC − φA = constant.

(1)

Next, consider a wave whose frequency ﬂuctuates over time, as shown in
ﬁgure 1 on the right (the eﬀect is quite subtle). If the time interval ∆t =
tB − tA is short compared to the (inverse) rate of change of ω, the diﬀerence
between the phases at A and B will still be nearly constant. However, for
longer times between two points on the wave this will no longer be the

3

Figure 1: Coherence: A wave of constant frequency over a long
time (left ﬁgure) will have a well-deﬁned phase relationship both
at short times (between point A and point B), as well as long
times (between point A and point C). Alternatively, if the fre-
quency ﬂuctuates over time (right ﬁgure), there will still be an
appreciable phase correlation at short times (between point A and
point B), but at long times the phase relationship ﬂuctuates (be-
tween point A and point C). The characteristic time at which
the coherence between the phases drops below a certain level is
called the coherence time. Sometimes this is also referred to as the
coherence length.

case. The ﬂuctuations in the frequency will cause ﬂuctuations in the phase
relationship between A and C, and we have

φB − φA (cid:39) constant

and

φC − φA = f (t) ,

(2)

where f (t) is a strongly ﬂuctuating function over time taking values in the
entire interval [0, 2π). There will be a characteristic time τ where the be-
haviour of the phase diﬀerence changes from nearly constant to strongly
ﬂuctuating. This is the coherence time of the wave. Multiplying the coher-
ence time by the velocity of the wave in the medium gives us the coherence
length. A very similar argument can be made for the phase coherence of two
emitters a distance d apart, leading to the concept of transverse coherence
length.

The coherence length of light plays a fundamental role in classical inter-
ference. Coherent sources interfere, while incoherent sources do not. These
properties carry over to the quantum mechanical treatment of light, and we
will see that coherence is a crucial property for optical quantum information
tasks.

4

●●●0AB2π4π6π8π10πC12π-101●●●0AB2π4π6π8π10πC12π-1012.2 Anti-bunching
Classical waves can have any amplitude, no matter how small. However,
this is not the case for quantum mechanical light. When the power of a light
source is reduced, at some point a detector will no longer record a constant
signal, but rather we ﬁnd that the light arrives in bursts. These bursts are
called photons.

We can easily imagine how such bursts come about: the atom that emits
the photon does so by having one of its electrons drop down to a lower
energy state (the diﬀerence in energy escapes in the form of our photon).
Creating a second burst of light requires the electron to be loaded back up
into the excited state, which takes time. This leads to the phenomenon of
anti-bunching: it is relatively unlikely that two photons are detected in much
shorter succession than the time it takes the electron to reoccupy the excited
state.

To make this description a bit more mathematically precise, we can con-
sider the probability distribution of the number of photons that are recorded
in a time interval ∆t. If the photons arrive completely randomly, this distri-
bution will be Poissonian:

Pr(n) =

λne−λ
n!

,

(3)

where n is the number of photons detected in the interval ∆t and λ is the (di-
mensionless) intensity of the light, which corresponds to the average number
of photons in ∆t. When a source exhibits anti-bunching at a time scale ∆t,
the probabilities of ﬁnding two, three, four, etc., photons will be suppressed
compared to the Poisson distribution in Eq (3).

Experimentally, we can demonstrate this by putting a beam splitter in the
light beam and count the number of coincidences in the two photodetectors,
as shown in ﬁgure 2. The number operator for detector 1 is given by ˆn1 and
that of detector 2 by ˆn2. The average photon number in detector j = 1, 2
at time t is then calculated via the quantum mechanical expectation value
(cid:104)ˆnj(t)(cid:105). The second-order correlation is measured by the g(2) function deﬁned
according to

g(2)(τ ) =

(cid:104)ˆn1(t) ˆn2(t + τ )(cid:105)
(cid:104)ˆn1(t)(cid:105)(cid:104)ˆn2(t + τ )(cid:105) ,

(4)

which does not depend on t for stationary processes, such as the situation
we consider here. A typical g(2)(τ ) function is shown in ﬁgure 2. For long
time scales the intensities for anti-bunched light in both detectors become

5

Figure 2: Second-order correlations: By counting the number of
coincidence detections in detectors 1 and 2 we can determine the
second order correlation function g(2). We vary the path length
of one of the detectors. For a Poissonian distribution (blue curve)
the g(2) function remains constant at 1, while at very short times
(i.e., equal distances of the detectors to the beam splitter) the
probability of getting detector coincidences drops to zero for anti-
bunched light (green curve). Note that thermal light is bunched
(orange curve), in the sense that it is more likely that two photons
are emitted at the same time.

independent, and the g(2) function for anti-bunched light (the green curve)
tends towards that of Poissonian light (the blue curve). For completeness
we also plotted the g(2) function for thermal light (the orange curve), which
shows bunching: it is more likely that the two detectors ﬁre in unison at very
short timescales compared to Poissonian light. This is in fact also a quan-
tum mechanical eﬀect: a thermal “gas” of photons obeys the Bose-Einstein
distribution, rather than the classical Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution.

2.3 The equations of motion for a photon
The question is now what makes light quintessentially quantum-mechanical,
and which features of light are well-explained by the classical theory. Maxwell’s
equations do not provide a description of quantised energy, but they do very
accurately describe the shapes of the wave packets. In particular, the co-
herence lengths (transverse and longitudinal) that are determined by the
classical theory determine the interference properties of photons. To illus-
trate this, we consider Young’s double-slit experiment with photons.

Suppose that a source of single photons illuminates a screen with two

6

12inputτ1234012time(τ)correlationg(2)narrow slits of width a placed at a distance d apart. The classical theory
predicts that the intensity pattern at a screen a distance L from the slits is
given by

(cid:18) xdπ

(cid:19)

Lλ

(cid:16) xaπ

(cid:17)

Lλ

I(x) = I0 cos

sinc

with

sinc β ≡ sin β
β

,

(5)

(cid:88)

where x is the position along the screen and λ is the wavelength of the light.
When the source emits single photons one at a time, after collecting many
photons the average intensity on the screen will be exactly the same. There-
fore the spatial behaviour of single photons is identical to that of classical
waves. However, this presupposes that we do not know which slit the pho-
ton travels through. This is equivalent to saying that the amplitudes of the
photon wave packet at the left slit and the right slit add coherently. In other
words, the transverse coherence of the photon wave packet must be larger
than the distance between the slits.

Next, we consider the quantum mechanical description of light. Classi-

cally, we can write the electric ﬁeld E as a solution to the wave equation:

E(x, t) =

Ak uk(x, t) + A∗

k u∗

k(x, t) ,

(6)

k

where A is the complex amplitude of a wave in mode k (commonly referred to
as the wave vector, but in principle we can have more exotic labelings), and
the sum over k indicates that the waves can be superposed. The functions
uk(x, t) in Eq. (8) are the so-called mode functions, and they form a complete
set of solutions to the classical Maxwell equations. Often a plane wave
expansion for E(x, t) is given, in which

uk(x, t) ∝ k eik·x−iωkt,

(7)

and the sum in Eq. (8) becomes an integral over k with ωk the frequency of
the wave vector k. The vector k determines the polarisation of the mode.
Other expansions are also possible, and may be more convenient depending
on the application (for example, a plane wave expansion is not very suited
to describe a wave in an optical ﬁbre).

In the full quantum mechanical description of optics, the electric ﬁeld

becomes an operator and can be written as [8]:
†
k u∗

ˆak uk(x, t) + ˆa

ˆE(x, t) =

k(x, t) ,

(cid:88)

(8)

k

7

†
where ˆak and ˆa
k are the annihilation and creation operator for the optical
mode indicated by k. These operators replace the complex amplitudes in
the classical theory and obey the commutation relations

[ˆak, ˆak(cid:48)] =

†
k, ˆa

†
k(cid:48)

ˆa

= 0

and

ˆak, ˆa

†
k(cid:48)

= δk k(cid:48) ,

(9)

(cid:104)

(cid:105)

(cid:104)

(cid:105)

where δk k(cid:48) is the Kronecker delta symbol1. The creation and annihilation
operators act on photon number states |n(cid:105)k according to the rules
n + 1|n + 1(cid:105)k .

n|n − 1(cid:105)k

ˆak |n(cid:105)k =

†
k |n(cid:105)k =
ˆa

(10)

and

√

√

†
The number operator for mode k is then given by ˆnk = ˆa
kˆak. The algebra
of these operators is identical to that of the simple harmonic oscillator.

Creating a photon in mode k means that the photon will behave accord-
ing to the spatio-temporal description provided by uk(x, t). Since uk(x, t) is
determined by Maxwell’s equations, we can say that the classical Maxwell
equations are the equations of motion for the photon. The quantum me-
chanical behaviour of light is restricted to the photon statistics.

2.4 The Hong-Ou-Mandel eﬀect
While the mode shapes of propagating photons are determined by the clas-
sical theory of electrodynamics, the quantum behaviour of light is most ap-
parent in multi-photon eﬀects. For the purposes of quantum information
processing, the most important example of this is the Hong-Ou-Mandel ef-
fect, which is a two-photon intensity interference eﬀect. Speciﬁcally, the
Hong-Ou-Mandel eﬀect occurs when two photons with identical frequency,
polarisation and shape of the wave packet enter a 50:50 beam splitter on
either side. If we place detectors in the two outgoing modes of the beam
splitter, each photon has two ways of triggering the detectors. Either the
photon triggers the upper detector, or it triggers the lower detector. The
resulting four possible paths for the two photons are shown in ﬁgure 3. In
(a) the top input photon is transmitted while the bottom photon is reﬂected.
In that case, both photons end up in the bottom detector. And vice versa,
both photons may end up in the top detector (d). Whenever a photon is
reﬂected oﬀ the topside of the beam splitter it experiences a π phase shift,
which results in a factor eiπ = −1 in the state of the photon.

An interesting eﬀect happens when we consider situations (b) and (c) in
ﬁgure 3. In case (b), both photons are reﬂected by the beam splitter, while in

1We can also deﬁne the electric ﬁeld operator over a continuum k, in which case the
sum over k becomes an integral and the Kronecker delta becomes a Dirac delta δ(k− k(cid:48)).

8

Figure 3: The Hong-Ou-Mandel eﬀect: If we send two photons
into the two input beams of a 50:50 beam splitter there are four
possible outcomes, as shown in the ﬁgure. In quantum mechanics,
these four possibilities are superposed. Due to a π phase shift
upon reﬂection of the top surface, the case where both photons are
reﬂected has a relative minus sign compared to the case where both
photons are transmitted. When the input photons are identical,
we cannot distinguish between the two middle outcomes, and they
cancel. So the identical photons will always pair oﬀ towards the
same output beam, and never leave the beam splitter in diﬀerent
beams.

case (c), both photons are transmitted. Since the photons are identical, the
two processes (b) and (c) are indistinguishable from each other. No physical
process can tell whether the photons were reﬂected or transmitted, and the
beam splitter itself holds no memory of the process. According to Feynman,
this means that the two contributions must be superposed coherently and
are allowed to interfere [9]. However, since the top photon in process (b)
picks up a phase factor eiπ, the two states must be subtracted. This leads to
destructive interference, and as a result the two identical photons will never
end up in separate detectors. This eﬀect was ﬁrst observed by Hong, Ou,
and Mandel in 1987 [10]. The eﬀect lies at the heart of the protocols that
enable quantum computing with single photons and linear optics. A recent
experimental realisation of the Hong-Ou-Mandel eﬀect is shown in ﬁgure 4
[11]. The depth of the dip indicates the level of indistinguishability between
the two photons. Together with a single-mode g(2) measurement to verify
the presence of only a single photon, the Hong-Ou-Mandel dip gives a good
indication for the quality of single-photon sources.

9

–+–(a)(d)(c)(b)topbottom3 Photons as quantum information carriers

As we encounter the quantum limits of light, we may ask what we can do
in terms of information processing if we embrace this natural behaviour.
Imagine that we send classical bits using the polarisation degree of freedom.
In other words, an optical pulse of horizontally polarised light (H) is deﬁned
as the bit value 0, and a vertically polarised pulse (V ) is the bit value 1.
At the single photon level the polarisation is still a well-deﬁned physical
property, since it is determined by the mode functions (and therefore obey
Maxwell’s equations). The polarised photons and their bit values can be
described quantum mechanically with the quantum states

|H(cid:105) ≡ |0(cid:105)

and

|V (cid:105) ≡ |1(cid:105) .

(11)

A fundamental property of classical light is that two pulses can be prepared in
superposition. For our example, this means that we can make a superposition
of vertical and horizontal light. The result is a new pulse with a polarisation
in a diﬀerent direction depending on the relative phase between the H and
V pulses. The new polarisation can be linear, circular, or elliptical.
This property carries over to photons. For example, left- and right-
handed circularly polarised photons have quantum states |L(cid:105) and |R(cid:105), re-

Figure 4: Experimental data for the Hong-Ou-Mandel eﬀect using
one dot and one laser input [11]. The dip is not as deep as one
would expect for two indistinguishable single photon sources, be-
cause the laser is not a single-photon source (it obeys Poissonian
statistics, rather than anti-bunching). Nevertheless, the dip (black
curve) is lower than expected for classical light (red curve).

10

  On (data) On (simulated) Off (data) Off (simulated)1.11.00.90.80.70.60.50.4–15–1050–51015g   (t)2time (ns)spectively:

|L(cid:105) =

|H(cid:105) + i|V (cid:105)

√

2

and

|R(cid:105) =

|H(cid:105) − i|V (cid:105)

√

2

.

(12)

If we treat the horizontal and vertical polarisation of a photon as bit values
0 and 1, we see that we now have two new bit values that are superpositions
of |0(cid:105) and |1(cid:105):

|(cid:9)(cid:105) =

|0(cid:105) + i|1(cid:105)√

2

and

|(cid:8)(cid:105) =

|0(cid:105) − i|1(cid:105)√

2

.

(13)

This is not possible for a classical bit, and we therefore call the polarised
photon a quantum bit, or qubit for short. Every classical polarisation has a
corresponding qubit when we bring the optical pulse down to a single photon.
This requires that the two pulses have a well-deﬁned phase relationship, and
are therefore coherent in the sense of the discussion in section 2.1. The extra
states in a qubit over a classical bit suggest that information processing with
qubits can be more powerful than information processing with classical bits,
because—loosely speaking—more available states means more room for the
information to play in.
Instead of polarisation, we can use other degrees
of freedom of light [8], but for simplicity we will restrict our discussion to
polarised photons in this article.

Since the qubit structure is directly inherited from the classical super-
position principle, the next question is: what makes the photonic qubit a
fundamentally quantum mechanical object? The answer is given by anti-
bunching. There is only one indivisible photon (see ﬁgure 2) that triggers
either detector 1 or detector 2. Classically, both detectors could register a
non-zero signal simultaneously. The fact that this is not possible for single
photons means that the photon ends up in either one or the other detector in
a probabilistic manner. If we wish to measure the polarisation of the photon,
we must ﬁrst choose which basis we want to measure (|H(cid:105) and |V (cid:105), or |L(cid:105)
and |R(cid:105)). If we measure the photon in the state |L(cid:105) in the H/V basis, we
will obtain the outcome “H” or “V” with 50:50 probability.

The superposition principle—together with the concept of the photon as
a particle—further leads to the phenomenon of entanglement. Two photons

(14)
where |HH(cid:105) ≡ |H(cid:105)1 |H(cid:105)2 and |V V (cid:105) ≡ |V (cid:105)1 |V (cid:105)2 are short-hand for the
It is easy to see that the state in
polarisation states of the two photons.

2

,

can be prepared in the state(cid:12)(cid:12)Φ+(cid:11) =

|HH(cid:105) + |V V (cid:105)

√

11

Eq. (14) cannot be written as the product of two separate photon states:

(cid:12)(cid:12)Φ+(cid:11) (cid:54)= (αH |H(cid:105) + αV |V (cid:105)) (βH |H(cid:105) + βV |V (cid:105)) ,

(15)
where α and β are complex numbers obeying |αH|2 +|αV |2 = 1 and |βH|2 +
|βV |2 = 1. The eﬀect of entanglement is that the two photons are more
strongly correlated than is possible classically:

(cid:2)(|L(cid:105) + |R(cid:105))(|L(cid:105) + |R(cid:105)) + (−i)2(|L(cid:105) − |R(cid:105))(|L(cid:105) − |R(cid:105))(cid:3)

(cid:12)(cid:12)Φ+(cid:11) =

|HH(cid:105) + |V V (cid:105)

|LR(cid:105) + |RL(cid:105)

=

√
2

√

2

=

√
1

2

2

.

(16)

There is not only a correlation in H and V , but also in L and R. This is not
possible in classical systems, and these stronger quantum correlations can be
utilised in information processing. For future use, we deﬁne a basis of four
entangled states, called the Bell states:

(cid:12)(cid:12)Φ+(cid:11) =
(cid:12)(cid:12)Φ−(cid:11) =

|HH(cid:105) + |V V (cid:105)

|HH(cid:105) − |V V (cid:105)

√

√

2

2

and

(cid:12)(cid:12)Ψ+(cid:11) =
(cid:12)(cid:12)Ψ−(cid:11) =

|HV (cid:105) + |V H(cid:105)

|HV (cid:105) − |V H(cid:105)

√

√

2

2

,

.

(17)

A measurement in this basis is called a Bell measurement, and plays a crucial
role in quantum information processing.

Now that we have a photonic qubit, what exactly can we do with it? We
would expect that all the classical information processing tasks with light
will in some way carry over to quantum light with some enhancements due
to qubit superpositions and entanglement.
Indeed, we can construct new
communication protocols and create a quantum internet [12], we can use
photons as measurement probes to achieve a much higher precision in pa-
rameter estimation [13] and imaging [14, 15], and we can use photons as the
fundamental information carriers in quantum computing [16].

However, photons are not equally good at all these things. While they
are clearly very good data carriers over long distances, it is rather hard to
slow them down signiﬁcantly or even stop them completely. Typical classical
and quantum information processing tasks require feed-forward operations
in which the state of a qubit is modiﬁed in a way that depends on the
measurement outcome of another process. If the photon ﬂies away at the

12

speed of light while the measurement is being made, we cannot perform feed-
forward because we cannot catch up with the photon. We therefore need to
store the photon in some kind of photon memory. This is a complicated
process that will likely introduce a lot of noise.

Another complication is that while the polarisation of a single photon is
very easy to manipulate using half wave plates and quarter wave plates, the
creation of entanglement between two photons is extremely hard. This is due
to the complete absence of direct photon-photon interactions. An operation
that entangles two photons must therefore be an inherently nonlinear process,
either involving nonlinear materials or a clever arrangement of projective
measurements. In this review we will consider the latter.

4 Quantum communication

Classical light makes for an excellent information carrier over long distances.
This is also true for quantum light. Moreover, we can use the quantum
mechanical properties of photons to accomplish new communication tasks
that are more diﬃcult or impossible with classical light. As an example,
we will consider secure communication using quantum key distribution, and
explore what requirements are necessary to extend these techniques beyond
a few hundred kilometres.

4.1 The no-cloning theorem and quantum key distribution
Consider a photon with horizontal and vertical polarisation states |H(cid:105) and
|V (cid:105), respectively. As we have seen, we can make quantum superpositions
of these states to obtain diﬀerent polarisation states. The no-cloning theo-
rem says that it is impossible to create a machine that copies an unknown
quantum state perfectly [17, 18]. To see this, suppose that we have a photon
in some unknown polarisation state |ψ(cid:105) and a second photon in a known
initial polarisation state, e.g., |H(cid:105). A proper copying machine would have to
produce the following eﬀect on any state |ψ(cid:105):

|ψ(cid:105)|H(cid:105) −→

|ψ(cid:105)|ψ(cid:105) .

copy

(18)
In particular, the machine must act on the states |H(cid:105) and |V (cid:105) according to
(19)

|H(cid:105)|H(cid:105) −→

|H(cid:105)|H(cid:105)

|V (cid:105)|H(cid:105) −→

|V (cid:105)|V (cid:105) .

and

copy

copy

This completely determines how the copying machine will handle the un-
known polarisation state, because any polarisation state can be written as a

13

|ψ(cid:105)|ψ(cid:105) =

√

2

√

2
|H(cid:105)|V (cid:105) +

i
2

quantum superposition of |H(cid:105) and |V (cid:105). For example, suppose that the state
|ψ(cid:105) is in fact the left-handed circularly polarised state |L(cid:105). Then

|ψ(cid:105) =

|H(cid:105) + i|V (cid:105)

√

2

,

and the copying machine will produce

|ψ(cid:105)|H(cid:105) =

|H(cid:105) + i|V (cid:105)

√

2

|H(cid:105) −→

copy

1√
2

|H(cid:105)|H(cid:105) +

|V (cid:105)|V (cid:105) .

i√
2

(20)

(21)

However, this is not the same as |ψ(cid:105)|ψ(cid:105), as you can tell when we write it
out in the H/V basis:

(cid:18)|H(cid:105) + i|V (cid:105)

(cid:19)(cid:18)|H(cid:105) + i|V (cid:105)

(cid:19)

1
2

|V (cid:105)|V (cid:105) .

|H(cid:105)|H(cid:105) +

i
2

|V (cid:105)|H(cid:105) − 1
2

=

(22)
This means that a copying machine that works for |H(cid:105) and |V (cid:105) will not
faithfully copy |L(cid:105) and |R(cid:105), and vice versa. Practically, this means that the
badly copied photon behaves diﬀerently from a photon in the original state.
The no-cloning theorem is a fundamental result in quantum mechanics and
applies to all physical systems.

Next, consider the situation in which two agents, Alice and Bob, wish to
communicate in private. One way they can accomplish this if they share a
secret string of random zeros and ones called a key: Alice adds this string
to her binary message, creating the encrypted message. Bob decrypts the
message by subtracting the key from the encrypted message. Since no-one
else has the secret key, nobody can decrypt the message but Alice and Bob.
The question is how to generate such a secret key.

Sending the secret key over a public channel will invite eavesdroppers
to copy it and gain access to the private message between Alice and Bob.
If Alice and Bob can detect the eavesdropper, they know the channel is
compromised and move to a diﬀerent channel. This is what the no-cloning
theorem allows them to do: Let’s suppose that |H(cid:105) and |L(cid:105) denote a bit
value of zero, and |V (cid:105) and |R(cid:105) denote a bit value of one. Alice sends a
random string of photons in polarisation states |H(cid:105), |V (cid:105), |L(cid:105), and |R(cid:105). Bob
measures randomly in the H/V basis or the L/R basis. About half the time
Alice will have created a photon in the same basis as Bob’s measurement,
and in those cases both Alice and Bob will know whether they shared a zero
or a one.
In the rest of the cases there is no correlation between the bit

14

value sent by Alice and the bit value measured by Bob. Alice and Bob then
publicly compare their preparation and measurement bases (H/V or L/R),
and keep only those bits for which the preparation and measurement bases
coincide. Note that they do not reveal the actual bit values, only the bases.
To see whether there is an eavesdropper on the line, Alice and Bob sac-
riﬁce a small part of their secret key. They publicly compare this part of
the key and see if the bit values match up. If they do, there was no eaves-
dropper, but if there is a sizeable amount of errors there may have been an
eavesdropper. Anyone trying to copy the secret key as it was being estab-
lished must copy the information of the photon polarisation. However, since
the photons were sent in two diﬀerent bases (unknown to anyone but Alice),
a copying machine that works perfectly in the H/V basis will create imper-
fect copies and cause incorrect measurement results for Bob. These incorrect
measurement results will show up when Alice and Bob compare part of their
secret key. The secrecy of the key is therefore guaranteed by the no-cloning
theorem.

The comparison between Alice and Bob of a fraction of their secret key
is what guarantees the privacy of the key. There is a trade-oﬀ between
the amount of information Eve can gain, and the level of privacy attained
by Alice and Bob. When this protocol is implemented with real devices,
additional noise will appear in the system, and Alice and Bob must be able
to account for that also. To this end, they can further sacriﬁce part of the
key to increase their privacy. This is called privacy ampliﬁcation [19], and is
a crucial part of any practical implementation of quantum key distribution.
The general trade-oﬀ in the communication between Alice and Bob is then
privacy versus bit rate.

A ﬁnal observation about this quantum key distribution protocol is that it
relies critically on the quantum mechanical possibility of anti-bunching of
light. If light did not come in discrete packages (photons), the eavesdropper
could siphon oﬀ a small part of the signal with a beam splitter and measure
the polarisation of this very weak ﬁeld. The fact that there is only one
photon in each successive pulse from Alice means that it either shows up
in Bob’s detector, or it arrives in the eavesdropper’s detector, in which case
Bob will register a failed transmission. In either case that photon will not
be used for the secret key and is useless to the eavesdropper. If there was a
possibility of more than one photon in each pulse (a Poissonian or thermal
distribution), the eavesdropper could measure one photon while an identical
photon makes its way to Bob. Note that this does not violate the no-cloning
theorem, since Alice can create however many photons she chooses in a state

15

Figure 5: Quantum teleportation. Alice takes a photon in an arbi-
trary quantum state (qubit 1) and one half of an entangled photon
pair (qubit 2) and performs a Bell measurement. The outcome
of the measurement determines the operation that Bob needs to
perform on his photon (qubit 3). After teleportation is complete,
the quantum state of qubit 1 has been transferred to qubit 3.

of her choice.

4.2 Quantum repeaters and quantum memories
When a photon travels in an optical ﬁbre, it has a certain probability of
being scattered by impurities in the ﬁbre. In this case the photon does not
make it to the end of the ﬁbre, and we call this photon loss. A ﬁbre can
be characterised by an attenuation length (cid:96) at which the original signal is
reduced by a factor 1/e. The attenuation for a ﬁbre of length L is then given
by exp(−L/(cid:96)). This is an exponential decay, which means that we cannot
lay arbitrarily long ﬁbre-optic cables and still expect a sizeable bit rate from
end to end. In practice, the cable length can be a few hundred kilometres at
most.

If we want to extend the reach of quantum communication protocols,
we have to add some active devices in the communications channel. Classi-
cally, this is accomplished by repeater stations, which amplify the signal and
transmit it to the next repeater station. However, ampliﬁcation is a form of
copying, and we have just seen that the no-cloning theorem prevents such
devices from working properly on general qubit states. At ﬁrst this looks
like quantum communication will remain viable only for short distances.
However, another fundamental protocol in quantum mechanics comes to the
rescue here, namely quantum teleportation [20].

16

BellMeasurementQubitGateentangled pairmeasurement outcomeALICEBOB123In quantum teleportation, shown schematically in ﬁgure 5, Alice wishes
to send an arbitrary quantum state of a photon to Bob. Rather than sending
the state directly (which would be subject to photon loss), they ﬁrst establish
entangled photons pairs between each other. We denote the arbitrary quan-
tum state by |ψ(cid:105)1 and the shared entanglement is in the Bell state |Φ+(cid:105)23,
where the labels 1, 2, and 3 indicate the photons. Photons 1 and 2 are held
by Alice, and photon 3 is held by Bob. The total state of the three photons
is then given by

23 = (α|H(cid:105)1 + β |V (cid:105)1)

|HH(cid:105)23 + |V V (cid:105)23

√

2

≡ |χ(cid:105)123 ,

(23)

(cid:12)(cid:12)Φ+(cid:11)

|ψ(cid:105)1

where α and β are complex numbers obeying |α|2 + |β|2 = 1. We can write
this as

|χ(cid:105)123 =

1√
2

(α|HHH(cid:105) + α|HV V (cid:105) + β |V HH(cid:105) + β |V V V (cid:105)) .

(24)

We suppressed the photon labels for brevity.
Next, Alice performs a Bell measurement, in which her two photons are
projected onto the Bell states. Writing the states |HH(cid:105), |HV (cid:105), |V H(cid:105), and
|V V (cid:105) in the Bell basis and rearranging the terms, the state just before the
Bell measurement is given by

(cid:2)(cid:12)(cid:12)Φ+(cid:11) (α|H(cid:105) + β |V (cid:105)) +(cid:12)(cid:12)Φ−(cid:11) (α|H(cid:105) − β |V (cid:105))
+(cid:12)(cid:12)Ψ+(cid:11) (β |H(cid:105) + α|V (cid:105)) +(cid:12)(cid:12)Ψ−(cid:11) (β |H(cid:105) − α|V (cid:105))(cid:3) .

1
2

|χ(cid:105)123 =

(25)

The outcomes of Alice’s Bell measurement indicate which state Bob’s photon
is in:

Φ+ :
Φ− :

|ψ(cid:105)3 = α|H(cid:105) + β |V (cid:105)
|ψ(cid:105)3 = α|H(cid:105) − β |V (cid:105)

Ψ+ :
Ψ− :

|ψ(cid:105)3 = β |H(cid:105) + α|V (cid:105) ,
|ψ(cid:105)3 = β |H(cid:105) − α|V (cid:105) .

(26)

Bob does not know which of these states his photon is in until he receives a
message from Alice telling him her measurement outcome. After receiving
the message, Bob can apply a corrective operation (using half wave plates
and quarter wave plates) to bring the quantum state of his photon back
to the original α|H(cid:105) + β |V (cid:105). This completes the teleportation protocol.
Quantum teleportation was demonstrated in 1997 and 1998 in various optical
implementations [21, 22, 23], and to various degrees of completeness [24].

A quantum repeater based on quantum teleportation works as follows
(see ﬁgure 6) [25]: Alice needs to send a polarised photon to Bob, who is

17

Figure 6: A series of quantum repeaters can be used to extend the
range of quantum communication. A quantum repeater teleports
an input photon to a photon in the next repeater via the “Swap”
operation. The entanglement between the repeaters is established
beforehand and made near perfect using entanglement distillation.
Bob receives a cumulative corrective instruction that is determined
by all the Swap operations in the repeaters, and includes informa-
tion which of his photons caries the teleported state.

too far away to send directly.
Instead, she sends it to a repeater station
somewhere between her and Bob. For now, let’s assume that this station
is close enough to Alice. The repeater station establishes shared entangled
pairs with Bob, or another repeater (more on that later). This allows the
repeater station to receive the incoming photon from Alice and teleport it to
Bob using the shared entanglement (the “Swap” gate in ﬁgure 6). For this to
work, the Bell measurement must reveal whether the photon sent by Alice
made it to the repeater station, and the entanglement between the repeater
station and Bob must be (near) perfect. The repeater station then informs
Bob what the corrective operation on his part of the entangled pair must be,
and after making this correction Bob can measure his photon in the basis
of his choice. Alice and Bob can now be far away from each other and still
establish a secret key with a suﬃciently high bit rate.

In the description above we have, of course, cheated! We magically as-
sumed that the repeater station and Bob share near-perfect entangled pho-
ton pairs. This is far from trivial to establish. The photons must be created
together, and at least one of them must travel the distance between the re-
peater station and Bob. That photon will inevitably incur losses of the same
magnitude as the photon sent by Alice. The repeater station and Bob can
share several pairs and try to ﬁnd out which of the photons made it through.
This is diﬃcult, because it requires detecting a photon without destroying it
(after all, we still need to use it in the teleportation protocol). Alternatively,
we can perform entanglement distillation, which takes several imperfect en-
tangled pairs and extracts one perfectly entangled pair. This is not easy

18

Repeater nRepeater 2Repeater 1ALICEBOBSwapSwapSwapGateSwapeither, because it requires entangling gates between photons. Finally, while
all this processing is going on, the photons don’t just sit there in the repeater
station. They need to be actively stored in either an optical delay line or
a quantum memory. If the distillation protocol requires communication be-
tween the repeater station and Bob, the length of time for which the photon
needs to be stored is comparable to the time it takes light to travel from Bob
to the repeater station. Any delay line memory would then incur the same
amount of photon loss as the channel between the repeater station and Bob,
and we’re back to square one.

There are several architectures that attempt to circumvent these various
diﬃculties, and one particular question of interest is what are the minimal
requirements for a repeater to work? Does it need two-way communication
between stations or can we construct a protocol that requires only one-way
communication as shown in ﬁgure 6? Does the repeater require memories
that last as long (or longer) than the ﬂight time of the photons between
repeater stations? A lot of progress is being made on these questions, and
this is currently an active area of research [25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30].

Finally, we note that while anti-bunching and the no-cloning theorem are
suﬃcient for the design of quantum key distribution, the implementation of
this protocol over long distances will most likely require the use of polarisa-
tion entanglement. This lifts the construction of repeaters into a new realm
of diﬃculty over direct quantum communication.

5 Quantum metrology and imaging

Light is also extremely useful in metrological applications. As a simple ex-
ample, consider the measurement of the thickness of a thin piece of foil. A
traditional mechanical micrometer has a precision of about 0.05 mm, which
is not good enough to measure foils that are much thinner2. To obtain the
required precision, we can use an optical interferometric micrometer shown in
ﬁgure 7, the principle of which is identical to that of Newton’s rings. The foil
is placed at the end of a mirror and holds up a plate of glass. The reﬂected
light will consist of two contributions, namely the light that is reﬂected oﬀ
the inside surface of the glass plate, and the light that is reﬂected oﬀ the
mirror. Whether constructive or destructive interference occurs at the out-
going light depends on the path diﬀerence t between the two contributions.
In ﬁgure 7, we show this eﬀect at three diﬀerent positions along the mirror.

2Metal foils a few micrometres thick are readily available.

19

Figure 7: Light can be used to measure the thickness d of a piece of
foil by counting the number of interference fringes along a distance
L as seen from above. The precision in the measurement of d can
be estimated as ∆d ∼ 1
2 λ, where λ is the wavelength of the light.
This is much more precise than a mechanical micrometer, which
has a precision of about 0.05 mm.

We ﬁnd destructive interference between the two reﬂected light waves

when the path length t is a half-integer multiple of the wavelength λ:

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

t =

m +

1
2

λ = x tan θ =

xd
L

,

(27)

where m is an integer, θ is the angle between the glass plate and the mirror,
L is the distance between the pivot point and the foil, and x is the distance
from the pivot point to the dark fringe. Adjacent fringes are a distance ∆x
apart, with

∆x =

λL
2d

or

d =

λL
2∆x

≡ 1
2

λLσ ,

(28)

where σ is the number of fringes per unit length. If we know λ and L, we
can count the fringes to obtain σ, which in turn gives us a value for the foil
thickness d.

The precision of this measurement can be estimated by noting that the
number of fringes per unit length σ can be counted very accurately, as long
as there is at least one fringe across the length L, or ∆σ ∼ 1/L. Using the
error propagation formula we calculate ∆d from this estimate as follows:

∆d =

∆σ

|dσ/dd| =

λ
2

L∆σ ∼ λ
2

.

(29)

20

dθtt’t’’LfoilglassmirrorxWe see that this device can reach a precision of a few hundred nanometers,
which is two to three orders of magnitude better than the mechanical mi-
crometer. The above example is using only classical light. Can we improve
on this technique by using quantum light? In order to answer this question
we will have to go back to what makes quantum light diﬀerent from classical
light.

We can in principle improve the precision of the optical micrometer by using
a lot of light: If we measure the intensity along the x-direction with very
high precision we can detect any variation in intensity, even if that amounts
to much fewer than one fringe per length L. There is a catch, however, since
the intensity itself is noisy. A (transversely) coherent state of light with
on average (cid:104)n(cid:105) photons has intensity ﬂuctuations that are proportional to

(cid:112)(cid:104)n(cid:105). The signal to noise ratio (SNR) is then (cid:104)n(cid:105)/(cid:112)(cid:104)n(cid:105) =(cid:112)(cid:104)n(cid:105). The more

photons, the higher the SNR, and the higher the SNR, the more precisely the
intensity curve in the x-direction can be measured (inversely proportional to
the SNR). The number of photons is therefore a resource for measuring the
foil thickness d: the more you have of them, the better you can estimate d.
The precision of d will scale according to

It originates in the natural intensity ﬂuctuations of light. The 1/(cid:112)(cid:104)n(cid:105) be-

This is called the shot noise limit, or the standard quantum limit (SQL).

haviour is speciﬁc to the type of light, which in this case is classical coherent
light. We therefore sometimes refer to this precision as the classical precision
limit.

If there is a way to suppress these ﬂuctuations in the intensity we may
be able to increase the precision ∆d. How would this work? To answer
this, note that the photons arrive in the detector completely independently
of each other, which means that they will cluster randomly at each pixel
in the detector according to the Poisson distribution in Eq. (3). To remove
this randomness we need a “conspiracy” between the photons in the form
of transverse anti-bunching (e.g., see ﬁgure 2, where τ may now denote the
distance between the detected positions). If the photons arrive nicely spaced
out, the intensity ﬂuctuations at each pixel will be suppressed. The periodic
structure of the fringes will then become clear much quicker, and an accurate
count of the fringes can be performed with fewer photons [31].

However, there is a limit to the precision gain that can be obtained this
way. No matter how evenly spaced, we still need an appreciable number of

∆d ∝ 1(cid:112)(cid:104)n(cid:105) .

(30)

21

photons to reveal the fringes. The ultimate precision in d can be calculated
as

∆d ∝ 1

(cid:104)n(cid:105) .

(31)

This is called the Heisenberg limit [32]. Since reaching this limit requires
anti-bunching (which in this case will require some form of entanglement
between the photons) this is a truly quantum mechanical precision scaling
without a classical implementation.

More generally, the ultimate precision allowed by quantum mechanics
of the measurement of a parameter θ is given by the expectation value of
the operator K that drives the changes in that parameter. These operators
are called generators. For example, the generator for changes in time is
the Hamiltonian, the generator for translations in space is the momentum
operator, and the generator for phase changes is the number operator. The
unitary evolution that imparts the parameter θ onto the quantum state is
given by U (θ) = exp(−iKθ/). The ultimate precision is then written as a
lower bound on the root mean square error of θ [33]:

∆θ ≥ 

2

1

∆K

.

(32)

For optimal states, the quantum mechanical operator variance (∆K)2 is
bounded by the (squared) expectation value (cid:104)K(cid:105)2, and (cid:104)K(cid:105) is the proper
deﬁnition of the resource (e.g., the amount) that allows us to increase the
precision of the measurement of θ [34]. The expectation value (cid:104)K(cid:105) is often
much easier to estimate than the variance (∆K)2.

From Eq. (32) it is clear why this limit is called the Heisenberg limit: if θ
is the position x of a particle and K is its momentum p, then the inequality
becomes

∆x ∆p ≥ 

2

,

(33)

which you will recognise as Heisenberg’s uncertainty relation for position
and momentum. Eq. (32) is more general than the traditional Heisenberg-
Robertson relation that is derived only for (non-commuting) observables,
since it is valid also for physical quantities that do not have an associated
quantum operator, such as time, phase and rotation angle.

It is often argued that entanglement is a prerequisite for reaching the
Heisenberg limit [35, 13]. While this is certainly true in the context of
estimation procedures involving many distinguishable particles, the situation

22

in optics—where photons may be indistinguishable—is a little more subtle.
Since the Heisenberg limit in Eq. (32) depends on ∆K, we can in principle
construct a quantum state on a single optical mode that maximises ∆K. For
example, if we wish to measure an optical phase ϕ, the relevant generator
is the number operator. The state with a maximal variance (and bounded
maximum number states) is given by

|ψ(0)(cid:105) =

|0(cid:105) + |N(cid:105)√

2

,

(34)

with |0(cid:105) the state of no photons, and |N(cid:105) the state of N photons in the optical
mode. A phase shift on the optical mode then leads to the transformation

|ψ(0)(cid:105) =

|0(cid:105) + |N(cid:105)√

2

→ |0(cid:105) + eiN ϕ |N(cid:105)

√

2

= |ψ(ϕ)(cid:105) .

(35)

Measuring the observable XN = |N(cid:105)(cid:104)0| − |0(cid:105)(cid:104)N| will then give a precision
[8]

∆ϕ =

π
2

1
N

.

(36)

There is no entanglement in a single optical mode, but we still attain the
Heisenberg limit.
In any real estimation procedure, however, the use of
entanglement can help overcome practical diﬃculties such as creating the
superposition in Eq. (34) or implementing the observable XN. For example,
instead of the state in Eq. (34), we may want to create the so-called noon
state [36, 37]

|ψ(0)(cid:105) =

|N, 0(cid:105) + |0, N(cid:105)

√

2

,

(37)

which is a two-mode state in which all the photons are in one mode (but it
is undetermined which mode). A phase shift in one of the modes will then
induce the same relative phase factor eiN ϕ as in Eq. (34). However, since this
is not a superposition of diﬀerent photon numbers but rather a superposition
of the distribution of N photons, it is conceptually easier to see how this can
be made in practice [38, 39].

Still, creating noon states is extraordinarily diﬃcult, and they are ex-
tremely sensitive to decoherence. More promising is the use of sqeezed light.
This is another type of quantum mechanical light that has no classical ana-
log. Instead of considering the photon number, which are the eigenvalues of

23

the operator ˆn = ˆa†ˆa, we may look at the quadrature operators

ˆX =

ˆa + ˆa†

2

and

ˆY = −i

ˆa − ˆa†

2

.

(38)

The commutation relation between ˆX and ˆY is [ ˆX, ˆY ] = i, which means that
they obey the uncertainty relation

∆X ∆Y ≥ 1
2

.

(39)

To get an idea what these operators mean, remember that the creation and
annihilation operators are mathematically identical to the ladder operators of
the simple harmonic oscillator. By analogy, ˆX and ˆY behave as the position
and momentum of the simple harmonic oscillator. Measuring ˆX would then
be equivalent to measuring the amplitude of the oscillator, while measuring
ˆY would be equivalent to measuring the momentum of the oscillator. In the
language of waves these are called quadratures.

A classical coherent state of light is a minimum uncertainty state, in the
sense that Eq. (39) becomes an inequality. Not only that, the two variances
are also equal:

(∆X)2 = (∆Y )2 =

1
2

.

(40)

Quantum mechanically, we can reduce the variance in one quadrature at the
expense of the other while still obeying Eq. (39). We can write this as

(∆X)2 =

e−2r
2

and

(∆Y )2 =

e2r
2

,

(41)

where r is called the squeezing parameter. Using these types of light allows
us to achieve a measurement precision in ϕ of

∆ϕ ≥ e−r(cid:112)M(cid:104)n(cid:105) ,

(42)

where (cid:104)n(cid:105) is the average number of photons in the light probe, and M is
the number of times the experiment is repeated [40]. The advantage of this
approach is that it does not require too exotic quantum states such as the
noon state, and the measurement can be achieved by ordinary homodyne
detection. This method is proposed as part of Advanced LIGO for the mea-
surements of gravitational waves [41, 42]

24

Figure 8: The image of a small circular source exhibits diﬀraction
fringes, and has a smeared out character that makes it diﬃcult to
ﬁnd the exact position and radius of the source. If the image was
perfectly smooth we would be able to characterise its parameters
from Fourier analysis, but the intensity proﬁle has a fair amount
of noise that leads to an error in the estimation of the source
dimensions.

Finally, the same transverse anti-bunching eﬀect that was used to increase
the precision of the optical micrometer can be employed to improve the
resolution in imaging. Suppose that we wish to image an object that we know
is circular (for example a star or a small aperture). We can use a telescope
or a microscope and obtain an image like the one shown in ﬁgure 8. We may
infer the radius (or, more precisely, the opening angle) of the sources, as well
as the position of the source, by matching the intensity of the light in the
imaging plane with a theoretical model of the image (related to the Fourier
transform of the source geometry). Given a perfectly smooth intensity proﬁle
in the imaging plane we can ﬁnd the position and radius with arbitrarily high
precision. However, as before the intensity of the light in the image plane
ﬂuctuates, and this will create a degree of uncertainty in the ﬁtting of the
theoretical curve to the data [43, 44]. If the ﬂuctuations can be suppressed
via transverse anti-bunching, the precision of the estimates of the position
and radius can achieve the Heisenberg limit [31].

25

6 Quantum computing

The last, and arguably most challenging information processing task with
single photon qubits is quantum computing. Quantum computers have very
stringent noise requirements, which linear optics can in principle meet. The
major challenge, however, is in the generation of entanglement. To make
matters worse, not all entanglement in created equal.

6.1 Entanglement generation between photons
One of the key ingredients in quantum information processing is quantum
entanglement. For example, in Section 4 we used the maximally entangled
Bell states as resources for quantum teleportation. For quantum computing,
entanglement is also a key resource. No exponential speed-up can be achieved
without it. However, when we deal with photons as our information carriers,
we must distinguish between diﬀerent types of entanglement.

Consider a single photon impinging on a 50:50 beam splitter. There are
two input and two output modes for a simple beam splitter, and we can
write the mode transformations as

ˆa1 → ˆb1 + ˆb2√

2

and

ˆa2 → ˆb1 − ˆb2√

2

,

(43)

where ˆa1 and ˆa2 are the annihilation operators for the input modes, and ˆb1
and ˆb2 are the annihilation operators for the output modes. A single photon
entering the beam splitter in mode 1 can then be written as a quantum state
transformation

|1, 0(cid:105)12 → |1, 0(cid:105)12 + |0, 1(cid:105)12

√

2

.

(44)

This state is entangled.
It can in principle be used to violate a Bell in-
equality (even though it would be diﬃcult to implement in practice). The
entanglement is between the spatial degree of freedom (mode 1 or 2), and
the photon number degree of freedom (0 or 1 photons). In general, quantum
states that are not thermal or classical coherent states become entangled
when they interact with beam splitters [8].

Unfortunately, this type of entanglement is of limited use for quantum
computation. To see this, consider a Bell state required for quantum com-
puting:

(cid:12)(cid:12)Φ+(cid:11)

12 =

|H, H(cid:105)12 + |V, V (cid:105)12

√

2

.

(45)

26

This is a state of two photons with polarisation degree of freedom (H and
V ) in two spatial modes (1 and 2). We can write this in terms of creation
operators acting on the vacuum as

(cid:12)(cid:12)Φ+(cid:11)

(cid:16)

12 =

1√
2

†
†
1,H ˆa
2,H + ˆa

†
†
1,V ˆa
2,V

ˆa

Suppose that we wish to create this state from the separable input state
|H, H(cid:105). The mode transformation that must be implemented is then

(cid:17)|0(cid:105) .
(cid:17)

.

(46)

(47)

(cid:16)ˆb

1,H →(cid:88)

†
ˆa

†
†
2,H → 1√
1,H ˆa
ˆa

2

†
1,H

†
†
2,H + ˆb
ˆb
1,V

†
ˆb
2,V

Linear optics is linear in the mode transformations, which means that each
input mode operator transforms into a linear combination of the output
mode operators. In other words,

U1j,Hs

ˆbj,s ,

(48)

j,s

where U1j,Hs are the elements of a unitary matrix3. Each mode operator is
replaced with a sum over mode operators. However, the substitution rule
of Eq. (48) applied to the left-hand side of Eq. (47) can never produce the
right-hand side of Eq. (47) because the left-hand side is separable into a
product of two mode operators, whereas the right-hand side is not. There-
fore, linear optics alone cannot be used to create the necessary entanglement
for quantum computing.

One potential way around this problem is to use an induced photon-
photon interaction, for example using a Kerr nonlinearity. Such a nonlin-
earity imparts a phase shift on one optical mode that is proportional to the
intensity in another mode. At the single-photon level this can act as a co-
herent switch. Unfortunately, Kerr nonlinearities are inherently noisy and
cannot be used for single-photon quantum gates [46]. The question is then
whether we can use photonic qubits for quantum computing.

6.2 The Knill-Laﬂamme-Milburn protocol
The problem was solved in 2000 by Knill, Laﬂamme and Milburn, in what
was to become one of the classic papers in quantum information processing
[47]. Instead of a medium-induced photon-photon interaction, the required

3There is a one-to-one relation between unitary matrices and linear optical networks

that consist of beam splitters, phase shifters and polarisation rotations [45].

27

Figure 9: A linear optical network that implements a nonlinear
phase shift (an NS gate) using only beam splitters and projective
measurements.
Instead of each photon in the input mode accu-
mulating a −1 phase shift, only the two-photon component picks
up the −1 phase shift, leaving the one-photon component unaf-
fected. The implementation requires one ancilla photon in the
middle mode, and a detection signature of one photon and no pho-
tons in the two detectors in the output. The beam splitters BS1,
BS2 and BS3 are not 50:50, but have specially chosen transmission
coeﬃcients.

nonlinearity of the mode transformations is provided by projective measure-
ments. In addition to the photons that are part of a computation, we may
send extra ancilla photons through a linear optical network of beam split-
ters and phase shifters. This gives us the freedom to detect photons in very
speciﬁc output modes, as shown in the example of the nonlinear phase shift
circuit in ﬁgure 9, also known as the NS gate. Since the number of added
ancilla photons is the same as the number of detected photons, the photon
number in the input mode does not change once it has passed through the
network.

Of course, it is not guaranteed that the two detectors will detect one and
zero photons, respectively. If it was, there would be no need for detection.
This implies that the circuit in ﬁgure 9 succeeds only part of the time (in this
case, the success probability of the gate is one quarter). This is no good for
quantum computation, in which all the circuits must be successful simulta-
neously. To overcome this problem, Knill, Laﬂamme and Milburn employed
quantum teleportation: Instead of trying to apply the probabilistic gate di-
rectly to the quantum information carrying qubits (which cannot be copied
and must therefore be handled with care), the gate is applied to one half of
an entangled pair. If the gate is successful, the now modiﬁed entangled pair
is used as the entanglement resource in quantum teleportation of the infor-
mation carrying qubit. The teleported qubit emerges with the gate applied

28

10“1”“0”inputoutputBS1BS2BS3to it. Knill, Laﬂamme and Milburn found a way to make the teleportation
procedure nearly deterministic, which means that the probabilistic gate can
now be applied deterministically to the qubit, and linear optical quantum
computing was in principle possible.

Once we can create an NS gate, we can use the Hong-Ou-Mandel eﬀect
to create controlled Pauli σz gates, or CZ gate. These are the two-qubit
gates that can create the entanglement necessary for quantum computing.
In terms of qubits, the CZ gate operates as follows on the two-qubit states:

UCZ |00(cid:105) = |00(cid:105) , UCZ |01(cid:105) = |01(cid:105) ,
UCZ |10(cid:105) = |10(cid:105) , UCZ |11(cid:105) = −|11(cid:105) .

(49)
In other words, when both qubits are in the |1(cid:105) state, the gate applies a
phase shift eiπ = −1. To see how this gate can be implemented with two NS
gates and the Hong-Ou-Mandel eﬀect, consider the circuit in ﬁgure 10. We
can arrange the two incoming qubits Q1 and Q2 in such a way that the |0(cid:105)
states for each qubit—i.e., horizontal polarisation—are mapped onto the top
and bottom modes that propagate freely. The |1(cid:105) states for each qubit are
the vertically polarised photons, and will be reﬂected in the polarising beam
splitters (PBS). The photons will combine in the ﬁrst 50:50 beam splitter. If
an input state |V, V (cid:105) enters this circuit, both photons will meet at the ﬁrst
beam splitter and experience to Hong-Ou-Mandel eﬀect. This means that
both photons will exit the beam splitter in a quantum superposition of both
photons in the top mode and both photons in the bottom mode. The NS
gate, if successful, will then impart a −1 phase shift on the two-photon state.
The second beam splitter will apply the Hong-Ou-Mandel eﬀect in reverse,
such that
|V, V (cid:105) → |2V, 0(cid:105) − |0, 2V (cid:105)

→ −|2V, 0(cid:105) + |0, 2V (cid:105)

→ − |V, V (cid:105) .

(50)

√

2

√

2

If only one photon enters the ﬁrst beam splitter, for example because Q1 is in
the logical state |1(cid:105) and Q2 is in the state |0(cid:105), there will only be one photon
going through the NS gates, and there will be no phase shift. Similarly, when
both photons are in the top and bottom mode, no photons travel through
the NS gates and no phase shift is imported on the quantum state. The
result is that the circuit in ﬁgure 10 implements the gate in Eq. (49). The
gate is successful when both NS gates are successful, and the total success
4 )2 = 1/16. The gate can be applied to
probability is therefore pCZ = ( 1
qubits in the computation using the teleportation trick described above.

29

Figure 10: The controlled-σz (CZ) gate. Two photonic qubits, Q1
and Q2, enter the interferometer. The modes corresponding to
qubit value |1(cid:105) are sent into a 50:50 beam splitter, the output of
which are subject to a nonlinear phase shift (NS). If there is a pho-
ton in each input mode of the beam splitter, the Hong-Ou-Mandel
eﬀect guarantees that the two photons will either go both through
the top NS gate or through the bottom NS gate. Consequently,
these photons will pick up a −1 phase. The second 50:50 beam
splitter will separate the two photons again into one photon in each
output mode of the beam splitter.

It is important for the operation of the CZ gate that the Hong-Ou-Mandel
eﬀect works perfectly. This means that the two photons must be indistin-
guishable in every respect, including frequency, polarisation and mode shape.
Imperfections in the photon source, the beam splitters, or the NS gate will
create faulty gates that can ruin the computation.

6.3 Measurement-based quantum computing
The Knill-Laﬂamme-Milburn protocol is a type of measurement-based quan-
tum computing, in which the computations are induced by measurements
and feed-forward processing of the measurement outcomes. As a practical
scheme, however, it has many downsides: a single entangling gate needs tens
to hundreds of thousands of ancilla photons; the detectors must be nearly
perfectly eﬃcient and be able to tell the diﬀerence between 0, 1 and 2 pho-
tons; all the photons must be identical to an extremely high degree; and the
feed-forward procedure requires high-quality, low-loss optical switches.
In
addition, while the feed-forward takes place, the photons must be stored in
a quantum memory.

The ﬁrst problem, the resource count, can be mitigated if instead of single
photon ancilla states we use entangled photons from the start. This requires

30

NSNSinputoutputQ1Q2PBSPBSBSBSFigure 11: Creating two-photon entangled states. a) Spontaneous
parametric down-conversion creates photon pairs probabilistically
when one or more pump photons break down into two entangled
photons whose frequencies sum to the pump frequency. This can
be achieved for example in a BBO crystal. Two BBO crystals
back-to-back rotated ninety degrees with respect to each other will
create polarisation-entangled photon pairs. b) A single quantum
dot in a Bragg stack can be excited and decay along two diﬀerent
paths, creating polarisation-entangled photons on demand. How-
ever, while this gives in principle superior performance over SPDC,
the fabrication challenges are signiﬁcant and this approach is cur-
rently still in the research stage.

a reliable source of photons in one of the Bell states (it does not really mat-
ter which one). Traditionally, entangled photon pairs have been generated
using a process called Spontaneous Parametric Down-Conversion (SPDC),
in which a high energy laser pumps a nonlinear crystal. The photons of the
laser have a very small probability of “breaking up” in the crystal into two
√
photons of lower energy. Depending on the arrangement, these two pho-
tons can be created in an entangled polarisation state (|H, H(cid:105) + |V, V (cid:105))/
2
[48]. Alternatively, we can engineer quantum dot structures that create en-
tangled photons on demand [49] as shown in ﬁgure 11. The dot can be
placed in a Bragg stack that sends photons in the vertical direction, and a
prism separates the diﬀerent frequency components. While SPDC is clean
and straightforward to implement, the rate of photon pair production is ex-
tremely low, and occasionally two or more pairs are created. The quantum
dot approach would therefore be preferable, but it is currently still in the
research stage.

Assuming that we have a reliable two-photon source we can design a new
architecture for linear optical quantum computing that requires signiﬁcantly
fewer resources. The key is still to use gate teleportation, but instead of

31

pumpBBOpumpdota)b)exciteHHVVthe complicated states required by the Knill-Laﬂamme-Milburn protocol we
create conceptually (and practically) simpler cluster states. Consider two
polarised photons in the (unnormalised) entangled state
|H, H(cid:105) + |H, V (cid:105) + |V, H(cid:105) − |V, V (cid:105) .

We can measure the ﬁrst photon in a special basis “±α” with eigenstates

|+α(cid:105) ≡ |H(cid:105) + eiα |V (cid:105)

√

2

and

After ﬁnding, say the measurement outcome +α the quantum state of the
remaining photon is
1 + e−iα

1 − e−iα

(cid:19)

|V (cid:105) = HUZ(α)

,

(52)

|ψout(cid:105) =

|H(cid:105) +

2

2

.

(51)

2

√

|−α(cid:105) ≡ |H(cid:105) − eiα |V (cid:105)
(cid:18)|H(cid:105) + |V (cid:105)√

2

where the last equality is true up to an unobservable global phase, and
UZ(α) = exp(−iασz/2) is a rotation generated by the Pauli σz operator. In
other words, measuring the ﬁrst photon in the special basis “±α” produces a
unitary gate HUZ(α) on the second photon. We can daisy-chain this process
by using a four-photon entangled state and measuring the ﬁrst three photons
in special bases deﬁned by successive angles α, β, and γ. The resulting
operation on the ﬁnal photon is the unitary gate

U (α, β, γ) = HUZ(γ)HUZ(β)HUZ(α) = HUZ(γ)UX (β)UZ(α) ,

(53)

where we have used that HUZH = UX, a rotation generated by the Pauli
σx operator. Such a gate can implement any single qubit operation given
judiciously chosen values of α, β, and γ. Depending on the (probabilis-
tic) measurement outcome (±α), the subsequent measurement angle must
be chosen as ±β, and the measurement outcome ±β determines the angle
±γ. This forward dependence of the measurement angles creates a deﬁnite
direction of the computation.

The four-photon state can be graphically represented as a linear (one-
dimensional) graph, in which the nodes denote the photons and the edges
denote entanglement created by CZ gates between the photons:

|ψ1D(cid:105) =

(54)

We can create two-dimensional graphs in which the vertical entanglement

32

Figure 12: Fusion gates for creating cluster states. a) Type-I
fusion allows us to take two Bell pairs and create an entangled
three-photon state by measuring a single photon in detector D af-
ter mixing on a linear polarising beam splitter (PBS1) and a half
wave plate (HWP). b) Type-II fusion is a form of entanglement
swapping that uses a circular polarising beam splitter (PBS2) and
two detection events at D1 and D2. Here, the fusion gate is applied
to two Bell pairs, which results in another pair. In larger systems
the type-II fusion gate can be used to create bigger cluster states
without the noise drawbacks of the type-I fusion gate.

connections represent entangling gates:

|ψ2D(cid:105) =

(55)

These structures can be mapped onto any quantum computational circuit
and are therefore universal for quantum computation. The entangled states
in Eqs. (54) and (55) are called cluster states, and the method is called one-
way quantum computation [50]. Since photon measurements can in principle
be carried out eﬃciently, the challenge is to create the required cluster states.
A particularly promising way to create large cluster states is to use so-
called fusion gates, shown in ﬁgure 12 [51]. The entanglement is created by
a variation of a probabilistic Bell measurement for polarised photons, and
can be implemented with linear optical elements such as half wave plates
and polarising beam splitters. Since the creation of the cluster state occurs
before we introduce the quantum computation via measurements, we are at
liberty to create the cluster state in a probabilistic manner and purify the
result until we have the desired ﬁdelity.

33

a)b)Bell pairBell pairBell pairBell pairDD1D2PBS1PBS2HWPHWPHWPThere are two types of fusion gates, type-I and type-II. The ﬁrst type
purports to detect a single photon, leaving the three remaining photons in
an entangled linear cluster state. This fusion gate can be described mathe-
matically by the operator

FI,± = |H(cid:105)(cid:104)H, H| ± |V (cid:105)(cid:104)V, V | ,

(56)
where the sign ± is determined by the polarisation of the photon measured
in detector D. Similarly, the type-II fusion gate can be described by the
operator

(cid:40)(cid:104)H, V | + (cid:104)V, H|

(cid:104)H, H| + (cid:104)V, V |

FII =

for outcome (H, H) or (V, V ) in D1 and D2,
for outcome (H, V ) or (V, H) in D1 and D2.

(57)

Starting with Bell pairs, the type-II fusion gates clearly cannot grow large
clusters on their own since they remove two photons from the entangled state.
However, type-II has a much more beneﬁcial behaviour that type-I when
the fusion gate fails. The best strategy is therefore to create three-photon
entangled states using type-I gates, and subsequently create larger cluster
states using only type-II fusion gates.
Improvements in the architecture
of linear optical quantum computers continue to be made, and in a recent
proposal the need for quantum memories is reduced by using a percolation-
based ballistic approach [52].

7 The future of optical quantum information pro-

cessing

One of the aims of this review is to show that diﬀerent quantum informa-
tion processing tasks have diﬀerent technological requirements. For quantum
computing, we need sources that produce Bell pairs on demand with high
eﬃciency and, perhaps more importantly, identical mode shapes to accom-
modate the Hong-Ou-Mandel eﬀect. Moreover, the Bell pairs must be very
close to pure states. The photodetectors must have a high detection eﬃ-
ciency, so that photon loss in the course of the computation remains low.
The linear optical components must similarly be low-loss and accurate. The
polarising beam splitters must have nearly perfect transmission or reﬂection
for the polarised photons, and beam splitters must have carefully calibrated
transmission coeﬃcients. The exact allowed tolerances of the components of
a linear optical quantum computer will be determined by the error correction

34

mechanism that is employed. Finally, the feed-forward nature of linear opti-
cal quantum computing means that we require fast, low-loss optical switches.
This is currently a major challenge.

An actual implementation of a linear optical quantum computer will
not use bulk optical elements, but rather have a chip-based architecture in
which microscopic waveguides are wired into programmable circuits. Beam
splitters can then be constructed from evanescently coupled waveguides. By
adjusting the distance between the waveguides, the transmission coeﬃcient
can in principle be carefully calibrated. Recently, photon sources have been
placed in or on top of waveguides, which allows for directional coupling of
the photon into the waveguide depending on the spin of the photon source
[53, 54, 55]. This new technology can be employed for alternative Bell pair
generation methods based on photon which-path erasure and spin readout.
Quantum metrology is similarly challenging to implement. It is known
that in the limit of large photon numbers the Heisenberg limit is extremely
sensitive to noise [56]. This means that some type of quantum error cor-
rection must be employed in order to achieve the Heisenberg limit, and this
places the practical challenge on a par with the construction of a full-scale
quantum computer. On the other hand, quantum metrology techniques that
do not achieve the Heisenberg limit but that nonetheless improve on the
shot-noise limit by a constant factor will still be very welcome. Squeezed
(quantum) light will be used in the next generation gravitational wave detec-
tors [42], especially now that gravitational waves have been observed directly
[57].

Quantum communication is arguably the least challenging task to imple-
ment in practice. Quantum key distribution requires single-photon sources
that may not be fully indistinguishable from each other. However, much
care must be taken in the prevention of side-channel detection, in which an
eavesdropper can infer or inﬂuence the polarisation of a photon via classical
methods (e.g., monitoring the photon source for tell-tale signals, etc.). These
can be diﬃcult engineering questions that must be solved. Extending quan-
tum communication over longer distances will require quantum repeaters.
These devices are much more challenging to build, and require multi-photon
entanglement, high-eﬃciency photodetectors, and generally rather large opti-
cal circuits. While repeaters do not have strict fault-tolerance requirements,
the techniques that will make them work will likely be similar to those of full-
scale quantum computers (indistinguishable photons, fast low-loss switches,
etc.).

To conclude, optical quantum information processing presents various
physical and engineering challenges for diﬀerent tasks. Some processes, such

35

as quantum key distribution are currently being implemented in commercial
products, while others are still very much in the research stage. I have shown
that diﬀerent tasks have very similar physical requirements at diﬀerent stages
of development, which makes it more likely that as our understanding and
mastery of Nature continues, even the more exotic applications will ﬁnd their
way into working devices.

Acknowledgements

I would like to thank Nikola Prtljaga for providing me with the data that
was used in ﬁgure 4.

References

[1] Photonics 21, Photonics industry report, http://www.photonics21.org/

(2013).

[2] R.G.H. van Uden, R.A. Correa, E.A. Lopez, F.M. Huijskens, C. Xia, G.
Li, A. Schülzgen, H. de Waardt, A.M.J. Koonen, and C.M. Okonkwo,
Ultra-high-density spatial division multiplexing with a few-mode multi-
core ﬁbre, Nature Photonics 8 (2014), p. 865.

[3] S.W. Hell and J. Wichmann, Breaking the diﬀraction resolution limit
by stimulated emission: stimulated-emission-depletion ﬂuorescence mi-
croscopy, Optics Letters 19 (1994), p. 780.

[4] M.J. Rust, M. Bates, and X. Zhuang, Sub-diﬀraction-limit imaging by
stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy (STORM), Nature Methods
3 (2006), p. 793.

[5] E. Betzig, G.H. Patterson, R. Sougrat, and O.W. Lindwasser, Imag-
ing intracellular ﬂuorescent proteins at nanometer resolution, Science
(2006).

[6] S.T. Hess, T.P.K. Girirajan, and M.D. Mason, Ultra-High Resolution
Imaging by Fluorescence Photoactivation Localization Microscopy, Bio-
physical Journal 91 (2006), pp. 4258–4272.

[7] H.J. Caulﬁeld and S. Dolev, Why future supercomputing requires optics,

Nature Photonics 4 (2010), p. 261.

36

[8] P. Kok and B.W. Lovett, Introduction to Optical Quantum Information

Processing, Cambridge University Press, 2010.

[9] R.P. Feynman, Lectures on Physics, Vol. III, Addison Wesley, 1965.

[10] C.K. Hong, Z.Y. Ou, and L. Mandel, Measurement of subpicosecond
time intervals between two photons by interference, Physical Review Let-
ters 59 (1987), pp. 2044–2046.

[11] N. Prtljaga, C. Bentham, J. O’Hara, B. Royall, E. Clarke, L.R. Wilson,
and A.M.F. Maurice S Skolnick, On-chip interference of single photons
from an embedded quantum dot and a laser, arXiv:1602.08363 (2016).

[12] H.J. Kimble, The quantum internet, Nature 453 (2008), pp. 1023–1030.

[13] V. Giovannetti, S. Lloyd, and L. Maccone, Advances in quantum metrol-

ogy, Nature Phot. 5 (2011), p. 222.

[14] A.N. Boto, P. Kok, D.S. Abrams, S.L. Braunstein, C.P. Williams, and
J.P. Dowling, Quantum interferometric optical lithography: exploiting
entanglement to beat the diﬀraction limit, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 (2000),
p. 2733.

[15] M.I. Kolobov (ed.), Quantum imaging, Springer, 2007.

[16] P. Kok, K. Nemoto, T.C. Ralph, J.P. Dowling, and G.J. Milburn, Linear
optical quantum computing with photonic qubits, Reviews of Modern
Physics 79 (2007), pp. 135–174.

[17] W.K. Wootters and W. Zurek, A single quantum cannot be cloned, Na-

ture 299 (1982), p. 802.

[18] D. Dieks, Communication by epr devices, Phys. Lett. A 92 (1982), p.

271.

[19] M. Koashi, Complementarity, distillable secret key, and distillable en-

tanglement, arXiv:0704.3661 (2007).

[20] C.H. Bennett, G. Brassard, C. Crepeau, R. Jozsa, A. Peres, and W.K.
Wootters, Teleporting an unknown quantum state via dual classical and
Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen channels, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70 (1993), p. 1895.

[21] D. Bouwmeester, J. Pan, K. Mattle, M. Eibl, H. Weinfurter, and A.
Zeilinger, Experimental quantum teleportation, Nature 390 (1997), p.
575.

37

[22] D. Boschi, S. Branca, F. DeMartini, L. Hardy, and S. Popescu, Experi-
mental Realization of Teleporting an Unknown Pure Quantum State via
Dual Classical and Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen Channels, Physical Review
Letters 80 (1998), p. 1121.

[23] A. Furusawa, J. Sorensen, S. Braunstein, C. Fuchs, H. Kimble, and E.
Polzik, Unconditional Quantum Teleportation, Science 282 (1998), p.
706.

[24] P. Kok and S.L. Braunstein, Postselected versus nonpostselected quan-
tum teleportation using parametric down-conversion, Physical Review
A 61 (2000), p. 042304.

[25] H.J. Briegel, W. Dür, J.I. Cirac, and P. Zoller, Quantum repeaters: The
role of imperfect local operations in quantum communication, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 81 (1998), p. 5932.

[26] P. Kok, C.P. Williams, and Dowling, Practical quantum repeaters with
linear optics and double-photon guns, Physical Review A 68 (2002), p.
022301.

[27] L. Jiang, J.M. Taylor, K. Nemoto, W.J. Munro, R.V. Meter, and M.D.
Lukin, Quantum repeater with encoding, Physical Review A 79 (2009),
p. 032325.

[28] M. Zwerger, W. Dür, and H.J. Briegel, Measurement-based quantum

repeaters, Physical Review A 85 (2012), p. 062326.

[29] K. Azuma, K. Tamaki, and H.K. Lo, All-photonic quantum repeaters,

Nature Communications 6 (2015), p. 6787.

[30] A. Reiserer and G. Rempe, Cavity-based quantum networks with single
atoms and optical photons., Reviews of Modern Physics 87 (2015), p.
1379.

[31] C.S. Embrey, M.T. Turnbull, P.G. Petrov, and V. Boyer, Observation
of localized multi-spatial-mode quadrature squeezing, Physical Review X
5 (2015), p. 031004.

[32] M.J. Holland and K. Burnett, Interferometric detection of optical phase

shifts at the heisenberg limit, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71 (1993), p. 1355.

[33] S.L. Braunstein, C.M. Caves, and G.J. Milburn, Generalized uncertainty
relations: Theory, examples, and lorentz invariance, Annals of Physics
247 (1996), p. 173.

38

[34] M. Zwierz, C.A. Pérez-Delgado, and P. Kok, General optimality of the
heisenberg limit for quantum metrology, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105 (2010), p.
180402.

[35] V. Giovannetti, S. Lloyd, and L. Maccone, Quantum metrology, Phys.

Rev. Lett. (2006).

[36] J.J.. Bollinger, W.M. Itano, D.J. Wineland, and D.J. Heinzen, Opti-
mal frequency measurements with maximally correlated states, Physical
Review A 54 (1996), p. R4649.

[37] H. Lee, P. Kok, and J.P. Dowling, A quantum rosetta stone for inter-

ferometry, Journal of Modern Optics 49 (2002), p. 2325.

[38] M.W. Mitchell, J.S. Lundeen, and A.M. Steinberg, Super-resolving
phase measurements with a multiphoton entangled state, Nature 429
(2004), p. 161.

[39] P. Walther, J.W. Pan, M. Aspelmeyer, R. Ursin, S. Gasparoni, and A.
Zeilinger, De Broglie wavelength of a non-local four-photon state, Nature
429 (2004), p. 158.

[40] L. Pezzé and A. Smerzi, Mach-Zehnder interferometry at the Heisenberg
limit with coherent and squeezed-vacuum light, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100
(2008), p. 073601.

[41] C.M. Caves, Quantum-mechanical noise in an interferometer, Physical

Review D 23 (1981), pp. 1693–1708.

[42] The LIGO Scientiﬁc Collaboration, Enhanced sensitivity of the LIGO
gravitational wave detector by using squeezed states of light, Nature Pho-
tonics 7 (2013), p. 613.

[43] C.A. Pérez-Delgado, M.E. Pearce, and P. Kok, Fundamental Limits of
Classical and Quantum Imaging, Physical Review Letters 109 (2012),
p. 123601.

[44] M.E. Pearce, T. Mehringer, J. Von Zanthier, and P. Kok, Precision es-
timation of source dimensions from higher-order intensity correlations,
Physical Review A 92 (2015), pp. 043831–12.

[45] M. Reck, A. Zeilinger, H. Bernstein, and P. Bertani, Experimental re-
alisation of any discrete unitary operator, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73 (1994),
p. 58.

39

[46] J.H. Shapiro, Single-photon kerr nonlinearities do not help quantum

computation, Physical Review A 73 (2006), p. 062305.

[47] E. Knill, R. Laﬂamme, and G.J. Milburn, A scheme for eﬃcient quan-

tum computation with linear optics, Nature 409 (2001), p. 46.

[48] P.G. Kwiat, K. Mattle, H. Weinfurter, A. Zeilinger, A.V. Sergienko, and
Y.H. Shih, New High-Intensity Source of Polarization-Entangled Photon
Pairs, Physical Review Letters 75 (1995), p. 4337.

[49] R.M. Stevenson, R.J. Young, P. Atkinson, K. Cooper, D.A. Ritchie,
and A.J. Shields, A semiconductor source of triggered entangled photon
pairs, Nature 439 (2006), p. 179.

[50] R. Raussendorf and H.J. Briegel, A One-Way Quantum Computer,

Physical Review Letters 86 (2001), p. 5188.

[51] D.E. Browne and T. Rudolph, Resource-eﬃcient linear optical quantum

computation, Physical Review Letters 95 (2005), p. 010501.

[52] M. Gimeno-Segovia, P. Shadbolt, D.E. Browne, and T. Rudolph, From
Three-Photon Greenberger-Horne-Zeilinger States to Ballistic Univer-
sal Quantum Computation, Physical Review Letters 115 (2015), pp.
020502–5.

[53] F.J. Rodriguez-Fortuno, G. Marino, P. Ginzburg, D. O’Connor, A. Mar-
tinez, G.A. Wurtz, and A.V. Zayats, Near-ﬁeld interference for the
unidirectional excitation of electromagnetic guided modes, Science 340
(2013), p. 328.

[54] I. Søllner, S. Mahmoodian, S.L. Hansen, L. Midolo, A. Javadi, G.
Kiršanske, T. Pregnolato, H. El-Ella, E.H. Lee, J.D. Song, S. Stobbe,
and P. Lodahl, Deterministic photon–emitter coupling in chiral photonic
circuits, Nature Nanotechnology 10 (2015), pp. 775–778.

[55] R.J. Coles, D.M. Price, J.E. Dixon, B. Royall, E. Clarke, A.M. Fox,
P. Kok, M.S. Skolnick, and M.N. Makhonin, Chirality of nanophotonic
waveguide with embedded quantum emitter for unidirectional spin trans-
fer, Nature Communications (2016).

[56] R. Demkowicz-Dobrzanski, J. Kolodynski, and M. Guta, The elusive
Heisenberg limit in quantum- enhanced metrology, Nature Communica-
tions 3 (1), pp. 1063–8.

40

[57] B.P. Abbott, et al., Observation of Gravitational Waves from a Binary
Black Hole Merger, Physical Review Letters 116 (2016), pp. 061102–16.

41

