6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
6
1

 
 
]
t
f
o
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
9
4
0
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Reversibility and hysteresis of the sharp yielding transition of a colloidal glass under

oscillatory shear

M. T. Dang,1 D. Denisov,1 B. Struth,2 A. Zaccone,3 and P. Schall1

1Van der Waals-Zeeman Institute, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands

2Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron, Hamburg, Germany

3Statistical Physics Group, Department of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology,

University of Cambridge, New Museums Site, Pembroke Street, CB2 3RA Cambridge, UK

The mechanical response of glasses remains challenging to understand. Recent results indicate
that the oscillatory rheology of soft glasses is accompanied by a sharp non-equilibrium transition in
the microscopic dynamics. Here, we use simultaneous x-ray scattering and rheology to investigate the
reversibility and hysteresis of the sharp sharp symmetry change from anisotropic solid to isotropic
liquid dynamics observed in the oscillatory shear of colloidal glasses [D. Denisov, M. T. Dang,
B. Struth, A. Zaccone, and P. Schall, Sci. Rep. 5 14359 (2015)]. We use strain sweeps with
increasing and decreasing strain amplitude to show that, in analogy to equilibrium transitions,
this sharp symmetry change is reversible and exhibits systematic frequency-dependent hysteresis.
Using the non-aﬃne response formalism of amorphous solids, we show that these hysteresis eﬀects
arise from frequency-dependent non-aﬃne structural cage rearrangements at large strain. These
results consolidate the ﬁrst-order like nature of the oscillatory shear transition and quantify related
hysteresis eﬀects both via measurements and theoretical modelling.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The ﬂow and relaxation of glasses is important for
a wide range of materials including metallic glasses,
polymer- and soft glasses, but remains challenging to un-
derstand. Glasses are structurally frozen liquids with re-
laxation times exceeding the experimental time scale by
many orders of magnitude and hence exhibiting solid-
like properties [1]. Their time-dependent response to
mechanical probing is central to many applications in
advanced material science and engineering [2–5], but re-
mains a major challenge. Besides applications, insight
into this response promises also a deeper understanding
of the glassy state as it addresses the important funda-
mental question of how the arrested glass state respond
to an externally applied stress imposing an independent
time scale.

So far the majority of rheological studies has focused
on bulk ﬂows, and on stress-strain relationships of glassy
materials [6]. Research on soft glasses such as colloids,
emulsions and foams provides growing insight into the
microscopic mechanism behind the mechanical response.
Recently, these studies reveal interesting signatures of
underlying non-equilibrium transitions in the response
of glasses to applied shear [7–12]. The idea is that the
applied shear provides an external ﬁeld, to which mi-
croscopic rearrangements can couple; coupling also oc-
curs between the rearrangements themselves, mediated
by their elastic interactions, leading to long-range corre-
lations in the microscopic deformation of slowly deformed
glasses [13–21]. Colloidal glasses have played an impor-
tant role in directly visualizing these microscopic cor-
relations. The particles exhibit dynamic arrest due to
crowding at particle volume fractions above φg ∼ 0.58,
the colloidal glass transition [22, 23], and they have been
used extensively as models for glasses.

Under continuous shear, colloidal glasses show long-
range correlations in their ﬂow [19, 20], and have been
shown recently to exhibit a ﬁrst-order transition in the
dynamics in response to increasing applied shear rate [7].
A particularly useful technique to investigate the time-
dependent response of soft glasses is oscillatory rheology.
By measuring the stress response to sinusoidal strain, one
determines the linear elastic and viscous moduli G(cid:48) and
G(cid:48)(cid:48) from the harmonic in and out of phase response, re-
spectively, all the way from the linear to the non-linear
response regime [24–27]. These measurements provide
insight into the yielding [28–30], caging and relaxation
processes of glasses [31–33] as a function of strain am-
plitude and frequency. The sinusoidal strain avoids the
continuous accumulation of strain and allows frequency-
dependent steady states [34] to be probed. Combined
with direct measurement of the particle dynamics, these
oscillatory measurements revealed the existence of a crit-
ical strain at which particle displacements become irre-
versible [9–11, 26, 28], as also recently observed in simula-
tions [12]. Independently, our own x-ray scattering mea-
surements during the oscillatory rheology of a colloidal
glass showed a sharp symmetry change from anisotropic
solid to isotropic liquid-like response [8] at the rheolog-
ical yielding of the glass, suggesting a non-equilibrium
ﬁrst-order transition under the applied oscillatory shear.
While the relation between these studies needs further
investigation, the central question is whether in analogy
to ﬁrst-order equilibrium transitions this sharp transi-
tion is reversible, and there are any delay or hysteresis
eﬀects. Following the increasing oscillatory amplitude by
a cycle with decreasing amplitude, does the transition, if
at all reversible, occur at the same critical strain? Ad-
dressing these questions would provide important insight
into this non-equilibrium transition.
In the oscillatory
rheology, hysteresis eﬀects could arise due to structural
changes of the glass that alter its rigidity and mechanical

2

properties. For example in the liquid state, restructuring
due to ”shear thinning” can lower the viscosity, enabling
the glass to ﬂow with less dissipation. Moreover, sub-
tle structural rearrangements can also occur in the solid
state; the resulting structural changes would lead to pro-
nounced hysteresis eﬀects depending on the frequency of
probing.

In this paper, we investigate the reversibility and
hysteresis of the sharp non-equilibrium transition using
simultaneous x-ray scattering and oscillatory rheology
on colloidal glasses. We ﬁnd that the sharp symme-
try change is indeed reversible and exhibits systematic
frequency-dependent hysteresis. Using our structural or-
der parameter, we can for the ﬁrst time identify solid
and liquid states of the sheared glass apart, and measure
hysteresis in the transition between them during strain
amplitude sweeps. Our rheological measurements indi-
cate that this hysteresis results from restructuring due to
”shear thinning” in the liquid regime at high strain. The
hysteresis almost vanishes for volume fractions around
the glass transition, but becomes pronounced for densi-
ties above and below. By employing a mean-ﬁeld model
based on the non-aﬃne response formalism for amor-
phous solids [35–38], we identify this non-monotonous
behavior as due to the competition of dissipation and
ﬁnite-rate non-aﬃne motion leading to entropic changes
of the material. These results provide deeper insight into
the nature of this non-equilibrium ﬁrst-order transition
in oscillatory sheared colloidal glasses.

II. EXPERIMENT

The colloidal glass consists of silica particles with a di-
ameter of 50 nm and a polydispersity of 10% to prevent
crystallization. The particles are suspended in water with
a small amount (1mM ) of N aCl to screen the particle
charges. The Debye screening length is 2.7 nm, result-
ing in an eﬀective particle diameter of 2r0 = 55.4 nm.
Dense samples around the colloidal glass transition were
prepared by diluting centrifuged samples. The eﬀective
volume fractions estimated assuming a sediment volume
fraction of 64% are φ ∼ 56%, 58%, 59% and 60% ±0.5%.
Investigation of the continuous shear rheology [39, 40]
showed extended shear-thinning regimes typical for col-
loidal glasses, and consistent with mode-coupling theory
predictions [40]. For the φ = 58% sample, these measure-
ments yielded a relaxation time of τ ∼ 106tB [39], with
tB the relaxation time at inﬁnite dilution, consistent with
this estimated volume fraction [41]. To measure the rhe-
ology and structure factor simultaneously, we placed an
adapted commercial rheometer (Mars II, Thermo Fisher)
into the beamline P10 of the synchrotron PETRA III at
DESY [42]. The well-collimated x-ray beam (wavelength
λ = 0.154 nm) is deﬂected vertically to pass the layer
of suspension in the shear-gradient direction [8]. After
loading, the samples are sealed with low-viscosity oil to
prevent evaporation and guarantee sample stability over

more than 4 hours, allowing us to measure samples re-
peatedly and reproducibly. Samples were initialized by
a ﬁxed protocol (preshear at ˙γ = 0.1 s−1 for 120 sec-
onds, followed by 600 seconds rest). For each sample vol-
ume fraction, we apply oscillatory strain with frequency
ω = π, 2π, 4π, 10π and 20π (rad/s) and amplitude γ0
increasing from γ0min = 10−4 to γ0max = 0.4 (forward
cycle) and decreasing from γ0max = 0.4 to γ0min = 10−4
(backward cycle). Each experiment consists of 100 points
on a logarithmic scale, three oscillations averaged per cy-
cle, leading to total duration of the experiment of around
1 hour for ω = π rad/s.

We use a Lambda detector to simultaneously monitor
the scattered intensity from the sheared suspensions. The
detector with pixel size 52 × 52 µm2 and operating at a
frame rate of 10 Hz, is placed at a distance of D = 280
cm, capturing wave vectors in the range qr0 = 0.5 to 5
in the shear direction–shear axis plane.

III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND

DISCUSSION

As we have shown in [8], our setup combining x-ray
scattering and rheology allows us to reveal a sharp sym-
metry change upon increasing strain amplitude: we ob-
served a sharp transition from twofold symmetry charac-
teristic of a sheared solid to isotropic symmetry charac-
teristic of a slowly sheared liquid. This transition occurs
at the intersection of the moduli, where the storage mod-
ulus, G(cid:48), decreases below the loss modulus, G(cid:48)(cid:48), typical
for the nonlinear rheology of soft glassy materials [43], as
shown by the red data in Fig. 1a.

the nearest-neighbor peak.

The identiﬁed symmetry change shows up in all angle-
dependent measures of the structure factor. We fo-
cus on the ﬁrst diﬀraction ring in the scattering plane,
i.e.
Its twofold symme-
try at small strain indicates the elastic-like distortion of
nearest-neighbor environments in the sheared glass [8].
This symmetry is most clearly demonstrated using angu-
lar correlations that pick out the underlying symmetry
of the structure factor most eﬃciently (see appendix),
as shown in Fig 1b. Twofold (p-wave) symmetry is
clearly observed at small strains. With increasing strain
amplitude, the twofold pattern suddenly disappears at
γ0 ∼ 0.08. This symmetry loss indicates the sudden tran-
sition to a liquid-like state. To demonstrate the sharpness
of this transition, we follow the maximum of the angu-
lar correlation function located at β = π (dash-dotted
horizontal line); this maximum quantiﬁes the extend of
two-fold symmetry and hence serves as order parameter
of the transition: it is 1 for ideal two-fold symmetry and
0 for isotropic symmetry. As shown in Fig. 2 (red data),
this order parameter drops indeed sharply to zero, man-
ifesting the sudden loss of two-fold symmetry. Moreover,
we ﬁnd that the sudden symmetry loss occurs precisely
at the intersection of the two moduli G(cid:48) and G(cid:48)(cid:48), indicat-
ing that it is connected to the rheological loss of rigidity

3

FIG. 2. (Color online) Reversible structural transition. The
structural order parameter (left axis) characterizing the de-
gree of two-fold symmetry from the peak value of the angular
correlation function at β = π is plotted as a function of strain
amplitude together with the elastic and viscous moduli (right
axis). Forward and backward shear are indicated by red and
blue color, respectively. Sharp drop (red) and rise (blue) of
the order parameter indicates the occurrence of a sharp, re-
versible structural transition at the intersection of G(cid:48) and G(cid:48)(cid:48).

(a)

(b)

(c)

FIG. 1.
(Color online) Sharp structural transition in the
oscillatory rheology of a colloidal glass at φ = 58% and
ω = 2π (rad/s) (a) Elastic modulus G(cid:48) (solid lines) and vis-
cous modulus G(cid:48)(cid:48) (dashed lines) during increasing (red) and
decreasing strain amplitude (blue). The intersection of G(cid:48)
and G(cid:48)(cid:48) in the forward cycle (increasing strain amplitude) is
marked by γ∗
0 . In the backward cycle (decreasing strain am-
plitude), this intersection occurs at slightly larger strain, indi-
cating hysteresis. (b,c) Contour plots of the angular correla-
tion of the scattered intensity indicate sharp symmetry change
of the sheared structure. In the forward cycle (b, increasing
strain amplitude), the two-fold symmetry vanishes abruptly
at γ∗
0 , indicating a sharp transition from elastic to viscous
response. In the backward cycle (c, decreasing strain ampli-
tude), the transition occurs at slightly higher strain, similar
to the intersection of G(cid:48) and G(cid:48)(cid:48) in (a).

of the material. This sharp symmetry change reminds of
ﬁrst-order equilibrium transitions, but in the case here is
induced by the applied oscillatory shear.

Exploiting the analogy with ﬁrst-order transitions, the
question is then whether this sharp symmetry change is
reversible, and whether there is any hysteresis. To inves-
tigate the reversibility, we added a ”backward” oscilla-
tory shear cycle, i.e. we started from large strain ampli-
tude in the nonlinear regime, and decreased the oscilla-
tory strain amplitude down to small values in the linear
regime. Remarkably, we ﬁnd that indeed the transition
reverses, as shown in Fig. 1c. The two-fold symmetry re-
appears spontaneously, and the order parameter jumps

FIG. 3. (Color online) Reproducibility of the rheological mea-
surement. Elastic and viscous moduli, G(cid:48) and G(cid:48)(cid:48) over sev-
eral cycles of forward and backward strain sweep at frequency
ω = 2π (rad/s) and volume fraction 59%. The overlap of
multiple forward and backward cycles demonstrates excellent
reproducibility. Only minor diﬀerences in the moduli (smaller
than the symbol size) are observed between the runs.

back to values of order 1, suggesting that the material
abruptly acquires solid properties. We ﬁnd that in the
case here, both forward and backward transitions occur
at very similar strain amplitude, and there is little hys-
teresis. Some hysteresis, however, occurs in the magni-
tude of the moduli G(cid:48) and G(cid:48)(cid:48) and the magnitude of the
order parameter. Both reﬂect the same trend: while the
material clearly recovers its elastic properties during the
backward transition as shown by both the order param-
eter and the moduli, the somewhat smaller magnitude of

4

(Color online) Elastic and viscous moduli, G(cid:48) and G(cid:48)(cid:48) of forward (red) and backward (blue) oscillatory shear at
FIG. 4.
frequencies ω = π (ﬁg. a), 2π (ﬁg. b), 4π (ﬁg. c), 20π (rad/s) (ﬁg. d) at volume fraction φ = 58%. (e) Plateau values of G(cid:48)
taken at γ0 = 10−4 as a function of frequency for forward (red) and backward (blue) shear at volume fractions φ = 56% (top)
and φ = 58% (bottom). In both cases, the largest hysteresis is observed for the lowest frequency. Error bars are smaller than
the symbol size.

both compared to the forward cycle indicates that the
material has not fully restored its initial rigidity. This
gradual loss of rigidity is likely associated with restruc-
turing of the material during the shear cycle, weakening
it.

To analyse this hysteresis eﬀect in more detail, we focus
on the rheology and investigate its frequency dependence.
We ﬁrst conﬁrm that the rheological measurements are
well reproducible, as shown by several repetitions of for-
ward and backward cycles superimposed on each other
in Fig. 3. Forward cycles as well as reverse cycles closely
overlap over several repetitions, demonstrating that the
run-to-run variation of our rheological experiments are
small (less than 10% of the magnitude of G(cid:48) and G(cid:48)(cid:48)).
Second, when we repeat the experiment at varying fre-
quency, large deviations between forward and reverse cy-
cle eventually emerge at low frequency, as shown in Fig. 4.
Clearly, the growing diﬀerence between the forward (red)
and backward (blue) cycle demonstrates that hysteresis
eﬀects grow with decreasing frequency. This diﬀerence
between forward and backward shear leads also to a shift
of the crossing point of the moduli.
In particular, the
loss modulus G(cid:48)(cid:48) increases less steeply on the way back
and exhibits a smaller maximum. This change of G(cid:48)(cid:48) is
likely associated with restructuring processes occuring in
the ”liquiﬁed” state at large strain amplitude. Such pro-
cesses, known as shear thinning in steady shear, typically
reduce the viscosity to facilitate the ﬂow. The higher
slope of G(cid:48)(cid:48) in the forward cycle indeed suggests that
the material exhibits stronger shear thinning than on the
way back. In the backward cycle, the material then ap-
proaches the yield strain with a much more ordered struc-
ture and hence much lower viscosity than it had when it
approached yielding coming from low strains. It follows
that in the backward cycle, the suspension reaches yield-
ing with lower values of η and G(cid:48)(cid:48) compared to those in
the forward route. Since G(cid:48), in contrast, is not much af-

← < G(cid:48)(cid:48)

← ∼ G(cid:48)

→ while G(cid:48)

fected by the structural changes at large strain, the fact
that G(cid:48)(cid:48)
→, must necessarily im-
ply that the intersection of G(cid:48) and G(cid:48)(cid:48) shifts to larger
strain. These results suggest that restructuring of the
material leads to hysteresis eﬀects at low frequency and
long time scale, as is expected for slow relaxation. Sim-
ilar frequency dependence is also observed for other vol-
ume fractions, both above and below the colloidal glass
transition. This is demonstrated in Fig. 4e, where we
show the plateau values of G(cid:48) for φ = 56% (top) and
58% (bottom). Hysteresis eﬀects are always the largest
at low frequency. We note that while we conﬁrmed that
the hysteresis eﬀects are reproducible over independent
runs, the precise behavior over subsequent repetitive cy-
cles needs further investigation.

We also investigated the hysteresis as a function of
volume fraction, and found a surprising non-monotonic
relation. Rheological data for four diﬀerent volume frac-
tions φ = 56%, 58%, 59% and 60% are shown in Fig. 5.
Interestingly, the hysteresis almost vanishes at around
the glass transition (Fig. 5b and c), while it becomes
much more signiﬁcant both below and above φg = 58%.
At the glass transition, the rheology is closely reversible:
the moduli of the forward and backward cycle overlap
nicely, even over several consecutive cycles. In contrast,
signiﬁcant hysteresis emerges for densities deep inside
the glass (Fig. 5d), and even more so below the glass
transition (Fig. 5a). The fact that the strongest hys-
teresis occurs for the lowest investigated volume fraction
(φ = 56%) lends credence to our interpretation that the
hysteresis eﬀect is due to shear-thinning processes. At
this volume fraction, the system is in a viscous, super-
cooled liquid state. Since it is relatively more dilute com-
pared to the glass, the particles can restructure more
easily, a process that lowers the viscosity due to the well-
known shear-thinning eﬀect upon increasing the strain
rate. This is reﬂected in a much steeper power-law de-

5

(Color online) Elastic and viscous moduli, G(cid:48) and G(cid:48)(cid:48) of forward (red) and backward (blue) oscillatory shear at
FIG. 5.
frequency ω = 2π (rad/s) for volume fractions 56% (a), 58% (b), 59% (c), and 60% (d). In panel (c), multiple forward and
backward cycles are overlaid onto each other. The overlap demonstrates excellent reproducibility. (e) Plateau values of G(cid:48)(cid:48)
taken at γ0 = 10−4 as a function of volume fraction φ at frequency ω = 2π (rad/s) of forward (red) and backward shear (blue).
The error bars are smaller than the symbol size.

vestigated in detail the structural transition as a function
of frequency and volume fraction. We ﬁrst conﬁrm that
for all frequencies and volume fractions within the range
investigated, the sharp structural transition is a robust
feature, and always occurs both in the forward and back-
ward cycle. Remarkably, when we determine the location
of the transition γ∗, we ﬁnd that it always coincides with
the intersection of G(cid:48) and G(cid:48)(cid:48). This is shown in Fig. 6,
where we plot the location of the structural transition to-
gether with that of the intersection of the moduli. When-
ever the intersection of G(cid:48) and G(cid:48)(cid:48) shifts due to hystere-
sis, the structural transition shifts as well so that they
always coincide, as demonstrated by the overlay of the
symbols in Fig. 6. This means that the coincidence of the
structural transition and the intersection of the moduli
is a robust experimental feature that remains valid even
when the transition shifts due to hysteresis. This is most
evident for φ = 56% at low frequency, where there is a
large mismatch between γ∗
0 in the forward and backward
cycle. We have shown in a previous publication [8] that
the intersection point where G(cid:48) = G(cid:48)(cid:48) is equivalent to
the equality of microscopic aﬃne and non-aﬃne compo-
nents underlying the macroscopic deformation. There-
fore, the robust coincidence of structural transition and
intersection of the moduli indicates that it is the bal-
ance of aﬃne and non-aﬃne components of deformation
that governs the rheological solid-liquid transition of the
material. This robust principle motivates a simple the-
oretical model of non-aﬃne deformation underlying the
observed trends.

FIG. 6. (Color online) Strain amplitudes at yielding as a func-
tion of frequency for forward (red) and backward shear (blue)
at volume fractions φ = 56% (top) and φ = 58% (bottom).
Squares and error bars indicate the intersection of G(cid:48) and G(cid:48)(cid:48),
while crosses indicate the structural transition. Both coincide
within error bars. A few structural transition data points are
missing due to beam loss.

0

0

crease of G(cid:48)(cid:48) ∝ η ∼ γ−0.7
, compared to the glass at higher
φ where G(cid:48)(cid:48) ∝ η ∼ γ−0.5
. On the other hand, in the su-
percooled state the lower slope of G(cid:48)(cid:48) after shear reversal
directly indicates the lower viscosity due to restructur-
ing. We give an overview of the hysteresis behavior by
plotting the plateau value of G(cid:48)(cid:48) as a function of volume
fraction φ in Fig. 5e.

How does this rheological hysteresis relate to the struc-
tural transition? Are similar hysteresis eﬀects observed
in the sharp symmetry change? To address this, we in-

6

FIG. 7. (Color online) Schematic of nearest neighbor loss un-
der applied shear. Upon application of shear, particles move
out of the cage in the extension direction, and move in along
the compression direction. Because of the hard-core poten-
tial, particles move in much less than they move out, leading
to net loss of connectivity.

IV. MEAN-FIELD MODEL OF YIELDING

A. Nonaﬃne model for G(cid:48)

We model the strain-dependent weakening of the ma-
terial with a microscopic model of aﬃne and non-aﬃne
deformation. In this model, the decrease of G(cid:48) with in-
creasing strain amplitude is due to shear-induced loss of
connectivity. Upon application of shear, nearest neigh-
bors of any tagged particle tend to be removed in the ex-
tensional sectors, whereas almost no new neighbors move
in along the compression sectors due to excluded vol-
ume [20, 44]. The resulting net loss of mechanically active
nearest-neighbours leads to connectivity loss and a weak-
ening of the structure with increasing strain [35]. This
eﬀect has been conﬁrmed experimentally in the pair cor-
relation function determined with confocal microscopy
during start-up shear deformation [45]. The lost neigh-
bours migrate into the free volume pockets as there is a
favourable chemical potential gradient in that direction,
which is reﬂected in the re-distribution of free volume.
The loss of nearest neighbors and concomitant loss of
rigidity leads to increasing non-aﬃne displacements un-
til, at yielding, the eﬀective number of nearest neighbors
is barely enough to sustain the nonaﬃne displacements
required to keep mechanical equilibrium [38]. This point
deﬁnes the transition from solid to liquid at which the
material starts to ﬂow.

To model the resulting decrease of the elastic modu-
lus, we ﬁrst consider the aﬃne part of the shear mod-
κφ
ulus GA = 1
σ nb in the linear regime, according to
5π
the Born-Huang theory of lattice dynamics [46]. Here,
nb is the number of nearest neighbors and κ the spring
constant associated with a nearest-neighbor bond.
In
our hard-sphere glass, ”bonded” neighbors arise from the
entropic attraction (akin to depletion attraction): basic
statistical mechanics [47], relates the ﬁrst peak of the
radial distribution function g(r) to an attractive min-

FIG. 8. (Color online) Storage modulus G(cid:48) ﬁtted by the non-
aﬃne model, in forward and backward shear for φ = 58% and
ω = 20π (a), ω = 10π (b), and ω = 1π (rad/s) (c). For
the highest frequency (a), the agreement is perfect because
shear thinning is negligible, i.e. the high deformation rate en-
sures that no relaxation occurs. Thus, the number of nearest
neighbors remains unchanged, nb,0 = nb,end = 12. Increasing
deviation occurs at lower frequency, indicating increasing re-
laxation. Accordingly, the number of neighbors at the end of
the cycle nb,end = 11.5 for both ω = 10π and 1π (rad/s),
while the amplitudes Af = Ab = −4.6 for ω = 10π (rad/s)
(b) and Af = −4.9 and Ab = −4.6 for ω = 1π (rad/s) (c).

imum in the pair potential of mean force Veﬀ /kT =
− ln g(r). This also deﬁnes the elastic spring constant
as κ = [d2Veﬀ /dr2]r=σ between two bonded neighbors.
The number of bonded neighbors is given by the inte-
b ≈ 12 for the
gral of the ﬁrst peak of g(r), which yields n0
static hard-sphere glass. The situation changes under ap-
plied shear, as shown schematically in Fig. 7: Particles
become crowded in the compression sector of the shear
plane, whereas they become dilated in the extension sec-
tor. Because of the strong excluded volume interactions
(the nearest neighbors cannot come closer to a selected
particle than its excluded volume), the particle increase
in the compression sector cannot balance the particle loss
in the extension sector, leading to a net loss of particles.
This is indeed what we observed experimentally when we
resolved the pair correlation function along the extension
and compression direction [45]: In the extension direc-
tion, the ﬁrst maximum of the pair distribution function
g(r)max decreases continuously, while in the compression
direction, this number increases only slightly to satura-
tion.

Assuming that the local cage dynamics is governed by
the Smoluchowski equation with shear [48], we found pre-
viously [45] that the number of nearest neighbors (pro-
portional to the ﬁrst peak of g(r)) decreases exponen-

b exp(−Aγ) corresponding
tially with strain, nb(γ) = n0
to a decrease of the ﬁrst-peak of g(r) in the extension
direction according to gc(r) = 3.07 exp(−Aγ). The nu-
merical factor A in the exponential decay follows from
the ﬁt to the experimental data for g(r) presented in [45].
Since this parameter represents the extent of the shear-
induced microscopic connectivity loss, its ﬁtted values, as
discussed below, may vary depending on the shear pro-
tocol, the glass volume fraction, and the frequency.

5π

κφ

κφ

σ (nc

b − Cγ)].

σ [nb(γ) − nc

As a result of the reduced connectivity, there are in-
creasing non-aﬃne contributions to the shear modulus,
as shown recently also in numerical simulations [49]. Ac-
cording to Alexander [50], the nonlinear (non-aﬃne) con-
tribution to the shear modulus can be written as resulting
from a Taylor expansion in the free energy up to third
order in γ, which gives a ﬁrst-order in γ correction to
the modulus as: GN A = 1
b + Cγ), where C = 3
5π
is a phenomenological constant from the non-aﬃne free
energy expansion and the critical coordination number
nc
b = 6 [35] for central-force interactions in the quasistatic
limit. The parameter C thus contains the information
about how sensitively the nonaﬃne contributions depend
on the strain amplitude. The total modulus is given by
the sum of aﬃne and non-aﬃne contributions, which,
because non-aﬃne parts contribute negatively (against
the internal force ﬁeld to restore force balance), reads:
G = GA − GN A = 1

In the low-strain limit, γ → 0, the nonaﬃne contri-
κφ
bution reduces to GN A = 1
σ 6, which, combined with
the aﬃne contribution leads to the scaling G ∼ (nb − 6),
5π
valid at zero frequency for athermal disordered solids. At
high frequency ω (cid:29) 1/τ , it is widely accepted that the
particles move in a dominantly aﬃne way in the elastic
regime before yielding [47], and G (cid:39) GA is a good ap-
proximation.
In physical terms, at high frequency the
particles have not enough time to relax into their non-
aﬃne positions and are stuck in the higher-energy aﬃne
positions as the deformation is quickly reversed. This im-
plies that the critical coordination number nc
b associated
with the nonaﬃne relaxation, eﬀectively must decrease
b = 0 at ω = ∞,
all the way from nc
in order to recover G = GA as the inﬁnite-frequency
modulus. These limits are fully consistent with the well-
documented existence[47, 51] of two limiting plateaus in
the frequency-dependent modulus of glasses, namely a
low-frequency plateau where the modulus is the lowest
in value and the nonaﬃnity is the highest, and a high-
frequency plateau where the modulus is aﬃne, in good
approximation. Hence, the critical connectivity parame-
ter nc
b which controls the extent of nonaﬃnity, is expected
to decrease with increasing ω and we adjust it as a func-
tion of frequency to ﬁt the oscillatory shear data of G(cid:48)
at varying frequencies. The shear-induced connectivity
decay coeﬃcient A will be shown to not depend much on
the frequency and the constant C = 3 remains unchanged
in the ﬁtting process.

b = 6 at ω = 0 to nc

We independently ﬁt the forward and backward shear
b to indicate the number of nearest neigh-

cycle. We use n0

7

b

b = 12. We use nend

bors before starting the shear, which for dense liquids and
glasses of spherical particles is n0
to
deﬁne the number of neighbours at the end of the back-
ward shear cycle, which may be diﬀerent from n0
b due
to shear-induced restructuring: some particles may have
irreversibly migrated into ”free volume” pockets where
they eﬀectively behave similarly to rattlers in packings,
i.e. without exhibiting any mechanically active contact
with other particles. This mechanism implies that irre-
versible motions of this kind should ultimately deplete,
on average, the cage of neighbours at the end of the cy-
cle. Since nend
is a ﬁtting parameter, whenever we will
ﬁnd nend
b < n0
b = 12, this is a strong indication that the
deformation has a ﬁnite degree of irreversibility, reﬂected
in a lower G(cid:48) in the backward cycle.

The ﬁnal formula used for the ﬁtting of G(cid:48) is thus

b

G(cid:48) = K{nb(γ) − [nc

b(ω) + Cγ]}

(1)
b exp(−Aγ) for the forward cycle, and
where nb(γ) = n0
exp(−Aγ) for the backward one, while
nb(γ) = nend
nc
b(ω) is ﬁtted within a reasonable range and varies (de-
creases) with ω. K is a ﬁtting prefactor which is propor-
tional to κφ/σ.

b

B. Eﬀect of frequency on G(cid:48)

b = n0

To check this model, we ﬁt G(cid:48) in eq. 1 to the mea-
sured elastic modulus from Fig. 4. As shown in Fig. 8,
the model captures the gradual decrease of G(cid:48) all the
way from the linear regime at small strain to the nonlin-
ear regime. Perfect agreement is obtained for the high-
est frequency: both forward and backward shear curves
overlap, and there is one and the same theoretical curve
describing both. In particular, nend
b = 12, indicat-
ing that no structural change has occurred. The situation
changes at lower frequency, with small deviations at 10π
(rad/s) (Fig. 8b), and larger ones at π (rad/s) (Fig. 8c).
The G(cid:48) curves of the forward and backward shear cy-
cle become diﬀerent and the ﬁt is good only within the
pre-yielding regime, i.e.
In fact, devia-
tions occur in the limit of high strain, where the exper-
iments show a decreasing power-law trend of both G(cid:48)
and G(cid:48)(cid:48), indicating the presence of shear-thinning phe-
nomena. Shear thinning is not included in our simple
model for G(cid:48) and therefore the power-law dependence
is not captured; the resulting restructuring reduces the
non-aﬃnity, causing the decrease of G(cid:48) to be smaller than
predicted by the non-aﬃne model, which explains the dis-
crepancy in the post-yielding regime. At high frequency,
this shear-thinning is less prominent because the short
time scale does not allow the particles to restructure into
the layered shear-thinning conﬁguration.

for γ0 < 0.1.

Correspondingly, the parameter nend

, a sensitive mea-
sure of irreversibility in the model, becomes smaller than
n0
b at these lower frequencies. From the ﬁts of the data we
indeed observe that nend
b = 11.5 < 12, implying a ﬁnite
extent of irreversible motions, at the lowest frequency

b

8

ω = π (rad/s). This means that, on average 0.5 par-
ticles in the original quiescent glassy cage has been lost,
and migrated irreversibly into free volume regions. The
G(cid:48) elastic plateau at the end of the cycle is thus lower
than the G(cid:48) elastic plateau at the start of the deforma-
tion. With increasing frequency, the values of nend
tend
to increase until ultimately for the highest frequency in-
vestigated here, ω = 20π (rad/s), we ﬁnd nend
b = 12,
implying a fully reversible deformation cycle and also G(cid:48)
having the same plateau value for both the forward and
backward regimes.

b

Finally, it is instructive to look at the ﬁtted values
of the nonaﬃnity parameter nc
b. We ﬁnd that indeed
nc
(rad/s) and
b = 6 at the lowest frequencies of π
10π (rad/s), implying that we are still close to the low-
frequency non-aﬃne plateau of the shear modulus. With
increasing frequency, the value of nc
b decreases until at
ω = 20π (rad/s) we ﬁnd nc
b = 3, closer to the aﬃne
high-frequency plateau, where nc

b vanishes.

C. Nonaﬃnity-based interpretation of G(cid:48)(cid:48)

To better understand the behaviour of the viscous
modulus, G(cid:48)(cid:48), we now focus on dissipative processes and
their description within the non-aﬃne response theory.
Our treatment will allow us to make qualitative predic-
tions about the behaviour of hysteresis and dissipation
as a function of frequency and volume fraction. We here
present only the essential results of the theory and derive
its consequences for the viscous modulus, with particu-
lar emphasis on the hysteresis. The full nonaﬃne model
of viscous dissipation, derived here for the ﬁrst time, is
presented in appendix B.

Similar to the elastic modulus described above, the
dissipative function contains two contributions: one is
the standard contribution related to viscosity and the
loss modulus G(cid:48)(cid:48), while the second contribution dis-
cussed here for the ﬁrst time is associated with the time-
dependence of nonaﬃne displacements in the amorphous
solid. While this latter, non-standard dissipation does
not directly contribute to the viscosity (which is deﬁned
based on aﬃne displacements [52]), it does alter the to-
tal energy of the system and may explain the decrease
in the plateau of the shear modulus at the end of the
deformation cycle in the limit of high packing fraction.

Recall that the experimental data show pronounced
hysteresis both at the lowest and the highest volume frac-
tion, while for φ ∼ φg, no hysteresis occurs. The hystere-
sis, i.e. the fact that the plateaus of G(cid:48) and G(cid:48)(cid:48) are lower
at the end of the deformation cycle, reﬂects the fact that a
quote of internal energy of the solid has been lost to dissi-
pation during the cycle. We deﬁne the dissipated energy
per time ˙E = −2Ψtot < 0 during the shearing, where the
Rayleigh dissipation function Ψtot > 0. Hence, the hys-
teresis of G(cid:48) and G(cid:48)(cid:48) is directly related to the behaviour
of the dissipation function Ψtot.

As shown in Appendix B, the total dissipation function

Ψtot in the solid regime can be written as

Ψtot =

1
2

2 + B | γ0 |

η ˙γ0

˙γ0,

(2)

where the ﬁrst term is the usual (aﬃne) viscous dissipa-
tion in liquids and solids [52] controlled by the viscosity
η ∼ G(cid:48)(cid:48) at ω → 0, and the second term arises from the
ﬁnite rate of nonaﬃne motions in the amorphous solid.
The second, non-standard contribution, is derived in Ap-
pendix B. Here we deﬁned ˙γ0 = γ0ω, and the prefactor B,
which is independent of γ0 and ˙γ0, relates to the entropy
change of the system, B ∼ (∂S/∂E)−1, where E is the in-
ternal energy of the system, i.e. the sum of potential and
kinetic energy. The above relation can be justiﬁed on the
basis of the following argument: Working with the par-
ticle nonaﬃne displacement xi, the dissipative function
is deﬁned in terms of the entropy production rate ˙S by
the relation: 2ΨN A = ˙S = (dS/dxi) · (dxi/dt). Upon
, and
introducing the Hessian (dynamical matrix) H
the thermodynamic relation (∂S/∂E)−1dS = −dRmin,
where dRmin is the reversible work equivalent to the
work done by the nonaﬃne displacement xi, this gives
ΨN A =

xj ˙xi ∼ C | γ0 |

˙γ0.

ij

1

2(∂S/∂E)−1 H

ij

In a hard-sphere colloidal glass, the main contribution
to E comes from the kinetic energy of the particles. Upon
increasing φ, the free volume decreases, and so does the
kinetic energy of the particles, along with the decrease
of mean square velocity ﬂuctuations. Eventually, the ki-
netic energy becomes zero at random close packing, and
B ∼ (∂S/∂E)−1 → 0. Hence, B in equation (2), is a
decreasing function of φ. If we look at the viscous term,
instead, we know that the viscosity of hard-sphere sus-
pensions is an increasing function of φ, and it eventually
diverges at random close packing, with a power-law di-
vergence. Hence, the two terms in equation (2) have
opposite qualitative trends as a function of φ.

The hysteresis observed in the experiments should be
directly related to the dissipated energy: because any
hysteresis implies changes of the structure, the larger the
dissipated energy, the larger the restructuring and hence
the larger the hysteresis. In an attempt to explain the
nonmonotonic hysteresis trend with φ, we can hence spec-
ulate that in the range φ = 56% − 58%, the decrease of
B ∼ (∂S/∂E)−1 with φ is stronger than the increasing
trend of η. This is meaningful if one recalls that ex-
perimental data suggests [53] the viscosity starts to vary
strongly with φ only in the vicinity of random close pack-
ing [6, 33], whereas the kinetic energy, which controls the
decrease of B, has a very strong decrease upon entering
the glass regime at φ = 58%. Furthermore, if the driv-
ing is slow, the viscous contribution, the ﬁrst term in
the above equation, can be considered small in the range
φ = 56% − 58%. Hence the decrease in hysteresis and
dissipation upon going from φ = 56% to φ = 58% can be
2 remains rela-
attributed to the fact that the term 1
tively small in this regime, whereas the term B | γ0 |
˙γ0
decreases signiﬁcantly upon increasing φ. The minimum
dissipation is achieved around φ = 58% where no hys-

2 η ˙γ0

teresis is observed. Upon further increasing φ, however,
the viscosity starts to increase more abruptly than the
kinetic energy decreases, and the dissipation starts to in-
crease as well. This results in an increase in hysteresis
observed at φ = 60%. We can hence understand the hys-
teresis trend qualitatively based on the non-aﬃne model
of dissipation in glasses.

V. CONCLUSION

We have demonstrated reversibility and hysteresis of
the sharp structural symmetry change in the oscillatory
shear of colloidal glasses. Upon increasing strain am-
plitudes from the linear into the nonlinear regime, the
glass exhibits a sharp, reversible transition from an elas-
tic to a liquid-like response, indicated by the sharp loss
of shear-induced structural anisotropy active in the solid
(which has a non-negligible aﬃne deformation compo-
nent). Upon varying frequency and volume fraction, this
sharp transition always occurs, and always coincides with
the intersection of the rheological moduli G(cid:48) and G(cid:48)(cid:48).
Looking in detail at the elastic and viscous moduli, we
found that hysteresis eﬀects arise at low frequency due to
restructuring of the glass at these low rates and long time
scales. We model this hysteresis behavior with a non-
aﬃne model that accounts for shear-induced loss of con-
nectivity and rigidity of the glass. Using this model, we
can describe the strain dependence of the elastic modulus
quantitatively all the way from the linear to the nonlin-
ear regime. Hysteresis occurs due to the additional shear
thinning in the liquid state of the suspension after yield-
ing, leading to restructuring. The corresponding dissi-
pated energy arises as a competition between the regular
dissipation in liquids and the entropy change associated
with restructuring due to time-dependent non-aﬃne par-
ticle motion.

VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors thank P. Lettinga for useful discussions.
We thank DESY, Petra III, for access to the x-ray beam,
proposal I-20130124 EC. We thank ESRF, DUBBLE
beamline and NWO for for access to the x-ray beam,
proposal 26-02-715. This work was supported by the
Foundation for Fundamental Research on Matter (FOM)
which is subsidized by the Netherlands Organisation for
Scientiﬁc Research (NWO).

APPENDIX A: ANGULAR CORRELATION

FUNCTION

From the recorded diﬀracted intensity, we determine
the structure factor S(q) by subtracting the solvent back-
ground and dividing by the particle form factor deter-
mined from dilute suspensions.
In the linear elastic

9

regime (low strain amplitude), we observe a character-
istic p-wave distortion that is consistent with an elastic
distortion of the nearest-neighbor structure due to the
applied shear. To bring out this underlying symmetry
most clearly, we focus on the ﬁrst diﬀraction ring S1(α)
and compute angular correlations of the ﬂuctuations of
S1 using

C(β) =

(cid:82) 2π
0 (S1(α + β)− < S1(α) >)(S1(α)− < S1(α) >)dα

(cid:82) 2π
0 (S1(α)− < S1(α) >)2dα

.

(3)

Here, α and β are polar angles in the diﬀraction plane,
and we integrate over the angle α as a function of the
correlation angle β. Possible eﬀects of elliptical distortion
of the ﬁrst ring are reduced by averaging radially over a
range of wave vectors (∆q ∼ 2w1) around q1, where w1
is the width of the nearest neighbor peak. We deﬁne the
peak value C(β = π) of the angular correlation function
as structural order parameter; this allows us to measure
the symmetry change as a function of applied strain.

APPENDIX B: NONAFFINE CONTRIBUTION

TO DISSIPATION (EQ.2)

The elastic deformation of amorphous solids can be
described and understood within the Born-Huang expan-
sion of deformation free energy of solids, provided that
the role of structural disorder is properly taken into ac-
count. Under an imposed shear γ, every particle tends
to reach its aﬃne position rA
i = γRj in space, which is
entirely speciﬁed by the applied strain tensor γ and by
the initial position of the particle Ri in the glass at rest.
However, due to the lack of a local center-inversion sym-
metry in the glass, the forces transmitted to particle i
by its nearest-neighbours j cannot just vanish by mutual
cancellation with their mirror-images across i, as they
would do in a lattice with center-inversion symmetry. As
a consequence, a net non-zero force f
acting on particle i
in its aﬃne position rA
i pushes particle i towards its ﬁnal
nonaﬃne position, where the particle is, eventually, at
mechanical equilibrium. The ﬁnal equilibrium position
can be written as ri(γ0) = rA
de-
notes the nonaﬃne displacement, or the distance vector
between the ﬁnal equilibrium position of the particle and
its aﬃne position. It has been shown that for suﬃciently
small strains, the nonaﬃne displacement is also linear in
the strain, uN A

, where uN A

i + uN A

i ∼ γ0.

Hence, the aﬃne positions rA

i of the atoms deﬁne a
nonequilibrium state of the solid. The nonaﬃne motions
represent the trajectory in phase space of the system
traveling towards the ﬁnal equilibrium state. The lat-
ter is achieved when all the atoms have reached their
ﬁnal true positions ri. The energy associated with the
relaxation to equilibrium is given by the entropy change

i

i

i

10
−T ∆S that corresponds to work dissipated by the sys-
tem. ∆S is the entropy diﬀerence between the ﬁnal equi-
librium state and the initial nonequilibrium state. From
statistical mechanics it is well known that this energy,
if the deviation from equilibrium is small (which may
be reasonable for γ small), coincides with the minimum
work Rmin that an external agent would do to bring the
system from the equilibrium state to the nonequilibrium
state that we are considering: ∆S = −Rmin/T [54]. This
equality applies to a closed system (the solid) where lo-
cally a small body (the particle) moves to reach equi-
librium with the system. The total dissipated work can
thus be calculated as follows.

We can write the generic force increment δf

needed to
inﬁnitesimally displace the particle from the ﬁnal equilib-
rium position. This force, most generally, can be written
as a ﬁrst-order Taylor expansion around the true position
in the elastic potential of the nearest-neighbors:

i

≈ −

δf

i

· xj = −H

xj

ij

(4)

(cid:18) ∂2F

(cid:19)

∂ri∂rj

ri(γ)

(cid:90) uN A

0

where xj measures the position of each atom j along the
nonaﬃne displacement pathway, and is such that xj = 0
when the atom j is in the true ﬁnal position rj and
xj = uN A
when the atom is in the aﬃne position rA
j .
According to this deﬁnition, the coordinate xj measures
the distance, along the nonaﬃne path, that separates
the particle j from its true ﬁnal position rj at equilib-
represents the standard
rium. H

=(cid:0)∂2E/∂rij∂rkl

(cid:1)

j

ij

Rij

dynamical matrix, or Hessian matrix, of the solid.

Using this expansion we can evaluate Rmin deﬁned as
the work that would be necessary to bring the particle i
from the true nonaﬃne position (where it is at equilib-
rium) back to the aﬃne position (where it out of equilib-
rium):

Rmin =

δf

i

· dxi = − 1
2

H

ij

uN A
i uN A

j

.

(5)

This work is negative because it is the work that an ex-
ternal agent does onto the system, in agreement with
the thermodynamic deﬁnition of Rmin. Using ∆S =
−Rmin/T , this establishes that the total free energy of
the deformed solid, including the contributions from the
nonaﬃne motions, is given by:

H

ij

uN A
i uN A

j

(6)

F = FA − T ∆S = FA − 1
2

(cid:0)∂2E/∂rij∂rkl

(cid:1) uA

8

ijuA

where FA = 1
kl denotes the stan-
dard Born-Huang free energy of aﬃne deformation for
harmonic lattices (the same applies to lattices with inver-
sion symmetry). In earlier independent contributions, it
was shown that upon diﬀerentiating the total free energy
twice with respect to the strain one obtains the follow-
ing formula for the shear modulus: G = GA − GN A =
GA − Ξi(H
/∂γ0 denotes the net

)−1Ξj, where Ξi = ∂f

ij

i

force per unit strain acting on the particle i resulting
from its nearest-neighbour forces. The nonaﬃne contri-
bution to the shear modulus is thus intimately related
to the work Rmin and to the entropy associated with de-
grees of freedom of nonaﬃne motion, ∆S. It is important
to note that for hard-sphere colloids, the usual tempera-
ture should be replaced with the the Maxwell relation as
T = (∂S/∂E)−1, where E is the total internal energy of
the system.

At this point, we can introduce the dissipative function
ΨN A associated with the nonaﬃne motion. The dissipa-
tive function is deﬁned in terms of the entropy production
rate ˙S by the relation: 2ΨN A = ˙S = (dS/dxi) · (dxi/dt).
Using (∂S/∂E)−1dS = −dRmin, and Eq.
dS/dxi =
1
2 (∂S/∂E)H
xj from the analysis above, we obtain the
following form of the dissipative function,

ij

ΨN A =

1

2(∂S/∂E)−1 H

xj ˙xi

ij

(7)

Interestingly, in contrast to the standard viscous dissipa-
2 the dis-
tion of liquids (and solids), given by Ψ = 1
sipation function for nonaﬃne motions is not a quadratic
form of the strain rate ˙xi, but just linear. For suﬃciently
small strain,

2 η ˙γ0

ΨN A ∼ xj ˙xi = B | γ |

˙γ0,

(8)

which represents the nonaﬃne contribution to the total
dissipation function in Eq.(2) in the main article.

1

ij

2(∂S/∂E)−1 H

N A = ∂ΨN A/∂ ˙xi =

Also of interest is the fact that the contribution of non-
aﬃne dissipation to the dissipative or viscous stress in the
xj ∝ γ0,
system, is σ(cid:48)
in contrast to the standard viscous stress which is ∼ ˙γ0.
Importantly, the dissipative contribution of nonaﬃne mo-
tions is independent of the internal friction, unlike the
standard viscous dissipation. This outcome is in agree-
ment with recent simulations of shock-wave propaga-
tion in frictionless jammed packings where dissipation
emerges from the nonaﬃne motions of the particles in
the absence of internal friction. The stress contribution
of nonaﬃne dissipation to the viscous part of the stress
should not be confused with the nonaﬃne contribution
to the elastic stress, which bears a negative sign and de-
creases the overall elastic stress, as shown by diﬀerent
authors in previous publications.
In general, the total
dissipative function can be written as the sum of the
standard viscous dissipative function and nonaﬃne one,
In the solid-like linear regime of
as Ψtot = Ψ + ΨN A.
deformation γ0 < γ∗
0 , Ψtot = Ψ + ΨN A with both con-
tributions, while in the liquid-like regime post-yielding
γ0 > γ∗
0 , we have Ψtot = Ψ, because ΨN A is deﬁned only
for nonaﬃne deformations of a solid.
It is diﬃcult to
quantitatively evaluate the nonaﬃne contribution ΨN A,
in comparison with the standard one. In highly viscous
systems like colloidal suspensions, it may be the case that
ΨN A (cid:28) Ψ is a possible outcome. However, we can at
least extract scaling laws with the present theory, and
analyse diﬀerent limits.

i

i

)γ0, where ˙xi|rA

For example, the maximum value of the dissipation
function is achieved in the aﬃne positions: Ψmax =
(∂S/∂E)(Ξi · ˙xi|rA
denotes the initial ve-
locity of particle i when it is in its aﬃne position rA
i and
begins its motion towards the ﬁnal position. In a crystal
lattice, where Ξi = 0 for all atoms i under quasistatic
deformation, this implies that Ψ = 0, at any point in the
deformation. Hence, nonaﬃne dissipation is zero only in
the quasistatic deformation of ordered lattices.

We can also analyse the behaviour of ΨN A as a func-
tion of the frequency, or equivalently, rate of deformation.
At very high rates or frequencies, the particles have no

11

time to relax from the aﬃne positions. As is well known,
high-frequency or high rates experiments probe the aﬃne
deformation and one can assume xi = 0 for all particles,
in this limit. Hence, ΨN A → 0, in the limit ω → ∞ and
˙γ0 → ∞. In the opposite limit of quasistatic deforma-
tion at zero-frequency and zero-strain rate, we have that
xi > 0, because particles can relax and undergo nonaﬃne
displacements on the time scale of deformation, but now
˙xi = 0. Hence, ΨN A → 0 also in the limit ω → 0 and
˙γ0 → 0. We conclude that ΨN A (cid:54)= 0 only at intermediate
rates and frequencies.

[1] M. D. Ediger, C. A. Angel and S. R. Nagel, J. Phys.

(1995).

Chem. 100, 13200 (1996).

[2] A. L. Greer, Science 267, 1947 (1995).
[3] G. Kumar, H. X. Tang and J. Schroers, Nature 457, 868

(2009).

[4] D. Jang and J. R. Greer, Nature Mater. 9, 215 (2010).
[5] The Physics of Deformation and Fracture of Polymers,
A. S. Argon, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
U.K. (2013).

[6] The Structure and Rheology of Complex Fluids, R. G.
Larson, Oxford University Press, New York, U.S.A.
(1999).

[25] P. Sollich, F. Lequeux, P. H´ebraud and M. E. Cates,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 2020 (1997); P. Sollich, Phys. Rev.
E 58, 738 (1998).

[26] P. H´ebraud, F. Lequeux, J. P. Munch, and D. J. Pine,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 4657 (1997).

[27] J. M. Brader, M. Siebenb¨urger, M. Ballauﬀ, K. Rein-
heimer, M. Wilhelm, S. J. Frey, F. Weysser and M. Fuchs,
Phys. Rev. E 82, 061401 (2010).

[28] G. Petekidis, A. Moussaid and P. N. Pusey, Phys. Rev.

E 66, 051402 (2002).

[29] G. Petekidis, D. Vlassopoulos and P. N. Pusey, Faraday

[7] V. Chikkadi, D. M. Miedema, M. T. Dang, B. Nienhuis,

Discuss. Chem. Soc. 123, 287 (2003).

and P. Schall, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 208301 (2014).

[30] A. Le Grand and G. Petekidis, Rheologica Acta 47, 579

[8] D. V. Denisov, M. T. Dang, B. Struth, A. Zaccone, and

(2008).

P. Schall, Sci. Rep. 5, 14359 (2015).

[9] K. H. Nagamanasa, S. Gokhale, A. K. Sood and R. Gana-

[31] S. A. Rogers and P.M Lettinga J. Rheol. 56 1 (2012).
[32] S. A. Rogers, B. M. Erwin, D. Vlassopoulos, M. Cloitre

pathy, Phys. Rev. E 89, 062308 (2014).

J. Rheol. 55, 435 (2011).

[10] R. Jeanneret, and D. Bartolo, Nature Comm. 5, 3474

[33] K. van der Vaart, Y. Rahmani, R. Zargar, Z. Hu, D.

(2014).

Bonn and P. Schall, J. Rheol. 57, 1195 (2013).

[11] E. D. Knowlton, D. J. Pine and L. Cipelletti, Soft Matter

[34] N. Koumakis, J. F. Brady and G. Petekidis, Phys. Rev.

10, 6931 (2014).

[12] T. Kawasaki and L. Berthier, arXiv:1507.04120 (2015).
[13] J. Goyon, A. Colin, G. Ovarlez, A. Ajdari and L. Boc-

Lett 110, 178301 (2013).

[35] A. Zaccone and E. Scossa-Romano, Phys. Rev. B 83,

184205 (2011).

quet, Nature 454, 84 (2008).

[36] A. Zaccone, J. R. Blundell and E. M. Terentjev, Phys.

[14] P. Olsson and S. Teitel, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 178001

Rev. B 84, 174119 (2011)

(2007).

[37] A. Zaccone and E. M. Terentjev, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110,

[15] C. E. Maloney and M. O. Robbins, Phys. Rev. Lett 102,

178002 (2013).

225502 (2009);

[16] A. Lemaˆıtre and C. Caroli, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 065501
(2009); J. Chattoraj, C. Caroli and A. Lemaˆıtre, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 105, 26601 (2010).

[17] C. Heussinger and J.-L. Barrat, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102,

218303 (2009).

[18] V. Chikkadi, E. Woldhuis, M. van Hecke and P. Schall,

Europhys. Lett. 112, 36004 (2015).

[19] V. Chikkadi, G. Wegdam, D. Bonn, B. Nienhuis and P.

Schall, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 198303 (2011).

[20] V. Chikkadi, S. Mandal, B. Nienhuis, D. Raabe, F.
Varnik and P. Schall, Europhys. Lett. 100, 56001 (2012).
[21] Y. Rahmani, R. Koopman, D. Denisov and P. Schall, Sci.

[38] A. Zaccone, Mod. Phys. Lett. B 27, 1330002 (2013).
[39] D. V. Denisov, M. T. Dang, B. Struth, G. H. Wegdam

and P. Schall, Sci. Rep. 3, 1631 (2013).

[40] C. P. Amann, D. Denisov, M. T. Dang, B. Struth, P.
Schall, and M. Fuchs, J. Chem. Phys. 143, 034505 (2015).

[41] Ackerson, B., Physica A 174, 15 (1991).
[42] Additional experiments have been carried out at the
DUBBLE beamline of the ESRF synchrotron facility. The
experimental conditions have been similar to the ones
performed at DESY, and the rheometer used identical to
the one at DESY.

[43] T. G. Mason, et al., Phys. Rev. E, 56, 3150, (1997).
[44] J. Zausch and J. Horbach, Europhys. Lett. 88, 60001

Rep. 2, 1064 (2013).

(2009).

[22] P. N. Pusey, and W. van Megen, Nature 320, 340 (1986).
[23] W. van Megen, T. C. Mortensen, S. R. Williams, and J.

[45] M. T. Dang, V. Chikkadi, R. Zargar, D. M. Miedema, D.

Bonn, A. Zaccone and P. Schall submitted.

M¨uller, Phys. Rev. E 58, 6073 (1998).

[46] M. Born and K. Huang, Dynamical Theory of Crystal

[24] T. G. Mason and D. A. Weitz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 2770

Lattices, Oxford University Press, 1954.

12

[47] J.-P. Hansen and I. R. MacDonald, Theory of Simple Liq-

[52] L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Theory of Elasticity,

uids, Academic Press, 2005.

Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1959.

[48] J. K. G. Dhont, An Introduction to Dynamics of Colloids,

[53] G. L. Hunter and E. R. Weeks, Rep. Prog. Phys. 75,

Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1996.

066501 (2012).

[49] N. V. Priezjev, Phys. Rev. E 93, 013001 (2016).
[50] S. Alexander, Phys. Rep. 296, 65 (1998).
[51] R. G. Larson, The Structure and Rheology of Complex

Fluids, Oxford University Press, 1999.

[54] L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Statistical Physics,

Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1958.

