epl draft

6
1
0
2

 

b
e
F
9
2

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
6
7
0
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

New analysis for the correlation between gravitational waves and
neutrino detectors during SN1987A

P.Galeotti1 and G. Pizzella2

1 Dipartimento di Fisica dell’Universit`a di Torino e INFN Sez. di Torino
2 Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare,Laboratori Nazionali di Frascati

PACS 97.60.bw – First pacs description
PACS 95.55.Ym – Second pacs description
PACS 95.55.Vj – Third pacs description

Abstract – The two major problems, still associated with the SN1987A, are: a) the signals
observed with the gravitational waves detectors, b) the duration of the collapse.
Indeed, the
sensitivity of the gravitational wave detectors seems to be small for detecting gravitational waves
and, while some experimental data indicate a duration of order of hours, most theories assume
that the collapse develops in a few seconds. Since recent data of the X-ray NuSTAR satellite show
a clear evidence of an asymmetric collapse, we have revisited the experimental data recorded by
the underground and gravitational wave detectors running during the SN1987A. New evidence is
shown that conﬁrms previous results, namely that the data recorded by the gravitational wave
detectors running in Rome and in Maryland are strongly correlated with the data of both the
Mont Blanc and the Kamiokande detectors, and that the correlation extends over a long period of
time (one or two hours) centered at the Mont Blanc time. This result is obtained by comparing
six independent ﬁles of data recorded by four diﬀerent experiments located at intercontinental
distances. The signals of the GW detectors preceded the signals of the underground detectors by
a time of the order of one second.

Introduction. – SN 1987A was the only supernova
visible at naked eye after the Kepler supernova (1604).
At the time of this event, four underground detectors
(Mont Blanc [1], Baksan [2], Kamiokande [3], IMB [4])
and two gravitational wave antennas (in Rome and in
Maryland) were running. The Mont Blanc Liquid Scin-
tillation Detector (LSD in the following) was the only ex-
periment designed to search for low energy neutrino inter-
actions from stellar collapses (energy threshold ∼5 MeV).
The Baksan Scintillation Telescope (BST in the following)
was a multipurposes cosmic ray detector with an energy
threshold ∼10 MeV. The Kamioka Nucleon Decay Exper-
iment (KND in the following) and the Irvine Michigan
Brookhaven (IMB in the following) experiments (energy
threshold ∼8 MeV and ∼25 MeV respectively) were de-
signed to search for proton decay candidates by observing
the Cerenkov light produced in the detector water by the
particles originated in the decay. These four detectors
were running at diﬀerent depths underground, being the
Mont Blanc LSD located deeper than the others (at the
minimum depth of about 5,200 meters of water equiva-

lent). This implies a much smaller background in LSD as
compared with the other detectors, because of the much
smaller ﬂux of cosmic ray muons interacting in the rock
around the LSD detector that produces a much smaller
background of neutral particles entering inside the detec-
tor and imitating neutrino interactions.

One major problem associated with a supernova explo-
sion is the duration of the inner core collapse. Accord-
ing to most theories of supernova explosion, the collapse
develops in a few seconds but, as we will discuss here,
all the experimental data indicate a duration of order of
hours. One should note that almost all theories do not
take into account core rotation and magnetic ﬁelds, even
if pulsars, i.e. a possible ﬁnal result of the collapse, have
the strongest magnetic ﬁeld and the fastest rotation in
the universe. However, some unconventional models based
on fast rotation and fragmentation of the collapsing core
have been suggested soon after the explosion to explain the
experimental data from neutrino and gravitational waves
detectors [6–9]. But only the recent observations of the
remnant of SN1987A made by NuSTAR (Nuclear Spec-

p-1

F. Author et al.

troscopic Telescope Array, a satellite launched by NASA
on June 2012 to study the X-ray sky) show a clear evi-
dence of an asymmetric collapse [5]. These data, in par-
ticular the high resolution analysis of 44Ti lines, show a
direct evidence of large-scale asymmetry in the explosion:
the massive star exploded in a lopsided fashion, sending
ejected material ﬂying in one direction and the core of the
star in the other. The asymmetry of the explosion is an
essential requirement in support of a collapse in two stages.
At the time of SN1987A, the four underground detec-
tors recorded statistically signiﬁcant signals but not at the
same time, and the origin of this time diﬀerence is still not
well understood, as we will discuss. The Mont Blanc LSD
detector recorded on line, i.e. on real time at the occur-
rence, ﬁve interactions on February 23rd at 2h 52m UT,
one day before the optical discovery of this supernova. The
signal was so clear that as early as a few days later (Febru-
ary 28th) the IAU Circular n. 4323 reporting this detec-
tion was distributed to the astronomical community by the
Central Bureau for Astronomical Telegrams of the Inter-
national Astronomical Union. Several days later, after the
raw data were analyzed and cosmic ray muons subtracted,
KND reported detection of eleven interactions at 7h35m
UT; a later analysis showed a second signiﬁcant burst of
seven interactions at 7h54m UT [10] (not reported in the
original paper by KND). IMB reported the detection of
eight interactions at 7h35m UT, BST of ﬁve interactions
at 7h36m UT and also LSD detected two interactions at
7h36m UT.

Because of the diﬀerent energy thresholds and masses
of these detectors it was clear very soon that there is no
contradiction in the data: the ﬁrst burst could be due to
a large ﬂux of low energy neutrinos and the second one
to a small ﬂux of high energy neutrinos. Indeed the ﬁve
low energy pulses detected by the scintillator of LSD with
visible energies in the range between 5.8 and 7.8 MeV,
correspond to visible energies at the limit to be detected
by KND and BST, and are not detectable by IMB.

Furthermore the gravitational wave detectors in Rome
and Maryland (GWR and GWM respectively in the fol-
lowing) recorded several signals in time coincidence be-
tween them and with the event detected by LSD at 2h52m
UT1. These unusual activity preceded the LSD signals by
1.1-1.2 s, with an absolute systematic error in timing of
the order of 0.5 s. This observation was not expected
because the sensitivity of the interaction of gravitational
waves with the detectors seemed to be too small for de-
tecting gravitational waves presumably produced by this
extragalactic supernova. Indeed the classical cross-section
for the interaction of gravitational waves with matter is far

1We remark that the correlation was observed in two independent
analysis of the data recorded by three diﬀerent detectors running at
intercontinental distances, namely: a ﬁrst analysis (a) among LSD,
Rome and Maryland and a second analysis (b) among Kamiokande,
Rome and Maryland. This crucial point escaped, among others, to
the attention of a critical paper [11] in which they used simulated
data for only two independent ﬁles, one for LSD and the other for
only one GW detector.

below that needed to detect GW [12–14]. However, there
are considerations based on the idea that cooperative ef-
fects might occur in the detector pushing the cross-section
to much larger values [15, 16]. We wish to recall that the
resonant bar gravitational wave detectors are also sensitive
to particles [17], diﬀerent from gravitational waves.

Correlations were also searched for among the various
underground detectors. We recall, in particular, the ex-
traordinary correlation [18, 19] found between LSD and
KND and between LSD and BST during a period of or-
der of 2 hours centered at 2h52m UT. The results of
the correlation analyses among neutrino and gravitational
wave detectors have been described mainly in the papers
[18,20–22] and in the review paper [23] where various cor-
relations among all neutrino and GW detectors were de-
scribed.

in [20],

The correlation algorithm. – This algorithm,
called the net excitation method [11] and described in
detail
is based on the idea to make use of
all available data in underground detectors, and not
only those considered to be produced by neutrino interac-
tions. Here we shall give a brief description of this method
to compare the data available from three independent de-
tectors.

Let us consider ﬁrst the gravitational wave detectors lo-
cated in Rome and in Maryland and the neutrino detector
LSD located deep underground in the Mont Blanc Labo-
ratory. We have three independent ﬁles of data, that we
call events for simplicity, even if we are well aware that
most of these events are just background triggers. Since
we sample the data of the GW antennas every second, in
one hour we have 3600 events for the Rome detector, and
3600 events for the Maryland detector. These events are
all independent one from each other, since the integration
times of the ﬁltering procedures [24] are much smaller than
one second. We have also a variable number of neutrino
events, of order of 50 per hour for the LSD detector, most
of them being triggers due to background local radioactiv-
ity.

Then we compute the sum E(t) =(cid:80)

Obviously the data of these three ﬁles are completely
independent. We consider the sum ERM (t) = ER(t) +
EM (t) where ER and EM are the measured energies (also
called energy innovations, in kelvin units) of the events
obtained with the Rome (RO) and the Maryland (MA)
detectors at the same time t, 3600 values ERM (t) per hour.
i ERM (ti) where ti
is the time of the ith event of the LSD neutrino detector.
The summation is extended over a given time interval (say
one hour) in which Nν events of the neutrino detector
(most of them certainly due to background) are present.
The background for this algorithm is obtained by cal-
j(ER(t1j) + EM (t2j)) at 2Nν times
t1j and t2j chosen randomly within the time interval,
which has a χ2 distribution with many degrees of free-
dom and approaches a gaussian distribution. In one hour
we have many more than 3600 × 3600 independent values

culating E(t1, t2) =(cid:80)

p-2

Title

seconds (see also [26]). If we require that the maximum
correlation occur at the same time (neutrino delay of 1.1
s) of LSD we ﬁnd that we must correct the KND time by
φ = 7.8 − 1.2 + 1.1 = 7.7 seconds.

We now compare the recorded times of the ﬁrst neutrino
signals of KND and IMB. We have for IMB 7h35m41.37s
and for KND 7h35m33.67s for a time diﬀerence of 41, 37−
33.67 = 7.7 second, just our time correction determined
with the net excitation method ! This result may be con-
sidered an additional proof that the KND and IMB did
detect real neutrinos.

While waiting for the next supernova, we have studied
again in more detail the available experimental data in
two distinct cases: a) using the data RO, MA and LSD,
b) using the data RO, MA and KND.

A new striking result. – Among the several correla-
tion analyses done in the past (see the cited literature) one
result [27] appeared very striking to us. We had applied
the net excitation method to periods of one hour, stepped
by 0.1 hour, correlating in a ﬁrst analysis RO, MA, LSD
and, in a second analysis, correlating RO, MA, KND.

It was found that the correlation curves show an ex-
tremely similar behavior: both the RO, MA, LSD and
RO, MA, KND curves have the greatest correlation at the
time of the LSD event. This result, indeed very striking,
was never discussed at length.

However, one objection can be raised, that the two cor-
relation curves are not completely independent, because
some of the RO-MA data used for the correlation with
LSD may have been also employed for the correlation with
KND, since some of the LSD events occur at the same time
of some of the KND events.

In order to obtain correlation curves completely inde-
pendent one from each other,
in this new analysis we
have searched for coincidences between LSD and KND and
eliminated the RO and MA data occurring at these times,
order of a few per hour.

For the correlations GW-neutrino detectors we apply
again the net excitation method, having eliminated from
the LSD and KND lists of events those in coincidence.
Again we have used moving time periods of one-hour
stepped by 0.1 hour. We obtain the result shown in ﬁg.2,
where we have considered a delay of 1.1 s between the
neutrino and the GW signals, as we had done in all our
previous analyses [18, 20]. The elimination of few events
in common between LSD and KND has not changed sub-
stantially the behavior of the two correlation curves with
GWR and GWM, as we ﬁnd by comparing these new re-
sults with those [27] previously published.

We wish to stress that each one of the two curves
has been obtained with independent triple coincidences,
the upper one RO-MA-LSD, the lower one RO-MA-KND.
Similar correlations have been already found and discussed
in our initial papers [18, 20].

In the present case, however, we have eliminated the
coincidences LSD-KND, thus the RO-MA data used for

Fig. 1: The net excitation method applied to a one-hour period
centered at the Mont Blanc time with 106 random extractions
for the background. On the abscissa we report the time shift
1.2+φ s applied to the recorded KND data.

of E(t1, t2).

Since we do not know whether the events we consider are
real signals or background, already in our ﬁrst paper [20]
we stressed that when we talk of g.w. or of neutrinos, we
refer to the events recorded by the corresponding detectors,
without neither presuming nor excluding that a part or all
of these events are actually due to physical g.w. or physical
neutrinos .

Our analysis consists in comparing the value E(t) with
the very large number of background values determined by
considering non coincident signals RO and MA, observed
at times uncorrelated with the neutrino events.
In ab-
sence of any real signal we expect that E(t) be just one of
the many E(t1, t2) background values and, on average, we
expect that half of the background values be larger than
E(t) and half be smaller.

An application of this method has been discussed at
length in [20]. The ﬁg.13 of ref. [20] shows that the max-
imum correlation between the data of LSD and the GW
detectors occurs when the GW data precede the LSD data
by 1.1 s.
With regard to the KND data, the time measurements
have an absolute error of ±1 minute. However the coin-
cidence with the IMB data restricts this error to a few
seconds (see ﬁg.3 of [25]). We have applied the net exci-
tation method also to the KND data obtaining the result
shown in ﬁg.1. We notice that the maximum correlation
between KND and the GW data occurs when we apply to
the recorded time of KND a correction φ of 1.2 + φ = 7.8

p-3

F. Author et al.

Fig. 2: The net excitation method is applied on one-hour time
periods moved in steps of 0.1 hour from 0 to 8 hours of 23
February, reported on the abscissa scale. As in our previous
analyses [18,20] we have introduced a delay of 1.1 s between the
neutrino and the GW signals. On the ordinate scale we show
the number of times, out of 106 or 105, the GW background
determinations are greater than the GW energy innovation ob-
tained in correspondence of the neutrino events.

Fig. 3: On the ordinate scale we show the probability pi that
the two correlation curves (RO-MA-LSD and RO-MA-KND),
calculated over periods of one-hour, stepped by 0.1 hour, give
at each step similar probability values. The arrow indicates
the time 2h52m UT of the ﬁrst real neutrino interaction in the
burst of ﬁve real events observed in the LSD experiment. The
dashed line indicates the expected value in the case of absence
of correlation.

the upper curve are diﬀerent from those used for the
lower curve and we notice that the two correlations are
still amazingly similar. This result again supports the idea
that the supernova phenomenon lasted much more than a
few seconds2.

For calculating the probability that the result of ﬁg.2
was obtained by chance we consider the ith one-hour time
periods. The corresponding probabilities that the correla-
tion for LSD or KND occurred by chance are n
105 ,
where n is the value on the ordinate axis of ﬁg.2. Since
the correlation GW-KND is due to data independent from
the data for the correlation GW-LSD we can multiply the
two modiﬁed [28] independent probabilities

106 and n

nLSD

106 × nKN D

105

)]

nLSD

106 × nKN D

105 × [1 − loge(

pi =

(1)
In the case of random numbers we should have pi = 0.5 ×
0.5(1 − loge(0.5 × 0.5)) = 0.60. The neighbor one-hour
time periods, stepped by 0.1 hour, are not independent
one from each other. We plot the result in ﬁg.3 that gives
a quantitative estimation of the probability that the two

2That the phenomenon could have lasted much longer [6, 8, 9] is
also supported by the fact that the Kamiokande data, in addition to
the strong burst of eleven interactions detected at 7:35:41 UT, also
show a second, rare and strong seven-pulses burst, never disclosed,
recorded at 7:54:22 UT of the same day [10], i.e. about 20 minutes
later.

correlations (RO-MA-LSD and RO-MA-KND) occurred at
the same time.

This ﬁgure shows very clearly an extremely signiﬁcant
peak at the time of the Mont Blanc LSD burst of 5 inter-
actions observed at 2h52mUT, with a probability order of
10−6-10−7 to be due to a random ﬂuctuation.

We have considered periods of one hour as done in the
past. In order to increase the time resolution we try to
use periods of 30 minutes. The result is amazing and is
shown in ﬁgures 4 and 5. We note that the best combined
correlation occurs just at the time of the LSD burst of 5
interactions.

The result, shown in ﬁgures 4 and 5, is amazing and
extremely important to understand the physics of the col-
lapse, because the best combined correlation occurs pre-
cisely at the time of the LSD burst of ﬁve neutrino inter-
actions, i.e. 4.7 hours before a second burst detected by
the other underground detectors.

Discussion. – Since one of the comments we have
often received in the past was that the LSD event is a
statistical ﬂuctuation in the data, a noise , here again we
stress that the Mont Blanc LSD signal is not only self con-
sistent, but additionally supported by all the experiments
running at that time, as shown in ﬁgs. 2, 3, 4 and 5 and by
the previous LSD KND and LSD BST correlation analyses

p-4

Title

Fig. 4: The net excitation method is applied on 30-minutes
time periods moved in steps of 0.1 hour from 0 to 8 hours
UT of 23rd February, shown on the abscissa scale. As in our
previous analyses [18, 20] we have introduced a delay of 1.1 s
between the neutrino and the GW signals. On the ordinate
scale we show the number of times, out of 106 or 105 , the GW
background determinations are greater than the GW energy
innovation obtained in correspondence of the neutrino events.

Fig. 5: On the ordinate scale we show the probability pi that
the two correlation curves (RO-MA-LSD and RO-MA-KND),
calculated over periods of 30-minutes, stepped by 0.1 hour, give
similar probability values at each step. The arrow indicates the
time 2h52m UT of the ﬁrst real neutrino interaction (out of ﬁve)
observed by the LSD collaboration. The dashed line indicates
the expected value in the case of absence of correlation..

[18, 19].

We want to stress again that these new results have
been obtained by comparing six independent ﬁles of
events recorded in four diﬀerent experimental apparatuses
located at intercontinental distances one from the other,
furthermore exactly during the explosion of the only su-
pernova visible at naked eye since 1604.

In more than thirty years of data taking from January
1985 in the Mont Blanc Laboratory with the LSD Experi-
ment, and from June 1992 to nowadays in the Gran Sasso
Underground Laboratory with the Large Volume Detector
(LVD) with a mass of 1000 tons of liquid scintillator, no
evidence of neutrino signals has been found [29] a part the
event printed on line in the night of February 23rd, 1987,
that could be a noise, but with very low probability. We
conclude that the chance that the results here discussed
are due to a statistical ﬂuctuation in the data is so small
that a deep discussion is imposed, and we feel forced to
try to ﬁnd a possible explanation, even if this costs the
use of a collapse scenario diﬀerent from the presently a la
page scenarios.

Among the neutrino events observed in the neutrino de-
tectors very few have been attributed, by the researchers,
to real neutrino interactions. However in our algorithm
we make use of additional signals, other than those recog-

nized as due to neutrino events. In our attempt to explain
the experimental result described in this paper we suggest
that many signals among those considered background (we
recall a background with a counting rate per hour of about
ﬁfty for LSD and more than one hundred for KND) are
real events due to neutrinos (or to any other exotic parti-
cles) that were not identiﬁed because of their low energy
and not grouped in a burst.

It is even more diﬃcult to understand the cause of the
signals in the GW detectors. As well known the predicted
(but never measured) classical cross section of the bar-
detectors for GW is at least one thousand times smaller
than what would be needed to interpret the signals as due
to GW, unless cooperative mechanisms are active in the
bars, as already indicated in the Introduction [15, 16], or
we were so lucky to intercept beamed ﬂuxes of gravita-
tional waves. However we believe that we must not dis-
card experimental results simply because we do not have
a model, or even an explanation for them. Again we feel
we must proceed in our attempt to explain what it is, in
any case, an extraordinary experimental result.

There are still two crucial points to be discussed. The
ﬁrst one is the time lag in the correlation between the
GW and the neutrino detectors, and the second point is
the astrophysical scenario of the supernova explosion. As
far as the ﬁrst point is concerned, we have found a time lag
of 1.1 s . The absolute time error for the GW apparatus in

p-5

F. Author et al.

Maryland is of the order of 0.1 s, while the absolute time
error for the GW apparatus in Rome has been discussed
at length in paper [20]. We can have a possible systematic
error of 0.5 s at most, which would reduce the time lag
to about 0.6 s. The UT time of LSD is measured by a
clock with an absolute time error of 2 ms. The absolute
time error for KND is 1 minute (more than enough for a
proton decay experiment) so that, in our analysis, we have
corrected the timing of the KND data by assuming that
the two bursts at 7h 35m UT of KND and IMB (whose
clock precision is 5 ms) start at the same time.

In conclusion, we ﬁnd a non-zero time gap between the
GW and the underground detectors. To explain this gap
it is necessary that the particles responsible for the signals
in the GW detectors be emitted by the star 1.1 s (or 0.6
s) before the particles detected in the neutrino detectors,
or that they are emitted simultaneously but the particles
interacting with the neutrino detectors have a larger mass
and arrive later. In both cases we must imagine that the
collapse mechanism be such that the two types of particles
be emitted more or less simultaneously during a period of
one or two hours.

Since the two neutrino bursts detected at 2h52m UT
and 7h35m UT extend over a few seconds (7 s for LSD
and 10 s for KND) at diﬀerent times we are forced to con-
sider the following scenario:
a) during several hours particles and perhaps gravitational
waves are emitted by SN1987A,
b) the 7 s burst in LSD and the 10 s burst in KND are
due to events which have been detected because recorded in
a short time interval and because of their higher energy,
c) the long lasting correlation with the GW detectors is due
to massive neutrinos (or to exotic particles) with lower
energy, not identiﬁed from the background because not
grouped together but distributed over long times.

Even if it seems diﬃcult to attribute the signals of the
GW detectors to real gravitational waves or to particles,
the recent observation of NuSTAR, [5] mentioned in the in-
troduction, shows a direct evidence of a large-scale asym-
metry in the explosion:
the massive star exploded in a
lopsided fashion, sending ejected material ﬂying in one di-
rection and the core of the star in the other. This exper-
imental result not only is an important evidence of the
fragmentation of the core, that involves a long duration of
the collapse [8, 9], but it is also an essential requirement
for the emission of gravitational waves, eventually along a
narrow beam as it happens for optical or radio emission
of pulsars. Finally, we have the experimental informa-
tion that the collapse was asymmetric, a very important
information to understand the mechanism of the collaps-
ing inner core of the massive blue supergiants Sanduleak
-69.202.

Conclusion. – We remark that the great similarity
between the correlations of the GW data with LSD and
with KND shown in ﬁgs.2 and 4, with a probability, quan-
tiﬁed in ﬁgs.3 and 5, lower than one in one million, to

be occurred by chance just at the time of the LSD ﬁve-
neutrino interactions, adds up to all previous correlation
analyses published in the above literature and induces us
to think that they cannot be due to chance.

We conclude that this new analysis of the experimental
data obtained with the gravitational waves and neutrino
detectors, strongly enforces the idea that between 2 and 4
hours UT of 23rd February 1987 both the neutrino and the
GW bar-detectors were invested by intense ﬂuxes of parti-
cles and ﬁelds presumably originating from the SN1987A.
As well known, higher ﬂuxes of particles continued until
7.35 UT not detected by the gravitational waves detectors
and with only two interactions detected by the LSD exper-
iment al 7h 36 m UT. Obviously, something has changed in
the structure and dynamics of the collapsing core in this
4.7 hours time interval between the ﬁrst neutrino burst
and the second.

Acknowledgment. – We dedicate this research-
paper to Edoardo Amaldi, Carlo Castagnoli, Joseph We-
ber and George T. Zatsepin for their pursuing in fore-
front research and for their contribution to the realization
of gravitational and neutrino detectors. We thank the
Kamiokande Collaboration for having supplied to us their
data. We thank Ugo Amaldi, Giovanni Vittorio Pallot-
tino and Francesco Ronga for useful discussions and sug-
gestions.

REFERENCES

[1] M. Aglietta et al. Europhys. Lett., 3, 1315 (1987).
[2] E. N. Alekseev et al Phys. Lett. B205 (1988) 209-214
[3] K. S. HIirata et al.: Phys.Rev.Lett.58, 1940 (1987)
[4] R. M. Bionta et al.: Phys. Rev. Lett., 58, 1494 (1987).
[5] S.E. Boggs et al., Science, 348, 670, (2015)
[6] A.DeRujula, Phys.Lett. B193,514 (1987)
[7] L.Stella and A.Treves, Astronomy and Astrophysics,

185,L5-L6 (1987)

[8] V.S. Berezinsky, C. Castagnoli, V. I. Dokuchaev , P Ga-

leotti ,
Nuovo Cimento C11,287-303 (1988)

[9] V.S.Imshennik and O.G.Ryashskaya, Astronomy Letters,

30,14-31 (2004)

[10] P. Galeotti and G. Pizzella, XII-th International Work-

shop on Neutrino Telescope,
Venice, 6-9 March 2007, arXiv:0706.2235

[11] C.A. Dickson and B.F. Schutz, Phys.Rev.D51 2644-2668

(1995)

[12] R.Ruﬃni and J.A.Wheeler Relativistic cosmology and

space platforms
Proc. of ESRO Colloquium, Interlaken (1969)

[13] S.Weinberg ”Gravitation and Cosmology”

John Wiley and Sons, Inc. New Kork (1972)

[14] G.Pizzella, Rivista del Nuovo Cimento 5 ,369 (1975)
[15] G.Preparata, Modern Physics Lett. A, 5 (1), 1-5, (1990)
[16] R.Sisto and A.Moleti, Int. J. Mod. Phys. D 13, 625 (2004)
[17] P. Astone et al.. Astropart.Phys. 30, 200 (2008)
[18] M.Aglietta et al., Nuovo Cimento C14 , 171-193 (1991)

p-6

Title

[19] A.E.Chudakov, Texas Symposium on Relativistic Astro-

physics
Volume 571 577-583, (1989)

[20] M.Aglietta et al., Nuovo Cimento C12, 75,(1989)
[21] E.Amaldi et al., LA THUILE Results and Perspectives in

Particle Physics,
59-68 (1999)

[22] E.Amaldi et al., Europhys. Lett. 3 , 1325-1330 (1987)
[23] G.Pizzella, Correlation among Gravitational Wave and

Neutrino Detectors Data during SN1987A
Jubilee Volume in Honour of Nathan Rosen. Editors: F.I.
Cooperstock, L.P. Horowitz and J. Rosen. (1990)
[24] P.Bonifazi et al. Nuovo: Cimento C1,465 (1978).
[25] D.N.Schramm, Neutrinos from Supernova SN 1987a Jun
1987 - 40 pages Comments Nucl.Part.Phys. 17 239-278
(1987)
FERMILAB-PUB-87-091-A

[26] E.Amaldi et al., Texas Symposium on Relativistic Astro-

physics
pages 561-576 (1989)

[27] see for instance: G.Pizzella. Edoardo Amaldi and the
Search for Gravitational Waves Italian Phys.Soc.Proc.
100.31-58 (2010)
Conference: C08-10-23.2 Proceedings
G.Pizzella, Quaderni di Storia della Fisica, n.7, pag 115-
122, Societ`a Italiana di Fisica (2000).
[28] B.P.Roe, Probability and Statistics

in Experimental

Physics, Springer pag.164 (2001)

[29] N.Y. Agafonova et al., The astrophysical Journal 802,47

(2015)

p-7

