6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
6
1

 
 
]
t
f
o
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
1
8
0
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Criteria for extensional necking instability in complex ﬂuids and soft solids:

imposed Hencky strain rate protocol.

D. M. Hoyle∗ and S. M. Fielding†

Department of Physics, University of Durham, Science Laboratories,

South Road, Durham, DH1 3LE, United Kingdom

(Dated: March 17, 2016)

We study theoretically the necking dynamics of a ﬁlament of complex ﬂuid or soft solid in uniaxial
tensile stretching at constant imposed Hencky strain rate ˙, by means of linear stability analysis and
nonlinear (slender ﬁlament) simulations. We demonstrate necking to be an intrinsic ﬂow instability
that arises as an inevitable consequence of the constitutive behaviour of essentially any material
(with a possible rare exception, which we outline), however carefully controlled the experimental
conditions. We derive criteria for the onset of necking that are reportable simply in terms of
characteristic signatures in the shapes of the experimentally measured rheological response functions,
and should therefore apply universally to all materials. As evidence of their generality, we show
them to hold numerically in six popular constitutive models: the Oldroyd B, Giesekus, FENE-CR,
Rolie-Poly and Pom-pom models of polymeric ﬂuids, and a ﬂuidity model of soft glassy materials.
Two distinct modes of necking instability are predicted. The ﬁrst is relatively gentle, and sets in
when the tensile stress signal ﬁrst curves downward as a function of the time t (or accumulated strain
 = ˙t) since the inception of the ﬂow. The second is more violent, and sets in when a carefully
deﬁned ‘elastic derivative’ of the tensile force ﬁrst slopes down as a function of t (or ˙).
In the
limit of fast ﬂow ˙τ → ∞, where τ is the material’s characteristic stress relaxation time, this second
mode reduces to the Consid`ere criterion for necking in solids. However we show that the Consid`ere
criterion fails to correctly predict the onset of necking in any viscoelastic regime of ﬁnite imposed
˙τ , despite being widely discussed in the complex ﬂuids literature. Finally, we elucidate in detail the
way in which these modes of instability manifest themselves in entangled polymeric ﬂuids (linear
polymers, wormlike micelles and branched polymers). In particular we demonstrate four distinct
regimes of necking behaviour as a function of imposed strain rate, consistent with master curves in
the experimental literature.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Extensional ﬂows provide a crucial benchmark for con-
stitutive theories of the rheology of complex ﬂuids. Un-
der conditions of constant imposed Hencky strain rate,
material elements separate exponentially quickly and so
subject the ﬂuid’s underlying microstructure (polymer
chains, wormlike micelles, etc.) to much more severe reor-
ganisation than is typically experienced in shear. In con-
sequence, many nonlinear ﬂow features manifest them-
selves only in extension: e.g., the extensional strain hard-
ening exhibited by many polymeric ﬂuids. Extensional
ﬂows are therefore highly sensitive to the underlying ﬂuid
microstructure, and prove important in discriminating
between competing constitutive theories.

Key aims of any constitutive model are to predict a
ﬂuid’s stress response as a function of applied strain his-
tory (or vice versa), in both shear and extension. In the
literature, many theoretical calculations make the sim-
plifying assumption that the ﬂow ﬁeld remains spatially
uniform in any given ﬂow protocol. In practice this as-
sumption may prove valid, to good approximation, in
some region of a carefully designed ﬂow cell. Near uni-
form simple shear may obtain in a narrow gap Couette
device, for example. Likewise a region of near uniform
extension may obtain in the vicinity of the central stag-
nation point of a cross slot device [29, 32].

However for many complex ﬂuids, in many ﬂow sit-
uations, conditions of uniform rheometric ﬂow prove

unattainable – or at least unsustainable – as a matter
of fundamental principle, even in the most carefully de-
signed ﬂow devices, as an unavoidable consequence of
a ﬂow instability inherent to the ﬂuid’s constitutive re-
sponse. Under an imposed shear, for example, the phe-
nomenon of shear banding arises widely as a consequence
of a ﬂow instability associated with a regime of nega-
tive slope in the underlying constitutive curve of shear
stress as a function of shear rate. When performing cal-
culations to compare with bulk measurements, it is then
crucial to take this heterogeneity into account by remov-
ing any assumption of uniform ﬂow in the calculations.
Experimentally, spatially resolved velocimetry becomes
necessary to ascertain the local constitutive response in
each band separately.

To characterise a ﬂuid’s extensional rheology, a com-
mon experiment consists of stretching out in length an
initially undeformed cylindrical ﬁlament (or rectangular
sheet) of the material. For a review of ﬁlament stretching
techniques, see [48] and references therein. In stretching
at constant imposed Hencky strain rate ˙, the extensional
stress growth coeﬃcient η+
E (t, ˙) records the extensional
(tensile) stress σ+
E (t, ˙), normalised by ˙, as a function
of the time t (or accumulated strain  = ˙t) since the
inception of the ﬂow. If this quantity can be measured
to steady state, in some part of the sample at least, the
steady tensile stress plotted as a function of applied strain
rate, obtained in a series of stretching experiments per-
formed at diﬀerent strain rates, then gives the extensional

constitutive curve, or ﬂow curve, σE( ˙).

Another common protocol comprises stretching a ﬁla-
ment at constant tensile stress σE [50–52]. This typically
allows a ﬂuid to attain a steady ﬂow more quickly than
under conditions of constant strain rate, giving readier
access to the constitutive curve [1]. Stretching at con-
stant tensile force F provides a more natural mimic of
some industrial processes, such as ﬁbre spinning [65, 70].
Even in the most carefully controlled ﬁlament stretch-
ing experiments, however, almost ubiquitously observed
is the onset of heterogeneous deformation. Typically (in
a ﬁlament stretching rheometer at least) the central re-
gion of the ﬁlament, furthest from the sample ends, de-
velops a higher strain rate than the globally applied one
and thins more quickly than the sample as a whole. This
eventually causes the ﬁlament to fail altogether, aborting
the experimental run. It has been seen in linear polymers
[7], branched polymers [13, 41], associative polymers [67],
wormlike micelles [9], bubble rafts [3], and dense colloidal
suspensions [62]. It arises in all common stretching pro-
tocols, including at constant tensile stress [2], constant
applied Hencky strain rate [13, 44], and following a ﬁnite
Hencky strain ramp [74]).

Two qualitatively diﬀerent modes of failure are widely
reported [6, 8, 71–73].
In slow stretching, failure typi-
cally occurs via a process of ductile necking in which the
variations in cross sectional area that develop along the
ﬁlament’s length are relatively gradual. Faster stretch-
ing experiments typically cause more dramatic failure in
which the sample suddenly ‘ruptures’ or ‘fractures’.

Experimentally, the occurrence of necking (or rupture)
presents a signiﬁcant technical challenge to characterising
a material’s extensional rheology. This is true even before
the ﬁlament ﬁnally fails, because the ﬂow ﬁeld becomes
heterogeneous and therefore renders the measurement of
a material’s local, homogeneous material response func-
tions more challenging.
In particular, the extensional
strain rate in the necking part of the sample increases
above the globally applied one in a manner that is a pri-
ori unpredictable. A comparison of experimental data
with the results of calculations that assume a homoge-
neous ﬂow therefore becomes much more diﬃcult.

To overcome this diﬃculty, feedback strategies have
been developed that monitor the strain rate in the neck-
ing region and responsively reduce the globally applied
strain accordingly, to keep the strain rate in the neck
temporally constant. Knowledge of the tensile force di-
vided by the local area in the neck then gives the time-
dependent local tensile stress at the given,
feedback-
controlled constant local strain rate [1, 5, 61]. Such tech-
niques can be thought of as the counterpart in extensional
rheometry of performing spatially resolved velocimetry
in shear banded ﬂows, with the additional feature of ac-
tively controlling the ﬂow by feedback. However success-
ful such strategies in temporarily stabilising a constant
strain rate in the neck, though, the necking instability it-
self cannot be avoided by such techniques, being intrinsic
to the material’s constitutive behaviour.

2

With this experimental backdrop in mind, the aim of
this work is to study theoretically the onset of necking in
ﬁlament stretching of complex ﬂuids and soft solids under
conditions of constant imposed Hencky strain rate. (In a
separate manuscript[31], we consider necking at constant
imposed tensile stress or tensile force.) Starting with a
time-dependent “base state” corresponding to a uniform
cylinder being stretched, we perform a linear stability
analysis for the dynamics of (initially) small perturba-
tions in the cylinder’s cross sectional area, to determine
the onset of necking. We then perform nonlinear simu-
lations to elucidate the dynamics once the necking het-
erogeneity has attained a ﬁnite amplitude, beyond the
linear regime. For deﬁniteness we consider a cylindrical
ﬁlament in uniaxial stretching, though the criteria that
we shall derive also apply to planar extension.

Our objectives are threefold. First, we seek to demon-
strate the phenomenon of necking to be a ﬂow instability
that arises as an inevitable consequence of the consti-
tutive behaviour of essentially any complex ﬂuid or soft
solid, however carefully controlled the experimental con-
ditions, unavoidably leading to a heterogeneous exten-
sional ﬂow ﬁeld along the ﬁlament. (In this sense, neck-
ing can be viewed as an extensional counterpart of the
banding instability that is widely seen in shear.)

Second, we derive criteria for the onset of necking that
are universal to all complex ﬂuids and soft solids, and
are reportable simply in terms of characteristic signa-
tures in the shapes of the experimentally measured ma-
terial response functions of tensile stress σ+
E and/or ten-
sile force F as a function of the time (or accumulated
strain) since the inception of the ﬂow. We shall ﬁrst
derive these by means of analytical linear stability calcu-
lations performed within a constitutive model of a highly
generalised form. We then conﬁrm their generality by
numerical simulations in six concrete choices of constitu-
tive model: the phenomenological Oldroyd B, Giesekus
and FENE-CR models; the microscopically motivated
Rolie-Poly model of entangled linear polymers and worm-
like micelles; the Pom-pom model of entangled branched
polymers; and a simpliﬁed ﬂuidity model of soft glassy
materials (foams, emulsions, dense colloids, microgels,
etc.), which display a yield stress and rheological ageing
[15, 26, 63].

Third, we seek to elucidate the way in which our uni-
versal criteria manifest themselves in those three major
classes of complex ﬂuids:
in entangled linear polymers
and wormlike micelles; in entangled branched polymers;
and in soft glassy materials.
In the context of entan-
gled polymers, a particular objective is to demonstrate
the tube theory of polymer rheology, with chain stretch
and convective constraint release, to be capable of cap-
turing all the features of a widely discussed experimental
master-curve of the strain at which a sample fails as a
function of imposed strain rate.
In ageing soft glassy
materials, we demonstrate that the sample fails by one
of two qualitatively diﬀerent modes of necking, according
to the sample age at the time stretching commences.

Commonly discussed in the literature as a predictor for
the onset of necking is the Consid`ere criterion [18, 57].
This predicts necking to set in when the tensile force at-
tains a maximum as a function of the accumulated strain,
then subsequently declines. It was originally put forward
in the context of solid mechanics, for which it is indeed
appropriate to take the accumulated strain  as the only
relevant deformation variable. For a complex ﬂuid, how-
ever, also crucial is the strain rate ˙ at which stretching
is performed, relative to the inverse characteristic relax-
ation time 1/τ of the ﬂuid in question. In view of this
there is no reason, a priori, for the Consid`ere criterion
to apply to complex ﬂuids. Indeed, our calculations will
demonstrate that it performs poorly in predicting the on-
set of necking at low to moderate imposed strain rates
(compared to 1/τ ). It does, however, compare quite well
with experiments [6, 7] and simulations [28, 47] at high
strain rates ˙. Indeed this is to be expected, because vis-
coelastic ﬂuids tend towards a solid-like response in the
regime ˙τ (cid:29) 1. In important contrast, the criteria for the
onset of necking oﬀered in this work are valid not only
in this fast ﬂow regime, but apply across the full range
of ﬂow rates from slow to fast. We shall also demon-
strate the way in which one of our criteria reduces to the
Consid`ere criterion in the limit of fast ﬂow ˙τ → ∞.

An early insightful attempt to consider the importance
of both strain and strain rate in the onset of necking can
be found in [33]. Stability analyses were later performed
for Newtonian and Maxwell ﬂuids in[36], and in the Ol-
droyd B and FENE-CR models in [55, 56]. A scaling
theory based on a critical recoverable strain was put for-
ward in [37, 38]. An empirical criterion for rupture was
oﬀered in [43]. Direct numerical simulations of necking
have been performed within constitutive models of poly-
mers [11, 48, 59], wormlike micelles [19], and amorphous
elastoplastic solids [23].

The criteria that we discuss in what follows were ﬁrst
outlined in [25] in the context of polymeric ﬂuids and in
[30] in the context of soft glassy materials respectively.
The purpose of the present manuscript is to give a much
more detailed explanation of the criteria announced in
those earlier Letters, and comprehensive numerical evi-
dence supporting them.

Our focus will be on the onset of necking in a highly vis-
coelastic ﬁlament of suﬃciently large radius that bulk vis-
coelastic stresses dominate surface eﬀects. Accordingly,
we set the surface tension to zero in most of our calcula-
tions. We therefore do not address capillary breakup as
studied in CaBeR rheometers [10, 17, 46, 65, 66, 68, 75].
However, towards the end of the paper we shall return to
incorporate surface tension and show that it aﬀects our
results only in the regime of very slow strain rates.

All our calculations are performed within a slender ﬁl-
ament approximation in which the wavelengths of any
variations along the ﬁlament’s length are taken as long
compared to the ﬁlament radius. Our approach there-
fore cannot capture the details of the ﬁnal pinchoﬀ of
any neck, nor can it capture a rupture mode in which

3

the ﬁlament sharply rips across its cross section. Such
phenomena are deferred to future study.

So far, we have discussed the onset of a heterogeneous
proﬁle along the ﬁlament in terms of a true material in-
stability (necking). It is important to note, however, that
even before a true necking instability arises, some nar-
rowing of the central region of the ﬁlament relative to
that near each endplate is to be expected because of the
boundary condition that prevents the ﬂuid from slipping
at the plates, and therefore prevents those parts of the
sample nearest the plates from being properly stretched.
We shall discuss the way in which this initial heterogene-
ity induced by the ﬂow geometry acts as a seed for the
true material necking instability.

The paper is structured as follows. We start in Sec. II
with a preamble concerning measures of extensional force
and stress that are commonly reported in the experi-
mental literature. In Sec. III we discuss the constitutive
models and ﬂow protocol to be studied throughout the
paper. In Sec. IV we outline in general terms the proce-
dure of our linear stability analysis for the onset of neck-
ing. In Sec. V we use this analysis, within a constitutive
model of highly general form, to derive ﬂuid-universal
criteria for the onset of two qualitatively diﬀerent modes
of necking instability. We discuss the rheological signa-
ture of these modes in the form of characteristic features
in the shapes of the material response functions plotted
versus the time (or accumulated strain) since the incep-
tion of the ﬂow. To conﬁrm the validity of these general
criteria, we then perform in Sec. VI numerical calcula-
tions of the linearised necking dynamics within six widely
used constitutive models and show the criteria to indeed
hold within them. We further discuss in more detail the
way the criteria manifest themselves in three important
classes of complex ﬂuid: entangled linear polymers and
wormlike micelles, entangled branched polymers, and soft
glasses. In Sec. VII we perform nonlinear simulations to
study the dynamics once the neck has developed to attain
a ﬁnite amplitude. Sec. VIII contains our conclusions.

II. MEASURES OF FORCE AND STRESS

Key variables measured as a function of the time t
(or accumulated strain  = ˙t) during ﬁlament stretching
at constant imposed Hencky strain rate ˙ are the tensile
force F (t), and the tensile stress, i.e., the tensile force per
unit cross sectional area. In fact three diﬀerent tensile
stress measures are commonly reported experimentally,
according to which area variable is used in the denomi-
nator:

(a) The engineering stress is deﬁned at any time t as
the force F (t) normalised by the cross sectional area,
A, of the ﬁlament at the start of the run, σ+
E,eng(t) =
F (t)/A(0). Further dividing this by the constant value
of the imposed Hencky strain rate gives the engineering
stress growth coeﬃcient η+
It is
important to note, however, that this quantity does not

E,eng(t) = F (t)/A(0) ˙.

A Mass balance and force balance

4

properly characterise the tensile stress, because it does
not allow for the ﬁlament’s (on average) exponentially
decreasing cross sectional area A(t) = A(0) exp(−) as a
function of the accumulating strain . In fact, the engi-
neering stress should properly be recognised as a measure
of the time-dependence of the tensile force, normalised by
the initial area A(0).

(b) The apparent tensile stress is deﬁned at any time
t as the force F (t) normalised by the cross sectional
area Ahom(t) = A(0)L(0)/L(t) = A(0) exp(−), as cal-
culated by supposing that the ﬁlament has remained
perfectly uniform up to that time, without any neck-
ing yet having occurred. This gives an apparent stress
σ+
E,app(t) = F (t)/Ahom(t) and a corresponding apparent
stress growth coeﬃcient η+
E,app(t) = F (t)/ ˙Ahom(t). As
a measure of the tensile stress this is a signiﬁcant im-
provement on the engineering stress, in accounting for
the overall exponential decrease in the ﬁlament’s cross
sectional area. However it still does not properly report
the tensile stress once necking occurs, because the cross
sectional area then varies along the ﬁlament’s length.

(c) The true tensile stress at any time t and location z
along the ﬁlament’s length is deﬁned as the force F (t) di-
vided by the actual cross sectional area of the ﬁlament at
that point, A(z, t), giving σ+
E (z, t) = F (t)/A(z, t). (Note
that although the stress may vary as a function of posi-
tion along the ﬁlament’s length, the force must remain
uniform by force balance at the low Reynolds number
ﬂows of interest here.) The corresponding true stress
growth coeﬃcient η+
E (z, t) = F (t)/ ˙A(z, t). To track the
evolution of this quantity at some location z requires not
only a measurement of the tensile force, but also of the
evolving cross sectional area at that location [1, 5, 60].

In seeking to compare our numerical results with ex-
perimental data, we shall sometimes show data for the
apparent stress growth coeﬃcient η+
E,app(t), to make con-
tact with experiments that do not explicitly track the
eﬀect of necking on the cross sectional area; and some-
times for the true stress growth coeﬃcient η+
E (zmid, t), to
make contact with experiments that do track the time-
evolution of the cross sectional area in the developing
neck. We use the value zmid = L(t)/2 because in all our
simulations the neck develops at the ﬁlament’s midpoint.

III. MODELS AND FLOW GEOMETRY

A. Mass balance and force balance

We write the total stress T (r, t) at time t in a ﬂuid
element at position r as the sum of a viscoelastic con-
tribution Σ(r, t) from the internal ﬂuid microstructure
(polymer chains, wormlike micelles, emulsion droplets,
etc.), a Newtonian contribution of viscosity η, and an
isotropic contribution with a pressure p(r, t):

T = Σ + 2ηD − pI.

(III.1)

The Newtonian contribution may arise from the pres-
ence of a solvent, and/or from any polymeric (or other
viscoelastic) degrees of freedom considered fast enough
not to be ascribed their own dynamics. The symmetric
2 (K + KT ) where Kαβ = ∂βvα
strain rate tensor D = 1
and v(r, t) is the ﬂuid velocity ﬁeld.

We consider the creeping ﬂow limit of zero Reynolds
number, in which the condition of force balance requires
the stress ﬁeld T (r, t) to be divergence free:

∇ · T = 0.

(III.2)

The pressure ﬁeld p(r, t) is determined by the condition
that the ﬂow remains incompressible:

∇ · v = 0.

(III.3)

B. Constitutive models

The viscoelastic stress Σ is speciﬁed by a constitutive
model for the ﬂuid in question. In this work we consider
six widely used constitutive models. These are set out in
Appendix A, along with values of any model parameters
used in our numerical studies. While inevitably diﬀering
in their detailed form, all of them have the same general
structure, which we now outline.

The viscoelastic stress

Σ = GS(W , λ, Q,··· )

(III.4)

is the product of a constant modulus G and a dimen-
sionless tensorial function S of a microstructural confor-
mation tensor W , together with any other microscopic
variables relevant to the ﬂuid under consideration. (We
list these here simply as λ, Q,··· . For further details,
see Appendix A.) For a polymeric (or wormlike micellar)
ﬂuid, the conformation tensor W could encode the en-
semble average dyad of the end-to-end vector of a chain
or subchain, depending on the level of description. For
an emulsion or foam, it could encode the ensemble av-
erage dyad of the interfacial normals. The dynamics of
the conformation tensor is then speciﬁed by a diﬀerential
equation of the general form

∂tW + v.∇W = f (∇v, W , λ, Q··· ),

(III.5)

with counterpart scalar equations for the dynamics of
λ, Q,··· , of the same diﬀerential form.

The governing equations of the six constitutive models
studied in this work, all of which conform to this general
structure, are set out in Appendix A. Among the these
models, the Oldroyd B [39] and FENE-CR [16] models
provide phenomenological descriptions for the dynamics
of the conformation tensor W in dilute polymer solutions
(with no additional variables λ, Q,··· ). The Giesekus
model [39] is a generalisation of Oldroyd B, aimed at
modelling more concentrated polymeric ﬂuids.

For a microscopically motivated description of more
concentrated solutions or melts of entangled linear poly-
mers, we use the Rolie-Poly model[40]. This also recovers

C Units and parameter values.

5

the reptation-reaction model [14] of wormlike micelles for
a particular choice of model parameters. It is based on
the tube theory of Doi and Edwards [21], whereby a poly-
mer chain (or wormlike micelle) is dynamically restricted
by a conﬁning tube of topological entanglements with the
surrounding chains. The chain then refreshes its conﬁg-
uration by a process of 1D curvilinear diﬀusion along the
tube contour, known as reptation. Later added to this
basic description were the additional dynamical processes
of chain stretch relaxation and convective constraint re-
lease [34, 35, 45] (CCR), in which the relaxation of the
stretch of a test chain has the eﬀect of also relaxing en-
tanglement points, thereby facilitating the relaxation of
tube orientation. The Rolie-Poly model [40] incorporates
these three dynamical process into a diﬀerential consti-
tutive equation for the dynamics of W , as set out in
Appendix A.

For a microscopically motivated description of entan-
gled long-chain branched polymers we use the Pom-pom
model [12, 49]. Here the presence of polymeric arms
branching oﬀ each end of a polymer molecule’s main
backbone inhibits the reptation of that backbone and
promotes its stretching between the branch-points. The
Pom-pom model speciﬁes dynamics of the conformation
W of the backbone, and of the degree of backbone
stretch, λ.

Finally we consider a phenomenological ﬂuidity model
of a broad class of disordered soft ‘glassy’ materi-
als (foams, dense emulsions, colloids, microgels, etc.)
[15, 26, 63]. Common to all these are the features of struc-
tural disorder (in a dense packing of emulsion droplets,
for example) and metastability (with the large energy
barriers involved in stretching soap ﬁlms inhibiting rear-
rangements of the droplets). These glassy features give
rise to rheological ageing, in which a sample becomes pro-
gressively more solid-like as a function of the time elapsed
since it was prepared. The sustained application of ﬂow
however halts ageing and rejuvenates the sample to a
steady state with an eﬀective age set by the inverse ﬂow
rate. The ﬂow curve displays a yield stress in the limit of
slow ﬂow. As outlined in Appendix A, our ﬂuidity model
speciﬁes the dynamics of a tensor W characterising the
conformation of the droplet interfaces, and of the total
interfacial area Q. Also speciﬁed is an evolution equa-
tion for the ageing stress relaxation time τ . We have also
checked that our results for the ﬂuidity model, presented
below, also hold within the more sophisticated soft glassy
rheology model [15, 30, 63].

For the Rolie-Poly model we set τd = 1. For the Pom-
pom model we set τb = 1. For the ﬂuidity model of soft
glasses we set the microscopic time τ0 = 1. (This model’s
actual stress relaxation time τ becomes highly separated
from τ0 during ageing.) The deﬁnition of these timescales
can be found in Appendix A. Values for the other model
parameters, in these units, are listed in table I of Ap-
pendix A.

D.

Initial conditions, ﬂow geometry and protocol.

We consider a sample of material that at some initial
time t = 0 is in the shape of an undeformed uniform cylin-
drical ﬁlament of length L(0) and cross sectional area
A(0), with an isotropic conformation tensor W (0) = I.
Initial conditions for any additional variables λ, Q,··· are
prescribed in Appendix A. For all times t > 0 the ﬁlament
is then subject to a constant applied Hencky strain rate
¯˙, such that its length increases as L(t) = L(0) exp(¯˙t).
The overbar signiﬁes that ¯˙ is the strain rate experienced
by the sample as a whole, globally averaged along its full
length. Once necking arises, the deformation rate will
locally vary along the ﬁlament’s length z such that the
Hencky strain rate ˙ = ˙(z, t), with the average ¯˙ of this
function along z remaining constant in time.

E. Slender ﬁlament approximation

We adopt a slender ﬁlament approximation [20, 27, 55],
in which the wavelengths of any variations that develop
in cross sectional area along the ﬁlament’s length are as-
sumed large compared to the ﬁlament’s radius, and the
ﬂow variables are averaged across the ﬁlament’s cross sec-
tion at any location z along it. Relevant dynamical vari-
ables are then the cross sectional area A(z, t), the area
averaged ﬂuid velocity in the z direction V (z, t), and the
extension rate ˙(z, t) = ∂zV . For clarity we drop the ”+”
superscript, usually used in Journal of Rheology to de-
note time-dependence in the extensional stress, from σ+
E
in the equations that follow.

The mass balance equation (III.3) is then written

∂tA + V ∂zA = − ˙εA,
and the force balance condition (III.2)

0 = ∂zF,

in which the tensile force

(III.6)

(III.7)

C. Units and parameter values.

F (t) = A(z, t)σE(z, t),

(III.8)

Throughout we adopt units of length in which the ini-
tial length of the ﬁlament L(0) = 1, and units of stress
in which the viscoelastic modulus G = 1. We use units
of time in which the intrinsic relaxation timescale of any
constitutive model is equal to unity. Accordingly, for the
Oldroyd B, Giesekus and FENE-CR models we set τ = 1.

and the total tensile stress

σE = G (Szz − Sxx) + 3η ˙ε.

(III.9)
As before, S = S(W , λ, Q,··· ). The evolution equation
for the conﬁrmation tensor is now written as
∂tW (z, t) + V ∂zW = f ( ˙, W , λ, Q,··· ),

(III.10)

G Simpliﬁed scalar model

with counterpart scalar diﬀerential equations for the dy-
namics of λ, Q,··· .

F. Transformation to co-extending frame

In the constant Hencky strain rate experiment of in-
terest here, the length of the ﬁlament increases expo-
nentially in time as L(t) = L(0) exp(¯˙t), and the area
decreases (overall) as A(t) = A(0) exp(−¯˙t) (subject to
local variations due to necking). This makes it convenient
to make a transformation to the coextending, cothinning
frame. Accordingly we deﬁne new variables of length u,
velocity v and area a:

u = z exp(−¯˙t),

v(u, t) = V (z, t) exp(−¯˙t),
a(u, t) = A(z, t) exp(¯˙t).

The diﬀerential operators then transform as

∂z −→ exp(−¯˙t)∂u,
∂t −→ ∂t − ¯˙u∂u,

(III.11)

(III.12)
(III.13)

giving the transformed equations of mass balance

∂ta + (v − ¯˙u)∂ua = −( ˙ − ¯˙)a,

(III.14)

and force balance

0 = ∂u ˜F ,

(III.15)

where the transformed tensile force

˜F (t) = F (t) exp(¯˙t) = a(u, t)σE(u, t).

(III.16)

The tensile stress σ+
E is given as in III.9 above, with
S = S(W , λ, Q,··· ) as before. The transformed evo-
lution equation for the conformation tensor is written as

∂tW + (v − ¯˙u)∂uW = f ( ˙, W , λ, Q,··· ),

(III.17)

with counterpart scalar diﬀerential equations for any ad-
ditional variables λ, Q,··· .

with the dynamics of Z speciﬁed as
∂tZ + V ∂zZ = ˙f (Z) − 1
τ

g(Z),

6

(III.19)

with separate loading and relaxation dynamics charac-
terised by the functions f and g respectively. For nota-
tional simplicity, in this scalar model, we have also ab-
sorbed a factor 3 into the solvent viscosity η.

Writing the model

in this highly generalised form,
without specifying any particular functional forms for the
loading and relaxation dynamics f (Z) and g(Z), will en-
able us to derive criteria for the onset of necking that are
reportable simply in terms of characteristic signatures
in the shapes of the material response functions (tensile
stress, etc.) as a function of the time (or accumulated
strain) since the inception of the ﬂow.

H. Boundary conditions

In our linear stability calculations we assume periodic
boundary conditions between the two ends of the ﬁla-
ment, thereby implicitly taking the ﬁlament to corre-
spond to a torus being stretched. We performed our
nonlinear numerical simulations for two diﬀerent sets of
boundary conditions in turn: ﬁrst, we adopted the pe-
riodic boundary conditions just discussed; and second,
we used an approximate mimic of the no-slip boundary
condition between the ﬂuid and the endplates. (The full
ﬂow ﬁeld near the plates cannot however be captured at
the level of this slender ﬁlament calculation.)

The second of these conditions is discussed in detail in
Sec. VII. As we shall demonstrate, it automatically pro-
vides some heterogeneity that seeds the formation of a
neck in the sample. For the nonlinear simulations per-
formed with the periodic boundary we instead seeded the
instability by adding a small initial perturbation to the
area proﬁle such that a(u, t = 0) = a(0) + δa0 cos(2πu)
with δa0 (cid:28) 1. In fact we found the necking dynamics
predicted with these two boundary conditions to be es-
sentially the same, so shall present the results of our non-
linear simulations only with the second condition, mim-
icking no-slip.

G. Simpliﬁed scalar model

So far, we have outlined the full tensorial constitutive
models to be used in our numerical calculations, within
a slender ﬁlament approximation. We shall also perform
analytical calculations within a simpliﬁed scalar model
that considers only the (assumed) dominant component
Z = Wzz of microstructural deformation that develops
in a ﬁlament stretching experiment, also at the level of
slender ﬁlament. Conditions of mass balance and force
balance remain as in Eqns. III.14 to III.16 above. We
then write the tensile stress simply as

σE = GZ + η ˙,

(III.18)

IV. LINEAR STABILITY ANALYSIS: GENERAL

PROCEDURE

We now outline in general terms the procedure of per-
forming a linear stability analysis for the onset of neck-
ing. We start by considering a homogeneous “base state”
corresponding to a ﬁlament that remains in a uniform
cylindrical shape as it is stretched out, with the ﬂow
variables homogeneous along it. To this base state are
then added small amplitude perturbations that are het-
erogeneous along the ﬁlament’s length, corresponding to
the precursor of a neck. Expanding the governing equa-
tions to ﬁrst order in the amplitude of these perturba-

tions gives linearised equations for the dynamics of the
perturbations. Integrating these in time, and/or examin-
ing the eigenvalues of the matrix that governs the linear
equations, then determines whether, and at what time
during the ﬁlament stretching process the perturbations
grow and thereby take the system towards a necked state,
or whether they decay to leave a uniform ﬁlament.

A. Homogeneous base state

We consider ﬁrst a uniform “base state”,

labelled
with a subscript 0, corresponding to a ﬁlament that re-
mains a uniform cylinder as it is stretched out, with
all ﬂow variables homogeneous along it.
In this state
the strain rate ˙(u, t) = ˙0 = ¯˙, the transformed ve-
locity v(u, t) = v0 = u¯˙ε and the transformed area
a(u, t) = a0 = A(0). (In the laboratory frame, the area
thins as A(t) = A(0) exp(−¯˙t).) The viscoelastic vari-
ables, for which no frame transformation is needed, fol-
low as homogeneous solutions W 0(t), λ0(t), Q0(t),··· of
their respective equations of motion (III.10 and its coun-
terparts for λ, Q,··· ) for times t > 0, subject to the
initial condition of the ﬁlament having been undeformed
priori to time t = 0. The time-dependent tensile stress

σE0( ˙, t) = G (Szz0 − Sxx0) + 3η¯˙,

with

S0 = S(W 0(t), λ0(t), Q0(t),··· ).

(IV.1)

(IV.2)

If the tensile stress attains a steady state in the limit
of long times t → ∞ after the inception of the ﬂow, once
many strain units ¯ = ¯˙t have been applied, the steady
state relation σE0(¯˙) deﬁnes the material’s homogeneous
extensional constitutive curve. The constitutive curves of
the six models considered in this work are shown in Fig. 2.
We shall return in the results sections below to describe
the shapes of these curves in more detail, in particular
discussing any features that pertain to necking.

The time-evolution σ+

E0(t) of the homogeneous stress
signal towards this steady state constitutive curve is
shown at several diﬀerent imposed strain rates for the
Giesekus and Rolie-Poly models in the left panels of
Fig. 1. The corresponding (untransformed) tensile force
F (t) = σ+
E (t)A(t) is shown in the right panels of the
same ﬁgure. The force initially increases, due to the ris-
ing stress, then later decreases, due to the declining cross
sectional area.

Without loss of generality we are at liberty to set the
initial cylinder area A(0) = a0 = 1. Note that this is in
addition to having set the initial cylinder length L(0) = 1
in our choice of units above. It is important to realise,
however, that we are not restricting ourselves to situa-
tions in which the initial area and length are constrained
relative to each other in any particular way. Any informa-
tion about the relative values of the cylinder’s area and
length has simply been lost as a consequence of making
the slender ﬁlament approximation [17, 20].

7

B. Heterogeneous perturbations

So far we have discussed a calculation in which
the ﬁlament is assumed to remain perfectly uniform
as it is stretched out, with all the ﬂow variables
homogeneous along it.
In the language of hydro-
dynamic stability theory,
this gives a “base state”
(¯˙, a0, W 0(t), λ0(t), Q0(t),··· ).
In contrast to conven-
tional stability calculations, however, this base state is
time-dependent, because of the time-evolution of the vis-
coelastic conformation variables following the onset of the
applied ﬂow, giving rise to the time-evolving tensile stress
signals in Fig. 1 (left panels). Eventually, after several
strain units, the base state will attain a steady state with
a tensile stress on the homogeneous constitutive curve.
As the calculations that follow will show, however, the
sample will in general neck signiﬁcantly before the sys-
tem has a chance to attain a state of homogeneous ﬂow
on that constitutive curve.

To study how this necking arises, we now add to
the homogeneous base state small amplitude heteroge-
neous perturbations, decomposed into Fourier modes
with wavevector q that is reciprocal to the space vari-
able u along the ﬁlament’s transformed length:



˙(u, t)
a(u, t)
W (u, t)
λ(u, t)
Q(u, t)

...

 =



 +



(cid:88)

q



δ ˙(t)
δa(t)
δW (t)
δλ(t)
δQ(t)

...

¯˙
a0

...

W 0(t)
λ0(t)
Q0(t)

exp(iqu).

q

(IV.3)
Note that the area perturbations δa(t) obey δa(t)/a0 =
δA(t)/A(t) where a0 is constant. They thereby give a
measure, at any time t, of the fractional variations in
cross sectional area along the ﬁlament’s length, compared
to the length-averaged cross sectional area at that time.
They therefore indicate the degree to which the ﬁlament
has necked at that time.

We then substitute this expression (IV.3) into the gov-
erning equations (III.14) to (III.17), expand in successive
powers of the amplitude of the perturbations, and retain
only terms of ﬁrst order in this amplitude. This gives lin-
earised equations for the dynamics of the perturbations:



∂t



q

δ ˙(t)
δa(t)
δW (t)
δλ(t)
δQ(t)

...





q

δ ˙(t)
δa(t)
δW (t)
δλ(t)
δQ(t)

...

= M (t) ·

,

(IV.4)

in which it is important to note that the stability matrix
M (t) has inherited the time-dependence of the base state
(¯˙, a0, W 0(t), λ0(t), Q0(t),··· ), upon which it depends.
We note that the stability matrix M (t) has however
no dependence on the wavevector q. This stems from the

B Heterogeneous perturbations

8

FIG. 1. Transient evolution of the stress σ+
E (left) and the force F (right) for the Giesekus model (top) and the ﬁnite-stretch
Rolie-Poly model (bottom), within a calculation that artiﬁcially constrains the ﬂow to remain homogeneous. The key shows
the strain rate for each data set. The counterpart steady-state homogeneous constitutive curves σE( ˙, t → ∞) can be seen
in ﬁgure 2. Parameter values for each model are given in appendix A, table I. The grey dashed curves in the Giesekus (top)
ﬁgures show for comparison results for the Oldroyd B model, to which the Giesekus model reduces in the limit α → 0.

fact that the governing equations (III.14) to (III.17) are
spatially local, apart from the convective terms, which
drop out at linear order in the above expansion. (Spatial
dependence of M would however be restored at length-
scales shorter than those considered here by moving be-
yond our slender ﬁlament assumption, or by incorporat-
ing surface tension, or by including stress diﬀusion, which
would cutoﬀ any instability at short lengthscales.) In this
way, all Fourier modes exp(iqu) are predicted to have the
same dynamics. Which mode will dominate any necking
stability in practice is therefore determined by which is
initially seeded most strongly: whether by thermal noise,
slight initial sample imperfection, or by geometrical fea-
tures of the experimental device. In a ﬁlament stretching
rheometer we expect the dominant seeding to arise from
the no-slip condition that applies where sample ends meet
the rheometer plates. As noted above, this constrains the
area to remain constant at each of the sample ends as the
sample is stretched out overall, thereby initiating a single
neck in the middle of the ﬁlament. (It is this eﬀect that
is modelled in our nonlinear simulations by the boundary
condition discussed at the start of Sec. VII.)

To determine whether in any ﬁlament stretching ex-
periment the perturbations δa(t) in the ﬁlament’s cross
sectional area will start to grow towards a necked state,
and at what time during the run they ﬁrst start to do so,
these linearised equations must be integrated in time. If
the stability matrix M were time-independent, it would
be trivial to establish that δa would grow if at least
one eigenvalue of M had positive real part. The time-
dependence of M clearly complicates this, although a
good indication of whether the area ﬂuctuations δa will

be growing at any time during a run is given by whether
(at least) one of the time-dependent eigenvalues of M has
a positive real part at that time. However the concept
of a time-dependent eigenvalue is clearly delicate. In our
numerical simulations of the six constitutive models in
Sec. VI below, therefore, we both directly integrate the
linearised equations and report the more indirect measure
given by the sign of the real part of the time-dependent
eigenvalue of M with the largest real part. Pleasingly,
we ﬁnd good agreement between the regime of strongly
growing area ﬂuctuations δa, and of a positive eigenvalue
of M .

The aim of the next section is to analytically derive
ﬂuid-universal (model-independent) criteria for the time
at which this necking instability ﬁrst sets in during any
ﬁlament stretching run, which we can then compare with
our numerical simulations of the six constitutive models.

V. CRITERIA FOR NECKING

Having outlined the procedure of a linear stability anal-
ysis in general terms, we now perform this calculation
analytically in the particular case of the simpliﬁed scalar
model introduced in Sec. III G. Our goal in doing so is
to derive criteria for the onset of necking that can be re-
ported in terms of characteristic signatures in the shapes
of the material response functions (tensile stress σ+
E , etc.)
as a function of the time (or accumulated strain) since the
inception of the ﬂow. Recall that the original Consid`ere
criterion would predict the onset of necking to coincide
with the characteristic signature ∂F < 0 in the func-

9

FIG. 2. Stationary homogeneous extensional constitutive curves of the models to be studied, for the model parameters values
speciﬁed in App. A, table I. The apparent negative curvature at low strain rates in (a), (b) and (c) is a consequence of the
log-linear scale. The more familiar log-log scale is shown as an inset for the Oldroyd B model in (a). In (g) the black curves show
the constitutive curves for the form of the Pom-pom model in which the backbone stretch has a hard cutoﬀ. The red-dotted
lines show the equivalent curves for a form of the model in which that cutoﬀ is removed. See the discussion at the end of
Sec. VII B.

10

FIG. 3. Numerical results for the linearised necking dynamics within six tensorial constitutive models. (Results for the Rolie-
Poly model are shown separately with chain stretch disallowed (d); with chain stretched allowed and unrestricted (e); and
with chain stretched allowed but restricted to be ﬁnite (f).) The thin black lines show contours of constant area perturbations
δa/δa0 = 10n/4, with n = 1··· 20 in curves from bottom to top, representing the growing degree of necking at increasing
strain  upwards in any ﬁlament stretching experiment at ﬁxed ˙. The green dotted lines shows the strain at which the largest
eigenvalue becomes positive, in increasing strain  upwards during stretching at ﬁxed ˙. (The overhang in the Pom-pom model
gives stability-instability-stability-instability in the range of strain rates 10 < ˙τ < 30.) Accordingly, the beige shaded area
shows the window of strains over which the ﬁlament is stable against necking. The thick black solid line shows the strain at
which the stress curvature criterion predicts the onset of necking, in increasing  at ﬁxed ˙. The red dot-dashed line shows
the strain at which the “elastic Consid`ere ” mode becomes unstable. The blue long-dashed line shows the strain at which the
original Consid`ere criterion would predict the onset of necking.

tional form of the tensile force F as a function of the
accumulated strain . As noted above, however, there
is no reason a priori to expect this criterion for necking
in solids to apply in complex ﬂuids with a ﬁnite stress
relaxation timescale τ .

We start by recollecting for convenience the governing

equations. The condition of mass balance gives

∂ta + (v − ¯˙u)∂ua = −( ˙ − ¯˙)a.

(V.1)

The condition of force balance for the transformed force
˜F (t) = F (t) exp(¯˙t) gives

0 = ∂u ˜F = ∂u(aσE),

where the tensile stress

σE = GZ + η ˙.

(V.2)

(V.3)

The scalar conformation variable evolves as

∂tZ + (v − ¯˙u)∂uZ = ˙f (Z) − 1
τ

g(Z),

(V.4)

We intentionally leave unspeciﬁed the forms of the load-
ing and relaxation functions f (Z) and g(Z) in order that
the criteria we derive are as ﬂuid-universal as possible,
independent of particular constitutive choices.

Following the procedure outlined above, we consider
a uniform base state ¯˙, a0, Z0(t), in which the viscoelas-
tic conformation variable Z0(t) evolves as a function of
the time t since the inception of the ﬂow in a man-
ner prescribed by Eqn. V.4, solved within the assump-
tion of homogeneous ﬂow, ∂uZ0 = 0. The tensile stress
E0(t) = GZ0(t) + η¯˙ accordingly evolves (in the ab-
σ+
sence of pathological choices for the loading and relax-
ation functions f and g) towards its eventual steady
state on the homogeneous constitutive curve at the given
applied strain rate ¯˙. The corresponding tensile force
F0(t) = σ+
E0(t)A0(t) initially increases as a result of the
rising stress, then decreases due to the declining ﬁlament
area A0(t) = A(0) exp(−¯˙t).

To this uniform, time-evolving base state we now add
small amplitude heterogeneous perturbations, which are
the precursor of any neck:

 ˙(u, t)

a(u, t)
Z(u, t)

 =

 ¯˙

a0

+

Z0(t)

 δ ˙(t)

δa(t)
δZ(t)



(cid:88)

q

exp(iqu). (V.5)

q

Substituting this into the governing equations (V.1) to
(V.4), expanding in powers of the amplitude of the per-
turbations, and retaining only terms of ﬁrst order in that
amplitude, gives a set of linearised equations for the dy-
namics of the perturbations.

11

and the linearised viscoelastic constitutive dynamics

∂tδZq = δ ˙qf (Z0) + CδZq

(V.8)

in which

C = ˙f(cid:48)(Z0) − 1
τ

g(cid:48)(Z0).

(V.9)

Here and throughout we use a prime to denote diﬀeren-
tiation with respect to a function’s own argument. Elim-
inating δ ˙q, which is instantaneously slaved to the other
variables by the condition of force balance in creeping
ﬂow, gives the two-dimensional linearised equation set:

∂t

= M (t) ·

.

(V.10)

 δa(t)



δZ(t)

q

This is governed by the stability matrix

σE0
η

G
η

M (t) =

−f (Z0)σE0

− f (Z0)G

η

+ C

 .

(V.11)

δZ(t)

 δa(t)




q

η

This depends on time via the evolving viscoelastic con-
formation variable Z0(t) in the base state, until that base
state settles to a steady state with the tensile stress on
the stationary homogeneous constitutive curve. As we
shall see below, however, the sample in general necks sig-
niﬁcantly before any such stationary homogeneous state
can be attained.

Denoting the trace and determinant of M by T and ∆

respectively, we have

and

T =

1
η

(σE0 − f G) + O(1),

∆ =

σE0C

η

.

(V.12)

(V.13)

In what follows we assume the solvent viscosity η small
compared to the scale of the viscoelastic viscosities, and
accordingly ignore the O(1) term in T .

It is possible to show that these expressions for T and
∆ can be cast in terms of more physically meaningful
properties of the underlying base state as follows:

T = − 1

A(0)η

∂Felastic,

(V.14)

The linearised mass balance equation is

and

∂tδaq = −δ ˙q.

(V.6)

∆ =

σE0
η

¨σE0
˙σE0

,

(V.15)

The linearised force balance equation is

0 = σEδaq + GδZq + ηδ ˙q,

(V.7)

where dot denotes time diﬀerentiation. Note that the
derivative ∂Felastic of the base state’s tensile force with

respect to strain  in Eqn. V.14 needs careful interpreta-
tion. It is deﬁned by evolving the state up to some strain
 with the full model dynamics, including loading by ﬂow
as encoded by f and relaxation as encoded by g. In the
next increment of strain  → +δ over which the deriva-
tive is taken the relaxation term g(Z) is then suppressed,
with only the loading (‘elastic’) dynamics implemented.
Necking in the elastic limit of viscoelastic models was
also discussed in [28].

The time-dependent eigenvalues ω(t) of M follow as

solutions of the quadratic

ω2 − T ω + ∆ = 0.

(V.16)

By examining the conditions under which these can be-
come positive (in the sense of having a positive real part)
during the course of a ﬁlament stretching run, we ﬁnd two
diﬀerent possible modes of instability to necking. The
ﬁrst gives instability in any regime where the determi-
nant ∆ < 0, and accordingly where

¨σE
˙σE

< 0.

(V.17)

(We return below to justify the fact that we have just
dropped the base state subscript, writing σE0 → σE.) In
all the constitutive models considered in this work the
tensile stress increases monotonically towards the consti-
tutive curve (at least before signiﬁcant necking occurs),
˙σE > 0, and the criterion for the onset of necking insta-
bility is simply

¨σE < 0.

“Stress curvature mode”

(V.18)

Its eigenvalue has an amplitude set by the imposed strain
rate ¯˙. Once this mode of instability sets in, therefore, it
gives rise to an observable neck over the course of a few
strain units. Note that in some experiments the stress
signal has been observed to overshoot on its approach
to the constitutive curve, giving ˙σE < 0 after the over-
shoot [60]. The implications of this for necking will be
considered in future work.

The second mode gives instability in any regime where

the trace T > 0, and so where

∂Felastic < 0. “Elastic Consid`ere mode” (V.19)

Its eigenvalue has an amplitude O(G/η), which is large
for the small solvent viscosities relevant to the highly vis-
coelastic materials considered here. If this mode becomes
unstable during any ﬁlament stretching run, it causes a
neck to then develop very quickly compared to the rate
of the imposed ﬂow.

Note that we have dropped the base-state subscript “0”
in writing (V.18) and (V.19). This is justiﬁed because
the base-state properties contained in these expressions
– in particular the stress curvature ¨σE in (V.18) – also
correspond to the full experimentally measured proper-
ties at least as long as the sample remains uniform, and
therefore up to the point that signiﬁcant necking occurs.

12

Accordingly, the experimentally measured signals can be
used in these expressions in order to predict the onset of
necking.

The stress signal σ+

E in (V.18) is widely reported in the
experimental literature. Whether the “elastic” derivative
of the force ∂Felastic in (V.19) has any easily measurable
counterpart is an open question. In any case, it is cru-
cial to note that the condition ∂Felastic = 0 does not
correspond to the condition ∂F = 0. This new “elas-
tic” Consid`ere criterion is therefore not (in general) the
same as the original Consid`ere criterion, which predicts
necking instability when ∂F < 0. Indeed our numerical
results below will show that the two conditions predict
the onset of instability at diﬀerent strains over most of
the range of imposed strain rates ˙. They do, however
coincide as ˙τ → ∞. This is to be expected, because in
this limit a ﬂuid’s relaxation dynamics, as encoded by
g/τ here, become unimportant compared to the loading
by ﬂow, as encoded by ˙f .

Note that we chose to express the stress curvature cri-
terion in terms of time derivatives of the stress, and the
elastic Consid`ere criterion in terms of a strain (elastic)
derivative of the force. However both criteria can equally
be expressed in either time or strain derivatives, because
∂t = ˙∂ for the constant ˙ protocol of interest here.
We chose our notation simply because the stress cur-
vature criterion corresponds to a rather gradual, liquid-
like mode of instability, for which time seems the more
the natural independent variable. In contrast, the elas-
tic Consid`ere criterion pertains to a solid-like mode, for
which strain seems more the natural variable.

Because these criteria for necking have been derived
within a highly generalised constitutive model, indepen-
dent of any particular constitutive choices for the func-
tions f and g, we suggest that they should apply rather
widely among materials that show a basic competition
between elastic loading and viscoelastic (or plastic) re-
laxation. Pleasingly, our numerical results in Sec. VI will
show that they hold either exactly or to a good level
of approximation in all of the six tensorial constitutive
models considered in this work.
Indeed, making the concrete choices f = 3 + 2Z − βZ 2
and g = Z +αZ 2 for the loading and relaxation functions
in this scalar model gives an excellent approximation to
the necking predictions of the full tensorial Oldroyd B
model (α = β = 0), the Giesekus and FENE-CR models
(α (cid:54)= 0, β = 0) and the Rolie-Poly model without chain
stretch (α = 0, β (cid:54)= 0). We veriﬁed this by comparing
numerical results for the scalar model with these param-
eter choices with their counterparts in the full tensorial
models, ﬁnding excellent agreement (Appendix A 7).

VI. NUMERICAL RESULTS: LINEAR

STABILITY

Having derived criteria for the onset of necking, we
now present numerical results to demonstrate their valid-

ity within six widely used tensorial constitutive models.
See Fig. 3. Each panel of this ﬁgure contains results pre-
sented in the plane (, ˙) of strain and strain rate (with
the latter expressed in units of the characteristic relax-
ation time in any model). Any vertical line from bottom
to top in this plane tracks a single ﬁlament stretching run
performed at constant strain rate ˙, with the strain  in-
creasing upwards in the plane as the ﬁlament is stretched
out. (Note that in previous sections we used ¯˙ to denote
the strain rate applied globally to the sample as a whole,
and ˙(z, t) the strain rate that varies locally along the
ﬁlament as the sample necks. In the results sections that
follow, we often use ˙ to denote the globally applied strain
rate for notational convenience.)

The thin solid black lines show contours of constant
area perturbation δa(t). (Recall the note after Eqn IV.3
regarding the deﬁnition of δa.) Each successive contour
crossing (as  increases upwards at ﬁxed ˙) corresponding
to an increase of factor 101/4 in the area perturbation,
such that the nth contour represents a degree of necking
δa/δa0 = 10n/4, where δa0 is the initial small seeding
provided at the start of the run. The more densely clus-
tered the contour lines vertically at any ﬁxed ˙, therefore,
the faster necking occurs in a ﬁlament stretching run at
that strain rate. We have shown only the ﬁrst 20 contour
lines, assuming that the sample will have failed altogether
by this time. Indeed, although the absolute necking am-
plitudes associated with these contours are arbitrary at
the level of this linear analysis, a good indication of the
dependence of the strain at which the sample is likely to
ﬁnally fail on the imposed strain rate is given by focusing
on one representative contour.

Also included in each panel is a green dotted line show-
ing the strain  at which the largest eigenvalue ωm ﬁrst
becomes positive (in the sense of having a positive real
part) in any ﬁlament stretching run at a given strain rate
˙, signifying the onset of instability to necking.
(The
slight overhang in the Pom-pom model gives stability-
instability-stability-instability in the range of strain rates
10 < ˙τ < 30.) Accordingly, the beige shading shows the
window of strains in which the sample is stable against
necking at any given imposed strain rate. As can be
seen, the onset of a positive eigenvalue agrees convinc-
ingly with the onset of strong exponential growth in neck-
ing depicted by the contour lines. (Some transient growth
is seen before the eigenvalue becomes positive, but of an
amplitude unlikely to be seen experimentally.)

The thick black solid line in each panel depicts the
strain at which the stress curvature criterion predicts the
onset of necking, as the strain increases in any ﬁlament
stretching run at ﬁxed ˙. For strains below this line, the
stress is an upwardly curving function of time (or accu-
mulated strain). For strains above it, the stress curves
downward in time as it tends ﬁnally towards the consti-
tutive curve. (Recall Fig. 1.) As can be seen, this stress
curvature criterion exactly predicts the onset of necking
(i.e., the change in sign of the eigenvalue) in the Ol-
droyd B, Giesekus, FENE-CR, and Rolie-Poly models,

13

apart from a slight discrepancy at small strains [53] It
also performs qualitatively well in the Pom-pom model,
with some quantitative discrepancy [54] In the ﬂuidity
model the curvature criterion is negative from the incep-
tion of ﬂow for all strain rates.

In the Oldroyd B, Giesekus, FENE-CR and Rolie-Poly
model (with chain stretch), the stress curvature mode
of necking instability just discussed is the only one that
arises. As noted above, it leads to relatively gentle neck-
ing with an eigenvalue of characteristic amplitude set by
˙.
In stark contrast, at high strain rates in the Roly-
Poly model without chain stretch, and in the Pom-pom
and ﬂuidity models, the “elastic Consid`ere ” mode also
arises. The strain at which it sets in is indicated by the
red dot-dashed lines. Once active, it causes very fast
necking, with an eigenvalue O(G/η): the contours of δa
then become almost too narrowly spaced to be separately
discerned on the strain scale of the plots in Fig. 3, and
the sample fails catastrophically quickly.

This diﬀerence in severity between the stress curvature
and elastic Consid`ere modes leads to radically diﬀerent
necking dynamics at low and high strain rates in these
three models (Figs. 3d,g,h). At low strain rates, necking
occurs gradually via the stress curvature mode. At high
strain rates the sample violently ruptures via the elastic
Consid`ere mode. However in any case where the elastic
Consid`ere mode does become unstable, it does so only
after the stress curvature mode has already caused some
necking. In this sense, it can be seen as a rapid ampliﬁer
of an already existing, but much gentler instability. (In
the ﬂuidity model a return to elastic-Consid`ere stability
is seen at larger strains at high strain rates, but this is of
no relevance because the sample will have already entirely
failed by that point.)

Having discussed the general features of the plots in
Fig. 3, we now describe in more detail the necking dy-
namics of each constitutive model in turn, starting with
the Oldroyd B model in panel a). Here the dominant
contribution GWzz to the tensile stress σ+
E has a time-
dependence of shape 1 + exp [(2 ˙ − 1/τ )t]. For imposed
strain rates ˙ < 1/2τ , therefore, the stress curves down-
wards as a function of time, and a neck starts to form,
right from the inception of the ﬂow.
In contrast, for
imposed strain rates ˙ > 1/2τ the stress signal curves
upwards in time indeﬁnitely. This is a result of the fact
that the molecular dumbbells that this model describes
can stretch out indeﬁnitely with ﬂow, consistent with the
absence at these strain rates of a steady state in the con-
stitutive curve of Fig. 2a). Although this well known ‘ex-
tensional catastrophe’ indeﬁnitely stabilises the ﬁlament
against necking, it is an unphysical feature of the Oldroyd
B model. We note that the predictions of Fig. 3a) agree
with earlier work in [55].

The FENE-CR and Giesekus models each contain non-
linearities that regularise this extensional catastrophe,
cutting oﬀ the indeﬁnite dumbbell stretching and restor-
ing a ﬁnite stress even at strain rates ˙ > 1/2τ in the con-
stitutive curves of Fig. 2b,c). (Both models reduce back

to Oldroyd B when those nonlinearities are removed.)
The Giesekus model, for example, includes an additional
term in the relaxation dynamics, Z/τ → (Z + αZ 2)/τ ,
with α small, recovering Oldroyd B when α = 0. These
nonlinearities manifest themselves only once the dumb-
bells become strongly stretched, such that αZ = O(1).
Because of this, for strain rates ˙ < 1/2τ the dynamics
of Giesekus and FENE-CR are essentially the same as
Oldroyd B, with a downwardly curving stress σ+
E (t) and
instability to necking. Similarly at higher strain rates
˙ > 1/2τ , and for strains less than around 5 − 10, be-
fore strong chain stretch arises, Giesekus and FENE-CR
display an upwardly curving σ+
E (t) and stability against
necking, as in Oldroyd B. Compare panels b,c) and a) in
Fig. 3.
In contrast, beyond a typical strain 5 − 10 for strain
rates ˙ > 1/2τ , the chain stretch becomes signiﬁcant and
the nonlinearities of Giesekus and FENE-CR become im-
portant, departing from the dynamics of Oldroyd B. In
particular the chain stretch saturates, the upward curva-
ture in the stress signal is halted, and the stress displays
an inﬂexion point ¨σE = 0, beyond which the stress curves
downwards as a function of time (or accumulated strain)
as it tends towards the constitutive curve (which it in
general however will not reach before signiﬁcant necking
occurs). The ﬁlament then, indeed, becomes unstable to
necking, as seen by the closely gathered contours beyond
the green dotted line in Figs. 3b,c)

The three models discussed so far provide phenomeno-
logical descriptions of the rheology of polymer solutions.
We now turn to the microscopically motivated Rolie-Poly
(RP) model, which describes more concentrated solutions
and melts of entangled linear polymers. It contains the
basic dynamical processes of reptation, in which the ori-
entation of a test chain relaxes on a timescale τd; chain
stretch, which relaxes on a much faster timescales τs; and
convective constraint release (CCR), in which the relax-
ation of chain stretch releases entanglement points and
so also allows some relaxation of orientation.

Before describing the necking predictions of the RP
model, we recall its extensional constitutive curves in
Figs. 2d,e,f). Setting τs → 0 gives the non-stretching
Rolie-Poly (nRP) model, for which the constitutive curve
(Fig. 2d) has a regime of linear response at low strain
rates, then a plateau for strain rates ˙ > 1/τd where the
chain orientation saturates. Restoring a ﬁnite τs gives the
stretching Rolie-Poly (sRP). For strain rates ˙ (cid:28) 1/τs
its constitutive curve (Fig. 2e) is essentially the same as
that of the nRP model, with minimal chain stretch. For
˙ = O(1/τs) and above, however, signiﬁcant chain stretch
develops and the stress correspondingly increases. Indeed
in the raw form of the sRP model the stress diverges as
˙ → 1/τs, in direct counterpart to the stretch catastro-
phe of the Oldroyd B model.
Including ‘FENE’ terms
to give the ﬁnite-stretch Rolie-Poly (fsRP) model regu-
larises this, as in moving from Oldroyd B to FENE-CR,
eliminating the possibility of indeﬁnite chain stretch and
restoring a ﬁnite stress at all strain rates (Fig. 2f).

14

We now address the necking predictions of the Rolie-
Poly model, starting with the version without chain
stretch (the nRP model). See Fig. 3d. Here the stress
curvature criterion predicts necking instability right from
the inception of the ﬂow for strain rates ˙ < 1/τd, and af-
ter a only a modest accumulated strain for ˙ > 1/τd. Fur-
thermore, in this regime ˙ > 1/τd the elastic Consid`ere
mode also sets in after an accumulated strain  = O(1),
causing violently fast necking once it does so. Just as
in Oldroyd B the indeﬁnite chain stretch and associated
divergence in tensile stress indeﬁnitely stabilised a ﬁla-
ment against necking, so conversely the absence of chain
stretch and the associated saturation in the stress with
increasing strain rate cause dramatically fast necking in-
stability via the elastic Consid`ere mode in the nRP model
for strain rates ˙ > 1/τd. Intuitively, as the sample starts
to neck and the strain rate in the necking region increases,
the polymer is unable to provide any counterbalancing
stress to restabilise the ﬂow and the sample quickly rup-
tures.

In order for the elastic Consid`ere mode of instability
to arise in any given constitutive model, the ‘loading’
terms of that model, as represented by ˙f in the toy
scalar version discussed above, must be suﬃciently non-
linear that the ‘elastic’ force derivative ∂Felastic, which
is set by −(σ+
E − Gf ), can become negative. For most
models of polymeric ﬂows that we have considered, in
most ﬂow regimes, this does not happen.
In the nRP
model, however, the loading dynamics has a (somewhat
in its toy rep-
counterintuitive) negative contribution:
resentation, the loading term f = 3 + 2Z − 2
3 Z 2. The
origin of the negative contribution lies in the assumption
of instantaneous chain stretch relaxation τs → 0: what
would be a chain stretch relaxation process with a ﬁnite
associated timescale τs in the full sRP model is instead
assumed to be inﬁnitely fast in nRP, such that the chain
stretch relaxes as quickly as it builds up with rate ˙ in
the ﬂow. This leads to the apparent ‘negative loading’
term − 2
3 ˙Z 2: it is actually a relaxation process, but oc-
curring at the rate the sample is ‘loaded’ by strain. At
high strain rates, this causes f to eventually become neg-
E − Gf ) and ∂Felastic negative, giving
ative, sending −(σ+
elastic Consid`ere instability.

The stretching Rolie-Poly (sRP) model has a ﬁnite
chain stretch relaxation timescale τs, which allows chain
stretch to develop for strain rates O(1/τs) and above.
Indeed, as noted above, in its raw form the sRP model
displays an extensional catastrophe for strain rates ˙ >
1/τs, with indeﬁnitely increasing chain stretch and tensile
stress. As in Oldroyd B, this indeﬁnitely stabilises the ﬁl-
ament against necking at imposed strain rates ˙ > 1/τs:
in Fig. 3e), no contour lines are crossed as the strain 
increases at these large strain rates (apart from mild tran-
sient growth, which quickly saturates). The introduction
of “FENE” terms into the sRP model regularises this
indeﬁnite molecular stretching, rendering it ﬁnite and
restoring necking instability at all strain rates (Fig. 3f).
The necking dynamics of the full Rolie-Poly model with

ﬁnite chain stretch (Fig. 3f) therefore shows four distinct
regimes, which can be summarised as follows. (I) For im-
posed strain rates ˙ < 1/τd, gentle necking occurs right
from the inception of the ﬂow. (II) For strain rates in
the regime 1/τd < ˙ < 1/τs the saturation of chain ori-
entation associated with the ﬂat region in the underlying
constitutive curve places strong limitations on the tensile
stress that the polymer can provide in any developing
neck, giving more violent necking. This is a vestige in
the fsRP model of the elastic Consid`ere mode seen in the
nRP model, although true elastic Consid`ere doesn’t arise
with chain stretch. (III) For ˙ = O(1/τs) the rapid rise in
chain stretch rate strongly mitigates necking, deferring it
to a Hencky strain  ≈ 8 for the parameter values con-
sidered here. Finally (IV) for ˙ > 1/τs the chain stretch
saturates, leading to more rapid necking.

These four regimes of necking dynamics have strong
signatures in the underlying homogeneous constitutive
curve (Fig. 2f): the ﬂatter this curve at any given strain
rate, the more violent the necking at that imposed strain
rate. Perhaps surprisingly, this is true even though the
system in general does not have a chance to ﬁnally attain
a state of steady homogeneous ﬂow on the constitutive
curve before it necks. This correspondence can, however,
be motivated by a ‘back of the envelope’ calculation for
a ﬁlament that does, in a thought experiment at least,
manage to remain uniform long enough to attain a state
of steady ﬂow on its homogeneous constitutive curve, be-
fore starting to neck. A linear stability analysis for the
dynamics of heterogeneous perturbations about this state
of uniform steady ﬂow then gives the linearised condition
of mass balance

˙δaq = −δ ˙q.

(VI.1)

The condition of force balance for a ﬁlament in a state
of steady ﬂow on its constitutive curve σE( ˙) gives
∂u[aσE( ˙)] = 0, which when linearised gives

0 = σE( ˙)δaq + σ(cid:48)

E( ˙)δ ˙q,

(VI.2)

where prime denotes derivative with respect to the func-
tion’s own argument. Combining these gives

˙δaq
δaq

=

σE( ˙)
σ(cid:48)
E( ˙)

,

(VI.3)

with a growth rate given by σE( ˙)/σ(cid:48)
E( ˙). The necking at
any given imposed strain rate is therefore faster the ﬂat-
ter the underlying constitutive curve at that strain rate,
as seen in our numerical results. This can be understood
physically as follows. Eqn. VI.1 states that in any region
of a ﬁlament where the strain rate increases, the area
decreases faster by mass conservation. Eqn. VI.2 states
that in any such region where the area decreases, the
strain rate must increase to provide an enhanced stress
to maintain a uniform force along the ﬁlament. This gives
a positive feedback loop and necking instability for any
constitutive curve with a positive slope σ(cid:48)
E( ˙) > 0. The

15

instability is furthermore faster the ﬂatter the constitu-
tive curve, because the strain rate must increase more
quickly to provide an enhanced stress to maintain uni-
form force.
Interestingly, a negative constitutive slope
σ(cid:48)
E( ˙) < 0 is predicted to confer stability against neck-
ing, and we consider the implications of this more fully
in [31].

The Pom-pom model of long chain branched polymers
shows similar necking dynamics (Fig. 3g) to those just
discussed for linear polymers. In particular we again see
four distinct regimes, with (I): relatively gentle necking
at low ﬂow rates, (II): more rapid necking at moderate
ﬂow rates associated with the saturation in chain back-
bone orientation, (III): a degree of stabilisation against
necking provided by developing backbone stretch, and ﬁ-
nally (IV): more violent necking at higher strain rates
due to a saturation in the degree of backbone stretch.

Two important diﬀerences between the Rolie-Poly
model of linear polymers and the Pom-pom model of
branched polymers should however be noted. The ﬁrst
is that in the Pom-pom model the stress curvature crite-
rion (shown by the thick black line in Fig. 3g), provides
only a qualitative ﬁt to the onset of necking (as char-
acterised by a positive eigenvalue, shown by the thick
dotted green line). This is because the expression for
the polymer stress in the Pom-pom model contains mul-
tiplicative contributions from the chain orientation and
chain stretch, each with its own dynamical evolution. (In
contrast, the Rolie-Poly has just a single dynamical fac-
tor Wzz − Wxx ≡ Z in the stress, as does the scalar
model in which we derived the necking criteria.) As a
result, the inﬂexion point ¨σE = 0 of the tensile stress
provides only an approximation to the onset of necking
in the Pom-pom model. Instead, it is the inﬂexion point
in the component Wzz of molecular orientation that ac-
tually predicts onset. However this quantity cannot be
accessed experimentally by measuring the tensile stress
signal, because it appears in the expression for σ+
E pref-
actored by the (also) time-evolving chain stretch.

The second diﬀerence is the appearance at high strain
rates ˙ > 1/τs in the Pom-pom model of the elastic Con-
sid`ere mode, which was absent in the ﬁnite stretch Rolie-
Poly model. This arises because the Pom-pom model
invokes a hard cutoﬀ for the growth in chain backbone
stretch, to model its entropic limitation by the branch-
ing priority, q [12, 49]: the stretch is assumed to evolve
only until it is equal to q and is held constant thereafter.
This sharp saturation eﬀectively removes the polymer’s
ability to provide any counterbalancing additional stress
in any thinning region of the ﬁlament, leading to violent
rupture. This upper bound on the stretch imposed in the
original form of the Pom-pom model [12, 49] is removed in
some subsequent versions of the model (e.g. [69]), causing
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent predictions for the necking dynam-
ics. We comment further on the comparative necking
dynamics predicted by these diﬀerent assumed forms of
backbone stretch dynamics in Sec. VII below.

We consider ﬁnally the necking dynamics of soft glassy

16

FIG. 4. Linearised necking dynamics in the Rolie-Poly model with ﬁnite chain stretch without surface tension (a) and with
surface tension (b). Values of all other model parameters are the same as in Fig. 3f).

materials (foams, emulsions, dense colloids, microgels,
etc.) [15, 63]. These widely exhibit rheological ageing,
in which (in the absence of an applied ﬂow) a sample be-
comes progressively more solid-like and less liquid-like as
a function of the time elapsed since it was prepared (for
example by being freshly loaded into a rheometer and
presheared). The ﬂuidity model that we adopt captures
ageing, predicting the stress relaxation timescale τ to in-
crease linearly (in the absence of ﬂow) as a function of
the time since sample preparation. Here we consider a
sample of age tw = 1000τ0 = 1000 (in our units) at the
time the ﬁlament stretching run commences.

As seen in Fig. 3h), the sample necks by qualitatively
diﬀerent modes according to whether the imposed strain
rate is fast or slow compared to the inverse sample age.
In fast stretching ˙ (cid:29) 1/tw, it ruptures violently via the
elastic Consid`ere mode. In slower stretching, ˙ (cid:28) 1/tw,
it fails more gradually, via a mode that is closely related
to the stress curvature mode derived above in the scalar
model: the stress curvature criterion is negative from the
inception of ﬂow for all ˙. See [30] for further details. Put
diﬀerently, for a ﬁxed ﬂow rate ˙ a young sample tw (cid:28) 1/ ˙
fails gradually, while an old sample tw (cid:29) 1/ ˙ will fail
more dramatically via the elastic Consid`ere mode. This
is the ﬁrst instance, of which we are aware, in which
a sample is predicted to fail by qualitatively diﬀerent
modes of necking instability according simply to its own
age. The same picture also holds within the more sophis-
ticated soft glassy rheology model [15, 30, 63].

In Fig. 3, then, we have shown our stress curvature and
elastic Consid`ere criteria to perform well in predicting the
onset of necking in six widely used tensorial constitutive
models of linear polymer solutions and melts, wormlike
micelles, branched polymers, and soft glassy materials.
They further perform well in distinguishing regions of
relatively gradual necking, caused by the stress curvature
mode, from the much more dramatic failure, caused by
the elastic Consid`ere mode.

Finally, in each panel of Fig. 3 we also mark as a blue
long-dashed line the strain  at which the tensile force
overshoot occurs, in any ﬁlament stretching experiment
at a ﬁxed strain rate ˙. For strains below this line, the
force increases with strain. For strains above it, the force
decreases and the original Consid`ere predicts instability
to necking. As can be seen, this original Consid`ere crite-
rion performs poorly in predicting the necking dynamics.
For example, in Oldroyd B (which is however pathologi-
cal in extension for the reasons discussed above) it fails
to predict the strain rate ˙ = 1/2τ below which necking
occurs and above which the ﬁlament is stable.
(It in-
stead incorrectly predicts this threshold to be ˙ = 1/τ .)
In the Giesekus, FENE-CR, ﬁnite-stretch Rolie-Poly and
Pom-pom models it fails to predict the pronounced up-
ward ‘nose’ shaped region of strains in which the sam-
ple is initially stable against necking, before necking sets
in for larger strains. Finally in the non-stretch Rolie-
Poly, Pom-pom and ﬂuidity models the Consid`ere crite-
rion does nothing to distinguish between the slow, grad-
ual necking that arises via the stress-curvature mode at
low strain rates, and the much more dramatic failure due
to the elastic Consid`ere mode at higher strain rates. As
noted above, however, the original Consid`ere criterion
converges towards our elastic Consid`ere criterion (where
present) in the limit of high strain rates ˙τ → ∞, consis-
tent with the fact that a complex ﬂuid displays essentially
solid-like response in this limit.

Eﬀects of surface tension

So far, we have ignored the eﬀects of surface tension.
This is expected to be a good approximation in the ini-
tial stages of necking for most ﬁlament stretching experi-
ments, because the samples used are typically highly vis-
coelastic and of suﬃciently large radius that bulk stresses
dominate surface ones. (Inevitably, surface tension must

play some role during the ﬁnal stages of pinchoﬀ once the
neck becomes very thin. However our slender ﬁlament
calculations are not capable of capturing the details of
pinchoﬀ, and we do not consider this here.)

To quantify any eﬀects of surface tension on the initial
onset of necking, we recognise that its dominant eﬀect is
to give an additional contribution to the tensile stress of
Eqn. III.9 [24], such that now

σE = G (Szz − Sxx) + 3η ˙ε +

χ
r

.

(VI.4)

Here χ is the coeﬃcient of surface tension between the
ﬁlament and surrounding ﬂuid (usually air), and r is the
time-evolving radius of the ﬁlament.

In Fig. 4 we compare linear stability results for the
Rolie-Poly model without surface tension (left panel)
with those in a calculation where surface tension is now
included. As can be seen, surface tension aﬀects the on-
set of necking only at very slow ﬂow rates. This is to
be expected: in this regime the bulk viscoelastic stresses
are relatively modest, and furthermore the sample sur-
vives to large strains before necking. This combination
of a highly stretched sample of small radius and low bulk
stresses means that the term χ/r is no longer small in
comparison to the bulk viscoelastic stress G (Szz − Sxx).
We have checked that this eﬀect of surface tension is
essentially the same across all the models considered, af-
fecting the onset of necking only in the regime of very
slow ﬂow rates. In view of this, we continue to neglect
surface tension throughout the rest of the manuscript.

VII. NON-LINEAR SIMULATIONS

To examine the necking dynamics once the amplitude
of heterogeneity has grown suﬃciently that the linear cal-
culations described in the previous section no longer pro-
vide a good approximation, the full nonlinear slender ﬁl-
ament equations were numerically evolved. It is to the
results of these nonlinear calculations that we now turn.
Recall that in the linear analysis we considered the
dynamics of harmonic modes with wavelengths commen-
surate with the ﬁlament length. We thereby implicitly
adopted periodic boundary conditions, eﬀectively taking
our ﬁlament to correspond to a torus being stretched. In
reality, however, the ﬁlament has ﬁnite length and makes
contact with a rheometer plate at each of its ends. The
no-slip boundary condition that must be obeyed at the
plates inevitably leads, during ﬁlament stretching, to a
shear component in the ﬂow ﬁeld in the transition zone
between the ﬂuid that contacts the plates and the region
of pure extensional stretching further from the plates.

This more complicated ﬂow near each plate cannot be
properly implemented at the level of our slender ﬁlament
calculation, which only accounts for pure extensional
ﬂow. However a reasonable mimic of the no-slip condition
can be achieved by employing the method suggested by

17

FIG. 5. Eﬀect of the no-slip boundary condition at the
rheometer plates in seeding heterogeneity even before any true
material instability causes signiﬁcant necking. Outline shows
a purely Newtonian ﬂuid stretched to a Hencky strain  = 2.0,
within our 1D slender ﬁlament approach.

Stokes et al. [64], whereby the background solvent viscos-
ity is taken to diverge near the plates, thereby acting to
‘pin’ the ﬂuid to the plates. The form of the divergence
was derived, for a Newtonian ﬂuid, by asymptotically
matching a lubrication solution near each plate with a
slender ﬁlament approximation far from the plates, and
is as follows:

(cid:34)

(cid:18) r0e−¯

(cid:19)2

u

1
32

(cid:19)2(cid:35)

(cid:18) r0e−¯

1 − u

+

1
32

η(u) = η

1 +

, (VII.1)

where r0 is the initial radius of the sample. (In principle
this form should be rederived for each given constitutive
equation in turn, but that task would be prohibitively
complicated and we do not tackle it here. We assume in-
stead that this form provides a reasonable model of the
essential physics for non-Newtonian ﬂuids too.) Impos-
ing this boundary condition sets the strain rate at each
end-plate to zero. In this way the ﬁlament area remains
pinned to its initial value at each plate, and no viscoelas-
tic stress develops there. The ﬂuid velocity exactly fol-
lows that of the plates.

Even in the absence of a true necking instability, this
boundary condition will lead to the development of some
spatial heterogeneity during ﬁlament stretching: the re-
gion of ﬂuid near each plate is essentially prevented from
stretching properly, so the central region of the ﬁlament
thins proportionately more quickly (Fig 5).

In view of this, one might in fact question the basis of
our linear stability calculations in Secs. IV to VI, which
assumed the ﬁlament to stretch in a purely uniform way
before any true necking instability arises. However the
heterogeneity arising from the no-slip condition tends to
be localised near the plates, with the central region re-
maining relatively uniform until necking arises. The cri-
teria of Sec. V should therefore still be expected to hold,
provided they are calculated using the material functions
in the central region of the ﬁlament, well away from the
plates. Nonetheless, it is reasonable to assume that the
dominant source of any initial heterogeneity that later
becomes exponentially ampliﬁed by the necking instabil-
ity will be this endplate eﬀect.

With these boundary conditions, we numerically evolve
the nonlinear slender ﬁlament equations III.14 to III.17.
The fact that these are already expressed in the coextend-
ing frame removes any need for remeshing the numerical

A Entangled linear polymers

18

grid as the ﬁlament stretches. Therefore we discretize the
equations on a ﬁxed mesh of grid points and time-step the
equations using an explicit Euler algorithm for the spa-
tially local terms and 1st order upwinding for the convec-
tive terms [58], with results checked against a 3rd order
upwinding scheme. Care is taken to ensure convergence
of the results with respect to increasing the number of
grid points N and decreasing the timestep ∆t. Generally
N = 1500 is suﬃcient, although in some cases N = 2000
is required. A timestep ∆ = 1/2N 2 is usually adequate,
but in the case of violent necking we employ an adaptive
time stepping algorithm in which the values of the stress
and area after a single time-step ∆t are compared to the
corresponding values after two half timesteps ∆t/2.
If
the diﬀerence between these values exceeds a certain tol-
erance, ∆t is halved and the procedure repeated until the
tolerance met.

With these remarks in mind, we now present our re-
sults. The nonlinear necking dynamics of soft glassy ma-
terials were reported previously in Ref. [30], so we focus
here on polymeric ﬂuids. We consider both entangled
linear polymers (and wormlike micelles), studied using
the Rolie-Poly model; and entangled branched polymers,
studied using the Pom-pom model.

A. Entangled linear polymers

In this section we consider entangled linear polymeric
ﬂuids (polymers and wormlike micelles) described by the
Rolie-Poly model with ﬁnite chain stretch. We study
a highly entangled sample with entanglement number
Z = 40, which gives a chain stretch relaxation time
τs = τd/3Z = 0.00833 in our units. The values of the
other model parameters are detailed in App. A 4.

The results of our nonlinear slender ﬁlament simula-
tions are shown in Fig. 6. Panel a) shows the equivalent,
for these nonlinear calculations, of the linear stability
data discussed previously in Fig. 3f). As before, a ver-
tical cut up this plane of strain  and strain rate ˙ rep-
resents a single ﬁlament stretching run performed at a
given imposed strain rate ˙, starting with an unstretched
ﬁlament at  = 0, and with the ﬁlament being progres-
sively stretched out as the accumulated strain  increases
upward. Recall the accumulated strain  is trivially re-
lated to the time t since the inception of the ﬂow by the
relation  = ˙t, in this constant strain rate protocol. In
what follows, we sometimes ﬁnd it convenient to refer to
time and sometimes strain.
The thin black lines in Fig. 6a) show contours of con-
stant Λ(t) ≡ Ahom(t)/Amid(t), where Ahom(t) is the ﬁl-
ament area calculated at any time t by supposing the
ﬁlament were stretching in a purely uniform way, and
Amid(t) is the actual cross sectional area at the ﬁlament’s
midpoint. In this way, Λ = 1 corresponds to a uniform
ﬁlament, and Λ progressively increases as the ﬁlament
necks. In the ﬁgure the ﬁrst contour has Λ = 1, and each
successive contour crossing as  increases upwards at ﬁxed

˙ corresponds to an increase in Λ by a factor 41/20, such
that the 20th contour, which is the ﬁnal shown, repre-
sents Λ = 4. (Although this ratio of areas is relatively
modest we note that the sample is close to necking by this
time, because the global area has become very small.)
The more densely clustered the contour lines vertically
at any ﬁxed ˙, therefore, the faster necking occurs in a
ﬁlament stretching experiment at that strain rate. We
have shown only the ﬁrst 20 contour lines, assuming that
the sample will have failed altogether by the time this
contour is attained. (We recall, however, that our slen-
der ﬁlament calculation is not capable of capturing the
details of ﬁnal pinchoﬀ.)

Also included in Fig. 6a), as in Fig. 3f), is a green
dotted line showing the strain  at which the largest
eigenvalue (calculated using the values of the material
functions at the ﬁlament’s midpoint) ﬁrst becomes pos-
itive in any ﬁlament stretching experiment at a given
strain rate ˙, signifying the onset of instability to necking.
The thick black solid line depicts the strain at which the
stress curvature criterion (V.18) predicts this onset. For
strains below this black line, the true tensile stress (calcu-
lated at the ﬁlament’s midpoint) is an upwardly curving
function of time (or accumulated imposed strain). For
strains above it, the stress curves downward in time. As
can be seen, our stress curvature criterion performs well
in predicting the onset of necking (rapid crossing of Λ
contours). Some contour crossing (growth in Λ) does
however occur before true onset, mainly because of the
endplate eﬀects discussed above.

Comparing Fig. 6a) with Fig. 3f), we see that our sim-
pliﬁed linear calculation (which assumed a perfectly uni-
form base state prior to the onset of necking, together
with simpliﬁed periodic boundary conditions), already
performed rather well in predicting the onset of neck-
ing in the full nonlinear calculations. All the features of
Fig. 3f) are preserved in Fig. 6a), with any small quan-
titative diﬀerences being explained by the fact that the
material functions at the ﬁlament’s midpoint in the non-
linear simulations diﬀer slightly from those in an initially
perfectly uniform ﬁlament.

The blue long-dashed line in Fig. 6a) shows the strain
 at which the tensile force overshoot occurs. For strains
below this line, the force increases with strain. For strains
above it, the force decreases and the original Consid`ere
criterion predicts instability to necking. As can be seen,
the Consid`ere criterion performs poorly compared to our
stress curvature criterion. For example, it fails to predict
the pronounced nose-shaped window of prolonged stabil-
ity at imposed strain rates  = O(1/τR). It also contains
no information about the rate of growth beyond onset,
which our calculation provides.

The necking dynamics at the six imposed strain rate
values denoted by over-arrows in Fig. 6a) are studied
in detail in panels b) and c). At each strain rate, the
symbols in panel b) show the time-evolution of the ap-
parent extensional stress growth coeﬃcient η+
E,app(t) =
F (t)/ ˙Ahom(t). Recall that this is deﬁned as the tensile

A Entangled linear polymers

19

FIG. 6. Necking dynamics in nonlinear slender ﬁlament simulations of the Rolie-Poly model of linear entangled polymeric ﬂuids.
(a) Thin black lines show contours of the degree of necking heterogeneity. Also shown are the criteria of Sec. IV, calculated
using values of rheological functions at the ﬁlament’s midpoint: onset of positive eigenvalue to necking (green dotted line),
stress curvature criterion (thick black line) and original Consid`ere criterion (blue long dashed line). For the six imposed strain
rates indicated by arrows in (a), the apparent stress growth coeﬃcient is reported in (b) for both the nonlinear simulation
(symbols) and for a calculation in which the ﬁlament is artiﬁcially assumed to remain uniform. Counterpart results for the
ﬁlament’s cross sectional area are shown in (c): assuming homogeneous ﬂow (solid black line) and allowing for necking (broken
lines).

force F (t) normalised by the constant imposed strain rate
˙ and the time-evolving cross sectional area Ahom(t) =
A(0)L(0)/L(t) = A(0) exp(−) as calculated supposing
uniform stretching, without necking or endplate eﬀects.
It is this measure of extensional stress that would be re-
ported in a ﬁlament stretching experiment that did not
explicitly measure changes in the ﬁlament’s cross sec-

tional area due to necking. For comparison we also show
by solid lines in panel b) the stress growth coeﬃcient
calculated by assuming (incorrectly) that the ﬁlament re-
mains uniform during stretching. As can be seen, when
necking sets in the measured apparent stress growth co-
eﬃcient decreases compared to that of the purely homo-
geneous calculation, because of a reduction in the force

A Entangled linear polymers

20

FIG. 7. Left) Sketch of strain to failure in ﬁlament stretching as a function of imposed strain rate, from [43]. Right) Master
curve of experimental data showing strain to failure in ﬁlament stretching as a function of imposed strain rate, from [76].
(Strain rate shown in units of inverse reptation time, as in our calculations.

F (t) as the ﬁlament thins in the neck. Such curves show
a close resemblance to experimental ones, for example in
[8]. For the same six values of imposed strain rate, panel
Fig. 6c) shows the time-evolution of the cross sectional
area at the ﬁlament’s midpoint as a function of accumu-
lated strain. Also shown by a solid line for comparison
is the area evolution A(t) = A(0) exp(−) supposing per-
fectly uniform stretching.

Recalling our discussion in Sec. VI above about the
four diﬀerent regimes of necking dynamics predicted by
the Rolie-Poly model, the results of Fig. 6 can be sum-
marised as follows.

For small imposed strain rates ˙ < 1/τd = 1 (in our
units) the stress curvature criterion is satisﬁed, and ﬁla-
ment is unstable to necking, straight away from the in-
ception of the ﬂow. However the rate of development of
the neck is rather modest, O( ˙), giving relatively widely
spaced contours of constant Λ in Fig. 6a): the cross sec-
tional area Amid(t) at the ﬁlament midpoint (red dashed
line in Fig. 6c) deviates relatively gradually from the area
Ahom(t) = A(0)L(0)/L(t) that would be expected assum-
ing purely uniform stretching (black solid line), and a
strain  ≈ 6 is attained before signiﬁcant necking occurs.
In contrast, the tensile stress attains a steady state on
the homogeneous constitutive curve after a strain of only
 ≈ 1 at these slow imposed strain rates. A meaningful
measurement of the constitutive curve can therefore be
taken before necking occurs: the red symbols in Fig. 6b)
display a window of steady state between t = 10 and 30
before the stress then falls due to necking.

For imposed strain rates in the regime 1/τd < ˙ < 1/τR
the stress curvature criterion is again satisﬁed, and the
ﬁlament is unstable to necking, right from the inception
of the ﬂow. However in this regime the neck develops
much more rapidly, as seen by the closely spaced contours
in panel a), consistent with the sudden fall at a strain
 ≈ 1.5 in Fig. 6b) of the actual cross sectional area at

the ﬁlament’s midpoint (green line) from the area evolu-
tion calculated supposing uniform stretching (black line).
As discussed in Sec. 3, this violent necking behaviour
is consistent with the ﬂat region in the material’s un-
derlying constitutive curve in this regime of strain rates
(Fig. 2f), associated with the saturation of chain orien-
tation for ˙ > 1/τd and the absence of any signiﬁcant
chain stretch for ˙ < 1/τR. These two factors combine
to place strong limitations on any tensile stress that the
polymer can provide to restabilise any developing neck.
As a result of this rapid necking, the tensile stress does
not have time to attain a steady state on the homoge-
neous constitutive curve before signiﬁcant heterogeneity
develops: the green symbols depart from the green line
in Fig. 6b) before steady state is attained.

At larger strain rates O(1/τR), signiﬁcant chain stretch
can develop and provide additional tensile stress, consis-
tent with the steep slope of the underlying constitutive
curve in this window of strain rates in Fig. 2f). This ad-
ditional stress provides some stabilisation against neck-
ing and the onset of necking is deferred until a ﬁnite
strain has accumulated after the inception of the ﬂow, as
seen by the ‘upward nose’ in the green and black lines in
Fig. 6a). This is consistent with the data in Fig. 6c) for
an imposed strain rate ˙ = 100.0, which shows the area
at the ﬁlament’s midpoint remaining rather close to that
calculated assuming uniform deformation even up to a
strain  = 8.0. (Indeed, some stabilisation eﬀect due to
chain stretch can already be seen at a strain rate ˙ = 10.0,
by comparing the blue and green curves in Fig. 6c.) How-
ever, in this regime of strain rates a typical strain  ≈ 10.0
would be required for the tensile stress to attain the ho-
mogeneous constitutive curve (in a thought experiment
where the ﬁlament remained uniform), as seen by the
black solid line in panel b). Because of this, a meaning-
ful measurement of the constitutive curve still cannot be
taken before the ﬁlament necks and the stress declines

B Branched polymers

21

(black symbols in panel b) compared to that in the ho-
mogeneous calculation. Note that the overshoot shown
by the black symbols in panel b) is in the apparent stress
growth coeﬃcient, and stems from the decline in tensile
force as the ﬁlament fails at the neck. The Rolie-Poly
model lacks any overshoot in the true stress growth co-
eﬃcient (Fig. 1).

Finally for ˙ > 1/τs the chain stretch saturates and
the additional tensile stress that can be provided by this
mechanism levels oﬀ, as seen in the constitutive curve in
Fig. 2f) at high strain rates. Therefore the polymer is
once again unable to supply additional stress to resta-
bilise any developing neck, leading to more sudden ﬁla-
ment ‘rupture’ (cyan and magenta symbols in panel b)
and lines in panel c). Sudden cohesive rupture is widely
reported experimentally at high strain rates, as for ex-
ample in Ref. [8] compared to a smoother, more ductile
necking process at lower strain rates.

In the experimental literature, the strain at which a
sample fails is often discussed in terms of a master curve,
plotted as a function of imposed strain rate. This was
introduced as a sketch [43, 44], which we reproduce here
in Fig. 7(left). Experimental data [42, 76] were col-
lected into such a curve for a styrene-butadiene random
(SBR) copolymer linear melt in [76], reproduced here in
Fig. 7(right). The four diﬀerent regimes in this master
plot were suggested by by [43, 44] to be interpreted as
I “ﬂow”; II “transition”; III “rubbery” and IV “glassy”.
Based on our results in Figs. 2f), 3f) and 6, however,
we now suggest that these four regimes can in fact be
fully interpreted within the Rolie-Poly model as I: a slow
ﬂow regime with gentle necking for ˙ < 1/τd; II: a regime
in which the chain orientation saturates, leading to fast
necking for 1/τd < ˙ < 1/τR; III: a regime of increas-
ing molecular stretch, which provides some stabilisation
against necking for ˙ = O(1/τR); and IV: a regime in
which the molecular stretch saturates, leading again to
more rapid necking for ˙ > 1/τR. In particular the form
of a representative contour in Fig. 6a), characterising the
typical strain to failure, is in overall agreement with the
experimental curves in both subﬁgure shown in Fig. 7.

B. Branched polymers

We now turn to the necking dynamics of branched
polymers as modelled by the Pom-pom constitutive equa-
tion of App. A 5. We perform calculations separately for
the two sets of model parameters listed in that appendix:
PP1, describing a highly branched sample with a num-
ber of arms q = 40 attached to each end of the molecular
backbone; and PP2, with q = 5.

We consider ﬁrst PP1, for which the underlying ho-
mogeneous extensional constitutive curve was shown in
Fig. 2g), and the predictions of our linear stability calcu-
lations were shown in 3g). The counterpart results of our
full nonlinear slender ﬁlament simulations are shown in
Fig. 8(a,c,e), in the corresponding format to the results

of Fig. 6 for the Rolie-Poly model.

As can be seen, the linear stability calculation of
Fig. 3g) again performs rather well in predicting the full
nonlinear necking dynamics of the Pom-pom model, de-
spite having considered the simpler case of small pertur-
bations about a perfectly uniform ﬁlament with periodic
boundary conditions. As is evident, the stress curva-
ture criterion determines the onset of necking for low and
moderate strain rates, before the elastic Consid`ere crite-
rion takes over at high strain rates. Furthermore, the
four regimes of strain rate discussed above in the context
of linear polymers are mirrored here for the branched
polymers, as follows.

For imposed strain rates ˙ < 1/τb, where τb is the
timescale for reorientation of the chain backbone, we see
a regime of relatively gentle necking instability that is ef-
fective right from the inception of ﬂow, triggered by the
stress curvature criterion: the stress signal curves down-
ward as a function of time for all times t > 0, as seen by
the thick black line at  = 0 for these strain rates.

For the window of imposed strain rates 1/τb < ˙ <
1/τs, where τs is the timescale for relaxation of back-
bone stretch, we ﬁnd more rapid necking. This is due
to the fact that backbone reorientation has saturated in
this regime and is therefore unable to provide a coun-
terbalancing tensile stress in any developing neck. This
is consistent with the ﬂat region in the underlying con-
stitutive curve of Fig. 2g) in this window of strain rates
1/τb < ˙ < 1/τs. This window is however smaller for PP1
in Fig. 8a) than in the Rolie-Poly calculations of Fig. 6,
because we assume that the higher drag aﬀorded by the
dangling arms slows down the relaxation of the backbone
stretch relative to reorientation. The strain at which sig-
niﬁcant necking occurs for the most unstable strain rate
is accordingly around 3.0 in PP1, compared to around
1.5 for the Rolie-Poly model.

For imposed strain rates ˙ = O(1/τs) signiﬁcant back-
bone stretch develops, consistent with the strong slope
in the underlying constitutive curve of Fig. 2g) for such
strain rates. As in linear polymers, this can provide an
additional tensile stress and act temporarily to stabilise
the ﬁlament against necking over a ﬁnite window of accu-
mulated strain after the inception of ﬂow. This is evident
in the upswing in the black solid and green dashed lines
at ˙τb ≈ 10.0 in Fig. 8a). At small times (or accumulated
strains) the stress curves upward as a function of time (or
strain), consistent with the ﬁlament being stable against
necking. Only after a ﬁnite strain has accumulated does
the stress curve downward and trigger instability.

For the highest strain rates ˙ > τs the chain stretch
saturates, the underlying constitutive curve ﬂattens out,
and the stabilisation mechanism just described is lost.
Indeed, in the original version of the Pom-pom model a
hard cutoﬀ is imposed in the degree of backbone stretch
that can develop, with the stretch taken to be entrop-
ically limited by the branching priority, λ ≤ q. This
pronounced nonlinearity results in the elastic Consid`ere
mode of necking instability setting in at these high strain

B Branched polymers

22

FIG. 8. Counterpart of Fig. 6, now for the Pom-pom model of branched polymers. Sub-ﬁgure (a)-(c) pertain to sample PP1
and sub-ﬁgures (d)-(f) to sample PP2. Model parameter values for each sample are given in App. A.

rates, at a strain denoted by the red dot-dashed line in
Fig. 8). Once active, this mode leads to to catastrophi-
cally fast necking.

Consistent with this discussion of the diﬀerent neck-
ing regimes, in the time-signals of the apparent stress
growth coeﬃcient and the cross sectional area at the
ﬁlament’s midpoint (Figs. 8b,c) we again see relatively
smooth necking at low strain rates, with much more vio-
lent ‘rupture’ at high strain rate.

As in the Rolie-Poly model, the original Consid`ere cri-
terion (blue long dashed line in Fig. 8a) performs less well
compared to our calculations in determining the onset of
necking. For example, it cannot predict the pronounced
upswing of stability against necking around ˙ = 10.0 evi-
denced by our stress curvature criterion (black solid line)
and eigenvalue calculations (green dashed line). It says
nothing of the rate at which a neck develops once insta-
bility sets in, and thereby fails (for example) to distin-
guish between the relatively gentle necking for imposed
ﬂow rates ˙ < 1/τb compared to the faster necking for

1/τb < ˙ < 1/τs. Finally, it fails to distinguish between
the two diﬀerent modes of instability that we predict:
stress curvature at low strain to moderate strain rates,
and elastic Consid`ere at high strain rates. At high strain
rates, however, the onset of the original Consid`ere mode
does coincide with that of our elastic Consid`ere mode,
consistent with the material behaving essentially like an
elastic solid in this regime.

A close comparison of Figs. 3g) and 8a) reveals a
greater eﬀect of the elastic Consid`ere mode in the non-
linear simulations than in the linear ones, with the red
dashed line extending to lower imposed strain rates in
Fig. 8a). The reason for this is as follows. In the linear
calculation, the background strain rate used to calculate
the instability criteria is ﬁxed throughout the whole run,
with any necking perturbations that arise being inﬁnites-
imal in comparison (by deﬁnition of the linearisation).
In contrast, the nonlinear calculation does account for
changes to the rheological quantities in the developing
neck. In particular, because the neck (by deﬁnition) thins

B Branched polymers

23

faster than the surrounding material, the ﬂuid within it
becomes subject to a larger strain rate than the globally
imposed one. After some time of necking via the stress
curvature mode, therefore, it suﬀers elastic Consid`ere at
a lower globally imposed strain rate than would be pre-
dicted by the linear calculation alone.

Results for sample PP2 with fewer arms, q = 5, are
shown in Fig. 8(d)-(f). The same four regimes as for
PP1 and the Rolie-Poly model are again evident, though
with slightly less well separated features. The shift in the
elastic Consid`ere threshold compared to that in the linear
calculations is particularly pronounced in this case, due
to the much stronger eﬀect of the hard cutoﬀ in λ for this
smaller q. In consequence, after an interval of necking via
the stress curvature mode, the region of material in the
neck would eventually succumb to the elastic Consid`ere
mode at any value of the globally imposed strain rate.
For strain rate less then around 20.0, however, this may
be unimportant because the sample will in practice have
failed altogether via the stress curvature mode before the
elastic Consid`ere mode has chance to set in.

The detailed necking dynamics for q = 5 at an im-
posed strain rate ˙ = 40.0 are shown in Fig. 9. Panel a)
shows as dashed, dash-dot and solid lines respectively the
mid-point true stress, apparent stress and (artiﬁcial) ho-
mogeneous stress growth coeﬃcient as a function of accu-
mulated strain  = ˙t in our necking simulation. (Recall
the deﬁnition of these coeﬃcients at the end of Sec. I.)
Panel b) shows snapshots of the ﬁlament’s proﬁle, with
the tensile stress represented by the colour scale. (Al-
though the proﬁles are graphically rendered in 3D, recall
that our calculations are performed in 1D.) As can be
seen, at early times (proﬁles a-f), the ﬁlament area and
tensile stress are uniform along ﬁlament, apart from in
a small region due to the (mimicked) no-slip condition
near each endplate. Once the stress curvature mode sets
in at a strain  ≈ 2.0 the stress proﬁle starts to become
inhomogeneous. Finally, the elastic Consid`ere criterion
is satisﬁed at the ﬁlament’s midpoint around a strain
 ≈ 3.2 and the sample quickly fails.

It is worth noting, however, that the presence of a true
elastic Consid`ere mode in the Pom-pom model relies on
the hard cutoﬀ in backbone stretch imposed in the origi-
nal version of the model as proposed by [12, 49]. Versions
of the model proposed since, for example in Ref. [69], re-
move this upper bound in the backbone stretch. There-
fore for comparison with our results shown in Fig. 8 for
the hard cutoﬀ, we show in Fig. 10 counterpart (linear
stability) results (for PP1) with the maximum stretch
limit removed as in [69]. As can be seen, this removes
the elastic Consid`ere mode and gives very much gentler
necking even at high imposed strain rates. However ex-
perimental evidence (e.g. [8]) suggests that branched ma-
terials do show a rather sudden rupture at suﬃciently
high strain rates. This may indicate a harder saturation
in backbone stretch than is accounted for in [69]. Indeed,
we suggest that the severity of necking may help to shed
some light on the appropriate form of model dynamics in

FIG. 9. (a) Apparent (dash-dot line) and true mid-point (dot-
ted line) extensional stress growth coeﬃcients versus time in
the Pom-pom model (PP2) at a imposed strain rate ˙ = 40.0.
Solid line shows the same quantity in a calculation that arti-
ﬁcially constrains the ﬁlament to remain uniform. (b) Proﬁle
snapshots at the times indicated in (a), with the colourscale
showing the tensile stress.

this regime.

VIII. CONCLUSIONS

We have studied the necking dynamics of a ﬁlament of
viscoelastic material subject to uniaxial tensile stretch-
ing. By means of a linear stability analysis performed
in a constitutive equation written in highly general form,

24

tensile force, and our elastic Consid`ere criterion reduces
to the widely discussed Consid`ere criterion for necking in
solids. An important contribution of this work, however,
is to show that the original Consid`ere criterion fails to
correctly predict the onset of necking in the regime of
viscoelastic ﬂows at ﬁnite imposed ﬂow rates ˙τ . Those
parts of the rheology literature that have discussed neck-
ing onset in terms of the Consid`ere criterion might there-
fore warrant some reinterpretation.

We have studied in detail the way in which our two
modes of necking instability manifest themselves within
the microscopically motivated Rolie-Poly model of en-
tangled linear polymers and wormlike micelles, and the
Pom-pom model of entangled branched polymers. In par-
ticular, we have demonstrated four distinct regimes of
necking dynamics, depending on the value of the imposed
strain rate relative to the inverse reptation and stretch
relaxation times. Our theoretically predicted curve of
strain-to-failure as a function of imposed strain rate is
consistent with master curves reported in the experimen-
tal literature [42–44, 76].

This manuscript has concerned necking at constant im-
posed Hencky strain rate. In a separate manuscript [31]
we consider the protocols of constant imposed tensile
stress, and constant imposed tensile force.

We hope that our calculations will stimulate exper-
imental work to conﬁrm (or disprove) the criteria of-
fered here, potentially enabling the rheology community
to move beyond the interpretation of necking in complex
ﬂuids in terms of the Consid`ere criterion for necking in
solids. It would be particularly interesting to determine
whether the appearance of an inﬂexion point (and sub-
sequent downward curvature) in the tensile stress signal
indeed acts as a trigger for the onset of necking.

Acknowledgements – The research leading to these re-
sults has received funding from the European Research
Council under the European Union’s Seventh Framework
Programme (FP7/2007-2013) / ERC grant agreement
number 279365. The authors thank Gareth McKinley
for suggesting that they work on this problem; and Ole
Hassager, Joe Leeman, and Tom McLeish for interesting
discussions.

FIG. 10. Counterpart to Fig. 8a) for the Pom-pom model
with parameter values PP1, but with the cutoﬀ condition on
chain stretch removed.

we have predicted criteria for the onset of necking that
can be expressed simply in terms of characteristic signa-
tures in the shapes of the experimentally measured rhe-
ological response functions. Given the highly generalised
nature of this calculation, we suggest that the criteria of-
fered here might be expected to apply universally to all
materials. We have provided evidence for their general-
ity by showing them to apply in numerical calculations
of six popularly used constitutive models: Oldroyd B,
Giesekus, FENE-CR, Rolie-Poly, Pom-pom and a ﬂuid-
ity model of soft glassy materials.

Two distinct modes of necking instability are pre-
dicted. The ﬁrst sets in when the tensile stress signal
ﬁrst curves downward as a function of the time (or ac-
cumulated strain) since the inception of the ﬂow. Once
active, it causes necking with a relatively gentle rate of
development. The second mode sets in when a carefully
deﬁned ‘elastic derivative’ of the tensile force ﬁrst slopes
downward as a function of time (or strain), and gives
much more violent failure. Whether this ‘elastic deriva-
tive’ has any easily measurable experimental counterpart
remains an open question. Nonetheless, in the limit of
large strain rate ˙τ → ∞ the elastic derivative tends
towards the ordinary time (or strain) derivative of the

∗ d.m.hoyle@durham.ac.uk; http://community.dur.ac.uk/d.m.hoyle/
† suzanne.ﬁelding@durham.ac.uk;

http://community.dur.ac.uk/suzanne.ﬁelding/

[1] N. J. Alvarez, J. Mar´ın, Q. Huang, M. Michelsen, and
O. Hassager. Creep Measurements Conﬁrm Steady Flow
after Stress Maximum in Extension of Branched Polymer
Melts. Physical Review Letters, 110(16):168301, apr 2013.
[2] R. J. Andrade and J. M. Maia. A study on the ﬂow, fail-
ure, and rupture mechanisms of low-density polyethylene
in controlled-stress uniaxial extensional ﬂow. Journal of
Rheology, 55(5):925–937, 2011.

[3] M. Arciniaga, C.-C. Kuo, and M. Dennin. Size dependent

brittle to ductile transition in bubble rafts. Colloids and
Surfaces A: Physicochemical and engineering aspects, 382
(1-3):36–41, jun 2011.

[4] D. W. Auhl, J. Ramirez, A. E. Likhtman, P. Chambon,
and C. Fernyhough. Linear and nonlinear shear ﬂow be-
havior of monodisperse polyisoprene melts with a large
range of molecular weights. Journal of Rheology, 52(3):
801, 2008.

[5] A. Bach, H. K. Rasmussen, and O. Hassager. Exten-
sional viscosity for polymer melts measured in the ﬁla-
ment stretching rheometer. Journal of Rheology, 47(2):
429, 2003.

[6] V. C. Barroso and J. M. Maia. Time dependent eﬀects on
the rupture of molten linear polymers in extension. Jour-
nal of Non-Newtonian Fluid Mechanics, 126(2-3):93–103,
mar 2005.

[7] V. C. Barroso and J. M. Maia. Inﬂuence of long-chain
branching on the rheological behavior of polyethylene in
shear and extensional ﬂow. Polymer Engineering & Sci-
ence, 45(7):984–997, jul 2005.

[8] V. C. Barroso, R. J. Andrade, and J. M. Maia. An exper-
imental study on the criteria for failure of polymer melts
in uniaxial extension: The test case of a polyisobutylene
melt in diﬀerent deformation regimes. Journal of Rheol-
ogy, 54(3):605–618, 2010.

[9] A. Bhardwaj, E. Miller, and J. P. Rothstein. Filament
stretching and capillary breakup extensional rheometry
measurements of viscoelastic wormlike micelle solutions.
Journal of Rheology, 51(2007):693, 2007.

[10] P. P. Bhat, O. a. Basaran, and M. Pasquali. Dynam-
ics of viscoelastic liquid ﬁlaments: Low capillary number
ﬂows. Journal of Non-Newtonian Fluid Mechanics, 150:
211–225, 2008.

[11] P. P. Bhat, S. Appathurai, M. T. Harris, M. Pasquali,
G. H. McKinley, and O. a. Basaran. Formation of beads-
on-a-string structures during break-up of viscoelastic ﬁl-
aments. Nature Physics, 6(8):625–631, jun 2010.

[12] R. J. Blackwell, T. C. B. McLeish, and O. G. Harlen.
Molecular dragstrain coupling in branched polymer
melts. Journal of Rheology, 44(1):121, 2000.

[13] T. I. Burghelea, Z. Star´y, and H. M¨unstedt. On the
viscosity overshoot during the uniaxial extension of a low
density polyethylene. Journal of Non-Newtonian Fluid
Mechanics, 166(19-20):1198–1209, oct 2011.

[14] M. E. Cates. Nonlinear viscoelasticity of wormlike mi-
celles (and other reversibly breakable polymers). The
Journal of Physical Chemistry, 94(1):371–375, jan 1990.
[15] M. E. Cates and P. Sollich. Tensorial constitutive mod-
els for disordered foams, dense emulsions, and other soft
nonergodic materials. Journal of Rheology, 48(1):193,
2004.

[16] M. Chilcott and J. Rallison. Creeping ﬂow of dilute poly-
mer solutions past cylinders and spheres. Journal of Non-
Newtonian Fluid Mechanics, 29:381–432, 1988.

[17] C. Clasen, J. Eggers, M. a. Fontelos, J. Li, and G. H.
McKinley. The beads-on-string structure of viscoelastic
threads. Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 556:283, may 2006.
[18] M. Consid`ere. Memoire sur l’emploi du fer et de l’acier
dans les constructions. Ann. Ponts Chaussees, 9:574,
1885.

[19] M. Cromer, L. P. Cook, and G. H. McKinley. Extensional
ﬂow of wormlike micellar solutions. Chemical Engineer-
ing Science, 64(22):4588–4596, 2009.

[20] M. M. Denn, C. J. S. Petrie, and P. Avenas. Mechanics of
steady spinning of a viscoelastic liquid. AIChE Journal,
21(4):791–799, 1975.

[21] M. Doi and S. Edwards. The Theory of Polymer Dynam-

ics. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1986.

[22] M. Doi and T. Ohta. Dynamics and rheology of complex
interfaces. I. The Journal of Chemical Physics, 95(2):
1242, 1991.

[23] L. Eastgate, J. S. Langer, and L. Pechenik. Dynamics of
Large-Scale Plastic Deformation and the Necking Insta-
bility in Amorphous Solids. Physical Review Letters, 90
(4):045506, jan 2003.

[24] V. Entov and E. Hinch. Eﬀect of a spectrum of relaxation

25

times on the capillary thinning of a ﬁlament of elastic
liquid. Journal of Non-Newtonian Fluid Mechanics, 72
(1):31–53, sep 1997.

[25] S. M. Fielding. Criterion for Extensional Necking Insta-
bility in Polymeric Fluids. Physical Review Letters, 107
(25):258301, dec 2011.

[26] S. M. Fielding, P. Sollich, and M. E. Cates. Ageing and
Rheology in Soft Materials. Journal of Rheology, 323
(2000):54, 1999.

[27] M. G. Forest and Q. Wang. Change-of-type behavior in
viscoelastic slender jet models. Theoretical and Compu-
tational Fluid Dynamics, 2(1):1–25, 1990.

[28] O. Hassager, M. I. Kolte, and M. Renardy. Failure and
nonfailure of ﬂuid ﬁlaments in extension. Journal of Non-
Newtonian Fluid Mechanics, 76(1-3):137–151, apr 1998.
[29] S. J. Haward, M. S. N. Oliveira, M. A. Alves, and G. H.
McKinley. Optimized Cross-Slot Flow Geometry for Mi-
croﬂuidic Extensional Rheometry. Physical Review Let-
ters, 109(12):128301, sep 2012.

[30] D. M. Hoyle and S. M. Fielding. Age-Dependent Modes of
Extensional Necking Instability in Soft Glassy Materials.
Physical Review Letters, 114(15):158301, 2015.

[31] D. M. Hoyle and S. M. Fielding. Criteria for extensional
necking instability in complex ﬂuids and soft solids: im-
posed stress and force protocols. Journal of Rheology,
2016.

[32] D. M. Hoyle, Q. Huang, D. W. Auhl, D. G. Hassell, H. K.
Rasmussen, A. L. Skov, O. G. Harlen, O. Hassager, and
T. C. B. McLeish. Transient overshoot extensional rheol-
ogy of long chain branched polyethylenes: experimental
and numerical comparisons between ﬁlament stretching
and cross-slot ﬂow. Journal of Rheology, 57(1):293–313,
2013.

[33] J. Hutchinson and K. Neale. Inﬂuence of strain-rate sen-

sitivity on necking under uniaxial tension, 1977.

[34] G. Ianniruberto and G. Marrucci. Convective constraint
release (CCR) revisited. Journal of Rheology, 58(1):89,
2014.

[35] G. Ianniruberto and G. Marrucci. Do Repeated Shear
Startup Runs of Polymeric Liquids Reveal Structural
Changes? ACS Macro Letters, 3(6):552–555, jun 2014.

[36] Y. Ide and J. L. White.

Investigation of failure dur-
ing elongational ﬂow of polymer melts. Journal of Non-
Newtonian Fluid Mechanics, 2:281–298, 1977.

[37] Y. M. Joshi and M. M. Denn. Rupture of entangled poly-
meric liquids in elongational ﬂow. Journal of Rheology,
47(1):291–298, 2003.

[38] Y. M. Joshi and M. M. Denn. Rupture of entangled
polymeric liquids in elongational ﬂow with dissipation.
Journal of Rheology, 48(3):591–598, 2004.

[39] R. G. Larson. Constitutive equations for polymer melts
and solutions. Butterworth Publishers, Stoneham, 1988.
[40] A. E. Likhtman and R. S. Graham. Simple constitutive
equation for linear polymer melts derived from molecular
theory: RoliePoly equation. Journal of Non-Newtonian
Fluid Mechanics, 114(1):1–12, sep 2003.

[41] G. Liu, H. Ma, H. Lee, H. Xu, S. Cheng, H. Sun,
T. Chang, R. P. Quirk, and S.-Q. Wang. Long-chain
branched polymers to prolong homogeneous stretching
and to resist melt breakup. Polymer, 54(24):6608–6616,
2013.

[42] C. Luap, C. M¨uller, T. Schweizer, and D. C. Venerus. Si-
multaneous stress and birefringence measurements dur-
ing uniaxial elongation of polystyrene melts with narrow

molecular weight distribution. Rheologica Acta, 45(1):
83–91, sep 2005.

[43] A. Y. Malkin and C. J. S. Petrie. Some conditions for
rupture of polymer liquids in extension. Journal of Rhe-
ology, 41(1):1–25, jan 1997.

[44] A. Y. Malkin, A. Arinstein, and V. G. Kulichikhin. Poly-
mer extension ﬂows and instabilities. Progress in Polymer
Science, 39(5):959–978, 2014.

[45] G. Marrucci. Dynamics of entanglements: A nonlinear
model consistent with the Cox-Merz rule. Journal of
Non-Newtonian Fluid Mechanics, 62(2-3):279–289, 1996.
[46] C. McIlroy and O. G. Harlen. Modelling capillary break-
up of particulate suspensions. Physics of Fluids, 26(3):
033101, mar 2014.

[47] G. H. McKinley and O. Hassager. The Considere Condi-
tion and Rapid Stretching of Linear and Branched Poly-
mer Melts. Journal of Rheology, 43(5):1195–1212, 1999.
[48] G. H. McKinley and T. Sridhar. Filament-Stretching
Rheometry of Complex Fluids. Annual Review of Fluid
Mechanics, 34(1):375–415, 2002.

[49] T. C. B. McLeish and R. G. Larson. Molecular consti-
tutive equations for a class of branched polymers: The
pom-pom polymer. Journal of Rheology, 42(February):
81, 1998.

[50] H. M¨unstedt. Viscoelasticity of polystyrene melts in ten-
sile creep experiments. Rheologica Acta, 14:1077–1088,
1975.

[51] H. M¨unstedt. Rheological experiments at constant stress
as eﬃcient method to characterize polymeric materials.
Journal of Rheology, 58(3):565–587, 2014.

[52] H. M¨unstedt and Z. Star´y. Steady states in extensional
ﬂow of strain hardening polymer melts and the uncer-
tainties of their determination. Journal of Rheology, 57
(4):1065, 2013.

[53] Note1. This arises because GWzz and σE do not coincide
in this regime: instead Wxx and Wzz are of comparable
size and both contribute to σE. Recall that our deriva-
tion of the criterion above assumed Wzz ≡ Z to be large
compared to all other components of W .

[54] Note2. This quantitative discrepancy arises because in
the Pom-pom model the viscoelastic tensile stress de-
pends not only on W but also on the auxiliary variable λ.
Our derivation of onset criterion assumed the viscoelastic
stress to be given simply by GWzz.

[55] D. O. Olagunju. A 1-D theory for extensional deforma-
tion of a viscoelastic ﬁlament under exponential stretch-
ing. Journal of Non-Newtonian Fluid Mechanics, 87:27–
46, 1999.

[56] D. O. Olagunju. Extensional ﬂow of a viscoelastic ﬁla-
ment governed by the FENE-CR model. International
Journal of Non-Linear Mechanics, 46(1):73–78, 2011.

[57] C. J. S. Petrie. Consid`ere reconsidered: Necking of poly-
meric liquids. Chemical Engineering Science, 64(22):
4693–4700, nov 2009.

[58] W. H. Press, S. A. Teukolsky, W. T. Vetterling, and B. P.
Flannery. Numerical Recipes 3rd Edition: The art of
Scientiﬁc Computing. Cambridge University Press, New
York, 2007.

[59] H. K. Rasmussen. Catastrophic failure of polymer melts
during extension. Journal of Non-Newtonian Fluid Me-
chanics, 198:136–140, 2013.

[60] H. K. Rasmussen and A. Bach. On the bursting of linear
polymer melts in inﬂation processes. Rheologica Acta, 44
(5):435–445, apr 2005.

26

[61] H. K. Rasmussen, J. K. Nielsen, A. Bach, and O. Has-
sager. Viscosity overshoot in the start-up of uniaxial
elongation of low density polyethylene melts. Journal
of Rheology, 49(2):369, 2005.

[62] M. I. Smith, R. Besseling, M. E. Cates, and V. Bertola.
Dilatancy in the ﬂow and fracture of stretched colloidal
suspensions. Nature communications, 1(8):114, jan 2010.
[63] P. Sollich, F. Lequeux, P. H´ebraud, and M. E. Cates.
Rheology of Soft Glassy Materials. Physical Review Let-
ters, 78(10):2020–2023, mar 1997.

[64] Y. M. Stokes, E. O. Tuck, and L. W. Schwartz. Exten-
sional fall of a very viscous ﬂuid drop. Quarterly Jour-
nal of Mechanics and Applied Mathematics, 53:565–582,
2000.

[65] P. Szabo, G. H. McKinley, and C. Clasen. Constant
force extensional rheometry of polymer solutions. Jour-
nal of Non-Newtonian Fluid Mechanics, 169-170:26–41,
feb 2012.

[66] M. Tembely, D. C. Vadillo, M. R. Mackley, and A. Souce-
marianadin. The matching of a one-dimensional numer-
ical simulation and experiment results for low viscosity
Newtonian and non-Newtonian ﬂuids during fast ﬁlament
stretching and subsequent break-up. Journal of Rheology,
56(1):159–183, 2012.

[67] A. Tripathi, K. C. Tam, and G. H. McKinley. Rhe-
ology and Dynamics of Associate Polymer Solutions in
Shear and Extension: Theory and Experiments. Macro-
molecules, 39:1981–1999, 2006.

[68] D. C. Vadillo, M. Tembely, N. F. Morrison, O. G. Harlen,
M. R. Mackley, and A. Soucemarianadin. The matching
of polymer solution fast ﬁlament stretching, relaxation,
and break up experimental results with 1D and 2D nu-
merical viscoelastic simulation. Journal of Rheology, 56
(6):1491–1516, 2012.

[69] W. M. H. Verbeeten, G. W. M. Peters, and F. P. T. Baai-
jens. Numerical simulations of the planar contraction
ﬂow for a polyethylene melt using the XPP model. Jour-
nal of Non-Newtonian Fluid Mechanics, 117(2-3):73–84,
feb 2004.

[70] M. H. Wagner, H. Bastian, A. Bernnat, S. Kurzbeck,
and C. K. Chai. Determination of elongational viscosity
of polymer melts by RME and Rheotens experiments.
Rheologica Acta, 41(4):316–325, may 2002.

[71] Y. Wang and S.-Q. Wang. From elastic deformation to
terminal ﬂow of a monodisperse entangled melt in uniax-
ial extension. Journal of Rheology, 52(2008):1275–1290,
2008.

[72] Y. Wang and S.-Q. Wang. Rupture in rapid uniaxial
extension of linear entangled melts. Rheologica Acta, 49:
1179–1185, 2010.

[73] Y. Wang and S.-Q. Wang. Salient features in uniaxial
extension of polymer melts and solutions: Progressive
loss of entanglements, yielding, non-Gaussian stretching,
and rupture. Macromolecules, 44:5427–5435, 2011.

[74] Y. Wang, P. Boukany, S.-Q. Wang, and X. Wang. Elas-
tic breakup in uniaxial extension of entangled polymer
melts. Physical Review Letters, 99(December):1–4, 2007.
[75] M. F. Webster, H. Matallah, K. Sujatha, and M. J. Ba-
naai. Numerical modelling of step-strain for stretched
ﬁlaments. Journal of Non-Newtonian Fluid Mechanics,
151:38–58, 2008.

[76] X. Zhu and S.-Q. Wang. Mechanisms for diﬀerent failure
modes in startup uniaxial extension: Tensile (rupture-
like) failure and necking. Journal of Rheology, 57(1):223,

2013.

Appendix A: Constitutive models

We now detail the constitutive models used in our nu-
merical calculations. As discussed in Sec. III B of the
main text, in each case the viscoelastic stress Σ can be
written as the product of a constant modulus G and a
tensorial function S of a dimensionless microstructural
conformation tensor W , together with any other micro-
scopic variables λ, Q,··· relevant to the ﬂuid under con-
sideration:

Σ = GS(W , λ, Q,··· ).

(A.1)

The dynamics of the conformation tensor is then speciﬁed
by a diﬀerential equation of the general form

DW
Dt

= f (∇v, W , λ, Q··· ),

(A.2)

27

with a characteristic relaxation time τ (set by the thermal
energy, the bead radius, and the solvent viscosity).

As discussed in the main text, for a sustained imposed
extensional strain rate ˙ > 1/2τ the Oldroyd B model
displays an extensional catastrophe in which the dumb-
bells stretch out indeﬁnitely and the extensional stress
grows indeﬁnitely. The constitutive curve is accordingly
undeﬁned for ˙ > 1/2τ .

2. FENE-CR model

The phenomenological FENE-CR model regularises
the extensional catastrophe of the Oldroyd B model by
insisting that the extension of the polymer chains (dumb-
bells) must remain ﬁnite in practice at all deformation
rates.
It does so by replacing the Hookean spring law
with a non-linear spring law [16], in which the exten-
sional stress

Σ = Gf (W ) (W − I) ,

(A.7)

(A.8)

(A.9)

with counterpart scalar equations for the dynamics of
λ, Q,··· , of the same diﬀerential form.

For notational convenience we deﬁne the Lagrangian

derivative

and the conformation tensor obeys

∇
W = − 1
τ

f (W ) (W − I) .

DW
Dt

=

∂W
∂t

+ v · ∇W ,

Here

(A.3)

and the upper convected derivative

∇
W =

DW
Dt

− W · K − KT · W ,

(A.4)

with velocity gradient tensor Kαβ = ∂αvβ.

1. Oldroyd B model

The phenomenological Oldroyd B model represents
each polymer chain in a dilute polymer solution as a
simpliﬁed dumbbell comprising two beads connected by
a Hookean spring. The relevant conformation tensor
W = (cid:104)RR(cid:105) is then the ensemble average (cid:104)(cid:105) of the outer
dyad of the dumbbell end-to-end vector R, which is taken
to have unit length in the absence of ﬂow.

The viscoelastic stress

Σ = G (W − I) ,

(A.5)

with a constant modulus G (set by the thermal energy
kBT , and the volume density of dumbbells.) In addition
to the Hookean spring force, each bead also experiences
viscous drag against the solvent [39], and stochastic ther-
mal ﬂuctuations. With these dynamics, the conformation
tensor obeys

f (W ) =

L2

L2 − R2 =

1

1 − δT /3

,

in which 3R2 = T = tr(W ) and L is a parameter that
sets the maximum length of the polymer chains. We
write L = δ−1/2 and work instead with the parameter
δ. (The limit δ → 0 corresponds to Oldroyd B dynamics
with inﬁnite extensibility.) The FENE-CR model has a
well deﬁned extensional constitutive curve at all strain
rates ˙, with a ﬁnite limiting extensional viscosity Gτ /δ
as ˙ → ∞

3. Giesekus model

The phenomenological Giesekus model was developed
in an attempt to model more concentrated polymers solu-
tions and melts, starting from the simple dumbbell model
for dilute solutions. It invokes an anisotropic drag such
that the relaxation time of a molecule (dumbbell) is al-
tered when the surrounding molecules (dumbbells) are
oriented [39]. The viscoelastic stress
Σ = G(W − I),

(A.10)

with the conformation tensor obeying the dynamics

∇
W = − 1
τ

(W − I) − α
τ

(W − I)2 .

(A.11)

∇
W = − 1
τ

(W − I) ,

(A.6)

The parameter α controls the degree of drag anisotropy,
and must lie in the range 0 ≤ α ≤ 1. The limit α → 0

3 Giesekus model

28

Model

Oldroyd-B
Giesekus
FENE-CR

non-stretch Rolie-Poly

stretch Rolie-Poly

ﬁnite-stretch Rolie-Poly

Pom-pom (PP1)
Pom-pom (PP2)
Doi-Ohta ﬂuidity

Non-linear parameters

-

α = 0.001
δ = 0.001
β = 0.0

β = 0.0, δ = −0.5, τR = 0.00833 (Z = 40)

β = 0.0, δ = −0.5, τR = 0.00833 and f = 0.000625 (Z = 40)

τs = 0.1 and q = 40
τs = 0.1 and q = 5

τw = 1000 and µ = 0.1

TABLE I. Parameter values used in our numerical studies of the constitutive models. The solvent viscosity is taken as η = 0.001
in all cases.

recovers Oldroyd B dynamics. For α > 0 the Giesekus
model regularises the extensional catastrophe of the Ol-
droyd B model and has a well deﬁned constitutive curve
at all extension rates, with a ﬁnite limiting extensional
viscosity Gτ /α in the limit ˙ → ∞. For matched (small)
values of α and δ the steady state extensional constitutive
curves of the Giesekus and FENE-CR models coincide.
As shown in the main text, their extensional dynamics
also closely correspond, though with some quantitative
diﬀerences.

∇
W = − 1
τd

(W − I) −

2

τs (1 − f T /3)

Here τd and τs are respectively the characteristic
timescales of reptation and of chain-stretch relaxation.
These are assumed to have the ratio

τd
τs

= 3Z,

(A.13)

where Z is the number of entanglements per chain.

In our numerics we take Z = 40, corresponding to a
well entangled system as used for example in Ref. [4].
The parameter β sets the degree of CCR. (Note that the
β used here is distinct from the one used in the deﬁnition
of the toy model in the main text, which is also repeated
in Eqn. A.28 below.) Following [40] we take β = 0.0 and
δ = −1/2. The factor (1−f T /3) accounts for ﬁnite chain
extensibility, as in Eqn. A.7 for the FENE-CR model.
This gives a bounded tensile polymer stress of 3G/f in
the limit ˙ → ∞.

4. Rolie-Poly model of linear polymers

The three models presented so far are phenomenolog-
ical in nature, based on simple dumbbell descriptions.
The Rolie-Poly model [40] provides a more microscopi-
cally motivated description of concentrated solutions and
melts of linear polymers. As discussed in the main text,
it is based on the tube theory of Doi and Edwards [21] in
which any given polymer chain is dynamically restricted
by a conﬁning tube of topological entanglements with
the surrounding chains, and is assumed to refresh its
conﬁguration by the basic dynamical process of repta-
tion, chain stretch relaxation and convective constraint
release [34, 35, 45] (CCR). Incorporating these process
into a diﬀerential constitutive equation for the dynam-
ics of W = (cid:104)RR(cid:105), with R the end-to-end vector of a
polymer chain, gives

(cid:32)

1 −

(cid:33)(cid:34)

(cid:114) 3

T

(cid:18) T

(cid:19)δ

3

(cid:35)

W + β

.

(A.12)

(W − I)

For highly entangled chains (large Z) the chain-stretch
relaxes quickly quickly on the timescale of reptation,
τs (cid:28) τd. For imposed ﬂow rates ˙ (cid:28) 1/τs it is then
convenient to take the limit τs → 0 upfront and work
with the non-stretching form of the Rolie-Poly, in which
the conformation dynamics obey

∇
W = − 1
τd

(W − I) − 2
3

K : W (W + β(W − I)). (A.14)

This also recovers the reptation-reaction model of worm-
like micelles [14] for β = 0.
In this non-stretching limit and for β = 0.0 (as used
in our numerics) the quantity σ = Wzz − Wxx, which
determines the tensile stress as Gσ, evolves according to

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

Dσ
Dt

= ˙ε

3 + σ − 2
3

σ2

− 1
τ

σ,

(A.15)

5 Pom-pom model of branched polymers

This has the basic form proposed for the simpliﬁed toy
version of the Rolie-Poly model at the end of Sec. V with
β in that toy model set equal to 1 here. (Note that β in
the toy model written in the main text is diﬀerent from
the β used in this appendix for the tensorial Rolie-Poly
model. Note also that the prefactor to the linear loading
term in Eqn A.15 is half that in the toy model in the
main text. This however has no eﬀect on the qualitative
behaviour.)

5. Pom-pom model of branched polymers

The models discussed so far pertain to polymeric ﬂu-
ids with molecules of linear topology. We now turn to
entangled branched polymers in which each molecule is
assumed to comprise a linear backbone with an equal
number of arms q attached to each end, as modelled by
the Pom-pom model [12, 49]. The relaxation of the arms
is considered fast compared to that of the backbone, and
so is not ascribed its own dynamics but acts as an addi-
tional drag, which slows the relaxation of the backbone.
The two dominant relaxation processes in the Pom-pom
model are therefore taken to be backbone reorientation,
with a characteristic timescale τb; and backbone stretch
relaxation, with timescale τs. These two timescales are
assumed to be in the ratio

τb
τs

= Zbφb,

(A.16)

where Zb is the number of entanglements along the back-
bone and

29
where ν∗ = 2/(q − 1), subject to an initial condition
λ(0) = 1. A hard cutoﬀ is then imposed once λ = q,
because the extent of backbone stretch is taken to be en-
tropically bounded by the number of arms attached to
each end of the backbone, placing an upper bound on
the tensile stress of 3Gq2. As shown in the main text,
the imposition of the hard cutoﬀ leads to catastrophi-
cally fast necking via the elastic Consid`ere mode in this
original version of the Pom-pom model. We shall also
consider a modiﬁed model [69] in which the hard cutoﬀ
is removed, such that λ obeys Eqn. A.20 for all values,
and ﬁnd much more gradual necking dynamics.

In the main text we present results for two diﬀerent sets
of model parameters. The ﬁrst, which we call PP1, has
a high number of arms, q = 40. We take Zbφb = 10.0,
such that τs = τd/10.0, giving a less wide separation
of the reorientation and stretch times for PP1 than in
our studies of the Rolie-Poly model, consistent with the
expectation that stretch arises more readily in branched
polymers due to the drag of the side arms. The second set
of model parameters, which we call PP2, assumes fewer
arms, q = 5, but still with τs = τd/10.0.

6. Fluidity model of soft glassy materials

We adopt a simpliﬁed tensorial ﬂuidity model [22, 30]
of soft glassy materials [15, 63]. This considers a local
density function f (n) for the area (per unit volume) of
droplet interfaces normal to n, with a normalisation

Q =

dnf (n).

(A.21)

φb =

Zb

Zb + 2qZa

,

(A.17)

The viscoelastic stress

(cid:90)

(cid:90)

(cid:18) 2

with Za the number of entanglements along each arm
such that φb is the fraction of material in the backbone
compared that in the molecule as a whole.

The viscoelastic stress

Σ = 3Gλ2

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

W − 1
3

I

,

(A.18)

in which W is a conformation tensor characterising
the backbone orientation and λ encodes the backbone
stretch. McLeish and Larson [49] modelled the backbone
orientation both using the full Doi-Edwards tensor, and
also in a simpler a diﬀerential approximation, which we
adopt here, taking:

W =

A

tr(A)

,

(A.19)

with the dynamics of A obeying the Maxwell model,
Eqn. A.6, with relaxation time τb. The backbone stretch
evolves according to

Dλ
Dt

= λK : W− 1
τS

(λ − 1) eν∗(λ−1) for λ ≤ q, (A.20)

Σ = GW

(A.22)

with a conformation variable

The conformation variable has the dynamics

W =

dn(nn − 1

3 I).

(A.23)

(cid:19)

I +

W
Q

3

− 1
τ

QW ,

(A.24)

∇
W =

2
3

QD − W : K

while Q obeys

DQ
Dt

= K : W − 1
τ

µQ2.

(A.25)

Here µ is a phenomenological parameter, which lies in
the range 0 ≤ µ ≤ 1 [22].

The relaxation timescale τ is assigned its own dynam-

ics according to

√

= 1 −

Dτ
Dt

2D : D (τ − τ0) ,

(A.26)

7 Toy scalar constitutive models

30

FIG. 11. Giesekus (top) and non-stretch Rolie-Poly (bottom) full (left) and toy(right) model comparisons. For both full and
toy Giesekus we use α = 0.001. For the non-stretch Rolie-Poly model this is equivalent to taking β = 2/3 in the toy model.

where D is the symmetric part of the velocity gradient
tensor K and τ0 is a microscopic time, set to unity in our
units. The ﬁrst term on the right hand side captures age-
ing in the absence of ﬂow, giving a relaxation timescale
τ ∼ tw that increases as a function of the sample age,
i.e., the time since sample preparation (assuming τ = τ0
for a freshly prepared sample). An applied ﬂow (second
term) can then arrest ageing and restore a steady state
relaxation timescale set by the inverse ﬂow rate.

We solve the above equations assuming an initial un-
deformed sample of age tw (such that the initial age
τ (t = 0) = tw). The initial conditions for Q is a function
of µ [30].

7. Toy scalar constitutive models

At the end of Sec. V we introduced a simpliﬁed, gen-
eralised, scalarised toy constitutive model that consid-
ers only the tensile component of the viscoelastic stress

Σ = GZ with dynamics

∂tZ + v.∇Z = ˙f (Z) − 1
τ

Z,

f (Z) = 3 + 2Z − βZ 2,

(A.27)

(A.28)

in which

and

g(Z) = Z + αZ.

(A.29)

It was in this model that we analytically derived our cri-
teria for the onset of necking. We also noted in the main
text that this toy model is capable of giving an excel-
lent approximation to the extensional necking dynamics
of the full tensorial Oldroyd B model (α = β = 0); the
Giesekus model (α (cid:54)= 0, β = 0); and the Rolie-Poly model
without chain stretch (α = 0, β (cid:54)= 0). This is conﬁrmed
in Fig. 11, which shows the counterpart of the results of
the full constitutive models of Fig. 3, comparing the full
tensorial Giesekus model with its toy scalar counterpart,
and likewise the Rolie-Poly model without chain stretch
with its toy counterpart. This excellent comparison be-
tween the scalar toy models and their full tensorial coun-
terparts lends additional conﬁdence to our having derived
our analytical criteria for necking within the scalar toy
model.

