Preprint typeset in JINST style - HYPER VERSION

Charge-Sensitive Front-End Electronics with
Operational Ampliﬁers for CdZnTe Detectors

P. Födischa∗, M. Berthelb, B. Langea, T. Kirschkea, W. Enghardtb,c,d and P. Kaevera
aHelmholtz-Zentrum Dresden - Rossendorf, Department of Research Technology,
Bautzner Landstr. 400, 01328 Dresden, Germany
bOncoRay - National Center for Radiation Research in Oncology, Faculty of Medicine and
University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden,
Fetscherstr. 74, PF 41, 01307 Dresden, Germany
cHelmholtz-Zentrum Dresden - Rossendorf, Institute of Radiooncology
Bautzner Landstr. 400, 01328 Dresden, Germany
dGerman Cancer Consortium (DKTK) and German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)
Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany

E-mail: p.foedisch@hzdr.de

ABSTRACT: Cadmium zinc telluride (CdZnTe, "CZT") radiation detectors are announced to be
a game-changing detector technology. However, state-of-the-art detector systems require high-
performance readout electronics as well. Even though an application-speciﬁc integrated circuit
(ASIC) is an adequate solution for the readout, our demands on a high dynamic range for en-
ergy measurement and a high throughput are not served by any commercially available circuit.
Consequently, we had to develop the analog front-end electronics with operational ampliﬁers for
an 8 × 8 pixelated CZT detector. For this purpose, we model an electrical equivalent circuit of
the CZT detector with the associated charge-sensitive ampliﬁer (CSA). Therefore, we present the
mathematical equations for a detailed network analysis. Additionally, we enhance the design with
numerical values for various features such as ballistic deﬁcit, charge-to-voltage gain, rise time,
noise level and verify the performance with synthetic detector signals. With this benchmark, the
CSA achieves a nominal energy resolution of 3.7keV and also a timing resolution far below 1ns
without an additional pulse shaper. The experimental results with the pixel detector assembly and
a 22Na radioactive source emphasize the depth dependence of the measured energy. After a pulse
processing with a depth correction based on a ﬁt of the weighting potential, the energy resolution
is about 2.2% (FWHM) for the 511keV photopeak.

KEYWORDS: Analogue electronic circuits, Front-end electronics for detector readout, Gamma
detectors.

∗Corresponding author.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
6
1

 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
8
9
0
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Contents

1.

Introduction

2. Basic design considerations
2.1 CZT detector assembly
2.2 Electrical characteristics of a CZT pixel detector
2.3 High voltage biasing and grounding
2.4 Signal formation in CZT detectors
2.5 Readout concepts
2.6 Operational ampliﬁer

3. Circuit design of a charge-sensitive preampliﬁer

3.1 Circuit analysis
3.2 Charge-to-Voltage transfer function
3.3
3.4 Noise

Input coupling of the CSA

4.

Implementation

5. Results

5.1 Test pulse input
5.2 Pixel detector

6. Summary

1. Introduction

1

2
2
3
5
6
8
12

13
14
17
19
20

23

25
25
27

29

Cadmium zinc telluride (CdZnTe, "CZT") is a room-temperature semiconductor material for ra-
diation detectors. It is available in compact detector units with highly segmented pixel layouts
and is ideally suitable for high-resolution gamma-ray spectroscopy and 3D imaging [1]. Due to
its proven performance, the detectors are now adopted for medical imaging applications [2]. As it
was previously reported, CZT detectors are useful components for a Compton camera [3], [4] and
with regard to current investigations, they have the potential to build an imaging system for proton
therapy [5]. State-of-the-art readout systems for highly segmented CZT detectors are convention-
ally built with an application speciﬁc integrated circuit (ASIC). The ASICS are optimized for the
use of gamma ray spectroscopy. A low energy range, usually up to 2MeV [5], [6], a limited count
rate capability and poor availability and product life cycle are the unsolved challenges of an ASIC-
based readout system for an imaging system in proton therapy. In this environment, high energies

– 1 –

up to 7MeV [7] and count rates up to 1Mcps [8] have to be handled. Instead of using an ASIC for
the readout electronics, commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS) operational ampliﬁers have been used
for the front-end electronics. Along with space-saving multi-channel analog-to-digital converters
(ADC) and a ﬁeld-programmable-gate-array (FPGA), all tasks related to the signal acquisition and
processing can be done with a COTS system. A programmable digital system beneﬁts from its
versatility, which is needed for the evaluation of a detector system for new applications like proton
therapy. But even with a foresight to a ﬁxed installation, a system made of COTS components
takes the advantages of a proven reliability and a support life cycle. The front-end electronics are
the key element for the entire performance of the detector system. Our goal is to maximize the
dynamic range of the front-end electronics, as the CZT is exposed to high-energy gamma rays, but
also has to detect low-energy scatter events used for the Compton imaging. As this is the main
goal, which cannot be solved with a state-of-the-art ASIC, the timing information of an interaction
must be preserved by the readout system. Most ASICs merely include a simple analog signal pro-
cessing (e. g. leading edge trigger for timing and peak hold circuit for energy information), making
a pulse shape analysis or advanced timing mostly uncomfortable or even impossible. However, the
front-end electronics should provide excellent signals for our digital pulse processing system. As
the design of the front-end electronics is a tradeoff between bandwidth, noise, complexity, size and
costs, the best solution must be driven by the application. For the prototype of a Compton cam-
era, we investigate a space-saving and simple circuit design with a few components. One system
must include at least 65 analog readout channels, set up with COTS voltage feedback operational
ampliﬁers.

2. Basic design considerations

2.1 CZT detector assembly

For a medical imaging application, we use a CZT detector as the scattering layer in a Compton
camera.
In our case, this is a pixelated CZT radiation detector from Redlen Technologies [9].
The detector size is 19.42 × 19.42mm2 with a thickness of 5mm. Towards the continuous planar
electrode on the backside, there are 64 pixel electrodes aligned in an 8 × 8 array on the front side.
The size of a pixel pad is 2.2×2.2mm2 for all pixels except the corner pixels with 1.98 × 1.98mm2.
In addition, a steering grid surrounds all pixels. They have an inter-pixel space of 0.26mm. The
bulk device and an assembled detector are shown in ﬁg. 1. The detector is mounted on a printed
circuit board (PCB) with the continuous planar electrode on top. A bond wire is attached to a copper
pad on the carrier PCB. Furthermore, a conductive adhesive on each pixel pad ensures the electrical
connection to the pixel array on the PCB. An underﬁll between the pixel array and the PCB supports
the adhesive connection and improves the mechanical stability. We also decided to use a 3.2mm
thick FR-4 material for the PCB to enhance the robustness of the assembly. The electrodes of the
detector are accessible via rugged high-speed connectors on the bottom side. To shield the detector
against visible light, a 3D-printed cap is attached above the detector on the top of the carrier board.
Our front-end electronics are designed to work with this type of detector assembly. Consequently,
the readout boards are plugged to the side faces of the detector assembly (see ﬁg. 22), so a stacked
system with arbitrary depth, as we need for the evaluation of the Compton camera, can be easily

– 2 –

Figure 1. A 5mm thick pixelated CZT detector from Redlen Technologies [9] with 8 × 8 electrodes (each
2.2mm × 2.2mm) on the front side (left) and a continuous planar electrode (19.42mm × 19.42mm) on the
backside (right). The detector is mounted on a 3.2mm thick carrier board with rugged connectors on the
bottom side.

built up. Further investigations on ruggedization of CZT detectors and detector assemblies have
been presented in [10].

2.2 Electrical characteristics of a CZT pixel detector

From the electrical point of view, a CZT detector can be modeled with the equivalent circuit shown
in ﬁg. 2. With an external operating voltage at the electrodes of the detector, the terminals are
referred as cathode and anode in accordance with the applied polarity. Usually, the continuous
electrode is biased with a negative potential and the pixel electrodes are at ground potential. For an
ideal detector material, this would force the negative charge carriers (electrons) to move towards
the anode and the positive charge carriers (holes) to move to the cathode. As a consequence of
charge trapping due to structural defects, impurities and irregularities of the material [11], the
mobility and lifetime of the holes in CZT are very poor compared to the electrons. Only the moving
electrons induce a signal on the electrodes, while the portion of the holes can be neglected. Thus,
if the generated electrons move to the position sensitive side of the detector, the overall detection
performance is improved. As the readout electronics are directly connected to the electrodes, the
electrical characteristics of the detector inﬂuence the dynamic behavior of the entire circuit. Finally,
the network model for the readout electronics must include the electrical equivalent circuit of the
detector.
In general, a very simple equivalent circuit is suitable to model the properties of the
detector. As summarized in ﬁg. 2, it is a passive two-terminal component with a permittivity and a
resistance. A capacitor represents the permittivity of the material and the conductance is modeled as
a resistor. For the evaluated pixelated CZT detector, the capacitance can be roughly approximated
by the model of the parallel-plate capacitor with an electrode area A separated by the distance d.
That capacitance C is calculated by

A
d ,

C = ε0εr

– 3 –

(2.1)

where ε0 is the vacuum permittivity end εr is the relative permittivity of CZT. For the detector in
this study, the values are A = 377mm2, d = 5mm. The value of εr depends on the manufacturing
process, but ranges from 10 to 11 [12], [13]. Our measurement with the Redlen CZT results in a
cathode to anode capacitance of 7.9pF and a single pixel capacitance of 1.42pF and 1.28pF for a
corner pixel. These were rough measurements and taken with −60V bias voltage applied to the
detector. But the bias voltage does not inﬂuence the relative permittivity in the applicable voltage
range up to −600V. The capacitance of the detector is thus largely independent of the bias volt-
age [14]. If we assume a value of 10 for εr, then is the cathode to anode capacitance 6.7pF referring
to eq. 2.1. The capacitance of a single pixel to the continuous electrode can also be calculated by
eq. 2.1, where the size of the pixel determines the value of A [15]. With the same assumption on
εr, the pixel capacitance is 86fF. A corner pixel has a capacitance of 69fF because of its smaller
area. The differences from the calculated values to the real values are caused by uncertainties in the
measuring setup and system. Such small capacitors needs a careful probing of the electrodes and
also require precise instruments. Additive stray capacitances are easily introduced by the needle
probes [15]. We can constitute the precision of our measurement setup to be about 120fF with a
lower limit of 1.2pF due to stray capacitances. By subtracting this parasitic capacitance from the
total capacitance measured for the entire detector, the value of the cathode to anode capacitance is
approximately 6.7pF, inferring a relative permittivity of εr = 10. Consequently, this measurement
result is in accordance with the parallel-plate capacitor model from eq. 2.1. Besides the estimation
of capacitance, the bulk resistivity of the detector is needed to model the electrical characteristics.
We measured the leakage current of the assembled CZT from ﬁg. 1 with a precision high-voltage
source with current monitor (Iseg SHQ series). This device reports a current of 10nA with a detec-
tor bias voltage of −500V. For a homogenous material, the resistance is deﬁned as:

R = ρ

d
A

(2.2)

where ρ is the resistivity of the material. Our measurement corresponds to a resistor of 50GΩ for
the two-terminal equivalent circuit or a resistivity of 4· 1011Ωcm. This is in accordance with the
values from the datasheet (ρ > 1011Ωcm) for the Redlen CZT [9]. Finally, the electrical charac-

Figure 2. An electrical equivalent circuit of a CZT detector. The bulk resistivity is modeled with the resistor
RD typically of several tens of GΩ. The capacitor CD represents the parallel-plate geometry of the electrodes.
Its value can be estimated with eq. 2.1.

teristics of a CZT mainly depends on the manufacturing process. If they cannot be experimentally
veriﬁed, the values for the components of the electrical equivalent circuit can be estimated with the

– 4 –

RDCDAnodeCathodegeometry of the detector and the constants from the literature by eqn. 2.1 and 2.2. The equivalent
circuit shown in ﬁg. 2 is the simplest case of an electrical representation of the detector unit. It
did not model a frequency dependency with a complex permittivity. Additionally, the stray capaci-
tances introduced by the traces and the carrier board itself, cross coupling between pixels as well as
any inductivities of the connectors are ignored. However, a well-designed PCB layout minimizes
these effects.

2.3 High voltage biasing and grounding

A fundamental operating condition for a CZT detector is the presence of an electric ﬁeld between
the electrodes. Therefore, the charge carriers generated by the incident radiation move to the elec-
trodes. Typical electric ﬁeld strengths for CZT detectors are in the range of 1 kV
cm [9]. As the contin-
uous electrode of the detector is biased with a negative voltage, the ground potential is connected
to the pixelated electrodes on the opposite side. In general, the high voltage with low ripple is gen-
erated by an external power supply connected to the detector via a cable or PCB traces. To reduce
any pickup noise related to electromagnetic interference, we recommend a high-voltage ﬁlter close
to the detector electrode. This is in the simplest case a passive ﬁrst order low-pass (RC network
shown in ﬁg. 3). The value of the resistor RB should be chosen to minimize the voltage drop across

Figure 3. Basic connection scheme of the CZT detector. A high voltage supply with a RC low-pass and
a resistor RB are used to generate the bias voltage for the cathode. The readout electronics are directly
connected to the cathode and anodes of the detector. So the anodes are biased with the signal ground by the
readout electronics and consequently both ground potentials must be tied together.

the high-voltage ﬁlter and the equivalent resistor RD of the detector. The value of the ﬁlter capacitor
should be as high as possible to achieve the best noise ﬁltering. According to the eqs. 2.1 and 2.2,
the capacitance is inversely proportional to the resistance. Therefore, the capacitor must be chosen
properly, so that the insulation resistance of the dielectric is much higher than the resistance of
the detector. Commercial capacitors of class 1 have an insulation resistance of more than 100GΩ
with a maximum capacitance of 10nF. Thus, a passive ﬁrst order low-pass with a cutoff frequency
below 1Hz is possible (R = 47MΩ, C = 10nF). As a noise ﬁltered voltage is the output of the RC

– 5 –

+−VRCRBiDRDCDAnodesCathodeHighvoltagebiasCZTDetectorReadoutGroundcircuit, it cannot be directly connected to the electrode in order to bias the detector. One reason is
the fact, that the ﬁlter capacitor would be in parallel with the capacitance CD of the detector. A bias
resistor RB "isolates" the bypass capacitor from the detector. Another point that has to be taken into
account is the path of current ﬂow generated by the detector. The current should not ﬂow into the
high-voltage source. This can be achieved by choosing a high resistance for biasing the detector
so that the time constant RBC is much larger than the equivalent input impedance of the readout
electronics [16]. The active components of the readout electronics have their own power supply,
which is separated from the high-voltage supply. Further, the anodes are biased with the ground
potential of the readout electronics (signal ground in ﬁg. 3). Both grounds have to be at the same
potential and must be tied together. Thus, the electric ﬁeld between the cathode and the anodes is
referenced to a known potential.

2.4 Signal formation in CZT detectors
As mentioned before, incident radiation hitting the detector generates free charge carriers. These
electrons and holes move contrary towards the opposite electrodes because of the applied electric
ﬁeld. However, the generated charge is proportional to the incident gamma ray energy and the
signal of the detector is an electric current. The induced current through an electrode is deﬁned as

i = q →v →E0 (x) ,

(2.3)
where q is the moving charge, →v is the instantaneous velocity of the charge q and →E0 (x) is the
weighting ﬁeld associated with the electrode at the position x of the charge [17]. The weighting
potential ϕ0(x) is deﬁned as

→E0 (x) = −∇ →ϕ0 (x) ,

(2.4)
by setting one electrode to unit potential and all others to zero. For a parallel-plate geometry of
a detector, where the widths in x and y dimensions of the electrodes are much larger than the
thickness z, the electric ﬁeld inside the detector is distributed homogeneously with a constant ﬁeld
strength. Therefore, the weighting ﬁeld →E0 (x) is equal to the electric ﬁeld and by solving eq. 2.4
in z-dimension, the normalized weighting potential ϕ0C(z) of the cathode is a linear function [17]
(2.5)

ϕ0C(z) = z,0 ≤ z ≤ 1 .

The solution for the Poisson equation in two dimensions was given by [15] and [18]. They pre-
sented an equation for the calculation of the weighting potential for a detector with a segmented
electrode layout. By setting one dimension of the pixel area to zero and normalizing the thickness
z of the detector to 1, the weighting potential ϕ0A of a single pixel with the normalized width a can
be calculated as

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

ϕ0A(x,z) =

arctan

1
π

sin(πz)sinh(π a
2 )

cosh(πx)− cos(πz)cosh(π a
2 )

,

(2.6)

where x and z are the coordinates and 0 ≤ z ≤ 1. The weighting potentials are shown in ﬁg. 4. The
weighting ﬁeld E0(z) under the collecting electrode (x = 0, y = 0) can be calculated by solving
eq. 2.4 with eq. 2.6. This results in the following equation
sinh(π a
2 )

(2.7)

E0(z) =

cos(πz)− cosh(π a
2 )

.

– 6 –

Figure 4. The weighting potentials of the cathode (bottom) and pixel anode (top) of the 5mm thick detector.
The cathode is located at position z = 0mm. The right plots show the weighting potential under the collecting
electrode (x = y = 0mm).

As we can estimate the weighting ﬁeld of the detector with eq. 2.7, the next step is to calculate
the expected electric current to simulate the transient behavior of the detector signals. With the
assumption that the electric ﬁeld E is constant and homogenous across the detector because all
anodes are at the same potential, the electric ﬁeld is calculated by

E =

V
d ,

(2.8)

where V is is the applied bias voltage and d is the thickness of the detector. So the velocity v of a
moving charge q in the detector is calculated by

v = µeE ,

(2.9)

where µ is the mobility of the charge carriers (electrons). A typical value of µe for a CZT is
about 1000 cm2
Vs [19], [20]. However, with the ionization energy Ei = 4.64eV for CZT [12] and the
incident radiation Eγ, the generated moving charge q is deﬁned as

q = e

Eγ
Ei

(2.10)

where e is the elementary charge. By inserting the eqs. 2.7, 2.8, 2.9, 2.10 in eq. 2.3, the detector
current can be numerically estimated. An example for an incident radiation of Eγ = 511keV is
shown in ﬁg.5. In conclusion, the ﬁg. 5 shows the currents ﬂowing through the electrodes for an
interaction at the cathode side of the detector. If the depth of interaction is closer to the anode side,
the total charge collection is incomplete, as the fraction of charge from the holes cannot be mea-
sured. This circumstance introduces a depth dependence and requires a correction for spectroscopic
applications.

– 7 –

012345z / mm00.20.40.60.81Weighting potential ?0012345z / mm00.20.40.60.81Weighting potential ?0CFigure 5. Induced current i on the detector electrodes for incident radiation with an energy of 511keV. The
left plot shows the current induced on the cathode and the right plot shows the current induced on an anode
pixel. The signals are calculated with eq. 2.3. An increased electric ﬁeld strength E causes a higher current
i with shorter drift times tD. The generated charge remains constant.

2.5 Readout concepts

The results from ﬁg. 5 give a good estimate of the required sensitivity for the readout electronics.
The signals are in the range of several nA (e. g. 8nA for 100keV at the cathode with an electric ﬁeld
of 1200 V
cm). In addition, the drift time tD can be as short as 40ns if the interaction takes place in
the last 10% of the detector volume at the anode side. As the detector signals are electric currents,
the simplest way to acquire these signals is a shunt resistor and a measurement of the voltage drop
across this resistor. Finally, the measured transient voltage signal could be fed to an arbitrary signal
processing system. In fact, a single resistor would be the simplest, smallest and cheapest solution
for the front-end electronics. With a resistor in the range of some MΩ, which is small enough
to force the detector current to ﬂow into it, a voltage drop in the range of some mV is generated.
This is sufﬁcient for most signal processing systems. However, this concept suffers from a lack of
bandwidth. As the left circuit in ﬁg. 6 shows, the induced current will ﬂow through RS, but the RC
time constant of this two terminal circuit determines the bandwidth and therefore the rise time of
this circuit. Moreover, the detector adds its own capacitance to the shunting elements. The −3dB
bandwidth of the output signal is given by

f−3db =

1

2πRS(CD +CS)

,

(2.11)

where CD is the capacitance of the detector and CS is the shunting capacitance of the readout
electronics. Even with an undersized value of 1pF for (CD +CS) and a shunt resistor of 1MΩ, the
resulting bandwidth is only 159kHz. However, the rise time tr of the output pulse is proportional
to the cutoff frequency fc of a low-pass. For a ﬁrst order low-pass, the rise time from 10% to 90%
of the step response is calculated by

tr =

ln(0.9)− ln(0.1)

2π fc

,

(2.12)

where fc is the −3dB cutoff frequency. In other words, the rise time for the given example is about
2.2 µs. Most of the current pulses won’t be detectable anymore. To increase the bandwidth for
such a current-to-voltage converter, a transimpedance ampliﬁer (TIA) is an appropriate solution
(see. ﬁg. 6, circuit in the middle). This conﬁguration forces the generated current to ﬂow into

– 8 –

0200400600Time / ns020406080100120140Cathode current / nAE=800 V/cmE=1000 V/cmE=1200 V/cm0200400600Time / ns020406080100120140Anode current / nAE=800 V/cmE=1000 V/cmE=1200 V/cmthe negative terminal (virtual ground) of the ampliﬁer. That means CD and CS are still present but
did not have that impact on the time constant as the shunting readout circuit would have. Instead,
the rise time and current-to-voltage gain of an ideal TIA are determined by the feedback network.
Similarly to the example with the shunting resistor, the TIA is assumed to have a current-to-voltage
gain of 1MΩ, but the bandwidth is now limited by the parasitic capacitance of the feedback resistor
(RF). The resulting bandwidth of the TIA is about 1.6MHz with a rise time of 220ns, if the parasitic
capacitance of the resistor is around 100fF. This is sufﬁcient to detect events near the cathode
with drift times longer than the rise time of the TIA, but most of the events will suffer from a
signiﬁcant pulse amplitude loss. To further increase the bandwidth of the TIA, several methods can
be applied [21], but nevertheless, the achievable gain-bandwidth product is too low regarding the
rise times of the anode signal and an adequate signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). Finally, to preserve the
pulse shape by means of a current-to-voltage converter is quiet challenging. Though, the detector
generates a charge, which can be measured with a modiﬁcation of the feedback network. A single
capacitor CF in the feedback loop of the ampliﬁer results in a current integrating circuit (see ﬁg. 6).
After all, the current ic through the capacitor is

Therefore, the voltage vOut at the output becomes

vOut = −1
CF

iddt = −q
CF

+ v0 .

iD = −iC = CF

dvOut
dt

.

(cid:90)

(2.13)

(2.14)

This results in a voltage output, which amplitude is proportional to the moving charge q generated
by the detector. This circuit is referred as the charge-sensitive ampliﬁer (CSA). Both the TIA

Figure 6. Three different readout circuits for the conversion and ampliﬁcation of the detector current iD
to a voltage vOut. The left circuit converts the current to a voltage by means of a shunt resistor. The tran-
simpedance ampliﬁer (middle) is also used as a current-to-voltage converter, whereas the charge-sensitive
ampliﬁer (right) is used for a charge-to-voltage conversion.

and the CSA are basic negative voltage feedback operational ampliﬁer circuits. As the gain of
the TIA is designed with a resistor in its feedback path, the gain of a CSA is determined by its
feedback capacitance. Nevertheless, a resistor has a parasitic capacitance and a capacitance also
has a parasitic resistance. Thus, both circuits are adequate modeled by an operational ampliﬁer
with a RC feedback network. Equally important, an operational ampliﬁer also introduces a shunting
resistor and capacitor. They are in parallel with the impedance of the detector and summarized in
ﬁg. 7 to the resistor RD and capacitor CD. On the whole, the model of a CSA is a mixture of the

– 9 –

iDiInRSCSivOut−+RFiRiiInvOutiD−+CFiCiiInvOutiD(cid:18)
1− e( −tD

CF RF

(cid:19)

)

Figure 7. A real conﬁguration of a readout circuit as charge-sensitive ampliﬁer. The shunting impedance
cannot be eliminated, but the effects are reduced by the operational ampliﬁer. The resistor RF from the
feedback path also has the parasitic capacitance CF. This circuit will be used for the further analysis.

three circuits shown in ﬁg. 6. For illustration, the simulated signal waveforms of the three readout
circuits with typical values are shown in ﬁg. 8. With this example, it is clearly visible that the CSA
achieves the highest amplitude. As the voltage output of the CSA begins to increase at time t = t0
and reaches its peak amplitude vpeak at time tD when the current ﬂow stops, the resulting output
voltage for an input current pulse with rectangle shape is

vpeak = iDRF

.

(2.15)

Therefore, the maximum output voltage vmax for the same input charge is calculated by setting RF

Figure 8. Output signals from the three different readout circuits (left). The resistor based current-to-
voltage conversion has poor gain and bandwidth. This is improved by the transimpedance ampliﬁer (TIA).
The largest gain is achieved with the charge-sensitive ampliﬁer (CSA). With a constant parasitic capacitance
CF = 100fF and an increasing feedback resistor RF, the TIA becomes a CSA (right).

to inﬁnity. So we deﬁne vpeak over vmax as the peak ratio P of the charge-sensitive preampliﬁer with
the time constant τ = RFCF as

(cid:19)
(cid:19)

)

(cid:18)
(cid:18)
1− e( −tD
(cid:17)
1− e( −tD

CFRF

CFR∞ )

iDRF

(cid:16)
1− e −tD

iDR∞
τ
tD

τ

.

vpeak
vmax

vpeak
vmax

=

=

P = lim
R∞→∞

– 10 –

(2.16)

(2.17)

−+vOvPvNCDRDCFRFiiInvOut0t0200400tD600800Time t / ns00.050.10.15Output vOut / VR      1Meg || 1pFTIA   1Meg || 100fFCSA 100fF0t0200400tD600800Time t / ns00.050.10.15Output vOut / VRF = 1+RF = 25 M+RF = 5 M+RF = 1 M+Eq. 2.17 describes the inﬂuence of the time constant τ to the peak amplitude loss in dependence of
the charge drift time tD. Referring to [22], the degree of which the inﬁnite time constant amplitude
has been decreased is called the ballistic deﬁcit B. With eq. 2.17, a numerical expression of B can
be deﬁned as

The calculations were made with the assumption, that the input current pulse has a rectangular

B = 1− P

(2.18)

Figure 9. The peak amplitude of the output signal from the charge-sensitive ampliﬁer decreases with an
increasing time constant τ = RFCF (left). Therefore, the ballistic deﬁcit B according to eq. 2.18 depends on
the time constant τ and the drift time tD of the moving charge (right).

shape and a constant value during the drift time tD as it is seen by the cathode. If we consider a
pixelated detector, where the size of the pixel is small compared to the continuous electrode and
detector thickness, the current pulse as shown in ﬁg. 5 just rises when the moving charge reaches
the pixel electrode. However, the drift time tD is the same as for the cathode current, but the most
of charge is deposited in the end of the pulse. Thus, the anode current can be simply imagined as a
rectangle pulse with a shorter drift time and higher current than the cathode signal. Consequently,
the ratio of τ
is larger than the ratio of the continuous electrode, if the same CSA is used. In con-
tD
clusion, the ballistic deﬁcit has a greater impact on the cathode signals than the anode signals. The
eq. 2.18 is essential to select the optimized feedback time constant in dependence of the proper-
ties of the detector. Usually, the minimum charge-to-voltage gain is a requirement imposed by the
lowest measurement range and is set by a carefully selected feedback capacitance (see eq. 2.14).
One parameter which can be optimized for the application is the value of the feedback resistor. Of
course, the best choice is a value close to inﬁnity, since it matches the ideal CSA. However, this is
practically not useful, as every current pulse from the detector forces the ampliﬁer to integrate the
charge on its steady state voltage level. After a while, the ampliﬁer overﬂows at that point, when
the output voltage reaches the level of the supply voltage (or even far below this level). Then it can-
not process another event until the feedback capacitor has discharged. A conventional method for
the discharge of the capacitor uses a switch, which is added to the feedback network. Though, this
requires an additional reset logic and active control, as it is featured by an ASIC. A more prevalent
practice is to reset the ampliﬁer by a proper choice of the feedback resistance RF. This feedback
resistor discharges the capacitor CF with the characteristic time constant τ. An optimally adjusted
value of the resistor is a tradeoff between ballistic deﬁcit, count rate and frequency response of the
ampliﬁer.

– 11 –

0100200300400Drift time tD / ns020406080100Peak ratio P / %RF = 1+RF = 25 M+RF = 5 M+RF = 1 M+100101102103(= / tD) / ns0510152025303540Ballistic deficit B / %2.6 Operational ampliﬁer
For the design and investigation of a CSA with an operational ampliﬁer, we will analyze the circuits
in time and frequency domain. Our notation for a complex number, as we use in frequency domain
is deﬁned as

s = σ + jω ,

(2.19)
where j is the imaginary unit, σ is the real part and ω the imaginary part in the range of real positive
values as not otherwise noticed. For many circuit designs, it is useful and sufﬁcient to analyze a
network containing an operational ampliﬁer with ideal constraints, that means such a device has an
inﬁnite high input impedance, inﬁnite open loop voltage gain, etc. But for a realistic and detailed
analysis, an operational ampliﬁer can be modeled as shown in ﬁg. 10.
In contrast to the ideal

Figure 10. A model of a realistic operational ampliﬁer [23]. The voltage difference vD between the two
terminals is ampliﬁed by the bandwidth-limited factor A. The input impedance ZI should be as high as
possible whereas the output impedance ZO should be close to zero.

operational ampliﬁer, the input impedance ZI is not inﬁnite. The basic function of an operational
ampliﬁer is the ampliﬁcation of the voltage drop across its positive and negative input terminals.
The output voltage is therefore given by

vO = (vP − vN)A ,

(2.20)

where vP is the potential at the positive terminal and vN at the negative terminal. For an ideal opera-
tional ampliﬁer, the transfer function A(s) has no frequency dependencies so that the corresponding
frequency response

HA( f ) = A(0) = AOL

(2.21)
is constant. AOL is the zero-frequency open-loop gain. For a realistic operational ampliﬁer, the
frequency response of the open-loop gain has the shape of a low-pass. Consequently, we model the
transfer function A(s) of the operational ampliﬁer as a ﬁrst order low-pass in the frequency domain
by

(2.22)

(2.23)

A(s) =

AOL
1 + sτ

with the ﬁnite open-loop voltage gain AOL and the −3dB cutoff frequency

fc =

1
2πτ .

– 12 –

vPvNZIvD+−+−AvDZOvOA characteristic parameter which simpliﬁes the frequency response of an operational ampliﬁer is
the gain-bandwidth product (GBP). At frequencies larger than fc, the GBP is constant for the ﬁrst
order low-pass frequency response. At the frequency fGBP, the open-loop gain equals the unity
gain. With the maximum open-loop voltage gain AOL, the functional relationship is given by

With the given parameters AOL and fGBP of an operational ampliﬁer, we can set

fcAOL = fGBP .

τ =

AOL

2π fGBP

(2.24)

(2.25)

and by setting s = jω with ω = 2π f , the transfer function of the open-loop gain for periodic
sinusoidal signals is

A(j2π f ) =

AOL
f

fGBP

.

AOL

1 + j

The frequency-dependent gain GA( f ) and phase shift ΦA( f ) are derived from Eq. 2.26.

(cid:114)

AOL

GA( f ) = |A(j2π f )| =

(cid:16) f
(cid:18) f
1 +
ΦA( f ) = ∠A(j2π f ) = −tan−1

fGBP

AOL

AOL

fGBP

(cid:17)2

(cid:19)

(2.26)

(2.27)

(2.28)

Figure 11. The gain GA( f ) and the phase shift ΦA( f ) of the frequency response of an operational ampliﬁer
with zero-frequency gain AOL. The frequency response is modeled as a ﬁrst order low-pass with the cutoff
frequency fc =

. The attenuation of AOL is −20dB /decade above fc.

fGBP
AOL

3. Circuit design of a charge-sensitive preampliﬁer

As brieﬂy described in sec. 2.5, an operational ampliﬁer integrates a charge, as there is a capacitor
CF in the feedback and the time constant of the RFCF network is large compared to the drift time
In general, a two-terminal equivalent circuit represents the
of the moving charge at its input.
feedback circuit adequate. Thus, the RFCF network is summarized with the impedance ZF.
In
accordance with ﬁg. 2, the impedance of the detector is modeled with the two terminal impedance

– 13 –

0fcfGBPFrequency f / Hz0AOLGain GA(f) / dB0fcfGBPFrequency f / Hz-90-60-300Phase shift )A(f) / degZD. Both impedances are connected to the inverting terminal of the operational ampliﬁer.
In
addition, there are parasitic shunt impedances between the negative and positive input terminal of
the operational ampliﬁer. As they are in parallel with the impedance of the detector, all additional
shunt impedances are absorbed by the model of ZD. For a simpliﬁed circuit analysis, the positive
terminal of the operational ampliﬁer is grounded. If the operational ampliﬁer requires a single
supply operation, the positive terminal is biased to the desired potential for the virtual ground. But
for a circuit analysis, this is negligible. Therefore, the initial circuit for the analysis is shown in
ﬁg. 12.

Figure 12. An operational ampliﬁer with a current input and a voltage feedback connected to the negative
input terminal. With ZF = CF||RF, this conﬁguration is used for the charge-to-voltage ampliﬁcation. ZD
represents all impedance connected between the input iIn and ground (e. g. capacitance of the detector and
parasitic capacitance of the negative input terminal).

3.1 Circuit analysis

Kirchhoff’s current law is used for the fundamental circuit analysis. For the node at the negative
terminal of the operational ampliﬁer, the sum of all currents must be zero.

Further, the currents can be expressed in terms of the feedback impedance ZF and shunt impedance
ZD.

0 = i− iZD + iZF

(3.1)

iZF =

iZD =

ZF

(vO − vN)
vN
ZD

(3.2)

(3.3)

According to eq. 2.20 and by setting vP = 0, the voltage vN in the eqs. 3.2 and 3.3 can be substituted
with

vN = −vO
A .

The solution of eq. 3.1 with eqs. 3.2-3.4 results in the current-to-voltage transfer function

−vO
i =

AZDZF

ZD(A + 1) + ZF

,

– 14 –

(3.4)

(3.5)

−+vOvPvNZDiZDZFiZFiiInvOutwhere A is the transfer function of the operational ampliﬁer according to eq. 2.22. Another useful
method for the circuit analysis is the principle of superposition. Because the system can be de-
scribed with linear equations, a superposition of all current and voltage sources is possible. That
means at ﬁrst, if the current source for i is turned off (replaced with open-circuit), the voltage source
for vO is acting alone and the resulting voltage at the negative input terminal of the operational am-
pliﬁer is

ZD

vN|i=0 = vO

ZD + ZF

.

(3.6)

Second, if the voltage source vO is turned off (replaced with a short), the current source is acting
alone and the voltage at the negative input terminal of the operational ampliﬁer is

vN|vO=0 = i

ZDZF
ZD + ZF

Finally, the superposition for the voltage node vN is the sum of the eqs. 3.6 and 3.7

By inserting the eqs. 3.4, 3.6 and 3.7 in eq. 3.8, the output voltage vO can be rewritten as

vN = vN|i=0 + vN|vO=0 .
(cid:18)

ZD

(cid:19)

.

vO = −A

vO

ZD + ZF

+ i

ZDZF
ZD + ZF

(3.7)

(3.8)

(3.9)

This eq. 3.9 is the same as eq. 3.5, but shows the terms for the basic block structure shown in
ﬁg. 13 in an intuitive and easy readable form. The basic block structure is used to identify the

Figure 13. Block diagram of the closed-loop transfer function. This structure shows the voltage feedback
network and loop-gain, which are essential for a stability analysis.

voltage feedback and the stability of the loop. It is obvious, that the feedback network β is

and the closed-loop voltage gain G is just [23]

β =

ZD

ZD + ZF

G =

A

1 + Aβ = −

vO
vI

.

(3.10)

(3.11)

The closed-loop gain G becomes 1
β if the loop gain Aβ is much greater than 1. On the contrary,
the closed-loop gain becomes inﬁnite if the loop gain Aβ = −1. At this frequency, the system
tends to be unstable and oscillate. As A and β are deﬁned to have positive real values, the case that
the loop gain becomes −1 just occurs if the loop gain is 1 and a phase shift of 180◦ is introduced

– 15 –

ZDZFZD+ZFΣAZDZD+ZFivI−vDvO−by the frequency response of the Aβ . A phase shift of a sinusoidal signal with 180◦ is equal
to a multiplication with −1. Thus to make the feedback circuit stable, the phase shift has to be
less than 180◦ at the frequency fi, where the loop gain is 1. A sufﬁcient phase margin at the
frequency fi is recommended, to ensure a stable operation over the entire temperature range and
also to cover tolerances of the used integrated circuits. The example in ﬁg. 14 is calculated with the

Figure 14. The bode plot of the closed-loop transfer function. The loop gain is 1 at the frequency fi with
a phase margin of roughly 90◦. This is sufﬁcient for a stable operation. See text for numeric values of the
example.

parameters from tab. 1 for the OPA657. The feedback impedance was chosen to be 100fF in parallel
with 25MΩ. Further, the detector capacitance of 6.7pF in parallel with a 50GΩ resistor and the
parasitic input capacitance of 5.2pF are the shunting impedance ZD. The stability is investigated
at the frequency, where the loop gain is 1. Mathematically this intersection can be calculated by
solving

|A(j2π f )β (j2π f )| = 1 .
From the Bode plot shown in ﬁg. 14, this point can be found at

log(|A|)− log(|

1
β |) = 0 .

(3.12)

(3.13)

In this plot, the reciprocal of the feedback network β intersects the open-loop gain at approximately
13MHz. At this frequency, the phase shift of the loop gain is 88◦ resulting in a phase margin φ of
92◦, which is sufﬁcient for a stable operation. The phase margin φ is calculated by

φ = 180◦ − (∠A(2π fi) +∠β (2π fi)) .

(3.14)

Besides the stability of the circuit, the effective input impedance also depends on the open-loop
voltage gain of the ampliﬁer and is changed by the feedback network [23]. The effective input

– 16 –

100101102103104105106107108109Frequency / Hz010203040506070Magnitude / dBfi = 13 MHzOpen-loop gain AFeedback 1/-Loop gain A-100101102103104105106107108109Frequency / Hz-180-150-120-90-60-300Phase / degPhase marginOpen-loop gain AFeedback 1/-Loop gain A-impedance of the CSA should be very low, to make sure that all current ﬂows into the ampliﬁcation
circuit. Regarding ﬁg. 12, the effective input impedance from the CSA is deﬁned by the ratio of
the voltage at the input terminal iIn and the input current i. The voltage at the input terminal is vN,
thus the effective input impedance Z∗I is

Z∗I =

vN
i

.

Solving eq. 3.1 for vN with the eqs. 3.2-3.4, Z∗I can be express as

Z∗I =

ZDZF

ZD(A + 1) + ZF

.

(3.15)

(3.16)

As A becomes inﬁnitely large, as we assume for an ideal operational ampliﬁer, the effective input
impedance is zero. This satisﬁes the principle of the virtual ground. If we assume an ideal detector
without a parasitic impedance from the CSA, ZD is inﬁnite. For this case, the input impedance is
determined by the open-loop gain and the feedback network ZF.

ZI =

lim
ZD→∞

ZF
A + 1

(3.17)

To force the CSA, that all current is integrated on the feedback capacitor, the impedance from
eq. 3.17 must be small compared to the shunting impedance ZD.

3.2 Charge-to-Voltage transfer function

The CSA is designed to measure a charge with a voltage output signal, where the peak amplitude
is proportional to charge at the input. The relation of the output voltage vO to the input charge Q is
the charge-to-voltage transfer function.

As the charge is deﬁned to be

where i is the electrical current, the corresponding Laplace transformation of eq. 3.19 is

vO
Q = HQ

dQ
dt = i ,

L(cid:8)Q(cid:48)(t)(cid:9) = sQ(s) = i(s) .

(3.18)

(3.19)

(3.20)

If we replace i in the current-to-voltage transfer function from eq. 3.5 by eq. 3.20 and set the
feedback network ZF = 1
to single capacitors, then the charge-
sCF
to-voltage transfer function is given by

and parasitic impedance ZD = 1
sCD

HQ =

−A

CD +CF(A + 1)

.

(3.21)

The simpliﬁcation of the impedances to single capacitors is valid, as we want to investigate the
frequency response of the charge-to-voltage-conversion. If the feedback time constant is properly
chosen according to eq. 2.18, there is no signiﬁcant peak amplitude loss in the voltage signal. That
means, the peak amplitude of the voltage signal is therefore independent of the feedback resistor
RF. The impedance ZD can also be simpliﬁed for this analysis, as the equivalent input resistance of

– 17 –

the ampliﬁer and detector is much larger than the effective input impedance according to eq. 3.16.
For an ideal operational ampliﬁer with inﬁnite open-loop gain A, HQ from eq. 3.23 becomes −1
CF
over the entire frequency domain. Since the open-loop voltage gain of an operational ampliﬁer is
not independent of frequency, a more realistic charge-to-voltage transfer function is obtained by
replacing A from eq. 3.23 by eq. 2.22

HQ(s) =

−AOL

CD +CF(AOL + 1) + sτ(CD +CF)

.

(3.22)

The charge-to-voltage gain is then given by

|HQ(j2π f )| = GQ( f ) =

(cid:114)

AOL

(cid:17)2

AOL(CD +CF)

.

(3.23)

(cid:16) f

fGBP

2
(CD +CF(AOL + 1))

+

The steady state of the system is derived by calculating the zero-frequency gain

GQS = lim
f→0

GQ( f ) =

AOL

CD +CF(AOL + 1)

.

(3.24)

Eq. 3.24 shows, that a ﬁnite open-loop gain AOL attenuates the measured peak voltage. The mea-
sured fraction of charge as ratio of GQS over the ideal charge-to-voltage gain ( 1
CF

) is given by

GQSCF =

AOL

CD
CF + AOL + 1

.

(3.25)

It is obvious that the measured peak amplitude is decreased by an increased detector capacitance
CD or an reduced open-loop voltage gain AOL. Thus, the operational ampliﬁer should provide a
high and stable open-loop voltage gain for an improved system performance as illustrated in ﬁg 15.
An equally important parameter of the CSA is the rise time of of the output voltage as an reaction

Figure 15. The measured fraction of charge in dependence of the ratio of input capacitance CD over feedback
capacitance CF. The fraction is increased with an increasing zero-frequency open-loop voltage gain AOL of
the operational ampliﬁer.

of a charge step at its input. As shown with eq. 2.12, the rise time is proportional to the cutoff
frequency of the system. Therefore, to determine the rise time, we have to calculate its cutoff

– 18 –

0100200300400500600700800900CD / CF5060708090100Fraction GQSCF / %AOL = 1AOL = 80 dBAOL = 70 dBAOL = 60 dBfrequency, which is given by

|HQ(j2π fc)|
|HQ(0)|

=

1
√2

fc = fGBP

CD
CF + (AOL + 1)
AOL(CD
CF + 1)

.

(3.26)

(3.27)

The eq. 3.27 shows, that the upper bandwidth limit is lowered with an increased fraction of the
shunting capacitance CD over CF. The bandwidth is extended with a lower value of AOL, but this
will reduce the measured fraction of charge as shown in ﬁg. 15. That means also, the signal-to-
noise ratio is decreased and therefore, the resolution of the charge measurement is decreased. The
response of the transfer function from eq. 3.23 to a unit step is shown in ﬁg. 16. Thus AOL should

Figure 16. The output signal of the charge-sensitive ampliﬁer with an unity step at its input. The rise
time is increased with an increasing ratio of CD
. The gain-bandwidth product of the operational ampliﬁer
CF
was assumed to be fGBP = 1GHz. In this example, the rise times are 17ns (solid line), 32ns (dashed line)
and 35ns (dotted line). The decreased rise time related to a smaller open-loop gain AOL is caused by the
attenuation of the peak amplitude.

be as large as possible. For this assumption, the bandwidth of the CSA is

fc =

lim
AOL→∞

fGBP
CD
CF + 1

.

(3.28)

The eq. 3.28 shows, that the cutoff frequency and therefore the rise time of the CSA is directly
proportional to the gain-bandwidth product of the ampliﬁer.

3.3 Input coupling of the CSA

As shown in ﬁg. 3, one electrode of the detector is usually biased at a negative high voltage.
Thus, the ampliﬁer at the cathode electrode must be protected against the bias voltage, since it is
not common for integrated circuits, that they operate at high input voltages in the range of several
hundreds of volts. A capacitor in series to the ampliﬁer input blocks the bias voltage of the detector,
but allows the detector current to ﬂow. This electrical circuit is shown in ﬁg. 17, where the coupling
capacitor CB is represented with the impedance ZB. In this conﬁguration, the parasitic impedance
ZI and the detector impedance ZD are separated by the impedance ZB. As the inﬂuence of the

– 19 –

010203040506070Time / ns00.20.40.60.81Charge / AsAOL = 1,       CD/CF = 10AOL = 1,       CD/CF = 100AOL = 60 dB, CD/CF = 100Figure 17. A functionally equivalent conﬁguration to ﬁg. 12 for the charge-to-voltage ampliﬁcation. The
input impedance at the terminal iIn is a Pi network instead of the single impedance ZD. ZB is a high voltage
coupling capacitor to protect the low voltage input terminals of the operational ampliﬁer.

coupling capacitor is not apparent at ﬁrst glance throughout the whole equation for the current-to-
voltage transfer function, a calculation with an inﬁnite loop-gain turns out the simpliﬁed equation

−vO
i =

ZDZF
ZB + ZD

.

(3.29)

To eliminate the inﬂuence of the impedance ZB, it must be much smaller than ZD. In the case that
all impedances are represented by a single capacitor, the steady state charge-to-voltage gain is then
given by

(cid:17) .

(cid:16)

1
1 + CD
CB

vO
Q =

CF

(3.30)

The eq. 3.30 shows, that the coupling capacitor must be much larger than the detector capacitance,
to avoid a peak amplitude loss and thus reducing the signal-to-noise ratio.

3.4 Noise
As already pointed out, the noise caused by the electronics and the corresponding signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR) characterizes the quality of the CSA with respect to the achievable resolution. The
precision of the charge measurement and the achievable timing are directly related to the SNR.
Regarding both values, the front-end electronics should not limit the intrinsic resolution of the
detector. Thus, to reduce the electronics noise, the noise sources of the detector system must be
identiﬁed in the ﬁrst step. The main source for the electronics noise is the operational ampliﬁer.
But also the passive components of an electronic circuit generate noise. The resulting noise at the
ampliﬁers output is the sum of all noise sources at the input, ampliﬁed by the noise gain. The
essential noise sources of the electronics circuit are shown in ﬁg. 18. The noise contribution of
the operational ampliﬁer is simpliﬁed to a model, where its noise is characterized by an equivalent
voltage noise source vnA and current noise source inA at the inverting input terminal. Additionally,
all resistors in the system contribute to the total noise by adding thermal noise. The equivalent
noise current of a resistor at temperature T is given by
4kT
R

(3.31)

inR =

– 20 –

−+vOvPvNZIiZIZFiZFiiInvOutZDiZDZBiZBFigure 18. The charge-sensitive ampliﬁer conﬁguration with its dominating noise sources at the input ter-
minal iIn. For the noise analysis, the current noise sources from the bias resistor (inRB), equivalent resistor
of the detector (inD), feedback resistor (inRF) and ampliﬁer (inA) can be substituted by a single source, as
they acting in parallel. Finally, the noise analysis is made with a current noise source in in parallel ("parallel
noise") and a voltage noise source vn in series ("series noise") to the input terminal.

where k is the Boltzmann constant. The equivalent resistor RD of the detector, the biasing resistor
RB as well as the equivalent resistor RF of the feedback impedance contribute to the total noise
following eq. 3.31. Each is represented by a current source in ﬁg. 19. As there are multiple noise
sources in the system, they all can be absorbed into a single source for the voltage noise vn and a
single source for the current noise in with

in = inRD + inRB + inRF ,

(3.32)

as they are connected in parallel. Voltage noise sources can be summed, as they are connected
in series. As we assume that all noise sources have a ﬂat frequency spectrum, the resulting noise
spectral density at the ampliﬁers output is shaped by the noise transfer function (noise gain). The
noise spectral density is usually expressed in units of nV√Hz. With regard to the block diagram of the
closed-loop transfer function from ﬁg.13, the current noise source is ampliﬁed by the current-to-
voltage transfer function, whereas the voltage noise source is ampliﬁed by the closed-loop voltage
gain. As illustrated in ﬁg. 19, the input noise current in to output noise voltage vOn transfer function

Figure 19. Block diagram of the closed-loop transfer function with additional current noise source in and
voltage noise source vn. Both sources act at the negative input terminal of the operational ampliﬁer but have
different transfer functions.

Gin is given by eq. 3.5 and the input noise voltage vn to vOn transfer function Gvn is given by
eq. 3.11. The resulting spectral noise density for the output noise voltage is shown in ﬁg. 20. For a
clear view on the components of the noise spectral density, the calculations are based on the ideal

– 21 –

−+vOvPvNinA+−vnAinRFvOutinDinRBiInΣZDZFZD+ZFΣAZDZD+ZFivI−vDvO−vn−inFigure 20. The noise spectral density log-log plot for the ideal charge-sensitive ampliﬁer with the capacitor
CF in the feedback network and the capacitor CD at its input terminal. In the lower frequency range, the
noise density is dominated by the current noise. Above the frequency fI, the portion of the voltage noise
dominates the total noise density vOn.

model of the CSA. The ﬁg. 20 shows the contribution of the input current noise, which has a typical
1
f shape and dominates the low frequency range (referred as ﬂicker noise). The noise density in the
upper frequency range is dominated by the input voltage noise but remains ﬂat (referred as white
noise). For a sufﬁcient large open-loop gain, the voltage noise is ampliﬁed by the factor 1
β . A
more realistic noise spectral density is shown in ﬁg. 21. For this illustration, the model of the ideal

Figure 21. The noise spectral density log-log plot for the charge-sensitive ampliﬁer with the resistor RF and
capacitor CF in the feedback network and the capacitor CD at its input terminal. The frequency response of
the current noise density has the shape of a low-pass, whereas the voltage noise density has the response of
a bandpass. The time constant τ = RFCF determines the low cutoff frequency fL2 for both responses. The
voltage noise density is limited by the corner frequency fc. Thus, the total noise density is bounded over the
whole frequency range.

CSA is extended with the feedback resistor RF and the gain-bandwidth product is bounded to fGBP.
The density of the ﬂicker noise is limited in its upper value. It has the shape of a typical low-pass
which is formed by the time constant RFCF of the feedback impedance. The maximum value inRF
is reached above the frequency fL2 (see eq. in ﬁg. 21). The voltage noise related portion has the
spectral density of a bandpass. The upper corner frequency fc is determined by the bandwidth limit
of the CSA. The lower corner frequency is given by fL2. At zero frequency, the voltage noise is
limited to the value of vn. However, the noise spectral density determines the root mean square

– 22 –

fIFrequency / Hzvn/-Noise density / (nV Hz-1/2)vnGvn=vn3CDCF+14inGin=in2:fCFvOn=q(vnGvn)2+(inGin)2Total noise densityVoltage noise densityCurrent noise densityfL1fL2fIfCFrequency / Hzvnvn/-RFinNoise density / (nV Hz-1/2)fL1=12:RF(CD+CF)fL2=12:RFCFfI=q(RFin)2!v2nvn2:RF(CD+CF)fC=fGBPCDCF+1Total noise densityVoltage noise densityCurrent noise densityamplitude of the output noise ("rms noise") over a given bandwidth. As the noise spectral density
is bounded over the entire frequency range, the total rms noise Vrms is calculated by

(cid:114)(cid:90) ∞

0

Vrms =

2
(vnGvn)

+ (inGin)

2d f

(3.33)

In accordance to the noise spectral density, an additional signal processing with ﬁlters (pulse
shapers) can be optimally adapted.

4. Implementation

A major design guideline was the reduction of the total amount of components per readout chan-
nel. This could be achieved, as we used a single operational ampliﬁer to built the CSA without
additional gain stages. Nevertheless, this circuit covers the desired measurement range and did not
need any pulse shapers for its basic operation. As mentioned in the preface, our system must detect
energies up to 7MeV and should be compatible to a digitizer system with an input voltage range
of 2V. According to eq. 2.10 and the steady state charge-to-voltage gain of an ideal OPA from
eq. 3.24, the feedback capacitance CF should be at least 120fF. A higher gain is acceptable since
an attenuation of the pulse amplitude can be made with less effort. Since the feedback capacitance
and the electrical characteristics of the detector are ﬁxed design parameters, the operational ampli-
ﬁer and the feedback resistance RF are the only components that remain for on optimization of the
readout circuit. As a ﬁrst step, the drift time tD of the moving charge must be taken into account to
choose an appropriate value of the time constant τ of the CSA. With regard to the induced currents
through the anode and cathode shown in ﬁg. 5, we expect rise times in the range up to 450ns for
the cathode and shorter rise times up to 200ns for the anode. Because the anode signals are used
for spectroscopy, the ballistic deﬁcit from eq. 2.18 should be less than 1%. Consequently, the ratio
of τ
must be greater then 50, which corresponds to a value of 10 µs for the time constant τ or
tD
83MΩ for the feedback resistor RF (nearest matching part has 82MΩ). With a constraint of 5%
( τ
tD = 9.66) for the ballistic deﬁcit on the cathode signal, we selected a feedback resistor of 47MΩ
for that readout channel. For the implementation of the CSA with a COTS operational ampliﬁer,
we have ﬁgured out four important features for the parametric selection. At ﬁrst, the operational
ampliﬁer must have a large input impedance. Therefore, the voltage noise gain of the feedback
network ( 1
β ) is reduced. Second, it must have a high open-loop voltage gain, so that the effective
input impedance regarding eq. 3.16 is minimized. Both requirements fulﬁll the following condition

ZD(A + 1) (cid:29) ZF ,

(4.1)

where ZD is the sum of the nominal input impedance ZI of the operational ampliﬁer and the detector
impedance. The highest input impedance is achieved by operational ampliﬁers with a ﬁeld-effect
transistor at their input terminals. As a third feature, the equivalent voltage and current noise must
be very low and as the fourth selection parameter, the operational ampliﬁers are compared to their
limited gain-bandwidth product. For our application, the achievable timing of the detector pulses is
important, as it must be further investigated. Thus, for the advanced analysis, the rise time should
not be limited. In tab. 1 we list some COTS operational ampliﬁer from different vendors, which
match the selection criteria. All operational ampliﬁers fulﬁll the requirements, that they have a high

– 23 –

Table 1. A list of suitable commercial-off-the-shelf operational ampliﬁers from different vendors. They are
compared in terms of our selection criteria: gain-bandwidth product ( fGBP), zero-frequency open-loop gain
(AOL) and input impedance (ZI). vn is the equivalent voltage noise source and in the current noise source.
All values are extracted from the datasheets [24],[25],[26],[27].

vn/ nV√Hz
4
4.3
4.0
4.8

in/ fA√Hz
2.5
5.5
7.0
1.3

Product
Vendor
Analog Devices
ADA4817
Linear Technology LTC6268
Linear Technology LTC6268-10
Texas Instruments OPA657

fGBP / MHz AOL / dB ZI /Ω||pF
1050
0.5T||1.4
0.5T||0.55
500
4000
0.5T||0.55
0.5T||5.2
1600

65
108
108
70

input impedance and a relatively large gain-bandwidth product. For the ﬁrst tests, we have chosen
the OPA657 because of its larger open-loop gain and bandwidth in comparison to the ADA4817.
As a second part, we choose the LTC6268-10 because of its outstanding parameters and very low
parasitic capacitance. Both operational ampliﬁers are available in an almost pin compatible pack-
age so that the evaluation procedure could be done with the same hardware. After a ﬁrst attempt
with the LTC6268, which worked on the OPA657 PCB layout, we decided to populate the hardware
with the LTC6268-10, but unfortunately, this circuit tends to oscillate, as also observed in [21]. In
conclusion, the implementation of the CSA with the OPA657 performs best for the ﬁrst proto-
type (see ﬁg. 22). Despite its higher parasitic input capacitance, a great advantage of the OPA657
over the LTC6268 is its wide supply voltage range of 12V. This provides enough headroom for
pulse pile-ups until the output voltage of the ampliﬁer saturates. Thus, this ampliﬁer is capable of
high count rates with high energies. The readout board contains 17 CSAs, where one channel is

Figure 22. The detector assembly with unpopulated readout boards (left) and a close-up of a populated
printed circuit board with 17 charge-sensitive ampliﬁers (right).

equipped for the readout of the cathode. All necessary functionality, like low voltage power supply,
high voltage ﬁlters, biasing and decoupling capacitors are included on the PCB. Each CSA has a
passive low-pass at its output. The bandwidth is limited to 21.2MHz (16.5ns rise time), which is
sufﬁcient for the CZT detector signals. One channel of the readout board is used for the evaluation
of the CSA and contains a test input circuit. This consist of a termination resistor and a series

– 24 –

Table 2. Numeric values for the different readout channels which are connected to a CSA based on the
OPA657. The cathode signal is used for the timing, whereas the anode signal provides the spectroscopic
information. The bandwidth-limited noise level complies with the nominal energy resolution of about 8keV.

RF ||CF

CD
CF

Ballistic deﬁcit
Charge fraction
Steady state gain
Cutoff frequency

Rise time

Noise level (rms)

Noise level (rms), BW limited

Peak amplitude @ 511keV

Cathode

Anode (Pixel)

Test input

47MΩ || 100fF 82MΩ || 100fF 82MΩ || 100fF

119

95.36%
96.34%
9.19 V
pC

13.84MHz
25.27ns
2.62mV
2.01mV
162.11mV

53.05
98.79%
98.32%
9.71 V
pC

30.11MHz
11.61ns
1.82mV
1.26mV
171.38mV

55

99.9%
98.26%
9.82 V
pC

29.08MHz
12.03ns
1.80mV
1.21mV
173.33mV

capacitor of 300fF for the charge injection in accordance with [22]. The theoretical performance
parameters of the CSA are listed in tab. 2. These values are estimates and will be veriﬁed with
experimental results.

5. Results

The readout board is evaluated with the test pulse input and with the detector shown in ﬁg. 2. The
test pulse input is sourced by a signal generator with a step voltage input. According to the current-
voltage relation of a capacitor, the step voltage applied to test input capacitor generates a current
ﬂowing into the CSA. With a varying shape of the voltage signal, arbitrary detector signals can be
synthesized.

5.1 Test pulse input

The most important feature of the front-end electronics is the noise performance. There are var-
ious methods to analyze the noise of a linear time-invariant (LTI) system like the CSA. A com-
mon method is described in the IEEE Std 1241-201 and is referred as "Sine-wave testing and
ﬁtting" [28]. It is known, that the response of a LTI system to a pure sine-wave is a sine-wave
with the same frequency but different (or same) amplitude and phase. A test with a sine-wave has
the advantage, that the waveform can be generated very accurate and the interpretation is done by
standardized instruments and tools. If a sine-wave is applied to the input, the output depends on the
transfer function of the system and is superimposed with noise. The input sine-wave is derived a
posteriori by a four-parameter sine-wave ﬁt and the residual is the noise level as described in [28].
The waveform is captured by our digitizer with 100MSPS and 14bit resolution This digitizer board
provides a SNR of 71.3dB at around −1dB of full scale input (2.3Vpp). This corresponds to a rms
noise level of 201 µV. These values are measured with an input frequency of 2MHz. With the same
setup, the sine-wave test with the test input of the CSA results in a rms noise level of 1.26mV. The
result is shown in ﬁg. 23. By removing the rms noise of the digitizer system, the adjusted rms noise

– 25 –

Figure 23. Noise measurement of the charge-sensitive ampliﬁer with a sine-wave test. A 2MHz sine-wave
was applied to the test input and the difference between the output signal and a four-parameter sine wave ﬁt
(∆Sineﬁt) is plotted against the period T of the sine-wave (left). All harmonic distortions were eliminated
by the test procedure, to get the noise level (standard deviation "sig" of ∆Sineﬁt, right)

.

value of the CSA is 1.24mV. This is in good accordance with the predicted values in tab. 2 for the
test input. Moreover, other tests were made to validate the pulse shape at the output of the CSA. The
signal generator was set up to generate a step input with a linear rise time of approximately 500ns.
Figure 24 shows the output signals for a variation of the signal generators amplitude (AT) up to
1V. The ﬁt of the peak heights (maximum value) and the generators amplitude shows an excellent
linearity. The linear ﬁt results in a gain of 3.03. This matches the ratio of test input capacitance
(300fF) over feedback capacitance (100fF). The test pulse input was also used to evaluate the tim-

Figure 24. A measurement with different rectangle pulses with amplitudes AT on the test input capacitance
of 300fF. The output signal was recorded with the 100MSPS digitizer (left) and the peak amplitude was
extracted from a single waveform. The linear range of the charge-sensitive ampliﬁer is up to 300fC, which
is roughly 9MeV in CZT (right).

ing capabilities of the CSA. As before, the signals were captured with the digitizer and processed
ofﬂine. The test pulses were synchronized to a known timing reference signal (sine-wave signal).
The timing performance was obtained from the difference between the zero crossing point of the
sine-wave and a digital constant fraction trigger on the output signal of the CSA. Both timestamps
were calculated by software. The results for some selected pulse heights are shown in ﬁg. 25. With
high signal amplitudes, the timing performance is in the range of several picoseconds (44ps stan-
dard deviation). This value increases with lower signal amplitudes because the SNR decreases as
well. This rough estimate of timing performance shows, that the CSA does not limit the timing
performance of the CZT which is estimated to be in the range above some nanoseconds [29]. For

– 26 –

0100200300400500Time mod T / ns-4-2024"Sinefit / mV-3-2-10123"Sinefit / mV00.20.40.60.81Normalized counts / a.U."Sinefitmu  = -2.24 uVsig = 1.26 mVcnt = 16k0204060Time / 7s-101030507090110130Output / mVAT = 45 mVAT = 15 mVAT = 3 mV00.20.40.60.81Test pulse amplitude AT / V0123Pulse height / VLinear fitMeasurementFigure 25. Results of about 1k test input measurements with the 100MSPS digitizer. The pulse height is the
maximum value of the output from the charge-sensitive ampliﬁer. The time ∆t is the difference between the
pulse trigger and the timing reference from the signal generator. The standard deviation of the measurements
are σx = 252ps and σy = 1.23mV for the left plot and σx = 44ps and σy = 1.23mV for the right plot. The
colormap is in logarithmic scale.

both test pulse amplitudes, the standard deviation of 1.23mV of the pulse height is in accordance
with the sine-wave test.

5.2 Pixel detector

The performance of the CSA is ﬁnally evaluated with the Redlen pixel detector and the hardware
shown in ﬁg. 22. The detector is biased at −600V and the signals are captured with our digitizer.
The waveforms of a single pixel and the cathode are stored for an ofﬂine analysis. The ﬁrst test
should carry out the measured energy on both electrodes in dependence of the depth of interaction
(DOI). As we showed the relationship between the measured charge and the DOI with the weighting
potential in ﬁg. 4, this should be experimentally veriﬁed with the data from the detector. The DOI
can be measured either with the ratio of cathode over anode energy or by a direct measurement of
the drift time of the moving charge. The drift time of charge correlates with the rise time of the
CSA. For our analysis, we calculate the rise time as the time difference between two thresholds of
the rising edge of the signal. On both the cathode and the anode signal, we set the thresholds to
10% and 90% of the peak amplitude. The data was collected with a 22Na radioactive source and an
arbitrary selected pixel of the 2 × 2 center array. The anode was used to trigger an event while the
cathode signal was captured at the same time. This measurement shows the expected relationship
of the DOI and the measured energy by the cathode and the anode signal. The peak amplitude
of the 511keV photopeak of the cathode decreases linearly with the rise time. A long rise time
correlates with a long drift time of charge and therefore with an event near the cathode. The linear
shape matches the expected weighting potential of the cathode. The anode signal also decreases
with the observed rise time. The depth of interaction is clearly visible along the predicted shape
of the weighting potential as shown in ﬁg. 4. The expected peak amplitudes for the photopeak are
in accordance with the calculated values in tab. 2. The cathode signal is around 158mV for an
event with full charge collection (maximum rise time is around 450ns). The CSA for the selected
anode pixel has a slightly larger gain than expected and results in 182mV for a fully integrated
detector current with a duration of about 210ns. The correlation between the rise time of the
cathode signal and cathode over anode ratio is shown in ﬁg. 27. Both values are aligned with the
depth of interaction. In contrast, the correlation between the cathode and anode rise time is smeared

– 27 –

-627-182263708"t / ps284286288290Pulse height / mV0481216202428-96-362484"t / ps2196219822002202Pulse height / mV0481216202428Figure 26. Measurement of a 22Na radioactive source with the Redlen CZT and the charge-sensitive ampli-
ﬁer (CSA) readout board. The peak amplitudes of the output pulses from the CSA are plotted against the
10% − 90%risetimes. The weighting potentials of the cathode (left) and an anode (right) are clearly visible
along the 511keV photopeak (160mV for the cathode and 180mV for the anode at longest rise times).

out. This is caused by uncertainties in the crossing of the low level threshold, because of the slow
rising portion of the signal at the beginning. The low level trigger is difﬁcult to hit exactly without
additional effort. However, the measurements show that the depth of interaction can be calculated

Figure 27. Correlation of the cathode over anode ratio (CAR) with the measured rise times of the cathode
pulses from the 22Na radioactive source measurement (left). The rise time has a strong correlation to the
CAR and therefore to the depth of interaction (DOI) in the detector volume. The correlation of the anode
rise time to the DOI is smeared out (right).

by the rise time of the cathode signal or the ratio of cathode over anode energy. In conclusion,
the measurement of the cathode rise time is more precisely than the anode rise time, because the
cathode signal rises with a nearly linear slope. We prefer a measurement of the rise time instead
of cathode over anode ratio for the estimation of the DOI. An advantage of this method is, that
the information is derived out of one detector signal instead of two. Additionally, the estimation
of cathode over anode ratio is error prone for charge-sharing events. It is evident, that the anode
energy has to be corrected in dependence of the DOI. There are several approaches for the depth
correction, which are all carried out empirically. The results are achieved with best-ﬁt functions,
based on e g. polynomial [30] or exponential [31], [32] equations. Our approach is based on the
weighting potential of a pixel, as this is the cause for the incorrect measurement. For this, we have
selected the events of the 511keV photopeak along its cluster as shown in ﬁg. 28. The eq. 2.6 of
the weighting potential matches the measured data. Thus, the derived mathematical relationship is
used to correct anode energy, which is shown in ﬁg. 28. We also evaluated polynomial functions for

– 28 –

Figure 28. The 511keV photopeak along the rise time of the cathode signal with the corresponding data
points used for the ﬁt of the weighting potential (left). The corrected spectrum of the anode signal is inde-
pendent of the depth of interaction (right). The selected pixel has an energy resolution of 9.5keV (standard
deviation) for the photopeak, which corresponds to 4.3%FWHM. The spectrum is recorded without any
additional pulse shapers.

the ﬁtting function, resulting in comparable results with a fourth degree polynomial. The presented
measurements were processes without any additional pulse shapers. This results in an energy
resolution of 4.3% (FWHM) for the 511keV photopeak. With the use of additional digital pulse
shapers, the energy resolution could be improved to 2.2% (see ﬁg. 29).

Figure 29. The results of a measurement with our charge-sensitive ampliﬁer and the Redlen CZT. The use
of an additional digital pulse shaper improves the energy resolution of the 511keV photopeak to 4.8keV
(standard deviation). This corresponds to 11keV FWHM (2.2%). All events of one pixel are shown.

6. Summary

We presented a circuit design and implementation of the analog front-end electronics for a cad-
mium zinc telluride (CdZnTe, "CZT") pixel detector. Starting from the electrical equivalent circuit

– 29 –

130140150160170180190Anode photopeak amplitude / mV0100200300400Risetime cathode / ns017034151176410621275Anode energy / keV100101102Counts22Na Spectrummu  = 511 keVsig = 9.5 keV010017034151176410621275Anode energy / keV100101102Counts22Na Spectrumwith shapermu  = 511 keVsig = 4.8 keVof the CZT, its electrical characteristics are carried out by means of equations and experimental
measurements. We gave a short summary of the signal formation in a CZT and showed the weight-
ing potentials for a pixelated detector. Finally, these equations were applied for the analysis of the
detector signals. After a comparison of different readout circuits, we focus our investigation on
the charge-sensitive ampliﬁer for the readout of the detector signals. As an ASIC-based solution
is not available for the application with high gamma-ray energies and count rates, we designed the
front-end electronics for the 8 × 8 pixel detector with commercial-off-the-shelf operational am-
pliﬁers. We showed a detailed analysis of the charge-sensitive ampliﬁer in conjunction with the
electrical model of the CZT. The limits of a design concerning gain, bandwidth and noise are given
with exact equations and numerical values for the use in practice. The performance of our readout
electronics is measured with synthesized detector signals from the test pulse input and with the
pixel detector of the size 20 × 20 × 5mm3 from Redlen. The measurements with the test pulse
show, that the total noise level of 1.26mV (corresponds to 3.7keV with the charge-to-voltage gain
of (100fF)−1) is below the nominal intrinsic resolution of about 8keV (FWHM at 122keV) of the
detector. Furthermore, we show that the signal-to-noise ratio is also sufﬁcient for a timing far below
1ns, which outstrips the expected CZT performance. However, all the results are achieved with-
out an additional pulse shaper. Moreover, we investigated the performance of the charge-sensitive
ampliﬁers with the detector from Redlen. We could verify that the claimed depth dependence
is in good accordance with the calculated weighting potential of a pixel. For this, we present a
measurement of a 22Na radioactive source and show a correction of the measured energy in depen-
dence of the depth-of-interaction. For the selected pixel we obtained an energy resolution of about
22keV (4.3% FWHM at 511keV). This result could be improved to 11keV (2.2%FWHM) with
the use of additional digital pulse shapers. Finally, the readout electronics fulﬁll our requirements
and operate from several keV up to 10MeV with sub-nanosecond timing capabilities. The charge-
sensitive front-end electronics are now used in a multichannel digital signal processing system for
a Compton camera prototype.

References

[1] C.G. Wahl et al., The Polaris-H imaging spectrometer, Nucl. Instr. Meth A 784, 2015,

[2] A.W. Grosser, Redlen Technologies Inc., Manufacturer of CZT Radiation Detection Products, Private

Presentation, 2015

[3] T. Kormoll et al., A prototype Compton camera for in-vivo dosimetry of ion beam cancer irradiation,

IEEE NSS/MIC 2011

[4] F. Hueso-González, Test of Compton camera components for prompt gamma imaging at the ELBE

bremsstrahlung beam, JINST 9, 2014

[5] M. McCleskey et al., Evaluation of a multistage CdZnTe Compton camera for prompt γ imaging for

proton therapy, Nucl. Instr. Meth A 785, 2015,

[6] P. Födisch et. al., Eine Ausleseelektronik für CZT-Detektoren mit dem RENA-3 IC von Nova R&D,

104th Meeting of the Study Group for Electronic Instrumentation (SEI 2013)

[7] A. Schumann et al., Simulation and experimental veriﬁcation of prompt gamma-ray emissions during

proton irradiation, PHYS MED BIOL 60, 2015

– 30 –

[8] F. Hueso-González, First test of the prompt gamma ray timing method with heterogeneous targets at a

clinical proton therapy facility, PHYS MED BIOL 60, 2015

[9] Redlen Technologies Inc., M1757 CZT Radiation Detector, Datasheet, 2011
[10] P.H. Lu et al., Ruggedization of CdZnTe detectors and detector assemblies for radiation detection

applications, Nucl. Instr. Meth A 784, 2015

[11] S. Awadalla, Solid-State Radiation Detectors: Technology and Applications , CRC Press, 2015
[12] H. Spieler, Semiconductor Detector Systems, Oxford University Press, 2005
[13] P. De Antonis et al., Measuring the bulk resistivity of CdZnTe single crystal detectors using a

contactless alternating electric ﬁeld method, Nucl. Instr. Meth A 380, 1996

[14] A. Garson et al., Leakage Currents and Capacitances of Thick CZT Detectors, IEEE NSS, 2007
[15] L. Rossi et al., Pixel Detectors: From Fundamentals to Applications, Springer, 2006
[16] C. Grupen et al., Particle Detectors, Cambridge University Press, 2008
[17] Z. He, Review of the Shockley-Ramo theorem and its application in semiconductor gamma-ray

detectors, Nucl. Instr. Meth A 463, 2001

[18] N. Wermes, Pixel Vertex Detectors, arXiv:physics/0611075, 2006
[19] Z. He, Direct measurement of product of the electron mobility and mean free drift time of CdZnTe

semiconductors using position sensitive single polarity charge sensing detectors, J. Appl. Phys. 84,
1998

[20] H.Y. Cho et al., Measurement of the drift mobilities and the mobility-lifetime products of charge

carriers in a CdZnTe crystal by using a transient pulse technique, JINST 6, 2011

[21] G. Brisebois, Op Amp Combines Femtoamp Bias Current with 4GHz Gain Bandwidth Product, Shines

New Light on Photonics Applications, LT Journal of Analog Innovation 25, 2015
[22] G.F. Knoll, Radiation Detection and Measurement, John Wiley & Sons Inc., 2010
[23] P. Horowitz, The Art Of Electronics, Cambridge University Press, 1989
[24] Analog Devices, ADA4817-1/ADA4817-2, 1 GHz FastFET Op Amps Data sheet Rev. B, 2013
[25] Linear Technology, LTC6268/LTC6269 500MHz Ultra-Low Bias Current FET Input Op Amp

Data sheet 62689f, 2014

[26] Linear Technology, LTC6268-10/LTC6269-10 4GHz Ultra-Low Bias Current FET Input Op Amp

Data sheet 626810f, 2015

[27] Texas Instruments, OPA657 1.6-GHz, Low-Noise, FET-Input Operational Ampliﬁer

Data sheet SBOS197F, 2015

[28] IEEE Instrumentation & Measurement Society, IEEE Standard for Terminology and Test Methods for

Analog-To-Digital Converters, IEEE Std 1241-2000

[29] L.J. Meng, Exploring the limiting timing resolution for large volume CZT detectors with waveform

analysis, Nucl. Instr. Meth A 550, 2005

[30] B. Donmez et al., 3D position sensing on UltraPeRL CdZnTe detectors, IEEE NSS, 2007
[31] J. Hong et al., Cathode depth sensing in CZT detectors, Proc. SPIE 5165, 2004
[32] H.Y. Cho et al., Improvement of the energy resolution in a pixellated CdZnTe detector using depth

sensing based on pulse rise-time correlation, JINST 11, 2016

– 31 –

