6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
 
6
1

 
 
]
T
G
h
t
a
m

.

[
 
 

1
v
0
9
0
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

INFINITE ORDER CORKS

ROBERT E. GOMPF

Abstract. We construct a compact, contractible 4-manifold C, an inﬁnite-order self-diﬀeomorphism f
of its boundary, and a smooth embedding of C into a closed, simply connected 4-manifold X, such that
the manifolds obtained by cutting C out of X and regluing it by powers of f are all pairwise nondiﬀeo-
morphic. The manifold C can be chosen from among inﬁnitely many homeomorphism types, revealing
a new construction of corks: attaching a 2-handle to the meridian of a thickened knot complement.

1. Introduction

The wild proliferation of exotic smoothings of 4-manifolds highlights the failure of high-dimensional
topology to apply in dimension 4, notably through failure of the h-Cobordism Theorem. Attempts to
understand this issue led to the notion of a cork twist. A cork, as originally envisioned, is a contractible,
smooth submanifold C of a closed 4-manifold X, with an involution f of ∂C, such that cutting out C
and regluing it by the twist f changes the diﬀeomorphism type of X (while necessarily preserving its
homeomorphism type). We can think of C as a control knob with two settings, toggling between two
smoothings of X. The ﬁrst example of a cork was discovered by Akbulut [A]. Subsequently, various
authors ([CFHS], [M], see [GS] for more history) showed that any two homeomorphic, simply connected
(smooth) 4-manifolds are related by a cork twist. Since then, much work has been done (eg [AR], [AY])
to understand and apply cork twists. Various people, going back at least to Freedman in the 1990s, have
asked whether higher order corks may exist—that is, knobs with n settings for n diﬀerent diﬀeomorphism
types, or possibly even inﬁnitely many settings all realizing distinct types. Recently, Tange [T] exhibited
knobs with n settings for any ﬁnite n, displaying two diﬀeomorphism types on X. Independently, Auckly,
Kim, Melvin and Ruberman [AKMR] constructed the desired ﬁnite order corks, and more generally G-
corks for any ﬁnite subgroup G of SO(4), where the control knob can be set to any element of G to yield
|G| diﬀeomorphism types. However, both of these latter papers pose the inﬁnite order case as a still
unsolved problem, in spite of fruitless attacks by various mathematicians. The purpose of the present
article is to exhibit a large family of inﬁnite order corks, arising from a new general construction.

There is variation in the literature about the deﬁnition of a cork. All approaches share the following:

Deﬁnition 1.1. A cork (C, f ) is a smooth, compact, contractible 4-manifold C with a diﬀeomorphism
f : ∂C → ∂C. The cork will be called nontrivial if f does not extend to a self-diﬀeomorphism of C. If
C is smoothly embedded in a 4-manifold X, cutting out C and regluing it by f to get (X − int C) ∪f C
will be called a twist by f .
Note that (C, f k) is then a cork for any k ∈ Z, so we also talk about twisting by powers f k. By Freedman
[F], [FQ], f necessarily extends to a self-homeomorphism of C, so a cork twist does not change the
homeomorphism type of a manifold. In some references, f is required to be an involution, or at least
extend to a ﬁnite cyclic (or other ﬁnite) group action. Since we are interested in Z-actions, no additional
hypothesis is needed. We can now state our main existence theorem, which is proved in Section 2.

Theorem 1.2. There is a cork (C, f ) and a smooth embedding of C into a closed, simply connected
4-manifold X, for which the manifolds Xk, k ∈ Z, obtained by twisting by f k are homeomorphic but
pairwise nondiﬀeomorphic. Hence, the corks (C, f k) are distinct (up to diﬀeomorphism commuting with
the maps), and nontrivial unless k = 0.
In the terminology of [AKMR], the embedding C (cid:44)→ X is Z-eﬀective and exhibits (C, f ) as the ﬁrst
example of a Z-cork.

1

−s

r

Figure 1. The double twist knot κ(r,−s).

Corollary 1.3. The homology 3-sphere ∂C bounds inﬁnitely many smooth, contractible manifolds that
are all diﬀeomorphic, homeomorphic rel boundary and pairwise nondiﬀeomorphic rel boundary.

Proof. Identify ∂C as the boundary of C using each of the diﬀeomorphisms f k.

(cid:3)

Corollary 1.4. There is a compact, contractible 4-manifold admitting inﬁnitely many nondiﬀeomorphic
smooth structures.

Proof. This follows immediately from the previous corollary and [AR].

(cid:3)

We obtain inﬁnitely many examples of corks (C, f ) as in the theorem, distinguished by the homeomor-
phism types of their boundaries. However, our examples all have a simple form. For any knot κ ⊂ S3,
let P be its closed complement, and let C(κ, m) be the oriented 4-manifold obtained from I × P , where
I denotes the interval [−1, 1] throughout the paper, by attaching a 2-handle along the meridian to κ in
{1} × P with framing m. Note that I × P can be identiﬁed with the obvious ribbon complement of κ#κ
in B4, so this is a special case of removing a slice disk and regluing it with a twist. Either perspective
reveals the identity C(κ, m) ≈ C(κ, m), and these are orientation-reversing diﬀeomorphic to C(κ,−m).
Clearly, C(κ, m) is the 4-ball when m = 0 or κ is unknotted, but otherwise it is a contractible manifold
whose boundary is irreducible and not S3. In fact, ∂C(κ, m) is obtained by (− 1
m )-surgery on κ#κ, and
contains two oppositely oriented copies of the complement P . Since these complements can be recov-
ered from the 3-manifold ∂C(κ, m) by the JSJ decomposition, it follows that such manifolds are never
orientation-preserving homeomorphic unless the corresponding knots are the same up to orientation and
the (nonzero) integers are equal. In our examples, κ is the double twist knot κ(r,−s) = κ(−s, r) shown
in Figure 1, where the boxes count full twists, right-handed when the integer is positive. The resulting
oriented 4-manifolds C(r, s; m) = C(κ(r,−s), m), for r, s > 0 and m (cid:54)= 0, are not orientation-preserving
homeomorphic to each other unless the integers m agree and the pairs (r, s) agree up to order. In general,
the incompressible torus {0} × ∂P in ∂C(κ, m) can be used to create self-diﬀeomorphisms of the latter:
Let f : ∂C(κ, m) → ∂C(κ, m) be obtained by rotating the torus ∂P parallel to the canonical longitude of
κ, through angle (t + 1)π, t ∈ I = [−1, 1], as we pass through I × ∂P , and extending as the identity. Our
simplest cork, (C(1, 1;−1), f ) is made in this manner from the ﬁgure-eight knot κ(1,−1). Its boundary
is given by surgery with coeﬃcient 1 on the connected sum of two ﬁgure-eight knots, with the obvious
incompressible torus in the complement of this sum. More generally, we have:

Theorem 1.5. The cork C appearing in Theorem 1.2 can be taken to be any of the inﬁnitely many
contractible manifolds C(r, s; m) with r, s > 0 and m (cid:54)= 0, and f as speciﬁed above. When r, s and m are
odd, the manifolds Xk can be assumed to be irreducible.

Recall that a 4-manifold is irreducible if it cannot split as a smooth connected sum unless one summand
is homeomorphic to S4. Other explicit constructions of corks in the literature typically involve reducible
(blown up) manifolds. The last sentence of the theorem is most likely true in general; see Remark 2.1(a).
Question 1.6. Is every pair (C(κ, m), f ) for κ a nontrivial knot, m (cid:54)= 0 and f as given above, a Z-cork?
Does the full action of T 2 on ∂P extend these to (Z ⊕ Z)-corks?

2

∂Σ

Σ

C+1

Kk

C−1

Kk

Figure 2. The punctured torus Σ in the knot complement M = S3 − νKk (k = 0).

The author would like to thank Cameron Gordon, Danny Ruberman and Andr´as Stipsicz for helpful

comments.

2. Constructing corks

The closed manifolds Xk in Theorem 1.2 are are made from the elliptic surface E(n), for a ﬁxed n ≥ 1,
by the Fintushel-Stern knot construction [FS1]. Recall (eg [GS]) that E(n) has a standard description in
which it is built from S1× S1× D2 (a neighborhood of a regular ﬁber F = S1× S1) by adding handles. Of
most interest for present purposes, each of the two circle factors has 6n parallel copies (vanishing cycles) to
which 2-handles are attached with framing −1 (relative to the product framing of the boundary 3-torus).
We will use three of these 2-handles. Given a knot K ⊂ S3, let M denote its closed complement. The
knot construction consists of removing S1 × S1 × D2 from E(n) and replacing it by M × S1, gluing by a
diﬀeomorphism of the boundary 3-torus that identiﬁes the canonical longitude of K with {point}× ∂D2,
and the meridian of K and circle {point} × S1 in M × S1 with copies of the two circle factors of F . As
detailed in [FS1], Freedman’s classiﬁcation [F], [FQ] shows that the resulting manifold XK retains the
homeomorphism type of E(n) (which is simply connected with b2 = 12n − 2 and signature −8n, and is
even if and only if n is). However when n ≥ 2, varying the knot K results in diﬀeomorphism types that
are distinguished by their Seiberg-Witten invariants if and only if the knots in question are distinguished
by their Alexander polynomials. The structure of the Seiberg-Witten invariants then also shows that
each XK is irreducible. When n = 1 the discussion becomes more technical, but these statements remain
true for the k-twist knots Kk = κ(k,−1) with k ∈ Z [FS2], except that the unknot K0 yields the reducible
manifold E(1), a sum of copies of ±CP2. For ﬁxed n ≥ 1, let Xk be obtained as above from the twist knot
Kk. Since these knots are distinguished by their Alexander polynomials, Theorem 1.2 follows once we
locate a contractible C ⊂ X = X0 = E(n) with a twist f for which each power f k gives the corresponding
Xk.
Proof of Theorem 1.2. Let Σ ⊂ M be the punctured torus depicted in Figure 2 (near the clasp of Kk,
the −s = −1 twist box in Figure 1) with circles C±1 generating its homology. Set k = 0 for this, but note
that the corresponding picture for any k (with the correct longitude) is then obtained from the k = 0 case
by (− 1
k )-surgery on the circle ∂Σ. To examine this surgery more closely, identify a tubular neighborhood
of Σ in M with I × Σ, where I = [−1, 1] and {1} × Σ contains the outer part of the boundary of I × Σ
visible in the ﬁgure. Let A be a collar of ∂Σ in Σ. Then we can perform the required surgery by cutting
out and regluing the solid torus I × A. Since the surgery coeﬃcient has numerator 1, we can take the
gluing diﬀeomorphism to be the identity everywhere except on the annulus I × ∂Σ. That is, we get from
the k = 0 case to the case of arbitrary k by slitting M open along the annulus I × ∂Σ and regluing by

3

i , i = −1, 0, 1 (suitably attached to the base point), where for i = ±1, C∗

gk for a suitable Dehn twist g of the annulus. Hence, to transform X0 to Xk, we slit X0 open along the
3-manifold N = I × ∂Σ × S1 ⊂ M × S1 and reglue by (g × idS1)k. (This operation can be viewed as a
torus surgery, also called a logarithmic transformation, and would be a Luttinger surgery if {0}× ∂Σ× S1
could be made Lagrangian. The latter is ruled out, however, since Xk has no symplectic structure unless
|k| ≤ 1.) Our goal is to ﬁnd a contractible manifold C ⊂ X0 whose boundary contains N . Extending
g × idS1 as the identity over the rest of ∂C then gives the required diﬀeomorphism f completing the
proof.
Our ﬁrst approximation to C is the manifold Y = I × Σ × S1 ⊂ M × S1 ⊂ X0. Then ∂Y clearly
contains N , but Y is far from being contractible. In fact, Y is homotopy equivalent to (S1 ∨ S1) × S1,
so it has b1 = 3 and b2 = 2, but no higher dimensional homology. Its fundamental group is generated by
i = {i}× Ci×{θi}
three circles C∗
0 = {1} × {p} × S1, for distinct points θ±1 ∈ S1 and p ∈ int Σ − (C−1 ∪ C1). A basis for H2(Y )
and C∗
is given by the pair of tori Ti = {0} × C(cid:48)
i is parallel to Ci in Σ − {p}. To
improve Y , observe in Figure 2 that the circles C±1 in M are both meridians of the knot K0. Thus, the
i ⊂ ∂Y with vanishing cycles of E(n). We obtain a new
knot construction matches all three circles C∗
manifold Y (cid:48) ⊂ X0 by ambiently attaching a (−1)-framed 2-handle hi to Y along C∗
i for each i = −1, 0, 1.
Then Y (cid:48) is simply connected with Ti, i = ±1, still giving a basis for H2(Y (cid:48)), and N still contained in
∂Y (cid:48). To eliminate the last homology, note that for i = ±1, the core of the handle hi ﬁts together with
the annulus I × Ci × {θi}, forming a pair of disks Di disjointly embedded rel boundary in Y (cid:48) (with
∂Di = {−i} × Ci × {θi}). Since each Di ∩ Ti is empty, and Di ∩ T−i is a single point of transverse
intersection, deleting tubular neighborhoods of these disks from Y (cid:48) gives a manifold C with no homology.
To see that π1(C) vanishes, use the core of the 2-handle h0 to surger the tori Ti to immersed spheres,
without changing the intersections with the disks Di. These spheres then provide nullhomotopies for the
meridians of the disks. Thus, C is a contractible manifold whose boundary contains N , as required. (cid:3)

i × S1, i = ±1, where C(cid:48)

Proof of Theorem 1.5. To identify the cork C constructed in the proof of Theorem 1.2, ﬁrst consider
any framed sphere S in a manifold Q. If we add a handle h to I × Q along 1 × S, and then delete a
neighborhood of the core of h, extended down to {−1} × Q using the annulus I × S, the result is easily
seen to be I × P , where P is made from Q by surgery on S. We apply this trick with Q = Σ× S1 from the
previous proof. Attaching the handles h±1 to Y = I × Q and deleting their cores D±1 gives a manifold of
the form I × P that will become C when h0 is attached. The manifold P is obtained from Q by surgery
on the disjoint curves C±1 × {θ±1}, with the framings induced from their identiﬁcation with vanishing
cycles of E(n). These framings are −1 relative to the oriented boundary of the ﬁber neighborhood in
E(n) on which we performed the Fintushel-Stern construction, and hence, relative to ∂Y . However, the
±1 lie on opposite faces of Y (with I coordinate ±1), which inherit opposite orientations from
circles C∗
Q. Thus, the framing coeﬃcients are ∓1 relative to Q. To construct a surgery diagram of Q, we cap
oﬀ Σ to get an embedding Q = Σ × S1 ⊂ T 2 × S1 = T 3, with the latter exhibited as 0-surgery on the
Borromean rings B. To recover Q, we remove its complementary solid torus in T 3. This has the eﬀect
of undoing one Dehn ﬁlling, leaving one component of B unﬁlled. The curves ∂Σ × {θ} correspond to
canonical longitudes of this drilled out link component, and {p} × S1 is a meridian of it. The surgery
curves C±1 × {θ±1} are then ∓1-framed meridians of the other two components. Blowing down changes
the unﬁlled curve into a ﬁgure-eight knot κ(1,−1) in S3, whose complement is P . Attaching h0 to I × P
0 now gives C = C(1, 1;−1), and ∂Σ × S1 is identiﬁed with the incompressible torus boundary
along C∗
of the ﬁgure-eight complement inside ∂C, with f twisting longitudinally as required.
Now that we have realized C(1, 1;−1) as the cork C in Theorem 1.2, using 4-manifolds Xk generated
from E(n) (so irreducible except for X0 when n = 1), we can easily realize any C(r, s; m) with r, s > 0 > m
by giving up irreducibility: Just blow up points on the cores of the handles hi to suitably lower their
framings (as measured in E(n)). This replaces the original manifolds Xk by their (r + s + |m| − 3)-fold
blowups, which remain pairwise nondiﬀeomorphic. To realize m > 0, simply reverse the orientation on
each Xk. Retaining irreducibility is no harder when the integers r, s and m are all odd. Simply choose n
2 (r +s+|m|−3) disjoint spheres of square −2 avoiding the submanifolds
large enough that E(n) contains 1

4

used in our construction. Tubing the 2-handle cores into these spheres has the same eﬀect as blowing up,
(cid:3)
without changing Xk.

Remarks 2.1. (a) When the integers r, s and m are not all odd, irreducibility still seems likely to be
obtainable. In that case, we need up to three spheres of odd square along with the previous even ones. We
can arrange this, for example, by normally summing a copy of E(3) onto Xk, using a rim torus in E(3) to
preserve its sections (9 spheres of square −3). The resulting manifolds will still be irreducible and seem
likely to be distinguishable by their Seiberg-Witten invariants, but the details are more complicated. This
idea misses the case with r, s or |m| equal to 2, for the technical reason that a disjoint sphere of square
−1 would mean our starting manifold was reducible. It seems reasonable to conjecture that irreducibility
is still attainable by a diﬀerent method in this case.

(b) Since our construction only used a single clasp of the knots Kk, one could use other families of knots
(or links) in the same way to produce diﬀerent families Xk related by twisting any of our previous corks
(C(r, s; m), f ). For example, the twisted doubles of any ﬁxed knot have the same Alexander polynomials
as the family Kk, so would produce a family of closed 4-manifolds similar to ours and with the same choice
of corks—however, their diﬀeomorphism types cannot presently be distinguished from our examples Xk.
Twisting other knots would produce families distinguished from ours by their Seiberg-Witten invariants,
as would replacing E(n) by a more complicated manifold. However, the analysis of the Seiberg-Witten
invariants becomes more complicated.
(c) Our corks C(r, s; m) all have Mazur type, built with a single handle of each index 0, 1 and 2. This
is because they have the form C(κ, m) for a 2-bridge knot κ (namely κ(r,−s)). The complement P of κ
then has a handle decomposition with two 1-handles and a 2-handle, as does I × P . The ﬁnal 2-handle
h0 of C(κ, m) cancels a 1-handle.

(d) Each of these corks also embeds in the 4-sphere. In fact, the double of any C(κ, m) is also obtained
from the complement of the spin of κ by ﬁlling trivially to get S4 (for even m) or by Gluck ﬁlling (which
gives S4 for all spun knots [Gk]). We are left with the following question, which can be restated as a
problem about certain torus surgeries in S4:

Question 2.2. Does iterated twisting on these corks in S4 always give the standard S4?

References

S. Akbulut, An exotic 4-manifold, J. Diﬀerential Geom. 33 (1991), 357–361.

[A]
[AR] S. Akbulut and D. Ruberman, Absolutely exotic compact 4-manifolds, arXiv:1410.1461 .
[AY] S. Akbulut and K. Yasui, Cork twisting exotic Stein 4-manifolds, J. Diﬀerential Geom. 93 (2013), 1–36.
[AKMR] D. Auckly, H. Kim, P. Melvin and D. Ruberman, Equivariant corks, arXiv:1602.07650 .
[CFHS] C. Curtis, M. Freedman, W. Hsiang and R. Stong, A decomposition theorem for h-cobordant smooth simply con-

nected compact 4-manifolds, Invent. Math. 123 (1996), 343–348.

[FS1] R. Fintushel and R. Stern, Knots, links and 4-manifolds, Invent. Math. 134 (1998), 363–400.
[FS2] R. Fintushel and R. Stern, Double node neighborhoods and families of simply connected 4-manifolds with b+ = 1, J.

Amer. Math. Soc. 19 (2006), 171–180.

[F] M. Freedman, The topology of four-dimensional manifolds, J. Diﬀerential Geom. 17 (1982), 357–453.
[FQ] M. Freedman and F. Quinn, Topology of 4-Manifolds, Princeton Math. Ser., 39, Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton,

NJ, 1990.

[Gk] H. Gluck, The embedding of two-spheres in the four-sphere, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 104 (1962), 308–333.
[GS] R. Gompf and A. Stipscz, 4-Manifolds and Kirby Calculus, Grad. Studies in Math. 20, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence,

1999.

[M] R. Matveyev, A decomposition of smooth simply-connected h-cobordant 4-manifolds, J. Diﬀerential Geom. 44 (1996),

571–582.

[T] M. Tange, Finite order corks, arXiv:1601.07589 .

The University of Texas at Austin, Mathematics Department RLM 8.100, Attn: Robert Gompf, 2515 Speed-

way Stop C1200, Austin, Texas 78712-1202

E-mail address: gompf@math.utexas.edu

5

