6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
6
1

 
 
]
t
f
o
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
2
9
0
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Amorphization of a crystalline solid by plastic deformation

Saswati Ganguly and J¨urgen Horbach

Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik II: Weiche Materie,

Heinrich Heine-Universit¨at D¨usseldorf, Universit¨atsstraße 1, 40225 D¨usseldorf, Germany

King’s College London, Department of Mathematics, Strand, London WC2R 2LS, U.K.

Peter Sollich

TIFR Centre for Interdisciplinary Sciences, 21 Brundavan Colony, Narsingi, Hyderabad 500075, India

Smarajit Karmakar and Surajit Sengupta

(Dated: March 17, 2016)

We demonstrate that plastic deformation in solids is associated with a dynamic transition that is
reminiscent to the transition from a superconducting to a mixed phase in Type II superconductors.
We report analytic calculations, extensive molecular dynamics and sequential umbrella sampling
Monte Carlo simulations of a two dimensional triangular crystalline solid undergoing plastic de-
formation under strain. The solid consists of particles connected by harmonic springs. Non-aﬃne
displacement ﬂuctuations of the solid are enhanced using an external ﬁeld, causing a rich deformation
behaviour. The external ﬁeld leads to a mixed phase, where defect and stress-free crystallites are
surrounded by a network of amorphous regions with large local internal stress — a “stress Meissner”
eﬀect. The transition shows slow ageing dynamics caused by the presence of many competing, non-
crystalline free-energy minima. Under uniform uniaxial strain, this amorphization transition gives
rise to irreversible plastic deformation with the amorphous regions appearing as band-like struc-
tures. Our results may be checked by careful experiments on colloidal crystals using holographic
optical tweezers.

Understanding plastic deformation of both crystalline
and amorphous solids remains an unsolved problem in
condensed matter physics [1–15]. Many studies involving
detailed experiments on colloids [3], atomistic and coarse-
grained simulations [4, 5] as well as general theoretical
arguments [6] give evidence that the onset of plastic de-
formation in crystalline solids has many characteristics of
a dynamic transition. It has been suggested that plastic
deformation may be related to de-pinning or jamming [7–
9]. However, there is no consensus even on the identity of
the order parameter. Recently, a new perspective on de-
formation of solids has been provided using the language
of non-aﬃne displacement ﬂuctuations [13, 15–19]. Here,
we follow this idea and explore whether a collective vari-
able related to such non-aﬃne ﬂuctuations may provide a
natural way to characterise plastic deformation of solids.
We identify a dynamic transition associated with the
initiation of plastic deformation of a strained crystalline
solid in two dimensions. The plastically deformed state
consists of a mixture of elastically isolated crystallites
separated by bands of amorphous material. We consider
a model solid that is analytically tractable and at the
same time rich enough to show such non-trivial mechan-
ical response. Our starting point is a periodic lattice of
point particles with a well deﬁned reference state at zero
temperature. The particles are connected to their near-
est neighbours by harmonic springs. In this solid, even
at non-zero temperatures lattice defects can neither un-
bind [2, 20–22] nor ﬂow because it would imply a break-
ing of bonds, which is not allowed. Despite this, plastic
deformation may be initiated by nucleation and growth
of localised amorphous domains. Experimentally, such a

solid has been realised by connecting colloidal particles
with DNA linkers [23] creating high energy bonds. The
spectrin network in erythrocyte membranes may also pro-
vide a realization of such a periodic lattice constrained
by nearest neighbor bonds [24–26].

We show that non-trivial mechanical response in this
solid can be induced using external ﬁelds. Thermally gen-
erated particle displacements in a periodic crystal may
be decomposed into aﬃne and non-aﬃne components in
comparison to the reference conﬁguration [17, 19]. An
external ﬁeld, hX can now be deﬁned which, being con-
jugate to the global non-aﬃne parameter X, can be used
to tune the non-aﬃne part of the particle displacements.
Experimentally, hX can be realised using laser tweezers
and spatial light modulation technology [18]. Deforma-
tion of the solid in the presence of hX leads to irre-
versible plastic deformation associated with a discontin-
uous crystal-to-amorphous transition [15, 27].

treatment of

Recently, a formal

the crystal-to-
amorphous transition in terms of a phenomenological
Landau-Ginzburg (LG) approach has been proposed by
Toledano [28], using the formalism of irregularly mod-
ulated crystals [29]. Within this theory, one obtains a
transition from a perfect crystal to a mixed phase where
stresses are eliminated from the crystalline regions into
localised, amorphous patches, much like the eponymous
phase in Type II superconductors [30]. However, unlike
superconductivity, a microscopic theory for this transi-
tion does not exist and thus the phenomenological theory
cannot elucidate the physical nature of the underlying or-
der parameter and its dynamics.

The present paper addresses these issues by investigat-

ing the statics and dynamics of the transition in the pres-
ence of both the non-aﬃne ﬁeld, hX , and a homogeneous,
external, uniaxial strain, ε. To elucidate the free energy
landscape associated with this transition, we use sequen-
tial umbrella sampling Monte Carlo (SUS-MC) [31, 32]
simulations. At the same time, the dynamics is studied
using molecular dynamics (MD) [33] simulations. Fur-
ther, we also furnish results from exact calculations wher-
ever possible.

The properties of the solid for suﬃciently small val-
ues of hX can be worked out exactly [18] for our model.
When hX is increased beyond a speciﬁc limiting value
h∗
X at ε = 0, the ideal crystal enters a mixed phase and
a network of amorphous regions proliferates. Maps of
the local stress show that internal stresses are mostly
concentrated within these amorphous regions and decay
within a “penetration depth” inside the defect-free crys-
talline regions. The dynamics of this transition shows
prominent ageing behaviour [34]. We rationalise this by
showing that the amorphization proceeds by the system
hopping among many amorphous minima in the conﬁgu-
ration space [35]. These amorphous minima correspond
to speciﬁc conﬁgurations of lattice defects.

In the presence of ε, we show that the onset of plastic
deformation of a strained solid is the same amorphization
transition described above. The amorphous state can be
approached either by varying hX at constant strain, ε,
or by varying ε at ﬁxed hX across a phase boundary.
Irreversible plastic ﬂow beyond the yield point is gov-
erned by the slow ageing dynamics seen at ε = 0. Irre-
versibility arises from repeated hopping of the system in
a free energy landscape consisting of multiple minima in
a mechanism reminiscent of soft glassy rheology [36, 37].
The rest of the paper is organised as follows. In the
next section we introduce the local non-aﬃne parameter
χ(R) and the conjugate ﬁeld hX and describe the quan-
tities of interest. We also describe brieﬂy the model solid
and simulation methodology. This section is followed by
our results divided into three subsections. The ﬁrst set
of results concern the properties of the parent ideal crys-
tals at small values of hX . We show how increasing hX
destabilises the solid so that relevant length and time
scales diverge.
It turns out that before the divergence
is reached an amorphization transition takes place, how-
ever. We present results for static and dynamical aspects
of the amorphization transition followed by results for
non-zero strain and the complete phase diagram in the
hX − ε plane. Finally we conclude, after a discussion on
the relevance of our results to plastic deformation in real
atomic or colloidal solids.

I. NON-AFFINE FLUCTUATIONS

An ideal crystal at a temperature T (cid:54)= 0 is a rather well
understood object - its physics being completely speciﬁed
by lattice vibrations [38]. First locally and eventually
globally, a crystal may be rendered amorphous by the nu-

2

cleation of lattice defects such as vacancies, interstitials
and dislocations [20, 21]. At non-zero temperatures, well
below melting, however, the density of such defects is
vanishingly small [22]. To nucleate a suﬃciently large
number of these defects, one therefore needs external
agencies other than temperature, e.g. external pressure
or radiation [27]. One may represent the amorphization
transition as a spatially random (or irregular) modula-
tion of the crystal periodicity [29]. Toledano shows [28]
that a coarse-grained free energy functional capable of
describing the crystal-to-amorphous solid transition may
be constructed using a complex order parameter to repre-
sent this modulation. Both the amplitude and the phase
of the order parameter are allowed to vary in space, with
care being taken to ensure global translational invariance
of the free energy. The resulting theory shares many sim-
ilarities with that of the normal (Type II) superconduc-
tor transition [30] in an, albeit classical, context. The
phenomenological LG theory captures [28] some of the
qualitative features of the crystal to amorphous transi-
tion that we describe later. For example, the existence
of a mixed phase with defect-free crystalline regions sur-
rounded by amorphous boundaries, a Meissner-like eﬀect
where stress is eliminated from the crystalline regions and
a well-deﬁned “penetration depth” beyond which inter-
nal stresses decay to zero, are all in close analogy with
superconductors.

To obtain deeper insight, however, one needs a micro-
scopic model system where one is able to excite irregular
modulations of particle coordinates of a crystalline solid
in a controlled fashion and study their dynamics. Usual
models of irradiated solids [27] are clearly unsuitable be-
cause, apart from amorphization, random agitation of the
crystal lattice produces uncontrolled local stresses and
heat which complicates the analysis of the transition.

Lattice distortions which give rise to irregular modu-
lations necessarily have to be non-aﬃne, relatively low
energy and should not lead to a spatially uniform com-
mensurate product phase. We propose that a system
of particles interacting with the following microscopic
Hamiltonian [18] is suﬃcient,

H =

(|rj − ri| − |Rj − Ri|)2

N(cid:88)

(cid:88)

i=1

j∈Ω,i<j

N(cid:88)

i=1

−hX

+

p2
i
2m

N(cid:88)

K
2

(cid:88)

jk∈Ω

i

(uj − ui)TPj−i,k−i(uk − ui).

(1)

In Eq. (1), the ﬁrst two terms represent the standard har-
monic solid [38] with particle momenta pi, mass m, in-
stantaneous positions ri, reference positions Ri and dis-
placements ui = ri − Ri. The size of the coarse graining
volume Ω surrounding particle i is set by the range of the
interaction. In the rest of this paper, we take Ω as the
nearest neighbour shell.

The third term multiplying hX is new and involves a
projection operator Pij, a function only of the reference

conﬁguration, that acts on particle displacements. A pos-
itive value of the non-aﬃne ﬁeld hX enhances non-aﬃne
distortions of the lattice [17, 18], namely, ﬂuctuations
in particle positions projected onto a subspace spanned
by those eigen-distortions of Ω which cannot be repre-
sented as combination of aﬃne deformations. We brieﬂy
describe this projection formalism below.

temporal correlation function

Cχ(R, t) =

(cid:104)χ(0, 0)χ(R, t)(cid:105) − (cid:104)χ(cid:105)2

(cid:104)χ2(cid:105) − (cid:104)χ(cid:105)2

.

These results are accurate at low temperatures where the
harmonic approximation, used in deriving them, is valid.

3

FIG. 1. Non-aﬃne distortions of the reference conﬁguration
R. The conﬁgurations 1 and 2 represent (degenerate) eigen-
vectors of PCPT corresponding to the two largest eigenval-
ues σ1 and σ2. The next largest eigenvalue belongs to the
eigenvector µ = 3. Note that µ = 1 and 2 represent dis-
tortions where nearest neighbours a, b move away from each
other while next nearest neighbours c, d come closer tending
to nucleate a dislocation dipole [18]. The third eigenvector
represents coming together of 4 particles to form a triangular
lattice of tetramers with twice the lattice parameter.

A. The non-aﬃne projection

that minimizes (cid:80)

The projection formalism described below is perfectly
general and can be carried through for any lattice in any
dimension. However, our results are presented for the
two dimensional (d = 2) triangular lattice, which is com-
monly observed in experiments on colloids [23, 41, 42],
abounds in nature [24–26] and has been studied in de-
tail [17, 18, 43]. Within Ω, around particle i, deﬁne rela-
tive atomic displacements, ∆j = uj − ui with j (cid:54)= i ∈ Ω.
The “best ﬁt” [16] local aﬃne deformation D is the one
j[∆j − D(Rj − Ri)]2 with the non-
aﬃnity parameter χ(Ri) > 0 being the minimum value
of this quantity. The minimisation procedure amounts to
projecting [17] ∆i onto a non-aﬃne subspace deﬁned by
the projection operators P such that, χ(Ri) = ∆TP∆
where ∆ is the column vector constructed out of the
∆i. The projector P = I − R(RTR)−1RT, where the
N d × d2 elements of R are given by Rjα,γγ(cid:48) = δαγRjγ(cid:48),
where the central particle i is taken to be at the origin.
Note that the third term in (1) is simply hX X where

In [17], we showed how the statistics of the non-aﬃne
parameter may be obtained for (1). For instance, the
thermal average (cid:104)χ(cid:105) is given by the sum of the eigen-
µ σµ, of PCPT with Ciα,jγ = (cid:104)∆iα∆jγ(cid:105), the
displacement correlator. Using standard statistical me-
chanical techniques one can obtain [17, 18] explicitly both
the single point probability, P (χ), and two point, spatio-

i χ(Ri).

X =(cid:80)N
values, (cid:80)

FIG. 2. a. The phonon dispersion curves and b. Scaled DOS
calculated for three diﬀerent values of hX indexed by the same
colours. Note the softening of some modes in the dispersion
curves which is reﬂected in the increase of the weight in the
DOS for ω → 0 as hX increases. c. Shows the radially av-
eraged, equal time, spatial correlations, Cχ(R, 0). The points
are simulation results for hX = 0.03 and 0.05 and the lines
are from analytic calculations. Correlation lengths ξχ are ob-
tained for both cases by ﬁtting an exponential decay to the
initial part of the curves (black curve, shown for hX = 0).
Inset shows the result for ξχ as a function of hX : points sim-
ulation results and curve from analytic theory. Note the di-
vergence as hX increases. d. Temporal correlation Cχ(0, t)
for the same values of hX . In this case the correlation time
τχ is the time at which Cχ(0, t) decreases to half its initial
value. The inset shows the divergence of τχ: lines and points
have same meaning as in c. The simulation results for the
correlation functions are the same as in Ref. [18].

B. Model and simulation details

In the Hamiltonian (1), the length scale is set by the
lattice parameter l, the energy scale by Kl2 and the time

scale by (cid:112)m/K. We have chosen l = m = K = 1.

The value of the dimensionless inverse temperature β =
Kl2/kBT , where kB is the Boltzmann constant.

Taking Ω as the nearest neighbour shell consisting of
particle i and its 6 neighbours, we obtain 12 possible lat-
tice modes. There are d × d = 4 aﬃne distortions in two

dimensions, viz. local volume, uniaxial and shear distor-
tion of Ω together with local rotations. The remaining 8
modes are non-aﬃne and appear as non-trivial eigenvec-
tors of PCPT. The distribution of the eigenvalues is not
uniform with the lowest eigenvalues being separated from
the rest by a large gap [18, 19]. In Fig. 1, we have plot-
ted three of the softest non-aﬃne modes which have the
highest eigenvalues and therefore make the largest con-
tribution to χ. Note that the reciprocal of the eigenvalue
is proportional to the curvature of the Hessian projected
in the direction of the eigenvector [18]. The two largest
eigen-distortions, (µ = 1, 2) are degenerate and have been
shown [18] to represent ﬂuctuations which tend to nucle-
ate a dislocation dipole. The third eigenvector (µ = 3),
with an eigenvalue about ﬁve times smaller, represents
a ﬂuctuation where the original triangular lattice trans-
forms to another similar triangular structure consisting
of tetramers with double the lattice parameter – similar
to the celebrated Peierls transition in one dimension [2].
The remaining higher energy modes represent more com-
plicated distortions of Ω [17, 18].

Analytic calculations of correlation functions for the
model solid presented in the next section have been car-
ried out using procedures explained in detail in Refs. [17]
and [18] and will not be repeated here. Simulation re-
sults report molecular dynamics (MD) calculations [33]
and SUS-MC simulations [32].

MD simulations in the canonical ensemble, i.e. at con-
stant particle number N , volume V and temperature T ,
were done using a leapfrog algorithm, coupling the sys-
tem to a Brown and Clarke thermostat [33]. The size of
the systems ranges from from N = 100 to N = 40000
particles. Typically, unless otherwise stated, we used an
MD time step of δt = 0.002 in reduced time units and
reduced inverse temperature β = 100.

The SUS-MC runs were done on smaller lattices be-
cause of the much larger computational demands of the
technique [31–33]. The SUS-MC technique enables us to
sample the regions of the conﬁguration space which are
otherwise inaccessible using simple MC or MD simulation
techniques. Our implementation of SUS-MC involves di-
viding the range of X into small windows to be sampled
successively starting at X = 0. Histograms denoted by
H(n) keep track of how often each value of X within
the nth window is realised, with H(n)L and H(n)R rep-
resenting the left and right boundaries of the nth his-
togram. Now, a predetermined number of MC moves are
attempted per window. Any move leading to values of
X outside the chosen window are rejected with appropri-
ate modiﬁcation of the histograms at the boundaries to
ensure detailed balance [32]. Finally, the unnormalized
relative probability distribution of X can be computed
using,

P (Xn)
P (X0)

=

H(0)R
H(0)L

.

H(1)R
H(1)L

....

H(n)R
H(n)L

.

4

II. RESULTS

We are now in a position to understand how the Hamil-
tonian (1) may be used to obtain a space-dependent ir-
regular modulation on the triangular lattice.
Increas-
ing hX enhances (cid:104)χ(cid:105) locally. Most of this contribution
comes from the softest non-aﬃne modes, corresponding
to µ = 1, 2 (see Fig. 1). Note that any linear combi-
nations of these modes are also degenerate and so the
direction of the modulation wavenumber, with magni-
tude χ−1/2, varies in space pointing randomly in all di-
rections consistent with crystal symmetry. Unlike the
next higher eigenmode, µ = 3 in Fig. 1, this modulation
is incompatible with global, crystalline order and there-
fore contributes to amorphization similar as in the LG
theory [28]. We now study in detail the consequences of
this transition using MD and SUS-MC calculations.

An advantage of studying the properties of a solid us-
ing a harmonic approximation is the possibility of obtain-
ing exact results even in the presence of the non-aﬃne
ﬁeld hX . Indeed, the complete statistical mechanics of
this system can be obtained as long as the periodic crys-
talline phase is stable. Therefore, we begin our study of
the crystal-amorphous transition by ﬁrst presenting re-
sults for small hX where analytic (apart from numerical
integrals and Fourier transforms) [17–19] results can be
obtained. Some of our results are then compared to MD
simulations. These are followed by MD and SUS-MC re-
sults at large hX where a crystal-to-amorphous transition
is observed. Finally, we include external strain and show
how the amorphization transition is related to plastic de-
formation.
A. Crystal properties in the presence of small hX

In order to understand how crystal properties are af-
fected by the non-aﬃne ﬁeld, hX , we calculate the Hes-
sian D(R, R(cid:48)) = ∂2H/∂u(R)∂u(R(cid:48)). A Fourier trans-
form then yields the dynamical matrix, whose eigenval-
ues are the phonon dispersion curves. In the Appendix
we give the full expression for D including the non-aﬃne
ﬁeld hX .

The analytically obtained phonon dispersion curves
ωs(q) are shown in Fig. 2a. The limiting behaviour of
ωs(q) as q → 0 is independent of hX . This implies that,
to leading order, hX does not change any of the me-
chanical properties of the crystalline solid, nor does it
introduce any stresses while enhancing non-aﬃnity.

Increasing hX leads to softening of certain phonon
modes. At small q, the transverse phonon modes are soft-
ened showing that the solid becomes nearly unstable to
large wavelength shear modes. At large q near the zone
boundary at the high symmetry M point, the phonon
mode becomes soft and ω(q) → 0 as hX is increased. In-
spection of the eigenvectors associated with this mode re-
veals that these are identical to the non-aﬃne mode µ = 3
(see Fig. 1). The normalised and scaled phonon density of

(cid:82)
BZ dq ωs(q) δ[ω−ωs(q)]
is shown in Fig. 2b for the same values of hX . The DOS

states (DOS) g(ω)/ω = ω−1(cid:80)

s

shows a prominent shift towards ω = 0 as hX increases.
A similar shift of the DOS to small ω is a well-known con-
sequence of introducing disorder in crystals [44]. Note
that in our calculations, we have necessarily imposed
crystal periodicity which neglects structural heterogene-
ity. Our calculations cease to be accurate close to the
discontinuous crystal to amorphous transition to be de-
scribed later, where long-lived heterogeneities appear.

5

In Figs. 2c & d we compare analytic results for the
non-aﬃne correlation functions with those obtained from
MD calculations. The spatio-temporal correlation func-
tions were obtained analytically as in [18]. For each of
these correlation functions we have obtained correlation
lengths ξχ and times τχ, which are shown in insets. For
the values of hX shown, our calculations show excellent
agreement with simulations. Both ξχ and τχ diverge as
hX increases and the solid becomes soft. This is further
illustrated by the divergence of the non-aﬃne eigenvalues
themselves as shown in Fig. 3a. As hX increases, all σ−1
vanish as
µ (Fig. 3b) pointing to an underlying
saddle-node bifurcation point beyond which a crystalline
solid cannot exist [17].

hX − h0

(cid:113)

µ

B. The amorphization transition

Before the eigenvalues can diverge, there is a discon-
tinuous transition from a low X to a high X solid. In
Fig. 3, we show a plot of (cid:104)X(cid:105) vs hX , obtained from MD
simulations. To obtain these results we always start with
an initial triangular lattice and instantaneously switch on
speciﬁc values of hX . For hX (cid:47) 0.05, the solid remains
homogeneous and X equilibrates to a speciﬁc value – ini-
tially growing linearly for small hX followed by a more
rapid rise. The initial growth of (cid:104)X(cid:105) with hX can be
computed exactly for our model solid and agrees with
X ≈ 0.051, there is a
the MD results [18]. For hX > h∗
discontinuous jump in X. For each value of the ﬁeld,
after an initial rapid burst of transformation, (cid:104)X(cid:105) con-
tinues to relax slowly at a rate which decreases with time
and depth of quench. Before we study in greater detail
the complex dynamics of (cid:104)X(cid:105) for large hX , however, we
need to examine the particle conﬁgurations.

In Fig. 4, we show a typical conﬁguration obtained af-
In
ter t = 2000 in reduced time units at hX = 0.06.
Fig. 4a, the particles are coloured using the local value
of χ. It is immediately clear that this leads to a mixed
phase consisting of large regions of nearly perfect trian-
gular solid, interspersed with a network of an intervening
amorphous phase with a large value of local χ. In Fig. 4b,
we plot the local (uniaxial) stress, σxx − σyy obtained by
averaging the local virial [33] over the neighbourhood Ω.
Clearly, the amorphous regions are also regions of high
stress, which then decays rapidly to zero within the crys-
tallites. Taken together, these results are analogous to
what is expected from the coarse grained LG theory [28],
with the elimination of stress from the solid-like regions

FIG. 3. a. Plots of σ−1
µ of PCP for varying values of hX (open
symbols, axis on the left). Open circles show eigenvalues for
the degenerate eigenvectors µ = 1, 2 and the open squares
represent eigenvalue corresponding to the eigenvector µ =
3 with the line showing the ﬁtted square root form. Filled
circles show a plot of (cid:104)X(cid:105) (axis on the right) as a function of
hX , demonstrating a ﬁrst order aﬃne to non-aﬃne transition
obtained from MD simulations. The line is a guide to the
eye. b. Plot of σ
3 =
0.064).

showing the square root divergence (h0

−1
3

being reminiscent of the Meissner eﬀect where magnetic
ﬁelds are ejected from the bulk of a superconductor. This
analogy, though quite illuminating, is not perfect and
now we turn to some of the surprising features of the
transition not addressed by the phenomenological the-
ory.

lap function Q(t) = N−1(cid:80)N

The main point of departure concerns the kinetics of
this transition. Unlike Type II superconductors, where
the mixed phase consists of an equilibrium Abrikosov lat-
tice of isolated vortices [30], the mixed phase of crystals
and amorphous regions remains disordered and shows
ageing dynamics. To show this, we compute the over-
i w(|ri(t) − ri(tw)|) for all
particles with local χ ≥ χcut = 1. The weight function
w(x) is zero or 1 depending on whether x > a or w ≤ a,
with a being some predetermined length, smaller than
the lattice spacing l; we choose a = 0.1l. For a ﬁxed
value of hX = 0.06, starting from an initial crystalline
structure, we let the system “wait” for time tw, before
Q(t) is computed. To obtain good statistics, Q(t) is av-
eraged over many independent runs.

6

FIG. 5.
a. Ageing plot for the overlap function. Q(t) as
a function of t for several waiting times tw (see text). The
black curve shows Q(t) for a crystalline lattice i.e. at a lower
value of hX = 0.02 b. Collapse of the overlap function. Sim-
ilar collapse is seen in trap models. The data is from MD
simulations of a 20 × 20 lattice at hX = 0.06, averaged over
60 independent realizations.

FIG. 4. a. Particle conﬁguration at hX = 0.06 after time t =
2000 in reduced time units, showing crystallites surrounded by
regions of large local non-aﬃnities. The particles are colored
according to their local non-aﬃnity values. To obtain the
conﬁgurations, we have averaged out the short time random
ﬂuctuations. b. Same as a with particles coloured with the
magnitude of their local uniaxial stress values. Note that
regions of large local non-aﬃnities are also associated with
large local stresses.

In Fig. 5a, we plot Q(t) for ﬁve values of tw spanning
three orders of magnitude. In each case Q(t) shows an
initial rapid decrease to a plateau value, slow relaxation
in the plateau followed by an eventual escape away from
the plateau at large times. Q(t) depends on both t and
the waiting time tw implying that the system shows age-
ing behaviour.
In Ref. [34], the expected behaviour of
Q(t) has been analysed for several simple models. Two
kinds of behaviour are observed. For a domain growth
process, where the system relaxes steadily to a steady
state conﬁguration, Q(t) at long times always has a non-
zero limiting value. To illustrate this, we plot in Fig. 5a
Q(t) for all the particles in a crystalline solid at a lower
hX = 0.02. The long time behaviour of Q(t) in this case
is very diﬀerent, saturating quickly to a constant value.
On the other hand, for a system showing complex dy-

FIG. 6. a. − log(P (X)) obtained from sequential umbrella
sampling of a 30× 30 lattice at various values of hX . The ﬁrst
minimum always corresponds to the ideal triangular lattice.
As hX increases, the crystalline solid is destabilised with re-
spect to other minima at larger X. b. − log(P (X)) obtained
from sequential umbrella sampling of 10× 10, 20× 20, 30× 30
and 50 × 50 lattices at hX = 0.025 showing that the P (X)
becomes sharper with increasing system size. c. Particle con-
ﬁgurations at speciﬁc points of − log(P (X)) for the 30 × 30
solid as indicated by dots in b. Note that each point is as-
sociated with a stable conﬁguration of a strip like non-aﬃne
region.

namics, such as that of a particle diﬀusing on a potential
energy landscape with many traps [35], Q(t) relaxes to
a plateau ﬁrst but then eventually decays to zero, on a
timescale that grows with tw. To distinguish between
these behaviours, we plot Q(t) against the scaled time
t∗ = (t − tw)/tw in Fig. 5. The data collected over all
three decades of tw collapse on a single curve which de-
cays to zero at large values of t∗ showing that the phase

transition kinetics bears strong resemblance to relaxation
in a complex landscape.

Is it possible to directly visualise the free energy land-
scape for the amorphisation transition? Modern simu-
lation techniques, such as SUS-MC [32], as explained in
Sec. I B do oﬀer a method for obtaining sections through
a (mean ﬁeld) free energy landscape by making accu-
rate measurements of the statistical probability P (O) of
a collective coordinate O. In more conventional systems,
containing, say, a small number of competing metastable
states, the negative logarithm of this probability obtains
a section through the multi-dimensional free energy land-
scape projected on O. In our system, we implement the
SUS-MC method using O = X with the following caveat.
It is known that in ageing systems, such as a liquid be-
low the glass transition temperature such a probability
never reaches a steady state value due to weak ergodic-
ity breaking [35, 37] and therefore − log P (O) cannot be
interpreted as an equilibrium free energy. This is indeed
true for our solid for hX large enough to cause the crystal
to amorphous transition. Nevertheless, such a probabil-
ity distribution obtained over a ﬁnite simulation time for
example when the system stays within the plateau in Q(t)
(Fig 5) can, and does, oﬀer insight into the nature of the
transition.

FIG. 7. a. Plot of (cid:104)X(cid:105) as a function of both hX and strain ε.
Note the shape of the transition boundary. b. Plot of (cid:104)X(cid:105) just
before (ﬁlled symbols) and just after (open symbols) along the
phase boundary. Note that just before the jump, (cid:104)X(cid:105) attains a
(nearly) constant value. The jump itself decreases as the tran-
sition boundary approaches hX = 0. c. Conﬁgurations along
the phase boundary (h = 0.051, ε = 0.00), (h = 0.049, ε =
0.08), (h = 0.041, ε = 0.08) and (h = 0.023, ε = 0.16). Note
the development of anisotropy with increase in strain.

In Fig. 6a, we plot the probability distribution P (X)
for a few values of hX near the transition. Far from the
transition, − log(P (X)) shows only one minimum corre-
sponding to the crystalline state. As hX increases, sev-
eral minima appear alongside that of the original crystal
and for a large enough ﬁeld, one of these new minima,
corresponding, as we show later, to amorphous states,
becomes stable. One notices immediately that the tran-
sition value of hX i.e. the value of hX at which P (X)

7

is the same for crystal and any one of the many amor-
phous states is much lower than the value implied by the
MD results (Fig. 3). Around the crystalline minimum,
where the system is fully equilibrated, one would be able
to deduce from the P (X) at hX = 0 the behavior at any
non-zero hX as − log(P (X)hX ) = − log(P (X)hX =0) +
βhX N X. Note that X, deﬁned as the global non-aﬃne
parameter per particle has been multiplied with the to-
tal number of particles, N . As hX is increased, the total
probability of amorphous states with some given X can
become larger than that of the crystal. However, which
particular amorphous states dominate and more particu-
larly which ones are sampled within our simulations can
depend sensitively on the value of hX , so that a sim-
ple linear scaling (or reweighting) of the depths of the
minima in the “eﬀective free energy” − log P (X) calcu-
lated at one value of hX cannot reproduce P (X) for all
hX . Further, while for small hX the distribution P (X)
converges to a unique function, after the transition, it is
diﬃcult to obtain a fully converged P (X) as the system
ages ever so slowly. In summary, (1) instead of an unique
product minimum, there are several product states with
small diﬀerences in free energy generally evoking a sce-
nario similar to that discussed in the context of the glass
transition [35, 45–47], (2) the dynamics is slow with the
system getting trapped for long periods in local minima
and ﬁnally (3) the number of minima depends on the
depth of quench.

In Fig. 6b, we plot P (X) at hX = 0.025 for various
system sizes N . In a conventional ﬁrst order phase tran-
sition [2], P (X) sharpens with increasing system size such
that −N−1 log(P (X, N )) approaches its thermodynamic
limit. In our system, while P (X) does become narrower
with increasing N , detailed features of P (X) depend non-
trivially on the system size.
Indeed for larger system
sizes, additional minima corresponding to domain con-
ﬁgurations not possible in smaller sizes, appear. One of
the great advantages of the SUS-MC method is that con-
ﬁgurations which contribute to P (X) in each range are
directly available. These are plotted in Fig. 6c for a few
values of X marked in Fig. 6b for the 30 × 30 lattice.
We see that each minimum is associated with distinctive
amorphous conﬁgurations as shown in Fig. 6.

The reason for the slow kinetics in this system is now
obvious. Once released from the deep crystalline min-
imum, the system negotiates a rough free energy land-
scape with multiple minima corresponding to speciﬁc de-
fect conﬁgurations. Each of these minima are potential
traps (in conﬁguration space) within which the solid be-
comes temporarily locked till activated hopping events
eventually release it.

C. Amorphization and plastic deformation

Can the amorphization transition described above lead
to insights into the mechanical behaviour of solids under
externally imposed stress or strain such as the origin and

8

Carlo simulations [31, 33] to obtain the position of the
critical point accurately. The conﬁgurations along the
transition boundary are plotted in Fig. 7b. The amor-
phous domains change from roughly isotropic to strongly
anisotropic as ε increases. The domains are aligned in
the direction of stretch and consists of rows of particles
collapsing on each other. The nature and orientation of
the domains is a feature of the harmonic network where
relative slip of adjacent atomic rows is suppressed.

FIG. 8.
a. Thermally averaged conﬁgurations from MD
simulations of a 100 × 100 system at hX = 0.04 and ε =
0.08 showing prominently anisotropic regions of large local
non-aﬃnities. The particles are coloured according to their
local non-aﬃnity values. b. Same conﬁguration as a, with
particles coloured according to the magnitude of their local σ
values. Note that regions of large local non-aﬃnities are also
associated with large local stresses. The conﬁguration was
collected after t = 2000 in reduced time units.
In general,
at larger stains several such amorphous bands are formed.
c. Plot of the logarithm of the magnitude of local stress
averaged in the horizontal (x) direction as a function of the
vertical coordinate y for three diﬀerent values of hX for the
same system as in b. Note that after the transition, stress is
eliminated from the crystal and is mainly concentrated in the
amorphous band in the centre.

nature of irreversible plastic deformation in this solid?
What is the nature of this transition? What are the
microscopic mechanisms?

To answer these questions, we now turn on a uniaxial
strain ε in the presence of hX . The strain is implemented
by stretching the simulation box along the x-direction
and compressing it along the y-direction while keeping
the area conserved. The transition shifts to lower values
of hX and the jump in (cid:104)X(cid:105) decreases with ε. The shape
of the phase boundary may be understood as follows. In
Ref. [17], we have shown that to lowest order, χ couples
to quadratically to stress, σ. Noting that χ is approxi-
mately linear with hX in the crystal phase and assuming
a Lindemann like criterion viz. X = X∗ just below the
transition in the crystal phase, we argue that the phase
boundary follows the curve hX + Aε2 = X∗, a constant.
Fig. 7a. which is a plot of (cid:104)X(cid:105) as a function of both hX
and ε shows that this expectation is justiﬁed. Indeed, in
Fig. 7b we plot (cid:104)X(cid:105) both before and after the transition
all along the phase boundary.
It is interesting to note
that (cid:104)X(cid:105) remains approximately constant in the crystal
phase. The jump in X decreases with ε. Since we know
that the harmonic solid is trivial for hX = 0, this indi-
cates the presence of a critical point in the (hX , ε) plane,
perhaps quite close to the hX = 0 axis. The slow kinet-
ics involved in this transition, however, makes it impos-
sible to use standard techniques from equilibrium Monte

FIG. 9.
a. Plots of uniaxial stress σ vs strain from MD
simulations of 100 × 100 lattices at hX = .045 − .02 (ﬁlled
symbols). The red line shows the harmonic lattice behaviour
(hX = 0.0). b. Plot of σ vs. ε for hX = .04 (black squares)
together with φχ(red circles), the fraction of particles within
the amorphous bands. Dotted line with open squares shows
value of stress as strain is removed with a strain rate of ˙ε =
2. × 10−5 starting from the equilibrated conﬁguration with
the highest ε. c. Growth of amorphous bands with strain
at ε = 0.08, 0.12 and 0.16 (top to bottom) for hX = 0.04.
The colours map log10(χ) with the same range as in previous
ﬁgures. d. Plot of σ vs. ε for 20 × 20, 50 × 50, 100 × 100,
and 200 × 200 lattices at hX = 0.04. For the smallest lattice
sizes, the data was obtained by averaging over many initial
conditions. e. Plot of the stress correlation function Cσ(t)
for two diﬀerent values of hX . Lines joining data points in all
plots above are guides to the eye.

In Fig. 8a, we plot a conﬁguration with a system span-
ning, anisotropic, amorphous domain. The local stress
corresponding to the conﬁguration is plotted in Fig. 8d.
It is clear that disorder and stress are both higher in the
amorphous bands. Again, as in Fig. 4a and b, we ob-
serve a stress-Meissner eﬀect where, now, as the solid is
strained, stress is eliminated from the crystalline regions
as soon as the mixed phase is formed.

We now study the mechanical eﬀects of this transition
to the mixed phase. In Fig. 9a, we plot MD results of the
uniaxial stress σ on 100×100 lattices for a few values of ε
and hX corresponding to 100×100 lattices. Each of these
systems was held at every value of ε and hX for 5.0× 105
MDS (t = 1000) till there was no perceptible change in
the stress values. In this sense, our loading may be con-
sidered to be quasistatic. For small values of ε, the stress

9

rugged landscape.

To investigate the inﬂuence of ﬁnite size on the non-
linear regime, we plot in Fig. 9d, σ vs. ε for hX = 0.04
for lattice sizes varying from 20 × 20 to 200 × 200. As
system size increases, the value of σ(ε) becomes ﬂatter
and more non-linear. However, for larger lattice sizes, the
total simulation time t = 1000 becomes small compared
to the relaxation time of the system and the solid gets
arrested earlier. Increasing the simulation time slightly
does not change these results signiﬁcantly.
Further, we plot the stress correlation function Cσ(t) =
(cid:104)∆σ(0)∆σ(t)(cid:105), in Fig. 9e after subtracting oﬀ the aver-
age behaviour of σ. In the linear regime, Cσ(t) decays
rapidly and thereafter oscillates about zero. In the plas-
tic regime, on the other hand Cσ(t) is more complex,
showing an initial rapid decay followed by a much slower
relaxation corresponding to stress ﬂuctuations due to the
formation of amorphous bands.

These results may be understood with the help of the
insights obtained from our SUS-MC simulations at ε = 0.
As the solid is strained, plastic irreversibility initiates to-
gether with the appearance of amorphous bands in the
(hX , ε) plane. These bands should be associated with
local minima in an eﬀective free energy landscape. The
yield process can then be described as the solid escap-
ing the crystalline minimum and relaxing to a nearby
amorphous one.
In an inﬁnitely large system, with an
(inﬁnitely) large number of such minima, one expects
the solid to continue jumping from one amorphous mini-
mum to the next loosely evoking the scenario for plastic
deformation envisaged in the SGR models [35–37]. This
course of events is of course modiﬁed due to limitations
of ﬁnite size and simulation time.

To visualize the free energy surface in the presence
of external strain, we carry out SUS-MC calculation of
the solid in the presence of ε and hX . Our results are
shown in Fig. 10a. The probability distribution P (X)
again shows multiple minima. As ε is increased, the
defect free solid like minimum becomes unstable. De-
fects appear and coalesce into amorphous bands which
then percolate throughout the solid. Since many diﬀer-
ent conﬁgurations of these domains are possible, we have
many minima about which the solid may get trapped.
Finally, the SUS-MC simulations may also be used to
illustrate metastability and the discontinuous nature of
this transition. For example, we carry out MD simula-
tions in the N V T ensemble for the same system using
the parameters of one of the curves shown in Fig. 10a,
viz. hX = 0.025, ε = 0.04. While SUS-MC results al-
ready show minima for both the (metastable) crystal and
a stable amorphous state, it is impossible to reach the
product conﬁguration starting from an initial defect free
crystal (Fig. 10b) using only MD. In our MD simulations
ε needs to be increased further (> .1, compare Fig. 7)
before a transition in (cid:104)X(cid:105) occurs. Similarly, MD simu-
lations starting from the most probable amorphous state
as obtained from SUS-MC cannot explore the defect free
crystalline conﬁguration at this temperature due to the

a. Plot of − log(P (X)) obtained from sequential
FIG. 10.
umbrella sampling of a 30×30 harmonic lattice for hX = 0.025
and ε = 0, 0.04 and 0.1. The ﬁrst minimum corresponds to
the perfect lattice while subsequent minima corresponds to
conﬁgurations with amorphous regions. As ε increases, the
minimum corresponding to the defect free solid is destabilised
in favour of those with higher X. b. Plot of − log(P (X))
from the same calculation at hX = 0.025 and ε = 0.04. Inset,
plotted in green, shows P (X) obtained from NVT MD sim-
ulations for the same parameters with an initial, triangular
lattice, conﬁguration (marked 1) while the blue line indicates
the result when the initial conﬁguration is collected from SUS-
MC from the second minimum (marked 5) on the log(P (X))
plot. MD simulations sample only a small portion (green and
blue patches respectively on the red curve) of the conﬁgura-
tion space. c. Conﬁgurations obtained from SUS-MC at the
positions indicated by dots in b.

is Hookean with a slope given by the elastic constant of
the triangular lattice independent of hX . As the solid en-
ters the mixed phase, the stress deviates from this linear
behaviour and amorphous bands begin to form. At still
larger values of ε the stress again appears to grow linearly
with ε in a way reminiscent of the phenomenon of “strain
hardening” in real solids [20, 21]. At this point the solid
is stuck in a particular mixed phase conﬁguration having
exhausted the range of accessible states available for a
system of this size within the ﬁnite time of the simula-
tion. In Fig. 9b, we re-plot σ vs. ε for hX = 0.04 for the
100 × 100 system together with φχ, the fraction of par-
ticles within the amorphous bands with large χ (≥ 1).
Initially, in the linear region, φχ = 0. Nonlinear elas-
tic response is associated with an increase in φχ at the
transition point. This is illustrated in Fig. 9c where we
show conﬁgurations of local χ at three diﬀerent values of
ε spanning the non-linear regime. At higher values of ε,
the transformation kinetics of (cid:104)X(cid:105) is arrested, φχ satu-
rates and the solid resumes a linear stress response. To
show that amorphization introduces permanent plastic
deformation, we continuously decrease ε from the solid
with the largest deformation (Fig. 9b). The strain where
σ vanishes is non-zero and interestingly assumes the value
obtained just before the transition. Plastic irreversibility
is intimately associated with phase ordering kinetics in a

large barrier involved.

III. SUMMARY, DISCUSSION AND

CONCLUSION

10

We have studied extensively a microscopic model
system consisting of a permanently connected net-
work of harmonic springs which undergoes a crystal-to-
amorphous phase transition. We show that under ex-
ternal strain this transition leads to irreversible plas-
tic deformation, provided that non-aﬃne displacements
are artiﬁcially enhanced using an external ﬁeld. Starting
from the ideal crystal, quenches across the phase bound-
ary lead to a mixed phase consisting of crystalline and
amorphous domains. This phenomenology is similar to
that observed in Type II superconductors in a magnetic
ﬁeld [28, 30]. Beyond the transition, the solid begins to
explore a rugged free energy landscape with many min-
ima. The solid shows ageing behaviour as evidenced by
the constantly relaxing overlap function Q(t). In this re-
spect, the deformation behaviour of our model periodic
solid shares many features with that of amorphous solids
and glasses [45–47]. Our results can be experimentally
veriﬁed using cross-linked colloidal solids [23] in external
laser ﬁelds [18].

The harmonic model that we have considered here does
not describe certain aspects of real solid materials. These
may modify the amorphization scenario that we have
seen for our model. Now, we discuss these aspects one
by one.

In crystalline solids, interactions between particles are
mostly harmonic because, in equilibrium, particles make
only small displacements away from their ideal lattice
positions. Anharmonic eﬀects arise when these displace-
ments become large. For example, when two particles
come too close to each other strong repulsive forces aris-
ing from hard particle cores become important. We
have investigated the eﬀect of a hard core repulsion by
adding,
in addition to harmonic springs, a repulsive,
(non-bonded) interaction among the particles. The re-
pulsion is modelled by the well-known Weeks-Chandler-
Andersen form [33]. We have repeated our MD simula-
tions with the WCA repulsion in place and our results for
the overlap function are shown in Fig. 11. It is obvious
that the qualitative nature of this function remains ex-
actly the same as before. Again the collapse of the over-
lap functions for various waiting times tw when plotted
against (t − tw)/tw shows that the overlap between the
initial and ﬁnal states keeps decreasing, irrespective of
the waiting time (Fig. 5a). This implies immediately the
presence of many distinct conﬁgurations which the solid
explores as seen in our SUS-MC results for this system
with hard core repulsion (Fig. 5b).
Indeed, individual
conﬁgurations shown in Fig. 5c also do not look very dif-
ferent. The presence of the hard core, in fact, increases
the number of possible metastable states and therefore
the number of minima in − log P (X).

In anharmonic solids, metastable non-aﬃne ﬂuctua-
tions have been observed both at ε = 0 [48] and just
before the yielding transition [49]. Real solids fail for

FIG. 11.
a. Ageing plot for the collapsed overlap function
Q(t) form MD simulations of a 20×20 lattice with particles in-
teracting via harmonic interactions together with a hard core
WCA repulsion. Data taken at hX = 0.06; plots show aver-
ages over 40 realisations. b. − log P (X) at hX = 0.054, just
before the amorphization transition obtained using SUS-MC
simulations of a 30 × 30 lattice with the same interactions.
c. Conﬁgurations from the SUS-MC simulations at three dif-
ferent values of X shown in b. Note that the nature of the
amorphous bands is similar to before despite the presence of
hard core repulsion.

FIG. 12. a. (cid:104)X(cid:105) as a function of hX and K1 for a 100 × 100
disordered triangular lattice at β = 200 using interactions as
for Model A in Ref. [50]. Note that the discontinuous aﬃne to
non-aﬃne transition survives for small values of the disorder
but becomes continuous as disorder is increased. b. Conﬁgu-
rations showing particles with large local non-aﬃnities mark-
ing out the amorphous bands for varying degrees of quenched
disorder in the system. The numbers give the value of K1
(see text [50]). These conﬁgurations were collected after equi-
librating the system for t = 500 in reduced time units with
δt = 0.001. As disorder increases, the interface between aﬃne
and non-aﬃne regions becomes fuzzy.

suﬃciently large strains ε even for hX = 0.
It can be
argued that such a solid, which undergoes plastic defor-
mation when ε increases beyond the yield point would be
further destabilised (stabilised) by a positive (negative)
external hX . Also, failure occurs by the nucleation of slip
bands [3]. For a deformation geometry corresponding to
uniaxial strain, these bands would be aligned 45◦ to the
direction of stretch in contrast to that seen in our har-
monic network, where row collapse, not slip, is the dom-
inant deformation mechanism. Preliminary calculations
in our group using particles interacting with realistic po-
tentials vindicate this scenario. We ﬁnd both kinds of
amorphous domains, some oriented along the stretch di-
rection and others oriented diagonally. As the potential
becomes closer to harmonic, the ﬁrst kind become more
numerous. These results will be published elsewhere.

In addition to the amorphization transition, similar to
the one studied here, real solids would also have ﬂowing
defects [6], such as dislocations, at all values of hX for suf-
ﬁciently large ε. Stress relaxation by ﬂowing defects may
mask the appearance of the stress-Meissner eﬀect [28] de-
pending on the relative timescales corresponding to strain
rate and dislocation ﬂow. Our work, in this respect, sim-
pliﬁes the problem, separating the issue of amorphization
from dislocation motion, thus revealing the phase transi-
tion connecting amorphization with plastic irreversibility.
What happens when we introduce disorder? We
present results for our model solid using a simple dis-
order model introduced in Ref. [50]. In this model, the
reference conﬁguration is maintained with the disorder
appearing only in the spring constants of the bonds such
that K = 1 + δK. Here, δK is taken as a random vari-
able distributed uniformly in the range (−K1, K1). We
ﬁnd that even this (seemingly innocent looking) disorder,
when suﬃciently large, is enough to make a dislocation
description disappear by reducing the gap between the

11

most probable non-aﬃne mode and the next most prob-
able ones. If the disorder is suﬃciently large, the tran-
sition is continuous [51] (see Fig. 12a). In Fig. 12b, we
show conﬁgurations of particles at the transition as the
strength of the disorder is increased. The disordered con-
ﬁgurations show fuzzy boundaries between the ordered
crystalline phase and the amorphous regions.

In the future we would like to extend our calculations
to systematically study the onset of plastic irreversibility
in amorphous solids within the same framework. Exten-
sions of this work to higher dimensions and towards real
materials are also in progress.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank D. Stein, C. Dasgupta, A. Mitra and H. Ra-
jpal for discussions. SS thanks the Okinawa Institute for
Science and Technology for hospitality. SG thanks CSIR
India for a Senior Research Fellowship. The authors are
grateful for funding from the FP7-PEOPLE-2013-IRSES
grant no: 612707, DIONICOS.

Appendix A: The Dynamical Matrix

In this Appendix we present our results for the dy-
namical matrix for the Hamiltonian (1). To proceed we
need to assume, of course, that the solid remains ho-
mogeneous. For convenience of representation we write
the dynamical matrix as a sum of two terms D(q) =
Dharm + DX , where the ﬁrst term Dharm corresponds to
the purely harmonic part of (1) and the second term, DX
corresponds to the interaction arising due to the nonaﬃne
ﬁeld (= −hX N X). The harmonic part of the dynamical
matrix [52] is given by,

(cid:32)

D0 = k

3 − 2 cos(qx) − cos( 1
2 qx) sin(

3 sin( 1

√

2 qx) cos(
√
3
2 qy)

√
3
2 qy)

√
3 sin( 1
3[1 − cos( 1

2 qx) sin(
2 qx) cos(

√
3
2 qy)
√
3
2 qy)]

(cid:33)

= k

(cid:18) 3 − 2A1 − A2

√

3A3

(cid:19)

,

√
3A3
3 − 3A2

where k and l are the spring constant and the lattice
parameter of the reference harmonic lattice with qx and
qy being the orthogonal components of the wave vector
q. The second term of the dynamical matrix, DX can be
derived from the global non-aﬃnity parameter X. The
individual components of DX may be represented as

Dνµ
X = −hX N

∂uµj∂uνi

j

(cid:88)

∂2X

e−iq.(Rj−Ri).

Here Rj represents the lattice positions of all the neigh-
bouring particles lying within the interaction volume of
the particle with reference Ri and uµi with µ = x, y rep-
resents the x and y components of the displacement vec-

tors of the particles. Taking double derivatives of X and
performing the sum over j leads to the ﬁnal expression
for DX ,

(cid:19)

(cid:18) 1 0

0 1

DX = −2 hX AX

with

AX =

1
6

(cid:40)(cid:34)
(cid:104)
(cid:34)

60 − 28 cos(qxl) − 56 cos

+

4 cos(2qxl) + 8 cos(qxl) cos(qy

3l)

(cid:16) qx3l

(cid:17)

2

(cid:16) qy

(cid:17)

√

2

3l

+

8 cos

cos

√

+ 4 cos(qy

3l)

.

(cid:16) qy

(cid:16) qxl

(cid:17)

cos

(cid:105)

2
√

(cid:17)(cid:35)

√

3l

2

(cid:35)(cid:41)

Assembling all terms, the full dynamical matrix in the

presence of the nonaﬃne ﬁeld is therefore given by,

(cid:18) 3 − 2A1 − A2 − 2hX

√

k AX

3A3

D = k

√

3A3

3 − 3A2 − 2hX

k AX

12

(cid:19)

The phonon dispersion curves shown in Fig 2 are ob-
tained by diagonalising D. The eigenvalues, which corre-
spond to the phonon frequencies ω(q), are given by,
ω2(q) = 3k − kA1(q) − 2kA2(q) − 2hXAX (q)
2 .

±k(cid:2)(A1(q) − A2(q))2 + 3A2

3(q)(cid:3) 1

Note that the leading order term in AX (q) is of order
O(q4), so that hX does not contribute to the speed of
sound or to elastic constants.

The phonon density of states is then evaluated numeri-
cally in the usual manner [53] by counting the number of
q values within the Brillouin zone which correspond to
the same value of ω.

[1] L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Theory of Elasticity,

bridge, 2012).

3rd edition (Pergamon Press, 1986).

[21] J. P. Hirth and J. Lothe, Theory of Dislocations

[2] P. Chaikin and T. Lubensky, Principles of Condensed

(McGraw-Hill, 1967).

Matter Physics (Cambridge Press, Cambridge, 1995).

[3] P. Schall, I. Cohen, D. A. Weitz, and F. Spaepen, Nature

440, 319 (2006).

[4] M.-C. Miguel, A. Vespignani, S. Zapperi, J. Weiss, and

J.-R. Grassok, Nature 410, 667 (2001).

[5] J. Lin, E. Lerner, A. Rosso, and M. Wyart, Proc. Nat.

Acad. Sci. 111, 14382 (2014).

[22] F. R. N. Nabarro and M. S. Duesbery, Eds., Dislocations
in Solids, Vol. 10 (Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1996), p.505-
594.

[23] N. Geerts and E. Eiser, Soft Matter 6, 4647 (2010).
[24] H. Li and G. Lykotraﬁtis, Biophys. J. 102, 75 (2012).
[25] H. Li and G. Lykotraﬁtis, Biophys. J. 107, 642 (2014).
[26] H. Li and G. Lykotraﬁtis, Phys. Rev. E 92, 012715

[6] F. Sausset, G. Biroli, and J. Kurchan, J. Stat. Phys. 140,

(2015).

718 (2010).

[7] D. M. Dimiduk, C. Woodward, R. LeSar, and M. D.

Uchic, Science 312, 1188 (2006).

[8] S. Papanikolaou, D. M. Dimiduk, W. Choi, J. P. Sethna,
M. D. Uchic, C. F. Woodward, and S. Zapperi, Nature
490, 517 (2012).

[27] P. R. Okamoto, N. Q. Lam, and L. E. Rehn, in Solid
State Physics, Vol. 52, H. Ehrenreich and F. Spaepen,
Eds. (Academic Press, Amsterdam, 2015).

[28] P. Toledano, Europhys. Lett. 78, 46003 (2007).
[29] A. Braginsky, Phys. Rev. B66, 054202 (2002).
[30] M. Tinkham, Introduction to Superconductivity, 2nd Ed.

[9] G. Tsekenis, N. Goldenfeld, and K. Dahmen, Phys. Rev.

(Dover Publications, New York, 2004).

Lett.106, 105501 (2011).

[10] V. Chikkadi, G. Wegdam, D. Bonn, B. Nienhuis, and P.

Schall, Phys. Rev. Lett.107, 198303 (2011).

[31] K. Binder and D. Heermann, Monte Carlo Simulation in
Statistical Physics: An Introduction, 5th Ed. (Springer,
Berlin, 2010).

[11] A. Zaccone, P. Schall, and E. M. Terentjev, Phys. Rev.

[32] P. Virnau and M. M¨uller, J. Chem. Phys. 120, 10925

B90, 140203(R) (2014).

(2004).

[12] K. H. Nagamanasa, S. Gokhale, A. K. Sood, and R.

[33] D. Frenkel and B. Smit, Understanding Molecular Simu-

Ganapathy, Phys. Rev. E89, 062308 (2014).

lations (Academic Press, San Diego, 2002).

[13] M. L. Falk and J. S. Langer, Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter

[34] A. Barrat, R. Burioni, and M. M´ezard, J. Phys. A: Math.

Phys. 2, 353 (2010).

Gen. 29, 1311 (1996).

[14] M. L. Manning and A. J. Liu, Phys. Rev. Lett.107,
108302 (2011); S. S. Schoenholz, A. J. Liu, R. A. Rig-
gleman, and J. Rottler, arXive:1404.1403v1.

[15] D. V. Denisov, M. T. Dang, B. Struth, A. Zaccone, G.

H. Wegdam, and P. Schall, Sci. Rep. 5, 14359 (2015).

[16] M. L. Falk and J. S. Langer, Phys. Rev. E57, 7192 (1998).
[17] S. Ganguly, S. Sengupta, P. Sollich, and M. Rao, Phys.

[35] J.-P. Bouchaud, J. Phys. I France 2, 1705 (1992).
[36] M. Evans and M. E. Cates, Eds., Soft and Fragile Matter:
Nonequilibirum Dynamics, Metastability and Flow, Vol.
53 of The Scottish Universities Summer School in Physics
(Institute of Physics, London, 2000).

[37] P. Sollich, F. Lequeux, P. H´ebraud, and M. E. Cates,

Phys. Rev. Lett.78, 2020 (1997).

Rev. E 87, 042801 (2013).

[38] M. Born and K. Huang, The dynamical theory of crystal

[18] S. Ganguly, S. Sengupta, and P. Sollich, Soft Matter 11,

lattices (Clarendon Press, Gloucestershire, 1998).

4517 (2015).

[19] A. Mitra, S. Ganguly, S. Sengupta, and P. Sollich, JS-

TAT, P06025 (2015).

[20] R. W. Baluﬃ, Introduction to the Elasticity Theory
for Crystal Defects (Cambridge University Press, Cam-

[39] A. Acharya, Proc. R. Soc. A 459, 1343 (2003); A. Roy
and A. Acharya, J. Mech. Phys. Solids 53, 143 (2005);
A. Acharya and A. Roy, J. Mech. Phys. Solids 54, 1687
(2006).

13

[40] E. Kr¨oner, Kontinuumstheorie der Versetzungen und

[47] L. Berthier and G. Biroli, Rev. Mod. Phys. 83, 587

Eigenspannungen (Springer, Berlin, 1958).

(2011).

[41] K. Zahn, A. Wille, G. Maret, S. Sengupta, and P.

[48] T. Das, S. Sengupta, and M. Rao, Phys. Rev. E 82,

Nielaba, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 155506 (2003).

041115 (2010).

[42] K. Franzrahe, P. Keim, G. Maret, P. Nielaba, and S.

[49] T. Das, S. Ganguly, S. Sengupta, and M. Rao, Sci. Rep.

Sengupta, Phys. Rev. E 78, 026106 (2008).

5, 10644, (2015).

[43] S. Sengupta, P. Nielaba, and K. Binder, Phys. Rev. E

[50] B. Didonna and T. C. Lubensky, Phys. Rev. E72, 66619

61, 6294 (2000).

(2005).

[44] W. Schirmacher, G. Diezemann, and C. Ganter, Physica

B 263-264, 160 (1999).

[51] Y. Imry and M. Wortis, Phys. Rev. B19, 3580 (1979).
[52] E. J. Garboczi and M. F. Thorpe, Phys. Rev. B 32, 4513

[45] K. Binder and W. Kob, Glassy Materials and Disordered
Solids: An Introduction to Their Statistical Mechanics
(World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 2011).

[46] A. Cavagna, Phys. Rep. 476, 51 (2009).

(1985).

[53] N. W. Ashcroft and N. D. Mermin, Solid State Physics

(Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, New York, 1976).

