6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
3

 
 
]

.

G
D
h
t
a
m

[
 
 

2
v
7
0
1
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

A Hamiltonian version of a result of Gromoll and

Grove

Urs Frauenfelder1, Christian Lange2, and Stefan Suhr3

1Institut f¨ur Mathematik, Universit¨at Augsburg,
Universit¨atsstrasse 14, 86159 Augsburg, Germany

2Mathematisches Institut der Universit¨at zu K¨oln, Weyertal 86-90,

3DMA, ENS Paris and Universit´e Paris Dauphine, 45 rue d’Ulm,

50931 Cologne, Germany

75005 Paris, France

April 1, 2016

Abstract

The theorem that if all geodesics of a Riemannian two-sphere are closed
they are also simple closed is generalized to real Hamiltonian structures
on RP 3. For reversible Finsler 2-spheres all of whose geodesics are closed
this implies that the lengths of all geodesics coincide.

1

Introduction

In [10] Poincar´e advertised the study of geodesics as a ﬁrst step to pen-
etrate in the exploration of Hamiltonian systems like the ones appearing
in celestial mechanics. A fascinating object in the study of geodesics are
manifolds all whose geodesics are closed, see [1]. This leads to the ques-
tion how much results on closed geodesics are Riemannian phenomena
or belong to the realm of Hamiltonian dynamics. For example in [5] it
was shown how the classical result of Bott-Samelson ﬁts into a contact
geometric set-up.

The theorem of Gromoll and Grove [6] asserts that if a Rieman-
nian metric on the two dimensional sphere S2 has the property that all
geodesics are closed, then each geodesic is simple closed and therefore all
geodesics have a common minimal period.

The geodesic equation is a second order ODE. Each second order ODE
can be transformed into a ﬁrst order ODE. This allows one to interpret the
geodesic equation as a ﬁrst order Hamiltonian ﬂow equation on the unit
cotangent bundle of the underlying manifold. In the case of S2 the unit
cotangent bundle S ∗S2 is diﬀeomorphic to real projective space RP 3. In

1

physics the underlying manifold is referred to as the conﬁguration space
while its cotangent space is denoted as the phase space.

The phase space is a symplectic manifold and the symplectic geometer
is interested to apply arbitrary symplectic transformations to this sym-
plectic manifold, since under these transformations the symplectic dynam-
ics transforms canonically and can under some lucky instances brought to
a form which makes it more tractible to explicit solutions. But under ar-
bitrary symplectic transformations the bundle structure of the cotangent
bundle is not preserved. Therefore the question if a closed characteristic
of the Hamiltonian ﬂow is simple or not does not make sense to the sym-
plectic geometer. However, in the case that all characteristics are closed,
if the Hamiltonian ﬂow admits a common minimal period, is a question
even a symplectic geometer can understand.

Unfortunately, in general this is bloody wrong. Here is an example.
Let p and q be two relatively prime integers. Identify the three dimensional
sphere S3 with {(z1, z2) ∈ C2 : |z1|2 + |z2|2 = 1} and consider the circle
action on S3 given by

eit
∗ (z1, z2) = (eiptz1, eiqtz2).

This circle action commutes with the antipodal involution z 7→ −z on
S3 and hence induces a circle action on RP 3 = S3/Z2. The minimal
period of the orbit through [(1, 0)] is π
p , the minimal period of the orbit
through [(0, 1)] is π
q , while the minimal period of an orbit through a point
[(z1, z2)] ∈ RP 3 with z1 6= 0 and z2 6= 0 is π in the case p and q are
both odd and 2π if one of them is even.
It is worth noting that this
example corresponds to the Katok examples as was pointed out by Harris
and Paternain [7]. This means that the Gromoll-Grove theorem already
fails for nonreversible Finsler metrics.

Geodesic ﬂows of a Riemannian or a reversible Finsler metric have the
following properties which distinguish them from other Hamiltonian ﬂows

(i) The geodesic ﬂow is invariant under time reversal, i.e., a geodesic

traversed backwards is again a geodesic.

(ii) The geodesic ﬂow is a Reeb ﬂow, i.e., it is the ﬂow of a Reeb vector

ﬁeld of a contact structure.

In this note we explain how under a suitable generalization of property
(i) for geodesics the Gromoll-Grove result about the common minimal
period generalizes to hold for general Hamiltonian systems all of whose
trajectories are closed on energy hypersurfaces having the same topology
as the ones studied by Gromoll and Grove, namely RP 3. Here we do not
need to assume that our Hamiltonian ﬂow is a Reeb ﬂow. Instead of that
we explain invoking a deep result of Epstein [4] that in this set-up the
Hamiltonian ﬂow will be stable.

The proof of Gromoll and Grove hinges on the Theorem of Lusternik
and Schnirelmann on the existence of three simple closed geodesics and the
theory of Seifert on three dimensional ﬁbred spaces. As explained above
there is no analogon of the Theorem of Lusternik and Schnirelmann for
Hamiltonian ﬂows because the notion of simpleness does not generalize
to the symplectic set-up. However, the tangent curve of a smooth regular

2

simple curve (i.e. an embedding) S1 → S2 is a noncontractible curve in
T S2 \ S2. We will show that the noncontractibility of all orbits follows
without further assumptions. The analogue in the Riemannian case is
proven in [8]. Here we emply the same method.

Acknowledgements: Urs Frauenfelder would like to thank the Ecole Nor-
male Sup´erieure for its hospitality during the visit while this research was
carried out.

The research leading to these results has received funding from the Eu-
ropean Research Council under the European Union’s Seventh Framework
Programme (FP/2007-2013) / ERC Grant Agreement 307062.

2 Real Hamiltonian manifolds

Assume that Σ = Σ2n+1 is a closed oriented manifold of dimension 2n + 1.
A Hamiltonian structure on Σ is a two form

ω ∈ Ω2(Σ)

satisfying the following two conditions

(i) ω is closed, i.e., dω = 0,

(ii) ker(ω) deﬁnes a one dimensional distribution on T Σ.

We refer to the pair (Σ, ω) is a Hamiltonian manifold. A Hamiltonian
manifold is the odd dimensional analogon of a symplectic manifold. In the
study of Hamiltonian dynamics Hamiltonian manifolds naturally arise as
energy hypersurfaces, i.e., level sets of a smooth function on a symplectic
manifold. The characteristic foliation, namely the leaves of the kernel
of ω, correspond to the trajectories of the Hamiltonian ﬂow on a ﬁxed
energy level. People studying Hamiltonian manifolds are relaxed people,
they do not care about the parametrization of the leaves but only about
the foliation itself.

Because we assume our manifold Σ to be oriented we actually obtain
an orientation of the leaves. Indeed, note that for each x ∈ Σ the two
form ωx is nondegenerate on TxΣ/ker(ωx), hence is a symplectic form on
this vector space and therefore deﬁnes an orientation on it.

Deﬁnition 2.1 A real Hamiltonian manifold is a triple (Σ, ω, ρ), where
(Σ, ω) is a Hamiltonian manifold and ρ ∈ Diﬀ(Σ) is a smooth involution
on Σ, i.e., ρ2 = idΣ satisfying the following two conditions

(i) ρ∗ω = −ω,

(ii) ρ reverses the orientation on ker(ω).

If L denotes the set of leaves of the foliation on Σ induced from ker(ω),
then the ﬁrst condition guarantees that ρ induces an involution on the set
of leaves

ρ∗ : L → L .

Here is an example of a real Hamiltonian manifold. For a closed Rieman-
nian manifold (N, g) let

Σ = S ∗N = {(q, p) ∈ T ∗N : ||p||gq = 1}

3

be its unit cotangent bundle with Hamiltonian structure obtained by re-
stricting the diﬀerential of the Liouville one-from to S ∗N . Then a real
structure is given by

ρ : S ∗N → S ∗N,

(q, p) 7→ (q, −p).

Note that the same construction works for reversible Finsler metrics but
fails for nonreversible Finsler metrics since in this case the unit cotangent
bundle is not invariant under ρ anymore. In this example the leaves of
the foliation correspond to oriented geodesics and the involution reverses
the orientation of the geodesic. In particular, no leaf is ﬁxed. This is a
more general phenomenon as the following Lemma shows.

Lemma 2.2 Suppose that (Σ, ω, ρ) is a real Hamiltonian manifold with
the property that

Fix(ρ) = ∅,

i.e., there are no ﬁxed points of the involution ρ on Σ. Then the induced
involution ρ∗ on the set of leaves L is free.

Proof: We argue by contradiction and assume that there exists a leaf
L ∈ L such that

Hence if x ∈ L it holds that

ρ∗(L) = L.

ρ(x) ∈ L.

Because ρ has no ﬁxed points by assumption we must have

x 6= ρ(x).

The leaf L is either diﬀeomorphic to a circle or to the real line. Hence we
can choose

diﬀeomorphic to a closed interval such that

I ⊂ L

∂I = {x, ρ(x)}.

Note that since ρ is an involution it interchanges the boundary points of
I. Because ρ reverses the orientation of L we conclude that

ρ(I) = I.

However, because ρ interchanges the boundary points of the closed interval
I we conclude by the intermediate value theorem that there exists y ∈ I
such that

ρ(y) = y

contradicting the assumption that Fix(ρ) = ∅. This contradiction con-
cludes the proof of the lemma.
(cid:3)

4

3 Stability

Assume that (Σ, ω) is a Hamiltonian manifold of dimension 2n+1. A one-
form λ ∈ Ω1(Σ) is called a stabilizing one-form, see [2, 3], if it satisﬁes the
following two conditions
(i) λ ∧ ωn > 0, i.e., λ ∧ ωn is a volume form on the oriented manifold Σ,
(ii) ker(ω) ⊂ ker(dλ).

We abbreviate by

Λ(Σ, ω) ⊂ Ω1(Σ)

the maybe empty subset of all stabilizing one-forms of (Σ, ω). Note that
Λ(Σ, ω) is a cone, i.e., if λ1, λ2 ∈ Λ(Σ, ω) and r1, r2 > 0, then r1λ1+r2λ2 ∈
Λ(Σ, ω). We refer to Λ(Σ, ω) as the stable cone of (Σ, ω).
Deﬁnition 3.1 A Hamiltonian manifold (Σ, ω) is called stable, if Λ(Σ, ω) 6=
∅, i.e., there exists a stabilizing one-form.

Now suppose that (Σ, ω, ρ) is a real Hamiltonian manifold. We say that
a stabilizing one-form λ ∈ Λ(Σ, ω) is real if it satisﬁes

ρ∗λ = −λ.

To produce real stabilizing one-forms we ﬁrst show that the cone Λ(Σ, ω)
is invariant under the involution λ 7→ −ρ∗λ of Ω1(Σ).
Lemma 3.2 Suppose that λ ∈ Λ(Σ, ω). Then

−ρ∗λ ∈ Λ(Σ, ω).

Proof: From the deﬁnition of a real Hamiltonian manifold we see imme-
diately that

(−1)n+1ρ∗(λ ∧ ωn) > 0.

Thus we have

(−ρ∗λ) ∧ ωn = (−1)n+1ρ∗(λ ∧ ω) > 0,

and the ﬁrst condition for a stablizing one-form is satisﬁed by −ρ∗λ.

Combining ker(ρ∗ω) = ker ω with ker ω ⊂ ker dλ implies

ker ω = ker ρ∗ω ⊂ ker ρ∗dλ = ker(−ρ∗λ).

Therefore −ρ∗λ is a stabilizing one-form.

(cid:3)

In view of the cone property of Λ(Σ, ω) the lemma enables us to con-
struct real stabilizing one-forms out of a stabilizing one-form.

Corollary 3.3 Suppose that the real Hamiltonian manifold (Σ, ω, ρ) is
stable. Then it admits a real stabilizing one-form.

Proof: Let λ be a stabilizing one-form. By Lemma 3.2 it follows that
−ρ∗λ is again a stabilizing one-form. Because Λ(Σ, ω) is a cone it follows
that

λρ := λ − ρ∗λ

is again a stabilizing one-form. Because ρ is an involution we have

ρ∗λρ = −ρ∗λρ.

Therefore λρ is a real stabilizing one-form.

(cid:3)

5

4 Periodic Hamiltonian manifolds

Deﬁnition 4.1 A Hamiltonian manifold (Σ, ω) is called periodic if all
leaves are circles.

Theorem 4.2 Assume that (Σ, ω) is a 3-dimensional periodic Hamilto-
nian manifold. Then it is stable.

Proof: For every Hamiltonian structure on an orientable manifold one
can orient the characteristic distribution. Therefore by choosing a nowhere
vanishing vectorﬁeld tangent to the charateristic distribution one ﬁnds
that the charateristic foliation consists of orbits of a R action on Σ.

According to the main theorem in [4] if (Σ, ω) is periodic on the 3-
manifold Σ then the R action is orbit equivalent to an S1 action. Thus
the length of the leaves with respect to any Riemannian metric on Σ is
bounded. Then by the Theorem of Wadsley in the version of [3] there
exists a stabilizing one-form.
(cid:3)

Corollary 4.3 Under the assumptions of Theorem 4.2 there exists a smooth
circle action on Σ without ﬁxed points such that the orbits of the circle
action correspond to the leaves of the characteristic foliation of (Σ, ω).

5 The main result and proof

Theorem 5.1 Suppose that (ω, ρ) is a periodic real Hamiltonian structure
on RP 3. Then there exists a free circle action on RP 3 with the property
that the leaves of (RP 3, ω) correspond to the orbits of the circle action. In
particular, all leaves are noncontractible.

Corollary 5.2 Let (S2, F ) be a reversible Finsler 2-sphere such that all
geodesics are closed. Then all geodesics give rise to noncontractible orbits
on the unit tangent bundle of S2 and have the same length.

In his fundamental monograph [12] Seifert studies eﬀective circle ac-
tions on closed three dimensional manifolds with no ﬁxed points. For a
modern account of Seifert’s theory see for example the paper by Scott
[11]. If the three dimensional manifold is orientable the quotient orbifold
is an orientable surface with ﬁnitely many cone points.
If S is a sur-
face and p1, · · · pℓ is a ﬁnite collection of positive integers bigger than two
we abbreviate by S(p1, · · · , pℓ) the surface with ℓ cone points of order
p1, · · · , pℓ.

Theorem 5.3 (Seifert) Suppose that S1 acts smoothly on RP 3 without
ﬁxed points. Then the quotient orbifold RP 3/S1 belongs to one of the
following examples

S2, S2(p), S2(p, q).

In the third case it holds that

(p, q) ∈ {1, 2}

i.e., p and q are either relatively prime or decompose as p = 2p′ and
q = 2q′ with p′ and q′ relatively prime.

6

Proof:
sequence of homotopy groups

For the ﬁbration S1 → RP 3 → RP 3/S1 we obtain an exact

π1(S1) → π1(RP 3) → π1(RP 3/S1) → π0(S1)

see [11, Lemma 3.2]. Hence we have an exact sequence

Z → Z2 → π1(RP 3/S1) → {1}

implying that the fundamental group of the orbifold RP 3/S1 is either
trivial or Z2. Closed two dimensional orbifolds of trivial fundamental
group or fundamental group Z2 are the three examples in the list above
as we explain in the appendix. This ﬁnishes the proof of the Theorem. (cid:3)

Corollary 5.4 Suppose that (ω, ρ) is a real Hamiltonian structure on
RP 3 with the property that Fix(ρ) = ∅. Then the space of leaves L is
diﬀeomorphic to S2 and all orbits are noncontractible.

Theorem 5.1 follows directly from the corollary.

Proof: By Corollary 4.3 there exists a circle action on RP 3 without
ﬁxed points such that the space of leaves is

L = RP 3/S1.

Because the involution ρ has no ﬁxed points by assumption Lemma 2.2
tells us that the induced involution ρ∗ on the space of leaves L is free.
In particular, the number of cone points of a given multiplicity is even.
Therefore by Theorem 5.3 the space of leaves belongs to one of the fol-
lowing orbifolds

S2, S2(p, p)

where in the later case we have

implying that

(p, p) ∈ {1, 2}

p = 2.

Lemma 3.4 in [8] shows that every eﬀective S1-action without ﬁxed points
on a lens space L(r, 1) with orbit space S2(2, 2) implies r ≥ 4. Here the
lens space L(r, 1) is deﬁned as S3/Zr where the Zr-action is generated by
i. This excludes the orbifold S2(2, 2) as the orbit
multiplication with e
space since RP 3 ∼= L(2, 1). Using the homotopy exact sequence

2π
r

π1(S1) → π1(RP 3) → π1(S2) = 0

we see that all orbits are noncontractible. This ﬁnishes the proof of the
Corollary.
(cid:3)

7

A The orbifold fundamental group

Assume that Σ is an orientable closed 3-dimensional manifold on which
the circle S1 acts eﬀectively without ﬁxed points. Then the quotient
S := Σ/S1 is an orbifold, namely a closed orientable surface with ﬁnitely
many cone points (say ℓ many) of multiplicity pi for 1 ≤ i ≤ ℓ. Suppose
that the genus of the surface S is g. Interpreted as a topological space
Stop and not as orbifold its fundamental group has the presentation

π1(Stop) = Da1, b1, · · · ag, bg(cid:12)(cid:12)a1b1a−1

1 b−1

1

· · · agbga−1

g b−1

g E.

Considered as an orbifold Sorb one deﬁnes its orbifold fundamental group
as

π1(Sorb) =

Da1, b1, · · · ag, bg, x1, · · · , xℓ(cid:12)(cid:12)xp1

1 , · · · , xpℓ

ℓ , a1b1a−1

1 b−1

1

· · · agbga−1

g b−1

g x1 · · · xpE.

The usefulness of the orbifold fundamental group lies in the fact that one
has a surjective group homomorphism

π1(Σ) ։ π1(Sorb)

as was proved by Seifert in [12, Chapter 10]. This comes from the homo-
topy exact sequence

π1(S1) → π1(Σ) → π1(Sorb) → π0(S1),

see for example [11, Chapter 3]. The existence of this surjective group ho-
momorphism gives us interesting information on the types of exceptional
ﬁbers the action of S1 on Σ can have.

Suppose in the following that the fundamental group of Σ is ﬁnite.
In view of the surjective group homomorphism the orbifold fundamental
group of S is ﬁnite as well.
In particular, topologically S has to be a
sphere

Stop = S2

and its orbifold fundamental group has the presentation

π1(Sorb) = Dx1, · · · , xℓ(cid:12)(cid:12)xp1

1 , · · · , xpℓ

ℓ , x1 · · · xpE.

It turns out that this group is ﬁnite only if there are less than three cone
points or if there are three cone points the orbifold is of the form

S2(2, 2, n), S2(2, 3, 3), S2(2, 3, 4), S2(2, 3, 5)

for n ≥ 2. For a beautiful geometric interpretation why this holds true
we invite the reader to consult directly Chapter 10 in Seifert’s paper [12].
In the case where there is just one cone point, the orbifold is a teardrop,
and its fundamental group is trivial.
If there are two cone points the
fundamental group is

π1(S2(p, q)) = Z/(p, q)Z

8

where (p, q) is the greatest common divisor of the integers p and q. The
fundamental group of S2(2, 2, n) is the dihedral group of order 2n while
the fundamental groups S2(2, 3, 3), S2(2, 3, 4) and S2(2, 3, 5) correspond
to the symmetry groups of the platonic solids. In particular, we see that
if the orbifold fundamental group of S is trivial or Z2, then the orbifold
belongs to one of the examples listed in Theorem 5.3.

References

[1] A. Besse, Manifolds all of whose geodesics are closed, Ergebnisse der

Math. 93 Berlin, Heidelberg, New York: Springer (1978).

[2] K. Cieliebak, U. Frauenfelder, G. Paternain, Symplectic topology of

Ma˜n´e’s critical values, Geom. Topol. 14, (2010), 1765–1870.

[3] K. Cieliebak, E. Volkov, First steps in stable Hamiltonian topology,

J. Eur. Math. Soc. (JEMS) 17, (2015), no. 2, 321–404.

[4] D. Epstein, Periodic ﬂows on 3-manifolds, Ann. of Math. 95 (1972),

68–82.

[5] U. Frauenfelder, C. Labrousse, F. Schlenk, Slow volume growth for
Reeb ﬂows on spherizations and contact Bott-Samelson theorems,
J. Top. Anal. 7 (2015), no. 3, 407–451.

[6] D. Gromoll, K. Grove, On metrics on S2 all of whose geodesics are

closed, Invent. math. 65 (1981), 175–177.

[7] A. Harris, G. Paternain, Dynamically convex Finsler metrics and
J-holomorphic embedding of asymptotic cylinders, Ann. Global
Anal. Geom. 34 (2008), no. 2, 115–134.

[8] Ch. Lange, On metrics on 2-orbifolds all of whose geodesics are

closed, arXiv:1603.08455.

[9] L. Lusternik, L. Schnirelmann, Sur le probl`eme de trois g´eod´esiques

ferm´ees sur surfaces de genre 0, C.R. Acad. Sci. Paris 189 (1929).

[10] H. Poincar´e, Sur les lignes g´eod´esiques des surfaces convexes,

Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 17 (1909), 237–274.

[11] P. Scott, Geometries of 3-manifolds, Bull. London Math. Soc. 15

(1983), 401–487.

[12] H. Seifert, Topologie dreidimensionaler gefaserter R¨aume, Acta

Math. 60 (1933), 147–238.

9

