6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
6
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
t
n
a
u
q
[
 
 

1
v
7
2
1
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Quantum Memory and Optical Transistor Based on Electromagnetically Induced

Transparency in Optical Cavities

Rommel R. Oliveira,1 Halyne S. Borges,1 James A. Souza,1, 2 and Celso J. Villas-Boas1

1Departamento de F´ısica, Universidade Federal de S˜ao Carlos,

P.O. Box 676, 13565-905, S˜ao Carlos, S˜ao Paulo, Brazil

2Departamento de F´ısica, Qu´ımica e Matem´atica,

Universidade Federal de S˜ao Carlos, 18052-780, Sorocaba, S˜ao Paulo, Brazil

(Dated: March 17, 2016)

We theoretically studied the implementation of a quantum memory and an optical transistor in
a system composed by a single atom trapped inside a high ﬁnesse cavity. In order to store and map
the quantum state of an input pulse onto internal states of the single atom (quantum memory) we
employ the electromagnetically induced transparency (EIT) phenomenon (which can work out as an
optical transistor) where the information can be transferred to the dark state of the atom modelled
by a three-level system in a Λ-type conﬁguration. In our model we consider a suitable temporal
shape for the control ﬁeld that ensures the adiabaticity of the storage process and retrieval of the
probe pulse. The dynamic of the ﬁeld inside the cavity was obtained by master equation approach,
while the outside ﬁeld was calculated by input-output formalism. We have analysed two diﬀerent
setups: i) two-sided and ii) single-sided cavities. While the ﬁrst setup is the most appropriate and
commonly used to observe cavity-EIT in the transmission spectrum, thus the best conﬁguration for
the optical transistor, the maximum quantum memory eﬃciency can not reach reasonable values,
being limited to 50% for symmetric cavities. On the other hand, with single-sided cavity the quantum
memory eﬃciency increases considerably and can reach values close to 100% in the strong atom-ﬁeld
coupling regime. However this speciﬁc setup is not favourable to observe the cavity-EIT eﬀect in
the transmission spectrum and then it is not appropriate to control the transmission of light pulses.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The implementation of quantum information process-
ing requires the ability to perform diﬀerent tasks with
high eﬃciency and control, for instance the initialization
and detection of quantum states, storage of quantum in-
formation (quantum memory), quantum logic gates, con-
trol the transmission of information (transistor), etc. The
optical transistor [1, 2] can be deﬁned as a device which
is able to control the transmission of light, allowing the
light to be either reﬂected or transmitted through the
application of a second light ﬁeld (control ﬁeld). In this
way, the transmission of quantum information mapped
onto a light pulse can be controlled via another light
ﬁeld. Recently this control was achieved using a trapped
atom inside an optical cavity [3], based on the electro-
magnetically induced transparency (EIT) phenomenon,
opening a great avenue for many applications in quan-
tum information area. In this experiment, even a single
atom was able to control the transmission of light of a
probe ﬁeld, although the contrast between the transmis-
sion of the probe ﬁeld when the control ﬁeld is on and
when it is oﬀ was of only 20% [3]. For an average of
15 atoms this contrast reached much higher values, over
90%. Another essential device for quantum information
processing is the quantum memory [4], which is a system
capable of storing quantum states to perform a certain
task. They can be applied not only in quantum computa-
tion but also in quantum repeaters, metrology, detection
and emission of single photons, quantum networks and as
a system to study fundamentals of quantum mechanics
[5, 6]. In general, an optical quantum memory transfers

the properties of a photonic qubit input and maps them
onto a medium, being retrieved after a storage time with
a signiﬁcant eﬃciency and ﬁdelity. Among the several
physical systems used for its implementation are atomic
ensembles in solid state [7], systems with a single atom in
optical cavities [8], atomic gases [9], semiconductor quan-
tum dots [10] and ensemble of nuclear spins in quantum
dots [11]. Recently a single-atom quantum memory was
accomplished with a 87Rb atom, where a photon state
given by a superposition of the right and left polariza-
tion was stored into a superposition of the atomic states,
with eﬃciency of 9.3% for storage time of 2µs and an
average ﬁdelity of 93% for a storage time of 180µs [8].
In the context of applications of quantum memory such
as quantum repeaters which needs an eﬃciency of over
90%, and in linear optical quantum computation, which
needs eﬃciencies over 99% [6], it is extremely relevant to
optimize the memory eﬃciency.

In this work we investigate theoretically the imple-
mentation of an optical quantum memory and an optical
transistor in a system composed by a single atom, mod-
elled as a three-level system in Λ-conﬁguration, trapped
in a high ﬁnesse optical cavity. The state of the probe
pulse is coherently mapped onto the atomic levels, con-
sidering the cavity in two diﬀerent setups, whose distinc-
tion is given by the diﬀerence between the reﬂectivity of
each one of the mirrors. Here we have investigated several
ways to optimize the quantum memory eﬃciency consid-
ering diﬀerent parameters values, which in turn can be
properly controlled experimentally. Based on the non-
linear optical phenomenon EIT, the state of a photonic
qubit is transferred to a superposition of the two atomic

ground states. This storage process is accomplished turn-
ing the control ﬁeld oﬀ adiabatically, ensuring that the
information of the input qubit remains stored in an eigen-
state of the system that does not contain any contribu-
tion of the excited state, i.e., in the dark state.

Our results show that for a two-sided cavity, which
is the appropriate experimental setup to observe cavity-
EIT eﬀect with single atoms [3], the value of memory
eﬃciency has an upper bound about 8.5% for the asym-
metric setup used in [3], not being suitable for quantum
memory application. This setup is neither convenient to
implement an optical transistor since most of the light is
immediately reﬂected, independently of the control ﬁeld,
as we discuss below. The symmetric two-sided cavity al-
lows for 100% transmission of light, being the most suit-
able setup to implement the optical transistor since one
is able to obtain 100% (0%) transmission when the con-
trol ﬁeld is on (oﬀ) in the limit of strong atom-ﬁeld cou-
pling. However, here we show that this septup provides a
quantum memory eﬃciency limited to 50%. Meanwhile,
the one-sided cavity setup has its maximum value of the
memory eﬃciency signiﬁcantly increased in relation to
the last conﬁgurations, close to 100%, however it is not
suitable to observe the cavity-EIT. In this speciﬁc con-
ﬁguration, the reﬂected and transmitted ﬁelds become
indistinguishable under transmission measurements. So,
the one sided-cavity setup is not useful for the implemen-
tation of the optical transistor.

The manuscript is divided as follows.

II we
present the theoretical model. In Sec. III we investigate
the optimization of the quantum memory eﬃciency and
discuss the implementation of the optical transistor for
the two diﬀerent setups. Finally we present our conclu-
sions in Sec. IV.

In Sec.

II. THEORY AND MODEL

In order to investigate the dynamics of the atom-ﬁeld
system inside the cavity we calculate the density matrix
via master equation formalism. The Hamiltonian that
describes the atom-cavity system under the inﬂuence of
probe and control ﬁelds, in the rotating wave approxi-
mation and without the time dependency, is given in the
interaction picture by:

HI =∆1σ33 + (∆1 − ∆2)σ22 + ∆σ11 − ∆a†a+

(εa + gaσ31 + ΩCσ32 + h.c.).

(1)

Here, ∆1 = ω3 − ω is the detuning between the |3(cid:105) ↔ |1(cid:105)
atomic transition and the cavity ﬁeld frequencies, ω3 and
ω, respectively. ∆2 = (ω3 − ω2) − ωC is the detuning
between the |3(cid:105) ↔ |2(cid:105) atomic transition (ω3 − ω2) and
the control ﬁeld (ωC) frequencies. ∆ = ωP − ω is the
detuning between cavity mode (ω) and probe ﬁeld (ωP )
frequencies. σkl = |k(cid:105)(cid:104)l| (k, l = 1, 2, 3) are the atomic
for k = l we have the population operators
operators:
and for k (cid:54)= l the transition ones. The cavity couples

2

the |3(cid:105) ↔ |1(cid:105) transition with a coupling constant g and
the control laser, with Rabi frequency ΩC, couples the
|3(cid:105) ↔ |2(cid:105) transition. h.c. stands for Hermitian conjugate.
The operators a and a† are associated to the internal cav-
ity mode. Finally, ε is the strength of the probe ﬁeld on
the cavity mode. Concerning the atom-cavity coupling is
important to point out that we do not take into account
oscillations of the atom in the cavity, i.e., we do not con-
sider any deviations in the value of the coupling constant
g, considering in all our results an eﬀective coupling.

Fig.1 shows the schematic representation of the atom-
cavity system with couplings and atomic decay rates.
The constants κA and κB represent the cavity ﬁeld decay
rates associated to each one of the mirrors.

Since we are interested in the implementation of the
optical transistor and the quantum memory based on EIT
phenomenon, we assume from now on that the control
laser is resonant with the atomic transition |3(cid:105) ↔ |2(cid:105), the
probe ﬁeld is tuned to resonance with cavity frequency,
which in turn couples resonantly the atomic transition
|3(cid:105) ↔ |1(cid:105). Therefore, all the detunings of the Hamilto-
nian (1) are null.
The principle behind quantum memories based on EIT
is to use the transparency window generated by this phe-
nomenon and, consequently, the reduction of the group
velocity of the light pulse into the medium. For the atom-
cavity system, ﬁrst one must prepare it in the ground
atomic state |1(cid:105)a and the cavity in the Fock state |0(cid:105)c
(the index a and c refer to the atom and cavity, respec-
tively).
If instead of a continuous probe ﬁeld, a pulse
with one photon is sent, with frequency spectrum within
the transparency window, in the limit where ΩC (cid:29) ΩP
(being ΩP the Rabi frequency of the probe ﬁeld), the
dark state of the system is given by the tensor product
|1(cid:105)a ⊗ |1(cid:105)c, since one photon was inserted into the cav-

Figure 1: Energy level diagram for a single atom in the

Λ conﬁguration trapped inside a high ﬁnesse cavity.

The incoming ﬁeld on the cavity is represented by ain.

The cavity couples the |3(cid:105) ↔ |1(cid:105) transition with a

coupling constant g. Meanwhile, a control laser of Rabi
frequency ΩC couples the |3(cid:105) ↔ |2(cid:105) transition. Γ31 and
Γ32 represent the polarization decay rates from the

excited state |3(cid:105).

{{3

ity. As the control laser is on, under these conditions the
probe pulse is not absorbed by the atom. However, if the
control ﬁeld is adiabatically turned oﬀ, keeping the sys-
tem in an eigenstate of the Hamiltonian (its dark state),
the pulse is now absorbed and the dark state of the com-
pose system is now |2(cid:105)a ⊗|0(cid:105)c. Similarly, the input pulse
can be a coherent superposition of 0 and 1 photon and,
then when the control ﬁeld is adiabatically turned oﬀ,
it will be transferred and stored in a superposition of
the ground atomic levels. For coherent probe pulses the
state of the light is a coherent superposition of 0, 1, 2...
photons, which can be well approximated (for quantum
memory purposes) to a superposition of 0 and 1 photon
for a very weak pulse, as we consider in this work.

In order to use this model to describe a quantum mem-
ory made up of this system, as carried out by H. P. Specht
et al. [8], we consider a weak coherent probe pulse incom-
ing to the cavity with the following Gaussian temporal
shape:

where the behaviour of the ﬁeld inside the cavity is com-
pletely described independently of the cavity design, and
by input-output formalism, that describes explicitly the
input and output ﬁelds that are emitted from or reﬂected
by the cavity, through Heisenberg-picture operators [15].
In the case of Fabry-Perot cavities, the physical system
can be constituted either by a perfectly reﬂective mirror,
while the other one is partially reﬂective, in such a way
that the ﬁeld can only enter and exit from cavity by one
side (one-sided cavity), or by mirrors which exhibit non
null reﬂection and transmission coeﬃcients so that, it is
possible to consider that the input ﬁeld is sent through
one side of the cavity while the output ﬁeld can exit by
both sides (two-sided cavity). As a particular case of two-
sided cavity we have the symmetric one, which consists of
a cavity where both mirrors have the same transmission
coeﬃcients.

In order to calculate the dynamics of the internal ﬁeld

of the atom-cavity system we use the master equation

(cid:112)

φin(t) = Eme− 1

2

(t−t0)2

α2

,

(2)

where its full width at half maximum (F W HM ) is given
2 ln(2). t0 is the time the probe pulse
by F W HM = 2α
(its maximum) enters the cavity mode. This probe ﬁeld
is what we are interested in storing in the atom. In order
to do the storage, we also must turn the control ﬁeld oﬀ,
making the atom absorb the probe pulse. In the follow-
ing we have to turn the control ﬁeld back on, in order
to restore the probe ﬁeld stored in the atom. Turning
oﬀ and on the control ﬁeld abruptly one can excite the
atomic level |3(cid:105), which can decay spontaneously, losing
energy and information. To avoid this source of error
we must turn oﬀ and on the control ﬁeld adiabatically,
which ensures that the system will be kept all the time
in its dark state [12]. In order to ensure the adiabaticity
in the storage process, we consider the time dependency
to the control ﬁeld given by:

ΩC(t) =

ΩC
2 {[1 − tanh(ζ1(t − t1))]+[1 + tanh(ζ2(t − t2))]},

(3)

where ζ1 (ζ2) is the rate at which we turn the control
ﬁeld oﬀ (on), at time t1 (t2) and ΩC is the maximum
Rabi frequency of the control ﬁeld. With this simple
form for the control ﬁeld we are able to reach memory
eﬃciencies close to 100% for the one sided cavity and
Gaussian coherent probe pulses. Thus we are not using
the protocols by J. Dilley et al. [13] or M. Fleischhauer
et al.
[14] which maximize the memory eﬃciency only
for single photon pulses (i.e., not being valid for weak
coherent probe pulse as we consider here) and at the
expense of the derivation of speciﬁc forms of the control
ﬁeld for each shape and width of the probe pulse.

In cavity quantum electrodynamics is well established
that an optical cavity driven by an electromagnetic ﬁeld
can be described by two formalisms: via master equation,

dρ
dt

= − i[HI , ρ] + κ(2aρa† − a†aρ − ρa†a)

+

Γ3i(2σi3ρσ3i − σ3iσi3ρ − ρσ3iσi3),

(4)

(cid:88)

i=1,2

being κ = κA +κB the total decay rate of the cavity ﬁeld,
Γ32 and Γ31 the polarization decay rates of the excited
level 3 to levels 2 and 1, respectively.

As we are interested in optimizing the quantum mem-
ory eﬃciency of this system, it is important to emphasize
that in order to evaluate the memory eﬃciency is nec-
essary to know the input and output ﬁelds, and their
corresponding relations with the internal cavity mode
(described by the operators a(t) and a†(t)) calculated
through of the master equation (4).

In this context, the input-output theory provides an
important relation between cavity mode and the external
modes [16]:

aout(t) = √2κAa(t) − φin(t),

(5)

where the operators φin and aout describes the incoming
and outgoing ﬁelds, respectively, for a single sided cavity
whose ﬁeld decays at a rate κA.

The connection between the input-output formalism
and the master equation approach is performed ﬁxing

ε = −i√κAφin.

The extension to a two-sided cavity is straightforward.
If we consider the input ﬁeld φin is sent only through one
side of the cavity, the output mode aout, now related to
the light ﬁeld which leaves the cavity by its left side (L),
obeys the equation (5). Meanwhile, the outgoing ﬁeld
described by the operator bout, related to the photons
which leaves the right side of the cavity (R), is given by
the relation: bout(t) = √2κBa(t), since in our model we
consider that the input pulse impinges on the left side of
the cavity, i.e. bin = 0. The main diﬀerence between the
outgoing ﬁelds of each one of the sides of the cavity is

an interference process occurring between the input ﬁeld
and the one reﬂected by the cavity, which does not occur
for the transmitted ﬁeld on the right side.

Here we have investigated the parameter conﬁguration
of the system in which the quantum memory eﬃciency
and the optical transistor are optimized considering two
diﬀerent setups. In our model each one of these setups are
distinguished by the relations between the decay rates of
the cavity ﬁeld associated to each one of the mirrors. The
two diﬀerent conﬁgurations are: two-sided (asymmetric
or symmetric) cavity when the cavity decay rates κA and
κB are non null and we labelled as conﬁguration I; the
one-sided cavity, when κA is non null and κB = 0, is
labelled as conﬁguration II. It is important to highlight
that the two-sided cavity is the common setup used to
perform cavity EIT experiments [3].

III. OPTIMIZING THE QUANTUM MEMORY

EFFICIENCY AND THE OPTICAL

TRANSISTOR

In order to analyse the feasibility of implementing a
quantum memory and/or an optical transistor in the
atom-cavity system based on the EIT phenomenon, we
investigated in detail which parameter conﬁguration the
memory eﬃciency/optical transistor are optimized con-
sidering the two diﬀerent setups described previously.
Considering our model in which the ﬁelds inside and out-
side the cavity were obtained through of master equation
approach (4) and input-output formalism respectively,
we are able to calculate the memory eﬃciency and trans-
mission in order to identify the parameter conﬁguration
experimentally accessible and investigate how they aﬀect
the maximum eﬃciency value and the performance of the
optical transistor. From ours simulations we determined
to which parameter conﬁguration associated to the probe
pulse ε(t), whose temporal dependency is given by equa-
tion (2), and control ﬁeld ΩC(t), expressed by equation
(3), the value of memory eﬃciency is optimized.

Quantum Memory: As well as in the reference [8],
here the memory eﬃciency is deﬁned as the total mean
number of retrieved photons from the cavity mode (after
turning on the control ﬁeld) in the presence of the atom,
normalized by the input pulse:

(cid:90)

η = (cid:104)nout(cid:105)stored/

dt|φin(t)|2,

(6)

where (cid:104)nout(cid:105)stored is the mean number of photons as-
sociated to the fraction of retrieved photons. For the
one-sided cavity the eﬃciency is provided by calculat-
ing the mean number of photons which leave the cavity

by its left side, i.e., (cid:104)nout(cid:105)stored = (cid:82) dt(cid:104)a†outaout(cid:105)stored.
in this case (cid:104)nout(cid:105)stored = (cid:82) dt(cid:104)a†outaout(cid:105)stored +

On the other hand, for the two-sided cavity setup we
compute the quantum eﬃciency taking into account the
retrieved photons which leave the cavity by both sides,
i.e.,

4

(cid:82) dt(cid:104)b†outbout(cid:105)stored.

Using the simple model described in the previous sec-
tion we were able to reproduce the results obtained in
the experimental work [8] as is shown in Fig. 2. The
setup used to perform the experiment was the conﬁgu-
ration detonated by us as I (two-sided cavity), but, as
κB = 0.1κA this setup can be approximated by an one-
sided cavity. In Fig. 2, we plot the ﬁelds involved in the
quantum memory process. The Gaussian pulse is rep-
resented by the red dashed curve with its maximum at
t0 = 2µs, the black dotted curve is the temporal form
of the control laser turned oﬀ and on at t1 = 2µs and
t2 = 6µs, respectively. The mean number of photons in-
side the cavity is given by the solid blue curve, where
the second peak whose maximum is around 6.5µs cor-
responds to the part of the retrieved photon pulse from
the memory, while the ﬁrst peak is associated to incident
light that is directly transmitted by the left mirror.

Figure 2: Single atom quantum memory scheme
considering the conﬁguration I, asymmetric cavity

(κB = 0.1κA). The black dotted curve represents the

control ﬁeld ΩC, the red dashed curve is the input pulse

ε and the solid blue curve is the mean number of

photons in the cavity. The parameters used here were:

κ/2π = 2.5MHz, Γ31 = Γ32 = 0.6κ, g = 1.0κ,

ΩC = 2g/3, EM = √10−4κ, ζ1 = ζ2 = ζ = 1.75MHz,

and F W HM = 1.0µs. We obtained an eﬃciency of

9.35%

It is relevant to mention that in this result we assumed
an eﬀective atom-ﬁeld coupling g as approximately half
of the maximum ideal coupling, as it was done in [3] in
order to theoretically ﬁt the experimental data for the
cavity EIT with single atoms. This has been done since
the atom is not perfectly cooled and then, due to its mo-
tion, it is not always in the maximum coupling position.
With an eﬀective coupling g (cid:39) gmax/2 we could obtain
a theoretical eﬃciency of 9.35% for restoring the stored
pulse, perfectly close the value 9.3% obtained experimen-
tally [8].

012345678Time(µs)0.00.20.40.60.81.0Signal(arbitraryunits)For not so large atom-ﬁeld coupling g, one important
condition to observe cavity EIT phenomenon is the probe
laser with low intensity. In our simulations we consider
the probe laser amplitude EM small enough such that
the probability of more than one photon in the cavity
is approximately null. From our analysis we obtained,

for the amplitude value EM = √10−4κ, the eﬃciency

assume its greatest value. Another parameter that inﬂu-
ences the maximum eﬃciency is the time the pulse enters
the cavity (t0) relatively to the time we choose to turn the
control ﬁeld oﬀ (t1). The fulﬁlled condition t1 − t0 = 0,
ensures also a best memory eﬃciency [14].
In relation
to the others parameters associated to the control ﬁeld,
the storage process is optimized when the rates that de-
termine how fast the control ﬁeld is turned oﬀ and on
assume an equal value, such that, ζ1 = ζ2 = 1.75MHz. It
is also extremely relevant to investigate the eﬀect of the
control laser amplitude ΩC and the atom-cavity coupling
g on the memory eﬃciency. These parameters have a fun-
damental role in optimizing the eﬃciency, since the EIT
transparency window is proportional to the rate |ΩC|2/g2
[3]. Thus, in order to store a Gaussian pulse with a given
F W HM , it is important to establish a relation between
g and ΩC which ensures that the maximum width win-
dow of the EIT is ﬁxed. From our simulations the best
memory eﬃciency is obtained when ΩC (cid:39) 2g/3, for a
pulse with F W HM = 1.0µs. This is due to the param-
eters that we are using in our simulations, which allows
the pulse being inside the transparency window (in fre-
quency domain). In contrast, if we consider a longer pulse
(in time domain), it will be also inside the transparency
window, however a large fraction of photons will be lost
by transmission.

From now on we will use a set of parameters accord-
ing to that described in the previous paragraph for both
cavity conﬁgurations, since we are interested in the high-
est eﬃciency value. In order to make a direct comparison
between the three diﬀerent setups in relation to the max-
imum eﬃciency value reached at each one, we plotted in
the Fig. 3 the memory eﬃciency as function of the ratio
g/κ, obtained for conﬁguration I, considering the asym-
metric and symmetric cavity (red and blue solid curves,
respectively) and conﬁguration II (black solid curve). In
our results we consider the total decay rate of the ﬁeld
equal for the three cases, κ = 2π × 2.5MHZ.

Firstly we investigated the memory eﬃciency consid-
ering the asymmetric two-sided cavity where the input
pulse impinges on the left cavity mirror, which has a very
high reﬂectivity compared to the right one. This experi-
mental setup is exactly the one employed in [3] to observe
cavity EIT with single atoms. In this setup, most of the
probe laser is directly reﬂected while for the remainder
photon fraction, one part is directly transmitted and an-
other interacts with the atom. So, immediately we see
that this scheme is not convenient for quantum memory
purposes since only a small part of the light can enter
the cavity and interact with the atom. We can note
in Fig.3 (red solid curve) that the eﬃciency saturates

5

at about 8.5%, even for high values of g coupling and,
therefore, only a small fraction of the probe pulse can be
storage in the atomic levels. This feature occurs due to
the inevitable losses of the energy and information of the
probe pulse due reﬂection (mainly) and transmission in
this conﬁguration. In this way, although this setup has
been very suitable for the observation of a narrow trans-
mission window occurring at the two-photon resonance
under cavity EIT conditions [3], it is not convenient to
perform a quantum memory.

Figure 3: Eﬃciency as function of g/κ for three

diﬀerent setups: asymmetric two-sided cavity (red solid
line), symmetric two-sided cavity (blue solid line) and

one-sided cavity (black solid line). We considered

κ = 2.5 × 2πMHZ, being κA = 0.1κB and κA = κB for
respectively. In the case of the one-sided cavity, κ = κA

asymmetric and symmetric two-sided cavities,

and κB = 0. The parameters used here were:
Γ31 = Γ32 = 0.6κ, ΩC = 2g/3, EM = √10−4κ,

ζ1 = ζ2 = ζ = 1.75MHz, and F W HM = 1.0µs. The dot
marked on the black curve corresponds to the eﬃciency
found in the single atom quantum memory experiment

[8].

Now we consider the conﬁguration I but for cavity mir-
rors with equal transmission and reﬂection coeﬃcients,
i.e., considering a symmetric cavity (blue solid curve).
Here, this experimental setup can be modelled assuming
κA = κB, which means that light can leave the cavity
from both sides. Before analysing the memory eﬃciency
for this setup, we ﬁrstly present an analytical result to
understand what could be expected here. To this end
we analyse the steady state solution for the expressions
of the external (aout(t), bout(t)) and internal (a(t)) cav-
ity modes described in the section II obtained via input-
output formalism for a continuous driving regime, where
φin is constant. The motion equation for the internal
ﬁeld operator a(t) in our model is given by the Langevin
equation [17]:

˙a(t) = −κT a(t) + √2κAφin(t),

(7)

05101520g/κ0.00.20.40.60.81.0EfﬁciencyRef.[8]experimentbeing κT = κA + κB + γ the total damping rate of in-
ternal cavity ﬁeld, where γ represents the others ﬁeld
losses, such as the absorbed or scattered light by the
atom. Thus, the equation (7) has the following station-
ary solution for the internal cavity mode:

as(t) =

√2κA
κT

φin.

(8)

Using the expression (8) and the input-output formalism
that connects the external and internal cavity modes, the
output cavity ﬁeld in the stationary regime is given by:

as
out =

bs
out = 2

2κA − κT
√κAκB

κT

κT

φin,

φin.

(9a)

(9b)

out = 0 and bs

It is important to note that, for an empty symmetric
cavity and a resonant probe ﬁeld, corresponding to the
case that γ = 0 and κA = κB = κ/2, we obtain using
the stationary solutions (9a): as
out = φin.
It means that there is no reﬂected light and the probe
light is completely transmitted. So, one could expect a
memory eﬃciency close to 100% for this conﬁguration as
all the probe ﬁeld cross the atom-cavity system, however
this does not occur. Still in the stationary regime and
when the input ﬁeld can be absorbed by the atom, i.e.,
γ (cid:54)= 0, we can deﬁne a operator that describes the rate
loss γ as:

(cid:112)

σs =

2γas =

√2η
1 + η

φin,

(10)

being η = γ/2κA. This expression allows us to calcu-
late the amount of the scattered or absorbed light by the
atom, given by |(cid:104)σs(cid:105)|2, whose function is maximum at
η = 1. This implies that the maximum light absorption
by the atom is 1
2|φin|2, which results in a maximum ex-
pected eﬃciency for symmetric two-sided cavity of 50%.
This analyses helps us to understand what can happen
with our system, however it is valid for continuous driv-
ing. For coherent pulses interference processes could help
to improve the eﬃciency but, as we show and explain
below, this does not occur for this two-sided symmetric
cavity and the eﬃciency is still limited to 50%.

Similarly to the asymmetric conﬁguration, for the sym-
metric cavity there are losses due the transmission and
reﬂection of the probe pulse. In this speciﬁc conﬁgura-
tion, in which the rates κA and κB are equal, the trans-
mission and reﬂection coeﬃcients from the cavity have
the same value, limiting the maximum eﬃciency value
in 50% as we see in Fig. 3 (blue solid curve). We can
explain this maximum eﬃciency in the following way: in
the regime ΩC (cid:28) g, the transparency window of the EIT
is narrower than the frequency width associated to the
probe laser pulse, implying a high reﬂection of the pulse.
In the opposite regime, ΩC (cid:38) g, the transmission of the
system is very high and we are not able to turn the con-

6

trol ﬁeld oﬀ fast enough to avoid the transmission of an
expressive part of the input pulse, which is then imme-
diately transmitted to the right side of the cavity before
being able to be absorbed by the atom. We also tried to
optimize the memory eﬃciency for this symmetric cavity
using diﬀerent shapes for the control ﬁeld, even using the
protocol by J. Dilley et al [13] for single photon pulses,
but the we found that the maximum eﬃciency was always
limited to 50%.

Ultimately remain in our analysis the maximum eﬃ-
ciency value for one-sided cavity case (black solid curve).
This setup in our theoretical model implies in the con-
dition κB = 0. In this conﬁguration we assume that the
right mirror reﬂects 100% of the light and then, the pho-
tons fraction retrieved leaves the cavity from the same
side which the input pulse is sent. From the steady state
analyses performed above for the continuous driving, but
now considering κB = 0, we see from the stationary solu-
tions (9a) and (10): as
out (cid:39) −φin and σs (cid:39) 0 in the limit
of γ (cid:29) κA. This means that this simple analyses is not
enough to explain how the memory eﬃciency can reach
values close to 100% in the one-sided cavity setup, thus
requiring interference process to understand it.

We observe in Fig.3 that for the same set of param-
eters that optimizes the eﬃciency for the others conﬁg-
urations, considering the one-sided cavity, the eﬃciency
has its maximum value increased considerably compared
to them. For this speciﬁc setup the maximum eﬃciency
value is close to 100%, for suﬃciently high values of the
coupling constant g. The white dot evidences the eﬃ-
ciency value experimentally measured in [8] (9.3 ± 1)%
when the g ≈ 1.09κ. The high eﬃciency value reached
in the strong coupling regime for the one-sided cavity
occurs due to the interference process between the ﬁeld
immediately reﬂected when the input pulse impinges on
the cavity mirror, and the ﬁeld that enters the cavity and
then is transmitted to the outside, by the same side, af-
ter one round trip. In this way, from the experimental
point of view both ﬁelds, reﬂected and transmitted, go
through the same path becoming indistinguishable to a
detector leading to an interference process, signiﬁcantly
increasing the memory eﬃciency.

In relation to the one-sided cavity conﬁguration, is im-
portant to mention that in the past years one has theoret-
ically demonstrated that for this speciﬁc setup and single
photon pulses the value of quantum memory eﬃciency
can reach near 100%, if the impedance matching condi-
tion is fulﬁlled [13, 14]. This condition requires an spe-
ciﬁc time dependency for the control ﬁeld ΩC(t), derived
from input-output theory, such that the reﬂected and
transmitted ﬁelds from the cavity interfere destructively,
completely annihilating each other. Using this approach,
J. Dilley et al.
[13], showed that for a suﬃciently high
cooperativity C = g2/κΓ, being Γ the total spontaneous-
emission rate of the excited state of the atom, a memory
eﬃciency arbitrarily close to 100% is obtained. It is rele-
vant to mention that in our simulation we were not able
to apply phase-matching conditions proposed by J. Dilley

et al. [13] since we are using weak coherent pulses. How-
ever, even using a simple form of the control ﬁeld (3), we
were able to achieve an eﬃciency close to 100% for the
quantum memory, simply by choosing the best parame-
ters for the system and adiabatically turning oﬀ and on
the control ﬁeld. For smooth pulses and symmetric in
time (such as in our case that we consider a Gaussian
pulse) some parameters such as the relation between the
time that the input pulse arrives and time that the con-
trol ﬁeld is adiabatically turned oﬀ, are more relevant
in order to obtain high eﬃciency values than the actual
shape of the control ﬁeld derived from the impedance
matching condition [14]. In fact, the maximum value of
the eﬃciency calculated using this speciﬁc form for ΩC
is extremely sensitive to any minimal change in the ﬁeld
shape, thus making an experimental challenge the inci-
dence of a pulse with a shape very speciﬁc and precise.
Optical Transistor: We are also interested in inves-
tigating the performance of an optical transistor based
on EIT phenomenon. So, here we analyse and compare
the transmission spectrum of the system for both ex-
perimental setups under EIT conditions. As mentioned
previously the asymmetric two-sided cavity is exactly
the experimental setup employed in [3] to observe cav-
ity EIT with single atoms. In that experiment a single
atom was able to control the passage of light through
the atom-cavity system, allowing this setup being named
as ”single-atom transistor for light” [2]. In this scheme,
most of the probe laser is directly reﬂected implying that
it can not work out perfectly as an optical transistor since
even in the absence of the atom most of light is reﬂected.
To have an ideal optical transitor, which can control
the passage of light through the application of a sec-
ond light ﬁeld, we must look for a setup which allows
us to have a perfect contrast between the transmission
when the control ﬁeld is on and oﬀ. This contrast can be
achieved using the conﬁguration I with symmetric cav-
ity, since it allows for a 100% transmission of light in
the absence of atom or when there is an atom inside it
in the EIT regime, i.e., for ΩC non null. Such feature
can be derived from the stationary solutions (9a). On
the other hand, when we have an atom inside the cavity
in the strong atom-ﬁeld coupling regime and the con-
trol ﬁeld is oﬀ, the transmission of a probe ﬁeld goes
to zero due to the normal mode splitting of the atom-
cavity system. Thus, placing a three-level atom inside
a symmetric cavity the transmission can be either max-
imum (100%) for ΩC (cid:54)= 0 or null, i.e., the probe ﬁeld is
completely reﬂected, for ΩC = 0. Thus, here we have
a perfect (single-atom) optical transistor. The transmis-
sion measurements considering the control ﬁeld on or oﬀ,
evidences the feasibility of the implementation of an opti-
cal transistor using two-side symmetric cavity setup. On
the other hand, the one-sided cavity is not suitable to
observe cavity EIT in the transmission spectrum, as we
explain below.

In Fig. 4(a)-(d) the theoretical curves of the transmis-
sion spectrum normalized by the input ﬁeld at resonance

7

Figure 4: Normalized cavity transmission for cavity EIT
as function of ∆/κ, considering (a) and (b) g = 5κ and
(c) and (d) g = 15κ. In the red solid curve ΩC = 0, and

in the black dashed curve ΩC = 3κ. (e) and (f) show
the contrast given by the diﬀerence between these two
curves at resonance, ∆ = 0. The inset shows the mean
number of photons from cavity (black solid curve) and
the scattered light by the atom (dashed red curve) as
function of the ratio g/κ, considering the conﬁguration
II. The left panels are associated to an one-sided cavity
system, while the right panels correspond to two-sided

cavity system.

are plotted for diﬀerent atom-cavity coupling regimes as
function of the normalized detuning ∆/κ, considering
ΩC = 0 (red solid line) and ΩC = 3κ (black dashed line).
For a continuous driving and ΩC = 0 the atomic popula-
tion goes asymptotically to state |2(cid:105) and then we would
end up with an empty cavity situation. To avoid this
and to simulate a two-level atomic system, for ΩC = 0
we must also artiﬁcially adjust Γ32 = 0.
In the pan-
els (a) and (b), g = 5κ and, in the panels (c) and (d),
g = 15κ. In Figs. 4(e) and (f) is plotted the contrast
of the normalized mean number of photons outside the
cavity as a function of the constant coupling g at reso-
nance, ∆ = 0. This amount is given by the diﬀerence
between the mean number of photons outside the cavity
when the control ﬁeld is turned on (ΩC = 3κ) and when
it is absent (ΩC = 3κ). In Fig. 4 the left panels (a, c and
e) correspond to one-sided cavity system (ﬁeld operator
aout) and, the right panels (b, d and f) are associated
to the system constituted by two-side symmetric cavity
(ﬁeld operator bout). The important feature that we can
observe in these results is that the transmission peak at
resonance, which in turn is a signature of transparency
window, does not appear in the transmission spectrum
of the conﬁguration II. Therefore, the EIT phenomenon
can not be properly observed in experiments based on

−20−15−10−5051015200.00.20.40.60.81.0ha†outaoutiN(a)−20−15−10−505101520∆/κ0.00.20.40.60.81.0ha†outaoutiN(c)05101520g/κ0.00.20.40.60.81.0Contrast(e)051015200.00.20.40.60.81.0ha†outaoutiΓ3hσ33i−20−15−10−5051015200.00.20.40.60.81.0hb†outboutiN(b)g=5κΩc=0Ωc=3κ−20−15−10−505101520∆/κ0.00.20.40.60.81.0hb†outboutiN(d)g=15κ05101520g/κ0.00.20.40.60.81.0Contrast(f)transmission measurements in the adequate experimen-
tal setup for optical quantum memory (setup II). The
big diﬀerence between the behaviour of these two con-
ﬁgurations, in the EIT regime, is entirely clear in the
contrast measure. In Fig. 4(f) the contrast goes to unity
as the coupling g increases, evidencing that the system
is completely transparent to the probe laser when ΩC is
turned on. Otherwise, for one-sided cavity the contrast
exhibits a peak at g/κ ≈ 0.8κ, whose maximum is 1.0
and for high values of g it tends to zero. This occurs
since in the strong coupling regime the light is reﬂected
if ΩC = 0 or transmitted if ΩC (cid:54)= 0. In this way, for cav-
ity EIT experiments performed in one-sided cavity it is
not possible to distinguish the reﬂected and transmitted
ﬁelds using intensity measurements and thus, as it can
be seen in the Fig. 4(c), both curves overlap completely,
resulting in null contrast. Then, it becomes more com-
plicated to this setup be used to implement an optical
transistor.

One way to distinguish the reﬂect and transmitted
ﬁelds from the one-sided cavity system is through the
phase diﬀerence between them, which is induced by the
control laser. If the control laser is turned oﬀ, only the
atomic levels |1(cid:105) and |3(cid:105) participate of the dynamics and,
according to the Jaynes-Cummings model, the photons
that impinge onto the system at resonance ∆ = 0, do
not enter the cavity. This happens because, due to the
mode splitting caused by the atom-cavity coupling, the
probe laser that was resonant with the transition |1(cid:105)−|3(cid:105)
for the empty cavity is now directly reﬂected by the left
mirror and its phase φr is shifted of π. Conversely if the
control laser couples resonantly the |2(cid:105) − |3(cid:105) transition,
the probe laser can enters the cavity interacting with the
atom and then being transmitted with φt phase, without
experiencing any change in its phase. Therefore, in this
experimental setup the control laser has an important
role to induce a phase diﬀerence between the reﬂected
and transmitted ﬁelds, such that |φt − φr| = π, when the
probe laser is resonant with the cavity mode. In fact, this
system can be used to produce a phase gate with a clas-
sical ﬁeld (control ﬁeld) inducing a π phase in a quantum
ﬁeld, for example a superposition of zero and one pho-
ton, or superposition of diﬀerent polarization states of
the ﬁeld: when the control ﬁeld is oﬀ the quantum ﬁeld
acquires a π phase shift. On the other hand the quantum
ﬁeld does not acquire any phase shift when the control
ﬁeld is on [20].

For g = 0.8κ, all the light from the probe ﬁeld goes
into the cavity and it is completely absorbed by the atom,
which scatters the light. In this situation there is no re-
ﬂected light and then we have an interesting eﬀect where
the atom is able to scatter 100% of the light incident on
the atom-cavity system. According to our simulations,
this eﬀect depends not only on the atom-ﬁeld coupling g
but also on the probe ﬁeld intensity: for stronger probe
ﬁeld the complete scattering happens for stronger g. This
speciﬁc value of the atom-ﬁeld coupling g where all the
light is completely scattered can also be obtained us-

8

ing the stationary solutions given by equations (9a) and
(10), if we consider γ = κA. Considering this speciﬁc
condition for one-sided cavity where κA = κ, we found
aout = 0, i.e., the outside ﬁeld is zero and σs = φin. Due
to the presence of the atom inside the cavity we can de-
rive an eﬀective ﬁeld decay which is given by γ = g2/Γ31
[18, 19]. Thus, as the light is completely scattered by
the atom when the condition γ = κ is fulﬁlled, we ob-
tained g = √Γ31κ.
In our numeric simulations we as-
sume Γ31 = 0.6κ, which implies g ∼ 0.8κ. Therefore,
this result obtained from the stationary expressions is in
complete agreement with the numerical results showed in
the inset of the Fig.4(e).

IV. CONCLUSIONS

Here we have presented theoretical results concern-
ing the implementation of quantum memory and opti-
cal transistor in cavity QED with a single trapped atom
based on electromagnetically induced transparency. This
atom-cavity system was already used for the generation
of single photons, to implement some quantum logic
gates, quantum memory and others applications [21],
which turns this system very attractive for quantum in-
formation processing. Depending on the mirrors conﬁg-
uration we can deﬁne two diﬀerent experimental setups:
conﬁgurations I two-sided (asymmetric or symmetric) or
II one-sided cavity. We have shown that the asymmet-
ric cavity employed in [3] to observe single atom cavity
EIT is neither convenient to perform quantum memory
or optical transistor. Still in the two-sided cavity setup,
the symmetrical one allows for a perfect contrast of the
transmitted ﬁeld between the situation when the control
ﬁeld is on and oﬀ, for strong atom-ﬁeld coupling g, thus
being suitable for the implementation of an ideal optical
transistor. However, this setup does not allow for high
quantum memory eﬃciencies, being limited to 50% for
strong g. On the other hand, the conﬁguration II is very
suitable for quantum memory applications, allowing eﬃ-
ciencies close to 100%, but it can not be used as an op-
tical transistor since both ﬁelds, reﬂected (control ﬁeld
oﬀ) and transmitted (control ﬁeld on) leave the cavity
by the same side, being indistinguishable in transmission
measurements. In order to observe the EIT phenomenon
in one-sided cavity system with coherent probe ﬁelds it is
necessary another kind of experiment, for example carry-
ing out phase measurements which would need additional
optical linear devices and local oscillators, for instance,
which would introduce other error sources.

V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

R.R.O., C. J. V.-B. and H. S. Borges acknowledges
support from CNPq and FAPESP (Proc. 2012/00176-9,
2013/04162-5 and 2014/12740-1), and the Brazilian Na-
tional Institute for Science and Technology of Quantum

Information (INCT-IQ). We also thank the fruitful dis-

cussions with Stephan Ritter.

9

[1] W. Chen et al., Science 341, 768 (2009).
[2] S. Parkins, Nature 465, 699 (2010).
[3] M. Mucke et al., Nature 465, 755 (2010).
[4] A. I. Lvovsky, B. C. Sanders and W. Tittel, Nature Pho-

[13] J. Dilley et al., Physical Review A 85, 023834 (2012).
[14] M. Fleischhauer, S.F. Yelin, and M.D. Lukin, Optics

Communication 179, 395 (2000).

[15] M. J. Collett and C. W. Gardiner, Physical Review A

tonics 3, 706 (2009).

31, 3761 (1985).

[5] C. Simon et al., European Physics Journal D 58, 1

[16] M. J. Collett and C. W. Gardiner, Physical Review A

(2010).

30, 1386 (1984).

[6] F. Bussi`eres et al., Journal of Modern Optics, 60, 1519

[17] Y. Yamamoto and N. Imoto, IEEE Journal of Quantum

(2013).

Electronics 22, 2032 (1986).

[7] M. T. Rakher, R. J. Warburton, and P. Treutlein, Phys-

[18] T. Werlang, R. Guzman, F. O. Prado, and C. J. Villas-

ical Review A 88, 053834 (2013).

[8] H. P. Specht et al., Nature 473, 190 (2011).
[9] S. Riedl et al., Physical Review A 85, 1 (2012).

[10] R. J. Young et al., New Journal of Physics 9, 365 (2007).
[11] Z. Kurucz et al., Physical Review Letters 103, 010502

(2009).

Boas, Physical Review A 78, 033820 (2008).

[19] F. O. Prado, N. G. de Almeida, E. I. Duzzioni, M. H. Y.
Moussa, and C. J. Villas-Boas, Physical Review A 84,
012112 (2011).

[20] H. S. Borges and C. J. Villas-Boas, (unpublished).
[21] A. Reiserer and G. Rempe, Rev. Mod. Phys. 87, 1379

[12] A. Kuhn et al., Applied Physics B 69, 373 (1999).

(2015).

