Decoherence of Topological Qubit in Linear and Circular Motions:

Decoherence Impedance, Anti-Unruh and Information Backﬂow

Pei-Hua Liu∗ and Feng-Li Lin†

Department of Physics, National Taiwan Normal University, Taipei, 11677, Taiwan

(Dated: March 28, 2016)

Abstract

In this paper, we consider the decoherence patterns of a topological qubit made of two Majorana

zero modes in the generic linear and circular motions in the Minkowski spacetime. We show

that the reduced dynamics is exact without Markov approximation. Our results imply that the

acceleration will cause thermalization as expected by Unruh eﬀect. However, for the short-time

scale, we ﬁnd the rate of decoherence is anti-correlated with the acceleration, as kind of decoherence

impedance. This is in fact related to the “anti-Unruh” phenomenon previously found by studying

the transition probability of Unruh-DeWitt detector. We also obtain the information backﬂow

by some time modulations of coupling constant or acceleration, which is a characteristic of the

underlying non-Markovian reduced dynamics. Moreover, by exploiting the nonlocal nature of the

topological qubit, we ﬁnd that some incoherent accelerations of the constituent Majorana zero

modes can preserve the coherence instead of thermalizing it.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
5
2

 
 
]
h
p
-
t
n
a
u
q
[
 
 

2
v
6
3
1
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗ lphhpl@gmail.com
† linfengli@phy.ntnu.edu.tw

1

CONTENTS

I. Introduction

II. Topological Qubits and their reduced dynamics

III. Formalism for the reduced dynamics of a moving topological qubit

A. Formalism

B. Environmental spectral densities and “inﬂuence functional”

C. Transition probability from reduced dynamics

IV. Reduced dynamics of topological qubit in linear motions

A. “Overtaking” phenomenon: Constant acceleration

B. “Overtaking” phenomenon: Constant velocity

C. Decoherence Impedance and “Anti-Unruh”

D. Information backﬂow and time modulation

1. Parameter space for information backﬂow

2. Modulation of switching function

3. Modulation of acceleration

E. Frame dependence for incoherent motions due to nonlocality

1. Separation by a distance initially

2. Majorana modes moving with diﬀerent accelerations

V. Reduced dynamics of topological qubit in circular motion

A. “Overtaking” phenomenon without frame issue: Constant angular velocity

B. Decoherence Impedance and “Anti-Unruh”

C. Modulation of switching function

D. Modulation of angular velocity

VI. Conclusion

Acknowledgments

A. Evaluation of inﬂuence functional by the merging formula of OPE

B. Spectral density and real-time correlators

2

3

7

9

9

12

14

16

17

20

21

24

25

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

35

35

36

C. Transition probability

D. Causal condition in the comoving coordinates

1. Linear acceleration: position diﬀerence

2. Linear acceleration: acceleration diﬀerence

3. Circular motion of constant angular velocity

References

I.

INTRODUCTION

38

38

38

38

39

39

The Unruh-DeWitt (UDW) model [1, 2] and many of its variations, see for example [3]

and reference therein, have been used to explore the novel thermal eﬀect, i.e., Unruh eﬀect

[1] felt by a constantly accelerating qubit/particle coupled to the environmental ﬁeld. This

phenomenon shed light on our understanding about Hawking radiation [4] and lately inspired

the related study on relativistic quantum information [5], for examples see [6–12].

However, most of studies on the UDW model are based on the time-dependent pertur-

bation theory in order to calculate the transition rate of the UDW detector, which shows

a thermal pattern as expected by the Unruh eﬀect. In fact, the transition rate can also be

obtained beyond the scheme of perturbation theory by calculating the reduced dynamics of

the UDW detector, moreover from which the decoherence pattern of the UDW detector can

be obtained. The full reduced dynamics if obtained can reveal the non-Markovian behavior

which is ignored in the perturbation scheme [13]. The diﬃculty for such consideration lies

on solving the exact master equation for the reduced dynamics of the UDW detector. If a

general scheme of exact dynamics exists, one can even consider the decoherence patterns

of the UDW detector under the arbitrary motion. Note that in the perturbation scheme

the Unruh-like eﬀect for the circular motion has been considered in [14–16], for the oscil-

latory motion in [17] (from exact reduced dynamics), non-uniform acceleration in [18–20],

and for ﬁnite duration acceleration in [21, 22]. Especially, in [22] a generic “anti-Unruh”

phenomenon is observed, i.e., for a UDW detector coupled to the environment ﬁeld only

in a ﬁnite duration (but long enough to satisfy the KMS condition), its KMS temperature

decreases with acceleration in certain regimes.

To bypass the diﬃculty of solving the exact master equation and obtain the exact reduced

3

FIG. 1. Left: A pair of topological qubits with their constituent Majorana zero modes in incoherent

linear boost or acceleration. Right: A topological qubit with its constituent Majorana zero modes

in a coherent circular motions. In both cases, the Majorana zero modes γ1,2 form a topological

qubit of which we study the eﬀect of the motions to the decoherence pattern.

dynamics of a qubit in arbitrary motion, in this paper we consider the topological qubit made

of pairs of moving constituent Majorana zero modes. These Majorana zero modes can be

realized as the edge modes of the 1D topological superconductor such as the Kitaev’s fermion

chain [24–26]. These edge modes are robust against fermion-parity-preserving perturbations,

in a similar way as for the most topological insulators/superconductors [27–29]. However, the

robustness will not be preserved if the Majorana zero modes couple to the environment via

interactions violating the fermion-parity symmetry. In such a case, the quantum information

of these zero modes will escape into the environment. This then causes quantum decoherence

of a topological qubit made of two spatially-separated Majorana zero modes.

The exact reduced dynamics for such (static) topological qubits has been obtained with-

out solving the master equation in [30, 31]. The solvability of the reduced dynamics for the

topological qubit is due to the spatial separation of the constituent Majorana zero modes

so that the inﬂuence functional is further restricted by the additional locality constraint

which is absent for the usual qubit. Based on this solvability, in this paper we will develop a

formalism by generalizing the one in [23] for the usual UDW detector to obtain the reduced

dynamics for the topological qubit, the constituent Majorana zero modes of which are in

arbitrary motions. Especially, we will study the decoherence pattern of the topological qubit

with its constituent Majorana zero modes moving as shown in Fig. 1.

In the left panel of Fig. 1, two wires hosting the edge Majorana zero modes are either

in boost or in acceleration. The pair of the speciﬁed Majorana zero modes γ1 and γ2 move

4

incoherently (i.e., with diﬀerent accelerations) but form a topological qubit. On the other

hand, in the right panel, two Majorana zero modes on the edge of a wire move coherently

(i.e., with the same acceleration) in a circular motion and again form a topological qubit.

We will then study the eﬀect of these motions to the decoherence patterns of the topological

qubit.

Despite that the topological qubit is novel and non-local, the eﬀect of the (acceleration)

motions to its decoherence patterns may bear some generic features shared by the usual

qubit in the similar motions. In some sense, it can be thought as the manifestation of the

Unruh eﬀect in the decoherence. Here we list what we found in this work, which we think

should be generic:

• Thermalization: We ﬁnd that the acceleration does cause thermalization as expected
by the Unruh eﬀect. This can be seen by the complete decoherence of the accelerating

topological qubit in the super-Ohmic environment as this kind of qubits without accel-

eration are robust against decoherence. However, the inﬂuence functional is diﬀerent

from the thermal one. It is worthy of further study to see if the inﬂuence functional

of the usual qubit in the constant acceleration is the same as the thermal one or not.

• Anti-Unruh: In our formalism we can obtain the full transition probability of the topo-
logical qubit as the UDW detector, which can be used to characterize Unruh eﬀect.

Follow the scheme in [22] by decoupling the UDW detector from the environmental

ﬁeld after ﬁnite time duration, we can ﬁnd from the transition probability the afore-

mentioned “anti-Unruh” phenomenon for the accelerating topological qubit in both

linear and circular motions. Our result is exact without Markov approximation as

done in [22] and thus justiﬁes the “anti-Unruh” phenomenon is generic.

• Decoherence impedance: By studying the decoherence patterns we ﬁnd some novel
feature. it seems that the topological qubit is resisting the enforced decoherence due

to the sudden change of the motion status such as acceleration or boost. We called

this tendency the decoherence impedance, namely, the initial rate of decoherence is

anti-correlated with the size of change, such as acceleration.

In the late time, this

impedance eﬀect will be taken over by thermalization so that in the mean time the

overtaking of the decoherence rates happens.

5

In fact, both the decoherence patterns and the transition probability are all dictated

by the inﬂuence functional. We would expect the decoherence impedance and “anti-

Unruh” phenomenon imply each other as both are the short-time non-equilibrium

eﬀects. This is indeed what we observe in this work.

• Information backﬂow and time modulation: As our reduced dynamics is exact without
Markov approximation, we shall expect some non-Markovian behaviors characterized

by the information ﬂow. We thus apply the time modulations to the coupling constant

(called “switching function” in this paper) and the acceleration to see if some modu-

lations can invoke information backﬂow. We ﬁnd that not all modulations will bring

out information backﬂow but some does and sometimes even ensures the robustness

against decoherence.

Moreover, by really exploiting the non-local feature of the topological qubit, in this

paper we will consider the frame dependence issues when both Majorana zero modes move

incoherently. We indeed ﬁnd some novel feature: some incoherent accelerations will instead

preserve the coherence of the topological qubit so that it will not be thermalized by the

accelerations. This is a phenomenon peculiar for the topological qubit as its constituents

can move diﬀerently.

The exact solvability of the reduced dynamics even with the nontrivial motions of the

topological qubit and the results presented in this paper demonstrate the power of marrying

topological order with relativistic quantum information. It is interesting to see if some of

the “generic” features aforementioned will also occur for the usual qubit. The answer to

this question will deﬁnitely shed new light on our understanding of relativistic quantum

information.

This paper is organized as follows:

in the next section we will brieﬂy review the for-

mulation of the topological qubit and its the reduced dynamics developed in [31]. In the

section III we develop the formalism to study the reduced dynamics for a moving topological

qubit by generalizing the one given in [23] for the usual UDW detector. Especially, in III C

we obtain the exact transition probability of the topological qubit beyond the Markovian

approximation. Based on our developed formalism, we will present the decoherence pat-

terns for various linear motions in section IV, and for various circular motions in section

V. We then conclude our paper in section VI. Besides, four technical appendices are given:

6

Appendix A is for the evaluation of the “inﬂuence functional” for the reduced dynamics of

the topological qubit, and Appendix B is about deﬁning Schwinger-Keldysh Green functions

and the related spectral density used in this paper. In Appendix C the transition probability

in the Markov approximation is derived. In Appendix D we consider the causal condition in

the comoving coordinates so that the time directions of the two incoherent Majorana zero

modes are ensured to be the same.

II. TOPOLOGICAL QUBITS AND THEIR REDUCED DYNAMICS

In [31] the topological qubits made of pairs of Majorana modes have been introduced

and their decoherence dynamics were then studied. A novel feature for these peculiar qubits

is their robustness against quantum decoherence in the super-Ohmic environments. In this

section we will brieﬂy review the setup and the resultant reduced dynamics, whose formal

form applies also to the cases of moving Majorana modes as will be shown in the next

section.

A topological qubit is made of a pair of Majorana modes which can be spatially sepa-

rated so that each Majorana mode interact independently with local environment, i.e., the

interaction Hamiltonian

V := γ1O1 + γ2O2

(1)

where γ1,2 are the Majorana operators, i.e., they satisfy the Cliﬀord algebra: γ2

2 = 1
and γ1γ2 + γ2γ1 = 0. These Majorana modes can be realized as the gapless edge modes

1 = γ2

of topological superconductors such as the Kitaev’s chain [24–26]. Thus, these Majorana
i = −Oi so that
†

modes are degenerate with zero kinetic energy, i.e., zero modes. Note O
V † = V .

Furthermore, in the interaction picture we further assume that the evolving operators
Oi(t) := eiHE tOie−iHE t with HE the environmental Hamiltonian obey the locality constraint

(cid:104)O1(t)O2(t(cid:48))(cid:105) = 0

(2)

where the vev is taken with respect to the environmental ground state denoted by ρE,0,
i.e., (cid:104)Oi(t)Oj(t(cid:48))(cid:105) := TrEρE,0Oi(t)Oj(t(cid:48)). This condition reﬂects the fact that the pair of
Majorana zero modes are spatially separated.

7

We can pack together a pair of Majorana zero modes to form a fermionic qubit though

they are physically separated, i.e.,

γ1 := a† + a ,

γ2 := i (a† − a)

(3)

so that a† and a are respectively the creation and annihilation operators of a fermionic 2-level
state, and satisfy a†a + aa† = 1.

Due to the relation (2), the reduced dynamics of the topological qubit is far easier to be

solved than the usual fermionic qubit. The latter has been solved in [32] via the coherent

state representation of path integral but the results cannot be put into a closed form. On

the other hand, given the initial state of the topological qubit

 ρ00

ρ01
01 1 − ρ00
ρ∗

 ,

ρM (t = 0) =

its reduced dynamics has been solved in [31] with the simple closed form

 1

ρM (t) =

eI2(t)Re ρ01 + ieI1(t)Im ρ01
2 − (ρ00 − 1
2)eI1(t)+I2(t)

1

2 + (ρ00 − 1
2)eI1(t)+I2(t)
eI2(t)Re ρ01 − ieI1(t)Im ρ01
(cid:90) t
(cid:90) t
(cid:0)(cid:104)Oi(t)Oi(t(cid:48))(cid:105) + (cid:104)Oi(t(cid:48))Oi(t)(cid:105)(cid:1) .

dτ(cid:48) Gi,sym(τ − τ(cid:48))

Ii(t) := 2

dτ

Gi,sym(t − t(cid:48)) =

1
2



(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

where the “inﬂuence functional” associated with the i-th Majorana zero mode is

with

Here, Gi,sym is the so-called Majorana-dressed symmetric Green function, which is diﬀerent
from the usual fermionic one, i.e., Gi,sym(t − t(cid:48)) = 1
2 ((cid:104)Oi(t)Oi(t(cid:48))(cid:105) − (cid:104)Oi(t(cid:48))Oi(t)(cid:105)). The
sign change is due to the Majorana dressing so that time-ordering for Oi changes from the
fermionic one to the bosonic one.

The derivation of (5) and (6) has been sketched in [31], which involves the evaluation of
the cosh/sinh correlators (cid:104)coshOi(t) coshOi(t)(cid:105) and (cid:104)sinhOi(t) sinhOi(t)(cid:105). However, a not
so rigorous procedure of re-exponentiation of (cid:104)Oi(t)Oi(t)(cid:105) is invoked to obtain the cosh/sinh
In appendix A, we re-derive the result by invoking the merging formula of
correlators.

operator product expansion given in [37].

Based on (5) and (6), in [31] we showed that reduced density matrix (5) relaxed to Gibbs
state, i.e., eIi(t→∞) −→ 0 if the spectral density for the excitations created by operator

8

Oi is sub-Ohmic and Ohmic, i.e., the Fourier transform of the symmetric Green function,
Ai(ω) ∼ ωQ for Q ≤ 1. However, for the super-Ohmic spectral density, i.e., Q > 1 the
topological qubit is robust against decoherence, i.e., eIi(t→∞) (cid:54)= 0.

III. FORMALISM FOR THE REDUCED DYNAMICS OF A MOVING TOPO-

LOGICAL QUBIT

As mentioned in the Introduction, most of the studies for the Unruh eﬀect in the context of

relativistic quantum information are about the entanglement degradation due to the constant

acceleration of a pair of qubits of particles. In such cases, the reduced dynamics and the

entanglement entropy are obtained by performing Bogoliubov transformation to relate the

Minkowski vacuum and the Rindler one. This method, however, cannot be generalized to

arbitrary motions. On the other hand, for most of the studies on UDW detector perturbation

scheme is usually adopted, which is the Markovian approximation. Therefore, the interesting

non-Markovian behaviors of the reduced dynamics such as information backﬂow will be

missed. To retain the non-Markovinity one needs the non-perturbative treatments as the

one developed in [31–34].

In this section we develop a formalism to deal with the reduced dynamics of a moving

topological qubit. Basically, we are applying the formalism for UDW detector given in [23]

to the topological qubit and its reduced dynamics developed in [31]. The key idea for the

formalism of [23] is to take care of the motion eﬀect by performing proper coordinate trans-

formations on the evolving Hamiltonians for either the UDW detector or the environmental

ﬁelds. Therefore, it can be applied to the UDW detector in arbitrary motion. Of course, the

exact solvability of the reduced dynamics will depend on the form of total Hamiltonian and

the related dynamical constraints. For the topological qubit, as seen below the additional lo-

cality constraint (2) on the environmental correlator will make the reduced dynamics exactly

solvable even when the constituent Majorana zero modes are in motion.

A. Formalism

Let us denote the environmental Hamiltonian by HE, which we assume to be constant

in time and space. On the other hand, the environmental operators to which the Majorana

9

modes couple are local operators so that they are functions of space coordinate only, i.e.,

O[(cid:126)x]. For simplicity, we will only consider the Majorana zero modes so that they have

zero kinetic Hamiltonian for them, i.e., HM = 0. Therefore, the total Hamiltonian in the

Schrodinger picture is

where V is given by (1).

H S

T = HE + V

(8)

Consider that the Majorana zero modes are in motion, and assume their trajectories are

parameterized by their own proper time τi, i = 1, 2, i.e.,

t = t(τi) ,

(cid:126)x = (cid:126)x(τi) .

(9)

To further evolve the whole system, we should choose a local observer and rewrite the

Hamiltonian according to the observer’s proper time by using the relations (9).

If we choose the local observer which is static with respect to the environment, i.e., t is

the proper time, then in this frame the total Hamiltonian in the interaction picture is

with

(cid:88)

i=1,2

dτi(t)

dt

V t :=

H D,t

T = HE + V t

λi[τi(t)] γi Oi[t, (cid:126)x(τi(t))] :=

(cid:88)

i

γi Ot

i(t)

(10)

(11)

where we also introduce the switching functions λ1,2 depending on the local proper times

τ1,2, repsectively. Moreover, in the above we have introduced the operators in the interaction

picture, i.e.,

Oi[t, (cid:126)x] := eiHE t Oi[(cid:126)x] e−iHE t .

(12)

On the other hand, if we choose the local observer comoving with the k-th Majorana zero

mode, then the total Hamiltonian in the interaction picture is

(13)

(14)

with

and

H D,τk

T = H τk

E + V τk

H τk :=

dt(τk)

dτk

HE

(cid:88)

dτi(t(τk))

V τk := λk[τk] γk Ok[t(τk), (cid:126)x(τk)] +

(cid:88)

i

:=

γi Oτk

i (τk) .

i(cid:54)=k

dτk

10

λi[τi(t(τk))] γi Oi[t(τk), (cid:126)x(τi(t(τk)))] (15)

(16)

Here, similarly Oi[t(τk), (cid:126)x] = eiH

τk

E τk Oi[(cid:126)x] e−iH

τk
E τk.

To be concise, we can unify the above once a local frame is chosen. Denote the local

proper time denoted by τ , i.e., τ can be t, or one of τi, and the total Hamiltonian in the

interaction picture is written as

with

V τ :=

H D,τ := H τ

E + V τ

(cid:88)

γi Oτ

i (τ )

where Oτ

i are deﬁned in either (11) or (16).

i

Then, the density matrix (in the interaction picture) evolves as

ρD(τ ) = U (τ ) ρ0 U†(τ )

(17)

(18)

(19)

where we will assume the initial state ρ0 at τ = 0 in the form of direct product of the states
of the topological qubit and the environment, i.e., ρM,0⊗ ρE,0 where the environmental state
is assumed to be either vacuum or thermal state of non-zero temperature. The evolution

operator is formally given by

U (τ ) = T e−i(cid:82) τ V τ (τ(cid:48))dτ(cid:48)

where T denotes the time-ordering for fermionic ﬁelds.

(20)

We can then obtain the reduced density matrix for the topological qubit by tracing over

the environmental states, i.e.,

ρM (τ ) = TrE e−iH τ

E τ ρD(τ ) e−iH τ

E τ = TrE ρD(τ ) .

(21)

To further simplify (21) we should reduce U by using the Cliﬀord algebra of γi’s. We then

(cid:0) cosh Oi(τ ) − iγi sinh Oi(τ )(cid:1)

(22)

U (τ ) = T e−i(cid:80)

arrive

where

1=1,2 γiOi(τ ) = T Πi=1,2

(cid:90) τ

dτ(cid:48) Oτ

i (τ(cid:48))

Oi(τ ) =

(23)
and T denotes the time-ordering for bosonic ﬁelds. The change of time-ordering from T to
T is due to the removal of the dressing of γi from Oi, e.g.,
dτ2[Θ(τ1 − τ2)Oτ
dτ2 T Oτ
1 (τ1)Oτ

1 (τ1)Oτ
1 (τ2) + (τ1 ↔ τ2)]
1 (τ2) := −T O1(τ )O1(τ ) .

T γ1O1(τ )γ1O1(τ ) = −
= −

(cid:90) τ
(cid:90) τ

(cid:90) τ
(cid:90) τ

0

dτ1

dτ1

0

0

0

11

In arriving the ﬁrst equality we used the fact that γ1Oτ

1 = −Oτ

1 γ1 and γ2

1 = 1.

Similarly, we can obtain

U†(τ ) = T † Πi=1,2

(cid:0) cosh Oi(τ ) + iγi sinh Oi(τ )(cid:1)

(24)

where T † denotes the backward time-ordering while T is the forward one.

Using the above and the fact of (2), we can simplify the reduced density matrix and get

ρM (τ ) = C1C2 ρM,0 − S1C2 σ1ρM,0σ1 − S2C1 σ2ρM,0σ2 + S1S2 σ3ρM,0σ3

(25)

where we have chosen the representation for γi such that γ1 = σ1 and γ2 = σ2 with σi’s the

Pauli’s matrices, and also deﬁned

Ci = (cid:104)T † cosh Oi(τ )T cosh Oi(τ )(cid:105) ,

(26)
Note that, there are no (cid:104)T † sinh Oi(τ )T cosh Oi(τ )(cid:105) and (cid:104)T † cosh Oi(τ )T sinh Oi(τ )(cid:105) terms
because the expectation values of operators with odd fermion parity are zero.

Si = (cid:104)T † sinh Oi(τ )T sinh Oi(τ )(cid:105) .

We can further simplify Ci and Si by using the merging formula of OPE, and the details

can be found in Appendix A. After doing this, we arrive the formal result of the reduced

dynamics in exactly the same form of (5) and (6) as in the static case, except that operators
Oi are deﬁned by either (11) or (16).

Though we are considering only two Majorana zero modes, it is straightforward to gen-

eralize the above formalism to any number of Majorana zero modes.

B. Environmental spectral densities and “inﬂuence functional”

The above formalism is quite generic and can be used for the considerations of topological

qubits in the general motions and quadratic couplings. However, for the evaluation of

decoherence patterns, in this paper we will focus on a particular environmental coupling.

That is, the operators to which the Majorana modes couple are given by

Oi(t, (cid:126)x) = ψi(t, (cid:126)x) − ψ

†
i (t, (cid:126)x)

(27)

where ψi(t, (cid:126)x) is a quasi-fermionic ﬁeld which can be expressed as the following mode ex-

pansion form

ψi(t, (cid:126)x) = λi(τi)

(cid:88)

(cid:126)k

1(cid:113)|(cid:126)k|

(cid:0)gi((cid:126)k) ˆai,(cid:126)k e−i|(cid:126)k|t+i(cid:126)k·(cid:126)x + ˜gi((cid:126)k) ˆb

†
i,(cid:126)k

ei|(cid:126)k|t−i(cid:126)k·(cid:126)x(cid:1)

(28)

12

where ˆai,(cid:126)k is the annihilation operator for the quasi-particles of spectral weight gi((cid:126)k), and
†
ˆb
is the creation operator for the quasi-holes of spectral weight ˜gi((cid:126)k). In the above, λi(τi)’s
i,(cid:126)k
are the local time-modulation functions depending on local proper time τi.

By construction, the spectral density for the excitations produced by ψi of (28) is given

by (set the switching function to unity)



(cid:80)
(cid:80)

(cid:126)k

(cid:126)k

Ai(ω) =

|(cid:126)k| δ(ω − |(cid:126)k|), for ω > 0
|gi((cid:126)k)|2
|(cid:126)k| δ(ω + |(cid:126)k|), for ω < 0
|˜gi((cid:126)k)|2

(29)

with the positive-frequency part for the particle excitations and the negative-frequency part

from the anti-particle ones.

Based on the relation between the spectral density and the Majorana-dressed symmetric

Green function as spelled out in Appendix B, we can derive the “inﬂuence functional” for

reduced dynamics. Especially, when the Majorana modes are set to motions, the “inﬂuence

functional” takes diﬀerent form for diﬀerent chosen observers. This change brings out new

features for the reduced dynamics diﬀerent from the static cases.

For example, we can choose to observe the reduced dynamics in the comoving frame of

k-th Majorana zero mode (we will call this frame “Mk”-frame hereafter, and omit subindex if

both Majorana zero modes move in the same way), then the “inﬂuence functional” associated

with the i-th Majorana zero mode evolves in the proper time τk as follows:

(cid:90) τk
(cid:73)

0

dτ(cid:48)

k

(cid:90) τk
(cid:104)

0

I Mk

i

(τk) = −2
×

dτ(cid:48)(cid:48)

k λi(τi(τ(cid:48)
iωˆn · ((cid:126)x(τ(cid:48)

k))λi(τi(τ(cid:48)(cid:48)
k ))
k) − (cid:126)x(τ(cid:48)(cid:48)
k ))

(cid:105)

(cid:90) ∞

−∞

dω |ω|d−1Ai(ω)e−iω(t(τ(cid:48)

k)−t(τ(cid:48)(cid:48)
k ))

where ˆn := (cid:126)k/|(cid:126)k| is the unit normal to the unit sphere of measure(cid:72) dΩ, and d is the space

dΩ exp

(30)

dimension. Note that the worldline relation (9) is used implicitly.

On the other hand, we can also choose to observe the reduced dynamics in the environ-

mental frame (we will call this frame “E-frame” hereafter) so that the “inﬂuence functional”

associated with the i-th Majorana zero mode evolves as

i (t) = −2
I E
×

(cid:104)

dt(cid:48)(cid:48) λi(τi(t(cid:48)))λi(τi(t(cid:48)(cid:48)))

dτi
dt(cid:48)(cid:48)
iωˆn · [(cid:126)xi(τi(t(cid:48))) − (cid:126)xi(τi(t(cid:48)(cid:48)))]

dτi
dt(cid:48)

0

dΩ exp

dω |ω|d−1Ai(ω)e−iω(t(cid:48)−t(cid:48)(cid:48))

(31)

dt(cid:48)(cid:90) t

(cid:90) t
(cid:73)

0

(cid:90) ∞
(cid:105)

−∞

where the inverse of the worldline relation (9) is again used implicitly.

13

Later on, we need to input the spectral density when evaluating the reduced dynamics.

We will consider four types of (particle-hole symmetric) spectral densities. Below are their

explicit forms:

• Uniform spectrum

q2

A(ω) =

(32)
where Θ(x) is the Heaviside step function and ΛIR is the IR cutoﬀ. Note that Ainv(ω)
is Lorentz invariant.

|ω|Θ(|ω| − ΛIR) := Ainv(ω)

The other three types are called the Ohmic type spectrum which takes the form A(ω) ∝
|ω|Q. It is called Ohmic, sub-Ohmic and super-Ohmic for Q = 1, Q < 1 and Q > 1,
respectively. For each we choose a typical one as follows.

• Ohmic spectrum

• Sub-Ohmic spectrum

A(ω) =

q2
|ω|(

|ω|
ΛU V

)2 e−ω2/Λ2

U V := Aohm(ω)

A(ω) =

q2
|ω|(

|ω|
ΛU V

)

• Super-Ohmic spectrum

3

2 e−ω2/Λ2

U V := Asub(ω) .

A(ω) =

q2
|ω|(

|ω|
ΛU V

)3 e−ω2/Λ2

U V := Asup(ω) .

(33)

(34)

(35)

In the above q2 and ΛU V are some positive constants. Also, for the Ohmic type spectrum we
have introduced the factor e−ω2/Λ2
we will choose q = 1 for our numerical calcuations.

U V to cutoﬀ the UV divergence. Hereafter, unless speciﬁed

Note that in the following numerical calculations, we will set ΛIR = 0.02 and ΛU V = 10

unless speciﬁed.

C. Transition probability from reduced dynamics

As recently pointed out in [22] by studying the transition probability of an Unruh-DeWitt

(UDW) detector (an accelerated two-level monopole) [1–3], one can ﬁnd the so-called anti-

Unruh phenomena, i.e., a UDW detector can cools down as the acceleration increases if it is

14

just accelerated for only a short period. This can be thought as non-equilibrium transient

behavior due to the switch-oﬀ of the acceleration.

It is interesting to see if the similar

phenomenon also occurs for the topological qubit, namely, the Majorana-Unruh-DeWitt

(MUDW) detector, and how it will reﬂect in the decoherence patterns.

The transition amplitude between the initial state |0(cid:105)|i(cid:105) and the ﬁnal state |m(cid:105)|f(cid:105) is

given by

(36)
where {|m(cid:105)} is a complete set of the environmental states, and |i(cid:105), |f(cid:105) are the initial and
ﬁnal state of the UDW detector (or the MUDW one), respectively. Then, the transition

i→f := lim

A(m)

t→∞ (cid:104)f|(cid:104)m|U (t)|0(cid:105)|i(cid:105)

probability can be recast into the reduced density matrix as follows:

Pi→f :=

|A(m)

i→f|2 = lim

(cid:104)m|U (t)|0(cid:105)|i(cid:105)(cid:104)i|(cid:104)0|U†(t)|m(cid:105)|f(cid:105) = lim

τ→∞(cid:104)f|TrEρD(t)|f(cid:105) .

(cid:88)

m

τ→∞(cid:104)f|(cid:88)

m

(37)

By using (21), TrEρD(t) is the reduced density matrix for the (M)UDW detector and note
that ρD(t = 0) = |0(cid:105)|i(cid:105)(cid:104)i|(cid:104)0| so that ρD(t) = U (t)ρD(t = 0)U†(t).

On the other hand, in the usual treatment for the UDW detector the transition probability

is evaluated up to the ﬁrst order expansion of U (t), see for example [3], i.e.,

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:90) ∞

(cid:88)

m

dτ(cid:48)(cid:104)f|(cid:104)m|V τ (τ(cid:48))|0(cid:105)|i(cid:105)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)2

P (1)

i→f =

.

(38)

Apply the above to the MUDW detector, we have (with ρ00 = 1) the full transition

probability

P0→1 = lim
t→∞

(1 − eI1(t)+I2(t))

1
2

(39)

and for comparison one can evaluate (38) explicitly (the details are given in Appendix C)

and get

P (1)

0→1 = lim

t→∞−1

2

(cid:16)I1(t) + I2(t)

(cid:17)

(40)

which agrees with the ﬁrst order expansion of (39).

Note that the above results apply for diﬀerent reference frames by just changing the
“inﬂuence functionals” Ii(t) accordingly. Moreover, one can also relax the condition t → ∞
to obtain the instantaneous transition probability at any time.

In most of the cases, the MUDW will decohere so that the ﬁnal state is “classical” and

the full transition probability is zero. In such cases, the ﬁrst order result (40) is ill-deﬁned

15

as Ii(t → ∞) → −∞. From our formulation, it is clear that this divergence is due to the
truncation of the higher order terms as the full transition probability is well-deﬁned. There

are two ways of remedy. One way is instead to consider the transition rate deﬁned by

(cid:80)

m

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:82) T dτ(cid:48) (cid:104)f|e(cid:104)m|V τ (τ(cid:48))|0(cid:105)e|i(cid:105)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)2

T

R0→1 := lim
T→∞

.

(41)

This will yield a ﬁnite result, and is usually adopted to derive the Unruh eﬀect. The other

way is to introduce time-modulation function λi(τ ) of ﬁnite duration.

In this way, the

decoherence will stop after the interaction is turned oﬀ so that the transition probability

can be nonzero and well-deﬁned. The short time modulation causes some nontrivial transient

eﬀect for the accelerating UDW detector, dubbed as “anti-Unruh” phenomenon [22]. In the

next section, we will see this “anti-Uuruh” phenomenon indeed yield nontrivial decoherence

patterns.

In the next section, we will see that the constantly-accelerating topological qubit will

always decohere completely into Gibbs state, i.e., Ii(t → ∞) → −∞ so that

 1

2
0

 ,

0

1
2

ρM (t → ∞) =

(42)

even for very small acceleration. Recall that the topological qubit has degenerate zero energy

spectrum as the Majorana modes are zero modes. Therefore, if we think the topological qubit

is thermalized due to the Unruh eﬀect, then the ﬁnal state of topological qubit will turn

into Gibbs state (42) which is independent of acceleration due to the degenerate zero energy

spectrum.

IV. REDUCED DYNAMICS OF TOPOLOGICAL QUBIT IN LINEAR MOTIONS

In this section we will consider the decoherence patterns of topological qubit in linear

motions, see the left panel of Fig. 1, where two Majorana zero modes γ1,2 form a topological

qubit. As shown in (5), the reduced dynamics is controlled by the “inﬂuence functionals”

associated with each Majorana modes, we will then evaluate them in both the Mk-frame

and E-frame for each speciﬁc linear motion trajectory.

16

A. “Overtaking” phenomenon: Constant acceleration

Before considering the generic motion of the topological qubit, we start with the case

of constant acceleration. Then, it is natural to ask if the reduced dynamics will be the

ﬁnite-temperature version of the static topological qubit as expected by the Unruh eﬀect.

The worldline of a particle with constant acceleration a is given by

t(τ ) =

sinh aτ

a

,

x(τ ) =

cosh aτ − 1

a

.

(43)

We assume this trajectory holds for both Majorana zero modes of the topological qubit.

Then, by evaluating the “inﬂuence functional” (30) in the M -frame, we obtain

(cid:90) ∞

−∞

dω A(ω)(cid:0)|E1(i

) − E1(i

ω
a

I M (τ ) = − 1
a2

where

ω
a

(cid:90) ∞

1

e−aτ )|2 + |E1(−i

ω
a

) − E1(−i

ω
a

e−zu
u

du ;

ω
a

e−aτ (t))|2 + |E1(−i

ω
a

) − E1(−i

ω
a

eaτ )|2(cid:1)

(44)

(45)

eaτ (t))|2(cid:1) (46)

(47)

E1(z) :=

or by evaluating (31) in the E-frame we get
) − E1(i

dω A(ω)(cid:0)|E1(i

I E(t) = − 1
a2

ω
a

(cid:90) ∞

−∞

where

τ (t) =

sinh−1 at

a

.

In the above we have assumed the time-modulation functions to be unity (time-independent)

and also omitted the Majorana index as both zero modes move in the same way.

On the other hand, applying Wick’s theorem as shown in [38] we can obtain the reduced

dynamics in the thermal environment by just replacing the Green functions with their ther-

mal versions. In our case, the resultant “inﬂuence functional” should look like

I T hermal(t) = −8

dω [1 + 2n(ω)]sgn(ω)A(ω)

1 − cos ωt

ω2

(48)

(cid:90) ∞

−∞

where n(ω) is the Bose-Einstein distribution with temperature a

2π by recalling that our
Majorana-dressed Green functions are bosonic deﬁned by the time-ordering when applying

Wick’s theorem.

By comparing the above “inﬂuence functionals” (e.g., in the environments of uniform and

super-Ohmic spectrum, respectively), we can see that the reduced dynamics of a constantly-

accelerating topological qubit is diﬀerent from the one in the thermal environment. As

17

FIG. 2.

Decoherence patterns (exponential of “inﬂuence functionals” vs log of proper time)

of a constantly-accelerating topological qubit in various frames in the environments of uniform

spectrum (Left) and of super-Ohmic spectrum (Right): in the M -frame (solid red), in the E-frame

(dotted blue) and of the thermal one (dashed black) with the acceleration a = 5.

the decay rates of the oﬀ-diagonal elements of the reduced density matrix, see (5), are

dictated by the “inﬂuence functional”, this comparison will demonstrate the diﬀerence of

the decoherence patterns. The results are explicitly shown in Fig. 2 where we plot the

exponential of the “inﬂuence functional” versus the log of chosen proper time in E-frame,

M -frame and thermal environment.

It is clear that the decoherence patterns of the accelerating topological qubit in either

E- or M -frames are quite diﬀerent from the ones of the static qubit in the corresponding

thermal environments. The diﬀerence could be attributed to either non-Markovinity or the

non-local nature of the topological qubit. To pin down the exact reason one should study

the decoherence patterns of the usual local qubit. This should be an interesting problem

for the future work. Moreover, due to the time-dilation eﬀect, the decoherence rate in the

E-frame is smaller than the one in the M -frame as shown in Fig. 2.

Next, we focus on the decoherence in the M -frame by tuning the magnitude of the accel-

eration. We show the results for the environments of uniform and super-Ohmic spectrum in

Fig. 3. Note that here we plot the “inﬂuence functionals” instead of their exponentials to

magnify the details of the so-called “overtaking” phenomenon (especially in the environment

of uniform spectrum) discussed below.

Firstly, we ﬁnd that in all cases the topological qubit will completely decohere into Gibbs

18

FIG. 3. “Inﬂuence functionals” of a constantly-accelerating topological qubit in the M -frame in

the environments of uniform spectrum (Left) and of super-Ohmic spectrum (Right) for diﬀerent

accelerations: a = 1 (solid red), a = 5 (dotted blue) and a = 10 (dashed black). Note that the

decoherence patterns show the “overtaking” phenomenon.

state (42) in the long run. Recall that the static topological qubit is robust against de-

coherence in the super-Ohmic environment [31]. Our results imply that the accelerating

topological qubit is completely thermalized due to Unruh eﬀect even though the “inﬂuence

functionals” are diﬀerent from the thermal ones. However, the ﬁnal Gibbs state has no

acceleration dependence due to the degenerate zero energy spectrum of topological qubit as

commented around (42). That is, the transition probability P0→1 (39) will be equal to 1/2.

Besides, from Fig. 3 we observe an interesting phenomenon which we call “overtaking”:

the topological qubit with smaller acceleration decoheres/thermalizes faster at beginning but

then slower than the one with larger acceleration in the late time. Note that the “overtaking”

with diﬀerent accelerations occurs almost around the same time.

Moreover, as seen from Fig. 3, the magnitudes of the “inﬂuence functionals” I in the
environments of uniform spectrum are far larger than in the super-Ohmic environments,
so that the corresponding eI’s are far smaller as I’s are negative. This implies that the
“overtaking” is far less obvious in the environments of uniform spectrum than in the Ohmic

type environments, e.g. the super-Ohmic one as shown in Fig. 3. This is also the reason
why we plot I instead of eI to magnify the details of the “overtaking” in the cases of
uniform spectrum. 1 The almost-“overtaking”-free feature in the environment of the uniform

1 We have checked that the “overtaking” is numerically stable against the tuning of time-step size (from

19

FIG. 4. Decoherence patterns of a boost topological qubit in the M -frame in the environments of

sub-Ohmic spectrum (Left) and of super-Ohmic spectrum (Right) for diﬀerent velocities: v = 0

(solid red), v = 0.4 (dotted blue) and v = 0.8 (dashed black). The insets show the details of

“overtaking” phenomena during the decohrence.

spectrum could be due to its invariance under Lorentz transformations.

B. “Overtaking” phenomenon: Constant velocity

Next, we turn into an even simpler setting but interesting enough to compare with the

constant acceleration cases: the boost topological qubit with constant velocity. In this case,

the worldline of the Majorana zero modes with constant velocity v (in (1+1)D spacetime)

is given by

t(τ ) =

τ√
1 − v2

,

x(τ ) =

vτ√
1 − v2

.

(49)

As the uniform spectrum is Lorentz invariant, so is the corresponding “inﬂuence func-

tional”. Therefore, the decoherence pattern in the environment of uniform spectrum will

be the same for all the Lorentz boosts of the topological qubit. However, this is not the

case for the Ohmic type environments and the corresponding decoherence patterns with

both Majorana zero modes moving along the worldline (49) are shown in Fig.4. For the

sub-Ohmic environment, the boost only change the rates of the decoherence and will not

change the ﬁnal state, i.e., it completely thermalize into Gibbs state. On the other hand,

0.002 to 0.01) when numerically evaluating the I.

20

for the super-Ohmic environment, the ﬁnal state does change due to the boost but it will

not thermalize completely. This implies that there is no Unruh eﬀect as expected.

Moreover, “overtaking” occurs again. Similarly, in this case, the slower topological qubit

decoheres/thermalizes faster at the beginning but then slower in the late time than the

fast-moving one.

Combined with the results for the cases with constant acceleration, it implies that the

“overtaking” phenomenon could mainly be due to the breaking of Lorentz invariance as the

“overtaking” phenomenon in the uniform-spectrum environment is (null or) far less obvious

than the ones in the Ohmic type environments.

C. Decoherence Impedance and “Anti-Unruh”

The “overtaking” phenomenon suggests that the quantum system has some kind of

“impedance” against decoherence when subjecting to the sudden change of external con-

ditions such as boost or acceleration. That is, the more violent change will instead cause

slower decoherence at the very beginning. However, ﬁnally the thermalization takes over

and the “impedance” eﬀect will be washed out. This is why the “overtaking” occurs as the

thermalization ﬁnally overcomes the decoherence impedance.

This kind of decoherence impedance reminds us the “anti-Unruh” phenomenon recently

studied in [22]. In this subsection we will explore the relation between them in the setup of

our MUDW detector.

In the usual UDW setup for the Unruh eﬀect, the higher acceleration will result in higher

temperature so that the transition probability of the UDW detector goes up. However, if

one decouple the UDW detector from the environment after a ﬁnite duration, an interesting

phenomenon coined as “anti-Unruh” can be observed from the transition probability of

the UDW detector: the transition probability decreases as the acceleration increases if the

coupling of the detector with the environmental ﬁeld lasts only for a short enough ﬁnite

duration. [22]. Namely, the coupling constant is a function of time, e.g.

λ(τ ) = e

− τ 2
σ2

(50)

where σ is the duration scale. For small enough σ, the “anti-Unruh” will occur.

As in our MUDW setup we have the exact expression for the ﬁrst-order and full transition

21

FIG. 5. Decoherence patterns and transition probabilities in the M -frame of a constantly acceler-

ating MUDW detector in the super-Ohmic environment (with q = 0.5) with the switching function

of the time duration scales: σ = 0.1 (red) and σ = 2 (blue). Left : Decoherence patterns with

a = 1 (solid), a = 5 (dashed) and a = 10 (dotted). Right: Transition probabilities P0→1 (solid)
and P (1)

0→1 (dashed) versus acceleration a. The left y-axis is for P0→1 and P (1)

0→1 with σ = 0.1, and

the right y-axis with σ = 2. This ﬁgure shows that the “overtaking” and “anti-Unruh” imply each

other.

probabilities, i.e., (40) and (39), respectively, we can check if we can observe the similar “anti-

Unruh” phenomenon by tuning σ. Note that the transition probability of MUDW detector

is dictated by the “inﬂuence functionals”.

On the other hand, the “overtaking” or the decoherence impedance shown in the deco-

herence patterns are also dictated by the “inﬂuence functionals”. Thus, we shall expect that

the decoherence impedance and the “anti-Unruh” shall imply each other. The decoherence

impedance appears in the early stage of the decoherence patterns, i.e., the larger acceler-

ation causes slower decoherence. This must correspond to the “anti-Unruh” for the small

duration coupling.

To demonstrate this possible connection, in Fig. 5 we juxtapose the decoherence pattern

and the transition probability of MUDW detector in the super-Ohmic environment. We

choose the Ohmic type environment here as it has more obvious “overtaking” than the one

of uniform spectrum.

In the left panel we plot the decoherence patterns for small time

duration (σ = 0.1) and the large one (σ = 2). One can see that only the latter shows

the “overtaking” so that the initial eﬀect of decoherence impedance is washed out by the

22

FIG. 6. Transition probabilities P0→1 (solid) and P (1)

0→1 (dashed) in the M -frame of a constantly

accelerating MUDW detector with the switching function of the time duration scales: σ = 0.1

(red) and σ = 2 (blue) in the environments of uniform spectrum with q = 0.01 (Left) and q = 0.05

(Right). The IR cutoﬀ ΛIR = 0.02.

thermalization. We shall then expect the “anti-Unruh” shall only occur for the σ = 0.1

one as the decoherence impedance is still in charge. This is indeed the case as shown in

the right panel in which we plot the corresponding transition probabilities which show the

“anti-Unruh” only for the σ = 0.1 case. Note that we have plotted both the ﬁrst-order and

the full transition probabilities, and they share the same qualitative features. The results

show that the “overtaking” and “anti-Unruh” imply each other, as speculated above.

Note that the thermalization goes faster if the strength q of the environmental spectrum

is larger. Thus, even with ﬁxed time duration scale, if q is large enough the thermalization

shall always dominate the decoherence impedance. Our numerical check conﬁrms this, i.e.,

the full transition probability P0→1 equal to 1/2 almost for all accelerations. The same

happens if we tune σ to be large enough with q ﬁxed.

Now we turn to the more peculiar “anti-Unruh” patterns for the environments of uniform

spectrum by tuning σ, q as shown in Fig. 6 and by tuning ΛIR as shown in Fig. 7. In Fig.
6 both P0→1 and P (1)
0→1 show a crossover from the “anti-Unruh” to the usual Unruh pattern
as the acceleration increases for the σ = 2 cases no matter of q = 0.01 or q = 0.05. On the

other hand, this peculiar crossover disappears for the case with σ = 0.1 but just remains

the anti-Unruh pattern. Similar peculiar crossover appears when we tune the IR cutoﬀ ΛIR

as shown in Fig. 7. Unlike the Ohmic type environment, the uniform spectrum has an IR

cutoﬀ dependence. From the results in Fig. 6 and Fig. 7, this peculiar crossover could be

23

FIG. 7. Transition probabilities P0→1 in the M -frame of a constantly accelerating MUDW detector

with a switching function of time duration scale σ = 2 in the environments of uniform spectrum

with q = 0.01 and the IR cutoﬀs: ΛIR = 0.001 (solid), ΛIR = 0.02 (dotted) and ΛIR = 1 (dashed).

due to interplay of tuning ΛIR, σ and q so that it may not be generic.

D.

Information backﬂow and time modulation

The important feature of our reduced dynamics is that it was solved exactly without mak-

ing Markov approximation. Thus, we shall expect the non-Markovian decoherence patterns

of the topological qubit, which will be characterized mainly by the information backﬂow.

There have been issues of quantifying the non-Marokovinity in the past few years, see [34–36]

for examples. However, here we will concern only the qualitative but not the quantitative fea-

ture of non-Markovinity/information backﬂow, which is characterized by the non-monotonic

decoherence patterns, i.e., the oﬀ-diagonal matrix elements of the reduced density matrix

do not decay monotonically in time.

Moreover, as the Majorana zero modes are degenerate with zero energy, there is no energy

ﬂow but only information ﬂow between the topological qubit and the environment during

the decoherence. This may in contrast to the case of usual qubit/probe with non-zero kinetic

energy for which the resultant non-monotonic decoherence patterns may also be assisted by

the energy backﬂow.

In the following we will tune the time dependence of either the switching function or the

24

acceleration to see when such behaviors of information backﬂow will be still preserved.

1. Parameter space for information backﬂow

In [31], it showed that the static topological qubit in the super-Ohmic environment does

show the non-Markovian behavior characterized in the way just described. As we expect

the thermalization will damp the information backﬂow, it is then interesting to explore this

possible connection from the decoherence patterns of the topological qubit in the super-

Ohmic environment by tuning the parameters controlling the degrees of the thermalization.

Based on the intuition and the studies in the previous sections, the coupling duration

σ (deﬁned in (50) for the switching function) and the size of the acceleration a aﬀect the

degrees of thermalization in the most direct and relevant way. We thus plot the parameter

space of information backﬂow by tuning σ and a. The result is shown in Fig. 8 and it shows

that the information backﬂow is conﬁned in the small σ and a regimes. This justiﬁes our

intuition about the relation between thermalization and information backﬂow.

2. Modulation of switching function

Naively, the information backﬂow is a time modulation of the decoherence patterns. We

may then wonder if the time modulation of the switching function or acceleration will invoke

the information backﬂow or not.

We ﬁrst consider the time modulation of the switching function. Instead of using the

Gaussian form of the switching function as given in (50), we consider the following form:

λ(τ ) = cos ωM τ .

(51)

The results of the decoherence patterns by varying ωM (in some sense, it can be called

“frequency modulation”) are given in Fig. 9 for the environments of both uniform spectrum

and super-Ohmic one. We ﬁnd that the decoherence patterns become highly modulated

as the modulation frequency ωM increases. This phenomenon occurs for both the cases of

uniform spectrum and the super-Ohmic one, especially for the former it shows no information

backﬂow if ωM is not large enough.

25

FIG. 8. The regime of the information backﬂow in the M -frame of a constantly accelerating

topoloigcal qubit in the super-Ohmic environment as a function of the time-duration scale σ of the

switching function and the acceleration a.

FIG. 9. Decoherence patterns in the M -frame of a constantly accelerating topological qubit in the

environments of uniform spectrum (Left) and of super-Ohmic spectrum (Right) with the frequency

modulation of the switching function: the modulation frequencies are ωM = 1 (solid red), ωM = 5

(dotted blue) and ωM = 10 (dashed black) with the acceleration a = 5.

3. Modulation of acceleration

We now turn to the eﬀect on the information backﬂow by by tuning the modulation

of acceleration. This was done by considering the general linear motions for which the

acceleration is time-varying. IN such cases, the worldline of the trajectory for the Majorana

26

zero mode is given by

(cid:90) τ

cosh(cid:2)(cid:90) τ(cid:48)

a(τ(cid:48)(cid:48))dτ(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:3)dτ(cid:48),

(cid:90) τ

0

sinh(cid:2)(cid:90) τ(cid:48)

0

a(τ(cid:48)(cid:48))dτ(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:3)dτ(cid:48)

x(τ ) =

(52)

t(τ ) =

0

0

where a(τ ) is the time-varying acceleration. When a(τ ) is constant, the above trajectory

reduces to (43).

In the following, we will consider two diﬀerent forms of a(τ ) and check the corresponding

decoherence patterns (with the switching function set to unity). One is the rectangular

function given by

a(τ ) =



if τ1 < τ < τ2,

C,
−C, if τ2 < τ < 2τ2 − τ1,
0,

otherwise.

(53)

where C is a constant factor determining the amplitude of the acceleration. The other is

the cosine function given by

a(τ ) = a cos ωGτ .

(54)

We will then tune C in (53) as the “amplitude modulation” (AM) of the accelerating motion,

and tune ωG in (54) as the “frequency modulation” (FM).

The corresponding decoherence patterns of an accelerating topological qubit in the M -

frame in the super-Ohmic environment for the rectangular (AM) and cosine (FM) modu-

lations of the acceleration are shown in the left and right panels of Fig. 10, respectively.

We see that the under AM the decoherence patterns show the information backﬂow for the

larger amplitude C. On the other hand, under FM, it shows no information backﬂow by

tuning the frequency ωG. However, for the some middle frequency, it shows some ripples in

the decoherence pattern but it is still monotonically decaying. In contrast to the frequency

modulation of the switching function, the modulation of the acceleration shows far more

mild behaviors of the invoking information backﬂow.

E. Frame dependence for incoherent motions due to nonlocality

For simplicity, so far we have assumed both Majorana modes move with the same world-

line. This however does not exploit the nonlocal feature of the topological qubit. To demon-

strate the eﬀect of the nonlocality, here we will consider the decoherence patterns of two

27

FIG. 10. Decoherence patterns in the M -frame of an accelerating topological qubit in the super-

Ohmic environment with the amplitude modulation (AM) and frequency modulation (FM) of the

acceleration. Left: AM with C = 1 (solid red) , C = 5 (dotted blue) and C = 10 (dashed black)

as τ1 = 0.3 and τ2 = 0.5. Right: FM with ωG = 10 (solid red) , ωG = 50 (dotted blue) and ωG = 1

(dashed black) as a = 10.

situations from the comoving frame of one of the Majorana modes, say γ1. This frame is

described by the Rindler coordinate (τ, ξ) relating to the Minkowski ones by [39]

t = (

1
a

+ ξ) sinh aτ,

x = (

1
a

+ ξ) cosh aτ − 1
a

.

(55)

Note that the Majorana mode γ1 moving with the acceleration a is located at ξ = 0 so

that (55) reduces to the worldline (43). Moreover, to ensure the Rindler and Minkowski
times ﬂow along the same direction, it requires ξ > − 1
a. Also, we will only consider the
super-Ohmic environment (with q = 1) for our demonstrations as the acceleration causes

more dramatic change of the decoherence patterns than in the other types of environments.

1. Separation by a distance initially

The ﬁrst situation is to consider that the two Majorana modes are separated initially by

a distance L but move with the same acceleration, i.e., the worldline of the Majorana mode

γ2 is given by

t =

1
a

sinh aτ2,

x = L +

(cosh aτ2 − 1).

1
a

(56)

28

FIG. 11. Decoherence pattern in the super-Ohmic environment associated with the Majorana

mode γ2 moving with the acceleration a2 as seen from the observer in the comoving frame of the

Majorana mode γ1 moving with the acceleration a. There is an initial separation L between γ1

and γ2. Left: L = 0 (solid red) , L = 1 (dotted blue) and L = 5 (dashed black) with a = a2 = 5.
Right: a2 = 5 (dotted blue), a2 = 2 (solid red), a2 = 1 (dot-dashed brown) and a2 = −1 (dashed
black) with a = 2 and L = 0.

From (55) and (56), we can then relate the Rindler time τ of γ1 to τ2 by the following

relation

τ2 =

1
a

log

aL +

a2L2 + coth2 aτ − 1
coth aτ − 1

(cid:112)

.

(57)

Using (57) we can evaluate the “inﬂuence functional” I2 which dictates the decoherence
pattern associated with γ2 as seen from the observer in the comoving frame of γ1. The

results are shown in the left panel of Fig. 11. It indicates that as the initial separation L
becomes larger, the rate of decoherence dictated by I2 is quicker.

2. Majorana modes moving with diﬀerent accelerations

The second situation is to consider that the two Majorana modes moves with diﬀerent

accelerations, say a for γ1 and a2 for γ2, i.e.,

t =

1
a2

sinh a2τ2,

x =

(cosh a2τ2 − 1).

1
a2

(58)

29

As before, one can obtain the relation between their Rindler times:

(cid:113)

a2

a − 1 +

τ2 =

1
a2

log

a − 1)2 + coth2 aτ − 1
( a2
coth aτ − 1

.

(59)

It is easy to see that τ2 = τ if a2 = a. We can then use this relation to evaluate the “inﬂuence
functional” I2 associated with γ2 as seen by γ2. 2

The results for the corresponding decoherence pattern are shown in the right panel of
Fig.11. It implies that rate of decoherence dictated by I2 is quicker than the one dictated
by I1 if a2 > a. Otherwise, it is slower and even stop to decohere if a2 < a. This indicates
that the topological qubit in the super-Ohmic environment may not look thermalized in the

comoving frame of one of Majorana modes even both Majorana modes are accelerated. This

is a novel feature of the topological qubit.

V. REDUCED DYNAMICS OF TOPOLOGICAL QUBIT IN CIRCULAR MO-

TION

In this section we will consider the topological qubit in the circular motion depicted in the

right panel of Fig. 1 where the two constituent Majorana modes sit and move diametrically.

This is a quite diﬀerent setup from the circular motion of the usual UDW detector where

the qubit is treated as a whole.

In contrast to the linearly accelerating UDW detector for which the the transition prob-

abilities derived from the Minkowski and Unruh vacua are the same, this is however not

the case for the UDW detector in the circular motion. Namely, the Unruh-like eﬀect (with

nonzero transition probability) happens only for the Minkowski vaccum, not for Rindler one

[3, 14–16]. Though this issue is interesting, we will not checked it for the topological qubit

in this work, and may explore it later. Instead, we will continue to work in the Minkowski

vacuum so that we can demonstrate some of the features found in the linear motion cases

are generic as also found in the circular motions.

For simplicity, we will consider the circular motion in (2 + 1)D Minkowski spacetime. 3

The worldline of the Majorana zero mode γi in a circular motion of radius r0 and with with
a ) when evaluating I2. The

2 A caution is that we need to ensure the causal condition ∂τ2

∂τ > 0 (i.e., ξ > − 1

explicit form of this condition is given in Appendix D.

3 We check some preliminary cases in (3 + 1)D and ﬁnd that the results are qualitatively the same as in the

(2 + 1)D.

30

FIG. 12. “Inﬂuence functionals” in the M -frame of a circularly moving topological qubit in the

super-Ohmic environment with constant angular velocities: Ω = 0.7 (solid red), Ω = 0.9 (dotted

blue) and Ω = 0.95 (dashed black). Note that the decoherence patterns show the “overtaking”

phenomenon.

a generic angular velocity Ω(τ ) is given by

t(τi) =

with

γ(τ(cid:48))dτ(cid:48),

(cid:90) τi
(cid:90) τi

0

x(τi) = r0 cos Θi(τi),

y(τi) = r0 sin Θi(τi) ,

(60)

γ(τ(cid:48))Ω(τ(cid:48))dτ(cid:48) + πδi,2,

γ(τ ) :=

1(cid:112)1 − r2

0Ω(τ )2

.

(61)

Θi(τi) :=

0

The factor of πδi,2 reminds the fact that the two Majorana modes sit diametrically to

each other. Note that the angular velocity should be constrained by special relativity, i.e.,
r0Ω(τ ) ≤ 1.

For simplicity, in the following we will simply set r0 = 1. We will also work in the super-

Ohmic environment (with q = 1) to demonstrate the change of the decoherence patterns

due to the circular motion.

A. “Overtaking” phenomenon without frame issue: Constant angular velocity

We ﬁrst consider the decoherence patterns for the cases with constant angular velocity

and trivial switching function, i.e., Ω(τ ) = Ω, λ(τ ) = 1. Then, using the circular worldline

(60) we can evaluate the “inﬂuence functional” (30) in the M -frame. The results are shown

in Fig. 12. It indicates that there are also the “overtaking” phenomena as in the linear

31

cases. The subtle diﬀerence is that the “overtaking” does not almost occur at the same time

as in the linear motions.

In the above, we did not specify sub-index for the “inﬂuence functional”, and we may

wonder if there is a frame-dependence issue as discussed for the linear case due to the

incoherent motion and non-locality. In fact, the circular motion in our setup implies that

both Majorana modes move coherently. Thus, we shall expect both “inﬂuence functionals”
are the same, i.e., I1 = I2 as seen in the comoving frame of one of the Majorana zero
modes, say γ1. Indeed, this is the case. To see this, we need to introduce the Rindler-like

coordinates for the circular motion as given in [40], and then relating the Rindler times of

two Majorana zero modes. As the procedure is similar to the case for the linear acceleration,

we will relegate the details to the Appendix D and just give the result:

(cid:2)cos−1(1 − r2

0Ω2) − π(cid:3) .

τ2 = τ +

1
γΩ

(62)

Note that they diﬀer just by a constant shift. Plugging this relation into (60) and using the
result to evaluate the integrand of the “inﬂuence functional” I2 of (30), it is straightforward
to verify I1 = I2. 4.

B. Decoherence Impedance and “Anti-Unruh”

In order to see if the feature of decoherence impedance and its relation to the “anti-

Unruh” phenomenon found in the linear motion are generic or not, we check here for the

circular motion by tuning the the angular velocity for the switching function of ﬁnite time-

duration, i.e., (50). Again, we ﬁnd the similar features as found in the linear motion, and the

results are shown in Fig.13. Therefore, we can conclude that these features and phenomena

are in some sense quite generic as they appear for both linear and circular motions of the

topological qubit.

(cid:90) τ

(cid:90) 2π

(cid:90) ∞

dθ

0

0

dτ2

dω|ω|A(ω)e−iω(t1−t2)+iω cos θ(x1−x2)+iω sin θ(y1−y2)

4 The explicit derivation goes as follows:
I2(τ ) := −2
= −2
= −2
= −2

dτ1
dτ1dτ2dθdω|ω|A(ω)e−iωγ(τ1−τ2)+iω{cos θ[cos(γΩτ1+C)−cos(γΩτ2+C)]+sin θ[sin(γΩτ1+C)−sin(γΩτ2+C]}
dτ1dτ2dθdω|ω|A(ω)e−iωγ(τ1−τ2)+iω[cos(γΩτ1+C−θ)−cos(γΩτ2+C−θ)]
dτ1dτ2dθ(cid:48)dω|ω|A(ω)e−iωγ(τ1−τ2)+iω[cos(γΩτ1−θ(cid:48))−cos(γΩτ2−θ(cid:48))] = I1(τ ) .

−∞

(63)

0

(cid:90) τ
(cid:90)
(cid:90)
(cid:90)

32

FIG. 13. Decoherence patterns and transition probability P0→1 in the M -frame of a circularly

moving MUDW detector of constant angular velocity Ω in the super-Ohmic environments with the

switching function of time duration scales: σ = 0.1 (red) and σ = 2 (blue). Left : Decoherence

patterns for Ω = 0.7 (solid), Ω = 0.9 (dashed) and Ω = 0.95 (dotted). Right: P0→1 versus Ω. This

ﬁgure shows that the “overtaking” and “anti-Unruh” imply each other.

FIG. 14. Decoherence patterns in the M -frame of a circularly moving topological qubit of constant

angular velocity Ω = 0.9 in the super-Ohmic environment with the frequency modulation of the

switching function: the modulation frequencies are ωM = 1 (solid red), ωM = 5 (dotted blue) and

ωM = 10 (dashed black).

C. Modulation of switching function

In the linear acceleration case we see that there a very apparent pattern of information

backﬂow as shown in Fig. 9 when we have the frequency modulation of the switching function

33

FIG. 15. Decoherence patterns in the M -frame of a circularly moving topological qubit in the

super-Ohmic environment with the amplitude modulation (AM) and frequency modulation (FM)

of the angular velocity. Left: AM with C = 0.7 (solid red) , C = 0.9 (dotted blue) and C = 0.95

(dashed black) as τ1 = 0.3, τ2 = 0.5. Right: FM with ωG = 1 (dashed black), ωG = 10 (solid red)

and ωG = 50 (dotted blue) as Ω = 0.95.

by using (51). Here we adopt the same modulation of the switching function in the case of

the circular motion. The results are shown in Fig.14. Unlike the linear acceleration case,

the pattern of the information backﬂow is barley seen though the decoherence patterns are

indeed modulated. In some sense, it is more similar to the case of the frequency modulation

of the acceleration shown by the solid red line in the right panel of Fig. 10.

D. Modulation of angular velocity

Finally, we will consider the amplitude and frequency modulations of the angular velocity

and see if these modulations will induce the information backﬂow or not. In order to compare

with the same situations in the linear acceleration cases, we will adopt the same AM and

FM functions (53) and (54) for the angular velocity. Note that the a on the RHS of (54) will

be replaced by Ω, and we still use C and ωG to parametrize AM and FM, respectively. The

results are shown in Fig. 15. For the AM, we ﬁnd that there is a minor information backﬂow.

However, it always decoheres completely and the decoherence pattern is not sensitive to C

unlike its counterpart of the linear acceleration. For the FM, the results indicates that the

higher frequencies induce more apparent information backﬂow and maintain the robustness

against decoherence at the same time. This is also diﬀerent from its linear counterpart.

34

VI. CONCLUSION

In this paper we take the advantage of exact solvable reduced dynamics of the topological

qubit and study the decoherence patterns when the topological qubit is subjected to the

linear or circular motions. Our results show interesting interplay of relativistic quantum

information and the topological ordered states manifested in the Majorana zero modes.

Though our results are pertinent to topological qubit, we believe the following aspects

are generic and should hold even for the usual qubit. They are (1) thermalization due to

acceleration; (2) “anti-Unruh” phenomenon and decoherence impedance found in this paper

and their intimate relation as they are both related to the short-time scale non-equilibrium

eﬀect; (3) information backﬂow invoked by the time modulation of coupling constant and

accelerations. We think it deserves more study to clarify the underlying physics for some of

the phenomenon and check their generality.

Besides, by exploiting the nonlocal feature of the topological qubit, we ﬁnd that some

incoherent accelerations of its constituent Majorana zero modes will preserve the coherence.

This novel feature may help to develop the robust qubit in the future. Moreover, in this

work we only consider the reduced dynamics of single topological qubit. It is interesting to

study the multiple topological qubits, especially the evolution of their entanglement.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work is supported by MoST grant:103-2112-M-003 -001 -MY3 and 103-2811-M-003

-024. We thank Hsi-Sheng Goan, Shih-Yuin Lin, Shin-Tza Wu and Wei-Min Zhang for

interesting discussions. We also thank NCTS for partial support.

Appendix A: Evaluation of inﬂuence functional by the merging formula of OPE

In this appendix, we show how to express Ci and Si given in (26) in term of the ”dressed”

symmetric Green function Gi,sym by invoking the following merging formula of OPE [37]:

(cid:82) τ
(cid:82) τ

1
2

0 dτ1

ˆF= e
: ˆF :: ˆG := e

0 dτ1

(cid:82) τ
0 dτ2(cid:104)Oi(τ1)Oj (τ2)(cid:105)
(cid:82) τ
0 dτ2(cid:104)OF (τ1)OG (τ2)(cid:105)

δ2

δOi(τ1)δOj (τ2) : ˆF :
δOF (τ1)δOG (τ2) : ˆF ˆG :

δ2

(A1)

(A2)

35

Recall Ci = (cid:104)T † cosh Oi(τ )T cosh Oi(τ )(cid:105), we can simplify it as follows:

Ci=

=

=

=

=

e

e

1
4
1
4
1
4
1
2
(e
1
2

1

2(cid:104)T †Oi(τ )Oi(τ )(cid:105)+ 1

1

2(cid:104)T †Oi(τ )Oi(τ )(cid:105)+ 1
e
2(cid:104) ˜Oi(τ )Oi(τ )(cid:105)+ 1

1

(e2(cid:82) τ dτ1

2(cid:104)Oi(τ ) ˜Oi(τ )(cid:105) + e− 1
(cid:82) τ dτ2Gi,sym(τ1−τ2) + 1) .

(cid:104)T †(eOi(τ ) + e−Oi(τ ))T (eOi(τ ) + e−Oi(τ ))(cid:105)
2(cid:104)T †Oi(τ )Oi(τ )(cid:105)+ 1

1

(A3)
2(cid:104)T Oi(τ )Oi(τ )(cid:105)(cid:104)(: e ˜Oi(τ ) : + : e− ˜Oi(τ ) :)(: eOi(τ ) : + : e−Oi(τ ) :)(cid:105) (A4)
2(cid:104)T Oi(τ )Oi(τ )(cid:105)(2e(cid:104) ˜Oi(τ )Oi(τ )(cid:105) + 2e−(cid:104) ˜Oi(τ )Oi(τ )(cid:105))
2(cid:104)T Oi(τ )Oi(τ )(cid:105)

(A5)

(A6)

2(cid:104) ˜Oi(τ )Oi(τ )(cid:105)− 1

2(cid:104)Oi(τ ) ˜Oi(τ )(cid:105))

(A7)

In the above, we apply (A1) to arrive the second equality and (A2) to obtain the third

equality along with the fact that the expectation value of any normal ordered product is
2((cid:104) ˜Oi(τ )Oi(τ )(cid:105) +
zero. Finally, in the fourth equality we have symmetrized (cid:104) ˜Oi(τ )Oi(τ )(cid:105) as 1
(cid:104)Oi(τ ) ˜Oi(τ )(cid:105)) to guarantee the symmetry between forward and backward time ordering. To
simplify the notations, we denote the operators on the forward-time contour by the ones

without tilde, and the ones with tilde on the backward-time contour.

Follow the similar steps, we can simplify Si = (cid:104)T † sinh Oi(τ )T sinh Oi(τ )(cid:105) to get the

following result:

(e2(cid:82) τ dτ1

(cid:82) τ dτ2Gi,sym(τ1−τ2) − 1) .

Si=

1
2

(A8)

Plug the results (A7) and (A8) into (25) we then arrive the ﬁnal form of the reduced

dynamics given by (5) and (6).

Appendix B: Spectral density and real-time correlators

The Schwinger-Keldysh Green functions are the real-time two-point functions on the

Keldysh contour. For the fermionic ﬁelds, they are deﬁned as follows :

G++(t, t(cid:48))= −i(cid:104)Tψ(t)ψ†(t(cid:48))(cid:105) ,
G−−(t, t(cid:48))= −i(cid:104)T†ψ(t)ψ†(t(cid:48))(cid:105) ,
G+−(t, t(cid:48))= i(cid:104)ψ†(t(cid:48))ψ(t)(cid:105) ,
G−+(t, t(cid:48))= −i(cid:104)ψ(t)ψ†(t(cid:48))(cid:105) ,

36

(B1)

(B2)

(B3)

(B4)

where T and T† denote the forward and backward time-ordering for the fermionic ﬁelds,
respectively. They satisfy

G++ + G−− = G+− + G−+ ;

(B5)

and their relations to the retarded Green function GR and the symmetric Green function

Gsym are as follows:

GR= G++ − G+− = G−+ − G−− ,

Gsym=

i
2

(G++ + G−−) =

(G+− + G−+) .

i
2

On the other hand, the Majorana-dressed real-time correlators are

++

G

−−

G

+−

G

−+

G

(t, t(cid:48))= −i(cid:104)T ψ(t)ψ†(t(cid:48))(cid:105) ,
(t, t(cid:48))= −i(cid:104)T †ψ(t)ψ†(t(cid:48))(cid:105) ,
(t, t(cid:48))= −i(cid:104)ψ†(t(cid:48))ψ(t)(cid:105) ,
(t, t(cid:48))= −i(cid:104)ψ(t)ψ†(t(cid:48))(cid:105) ,

(B6)

(B7)

(B8)

(B9)

(B10)

(B11)

where T and T † denote the forward and backward time-ordering for bosonic ﬁelds, respec-
tively. They satisfy

++

G

+ G

−−

+−

−+

= G

+ G

;

(B12)

and their relations to the Majorana-dressed retarded Green function GR and the Majorana-

dressed symmetric Green function Gsym are as follows:
−+ − G
+−
i
2

GR= G
i
2

++ − G

= G
−−

Gsym=

+ G

) =

(G

++

(G

+−

−−

,

−+

+ G

) .

(B13)

(B14)

In frequency domain, the spectral density A(ω) is related to G

+−

−+

(ω) and G

(ω) by the

following relations:

+−

G

−+

G

(ω)= −iA(ω)Θ(−ω) .
(ω)= −iA(ω)Θ(ω) .

(B15)

(B16)

Therefore, the relation between spectral density A(ω) and the dressed symmetric Green
function Gsym is

(B17)

A(ω) .

Gsym(ω) =

1
2

37

Appendix C: Transition probability

Here, we explicitly derive (40) from (38):

P (1)

0→1:=

=

=

=

m

m

γi Oτ

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:90) ∞
dτ(cid:48)(cid:104)1|(cid:104)m|V τ (τ(cid:48))|0(cid:105)|0(cid:105)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)2
(cid:88)
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:90) ∞
i (τ(cid:48))|0(cid:105)|0(cid:105)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)2
(cid:88)
dτ(cid:48)(cid:104)1|(cid:104)m|(cid:88)
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:90) ∞
i (τ(cid:48))|0(cid:105)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)2
(cid:88)
(cid:90) ∞
(cid:110)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)gi(m)
dτ(cid:48)λ(τ(cid:48))ei|m|t(cid:48)−imx(cid:48)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)2
(cid:88)
(cid:16)I1(t) + I2(t)
(cid:17)
t→∞−1

dτ(cid:48)(cid:104)m|Oτ

|m|

m,i

m,i

i

+

= lim

2

(cid:90) ∞

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) ˜gi(m)

|m|

dτ(cid:48)λ(τ(cid:48))ei|m|t(cid:48)−imx(cid:48)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)2(cid:111)

(C1)

(C2)

(C3)

(C4)

(C5)

Appendix D: Causal condition in the comoving coordinates

In this appendix, we check the causality condition in the comoving coordinates of linear

acceleration and circular motion, which ensures the Rindler times of the two Majorana zero

modes have the same time direction.

1. Linear acceleration: position diﬀerence

In the linear acceleration case, the causality condition is the same as requiring ξ > − 1
a.
For the case with two Majorana zero modes separated by a distance L as given by (56),

using the deﬁning equation (55) of the Rindler coordinates we can obtain

(D1)
As the hyperbolic cosine function is always positive, we ﬁnd ξ always is bigger than − 1
a.
Thus, there is no constraint for this case.

cosh aτ

ξ =

+

(

L

1
a

cosh aτ2
cosh aτ

− 1) .

2. Linear acceleration: acceleration diﬀerence

For the case of two Majorana modes moving with diﬀerent accelerations as speciﬁed by

(58), the deﬁning equation (55) then yields

ξ =

1

a2 cosh aτ

(cosh a2τ2 − 1) +

1
a

(

1

cosh aτ

− 1) .

(D2)

38

Thus, the condition ξ > − 1

a yields

1
a2

cosh a2τ2 +

1
a

− 1
a2

> 0 .

(D3)

This condition is automatically satisﬁed for a2 > 0 as cosh a2τ2 > 1. For a2 < 0, it yield a

constraint as follows:

τ2 < − 1
a2

cosh−1(1 − a2
a

) .

(D4)

3. Circular motion of constant angular velocity

For circular motion case of constant angular velocity, the comoving coordinates (τ, xM , yM )

(of the Majorana zero mode γ1) and the Minkowski coordinates (t, x, y) are related by [40]

t= γτ + r0γΩyM ,
x= xM cos γΩτ − γyM sin γΩτ + r0 cos γΩτ,

y= xM sin γΩτ + γyM cos γΩτ + r0 sin γΩτ .

(D5)

The worldline of γ1 is obtained by setting xM = yM = 0.

On the other hand, the worldline of the second Majorana zero mode γ2 is given by

t= γτ2,

x= r0 cos(γΩτ2 + π),

y= r0 sin(γΩτ2 + π).

From (D5) and (D6), we can ﬁnd the following relation between τ2 and τ

τ2 − τ

sin [γΩ(τ2 − τ ) + π]

=

Ωr2
0
γ

.

(D6)

(D7)

[1] W. G. Unruh, “Notes on black hole evaporation,” Phys. Rev. D 14, 870 (1976).

[2] B. S. DeWitt, 1979, in General relativity: An Einstein centenary survey, edited by S. W.

Hawking and W. Israel (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge), 680-745.

[3] L. C. B. Crispino, A. Higuchi and G. E. A. Matsas, “The Unruh eﬀect and its applications,”

Rev. Mod. Phys. 80, 787 (2008) [arXiv:0710.5373 [gr-qc]].

39

[4] S. W. Hawking, “Particle Creation by Black Holes,” Commun. Math. Phys. 43, 199 (1975)

[Commun. Math. Phys. 46, 206 (1976)]. doi:10.1007/BF02345020

[5] A. Peres and D. R. Terno, “Quantum information and relativity theory,” Rev. Mod. Phys.

76, 93 (2004) doi:10.1103/RevModPhys.76.93 [quant-ph/0212023].

[6] P. M. Alsing and G. J. Milburn, “Teleportation with a Uniformly Accelerated Partner,” Phys.

Rev. Lett. 91, 180404 (2003).

P. M. Alsing, D. McMahon, and G. J. Milburn, “Teleportation in a non-inertial frame,” J.

Opt. B: Quantum Semiclass. Opt. 6 (2004), S834.

[7] I. Fuentes-Schuller and R. B. Mann, “Alice falls into a black hole: Entanglement in non-inertial

frames,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 120404 (2005) [quant-ph/0410172].

[8] P. M. Alsing, I. Fuentes-Schuller, R. B. Mann and T. E. Tessier, “Entanglement of Dirac ﬁelds

in non-inertial frames,” Phys. Rev. A 74, 032326 (2006). [quant-ph/0603269].

[9] S. Y. Lin, C. H. Chou and B. L. Hu, “Disentanglement of two harmonic oscillators in relativistic

motion,” Phys. Rev. D 78, 125025 (2008). [arXiv:0803.3995 [gr-qc]].

[10] E. Martin-Martinez, “Relativistic Quantum Information: developments in Quantum Informa-

tion in general relativistic scenarios,” arXiv:1106.0280 [quant-ph].

[11] D. C. M. Ostapchuk, S. Y. Lin, R. B. Mann and B. L. Hu, “Entanglement Dynamics between

Inertial and Non-uniformly Accelerated Detectors,” JHEP 1207, 072 (2012) [arXiv:1108.3377

[gr-qc]].

[12] B. Richter and Y. Omar, “Degradation of entanglement between two accelerated parties: Bell

states under the Unruh eﬀect,” Phys. Rev. A 92, 2, 022334 (2015). [arXiv:1503.07526 [quant-

ph]].

[13] S. Y. Lin and B. L. Hu, “Backreaction and the Unruh eﬀect: New insights from exact solutions

of uniformly accelerated detectors,” Phys. Rev. D, 76, 064008 (2007). [arXiv:gr-qc/0611062].

[14] J. S. Bell and J. M. Leinaas, “Electrons As Accelerated Thermometers,” Nucl. Phys. B 212,

131 (1983).

[15] J. S. Bell and J. M. Leinaas, “The Unruh Eﬀect and Quantum Fluctuations of Electrons in

Storage Rings,” Nucl. Phys. B 284, 488 (1987).

[16] J. R. Letaw and J. D. Pfautsch, “The Quantized Scalar Field in Rotating Coordinates,” Phys.

Rev. D 22, 1345 (1980). “The Quantized Scalar Field in the Stationary Coordinate Systems

of Flat Space-time,” Phys. Rev. D 24, 1491 (1981).

40

J. R. Letaw, “Vacuum Excitation of Noninertial Detectors on Stationary World Lines,” Phys.

Rev. D 23, 1709 (1981).

P. C. W. Davies, T. Dray and C. A. Manogue, “The Rotating quantum vacuum,” Phys. Rev.

D 53, 4382 (1996) [gr-qc/9601034].

O. Levin, Y. Peleg and A. Peres, “Unruh eﬀect for circular motion in a cavity,” J. Phys. A

26, 3001 (1993).

[17] J. Doukas, S. Y. Lin, B. L. Hu and R. B. Mann, “Unruh Eﬀect under Non-equilibrium

conditions: Oscillatory motion of an Unruh-DeWitt detector,” JHEP 1311, 119 (2013).

[arXiv:1307.4360].

[18] D. Kothawala and T. Padmanabhan, “Response of Unruh-DeWitt detector with time-

dependent acceleration,” Phys. Lett. B 690, 201 (2010). [arXiv:0911.1017 [gr-qc]].

[19] N. Obadia and M. Milgrom, “On the Unruh eﬀect for general trajectories,” Phys. Rev. D 75,

065006 (2007). [gr-qc/0701130 [GR-QC]].

[20] L. C. Barbado and M. Visser, “Unruh-DeWitt detector event rate for trajectories with time-

dependent acceleration,” Phys. Rev. D 86, 084011 (2012) [arXiv:1207.5525 [gr-qc]].

[21] B. F. Svaiter and N. F. Svaiter, “Inertial and noninertial particle detectors and vacuum ﬂuc-

tuations,” Phys. Rev. D 46, 5267 (1992).

[22] W. G. Brenna, R. B. Mann and E. Martin-Martinez, “Anti-Unruh Phenomena,”

arXiv:1504.02468 [quant-ph].

[23] E. G. Brown, E. Martin-Martinez, N. C. Menicucci and R. B. Mann, “Detectors for probing

relativistic quantum physics beyond perturbation theory,” Phys. Rev. D 87, 084062 (2013).

[arXiv:1212.1973 [quant-ph]].

[24] A. Y. Kitaev, “Unpaired Majorana fermions in quantum wires”, Phys. Usp. 44, 131 (2001).

[arXiv:cond-mat/0010440].

[25] J. Alicea, “Majorana fermions in a tunable semiconductor device”, Phys. Rev. B 81, 125318

(2010).

[26] L. Fidkowski, J. Alicea, N. Lindner, R. M. Lutchyn, and M. P. A. Fisher, ”Universal transport

signatures of Majorana fermions in superconductor-Luttinger liquid junctions”, Phys. Rev. B

85, 245121 (2012). [arXiv:1203.4818 [cond-mat.str-el]].

[27] M. Z. Hasan, C. L. Kane, “Topological Insulators,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 82, 3045 (2010).

[28] X.-L. Qi and S.-C. Zhang, “Topological insulators and superconductors”, Rev. Mod. Phys.

41

83, 1057 (2011).

[29] Xie Chen, Zheng-Cheng Gu, Zheng-Xin Liu, Xiao-Gang Wen, “Symmetry-Protected Topologi-

cal Orders in Interacting Bosonic Systems,” Science, 338, 1604 (2012). [arXiv:1301.0861[cond-

mat.str-el]]

[30] G. Goldstein, C. Chamon, “Decay rates for topological memories encoded with Majorana

fermions”, Phys. Rev. B 85, 205109 (2011). [arXiv:1107.0288 [cond-mat.mes-hall]].

[31] Shih-Hao Ho, Sung-Po Chao ,Chung-Hsien Chou and Feng-Li Lin,”Decoherence patterns

of topological qubits from Majorana modes,” New J. Phys. 16, no. 11, 113062 (2014).

[arXiv:1406.6249 [cond-mat.str-el]].

[32] Matisse W. Y. Tu and Wei-Min Zhang , ”A non-Markovian decoherence theory for double dot

charge qubit”, Phys. Rev. B 78, 235311 (2008).

[33] B. L. Hu, J. P. Paz and Y. -h. Zhang, “Quantum Brownian motion in a general environment:

1. Exact master equation with nonlocal dissipation and colored noise,” Phys. Rev. D 45, 2843

(1992).

[34] W.-M. Zhang, P.-Y. Lo, H.-N. Xiong, M. W.-Y. Tu, F. Nori, “General non-Markovian dy-

namics of open quantum systems”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 170402 (2012). [arXiv:1206.4490

[quant-ph]].

[35] H.-P. Breuer, E.-M. Laine, J. Piilo, “Measure for the Degree of Non-Markovian Behavior of

Quantum Processes in Open Systems,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 210401 (2009).

E.-M. Laine, J. Piilo, H.-P. Breuer, “Measure for the non-Markovianity of quantum processes,”

Phys. Rev. A bf 81, 062115 (2010).

[36] A. Rivas, S. F. Huelga, and M. B. Plenio, “Entanglement and Non-Markovianity of Quantum

Evolutions,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 050403 (2010).

[37] J. Polchinski, “String theory. Vol. 1: An introduction to the bosonic string,” Cambridge

University Press, 2007.

[38] T.S. Evans, D.A. Steer, ”Wick’s theorem at ﬁnite temperature”, Nucl. Phys B 474, 481-496

(1996).

[39] V. Mukhanov and S. Winitzki, “Introduction to quantum eﬀects in gravity,” Cambridge Uni-

versity Press (2007).

[40] B. Mashhoon and U. Muench, “Length measurement in accelerated systems,” Annalen Phys.

11, 532 (2002) [gr-qc/0206082].

42

