Can banks default overnight? Modeling endogenous contagion on O/N interbank

market

Paweł Smagac,d, Mateusz Wili´nskia, Piotr Ochnickia, Piotr Arendarskib, Tomasz Gubieca

aFaculty of Physics, University of Warsaw

bThe Poznan University of Economics and Business

cWarsaw School of Economics

dNational Bank of Poland

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
6
1

 
 
]

.

C
E
n
i
f
-
q
[
 
 

1
v
2
4
1
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

We propose a new model of the liquidity driven banking system focusing on overnight interbank loans. This signiﬁcant

branch of the interbank market is commonly neglected in the banking system modeling and systemic risk analysis.

We construct a model where banks are allowed to use both the interbank and the securities markets to manage their

liquidity demand and supply as driven by prudential requirements in a volatile environment. The network of interbank

loans is dynamic and simulated every day. We show how only the intrasystem cash ﬂuctuations, without any external

shocks, may lead to systemic defaults, what may be a symptom of the self-organized criticality of the system. We also

analyze the impact of diﬀerent prudential regulations and market conditions on the interbank market resilience. We

conﬁrm that central bank’s asset purchase programs, limiting the declines in government bond prices, can successfully

stabilize bank’s liquidity demand. The model can be used to analyze the interbank market impact of macroprudential

tools.

Keywords: contagion, interbank market, network analysis, systemic risk, quantitative easing, macroprudential policy

Acknowledgements

Support of Fundation For Polish Science (28/UD/SKILLS/2015) in funding this research is acknowledged. The

opinions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not reﬂect those of the associated institutions. The authors

are grateful to Professor Stefan Thurner from Medical University of Vienna for helpful discussion and comments.

Corresponding author’s email: Tomasz.Gubiec@fuw.edu.pl.

Preprint submitted to Elsevier

March 17, 2016

1. Introduction

The interbank market activity in many countries has been severely impaired during the recent global ﬁnancial

crisis. The events of 2007 were the hard way to ﬁnd out how a single shock can lead to disastrous eﬀects on the whole

international ﬁnancial system. The network of complicated relations and dependencies between ﬁnancial institutions

across the globe was the main reason for which a single crash spread through the world like a disease [44]. From this

moment on, the term contagion [78] became an important topic in ﬁnancial stability research.

The central term in mentioned area of research is systemic risk1. In economy and ﬁnance, risk is often described

in terms of volatility and uncertainty. A more precise description and at the same time a good measure of risk, would

be to say that it is a probability of an event multiplied by its negative consequences. What this approach lacks are

the dependencies and correlations between events. Thus, systemic risk is not about a single, unrelated crashes, it is

about connected series of negative events. In more descriptive way, it is about ﬁnancial domino eﬀect or an avalanche

of failures, where even smaller but correlated events, may lead to system breakdown. Study of systemic risk aims at

describing the odds of the whole system collapse, instead of concentrating only on individual institutions risks. A very

elegant description of the systemic risk concept can be found in Haldane et al. [42]. One of the crucial elements in

the rise of so called cascades of failures are connections between diﬀerent elements of the system. These connections

may transmit negative eﬀects from one institution to another causing a great damage to the whole economy. In order

to approach this problem, we need to precisely deﬁne the links. Having that, we will be able to use the network

formalism, a common tool used by researchers in many areas [26] including ﬁnance and economy2. This popularity

is partly because of clear analogies between ﬁnancial systems and other systems where this approach turned out to be

very succesful [60].

Allen and Gale [7] where the ﬁrst to show that contagion risk prevails in incomplete bank network structures where

small shocks lead to large eﬀects through contagion mechanism. Freixas et al. [29] further show that interbank market

used for liquidity management purposes endogenously leads to a coordination failure which exposes the system to

contagion in case of a single too-interconnected-to-fail bank default. Therefore, the loosened market discipline on the

interbank market requires the central bank to act as a crisis manager. This notion is further strengthened by Montagna

and Lux [63], who show that there are non-linearities in the way bank-speciﬁc shocks are propagated and structure

1See [19] and [76] for an overview of the systemic risk concept.
2In

2013, Nature

published

a

special

Physics

issue, which main

subject was

’Complex Networks

in

Finance’.

http://www.nature.com/nphys/journal/v9/n3/index.html

2

of the various layers of interbank relations matters for contagion assessment. Such studies show that the network

structure determines the stability of the interbank market (for a contrasting view see Birch and Aste [14], who argue

that the network structure has less importance).

The inherent instability of the network structure is exempliﬁed by a robust-yet-fragile character of ﬁnancial net-

works [33]. The network structures are resistant to shocks in general or to peripheral nodes, yet vulnerable to conta-

gion from failure of nodes with concentrated exposures [3, 22, 53]. This is conﬁrmed by other studies [16, 71, 30, 18]

which ﬁnd that majority of real interbank networks have strong tiered and core-periphery structures, meaning that

they have low density and the exposures distribution is concentrated in a small number of nodes that lay in the core.

Therefore, tiered networks may be inherently less stable [74].

Most of interbank network analyses are country studies based on static interbank network structures, while as-

suming idiosyncratic or common shocks (e.g. [75, 31, 81, 16, 80, 56, 21, 73, 58, 61, 28]). They are surveyed by

Upper [79], who concludes that the common ﬁnding is that contagion in core-periphery structured networks can be

considered as a low probability, but high impact event. The drawback of those studies is that they are based on a

point-in-time structure of the interbank network and due to its constant evolution the resulting contagion risk should

be assessed with caution. Moreover, the studies analyzed by Upper usually include contagion eﬀects only in one

particular segment of the interbank market (the lending market), excluding other layers of interconnectedness (e.g.

cross-holding of securities). However, diﬀerent studies include randomly generated distribution of possible networks

and provide more robust results [40]. Taking into account banks’ behavioral reactions motivated by liquidity man-

agement strategies leads to liquidity contagion (e.g. [49, 2, 15]) which cannot be neglected. We contribute to this

debate by simulating a dynamic market structure with liquidity being one of the main drivers of banks’ behavior in

our model.

The main idea behind the network analysis is that the properties and behavior of a node have to take into account

the behavior of nodes directly or indirectly linked to it [23]. In most cases of systemic risk research, nodes in the

analysed network are simply ﬁnancial institutions. In this particular paper we focus on the interbank system, thus

analysed network will consider only banks. Moreover, we want to concentrate on the transactions with short-term

maturities, mainly overnight loans. This type of loans is a substantial part of the whole interbank activity, and their

main purpose is to manage liquidity. In most countries they represent about 30% of all interbank loans volume,

making them an important and not negligible part of the market. Furthermore, in countries like Russia, Poland,

Czech Republic or Belarus, overnight loans dominate entirely, having more than 90% share in the interbank market.

3

Therefore, we believe that analysing the impact of overnight loans on market stability, is an important part of systemic

risk research, maybe the most important for some parts of the world. As a result, in our model links between banks

describe overnight loans. The main obstacle in majority of networks analysis studies is lack of data on bilateral

interbank exposures either from ﬁnancial reporting or payment system ﬂows. This data is conﬁdential and usually

unavailable even for supervisory authorities and central banks. As a solution to these problems, many researchers use

various methods, in order to estimate the structure of connections between banks [55, 41, 64].

Network approach has been intensively used to analyze the interbank market contagion. This market can on

the one hand act as a shock absorber, bank liquidity management mechanism and induce market discipline through

incentivizing monitoring (e.g. [72]). But on the other hand, interbank market may serve as a transmission channel for

contagion eﬀect [68, 6]. There are two crucial propagation mechanisms in the interbank market. The most obvious

one is simply through insolvency of debtors, who are unable to pay oﬀ their liabilities. In this case, negative eﬀects

spread along the edges of our network. This transmission channel is direct. In contrast, the trust eﬀect causes a

ﬁnancial crisis to propagates indirectly. In response to other institutions ﬁnancial problems, a bank may decide to

limit its participation in the interbank market. Such behavior leads to an overall reduction in bank funding supply

on the interbank market or selectively only towards banks perceived as unhealthy [9, 49, 20, 8, 32]. As shown by

Gai and Kapadia [34], this propagation mechanism may cause severe cascade eﬀects. However, interbank is not the

only source of failure propagation. Crisis may also spread due to common external assets held by diﬀerent banks.

If a failing bank decides to sale its assets in order to maintain liquidity, he may cause a signiﬁcant loss in value of a

particular asset or even a whole class of assets, making him also suﬀer a loss. If other banks, with a similar portfolio

of external assets, are on the verge of solvency, it may trigger a series of defaults across the system [5, 36]. The model

presented in the paper accounts for all of the above mechanisms of contagion.

The approach to modelling economical phenomena, shown in this work, is a part of an increasingly popular

concept of agent based modelling in ﬁnance and economy [35]. Complexity theory, agent based models and network

science are the elements that may give rise to a new quality in modern economy and ﬁnance [27, 12], and they are all

jointly used in our research. The structure of our model, which will be described in further sections, is in some aspects

similar to model B proposed in paper by Iori et al. [48]. Instead of analysing single shocks, we try to ﬁnd a relation

between the size of banks cash ﬂuctuations and the stability of the market. In such a case, collapse will be a result

of the internal system dynamics. We make several assumptions regarding the response of a bank to these ﬂuctuations

given the need to fulﬁll the simpliﬁed prudential requirements. We also need to remember that those random changes

4

in bank’s balance sheet may be both positive and negative. Finally, even though banks react in a rational way from

their individual perspective, the decisions they make often have a negative impact on the system as a whole. Their

strategy may even assume other banks failure as long as it keeps them solvent [70].

First step of the model simulation is to build a network of bilateral interbank exposures, according to the supply

and demand on the interbank system. Since it is very unlikely to get a perfect matching across all the banks that need

money and those who want to lend money, banks need to reach to the securities market next. At every step, banks

need to check the status of their debt and the regulatory requirements that they need to fulﬁll. The central questions

of our paper is to what extent does the interbank market stabilize the system, what is its impact on propagation of

defaults and how the regulations aﬀect both stability and contagion process.

The contributions of the paper are threefold. First, unlike most previous models which tested system’s reaction

to an external shock, in our dynamic model crashes of the entire banking system may occur as a result of an internal

feature of the system (cash ﬂuctuations). Secondly, our interbank network structure is dynamic and while other

studies mainly analyze static network structures (see [79] for a survey), the network structure in our model is unique

i.e. simulated every day on the basis of interbank transactions from the previous day. From this perspective, our work

is a part of large branch of science which is dedicated to systems described with evolving networks [82] (or even more

popular lately, temporal networks [45]). Thirdly, we take into account three types of interconnectedness channels at

the same time together with an array of capital and liquidity requirements. We show to what extent do prudential ratios

dampen or magnify contagion on the interbank market. We also conﬁrm that central bank’s asset purchase programs,

limiting the declines in government bond prices, may successfully stabilize bank liquidity demand.

In our study, we used data from Polish interbank market. To the best of our knowledge, there are scarcely any

studies of the interbank contagion in Poland, all of which ﬁnd a limited contagion risk. Hałaj [39], studying domino

eﬀects, suggests that it results only from the failure of some of the largest interbank players and the second round

eﬀects of the initial default are negligible. The Polish central bank (NBP) study also conﬁrms a low probability of a

domino eﬀect [65]. Gr ˛at-Osi´nska and Pawliszyn [38], using BoF-PSS2 Payment System Simulator, come to a similar

conclusion that banks hold excess liquidity for the settlement of intraday payments, while the queue management and

central bank’s intraday credit in the payments systems contribute to low liquidity contagion potential [66].

Our study has several practical applications. It may be successfully applied to a stress testing framework to gauge

the probability and impact of shocks and the resulting network resilience. The model may also be used to test the

interbank impact of macroprudential requirements and their calibration before they are implemented. Moreover, if

5

extended, the model might prove helpful in assessing the systemic importance of particular nodes to identify the

super-spreaders, which is of great relevance to both central bank liquidity management for monetary policy purposes,

as well as to detection of too-interconnected-to-fail institutions [54]. It would be particularly fruitful to combine this

model with models of long-term maturity loans, which would give us a more comprehensive picture of the interbank

market.

The article is structured as follows. First, we describe the stylized facts about the interbank market in Poland and

data used in the model. Model assumptions and its construction are presented in the subsequent section. After that we

discuss the results. In the last part we present policy implications of our research and conclusions.

2. Stylized facts about the interbank market in Poland and data used

We study the Polish unsecured segment of the interbank market that includes transactions between banks used for

liquidity management purposes. According to the National Bank of Poland data [67] the unsecured segment dominated

in Poland in 2013 (almost 60% of the total volume of interbank transactions), while it played a marginal role in the

euro area, dominated by repos (60%). Polish banking sector has a structural liquidity surplus and the counterparty

exposure limits between banks on interbank market are set relatively low to limit credit risk. The interbank market

is stable and O/N constituted almost all (93%) unsecured transactions in 2013 (both in terms of volume and value)

with very few transactions for longer periods. In the euro area the term structure of interbank transactions is more

balanced. An average daily turnover of unsecured O/N transactions in Poland equaled 4.36 bilion PLN in 2013, half

compared to pre-crisis period.

There is a clearly visible core-periphery structure of the Polish interbank network – almost half of the unsecured

interbank market turnover (both the demand and the supply sides) is concentrated in 5 banks (75% of O/N), according

to KNF3 data [50]. These banks have structural liquidity surpluses and determine the liquidity of the whole market.

For payment settlement purposes banks can also use the secured overnight credit (standing facility) from the central

bank or lombard credit, yet their use is negligible. The obligatory reserve ratio is 3.5% and banks hold marginal excess

reserves at the NBP.

There are also three features of the banking system in Poland relevant to the perspective of our model approach.

First, the Polish banking sector has a large home bias. According to the ESRB [25], at end-2013, holdings of sovereign

3Polish Financial Supervision Authority

6

debt (domestic and other Member States) equaled 41% of total assets, while the home bias (holdings of domestic

sovereign debt/holding of domestic + euro area sovereign debt) stood at 98% in Poland. Second, equity in the Polish

banking system is of very high quality i.e. it consists almost entirely of fully loss-absorbing Tier 1 capital. According

tho KNF data [51], Tier 1 capital constituted 90.2% of the total equity in the banking sector at the end of 2013.

Third, there is a signiﬁcant maturity mismatch in the Polish banking sector for short-term maturities. Liabilities with

maturity of up to 1 year constituted 73.5% of the total liabilities, while on the asset side this share equaled only 29%

[51]. Therefore, liquidity risk is an important determinant of banking system stability in Poland.

As a sample set in the simulation we use end-2013 data collected for 31 largest banks in Poland from their

respective annual reports on a standalone basis. In our sample we have included only the banks fulﬁlling the following

two conditions. First, the bank had to participate in the Elixir system (interbank payments clearing system in Poland).

At the end of 2013 there were 46 banks active in Elixir. Second, the bank had to provide complete ﬁnancial reporting

data in its annual reports. We exclude the central bank (NBP) and the State Development Bank of Poland. The ﬁnal

list of banks used in the model simulation is included in appendix 1. Our sample, thus, covers 79.8% of banking sector

assets in Poland as of end-2013 (including assets of commercial banks, cooperative banks and branches of foreign

credit institutions). This is a relatively high share, given that the interbank transactions in Poland are performed mainly

within the pool of commercial banks and branches of foreign credit institutions, while numerous small cooperative

banks usually use their associated banks for liquidity purposes and do not engage in interbank transactions directly.

All regulatory ratios are calculated using the same end-2013 data.

3. The model (assumptions and construction)

In the previous section we brieﬂy presented characteristics of the Polish interbank market. As already mentioned,

in contrast to most European countries, unsecured O/N loans dominate the interbank market in Poland. For that

reason, a majority of models present in the literature tested on diﬀerent market structures cannot be directly applied

to the Polish market. In fact, the network of loan connections on the Polish interbank market diﬀers every single day,

while most of hitherto models analyzed the dynamics of a static loan network only. This explains why creating a new

liquidity-driven interbank market model was necessary.

In this section we introduce a new model of an interbank system dominated by transactions with short maturities.

Our aim is to model the condition and behavior of each bank on a daily basis. Since our model focuses on the short

term, we analyze banks’ reactions to changes in their liquidity demand and supply, shaped by internal as well as

7

external factors. Our approach is founded on a stylized bank balance sheet-based model with a simpliﬁed structure

and is similar to those presented by e.g. [52, 57, 62, 77, 14, 43, 4]. In addition, it also develops the initial work on

network modeling performed by Gai and Kapadia [33] and May and Arinaminpathy [59]. We construct a banking

system network from heterogeneous banks, all of which have a diﬀerent size and balance sheet structure, based on the

data extracted from their ﬁnancial reports.

Our model has several assumptions:

• the entire market of interbank transactions consists only of unsecured O/N loans (in other words, we exclude

interbank transactions with longer maturities and secured interbank transactions)

• banks’ behavior is motivated by the need to fulﬁll the liquidity demand and maintain the regulatory ratios

• O/N loans are granted each day and repaid the following day

• banks’ securities portfolios consist only of liquid Polish government bonds available for sale and valued using

mark-to-market accounting

• after a bank defaults, its counterparty banks immediately experience losses on their interbank loans equal to the

amount of the exposure (we assume the Recovery Rate is zero and Loss Given Default equals 100%)

• any losses incurred by the bank are directly reducing its equity

• troubled banks cannot raise additional capital overnight or be bailed out (no state aid provision by public au-

thorities and no recourse to the Lender of Last Resort from the central bank is possible)

• we focus on short-term reactions of banks, changes in business models are not considered

• we analyze the impact only on the balance sheet items and exclude any income statement adjustments

• counterparty (interbank exposures) and market risks (bond prices) are not being hedged

• we analyze the dynamics within a closed system – only the banks from Poland participate in the domestic

interbank market

Our stylized bank balance sheet structure includes several items. They are used as variables representing the state

of each bank every day. We assume that assets may be described by the following four variables:

• Loans - total amount of loans to the nonﬁnancial and public sector at their book value

8

• Cash - cash and balances with the central bank

• Securities - consisting only of liquid government bond portfolio of a single bond type; current price of a single

bond is described by the variable p, so the mark-to-market value of securities is equal to p times Securities

• Interbank Assets - total amount of all interbank O/N loans granted

Liabilities of the bank may be described by only two variables, namely:

• Deposits - total amount of deposits from the nonﬁnancial and public sector at their book value as well as any

bank bonds issued that can be redeemed at notice by the bank before their maturity without loss of value

• Interbank Liabilities - total amount of all interbank O/N loans received

Total Assets is a sum of Loans, Cash, Securities times p, and Interbank Assets, while Total Liabilities is a sum of

Deposits and Interbank Liabilities. Equity of the bank is deﬁned as the diﬀerence between Total Assets and Total

Liabilities. Loans to the nonﬁnancial and public sector remain constant. Cash and Securities serve as liquidity buﬀer.

Although the fundamental aim of banks’ activity is to make proﬁt, this activity is limited by the need to fulﬁll

numerous prudential regulations. In our model we assume several simpliﬁed prudential regulatory constraints on

banking activity that banks try to maintain at all time. These ratios act, therefore, as drivers of banks’ behavior and

their responses to changes in their liquidity demand4. As our model focuses solely on the short term, we assume

that two prudential ratios are crucial: Reserve Requirement and Liquidity Ratio. These ratios can be expressed in the

model in terms of the variables deﬁned.

Reserve requirement is a monetary policy tool. It is an obligatory level of banks reserves set aside for liquidity

reasons. It is dependent on the reserve rate set by the NBP (3.5% as of end-2013). It is calculated on the basis of

nonﬁnancial deposits (500k EUR is subtracted from the required reserve level), excluding interbank deposits. We

model it as follows:

Reserve Requirement =

Cash

Deposits

(1)

Liquidity Ratio represents bank’s ability to service its short term obligations. It is also based on Basel III Liquidity

Coverage Ratio (LCR). LCR is deﬁned as high quality liquid assets devided by total net cash outﬂows over the next

4We go further than Aldasoro et al. [4] where bank’s optimization decisions are subject only to two standard regulatory requirements: liquidity

and capital adequacy ratios

9

30 calendar days. In our model we assume that the Liquidity Ratio is deﬁned as:

Liquidity Ratio =

(Cash + p · Securities)

Deposits

(2)

Although only a fraction of deposits in the denominator may be regarded as short-term liabilities, we can multiply

both sides of the equation by this fraction without a loss of generality. As a result, the regulatory limit is lower as it is

multiplied by the share of short-term deposits in total deposits (which is lower than 100%).

When those two crucial regulatory requirements are fulﬁlled, bank considers three other ratios. The ﬁrst one is

the Leverage Ratio representing the overall level of bank’s risk exposure. It has to be equal to or greater than 3%

according to Basel standards. Another one is the Capital Adequacy Ratio which represents bank’s resilience and

overall soundness. It is modeled on the basis of Basel methodology of risk-weighted assets (RWA) and has to equal

at least 8%. RWA includes bank’s exposure to credit risk, which is the most important element of RWA for Polish

banks 5. We account for market and operational risk by setting slightly higher risk weights. Risk weights for cash and

other assets (i.e. government bonds) equal 0%. The third ratio considered is the large exposure limit representing part

of bank’s credit risk management requirements. It is based on Article 111 of Directive 2006/48/EC and limits bank’s

overall exposure to interbank market. These ratios are estimated in our model as follows:

Leverage Ratio =

Equity

Total Assets

Capital Adequacy Ratio =

Equity
RWA

where RWA = 90% · Loans + 20% · Interbank Assets

Large Exposure Limit =

Interbank Assets

Equity

≤ 25%

(3)

(4)

(5)

The deﬁnitions of all ﬁve regulatory ratios outlined above are naturally a simpliﬁcation of the real regulatory require-

ments and the exact values of those ratios in our model should not be directly compared with regulatory limits. Since

we do not have access to granular bank ﬁnancial reporting data used for supervisory purposes, we had to rely on

banks’ annual reports, which rarely used exact deﬁnitions of particular balance sheet items. To mitigate this problem

we calculate values of four regulatory ratios (Reserve Requirement, Liquidity Ratio, CAR, Leverage Ratio) based

on empirical data for end-2013 and assume that these values are actually the regulatory requirement i.e. during the

simulation each bank is trying to maintain the ratios higher or equal to their initial value. This is analogical to the

assumption in the DebtRank method [13, 10]. For the large exposure limit we are using the actual regulatory require-

ment of 25% of equity. Of course, contrary to the four other ratios, the bank is trying to maintain its Large Exposure

value below this threshold.

5It constituted 87.3% of the total bank capital requirement at the end of 2013, according to KNF data [51]

10

As mentioned before, we assume that our interbank system model is driven by the ﬂuctuations in the environment

which aﬀect banks’ balance sheets. Some loans are not repaid, assets are changing their values, customers’ bank

transfers are changing the level of cash and deposits. Moreover, we cannot neglect banks commercial activity, for

example on FX swaps market. All of these factors would have to be taken into account in our model. At the same time

we want to keep our model as simple as possible. Without a doubt, all of the deﬁned variables describing the balance

sheet of a single bank should ﬂuctuate daily. As a compromise between simplicity of the model and its accuracy,

we assume that the impact of the above-mentioned factors is approximated by Cash ﬂuctuation only. Moreover,

ﬂuctuation of Cash level of each bank should somehow depend on its size. As a result, we assume that every day, for

the period of one day, Cash level of each bank diﬀers by

(initial Cash) · σ · N(0, 1),

(6)

where N(0,1) is a random number drawn from the normal distribution. Such a change in Cash level can be both

positive and negative. Let us emphasize that on average such an assumption does not change the total amount of cash

available in the whole banking system. Parameter sigma measures the amplitude of ﬂuctuation aﬀecting the banking

system. For σ = 0 there are no changes in Cash level, and the higher σ the higher the Cash ﬂuctuations and the more

unpredictable and dangerous the environment of the banking system becomes (exemplifying a bank run, for instance).

It may be regarded as an analogue of a physical quantity – the temperature of the banking system.

So far we deﬁned the variables describing the state of the system and external factors inﬂuencing them. However,

the most important part of our model are the system’s dynamics, determined by banks’ activity. Since we focus on

a daily time scale, we only consider actions that a real bank would be able to take within one day, which include:

selling/buying of securities, interbank lending/borrowing and – following the DebtRank model – repurchase of bonds

issued, as included in the Deposits. This way we exclude external ﬁnancial support to the bank, or changes in retail

loans and deposit policies. Such actions are usually taken by the management of the bank and require some adjustment

time to be reﬂected in balance sheet items, which does not happen on a daily basis. This limits the applicability of

our model to approximately 60 working days. A detailed description of the actions that can be taken by banks in our

model is provided below.

• Interbank lending: decreases the amount of Cash and increases the Interbank Assets. By lending on the in-

terbank market, the bank makes proﬁt (although our model does not explicitly account for that proﬁt) so we

assume that it prefers to lend the amount of money exceeding the amount of Cash needed to fulﬁll the regulatory

11

Bank Action

Reserve

Liquidity

Leverage

Capital

Large

Ratio

Ratio

Ratio

Adequacy Ratio

Exposure Limit

Grant interbank loan

Receive interbank loan

Buy securities

Sell securities

”Repayment of” deposits

⇓

⇑

⇓

⇑

⇓

⇓

⇑

0

0

⇓

0

⇓

0

0

⇑

⇓

0

0

0

0

⇑

0

0

0

0

Table 1: Bank actions and their impact.

requirements, rather than to put its excess aside. From the regulatory point of view interbank lending: decreases

Liquidity Ratio, decreases CAR, but increases Large Exposure ratio.

• Interbank borrowing: increases the amount of Cash and increases Interbank Liabilities. As a result both Total

Assets and Total Liabilities increase. It is the cheapest and the fastest way to satisfy Cash demand needed to

fulﬁll regulatory requirements (Reserve Requirement and Liquidity Ratio). Impact on the regulatory ratios:

increases Liquidity Ratio and decreases Leverage Ratio.

• Buying of securities: decreases the amount of Cash and increases Securities. The bank proﬁts from holding

securities so we assume that it prefers to buy Securities instead of just holding excess of Cash that cannot be

lent on the interbank market and exceeds the amount needed to fulﬁll the regulatory requirements.

• Selling of securities: increases the amount of Cash and decreases Securities. If a bank does not have enough

Cash to fulﬁll the Reserve Requirement, it can sell its Securities, if it has any. In this way the bank does not

change any other regulatory ratios except the Reserve ratio.

• Repurchase of bonds issued: decreases the amount of Cash and decreases Deposits. This operation is the only

way a bank may improve its leverage ratio in the short term. It will only be taken in case of a too low leverage

ratio and only until this requirement is fulﬁlled.

The impact of each of the actions outlined above on particular regulatory ratios is summarized in Table 1. The

arrows indicate improvement/worsening of the ratio, while 0 signiﬁes no impact.

Let us now analyze the net impact of all ﬁve actions considered and the need to fulﬁll the deﬁned regulatory

12

ratios, on the variables describing banks’ balance sheets. For the purposes of this analysis we assume that there are

no transactional costs related to trading securities. The most important observation is that in such conditions these

actions cannot aﬀect banks’ Equity. Equity will decrease only if a bank experiences losses on defaulted interbank

loans or is hit by a negative daily random Cash ﬂuctuation. Within a single day a bank cannot increase its equity in

any way, but it can only manage its liquidity and adjust the amount of Cash and Securities. In such case we cannot

apply the standard condition of banks default being Equity lower than or equal to zero. Hence, in our model the

default condition had to be deﬁned in a diﬀerent way which will be described further in the text. In order to precisely

deﬁne the possible interactions and dynamics of the model we need to specify the simulation scenario of a single day

in a sequential manner.

1. Repayment of O/N loans. At the beginning of the day all banks are repaying their yesterday’s interbank

liabilities. After this action it is possible that bank’s Cash level is negative. However, we assume that at this

stage such situation is possible as it may use the intraday overdraft facility oﬀered by the central bank free of

charge (we do not include the impact of collateralization of the intraday overdraft). As an exception, this step

is not included in the very ﬁrst day of the simulation.

2. Cash ﬂuctuations. Bank transfers executed by the customers and banks’ trading activity result in changes in

banks’ Cash level, as described and justiﬁed previously.

3. Check of leverage level and possibly repurchase of bonds issued. If the current state of a bank satisﬁes

both Reserve Requirement and Liquidity Ratio, we are dealing with Cash surplus. In such a case, and only

in such a case, the bank will use this surplus to redeem the bonds issued, provided the leverage ratio exceeds

the regulatory requirement as well. By repurchasing the bonds issued, the bank lowers its Total Liabilites and

Total Assets, and thus, the leverage ratio. However, the bank is limited by the requirement to satisfy Reserve

Requirement and Liquidity Ratio.

4. Specifying the demand for Cash. Before any interbank loan is executed we need to specify the cash supply

and demand for all banks. As mentioned, if a bank satisﬁes both Reserve Requirement and Liquidity Ratio, we

are dealing with Cash surplus. In such a case the bank is able to allocate the remaining excess of cash (X) on

the interbank market. We decided to include another way of ﬁnancial contagion which we called the trust eﬀect.

It is well-known that during a crisis the banks do not fully trust each other and are not willing to grant loans

in the same amount as before. To model this phenomenon we assume that if any of the banks in the system

defaulted the trust between the banks is reduced. In such a case, instead of the whole surplus Cash (X) the

13

banks are willing to lend only 20% of it (X/5). This fraction was chosen arbitrarily only to show the impact of

this phenomenon on system’s dynamics. Moreover, granting a loan decreases bank’s Liquidity Ratio and CAR,

so the ﬁnal Cash supply of a bank is limited to a value which ensures Reserve Requirement, Liquidity Ratio,

CAR and Large exposure limit are satisﬁed.

If the current state of a bank does not satisfy Reserve Requirement or Liquidity Ratio we are dealing with a

Cash deﬁcit. In such a case the bank disregards other regulatory requirements and seeks to borrow the amount

needed to meet the shortfall to fulﬁll these two ratios.

5. Interbank loans market. Once we divided banks into groups of potential creditors (with Cash surplus) and

debtors (with Cash deﬁcit) we need to specify the loans’ amounts. If the total Cash supply is not equal to the

total Cash demand, the total amount of interbank loans granted is limited to the inferior of the two. In the

ﬁrst model we assume that loans are distributed perfectly evenly i.e. every creditor lends to every debtor. The

amount is proportional both to the creditor’s supply and the debtor’s demand. This may be regarded as the ﬁrst

step of proportional ﬁtting used by Battiston et al.[11].

6. Specifying the demand for Securities. Since the interbank lending may not satisfy the demand for Cash on

the market in full or not allocate the cash supply available, we take into account an alternative way of gaining

and allocating Cash, namely we allow the banks to buy or sell Securities. Such an operation involves a risk

of loss, therefore, the interbank market is the preferred way of acquiring and allocating Cash on the daily time

scale. Analogically to the previously-analyzed interbank loans market, we specify banks’ supply and demand

for Securities. If after the interbank market transactions the current state of a bank still does not satisfy Reserve

Requirement or Liquidity Ratio, it needs to sell Securities in the amount necessary to cover the Cash deﬁcit. On

the other hand, if a bank is dealing with a Cash surplus even after allocating the excess on the interbank market,

it uses the rest of it to buy Securities.

7. Securities market. The securities market diﬀers from the interbank market signiﬁcantly. It is not a closed

market and banks are not its only participants. For the purpose of the model we assume that other participants’

supply and demand are constant, which means that only supply and demand of the banks’ may inﬂuence the

price of Securities. We calculate the excess demand (ED = total demand - total supply) and following [17]

assume that the price of the securities changes according to the following formula:

dp
p

= η · ED

14

(7)

where parameter η is called the market depth and p is the price of security. As we may easily notice, if η = 0 the

price of security does not change regardless of demand or supply. In that case, the securities market mechanism

is a simple barter between Securities and Cash. It may be interpreted as an intervention of the Central Bank

which decides to buy or sell Securities at a speciﬁc price. In the real market η > 0. We assume η = 10−6 which

means that if banks decide to sell 10% of all their Securities, their price will decrease by 3%. This assumption

may be slightly too lenient to be realistic. It should, however, be enough to show the impact of this phenomenon.

8. Update of the state. Although banks operate in such a way to fulﬁll all the regulatory requirements, we assume

that the only default condition is Cash < 0 at the end of the day. Thus, we only consider the softest condition

but at the same time the one that renders a bank inevitably bankrupt.

Since the above-mentioned steps of the simulation are performed every day, the resulting interbank market structure

is dynamic and varies daily.

In conclusion, our model takes into account three possible ways of ﬁnancial contagion. The ﬁrst channel is the

direct interconnectedness i.e. a collapsing bank not paying its obligations inducing losses on its interbank liabilities.

The counterparty banks suﬀer losses, which worsens their ﬁnancial standing by reducing their equity. The second

channel we analyze is the asset price contagion [15] (indirect interconnectedness) through government bonds. A

falling bank, after suﬀering a drop in equity is forced to sell its securities (government bonds) in signiﬁcant amounts

in order to maintain regulatory ratios. This in turn results in an immediate and signiﬁcant decrease in their value. In

eﬀect, the bank not only does not recover the full value of the bonds held, but also aﬀects the market price of the bond

(ﬁre sale eﬀect). As a result, this decreases the value of securities held by other banks thus aggravating their condition.

Lastly, we also consider a reduction of availability of interbank credit due to a loss of conﬁdence.

4. Results

The dynamics of the model proposed in this paper are driven by cash ﬂuctuations. These random changes of

banks’ assets are fundamental to the whole concept, determine banks’ reactions and the stability of the system. The

amplitude of these ﬂuctuations is controlled by a single parameter σ, strongly aﬀecting the results of a single simu-

lation. The most interesting outcome of the simulation is the fraction of defaulted banks at the end of the assumed

simulation period (the number of defaulted banks divided by the total number of banks in the simulation). Because

our assumptions are valid only at the time scale of days, we assume that 3 months (60 working days) is the maximum

period of applicability of the model. Hence, the average number of defaulted banks at the end of 60 days period as

15

a function of parameter σ seems to be the most reliable default metric. Further in this section we focus on the plots

presenting this metric in diﬀerent model versions.

A computer simulation of the banking system gives us a unique opportunity to analyze its behavior in conditions

similar to the real world. We may easily exclude the selected features of the system, and thus assess their inﬂuence

on the system. From this perspective, the most basic model we can think of is a case without the securities and the

interbank market. In this scenario the banks cannot react in any way, so their default is just a matter of strong enough

ﬂuctuations. Since the bank goes bankrupt when its Cash falls below zero, the probability of default in each step is

simply the probability of a negative ﬂuctuation exceeding bank’s initial cash. The distribution of the changes described

is Gaussian with standard deviation equal to the initial cash multiplied by the parameter σ. Therefore, the probability

of default is every day equal to Φ(cid:16)− 1

σ(cid:17), where Φ(.) is the Gaussian cumulative distribution function. Furthermore, the

probability of bankruptcy during the time period T = 60 days equals:

This leads to a formula for the expected fraction of banks which went bankrupt, as a function of σ:

pT (σ) = 1 − ΦT (−1/σ) .

h fdef(σ)i = 1 − ΦT (−1/σ) ,

(8)

(9)

where h.i is the ensemble average of the process. This result is presented in the Fig. 1 with a dashed line. We analyzed

the result for σ from 0 to 8. Even for relatively small values of sigma, below unity, almost all banks in the system

defaulted. As expected, without the interbank market and any possibility to liquidate the assets, even a relatively small

ﬂuctuation may result in a default. In this version of the model the banks are fully independent, but despite that the

whole system collapses very quickly.

The obvious next step is to allow the banks to sell their securities and analyze the diﬀerence compared to the

previous case. For simplicity reasons we assume that the securities market is perfect i.e. selling or buying any amount

of securities does not aﬀect their price.

In our model such situation is equivalent to η = 0 in Eq.(7). Such an

assumption reﬂects the government bond purchase program by the central bank, being possibly one of the measures

of last resort to stabilize the interbank and government bond markets during the crisis. In this version of the model

the banks cannot inﬂuence other regulatory ratios than Reserve Requirement so it is the only ratio they are trying to

satisfy. This version is also analytically solvable. The average fraction of defaulted banks as a function of σ is given

by:

h fdef(σ)i =

1
N

N

Xi=1  1 − ΦT  −

1 + Securitiesi/InitialCashi

σ

!! ,

16

(10)

where N is a number of banks in the system. This dependance is presented in the Fig. 1 with a solid line. When

 1

 0.8

 0.6

 0.4

 0.2

〉

s
t
l
u
a
f
e
d
 
f
o
 
s
n
o
i
t
c
a
r
f

〈

 0

 0

 1

 2

no interbank, η=0
interbank, η=0
no interbank, η>0
interbank, η>0
no interbank, no securities market

 3

 6

 7

 8

 4

 5

σ - amplitude of Cash fluctuations

Figure 1: Average fraction of defaults as a function of σ for various versions of the model with two regulatory ratios (Reserve Requirement and

Liquidity Ratio): solid black line - η = 0, without the interbank, black squares - η = 0, with the interbank, black circles - η = 10−6, without the

interbank, black traingles - η = 10−6, with the interbank, dashed black line - without the securities market, without the interbank.

selling of securities is allowed, the behavior of the system is considerably diﬀerent compared to the previous case.

A signiﬁcant fraction of defaults is observed only for σ > 1 and even for huge ﬂuctuations (σ ≈ 8) only about 80%

of the banks defaulted. Even such a simple example shows that purchase of government bonds in quantities large

enough to stabilize their prices (quantitative easing) may signiﬁcantly decrease the number of defaulted banks during

the crisis or even prevent the defaults. In this model banks are still independent, so let us now focus on the model with

interactions leading to inter-dependencies.

The most natural way of interaction between the banks is via the interbank loans market. Let us consider the

previous version of the model with perfect securities market (η = 0), but with the interbank market as described in

the previous section. In such a version, the banks are able to adjust both Reserve Requirement and Liquidity Ratio.

We, therefore, assume that banks are trying to satisfy both of these conditions. Due to more complicated dynamics

this version had to be solved using a numerical simulation. The dependance between the average fraction of defaulted

bank and σ, obtained by averaging over 100 realizations, is presented in Fig. 1 with black squares. The result fully

conﬁrms the expectations presented in the literature (e.g. [1, 24, 37]), when compared to the version without the

17

interbank market. First of all, with the interbank market the number of defaults became noticable for σ > 1.5, which

means that the system can survive without any defaults even for relatively large ﬂuctuations. Moreover, for σ < 4.5

the fraction of defaulted banks is lower than in the case without the interbank market. However, for σ > 4.5 the

fraction of the defaulted banks becomes grater than in the case without the interbank market. This result conﬁrms the

stabilizing role of the interbank market in a situations of moderate ﬂuctuation, but not in the case of a systemic crisis.

During the crisis, the interbank market is one of the contangion channels and may actually increase the number of

defaults. Our result conﬁrms for instance the intuitions of the Iori et al. [47] not shown by their model.

Two versions of the model presented above assumed a perfect securities market corresponding to η = 0. Such

assumption does not, however, describe the real banking system without central bank’s intervention. The next question

we pondered over was the inﬂuence of a positive η. Since we do not have the data about transactions on Polish

government bonds market, we were unable to estimate the price impact function in this case and the market depth. We

limited our analysis to the qualitative study of the impact of an inﬁnitesimally small η = 10−6. Both versions with and

without the interbank market were analyzed with positive η. The results obtained are shown in Fig. 1 with triangles

and circles respectively. With a positive η a single bank with a Cash deﬁcit selling securities may – via ﬁre sales –

decrease the value of the bonds held by other banks and hence aﬀect their ﬁnancial standing. The securities market in

this form may be viewed as a second channel of contagion in our model. As we may see in Fig. 1 in both cases higher

η increased the fraction of defaulted banks. The inﬂuence of the interbank market is qualitatively similar to the case

of η = 0 i.e. for smaller σ it stabilizes the system and reduces the number of defaults, while for larger σ it ampliﬁes

the contagion. Yet, the stabilizing eﬀect of the interbank market is it this case much weaker and is suppressed already

for σ ≈ 2.5. The inﬂuence of η > 0 is, therefore, much more signiﬁcant than the existence of the interbank market in

our model.

In addition to two contagion channels already introduced, interbank market and securities market, we now add

the third one called the trust eﬀect, as described in the previous section. The comparison of the fraction of defaulted

banks for various σ, with present interbank market and two cases of η equal to zero and greater than zero are shown in

Fig. 2. In both cases, η = 0 and η > 0, the inﬂuence of the trust eﬀect is not as signiﬁcant as the alterations discussed

previously. The defaults start approximately at the same point σ ≈ 1.5. For smaller sigmas the trust eﬀect increases

the fraction of defaults, but it decreases it for larger ones. This conﬁrms the conjecture that a decrease in interbank

trust may propagate the crisis. However, this eﬀect is of little relevance in case of η > 0. In the case of η = 0, which

can be viewed as an intervention of the central bank, the negative impact of the trust eﬀect is much more explicit. For

18

 1

 0.8

 0.6

 0.4

 0.2

〉

s
t
l
u
a
f
e
d
 
f
o
 
s
n
o
i
t
c
a
r
f

〈

 0

 0

 1

 2

no trust effect, η=0
trust effect, η=0
no trust effect, η>0
trust effect, η>0

 3

 6

 7

 8

 4

 5

σ - amplitude of Cash fluctuations

Figure 2: Impact of the trust eﬀect. Average fraction of defaults as a function of σ for various versions of the model with interbank market and two

regulatory ratios (Reserve Requirement and Liquidity Ratio): black squares - η = 0, without the trust eﬀect, white squares - η = 0, with the trust

eﬀect, black traingles - η = 10−6, without the trust eﬀect, white traingles - η = 10−6, with the trust eﬀect.

large ﬂuctuations the behavior described by the trust eﬀect is reasonable not only from the point of view of a single

bank but also from the point of view of the whole system, and it slightly reduces the fraction of defaulted banks. And

while this eﬀect signiﬁcantly reduces the total volume of the interbank loans, it does not inﬂuence the fraction of

defaults in a similar way.

The ﬁnal inquiry made by this analysis is the impact at the daily time scale of all the remaining regulatory require-

ments. Besides Reserve Requirement and Liquidity Ratio already applied, we described Capital Adequacy Ratio,

Leverage Ratio, and Large Exposures limit. The result of the simulation including all of them is presented in Fig. 3.

There is almost no diﬀerence compared to the previous version of the model with the trust eﬀect, the version closest

to the real banking system both in case of η = 0 and η > 0. Upon closer inspection we are able to see two eﬀects,

both of them increasing the number of deafults. First of them, present in the case of η = 0, increases the fraction

of defaults for σ ∈ [1.5, 3] and is caused by the Large Exposure Limit6. Second eﬀect inﬁnitesimally increases the

6We analyzed all combinations of the regulatory requirements (Capital Adequacy Ratio, Leverage Ratio, Large Exposure Limit) added to the

standard two (Reserve Requirement and Liquidity Ratio).

In all cases with Large Exposure Limit the eﬀect was present. Without the Large

Exposure Limit the results overlapped the result without additional requirements.

19

 1

 0.8

 0.6

 0.4

 0.2

〉

s
t
l
u
a
f
e
d
 
f
o
 
s
n
o
i
t
c
a
r
f

〈

 0

 0

 1

 2

η=0, Reserve, Liquidity
η=0, all ratios
η>0, Reserve, Liquidity
η>0, all ratios

 3

 6

 7

 8

 4

 5

σ - amplitude of Cash fluctuations

Figure 3: Impact of the regulatory ratios. Average fraction of defaults as a function of σ for various versions of the model with interbank market

and ”the trust eﬀect”: white squares - two regulatory ratios: Reserve Requirement and Liquidity Ratio, η = 0, black squares - all analyzed

regulatory requirements (Reserve Requirement, Liquidity Ratio, Capital Adequacy Ratio, Leverage Ratio, Large Exposure Limit), η = 0, white

triangles - two regulatory ratios: Reserve Requirement and Liquidity Ratio, η = 10−6, black triangles - all analyzed regulatory requirements

(Reserve Requirement, Liquidity Ratio, Capital Adequacy Ratio, Leverage Ratio, Large Exposure Limit), η = 10−6.

fraction of defaults for large Cash ﬂuctuations, σ > 3. The latter is caused by the Leverage Ratio Requirement7. We

may, therefore, conclude that currently used regulatory requirements have a very limited impact on the fraction of

defaults for any σ and their inﬂuence is almost negligible.

5. Conclusions and policy implications

The collapse of the interbank markets during the recent global ﬁnancial crisis underlined the importance of the

interbank contagion due to network interconnectedness. We devised an interbank market model for an interbank

market structure dominated by O/N transactions and tested it on a sample of Polish banking system data for end-2013.

We demonstrated how does banks’ behavior, motivated by the need to fulﬁll the regulatory prudential requirements,

determine the extent of contagion. We prove that internal model dynamics may lead to contagious default cascades.

In the numerous versions of our model, we studied three possible channels of ﬁnancial contagion (balance sheet

7The result conﬁrmed in the same way as in the case of the ﬁrst eﬀect.

20

interconnectedness, asset price contagion and conﬁdence decline). Furthermore, our results also point to some key

policy implications.

Firstly, and rather unsurprisingly, we conﬁrm the stabilizing eﬀect of the interbank market, although it seems to be

the weakest when all of the regulatory ratios considered need to be met by banks. This underlines the conclusion that

during a systemic crisis less restrictive prudential requirements may reduce the default propensity on the interbank

market by maintaining its eﬀective functioning. However, for signiﬁcant ﬂuctuations of cash, the interbank market

begins to amplify instead of dampening the shocks, which also conﬁrms the previous ﬁndings showing that the impact

of the network connectivity on the banking system’s stability, depends on the magnitude of the shock (see [77] and

[68]).

Secondly, once the default cascade starts, the contagion spreads relatively quickly on the market, so interventions

of public authorities have to be prompt in order to be eﬀective. We also conﬁrm the substitutive role of the interbank

market and the government bond market as banks’ liquidity demand stabilizers. Moreover, we conﬁrm that central

bank’s asset purchase programs, aimed at limiting the declines in government bond prices during the crisis, can

successfully stabilize banks’ liquidity demand and act as a crisis-management tool.

Thirdly, in case of central bank’s asset purchase program, the need to fulﬁll the large exposure limit reduces

the volume of interbank transactions and slightly increases the number of defaults. It suggests that usage of such a

tool should be preceded by in-depth analyzes of applicable regulatory requirements. In conclusion, the supervisory

authorities should be able to exercise discretion and ﬂexibly adjust these requirements, as the crisis unfolds.

We are fully aware of the limitations of our model, relating mainly to model assumptions, simpliﬁcations and

assumed behavioral responses on the need to fulﬁll the regulatory ratios. Therefore, our model may surely be further

enhanced in many diﬀerent ways e.g. by introducing the central bank as an active interbank market player or more

realistic network of interbank loans connections. Moreover, it is possible to apply our model to data for diﬀerent

periods and from other EU countries. Our model may also be directly applied to data of countries with similar maturity

structure of the interbank transactions e.g. the Czech Republic, Russia or Belarus, which would allow comparisons

of potential contagion in other banking systems, as well as over time. Similarily, it is possible to introduce additional

(i.e. regulatory or idiosyncratic) factors determining banks liquidity demand.

The results of our study contribute to the literature on the impact and eﬀectiveness of prudential requirements on

the interbank market, which is still scarce8. Our short-term model underlines the importance of studying contagion

8See e.g.

[46] or [69] for a comprehensive evaluation of the eﬀectiveness of macroprudential tools, yet not including their impact on the

21

mechanisms within the daily dynamics of the interbank network structure. This stands in contrast to the fact that a

majority of hitherto models analyze contagion only over longer periods. We believe that combining these two ap-

proaches might prove conducive to comprehensive and more precise estimations of contagion potential in the banking

systems, which studies omitting the O/N transactions dynamics could underestimate.

Appendix A. The algorithm

Below we describe the algorithm used in our simulation.

In order to fully understand it, it is crucial for the

reader to be aware of the exact structure of the objects used in the pseudo-code. These objects are deﬁned as follows:

Banks – elements of the interbank system, each characterized by the following attributes: Cash, Deposits, Equity,

Loans, Securities, representing its assets and liabilities, and ReserveRatio, LeverageRatio, CapitalAdequacyRatio,

LiquidityRatio, which represent the regulatory ratios imposed on each bank individually.

0.Setting regulatory ratios according to current Bank ratios.

FOR EACH bank IN banks DO:

ReserveRatio = Cash/Deposits

LeverageRatio = Equity/( Securities + Loans)

CapitalAdequacyRatio = Equity/Loans

LiquidityRatio = Securities/Deposits

1.Repayment of all O/N loans.

FOR EACH loan IN loans DO:

IF(DebtorDefaulted = TRUE):

Creditor[Cash] = Creditor[Cash] + Amount

Debtor[Cash] = Debtor[Cash] - Amount

2.Cash fluctuations.

FOR EACH bank IN banks DO:

Cash = Cash - RandomCash[previous_day]

RandomCash[current_day] = InitialCash*RandomGauss(mean=0, variance=Sigma)

Cash = Cash + RandomCash[current_day]

interbank market.

22

3.Checking leverage ratio of every bank and repaying deposits if necessary.

FOR EACH bank IN banks DO:

IF( Equity / ( Loans + InterbankAssets + Securities) < LeverageRatio ):

lackLR = Loans + InterbankAssets + Securities - Equity / LeverageRatio

maxLR = MAX((Securities - LiquidityRatio*Deposits )/(1 - LiquidityRatio),0)

maxRR = MAX((Cash - ReserveRatio*Deposits)/(1 - ReserveRatio),0)

Deposits = Deposits - MIN(lackLR,maxLR,maxRR)

Cash = Cash - MIN(lackLR,maxLR,maxRR)

4.Calculating demand for cash for each bank.

FOR EACH bank IN banks DO:

CashDemand = 0.0

IF(Securities/ Deposits >= LiquidityRatio AND Cash >= ReserveRatio*Deposits):

maxLR = MAX(Securities - LiquidityRatio*Deposits, 0)

maxBE = MAX(0.25*Equity, 0)

maxCAR = MAX(5.0*(Equity/CapitalAdequacyRatio - Loans), 0)

CashDemand = -TrustRatio*(Cash - ReserveRatio*Deposits)

IF(LiquidityRatioOn = TRUE):

IF(CashDemand < -maxLR):

CashDemand = -maxLR

IF(BigExposureOn = TRUE):

IF(CashDemand < -maxBE):

CashDemand = -maxBE

IF(CapitalAdequacyRatioOn = TRUE):

IF(CashDemand < -maxCAR):

CashDemand = -maxCAR

ELSE:

CashDemand = MAX(LiquidityRatio*Deposits - Securities,

ReserveRatio*Deposits - Cash,0)

5.Network of interbank loans is created according to banks’ demand and supply.

23

All of the loans are executed.

Total = MIN(SUM(Supply), SUM(Demand))

Sup = Supply/SUM(Supply)

Dem = Demand/SUM(Demand)

FOR i = 1 TO SIZE(Supply) DO:

FOR j =1 TO SIZE(Demand) DO:

Amount = Total*Sup*Dem

IF(Amount > 0):

ADD Loan(Banks[i], Banks[j], Amount) TO Loans

Supply[i] = Supply[i] + Amount

Demand[j] = Demand[j] - Amount

6.Calculating demand for securities for each bank.

FOR EACH bank IN banks DO:

ExpectedCash = ReserveRatio*Deposits

SecuritiesDemand = MAX((Cash - ExpectedCash)/SecuritiesPrice,-Securities)

7.Orders for securities are executed at a price calculated according to the demand size.

TotalDemand = SUM([SecuritiesDemand FOR ALL banks])

SecuritiesPrice = SecuritiesPrice*(1 + Eta*TotalDemand)

FOR EACH bank IN banks DO:

Securities = Securities + SecuritiesDemand

Cash = Cash - SecuritiesDemand*SecuritiesPrice

SecuritiesDemand = 0

8.Every bank with cash < 0 defaults and cannot repay its loans nor participate in the system.

9.Repeat from step 1.

References

[1] Acemoglu, D., Ozdaglar, A., Tahbaz-Salehi, A., February 2015. Systemic Risk and Stability in Financial Networks. American Economic

Review 105 (2), 564–608.

[2] Aikman, D., Alessandri, P., Eklund, B., Gai, P., Kapadia, S., Martin, E., Mora, N., Sterne, G., Willison, M., 2011. Funding liquidity risk in a

quantitative model of systemic stability. Central Banking, Analysis, and Economic Policies Book Series 15, 371–410.

24

[3] Albert, R., Jeong, H., Barabási, A.-L., 2000. Error and attack tolerance of complex networks. nature 406 (6794), 378–382.

[4] Aldasoro, I., Delli Gatti, D., Faia, E., 2015. Bank networks: Contagion, systemic risk and prudential policy.

[5] Alessandri, P., Gai, P., Kapadia, S., Mora, N., Puhr, C., 2009. A framework for quantifying systemic stability. International Journal of Central

Banking 5 (3), 47–81.

[6] Allen, F., Babus, A., 2008. Networks in ﬁnance.

[7] Allen, F., Gale, D., 2000. Financial contagion. Journal of political economy 108 (1), 1–33.

[8] Anand, K., Gai, P., Marsili, M., 2012. Rollover risk, network structure and systemic ﬁnancial crises. Journal of Economic Dynamics and

Control 36 (8), 1088–1100.

[9] Arinaminpathy, N., Kapadia, S., May, R. M., 2012. Size and complexity in model ﬁnancial systems. Proceedings of the National Academy of

Sciences 109 (45), 18338–18343.

[10] Bardoscia, M., Battiston, S., Caccioli, F., Caldarelli, G., 2015. Debtrank: A microscopic foundation for shock propagation. PloS one 10 (6),

e0130406.

[11] Battiston, S., Caldarelli, G., D’Errico, M., Gurciullo, S., 2015. Leveraging the network: a stress-test framework based on debtrank.

[12] Battiston, S., Farmer, J. D., Flache, A., Garlaschelli, D., Haldane, A. G., Heesterbeek, H., Hommes, C., Jaeger, C., May, R., Scheﬀer, M.,

2016. Complexity theory and ﬁnancial regulation. Science 351 (6275), 818–819.

[13] Battiston, S., Puliga, M., Kaushik, R., Tasca, P., Caldarelli, G., 2012. Debtrank: Too central to fail? ﬁnancial networks, the fed and systemic

risk. Scientiﬁc reports 2.

[14] Birch, A., Aste, T., 2014. Systemic losses due to counterparty risk in a stylized banking system. Journal of Statistical Physics 156 (5),

998–1024.

[15] Bluhm, M., Krahnen, J. P., 2011. Default risk in an interconnected banking system with endogeneous asset markets.

[16] Boss, M., Elsinger, H., Summer, M., Thurner 4, S., 2004. Network topology of the interbank market. Quantitative Finance 4 (6), 677–684.

[17] Cifuentes, R., Ferrucci, G., Shin, H. S., 2005. Liquidity risk and contagion. Journal of the European Economic Association 3 (2-3), 556–566.

[18] Craig, B., Von Peter, G., 2014. Interbank tiering and money center banks. Journal of Financial Intermediation 23 (3), 322–347.

[19] De Bandt, O., Hartmann, P., 2000. Systemic risk: a survey.

[20] De Bandt, O., Hartmann, P., Peydro, J., 2009. Systemic risk in banking: An update. Oxford Handbook of Banking, Oxford University Press,

Oxford.

[21] Degryse, H., Nguyen, G., 2004. Interbank exposure: An empirical examination of systemic risk in the belgian banking system.

[22] Doyle, J. C., Alderson, D. L., Li, L., Low, S., Roughan, M., Shalunov, S., Tanaka, R., Willinger, W., 2005. The ”robust yet fragile” nature of

the internet. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 102 (41), 14497–14502.

[23] ECB, June 2010. Financial stability review.

[24] Elliott, M., Golub, B., Jackson, M. O., 2014. Financial networks and contagion. American Economic Review 104 (10), 3115–53.

[25] ESRB, 2015. Esrb report on the regulatory treatment of sovereign exposures, march 2015.

[26] Fang, J.-q., Wang, X.-f., Zheng, Z.-g., Bi, Q., Di, Z.-r., Xiang, L., 2007. New interdisciplinary science: Network science (1). PROGRESS IN

PHYSICS-NANJING- 27 (3), 239.

[27] Farmer, J. D., Foley, D., 2009. The economy needs agent-based modelling. Nature 460 (7256), 685–686.

[28] Fourel, V., Héam, J.-C., Salakhova, D., Tavolaro, S., 2013. Systemic risk in the french banking system: A network analysis.

25

[29] Freixas, X., Parigi, B. M., Rochet, J.-C., 2000. Systemic risk, interbank relations, and liquidity provision by the central bank. Journal of

money, credit and banking, 611–638.

[30] Fricke, D., Lux, T., 2012. Core–periphery structure in the overnight money market: evidence from the e-mid trading platform. Computational

Economics 45 (3), 359–395.

[31] Furﬁne, C. H., 1999. The microstructure of the federal funds market. Financial Markets, Institutions & Instruments 8 (5), 24–44.

[32] Gabrieli, S., Salakhova, D., Vuillemey, G., 2015. Cross-border interbank contagion in the european banking sector.

[33] Gai, P., Kapadia, S., 2010. Contagion in ﬁnancial networks. In: Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A: Mathematical, Physical and

Engineering Sciences. The Royal Society, p. rspa20090410.

[34] Gai, P., Kapadia, S., 2010. Liquidity hoarding, network externalities, and interbank market collapse. In: Proc. R. Soc. A. Vol. 466. p. 439.

[35] Gatti, D. D., Desiderio, S., Gaﬀeo, E., Cirillo, P., Gallegati, M., 2011. Macroeconomics from the Bottom-up. Vol. 1. Springer Science &

Business Media.

[36] Gauthier, C., Lehar, A., Souissi, M., 2010. Macroprudential regulation and systemic capital requirements. Tech. rep., Bank of Canada Working

Paper.

[37] Georg, C.-P., 2013. The eﬀect of the interbank network structure on contagion and common shocks. Journal of Banking & Finance 37 (7),

2216 – 2228.

[38] Gr˛at-Osi´nska, A., Pawliszyn, M., 2007. Poziomy płynno´sci i opó´znienia w rozrachunku w systemie sorbnet-podej´scie symulacyjne przy

u˙zyciu symulatora systemów płatno´sci bof-pss2. Bank i Kredyt (5), 53–66.

[39] Hałaj, G., 2005. Badanie efektu domina w polskim systemie bankowym. Bank i Kredyt (10), 39–50.

[40] Hałaj, G., Kok, C., 2013. Assessing interbank contagion using simulated networks. Computational Management Science 10 (2-3), 157–186.

[41] Hałaj, G., Kok, C., Mar. 2014. Modeling emergence of the interbank networks. Working Paper Series 1646, European Central Bank.

[42] Haldane, A. G., May, R. M., 2011. Systemic risk in banking ecosystems. Nature 469 (7330), 351–355.

[43] Hausenblas, V., Kubicová, I., Lešanovská, J., 2015. Contagion risk in the czech ﬁnancial system: A network analysis and simulation approach.

Economic Systems 39 (1), 156–180.

[44] Helbing, D., 2013. Globally networked risks and how to respond. Nature 497 (7447), 51–59.

[45] Holme, P., Saramäki, J., 2012. Temporal networks. Physics reports 519 (3), 97–125.

[46] IMF, 2012. The interaction of monetary and macroprudential policies. IMF Policy Paper.

[47] Iori, G., Jafarey, S., Padilla, F., Jul. 2003. Interbank Lending, Reserve Requirements and Systemic Risk (17).

[48] Iori, G., Jafarey, S., Padilla, F. G., 2006. Systemic risk on the interbank market. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 61 (4),

525–542.

[49] Karas, A., Schoors, K. J., Lanine, G., 2008. Liquidity matters: Evidence from the russian interbank market.

[50] KNF, 2012. Rynek mi˛edzybankowy w polsce - wyniki ankiet skierowanych do banków i oddziałów instytucji kredytowych pełni˛acych funkcj˛e

dealera rynku pieni˛e˙znego, 2012.

[51] KNF, 2015. Report on the condition of banks in 2013, 2015.

[52] Krause, A., Giansante, S., 2012. Interbank lending and the spread of bank failures: A network model of systemic risk. Journal of Economic

Behavior & Organization 83 (3), 583–608.

[53] Langﬁeld, S., Liu, Z., Ota, T., 2014. Mapping the uk interbank system. Journal of Banking & Finance 45, 288–303.

26

[54] León, C., Machado, C. L., Sarmiento, M., 2014. Identifying central bank liquidity super-spreaders in interbank funds networks. Available at

SSRN 2413056.

[55] Lü, L., Zhou, T., 2011. Link prediction in complex networks: A survey. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 390 (6),

1150–1170.

[56] Lublóy, Á., 2005. Domino eﬀect in the hungarian interbank market. Hungarian Economic Review 52 (4), 377–401.

[57] Manna, M., Schiavone, A., 2012. Externalities in interbank network: results from a dynamic simulation model. Bank of Italy Temi di

Discussione (Working Paper) No 893.

[58] Martínez-Jaramillo, S., Pérez, O. P., Embriz, F. A., Dey, F. L. G., 2010. Systemic risk, ﬁnancial contagion and ﬁnancial fragility. Journal of

Economic Dynamics and Control 34 (11), 2358–2374.

[59] May, R. M., Arinaminpathy, N., 2010. Systemic risk: the dynamics of model banking systems. Journal of The Royal Society Interface 7 (46),

823–838.

[60] May, R. M., Levin, S. A., Sugihara, G., 2008. Complex systems: Ecology for bankers. Nature 451 (7181), 893–895.

[61] Memmel, C., Sachs, A., 2013. Contagion in the interbank market and its determinants. Journal of Financial Stability 9 (1), 46–54.

[62] Montagna, M., Kok, C., 2013. Multi-layered interbank model for assessing systemic risk. Tech. rep., Kiel Working Paper.

[63] Montagna, M., Lux, T., 2014. Contagion risk in the interbank market: a probabilistic approach to cope with incomplete structural information.

Tech. rep., FinMaP-Working Paper.

[64] Musmeci, N., Battiston, S., Caldarelli, G., Puliga, M., Gabrielli, A., 2013. Bootstrapping topological properties and systemic risk of complex

networks using the ﬁtness model. Journal of Statistical Physics 151 (3-4), 720–734.

[65] NBP, 2011. Financial stability report, 2011.

[66] NBP, 2013. Financial stability review, 2013.

[67] NBP, 2014. Rozwój systemu ﬁnansowego w polsce w 2013 r., 2014.

[68] Nier, E., Yang, J., Yorulmazer, T., Alentorn, A., 2007. Network models and ﬁnancial stability. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control

31 (6), 2033–2060.

[69] Ozge, A., Olmstead-Rumsey, J., 2015. How eﬀective are macroprudential policies?: an empirical investigation.

[70] Perotti, E. C., Suarez, J., 2002. Last bank standing: What do i gain if you fail? European economic review 46 (9), 1599–1622.

[71] Puhr, C., Seliger, R., Sigmund, M., 2012. Contagiousness and vulnerability in the austrian interbank market. Oesterreichische Nationalbank

Financial Stability Report 24.

[72] Rochet, J.-C., Tirole, J., 1996. Interbank lending and systemic risk. Journal of Money, credit and Banking, 733–762.

[73] Rørdam, K. B., Bech, M. L., et al., 2009. The topology of danish interbank money ﬂows. Banks and Bank Systems 4, 48–65.

[74] Sachs, A., 2014. Completeness, interconnectedness and distribution of interbank exposures a parameterized analysis of the stability of ﬁnan-

cial networks. Quantitative Finance 14 (9), 1677–1692.

[75] Sheldon, G., Maurer, M., 1998. Interbank lending and systemic risk: an empirical analysis for switzerland. Swiss Journal of Economics and

Statistics 134, 685–704.

[76] Smaga, P., 2014. The concept of systemic risk. Systemic Risk Centre Special Paper (5).

[77] Steinbacher, M., Steinbacher, M., 2014. Robustness of banking networks to idiosyncratic and systemic shocks: a network-based approach.

Journal of Economic Interaction and Coordination, 1–23.

27

[78] Stiglitz, J. E., 2010. Contagion, liberalization, and the optimal structure of globalization. Journal of Globalization and Development 1 (2).

[79] Upper, C., 2011. Simulation methods to assess the danger of contagion in interbank markets. Journal of Financial Stability 7 (3), 111–125.

[80] Upper, C., Worms, A., 2004. Estimating bilateral exposures in the german interbank market: Is there a danger of contagion? European

Economic Review 48 (4), 827–849.

[81] Wells, S., 2002. Uk interbank exposures: systemic risk implications. Financial Stability Review 13 (12), 175–182.

[82] Yook, S.-H., Jeong, H., Barabási, A.-L., Tu, Y., 2001. Weighted evolving networks. Physical review letters 86 (25), 5835.

28

