6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
6
1

 
 
]

.

O
C
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
9
0
2
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Causality, initial conditions and inﬂationary

magnetogenesis

Christos G. Tsagas

Section of Astrophysics, Astronomy and Mechanics, Department of Physics

Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki 54124, Greece

Abstract

The post-inﬂationary evolution of inﬂation-produced magnetic ﬁelds, conventional or not,
can change dramatically when two fundamental issues are accounted for. The ﬁrst is causal-
ity, which demands that local physical processes can never aﬀect superhorizon perturbations.
The second is the nature of the transition from inﬂation to reheating and then to the radia-
tion era, which determine the initial conditions at the start of these epochs. Technically, the
latter issue can be addressed by appealing to Israel’s junction conditions. Causality implies
that inﬂationary magnetic ﬁelds dot not freeze into the matter until they have re-entered the
causal horizon. The nature of cosmological transitions and the associated initial conditions,
on the other hand, determine the large-scale magnetic evolution after inﬂation. Put together,
the two can slow down the adiabatic decay of superhorizon-sized magnetic ﬁelds throughout
their post-inﬂationary life and thus lead to considerably stronger residual strengths. This
is “good news” for both conventional and non-conventional magnetogenesis. Mechanisms
operating outside standard electromagnetism, in particular, do not need to enhance their
ﬁelds too much during inﬂation, in order to produce seeds that can feed the dynamo today.
In fact, even conventional inﬂationary magnetic ﬁelds might be able to do the same.

1

Introduction

Despite the eﬀorts, the quest for the origin of the large-scale magnetic (B) ﬁelds seen in the
universe today still goes on [1]. Two are the main “schools of thought”. The ﬁrst suggests a late-
time generation for these ﬁelds, triggered by physical processes that operate after recombination,
while the second advocates a primordial origin for cosmic magnetism. In both cases, the aim is
to produce the seeds that will be later ampliﬁed by the galactic dynamo to produce the large-
scale B-ﬁelds observed in galaxies [2]. To operate successfully, however, the dynamo requires
seeds with certain speciﬁcations. One is the coherence scale, which should not be less than
10 Kpc (comoving, namely before the collapse of the protogalaxy). The other requirement is
the seed’s strength, which depends on the eﬃciency of the dynamo ampliﬁcation and generally
varies between 10−22 and 10−12 Gauss. Note that these magnitudes are measured at the time
of completed galaxy formation, that is after the collapse of the protogalaxy. The presence of B-
ﬁelds in high-redshift protogalaxies, where the dynamo had less time to operate, with strengths
(of µG-order) similar to that of their galactic counterparts could be interpreted as a sign in
favour of primordial magnetism [3]. This idea has received additional boost from recent reports

1

suggesting the existence of magnetic ﬁelds close to 10−15 G in empty intergalactic space, where
presumably no dynamo mechanism can operate [4]. However, producing B-ﬁelds in the early
universe that will successfully seed the galactic dynamo has proved anything but straightforward.
Assuming that the magnetic seeds are generated after inﬂation, the main problem is their
coherence length, which is generally much smaller than the required 10 Kpc. This is due to
causality, which conﬁnes the scale of the newly produced B-ﬁeld inside the horizon at the time.
The latter is typically too small. Theoretically, one could address the size-issue by appealing
to “inverse cascade”, a mechanism that can transfer magnetic energy from smaller to larger
scales and thus increase the eﬀective length of the ﬁeld [5]. Nevertheless, the jury is still out,
as it appears that inverse cascade requires rather large amounts of magnetic helicity in order to
operate successfully. There is no size-problem whatsoever for the inﬂationary magnetic ﬁelds,
since inﬂation naturally achieves very large correlation lengths. Here, the main obstacle is the
residual strength of the ﬁeld, which is believed to be too weak (less than 10−50 G today) to
have any astrophysical signiﬁcance. This has been largely attributed to the so-called adiabatic
magnetic decay. To the belief, in other words, that B-ﬁelds decay adiabatically (i.e. B ∝ a−2,
where a is the cosmological scale factor) throughput their evolution and on all scales.

2 Magnetic ﬁelds with superhorizon correlations

The adiabatic magnetic decay is attributed to the rapidly increasing electrical conductivity of
the post-inﬂationary universe, which is thought to guarantee that B-ﬁelds remain frozen into
the cosmic medium at all times and on all scales. However, the magnetic freeze-in cannot take
place without the electric currents. These are generated after inﬂation and therefore, unlike the
inﬂation-produced B-ﬁelds, their size is always conﬁned within the causal horizon. Put another
way, there can be not electric currents with super-Hubble correlations. Moreover, the freeze-in
process itself is causal and therefore it cannot aﬀect magnetic ﬁelds larger than the horizon at
the time. Arguing for the opposite is claiming that local causal physics can aﬀect superhorizon-
sized perturbations, which openly violates causality (e.g. see [6] for related quotes). All these
mean that inﬂationary magnetic ﬁelds do not necessarily freeze-in until they have crossed back
inside the horizon and have come again into full causal contact.1 Before horizon entry, these
B-ﬁelds were causally disconnected and therefore immune to local physics, being aﬀected by the
universal expansion only. At the same time, like any other superhorizon perturbation produced
during inﬂation, the aforementioned magnetic ﬁelds retain the memory of their de Sitter past.
In practice, this means that, as long as they remain outside the Hubble radius of a spatially ﬂat
Friedmann-Robertson-Walker (FRW) universe, B-ﬁelds with superhorizon correlations obey the
long-wavelength solution

B ≡ a2B = C1 + C2nη ,

(1)

of the linear “source-free” wave-like formula B′′ −D2B = 0 [3]. Note that B = a2B is the rescaled
magnetic ﬁeld, n is its comoving wavenumber, η is the conformal time and primes indicate
conformal-time derivatives. Also, since the B-ﬁelds in question are well outside the Hubble
radius, they have nη ≪ 1. The latter has led many authors to disregard the second mode on

1Once back inside the causal horizon, the electric currents quickly freeze the magnetic ﬁelds into the highly
conductive matter of the post-inﬂationary universe. Then after, the B-ﬁelds decay adiabatically to the present.

2

the right-hand side of solution (1) and thus conclude that magnetic ﬁelds decay adiabatically on
super-Hubble scales as well. It is conceivable, however, that there are initial conditions allowing
for C2 ≫ C1, in which case the aforementioned “redundant” mode can dominate. After all, this
is essentially a “growing” mode and for this reason it should not be a priori ignored, at least
not before the integration constants have been evaluated.

Before discussing the implications of solution (1), we should remind the reader that the direct
link between the aforementioned source-free treatment of superhorizon-sized magnetic ﬁelds and
causality was originally made in [7]. That work, however, dealt with spatially open Friedmann-
Robertson-Walker (FRW) universes. The ﬁrst lengthy discussion of the causality issue and
its potentially pivotal implications for cosmic magnetogenesis in spatially ﬂat FRW universes
was given in [8]. That work was then specialised to non-conventional scenarios of inﬂationary
magnetic generation in [9]. In both cases, the ﬁnal strength of the aforementioned large-scale
B-ﬁelds was found to be much larger than the typical values quoted in the standard literature.
More recently, the same source-free approach to the study of superhorozon-sized magnetic ﬁelds
was also adopted in [10, 11], this time from the viewpoint of high energy physics, with analogous
results. Here, we will focus on the role and the consequences of the initial conditions for the
post-inﬂationary evolution of large-scale primordial (conventional or not) magnetic ﬁelds.

Let us now go back to Eq. (1) and to the integration constants seen there. These are fairly

straightforward to calculate and once this is done solution (1) reads [8]

B = [B∗ − η∗(2a∗H∗B∗ + B ′

∗)](cid:16) a∗
a (cid:17)2

+ η∗(2a∗H∗B∗ + B ′

∗)](cid:16) a∗

a (cid:17)2(cid:18) η
η∗(cid:19)

(2)

where H = a′/a2 is the Hubble parameter and the ⋆-suﬃx marks the start of a post-inﬂationary
cosmological epoch (e.g. the reheating, the radiation or the dust eras). Also, a ≥ a∗, η ≥ η∗ and
a = a(η). Recalling that after inﬂation the conformal time is proportional to a positive power of
the scale factor, it becomes immediately obvious that the second mode of (2) decays slower that
its adiabatic counterpart. Whether this slowly decaying mode survives or not depends on the
initial conditions, which determine its coeﬃcient. All these make the post-inﬂationary evolution
of superhorizon-sized magnetic ﬁelds a matter of initial conditions. At the start of reheating, the
latter are decided by the magnetic evolution during inﬂation and by the nature of the transition
from inﬂation to reheating. The initial conditions at the beginning of the subsequent epochs are
determined in an analogous way as well. In what follows we will consider three complementary
sets of initial conditions, keeping in mind that alternative scenarios may also be possible.

3

Initial conditions and alternative scenarios

In the literature, the transitions from inﬂation to reheating and then to the radiation era are
generally treated as discontinuous, which in a sense reﬂects the overall uncertainty still clouding
these events. More speciﬁcally, in both cases the equation of state of the universe is allowed
to undergo an abrupt change. As a result, one needs to “match” the spacetime prior to the
transition with the one after and the standard way of doing this is by appealing to Israel’s
junction conditions [12]. According to these, the matching of the aforementioned two spacetimes
depends on whether the 3-dimensional transition hypersurface (Σ) has zero or ﬁnite “width”.

3

− − H +

In the former case there is no “thin shell” on the matching surface, while in the latter there
is a thin “surface layer” with a ﬁnite surface stress-energy tensor (e.g. see [13]). The main
diﬀerence between the two alternatives is that, in the absence of thin shells, there can be no
discontinuity in the extrinsic curvature on Σ. When dealing with an FRW background, this
demands that the value of the Hubble parameter remains the same before and after the transition
(i.e. [H∗]+
∗ = 0, where the “−” and “+” superscripts denote the moments just prior
and immediately after the transition respectively),2 In the presence of ﬁnite surface layers, on the
other hand, there is a “jump” in the Hubble value measured on either side of the transit surface
(i.e. [H∗]+
∗ 6= 0). Note that in the former case Σ is the hypersurface of constant
density, but not necessarily of constant time (e.g. see [14]), while in the latter Σ is typically the
hypersurface of constant conformal time (e.g. see [15]). Also, there can be no discontinuity in
the cosmological scale factor in either case, which ensures that [a∗]+

∗ = 0 [12, 13].

− = H +

∗ − H −

∗ − H −

− = a+

∗ − a−

Assuming that the nature of the transition from inﬂation to reheating and then to the
radiation era is “ﬁxed” by Israel’s junction conditions, the remaining degree of freedom is decided
by the magnetic evolution during the de Sitter phase. Here, we will consider two alternatives. In
the ﬁrst, we will assume that the B-ﬁeld decayed adiabatically (i.e. that B ∝ a−2) throughout
inﬂation, as it is the case for the conventional ﬁelds. The second alternative, on the other hand,
will allow for the superadiabatic ampliﬁcation of the magnetic ﬁeld. To be precise, we will
assume that B ∝ a−m (with 0 < m < 2) all along the de Sitter expansion, as it happens in
typical non-conventional scenarios of inﬂationary magnetogenesis (e.g. see [16]).

Scenario A: Consider conventional inﬂationary magnetic ﬁelds, produced within the frame-
work of standard electromagnetism, which had been decaying adiabatically throughout the de
Sitter regime. Suppose also that there is no thin shell on the transition hypersurface from in-
ﬂation to reheating. Recalling that H = a′/a2, we deduce that B ′ −
∗ at the
end of inﬂation. Then, given that a+
∗ (in the absence of surface
layers) and assuming that there is no discontinuity in the magnetic ﬁeld on the matching surface
(i.e. setting B+
∗ at the start of reheat-
ing [8]. On using these initial conditions, the coeﬃcient of the second mode on the right-hand
side of solution (2) vanishes, leaving the adiabatically decaying mode as the sole survivor. As a
result, throughout the reheating phase we have

∗ ), we obtain B ′ +

∗ always, that H +

∗ = −2a+

∗ and B ′ +

∗ = −2a−

∗ = B ′ −

∗ = H −

∗ = B−

∗ H +

∗ B+

∗ H −

∗ B−

∗ = a−

B = B+

a (cid:19)2
∗ (cid:18) a+

∗

,

(3)

where a ≥ a+
∗ . It is straightforward to verify that the situation repeats itself at the transition to
radiation epoch and later to that of dust, as long as there is no discontinuity in the value of the
Hubble parameter at the time of the transit [8]. Overall, one could argue that, in the absence
of surface layers on the hypersurfaces connecting consecutive cosmological epochs, large-scale
magnetic ﬁelds that happen to decay adiabatically prior to the transition, will keep doing so
throughout the subsequent era as well. Thus, for all practical purposes, the initial conditions
adopted in this scenario have essentially reproduced the standard story of conventional inﬂa-

2Hereafter, the ⋆-suﬃx will always indicate the moment of the transition from one cosmological epoch to the

next, while the zero suﬃx will correspond to the present (see Eqs. (6) and (9) below).

4

tionary magnetogenesis, which leads to astrophysically irrelevant magnetic ﬁelds with residual
strengths around 10−53 G or less (on comoving scales of ∼ 10 Kpc or more).

Scenario B: Most mechanisms of non-conventional inﬂationary magnetogenesis operate out-
side standard electromagnetic theory, with the latter typically restored once the de Sitter phase
is over. Breaking away from Maxwellian electromagnetism can lead to strong superadiabatic
ampliﬁcation and thus achieve magnetic ﬁelds that, by the end of inﬂation, are strong enough
to seed the galactic dynamo today, despite their post-inﬂationary adiabatic decay. There are
caveats, however, one of which is the so-called “backreaction problem”, where the magnetic en-
hancement is so eﬃcient that it starts interfering with the dynamics of the exponential expansion
(e.g. see [17]). However, producing very strong magnetic ﬁelds by the end of de Sitter regime is
not necessary, provided the subsequent magnetic decay is slower than the adiabatic. To demon-
strate this, let us consider a B-ﬁeld that had been decaying as B ∝ a−m, with 0 < m < 2, all
along inﬂation. At the end of that period we have B ′ −
∗ , which translates into
∗]+
B ′ +
as in Scenario A above). Therefore, at the onset of the reheating epoch, solution (2) reads

∗ at the start of reheating (recall that [a∗]+

− = 0 = [H∗]+

∗ = −ma+

∗ = −ma−

− = [B∗]+

− = [B ′

∗ H −

∗ H +

∗ B+

∗ B−

−

B = [1 − (2 − m)η+

∗ a+

∗ H +

∗ ]B+

a (cid:19)2
∗ (cid:18) a+

∗

+ (2 − m)η+

∗ a+

∗ H +

∗ B+

∗ (cid:18) a+

a (cid:19)2(cid:18) η

∗ (cid:19) ,

η+

∗

(4)

with a ≥ a+
reheating, the above reduces to [8, 9]

∗ and η ≥ η+

∗ > 0. Moreover, recalling that a ∝ η2 and H = 2/aη throughout

B = −(3 − 2m)B+

a (cid:19)2
∗ (cid:18)a+

∗

+ 2(2 − m)B+

∗ (cid:18) a+

a (cid:19)3/2

∗

.

(5)

Given that m 6= 2, the slowly decaying second mode on the right-hand side of the above survives
and the B-ﬁeld is superadiabatically ampliﬁed all along the reheating era. Similarly, one can
show that the superadiabatic ampliﬁcation persists into the radiation and the dust epochs,
with B ∝ a−1 and B ∝ a−3/2 respectively, as long as the B-ﬁeld remains outside the Hubble
radius [8, 9]. As mentioned before, once back inside the horizon, the highly conductive electric
currents will freeze the magnetic ﬁeld into the matter and thus “restore” their adiabatic decay-
law.
In practice, all these mean that a B-ﬁeld with current comoving size close to 10 Kpc
(the minimum required by the galactic dynamo) and strength BDS at the end of the de Sitter
expansion will have residual magnitude

B0 ≃ BDS

T 2
0 TRH
THC M 2 ,

(6)

today [9]. Note that T0 is the current temperature of the universe, TRH is the reheat temperature,
THC is the temperature at the time the magnetic ﬁeld crossed back inside the Hubble radius and
M is the energy scale of the adopted inﬂationary model (all measured in GeV). Wavelengths
close to 10 Kpc today have re-entered the horizon prior to equipartition at THC ≃ 10−6 GeV
(recall that TEQ ≃ 10−9 GeV). Consequently, setting T0 ≃ 10−13 GeV, TRH ≃ 1010 GeV and
M ≃ 1017 GeV, we obtain B0 ≃ 10−47BDS. This is the comoving value of the ﬁeld, calculated
before the collapse of the protogalaxy. When the latter is anisotropic (see [18] for related

5

studies), the magnetic strength can increase by up to six orders of magnitude to B0 ≃ 10−41BDS.
Magnetic ﬁelds are capable of seeding the galactic dynamo when B0 & 10−22 G, which in our case
is achieved when BDS & 1019 G at the end of the de Sitter regime. Strengths of this magnitude
are fairly easy to achieve by non-conventional mecamisms of inﬂationary magnetogenesis and
do not cause any backreaction or other known problems (e.g. see [19]). Note that, if magnetic
ﬁelds were to decay adiabatically on all scales after inﬂation, the minimum required strength at
the end of the de Sitter phase would have exceeded 1040 G.

Scenario C: Let us now assume that the B-ﬁelds decay adiabatically during the de Sitter
regime, but that there is a ﬁnite surface layer (a thin shell) on the transit hypersurface (Σ)
to reheating. Then, following Israel’s junction conditions, there is a jump in the value of the
Hubble parameter at the time of the transition. This ensures that H +
∗ , which implies
that the coeﬃcient of the second mode on the right-hand side of (2) is not necessarily zero.
Consequently, the adiabatic magnetic decay after the transition is no longer guaranteed. To
demonstrate this recall that during reheating the cosmological scale factor and the conformal
time are related by a ∝ η2, with η > 0, while the Hubble parameter is H = 2/aη. Then, at the
start of reheating, solution (2) recasts into

∗ 6= H −

B = −(3B+

∗ + η+

∗ B ′ +

a (cid:19)2
∗ )(cid:18) a+

∗

+ (4B+

∗ + η+

∗ B ′ +

∗ )(cid:18) a+

a (cid:19)3/2

∗

,

(7)

∗ H −

∗ B−

∗ = −2a−

where a ≥ a+
we have B ′ −
aforementioned condition is also written as η−
and H = −1/aη throughout the inﬂationary expansion. Therefore, setting η+
that η−
of reheating. Substituting these initial conditions to the right-hand side of (3) we arrive at

∗ . Assuming that the B-ﬁeld decayed adiabatically during the de Sitter phase,
∗ at the end of inﬂation proper (see also Scenario A before). The
∗ , given that a ∝ −1/η, with η < 0,
∗ (recall
∗ at the beginning

∗ , we have η+

∗ < 0 and η+

∗ = −2B+

∗ > 0), B+

∗ B ′ −

∗ = 2B−

∗ and B ′ +

∗ = B ′ −

∗ = −η−

∗ = B−

∗ B ′ +

B = −B+

a (cid:19)2
∗ (cid:18) a+

∗

+ 2B+

∗ (cid:18) a+

a (cid:19)3/2

∗

.

(8)

which shows that the B-ﬁeld no longer decays adiabatically [8]. Instead, the magnetic decay
rate has slowed down to B ∝ a−3/2, which means that the ﬁeld is superadiabatically ampliﬁed
throughout the reheating era. Proceeding in an exactly analogous way, it is straightforward to
demonstrate that the magnetic superadiabatic ampliﬁcation continues into the radiation and
the dust epochs, as long as the ﬁeld remains larger than the Hubble radius.
In particular,
superhorizon-sized ﬁelds decay as B ∝ a−1 and B ∝ a−3/2, during the radiation and the dust
eras respectively [8, 9]. Scenario C aﬀects conventional inﬂation-produced magnetic ﬁelds and
allows them to achieve residual magnitudes much stronger than those typically quoted in the
literature. For example, a B-ﬁeld with current scale close to 10 Kpc that crossed back inside the
horizon in the late radiation epoch, at THC ≃ 10−6 GeV, will have current comoving strength [8]

B0 ≃ 10−33(cid:18) M

1017(cid:19)2/3(cid:18) TRH

1010(cid:19)1/3

G .

(9)

For typical values of the inﬂationary energy scale and the reheat temperature (i.e. when M ≃
1017 GeV and TRH ≃ 1010 GeV), we obtain B0 ≃ 10−33 G. The latter can increase up to

6

∼ 10−27 G by the time the galaxy is formed, especially when the more realistic scenario of an
anisotropic protogalactic collapse is adopted [18].

Although magnetic strengths of B0 ∼ 10−27 are still outside the typical galactic-dynamo
requirements, they are close enough to make one think that conventional models of inﬂationary
magnetogenesis might still be able to work. For example, the ﬁnal magnetic ﬁeld can grow
substantially if there was a brief period of stiﬀ-matter domination prior to the radiation era.
During such a phase the B-ﬁeld maintains constant magnitude [8], while the energy density of
the matter drops as ρSM ∝ a−6, leading to a sharp increase in the relative magnetic strength
within a few expansion timescales. In particular, if TSM is the temperature at the end of the
stiﬀ-matter era, Eq. (9) recasts into

B0 ≃ 10−33(cid:18) M

1017(cid:19)2/3(cid:18) TRH

1010(cid:19)1/3(cid:18) TRH

TSM(cid:19)2

G .

(10)

Consequently, assuming that stiﬀ matter dominated the energy density of the universe between,
say, TRH ≃ 1010 GeV and TSM ≃ 107 GeV, would increase the ﬁnal magnetic strength from
10−27 G to 10−21 G. The latter lies within the galactic dynamo limits.

4 Discussion

All physical processes propagate at a ﬁnite speed, which ensures that local (causal) physics can
never aﬀect superhorizon perturbations. This is the root of the celebrated “horizon problem”.
Inﬂationary magnetic ﬁelds, like any other inﬂation-generated perturbation, can have coherence
lengths vastly larger than the associated causal horizon.
In addition, during inﬂation there
are no electric currents and the aforementioned B-ﬁelds are not frozen into the matter, but
“free”. Since the post-inﬂationary magnetic-ﬂux freezing is a causal process, mediated by the
newly produced electric currents, it is always conﬁned inside the horizon and can never aﬀect
B-ﬁelds with super-hubble correlations. The opposite would had been a direct violation of
the causality principle. Magnetic ﬁelds that are not frozen into the matter do not necessarily
decay adiabatically. This means that superhorizon-sized magnetic ﬁelds do not need to obey the
adiabatic (B ∝ a−2) decay-law, as long as the remain larger than the Hubble radius. Instead,
the post-inﬂationary evolution of such ﬁelds is decided by the initial conditions at the start of the
reheating phase. These are determined by the magnetic evolution during the de Sitter regime
and by the speciﬁcs of the transition from inﬂation to reheating. The latter can be studied by
means of Israel’s junction conditions, which depend on whether the hypersurface matching two
successive cosmological epochs has zero or ﬁnite width, namely vanishing or ﬁnite surface layers.
We have outlined here three alternative and, to a large extent, complementary scenarios of
initial conditions, referring the reader to [8, 9] for further technical details. The ﬁrst scenario
assumes adiabatic magnetic decay during inﬂation and no thin shells on the transit surface
to reheating. Under these assumptions, the adiabatic decay of the ﬁeld persists throughout its
post-inﬂationary life. Therefore, for all practical purposes, this scenario reproduces the standard
story of conventional primordial magnetogenesis, which leads to astrophysically irrelevant B-
ﬁelds. Scenario B maintains the absence of surface layers on the matching hypersurfaces, but
considers non-conventional magnetic ﬁelds that had been superadiabatically ampliﬁed during

7

the de Sitter phase. Here, the superadiabatic magnetic ampliﬁcation continues after inﬂation
as well, at a rate determined by the speciﬁcs of the cosmological epoch. This is good news
for the non-conventional mechanisms of primordial magnetogenesis, because a relatively mild
enhancement of their B-ﬁelds during inﬂation will suﬃce to produce seeds that could feed the
galactic dynamo today.
In particular, the minimum required strength at the end of the de
Sitter phase is around 1019 G, a fairly straightforward magnitude to achieve through typical
non-conventional mechanisms. There are good news for conventional magnetogenesis as well
in scenario C. Assuming that B-ﬁelds decayed adiabatically during the de Sitter expansion,
but endowing the transition hypersurface to reheating with a thin surface layer, triggers the
superadiabatic ampliﬁcation of the aforementioned B-ﬁelds after inﬂation and for as long as they
remain outside the Hubble radius. As a result, conventionally produced primordial magnetic
ﬁelds can reach residual strengths much larger than those usually quoted in the literature,
making one think that conventional magnetogenesis might still be able to work.3 Irrespective of
whether this may prove to be the case or not, the underlying point is that by “exploiting” the
implications of causality and the role of the initial conditions, one can introduce an alternative,
fundamentally diﬀerent and potentially pivotal approach to the question of cosmic magnetism.

References

[1] P.P. Kronberg, Rep. Prog. Phys. 57, 325 (1994); C.L. Carilli and G.E. Taylor, Ann. Rev.
Astron. Astrophys. 40, 319 (2002); R. Beck, in High Energy Gamma-Ray Astronomy, AIP
Conf. Proc. 1085, 83 (2008); J.P. Vallee, New Astron. Rev. 55, 91 (2011).

[2] F. Krause, in The Cosmic Dynamo, Eds. F. Krause, K.-H. Radler and G. Rudiger (Kluwer,
Dordrecht, 1993) p. 487; R. Beck, A. Brandenburg, D. Moss, A. Shukurov and D. Sokoloﬀ,
Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 34, 155 (1996); J.L. Han, R.N. Manchester, E.M. Berkhui-
jsen and R. Beck, Astron. Astrophys. 322, 98 (1997); R.M. Kulsrud, Ann. Rev. Astron.
Astrophys. 37, 37 (1999); A. Brandenburg and K. Subramanian, Phys. Rep. 417, 1 (2005).

[3] D. Grasso and H.R. Rubinstein, Phys. Rep. 348, 163 (2001); A. Kandus, K.E. Kunze, C.G.
Tsagas, Phys. Rep 505, 1 (2011); L. Widrow, D. Ryu, D.R.G. Schleicher, K. Subramanian,
C.G. Tsagas and R.A. Treumann, Space, Sci. Rev. 166, 37 (2012).

[4] A. Neronov and L. Vovk, Science 328, 73 (2010); S. Ando and A. Kusenko, Astropys. J.
722, L39 (2010); F. Tavecchio, et al, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 406, L70 (2010); W. Chen,
J.H. Buckley and F. Ferrer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 211103 (2015).

3The three scenarios presented here have been approached from the relativistic point of view. As we have
already mentioned, scenario A is the standard model of conventional inﬂationary magnetogenesis, which has been
discussed many times in the past and in a variety of ways. Scenarios B and C, on the other hand, are new additions
to the literature (see also [8, 9]). Of these, scenario B was recently reproduced in [11], both qualitatively and
quantitatively, using an approach closer in spirit to high energy physics. Scenario C could have been reproduced
as well, if [11] had also allowed for a “jump” in the value of the Hubble parameter (i.e. set [H∗]+
∗ 6= 0)
at the moment of the transition from inﬂation to reheating, in line with Israel’s junction conditions.

− = H +

∗ − H −

8

[5] A. Brandenburg, K. Enqvist and P. Olesen, Phys. Rev. D. 54, 1291 (1996); J.M. Cornwall,
Phys. Rev. D 56, 6146 (1997); D.T. Son, Phys. Rev. D 59, 063008 (1999); M. Christensson,
M. Hindmarsh and A. Brandenburg, Phys. Rev. E 64, 056405 (2001).

[6] J. Robinson and B.D. Wandelt, Phys. Rev. D 53, 618 (1996); R.H. Brandenberger, in High
Energy Physics and Cosmology, Eds. E. Gava et al (World Scientiﬁc Publishers, Singapore,
1998) p. 412; S. Dodelson, AIP Conf. Proc. 689, 184 (2003); D. Baumann [arXiv:0907.5424].

[7] J.D. Barrow and C.G. Tsagas, Phys. Rev. D 77, 107302 (2008); J.D. Barrow and C.G.

Tsagas, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 414, 512 (2011).

[8] C.G. Tsagas [arXiv:1412.4806].

[9] C.G. Tsagas, Phys. Rev. D 92, 101301(R) (2015).

[10] L. Campanelli [arXiv:1508.01247].

[11] L. Campanelli, Phys. Rev. D 93, 063501 (2016).

[12] W. Israel, Nuovo Cimento Soc. Ital. Fis. B 44, 1 (1966).

[13] E. Poisson, A Relativist’s Toolkit (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2004).

[14] N. Deruelle and V.F. Mukhanov, Phys. Rev. D 52, 5549 (1995).

[15] E.J. Copeland and D. Wands, JCAP 06, 014 (2007).

[16] K. Subramanian, Astron. Nachr. 331, 110 (2010).

[17] V. Demozzi, V. Mukhanov and H. Rubinstein, JCAP 0908, 025 (2009).

[18] K. Dolag, M. Bartelmann and H. Lesch, Astron. Astrophys. 348, 351 (1999); M. Bruni, R.

Maartens and C.G. Tsagas, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 338, 785 (2003).

[19] S. Kanno, J. Soda and M. Watanabe, JCAP 12, 009 (2009).

9

