6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
6
1

.

 
 
]
S
P
n
i
l
n
[
 
 

1
v
6
0
2
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Fractal scattering of Gaussian solitons in directional couplers with logarithmic nonlinearities

Instituto de F´ısica, Universidade Federal de Goi´as, 74.690-900, Goiˆania, Goi´as, Brazil

Rafael M. P. Teixeira and Wesley B. Cardoso

In this paper we study the interaction of Gaussian solitons in a dispersive and nonlinear media with log-law
nonlinearity. The model is described by the coupled logarithmic nonlinear Schr¨odinger equations, which is a
nonintegrable system that allows the observation of a very rich scenario in the collision patterns. By employing
a variational approach and direct numerical simulations, we observe a fractal-scattering phenomenon from the
exit velocities of each soliton as a function of the input velocities. Furthermore, we introduce a linearization
model to identify the position of the reﬂection/transmission window that emerges within the chaotic region. This
enable us the possibility of controlling the scattering of solitons as well as the lifetime of bound states.

I.

INTRODUCTION

A soliton is a solitary wave that arises due to a perfect
balance between the dispersive and nonlinear effects present
in the system, it maintains its shape when moving at con-
stant speed or even when it emerges from the interaction with
another soliton (except for a phase shift) [1]. Solitonic so-
lutions have been observed in various contexts, such as, in
Bose-Einstein condensates (BECs) [2–6], water waves [7],
proteins [8], DNA [9], nonlinear ﬁber optics [10, 11] as tem-
poral solitons and as spatial optical solitons in a cell ﬁlled
with sodium vapor [12], liquid carbon disulphide [13], pho-
torefractive crystals [14], semiconductor waveguides [15], ne-
matic liquid-crystal planar cells [16], etc.

Some nonlinear systems have its dynamics dictated by
the well-known nonlinear Schr¨odinger (NLS) equation, e.g.,
BECs and nonlinear ﬁber optics [17]. In some particular cases
the NLS equation appears as an integrable equation, i.e., it
can be integrated exactly by the inverse scattering transform
method [18]. Thus, solitary wave solutions behave like soli-
tons, with the characteristics described above. In a more com-
plex scenario, when the NLS equation presents nonintegrabil-
ity, collision of solitary waves can show a complex structure
since the collision outcome can depend on the initial condi-
tions, presenting a fractal pattern [19–26]. Fractal structures
in solitons’ collisions are also reported in systems described
by other equations, such as, in the ϕ4 model [27, 28], the sine-
Gordon model [29–33], etc.

In case of systems governed by coupled NLS equations the
conditions of integrability can also be attained, as is the case
of Manakov equations, which describes the interaction of two
light waves at different wavelengths copropagating along one
of the principal axes of a birefringent single-mode ﬁber [10]
or a two-component BEC with two-body interaction and in
absence of external potentials [34, 35]. Once again, a rich
scenario arises when the system becomes nonintegrable due
to simple changes in the values of the couplings, the inclu-
sion of inhomogeneous terms or high-order terms in the cou-
pled NLS equation. In this case we have the possibility to
get modulated localized solutions [36, 37] or observe its frac-
tal scattering [19]. Another possibility to obtain this type of
nonintegrable systems is the use of directional couplers [38–
41], which is composed by ﬁbers that are generally twisted
together and then spot fused under tension such that the fused
section is elongated to form a biconical tapered structure, be-

ing based on the transfer of energy by surface interaction be-
tween the ﬁbers. The amount of power taken from the main
ﬁber or given to the it depends on the length of the fused sec-
tion of the ﬁber and the distance between the cores of the fused
ﬁbers [42].

In several distinct scenarios in physics and in other areas of
nonlinear science the systems under consideration are well de-
scribed by NLS equations with logarithm nonlinearity, as for
example, in dissipative systems [43], in nuclear physics [44],
in optics [45, 46], capillary ﬂuids [47], and even in magma
transport [48]. Also, the study of localized Gaussian-shaped
solutions (Gaussons) was central point in Ref. [49]. In Refs.
[50, 51] were provided a set of exact optical soliton solu-
tions of the NLS equation with Kerr and non-Kerr (including
logarithm) nonlinearities and in presence of different pertur-
bations. A wavelet formulation was proposed in Ref. [52],
which is suitable for analyzing the optical soliton signals by
introducing a nonlinear wavelet-like basis of scaling functions
made by localized analytical nonlinear solutions. The modu-
lation of localized solutions in inhomogeneous NLS equations
with logarithm nonlinearity was studied in Ref. [53] and in
a system with time-dependent dispersion and nonlinearity in
[54]. Quasi-stationary optical solitons in non-Kerr media in
presence of high-order terms was investigated in Ref. [55].

In the present paper we study the fractal scattering of soli-
tons’ collisions in a directional coupler in presence of log-
arithm nonlinearities. To this end, we apply the variational
approach by assuming Gaussian symmetric solutions for each
branch of the directional coupler to construct a reduced or-
dinary differential equations (ODE) model [56]. This model
allows us to analytically investigate the formation of fractal
patterns and the properties of scattered solitons. Within the
reﬂection windows, we can distinguish the conditions for the
shape-oscillations obtained by the solitons during its interac-
tion, which is due to the exchange of energy between the os-
cillation and propagation modes of the solutions. We also em-
ploy direct numerical simulations to conﬁrm the applicability
of the ODE model.

This paper is organized as follows. In the next section we
present the theoretical model and the analytical result obtained
by the variational approach. Numerical results for the reduced
ODE model and direct numerical simulations are presented in
Sec. III. Particularly, we present in Subsec. III C the analysis
of the dynamics of solitons’ collisions from both approaches.
Concluding remarks are given in Sec. IV.

II. THEORETICAL MODEL

For twin-core couplers in a system with log-law nonlinear-
ity, the wave propagation at relatively high ﬁeld intensities is
described by coupled nonlinear equations. In the dimension-
less form, they are given by [42]

iφz = −

iψz = −

1
2
1
2

φT T + g ln(|φ|2)φ + Γψ,

ψT T + g ln(|ψ|2)ψ + Γφ,

(1a)

(1b)

where z is the longitudinal coordinate and T = t − βz, with
time t, is the retarded time moving with the group veloc-
ity of the fundamental mode in one of the waveguide with
propagation constant β, the other mode is assumed to be the
same value of the propagation constant. ψ = ψ(z, T ) and
φ = φ(z, T ) are complex amplitudes of the wave envelopes
in the respective cores of the optical ﬁbers, g is a negative
coefﬁcient providing a self-focusing nonlinearity, and Γ is the
coefﬁcient that binds the two pulses propagating through these
cores. When there is no coupling, i.e., Γ = 0, one can easily
found a localized solution for both decoupled ﬁelds by assum-
ing (and similarly for ψ(z, T ))

φ(z, T ) = U (T )eiµz,

(2)

which transforms the Eq. (1a) in an ODE that yields the solu-
tion

φ(z, T ) = exp(cid:20)g(T − T0)2 +

1

2(cid:18)1 −

µ

g(cid:19) + iµz(cid:21) ,

(3)

where µ is an arbitrary real constant and T0 is the Gaussian
peak position at z = 0. Note that the solution (3), since g < 0,
have a Gaussian-shaped proﬁle. Thus, in the literature these
solutions are also known as Gaussons.

A. Variational approach

The equations of motion (1a) and (1b) comes from the fol-

lowing Lagrangian density

L =

−

i
2
1
2

(ψψ∗

z − ψ∗ψz) +

i
2

(φφ∗

z − φ∗φz)

|ψT |2 −

1
2

|φT |2 − Γ(ψφ∗ + ψ∗φ)

− g|ψ|2[ln(|ψ|2) − 1] − g|φ|2[ln(|φ|2) − 1],

(4)

where the subscript “∗” stands for complex conjugation.

Analytical results can be obtained through a variational ap-
proach that uses a functional form (ansatz) for ﬁelds ψ and φ.
To this end, we use an ansatz that reproduces very well most of
the features involving interactions of solitons and provide an
exact solution when Γ → 0. Assuming the ﬁelds to be sym-
metric with respect to T = 0, we consider the ansatz given
by

ψ(z, T ) = ηeng( T −ξ
φ(z, T ) = ηeng( T +ξ

w )2

+i[ v

4 (T −ξ)+ b

w )2

+i[ −v

4 (T +ξ)+ b

2w (T −ξ)2+σ]o,
2w (T +ξ)2+σ]o,

(5a)

(5b)

Lagrangian by L =R ∞
L = η2wr π
2 (cid:26) ξtv
− 2Γ exp
−(cid:16) v

v2
16

b2
4

−

−

−

−

−

2w

w2

bwt

2 (cid:18) bt

2w2(cid:19)
2
1
w2 + g (3 − 4 ln η) −
2 − 2bξ
w4 + 16ξ2

w (cid:17)2

8w2

.

(6)






2

where the dimensionless variational parameters η, w, v, b,
ξ and σ are z-dependent functions and represents the am-
plitude, width, velocity, chirp, position, and phase, respec-
tively, of both solitary waves. The chirp parameter is respon-
sible to induce shape-oscillations, which are seen as oscilla-
tions of the amplitude and the width of the Gaussian proﬁle
of both solitary waves. So, substituting Eqs. (5a)-(5b) into
the Lagrangian density (4), one can calculate the associated
−∞ L dT, which gives, after performing
the necessary integrations and some algebra, the following re-
sult:

The equations of motion are the Euler-Lagrange equations
derived from (6). Since σ is assumed to be a constant phase
factor, there are ﬁve equations, given by

,

=

v
4

+ 4Γ

= −4Γ

∂G
∂v

η2w = K = constant ,
dξ
dz
dv
dz
dw
dz
db
dz

∂G
∂b
4g
w

4
w3 +

= b + 4Γ

∂G
∂ξ

=

,

,

− 4Γ

(7a)

(7b)

(7c)

(7d)

(7e)

∂G
∂w

,

where the function of variational parameters G =
G(ξ, w, v, b) is written as

G = exp
−(cid:16) v

2 − 2bξ

w (cid:17)2

8w2

w4 + 16ξ2


 .

(8)

Nψ = R ∞

In the case of decoupled ﬁelds (Γ = 0 in Eqs.

−∞ |ψ(z, T )|2dT and Nφ = R ∞

(1a)
and (1b)) we expect the individual norm conservation, i.e.,
−∞ |φ(z, T )|2dT .
In the general case we attempt to the total norm, given by
N = Nφ + Nψ. Also, the ansatz employed does not contain
degrees of freedom that would be responsible for radiation
loss hence the total norm of both solitary waves must be a
conserved quantity of the system. In fact, since the interaction
is assumed to be symmetric, the norm is conserved for each
soliton individually. The calculation of individual norm for
both ﬁelds in equations in (5a)-(5b) results in

Nφ,ψ = η2wr π

2|g|

,

(9)

providing that N ∝ K and the Eq. (7a) is attained from the
norm conservation.

In order to investigate symmetric solitons’ collisions, the
system of coupled ODE (7b)-(7e) is solved numerically sub-
jected to the condition η2w = K. For this we use w0 = 1,
b0 = 0, and K = 1, for simplicity. Since the width oscilla-
tions are induced by the chirp parameter, null initial values for
it (i.e., b = 0) guarantee that no shape-oscillations exist ini-
tially. In the next section we show the results of our numerical
simulations.

III. NUMERICAL RESULTS

A. Reduced ODE model

The numerical simulations of the coupled equations from
the reduced ODE model were performed using the 4th-order
Runge-Kutta method. We chose as initial conditions ξ0 = 10,
w0 = 1, b0 = 0, σ = 0, and K = 1. The initial separation
between the soltions is then 20 units wide, which is found to
guarantee a negligible overlap of the wave packets at z = 0.
Here, we assume the nonlinear and coupling coefﬁcients given
by g = −1 and Γ = −0.2, respectively. Then, we study the
scattering in soliton symmetric collisions by using the initial
velocity v0 as the control parameter. In the simulations we set
the z-step value as 0.001 and the T -range in a symmetric in-
terval with 100 units wide. The program was developed using
the Fortran 95 language, in which we used double precision
for both real and complex numbers.

The solitons scattering simulations were executed over var-
ious intervals of v0, each with at least 5000 points that cor-
respond to the same number of individual simulations with a
ﬁxed v0, in which we get the exit velocity (v∞) of both soli-
tons at the end of the interaction. We chose the soliton in
the right position as reference when recording the scattering
data; its initial velocity must be always negative in order to
obtain a collisional scenario, while for the soliton in the left
position stands the opposite. The exit velocity will assume
negative (positive) values when the right soliton exits toward
the T < 0 (T > 0) region. In this sense, the exit velocity
is attained when the solitons are far apart from each other,
enough to ensure that no more interaction will occur in the
unbounded medium (in our case we veriﬁed that it should be
about 20 units wide in T ). The solitons can interact for a very
long time, forming a bound-state. So, we set a stopping trig-
ger to not let the program exceed a certain interaction time, in

FIG. 1. (Color online) Exit velocity v∞ versus the input velocity v0
in the soliton interaction. The critical point (vc, 0) separates the re-
gion where the collision dynamics is irregular from the region where
the solitons collide elastically (|v0| > |vc|). Two straight lines given
by v∞ = ±v0 deﬁne a cone in which all points are contained.

3

FIG. 2. (Color online) (Top) The exit versus input velocities in the
soliton scattering. The reﬂection windows Wn are highlighted to
evidence the adopted sequence for n (there is no windows before
W1). (Bottom) Soliton proﬁle (|ψ(z, T )|2) during the interaction for
values of v0 in the crest of the reﬂection windows with n = 1, 2, 3
and 4. The crests are very close to the cone of maximum exit velocity.
The proﬁle for the |φ(z, T )|2 is a mirrored image of |ψ(z, T )|2.

our case it was achieved by setting zmax = 400. When this
maximum is reached we assign v∞ as zero, i.e., we consider
it as a bound-state.

In the ﬁrst simulation we use a v0-interval starting at a rel-
atively low velocity (> −0.05) and ending at very large ve-
locity (< −5.0). We veriﬁed that for large values of |v0| the
collision is elastic and consists of only one interaction with
the solitons passing through each other. At lower velocities
there is a critical point (vc, 0), such that as v0 approximates
the critical velocity vc ≈ −1.04 the collision becomes each
time more inelastic.
If v0 > vc (i.e, |v0| < |vc|) the dy-
namics of the interaction changes completely and the solitons
collide in an unpredictable fashion. This is shown in Fig. 1
for the exit velocity limited to the range [−0.05, −2.00]. The
irregular scattering of the solitons is characterized by the high
sensitivity of the initial condition, i.e., the collisional veloc-
ity v0. Note that all points in the plot are contained in a cone
of maximum exit velocity, which is given by the dotted-lines
(v∞ = ±v0), which means that in the current conﬁguration of
our system the inequality |v∞| ≤ |v0| holds, and the solitons
can not gain momentum through symmetric collisions.

The region v0 > vc is shown in more details in Fig. 2 (top),
where we detect the existence of several windows of lump-
like shape that repeats indeﬁnitely as v0 tends to vc. In these
windows the soliton scattering is not sensitive to v0, in fact,
we veriﬁed that inside each window the collision resembles
a reﬂection process, with the solitons forming a bound-state
with ﬁxed lifetime (z-interval of existence of the bound-state)
and escaping toward the same region (T > 0 or T < 0),
i.e., its initial position. This type of window is called reﬂec-

4

FIG. 4. (Color online) Results of successive ampliﬁcations of slim
v0-intervals between certain reﬂection and transmissional windows
as marked in ﬁgures: (a) top part of Fig. 2 that is used to emphasize
the pattern repetition; (b)-(e) are successive ampliﬁcations of the in-
tervals marked in the exit velocity graphs, where we verify similar
window structures to those ones appearing in (a).

results shown in Fig. 4, where the ﬁrst plot is the same of
Fig. 2 (top). The highlighted intervals in the plots indicate
the region of ampliﬁcation, which corresponds to the plot im-
mediately bellow. Here we modiﬁed our notation for labeling
reﬂectional/transmissional windows, such that the superscript
(s) were added to denote the structure in which the window
is located, i.e., W (s)
is the label of the n-th window in the
structure in Fig. 4(s), with s = a, b, ..., e. We extend this
notation to the critical velocity associated with each structure,
here denoted by v(s)

n

.

c

1

We observed that for all scattering data obtained, zero exit
velocities have appeared only for collisions associated with
initial velocities between zero and the window W (a)
. In or-
der to verify the true outcome of these collisions, very long
simulations were performed. We found that the bound-state
formed during the collision eventually ends for a certain z
much larger than zmax. Thus there are only two differ-
ent scenarios concerning the solitons’ collisions accordingly
to the reduced ODE model, namely, transmissional collision
(v∞ < 0) and reﬂectional collision (v∞ > 0). Our simula-
tions show that transmission and reﬂection windows are dis-
tributed along very slim intervals within the chaotic region

FIG. 3. (Color online) Result for the simulation in an interval cen-
tered at W2 (Fig. 2 (top)). The size of the interval was chosen to
totally encompass the window structures that appear in the edges of
the reﬂection window W2.

tion window. An interesting feature of the reﬂection window
is that for any value of the initial velocity within it, the soli-
ton proﬁle oscillates the same number of times, in which one
shape-oscillation was taken to be one period of oscillation of
the width of the solitons. This last statement leads to the prop-
erty of a ﬁxed lifetime of the bound-state of the solitons, as
mentioned before. Also, the differences between the lifetimes
of bound-states of any two successive windows are always one
shape-oscillation period. We designate these windows by Wn,
as seen in Fig. 2 (top), with n being the window index. The
numbering starts with the largest window (n = 1). Also, in
Fig. 2 (bottom) the details of the collisions are shown for val-
ues of v0 within four successive reﬂection windows, the num-
SO) was found to be related to n
ber of shape-oscillations (N n
by N n
SO is obtained by counting
the number of amplitude peaks in the soliton, which is eas-
ily seen in the contour plots. We noticed that these windows
form a structure, which consist of a repetition of windows sep-
arated by intervals that become smaller as v0 approaches vc.
The window shape is basically a lump with the crest almost
tangent to the cone of maximum v∞, it becomes narrower as
closer it is from the critical point.

SO = n + 3. The value of N n

In Fig. 2 we noticed the existence of some smaller window
structures in the edges of each reﬂection window. Then, to
provide a better visualization of it we simulated in an inter-
val centered at W2, where the resultant exit velocity graph is
shown in Fig. 3. In this ﬁgure two structures appear clearly,
one resembling a mirrored image of the other. Besides, both
are very similar to the one in Fig. 2, but with the windows
being like valleys instead of lumps. These are called transmis-
sion windows because the collisions associated to it resemble
a transmission process. As seen in the ﬁrst exit velocity graph,
the windows become narrower and closer spaced near the crit-
ical points. For the structures in Fig. 3 these points are located
in the edges of the reﬂection window W2.

To explore the smaller structures embedded in the region
|v0| < |vc| we performed simulations amplifying the struc-
tures located in narrower v0-intervals near the edges of cer-
tain windows. Firstly, we chose the left edge of the window
W2, which yielded a structure of windows similar to the ones
seen until now. Hence, we expected that smaller structures
with same pattern could be found by applying the same pro-
cedure. So, we have adopted a protocol that consists of choos-
ing intervals for ampliﬁcations always in the left edge of every
second window of any structure that may appear in the succes-
sive ampliﬁcations. Following this protocol we obtained the

(|v0| < |vc|), where the collision dynamic is indeed very sen-
sitive to the choice of v0. The most interesting feature found
for the exit velocities are the structures that repeat embedded
in itself, forming in the edges of every window, as shown be-
fore in Fig. 3. Besides, they have a very similar pattern regard-
ing the size and distribution of the windows. It is clearly seem
that Fig. 4(a) resembles Figs. 4(c) and 4(e), also the Fig. 4(b)
resembles Fig. 4(d). This suggests that the structures always
appear alternating the window type. Also, excepting in Fig.
4(a), they seem to be related by just one symmetry operation,
i.e., a reﬂection about the v0-axis.

By analyzing the window patterns for the structures in Fig.
n in the crest (trough) of a
n and the critical veloc-
of the structure given in 4(s) are very well related by

4, we found that the velocity v(s)
reﬂection (transmission) window W (s)
ity v(s)
[20, 56]

c

1

q|(v(s)

c )2 − (v(s)

n )2|

= p(s)n + q(s) ,

(10)

1

where the coefﬁcients p(s) and q(s) vary for the different val-
ues of s. We illustrate this fact for the windows until index
n = 6, the linear relation in (10) is satisﬁed with great preci-
sion for the Fig. 4(a), while for the other structures in Figs.
4(b)-(e) we found relative small standard deviations. These
results allowed us to infer that the window patterns in the in-
tervals of our simulations satisfy a common relation given by
(10), however, it is not enough to conclude that the pattern
is closely the same, since the coefﬁcients can not be com-
pared because the structures have different sizes. We solved
this problem by rescaling and displacing the structures, in a
manner that the left edge of W (s)
is at the origin and the
critical point of every structure at (−1, 0). This transforma-
tion changes the values of the initial velocities in the crest
n . In this way we can say
. So, the trans-
formed structures have the same size. The coefﬁcients found

(trough), which are denoted byev (s)
that ev (s)
c ≡ −1 for all (s), with ev (s)
for the ﬁrst structure are ep (a) = 0.325 ± 0.006 (1.85%) and
eq (a) = 0.65 ± 0.02 (3.08%), while for the remaining struc-
with the standard deviations hepi = 0.280±0.003 (1.24%) and
heqi = 0.662 ± 0.004 (0.68%). Note that these averages values
ference when comparing hepi andep (a). These results show that

the window pattern is almost the same for all structures after
the ﬁrst ampliﬁcation. We stress that the ﬁrst exit velocity plot
presents a subtle difference among the others, which resides
in the region where zero exit velocities appeared (which is
purely chaotic), differently from the other structures. Hence a
self-similarity argument can be applied only to Figs. 4(b)-(e).
n )2]−1/2 as a func-
tion of the window index n. Note that the curves related to
the structure presented in Figs. 4(c)-(e) are too close to be
distinguished and the curve related to Figs. 4(b) is also very
close from those. Also, our observations indicate that this pat-
tern prevails for any window structure embedded into the Fig.

In Fig. 5 we show the quantity [1 − (ev (s)

tures we calculated the average of the coefﬁcients together

have very small standard deviations, but there is a relevant dif-

c

n < ev (s)

5

(a)
(b)
(c,d,e)

FIG. 5. (Color online) Plot of [1 − (ev (s)
n )2]−1/2 as a function of the
the window index n. In curves (a)-(e) we used data obtained by the
structures shown in Fig. 4(a)-(e), respectively.

4(a), which is a characteristic feature of a fractal pattern and
demonstrate the chaotic behavior of the scattering. Further-
more, we verify that the size (L(s)) of the window structure
in Fig. 4(s), which is the length between the left edge of the
ﬁrst window and the critical velocity v(s)
, nicely satisﬁes the
formula

c

log10 L(s) = Rj + r ,

(11)

where j = 1 for Fig. 4(a), j = 2 for Fig. 4(b), and
so on. Moreover, the integer number j − 1 is the num-
ber of ampliﬁcations.
(11) the linear ﬁt yielded
R = −1.639 ± 0.008 (0.47%) and r = 1.56 ± 0.02 (1.63%).
After some algebra, the length L(s) can be expressed in terms
of the j and L(a) as

In Eq.

L(s) = 10R(j−1)L(a) .

(12)

Since R is a negative constant, the factor that multiplies L(a)
in (12) is less than unity and we call it as reduction factor.
Note that this results implies that length of the window struc-
tures decreases exponentially with the number of ampliﬁca-
tions. Therefore the zoom ratio is closely the same at each
ampliﬁcation, which is given by 10−R ≈ 43.6 (the reduction
ratio is the inverse). As an example, to emphasize how is this
reduction, for structure in Fig. 4(e) (j = 5) one obtains the re-
duction factor ∼ 10−7, while for structure in Fig. 4(d) (j = 4)
it is ∼ 10−2.

In Fig. 6 we show details of the collisions for the trans-
mission windows in Figs. 4(b) and (d) and for the reﬂection
windows in Figs. 4(c) and (e). Again, we note the formation
of a bound-state with ﬁxed lifetime for any value of v0 within
the same window, and also, collisions of successive windows
differs only by one shape-oscillation period. Thus, the inter-
esting feature observed for the reﬂection windows in the ﬁrst
structure extends for any window, where the collision may be
of type transmission or reﬂection.

The self-similarity involving the structures in Fig. 4 and
the high sensitivity to the initial conditions, reinforce the hy-
pothesis that the soliton scattering described by the reduced
ODE model is chaotic and the exit velocity plots are differ-
ent views of a fractal. Thus, we found that the reﬂection and
transmission windows are intervals where the chaotic behav-
ior disappears, that is, for any v0 taken within these windows

6

FIG. 6. Proﬁle of the localized solution |ψ(z, T )|2 during the interaction with the ﬁeld |φ(z, T )|2 obtained using the reduced ODE model of
Eqs. (1a) and (1b). The initial velocity values are taken within four successive windows in the structure shown in Fig. 4(s), with s = {b, c, d, e}.
The number of shape-oscillations in the bound-state of the solitons yields N n
n window (including
Fig. 2(botton)), in which the integer m(s) was introduced to designate the number of ampliﬁcations (m(s) = j − 1), with m(a) = 0, m(b) = 1,
etc.

SO = (n − 1) + m(s) × 4 + 4 for any W (s)

one can immediately predict the outcome of the collision, as
well as the lifetime of the solitons bound-state.

B. Direct numerical simulations

The coupled NLS equations (1a) and (1b) were simulated
by using the split-step method to perform the temporal evolu-
tion of the ﬁelds. To solve the linear part of the equations we
used the Crank-Nicholson algorithm while for the nonlinear
part we applied the 4th-order Runge-Kutta algorithm. Also,
we take the initial conditions for simulations of solitons’ col-
lisions in the form

ψ(0, T ) = exp(cid:26) 1
φ(0, T ) = exp(cid:26) 1

2(cid:18)1 +
2(cid:18)1 +

1

g(cid:19) + g(T − T0)2 +
g(cid:19) + g(T + T0)2 −

1

v0T(cid:27) ,
v0T(cid:27) ,

(13a)

i
4

i
4

(13b)

where the initial separation 2T0 needs to be large enough to
provide a negligible overlap of the solitons tails at T = 0, such
that the localized solutions are indeed a good approximation

for the ﬁelds at z = 0. In our case it was taken to be equal
to 20 dimensionless units. As mentioned before, localized so-
lutions are obtained for negative values of g in the nonlinear
term (in our case we set g = −1). In the collision simula-
tions, the spatial interval were [−50, 50], the T -stepsize were
0.04, and the z-stepsize 0.001, values that satisfy the CFL
condition associated with the implemented discretization in
the linear part of the coupled NLS equations given by Eqs.
(1a) and (1b). We veriﬁed that for wider spatial intervals there
will be no signiﬁcant changes for the collision results in the
observed bound-state scenarios. The numeric procedure was
implemented with the same numerical precisions used in the
variational approach. In our simulations, we found to be neg-
ligible the losses by radiation due to the approximate solution
proﬁle used as initial conditions. In order to avoid very long
simulations, we analyze the position of both solitons to predict
whether the collision leads to a trapping scenario or not, and
if so we assign a null value to the exit velocity. Several sim-
ulations were performed to investigate the scattering of soli-
tons under the same conditions addressed in the reduced ODE
model. The parameter v0 was varied in intervals with 5000
grid points, where these intervals were chosen in accordance
with the results obtained in the variational model.

The obtained scattering data shows that three collision sce-
narios are possible, viz., transmission, reﬂection, and trapping

ones. We stress that trapped solitons were not observed in the
reduced ODE model, which was expected because no radia-
tion emission process is described by that model [19, 20, 56].
The ﬁrst exit velocity graph acquired from the direct nu-
merical simulations is shown in Fig. 7, where one can note
the existence of a critical velocity vc ≈ −0.993 that sepa-
rates the region of chaotic scattering from the region of regular
scattering. Similarly to the reduced ODE model, the critical
velocity is very close to −1 and the collision is elastic only
if v0 ≪ vc (|v0| ≫ |vc|). This ﬁrst view of the exit veloc-
ity graph reveals the existence of reﬂection and transmission
windows with different shapes, where some of these windows
appear distributed uniformly only in a tiny interval limited by
the critical velocity at the right side and the edge of a trans-
mission window at the left side, which is indicated with an
arrow in Fig. 7 and shown ampliﬁed in Fig. 8(a). By ana-
lyzing the windows structure revealed by the collisional dy-
namics in Fig. 8(a), we found the same feature of the reduced
ODE model, that is, the outcome of each collision with ini-
tial velocity within a speciﬁc window is always of reﬂective
type, preceded by a bound-state of same lifetime and number
of shape oscillations. Note that this ﬁrst ampliﬁcation yields
a windows structure that resembles the ﬁrst one provided by
the reduced ODE model (Fig. (4)(a)). However, in the numer-
ical simulations we observe a great number of trapped states,
returning null output velocities. Also, we noted a small differ-
ence in the width and position of the windows when compar-
ing both models.

The second ampliﬁcation was taken in the right edge of the
largest window of Fig. 8(a), which is highlighted by a dashed
rectangle, corresponding to the plot displayed in Fig. 8(b). To
construct the plots of each ampliﬁcation we performed new
simulations for 5000 different values of input velocities v0
within the appropriate range. Furthermore, Fig. 8(b) revealed
a structure composed by transmission windows with different
spacing. Indeed, one can note that this structure is more simi-
lar to those obtained by reduced ODE model than the previous
structure. From this point, we proceeded with ampliﬁcations
following a protocol equivalent to that employed in the re-
duced ODE model simulations. This region allow us to get
a symmetry for each ampliﬁcation, changing only by a reﬂec-
tion in vertical axis, which simpliﬁes our analysis of the fractal
pattern. Note that the Fig. 8(c) appears approximately as a re-
ﬂection of Fig. 8(b). We observe this pattern when comparing
Figs. 8(c) and 8(d), as well as Figs. 8(d) and 8(e). In addition,
we get very similar patterns revealing a fractal structure when
comparing the ampliﬁcations shown in Figs. 8(b) and 8(d)
and Figs. 8(b) and 8(d). As we observed in the reduced ODE
model, the bound-state associated with two successive win-
dows in structures of Figs. 8(a)-(e) differs only by one shape-
oscillation, which can be expressed by N n+1
SO + 1.
Using the same notation W (s)
n , we highlighted the ﬁrst two
windows in the Figs. 8(a) and 8(b), indicating the sequence
used for the index n. In Fig. 9 we display some examples
of collision scenarios obtained via direct numerical simula-
tions with values of initial velocities within four successive
windows in each structure shown in Figs. 8(a)-(e).

SO = N n

A similar analysis, previously realized for the window pat-

7

FIG. 7. (Color online) Exit-velocity v∞ versus collision-velocity v0
obtained via direct numerical simulations of Eqs. (1a) and (1b) with
initial conditions given by Eqs. (13a) and (13b). The arrow indicates
the critical velocity vc, above which (in absolute value) no longer
obtains the chaotic pattern.

FIG. 8. (Color online) Successive ampliﬁcations of exit-velocities
(v∞) versus input-velocities (v0) due to the scattering of solitons. (a)
Result of the ampliﬁcation of the tiny interval close to the arrow (left
side) in Fig. 7; (b)-(e) are successive ampliﬁcations of the intervals
highlighted in the exit-velocity graphs (a)-(d), respectively.

terns in the reduced ODE model, was performed here con-
sidering the structures in Fig. 8. The relation involving the
quantities [|(v(s)
c )2|]−1/2 and the window index n
(10),
is also very well established in accordance with Eq.

n )2 − (v(s)

obtained for the structures transformed in the same way de-

hence the slope ep (s) and the intercept coefﬁcient eq (s) were
scribed before. We foundep (a) = 0.047 ± 0.002 (4.26%) and
eq (a) = 0.941 ± 0.009 (0.96%). Again, for the remaining
cients together with their standard deviations, yielding hepi =
0.271 ± 0.006 (2.23%) and heqi = 0.667 ± 0.006 (0.84%).

rescaled structures, we calculated the average of the coefﬁ-

Clearly, these values present relevant differences when com-

8

FIG. 9. Proﬁle of the localized solution |ψ(z, T )|2 during the interaction with the ﬁeld |φ(z, T )|2 obtained via direct numerical simulations
of Eqs. (1a) and (1b). The initial velocity values are taken within four successive windows in the structure shown in Fig. 8(s), with s =
{a, b, c, d, e}. By counting the number of shape-oscillations in the solitons bound-state we found N n
SO = (n − 1) + m(s) × 4 + 13 + N0
(where N0 = 1 ⇐⇒ m(s) = 0, otherwise N0 = 0) for any W (s)

n window.

pared with ep (a) and eq (a), respectively. Therefore, these re-
ep (a) < hepi, the window pattern of the Fig. 8(a) contain less
played the relation between [1 − (ev (s)
tween the values of hepi yielded by the direct and variational

spaced windows, as one can see in the plots. In Fig. 10 is dis-
n )2]−1/2 and the window
index n. The remarkably linear relation of these quantities
appears very well established as well as in the result obtained
with the reduced ODE model. Additionally, comparison be-

sults provide a numerical evidence that the window spacing
of the structure in Fig. 8(a) and the ampliﬁed ones embedded
in it are indeed very different when compared. Also, since

approach shows that they differ only by ∼ 3.2%. This re-

inforces that the reduced ODE model provides a very good
approximation regarding the window pattern. Since the lin-
ear relation in Eq. (10) it is suitable for the window spacing
description, it can be used as an estimative of the position of
very narrow windows that are difﬁcult to access.

When analyzing the length of the structures given by the
direct numerical simulations, we found that all structures re-
sultant of ampliﬁcations obey with great precision the linear
relation given by Eq.
(11), for which the coefﬁcients are
R = −1.481±0.006 (0.43%) and r = −0.91±0.02 (2.34%).
As shown in Eq. (12), only the coefﬁcient R is important in
the zoom ratio. By comparing its value provided by the two

(a)
(b)
(c,d,e)

FIG. 10. (Color online) Plot of [1 − (ev (s)
the the window index n.
structures shown in Fig. 8(a)-(e), respectively.

n )2]−1/2 as a function of
In (a)-(e) we used data obtained by the

approaches we found a difference of ∼ 9.6%. However, the
ﬁrst window structure of the direct numerical simulations has
a length that is more than two orders of magnitude smaller
than the length found in the variational approach, resulting in
even smaller structures when amplifying.

C. Analysis of soliton scattering for both approaches

In order to compare the soliton collision dynamics
given by the two employed methods, we analyze only the in-
teraction stage that follows after the waves cross the z axis
at T = 0, where they overlap at most and energy can be ex-
changed between the solitons and their internal and external
modes. A mechanism of resonance energy exchange between
the internal and translational modes of the solitons was pro-
posed in Ref.
[57], where this mechanism was employed
to describe a structure of reﬂection windows intertwined by
trapping intervals in kink-antikink collisions. The energy ex-
change was found to take place at the instants of great overlap
of the waves, which is when an internal mode can become
active by storing part of the kinetic energy. The resonance
mechanism was associated to the existence of fractal win-
dow structure resultant in kink-antikink collisions in the scalar
λ(φ2 − 1)2 theory [58], and in Refs. [19, 20, 56] regarding
vector-soliton collision. Here we also adopt this mechanism
to explain how the soliton exchange kinetic energy with its
oscillation-mode, which store energy in soliton’s shape vibra-
tions. In our simulations we noted that this exchange also oc-
curs when the solitons overlap at most by passing each other.
For our system, the analysis of the exit velocity plots pre-
sented previously revealed how sensitive can the collision dy-
namic be. Indeed, just after the solitons pass each other for
the ﬁrst time, what follows next depends on the impact veloc-
ity that is directly related to v0. Considering the controlled
collision scenarios provided by reﬂection/transmission win-
dows, in the ﬁrst passing drained kinetic energy sets up shape-
oscillations, then the attraction interaction binds the solitons
that remain in a bound-state until they bounce (moving forth
and back) to pass each other again. How the energy is ex-
changed again depends greatly of the relative phases of the
internal modes of the solitons, as discussed in Ref. [58]. If
enough kinetic energy is restored the pair unbinds, otherwise
In Figs. 6(a)-(d) and 9(b)-(e) the
the bound-state prevails.
bound-state dynamics are initially the same for every win-

9

dow in a given structure, considering the bouncing motion and
the number of shape-oscillations, but it changes in a different
manner at a certain passing. In both approaches we veriﬁed
that these changes happen when the solitons pass each other
(m(s) + 1) times and after that another type of bound-state
arises. This ﬁnal bound-state precede the unbinding of the
solitons and has a varying dynamics, in which the translational
mode can lose energy (n = 1), keep it unchanged (n = 2) or
increase it (n > 2). In any ﬁgure regarding these collisions
one can realize what changed in the solitons kinetic energy by
looking at the number of shape-oscillation during a complete
bounce of the solitons. If it was shortened, for example, then
more energy was drained from the translational mode.

In the direct numerical simulations the initial bound-state
has a longer lifetime and the solitons bounce around the z-
axis as in variational approach, but before the second passing
time the bound-state has less energy in the internal modes and
more energy in the translational modes, resulting in a longer
bouncing motion as seen in the Figs. 9(b)-(e). The dynamic
of this bound-state initially resembles the collision for the ﬁrst
window in Fig. 9(a), which presents the same number of
shape-oscillations. Therefore, the ﬁnal bound-state dynam-
ics depends upon n, furthermore it changes in the same man-
ner of the single bound-states formed in the ﬁrst structure of
windows (in which there is only the ﬁnal bound-state). This
last statement is valid for both presented approaches. In Fig.
11 we show a scheme that identify the initial and ﬁnal bound-
state that appear in a reﬂectional collision, which is associated
to the W (e)
4 window found after the fourth ampliﬁcation. We
highlight in this ﬁgure how the ﬁnal bound-state depends upon
n, and also whether the internal or translational modes acquire
energy after the exchange.

Hitherto we have omitted the losses by radiation, which
have an important role in the solitons’ collision dynamics.
These losses can be excited during the instants of energy ex-
change and carry out energy of the translation and/or inter-
nal modes of the solitons. In Ref. [58] the energy taken by
the radiation losses is later retransferred to the pair, while for
vector-soliton collisions they develop a different role in the
dynamics. As mentioned before, although the variational ap-
proach describe very well the resonance mechanism involv-
ing the translational and internal modes, it does not support
radiation losses due to the constraints imposed by the ansatz.
This explains the absence of trapping scenarios in our simula-
tions of the reduced ODE model, since radiation emission can
prevent the translational modes to recover enough energy to
unbind the bound-state of solitons, which does happen in the
direct numerical simulations of the ﬁeld equations. In these
simulations, all the trapping scenarios are characterized by the
solitons quickly bouncing around the z-axis while very close
to each other.
In contrast, for a collision described by the
reduced ODE model we attested that after a sufﬁciently long
time eventually occurs a phase matching of internal modes, re-
transferring kinetic energy to the solitons, in a such way that
they can immediately unbind or bounce until a ﬁnal energy
exchange that results in a deﬁnitive unbinding.

Since there is no radiation emission in the reduced ODE
model, solitons are able to escape with velocity |v∞| ≤ |v0|

10

FIG. 11. Scheme identifying the initial bound state and the ﬁnal bound-state, the collisions in the ﬁgure are plotted as contour lines of
|ψ(z, T )|2, the initial velocity was taken in the W (e)
4 window for structures in Fig. 4(e) (top) and Fig. 8(e) (bottom). In these collisions the
ﬁfth passing (P5) is when the bound-state changes. At the left side of the ﬁgure we highlight how the ﬁnal bound-state depends upon n, the
symbols ↑, ↓ and ◦ indicate whether energy of the mode has increased, decreased or kept unchanged, respectively.

in the variational description, and the height (depth) of the re-
ﬂection (transmission) windows is closely equal to the value
|v0| corresponding to the its maximum (minimum). On the
other hand, in the direct numerical simulations radiation emis-
sion always happens during the bound-state, which results in
|v∞| always smaller than |v0| in all structures. When soli-
tons unbind and move away, the exit velocity value show us
if the internal modes remained excited after the collision be-
cause the smaller the value of |v∞| is, compared with |v0|,
greater is the energy in shape oscillation. Analyzing the ra-
diation emitted during the collisions in the direct numerical
simulations, we noted that it happens not only when the soli-
tons pass through each other, but also when they are moving
side by side as a bound-state. This means that such radiation
losses play an important role in the window structure and in
the dynamics of the reﬂectional/transmissional collisions, and
not only in trapping scenarios.

By a graphical analyses of the solitons’ collisions, we found
that its lifetime (Z (s)
n ) is nicely predicted by a multi-linear
function of the integer quantities n and m(s), likewise the
number of shape-oscillations N n
SO, as shown in Figs. 6 and
9. They are given by

n = (n − 1)zf + m(s)zi + z1 ;
Z (s)
SO = (n − 1) + 4m(s) + 4 ;
N n

֒→


zf = 2.39 ± 0.02 (0.65%)
zi = 10.16 ± 0.06 (0.57%)
z1 = 7.9 ± 0.1 (1.26%),

(14)

for the variational model simulations, and

(where N0 = 1 ⇐⇒ m(s) = 0, otherwise N0 = 0) ;

(15)

Z (s)
n = (n − 1)zf + m(s)zi + z1 ;
N n
SO = (n − 1) + 4m(s) + 13 + N0 ,

֒→


zf = 2.38 ± 0.07 (3.01%)
zi = 9.4 ± 0.4 (4.61%)
z1 = 31.5 ± 0.9 (2.79%),

for the direct numerical simulations. We point out that in
(15) the relation for N n
SO is multi-linear only for the ampli-
ﬁed structures (m(s) > 0), which is due to N0 that was added
to encompass all the structures in a single formula. In (14) and
(15), zf and zi are characteristic times of the ﬁnal bound-state
(FBS) and initial bound-state (IBS) (see Fig. (11)), respec-
tively, while z1 is the lifetime of the bound-state associated
with the ﬁrst reﬂection window of the ﬁrst window structure
(given by n = 1 and m(a) = 0 in both formulas). The coefﬁ-
cient zf represents the width ∆z of the solitons’ shape vibra-
tion in the FBS. The results show that it is closely the same
for every structure, which means that the quantity of energy
stored in the internal mode inﬂuences only in the amplitude
of the shape vibrations and not in its frequency. The zi coefﬁ-
cient represents the width ∆z of the solitons bounce (shortest
bounce in the direct numerical simulations) in the IBS. The
multi-linear relations for Z (s)
SO are clearly similar,
n
but this is an expected result since each coefﬁcient in Z (s)
n
is related to a number of shape-oscillations. For the reduced
ODE model, both Z (s)
SO can be well predicted for the
bound-states by using the formulas above, while for the direct
numerical simulations they provide a less precise prediction
for Z (s)
n , but still reasonable. The numerical values of the co-
efﬁcients in these formulas give us some useful information

n and N n

and N n

11

about the two approaches. The difference between the z1 co-
efﬁcients reproduces the difference seen in the ﬁrst bounce
in the IBS, which resides mainly in the number of shape-
oscillations that is provided by the last coefﬁcient of the N n
SO
formulas, where for the variational approach it is 4 and for the
direct numerical simulations it is 14. The other z-coefﬁcients
have similar values. Additionally, the FBS lifetime and shape
vibrations are nicely reproduced by the reduced ODE model.

IV. CONCLUSION

In conclusion, we studied the fractal scattering of Gaussian
solitons in directional couplers with logarithmic nonlineari-
ties. In this sense, we employed two methods, viz., the varia-
tional approach and direct numerical simulations. Regarding
the variational approach, we have started our study by ﬁrstly
developing the reduced ODE model for our system governed
by the ﬁeld equations (1a) and (1b), which provided the results
presented in the section II. The reduced ODE model descrip-
tion shows that the collisions of the solitons is chaotic when
the absolute value of the input velocity is less than a certain
critical value, and a fractal structure composed by reﬂection
and transmission windows arises within the chaotic region. In
the same way, in view to verify the feasibility of the reduced
ODE model in the present context we performed direct nu-
merical simulations. So, in Sec. III we shown similar features
presented by the two approaches employed.

Our analysis on the size of the structures and window po-
sitions yielded quite precise results for the ﬁtting curves. As
long as the ampliﬁcations follow the adopted protocol these
structures closely preserve their window pattern and they are
all embedded in each other in a quite well deﬁned manner,
which means that the ampliﬁcations almost occur in the same
ratio. Interestingly, a numerical comparison of the window
pattern and ampliﬁcation ratio of both variational and direct
numerical approaches shows that these are not very much dif-
ferent. Once again, it reinforces the usefulness of the varia-
tional model in predicting the major features of solitons scat-
tering and collision dynamics.

This study also gives us an idea about the form of colli-
sions of solitons in reﬂection/transmission windows within the
chaotic region, which can enable us to control the pattern of
collision via initial approach velocity between them. Also,
due to sensitivity to small changes in the velocity, we theorize
that it could be used as a kind of sensor to verify inhomo-
geneities caused by impurities in the medium. In this sense,
we are studying other models as well as including tests of ef-
fects of inhomogeneities in the medium.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We acknowledge ﬁnancial support from the Brazilian agen-
cies CNPq, CAPES, and the National Institute of Science and
Technology (INCT) for Quantum Information.

[1] N.

J.

and
Phys. Rev. Lett. 15, 240 (1965).

Zabusky

M.

D.

Kruskal,

[15] J. Aitchison, K. Al-Hemyari, C. Ironside, R. Grant, and W. Sib-

[2] L. Khaykovich, Science (80-. ). 296, 1290 (2002).
[3] K. E. Strecker, G. B. Partridge, A. G. Truscott, and R. G. Hulet,

Nature 417, 150 (2002).

[4] S. L. Cornish, S. T. Thompson,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 170401 (2006).

and C. E. Wieman,

[5] A. L. Marchant, T. P. Billam, T. P. Wiles, M. M. H. Yu, S. A.

Gardiner, and S. L. Cornish, Nat. Commun. 4, 1865 (2013).

[6] S. Burger, K. Bongs, S. Dettmer, W. Ertmer, K. Seng-
and M. Lewenstein,

stock, A. Sanpera, G. V. Shlyapnikov,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 5198 (1999).

[7] W. Craig, P. Guyenne, J. Hammack, D. Henderson,

and

C. Sulem, Phys. Fluids 18, 057106 (2006).

[8] A. S. Davydov, Solitons in Molecular Systems, Mathematics
and its applications (D. Reidel Publishing Company).: Soviet
series (D. Reidel Publishing Company, 1985).

[9] L. V. Yakushevich, Nonlinear Physics of DNA (Wiley, 2004).
[10] G. Agrawal, Nonlinear Fiber Optics, Optics and Photonics (El-

sevier Science, 2001).
Hasegawa

[11] A.

Kodama,
Solitons in optical communications, Oxford series in opti-
cal and imaging sciences (Clarendon Press, 1995).
A.

Bjorkholm

Ashkin,

and

and

A.

E.

Y.

[12] J.

Phys. Rev. Lett. 32, 129 (1974).

[13] A. Barthelemy,

S. Maneuf,

and C.

Froehly,

Opt. Commun. 55, 201 (1985).

[14] M. Segev, B. Crosignani, A. Yariv,

and B. Fischer,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 923 (1992).

bett, Electron. Lett. 28, 1879 (1992).

[16] J. Beeckman, K. Neyts, X. Hutsebaut, C. Cambournac, and

M. Haelterman, Opt. Express 12, 1011 (2004).
G.

Kivshar

and

S.

[17] Y.

Optical Solitons: From Fibers to Photonic Crystals
vier Science, 2003).
Zakharov

and

A.

[18] V.

Sov. J. Exp. Theor. Phys. 34, 62 (1972).

Agrawal,
(Else-

Shabat,

[19] J. Yang and Y. Tan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 3624 (2000).
[20] Y. Tan and J. Yang, Phys. Rev. E 64, 056616 (2001).
[21] S.

Dmitriev

and

V.

T.

Shigenari,

Chaos An Interdiscip. J. Nonlinear Sci. 12, 324 (2002).

[22] Y. Zhu and J. Yang, Phys. Rev. E 75, 036605 (2007).
[23] Y.
J.

Haberman,

Zhu,

and

R.

Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 143901 (2008).

[24] Y.

[25] Y.

R.

Zhu,

Haberman,

and
Phys. D Nonlinear Phenom. 237, 2411 (2008).
and

Haberman,
Stud. Appl. Math. 122, 449 (2009).

Zhu,

R.

J.

J.

Yang,

Yang,

Yang,

[26] A.

Hause,

Hartwig,
Phys. Rev. A 82, 053833 (2010).

H.

and

F. Mitschke,

[27] R. H. Goodman, Chaos An Interdiscip. J. Nonlinear Sci. 18, 023113 (2008).
[28] R.

H.
Bellanich,
Chaos An Interdiscip. J. Nonlinear Sci. 25, 043109 (2015).

Rahman,
N.

M.
J.
Morrison,

Goodman,

and

A.

C.

[29] K. Fukushima and T. Yamada, Phys. Lett. A 200, 350 (1995).
[30] M. Higuchi,

Fukushima,

T. Yamada,

and

K.

Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 9, 845 (1998).

[31] S. V. Dmitriev, Y. S. Kivshar,

and T. Shigenari,

Phys. Rev. E 64, 056613 (2001).

Phys. Rev. E 61, 3122 (2000).

[46] H. Buljan, A. ˇSiber, M. Soljaˇci´c, T. Schwartz, M. Segev, and

[32] S. V. Dmitriev, Y. S. Kivshar,

and T. Shigenari,

D. N. Christodoulides, Phys. Rev. E 68, 036607 (2003).

12

Phys. B Condens. Matter 316-317, 139 (2002).

[33] S. V. Dmitriev, P. G. Kevrekidis,

and Y. S. Kivshar,

Phys. Rev. E 78, 046604 (2008).

[34] C. J. Myatt, E. A. Burt, R. W. Ghrist, E. A. Cornell, and C. E.

Wieman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 586 (1997).

[35] D. M. Stamper-Kurn, M. R. Andrews, A. P. Chikkatur,
and W. Ketterle,

S. Inouye, H.-J. Miesner, J. Stenger,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 2027 (1998).

[36] W. B. Cardoso, A. T. Avelar,

and D. Bazeia,

Phys. Rev. E 86, 27601 (2012).

[47] S. De Martino and G. Lauro, in Waves Stab. Contin. Media,
edited by R. Monaco (WORLD SCIENTIFIC, 2004) pp. 148–
152.

[48] S. D. Martino, M. Falanga, C. Godano,

and G. Lauro,

Europhys. Lett. 63, 472 (2003).
and

Biswas

[49] A.

D.

Milovi´c,

Commun. Nonlinear Sci. Numer. Simul. 15, 3763 (2010).

[50] A. Biswas, M. Fessak,

S.

Johnson,

D. Milovic, Z.
Opt. Laser Technol. 44, 263 (2012).

Jovanoski, R. Kohl,

S. Beatrice,
and F. Majid,

[37] W. B. Cardoso, A. T. Avelar, D. Bazeia, and M. S. Hussein,

[51] Q.

Zhou,

D. Yao,

Q. Xu,

and X.

Liu,

Phys. Lett. A 374, 2356 (2010).

[38] H.

Kogelnik

and

R.

Schmidt,

IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 12, 396 (1976).

[39] R.

Bergh,

G.

Kotler,

Electron. Lett. 16, 260 (1980).

and

H.

Shaw,

[40] A. M. Streltsov and N. F. Borrelli, Opt. Lett. 26, 42 (2001).
[41] E. O. Alves, W. B. Cardoso,

and A. T. Avelar,

(2015),

arXiv:1505.06719.
Biswas

[42] A.

Konar,
S.
Introduction to non-Kerr Law Optical Solitons,
Chapman
& Hall/CRC Applied Mathematics & Nonlinear Science (CRC
Press, 2006).

and

Opt. - Int. J. Light Electron Opt. 124, 2368 (2013).

[52] E. M. Hilal, A. A. Alshaery, A. H. Bhrawy, B. Bhosale, and
A. Biswas, Opt. - Int. J. Light Electron Opt. 125, 4589 (2014).
and W. B. Cardoso,

[53] L. Calac¸a, A. T. Avelar, D. Bazeia,

Commun. Nonlinear Sci. Numer. Simul. 19, 2928 (2014).

[54] A. Biswas, C. Cleary, J. E. Watson,

and D. Milovic,

Appl. Math. Comput. 217, 2891 (2010).

[55] A. Biswas, E. Topkara, S. Johnson, E. Zerrad, and S. Konar,

J. Nonlinear Opt. Phys. Mater. 20, 309 (2011).

[56] J. Yang, Nonlinear Waves in Integrable and Nonintegrable Systems

(Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 2010).

[57] D. K. Campbell, J. F. Schonfeld,

and C. A. Wingate,

[43] E.

S.

B.
Phys. A Stat. Mech. its Appl. 105, 130 (1981).

Hern´andez

and

[44] E. F. Hefter, Phys. Rev. A 32, 1201 (1985).
[45] W. Kr´olikowski, D. Edmundson,

and O. Bang,

Remaud,

Phys. D Nonlinear Phenom. 9, 1 (1983).

[58] P. Anninos,

S. Oliveira,
Phys. Rev. D 44, 1147 (1991).

and R. A. Matzner,

