6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
6
1

 
 
]

M

I
.

h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
7
1
2
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

First Upper Limits on the Radar Cross Section of

Cosmic-Ray Induced Extensive Air Showers

R.U. Abbasia, M. Abeb, M. Abou Bakr Othmanc, T.Abu-Zayyada, M. Allena, R. Andersona, R. Azumad,
E. Barcikowskia, J.W. Belza,∗, D.R. Bergmana, D. Bessone,f, S.A. Blakea, M. Byrnea, R. Cadya, M.J. Chaeg,

B.G. Cheonh, J. Chibai, M. Chikawaj, W.R. Chok, B. Farhang-Boroujenyc, T. Fujiil, M. Fukushimal,m,

W.H. Gillmann, T. Gotoo, W. Hanlona, J.C. Hansone, Y. Hayashio, N. Hayashidap, K. Hibinop, K. Hondaq, D. Ikedal,

N. Inoueb, T. Ishiiq, R. Ishimorid, H. Itor, D. Ivanova, C. Jayanthmurthyc, C.C.H. Juia, K. Kadotas, F. Kakimotod,
O. Kalashevt, K. Kasaharau, H. Kawaiv, S. Kawakamio, S. Kawanab, K. Kawatal, E. Kidol, H.B. Kimh, J.H. Kima,
J.H. Kimw, S. Kitamurad, Y. Kitamurad, S. Kunware, V. Kuzmint, Y.J. Kwonk, J. Lana, S.I. Limg, J.P. Lundquista,
K. Machidaq, K. Martensm, T. Matsudax, T. Matsuyamao, J.N. Matthewsa, M. Minaminoo, K. Mukaiq, I. Myersa,
K. Nagasawab, S. Nagatakir, T. Nakamuray, T. Nonakal, A. Nozatoj, S. Ogioo, J. Ogurad, M. Ohnishil, H. Ohokal,

K. Okil, T. Okudaz, M. Onoaa, A. Oshimaab, S. Ozawau, I.H. Parkac, S. Prohirae, M.S. Pshirkovad,t,

A. Rezazadeh-Reyhanic, D.C. Rodrigueza, G. Rubtsovt, D. Ryuw, H. Sagawal, N. Sakuraio, A.L. Sampsona,

L.M. Scottae, D. Schurigc, P.D. Shaha, F. Shibataq, T. Shibatal, H. Shimodairal, B.K. Shinh, J.D. Smitha, P. Sokolskya,

R.W. Springera, B.T. Stokesa, S.R. Strattona,ae, T.A. Stromana, T. Suzawab, H. Takaiaf, M. Takamurai, M. Takedal,

R. Takeishil, A. Taketaag, M. Takital, Y. Tamedap, H. Tanakao, K. Tanakaah, M. Tanakax, S.B. Thomasa,

G.B. Thomsona, P. Tinyakovt,ai, I. Tkachevt, H. Tokunod, T. Tomidaaj, S. Troitskyt, Y. Tsunesadao, K. Tsutsumid,

Y. Uchihoriak, S. Udop, F. Urbanai, G. Vasiloﬀa, S. Venkateshc, T. Wonga, R. Yamaneo, H. Yamaokax, K. Yamazakio,

J. Yangg, K. Yashiroi, Y. Yonedao, S. Yoshidav, H. Yoshiial, R. Zollingera, Z. Zundela

aHigh Energy Astrophysics Institute and Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA

bThe Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Saitama University, Saitama, Saitama, Japan

cDepartment of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
dGraduate School of Science and Engineering, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Meguro, Tokyo, Japan

eUniversity of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas, USA

fMoscow Engineering and Physics Institute, Moscow, Russia

gDepartment of Physics and Institute for the Early Universe, Ewha Womans University, Seodaaemun-gu, Seoul, Korea
hDepartment of Physics and The Research Institute of Natural Science, Hanyang University, Seongdong-gu, Seoul, Korea

iDepartment of Physics, Tokyo University of Science, Noda, Chiba, Japan
jDepartment of Physics, Kinki University, Higashi Osaka, Osaka, Japan
kDepartment of Physics, Yonsei University, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul, Korea

lInstitute for Cosmic Ray Research, University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, Chiba, Japan

mKavli Institute for the Physics and Mathematics of the Universe (WPI), Todai Institutes for

Advanced Study, the University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, Chiba, Japan

nGillman & Associates, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA

oGraduate School of Science, Osaka City University, Osaka, Osaka, Japan
pFaculty of Engineering, Kanagawa University, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan

qInterdisciplinary Graduate School of Medicine and Engineering, University of Yamanashi, Kofu, Yamanashi, Japan

rAstrophysical Big Bang Laboratory, RIKEN, Wako, Saitama, Japan

sDepartment of Physics, Tokyo City University, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, Japan

tNational Nuclear Research University, Moscow Engineering Physics Institute, Moscow, Russia

uAdvanced Research Institute for Science and Engineering, Waseda University, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan

vDepartment of Physics, Chiba University, Chiba, Chiba, Japan

wDepartment of Physics, School of Natural Sciences, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology, UNIST-gil, Ulsan, Korea

xInstitute of Particle and Nuclear Studies, KEK, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan

yFaculty of Science, Kochi University, Kochi, Kochi, Japan

zDepartment of Physical Sciences, Ritsumeikan University, Kusatsu, Shiga, Japa

aaDepartment of Physics, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Fukuoka, Japan

abEngineering Science Laboratory, Chubu University, Kasugai, Aichi, Japan
acDepartment of Physics, Sungkyunkwan University, Jang-an-gu, Suwon, Korea

adSternberg Astronomical Institute Moscow M.V.Lomonosov State University, Moscow, Russia

aeDepartment of Physics and Astronomy, Rutgers University - The State University of New Jersey, Piscataway, New Jersey, USA

∗Corresponding Author. Tel.: +01 801 585-9620. Addr.: 115 S 1400 E #201 JFB
Email address: belz@physics.utah.edu (J.W. Belz)

Preprint submitted to Astropart. Phys.

March 17, 2016

ahGraduate School of Information Sciences, Hiroshima City University, Hiroshima, Hiroshima, Japan

aiService de Physique Th´eorique, Universit´e Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium

ajDepartment of Computer Science and Engineering, Shinshu University, Nagano, Nagano, Japan

afBrookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York, USA

agEarthquake Research Institute, University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan

akNational Institute of Radiological Science, Chiba, Chiba, Japan

alDepartment of Physics, Ehime University, Matsuyama, Ehime, Japan

Abstract
TARA (Telescope Array Radar) is a cosmic ray radar detection experiment colocated with Telescope Array, the
conventional surface scintillation detector (SD) and ﬂuorescence telescope detector (FD) near Delta, Utah, U.S.A. The
TARA detector combines a 40 kW, 54.1 MHz VHF transmitter and high-gain transmitting antenna which broadcasts
the radar carrier over the SD array and within the FD ﬁeld of view, towards a 250 MS/s DAQ receiver. TARA has been
collecting data since 2013 with the primary goal of observing the radar signatures of extensive air showers (EAS).
Simulations indicate that echoes are expected to be short in duration (∼ 10 µs) and exhibit rapidly changing frequency,
with rates on the order 1 MHz/µs. The EAS radar cross-section (RCS) is currently unknown although it is the subject
of over 70 years of speculation. A novel signal search technique is described in which the expected radar echo of a
particular air shower is used as a matched ﬁlter template and compared to waveforms obtained by triggering the radar
DAQ using the Telescope Array ﬂuorescence detector. No evidence for the scattering of radio frequency radiation
by EAS is obtained to date. We report the ﬁrst quantitative RCS upper limits using EAS that triggered the Telescope
Array Fluorescence Detector.

Keywords: cosmic ray, radar, digital signal processing, radar cross-section

1. Introduction

Ultra-high energy cosmic ray (UHECR, primary en-
ergy E0 > 1018 eV) research is limited primarily by low
ﬂux. There are currently two dominant detection tech-
niques, surface detectors (SD) comprised of plastic scin-
tillator or water Cherenkov detectors, and ﬂuorescence
telescope detectors (FD). Conventional detection meth-
ods have been successful in mapping out the UHECR
spectrum, observing the GZK cutoﬀ [1, 2, 3] and locat-
ing a potential “hotspot” in CR arrival directions [4].
However, large SD arrays are expensive to build and
maintain, and FD telescopes have limited statistics due
to their low duty cycle (∼ 10%).

Recently proposed alternative detection methods in-
clude those using the geo-magnetic synchrotron [5] and
Askaryan [6] eﬀects, both of which require a large in-
strumentation area. Radar detection has the potential
to be being a remote detection technique with 100%
duty cycle. The idea was initially suggested in 1941 [7]
when reﬂections from extensive air showers (EAS) were
proposed as a possible explanation for anomalous atmo-
spheric radar echoes.

Telescope Array Radar (TARA) seeks to observe
radar echoes in coincidence with the Telescope Array
(TA) and determine the viability of the radar technique

for UHECR detection. TARA is the most advanced
CR radar detection experiment to date, improving upon
other experiments with several key attributes:

• The transmitter is under the direct control of ex-
perimenters, and in a radio-quiet area isolated from
other radio frequency (RF) sources. The power and
radiation pattern are known at all times.

• Forward power up to 40 kW and gain exceeding
20 dB maximize energy density in the radar ﬁeld.
• Continuous wave (CW) transmission gives 100%

duty cycle, as opposed to pulsed radar.

• TARA utilizes a high sample rate DAQ (250 MS/s).
• TARA is colocated with a large state-of-the-art
conventional CR observatory, allowing the radar
data stream to be sampled at the arrival times of
known cosmic ray events.

Each of these attributes of the TARA detector has been
discussed in detail in the literature [8]. A map showing
the TA SD array and the location of the TARA transmit-
ter and receiver is shown in Figure 1.

2

is a simple geometrical formula used to calculate re-
ceived power when the transmitter (TX) and receiver
(RX) are at diﬀerent locations. PR is received power,
PT is transmitter power, GR and GT are the receiver and
transmitter station antenna gains, respectively, λ is the
radar wavelength, RT is distance between transmitter
and target, RR is distance between target and receiver,
and σ is the RCS. Most of the parameters in the bi-static
radar equation are known a priori or can be measured.
In the case of EAS, the RCS is currently unknown and,
as will be shown, is diﬃcult to calculate directly.

Scattering occurs from interaction of the radar wave
with free electrons liberated from air molecules by pass-
ing shower particles. Therefore, the RCS is proportional
to the density and area of the plasma body. This merits
a discussion of the calculation of ionization density cre-
ated by EAS.

Standard EAS parameters include primary particle
energy E0 (eV), depth Xmax (g/cm2) in the atmosphere
where the number of shower particles reaches a maxi-
mum Nmax, and the depth of ﬁrst interaction X0 (g/cm2).
The critical energy Ec (eV) is the energy below which
the dominant energy loss mechanism is bremsstrahlung
In air, Ec is
radiation rather than pair production.
81 MeV [9]. When the average particle energy de-
creases below Ec, particle production ceases and the
EAS starts to decrease in size.

Gaisser and Hillas [10] have parameterized the aver-
age shower longitudinal proﬁle, the number of charged
shower products N(X) as a function of depth X in
the atmosphere. Nishimura, Kamata, and Greisen
(NKG) [11] have created a function describing the num-
ber area density as a function of radius, at a speciﬁc
shower age s [12], as a function of N(X). Together,
Gaisser-Hillas and NKG describe charged particle den-
sity as the shower evolves. Electrons and positrons
are the dominant component of charged shower parti-
cles [12], outnumbering other species such as muons,
to the extent that N(X) can be approximated as the to-
tal number of electrons and positrons produced by the
shower. This assumption is maintained in this paper.

Together with the Gaisser-Hillas and NKG functions,
atmospheric energy deposition models permit the cal-
culation of ionization yield. Nerling et al. [13] have
parameterized αeﬀ(X), where αeﬀ(X) N(X) = dE
dX (X).
Combined with the mean ionization energy in the at-
mosphere, I = 33.8 eV [14], the energy deposit dE
dX (X)
from Nerling can be used to estimate the EAS plasma
properties. Atmospheric ionization occurs at a greater
rate in regions where the shower particle density is
high. Therefore, it is expected that the total plasma den-
sity follows the shower lateral distribution described by

Figure 1: Map of Telescope Array (TA) detector facilities, both SD
and FD, and TARA transmitter and receiver sites. The radar carrier is
broadcast from the transmitter site toward the TA Long Ridge Fluo-
rescence Detector (FD). Dashed blue lines indicate the beamwidth at
the points 3 dB below the peak gain. This map is copied from [8].

Section 2 of this paper includes a description of air
shower plasmas and possible radio scattering mecha-
nisms. Theoretical and experimental parameters that
inﬂuence radio scattering are presented and discussed.
We justify use of the thin wire model in a radar echo
simulation that predicts echo waveforms, which we will
subsequently (Section 6) use in placing limits on the air
shower radar cross section (RCS). Sections 3 and 4 de-
scribe TARA data and oﬄine processing techniques. In
Section 5, we describe the signal search using simulated
waveforms as matched ﬁlter (MF) templates in order
to maximize sensitivity. Section 6 describes the pro-
cedure for calculating a scale factor to the RCS model
described in Section 2, the results of which are used
in placing the ﬁrst quantitative upper limit on the EAS
radar cross-section (RCS). In Section 7 we summarize
these results and discuss the viability of radar detection
of cosmic rays in light of the TARA ﬁndings.

2. EAS Radio Scattering

We begin with an overview of the issues relevant to
RF scattering by EAS, focusing on those which inform
the design of the TARA detector and its data analysis.

2.1. Air Shower Plasmas

The bi-static radar equation

PR = PT

GT
4πR2
T

σ

GR
4πR2
R

λ2
4π

,

(1)

3

NKG.

Figure 2 shows the ionization density predicted by
the NKG distribution for an E0 = 1019 eV air shower
at Xmax, compared with an unthinned simulated shower
produced with the CORSIKA [15] package using the
QGSJETII-03 [16]) high-energy interaction model. The
ionization electron density is calculated for the COR-
SIKA shower as follows:

Nions =

Ee × (1 − 1

e ) × ρair

Xrad × Eion

(2)

where Ee is the electron or positron energy from COR-
SIKA, ρair is the density of air at 1500 m M.S.L, Xrad is
the electron radiation length in air, and Eion is the mean
ionization energy of air. Agreement between the NKG
and CORSIKA predictions is good near the critical re-
gion close to the shower core, where electron density is
highest.

radar carrier frequency. This equation can be used [17]
to obtain the index of refraction as a function of the
plasma frequency:

n2 = 1 − Ne2
r 0m

ω2

= 1 − ω2
e
ω2
r

.

(4)

In this low density plasma, collisions between free elec-
trons and molecules, as well as geomagnetic eﬀects are
neglected. The plasma frequency is

(cid:115)

ωe ≡

Ne2
0m

(5)

The index of refraction can be either real or imagi-
nary. If ωe > ωr (overdense), n is imaginary and the
waves cannot penetrate the medium. Specular reﬂection
is the typical scattering regime for overdense plasma
bodies. In the case ωe < ωr (underdense), waves pene-
trate the medium. Scattering in the underdense regime is
primarily via Thomson scattering [18] which, depend-
ing on the size of the scattering body relative to the
wavelength, can interfere either constructively or decon-
structively at the receiver.

Figure 3 shows the plasma frequency as a function
of radius, calculated from Gaisser-Hillas and NKG in a
manner similar to the values obtained in Figure 2. Given
the TARA 54.1 MHz radar carrier, the shower only ap-
pears overdense at small radii, ∼ 1 cm.

Figure 2: The comparison of the ionized plasma densities calculated
with CORSIKA (histogram) and with Gaisser-Hillas and NKG func-
tions (curve) as a function of radius near Xmax for a 1019 eV vertical
shower.

2.2. Plasma Scattering

In the presence of an incident time-varying electric
ﬁeld, a low density plasma will oscillate according to
the equation of motion:

eE = m ∂2r
∂t2 ,

(3)

where r is the electron displacement vector. Both E and
r have the harmonic component exp(−iωrt), with ωr the

Figure 3: Plasma frequency as a function of radius at Xmax for a
1019 eV shower calculated using Gaisser-Hillas and NKG parame-
terizations. Gaisser-Hillas parameters are averages of values obtained
by CORSIKA simulations. The horizontal black line corresponds to
the TARA radar carrier frequency at 54.1 MHz.

2.3. Collisional Damping

Collisions between free electrons and atmospheric
molecules will tend to damp reradiation as the electrons’

4

motion becomes incoherent. Scattered power can be ex-
pected to decrease as the eﬀective collision frequency ν
increases, particularly when ν becomes large compared
to the sounding frequency. We can modify Equation 3
to include the eﬀects of collisional damping by adding
a term assuming that all of an electron’s excess momen-
tum gained from the radar carrier is lost upon collision
with a molecule.

∂r
∂t .
The index of refraction is then given by

∂t2 − mν

eE = m ∂2r

n2 = 1 −

ω2
e

r (1 − iν/ωr) .
ω2

(6)

(7)

With collisional eﬀects included, n is thus complex.
Speciﬁcally, n ≡ µ − iχ, with χ the absorption coef-
ﬁcient and µ the real part of the index of refraction.
When collisions are included, there are no longer two
distinct regimes; rather incident waves are both partially
reﬂected and partially absorbed.

Figure 4 gives values of ν for atmospheric plasmas as
calculated by several authors, as well as a simple esti-
mate obtained by dividing the mean thermalized elec-
tron velocity by the mean free path.

Not including the simple estimate, all values were
calculated as functions of the momentum transfer cross-
section and electron velocity [19]:

(cid:17)

ν(v) = v

NN2 QN2

m (v) + NO2 QO2

m (v)

.

(8)

Qm(v) is the momentum transfer cross-section as a func-
tion of velocity v and N is the number density.

By deﬁnition, the average shower particle energy at
Xmax in air is Ec = 81 MeV. Electron temperatures up
to 1000 K ((cid:104)E(cid:105) = 3
2(cid:104)kBT(cid:105)) were used in Equation 8
to calculate the resultant values, which corresponds to
∼ 0.1 eV. Ionization electron energies increase with that
of incident particles [25] (shower electrons), therefore
the electron velocities used to calculate the values in
Figure 4 are likely too low.

Above 1 keV, QN2

m decreases nearly two orders of
magnitude for each decade increase in electron en-
ergy [25]. Data for electron energies in the range of
interest (∼ 10 MeV) do not exist in the literature. If the
trend of decreasing momentum transfer cross-section
continues, then eﬀective collision frequency values in
Figure 4 are overestimates, caused by assuming a near-
thermal secondary electron energy distribution. NO2
is small compared to NN2 and the momentum transfer
cross-section of oxygen molecules appears to ﬂatten as
it approaches 1 keV [26]. Therefore, it is unlikely the

(cid:16)

Figure 4: Survey of estimates of electron-neutral collision frequency
as a function of altitude, mean sea level. Data points are from
Vidmar [20], Itikawa [21], Lovell [22], Suga [23], and Stasielak et
al. [24]. A simple estimate is also shown, the result of dividing mean
electron speed by the mean free path.

oxygen term in Equation 8 will compete with the nitro-
gen term.

Without the beneﬁt of high-energy electron data, one
can estimate the eﬀect of collisional damping assuming
that the collision rate in air is ∼ 1011 Hz. Comparing
Equations 4 and 7, an eﬀective mass can be deﬁned as
meﬀ = m
. Scattering power is proportional to
(∂2r/∂t2)2 ∝ 1/m2. The damping factor is

1 − i ν

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

ωr

(cid:33)2

(cid:32)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) meﬀ

m

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)2 (cid:39)

ν
ωr

.

(9)

Given ωr = 108 Hz and a possibly overestimated colli-
sion frequency ν = 1011 Hz, the damping factor is 106.
The damping phenomenon is potentially catastrophic
to the radar detection scheme, a fact that has been ne-
glected in recent radar detection literature [27].

Figure 5 shows µ and χ as a function of radar carrier
frequency near 54.1 MHz at three diﬀerent plasma fre-
quencies ωe = (10−3, 10−2, 10−1) ν, with ν = 1011 Hz.
The refractive part of the index of refraction, µ, does not
deviate appreciably from unity at 54.1 MHz and plasma
frequency ωe equal to 10−3 ν. Absorption in the medium
is of order 10−3. Thus we might expect that scattering
power is very small even when the plasma frequency
meets and exceeds the radar frequency (ωe (cid:39) 10−3 ν).

5

Figure 6: Relative scattered electric ﬁeld [28] magnitude for several
diﬀerent cylinder radii, expressed as fractions of the incident wave-
length, as a function of angular deviation from the forward scattering
direction.

2.5. Simulation

Energetic shower particles travel in a disk coaxial
with the EAS direction of propagation. Less energetic
products are quickly thermalized on a time scale of the
order of the free electron lifetime. From the perspective
of a radar system, an EAS is a (narrow) disk moving
through the atmosphere at the speed of light, leaving
a quickly fading plasma trail. The simulation of radar
echoes is made possible using the bi-static radar equa-
tion, TARA detector geometry and known EAS dynam-
ics to calculate the received signal based on a scattering
model, as detailed below.

The superposition principle implies that multiple
scattering path lengths from diﬀerent segments of the
shower track (see Figure 7) result in summation of
scattered rays of the same frequency but with diﬀer-
ent phase. Unlike other radar applications, the target is
moving at essentially the same speed as the interrogat-
ing wave, so phase evolves rapidly. EAS radar echoes
exhibit rapidly changing frequency [29]. Such signals
are often referred to as “chirps”.

During a given time step δt at time ti, the bi-static
radar equation is applied to each longitudinal shower
segment (each with length c δt) from which light could
have reached the receiver. A segment j is included if the
shower progress Pi, the distance the shower has trav-

Figure 5: Real and imaginary parts of the index of refraction
(n = µ − i χ) with 1011 Hz collision frequency each with ωe =
(10−3, 10−2, 10−1) ν. µ − 1 is plotted to emphasize the diﬀerence
between the 10−2 ν and 10−3 ν curves which are very close to unity.
The TARA radar frequency is 54.1 MHz.

2.4. Forward-scattering Enhancement

The relative size of the radar wavelength λ to the
characteristic lateral size of the target a determines if
there is a peak in the scattered radiation pattern. Fig-
ure 6 shows a comparison of metallic cylinder forward-
scattering radiation patterns as a function of the angle
from the forward direction for several diﬀerent cylinder
radii a expressed as fractions of the radar wavelength.
The diﬀraction peak vanishes when a/λ < 0.1.

If the majority of scattered power comes from near
the shower core in the region that would be consid-
ered overdense in the collisionless regime, the scatter-
ing region with radius a ∼ 1 cm can be represented as a
thin conductive wire with no forward enhancement. In
the opposite case, one considers a cylinder with radius
equal to λ, which encloses over 30% of shower elec-
trons. This scattering volume is expected to have appre-
ciable forward enhancement.

6

Figure 7: Contributions from paths of varying lengths, TX →
target → RX, summed at the receiver result in a chirp signal (bi-static
conﬁguration).

elled since ﬁrst interaction, is greater than the distance
from segment j to the receiver RR, j minus the progress
of the shower at segment j, P j. The plasma state of
segment j, and thus RCS properties, are that of the seg-
= (Pi − RR, j − P j)/c. The time
ment at retarded time t(cid:48)
(Pi − RR, j)/c is deﬁned by scattered light from segment
j leaving the segment. It does not include shower age
which must be tracked carefully to include the eﬀect of
plasma dissipation.

i, j

Each segment has magnitude and phase determined
by the segment’s total path length, radar wavelength,
RCS at the current point in the shower, shower geom-
etry relative to the TX and RX and geometrical antenna
factors. The integrated contribution of all segments j is
the received signal at time ti

VR,i =

P j(t(cid:48)

i) Z .

(10)

(cid:88)

(cid:113)

j

P j(t(cid:48)
i) is the received power from the bi-static radar
equation (Equation 1) calculated at the retarded time,
and Z is the impedance of the receiving antenna. The
sum should properly account for phase factors in P j.
In practice, antenna impedance Z is a function of fre-
quency. Here, a ﬁxed value is assumed. Error intro-
duced from this assumption is discussed in Section 6.3.
Signal components scattered early in shower evolu-
tion when the RCS is small and path length is large will
have low amplitude, while segments near Xmax (typi-
cally 3-5 km from ground level at the location of the
detector) have larger RCS due to high plasma density
near Xmax and have shorter path lengths so the expected
received signal later in the shower is greater.

Several physical models are included in the simula-
tion to increase accuracy. Gaisser-Hillas parameters are
coded as functions of primary energy E0 using COR-
SIKA Monte Carlo data [30]. The NKG function com-
bined with Nerling’s parameterization [13] of α describe
the ionization lateral distribution. Atmospheric density
as a function of altitude is obtained from the 1976 Stan-
dard Atmosphere [31]. Electron lifetime as a function
of altitude comes from Vidmar [20]. Transmitter and

receiver radiation patterns have been simulated [32] and
conﬁrmed observationally (see [8]).

The electron lifetime my be underestimated due to
the assumption of near-thermal electrons. This is the
analog to overestimation of eﬀective collision frequency
in the Section 2.2. Electron lifetime for near-thermal
electrons (500 K) is τ (cid:39) 10 ns [20, 33]. Electrons
with greater energy require additional collisions with
neutral molecules before attachment/recombination can
occur. Without strong evidence in favor of decreasing
momentum-transfer cross section, near-thermal electron
lifetime is used in the simulation. Underestimated elec-
tron lifetime results in lower predictions for received
power.

2.5.1. The Thin Wire Model

In order to examine the radar target presented by par-
ticular air showers, we adopt a simpliﬁed “thin wire
model” in terms of which we can quantify the RCS.

As described in Section 2.4, the bulk of coherent scat-
tered power will occur in a cylindrical region with ra-
dius less than λ, possibly much less due to the steep
shower density proﬁle. Only the narrow overdense re-
gion (collisionless model) is used in the simulation. It
may be regarded as a short-lived, thin conductive wire.
The overdense region radius is determined from the lat-
eral distribution, which is used in the thin-wire approxi-
mation to give the segment cross-section. Forward scat-
tering enhancement (Section 2.4) is not expected from a
scattering region with radius much less than λ. Neglect-
ing the possibility of such enhancement conservatively
underestimates received power, thus preventing under-
estimation of the RCS upper limit discussed below in
Section 6.

The RCS of a perfectly conducting thin wire σTW
several wavelengths long but only a fraction of a wave-
length in diameter is given by [34],

(cid:104) sin η

η

λ

(cid:105)2
(cid:17)2 cos4 φ , η =

2πL
λ

cos θ .

σTW =

πL2 sin2 θ

(cid:16)

(cid:17)2

(cid:16) π

2

+

ln

γπasin θ

(11)
L is the wire length, θ is the angle between the wire and
the direction of incidence, φ is the angle between the
incident wave polarization and the wire axis, a is the
radius, λ is the wavelength and γ is 1.78, e raised to the
power of Euler’s constant 0.577.

In the simulation, the thin-wire radius a is dependent
on the shower lateral distribution, and the state of the
plasma at retarded time t(cid:48). Segment j at time step i is
described by NKG with N = N0, j exp(−t(cid:48)
i, j/τ), where

7

N0, j is the initial number of ionization electrons in seg-
ment j and τ is electron lifetime. The thin-wire radius a
is the largest radius for a given shower segment within
which the free electron density exceeds the density that
corresponds to a plasma frequency of 54.1 MHz.

We note the following features of the thin-wire

model [34] and Equation 11:

• The dependence on polarization enters as cos4 φ,
peaked for polarization parallel to the wire axis and
zero for polarization perpendicular to wire axis.
To maximize received signal, E-ﬁeld polarization
should be parallel to the air shower trajectory.

• The radius a of the wire contributes logarithmically
to the radar cross section. Since the radius of the
overdense region is linearly dependent on E0, the
RCS will be only logarithmically dependent on pri-
mary energy and not proportional to primary en-
ergy as might be expected in a simpler model.

• Unlike scattering in the a ≈ λ regime, scattered ra-
diation will not be enhanced in the forward direc-
tion (Figure 6). Rather, short-thin-wire radiation is
treated as dipole emission.

• A change of ∼ 30◦ in aspect θ will cause signiﬁcant
oscillations in σTW because of ampliﬁcation in the
(sin η/η)2 term.

Known shortcomings of the model include:
• High electron density air shower core ionization
will likely be an imperfect conductor, due again to
the high rate of collisions with neutral molecules.
Signiﬁcant damping of RCS is expected due to this
eﬀect.

• Even absent collisional eﬀects, plasmas have an as-
sociated “skin depth” given by δ = c/ωp. If the
radius of the wire a (cid:28) δ, only a small part of the
incident radiation may be absorbed and re-radiated
by the wire.

• Contributions from parts of the shower with radii

greater than a are neglected.

greater than the radar frequency. Time-dependent fre-
quency is analogous to Doppler shifted light or sound
waves, though not identical because the wavelength of
scattered radar carrier is ﬁxed at the receiver—only
combined phase changes.

CR air showers which start far away and move toward
the Earth’s surface produce “down chirps” (decreasing
frequency) starting above the carrier frequency as long
as the core location is between TX and RX. There are
geometries in which ˙R approaches zero, then becomes
positive as the shower crosses the line connecting TX
and RX. In this case, the chirp frequency will ﬁrst de-
scend to, then below the radar frequency. Neutrino air
showers originating close to the earth’s surface or low in
the atmosphere could produce down chirps that start be-
low the radar frequency and descend to lower frequen-
cies.

The chirp signature contains information about air
shower geometry. With the exception of lateral symme-
try about a plane perpendicular to the ground and con-
taining the TX and RX points, and a rotational symme-
try about a line connecting the transmitter and receiver,
radar echoes are unique.

Figure 8: Simulated chirp spectra ﬁts to highest amplitude frequency
component for four diﬀerent geometries. Each simulation represents
a vertical, 10 EeV CR shower located midway between transmitter
and receiver. TX → RX separation distances are shown on the leg-
end. Both the time oﬀsets and absolute frequency ranges have been
justiﬁed for direct chirp rate comparison.

2.5.2. Frequency Shift: The “Chirp”

Some of the characteristics of the chirp can be under-
stood using geometrical arguments. Let R be the total
path length RT + RR and ˙R = dR/dt the instantaneous
rate of change of path length. ˙R is proportional to chirp
rate. If ˙R > 0 the received frequency is less than the
radar frequency and if ˙R < 0 the received frequency is

Figure 8 shows frequency vs.

time for four canon-
ical chirps with diﬀerent TX/RX separation distances.
Canonical chirps are simulated radar echoes from small
zenith angle, 10 EeV air showers located midway be-
tween the transmitter and the receiver. The curves repre-
sent the highest amplitude frequency component in each
time bin. In the following sections, duration is deﬁned

8

as the total time during which received power is within
10 dB of maximum. Bandwidth is the frequency diﬀer-
ence between the two maximum−10 dB power points,
on either side of the frequency at maximum power. The
plot indicates that echoes with small TX/RX separation
distances are short in duration and have large chirp rates.
A simple simulation that only tracks the phase of
a point source with speed c will correctly yield the
chirp signature of a given geometry. This fact is im-
portant because the assumption of a scattering model
does not aﬀect the frequency vs.
time graph. Three
radar echoes have been simulated with the same geom-
etry and diﬀerent electron lifetimes. Spectrograms of
the simulated waveforms are shown in Figure 9. The
ﬁrst two have constant cross-sections; each segment has
the same value of σ in the bi-static radar equation. The
third uses the thin-wire approximation described above
for the RCS, the parameters of which are informed by
air shower evolution models and evolving electron life-
time [20].

Simulation 1 (top) has a very short, ﬁxed, free elec-
tron lifetime, similar to a very small metallic sphere
moving with speed c. There is only one scattering path
length per time step. Simulation 2 (middle) has a life-
time longer than the travel time of the shower from
ﬁrst interaction to ground level, similar to a thin metal-
lic cylinder that grows toward the ground at speed c.
Simulation 3 is the output of the full simulation includ-
ing lookup tables for the TARA TX and RX antennas
in three dimensions, shower evolution models (Gaisser-
Hillas, NKG, Nerling, Standard Atmosphere, etc., as
above), and the thin-wire approximation for the RCS.
The frequency vs. time graphs for the three simulations
are superimposed in Figure 10, where only the maxi-
mum frequency in a given time bin is plotted. This com-
parison shows that frequency vs. time is independent of
the radar target.

Figure 11 shows the spectrogram of a canonical
shower generated with the full TARA detector simula-
tion. Properties relevant to detection are chirp slope (∼
2 MHz/µs), frequency at maximum power Fmax (near
60 MHz), and chirp duration (∼ 10 µs).

Figure 9: Spectrograms showing simulated radar echoes for a shower
midway between transmitter and receiver and inclined 30◦ out of the
TX/RX plane. Top: Electron lifetime is ﬁxed at 1 ns and antenna
gain is held constant. This conﬁguration simulates a small scatter-
ing object travelling at the speed of light toward the ground. Middle:
Electron lifetime is ﬁxed at 100,000 ns and antenna gain is held con-
stant. This conﬁguration simulates a scattering rod beginning high in
the atmosphere and growing toward the ground at the speed of light.
Bottom: Electron lifetime is determined from empirical models and
RCS comes from the thin-wire approximation and shower evolution
models. Antenna gain is determined from lookup tables generated by
NEC [32]. This conﬁguration simulates a cosmic ray radar echo.

3. Radar Receiver and DAQ

The TARA DAQ (described in detail in [8]) records
custom binary ﬁles that each contain a metadata header
and 1,000 triggers. DAQ settings are contained in
the metadata header and each trigger includes its own
header and four waveforms, each 130.976 µs in du-
ration, or 32,744 samples at 250 MS/s, composed of

16 bit signed integer samples. Each waveform corre-
sponds to one of four DAQ input channels, which are
fed by two dual-polarized log periodic dipole antennas
(LPDA). While collecting data used in the present anal-
ysis, the TARA transmitter was operated with horizontal
polarization and hence we are primarily concerned with
the horizontal receiver channels in which the sensitivity
will be greatest.

9

the noise background. The receiver is located on the
campus of the Long Ridge ﬂuorescence detector, lo-
cated southwest of the TA surface detector. During FD
data acquisition, trigger pulses are sent to the radio re-
ceiver DAQ. The hardware level trigger from the FD to
the TARA DAQ forces one event and a time stamp to be
recorded. The FD triggers used were low-level triggers,
a subset of which corresponded to actual CR events.
Star light intensity ﬂuctuations, passing airplanes and
self-calibration triggers are included in low-level hard-
ware triggers. The rate of these triggers during standard
FD acquisition is 3–5 Hz, much higher than expected
for high energy CR events.

Snapshot triggers occur once per minute and are not
correlated to any external trigger. These triggers oﬀer
an unbiased representation of the RF background, as-
suming there is no additional trigger noise from the FD
electronics or TARA DAQ. A quantitative comparison
of snapshot and FD triggers is shown in Figure 12. Re-
call that the majority of FD triggers are the result of low
level FD trigger noise, and therefore should not have
special waveform features. The black histogram is the
distribution of VRMS values for all matched FD-trigger
events. The red histogram is the distribution of snap-
shots selected for analysis (selection process described
below) from the FD observation period. Good agree-
ment between snapshot and FD-trigger RMS distribu-
tions indicates that there is not additional FD noise that
can obscure signal.

FD triggers and snapshots are used in the present
analysis. FD triggers comprise a promising dataset be-
cause a subset of these triggers are radar data obtained
during actual CR events in the ﬁeld of view of the detec-
tor. It only operates when the moon is below the horizon
on clear, dry nights. The average duty cycle is approxi-
mately 10%.

Figure 10: Plot showing Fmax vs. time for the three simulated echo
waveforms shown in Figure 9. Black points represent Fmax
for the
short lifetime waveform. Red and blue points represent Fmax for the
long lifetime and full simulation waveforms, respectively.

Figure 11: Radar echo spectrogram from a 1019 eV shower located
midway between transmitter and receiver inclined 30◦ out of the plane
connecting the two.

Signals ﬁrst pass through a series of RF ﬁlters and
an ampliﬁer on the front end of the RF DAQ system.
Sequentially, the components are:
lightning arrestor,
which grounds the center conductor during periods of
excessive voltage; RF limiter, which limits power to
+11 dBm (decibels relative to mW); 30 dB ampliﬁer;
40 MHz high pass (HP) ﬁlter, which attenuates fre-
quency components below 40 MHz; FM band stop,
which attenuates frequency components in the range
88–108 MHz; and a 90 MHz low pass (LP) ﬁlter, which
attenuates frequencies above 90 MHz.

A single binary output ﬁle contains both FD triggers
and “snapshot” triggers. Snapshot triggers are taken au-
tomatically once per minute, and are used to estimate

4. Oﬄine Processing

TARA events from FD triggers are time-matched
with reconstructed Long Ridge FD events [35] to re-
move noise triggers, after which the following recon-
struction parameters are available: GPS time stamp, pri-
mary energy, core location, zenith/azimuth angle and
Xmax. The reconstructed FD events from Long Ridge
are selected by quality cuts designed to remove those
which are reconstructed with large uncertainty. Table 1
gives the list of cuts and their descriptions. Figure 13
shows a diagram of the FD geometry.

Triggers are matched with an absolute time diﬀer-
ence less than 200 µs. Figure 14 shows a histogram of

10

Table 1: Long Ridge FD-reconstructed event quality cuts. (NPE = number of photo-electrons; SDP = shower detector plane; see Figure 13.
Pseudo-distance is the speed of light divided by the angular speed of the track.)

Cut Name

good tube fraction

good tubes
NPE/degree

pseudo-distance

SDP angle

Rp
Ψ
δΨ

tangent ﬁt
zenith angle

t0

Rp and t0

ﬁrst tube depth

observed slant depth

Xmax

Criteria
≥ 3.5%
≥ 6
≥ 25
≥ 1.5 km
< 80◦
≥ 1 km
< 36◦
< 70◦
< 25.6 µs

0◦ ≤ Ψ < 150◦

χ2/DOF < 10

(Rp > 5 km) or (t0 > 3 µs)
150 < X1 < 1200 g/cm2

> 150 g/cm2

400 < Xmax < 1200 g/cm2

Description
data quality, noise reduction
data quality, noise reduction
data quality, suﬃcient signal
geometry, shower resolution
geometry
geometry
geometry
ﬁt reconstruction, Ψ error
ﬁt reconstruction
geometry
event occurs in trigger window
geometry
geometry, ﬁrst tube illuminated from reasonable depth
geometry, minimum track length
ﬁt reconstruction

Figure 12: Voltage RMS distribution of all matched FD-triggered
events in black overlayed with that of snapshots in red, recorded dur-
ing several FD observation periods from August, 2013 to April, 2014.
Waveforms are notch- and HP-ﬁltered before the RMS is calculated.
A ﬁxed number of matched events occur during each FD observa-
tion period. The number of snapshot RMS values included in the his-
togram, per run, is equal to the number of included FD trigger values.

Figure 13: Fluorescence detector geometry [36].

4.1. Trigger Time Range

the time diﬀerence between TARA FD triggers and re-
constructed TA FD events collected over the course of
several FD observation periods between August, 2013
and April, 2014. Matched FD-triggered events recorded
during this date range are the focus of this analysis. Ig-
noring the delay in trigger formation, absolute timing
uncertainty is 20 ns [37].

Spurious noise (discussed in Section 4.2) can inter-
fere with the signal search and possibly mimic a positive
detection. Therefore, a ﬁxed time range of waveform
samples is included in the analysis to reduce the proba-
bility that noise is present in the analyzed portion of the
waveform. Any waveform samples or features outside
this time range are not considered in any steps of the

11

Figure 14: Time diﬀerence between FD reconstructed events and the
TARA FD-triggered events recorded during FD observation periods
between August, 2013 and April, 2014. The 33 µs delay is caused
by FD DAQ trigger formation, cable delay and TARA DAQ delay in
signaling an event to the GPSY [37] GPS event logger.

analysis. Only signals occurring between 48 µs before
and 5 µs after the expected arrival time were considered.

4.2. Filtering

The radar carrier frequency component at 54.1 MHz
dominates all other frequencies and obscures low-power
features in the time domain. Waveforms are therefore
digitally notch- and high pass-ﬁltered (see [38] for a dis-
cussion of each). The carrier is removed with an adap-
tive two-tap, recursive least squares (RLS) ﬁlter [39].
The high pass (HP) ﬁlter passes all frequencies above
some cut-oﬀ frequency. It is designed using the Parks-
McClelland [40] algorithm with input zero amplitude
ﬁlter response at 31.25 MHz and 43.75 MHz. Here it is
referred to simply as the 30 MHz HP ﬁlter. Figure 15
shows the ﬁrst 10 µs of the 132 µs snapshot event dis-
play after applying a 54.1 MHz notch and a 30 MHz
HP ﬁlter. Near the beginning of the time and frequency
domain plots the high amplitude 54.1 MHz frequency
component can be seen. It diminishes as the notch ﬁlter
adapts its phase and amplitude to cancel the carrier.

Radio noise is minimal at the location of the receiver.
There are no static noise sources, but intermittent carri-
ers and spurious impulsive noise must be considered in
the background estimation. Broadband transients (Fig-
ure 16) are the most common noise source and pose
the worst threat of interfering in analysis because of the
similarity to radar echoes, being broadband with short
duration. Detection sensitivity is ultimately limited by
the DAQ noise ﬂoor which has been shown to be con-
sistent with galactic radio noise [8].

Figure 15: Event display for a snapshot chosen at random from the
August, 2013 FD run with both 54.1 MHz notch and 30 MHz high
pass digital ﬁlters applied. Only the ﬁrst 10 µs of the 132 µs waveform
is shown to emphasize ﬁlter characteristics. The high pass ﬁlter is
ﬁxed and attenuates frequencies below approximately 30 MHz from
the beginning of the waveform. Carrier amplitude decreases as the
adaptive notch ﬁlter ﬁnd the correct amplitude and phase.

5. Signal Search

Section 2 describes the thin-wire approximation to
the RCS. It is emphasized that this model is a reason-
able representation of the scattering geometry of the
true RCS and that it overestimates the received power
because collisional damping and skin depth are not in-
cluded. Any observed signals are expected to have abso-
lute power signiﬁcantly below the simulation prediction
and the same frequency versus time characteristic.

If signal power were not overestimated, receiver data
would be replete with radar echo coincidences with TA
reconstructed events. The following analysis shows that
this is not the case. Data are searched with a matched
ﬁlter (MF) tuned to a speciﬁc event via echo simulation.
Section 5.1 introduces the concept of matched ﬁltering.
Section 5.2 gives a description of how the RF front end
is simulated such that simulated echoes have the same

12

(ASNR)

ASNR =

V2
max, c
σ2

noise

.

(12)

(where Vmax, c is the maximum chirp amplitude and
σnoise is the standard deviation of the background noise)
of the three examples are 10, 0 and −10 dB. In this anal-
ysis, noise comprises all frequencies that remain after
notch and HP ﬁltering. (The more common SNR is de-
ﬁned as

SNR =

,

(13)

Pc
σ2

noise

where Pc is the chirp signal power, the square of the
chirp waveform RMS.)

The simulated radar echoes are decimated down to
the DAQ rate of 250 MS/s. Templates are then scaled
such that the maximum voltage sample is 1.0 mV. The
MF response is calculated in the trigger range of interest
by computing the inner product of the template and pre-
dicted waveform. The result is a series of MF responses
as a function of time in the window when the MF is ap-
plied, similar to the MF responses in Figure 17. Only
the maximum value (peak response) from the series of
MF outputs is saved for further analysis.

5.2. Front End Simulation

Simulation of the receiver front end electronics in
TARA is necessary to understand the response of the
system to theoretical chirp signals and, ultimately, to
estimate the cross-section upper limit of UHECR air
showers. The receiver antenna response is included in
the simulation when radiation pattern lookup tables are
queried for the gain speciﬁc to a shower segment, the lo-
cation of which has speciﬁc geometry in the antenna co-
ordinate system. Other front end components are char-
acterized through the frequency response H (see Fig-
ure 18), measured as the transmission coeﬃcient S21
in situ with a two-port vector network analyzer (VNA).
Components in the RF frontend including RF limiter,
ampliﬁers and ﬁlters, are detached from the antenna
and transmission line to the DAQ. The input and out-
put of the RF chain is then connected to the VNA,
where S 21 is measured at discrete frequency points in
the 0 − 125 MHz DAQ band.

Data from the S21 measurement are used to construct
a ﬁlter which can be applied in the time domain to sim-
ulated echoes. Echoes ﬁltered in this manner exhibit
a frequency response as if the waveform had passed
through the actual RF frontend. The procedure for
creating the time domain ﬁlter from desired frequency
response H is introduced in digital signal processing

Figure 16: Event display of high amplitude, transient broadband
noise. This type of noise has high MF response.

frequency characteristics as the physical RF front end.
In Section 5.3, the MF threshold is described and the
following two sections detail the signal search.

5.1. Matched Filter

Matched Filtering (MF) is a digital signal processing
(DSP) technique for detecting the presence of a known
signal or “template” in a test waveform. The MF tem-
plate is the ideal (no noise) digitized signal. The MF
response is the convolution between the test waveform
and the time-reversed template.

Figure 17 shows three examples of a test waveform
and MF output.
In each case a simulated radar echo
is superimposed on a random, ﬁltered snapshot wave-
form. A template identical to the superimposed wave is
used to calculate the absolute value of MF response as
a function of the time after the convolution calculation
begins (right plots). Peak MF response occurs at 60 µs
where the template and the superimposed wave coincide
in time and phase. The amplitude signal-to-noise ratios

13

Figure 17: Three examples of test waveform composed of a notch and HP ﬁltered snapshot background superimposed with a simulated canonical
radar echo (left plots) and their Matched Filter (MF) responses (right plots). The MF response is calculated using same superimposed simulated
echo waveform as a template. Peak response occurs at 60 µs at the location of the below-noise beginning of the superimposed waveform, where
the template and superimposed echo are aligned and the dot product between the two is maximized. The top, middle and bottom plots show results
from superimposing the simulated echo at 30, 10 and −10 dB amplitude signal-to-noise ratio (ASNR).

(DSP) texts [38]. In practice, ﬁlter coeﬃcients are ob-
tained by calculating the inverse Fourier transform of
H.

Figure 19 shows two spectrograms featuring Gaus-
sian and post-ﬁltered Gaussian noise. The frequency
response H of the RF frontend for the acquisition chan-
nel used in the present analysis is plotted in Figure 18,
where it has been reﬂected about zero. Features of the
frequency response are clearly seen in the bottom plot
in Figure 19. All simulated echoes are ﬁltered in this
manner before being used in analysis.

5.3. MF Threshold

Snapshots of the TARA data stream are selected from
the FD run according to the following criteria: the trans-
mitter must be on at the time the snapshot was acquired,
the snapshot must occur in a ﬁve-minute bin in which

the average FD trigger rate is at least 1 Hz, and no
dead channels or DAQ interruptions can be present in
the waveform. The same quality cuts are applied to
matched FD triggers.

Parameters from matched TA events are used to sim-
ulate radar echoes. Each matched TARA FD-trigger
has a unique, simulated echo which is used to cre-
ate a MF template. The radar echo simulation pro-
duces theoretical received signals according to transmit-
ter power, detector and shower geometry, antenna gain
and shower parameters. Matched triggers have associ-
ated CR energy, geometry, Xmax and core locations de-
termined from the reconstructed FD event to which they
are matched. These data are used in the radar echo sim-
ulation.

Templates are created by ﬁltering simulated echoes
to emulate the RF front end response (see Section 5.2),

14

Figure 18: Frequency response H, which has been reﬂected about
0 MHz, or DC. These data are the transmission coeﬃcient S 21 which
is measured at ﬁlter bank 3 and used to emulate a digital ﬁlter.

decimating to 250 MS/s, and then truncating by remov-
ing samples at the beginning and end of the waveform
that are below 5% of the peak. Low amplitude parts
of the template do not greatly aﬀect MF response and
processing time is reduced by removing low amplitude
tails.

It is necessary to estimate the noise response of each
MF independently. Therefore, a peak MF response dis-
tribution is created for each matched FD-triggered event
by applying the simulated echo template as a MF to a
set of 400 selected snapshots, which are ﬁrst notch- and
then 30 MHz HP-ﬁltered. The distribution is used to
calculate a MF threshold at the 3 RMS (three standard
deviations) level. An example distribution and threshold
is shown in Figure 20.

This MF detection scheme, in which the MF peak
response distribution mean and RMS determine the
threshold, has high eﬃciency at signal levels more than
10 dB ASNR below the galactic noise ﬂoor. Figure 21
shows detection eﬃciency as a function of ASNR for a
typical event geometry.

5.4. Search: Reconstructed Events

Of 1,206 events processed in the data set (including
FD runs from August, 2013 to April, 2014), 17 events
are found to have MF response greater than 3 RMS.
These are considered as possible positive detections of
scattered radar waves from EAS. The statistical signiﬁ-
cance of this value is calculated using the expected value
of snapshot false positives.

Recall that distributions of the snapshot peak MF re-
sponse are used to calculate the detection threshold. In
the majority of these distributions, which are created for

Figure 19: Spectrograms showing simulated Gaussian noise (top) and
the same noise ﬁltered with an FIR ﬁlter designed from the frequency
response shown in Figure 18. Amplitude features can be directly com-
pared between the spectrogram and the desired response.

each event, several snapshot MF responses exceed the
threshold. Figure 20 shows the MF response distribu-
tion for an event from August, 2013. The threshold is
¯x + 3RMS = 51.8. Seven snapshots out of 400 exceed
the threshold.

Figure 22 shows the number of snapshots exceed-
ing threshold for all 1,206 events included in the analy-
sis. On average, 1.34% of snapshots exceed the 3 RMS
threshold, leading to a false-positive estimate of 16.2
events for our current sample. This is completely con-
sistent with our observation of 17 positive detections.
We thus interpret our positive detections as false posi-
tives, caused by common background noise.

5.5. Search: Nearby Events

The previous analysis only considers events which
can be fully reconstructed by the FD. This restricts the
number of events by requiring a minimum Rp of 1 km
(see Table 1). Events that occur close to the FD pass

15

Figure 20: Peak MF response distribution for an August, 2013 FD-
triggered matched event using 400 snapshots with a simulated radar
echo MF template. The 3 RMS threshold is 51.8.

Figure 21: Matched ﬁlter detection eﬃciency as a function of ASNR
using a simulated radar echo, for a 10 EeV shower midway between
transmitter and receiver. Selected snapshots from the August, 2013
FD run are used both to determine the 3 RMS response threshold and
as backgrounds on which scaled echo waveforms are superimposed.

through the telescope ﬁeld of view quickly relative to
the DAQ trigger sampling rate such that shower evolu-
tion and proﬁle are not clearly observed: the events are
not reconstructible. The bistatic radar equation (Equa-
tion 1) predicts maximum received power when the tar-
get is close to either the transmitter or receiver. There
are no FD-triggered events that occur near the transmit-
ter station because it is beyond the detection range of
the FD, but many events occur close to the FD where
the TARA receiver is located.

A search was conducted for evidence of CR radar
echoes in FD triggers that fail the Rp cut. After time-
matching TARA FD triggers with events that fail the Rp

Figure 22: Distribution of Nsnap,exc, the number of snapshots with
peak MF responses that exceed threshold. One entry per matched FD-
triggered event.

cut in the same manner as above, 2124 events remain.
Simulated radar echoes of nearby Monte Carlo events
are used to create a set of matched ﬁlters which will be
used in the search. A large set of FD-triggering Monte
Carlo events was narrowed down to a total of 673 events
by requiring that E0 > 3 × 1017 eV and Rp < 1 km.

Radar echoes from the nearby and unreconstructible
Monte Carlo events are simulated and analyzed for chirp
slope and duration within the passband. Due to the
proximity of the shower and receiver, many of the sim-
ulated events are undetectable due to large frequency
shifts that place echoes above the 80 MHz passband
ceiling. Duration and slope distributions of the simu-
lated events are shown in Figures 23 and 24. Entries
with zero duration or slope are events with echoes out-
side the passband.

A set of 21 linear chirp, constant amplitude matched
ﬁlters (MF) were created to broadly represent the Monte
Carlo distributions: MFs are 400 ns in duration, span
140 MHz of chirp rate in seven discrete steps (10,
20, 30, 40, 50, 100, and 150 MHz/µs), and represent
three diﬀerent frequency bands, starting at 80, 70, and
60 MHz. A 3RMS threshold is determined for each of
the 21 MF templates. No signal candidates were found
in the relaxed Rp signal search.

6. RCS Calculation

6.1. Γ90 Calculation

The search described in the previous section indicates
that there is no echo signal present in the dataset de-
scribed in this paper. Now, we use this information to
place quantitative limits on the RCS for particular air

16

Figure 23: Distribution of radar echo durations within the TARA [40,
80] MHz passband. Duration is deﬁned as the period during which the
peak power occurs, with endpoints 10 dB below the peak.

Figure 25: Γ90 distribution of all negative detection events. Large Γ90
occurs when matched-event geometry speciﬁes an EAS that occurs
outside the antenna main lobe.

Figure 26 is a plot showing the locations at which
the air shower core strikes the ground, including only
events with Γ90 < 0.1. Red, dashed lines indicate the
transmitter antenna −3 dB beamwidth. Event core loca-
tions are clustered near – but not under – the main lobe.
Very few of the selected events will have small zenith
angles due to the horizontal polarization of the transmit-
ted signal. Small scale factor events must be those that
pass through the main lobe, therefore there will be few
events along the center of the beam. Γ90 > 0.1 events
comprise the majority of events and are those to which
TARA is least sensitive.

Figure 26: Γ90 (color scale) for negative detection events with Γ90 <
0.1 shown at reconstructed core locations in Telescope Array CLF co-
ordinates. Red dashed lines mark the primary beam -3 dB beamwidth.

Figure 24: Distribution of radar echo chirp slopes within the TARA
[40, 80] MHz passband. The slope is calculated from a simple straight
line ﬁt to the power spectrogram.

shower events. We make use of the thin-wire model de-
scribed in Section 2, and assume that the cross section
is proportional to the thin wire cross section σTW:

σEAS = ΓσTW ,

(14)

(where Γ is a dimensionless scale factor) and place
90% c.l. upper limits on the RCS within the thin-wire
model. The basic strategy is to vary the scale factor Γ
until 90% of the simulated waveforms exceed the MF
threshold determined by the algorithm described in Sec-
tion 5.3. This value of Γ is then designated Γ90 for a
particular event.

6.2. Γ90 Results

Figure 25 shows a histogram of all Γ90 values for
events with a MF response of less than 3 RMS (“neg-
ative detection”).

The eﬀect of the transmitter antenna main lobe on the
scale factor can be seen in Figure 27, which restricts the
set of events to those with azimuth greater than 90◦ and

17

less than 180◦.
(The azimuth origin is due east. All
events in the plot point back to the source toward the
second quadrant (upper left). Events above the beam
have very high scale factors because those events do
not interact with the main lobe. The lowest scale fac-
tor events are those that produce high echo voltages due
to optimal geometry and interaction with the main lobe.
Reversing the general pointing direction of events, by
limiting azimuth to greater than 270◦ and less than 360◦,
produces a similar plot, but with the high Γ90 events be-
low the main lobe and low Γ90 above the main lobe.

Figure 28: Γ90 (color scale) for negative detection events with Γ90 <
0.1, similar to Figure 26. Additionally, green arrows point in the di-
rection the shower propagates through the atmosphere at the core lo-
cation of the ﬁve lowest Γ90 events. Arrow length is proportional to
zenith angle.

The receiver gain is also modeled using NEC, at
54.1 MHz. An uncertainty arises from variations in the
receiver gain as a function of frequency, which is not in-
cluded in the waveform simulations. This eﬀect is esti-
mated to be 3% or less for events in geometries to which
TARA is most sensitive.

Monocular FD reconstruction uncertainties of ap-
proximately 17% in the energy of air showers and ap-
proximately 70 g/cm2 in the depth of shower maximum
enter in to the expectation for the target cross-section.
Within the thin wire model the eﬀect due to uncertainty
in energy is weak, owing to the log-squared dependence
of cross section on wire diameter (and therefore energy,
Equation 11). Shifting the location of shower maximum
Xmax by 100 g/cm2 is also found to be a small eﬀect,
shifting Γ90 by less than 1%.

Uncertainties in the transmitter-to-target (RT ) and
target-to-receiver (RR) distances come from uncertainty
in the air shower geometries arising from monocular
ﬂuorescence reconstruction. The largest eﬀect derives
from the uncertainty in the shower-detector plane angle
Ψ, shown in Figure 13. The uncertainty in Ψ is typi-
cally 8◦. Fluctuations of either sign in Ψ are found to
have the eﬀect of increasing Γ90 by as much as 60%.
This is by far the dominant contribution to systematic
uncertainty in the cross-section upper limit. We account
for this systematic by increasing the lower limits by the
amounts shown in Table 2.

Figure 27: Γ90 (color scale) negative detection events restricted to
those with 90◦ < azimuth < 180◦ shown at reconstructed core loca-
tions in Telescope Array CLF coordinates. Red dashed lines mark the
primary beam -3 dB beamwidth.

Figure 28 is similar to the plot in Figure 26, but in-
cludes green arrows that point at the core location of
the ﬁve lowest Γ90 events and point in the direction the
shower travels toward the ground. Arrow length is pro-
portional to zenith angle. One observes that the ﬁve
events with the lowest Γ90 are highly inclined to match
transmitter and receiver polarization and have azimuth
values which allow them to interact with the main lobe.

6.3. Systematic Uncertainties

In the previous section, we describe the calculation of
90% c.l. upper limits on the radar cross section for par-
ticular Telescope Array events. Systematic uncertainties
in the terms in the bistatic radar equation (Equation 1)
make necessary relatively small adjustments to the up-
per limits reported.

The total transmitter power is logged, and is known
at any particular time to better than 1%. Transmitter
forward gain is modelled as a function of angle by Nu-
merical Electromagnetics Code [32] (NEC), which has
been conﬁrmed by direct measurements as an accurate
representation of the relative gain to within 10% [8].

18

Table 2: Summary of ﬁve lowest Γ90 events. The values presented for Γ90 include an increase — by as much as 60% — due to systematic
uncertainties associated with uncertainties in the shower-detector plane angle. Core location pairs (x,y) are in units of kilometers relative to TA’s
central laser facility (CLF). In this coordinate system the transmitter is located at (17.9, 4.7) and the receiver site is located at (–18.4, –9.9).

Date
20130809
20130816
20130926
20131105
20131202

Energy [EeV] Core Loc. [km] Zen. [deg.] Azi. [deg.]

Xmax g/cm2

Γ90 × 104

1.22
1.43
1.38
1.83
11.04

(-11.5,1.9)
(-7.9,6.2)
(-14.3,3.2)
(-4.8,-16.0
(-6.4,-13.6)

65.7
68.6
54.9
59.6
62.7

301.6
280.5
299.5
121.4
114.6

772
755
837
805
859

13.4
10.8
12.5
13.1
7.7

6.4. Discussion; RCS Upper Limits

Estimates of the detectable RCS for the TARA de-
tector have been made previously [8], and shown to be
of order 50 cm2, without the post-processing technique
used in the present paper. For comparison, we may con-
sider the best result in Table 2:

σ ≤ 0.00077 σTW (90% c.l.)

(15)
Figure 29 shows the total integrated thin-wire RCS as
a function of time during shower evolution and propa-
gation toward the ground for this speciﬁc event. The
RCS is integrated over every longitudinal segment of
the shower with plasma age less than 5 τ at each 2 ns
time step and phase factors attributed to diﬀering path
length are included in each term in the sum. The peak
RCS is 5.5 m2.

42 cm2 at 90% c.l. This is in good agreement with the
earlier estimate. The implications of such a small upper
limit will be discussed in the conclusion.

Figure 30 shows simulated received power versus
time for the event with Γ90 = 0.00077. The top
(black) curve is the unmodiﬁed simulated power for this
shower, within the thin-wire scattering model. The mid-
dle (blue) curve is the thin-wire simulated power for
this shower modiﬁed by the Γ90 = 0.00077 scale fac-
tor. The bottom (green) curve is the thin-wire simulated
power modiﬁed by the 10−6 collisional damping factor
calculated in Section 2.2. The red line is the integrated
TARA passband noise power, which is calculated from
data which have been ampliﬁed by 30 dB in the RF fron-
tend. This plot conﬁrms earlier predictions: damping is
large, and this analysis technique can detect signal be-
low the noise ﬂoor.

Figure 29: Integrated EAS RCS using the thin-wire approximation to
RCS for a radar echo simulated with reconstructed shower parameters.
Phase factors are included in the sum of the total RCS to properly
account for each longitudinal shower segment.

After including detector sensitivity, nonobservation
of signal and the eﬀect of systematic uncertainty the ef-
fective RCS upper limit may be expressed as a prod-
uct of the peak RCS with Γ90, equal to approximately

19

Figure 30: Received power vs. time for the event with Γ90 = 0.00077
(black) after adjusting for uncertainty in reconstruction parameters.
The same received power curve is shown multiplied by Γ90 (blue) or
the damping factor 10−6 (green) calculated in Section 2.2 to account
for collisional damping. The red line is integrated background noise
power in the TARA passband.

7. Conclusion

The TARA detector is the ﬁrst facility designed
speciﬁcally to search for the radar signature of UHECR.
It combines a dedicated 40 kW, 54.1 MHz transmitter,
high-gain (23 dB) phased antenna array, dual-polarized
log periodic receiver antennas and a 250 MS/s receiver,
colocated with the conventional Telescope Array cos-
mic ray observatory in radio-quiet western Utah, U.S.A.
In this paper, we have reported the null result of a
search for radar echoes in a set of radio waveforms
which were collected by triggering on the Telescope
Array Long Ridge ﬂuorescence detector. None of
the cosmic-ray coincident waveforms contained signals
comparable to the high rate “chirps” expected for EAS
radar echoes. A small subset of waveforms contained
broadband transients, at a level consistent with the ex-
pectation from random snapshots of the radar receiver
stream.

Based on these observations, we have for the ﬁrst
time set upper limits on the radar cross sections of par-
ticular EAS. These limits are set based on the assump-
tion that the radar cross section of EAS is dominated
by a relatively narrow (few cm) core, corresponding
to the overdense regime in a plasma in the absence of
collisional damping eﬀects. Skin-depth considerations
are also ignored. Such an airshower may be treated
as a thin wire relative to our 5.5 meter sounding wave-
length, and we designate its theoretical cross section as
σTW. For the most geometrically ideal EAS we stud-
ied in the present analysis, we place an upper limit of
7.7 × 10−4 σTW, at 90% c.l.

This limit is consistent with the expectation that
collisional damping of ionization electrons by neutral
molecules heavily attenuates any potential radar signa-
ture in this regime of sounding frequencies and ioniza-
tion densities. Further, these studies indicate that that
the prospects are poor for remote detection of cosmic
ray air showers via the radar technique.

8. Acknowledgments

The Telescope Array experiment

TARA is supported by NSF PHY-0969865, PHY-
1126353 (MRI), PHY-1148091, and the W.M. Keck
Foundation.
is
supported by the Japan Society for the Promotion
of Science through Grants-in-Aids for Scientiﬁc Re-
search on Specially Promoted Research (21000002)
“Extreme Phenomena in the Universe Explored by
Highest Energy Cosmic Rays” and for Scientiﬁc
Research (19104006), and the Inter-University Re-
search Program of the Institute for Cosmic Ray Re-

20

search; by the U.S. National Science Foundation
awards PHY-0307098, PHY-0601915, PHY-0649681,
PHY-0703893, PHY-0758342, PHY-0848320, PHY-
1069280, PHY-1069286, PHY-1404495 and PHY-
1404502; by the National Research Foundation of Ko-
rea (2007-0093860, R32-10130, 2012R1A1A2008381,
2013004883); by the Russian Academy of Sciences,
RFBR grants 11-02-01528a and 13-02-01311a (INR),
IISN project No. 4.4509.10 and Belgian Science Pol-
icy under IUAP VII/37 (ULB). The foundations of Dr.
Ezekiel R. and Edna Wattis Dumke, Willard L. Eccles
and the George S. and Dolores Dore Eccles all helped
with generous donations. The State of Utah supported
the project through its Economic Development Board,
and the University of Utah through the Oﬃce of the Vice
President for Research. The experimental site became
available through the cooperation of the Utah School
and Institutional Trust Lands Administration (SITLA),
U.S. Bureau of Land Management, and the U.S. Air
Force. We also wish to thank the people and the of-
ﬁcials of Millard County, Utah for their steadfast and
warm support. We gratefully acknowledge the contri-
butions from the technical staﬀs of our home institu-
tions. An allocation of computer time from the Center
for High Performance Computing at the University of
Utah is gratefully acknowledged.

References

[1] R. Abbasi, et al., First Observation of the Greisen-Zatsepin-

Kuzmin Suppression, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100 (2008) 101101.

[2] T. Abu-zayyad, et al., The Cosmic-Ray Energy Spectrum Ob-
served with the Surface Detector of the Telescope Array Exper-
iment, Astrophys. J. Lett. 768 (1) (2013) L1.
[3] J. Abraham, et al., Observation of the Suppression of the Flux
of Cosmic Rays above 4 × 1019 eV, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101 (2008)
061101.

[4] R. Abbasi, et al., Indications of Intermediate-Scale Anisotropy
of Cosmic Rays with Energy Greater than 57 EeV in the North-
ern Sky Measured with the Surface Detector of the Telescope
Array Experiment, Astrophys. J. Lett. 790 (2014) L21.

[5] H. Falcke, et al., Detection and Imaging of Atmospheric Radio
Flashes from Cosmic Ray Air Shower, Nature 435 (2005) 313–
316.

[6] G. Askaryan, Excess Negative Charge of an Electron-Photon
Shower And Its Coherent Radio Emission, Sov. J. Exp. Theor.
Phys. 14 (2) (1962) 441–443.

[7] P. Blackett, et al., Radio Echoes and Cosmic Ray Showers, Proc.

Roy. Soc. A 177 (969) (1941) 183–186.

[8] R. Abbasi, et al., Telescope Array Radar (TARA) observatory
for Ultra-High Energy Cosmic Rays, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A
767 (2014) 322–338.

[9] K. Olive, et al., Review of Particle Physics, Chin. Phys. C38

(2014) 090001.

[10] T. Gaisser, A. Hillas, Reliability of the Method of Constant In-
tensity Cuts for Reconstructing the Average Development of
Vertical Showers, in: Proceedings of the 15th ICRC, Vol. 8,
1977, p. 353.

[11] K. Greisen, Cosmic Ray Showers, Ann. Rev. Nucl. Sci. 10

(1960) 63–108.

[12] P. Sokolsky, Introduction to Ultrahigh Energy Cosmic Ray

Physics, Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado, 2004.

[13] F. Nerling and others, Universality of Electron Distributions in
High-energy Air Showers — Description of Cherenkov Light
Rroduction, Astropart. Phys. 24 (2006) 421–437.

[14] B. Rossi, High Energy Particles, Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood

Cliﬀs, NF, 1952.

[15] D. Heck, et al., CORSIKA: A Monte Carlo Code to Simu-
late Extensive Air Showers, Wissenschaftliche Berichte FZKA
6019.

[16] S. Ostapchenko, QGSJET-II: Towards Reliable Description of
Very High Energy Hadronic Interactions, Nucl. Phys. B-Proc.
Suppl. 151 (2006) 143–146.

[17] K. Davies, Ionospheric Radio Waves, Blaisdell Publishing Com-

pany, Waltham, Massachusetts, 1969.

[18] J. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics, Third Edition, John Wi-

ley & Sons, Inc., 1999.

[19] I. Shkarofsky, Collision Frequency Associated with High Tem-
perature Air and Scattering Cross-sections of the Constituents,
Planet. Space Sci. 6 (1961) 24–46.

[20] R. Vidmar, On the Use of Atmospheric Pressure Plasmas as
Electromagnetic Reﬂectors and Absorbers, IEEE T. Plasma Sci.
18 (4) (1990) 733–741.

[21] Y. Itikawa, Eﬀective Collision Frequency of Electrons in Atmo-

spheric Gases, Planet. Space Sci. 19 (1971) 993.

[22] Sir Bernard Lovell, F.R.S., Reminiscences and Discoveries, The
Blackett-Eckersley-Lovell Correspondence of World War II and
the Origin of Jodrell Bank, Notes Rec. R. Soc. Lond. 47 (1)
(1993) 119–131.

[23] K. Suga, Methods for Observing Extremely Large Extensive Air
Showers, in: Proc. Fifth Interamerican Sem. on Cosmic Rays,
Vol. XLIX, 1962.

[24] J. Stasielak, et al., Feasibility of Radar Detection of Extensive

Air Showers, ArXiv e-printsarXiv:1411.7295.

[25] Y. Itikawa, et al., Cross Section for Collisions of Electrons and
Photons with Nitrogen Molecules, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data 15
(1986) 985–1010.

[26] Y. Itikawa, et al., Cross Section for Collisions of Electrons and
Photons with Oxygen Molecules, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data 18
(1989) 23–42.

[27] P. Gorham, On the Possibility of Radar Echo Detection of Ultra-
high Energy Cosmic Ray- and Neutrino-induced Extensive Air
Showers, Astropart. Phys. 15 (2001) 177–202.

[28] R. King, T. Wu, The Scattering and Diﬀraction of Waves, Har-

vard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1959.

[29] D. Underwood, Large Doppler Shift in RADAR Detection
in: Radar Conference,

of Ultra-high Energy Eosmic Rays,
RADAR ’08. IEEE, 2008, pp. 1–5.

[30] A. Zech, A Measurement of the Ultra-High Energy Cosmic Ray
Flux with the HIRES FADC Detector, Ph.D. thesis, Rutgers Uni-
versity (2004).

[31] NASA, U.S. Standard Atmosphere, Tech. rep., U.S. Govern-

ment Printing Oﬃce (1976).

[32] G. Burke, et al., NEC - Numerical Electromagnetics Code for
Antennas and Scattering, in: Antennas and Propagation Society
International Symposium, Vol. 17, 1979.

[33] A. Dogariu, et al., Versatile Radar Measurement of the Electron

Loss Rate in Air, Appl. Phs. Lett. 103 (2013) 224102.

[34] J. Crispin, A. Maﬀett, Radar Cross-Section Estimation of Sim-

ple Shapes, P. IEEE 53 (8) (1965) 833–848.

[35] R. Abbasi, et al., Monocular Measurement of the Spectrum of
UHE Cosmic Rays by the FADC Detector of the HiRes Experi-
ment, Astropart. Phys. 23 (2005) 157–174.

[36] B. Stokes, A Search for Anisotropy in the Arrival Directions of
Ultra High Energy Cosmic Rays Observed by the High Resolu-
tion Fly’s Eye Detector, Ph.D. thesis, University of Utah (2006).
[37] J. Smith, et al., GPSY2: A Programmable Hardware Module for
Precise Absolute Time Event Generation and Measurement, in:
Proceedings of the 30th ICRC, Vol. 5, 2008, pp. 997–1000.

[38] J. Proakis, D. Manolakis, Digital Signal Processing, Third Edi-

tion, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 1995.

[39] M.H. Hayes, Statistical Digital Signal Processing and Modeling,

Wiley, 1996, 9.4: Recursive Least Squares.

[40] Digital Signal Processing Committee of the IEEE Acoustics,
Speech, and Signal Processing Society, eds., Programs for Dig-
ital Signal Processing, IEEE Press, New York, 1979, algorithm
5.1.

21

