Draft version March 18, 2016
Preprint typeset using LATEX style emulateapj v. 5/2/11

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
 
6
1

.

 
 
]
P
E
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
9
4
2
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

ON THE FEASIBILITY OF CHARACTERIZING FREE-FLOATING PLANETS WITH CURRENT AND

FUTURE SPACE-BASED MICROLENSING SURVEYS

Calen B. Henderson1,A and Yossi Shvartzvald1,A

Draft version March 18, 2016

ABSTRACT

Simultaneous space- and ground-based microlensing surveys, such as those planned with K2’s Cam-
paign 9 (K2C9) and, potentially, WFIRST, facilitate measuring the masses and distances of free-
ﬂoating planet (FFP) candidates. FFPs are initially identiﬁed as events arising from a single lensing
mass with a short timescale, ranging from one day for a Jupiter-mass planet to a few hours for an
Earth-mass planet. Measuring the mass of the lensing object requires measuring the angular Einstein
radius θE, typically by ﬁrst determining the ﬁnite size of the source star ρ, as well as the microlens
parallax πE. A planet that is gravitationally bound to, but widely separated from, a host star ((cid:38)20
AU) can produce a light curve that is similar to that of an FFP. This tension can be resolved with
high-resolution imaging of the microlensing target to search for the lens ﬂux F(cid:96) from a possible host
star. Here we investigate the accessible parameter space for each of these components — πE, ρ, and
F(cid:96) — considering diﬀerent satellite missions for a range of FFP masses, Galactic distances, and source
star properties. We ﬁnd that at the beginning of K2C9, when its projected separation from the Earth
(as viewed from the center of its survey ﬁeld) is (cid:46)0.2 AU, it will be able to measure πE for Jupiter-mass
FFP candidates at distances larger than ∼2 kpc and to Earth-mass lenses at ∼8 kpc. At the end of
its campaign, when D⊥ = 0.81 AU, it is sensitive to planetary-mass lenses for distances (cid:38)3.5 kpc, and
even then only to those with mass (cid:38)MJup. From lens ﬂux constraints we ﬁnd that it will be possible
to exclude all stellar-mass host stars (down to the deuterium-burning limit) for events within ∼2 kpc,
and for events at any distance it will be possible to exclude main sequence host stars more massive
than ∼0.25 M(cid:12). Together these indicate that the ability to characterize FFPs detected during K2C9
is optimized for events occurring toward the beginning of the campaign. WFIRST, on the other hand,
will be able to detect and characterize FFPs with masses at least as low as super-Earths throughout
the Galaxy during its entire microlensing survey.
Subject headings: bulge – gravitational lensing: micro – planets and satellites: detection – planets and

satellites: fundamental parameters

1.

INTRODUCTION

Understanding the frequency and mass function of
free-ﬂoating planets (FFPs) is integral for a complete
comprehension of the formation and evolution of plane-
tary systems. Using deep photometric imaging primarily
in near-infrared bands and, in some cases, astrometric
and/or spectroscopic follow-up data, Jupiter-mass FFPs
and FFP candidates have been detected in the Trapez-
ium cluster (Lucas & Roche 2000), the σ Orionis open
cluster (Bihain et al. 2009), the AB Doradus moving
group (Delorme et al. 2012; Gagn´e et al. 2015), the β
Pictoris moving group (Liu et al. 2013b; Allers et al.
2016), the Upper Scorpius Association (Pe˜na Ram´ırez
et al. 2015), and in the ﬁeld (Dupuy & Kraus 2013). Yet
detections from photometric surveys require and depend
sensitively on an independent constraint for the object’s
age while the dynamical association of objects in moving
groups is intrinsically more uncertain.

In a broader statistical sense, Sumi et al. (2011) exam-
ined two years of microlensing survey data from the Mi-
crolensing Observations in Astrophysics (MOA) collabo-
ration. They found an excess of short-timescale events
(<2 days) above expectations based on an extrapolation

calen.b.henderson@jpl.nasa.gov

1 Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technol-

ogy, 4800 Oak Grove Drive, Pasadena, CA 91109, USA

A NASA Postdoctoral Program Fellow

of the stellar mass function down to low-mass brown
dwarfs. From this they inferred a population of FFP
candidates that outnumber main sequence stars by a ra-
tio of 1.8+1.7−0.8. However, mass measurements do not exist
for any of the candidate objects upon which the inference
rests.

The formation mechanisms for FFPs remain an open
theoretical question. One possible avenue is that these
objects were originally formed in protoplanetary disks
and were subsequently ejected. Simulations by Pfyﬀer
et al. (2015) of the formation and evolution of planetary
systems without eccentricity or inclination damping eject
planets at a rate that is (cid:38)50 times lower than is needed
to explain the MOA result. Indeed, Veras & Raymond
(2012) assert that planet-planet scattering itself is in-
suﬃcient to reproduce the abundance of FFP candidates
seen by MOA. In the context of open clusters, N-body dy-
namical simulations ﬁnd that roughly half of star-planet
and planet-planet interactions occur within the ﬁrst 30
Myr (Wang et al. 2015) and that 80% of the resulting
FFPs are ejected from the cluster while the remaining
∼20% become concentrated in the central ∼2 pc (Liu
et al. 2013a).

A second option is that FFPs form via direct collapse
of molecular clouds. Silk (1977) found that opacity-
limited fragmentation of collapsing clouds could, in prin-
ciple, produce a fragment with a minimum mass as

2
low as ∼0.01M(cid:12). Additionally, turbulent shocks could
cause protostellar cores with masses in the brown dwarf
regime to become gravitationally unstable and hypothe-
sized that turbulent density ﬂuctuations smaller than a
critical mass could induce collapse into objects with the
mass of giant planets (Padoan & Nordlund 2004).

Gravitational microlensing does not rely on the ﬂux
output from the lensing object and so is well-positioned
to explore FFP demographics across a wide range of
planet masses. The mass of an FFP lens, MFFP, is given
by:

MFFP = θE/(κπE),

(1)
the angular Einstein radius, κ ≡
where θE is
4G/(c2AU) = 8.144 mas/M(cid:12), and πE is the microlens
parallax:

πE = AU/˜rE = πrel/θE.

(2)

−1 − Ds

Here πrel is the lens-source relative parallax, deﬁned as
−1), where D(cid:96) and Ds are the distances
AU(D(cid:96)
from the observer to the lens and source, respectively,
and ˜rE is the physical size of θE projected onto the plane
of the observer.

The most salient observable for a light curve arising
from a single lensing mass is the Einstein timescale tE,
which measures the time required for the lens-source an-
gular separation to change by one angular Einstein ring
radius and is deﬁned as:
tE ≡ θE
µrel

(3)

(cid:18) MFFP

(cid:19)1/2(cid:18) πrel

(cid:19)1/2(cid:18)

(cid:19)−1

(cid:39) 1.4 hr

M⊕

125 µas

µrel

10 mas yr−1

where µrel is the lens-source relative proper motion. The
timescale is routinely measured for single-lens events.
However, several physical properties are encoded within
tE, including D(cid:96), MFFP, and µrel. Thus, in order to de-
termine that the lensing object giving rise to the short
timescale is indeed planetary-mass, it is crucial to mea-
sure both θE and πE. The angular Einstein radius is
typically determined by combining a measurement of ρ,
the angular radius of the source star normalized to θE,
with multiband photometry to determine the color and,
ultimately, the angular size of the source (Yoo et al.
2004). Lastly, a short-timescale event deﬁnitively due to
a planetary-mass lens must be proven to be free-ﬂoating,
which requires high-resolution photometry to search for
ﬂux from a possible lens host star. Han et al. (2005)
studied bound planets that are widely separated from
their host star. They found that if the projected separa-
tion between a planet and its parent star is (cid:38)20 AU, the
resulting light curve can mimic that of an FFP, as the
alignment between the source trajectory and the binary
lens axis can cause the primary microlensing event due to
the star not to be observed, allowing a bound planet to
masquerade as an FFP. They also investigated the abil-
ity to identify the bound nature of a planet in the case of
isolated planetary-mass lensing events via the caustic in-
duced by the shear of the planet’s host star, which would
introduce magniﬁcation structure to the light curve of the
event.

Fully characterizing an FFP requires that all of these
criteria are met. However, the intersection of all afore-

,

mentioned constraints is far from guaranteed for a given
space mission. The goal of this paper is to map the re-
gions of parameter space for which a given satellite will be
sensitive to FFPs, particularly K2’s Campaign 9 (K2C9;
see §2.2) and WFIRST (see §2.3), and to identify the
dominant limiting factors in each regime. Throughout
the paper we will assume that the source is located in
the bulge at a distance of Ds = 8.2 kpc (Nataf et al.
2013) and focus on D(cid:96) as an independent variable.
It
is possible to explore the demographics of FFPs statis-
tically without requiring that the parameters πE, ρ, and
F(cid:96) each be measured for all systems. That said, the pri-
mary focus of this paper is on the subset of FFPs that
can be fully characterized via measurements of all three.
The expected yield of FFPs for a given microlensing
survey depends, intrinsically and sensitively, on their un-
derlying event rate. Understanding the relative rates for
diﬀerent FFP populations can inﬂuence the observational
strategy. The microlensing rate as a function of the FFP
physical parameters, derived from the generic rate for-
mula Γ = nσv, is given by (Batista et al. 2011):

∂4Γ

∂D(cid:96)∂MFFP∂2µ

= n(x, y, z)(2rE)vrelf (µ)g(MFFP). (4)

Here n(x, y, z) is the local space density of FFPs, f (µ) is
the lens-source relative proper motion probability distri-
bution, and g(MFFP) is the FFP mass function. While
1/2 and f (µ) can be assumed
rE is proportion to MFFP
to be similar to that for the general Galactic stellar pop-
ulation, n(x, y, z) and g(MFFP) are precisely what the
experiment is trying to measure and are hitherto uncon-
strained. Furthermore, the kinematics for FFPs will de-
pend on the fraction that are the result of dynamical ejec-
tions versus those that form in situ. Thus, in this paper
we cannot and do not predict the relative rates for dif-
ferent FFP populations but instead study the feasibility
of characterizing FFPs with various physical parameters,
assuming that an event has occurred.

Our methodology builds upon and extends previous
studies of lens characterization for FFPs and also bound
planets. Han et al. (2004) examined the ability of a joint
ground- and space-based microlensing survey to con-
strain the mass of FFPs. Considering a generic satellite
at the Earth-Sun L2 point paired with a ground-based
survey, they found that microlensing events arising from
planetary-mass lenses can be detected for planet masses
down to that of the Earth. Han (2006) subsequently ex-
plored how to distinguish between isolated lensing events
due to widely separated, bound planets from FFP events
using interferometry to search for the astrometric signa-
ture of a lens host star. He found that for bright sources,
with V (cid:46) 19, a centroid shift can be measured given
an astrometric precision that is of-order one microarc-
second. More generally, Yee (2015) investigated how to
measure lens masses and distances solely from measure-
ments of the microlens parallax πE and the lens ﬂux F(cid:96),
circumventing the need to measure θE. She considered
spacecraft in Earth-trailing Solar orbits and at Earth-
Sun L2, similar to those of Kepler, Spitzer, and WFIRST.
Naturally, lens ﬂux cannot be used as a tool for char-
acterizing FFPs, necessitating an additional constraint.
Zhu & Gould (2016) advocate for a simultaneous ground-
based survey to accompany the WFIRST microlensing

observations in order to obtain two-dimensional vector
microlens parallax measurements. These would provide
complete solutions, and thus masses and distances, for a
substantial fraction of FFP events. We present the ﬁrst
combined treatment of constraints from πE, ρ, and F(cid:96)
to explore regimes of detectability and characterization
for FFPs across a range of lens distances, source star
properties, and satellite characteristics.
In §2 we brieﬂy describe the parameters and goals of
six relevant space missions. Measuring πE with a space
telescope requires a delicate balance between ˜rE and the
projected separation D⊥ of the Earth and the satellite
as seen from the lens-source line-of-sight. We investigate
the interplay between D⊥ and ˜rE for these satellite mis-
sions in §3. In §4 we discuss the probability of measuring
ρ through the detection of ﬁnite-source eﬀects. Finally,
in §5 we detail the constraints from measuring the lens
ﬂux. We summarize our ﬁndings and discuss their ap-
plications in the context of K2C9 and WFIRST in §6,
wherein we identify the regimes of parameter space to
which each will ultimately be able to robustly character-
ize FFP events.

2. OVERVIEW OF SATELLITE MISSIONS

In this section we provide an overview of all space tele-
scopes that are potentially relevant for monitoring mi-
crolensing events simultaneously with ground-based re-
sources.

2.1. Spitzer

Spitzer, a 0.85m infrared telescope, was the ﬁrst
satellite used to conduct real-time monitoring of a mi-
crolensing event simultaneous with ground-based facili-
ties (Dong et al. 2007). A 100-hour campaign in 2014
expanded upon this in an eﬀort to make such measure-
ments systematically for multiple events. The 2014 pro-
gram led to the ﬁrst satellite parallax measurement for
an isolated star (Yee et al. 2015b) and a microlensing-
discovered exoplanet (Udalski et al. 2015). A larger 832-
hour program followed in 2015, for which target events
were selected using objective criteria in order to max-
imize planet sensitivity and number of detections (Yee
et al. 2015a). The resulting discoveries include mass and
distance measurements for a cold Neptune in the Galac-
tic disk (Street et al. 2015), a massive remnant in a stellar
binary (Shvartzvald et al. 2015), and several isolated ob-
jects, including a brown dwarf (Zhu et al. 2015), demon-
strating the wide range of astrophysical populations that
can be probed with such a technique. These campaigns
are the ﬁrst steps for measuring the Galactic distribution
of bound planets (Calchi Novati et al. 2015).

Two additional Spitzer programs will take place in
2016, one to explore the Galactic distribution of exoplan-
ets using high-magniﬁcation microlensing events (Gould
et al. 2015b) and the other to conduct a two-satellite mi-
crolensing experiment (Gould et al. 2015a) by observing
in conjunction with K2C9 (see §2.2). However, the short-
timescale events that are indicative of FFPs are generally
inaccessible with Spitzer due to the several-day lag be-
tween target selection and upload and the ﬁrst possible
observations (see Figure 1 of Udalski et al. 2015). Never-
theless, we include it here because it is possible to have a
combination of physical parameters D(cid:96), MFFP, and µrel

3

that produces a longer timescale for an FFP, and also for
the sake of completeness.

2.2. Kepler

Kepler is 0.95m telescope in an Earth-trailing Solar
orbit whose primary mission was to explore exoplanet
demographics using the transit method. The mechan-
ical failure of the second of its four reaction wheels in
2013 signaled an end to the primary mission but her-
alded the genesis of its extended K2 Mission, which is in
the midst of a series of ∼80-day campaigns performing
high-precision photometry for targets along the Ecliptic
(Howell et al. 2014). K2C9 will conduct the ﬁrst mi-
crolensing survey from the ground and from space, cover-
ing 3.74 deg2 from 7/April through 1/July of 2016 in con-
cert with a vast array of ground-based resources (Hender-
son et al. 2015). Approximately (cid:38)120 events will occur
in the K2C9 microlensing survey ﬁeld (termed “super-
stamp”) during the campaign dates, of-order 10 of which
are estimated to be short-timescale FFP candidates.

K2’s Campaign 11 will also point toward the Galac-
tic bulge from 24/September through 8/December of
2016. While it will not perform an automated microlens-
ing survey,
it will yet be possible to measure πE for
events detected by ground-based telescopes that will have
timescales long enough that they will be ongoing when
K2 observations take place, though this excludes short-
timescale FFP candidates.

2.3. WFIRST

WFIRST, which was recently approved for Phase A
development, will be a 2.4m telescope equipped with a
wide-ﬁeld imager with a ﬁeld of view of 0.28 deg2 and six
imaging ﬁlters that span 0.76–2.0 microns (Spergel et al.
2015). Set to launch in the mid-2020s, it will be inserted
into a Solar orbit at Earth-Sun L2. WFIRST will con-
duct a ∼432-day microlensing survey toward the Galactic
bulge divided equally between six 72-day seasons. These
seasons will be split between the beginning and end of
the mission to maximize the ability of WFIRST to mea-
sure µrel for the detected events. Furthermore, its orbital
placement and observational parameters will make it the
most advanced experiment in terms of FFP detection and
characterization.

2.4. Euclid

The scientiﬁc focus of Euclid will be to explore the
nature of dark energy. However, an exoplanetary mi-
crolensing survey could be conducted as part of the mis-
sion’s legacy program and would, in principle, be sensi-
tive to FFPs (Penny et al. 2013). Euclid, which is sched-
uled to launch in 2020, will be placed in a halo orbit at
Earth-Sun L2. So, while its 1.2m aperture is smaller than
that of WFIRST’s, the orbital conﬁguration and result-
ing geometric sensitivity will be quite similar to that of
WFIRST, which we derive here. As such, we do not ex-
plicitly consider Euclid as a separate mission throughout
the remainder of the text and instead note that WFIRST
is a good proxy for its capabilities.

2.5. Swift

During the 2015 Spitzer campaign, the microlensing
event OGLE-2015-BLG-1395 (OB151395) was observed

4

with Swift, a 0.3m telescope that can observe from optical
to γ-ray, while it was highly magniﬁed, with V (cid:46) 16.5.
OB151395 is thus the ﬁrst event with observations from
two satellites while the event was ongoing (Shvartzvald
et al., in prep.). While the rapid response of Swift is ideal
for short-timescale FFPs, it is uncommon to have events
reach a suﬃciently bright magnitude to be detectable for
the Ultra Violet/Optical Telescope. Furthermore, Swift
is on a low-Earth orbit, so its distance from the surface
of the Earth is within the range ∼560–576 km, leading to
an extremely small projected separation (see §3.1) that
moreover varies signiﬁcantly during its ∼96-minute or-
bital period. That said, Swift’s orbit can be advanta-
geous for events sensitive to terrestrial parallax.

2.6. New Horizons

New Horizons completed a six-month ﬂyby of Pluto
in the summer of 2015 and is continuing into the outer
reaches of the Solar System to study the Kuiper belt. Its
projected separation is, by a factor of several, the largest
of the satellites we will discuss here. While this indicates
that it will be all but impossible for New Horizons to de-
tect FFPs, we include it as an upper limit and note that it
is potentially well-suited to measure πE for lens systems
that are much more massive than FFPs and generally
have longer timescales and larger Einstein radii, such as
stellar remnants.

3. MEASURING THE MICROLENS PARALLAX πE

A microlensing event due to a single lensing mass leads
to a light curve deﬁned by three microlensing observables
(Paczynski 1986). The ﬁrst is t0, the time of closest ap-
proach of the source to the lens. Second is the impact
parameter u0, which measures the angular distance of the
closest approach of the source to the lens and is normal-
ized to θE. Third is the timescale tE, deﬁned in Equation
(3). Measuring the microlensing parallax πE for a short-
timescale microlensing event requires measuring the shift
in t0, u0, or both, in the light curve as it is seen from two
(or more) locations (for a recent review on this method
see Calchi Novati & Scarpetta 2015). Together these ob-
servables deﬁne the ratio of D⊥, the projected separation
between two observers, to ˜rE via:

D⊥
˜rE

= (

∆t0
tE

, ∆u0).

(5)

In principle, πE can also be measured by a single, accel-
erated observer for long-timescale events, for which tE is
of-order the orbital period (i.e., tE (cid:38) 100 d), though this
is not relevant for FFPs.

3.1. Satellite-Earth Projected Separation D⊥

Figure 1 shows the projected separation D⊥ between
Earth and each of the six satellite missions discussed
in §2 as seen from the center of the K2C9 superstamp
throughout a generic year.
In all cases we compute
orbits using the JPL HORIZONS web interface3. We
use the center of the K2C9 superstamp, (RA, Dec) =
(17h56m54s,−28d22m5s), as the approximate center of
bulge observations, coupled with the Earth’s geocenter
when computing D⊥ for all satellites.

3 http://ssd.jpl.nasa.gov/horizons.cgi

The projected separation D⊥ between the Earth
Figure 1.
and several satellite missions (see §2) throughout a generic year
(top). In the bottom panel we show the number of hours that the
Galactic bulge is visible from CTIO during the ground-based bulge
observing season. Regarding Spitzer, the red curves identify when
the viewing angle ψ between the Sun and the bulge, for which
we use the approximate center of the K2C9 superstamp: (RA,
Dec) = (17h56m54s, −28d22m5s), satisﬁes: 82.5 ≤ ψ/deg ≤ 120.
The two blue lines denote when Kepler will be oriented toward
the bulge: during its Campaign 9 (left) and Campaign 11 (right).
WFIRST, for which we use the orbit of Gaia as a proxy (see §3.1
for discussion), will not observe the bulge continuously but instead
during six 72-day microlensing seasons (Spergel et al. 2015). The
exact dates of these seasons have yet to be set but will likely be
centered on the equinoxes due to Sun angle pointing restrictions.
Thus, the broad light purple band shows the full orbit while the
thinner dark purple curves show a 72-day window centered on each
equinox. For Swift, in pink, we show the maximum D⊥ it attains
over the course of its ∼96-minute low-Earth orbit and note that
this value is computed from the Earth’s geocenter, indicating that
its projected separation from an observatory on Earth can diﬀer,
potentially signiﬁcantly. For New Horizons, the annual parallactic
oscillation in its projected separation is primarily due to the orbital
motion of the Earth. All orbits were computed using the JPL
HORIZONS web interface (see §3.1).

Over the course of K2C9 its projected separation will
span 0.07 (cid:46) D⊥/AU (cid:46) 0.81. The visibility windows for
Spitzer are set by the requirement that the viewing angle
ψ between the Sun and the target falls within the range:
82.5 ≤ ψ/deg ≤ 120. This highlights the synergy be-
tween Kepler and Spitzer that will occur during the last
two weeks of K2C9, though it is unlikely that Spitzer
will obtain data for any FFP candidates. For Swift, we
show the maximum D⊥ it reaches over the course of its
∼96-minute low-Earth orbit. We note that its projected
separation varies signiﬁcantly over the course of its orbit
and also as a displacement measured from any observa-
tory on the surface of the Earth. For New Horizons, the
annual parallactic oscillation in its projected separation
is primarily due to the orbital motion of the Earth.

Lastly, WFIRST will not observe the bulge continu-
ously but will feature six 72-day observing seasons ded-
icated to microlensing. The most recent Sun angle
pointing requirements for the planned spacecraft indi-

5

cate that the microlensing seasons will be centered on
the equinoxes. This indicates that D⊥ will be near its
maximum for much of these seasons and also that si-
multaneous ground-based observations will be restricted
due to the visibility of the Galactic bulge. The WFIRST
spacecraft will be inserted into the Earth-Sun L2 La-
grange point. Due to the dynamically unstable nature of
L2, WFIRST will trace out a halo orbit around the L2
point. Currently no orbital data exist on JPL’s HORIZONS
for WFIRST, so we investigate the orbits of two other L2
spacecraft as proxies. JWST will also be inserted into a
halo orbit at Earth-Sun L2, but its periapsis and apoap-
sis will each be larger than that of WFIRST by a factor
of ∼2. Gaia is on a Lissajous orbit around L2 with a
periapsis and apoapsis that are each within a few tens of
percent of that of WFIRST. While halo orbits are peri-
odic and Lissajous orbits are quasi-periodic, the L2 orbits
of JWST, WFIRST, and Gaia all feature a periodicity of
∼180 days. We thus use the orbit of Gaia as a proxy for
that of WFIRST and note that the morphology and ex-
trema for the ﬁnal true orbit of WFIRST will be slightly
altered from what is presented here.

3.2. Projected Physical Einstein Radius ˜rE

The projected physical size of the Einstein ring is re-

lated to the physical parameters MFFP and πrel by:

(cid:114) κMFFP

πrel

˜rE =

AU.

(6)

Figure 2 shows ˜rE for several planet masses as well as
the brown dwarf mass limit (13 MJup, ∼4100 M⊕), as a
function of D(cid:96).
We consider a microlensing event to be detectable if
|u0| ≤ 1 from both the ground and space. In principle,
though, it is possible to detect an event with |u0| > 1
if the source is very bright. Deﬁning φ as the angle be-
tween the lens-source relative proper motion µrel and the
Earth-satellite projected separation D⊥, we establish the
following relation:

D⊥
˜rE

sinφ = ∆u0.

(7)

The criterion for detectability, when coupled with Equa-
tion (7), means that even if |u0| ≤ 1 from one observa-
tory, there will exist values of ∆u0 for which |u0| > 1
for the second observatory, leading to an undetectable
event. Furthermore, the existence of a preferred direc-
tion for µrel will necessarily select a locus of φ and conse-
quentially, via Equation (7), a range of ∆u0. As a result,
even for an assumed distribution of u0 for the ﬁrst ob-
servatory that is uniform, the distribution of u0 for the
second observatory would not be uniform and, as men-
tioned above, would include a population of undetectable
events. A lower limit of ∆u0, which is implied in the case
of a non-detection of the event by one observer, places a
lower limit on πE and hence an upper limit on the lens
mass, if θE is measured. Given this, we note that even
with a sample of events that are detected only from the
ground or from space, and for which there exists only a
lower limit on πE, it is still possible to statistically ex-
plore the FFP mass function.

In the Milky Way there is a preferred direction of µrel
deﬁned by the direction of Galactic rotation, so here we

Figure 2. The physical size of the Einstein radius projected onto
the observer plane, ˜rE, as a function of lens distance D(cid:96) (bottom
axis) and lens-source relative parallax πrel (top axis), for several
planet masses MFFP and for the brown dwarf mass limit (∼4100
M⊕). For comparison, the horizontal grey lines indicate the time
of the minimum (0.07 AU) and maximum (0.81 AU) values of D⊥
for K2C9. This is not a strict cutoﬀ for detection of FFP candidate
events, as discussed in §3.2, but provides a reasonable estimate of
the combinations of MFFP and D(cid:96) that will be detectable with
K2C9 throughout its campaign.

determine the probability that an event will be detectable
as a function of D⊥/˜rE. The probability distribution of
the proper motion µrel is a two-dimensional (Galactic
coordinates: l, b) Gaussian with expectation value:

< µrel > =

,

(8)

v(cid:96) − v(cid:12)

D(cid:96)

− vs − v(cid:12)

Ds

where v(cid:96), vs, and v(cid:12) are the velocity of the lens, source,
and Sun, in Galactic coordinates. We model each as a
Gaussian and list the mean and standard deviation for
each object in Table 1. Since all satellites considered
here are on the Ecliptic and the bulge microlensing ﬁelds
are generally close to the Ecliptic ((cid:46)5◦), we rotate the
coordinates by 60◦ (the angle between the Ecliptic and
the Galactic plane) and derive φ. The correction for ﬁelds
oﬀ of, but close to, the Ecliptic under this approximation
should thus be (cid:46)5◦. Moreover, events due to lenses in the
bulge have a negligible preferred direction (see Table 1),
so this sets an upper limit for the error on our assumed
rotation.

We note that the preferred direction of µrel also sug-
gests a preferred sign of ∆t0, primarily for disk lenses.
On average, events will be detected ﬁrst by a western
observer, e.g., an Earth-trailing satellite. This can have
implications when considering events alerted from one
observer location and followed up by a second observer.

6

Table 1

Velocity Distributionsa

Object

vb

vl

Disk lens
Bulge lens

Source

0
0
0
7

220

0
0

242

Sun

0
a All values are in km s−1.

σvb
20
100
100

σvl
30
100
100

0

For WFIRST this would indicate a shift in the origin of
ﬁrst-detection alerts for a season centered on the vernal
equinox compared to a season centered on the autumnal
equinox.

With the velocity distributions in hand, we compute
the probability of a detectable event, i.e., an event that
is seen from both the Earth and a satellite. We ﬁrst draw
u0 for one observer (the order of observatories is imma-
terial in this context) from a probability distribution of
P (|u0| ≤ 1) (i.e., detected by the ﬁrst observer). Next,
we draw a direction from the proper motion probability
distribution for lenses in the disk with D(cid:96) = 1 and 4 kpc
and bulge lenses with D(cid:96) = 7 kpc. Using Equation (7)
we then derive ∆u0 for a range of D⊥/˜rE, speciﬁcally,
0.1 ≤ D⊥/˜rE ≤ 10. Finally, after adding ∆u0 to the
u0 of the ﬁrst observer, we check if |u0| ≤ 1 also for the
second observer.
In principle, P (|u0| ≤ 1) should be uniform. How-
ever, as Shvartzvald & Maoz (2012) and Shvartzvald
et al. (2016) showed, there is a selection eﬀect that, for
intrinsically faint sources, favors the detection of high-
magniﬁcation events (i.e., small u0) due to the limiting
magnitudes of the surveys. This bias will persist for cur-
rent ground and space surveys. In the case of WFIRST,
most of the sources will be bright enough to be detected
at baseline from space and, potentially, from the ground
as well, though the resources contributing to a simulta-
neous ground-based survey are currently unknown. Ad-
ditionally, since, for a signiﬁcant fraction of the FFP pa-
rameter space, the maximum possible magniﬁcation is
relatively low (see §4), this bias will be less prevalent.
Therefore, we calculate the results both for a uniform dis-
tribution of u0 and for the observed distribution found
by Shvartzvald & Maoz (2012) and Shvartzvald et al.
(2016), which favors small u0.
Figure 3 shows the probability of a detectable event
(i.e., |u0| ≤ 1 from both observer locations) as a function
of D⊥/˜rE for the three lens distances and two u0 distribu-
tions we explore. For D⊥ < ˜rE, the probability is >60%
for all possibilities, with the observed u0 distributions
yielding a higher probability by up to 8% as expected.
For D⊥ = 2˜rE the probability falls to 20–36%, with a
higher probability for the uniform distribution by ∼2%.
This arises from the fact that on average ∆u0 > 1, so a
higher probability of having a smaller u0 for one observer
suggests that for the other |u0| > 1. Beyond D⊥ > 2˜rE
the probability declines gradually.

4. NORMALIZED ANGULAR SOURCE STAR RADIUS ρ
An additional requirement for a secure FFP character-
ization is the determination of θE, which must be done
via the measurement of ﬁnite-source eﬀects, given the ab-
sence of detectable lens ﬂux and high-precision astromet-
ric data. The geometric probability P that the projected

Figure 3.
The probability for an event to be detected from
both the ground and a satellite (i.e., |u0| ≤ 1 for both) as a func-
tion of D⊥/˜rE for a lens (e.g., FFP) in the bulge with D(cid:96) = 7
kpc (orange), in the disk with D(cid:96) = 4 kpc (blue), and in the disk
with D(cid:96) = 1 kpc (purple). For u0 we use both a uniform dis-
tribution (solid lines) and the observed distribution (dashed lines;
Shvartzvald & Maoz 2012; Shvartzvald et al. 2016), which favors
smaller u0, and compute the probability as described in §3.2. The
probability is >60% for D⊥ < ˜rE, 20–36% for D⊥ = 2˜rE, and it
decreases monotonically for D⊥ > 2˜rE.

separation between the source and the FFP lens will be
suﬃciently small that the angular size of the source is
measurable can be cast in terms of the physical parame-
ters as:

P (cid:39) ρ =

√

θ∗

κMFFPπrel

,

(9)

where θ∗ is the angular radius of the source star.
In
general, it is necessary that u0 (cid:46) ρ, for at least one
of the observers, in order for the ﬁnite angular size of
the source to be measured. We note that for ρ (cid:46) 0.01,
the probability can be boosted by a factor of ∼2 for two
observers with D⊥ < ˜rE, assuming a uniform distribution
for u0, and up to a factor of ∼4, given the observed u0
distribution. However, as ρ increases, the probability
converges to Equation (9).

Figure 4 shows ρ as a function of D(cid:96) for several FFP
masses. Each panel represents a typical physical source
radius Rs for diﬀerent source spectral types: Rs = 13R(cid:12)
for a clump giant, 3R(cid:12) for a subgiant, 1R(cid:12) for a main se-
quence Solar-type source, and 0.5R(cid:12) for a late K/early
M dwarf.
It is crucial to note that the probability of
detecting ﬁnite-source eﬀects computed in Equation (9)
is counterbalanced by the fact that the maximum pos-
sible magniﬁcation decreases for larger ρ. Witt & Mao
(1994) found that the maximum magniﬁcation Amax as
a function of ρ is:

(cid:112)

Amax =

ρ2 + 4/ρ.

(10)

The right-hand y-axis of Figure 4 provides the values of
Amax. As ρ increases, not only is the maximum possible
magniﬁcation suppressed, but the light curve broadens.

7

Figure 4. The angular size of the source star normalized to the Einstein radius, ρ, as a function of lens distance D(cid:96) (lower x-axis) and
lens-source relative parallax πrel (upper x-axis) for several planet masses MFFP. Each panel represents a source star with a diﬀerent physical
radius for four typical spectral types: a giant (Rs = 13R(cid:12); top left), a subgiant (3R(cid:12); top right), a Solar-type main sequence star (1R(cid:12);
bottom left), and a late K/early M dwarf (0.5R(cid:12); bottom right). We assume Ds = 8.2 kpc (Nataf et al. 2013), with which we compute the
angular radius of the source star θ∗ for all cases. The right-hand y-axis gives the maximum possible magniﬁcation corresponding to each
ρ, which is signiﬁcantly suppressed for a giant source, while the probability of measuring ﬁnite-source eﬀects, and thus ρ, for individual
events is much lower for main sequence sources.

Consequentially, the fractional deviation of the wings of
the light curve from that expected for a point-like source
can be substantial. However, it becomes increasingly
possible to reproduce the light curve with a range of im-
pact parameters, a degeneracy that ultimately impacts
the ability to robustly measure πE.
For giant sources, the maximum possible magniﬁcation
across all FFP planet masses is (cid:46)100 and never exceeds
2 for Earth-mass planets. This will make it diﬃcult to
securely detect the event from two observatories and to
also robustly measure πE. The limiting factor shifts when

considering main sequence sources, with Rs (cid:46) 1R(cid:12). A
smaller ρ indicates a higher possible magniﬁcation but
a correspondingly lower probability for measuring ﬁnite-
source eﬀects. Given a Solar-type source with Rs = 1R(cid:12)
and an FFP lens at D(cid:96) = 4 kpc, there is only a ∼30%
chance of measuring ρ for a planet with MFFP = 1M⊕,
and this drops to ∼1% for MFFP = 1000M⊕.

8

5. CONSTRAINING LENS FLUX F(cid:96) TO EXCLUDE

POSSIBLE HOST STAR

treatment of the relevant uncertainties. Here we consider
two observational regimes.

Lastly, once a planetary-mass lens has been identiﬁed,
it is necessary to exclude the possibility of the FFP being
bound by searching for and constraining the ﬂux contri-
bution from a possible host star. This requires a mea-
surement of the source ﬂux and at least one epoch of
high-resolution data. The assumed procedure is as fol-
lows.

5.1. General Methodology

The ﬂux F of a microlensing event at time t is given

by:

F (t) = FsA(t) + Fb,

(11)

where Fs is the ﬂux of the source, A(t) is the magniﬁca-
tion of the source at t, and Fb is the blend ﬂux of all other
stars that are not resolved.
It is relatively straightfor-
ward to ﬁt a microlensing model for a well-sampled light
curve of a single-lens microlensing event, giving A(t) for
all times t. This is true regardless of observing band-
pass, since microlensing is achromatic. Then, for every
additional band beyond the primary one with which A(t)
is computed, in principle only two data points, taken at
two diﬀerent magniﬁcations, are required to measure Fs
and Fb in that band.

A high-resolution image of the microlensing event
taken at any time will resolve out all stars not dynam-
ically associated with the event to a high probability,
meaning that Fb will consist only of the lens and compan-
ions to the lens and/or source. Taking a high-resolution
observation at baseline, when the event is over and the
source is no longer magniﬁed, optimizes the chances of
detecting light from any luminous lenses, since the ﬂux
contribution from the source will be minimized and no
ambient interloping stars will be contributing to Fb. We
will refer to such a high-resolution ﬂux measurement as
Ft,base, since only light from the microlensing target —
the lens and source systems — will be included in the
point-spread function (PSF). This can be combined with
the known source ﬂux to determine ∆F , a measure of
any ﬂux in excess of the known source ﬂux in the high-
resolution image, via:

∆F ≡ Ft,base − Fs.

(12)

Regarding FFPs, ∆F = 0 provides a limit on the bright-
ness of a possible lens host star. Since the distances to
the FFPs will be derived from the measurements of πE
and θE, this allows for the strongest constraints on the
lens host star ﬂux F(cid:96), which in turn provides yields a
limit on the lens host star mass M(cid:96).

This same principle has been used to characterize a
handful of bound planetary microlensing events (Bennett
et al. 2007; Dong et al. 2009; Janczak et al. 2010; Sumi
et al. 2010; Batista et al. 2011, 2014, 2015; Fukui et al.
2015). The high-resolution data are typically taken in
H-band, which balances the seeing-limited angular reso-
lution with the attainable Strehl ratio and the sky back-
ground. Hereafter we will consider only H-band ﬂuxes of
the source, lens, and target, Hs, Hl, and Ht, respectively,
but note that this technique works for any observational
band.

Estimating the mass above which it is possible to rule
out the presence of a lens host star requires a careful

5.2. Fiducial Simulation

For our ﬁducial simulation, we assume the observa-
tional resources that will be implemented during K2C9.
A proposal was accepted to take target-of-opportunity
(ToO) observations of short-timescale FFP candidates
using NIRC2 on Keck 2. Each ToO will be used to ob-
tain a high-resolution measurement of the H-band ﬂux
of a microlensing target while the source is magniﬁed,
which we will refer to as Ht,mag. We also assume the
existence of a future high-resolution epoch of the target
when the source is at its baseline ﬂux, which we will de-
note as Ht,base. As described in §5.1, these two points
are suﬃcient to measure the source ﬂux (Hs,high−res)
and blend ﬂux (Hb,high−res) in the high-resolution data,
given a light curve model derived using other bandpasses.
Equation (12) refers to the general case for which only
the baseline epoch of high-resolution data exists. In this
scenario, however, obtaining a magniﬁed point and an
eventual baseline epoch mean that a measurement of
Hb,high−res = 0 establishes a limit on the brightness of
a possible lens host star. Under this procedure, the as-
sociated uncertainties are thus:

1. σHt,mag : the statistical uncertainty of the microlens-
ing target taken using the high-resolution facility
when the source is magniﬁed;

2. σHt,base :

the statistical uncertainty of the mi-
crolensing target taken using the high-resolution
facility when the event is over and the source has
returned to its baseline brightness;

3. σalign: the uncertainty of photometrically aligning
the two high-resolution images in order to compute
Hb,high−res;

4. σHb,high−res : the statistical uncertainty of the blend
brightness, which includes its covariance with the
other parameters from the light curve model; and
5. σcalib: the uncertainty required to calibrate to a

photometric standard system.

For our ﬁducial computation, we assume σHt,mag =
σHt,base = 0.1% and σalign = σHb,high−res = 1%. We as-
sume that σcalib = 1% (Batista et al. 2014) and consider
four diﬀerent H-band source magnitudes, each of which
corresponds to one of the four spectral types explored in
§4. Assuming a source distance of Ds = 8.2 kpc (Nataf
et al. 2013) and an H-band extinction of AH = 0.5, we
take Hs = 14.0 for a giant source, Hs = 16.5 for a sub-
giant, Hs = 19.0 for a Solar-type main sequence source,
and Hs = 21.0 for a late K/early M dwarf. We add all
uncertainties in quadrature and determine the H-band
apparent magnitude of a possible lens host star, Hl, that
can be excluded at the three-sigma level, from an upper
limit of Hb,high−res = 0. Finally, using a 5 Gyr Padova
isochrone (Bressan et al. 2012; Chen et al. 2014; Tang
et al. 2014; Chen et al. 2015), we convert Hl into a limit
on the lens host star mass, M(cid:96), as a function of lens
distance D(cid:96). The isochrone extends only to 0.09M(cid:12), so
we extrapolate down to the deuterium-burning limit at
0.08M(cid:12), which we establish as the threshold for stellar-
mass FFP host star exclusion. Our results are shown in
Figure 5.

9

Figure 5. The highest lens mass M(cid:96) of a possible host star that can be excluded, as a function of lens distance D(cid:96). Each panel represents
a source star with a diﬀerent apparent H-band brightness, corresponding to the four broad categories of spectral types discussed in §4. For
each, the blue line corresponds to our ﬁducial simulation (see §5.2) assuming a conservative 3% precision in photometrically aligning the
high-resolution data (dotted line) and a 1% precision (solid line). The red line shows the results for our optimal simulation (see §5.3). We
use a 5 Gyr Padova isochrone (Bressan et al. 2012; Chen et al. 2014; Tang et al. 2014; Chen et al. 2015) that extends only to 0.09M(cid:12), so we
extrapolate it to the deuterium-burning limit (dashed lines), at 0.08M(cid:12), which we set as the limit for stellar-mass lens host star exclusion.
If Hs (cid:38) 19.0 it is possible to completely exclude the presence of a stellar host out to a certain lens distance threshold. For Hs ≈ 19 using
our ﬁducial simulation and assuming a photometric alignment precision of 1%, which is a good representation of the observing capabilities
for K2C9, we ﬁnd that stellar lenses can be excluded up to D(cid:96) ≈ 2 kpc. Our optimal simulation extends this threshold to ∼6 kpc for
Hs ≈ 21, which is typical for WFIRST sources.

10

Giant and subgiant sources are generally too bright to
be able to robustly rule out the presence of an M-dwarf
FFP host star, particularly at distances of several kilo-
parsecs. However, for fainter main sequence sources, for
which the ﬂux contribution from a potential lens host
star will be a signiﬁcantly larger fraction of the total
light measured in the baseline high-resolution observa-
tion Ft,base, the situation is much diﬀerent. Assuming
Hs ≈ 19, stellar hosts of any mass can be excluded up
to ∼1.8 kpc, and even for FFPs in the bulge the most
massive host star that could go undetected is ∼0.25 M(cid:12).
Finally, as a more conservative limit, we set σalign = 3%,
the results for which are also shown in Figure 5. This
decreases the limiting distance closer than which hosts
of any mass can be excluded to ∼1.3 kpc. Correspond-
ingly, the mass limit that can be ruled out for an FFP
lens at any distance increases to ∼0.37 M(cid:12).

5.3. Optimal Simulation

We also perform a second simulation with an optimal
set of assumptions regarding the relevant uncertainties.
The primary band in which WFIRST will conduct its
microlensing survey, W149, will have a PSF of ∼0.14(cid:48)(cid:48)
(Spergel et al. 2015). At this angular resolution, the
probability of having an ambient interloping star with
HAB < 26 blended with the microlensing event is <15%
(Spergel et al. 2015). Thus, for the vast majority of mi-
crolensing events that WFIRST will detect, having addi-
tional high-resolution observations taken with a diﬀerent
facility, both while the source is magniﬁed and while it
is at baseline, is unnecessary. Moreover, during a mi-
crolensing season images will be taken in W149 every ∼15
minutes, producing light curves with exquisite photomet-
ric precision and sampling. Lastly, WFIRST’s microlens-
ing predicted detection rates peak between W149AB =
22–23 (Penny et al., in prep.), much fainter than for
K2C9 or current ground-based surveys. In summary, the
WFIRST data set will largely be self-contained. Given
these factors, for our optimistic simulation we remove
σalign and σHt,mag , set Hb,high−res = σHt,base = 0.1%, and
assume σcalib = 1%.

Figure 5 shows the results for our optimal scenario.
For subgiant and giant sources it is still diﬃcult to set
meaningful mass limits for a lens host star, particularly
as D(cid:96) increases. However, for Solar-type main sequence
sources with Hs = 19.0, the distance to which stellar
hosts can be excluded increases to ∼2.4 kpc, and for
lenses in the bulge we can probe down to ∼0.2M(cid:12). This
improves dramatically for late K/early M dwarf sources
with Hs = 21.0. Stellar lens host stars can be excluded
out to ∼6.1 kpc, and even in the central bulge the highest
mass star that would remain undetected is only ∼0.1M(cid:12).

5.4. Spatially Resolve Lens and Source

For our simulations and results regarding lens ﬂux con-
straints we have operated in the regime of prompt follow-
up photometry, i.e., high-resolution images taken shortly
after the event is over. Even with facilities such as NIRC2
on Keck and WFIRST, the lens and source will remain
unresolved. However, it is possible to set even stronger
F(cid:96) constraints by waiting for the lens and source to sepa-
rate according to their relative proper motion µrel. Then
the possible lens host star can be treated as an isolated

object, allowing for more robust F(cid:96) and, ultimately M(cid:96)
constraints when compared to searching for an increase
in ﬂux on top of the (known) source ﬂux. Gould (2016)
ﬁnds that for FFP candidate events it is feasible to ex-
clude the presence of lens host stars with separations
comparable to the Oort Cloud using existing adaptive
optics facilities by waiting ∼50 years after the event is
over.

This technique still requires that πE and θE (from a de-
termination of ρ) are measured, such that the mass of the
FFP will be known. By coupling these parameters with
tE, the lens-source relative proper motion vector µrel can
be measured. It is then straightforward to estimate the
timescale on which the lens and source could be spatially
resolved using a given facility as well as the direction
of separation (see Henderson 2015 for a more thorough
discussion of spatially resolving lenses and sources). It
would still be optimal to obtain a prompt high-resolution
epoch shortly after the event is over. Given the stellar
surface density toward the bulge, it is best to identify and
exclude any ambient interloping stars that could possible
be confused for the microlensing target, especially if the
proper motion is not well constrained.

6. DISCUSSION

Here we present the implications our ﬁndings have for
the characterization of FFP candidate events. It is emi-
nently possible to explore the frequency, Galactic distri-
bution, and even mass function of FFPs without robustly
measuring πE and θE (via ρ), which together provide
mass and distance measurements for individual events.
Nor is fully excluding stellar-mass hosts a requirement
for gaining traction in understanding FFP demograph-
ics. In this section, however, we will focus on the full set
of constraints as they can be measured using data taken
during K2C9 or by WFIRST.

6.1. Application to K2C9

The projected separation D⊥ of K2C9 reaches its min-
imum value of 0.07 AU one week into the campaign, on
14/April/2016, after which it increases monotonically to
0.81 AU on 1/July. This signiﬁcantly aﬀects its ability to
measure πE for FFP lenses with diﬀerent masses and dis-
tances throughout the campaign. Figure 6 shows MFFP
as a function of D(cid:96). By assuming a value of ˜rE that is
equal to D⊥ it is possible to determine the masses and
distances of FFPs that will yield detectable events at a
given time during K2C9. As discussed in §3.2, the proba-
bility that events with D⊥ = ˜rE will be detectable by the
pair of observer locations is ∼60%, and this probability
declines steeply as D⊥/˜rE increases. We thus use this as
a benchmark for sensitivity to πE. Immediately we see
that toward the end of K2C9 πE can only be measured
for lenses with mass lower than the deuterium-burning
limit for D(cid:96) (cid:38) 4 kpc. Near the beginning of the cam-
paign it will be possible to measure a parallactic shift for
nearby Jupiter-mass lenses, with its sensitivity extending
down to Earth-mass FFPs as the lens distance increases
to D(cid:96) ≈ 8 kpc.
But πE is only one of two ingredients necessary for mea-
suring MFFP and D(cid:96). The other is ρ, which helps deter-
mine θE. By rearranging the right-hand side of Equation
(9) we compute MFFP as a function of D(cid:96) for diﬀerent
values of ρ, given an assumed physical source radius Rs

11

Figure 6.
Free-ﬂoating planet mass MFFP as a function of lens distance D(cid:96) for K2C9 (left panel) and WFIRST (right panel). The
red lines correspond to the minimum and maximum values of the projected separation D⊥ for the respective satellites throughout their
microlensing campaigns. The blue lines indicate ρ = 0.01 (solid lines), 0.1 (dashed), and 1.0 (dotted). In the right panel they correspond
to a physical source radius of Rs = 0.5R(cid:12), typical for WFIRST sources. In the left panel we instead assume Rs = 1.0R(cid:12), since Hs ≈ 21
will likely be too faint for K2C9 but Hs ≈ 19 allows for the otherwise strongest lens ﬂux constraints. The purple line indicates the largest
lens distance D(cid:96) at which all stellar-mass lens host stars can be excluded for our ﬁducial simulation assuming an H-band source magnitude
of Hs = 19 (solid; left panel), and for our optimal simulation assuming Hs = 21 (dashed; right panel). Finally, the black horizontal line
demarcates the deuterium-burning limit that is the classical boundary between planets and brown dwarfs. Both panels show how the
constraints for measuring πE (set by the red lines) and ρ (blue lines) work in opposing directions. Regarding K2C9, FFP events occurring
toward the beginning of the campaign have a higher probability of being fully characterized. In the case of WFIRST, on the other hand,
full charactaerization is possible for FFPs with masses at least as low as super-Earths throughout its entire microlensing observing window.

(and thus angular source radius θ∗, assuming Ds = 8.2
kpc). To compute ρ for K2C9 (left panel of Figure 6)
we assume Rs = 1.0R(cid:12). We select this as the bench-
mark value of Rs because Hs ≈ 21, corresponding to
Rs = 0.5R(cid:12), is likely too faint for K2C9 and Hs ≈ 19
allows for the otherwise strongest lens ﬂux constraints.
From the left-hand side of Equation (9), the probabil-
ity of detecting ﬁnite-source eﬀects, and thus measuring
ρ and, ultimately, determining θE, scales approximately
as ρ itself. Thus, the value of ρ at a given (D(cid:96), MFFP)
coordinate gives the probability of measuring ρ for an
FFP with those physical properties. Rephrased, ρ−1 in-
dicates, roughly, the number of events with that speciﬁc
(D(cid:96), MFFP) combination that would need to be detected
in order to measure ρ for at least one of them. The
constraints for measuring πE and ρ work in opposing di-
rections. For a ﬁxed D⊥, the mass to which the satellite
is sensitive decreases as D(cid:96) increases. However, as D(cid:96)
increases, the probability of measuring ρ increases, for a
ﬁxed FFP mass.

Finally, we incorporate the ﬂux constraint for ruling

out the presence of lens host stars. From the left panel
of Figure 6, the largest D(cid:96) at which stellar-mass lens host
stars can be excluded for sources with Hs ≈ 19 is ∼1.8
kpc from our ﬁducial simulation. When considering all
three factors, πE, ρ, and F(cid:96), the optimal regime for char-
acterizing FFPs occurs for the smallest D⊥, when the
sensitivity extends to FFPs with the lowest masses, for
a ﬁxed D(cid:96), and for when the probability of measuring
ρ is the highest, i.e., larger values of ρ. This drives the
sensitivity of K2C9 toward the ﬁrst few weeks of the cam-
paign, when D⊥ (cid:46) 0.2 AU, as is furthermore supported
by the goal of excluding stellar-mass host stars, which
requires that D(cid:96) (cid:46) 1.8 kpc.
In this regime, however,
while stellar hosts can be excluded at the three-sigma
level from F(cid:96) constraints, the probability of measuring
both πE and ρ is only ∼1.5%. At the end of K2C9, when
D⊥ = 0.81 AU, the lowest mass lens for which it will be
possible to measure πE and also constrain the ﬂux will
be M ≈ 104M⊕, above the brown dwarf mass limit.

6.2. Planning for WFIRST

12

The current plan is for each of WFIRST’s 72-day ob-
serving seasons to be centered on an equinox. Its pro-
jected separation would thus be restricted to 0.006 (cid:46)
D⊥/AU (cid:46) 0.009. Nevertheless, given the uncertain na-
ture of the orbital parameters (see §3.1) and the exact
timing of the observing seasons, we presume D⊥,min ≈
10−2 AU and D⊥,max ≈ 10−3 AU to bracket the full
range possible for WFIRST. These are shown in the
right panel of Figure 6. From the detectability limit of
D⊥ = ˜rE discussed in §3.2, this indicates that WFIRST
will be able to measure πE for Earth-mass planets for
D(cid:96) (cid:38) 2 kpc and for lower-mass planets at larger dis-
tances. Were the Sun-angle restrictions relaxed such
that WFIRST could observe toward the bulge near the
June solstice, when its projected separation could reach
as small as 10−3 AU, it would be sensitive to planets
∼2 orders-of-magnitude less massive (i.e., free-ﬂoating
moons).

The typical source stars for WFIRST will have Rs =
0.5R(cid:12), meaning that the probability to measure ρ is
(cid:38)10% for Earth-mass FFPs with D(cid:96) (cid:38) 2.5 kpc. The
corresponding source magnitude of Hs ≈ 21, combined
with the optimal lens ﬂux simulation (which is appro-
priate for WFIRST), suggests that it will be possible to
exclude host stars for FFPs detected by WFIRST for
D(cid:96) (cid:46) 6.1 kpc. This means that WFIRST will be sensi-
tive to FFPs at least down to the mass of super-Earths
throughout the Galaxy.

One possible limiting factor, however, could be the ca-
pabilities of the accompanying ground-based facilities. A
source with Hs ≈ 21 will have an optical magnitude of
I ≈ 22–24. This is below the sensitivity of current mi-
crolensing surveys. Additionally, the maximum magniﬁ-
cation limitation from having a larger ρ means that many
of these events may not get suﬃciently bright to be de-
tected even at peak. However, if future surveys will be
conducted by larger telescopes, such as that proposed
for Subaru, this limit is no longer relevant. Secondly,
the bulge is visible only for ∼1–7 hours from CTIO (as
a representative for the southern hemisphere) during the
currently planned WFIRST campaigns (as shown on the
bottom panel of Figure 1). For telescopes in the northern
hemisphere, such as Subaru on Mauna Kea, the bulge is
visible for only 60% of each WFIRST observing season
and even then only up to a maximum of ∼3 hours per
night.

Work by CBH and YS was supported by an ap-
pointment to the NASA Postdoctoral Program at the
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, administered by Universi-
ties Space Research Association through a contract with
NASA. We thank David Ciardi, Chas Beichman, and
Chris Gelino for useful discussions regarding adaptive
optics observations. Finally, we thank Scott Gaudi, Dan
Maoz, Matt Penny, and Sebastiano Calchi Novati for a
careful and fruitful reading of the manuscript.

REFERENCES

Allers, K. N., Gallimore, J. F., Liu, M. C., & Dupuy, T. J. 2016,

ArXiv e-prints, arXiv:1601.04717

Batista, V., Beaulieu, J.-P., Bennett, D. P., et al. 2015, ApJ, 808,

170

Batista, V., Gould, A., Dieters, S., et al. 2011, A&A, 529, A102
Batista, V., Beaulieu, J.-P., Gould, A., et al. 2014, ApJ, 780, 54
Bennett, D. P., Anderson, J., & Gaudi, B. S. 2007, ApJ, 660, 781
Bihain, G., Rebolo, R., Zapatero Osorio, M. R., et al. 2009, A&A,

506, 1169

Bressan, A., Marigo, P., Girardi, L., et al. 2012, MNRAS, 427, 127
Calchi Novati, S., & Scarpetta, G. 2015, ArXiv e-prints,

arXiv:1512.09141

Calchi Novati, S., Gould, A., Udalski, A., et al. 2015, ApJ, 804, 20
Chen, Y., Bressan, A., Girardi, L., et al. 2015, MNRAS, 452, 1068
Chen, Y., Girardi, L., Bressan, A., et al. 2014, MNRAS, 444, 2525
Delorme, P., Gagn´e, J., Malo, L., et al. 2012, A&A, 548, A26
Dong, S., Udalski, A., Gould, A., et al. 2007, ApJ, 664, 862
Dong, S., Gould, A., Udalski, A., et al. 2009, ApJ, 695, 970
Dupuy, T. J., & Kraus, A. L. 2013, Science, 341, 1492
Fukui, A., Gould, A., Sumi, T., et al. 2015, ApJ, 809, 74
Gagn´e, J., Burgasser, A. J., Faherty, J. K., et al. 2015, ApJ, 808,

L20

Gould, A. 2016, ArXiv e-prints, arXiv:1603.03773
Gould, A., Yee, J., & Carey, S. 2015a, Degeneracy Breaking for

K2 Microlens Parallaxes, Spitzer Proposal

—. 2015b, Galactic Distribution of Planets From

High-Magniﬁcation Microlensing Events, Spitzer Proposal

Han, C. 2006, ApJ, 644, 1232
Han, C., Chung, S.-J., Kim, D., et al. 2004, ApJ, 604, 372
Han, C., Gaudi, B. S., An, J. H., & Gould, A. 2005, ApJ, 618, 962
Henderson, C. B. 2015, ApJ, 800, 58
Henderson, C. B., Penny, M., Street, R. A., et al. 2015, ArXiv

e-prints, arXiv:1512.09142

Howell, S. B., Sobeck, C., Haas, M., et al. 2014, PASP, 126, 398
Janczak, J., Fukui, A., Dong, S., et al. 2010, ApJ, 711, 731
Liu, H.-G., Zhang, H., & Zhou, J.-L. 2013a, ApJ, 772, 142
Liu, M. C., Magnier, E. A., Deacon, N. R., et al. 2013b, ApJ, 777,

L20

Lucas, P. W., & Roche, P. F. 2000, MNRAS, 314, 858
Nataf, D. M., Gould, A., Fouqu´e, P., et al. 2013, ApJ, 769, 88
Paczynski, B. 1986, ApJ, 304, 1
Padoan, P., & Nordlund, ˚A. 2004, ApJ, 617, 559
Pe˜na Ram´ırez, K., B´ejar, V. J. S., & Zapatero Osorio, M. R.

2015, ArXiv e-prints, arXiv:1511.05586

Penny, M. T., Kerins, E., Rattenbury, N., et al. 2013, MNRAS,

434, 2

Pfyﬀer, S., Alibert, Y., Benz, W., & Swoboda, D. 2015, A&A,

579, A37

Shvartzvald, Y., & Maoz, D. 2012, MNRAS, 419, 3631
Shvartzvald, Y., Udalski, A., Gould, A., et al. 2015, ApJ, 814, 111
Shvartzvald, Y., Maoz, D., Udalski, A., et al. 2016, MNRAS, 457,

4089

Silk, J. 1977, ApJ, 214, 152
Spergel, D., Gehrels, N., Baltay, C., et al. 2015, ArXiv e-prints,

arXiv:1503.03757

Street, R. A., Udalski, A., Calchi Novati, S., et al. 2015, ArXiv

e-prints, arXiv:1508.07027

Sumi, T., Bennett, D. P., Bond, I. A., et al. 2010, ApJ, 710, 1641
Sumi, T., Kamiya, K., Bennett, D. P., et al. 2011, Nature, 473,

349

Tang, J., Bressan, A., Rosenﬁeld, P., et al. 2014, MNRAS, 445,

4287

Udalski, A., Yee, J. C., Gould, A., et al. 2015, ApJ, 799, 237
Veras, D., & Raymond, S. N. 2012, MNRAS, 421, L117
Wang, L., Kouwenhoven, M. B. N., Zheng, X., Church, R. P., &

Davies, M. B. 2015, MNRAS, 449, 3543

Witt, H. J., & Mao, S. 1994, ApJ, 430, 505
Yee, J. C. 2015, ApJ, 814, L11
Yee, J. C., Gould, A., Beichman, C., et al. 2015a, ApJ, 810, 155
Yee, J. C., Udalski, A., Calchi Novati, S., et al. 2015b, ApJ, 802,

76

Yoo, J., DePoy, D. L., Gal-Yam, A., et al. 2004, ApJ, 603, 139
Zhu, W., & Gould, A. 2016, ArXiv e-prints, arXiv:1601.03043
Zhu, W., Calchi Novati, S., Gould, A., et al. 2015, ArXiv e-prints,

arXiv:1510.02097

