Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 000, 1–5 (2016)

Printed 18 March 2016

(MN LATEX style ﬁle v2.2)

Cosmological N-body simulations with suppressed variance

Raul E. Angulo1∗ & Andrew Pontzen2†

1 Centro de Estudios de F´ısica del Cosmos de Arag´on (CEFCA), Plaza San Juan 1, Planta-2, 44001, Spain.
2 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University College London, Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT, UK.

18 March 2016

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
6
1

 
 
]

.

O
C
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
3
5
2
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT
We present and test a method that dramatically reduces variance arising from the sparse sam-
pling of wavemodes in cosmological simulations. The method uses two simulations which are
ﬁxed (the initial Fourier mode amplitudes are ﬁxed to the ensemble average power spectrum) and
paired (with initial modes exactly out of phase). We measure the power spectrum, monopole and
quadrupole redshift-space correlation functions, halo mass function and reduced bispectrum at
z = 1. By these measures, predictions from a ﬁxed pair can be as precise on non-linear scales as
an average over 50 traditional simulations. The ﬁxing procedure introduces a non-Gaussian cor-
rection to the initial conditions; we give an analytic argument showing why the simulations are still
able to predict the mean properties of the Gaussian ensemble. We anticipate that the method will
drive down the computational time requirements for accurate large-scale explorations of galaxy
bias and clustering statistics, enabling more precise comparisons with theoretical models, and
facilitating the use of numerical simulations in cosmological data interpretation.

Key words: N-body simulations, large-scale structure of the Universe

1 INTRODUCTION

Numerical simulations are an essential tool for cosmology, especially
for interpreting observational surveys (see Kuhlen et al. 2012 for a
review). They can be deployed to probe the impact of a given cosmo-
logical ingredient (e.g. Baldi et al. 2014), create virtual galaxy pop-
ulations (e.g. Overzier et al. 2009), check and develop analytic treat-
ments for structure formation (e.g. Carlson et al. 2009), and under-
stand systematic and statistical errors in cosmological measurements
(e.g. Manera et al. 2015). In the future, simulations could even be
used to constrain cosmological parameters (Angulo & Hilbert 2015).
However, a limitation for all the above applications is the sparse
sampling of Fourier modes due to the ﬁnite extent of the simulation
box. A given cosmological simulation is initialised to a particular re-
alisation of a Gaussian random ﬁeld. The power spectrum of the real-
isation, ˆP L(k), therefore diﬀers from the ensemble mean power spec-
trum, P L(k). Given a box large enough to capture all physical eﬀects
(Bagla et al. 2009), the largest-scale modes are still poorly sampled.
This, together with the non-linear coupling of small and large scales,
implies that several-Gpc size boxes generate statistical errors which
limit inferences on 100 or even 10 Mpc scales.

This under-sampling eﬀect is closely connected to (though, ow-
ing to the non-linear evolution, not precisely the same as) observa-
tional cosmic variance. In the observational case, the ﬁnite volume
that can be achieved by a given survey constitutes an irreducible
source of uncertainty. On the other hand the computational variance
can be strongly suppressed, at least in principle, until it is smaller
than the cosmic variance and other sources of error. This is usually

∗ rangulo@cefca.es
† a.pontzen@ucl.ac.uk
c(cid:13) 2016 RAS

achieved by simulating huge cosmological volumes (e.g. Rasera et al.
2014) or a large number of realisations (e.g. Takahashi et al. 2009).
Finite computing resources then generate a tension between the need
for large volumes and for high resolution (the latter is required to bet-
ter resolve the distribution of individual galaxies and their internal
structure). Even as supercomputing facilities expand, the tension is
becoming more acute as surveys probe larger scales and constrain the
statistics of ﬂuctuations to greater precision. For instance, reaching
1% accuracy over the whole range of scales to be probed by Euclid
would require the simulation of ∼ 105 Gpc3.
In this Letter we propose and test a method to suppress the eﬀect
of box variance drastically. We will show that with just two simula-
tions we can achieve the accuracy delivered by tens to hundreds of
traditional simulations at the same scale, depending on the particular
problem in hand. Brieﬂy, the two simulations:

(i) use a ﬁxed input power spectrum, meaning that we enforce

ˆP L = P L when generating the initial conditions;

(ii) are paired, so that a hierarchy of eﬀects due to chance phase

correlations can be cancelled (Pontzen et al. 2015).

The ﬁrst condition destroys the statistical Gaussianity of the in-
put ﬁeld which, at ﬁrst sight, would seem to limit the usefulness of
the approach. However we will demonstrate empirically and analyt-
ically that, by all measures explored here, the non-Gaussian correc-
tions have a negligible eﬀect on ensemble mean clustering statistics.
This Letter is set out as follows. In Section 2 we implement and
test our method. In particular, we quantify its performance by com-
paring predictions with those from an ensemble of 300 independent
simulations. We develop an analytic understanding of why the method
works in Section 3. Finally, in Section 4 we present our conclusions.

2

Angulo & Pontzen

where Pi is the discrete version of the power spectrum P(k). In the
ﬁxed-power approach, the pdf is instead given by

, θi(cid:17) ≡ Yi

1
2π

Pr f (cid:16)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

δL

i (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

where δD indicates the Dirac delta-function. One can sample from Pr f
straightforwardly by setting

δD(cid:16)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

δL

i (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) − pPi(cid:17) ,

(3)

Figure 1. The probability density function of non-linear overdensities in
spheres of radius 8 h−1Mpc, as measured in the ﬁxed simulations (orange
lines) and in an ensemble of Gaussian simulations (grey lines), at the starting
redshift, z = 9. The blue line and red circles show the mean of the respective
cases, as indicated by the legend.

2 COMPARISON WITH AN ENSEMBLE OF

SIMULATIONS

2.1 Numerical Simulations

All simulations considered in this Letter contain 10243 particles of
mass 1.7 × 1012 h−1 M
inside a box of side L = 3 h−1Gpc. The ini-
⊙
tial particle positions are computed from an input linear density ﬁeld
δL using 2LPT. The simulation particles are then evolved under self-
gravity with a COLA algorithm (Tassev et al. 2013) using 10 steps
from z = 9 to z = 1. The cosmological parameters assumed corre-
spond to those of the Millennium series (Springel 2005): Ωm = 0.25,
σ8 = 0.9, and h = 0.73.

The COLA algorithm is an approximate N-body method, in the
sense that the orbits inside high density regions are not properly in-
tegrated. However, the non-linear evolution of intermediate and large
scales is accurately captured (Howlett et al. 2015; Koda et al. 2015),
at a fraction of the computational cost of a traditional N-body simu-
lation. This enables the rapid simulation of extremely large volumes,
which in turn allows very precise calculations of diﬀerent statistics
that serve as a benchmark for the performance of our method. The to-
tal volume of our reference ensemble is 8100 h−1 Gpc3; more details
are given in Chaves-Montero et al. (in prep).

The only diﬀerence between the ensemble of simulations and
the pair of ﬁxed simulations is in the input ﬁelds δL(x). Because of
the ﬁnite box size, the Fourier modes for the ﬁeld are quantised; we
write

δL(x) ≡ Xi

eiki·xδL
i ,

(1)

where i indexes the possible modes and δL
is the Fourier amplitude
i
for the mode at wavevector ki. We can choose the indexing such that
−i = −ki; note that, for the ﬁeld δL(x) to remain real, δL∗i
k
each with δL
bution function (pdf). Decomposed into the the magnitude |δL
phase θi ≡ arg δL

The reference ensemble of 300 simulations consists of boxes
i s drawn from a Gaussian, zero-mean probability distri-
i | and

i , the pdf is given by

= δL
−i.

Prg(cid:16)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

δL

i (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

, θi(cid:17) ≡ Yi

1

2π r 2

πPi

exp

2

δL

−(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
i (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
2Pi 

,

(2)

δL

i = pPi exp (iθi) ,

(4)
with θi drawn with uniform probability between 0 and 2π, and θ−i =
−θi. The second of the pair of simulations is then generated by trans-
forming θi → π + θi (Pontzen et al. 2015).
Sampling from Pr f results in an ensemble that is not equivalent
to sampling from Prg. However, Pr f can stand in place of Prg for many
practical calculations (the analytic justiﬁcation is discussed in Section
3). We veriﬁed that, despite the ﬁxed amplitudes, the one-point input
overdensity pdf in real space, δL(x), is still a Gaussian deviate owing
to the central limit theorem. Furthermore, Fig. 1 shows the distribu-
tion of overdensities δNL at z = 9, averaged over spheres of 8 h−1Mpc
radius for a subset of traditional simulations (grey lines) and the two
paired-and-ﬁxed (orange lines; these overlap almost perfectly). The
corresponding pdf for the combined volume of the two paired-and-
ﬁxed simulations is shown by the red dots. There is excellent agree-
ment between this characterisation of the density ﬁelds of traditional
and ﬁxed simulations, with both following a near-Gaussian distribu-
tion. The mild skewness (which also agrees between the cases) arises
from the 2LPT particle displacements.

2.2 Results

Fig. 2 shows the dark matter power spectrum measured from the z = 1
outputs. In the top panel, the results of the ﬁxed pair (red circles)
are indistinguishable from the traditional ensemble mean (blue line)
over all the scales plotted, conﬁrming that the approach correctly pre-
dicts the ensemble average power spectrum in linear and in non-linear
regimes.

The bottom panel shows deviations with respect to the ensem-
ble mean, in units of the standard deviation of the ensemble, σ(k) =
(h ˆP NL(k)2i − h ˆP NL(k)i2)1/2. On scales where evolution is linear (ap-
proximately k < 0.03 hMpc−1) the ﬁxed simulations should exactly
coincide with linear theory by construction. As expected, the mea-
sured power spectrum agrees with the ensemble mean to an accuracy
limited only by the statistical errors of the latter, σ(k)/√300 . 2% of
P(k). At larger k, non-linear eﬀects — which depend not only on the
initial amplitude of Fourier modes but also on phases — become im-
portant. Accordingly, the power spectrum of the two individual ﬁxed
simulations (orange lines) drift away from the exact mean. However
the leading order deviations from the ensemble mean are equal and
opposite in sign (Pontzen et al. 2015) between the pair of ﬁxed sim-
ulations, so that their average (red dots) has a reduced r.m.s. error
much below 1% (0.27σ over the range 0.03 < k hMpc−1 < 1). The
accuracy of our pair of ﬁxed simulations by this measure is approxi-
mately equivalent to averaging over 14 traditional simulations, allow-
ing for a factor 7 reduction in computer time. In particular, the tech-
nique suppresses statistical errors on all scales to the point where they
are smaller than the impact of numerical parameters (Schneider et al.
2015).

In Fig. 3 we show that the high accuracy of the method also holds
in redshift space. In this ﬁgure we plot the monopole (red circles) and
quadrupole (green triangles) terms of an expansion of the 2D correla-
tion function in terms of Legendre polynomials. Predictions from the
pair of ﬁxed simulations again agree well with the ensemble mean.
The same pattern persists where the individual ﬁxed simulations per-
form best on large scales, while on smaller scales the pairing leads

c(cid:13) 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–5

Simulations with suppressed variance

3

Figure 3. Same as Fig. 2 but for the monopole (red circles) and the quadrupole
(green triangles) of the redshift-space correlation function. The r.m.s. error
on the paired-and-ﬁxed result is 0.13 σ and 0.15 σ for the monopole and
quadrupole respectively, meaning that around 50 traditional simulations are
required to reach the accuracy of a ﬁxed pair of simulations.

the pairing procedure cancels the leading-order contribution to these
ﬂuctuations because they have odd parity in the input linear density
ﬁeld. Therefore the ﬁnal estimate from the pair of ﬁxed simulations
has an r.m.s. deviation from the ensemble average of only 0.14σ over
all θ. Reaching this accuracy with traditional simulations would again
require averaging over 50 (as opposed to two) realisations.

As discussed in Koda et al. (2015), the COLA N-body algorithm
does not resolve the internal structure of halos but nonetheless pre-
dicts accurate mass functions for the overall population. Therefore
we can meaningfully test the abundance of collapsed objects. In Fig.
5 we show the mass function of dark matter halos identiﬁed using a
Friends-of-Friends algorithm (Davis et al. 1985) with a linking length
set to l = 0.2. We ﬁnd the same qualitative picture as in previous plots
and statistics, although with slightly less striking noise suppression.
The new method produces results with suppressed ﬂuctuations rela-
tive to two Gaussian simulations, with strong cancellations between
the pair. The average r.m.s. error is 0.47σ, roughly the level expected
from four simulations randomly picked from the traditional ensem-
ble.

3 ANALYTIC EXPLORATION

In the previous Section we showed that paired-and-ﬁxed simulations
are able to predict the average properties of a traditional ensemble.

Figure 2. The power spectrum of the dark matter at z = 1. In the top panel,
measurements from the ensemble of 300 traditional simulations are shown as
grey lines, with the mean shown by a blue line. The solid red circles show the
average of the two simulations in the paired-and-ﬁxed set. Finally, the hori-
zontal dotted line marks the shot noise limit. In the bottom panel we show the
diﬀerences with respect to the average ensemble measurement, in units of the
standard deviation in the ensemble. As in the top panel, red symbols show the
ﬁnal estimate from the pair of ﬁxed simulations. We additionally show residu-
als in each of the two individual ﬁxed simulations by the orange lines. The en-
velopes bounded by dashed lines mark a 1% (left) and 0.1% (right) uncertainty
in the power spectrum. The ﬁxed pair produces a power spectrum estimate
with an r.m.s. error of just 0.27σ on non-linear scales 0.03 < k/hMpc−1 < 1.

to a substantial cancellation of remaining errors. The overall tech-
nique yields a precise prediction for the non-linear correlation func-
tion, reaching a 2% accuracy over the whole range of scales inves-
tigated (in particular around the baryonic acoustic oscillation peak,
whose shape and location is currently driving large simulation cam-
paigns). With traditional ensemble-average techniques, achieving this
accuracy would require around 50 simulations of 3 h−1Gpc box size.
Having established the accuracy of our simulations for predict-
ing two-point statistics, we now turn to higher order-order clustering.
The bispectrum is deﬁned (in the limit that the box size is inﬁnite) by

B(k1, k2, θ) δD(k1 + k2 + k3) = hδNL(k1)δNL(k2)δNL(k3)i,

(5)

where δNL(k) is the Fourier transform of the non-linear evolved over-
density. We have assumed statistical isotropy in writing B as a func-
tion of θ, the angle between the k1 and k2 vectors, and statistical
homogeneity imposes the Dirac-delta dependence on the left-hand-
side. We particularly consider the case where k1 = 0.02 h−1Mpc and
k2 = 0.04 h−1Mpc to capture the onset of non-linearity, and plot the
reduced bispectrum

Q(θ) =

ˆB(k1, k2, θ)

ˆP NL(k1) ˆP NL(k2) + ˆP NL(k1) ˆP NL(k3) + ˆP NL(k2) ˆP NL(k3)

,

(6)

where ˆB is the estimated bispectrum from a simulation. The deﬁni-
tion of Q(θ) divides out much of the sensitivity to the power spec-
trum realisation. Accordingly, when we plot this quantity in Fig. 4,
each of the two individual ﬁxed simulations exhibit ﬂuctuations of
an amplitude comparable to that in traditional realisations. However,

c(cid:13) 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–5

4

Angulo & Pontzen

Figure 4. Same as Fig. 2 but for the reduced bispectrum. The conﬁguration
plotted corresponds to triangles with two sides ﬁxed at k1 = 0.02 hMpc−1 and
k2 = 0.04 hMpc−1, with their angle ranging from 0 to π. The r.m.s. deviation
is 0.14 σ.

Figure 5. Same as Fig. 2 but for the abundance of FoF halos. The r.m.s. devi-
ation is 0.47 σ – this is a signiﬁcant improvement over two randomly chosen
ensemble members (0.70σ) albeit not as decisive as in the earlier cases of the
power spectrum, correlation function and bispectrum.

We will now explore the technique from an analytic perspective. The
pairing approach has recently been introduced and discussed else-
where (Pontzen et al. 2015, see particularly section II.C) and so our
focus is on the power spectrum ﬁxing. Sampling from the ˆP(k)-ﬁxed
pdf Pr f , deﬁned by equation (3), is not equivalent to sampling from
the true Gaussian Prg, equation (2). The aim of this Section is there-
fore to motivate more precisely why Pr f has reproduced the ensemble
average results of Prg.

Expectation values of any n-point expression with respect to ei-
ther Pr f or Prg will be denoted by hδi1 ··· δini f and hδi1 ··· δinig respec-
tively. In the case of the ﬁxed distribution, we can use expression (4)
to write that

i1 · ·· δL
hδL

ini f = pPi1 · ·· Pin

(2π)N

Z 2π

0

dN θ exp(cid:16)iθi1

+ ··· + iθin(cid:17) ,

(7)

where the integral is over the possible θ values for all N modes.

For n = 1 the single phase factor exp(iθ1) averages to zero, and
consequently hδL
i i f = 0. This result extends to any n-point
correlation for n odd; we therefore need only consider the even-n
cases further.

i ig = hδL

For n = 2, the properties of the two pdfs are indistinguishable:

i δL
hδL

i δL
j i f = hδL

j ig = δi,− jPi,

(8)
where δi,− j is the Kronecker delta equal to 1 when i = − j and 0 other-
wise, and there is no sum implied over repeated indices. The Gaussian
result is standard, and the ﬁxed result is obtained by seeing that when
i , − j, the i and j phase integrals in equation (7) evaluate to zero. For
n = 4, the Gaussian result follows by Wick’s theorem:

j δL

i |4i f = P2

i δL
k δL
l i f = hδL

the ﬁxed case we ﬁnd that h|δL
i . Overall the result is therefore
k δL
l ig − 2(cid:16)δi jδklδi,−k + δikδ jlδi,− j + δilδ jkδi,− j(cid:17) P2
i δL
hδL
i ,
(10)
assuming that we have P0 = 0 (otherwise a further term is necessary
to divide the correction by 3 in the i = j = k = l = 0 case).

j δL

The correction (10) is consistent with how the power spectrum

of a ﬁxed realisation must have zero variance:

(cid:28)(cid:16)|δL

i |2 − Pi(cid:17)2(cid:29) f

= (cid:28)(cid:16)|δL

i |2 − Pi(cid:17)2(cid:29)g − 2P2

i = 0.

(11)

Evidently there is a dramatic diﬀerence — intentionally so — be-
tween ﬁxed and Gaussian statistics: in the linear regime, the ﬁxed P(k)
approach reproduces the ensemble mean with no variance. While this
also means that the input trispectrum is unavoidably non-Gaussian by
equation (10), the correction only appears when all indices always
take the same value (up to sign). We can now explain why most mea-
sures of the output non-linear density ﬁeld are extremely insensitive
to this change.

The non-linear density ﬁeld can be written in standard perturba-

tion theory (SPT, e.g. Bernardeau et al. 2002) as
F(3)
i jklδL

F(2)
i jk δL

= δL

δNL
i

j δL
k

j δL

k δL
l

i +Xjk

+Xi jkl

+ · ··

(12)

where F(n)
for n = 2, 3, ··· are the discretised version of the SPT ker-
···
nels which in turn are homogeneous, degree-zero, continuous func-
tions of the wavevectors. As a concrete example of an observable
correlation in this formalism, we can consider the one-loop SPT non-
linear power spectrum with Gaussian statistics:

i δL
hδL

j δL

k δL

l ig = δi,− jδk,−lPiPk + δi,−kδ j,−lPiP j + δi,−lδ j,−kPiP j.

(9)

PNL,g
i

The ﬁxed result, again obtained through use of (7) is similar to the
Gaussian case because indices must be “paired up” for their phase
integrals to be non-vanishing. The only diﬀerence arises in the case
where δiδ jδkδl = |δi|4; here, the Gaussian result is h|δL
i but in

i |4ig = 3P2

i δNL

−i ig ≃ Pi +Xjklm(cid:16)F(2)

+ 2δi,− jF(3)
≡ hδNL
iklm(cid:17) ×
(cid:16)δ j,−kδl,−mP jPl + δ j,−lδk,−mP jPk + δ j,−mδk,−lP jPk(cid:17) .

i jk F(2)
−i,lm

(13)

Momentum conservation implicit in the F(n)
s and explicit in the Kro-
···
necker deltas eliminate three of the summations, so that the overall

c(cid:13) 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–5

summation is over just one index. Therefore the magnitude of the
one-loop terms scales proportionally to NkP(k) where k is a charac-
teristic scale and Nk is the number of modes around that scale (as
deﬁned by the range of modes over which the relevant F is large). In
a continuum limit (i.e. as the box size L → ∞), Nk turns into the ap-
propriate Fourier-space volume. These simple scaling behaviours are
assured by the degree-zero homogeneity of the F(n) functions.

In the ﬁxed case, expression (13) must be corrected by using

relation (10), giving
≃ PNL,g

PNL,f
i

i

− 12F(3)

i,−i,i,−iP2

i − 2Xj

i j j F(2)
F(2)

−i,− j,− jP2
j,

(14)

which is valid at one-loop order for the case ki , 0. Here most of
the Kronecker deltas have already been summed out; the remaining
summation, by momentum conservation in F(2), only has a contribu-
tion at the index j with k j = ki/2. The overall contribution of the
correction (14) is therefore suppressed relative to the physical terms
in equation (13) by O(Nk).

For the bispectrum with Gaussian statistics, we have
Bg
i jk ≡ hδNL
≃ 2F(2)

i δNL
j δNL
k ig
i,− j,−k P jPk + δ j,−kXl

F(2)
il,−lP jPl + cyc. perms in i jk

(15)

= Bg

to one-loop order. The second term contributes only for ki = 0. The
correction is now
i jk − 4F(2)

B f
(16)
i jk
and is non-zero only in the case where k j = kk = −ki/2 or ki = 0 (or
a cyclic permutation of those conﬁgurations). All other bispectra are
unaﬀected by the changed statistics at this order.

j δ jk − cyc. perms in i jk,

j δ jk − 2F(2)

i,− j,− j P2

i, j,− j P2

For higher order perturbation theory (or higher-n correlations)
the overall pattern established here will remain: the linear n-point
correction term (10) will always involve at least one extra Kronecker
delta relative to the physical part (9). For observable correlations, this
implies that either the eﬀect is diluted by a power of a large factor
Nk (as in the case of the one-loop power spectrum) or plays a role
only in a measure-zero part of the continuous function being studied
(as in the case of the one-loop bispectrum). The intentionally-reduced
power spectrum variance (11) falls into the latter category, since it is
only the diagonal part of the full covariance that is altered.

4 CONCLUSIONS

In this Letter we have explored a new method to suppress the impact
of under-sampling in simulations. We have tested the non-linear dark
matter power spectrum, the multipoles of the redshift-space correla-
tion function, the reduced bispectrum and the halo mass function. In
all cases, the method is unbiased and strongly suppresses unwanted
variance.

By ﬁxing the initial amplitude of Fourier modes to the cosmic
mean, variance has been eliminated on linear scales. In the non-linear
regime, the suppression is imperfect because phase-correlation eﬀects
begin to impact on the evolved amplitudes. However by also pair-
ing the simulation with a phase-reversed counterpart (Pontzen et al.
2015) we can average away the leading-order imperfections of this
type; ﬂuctuations about the ensemble mean are then near-identical in
magnitude but opposite in sign. Residual noise could be reduced ar-
bitrarily by considering an ensemble of paired-and-ﬁxed simulations
with diﬀerent realisations of the initial random phases.

Paired simulations can be used with purely Gaussian initial con-
ditions if desired, retaining many of the small-scale beneﬁts we have
discussed. Conversely, single unpaired simulations with ﬁxed ampli-
tudes can be used, retaining the large-scale beneﬁts. Whenever ﬁxing

c(cid:13) 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–5

Simulations with suppressed variance

5

is applied, the ensemble statistics are not strictly Gaussian. The local
one-point pdf is, however, unaﬀected (Figure 1) and furthermore our
numerical results directly show that a variety of statistics attain the
correct, unbiased ensemble mean value. We gave an analytic discus-
sion of why the non-Gaussianity does not impinge, arguing that the
errors are either strongly suppressed by the large density of modes
or, in other cases, aﬀect only a measure-zero set of correlations. Fix-
ing the power spectrum does need to be approached with care but our
results underline that it can be a valuable technique.

Straightforward applications are in any comparison to analytic
models, in characterisation of the performance of data modelling,
in emulators and in development of ﬁtting functions for non-linear
statistics. It will be particularly valuable to couple the technique to
high-resolution simulations incorporating baryonic eﬀects to measure
galaxy bias, free of the usual diﬃculties of large-scale variance. Fur-
thermore the method could be used in combination with rescaling
techniques to quickly predict galaxy clustering statistics as a func-
tion of cosmological parameters (Angulo & White 2010). All these
are crucial steps towards a comprehensive exploitation of upcoming
survey data.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We would like to thank Jon´as Chavez-Montero for providing us
with access to the ensemble of COLA simulations. We thank the
Lorentz Center and the organisers of the “Computational Cosmol-
ogy” workshop where this study was initiated, and Oliver Hahn, Car-
los Hernandez-Monteagudo, Hiranya Peiris, Anˇze Slosar, and Mat-
teo Viel for helpful discussions. REA acknowledges support from
AYA2015-66211-C2-2. AP is supported by the Royal Society.

REFERENCES

Angulo R. E., Hilbert S., 2015, MNRAS, 448, 364
Angulo R. E., White S. D. M., 2010, MNRAS, 401, 1796
Bagla J. S., Prasad J., Khandai N., 2009, MNRAS, 395, 918
Baldi M., Villaescusa-Navarro F., Viel M., Puchwein E., Springel
V., Moscardini L., 2014, MNRAS, 440, 75
Bernardeau F., Colombi S., Gazta˜naga E., Scoccimarro R., 2002,
Phys. Rep., 367, 1
Carlson J., White M., Padmanabhan N., 2009, Phys. Rev. D, 80,
043531
Davis M., Efstathiou G., Frenk C. S., White S. D. M., 1985, ApJ,
292, 371
Howlett C., Manera M., Percival W. J., 2015, Astronomy and Com-
puting, 12, 109
Koda J., Blake C., Beutler F., Kazin E., Marin F., 2015, ArXiv e-
prints
Kuhlen M., Vogelsberger M., Angulo R., 2012, Physics of the Dark
Universe, 1, 50
Manera M. et al., 2015, MNRAS, 447, 437
Overzier R. A., Guo Q., Kauﬀmann G., De Lucia G., Bouwens R.,
Lemson G., 2009, MNRAS, 394, 577
Pontzen A., Slosar A., Roth N., Peiris H. V., 2015, ArXiv e-prints
Rasera Y., Corasaniti P.-S., Alimi J.-M., Bouillot V., Reverdy V.,
Balm`es I., 2014, MNRAS, 440, 1420
Schneider A. et al., 2015, ArXiv e-prints
Springel V., 2005, MNRAS, 364, 1105
Takahashi R. et al., 2009, ApJ, 700, 479
Tassev S., Zaldarriaga M., Eisenstein D. J., 2013, J. Cosmology As-
tropart. Phys., 6, 036

