NIKHEF/2016-012

Unitarity methods for Mellin moments of Drell-Yan cross

sections

Domenico Bonocore1, Eric Laenen1,2,3, Robbert Rietkerk1,2

1Nikhef, Science Park 105, NL–1098 XG Amsterdam, The Netherlands

2ITFA, University of Amsterdam, Science Park 904, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

3ITF, Utrecht University, Leuvenlaan 4, Utrecht, The Netherlands

Abstract

We develop a method for computing Mellin moments of single inclusive cross sections
such as Drell-Yan production directly from forward scattering diagrams, by invoking uni-
tarity in the form of cutting equations. We provide a diagram-independent prescription for
eliminating contributions from unwanted cuts at the level of an expansion in the reciprocal
ω = 1/z variable. The modiﬁed sum over powers of ω produces the result from physical cuts
only, with the nth coeﬃcient precisely equal to the nth Mellin moment of the cross section.
We demonstrate and validate our method for representative one- and two-loop diagrams.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
6
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
p
e
h
[
 
 

1
v
2
5
2
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Introduction

The eﬃcient computation for higher order QCD corrections for scattering processes has been
a mainstay of research in theoretical particle physics for decades, as this directly impacts the
potential for discovery at colliders: the more precisely signal and background are computed,
the more signiﬁcant comparison of theory with data can be. In recent years a notable increase
in computational capacity has taken place, spurred largely by the development of unitarity
techniques for computing scattering amplitudes. The ability to determine a scattering amplitude
from its poles and branch cuts [1–3] has been a watershed in these eﬀorts, especially for one-loop
high-multiplicity processes.

Unitarity methods for few external legs but at higher loop have proven to be highly valuable
as well. Reverse unitarity techniques have been important in relating real emission amplitudes
to virtual ones [4] for two and three-loop calculations. An inspiration for the present paper
is the body of work on the computation of the 2- and 3-loop splitting functions and deep-
inelastic scattering (DIS) Wilson coeﬃcients [5–10]. Computing the DIS structure functions
by moments has been a very succesful approach for massless partons [5, 8, 11–14], and also for
heavy quarks [15–23]. For the inclusive DIS structure functions it is possible to use the optical
theorem to compute all the cuts of the forward scattering process, and directly extract the
Mellin moments of the coeﬃcients. In essence, from unitarity considerations, one may expand
the forward scattering amplitude in reciprocal powers of the Bjorken scaling variable x, the
coeﬃcient at order n then being the nth Mellin moment of the coeﬃcient function.

In this paper we aim to generalise this method to a single-inclusive cross section, speciﬁcally
the Drell-Yan cross section, which is then prototypical for other processes such as Higgs pro-
duction in the large top mass limit, for which remarkable results for high-order corrections to
Higgs have recently been achieved [24–29]. The optical theorem does not directly apply to the
Drell-Yan cross section, not being a fully inclusive observable. We show in this paper that it
is nevertheless possible to compute the Mellin moments of the Drell-Yan cross section directly
from forward diagrams, using unitarity and an expansion in reciprocal powers of z. The key
aspect of our method is the eﬃcient subtraction of unwanted cuts, through complex-valued
shifts of the moment variable n and through a replacement rule for harmonic sums.

The paper is organised as follows. In section 2 we review the relevant aspects of unitarity
and the optical theorem, and their role in DIS. In section 3 we treat the one-loop corrections
in “scalar” Drell-Yan correction with our new method in some detail, highlighting key features.
In section 4 we test our method at two loops, showing how our methods work for representative
two-loop forward scattering scalar diagrams. Here we show explicitly how remove contributions
from unphysical cuts, such that those from physical cuts are unaltered. We conclude with a
summary and some remarks towards further development.

2 Forward amplitudes and unitarity

In this section we outline the general ideas of the paper, postponing technical details to the
following sections, where one and two loop examples will be discussed.

We start in section 2.1 reviewing the essential points that make the optical theorem successful
for DIS. Then, in section 2.2 we move to the Drell-Yan case, stressing the diﬀerences that make
a generalization of the DIS method highly non-trivial. Among these, the most problematic one

1

is the presence of unphysical cuts, absent in DIS, that need to be removed from the discontinuity
of the forward amplitude. Therefore in section 2.3 we classify all unphysical cuts, showing that
most of them either vanish or are easily treated. For the remaining unphysical cuts, we outline
a solution in section 2.4, referring the reader to section 3 and section 4 for more technical
explanations.

2.1 DIS and the optical theorem

Let us ﬁrst review the role of the unitarity, in the form of the optical theorem, in deep-inelastic
scattering through oﬀ-shell photon exchange. Our exposition follows largely that of ref. [30]. It

is well-known that the fully inclusive cross section for this process, e(l) + P (p) −→ e(l(cid:48)) + X,

can be written in the form

dσ =

1
2s

1
Q4 Lµν(l, l

(cid:48)

)Wµν(p, q)

d3l(cid:48)
|l(cid:48)
|

,

(2.1)

with q = l − l(cid:48), and with Wµν (Lµν) the hadronic (leptonic) tensor. They are deﬁned as

Lµν(l, l

(cid:48)

) =

Wµν(p, q) =

e2

(cid:48)
ν + lνl

8π2(cid:0)lµl
8π(cid:88)n (cid:104)P (p)|J

1

(cid:48)
µ − ηµνl · l
†
µ(0)|n(cid:105)(2π)4δ(4)(pn − p − q)(cid:104)n|Jν(0)|P (p)(cid:105) ,

(cid:48)(cid:1) ,

(2.2)

where implicit spin quantum numbers in the external states are summed over. Note that the
sum over ﬁnal states |n(cid:105) is fully inclusive in terms of QCD as both explicit momenta p and q are
incoming. Current conversation and parity invariance in both indices then imply the structure

Wµν(p, q) = −(cid:18)ηµν −

qµqν

q2 (cid:19) W1(x, Q2) +(cid:18)pµ −

qµp · q

q2 (cid:19)(cid:18)pν −

qνp · q

q2 (cid:19) W2(x, Q2) ,

(2.3)

so that the structure of the proton is encoded into two scalar functions that depend on the
variables

Q2 = −q2,

x =

Q2
2p · q

.

(2.4)

The optical theorem applies to the hadronic tensor Wµν, since the sum in eq. (2.2) is fully

inclusive so that we can write

where Tµν is the forward Compton amplitude γ∗(q) + P (p) −→ γ∗(q) + P (p), having the same

tensor structure as in eq. (2.3) but now in terms of the scalar functions

Wµν(p, q) = 2 Im Tµν(p, q) ,

(2.5)

Ti(cid:18)ω =

1
x

, q2(cid:19) ,

i = 1, 2 .

(2.6)

Note that we have chosen to indicate the functional dependence in terms of the reciprocal x
variable, for reasons we discuss below. The functions Wi and Ti both have cuts starting at
branch points at x = ±1, corresponding to the kinematical conditions for normal thresholds,
(p ± q)2 > 0. For the Wi(x, Q2) functions, the cut then runs from x = −1 to x = 1. For the
Ti(ω, Q2) functions, consequently, the cuts lie along the ω-intervals (−∞,−1] and [1,∞). These
are also the only cuts, and we have in general for the Ti

Ti(−ω, Q2) = Ti(ω, Q2) .

2

(2.7)

Figure 1: Branch cut structure of Ti(ω, Q2) with the two contours used for T (n)
(Q2). On the
left the contour C0 wraps around the origin, while on the right the contour C1 encloses the two
branch cuts. Note that the combination ω−n−1T (ω) of eq. (2.8) has an additional pole at the
origin.

i

One can now compute Mellin moments of the Wi(x, Q2) functions by expanding the Ti(ω, Q2)
amplitudes. The nth derivative of Ti at ω = 0 may be rewritten by Cauchy’s theorem in terms
of the contour in ﬁg. 1a

T (n)
i

(Q2) ≡

1
n!

dnTi(ω, Q2)

dωn

=(cid:73)C0

dω
2πi

−n−1Ti(ω, Q2) .

ω

(2.8)

The contour C0 may be deformed into the contour C1 shown in ﬁg. 1b. Then, using eq. (2.7),
we have

T (n)
i

(Q2) =

(1 + (−1)n)

2πi

dω ω

−n−1 Disc

ω

Ti(ω, Q2) ,

where the discontinuity of a function in the variable x is deﬁned in general by

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)ω=0
(cid:90) ∞

1

(2.9)

(2.10)

(2.11)

Disc

x

f (x) = lim

η→0(cid:0)f (x + iη) − f (x − iη)(cid:1) .

The presence of the factor (1 + (−1)n) in eq. (2.9) implies that odd series coeﬃcients vanish.
For n even, instead, using the optical theorem in the form of eq. (2.5), and changing integration
variables to x = 1/ω, we get

T (n)
i

(Q2) =

1

π(cid:90) 1

0

dx xn−1Wi(x, Q2) =

1

πMn(cid:2)Wi(Q2)(cid:3) ,

where the second equality deﬁnes the Mellin transform Mn. Thus, indeed, the expansion of the
forward scattering amplitude in ω yields the Mellin moments of the cross section.

A few remarks are in order. This way of using the optical theorem, computing directly
the Mellin moments of the DIS structure functions by expansion in 1/x, has been marvellously
successful for 2- and 3-loop calculations for DIS [5–7]. Translating back to momentum space is
readily done, and produces known combinations of functions (Harmonic Polylogarithms (HPL’s)
[31]). The presence of the branch points at ω = ±1 and the analytical behaviour of the Ti(ω, Q2)
near ω = 0 is very helpful towards the consistency and also practicality of the method.

The question whether the DIS method can be generalized to semi-inclusive cross sections
such as Drell-Yan and Higgs production will be addressed in the next sections, and is indeed
the central issue of the present paper.

3

ω−11C0(a)ω−11C1C1(b)2.2 Analytical structure of one-particle inclusive processes

We consider the inclusive production of an electroweak boson V of invariant mass Q2 by quark-
antiquark annihilation

q(p) + ¯q(¯p) −→ V + X ,

(2.12)

where X represents any partonic contribution to the ﬁnal state and the vector boson V may
be an oﬀ-shell photon γ∗, or an on-shell W ± or Z boson. As such, this process is described by
two scales only, the mass Q2 and the squared partonic center-of-mass energy s, from which it
is possible to deﬁne the dimensionless variables

ω =

1
z

,

z =

Q2
s

,

(2.13)

where z is the variable analogous to the Bjorken variable x for DIS. In the following we will focus
on the case of an oﬀ-shell photon, referring to this process as Drell-Yan. Apart from interesting
in its own right, this process is prototypical for many other partonic processes relevant at hadron
colliders, especially Higgs boson production via gluon fusion. Diﬀerences with the Drell-Yan case
resides only in numerator factors which go along for the ride in our method. Before discussing
how the generalisation of the DIS formalism to the Drell-Yan case can be set up, let us review
those similarities and diﬀerences between the two processes that are relevant for our purposes.

At face value, the diﬀerences seem not very large. Focusing on the partonic part, the set of
diagrams for the Drell-Yan process can be obtained from the DIS ones, by crossing the exchanged
oﬀ-shell photon to the ﬁnal state, and the outgoing quark to the initial state. However, this
crossing has signiﬁcant consequences. First, the oﬀ-shellness of the photon becomes time-like
and can be eﬀectively regarded as a mass. Therefore the forward amplitude q(p) + ¯q(¯p) −→
q(p) + ¯q(¯p) will contain a massive propagator. Then, most importantly, the vector boson must
be present in the ﬁnal state. Hence, the process is not fully inclusive like DIS, but only single-
particle inclusive, so that the optical theorem, as the simplest realization of unitarity, cannot
be used and the cross section is not given by the imaginary part of the full forward amplitude.
A further complication arises when moving to Mellin space. Looking at the analytical
structure of the DIS forward amplitude, branch cuts in the ω-plane are at (−∞,−1] and [1,∞).
Due to the symmetry in eq. (2.7) of the forward amplitude, one may consider only the cut along
the positive real axis, which can be eventually converted to a Mellin transform, as discussed
in the previous subsection. In the Drell-Yan case instead the forward amplitude generally will
have more branch cuts, in particular also along (−∞, 0] and [0,∞) and no symmetry relates the
forward amplitudes with opposite value of ω. A new strategy is needed if we want to extract
the series coeﬃcients of the forward amplitude expanding it around the branch point ω = 0.

These considerations suggest that extending the DIS techniques for directly computing
Mellin moments to the Drell-Yan case is not straightforward. However, we shall see that it
is possible when using unitarity cuts. Let us discuss the key aspects of this in somewhat more
detail.

The optical theorem relates a cross section to the imaginary part of the relevant forward
amplitude. At the same time, this imaginary part is, by the Cutkosky rules [32], equal to the

4

sum over all cuts of the amplitude. For a fully inclusive processes like DIS, these cuts correspond
to the phase space integration of the squared matrix elements of the process. For Drell-Yan
instead this is not the case, as cuts that do not cut the massive photon are not to be included
for the cross-section. However, the use of unitarity cuts is considerably more general, and
holds on diagram-by-diagram basis. In general, branch cut discontinuities in diﬀerent channels
correspond to diﬀerent cuts of the diagram [33, 34]

DiscF =(cid:88)k

Cutk F ,

(2.14)

for any Feynman diagram F. Our approach exploits this fact fully when F is a forward scattering
diagram.

Our goal is to compute (moments of) the cross section from the forward amplitude. The
cross section can be reconstructed from the discontinuity of the forward amplitude across the
physical branch cut.
In general an amplitude has discontinuities around unphysical branch
cuts as well, and these must be subtracted. This does not seem a very eﬃcient procedure,
as it apparently requires one to compute unphysical-cut diagrams nonetheless. Moreover, the
unphysical cuts may be even more complicated than the physical cuts. However, as we will see
in the following sections, one can modify the analytic structure of the forward amplitude such
that its discontinuity is given by the sum of physical cuts only. In particular, we will see that,
after moving to Mellin space, it is possible to automatically select the physical cut without the
need to subtract (and compute) the unphysical cuts.

Let us ﬁrst review the classiﬁcation of the cuts appearing in the forward amplitude of the

Drell-Yan process.

2.3 Classiﬁcation of Drell-Yan cuts

The set of diagrams we would like to discuss are those required in a NNLO calculation, though
many of the features will be valid also at higher order. To set up our classiﬁcation, we regard
forward diagrams as amplitudes that may depend on diﬀerent channels, and therefore can be
cut in all possible ways, as long as the diagram is cut into two (connected) subgraphs. In this
regard, we distinguish four diﬀerent classes of cuts, depicted in ﬁg. 2 and denote them as vertex,
s-channel, t-channel and u-channel cuts. Of course, for a forward amplitude and with on-shell
external lines the only possible invariant is s, but the nomenclature will be useful, and is based
on the case when ﬁnal momenta are diﬀerent from the initial ones, such that also the t and u
channels would be open.

The s-channel cuts are the only ones that can be interpreted as a phase space integration of
squared matrix elements. Among these, physical cuts, i.e. those that contribute to the cross-
section, are only those s-channel cuts that pass through the massive photon, and we thus call
massive s-channel cuts. More generally, we call massive (massless) every cut that does (does
not) cut the massive boson propagator. At ﬁrst it seems that the number of unphysical cuts
might grow dramatically with the order of the computation, making it diﬃcult to control them.
However, a number of simpliﬁcations are possible, making some of these cuts give a vanishing
contribution.

The vertex cut in ﬁg. 2a vanishes, because it measures the discontinuity of the forward
amplitude in the p2-channel. But this discontinuity is zero, because the forward amplitude does

5

Figure 2: Generic cuts of forward aplitudes with two initial massless particles with momenta p
and ¯p. The cuts of type (a) and (c) vanish by the general cutting rules. Note that the u-channel
cut diﬀers from the t-channel cut by interchange of the two outgoing momenta.

not actually depend on this variable due to the on-shell condition p2 = 0. The same holds
when any other of the four vertices is cut. Furthermore, by the same token, the t-channel cut
in ﬁg. 2c vanishes as well. This leaves only the s- and u-channel cuts to be considered: the
massless s-channel cuts and the (massive and massless) u-channel cuts. In section 4.1 we will
treat these unphysical cut diagrams in greater detail and in speciﬁc examples. In the following
subsection we ﬁrst review the general ideas how to deal with these cuts.

2.4 Extracting the physical cuts from the forward amplitude

At this point we make an important observation. The forward amplitude carries more infor-
mation than needed; indeed we are only interested in its imaginary part. We have the freedom
to modify the amplitude, as long as the branch cut structure remains the same. For instance,
adding a constant or even an analytic function will not aﬀect the physical information one
wishes to extract from its cuts. This consideration leads us to disregard lower order Mellin
moments. Indeed, assuming that the forward amplitude can be expanded around ω = 0 as

f (ω) =

∞

(cid:88)n=n0

cn ωn ,

n0 ≥ 0

(2.15)

its series coeﬃcients cn will be deﬁned only for n ≥ n0. However, any shift in n0 making the sum
start from a new positive integer is equivalent to adding to the original f (ω) simply polynomials
in ω, which does not aﬀect the branch cut structure. Therefore, we conclude that no physical
information is carried in the lower bound of the sum, and henceforth we shall omit it in series
expansions except where necessary. We can even take a further step in this line of reasoning.
Since we are interested in extracting the discontinuity of the forward amplitude only across the
physical branch cut, we have the freedom to redeﬁne the forward amplitude, modifying also its
branch cut structure, as long as this leaves the physical branch cut unaltered. Also, poles in ω
can be removed from (2.15) because such poles do not correspond to physical cuts. These steps
form the essence of the strategy we shall implement to deal with the unphysical cuts.

We start with the ﬁrst two types of cuts presented in section 2.3: massless s-channel cuts
and massless u-channel cuts. These classes of cut diagrams contain factors ω, where  = 4−d
is
the dimensional regulator. Hence, they belong to branch cuts starting at ω = 0. As such, those
are the cuts that prevent the forward amplitude to be written as a power series in ω around
ω = 0. We introduce a shifting procedure, through which it will be possible to deﬁne a new

2

6

p¯pp¯p(a)vertexcutp¯pp¯p(b)s-channelcutp¯pp¯p(c)t-channelcutp¯p¯pp(d)u-channelcutFigure 3: Diagrams needed for the one-loop DY cross sections. Diagrams obtained by complex
conjugation or exchanging p ↔ ¯p are omitted. Arrows on the lines indicate momentum ﬂow.

will be further discussed in section 3.4.

function (cid:101)f (ω) with no branch point at ω = 0. This will be necessary already at one loop and

The most diﬃcult kind of unphysical cut appears only from two loops: the massive u-channel
cut, because it corresponds to a branch cut in the forward amplitude starting at ω = −1.
We shall go beyond the simple shifting procedure and subtract the contributions from this
cut directly in Mellin moment space, following the extending reasoning above. We are able to
compose a dictionary of replacements for harmonic sums, which may be applied to any diagram.
This procedure will be ﬁrst discussed in section 4.2 and is applied to a two-loop crossed box in
section 4.3.2.

After all unphysical cuts are removed, one can repeat the procedure carried out for DIS in
ﬁg. 1. This time only the branch cut [1,∞) is present and the generalization of eq. (2.11) (for
both even and odd Mellin moments) reads

F (n)
phys =

1
2πi Mn[Cutphys F] ,

(2.16)

where F (n)

phys are the series coeﬃcients of the forward amplitude modiﬁed such that it contains
only the physical cut. Let us now turn to a more explicit illustration of these methods at
one-loop.

3 Drell-Yan at one loop

Here we develop the concepts from section 2 for the one-loop Drell-Yan cross section. The
standard approach requires the evaluation of the matrix elements for real and virtual corrections,
and the subsequent integration over the phase space. This requires the computation of three
phase space integrals, represented in ﬁg. 3, which in the language of section 2 are massive s-
channel cuts. In order to minimise technical complications we will henceforth omit numerator
factors in those diagrams, i.e. we restrict to the scalar case, as these are anyway irrelevant for
illustrating our method. This is motivated by the fact that the analytical structure of Feynman
integrals in QCD arises in essence from denominators in diagrams.1

In the next three subsections the calculation of the scalar equivalent of the diagrams in ﬁg. 3
is presented, verifying the cutting equation in Mellin space in the form of eq. (2.16). In this
process we encounter two relatively harmless types of unphysical cuts and we show how to deal
with them as discussed in section 2. In particular, we devote one subsection to the notion of

1We have of course checked that the well-known one-loop results for Drell-Yan [35] are recovered after restoring

the numerators.

7

p¯pp¯pp¯pp¯pp¯p¯ppFigure 4: Cutting equation for the one-loop triangle diagram. The right-hand side features
both Cut1 T , a physical massive s-channel cut, and Cut2 T , an unphysical massless s-channel
cut.

the shifting procedure, which is needed to remove both kinds of cuts. Given the simplicity of
those one-loop calculations, the computation is actually performed to all orders in . However,
extracting the series coeﬃcients of the ω expansion exactly in  is not feasible at higher loops.
Therefore, in the last subsection section we illustrate how to compute the Mellin moments using
IBP identities, by the example of the one-loop box diagram.

3.1 Triangle diagram

The simplest of the three diagrams that contribute to the one-loop Drell-Yan forward amplitude
involves a triangle loop. The cutting equation for this graph is schematically depicted in ﬁg. 4,
showing both a physical and an unphysical cut. It appears that in order to compute the physical
Cut1 T contribution one would need to ‘subtract’ the unphysical Cut2 T contribution from the
full discontinuity Disc T .

To verify explicitly the presence of an unphysical cut, let us compute both the forward

amplitude and the physical cut diagram. The forward amplitude T reads

T = C() Q2
1
2 (−ω)

=

s2

s − Q2 (cid:90)

− ω

,

ω − 1

d4−2k

k2 (k − p)2 (k − p − ¯p)2

(3.1)

(3.2)

.

where the prefactor coming from the loop integration is given by

C() =

1

iπ2−rΓ

, rΓ =

Γ(1 − )2 Γ(1 + )

Γ(1 − 2)

and we have set µ2 = Q2. We rescale forward diagrams F by their mass dimension sdim[F ], such

that they become dimensionless. Applying the Cutkosky cutting rule, the physical cut reads

Cut1 T = C() Q2 (−2πi) s2 δ(s − Q2)(cid:90)

2πi
2 (−z) δ(1 − z) ,

= −

d4−2k

k2 (k − p)2 (k − p − ¯p)2

(3.3)

where we expressed the result as function of z = 1/ω. Clearly, the discontinuity of the forward

amplitude is not given by the physical cut alone, as can be seen by the presence of (−ω)− in
the forward amplitude.2 Indeed, upon expanding this factor in , it is evident that T has a
2The importance of keeping track of such factors z− has recently also been analysed in the context of e+e−

annihilation at two loops with diﬀerential equations [36].

8

Discp¯pp¯p=p¯pp¯p+p¯pp¯pbranch cut for ω < 0, whereas Cut1 T is diﬀerent from zero only at ω = 1. Therefore, to recover
the physical cut diagram, we should compute also the unphysical Cut2 T . As we shall see, this
can be bypassed in Mellin space.

We start computing the Mellin moments of the physical cut

Mn[Cut1 T ] = −

zn−1(−z) δ(1 − z) = −

−iπ ,

2πi
2 e

(3.4)

2πi

2 (cid:90) 1

0

where the phase e−iπ is due to the minus sign in (−z) and can be ﬁxed by keeping track of

the Feynman iη in the propagators. Then, we would like to compare eq. (3.4) with the series
coeﬃcients cn of the forward amplitude expanded in powers of ω. However, as can be seen in
eq. (3.1), this expansion cannot be perfomed, since T contains a non-integer power of ω. This
is of course expected: the forward amplitude has a branch point at ω = 0 and therefore cannot
be expanded around that point. However, the structure of this branch cut starting from the

origin is simply given by (−ω)−. Therefore, we apply the following procedure. We write a

series representation for the other factors, to get
e−iπ
2

T = −

ωn− .

∞

(cid:88)n=1

(3.5)

Then, we shift n → n +  in the summand, leaving the lower bound of the sum unaltered. This

(3.7)

(3.8)

deﬁnes a new function (cid:101)T

e−iπ
2

∞

(cid:88)n=1

ωn =

e−iπ
2

ω
ω − 1

,

(3.6)

(cid:101)T = −

with no branch cut from the origin, but with the physical pole in ω = 1 still present. This
procedure will be also used in section 3.3 for the crossed box diagram, where a non-trivial n-

dependence of the summand will make the shift less trivial. Thus, writing (cid:101)T =(cid:80)n(cid:101)cnωn, we

ﬁnd

Comparing eq. (3.4) and eq. (3.7) we get

(cid:101)cn = −

e−iπ
2

.

which veriﬁes the cutting equation in Mellin space in the form of eq. (2.16).

1
2πi Mn[Cut1 T ] ,

(cid:101)cn =

The triangle diagram is the easiest example that exhibits an unphysical cut and where it is
possible to test our Mellin space approach. In the next subsection we discuss an example with
non-trivial n-dependence.

3.2 Box diagram

For the box diagram B1 all unphysical cuts vanish at the outset. The only cut, shown in ﬁg. 5,
is the physical massive s-channel cut, which we call Cut1 B1.

9

Figure 5: Cutting equation for the one-loop box diagram.

As we did for the triangle diagram, let us compute explicitly the forward amplitude B1 and

the cut diagram Cut1 B1. From a direct computation we have
d4−2k

B1 = C() Q2 s2 (cid:90)

=

Γ(1 − 2)

 Γ(1 − ) Γ(2 − )

((k + ¯p)2)2 (k + p + ¯p)2 (k2 − Q2)

ω2

2F1(1, 2 + ; 2 − ; ω) ,

(3.9)

where we expressed the result as a function of ω = s/Q2. The cut diagram Cut1 B1 is easily
computed as well. It is deﬁned as

Cut1 B1 = C() Q2 (−2πi)2 (cid:90) d4−2k

δ+(k2) δ+((p + ¯p − k)2 − Q2)

(k − p)2 (k − p)2

.

(3.10)

As for all massive s-channel cuts, this integral is non-vanishing when s > Q2, and we can
perform the computation in the centre-of-mass frame, where

√s
2

p =

(1, 1, 0, 0) , ¯p =

√s
2

(1,−1, 0, 0) , k = k0(1, cos θ, sin θ, 0) .

Computing the integral in this frame yields

Cut1 B1 = −4iπ z (1 − z)

−1−2

θ(z) θ(1 − z)

Γ(2 + ) Γ(1 − )

,

(3.11)

(3.12)

where we expressed the result as a function of z = 1/ω. Note that both results (3.9) and (3.12)
are valid to all orders in .

We can now verify the cutting equation in Mellin space. Speciﬁcally, the forward amplitude

may be written as a series representation B1 =(cid:80)n cn ωn, where

cn =

Γ(1 − 2)

 Γ(1 − ) Γ(2 + )

Γ(n + )
Γ(n − )

,

while the Mellin transform of the cut diagram can be trivially computed and reads

Mn[Cut1 B1] = −4πi
Comparing eq. (3.13) and eq. (3.14) we ﬁnd

Γ(−2)

Γ(2 + ) Γ(1 − )

Γ(n + )
Γ(n − )

.

cn =

1
2πiMn[Cut1 B1]

(3.13)

(3.14)

(3.15)

which veriﬁes the cutting equation in Mellin space in the form of eq. (2.16).

This example has shown the cutting equation in Mellin space with a non-trivial n-dependence.
To increase further the complexity, in the next section we will compute the crossed-box diagram,
which has both non-vanishing unphysical cuts and non-constant moments.

10

Discp¯pp¯p=p¯pp¯p3.3 Crossed-box diagram

The crossed box B2 is the last contribution to the one-loop Drell-Yan forward amplitude. It
results from the normal box B1 by interchanging the two ﬁnal state momenta. This has the
consequence that the u-channel cut does not vanish so that the discontinuity of the forward
consists of two cuts, a physical and an unphysical cut, as shown in ﬁg. 6.

Figure 6: Cutting equation for the one-loop crossed-box diagram B2, featuring on the right-hand
side both the physical s-channel cut (Cut1 B2) and the unphysical u-channel cut (Cut2 B2).

As we did for the other two examples, we compute the forward amplitude and the cut

diagrams. The former it is deﬁned as

B2 = C() Q2 s2 (cid:90)

d4−2k

(k + p)2(k + ¯p)2(k + p + ¯p)2(k2 − Q2)

.

(3.16)

Again, applying standard techniques with Feynman parameters, it is possible to work out a
result for this integral exact in , which is

B2 =

2 Γ(1 − )2(cid:16)2F1(1, 1 + ; 1 − ; ω) − 2F1(1, 1; 1 − ; ω)(cid:17)

Γ(1 − 2) ω
ω1−
2

+

2F1(1, 1 − ; 1 − 2; ω) .

(3.17)

The computation of the physical cut Cut1 B2 (see ﬁg. 6) is essentially the same as the cut
diagram of the normal box B1, since it again has a two-particle phase space non-vanishing for
s > Q2. It reads

Cut1 B2 = C() Q2 s2 (−2πi)2(cid:90) d4−2k

δ+(k2)δ+((p + ¯p − k)2 − Q2)

(k − p)2 (k − ¯p)2

= −4iπ z (1 − z)

−1−2

θ(z) θ(1 − z)

 Γ(1 − ) Γ(1 + )

.

(3.18)

In order to clarify the structure of the cutting equation, we explicitly compute also the unphysi-
cal u-channel cut diagrams (the second diagram on the right-hand side of ﬁg. 6). This is deﬁned
as

Cut2 B2 = C()Q2 s2 (−2πi)2(cid:90) d4−2k

δ+(k2)δ+((p − ¯p − k)2)
(k − p)2 [(k + ¯p)2 − Q2]

.

(3.19)

In contrast with the s-channel cut, this is non-vanishing when s < 0, so we perform the com-
putation in the following frame:

√−s

2

p =

(1, 1, 0, 0) , ¯p =

√−s

2

(−1, 1, 0, 0) , k = k0(1, cos θ, sin θ, 0) .

(3.20)

11

Discp¯p¯pp=p¯p¯pp+p¯p¯ppPutting the right-most vertical propagator on-shell ﬁxes k0 =
frame yields

√−s
2 . The calculation in this

Cut2 B2 = 2πi e

−iπ

Γ(−)

Γ(1 − )2 Γ(1 + )

−1+

z

2F1(1, 1 − ; 1 − 2; 1/z) θ(−z) .

(3.21)

Combining eqs. (3.17), (3.18) and (3.21), it is straightforward to verify that

Disc

ω

B2 = Cut1 B2 + Cut2 B2 ,

(3.22)

as shown in ﬁg. 6, proving that in z-space both cuts are needed to reproduce the discontinuity.
Hence, in order to work out the physical cut contribution, one would need to subtract the
unphysical cut from the discontinuity of the forward diagram. As we shall see, this can be
bypassed in Mellin space by using the shifting procedure that we introduced in section 3.1 for
the triangle diagram.

We start writing eq. (3.17) as a series representation for the hypergeometric functions and

moving the overall ω inside the sums. This gives

B2 =

Γ(1 − 2)

2 Γ(1 − )(cid:34) ∞
(cid:88)n=1

−Γ(n)
Γ(n − )

ωn +

1

Γ(1 + )

Γ(n + )
Γ(n − )

ωn +

∞

(cid:88)n=1

ωn−(cid:35) .

Γ(n − )
Γ(n − 2)

(3.23)

We note that the last term contains a non-integer power of ω, which prevents us from con-
structing a formula for the series coeﬃcients of the forward amplitude. Therefore, we apply to
this term the same trick that we used for the triangle diagram. We change n → n +  in the
summand but not in the range of the sum (i.e. we sum from n = 1). This gives for the last
term

∞

(cid:88)n=1

∞

(cid:88)n=1

Γ(n)
Γ(n − )

ωn .

(3.24)

we can extract the series coeﬃcients. Applying this prescription to eq. (3.23), we see that last
term cancels against the ﬁrst sum and we are left with the second term. In conclusion, writing

We have now deﬁned a new function (cid:101)B2 with no branch cut starting at the origin, from which
(cid:101)B2 =(cid:80)n(cid:101)cnωn, we have

Γ(1 − 2)

(3.25)

.

2 Γ(1 − ) Γ(1 + )

Γ(n + )
Γ(n − )

Now we move to the cut diagrams. As for the normal box B1, they can be computed after
writing them as function of z = Q2/s, and then performing the standard Mellin transform.
Using the results in eqs. (3.18) and (3.21) this yields

(cid:101)cn =

Mn[Cut1 B2] = 2πi
Mn[Cut2 B2] = 0 .

Γ(1 − 2)

2 Γ(1 − ) Γ(1 + )

Γ(n + )
Γ(n − )

,

(3.26)

The latter moments are zero due to the step function θ(−z). Comparing the series coeﬃcients
in eq. (3.25) to the moments of the physical cut in the ﬁrst line of eq. (3.26), we see that

1
2πiMn[Cut1 B2] ,

(3.27)

which veriﬁes eq. (2.16). We conclude that the Mellin moments of the physical cut are in-

deed reproduced by the series coeﬃcients of the modiﬁed forward amplitude (cid:101)B2 and that the

unphysical cut has been removed by the shifting procedure.

(cid:101)cn =

12

3.4 Shifting procedure

For the triangle and the crossed-box diagrams, we introduced a prescription to deal with a
forward amplitude f (ω) that cannot be expanded around ω = 0. We also saw that for the
crossed box diagram this is due the presence of a non-vanishing massless u-channel cut, which
encodes the part of the forward amplitude having a branch cut along the negative real axis in
the ω-plane. For the triangle diagram, instead, this is due to a non-vanishing massless s-channel
cut, with branch cut in the positive real axis in the ω-plane.

In order to clarify the shifting procedure let us review its general features. Assume that (a

non-analytic piece of) the forward amplitude f (ω) can be written as

f (ω) = ωkg(w) ,

(3.28)

where k is some integer and g(ω) is analytic in ω = 0. The following discussion will trivially
generalise to the case with more terms, which for instance might have diﬀerent values of k or
diﬀerent signs like (±ω)k. The functions f (ω) and g(ω) may also depend on , which is left
implicit for brevity. Writing g(ω) as an expansion around ω = 0, we have

f (ω) =

∞

(cid:88)n=n0

cn ωn+k .

(3.29)

The shifting procedure is deﬁned by replacing n with n − k in the summand, but not in the
lower bound of the sum.3 This produces a new function

∞

(cid:88)n=n0

cn−k ωn .

(3.30)

(cid:101)f (ω) =

This function (cid:101)f (ω) is a modiﬁed version of the forward diagram that is precisely what is needed

for our purpose, if the following two criteria are met:

(i) The unphysical cut must be absent in Disc

ω (cid:101)f (ω);

(ii) The discontinuity around the physical cut must be unaﬀected.

We discuss the validity of these two conditions in turn.

The ﬁrst criterium goes back to the assumption made in eq. (3.28), namely that the non-
analyticity of f (ω) around ω = 0 is captured by an overall factor ωk. This can be argued
with dimensional analysis, when looking at the physical complex s-plane (remembering that
ω = s/Q2). Branch cuts starting at s = 0 are described by the single dimension-full quantity
s, irrespective of the value of Q2. Since Feynman diagrams have a ﬁxed integer mass dimen-
sion, the only way in which s can occur is as an overall power of s and not as the argument
of some other (elementary) function. Fractional powers are excluded by dimensional analysis.
The only deviation from integer s powers allowed is due to the d-dimensional integration mea-
sure. Feynman integrals yield results proportional to sk which, combined with the dimensional

as f (ω) =(cid:80)∞
(cid:80)∞
3 An alternative deﬁnition of the shifting procedure is the following. First rewrite the forward amplitude
n=n0+k cn−k ωn, where sums starting at non-integer lower bound α ∈ C are to be interpreted as
lower bound of the sum, so that f (ω) → (cid:101)f (ω) =(cid:80)∞
n=α sn = sα + sα+1 + ··· . The shifting procedure may then alternatively be deﬁned as setting  = 0 in the

cn−k ωn.

n=n0

13

regularisation mass scale set to Q2, produces overall factors ωk. We thus conclude that any
unphysical cut starting at ω = s = 0 is captured by functions of the form in eq. (3.29). The
modiﬁed forward amplitude in eq. (3.30) is analytic at ω = 0 by construction and therefore the
unphysical cut is indeed completely removed from Disc f (ω) by the shifting procedure.

The second criterium ensures that altering the forward amplitude, does not destroy the
connection between the discontinuity around the physical branch of the forward amplitude and
the sum of physical cut diagrams. This issue can be clariﬁed through some toy examples. Let
us ﬁrst consider a simple case where the “forward amplitude” is given by

f1(ω) =

ω−
1 − ω

=

∞

(cid:88)n=0

ωn− .

Applying the shifting procedure, we arrive at the new function

∞

(cid:88)n=0

ωn =

1

1 − ω

.

(cid:101)f1(ω) =

While the original function has its branch cut along the negative real axis removed, both func-
tions have the same pole structure in the region ω ≥ 1, namely

Disc
ω≥1

f1(ω) = 2πi δ(1 − ω) = Disc

ω≥1 (cid:101)f1(ω) .

Therefore in this example the discontinuity in the physical region is unaltered by the shifting
procedure. Another example is given by a function with a branch cut, rather than a simple
pole, in the physical region. This mimics more closely the cases we encountered at one loop.
Consider

f2(ω) = − log(1 − ω) ω

− =

The shifting procedure produces

∞

(cid:88)n=1

ωn− .

1
n

(3.34)

(3.35)

Again, these functions have the same discontinuity in the physical region. This is most easily
veriﬁed upon writing both functions as an expansion in ,

∞

(cid:88)n=1

1

n + 

ωn .

(cid:101)f2(ω) =

∞

∞

(cid:88)k=0

f2(ω) = − log(1 − ω)

(cid:88)k=0
(−)k logk(ω)
(−)k Lik+1(ω) .

k!

,

(cid:101)f2(ω) =
ω≥1(cid:2)log(1 − ω) logk(w)(cid:3) = −2πi logk(ω) ,
ω≥1(cid:2)Lik+1(ω)(cid:3) = 2πi

logk(ω)

k!

,

Disc

Disc

(3.31)

(3.32)

(3.33)

(3.36)

(3.37)

Using the identities

one readily conﬁrms that the discontinuity of f2(ω) in the physical region is equal to that of

(cid:101)f2(ω) and is thus unaltered by the shifting procedure.

14

3.5 Direct extraction of series coeﬃcients from IBP’s

The shifting procedure from the previous subsection requires the result of an integral to be
given in terms of ω− in unexpanded form. Indeed, if the integral were expanded in , then
the logarithmic divergence at ω = 0 could no longer be removed by shifting n. In the one-loop
examples of the previous section, there is no problem since the forward amplitude diagrams are
exact in . Moreover, for each of the one-loop diagrams a simple series representation is known,
which allows us to extract their series coeﬃcients exact in  as well.

At higher loops it is not realistic to expect exact results in  for all the forward diagrams.
However, it is in fact suﬃcient that the divergent part of a forward diagram f (ω, ) around
ω = 0 is written as ω− g(ω, ), where g(ω, ) is regular at ω = 0, and may also be given in

expanded form g(ω, ) =(cid:80)k≥k0 k gk(ω). Such a hybrid expression can be obtained by making

a series ansatz for the forward diagram. Speciﬁcally, for one-loop diagrams one writes

f (ω, ) = sdim[f ](cid:32)(cid:88)n

cn() ωn + ω

−(cid:88)n

dn() ωn(cid:33) ,

(3.38)

where dim[f ] denotes the integer mass dimension of the forward amplitude f . This structure for
a forward diagram is not surprising, since in general the function is non-analytic at the origin
ω = 0. Without loss of generality, one can decompose such a function into a sum of analytic and
non-analytic pieces. As discussed in the previous subsection, the non-analyticity can always be
captured by a factor ω− multiplied by another function, which is regular at the origin and thus
admits a series representation. The coeﬃcients cn() and dn() may be given exact in  or as
an expansion in ; in either case the shifting procedure works.

A further beneﬁt of making the series ansatz in eq. (3.38) is that the series coeﬃcients can be
extracted more directly by deriving equations for them and subsequently solving the equations.
One way to proceed along these lines is to generate a diﬀerential equation for f (ω, ) from
integration-by-parts (IBP) identities. Inserting the series ansatz into such diﬀerential equation
yields in turn a diﬀerence equation for the series coeﬃcients, which takes the form

A0,n cn() + A1,n cn+1() + ··· + Ar,n cn+r() = Fn ,

(3.39)

where the Ai,n and Fn are rational functions of , whose form depends on the particular diﬀer-
ential equation for f (ω, ) under consideration. If r = 1, then eq. (3.39) is simply a recursion, in
which case the series coeﬃcients can be found exact in . For diagrams with multiple loops the
order of the diﬀerence equation becomes typically quite high (we ﬁnd up to r = 8 for two-loop
diagrams). In that case it will be advantageous to expand the diﬀerence equation eq. (3.39) in 

and solve for the coeﬃcients cn() =(cid:80)k≥k0 k ck,n, order-by-order in . The task of solving the

resulting diﬀerence equations for the set {ck,n} may be even further simpliﬁed by following the
approach in ref. [37], which exploits the expectation that these coeﬃcients are given in terms
of harmonic numbers.

For the computation of the two-loop diagram in this paper we indeed adopt the approach

in ref. [37] and seek solutions to eq. (3.39) of the form

cn() = (cid:88)k,(cid:126)(cid:96),m

Ak,(cid:96),m k S(cid:126)(cid:96) (n − m) .

(3.40)

15

for reasonable choices of k, (cid:126)(cid:96), m. The functions S(cid:126)(cid:96) (n) are harmonic sums, whose properties
are well-known [38]. The unknown coeﬃcients Ak,(cid:126)(cid:96),m contain both rational and transcendental
numbers, and may be determined as follows. The simplest approach is to evaluate the diﬀer-
ence equation for ck,n at suitably many values of n, so as to obtain a system of equations which
may be solved for the unknown Ak,(cid:126)(cid:96),m. In a more sophisticated method [37] each term in the
diﬀerence equation for ck,n is projected onto a basis of synchronised harmonic numbers, after
which the coeﬃcients of each harmonic number is equated to zero. This also yields a system
of equations for the unknown Ak,(cid:126)(cid:96),m. We have implemented both techniques and successfully
applied them to the two-loop examples in section 4.3.

Before closing this section, let us present an example of the methods in this subsection for
obtaining the series coeﬃcients from IBP’s. To this end, consider the one-loop box B1 from
section 3.2. After shifting the loop momentum k → q = k + ¯p in eq. (3.9), the scalar box integral
becomes a special case B(2, 1, 1) of the topology

B(a, b, c) =(cid:90)

d4−2q

(q2)a ((q + p)2)b ((q − ¯p)2 − Q2)c .

(3.41)

The derivative of B(a, b, c) with respect to Q2 produces another integral in the topology:

∂
∂Q2 B(a, b, c) = c B(a, b, c + 1) for c ≥ 0 .

(3.42)

Performing IBP reduction on the right-hand side of eq. (3.42) thus yields a diﬀerential equation
for B(a, b, c) in terms of (typically) simper integrals.
In the case of the one-loop box, the
diﬀerential equation for B(2, 1, 1) reads4

(cid:20)(−1 − 2) + (s − Q2)

∂

∂Q2(cid:21)B(2, 1, 1) = 2B(3, 0, 1) +

∂
∂Q2 B(2, 0, 1) .

(3.43)

The inhomogeneous terms on the right-hand side are simpler integrals because they have fewer
propagators. Inserting the known bubbles B(a, 0, 1) on the right-hand side and the deﬁnition of
B(2, 1, 1) in terms of the forward box B1 on the left-hand side, leads to a diﬀerential equation
for B1:

(cid:20)(−1 −  −  ω) + (s − Q2)

∂

∂Q2(cid:21)B1 =

Γ(1 − 2)
 Γ(1 − )2

1

(Q2)2 .

(3.44)

One way to solve this diﬀerential equation is by inserting an ansatz for B1, like in eq. (3.38), in
terms of unknown coeﬃcients cn() and dn(). Upon doing so, one ﬁnds that dn() = 0, while
the other coeﬃcients cn() satisfy the equation

c2() ω2(1 − ) +

∞

(cid:88)n=3(cid:20)(n − 1 − ) cn() − (n − 1 + ) cn−1()(cid:21)ωn =

Γ(1 − 2)
 Γ(1 − )2 ω2 .

(3.45)

Equating terms with equal powers of ω on both sides leads to a recurrence relation in n,

c2() =

Γ(1 − 2)

 Γ(1 − ) Γ(2 − )

,

cn() =

n − 1 + 
n − 1 − 

cn−1()

for n > 2 .

(3.46)

4 This equation directly follows after inserting d

dqµ (q + p)µ under the integral sign in eq. (3.41) with (a, b, c) =

(2, 1, 1) and using eq. (3.42).

16

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 7: Types of unphysical cuts appearing at two loops. Example are: (a) massless s-channel
cut; (b) massless u-channel cut; (c) massive u-channel cut.

This recursion is solved by

cn() =

1

 (1 + )

Γ(1 − 2)

Γ(1 − )Γ(1 + )

Γ(n + )
Γ(n − )

.

(3.47)

This result for the series coeﬃcients of B1 fully agrees with eq. (3.13).

In this simple example it has been possible to solve the recursion exact in . For higher loop
diagrams this is typically not expected to be possible to do exactly but rather order-by-order
in . In the next section we extend our investigations to two-loop diagrams, where it is shown
how to solve a higher-order diﬀerence equation by making an ansatz for the series coeﬃcients
in terms of harmonic numbers.

4 Drell-Yan at two loop

The previous section discussed for Drell-Yan production at the one-loop level, how Mellin mo-
ments of cut diagrams can be computed as series coeﬃcients of forward diagrams. A feature
in our approach is that unphysical cuts in forward amplitude diagrams can be removed by
a shifting procedure. At higher loops this shifting procedure is no longer suﬃcient. Indeed,
in this section we extend our investigations to two loops, for which we develop an additional
prescription to subtract unphysical cuts. Two-loop diagrams serve furthermore as non-trivial
applications of our method for direct extraction of Mellin moments from integration-by-parts
identities, as discussed in section 3.5. In the next subsection we start by listing all possible types
of unphysical cuts, placing particular emphasis on the new type of unphysical cut appearing at
two loops. We then describe our methods to remove them, working out two examples in detail.

4.1 Unphysical cuts of two-loop diagrams

Let us analyse the possible unphysical cuts of two-loop forward diagrams. At one-loop level
there are two types: unphysical s-channel cuts and massless u-channel cuts (which do not cut
the massive photon). At two loops, there is the possibility for a new type: massive u-channel
cuts (which do cut the massive photon). All types of unphysical cuts are illustrated in ﬁg. 7.
We brieﬂy discuss the diﬀerences between these types of unphysical cuts.

Massless s-channel cuts A cut of this type appears already in the case of the one-loop
triangle in ﬁg. 4. A two-loop example is given in ﬁg. 7a, which features a three-particle massless

17

p¯pp¯pp¯p¯ppp¯p¯ppFigure 8: Branch cut structures that appear in two-loop forward diagrams, listed together
with cuts that describe the corresponding branch cut discontinuities according to the cutting
equation. Only the ﬁrst type of cut is physical, i.e. contributes to the Drell-Yan cross section.

phase-space integral.
In general, diagrams in this category are always massless phase-space
integrals, because the massive line is not cut by deﬁnition. Such massless phase-space integrals
always come with a step function θ(s), which indicates that it arises from the discontinuity
around a logarithmic branch cut starting at the origin s = 0 (or ω = 0). This situation is
reminiscent of the unphysical branch cut corresponding to massless u-channel cut diagrams,
which can be removed by the shifting procedure from section 3.4.
Indeed, we ﬁnd that the
shifting procedure is suﬃcient to deal with these unphysical s-channel cuts, which is supported
by the example to be treated in section 4.3.1.

Massless u-channel cuts Cuts in the u-channel are for our case unphysical by deﬁnition,
as they do not occur in the cut-diagrammatic expansion of the Drell-Yan cross section. The
simplest class of unphysical u-channel cuts are the ones where only massless lines are cut.
Examples of such cuts are depicted in ﬁg. 6 and ﬁg. 7b, in the case of one- and two-loop
crossed-box diagrams, respectively. These cuts correspond to branch cuts of forward diagrams
with the branch point at the origin, so they can be removed by the shifting procedure from
section 3.4. In section 4.3.2 a two-loop example is discussed where this procedure is applied.

Massive u-channel cuts This is a new type of u-channel cut which ﬁrst appears at the
two-loop level. The presence of the massive line has the eﬀect of shifting the branch point to
ω = −1, as compared to situation of the massless u-channel cuts. In this case the shifting pro-
cedure cannot be applied, so new method must be introduced to remove this type of unphysical
cut. In the next section we focus on this problem and propose a solution in the form of an
extra prescription. A non-trivial test of that procedure is then presented in the context of the
two-loop crossed box in section 4.3.2.

The various types of unphysical cuts correspond to branch cut discontinuities of forward
amplitude diagrams, where the branch cut does not extend from ω = 1 to ω = ∞. The connec-
tion between the above-mentioned cut diagrams and branch cut discontinuities is summarized
in ﬁg. 8.

18

ωlMassives-channelcutsωlMasslesss-channelcutsωlMasslessu-channelcutsωlMassiveu-channelcutsPHYSICALUNPHYSICAL4.2 Extracting series coeﬃcients for two-loop forward amplitude diagrams

The analysis of the types of unphysical cuts of two-loop diagrams in the previous subsection
calls for an extension of our method for extracting the series coeﬃcients of forward amplitudes,
as described in section 3 for one-loop diagrams. In particular, the massive u-channel cut requires
a new prescription besides the shifting procedure in section 3.4. The shifting procedure itself
works also at higher loops, but the series ansatz for a forward diagram in eq. (3.38) is particular
to the one-loop case and needs to be generalised. Furthermore, when dealing with higher-loop
diagrams, the discussion in section 3.5 on how to obtain the series coeﬃcients from IBP’s should
be combined with the notion of master integrals. We start by discussing the latter.

In many calculations of scattering amplitudes at higher orders in the QCD coupling constant,
the use of master integrals has proven to be extremely useful. There can be many diagrams
contributing to a cross-section, which produce even more Feynman integrals upon working out
tensor reduction. Typically, all those integrals can be written as special cases of a handful
of topologies:
integrals with as many linearly independent propagators as Lorentz invariants
formed out of at least one loop momentum, raised to arbitrary powers.
It has been shown
that all integrals in a topology can be written in terms of a ﬁnite set of master integrals [39].
The computation of Feynman integrals for cross-sections thus boils down to computing master
integrals. For this reason we focus in the remainder of this section on applying our method to
master integrals.

1 , . . . , M B

Let M denote a vector of n such master integrals which depend on ω and . Assume that
the ﬁrst k master integrals can be computed by applying known analytical formulae for one-
loop bubbles successively. We indicate these with a superscript B. Then the vector of master
integrals is written as M = (M B
k , Mk+1, . . . , Mn). Given the fact that the bubble-
type integrals M B
i are known exactly in , they can serve as inhomogeneous terms for the
diﬀerential equations for the remaining unknown Mi. This works as follows. Gathering the
unknown integrals in the vector M = (Mk+1, . . . , Mn), taking its derivative with respect to ω
and reducing the result to master integrals yields a system of ﬁrst-order coupled diﬀerential
equations d
dω M = A · M. Notice here that the right-hand side generally depends on all master
integrals. This situation can be avoided by decoupling the diﬀerential equations, at the expense
of raising the order of the diﬀerential equations [40]. As a result, the diﬀerential equation for a
given Mi will then be of order r, which takes some value 1 ≤ r ≤ k depending on the particular
system, and has the form

(cid:32) r(cid:88)m=0

am

dm

dωm(cid:33) Mi =

.

(4.1)

k(cid:88)j=1

r−1(cid:88)m=0

bj,m

dm

dωm M B

j

Here, the free index i is bound by k + 1 ≤ i ≤ n and the coeﬃcients am and bj,m are rational
functions of ω and . We emphasise that the right-hand side is known exactly in , since it
consists of the known bubble-type integrals and derivatives thereof. The number of unknown
integrals k can be large, in practice. This means that the order of the diﬀerential equation
r ∈ [1, k] could be equally large, making it challenging to solve. Moreover, the rational functions
am and bj,m also grow in size as r increases. Such situations may be ameliorated by decoupling
diﬀerential equations to subsets of master integrals in M. After each iteration the solutions
that can be found exact in  may be used as inhomogeneous terms as well, thus lowering the
order of the diﬀerential equations for the next integrals to be calculated.

19

The next task is to solve the diﬀerential equations in eq. (4.1) for i = k + 1, . . . , n. The
approach we shall take in this paper is that of inserting an ansatz for the Mi in terms of series
expansions in ω. The one-loop ansatz in eq. (3.38) already displays the key feature, namely of
decomposing the function into analytic and non-analytic pieces. The non-analyticity at ω = 0
is captured by powers ω−. In the case of two-loop diagrams the ansatz will take the following
form

Mi =(cid:88)n

c(i)

n ωn +(cid:88)n

d(i)

n ωn− +(cid:88)n

n ωn−2 ,
e(i)

(4.2)

n , e(i)

n , d(i)

where the series coeﬃcients c(i)
n depend on  but not on ω. Substituting this expression
for Mi into the diﬀerential equation eq. (4.1) and equating equal powers of ω produces diﬀerence
equations for the series coeﬃcients. The diﬀerence equations have the general form of eq. (3.39).
Non-zero coeﬃcients of ωk on the right-hand side of the diﬀerential equation supply boundary
conditions to the diﬀerence equations. This means that additional computations to ascertain
such boundary conditions, e.g. using expansion-by-regions, are (typically) not necessary. In
simple cases, when the order of the diﬀerence equation is relatively low, the series coeﬃcients
might be solved exactly in , involving ratios of Gamma-functions. Otherwise, the series coeﬃ-
cients can always be solved order-by-order in  in terms of harmonic sums, using an ansatz of
the form given in eq. (3.40). Once one has the series coeﬃcients c(i)
n in hand, we have
essentially computed the forward diagram.

n , d(i)

n , e(i)

Then we are in the position to start modifying the forward diagram in such a way that its
discontinuity no longer has any contribution from unphysical cuts. The ﬁrst step in this process
is the shifting procedure. Conceptually, this procedure prescribes exactly what was discussed

for one-loop diagrams: terms in the series are replaced according to cn ωn−k → cn+k ωn. After

shifting, a two-loop forward master integral thus becomes

n+2(cid:17) ωn ≡(cid:88)n (cid:101)c (i)

n ωn .

(4.3)

Mi → (cid:102)Mi =(cid:88)n (cid:16)c(i)

n + d(i)

n+ + e(i)

As discussed in section 3.4, this procedure removes the unphysical branch cut discontinuity that

arise from massless s-channel cuts and/or massless u-channel cuts. Indeed, the function (cid:102)Mi is

expanded as a series around ω = 0. At a technical level, this shifting procedure can be a bit
more involved than the one-loop case. Namely, if the coeﬃcients c(i)
n were expressed
order-by-order in  in terms of harmonic numbers, then the series in eq. (4.3) features harmonic
numbers evaluated at non-integer values: S(cid:96)(n + k). These functions must be expanded in  to
match the form of the rest of the expression, which boils down to taking derivatives of harmonic
numbers with respect to their argument. To this end one uses the known analytic continuation
of harmonic numbers from the integers to the real line. In practice, we make use of the package
HarmonicSums [31, 38, 41–45] to expand the harmonic numbers evaluated at non-integer values.

n , d(i)

n , e(i)

So far we have discussed the shifting procedure and the use of IBP’s to extract series coeﬃ-
cients in the context of two-loop diagrams. This is suﬃcient to deal with all types of unphysical
cut of two-loop diagrams, except for massive u-channel cuts. The latter type of cut diagrams
correspond to a branch cut of the forward along (−∞,−1] in the complex ω-plane. Since the
branch point is not at the origin ω = 0, it is not removed by the shifting procedure. In order to
remove discontinuities around such branch cuts, we extend our method further.

20

contains contributions from both physical and un-physical cut diagrams. The second function,

Figure 9: The analytic structure of the example functions (cid:101)f (ω) and (cid:98)f (ω), given in eq. (4.4) and
eq. (4.11), respectively. The function (cid:101)f (ω) represents a forward diagram, whose discontinuity
(cid:98)f (ω), is a modiﬁed version of the forward, such that only the physical branch cut is present.

We shall replace the forward diagram by a new function, whose branch cut along ω ∈
(−∞,−1] is removed while its branch cut discontinuity around the physical region ω ∈ [1,∞)
remains unchanged. Our technique for obtaining a function that satisﬁes these requirements
is perhaps best explained with the help of an example. Consider the following product of

(cid:101)f (ω) = log(1 + ω) log(1 − ω) .

logarithms, denoted (cid:101)f (ω) in view of the absence of a branch point at ω = 0,
In the complex ω-plane this function (cid:101)f (ω) has two branch cuts, which are located along the dis-
of (cid:101)f (ω) is simply the sum of the discontinuities around the individual branch cuts:
ω (cid:101)f (ω) = 2πi log(1 − ω)θ(−ω − 1) − 2πi log(1 + ω)θ(ω − 1) .

connected intervals (−∞,−1] and [1,∞). This situation is shown in ﬁg. 9(a). The discontinuity

In eq. (4.5), the ﬁrst term on the right-hand side may be interpreted as a contribution coming
from unphysical cut diagrams. Removing the unphysical cuts thus amounts to removing the

(4.5)

(4.4)

Disc

Disc

ω (cid:98)f (ω) = −2πi log(1 + ω)θ(ω − 1) .

branch cut along (−∞,−1] from the function (cid:101)f (ω), leaving a new function, (cid:98)f (ω), such that
The corresponding analytic structure is displayed in ﬁg. 9b. The question is how to ﬁnd (cid:98)f (ω).
is lifted by imposing the constraint (cid:98)f (0) = 0, which reﬂects the physical property of scatter-
together with the analyticity of (cid:98)f (ω) around the origin, allows us to write down a series repre-

Note that in there is no unique answer to this question. Indeed, any constant (or smooth
function, for that matter) may be added without changing the discontinuity. This ambiguity

ing cross-sections that they vanish in the limit of zero centre-of-mass energy. This constraint,

sentation

(4.6)

(4.7)

The coeﬃcients(cid:98)cn can be obtained from the Cauchy integral formula, taking a small contour

Inﬂating the contour such that it wraps around the branch cut, the
enclosing the origin.
contour integral becomes the integration of the discontinuity along the real line, analogous to

(cid:98)f (ω) =

∞

(cid:88)n=1(cid:98)cn ωn .

21

ωef(ω)(a)ωbf(ω)(b)the discussion in section 2.1. Subsequently changing variables to the reciprocal z = 1/ω leads
to the following Mellin-transform integral

zn−1 log(1 + 1

z ) .

(4.8)

(cid:98)cn = −(cid:90) 1

0

This standard integral transform may be performed (for more complicated cases one may use
the MT package [46]) and the result is

(cid:98)cn = −

1
n2 +

(−1)nS−1(n)

n

log 2

n

−

+

(−1)n log 2

n

.

(4.9)

In the analogy with perturbative computations, these coeﬃcients correspond to the Mellin

physical cuts. Considering the aim of this paper, these moments therefore provide a satisfactory
answer.

moments of the sum of cut diagrams obtained from the forward (cid:101)f (ω) by taking all possible
For completeness, we will also determine the full function (cid:98)f (ω). Obviously, in a small neigh-
bourhood around the origin, (cid:98)f (ω) is given by the series eq. (4.7) with coeﬃcients in eq. (4.9). Its
of harmonic sums with multiple indices [37], which essentially projects (cid:98)cn onto a convenient

analytic continuation to the complex ω-plane is given in terms of polylogarithms. This continu-
ation may actually be constructed by ﬁrst rewriting the series coeﬃcients as linear combination

basis of the function space:

(cid:98)cn = −S2(n) + S−1,−1(n) + log 2 S−1(n) − log 2 S1(n) ,

where S(cid:96)(n) = S(cid:96)(n) − S(cid:96)(n − 1). With this expression in hand, the sum in eq. (4.7) may be
evaluated in closed form, using the fact that the series coeﬃcients of harmonic polylogarithms
are harmonic numbers [31], and one ﬁnds

(4.10)

(cid:98)f (ω) = −H−1,1(ω) − log 2 H−1(ω) − log 2 H1(ω)

2 (cid:17) + log 2 log(1 − ω) −

= − Li2(cid:16) 1 + ω

log2 2

2

+

π2
12

.

(4.11)

One can check explicitly that this expression has the correct branch cut discontinuity, as required
by eq. (4.6). This completes the example.

The same method for removing the unphysical branch cut can be applied to two-loop forward
diagrams. Apart from branch cuts, one then also deals with poles, typically at ω = 1. One
simple way to implement the removal of the wrong branch cut is by deriving replacement rules for
the individual harmonic numbers, which appear in the result of the shifting procedure eq. (4.3).

For a given harmonic number S(cid:126)(cid:96) (n), one ﬁrst evaluates the corresponding sum (cid:80)n S(cid:126)(cid:96) (n) ωn

in closed form. Based on similar analysis as in the previous example, one then constructs a
function which has the unphysical branch cut removed and whose series coeﬃcients deﬁne the
replacement of S(cid:126)(cid:96) (n). For example, in the case of S1,−2(n) we get

4 ζ2 H1(ω) + ω ζ3

S1,−2(n) ωn =

H−3(ω) + H1,−2(ω)

(cid:88)n=1
which is equivalent to the eﬀective replacement rule S1,−2(n) → − 1
8 ζ3. Following these
steps with all harmonic sums produces a ‘dictionary’ of replacement rules, which may then be
applied to any diagram. We shall use such replacement rules in section 4.3.2.

2 S1(n) − 1

2 S1(n)− 1

8 ζ3(cid:17) ωn ,

(cid:88)n=1(cid:16)− 1

8 (ω − 1)

ω − 1

(4.12)

→

∞

=

∞

22

Figure 10: Cutting equation for a two-loop self-energy diagram.

4.3 Two-loop examples

This subsection provides examples that serve to illustrate two main lessons from our studies
of two-loop diagrams, namely: how to remove unphysical cuts from a forward diagram, and
how to compute the series coeﬃcients of forward diagrams at higher loops from diﬀerential
equations. The ﬁrst example below will illustrate how to deal with massless s-channel cuts.
We demonstrate that the shifting procedure not only removes massless u-channel cuts, but also
removes any unphysical s-channel cut. The second example shows the power of the method
by applying it to a rather diﬃcult forward amplitude diagram, the two-loop crossed box. The
latter admits massive u-channel cuts, which can be treated along the lines of section 4.2.

4.3.1 Two-loop self-energy diagram

In our ﬁrst two-loop example we study a forward self-energy diagram, whose cutting equation is
depicted in ﬁg. 10. As illustrated in the ﬁgure, the forward diagram admits two cuts: a two- and
a three-particle cut. The two-particle cut is physical, but the three-particle cut is an unphysical
s-channel cut which needs to be removed from the forward. In this subsection we show how to
compute the physical cut from the forward diagram and point out the diﬀerences with a direct
calculation the cut diagram.

Let us start by computing the forward diagram, before proceeding to remove the unphysical
cut in order to extract the moments of the physical cut. The forward two-loop self-energy
diagram is given by

where C() = (iπ2−rΓ)−1 and G1,1,1,1,0 is embedded in the integral topology

S =(cid:0)C()Q2(cid:1)2 G1,1,1,1,0 ,

(4.13)

Ga1,a2,a3,a4,a5 =(cid:90)

d4−2k d4−2(cid:96)
3 Da4
1 Da2

2 Da3

Da1

,

(4.14)

4 Da5

5

with denominators Di given by the following expressions in terms of P = p + ¯p,

D1 = k2 − Q2 , D2 = (k + P )2 , D3 = (cid:96)2 , D4 = ((cid:96) + k)2 , D5 = ((cid:96) + P )2 .

(4.15)

We proceed to compute G1,1,1,1,0 by establishing an appropriate diﬀerential equation. To this
end, notice that raising the power of the massive propagator may be achieved by diﬀerentiation
with respect to the mass Q2, that is

G2,1,1,1,0 =

d
dQ2 G1,1,1,1,0 .

23

(4.16)

Discp¯pp¯p=p¯pp¯p+p¯pp¯pUsing IBP reduction, the integral on the left-hand side can be expressed in terms of simpler
integrals

G2,1,1,1,0 = −(cid:0)Q2 + (s − 3Q2)(cid:1) G1,1,1,1,0

Q2 (s − Q2)

−

(2 − 3)G0,1,1,1,0

Q2 (s − Q2)

+

(1 − )G1,0,1,1,0
Q2 (s − Q2)

.

(4.17)

The ﬁrst integral on the right-hand side is the self-energy diagram at hand (up to a prefactor),
the integral on the left-hand side is its derivative, and the last two integrals on the right-
hand side are simpler bubble-type integrals. The latter can readily be computed exactly in ,
producing

G0,1,1,1,0 = R1() s1−2

with R1() = −
G1,0,1,1,0 = R2() (Q2)1−2 with R2() =

π4−2 Γ(1 − )3Γ(−1 + 2)
π4−2 Γ(1 − )2Γ()Γ(−1 + 2)

Γ(3 − 3)

e2iπ ,

(4.18)

.

(4.19)

Γ(2 − )

where we have performed the analytic continuation (−s)−2 ≡ (−s−i0)−2 = e2iπs−2. Inserting

eqs. (4.16), (4.18) and (4.19) into eq. (4.17) thus produces a ﬁrst-order linear diﬀerential equation
for the integral G1,1,1,1,0. Exchanging the latter for S, see eq. (4.13), yields the following
diﬀerential equation

(cid:18)(1 −  −  ω) − (1 − ω)Q2 d

dQ2(cid:19) S = −(2 − 3)C()2 R1() ω1−2

+ (1 − )C()2 R2() .

(4.20)

As we discussed in the previous subsection, we now insert a series ansatz for S into this dif-
ferential equation, to turn it into a diﬀerence equation for the series coeﬃcients. From the
inhomogeneous terms in eq. (4.20) one can infer that the forward diagrams will have the struc-
ture S = f1(ω)+ω−2f2(ω), where f1(ω) and f2(ω) are regular functions of ω close to the origin.
We thus proceed to make the series ansatz5

S =

∞

(cid:88)n=0

cn ωn +

∞

(cid:88)n=0

en ωn−2 .

Inserting this into eq. (4.20) yields

(4.21)

(4.22)

(4.23)

(4.24)

∞

∞

0 =

+

∞

(cid:88)n=0
cn(n + 1 − )ωn
cn−1(n − 1 + )ωn −
∞
(cid:88)n=0
en(n + 1 − 3)ωn−2
en−1(n − 1 − )ωn−2 −

(cid:88)n=1
(cid:88)n=1
− (2 − 3)C()2R1()ω1−2 + (1 − )C()2R2() .
n + 1 − (cid:19) cn−1
n + 1 − 3(cid:19) en−1 for n > 1 , e1 = −C()2R1() , e0 = 0 .

for n > 0 , c0 = C()2R2() ,

cn =(cid:18) n − 1 + 
en =(cid:18) n − 1 − 

Equating same powers of ω produces two recursions, complete with boundary conditions:

5 Alternatively, one may insert the general ansatz for two-loop diagrams in eq. (4.2) and derive that the

corresponding coeﬃcients dn all vanish.

24

The solutions to these elementary recursions are ratios of gamma functions,

cn = C()2R2()
en = −C()2R1()

Γ(n + )
Γ(n + 2 − )
Γ(n − )

Γ(2 − )
Γ()
Γ(3 − 3)
Γ(1 − )

Γ(n + 2 − 3)

for n ≥ 0 ,

for n ≥ 1 .

(4.25)

(4.26)

As a result, the forward self-energy diagram S is now known as a series expansion around the
origin:

S = −

Γ(1 − 2)2Γ(−1 + 2)

Γ(1 − )2Γ(1 + )2 (cid:32) ∞
(cid:88)n=0

Γ(n + )
Γ(n + 2 − )

ωn + e2iπ

∞

(cid:88)n=1

Γ(n − )

Γ(n + 2 − 3)

ωn−2(cid:33) .

(4.27)

These series can easily be recognised as representations of 2F1-hypergeometric functions, but
for our purposes the current form is actually more useful. Indeed, the aim of the remainder
of this section is to extract the Mellin moments of the physical cut in ﬁg. 10 from the forward
amplitude diagram in eq. (4.27).

Extracting the Mellin moments of the physical cut from the forward is done in the following

way. We construct a new function (cid:101)S, which has the same branch cut discontinuity as S around

ω ∈ [1,∞), but does not possess a branch cut starting at the origin ω = 0. In practice, we ﬁnd
such a function by means of the shifting procedure, as explained in section 3.4. Applied to the
series in eq. (4.27) this produces

S −→ (cid:101)S = −(cid:0)1 + e2iπ(cid:1) Γ(1 − 2)2Γ(−1 + 2)

Γ(1 − )2Γ(1 + )2

∞

(cid:88)n=1

Γ(n + )
Γ(n + 2 − )

ωn .

(4.28)

where we dropped an ω-independent term, without aﬀecting the discontinuity. The series coef-

ﬁcients of this new function (cid:101)S (in contrast to S) are well-deﬁned. If we write (cid:101)S =(cid:80)∞
then its series coeﬃcients(cid:101)cn are equal to

.

n=1(cid:101)cnωn,

(4.29)

(cid:101)cn = −(cid:0)1 + e2iπ(cid:1) Γ(1 − 2)2Γ(−1 + 2)

Γ(1 − )2Γ(1 + )2

Γ(n + )
Γ(n + 2 − )

Based on our arguments presented in section 4.2 we claim that these series coeﬃcients provide
the Mellin moments of the physical cut on the right-hand side of the cutting equation in ﬁg. 10.
The coeﬃcients in eq. (4.29) therefore constitute the main result of this example.

Let us now verify our claim. To this end we shall compute the physical cut diagram explicitly.
One way to proceed is by applying reverse unitarity [4] to the IBP reduction in eq. (4.17), in
order to derive a diﬀerential equation for the cut diagram. Alternatively, one may actually
perform the phase-space integration directly. In the latter approach one simply integrates a
massless sub-bubble over a two-particle (one-mass) phase space. The massless sub-bubble reads

Bub = iπ2− Γ(1 − )2 Γ()

Γ(2 − 2)

1

(−k2) .

(4.30)

Because the massive line is cut, k2 = Q2, the bubble can be pulled out of the phase-space
integral. As a result, the cut diagram is given by

Cutphys S = 2πi eiπ z(1 − z)1−2

Γ(1 − 2)2 Γ()

Γ(2 − 2)2 Γ(1 − ) Γ(1 + )2 .

(4.31)

25

Figure 11: The forward two-loop crossed-box diagram B2.

The Mellin moments can be computed exactly in  due to the simple dependence on z. They
are given by

Mn(cid:2)Cutphys S(cid:3) = 2πi eiπ

Γ(1 − 2)2 Γ()

Γ(2 − 2) Γ(1 − ) Γ(1 + )2

Γ(n + )
Γ(n + 2 − )

.

(4.32)

Comparing this expression to the series coeﬃcients in eq. (4.29), and making use of the identity

Γ(1 − 2)Γ(1 + 2)(cid:0)1 + e2iπ(cid:1) = 2Γ(1 − )Γ(1 + )eiπ, we can verify that

This relation holds at all orders in , as claimed.

1
2πi

Mn(cid:2)Cutphys S(cid:3) .

(cid:101)cn =

(4.33)

4.3.2 Two-loop crossed-box diagram

We turn to our second example: the two-loop crossed-box diagram, depicted in ﬁg. 11. This
diagram is distinguished from previous examples in two key aspects. First, it is suﬃciently
complicated so that it cannot be calculated exactly in , thereby providing a testing ground
for the techniques of the previous subsection for computing the series coeﬃcients of forward
diagrams order-by-order in  from diﬀerential equations. Second, the diagram is the ﬁrst example
to admit a massive u-channel cut, for which a new procedure was developed also in the previous
subsection. In the example below we focus on these two aspects: ﬁrst we compute the forward
diagram, after which the moments of the physical cut are recovered by means of the shifting
procedure and the replacement rules. We ﬁnally cross-check our results against the literature.

Our ﬁrst task is to compute the crossed-box diagram in ﬁg. 11. It may be written as

where G1,1,1,1,1,1,1 is one of the integrals in the following two-loop double-box topology

B2 =(cid:0)C() Q2(cid:1)2 s3 G1,1,1,1,1,1,1 ,

(4.34)

Ga1,a2,a3,a4,a5,a6,a7 =(cid:90)

where the denominators Di are given by

d4−2k d4−2(cid:96)
2 Da3
4 Da5

3 Da4

Da1

1 Da2

5 Da6

6 Da7

7

,

(4.35)

D1 = k2 ,
D5 = ((cid:96) + ¯p)2 ,

D2 = (k + p)2 ,
D6 = ((cid:96) + p + ¯p)2 ,

D3 = (k + ¯p)2 ,
D7 = (k − (cid:96))2 − Q2 .

D4 = ((cid:96) + p)2 ,

(4.36)

26

B2=p¯p¯ppkk+pk−‘k+¯p‘+p‘+¯p‘+p+¯pThere are fourteen master integrals for the topology in eq. (4.35). We use the following set of
master integrals, as provided by Litered [47, 48],

M B
M B
M B

1 = G0,0,0,1,1,0,1 ,
4 = G0,0,1,1,0,0,1 ,
7 = G2,0,0,0,0,1,1 ,
M9 = G0,1,1,0,0,1,1 ,

M B
M B
M B

2 = G0,0,1,0,0,1,1 ,
5 = G1,0,0,0,0,1,1 ,
8 = G0,1,1,1,1,0,0 ,
M10 = G0,1,1,0,1,1,1 ,

M B
M B

3 = G0,0,1,0,1,0,1 ,
6 = G0,0,2,1,0,0,1 ,

M11 = G0,1,1,1,1,0,1 ,

M12 = G0,2,1,0,0,1,1 ,

M13 = G1,0,1,0,1,1,1 ,

M14 = G1,1,1,1,1,1,1 .

(4.37)

The integral of interest is the last (and most complicated) master integral M14. Following the
notation introduced in section 4.2, the ﬁrst eight integrals are marked with the superscript “B”
to indicate that they can be readily computed as iterated bubble integrals. These integrals are

M B

1 =

M B

2 =

M B

3 =

M B

4 =

M B

5 =

M B

6 = −

M B

7 = −

M B

8 = −

,

,

,

Γ(2 − )

Γ(2 − )

Γ(2 − 2)

π4−2s1−2ω−1+Γ(1 − )2Γ(−1 + )Γ()
π4−2s1−2ω−1+2Γ(1 − )2Γ()Γ(−1 + 2)
π4−2s1−2ω−1+2Γ(1 − )2Γ()Γ(−1 + 2)
π4−2s1−2ω−1+2Γ(1 − )2Γ()Γ(−1 + 2) 2F1(,−1 + 2; 2 − ;−ω)
π4−2s1−2ω−1+2Γ(1 − )2Γ()Γ(−1 + 2) 2F1(,−1 + 2; 2 − ; ω)
π4−2s−2ω2Γ(1 − )Γ(−)Γ(2)Γ(1 + ) 2F1(2, 1 + ; 2 − ;−ω)
π4−2s−2ω2Γ(1 − )Γ(−)Γ(2)Γ(1 + ) 2F1(2, 1 + ; 2 − ; ω)
π4−2s−2Γ(1 − )4Γ()2

Γ(2 − )

Γ(2 − )

Γ(2 − )

Γ(2 − )

.

Γ(2 − 2)2

,

,

,

,

(4.38)

Being exact in , these expressions are allowed to appear as inhomogeneous terms in diﬀerential
equations for the six remaining unknown master integrals.

We proceed to derive decoupled diﬀerential equations for the master integrals M9 through
M14 of the form in eq. (4.1), using the Laporta reduction algorithm in FIRE [49, 50]. Inserting
the series ansatz eq. (4.2) for the two-loop forward master integrals, the diﬀerential equations
then transform into diﬀerence equations.
It turns out that three of those equations can be
solved exact in , producing series coeﬃcients expressed as ratios of Gamma functions. As a

27

result, the ans¨atze are easily recognised as series representations of hypergeometric functions:

M9 =

+

Γ(2 − )

π4−2s−2ω2Γ(1 − )2Γ()Γ(2) 3F2(1, 1, 2; 2, 2 − ; ω)
π4−2s−2ωΓ(1 − )2Γ(−1 + )Γ() 3F2(1, 1 − , ; 2 − 2, 2 − ; ω)
π4−2s−1−2ω2(1 − 3 + 22)Γ(1 − )2Γ()Γ(−1 + 2) ( 3F2(1, 1, 2; 2, 1 − ; ω) − 1)
π4−2s−1−2ωΓ(1 − )2Γ(−1 + )Γ() 3F2(1, 1 − , ; 1 − 2, 2 − ; ω)
π4−2s−1−2ω1+2Γ(−)2Γ(2 + )Γ(1 + 2) 4F3(1, 1, 2 + , 1 + 2; 2, 2, 2 − ; ω)

Γ(2 − 2)

Γ(1 − 2)

Γ(2 − )

,

.

,

+

(4.39)

M12 = −

M13 =

Γ(2 − )

These expressions are useful because the corresponding integrals may appear as inhomogeneous
terms in diﬀerential equations for the remaining unknown integrals: M10, M11 and M14.

In the remainder we focus on the computation of M14, which is the forward crossed-box
diagram. Inspecting the ﬁrst-order diﬀerential equation for this integral reveals that it is coupled
to all other master integrals, in particular to the unknown integrals M10 and M11. After
decoupling those two, as described in section 4.2, we obtain a third-order diﬀerential equation
for M14. As before we insert the series ansatz eq. (4.2) for the forward integral, which produces
an eighth-order diﬀerence equation. The latter can be solved order-by-order in  in terms of
harmonic numbers, c.f. eq. (3.40), using the strategy outlined in section 3.5. If the full diagram
B2 = (C()Q2)2s3M14 is written as
(cid:88)n=1
+ −16S−2,1 − 8S1,−2 + 4S1,2 + 4S2,1 − 18S1,1,1 + 20S−3 + 6S3
+ 80S−3,1 + 40S−2,2 + 40S1,−3 − 8S1,3 + 8S2,−2 − 14S2,2 − 6S3,1 − 64S−2,1,1 − 56S−4
− 32S1,−2,1 − 16S1,1,−2 + 52S1,1,2 + 52S1,2,1 + 48S2,1,1 − 110S1,1,1,1 − 14S4 − 8ζ2S1,1
− 16ζ2S−2 − 8ζ2S2 + O() ,

cn = −2S1,1 − 4S−2 − 2S2

then its series coeﬃcients are found to be

dn ωn− +

en ωn−2 ,

(cid:88)n=1

(cid:88)n=1

cn ωn +

(4.40)

B2 =

∞

∞

∞

2



dn = −

2S1
3 +

2

8S2 − 10S1,1

22S1,2 + 20S2,1 − 38S1,1,1 − 6S3 − 2ζ2S1

+

− 18S1,3 − 28S2,2





− 14S3,1 + 62S1,1,2 + 58S1,2,1 + 60S2,1,1 − 130S1,1,1,1 + 8S4 − 10ζ2S1,1 + 8ζ2S2
− 4ζ3S1 + O() ,

4S1,1 + 2S2

4S1,2 + 2S2,1 + 8S1,1,1 + 2S3

en = −

1
4 −

2S1
3 −

2

−

− 8S1,1,2 − 4S1,2,1 − 2S2,1,1 − 16S1,1,1,1 − 2S4 + O() ,

− 4S1,3 − 2S2,2 − 2S3,1

(4.41)

where S(cid:126)(cid:96) ≡ S(cid:126)(cid:96) (n − 1). We have checked the validity of the representation eq. (4.40) for the
forward crossed-box diagram, by reconstructing from the inﬁnite sums the full diagram in terms
of harmonic polylogarithms and performing a numerical cross-check using SecDec [51–53]. These
series coeﬃcients now form the starting point for the next phase, which is to extract the Mellin
moments of the corresponding physical s-channel cut diagram.

28

Inspecting the analytical structure of B2 from its representation in terms of harmonic poly-
logarithms reveals three branch cuts. They are located along the real axis in the domains
ω ∈ (−∞, 0], ω ∈ (−∞,−1] and ω ∈ [1,∞), which correspond to massless u-channel cuts,
massive u-channel cuts and the massive s-channel cut, respectively. The ﬁrst and second types
of branch cuts in the forward diagram are unphysical; they will be removed by performing the
shifting procedure and applying replacement rules, respectively. Let us start with the shifting
procedure. As we have seen in previous examples, this amount to the transformation

∞

(cid:88)n=1(cid:101)cn ωn .

(4.42)

+ −20S3 + 40S1,2 + 40S2,1 − 64S1,1,1



∞

(cid:88)n=1
(cn + dn+ + en+2) ωn ≡
More explicitly, the newly deﬁned coeﬃcients(cid:101)cn are given by

B2 −→ (cid:101)B2 =

10S2 − 16S1,1 − 4S−2 − 6ζ2

4S1
3 +

1
4 −
20S−3 − 16S−2,1 − 8S1,−2 − 20ζ2S1

2

(cid:101)cn = −



+ 40S4 − 100S2,2 − 80S3,1 + 160S1,1,2
+
+ 160S1,2,1 + 160S2,1,1 − 256S1,1,1,1 − 56S−4 + 80S−3,1 + 40S1,−3 − 84S1,3
+ 40S−2,2 + 8S2,−2 − 64S−2,1,1 − 32S1,−2,1 − 16S1,1,−2 − 16ζ2S−2 + 44ζ2S2
− 72ζ2S1,1 − 4ζ3S1 − 55ζ4 + O() .

(4.43)

have made use of the package HarmonicSums to expand the harmonic numbers S(cid:126)(cid:96) (n + k),
which appear in the coeﬃcients dn+ and en+2 as a result of shifting, as a Taylor series in

where again S(cid:126)(cid:96) ≡ S(cid:126)(cid:96) (n − 1). In order to arrive at this form for the series coeﬃcients (cid:101)cn, we
. From the formula in eq. (4.42) it is clear that (cid:101)B2 is regular at the origin, so we have
by explicitly computing and comparing the discontinuity of both B2 and (cid:101)B2 using the HPL

successfully removed the branch cut along ω ∈ (−∞, 0] from the forward diagram. Crucially,
the discontinuities around the remaining two branch cuts are unchanged. This can be veriﬁed

package [54, 55]6. In terms of cutting equations, this elimination of unphysical branch cut in
the forward diagram is to be interpreted as the elimination of cut diagrams on the right-hand
side of the cutting equation, as indicated by the ﬁrst two lines in ﬁg. 12.

In the next stage we modify the forward diagram even further, in such a way that the second
unphysical branch cut is removed as well. At the level of individual harmonic polylogarithms
this task is performed simply along the lines of the example in section 4.2. The results translate
to replacement rules for the harmonic numbers.
In particular, harmonic numbers with only
positive indices do not need to be altered: the corresponding “resummed functions” do not

contain unphysical branch cuts. The ﬁrst two orders in  of (cid:101)cn therefore do not need to be

modiﬁed. For the remaining harmonic numbers we apply the following replacement rules. We
recall that these rules are derived in a diagram-independent way. At order −2 we need a single
replacement rule:

6Speciﬁcally, using the function HPLAnalyticContinuation in that package.

S−2 → − 1

2 ζ2 .

(4.44)

29

Figure 12: Cutting equation for the forward diagram B2 (top line), for the modiﬁed forward

diagram (cid:101)B2 which does not contain the unphysical branch cut along ω ∈ (−∞, 0] (middle line),
and for (cid:98)B2 which does not contain the other unphysical branch cut along ω ∈ (−∞,−1] either
(bottom line). The series coeﬃcient of (cid:98)B2 are equal to the Mellin moments of the physical cut.

Replacement rules at order −1 are:

4 ζ3 ,
8 ζ3 ,
8 ζ3 − 1
And ﬁnally, replacement rules at order 0 are given by:

S−3 → − 3
S−2,1 → − 5
S1,−2 → − 1

2 ζ2S1 .

S−4 → − 7
S−3,1 → − 11
S1,−3 → + 15
S−2,2 → + 51
S2,−2 → − 65
S−2,1,1 → + 5
S1,−2,1 → − 3
S1,1,−2 → − 13

8 ζ4 ,
2 ζ2 log2 2 + 7
4 ζ4 − 1
2 ζ2 log2 2 − 7
8 ζ4 + 1
16 ζ4 + ζ2 log2 2 − 7
16 ζ4 − ζ2 log2 2 + 7
4 ζ2 log2 2 − 7
16 ζ4 + 1
16 ζ4 − 5
8 ζ3S1 ,
4 ζ2 log2 2 + 7
8 ζ4 − 1

2(cid:1) + 1
4 ζ3 log 2 + 2Li4(cid:0) 1
12 log4 2 ,
2(cid:1) − 1
4 ζ3 log 2 − 2Li4(cid:0) 1
12 log4 2 − 3
2(cid:1) − 1
2 ζ3 log 2 − 4Li4(cid:0) 1
6 log4 2 ,
2(cid:1) + 1
2 ζ3 log 2 + 4Li4(cid:0) 1
6 log4 2 − 1
2(cid:1) − 1
8 ζ3 log 2 − Li4(cid:0) 1
24 log4 2 ,
8 ζ3 log 2 + Li4(cid:0) 1
2(cid:1) + 1

24 log4 2 − 1

4 ζ3S1 ,

2 ζ2S2 ,

8 ζ3S1 − 1
After making these replacements the series coeﬃcients(cid:101)cn become(cid:98)cn, given by

10S2 − 16S1,1 − 4ζ2

1
4 −

4S1
3 +

2 ζ2S1,1 .

+ −20S3 + 40S1,2 + 40S2,1 − 64S1,1,1 − 16ζ2S1 − 4ζ3

(cid:98)cn = −

2



(4.45)

(4.46)

+ 40S4 − 84S1,3 − 100S2,2 − 80S3,1 + 160S1,1,2 + 160S1,2,1
+ 160S2,1,1 − 256S1,1,1,1 + 40ζ2S2 − 64ζ2S1,1 − 12ζ3S1 − 24ζ4 + O() .

(4.47)

30

DiscB2=p¯p¯pp+p¯p¯pp+p¯p¯pp+p¯p¯pp+p¯p¯ppDisceB2=p¯p¯pp+p¯p¯pp+p¯p¯ppDiscbB2=p¯p¯ppFigure 13: The only physical cut of the two-loop forward crossed-box diagram.

These coeﬃcients (cid:98)cn constitute the main result of this example section. We have checked

explicitly that resumming these coeﬃcients yields an expression

∞

(cid:88)n=1(cid:98)cnωn ,

(cid:98)B2 =

(4.48)

(4.49)

which only has a branch cut along ω ∈ [1,∞) and whose discontinuity along that branch cut is

the same as for the original diagram B2. This means that these series coeﬃcients(cid:98)cn in eq. (4.47)

must be equal to the Mellin moments of the sum of physical cuts of the forward diagram B2!
We claim that

1

2πiMn[Cutphys B2] =(cid:98)cn .

The validity of the above statement can be veriﬁed by comparing the coeﬃcients(cid:98)cn against

an explicit computation of the Mellin moments of the physical cut of the forward diagram B2,
depicted in ﬁg. 13. An explicit result for this particular cut diagram was given in eq. (B.21) of
ref. [4]. Correcting for small misprints (see appendix A of ref. [56]) and adopting our normali-
sation convention, we have that

Cutphys B2 = −2πiN () z2(1 − z)

6

+ 1

4
3 +

16
2 +

z(z − 8) − 89

9 (z − 1)(1 + 2z) + 2

−1−4(cid:18)−
27 (z − 1)(13z − 16) + O(2)(cid:19)
−1−2(cid:18)−
(cid:104)2 log2 z
− 2πiN () z2(1 − z)
6 (1 − z)(z − 7)(cid:105) − 4
+ log z(cid:0)4 log(1 − z) + 8(cid:1) + 1
3 log3 z
− log2 z(cid:0)8 + 2 log(1 − z)(cid:1) + 36(cid:0) Li3(z) − ζ3(cid:1) + 1
9 (z − 2z2 + 1)
− log z(cid:0)20ζ2 + 16 Li2(z) + 16 log(1 − z) + 4 log2(1 − z) + 8(cid:1)
3 (z − 1)(z − 7) log(1 − z) + O()(cid:19) .

2 +

2 log z

1

+ 1

(4.50)

Γ(1−2)4

Γ(1−4) Γ(2−2)2 Γ(1−)2 Γ(1+)2 . After expanding the factors (1− z)−1−k in terms of

where N () =
plus-distributions and taking the Mellin transform of this equation, we ﬁnd perfect agreement
with our formula in eq. (4.49), which expresses the Mellin moments in terms of series coeﬃcients
of the (modiﬁed) forward diagram. This concludes the example.

31

CutphysB2=p¯p¯pp5 Conclusions

In this paper we have presented a method for computing Mellin moments of single-particle
inclusive cross sections, such as Drell-Yan and Higgs production, directly from forward scattering
diagrams by invoking unitarity in the form of cutting equations. Due to the non-inclusive nature
of these processes, the cutting equations contain unphysical cuts. The main achievement of
this paper is to a provide diagram-independent prescription for “removing” such unphysical
cut contributions to the discontinuity of a forward diagram, once these are expressed in the
reciprocal ω = 1/z variable. The removal occurs through a complex shift in the summation
index, and through a replacement rule dictionary for harmonic sums in the results. After this,
the modiﬁed sum over powers of ω reproduces precisely the desired sum of physical cuts, and
the coeﬃcients are precisely the Mellin moments of the corresponding contribution to the cross
section. We have demonstrated our method for various one- and two-loop diagrams.

The approach of this paper is conceptually similar to the computation of three-loop DIS
splitting functions [6, 7]. While DIS is a fully-inclusive process, our method provides a non-
trivial extension to semi-inclusive processes. Other methods exist for obtaining cross sections of
semi-inclusive processes, but they do not make use of the optical theorem or cutting equations.
For example, one very successful approach [4] computes cut diagrams as solutions to diﬀerential
equations. Technically the latter need to be augmented with boundary conditions coming from a
separate calculation (typically expansion-by-regions). In our approach the boundary conditions
to diﬀerence equations for the Mellin moments are provided by the results for bubble-type loop
integrals.
In these other approaches calculations are moreover performed in z-space, except
in [9].

Our method thus provides a new means of computing semi-inclusive cross sections, at least
up to two-loop order. Since the main ingredients to the method are forward loop diagrams, as
opposed to cut diagrams, it is particularly useful as an alternative to corrections involving real
radiation, but provides no alternative way to compute virtual corrections. Being exclusively
made out virtual diagrams, numerical cross-checks may be performed in a uniform way for all
contributions (see the two-loop examples in the previous section).

In regards to extending our method beyond two-loop order, we note that the work in this
paper is based on an analysis of (un)physical branch cuts and the assumption that the solution
space is spanned by harmonic sums. Both aspects will need to be reviewed at higher loops, but
we are hopeful that progress can be made towards single-scale cross sections at N3LO.

Acknowledgments We gratefully acknowledge Sven Moch, Jos Vermaseren and Andreas
Vogt for helpful discussions, as well as Mert Aybat and Lisa Hartgring for early collaboration.
This work was supported by the Research Executive Agency (REA) of the European Union
under the Grant Agreements number PITN-GA-2010-264564 (LHCPhenoNet) and PITN-GA-
2012-316704 (HIGGSTOOLS); by the Foundation for Fundamental Research of Matter (FOM),
programme 156, “Higgs as Probe and Portal”; by the Dutch National Organization for Scientiﬁc
Research (NWO).

32

References

[1] G. ’t Hooft and M. J. G. Veltman, “DIAGRAMMAR,” NATO Sci. Ser. B 4 (1974)

177–322.

[2] Z. Bern, L. J. Dixon, and D. A. Kosower, “Progress in one loop QCD computations,”

Ann. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci. 46 (1996) 109–148, arXiv:hep-ph/9602280 [hep-ph].

[3] C. F. Berger and D. Forde, “Multi-Parton Scattering Amplitudes via On-Shell Methods,”

Ann. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci. 60 (2010) 181–205, arXiv:0912.3534 [hep-ph].

[4] C. Anastasiou and K. Melnikov, “Higgs boson production at hadron colliders in NNLO

QCD,” Nucl. Phys. B646 (2002) 220–256, arXiv:hep-ph/0207004 [hep-ph].

[5] J. A. M. Vermaseren, A. Vogt, and S. Moch, “The Third-order QCD corrections to

deep-inelastic scattering by photon exchange,” Nucl. Phys. B724 (2005) 3–182,
arXiv:hep-ph/0504242 [hep-ph].

[6] A. Vogt, S. Moch, and J. A. M. Vermaseren, “The Three-loop splitting functions in QCD:
The Singlet case,” Nucl. Phys. B691 (2004) 129–181, arXiv:hep-ph/0404111 [hep-ph].

[7] S. Moch, J. A. M. Vermaseren, and A. Vogt, “The Three loop splitting functions in QCD:

The Nonsinglet case,” Nucl. Phys. B688 (2004) 101–134, arXiv:hep-ph/0403192
[hep-ph].

[8] S. Moch and J. A. M. Vermaseren, “Deep Inelastic Structure Functions at Two Loops,”

Nucl. Phys. B573 (2000) 853–907, arXiv:hep-ph/9912355 [hep-ph].

[9] A. Mitov, “A New Method for Calculating Diﬀerential Distributions Directly in Mellin

Space,” Phys. Lett. B643 (2006) 366–373, arXiv:hep-ph/0511340 [hep-ph].

[10] A. Mitov and S.-O. Moch, “QCD Corrections to Semi-Inclusive Hadron Production in

Electron-Positron Annihilation at Two Loops,” Nucl. Phys. B751 (2006) 18–52,
arXiv:hep-ph/0604160 [hep-ph].

[11] S. A. Larin, T. van Ritbergen, and J. A. M. Vermaseren, “The Next next-to-leading QCD
approximation for nonsinglet moments of deep inelastic structure functions,” Nucl. Phys.
B427 (1994) 41–52.

[12] S. A. Larin, P. Nogueira, T. van Ritbergen, and J. A. M. Vermaseren, “The Three loop

QCD calculation of the moments of deep inelastic structure functions,” Nucl. Phys. B492
(1997) 338–378, arXiv:hep-ph/9605317 [hep-ph].

[13] A. Retey and J. A. M. Vermaseren, “Some higher moments of deep inelastic structure

functions at next-to-next-to-leading order of perturbative QCD,” Nucl. Phys. B604
(2001) 281–311, arXiv:hep-ph/0007294 [hep-ph].

[14] D. I. Kazakov and A. V. Kotikov, “Total α−s Correction to Deep Inelastic Scattering

Cross-section Ratio, R = σ−l / σ−t in QCD. Calculation of Longitudinal Structure
Function,” Nucl. Phys. B307 (1988) 721. [Erratum: Nucl. Phys.B345,299(1990)].

33

[15] I. Bierenbaum, J. Blumlein, and S. Klein, “Mellin Moments of the O(α3

Contributions to unpolarized Deep-Inelastic Scattering at Q2 (cid:29) m2 and Anomalous
Dimensions,” Nucl. Phys. B820 (2009) 417–482, arXiv:0904.3563 [hep-ph].

s) Heavy Flavor

[16] J. Blumlein, S. Klein, and B. Todtli, “O(α2

s) Heavy Flavor Contributions to
Transversity at Q2 (cid:29) m2,” Phys. Rev. D80 (2009) 094010, arXiv:0909.1547 [hep-ph].
[17] A. Behring, I. Bierenbaum, J. Bl¨umlein, A. De Freitas, S. Klein, and F. Wißbrock, “The

s) and O(α3

logarithmic contributions to the O(α3
operator matrix elements in deeply inelastic scattering,” Eur. Phys. J. C74 no. 9, (2014)
3033, arXiv:1403.6356 [hep-ph].

s) asymptotic massive Wilson coeﬃcients and

[18] J. Blumlein, A. Hasselhuhn, S. Klein, and C. Schneider, “The O(α3

snf T 2

F CA,F )

Contributions to the Gluonic Massive Operator Matrix Elements,” Nucl. Phys. B866
(2013) 196–211, arXiv:1205.4184 [hep-ph].

[19] J. Ablinger, J. Blumlein, S. Klein, C. Schneider, and F. Wissbrock, “The O(α3
Operator Matrix Elements of O(nf ) for the Structure Function F2(x, Q2) and
Transversity,” Nucl. Phys. B844 (2011) 26–54, arXiv:1008.3347 [hep-ph].

s) Massive

[20] J. Ablinger, J. Bl¨umlein, A. De Freitas, A. Hasselhuhn, A. von Manteuﬀel, M. Round,

and C. Schneider, “The O(α3
Element,” Nucl. Phys. B885 (2014) 280–317, arXiv:1405.4259 [hep-ph].

F ) Contributions to the Gluonic Operator Matrix

sT 2

[21] J. Ablinger, J. Blumlein, A. Hasselhuhn, S. Klein, C. Schneider, and F. Wissbrock,

“Massive 3-loop Ladder Diagrams for Quarkonic Local Operator Matrix Elements,” Nucl.
Phys. B864 (2012) 52–84, arXiv:1206.2252 [hep-ph].

[22] J. Ablinger, J. Bl¨umlein, C. Raab, C. Schneider, and F. Wißbrock, “Calculating Massive
3-loop Graphs for Operator Matrix Elements by the Method of Hyperlogarithms,” Nucl.
Phys. B885 (2014) 409–447, arXiv:1403.1137 [hep-ph].

[23] J. Ablinger, A. Behring, J. Bl¨umlein, A. De Freitas, A. von Manteuﬀel, and C. Schneider,

“Calculating Three Loop Ladder and V-Topologies for Massive Operator Matrix
Elements by Computer Algebra,” arXiv:1509.08324 [hep-ph].

[24] C. Anastasiou, C. Duhr, F. Dulat, F. Herzog, and B. Mistlberger, “Higgs Boson

Gluon-Fusion Production in QCD at Three Loops,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 114 (2015) 212001,
arXiv:1503.06056 [hep-ph].

[25] C. Anastasiou, C. Duhr, F. Dulat, E. Furlan, T. Gehrmann, F. Herzog, and

B. Mistlberger, “Higgs Boson Gluon-Fusion Production Beyond Threshold in N3Lo
QCD,” JHEP 03 (2015) 091, arXiv:1411.3584 [hep-ph].

[26] C. Anastasiou, C. Duhr, F. Dulat, E. Furlan, T. Gehrmann, F. Herzog, A. Lazopoulos,

and B. Mistlberger, “High precision determination of the gluon fusion Higgs boson
cross-section at the LHC,” arXiv:1602.00695 [hep-ph].

[27] S. Catani, L. Cieri, D. de Florian, G. Ferrera, and M. Grazzini, “Threshold resummation

at N3LL accuracy and soft-virtual cross sections at N3LO,” Nucl. Phys. B888 (2014)
75–91, arXiv:1405.4827 [hep-ph].

34

[28] M. Bonvini, R. D. Ball, S. Forte, S. Marzani, and G. Ridolﬁ, “Updated Higgs cross section

at approximate N3LO,” J. Phys. G41 (2014) 095002, arXiv:1404.3204 [hep-ph].

[29] T. Ahmed, M. Mahakhud, N. Rana, and V. Ravindran, “Drell-Yan Production at
Threshold to Third Order in QCD,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 113 no. 11, (2014) 112002,
arXiv:1404.0366 [hep-ph].

[30] G. F. Sterman, An Introduction to quantum ﬁeld theory. Cambridge University Press,

1993.

[31] E. Remiddi and J. A. M. Vermaseren, “Harmonic polylogarithms,” Int. J. Mod. Phys.

A15 (2000) 725–754, arXiv:hep-ph/9905237 [hep-ph].

[32] R. E. Cutkosky, “Singularities and discontinuities of Feynman amplitudes,” J. Math.

Phys. 1 (1960) 429–433.

[33] M. J. G. Veltman, “Diagrammatica: The Path to Feynman rules,” Cambridge Lect. Notes

Phys. 4 (1994) 1–284.

[34] M. J. G. Veltman, “Unitarity and causality in a renormalizable ﬁeld theory with unstable

particles,” Physica 29 (1963) 186–207.

[35] G. Altarelli, R. K. Ellis, and G. Martinelli, “Large Perturbative Corrections to the

Drell-Yan Process in QCD,” Nucl. Phys. B157 (1979) 461.

[36] O. Gituliar, “Master integrals for splitting functions from diﬀerential equations in QCD,”

JHEP 02 (2016) 017, arXiv:1512.02045 [hep-ph].

[37] J. A. M. Vermaseren and S. Moch, “Mathematics for Structure Functions,” Nucl. Phys.

Proc. Suppl. 89 (2000) 131–136, arXiv:hep-ph/0004235 [hep-ph].

[38] J. A. M. Vermaseren, “Harmonic Sums, Mellin Transforms and Integrals,” Int. J. Mod.

Phys. A14 (1999) 2037–2076, arXiv:hep-ph/9806280 [hep-ph].

[39] R. N. Lee and A. A. Pomeransky, “Critical Points and Number of Master Integrals,”

JHEP 11 (2013) 165, arXiv:1308.6676 [hep-ph].

[40] T. Gehrmann and E. Remiddi, “Diﬀerential equations for two loop four point functions,”

Nucl. Phys. B580 (2000) 485–518, arXiv:hep-ph/9912329 [hep-ph].

[41] J. Ablinger, A Computer Algebra Toolbox for Harmonic Sums Related to Particle Physics.

PhD thesis, Linz U., 2009. arXiv:1011.1176 [math-ph].
https://inspirehep.net/record/875721/files/arXiv:1011.1176.pdf.

[42] J. Ablinger, Computer Algebra Algorithms for Special Functions in Particle Physics. PhD

thesis, Linz U., 2012-04. arXiv:1305.0687 [math-ph].
http://inspirehep.net/record/1232081/files/arXiv:1305.0687.pdf.

[43] J. Ablinger, J. Bl¨umlein, and C. Schneider, “Analytic and Algorithmic Aspects of

Generalized Harmonic Sums and Polylogarithms,” J. Math. Phys. 54 (2013) 082301,
arXiv:1302.0378 [math-ph].

35

[44] J. Ablinger, J. Blumlein, and C. Schneider, “Harmonic Sums and Polylogarithms

Generated by Cyclotomic Polynomials,” J. Math. Phys. 52 (2011) 102301,
arXiv:1105.6063 [math-ph].

[45] J. Blumlein, “Structural Relations of Harmonic Sums and Mellin Transforms Up to

Weight W = 5,” Comput. Phys. Commun. 180 (2009) 2218–2249, arXiv:0901.3106
[hep-ph].

[46] M. H¨oschele, J. Hoﬀ, A. Pak, M. Steinhauser, and T. Ueda, “MT: A Mathematica
package to compute convolutions,” Comput. Phys. Commun. 185 (2014) 528–539,
arXiv:1307.6925 [hep-ph].

[47] R. N. Lee, “Presenting Litered: a Tool for the Loop Integrals Reduction,”

arXiv:1212.2685 [hep-ph].

[48] R. N. Lee, “Litered 1.4: a Powerful Tool for Reduction of Multiloop Integrals,” J. Phys.

Conf. Ser. 523 (2014) 012059, arXiv:1310.1145 [hep-ph].

[49] A. V. Smirnov, “Algorithm Fire – Feynman Integral Reduction,” JHEP 10 (2008) 107,

arXiv:0807.3243 [hep-ph].

[50] A. V. Smirnov and V. A. Smirnov, “Fire4, Litered and Accompanying Tools to Solve

Integration by Parts Relations,” Comput. Phys. Commun. 184 (2013) 2820–2827,
arXiv:1302.5885 [hep-ph].

[51] J. Carter and G. Heinrich, “Secdec: a General Program for Sector Decomposition,”

Comput. Phys. Commun. 182 (2011) 1566–1581, arXiv:1011.5493 [hep-ph].

[52] S. Borowka, J. Carter, and G. Heinrich, “Numerical Evaluation of Multi-Loop Integrals

for Arbitrary Kinematics with Secdec 2.0,” Comput. Phys. Commun. 184 (2013)
396–408, arXiv:1204.4152 [hep-ph].

[53] S. Borowka, G. Heinrich, S. P. Jones, M. Kerner, J. Schlenk, and T. Zirke, “Secdec-3.0:

Numerical Evaluation of Multi-Scale Integrals Beyond One Loop,” Comput. Phys.
Commun. 196 (2015) 470–491, arXiv:1502.06595 [hep-ph].

[54] D. Maitre, “HPL, a mathematica implementation of the harmonic polylogarithms,”
Comput. Phys. Commun. 174 (2006) 222–240, arXiv:hep-ph/0507152 [hep-ph].

[55] D. Maitre, “Extension of HPL to complex arguments,” Comput. Phys. Commun. 183

(2012) 846, arXiv:hep-ph/0703052 [hep-ph].

[56] A. Pak, M. Rogal, and M. Steinhauser, “Production of scalar and pseudo-scalar Higgs

bosons to next-to-next-to-leading order at hadron colliders,” JHEP 09 (2011) 088,
arXiv:1107.3391 [hep-ph].

36

