A Holographic Entanglement Entropy Conjecture for General Spacetimes

Fabio Sanches∗ and Sean J. Weinberg†

Berkeley Center for Theoretical Physics and Department of Physics

University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
6
1

 
 
]
h
t
-
p
e
h
[
 
 

1
v
0
5
2
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

We present a natural generalization of holographic entanglement entropy proposals beyond the
scope of AdS/CFT by anchoring extremal surfaces to holographic screens. Holographic screens are
a natural extension of the AdS boundary to arbitrary spacetimes and are preferred codimension
1 surfaces from the viewpoint of the covariant entropy bound. Screens have a unique preferred
foliation into codimension 2 surfaces called leaves. Our proposal is to ﬁnd the areas of extremal
surfaces achored to the boundaries of regions in leaves. We show that the properties of holographic
screens are suﬃcient to prove, under generic conditions, that extremal surfaces anchored in this way
always lie within a causal region associated with a given leaf. Within this causal region, a maximin
construction similar to that of Wall proves that our proposed quantity satisﬁes standard properties
of entanglement entropy like strong subadditivity. We conjecture that our prescription computes
entanglement entropies in quantum states that holographically deﬁne arbitrary spacetimes, including
those in a cosmological setting with no obvious boundary on which to anchor extremal surfaces.

CONTENTS

I. Introduction

II. Holographic Screen Entanglement Entropy

Properties of Holographic Screen
Entanglement Entropy and Extremal Surfaces
The Screen Entanglement Conjecture

III. Proofs of Strong Subadditivity and Other

Relations
Existence and Containment of Extremal
Surfaces
A Maximin Construction for Holographic
Screens
Deﬁnition and Existence of Mm(A)
Equivalence of Mm(A) and ext
(A)

IV. Extremal Surfaces in FRW Cosmology

Holographic Screens in FRW Cosmology
Extremal Surfaces in de Sitter Space
Random Entanglement and the Static Sphere
Approximation
Closed Universe with a Big Crunch

V. Concluding Remarks

A. Holographic Screens

References

1

2

3
3

3

4

5
5
6

9
9
9

10
12

13

14

15

I.

INTRODUCTION

A theory of quantum gravity should not apply only to
asymptotically locally anti-de Sitter (AlAdS) spacetimes.

∗ fabios@berkeley.edu
† sjweinberg@berkeley.edu

For this reason, the AdS/CFT correspondence [1, 2], al-
though immensely successful, has fallen short of a de-
scription of the quantum mechanics of spacetime. The
AdS restriction is severe: Maldacena’s conjecture does
not apply in an obvious way to even the cosmological
spacetime we ﬁnd ourselves in.

If a quantum theory applies to general spacetimes, it
is desirable that it reduces to AdS/CFT in the appro-
priate cases. This suggests a strategy for guessing prop-
erties of a complete theory: consider speciﬁc aspects of
AdS/CFT and devise generalizations that are applicable
to other spacetimes. If one knew only of Special Rela-
tivity, she could guess aspects of General Relativity by
thinking to “promote” the ﬂat metric to a dynamical one.
Similar statements can be made about the relation be-
tween many other pairs of theories. But retrospective
examples obscure the challenge: one cannot conﬁdently
know what to promote (and how to promote it) to enlarge
the regime of validity of a given theory.

Holographic entanglement entropy, proposed by Ryu
and Takayanagi (RT) [3], proved by Lewkowycz and Mal-
dacena [4], and made covariant by Hubeny, Rangamani,
and Takayanagi (HRT) [5], is a beautiful property (or, in
the covariant case, conjecture) of AdS/CFT. Below we
describe a promotion of holographic entanglement en-
tropy beyond the scope of AdS/CFT that applies just
as well to cosmological spacetimes as it does to asymp-
totically AdS spacetimes.
In the case of the latter, it
reduces to the HRT proposal. Moreover, the promoted
holographic entanglement entropy satisﬁes, for nontriv-
ial reasons, expected properties of entanglement entropy
like strong subadditivity.

The HRT prescription provides a way to compute en-
tanglement entropy of a spatial region A in a quantum
state dual to an AlAdS spacetime. The procedure is to
consider ∂A, the boundary of the spatial region, and to
ﬁnd the area of a codimension 2 extremal surface that
is anchored to ∂A. A naïve extension of this idea to
general spacetimes would be to take A to be a region in
the conformal boundary of an arbitrary spacetime. This

2

approach fails: what is the boundary of a closed FRW
universe with past and future singularities?

In our proposal, we anchor extremal surfaces to a holo-
graphic screen. Holographic screens are codimension 1
surfaces that appear to be the most natural place for
quantum states dual to arbitrary geometries to live on.
In fact, they were proposed by Bousso [7] in an attempt
to ﬁnd the analogue of the AdS boundary when extend-
ing holography to general spacetimes. If one believes the
covariant entropy bound [6], then there is essentially no
other reasonable class of surfaces for this purpose.

II. HOLOGRAPHIC SCREEN
ENTANGLEMENT ENTROPY

Throughout this paper, we will work in a spacetime
M that is globally hyperbolic (or, in the AlAdS case,
satisﬁes a generalization of global hyperbolicity) and that
satisﬁes the null energy condition. Put d = dim M. Let
H denote a past holographic screen. Everything below
can be modiﬁed to the case of a future holographic screen
without subtlety.

As in the case of appendix A, we will assume some

genericity conditions.
• Strict Focusing.

If B is a codimension 2 space-
like surface, the four surface-orthogonal null con-
gruences have strictly decreasing expansion as they
move away from B.

• Strict Second Law of Holographic Screens. If leaves
of H are smoothly parameterized as σ(r) with
r nonzero, then area(σ(r)) has a nonzero
ha = ∂a
derivative for all r.

The sense in which the second condition is generic is de-
scribed in [8, 9] and reviewed in appendix A. If our space-
time fails to satisfy these conditions, it can be made to do
so by sprinkling a very small amount of classical matter
everywhere.
As discussed in appendix A, there is a unique foliation
of H into anti-trapped leaves. Let σ be a particular leaf
in this foliation and let k and l denote the vector ﬁelds
on σ that satisfy equation A.1. Because M is globally
hyperbolic, there exists a Cauchy surface S0 containing
σ such that S0 \ σ consists of a disconnected interior and
exterior. The interior of S0 is deﬁned so that a vector on
σ pointing toward the interior takes the form −c1k + c2l
with c1, c2 > 0. Let S denote the union of the interior
of S0 with σ. We will assume that S is compact and
that it has the topology of a solid ball. Now let Dσ
be the domain of dependence of S, Dσ = D(S), with
the convention that Dσ includes orthogonal null surfaces
generated by l and −k.
Suppose that A is a d−2 dimensional submanifold of σ
with a boundary. Consider the set of extremal codimen-
sion 2 surfaces that are anchored to and terminating at
∂A, and contained entirely in Dσ (see ﬁgure 1). In section

FIG. 1. This ﬁgure depicts our construction of holographic en-
tanglement entropy in general spacetimes. The horn-shaped
surface is a past holographic screen H. The black and red
codimension 2 regions together form a single leaf σ. The
black segment represents a region A and the extremal sur-
face ext (A) (orange) is anchored to its boundary. The causal
region Dσ is shown in green. Note that ext A ⊂ Dσ.

III we will give conditions on Dσ that ensure that this
set is not empty. Taking the existence of such a surface
for granted, let the one of minimal area be denoted by
ext (A) and deﬁne the holographic screen entanglement
entropy (or screen entanglement entropy for brevity) of
A as

S(A) =

area(ext (A))

4

.

(II.1)

The quantity S(A) is the most natural generalization of
the HRT proposal to general spacetimes. We emphasize
that we have deﬁned screen entanglement entropy geo-
metrically without reference to a quantum theory. The
term “entanglement entropy” is only meant suggestively.
Nonetheless, below we state a screen entanglement con-
jecture: that S(A) is in fact the von Neumann entropy of
a subsystem of a holographic quantum state for general
spacetimes. Regardless of the validity of this conjecture,
we are free to study S(A) as we have deﬁned it. As we
will see, the properties of holographic screens ensure that
screen entanglement entropy possesses numerous proper-
ties reminiscent of von Neumann entropy which we now
discuss.

Properties of Holographic Screen

Entanglement Entropy and Extremal Surfaces
• Existence and Containment. In section III we pro-
vide conditions for ext (A) to exist. This is a non-
trivial issue because of the “containment condition”
that ext A ⊂ Dσ. Arguments that Dσ contains an
extremal surface rely critically on the assumption
that A is in a leaf of a holographic screen. More-
over, the condition that ext (A) ⊂ Dσ gives rise
to properties of holographic screen entanglement
entropy like strong subadditivity (see below) and
will allow us to reasonably deﬁne an entanglement
wedge for A. For an example of the importance of
the containment condition, see equation III.1 below
and the paragraphs around it.

• (Strong) Subadditivity. Suppose that A and B are

regions in σ. Then,

S(A) + S(B) ≥ S(A ∪ B) + S(A ∩ B)

where S is the function deﬁned in II.1. This result
holds regardless of whether or not A and B intersect
as long as we take the convention that S(∅) = 0.
As we will see in section III, the proof of this is
a modiﬁed version of Wall’s [13] “maximim” proof
for the HRT case. This does not mean that strong
subadditivity is an obvious result: most of the work
in section III is to show that the properties of leaves
of holographic screens are suﬃcient to generalize
Wall’s arguments to our context.

• Page Bounded. Deﬁne the extensive entropy of A as
Sextensive(A) = area(A)/4. Then, the holographic
screen entanglement entropy satisﬁes the following
Page bound:1

S(A) ≤ min{Sextensive(A), Sextensive(σ \ A)}.

(II.2)
This is a simple consequence of the maximin con-
struction we give in section III. Note that the strict
second law for holographic screens implies that this
inequality becomes a weaker constraint if we trans-
port A along the ﬁbration vector ﬁeld deﬁned in
appendix A. In certain cases, the inequality satu-
rates and S(A) approaches a “random entanglement
limit.” (See section IV for examples of this in cos-
mology.)

• Reduction to the HRT Proposal. As explained in
detail in [7], the AdS boundary can be regarded as
a holographic screen. In this case, surfaces of con-
stant time in the dual ﬁeld theory correspond to
leaves, and our proposal becomes identical to the
covariant holographic entanglement entropy conjec-
ture of [5].

1 The term “Page bound” is motivated by Page’s considerations of

the entanglement entropies of subsystems [16].

The Screen Entanglement Conjecture

3

The content of this work does not rely on any unver-
iﬁed statement. Nonetheless, for the purposes of better
motivating the deﬁnition of holographic screen entangle-
ment entropy, we allow ourselves to make a speculative
conjecture about the role of S(A) in quantum gravity.

Our proposal can be regarded as an extension on co-
variant holographic principle due to Bousso which we now
review. In [7], Bousso proposed that each marginal sur-
face B foliating a holographic screen is associated with a
Hilbert space HB of dimension exp(area(B)/4) and that
states in HB holographically deﬁne the state on a null
surface N passing through B in the marginal direction.
For our purposes, this holographic principle takes the fol-
lowing form. To each leaf σ of a holographic screen we
assign a density matrix ρσ. The density matrix acts on a
Hilbert space of dimension exp(area(σ)/4) which may be
a subspace of a “complete” Hilbert space.2 The covariant
entropy bound suggests that ρσ encodes the quantum in-
formation on the null slice generated by l and −l in the
notation of appendix A.

We now assume Bousso’s holographic principle and
state our new conjecture. We propose that every region
A of σ (up to string scale resolution) corresponds to a
subsystem of the Hilbert space that ρσ acts on. We con-
jecture that the von Neumann entropy of that subsystem
in the density matrix ρσ is given, at leading order, by
S(A) as we have deﬁned it in equation II.1.

We refer to this statement as the screen entanglement
conjecture. Because a holographic quantum theory dual
to arbitrary spacetimes is not known, the screen entangle-
ment conjecture is not a mathematical statement about
the relation between two known theories (as in the case
of HRT). Instead, our conjecture suggests a way to com-
pute properties of quantum states in an unknown theory.
It is our hope that this will, in fact, be a step toward
developing a quantum theory for arbitrary spacetimes.

III. PROOFS OF STRONG SUBADDITIVITY

AND OTHER RELATIONS

In this section we prove key technical results about
holographic screen entanglement entropy including many
of the properties advertised above. The notation and con-
ventions we will use are the same as those given in section

2 The concept that the states corresponding to any particular
approximately ﬁxed geometry form a subspace of a complete
Hilbert space is due to Nomura [17, 18].
In his formulation,
a larger Hilbert space for arbitrary geometries is a direct sum
over subspaces for each geometry. This direct sum itself is only
a subspace of the complete Hilbert space which may include an
“intrinsically stringy” subspace with no geometrical interpreta-
tion. This construction may provide insight into how quantum
mechanics can be unitary despite the fact that screens have non-
constant area.

4

∂A that lies entirely in Dσ and that intersects ∂Dσ only
at ∂A.
Proof. Let Σ+ and Σ− denote the future and past ingo-
ing light-sheets of σ. We now extend Σ− to a slightly
larger light-sheet, ˜Σ−, by following the future directed
null congruence of k. Because θk > 0 on σ, we can make
this extension so that ˜Σ− has θk > 0 everywhere and so
that there exists an open set in ˜Σ− containing σ.
In the language of [14], both Σ+ \ σ and ˜Σ− are ex-
tremal surface barriers because they have negative ex-
pansion in the l and −k directions respectively. More-
over, ∂Dσ ⊂ (Σ+ \ σ) ∪ ˜Σ−. It follows that ∂Dσ is itself
an extremal surface barrier for extremal surfaces in the
interior4 of Dσ.

Now consider the region A. The spherical topology5
of σ ensures that it is possible to introduce a continuous
one-parameter family of submanifolds of Dσ, As, such
that

• A0 consists of a single point in the interior of Dσ
• A1 = A
• for 0 < s < 1, As is a codimension 2 submanifold
of the interior of Dσ that is diﬀeomorphic to A.

This is shown in ﬁgure 2. Note, in particular, that if
s < 1, As ∩ ∂Dσ = ∅.

If  > 0 is suﬃciently small, then the extremal sur-
face of minimal area that is anchored to ∂A lies entirely
in the interior of Dσ. Consider increasing the value of
the parameter s from  to 1. For each value of s, con-
struct an extremal surface anchored to ∂As. Because
Dσ is compact we can require that as s increases the ex-
tremal surface anchored to ∂As does not jump discontin-
uously. Because, as discussed above, ∂Dσ is an extremal
surface barrier, the extremal surface anchored to ∂As is
contained in the interior of Dσ for all s < 1. When we
take the limit sending s to 1, the extremal surface an-
chored to ∂A must intersect ∂Dσ at ∂A and nowhere
else: if it did intersect ∂Dσ outside of ∂A, the extremal
surface would be locally tangent to an extremal surface
barrier with strictly nonzero null extrinsic curvature.

The unwanted assumption that Dσ is compact (which
fails in the event that Σ+ or Σ− encounter a singularity)
can be dropped if there exists a codimension 0 submani-
fold (with boundary) of Dσ, R, which “restricts” extremal
surfaces (see ﬁgure 3). By this we mean that

FIG. 2. The proof of lemma 1 involves a continuous family of
surfaces As along with their extremal surfaces (dotted curves).

II and appendix A. In particular, H is a past holographic
screen in a globally hyperbolic spacetime of dimension d
that satisﬁes the genericity conditions of section II. σ is a
compact leaf of H which we assume to have the topology
of Sd−2. k and l are null orthogonal vector ﬁelds on σ
satisfying equation A.1. S0 is a Cauchy slice containing σ
and S is the portion of S0 that is enclosed by σ including
σ itself (the enclosed side is deﬁned in section II). S is
assumed to have the topology of a compact d − 1 ball.
Dσ is the domain of dependence of S.

As always, the case of a future holographic screen is

omitted because it presents no additional subtlety.

Existence and Containment of Extremal Surfaces

As discussed in section II, it is nontrivial and critical
to show the existence of an extremal surface anchored
to ∂A that lies entirely in Dσ. We now prove that such
a surface exists under very generic conditions. Our ﬁrst
step is to show that ext (A) exists in the case that Dσ
is compact. This is a common situation3 although it is
not the case if the ingoing light sheets of σ encounter a
singularity.
Lemma 1. If Dσ is compact, then there exists a codi-
menson 2 extremal surface anchored and terminating at

3 Suppose that the future and past ingoing light-sheets of σ ter-
minate at caustics rather than singularities. Let C+ and C− de-
note the set of the ﬁrst caustics encountered (local or nonlocal)
by null geodesics in the future and past light sheets respectively.
Then, if Dσ = J−(C+) ∩ J+(C−), we can conclude that Dσ is
compact. This follows from the fact that C± inherits the com-
pactness of σ and from the fact that global hyperbolicity implies
that J−(K1) ∩ J+(K2) is compact if K1 and K2 are compact.

4 In [14], extremal surfaces are conﬁned to regions referred to as
the “exterior” of an extremal surface barrier. The interior of Dσ,
i.e. Dσ \ ∂Dσ, is analogous to exterior regions studied by Wall
and Engelhardt.

5 We remind the reader that our conventions are those laid out
in the ﬁrst paragraph of section II. In particular, we are making
simplifying topological assumptions about σ and S. We will leave
it to future work to investigate the consequences of relaxing these
assumptions.

5

Theorem 1. If Dσ possesses a compact restriction, then
there exists a codimenson 2 extremal surface anchored
and terminating at ∂A that lies entirely in Dσ and that
intersects ∂Dσ only at ∂A.

To better appreciate this theorem, it is helpful show
that the statement is false if σ is not a leaf of a holo-
graphic screen. Consider 2 + 1 dimensional Minkowski
space with inertial coordinates (t, x, y) and let C denote
the large cylinder satisfying x2 + y2 = R2 with R (cid:29) 1.
Consider the two line segments on C that are approxi-
mately given by

A = {(t =
B = {(t =

1
2
1
2

|x|,−1 > x ≥ 0, y = R)}
|x|, 0 ≤ x < 1, y = R)}

(III.1)

and construct any spacelike “time slice” on C, σ, that
includes AB.
It is easy to see that the extremal sur-
face anchored to ∂ (AB) is a straight line that is timelike
related to AB and thus fails to lie within the domain
of dependence Dσ. To see how severe this problem is,
note that the segments A and B fail to satisfy subaddi-
tivity of entanglement entropy. That is, the inequality
SA + SB ≥ SAB is false. Note that in this example σ
fails to satisfy equation A.1 because of the kink at A∩ B.

A Maximin Construction for Holographic Screens

Theorem 1 ensures that holographic screen entangle-
ment entropy is a well-deﬁned quantity in a broad set of
cases. We will now demonstrate that this quantity sat-
isﬁes expected properties of entanglement entropy. To
do this, it is very useful to closely follow [13] and intro-
duce a maximin construction of ext A. Our construction
will be slightly modiﬁed from that used for HRT surfaces
anchored to the AdS boundary. Wall’s maximin prescrip-
tion involves considering a collection of Cauchy slices that
are anchored only to ∂A. Because we already know that
ext A lies inside of Dσ, we will introduce a stronger con-
straint requiring that we only consider achronal slices
that are anchored to all of σ.

Deﬁnition and Existence of Mm(A)

Our setup remains unchanged. Fix a past (or future)
holographic screen H in a globally hyperbolic spacetime
and let σ be a leaf. We take a Cauchy surface S0 con-
taining σ and deﬁne S as the closure of the portion of
S0 inside of σ. As before, we require that S is compact
and that it has the topology of a solid d − 1 ball. Let
Dσ = D(S). We also ﬁx a region A in σ with a bound-
ary. Now deﬁne Cσ as the collection of codimension 1
compact achronal surfaces that are anchored to σ and
that have domain of dependence Dσ. Note, in particular,

FIG. 3. The idea of a compact restriction is shown here. The
restriction R is the shaded region along with its boundary, the
blue and orange lines. ∂R consists of two parts: an extremal
surface barrier B (blue) and a portion of ∂Dσ (orange). In
this ﬁgure, the barrier B protects extremal surfaces in R from
a singularity. Not shown are extremal surfaces in R, none of
which contact ∂R except at their anchor on the leaf σ.

1. R is compact,
2. There exists an open set U containing S with Dσ ∩

U = R ∩ U, and

3. ∂R = (∂Dσ ∩ R)∪B where B is an extremal surface
barrier for codimension 2 extremal surfaces inside
in R.

These conditions for R are designed to ensure that R
can be used in lemma 1 in place of Dσ without diﬃculty.
The existence of such regions R relies on the existence of
the barrier B. The arguments in theorem 11 of [13] show
that Kasner singularities are always protected by such
barriers. Hartman and Maldacena [15] encountered a
barrier protecting black hole singularities from codimen-
sion 2 extremal surfaces. Constant time slices in FRW
spacetimes are another example of suitable barriers.6
Any region R ⊂ Dσ satisfying the conditions will be
called a compact restriction of Dσ. Note that, in partic-
ular, if Dσ is compact then Dσ is a compact restriction
of itself. Our ﬁndings can now be summarized by the
following improvement upon lemma 1:

6 Many extremal surfaces are anchored at singularities and thus
pass through barriers. This is irrelevant because the barriers we
are discussing here play the of ∂Dσ in the proof of lemma 1.
As a region As is deformed from a point inside R into A ⊂ σ,
extremal surfaces anchored to ∂As cannot smoothly pass B or
∂Dσ.

Σ+Σ+Σ-Σ-SBthat S ∈ Cσ. Moreover, note that the global hyperbolic-
ity of Dσ ensures that every element of Cσ has the same
topology as S: that of a compact d − 1 ball.
Take any Σ ∈ Cσ. Let min(∂A, Σ) denote the codimen-
sion 2 surface of minimal area7 on Σ that is anchored to
∂A. The existence of min(∂A, Σ) is guaranteed by the
compactness of Σ and theorem 9 of [13]. Deﬁne a func-
tion F : Cσ → [0, area(A)] by F (Σ) = area(min(∂A, Σ)).
Now assume that there exists a Σ0 in Cσ that maximizes
F (globally). We now deﬁne min(∂A, Σ0) as the maximin
surface of A, and we will denote it by Mm(A). If there
are several maximin surfaces, Mm(A) can refer to any of
them.

The existence of Mm(A) can be proven in many cases
by appropriately importing the arguments of theorems
10 and 11 in [13] which we only brieﬂy describe here.
Consider the Cauchy surface S0 which can be identiﬁed
as a slice in a foliation of Cauchy surfaces {St}. Using
this deﬁnition of time, we can identify a surface Σ ∈ Cσ
with a function tΣ : S0 → R in a natural way:
if Ix
denotes the integral curve of ∂t that passes through a
point x ∈ S, then Σ = {Ix ∩ StΣ(x)|x ∈ S}. From this
viewpoint, F can be regarded as a real-valued functional
on {tΣ}. Now if Dσ is compact, we can ﬁnd the maxi-
mum and minimum values of t for the set Dσ to obtain
an upper and lower bound on tΣ that applies for all Σ.
Moreover, the condition that Σ be compact and achronal
ensures that {tΣ} is equicontinuous. These facts imply
that Cσ is compact (with the uniform topology) and that
the extreme value theorem applies to the function F .

In the case where Dσ is not compact (for instance, due
to a singularity terminating a light sheet of σ), we can
still argue that F has a maximum as long as Dσ satis-
ﬁes a condition similar to but slightly stronger than the
“compact restriction” idea discussed above. Suppose that
B+ is a surface in Cσ which is identical to Σ+ in some
neighborhood of S. For any Σ ∈ Cσ, deﬁne another sur-
face ¯Σ by t ¯Σ = min{tΣ, tB+}. If B+ has the property that
for any Σ we have F (Σ) ≤ F ( ¯Σ), then we will say that
B+ is a future maximin barrier. A past maximin barrier
is deﬁned analogously as a surface B− ∈ Cσ, identical to
Σ− in a neighborhood of S, such that for any Σ we have
F (Σ) ≤ F ( ¯Σ) where ¯Σ is deﬁned by t ¯Σ = max{tΣ, tB−}.
Now if Dσ possesses both a past and future maximin
barrier, then we can restrict our attention to the sub-
set of surfaces in Cσ that satisfy tB− ≤ tΣ ≤ tB+. Let
Cσ(B−, B+) denote this restricted set. Because B− and
B+ are compact, J+(B−) ∩ J−(B+) is compact and so
the set Cσ(B−, B+) is compact in the uniform topology
and F has a maximum Σ0 ∈ Cσ(B−, B+). The deﬁnition

7 Wall [13] added the condition that min(∂A, Σ) be homologous to
A. While this condition ought to be included in our discussion as
well, the assumption that S (and thus every element of Cσ) has
the topology of a compact d− 1 ball makes a homology condition
trivial. We leave the task of investigating more general topologies
to future work.

6

of past and future maximin barriers ensures us that if
Σ ∈ Cσ, then F (Σ0) ≥ F (Σ). Thus, Σ0 is a global maxi-
mum for F and we can safely deﬁne min(∂A, Σ0) as the
maximin surface of A, Mm(A).

As in the case of the compact restriction of Dσ used
in theorem 1, it is diﬃcult to ﬁnd examples where Dσ
does not possess a past and future barrier. Wall [13] ar-
gued that such barriers protect maximin surfaces from a
wide range of singularities: approximately Kasner singu-
larities, BKL singularities, and FRW big bangs all lead
to past or future maximin barriers. If Σ± simply termi-
nate at caustics rather than singularities, then B± = Σ±
are barriers. In any event, if B± exist, then the region
J+(B−) ∩ J−(B+) provides a compact restriction of Dσ
in the sense of theorem 1. Thus, the existence of B±
ensures both the existence of Mm(A) as well as the exis-
tence of ext (A). From here on, we will simply take for
granted that a past and future maximin barrier exist.

Equivalence of Mm(A) and ext

(A)

Below we will argue that Mm(A) = ext (A). However,
it is ﬁrst very useful to introduce two additional deﬁni-
tions ﬁrst.

1. Take Σ ∈ Cσ and let Γ be a codimension 2 surface
anchored to ∂A that lies in Dσ. Consider the inter-
section between Σ and the future and past-directed
orthogonal null surfaces of Γ that are directed to-
ward A. This intersection is called the representa-
tive of Γ on Σ and will be denoted by rep(Γ, Σ).

2. The domain of dependence of codimension 1
achronal surfaces anchored to A ∪ ext A lying in
Dσ will be called the entanglement wedge of A.

Note that rep(Γ, Σ) is itself a codimension 2 surface
anchored to ∂A that lies on Σ. Moreover, if Γ is ex-
tremal then, by the focusing theorem, area(rep(Γ, Σ)) ≤
area(Γ).

We now demonstrate that our maximin procedure al-
ways ﬁnds ext A, the extremal surface of minimal area
that is anchored to ∂A and which lies in Dσ. While
much of the proof is similar to the arguments in [13], we
will have to pay special attention to the possibility that
the maximin surface could run into the boundary of Dσ.
Theorem 2. Mm(A) = ext (A).
Proof. The argument of theorem 15 in [13] immediately
shows that if a point p ∈ Mm(A) is also in the interior
of Dσ (i.e. Dσ \ ∂Dσ), then Mm(A) is extremal at p.
In particular, if Mm(A) ∩ ∂Dσ = ∂A, then Mm(A) is an
extremal surface everywhere. We now argue that Mm(A)
in fact cannot ever intersect ∂Dσ outside of ∂A.
Suppose there exists p ∈ Mm(A) ∩ (∂Dσ \ ∂A). There
must be an open neighborhood of p in Mm(A) (open in
the d-2 dimensional manifold Mm(A)) that is entirely
contained in ∂Dσ.
If this were not the case, Mm(A)

7
f : σ → [0, 1] is a smooth weighting function which
equals 1 at the null generator xp that p lies on.
We take f to go to zero smoothly as x moves away
from xp, equaling zero exactly when x corresponds
to a point outside of U ∩ Mm(A). For λ < λ(x),
we require that the surface Σ is identical to Σ+.
We extend Σ beyond λ by parallel transporting
tangent vectors on Mm(A) directed toward V down
to λ. This prescription does not uniquely ﬁx Σ,
but it is suﬃcient for our purposes.
Consider the one-parameter family of codimension
2 curves min(∂A, Σ). For any  > 0, let L denote
the future-directed null congruence of min(∂A, Σ)
that points toward the interior of Dσ (see ﬁgure
4). The continuity of min(∂A, Σ) as  varies and
the fact that Σ+ is a light sheet ensures that there
exists and 0 > 0 such that for  < 0,

– L intersects Σ0 to form a codimension 2 sur-

face on Σ0 anchored to ∂A and

– L has negative future-directed expansion in
the region between min(∂A, Σ) and its inter-
section with Σ0.

Denote this intersection by C and observe that
C0 = Mm(A). But Mm(A) is minimal on Σ0 so
for suﬃciently small ,
area(Mm(A)) < area(C) ≤ area(min(∂A, Σ))
which contradicts the assumption that Mm(A) has
area greater than or equal to the minimal area sur-
face on any slice. Note that the last inequality
above follows from the focusing theorem applied
to L.

• case 2 : p ∈ σ.

Assume that there exists a (dimension d-2) open
subset of Mm(A) that is contained in σ. (If not,
there must be such an open set in ∂Dσ \ σ which
just leads to case 1 above.) Now consider the null
vector ﬁeld la on σ and the geodesics generated by
it. Follow these geodesics from σ up along Σ+ by
a short aﬃne distance  > 0 to generate a new
codimension 2 surface, σ, which limits to σ when
 → 0. The focusing theorem now gives rise to a
modiﬁed version of equation A.1 at σ:

θk
 > 0
θl
 < 0.

(III.2)

Along with moving σ up the light-sheet, we also
translate A up the sheet to a one-parameter family
of surfaces A that limit to A. Consider the max-
imin construction applied to codimension 2 surfaces
anchored to ∂A that lie on codimension 1 surfaces
anchored to σ. We denote the result by Mm(A).
We also deﬁne Dσ in the obvious way. Now this

FIG. 4. This ﬁgure depicts the argument of case 1 of the
proof of theorem 2. Note that the surface S is shown here
for reference and that it does not play a critical role in the
proof. The shaded region is Dσ = D(S) and the green dot is
(a cross-section of) the leaf σ.

would be extremal at points arbitrarily close to p and
would thus be extremal at p. Moreover, Mm(A) would be
tangent to ∂Dσ at p. However, ∂Dσ is an extremal sur-
face barrier (see lemma 1) so this is not possible. There
are now two cases to consider.

• Case 1 : p ∈ ∂Dσ \ σ.
Figure 4 illustrates a construction that we will use
for this case. Take p ∈ Σ+ (the case of p ∈ Σ− is no
diﬀerent). By construction, Mm(A) is minimal on
a surface Σ0. There exists a (dimension d-1) open
subset U of Σ0 containing p such that U∩Mm(A) ⊂
Σ+. Moreover, we can require that U is “split” by
Mm(A) into two disconnected sets, N and V , such
that N is the side of U closer to σ. Since Σ0 is
anchored to σ, we must have that N ⊂ Σ+ and, in
particular, N is null. On the other hand, V cannot
be a subset of Σ+. If it were, then Mm(A) could
decrease its area by being deformed up Σ+ (by the
focusing theorem).
In particular, we can take U
small enough to ensure that V is nowhere null in
the direction of la.
We now consider the process of slightly sliding Σ0
down Σ+. More precisely, take a small parameter
 > 0 and a corresponding one-parameter family of
slices {Σ} that are slightly deformed from Σ0 in a
way we now describe (an example of Σ is depicted
in ﬁgure 4 by an orange dashed line). The surface
Mm(A)∩ U is described by a function λ0(x) giving
the aﬃne distance from σ up to Mm(A) at a point
x ∈ σ. Now put λ(x) = λ0(x) − f (x). Here,

maximin procedure leads to the same two cases that
we are now studying. The ﬁrst case, where Mm(A)
intersects ∂Dσ \ σ proceeds exactly as it did with
 = 0. Now suppose that Mm(A) has an open
set contained in σ. Mm(A) must be minimal on
some slice Σ. However, equation III.2 implies that
σ has negative (inward) extrinsic curvature on Σ.
It is thus impossible for Mm(A) to be minimal
on Σ since its area could be decreased by “cutting
corners.”
We can thus conclude that Mm(A)∩ ∂Dσ = ∂A.
This implies that Mm(A) is extremal. Taking the
limit as  → 0, we conclude that Mm(A) is ex-
tremal. But, given our assumption that part of
Mm(A) lies on σ, equation A.1 shows that Mm(A)
cannot be extremal since extremal surfaces have
zero null expansion in all directions.

At this point it is proven that Mm(A) is extremal. All
that is left is to show that, of all the extremal surfaces
in Dσ that are anchored to ∂A, Mm(A) is the smallest.
Let Σ0 ∈ Cσ be a slice on which Mm(A) is minimal. If
Γ is another extremal surface anchored to ∂A then, as a
result of the focusing theorem, we ﬁnd that

area(Mm(A)) ≤ area(rep(Γ, Σ0)) ≤ area(Γ).

We are now in a position to prove a variety of proper-
ties of screen entanglement entropy. We begin with the
“Page bound” advertised in section II.
Corollary 1. If A is a region in the leaf σ, then
S(A) ≤ min{Sextensive(A), Sextensive(σ \ A)}

where S deonotes the holographic screen entanglement
entropy of A and Sextensive(X) denotes the area of a re-
gion X ⊂ σ divided by 4.
Proof. S(A) = area(Mm(A))/4 but Mm(A) =
min(∂A, Σ0) for some Σ0 ∈ Cσ. Both A and σ \ A are
codimension d − 2 dimensional surfaces on Σ0 anchored
to ∂A so the area of Mm(A) is less than or equal to the
areas of both A and σ \ A.

Next we turn to the proof of strong subadditivity for
holographic screen entanglement entropy (other proper-
ties of entanglement entropy that admit covariant geo-
metrical bulk proofs can be imported here as well). Un-
like the case of theorems 1 and 2, the arguments below
are essentially identical to those of [13] with little ad-
ditional subtlety. We start with our version of theorem
17 in [13] which states that if B ⊂ A, then ext A lies
“outside” of ext B.
Theorem 3. Suppose that A and B are regions in the
leaf σ with B ⊂ A. Then,

8

1. the entanglement wedge of A contains the entan-

glement wedge of B,

2. there exists a surface in Cσ on which both extA and

ext B are minimal.

Sketch of Proof: The proof is the same as that of theorem
17 of [13] so we only sketch it here. For any surface
in Σ ∈ Cσ, consider a pair of codimension 2 surfaces
constrained to lie on Σ, ΓA and ΓB, such that ΓA is
anchored to ∂A and ΓB is anchored to ∂B. Then let
Z = area(ΓA) + area(ΓB). We now minimize the value of
Z by varying over all possible choices of ΓA and ΓB. After
that, we maximize the minimal values of Z by varying
over all possible Σ.

This new maximin procedure gives a well-deﬁned an-
swer for the maximinimal value of Z. Moreover, a slice
Σ0 results on which both ΓA and ΓB are minimal. On
this slice, it is impossible for ΓA to cross ΓB as this would
necessarily give rise to a surface on Σ0 anchored to ∂A
with smaller area than ΓA. A further observation is that
if a connected component of A is distinct from a compo-
nent of B, the corresponding connected components of
ΓA and ΓB cannot come into contact even tangentially.
The argument for this is that the component of ΓB would
necessarily have a diﬀerent trace of its spatial extrinsic
curvature than ΓA at points close to the contact point.
This would mean that either ΓA or ΓB is not minimal on
Σ0.

At this point it is known that components of ΓA or
ΓB that are distinct have neighborhoods in Σ0 that do
not intersect the other surface. Within such neighbor-
hoods, small deviations Σ0 and the minimal surfaces can
be made that prove that such surfaces are extremal.

The only remaining step is to show that, in fact, ΓA
and ΓB are the extremal surfaces in Dσ of minimal area.
If Γ(cid:48)
A is an extremal surface in Dσ anchored to ∂A,
then its representation on Σ0 must have larger area than
that of ΓA but smaller area than that of Γ(cid:48)
A. Thus,
ΓA = ext A. Similarly, ΓB = ext B. By construction,
both are minimal on the same surface Σ0 ∈ Cσ. More-
over, because Σ0 is achronal, we must have that the en-
tanglement wedge of A contains that of B.

Corollary 2. Suppose that A, B, and C are noninter-
secting regions in σ. Then,

S(AB) + S(BC) ≥ S(ABC) + S(B)

where XY denotes X ∪ Y and where the function S is
deﬁned in equation II.1.
Proof. By theorem 3, we can ﬁnd a surface Σ0 ∈ Cσ such
that ext B and ext ABC are both minimal on Σ0. Let
˜S(AB) and ˜S(BC) denote the areas of the representa-
tions of ext AB and ext BC on Σ0. Then,
S(AB) + S(BC) ≥ ˜S(AB) + ˜S(BC) ≥ S(ABC) + S(B)
where the ﬁrst inequality follows from the focusing theo-
rem and the second inequality follows from the standard
geometric proof of strong subadditivity [12].

Holographic Screens in FRW Cosmology

ds2 = −dT 2 + α2 cosh2

Note that the inequality S(A)+S(B) ≥ S(AB) follows

as a special case of this result.

IV. EXTREMAL SURFACES IN FRW

COSMOLOGY

The conventional holographic entanglement entropy
prescription, with its limitation to asymptotically locally
AdS spacetimes, provides very little information about
entanglement structure in cosmology. One of the most in-
triguing applications of our proposal, therefore, is to cal-
culate holographic screen entanglement entropy in FRW
universes. Assuming the screen entanglement conjecture,
the calculations below give the entanglement entropy of
subsystems in quantum states that are dual to cosmolog-
ical spacetimes.

First we review the holographic screen structure of
FRW spacetimes. Consider a homogeneous and isotropic
spacetime with the metric

ds2 = −dτ 2 + a(τ )2(cid:0)dχ2 + f (χ)2dΩ2

(IV.1)

(cid:1)

2

where f (χ) = sinh(χ), χ, or sin(χ) in the open, ﬂat,
and closed cases respectively. Before computing ex-
tremal surfaces we must decide upon a null foliation for
the spacetime and then identify the corresponding holo-
graphic screen. Null foliations (and thus holographic
screens) are highly nonunique. The foliation we will con-
sider here is that of past light cones from a worldline at
χ = 0.

To ﬁnd the holographic screen for this foliation, it is
convenient to introduce a conformal time coordinate η
such that dτ /dη = a. Then, the past light cone of the
point (η = η0, χ = 0) satisﬁes χ = η0 − η. Spheres
along the past light cone can be parameterized by the
coordinate η, and their area is given by

(cid:16)

(cid:17)2

A(η) = 4π a

τ (η0 − η)

f (η0 − η)2

(IV.2)

Assuming that a = 0 is not merely a coordinate singu-
larity, the condition that A is maximized is equivalent to
the condition that dA/dη = 0. Thus, equation IV.2 gives
the condition that ﬁxes the holographic screen:

f (χ)
f(cid:48)(χ)

− 1
˙a(τ )

= 0.

(IV.3)

The codimension 1 surface deﬁned by this constraint may
be timelike, spacelike, or null, depending on the partic-
ular choice of FRW spacetime. The foliating leaves of
this holographic screen are spheres of constant τ and co-
moving radius χ satisfying equation IV.3. The covariant
entropy bound implies that each leaf has suﬃcient area

9

to holographically encode the information on one past
light cone from the worldline at χ = 0 [6, 7].

Let σ(τ ) be the leaf of the holographic screen at time
τ and let ρ(τ ) denote the energy density in the universe
(measured by comoving observers) at time τ. Then, one
can write a simple expression for the area of a leaf of the
holographic screen at time τ, valid for any f:

area(σ(τ )) =

3

2ρ(τ )

.

(IV.4)

In particular, this expression shows that holographic
screens grow in area as the universe expands.

Extremal Surfaces in de Sitter Space

Consider 3+1 dimensional de Sitter space of radius α.

This spacetime is S3 × R with the metric

(cid:18) T

(cid:19)

α

dΩ2
3

where dΩ2
3 is the metric on a unit 3-sphere. Despite the
fact that this spacetime has the form of equation IV.1
(with f (χ) = sin χ), it is an awkward setting for the
consideration of holographic screens: the null expansion
on the past or future light cones of any point in de Sit-
ter space goes to zero only at inﬁnite aﬃne parameter.
This suggests that the appropriate “boundary” of de Sit-
ter space is past or future inﬁnity. Even if we do attempt
to anchor extremal surfaces to spheres at inﬁnity, the
analysis in section III fails to apply because of the as-
sumption made there that leaves are compact.

Fortunately these diﬃculties can be averted completely
by considering an FRW spacetime that asymptotically
approaches de Sitter space at late times. Speciﬁcally, we
will consider a spacetime of the form of equation IV.1
with vacuum energy density ρΛ and, in addition, some
matter content ρmatter(τ ) with the property the matter
content gives rise to a big bang at τ = 0 and dilutes
completely8 as τ → ∞.

Equation IV.4 immediately implies that

3
2ρΛ

(IV.5)

= 4πα2

τ→∞ area(σ(τ )) =
lim

where α =(cid:112)3/8πρΛ. Because of the big bang singular-

ity, we must have that area(στ =0) = 0. Thus, by the area
law for holographic screens [8, 9], we can conclude that
the leaves of our screen are spheres that monotonically
increase in area, starting with 0 area at the big bang,
and expanding to approach the de Sitter horizon of area
4πα2 at late τ.

8 In particular, we are not considering spacetimes with a big crunch

in this section.

Now focus on a late time leaf σ(τ ). As discussed in
section III, given a region A ⊂ σ(τ ) with a boundary,
we can determine the holographic screen entanglement
entropy of A, S(A), by considering an extremal surface
anchored to and terminating at ∂A. In the notation of

section III, Dσ(τ ) is compact so theorem 1 implies that
an extremal surface anchored to ∂A exists and lies inside
of Dσ(τ ).

10

For any time τ, deﬁne

(cid:40) 1
area(A) ≤ 1
4area(A)
4 (area(σ(τ )) − area(A)) area(A) > 1

1

2area(σ(τ ))
2area(σ(τ )).

Sτ

Page(A) =

(IV.6)

We allow this deﬁnition to extend to a function S∞
Page(A)
where A is a region on a 2-sphere of radius α. This
τ = ∞ case is deﬁned exactly as in equation IV.6 if we
take area(σ(∞)) = 4πα2.
Below we will present an argument that if A ⊂ σ(τ ),

then

τ→∞ S(A) = S∞

lim

Page(A).

(IV.7)

(Note that in this limit, it is implied that A is transported
to later and later leaves.) Thus, we will ﬁnd that as
τ → ∞, S(A) approaches the random entanglement limit
discussed in section II.

Any interpretation of this result is necessarily specu-
lative. Nevertheless, if one assumes the screen entangle-
ment conjecture, then equation IV.7 implies that the the
quantum state of an FRW universe asymptotically ap-
proaching de Sitter space has the property that its O(α2)
degrees of freedom are almost randomly entangled with
one-another. At earlier times, the degrees of freedom are
not randomly entangled because S(A) < S∞

Page(A).

Random Entanglement and the Static Sphere Approximation

We now present a combination of rigorous arguments,
numerical data, and analytic approximations suggest-
ing that the approximate de Sitter cosmological space-
times discussed above saturate the random entanglement
bound in the τ → ∞ limit. As before, σ(τ ) denotes a leaf
at time τ in an FRW universe with vacuum energy as well
as matter energy that dilutes at late time.

The entire region Dσ(τ ) has a metric that can be made
arbitrarily similar to that of a patch of empty de Sit-
ter space by making τ large. To see this, ﬁrst note that
points in Dσ(τ ) have χ < χscreen(τ ) and χscreen(τ ) can be
made arbitrarily small by making τ large. (This follows
from equation IV.5 and the fact that limτ→∞ a(τ ) = ∞.)
Meanwhile, the conformal diagram for our spacetime im-
mediately shows that the minimal value of τ in Dσ(τ )
can be made arbitrarily large by making τ large. Thus
Dσ(τ ) can be made to only cover arbitrarily large τ and
arbitrarily small χ, in which case our metric of equation
IV.1 takes the form

ds2 ≈ −dτ 2 + c e2τ /α(dχ2 + χ2dΩ2
2)

(IV.8)

where c is a constant and α is the same constant as before.
Here we have made use of the Friedmann equations. The
right-hand side of this equation is precisely the metric
of de Sitter space in ﬂat slicing. De Sitter space can
also be described in static coordinates that make a time-
translation Killing vector ﬁeld manifest:

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)−1

ds2 ≈ −

1 − r2
α2

dt2 +

1 − r2
α2

dr2 + r2dΩ2
2.

(IV.9)
Fortunately, Dσ(τ ) lies in a region that is well-described
by either the ﬂat or static slicing of equations IV.8 and
IV.9 respectively.

We can now identify Dσ(τ ) with a region D˜σ(τ ) where
D˜σ(τ ) denotes a corresponding region in exact de Sit-
ter space obtained by ﬁnding a sphere ˜σ(τ ) in the static
patch with area matching that of σ(τ ). While it may
seem natural to put ˜σ(τ ) at large static time, we can use
the t translational symmetry of de Sitter space to place
˜σ(τ ) at t = 0 for all τ. The eﬀect of increasing τ is simply
to bring ˜σ(τ ) closer to the bifurcation sphere on the de
Sitter horizon. This identiﬁcation is illustrated in ﬁgure
5. Note that as τ → ∞, the geometry of Dσ(τ ) and D˜σ(τ )
become arbitrarily similar.
Consider the region A ⊂ σ(τ ) which can be identiﬁed
with a region ˜A ⊂ ˜σ(τ ). At large τ, ˜σ(τ ) approaches the
equator of a 3-sphere of radius α. The equator itself is
an extremal surface so with τ < ∞ but still large, there
must be an extremal surface that is close to ˜A but not
exactly on it. Its area will be slightly less than that of
˜A. Note, moreover, that if the area of ˜A exceeds half the
area of the equator, then a smaller extremal surface can
be obtained by considering the complement of A.

This suggests but does not yet prove that at large τ,
the holographic screen entanglement entropy of A is al-
most equal to a fourth of its own area in Planck units if
A has less area than half of the de Sitter horizon. What
we have proven so far is that an extremal surface exists
with area almost equal to that of A (or 4πα2 − area(A)).
What if there is another extremal surface with smaller
area than the one we have found? It is easy to see that
this is impossible. Following the notation in section III,
consider the spacelike surface Σ0 that, after mapping to
D˜σ(τ ), lies at static time t = 0, and that and terminates
at ˜σ. (Σ0 is most of a hemisphere of the 3-sphere.) The

11

FIG. 6. The upper hemisphere of a 3-sphere of radius α is
half of a static slice in empty de Sitter space and serves as a
good approximation for Dσ(τ ) at large τ. The blue 2-sphere
(appearing as a circle here) lies at constant z (equivalently,
constant r where r is the radial coordinate in equation IV.9).
This 2-sphere is an approximation for the leaf σ(τ ). Green
surfaces depict extremal spherical caps on S3 that approxi-
mate ext Aψ for various values of ψ. The many samples of
extremal surfaces shown here have evenly spaced values of ψ.
Figure 7 provides evidence that this static sphere approxima-
tion is accurate at late τ.

S∞
Page arises.
We begin by further discussing the role of the 3-sphere
in de Sitter space. Figure 6 depicts a hemisphere of an
S3 of radius α which is precisely half of a static slice of de
Sitter space (which we can freely take to be t = 0). Deﬁne
α2 − r2 where r is the static
a parameter z as z =
radius appearing in equation IV.9. Note that a surface of
constant z (and static time) is an S2 of area 4π(α2 − z2).
This suggests a way to obtain an approximation for S(A)
if A is a region in the leaf σ(τ ). Rather than taking A to
be a region in σ(τ ), we take ﬁgure 5 seriously and map
A to a region in the S2 of constant

√

(cid:114)

z =

4πα2 − area(σ(τ ))

4π

(IV.10)

which ensures that this S2 has the same area as σ(τ ). Af-
ter this mapping is made, one computes S(A) by ﬁnding
the extremal surface on the S3 that is anchored to ∂A
(which we take to lie at constant z). Below we will refer
to this procedure as the “static sphere approximation.”

Consider regions in σ(τ ) that are spherical caps. Such
a cap can be ﬁxed (up to SO(3) rotation) by a zenith
opening angle angle ψ, so we will denote our region of
σ(τ ) by Aψ. (With this notation, Aπ/2 is a hemisphere
and Aπ is the entire leaf.) The static sphere approxi-
mation makes it is clear that for 0 < ψ (cid:28) π/2, ext Aψ
is close to Aψ itself and that for π/2 (cid:28) ψ < π, ext Aψ
approaches σ(τ ) \ Aψ. As ψ passes the transition angle
π/2, ext Aψ quickly passes over the top of the 3-sphere
of radius α. The closer area(σ(τ )) is to 4πα2, the faster

FIG. 5. The domain of dependence Dσ(τ ) for a late time leaf
in the ﬂat FRW universe (the small green triangle in the upper
diagram) can be approximately mapped to a domain of depen-
dence D˜σ(τ ) in empty de Sitter space (lower diagram). The
mapping becomes increasingly accurate as τ becomes larger.
The eﬀect of increasing τ is to move the green triangle in the
upper diagram into the top-left corner (along the blue curve),
while the green triangle in the lower diagram moves to the
right and approaches the entire left static wedge.

Riemannian geometry of S3 shows that the surface of
minimal area anchored to ∂A is the one we have already
found. If Γ is another extremal surface (not necessarily
lying on Σ0), then its representation on Σ0, rep(Γ, Σ0),
necessarily has larger area than the extremal surface close
to the horizon. But area(Γ) ≥ area(rep(Γ, Σ0)) so we
conclude that Γ does not have minimal area.
The arguments above show that the random entangle-
ment limit is saturated at large τ. Taking 0 (cid:28) τ < ∞
and A ⊂ σ(τ ), we now explain a way to obtain a more
accurate estimate for S(A) than Sτ
Page(A). Calculating
S(A) without taking the large τ limit is more involved
than what was done above. Nonetheless, it is worthwhile
to investigate this case to better understand how the Page
bound limit is approached. In particular, it is of interest
to understand how the discontinuity of the derivative of

ext Aψ passes over the top of the sphere. This explains
how the discontinuity in the derivative of S∞
Page(A) arises
in the large τ limit.9

Because the geometry of S3 is simple, it is not diﬃ-
cult to obtain an explicit (if cumbersome) expression for
S(Aψ) in the static sphere approximation:

12

S(Aψ) ≈ π(cid:0)α2 − z2(cid:1) sin2

 cos−1(cid:104) z2

(cid:16)
(cid:113)

α2 +

4

1 − z2
1 − z2

α2

α2

(cid:17)

cos 2ψ

(cid:105)



(IV.11)

(cid:112)3/8πρΛ. This expression can be thought of as giving

where z is given by equation IV.10 and, as before, α =
a correction to the “zeroth order” expression S(Aψ) ≈
Page(Aψ). Taking τ < ∞ will lead to corrections in 1/τ
S∞
that are not described by the static sphere method. It is
an open question as to whether or not such corrections
can, in principle, be of the same (or greater) order in 1/τ
as the one we have studied here. However, numerical
data that suggests that the static sphere approximation
is accurate at large τ as we will now see.

As explained above, the cosmological spacetimes we
have been discussing have vacuum energy ρΛ as well as
some matter content that dilutes at late time. The sim-
plest case of this is when the universe is ﬂat (f (χ) = χ)
and when the additional matter content consists of only
one species with density ρmatter and pressure pm = wρm.
The scale factor for this case is

a(τ ) = C sinh

2

3(1+w)

(IV.12)

(cid:20) 3(1 + w)τ

(cid:21)

2α

where the normalization factor C is independent of τ.

This setting is very useful to test the theoretical ap-
paratus developed in this section. In the case of w = 0,
ﬁgure 7 shows a variety of quantities we have discussed.
Figure 7 (a) and (b) depict the case of an earlier and
later time leaf with z/α ≈ .05 and z/α ≈ .02 respec-
tively. The solid red curves show S(Aψ) (computed nu-
merically) while the green curves give the static sphere
approximation of equation IV.11. The dotted horizontal
line marks half of the de Sitter entropy: S1/2 = πα2/2.
As expected, S(Aψ) < S1/2. The orange curve with a
discontinuity in its derivative is S∞
Page(Aψ). Comparing
ﬁgures 7 (a) and (b), one can see that S(Aψ) is approach-
Page(Aψ) as τ → ∞. Finally, the black curves shows
ing S∞

9 For ﬁnite τ, there is always another extremal surface on the 3-
sphere which goes around the sphere the wrong way. This surface
always has area greater than ext Aψ and, in any case, fails to lie
in Dσ(τ ). However, if we consider the τ = ∞ limit, then ext Aψ
does not smoothly pass over the hemisphere of the 3-sphere, and
in this case, the discontinuity in the derivative of S∞
Page(A) is
explained by the fact that the surface that wraps around the
sphere the “wrong way” is now precisely the complement of Aψ in
the equator. If ψ exceeds π/2 in this case, then the complement
of Aψ has smaller area than Aψ. We see that a phase transition
occurs only in the exact τ = ∞ limit.

extensive entropy: Sextensive(Aψ) = (1/4)area(Aψ). Note
that S(Aψ) < Sextensive(Aψ) for all ψ as required by
corollary 1.

Closed Universe with a Big Crunch

The holographic screen entanglement entropy struc-
ture of a closed universe with a past and future singu-
larity is similar to that of approximate de Sitter space.
The spacetimes we consider have the metric of equation
IV.1 with f (χ) = sin(χ). In this case the coordinate χ
takes values from 0 to π. We put one species of mat-
ter content in the spacetime that satisﬁes p = wρ which
gives rise to a big bang at τ = 0 as well as a big crunch.
As before, we introduce a conformal time coordinate η in
terms of which the scale factor is

(cid:18)

(cid:19)q

η
q

a(η) = c

sin

where q = 2/(1 + 3w) and c is constant. This shows that
the Penrose diagram for this spacetime is a rectangle with
a time-to-space aspect ratio of q.

Figure 8 shows the holographic screen structure of this
spacetime for two examples of null foliations. We focus
on the diagram to the left in which case the null folia-
tion (partially) consists of past light cones of a comoving
worldline at the χ = 0. As suggested by the ﬁgure, the
holographic screen is given by

χscreen =

1
q

η.

However, a subtlety arises because the screen is a past
holographic screen for η < qπ/2 and a future screen for
η > qπ/2. The sphere that connects the past and future
screen is extremal (this was called an “optimal” surface
in [7]) and has area 4πc2. Let σ(η) denote the leaf at
conformal time η. We put σ0 = σ(η = qπ/2).

Just as in the de Sitter case, this example leads to a
saturation of the Page bound of equation II.2 as leaves
are maximized in area. More precisely, if A ⊂ σ(η), then
limη→qπ/2 S(A) = S∞

Page(A) where in this case

S∞
Page(A) =

(cid:0)4πc2 − area(A)(cid:1) area(A) > 1

area(A) ≤ 1

4area(A)

2 πc2
2 πc2.

(cid:40) 1

1
4

13

FIG. 8. Both Penrose diagrams here are for the same space-
time: a closed FRW universe with dust. The red lines denote
a null foliation and the black diagonals are the past and fu-
ture holographic screens corresponding to the foliation. The
two ﬁgures demonstrate that diﬀerent foliations give rise to
diﬀerent screens. In both ﬁgures, the lower half of the diago-
nal is a past holographic screen and the upper half is a future
holographic screen. Arrows show the direction of increasing
area.

1. Select a particular null foliation {Nr} of a space-

time with dimension d.

2. Find the codimension 2 surfaces {σr} with σr ⊂ Nr

that have maximal area on each Nr.

3. Take a d − 2 dimensional subregion A ⊂ σr with a

boundary ∂A.

4. Of all extremal surfaces anchored to ∂A and lying
in the causal region Dσ (see section II), select the
one of minimal area. The conjectured entropy S(A)
is then one fourth the area of the minimal extremal
surface in Planck units.

Potential applications of our conjecture are numerous.
One example not considered above is case of a spacetime
with a black hole. Black holes formed through the col-
lapse of matter possess future holographic screens in their
interiors that approach their horizons at late times. It is
of potential signiﬁcance to investigate the entanglement
structure of such spacetimes. Perhaps such an analysis
will shed light on the ﬁrewall paradox [22].

If the screen entanglement conjecture is correct,

it
should still only be regarded as a leading order prescrip-
tion for the computation of von Neumann entropies. A
version of the analysis of [23] may be extendible to the
context of holographic screens. It is not completely ob-
vious how this should be done. If A is a region in a leaf

(a)z/α ≈ .05

(b)z/α ≈ .02

FIG. 7. Plots of S(Aψ) and other quantities for two leaves at
diﬀerent times in a universe with dust and vacuum energy. In
both plots, the red curve is the numerically computed holo-
graphic screen entanglement entropy of Aψ. The dashed green
curve is the static sphere approximation for S(Aψ) which be-
comes more accurate at later τ (smaller z). The orange curve
with a sharp peak is SPage(Aψ) as deﬁned by equation IV.6
and the black curve is Sextensive(Aψ). The horizontal line, pro-
vided for scale, marks the value of πα2/2 which is precisely
one fourth of the extensive entropy of the de Sitter horizon.

It appears that S(A) saturates the Page bound in
a great variety of cases where the areas of leaves are
bounded above.

V. CONCLUDING REMARKS

The proposal we have given above may open the door
to a new research program: the study of the entangle-
ment structure of general spacetimes.
In light of this,
and for the sake of clarity, we now summarize the recipe
for computing von Neumann entropy under the assump-
tion of the screen entanglement conjecture discussed in
section II:

σ lying on a Cauchy slice S0, one may consider the re-
gion on S0 bounded by A and its extremal surface ext(A)
and compute the entanglement entropy of this region in a
quantum ﬁeld theory on the spacetime background. On
the other hand, it may be necessary to modify the space-
time position of the holographic screen itself as was done
in [24].

Acknowledgments
We are very grateful to C. Akers, R. Bousso, Z. Fisher,
D. Harlow, J. Koeller, M. Moosa, M. Van Raamsdonk,
and A. Wall for for impactful discussions. The work of
FS is supported in part by the DOE NNSA Stewardship
Science Graduate Fellowship. The work of SJW is sup-
ported in part by the BCTP Brantley-Tuttle Fellowship
for which he would like to extend his gratitude to Lynn
Brantley and Douglas Tuttle.

Appendix A: Holographic Screens

Let M be a globally hyperbolic spacetime of dimension
d. We assume that the spacetime satisﬁes the genericity
conditions laid out in [9].
A past holographic screen is a codimension 1 surface
H that is foliated by marginally anti-trapped compact
spacelike surfaces called leaves. A future holographic
screen is deﬁned identically except with the leaves be-
ing marginally trapped rather than anti-trapped. In this
paper, we will always assume that leaves have the topol-
ogy of Sd−2.
Suppose that H is a past holographic screen. Let σ be
a leaf of H. Let k and l denote, respectively, the outgoing
and ingoing future-directed null surface-orthogonal vec-
tor ﬁelds on σ. Then, the condition that σ is marginally
anti-trapped means that

θk > 0
θl = 0

(A.1)

where θk and θl denote the expansion of congruences in
the k and l directions at σ.

Every holographic screen comes with a ﬁbration. A
ﬁbration is a family of curves generated by a nonvanish-
ing vector ﬁeld h on and tangent to H with the property
that h is orthogonal to every leaf. If we extend the vector
ﬁelds k and l to all of H (so that they are surface orthog-
onal to every leaf), then h = αk + βl where α and β are

14
scalar functions on H. h is not required to be timelike,
spacelike or null and, in fact, can switch between these
three cases on one screen. Thus, holographic screens need
not have deﬁnite signature.10
Bousso and Engelhardt proved that α > 0 at every
point in H and concluded that leaves have strictly in-
creasing area [8, 9]. More precisely, choose some leaf on
H and label it σ(0). From any point in σ(0), follow the
curve generated by h by aﬃne parameter r. The points
obtained in this way precisely form another leaf, σ(r).
The area of σ(r2) is greater than the area of σ(r1) if
r2 > r1, and, in fact,

(cid:112)

dd−2y

g(σ(r)) α θk

(cid:90)

d
dr

area(σ(r)) =

σ(r)

which is positive by equation A.1 and the fact that α > 0.
Here, g(σ(r)) denotes the induced metric on σ(r).

The splitting of H into leaves is unique:

if s ⊂ H is
a marginally anti-trapped inextendible surface in H then
s = σ(r) for some r.

Holographic screens are generated by null foliations: if
{Nr} is a null foliation of a spacetime, it is possible to
identify a family of leaves {σ(r)} with σ(r) ⊂ Nr by sim-
ply ﬁnding the codimension 2 surface of maximal area
on each null surface. In general, this will break the val-
ues of the parameter r into open intervals, some of which
correspond to past holographic screens and others corre-
sponding to future screens. Isolated values of r that lie
between past and future screens correspond to the case
where σ(r) is an isolated extremal sphere which can join
a past and future screen. Such a sphere will not be con-
sidered to lie on a past or future holographic screen by
convention. This occurs in the case of a closed universe
with a big crunch: see ﬁgure 8.

Because null foliations are highly non-unique, holo-
graphic screens are also non-unique. For example, in
many cases a past holographic screen can be obtained
by considering the surfaces of maximal area on the past
light-cones of some observer’s worldline. This procedure
is only valid if the maximal area surfaces are anti-trapped
and compact which we assume here. In this case, per-
forming any modiﬁcation to the worldline will modify
the holographic screen.11 From this point of view, holo-
graphic screens are very “pro-complementarity” objects.

10 This is the key distinguishing feature between holographic
screens and related objects known as dynamical horizons [10, 11].
11 Note that the non-uniqueness of holographic screens for a given
spacetime is well in line with the ideas of [19–21] where a strong

emphasis is placed on the importance of “ﬁxing the gauge” in
quantum gravity. This idea is most clearly emphasized in [19] in
which the role of a gauge-ﬁxed apparent horizon (essentially the
same thing as a holographic screen) was discussed. We do not
commit to the speciﬁc pictures described in these papers.

[1] J. M. Maldacena,

Int. J. Theor. Phys. 38, 1113
[Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2, 231 (1998)]

(1999)
doi:10.1023/A:1026654312961 [hep-th/9711200].

[2] E. Witten, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2, 253 (1998) [hep-

th/9802150].

[3] S. Ryu and T. Takayanagi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96,
181602 (2006) doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.96.181602 [hep-
th/0603001].

[4] A. Lewkowycz and J. Maldacena, JHEP 1308, 090
(2013) doi:10.1007/JHEP08(2013)090 [arXiv:1304.4926
[hep-th]].

[5] V. E. Hubeny, M. Rangamani and T. Takayanagi, JHEP
0707, 062 (2007) doi:10.1088/1126-6708/2007/07/062
[arXiv:0705.0016 [hep-th]].

[6] R. Bousso, JHEP 9907, 004 (1999) doi:10.1088/1126-

6708/1999/07/004 [hep-th/9905177].

[7] R. Bousso, JHEP 9906, 028 (1999) doi:10.1088/1126-

6708/1999/06/028 [hep-th/9906022].

[8] R. Bousso and N. Engelhardt, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, no.
8, 081301 (2015) doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.115.081301
[arXiv:1504.07627 [hep-th]].

[9] R. Bousso and N. Engelhardt, Phys. Rev. D 92,
no. 4, 044031 (2015) doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.92.044031
[arXiv:1504.07660 [gr-qc]].

[10] A. Ashtekar and B. Krishnan, Phys. Rev. D 68,
104030 (2003) doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.68.104030 [gr-
qc/0308033].

[11] A. Ashtekar and G. J. Galloway, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys.
9, no. 1, 1 (2005) doi:10.4310/ATMP.2005.v9.n1.a1 [gr-
qc/0503109].

[12] M. Headrick and T. Takayanagi, Phys. Rev. D
106013 (2007) doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.76.106013

76,
[arXiv:0704.3719 [hep-th]].

[13] A. C. Wall, Class. Quant. Grav. 31, no. 22, 225007 (2014)

15

[arXiv:1211.3494

doi:10.1088/0264-9381/31/22/225007
[hep-th]].

[14] N. Engelhardt and A. C. Wall, JHEP 1403, 068
(2014) doi:10.1007/JHEP03(2014)068 [arXiv:1312.3699
[hep-th]].

[15] T. Hartman and J. Maldacena, JHEP 1305, 014
(2013) doi:10.1007/JHEP05(2013)014 [arXiv:1303.1080
[hep-th]].

[16] D. N. Page, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71,

1291 (1993)

[17] Y.

doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.71.1291 [gr-qc/9305007].

Nomura,

(2011)
doi:10.1007/JHEP11(2011)063 [arXiv:1104.2324 [hep-
th]].

JHEP

1111,

063

43,

978

[18] Y. Nomura,

(2013)
doi:10.1007/s10701-013-9729-1 [arXiv:1110.4630 [hep-
th]].

Found. Phys.

[19] Y. Nomura, J. Varela and S. J. Weinberg, Phys. Lett.
B 733, 126 (2014) doi:10.1016/j.physletb.2014.04.027
[arXiv:1304.0448 [hep-th]].

[20] Y. Nomura, F. Sanches and S. J. Weinberg, JHEP
doi:10.1007/JHEP04(2015)158

1504,
[arXiv:1412.7538 [hep-th]].

(2015)

158

[21] Y. Nomura,

F.

Sanches

and
114,
berg,
doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.114.201301
[hep-th]].

Phys. Rev.

Lett.

J. Wein-
S.
(2015)
201301
[arXiv:1412.7539

[22] A. Almheiri, D. Marolf, J. Polchinski and J. Sully,
JHEP 1302, 062 (2013) doi:10.1007/JHEP02(2013)062
[arXiv:1207.3123 [hep-th]].

[23] T. Faulkner, A. Lewkowycz

and J. Maldacena,
JHEP 1311, 074 (2013) doi:10.1007/JHEP11(2013)074
[arXiv:1307.2892 [hep-th]].

[24] R. Bousso and N. Engelhardt, Phys. Rev. D 93,
no. 2, 024025 (2016) doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.93.024025
[arXiv:1510.02099 [hep-th]].

