Maximum Entropy Production and Non-Gaussian

Climate Variability

Philip Sura

Department of Earth, Ocean and Atmospheric Science

The Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida

March 18, 2016

Corresponding author address:

Philip Sura

Department of Earth, Ocean and Atmospheric Science

The Florida State University

1017 Academic Way, Tallahassee, FL 32306-4520

Phone: (850) 644-1268, Fax:(850) 644-9642

Email: psura@fsu.edu

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
6
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
o
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
0
6
2
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT

Earth’s atmosphere is in a state far from thermodynamic equilibrium. For example, the

large scale equator-to-pole temperature gradient is maintained by tropical heating, polar

cooling, and a midlatitude meridional eddy heat ﬂux predominantly driven by baroclinically

unstable weather systems. Based on basic thermodynamic principles, it can be shown that

the meridional heat ﬂux, in combination with the meridional temperature gradient, acts

to maximize entropy production of the atmosphere. In fact, maximum entropy production

(MEP) has been successfully used to explain the observed mean state of the atmosphere

and other components of the climate system. However, one important feature of the large

scale atmospheric circulation is its often non-Gaussian variability about the mean. This

paper presents theoretical and observational evidence that some processes in the midlatitude

atmosphere are signiﬁcantly non-Gaussian to maximize entropy production. First, after

introducing the basic theory, it is shown that the skewness of sea surface winds, damped

by nonlinear surface drag, are consistent with the MEP principle. Then it is pointed out

that the observed k−3 wavenumber spectrum of long planetary waves in the midlatitudes

can be roughly explained by maximizing the meridional eddy heat ﬂux (and related entropy

production) of unstable baroclinic Eady waves. Finally observational evidence is presented

that the meridional eddy heat ﬂux is increased by non-Gaussian variability in meridional

wind and temperatures anomalies.

1

1. Introduction

The atmospheric system is a high-dimensional and highly complex dynamical system

with very many nonlinearly interacting modes. One important feature of the large scale

(predominantly low-frequency) atmospheric circulation is its non-Gaussianity. Understand-

ing non-Gaussianity has become an important objective in weather/climate research, be-

cause weather and climate risk assessment depends on knowing and understanding the tails

of probability distributions. In particular, there is broad consensus that the most hazardous

eﬀects of climate change are related to a potential increase (in frequency and/or intensity) of

extreme weather and climate events populating the tails of often non-Gaussian distributions.

Various mechanisms behind the observed atmospheric non-Gaussian statistics have been

proposed. The mechanisms are multifaceted (e.g., nonlinear dynamics, multiplicative noise,

cross-frequency coupling) and scattered in the literature. Sura and Hannachi (2015) provide a

comprehensive review, focusing on atmospheric synoptic and low-frequency variability. How-

ever, while there are many mechanisms contributing to non-Gaussian atmospheric statistics,

there does not exist a deeper grand principle beyond the diversity of phenomena. Yet it is not

unreasonable to believe that there may exist a deeper grand principle beyond the diversity

of phenomena. For example, one possibility is that atmospheric and/or climate statistics are

collectively non-Gaussian to maximize a speciﬁc functional of the weather/climate system.

One possible candidate to explore would be the entropy production (e.g., Paltridge 1975;

Ozawa et al. 2001, 2003; Kleidon 2009). That is, the climate system may exhibit a speciﬁc

collective non-Gaussianity to maximize the overall entropy production.

2

Maximum entropy production (MEP) has already been successfully (and extensively)

used to explain the observed mean state of the atmosphere and climate, such as the merid-

ional distribution of mean air temperature, cloud cover, and meridional heat transport

(Paltridge 1975). While the initial idea goes back to Paltridge (1975), excellent sum-

maries/reviews have been provided by many authors (e.g., Ozawa et al. 2001, 2003; Kleidon

2009). At this point it is important to realize that, despite many attempts, MEP has (so far)

no generally accepted theoretical basis. That is, while it makes physical sense that a system

not in its unique thermodynamic equilibrium state wants to get there as fast as possible by

maximizing entropy production, this physically reasonable statement does not constitute a

universal proof that the MEP principle is generally valid in nature. A better term would be

MEP conjecture, but for the sake of simplicity we use the words “principle” and “conjecture”

interchangeably.

In this paper we propose that MEP may also point a way forward towards a uniﬁed

perspective of non-Gaussianity in weather and climate variability. The basic theory (equa-

tions governing the time rate of change of entropy of an open ﬂuid system) is derived and

explained in section 2. In contrast to previous work the theory is formulated to highlight

the potential impact of probability distributions on entropy production.

In section 3 we

use MEP to study a simpliﬁed conceptual model of the midlatitude atmospheric circulation.

The model consists of a midlatitude volume above the boundary layer. The baroclinically

unstable atmosphere within that volume, which is frictionally damped by the surface drag

due to turbulence in the atmospheric boundary layer, transports heat poleward to keep the

average temperatures in the tropics and in the polar zone constant. As a ﬁrst result we will

3

see that the observed skewness of sea surface winds, damped by nonlinear surface drag, is

consistent with MEP. While it is already known that the product F ∆T of the meridional

heat ﬂux F and the meridional temperature gradient ∆T has to be maximized to be in

accordance with the MEP principle1, a novel ﬁnding is that the observed k−3 wavenumber

spectrum of long waves can be roughly explained by maximizing the meridional eddy heat

ﬂux v(cid:48)T (cid:48) of unstable baroclinic Eady waves. Next it is shown that the meridional eddy heat

ﬂux is increased by non-Gaussian variability in meridional wind and temperatures anomalies

v(cid:48) and T (cid:48). Overall that means, as discussed in the ﬁnal section 4, that MEP is consistent with

the observed non-Gaussian variability in the midlatitude atmosphere, and may point a way

forward towards a uniﬁed perspective of non-Gaussianity in weather and climate variability.

2. Theory

a. Basics

In the following let us derive and discuss the basic equations governing the time rate

of change of entropy of an open ﬂuid system [in the style of Ozawa et al. (2001)]. Here

open means that the system exchanges heat and momentum, but not overall mass, with its

surrounding. The starting equation is the time derivative

(cid:20)(cid:90)

˙Ssys =

d
dt

(cid:21)

(cid:90) ∂(ρs)

∂t

(cid:90)

ρsdV

=

dV +

ρsvdA ,

(1)

1Note that if the meridional temperature gradient ∆T is assumed to be constant, it is the meridional

heat ﬂux F alone that has be maximized.

4

where ρ is the density of the ﬂuid, s is the entropy per unit mass, v is the normal (positive

outward) component of the ﬂuid velocity at the surface, V is the volume of the system,

and A is the surface bounding the system. It is important to note that the boundary ﬂux

term(cid:82) ρsvdA is needed to maintain the overall (i.e., integrated) mass of the otherwise open

ﬂuid system. In the discussion of entropy production by Landau and Lifshitz (1966) only

the volume integral appears because they consider a closed system. That is, in Landau

and Lifshitz (1966) the mass of the systems is automatically conserved because there is

no exchange with its surrounding at all (that is, v in the boundary ﬂux term is zero by

construction).

Next, using the continuity equation ∂ρ/∂t = −∇ · (ρv) we obtain

∂(ρs)

∂t

= ρ

∂s
∂t

+ s

∂ρ
∂t

= ρ

∂s
∂t − ∇ · (ρsv) + ρv · ∇s ,

which we can use, together witch Gauss’ theorem, to rewrite Eq. (1) to get

(cid:90)

(cid:20)∂s

∂t

(cid:21)

˙Ssys =

ρ

+ v · ∇s

dV =

ρ

ds
dt

dV .

(2)

(3)

(cid:90)

(cid:19)

Note that the expression in square brackets is just ds/dt, the total derivative of the entropy

per unit mass following the ﬂuid motion. However, we know that ds = dq/T , where dq is

the heat ﬂux (per unit mass) into the small volume element dV and T is its temperature.

In addition, from the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics we know that dq = du + pd(1/ρ) (here u

is the internal energy per unit mass and p is pressure). Therefore,

(cid:18)du

dt

ds
dt

=

1
T

+ p

d(1/ρ)

dt

.

(4)

Using this in Eq. (3), the fact that du/dt = ∂u/∂t + v · ∇u, and the continuity equation in

5

the form d(1/ρ)/dt = (1/ρ)∇ · v , we obtain

(cid:90) 1

(cid:20)

ρ

∂u
∂t

T

˙Ssys =

by using

(cid:21)

+ ρv · ∇u + p∇ · v

dV .

ρ

∂u
∂t

+ ρv · ∇u =

∂(ρu)

∂t

+ ∇ · (ρuv)

(5)

(6)

and u = cT (where c is the speciﬁc heat at constant volume) we ﬁnally get

(cid:90) 1

(cid:20)∂(ρcT )

T

∂t

˙Ssys =

(cid:21)

(cid:90) Q

T

+ ∇ · (ρcT v) + p∇ · v

dV ≡

dV .

(7)

Equation (7) describes the rate of entropy change of an open ﬂuid system in terms of pressure,

temperature, density, and velocity ﬁelds. The term in square brackets is the local diabatic

heating rate per unit volume Q which can be rewritten in terms of the convergence of a

diabatic heat ﬂux density F due to ﬂuid motion (turbulence) and the heating rate (per unit

volume) Φ representing the rate of dissipation of kinetic energy by viscosity:

Q = −∇ · F + Φ .

(8)

The heat ﬂux F includes all diabatic heat transport processes associated with turbulent

ﬂuid motion (i.e., heat conduction, latent heat transport). It is important to note that F

does not include the advective heat ﬂux because advection (i.e. coherent motion of ﬂuid)

is intrinsically a reversible process (one can reverse the heat transport by reversing the

movement). We could include a reversible advective heat ﬂux in F but it would results in

no contribution to entropy production of the whole system: moving the internal energy (i.e.

heat) of ﬂuid from one place to another alone will not change the system’s overall entropy.

However, the advection of, for example, hot ﬂuid into a colder region results in entropy

6

production by heat conduction across the frontal regions with strong temperature gradients

(as we will see from the overall entropy production equation next).

While Eq. (7) describes the entropy production of the open ﬂuid system, the entropy of

the surrounding system will also increase by the heat ﬂux F from the ﬂuid system through

the boundary. The rate of entropy change of the surrounding system ˙Ssurr is given by the

surface integral

(cid:90) F

T

dA ,

˙Ssurr =

(9)

where F is the normal component (deﬁned as positive outward) of the heat ﬂux F. Now we

are in the position to formulate the budget for entropy production (due to turbulence in the

ﬂuid system) of the whole system as the sum of Eqs. (7) and (9):

˙Sturb =

−∇ · F + Φ

T

dV +

Using Gauss’ theorem we can rewrite the surface integral as

(cid:90)

(cid:90) F

T

dA =

∇ ·

dV =

∇ · F
T

dV +

dA .

(cid:18) 1

(cid:19)

T

F · ∇

(10)

dV ,

(11)

(cid:90)
(cid:18) F
(cid:90)

T

(cid:19)

T

(cid:90) F
(cid:90)
(cid:90) Φ

T

to obtain our ﬁnal entropy production equation for the whole system

˙Sturb =

F · ∇

dV +

dV .

(12)

Equation (12) describes the rate of entropy change of the whole system due to motion/turbulence

in the ﬂuid system. The ﬁrst term is the rate of entropy increase by heat conduction (i.e.

thermal dissipation), and the second is that by viscous dissipation.

Finally, let us look into a steady state system in some more detail. Then the entropy of

the ﬂuid system remains constant and Eq. (10) becomes

˙Sturb,st =

dA ,

(13)

(cid:90)
(cid:18) 1

T

(cid:19)

(cid:90) F

T

7

where the subscript st denotes that the ﬂuid systems is in a steady state. This equation

tells us that in a steady state the entropy produced by irreversible processes (i.e., thermal

and viscous dissipation) in a turbulent ﬂuid is entirely discharged to the surrounding system

through a boundary heat ﬂux F . That is, in a steady state we have

(cid:90)

(cid:18) 1

(cid:19)

˙Sturb,st =

F · ∇

T

(cid:90) Φ

T

(cid:90) F

T

dV +

dV =

dA = Maximum ,

(14)

where we ultimately also assumed that the ﬂuid system maximizes the entropy production.

It has been already mentioned in the introduction that, while it makes physical sense that

a system not in its unique thermodynamic equilibrium state wants to get there as fast as

possible by maximizing entropy production, this statement does not constitute a universal

proof that the MEP principle is generally valid. However, it is possible to show that the global

distribution of key climate variables and several maximum transport properties suggested in

the literature are consistent with Eq. (14) (Paltridge 1975; Ozawa et al. 2001, 2003), making

MEP a physically reasonable tool for climate research.

b. Maximum entropy production: probability distributions

It should be noted that Eq. (14) describes the instantaneous state of the ﬂuid system.

However, describing a turbulent ﬂuid by its instantaneous state does not make much statis-

tical sense. That is, we should interpret Eq. (14) in a time averaged framework:

(cid:90)

(cid:18) 1

(cid:19)

(cid:90) (cid:18) Φ

(cid:19)

˙Sturb,st =

F · ∇

T

dV +

dV =

T

(cid:90) (cid:18) F

(cid:19)

T

dA = Maximum ,

(15)

where the overbar denotes a time mean. Remember that the time mean x of the variable x

can also be written in terms of its probability density function (PDF) p(x): x =(cid:82) xp(x)dx.

8

That means that we can rewrite Eq. (15) in terms of the PDFs of the entropy increases due

to thermal dissipation, viscous dissipation, and boundary heat ﬂuxes. If we deﬁne the new

variables X1 ≡ F · ∇ (1/T ), X2 ≡ Φ/T , and X3 ≡ F/T we can rewrite the MEP proposition
as

(cid:90) (cid:18)(cid:90)
(cid:90) (cid:18)(cid:90)

(cid:19)
(cid:19)

(cid:90) (cid:18)(cid:90)

(cid:19)

˙Sturb,st =

X1p(X1)dX1

dV +

X2p(X2)dX2

dV

=

X3p(X3)dX3

dA

= Maximum .

(16)

In this equation it is apparent that the entropy production depends on the PDFs of thermal

dissipation X1, viscous dissipation X2, and boundary heat ﬂuxes X3. Let us now apply the

MEP principle (16) to explain some of the non-Gaussian features observed in the midlatitude

atmosphere.

3. Applications

In the following discussion we consider a simpliﬁed conceptual model of the atmospheric

circulation depicted in Fig. 1. The atmosphere is composed of three regions: a tropical

zone, the midlatitudes, and a polar zone. The average temperature in the tropics is TT rop

and the average temperature in the the polar zone is TP ole. In the tropics there is a net

input of radiation/heat, whereas in polar regions there is a net output. To keep the average

temperatures in the tropics and in the polar zone constant the midlatitude atmosphere

transports heat poleward through its (predominantly horizontal) circulation, characterized

9

through zonal and meridional velocities u and v, and temperature T . The poleward heat

ﬂux consists of a ﬂux from the tropics into the midlatitudes FT M , and a ﬂux from the

midlatitudes into the polar zone FM P . Below the free midlatitude atmosphere we have a

turbulent boundary layer that exerts a drag on the surface winds and induces a dissipative

heating rate Φ.

In the following we ﬁrst consider the entropy production through viscous dissipation in

the boundary layer. Then we study entropy production in a midlatitude volume (the shaded

region) above the boundary layer.

a. Viscous dissipation

As a simple example let us consider a well-mixed atmospheric boundary layer where

the wind speeds (and temperature) are approximately independent of height. According to

Monin-Obukhov similarity theory, the zonal and meridional components of the surface stress
vector are τx = ρcDu√u2 + v2 and τy = ρcDv√u2 + v2, where u and v are the zonal and

meridional surface wind components, cD is the (nondimensional) drag coeﬃcient, and ρ is

the density of air. Then the rate of velocity changes (now in vector notation) due to viscous

dissipation are

∂u
∂t

= ··· −

cD
h

u|u| ,

(17)

where h is the depth of the boundary layer (the dots symbolize all the other terms in the

momentum budget). As the energy lost to viscosity is ultimately converted to heat, the

10

(instantaneous) viscous heating rate per unit volume in the boundary layer is

Φ =

ρcD
h

u2|u| .

Then the averaged MEP proposition (15, 16) simpliﬁes to

(cid:90) (cid:18) Φ

(cid:19)

(cid:90)

˙Sturb,st =

dV ∝

T

u2|u|dV = Maximum .

(18)

(19)

That is, locally surface winds have to maximize u2|u|. If, for the sake of conceptual simplicity,
we also assume a monodirectional wind u, we obtain

(cid:90)

u2|u| = u2|u| =

u2|u|p(u)du = Maximum .

(20)

To study this equation we use a general parametric PDF p(u) that has been shown to

describe non-Gaussian atmospheric variability very well (Sardeshmukh and Sura 2009; Sura

2011, 2013). The non-Gaussian PDF is generated by a univariate linear stochastic diﬀerential

equation with correlated additive and linear multiplicative (CAM) noise. In particular, it

is the CAM noise that is responsible for skewness and kurtosis of the related PDF. As an

example, we use a PDF with a 10 ms−1 mean wind and 1 ms−1 standard deviation. The non-

Gaussianity can be controlled by changing the CAM noise parameter, while keeping mean

and standard deviation constant.

If the additive and multiplicative noise are positively

correlated, the skewness is positive; the reverse (negative skewness) is true for negatively

correlated additive and multiplicative noise. If we don’t have multiplicative noise, the PDF

is Gaussian. Representative plots are shown in Fig. 2. The thick solid line denotes a PDF

with negative skewness, the thin solid line is a PDF with positive skewness, and the dashed

line represents a Gaussian; all three PDFs have the same mean and variance. Given the PDFs

we can calculate the entropy production ∝ u2|u|. It turns out that, in general, the PDF

11

with negative skewness maximizes u2|u|. That is, for positive mean winds MEP predicts
negative skewness. For negative mean winds MEP favors positive skewness (not shown).

Sure enough, this link between mean and skewness is consistent with observations.

For example, Fig. 3 shows the mean, standard deviation, and skewness of NCEP-NCAR

zonal sea surface (995 hPa) winds. The mean sea surface zonal wind ﬁeld displays the famil-

iar tropical easterlies and midlatitude westerlies. The standard deviation shows variability

minima in the tropics/subtropics and maxima in the midlatitude storm tracks. The skewness

of the zonal wind is generally positive in the tropics and negative in the midlatitudes. In

fact, there exists a linear relationship between the mean and skewness of the zonal winds:

positive means winds are related to negative skewness and vice versa. The same relationship

holds for meridional winds; see Monahan (2004) for more details.

While here we derived the basic link between mean and skewness of sea surface winds

using the MEP proposition, the dynamical principle behind the observed anticorrelation can

also be understood rather easily (Monahan 2004). As with MEP, the main building block

is the fact that the stress in the boundary layer is nonlinear. Now the basic understanding

of the link between the mean and the skewness of the sea surface wind components is

straightforward. First suppose that the mean wind is zero and that the ﬂuctuations are

equally likely to be positive and negative. Then both the mean and skewness of the resulting

wind will be zero. Now suppose that the mean wind is positive. Because of the nonlinear

surface drag, positive wind anomalies will experience stronger friction than negative ones.

Therefore, the winds will be negatively skewed. The opposite is true if we consider a negative

mean wind. That is, the non-Gaussianity of the sea surface winds is due to the nonlinear

12

boundary layer drag. Over land the situation is a bit more complicated because the boundary

layer is inﬂuenced more strongly by the diurnal cycle than over sea (He et al. 2010; Monahan

et al. 2011).

b. Meridional heat transport

As the next example let us now neglect the eﬀect of the boundary layer and focus on the

horizontal heat ﬂuxes (Fig. 1). In our conceptual model of the atmosphere that means that

the ﬂux from the tropics into the midlatitudes equals the ﬂux from the midlatitudes into the

polar zone: FT M = FM P ≡ F . Then the MEP proposition (15, 16) becomes

˙Sturb,st =

F
TP ole −

F

TT rop

=

∆T F

TP oleTT rop

= Maximum ,

(21)

where ∆T = TT rop − TP ole. That is, the product of the mean meridional heat ﬂux F and
the meridional temperature gradient ∆T has to be maximized to be in accordance with the

MEP principle. If we treat the temperatures in the zones/reservoirs as constant ∆T is also

constant, and the mean meridional heat ﬂux F alone has to be maximized for the global

atmosphere to be in a state of maximum entropy production. However, it is important

to note that the tropics to pole temperature diﬀerence ∆T is actually a function of the

mean heat ﬂux F : ∆T = ∆T (F ) (Ozawa et al. 2001, 2003). To understand this, consider

the extreme case of a motionless atmosphere. In this static state the meridional heat ﬂux

vanishes: F ≈ 0. Then the tropics will heat up and the poles will cool down, resulting in
an increased (decreased) thermal emission from the tropics (poles), respectively, to close the

energy imbalance in each region. Therefore, the temperature diﬀerence ∆T will be largest

in the static state. If we now allow F to increase from zero, ∆T will decrease. On the other

13

hand, if we have extreme atmospheric mixing resulting in a very large F , the temperature

diﬀerence ∆T will be very small. Overall this means that ∆T (F ) is a monotonic decreasing

function of F (Ozawa et al. 2001, 2003). Now, because the entropy production ˙Sturb,st in (21)

is proportional to the product ∆T (F )F , it must have a maximum between the two extreme

cases F = 0 (static state with no mixing) and ∆T (F ) = 0 (extreme mixing). According to

the MEP principle (15, 16), this maximum corresponds to the optimal mean state of the

atmospheric circulation. Starting with Paltridge (1975) it has been shown in many papers

[see Ozawa et al. (2001, 2003) and Kleidon (2009) for excellent reviews] that the observed

mean state of the climate system is indeed maximizing entropy production.

As mentioned earlier, in its original formulation (14, 15) F does not include advective

heat ﬂuxes because advection is a reversible process. However, in the case of our box model

we have to take a closer look. The midlatitude atmosphere is predominantly transporting

heat by turbulent advection v(cid:48)T (cid:48) induced by baroclinic instability. As baroclinic instability

is eﬀectively just replacing cold high-density air from high altitudes (and latitudes) with

warm low-density air from low altitudes (and latitudes), it is obvious that there is no entropy

produced in that process. If the turbulent (eddy) heat ﬂux does not produce entropy, where is

the entropy produced in our box model? In a similar model for small scale thermal convection

(like in a lava lamp) the MEP equation is identical to (21), where the temperatures are then

related to the heating at the bottom and cooling at the top (Ozawa et al. 2001, 2003). Within

the bulk of the ﬂuid the convection (i.e., heat advection) does not produce entropy. Only in

the thin thermal boundary layers the temperature gradients are, on average, large enough

to establish an irreversible heat conduction ﬂux F out of the ﬂuid volume that actually

14

contributes to the entropy production. In our atmospheric model (Fig. 1) we do not have

thermal boundary layers between the boxes, so the close analogy breaks down here. However,

because we have a mass ﬂux between the boxes due to the atmospheric general circulation

(keeping the net masses of our boxes constant, though), we implicitly assumed that tropical

and polar boxes are well mixed to have constant temperatures. That is, the box model setup

implies that entropy is produced mainly through mixing, and that the entropy production

through mixing equals the rate predicted by (21) with advection included in F [as in the

multiple box model used Paltridge (1975)].

1) Meridional heat transport through baroclinic instabilty

In the midlatitude atmosphere most of the meridional heat transport is done by unstable

baroclinic eddies (i.e., weather systems). Therefore, the meridional heat ﬂux is dominated

by the eddy covariance of temperature anomalies T (cid:48) and meridional velocity anomalies v(cid:48):

F ≈ cv(cid:48)T (cid:48), where c is the speciﬁc heat at constant volume. While we know that the atmo-
spheric circulation maximizes entropy production and therefore, if we assume for the sake

of simplicity that the meridional temperature gradient ∆T is constant, the heat ﬂux F , we

do not know much about the dynamics behind the maximization. To do that, we need to

have a dynamical model representing baroclinic instability in our a midlatitude volume (the

shaded region above the boundary layer) in Fig. 1.

The simplest model of baroclinic instability, which represents the essential instability

process in its purest and mathematically feasible form, was introduced by Eady (1949). The

details of Eady’s model can be found in all standard textbooks on dynamical meteorology

15

and geophysical ﬂuid dynamics (e.g., Holton 2004; Pedlosky 1987; Gill 1982; Vallis 2006).

That is, in the following discussion we will use Eady’s model to represent unstable baroclinic

waves and the related poleward heat ﬂux in our midlatitude volume. In the previous section

we have seen that the tropics to pole temperature gradient is actually a function of the

meridional heat ﬂux: ∆T = ∆T (F ). However, in the following discussion of the heat

ﬂux induced by unstable Eady waves we consider the temperature gradient as constant.

That means that we are strictly speaking not maximizing entropy production but the heat

ﬂux.

In this simpliﬁed setting maximizing entropy production and maximizing heat ﬂux

are equivalent. Nevertheless, in the real atmosphere these two principles are not identical

any more because ∆T = ∆T (F ). Thus in the following treatment of the Eady model we

consider a maximum ﬂux principle that we derived as a special (i.e., simpliﬁed) case of the

MEP principle, keeping in mind that they are not equivalent.

In a nutshell, the Eady model is a quasi-geostrophic and continuously stratiﬁed baroclinic

atmosphere in a f -plane channel of width Ly. The basic state density is constant, the

vertical shear of the basic state zonal ﬂow is constant (∂u/∂z = Λ = constant), and it

has rigid lids at the bottom (z = 0) and the top (z = H) of the atmosphere. Then the

linearized potential vorticity equation and the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics in terms of the

streamfunction ψ = ψ + ψ(cid:48) [i.e., ∂ψ/∂y = −u (u is zonal wind), ∂ψ/∂x = v (v is meridional
wind), ∂ψ/∂z = RT /f0H (T is temperature), and R = 287 J K−1 kg−1 is the gas constant

for dry air] are

(cid:18) ∂

+ u

∂
∂x

∂t

(cid:19)(cid:18)
∇2ψ(cid:48) + 

∂2ψ(cid:48)
∂z2

(cid:19)

= 0

(22)

16

and

(cid:18) ∂

∂t

(cid:19) ∂ψ(cid:48)

∂z −

+ u

∂
∂x

∂ψ(cid:48)
∂x

∂u
∂z

= 0 ,

(23)

where  = f 2

0 /N 2 (f0 is the Coriolis parameter and N is the buoyancy frequency). Solutions

can be found in the form ψ(cid:48)(x, y, z, t) = Ψ(z) cos(ly) exp[ik(x− ct)], where Ψ(z) is a complex
amplitude and c = cr + ici is a complex phase speed. Obviously, the ﬂow is unstable with

a growth rate kci if c has an imaginary part ci > 0. The stability criterion can be obtained

from the dispersion relation c = ΛH/2 ± ΛH/2 [1 − 4 coth(αH)/(αH) + 4/(αH)2]1/2, where
α2 = (k2 + l2)/: The ﬂow is unstable for α < αc, where the critical value αc is given by

αcH/2 = coth(αcH/2) or αc ≈ 2.4/H. For typical atmospheric values (H = 7 km, N =
1.2×10−2 s−1, f0 = 10−4 s−1, Λ = 8×10−3 s−1) we obtain αc = 0.343 km−1.
If we now
calculate the zonal wavenumber k of maximum growth rate for a channel width Ly = 1500

km and allow only half a wavelength in the meridional direction (i.e., l = π/Ly), we obtain

λg ≈ 4500 km (or kg = 2π/λg ≈ 0.0014 km−1), where λg is the wavelength where cik has a
maximum. Of course, the Eady model has been seminal because this wavelength is similar to

the wavelength of observed weather systems in the midlatitudes (see Holton 2004; Pedlosky

1987; Gill 1982; Vallis 2006, for details). The growth rate as a function of k is shown in

Fig. 4 (solid line).

We can also calculate the poleward eddy heat ﬂux of unstable Eady waves (averaged over

one wavelength λ):

v(cid:48)T (cid:48) =

(cid:90) λ

0

1
λ

v(cid:48)T (cid:48)dx =

ciα2kf0HA2

2ΛR

cos2(ly) exp2(kcit) ,

(24)

where A is an (so far) arbitrary amplitude coeﬃcient of the stream function perturbation.

That is, v(cid:48)T (cid:48) ∝ ciα2k from which we can calculate the wavelength of maximum heat transport

17

λh ≈ 4200 km (or kh = 2π/λh ≈ 0.0015 km−1), where λh is the wavelength where ciα2k has
a maximum. The (dimensionless) heat transport as a function of k is shown in Fig. 4 (doted

line); it is arbitrarily scaled to have the same maximum value as the growth rate to make

the shape of the graphs easily comparable.

While the maxima λg ≈ 4500 km and λh ≈ 4200 km are not identical, they are very
similar (i.e., have the same order of magnitude). Thus, the maximum heat ﬂux principle

(derived from MEP in our simpliﬁed setting) is consistent with the observed wavelength of

unstable baroclinic eddies in the midlatitude atmosphere. In particular, the wavelength of

the fasted growing wave explains more than 95% of the maximum heat transport. Diﬀerent

channel width are explored in Fig. 5. In Fig. 5a the channel width is decreased to Ly =

1250 km, resulting in almost identical wavelengths of maximum entropy production (i.e.,

eddy heat transport) and maximum growth rate. On the other hand, if the channel width

is increased to Ly = 2000 km (Fig. 5b), the maxima drift slightly further apart. However,

even in that case the wavelength of the fasted growing wave explains more than 90% of the

maximum heat transport.

Equation (24) describes the heat ﬂux of a single wave. However, fully developed baroclinic

turbulence does consist of a full spectrum of wavenumbers. Therefore, let us assume a

turbulent midlatitude atmosphere in which a full spectrum of baroclincally growing eddies

is already in place. We also assume that those eddies are circular (k = l) and that each of

them transports heat poleward according to Eq. (24). To obtain the total heat ﬂux F of a

full spectrum of waves Eq. (24) has to be summed/integrated over all wavenumbers k:

(cid:90) ∞

F ∝

A(k)2cik3dk = Maximum ,

(25)

0

18

where we skipped all the constants (including functions of t and y), used α2 = 2k2/ for

circular eddies, and already assumed that the total heat ﬂux has to be maximized according

to the simpliﬁed version of the MEP principle. Note that now A is not a constant but

a function of the wavenumber k: A = A(k). Thus, A(k)2 is the spectral density in the

wavenumber spectrum of the stream function perturbation (and the related velocity and

temperature anomalies). That means Eq. (25) asks us to choose the wavenumber spectrum

that maximizes the integral of all wavenumbers. The maximum requires

(cid:90) ∞

(cid:90) ∞

∆(cid:2)A(k)2cik3(cid:3) dk = 0 ,

∆

A(k)2cik3dk =

(26)

0

0

or A(k)2cik3 = const. Therefore, the wavenumber spectrum which maximizes the heat ﬂux

is

A(k)2 ∝

1
cik3 .

(27)

As we have ci from the dispersion relation, we can immediately evaluate (27) (Fig. 6). It can

be seen that for long waves (small wavenumbers) the spectrum approximately follows a k−3

law. For wavelengths shorter than about 4000 km the slope of the spectrum changes towards

k−5/3. Close to the instability limit (at k ≈ 0.002 radians/km or a wavelength of about 3000
km) the spectrum bends upward. While we do not expect an overly realistic spectrum from

a model as simple as the Eady model, the −3 slope for long waves is astonishingly accurate;
an observed atmospheric wavenumber spectrum is shown in Fig. 7 [adapted from Nastrom

and Gage (1985)]. There it can be seen that spectra of temperature and velocity have

slopes close to −5/3 for scales up to about 400 km. At larger scales the spectra steepen
to an approximate slope of −3. That is, we conclude that the observed k−3 spectrum for
long waves is consistent with heat ﬂux maximization due to baroclinic instability in the

19

midlatitude atmosphere.

We are, of course, aware of the fact that the observed spectra in Fig. 7 are traditionally

explained through the full nonlinear interactions in fully developed quasigeostrophic 2D and

3D turbulence, and that there exists an extensive pool of literature (not referenced here)

dealing with the spectra and the related energy and enstrophy cascades. While there is no

doubt that full nonlinear models are the appropriate tools to study turbulence it is, however,

interesting that a simple linear model of baroclinic instability is able to produce a −3 slope
for long waves if we maximize the meridional heat transport. A more detailed study of this

phenomenon is part of our ongoing research.

2) Meridional heat transport and non-Gaussian variability

So far we have seen that heat ﬂux maximization, derived from the MEP principle, is

capable of explaining some general features of observed wavenumber scales/spectra in the

midlatitude atmosphere. Let us now explore if heat ﬂux maximization is also consistent with

the observed non-Gaussian variability in the midlatitude free atmosphere. That is, we ask

if the midlatitude eddy heat ﬂux F ∝ v(cid:48)T (cid:48) is indeed maximized by non-Gaussian variability
in v(cid:48) and/or T (cid:48).

In general, the statistics of almost all atmospheric variables are non-Gaussian. However,

the origin of non-Gaussianity is not unique and is a topic of active research [Sura and

Hannachi (2015) provide a comprehensive review, focusing on atmospheric synoptic and

low-frequency variability]. Often skewness S and/or excess2 kurtosis K are used to quantify

2Here we use excess kurtosis, deﬁned with respect to that of a Gaussian distribution.

20

non-Gaussianity: S(x(cid:48)) ≡ x(cid:48)3/σ3 and K(x(cid:48)) ≡ x(cid:48)4/σ4−3, for anomalies x(cid:48) with zero mean and
standard deviation σ. For example, Perron and Sura (2013) provide a 62-year (1948-2009)

climatology of global skewness and (excess) kurtosis at every gridpoint of key atmospheric

variables (including meridional wind and temperature anomalies v(cid:48) and T (cid:48), respectively)

using daily data from the NCEP-NCAR Reanalysis project (Kalnay and coauthors 1996).

The zonally averaged skewness and kurtosis ﬁelds of meridional wind and temperature for

winter (DJF) and summer (JJA) are shown in Fig. 8 (however, in the following we focus

exclusively on the northern hemisphere winter).

For our purpose, let us emphasis several points. The skewness of meridional winds is close

to zero in the entire midlatitude northern hemisphere (in winter and summer). The kurtosis

of meridional winds is on average slightly positive in the midlatitude northern hemisphere

winter. The zonally averaged skewness and kurtosis ﬁelds of temperature are a bit more

complicated with respect to height and latitude, but we can make the following general

statements. Averaged over the entire midlatitude atmosphere the temperature skewness is

approximately zero.

In addition, the temperature kurtosis is predominantly (on average)

negative in the midlatitude northern hemisphere winter. Those general statements can also

be visualized by looking at the joint PDF of all midlatitude meridional wind and temperature

anomalies v(cid:48) and T (cid:48). To do that we normalize the meridional wind and temperature time

series at all midlatitude grid points (approximately 25◦N – 65◦N and 900 hPa – 100 hPa) to

zero mean and unit standard deviation. We then calculate the joint PDF p(v(cid:48), T (cid:48)) and the

related bivariate Gaussian distribution. The non-Gaussian structure of p(v(cid:48), T (cid:48)) can now be

highlighted by plotting the joint PDF anomaly [i.e., p(v(cid:48), T (cid:48)) minus the bivariate Gaussian];

21

the result is shown in Fig. 9a. Of course, the ﬁrst-order fact to notice is that p(v(cid:48), T (cid:48)) has

a pronounced non-Gaussian structure. There is a pronounced stronger than Gaussian peak

around about v(cid:48) ≈ 0 and T (cid:48) ≈ −1. A secondary peak exists near v(cid:48) ≈ 0.3 and T (cid:48) ≈ +1.
Both peaks are connected by a stronger than Gaussian ridge. On both side of that ridge are

weaker than Gaussian regions at about v(cid:48) ≈ ±1 and T (cid:48) ≈ 0. This overall structure results in
a marginal distribution p(v(cid:48)) (not shown) with vanishing skewness and positive kurtosis, and

a marginal distribution p(T (cid:48)) (not shown) with negligible skewness and negative kurtosis,

consistent with the above discussion of Fig. 8 and the analysis of Messori and Czaja (2012).

Let us now analyze if the heat ﬂux F ∝ v(cid:48)T (cid:48) is maximized by non-Gaussian variability
in v(cid:48) and/or T (cid:48). To do that we calculated the eddy heat ﬂux v(cid:48)T (cid:48) and the skewness and

kurtosis of v(cid:48) and T (cid:48) at every midlatitude gridpoint. We then looked at the joint PDF

of the individual moments [i.e., S(v(cid:48)), S(T (cid:48)), K(v(cid:48)), K(T (cid:48))] and v(cid:48)T (cid:48) to ﬁnd a potential

correlation between non-Gaussianity and the eddy heat ﬂux. It turns out that there is no

signiﬁcant correlation between the skewness K(v(cid:48)) and K(T (cid:48)), and v(cid:48)T (cid:48), which makes sense

because K(v(cid:48)) and K(T (cid:48)) are small (as discussed above). However, the eddy heat ﬂux v(cid:48)T (cid:48)

is correlated with the kurtosis K(v(cid:48)) and K(T (cid:48)): The correlation is positive between v(cid:48)T (cid:48)

and K(v(cid:48)) (see joint PDF in Fig. 9b), and negative between v(cid:48)T (cid:48) and K(T (cid:48)) (see joint PDF

in Fig. 9c). To summarize (and visualize) this behavior we constructed a non-Gaussianity

index N GI as N GI ≡ K(v(cid:48)) − K(T (cid:48)) (this index captures the observed correlation between
the eddy heat ﬂux and the non-Gaussianity of v(cid:48) and K(cid:48)) and calculated the joint PDF of

this index and the eddy heat ﬂux. The result p(N GI, v(cid:48)T (cid:48)) is shown in Fig. 9d, where it can

be seen that there exists a (close to linear) positive correlation between the non-Gaussianity

22

index and the eddy heat ﬂux. That is, a positive K(v(cid:48)) and a negative K(T (cid:48)) are linked to a

high probability of a large positive (i.e., poleward) eddy heat ﬂux v(cid:48)T (cid:48). On the other hand,

a close to Gaussian ﬂow ﬁeld likely results in a relatively small eddy heat ﬂux.

Overall, the midlatitude eddy heat ﬂux F ∝ v(cid:48)T (cid:48) is increased by non-Gaussian variability
in v(cid:48) and T (cid:48). In other words, the MEP derived maximum heat ﬂux principle principle is

consistent with the observed non-Gaussian variability and the related meridional eddy heat

ﬂux in the midlatitude free atmosphere. While, at this point, we can only speculate (done

in the the following conclusions) about speciﬁc dynamical mechanisms linking MEP and

non-Gaussian variability, MEP (and related ﬂux maximization principles) seems a useful

and promising tool to study and potentially better understand non-Gaussian weather and

climate variability.

4. Conclusions

In this paper we have presented theoretical and observational evidence that some pro-

cesses in the midlatitude atmosphere are signiﬁcantly non-Gaussian to maximize entropy

production or related heat ﬂuxes. First we have shown that the skewness of sea surface

winds, damped by nonlinear surface drag, are consistent with maximum entropy production

(MEP). Then we considered a simpliﬁed conceptual model of the atmosphere composed of

three regions: a tropical zone, the midlatitudes, and a polar zone (Fig. 1). One novel ﬁnding

presented in this paper is that the observed k−3 wavenumber spectrum of long waves in the

midlatitudes can be roughly explained by maximizing the meridional eddy heat ﬂux v(cid:48)T (cid:48) of

23

unstable baroclinic Eady waves. Finally we have shown that the meridional eddy heat ﬂux is

increased by non-Gaussian variability in meridional wind and temperatures anomalies v(cid:48) and

T (cid:48). Overall that means that MEP is consistent with the observed non-Gaussian variability

in the midlatitude atmosphere. That is, MEP may point a way forward towards a uniﬁed

perspective of non-Gaussianity in weather and climate variability.

Why are our ﬁndings important and useful? One question often asked with respect to

climate change is the following: How does the probability of extreme events changes in

a warming climate? More often than not an answer is provided by extensive numerical

simulations. Numerical modeling allows us to estimate the statistics of extreme events (the

tails of the PDF) by integrating a general circulation model (GCM) for a very long period

(e.g., Easterling et al. 2000; Kharin and Zwiers 2005; Kharin et al. 2007).

It is obvious

that the eﬀorts by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) to understand

and forecast the statistics of extreme weather and climate events in a changing climate fall

into this category. However, while the numerical modeling is very useful and practical, a

weakness lies in the largely unknown ability of a GCM to reproduce the correct statistics of

extreme events. Currently, many climate models are calibrated to reproduce the observed

ﬁrst and second moments (mean and variance) of the general circulation of the ocean and

atmosphere. Very little is known about the credibility of GCMs to reproduce non-Gaussian

statistics.

The MEP proposition allows us to provide a diﬀerent, more conceptually pleasing, kind of

answer, though. The probabilities (i.e., PDFs) of variables and processes under consideration

are altered by climate change to maximize entropy production. That is, by changing the

24

atmosphere’s energy balance and related heat ﬂuxes, the climate system adjusts its PDFs to

a new MEP state. While, at ﬁrst sight, this answer is not of much practical value compared

to straightforward GCM runs, the MEP principles potentially gives us a tool to gauge the

ﬁdelity of global warming simulations in a thermodynamically sound and well established

framework. The exploration of this route is part of our ongoing and future research.

Acknowledgments. We would like to thank Dr. Hisashi Ozawa and one anonymous re-

viewer for their constructive comments that helped to substantially improve the manuscript.

25

REFERENCES

Eady, E. T., 1949: Long waves and cyclone waves. Tellus, 33–52.

Easterling, D. R., G. A. Meehl, C. Parmesan, S. A. Changnon, T. R. Karl, and L. O. Mearns,

2000: Climate extremes: Observations, modeling, and impacts. Science, 289, 2068–2074.

Gill, A. E., 1982: Atmosphere-Ocean Dynamics. Academic Press, San Diego, 662 pp.

He, Y., A. H. Monahan, C. G. Jones, A. Dai, S. Biner, D. Caya, and K. Winger, 2010:

Probability distributions of land surface wind speeds over North America. J. Geophys.

Res., 115, doi:10.1029/2008JD010 708.

Holton, J. R., 2004: An Introduction to Dynamic Meteorology. 4th ed., Elsevier Academic

Press, 535 pp.

Kalnay, E. and coauthors, 1996: The NCEP/NCAR 40-Year Reanalysis Project. Bull. Amer.

Meteor. Soc., 77, 437–471.

Kharin, V. V. and F. W. Zwiers, 2005: Estimating extremes in transient cimate change

simulations. J. Climate, 18, 1156–1173.

Kharin, V. V., F. W. Zwiers, X. Zhang, and G. C. Hegerl, 2007: Changes in temperature

and precipitation extremes in the IPCC ensemble of global coupled model simulations. J.

Climate, 20, 1419–1444.

26

Kleidon, A., 2009: Nonequilibrium thermodynamics and maximum entropy production in

the Earth system. Naturwissenschaften, 96, 653–677.

Landau, L. D. and E. M. Lifshitz, 1966: Course of Theoretical Physics Volume 6: Fluid

Mechanics. 3d ed., Pergamon Press, 536 pp.

Messori, G. and A. Czaja, 2012: On the sporadic nature of meridional heat transport by

transient eddies. Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc., 139, 999–1008.

Monahan, A. H., 2004: A simple model of the skewness of global sea surface winds. J. Atmos.

Sci., 61, 2037–2049.

Monahan, A. H., Y. He, N. McFarlane, and A. Dai, 2011: The probability distribution of

land surface winds speeds. J. Climate, 24, 3892–3909.

Nastrom, G. D. and K. S. Gage, 1985: A climatology of atmospheric wavenumber spectra

of wind and temperature observed by commercial aircraft. J. Atmos. Sci., 42, 950–960.

Ozawa, H., A. Ohmura, R. D. Lorenz, and T. Pujol, 2003: The second law of thermodynamics

and the global climate system: A review of the maximum entropy production principle.

Rev. Geophys., 41, 1018.

Ozawa, H., S. Shimokawa, and H. Sakuma, 2001: Thermodynamics of ﬂuid turbulence: A

uniﬁed approach to the maximum transport properties. Phys. Rev. E, 64, 026 303.

Paltridge, G. W., 1975: Global dynamics and climate - a system of minimum entropy

echange. Quart. J. R. Met. Soc., 101, 475–484.

Pedlosky, J., 1987: Geophysical Fluid Dynamics. Springer Verlag, New York, 710 pp.

27

Perron, M. and P. Sura, 2013: Climatology of non-Gaussian atmospheric statistics. J. Cli-

mate, 26, 1063–1083.

Sardeshmukh, P. D. and P. Sura, 2009: Reconciling non-Gaussian climate statistics with

linear dynamics. J. Climate, 22, 1193–1207.

Sura, P., 2011: A general perspective of extreme events in weather and climate. Atmospheric

Research, 101, 1–21.

Sura, P., 2013: Stochastic models of climate extremes: Theory and observations. Ex-

tremes in a Changing Climate, A. AghaKouchak, D. Easterling, K. Hsu, S. Schubert,

and S. Sorooshian, Eds., Springer, 181–222.

Sura, P. and A. Hannachi, 2015: Perspectives of non-Gaussianity in atmospheric synoptic

and low-frequency variability. J. Climate, 28, 5091–5114.

Vallis, G. K., 2006: Atmospheric and Oceanic Fluid Dynamics. Cambridge University Press,

745 pp.

28

List of Figures

1

Representation of the atmosphere for the entropy production mechanisms con-

sidered in this paper. The atmosphere is composed of three regions: a tropical

zone (with temperature TT rop), the midlatitudes (temperature T ), and a polar

zone (temperature TP ole). In the tropics there is a net input of radiation/heat,

in polar regions there is a net output. The midlatitude atmosphere transports

heat poleward through its circulation (characterized by u, v, and T ). The

poleward heat ﬂux consists of a ﬂux from the tropics into the midlatitudes

FT M , and a ﬂux from the midlatitudes into the polar zone FM P . Below the

free midlatitude atmosphere we have a turbulent boundary layer that exerts a

drag on the surface winds and induces a dissipative heating rate Φ. In this pa-

per we consider the entropy production through (a) viscous dissipation in the

boundary layer, and (b) the meridional heat ﬂux in the midlatitude volume

(the shaded region) above the boundary layer.

2

PDFs generated by a univariate linear stochastic diﬀerential equation with

correlated additive and linear multiplicative (CAM) noise (Sardeshmukh and

Sura 2009; Sura 2011, 2013). The thick solid line denotes a PDF with negative

skewness, the thin solid line is a PDF with positive skewness, and the dashed

line represents a Gaussian; all three PDFs have the same 10 ms−1 mean and

unit variance. From the PDFs we can calculate the entropy production ∝
u2|u|. The PDF with negative skewness maximizes u2|u|.

3 Mean, standard deviation, and skewness of NCEP-NCAR zonal sea surface

(995 hPa) winds. Adapted from Monahan (2004).

32

33

34

29

4

5

Growth rate cik (solid line) and dimensionless eddy heat ﬂux v(cid:48)T (cid:48) ∝ ciα2k
(dotted line) of unstable Eady wave as a function of zonal wavenumber k

for a meridional channel width of 1500 km. Note that the eddy heat ﬂux

is arbitrarily scaled to have the same maximum value as the growth rate to

make the shape of the graphs easily comparable.

Growth rate cik (solid lines) and dimensionless eddy heat ﬂux v(cid:48)T (cid:48) ∝ ciα2k
(dotted lines) of unstable Eady wave as a function of zonal wavenumber k for

meridional channel width a) 1250 km, and b) 2000 km.

35

36

6 MEP spectrum ∝ (cik3)−1 of unstable Eady waves (solid line). Note that for
small wavenumbers (long aves) the spectrum approximately follows a k−3 law

(dashed line). For wavenumbers larger than k ≈ 0.001 radians/km the slope
of the spectrum changes towards k−5/3 (dashed line).

37

7

Power spectra of wind and potential temperature near the tropopause from

GASP (Global Atmospheric Sampling Program) aircraft data. The spectra

for meridional wind and temperature are shifted one and two decades to the

right, respectively. Adapted from Nastrom and Gage (1985).

8

Zonally averaged skewness and kurtosis ﬁelds of meridional wind and tem-

perature for winter (DJF) and summer (JJA) calculated from NCEP-NCAR

reanalysis data.

38

39

30

9

a) PDF anomaly [i.e., joint PDF p(v(cid:48), T (cid:48)) minus bivariate Gaussian] of nor-

malized midlatitude meridional wind v(cid:48) and temperature T (cid:48) anomalies. The

contour interval is 0.005. b) Joint PDF p(K(v(cid:48)), v(cid:48)T (cid:48)). Note the positive cor-

relation. The contour interval is 0.01. c) Joint PDF p(K(T (cid:48)), v(cid:48)T (cid:48)). Note the

negative correlation. The contour interval is 0.01. d) Joint PDF p(N GI, v(cid:48)T (cid:48))
of non-Gaussianity index N GI ≡ K(v(cid:48)) − K(T (cid:48)) and eddy heat ﬂux v(cid:48)T (cid:48) for
all midlatitude gridpoints. Note the positive correlation between the non-

Gaussianity index and the eddy heat ﬂux. The contour interval is 0.01.

40

31

Fig. 1.
Representation of the atmosphere for the entropy production mechanisms con-
sidered in this paper. The atmosphere is composed of three regions: a tropical zone (with
temperature TT rop), the midlatitudes (temperature T ), and a polar zone (temperature TP ole).
In the tropics there is a net input of radiation/heat, in polar regions there is a net output.
The midlatitude atmosphere transports heat poleward through its circulation (character-
ized by u, v, and T ). The poleward heat ﬂux consists of a ﬂux from the tropics into the
midlatitudes FT M , and a ﬂux from the midlatitudes into the polar zone FM P . Below the
free midlatitude atmosphere we have a turbulent boundary layer that exerts a drag on the
surface winds and induces a dissipative heating rate Φ. In this paper we consider the entropy
production through (a) viscous dissipation in the boundary layer, and (b) the meridional
heat ﬂux in the midlatitude volume (the shaded region) above the boundary layer.

32

!!"#$%&'()!*$+,!-$)(#!*$+,!.&/)(0&01/,2!"1#31),+0!4$1+/(#5!6(5,#!781(0$#!-$),!""#$%!"-$),!9".!9.-!!:%(',!1;!<;!"!Fig.1.Representationoftheatmospherefortheentropyproductionmechanismsconsideredinthispaper.Theatmosphereiscomposedofthreeregions:atropicalzone(withtempera-tureTTrop),themidlatitudes(temperatureT),andapolarzone(temperatureTPole).Inthetropicsthereisanetinputofradiation/heat,inpolarregionsthereisanetoutput.Themidlatitudeatmospheretransportsheatpolewardthroughitscirculation(characterizedbyu,v,andT).ThepolewardheatﬂuxconsistsofaﬂuxfromthetropicsintothemidlatitudesFTM,andaﬂuxfromthemidlatitudesintothepolarzoneFMP.Belowthefreemidlatitudeatmospherewehaveaturbulentboundarylayerthatexertsadragonthesurfacewindsandinducesadissipativeheatingrate .Inthispaperweconsidertheentropyproductionthrough(a)viscousdissipationintheboundarylayer,and(b)themeridionalheatﬂuxinthemidlatitudevolume(theshadedregion)abovetheboundarylayer.32Fig. 2.
PDFs generated by a univariate linear stochastic diﬀerential equation with cor-
related additive and linear multiplicative (CAM) noise (Sardeshmukh and Sura 2009; Sura
2011, 2013). The thick solid line denotes a PDF with negative skewness, the thin solid line
is a PDF with positive skewness, and the dashed line represents a Gaussian; all three PDFs
have the same 10 ms−1 mean and unit variance. From the PDFs we can calculate the entropy
production ∝ u2|u|. The PDF with negative skewness maximizes u2|u|.

33

 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14p(u)Wind u [m/s]10 ms(cid:239)1 mean wind, 1 ms(cid:239)1 standard deviationnegative skew (MEP)positive skewGaussianFig.2.PDFsgeneratedbyaunivariatelinearstochasticdi↵erentialequationwithcorrelatedadditiveandlinearmultiplicative(CAM)noise(SardeshmukhandSura2009;Sura2011,2013).ThethicksolidlinedenotesaPDFwithnegativeskewness,thethinsolidlineisaPDFwithpositiveskewness,andthedashedlinerepresentsaGaussian;allthreePDFshavethesame10ms 1meanandunitvariance.FromthePDFswecancalculatetheentropyproduction/u2|u|.ThePDFwithnegativeskewnessmaximizesu2|u|.33Fig. 3. Mean, standard deviation, and skewness of NCEP-NCAR zonal sea surface (995
hPa) winds. Adapted from Monahan (2004).

34

Fig.3.Mean,standarddeviation,andskewnessofNCEP-NCARzonalseasurface(995hPa)winds.AdaptedfromMonahan(2004).34Fig. 4. Growth rate cik (solid line) and dimensionless eddy heat ﬂux v(cid:48)T (cid:48) ∝ ciα2k (dotted
line) of unstable Eady wave as a function of zonal wavenumber k for a meridional channel
width of 1500 km. Note that the eddy heat ﬂux is arbitrarily scaled to have the same
maximum value as the growth rate to make the shape of the graphs easily comparable.

35

 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 0 0.0005 0.001 0.0015 0.002growth rate [1/day]zonal wavenumber k [radians/km]Channel width: 1500 kmgrowth rate [1/day]heat transport [dimensionless]Fig.4.Growthratecik(solidline)anddimensionlesseddyheatﬂuxv0T0/ci↵2k(dottedline)ofunstableEadywaveasafunctionofzonalwavenumberkforameridionalchannelwidthof1500km.Notethattheeddyheatﬂuxisarbitrarilyscaledtohavethesamemaximumvalueasthegrowthratetomaketheshapeofthegraphseasilycomparable.35Fig. 5. Growth rate cik (solid lines) and dimensionless eddy heat ﬂux v(cid:48)T (cid:48) ∝ ciα2k (dotted
lines) of unstable Eady wave as a function of zonal wavenumber k for meridional channel
width a) 1250 km, and b) 2000 km.

36

a) 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0 0.0005 0.001 0.0015growth rate [1/day]zonal wavenumber k [radians/km]Channel width: 1250 kmgrowth rate [1/day]heat transport [dimensionless]b) 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4 0 0.0005 0.001 0.0015 0.002 0.0025growth rate [1/day]zonal wavenumber k [radians/km]Channel width: 2000 kmgrowth rate [1/day]heat transport [dimensionless]Fig.5.Growthratecik(solidlines)anddimensionlesseddyheatﬂuxv0T0/ci↵2k(dottedlines)ofunstableEadywaveasafunctionofzonalwavenumberkformeridionalchannelwidtha)1250km,andb)2000km.36Fig. 6. MEP spectrum ∝ (cik3)−1 of unstable Eady waves (solid line). Note that for small
wavenumbers (long aves) the spectrum approximately follows a k−3 law (dashed line). For
wavenumbers larger than k ≈ 0.001 radians/km the slope of the spectrum changes towards
k−5/3 (dashed line).

37

 1 10 100 1000 10000 0.0001 0.001 0.01spectral densitywavenumber k [radians/km]k−5/3k−3(cik3)−1ci>0ci=0predicted MEP spectrumFig.6.MEPspectrum/(cik3) 1ofunstableEadywaves(solidline).Notethatforsmallwavenumbers(longaves)thespectrumapproximatelyfollowsak 3law(dashedline).Forwavenumberslargerthank⇡0.001radians/kmtheslopeofthespectrumchangestowardsk 5/3(dashedline).37Fig. 7. Power spectra of wind and potential temperature near the tropopause from GASP
(Global Atmospheric Sampling Program) aircraft data. The spectra for meridional wind
and temperature are shifted one and two decades to the right, respectively. Adapted from
Nastrom and Gage (1985).

38

Fig.7.PowerspectraofwindandpotentialtemperaturenearthetropopausefromGASP(GlobalAtmosphericSamplingProgram)aircraftdata.Thespectraformeridionalwindandtemperatureareshiftedoneandtwodecadestotheright,respectively.AdaptedfromNastromandGage(1985).38Fig. 8. Zonally averaged skewness and kurtosis ﬁelds of meridional wind and temperature
for winter (DJF) and summer (JJA) calculated from NCEP-NCAR reanalysis data.

39

!!!!"#$"%&'(%")"#$%&$''!()*+,'-'!*"%+,+-.&/)0+.,)"#$%&$''!()*+,'-'!Fig.8.Zonallyaveragedskewnessandkurtosisﬁeldsofmeridionalwindandtemperatureforwinter(DJF)andsummer(JJA)calculatedfromNCEP-NCARreanalysisdata.39a) PDF anomaly [i.e., joint PDF p(v(cid:48), T (cid:48)) minus bivariate Gaussian] of normalized
Fig. 9.
midlatitude meridional wind v(cid:48) and temperature T (cid:48) anomalies. The contour interval is 0.005.
b) Joint PDF p(K(v(cid:48)), v(cid:48)T (cid:48)). Note the positive correlation. The contour interval is 0.01. c)
Joint PDF p(K(T (cid:48)), v(cid:48)T (cid:48)). Note the negative correlation. The contour interval is 0.01. d)
Joint PDF p(N GI, v(cid:48)T (cid:48)) of non-Gaussianity index N GI ≡ K(v(cid:48))− K(T (cid:48)) and eddy heat ﬂux
v(cid:48)T (cid:48) for all midlatitude gridpoints. Note the positive correlation between the non-Gaussianity
index and the eddy heat ﬂux. The contour interval is 0.01.

40

	a)	b)	c)	d)	K(T’) PDF of K(T’) and Eddy Heat Flux Fig.9.a)PDFanomaly[i.e.,jointPDFp(v0,T0)minusbivariateGaussian]ofnormalizedmidlatitudemeridionalwindv0andtemperatureT0anomalies.Thecontourintervalis0.005.b)JointPDFp(K(v0),v0T0).Notethepositivecorrelation.Thecontourintervalis0.01.c)JointPDFp(K(T0),v0T0).Notethenegativecorrelation.Thecontourintervalis0.01.d)JointPDFp(NGI,v0T0)ofnon-GaussianityindexNGI⌘K(v0) K(T0)andeddyheatﬂuxv0T0forallmidlatitudegridpoints.Notethepositivecorrelationbetweenthenon-Gaussianityindexandtheeddyheatﬂux.Thecontourintervalis0.01.40