Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 000, 1–15 (0000)

Printed 18 March 2016

(MN LATEX style ﬁle v2.2)

Implications of a variable IMF for the interpretation of
observations of galaxy populations

Bart Clauwens1,2(cid:63), Joop Schaye1, Marijn Franx1
1Leiden Observatory, Leiden University, PO Box 9513, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands
2Instituut-Lorentz for Theoretical Physics, Leiden University, 2333 CA Leiden, The Netherlands

Accepted, ?. Received ?; in original form, 16 March 2016

ABSTRACT

We investigate the eﬀect of a metallicity-dependent stellar initial mass function
(IMF), as deduced observationally by Martín-Navarro et al. (2015c), on the inferred
stellar masses and star formation rates of a representative sample of 186,886 SDSS
galaxies. Compared to a universal Chabrier IMF, this variable IMF implies a large in-
crease in the star formation rates inferred from the observed UV and IR luminosities.
This extends the star formation main sequence to higher masses and increases the
total low-redshift SFR density by an order of magnitude. Depending on the metal-
licity, the inferred galaxy masses increase either because of the addition of stellar
remnants or dwarf stars relative to a Chabrier IMF, for which the implied mass is
minimal. This causes a shift of the galaxy stellar mass function (GSMF) to higher
masses by 0.5 dex and a factor 2.3 increase in the stellar mass density above 109M(cid:12).
However, the results depend strongly on the assumed IMF parametrisation, which is
not directly constrained by the observations. Varying the low-end IMF slope instead
of the high-end IMF slope, while maintaining the same dwarf-to-giant ratio, results
in a SFR density increase by a factor 1.1, a GSMF shift by 0.2 dex and a factor 1.3
increase in the stellar mass density relative to the Chabrier IMF. In both cases, the
steepness of the high-end GSMF drop-oﬀ is not aﬀected, thus a variable IMF does
not remove the need to quench high-mass galaxies. A bottom-heavy IMF during the
late, metal-rich evolutionary stage of a galaxy could help explain the rapid quench-
ing and the bimodality in the galaxy population by on the one hand making galaxies
less quenched (due to the continued formation of dwarf stars) and on the other hand
reducing the gas consumption timescale. We conclude that the implications of the ob-
servational evidence for a variable IMF could vary from absolutely dramatic to mild
but signiﬁcant.
Key words: galaxies: stellar content – galaxies: luminosity function, mass function
– galaxies: star formation – galaxies: fundamental parameters

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
6
1

 
 
]

.

A
G
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
1
8
2
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

1 INTRODUCTION

The stellar initial mass function (IMF) describes the number
distribution of stars as a function of stellar mass at the zero
age main sequence. The IMF can not only help us under-
stand physical processes inside molecular clouds, it is also a
key ingredient for understanding astrophysical processes on
larger scales. A top-heavy IMF will lead to more energetic
stellar feedback, a higher metal production and more ioniz-
ing radiation, which could have an impact on the nature of

(cid:63) E-mail: clauwens@strw.leidenuniv.nl

c(cid:13) 0000 RAS

the formed galaxies, the total star formation history, metal
enrichment and on the re-ionization history of our Universe.
Although IMF studies have a rich history going back to
the seminal work of Salpeter (1955), both in nearby galaxies
through direct star counts and in more distant galaxies by
more indirect methods, a consensus on the functional form of
the IMF and its possible dependencies has not been reached.
Observations aiming to measure galaxy stellar masses and
star formation rates typically assume a Chabrier (2003) IMF
(e.g. Moustakas et al. 2013; Bauer et al. 2013; Chang et al.
2015) or a similar Kroupa (2001) IMF (e.g. Kauﬀmann et al.
2003; Muzzin et al. 2013). The same holds true for hydrody-
namic simulations of galaxy formation (e.g. Hopkins et al.

2

Clauwens et al.

2014; Schaye et al. 2015; Snyder et al. 2015). A diﬀerent
IMF, speciﬁcally an IMF that depends on one or more local
astrophysical conditions, could have a dramatic impact on
the interpretation of observations and the results of simula-
tions.

Most nearby IMF measurements tend to support a uni-
versal Kroupa- or Chabrier-like IMF, see Chabrier (2003);
Kroupa et al. (2013); Kirk & Myers (2011); Bastian, Covey
& Meyer (2011) and references therein, but there are many
complications in determining the IMF from direct star
counts, see e.g. Scalo (2005) and Weisz et al. (2013). Re-
cently, Weisz et al. (2015) found a very small intrinsic scat-
ter in the power-law slope of the high-end mass function
for young resolved star clusters in M31, albeit at a higher
value (1.45±0.05) than the Kroupa slope (1.30) or the slope
they infer for the Milky Way (1.15±0.1). Conversely, a re-
cent dynamical study of 29 Local Group Clusters by Zaritsky
et al. (2014) concludes that there are clear variations in the
cluster IMF. Indications for a nearby metallicity-dependent
IMF come from stellar counts of two nearby metal-poor, old,
ultra-faint dwarf galaxies by Geha et al. (2013), which are
found to have a very top-heavy IMF, and from a study of
galactic globular clusters by Marks et al. (2012), who re-
port an increasingly top-heavy IMF with decreasing cluster
metallicity and increasing cloud-core density.

IMF studies based on observations of more distant
galaxies can be roughly divided into two classes. The ﬁrst
class consists of dynamical methods that weigh the stellar
content of a galaxy and compare this to the stellar mass
obtained from spectral energy density (SED) ﬁtting. Stud-
ies of the dynamical masses of SDSS galaxies by Dutton
et al. (2013); Conroy & van Dokkum (2012); Tortora, Ro-
manowsky & Napolitano (2013) report IMF trends with ve-
locity dispersion or galaxy mass. However, a similar study
of low-mass (around 109M(cid:12)) early-type galaxies (ETGs) by
Tortora, La Barbera & Napolitano (2015) reports the same
average IMF for these low-mass ETGs as for the more mas-
sive ETGs. All these studies report relatively large varia-
tions in the IMF mass normalisation at ﬁxed stellar mass,
but it is not exactly clear to what extent these variations
could be caused by assumptions on the dark matter proﬁle,
the anisotropy of stellar motions or the inclination of the
observed galaxies. A major risk is confusion of dark matter
and stellar matter. For this reason the centres of ETGs are
the best targets as they are believed to be relatively devoid
of dark matter.

The most ambitious attempt at measuring dynamical
stellar masses of ETG centres has been undertaken by the
ATLAS3D team, who use integral ﬁeld spectroscopy of 260
nearby ETGs. Cappellari et al. (2012, 2013b,a) report IMF
variations that correlate with the stellar mass-to-light ra-
tio inferred from SED modelling under the assumption of
a universal IMF and also with the eﬀective velocity disper-
sion of the ETGs, but not with age, metallicity or alpha-
enhancement (McDermid et al. 2014). However, Clauwens,
Schaye & Franx (2015) show that the inferred IMF vari-
ations could be caused by a slight underestimation of the
modeling- and measurement errors. Random Gaussian er-
rors in the total kinematic mass determination of the order
30% would give a trend that is very similar to the one re-
ported in Cappellari et al. (2012). Recently, Li et al. (2015)
tested the accuracy of stellar mass measurements with the

JAM method used by Cappellari et al. (2012), by applying
it to mock galaxies from the Illustris simulation and they
report random modeling errors of 40% and biases that grow
with diminishing resolution1.

Strong gravitational lensing provides an independent
way to measure dynamical stellar masses. In general such
studies ﬁnd a Kroupa-like IMF normalization for spiral
galaxies (Brewer et al. 2012) and a normalization heavier
than Kroupa for massive ETGs (Treu et al. 2010; Oguri,
Rusu & Falco 2014; Barnabè et al. 2013), but the analy-
sis of the nearest strong-lensing galaxy by Smith & Lucey
(2013) does not support this2.

The second class of independent methods to determine
the galaxy scale IMF relies on the observation of speciﬁc
spectral features that discriminate between low- and high-
mass stars. A comparison of the X-ray binary count studies
of Dabringhausen et al. (2012) and Peacock et al. (2014)
suggests a top-heavy IMF for ultracompact dwarf galaxies.
Several spectral studies point at an enhanced fraction of low-
mass stars in ETGs with respect to a standard Kroupa IMF.
van Dokkum & Conroy (2012) and Conroy & van Dokkum
(2012) ﬁnd an IMF trend with alpha-enhancement, veloc-
ity dispersion and metallicity (in decreasing order of signiﬁ-
cance), compatible with results from Pastorello et al. (2014).
Other studies (La Barbera et al. 2013; Martín-Navarro et al.
2015b,a) suggest a trend that is driven by velocity dispersion
or stellar mass. Smith (2014) and Smith et al. (2015) show
that there is disagreement between IMF results from spec-
tral features and respectively kinematic- and strong lensing
studies of the same galaxies.

Overall, IMF observations have not yet converged to a
single view. The primary candidates for variables that cor-
relate with IMF variations are metallicity and velocity dis-
persion. Some other candidates suggested by observations
are dynamical density (Spiniello et al. 2015), star formation
rate (Gunawardhana et al. 2011), surface brightness (Meurer
et al. 2009, but see Boselli et al. 2009) and cosmic time (Davé
2008; Ferreras et al. 2015). Of course all these variables are
also correlated with each other in a complicated way.

Distilling a consistent view from the reported con-
straints on the IMF is diﬃcult, since the observations are
performed on diﬀerent types of galaxies with diﬀerent diag-
nostics, diﬀerent systematics, diﬀerent model dependencies,
diﬀerent assumptions, a sensitivity to diﬀerent mass ranges
of the IMF and even diﬀerent IMF parametrisations. For ex-
ample, some spectroscopic studies use the so-called bimodal
IMF parametrisation from Vazdekis et al. (1996), for which
the free parameter is the IMF slope above 0.6 M(cid:12), whereas

1 This 40% error is for the high-resolution test, which still has
a lower resolution than is typical for ATLAS3D observations. A
similar analysis of mock galaxies at a higher resolution would be
needed to disentangle the contributions of IMF variations and
modelling- and measurement-errors to the observed variations
in M∗kin/M∗Salp found by the ATLAS3D Survey. A resolution-
dependent bias could also possibly cause a trend of M∗kin/M∗Salp
with distance, like the one reported in Clauwens, Schaye & Franx
(2015).
2 The strong-lensing measurement of this particular galaxy is ex-
pected to be less sensitive to dark matter, since the Einstein ra-
dius is roughly 25% of the eﬀective radius, probing a region that
is believed to be dominated by stars.

c(cid:13) 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–15

others use a parametrisation for which the IMF slope above
0.5 M(cid:12) or 1.0 M(cid:12) is kept ﬁxed (Conroy & van Dokkum
2012). In addition, sometimes the low-mass cut-oﬀ is allowed
to vary (Spiniello et al. 2015).

Still, the implications of IMF variations on derived
galaxy properties could be large and are worth investigating.
Previous work on the eﬀect of IMF variations on inferred
galaxy masses has focused speciﬁcally on the implications
of an IMF trend with velocity dispersion. McGee, Goto &
Balogh (2014) report a signiﬁcantly shallower galaxy stellar
mass function (GSMF) high-mass drop-oﬀ based on IMF-
velocity dispersion trends observed by La Barbera et al.
(2013); Ferreras et al. (2013); Spiniello et al. (2014). Con-
versely, Clauwens, Schaye & Franx (2015) report a nearly
unchanged GSMF high-mass drop-oﬀ, based on the IMF ob-
servations by Cappellari et al. (2012).

In this paper we investigate the eﬀects of the IMF trend
with metallicity observed by Martín-Navarro et al. (2015c),
although many of the main conclusions also hold in a broader
context. We will not only focus on the eﬀects on inferred
galaxy masses, but also on the inferred star formation rates,
which turn out to be very sensitive to the assumed IMF.

Martín-Navarro et al. (2015c) ﬁnd a strong IMF depen-
dency on metallicity, with high-metallicity regions contain-
ing more low-mass stars. They analyse integral ﬁeld spectro-
scopic data from the CALIFA survey (Sánchez et al. 2012)
for 24 ETGs in order to obtain radial IMF proﬁles, using the
spectral indices HβO , [MgFe](cid:48) , Mg2Fe, NaD, TiO2CALIFA
and TiO1. A consistent IMF-metallicity trend is obtained
for SDSS galaxy spectra that include near-IR IMF-sensitive
features. Their sample shows a weaker IMF dependence on
respectively age, velocity dispersion and [Mg/Fe]. The re-
ported stronger trend with metallicity (Spearman rank cor-
relation 0.82) rather than with [Mg/Fe] (Spearman rank cor-
relation 0.21) is not necessarily in conﬂict with the results
from Conroy & van Dokkum (2012) who ﬁnd Spearman rank
correlations of respectively 0.33 with metallicity and 0.81
with [Mg/Fe], because the sample of Martín-Navarro et al.
(2015c) has a much wider range of metallicities, going as low
as [M/H]≈ −0.4.

In this paper we investigate the implications that this
strong metallicity dependence of the IMF, concretely equa-
tion 2 from Martín-Navarro et al. (2015c), would have on
several galaxy diagnostics. Speciﬁcally, we concentrate on
the implications for galaxy stellar masses, star formation
rates and derived relations like the galaxy stellar mass func-
tion, the main sequence of star formation and the mass-
metallicity relation. We do this by re-interpreting the obser-
vations of a representative sample of 186,886 SDSS redshift
z ∼ 0.1 galaxies. Although the presented results will be fully
quantitative, our results should be viewed in a more quali-
tative way, due to the many uncertainties in measuring the
IMF and the resulting diversity of the reported IMF mea-
surements that have been discussed.

Although the physical mechanisms responsible for the
formation of the IMF are not yet understood, metallicity, be-
ing a local property of the interstellar medium with a strong
inﬂuence on the cooling rate of the gas, is likely to have an
inﬂuence on the mass function of stars. On the other hand,
a locally metallicity dependent IMF could have a large in-
ﬂuence on galaxies as a whole. A reduction in the formation
of high-mass stars with respect to low-mass stars in the late,

c(cid:13) 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–15

Implications of a variable IMF

3

high-metallicity, stage of a galaxy could have an accelerating
eﬀect on the quenching of star formation in the galaxy, due
to less energetic stellar feedback. This could trigger a last
burst of low-mass star formation that empties the cool gas
reservoir more rapidly. The true star formation rate of the
galaxy would be larger than the typically measured SFR,
which is only sensitive to high-mass star formation.

The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. Sec-
tion 2 describes the method used to translate the metallicity-
dependent IMF variations into stellar mass and SFR changes
for a large sample of SDSS galaxies. The implications for
the star formation main sequence, GSMF and the mass-
metallicity relation are presented in sections 3, 4 and 5, re-
spectively. Section 6 discusses the possible implications of
a IMF-metallicity trend on the quenching of galaxies. For
an overview of the main takeaways of this work, see section
7. Some limitations of our analysis are discussed in the Ap-
pendix. Throughout this work we adopt a solar abundance
of Z(cid:12) = 0.019.

2 METHOD

2.1 The Vazdekis IMF
The IMF can be uniquely deﬁned by its slope as a function
of stellar mass. The IMF slope is deﬁned as the slope in the
plane of (log number of stars per log initial stellar mass) ver-
sus (log initial stellar mass), see Figure 1. It is customary to
deﬁne this IMF slope to be positive for a descending curve.
Martín-Navarro et al. (2015c) report a strong trend of
the IMF slope with metallicity, expressed in their equation
2:

Γb = 2.2(±0.1) + 3.1(±0.5) × [M/H],

(1)

where [M/H] is the logarithm of the metallicity with re-
spect to solar and Γb is the IMF slope above a stellar mass
of 0.6 M(cid:12) in the bimodal IMF parametrisation of Vazdekis
et al. (1996) (in which the Salpeter slope equals 1.35). In
this work we will refer to this IMF parametrisation as the
Vazdekis IMF. We show some examples of this IMF for dif-
ferent values of Γb in Figure 1. This Vazdekis IMF has a
slope of zero below a stellar mass of 0.2 and a spline from
0.2 M(cid:12) to 0.6 M(cid:12). The spline is normalized such that the
endpoints would be the same if the IMF of the two outer
parts would be interpolated and matched at 0.4 M(cid:12). The
IMF is deﬁned between 0.1 M(cid:12) and 100 M(cid:12). Equation 1 is a
ﬁt to spectroscopic IMF determinations from local CALIFA
measurements, SDSS measurements and radial proﬁle mea-
surements of three ETGs by Martín-Navarro et al. (2015c).
These three data sets use a similar spectroscopic IMF anal-
ysis on diﬀerent sources and give consistent results, as can
be seen from ﬁg. 2 of Martín-Navarro et al. (2015c).

The aim of this paper is to apply this relation on a
galaxy-by-galaxy basis to a large sample of SDSS galax-
ies and to investigate the potential consequences of such
a metallicity-dependent IMF. We use the stellar metallic-
ity measurements of Gallazzi et al. (2005) as input for the
metallicity-dependent IMF. In doing so we implicitly assume
that these metallicity measurements themselves are not de-
pendent on the IMF. This will not be completely accurate,
but it is a valid approximation, since the typically IMF-

4

Clauwens et al.

Figure 1. The IMF for the two parametrisations used throughout
this work. The yellow solid line depicts the Chabrier IMF. The
other solid lines are for the Vazdekis IMF (Vazdekis et al. 1996),
which is parametrised by its high-end slope. The indicated IMF
slopes for the blue-, black- and red curves correspond to a [M/H]
value in equation 1 of respectively -0.55, -0.29 and 0.26. Dashed
lines show our corresponding low-end IMF, for which the slope
below 0.5 M(cid:12) is the free parameter. Lines with the same colour
are matched on the dwarf-to-giant ratio, equation 3, deﬁned as
the the ratio of the mass in stars below 0.5 M(cid:12) with respect to
the mass in stars below 1.0 M(cid:12). These mass regimes are indicated
with the vertical dotted lines. The same dwarf-to-giant ratio, as
measured from IMF sensitive spectral lines (Martín-Navarro et al.
2015c), can be accommodated by vastly diﬀerent IMFs.

dependent metal line indices TiO and NaD are excluded
from the metallicity measurement of Gallazzi et al. (2005).
They concentrate on those indices that are best reproduced
by the Bruzual & Charlot (2003) models with a ﬁxed IMF.
A recent mass-metallicity relation measurement by González
Delgado et al. (2014) with the CALIFA integral ﬁeld spec-
trograph for a sample of 300 galaxies, ranging from ellipti-
cals to late-type spirals, agrees well with the SDSS measure-
ments by Gallazzi et al. (2005). At a given mass, the scatter
in the metallicity is expected to be mostly intrinsic, rather
than due to measurement uncertainties (see ﬁg. 8 of Gallazzi
et al. 2005).

The spectroscopic IMF determination of Martín-
Navarro et al. (2015c) relies on the light being dominated
by old stars. Therefore these measurements are done ex-
clusively for ETGs. We will assume that the same relation
holds also for star forming galaxies. Of course there is a
possibility that a metallicity-IMF relation will manifest it-
self diﬀerently in star forming galaxies, but large diﬀerences
are not expected, since the IMF is literally a property of the
galaxy during star formation. Hence, for any given ETG,
the measured IMF corresponds to the time when most of its
stellar mass was build up, at which time it would be clas-
siﬁed as a star forming galaxy. There is a possibility of a
redshift dependence of equation 1, which could mean that
it would be diﬀerent for ETGs and star forming galaxies
observed at redshift zero, but here we will assume that the
IMF is solely determined by the local gas metallicity during
star formation and does not depend directly on redshift. The

measured stellar metallicity reﬂects this local gas metallicity
during star formation.

The two main galaxy properties that we want to ad-
just to a metallicity dependent IMF are galaxy stellar mass
and star formation rate. We use the SDSS masses and star
formation rates from Chang et al. (2015) and the r-band
weighted ages from Gallazzi et al. (2005) . We match on
Plate ID, Fiber ID and modiﬁed julian date and select the
galaxies with a well-deﬁned metallicity and age in Gallazzi
et al. (2005). This leaves a sample of 186,886 SDSS galaxies.
To recompute the galaxy masses, for each galaxy we
compare the Cousins R-band mass-to-light ratio of a simple
stellar population (SSP) with the given metallicity and age
and a Chabrier IMF to the mass-to-light ratio of a SSP with
the same metallicity and age, but with the IMF implied by
equation 1. We veriﬁed that the results are almost the same
if we use the Johnson V-band or the SDSS r-band.

All results in this paper are obtained with the ﬂex-
ible stellar population synthesis (FSPS) code of Conroy
& Gunn (2010), but where possible we veriﬁed that very
similar results are obtained by using the tables from the
MILES website. Metallicities are restricted to the range
for which there are BaSTI isochrones (Pietrinferni et al.
2013), −1.80 < Log(Z/Z(cid:12)) < 0.32, for a solar metallicity
of Z(cid:12) = 0.019 (which is used throughout this paper). The
FSPS spectra are generated for IMF slope values binned
with a separation of δΓ = 0.1. Then the M/LR values are
interpolated in the 3-dimensional space of (log age, metal-
licity, IMF slope).

We apply equation 1 slightly outside the metallic-
ity regime of the observations by Martín-Navarro et al.
(2015c) (−0.40 < Log(Z/Z(cid:12)) < 0.25). The highest metallic-
ity in Gallazzi et al. (2005) is Log(Z/Z(cid:12)) = 0.417. At the
low-metallicity-end we extrapolate to Log(Z/Z(cid:12)) = −0.60
or equivalently a Vazdekis IMF slope of 0.34, and keep
the IMF constant for lower metallicities. This extrapola-
tion, necessitated by a lack of measurements for galaxies
in the metallicity range −1.80 < Log(Z/Z(cid:12)) < −0.40, intro-
duces a large uncertainty in the predictions for these low-
metallicity galaxies. Equation 1 gives very shallow high-end
IMF slopes for very metal-poor galaxies, thus much depends
on the exact choice of the low-metallicity cut-oﬀ. Also, for
shallow high-end IMF slopes, the results become quite sen-
sitive to the precise high-mass cut-oﬀ that is used. For an
IMF deﬁned in between 0.1 M(cid:12) and 100 M(cid:12), half of the
initial mass is created in stars heavier than 50 M(cid:12) for a
high-end IMF slope of zero. In equation 1 this happens at
Log(Z/Z(cid:12)) = −0.71. At our adopted low-metallicity cut-oﬀ
of Log(Z/Z(cid:12)) = −0.6, 37% of the stellar mass is created in
stars heavier than 50 M(cid:12). It is good to keep in mind that
the IMF measurements of Martín-Navarro et al. (2015c) are
still marginally consistent with a minimal high-end slope
of 1.3 (Kroupa) for galaxies with Log(Z/Z(cid:12)) < −0.29, in
which case there would be a bottom-heavy IMF for metal-
rich galaxies, but no top-heavy IMF for metal-poor galaxies.
We may expect a top-heavy IMF for extremely low
metallicities in theorised Population III stars, but the IMF in
the intermediate metallicity regime is not well constrained.
This metallicity regime is however probed by the IMF de-
termination of Marks et al. (2012). They report an IMF
dependence on metallicity for globular clusters that is quali-
tatively similar to Martín-Navarro et al. (2015c). Their ﬁt of

c(cid:13) 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–15

10-1100101102Log Initial Stellar Mass [M⊙]10-310-210-1100101102 d(Number of Stars)/d(Log Initital Mass)Vazdekis IMF slope 0.5Vazdekis IMF slope 1.3Vazdekis IMF slope 3.0Chabrier IMFmatched low-end IMFmatched low-end IMFmatched low-end IMF(cid:82) 0.5M(cid:12)
(cid:82) 1.0M(cid:12)

0.1M(cid:12) M Φ(M )dM
0.1M(cid:12) M Φ(M )dM

Implications of a variable IMF

5

tion, we will also use an alternative ‘low-end’ IMF parametri-
sation in which the IMF slope below 0.5M(cid:12) is varied and the
slope above 0.5M(cid:12) is ﬁxed at the standard Kroupa value of
1.3. Instead of matching the Vazdekis IMF slope to the low-
end slope that yields the same F0.5, we match the two IMF
parametrisations by requiring the same value of F0.5/F1.0:

F0.5/F1.0 =

.

(3)

Matching directly on F0.5 would not eliminate the implicit
extrapolation of the Vazdekis IMF to high masses.

For a shallow Vazdekis IMF slope, F0.5 can become very
small, but this does not mean that the stars below 0.5 M(cid:12)
do not give a signiﬁcant contribution to the current mass-
or light-budget of the galaxy, since all the high-mass stars
have turned into stellar remnants. Matching the two IMF
parametrisations on F0.5/F1.0 more closely preserves the ac-
tually measured signal related to the dwarf-to-giant ratio.
In principle one could choose to tune the mass parameter in
FM separately for each galaxy, depending on its age, but we
chose to ﬁx this value at 1.0 M(cid:12). The fact that the TiO2
and TiO1 indices in La Barbera et al. (2013) do not depend
much on the SSP age below 10 Gyr (see their ﬁgure 4) shows
that even for ETGs that have some stars with masses above
1.0 M(cid:12), these will not dominate the measured IMF signal.
Throughout this paper we will present results for the
two extreme cases described above, but one should keep in
mind that any normalised linear combination of the two, dis-
tributing the IMF eﬀect over the low- and high-end slopes,
would also be in agreement with the data from Martín-
Navarro et al. (2015c). Figure 1 shows some examples of
IMFs for the two diﬀerent parametrisations that are matched
on F0.5/F1.0.

2.3 Star formation rates
In order to estimate the changes to the inferred star forma-
tion rates due to a variable IMF, we compare the magnitudes
in several ultraviolet bands for a 100 Myr old constant star
formation rate population, implemented with the help of the
FSPS code. We do this for each galaxy in the sample, inter-
polating the metallicity between the discrete BaSTI values
and the IMF slope on a 0.1 width grid. As SFR tracers we
use the SDSS u-band, the GALEX FUV band and the total
intensity of ionising radiation obtained from integrating the
FSPS spectra up to 912.0 Å3. These three diﬀerent bands
are sensitive to star formation on diﬀerent time scales. The
FUV-band magnitude of a galaxy with a constant star form-
ing rate levels oﬀ after about 100 Myr (although this is an
IMF dependent statement), with H-alpha (which tracks the
ionising luminosity) being sensitive to shorter time scales
and the u-band to much longer time scales. Part of the high
energy photons that are emitted by the young massive stars
will be absorbed by dust and re-emitted in the infrared. For
our purposes this is a second order eﬀect. Assuming that the
infrared output from dust is in equilibrium with the input
in energetic radiation from massive young stars, it scales in
a similar way with IMF changes as the UV emission.

3 Using the number of ionising photons instead of the total energy
in ionising photons gives indistinguishable results.

Figure 2. The dashed line shows the fraction of galaxies below
our adopted metallicity cut-oﬀ of the IMF-metallicity relation,
equation 1, at Log(Z/Z(cid:12)) = −0.6. For masses below 109.2M(cid:12),
more than 50% of the galaxies have a metallicity below this cut-
oﬀ. The solid line shows the same fraction for the lowest metal-
licity in the sample of Martín-Navarro et al. (2015c).

the metallicity-dependent high-end IMF slope reaches 0.05
for the lowest metallicities (Z ≈ −2.5Z(cid:12)), so even lower than
our adopted minimum value of 0.34. Figure 2 shows the frac-
tion of galaxies in our sample that fall below our adopted
cut-oﬀ of the IMF-metallicity relation as a function of stellar
mass for a Chabrier IMF. Below a Chabrier mass of 109.2M(cid:12)
50% of the galaxies have a metallicity lower than the cut-
oﬀ. A simple extrapolation of equation 1 would therefore
enhance the eﬀect of a top-heavy IMF at low metallicities
with respect to the results reported in this work for low
masses.

(cid:82) 0.5M(cid:12)
(cid:82) 100M(cid:12)

2.2 The matched low-end IMF
Another implicit extrapolation of the IMF determination
from spectral indices by Martín-Navarro et al. (2015c) is
contained in the parametrisation used for the IMF. Al-
though the free parameter of the Vazdekis et al. (1996) IMF
parametrisation is the high-end IMF slope, this high-end
slope is not directly measured. Martín-Navarro et al. (2015c)
state that the IMF sensitive features more closely trace the
dwarf-to-giant ratio F0.5, as deﬁned in La Barbera et al.
(2013):

F0.5 =

0.1M(cid:12) M Φ(M )dM
0.1M(cid:12) M Φ(M )dM

,

(2)

which denotes the initial mass fraction in stars below 0.5
M(cid:12). In fact, since most ETGs contain very few stars more
massive than 1.0 M(cid:12), beyond this mass the inferred IMF is
more sensitive to the parametrisation than to the direct ob-
servations. It would be interesting to see whether the use of
an IMF parametrisation for which the low-mass end varies in
the analysis of Martín-Navarro et al. (2015c), would indeed
give similar results in terms of the trend between metallicity
and F0.5.

In this work, apart from the Vazdekis IMF parametrisa-

c(cid:13) 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–15

8.08.59.09.510.010.511.011.512.0Log Stellar Mass (for a Chabrier IMF) [M⊙]0.00.20.40.60.81.0Fraction of galaxies below metallicity cut-offlog(Z/Z⊙)<−0.4log(Z/Z⊙)<−0.66

Clauwens et al.

Figure 3. The luminosity ratio of a 100 Myr old constant star
formation rate stellar population with a Vazdekis IMF with the
given high-end slope and that of the same stellar population with
a Chabrier IMF. The top horizontal axis gives the metallicities
corresponding to the IMF slopes via equation 1. Diﬀerent colours
depict diﬀerent bands: black for for the total luminosity in ionising
radiation, blue for the GALEX-FUV band and red for the SDSS-
u band. Diﬀerent line styles depict diﬀerent metallicities. The
black dashed horizontal and vertical lines depict the Chabrier
values and the black dotted vertical lines show the minimum and
maximum values of the Vazdekis IMF slope that are used in this
work. The implied correction to the star formation rate when
switching from the Chabrier to the Vazdekis IMF is the inverse
of this luminosity ratio. These implied SFR changes span orders
of magnitude. The much smaller luminosity ratio between the
low-end IMF and the Chabrier IMF is indicated by the solid grey
curve. It does not depend on the choice of UV-band.

Figure 3 shows how the luminosity in diﬀerent bands
of a 100 Myr old constant star formation rate population
changes with respect to a Chabrier IMF as a function of
the assumed Vazdekis slope. There is a slight dependence on
the metallicity of the stellar population (the metallicity-IMF
relation has not yet been implemented here). The SDSS-
u, GALEX-FUV and total ionising luminosity show similar
oﬀsets. For a shallow Vazdekis IMF slope (i.e. a low metal-
licity) most star formation goes into massive stars and the
diﬀerent tracers can indicate, if interpreted using a Chabrier
IMF, a SFR up to an order of magnitude too high. For a
steep Vazdekis IMF slope (i.e. a high metallicity) mostly
dwarf stars are formed and the luminosity in the given bands
drops dramatically by up to three orders of magnitude. The
diﬀerence between the FUV luminosity and the luminosity
in ionising radiation also implies a calibration oﬀset between
the FUV-SFR and Hα-SFR that can exceed an order of mag-
nitude.

For our sample of observed galaxies we adjust the SFR
on a galaxy-by-galaxy basis by the inverse of the luminosity
ratio of Figure 3. For each galaxy we use the Vazdekis IMF
slope implied by the IMF-metallicity relation, equation 1.
As a conservative estimate of the implied SFR change, we
use the ratio of luminosities in the GALEX-FUV band.

For the ‘low-end’ IMF parametrisation, shown in grey
in Figure 3, the SFR changes are much smaller than for the

Figure 4. The implied stellar mass changes of galaxies resulting
from switching from a Chabrier IMF to a metallicity-dependent
IMF, equation 1, for a ﬁxed observed luminosity. The double hor-
izontal axis reﬂects this equation. The mass changes are based
on the change in mass-to-light ratio in the Cousins R-band for a
galaxy with a ﬁxed age and metallicity. Diﬀerent line colours rep-
resent diﬀerent SSP ages. The dashed lines represent the low-end
IMF parametrisations matched to the Vazdekis IMF on F0.5/F1.0,
equation 3. The black dashed lines depict the Chabrier values and
the black dotted vertical lines show the minimum and maximum
values of the Vazdekis IMF slope used in this work. The stel-
lar mass increase at high metallicities is due to dwarf stars. The
slight stellar mass decrease for low metallicity and a low-end IMF
is due to a shortage of dwarf stars. The Vazdekis IMF shows an
increase in mass in this region due to stellar remnants. A similar
plot for a constant star formation rate instead of a simple stellar
population is shown in the Appendix, Figure A2.

‘Vazdekis’ case. Moreover, the implied changes are in this
case nearly identical for the diﬀerent bands and metallici-
ties. This is because the ‘low-end’ IMF changes the reser-
voir of stars that are formed below 0.5 M(cid:12), while keeping
the IMF slope above 0.5 M(cid:12) ﬁxed. Because dwarf stars with
M < 0.5M(cid:12) give a negligible contribution to the luminosity
in these bands, the only eﬀect is that of a change in the
overall normalization of the high-mass end of the IMF.

2.4 Stellar masses
Figure 4 shows the galaxy mass changes caused by a switch
from a Chabrier IMF, depending on metallicity and r-band
weighted age. The mass change is determined by the change
in mass-to-light ratio in the Cousins R-band. Galaxies are
represented by a simple stellar population. This is a much
better approximation for the ETGs used in the IMF deter-
mination of Martín-Navarro et al. (2015c) than for actively
star forming galaxies. This simpliﬁcation of the star forma-
tion history is justiﬁed in the Appendix by comparing results
from a SSP with those from a constant star formation his-
tory. Qualitative diﬀerences only show up for low-metallicity
galaxies in the Vazdekis IMF parametrisation.

Figure 4 shows that for steep Vazdekis IMF slopes, or
equivalently high metallicities, switching from a Chabrier
IMF to a Vazdekis IMF can increase the inferred stellar mass

c(cid:13) 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–15

0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0Vazdekis IMF slope−3−2−1012Log UV Luminosity ratio (Vazdekis-Chabrier)Ionising radiation [Z]=0.32[Z]=-0.28[Z]=-0.98[Z]=-1.8GALEX-FUVSDSS-ulow-end IMF-0.71-0.55-0.39-0.23-0.060.10.260.420.58Metallicity Log(Z/Z⊙)0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0Vazdekis IMF slope−0.50.00.51.01.52.02.5Log Stellar Mass ChangeVazdekis IMF, 1010yr109.5yr109yr108.5yrlow-end IMF, 1010yr109.5yr109yr108.5yr-0.71-0.55-0.39-0.23-0.060.10.260.420.58Metallicity Log(Z/Z⊙)by more than an order of magnitude due to an increase in
the fraction of dwarf stars. Most of these metal-rich galax-
ies are old though, which results in a mass change of ap-
proximately 0.6 dex. For metal-poor galaxies, the increased
fraction of stellar remnants can induce a mass increase of
0.2 − 0.65 dex. For the low-end IMF the expected stellar
mass changes are much smaller, ranging from -0.06 dex at
low metallicities due to a shortage of dwarf stars to 0.29 dex
at high metallicities due to an excess of dwarf stars. Mass
changes for the low-end IMF are almost independent of age.
It is worth noting that for old galaxies a high-end IMF
slope around 1.3, or equivalently a Chabrier-like IMF, min-
imizes the inferred stellar mass of the galaxy. This means
that any variations in the high-end slope of the IMF away
from Chabrier are bound to increase the inferred mass of the
galaxy. A Chabrier IMF balances the amount of mass locked
up in dwarf stars on the one side and stellar remnants on
the other side in such a way that the total of this invisible
stellar mass is close to minimal at late times.

3 STAR FORMATION MAIN SEQUENCE
Figure 5 shows the mass and SFR changes relative to a
Chabrier IMF implied by the metallicity-dependent IMF
from Martín-Navarro et al. (2015c), equation 1, for 186,886
SDSS galaxies. The left panel shows the results for the
Vazdekis IMF parametrisation and the right panel shows
the results for the low-end IMF parametrisation. The large
diﬀerence between both panels clearly shows that the eﬀects
of the IMF change is more sensitive to the IMF parametri-
sation, rather than to the direct measurements.

The ‘Vazdekis IMF’ panel shows two tails emanating
from the (zero SFR change, zero mass change) point. The
lower tail consists of low-metallicity galaxies, which have a
shallow high-end IMF slope. This results in a negative SFR
correction, since there are fewer dwarf stars formed than
for a Chabrier IMF. The stellar mass correction for most of
these galaxies is positive though, because of invisible mass
locked up in stellar remnants. The maximum extent of this
eﬀect depends in part on the assumed cut-oﬀ in equation 1
below Log(Z/Z(cid:12)) = −0.6. The upper tail consists of high-
metallicity galaxies, which have a steep high-end IMF slope.
These have more star formation in dwarf stars than for a
Chabrier IMF, which results in an increase of the inferred
star formation rate of up to two orders of magnitude. The
increase in stellar mass is smaller, which means that the
speciﬁc star formation rate (SSFR) is increased as well.

The eﬀect for the ‘low-end’ IMF parametrisation is
much smaller (especially for the SFR) but still signiﬁcant. In
this case the whole eﬀect can be understood in terms of how
much mass is locked up in dwarf stars, since the IMF slope
above 0.5 M(cid:12) is kept ﬁxed. Naively one might think that
the speciﬁc star formation rate should remain unchanged in
this case, since the percentage of extra dwarf stars formed in
current star formation is the same as the percentage of extra
dwarf stars locked up from older generations. This would be
true if the SSFR were deﬁned as the SFR divided by the
total initial stellar mass formed, but it is instead deﬁned
with respect to the current stellar mass (Hopkins & Beacom
2008). The current total stellar mass is lower than the ini-
tial stellar mass, because of mass loss by intermediate-mass

c(cid:13) 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–15

Implications of a variable IMF

7

and massive stars. This means that for an IMF with rela-
tively more dwarf stars, there is an extra relative ‘increase’
of stellar mass with respect to the Chabrier case, caused by
a diminished stellar mass loss (and thus a diminished diﬀer-
ence between the initial stellar mass and the current stellar
mass). This means that the change in stellar mass is larger
than the change in SFR and thus that the SSFR decreases.
The opposite happens in the case where the ‘low-end’ IMF
has fewer dwarf stars than the Chabrier IMF. This causes
the pattern in the second panel of Figure 5, which shows
the displacement of the galaxies in the mass-SFR plane. The
change in SFR is roughly two thirds of the change in mass.
Figure 6 shows the eﬀect of the metallicity-dependent
IMF on the star formation main sequence. The left panel
shows the mass-SFR relation for the selection of 186,886
galaxies out of the 858,365 SDSS galaxies of Chang et al.
(2015) that have a well-deﬁned metallicity and age determi-
nation by Gallazzi et al. (2005). The running median SFR
of star-forming galaxies with SSFR > 10−11.5/yr, black solid
line, coincides with that for the complete Chang et al. (2015)
sample (solid white line). Therefore, we expect no signiﬁcant
selection eﬀects for the main sequence. The running me-
dian for the complete sample (black and white dashed lines)
shows a slight underrepresentation of quiescent galaxies in
our sample with respect to the complete Chang et al. (2015)
sample. The colour scale in Figure 6 represents the number
of galaxies per Mpc3, per dex stellar mass, per dex SFR. In-
dividual galaxies have been weighted by 1/Vmax from Chang
et al. (2015), correcting for the maximum volume in which
the given galaxy would be selected. The whole sample has
been rescaled by 858,365/186,886, neglecting the aforemen-
tioned slight underrepresentation of quiescent galaxies in our
sample.

The middle and right panels show the eﬀect of the
metallicity-dependent dwarf-to-giant ratio for respectively
a Vazdekis IMF parametrisation and a low-end IMF
parametrisation, as described in section 2. The Vazdekis
IMF has a dramatic inﬂuence on the star formation main
sequence (compare the black and white solid lines in the
middle panel). Below a mass of ∼ 1010.5M(cid:12) the dominant
eﬀect is from metal-poor galaxies which lower the median in-
ferred SFR by ∼ 0.5 dex relative to a Chabrier IMF. Above
this mass the dominant eﬀect is from metal-rich galaxies
which increase the median SFR, eﬀectively extending the
SSFR main sequence up to a stellar mass of ∼ 1012M(cid:12) and
making it more linear. We used a running median to repre-
sent the typical galaxy at each mass. The true average SFR
at low masses is actually increased, because of an increase
in the scatter.

The increased scatter in this plot could indicate that
the underlying metallicity-IMF relation or the Vazdekis
parametrisation of the IMF is wrong, because in general
a more precise description will cause a decrease in the ob-
served scatter. This is not necessarily the case though. Apart
from measurement or modelling errors in the metallicity, the
increased scatter could also be an intrinsic property of the
galaxy population. For a galaxy population that truly fol-
lows the assumed Vazdekis IMF-metallicity trend, the mid-
dle panel would indicate the total star formation, but the
left panel would still indicate the eﬀective high-mass star
formation. It is possible that the high-mass star formation
is better behaved than the total star formation. For a vary-

8

Clauwens et al.

Figure 5. The implied stellar mass change and star formation rate change with respect to observations that assume a Chabrier IMF for
a sample of SDSS galaxies that obey the IMF-metallicity relation of Martín-Navarro et al. (2015c), equation 1, with metallicities from
Gallazzi et al. (2005). The colour scale indicates the average log stellar mass of the galaxies in each pixel. Some typical metallicity values
are indicated with arrows. The black dotted line depicts a constant speciﬁc star formation rate. The left panel assumes the Vazdekis
IMF parametrisation for which the free parameter is the high-end IMF slope. The right panel assumes our low-end IMF parametrisation,
for which the free parameter is the low-end IMF slope. Both panels show large changes, but the ‘Vazdekis’ case has much more drastic
consequences, with star formation rate changes of over two orders of magnitude. Any normalised linear combination of these two cases
would be in agreement with the IMF measurements from line indices by Martín-Navarro et al. (2015c).

Figure 6. The inferred star formation rate as a function of inferred stellar mass for diﬀerent IMFs. The left panel shows the matched
sample of SDSS galaxies with metallicities from Gallazzi et al. (2005) and masses and star formation rates from Chang et al. (2015),
assuming a Chabrier IMF. The middle panel shows the results for the metallicity-dependent Vazdekis IMF, as described in Figure 5.
The right panel shows the eﬀect of a low-end metallicity-dependent IMF. For ease of comparison, the medians of the matched sample
with the Chabrier IMF have been plotted in black in all panels: dashed lines denote the median for all galaxies and solid lines denote the
median for all star-forming galaxies (deﬁned as those galaxies with a SSFR larger than 10−11.5/yr, indicated with a red dashed line).
White lines in the left panel show the medians for the complete sample from Chang et al. (2015). In the middle and right panels the
white lines show the medians of the underlying distributions. The excellent agreement between the white and black solid lines in the
left panel shows that our selection on galaxies for which stellar metallicities are available, does not introduce a bias. The red line in the
left panel demarcates the boundary below which the star formation rates should be regarded as upper bounds. The region below the
red line in the middle panel is contaminated by these upper bounds. The middle panel shows that the metallicity-dependent Vazdekis
IMF has a large inﬂuence on the mass-SFR relation, while the low-end metallicity-dependent IMF in the right panel has only a small
eﬀect. Any normalised linear combination of these two cases would be in agreement with the IMF measurements from line indices by
Martín-Navarro et al. (2015c).

c(cid:13) 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–15

−0.4−0.20.00.20.40.60.81.01.21.4Log Stellar Mass Change−1.0−0.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.0Log Star Formation Rate ChangeVazdekis IMF[Z]=−0.6[Z]=−0.3[Z]=0.0[Z]=0.3−0.10.00.10.20.3Log Stellar Mass Change−0.10.00.10.20.3Log Star Formation Rate Changelow-end IMF[Z]=−0.6[Z]=−0.3[Z]=0.0[Z]=0.39.29.610.010.410.811.211.612.0Average Log Stellar Mass [M⊙]89101112Log Stellar Mass [M⊙]−5−4−3−2−101234Log Star Formation Rate [M⊙/yr]Chabrier IMF89101112Log Stellar Mass [M⊙]−5−4−3−2−101234Vazdekis IMF89101112Log Stellar Mass [M⊙]−5−4−3−2−101234low-end IMF−6.4−5.6−4.8−4.0−3.2−2.4−1.6Log Number / Mpc3 / dex2 Implications of a variable IMF

9

Figure 8. The diﬀerence in stellar mass estimates between a
metallicity-dependent IMF and a Chabrier IMF as a function of
the stellar mass inferred for a Chabrier IMF for the sample of
186,886 SDSS galaxies. The red line and shaded region show the
median and the 10%-90% region for the Vazdekis IMF. Blue cor-
responds to the low-end IMF. The black dashed and dotted lines
depict the Chabrier and Salpeter IMFs respectively.

Vazdekis IMF this is a factor of 16.6. The eﬀect is much
stronger, with a large peak of dwarf star formation around
M∗,SSP ≈ 1011.3M(cid:12).

4 GALAXY STELLAR MASS FUNCTION
Figure 8 shows the mass change due to the change from a
Chabrier IMF to a metallicity-dependent IMF for our sam-
ple of galaxies as a function of the original Chabrier stel-
lar mass. The median mass increase for the Vazdekis IMF
is larger than that for a Salpeter IMF, which might be in
tension with some of the mass measurements from strong
lensing and from dynamics. This suggests that at least a
fraction of the IMF-metallicity trend measured by Martín-
Navarro et al. (2015c) should be provided for by a change in
the the low-end slope of the IMF. For the Vazdekis IMF the
mass change at low masses is due stellar remnants while at
high masses it is due to dwarf stars. Nevertheless, the overall
eﬀect is insensitive to mass, with a large scatter at all masses.
Thus, metallicity-dependent IMF changes do not necessar-
ily create a clear trend of M∗true/M∗Chabrier with M∗Chabrier,
where the latter is obtained through SED ﬁtting. The low-
end IMF parametrisation gives smaller mass changes, but
it does produce a clear trend of M∗true/M∗Chabrier with
M∗Chabrier, with a progressively more massive IMF towards
higher masses.

In ﬁgure 9 we show the eﬀect on the galaxy stellar mass
function inferred from the observations of Moustakas et al.
(2013). Galaxies are scattered as a function of mass accord-
ing to the exact distribution underlying Figure 8. For galax-
ies below a mass of 109M(cid:12) we extrapolate the Moustakas
mass function with a slope of 0.41 and we apply the mass
changes corresponding to the lowest 0.1 wide mass bin at
109M(cid:12). For both IMF parametrisations the knee of the mass
function shifts to a higher mass, but the steepness of the
high-mass drop-oﬀ is not aﬀected much. The abrupt nature

Figure 7. The inferred star formation rate density as a func-
tion of the inferred stellar mass for the sample of SDSS galaxies
with diﬀerent IMFs. The black line shows the original estimate
for a Chabrier IMF. The red line corresponds to the metallicity-
dependent Vazdekis IMF and the blue line corresponds to the
metallicity-dependent low-end IMF. The increased number of
dwarf stars for metal-rich galaxies causes a very large increase
in the inferred SFR, which peaks around a mass of 1011.3M(cid:12) for
the Vazdekis IMF. For the low-end IMF the eﬀect is much more
subtle.

ing IMF these two quantities are no longer directly linked to
each other, but it is the high-mass star formation that deter-
mines the stellar feedback. It could well be that this causes
the high-mass star formation to be regulated, whereas the
increased dwarf star formation for metal-rich galaxies could
create a runaway process of star formation that is less reg-
ulated and therefore shows a larger galaxy-by-galaxy vari-
ation at a given mass. We will discuss this possibility in
section 6.

The right panel shows results for the low-end IMF
parametrisation. For this parametrisation there is almost no
eﬀect at low masses and at high masses the star formation
main-sequence is prolonged to slightly higher masses. The
eﬀect on the median for star forming galaxies is especially
small, since individual galaxies are displaced almost parallel
to lines of constant SSFR, along the main sequence, see also
Figure 5. In practice one could construct an IMF parametri-
sation in between the two options described here, for which
part of the observed trend of the IMF sensitive line indices
would be caused by a changing low-end IMF slope and part
would be caused by a changing high-end slope. The eﬀects
on the mass-SFR plot would fall somewhere in between the
middle and right panels of Figure 6. Qualitatively this means
an extension of the star formation main sequence together
with a possible lowering of the median SFR at low masses,
but quantitatively the magnitude of this eﬀect is not well
constrained by current observations.

Figure 7 shows the inferred low-redshift SFR densities
of the Universe as a function of galaxy mass. The eﬀect of
a low-end metallicity-dependent IMF is quite small, shift-
ing the star formation to higher masses by about 0.2 dex.
The implied increase of the total SFR density of galax-
ies more massive than 109M(cid:12) is a factor of 1.11. For the

c(cid:13) 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–15

9.09.510.010.511.011.512.012.513.0Log Stellar Mass [M⊙]−7−6−5−4−3−2−10Log ρSFR [M⊙ yr−1 dex−1 Mpc−3]Chabrier IMFVazdekis IMFlow-end IMF9.09.510.010.511.011.512.0Log Stellar Mass (Chabrier) [Mﬂ]0.10.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.8Log Stellar Mass ChangeVazdekis IMFChabrier IMFlow-end IMFSalpeter IMF10

Clauwens et al.

Figure 9. The galaxy stellar mass function inferred from
observations of Moustakas et al. (2013) for several
IMFs:
Chabrier (black), metallicity-dependent Vazdekis IMF (red) and
metallicity-dependent low-end IMF (blue). For both metallicity-
dependent IMFs the knee of the mass function shifts to higher
masses, but the steepness of the drop-oﬀ is hardly aﬀected.

of this drop-oﬀ is generally believed to be caused by the
feedback of active galactic nuclei (AGN). This AGN feed-
back should be very eﬀective at quenching high-mass galax-
ies in order to prevent more massive galaxies from forming.
A metallicity-dependent IMF does not remove the need for
such an eﬃcient quenching mechanism at high masses, it
only shifts the mass at which this quenching occurs, which
can also be seen in Figure 6. The IMF changes also imply a
change in the total stellar mass density of the Universe. The
total stellar mass density in galaxies above 109M(cid:12) increases
by a factor 1.33 for the low-end IMF and by a factor 2.31
for the Vazdekis IMF.

In this work we focus on low-redshift observations, but
the implications of a metallicity-IMF trend at higher red-
shifts could be very signiﬁcant. A more top-heavy IMF at
higher redshifts, implied by lower metallicities, would aﬀect
the relation between the total star formation rate density
implied by direct SFR measurements at these redshifts and
that from comparing the galaxy stellar mass function at dif-
ferent redshifts. At high redshifts the true star formation
rate would be smaller than that inferred from SFR measure-
ments with a Chabrier IMF. The star formation rate density,
deduced from comparing neighbouring redshift slices of the
galaxy stellar mass function, interpreted with a Chabrier
IMF, would also be too high. In the case of a ‘low-end’
IMF, the oﬀsets in both SFR density determinations are the
the same, since they are caused by the same overestimation
of mass locked in invisible dwarf stars with masses smaller
than 0.5M(cid:12). The consistency between both SFR density de-
terminations is thus not aﬀected. For a Vazdekis IMF, the
direct SFR density measurement is more sensitive to the
IMF change than the SFR density estimate from compar-
ing GSMFs, because it is more sensitive to the highest mass
stars. In this case we thus expect a smaller increase in stel-
lar mass in the Universe from comparing GSMFs than that
implied by direct SFR observations, if both are interpreted
with a Chabrier IMF.

5 METALS

We used the stellar mass-metallicity measurements of Gal-
lazzi et al. (2005) as input for the metallicity-dependent
IMF. However, a metallicity-dependent IMF will alter the
stellar masses of these observed galaxies and will therefore
change the mass-metallicity relation. Figure 10 shows the
eﬀect that this has for both the Vazdekis IMF and the low-
end IMF. Solid white lines in both panels show the running
median metallicity for the Vazdekis (left panel) and low-end
(right panel) IMFs, while the black curve indicates the me-
dian metallicity for a universal Chabrier IMF. In both cases
the mass-metallicity relation is steeper at high high mass for
the metallicity-dependent IMF than for the Chabrier IMF.
We used the same weighting with 1/Vmax as in Figure 6.

The behaviour at low metallicity is diﬀerent for the two
parametrisations. In the Vazdekis case we see a clear shift
to higher masses for Z < Z(cid:12). At the low-metallicity end this
shift is caused by a progressively more top-heavy IMF for
lower metallicities and the resulting mass gain is comprised
of stellar remnants. We did not extrapolate the IMF metal-
licity trend, equation 1, below Log(Z/Z(cid:12)) = −0.6, otherwise
this shift to the right in the left panel of ﬁgure 10 would get
more prominent toward lower metallicities, as can be seen
in Figure 4.

The mass-metallicity relation inferred from the low-end
IMF is much less sensitive to this extrapolation and the ef-
fect goes in the opposite direction. Since in this case the
high-end IMF slope is kept ﬁxed, the net eﬀect of extrapo-
lating to lower metallicities would be to have an IMF that
is increasingly deﬁcient in M < 0.5M(cid:12) stars. The result-
ing galaxies would be less massive than suggested by SED
ﬁtting with a Chabrier IMF. This would shift the galax-
ies in the right panel of ﬁgure 10 at metallicities below
Log(Z/Z(cid:12)) = −0.6 slightly to the left. This eﬀect is much
less drastic than for the Vazdekis case as it is clearly bounded
from below by having no stars below 0.5 M(cid:12), whereas in the
Vazdekis case the ratio of observed stars over remnants is
not bounded.

Figure 11 shows the metal mass released over the life-
time of a simple stellar population as a function of metal-
licity. In order to construct this we used the metallicity-
dependent yield tables for individual stars of diﬀerent masses
from Portinari, Chiosi & Bressan (1998) and Marigo (2001).
There are two ways in which the metal release of a sim-
ple stellar population depends on metallicity. First, through
a metallicity dependence of the metals released by individ-
ual stars, but the more signiﬁcant contribution comes from
the metallicity dependence of the IMF, especially for the
Vazdekis IMF. In this case, a galaxy would presumably start
out on the left, with a low metallicity, a top-heavy IMF and
a high metal output. During the lifetime of a galaxy on aver-
age its metallicity will grow and as a result it will shift to the
right in this graph, towards a more bottom-heavy IMF and a
lower metal output. Apart from a boost in the metal release,
the early top-heavy IMF will leave not much evidence, be-
cause these metal producing stars will have been turned into
stellar remnants. The metal output inferred from the inte-
grated contribution of SFR observations at higher redshifts
over time would not change drastically though, since these
SFR observations eﬀectively measure the formation rate of

c(cid:13) 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–15

9.09.510.010.511.011.512.012.513.0Log Mass [M⊙]10-610-510-410-310-210-1Φ [h370Mpc−3dex−1]Chabrier IMFVazdekis IMFlow-end IMFImplications of a variable IMF

11

Figure 10. The eﬀect of a metallicity-dependent IMF on the inferred stellar mass-metallicity relation from Gallazzi et al. (2005). The
left and right panels show the results for respectively the Vazdekis and the low-end IMF parametrisations. White solid lines indicate the
running median and the black solid line indicates the running median for a universal Chabrier IMF. In both panels the mass-metallicity
relation shows considerable less ﬂattening at high masses for the variable IMF. In the ‘Vazdekis IMF’ panel there is a clear feature of
galaxies shifting to the right at Log(Z/Z(cid:12)) ≈ −0.6. The reason that this shift remains constant below Log(Z/Z(cid:12)) = −0.6 is that we do
not extrapolate the IMF-metallicity relation, equation 1, below this metallicity, which is a somewhat arbitrary choice. This mass shift is
due to stellar remnants that are created by a presumably more top-heavy IMF at low metallicities. The ‘low-end’ panel does not have
this feature. The eﬀect of extrapolating below Log(Z/Z(cid:12)) = −0.6 in this panel would be a slight shift to the left instead of to the right.

high-mass stars. These are exactly the stars that produce
the metals.

The same situation applies to ionising radiation, be-
cause the bulk of the ionising radiation and metals are pro-
duced by the same massive stars. In principle reionisation
would get a head start due to an early top-heavy IMF. For
redshifts where we have representative Hα-based SFR mea-
surements, the IMF-metallicity relation should not change
the implied ionising photon production much, but for higher
redshifts the IMF eﬀect on reionisation can potentially be
large.

6 RAPID GALAXY QUENCHING
The distribution of galaxies in a colour-magnitude plot is ob-
served to follow a bimodal pattern (e.g. Strateva et al. 2001;
Bell et al. 2004), with most galaxies being classiﬁed as either
a ‘red sequence’ or a ‘blue cloud’ galaxy. The red sequence
is comprised of red, mostly elliptical galaxies and the blue
cloud is comprised of blue, mostly spiral galaxies. Galaxies
that fall in between those categories are called ‘green valley’
galaxies. They are believed to be mostly galaxies that are
currently quenching, making the transition from the blue
cloud to the red sequence (e.g. Trayford et al. 2016).

A similar classiﬁcation of galaxies can be made based on
stellar mass and speciﬁc star formation rate, although this
may depend on the type of SFR estimator used. A short-
time SFR indicator like Hα may be inherently more bursty,
so a quiescent galaxy based on the Hα SFR may not be
quiescent based on the u-band SFR. Regardless of this am-
biguity in deﬁning a green valley galaxy, in general relatively

c(cid:13) 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–15

Figure 11. The total metal mass released by a simple stellar
population over its lifetime as a function of metallicity for the
metallicity-dependent Vazdekis IMF, the corresponding low-end
IMF and the Chabrier IMF. The metal release for diﬀerent stellar
masses and stellar stages are taken from Portinari, Chiosi & Bres-
san (1998) and Marigo (2001). The trends are primarily due to
changes in the IMF with metallicity and to a lesser extent due to
a metallicity-dependence in the metal output of individual stars.
Dotted vertical lines show the minimum and maximum values of
the metallicity used in this work.

few galaxies are in this ‘in between’ state. This suggests that
the quenching of a typical galaxy is a fast process. Also, es-
pecially at high masses, quenching needs to be very eﬀective

8910111213Log Stellar Mass [M⊙]−1.5−1.0−0.50.00.5Log (Z/Z⊙)Vazdekis IMF8910111213Log Stellar Mass [M⊙]−1.5−1.0−0.50.00.5Log (Z/Z⊙)low-end IMF−6.4−5.6−4.8−4.0−3.2−2.4−1.6Log Number / Mpc3 / dex2 −0.6−0.4−0.20.00.20.4log(Z/Z⊙)10-510-410-310-210-1100mass of metal release per M⊙ [M⊙]low-end IMFVazdekis IMFChabrier IMF12

Clauwens et al.

to explain the sharp drop-oﬀ in the number density of high-
mass galaxies beyond the knee of the galaxy mass function.
A bottom-heavy IMF at the late stages of galaxy evolu-
tion could help speed up the last phase of the quenching
process, because it produces less feedback per unit mass
of stars formed and because it shortens the gas consump-
tion time scale inferred from the observed galaxy proper-
ties. Figure 5 shows that a metallicity-dependent IMF can
cause the inferred SFR to increase by of up to 2.5 orders
of magnitude relative to a Chabrier IMF (although the im-
plied SFR changes are much smaller if the IMF changes
apply to the low-end IMF slope rather than the high-
end IMF slope). The implied gas consumption timescale4,
τgas = 1.33 ∗ (MHI + MH2 )/SFR, i.e. the timescale for the
galaxy to run out of its current cold gas reserve, scales with
the inverse of the SFR and will thus be signiﬁcantly short-
ened. On the other hand, the expected stellar feedback for a
galaxy with such a bottom-heavy IMF will not change much,
because the observed SFR already eﬀectively represents the
SFR in high-mass stars.

A late time bottom-heavy IMF for massive present-day
galaxies would help to explain the bimodal distribution of
galaxies in another way. It would make the quenched galax-
ies eﬀectively less quenched, because most of their star for-
mation is in dwarf stars, the star formation rates implied
by the observations would be higher. The requirements on
the eﬃciency of the feedback process that is responsible for
preventing gas accretion and for the ejection of gas lost by
evolved stars would thus be reduced.

The higher SFRs imply shorter gas consumption
timescales. Table 1 lists the median values for the gas con-
sumption timescale implied by the SFR changes and the
measurements of total HI plus H2 gas from the GASS and
COLD GASS surveys (Catinella et al. 2010; Saintonge et al.
2011). For a universal Chabrier IMF the median gas con-
sumption timescale is almost constant over the mass range
from 1010M(cid:12) to 1011.5M(cid:12) at a value of ≈ 2 × 109 yr. Over
the same mass range a metallicity-dependent Vazdekis IMF
implies a progressively shorter median gas consumption
timescale for more massive galaxies, with a decrease by a
factor of 32 to a value of 67 million years for the most mas-
sive galaxies. If this star formation were to be sustained for
longer periods, it would require an eﬃcient refueling of the
cool gas reservoir of 50 M(cid:12)/yr (in which case the refueling
rate equals the star formation rate). We can compare this
rate to the rate of gas accretion onto the halo. For this we use
the stellar mass-halo mass relation from Behroozi, Conroy
& Wechsler (2010) to determine the halo mass (where we al-
ways use the Chabrier IMF) and the corresponding halo gas
accretion rate from Correa et al. (2015). At a stellar mass
of 1010M(cid:12), the accretion onto the halo is about a factor 2.5
larger than the median SFR, both for a universal Chabrier
IMF and for the Vazdekis IMF. For the Chabrier IMF this
ratio becomes progressively larger for larger masses, but for
the Vazdekis IMF it ﬁrst drops, around the knee of the
galaxy mass function, where the halo gas accretion rate is
just marginally larger than the SFR, before rising again at
the high-mass end.

In conclusion, the increased SFR, relative to Chabrier,

4 The factor of 1.33 captures the contribution from helium.

for the metallicity-dependent Vazdekis IMF may require
large cooling ﬂows onto the galaxy, of the same order as
the gas accretion rate onto the halo, and would imply very
short gas consumption timescales. The large gas accretion
rates may be inconsistent with X-ray observations of galaxy
clusters (e.g. Peterson et al. 2003). Combining the high-end
metallicity-dependent IMF changes with changes to the low-
end slope would reduce the magnitude of these eﬀects. They
would imply a speedup of the quenching process, especially
around the knee of the galaxy stellar mass function.

7 CONCLUSIONS

In this paper we have investigated the consequences of a
metallicity-dependent IMF, as measured for SDSS galaxies
and elliptical annuli of CALIFA galaxies by Martín-Navarro
et al. (2015c). We use the stellar mass and SFR measure-
ments of Chang et al. (2015) and the stellar metallicity mea-
surements of Gallazzi et al. (2005). We assume that each of
our 186,886 SDSS galaxies follows the exact IMF-metallicity
relation given by equation 1 (Martín-Navarro et al. 2015c).
The measurement of IMF speciﬁc spectral lines in ETGs
by Martín-Navarro et al. (2015c) is eﬀectively sensitive to
the current dwarf-to-giant ratio, equation 3. It is insensitive
to the IMF slope for stellar masses M (cid:29) 1.0M(cid:12), because
of a sparseness of stars in this mass range in the observed
ETGs and because of the relative insensitivity of the used
line indices to stars in this mass range. The implications of
this varying IMF for the masses and star formation rates of
observed galaxies are however very dependent on the high-
end IMF. For this reason we investigate two extreme cases.
First, we use the IMF parametrisation of Martín-Navarro
et al. (2015c), for which the high-end IMF slope is varied and
the low-end slope is held ﬁxed. We refer to this case as the
‘Vazdekis IMF’. Second, we use a ‘low-end’ IMF parametri-
sation, for which the high-end slope is ﬁxed at the Chabrier
value and the slope below 0.5 M(cid:12) is varied. Our main con-
clusions are as follows:

• When we match both IMF parametrisations on the cur-
rent dwarf-to-giant ratio, the same observations lead to com-
pletely diﬀerent IMFs (Fig. 1).
• The trend between the high-end IMF slope and metal-
licity can imply large changes in the SFR inferred from ob-
servations, depending on the SFR tracer. Compared to a
Chabrier IMF, the implied bottom-heavy SFR can be up
to three orders of magnitude larger for the most metal-
rich galaxies, with a calibration oﬀset between the observed
FUV-SFR and the Hα-SFR of up to an order of magnitude.
The top-heavy IMF for metal-poor galaxies can reduce the
inferred SFR by up to 0.8 dex. When we vary the low-end
IMF slope instead of the high-end slope, the same IMF-
metallicity trend causes much smaller SFR changes ranging
from -0.02 dex to 0.20 dex and no FUV-Hα SFR calibration
oﬀsets (Fig. 3).

• The stellar mass changes

implied by the IMF-
metallicity trend are also much smaller when the low-end
IMF slope is varied (-0.06 dex < ∆Log(M(cid:63)) < 0.29 dex)
than when the high-end IMF slope is varied (-0.06 dex
< ∆Log(M(cid:63)) < 1.25 dex). A combination of a metallicity-
dependent variation of the low-end and high-end IMF slope

c(cid:13) 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–15

Implications of a variable IMF

13

Table 1. The ﬁrst column gives some typical stellar mass values for a universal Chabrier IMF. The second column gives the corresponding
median stellar mass for a metallicity-dependent Vazdekis IMF, from Figure 8. The third column gives the corresponding halo mass from
Behroozi, Conroy & Wechsler (2010). The fourth column gives the median total HI plus H2 gas mass from Bahe et al. (2015) and references
therein. The starred measurement indicates a slight extrapolation beyond M(cid:63) ≈ 11.3M(cid:12). There is at least a 0.5 dex uncertainty in this
median gas mass value. The ﬁfth and sixth columns give the median SFR for a Chabrier respectively Vazdekis IMF from Figure 6. The
seventh column gives the halo gas accretion rate at the given halo mass from Correa et al. (2015). The accretion rates in the middle
two lines are very close to the implied SFR for the Vazdekis IMF. The eighth and ninth columns give the median gas consumption
timescales for respectively a Chabrier and Vazdekis IMF, calculated from the corresponding star formation rates and the hydrogen gas
mass (column four), including a correction for helium. The Chabrier IMF implies a nearly constant median gas consumption timescale
across 1.5 dex in mass, whereas the median gas consumption timescale for a Vazdekis IMF decreases by a factor 32 over this mass range.

Log(M(cid:63))
Log(M(cid:63))
Chabrier Vazdekis
[M(cid:12)]

[M(cid:12)]

Log
(MHalo)
[M(cid:12)]

SFR

SFR

Log
(MHI+H2 ) Chabrier Vazdekis
[M(cid:12)/yr]
[M(cid:12)]

[M(cid:12)/yr]

halo gas
accretion rate
[M(cid:12)/yr]

10.0
10.5
11.0
11.5

10.3
10.8
11.3
11.8

11.6
12.1
13.1
14.9

9.2
9.5
9.5
9.4∗

1.0
1.8
2.5
2.5

1.0
7.1
50
50

2.5
8.0
79
1 × 104

gas consump-
tion time
Chabrier [yr]
2.1 × 109
2.3 × 109
1.7 × 109
1.3 × 109

gas consump-
tion time
Vazdekis [yr]
2.1 × 109
5.9 × 108
8.4 × 107
6.7 × 107

would cause a behaviour that is in between these two ex-
tremes (Fig. 4).

• The high-end Chabrier slope of 1.3 minimizes the total
mass of old galaxies. Changing the high-end slope will always
increase the inferred mass of the galaxy by either locking up
more mass in dwarf stars or in stellar remnants (Fig. 4).

• The implied combined mass-SFR changes for our sam-
ple of 186,886 SDSS galaxies are shown in Figure 5. When
the high-end IMF slope is varied, metal-rich galaxies will
become more massive and their SSFR will increase by up to
two orders of magnitude. When changing the low-end IMF
slope, the increase in mass is combined with a slight decrease
in the SSFR.

• Figure 6 shows the eﬀect of a variable IMF on the
star forming main sequence. The eﬀect for the low-end IMF
is mild, because most galaxies are displaced along the se-
quence. When changing the high-end slope the eﬀect is
large, especially at the high-mass end. The star-forming
main sequence is eﬀectively prolonged up to a stellar mass
of 1012M(cid:12). In between 109M(cid:12) and 1010M(cid:12) the median SFR
becomes lower, but the same does not hold for the average
SFR, due to an increased scatter.

• Increases in the total low-redshift SFR density range
from a factor of 1.11 for the low-end IMF to a factor of 16.6
for the Vazdekis IMF, with a larger SFR contribution from
galaxies around a mass of 1011.3M(cid:12) (Fig. 7).

• If the metallicity-dependent IMF variations only aﬀect
the low-end slope, then they will produce a clear trend of the
IMF-dependent mass change with SED-ﬁtting mass (using
a Chabrier IMF for the SED ﬁt) (Fig. 8). For M (cid:38) 1011M(cid:12)
a small fraction of galaxies will be more massive than for
a Salpeter IMF. High-end IMF slope variations produce a
larger mass change, possibly in tension with dynamic mass
measurements, but no clear trend with Chabrier SED mass.
• Independent of the IMF parametrisation, the IMF-
metallicity trend will produce a shift of the galaxy stellar
mass function to higher masses, without changing the steep-
ness of the high-mass dropoﬀ much, see Figure 9. This means
that these IMF variations do not remove the need for an eﬃ-
cient quenching mechanism for high-mass galaxies, but they
shift the mass at which this happens upwards by 0.2 to 0.5

c(cid:13) 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–15

dex. The implied total stellar mass density of the Universe
increases by a factor of 1.3 to 2.3.
• The IMF-metallicity trend implies a steeper stellar
mass-metallicity relation for M ∼ 1011M(cid:12) (Fig. 10).
• If the high-end IMF slope is more shallow for metal-
poor galaxies, then this would produce a large change in
the metal mass released per unit mass of formed stars over
the lifetime of a galaxy. Figure 11 shows that this metal
production could be three orders of magnitude higher in the
early metal-poor stage of a galaxy than in the late metal-
rich stage. This strong evolution makes it impossible to give
a good estimate of the total metal production of any galaxy
as this might be dominated by the early stages and depends
crucially on the exact mass and metallicity evolution of the
galaxy. The total metal production deduced from the Hα-
SFR evolution of the Universe is not expected to change
much though, since Hα directly traces the massive metal-
producing stars.
• If the high-end IMF slope is shallower for metal-poor
galaxies, then this will increase the production of ionising
photons for metal-poor galaxies in the early Universe. This
would imply an increased production of ionising photons
for high redshifts that are not probed directly by Hα ob-
servations, which would have an eﬀect on models for the
reionisation of the Universe.
• A bottom-heavy IMF during the late, metal-rich stage
of galaxy evolution could help explain the observed bimodal-
ity in galaxy properties: the observation that most galaxies
can be classiﬁed as ‘blue cloud’ or ‘red sequence’ galaxies
and only very few galaxies are observed in the intermediate
‘green valley’ stage. On the one hand, ‘quenched’ galaxies
would be less quenched, because their true star formation
rate would be higher than for a Chabrier IMF, due to the
‘invisible’ formation of dwarf stars. On the other hand, the
quenching time of these galaxies would be lower, due to the
much shorter implied gas consumption timescale. If gas cool-
ing onto the galaxy is regulated in part by stellar feedback,
then a more bottom-heavy IMF at higher metallicity could
initiate a runaway process of low-mass star formation, be-
cause these low-mass stars do not provide feedback.
• Metallicity-dependent changes to the high-end IMF
slope imply gas consumption timescales that become pro-

14

Clauwens et al.

gressively shorter for more massive galaxies, down to 67
million years at 1011.5M(cid:12), whereas for a universal Chabrier
IMF this gas consumption timescale is approximately con-
stant at ≈ 2 × 109yr. Around the knee of the GSMF these
IMF changes require a cooling ﬂow onto the galaxy of about
7 to 50 M(cid:12)/yr in order to sustain the SFR. These values are
only slightly below the expected gas accretion rate onto the
halo, see Table 1.

In conclusion, the implications of the observational evi-
dence for a variable IMF for the low-redshift Universe could
vary from absolutely dramatic to mild but signiﬁcant, de-
pending on the assumed IMF parametrisation.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We gratefully acknowledge support from the European Re-
search Council under the European Union’s Seventh Frame-
work Programme (FP7/2007-2013) / ERC Grant agreement
278594-GasAroundGalaxies.

REFERENCES
Bahe Y. M. et al., 2015, ArXiv e-prints
Barnabè M., Spiniello C., Koopmans L. V. E., Trager S. C.,
Czoske O., Treu T., 2013, MNRAS, 436, 253
Bastian N., Covey K. R., Meyer M. R., 2011, in Astronomi-
cal Society of the Paciﬁc Conference Series, Vol. 448, 16th
Cambridge Workshop on Cool Stars, Stellar Systems, and
the Sun, Johns-Krull C., Browning M. K., West A. A.,
eds., p. 361
Bauer A. E. et al., 2013, MNRAS, 434, 209
Behroozi P. S., Conroy C., Wechsler R. H., 2010, ApJ, 717,
379
Bell E. F. et al., 2004, ApJ, 608, 752
Boselli A., Boissier S., Cortese L., Buat V., Hughes T. M.,
Gavazzi G., 2009, ApJ, 706, 1527
Brewer B. J. et al., 2012, MNRAS, 422, 3574
Bruzual G., Charlot S., 2003, MNRAS, 344, 1000
Cappellari M. et al., 2012, Nature, 484, 485
Cappellari M. et al., 2013a, MNRAS, 432, 1862
Cappellari M. et al., 2013b, MNRAS, 432, 1709
Catinella B. et al., 2010, MNRAS, 403, 683
Chabrier G., 2003, PASP, 115, 763
Chang Y.-Y., van der Wel A., da Cunha E., Rix H.-W.,
2015, ApJS, 219, 8
Clauwens B., Schaye J., Franx M., 2015, MNRAS, 449, 4091
Conroy C., Gunn J. E., 2010, FSPS: Flexible Stellar Pop-
ulation Synthesis. Astrophysics Source Code Library
Conroy C., van Dokkum P. G., 2012, ApJ, 760, 71
Correa C. A., Wyithe J. S. B., Schaye J., Duﬀy A. R., 2015,
MNRAS, 450, 1521
Dabringhausen J., Kroupa P., Pﬂamm-Altenburg J.,
Mieske S., 2012, ApJ, 747, 72
Davé R., 2008, MNRAS, 385, 147
Dutton A. A., Macciò A. V., Mendel J. T., Simard L., 2013,
MNRAS, 432, 2496
Ferreras I., La Barbera F., de la Rosa I. G., Vazdekis A., de
Carvalho R. R., Falcón-Barroso J., Ricciardelli E., 2013,
MNRAS, 429, L15

Ferreras I., Weidner C., Vazdekis A., La Barbera F., 2015,
MNRAS, 448, L82
Gallazzi A., Charlot S., Brinchmann J., White S. D. M.,
Tremonti C. A., 2005, MNRAS, 362, 41
Geha M. et al., 2013, ApJ, 771, 29
González Delgado R. M. et al., 2014, ApJ, 791, L16
Gunawardhana M. L. P. et al., 2011, MNRAS, 415, 1647
Hopkins A. M., Beacom J. F., 2008, ApJ, 682, 1486
Hopkins P. F., Kereš D., Oñorbe J., Faucher-Giguère C.-
A., Quataert E., Murray N., Bullock J. S., 2014, MNRAS,
445, 581
Kauﬀmann G. et al., 2003, MNRAS, 341, 33
Kirk H., Myers P. C., 2011, ApJ, 727, 64
Kroupa P., 2001, MNRAS, 322, 231
Kroupa P., Weidner C., Pﬂamm-Altenburg J., Thies I.,
Dabringhausen J., Marks M., Maschberger T., 2013, The
Stellar and Sub-Stellar Initial Mass Function of Simple
and Composite Populations, Oswalt T. D., Gilmore G.,
eds., p. 115
La Barbera F., Ferreras I., Vazdekis A., de la Rosa I. G.,
de Carvalho R. R., Trevisan M., Falcón-Barroso J., Ric-
ciardelli E., 2013, MNRAS, 433, 3017
Li H., Li R., Mao S., Xu D., Long R. J., Emsellem E., 2015,
ArXiv e-prints
Marigo P., 2001, A&A, 370, 194
Marks M., Kroupa P., Dabringhausen J., Pawlowski M. S.,
2012, MNRAS, 422, 2246
Martín-Navarro I., La Barbera F., Vazdekis A., Ferré-
Mateu A., Trujillo I., Beasley M. A., 2015a, MNRAS, 451,
1081
Martín-Navarro I. et al., 2015b, ApJ, 798, L4
Martín-Navarro I. et al., 2015c, ApJ, 806, L31
McDermid R. M. et al., 2014, ApJ, 792, L37
McGee S. L., Goto R., Balogh M. L., 2014, MNRAS, 438,
3188
Meurer G. R., Wong O. I., Kim J. H., Hanish D. J.,
SUNGG, SINGG, 2009, in Bulletin of the American Astro-
nomical Society, Vol. 41, American Astronomical Society
Meeting Abstracts 213, p. 443.06
Moustakas J. et al., 2013, ApJ, 767, 50
Muzzin A. et al., 2013, ApJ, 777, 18
Oguri M., Rusu C. E., Falco E. E., 2014, MNRAS
Pastorello N., Forbes D. A., Foster C., Brodie J. P., Usher
C., Romanowsky A. J., Strader J., Arnold J. A., 2014,
MNRAS, 442, 1003
Peacock M. B., Zepf S. E., Maccarone T. J., Kundu A.,
Gonzalez A. H., Lehmer B. D., Maraston C., 2014, ArXiv
e-prints
Peterson J. R., Kahn S. M., Paerels F. B. S., Kaastra J. S.,
Tamura T., Bleeker J. A. M., Ferrigno C., Jernigan J. G.,
2003, ApJ, 590, 207
Pietrinferni A., Cassisi S., Salaris M., Hidalgo S., 2013,
A&A, 558, A46
Portinari L., Chiosi C., Bressan A., 1998, A&A, 334, 505
Saintonge A. et al., 2011, MNRAS, 415, 32
Salpeter E. E., 1955, ApJ, 121, 161
Sánchez S. F. et al., 2012, A&A, 538, A8
Scalo J., 2005, in Astrophysics and Space Science Library,
Vol. 327, The Initial Mass Function 50 Years Later, Cor-
belli E., Palla F., Zinnecker H., eds., p. 23
Schaye J. et al., 2015, MNRAS, 446, 521
Smith R. J., 2014, ArXiv e-prints

c(cid:13) 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–15

Implications of a variable IMF

15

parametrisation the changes in dustless colours are quite
small.

Another simpliﬁcation lies in the fact that we use a sim-
ple stellar population, which is a good approximation for
ETGs but not for star forming galaxies. For a star forming
galaxy the used SSP is a simpliﬁcation with respect to a
constant star formation history or an exponential one, but
the used r-band luminosity weighted age is skewed towards
more recent star formation, as opposed to a mass-weighted
age, through a large dependency of luminosity on mass. Typ-
ically the r-band luminosity weighted age is about half of the
true average stellar age for a Chabrier constant star forma-
tion rate older than 108yr. In order to estimate the error in
the IMF dependent mass change introduced by our simpli-
ﬁcation of the star formation history we plot the expected
mass changes for a constant star formation history in Fig-
ure A2. This should be compared with Figure 4. The labeled
ages are r-band luminosity weighted ages. As a function of
IMF slope also the ratio between the r-band weighted age
and the age of the start of star formation changes. This ra-
tio becomes increasingly larger for an increasingly top-heavy
IMF, which causes the cut-oﬀ of the Vazdekis IMF lines at
the left. Here the implied age to the start of the constant
star formation would be more than the age of the universe.
The assumption of a SSP has no drastic consequences. For
a low-end IMF parametrisation the results are almost in-
distinguishable. For a Vazdekis IMF parametrisation with
a super-Chabrier slope, a constant star formation rate in-
creases the expected dex mass shifts by 15%-25%. For a sub-
Chabrier IMF slope the eﬀect is more complicated. Here, a
constant star formation history is only possible for low r-
band weighted ages. The implied mass changes will be up to
0.15 dex lower than for a SSP. In some cases this may make
the galaxy lighter than Chabrier instead of heavier, with a
lightest mass change of -0.17 dex.

We conclude that our method is a good ﬁrst order ap-
proximation of the expected mass diﬀerences implied by a
metallicity dependent IMF. A more precise treatment, using
a varying IMF in SED ﬁtting could be beneﬁcial, but at the
moment this is not expected to be the main source of sys-
tematic or random errors. Moreover SED ﬁtting itself also
suﬀers from an age metallicity degeneracy and a degener-
acy in the ﬁtted star formation history. For example Torrey
et al. (2015) ﬁnd that SED ﬁtting mock galaxies from the
Illustris simulation with the FAST code delivers more ac-
curate stellar masses when the metallicity for all galaxies is
kept ﬁxed.

Smith R. J., Alton P., Lucey J. R., Conroy C., Carter D.,
2015, MNRAS, 454, L71
Smith R. J., Lucey J. R., 2013, MNRAS, 434, 1964
Snyder G. F. et al., 2015, ArXiv e-prints
Spiniello C., Barnabè M., Koopmans L. V. E., Trager S. C.,
2015, MNRAS, 452, L21
Spiniello C., Trager S., Koopmans L. V. E., Conroy C.,
2014, MNRAS, 438, 1483
Strateva I. et al., 2001, AJ, 122, 1861
Torrey P. et al., 2015, MNRAS, 447, 2753
Tortora C., La Barbera F., Napolitano N. R., 2015, ArXiv
e-prints
Tortora C., Romanowsky A. J., Napolitano N. R., 2013,
ApJ, 765, 8
Trayford J. W., Theuns T., Bower R. G., Crain R. A.,
Lagos C. d. P., Schaller M., Schaye J., 2016, ArXiv e-
prints
Treu T., Auger M. W., Koopmans L. V. E., Gavazzi R.,
Marshall P. J., Bolton A. S., 2010, ApJ, 709, 1195
van Dokkum P. G., Conroy C., 2012, ApJ, 760, 70
Vazdekis A., Casuso E., Peletier R. F., Beckman J. E.,
1996, ApJS, 106, 307
Weisz D. R. et al., 2013, ApJ, 762, 123
Weisz D. R. et al., 2015, ApJ, 806, 198
Zaritsky D., Colucci J. E., Pessev P. M., Bernstein R. A.,
Chandar R., 2014, ApJ, 796, 71

APPENDIX A:

In section 2 we described the method by which we calcu-
late new masses and star formation rates for galaxies with
an IMF diﬀerent than the one used in the original mass
and SFR determination. The most precise way to do this
would be by redoing the whole SED ﬁtting procedure for
every galaxy, assuming a metallicity dependent IMF. In this
work we have used a simpler method to recalibrate the stel-
lar masses and star formation rates, because at the moment
we believe the errors to be dominated by uncertainties in
the IMF measurements and in the stellar metallicity mea-
surements and by a large dependency on the assumed IMF
parametrisation. As a ﬁrst order correction to the masses
we compare mass-to-light ratios in the Cousins R-band for
a simple stellar population with an r-band weighted age and
metallicity given by Gallazzi et al. (2005) and a varying
IMF to the mass-to-light ratio of a SSP with the same age
and metallicity, but a Chabrier IMF. An alternative method
would be to match on colour and some combination of age
and metallicity. The problem with matching on colour is that
it is very susceptible to dust. Still, we expect our method to
break down once the dustless colour of the varied IMF SSP is
very diﬀerent from that of the Chabrier SSP, because a large
change in dustless colour would also imply a large change in
the true observed colour.

For this reason we plot the dustless SDSS g-r colours
of our complete galaxy sample in ﬁgure A1. For the low-end
IMF parametrisation there is almost no change in colour.
This parametrisation only changes the IMF below 0.5 M(cid:12).
These stars do not contribute much to the overall light and
as a consequence changing the low-end IMF has a neglige-
able eﬀect on the dustless colour. Also for the Vazdekis IMF

c(cid:13) 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–15

16

Clauwens et al.

Figure A1. Dustless SDDS g-r colour of the varying IMF versus the colour of a Chabrier IMF for the complete sample of galaxies
used in this work. The left panel show the Vazdekis IMF and the right panel shows the low-end IMF. The black dotted line indicates a
one-to-one relation. A large deviation from this would mean a breakdown of our method to recalibrate stellar masses to a changed IMF.
In the ‘low-end’ case the colours are almost unchanged, because the dwarf stars do not contribute much to the overall light. Also in the
‘Vazdekis’ case the colour changes are quite small.

Figure A2. Same as ﬁgure 4, but for a constant star formation
history instead of a simple stellar population. This plot is meant
to estimate the error made in using a SSP for all galaxies. The
diﬀerent colours denote diﬀerent r-band weighted ages. The solid
lines stop at the left when the implied start of constant star for-
mation would be the same as the age of the Universe.

c(cid:13) 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–15

−0.20.00.20.40.60.81.0g-r Vazdekis IMF−0.20.00.20.40.60.81.0g-r Chabrier IMF−0.20.00.20.40.60.81.0g-r low-end IMF−0.20.00.20.40.60.81.0g-r Chabrier IMF0.000.150.300.450.600.750.901.051.201.351.50Log Number of Galaxies per pixel0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0Vazdekis IMF slope−0.50.00.51.01.52.02.5Dex Stellar Mass ChangeVazdekis IMF, 109.5yr109yr108.5yrlow-end IMF, 109.5yr109yr108.5yr-0.71-0.55-0.39-0.23-0.060.10.260.420.58Metallicity Log(Z/Z⊙)