Stability and Control of Ad Hoc DC Microgrids

Julia A. Belk, Wardah Inam, David J. Perreault, Konstantin Turitsyn

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
6
1

 
 
]

Y
S
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
9
8
2
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract— Ad hoc electrical networks are formed by connect-
ing power sources and loads without pre-determining the net-
work topology. These systems are well-suited to addressing the
lack of electricity in rural areas because they can be assembled
and modiﬁed by non-expert users without central oversight.
There are two core aspects to ad hoc system design: 1) designing
source and load units such that the microgrid formed from the
arbitrary interconnection of many units is always stable and
2) developing control strategies to autonomously manage the
microgrid (i.e., perform power dispatch and voltage regulation)
in a decentralized manner and under large uncertainty. To
address these challenges and expose the system structure we
apply a number of nonlinear control techniques—including
Brayton-Moser potential theory and primal-dual dynamics—to
obtain conditions under which an ad hoc dc microgrid will have
a suitable and asymptotically stable equilibrium point. Further,
we propose a new decentralized control scheme that coordinates
many sources to achieve a speciﬁed power dispatch from each.
A simulated comparison to previous research is included.

I. INTRODUCTION

More than one billion people do not have electricity access
[1], largely because of insufﬁcient centralized power systems
in developing countries. The need for electricity in remote
and rural areas and the evolving demands on the existing
bulk power infrastructure have driven extensive develop-
ment of microgrids in recent years. Microgrids naturally
incorporate distributed renewable sources and are inherently
decentralized. However, designing and installing a microgrid
to electrify an off-grid community typically requires special-
ized planning. Electrical networks which could be formed
by the ad hoc interconnection of modular power sources
and loads by non-specialist users would remove barriers to
energy access, allowing decentralized electricity markets to
proliferate in an unprecedented manner.

Broadly, the critical challenges of ad hoc microgrids are:
1) the microgrid components (power sources, loads, and
lines) should be designed so that any network formed
by connecting many units always has an appropriate
and stable equilibrium point,

2) the sources should be controlled in a coordinated and
decentralized manner to manage power dispatch, and
3) the system should function entirely autonomously un-
der signiﬁcant uncertainty regarding the network con-
ﬁguration and power supply and demand.

To evaluate stability, traditional power system operators
use computationally intensive simulations and empirical test-
ing of the pre-determined network topology. By contrast, ad

J.A. Belk, W. Inam, and D.J. Perreault are with the Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science Department and K. Turitsyn is with the Mechanical
Engineering Department, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
MA, 02139 USA, e-mails: {jabelk, wardah, djperrea, turitsyn}@mit.edu.

hoc networks present unique challenges because the network
topology is not speciﬁed. Instead, analytic constraints on the
individual source, load, and line units—independent from
the interconnection structure—must be developed such that,
when satisﬁed, they guarantee the existence, feasibility, and
stability of an equilibrium point. This is different from
previous stability analyses in power electronics, which have
relied on impedance measurements, used overly simpliﬁed
network models, or placed unrealistic constraints on the
network conﬁguration [2], [3]. An additional complication
is the widespread and increasing use of power electronic
devices, which draw constant power at their inputs to regulate
their outputs. The negative incremental impedance (∂v/∂i)
of these loads has a well-documented destabilizing effect
on power systems [4]. The effect of constant power loads
on stability has attracted recent
in the controls
community ([5], [6], [7], [8], [9]) but has not yet been
analyzed in the context of ad hoc systems.

interest

To plan and coordinate power dispatch,

traditional ac
power system operators compute the optimal dispatch based
on the marginal costs of the generators, and each generator
realizes its assigned power output by controlling the phase
angle between its output voltage and current. Ad hoc systems
again present unique challenges because of the combination
of the need for decentralized computation and control and
the uncertainty in power supply and demand. In dc systems
powered by voltage-source converters, each source realizes
its assigned power output by controlling its voltage level.
A set of control techniques, organized into a hierarchy, has
been widely used in ac and dc microgrids to accomplish these
objectives [10], and economically optimal dispatch strategies
for dc microgrids have been considered [11], but again, not
in the context of nonlinear ad hoc systems.

In this paper, we develop design-friendly conditions on
both the total system load and the individual source, load,
and line units under which microgrids composed of these
units will have a suitable and stable equilibrium point. We
use techniques from nonlinear control theory ([12], [13],
[14], [15]), and the resulting conditions (Eqs. (23), (28), and
(31)) are more ﬂexible and better suited to a priori device
design than previous stability criteria. We also propose a
decentralized control strategy which achieves precise power
sharing and voltage regulation, and include a simulated
comparison to a well-known power electronics benchmark.
Throughout, we discuss how previously developed mathe-
matical structures can be related to the analysis of stability
and control of ad hoc systems and highlight opportunities and
challenges related to this emerging class of power systems.

II. MODELS AND NOTATION

In this section we present models for the interconnecting
lines, power electronic loads, and voltage source converters
which are analytically tractable and can be adapted to de-
scribe many networks. These are summarized in Fig. 1, and
are based on a previously presented ad hoc dc microgrid
[16].

we will take the limit Ck → 0 for the source buses. Each
source voltage is described by:

Ck ˙vk =

uk − vk

rk

− (∇(cid:62)i)k ,

k ∈ Vs ,

which reduces to

vk = uk − rk(∇(cid:62)i)k

(4)

(5)

A. Network Structure

The electrical network is described as a weighted, directed
graph (V,E) with a total of |V| = n nodes (buses) and |E| =
m edges (lines). The edges of the graph represent the lines
and a power source or load is attached to each node. The
models for each element are depicted in Fig. 1. The electric
state of the system is described by the voltage and current
vectors v ∈ Rn and i ∈ Rm. The topology of the graph
is deﬁned by an incidence matrix ∇ ∈ Rm×n, such that
applying ∇ to the voltage vector results in a potential drop
across line α: (∇v)α = vsα − vtα, where sα, tα are the
indices of the source and target buses for that line. Similarly,
applying ∇(cid:62) to the current vector provides the total current
ﬂowing out of each node, as shown in Fig. 1 and given by:

(∇(cid:62)i)k =

(cid:88)

iα − (cid:88)

{α: sα=k}

{α: tα=k}

iα .

(1)

B. Power Lines (Edges)

Each power line is associated with a graph edge α ∈ E
and is characterized by an inductance Lα and a resistance
Rα, as shown in Fig. 1a. We assume that all lines have the
same time constant τ = Lα/Rα, which is reasonable [17].
Each iα is described by:

Lα˙iα = −Rαiα + (∇v)α, α ∈ E .

(2)

C. Sources/Loads (Nodes)

Each bus has either a load or a source attached to it. We
denote the subset of vertex indices corresponding to loads as
Vl ⊂ V with |Vl| = nl and the subset of source indices as
Vs ⊂ V with |Vs| = ns. Load k is represented as a capac-
itance Ck and a constant power load drawing power pk in
parallel. In general, constant power loads represent perfectly-
regulated power converters, and hence are conservative and
general models which can be used to describe many power
electronic devices. The capacitor across the input of the
power converter is a standard feature of these converters,
and is critical for system stability [8]. Each load voltage is
described by:

Ck ˙vk = − pk
vk

− (∇(cid:62)i)k,

k ∈ Vl .

(3)

Sources are represented as a voltage source with value uk
in series with a resistance rk. Both uk and rk are internal
control parameters and can be varied independently—an
overview is provided in Section V and in [18], [10]. To
simplify our notation, a parallel capacitor is also included
in the source model. Unlike the load capacitor, this is not
typically present in power converters, so in our ﬁnal results

as Ck → 0.

Finally, we introduce a simpliﬁed control method for uk,
mainly to demonstrate how the stability of source voltage
control strategies can be rigorously analyzed:
k ∈ Vs ,

τu ˙uk = vref − vk ,

(6)

where vref
is the nominal network voltage. This control
strategy is not typically used—a coordinated strategy for
practical use is presented in Section V.

III. DYNAMICS AND STABILITY

In this section we analyze the stability of arbitrary inter-
connections of sources, loads, and lines. Two assumptions
underlie our analysis:

1) each line has a ﬁxed time constant τ = Lα/Rα, and
2) each source is controlled according to Eq. (6).
We formulate the dynamical equations in a structured way
so that we can apply the classic results by Brayton and Moser
regarding the stability of nonlinear circuits [12] to ad hoc
networks. This representation allows us to ﬁnd a Lyapunov
function which certiﬁes the stability of an equilibrium point.
In the next section, we reduce the derived linear matrix
inequalities to design-friendly constraints on the total load
and individual sources, loads, and lines.

A. Brayton-Moser Representation of the System

We ﬁrst rewrite the equations from Section II in vector
form. We introduce the diagonal resistance matrix R =
diag[Rα] ∈ Rm×m for the line resistances, the diagonal
capacitance matrix C = diag[Ck] ∈ Rn×n for the source and
load capacitances, the resistive content of the lines R0(i),
and the resistive co-content of the sources and loads G0 [14]:

G0(v, u) =

(cid:88)

k∈Vl

R0(i) =

i(cid:62)Ri ,

1
2

(cid:88)

k∈Vs

pk ln vk +

v2
k
2rk

+

(vref − vk)uk

rk

(7)

. (8)

These deﬁnitions allow us to write the voltage and current

equations as:

τ R˙i = − ∂iR0(i) + ∇v ,
C ˙v = − ∂vG0(v, u) − ∇(cid:62)i ,
τu ˙u =∂uG0(v, u) .

(9a)
(9b)
(9c)
We now introduce the Brayton-Moser (BM) Potential P0

and the matrix Q0 [12], [13]:

P0 = G0(v) − R0(i) + i(cid:62)∇v ,

(10)

(a) Line with impedance Rα +jωLα.
Lα/Rα = τ for all
lines in the
network.

(c) A voltage source converter with droop
resistance rk and parasitic parallel capaci-
tance Ck → 0.
Fig. 1: Representations of lines, loads, and sources in our dc microgrid.

(b) Ideal power electronic load model: con-
stant power load with parallel stabilizing
capacitance Ck.

(cid:20)−τ R 0

(cid:21)

0

C

Q0 =

.

(11)

These allow us to represent the current and voltage equa-
tions together with a single state vector x = [i(cid:62), v(cid:62)](cid:62) that
evolves according to quasi-gradient dynamics of the form:

Q0 ˙x = −∂xP0 .

(12)

Although this formulation reveals the structure of the
underlying dynamics, it is not sufﬁcient to certify the sta-
bility of the system, because the natural Lyapunov function
candidate P0(x) is neither convex nor sign deﬁnite. However,
we can use these quantities to deﬁne a closely related BM
potential P and resistive co-content G:

(cid:20)∂iP0

(cid:21)(cid:62)(cid:20)τ R 0

(cid:21)−1(cid:20)∂iP0

(cid:21)

0 C

∂vP0
∂vP0
(∂vP0)(cid:62)C−1(∂vP0) + G(v, u)
˙v(cid:62)C ˙v + G(v, u)

(cid:0)R−1∇v(cid:1) + G0(v, u)

+ P0

(13)

=

P(x, u) =

τ
2
τ
2
τ
2
G(v, u) = R0
1
2

=

=

v(cid:62)∇(cid:62)R−1∇v + G0(v, u)

(14)
Note that, as Ck → 0, ˙vk approaches the ﬁnite limit ˙vk →
˙uk − rk∇(cid:62)˙ik derived from the algebraic model (5) and
˙v(cid:62)
k Ck ˙vk vanishes. Hence, only load voltages contribute to
˙v(cid:62)
k Ck ˙vk in (13).
The matrix Q corresponding to the new BM potential
P can be derived by differentiating the equation (13) with
respect to x and using ∂xP = −Q ˙x:

τ R˙i + τ∇ ˙v − τ R˙i

−τ∇(cid:62)˙i − τ ∂vvG0 ˙v − C ˙v

,

(15)

(cid:21)

−τ∇

(16)
Finally, in the limit Ck → 0 on source nodes, the equation

τ∇(cid:62) C + τ ∂vvG0

.

(cid:21)

(cid:20)∂iP

∂vP

=

Q =

(cid:20)
(cid:20) 0

(cid:21)

for u is:

τu ˙u = ∂uP .

(17)

This concludes our derivation of the Brayton-Moser rep-
resentation of the system dynamics in terms of the potentials
P,G and matrix Q. These equations expose the fundamental
structure of the system and are useful for stability analysis.

B. Equilibrium Point Stability

Stability of the system can be certiﬁed by noticing that
the combination of (17) and Q ˙x = −∂xP with Q (cid:31) 0
can be interpreted as primal-dual dynamics with respect to
the Lagrangian −P [15]. The system attempts to maximize
the Lagrangian with respect to the primal variable x and
minimize it with respect to the dual variable u. The dynamics
converge to an equilibrium point whenever the Lagrangian is
locally concave with respect to the primal variable (∂xxP (cid:23)
0), and convex with respect to the dual variable (∂uuP (cid:22) 0).
The second condition is automatically satisﬁed because P is
afﬁne in u, while the ﬁrst condition is equivalent to ∂vvG (cid:23) 0
and can be satisﬁed by imposing certain constraints on the
network and the operating point which are discussed below.
The asymptotic stability of the system can be formally

established by considering the Lyapunov function V :

˙x ≤ 0.

˙V = − ˙x(cid:62)(cid:104)

∂xxP + ˙Q(cid:105)

V = ˙x(cid:62)Q ˙x + τu ˙u(cid:62) ˙u.

(18)
If there is an equilibrium point x∗ = [i∗(cid:62), v∗(cid:62)](cid:62), u∗, this
function exhibits non-decreasing behavior in its neighbor-
hood:

(19)
Note that the matrix ˙Q vanishes at equilibrium and can be
made arbitrarily small in its neighborhood, so the system is
asymptotically stable whenever ∂xxP(x∗, u∗) (cid:31) 0. Notably,
these conditions can be also interpreted as the contraction
behavior of the underlying dynamics [15], [19] (for more,
see example 3.7 of [20]).

Going beyond asymptotic stability is extremely challeng-
ing. Explicit construction of the attraction regions or their
approximations is beyond the scope of this work. However, a
simple univariate form of nonlinearity −pk/vk suggests that
the approaches based on sector bounding of nonlinear terms,

recently used for characterization of the attraction regions
in ac power systems [21], [22] may be appropriate for this
problem as well.

In summary, existence, feasibility and stability of at least
one operating point is certiﬁed as long as the following three
conditions are satisﬁed:

1) There exist equilibrium voltage vectors v∗, u∗ that
satisfy ∂vG(v∗, u∗) = 0 and ∂uG(v∗, u∗) = 0, and
all load voltages satisfy v∗
k > vmin. The equilibrium
current vector is then given by i∗ = R−1∇v∗.
is positive
deﬁnite at the equilibrium point: H∗ = ∂vvG(v∗, u∗) (cid:31)
0.
3) The matrix Q is positive semideﬁnite at the operating
point: Q(x∗) = C + τ ∂vvG0(v∗, u∗) (cid:23) 0.

2) The Hessian of the resistive co-content

Whenever the three conditions above hold, the stability of
an operating point follows directly from LaSalle’s invariance
principle.

IV. DESIGN CONSTRAINTS

The criteria derived in Section III can be applied directly
to any power system with a speciﬁed network structure.
However, for ad hoc networks, these criteria must be refor-
mulated in terms of individual components—removing the
dependence on ∇—which we do in this section.

We begin with a few basic assumptions:
1) The power network graph is strongly connected.
2) There is at least one source.
3) The total power consumption of all
pk ≤ pΣ.

bounded from above:(cid:80)
(cid:80)
α∈E Rα ≤ RΣ.

4) The total resistance of all lines is bounded from above:

the loads is

k∈Vl

A. Existence of the Equilibrium

The equilibrium conditions for the system (9) can be

rewritten in a more traditional load-ﬂow form:

pk = − v∗
v∗
k =vref
i∗
α =R−1

k(∇(cid:62)R−1∇v∗)k
k ∈ Vs ,
α (∇v∗)α .

k ∈ Vl ,

(20a)
(20b)
(20c)

ref /(4(cid:107)Z(cid:107)∗

Sufﬁcient conditions for the existence of a solution to
these load ﬂow equations have been recently proposed in
[6] and later improved and extended to a number of other
settings in a series of follow-up works including [7], [23],
[24]. It has been shown in [6] that the solution of (20) is
guaranteed to exist whenever the total load is bounded by
pΣ ≤ v2
∞), where Z is the effective impedance
matrix, which in our notation could be written as Z =
(∇(cid:62)
l R−1∇l)−1 with ∇l being the submatrix of ∇ corre-
sponding to load buses. The expression (cid:107)Z(cid:107)∗
∞ also admits a
simple interpretation. Whenever a current (δj)k is injected
at
the voltage on this bus rises by (δv)k.
Then (cid:107)Z(cid:107)∗
∞ = maxk∈Vl (δv)k/(δj)k—the maximal effective
resistance between the load and source buses. From the

load bus k,

assumptions stated above, the maximum resistance between
two nodes cannot exceed RΣ, and hence (cid:107)Z(cid:107)∗

∞ ≤ RΣ.

This upper bound is reached when a single generator and
a single load are separated by a power line of resistance
RΣ, so that is the “worst case” topology with respect to that
condition. We conclude that, in the presence of uncertainty
regarding the network structure,
the solution to (20) is
guaranteed to exist if and only if the maximum power level
satisﬁes

pΣ ≤ v2
ref
4RΣ

.

(21)

B. Feasibility of the Equilibrium

In addition to the existence of an equilibrium point, power
systems typically also have a minimum voltage level require-
ment such that vk ≥ vmin on every load bus. In practical
systems, this requirement (“feasibility” of an equilibrium
point) is stricter than the condition for existence of an
equilibrium point. The corresponding design constraint can
be derived using the expression for the voltage level:

vk =vref −(cid:88)

l∈Vl

Zkl

pl
vl

1

,

(cid:88)

≥vref −

≥vref −

|Zkl|pl ,

minl∈Vl vl

1

minl∈Vl vl

l∈Vs
(cid:107)Z(cid:107)∗

∞pΣ .

(22)

Hence, we obtain a quadratic inequality for mink∈Vl vk. As
long as the upper voltage solution to the load ﬂow equations
exists, it will be feasible when the following condition is
satisﬁed:

pΣ ≤ vmin(vref − vmin)

RΣ

.

(23)

This condition is more restrictive than (21) as long as vmin >
vref /2. Inequality (23) becomes binding for the same “worst
case” scenario as described above.

C. Convexity of the BM Potential

Next, we consider the condition for positive-deﬁniteness
of the Hessian H∗ = ∂vvP(v∗) of the BM potential at the
equilibrium point. We introduce a path-decomposition of the
graph characterized by the matrix σ ∈ Rn×l with elements
σkα ∈ {0, 1,−1}. The values of σkα are chosen to deﬁne
the path from some source bus κ to bus k. Then, the voltage
on bus k can be represented as:

vk = vκ +

σkα(∇v)α .

(24)

α=1

For convenience, we extend the original graph with a
virtual node k = 0 with v0 = 0 and add an extra edge
α = 0 with R0 = rκ connecting the virtual node s0 = 0
to the source bus t0 = κ. Assuming that the corresponding
incidence and path-decomposition matrices are denoted as

m(cid:88)

ˆ∇ and ˆσ we can write vκ = ˆσκ0( ˆ∇v)κ and (24) can be
rewritten as v = ˆσ ˆ∇v, or

vk = (ˆσ ˆ∇v)k =

(25)
The quadratic form corresponding to H∗ acting on an

α=0

σkα(∇v)α .

m(cid:88)

arbitrary vector v ∈ Rn can be written:
v2
k
rk

v(cid:62)H∗v =

α +

m(cid:88)
m(cid:88)

α=1

α=0

=

α (∇v)2
R−1
(cid:88)

Rαi2

α +

k∈Vs
k(cid:54)=κ

− (cid:88)

k∈Vl

(cid:88)
− (cid:88)

k∈Vs
v2
k
rk

k∈Vl

gkv2
k

(26)

min, so the total load conductance satisﬁes(cid:80) gk ≤

We have introduced a current iα = R−1
effective load conductance gk = pk/(v∗
gk ≤ pk/v2
pΣ/v2
of (26) with the help of the Jensen’s inequality:

min. These observations allow us to bound the last term

α ( ˆ∇v)α and an
k)2 that satisﬁes

gk

ˆσkαRαiα

(cid:88)

k∈Vl

gkv2

k =

≤

(cid:88)
(cid:32) m(cid:88)

k∈Vl

(cid:32) m(cid:88)
(cid:33) m(cid:88)

α=0

Rα

α=0

α=0

≤(RΣ + rκ)

pΣ
v2
min

Rαi2
α

m(cid:88)

α=0

(cid:33)2
(cid:32)(cid:88)

k∈Vl

(cid:33)

σ2
kαgk

Rαi2
α.

(27)

Therefore,

the quadratic form in (26) is non-negative
whenever the total load power and total network resistance
satisfy a constraint on the maximum power demand:

pΣ ≤ v2

min

RΣ + rκ

.

(28)

Again, the “worst case” network conﬁguration for this
condition is the maximally separated single source and load.
This condition is typically less restrictive than (23), however
it can be binding in microgrids that rely on large values of
rk (larger rk values are often used for coordinated microgrid
control—see Section V).
D. Asymptotic Stability of the Equilibrium

The condition Q(x∗) (cid:31) 0 with Q deﬁned in (16) can be

rewritten as:

τ /rk > 0 ,
Ck − τ pk
k)2 > 0 ,
(v∗

∀k ∈ Vs ,
∀k ∈ Vl .

(29)
(30)

This is automatically satisﬁed for sources. It is also satisﬁed
on loads as long as the equilibrium voltage is bounded from
below by v∗
k > vmin and the total power consumption of the
load is limited by

pk < Ck

v2
min
τ

,

∀k ∈ Vl ,

(31)

which can be interpreted either as an upper bound on the
power demand of each individual load, or as a lower bound
on the size of each load capacitance Ck.

In summary, we have derived three simple criteria ((23),
(28), and (31)) can guarantee that an equilibrium point
will exist, be feasible, and be asymptotically stable for any
network structure. Together, these three constraints deﬁne
the set of necessary and sufﬁcient conditions under which
the arbitrary interconnection of sources, loads, and lines is
guaranteed to be stable—regardless of the network topology.

pkv2
k
(v∗
k)2

V. DC MICROGRID CONTROL

A. Control Objectives

The conditions derived in Sections III and IV ensure that
a feasible operating point exists for all admissible network
topologies and loading levels. In addition to stable operation,
there are two more objectives that are critical for allowing
multiple sources to cooperate when connected to the same
microgrid:

1) each source must be able to set and update its fraction
of total supplied power (“dynamic load sharing”), and
2) node voltages vk must be maintained near the nominal

network voltage vref.

in a microgrid,

When multiple sources are connected without coordinated
control
the steady-state fraction of total
power each supplies is ﬁxed and is determined by the line
resistances. This is not ideal because we would like to be
able to control the power output of each source.

We assume that a vector of optimal power sharing pro-
portions λ has been computed from some arbitrary set of
cost functions and analyze how to realize the desired power
dispatch. λk is the participation factor that source k should
supply relative to average power and the power sharing
objective is given by:

Pk = λkP ≡ λk
ns

Pl,

∀k ∈ Vs.

(32)

To quantify this objective, we deﬁne v =(cid:80)

At the same time, the network voltage must be regulated.
vk/ns as
the average of the source node voltages. Our objective is to
maintain this average at the desired network voltage vref:

k∈Vs

(cid:88)

l∈Vs

v = vref .

(33)

Note that: 1) if the loads also have communication capa-
bilities they could also be included in v, and 2) much of
the microgrid control literature (including [10]) considers
only two-source, one-load networks when formulating their
control strategies, and states their objective in terms of the
single load voltage: vl = vref. Where applicable, we have
replaced vl with the more general v.

B. Hierarchical Microgrid Control

To manage complexity, microgrid control

is typically
separated into a hierarchy of strategies operating on differ-
ent timescales and with different objectives. The standard
strategy [10], which is well-known and widely-cited,
is
summarized below, and consists of:

1) Individual (uncoordinated) control of each power con-
verter, which, for voltage-source converters, realizes
the terminal voltage vk.

2) Droop control, which modiﬁes vk proportionally to the
output current, mimicking a resistor. The goal of droop
control is achieving power sharing.

3) Secondary voltage control, which increases uk to offset
the voltage drop caused by droop control. In its stan-
dard form, secondary voltage control only regulates
the network voltage. In our proposed control strategy,
it also improves power sharing.

4) Tertiary control, which interfaces the microgrid with
another power system. Tertiary control is outside the
scope of this work.

1) Primary Control—Droop: When sources and loads
are connected without coordinated control, the amount of
power each source supplies is determined by the network
conﬁguration and line resistances. To modify the power
sharing of the sources, a “virtual resistance” rk is inserted
at the output of each converter. rk is a control parameter
internal to the power electronic device and hence does not
dissipate power. For optimal performance, rk must be much
greater than the line resistances, so that the impact of the
line resistance on the power sharing is negligible. In practice,
rk (cid:29) Rα is typically not obtainable because larger rk values
increase the node voltage deviation: vk = uk−rk(∇(cid:62)i)k (see
Fig. 1c as Ck → 0). This means that droop control alone
cannot achieve arbitrary power sharing proportions, but it
remains a popular control strategy because it is simple and
does not require communication if all rk values are ﬁxed
(however, to update the power sharing proportions, the rk
values must also be updated).

2) Secondary Control—Voltage Restoration (Standard):
To mitigate the voltage deviations caused by droop control,
proportional-integral control can be used to restore the net-
work voltage level. The standard way of achieving this is by
increasing uk until equation (33) is satisﬁed:

τu ˙uk = vref − v .

(34)

In this way, all the uk values change in response to a
global error signal, and under the usual assumption that
uk(0) = vref for all sources, all uk values are identical and
the secondary voltage control does not affect power sharing.
3) Secondary Control—Voltage Restoration (Proposed):
For reasons mentioned in Sec. V-B.1, droop control alone
is not sufﬁcient to achieve the power sharing objective Eq.
(32). Here, we propose a new method of secondary voltage
control that ensures accurate power sharing in addition to
network voltage regulation. We accomplish this by varying
the uk values independently, rather than enforcing equal uk
values across all sources.

First, we deﬁne an error signal for every source which

vanishes if and only if (32) and (33) are satisﬁed:

with some kλ > 0 and λ =(cid:80)

ek = vref − v + kλ(λkP − λPk)

k∈Vs

λk/ns.

(35)

The following secondary voltage control scheme achieves
the desired objectives while maintaining system stability for
properly chosen τu, τw and kλ, kp:

τu ˙uk = kpek + kiwk − vk ,
˙wk = ek .

(36a)
(36b)

This is a simple proportional-integral controller that ad-
justs uk in response to the observed power and voltage levels.
It is based on the observation that increasing uk increases
both the node voltage vk and the power output of the kth
source.

The conditions for stability of this method are still un-
known; the scheme does not possess the primal-dual struc-
ture that was exploited to directly certify the stability of
the uncoordinated sources described by (6). However, the
contraction interpretation of the Lyapunov function (18) is
potentially generalizable to more sophisticated controls like
(36) with proper adjustment of the contraction metric. In
particular, the extension of the original contraction analysis
to singular systems, developed in [25], [26], provides a
natural framework for estimating the stability limits on the
controller gains ki and kp.

C. Secondary Control: Communication Requirements

The required communication speed and volume is a crit-
ical metric for comparing microgrid control strategies. Both
secondary voltage methods require all sources to share their
voltage values to compute v. In addition,
the proposed
strategy requires communication of the source currents and
the moving references w. w is designed to update much more
slowly than u, so the proposed strategy requires messages
which are approximately twice as long (voltage and current
of all sources) but no additional bandwidth. Further nonide-
alities, including communication bandwidth and delays, are
not analyzed here.

VI. MICROGRID CONTROL SIMULATION

To compare our proposed secondary voltage strategy to
the standard strategy, in this section we present simulation
results obtained using the network conﬁguration shown in
Fig. 3 and the parameters given in Table I.

TABLE I: Simulation Parameters

Parameter

vref
Rα
τ
rk
C
pk
τu
kp
ki
kλ
λk

Description

Nominal Network Voltage

Line Resistance

Line Time Constant
Droop Resistance

Load Input Capacitance

Load Power

u Time Constant
Proportional Gain

Integral Gain

Power Sharing Error Gain

Participation Factor of Source k

Value
48 V

0.111 Ω
55.45 µs
0.5 Ω

845.7 pH
35.11 W

τ
1

0.1/τ
1 A−1

1

(a) Droop control and standard secondary control [10].

(b) Droop control and modiﬁed secondary control.

Fig. 2: Our proposed power sharing strategy compared to the standard method of hierarchical microgrid control. Parameters
chosen to achieve equal power sharing. The proposed strategy eliminates steady-state error by allowing each uk to vary
independently.

Fig. 3: Visualization of the simulated network. Sources are
depicted as squares, and loads as circles. Gray units turned
on at 10 ms—all other units were on throughout.

Fig. 4: Total power drawn by all loads in the network.

The network has a total of seven loads—initially, two were
on, and the other ﬁve turned on at 10 ms as shown in Fig.
4. Source, load, and line models are as depicted in Fig. 1.
The power sharing results obtained by the standard voltage
restoration strategy and our strategy are shown in Fig. 2. The
droop resistances and λk values were designed for all sources
to share equally (P1 = P2 = P3). The proposed strategy
obtains precise power sharing because it uses the secondary

Fig. 5: Voltage regulation capability of the proposed strategy.

voltage control for power sharing in addition to voltage regu-
lation. The standard strategy has an unavoidable steady-state
power sharing error because it uses only proportional primary
(droop) control. Both approaches achieve comparable voltage
regulation (results for the standard strategy are not shown),
and the source node voltages in the proposed strategy are
shown in Fig. 5.

VII. CONCLUSIONS AND PATH FORWARD

Ad hoc microgrids present an alternative to the inherently
centralized nature of bulk power systems. By allowing non-
specialist consumers to safely conﬁgure and maintain their
own electricity infrastructure and markets, they have unparal-
leled potential to provide power to communities underserved
by traditional power systems. In the past, development of
ad hoc networks has been impeded by the difﬁculty of
guaranteeing the stability of arbitrary interconnections of
power electronic subsystems a priori. In this paper we have
relied on a number of classical control theory techniques,
including Brayton-Moser potentials, primal-dual dynamics,
and recent approaches to the analysis of load ﬂow equations,
to develop conditions under which ad hoc dc microgrids

9.09.510.010.511.011.512.020406080t[ms]SourcePkValues[W]StandardStrategy:PowerSharingOut[1471]=9.09.510.010.511.011.512.020406080t[ms]SourcePkValues[W]ProposedStrategy:PowerSharingP1P2P39.09.510.010.511.011.512.0100150200250t[ms]TotalPower[W]LoadProfileOut[1476]=9.09.510.010.511.011.512.047.8547.9047.9548.0048.0548.10t[ms]SourcevkValues[V]VoltageRegulationv1v2v3vare stable. In particular, we have developed conditions on
the overall system power consumption (Eqs. (23) and (28))
and individual load capacitance values (Eq. (31)) such that
the stability of arbitrary interconnections of voltage-source
converters and tightly-regulated power electronic loads is
guaranteed.

In addition, we have proposed a new decentralized control
strategy for autonomous coordination of many sources to
achieve dynamic load sharing while regulating the network
voltage. As shown in our simulated comparison, this strategy
obtains more accurate power sharing than the decentralized
microgrid control techniques used in practice.

Finally, there are several exciting open questions that still

need to be answered:

• What are admissible and optimal values of the decen-
tralized control gains that ensure system stability and
performance in ad hoc microgrids?

• Can more ﬂexible stability conditions be derived by
adding carefully chosen constraints to the network
topology—for example, by focusing on a particular
class of networks?

• Can either of the assumptions stated at

the top of

Section III be relaxed?

• What are the effects of practical limitations (like com-
munication delays and outages) on decentralized con-
troller performance?

• How can the transient stability of ad hoc systems be

characterized?

• How resilient are ad hoc systems to the perturbations
caused by routine switching events and/or emergency
faults?

In this paper, we have addressed some challenges inherent
to ad hoc microgrids and hope that these challenges continue
to be resolved, with the ultimate goal of enabling the large-
scale deployment of truly decentralized power systems.

REFERENCES

[1] IEA, World Energy Outlook 2015, International Energy Agency, 2015.
“Comprehensive review of stability
[2] A. Riccobono and E. Santi,
Industry Applications,

criteria for dc power distribution systems,”
IEEE Transactions on, vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 3525–3535, March 2014.

[3] S. Anand and B. G. Fernandes, “Reduced-order model and stability
analysis of low-voltage dc microgrid,” Industrial Electronics, IEEE
Transactions on, vol. 60, no. 11, pp. 5040 – 5049, November 2013.
[4] A Emadi, A Khaligh, C. H. Rivetta, and G. A. Williamson, “Constant
power loads and negative impedance instability in automotive systems:
deﬁnition, modeling, stability, and control of power electronic convert-
ers and motor drives,” Vehicular Technology, IEEE Transactions on,
vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 1112–1125, July 2006.

[5] Santiago Sanchez, Romeo Ortega, Gilbert Bergna, Marta Molinas,
and Robert Grino, “Conditions for existence of equilibrium points
of systems with constant power loads,” in 2013 IEEE 52nd Annual
Conference on Decision and Control (CDC). 2013, pp. 3641–3646,
IEEE.

[6] Saverio Bolognani and S Zampieri, “On the Existence and Linear
Approximation of the Power Flow Solution in Power Distribution
Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, , no. 99, pp. 1–
10, 2015.

[7] John W Simpson-Porco, Florian D¨orﬂer, and Francesco Bullo, “On
Resistive Networks of Constant-Power Devices,” IEEE Transactions
on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs, vol. 62, no. 8, pp. 811–815,
2015.

[8] Gustavo Cezar, Ram Rajagopal, and Baosen Zhang,

“Stability of
interconnected DC converters,” in 2015 54th IEEE Conference on
Decision and Control (CDC. 2015, pp. 9–14, IEEE.

[9] Nikita Barabanov, Romeo Ortega, Robert Grino, and Boris Polyak,
“On Existence and Stability of Equilibria of Linear Time-Invariant
Systems With Constant Power Loads,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits
and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 114–121, 2016.

[10] J.M. Guerrero, J.C. Vasquez, J. Matas, L.G. de Vicua, and M. Castilla,
“Hierarchical control of droop-controlled ac and dc microgridsa gen-
eral approach toward standardization,” Industrial Electronics, IEEE
Transactions on, vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 158–172, January 2011.

[11] Jinxin Zhao and Florian D¨orﬂer, “Distributed control and optimization

in DC microgrids,” Automatica, vol. 61, pp. 18–26, Nov. 2015.

[12] R Brayton and J Moser, “Some Results on the Stability of Nonlinear
Networks Containing Negative Resistances,” IEEE Transactions on
Circuit Theory, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 165–167, 1964.
[13] Dimitri Jeltsema and Jacquelien M A Scherpen,

“A dual relation
between port-Hamiltonian systems and the Brayton–Moser equations
for nonlinear switched RLC circuits,” Automatica, vol. 39, no. 6, pp.
969–979, 2003.

[14] Dimitri Jeltsema and Jacquelien Scherpen, “Multidomain modeling of
nonlinear networks and systems,” IEEE Control Systems Magazine,
vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 28–59, 2009.

[15] Diego Feijer and Fernando Paganini, “Stability of primal–dual gradient
dynamics and applications to network optimization,” Automatica, vol.
46, no. 12, pp. 1974–1981, Dec. 2010.

[16] W. Inam, D. Strawser, K.K. Afridi, R.J. Ram, and D.J. Perreault,
“Architecture and system analysis of microgrids with peer-to-peer
electricity sharing to create a marketplace which enables energy
access,” in Power Electronics and ECCE Asia (ICPE-ECCE Asia),
2015 9th International Conference on, June 2015, pp. 464–469.

[17] A. N. Tahim, D. J. Pagano, E. Lenz, and V. Stramosk, “Modeling
and stability analysis of islanded dc microgrids under droop control,”
Power Electronics, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 30, no. 8, pp. 4597–
4607, September 2014.

[18] Xiaonan Lu, J.M. Guerrero, Kai Sun, and J.C. Vasquez, “An improved
droop control method for dc microgrids based on low bandwidth
communication with dc bus voltage restoration and enhanced current
sharing accuracy,” Power Electronics, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 29,
no. 4, pp. 1800–1812, April 2014.

[19] Winfried Lohmiller and Jean-Jacques E Slotine,

“On contraction
analysis for non-linear systems,” Automatica, vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 683–
696, 1998.

[20] Jean-Jacques E Slotine,

“Modular stability tools for distributed
computation and control,” International Journal of Adaptive Control
and Signal Processing, vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 397–416, 2003.

[21] Thanh Long Vu and Konstantin S Turitsyn, “Lyapunov Functions Fam-
ily Approach to Transient Stability Assessment,” IEEE Transactions
on Power Systems, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 1269–1277, 2016.

[22] Thanh Long Vu and Konstantin Turitsyn,

“A Framework for
Robust Assessment of Power Grid Stability and Resiliency,”
IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control,, vol. in press, no. also
arXiv:1504.04684v1, Apr. 2015.

[23] Suhyoun Yu, Hung D Nguyen, and Konstantin S Turitsyn, “Simple
certiﬁcate of solvability of power ﬂow equations for distribution
systems,” in 2015 IEEE Power & Energy Society General Meeting.
2015, pp. 1–5, IEEE.

[24] Cong Wang, Andrey Bernstein, Jean-Yves Le Boudec, and Mario
Paolone, “Explicit Conditions on Existence and Uniqueness of Load-
Flow Solutions in Distribution Networks,” arXiv.org, Feb. 2016.

[25] Domitilla Del Vecchio and J-j E Slotine,

“A contraction theory
approach to singularly perturbed systems,” Automatic Control, IEEE
Transactions on, vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 752–757, 2013.

[26] Gabriel D Bousquet and Jean-Jacques E Slotine, “A contraction based,
singular perturbation approach to near-decomposability in complex
systems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.08464, 2015.

