Violation of the Born Rule: Implications for the Classical Electromagnetic Field.

R. E. Kastner1
20 February 2016

ABSTRACT. It is shown that violation of the Born Rule leads to a breakdown
of the correspondence between the quantum electromagnetic ﬁeld and its classical
counterpart. Speciﬁcally, the relationship of the quantum coherent state to the
classical electromagnetic ﬁeld turns out to imply that if the Born Rule were vi-
olated, this could result in apparent deviations from the energy conservation law
applying to the ﬁeld and its sources (Poynting’s Theorem). The result suggests
that the Born Rule is just as fundamental a law of Nature as are the conservation
laws.

1 Coherent states

Coherent states, often called Glauber states due to the pioneering work of Roy
Glauber[1], are the quantum states that support classical electromagnetic
ﬁelds. Whereas so-called Fock states |ni are eigenstates of the occupation
number operator ˆN with deﬁnite photon number n, coherent states are states
for which the quantum electromagnetic ﬁeld has an indeﬁnite number of
photons.

The coherent state |αi is deﬁned in terms of Fock states as

2

|αi = e− |α|

2

∞

Xn=0

αn
√n!|ni

(1)

The coherent state |αi is an eigenstate of the ﬁeld annihilation operator
ˆa with eigenvalue α (which can be complex, since ˆa is not Hermitian). Thus
we have that

and

ˆa|αi = α|αi

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
6
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
t
n
a
u
q
[
 
 

1
v
1
0
3
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

(2a, b)
The probability of detecting a particular number n in the state |αi is

hα|ˆa† = hα|α∗

given by the Born Rule, i.e.,

1Foundations of Physics Group, University of Maryland, College Park, USA; rkast-

ner@umd.edu

1

P (n) = |hn|αi|2 = e−hnihnin

n!

(3)

It is a Poisson distribution, reﬂecting the statistical independence of each
detection.

The mean photon number hni for is given by the expectation value of the

number operator ˆN = ˆa†ˆa for |αi, namely:

hni = hˆa†ˆai = |α|2

(4)

2 Correspondence between the classical elec-

tromagnetic ﬁeld and the quantum ﬁeld

The electric ﬁeld ˆE (which is an operator in the quantum electromagnetic
ﬁeld) is proportional to the “ﬁeld quadrature” X,

(5)
Upon taking the expectation value of X for the coherent state |αi (as-

suming for simplicity only a single ﬁeld mode), we ﬁnd based on (2) that

X = ˆa† + ˆa

hXi = α∗ + α

(6)

i.e. the coherent state corresponds to a classical electic ﬁeld with amplitude
α.

It is well-known that the classical electromagnetic ﬁeld obeys energy con-
servation; this is usually stated in terms of Poynting’s Theorem. For a col-
lection of ﬁelds and sources in some arbitrary volume V bounded by surface
S,

dE

dt

=

d

dt

(Emech + Ef ield) = −Is

n · S da

where Ef ield is the standard classical ﬁeld energy,

Ef ield =

1

8π Z (E2 + B2)d3x

Emech is the rate of work done on all charges in V,

dEmech

dt

= Z J · E d3x

and S is the Poynting vector representing energy ﬂow of the ﬁeld,

(7)

(8)

(9)

2

S =

c

4π

(E × H)

(10).

An ordinary classical ﬁeld is instantiated by a coherent state with an
enormous average photon number. However, much smaller amplitude ﬁelds
can be studied in the laboratory. As the average photon number increases,
the more closely the measured ﬁeld approaches the classical ideal[2]. It is
important to keep in mind that at a fundamental level all ﬁeld measurements
are achieved through photon absorption; i.e., absorption of electromagnetic
energy, which is proportional to the square of the ﬁeld amplitude. One
never detects the amplitude directly but always infers it based on the energy
transferred by the ﬁeld. Thus, it is the average photon number hni = |α|2
that constitutes the pointer to the ﬁeld amplitude, for any value of α. In
addition, work is done by the ﬁeld on the charges involved in the detection–
this is quantiﬁed by (9).

This brings us to the crucial point: the average number of photons ab-
sorbed by a suitable ﬁeld detection system must correspond to |α|2 in order
to make possible the correspondence between the quantum level of the ﬁeld
and its classical counterpart. In particular, the energy E2 in the classical
electric ﬁeld component is proportional to |α|2 because of the Born Rule (as
well as because of Maxwell’s equations!). Therefore, if the Born Rule were
violated in such a way as to result in any detectable deviation, the macro-
scopic ﬁeld would deviate as well, meaning that the energy in the ﬁeld would
no longer be given by E2. This is turn would mean that Maxwell’s equations
would not hold, nor would Poynting’s theorem. Without adherence to the
Born Rule, the classical statement of electromagnetic energy conservation,
i.e., Poynting’s theorem, would not apply to the processes taking place. Of
course, energy would be conserved at the microscopic level, but if one consid-
ered a macroscopic volume V, one could ﬁnd that the work done on charges
in V, as given by (9), failed to satisfy Poynting’s theorem (7) given (8), the
latter being a straightforward consequence of Maxwell’s equations.

The more systematic and pronounced the Born Rule violation, the more
detectable would be the apparent energy conservation violation. Although
the result found herein is in terms of the electromagnetic ﬁeld, the argument
is not limited to massless ﬁelds;
it applies to any ﬁeld subject to energy
conservation and coherent states.2

2Moreover, you could also lose phase information if the detected (absorbed) number of
photons deviated signiﬁcantly from hni. That is yet another obstacle to the possibility of
Born Rule violation, which we will not go into here.

3

3 Conclusions

The correspondence of the classical ﬁeld amplitude E with the amplitude α
of the quantum coherent state translates into a requirement that the Born
Rule must be obeyed in order for Maxwell’s Equations to hold and for the
classical statement of energy conservation to be preserved. This result has
implications for some interpretations of quantum theory which allow for vi-
olations of the Born Rule and/or the idea that the Born Rule is not a fun-
damental law of Nature. One such interpretation is the so-called Bohmian
theory[3]. According to the Bohmian theory, the Born Rule reﬂects the
“equilibrium distribution” of particle positions, where the material particle
is assumed to have a well-deﬁned position at all times (whether measured or
not) and to be guided by its associated wave function. As Valentini has em-
phasized, the Bohmian theory allows for deviation of the particles from their
“equilibrium” condition. He states that according to the Bohmian theory,
“...[quantum] noise is not fundamental but merely a property of an equilib-
rium state in which the universe happens to be at the present time. It is
suggested that ’non-quantum’ or nonequilibrium matter might exist today in
the form of relic particles from the early universe.”([4], Abstract). However,
the result obtained herein indicates that in the event of such a deviation of
particles from their “equilibrium condition”, classical continuity equations
such as Poynting’s Theorem in general would not hold (nor would the basic
ﬁeld equations). Thus, postulating that the Born Rule corresponds only to a
contingent distribution of matter has signiﬁcant consequences in terms of the
applicability of conservation laws and ﬁeld equations generally assumed to
be fundamental; i.e., not contingent on any particular distribution of matter.

References

[1] Glauber R. Coherent and incoherent states of radiation ﬁeld. Phys. Rev.

131 (1963) 2766-2788.

[2] Breitenbach G. Measurement of the Quantum State of Squeezed Light

Nature 387 (1997) 471-475.

[3] Bohm, D. A Suggested Interpretation of the Quantum Theory in Terms

of ’Hidden Variables’ I Phys. Rev. 85 (1952) 166 -179.

[4]

Valentini A.

Pramana - J. Phys. 59
http://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0203049

Subquantum Information
(2002) 269-277

and Computation.
Preprint version:

4

