Market Dynamics vs. Statistics: Limit Order Book Example.

Vladislav Gennadievich Malyshkin∗

Ioﬀe Institute, Politekhnicheskaya 26, St Petersburg, 194021, Russia

Ray Bakhramov†

Forum Asset Management LLC, 733 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017

(Dated: March, 16, 2016)

$Id: DynamicsVsStatistics.tex,v 1.75 2016/03/29 23:23:26 mal Exp $

Commonly used limit order book attributes are empirically considered based on

NASDAQ ITCH data. It is shown that some of them have the properties drastically

diﬀerent from the ones assumed in many market dynamics study. Because of this

diﬀerence we propose to make a transition from “Statistical” type of order book

study (typical for academics) to “Dynamical” type of study (typical for market

practitioners). Based on market data analysis we conclude, that most of market

dynamics information is contained in attributes with spikes (e.g. executed trades

ﬂow I = dv/dt), there is no any “stationary case” on the market and typical market

dynamics is a “fast excitation and then slow relaxation” type of behavior with a

wide distribution of excitation frequencies and relaxation times. A computer code,

providing full depth order book information and recently executed trades is available

from authors[1].

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
0
3

 
 
]

.

R
T
n
i
f
-
q
[
 
 

3
v
3
1
3
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗ malyshki@ton.ioﬀe.ru
† rbakhramov@forumhedge.com

2

I disagree with the world.

Penelope Fitzgerald

I.

INTRODUCTION

Limit order book study is a hot topic of quantitative ﬁnance[2–7]. The reason is simple:

while executed trades provide information about the “past” execution prices, order book

may, possibly, provide information about “future” execution prices, what attract a lot of

attention.

Most of current order book study have a goal of building a “statistical” type of theory.

This typically mean 1) an introduction of some (often implicit) time–scale. 2) Calculation of

some statistical characteristics, that is claimed to help in describing market dynamics and,

in best possible case, helps in predicting future price changes[8].

However, when one visit a trading ﬂoor of a major bank, or any hedge fund (at least those

the authors of this paper have seen), nobody uses “statistical” type of theory at all to make

a trading decision. Market practitioners look not on statistical parameters, they typically

talk over the phone to each other and, most of them, watch time–dependent variables (e.g.

prices, moving averages, bond spreads, volatility charts, etc.)

trying to make a trading

decision. Only after the decision is already made a statistical theory of some kind is often

deployed to estimate a proper hedge ratio or possible risk. Same thing we have observed

with HFT trading, where an algorithms is typically represented as a “hardwired” trading

idea and statistical characteristics are only used for e.g. thresholds calculation.

There is a diﬀerent mindset between academical studies, that is of “statistical” type,

and market practitioners mindset, that is of “dynamical” type. Some market practitioners

activity, such as watching all day prices and moving averages, may be worthless, (we believe

that price–information is insuﬃcient for successful trading[9]). Despite useless, or in some

cases even counterproductive, market practitioners activity, we, nevertheless, think that an

eﬀort should be made to bring academic studies close to real markets, and the diﬀerent

mindset issue should be addressed.

The ﬁrst simple step in this direction is made in this paper: we are going to plot several

time–dependent characteristics of real market data to debunk some common in academic cir-

cles opinions about limit order book. This may look as “trolling”: in our previous paper[10]

3

we have thrown away the “Supply and Demand”, and now throw away the “Statistics”.

But this is the life of real markets. During all our more than 40 years of combined “hedge

fund experience” 1) nobody used supplied and demand 2) statistics was used only to justify

already made decision.

II.

LIQUIDITY DEFICIT

Before we go ahead with charts related to order book study we provide brief introduction

to our market dynamics theory[9], because we are going to use it for explanations. The

execution rate,

I =

dv
dt

(1)

the number of shares traded per unit time, is the key concept of our theory. Numerical

estimation of (1) can be done by using either some crude techique such as “sliding window”,

or, much better option, by an application of Radon–Nikodym derivatives[11] on two measures

dv and dt, see [9] for details of numerical estimation of it and the calculation of I0 (I “now”)

with possible thresholds for I0 (using either boundary conditions for the probability state,

or a projection of the state “now” to the states of minimal and maximal I).

As we established empirically [9, 10] the trading rate (1) is the most important charac-

teristics aﬀecting price dynamics. This is especially evident in a quasi-stationary case [10],

where high price changes are observed on high values of I, but with little volume traded.

The (1) with thresholds deﬁne what market practitioners call “slow” and “fast” markets.

In this sense we agree with the Ref. [12] B. Mandelbrot and R. Hudson:

“In fractal analysis, time is ﬂexible. The multifractal model describes markets as de-

forming timeexpanding it here, contracting it there. The more dramatic the price changes,

the more the trading time-scale expands. The duller the price chart, the slower runs the

market clock. Some researchers have tried linking this concept to trading volume: High

volume equals fast trading time. That is a connection not yet established, and it need not

be. Time deformation is a mathematical convenience, handy for analyzing the market; and

it also happens to ﬁt our subjective experience. Time does not run in a straight line, like the

markings on a wooden ruler. It stretches and shrinks, as if the ruler were made of balloon

rubber. This is true in daily life: We perk up during high drama, nod oﬀ when bored.

Markets do the same.”

4

But with one very important adjustment. Link how the “the trading time-scale expands”,

not to the “trading volume”, but to the “trading rate” the I = dv/dt from (1). In our earlier

papers[9, 10] we linked the high price volatility periods to the periods of high I value, what

is especially evident in a quasi-stationary case.

In [5] authors emphasize that information propagates very fast and market makers update

their quotes immediately. We think that for US equity and ﬁxed income markets the main

source of this information is the fact that market participants “feel” the trading rate I

and once the it become large – they immediately start adjusting their quotes, thus making

the large price movements. For these markets the trading rate I can be considered as the

“driving force”. Market observation show, that prices react on trading rate much stronger

than on, say, news or other events. Some traders tried to estimate this trading rate “dynamic

impact” experimentally[13] on NASDAQ exchange (one can move not very liquid stock a

lot with just half a million in capital) but such experiments are really costly. For other

markets (e.g. US real estate market) we do not have an answer whether the I (e.g. the total

price of houses (or their number) sold in unit time) is the driving force of the market or is

a consequence of some other, unknown factor. It may be both.

We believe the trading rate I from (1) is the key factor deﬁning US equity market dy-

namics and we will present it in all the charts below.

III. ORDER BOOK CHARTS

Despite wide attention to order book study, the interpretation of attributes, used in these

theories, often looks very much as “a falsis principiis proﬁcisci”, or, to quote the Ref. [14]:

“Today many mathematical or conceptual models that are claimed to be rigorous are

based upon unvalidated and incorrect assumptions. Such models are rational in the sense

that they are logically derived from their assumptions, except that it is the modeler who is

using an incomplete representation of the reality.”

Below we provide, as a simple example, three commonly used order book attributes and

discuss their role in market dynamics.

In all the Figs. 1, 2 and 3 we present the data,

obtained from NASDAQ ITCH data feed[15], for the AAPL stock on September, 20, 2012

round 10am. The time on x axis is in decimal fraction of an hour, e.g. 9.75 mean 9:45am.

For a reference the execution ﬂow I0 is presented on each chart (Scaled to ﬁt the chart.

5

(Pbuy-Plast)*4
(Psell-Plast)*4
I0
Plast

 9.75

 9.8

 9.85

 9.9

 9.95

 10
t

 10.05

 10.1

 10.15

 10.2

 10.25

 10.3

P

 699
 698.5
 698
 697.5
 697
 696.5
 696
 695.5
 695
 694.5
 694
 693.5
 693

 9.7

FIG. 1. Psell − Plast and Pbuy − Plast (scaled to ﬁt the chart). The Plast is last execution price and

Pbuy and Psell are the best order book bid & oﬀer.

Calculated in Shifted Legendre basis with 7 elements in basis and τ =128sec. See Ref. [9],

Section II.B for numerical calculation method.). The I is believed to be the driving force of

the market and for this reason it is presented on all the charts.

A. Midprice Value

The midprice,

Pm =

Psell + Pbuy

2

(2)

where Pbuy and Psell are the best order book bid & oﬀer, is often considered as an important

price to be used in order book dynamics models. In the Fig. 1 we present the Psell − Plast

and Pbuy − Plast. These ﬂuctuate only within about a spread value, but it is clear that

during the periods of high value of I0 the trading typically occurs on one side of the book

and the spread can either growths or shrink to minimal value when a “maximal I” price

is reached and buyers and sellers send to the exchange whatever liquidity they have.

In

the last case the two types of matching “market sell matched limit buy” and “market buy

matched limit sell” become almost identical. This make the midprice (2) irrelevant during

most interesting moments of high I0 (correspond to the moments of high price volatility). We

also emphasized in [9], that current NASDAQ fee structure make order book manipulation

6

close to free.

In addition to that, if you talk to market practitioners, and our personal

trading experience conﬁrms this, since about 2008–2010 nobody in a sane mind would trade

according to the Pbuy and Psell levels of the order book. Actual exchange liquidity is typically

signiﬁcantly better, than the Pbuy and Psell levels. If you send a “buy” order slightly lower

than Psell or “sell” order slightly higher than Pbuy, then this order typically gets almost

immediately matched by a market order coming. This means that actual best buy/sell prices

are substantially better than the order book reports and to trade market order according to

order book best levels guarantee to lose at least a few cents in price and lose the rebate paid

by the exchange for executed limit orders, compared to an alternative of posting limit order

at price few cents better than order book best price level. Moreover, experiments show, that

for high liquidity stocks, buy order with price min(Psell, Plast + δ) and sell orders with price

max(Pbuy, Plast − δ) get almost immediately executed. The value of δ is about few cents

(depend on stock liquidity, and spread).

Another concept we have widely seen in academic publications is a concept of “patient”

and “impatient” traders. We think that this concept has nothing to do with reality. The goal

of all traders is to get orders executed at a good price. When some trader put a limit order

deep inside order book — this is not because this trader is “patient”. It is very opposite:

a trader put an order deep inside the order book only because this trader want be the ﬁrst

(very impatient) when the price reaches that level. We believe, that exchange trading since

at least 2010 is not very much diﬀerent from a “dark pool” trading: you send an order at

some price — you may or may not get it executed, and the order book information is of

little value. Typical exchange order execution pattern is this: an order came at some price

in between book ”best buy” and ”best sell”, spend almost no time in the order book, then it

either get almost immediately executed or cancelled. The ratio observed is that more than

90% of orders being at best price level at some time end up being cancelled[9, 16]. The order

book contains mostly ”old” orders, having no much eﬀect on execution rate. This make us

to conclude that since at least 2010 available from exchange order book best price levels are

way too conservative, and actual “exchange” info is not that much diﬀerent from a “dark

pool” info. This mean that the order book spread and the midprice (2) are almost useless.

7

-Vbestbuy*1e-3
Vbestsell*1e-3
I0
Plast

 9.75

 9.8

 9.85

 9.9

 9.95

 10
t

 10.05

 10.1

 10.15

 10.2

 10.25

 10.3

P

 699
 698.5
 698
 697.5
 697
 696.5
 696
 695.5
 695
 694.5
 694
 693.5
 693

 9.7

FIG. 2. The values of book volume on best buy/sell price levels (scaled to ﬁt the chart).

B. Volume Disbalance

Order book best levels volume relative disbalance (3) is often considered to be an impor-

tant attribute for market dynamics theories.

ηdisbalance =

Vbest sell − Vbest buy
Vbest sell + Vbest buy

(3)

This attribute is commonly interpreted as deﬁning the asymmetry of “price impact”: the

side with the biggest best level volume providing “price support”; price move in this direction

requires a bigger volume traded. In the Fig. 2 we present the absolute value of order book

best price level volume (scaled to ﬁt the chart). First, what is very clear from the charts, is

the spikes in volume on best price levels, that correlate with high value of trading rate I (1).

Another very clear observation from this chart is that large best price level volume can have

a diﬀerent eﬀect on price dynamics. Check, for instance, time interval between 9.95 and 10.0.

There large best bid volume can serve both as “price support” and as “liquidity attractor”.

For “liquidity attractor” market participants see large liquidity on the best price level, and,

if this price is acceptable to them, take it immediately, considering best level liquidity as an

opportunity. This “liquidity attractor” eﬀect is opposite to the “price support”. Ideologically

the situation is similar to the situation with large price change. What can happen after asset

price strong move in some direction. It can be both: bounce back or follow the trend. Very

similar situations is here. Large order book best price level volume can cause both: “price

support”(bounce back) and “liquidity attractor”(trend following), not to mention the most

8

-τ
bestbuy*1e-2
τ
bestsell*1e-2
I0
Plast

 9.75

 9.8

 9.85

 9.9

 9.95

 10
t

 10.05

 10.1

 10.15

 10.2

 10.25

 10.3

P

 699
 698.5
 698
 697.5
 697
 696.5
 696
 695.5
 695
 694.5
 694
 693.5
 693

 9.7

FIG. 3. Time spend in order book for the orders on best buy/sell price level.

common outcome — orders cancellation.

We think that widely used in academic study best price level volume disbalance indicator

(3) has a bad normalizing (spikes are the most informative features) and volume disbalance

should be interpreted ambivalently: both as “price support” and as “liquidity attractor”.

C. Time In Order Book

The best price level volume value is not a very good indicator for the reason market

participants typically keep the order book volume at some moderate level and update it

as long as execution goes for the reason not to reveal their actual intentions. In this sense

average time (calculated as the diﬀerence between current time and limit order origination

time, weighted with order size) on best price level can serve as a better than volume indicator

of liquidity inﬂux.

It should be noted, that NASDAQ exchange also has non–displayable (previously called

“hidden”) orders, that cost more to place and are not reported in order book. They are only

reported in execution. Executed non–displayable order id was actually available before Oc-

tober 6, 2010, what allowed to interpolate hidden order origination time, but after this date

NASDAQ broadcast 0 as hidden order id. In addition to that eﬀective July 14, 2014, NAS-

DAQ does not report matching type (market–buy matched limit–sell or market–sell matched

limit–buy) for non–displayable orders. See Appendix A of Ref.

[15]. For these reasons all

9

the order data analyzed in this paper actually misses all hidden orders information.

In Fig. 3 for the orders on the best buy/sell level the average time spent in order book

is presented. This time has spikes (similar to volume spikes, but more clear ones), and

these spikes correlate with large I (1). The picture is similar to the volume disbalance of

subsection (III B), but the result is less ambivalent between “price support” and “liquidity

attractor”. This can be interpreted in a way similar to “trading volume vs trading rate”

of Ref. [10], here it would be the “volume at best price level vs orders inﬂux (proportional

to inverse time)”. As we emphasized in Ref.

[9] the time spent in order book is one of a

few good indicators obtained out of the order book data. The reasons may be: diﬃculty to

calculate (the order book is required), harder to manipulate (time is not possible to “ﬁx”,

but the volume is easy) and being rate–like attribute.

IV. DISCUSSION

In this paper we emphasize the importance for academic community to make a transition

from “Statistical” to “Dynamical” type of order book study to bring order book study more

in line with market practitioners activity.

We propose the following steps in this direction :

• Stop making distribution charts and start making time–dependent charts. As a contri-

bution to this pathway we provide computer code, see Appendix A as a reference im-

plementation. Take e.g. com/ polytechnik/ algorithms/ ExampleBookDisbalance.java

and modify the “processData” method, that is called on every book modiﬁcation event,

and has three arrays as the arguments: recently executed trades, order book buy side

orders, order book sell side orders. It is seductively easy to make some statistics out

of these arrays, but try not to do this, and, instead, do plain output of the attributes

calculated. Then look at them as time–dependent values.

• Stop normalizing calculated values. Do not divide on standard deviation or other “ad

hoc” selected scale. For example, used in numerous study the sell–buy book order best

level volume relative disbalance (3) we think can be used only by those who have never

seen actual order book volume at best price level (or those who have no risk to lose real

money if the market goes against your positions). As we emphasized in the subsection

10

III B actual volume at best price level have huge spikes, the changes are often of several

orders of magnitude. The most important information is contained in these spikes,

because they determine the liquidity available. Dividing the volume by the absolute

value (3) remove the spikes and make the attribute worthless. Moreover, we think

that most market study should be directed toward the “attributes with spikes” as they

deﬁne the dynamics, e.g. the trading rate (1), or time the order spent in the order

book, considered in subsection III C. The “attributes with spikes” are fundamental to

e.g. Limit Order Book structure or execution ﬂow: there is no any stationary state

for these variables; the data supported fact is that most of observable variables are

severely non–stationary and represent a combination of “fast excitation and then slow

relaxation” type of behavior with a wide distribution of excitation frequencies and

relaxation times. Once the “attributes with spikes” are identiﬁed — the threshold for

their estimation of “low” and “high” value is required. This is a complex problem, no

simple thing with ﬁxed time scale statistics (e.g. standard deviation) would ever work.

In our [9] paper we proposed a “probability states” –type of answer, an application of

that was demonstrated there for the calculation of I thresholds.

• Stop linking model quality with the quality of price prediction. Predicted price typi-

cally provide completely meaningless result (but often very good Sharpe Ratio). Be-

cause of price prediction errors the trading strategy can give both positive and negative

P&L. We think that model quality should be based on the quality of P&L prediction.

P&L dynamics include not only price dynamics, but also trader actions. There is “a

posse ad esse” question about the possibility of future price prediction. We believe

that price prediction is possible only in some seldom moments. The key element of any

P&L trading strategy is an existence of at least four signals (trader actions): “Enter

Long”, “Exit Long (sell existing long)”, “Enter Short”, “Exit Short (buy to cover)”.

A proﬁtable P&L trading strategy should open the position during the time, when

future market movement can be predicted (enter condition) and closing the position

when future direction is uncertain (exit condition). In our work [9] we linked opening

position (but the decision about “long” or “short” is still problematic) with liquid-

ity deﬁcit event and closing the position with liquidity excess[17]. Other approaches

to opening and closing positions can be used, but what is important for any trading

11

strategy is the separation of price movement and trader actions. Together they give

the P&L, that is “the ultimate criteria” of any trading strategy quality. In this sense

the P&L dynamics is not “ad captandum vulgus”, what some academics was telling

us. And not only academics, the backtesting process in some practical automated

trading machines we have seen was actually an estimation of price prediction quality.

We believe that the P&L dynamics, that separates trader actions and price movement,

should be the fundamental topic of any market dynamics study.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Vladislav Malyshkin would like to thank Alberto Bicci and Charles–Albert Lehalle for

fruitful discussions.

Appendix A: Code implementation

Computer code implementing the algorithms is available[1]. The code is java written. To

reproduce the results follow these steps:

• Install java 1.8 or later.

• Download from [1] the data ﬁle S092012-v41.txt.gz and code archive SupplyDe-

mandQuasiStationary.zip.

• Decompress the code and recompile it.

unzip SupplyDemandQuasiStationary.zip

javac -g com/polytechnik/*/*java

• Run the command:

java com/polytechnik/algorithms/ExampleBookDisbalance \

S092012-v41.txt.gz AAPL >book_aapl.csv

to extract order book edges information on every order book modiﬁcation event. The

output include last executed and book best prices, book best level volume, and book

12

best level time. Book edges approximation (e.g. volume via Christoﬀel function) is

also presented (for approximation the book orders are cut at high enough price level

(about $1 from the best price), then 10–points Gauss–Radau quadrature is built on

this price–volume distribution and the weight (equal to Christoﬀel function value) at

best price give best price level volume interpolation). If one does not need Christoﬀel

function (for the volume) and Radon–Nikodym (for τ ) book edge approximation, then

the class com/ polytechnik/ itch/ DumpData2Trader.java can be used instead of the

com/ polytechnik/ algorithms/ ExampleBookDisbalance.java.

• The “processData” method, that is called on every book modiﬁcation event, has three

arrays as the arguments: recently executed trades, order book buy side orders, order

book sell side orders; the method can be modiﬁed to produce other output.

[1] Vladislav Gennadievich Malyshkin,

(2014),

the code for polynomials calculation,

http://www.ioffe.ru/LNEPS/malyshkin/code.html.

[2] Jean-Philippe Bouchaud, J. Doyne Farmer, and Fabrizio Lillo, “How markets slowly digest

changes in supply and demand,” ArXiv e-prints (2008), arXiv:0809.0822 [q-ﬁn.TR].

[3] Bence T´oth, J´anos Kert´esz, and J Doyne Farmer, “Studies of the limit order book around

large price changes,” The European Physical Journal B 71, 499–510 (2009).

[4] Zolt´an Eisler,

Jean-Philippe Bouchaud,

and Julien Kockelkoren,

“The price

impact of order book events:

market orders,

limit orders and cancellations,”

Quantitative Finance 12, 1395–1419 (2012).

[5] Paul Besson and Charles-Albert Lehalle, “The Deal/Book Split Analysis: A New Method

to Disentangle the Contribution to Market and Limit Orders in Any Price Change,”

Available at SSRN 2377965 (2014).

[6] Jonathan Donier and Jean-Philippe Bouchaud, “From Walras’ auctioneer to continuous time

double auctions: A general dynamic theory of supply and demand,” ArXiv e-prints (2015),

arXiv:1506.03758 [q-ﬁn.TR].

[7] Alberto Bicci, “Limit Order Book and its modelling in terms of Gibbs Grand-Canonical En-

semble,” ArXiv e-prints (2016), arXiv:1602.06968 [q-ﬁn.TR].

13

[8] ´Alvaro Cartea, Sebastian Jaimungal, and Jason Ricci, “Buy low, sell high: A high frequency

trading perspective,” SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics 5, 415–444 (2014).

[9] Vladislav Gennadievich Malyshkin and Ray Bakhramov, “Mathematical Foundations of Real-

time Equity Trading. Liquidity Deﬁcit and Market Dynamics. Automated Trading Machines.

http://arxiv.org/abs/1510.05510,” ArXiv e-prints (2015), arXiv:1510.05510 [q-ﬁn.CP].

[10] Vladislav Gennadievich Malyshkin, “Market Dynamics. On Supply and Demand Concepts,”

ArXiv e-prints (2016), arXiv:1602.04423.

[11] A. N. Kolmogorov and S. V. Fomin, Elements of the Theory of Functions and Functional

Analysis (Martino Fine Books (May 8, 2012), 8 May 2012).

[12] Benoit Mandelbrot and Richard L Hudson, The Misbehavior of Markets: A fractal view of

ﬁnancial turbulence (Basic books, 2014).

[13] Eugeny Yakushev, (2009), private communication.

[14] Nassim Nicholas Taleb, R Read, Raphael Douady, Joseph Norman,

and Y Bar-

Yam, “The precautionary principle:

fragility and black swans from policy actions,”

Extreme Risk InitiativeNYU School of Engineering Working Paper Series (2014).

[15] Nasdaq OMX, NASDAQ TotalView-ITCH 4.1 , Report (Nasdaq OMX, 2014) Also see data

ﬁles samples ftp://emi.nasdaq.com/ITCH/.

[16] Nikolaus Hautsch and Ruihong Huang, “Limit order ﬂow, market impact and optimal order sizes: Evidence from

(2011).

[17] Note, that commonly used trading strategies, for which enter/exit conditions are diﬀerent

only in threshold values can never work as a P&L trading strategy. This is a trivial illustrative

example of a “mean reverse strategy”: given price P , moving average PA, and enter and exit

thresholds, satisfying σenter > σexit. Then typical conditions are:

“Enter Long”:P − PA < −σenter; “Exit Long”:P − PA > σexit;

“Enter Short”:P − PA > σenter; “Exit Short”:P − PA < −σexit.

For a P&L trading strategy enter condition must identify the moments when the price can be

predicted, and exit condition must identify the moments, when the price cannot be predicted

and the position must be closed to avoid price uncertainty risk (otherwise a price move against

position held, that lead to a catastrophic P&L loss is guaranteed to happen sooner or later).

The problem with these, just threshold–diﬀerent enter/exit conditions, such as e.g. “Enter

Long”:P − PA < −σenter and “Exit Short”:P − PA < −σexit — they are essentially the same.

14

They do not carry any information, that qualitatively distinguish possibility or impossibility

of price prediction. In [9] we used low/high value of the execution rate I as the criteria distin-

guishing enter/exit condition. This I–based criteria can determine possibility or impossibility

of price prediction. It is qualitatively diﬀerent from the direction determining criteria. A P&L

trading strategy is ideologically similar (but not identical, because P&L trading do have a di-

rectional component) to volatility trading strategy. Take a position during low volatility and

close it during high volatility to avoid unexpected price move. Because price high volatility

correspond to high I (the I is the driving force of the market), the position held must be

closed when the value of I is high. Consequently, it should be opened when the I is low.

The I, along with limit order cancellation ﬂow, describe what the authors of [5] call the

“liquidity consumption”. The balance of “liquidity oﬀer” (orders inﬂux to the Limit Order

Book) and “liquidity consumption” is currently an active research subject. Many authors made

attempts to obtain large time scale price dynamic out of the disbalance of “liquidity oﬀer”

and “liquidity consumption”. Our numerical experiments (the code is very similar to the one

described in Appendix A), show that “liquidity oﬀer” and “liquidity consumption” ﬂows have

almost identical timing (check the position of the spikes in ﬂows plotted as time–dependent

charts, do not use any statistics). This gives possible prediction time, obtained from ﬂows–

disbalance, not exceeding milliseconds scale (the ITCH data from [15] provide time resolution

of one nanosecond). At such a small time scale there is very little liquidity available and a

ﬁerce competition for it among the HFT ﬁrms, make such a small timescales unworkable for a

“regular” HFT ﬁrm. A larger time scale is required. The approach of subsection III C, where

the time spent in the order book is demonstrated as a possible approach to reach a “workable”

time scale. Another option to obtain a “workable” time scale is to use the dynamic equation

I → max, that we introduced in Ref. [9]. Knowing the probability state ψ(t), maximizing

the functional < Iψ2(t) > / < ψ2(t) > (stable estimator[18, 19]), is equivalent to knowing

the “proper” time scale. Anyway, for any attainable to a “regular” HFT ﬁrm time scale, the

“liquidity oﬀer” and the “liquidity consumption” can often be considered as redundant, and

the execution rate I is suﬃcient to be considered as a proxy for both. The situation here is

similar to our alternative to Supply–Demand theory, the Liquidity Deﬁcit theory[10], where

supply and demand are considered as always matched, but the rate of their matching I varies.

The [10] demonstrate this on a large time scale (one trading day). Numerical experiment with

15

the code from Appendix A and NASDAQ ITCH data[15] can demonstrate “liquidity oﬀer”

and “liquidity consumption” matching down to milliseconds scale (in a sense time diﬀerence

in spikes position).

[18] Gennadii Stepanovich Malyshkin, Optimal and Adaptive Methods of Hydroacoustic Signal Processing. Vol 1. Optimal

(Elektropribor Publishing, 2009) ISBN: 978-5-900780-90-0.

[19] Vladislav Gennadievich Malyshkin, “Norm-Free Radon-Nikodym Approach to Machine Learn-

ing,” ArXiv e-prints (2015), arXiv:1512.03219 [cs.LG].

