Broadband highly-eﬃcient dielectric metadevices for polarization control

Sergey Kruk,1 Ben Hopkins,1 Ivan Kravchenko,2 Andrey Miroshnichenko,1 Dragomir N. Neshev,1 and Yuri S. Kivshar1

1Nonlinear Physics Centre, Australian National University, Canberra ACT 2601, Australia

2Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN 37831, USA

Metadevices based on dielectric nanostructured surfaces with both electric and magnetic Mie-
type resonances have resulted in the best eﬃciency to date for functional ﬂat optics with only one
disadvantage: a narrow operational bandwidth. Here we experimentally demonstrate broadband
transparent all-dielectric metasurfaces for highly eﬃcient polarization manipulation. We utilize
the generalized Huygens principle, with a superposition of the scattering contributions from sev-
eral electric and magnetic multipolar modes of the constituent meta-atoms, to achieve destructive
interference in reﬂection over a large spectral bandwidth. By employing this novel concept, we
demonstrate reﬂectionless (∼90% transmission) half-wave plates, quarter-wave plates, and vector
beam q-plates that can operate across multiple telecom bands with ∼99% polarization conversion
eﬃciency.

The concept of metamaterials – artiﬁcial electromag-
netic structures with unconventional properties com-
posed of subwavelength constituent elements – has
opened many new opportunities for the eﬃcient manip-
ulation of light propagation and a design of novel types
of metadevices with unusual properties1. In particular,
metasurfaces, ultra-thin nanostructured layers, emerged
recently as novel metadevices capable of reshaping trans-
mitted and reﬂected light. Metasurfaces are composed
of resonant subwavelength elements that are distributed
spatially across a two-dimensional surface. Due to the
resonant scattering of the incoming light, each element
can alter the phase and amplitude of the light ﬁeld.
Metasurfaces thus enabled a variety of diﬀerent function-
alities realized at the subwavelength scale2,3, including
controlled beam deﬂection, ﬂat-lens focusing, and holog-
raphy. As such, metasurfaces can replace the conven-
tional free-space bulky components for wavefront and po-
larization control, imaging, and even on-chip integration.
While many designs and functionalities of metasurfaces
have been suggested based on plasmonic planar struc-
tures2,3, most of these metasurfaces demonstrate low ef-
ﬁciencies in transmission due to losses in their metallic
components.
Indeed, the maximum eﬃciency reported
so far does not exceed 10%4, and usually much lower
eﬃciencies are reported (see Refs.5,6 to cite a few). In
contrast, all-dielectric resonant metasurfaces completely
avoid absorption losses, and can drastically enhance
the overall eﬃciency7–12, especially in the transmission
regime. However, there exists a serious issue that pre-
vents the immediate use of all-dielectric metasurfaces in
practical planar metadevices: the ﬁxed wavelength11,13
or narrow spectral range9 of operation. Broadband and
highly-eﬃcient functionality was demonstrated for meta-
surfaces operating in reﬂection14, but to date it has not
been achieved for transmissive devices. Recently, trans-
missive metasurfaces operating at several diﬀerent fre-
quencies15,16 were demonstrated. Multiple frequency op-
eration resolves the issue of narrow-band response for
many speciﬁc applications, such as multi-colour imaging.
However, for a number of technological implementations
of metasurfaces , e.g.
for polarization control of light,

a continuous spectral range of operation is required, ac-
companied by clear design principles that can enable such
broad bandwidth.

In this Letter, we suggest and demonstrate a novel
approach for the design of broadband all-dielectric meta-
surfaces by overlapping the scattering contributions of
several multipoles (both electric and magnetic) of the
constituent nanoscale meta-atoms, thus producing high-
transmission polarization and phase control over a wide
spectral bandwidth. We employ this approach to demon-
strate planar metadevices for eﬃcient polarisation con-
trol,
including half- or quarter-wave plates and vec-
tor beam q-plates. Our metadevices demonstrate near-
100% energy eﬃciency in full-wave numerical simula-
tions. 100% eﬃciency of a single-layer functional de-
vice is an advantage of employing resonant nanostructure
as this allows for impedance-matching with air, which
cannot be achieved with single-layer non-resonant func-
tional structures.
In experiment, the transmission eﬃ-
ciencies reach 90% and polarization conversion eﬃciency
of ∼99% across several telecommunication bands. While
experimental energy eﬃciency is lower than theoretically
predicted due to fabrication imperfections, it is among
the highest demonstrated eﬃciencies of the metadevices.
When compared to conventional birefringent media our
devices demonstrate eﬀective values of birefringence that
are at least three times greater, and they allow for trans-
verse patterning with pixel density at least three orders
of magnitude better than any available liquid-crystal ar-
rays.

To investigate the general operation of high-eﬃciency
ultra-thin transmissive metadevices, we ﬁrst review the
basic conditions of operation for phase and polarization
control.

1. The device should provide high transmission, as il-

lustrated in Fig. 1(a): T → 100%.

2. The device should provide 2π phase control of
transmission, relative to incident wave, thus cov-
ering the entire phase space [Fig. 1(b)]: ϕ ∈ [0, 2π]
3. The device should provide π control of the phase
diﬀerence between the transmission of two orthog-

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
3
2

 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

2
v
6
2
3
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

2

FIG. 1. Concept of a broadband highly-eﬃcient metadevice. (a) Near-unity energy eﬃciency over a broad spectral
region. (b) Phase coverage in the range [0 - 2π]. (c) Phase diﬀerence for two orthogonal polarizations in the range [0 - π]. (d)
An artistic view of a metadevice for spatially-variant polarization control operating in a broad spectral range.

onal polarizations [Fig. 1(c)]: ϕx − ϕy ∈ [0, π]

diate as:

The former two conditions provide a high-transmission
phase control, while the latter condition is further nec-
essary to provide a polarization control. In conventional
optics, the ﬁrst condition of broadband anti-reﬂection de-
vice can be fulﬁlled by employing multi-wave interference
techniques from multiple stacked layers. However, satis-
fying all three conditions in a single layer metasurface
over a broad bandwidth appears as an impossible task.

To tackle this problem, we must revisit the scattering
of the constituent elements of the metadevice from the
perspective of multipolar interference. We notice that
light scattered from any arbitrary object can be decom-
posed into multipoles that have even or odd parity under
spatial inversion (see Supporting Information), thereby
allowing us to express the scattered ﬁeld E as a sum of an
even component Eeven and an odd component Eodd. As
such, the transmission T and reﬂection R of a normally-
incident, co-polarized plane wave propagating in the ˆz
direction, can be written as follows,
T = |1 + Eeven(ˆz) + Eodd(ˆz)|2 ,
(1)
R = |Eeven(−ˆz) + Eodd(−ˆz)|2 = |Eeven(ˆz) − Eodd(ˆz)|2 ,
(2)

where we have deﬁned the magnitude and phase of the
incident ﬁeld such that EPW(ˆz) = 1, and have assumed
negligible absorption. However, to further control the
phase φ of reﬂectionless transmission we need to satisfy:

[1 + Eeven(ˆz) + Eodd(ˆz)] = eiφ.

(3)

Yet, because the magnitude is positive deﬁnite in Eq. (2),
reﬂection can vanish only when Eeven(ˆz) and Eodd(ˆz) are
equal to each other in both magnitude and phase. As
such, at any phase φ, the full transmission is achieved
when the individual nanostructures of a metadevice ra-

Eeven(ˆz) = Eodd(ˆz) =

(cid:0)eiφ − 1(cid:1) .

1
2

(4)

Notably, this equation can be satisﬁed for a single wave-
length with a minimum of two multipoles, each hav-
ing opposite parity; such as an electric and a magnetic
dipole resonance. This single-wavelength functionality
has previously been demonstrated for Huygens’ metasur-
faces9,17,18. In particular, optical all-dielectric Huygens’
metasurfaces rely on an overlap of the electric and mag-
netic resonances in high-index dielectric nanoparticles,
resulting in zero backward scattering19,20. The idea of
Huygens metasurface has proven successful in designing
diﬀerent functional metadevices, including vortex beam
generators12,21, beam deﬂectors12,22 and holograms11,23.
However, since the overlap of the electric and magnetic
dipole resonances (the so-called Huygens’ condition) oc-
curs only in a narrow spectral range, it is believed that
no broadband devices can de achieved in this way.

To satisfy Eq. (4) over a broad spectral range we in-
stead employ a multipolar nanostructure, which makes
Eeven and Eodd each a linear combination of many mul-
tipoles.
Importantly, Eq. (4) then becomes a balance
between multipoles, and does not require resonances of
equal amplitude and spectral width.
In other words,
multipolar structures are inherently suited for realizing
broadband phase control. Additional discussion regard-
ing this conclusion and its derivation is provided in Sup-
porting Information.

We can thereby achieve a broadband response as a
result of multi-wave interference between the scattering
waves produced by several pairs of multipoles of oppo-
site parity. We refer to such multipolar forward scatter-
ing as the generalized Huygens condition, which resem-
bles to an extent the forward scattering from two higher
order multipoles called generalized Kerker condition24,25.
Such multipolar scattering also resembles some principles

(a)Δφ(b)(с)0102πΔφλ0λ1Wavelength(d)TransmissionPolarization controlPhase control02πExEyxyE3

FIG. 2.
(a) Schematic of our broadband metadevice. The
spectra in (b) and (c) show the transmission and reﬂection of
the metadevice and their dependence on the multipoles (ED
= electric dipole, MD = magnetic dipole, and HOM = sum of
higher-order multipoles). The black dashed curve in (c) shows
the complete multipolar reﬂection when excluding reﬂection
oﬀ the glass substrate. Dimensions are a = 285 nm, b =
450 nm, c = 860 nm and D = 750 nm, and the incident
polarization is parallel to the short axis of the nanopillars.

of operation from multilayer dielectric coatings, where
broadband functionality is a result of interference of mul-
tiple reﬂected waves.

We now focus on demonstrating the capacity of mul-
tipolar dielectric nanostructures for constructing broad-
band metasurfaces for highly-eﬃcient polarization con-
trol. Our metasurface consists of closely spaced silicon
nanopillars, as shown in Fig. 2(a) to allow more mul-
tipolar modes in comparison with nanodisks. Here we
assume negligible optical losses and focus on minimiz-
ing reﬂection. First, we relate the metasurface reﬂection
to the magnitude of backward scattering from a single
nanopillar with a superposition of individual contribu-
tions of higher-order multipoles [details in Supporting
Information]. As seen in Fig. 2(b), the silicon nanopillar
array approaches broadband near-unity transmission as
we account for higher-order multipoles. In Fig. 2(c), we
show that the origin of this broadband transmission is at-
tributed to interference in the reﬂection between dipole-
and higher-order multipoles (HOM). Both dipole-order
multipoles and the higher-order multipoles can be seen
to provide a signiﬁcant contribution to reﬂection in iso-
lation, while their sum suppresses reﬂection. Because of
the negligible material losses of silicon, this broad sup-
pression of reﬂection is suﬃcient to provide near-unity
and broadband transmission through the metasurface.

As the next step, we need to achieve the control over

FIG. 3. (a) Transmission spectrum of the metadevice shown
in Fig. 2, for polarizations parallel to the two axes of the
nanopillar. (b) Phase of the transmitted waves with respect
to the incident ﬁeld for both orthogonal polarizations. The
phase diﬀerence ϕx − ϕy shows a constant value of π over a
broad spectral range, as required for a broadband half-wave
plate.

the phase of the transmitted wave.
In this regard, it
is important to recognize that the forward scattering
components from each active multipole must collectively
suppress the incident ﬁeld and construct a new wave-
front that can have a diﬀerent phase to that of the
background ﬁeld. Therefore, the scattering contributions
from the various multipoles have to be non-negligible rel-
ative to the incident ﬁeld. This is indeed the situation in
Figs. 2(b,c), where both the dipole- and the higher-order
multipoles are shown to provide a signiﬁcant contribution
to transmission and reﬂection in isolation.

To ﬁnally demonstrate the combined phase and po-
larization control of the transmitted wavefront, we can
maintain a near constant relative phase diﬀerence be-
tween the transmitted wave polarized along each axis of
the silicon nanopillars of Fig. 2(a). In particular, we con-
sider the case of a half-wave plate in Fig. 3, and main-
tain a π phase diﬀerence between the transmission po-
larized along each axis.
Importantly, our results show
that the π phase diﬀerence is maintained together with
near unity transmission over both C and L telecommu-
nications bands.

High operation bandwidth is a result of multipolar in-
terference that can be achieved in various systems not
limited to dielectric nanopillars. On the other hand, the
use of similar nanopillar geometries may not meet the
conditions for the multipolar interference and thus lead
to essentially single-wavelength operation. In Supporting
Information we give an example of two metadevices with

(a)(b)(c)TotalED+MDMDED+MDHOMTotalWavelength (nm)Wavelength (nm)Transmission (%)Reflection (%)C bandL bandWavelength (nm)(a)(%)(b)4

FIG. 4. Demonstration of half- and quarter-wave plates. (a) Experimental transmission spectra of the half-wave plate.
Black line – total transmission. Red line – transmission through a metasurface positioned between a pair of linear parallel
polarizer and analyzer with polarization axis oriented at 45◦ to metasurface’s anisotropy axis. Blue line – transmission through
a metasurface positioned between a pair of linear crossed polarizer and analyzer with polarization axis oriented at ±45◦ to
metasurface’s anisotropy axis. (b) Experimentally retrieved retardance of the half-wave plate. Highlighted region shows the
spectral range, with a deviation from λ/2 by no more that 10%, or λ/20. Inset shows a scanning electron micrograph of the
fabricated half-wave plate. (c) Experimental transmission spectra of the quarter-wave plate. Black line – total transmission.
Red line – transmission through a metasurface positioned between a pair of linear polarizer with polarization axis oriented at
45◦ to metasurface’s anisotropy axis and a right-circular analyzer. Blue line – transmission through a pair of linear polarizer
with polarization axis oriented at 45◦ to metasurface’s anisotropy axis and a left-circular analyzer. (d) Experimentally retrieved
retardance of the quarter-wave plate. Highlighted region show the spectral range, with retardance deviation from λ/4 by no
more than λ/20.

similar geometries of nanopillars, but featuring 8 times
diﬀerence in the spectral bandwidth.

We then proceed to experimental realization and op-
tical testing of the proposed broadband functionality.
We fabricate our samples from polycrystalline silicon on
quartz substrate using electron-beam lithography [see de-
tails in Supporting Information]. Overall, we demon-
strate three types of optical metadevices – a half-wave
plate, a quarter-wave plate, and a q-plate all working

in the telecom spectral region. The half-wave plate is
an element that adds π phase diﬀerence between two
principal linear polarizations of light. It is used for po-
larization rotation by up-to 90o. Our half-wave plate
consists of nanoparticles with sizes a = 280 nm, b =
430 nm, c = 850 nm, arranged into a square lattice with
period D = 750 nm. The q-plates are used for conversion
of linearly-polarized beam into radially, or azimuthally
polarized. Our q-plate consists of the same nanoparti-

140015501700147616070.3λ0.4λλ/20.6λ0.7λRetardanceWavelength, nm140015501700147616070.00.20.40.60.81.0TransmissionWavelength, nmTotal transmission14001600152516640.000.1λ0.4λ0.5λλ/4RetardanceWavelength, nm14001600152516640.00.20.40.60.81.0TransmissionWavelength, nmTotal transmissionHalf-Wave PlateQuarter-Wave Plate1µm(a)(с)(b)(d)5

FIG. 5. Demonstration of highly-eﬃcient q-plates. (a) Transmission image of the q-plate 1.5 mm in diameter placed
on top of a quartz wafer, taken with an ampliﬁed spontaneous emission (ASE) broadband light source at around 1550 nm
wavelengths. Note that the device appear to be nearly transparent.
(b) Spectrum of the ASE light source used for the
experiment. (c) q-plate functionality concept: conversion of vertical into azimuthal polarization. (d) Experimentally measured
spatially-resolved polarization of the azimuthally polarized output beam. (e) The q-plate functionality concept: conversion of
horizontal into radial polarization. (f) Experimentally measured spatially-resolved polarization of the radially polarized output
beam. (g) Examples of light transmission through the q-plate positioned between diﬀerent polarizers and analyzers (polarizer
axes orientations marked in insets).

cles arranged into hexagonal lattice with the same den-
sity of particles per unit area. The spatial orientation
of the nanoparticles, however varies spatially across the
q-plate, as shown in Fig. 5. The quarter-wave plate is an
element that adds π/2 phase diﬀerence between two prin-
cipal linear polarizations of light. It is used for polariza-
tion conversions between linear, circular and intermedi-
ate elliptical polarizations. Our half-wave plate consists
of nanoparticles with sizes a = 310 nm, b = 370 nm,
same height c = 850 nm and arranged into the same
square lattice (D = 750 nm).

We then study experimentally the optical properties
of the fabricated wave-plates. First, we measure their

transmission spectra. For this, we employ a home-built
white-light spectrometer that uses a tungsten light bulb
as a broadband optical source and an Optical Spectrum
Analyzer detection. The transmission spectra of the sam-
ples are shown in Figs. 4(a,c–black lines).

To check the basic functionalities of the metadevices,
we measure how well the half-wave platecan rotate lin-
ear polarization by 90◦ and how well the quarter-wave
plate can convert linear polarization into circular one.
We start with the fabricated half-wave plate and place it
between linear polarizer and analyzer with the wave plate
axis being at 45◦ to the axis of the polarizer (the wave
plate axis is deﬁned here as the long axis of constituent

140015501700147616070.00.20.40.60.81.0Intensity, a.u.Wavelength, nm(с)(d)(e)(f)1(a)(g)1mm00.5Q-plate radialQ-plate azimuthal(b)quartzmetasurfacelightsourceelliptical nanoparticles). We observe that in this case
the half-wave plate rotates linear polarization of virtu-
ally 100% of transmitted light by 90◦ over a broad spec-
tral region (shown as shaded region in the plots).
In
particular, Fig. 4(a) shows that transmission through a
wave plate positioned between two crossed polarizers is
reaching its maximum value, and transmission through
a wave plate positioned between two parallel polarizers
almost vanishes.

Similarly, we test the performance of the quarter-wave
plate. We place a linear polarizer in front of it and orient
the wave plate axis at 45◦ with respect to the polarizer’s
axis. After the wave plate we place a circular polarizer
(transmitting either left- or right-circular polarization)
made of a superachromatic quarter-wave plate (from B.
Halle) and a linear analyzer. We demonstrate virtually
100% conversion of linear polarization into circular over
a broad spectral region, as shown in Fig. 4(c).

We further perform the full polarimetry measurements
of the transmission spectra of the metasurfaces. For this
we keep a vertically aligned linear polarizer and orient
the samples anisotropy axis at 45◦. We use a set of
six diﬀerent analyzers (six diﬀerent orientations of the
super-achromatic quarter-wave plate and a linear ana-
lyzer): linear horizontal and vertical, two linear diagonal,
left-circular and right-circular analyzers; and correspond-
ingly record six spectra. We then use the Stokes vector
formalism to retrieve the full information about the po-
larization states of the transmission spectra in terms of
their polarization degree, ellipticity and polarization ro-
tation angle [see more details in Supporting Information].
The extracted retardance of our wave plates is shown in
Figs. 4(b,d). Clearly, the measured retardance is close to
0.5 for the case of the half-wave plate and 0.25 for the
case of the quarter-wave plate. Importantly, these values
are constant (within the practically accepted tolerances)
over a broad spectral range.

The biggest signiﬁcance of the metasurfaces approach
however comes from the ability to spatially vary the
degree of polarization rotation. We therefore demon-
strate experimentally the broadband operation of a q-
plate, which is a device that converts beam with linear
vertical polarization into a beam with azimuthal polar-
ization and a beam with horizontal polarization into a
beam with radial polarization [see Fig. 5]. We build an
image of the q-plate on an infrared Xenics camera and
use an ampliﬁed spontaneous emission broadband light
source such that on the camera we receive an image [see
Fig. 5(a)] integrated over the entire spectral range of our

6
source, shown in Fig. 5(b). The q-plate shows ∼ 90%
overall transmission and it looks nearly transparent on
the camera. Similarly to the studies of the wave plates,
we perform the full polarimetry of the optical images [see
more details in Supporting Information], i.e. we capture
six images of the q-plate when the light passes through
six diﬀerent analyzers [see Fig. 5(g)]. We then employ
the Stokes vector formalism and, in particular, retrieve
polarization angles of light that passes through diﬀerent
spatial points of the q-plate [see Figs. 5(d,f), diﬀerent
colors correspond to diﬀerent directions of linear polar-
ization]. Figures 5(d,f) show that the metadevice allows
virtually perfect conversion of vertical polarization into
radial polarization and horizontal polarization into az-
imuthal polarization.

In conclusion, we have designed and demonstrated
transparent all-dielectric metadevices for highly eﬃcient
polarization manipulation based on the generalized Huy-
gens’ principle, including half-wave plates, quarter-wave
plates, and vector beam q-plates that can operate across
several telecom bands. While the demonstrated metade-
vices allow to change the polarization of light in a man-
ner similar to conventional birefringent crystals and liq-
uid crystals, the eﬀective value of birefringence is much
higher than that in conventional materials. Indeed, for
both half-wave plates and q-plates, the π phase diﬀerence
is accumulated over 850 nm distance at 1550 nm wave-
length, being equivalent to ∆n = (no − ne) ≈ 0.9. The
highest values of ∆n for conventional materials are of
the order of 0.326,27. The metadevices feature subdiﬀrac-
tional spatial resolution of parameters variation, which is
three orders of magnitude higher than that in the state-
of-the-art liquid crystal arrays. The spectral bandwidth
of the demonstrated metadevices is comparable or larger
than the bandwidth of conventional zero-order wave re-
tarders and diﬀractive optical elements.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors acknowledge a support of the Australian
Research Council and thank F. Capasso, T. Krauss, and
S. Turitsyn for stimulating discussions. A portion of this
research was conducted at the Center for Nanophase Ma-
terials Sciences sponsored at Oak Ridge National Labo-
ratory by the Scientiﬁc User Facilities Division, Oﬃce of
Basic Energy Sciences, the US Department of Energy.

1 N. I. Zheludev and Y. S. Kivshar, Nat. Mater. 11, 917

4 X. Ni, S. Ishii, A. V. Kildishev, and V. M. Shalaev, Light:

(2012).

2 N. Yu and F. Capasso, Nat. Mater. 13, 139 (2014).
3 A. E. Minovich, A. E. Miroshnichenko, A. Y. Bykov, T. V.
Murzina, D. N. Neshev, and Y. S. Kivshar, Laser & Pho-
tonics Reviews 9, 195 (2015).

Science & Applications 2, e72 (2013).

5 F. Aieta, P. Genevet, M. A. Kats, N. Yu, R. Blanchard,
Z. Gaburro, and F. Capasso, Nano Lett. 12, 4932 (2012).
6 B. Walther, C. Helgert, C. Rockstuhl, F. Setzpfandt,
F. Eilenberger, E.-B. Kley, F. Lederer, A. T¨unnermann,

7

and T. Pertsch, Advanced Materials 24, 6300 (2012).

7 Y. Yang, I. I. Kravchenko, D. P. Briggs, and J. Valentine,

Nat. Commun. 5, 5753 (2014).

Neshev, I. Brener, and Y. Kivshar, ACS Nano 7, 7824
(2013).

19 S. Person, M. Jain, Z. Lapin, J. J. S´aenz, G. Wicks, and

8 D. Lin, P. Fan, E. Hasman, and M. L. Brongersma, Science

L. Novotny, Nano Lett. 13, 1806 (2013).

345, 298 (2014).

9 M. Decker, I. Staude, M. Falkner, J. Dominguez, D. N.
Neshev, I. Brener, T. Pertsch, and Y. S. Kivshar, Adv.
Opt. Mater. 3, 813 (2015).

10 A. Arbabi, Y. Horie, A. J. Ball, M. Bagheri,

and

A. Faraon, Nature Commun 6 (2015).

11 A. Arbabi, Y. Horie, M. Bagheri, and A. Faraon, Nat.

Nanotech. 10, 937 (2015).

12 M. I. Shalaev, J. Sun, A. Tsukernik, A. Pandey, K. Nikol-
skiy, and N. M. Litchinitser, Nano Lett. 15, 6261 (2015).
and

13 P. Lalanne, S. Astilean, P. Chavel, E. Cambril,

H. Launois, Opt. Lett. 23, 1081 (1998).

14 Y. Yang, W. Wang, P. Moitra, I. I. Kravchenko, D. P.

Briggs, and J. Valentine, Nano Letters 14, 1394 (2014).

15 F. Aieta, M. A. Kats, P. Genevet, and F. Capasso, Science

347, 1342 (2015).

20 Y. H. Fu, A. I. Kuznetsov, A. E. Miroshnichenko, Y. F.
Yu, and B. Luk/’yanchuk, Nat. Commun 4, 1527 (2013).
21 K. E. Chong, I. Staude, A. James, J. Dominguez, S. Liu,
S. Campione, G. S. Subramania, T. S. Luk, M. Decker,
D. N. Neshev, I. Brener, and Y. S. Kivshar, Nano Lett.
15, 5369 (2015).

22 Y. F. Yu, A. Y. Zhu, R. Paniagua-Dom´ınguez, Y. H. Fu,
B. Luk’yanchuk, and A. I. Kuznetsov, Laser & Photonics
Reviews 9, 412 (2015).

23 K. E. Chong, L. Wang, I. Staude, A. James, J. Dominguez,
S. Liu, G. S. Subramania, M. Decker, D. N. Neshev,
I. Brener, and Y. S. Kivshar, arXiv:1602.00755 (2016).

24 W. Liu, J. Zhang, B. Lei, H. Ma, W. Xie, and H. Hu, Opt.

Express 22, 16178 (2014).

25 R. Alaee, R. Filter, D. Lehr, F. Lederer, and C. Rockstuhl,

Opt. Lett. 40, 2645 (2015).

16 E. Arbabi, A. Arbabi, S. Mahsa Kamali, Y. Horie, and

A. Faraon, (2016), arXiv:1601.05847.

26 J. R. DeVore, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 41, 416 (1951).
27 J. Li, S.-T. Wu, S. Brugioni, R. Meucci, and S. Faetti, J.

17 C. Pfeiﬀer and A. Grbic, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 197401

Appl. Phys. 97, 073501 (2005).

(2013).

18 I. Staude, A. E. Miroshnichenko, M. Decker, N. T. Fo-
fang, S. Liu, E. Gonzales, J. Dominguez, T. S. Luk, D. N.

