6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
7
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
t
n
a
u
q
[
 
 

1
v
9
3
3
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Review Article: Quantum Nanophotonics in Diamond

Tim Schr¨oder,1 Sara Mouradian,1 Jiabao Zheng,1, 2 Matthew E. Trusheim,1

Michael Walsh,1 Edward H. Chen,1 Luozhou Li,1 Igal Bayn,1 and Dirk Englund1

1Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge MA 02139, United States

2Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University, New York, New York 10027, United States

(Dated: March 18, 2016)

The past decade has seen great advances in developing color centers in diamond for sensing, quan-
tum information processing, and tests of quantum foundations. Increasingly, the success of these
applications as well as fundamental investigations of light-matter interaction depend on improved
control of optical interactions with color centers – from better ﬂuorescence collection to eﬃcient and
precise coupling with conﬁned single optical modes. Wide ranging research eﬀorts have been un-
dertaken to address these demands through advanced nanofabrication of diamond. This review will
cover recent advances in diamond nano- and microphotonic structures for eﬃcient light collection,
color center to nanocavity coupling, hybrid integration of diamond devices with other material sys-
tems, and the wide range of fabrication methods that have enabled these complex photonic diamond
systems.

CONTENTS

C. Photonic Crystal Cavities in Bulk

Diamond

12

I. Introduction

II. Diamond for Quantum Photonics

A. Material Properties
B. Defect Centers in Diamond

III. Fabrication of Diamond Photonic Devices

A. Synthetic Creation of Diamond
B. Diamond Thin Film Fabrication
C. Focused Ion Beam Milling
D. Direct Electron Beam Lithography
E. Transferrable Silicon Mask Lithography
F. Angular Etching and Isotropic Etching

Techniques

IV. Synthetic Creation of Defect centers

A. Annealing Temperature and Optical

Properties

B. Activation of Incorporated Ions in

As-Grown Diamond

C. Controlled Incorporation of Ions during

Growth: Delta Doping

D. Implantation of Ions
E. Targeted Creation of Defect Centers
F. Deterministic Coupling To Optical

Cavities

G. Dipole Orientation of Defects

V. Diamond Devices I: Enhanced Light

Collection
A. Waveguiding Structures
B. Solid Immersion Lenses
C. Circular Grating Structure

VI. Diamond Devices II: Optical Cavities

A. Whispering-Gallery-Mode Resonators
B. Thin Film Photonic Crystal Cavities

1

2
2
2

3
3
3
4
4
5

5

5

6

6

6
7
7

8
8

8
9
10
10

11
11
11

VII. All-Diamond Photonic Systems

13
A. Photonic Systems in Diamond Thin Films 13
13
B. Photonic Systems in Bulk Diamond

VIII. Hybrid Photonic Systems

A. Cavity Systems
B. Fiber Coupled DBR Cavity Systems
C. Photonic Circuit Integration
D. Towards Complex Photonic Architectures

IX. Conclusion and Remaining Challenges

Acknowledgments

References

13
13
14
14
15

15

16

16

I.

INTRODUCTION

Over the past two decades, color centers in diamond
have emerged as promising systems for quantum in-
formation (QI) applications [1–3] and precision sens-
ing [4–7]. They were the ﬁrst and are still among
the brightest solid-state, room-temperature single pho-
ton sources [8, 9]. Moreover, several defects allow for
optical access to associated electron and nuclear spin
states, which can exhibit long coherence times [10], en-
abling their use as quantum memories [11] in QI appli-
cations [12]. These defects also exhibit strong sensitivity
to magnetic ﬁeld [5, 13], electric ﬁeld [14], strain [15],
pressure [16], and temperature dependence [17], enabling
sensing of small ﬁelds at low frequencies [18, 19], often at
room temperature [20], and down to the single nuclear
spin level [21, 22]. By coupling these already promising
defect centers to optical nano- and microstructures [23–
27], one can shape and control the optical properties to

increase the performance, eﬃciency, and ﬁdelity of sens-
ing and QI protocols.

Recent demonstrations of a variety of diamond pat-
terning techniques – focused ion beam (FIB) milling [28],
reactive ion etching (RIE) [29–31], quasi-isotropic etch-
ing [32], and electron beam induced etching (EBIE) [33]
– have enabled patterning of diamond at the nanoscale,
and thus the ﬁeld of diamond nanophotonics. With high
quality diamond fabrication now a reality, many opti-
cal systems have been proposed and realized in diamond
and hybrid diamond systems. Here, we will discuss pho-
tonic structures for increased collection eﬃciency, stand-
alone defect-cavity systems for tailored light-matter in-
teraction, and hybrid photonic architectures for photon
collection, routing, interaction, and detection. We will
particularly focus on diamond photonic structures cou-
pled to single quantum systems, and not discuss dia-
mond plasmonics
[34–37], non-linear photonics in dia-
mond resonators [38], Raman-lasers [39], optomechanical
systems [15, 32, 40], and hybrid systems with diamond
nanocrystals [41]. While there have been signiﬁcant ad-
vances with nanodiamonds in hybrid photonic systems,
and nanodiamond fabrication and properties have ad-
vanced [42, 43], in this paper we will focus on diamond
nano- and microstructures patterned into polycrystalline
and single-crystal diamond, which have been shown to
have superior optical and spin properties compared to
most diamond nanocrystals.

II. DIAMOND FOR QUANTUM PHOTONICS

A. Material Properties

Diamond’s exceptional combination of a wide elec-
tronic bandgap, high mechanical strength, high ther-
mal conductivity, and large hole mobility has made it
an attractive material for high frequency, power, tem-
perature, and voltage applications such as power elec-
tronics [44, 45]. Furthermore, diamond is chemically in-
ert and biocompatible making it a promising material
for biological applications, especially in nanocrystalline
form [46].
In the ﬁeld of quantum optics, diamond is
uniquely attractive due to its wide bandgap, ∼ 5.5 eV,
which allows it to host to more than 500 optically ac-
tive defects, known as ‘color centers’. These crystalline
defects, corresponding to some combination of displace-
ment or substitution of the native carbon atoms within
the diamond lattice, create spatially localized, energet-
ically separated ground and excited states within the
electronic band gap of the bulk crystal. The high De-
bye temperature of diamond (Θ0 ∼ 2219 K [47]) leads
to a relatively low phonon population at room temper-
ature, which allows these defect-related electronic states
to persist for long times without suﬀering from phonon-
induced relaxation. Finally, diamond crystals are rela-
tively free of nuclear spins, with a natural composition
of 12C of ∼ 99% that can be increased to ∼ 99.99% in

2

isotopically-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (CVD)
growth [48, 49]. This lack of background spins leads to
low magnetic ﬁeld ﬂuctuations, in principal facilitating
long coherence times for the few electronic or nuclear
spins present. These properties make diamond an ideal
host material for single quantum defects and photonic
elements.

Figure 1. Overview of studied color centers. For centers with
emission wavelengths shorter than 730 nm, the length of the
colored line represents the approximate width of the emission
spectrum of the color center including phonon sidebands. The
wavelength given for each center denotes the zero-phonon-
line (ZPL) wavelength. The black arrows indicate that the
centers spin has been addressed. Reprinted with permission
from Reference [50]. c(cid:13)2014 WILEY-VCH.

B. Defect Centers in Diamond

Of the over 500 optically active defect centers in dia-
mond [51], more than 10 have been demonstrated to ex-
ist as single quantum emitters [50]. As shown in Fig. 1,
these centers span a wide range of single-photon emission
wavelengths across the visible spectrum ranging from the
blue into the near-infrared.

Of these single-photon sources, three have been ob-
served to exhibit optically detected magnetic resonance
(ODMR), in which changes in photon emission intensity
are observed while driving the spin on and oﬀ resonance
with a tunable microwave ﬁeld, ﬁrst demonstrated for the
negatively charged nitrogen vacancy center (NV−) [52].
This is a convenient mechanism for direct spin state read-
out via photoluminescence. Spin-state-dependent optical
transitions, in general, enable fast initialization, manipu-
lation and measurement of spin states using laser excita-
tion [12]. Many quantum information processing (QIP)
schemes use a link between stationary solid-state quan-
tum memory bits and ﬂying photonic qubits as a basic
resource [53], making diamond spin systems an attractive
candidate for QIP [1, 54].
The most prominent among the ODMR-active dia-
mond color centers is the NV−, which exhibits stable
room temperature single photon emission and partic-
ularly long electron and nuclear spin coherence times
compared to other solid state defect centers [55].
In
the ﬁeld of quantum optics, the NV− has notably been

applied in experiments demonstrating spin-photon en-
tanglement [56], distant spin entanglement [57], quan-
tum teleportation [58], and ﬁnally the ﬁrst loophole free
demonstration of Bell’s inequality [59]. Recently, entan-
gled absorption was demonstrated mediated by an inher-
ent spin-orbit entanglement in a single NV− [60]. Also
the coherent transfer of a photon to a single solid-state
nuclear spin qubit with an average ﬁdelity of 98% and
storage times over 10 seconds demonstrated [61]. In ad-
dition to the NV−, the negatively charged silicon vacancy
defect center (SiV−) has recently gained attention as an
optically accessible single spin system. Notably, the SiV−
in pure, strain free crystals possesses optical transitions
that are naturally nearly Fourier-transform-limited and
insensitive to environmental noise. This has enabled the
demonstration of high-ﬁdelity Hong-Ou-Mandel interfer-
ence between photons emitted by two SiV− centers [62].
Unfortunately, the spin coherence times are currently
limited by phonon interactions to several 10s of nanosec-
onds, which is many orders of magnitude lower than that
of the NV−.

III. FABRICATION OF DIAMOND PHOTONIC

DEVICES

The realization of diamond-based photonic devices
requires that optical design parameters are accurately
transferred into diamond by either an additive [63]
or subtractive approach. We will focus on the sub-
tractive approach, as it is more common for well de-
signed photonic structures. Various fabrication methods
have been used to demonstrate photonic devices in dia-
mond [26, 29, 30, 33, 63–66]. Focused Ion Beam (FIB)
milling deﬁnes and transfers the photonic pattern directly
into diamond [67, 68]. Direct electron beam lithography
(EBL) writing deﬁnes a pattern with nanometer preci-
sion in an electron beam resist layer and is usually com-
bined with a subsequent dry etching step to transfer the
photonic pattern into the diamond. Transferrable sili-
con mask lithography [31] exploits the relatively mature
fabrication process on silicon-on-insulator (SOI) sam-
ples, and provides high etch selectivity for the subse-
quent oxygen etching step. Due to the lack of commer-
cially available diamond thin ﬁlms of optical thickness, 3-
dimensional (3D) monolithic patterning techniques have
also been developed such as angular FIB and RIE etch-
ing [69, 70] and isotropic etching [32, 71] techniques.

A. Synthetic Creation of Diamond

All successful photonic devices must begin with high-
purity single crystal diamond. While initial defect stud-
ies were done on natural diamond, current nano-photonic
structures are made from synthetic diamond. Chem-
ical vapor deposition (CVD) and high-pressure high-
temperature (HPHT) growth allow for the production of

3

low strain single-crystal diamond with controllable defect
concentrations [45, 72]. These high-quality single-crystal
diamonds are limited in size to a few tens of mm2, while
polycrystalline ﬁlms and bulk diamonds can be grown
on signiﬁcantly larger scales, though with less control
over lattice strain and defect inclusion across the sam-
ple. Growth process parameters strongly inﬂuence the
quality of the crystal and the concentration and type of
lattice defects, making diamond growth still technically
challenging, though high quality synthetic diamonds are
available commercially. Ultra-pure diamond, categorized
as type IIa for low nitrogen and boron content, is often
used as a starting point for quantum optics applications
because of higher purity. In fact, defects in ultra-pure di-
amond can be eliminated down to levels < 1 ppb. How-
ever, desired defects can also be introduced in the dia-
mond growth up to high levels > 100 ppm, allowing for
control of the native defect densities across several orders
of magnitude. This approach can avoid crystalline dam-
age associated with defect creation through implanta-
tion, and has been shown to provide long spin-coherence
times [73], high defect density or spatially-selected de-
fect layers [74–76] as will be discussed in Section 4c.
Further insights into the synthesis of single crystal di-
amond by HPHT or CVD methods, either by homoepi-
taxial growth [77] or heteroepitaxial deposition on large-
area single crystals of a foreign material are discussed in
Ref. [72, 78].

B. Diamond Thin Film Fabrication

One very promising exception is

Many photonic systems that conﬁne light on the or-
der of the wavelength are based on thin ﬁlm substrates
which are either suspended or supported by a lower in-
dex of refraction material to achieve total internal reﬂec-
tion. For single mode devices operating resonantly with
color centers in the visible range, such a thin ﬁlm has to
be on the order of 200 nm in thickness. In contrast to
many other semi-conductor materials, single crystal dia-
mond growth is challenging and has been limited mainly
to diamond-on-diamond techniques, precluding the use
of an underlying sacriﬁcial layer or lower index material.
the heteroepi-
taxial growth via bias-enhanced nucleation [79] on
iridium/yttria-stabilized zirconia buﬀer layers on silicon
(layer structure: diamond/Ir/YSZ/Si(001)) [78]. Due to
an unmatched degree of initial alignment and extraordi-
nary high density of such epitaxial diamond grains on the
iridium layer, they can lose their polycrystalline charac-
ter during subsequent textured growth within a few to
tens of micrometers [80]. A several hundred nanometer
thick suspended diamond membrane can be fabricated
by ﬁrst removing the silicon substrate and buﬀer layers
and then dry-etching the polycrystalline backside of the
diamond [26].

For the fabrication of diamond thin ﬁlms from bulk dia-
mond substrates, diﬀerent methods have been developed.

FIB milling has been pursued for the separation of small
diamond slabs from the bulk [81]. However, the highly
physical nature of the ion bombardment causes crystal
damage as evidenced by Raman spectroscopy, photolumi-
nescence [81], and transmission electron microscopy [82].
Reactive Ion Etching (RIE) of slabs was seen to cause
less crystal damage [82] in the ﬁnal product, allowing for
spin coherence times approaching 100 µs [83]. However,
this RIE method only allowed for the production of small
( ∼ 10 × 10 µm2) membranes, which limits the ability to
post-process and fabricate more complex photonic struc-
tures.

There has also been work towards the separation of
a diamond ﬁlm from the bulk via the controlled cre-
ation of a damage layer. MeV ions accelerated at the
diamond crystal will stop at an energy-dependent depth.
The damage caused by collisions with the lattice will cre-
ate a well-localized graphite layer that can be removed
via a wet-etch step [84, 85]. Crystal damage is inevitably
induced in the removed membrane. However, this can be
mitigated with a strategic etch of the damaged side [86],
and subsequent diamond overgrowth [87–89], allowing for
high quality spin properties of defect centers [88].

C. Focused Ion Beam Milling

FIB milling of diamond, in which carbon atoms are
mechanically removed from the lattice with accelerated
Ga+ ions, or O2 ions is a masks process which can be used
for fabrication of diamond photonic devices [26, 28, 68].
The spatial resolution is mainly limited by the ion beam
width. This gives several advantages for diamond pat-
terning: (i) a mask is not required, eliminating the need
for special handling or resist spinning, and (ii) optical
isolation from the bulk is achieved simply by tilting the
stage to etch at an angle relative to the beam and to un-
dercut the structure [28]. FIB milling has been used to
demonstrate nanobeam cavities [28] and free-standing,
undercut bridge structures [90] in bulk diamond, and
two-dimensional (2D) photonic cavities [26] in a single
crystal diamond layer on a buﬀered Si substrate. How-
ever, this technique is limited by the relatively long
milling time and inclined side walls [26] leading to limited
cavity quality-factors, and the residual damage to the di-
amond material, which results in reduced color center
properties as well as additional optical and spin back-
ground. The material damage from ion milling can be
partially removed either by acid treatment and oxida-
tion step [26] or using electron beam induced local etch-
ing [90]. This minimizes the optical losses and ﬂuores-
cence background from the ion contamination.

D. Direct Electron Beam Lithography

EBL is widely used for deﬁning patterns with nanome-
ter feature size, and is applied in combination with an

4

Figure 2. Fabrication procedure and cavity characterization
outcome. a) NV−s were created ∼ 100 nm below the surface
of the diamond membranes by implantation of 15N atoms and
subsequent annealing at 850◦C. The magniﬁed scanning elec-
tron micrograph (SEM) shows a ∼ 200 nm membrane. b)
Silicon (Si) masks were patterned on silicon-on-insulator, re-
leased and transferred onto diamond membranes. The SEM
shows a patterned Si mask before transfer. The scale bar
represents 1 mm. c) Oxygen reactive ion etching was used
to pattern diamond membranes. The false-color SEM shows
the Si mask (purple) on diamond after oxygen etching. The
scale bar represents 1 mm. d) Patterned diamond membrane
on microwave striplines for optical and spin characterization.
The SEM shows diamond PhC structures alongside metal-
lic striplines in Si channels. The scale bar represents 5 mm.
c(cid:13)2015 Na-
Reprinted with permission from Reference [27].
ture Publishing Group.

etching method, most often RIE or inductively coupled
plasma (ICP) RIE. EBL typically requires a conduc-
tive substrate that is several millimeters in size and an
E-beam resist having suﬃcient etch selectivity with re-
spect to the substrate for the subsequent pattern transfer.
These requirements are challenging to satisfy for small,
insulating diamond samples. Coating diamond with a
conductive layer is widely used to minimize charging dur-
ing EBL writing. Hydrogen silsesquioxane (HSQ) resist
is a high resolution E-beam resist that can be used to
pattern diamond [91]. Its modest intrinsic selectivity to

200 nmN ions155 µmOxygen plasmaabcd5 μmPt1 μm1 μm200 nmPDMS adhesiveSi maskstandard diamond RIE etch recipes can be enhanced by
post-development electron curing [92]. The etch selectiv-
ity can be further enhanced with other mask layers pat-
terned via lift-oﬀ, or an initial short dry or wet etch step.
Such recipes have been used to demonstrate diamond
nanowires [30], suspended waveguide and nanobeam cav-
ities [69, 70, 76], diamond plasmonic apertures [91], and
gratings [37].

E. Transferrable Silicon Mask Lithography

To avoid spin-coating small diamond samples and ex-
posing them to electron, ion, or UV radiation, a novel
nanofabrication technique [31] was developed as illus-
trated in Fig. 2.
Instead of deﬁning a mask directly
on the diamond substrate, a frameless single-crystal sil-
icon membrane mask is pre-patterned from (SOI) sam-
ples [93–95] and placed onto the diamond substrate sil-
icon using membrane-transfer techniques [31]. This en-
ables pattern transfer with feature sizes down to 10 nm,
etch selectivity of over 38 for the subsequent oxygen RIE,
and automatic positioning of ion implantation apertures
with respect to the photonic structure, as will be dis-
cussed in Sec. IV with alignment accuracy guaranteed by
the EBL writing. For patterning of the silicon masks,
high resolution EBL is applied, in combination with well
developed RIE.

By applying one of two complimentary transfer tech-
niques, one can place both small and large masks on
diamond substrates with sizes up to 200 x 200 µm,
and 1 x 1 mm, as required by the sample size to be
patterned. For small masks, a pick-and-place method
is applied based on nanomanipulation of a micro-
polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) adhesive attached to a
tungsten probe tip. For large masks, a stamping ap-
proach is used with a transparent polytetraﬂuoroethy-
lene (PTFE) sheet [31]. After the pattern is transferred
to diamond by oxygen etching, the Si membrane masks
are mechanically removed, avoiding solvent-based mask
removal procedures on diamond substrates.

The Si mask patterning was applied for various pho-
tonic nanostructures in both bulk samples [96] and dia-
mond thin ﬁlms with sizes down to hundreds of square
microns [27]. To pattern diamond membranes with
200− 300 nm thickness, the diamond membranes are ad-
hered to a Si substrate, the patterned Si mask is put on
the diamond membrane using the pick-and-place tech-
nique, photonic patterns are transferred into the diamond
membrane by oxygen RIE, the Si mask is mechanically
removed, and ﬁnally isotropic SF6 plasma is applied to
undercut the etched diamond photonic structure for op-
tical measurements.

5

F. Angular Etching and Isotropic Etching

Techniques

As discussed above, the fabrication of large uniform
thin ﬁlm diamond samples has not yet been developed.
This limits the fabrication of diamond devices that guide
and capture light when 2D or 3D conﬁnement is required.
To achieve the needed optical isolation for photonic struc-
tures in bulk diamond, and to circumvent the need for
large thin ﬁlm diamond samples for patterning, alterna-
tive fabrication approaches have been demonstrated that
enable the monolithic patterning of waveguide and cav-
ity structures into bulk diamond. One design concept is
based on suspended devices with triangular cross-section.
Such designs can be realized by angled etching, either by
rotating the sample [28] and milling by FIB, or by guid-
ing the trajectory of ions with a Faraday cage [69] in
an RIE process. Angular etching was used to demon-
strate race-track patterns with ultra high quality fac-
tor (Q factor) [69] and one-dimensional (1D) nanobeam
cavities[70, 96].

Another technique to produce free-standing structures
is a quasi-isotropic oxygen undercut. This technique is
based on the combination of standard vertical RIE and
zero forward bias oxygen plasma etching at an elevated
sample temperature. This zero bias etching takes ad-
vantage of the low directionality of the oxygen ions and
the thermally activated diamond surface leading to a
quasi-isotropic chemical etching eﬀect. This technique
has enabled high-Q cavities in a nanofabricated pho-
tonic disk [32], and high mechanical quality factor waveg-
uides [71].

IV. SYNTHETIC CREATION OF DEFECT

CENTERS

Color centers can be found in natural or as-grown syn-
thetic diamond. However, for high quality samples with
very low defect concentrations (e.g. N ¡ 1ppm) the con-
centration of color centers is too low for many of the in-
tended applications [97], and the distribution is random.
Controlled creation of defect centers is important for the
fabrication of photonic constituents in a scalable way and
for the extension beyond present proof-of-principle imple-
mentations. One can diﬀerentiate between methods that
rely on (i) ’activation’ of incorporated defects in as-grown
diamond [98], (ii) controlled incorporation of defects dur-
ing growth [74], and (iii) controlled implantation of de-
fects after diamond growth [99]. Combinations of these
methods have also been demonstrated. For example, ’ac-
tivation’ methods can be combined with the controlled
or targeted ’placement’ methods [100]. A very power-
ful tool is the spatially deterministic creation via focused
ion beam or masked implantation [101]. These methods
enable high yield creation of nanostructures with incor-
porated defect centers.

The synthetic creation of defect centers depends on

a wide range of parameters; annealing temperature, va-
cancy density, and local charge environment have all been
shown to aﬀect NV creation. While many works ad-
dress NV formation as a function of these parameters,
the detailed mechanism of color center creation is still
not deﬁnitively understood. Until recently, it was com-
monly proposed that diﬀusing vacancies are trapped by
substitutional atoms (e.g., nitrogen) to create a color
center (e.g., the NV) [102–105]. Therefore, the estab-
lished recipes for creating defect centers rely on anneal-
ing above 600◦C, at which temperature vacancies become
mobile [106, 107]. This mechanism has been questioned
by advanced density functional theory (DFT) calcula-
tions that were applied to determine the formation and
excitation energies, the charge transition levels, and the
diﬀusion activation energies for nitrogen- and vacancy-
related defects in diamond [108]. These calculations
concluded that irradiation of diamond is more likely
to directly create NV defects, and not isolated vacan-
cies. Direct NV creation has been shown without ther-
mal annealing by irradiation of diamond that has been
implanted with nitrogen ions with low-energy electrons
(2−30 keV) [109] and beams of swift heavy ions (∼1 GeV,
∼4 MeV/u) [110]. However, this model of direct NV
creation is contradicted by other works. For example,
experimental results still show evidence of high vacancy
mobility and indicate formation of NVs after implanta-
tion during annealing [111, 112]. Further fundamental
investigation of defect center creation is required to un-
derstand this process in full detail.

A. Annealing Temperature and Optical Properties

Annealing temperatures are a crucial tool to control
the concentration of diﬀerent types of lattice and crystal
defects. While it is in principle suﬃcient to anneal sam-
ples just above above 600◦C, temperatures around 850◦C
were chosen for most demonstrations over the past years.
Recently, temperatures up to 1200◦C are being applied
to reduce strain and lattice defects, leading to increased
spin-coherence times of NV−s [113]. For the SiV− this
leads to a narrowing of the inhomogeneous distribution
from 3− 4 nm (after 800◦C anneal) to 0.03 nm (15 GHz,
after 1100◦C anneal), and results in nearly lifetime-
linewidths [114]. Furthermore, above
limited optical
1100◦C the concentration of di-vacancies is reduced as
their bonds are broken. Di-vacancies are suspected to in-
ﬂuence the photostability of NV− centers [108] and spec-
tral diﬀusion properties of the NV− ZPL. For N implan-
tation doses of 109/cm2, energies of 85 keV and anneal-
ing up to 1200◦C, stable optical transitions of the NV−
ZPL with linewidth down to 27 MHz have been demon-
strated [115], which is close to the lifetime-limited emis-
sion linewidth of about ∼13 MHz [116]. Charge-state
stability has been shown to be directly eﬀected by sur-
face termination, with ﬂuorination leading to a higher
concentration of stable NV− centers [117].
It is com-

6

monly assumed that surface treatment also aﬀects the
NV− ZPL stability [115]. However this has not been sys-
tematically studied in the literature at the time of this
review.

B. Activation of Incorporated Ions in As-Grown

Diamond

Defect centers can be formed by the creation of addi-
tional vacancies in doped diamond by irradiation with en-
ergetic neutrons, electrons, or ions [98, 118, 119] in com-
bination with a subsequent annealing step above 600◦C.
In this process, ions already present in the diamond lat-
tice can be combined with the newly created vacancies.
Early work used electron and Ga+ beams to irradi-
ate N-rich type-Ib diamond to create vacancies and in-
directly defect centers, in particular NV centers, from
already incorporated N ions. For an unpatterned dia-
mond surface, a spatial lateral resolution below 180 nm
was achieved [98]. Controlling the creation depth relative
to the surface is challenging, as lattice defects are created
along the path of the particle in the lattice, and the scat-
tering cross-section varies for every species. Scanning
focused He-ion irradiation and subsequent annealing was
also applied for the creation of NV centers [120, 121].
While these works achieve spatially localized NV cre-
ation, large areas, in particular entire samples, can also
be irradiated to create large ensembles. Such large area
irradiation was, for example, used to create a millimeter-
scale diamond sample with about 16 ppm (correspond-
ing to 2.8 ∗ 1018 cm−3) NVs [103]. Such samples with
large ensembles of spins enable magnetic-ﬁeld measure-
ments with sensitivities down to < 0.5 nT Hz−1/2 in the
low-frequency regime around 1 Hz [18, 20]. For eﬀec-
tive sensor volumes of 8.5 × 10−4 mm3 and ensembles
of N ∼ 1011 NV−s, photon-shot-noise-limited magnetic-
√
ﬁeld sensitivity was demonstrated with a sensitivity of
0.9 pT/

Hz for ac signals of f = 20 kHz.

C. Controlled Incorporation of Ions during

Growth: Delta Doping

An alternative way of controlling the depth of de-
fect centers relative to the diamond surface is delta-
doping. This has been experimentally demonstrated
for the NV− [74] and the SiV− [75]. For the NV, a
nanometer-thick nitrogen-doped layer is created by the
controlled introduction of N2 gas during plasma en-
hanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) diamond
growth. Similarly, SiV−s are created by controlling the
Si concentration during the growth, giving control of
the concentration over two orders of magnitude. Sub-
sequent electron irradiation and annealing leads to for-
mation of NV centers in a thin layer. This ﬁnal NV
creation process causes less crystal damage than direct
ion implantation methods [113], and is therefore advanta-

geous for both long spin-coherence times and stable and
narrow spectral linewidth. Delta-doped diamond thin-
ﬁlms have been applied to couple ensembles of NV−s to
a nanobeam photonic crystal cavity, demonstrating that
this technique could be interesting for single-NV cavity
coupled systems [76]. However, in this work conﬁnement
was demonstrated in 1D only, but could be combined
with FIB or ebeam ’activation’ to achieve 3D conﬁne-
ment. For high-resolution sensing in ﬂuids, delta-doping
enabled engineered diamond probes with diameter and
height ranging from 100 nm to 700 nm and 500 nm to
2 µm, respectively [122].

Besides incorporating atomic defects into the lattice,
the concept of delta doping can also be applied to engi-
neer speciﬁc nuclear spin environments, e.g., nanometer-
thick layers of 13C in ultra-pure natural abundance 13C
diamond by switching between puriﬁed 12CH4 and 13CH4
(99.99%) source gases [74] during diamond PECVD
growth. This is promising for the creation of a con-
trolled number or distribution of 13C nuclear spin mem-
ories, which could be used for spin-spin entanglement,
quantum error correction protocols or for quantum sim-
ulators [48, 123–126].

D.

Implantation of Ions

The most common method for the creation of color
centers is direct ion implantation of a color center con-
stituent – for example, N, Si, Cr, or other ions [99, 127–
129] – into the diamond crystal. Subsequent annealing
creates defect centers. This method enables control of
the center depth with respect to the surface, as can be
determined via SRIM simulations [130, 131]. The ﬁrst
demonstration of this method used N ions with ∼2 MeV
energy, corresponding to an implantation depth of about
1.15 µm [127]. Shallow NV−s were created with 7 keV ion
energy, corresponding to an implantation depth of about
10 nm, and the typical 15N 2-fold hyperﬁne splitting was
demonstrated, in contrast to a 3-fold hyperﬁne splitting
for natural 14N defects [128]. Single photon emission was
demonstrated from single SiV− centers created via ion
implantation of 29Si ions [132]. To further understand
the creation process of color centers via ion implantation,
the creation eﬃciency of NVs as a function of ion energy
was experimentally determined [104] and compared to
theoretical models, leading to 25% NV creation yield per
implanted nitrogen ion [133]. All these examples have
not demonstrated control of the lateral position of cre-
ated color centers.

E. Targeted Creation of Defect Centers

The relative alignment of color centers to each other
is important for the deterministic arrangement in an ar-
ray, in particular if these centers are used as a grid of
sensors or as a network of entangled spins. Depend-

7

Figure 3. Implantation through silicon hard mask. a) Fab-
rication scheme from silicon mask undercut to implantation
for Samples A and B. b) SRIM simulation of implanted ni-
trogen. Vertical cross section of the mask and implantation
region (left); close-up of nitrogen post-implantation ion on
Sample A (center, 6 keV) and Sample B (right, 20 keV) with
lateral straggle of 3.1 and 11 nm, respectively. Color bar: nor-
malized nitrogen density. c) Top-down SEM images of mask
following ALD, showing a minimum mask width of 3.1 nm.
Reprinted with permission from Reference [101]. c(cid:13)2015 ACS
Publications.

ing on the application, lattice constants as low as tens
of nanometers are required with precise positioning at
each lattice site. One way to achieve this goal is the tar-
geted implantation through 30 nm apertures in the tip
of an atomic force microscope (AFM) [134]. This AFM
method was combined with stimulated emission depletion
microscopy [135] to demonstrate nanometer-scale map-
ping of randomly distributed NV−s within a less than
100 nm diameter spot [136].

A diﬀerent method for the precise relative alignment
of color centers is the implantation through large-scale
lithographically deﬁned apertures,
for example, EBL
written apertures in beam resist [137] or EBL patterned
Si-masks. In the latter experiment, ensembles of individ-
ually resolvable NV−s were created with nanometer-scale
apertures in ultrahigh-aspect ratio implantation masks.
These masks were fabricated by narrowing down aper-
tures via atomic-layer-deposition (ALD) of alumina, en-
abling a Gaussian FWHM spatial distribution of about
26.3 nm, thus, reaching the lateral implantation straggle

limit [101], see Fig. 3.

Irradiation is not limited to as-grown diamond but can
also be used to increase the creation yield of delta-doped
samples. For example, 12C implantation of a delta-doped
sample post-growth, creates additional lattice defects,
and individual NV−s can be localized within a volume
of (180 nm)3 in an unpatterned diamond at a predeter-
mined position deﬁned by an implantation aperture [112].
Alternatively, by combining delta-doping for vertical con-
ﬁnement, and electron irradiation in a transmission elec-
tron microscope (TEM) for lateral conﬁnement, NV−s
were created in a volume of less than 4 nm x 1 µm2 [100].

A very versatile tool for the creation of color center ar-
rays is focused ion beam implantation. It is maskless and
enables the implantation of almost arbitrary patterns.
Similar to the electron beam in an scanning electron mi-
croscope, a focused ion beam can be applied to control
the position and concentration of ions. This method has
been used to implant N ions within a spot size of approx-
imately 100 nm [68]. Similarly, arrays of silicon-vacancy
centers were created by low-energy focused ion beam im-
plantation [138]. These are promising methods towards
the targeted coupling of single defect centers to nanos-
tructures.

F. Deterministic Coupling To Optical Cavities

The deterministic coupling of a single or few color
centers to a photonic nanostructure,
in particular a
high-Q cavity, is one of the most important prerequisites
for the upscaling of QI architectures. Such deterministic
coupling was recently demonstrated by fabrication of
a photonic crystal cavity around a pre-characterized
SiV− by FIB milling [139] enabling a resonant Purcell
enhancement of the zero-phonon transition by a factor
of 19, mainly limited by the positioning accuracy.
To achieve a higher positioning accuracy,
targeted
implantation of ions into a photonic crystal cavity was
realized with the AFM method discussed earlier, and
Purcell enhancement of single NV− centers was demon-
strated [140]. A more scalable fabrication method for
cavity-defect center systems is based on an implantation
mask with small apertures of 30 − 70 nm in diameter for
targeting a large number of cavity mode maxima with a
wide 15N beam [141]. By combining the nanocavity etch
mask with an implantation mask into a single physical
mask, RIE etching (see Sec. III) and implantation can be
carried out subsequently without the need of challenging
re-alignment processes for two-mask processes. With
this method, intensity enhancement of a factor up to 20
was demonstrated (Fig. 4) [142].

8

Figure 4. Targeted creation of single NV− defect centers in
the mode maximum of L3 photonic crystal cavities. The illus-
tration indicates an ideal NV−-cavity system: In the center
of each cavity, a single NV− was created. The spectrum is
an example of the experimental implementation that yielded
in a high number of NV−-cavity systems. For certain fabri-
cation runs, most of the cavities in large arrays of more then
100 cavities were coupled to a single or few NV−s and showed
intensity enhancement of the phonon sideband by a factor of
5 to 20 [141]. Adapted reprint with permission from Refer-
ence [142]. c(cid:13)2015 OSA Publications.

G. Dipole Orientation of Defects

To achieve optimal light-matter coupling in cavities
and other photonic systems, the defect centers must not
only have precise spatial positing with respect to the op-
tical ﬁeld, but their emission dipoles must also be cor-
rectly aligned. Each color center has an individual atom-
vacancy composition and geometry, and therefore a cer-
tain emission dipole orientation. For instance, the NV
center has four possible orientations with respect to the
crystal lattice. Naturally occurring NV populations have
a random distribution of orientations.
In the last few
years, research has been done to control the orientation
of NV centers during CVD growth and thus increase
Initial studies showed that diamond
the device yield.
grown with homoepitaxial CVD growth on [110]
[143]
and [100] [144] oriented substrates mainly supports two
NV orientations when the growth parameters are con-
trolled precisely. Further work showed that for NV cen-
ters created during CVD of diamond on [111] surfaces,
microwave plasma-assisted CVD yields 94% of NV cen-
ters along a single crystallographic direction [145]. A
diﬀerent study showed that 97% perfect alignment can
be obtained by controlling the CVD growth parameters
precisely [146]. This research is promising, and if the
exact mechanisms can be understood and these samples
can be made routinely with high yield, this technology
can help increase quantum sensing sensitivity as well as
interaction with fabricated photonic structures.

V. DIAMOND DEVICES I: ENHANCED LIGHT

COLLECTION

In this section, we will focus on micro- and nanopho-
tonic structures to increase the collection eﬃciency of
photons emitted by defect centers. A higher collection
eﬃciency leads to improved entanglement rates for both

62064066068070072074076078005001000150020002500Wavelength (nm)Intensity (counts)dataY1 vs. dataX1Excluded dataY1 vs. dataX1Trialz_600_L3D_HighP20 copy 120xemission-based and absorption-based quantum communi-
cation applications and also to higher read-out ﬁdelities
for quantum sensing applications [147, 148]. Without any
modiﬁcation of the diamond surface, the high refractive
index (∼ 2.4) of diamond results in a relatively small an-
gle (∼ 24.6◦) of total internal reﬂection at diamond-air
interfaces, allowing only a small part of the overall emis-
sion to exit the diamond. Even for very shallow NV−s
(several 10s of nm in depth) relevant for sensing appli-
cations, emission into the air is unfavorable due to the
directed emission of a dipole into the higher refractive
index material [149–151]. To overcome this limitation,
a variety of photonic structures have been implemented
at the diamond-air interface. A selection of devices and
methods is discussed in more detail in this section.

A. Waveguiding Structures

One approach for overcoming limited collection eﬃ-
ciencies at diamond-air interfaces are cylinder- or cone-
like structures etched into diamond. Depending on their
shape and aspect ratio, they are referred to as diamond
microcylinders [29], nanowires [23, 30], nanopillars [152],
nanobeams [148], or nanowaveguides [153].

Conceptually, these structures are micro- or nanometer
size single-mode waveguides: the defect couples directly
to a single waveguide (WG) mode, while emission into
other modes is suppressed. This enables eﬃcient coupling
to that speciﬁc WG mode. For a relatively narrow emis-
sion line of a few nanometers, e.g. the ZPL of an NV−
or SiV−, the coupling eﬃciency can be up to 86% [154].
From the WG mode the light is then either launched
into free-space, bulk diamond, or another guiding pho-
tonic structure, enabling high overall collection eﬃcien-
cies. Such structures can be used as standalone devices
as discussed in this section or can be integrated in hybrid
photonic circuits and ﬁber architectures (Sec. VIII).

The ﬁrst demonstration of microcylinders with the
high aspect ratio of 8 (25 for exceptional cases) did
not yet consider photonic applications but demon-
strated smooth and high-rate reactive ion etching of
diamond [29]. Numerical modelling was later used to
study the coupling of an NV− to the optical modes
of a nanowire, and to determine the optimal nanowire
parameters for large photon collection eﬃciency. For
nanowires with diameters of 180 nm to 230 nm and for
s-polarized dipoles with nanometer emission linewidth,
more than 80% of emitted photons can couple to the
nanowire mode [30]. Such nanowires were realized in the
same work in both bulk single crystal and polycrystalline
diamond and were applied to demonstrate high photon
collection eﬃciencies of an NV− with a detected photon
ﬂux of about 168 ± 37 kcts/s, ten times greater than for
bulk diamond while using ten times less laser excitation
power (∼58 µW under the same excitation conditions
(objective lens with a numerical aperture of 0.95) [23].
An improvement to about 304 kcts/s photon ﬂux in sat-

9
uration was achieved with NV−s located about ∼ 1 µm
away from the nanowire end by combining ion implanta-
tion and top-down diamond nanofabrication [155].

These experiments were realized on [100]-oriented dia-
mond, where the NV− dipole is inclined to the nanowire
axis, limiting the NV− dipole coupling to the nanowire
mode, hence limiting the overall photon collection eﬃ-
ciency. This limitation was overcome by fabricating such
nano-structures on [111]-oriented diamond for which the
electric dipole can be in-plane, increasing saturated ﬂuo-
rescence count rates to over 106 counts per second [152].
Spin coherence measurements of NV−s in the sample be-
fore and after fabrication demonstrated the quality of
their nano-fabrication procedure, with average spin co-
herence times remaining unaﬀected at ∼ 200 µs. A fur-
ther study in controlling the shape of nano pillars and its
corresponding guiding properties was realized with EBL
and inductively coupled plasma RIE with a two resin
technology and the usage of a titanium metal mask [156].

By integrating a nanopillar into a diamond AFM can-
tilever and additionally positioning a single NV− at the
tip of the nanopillar close to the diamond surface, a
robust scanning sensor for nanoscale imaging was real-
ized, demonstrating imaging of magnetic domains with
widths of 25 nm, and magnetic ﬁeld sensitivities down to
56 nT/Hz1/2 at a frequency of 33 kHz [157]. For high-
resolution sensing in ﬂuid, cylindrical diamonds particles
with diameter (height) ranging from 100 nm to 700 nm
(500 nm to 2 µm), were fabricated with shallow-doped
NV− centers [122]. The defects in these nanostructures
retained spin coherence times ¿700 µs, enabling an ex-
perimental DC magnetic ﬁeld sensitivity of 9 µT/
Hz in
ﬂuid.

√

Nanobeam waveguides with a triangular cross-section
of 300 nm width and 20 µm length were fabricated as free-
standing structures in bulk diamond with an angled reac-
tive ion etching [69], and were placed on a cover slip for oil
immersion spectroscopy. By adding 50-nm deep notches
every 2µm along the beam, guided light is scattered to be
collected with high numerical aperture (NA=1.49) collec-
tion optics, leading to saturation photon count rates of
about 0.95 Mcts/s [148] . These structures were used to
demonstrate eﬃcient spin readout of NV− centers based
on conversion of the electronic spin state of the NV− to a
charge-state distribution, followed by single-shot readout
of the charge state [148].

An asymmetric waveguide design was demonstrated
for even higher collection eﬃciencies for monolithic bulk
structures and close to the surface sensing applica-
tions [153]. These pillar-shaped nanowaveguides have a
top diameter of 400 nm and a bottom diameter of up to
900 nm. This variation modiﬁes the eﬀective refractive
index along the pillar as well as the propagation constant
for each mode [158], enabling saturation photon count
rates of up to ∼ 1.7 Mcts/s. The temperature depen-
dency of the T1 relaxation time of a single shallow NV−
electronic spin was determined with this structure.

B. Solid Immersion Lenses

In contrast to collecting the defect emission via cou-
pling to a waveguide mode, solid immersion lenses (SILs)
enable eﬃcient outcoupling from bulk diamond by pro-
viding perpendicular angles of incidence at the diamond-
air interface. In the simplest implementation, the emis-
sion pattern from a color center in diamond is not al-
tered, but a higher fraction of light is emitted into the
free-space. Although so-called Weierstrass [159], and el-
liptical [160] designs promise higher collection eﬃciencies
compared to the standard hemispheric shape, in diamond
only hemispheric designs have been realized. One can dif-
ferentiate between microscopic [161] (a few to a few ten
µm in size) and macroscopic SILs [151].

Microlens arrays were ﬁrst realized by fabrication of
natural diamond by a combination of photoresist reﬂow
and plasma etching with lens diameters ranging from 10
to 100 µm [161]. Concave and convex microlenses with
diameters ranging from 10 to 100 µm were fabricated
with hot-embossing and photoresist re-ﬂow, followed by
ICP etching were applied [162].

Microscopic lenses oﬀer the advantage of micro-
integration and straight-forward fabrication via FIB [24]
enabling fabrication around a pre-characterized defect
centers [163]. However, their extraction eﬃciencies are
more sensitive to surface roughness and non-ideal shapes
than macroscopic lenses. Still, a roughly 10-fold enhance-
ment of the photon detection rate was achieved with 5 µm
SILs [24]. Recently, by further optimizing FIB fabrica-
tion and alignment parameters, position accuracies of
better than 100 nm (lateral) and 500 nm (axial) were
demonstrated, leading to saturation count rates of about
1 Mcts/s for a single NV− center oriented perpendicular
to the [111] cut diamond surface [164]. The determinis-
tic alignment relative to color centers, high collection eﬃ-
ciencies, and relative ease of fabrication have made SILs
a valuable tool for QI protocols where eﬃcient photon
collection is of crucial importance, for example, quantum
interference experiments for the heralded entanglement
of distant NV− qubits [57] and unconditional quantum
teleportation between them [58].
SILs were also demonstrated for the SiV− center, en-
abling higher photon collection eﬃciencies for funda-
mental investigations of the electronic structure of the
SiV− [165] and for the demonstration of multiple spec-
trally identical SiV− with spectral overlap of up to 91%
and nearly transform-limited excitation linewidths [75].
A macroscopic 1 mm in diameter diamond SIL with
surface ﬂatness better than 10 nm (rms) was fabricated
with combination of laser and mechanical processing
stages, leading to a saturation count rate of 493 kcts/s
from a single NV− [166]. Macroscopic SILs from other
materials with high refractive index such as gallium phos-
phite (GaP, n = 3.3) can also be applied to bulk or thin
ﬁlm diamond if the surfaces are smooth and ﬂat enough
to prevent airgaps of more than a few 10 nanometers. For
thin ﬁlm diamond, this leads to a more eﬃcient collection

10

due to the asymmetric refractive index proﬁle around the
color center (one side GaP, on the other side air), pro-
viding a broadband antenna mechanism for color centers.
For a single NV−, saturation count rates of 633 kcts/s
were demonstrated [167].

Figure 5. Bullseye grating structure for high collection ef-
ﬁciency of single defect center emission. a) Illustration. b)
Parameters of the structure, a denotes the lattice constant,
and gap the air spacing between circular gratings. c) Finite
diﬀerence time domain (FDTD) simulation of the electric ﬁeld
intensity in the x = 0 plane with refractive indices correspond-
ing diamond (bullseye), to air (above), and glass (below).
Here, a = 330 nm, and gap = 99 nm. A dipole emitter was
placed in the center of the bullseye grating and was oriented
along the horizontal direction. d) Saturation measurements
from a single NV− enhanced by the ’bullseye’ grating struc-
ture in diamond membranes. Reprinted with permission from
Reference [168]. c(cid:13)2015 ACS Publications.

C. Circular Grating Structure

To further increase the collection eﬃciency and over-
all single photon count rates from stand-alone photonic
devices, a circular ‘bullseye’ grating structure fabricated
in a diamond membrane was placed directly on a glass
coverslip [168], as indicated in Fig. 5. The periodic grat-
ing structure leads to constructive interference of the
membrane-guided emission into the out-of-plane direc-
tion. Finite diﬀerence time domain (FDTD) simulations
indicate (Fig. 5c) that up to 70% of the ZPL emission of
a horizontally oriented dipole emitter is guided into the
glass coverslip, aided in part by the higher refractive in-
dex contrast of the diamond-air interface [151]. Fabrica-

dtion of these devices is carried out with the methods dis-
cussed in Section III. The bullseye gratings were analyzed
in a home-built confocal microscope setup ( NA= 1.3,
Nikon Plan Fluor), and two methods are applied to deter-
mine the upper and lower bounds of the saturated single
photon detection rates. As upper (lower) bound, a single
photon collection rate of about 4.56 Mcps (2.70 Mcps)
at saturation was determined. The saturation curves are
plotted in Fig. 5b. Moreover, the high quality fabrica-
tion preserves the spin properties of the included NV−
centers, with measured electron spin coherence times of
1.7±0.1s [168].

VI. DIAMOND DEVICES II: OPTICAL

CAVITIES

Optical resonators enable control of the spectral emis-
sion properties of optical emitters and enhancing light-
matter interaction of single spin systems is enabled by
optical resonators. Applying the concepts of optical
resonators to diamond photonics allows the tailoring
of the light emission properties of defect centers, en-
hancing their ﬂuorescence emission rates, and establish-
ing eﬃcient spin-photon interfaces, particularly impor-
tant to correlate single spin states with single quantum
states of light. There is also a proposal to improve
the eﬃciency and ﬁdelity of the ground state spin of
an NV− spin using cavity-enhanced reﬂection measure-
ments [169]. A large variety of resonator types ranging
from micro- to nanoscopic designs have been introduced,
such as whispering gallery resonators, microscopic open
cavity designs, and photonic crystal cavities. A concep-
tual overview of diﬀerent cavity designs can be found in
a recent review article [170]. The relevant cavity parame-
ters are the cavity quality factor Q ∼ λ/δλ and the cavity
mode volume Vmode which directly inﬂuence the dipole-
cavity interaction, e.g.
the spontaneous emission rate
enhancement FZPL is proportional to Vmode ∼ (λ/n)3.
For a large F max
ZPL we will focus on photonic crystal (PhC)
nanocavities, as they enable small mode volumes [171],
Vmode ∼ (λ/n)3, and large quality factors Q.

An emitter-cavity system can be described by the
Jaynes-Cummings model
in the Markov approxima-
tion [172], and the Purcell factor quantiﬁes the emit-
ters spontaneous emission (SE) suppression or enhance-
ment [173]. In the strong Purcell regime, in which the
emitter is coupled mainly to one optical mode, the SE
can be signiﬁcantly enhanced and the overall Purcell en-
hancement exceeds one (F > 1) [174, 175].
When the NV− ZPL is coupled to a cavity the SE rate

is enhanced according to:

FZPL = ξF max
ZPL

(1)

1

(cid:16) λcav
1 + 4Q2(λZPL/λcav − 1)2

(cid:17)3

Q

where F max
spectrally-resolved SE rate enhancement [176] and ξ =

ZPL = 3

is the maximum

Vmode

4π2

n

11

(cid:16) |µ·E|

(cid:17)2

quantiﬁes the angular and spatial overlap

|µ||Emax|
between the dipole moment (µ) and the cavity mode elec-
tric ﬁeld (E).

In contrast to atoms, quantum dots, and defect
centers with narrow emission lines on the order of the
cavity linewidth, the NV− emission has two major
contributions,
the narrow zero phonon line (ZPL)
emission around 637 nm and a broad phonon sideband
emission with a full-width at half maximum (FWHM)
of about 100nm. The ratio between the two emission
bands is described by the Debye-Waller factor DW
which is only about 3 % for the NV−, hence only a
few percent
[177] of the overall photoluminescence
(PL) are emitted into the ZPL. Therefore, one has to
diﬀerentiate between the overall Purcell enhancement F
and the spectrally-resolved spontaneous emission (SE)
rate enhancement FZPL = F/DW around the ZPL.

A. Whispering-Gallery-Mode Resonators

In an early demonstration of a whispering-gallery-
mode resonator, diamond microdisks were fabricated
into nanocrystalline diamond via FIB milling. Resonant
modes with Q-factors of about 100 were observed near
the NV− ZPL around 637 nm via detection of photolu-
minescence and near 1550 nm via evanescent ﬁber cou-
pling [178]. Suspended single crystal diamond microdisks
were fabricated by implantation of 180 keV energy boron
ions to create subsurface damage and homoepitaxial di-
amond overgrowth was applied for required microdisk
thickness. The ion-damaged layer was selectively re-
moved by electrochemical etching and the disks were pat-
terned via ICP-RIE [84]. The ﬁrst resonant enhancement
of the NV− ZPL was also realized with a single crystal di-
amond resonator that was patterned via EBL and oxygen
RIE. A 10-fold enhancement was demonstrated, marking
an important step of controlling the NV− emission via
coupling to optical resonators [25]. Further work with
whispering gallery resonators coupled to waveguides will
be discussed in the context of hybrid photonic systems
in Section VIII.

B. Thin Film Photonic Crystal Cavities

The ﬁrst

fabrication and optical characterization
of photonic crystal cavities were demonstrated with
nanocrystalline diamond, and fundamental cavity modes
near the NV− ZPL with Q-factors up to 585 were ob-
served [84]. 1D-nanobeam photonic crystal cavities with
theoretical Q-factors of up to 106 were introduced and
fabricated via two diﬀerent FIB milling methods [179].
The ﬁrst demonstration of coupling a single defect cen-
ter to a PhC cavity was demonstrated by FIB milling
of single crystal diamond for an L7 cavity design and a

12

to 6000, enhancement of the NV− ZPL ﬂuorescence by
a factor of ∼ 7 was demonstrated [181]. Such waveg-
uide based 1D-cavities enable the direct integration into
a photonic architecture and are therefore interesting for
eﬃcient coupling and transmission experiments. A 1D-
nanocavity fabricated by transferred hard mask lithogra-
phy [31] and oxygen RIE (Fig. 6) enabled the demonstra-
tion of Q-factors approaching 10,000, enhancement of the
ZPL transition rate of ∼ 62, and a beta-factor β = 0.54,
indicating operation in the strong Purcell regime [27].
Furthermore, electron spin manipulation was realized for
the ﬁrst time for cavity-coupled NV−s with coherence
times exceeding 200 µs with on-chip microwave striplines
for eﬃcient spin control, providing a long-lived quantum
system [27]. This spin-photon interface experimentally
validates the promise of long spin coherence NV−-cavity
systems for scalable quantum repeaters and quantum
networks.

C. Photonic Crystal Cavities in Bulk Diamond

Due to the experimental diﬃculties of creating large
scale, high-quality, membranes of uniform and control-
lable thickness, many groups have begun to explore
the fabrication of photonic crystal cavities in bulk dia-
mond. First implementations focused on creating mem-
branes through ion damage of the diamond layer, and
subsequent etching using FIB milling, as introduced in
Sec. III B. This enabled photonic crystals etched from
bulk diamond with Q∼ 500 near the NV− ZPL [182].
However, as discussed previously the lattice damage in
this method is currently high and will most likely hinder
the spin and spectral properties of defect centers.

Three step tilted FIB milling, in which the stage is
tilted with respect to the ion milling beam in two di-
rections to achieve an undercut, and a last un-tilted
mill step is used to etch the photonic crystal holes en-
abled nanobeam cavities which were separated from the
bulk [28, 67]. This technology enabled cavities with Q’s
of a few hundred, matching theoretical predictions across
multiple modes [28]. Simulations also showed that the
triangular geometry that results from the tilted FIB etch-
ing can support high Qs (> 106) [28].

While FIB processing of diamond has enabled cavities
in membrane and bulk diamond, it is an inherently low
output process, as it is a serial etching process. The de-
velopment of angled RIE etching with an angled cage
allowed the extension of RIE etching techniques to tri-
angular nanobeam cavities in bulk diamond. With this
technique, cavities were realized with resonances near the
NV− ZPL of a few thousand [70, 96]. High Q cavities
(loaded Q> 180, 000) have also been demonstrated in
the infrared [70].

Figure 6.
a) The diamond photonic crystal (PhC) cavities
are integrated on a Si substrate with metallic striplines for
coherent spin control and optically addressed using a confo-
cal set up with 532nm continuous-wave excitation and pho-
toluminescence collected > 630 nm. The inset shows the
nitrogen-vacancy (NV)-nanocavity system with g the NV−-
nanocavity Rabi frequency, γ the NV− natural spontaneous
emission (SE) decay rate and κ the cavity intensity decay rate.
The NV− consists of a substitutional nitrogen atom adjacent
to a vacancy in the diamond lattice. I0 denotes the current
through the stripline, and h the membrane thickness. b) Sim-
ulated electric ﬁeld intensity for the optimized fundamental
cavity mode. The PhC has a width W and a lattice con-
stant varying from 0.9a at the centre to a ∼ 220 nm over ﬁve
periods. c) Scanning electron micrograph of a representative
cavity structure. The scale bar represents 1 mm. d) Measured
cavity resonance (dots) with a quality factor Q = 9, 900± 200
from a Lorentzian ﬁt (blue line). e) System B at maximum
Purcell enhancement. The inset shows a close-up of the spec-
trum. The ZPL transitions of four individual NV−s (includ-
ing the cavity-coupled ZPL) are visible, each with a diﬀerent
strain-induced spectral position. The accumulated phonon
sidebands of these NV−s are also apparent. f) High resolution
spectra of system B in cavity-coupled and uncoupled cases.
The insets show the lifetime measurements corresponding to
τon ∼ 6.7 ns and τof f ∼ 18.4 ns. Reprinted with permission
from Reference [27]. c(cid:13)2015 Nature Publishing Group.

SiV− center with ﬂuorescence intensity enhancement by
a factor of 2.8 [26]. The demonstration of the 70-fold en-
hancement of the ZPL transition rate of a cavity-coupled
NV− marked an important step for cavity QED with de-
fect centers in diamond, realized with a photonic crystal
cavity fabricated in monocrystalline diamond using stan-
dard semiconductor fabrication techniques. The coupled
NV− had a single-scan linewidth of a few GHz, deter-
mined with photoluminescence excitation measurements
[180]. By coupling a single NV− to a waveguide based
1D-nanobeam photonic crystal cavity with Q-factors up

Wavelength (nm)01234637638639Intensity (a.u.)637638639010201Time (ns)Norm. counts (log)010201Time (ns)Norm. counts (log)τ = 6.7 nsτ = 18.4 ns60070080000.10.260065070075080001234567Wavelength (nm)Intensity (a.u.)efQ = 3300 ± 50ZPL + resonanceZPLResonance(on)(off)|E|2aw1 µmWavelength (nm)765.5766766.5767IntensityQ = 9,900 ± 200abcdhgκγVNC12IωVII. ALL-DIAMOND PHOTONIC SYSTEMS

B. Photonic Systems in Bulk Diamond

13

In contrast to diamond stand-alone devices, we will
discuss diamond photonic systems comprising more than
one optical element. This can, for example, be a ring-
resonator coupled to waveguide. We make the distinc-
tion from stand-alone devices, as the extension of pho-
tonic systems can lead to complex architectures that will
enable on-chip functionalities such as generation, entan-
glement, routing, and gating.

Two approaches have been demonstrated for the fabri-
cation of all-diamond integrated photonic architectures.
The ﬁrst one is based on photonic elements etched
into diamond-on-insulator or free-standing diamond thin-
ﬁlms. The second approach is based on fabricating mono-
lithic, suspended 3D structures into bulk diamond sam-
ples. For more details on the patterning methods, please
refer to Sec. III.

A. Photonic Systems in Diamond Thin Films

Silicon-on-insulator fabrication technology has enabled
many high quality photonic structures by providing high
index contrast and a stable platform. Diamond ﬁlms sus-
pended over air or placed on SiO2 substrates provides
similar index contrast and stability, and photonic device
designs have been shown to translate with ease. The
main disadvantage is the requirement of large, single-
crystal diamond ﬁlms with uniform thickness, which
are diﬃcult to fabricate as discussed in Sec. III B. De-
spite this challenge, ﬁrst proof-of-principle experiments
have been demonstrated. Haussmann et al. realized a
nanophotonic network in a single crystal diamond ﬁlm
by integrating a high-Q ring resonator (Q ∼ 12600) with
an optical waveguide containing grating in- and outcou-
plers. A single NV− center inside the ring-resonator was
coupled to its mode and single photon generation and
routing was demonstrated with an overall photon extrac-
tion eﬃciency of about 10% [183]. In a similar system,
Faraon et al. showed strong enhancement of the zero-
phonon line of NV− centers coupled to the ring reso-
nance [184]. By replacing grating couplers with polymer
spot-size converters at the end of the diamond waveg-
uides, oﬀ-chip ﬁber coupling as low as 1 dB/facet were
demonstrated for wavelengths around 1550 nm. The in-
tegrated race-track resonators had quality factors up to
∼ 250, 000 and signatures of nonlinear eﬀects were ob-
served [185]. By coupling a second waveguide to a ring-
resonator and by locally tuning the temperature of the
diamond waveguides an optical-thermal switch was real-
ized with switching eﬃciencies of 31% at the drop and
73% at the through port [186].

Initial attempts to fabricate photonic components in
bulk diamond used a combination of patterning tech-
niques (ion-induced damage for structure undercut, RIE
for large pattern transfer, and FIB for local pattern trans-
fer) [187]. Two mode ridge waveguides in type-1b sin-
gle crystal diamond were produced, though the damage
caused by the ion implantation suggests that this tech-
nique cannot be adopted for quantum technologies.

On the other hand, triangular RIE etching (as intro-
duced in Sec. III F) is well suited to pattern photonic
systems into bulk diamond directly. Free-standing com-
ponents of a photonic integrated circuit, including optical
waveguides and photonic crystal and microdisk cavities
have been fabricated in a proof-of-principle demonstra-
tion [69]. It was later shown in simulation that ‘s-bend’
structures can be used in conjunction with the triangu-
lar RIE etching to add low-loss connection points to the
bulk, and thus extend the length of the waveguides [96].
More work will have to be done in this area to increase
the structural stability, operation at visible wavelengths,
and fabrication yield of these bulk photonic integrated
circuits.

VIII. HYBRID PHOTONIC SYSTEMS

Hybrid photonic systems combine and exploit the ad-
vantages of multiple systems to achieve more function-
ality than any single isolated system. Random assem-
bly, self assembly, bottom up fabrication, and manual
assembly have all been used to access plasmonic and pho-
tonic regimes that would otherwise be inaccessible [41].
Here, we will review the integration of diamond with
other semiconductor material systems to gain access to
high quality cavity and photonic integrated circuit sys-
tems that are currently diﬃcult to achieve with high-
yield in diamond. Integration into cavities has allowed
for emission enhancement of defects in un-patterned dia-
mond slabs and nanodiamonds [188], and integration into
waveguides has allowed for high collection eﬃciency and
on-chip routing of emitted light.

A. Cavity Systems

Due to its large bandgap, low intrinsic ﬂuorescence,
and ease of fabrication, Gallium Phosphide (GaP) has
been used to enhance single defect emission in diamond.
The ﬂoat down of pre-patterned GaP microdisks onto
an unpatterned bulk diamond allowed GaP to be used
as both an etch mask and a higher index guiding mate-
rial [189]. These high quality hybrid cavities supported
whispering gallery mode resonances with Q > 25000 and
loaded Q factor of 3,800 [190]. The structure and the
mode proﬁle can be seen in Fig. 7. However, the place-
ment of NV−s with respect to the optical mode is ran-

14

system maintains the cavity properties, while achieving
high coupling into a useable single ﬁber mode [198]. The
coupling of a single NV− center in a nanodiamond to
the ﬁeld maximum of a tunable high ﬁnesse DBR cavity
(F = 3500 at 640 nm) via lateral positing allowed study
of the phonon-assisted transitions of the NV− [199]. A
similar setup with a ﬁber-based DBR cavity elucidated
the full scaling laws of Purcell enhancement for the NV−
emission spectrum [200]. Both setups are projected to
reach the strong Purcell regime at cold temperatures
when the coupling between the NV− ZPL and the cavity
ﬁeld is larger. A ﬁber-based DBR cavity in which both
input and output are coupled directly to ﬁber modes
has increased the spectral photon rate density by orders
of magnitude [201], an important step for quantum
information processing. These ﬁber-based DBR cavities
have also been engineered to maintain high ﬁnesse
and quality factors (F = 17000 Q ∼ 106) even while
containing thick diamond membranes (> 10 µm) which
can contain spectrally stable NV− centers with long
coherence times, unlike nanodiamonds [202].

C. Photonic Circuit Integration

Hybrid systems have also been used to enhance the
coupling of the NV− emission into traveling-wave modes
for enhanced detection rates, and collection into pho-
tonic modes that can be then manipulated and inter-
fered to create larger networks. Early work has concen-
trated on the hybrid diamond-GaP systems discussed in
Section VIII A, demonstrating the evanescent coupling
of NV− center emission to GaP multimode waveguides
which suﬀered from high loss and ﬂuorescence [203]. The-
oretical work demonstrated the possibility of single-mode
operation with better coupling between the NV− emis-
sion and the GaP waveguide mode, along with a scheme
for coupling NV− centers more than 50nm from the cen-
ter to high Q nanobeam cavities in the GaP layer [204].
Recent work on GaP-diamond hybrid systems has shown
the waveguide-coupling of single NV− zero phonon line
emission into disk resonators with estimated high zero-
phonon line emission rates into one direction of the
waveguide [205]. This approach takes advantage of well-
established thin ﬁlm growth of and patterning methods
of GaP, and enables the use of mainly unpatterned di-
amond to preserve the defect properties. However, this
approach is limited by the reduced coupling of the de-
fects to the waveguide mode. While this is mediated by
the addition of a cavity as theoretically [204] and exper-
imentally [205] demonstrated, there exists no proposed
way to locate the defect in the cavity mode maximum.
One approach to overcome this limitation is to fab-
ricate diamond single-mode waveguides with NV−s di-
rectly at the mode maximum. Such a waveguide can
then be coupled with almost unity coupling eﬃciency to a
pre-fabricated SiN photonic waveguide architecture with

Figure 7. a) Scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of a
hybrid GaP-diamond microdisk. (b,c) FDTD simulated ﬁeld
proﬁles (Er(r, z) and Ez(r, z), respectively), of the TEm
0 and
TMm
0 modes. d) Wideﬁeld CCD image of photoluminescence
from a hybrid microdisk. Reprinted with permission from
Reference [189]. c(cid:13)2015 AIP Publishing LLC.

dom, and single NV− enhancement was not shown. The
same ﬂoat down method was used to pattern ring res-
onators (Q ∼ 3000 − 6800) on a diamond sample with a
lower density of NV− centers [191, 192]. Tuning the cav-
ity resonance at 10 K, and measuring the cavity-coupled
emission through a tapered ﬁber showed enhancement of
multiple single NV− ZPLs. However, the Purcell eﬀect
was limited to F ∼ 3.5, again due to placement with re-
spect to the mode maximum, as well as the large volume
of the resonator.
Silica whispering gallery mode resonators (WGMs)
have also been coupled to diamond structures with NV−
centers in order to exploit the ultra-high quality factors
possible with WGMs, although the mode volumes are
high. A deterministic coupling approach in which silica
microspheres are brought into contact with integrated
200 nm diamond nanopillars with nanometer precision al-
lows the preservation of NV− bulk properties while main-
taining high quality factors (Q > 106) for the composite
system [193].

B. Fiber Coupled DBR Cavity Systems

High quality factor resonators can also be achieved
with distributed Bragg reﬂector (DBR) cavities. Micro
fabricated mirrors can facilitate high ﬁnesse, small mode
volume cavities which are tunable post-fabrication [194–
197]. Integrating these DBR mirrors into a ﬁber-based

15

coupled to the optical mode. This enables a linear scal-
ing in the number of fabrication attempts necessary to
create a quantum network with the desired number of
nodes [154].

To increase the detection eﬃciency of single photon
emitted by defects in diamond, eﬀorts are underway
to fabricate superconducting nanowire single photon
detectors (SNSPDs) directly on diamond or to integrated
them with hybrid waveguide architectures [207, 208].
Niobium Titanium Nitritide (NbTN) SNSPDs have been
fabricated on single-crystal diamond substrates and have
been shown to have good detection properties [209].
Niobium nitride (NbN) SNSPDs fabricated directly on
waveguides in polycrystalline thin-ﬁlm diamond grown
on oxide show high detection eﬃciencies up to 66% at
1550 nm combined with low dark count rates, and timing
resolution of 190 ps [210].

IX. CONCLUSION AND REMAINING

CHALLENGES

As discussed in this review, recent advances in dia-
mond synthesis and fabrication have enabled high-quality
nano- and microphotonic devices for increased photon
collection and tailored light-matter interaction. De-
spite this progress, there are still
fundamental chal-
lenges to be overcome on the way towards more complex
QI implementations based on these diamond photonic
nanostructures. High ﬁdelity QI applications require
long spin coherence times and lifetime limited emission
linewidths [53, 211, 212]. As noted in the review, many
diamond growth and fabrication schemes have been tai-
lored to bolster spin coherence times. However, more de-
velopment must be done to produce nanostructures with
both high intrinsic quality (high Q values and low mode
volumes) and high defect quality (long spin coherence
times and lifetime limited emission linewidths). In par-
ticular the latter has up to date been limited to a factor
of about 30 of the ﬂuorescence lifetime-limit [154].
It
is commonly believed that both crystal lattice defects
induced by dry etching and increased surface area near
defects due to nanofabrication lead to the degradation
of defect properties. Therefore, suitable nanofabrication
technology and proper surface termination methods must
be developed. Furthermore, the realization of large-scale
quantum photonic systems will depend on scalable fabri-
cation techniques and on tunability – Stark shift control
to bring multiple defect transitions (e.g. the NV− ZPL)
to the same frequency [116], and cavity tuning [213] to
match the resonance wavelength with the defect transi-
tion frequency without degrading the cavity Q. Finally,
for high ﬁdelity information processing, error correction
is required. To establish error-corrected logical qubit
nodes in a large quantum photonic processor [214], ad-
vances must be made in the high yield creation of cou-
pled defect centers [215] as well as control over the sur-

Figure 8. a) Sketch of a SiN PIC with multiple quantum
nodes. b) FDTD simulation (Ex ﬁeld) showing the adiabatic-
like mode transfer from a single-mode diamond waveguide
into a single-mode.
c) Saturation measurements acquired
on the same emitter with confocal (dashed line) and waveg-
uide (solid line) collection after background subtraction and
correction for measured collection losses. About four times
more emission is coupled into the waveguide compares to the
high numerical aperture objective. Reprinted with permission
from Reference [154]. c(cid:13)2015 APS.

a suspended coupling region as shown in Fig. 8. For a
diamond waveguide with a 200 x 200 nm2 cross section, it
was determined that a dipole oriented perpendicularly to
the propagation direction will couple 83% of the emission
to the single optical waveguide mode. Moreover, with the
optimized tapering of both the diamond waveguide and
the waveguide in the underlying photonic circuitry, up to
96% of the light in the diamond waveguide will be cou-
pled to the single mode SiN waveguide. In experiment,
the hybrid structure shows that 3.5 times more photons
emitted by the NV− are collected into one direction of
the waveguide than into a free space 0.95 NA objective,
even with non-optimized diamond tapering regions [154].
A similar hybrid approach can also be used to eﬃciently
couple light from single emitters in diamond to single-
mode silica ﬁbers. As in the photonic integrated circuit,
tapers enable an adiabatic mode transfer between the
single mode diamond waveguide and guided mode in the
tapered silica ﬁber, theoretically enabling unity power
transfer from diamond to ﬁber waveguide. Experimen-
tally, an overall collection eﬃciency between 16% and
37% into a single optical mode was demonstrated, with
a single photon count rate of more than 700 kcps in sat-
uration [206].

D. Towards Complex Photonic Architectures

Another important advantage of a hybrid bottom-up
approach is that it enables the building of large-scale
systems with almost unity probability, overcoming the
stochastic defect center creation process with inherently
low yield of high-quality quantum nodes. Pre-selection
of the best diamond waveguides from an array of fabri-
cated waveguides guarantees that every node in the ﬁnal
integrated network will contain a single defect with the
desired spectral and spin properties, as well as being well

(a)Air gapDiamond micro-waveguideSiN waveguide2 μmxyz(b)(c)Pump Power(mW)00.511.522.50.40.81.21.00.60.20Mcpswaveguidecollectionconfocalcollection16

rounding nuclear environment as resource to potentially
store quantum states longer than an individual quan-
tum memory is able to [125, 126, 216]. The progress
presented in this review proves the viability of diamond
based nanophotonic systems in QI and sensing, and fur-
ther progress will enable enhanced sensing as well as scal-
able solid state quantum networks.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Fabrication and experiments were supported in part
by the Air Force Oﬃce of Scientiﬁc Research PECASE
(AFOSR Grant No. FA9550-11-1-0014), the AFOSR

Quantum Memories MURI, and the U.S. Army Research
Laboratory (ARL) Center for Distributed Quantum In-
formation (CDQI). Research was carried out in part at
the Center for Functional Nanomaterials, Brookhaven
National Laboratory, which is supported by the U.S. De-
partment of Energy, Oﬃce of Basic Energy Sciences, un-
der Contract No. de-sc0012704. T.S. was supported
in part by the CDQI. E.H.C. was supported by the
NASA Oﬃce of the Chief Technologist’s Space Tech-
nology Research Fellowship. M.E.T. was supported in
part by the AFOSR Quantum Memories MURI. M.E.T.
was supported by the NSF IGERT program Interdisci-
plinary Quantum Information Science and Engineering
(iQuISE). S.M. is supported by the AFOSR PECASE.

[1] J. Wrachtrup and F. Jelezko, “Processing quantum in-
formation in diamond,” Journal of Physics: Condensed
Matter 18, S807–S824 (2006).

[2] L. Childress and R. Hanson, “Diamond NV centers for
quantum computing and quantum networks,” MRS Bul-
letin 38, 134–138 (2013).

[3] K. Nemoto, M. Trupke, S. J. Devitt, A. M. Stephens,
K. Buczak, T. Nobauer, M. S. Everitt, J. Schmiedmayer,
and W. J. Munro, “Photonic architecture for scal-
able quantum information processing in NV-diamond,”
arXiv:1309.4277 [quant-ph] (2013).

[4] J. Wrachtrup, F. Jelezko, B. Grotz, and L. McGuinness,
“Nitrogen-vacancy centers close to surfaces,” MRS Bul-
letin 38, 149–154 (2013).

[5] S. Hong, M. S. Grinolds, L. M. Pham, D. Le Sage,
L. Luan, R. L. Walsworth, and A. Yacoby, “Nanoscale
magnetometry with NV centers in diamond,” MRS Bul-
letin 38, 155–161 (2013).

[6] R. Schirhagl, K. Chang, M. Loretz, and C. L. Degen,
“Nitrogen-Vacancy Centers in Diamond: Nanoscale
Sensors for Physics and Biology,” Annual Review of
Physical Chemistry 65, 83–105 (2014).

[7] L. Rondin, J.-P. Tetienne, T. Hingant, J.-F. Roch,
P. Maletinsky, and V. Jacques, “Magnetometry with
nitrogen-vacancy defects in diamond,” Reports on
Progress in Physics 77, 056503 (2014).

[8] R. Brouri, A. Beveratos, J.-P. Poizat, and P. Grangier,
“Photon antibunching in the ﬂuorescence of individual
color centers in diamond,” Optics Letters 25, 1294–1296
(2000).

[9] C. Kurtsiefer, S. Mayer, P. Zarda, and H. Weinfurter,
“Stable Solid-State Source of Single Photons,” Physical
Review Letters 85, 290–293 (2000).

[10] N. Bar-Gill, L. M. Pham, A. Jarmola, D. Budker, and
R. L. Walsworth, “Solid-state electronic spin coherence
time approaching one second,” Nature Communications
4, 1743 (2013).

[11] P. C. Maurer, G. Kucsko, C. Latta, L. Jiang, N. Y. Yao,
S. D. Bennett, F. Pastawski, D. Hunger, N. Chisholm,
M. Markham, D. J. Twitchen, J. I. Cirac, and M. D.
Lukin, “Room-Temperature Quantum Bit Memory Ex-
ceeding One Second,” Science 336, 1283–1286 (2012).

[12] W. B. Gao, A. Imamoglu, H. Bernien, and R. Hanson,
“Coherent manipulation, measurement and entangle-

ment of individual solid-state spins using optical ﬁelds,”
Nature Photonics 9, 363–373 (2015).

[13] J. R. Maze, P. L. Stanwix, J. S. Hodges, S. Hong, J. M.
Taylor, P. Cappellaro, L. Jiang, M. V. G. Dutt, E. To-
gan, A. S. Zibrov, A. Yacoby, R. L. Walsworth, and
M. D. Lukin, “Nanoscale magnetic sensing with an in-
dividual electronic spin in diamond,” Nature 455, 644–
647 (2008).

[14] F. Dolde, H. Fedder, M. W. Doherty, T. Nbauer,
F. Rempp, G. Balasubramanian, T. Wolf, F. Reinhard,
L. C. L. Hollenberg, F. Jelezko, and J. Wrachtrup,
“Electric-ﬁeld sensing using single diamond spins,” Na-
ture Physics 7, 459–463 (2011).

[15] P. Ovartchaiyapong, K. W. Lee, B. A. Myers, and
A. C. B. Jayich, “Dynamic strain-mediated coupling of
a single diamond spin to a mechanical resonator,” Na-
ture Communications 5, 4429 (2014).

[16] J. Cai, F. Jelezko, and M. B. Plenio, “Signal trans-
duction and conversion with color centers in dia-
mond and piezo-elements,” arXiv:1404.6393 [cond-mat,
physics:quant-ph] (2014).

[17] P. Neumann, I. Jakobi, F. Dolde, C. Burk, R. Reuter,
G. Waldherr, J. Honert, T. Wolf, A. Brunner, J. H.
Shim, D. Suter, H. Sumiya, J. Isoya, and J. Wrachtrup,
“High-Precision Nanoscale Temperature Sensing Using
Single Defects in Diamond,” Nano Letters 13, 2738–
2742 (2013).

[18] H. Clevenson, M. E. Trusheim, C. Teale, T. Schrder,
D. Braje, and D. Englund, “Broadband magnetometry
and temperature sensing with a light-trapping diamond
waveguide,” Nature Physics 11, 393–397 (2015).

[19] T. Wolf, P. Neumann, K. Nakamura, H. Sumiya,
T. Ohshima, J. Isoya, and J. Wrachtrup, “Subpicotesla
Diamond Magnetometry,” Physical Review X 5, 041001
(2015).

[20] D. Le Sage, L. M. Pham, N. Bar-Gill, C. Belthangady,
M. D. Lukin, A. Yacoby, and R. L. Walsworth, “Eﬃcient
photon detection from color centers in a diamond optical
waveguide,” Physical Review B 85, 121202 (2012).

[21] J. M. Taylor, P. Cappellaro, L. Childress, L. Jiang,
D. Budker, P. R. Hemmer, A. Yacoby, R. Walsworth,
and M. D. Lukin, “High-sensitivity diamond magne-
tometer with nanoscale resolution,” Nature Physics 4,
810–816 (2008).

[22] I. Lovchinsky, A. O. Sushkov, E. Urbach, N. P. d. Leon,
S. Choi, K. D. Greve, R. Evans, R. Gertner, E. Bersin,
C. Mller, L. McGuinness, F. Jelezko, R. L. Walsworth,
H. Park, and M. D. Lukin, “Nuclear magnetic reso-
nance detection and spectroscopy of single proteins us-
ing quantum logic,” Science 351, 836–841 (2016).

[23] T. M. Babinec, B. J. M. Hausmann, M. Khan, Y. Zhang,
J. R. Maze, P. R. Hemmer, and M. Lonar, “A diamond
nanowire single-photon source,” Nature Nanotechnol-
ogy 5, 195–199 (2010).

[24] J. P. Hadden, J. P. Harrison, A. C. Stanley-Clarke,
L. Marseglia, Y. L. D. Ho, B. R. Patton, J. L. OBrien,
and J. G. Rarity, “Strongly enhanced photon collection
from diamond defect centers under microfabricated inte-
grated solid immersion lenses,” Applied Physics Letters
97, 241901–241901–3 (2010).

[25] A. Faraon, P. E. Barclay, C. Santori, K.-M. C. Fu, and
R. G. Beausoleil, “Resonant enhancement of the zero-
phonon emission from a colour centre in a diamond cav-
ity,” Nature Photonics 5, 301–305 (2011).

[26] J. Riedrich-Mller, L. Kipfstuhl, C. Hepp, E. Neu,
C. Pauly, F. Mcklich, A. Baur, M. Wandt, S. Wolﬀ,
M. Fischer, S. Gsell, M. Schreck, and C. Becher, “One-
and two-dimensional photonic crystal microcavities in
single crystal diamond,” Nature Nanotechnology 7, 69–
74 (2012).

[27] L. Li, T. Schrder, E. H. Chen, M. Walsh, I. Bayn,
J. Goldstein, O. Gaathon, M. E. Trusheim, M. Lu,
J. Mower, M. Cotlet, M. L. Markham, D. J. Twitchen,
and D. Englund, “Coherent spin control of a nanocavity-
enhanced qubit in diamond,” Nature Communications
6, 6173 (2015).

[28] I. Bayn, B. Meyler, J. Salzman, and R. Kalish, “Trian-
gular nanobeam photonic cavities in single-crystal dia-
mond,” New Journal of Physics 13, 025018 (2011).

[29] Y. Ando, Y. Nishibayashi, K. Kobashi, T. Hirao, and
K. Oura, “Smooth and high-rate reactive ion etching of
diamond,” Diamond and Related Materials 11, 824–827
(2002).

[30] B. J. M. Hausmann, M. Khan, Y. Zhang, T. M. Babinec,
K. Martinick, M. McCutcheon, P. R. Hemmer, and
M. Lonar, “Fabrication of diamond nanowires for quan-
tum information processing applications,” Diamond and
Related Materials 19, 621–629 (2010).

[31] L. Li, I. Bayn, M. Lu, C.-Y. Nam, T. Schrder, A. Stein,
N. C. Harris, and D. Englund, “Nanofabrication on un-
conventional substrates using transferred hard masks,”
Scientiﬁc Reports 5, 7802 (2015).

[32] B. Khanaliloo, M. Mitchell, A. C. Hryciw, and P. E.
Barclay, “High-Q/V Monolithic Diamond Microdisks
Fabricated with Quasi-isotropic Etching,” Nano Letters
15, 5131–5136 (2015).

[33] A. A. Martin, M. Toth, and I. Aharonovich, “Subtrac-
tive 3d Printing of Optically Active Diamond Struc-
tures,” Scientiﬁc Reports 4, 5022 (2014).

[34] S. Schietinger, M. Barth, T. Aichele, and O. Ben-
son, “Plasmon-Enhanced Single Photon Emission from
a Nanoassembled Metal-Diamond Hybrid Structure
at Room Temperature,” Nano Letters 9, 1694–1698
(2009).

[35] M. Barth, S. Schietinger, T. Schrder, T. Aichele, and
O. Benson, “Controlled coupling of NV defect centers
to plasmonic and photonic nanostructures,” Journal of
Luminescence 130, 1628–1634 (2010).

17

[36] I. Bulu, T. Babinec, B. Hausmann, J. T. Choy, and
M. Lonar, “Plasmonic resonators for enhanced diamond
NV- center single photon sources,” Optics Express 19,
5268 (2011).

[37] J. T. Choy, I. Bulu, B. J. M. Hausmann, E. Janitz, I.-
C. Huang, and M. Lonar, “Spontaneous emission and
collection eﬃciency enhancement of single emitters in
diamond via plasmonic cavities and gratings,” Applied
Physics Letters 103, 161101 (2013).

[38] B. J. M. Hausmann,

I. Bulu, V. Venkataraman,
P. Deotare, and M. Lonar, “Diamond nonlinear pho-
tonics,” Nature Photonics 8, 369–374 (2014).

[39] R. P. Mildren and A. Sabella, “Highly eﬃcient diamond

Raman laser,” Optics Letters 34, 2811–2813 (2009).

[40] P. Ovartchaiyapong, L. M. A. Pascal, B. A. Myers,
P. Lauria, and A. C. B. Jayich, “High quality factor
single-crystal diamond mechanical resonators,” Applied
Physics Letters 101, 163505 (2012).

[41] O. Benson, “Assembly of hybrid photonic architectures
from nanophotonic constituents,” Nature 480, 193–199
(2011).

[42] M. E. Trusheim, L. Li, A. Laraoui, E. H. Chen,
H. Bakhru, T. Schrder, O. Gaathon, C. A. Meriles, and
D. Englund, “Scalable Fabrication of High Purity Dia-
mond Nanocrystals with Long-Spin-Coherence Nitrogen
Vacancy Centers,” Nano Letters 14, 32–36 (2014).

[43] H. S. Knowles, D. M. Kara, and M. Atatre, “Observing
bulk diamond spin coherence in high-purity nanodia-
monds,” Nature Materials 13, 21–25 (2014).

[44] C. J. H. Wort and R. S. Balmer, “Diamond as an elec-

tronic material,” Materials Today 11, 22–28 (2008).

[45] R. S. Balmer, J. R. Brandon, S. L. Clewes, H. K.
Dhillon, J. M. Dodson, I. Friel, P. N. Inglis, T. D.
Madgwick, M. L. Markham, T. P. Mollart, N. Perkins,
G. A. Scarsbrook, D. J. Twitchen, A. J. Whitehead, J. J.
Wilman, and S. M. Woollard, “Chemical vapour depo-
sition synthetic diamond: materials, technology and ap-
plications,” Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 21,
364221 (2009).

[46] V. N. Mochalin, O. Shenderova, D. Ho, and Y. Gogotsi,
“The properties and applications of nanodiamonds,”
Nature Nanotechnology 7, 11–23 (2012).

[47] J. E. Desnoyehs and J. A. Morrison, “The heat capac-
ity of diamond between 128 and 277k,” Philosophical
Magazine 3, 42–48 (1958).

[48] G. Balasubramanian, P. Neumann, D. Twitchen,
M. Markham, R. Kolesov, N. Mizuochi, J. Isoya,
J. Achard, J. Beck, J. Tissler, V. Jacques, P. R. Hem-
mer, F. Jelezko, and J. Wrachtrup, “Ultralong spin co-
herence time in isotopically engineered diamond,” Na-
ture Materials 8, 383 (2009).

[49] T. Teraji, T. Taniguchi, S. Koizumi, K. Watanabe,
M. Liao, Y. Koide, and J. Isoya, “Chemical Vapor Depo-
sition of 12 C Isotopically Enriched Polycrystalline Dia-
mond,” Japanese Journal of Applied Physics 51, 090104
(2012).

[50] I. Aharonovich and E. Neu, “Diamond Nanophotonics,”

Advanced Optical Materials 2, 911–928 (2014).

[51] A. M. Zaitsev, Optical Properties of Diamond (Springer

Berlin Heidelberg, 2001).

[52] A. Gruber, A. Drbenstedt, C. Tietz, L. Fleury,
J. Wrachtrup, and C. v. Borczyskowski, “Scanning Con-
focal Optical Microscopy and Magnetic Resonance on
Single Defect Centers,” Science 276, 2012–2014 (1997).

[53] H. J. Kimble, “The quantum internet,” Nature 453,

1023–1030 (2008).

[54] D. D. Awschalom, L. C. Bassett, A. S. Dzurak, E. L. Hu,
and J. R. Petta, “Quantum Spintronics: Engineering
and Manipulating Atom-Like Spins in Semiconductors,”
Science 339, 1174–1179 (2013).

[55] M. W. Doherty, N. B. Manson, P. Delaney, F. Jelezko,
J. Wrachtrup, and L. C. L. Hollenberg, “The nitrogen-
vacancy colour centre in diamond,” Physics Reports
528, 1–45 (2013).

[56] E. Togan, Y. Chu, A. S. Trifonov, L. Jiang, J. Maze,
L. Childress, M. V. G. Dutt, A. S. Srensen, P. R. Hem-
mer, A. S. Zibrov, and M. D. Lukin, “Quantum en-
tanglement between an optical photon and a solid-state
spin qubit,” Nature 466, 730–734 (2010).

[57] H. Bernien, B. Hensen, W. Pfaﬀ, G. Koolstra, M. S.
Blok, L. Robledo, T. H. Taminiau, M. Markham, D. J.
Twitchen, L. Childress, and R. Hanson, “Heralded
entanglement between solid-state qubits separated by
three metres,” Nature 497, 86–90 (2013).

[58] W. Pfaﬀ, B. J. Hensen, H. Bernien, S. B. v. Dam, M. S.
Blok, T. H. Taminiau, M. J. Tiggelman, R. N. Schouten,
M. Markham, D. J. Twitchen, and R. Hanson, “Uncon-
ditional quantum teleportation between distant solid-
state quantum bits,” Science 345, 532–535 (2014).

[59] B. Hensen, H. Bernien, A. E. Drau, A. Reiserer,
N. Kalb, M. S. Blok, J. Ruitenberg, R. F. L. Vermeulen,
R. N. Schouten, C. Abelln, W. Amaya, V. Pruneri,
M. W. Mitchell, M. Markham, D. J. Twitchen, D. Elk-
ouss, S. Wehner, T. H. Taminiau, and R. Hanson,
“Loophole-free Bell inequality violation using electron
spins separated by 1.3 kilometres,” Nature 526, 682–
686 (2015).

[60] H. Kosaka and N. Niikura, “Entangled Absorption of a
Single Photon with a Single Spin in Diamond,” Physical
Review Letters 114, 053603 (2015).

[61] R. Yang, C. A. Zorman, and P. X. L. Feng, “High
frequency torsional-mode nanomechanical resonators
enabled by very thin nanocrystalline diamond di-
aphragms,” Diamond and Related Materials 54, 19–25
(2015).

[62] A. Sipahigil, K. Jahnke, L. Rogers, T. Teraji, J. Isoya,
A. Zibrov, F. Jelezko, and M. Lukin, “Indistinguishable
Photons from Separated Silicon-Vacancy Centers in Di-
amond,” Physical Review Letters 113, 113602 (2014).
[63] S. Furuyama, K. Tahara, T. Iwasaki, M. Shimizu,
J. Yaita, M. Kondo, T. Kodera, and M. Hatano, “Im-
provement of ﬂuorescence intensity of nitrogen vacancy
centers in self-formed diamond microstructures,” Ap-
plied Physics Letters 107, 163102 (2015).

[64] I. Aharonovich, J. C. Lee, A. P. Magyar, D. O. Bracher,
and E. L. Hu, “Bottom-up engineering of diamond
micro- and nano-structures,” Laser & Photonics Re-
views 7, L61–L65 (2013).

[65] D. Sovyk, V. Ralchenko, M. Komlenok, A. A. Khomich,
V. Shershulin, V. Vorobyov, I. Vlasov, V. Konov, and
A. Akimov, “Fabrication of diamond microstub pho-
toemitters with strong photoluminescence of SiV color
centers: bottom-up approach,” Applied Physics A 118,
17–21 (2014).

[66] Y. Tao and C. Degen, “Facile Fabrication of Single-
Crystal-Diamond Nanostructures with Ultrahigh As-
pect Ratio,” Advanced Materials 25, 3962–3967 (2013).

18

[67] I. Bayn, B. Meyler, A. Lahav, J. Salzman, R. Kalish,
B. A. Fairchild, S. Prawer, M. Barth, O. Benson,
T. Wolf, P. Siyushev, F. Jelezko, and J. Wrachtrup,
“Processing of photonic crystal nanocavity for quantum
information in diamond,” Diamond and Related Mate-
rials 20, 937–943 (2011).

[68] M. Lesik, P. Spinicelli, S. Pezzagna, P. Happel,
V. Jacques, O. Salord, B. Rasser, A. Delobbe, P. Su-
draud, A. Tallaire, J. Meijer, and J.-F. Roch, “Mask-
less and targeted creation of arrays of colour centres in
diamond using focused ion beam technology,” physica
status solidi (a) 210, 2055–2059 (2013).

[69] M. J. Burek, N. P. de Leon, B. J. Shields, B. J. M. Haus-
mann, Y. Chu, Q. Quan, A. S. Zibrov, H. Park, M. D.
Lukin, and M. Lonar, “Free-Standing Mechanical and
Photonic Nanostructures in Single-Crystal Diamond,”
Nano Letters 12, 6084–6089 (2012).

[70] M. J. Burek, Y. Chu, M. S. Z. Liddy, P. Patel,
J. Rochman, S. Meesala, W. Hong, Q. Quan, M. D.
Lukin, and M. Lonar, “High quality-factor optical
nanocavities in bulk single-crystal diamond,” Nature
Communications 5, 5718 (2014).

[71] B. Khanaliloo, H. Jayakumar, A. C. Hryciw, D. P. Lake,
H. Kaviani, and P. E. Barclay, “Single-Crystal Diamond
Nanobeam Waveguide Optomechanics,” Physical Re-
view X 5, 041051 (2015).

[72] M. Schreck, J. Asmussen, S. Shikata, J.-C. Arnault, and
N. Fujimori, “Large-area high-quality single crystal di-
amond,” MRS Bulletin 39, 504–510 (2014).

[73] T. A. Kennedy, J. S. Colton, J. E. Butler, R. C. Linares,
and P. J. Doering, “Long coherence times at 300 K
for nitrogen-vacancy center spins in diamond grown by
chemical vapor deposition,” Applied Physics Letters 83,
4190–4192 (2003).

[74] K. Ohno, F. J. Heremans, L. C. Bassett, B. A. My-
ers, D. M. Toyli, A. C. B. Jayich, C. J. Palmstrm,
and D. D. Awschalom, “Engineering shallow spins in
diamond with nitrogen delta-doping,” Applied Physics
Letters 101, 082413 (2012).

[75] L. J. Rogers, K. D. Jahnke, T. Teraji, L. Marseglia,
C. Mller, B. Naydenov, H. Schauﬀert, C. Kranz,
J. Isoya, L. P. McGuinness, and F. Jelezko, “Multiple
intrinsically identical single-photon emitters in the solid
state,” Nature Communications 5, 4739 (2014).

[76] J. C. Lee, D. O. Bracher, S. Cui, K. Ohno, C. A. McLel-
lan, X. Zhang, P. Andrich, B. Alemn, K. J. Russell, A. P.
Magyar, I. Aharonovich, A. B. Jayich, D. Awschalom,
and E. L. Hu, “Deterministic coupling of delta-doped ni-
trogen vacancy centers to a nanobeam photonic crystal
cavity,” Applied Physics Letters 105, 261101 (2014).

[77] T. Teraji, T. Yamamoto, K. Watanabe, Y. Koide,
J. Isoya, S. Onoda, T. Ohshima, L. J. Rogers, F. Jelezko,
P. Neumann, J. Wrachtrup, and S. Koizumi, “Homoepi-
taxial diamond ﬁlm growth: High purity, high crys-
talline quality, isotopic enrichment, and single color cen-
ter formation,” physica status solidi (a) 212, 2365–2384
(2015).

[78] S. Gsell, T. Bauer, J. Goldfu, M. Schreck, and
B. Stritzker, “A route to diamond wafers by epitaxial
deposition on silicon via iridium/yttria-stabilized zirco-
nia buﬀer layers,” Applied Physics Letters 84, 4541–
4543 (2004).

[79] M. Schreck, F. Hrmann, H. Roll, J. K. N. Lindner,
and B. Stritzker, “Diamond nucleation on iridium buﬀer

layers and subsequent textured growth: A route for
the realization of single-crystal diamond ﬁlms,” Applied
Physics Letters 78, 192–194 (2001).

[80] M. Schreck, A. Schury, F. Hrmann, H. Roll, and
B. Stritzker, “Mosaicity reduction during growth of het-
eroepitaxial diamond ﬁlms on iridium buﬀer layers: Ex-
perimental results and numerical simulations,” Journal
of Applied Physics 91, 676–685 (2002).

[81] P. Olivero, S. Rubanov, P. Reichart, B. C. Gibson, S. T.
Huntington, J. R. Rabeau, A. D. Greentree, J. Salzman,
D. Moore, D. N. Jamieson, and S. Prawer, “Character-
ization of three-dimensional microstructures in single-
crystal diamond,” Diamond and Related Materials 15,
1614–1621 (2006).

[82] L. Li, M. Trusheim, O. Gaathon, K. Kisslinger, C.-J.
Cheng, M. Lu, D. Su, X. Yao, H.-C. Huang, I. Bayn,
A. Wolcott, R. M. O. Jr, and D. Englund, “Reactive ion
etching: Optimized diamond membrane fabrication for
transmission electron microscopy,” Journal of Vacuum
Science & Technology B 31, 06FF01 (2013).

[83] J. S. Hodges, L. Li, M. Lu, E. H. Chen, M. E. Trusheim,
S. Allegri, X. Yao, O. Gaathon, H. Bakhru, and D. En-
glund, “Long-lived NV-spin coherence in high-purity di-
amond membranes,” New Journal of Physics 14, 093004
(2012).

[84] C. F. Wang, R. Hanson, D. D. Awschalom, E. L. Hu,
T. Feygelson, J. Yang, and J. E. Butler, “Fabrication
and characterization of two-dimensional photonic crys-
tal microcavities in nanocrystalline diamond,” Applied
Physics Letters 91, 201112 (2007).

[85] B. A. Fairchild, P. Olivero, S. Rubanov, A. D. Green-
tree, F. Waldermann, R. A. Taylor, I. Walmsley, J. M.
Smith, S. Huntington, B. C. Gibson, D. N. Jamieson,
and S. Prawer, “Fabrication of Ultrathin Single-Crystal
Diamond Membranes,” Advanced Materials 20, 4793–
4798 (2008).

[86] A. P. Magyar, J. C. Lee, A. M. Limarga, I. Aharonovich,
F. Rol, D. R. Clarke, M. Huang, and E. L. Hu, “Fabrica-
tion of thin, luminescent, single-crystal diamond mem-
branes,” Applied Physics Letters 99, 081913 (2011).

[87] J. C. Lee, A. P. Magyar, D. O. Bracher, I. Aharonovich,
and E. L. Hu, “Fabrication of thin diamond membranes
for photonic applications,” Diamond and Related Ma-
terials 33, 45–48 (2013).

[88] I. Aharonovich, J. C. Lee, A. P. Magyar, B. B. Buckley,
C. G. Yale, D. D. Awschalom, and E. L. Hu, “Homoepi-
taxial Growth of Single Crystal Diamond Membranes
for Quantum Information Processing,” Advanced Ma-
terials 24, OP54–OP59 (2012).

[89] O. Gaathon, J. S. Hodges, E. H. Chen, L. Li, S. Bakhru,
H. Bakhru, D. Englund, and R. M. Osgood Jr., “Pla-
nar fabrication of arrays of ion-exfoliated single-crystal-
diamond membranes with nitrogen-vacancy color cen-
ters,” Optical Materials 35, 361–365 (2013).

[90] A. A. Martin, S. Randolph, A. Botman, M. Toth, and
I. Aharonovich, “Maskless milling of diamond by a fo-
cused oxygen ion beam,” Scientiﬁc Reports 5, 8958
(2015).

[91] J. T. Choy, B. J. M. Hausmann, T. M. Babinec, I. Bulu,
M. Khan, P. Maletinsky, A. Yacoby, and M. Lonar, “En-
hanced single-photon emission from a diamond-silver
aperture,” Nature Photonics 5, 738–743 (2011).

[92] J. K. W. Yang, V. Anant, and K. K. Berggren, “En-
hancing etch resistance of hydrogen silsesquioxane via

19

postdevelop electron curing,” Journal of Vacuum Sci-
ence & Technology B: Microelectronics and Nanometer
Structures 24, 3157 (2006).

[93] M. Lipson, “Silicon photonics: An exercise in self con-

trol,” Nature Photonics 1, 18–19 (2007).

[94] X. Liu, R. M. Osgood, Y. A. Vlasov, and W. M. J.
Green, “Mid-infrared optical parametric ampliﬁer using
silicon nanophotonic waveguides,” Nature Photonics 4,
557–560 (2010).

[95] C. Peroz, S. Dhuey, M. Cornet, M. Vogler, D. Olynick,
and S. Cabrini, “Single digit nanofabrication by step-
and-repeat nanoimprint lithography,” Nanotechnology
23, 015305 (2012).

[96] I. Bayn, S. Mouradian, L. Li, J. A. Goldstein,
T. Schrder, J. Zheng, E. H. Chen, O. Gaathon, M. Lu,
A. Stein, C. A. Ruggiero, J. Salzman, R. Kalish,
and D. Englund, “Fabrication of triangular nanobeam
waveguide networks in bulk diamond using single-
crystal silicon hard masks,” Applied Physics Letters
105, 211101 (2014).

[97] R. U. A. Khan, B. L. Cann, P. M. Martineau, J. Samart-
seva, J. J. P. Freeth, S. J. Sibley, C. B. Hartland,
M. E. Newton, H. K. Dhillon, and D. J. Twitchen,
“Colour-causing defects and their related optoelectronic
transitions in single crystal CVD diamond,” Journal of
Physics: Condensed Matter 25, 275801 (2013).

[98] J. Martin, R. Wannemacher, J. Teichert, L. Bischoﬀ,
and B. Khler, “Generation and detection of ﬂuorescent
color centers in diamond with submicron resolution,”
Applied Physics Letters 75, 3096–3098 (1999).

[99] C. Yang, D. N. Jamieson, C. Pakes, S. Prawer, A. Dzu-
rak, F. Stanley, P. Spizziri, L. Macks, E. Gauja, and
R. G. Clark, “Single Phosphorus Ion Implantation into
Prefabricated Nanometre Cells of Silicon Devices for
Quantum Bit Fabrication,” Japanese Journal of Applied
Physics 42, 4124–4128 (2003).

[100] C. A. McLellan, B. A. Myers, S. Kraemer, K. Ohno,
D. D. Awschalom, and A. C. B. Jayich, “Determinis-
tic formation of highly coherent nitrogen-vacancy cen-
ters using a focused electron irradiation technique,”
arXiv:1512.08821 [cond-mat] (2015).

[101] I. Bayn, E. H. Chen, M. E. Trusheim, L. Li, T. Schrder,
O. Gaathon, M. Lu, A. Stein, M. Liu, K. Kisslinger,
H. Clevenson, and D. Englund, “Generation of En-
sembles of Individually Resolvable Nitrogen Vacancies
Using Nanometer-Scale Apertures in Ultrahigh-Aspect
Ratio Planar Implantation Masks,” Nano Letters 15,
1751–1758 (2015).

[102] G. Davies, “Charge states of the vacancy in diamond,”

Nature 269, 498–500 (1977).

[103] V. M. Acosta, E. Bauch, M. P. Ledbetter, C. Santori,
K.-M. C. Fu, P. E. Barclay, R. G. Beausoleil, H. Linget,
J. F. Roch, F. Treussart, S. Chemerisov, W. Gawlik, and
D. Budker, “Diamonds with a high density of nitrogen-
vacancy centers for magnetometry applications,” Phys-
ical Review B 80, 115202 (2009).

[104] S. Pezzagna, B. Naydenov, F. Jelezko, J. Wrachtrup,
and J. Meijer, “Creation eﬃciency of nitrogen-vacancy
centres in diamond,” New Journal of Physics 12, 065017
(2010).

[105] J. O. Orwa, C. Santori, K. M. C. Fu, B. Gibson,
D. Simpson, I. Aharonovich, A. Stacey, A. Cimmino,
P. Balog, M. Markham, D. Twitchen, A. D. Green-
tree, R. G. Beausoleil, and S. Prawer, “Engineering of

nitrogen-vacancy color centers in high purity diamond
by ion implantation and annealing,” Journal of Applied
Physics 109, 083530 (2011).

[106] G. Davies and M. F. Hamer, “Optical Studies of the
1.945 eV Vibronic Band in Diamond,” Proceedings of
the Royal Society of London A: Mathematical, Physical
and Engineering Sciences 348, 285–298 (1976).

[107] A. T. Collins and I. Kiﬂawi, “The annealing of radia-
tion damage in type Ia diamond,” Journal of Physics:
Condensed Matter 21, 364209 (2009).

[108] P. Dek, B. Aradi, M. Kaviani, T. Frauenheim, and
A. Gali, “Formation of NV centers in diamond: A theo-
retical study based on calculated transitions and migra-
tion of nitrogen and vacancy related defects,” Physical
Review B 89, 075203 (2014).

[109] J. Schwartz, S. Aloni, D. F. Ogletree, and T. Schenkel,
“Eﬀects of low-energy electron irradiation on formation
of nitrogenvacancy centers in single-crystal diamond,”
New Journal of Physics 14, 043024 (2012).

[110] J. Schwartz, S. Aloni, D. F. Ogletree, M. Tomut,
M. Bender, D. Severin, C. Trautmann, I. W. Rangelow,
and T. Schenkel, “Local formation of nitrogen-vacancy
centers in diamond by swift heavy ions,” Journal of Ap-
plied Physics 116, 214107 (2014).

[111] C. Santori, P. E. Barclay, K.-M. C. Fu, and R. G. Beau-
soleil, “Vertical distribution of nitrogen-vacancy centers
in diamond formed by ion implantation and annealing,”
Physical Review B 79, 125313 (2009).

[112] K. Ohno, F. J. Heremans, C. F. d. l. Casas, B. A. My-
ers, B. J. Alemn, A. C. B. Jayich, and D. D. Awschalom,
“Three-dimensional localization of spins in diamond us-
ing 12c implantation,” Applied Physics Letters 105,
052406 (2014).

[113] B. Naydenov, F. Reinhard, A. Lmmle, V. Richter,
R. Kalish, U. F. S. DHaenens-Johansson, M. Newton,
F. Jelezko, and J. Wrachtrup, “Increasing the coherence
time of single electron spins in diamond by high temper-
ature annealing,” Applied Physics Letters 97, 242511
(2010).

[114] R. E. Evans, A. Sipahigil, D. D. Sukachev, A. S. Zibrov,
and M. D. Lukin, “Coherent optical emitters in diamond
nanostructures via ion implantation,” arXiv:1512.03820
[cond-mat, physics:quant-ph] (2015).

[115] Y. Chu, N. de Leon, B. Shields, B. Hausmann, R. Evans,
E. Togan, M. J. Burek, M. Markham, A. Stacey, A. Zi-
brov, A. Yacoby, D. Twitchen, M. Lonar, H. Park,
P. Maletinsky, and M. Lukin, “Coherent Optical Tran-
sitions in Implanted Nitrogen Vacancy Centers,” Nano
Letters 14, 1982–1986 (2014).

[116] P. Tamarat, T. Gaebel, J. R. Rabeau, M. Khan, A. D.
Greentree, H. Wilson, L. C. L. Hollenberg, S. Prawer,
P. Hemmer, F. Jelezko, and J. Wrachtrup, “Stark Shift
Control of Single Optical Centers in Diamond,” Physical
Review Letters 97, 083002 (2006).

[117] S. Cui and E. L. Hu, “Eﬀect of ﬂuorinated diamond
surface on charge state of nitrogen-vacancy centers,”
arXiv:1304.1407 (2013).

[118] A. Mainwood, “Nitrogen and nitrogen-vacancy com-
plexes and their formation in diamond,” Physical Re-
view B 49, 7934–7940 (1994).

[119] F. C. Waldermann, P. Olivero, J. Nunn, K. Surmacz,
Z. Y. Wang, D. Jaksch, R. A. Taylor, I. A. Walms-
ley, M. Draganski, P. Reichart, A. D. Greentree, D. N.
Jamieson, and S. Prawer, “Creating diamond color cen-

20

ters for quantum optical applications,” Diamond and
Related Materials 16, 1887–1895 (2007).

[120] Z. Huang, W.-D. Li, C. Santori, V. M. Acosta,
A. Faraon, T. Ishikawa, W. Wu, D. Winston, R. S.
Williams, and R. G. Beausoleil, “Diamond nitrogen-
vacancy centers created by scanning focused helium ion
beam and annealing,” Applied Physics Letters 103,
081906 (2013).

[121] D. McCloskey, D. Fox, N. O’Hara, V. Usov, D. Scan-
lan, N. McEvoy, G. S. Duesberg, G. L. W. Cross, H. Z.
Zhang, and J. F. Donegan, “Helium ion microscope gen-
erated nitrogen-vacancy centres in type Ib diamond,”
Applied Physics Letters 104, 031109 (2014).

[122] P. Andrich, B. J. Alemn, J. C. Lee, K. Ohno, C. F. de las
Casas, F. J. Heremans, E. L. Hu, and D. D. Awschalom,
“Engineered Micro- and Nanoscale Diamonds as Mo-
bile Probes for High-Resolution Sensing in Fluid,” Nano
Letters 14, 4959–4964 (2014).

[123] T. Gaebel, M. Domhan, I. Popa, C. Wittmann, P. Neu-
mann, F. Jelezko, J. R. Rabeau, N. Stavrias, A. D.
Greentree, S. Prawer, J. Meijer, J. Twamley, P. R. Hem-
mer, and J. Wrachtrup, “Room-temperature coherent
coupling of single spins in diamond,” Nature Physics 2,
408–413 (2006).

[124] J. Cai, A. Retzker, F. Jelezko, and M. B. Plenio, “A
large-scale quantum simulator on a diamond surface at
room temperature,” Nature Physics 9, 168–173 (2013).
[125] G. Waldherr, Y. Wang, S. Zaiser, M. Jamali, T. Schulte-
Herbrggen, H. Abe, T. Ohshima, J. Isoya, J. F. Du,
P. Neumann, and J. Wrachtrup, “Quantum error correc-
tion in a solid-state hybrid spin register,” Nature 506,
204–207 (2014).

[126] T. H. Taminiau, J. Cramer, T. v. d. Sar, V. V. Dobrovit-
ski, and R. Hanson, “Universal control and error correc-
tion in multi-qubit spin registers in diamond,” Nature
Nanotechnology 9, 171–176 (2014).

[127] J. Meijer, B. Burchard, M. Domhan, C. Wittmann,
T. Gaebel, I. Popa, F. Jelezko, and J. Wrachtrup, “Gen-
eration of single color centers by focused nitrogen im-
plantation,” Applied Physics Letters 87, 261909 (2005).
[128] J. R. Rabeau, P. Reichart, G. Tamanyan, D. N.
Jamieson, S. Prawer, F. Jelezko, T. Gaebel, I. Popa,
M. Domhan, and J. Wrachtrup, “Implantation of la-
belled single nitrogen vacancy centers in diamond using
N15,” Applied Physics Letters 88, 023113 (2006).

[129] S. Pezzagna, D. Rogalla, D. Wildanger, J. Meijer, and
A. Zaitsev, “Creation and nature of optical centres in
diamond for single-photon emissionoverview and critical
remarks,” New Journal of Physics 13, 035024 (2011).

[130] J. F. Ziegler and J. P. Biersack, “The Stopping and
Range of Ions in Matter,” in “Treatise on Heavy-Ion
Science,” , D. A. Bromley, ed. (Springer US, 1985), pp.
93–129.

[131] J. Ziegler, “INTERACTIONS OF IONS WITH MAT-

TER,” http://srim.org/.

[132] C. Wang, C. Kurtsiefer, H. Weinfurter, and B. Bur-
chard, “Single photon emission from SiV centres in
diamond produced by ion implantation,” Journal of
Physics B: Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics 39,
37–41 (2006).

[133] D. Antonov, T. Huermann, A. Aird, J. Roth, H.-R. Tre-
bin, C. Mller, L. McGuinness, F. Jelezko, T. Yamamoto,
J. Isoya, S. Pezzagna, J. Meijer, and J. Wrachtrup, “Sta-
tistical investigations on nitrogen-vacancy center cre-

ation,” Applied Physics Letters 104, 012105 (2014).

[134] J. Meijer, S. Pezzagna, T. Vogel, B. Burchard, H. H.
Bukow, I. W. Rangelow, Y. Sarov, H. Wiggers, I. Plmel,
F. Jelezko, J. Wrachtrup, F. Schmidt-Kaler, W. Schnit-
zler, and K. Singer, “Towards the implanting of ions and
positioning of nanoparticles with nm spatial resolution,”
Applied Physics A 91, 567–571 (2008).

[135] K. Y. Han, K. I. Willig, E. Rittweger, F. Jelezko,
C. Eggeling, and S. W. Hell, “Three-Dimensional Stim-
ulated Emission Depletion Microscopy of Nitrogen-
Vacancy Centers in Diamond Using Continuous-Wave
Light,” Nano Letters 9, 3323–3329 (2009).

[136] S. Pezzagna, D. Wildanger, P. Mazarov, A. D. Wieck,
Y. Sarov, I. Rangelow, B. Naydenov, F. Jelezko, S. W.
Hell, and J. Meijer, “Nanoscale Engineering and Optical
Addressing of Single Spins in Diamond,” Small 6, 2117–
2121 (2010).

[137] D. M. Toyli, C. D. Weis, G. D. Fuchs, T. Schenkel, and
D. D. Awschalom, “Chip-Scale Nanofabrication of Sin-
gle Spins and Spin Arrays in Diamond,” Nano Letters
10, 3168–3172 (2010).

[138] S. Tamura, G. Koike, A. Komatsubara, T. Teraji, S. On-
oda, L. P. McGuinness, L. Rogers, B. Naydenov, E. Wu,
L. Yan, F. Jelezko, T. Ohshima, J. Isoya, T. Shinada,
and T. Tanii, “Array of bright silicon-vacancy centers in
diamond fabricated by low-energy focused ion beam im-
plantation,” Applied Physics Express 7, 115201 (2014).
[139] J. Riedrich-Mller, C. Arend, C. Pauly, F. Mcklich,
M. Fischer, S. Gsell, M. Schreck, and C. Becher, “De-
terministic Coupling of a Single Silicon-Vacancy Color
Center to a Photonic Crystal Cavity in Diamond,” Nano
Letters 14, 5281–5287 (2014).

[140] J. Riedrich-Mller, S. Pezzagna, J. Meijer, C. Pauly,
F. Mcklich, M. Markham, A. M. Edmonds, and
C. Becher, “Nanoimplantation and Purcell enhance-
ment of single nitrogen-vacancy centers in photonic
crystal cavities in diamond,” Applied Physics Letters
106, 221103 (2015).

[141] T. Schroder, E. Chen, L. Li, M. Walsh, M. E. Trusheim,
I. Bayn, and D. Englund, “Targeted creation and Pur-
cell enhancement of NV centers within photonic crys-
tal cavities in single-crystal diamond,” in “Conference
on Lasers and Electro-Optics 2014,” (OSA, 2014), OSA
Technical Digest (online), p. FW1B.6.

[142] T. Schroder, L. Li, E. Chen, M. Walsh, M. E.
Trusheim, I. Bayn, J. Zheng, S. Mouradian, H. Bakhru,
O. Gaathon, and D. R. Englund, “Deterministic High-
yield Creation of Nitrogen Vacancy Centers in Diamond
Photonic Crystal Cavities and Photonic Elements,” in
“Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics 2015,” (OSA,
2015), OSA Technical Digest (online), p. FTh3B.1.

[143] A. M. Edmonds, U. F. S. DHaenens-Johansson, R. J.
Cruddace, M. E. Newton, K.-M. C. Fu, C. Santori,
R. G. Beausoleil, D. J. Twitchen, and M. L. Markham,
“Production of oriented nitrogen-vacancy color centers
in synthetic diamond,” Physical Review B 86, 035201
(2012).

[144] L. M. Pham, N. Bar-Gill, C. Belthangady, D. Le Sage,
P. Cappellaro, M. D. Lukin, A. Yacoby, and R. L.
Walsworth, “Enhanced solid-state multispin metrology
using dynamical decoupling,” Physical Review B 86,
045214 (2012).

[145] J. Michl, T. Teraji, S. Zaiser, I. Jakobi, G. Waldherr,
F. Dolde, P. Neumann, M. W. Doherty, N. B. Man-

21

son, J. Isoya, and J. Wrachtrup, “Perfect alignment and
preferential orientation of nitrogen-vacancy centers dur-
ing chemical vapor deposition diamond growth on (111)
surfaces,” Applied Physics Letters 104, 102407 (2014).
[146] M. Lesik, J.-P. Tetienne, A. Tallaire, J. Achard,
V. Mille, A. Gicquel, J.-F. Roch, and V. Jacques, “Per-
fect preferential orientation of nitrogen-vacancy defects
in a synthetic diamond sample,” Applied Physics Let-
ters 104, 113107 (2014).

[147] K. Nemoto, M. Trupke, S. J. Devitt, B. Scharfenberger,
K. Buczak, J. Schmiedmayer, and W. J. Munro, “Pho-
tonic Quantum Networks formed from NV- Centers,”
arXiv:1412.5950 [quant-ph] (2014).

[148] B. Shields, Q. Unterreithmeier, N. de Leon, H. Park,
and M. Lukin, “Eﬃcient Readout of a Single Spin State
in Diamond via Spin-to-Charge Conversion,” Physical
Review Letters 114, 136402 (2015).

[149] W. Lukosz and R. E. Kunz, “Light emission by mag-
netic and electric dipoles close to a plane interface. I.
Total radiated power,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. 67, 1607–1615
(1977).

[150] K. G. Lee, X. W. Chen, H. Eghlidi, P. Kukura, R. Let-
tow, A. Renn, V. Sandoghdar, and S. Gtzinger, “A
planar dielectric antenna for directional single-photon
emission and near-unity collection eﬃciency,” Nature
Photonics 5, 166–169 (2011).

[151] T. Schrder, F. Gdeke, M. J. Banholzer, and O. Ben-
son, “Ultrabright and eﬃcient single-photon generation
based on nitrogen-vacancy centres in nanodiamonds on
a solid immersion lens,” New Journal of Physics 13,
055017 (2011).

[152] E. Neu, P. Appel, M. Ganzhorn, J. Miguel-Snchez,
M. Lesik, V. Mille, V. Jacques, A. Tallaire, J. Achard,
and P. Maletinsky, “Photonic nano-structures on (111)-
oriented diamond,” Applied Physics Letters 104,
153108 (2014).

[153] S. A. Momenzadeh, R. J. Sthr, F. F. de Oliveira,
A. Brunner, A. Denisenko, S. Yang, F. Reinhard, and
J. Wrachtrup, “Nanoengineered Diamond Waveguide as
a Robust Bright Platform for Nanomagnetometry Using
Shallow Nitrogen Vacancy Centers,” Nano Letters 15,
165–169 (2015).

[154] S. L. Mouradian, T. Schrder, C. B. Poitras, L. Li,
J. Goldstein, E. H. Chen, M. Walsh, J. Cardenas, M. L.
Markham, D. J. Twitchen, M. Lipson, and D. Englund,
“Scalable Integration of Long-Lived Quantum Memories
into a Photonic Circuit,” Physical Review X 5, 031009
(2015).

[155] B. J. M. Hausmann, T. M. Babinec, J. T. Choy, J. S.
Hodges, S. Hong, I. Bulu, A. Yacoby, M. D. Lukin, and
M. Lonar, “Single-color centers implanted in diamond
nanostructures,” New Journal of Physics 13, 045004
(2011).

[156] C. J. Widmann, C. Giese, M. Wolfer, D. Brink, N. Hei-
drich, and C. E. Nebel, “Fabrication and character-
ization of single crystalline diamond nanopillars with
NV-centers,” Diamond and Related Materials 54, 2–8
(2015).

[157] P. Maletinsky, S. Hong, M. S. Grinolds, B. Hausmann,
M. D. Lukin, R. L. Walsworth, M. Lonar, and A. Ya-
coby, “A robust scanning diamond sensor for nanoscale
imaging with single nitrogen-vacancy centres,” Nature
Nanotechnology 7, 320–324 (2012).

[158] J. Love, W. Henry, W. Stewart, R. Black, S. Lacroix,
and F. Gonthier, “Tapered single-mode ﬁbres and de-
vices. Part 1: Adiabaticity criteria,” IEE Proceedings J
Optoelectronics 138, 343 (1991).

[159] M. Yoshita, K. Koyama, Y. Hayamizu, M. Baba,
and H. Akiyama, “Improved High Collection Eﬃciency
in Fluorescence Microscopy with a Weierstrass-Sphere
Solid Immersion Lens,” Japanese Journal of Applied
Physics 41, L858–L860 (2002).

[160] A. W. Schell, T. Neumer, and O. Benson, “Numerical
analysis of eﬃcient light extraction with an elliptical
solid immersion lens,” Optics Letters 39, 4639 (2014).
[161] H. W. Choi, E. Gu, C. Liu, C. Griﬃn, J. M. Girkin,
I. M. Watson, and M. D. Dawson, “Fabrication of natu-
ral diamond microlenses by plasma etching,” Journal of
Vacuum Science & Technology B 23, 130–132 (2005).

[162] C. L. Lee, H. W. Choi, E. Gu, M. D. Dawson, and
H. Murphy, “Fabrication and characterization of dia-
mond micro-optics,” Diamond and Related Materials
15, 725–728 (2006).

[163] L. Marseglia, J. P. Hadden, A. C. Stanley-Clarke,
J. P. Harrison, B. Patton, Y.-L. D. Ho, B. Naydenov,
F. Jelezko, J. Meijer, P. R. Dolan, J. M. Smith, J. G.
Rarity, and J. L. O’Brien, “Nanofabricated solid immer-
sion lenses registered to single emitters in diamond,”
Applied Physics Letters 98, 133107 (2011).

[164] M. Jamali, I. Gerhardt, M. Rezai, K. Frenner, H. Fed-
der, and J. Wrachtrup, “Microscopic diamond solid-
immersion-lenses fabricated around single defect centers
by focused ion beam milling,” Review of Scientiﬁc In-
struments 85, 123703 (2014).

[165] C. Hepp, T. Mller, V. Waselowski, J. N. Becker, B. Pin-
gault, H. Sternschulte, D. Steinmller-Nethl, A. Gali,
J. R. Maze, M. Atatre, and C. Becher, “Electronic
Structure of the Silicon Vacancy Color Center in Di-
amond,” Physical Review Letters 112, 036405 (2014).
I. Gerhardt,
S. Bischof, H. Fedder, J. Dodson, M. Markham,
D. Twitchen, F. Jelezko, and J. Wrachtrup, “Monolithic
diamond optics for single photon detection,” Applied
Physics Letters 97, 241902 (2010).

[166] P. Siyushev, F. Kaiser, V. Jacques,

[167] D. Riedel, D. Rohner, M. Ganzhorn, T. Kaldewey,
P. Appel, E. Neu, R. Warburton, and P. Maletinsky,
“Low-Loss Broadband Antenna for Eﬃcient Photon
Collection from a Coherent Spin in Diamond,” Phys-
ical Review Applied 2, 064011 (2014).

[168] L. Li, E. H. Chen, J. Zheng, S. L. Mouradian,
F. Dolde, T. Schrder, S. Karaveli, M. L. Markham, D. J.
Twitchen, and D. Englund, “Eﬃcient Photon Collection
from a Nitrogen Vacancy Center in a Circular Bullseye
Grating,” Nano Letters 15, 1493–1497 (2015).

[169] A. Young, C. Y. Hu, L. Marseglia, J. P. Harrison, J. L.
O’Brien, and J. G. Rarity, “Cavity enhanced spin mea-
surement of the ground state spin of an NV center in
diamond,” New Journal of Physics 11, 013007 (2009).
[170] K. J. Vahala, “Optical microcavities,” Nature 424, 839–

846 (2003).

[171] T. G. Tiecke, J. D. Thompson, N. P. de Leon, L. R. Liu,
V. Vuleti, and M. D. Lukin, “Nanophotonic quantum
phase switch with a single atom,” Nature 508, 241–244
(2014).

[172] P. Meystre and M. Sargent, Elements of Quantum Op-

tics (Springer Science & Business Media, 2007).

22

[173] E. M. Purcell, “Spontaneous emission probabilities at

radio frequencies,” Physical Review 69, 681 (1946).

[174] C.-H. Su, A. D. Greentree, and L. C. L. Hollenberg, “To-
wards a picosecond transform-limited nitrogen-vacancy
based single photon source,” Optics Express 16, 6240
(2008).

[175] C.-H. Su, A. D. Greentree, and L. C. L. Hollen-
berg, “High-performance diamond-based single-photon
sources for quantum communication,” Physical Review
A 80, 052308 (2009).

[176] C. Santori, D. Fattal, and Y. Yamamoto, Single-photon

Devices and Applications (John Wiley & Sons, 2010).

[177] H.-Q. Zhao, M. Fujiwara, and S. Takeuchi, “Suppression
of ﬂuorescence phonon sideband from nitrogen vacancy
centers in diamond nanocrystals by substrate eﬀect,”
Optics Express 20, 15628 (2012).

[178] C. F. Wang, Y.-S. Choi, J. C. Lee, E. L. Hu, J. Yang,
and J. E. Butler, “Observation of whispering gallery
modes in nanocrystalline diamond microdisks,” Applied
Physics Letters 90, 081110 (2007).

[179] T. M. Babinec, J. T. Choy, K. J. M. Smith, M. Khan,
and M. Lonar, “Design and focused ion beam fabri-
cation of single crystal diamond nanobeam cavities,”
Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B 29, 010601
(2011).

[180] A. Faraon, Z. Huang, V. Acosta, C. Santori, and
R. Beausoleil, “Coupling of Nitrogen-Vacancy Centers
to Photonic Crystal Resonators in Monocrystalline Di-
amond,” in “Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics
2012,” (OSA, 2012), OSA Technical Digest, p. QM3C.5.
[181] B. J. M. Hausmann, B. J. Shields, Q. Quan, Y. Chu,
N. P. de Leon, R. Evans, M. J. Burek, A. S. Zibrov,
M. Markham, D. J. Twitchen, H. Park, M. D. Lukin,
and M. Lonar, “Coupling of NV Centers to Photonic
Crystal Nanobeams in Diamond,” Nano Letters 13,
5791–5796 (2013).

[182] I. Bayn, B. Meyler, J. Salzman, V. Richter, and
R. Kalish, “Single Crystal Diamond Photonic Crystal
Nanocavity: Fabrication and Initial Characterization,”
in “Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics 2010,”
(OSA, 2010), OSA Technical Digest (online), p. QThL7.
[183] B. J. M. Hausmann, B. Shields, Q. Quan, P. Maletinsky,
M. McCutcheon,
J. T. Choy, T. M. Babinec,
A. Kubanek, A. Yacoby, M. D. Lukin, and M. Lonar,
“Integrated Diamond Networks for Quantum Nanopho-
tonics,” Nano Letters 12, 1578–1582 (2012).

[184] A. Faraon, C. Santori, Z. Huang, K.-M. C. Fu, V. M.
Acosta, D. Fattal, and R. G. Beausoleil, “Quantum pho-
tonic devices in single-crystal diamond,” New Journal of
Physics 15, 025010 (2013).

[185] B. J. M. Hausmann, I. B. Bulu, P. B. Deotare, M. Mc-
Cutcheon, V. Venkataraman, M. L. Markham, D. J.
Twitchen, and M. Lonar, “Integrated High-Quality Fac-
tor Optical Resonators in Diamond,” Nano Letters 13,
1898–1902 (2013).

[186] Z. Huang, A. Faraon, C. Santori, V. Acosta, and
R. G. Beausoleil, “Microring resonator-based diamond
optothermal switch: a building block for a quantum
computing network,” in “Proc. SPIE 8635,” , vol. 8635
(SPIE Digital Library, 2013), vol. 8635, p. 86350E.

[187] M. P. Hiscocks, K. Ganesan, B. C. Gibson, S. T. Hunt-
ington, F. Ladouceur, and S. Prawer, “Diamond waveg-
uides fabricated by reactive ion etching,” Optics Express
16, 19512 (2008).

[188] C. Santori, P. E. Barclay, K.-M. C. Fu, R. G. Beau-
soleil, S. Spillane, and M. Fisch, “Nanophotonics for
quantum optics using nitrogen-vacancy centers in dia-
mond,” Nanotechnology 21, 274008 (2010).

[189] P. E. Barclay, K.-M. C. Fu, C. Santori, and R. G. Beau-
soleil, “Chip-based microcavities coupled to nitrogen-
vacancy centers in single crystal diamond,” Applied
Physics Letters 95, 191115–191115–3 (2009).

[190] N. Thomas, R. J. Barbour, Y. Song, M. L. Lee, and
K.-M. C. Fu, “Waveguide-integrated single-crystalline
GaP resonators on diamond,” Optics Express 22, 13555
(2014).

[191] P. E. Barclay, K.-M. C. Fu, C. Santori, A. Faraon,
and R. G. Beausoleil, “Hybrid Nanocavity Resonant
Enhancement of Color Center Emission in Diamond,”
Physical Review X 1, 011007 (2011).

[192] K.-M. C. Fu, P. E. Barclay, C. Santori, A. Faraon, and
R. G. Beausoleil, “Low-temperature tapered-ﬁber prob-
ing of diamond nitrogen-vacancy ensembles coupled to
GaP microcavities,” New Journal of Physics 13, 055023
(2011).

[193] M. Larsson, K. N. Dinyari, and H. Wang, “Composite
Optical Microcavity of Diamond Nanopillar and Silica
Microsphere,” Nano Letters 9, 1447–1450 (2009).

[194] M. Trupke, E. A. Hinds, S. Eriksson, E. A. Curtis,
Z. Moktadir, E. Kukharenka, and M. Kraft, “Micro-
fabricated high-ﬁnesse optical cavity with open access
and small volume,” Applied Physics Letters 87, 211106
(2005).

[195] D. Hunger, C. Deutsch, R. J. Barbour, R. J. Warburton,
and J. Reichel, “Laser micro-fabrication of concave, low-
roughness features in silica,” AIP Advances 2, 012119
(2012).

[196] A. Muller, E. B. Flagg, J. R. Lawall, and G. S. Solomon,
“Ultrahigh-ﬁnesse, low-mode-volume FabryPerot micro-
cavity,” Optics Letters 35, 2293 (2010).

[197] P. R. Dolan, G. M. Hughes, F. Grazioso, B. R. Patton,
and J. M. Smith, “Femtoliter tunable optical cavity ar-
rays,” Optics Letters 35, 3556 (2010).

[198] T. Steinmetz, Y. Colombe, D. Hunger, T. W. Hnsch,
A. Balocchi, R. J. Warburton, and J. Reichel, “Stable
ﬁber-based Fabry-Prot cavity,” Applied Physics Letters
89, 111110 (2006).

[199] R. Albrecht, A. Bommer, C. Deutsch, J. Reichel, and
C. Becher, “Coupling of a Single Nitrogen-Vacancy Cen-
ter in Diamond to a Fiber-Based Microcavity,” Physical
Review Letters 110, 243602 (2013).

[200] H. Kaupp, C. Deutsch, H.-C. Chang, J. Reichel,
T. W. Hnsch, and D. Hunger, “Scaling laws of
the cavity enhancement for NV centers in diamond,”
arXiv:1304.0948 (2013).

[201] R. Albrecht, A. Bommer, C. Pauly, F. Mcklich, A. W.
Schell, P. Engel, T. Schrder, O. Benson, J. Reichel,
and C. Becher, “Narrow-band single photon emission at
room temperature based on a single nitrogen-vacancy
center coupled to an all-ﬁber-cavity,” Applied Physics
Letters 105, 073113 (2014).

[202] E. Janitz, M. Ruf, M. Dimock, A. Bourassa,
J. Sankey, and L. Childress, “Fabry-Perot microcavity
for diamond-based photonics,” Physical Review A 92,
043844 (2015).

[203] K.-M. C. Fu, C. Santori, P. E. Barclay, I. Aharonovich,
S. Prawer, N. Meyer, A. M. Holm, and R. G. Beausoleil,
“Coupling of nitrogen-vacancy centers in diamond to a

23

GaP waveguide,” Applied Physics Letters 93, 234107
(2008).

[204] P. E. Barclay, K.-M. Fu, C. Santori, and R. G. Beau-
soleil, “Hybrid photonic crystal cavity and waveguide
for coupling to diamond NV-centers,” Optics Express
17, 9588 (2009).

[205] M. Gould, S. Chakravarthi, I. R. Christen, N. Thomas,
S. Dadgostar, Y. Song, M. L. Lee, F. Hatami, and
K.-M. C. Fu, “A Large-Scale GaP-on-Diamond In-
tegrated Photonics Platform for NV Center-Based
Quantum Information,” arXiv:1510.05047 [cond-mat,
physics:physics, physics:quant-ph] (2015).

[206] R. N. Patel, T. Schrder, N. Wan, L. Li, S. L. Moura-
dian, E. H. Chen, and D. R. Englund, “Eﬃcient photon
coupling from a diamond nitrogen vacancy center by
integration with silica ﬁber,” Light: Science & Applica-
tions 5, e16032 (2016).

[207] J. P. Sprengers, A. Gaggero, D. Sahin, S. Jahan-
mirinejad, G. Frucci, F. Mattioli, R. Leoni, J. Beetz,
M. Lermer, M. Kamp, S. Hﬂing, R. Sanjines, and
A. Fiore, “Waveguide superconducting single-photon
detectors for integrated quantum photonic circuits,”
Applied Physics Letters 99, 181110 (2011).

[208] F. Najaﬁ, J. Mower, N. C. Harris, F. Bellei, A. Dane,
C. Lee, X. Hu, P. Kharel, F. Marsili, S. Assefa, K. K.
Berggren, and D. Englund, “On-chip detection of non-
classical light by scalable integration of single-photon
detectors,” Nature Communications 6, 5873 (2015).

[209] H. A. Atikian, A. Eftekharian, A. J. Salim, M. J. Burek,
J. T. Choy, A. H. Majedi, and M. Lonar, “Supercon-
ducting nanowire single photon detector on diamond,”
Applied Physics Letters 104, 122602 (2014).

[210] P. Rath, O. Kahl, S. Ferrari, F. Sproll, G. Lewes-
Malandrakis, D. Brink, K. Ilin, M. Siegel, C. Nebel,
and W. Pernice, “Superconducting single-photon detec-
tors integrated with diamond nanophotonic circuits,”
Light: Science & Applications 4, e338 (2015).

[211] L.-M. Duan and H. J. Kimble, “Scalable Photonic
Quantum Computation through Cavity-Assisted Inter-
actions,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 127902 (2004).

[212] L.-M. Duan, M. D. Lukin, J. I. Cirac, and P. Zoller,
“Long-distance quantum communication with atomic
ensembles and linear optics,” Nature 414, 413–418
(2001).

[213] X. Chew, G. Zhou, F. S. Chau, and J. Deng, “Enhanced
resonance tuning of photonic crystal nanocavities by in-
tegration of optimized near-ﬁeld multitip nanoprobes,”
Journal of Nanophotonics 5, 059503 (2011).

[214] M. S. Blok, N. Kalb, A. Reiserer, T. H. Taminiau, and
R. Hanson, “Towards quantum networks of single spins:
analysis of a quantum memory with an optical interface
in diamond,” Faraday Discussions 184, 173–182 (2015).
[215] F. Dolde, V. Bergholm, Y. Wang, I. Jakobi, B. Nayde-
nov, S. Pezzagna, J. Meijer, F. Jelezko, P. Neumann,
T. Schulte-Herbrggen, J. Biamonte, and J. Wrachtrup,
“High-ﬁdelity spin entanglement using optimal control,”
Nature Communications 5, 3371 (2014).

[216] J. Cramer, N. Kalb, M. A. Rol, B. Hensen, M. S.
Blok, M. Markham, D. J. Twitchen, R. Hanson, and
T. H. Taminiau, “Repeated quantum error correction
on a continuously encoded qubit by real-time feedback,”
arXiv:1508.01388 [cond-mat, physics:quant-ph] (2015).

