6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
7
1

 
 
]
P
A

.
t
a
t
s
[
 
 

1
v
1
4
3
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Covariate Microaggregation for Logistic Regression: An

Application for Analysis of Conﬁdential Data

Paramita Saha-Chaudhuri

paramita.sahachaudhuri@mcgill.ca

Updated: March 18, 2016

Abstract

In the recent past, electronic health records and distributed data networks emerged as a viable resource
for medical and scientiﬁc research. As the use of conﬁdential patient information from such sources
become more common, maintaining privacy of patients is of utmost importance. For a binary disease
outcome of interest, we show that the techniques of microaggregation (equivalent to specimen pooling)
and Pooled Logistic Regression (PoLoR) could be applied for analysis of large and/or distributed data
while respecting patient privacy. PoLoR is exactly the same as standard logistic regression, but instead
of using individual covariate level, the analysis uses microaggregated covariate level when microag-
gregation is conditional on the outcome status. Aggregate levels of covariates can be passed from the
nodes of the network to the analysis center without revealing individual-level microdata and can be used
very easily with standard softwares for estimation of disease odds ratio associated with a set of cate-
gorical or continuous covariates. Microaggregation of covariates allows for consistent estimation of the
parameters of logistic regression model that can include confounders and transformation of exposure.
Additionally, since the microdata can be accessed within nodes, effect modiﬁers can be accommodated
and consistently estimated. For analysis of conﬁdential health data, covariate microaggregation for lo-
gistic regression will provide a practical and straightforward alternative to more complicated existing
options.

Keywords

Data privacy; Distributed data; PoLoR (Pooled Logistic Regression).

1 Introduction

Each year in the US and elsewhere, state and federal governments and health care authorities collect
immense amount of personal and sensitive data on health care use, diagnoses, risk factors and behaviors
and many others features. The advent of personalized medicine and the genomic revolution will result in
further gathering of a large number of very sensitive data including genomic data on large segments of
the population. Although these data could provide critical information for the management of the health
care system, for studying causation of diseases, prognosis and the impact of treatment or prevention
efforts, their use is constrained by legitimate concerns about privacy of information. Concerns about data
privacy is not just limited to healthcare ﬁeld. The issue has long plagued statistical agencies throughout
the world. As a result, many agencies are bound by law to protect the information they collect from
individuals and businesses. For example, US Census Bureau is bound by Title 13 of the US Code. In
order to extract useful information from sensitive individual-level data (microdata), agencies frequently

1

PoLoR for Privacy

Saha-Chaudhuri

employ various Statistical Disclosure Limitation (SDL) (also known as, Statistical Disclosure Control
(SDC)) techniques that strive to achieve a balance between data use and conﬁdentiality with varying
degree of complexity and success.

With the rise of data networks for pharmacosurveillance, such as the Sentinel Initiative of the USA
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) (Cook et al., 2012) and Canadian Network for Observational Drug
Effect Studies (CNODES) (Suissa et al., 2012), data conﬁdentiality is now paramount in healthcare and
clinical research. An additional complexity with such large data network is that the data is distributed
over several nodes and frequently, law limits sharing of the data between nodes and even with the analyt-
ical center (AC) (Gunn et al., 2004, Ness, 2010). Therefore, even though ideal (Nattinger et al., 2010),
it is not possible to combine and create a single analysis dataset. Statistical analysis and release of sum-
mary statistics, such as tables of population characteristics, parameter estimates, etc. need to comply
with privacy laws that severely restrict analytical toolset. For example, for exploratory analysis of data
and creating tables, most provincial partners of CNODES restrict release of table shells with less than 5
observations. Exploration of association between variables is even more complex.

A primary goal of pharmacosurveillance using these large health databases, such as CNODES, is to
identify post-marketing safety signal of drugs (Yu et al., 2015). Existing approaches for modeling an
adverse effect of a drug can be classiﬁed as either non-interactive or interactive (Dwork, 2006). In the
non-interactive approach, each node or data owner performs analysis on their own dataset and the results
are combined using meta-analytic techniques (Filion et al., 2014, Wolfson et al., 2010). A drawback
of this approach is that exploratory analysis or model selection may be cumbersome or may not even
be possible. Interactive approach is more involved and requires nodes to work together to pass sum-
mary statistics to and from AC (Wu et al., 2012, El Emam et al., 2013). For a continuous outcome and
linear regression, analysis is relatively straight-forward using either approach, but privacy-preserving
modeling options of a binary disease outcome is limited and the existing approaches are quite compli-
cated (Fienberg et al., 2006; 2009) putting signiﬁcant analytical burden on potentially ill-equipped nodes
with oversight from the AC. While some of these approaches could be adapted, the performance of the
strategies have not been explored for other types of designs, such as a matched case-control design.

Building on our previous work on specimen pooling, in this manuscript, we propose covariate mi-
croaggregation to ensure data conﬁdentiality with the goal of estimating parameters of a logistic regres-
sion model for a binary disease outcome. We call this approach PoLoR (Pooled Logistic Regression).
PoLoR retains the ﬂavor of interactive approach with a ease of computation similar to the non-interactive
approach. For estimating covariate odds ratio (OR), rather than sharing the summary statistics at each
stage of iteration, we propose to share aggregate covariate information only once from the nodes to the
AC. PoLoR does not require multiple updates for parameter estimation because the aggregate covariate
information can be used in a single pass to estimate relevant model parameters. Since only aggregate
covariate information is exchanged, there is limited concern about privacy. The approach requires indi-
vidual nodes to only aggregate or add covariates according to a predeﬁned protocol and does not impose
any additional computational or statistical burden. Moreover, since the approach is equivalent to the
standard logistic regression, but on aggregate covariate level, standard error estimates of the model pa-
rameters can be obtained and model selection using likelihood ratio test is also possible and valid.

Microaggregation of continuous variables has a long history in SDL literature (Domingo-Ferrer and
Mateo-Sanz, 2002). The connection between microaggregation and specimen pooling (Weinberg and
Umbach, 1999, Saha-Chaudhuri et al., 2011, Saha-Chaudhuri and Weinberg, 2013) has not been recog-
nized before, but both, in principle are the same. To obtain microaggregates for an individual-level data
or microdata, data from multiple participants are aggregated to produce the average of the values for the
group. While microdata is not disclosed to outsiders (e.g., AC), insiders (a particular node) need to have
access to the microdata in order to perform aggregation. The context for specimen pooling is different
than microaggregation. When environmental and/or chemical exposures are to be measured in biospec-
imen, e.g., urine, using an expensive assay, specimen pooling offers an efﬁcient strategy that provides
savings for both monetary resource as well as (banked) biospecimen. Here, individual-level exposure
is not known in advance. Instead, biospecimen from multiple participants are aggregated or combined

Page 2 of 16

PoLoR for Privacy

Saha-Chaudhuri

according to a rule to produce a pooled specimen. The pooled specimen is then assayed to measure
the exposure. Consequently, only the average exposure for the group is available and individual-level
exposure is not available at all. For a binary disease outcome, pooled exposure can be used to esti-
mate individual-level exposure-disease OR (Weinberg and Umbach, 1999, Saha-Chaudhuri et al., 2011,
Saha-Chaudhuri and Weinberg, 2013) and the strategy is most useful when outcome ascertainment is
inexpensive, but exposure assessment is expensive.

Leaning on the connection between microaggregation and specimen pooling, we demonstrate that the
aggregate covariates can be used to estimate individual-level OR for a covariate with a binary outcome.
The rest of the manuscript is organized as follows. In section 2, we outline the PoLoR approach for a
binary outcome and microaggregated covariate. We then demonstrate how PoLoR can be applied for
conﬁdential data while protecting patient privacy. In section 3, we demonstrate the application of PoLoR
with simulated and real datasets and compare the results with standard logistic regression analysis. We
make some practical recommendations and conclude with a discussion.

2 Methods

In this section we outline the covariate microaggregation strategy and describe PoLoR when it is of
interest to estimate the ORs associated with a set of covariate for a binary outcome (e.g., presence and
absence of a disease). We then extend the concept for application with distributed data network. Since
the analysis is based on aggregate rather than microdata, even when the data pass through ﬁrewalls,
patients’ identity are always protected. We demonstrate the approach for a binary outcome. Categorical
outcomes with multiple category logit model can be easily accommodated whereas the approach for a
continuous outcome is obvious and has been studied (Domingo-Ferrer and Mateo-Sanz, 2002).

2.1 Specimen Pooling
PoLoR is based on the idea of pooling or combining biospecimen such as blood or serum. Instead of
analyzing individual assay for exposure or biomarker measurement, the idea is to combine specimen
from multiple assays and measure exposure in the combined assay or pools. Thus, instead of knowing
individual level of exposure, only the average exposure can be measured in the pools. In contrast, for
microaggregation, microdata is available to inform pooling strategy. But after the pools are formed, only
the average covariate level of the pools are reported and/or shared. This connection between specimen
pooling and microaggregation has not been recognized before, but both strategy are the same in principle,
where instead of the individual level covariate values, only group averages are recorded and shared.

The idea of specimen pooling originated during World War II in a slightly different context when
blood from military recruits were pooled to identify recruits with syphilis (Dorfman, 1943). Pooling of
biospecimen is used predominantly in infectious disease where multiple specimens are pooled together
to identify the infection status of the samples, because if all of the contributing samples are negative for
an infectious disease (e.g., HIV), the pooled specimen will also be negative whereas the pooled specimen
will be positive otherwise. Such a strategy leads to a reduction in expected assay cost. Other uses of
specimen pooling include application for estimating disease prevalence, to characterize distribution of
variables (Caudill, 2010), to assess diagnostic accuracy (Faraggi et al., 2003, Liu and Schisterman, 2003),
etc.. DNA pooling has also been employed for association studies (Sham et al., 2002). The particular
application of pooling that we focus on is for estimating exposure OR for a logistic regression model
for a binary disease outcome (Weinberg and Umbach, 1999, Saha-Chaudhuri et al., 2011) as we will
discuss in detail later. We extended this approach for discrete survival time outcome (Saha-Chaudhuri
and Weinberg, 2013). In all these situations, pooling offers an economical solution for various estimation
problems.

Page 3 of 16

PoLoR for Privacy

Saha-Chaudhuri

2.1.1 Notation
We start with a simple scenario where we are interested to quantify the effect of a covariate or exposure
X (continuous or categorical with appropriate set of indicator variables) on a binary outcome of interest
Y such as presence (Y = 1) or absence (Y = 0) of disease. A logistic regression model can naturally be
conceived for such a setting:

logit(Pr(Y = 1|x)) = β0 + β1x.

To estimate the parameter of interest β1, we can employ either of the two designs. In a prospective
study setting, we can randomly sample subjects from a deﬁned cohort and ascertain their exposure level
and their outcome status. This approach is not efﬁcient for studying rare diseases, so an alternate is to
employ a case-control design where subjects are selected based on their outcome status, followed by
exposure determination. While an unbiased estimate of the baseline log odds β0 can only be obtained
from a prospective design, we can estimate β1, the log OR associated with unit increase in the level of X
from both prospective and case-control design. In many scientiﬁc situations, we are primarily interested
in the exposure log OR β1. While it is possible to estimate disease prevalence from pooled data as is
done in group testing, we assume that the individual level outcome and baseline disease prevalence (and
disease odds) are known at the outset. For the rest of the manuscript, we use a general notation keeping
in mind that we are interested in estimating exposure effect (eβ1) rather than baseline disease odds (eβ0).
When microdata is available, β1 can be estimated easily. However, we are interested to characterize
the association of X and Y without using individual-level covariate information, but using aggregate
covariate information only. Thus, to characterize the association of exposure or covariate with a binary
outcome via pooled approach, we require that the outcome status of each subject be known in advance.
This in turn implies that the outcomes are easy and/or inexpensive to ascertain while the exposure or
marker of interest is expensive to assess. The proposed pooling approach is applicable to a case-control
study as well as a prospective or a cross-sectional study with a binary outcome (Weinberg and Umbach,
1999, Saha-Chaudhuri et al., 2011).

Pooled analysis with a binary outcome has two stages: design stage and estimation stage. In the
design stage, we create pools or groups of observation to form the basis of aggregation and measure
aggregate covariate information for the pool. In the estimation stage, we use the pooled covariate mea-
surements instead of individual covariate measurements to estimate β1 or covariate log OR. Let n denote
the number of case subjects with Y = 1 and m denotes the number of control subjects Y = 0. Although
pools of multiple sizes can be utilized for one study, for simplicity of notation, we assume that pool of
size g is formed within cases and controls that both n, m are multiples of g: n = kn × g, m = km × g,
that is, each pools consists of either g cases or g controls.

2.1.2 Utility of Pooling in Epidemiologic Setting
To see the utility of pooling in epidemiologic settings, let us consider an example. Consider the asso-
ciation of perﬂuorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and perﬂuorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) with adverse birth out-
comes. In particular, researchers have identiﬁed weak association of PFOA and PFOA with preeclampsia
(Stein et al., 2009). Preeclampsia is a complication of pregnancy characterized primarily by high blood
pressure and proteinuria. The only treatment for preeclampsia is delivery of the baby. It is relatively
easy to diagnose preeclampsia by monitoring blood pressure and amount of protein in urine. However,
assessing the level of PFOA or PFOS in the blood costs at least US$400 per assay. Thus, a study recruit-
ing only 50 preeclampsia cases and 50 controls without preeclampsia would require US$40,000 simply
to analyze participants blood to assess the level of only one of the two chemicals. If pooling in groups of
two (g = 2) is employed, then instead of analyzing 100 (50 from cases and 50 from controls) specimens,
we would only require to analyze 50 (25 case pools and 25 control pools) specimens. Consequently, the
total exposure assessment cost will be cut down by half.

Page 4 of 16

PoLoR for Privacy

Saha-Chaudhuri

Pooling also preserves valuable biospecimen. For example, suppose assessing PFOS in blood re-
quires 1ml of blood per assay. If, as before, g = 2 is employed, then we would need 0.5ml of blood per
person so that the total volume of the pooled specimen is still 1ml. If specimens from participants are
banked and/or cannot be recollected, then pooling offers a viable strategy to save valuable biospecimen.

2.1.3 Pooling Strategy and Covariate Assessment
The ﬁrst stage for pooled analysis is to create pools of observation to form the basis of aggregation.
Instead of measuring individual level covariates, we measure aggregate or average covariate level for the
pool. So, irrespective of the number of subjects in a pool, we obtain one measurement per covariate for
the pool. Hence the unit of analysis is pool rather than individual participant. To estimate the parameter
of interest β1, we create random pools conditional on the outcome status. That is, for PoLoR, we create
pools of a given size by randomly pooling cases with cases and randomly pooling controls with controls.
If we select a pool size of g, then to create case pools (deﬁned by Y = 1), we randomly partition the cases
in kn groups each with g subjects, such that each subject belong to one and only one pool. Similarly,
we partition m controls (deﬁned by Y = 0) to create km groups of size g each. For each group, we
simply evaluate the group-sum (or group average) of the covariate, rather than reporting individual-level
covariate values. PoLoR is ultimately based on these pooled group-level or microaggregated covariate
values and does not involve individual-level covariate information.

2.1.4 Pooled Model
Suppose Yij, j = 1, 2, . . . , g denotes the outcomes of the subjects belonging to the ith pool, i =
1, 2, . . . , kn for cases and i = 1, 2, . . . , km for controls. Similarly, let Xij, j = 1, 2, . . . , g denotes
the corresponding exposure. For pooled analysis, we do not observed individual exposure measurements

Xij, j = 1, 2, . . . , g, rather, for the ith pool, we only observe ¯Xi = 1

g Si = 1

g

Xij, the pooled

exposure level. It can be shown that (Weinberg and Umbach, 1999):

j=1

g(cid:88)

logit(Pr(Yi1 = 1, Yi2 = 1, . . . , Yig = 1|si)) = β∗

0 g + β1 si + ln(rg)

(cid:16) Pr(Y =0)

(cid:17)

Pr(Y =1)

0 = β0 + ln

where β∗
and rg denotes the number of case sets of size g divided by the number
of control sets of size g in the data or kn/km. Pooled analysis also allows use of different pool sizes to
accommodate for the fact that m and n may not always have a common divisor. The only restriction is
that pools of a particular size should be represented among both case pools and control pools. Thus, if
pools of size 2 and 5 are used for cases, the same pool sizes should also be used for controls and rg for
each value of g should be evaluated and used in the model appropriately.

Thus, a logistic regression based on the pools rather than the individual outcomes, retain the same
parameter of interest β1 as the individual outcome model. Hence, the OR for the covariate X can
be estimated using pooled measurements and outcomes. Moreover, we do not need any novel tool or
software to run a logistic regression model with pooled covariates. Any statistical software capable of
estimating parameters of a logistic regression model can be used with appropriate offset to estimate the
parameters based on the pooled model.

Confounders can be handled in a similar fashion by aggregating the confounder measurements over
the pools and including them in the logistic model. Both categorical and continuous confounders can be
accommodated in this way.

For pooled analysis in a epidemiologic setting, which we call traditional pooled analysis, only cate-
gorical effect modiﬁers are accommodated by pooling conditional on the levels of effect modiﬁers (EMs)
and outcome status. For example, if age (young versus old) is an effect modiﬁer, then pooling has to be
done separately within four strata deﬁned as: (1) Young cases, (2) Old cases, (3) Young controls and (4)
Old controls. However, pooling within the levels of effect modiﬁer renders the main effect of the effect

Page 5 of 16

PoLoR for Privacy

Saha-Chaudhuri

modiﬁer aliased with the baseline log odds and hence it is not possible to estimate the main effect of the
effect modiﬁer. Moreover, if multiple EMs are to be included in the model, the advantage of pooling is
reduced due to potential sparsity as all combination of EMs and outcome may not have enough subjects
(g or more) required for pooling.

Another limitation of traditional pooled analysis is that transformation of variables that are measured
in pool cannot be accommodated. Once a pool is formed, and aggregate level of the covariate is measured
in pool, individual level of the covariate cannot be assessed without requiring a reanalysis of individual
i xi) and we
logit(Pr(Y = 1|x)) = β0 +
cannot be employed in a pooled setting, because this model would require evaluating
i xi in the pooled sample and cannot

specimen. This is because, in general for any non-linear function h,(cid:80)
can only measure(cid:80)
(cid:80)
i log(xi) in the pooled sample whereas we can only assess(cid:80)
substitute(cid:80)

i h(xi) (cid:54)= h((cid:80)

i xi in a pooled sample. Thus, a model such as:

β1 log(x),

i log(xi) with log((cid:80)

i xi).

2.1.5 Model Diagnostics
For a binary outcome and a logistic regression model, we can think of two types of model misspeciﬁca-
tion: ﬁrst, appropriateness of logit link function, and second, selection between two competing logistic
regression model. The misspeciﬁcation of the logit link is not severe in general. Unfortunately, existing
pooling methodology only allows a logit link function for a binary outcome and hence does not allow
researchers to choose between different link functions and compare model ﬁtting between them. Hence,
for model diagnostic with pooled covariate level, we begin by assuming that the logit link function is ap-
propriate for the covariate-outcome association. As such, the second issue of choosing between different
logistic models is viable using pooled data, especially in the context of distributed data setting.

In a traditional setting, it is possible to assess association of the exposure with the outcome using
pooled exposure level. The pooled model is simply a logistic regression model with pooled exposure
level instead of individual level exposure. Hence, in addition to the parameter estimate, estimated stan-
dard error (SE), conﬁdence interval and associated p-value can be obtained for the exposure and other
variables. If confounders are not subject to pooling, then alternate transformation for confounder can
also be evaluated. However, model selection involving different transformations of the pooled variables
will not be possible. In addition, we can also test for the interaction parameters for categorical EM pro-
vided we pooled stratiﬁed by both outcome and levels of EM. If two competing models can both be ﬁt
using pooled data, we can use likelihood ratio test or AIC, etc. ROC curve can be employed to assess
prediction accuracy of the model. Noting that pooling fundamentally alters the intercept parameter akin
to a case-control study, model calibration tests such as Hosmer-Lemeshow goodness of ﬁt test cannot be
employed directly. If supplementary information about the disease prevalence is available, then alternate
approaches such as that of Huang and Pepe (2010) can be employed for assessing model calibration.

2.2 Application of Specimen Pooling for Distributed Data
Coupling our approach with additional security measures such as secure summation, we can directly ap-
ply pooled analysis strategy for a distributed data network. Whether the data is horizontally or vertically
partitioned, PoLoR can be adapted to estimate the parameters of interest in a single pass, without requir-
ing multiple iterations. We demonstrate the implementation for a horizontally partitioned dataset where
each node has exactly the same variables but holds only a subset of the subjects; the implementation
for a vertically partitioned dataset where nodes hold different variables for a common set of subjects,
is similar. We consider the following scenario where there are multiple nodes, each holding a subset of
records and an analytical center that can have contact with every node. A designated node can act as the
center or representatives from nodes may constitute a center or a center can be a suitable third party.
Implementation
We suggest the following implementation of PoLoR for the distributed data setting where patient privacy

Page 6 of 16

PoLoR for Privacy

Saha-Chaudhuri

Figure 1: Schematic of a Distributed Data Network. Here we assume that the data is horizontally partitioned
among the nodes. Center can send instruction to nodes as to how to aggregate data. Only aggregate data
from the nodes can be passed to the center.

need to be maintained throughout. By protecting patient privacy, we mean that individual record, covari-
ate level, outcome status, etc. of a patient cannot be shared outside the speciﬁc node and we begin with
anonymized data. We also assume that while individual information cannot be shared between nodes
or with the center, aggregate level covariate information such as the total counts for binary or categor-
ical variables and sum/average for continuous variables can be shared between nodes and centers. We
assume that agencies do not collude with each other and use secure summation in addition to aggregate
covariate information to further protect individual record. We assume that the center can direct the nodes
as to how to aggregate the covariates and can receive aggregate data from nodes (Figure 1).

The implementation begins with the analytical center identifying the number of case and control
subjects in the study cohort. Each node can send the number of cases and controls to the center without
compromising privacy. The next step is to determine the pool size g and creating random partition
separately among cases and controls to identify which patients will contribute to which pool. To achieve
this with, say, n = g × kn cases and m = g × km controls, we randomly partition the cases and
controls in kn and km groups respectively. Suppose, subjects i1, i2, . . . , ig belongs to the ith case pool
(i = 1, 2, . . . , kn), and subjects j1, j2, . . . , jg belongs to the jth case pool (j = 1, 2, . . . , km). These
pool memberships are passed onto the networks nodes to create pooled covariate values. After the pooled
covariate values are returned to the analytical center, an analysis dataset is created based on the pooled
covariate values and logistic regression is run on the pooled values to estimate covariate-speciﬁc ORs.

The process can be described step by step as follows:
1. After applying appropriate inclusion and exclusion criteria, determine the number of cases (n) and

controls (m) in the study cohort.

2. Determine the pool size g (if n and m have common divisor) or multiple pool sizes.
3. Assuming n = g× kn, randomly partition cases in kn groups with case ids i1, i2, . . . , ig belonging

4. Assuming m = g × km, randomly partition controls in km groups with control ids j1, j2, . . . , jg

to the ith case pool.

belonging to the jth control pool.

Page 7 of 16

McGillU,201419DistributedDataCenterNodeNodeNodeNodeAggregateDataHowtoBiostat,McGillUniversityP.SahaChaudhuriPoLoR for Privacy

Saha-Chaudhuri

Table 1: Case-id dataset will consists of the pool id and the case ids contributing to speciﬁc pool.

Pool id
1
...
i
...
kn

case id 1

case id 2

11
...
i1
...
kn1

12
...
i2
...
kn2

. . .
. . .
...
. . .
...
. . .

case id g

1g
...
ig
...
kng

Table 2: Pooled data passed from the nodes to the Analytical Center that is to be used for PoLoR.

Case Pool Pool id Pooled Covariate value
Yes
...
Yes
No
...
No

1
...
kn
1
...
km

s1
1
...
s1
kn
s0
1
...
s0
km

5. Pass a case-id dataset to the nodes of the networks (see Table 1) to aggregate covariate for the

cases.

6. Pass a control-id dataset to the nodes of data networks similar to the case-id dataset to aggregate
covariates for the controls. The case-id dataset and the control-id dataset will be the basis for
pooling covariate values.

7. Nodes work among themselves to pool the appropriate covariate values according to the case-id

and control-id datasets and pass that to the analytic center.

8. Analytical center uses a dataset as in Table 2 and runs logistic regression using case pool status

(yes/no) as outcome and pooled covariate values.

In addition to a primary exposure, confounders can be accommodated in a similar fashion as out-
lined before. In an epidemiological context, only categorical effect modiﬁers can be accommodated in
PoLoR. Moreover, transformation of the covariate cannot be handled in PoLoR. In contrast, in the con-
text of patient privacy, these issues can be addressed because individual level data is already collected
and is available at the node level. It is easy to see that by using random pooling conditional only on
the outcome, we can essentially circumvent these issues to (1) estimate all the components of the effect
modiﬁers including the main effect and interaction and (2) accommodate continuous effect modiﬁers.
i xi, pooled level of appro-
i log(xi) can be made available to the center. Care should be taken in
the choice of g when multiple functional forms of the same covariates are included in the model. For
example, if a cubic power and all lower powers of exposure X is included in the model, then use of
g ≤ 3 would divulge the individual patient covariate values. However, even in this case, it will not be
possible to extract exact covariate combination for an individual participant.

Transformations can be handled in a similar manner: instead of sending(cid:80)
priate transformation, such as(cid:80)

As mentioned earlier, multiple pool sizes can be accommodated with the only stipulation that at
least one pool of a speciﬁc size should be present in both case and control pools. However, unlike the
standard approach, due to privacy concerns, we would not be able to create pools of size 1 in distributed

Page 8 of 16

PoLoR for Privacy

Saha-Chaudhuri

data setting. We recommend choosing pool sizes to exhaust both n and m; otherwise, excluding a very
small number of observations from cases and controls. Not including these small number of samples
in the analysis will likely minimally impact estimation and efﬁciency and will still keep patient records
private. For example, if there are 100 cases and 4321 controls, one can use pool sizes of 3 and 4, with 4
pools of size 3 and 22 pools of size 4 among cases and 3 pools of size 3 and 1078 pools of size 4 among
controls. Otherwise, one can use pool of size 4 only and exclude one control observation altogether from
consideration.

In a distributed data setting, much of the limitation of the traditional setting, in particular for model
selection, can be circumvented simply because individual level data can be accessed at the node level. For
example, choosing between alternate transformations of the primary covariate of interest or confounder
and EM would only require that center resend the new functional form to the nodes and nodes send
back the pooled values according the transformation, while keeping the pool memberships the same as
before. Hence, all standard diagnostics for logistic regression model can be adapted here. However,
appropriateness of logit link still cannot be assessed in this setting using the existing tools.
Additional Considerations for Privacy
Secure summation: In addition to pooling of the covariate value, secure summation can be employed
to further protect individual records. A simple secure summation protocol would require generation of
random numbers for each pool and/or each node (and/or each covariate). After pooling the covariate
level for a given pool, the node adds a random number to the pooled covariate value and passes this on
to the next node. The next node, adding the covariate values from appropriate pools, again add a random
number and pass on to other node as appropriate. When the aggregate levels of the covariates reach the
center, the nodes also pass along the set of random number that were added to the pools. Finally, the
center subtracts the random numbers as appropriate and works with the aggregate covariate values. If
multiple nodes are not colluding, secure summation is a very secure process. For more details about
secure summation, see, Karr et al. (2007).
Randomizing the order of the nodes for summation: For a given pool, when multiple covariates need to
be aggregated, we can randomly order the nodes to add another layer of security. For example, if nodes
1, 2, and 3 contribute to pool 1 for two variables, then for one of the variables, the secure summation
may begin with node 1, then node 3 and ﬁnally end with node 2, while for the second variable, the secure
summation can follow the order: 3, 1, 2. Of course, only the center should have the information about the
randomization scheme while nodes could have a limited information so that they can pass the aggregate
value to the appropriate nodes.

3 Example
3.1 Simulated Data
To demonstrate the viability of pooled analysis in a setting where individual-level covariate information
can be accessed but not shared, we carried out simulation studies. Our earlier research and that of our
collaborators established that pooled analysis produces consistent estimator of an exposure subject to
pooling, a confounder (may or may not be subject to pooling) and interaction parameter for a categor-
ical EM (Weinberg and Umbach, 1999, Saha-Chaudhuri and Weinberg, 2013, Saha-Chaudhuri et al.,
2011). For a binary outcome, we demonstrate the feasibility of pooling in a distributed data context with
transformation of a confounder and show that all parameters associated with a continuous EM can be
consistently estimated using pooled analysis.

We considered 500 simulated datasets each with a sample size of 30000. The primary exposure X
was assumed to be normally distributed. The confounder Z1 was distributed as an absolute value of
standard normal variable that had a correlation of 0.3 with the primary exposure. Finally, a continuous
EM Z2 was generated as standard normal independent of both X and Z1. The following model was

Page 9 of 16

PoLoR for Privacy

Saha-Chaudhuri

Table 3: Parameter estimates between standard analysis and pooled analysis with different poolsizes for a
binary outcome. (see section 3.1 for detailed simulation setting). In addition, the model-based SE (Mod-
elSE) and coverage (nominal: 0.95) are also shown. The power (not shown) for all parameters and for both
unpooled and pooled analysis are equal to 1.

βx = 0.25
Estimate
ModelSE
Coverage
βz1 = −0.30
Estimate
ModelSE
Coverage
βz2 = 0.15
Estimate
ModelSE
Coverage
βxz1 = 0.50
Estimate
ModelSE
Coverage

Pooled

Unpooled
0.2499
0.0245
0.9540

g=2
0.2500
0.0253
0.9400

g=3
0.2500
0.0262
0.9560

g=4
0.2504
0.0272
0.9400

g=6
0.2502
0.0293
0.9480

-0.3004
0.0175
0.9580

-0.3007
0.0184
0.9580

-0.3009
0.0193
0.9520

-0.3013
0.0203
0.9540

-0.3022
0.0224
0.9520

0.1507
0.0243
0.9620

0.5002
0.0225
0.9320

0.1508
0.0251
0.9540

0.5006
0.0237
0.9340

0.1513
0.0259
0.9500

0.5003
0.0250
0.9360

0.1504
0.0268
0.9520

0.5016
0.0264
0.9220

0.1514
0.0288
0.9700

0.5005
0.0294
0.9440

considered for the binary outcome generation:

logit Pr(Y = 1|x, z1, z2) = β0 + βxx + βz1 log(z1) + βz2z2 + βxz2x z2.

We considered several combination of parameter values and show the results for the following set: β0 =
−3.0, βx = 0.25, βz1 = −0.3, βz2 = 0.15, βxz2 = 0.5, resulting in a prevalence of 6.8%. We used all
observations for standard analysis.
For pooled analysis, we considered pools of sizes: g = 2, 3, 4, 6 conditional on the outcome status.
To simplify the setting, we discarded at most (g − 1) observations from cases and/or controls when the
n and/or m were not divisible by g. Simulation for the entire setup was performed in the programming
language R. In Table 3 we report the average parameter estimate, average model-based standard error
(SE) and coverage probability out of 500 simulations. In Figure 2, we plotted the parameter estimates
from the standard analysis and pooled analysis (with g = 6) to assess the agreement between the two
sets of parameter estimates.

Comparing the parameter estimates, model-based SE and coverage for the four parameters of the
model between standard logistic regression and PoLoR, we see that on an average PoLoR performs
comparably to standard analysis. Given that pooling essentially reduce the data dimension, we see a
tendency of increased model-based SE, especially for larger poolsizes. However, the corresponding
coverage of the model-based CI is generally close to the nominal coverage.

We also plotted the estimates of the four parameters (βx, βz1, βz2 , βx z2) from each of the simula-
tions obtained via standard logistic regression and PoLoR with g = 6 in Figure 2 to demonstrate the
comparability between two sets of estimates over each simulation. We added a diagonal line (black,
dashed) and the lowess line (red, solid) to the plots. The red lowess line is generally in agreement with
the diagonal black line indicating the similarity between the two sets of estimates.

Page 10 of 16

PoLoR for Privacy

Saha-Chaudhuri

Figure 2: Comparison of individual parameter estimates between standard analysis and pooled analysis with
g = 6 for a binary outcome for four model parameters (see section 3.1 for detailed simulation setting). The
true parameter values on both axes are indicated by dotted lines. A lowess line is added in red and the dashed
black line has a slope of 1 and intercept of 0. There is good agreement between the black and red lines for
all parameters indicating that the parameter estimates from pooled analysis are generally comparable to that
from standard analysis for each of the 500 simulations.

Page 11 of 16

llllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll0.200.250.300.350.200.250.300.35bxUnpooled EstimatePooled Estimatellllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll−0.38−0.34−0.30−0.26−0.38−0.34−0.30−0.26bz1Unpooled EstimatePooled Estimatellllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll0.100.150.200.100.150.20bz2Unpooled EstimatePooled Estimatellllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll0.400.450.500.550.600.400.450.500.550.60bxz2Unpooled EstimatePooled EstimatePoLoR for Privacy

Saha-Chaudhuri

Practical Consideration: Poolsize Recommendation
In the simulation settings we considered with a sample size of 30,000, poolsizes g between 10 − 40
produced PoLoR estimates that were comparable to the estimates from standard logistic regression.
Due to regression to the mean, larger poolsizes, especially, for a skewed covariate, produced estimates
that were biased away from null. Therefore, we do not recommend poolsizes larger than 40. Poolsizes
g = 10− 20 (or smaller) performed well for different exposure distributions. For distributed data setting,
g between 5 − 20 could be used to achieve a balance between privacy and unbiased estimation.

3.2 Real Data
We demonstrate the comparability of PoLoR with standard logistic regression using a modiﬁed version
of data from one of the ﬁrst successful trials of adjuvant therapy regimens for colon cancer. The original
study compared two treatment: Levamisole, and combination of Levamisole and Fluorouracil against
observation only arm using a randomized controlled clinical trial among stage III colon cancer patients
(Laurie et al., 1989). Due to strong evidence of beneﬁt from the combination of Levamisole and Fluo-
rouracil, the trial was stopped early. The dataset (data(colon)) has been downloaded from R library
survival and is closest to that of the ﬁnal report by Moertel et al. (1995).

In the original dataset, each patient contributed two time-to-event outcomes: time to recurrence and
time to survival. We use only the time to recurrence and converted the endpoint to a binary outcome using
“recurrence-free for 5 years” (yes/no) as an endpoint. Fifty ﬁve patients censored before 5 years and 22
patients with missing tumor differentiation status were excluded, leaving 866 patients. For standard
logistic regression and PoLoR, we included the following variables in the model: sex (female:0, male:1),
age (in years), obstruction of colon by tumor (yes/no), perforation of colon (yes/no), adherence of tumor
to nearby organs (yes/no), tumor differentiation (1=well, 2=moderate, 3=poor), more than 4 positive
nodes (yes/no), and treatment (observation only, Levamisole and Levamisole+Fluorouracil).

For PoLoR, we aggregated the variables using poolsizes g = 3 and g = 4 resulting in 288 and 216
pools respectively. Two patients were excluded at random to create the pools. Larger poolsizes were not
considered due to relatively modest sample size of 866. The pools were created randomly. The parameter
estimates of PoLoR are dependent on the particular pool formation and can differ according to different
pool formation. We report the estimates based on one particular realization. For demonstration purpose,
we considered age as a conﬁdential variable. We created pool ids at random and aggregated all variables
except age according to the pool ids. Instead of aggregating age, we aggregated a perturbed age variable
by adding a random integer between 1 and 20 to the observed age. Aggregate age was then derived from
the perturbed age by subtracting the aggregate of the random numbers. Finally we analysed the pooled
data using PoLoR with the appropriate offset. We list the log OR and the SE for each of the covariate for
standard logistic regression and PoLoR (g = 3, 4) in Table 4. In general, the direction and magnitude
of the log ORs are similar between standard logistic regression and PoLoR, except for the variables
perforation (only 27 patients with perforation) and differentiation (91 patients without differentiation).
The SEs are generally comparable.

4 Discussion

In this manuscript, we introduce PoLoR (Pooled Logistic Regression) as a privacy-preserving approach
to estimate coefﬁcients of a logistic regression model using only aggregate covariate level. PoLoR is
an existing idea from observational and epidemiologic study setting and can be adapted for distributed
data network while maintaining patient privacy. PoLoR, being based on aggregate covariate level also
reduces data dimension and hence can be used to analyze big data under a resource-constrained setting.
PoLoR is primarily intended for an exposure that is measured in an assay (e.g., blood, serum, urine,
etc.) and pooling specimen from multiple study subjects leads to a reduced overall assay cost. We show
here that covariate pooling approach or microaggregation for logistic regression can be applied in a non-

Page 12 of 16

PoLoR for Privacy

Saha-Chaudhuri

Table 4: Log OR and SE for standard logistic regression and PoLoR for Colon cancer data.

Log Odds Ratio
Standard Error

Variable
Sex

Age

Obstruction

Perforation

Adherence

Differentiation=2

Differentiation=3

Node4

Levamisole

Lev+FU

Std logit PoLoR g = 3 PoLoR g = 4
-0.158
0.180
-0.012
0.008
0.143
0.201
0.154
0.512
0.612
0.247
0.208
0.272
0.603
0.338
1.231
0.215
-0.182
0.225
-0.880
0.236

-0.044
0.163
-0.006
0.007
0.117
0.190
0.531
0.465
0.346
0.221
0.228
0.265
0.632
0.334
1.067
0.187
-0.285
0.209
-0.788
0.210

-0.149
0.144
-0.003
0.006
0.096
0.183
0.466
0.430
0.408
0.208
-0.092
0.236
0.163
0.288
1.238
0.171
-0.145
0.174
-0.750
0.178

Page 13 of 16

PoLoR for Privacy

Saha-Chaudhuri

assay setting to protect patient privacy. PoLoR is an application of specimen pooling for distributed
data. In PoLoR, estimation of model parameters is based only on the aggregate covariate level rather
than individual covariate level. Adopting this strategy in a distributed data setting would imply that only
aggregate covariate information is needed to estimate ORs associated with covariates. Since aggregate
covariate levels does not reveal individual information, it can be shared without compromising patient
privacy and hence is suitable in a distributed data setting. For a binary outcome and a discrete time-
to-event outcome, the model parameters between PoLoR and a standard logistic regression based on
individual covariate levels remain the same, thus allowing estimation of the parameters of interest using
aggregate covariate values.

However, PoLoR is not without limitations. PoLoR is scalable for larger number of nodes. But to
ensure valid parameter estimates, it is important to keep track of the pools and which patients (from
which node) are contributing to a given pool. For maintaining patient privacy in PoLoR, we need to
create reasonably large pool size and therein lies the dilemma of choosing an appropriate poolsize g.
For PoLoR, the unit of measurement is pools and not individuals, so the asymptotic properties of the
estimators will be somewhat dependent on the number of pools rather than the number of individuals.
Thus, for asymptotic properties of the estimators, such as nominal conﬁdence level, to hold, we need
large number of pools, which in turn implies that we cannot use g that is too large compared to n and m,
because nk and mk will need to be large for asymptotic properties to hold. In our simulations, a poolsize
between 5 − 20 achieves a reasonable balance between unbiasedness and privacy and that is what we
recommend. We do not recommend g > 40 even for a very large dataset due to regression to mean
and resulting bias in parameter estimates. If privacy is of no concern, another important issue would be
to assess the properties of PoLoR when we use different g for cases and control and in particular use
a small value gn = 1 of g for cases and a large value of gm >> 1 for controls with only one pool
of size gn among controls and one pool of size gm among cases. Also, PoLoR is meant for one time
application only. Addition of a new patient record would require creating pools afresh and similar to
standard logistic regression, would require reanalysis.

Several important issues warrant additional research. One can show that PoLoR can be used for a
discrete survival outcome. Frequently though, survival outcome is continuous and currently there is no
method for analyzing survival outcome in a distributed data setting. Another important extension could
be for longitudinal outcome. Conceivably, PoLoR would likely be applicable in longitudinal setting, but
the details need to be worked out. We surmise that other approaches in the infectious disease setting that
uses pooling could be adapted for distributed data setting. This may open up several opportunities for
analyzing distributed data. Finally, approaches from statistical disclosure limitation may be borrowed
for distributed data while maintaining patient privacy.

Acknowledgement

References
Caudill, S. P. (2010). Characterizing populations of individuals using pooled samples. Journal of Expo-

sure Science and Environmental Epidemiology, 20: 29–37.

Cook, A., Wellman, R., Marsh, T., Tiwari, R., Nguyen, M., Russek-Cohen, E., Jiang, Z., and Nelson,
J. (2012). Mini-sentinel methods development: Statistical methods for estimating causal risk differ-
ences in the distributed data setting for postmarket safety outcomes. Technical report, FDA’s Sentinel
Initiative.

Domingo-Ferrer, J. M. and Mateo-Sanz, J. (2002). Practical data-oriented microaggregation for statisti-

cal disclosure control. IEEE Transactions on Knolwedge and Data Engeneering, 14: 189–201.

Page 14 of 16

PoLoR for Privacy

Saha-Chaudhuri

Dorfman, R. (1943). The detection of defective members of large populations. Annals of Mathematical

Statistics, 14: 436–440.

Dwork, C. (2006). Differential privacy. In Proceedings of the 33rd International Colloquium on Au-

tomata, Languages and Programming, volume 4052 of LNCS, pages 1–12. Springer-Verlag.

El Emam, K., Samet, S., Arbuckle, L., Tamblyn, R., Earle, C., and Kantarcioglu, M. (2013). A secure
distributed logistic regression protocol for the detection of rare adverse drug events. Journal of the
American Medical Informatics Association, 20(3): 453–461.

Faraggi, D., Reiser, B., and Schisterman, E. F. (2003). ROC curve analysis for biomarkers based on

pooled assessments. Statistics in Medicine, 22: 2515–2527.

Fienberg, S. E., Fulp, W. J., Slavkovic, A. B., and Wrobel, T. A. (2006). "Secure" log-linear and logistic
In Domingo-Ferrer, J. and Franconi, L., editors, Pri-
regression analysis of distributed databases.
vacy in Statistical Databases, volume 4302 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 277–290.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

Fienberg, S. E., Nardi, Y., and Slavkovic, A. B. (2009). Valid statistical analysis for logistic regression
with multiple sources. In Gal, C., Kantor, P., and Lesk, M., editors, Protecting Persons While Protect-
ing the People, volume 5661 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 82–94. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg.

Filion, K. B., Chateau, D., Targownik, L. E., Gershon, A., Durand, M., Tamim, H., Teare, G. F., Ravani,
P., Ernst, P., Dormuth, C. R., and the CNODES Investigators (2014). Proton pump inhibitors and
the risk of hospitalisation for community-acquired pneumonia: replicated cohort studies with meta-
analysis. Gut, 63(4): 552–558.

Gunn, P. P., Fremont, A. M., Bottrell, M., Shugarman, L. R., Galegher, J., and Bikson, T. (2004). The
health insurance portability and accountability act privacy rule: a practical guide for researchers. Med
Care, 42(4): 321–7.

Huang, Y. and Pepe, M. S. (2010). Assessing risk prediction models in case-control studies using semi-

parametric and nonparametric methods. Statistics in Medicine, 29(13): 1391–1410.

Karr, A. F., Fulp, W. J., Vera, F., Young, S. S., Lin, X., and Reiter, J. P. (2007). Secure, privacy-preserving

analysis of distributed databases. Technometrics, 49: 335–345.

Laurie, J. A., Moertel, C. G., Fleming, T. R., Wieand, H. S., Leigh, J. E., Rubin, J., McCormack,
G. W., Gerstner, J. B., Krook, J. E., and Malliard, J. (1989). Surgical adjuvant therapy of large-bowel
carcinoma: An evaluation of levamisole and the combination of levamisole and ﬂuorouracil: The
north central cancer treatment group and the mayo clinic. J Clinical Oncology, 7: 1447–1456.

Liu, A. and Schisterman, E. F. (2003). Comparison of diagnostic accuracy of biomarkers with pooled

assessments. Biometrical Journal, 45: 631–644.

Moertel, C. G., Fleming, T. R., Macdonald, J. S., Haller, D. G., Laurie, J. A., Tangen, C. M., Ungerleider,
J. S., Emerson, W. A., Tormey, D. C., Glick, J. H., Veeder, M. H., and Mailliard, J. A. (1995).
Fluorouracil plus levamisole as effective adjuvant therapy after resection of stage iii colon carcinoma:
A ﬁnal report. Annals of Internal Medicine, 122(5): 321–326.

Nattinger, A. B., Pezzin, L. E., Sparapani, R. A., Neuner, J. M., King, T. K., and Laud, P. W. (2010).
Heightened attention to medical privacy: Challenges for unbiased sample recruitment and a possible
solution. American Journal of Epidemiology, 172(6): 637–644.

Page 15 of 16

PoLoR for Privacy

Saha-Chaudhuri

Ness, R. B. (2010). Invited commentary: Population-based human subjects research in the era of en-

hanced privacy regulation. American Journal of Epidemiology, 172(6): 648–650.

Olsen (2014). Data protection and epidemiological research: a new EU regulation is in the pipeline.

International Journal of Epidemiology, 43(5): 1353–1354.

Saha-Chaudhuri, P., Umbach, D. M., and Weinberg, C. R. (2011). Pooled exposure assessment for

matched case-control studies. Epidemiology, 22(5): 704–712.

Saha-Chaudhuri, P. and Weinberg, C. R. (2013). Specimen pooling for efﬁcient use of bio-specimens in

studies of time to a common event. American Journal of Epidemiology, 178: 126–135.

Sham, P., Bader, J. S., Craig, I., O’Donovan, M., and Owen, M. (2002). Dna pooling: a tool for large-

scale association studies. Nature Reviews Genetics, 3: 862–871.

Stein, C. R., Savitz, D. A., and Dougan, M. (2009). Serum levels of perﬂuorooctanoic acid and perﬂuo-

rooctane sulfonate and pregnancy outcome. American Journal of Epidemiology, 170(7):837–846.

Suissa, S., Henry, D., Caetano, P., Dormuth, C. R., Ernst, P., Hemmelgarn, B., Lelorier, J., Levy, A.,
Martens, P. J., Paterson, J. M., Platt, R. W., Sketris, I., and Teare, G. (2012). CNODES: the Canadian
Network for Observational Drug Effect Studies. Open Med, 6(4): e134–40.

Wang, S., Jiang, X., Wu, Y., Cui, L., Cheng, S., and Ohno-Machado, L. (2013). EXpectation Propagation
LOgistic REgression (EXPLORER): Distributed privacy-preserving online model learning. Journal
of Biomedical Informatics, 46(3): 480–496.

Weinberg, C. R. and Umbach, D. M. (1999). Using pooled exposure assessment to improve efﬁciency

in case-control studies. Biometrics, 55: 718–726.

Wolfson, M., Wallace, S. E., Masca, N., Rowe, G., Sheehan, N. A., Ferretti, V., LaFlamme, P., Tobin,
M. D., Macleod, J., Little, J., Fortier, I., Knoppers, B. M., and Burton, P. R. (2010). DataSHIELD:
resolving a conﬂict in contemporary bioscience-performing a pooled analysis of individual-level data
without sharing the data. International Journal of Epidemiology, 39: 1372–1382.

Wu, Y., Jiang, X., Kim, J., and Ohno-Machado, L. (2012). Grid binary logistic regression (glore): build-
ing shared models without sharing data. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association,
19(5):758–764.

Yu, O. H. Y., Filion, K. B., Azoulay, L., Patenaude, V., Majdan, A., and Suissa, S. (2015). Incretin-based

drugs and the risk of congestive heart failure. Diabetes Care, 38(2): 277–284.

Page 16 of 16

