6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
7
1

 
 
]
t
f
o
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
0
6
3
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Why the smectic A – hexatic phase transition does not follow its universality class?

E.I.Kats1, V.V.Lebedev1, and A.R.Muratov2
1Landau Institute for Theoretical Physics, RAS,
142432, Chernogolovka, Moscow region, Russia

2 Institute for Oil and Gas Research, Moscow, Russia.

We resolve the old riddle related to the critical behavior of the heat capacity near the smectic A –
hexatic second order phase transition. Experiment suggests a “large” speciﬁc heat critical exponent
α = 0.5 ÷ 0.7 inconsistent with the universality class for this phase transition implying the very
small negative exponent α ≈ −0.01. We show that essential features of the heat capacity for the
smectic A – hexatic phase transition can be rationalized in the framework of a theoretical model
treating jointly ﬂuctuations of the hexatic orientational order and of the positional (translational)
order parameters. Assuming that the positional (translational) correlation length ξtr is larger than
the hexatic correlation length ξh, we calculate a temperature dependence of the speciﬁc heat in
the critical region near the smectic A – hexatic phase transition. Our results are in a quantitative
agreement with the calorimetric experimental data.

PACS numbers: 64.70.Md, 61.30.Dk, 61.30.Gd

Keywords:

I.

INTRODUCTION

Smectic liquid crystals are remarkable layered phases possessing an astonishingly rich variety of structures. The
simplest smectic structure is the smectic A liquid crystal, which is solid-like in the direction perpendicular to the
layers and ﬂuid-like within the layers. By other words, the smectic A can be thought as a stack of liquid layers.
Smectics C possess nematic-like orientationally ordered layers. In the late seventies, ﬁrst as a theoretical suggestion
[1, 2], and later on by experimental observations [3–6] some smectic phases have been identiﬁed as stacks of layers
with hexagonal orientational order, the phases are termed as hexatic smectics or hexatics. The hexatics possess a long-
range hexagonal orientational order, however, they have no long-range positional (translational) order. It is worth to
note that the hexatic phases are not merely a funny state of a few liquid-crystalline materials. They appear in many
biological systems (see, e.g., Refs. [7, 8]), and even in planetary or astrophysical science as a form of dust plasma [9].
Investigation of the hexatics is a multidisciplinary area including many fundamental physical problems and involving
various questions of chemistry and biology. However, even after some decades of investigations of the hexatics, a
complete description of this liquid crystalline state is still not available, and a number of phenomena remain to be
clariﬁed.

In this work we examine properties of a liquid crystal near the continuous smectic A – hexatic phase transition,
such transition is observed in a variety of materials, see Refs. [3, 4, 6, 10–18]. We investigate the phase transition
in spirit of the Landau approach in terms of the hexatic orientational order parameter. The order parameter for the
phase transition has to be introduced from symmetry reasoning [19]. Say, the nematic order parameter is a second
order symmetric traceless tensor Qik [20]. In the nematic phase the average value of Qik is nonzero and therefore
the complete rotational symmetry of the isotropic liquid is reduced to the quadrupole symmetry of the nematic. An
analogous “nematic-like” orientational order parameter can be introduced for the smectics C. It is also a second order
symmetric traceless tensor, however, its components are within the smectic layers (i.e., the order parameter is a 2 × 2
tensor unlike the 3× 3 order parameter in nematics). A non-zero average value of the order parameter means reduction
of the uniaxial rotational symmetry D∞h, characteristic of the smectic layers in the phase A, to the biaxial rotational
symmetry D2h in the phase C. By other words, in the smectics C the layers are invariant under rotation around the
second order axis whereas in the smectics A the layers are isotropic.

Similarly to the smectic A – smectic C phase transition the smectic A – hexatic phase transition means a reduction
of the rotational symmetry of the smectic layers. However, the symmetry of the smectic layers in the hexatics is D6h
instead of D2h in the smectics C. By other words, in the hexatics the layers are invariant under rotations around the
axis of the sixth order. The corresponding order parameter is a six-order symmetric irreducible tensor Qinjklm (its
irreducibility means Qiijklm = 0), having components solely within the layers. In the smectic A phase the average
value of the tensor Qinjklm is zero (the layers are isotropic) whereas in the hexatic phase its average value becomes
non-zero. As a result, the smectic layers possess a hexagonal symmetry, i.e., they are invariant under rotation around

2

the six-order rotation axis. The tensor Qinjklm has two independent components [21]. Apart of small ﬂuctuations,
almost parallel smectic layers are well-deﬁned. If we direct the Z-axis perpendicular to the layers, then the two
independent components of the tensor are Qxxxxxx and Qxxxxxy. It is convenient to deal with the scalar complex ﬁeld

Ψ = Qxxxxxx + iQxxxxxy,

(1)

instead of the tensor Qinjklm. At rotation by an angle χ around the Z-axis the order parameter Ψ is transformed as

Ψ → exp(6iχ)Ψ.

(2)

The order parameter Ψ is equivalent to the traditional hexatic order parameter introduced in [1, 2] in terms of the
molecular bond orientations (see also the textbooks [19, 20]).

The next step in constructing our theory is deriving the Landau functional for the smectic A – hexatic phase
transition. Due to the rotational invariance the Landau functional FLa (determining an energy excess associated with
the order parameter Ψ) contains only even in Ψ terms in its expansion. Indeed, just the combinations ΨΨ∗, (ΨΨ∗)2 etc
are invariant under the transformation (2). Therefore the smectic A – hexatic phase transition should be of the second
order (see the textbooks [19, 22–24]), in accordance with experiment. Since we deal with the two-component order
parameter, the phase transition belongs to the same universality class as the superﬂuid one. Particularly, the heat
capacity exponent α for the smectic A – hexatic phase transition should be small and negative α ≈ −0.01 (see results
of Monte Carlo simulations and experimental data presented in [24–26]). Note to the point that the second order
ǫ-expansion [27] gives a positive but also very small (near 0.01) value for the exponent α. In a dramatic contradiction
to this theoretical expectation, all known calorimetric data for the smectic A – hexatic phase transition [10–18] show
large and positive exponent α = 0.5 ÷ 0.7. Thus one encounters an obvious problem, and the main motivation of this
work is to ﬁnd where is a catch.

We are not the ﬁrst trying to resolve the contradiction. Some attempts have been performed in order to provide a
rational basis for such behavior of the heat capacity. Two diﬀerent suggestions can be found in literature. Having in
mind that the exponent α is near 0.5, it is tempting to assume that the smectic A – hexatic phase transition occurs
in a vicinity of a tricritical point [28]. Then one could expect a sort of crossover behavior, in spirit of of the nematic
– smectic A – smectic C tricritical point [29]. However, it is hard to believe that all known hexatic liquid-crystalline
materials, irrespective to the width of the stability region for the hexatic phase (ranging from a few to 50 degrees [15])
are always near the tricritical point (and in the continuous phase transition side). Another suggestion as far as we
aware advocated ﬁrst in the works [30–32] is based on an observation that measured experimentally critical exponents
for the hexatic – smectic A phase transition are close to those predicted by the q-state Potts model [33] (with q = 3
or q = 4 in 2- or 3-dimensional space). However it is not clear at all, how (and why) the Potts model can be mapped
to the physics of the phase transition with the two-component order parameter. In our opinion, this approach is not
consistent to be confronted with the entire array of the experimental data.

We propose another way to reconcile the well established phase transition universality conception and the massive
of experimental data for the smectic A – hexatic phase transition. A recent progress in experimental X-ray scattering
techniques [6] reveals a rather unusual feature of the hexatics. Namely, very narrow peaks are observed in the X-ray
scattering data there in the hexatic phase, that is the hexatics are almost “ready” to crystallize. The correlation
length ξtr of the short-range density ﬂuctuations δρ (that is the positional order parameter), extracted from the
X-ray data [6] for 3(10)OBC, is anomalously large, ranging from about 3 nm in the vicinity of the transition point up
to 20 nm deeply in the hexatic phase. Then because of a relevant coupling between the hexatic and positional order
parameters the universal critical behavior, characteristic of the superﬂuid helium universality class, should be observed
only at the condition ξh ≫ ξtr, where ξh is the correlation length of the hexatic order parameter. In the opposite
limit, at ξh ≤ ξtr, the self-interaction of the hexatic order parameter mediated via the translational order parameter
ﬂuctuations is eﬀectively non-local and, consequently, some non-standard critical behavior could be expected. It is
the intermediate behavior which results in diﬃculties when developing theory tool. We examine just this possibility.

Of course, at the condition ξh ≫ ξtr one has to recover the standard universal behavior. However, to achieve such
relatively large value of the orientational correlation length ξh one has to probe a very narrow vicinity of the phase
transition point. It would be fairly to say that from the available experimental data we are not in the position to
estimate how narrow is this region of temperatures with the standard universal behavior. The textbook wisdom about
second order phase transitions [19, 22] suggests only that ξh ≃ ξ0|(T − Th)/Th|−ν where ξ0 is the bare (microscopic)
correlation length, Th is the second order smectic A – hexatic transition temperature, and ν = 0.76 is the critical
exponent of the correlation length for the universality class with the two-component order parameter (in three-
dimensional space). Assuming ξ0 ≃ 0.1 nm we ﬁnd that ξh achieves the value a few times larger than ξtr ≃ 3 nm

in the vicinity of the transition point ∆T /Th <
asymptotic behavior caused by the interaction of the hexatic order parameter Ψ with the long-correlated translational
order parameter ﬂuctuations δρ. The asymptotic behavior is characterized by a scaling behavior, and the main goal
of our work is to construct a theoretical scheme for this case and to compare the theoretical predictions with known
calorimetric experimental data.

∼ 10−3. Beyond this region, one has to deal with the intermediate

Our paper is divided into the following sections. In the foregoing section II we introduce ingredients and basic
notions of our model and present its theoretical treatment. In the section III we examine ﬂuctuation eﬀects in the
framework of our model. The section IV is devoted to confronting the theoretical results and experimental data. The
section V summarizes our main ﬁndings.

3

II. MODEL

Our model is based on involving into consideration two strongly ﬂuctuating ﬁelds: the hexatic order parameter Ψ
and the short-range density modulation δρ (that plays a role of the order parameter for the crystallization phase
transition). We consider a vicinity of the smectic A – hexatic phase transition where ﬂuctuations of Ψ are strong and
one would expect the standard critical behavior with universal exponents characteristic of a two-component order
parameter. However, as we noted, the observed behavior of the heat capacity near the smectic A – hexatic phase
transition does not follow its universality class. We explain this unusual behavior by an interaction of the order
parameter Ψ with ﬂuctuations of the short-range density modulation δρ. Note to the point that the interaction is
relevant also in the hexatic phase (out of the critical region), where eﬀects related to the non-zero mean value of the
order parameter Ψ have to be included into the consideration. We defer the investigation of the region for a future
work.

The cornerstone assumptions of our model are based on the experimental X-ray scattering patterns. It is well
known, that the X-ray scattering is produced by the short-range electron density ﬂuctuations proportional to the
mass density ﬂuctuations δρ. Quantitatively, it is determined by the pair correlation function of δρ. Fourier transform
of the correlation function is known as the structure factor S(q):

S(q) = Z d3r exp(−iqr)hδρ(r1)δρ(r1 + r)i.

(3)

For the smectic phases, the structure factor S(q) has quasi-Bragg peaks at qx, qy = 0, qz = 2π/l (where l is the thickness
of the smectic layers) and also maxima at q⊥ = q0, q2
is on the order of a characteristic inter-
molecular distance in the smectic layers. A hallmark feature of the hexatics, established experimentally [6], is that
near the cylinder q⊥ = q0 the structure factor S(q) is almost independent of qz (more precisely, one should deal with
the quasi-momentum and with the ﬁrst Brillouin zone in Z-direction). In terms of the positional order parameter
δρ, the feature (weak dependence of the structure factor on qz) implies that relevant ﬂuctuations of δρ are strongly
conﬁned in the central part of the smectic layers.

y, where q−1
0

⊥ = q2

x + q2

The X-ray scattering data provide an information on the temperature dependence of the structure function S(q)
near the smectic A – hexatic phase transition (see [6] and references therein). In the smectic A phase the pattern is
a bright diﬀuse ring (cylinder in the three-dimensional reciprocal space) parallel to the smectic layers with the radius
q⊥ = q0. In the hexatic phase the ring is split into six spots, according to the rotational six order symmetry axis of
the phase. The angular dependence of the structure function S(q) is related to a non-zero average value of the order
parameter Ψ in the hexatic phase. Each spot is narrow in the radial direction (along q⊥) and elongated in the angular
direction. The radial behavior of the structure function is characterized by the correlation length ξtr. As we already
noted, for 3(10)OBC the correlation length ξtr is ranging from about 3 nm in the vicinity of the transition point up
to 20 nm in the hexatic phase. Any case, the correlation length is much larger, than the characteristic molecular size.

We analyze the critical behavior of a liquid crystal near the smectic A – hexatic phase transition where ﬂuctuations
of the hexatic order parameter Ψ are strong. In this case the angular dependence of the structure function in the
hexatic phase is weak and therefore it will be neglected below. We are interested in the temperature region where the
condition

is valid (as above, ξh is the hexatic order parameter correlation length, that characterizes correlations of the Ψ
ﬂuctuations). As we explained in Introduction, the inequality (4) is violated only in a very narrow vicinity of the

ξtr > ξh ,

(4)

4

smectic A - hexatic transition temperature where the critical behavior characteristic of the superﬂuid phase transition
has to be restored. Beyond the narrow vicinity, that is in the region where the inequality (4) holds, a special theoretical
analysis of the critical behavior is needed, that is the subject of our work.

Crystallization of a conventional liquid or of a liquid crystal is as a rule a strong ﬁrst order phase transition.
Particularly, its latent heat per molecule is on the order of (or larger than) kBTm, where kB is the Boltzmann
constant, and Tm is the crystallization temperature (room temperature in our case). Therefore one naturally expects
the positional correlation length ξtr to be on the order of the molecular scale q−1
0 . Since the experimental data [6]
suggests ξtr ≫ q−1
0 , we do believe to the weak ﬁrst order crystallization phase transition for the hexatics, and therefore
the weak crystallization theory, see Ref. [34], is a natural tool to describe positional ﬂuctuations both, in the hexatic
and in the smectic A phases, near the phase transition. Within this theory the characteristic value of the short scale
density mass δρ (positional order parameter) is much smaller than the average uniform mass density. Then, according
to the Landau approach, the energy, associated with ﬂuctuations of δρ can be expanded into a series over δρ. The
expansion, known as the Landau functional, determines correlation functions of δρ, particularly, the structure factor
(3).

The Landau functional contains some terms of the expansion in δρ, starting from the second order contribution,

which can be written as

F(2) = Z

d3q

(2π)3 (cid:20) a

2|δρ(q)|2 +

b
2

(q⊥ − q0)2|δρ(q)|2(cid:21) .

(5)

Here δρ(q) is Fourier transform of δρ(r) and a, b are some coeﬃcients. The coeﬃcient a diminishes as the temperature
decreases, as usually in the Landau approach, we assume a ∝ (T −T⋆) where T⋆ is the bare crystallization temperature,
i.e., the mean ﬁeld stability limit of the hexatic state. The coeﬃcient at |δρ(q)|2 in Eq. (5) has a minimum at q⊥ = q0.
It corresponds to the maximum of the structure function (3) at q⊥ = q0. There is no dependence on qz in the expression
(5) in accordance with the discussed above experimental observations [6] showing no dependence on qz of the structure
function.

The next relevant term in the Landau expansion is of the fourth order over δρ, it can be written as

F(4) = Z d3q1 d3q2d3q3d3q4

δ(q1 + q2 + q3 + q4)

(2π)9
λl
24

δρ(q1)δρ(q2)δρ(q3)δρ(q4).

(6)

The contribution (6) describes the self-interaction of the short-range density ﬂuctuations. Generally, the factor λ
depends on the wave vectors q1 ÷ q4. Below, for the sake of simplicity (but keeping an essential physics), we restrict
ourselves to the case λ = const. One more note of caution is in order here. Since the positional order parameter δρ
is a scalar quantity, a third order over δρ contribution into the Landau functional is not forbidden by the symmetry.
We neglect this third order term in what follows based on the experimentally conﬁrmed large value of the positional
correlation length ξtr. Indeed, if the third-order term is not small then the crystallization of the hexatic smectic phase
would be a strong ﬁrst order transition and ξtr would be on the order of the molecular size.

The average value of the short-range density modulation δρ is zero in both, smectic A and hexatic, phases. By
other words, there is no long-range positional order in the smectic layers. Let us stress that we are interested in the
mass density with the wave vectors near the circle q⊥ = q0 (besides the standard for all smectics quasi-Bragg peaks at
qz = 2π/l, q⊥ = 0, reﬂecting the density modulation in the direction perpendicular to the layers). Near the smectic A
– hexatic phase transition (both, above and below the transition temperature Th) the short-range density modulation
δρ is a strongly ﬂuctuating quantity, a manifestation of the fact is its large correlation length ξtr. Therefore to ﬁnd,
say, the structure function (3) one has to calculate ﬂuctuation corrections to the bare value determined by the second-
order term (5). A theoretical framework of the corresponding analysis can be found in our survey [34], here we adopt
the method for the smectics near the smectic A – hexatic phase transition.

The interaction between the orientational order parameter and the density ﬂuctuations is described by a crossed
term in the Landau functional depending on the both ﬁelds, δρ and Ψ. The main interaction term in the Landau
functional can be written as

Fint = −

1
2q6
0

ReZ dV Ψ[(∂x − i∂y)3δρ]2,

(7)

where, as above, distortions of the smectic layers are neglected. Note that the transformation law (2) explicitly
demonstrates rotational invariance of the interaction term (7). The interaction produces, particularly, a hexagonal
angular dependence of the density correlations in the hexatic phase, where the mean value of Ψ is non-zero. Note,
that ﬁxing the coeﬃcient in Eq. (7) (that is equal to unity) we deﬁne the normalization of the orientational order
parameter Ψ.

5

III. FLUCTUATION EFFECTS

To ﬁnd correlation functions of the order parameters Ψ and δρ, one has to take into account a self-interaction of the
ﬁelds and their coupling. The self-interaction of the hexatic order parameter Ψ leads to a universal scaling behavior
characterized by a set of critical exponents [19, 23, 24, 35]. The self-interaction of the parameter δρ produces eﬀects
that can be examined in the framework of the weak crystallization theory, see Ref. [34]. In addition, we should involve
into consideration the coupling between the order parameters Ψ and δρ that will be examined in the framework of
the perturbation theory. The applicability condition of this approach is weakness of the coupling.

An analysis of the ﬂuctuational eﬀects shows that in the smectic A phase the structure function (3) can be written

as

(8)

S(q) =

T

∆ + b(q⊥ − q0)2 ,

where b is the same parameter as in the Landau functional (5). Below, the parameter ∆ will be termed gap. As it

follows from the expression (8), the positional (translational) correlation length is ξtr = pb/∆. The expression (8) is

correct in the smectic A phase, in the hexatic phase the structure function acquires a hexagonal angular dependence.
However, in a vicinity of the the smectic A – hexatic phase transition, we are interested in this work, the angular
dependence is weak and therefore it will be ignored in our analysis. Thus, we use the expression (8) both, for the
smectic A and the hexatic phases. Use of the expression (8) is justiﬁed by the inequality q0ξtr ≫ 1, that is the main
applicability condition for our theory.

The gap ∆ possesses an essential temperature dependence. The bare value of the gap is a, see Eq. (5), the value is
renormalized due to self-interaction of the density ﬂuctuations. The main ﬂuctuation contribution to ∆ is determined
by the so-called one-loop term depicted by the following Feynman diagram

•

 

(9)

where the solid line represents the pair correlation function (3) and the bullet represents λ, see Eq. (6). Adding this
ﬂuctuation contribution to the bare value of ∆, that is a, one ﬁnds the self-consistent equation for the gap

∆ = a +

T q0λ
4√b∆

,

(10)

in a close analogy to the weak crystallization theory of three-dimensional liquids, see details in the survey [34]. Note
that the equation (10) has a solution for both, positive and negative a. That implies that the hexatic phase remains
metastable even below the crystallization temperature. Note parenthetically that one has to keep in mind this fact
discussing equilibration time in the hexatic smectics.

Next, we should take into account the interaction between the orientational order parameter Ψ and the position order
parameter δρ (short-range density ﬂuctuations), determined by the term (7) in the Landau functional. The interaction
between the orientation and the position order parameters modiﬁes correlation functions of both ﬂuctuating quantities,
Ψ and δρ. We examine the eﬀect using the perturbation theory, that is we take into account only ﬁrst corrections to
the correlation functions, related to the interaction (7). The applicability condition of the perturbative approach will
be formulated later on in this section.

Let us examine contributions to the gap ∆ caused by the interaction. First contributions to ∆ related to the

interaction term (7) can be represented by the following Feynman diagrams

g g

 

(11)

where the wavy lines correspond to the pair correlation function of the hexatic order parameter

f f

F (r1, r2) = hΨ(r1)Ψ⋆(r2)i.

6

(12)

(13)

According to the second order phase transitions theory [19, 23, 24, 35], the Fourier transform of the correlation function
(13) has the following self-similar form

F (q) =

1
q2−η f (qξh),

(14)

where η is the so-called anomalous critical exponent. For the superﬂuid universality class η ≈ 0.02, see Refs. [24–26].
The scaling function f in Eq. (14) provides that F depends solely on |T − Th| (Th is the smectic A – hexatic transition
temperature) for qξh ≪ 1 and solely on q in the opposite limit qξh ≫ 1 , see Refs. [19, 23, 24, 35].

In the smectic A phase the contribution (11) is zero. Indeed, the closed loop in the diagram (11) corresponds to
the single point average h[(∂x − i∂y)3δρ]2i, see Eq. (7), the average is zero due to isotropy of the smectic A layers. In
the vicinity of the phase transition, we are considering in this paper, the corresponding contribution is also negligible
in the hexatic phase. Thus, one should take into account solely the term (12) that gives the following contribution to
the gap ∆

δ∆ = −

1

2T Z

d3q
(2π)3 F (q)S(k + q),

(15)

where k is the wave vector of the density ﬂuctuation. Here the wave vector k lies near the ring (cylinder) k⊥ = q0
whereas the wave vector q can be estimated as q ∼ ξ−1
h . Thus, the inequalities k ≫ q and ∆ ≪ bq2 are valid. The ﬁrst
inequality is related to the condition that ξhq0 ≫ 1, which is valid near the phase transition point, and the second
one is equivalent to the condition (4). Using the inequalities, one obtains

where at the derivation of (16) we used the expression (8). Thus we end up with the equation

δ∆ = −

1

8π2√b∆ Z dqzdq⊥F (q),

∆ = a +

T q0λ
4√b∆

+ δ∆,

(16)

(17)

instead of Eq. (10). The equation (17) determines the temperature dependence of the gap ∆ in the critical region.

In the region qξh ≫ 1 the pair correlation function F (q) ∝ qη−2 [19, 23, 24, 35]. Therefore there is an ultraviolet
contribution to the integral R dqzdq⊥F to be included into a redeﬁnition of the factor λ, entering Eq. (17). Besides,
there is negative critical contribution to the integral R dqzdq⊥F that behaves ∝ |T − Th|νη, as follows from Eq. (14).

We are interested just in this term that produces a singular contribution to the gap ∆. Taking a derivative of the
equation (17) and keeping in mind that ∆ remains ﬁnite at the transition point, we ﬁnd

∂
∂T

∆ ∝ |T − Th|νη−1.

(18)

The singularity is integrable due to η, ν > 0. Therefore the gap ∆ remains ﬁnite at the transition point, indeed, that
justiﬁes our approach.

Now we can formulate the applicability condition of our perturbation approach. For the purpose we should compare
the contribution depicted by the one-loop diagram (12) with contributions of higher order, determined by many-loop
diagrams. An example of such diagram is illustrated by the ﬁgure

f f f

(19)

7

where a two-loop diagram is presented. Straightforward estimation shows that one can neglect the diagram (19) in
comparison with the diagram (12) if

δ∆ ≪ ∆,

(20)

where δ∆ is determined by Eq. (16). If the inequality (20) is not satisﬁed, we may not restrict ourselves to the one-loop
approximation and summation of an inﬁnite series of terms is needed. Such analysis is beyond the scope of this work.

Our theory yields additional contributions to the heat capacity related to the positional degree of freedom δρ.
The leading contribution is associated with the T -dependence of the coeﬃcient a in Eq. (5). Namely, we ﬁnd for the
a-dependent part of the free energy

∂Fa
∂T

=

V
2

∂a
∂T h(δρ)2i =

∂a
∂T

T V q0
4l√b∆

,

(21)

where the thickness l of the smectic layer appears due to integration over qz within the ﬁrst Brillouin zone. Taking
the T -derivative of the expression (21), we ﬁnd the following critical contribution to the heat capacity

∂2Fa
∂T 2 =

V
8

∂a
∂T

− T

T 2q0

lb1/2∆3/2

∂∆
∂T

.

(22)

In accordance with Eq. (18), the contribution (22) diverges near the phase transition with the exponent 1 − νη, close
to unity.

The additional contribution to the heat capacity (22) is crucial for our approach. The main message of our work (see
details in the next section) is to claim that a sum of two critical contributions to the heat capacity, with the “small”
exponent α and with the “large” exponent 1− νη, enables one to describe quantitatively the known experimental data.

IV. COMPARISON WITH EXPERIMENT

Unfortunately in the critical region for the smectic A - hexatic phase transition, the X-ray scattering experimental
data are very scarce (only a few experimental points). Certainly in such a situation it is useless to ﬁt the theory to
estimate at least 3 unknown parameters entering the theory equation for the gap. On the contrary, calorimetric data
in the critical region are quite informative. Thus in this work we focus on the measurable speciﬁc heat behavior and
take a pragmatic approach to understand calorimetric features of the smectic A – hexatic smectic phase transition,
and provide relationships between diﬀerent physical properties.

Let us turn to comparing our theory with the heat capacity experimental data. Known from the literature
experimental calorimetric data for 65OBC liquid crystalline material [10–18] manifest that the smectic A – hexatic
transition is a second order phase transition with a strong, nearly symmetric singularity of the heat capacity. The
value of the critical exponent α is extracted in the works from ﬁtting the experimental data to a single power law
dependence in the temperature range |T − Th| > 0.1K. For 65OBC the eﬀective critical exponent is α ≈ 0.64, and the
critical amplitude ratio is A+/A− ≈ 0.84. Note that the eﬀective critical exponent α depends on the material. Results
presented in the work [12] give the values ranging from 0.48 to 0.67 for eight diﬀerent substances. Such dispersion
signals about at least some problems of the approach.

Our theory states that the singular part of the heat capacity in the intermediate critical region is a sum of the two
terms: the ﬁrst term with the standard small critical exponent α characteristic of the theory for the two-component
order parameter universality class and the second term with the exponent 1 − νη ≈ 0.985, see Eq. (22). The second
contribution originates from the interaction of the order parameters Ψ and δρ. Thus to ﬁt the experimental data we
utilize the following expression for the heat capacity

p1

C =

C =

|x|−0.013 +
x−0.013 +

p2

p3
|x|
p4
x

+ p5,

if x < 0,

+ p5,

if x > 0,

(23)

8

 Thoen 2004
 calculation

40

35

30

25

C

20

15

10

5

0

340.6

340.7

340.8

340.9

T, oC

Рис. 1: Calorimetric experimental data [17] for 65OBC (open circles) versus our calculation (solid line)

where x = (T − Th)/Th is the reduced temperature, and we borrowed the value of the exponent α = −0.013 from
the standard data for the two-component order parameter in three dimensions presented in [24–26]. The obtained
values giving the best ﬁtting are Th = 341.11K, p1 = −48.09599, p2 = −48.19495, p3 = 0.0008, p4 = 0.00064 and
p5 = 91.60242. Although the found dimensionless parameters p3 and p4 are much smaller than p1 and p2, the former
ones are meaningful and anyway larger than the numeric accuracy of the ﬁtting procedure. Physically, the small values
of the parameters p3 and p4 indicate (consistently with our perturbation theory assumptions) that the coupling term
(7) is small.

Figure 1 confronts results of the computations of the speciﬁc heat in our model, see Eqs. (22) and (23), and the
experimental data [17] (which almost coincide, up to a regular shift of the sample-dependent transition temperature,
with the data presented in Refs. [10] and [16]). We see a reasonable agreement of the experimental data and our theory
(valid in the temperature range about 0.6 − 1 K around Th). The exponent α found in the works [10], [16], [17] is
based on the single power-law ﬁtting of the experimental data in the temperature range 0.005 < |T − Th|/Th < 1.5.
In this more broad temperature region we expect a sort of crossover behavior which can be ﬁtted by a single (but
not universal!) power law. Understanding all its limitations, we are conﬁdent that our model captures the essential
features of the smectic A – hexatic phase transition in the intermediate critical region (with two strongly ﬂuctuating
and coupled order parameters).

V. CONCLUSION

The main advance of our work is establishing for the ﬁrst time the model enabling to match quantitatively theory
and calorimetric data for the smectic A – hexatic phase transition, explaining, particularly, the eﬀective “large”
value of the heat capacity critical exponent. To avoid a confusion, let us stress that we are not ﬁghting with the well
established and widely accepted conception of the second order phase transition universality. There are no doubts that
suﬃciently close to the smectic A – hexatic transition temperature, the universal behavior of the heat capacity has to
be observed. However, we claim that the temperature region where the standard universality holds in a narrow vicinity
of the transition point. Outside the region the critical behavior does not correspond to the standard universality, its
description needs some additional ingredients, presented in our paper.

Our model involves an interaction between the strongly ﬂuctuating orientational (hexatic) and positional degrees
of freedom, Ψ and δρ, that oﬀers a new non-trivial scenario for the temperature dependencies of the speciﬁc heat and
X-ray scattering patterns near the smectic A – hexatic phase transition. Our approach allows one to reconcile well
established phase transition universality conception and the calorimetric experimental data [10–18] for the smectic A
– hexatic smectic phase transition. Thus, we claim, that we solved the old riddle related to the “large” value of the
heat capacity exponent for the phase transition. Our theoretical model lays ﬁrm foundations for the further studies
for biologists, experimental and theoretical physicists.

Our results, reported in the paper, concern the critical region (region of strong ﬂuctuations of the hexatic order
parameter Ψ) near the transition point. However, our model can be applied to the hexatic phase (outside the critical
region) as well. In the region one has to take into account ﬂuctuations of both, Ψ and δρ. Certain features of the
ﬂuctuations in the hexatic phase are diﬀerent from those in the critical region due to non-zero mean value of the order
parameter Ψ. A description of the region is a subject for future investigations.

One should keep in mind that our scheme implies weakness of the interaction between the orientation and the
position degrees of freedom. That is why we restrict ourselves to ﬁrst corrections over the interaction. An intriguing
question about the system behavior when the coupling is not small is beyond the scope of our consideration in this
publication, it will be analyzed elsewhere.

9

Acknowledgments

Our work was funded by Russian Science Foundation (grant 14-12-00475). We acknowledge stimulating discussions
with B.I.Ostrovskii, I.A.Vartanyants, and I.A.Zaluzhnyy, inspired this work. This paper has beneﬁted also from
exchanges with many colleagues. We thank in particular I.Kolokolov and L.Schur.

[1] R.J.Birgeneau, J.D.Litster, J. Phys. (Paris) 39, 1399 (1978).
[2] R.Bruinsma, D.R.Nelson, Phys. Rev. B 23, 402 (1981).
[3] R.Pindak, D.E.Moncton, S.C.Davey, J.W.Goodby, Phys. Rev. Lett. 46, 1135 (1981).
[4] J.D.Brock, A.Aharony, R.J.Birgeneau, K.W.Evans-Lutterodt, J.D.Litster, P.M.Horn, G.B.Stephenson, A.R.Tajbakhsh,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 98 (1986).

[5] W.H. de Jeu, B.I.Ostrovskii, and A.N.Shalaginov, Rev. Mod. Phys. 75, 181 (2003).
[6] I.A. Zaluzhnyy, R.P.Kurta, E.A.Sulyanova, O.Y.Gorobtsov, A.G.Shabalin, A.V.Zozulya, A.P. Menushenkov, M.Sprung,

B.I.Ostrovskii, I.A.Vartanyants, Phys. Rev. E 91, 042506 (2015).

[7] J.F. Nagle, S. Tristram-Nagle, Biochim. Bophys. Acta 10, 159 (2000).
[8] S.J.Marrink, H.J.Risselada, A.E.Mark, Chemistry and Physics of Lipids 135, 223 (2005).
[9] O.F.Petrov, M/M.Vasiliev, O.S.Vaulina, K.B.Stasenko, E.K.Vasilieva, E.A.Lisin, Y.Tun, V.E.Fortov, Europhys. Lett. 111,

45002 (2015).

[10] J.M.Viner, D.Lamey, C.C.Huang, R.Pindak, J.W.Goodby, Phys. Rev. A 28, 2433 (1983).
[11] C.C. Huang, J.M. Viner,R. Pindak, J.W. Goodby, Phys. Rev. Lett. 46, 1289 (1981).
[12] T. Pitchford, G. Nounesis, S. Dumrongrattana, J.M. Viner, C.C. Huang, J. W. Goodby, Phys. Rev. A 32, 1938 (1985).
[13] R.Geer, T.Stoebe, C.C.Huang, R.Pindak, G.Srajer, J.W.Goodby, M.Cheng, J.T.Ho, S.W.Hui, Phys. Rev. Lett. 66, 1322

(1991).

[14] T.Stoebe, R.Geer, C.C.Huang, J.W.Goodby, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 2090 (1992).
[15] R.Geer, T.Stoebe, C.C.Huang, Phys. Rev. E 48, 408 (1993).
[16] H. Haga, Z. Kutnjak, G.S. Iannacchione, S. Qian, D. Finotello, C.W. Garland, Phys. Rev. E 56, 1808 (1997).
[17] B. Van Roie, K.Denolf, G.Pitsi, J.Thoen, Eur. Phys. J. E 16, 361 (2005).
[18] F.Mercuri, S.Paolini, M.Marinelli, R.Pizzoferrato, U.Zammit, J. Chem. Phys. 138, 074903 (2013).
[19] P.M.Chaikin, T.C.Lubensky, Principles of condensed matter physics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2000.
[20] P.G. de Gennes and J. Prost, The Physics of Liquid Crystals, Claredon Press, Oxford, 1993.
[21] E.V.Gurovich, E.I.Kats, V.V.Lebedev, ZhETF 100, 855 (1991) [Sov. Phys. JETP 73, 473 (1991)].
[22] L.D.Landau, E.M.Lifshitz, Course of Theoretical Physics, Statistical Physics, Part 1, Pergamon Press, New York, 1980.
[23] K.G.Wilson and J.Kogut, Physics Reports 12, 75 (1974).
[24] H.E.Stanley, Introduction to phase transitions and critical phenomena, Oxford University Press, New York, 1987.
[25] M.A.Anisimov, Critical phenomena in liquids and liquid crystals, Gordon and Breach, Philadelphia, 1991.
[26] A.Pelissetto, E.Vicari, Physics Reports 368, 549 (2002).
[27] J.C. Le Guillou, J.Zinn-Justin, Phys. Rev. B 21, 3976 (1980).
[28] A.Aharony, R.J.Birgeneau, J.D.Brock, J.D.Litster, Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 1012 (1986).
[29] M.A.Anisimov, V.P.Voronov, A.O.Kul’kov, F.Kholmurodov, Pis’ma v ZhETF 41, 248 (1985) [JETP Lett. 41, 302 (1985)].
[30] C.Rosenblat, J.T.Ho, Phys. Rev. A 26, 2293 (1982).
[31] J.D.Brock, R.J.Birgeneau, D.Litster, A.Aharony, Contemp. Phys. 3, 321 (1989).
[32] E.Gorecka, Li Chen, O.Lavrentovich, W.Pyzuk, Europhys. Lett. 27, 507 (1994).
[33] T.W.Burkhadt, H.J.F. Knops, M. de Vijs, J. of Phys. A 9, L-179 (1976).
[34] E.I. Kats, V.V. Lebedev, A.R. Muratov, Physics Reports 228, 1 (1993).
[35] A.Z. Patashinskii, V.L. Pokrovskii, Fluctuation Theory of Phase Transitions, Pergamon Press, New York, 1979.

