6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
 
7
1

 
 
]
T
I
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
8
6
3
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

A Survey on High-Speed Railway Communications:

A Radio Resource Management Perspective

1

Shengfeng Xu, Gang Zhu, Bo Ai, Zhangdui Zhong

State Key Laboratory of Rail Trafﬁc Control and Safety

Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, P. R. China

Email:{xsf1988, gzhu, boai, zhdzhong}@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

High-speed railway (HSR) communications will become a key feature supported by intelligent transportation

communication systems. The increasing demand for HSR communications leads to signiﬁcant attention on the study

of radio resource management (RRM), which enables efﬁcient resource utilization and improved system performance.

RRM design is a challenging problem due to heterogenous quality of service (QoS) requirements and dynamic

characteristics of HSR wireless communications. The objective of this paper is to provide an overview on the key

issues that arise in the RRM design for HSR wireless communications. A detailed description of HSR communication

systems is ﬁrst presented, followed by an introduction on HSR channel models and characteristics, which are vital

to the cross-layer RRM design. Then we provide a literature survey on state-of-the-art RRM schemes for HSR

wireless communications, with an in-depth discussion on various RRM aspects including admission control, mobility

management, power control and resource allocation. Finally, this paper outlines the current challenges and open issues

in the area of RRM design for HSR wireless communications.

Keywords—High-speed railway communications, HSR, radio resource management, RRM, optimization design.

I. INTRODUCTION

For the last two decades, intelligent transportation systems (ITS) have emerged as an efﬁcient way of improving

the performance of transportation systems. As an essential element of ITS, high-speed railway (HSR) has been

developed rapidly as a fast, convenient and green public transportation system and would become the future trend

of railway transportation worldwide [1]. For instance, a high speed rail plan has been outlined in America and the

length of HSR lines in China will reach 18,000 km by 2020 [2]. With the continuous construction of HSR in recent

years, the issue of train operation safety has attracted more and more attention. The train operation control system

plays a key role in train operation safety and is regarded as the nerve center of the HSR system. A standard has

been set up for the train operation control system, which is known as European Train Control System (ETCS) [3, 4].

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

2

In order to make ETCS work better and create a digital standard for railway communications, a dedicated mobile

communication system called the global system for mobile communications for railway (GSM-R) has been proposed

by International Union of Railway (UIC) [5].

GSM-R has been widely used in HSR communications and can maintain a reliable communication link between

the train and the ground. However, GSM-R has some major shortcomings, such as insufﬁcient capacity, low network

utilization, and limited support for data services [6]. A broadband wireless communication system for HSR called

long-term evolution for railway (LTE-R) has been presented in [7, 8] and determined in the 7th World Congress on

High-Speed Rail [9]. Broadband wireless communications can enhance the train operation by allowing an operation

center to monitor real-time train-related data information, such as safety information and track diagnostic information

[10]. In addition to the train control data transmission, LTE-R is also expected to provide passenger services such

as Internet access and high-quality mobile video broadcasting [3, 4, 11]. With the beneﬁt of it, passengers can treat

their journey as a seamless extension of their working or leisure environment.

To improve the capacity for wireless communications on the train, the future HSR communication networks

are expected to be heterogeneous with a mixture of different networks and radio access technologies that can

be simultaneously accessed by hundreds of users on the train [12, 13]. For instance, the heterogeneous network

architecture can be considered as a combination of satellite network, cellular network and wireless data network

[10], where the advantage of each access network can be taken into consideration. This architectural enhancement

along with the advanced communication technologies such as multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO), orthogonal

frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) and radio over ﬁber (RoF), will provide high aggregate capacity and high

spectral efﬁciency. Nevertheless, the demand for HSR wireless communications is increasingly growing, for example,

the estimated wireless communication requirement could be as high as 65 Mbps per train [14]. To further relieve

the contradiction between the increasing demand and limited bandwidth of HSR wireless communications, it is

necessary to implement radio resource management (RRM) to improve resource utilization efﬁciency and ensure

quality of service (QoS) requirements. However, the traditional RRM methods (e.g., handover, power control and

resource allocation) for common cellular communications may not be efﬁcient in HSR wireless communications due

to the following reasons, which are closely related to the characteristics of HSR scenario.

• High mobility. The dramatic increase of train speed will cause frequent handover. Given a cell size of 1-2

km, a high-speed train of 350 km/h experiments one handover every 10-20 seconds [15]. To solve the frequent

handover problem is one of the main functions of RRM in HSR wireless communications. Moreover, the fast

relative motion between the ground and the train will lead to large Doppler shift and small coherence time.

The maximum speed of HSR in China is currently 486 km/h, which induces a Doppler shift of 945 Hz at 2.1

GHz [14]. Thus, when implementing resource allocation for HSR communications, it is necessary to consider

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

3

the fast-varying channel and inter-carrier interference (ICI) especially for OFDM technology.

• Unique channel characteristics. The moving train encounters diverse scenarios (e.g. cuttings, viaducts and

tunnels) with different channel propagation characteristics [3, 16], which causes that a single channel model

could not depict features of HSR channels accurately. It brings a big challenge to RRM schemes, which should be

adaptive to diverse scenarios along the rail with different channel models. Furthermore, the line-of-sight (LOS)

component is much stronger than the multipath components especially in viaduct scenario, which implies that

the propagation loss mainly depends on the distance between the base station (BS) and the train [17]. Since

the distance varies with the train’s position, the power control along the time has a large inﬂuence on system

transmission performance [18].

• Heterogeneous QoS requirements. Many types of services with heterogeneous QoS requirements and priorities

will be supported on the train [10]. The QoS performance in HSR wireless communications will be degraded

because of high mobility and unique channel characteristics, especially for real-time services and critical core

services that are critical for the train operation [19]. In order to improve system performance and satisfy

heterogeneous QoS requirements, it is critical to design effective RRM schemes and resource optimization

methods for multiple services transmission in HSR communications.

All these unique characteristics make it challenging to facilitate RRM design for HSR wireless communications.

Thus, a new look into the RRM problem in HSR communications is urgently required, where the network architecture

and unique characteristics of HSR scenario should be fully taken into consideration. This paper systematically reviews

and evaluates the various studies performed in the area of HSR communication systems. There are also some survey

papers discussing the research topics in HSR wireless communications, such as the network architectures [12, 13],

the handover schemes [20], and the channel characteristics and models [21, 22]. Contrary to these surveys, this paper

provides a comprehensible survey on HSR wireless communications from the perspective of RRM and optimization

design. Our goal is to present a detailed investigation and thorough discussion of current state-of-the-art RRM schemes

for HSR wireless communications, as well as provide a better understanding of the RRM research challenges and

open issues in HSR wireless communications.

The paper is organized based on the structure shown in Fig. 1. Section II provides an overview of HSR com-

munication systems, including potential network architecture, HSR applications and services, as well as advanced

transmission technologies. This is followed by a discussion on HSR channel characteristics in Section III, where

a detailed analysis is carried out to understand the effects of channel characteristics on RRM design. Section IV

surveys the RRM schemes for HSR wireless communications from several aspects: admission control, mobility

management, power control, and resource allocation. The current challenges and open issues of RRM design for

HSR wireless communications are given in Section V, prior to the conclusions in Section VI.

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

Section I. Introduction

- background and motivations

HSR Communication Systems

4

Section IV. Radio Resource Management

- overview of current research on RRM in 
HSR communication systems
A. admission control
B. mobility management
C. power control
D. resource allocation

RRM

Channel Model

Section II. Overview of HSR 
Communication Systems

- detail description of HSR communication 
systems
A. network architecture
B. railway applications and services
C. advanced transmission technology

Fig. 1. The structure of this survey paper

Section III. HSR Channel Characterization

Section V. Open Issues

- key characteristics of wireless channels in 
HSR communication systems
A. multiple scenarios
B. LOS dominance
C. Doppler shift

- related open issues on RRM in 
HSR communication systems

Section VI. Conclusions

II. OVERVIEW OF HSR COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS

A. Network Architecture

A proper network architecture is the basis of broadband wireless communications for high-speed trains [2]. In

this subsection, we provide a potential architecture to guide our discussion of broadband Internet access on trains.

A global overview of the network architecture for HSR communications is depicted in Fig. 2. This heterogeneous

network architecture is responsible for the data transmission between the fast moving train and the service providers.

It is layered and consists of the core network, the aggregation network, the access network and the train network

[10, 23]. All these four layers are brieﬂy introduced as below.

1) Core Network: The core network is responsible for providing services and data processing in HSR commu-

nication systems. There are two major actors in the core network, i.e., Internet and Railway Stakeholders (RST)

[10]. The Internet can provide the multimedia services for passengers and the content servers (CSs) are deployed

in order to ofﬂoad data trafﬁc [24], which have been applied in [25, 26]. The RST can have remote data access to

devices on the trains, such as train operating company (TOC) and train maintainer company (TMC). The former

operates the trains for passenger or freight transport, while the latter is responsible for maintaining the trains. In

LTE-R system, the core network is the Evolved Packet Core (EPC) [8]. The signiﬁcant difference from the core

network of GSM-R is that the EPC is an all-IP mobile core network. This means that all services will be transmitted

on the packet-switched domain.

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

5

Internet

RST

CS

TOC

TMC

Core Network

SGW

Aggregation Network

AGW

Satellite Network

Cellular Network

Wireless Data Network

Passengers

AP

TAT

Control
Elements

Access Network

Train Network

Fig. 2. Network architecture for HSR communications

2) Aggregation Network: The aggregation network lies between the access network and the core network, and

it forwards data from the access network to the global Internet. The aggregation network can use the following

technologies for forwarding data: IEEE 802.11, Ethernet, ADSL, or optical ﬁber [12]. Two types of gateways in the

architecture play a key role in data aggregation, named the access gateway (AGW) and service gateway (SGW). The

AGW serves as an interface between the access network and aggregation network. It combines the data from the

access networks and forwards that data to the SGW, which serves as an interface between the aggregation network

and core network.

3) Access Network: The access network is close to the railway line, and it provides the last hop communication

for the train. Three kinds of wireless access technologies are used to provide wireless access for high-speed

trains: satellite, cellular and dedicated wireless data networks. Thus, this network architecture can be regarded

as a heterogeneous network. Table I gives an overview of the different characteristics of these access technologies

[10, 12, 13]. Speciﬁcally, it provides a comparison with respect to their capabilities of delivering broadband services

to fast moving trains. It can be seen that none of these technologies can meet all requirements: high data rate, low

latency and fast handover. Thus, to take full use of the advantages of different access technologies, a combination of

some technologies is typically considered to be used in [27–29]. Meanwhile, the technical solutions and the choice

of the right technology are well documented in the literature [12, 30].

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

6

TABLE I

COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT ACCESS NETWORKS

Parameter

Technologies

Satellite network

DVB-S, DVB-S2

DVB-RCS

Cellular network Wireless data network

2G, 3G, 4G

Wi-Fi, WiMAX

LTE

Flash-OFDM

Current converge

Very large (International)

Large (National)

Small (Limited)

Maximum train speed

Very high

Supported data rate

Transmission delay

High

High

Handover performance Good

High

Low-high

Low-high

Bad-good

Low-high

Very high

Very low

Bad

4) Train Network: Broadband wireless communications on the train are provided through the train access terminal

(TAT). This TAT connects to the access network using an antenna mounted on the outside of the train. It can combine

different access technologies and can also intelligently select the best means of communication between the train

and the access network [12]. The incoming signal from the TAT is then fed to the access point (AP) for passengers

wireless access or control elements for the train controlling.

We have provided a detailed description of this heterogonous network architecture. In conclusion, it has numerous

advantages for HSR wireless communications

• Since the TAT acts as a transmission relay, a two-hop communication link is established and penetration loss

is avoided. In addition, the Doppler frequency shift and handover can be handled easily.

• This architecture can support multiple access technologies, thus the users don’t need to switch or upgrade their

equipments and just use their own radio access technologies.

• This architecture not only can provide multimedia services for passenger entertainment, but also can be used

for railway signaling to improve railway operations.

B. Railway Applications and Services

Current railway applications are focused on ensuring essential radio communications for train controlling, such as

GSM-R and CBTC (Communication-Based Train Control). The availability of high-speed broadband connections on

the train opens up the possibility for new categories of services. Fig. 3 offers a comprehensive classiﬁcation of the

applications and services in HSR communications [7, 11, 31, 32]. Two main groups have been identiﬁed: critical core

services and non-critical services. Critical core services are usually referred to as mission critical services, including

critical railway communications, train operational voice services and operational data applications. The most common

examples are staff voice communications, onboard closed circuit television (CCTV), and communication-based train

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

control. The non-critical services include passenger experience services and business process support services. The

passengers can have high-speed Internet access and personal onboard multimedia entertainment, which have been

achieved by one of the European HSR operators [12]. Some business-related services can also be supported, such

as remote diagnostics and location-based services [31].

7

Railway applications and services

Critical core services

Non-critical services

Critical railway 

operations

Staff voice 
operations

Control data 
operations

Passenger
experience

Business process 

support

Fig. 3. Railway services classiﬁcation

The future HSR communication systems can address both critical and non-critical applications. Obviously, the

service requirements are signiﬁcantly different from each other. The main requirements for non-critical services

include coverage, network capacity and cost requirements, while the requirements for critical services are mainly

related to reliability, availability and prioritization. Speciﬁcally, the work [10] has identiﬁed the QoS requirements

of these HSR services from the perspective of delay, jitter and loss. The critical services need assurances for low

delay and high reliability, while the non-critical services are constrained by available bandwidth [31]. Clearly, there

exists a mismatch between the critical services and non-critical services, and thus it has a signiﬁcant effect on the

RRM and optimization design, which will be discussed in Section IV.

C. Advanced Transmission Technology

The HSR wireless communications require high data rates to satisfy the demands of train operations and meet the

communication requirements for passengers [32, 33]. Advanced transmission technologies are desired to keep up

with this unprecedented demand growth. As shown in Fig. 4, OFDM, MIMO and RoF technologies can be efﬁciently

utilized to improve the transmission capacity for HSR wireless communications.

1) OFDM: OFDM has become a dominant technology for the broadband wireless communications, forming the

basis of all current WiFi standards and LTE. Its qualities include

• The robustness to the frequency-selective multipath channel, avoiding intersymbol interference and leading to

high spectral efﬁciency.

• The ﬂexibility for resource allocation and management, since OFDM allows for dynamically assigning the

subcarriers to multiple users and adaptively choosing the proper modulation and coding scheme.

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

OFDM

f1 f2

f3

MIMO

CC

RAU1 RAU2

RAUN

8

(a) OFDM technology

(b) MIMO technology

(c) RoF technology

Fig. 4. Advanced transmission technologies for HSR wireless communications

• An excellent pairing for MIMO, since the spatial interference from multiantenna transmission can be handled

at the subcarrier level, without adding intersymbol interference.

Given this impressive list of qualities, OFDM is the unquestionable frontrunner for future HSR communications

[34, 35]. However, some weak points would possibly become more pronounced in HSR environment. First, Doppler

shift caused by the high mobility destroys the orthogonality of the subcarriers, and results in ICI. Since ICI

signiﬁcantly degrades system performance, it is not negligible when it comes to resource allocation. Moreover,

if OFDM technology is applied into future HSR communications, it is necessary and feasible to reduce the inﬂuence

of ICI through channel estimation and equalization [36, 37]. Recently, a fundamentally distinct OFDM transmission

scheme called time-frequency training OFDM is proposed in [34] for high speed mobile environments, and it can

achieve high spectral efﬁciency as well as reliable performance. Second, OFDM technology faces the peak-to-average

power ratio (PAPR) problem, which will reduce the resolution of signal conversion and degrade the efﬁciency of the

power ampliﬁer. For an actual power ampliﬁer, a high PAPR sets up a design tradeoff between the linearity of the

transmitted signal and the ampliﬁer cost. When applying OFDM technology into practical HSR communications, the

PAPR problem can be largely overcome by using the pilot-assisted technique [38] and signal precoding technique

[39].

2) MIMO: With the development of HSR communication systems, MIMO technology has become a hot research

topic in train-to-ground communications [40–45]. As we know, MIMO is one of the key technologies in 4G mobile

communications, where the spatial multiplexing and transmit diversity can improve the signal quality and system

spectral efﬁciency. However, wireless channels are highly correlated with strong LOS due to few multipaths and

scatterers in HSR environments. The presence of the LOS component is regarded as a limiting factor for MIMO

technology due to lower multiplexing gain compared with the prevalent Rayleigh fading channel [46]. Thus, the

conventional spatial multiplexing and diversity of MIMO cannot be directly applied into HSR environments.

Some advanced schemes have been proposed to take advantage of MIMO technology for HSR communications.

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

9

First, based on the 3-D modeling of the LOS MIMO channel, a multiple-group multiple-antenna (MGMA) scheme

is proposed in [40] to increase the MIMO channel capacity, where the capacity gain can be achieved by adjusting the

weights among MGMA arrays. Second, beamforming is the most suitable transmission mode for the LOS scenario

with strong channel correlation. With the help of real-time train position information, a beamforming platform and a

distributed beamforming algorithm for HSR communications are respectively proposed in [41] and [42] to improve

the communication quality. Finally, the combination of OFDM and MIMO technologies has been introduced into

HSR communications, and it can further improve the spectrum efﬁciency [43, 44].

Recently there have been increasing interests in massive MIMO systems, which employ tens or hundreds of anten-

nas at the transmitter and receiver [47], and can potentially yield a signiﬁcant improvement in system performance.

The massive MIMO technology is especially suitable for HSR communications due to the large size of the train.

Meanwhile, with the linear topology of HSR cellular networks, multiple antennas can be employed at both BS

and train. More speciﬁcally, a two-antenna conﬁguration with one antenna at train head and another at train tail is

adopted by [15] and [48] to enable a more efﬁcient handover process. The optimum design and performance analysis

of HSR communications with massive MIMO are studied in [45], where co-located antenna and distributed antenna

layouts on the train are considered.

3) RoF: Cellular mobile networks have been well developed for train-to-ground wireless communications. To

provide broadband wireless communications for high speed trains, RoF technology has been extensively investigated

as an appropriate solution [2, 33, 48–51]. Figure 4(c) shows an example of the RoF-based cellular mobile network.

Several remote access units (RAUs) are located along the rail and an optical ring interconnects them. All RAUs within

the same ring are under the supervision of a centralized controller (CC), where the signal processing is performed.

Compared with conventional cellular networks, it can be seen that the RoF scheme is more cost-effective, since it

needs only a control equipment with N low-cost RAUs to provide the same coverage as that of N conventional

BSs. Moreover, these N RAUs that are controlled by the same CC, can be used as repeaters for the same signal

and there is no need for handover when the train moves from one RAU to the next. Thus, the RoF scheme can

reduce the number of handover, which is the main cause of dropped calls in HSR communications. In addition, RoF

technology can greatly improve the coverage efﬁciency of HSR cellular networks [48, 52].

RoF technology has shown a promising future for broadband wireless communications in HSR environments.

Based on RoF technology, a distributed antenna system (DAS) has been implemented and experimented over railway

communications [49]. The targets of implementing DAS are to extend the service coverage for single BS and alleviate

handover penalty. The DAS system could also provide better signal quality and bandwidth efﬁciency [2, 50]. By

combining RoF technology with the “moving cells” or “moving frequencies” concept, the handover time can be

reduced signiﬁcantly [2, 33]. Besides, to support higher data rate and provide larger bandwidth, millimeter-wave

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

10

bands (e.g. 60 GHz band) are suggested to be combined with RoF technology [33, 51].

III. HSR CHANNEL CHARACTERIZATION

The knowledge of the wireless channel between the train and ground is vital to the optimal design and performance

of HSR communication systems. Different from traditional cellular scenarios, there are some speciﬁc characterizations

in the HSR propagation environments such as multiple scenarios, LOS dominance and Doppler shift [14]. Detailed

information about these channel characterizations has been illustrated in [21] and [22]. This paper focuses on

analyzing the effects of these channel characterizations on RRM design.

A. Multiple Scenarios

HSR is usually situated on multiple different scenarios crossing a suburban or rural area. The path loss and

multipath effects are in disparity under various propagation environments, leading to the impossibility of accurate

channel predictions under different propagation environments with the same channel model [3]. Thus, radio wave

propagation scene partitioning plays an important role in wireless channel modeling. The HSR scenarios are

partitioned into 12 types in [16], where the detailed description about scene partitioning can be found. The main

HSR scenarios include viaduct, cutting and tunnel, as shown in Fig. 5.

Viaduct

Cutting

 Tunnel

Fig. 5. Multiple scenarios in HSR communications

These special HSR scenarios have signiﬁcant impacts on the propagation characteristics. Viaduct is the most

common scenario, where the railway track is placed on the viaduct surface to ensure its ﬂatness. The propagation

channel in viaduct scenario is found to be greatly inﬂuenced by the physical environments, the directional BS

antennas, and the viaduct height [14, 53]. Cutting is used on uneven ground to help the train pass through large

obstacles and ensure ﬂatness of the rail lines. An important feature of the cutting is the rich reﬂection and scattering

components caused by the steep walls on both sides of the railway tracks [16, 54]. Tunnel is built through a mountain

in HSR environments. For a long tunnel, several BSs are installed on the wall inside the tunnel. Due to the smooth

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

11

wall and close structure, there are rich reﬂections and scattering components inside the tunnel, and they introduce

the waveguide effect dominating the radio wave propagation [55, 56].

Different propagation characteristics in these HSR scenarios bring several challenges to RRM design for HSR

communications. On one hand, the channel measurements and models for these HSR scenarios have been widely

investigated in [14, 16, 53–56]. There are several types of channel models: empirical models, deterministic models,

semi-deterministic models, and hybrid models [57]. Generally speaking, empirical models are easy and fast to

implement, but hard to reﬂect the practical propagation channel characteristics. In contrast, deterministic models can

achieve higher accuracy than empirical models, but at the cost of high complexity. Thus, when developing cross-

layer optimization and RRM design, it is necessary to choose a suitable channel model based on the accuracy

and complexity. On the other hand, considering the complex environments along the rail, several propagation

scenarios may exist in one communication cell [3]. When the high-speed train runs across these propagation

scenarios, the channel characteristics change rapidly accordingly. Thus, the cross-layer based RRM schemes for

HSR communications should be adaptive to the rapid transition on channel propagation characteristics.

B. LOS Dominance

The newly-built HSR routes are distinguished from conventional ones, by gentler curves, shallower grooves and

ﬂatter tracks. Viaducts account for the vast majority of Chinese HSR (for example, 86.5% elevated in Beijing-

Shanghai HSR [40]). Combined with the high antennas, these yield an open space. Compared with urban and indoor

environments, the LOS component is much stronger and other multipath echoes are encountered less frequently

between the train and ground. This fact has been conﬁrmed by engineering measurements [14, 58]. Thus, the channel

is lightly scattered and only the LOS path is available at most time, which provides a convenient environment for

HSR communications.

The BS coverage model for HSR cellular communications is given in Fig. 6. BSs are positioned along the railway,

spacing each other by 2R, which represents the service distance of one BS [59]. The train moves at a constant velocity

v along the rail. When the train locates at the position ds of current cell for 0 ≤ ds ≤ 2R, the distance between
BS and train is d = pd2

0 + (ds − R)2, where d0 is the distance between the BS and the rail line. Based on the

assumption of ignoring the altitude difference between BS antenna and train antenna, the propagation loss of the

LOS path in free space is given by

c (cid:21) ,
L = 20 log10(cid:20) 4πdf

(1)

where f and c are the emitted frequency and velocity of light, respectively. From (1), we can see that the path loss

L is related with the distance d and frequency f .

Fig. 7(a) shows the effects of both distance and frequency on path loss. It is clearly shown that the path loss varies

quickly with the train location no matter which frequency is used. When the train moves towards the cell edge, the

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

12

overlap region

BS/RRU

(cid:14) v

d

ds

d0

R

Fig. 6. BS coverage model for HSR cellular communications

path loss turns larger and the corresponding channel condition gets worse. On the contrary, when the train moves

towards the cell center, the path loss turns smaller and the corresponding channel condition turns better. The periodic

variation of channel conditions causes that the power control along the time has a large inﬂuence on the transmission

performance. Thus, it is necessary and feasible to implement power control along the travel time. It can be also

observed from Fig. 7(a), the path loss at 2.4 GHz is larger than that at 900 MHz. Note that 900 MHz and 2.4GHz

are the working frequencies of GSM-R in China and LTE, respectively. If higher frequency is chosen as the carrier

frequency for future HSR communications, more transmit power will be consumed for pathloss compensation. In

addition, the path-loss value at cell edge and the selection of the carrier frequency will drive the network planning

due to the different path losses at different distances and frequencies [60].

−70

−75

−80

−85

−90

−95

)

B
d
(
 
s
s
o
l
 
h
t
a
P

−100

−105

−1500

f = 900 MHz

f = 2.4 GHz

f = 900 MHz

f = 2.4 GHz

1000

800

600

400

200

0

−200

−400

−600

−800

)
z
H

(
 
t
f
i
h
s
 
r
e
l
p
p
o
D

−1000

−500

0

Location (m)

(a)

500

1000

1500

−1000

−1500

−1000

−500

0

Location (m)

500

1000

1500

(b)

Fig. 7. Path loss and Doppler shift versus location at two frequencies: 900 MHz and 2.4 GHz. BS is located at 0, the cell radius R is 1500

m, and the train moving speed v is 100 m/s.

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

13

The path loss model (1) explains the effect of the periodic channel variation on network planning and RRM

design. To obtain reasonable network planning and optimal system performance, it requires a deep understanding

of the path loss in HSR environments. Based on the channel measurements in practical HSR environments, more

accurate path loss models for different HSR scenarios have been widely investigated [14, 17, 58]. Actually, the LOS

path is a main component and the multipath can not be ignored in high-mobility scenarios. Some channel models

for high-mobility scenarios have been proposed in [53, 54, 56], but they are very complex for the upper-layer

protocol design and performance optimization. To capture the characteristics of the time-varying wireless channel

and simultaneously obtain mathematically tractable channel models, a ﬁnite-state Markov channel model is developed

for HSR communications in [61], and its accuracy is validated in [62].

C. Doppler Shift

The high mobility causes the high Doppler shift and spread. In HSR environments, the ratio of the energy in the

LOS path to that in the multipath is relatively large, and the delay of multipath is relatively small. As a result, the

major inﬂuence on HSR wireless channels caused by high mobility is Doppler shift instead of Doppler spread [40].

As shown in Fig. 6, when the train moves along the rail, Doppler shift fρ can be calculated by

fρ = fd × cos θ,

(2)

where fd = v
of sight from BS to the train. Based on geometry information, from Fig. 6, we have cos θ = R−ds

c ×f is the maximum Doppler frequency, θ is the angle between the train’s forward direction and the line
, 0 ≤ ds ≤ 2R.

d

It can be seen that when the BS is placed far from the rail, i.e., d0 ≫ R, fρ is relatively low since θ will be

approximately 90◦. However, it will cause large path loss according to equation (1). Thus, there exists a tradeoff

between path loss and Doppler shift when optimizing BS assignments.

Fig. 7(b) shows the Doppler shift along the rail for different carrier frequencies. Several facts can be obtained as

below.

• fρ is time-varying from the maximum positive value to maximum negative value as the train moves through a

cell. This change process will repeat when the train moves along the rail.

• Severe Doppler shift exists in the communication process. The Doppler shift could be up to 800 Hz when the

train travels at 100 m/s and the carrier frequency is 2.4 GHz.

• Although fρ is very small as the train moves through BS, it will encounter a rapid Doppler transition.

• fρ will jump from the maximum negative value to the maximum positive value, when the train moves into the

overlap region between neighbor cells as depicted in Fig. 6.

For HSR wireless communications, severe Doppler shift and rapid Doppler transition issues need to be addressed

before the practical application. On one hand, severe Doppler shift would result in the difﬁculty of synchronization

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

14

and bit error rate [36]. However, it is worth noting that for most of the cell coverage, although the Doppler shift is

large, its variation is so small that the Doppler shift can be estimated accurately and compensated easily according

to accurate train’s velocity and location information [37, 63]. On the other hand, rapid Doppler transition at the

cell center greatly increases the difﬁculty of channel estimation and Doppler shift estimation, which will cause

irrecoverable channel estimation error and severe ICI [14, 64]. The channel uncertainty and imperfection in the

physical layer bring a big challenge to RRM design in the upper layers. A reliable RRM scheme should be essentially

robust to channel uncertainty and adaptive to the rapid Doppler transition.

IV. RADIO RESOURCE MANAGEMENT

With growing demand for more and more QoS features and multi-service support in future HSR communication

systems, RRM has become crucial and attracted great attention. RRM is the process of developing decisions and

taking actions to optimize the system resource utilization. In particular, RRM consists of four key elements: admission

control, mobility management, power control, and resource allocation [65]. Each element has a corresponding function

with a common objective of achieving better system performance. Compared with traditional cellular communications,

supporting multi-service transmission under HSR scenarios introduces some new challenging issues to these RRM

elements. In this section, we provide a comprehensive state-of-the-art survey on RRM schemes for HSR wireless

communications, with a focus on speciﬁc solutions for each element in detail.

A. Admission Control

Admission control is an essential tool for congestion control and QoS provisioning by restricting the access

to network resources. Generally, the admission control function has two considerations: the remaining network

resources and the QoS guarantees. In an admission control mechanism, a new access request can be accepted if

there are adequate free resources to meet its QoS requirement without violating the committed QoS of the accepted

accesses. Thus, there is a fundamental tradeoff between the QoS level and the resource utilization. To solve this

tradeoff, admission control has been extensively studied in common communication networks, and different aspects

of admission control design and performance analysis have been surveyed in [66]. However, the admission control

problem in HSR wireless communications is more sophisticated due to the following reasons.

• High mobility brings some challenges to the implementation of admission control schemes, such as the fast-

varying fading channel and frequent handover. The fast-varying characteristics of the wireless channel will cause

channel estimation error, and further lead to admission control schemes inaccurate. For frequent handover, since

available handover time is short and handover connections almost arrive in batches, it is critical to consider the

handover connections when implementing admission control.

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

15

• Multiple services with heterogenous QoS requirements are supported on the train. The prioritization and fairness

among different services should be taken into account in assigning admission control schemes. For example,

higher priority should be given to safety-related services while the other services are delivered using the

remaining network sources.

The above reasons make it difﬁcult to directly apply the common admission control schemes into HSR communi-

cations. The investigation on novel and proper admission control schemes is of great importance. In the following,

we provide an overview of the existing research on admission control for HSR wireless communications, including

the classiﬁcation, the detailed description, and the comparisons of different admission control schemes.

1) Level-based Admission Control: Based on the admission level, the admission control schemes can be classiﬁed

into the call-level admission control and the packet-level admission control. Traditional admission control schemes

only consider call-level performance and are mainly designed for circuit-switched GSM-R system [43, 67–72]. Since

LET-R will become a packet-switched system, the packet-level features could be explored to improve the system

performance [26]. The difference between the call-level admission control and packet-level admission control is as

follows. At call level, each call is characterized by its arrival rate and holding time. If the system has enough resource,

the new call request will be accepted, otherwise, the call will be rejected. The packet-level features are characterized

by the QoS proﬁle that describes the packet arrival rate, packet queueing delay and packet loss ratio requirement.

For the elastic trafﬁc transmission, the system simply drops the excess packets based on the system status and the

minimum QoS guarantee. To the best of our knowledge, the call-level admission control and packet-level admission

control are investigated separately. In the packet-switched LTE-R system, the packet-level dynamics are central to

the call-level performance, and thus both the packet level and call level should be considered in admission control

schemes.

2) Handover-based Admission Control: Compared with the conventional mobile communications, handover is

more frequent in HSR mobile communications. Thus, to reduce the handover failure probability and prevent the

handover connections from being rejected, it is critical to consider the handover connections when implementing

admission control. Some existing papers have studied the admission control schemes associated with handover in

high-speed mobile scenarios. A spring model-based admission control scheme is proposed in [67], where every

existing service is considered as a spring. For admitting handover services, bandwidth resource borrowing strategy is

provided by compressing the spring as long as the lowest QoS can still be guaranteed. Performance metrics such as

dropping probability and blocking probability are analyzed based on the birth-death process. In [68], a mobility-aware

call admission control algorithm is proposed in mobile hotspots, where a handover queue is involved to reduce the

handover-call dropping probability. The guard channels are dynamically assigned for handover calls depending on the

vehicular mobility. By means of Markov chains, the proposed algorithm is evaluated in terms of new-call blocking

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

16

probability, handover-call dropping probability, handover-call waiting time in the queue, and channel utilization. The

literature [69] proposes joint admission control and handover policies in an integrated satellite-terrestrial architecture,

and the proposed policies aim to increase both the user satisfaction and the resource utilization. Another handover-

based admission control scheme is proposed in [70], where a position-based factor is introduced to reserve more

resources to accept handover calls. With the help of the handover location information, the resource reservation

scheme divides the system resources for handover calls and new calls, respectively.

In the above schemes [67–70], the handover services and new services are considered when making admission

control decisions. Actually, the services can dynamically change their modulation and coding schemes (MCS) in

HSR wireless communications. When the adopted MCS changes from high spectrum efﬁciency to low spectrum

efﬁciency, the occupied physical bandwidth will increase. Then, besides handover services and new services, MCS

changed service may be also dropped. In [71], the main potential origins of service dropping are classiﬁed into two

types: MCS changed service dropping and handover service dropping. A cross-layer admission control scheme with

adaptive resource reservation is proposed to reduce the service dropping probability, where the inﬂuences of MCS

change and time-varying channels are taken into account.

3) Priority-based Admission Control: As described in subsection II.B, different types of services will be transmit-

ted between the train and ground. Generally, different services have different priorities and bandwidth requirements.

Thus, the service priority should be considered in admission control schemes for HSR wireless communications.

In [72], an admission control scheme with the complete-sharing resource allocation model is proposed for LTE-R

system to maximize the number of admitted services while guaranteeing their related QoS. The proposed admission

control scheme gives high priority to on-going services and guarantees the optimal bandwidth resource allocation.

[43] proposes an effective admission control scheme for HSR communications with MIMO antennas, where both

new services and handover services are considered. Handover services will be admitted ﬁrst. The reason is that

dropping an on-going service during the handover process will bring about more serious results than blocking a

new service. For different handover services to admit, voice has the highest priority while data has the lowest.

After all the handover services are processed, the new services will be considered in the same way as the handover

services. A joint optimal design of admission control and resource allocation is considered in [26] for multimedia

service delivery in HSR wireless networks. Different types of services are assigned to different utility functions that

represent different service priorities. The considered problem aims at maximizing the total utility while stabilizing

all transmission queues under the average power constraint. A threshold-based admission control scheme is proposed

and the service with high priority gets large average throughput.

Related admission control schemes mentioned in this subsection are summarized in Table II. Based on the survey

on admission control research, we can make some conclusions as follows. First, since LTE-R is designed as a packet-

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

TABLE II

SUMMARY OF ADMISSION CONTROL SCHEMES

17

Scheme

Brief description

Articles

Performance criteria

Comments

Call-level

Packet-level

Handover-based

Priority-based

The admission is conducted at the

call level.

The admission is conducted at the

packet level.

The handover services are admitted

based on different criterions.

Different priorities are assigned to

different types of services.

[43, 67–72]

[26]

[67–71]

call dropping probability;

Designed for circuit-switched

call blocking probability

GSM-R system.

packet queueing delay;

Designed for packet-switched

packet loss ratio

LTE-R system.

handover service dropping;

Resource reservation for

MCS changed service dropping

handover services is required.

[26, 43, 72]

service blocking probability;

Handover and critical core

service delivery ratio

services have a high priority.

switched communication system, it is necessary to conduct admission control at packet level, which needs further

investigations. Second, it is serious to drop on-going services during the handover process and critical core services

during the trip. Thus, the handover services and critical core services should have high priority to access the networks,

where the resource reservation approach is also required. Third, the handover-based admission control and priority-

based admission control should be combined together so as to deal with handover services and new critical core

services reasonably. At the same time, their advantages can be exploited jointly. Finally, adaptive admission control

schemes with low complexity are critical to suit the requirements such as frequent handover, quick decision-making

duration and fast-varying wireless channel in HSR environments.

B. Mobility Management

Mobility management is one of the most important issues in HSR wireless networks, with the purpose of supporting

seamless service transmission for the moving train. Generally, mobility management includes two aspects, i.e.,

location management and handover management [73]. In HSR wireless networks, location management has the

functions of tracking and updating the location of mobile users on the train. Handover management enables the train

to seamlessly obtain transmission services after handover. In particular, mobility management is essential to meet

the following requirements for HSR wireless networks.

• Realtime and accurate location update: Realtime location update is necessary for both the train and the mobile

users due to the high mobility of the train. The location information can be used to facilitate RRM design, such

as handover and power control. Therefore, realtime and accurate location update is important to improve the

overall performance of HSR wireless communications.

• Fast handover and seamless transmission: Fast handover is a crucial requirement for HSR wireless communi-

cations, since the train spends only a short period of time moving through one cell. Seamless transmission is

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

18

required especially for delay-sensitive applications (e.g., safety-related services).

• Group mobility: A group of mobile users in a train need to execute handover simultaneously when entering

a new cell. Moreover, location update requests from all mobile users will be handled along the trip. There is

a need to consider the introduction of optimization solutions to reduce unnecessary signaling overheads and

system loads in the group mobility [74].

A simple taxonomy of mobility management for HSR wireless networks is shown in Fig. 8. In the following,

various mobility management schemes are reviewed and discussed.

Mobility management

Location management

Handover management

Clustering-based

Group-based

 Relay-assisted

 Group cell-based

Location-aware

Fig. 8. Taxonomy of mobility management for HSR wireless networks

1) Location Management: There are a large number of mobile users in the same train. All mobile users will send

the location update messages to the network at the same time. As a result, the signaling overhead increases and

even causes the network congestion. To reduce the cost of the location update and improve the system performance,

the clustering-based location management (CLM) scheme and group-based location management (GLM) scheme are

proposed in [75], and they can ensure the mobile users to execute location update successfully.

The basic idea of CLM scheme is to divide the mobile users on the train into some clusters according to their

identiﬁcations such as international mobile subscriber identity, and then the mobile users in each cluster perform

location update in turns. Thus, it can reduce the frequency of location update and further decrease the network cost.

GLM scheme can be implemented based on the two-hop network architecture in Fig. 2, where another device called

group head should be equipped. The group head is responsible for performing the integrated location update for the

user group. Speciﬁcally, the group location update is requested by the group head instead of each mobile user, and

it may update the location information of all mobile users. Apparently, the update efﬁciency is highly improved in

both CLM scheme and GLM scheme.

Two features in HSR environments make it feasible to obtain accurate position information. On one hand, since

the train moves on a predetermined rail line and the velocity is relatively steady, the train trajectory information can

be obtained in advance with high accuracy [25]. On the other hand, many train positioning techniques are applied

into HSR communication systems [76]. Some devices are installed on the train to determine its location on the rail,

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

19

such as global positioning system (GPS) and odometer. Thus, it is worthwhile to explore the potential of accurate

position information for RRM design, such as handover management and power control in the sequel.

2) Handover Management: As shown in Fig. 6, when the train moves through the overlap region between two

adjacent cells, the mobile users on the train will perform handover to the new cell. Handover is one of the most

challenging issues in HSR mobile communications, due to high handover frequency, group handover and QoS

guarantees [15]. The literature [20] has presented an overview of the technical developments on handover in HSR

mobile communications. Handover schemes are classiﬁed into seven categories according to the access technologies

and network architectures. In this paper, we summarize the handover schemes from the perspective of the scenario

characteristics in HSR mobile communications, and classify them into three groups, i.e., the relay-assisted, group

cell-based and location-aware handover schemes. In the following, the brief overview and comparison of these

handover schemes are provided.

First, the relay-assisted handover schemes are based on the two-hop network architecture in Fig. 2. The BSs only

need to deal with the handover of relay rather than all mobile users, which leads to the reduction of drop-off rate.

A single relay on the train is involved in [77, 78] to facilitate handover process. In particular, the authors in [77]

modify the standard LTE handover scheme for the two-hop architecture, and bi-casting is introduced to achieve

seamless handovers. The work [78] proposes an effective handover scheme based on the distributed antenna system

and relay-aided two-link architecture, where an antenna selection scheme with optimal power allocation is proposed

to improve handover performance. Some studies [15, 79–83] describe the dual-link handover schemes based on the

two-hop architecture. In these schemes, two relay stations are respectively installed on the front end and the rear

end of the train. When the train is at the cell boundary, the front relay performs handover to the target BS, while

the rear relay is still communicating with the source BS. In this way, the network connection can be maintained

during the entire handover procedure. The results show that with the help of dual relays, soft handover can be

effectively seamless, the handover interruption time is reduced, higher handover probability is guaranteed, and the

system throughput is also improved. Another relay-assisted handover scheme for LTE-advanced HSR networks is

proposed in [84], where a control relay is equipped in the front of the train, and several general relays are evenly

distributed on the train. Mobile users are served by the general relays and the control relay performs the enhanced

measurement procedure. The results show that the proposed scheme can effectively reduce handover time. However,

for the above relay-assisted handover schemes, since multiple relays need to be deployed on the train, the investment

cost is high and lots of modiﬁcations on network procedures are required.

Second, group cell-based handover schemes have been extensively investigated recently. The group cell refers to

a group of geographically adjacent cells. Handover only occurs between group cells and no handover is needed

when the train moves within the group cell. Since the coverage region of one group cell is increased, it leads to

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

20

the reduction of handover frequency. RoF technology that has been brieﬂy introduced in subsection II.C, can be

regarded as a special case of group cell. The handover schemes for RoF technology are originated from the “moving

cell” concept, which is proposed in [85] to avoid frequent handovers in highway communications. This concept

can be also applied into HSR communications, where the BSs physically move with the train. However, since the

construction cost of a separate rail is high, the implementation of such a moving cell concept is difﬁcult in practice

[2]. Alternatively, the moving cell concept can be replaced by the moving frequency concept [33, 51]. The basic

idea is to change the radio frequencies of the RAUs in a predeﬁned order according to the train location. As a result,

the frequencies of RAUs are moving with the train and the radio frequency used by the train will be unchanged.

Although the handover is still needed when the train moves into the coverage area of another control center, the

handover rate is reduced to a considerably low level. As an extension of work [51], the concept of “moving extended

cells” is proposed in [86]. The main idea is to introduce a user-centric virtual extended cell consisting of a source

cell and surrounding cells. As the train moves, a restructuring mechanism is applied to the virtual extended cell.

In this way, the end-user is always surrounded by a certain number of grouped cells, which transmit concurrently

the same data over the same radio frequency. Another variation of moving cells is proposed based on a cell array

in [87]. The cell array smartly organizes a number of cells along the rail, together with a femtocell service that

aggregates trafﬁc demands within individual train cabins. Since the movement direction and speed of the train are

generally known, the cell array can effectively predict the upcoming cells and enable a seamless handover. Although

the above group cell-based handover schemes can lead to the reduction of handover frequency, the construction cost

will be high for dynamically organizing group cells.

Finally, in location-aware handover schemes [87–91], the handover process is facilitated with the help of train

location information. The basic idea in [88] is to divide the railways into several segments. When the train enters a

predeﬁned handover zone between two segments, the handover procedure can be automatically started. In [89], the

triggering condition of handover is adaptively decided according to the train’s speed and position, when the train

enters the coverage area of the target BS. To improve handover success probability, the mobile device can trigger

handover earlier if the train moves at a high speed. It is also pointed out in [87] and [90] that the forward-looking

idea of using the predictable speed and location information can be applied to assist the handover process with the

effective channel prediction. Results from [91] show that position information can assist to reduce the handover

delay and improve handover success probability under high mobility scenarios. Two position-assisted fast handover

schemes are proposed in [91], with one making handover preparation before the handover procedure starts and

another calculating the best target cell. Although the train location information can be used to facilitate the handover

process, the overheads are incurred in some aspects. First, trains and BSs have to exchange location information,

and the trains have to carry GPS information in the measurement reports, which will cause standardization overhead.

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

Second, some works require the network operators to mutually plan the handover positions, which further increases

the overhead on network planning. Moreover, the location-based handover schemes may not be robust when GPS

signal reception is poor or intermittent. For instance, when the train leaves a long tunnel, the GPS device on the

train may need a long time to search satellites.

21

TABLE III

COMPARISON OF HANDOVER SCHEMES

Schemes

Articles Main ideas

Advantage

Disadvantage

Relay-assisted

Group cell-based

[15]

The relay facilitates group handover

Group handover is avoided and

The investment cost is high

[77–83]

procedures for mobile users onboard.

handover complexity is reduced.

due to deployment of relay.

[33, 51]

Increase the cell coverage and apply

The handover frequency can be

The cost will be high

[85–87]

various concepts of “moving cell”.

greatly reduced.

for constructing group cell.

Location-aware

[87–91]

Train location information is applied

Handover process is facilitated

It incurs overheads and is

to assist the handover process.

with better performance.

inﬂuenced by location error.

The comparison of different handover schemes is provided in Table III. Through the further analysis, we can

observe that the handover performance can be improved by applying advanced technologies, such as relay and

RoF technologies, at the cost of high system overhead. To fully exploit the advantages of these schemes, the

combination of them should be further investigated, such as [87, 92]. It is also necessary to study the handover

scheme for heterogenous HSR networks with multiple access technologies [81, 93]. Finally, to provide seamless

service transmission in HSR scenarios, an efﬁcient handover scheme should be adaptive to fast-varying environment

and robust to the location information error.

C. Power Control

Compared with the conventional communication systems, there are three unique features in HSR communication

systems [61], i.e., the deterministic moving direction, relatively steady moving speed and the accurate train location

information. The data transmission rate is highly determined by the transmit power and the distance between BS

and the train, thus these features make it necessary and feasible to implement power control along the time.

To achieve different optimization objectives under average power constraint, four power allocation schemes are

proposed in [18], i.e., constant power allocation (CPA), channel inversion power allocation (CIPA), water-ﬁlling power

allocation (WFPA), and proportional fair power allocation (PFPA). Fig. 9(a) and 9(b) provide the comparisons of the

power allocation results and the corresponding transmission rate results for these four schemes. The advantage and

disadvantage of these schemes can be observed from these two ﬁgures. For the sake of convenience in the engineering

implementation, a constant power is allocated along the rail in CPA scheme while it ignores the variation of channel

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

22

gain and results in the great unfairness in term of transmission rate. In order to provide a stable transmission rate

and achieve the best fairness along the rail, the CIPA scheme spends much power to compensate those bad channel

states when the train is far from the BS. Similar to the traditional water ﬁlling method, the WFPA scheme can

maximum the total transmission rate within one BS, whereas the services will generally suffer from starvation when

the train is near the cell edge. In addition, the PFPA scheme can achieve a trade-off between the total transmission

rate and the fairness along the time. As an extension of [94], the work[95] investigates the utility-based resource

allocation problem, which can jointly take into account power allocation along the time and packet allocation among

CPA
CIPA
WFPA
PFPA

the services.

)

W

(
 
n
o
i
t
a
c
o
l
l
a
 
r
e
w
o
P

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

0

)
s
/
s
t
i
b
M

(
 
e
t
a
r
 
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
s
n
a
r
T

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

0

CPA
CIPA
WFPA
PFPA

500

Location (m)

1000

1500

500

Location (m)

1000

1500

(a)

(b)

Fig. 9. Comparisons of four power allocation schemes [94]. BS is located at 0, the cell radius R is 1500 m, and average power is 30 W.

The works [94] and [95] pursue some system optimization objectives under the power constraint. On the other hand,

some works [96–98] consider the power allocation problem from the perspective of energy efﬁciency, mainly focusing

on how to match the data arrival process and the time-varying channel for HSR communications. Speciﬁcally, [96]

provides a novel method to minimize the total transmit power for data uplink transmission under a certain deadline

constraint by exploiting the future channels. In [97], authors study the optimal power allocation policy under given

delay constraints in uplink transmission. It shows that there are two tradeoffs in the transmission model, one is

between the average transmit power and the delay constraint, and the other is between the average transmit power

and the train velocity. Inspired by the unique spatial temporal characteristics of wireless channels along the rail, [98]

presents a novel energy-efﬁcient and rate-distortion optimized approach for uploading video streaming. Although

the studies in [94–98] are useful for the optimal design of HSR wireless communications, they only take account

of the time-varying channel state while do not consider the dynamic characteristics of the service or packet arrivals,

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

23

which causes that the above power allocation schemes are not practical.

Dynamic power control is necessary to improve the performance of HSR communication systems, where the

transmit power should be adaptive to the time-varying channel and dynamic service arrival. Considering the power

constraint in HSR communications, the work [26] investigates a joint admission control and resource allocation

problem. A dynamic power control and resource allocation algorithm is proposed to maximize the system utility

while stabilizing all transmission queues. Different from [26], the work [99] studies the delay-aware multi-service

transmission problem in HSR communication systems, with a focus on how to implement power control and resource

allocation to guarantee the delay requirements under power constraint.

D. Resource Allocation

Resource allocation, as a critical part of RRM, plays an important role in enhancing the data transmission

efﬁciency and improving the QoS performance in HSR communications. A great variety of resource allocation

schemes have been proposed in the literature, aiming at sharing the limited network resources while satisfying the

heterogeneous QoS requirements. Due to the unique characteristics of HSR environments, the existing resource

allocation schemes for general wireless networks cannot be directly applied to HSR wireless networks. Moreover,

the dynamic characteristics such as time-varying wireless channels and random packet/service arrivals, should be

incorporated into the resource allocation schemes. In this subsection, the resource allocation schemes for HSR

wireless communications are systematically surveyed from three aspects: interference-aware resource allocation,

QoS-aware resource allocation and dynamic cross-layer resource allocation.

1) Interference-Aware Resource Allocation: Resource allocation is an effective way to reduce the effect of

interference and further improve the communication performance. Generally, the interference in HSR wireless

communications mainly comes from two sources: ICI for OFDM technology and interference from two-hop links.

The ICI caused by Doppler shift, is obviously not negligible and may degrade the system performance. Thus, the

resource allocation problem in HSR communications with OFDM technology has attracted great research interest.

For example, [100] focuses on the joint subcarrier and power allocation problem with adaptive modulation and

coding in high speed mobile environments. The established optimization problem, which aims to minimize the

overall transmit power while satisfying all the user requirements, is a non-linear programming. Considering that the

exact expression of ICI term is complicated, the statistical mean value of the ICI power is utilized to simplify the

complexity. In addition, [44] and [101] study the multidimensional resource allocation problem for HSR downlink

communications with OFDM technique and MIMO antennas. The objective is to maximize the throughput under

the total transmit power constraint and ICI. In order to reduce computational complexity, the suboptimal solution is

obtained by using quantum-behaved particle swarm optimization.

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

24

The above studies mainly focus on solving the resource allocation problems with ICI under one-hop architecture

in HSR communications. Since the scarcity of spectrum nowadays, it is difﬁcult to allocate dedicated spectrum for

the two-hop links. Consequently, the spectrum reuse is inevitable and the resource sharing will lead to the inter-

link interference. There are also some study works on resource allocation for the two-hop communications. [35]

formulates a joint optimization problem of subcarrier allocation, subcarrier pairing and power allocation in two-hop

links. Due to the complicated expression of ICI, the joint optimization problem is decomposed into several sub-

problems and an iterative algorithm is proposed to solve the non-convex problem. In [102], the resource allocation

problem in two-hop links is formulated as a mixed integer nonlinear programming. Since the optimization problem

is NP-hard, an alternative heuristic resource allocation scheme is proposed and then the optimal power is determined

to maximize the system sum throughput. In addition, the performance analysis of HSR wireless communications is

studied in [64] to better understand the effect of the inter-link interference.

2) QoS-Aware Resource Allocation: It is a natural requirement for HSR wireless networks to provide end-to-end

QoS to the services, with the purpose of guaranteeing the safe operation of trains and improving the quality of

passenger experience. Data transmission reliability is critical in HSR communications, and is often evaluated by

bit error rate (BER). With the speed increases, the communications will suffer from high BER, which may cause

signaling error, retransmission and energy waste. Thus, the BER requirement should be considered for resource

allocation design in HSR communications. The work [103] tries to solve a resource allocation optimization problem,

which minimizes the total transmit power while considering BER that partially depends on the modulation and

coding scheme. For improving the goodput of HSR communications, a link adaptation scheme is proposed in [104]

under the condition of guaranteeing prescribed BER target. Multimedia entertainment is an important application

in which a data stream often contains the packets with different BER requirements. For example, the video stream

encoded with scalability contains the base layer packets with high BER requirement and enhancement layer packets

with low BER requirement. To achieve efﬁcient resource allocation, [105] develops a resource allocation approach

by considering multiple BER requirements for different types of packets in one data stream. In order to simplify

the complexity of resource allocation, a proper number of contiguous subcarriers are grouped into chunks and the

spectrum is allocated chunk by chunk.

Service transmission delay is another key QoS parameter which directly affects perceived QoS of real-time service.

The communication delay of train control services also affects the track utilization and speed proﬁle of high-speed

trains [106]. HSR services such as critical core services have a high demand for transmission delay. Thus, delay

requirements should be fully taken into consideration when implementing resource allocation among the services. To

better describe delay requirements, an interval-based service request model is formulated in [25], where each service

has to be delivered within its given lifetime. The corresponding resource allocation problem aims to maximize the

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

25

total weights of the fully completed requests and incomplete requests do not yield any revenue. As an extension,

[107] and [108] build more reasonable service delivery models for on-demand data packet transmission to high-speed

trains, where the deadline constraints are built on each data packet rather than the whole service. Compared with

the deterministic deadline constraint case, [109] and [110] focus on the average delay constraint for the service

transmission. The resource allocation problem is formulated as a constrained Markov decision process (MDP) and

the corresponding online resource allocation algorithm is proposed.

3) Cross-Layer Dynamic Resource Allocation: Cross-layer design is a well-known approach to achieve QoS

support. In cross-layer design, the challenges from the physical wireless channel and the QoS requirements are taken

into account so that the resource allocation can be adapted to meet the service requirements for the given channels

and network conditions. It should also consider the dynamic characteristics in HSR communication systems, such as

time-varying wireless channels and random service arrivals. Thus, to enhance the efﬁciency of resource utilization

and improve the QoS performance, it is necessary to implement dynamic resource allocation in a cross-layer way.

APP Layer

 service request 

deadline

MAC Layer

Resource
Allocation

SCI

QSI

buffer

Control Actions

PHY Layer

P

Power Control

CSI

QoS

Requirements

MAC State

Cross-layer
Resource

Management

Controller

PHY State

Fig. 10.

Illustration of cross-layer dynamic resource allocation framework

Fig. 10 presents an illustration of cross-layer dynamic resource allocation framework with respect to the application

(APP) layer, medium access control (MAC) layer and physical (PHY) layer. At the PHY layer, the channel state

information (CSI) allows an observation of good transmission opportunity. At the MAC layer, the queue state

information (QSI) provides the urgency of data packets. At the APP layer, service characteristics information (SCI)

offers the service characteristics, e.g., packet arrival rate and rate-utility relationship. The control actions, which

include power control action and resource allocation action, should be decided dynamically based on the PHY layer

CSI, the MAC layer QSI and the APP layer SCI. Speciﬁcally, the power control action decides the wireless link

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

26

capacity, i.e., the total resource allocated to the services. The resource allocation action decides how many resources

should be allocated to each service.

Based on the above framework, [110] investigates the downlink resource allocation problem in relay-assisted HSR

communication systems, taking account of bursty packet arrivals and delay performances. The considered problem

is formulated as an inﬁnite-horizon average cost constrained MDP, where the control actions depend on both the

CSI and the QSI. The objective is to ﬁnd a policy that minimizes the average end-to-end delay through control

actions under the service delivery ratio constraints. A joint admission control, power control and resource allocation

problem is investigated in [26]. A dynamic resource allocation algorithm is proposed to maximize the system utility

while stabilizing all transmission queues. In addition, [111] presents the resource allocation schemes for voice over

Internet protocol (VoIP) trafﬁc under HSR scenarios, in which the 2-state VoIP trafﬁc model based on Markov chain

is considered. An adaptive resource allocation scheme is developed based on the idea of packet bundling to increase

the spectral efﬁciency and reduce the outage probability.

TABLE IV

SUMMARY OF RESOURCE ALLOCATION SCHEMES

Category

Articles

Problem characteristic

Challenges/Optimization method

Interference-aware

resource allocation

[100]

[44, 101]

[35, 102]

[103–105]

- Resource optimization with modulation

- Non-linear programming with great complexity

- Consider the effect of ICI

- Standard optimization package, e.g., CPLEX

- Multidimensional resource allocation

- Computational complexity of joint optimization

- Under MIMO and OFDM techniques

- Quadratic ﬁtting/convex optimization

- Resource allocation in two hop links

- The difﬁculty of non-convex optimization

- To handle two-hop interference

- Problem decomposition/convex optimization

- Reliable transmission problem

- Simpliﬁed reliability expression with high accuracy

- Consider BER requirements

- Partially observable MDP/convex optimization

QoS-aware

[25]

- Reward maximization problem

- Low-complexity online scheduling design

resource allocation

[107, 108]

- Deterministic deadline constraint

- Sequencing theory/Checker algorithm

[109, 110]

[26]

[110, 111]

- Long term resource optimization

- How to handle state-space explosion problem

- Average delay constraint

- MDP/heuristic scheme

- Joint resource optimization

- Dynamic design and optimization

- Dynamic system model

- Stochastic network optimization theory

- Dynamic resource allocation problem

- Cross-layer design and dynamic optimization

- Dynamic trafﬁc arrival

- MDP/heuristic scheme

Cross-layer dynamic

resource allocation

A summary of the discussed resource allocation schemes for HSR communications is provided in Table IV. It

can be seen that these existing schemes mainly focus on interference awareness, QoS requirements and cross-layer

dynamic design, which are consistent with the characteristics of HSR communications. Moreover, these three cate-

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

27

gories of resource allocation schemes correspond to different resource allocation problems. For the interference-aware

resource allocation, the optimization problems are mainly built on the ICI and inter-link interference. The complicated

expression of the interference term makes the formulated problems nonconvex, and some heuristic algorithms are

proposed to obtain the suboptimal solutions. In the QoS-aware resource allocation, the formulated problems consider

the reliability or delay requirements. The reliability is often evaluated by BER, which acts as a constraint and is

affected by the applied modulation and coding scheme. The delay requirements are typically represented by the

deterministic deadline constraint or average delay constraint. For the cross-layer dynamic resource allocation, the

considered problems are dynamic optimization problems with cross-layer design. Stochastic optimization theory and

MDP theory are used to effectively solve them. Finally, we point out that the combination of different resource

allocation schemes would be an interesting direction for future research. For example, a practical and challenging

problem is resource allocation for the delay-aware data transmission using OFDM technology in the two-hop wireless

links.

V. CHALLENGES AND OPEN ISSUES

As we have seen from the previous sections, RRM services as an effective method to optimize the system resource

utilization and provide QoS guarantees. Besides the existing research efforts, there are still some challenges and open

research issues on RRM design, which will be discussed as follows. In addition, we also recommend the readers

refer to [112] for more challenges and opportunities related to radio communications that railways will meet in both

the near and far future.

A. Location-Aware RRM

Train positioning technique is one of the main techniques in HSR communication systems [76]. How to use the

position information to enhance the HSR communication performance has become a research trend. However, only

a limited number of studies have considered the train position information to facilitate the system design, such

as position-based channel modeling [14], position-assisted handover scheme [91], position-based limited feedback

scheme [113], and location information-assisted opportunistic beamforming [114]. In HSR scenarios, the channel

condition mainly depends on the signal transmission distance, which results in the different channel conditions along

the rail. Therefore, further research is needed to exploit the train position information to facilitate RRM design, by

taking use of the future channel or signal prediction. For example, based on signal strength prediction, [98] proposes

an energy-efﬁcient mobile data uploading approach, and the energy consumption is heavily reduced. Moreover,

the seamless handover scheme can be further strengthened with the help of train position information and signal

prediction.

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

Accurate position and speed measurements of the high-speed train are critical for the location-aware RRM in

HSR communications. However, there exist measurement errors in the train positioning techniques, such as GPS

and odometer [63]. Thus, studies on the effect of location uncertainty are needed to assess performance in practical

HSR scenarios. Also, models that capture the variability of train location information, as well as methods that are

28

robust to such inaccuracies are required.

B. Cross-Layer-Based Joint RRM

To satisfy different requirements stemming from various layers, an appropriate cross-layer model will be highly

beneﬁcial to improve the RRM performance in HSR wireless communications. These models should account for

the parameters at the PHY layer (e.g., channel, power and modulation order), MAC layer (e.g., scheduling, queuing

and automatic repeat request), network layer (e.g., routing and packet forwarding) and APP layer with different

QoS requirements, and then optimally determine the resource management actions. Such cross-layer models are able

to manage the inherent tradeoffs at different layers in a comprehensive manner. More models and designs of both

physical layer and higher layer for high mobility wireless communications have been discussed in [115]. However,

note that the incorporation of the constraints from different layers can further complicate the feasibility of RRM

problems. In light of practicality, it is necessary to devise the low-complexity cross-layer techniques so that the

close-to-optimal solutions can be identiﬁed while not severely compromising the overall system performance.

Considering the cross-layer model, most available studies in HSR wireless communications only focus on one

single type of RRM, such as independent resource allocation and handover scheme. To achieve higher system

performance, it is necessary and challenging to jointly optimize RRM schemes [26]. For example, a cross-layer design

approach is proposed in [116] to jointly optimize application-layer parameters and handover decisions to improve

video transmission quality. Further studies are needed to develop joint RRM schemes, such as jointly optimizing

admission control, power control and resource allocation. Additionally, the tradeoff between the complexity and

performance deserves future research.

C. Energy-Efﬁcient RRM for Media Delivery

Providing multimedia services in HSR wireless communications will become a reality in the very near future,

such as on-demand media services [25] and social network services [117]. Some network architectures have been

presented for multimedia service transmission over HSR communications, such as a mobile proxy architecture in

[118]. However, most of the existing studies only focus on RRM design for both voice and data services while

multimedia services receive little attention. Thus, the effective RRM schemes for multimedia services delivery are

critical with the purpose of high efﬁciency and green train communications [98, 119]. Proper RRM design can lead

to signiﬁcant improvements in energy efﬁciency due to the strong dependence of power consumption on the distance

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

29

between the train and base station. For instance, solely for a fairly constant rate, much power will be consumed

to compensate for the fading effect when the train is far from the base station. From the perspective of energy

efﬁciency, it is intuitive to transmit more data when the signal is strong and less data when the signal is weak.

Therefore, energy-efﬁcient media delivery problem should be further analyzed, and the related schemes such as

power control and resource allocation are developed. Furthermore, the QoS requirements should be also considered

into RRM design for media delivery, such as playback delay and quality level.

D. Robust RRM for Reliability Assurance

Reliability requirements of HSR wireless communications pose great challenges to RRM design. Generally, the

HSR services especially critical core services have strict reliability requirements, such as very low bit error rate

and packet loss probability. The reliable transmission of critical core services directly affects the safe operation

of the train. Thus, how to design a robust RRM scheme for reliability assurance is an important issue. However,

most existing RRM schemes for HSR wireless communications are built on the perfect CSI assumption, while few

investigations have been performed on the impact of channel estimation error in terms of resource allocation and

beamforming design. Indeed, the channel estimation error that may result from the time-varying wireless channel,

has a direct effect on the communication reliability, such as the bit-error-rate performance. Further research is

therefore needed to address a range of issues related to communication robustness, and improve the reliability of

service transmission. A typical example is the robust beamforming design problem for MIMO-based HSR wireless

communications with imperfect CSI, where the worst-case performance optimization will be exploited and the robust

algorithms with low complexity are more attractive for practical implementation.

E. Advanced RRM for Fifth Generation Communications

The research for the ﬁfth generation (5G) communications is now on its way. The European Union, the United

States, Korea, China, and Japan have developed their organizations for 5G development. The HSR scenario has been

recognized as one of the typical scenarios for 5G [3]. The related system designs such as network architecture and

transmission technique have received much attention. Meanwhile, the advanced RRM for 5G HSR communications

is urgently needed to further improve overall system performance and face the increasing demands.

To meet the emerging massive capacity demands in 5G communications, a control and data signaling decoupled

architecture bas been presented for railway wireless communications [120], in which the relatively important control

plane is kept on high-quality lower frequency bands to handle mobility, while the corresponding user plane is

moved to higher frequency bands to gain broader spectra. Since the control plane and user plane are physically

separated, the RRM schemes for this novel architecture, such as handover and spectrum allocation schemes, are

required to further investigated. One of the 5G key techniques, massive MIMO technique, has been involved into

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

30

HSR wireless communications [45]. Wireless coverage based on massive MIMO for railway stations and train cars

is proposed to fulﬁll the requirement of high-data-rate and high spectrum efﬁciency [121]. Further investigations on

channel modeling and system-level modeling for HSR communications are still needed. Additionally, the bandwidth

shortage has motivated the exploration of the underutilized millimeter wave (mm-wave) frequency spectrum for

future HSR broadband mobile communications [122, 123]. However, mm-wave communications suffer from huge

propagation loss, which indicates that it would be beneﬁcial to investigate the use of power control to improve

system performance.

VI. CONCLUSIONS

Radio resource management is a powerful tool that enables high resource utilization and results in improved

QoS performance. However, compared with common cellular communications, some characteristics in HSR wireless

communications, such as high mobility, unique channel conditions and heterogenous QoS requirements, impose

some challenges to the RRM design. This leads to signiﬁcant attention on the study of RRM under HSR scenarios.

In this paper, we have provided a literature survey on HSR wireless communications from a perspective of RRM

design. Firstly, we have presented an overview of the HSR communication systems with a detailed description of

network architecture, railway applications and services as well as advanced transmission technologies. Then the HSR

channel models and characteristics are introduced, which are vital to the cross-layer RRM design and optimization.

Afterwards, we have surveyed the RRM schemes for HSR wireless communications, with an in-depth discussion on

admission control, mobility management, power control and resource allocation. Finally, challenges and open issues

on RRM design of HSR wireless communications have been outlined.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. U1334202, the State Key

Laboratory of Rail Trafﬁc Control and Safety under Grant No. RCS2015ZT001, and the Fundamental Research

Funds for the Central Universities under Grant No. 2015YJS032.

REFERENCES

[1] B. Ning, T. Tang, H. Dong, D. Wen, D. Liu, S. Gao, and J. Wang, “An introduction to parallel control

and management for high-speed railway systems,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems,

vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 1473–1483, 2011.

[2] J. Wang, H. Zhu, and N. J. Gomes, “Distributed antenna systems for mobile communications in high speed

trains,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 675–683, 2012.

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

31

[3] B. Ai, X. Cheng, T. Kurner, Z. Zhong, K. Guan, R. He, L. Xiong, D. Matolak, D. Michelson, and C. Briso-

Rodriguez, “Challenges toward wireless communications for high-speed railway,” IEEE Transactions on

Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 2143–2158, 2014.

[4] A. D. Zayas, C. G. Perez, and P. Gomez, “Third-generation partnership project standards: For delivery of

critical communications for railways,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 58–68, 2014.

[5] Z. D. Zhong, B. Ai, Q. Y. Liu, and S. Y. Lin, Basis theory of railway digital mobile communication system.

Beijing: Tsinghua University Press and Beijing Jiaotong University Press, 2009.

[6] A. Sniady and J. Soler, “LTE for railways: Impact on performance of ETCS railway signaling,” IEEE Vehicular

Technology Magazine, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 69–77, 2014.

[7] K. D. Masur and D. Mandoc, “LTE/SAE-The Future Railway Mobile Radio System: Long-Term Visions on

Railway Mobile Radio Technologies”, International Union of Railways (UIC), Technocal Report, vol.1.1, Nov.

2009.

[8] T. T. Gao and B. Sun, “A high-speed railway mobile communication system based on LTE,” in Proceedings

of International Conference On Electronics and Information Engineering, vol. 1, 2010, pp. 414–417.

[9] K. Guan, Z. D. Zhong, and B. Ai, “Assessment of LTE-R using high speed railway channel model,” in

Proceedings of International Conference on Communications and Mobile Computing, 2011, pp. 461–464.

[10] D. Pareit, E. V. de Velde, D. Naudts, and et.al, “A novel network architecture for train-to-wayside

communication with quality of service over heterogeneous wireless networks,” EURASIP Journal on Wireless

Communications and Networking, vol. 2012, no. 1, pp. 1–30, 2012.

[11] G. Barbu, “E-Train, Broadband Communication with moving trains”, International Union of Railways (UIC),

Technical Report, June 2010.

[12] D. Fokum and V. Frost, “A survey on methods for broadband Internet access on trains,” IEEE Communications

Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 171–185, 2010.

[13] J. Y. Zhang, Z. H. Tan, Z. D. Zhong, and Y. Kong, “A multi-mode multi-band and multi-system-based access

architecture for high-speed railways,” in Proceedings of IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC Fall),

2010, pp. 1–5.

[14] L. Liu, C. Tao, J. Qiu, H. Chen, Y. Li, W. Dong, and Y. Yuan, “Position-based modeling for wireless channel

on high-speed railway under a viaduct at 2.35 GHz,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,

vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 834–845, 2012.

[15] L. Tian, J. Li, Y. Huang, J. Shi, and J. Zhou, “Seamless dual-link handover scheme in broadband wireless

communication systems for high-speed rail,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 30,

no. 4, pp. 708–718, 2012.

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

32

[16] B. Ai, R. He, Z. Zhong, K. Guan, B. Chen, P. Liu, and Y. Li, “Radio wave propagation scene partitioning for

high-speed rails,” International Journal Antennas Propagation, vol. 2012, Article ID 815232, 7 pages, 2012.

[17] R. He, Z. Zhong, B. Ai, J. Ding, W. Jiang, H. Zhang, and X. Li, “A standardized path loss model for the

gsm-railway based high-speed railway communication systems,” in Proceedings of IEEE Vehicular Technology

Conference (VTC Spring), 2014.

[18] Y. Q. Dong, P. Y. Fan, and K. B. Letaief, “High speed railway wireless communications: Efﬁciency v.s.

fairness,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 63, no. 2, pp. 925–930, 2013.

[19] S. Lin, Z. Zhong, B. Ai, and C. Briso, “Transmission interference improvement of railway communication via

distributed antennas system,” in Proceedings of IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC Spring), May

2010.

[20] Y. Z. Zhou and B. Ai, “Handover schemes and algorithms of high-speed mobile environment: A survey,”

Computer Communications, vol. 47, pp. 1–15, 2014.

[21] C. X. Wang, A. Ghazal, B. Ai, Y. Liu, and P. Fan, “Channel measurements and models for high-

speed train communication systems: A survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 2015. DOI:

10.1109/COMST.2015.2508442.

[22] B. H. Chen, Z. D. Zhong, B. Ai, K. Guan, R. He, and D. G. Michelson, “Channel characteristics in high-speed

railway: A survey of channel propagation properties,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine, vol. 10, no. 2,

pp. 67–78, 2015.

[23] F. Greve, B. Lannoo, L. Peters, T. Leeuwen, F. Quickenborne, D. Colle, F. Turck, I. Moerman, M. Pickavet,

B. Dhoedt, and P. Demeester, “FAMOUS: A network architecture for delivering multimedia services to fast

moving users,” Wireless Personal Communications, vol. 433, no. 3, pp. 281–304, 2005.

[24] S. Spagna, M. Liebsch, and R. Baldessari, “Design principles of an operator-owned highly distributed content

delivery network,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 132–140, 2013.

[25] H. Liang and W. H. Zhuang, “Efﬁcient on-demand data service delivery to high-speed trains in cellu-

lar/infostation integrated networks,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 30, no. 4,

pp. 780–791, May 2012.

[26] S. F. Xu, G. Zhu, C. Shen, Y. Lei, and Z. Zhong, “Analysis and optimization of resource control in high-speed

railway wireless networks,” Mathematical Problems in Engineering, vol. 2014, Article ID 781654, 13 pages,

2014.

[27] K. Lin and J. Chang, “Communications and entertainment onboard a high-speed public transport system,”

IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 84–89, 2002.

[28] X. Liang, F. Ong, P. Chan, R. Sheriff, and P. Conforto, “Mobile internet access for high-speed trains via

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

33

heterogeneous networks,” in Proceedings of IEEE International Symposium on Personal Indoor and Mobile

Radio Communications (PIMRC), 2003, pp. 177–181.

[29] K. Kumar, P. Angolkar, D. Das, and R. Ramalingam, “Swift: A novel architecture for seamless wireless

internet for fast trains,” in Proceedings of IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC Spring), May 2008,

pp. 3011–3015.

[30] L. Verstrepen, W. Joseph, E. Tanghe, J. V. Ooteghem, B. Lannoo, M. Pickavet, L. Martens, and P. Demeester,

“Making a well-founded choice of the wireless technology for train-to-wayside data services,” in Proceedings

of 9th Conference on Telecommunications Internet and Media Techno Economics, June 2010, pp. 1–7.

[31] C. Jaime, M. Mariano, I. Jose, and F. Alfonso, “Long term evolution in high speed railway environments:

Feasibility and challenges,” Bell Labs Technical Journal, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 237–253, 2013.

[32] C. Briso-Rodriguez, F. L. Carlos, R.O. Jean, et al. “Broadband Access in Complex Environments: LTE on

Railway”, IEICE Transactions on Communications, vol. E97-B, no. 8, pp. 1514-1527, 2014.

[33] Y. Zhou, Z. Pan, J. Hu, J. Shi, and X. Mo, “Broadband wireless communications on high speed trains,” in

Proceedings of Wireless and Optical Communications Conference (WOCC), 2011, pp. 1–6.

[34] L. L. Dai, Z. C. Wang, and Z. X. Yang, “Time-frequency training OFDM with high spectral efﬁciency

and reliable performance in high speed environments,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,

vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 695–707, 2012.

[35] J. H. Qiu, Z. H. Lin, W. Hardjawana, B. Vucetic, C. Tao, and Z. H. Tan, “Resource allocation for OFDMA

system under high-speed railway condition,” in Proceedings of IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking

Conference (WCNC), 2014, pp. 2725–2729.

[36] Y. Q. Yang and P. Y. Fan, “Doppler frequency offset estimation and diversity reception scheme of high-speed

railway with multiple antennas on separated carriage,” Journal of Modern Transportation, vol. 20, no. 4, pp.

227–233, 2012.

[37] Q. Du, G. Wu, Q. L. Yu, and S. Q. Li, “ICI mitigation by doppler frequence shift estimation and pre-

compensation in LTE-R systems,” in Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Communications in

China, 2012, pp. 469–474.

[38] W. O. Popoola, Z. Ghassemlooy, and B. G. Stewart, “Pilot-assisted PAPR reduction technique for optical

OFDM communication systems,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 32, no. 7, pp. 1374–1382, 2014.

[39] M. J. Hao and C. H. Lai, “Precoding for PAPR reduction of OFDM signals with minimum error probability,”

IEEE Transactions on Broadcasting, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 120–128, 2010.

[40] W. Luo, X. Fang, M. Cheng, and Y. Zhao, “Efﬁcient multiple-group multiple-antenna (MGMA) scheme for

high-speed railway viaducts,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 62, no. 6, pp. 2558–2569,

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

34

2013.

[41] H. H. Wang and H. A. Hou, “Experimental analysis of beamforming in high-speed railway communication,”

in Proceedings of IEEE International Symposium on Personal Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications

(PIMRC), 2011, pp. 745–749.

[42] C. Wang, R. T. Xu, and Z. D. Zhong, “Distributed beamforming for high speed railway,” in Proceedings of

IEEE International Conference on Signal Processing, 2012, pp. 1410–1414.

[43] Y. Zhao, X. Li, and H. Ji, “Radio admission control scheme for high-speed railway communication with

MIMO antennas,” in Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), 2012, pp.

5005–5009.

[44] Y. Zhao, X. Li, X. Zhang, and H. Ji, “Multidimensional resource allocation strategy for high-speed railway

MIMO-OFDM system,” in Proceedings of IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), 2012,

pp. 1653–1657.

[45] Z. Y. Liu, J. Wu, and P. Fan, “On the uplink capacity of high speed railway communications with massive

MIMO systems,” in Proceedings of IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC Spring), 2014.

[46] M. Kang and M. S. Alouini, “Capacity of MIMO rician channels,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless

Communications, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 112–122, 2006.

[47] F. Rusek, D. Persson, B. K. Lau, E. G. Larsson, T. L. Marzetta, O. Edfors, and F. Tufvesson, “Scaling up

MIMO: Opportunities and challenges with very large arrays,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 30,

no. 1, pp. 40–60, 2013.

[48] J. Y. Zhang, Z. H. Tan, and X. Yu, “Coverage efﬁciency of radio-over-ﬁber network for high-speed railways,”

in Proceedings of International Conference on Wireless Communications Networking and Mobile Computing,

2010, pp. 1–4.

[49] H. W. Chang, M. C. Tseng, S. Y. Chen, M. H. Cheng, and S. K. Wen, “Field trial results for integrated

WiMAX and radio-over-ﬁber systems on high speed rail,” in Proceedings of IEEE International Symposium

on Personal Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC), 2011, pp. 2111–2115.

[50] H. A. Hou and H. H. Wang, “Analysis of distributed antenna system over high-speed railway communication,”

in Proceedings of IEEE International Symposium on Personal Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications

(PIMRC), 2012, pp. 1300–1305.

[51] B. Lannoo, D. Colle, M. Pickavet, and P. Demeester, “Radio-over-ﬁber-based solution to provide broadband

internet access to train passengers,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 56–62, 2007.

[52] T. Han and N. Ansari, “Radiate: radio over ﬁber as an antenna extender for high-speed train communications,”

IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 130–137, February 2015.

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

35

[53] R. He, Z. Zhong, B. Ai, G. Wang, J. Ding, and A. Molisch, “Measurements and analysis of propagation

channels in high-speed railway viaducts,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 12, no. 2, pp.

794–805, February 2013.

[54] R. He, Z. Zhong, B. Ai, J. Ding, Y. Yang, and A. Molisch, “Short-term fading behavior in high-speed

railway cutting scenario: Measurements, analysis, and statistical models,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas

and Propagation, vol. 61, no. 4, pp. 2209–2222, 2013.

[55] C. Briso-Rodriguez, J. Cruz, and J. Alonso, “Measurements and modeling of distributed antenna systems in

railway tunnels,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 2870–2879, 2007.

[56] K. Guan, Z. Zhong, J. Alonso, and C. Briso-Rodriguez, “Measurement of distributed antenna systems at 2.4

ghz in a realistic subway tunnel environment,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 61, no. 2,

pp. 834–837, 2012.

[57] X. L. Chu, D. Lopez-Perez, Y. Yang, and F. Gunnarsson, Heterogeneous Cellular Networks: Theory, Simulation

and Deployment. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2013.

[58] R. He, Z. D. Zhong, B. Ai, and J. Ding, “An empirical path loss model and fading analysis for high-speed

railway viaduct scenarios,” IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 10, pp. 808–812, 2011.

[59] C. Zhang, P. Y. Fan, Y. Q. Dong, and K. Xiong, “Service-based high-speed railway base station arrangement,”

Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing, vol. 15, no. 13, pp. 1681–1694, 2015.

[60] M. Fitzmaurice, “Wayside communications: CBTC data communications subsystems,” IEEE Vehicular

Technology Magazine, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 73–80, 2013.

[61] S. Lin, Z. Zhong, L. Cai, and Y. Luo, “Finite state markov modelling for high speed railway wireless

communication channel,” in Proceedings of IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), 2012,

pp. 5421–5426.

[62] S. Lin, L. Kong, L. He, K. Guan, B. Ai, Z. Zhong, and C. Briso-Rodrłguez, “Finite-state markov modeling for

high-speed railway fading channels,” IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 14, pp. 954–957,

2015.

[63] J. X. Li and Y. P. Zhao, “Radio environment map-based cognitive doppler spread compensation algorithms

for high-speed rail broadband mobile communications,” EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and

Networking, vol. 2012, no. 1, pp. 1–18, 2012.

[64] J. Zhang, F. Jin, Z. Tan, H. Wang, Q. Huang, and L. Hanzo, “Performance analysis of high-speed

railway communication systems subjected to co-channel interference and channel estimation errors,” IET

Communications, vol. 8, no. 7, pp. 1151–1157, 2014.

[65] J. Zander, Radio Resource Management for Wireless Networks. Boston, MA: Artech House, 2001.

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

36

[66] M. H. Ahmed, “Call admission control in wireless networks: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Communications

Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 49–68, 2005.

[67] Y. S. Zhao, X. Li, and H. Ji, “Spring model-based call admission control mechanism for high-speed railway

environment,” in Proceedings of International ICST Conference on Communications and Networking in China,

2011, pp. 1196–1200.

[68] Y. Kim, H. Ko, S. Pack, W. Lee, and X. Shen, “Mobility-aware call admission control algorithm with handoff

queue in mobile hotspots,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 62, no. 8, pp. 3903–3912, 2013.

[69] F. Lattanzi, G. Giambene, G. Acar, and B. Evans, “Admission control and handover management for high-

speed trains in vehicular geostationary satellite networks with terrestrial gap-ﬁlling,” International Journal of

Satellite Communications and Networking, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 1–27, 2010.

[70] Y. Z. Zhou and B. Ai, “Access control schemes for high-speed train communications,” in Proceedings of

International Workshop on High Mobility Wireless Communications (HMWC), Nov 2014, pp. 33–37.

[71] Q. Xu, X. Li, H. Ji, and L. P. Yao, “A cross-layer admission control scheme for high-speed railway

communication system,” in Proceedings of International Conference on Communications (ICC), 2013, pp.

4936–4940.

[72] ——, “Radio admission control scheme for high-speed railway scenario: An optimal accepted service number

approach,” in National Doctoral Academic Forum on Information and Communications Technology, Aug 2013,

pp. 1–6.

[73] K. Zhu, D. Niyato, P. Wang, E. Hossain, and D. Kim, “Mobility and handoff management in vehicular

networks: a survey,” Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 459–476, 2011.

[74] X. Zhu, S. Chen, H. Hu, X. Su, and Y. Shi, “TDD-based mobile communication solutions for high-speed

railway scenarios,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 22–29, 2013.

[75] H. Wu, T. Wang, and Z. Zhong, “Location updating schemes for high-speed railway cellular communication

systems,” Mathematical Problems in Engineering, vol. 2012, Article ID 802152, 15 pages, 2012.

[76] R. D. Pascoe and T. N. Eichorn, “What is communication-based train control?” IEEE Vehicular Technology

Magazine, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 16–21, 2009.

[77] Q. Huang, J. M. Zhou, C. Tao, S. Yi, and M. Lei, “Mobile relay based fast handover scheme in high-speed

mobile environment,” in Proceedings of IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC Fall), Sep 2012.

[78] Z. Y. Liu and P. Fan, “An effective handover scheme based on antenna selection in ground-train distributed

antenna systems,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 63, no. 7, pp. 3342–3350, 2014.

[79] X. J. Chen, C. S. Li, and Y. Luo, “A seamless dual-link handover scheme suitable for high-speed rail,”

in Proceedings of International Workshop on High Mobility Wireless Communications (HMWC), 2013, pp.

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

37

91–95.

[80] W. T. Luo, R. Q. Zhang, and X. M. Fang, “A CoMP soft handover scheme for LTE systems in high speed

railway,” EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking, vol. 2012, no. 1, pp. 1–9, 2012.

[81] Y. B. Lin, S. N. Yang, and C. T. Wu, “Improving handover and drop-off performance on high-speed trains

with multi-RAT,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 2720–2725,

2014.

[82] C. W. Lee, M. C. Chuang, M. C. Chen, and Y. S. Sun, “Seamless handover for high-speed trains using

femtocell-based multiple egress network interfaces,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 13,

no. 12, pp. 6619–6628, 2014.

[83] X. Yu, Y. Luo, and X. chen, “An optimized seamless dual-link handover scheme for high-speed rail,” IEEE

Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 2015. DOI: 10.1109/TVT.2015.2508485.

[84] M. S. Pan, T. M. Lin, and W. T. Chen, “An enhanced handover scheme for mobile relays in LTE-A high-speed

rail networks,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 64, no. 2, pp. 743–756, 2015.

[85] C. D. Gavrilovich, G. C. Ware, and F. LLP, “Broadband communications on the highways of tomorrow,” IEEE

Communications Magazine, vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 146–154, 2001.

[86] N. Pleros, K. Vyrsokinos, K. Tsagkaris, and N. Tselikas, “A 60 GHz radio-over-ﬁber network architecture for

seamless communication with high mobility,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 27, no. 12, pp. 1957–

1967, 2009.

[87] O. B. Karimi, J. Liu, and C. Wang, “Seamless wireless connectivity for multimedia services in high speed

trains,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 729–739, 2012.

[88] H. Huang and W. J. Hu, “A fast handover scheme based on GPS information for IEEE 802.16e on high-speed

railway,” in Proceedings of International Conference on Electronics, Communications and Control (ICECC),

2011, pp. 2408–2412.

[89] M. Aguado, E. Jacob, J. Astorga, N. Toledo, and M. Berbineau, “The cross layer RMPA handover: a reliable

mobility pattern aware handover strategy for broadband wireless communication in a high-speed railway

domain,” EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking, vol. 2012, no. 1, pp. 1–29, 2012.

[90] M. Cheng, X. Fang, and W. Luo, “Beamforming and positioning-assisted handover scheme for long-term

evolution system in high-speed railway,” IET Communications, vol. 6, no. 15, pp. 2335–2340, 2012.

[91] M. Fei and P. Z. Fan, “Position-assisted fast handover schemes for LTE-advanced network under high mobility

scenarios,” Journal of Modern Transportation, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 268–273, 2012.

[92] Y. Y. Xia, X. M. Fang, W. T. Luo, M. Liu, S. S. Li, and Y. J. Zhao, “Coordinated of multi-point and bi-casting

joint soft handover scheme for high-speed rail,” IET communications, vol. 8, no. 14, pp. 2509–2515, 2014.

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

38

[93] H. Song, X. Fang, and L. Yan, “Handover scheme for 5G C/U plane split heterogeneous network in high-speed

railway,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 63, no. 9, pp. 4633–4646, 2014.

[94] Y. Q. Dong and P. Y. Fan, “Bounds on the average transmission rate in high speed railway wireless

communications,” in Proceedings of International Workshop on High Mobility Wireless Communications

(HMWC), 2013, pp. 142–145.

[95] S. F. Xu, G. Zhu, C. Shen, Y. Lei, and Z. Zhong, “Utility-based resource allocation in high-speed railway

wireless networks,” EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking, vol. 2014, no. 1, pp.

1–14, 2014.

[96] C. D. Thai, M. Berbineau, and F. Sun, “Exploiting the forecast channels for power allocation in high-speed

railway communications,” in Proceedings of International Conference on ITS Telecommunications, 2013, pp.

402–406.

[97] C. Zhang, P. Y. Fan, K. Xiong, and P. Z. Fan, “Optimal power allocation with delay constraint for signal

transmission from a moving train to base stations in high-speed railway scenarios,” IEEE Transactions on

Vehicular Technology, vol. 64, no. 12, pp. 5775–5788, 2015.

[98] X. Ma, J. Liu, and H. Jiang, “Energy-efﬁcient mobile data uploading from high-speed trains,” Mobile Networks

and Applications, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 143–151, 2012.

[99] S. F. Xu, G. Zhu, C. Shen, S. C. Li and Z. D. Zhong, “Delay-aware dynamic resource management for

high-speed railway wireless communications,” http://arxiv.org/abs/1601.01526.

[100] M. Gong, C. Zhang, J. H. Lu, and X. K. Lin, “Dynamic resouce allocation in high speed mobile OFDMA

system,” in Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), 2008, pp. 3335–3339.

[101] Y. Zhao, X. Li, Y. Li, and H. Ji, “Resource allocation for high-speed railway downlink MIMO-OFDM system

using quantum-behaved particle swarm optimization,” in Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on

Communications (ICC), 2013, pp. 2343–2347.

[102] S. Y. Xu and K. S. Kwak, “Effective uplink interference avoidance scheme for high-speed railway communi-

cations,” in Proceedings of IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC Fall), September 2013.

[103] Y. Z. Zhou and B. Ai, “Quality of service improvement for high-speed railway communications,” China

Communications, vol. 11, no. 11, pp. 156–167, 2014.

[104] Q. S. Xu, H. Ji, and X. Li, “Goodput performance improvement in high-speed railway communication systems:

A link adaptation approach,” in Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC),

2014, pp. 1059–1064.

[105] H. L. Zhu, “Radio resource allocation for OFDMA systems in high speed environments,” IEEE Journal on

Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 748–759, 2012.

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

39

[106] L. Lei, J. Lu, Y. Jiang, X. Shen, Y. Li, Z. Zhong, and C. Lin, “Stochastic delay analysis for train control

services in next-generation high-speed railway communications system,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent

Transportation Systems, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 48–64, 2016.

[107] S. F. Xu, G. Zhu, C. Shen, and B. Ai, “A QoS-aware scheduling algorithm for high-speed railway

communication system,” in Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), 2014,

pp. 2855–2860.

[108] T. Y. Chen, H. G. Shan, and X. Wang, “Optimal scheduling for wireless on-demand data packet delivery to

high-speed trains,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 64, no. 9, pp. 4101–4112, 2014.

[109] S. F. Xu, G. Zhu, C. Shen, and Y. Lei, “Delay-aware fair scheduling in relay-assisted high-speed railway

networks,” in Proceedings of International Conference on Communications and Networking in China, 2013,

pp. 17–21.

[110] S. F. Xu, G. Zhu, C. Shen, Y. Lei, and Z. Zhong, “Delay-aware online service scheduling in high-speed

railway communication systems,” Mathematical Problems in Engineering, vol. 2014, Article ID 248174, 10

pages, 2014.

[111] X. Yang and H. Liu, “A resource allocation scheme for VoIP trafﬁc under high speed train scenario,” in

Proceedings of International Workshop on High Mobility Wireless Communications (HMWC), Nov 2014, pp.

23–26.

[112] J. Moreno, J. M. Riera, L. D. Haro, and C. Rodriguez, “A survey on future railway radio communications

services: challenges and opportunities,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 53, no. 10, pp. 62–68, 2015.

[113] L. Yan, X. Fang, and C. X. Wang, “Position based limited feedback scheme for railway MU-MIMO systems,”

IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 2015. DOI: 10.1109/TVT.2015.2511021.

[114] M. Cheng and X. Fang, “Location information-assisted opportunistic beamforming in lte system for high-

speed railway,” EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communication and Networking, vol. 2012, no. 1, pp. 1–7,

2012.

[115] J. Wu and P. Fan, “A survey on high mobility wireless communications: Challenges, opportunities and

solutions,” IEEE Access, vol. 4, pp. 450–476, 2016.

[116] L. Zhu, F. R. Yu, B. Ning, and T. Tang, “Cross-layer design for video transmissions in metro passenger

information systems,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 1171–1181, 2011.

[117] B. Ai, X. Cheng, L. Q. Yang, Z. D. Zhong, J. W. Ding, and H. Song, “Social network services for rail trafﬁc

applications,” IEEE Intelligent Systems, vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 63–69, 2014.

[118] M. C. Chuang and M. C. Chen, “A mobile proxy architecture for video services over high-speed rail

environments in LTE-A networks,” IEEE Systems Journal, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 1264–1272, 2015.

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

40

[119] J. Y. Huang and Z. D. Zhong, “Dynamic green communication strategy for railway cellular network,” in

Proceedings of IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC Spring), May 2014.

[120] L. Yan, X. Fang, and Y. Fang, “Control and data signaling decoupled architecture for railway wireless

networks,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 103–111, February 2015.

[121] B. Ai, K. Guan, M. Rupp, T. Kurner, X. Cheng, X. Yin, Q. Wang, G. Ma, Y. Li, L. Xiong, and J. Ding, “Future

railway services-oriented mobile communications network,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 53, no. 10,

pp. 78–85, 2015.

[122] P. Dat, A. Kanno, N. Yamamoto, and T. Kawanishi, “WDM RoF-MMW and linearly located distributed

antenna system for future high-speed railway communications,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 53,

no. 10, pp. 86–94, 2015.

[123] S. Choi, D. You, I. Kim, and D. J. Kim, “Uplink design of millimeter-wave mobile communication systems

for high-speed trains,” in Proceedings of IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC Spring), May 2014.

March 18, 2016

DRAFT

