6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
7
1

 
 
]
T
G
h
t
a
m

.

[
 
 

1
v
8
7
3
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

A COMMENTARY ON TEICHM ¨ULLER’S PAPER

VOLLST ¨ANDIGE L ¨OSUNG EINER EXTREMALAUFGABE DER
QUASIKONFORMEN ABBILDUNG (COMPLETE SOLUTION OF

AN EXTREMAL PROBLEM OF THE QUASICONFORMAL

MAPPING)

VINCENT ALBERGE AND ATHANASE PAPADOPOULOS

Abstract. We comment on Teichm¨uller’s paper Vollst¨andige L¨osung einer
Extremalaufgabe der quasikonformen Abbildung (Complete solution of an ex-
tremal problem of the quasiconformal mapping) [8], published in 1941. In this
paper, Teichm¨uller gives a proof of the existence of extremal quasiconformal
mappings in the case of the pentagon (disc with ﬁve distinguished points on
the boundary).

AMS Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation: 30F60, 32G15, 30C62, 30C75, 30C70.

Keywords: Quasiconformal mapping, length-area method, extremal problem,
method of continuity, quadratic diﬀerential, Riemann mapping theorem.

The ﬁnal version of this paper will appear as a chapter in Volume VI of the
Handbook of Teichm¨uller theory. This volume is dedicated to the memory of
Alexander Grothendieck.

References

6

Contents

We comment on the paper Vollst¨andige L¨osung einer Extremalaufgabe der quasikon-

formen Abbildung (Complete solution of an extremal problem of the quasiconformal
mapping) [8] by Teichm¨uller, published in 1941. In this paper Teichm¨uller proves
his famous existence theorem of extremal quasiconformal mappings (we shall recall
the statement below), for the case of the pentagon (a disc with ﬁve distinguished
points on the boundary). In the paper [7] (see also the commentary [4]), published
in 1939 and which is probably his most quoted paper, Teichm¨uller had announced
this theorem for arbitrary surfaces of ﬁnite topological type (orientable or not),
with only a sketch of a proof. A complete proof of this theorem is given in that
paper only in the case of the torus and in a few other cases which can be reduced
to that case: the sphere with four distinguished points, the annulus (a case which
was already treated by Gr¨otzsch), the disc with two interior distinguished points,
and the disc with one interior distinguished point and two boundary distinguished
points. In the later paper [9] (see also the commentary [1]), published in 1943, Te-
ichm¨uller gave a complete proof of this theorem in the case of an orientable closed
surfaces of ﬁnite type. The case of the pentagon is not proved rigorously in the
paper [7] (and this case is also not considered in the paper [9] which was published

Date: March 18, 2016.

1

2

VINCENT ALBERGE AND ATHANASE PAPADOPOULOS

later).1 However, Teichm¨uller proves in § 129 of [7], using the length-area method,
that the aﬃne maps (which are in fact Teichm¨uller maps) between two pentagons
of a particular type (see Figure 1) are extremal. Furthermore, in § 130 of the same
paper, he develops the geometry of the space we call today the Teichm¨uller space
of the pentagon, equipped with its Teichm¨uller metric. He studies quasiconformal
maps between pentagons and the geodesics in this Teichm¨uller space. The existence
theorem for extremal quasiconformal mappings between two pentagons is implicitly
admitted (and not proved) in that paper. This is why the present paper is a valu-
able addition to the paper [7]. It is also important to add that in [7], Teichm¨uller
was still not using the so-called method of continuity, and this is why in § 161 to
§ 163 of that paper he tried to use the so-called length-area method2 in order to
determine the extremal map. His idea was probably to generalize the method used
for the quadrilateral which originates in the work of Gr¨otzsch.

Let us note by the way that the case of the pentagon is a nontrivial one. Gr¨otzsch,
in 1932, had treated the case of a quadrilateral (a disc with four distinguished points
on the boundary) [5]. In his 1964 survey paper on quasiconformal maps and their
applications [2], Ahlfors, reporting on Teichm¨uller’s work, writes that the result on
pentagons is “already a sophisticated result.” Teichm¨uller writes (§1 of the present
paper) that the case of the pentagon is “the simplest case of the higher cases,”
and that this simple case already “shows how far one has to go beyond and extend
the methods of Ahlfors and Gr¨otzsch.” Indeed, some nontrivial work is needed for
the existence proof in this case, and the proofs already highlight the diﬃculties
that appear in the general case. In fact, Teichm¨uller wrote explicitly that he will
only deal with the “solution of the problem of extremal quasiconformal mapping
in the case of the pentagon,” and that to solve this problem he will use a proof
by continuity; a method which “may serve [...]
for a proof of the general case.”
We know that Teichm¨uller used this method in [9] to give a rigorous proof for
the existence of extremal quasiconformal mappings in the case of closed surfaces
of genus ≥ 2. We also note that the Teichm¨uller space of the pentagon, which
is studied in some detail in the paper [7], coincides with the moduli space of this
surface since the mapping class group in this case is trivial (the distinguished points
on the boundary are pointwise ﬁxed by the mappings).

Let us make a further remark on the geometry of pentagons.
One of the beautiful results of Teichm¨uller’s work is that the extremal quasicon-
formal mappings (the so-called Teichm¨uller mappings) between arbitrary surfaces
of ﬁnite type are locally aﬃne; more precisely, in the local ζ-coordinate of the
complex plane, they have the form

ζ → K · Re (ζ) + Im (ζ) .

In the case of the quadrilateral, this is also the form of a global map, by a result
of Gr¨otzsch, obtained after conformally mapping an arbitray quadrilateral to a
Euclidean rectangle with sides parallel to the real and imaginary axes of the complex
plane. Now if one hopes for such a result for more general surfaces, one needs to ﬁnd
good conformal representatives of more general polygons (discs with distinguished
points on the boundary). Teichm¨uller succeeds in doing this, but representing a
pentagon by a Euclidean hexagon, that is, a ﬁgure with 6 vertices instead of ﬁve
(see Figure 1 below). In this case, one of the vertices (the one with the re-entering
angle) is not considered as a distinguished point, and the hexagon becomes the
conformal image of a pentagon.

1In [9], Teichm¨uller promises to give later on a proof in the most general case of surfaces of
ﬁnite type (orientable or not, with or without boundary, with or without distinguished points in
the interior and/or on the boundary). His project was not realized since he died soon later.

2In [7], Teichm¨uller calls this method the Gr¨otzsch-Ahlfors method.

A COMMENTARY ON TEICHM ¨ULLER’S PAPER

3

Let us now present in some detail the results in this paper.
In §2 of the paper, Teichm¨uller states precisely the existence problem for extremal
quasiconformal mappings, in the case of pentagons. A pentagon is a disc with ﬁve
ordered distinguished points on its boundary. It is represented conformally (using
the Riemann mapping theorem) as the upper half-plane Im (z) > 0 together with
its boundary, such that (using Teichm¨uller’s notation) the distinguished points are
sent to the ordered quintuple 0, p2, 1, p4, ∞. Thus, the pair of real numbers p2, p4,
with the conditions 0 < p2 < 1, 1 < p4 < ∞, are the parameters for the space
of conformal classes of pentagons. Teichm¨uller called such pentagons “normalized
pentagons.” The quasiconformal mappings between pentagons are deﬁned, as con-
tinuously diﬀerentiable mappings in both directions, with singularities at ﬁnitely
many points and at ﬁnitely many analytical arcs. The dilatation quotient is deﬁned
as the ratio of the large axis to the small axis of the inﬁnitesimal ellipse which is the
image of an inﬁnitesimal circle at a point where the mapping is diﬀerentiable, and
the map is said to be quasiconformal if the supremum of the dilatation quotient
over the whole surface (whenever the quotient is deﬁned) is ﬁnite. Teichm¨uller
assumes the reader familiar with this notion, and he refers to his earlier paper [6].
We call this supremum the quasiconformal dilatation of the map.

Given two pentagons P, Q there always exists a quasiconformal mapping between
them, and Teichm¨uller gives the following example of such a mapping. The upper
half-plane is sent conformally to the unit disc. The ﬁve distinguished points divide
the boundary of this disc into ﬁve sectors. Using the polar coordinates ρeiθ, the
corresponding sectors are sent to each other by maps of the form ρ′ = ρ and
θ′ = aθ + b, with a > 0. The problem is now the following:

Given two pentagons P and Q, is there an extremal quasiconfor-
mal mapping, that is, a mapping which has the smallest possible
quasiconformal dilatation?

The aim of this paper is to answer this question aﬃrmatively. Furthermore, Te-
ichm¨uller shows that the dilatation quotient of this extremal map is everywhere
constant, and he gives an explicit expression for the form that this map has.

The proof will use the so-called “continuity argument,” in the following form.
One starts with an arbitrary pentagon P , and builds a two-parameter family of
pentagons Q, equipped with special mappings P → Q. These special mappings
are shown to be extremal quasiconformal, and the “continuity argument” will show
that an arbitrary pentagon is obtained in this manner. The continuity argument is
Brouwer’s theorem of invariance of domain.

In §3, titled Maps to axis-parallel hexagons, Teichm¨uller uses a mapping given

by the integral

(1)

ζ =Z s

cos ϕ + z sin ϕ

z(z − p2)(z − 1)(z − p4)

dz.

Such a mapping is called a Schwarz-Christoﬀel mapping.
It sends the family of
polygons parametrized as above by the points p2, p4 on the boundary of the upper
half-plane to a family of polygons in the ζ-plane which are simply connected regions
having the form of Euclidean polygons. Depending on the values of the parameter
ϕ, the image is either a Euclidean hexagon (when cot (ϕ) 6= 0, −p2, −1, −p4, ∞)
where distinguished points correspond to vertices with angle π
2 , this Euclidean
hexagon having also a re-entrant vertex of angle 3π
2 (this vertex is not considered
as a distinguished point), or a rectangle with ﬁve marked points where the four
vertices are distinguished points, and one of the ﬁve distinguished points lies on
one of the sides. See Figure 1. Using the notation in that ﬁgure, by making a = A,
or b = 0, the hexagon degenerates into a rectangle. Teichm¨uller calls this kind of

4

VINCENT ALBERGE AND ATHANASE PAPADOPOULOS

degenerate hexagon a rectangular hexagon. We recall that the study of pentagons
using a representation by Euclidean hexagons was already done in § 129 of [7]. For
a ﬁxed pentagon determined by p2, p4, taking the square of the above integrand,

dζ 2 =

cos ϕ + z sin ϕ

z(z − p2)(z − 1)(z − p4)

dz 2,

is, up to a positive factor, the general form of the real and not identically zero
quadratic diﬀerentials on the Riemann sphere represented by the parameter z and
the point at inﬁnity. This kind of quadratic diﬀerential is real along the real axis
and is meromorphic with at most simple poles at the ﬁve points 0, p2, 1, p4, ∞.
Teichm¨uller calls such a quadratic diﬀerential “regular.”3

In § 4, a space of pairs (P, ϕ) is studied. It has three parameters: two parameters
for (p2, p4) varying in (0, 1)×(1, ∞), and one for the angle parameter ϕ. This spaces
is equipped with the canonical topology induced by that of R3. A map (P, ϕ) → S is
deﬁned from this parameter space into the space of equivalence classes of hexagons
(and rectangular hexagons) with the parameters a, b, A, B that we mentioned, up
to the transformations

ζ → aζ + b,

where b ∈ C and a ∈ R∗. The topology on this space of pentagons (which have the
shape of hexagons) is the one induced by the four numbers a, b, A, B up to a scalar
factor, or, as Teichm¨uller puts it, by the homogeneous coordinates a : b : A : B.
He makes a detailed study of the cases where the hexagonal shapes degenerate to
rectangles. Teichm¨uller shows that the map (P, ϕ) → S is continuous. For that, he
starts by showing that the image of the map is a 3-dimensional topological manifold.
Using the dominated convergence theorem for integrals, he deduces that the map
given by the integral of type (1) depends continuously on (p2, p4, ϕ). The next goal
is to show that this map is a homeomorphism. This is done in the next section.

B

0

−b

a

A

Figure 1. This hexagonal-shaped ﬁgure is a pentagon (the ﬁve distin-
guished points are at the salient angles).

3The explicit deﬁnition of such a notion is given in § 100 of [7].

A COMMENTARY ON TEICHM ¨ULLER’S PAPER

5

In § 5, Teichm¨uller starts by showing that the map given by the integral is injec-
tive. Thus, this map is continuous and one-to-one onto its image. He then applies
Brouwer’s theorem of invariance of domain to conclude that the map, in fact, is
a homeomorphism onto its image. Teichm¨uller notes however that the use of this
theorem “can still be avoided.” He concludes this section by showing that the map
is in fact surjective. Therefore the map (P, ϕ) → S is a homeomorphism.

In § 6, Teichm¨uller deﬁnes what is called today the Teichm¨uller mapping. Let
us recall the construction. Let P be a pentagon determined by a pair (p2, p4) ∈
(0, 1) × (1, ∞). Using the formula given by (1), we obtain, from ϕ (a real number
modulo 2π), a new coordinate ζ in which the pentagon has one of the desired forms,
that is, either a hexagon in the plane whose distinguished points are the ﬁve salient
vertices, or a rectangular hexagon. In either case, we obtain an equivalence class
of such hexagons called S. Teichm¨uller deﬁnes, for K ≥ 1, a map (which is called
now a Teichm¨uller map), between two Euclidean hexagons which in natural local
coordinates has the form

(2)

ζ → K · mathrmRe (ζ) + Im (ζ) .

This map is quasiconformal and its dilatation quotient is equal to K. Via the
homeomorphism that we already considered, we get a new pentagon Q, denoted by
P (K, ϕ). Thus, Teichm¨uller deﬁnes a map

(3)

(K, ϕ) → P (K, ϕ)

with values in the Teichm¨uller space of the pentagon. We have

P (1, ϕ) = P.

In the next section, Teichm¨uller shows that the map given by (3) is continuous.
This is only a consequence of the fact that the set of pairs (P, ϕ) is homeomorphic
to the set of equivalence classes of Euclidean hexagon-shaped ﬁgures.

In § 8, Teichm¨uller shows that for a given (K, ϕ), the quasiconformal mappings
between P and P (K, ϕ) that are induced from (2) are extremal. This result (in
its general form, for an arbitrary surface of ﬁnite type) is often called the Te-
ichm¨uller uniqueness theorem. For the proof, Teichm¨uller uses the so-called length-
area method. As we already noted, this was already proved in § 129 of [7] for
pentagons and in § 132 to § 140 of that paper in full generality. The novelty in the
present paper is in the next section.

Indeed, in the last section, Teichm¨uller shows that the map (3) is a homeomor-
phism. To do this, he starts by showing that it is injective. Given that the map
is continuous (§ 7), he concludes, again using Brouwer’s theorem of invariance of
domain that this map is a homeomorphism onto its image. He then shows that
the image corresponds to {(p2, p4) | 0 < p2 < 1, 1 < p4 < ∞}, i.e. the Teichm¨uller
space of the pentagon. This concludes the Teichm¨uller theorem for the pentagon.
As a conclusion to this commentary, let us note that the proof of the Teichm¨uller
theorem for general compact hyperbolic surfaces given in [9] is modelled on the
same idea, namely the application of Brouwer’s theorem of invariance of domain to
a space which is homeomorphic to Teichm¨uller space.

In the paper [3], Ahlfors and Beurling consider conformal parameters for the
pentagon and for some other special planar surfaces. This was the beginning of the
notion of extremal length, which they try to apply to the study of the moduli of discs
with a few number of distinguished points on the boundary, after representing them
as polygons in the Euclidean plane. Ahlfors and Beurling do not quote the paper
[8] (it is possible that they were not aware of it), but they quote [7]. They write
the following: “Those who are familiar with the beautiful works of Mr. Teichm¨uller
will notice the link between our results and his results. Nevertheless, one has to

6

VINCENT ALBERGE AND ATHANASE PAPADOPOULOS

note that our starting point and the problem in which we are interested are enough
far from the notions with which Mr. Teichm¨uller was concerned.”4

Acknowledgements The authors were partially supported by the French ANR
program FINSLER and by the U.S. National Foundation grants DMS 1107452,
1107263, 1107367 “RNMS GEometric structures And Representation varieties.”
They wish to thank the Graduate Center of the City University of New York where
part of this work was done.

References

[1] A. A’Campo-Neuen, N. A’Campo, V. Alberge and A. Papadopoulos, A commentary on Te-
ichm¨uller’s paper Bestimmung der extremalen quasikonformen Abbildungen bei geschlossenen
orientierten Riemannschen Fl¨achen. In Handbook of Teichm¨uller theory (A. Papadopoulos,
ed.), Volume V, EMS Publishing House, Z¨urich 2015, 569-580.

[2] L. V. Ahlfors, Quasiconformal mappings and their applications, In Lect. on Modern Math. 2

(1964), 151-164. Collected papers Volume II, 301-314.

[3] L. V. Ahlfors and A. Beurling, Invariants conformes et probl`emes extr´emaux. In Comptes ren-
dus du 10me congr`es des math´ematiciens scandinaves, Copenhagen, 1946, 341-351. Collected
papers Volume I, 395-405.

[4] V. Alberge, A. Papadopoulos and W. Su, A commentary on Teichm¨uller’s paper Extremale
quasikonforme Abbildungen und quadratische Diﬀerentiale. In Handbook of Teichm¨uller theory
(A. Papadopoulos, ed.), Volume V, EMS Publishing House, Z¨urich 2015, 485-531.

[5] H. Gr¨otzsch, ¨Uber das Parallelschlitztheorem der konformen Abbildung schlichter Bereiche,

Berichte Verhandlungen S¨achsischen Akademie Leipzig 84 (1932), 15-36.

[6] O. Teichm¨uller, Eine Anwendung quasikonformer Abbildungen auf das Typenproblem,

Deutsche Math. 2 (1937), 321-327.

[7] O. Teichm¨uller, Extremale quasikonforme Abbildungen und quadratische Diﬀerentiale. Abh.
Preuss. Akad. Wiss., Math.-Naturw. Kl. 22 (1940), 1-197. English translation by G. Th´eret,
Extremal quasiconformal mappings and quadratic diﬀerentials. In Handbook of Teichm¨uller
theory (A. Papadopoulos, ed.), Volume V, EMS Publishing House, Z¨urich 2015, 321-483.

[8] O. Teichm¨uller, Vollst¨andige L¨osung einer Extremalaufgabe der quasikonformen Abbildung.
Ab. Preuss. Akad. Wiss., math.-naturw. Kl. 5, 18 (1941), 3-18. English translation by M.
Karbe, Complete solution of an extremal problem of the quasiconformal mapping. In Hand-
book of Teichm¨uller theory (A. Papadopoulos, ed.), Volume VI, EMS Publishing House,
Z¨urich,2016, 564-558.

[9] O. Teichm¨uller, Bestimmung der extremalen quasikonformen Abbildungen bei geschlossenen
orientierten Riemannschen Fl¨achen. Abh. Preuss. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl. 4 (1943), 1-
42. English translation by A. A’Campo Neuen, Determination of extremal quasiconformal
mappings of closed oriented Riemann surfaces. In Handbook of Teichm¨uller theory (A. Pa-
padopoulos, ed.), Volume V, EMS Publishing House, Z¨urich 2015, 533-567.

Institut de Recherche Math´ematique Avanc´ee, CNRS et Universit´e de Strasbourg, 7
rue Ren´e Descartes - 67084 Strasbourg Cedex, France;, The Graduate Center,
City University of New York,, 365 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10016 USA.,
alberge@math.unistra.fr, papadop@math.unistra.fr

4“Ceux qui connaissent bien les beaux travaux de M. Teichm¨uller noterons [sic] le lien ´etroit
entre nos r´esultats et les siens. Il faut tout-de-mˆeme remarquer que notre point de d´epart ainsi que
le probl`eme qui nous int´eresse sont assez ´eloign´es des notions dont M. Teichm¨uller s’est pr´eoccup´e.”

