6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
7
1

 
 
]
l
l
a
h
-
s
e
m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
8
3
4
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Observing “Quantized” Conductance Steps in Silver Sulﬁde: Two Parallel
Resistive Switching Mechanisms

Jelmer J.T. Wagenaar, Monica Morales-Masis, and Jan M. van Ruitenbeeka)
Kamerlingh Onnes Laboratorium, Leiden University, PO Box 9504, 2300 RA Leiden,
The Netherlands

We demonstrate that it is possible to distinguish two conductance switching mechanisms in silver sulﬁde
devices at room temperature. Experiments were performed using a Ag2S thin ﬁlm deposited on a wide
Ag bottom electrode, which was contacted by the Pt tip of a scanning tunneling microscope. By applying
a positive voltage on the silver electrode the conductance is seen to switch to a state having three orders
of magnitude higher conductance, which is related to the formation of a conductive path inside the Ag2S
thin ﬁlm. We argue this to be composed of a metallic silver nanowire accompanied by a modiﬁcation of
the surrounding lattice structure. Metallic silver nanowires decaying after applying a negative voltage allow
observing conductance steps in the breaking traces characteristic for atomic-scale contacts, while the lattice
structure deformation is revealed by gradual and continuously decreasing conductance traces.

I.

INTRODUCTION

II. EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS

It poses an interesting challenge to attempt to create
atomic scale switches for implementation in future elec-
tronic devices, and some progress in this direction has
been reported.1–4 One of the proposed switches is based
on cation migration and redox reactions in solid-state
ionic conductors.5–7 Terabe et al.3 reported atomic
switching behavior by electrochemical reactions taking
place in a vacuum gap between micro fabricated Pt and
Ag2S electrodes. They showed switching between integer
values of the unit of conductance, G0 = (12.9 kΩ)−1, at
room temperature and attributed this to the formation
of a contact made up of a single atom, or a few atoms.
Atomic conductance steps were also observed much ear-
lier by Hajto et al.8 in a metal/p+-amorphous Si/metal
thin ﬁlm memory structures.

Here, we report on investigations on the conditions for
observing atomic switching behavior without a vacuum
gap.10 We used a device composed of a Ag2S thin ﬁlm
deposited on top of a wide Ag layer. By contacting the
thin ﬁlm with the Pt tip of a scanning tunneling micro-
scope (STM) and applying a positive bias voltage to the
silver bottom layer the Ag2S ﬁlm was seen to switch to a
high-conductive state. This high-conductive state is as-
sociated with the creation of a conducting path inside the
Ag2S ﬁlm.11 The Ag2S ﬁlm can be switched back to the
low-conductive state by applying a negative bias voltage,
which is associated with breaking up, or dissolution, of
the conductive path. In analyzing ’on’ to ’oﬀ’ conduc-
tance traces we found evidence for the coexistence of two
parallel breaking mechanisms.

a)Electronic mail: ruitenbeek@physics.leidenuniv.nl

The deposition of Ag2S was achieved by sputtering Ag
in a Ar/H2S plasma. It was deposited on top of a Ag ﬁlm
(200nm) which sits on a Si(100) substrate. The thick-
ness of the silver sulﬁde layer is approximately 200nm
and has a roughness of 30nm. The fabrication process
and the characterization are described in more detail in
a previous report by Morales et al.12

The measurements have been performed using a JEOL
ultra-high vacuum STM (JSPM-4500A) at room temper-
ature and at a pressure of 10−9mbar. The contact geom-
etry is illustrated in the inset in Fig 1(a). A FEMTO
(DLPCA-200) current ampliﬁer was used to replace the
standard JEOL current ampliﬁer in order to cover a
larger current ampliﬁcation range. In terms of electron
transport silver sulﬁde is a semiconductor, therefore con-
trol of the tip-sample distance requires biasing well be-
low or well above the band gap.13 In order to avoid early
ion accumulation and the built up of a conducting path
before the start of the experiment, the setting of the
tip-sample distance requires a negative voltage on the
sample, larger than the band gap. An external data ac-
quisition card from National Instruments was added to
the controller of the STM in order to apply the sample
voltage and for measuring the current. The data acquisi-
tion card was controlled by a Labview program that was
set up for measuring current-voltage (IV) characteristics,
and traces of conductance (G) vs. time (t).

III. RESULTS

A.

IV characteristics

Before starting the measurements we need to conﬁrm
that the tip is in contact with our sample. This can be
decided based upon the measured current-voltage rela-
tion. When a large tunneling gap is formed the resistance
is dominated by vacuum tunneling and the IV curve is
nearly linear, for suﬃciently low bias. On the other hand,

2

the only ﬁtting parameter, from which we determine the
size of the Pt STM tip contact. Fig. 1(b) presents the IV
curve for the low-conductance state (oﬀ-state) and the
ﬁt of the curve to Eq. (1). From the quality of the ﬁt
we conclude that the sample is in its pristine, semicon-
ducting, state and that the Pt tip is in contact with the
sample. We can also conclude that there is no Joule heat-
ing of the sample since the temperature dependency is
in the exponential. Increasing the voltage further causes
switching to the on-state (Fig. 1(a)) due to the formation
of a conductive path. Fig. 1(c) shows an IV curve for the
on-state, and the linear ﬁt indicates metallic behavior.
Subsequently, returning to a suﬃciently large negative
voltage the sample switches back to the oﬀ-state.

After switching the device several times the oﬀ-state
conductance of the sample becomes strongly modiﬁed.
The evolution of the oﬀ-state IV curves with the number
of switching cycles is presented in Fig. 2. The switch-
ing cycles were similar to the one shown Fig. 1 and the
IV curves were recorded a few seconds after every cycle.
Starting from the IV characteristics of the pristine sam-
ple (green curve) we observed the conductance increasing
from 0.1G0 to 1G0 after the sixth cycle.

Initially, the IV curves are described well by Eq. (1)
(the red dashed curve). After several switching cycles the
IV characteristic can only be ﬁt by adding a signiﬁcant
linear term to Eq. (1). This higher conductance state of
the sample will eventually return to the initial conduc-
tance after applying a negative voltage for a longer period

FIG. 2. Evolution of the oﬀ-state conductance curve for a
Ag2S ﬁlm with an increasing number of switching cycles.
Each of the IV curves in the plot is measured after a full
switching cycle, such as the one shown in Fig. 1a). The ﬁrst
curve (green) is measured after the ﬁrst switching cycle, and
the ﬁt to Eq. (1) indicates that it remains close to the initial
state of the pristine sample. The arrows give the direction of
evolution for consecutive cycles. The zero-bias conductance
of the junction changes from 0.1 G0 (ﬁtted curve) to approx-
imately 1 G0 (black curve).

FIG. 1. a) Current-voltage characteristics of a Ag-Ag2S-Pt
device (see inset) measured for a cycle duration of 1s. The
ramp was started at 0V and follows the red arrows. In this
IV curve full conductance switching is observed. The inset
illustrates the contact geometry. b) Expanded scale view of
the section of the IV curve in the ’oﬀ’ state in (a). This part of
the IV curve is ﬁt very well by Eq. (1) (red curve), indicating
that the Pt tip is in contact with the Ag2S ﬁlm, and that the
ﬁlm is in its equilibrium (semiconducting) state. The zero-
bias conductance of the oﬀ-state is approximately 0.2G0 for
this contact size. c) On-state section of the IV curve in (a).
At this stage the sample has a conductance of 100G0, and the
linear ﬁt (red line) indicates metallic behavior.

when in contact an exponential current-voltage charac-
teristics is observed that is the result of ion accumulation
near the contact at positive bias before full conductance
switching occurs. The ions act as dopants and their ac-
cumulation results in an exponential increase of the elec-
tronic conductance. The IV curves are well described by
the following expression,12

I(V ) = Kσ0

kBT

e

e(eV /kB T ) − 1

with σ0 = 7.8 10−2 Ω−1m−1 the electronic conductivity
of Ag2S at zero bias,14 T = 295 K is the temperature, kB
is Boltzmann’s constant, and K is a geometrical factor
with dimensions of length representing the contact size.
We measured IV curves by ramping the bias voltage
and measuring the current with a sampling rate of 10000
samples per second. In ﬁtting the data with Eq. (1) K is

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

(1)

-100-50050100-0.10.00.10.20.30.40.5010200.00.10.2-60-3003060-10123a)Current(mA)Voltage(mV)Current(mA)Voltage(mV)c)ExperimentLinearFitb)Current((cid:31)A)Voltage(mV)ExperimentFit-50-25025-4-2024  Current (mA)Voltage (mV) equation 1of time as will be shown below (Fig. 4). This changing
sample conductance characteristics after switching has
been reported previously and is referred to as the learning
behavior of the switching mechanism.15,16, and is being
explored for realizing artiﬁcial synapses.9

B. Breaking

We measured traces of conductance as a function of
time by control of the bias voltage in the following way:
when the conductance was seen to fall below 0.5G0 a pos-
itive bias voltage was applied to the sample. To achieve
rapid switching we used a voltage of +100mV.13 A high-
conductance path was formed and the conductance was
seen to rise to values above 100G0. Once G was detected
to pass above 100G0 a negative bias voltage of −100mV
was applied to the sample in order to break the conduc-
tive path, until the conductance approached the initial
state of G < 0.5G0. In this way the formation and break-
ing process is more controllable than by applying ﬁxed
pulses to the sample.

We measured many breaking traces at diﬀerent spots
on the sample and we recognized two types of traces:
traces having a step-like pattern, and traces showing only
a slow and continuous decay of the conductance. The
observed patterns in the traces indicates the coexistence
of two switching mechanisms.

The ﬁrst mechanism is the dissolution of a metallic sil-
ver conductance path showing, at the ﬁnal stages of the
breaking, atomic conductance steps. When a metallic sil-
ver ﬁlament dominates the conductance, upon applying
a negative voltage the ﬁlament at its weakest point will
become reduced to only a few bridging atoms.
In this
way quantum properties of the conductance of the silver
ﬁlament will show up.17 Fig. 3 shows some examples of
atomic conductance steps observed in conductance traces
recorded as a function of the breaking time. In Fig. 3(a)
one observes that the conductance decays almost linearly
until arriving at about 5G0, when steps of close to 1G0
in height start to be visible. Very pronounced plateaus
and steps of approximately 1G0 can also be seen in the
plots of Fig. 3(b), with a very long plateau of 0.4s in the
middle trace. The upper trace also shows two level ﬂuc-
tuations with an amplitude close to 1G0 that is typical
for atomic-scale contacts.17

However, there appears to be a second mechanism
active. We conclude this from the observation of a
slower and nearly continuous decrease of the conduc-
tance. Traces with atomic conductance steps appeared
only when the conductance rapidly dropped below 0.5G0
in approximately one second. When the decrease in the
conductance was slower, we observed behavior as illus-
trated by the upper trace in Fig. 4. This is accompanied
by a change in the IV characteristics similar to Fig.2.
We attribute this behavior to a second mechanism, most
likely due to a modiﬁcation of the local lattice struc-
ture giving rise to a region of increased conductance.

3

FIG. 3. Steps in the conductance become visible when break-
ing the conductive path at a bias of −100mV. The conductive
path was formed by applying a voltage of +100mV, allowing
the conductance to reach 100G0 within a second. a) Break-
ing trace with three clear conductance steps of approximately
1G0 observed at the last stages of breaking. The inset shows
a zoom of the steps. b) Three breaking traces with atomic
conductance steps having diﬀerent lengths in time. The mea-
surements were performed on diﬀerent spots of the sample
and using diﬀerent Pt-tips. The upper trace shows two-level
ﬂuctuations that are typical for atomic size contacts, and are
attributed to single atoms oscillating near the contact.

This modiﬁcation is probably induced by the electric ﬁeld
and the increased concentration of silver in the region of
switching. It has been previously shown that the elec-
tric ﬁeld can induced phase transitions, or decrease the
phase transition temperature in materials like vanadium
dioxide18 and complex perovskites19. After applying a
negative voltage silver diﬀuses back to the Ag bottom
reservoir and the lattice slowly relaxes to its equilibrium
structure11.

Occasionally the two processes can be observed to-
gether, as illustrated in the lower trace in Fig.4: around
6G0 atomic conductance steps are visible, while some-
what later there is a continuous decrease over ﬁve sec-
onds from 2 to 1G0.
In terms of the two mechanisms

012345b)Conductance(G0)Time(scaled)10ms400ms300ms0.150.200.250.3005101520250.260.280123Conductance(G0)Time(s)a)4

speciﬁc values of conductance as illustrated in Fig. 5. In
this example the conductance of the contact at a bias of
-110mV was 0.3G0, slightly higher than the conductance
of the contact in the pristine state of 0.1 G0.

This nanoscale resistive switch in the regime of the
quantum of conductance should not be confused with an
atomic scale switch. The steps that we attribute to in-
trinsic atomic scale structure (‘quantization’) are only
short lived (Fig.3), and the IV curves in this state are lin-
ear, so that the conductance does not depend on the bias
voltage. By controlling the second mechanism of conduc-
tance switching any conductance, including ‘quantized’
values, can be set and maintained. The time scale for
this process is much longer, and it allows manipulating
the conductance over a wide range (Fig. 5).

IV. DISCUSSION

We have observed two types of conductance breaking
traces, which we associate to the occurrence of two
switching mechanisms in silver sulﬁde.
the
presence of atomic conductance steps supports an inter-
pretation in terms of the formation of a metallic silver
ﬁlament. From previously performed experiments17 we
can state that a Ag atomic scale point contact presents
steps in the conductance at the last stage before it
breaks. However, the controllable switching, the contin-
uously changing IV characteristics, and the gradually

First,

FIG. 4. a)Continuous conductance changes observed when
breaking a preformed conductive path at a bias voltage of
−100mV. Mixed behavior is seen in the middle trace. The
inset shows a magniﬁcation of the steps of approximately
1G0. The upper trace shows only continuous behavior and
illustrates the high-conductance that is visible in some mea-
surements after switching several times. The lower trace also
shows only continuous behavior but the high-conductance
state decays in few seconds to a conductance around 0.1G0.
b) Comparison between a continuous trace (lower trace pre-
sented in (a)) and a trace with atomic conductance steps (red
trace in Fig. 3(b)).

described above this may be explained as being due to
two parallel conductance paths.

C. Controllable switching

The continuous evolution of the IV characteristics in
Fig. 2 and the continuous ‘on’ to ‘oﬀ’ conductance traces
suggests that the local structure of the Ag2S ﬁlm has
been modiﬁed. The conductance in this state can be con-
trolled by applying positive bias voltages smaller than the
threshold voltage. The voltages can be chosen to obtain

FIG. 5. Switching between targeted values of conductance by
applying speciﬁc low-bias voltages to the Ag2S device. In this
experiment the voltages were chosen such as to obtain approx-
imately the ﬁrst two integer conductance values, in analogy
to the experiments by Terabe et al.3 Here we use ﬁxed bias
voltages instead of short pulses. This controllable switching
can only be achieved after preparing the sample by several
switching cycles. This example is chosen for illustration of
the ambiguity that may arise when deciding whether a device
is a true atomic scale switch.

152025303540012Voltage (mV) Conductance (G0)Time (s)-11050 105

but is believed to be driven by the increased silver ion
concentration and the applied ﬁeld.

Adhering to this interpretation of the phase transi-
tion we explain the observed continuous traces and mixed
traces shown in Fig.4 as follows. The bias voltage drives
both switching mechanisms: metallic ﬁlament formation
and the local partial phase transition. When a silver ﬁl-
ament is formed that stretches fully across the thickness
of the ﬁlm its high conductance dominates the observed
electron transport. Break down of the ﬁlament at the last
stages produces a connection formed by just a few atoms,
and when these disconnect one by one this becomes vis-
ible as near-quantized steps in the conductance. When
the metallic silver of a ﬁlament dissolves very rapidly,
or an incomplete ﬁlament is formed, atomic conductance
steps will be absent and the conductance will drop con-
tinuously, as a result of the gradual decay of the locally
modiﬁed structure. When the breaking of the silver ﬁla-
ment occurs on the same time scale as the decay of the
modiﬁed structure back to the initial room temperature
phase, mixed behavior as seen in the middle curve in
Fig. 4 can be observed. The conditions for the formation
of a metallic silver ﬁlament and the observation of atomic
conductance steps are not yet fully understood, since the
two processes are controlled by the same bias voltage.

V. CONCLUSION

In summary, we identify two mechanisms of conductive
path formation inside a thin ﬁlm of silver sulﬁde. The
ﬁrst mechanism is the formation of a metallic silver ﬁla-
ment which we associate with the observation of atomic
conductance steps. Second, there is a modiﬁcation of the
silver sulﬁde structure to a higher-conductance phase.
The conductance of this modiﬁed structure is continu-
ously tunable, and allows setting the conductance to any
target value by applying appropriate positive voltages.
Contrary to previous reports,9,16 we argue that this con-
trollable switching cannot be attributed to an intrinsic
atomic scale structure. The memory functions explored
by Ohno et al.9 cannot be explained by a metallic ﬁla-
ment formation alone. Our results point towards the role
of the two switching mechanisms in deciding whether the
information is maintained for shorter or longer times.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work is part of the research program of the Dutch
Foundation for Fundamental Research on Matter (FOM)
that is ﬁnancially supported by NWO.

1C. A. Martin, R. H. M. Smit, H. S. J. van der Zant, and J. M.
van Ruitenbeek, Nano Letters 9, 2940 (2009)
2F.-Q. Xie, L. Nittler, C. Obermair, and T. Schimmel, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 93, 128303 (2004)

FIG. 6. The measurements suggest that three structures are
involved in the conductance after full resistive switching. Be-
fore switching we have our pristine sample which obeys the
IV relation of Eq. (1). During switching a high-conductive
path is formed by metallic silver and, in parallel, by a mod-
iﬁed structure of the silver sulﬁde (X). An interpretation of
this modiﬁed structure comes from comparison of our results
with Xu et al.,11 who identiﬁed it in HRTEM studies as the
argentite phase of silver sulﬁde.

decreasing conductance traces cannot be explained by
the formation of a metallic silver ﬁlament alone. The
fact that the gradually decreasing conductance traces
can take several seconds to return to the ‘oﬀ’ conduc-
tance (Fig. 4), and decay of concentration gradients in
Ag2S occurs much faster than a second12 point towards
the view that a modiﬁcation of the lattice structure is
induced, which we refer to as the second mechanism of
conductance switching. Figure 6 shows a cartoon of the
three diﬀerent structures that may contribute in parallel
to the total conductance: the pristine semiconducting
sample (Ag2S), metallic silver ﬁlaments (Ag), and the
as yet undeﬁned modiﬁed structure (X).

Our interpretation is consistent with the observations
by Xu et al.11 from in situ switching measurements of
a Ag/Ag2S/W device. From real time measurements
inside a high-resolution transmission electron microscope
(HRTEM), Xu et al. determined that the conductive
path formed when applying a positive voltage to the Ag
electrode, is composed of a mixture of metallic Ag and
argentite Ag2S.

At room temperature, the equilibrium lattice struc-
ture of silver sulﬁde is the so called acanthite phase.
Above 450 K, the lattice undergoes a phase transition
to the argentite structure. Argentite has an electronic
conductivity that is three orders of magnitude higher,
and behaves like a metal.20 The argentite structure
has previously been stabilized at room temperature by
rapidly cooling of silver sulﬁde from high temperatures.21
According to Xu’s interpretation this phase transition
to the argentite phase is not caused by Joule heating
because the currents are quite low at the oﬀ state,

3K. Terabe, T. Hasegawa, T. Nakayama, and M. Aono, Nature
433, 47 (2005)
4A. Geresdi, A. Halbritter, A. Gyenis, P. Makk, and G. Mih´aly,
Nanoscale 3, 1504 (2011)
5R. Waser and M. Aono, Nature Mater. 6, 833 (2007)
6R. Waser, R. Dittmann, G. Staikov, and K. Szot, Adv. Mater.
21, 2632 (2009)
7J. R. Jameson, N. Gilbert, F. Koushan, J. Saenz, J. Wang,
S. Hollmer, and M. N. Kozicki, Appl. Phys. Lett. 99, 063506
(2011)
8J. Hajto, M. Rose, A. Snell,
and
P. Lecomber, Journal of Non-Crystalline Solids 137-138, 499
(1991),
9T. Ohno, T. Hasegawa, T. Tsuruoka, K. Terabe, J. K.
Gimzewski, and M. Aono, Nature Materials 10, 591 (2011)

I. Osborne, A. Owen,

10One may argue that the assumption made in Ref. [3] of the forma-
tion of a vacuum gap prior to the switching operation is unlikely,
and it is also not supported by evidence. For the functioning
of the device it is not needed because switching occurs inside
the Ag2S material. Also, the initial state of the measurement in
Ref. [9] is with the STM tip in contact with the silver sulﬁde, as
was shown in Ref. [13]

11Z. Xu, Y. Bando, W. Wang, X. Bai, and D. Golberg, ACS Nano

4, 2515 (2010)

6

12M. Morales-Masis, H.-D. Wiemhofer, and J. M. van Ruitenbeek,

Nanoscale 2, 2275 (2010)NoStop

13M. Morales-Masis, S. van der Molen, T. Hasegawa, and J. van

Ruitenbeek, Phys. Rev. B 84, 115310 (2011)NoStop

14G. Bonnecaze, A. Lichanot, and S. Gromb, J. Phys. Chem. Solids

39, 299 (1978)

15T. Hasegawa, T. Ohno, K. Terabe, T. Tsuruoka, T. Nakayama,

J. K. Gimzewski, and M. Aono, Adv. Mater. 22, 1831 (2010)

16K. Terabe, T. Hasegawa, C. Liang, and M. Aono, Sci. Techn.

Adv. Mater. 8, 536 (2007)

17N. Agra¨ıt, A. Levy Yeyati, and J. M. van Ruitenbeek, Phys.

Rep. 377, 81 (2003)NoStop

18A. Pergament, P. Boriskov, A. Velichko, and N. Kuldin, J. Phys.

Chem. Solids 71, 874 (2010)

19X. Zhao, W. Qu, X. Tan, A. A. Bokov, and Z.-G. Ye, Phys. Rev.

B 75, 104106 (2007)

20S. Kashida, N. Watanabe, T. Hasegawa, H. Iida, M. Mori, and

S. Savrasov, Solid State Ionics 158, 167 (2003)

21M. Kundu, K. Terabe, T. Hasegawa, and M. Aono, J. Appl.

Phys. 99, 103501 (2006)

