Limits of time in cosmology

S.E. Rugh∗ and H. Zinkernagel∗∗

To appear in The Philosophy of Cosmology; edited by K. Chamcham, J.
Silk, J. Barrow and S. Saunders. Cambridge University Press, 2016.

Abstract We provide a discussion of some main ideas in our project about
the physical foundation of the time concept in cosmology. It is standard to
point to the Planck scale (located at ∼ 10−43 seconds after a ﬁctitious “Big
Bang” point) as a limit for how far back we may extrapolate the standard
cosmological model.
In our work we have suggested that there are several
other (physically motivated) interesting limits – located at least thirty orders
of magnitude before the Planck time – where the physical basis of the cosmo-
logical model and its time concept is progressively weakened. Some of these
limits are connected to phase transitions in the early universe which gradu-
ally undermine the notion of ’standard clocks’ widely employed in cosmology.
Such considerations lead to a scale problem for time which becomes particu-
larly acute above the electroweak phase transition (before ∼ 10−11 seconds).
Other limits are due to problems of building up a cosmological reference frame,
or even contemplating a sensible notion of proper time, if the early universe
constituents become too quantum. This quantum problem for time arises e.g.
if a pure quantum phase is contemplated at the beginning of inﬂation at, say,
∼ 10−34 seconds.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
7
1

 
 
]
c
q
-
r
g
[
 
 

1
v
9
4
4
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Symposion,“The Socrates Spirit”, Section for Philosophy and the Foundations of Physics,

Hellebækgade 27, Copenhagen N, Denmark (e-mail: rugh@symposion.dk).

∗∗Department of Philosophy I, University of Granada, 18071 Granada, Spain (e-mail:

zink@ugr.es).

1

1

Introduction

What does time mean in cosmology? Are there any physical conditions which must
be satisﬁed in order to speak about cosmic time? If so, how far back can time be
extrapolated while still maintaining it as a well-deﬁned physical concept? We have
studied these questions in a series of papers over the last ten years. The present
manuscript is a summary of some main points from our investigations, as well as
some further considerations regarding time in cosmology.

It is standard to assume that a number of important events took place in the ﬁrst
tiny fractions of a second ‘after’ the big bang. For instance, the universe is thought
to have been in a quark-gluon phase between ∼ 10−11 − 10−5 seconds, whereas
the fundamental material constituents are massless due to the electroweak (Higgs)
transition at times earlier than ∼ 10−11 seconds. A phase of inﬂation is envisaged
(in some models) to have taken place around ∼ 10−34 seconds after the big bang. A
rough summary of the phases of the early universe is given in the ﬁgure:1

Quantum
problem
for time

↓

Inﬂation

|
10−34

Planck
‘time’
✛|
10−43

Scale

problem
for time

↓
Higgs
|

10−11

Quark-
gluon

|
10−5

Nuclei
|
100

CMB
|
1013

Now
|
1017 seconds

Figure 1: Contemplated phases of the early universe. The indicated quantum and scale
problems for time are discussed in the text.

What could be wrong (or at least problematic) with this backward extrapolation
from now? A main point is that physical time in relativity theory, in contrast to
a purely mathematical parameter with the label t, is bound up with the notion of
proper time.2 For example, Misner, Thorne and Wheeler (1973, p. 813) write:

...proper time is the most physically signiﬁcant, most physical real time
we know. It corresponds to the ticking of physical clocks and measures
the natural rhythms of actual events.

The connection between physical time and proper time leads to two kinds of prob-
lems for the backward extrapolation. The ﬁrst of these follows from the fact that
proper time is closely related to physical clocks or processes. The nature (and avail-
ability) of such clocks or processes changes as we go back in time. The problem
in this regard was hinted at by Misner, Thorne and Wheeler in connection with a

1For a detailed discussion of (the assumptions behind) this ﬁgure and the epochs indicated, see

also Rugh and Zinkernagel (2009).

2Proper time along a (timelike or lightlike) world line (the path of a particle in 4-dimensional

spacetime) can be thought of as the time measured by a “standard” clock along that world line.

2

discussion of whether a singularity occurs at a ﬁnite past proper time. They note
that no actual clock can adequately time the earliest moments of the universe:

Each actual clock has its “ticks” discounted by a suitable factor - 3∗ 107
seconds per orbit from the Earth-sun system, 1.1 ∗ 10−10 seconds per
oscillation for the Cesium transition, etc. Since no single clock (because
of its ﬁnite size and strength) is conceivable all the way back to the sin-
gularity, a statement about the proper time since the singularity involves
the concept of an inﬁnite sequence of successively smaller and sturdier
clocks with their ticks then discounted and added.
...ﬁniteness [of
the age of the universe] would be judged by counting the number of dis-
crete ticks on realizable clocks, not by accessing the weight of unrealizable
mathematical abstractions. [Our emphasis]

[...]

Misner, Thorne and Wheeler (1973, p. 814)

The authors’ discussion regarding this quote seems to imply that the progres-
sively more extreme physical conditions, as we extrapolate the standard cosmological
model backwards, demand a succession of gradually more ﬁne-grained clocks to give
meaning to (or provide a physical basis of) the time of each of the epochs.3 In this
spirit, our view is that a minimal requirement for having a physical notion of time
(with a scale) is that it must be possible to ﬁnd physical processes (what we call
‘cores of clocks’) with a suﬃciently ﬁne-grained duration in the physics envisaged
in the various epochs of cosmic history. As we shall discuss below, this require-
ment of linking time to conceivable cores of clocks leads to a scale problem for time,
since it becomes progressively more diﬃcult to identify physical processes with a
well-deﬁned (and non-zero) duration in the very early universe.

A second kind of problem with the backward extrapolation follows since proper
time is deﬁned in terms of (possible) particle world lines or trajectories. Within
the standard cosmological model, there is a privileged set of such world lines since
matter on large scales is assumed to move in a highly ordered manner (allowing for
the identiﬁcation of a comoving reference frame and a global cosmic time equal to
the proper time of any comoving observer). As we shall discuss, this implies that
the notion of cosmic time is closely related to the so-called Weyl principle. Problems
with the notion of a global cosmic time may arise if a privileged set of world lines
becomes diﬃcult to identify, e.g.
in the very early universe above the electroweak
(Higgs) phase transition or in a (complicated) inhomogeneous universe.

A more serious problem for time (which is a problem even for a local deﬁnition of
time) arises if a point is reached in the backward extrapolation where the world lines
themselves can no longer be identiﬁed. In particular, this appears to be the case if

3Regarding, Misner, Thorne and Wheeler’s examples in the quote, it is clear that one has to
distinguish between how ﬁne-grained a clock is (its precision) and when (in which cosmological
epoch) such a clock could in principle be realized. For instance, no stable Cesium atoms – let alone
real functioning Cesium clocks – can exist before the time of decoupling of radiation and matter,
about 380,000 years after the big bang.

3

some point is contemplated, e.g. at the onset of inﬂation, where all constituents of
the universe are of a quantum nature, leading to what can be called the quantum
problem of time. Note that this problem arises roughly ten orders of magnitude
‘before’ (in the backward extrapolation from now) reaching a possible quantum
gravity epoch, and so before hitting the usual problem of time in quantum gravity
models.

In the following, we ﬁrst outline the scale problem for time and the close relation
between time and clocks. We then address the relation between time and world
lines in the set-up of the standard cosmological model. We brieﬂy indicate how this
relation may lead to problems for a global (cosmic) time concept in the very early
universe above the electroweak phase transition or in a (complicated) inhomogeneous
universe. We ﬁnally discuss the more serious local (quantum) problem for time in
relation to the problem of identifying individual world lines.

2 Time and clocks

The idea that time is dependent on change and/or motion is called relationism.
It has been defended by classic thinkers like Aristotle and Leibniz, and in modern
times by physicists like Barbour, Smolin and Rovelli. In our version of relationism,
we argue in favour of a ‘time-clock’ relation which asserts that time, in order to
have a physical basis, must be understood in relation to physical processes which
act as ‘cores’ of clocks (Rugh and Zinkernagel 2005, 2009, see also Zinkernagel 2008).
In the cosmological context, the time-clock relation implies that a necessary physi-
cal condition for interpreting the t parameter of the standard Friedmann-Lemaˆıtre-
Robertson-Walker (FLRW) model as cosmic time in some ‘epoch’ of the universe is
the (at least possible) existence of a physical process which can function as a core
of a clock in the ‘epoch’ in question. In particular, we have suggested that in order
to make the interpretation

t ↔ time,

at a speciﬁc cosmological ‘epoch’, the physical process acting as the core of a clock
should 1) have a well-deﬁned duration which is suﬃciently ﬁne-grained to ‘time’ the
epoch in question; and 2) be a process which could conceivably take place among
the material constituents available in the universe at this epoch.

The time-clock relation is in conformity with how time is employed in cosmology
although cosmologists often formulate themselves in operationalist terms – that is,
invoking observers measuring on factual clocks. For instance, Peacock (1999, p. 67)
writes concerning the FLRW model:

We can deﬁne a global time coordinate t, which is the time measured
by clocks of these observers – i.e. t is the proper time measured by an
observer at rest with respect to the local matter distribution.

While this reference to clocks (or ‘standard’ clocks) carried by comoving observers
is widely made in cosmology textbooks, there is usually no discussion concerning

4

the origin and nature of these clocks. Part of the motivation for our investigations
has been to provide a discussion of this kind.

The standard deﬁnition of the global time coordinate to which Peacock refers –
and, in general, the question of how to make the t-time identiﬁcation – can be read
in at least two diﬀerent ways: 1) Actual clocks should be available (operationalism);
or 2) rudiments (cores) of clocks with a well-deﬁned duration should, in principle,
be present (time-clock relation). Clearly, the ﬁrst possibility is not an option in the
very early universe where no actual clocks, let alone observers and measurements,
are available. As we shall see below, the viability of the second option depends upon
the availability of physical processes with well-deﬁned (and non-zero) duration.

We attempt to develop a position on the time concept which represents a depar-
ture from operationalism in several ways: (i) Time cannot be deﬁned (reductively)
in terms of clocks (since clocks and measurements depend on the time concept); (ii)
no actual clocks are needed, we allow reference to possible (counterfactual) clocks,
compatible with the physics of the epoch in question; (iii) we attempt to construct
the cores of clocks out of available physics, but do not require that this core should be
associated with a counter mechanism that could transform it into a real functioning
clock; and (iv) we do not require the existence of observers and actual measure-
ments. Nevertheless, the above formulated criterion for the t ↔ time interpretation
of being able to identify a process with a well-deﬁned duration may still have an
operationalist feel. For, as we shall see below, it means that there may be limits to
time in cases where scales can be found in the physics, but where no physical process
(core of a clock) can be identiﬁed which could in principle exemplify or realize the
time scale in question.

Whereas cosmologists often refer to clocks as sketched above, they also deﬁne
cosmic time ‘implicitly’ by the speciﬁc cosmological model employed to describe the
universe.4 This can be done e.g. through the relation between time and the scale
factor. If we for instance consider a radiation dominated epoch, the Einstein ﬁeld
equations may yield (see e.g. Rugh and Zinkernagel (2009), section 4):

√t

R(t) ∝

In some sense, the scale factor here serves as a (core of a) clock. However, for this
idea to work, one needs to have some bound system or a ﬁxed physical length scale
which does not expand (or which expands diﬀerently than the universe). Otherwise,
there is no physical content of R(t) and hence no physical content of “expansion”.
Eddington, for example, emphasized the importance of the expansion of the universe
to be deﬁned relative to some bound systems by turning things upside-down: ‘The
theory of the “expanding universe” might also be called the theory of the “shrinking
atom” (Eddington 1933, quoted from Whitrow 1980, p. 293).

The viewpoint presented here assumes that a physical foundation of time is
closely related to which physical constituents are available (or at least possible) in
the early universe. Such an assumption can be circumvented if one subscribes to

4This is related to a more general discussion of the implicit deﬁnition of time via natural laws,

see Rugh and Zinkernagel (2009), section 2.1.

5

some sort of Platonism (or mathematical foundationalism) according to which a
purely mathematical deﬁnition of time, extracted e.g. from the formalism of general
relativity (or, as simply the t parameter in some model), is suﬃcient. According to
such a view, there would seem to be no problem in contemplating, say, periods like
10−100 seconds after the big bang. However, it is widely accepted that the standard
cosmological model cannot be extrapolated below Planck scales and, accordingly,
that the t ↔ time interpretation cannot be made for t values below 10−43 seconds.
This illustrates that a physical condition (namely that quantum gravity eﬀects may
be neglected) can imply a limitation for the t ↔ time interpretation. But if it is ac-
cepted that there is at least one physical condition which must be satisﬁed in order
to trust the backward extrapolation of the FLRW model and its time concept, it ap-
pears reasonable to require that also other physical conditions (which are necessary
to set up the FLRW model) should be satisﬁed during this extrapolation.5 Hence,
we take it that Platonism is not a satisfactory position regarding time in cosmology.
In our view, time has to have some physical basis (i.e. it must be embedded in the
available physics) in order to be a well-deﬁned physical concept.

2.1 The scale problem for time

Let us now shortly review how the above considerations may lead to a scale problem
for time in the early universe. The scale problem for time is related to two contem-
plated phase transitions at ∼ 10−5s and ∼ 10−11s in the early universe, where the
notion of length and time scales (and their physical underpinning in terms of cores
of clocks and rods) becomes progressively weaker and disappears at ∼ 10−11s (if we
consider well-known physics set by the standard model of particle physics).

∼ 10−5s: No bound systems (the quark-hadron phase transition)
Physically based time and length scales are not independent notions. Einstein dis-
cussed an elementary clock system, ‘the light-clock’, which involves the propagation
of a light signal across some physical length scale as when a light signal is being
reﬂected back and forth between the ends of a rigid rod. If we ask whether we in
principle may build up such Einstein light-clocks from the constituents of the early
universe we note, as we extrapolate backwards in time (and the temperature rises),
that it becomes progressively more diﬃcult to ﬁnd any spatially extended physical
systems. In the so-called hadron era there are still bound (hadron) systems such as
pions, neutrons and protons. At a transition temperature of T ∼ 1012 K (∼ 10−5s
after the big bang) it is, however, believed that there is a quark-hadron phase tran-
sition, and above this transition point no bound states are left. The universe then
consists of particles (like quarks, leptons, gluons and photons) which have no known
spatial extension.
If a rudiment (or core) of a rod has to be constructed from a

5We shall return to this requirement in the ﬁnal section. We also note that – except for the
space-time singularity itself – there are no internal contradictions in the mathematics of the FLRW
model (or classical general relativity) which suggests that this model should become invalid at
some point, e.g. at the Planck scale.

6

bound physical system, we no longer have such rudiments of rods left in the uni-
verse, and we have to look elsewhere for physics which can set a physical length
scale.

The quarks and leptons still possess the physical property of mass. Thus, one
still has length scales if the Compton wavelength λ = λC = ¯h/(mc) of these particles
can be taken to set such a scale. However, a rod with spatial extension equal to the
Compton wavelength leads to a ‘pair-production of rods’ as a quantum eﬀect (in
general, the Compton wavelength is the length scale at which ‘pair production’ of
particle-antiparticle pairs occurs). It is thus diﬃcult to imagine how the Compton
wavelength divided by c corresponds to a physical process which could function as
the core of a clock e.g. in the above mentioned light-clock.

Note that these considerations, and hence our ﬁrst proposed time limit at 10−5
seconds, is based on the somewhat operationalist premise that one should in principle
be able to identify a core of a clock (physical process) with a well-deﬁned duration.
The contemplated process is one in which a light signal travels a well-deﬁned distance
(namely a Compton wavelength of a quark or a lepton), but this process seems
physically unrealizable insofar as the photon is converted to a particle-antiparticle
pair during ﬂight.6

∼ 10−11s: Scale invariance (the electroweak phase transition)
According to the standard model of particle physics (which embodies a Higgs sector
with a (set of) scalar ﬁeld(s) φ) there is an electroweak phase transition at a tran-
sition temperature of T ∼ 300 GeV ∼ 1015 K when the universe was ∼ 10−11 s old.
Above this phase transition the Higgs ﬁeld expectation value vanishes < φ >= 0.
This transition translates into zero rest masses of all the fundamental quarks and
leptons (and massive force mediators) in the standard model. Without any masses
in the theory it will exhibit a symmetry known as conformal invariance, and it will
be impossible to ﬁnd physical processes (among the microphysical constituents) with
a well-deﬁned (and non-zero) duration.7

Thus, not only can no core of a clock be identiﬁed. The relevant physics (the
electroweak and strong sector) cannot set physical scales for time, scales for length
and no scale for energy. If there is no scale for length and energy then there is no
scale for temperature T . Metaphorically speaking, we may say that not only the
property of mass of the particle constituents ‘melts away’ above the electroweak
phase transition but also the concept of temperature itself ‘melts’ (i.e. T loses its
physical foundation above this transition point).

6As diﬀerent sorts of rudiments (cores) of clocks, we may consider the decay processes of un-
stable, massive particles such as the decay of the muons µ− → e− ¯νeνµ, or the decay of the Z 0
particles, Z 0 → f ¯f (which can decay into any pair of fermions). But, as discussed in Rugh and
Zinkernagel (2009), also these processes are diﬃcult to conceive as functioning cores of clocks due
to their quantum-mechanical and statistical nature.

7See however Rugh and Zinkernagel (2009, section 5.3) for a brief discussion of some possible
rudiments of mass which could remain above the Higgs transition (but which are, in our assessment,
insuﬃcient to ground e.g. a physical time scale).

7

In our assessment, therefore, the time scale assumed (e.g. in cosmology books)
above the electroweak phase transition is purely speculative in the sense that it
cannot be founded upon an extrapolation of well known physics (due to conformal
invariance) above the phase transition point. Thus, the time scale will have to be
founded on the introduction of some new physics (beyond the standard model of
particle physics), and is in this sense as speculative as the new (speculative) physics
on which it is based.

It is of interest that Roger Penrose has recently attempted to turn the scale
problem for time into a virtue in the construction of a new kind of cosmological
scenario. Penrose (2010, p. 142) cites our study8 in connection with the following
quote:

...close to the Big Bang, probably down to around 10−12 seconds af-
ter that moment, when temperatures exceed about 1016 K, the relevant
physics is believed to become blind to the scale factor Ω, and conformal
geometry becomes the space-time structure appropriate to the relevant
physical processes. Thus, all this physical activity would, at that stage,
have been insensitive to local scale changes. [Emphasis in original]

Our mentioning this point does not imply an endorsement of Penrose’s proposal of
an “Extraordinary New View of the Universe” (a conformal cyclic cosmology) in
which approximate conformal invariance holds in both ends (the beginning and the
remote future) of the universe. Nevertheless, there seems to be a certain agreement
in philosophical outlook, also when Penrose mentions (2010, p. 93): “It is important
for the physical basis of general relativity that extremely precise clocks actually exists
in Nature, at a fundamental level, since the whole theory depends upon a naturally
deﬁned metric g” (our emphasis).

Why not refer to the Planck scales?

The combination of the constants ¯h and c from relativistic quantum mechanics, and
c and G from classical general relativity yields – as a mathematical combination of
physical constants – the famous Planck scales. As concerns time, the Planck time
scale tP = (¯hG/c5)1/2 ∼ 10−43 seconds is immensely more ﬁne-grained than time
scales set by any physical process which we (in our investigations) have attempted
to utilize as rudiments of clocks at various stages in cosmic history. If the Planck
time scale were considered suﬃcient to provide a physical basis for the time scale in
the early universe, then there would be no scale problem for time anywhere along
the extrapolation from now to the Planck times.

However, we see several related reasons to be suspicious that the Planck time
scale does indeed provide a suﬃcient physical basis for the time scale in the early
universe. First of all, the Planck scales are supposed to be the physical relevant scales
of theories of quantum gravity, and such theories are still highly speculative. The

8Our study appeared as a handout in a ﬁrst print in 2005 (Rugh and Zinkernagel 2005) and

was published in a revised version in 2009.

8

Planck time scale is therefore at least as speculative as any other imagined time scale
above the electroweak phase transition. Second, it is expected that quantum gravity
eﬀects are totally negligible at energy scales around the electroweak phase transition
point (and negligible well into the ‘desert’ above this phase transition). It appears
dubious to ground time scales of Higgs-physics on quantum gravity eﬀects which are
irrelevant at Higgs-physics scales.9 Third, even if we bypass the second problem,
one may well question how physically reasonable the supposed physical processes
would be for grounding the Planck scale (recall that, in our view, a physical basis
for a time scale should be related to relevant physical processes). The Planck scales
may be arrived at by setting the Compton wavelength equal to the Schwarschild
radius of a black hole.
It is thus a characteristic scale at which there is a pair
production of black holes as a quantum eﬀect. Consider this in the context of the
discussion above on time and length scales in connection with the light-clock: At
the Planck length scale there is ‘pair production of rods’ (the rod being the spatial
extension of the quantum black hole), and the corresponding Planck time scale is
the time it takes a light pulse to cross this length scale. This appears to be more of
a mathematical construct than a conceivable physical process since the crossing of a
light pulse is hardly a well-deﬁned physical process within such violent ﬂuctuations
in the geometry. For instance, one may ask at which of the two pair produced
quantum black holes the light pulse is supposed to end its ‘crossing’ ?10

In our assessment, then, if one wants to solve (or dissolve) the scale problem
for time at and above the Higgs transition by referring to speculative processes in
quantum gravity, such as ‘quantum pair production of black holes’, then it should
at least be admitted that the cosmic time scale constructed in this way is highly
speculative.11

3 Time and world lines

The above section has focused on the consequences of proper time being related to
clocks. As we saw, this relation leads to the idea that time is related to physical
processes – which is a version of what is known as relationism. But there is a more

9Note that today we deﬁne a second as 9.192.631.770 vibrations of radiation caused by well-
deﬁned transitions in Cs-133 (see e.g.
’t Hooft and Vandoren 2014). This is a physical ground-
ing (even operationally) of a timescale (a second) in terms of physical processes taking place at
timescales substantially (10 orders of magnitude) smaller. It would be of interest if one could spec-
ulate any eﬀect on Higgs-scale physics stemming from the quantum gravity scales thirty orders of
magnitude below.

10Note that this third reason against using the Planck scale as a physical basis for the time scale
in the early universe is, just like the 10−5 second limit discussed above, based on the somewhat
operationalist premise that we should be able to point to a process (a core of a clock) which
provides a deﬁnite time interval.

11As we shall discuss later, the quantum problem of time (section 3.3) does not depend on
whether we have a physically well-founded scale for time. This problem remains (e.g. at the onset
of inﬂation) even if we base length and time scales (throughout cosmic history) on speculative
Planck scale physics.

9

direct route to relationism in cosmology which is independent of the mentioned
time-clock-relation (even if in conformity with it). This has to do with the fact that
proper time is deﬁned in terms of (possible) particle world lines. In the following
we shall discuss how this implies a close relation between time and cosmic matter,
both at the global and at the local level.

3.1 Setting up the FLRW model with a cosmic time

In Rugh and Zinkernagel (2011) we discuss how the set-up of the FLRW model with
a global time is closely linked to the motion, distribution and properties of cosmic
matter. We now brieﬂy review some key points of this discussion.

In relativity theory time depends on the choice of reference frame. For the uni-
verse, a reference frame cannot be given from the outside, so such a frame has to
be “built up from within”, that is, in terms of the (material) constituents within
the universe. It is often assumed that the FLRW model may be derived just from
the cosmological principle. This principle states that the universe is spatially ho-
mogeneous and isotropic (on large scales). It is much less well known that another
assumption, called Weyl’s principle, is necessary in order to arrive at the FLRW
model and, in particular, its cosmic time parameter.12 Whereas the cosmological
principle imposes constraints on the distribution of the matter content of the uni-
verse, Weyl’s principle imposes constraints on the motion of the matter content.
Weyl’s principle (from 1923) asserts that the matter content is so well behaved that
a reference frame can be built up from it:

Weyl’s principle (in a general form): The world lines of ‘fundamental
particles’ form a spacetime-ﬁlling family of non-intersecting geodesics (a
congruence of geodesic world lines).

The importance of Weyl’s principle is that it provides a reference frame which
is physically based on an expanding ‘substratum’ of ‘fundamental particles’ (e.g.
galaxies or clusters of galaxies). In particular, if the (non-crossing) geodesic world
lines are required to be orthogonal to a series of space-like hypersurfaces, a comoving
reference frame is deﬁned in which constant spatial coordinates are “carried by” the
fundamental particles (see e.g. ﬁgure 3.7 in Narlikar 2002, p. 107). The time
coordinate is a cosmic time which labels the series of hypersurfaces, and which may
be taken as the proper time along any of the particle world lines. We note that
the congruence of world lines is essential to the standard cosmological model since
the symmetry constraints of homogeneity and isotropy are imposed w.r.t. such a
congruence (see e.g. Ellis 1999). Thus, Weyl’s principle is a precondition for the
cosmological principle; the former can be satisﬁed without the latter being satisﬁed
but not vice versa.

12In some cosmology textbooks – e.g. by Bondi, Raychaudhuri and Narlikar – the importance
of Weyl’s principle is emphasized, and explicitly referred to. In other textbooks it appears, in our
assessment (see Rugh and Zinkernagel 2011), that the Weyl principle is implicitly assumed in the
process of setting up the FLRW model.

10

In the early universe, problems may arise for the Weyl principle and thus for the
possibility of identifying a reference frame and a global cosmic time parameter.13
At present and for most of cosmic history, the comoving frame of reference can be
identiﬁed as the frame in which the cosmic microwave background radiation (CMB)
looks isotropic (see e.g. Peebles 1993, p. 152), and cosmic matter is (above the
homogeneity scale) assumed to be described as dust particles with zero pressure
which fulﬁll Weyl’s principle. But before the release of the CMB, the situation is
less straightforward. For, as we go backwards in time, it may become increasingly
more diﬃcult to satisfy, or even formulate, the Weyl principle as a physical principle,
since the nature of the physical constituents is changing from galaxies, to relativistic
gas particles, and to entirely massless particles moving with velocity c.14 Indeed,
above the electroweak phase transition (before 10−11 seconds ‘after’ the big bang),
all constituents are massless and move with velocity c in any reference frame. There
will thus be no constituents which are comoving (at rest). One might attempt to
construct mathematical points (comoving with a reference frame) like a center of
mass (or, in special relativity, center of energy) out of the massless, ultrarelativistic
gas particles, but this procedure seems to require that length scales be available in
order to e.g. specify how far the particles are apart (which is needed as input in
the mathematical expression for the center of energy). As discussed earlier, the only
option for specifying such length scales (above the electroweak phase transition) will
be to appeal to speculative physics, and the prospects of satisfying Weyl’s principle
(and have a cosmic time) will therefore also rely on speculations beyond current
well-established physics. The problem of building up the FLRW model with matter
consisting entirely of consituents moving with velocity c, may also be seen by noting
that the set-up of the FLRW model requires matter (the energy-momentum tensor)
to be in the form of a perfect ﬂuid, as this is the only form compatible with the
FLRW symmetries, see e.g. Weinberg (1972, p. 414). For this, a source consisting
of pure radiation is not suﬃcient since one cannot eﬀectively simulate a perfect ﬂuid
by “averaging over pure radiation”.15

On top of this, the physical basis of the Weyl postulate (e.g. non-intersecting
world lines of ‘fundamental particles’), and even that of proper time, appears ques-
tionable if some period in cosmic history is reached where the ‘fundamental parti-
cles’ are described by wave-functions ψ(x, t) referring to (entangled) quantum con-
stituents. What is a ‘world line’ or a ‘particle trajectory’ then? (See also the section

13In Rugh and Zinkernagel (2013) we also argue that there is no approximate fulﬁllment of a Weyl
principle and no well-deﬁned global (multiverse) cosmic time concept in the eternal inﬂationary
multiverse model outlined e.g. by Linde and Guth.

14In the early radiation phase, matter is highly relativistic (moving with random velocities close
to c), and the Weyl principle is not satisﬁed for a typical particle but one may still introduce
ﬁctitious averaging volumes in order to create substitutes for ‘galaxies which are at rest’; see e.g.
Narlikar (2002, p. 131).

15Krasinski (1997, p. 5 - 9) notes that the energy-momentum tensor in cosmological models
may contain many diﬀerent contributions, e.g. a perfect ﬂuid, a null-ﬂuid, a scalar ﬁeld, and an
electromagnetic ﬁeld. He also emphasizes that a source of a pure null ﬂuid or a pure electromagnetic
ﬁeld is not compatible with the FLRW geometry, and that solutions with such energy-momentum
sources have no FLRW limit (Krasinski 1997, p. 13).

11

below on the quantum problem for time).

In the following we shall brieﬂy question what happens to cosmic time if/when we
cannot assume the validity of the standard FLRW model (next subsection), before
we turn to the question of what happens if/when the cosmic constituents become
quantum (subsection 3.3).

3.2 Cosmic time in an inhomogeneous universe

The cosmological standard model is highly idealized and it is therefore of interest
to inquire about cosmic time when the model’s idealizing assumptions are relaxed.
In particular, one may ask whether we still have a good cosmic time concept in our
actual – at least up to very large scales – inhomogeneous universe? It is well known
that close to massive objects time runs diﬀerently than in more ‘void like’ segments
of spacetime away from any such massive objects. The complexity of constructing
a privileged time notion in such situations has been illustrated e.g. in the following
example by Feynman.

How old is our earth? Since clocks (time) run diﬀerently in diﬀerent gravitational
potentials (time dilation in a gravitational ﬁeld), time will run at a diﬀerent rate
in the center of the earth than on the surface of the earth. Feynman (1995, p. 69)
remarks:

...we might have to be more careful in the future in speaking of the
ages of objects such as the earth, since the center of the earth should be
a day or two younger than the surface!

In fact, the situation is slightly worse, for integrating up a relative time dilation
factor of △τ /τ = △Φ/c2 over a coarse estimate of the (not precisely deﬁned) lifespan
of our earth ( ∼ 5 × 109 years) yields some years in time diﬀerence.16
In a universe with an inhomogeneous distribution of the material constituents,
the situation is less clear than in the Feynman example of a slightly inhomogeneous
gravitational ﬁeld throughout our earth. In some mathematically simpliﬁed spatially
inhomogeneous models, it may be possible to maintain a Weyl principle and a notion
of a global cosmic time (cf. e.g. Krasinski (1997) and references therein). However, if
our universe exhibited fractal behavior and collisions on all scales it would be diﬃcult
to uphold a Weyl principle (even in an ‘average sense’ where small scale collisions
and inhomogeneities are averaged out). We may add that such fractal behavior
and collisions on all scales appear to be a characteristic of envisaged multiverse
inﬂationary scenarios like chaotic inﬂation, see e.g. discussion and references in
Rugh and Zinkernagel (2013).

16In an order of magnitude estimate we may assume that our earth is homogeneous and the
potential diﬀerence between the center and the surface of our earth is then integrated up to △Φ =
GM/2R which translates into a relative time dilation eﬀect △τ /τ = △Φ/c2 = 1/4× (RSchw/R) ∼
1/3 × 10−9 (Here RSchw = 2GM/c2 is the Schwarzschild radius of our earth with mass M and
radius R). Integrating this relative time dilation over ∼ 5× 109 years yields an order of magnitude
estimate of ∼ 2 years for the age diﬀerence (as measured by counterfactual clocks located in the
center and at the surface of our earth over the lifespan of our earth).

12

Not least due to the observed microwave background isotropy (and the remark-
able isotropy of X-ray counts, radio source counts, and γ-ray bursts) it is generally
expected (yet debated) among cosmologists that there will be a transition from
small-scale fractal behavior to large-scale homogeneity.17 A recent study arguing
this case is e.g. Scrimgeour et al. (2012).18 Nevertheless, even if our universe is not
fractal at the largest – but only at intermediate – distance scales, it is an interesting
question how signiﬁcantly this may change the cosmic time concept of the resulting
cosmological model. Indeed, inhomogeneous models with a fractal matter distribu-
tion at intermediate scales will presumably exhibit more complicated conceptions of
cosmic time than in the highly symmetric, idealized FLRW model universes.

One way to address what happens in an inhomogeneous universe, is to attempt
to construct a notion of cosmic time associated with an event (here, now) by looking
at the proper time (e.g. MTW (1973), §13.4 §27.4)

τ = τ (γ) = Zγ qgµνdxµdxν ,

(1)

along (particle) timelike world lines (indicated with subscript γ and with 4-velocities
uµ(v) = dxµ(v)/dv), which starts at the beginning of space time, and ends in the
event (here, now).19 But along which world lines γ should the proper time integral
be taken?

Ellis (2012, p. 9-10) proposes to take the proper time integral along a speciﬁc set
of preferred fundamental world lines, which (for realistic matter) are uniquely geo-
metrically determined. This construction does not invalidate the Weyl principle but
rather builds on it and develops it (Ellis, private communication).20 The ‘present’
is in this construction deﬁned as the surface {τ = constant} determined by taking
17Moreover, it has been emphasized, e.g. by Barrow (2005), that large contrasts in density
δρ/ρ are not necessarily mirrored in similar inhomogeneities in the gravitational potential Φ since
the equation of the relative perturbation δΦ/Φ of the gravitational potential has in it a huge
suppression factor (δΦ/Φ ∼ δρ/ρ × (L/(c/H))2) if the size L of the density irregularity is small
relative to the Hubble radius c/H.
18If we want to observationally test the expected homogeneity at large scales, one should pay at-
tention to the danger of vicious circularities (“catch-22”). Distance measures like redshift-distance
measures (at large distances) should not have built-in the assumptions we want to test (the FLRW
model as space-time metric, etc.). The analysis provided in e.g. Scrimgeour et al. (2012) is very
elaborate but it is of interest that they note (p. 4): “To do this, we assume the FRW metric
and ΛCDM. This is necessary for any homogeneity measurement, since we must always assume
a metric in order to interpret redshifts. Therefore in the strictest sense this can only be used
as a consistency test of ΛCDM. However, if we ﬁnd the trend towards homogeneity matches the
trend predicted by ΛCDM, then this is a strong consistency check for the model and one that an
inhomogeneous distribution would ﬁnd diﬃcult to mimic” (our emphasis).

19Such a deﬁnition is only well-deﬁned, i.e. the proper time is only ﬁnite, if there is a beginning
in a “big bang” (see also Lachi`eze-Rey 2014, section 5.3), or if we chose some

of space-time e.g.
arbitrary starting point (assumed to exist) from which we can integrate (Ellis 2012, section 3).

20We note that Ellis assumes that there is a uniquely deﬁned vector ﬁeld of 4-velocities uµ(v) =
dxµ(v)/dv (if such 4-velocities are uniquely deﬁned in each spacetime point on the manifold, this
is equivalent to assuming the existence of a congruence of world lines which are non-crossing).
According to Ellis’ proposal, these 4-velocities (in order to be preferred fundamental world lines)
should satisfy that they are timelike eigenlines of the Ricci tensor, Rµν uν = λuµ.

13

the proper time integral (1) over the family of fundamental world lines starting at
the “big bang”. However, according to Ellis, the equal time hypersurfaces can in
generic situations be much more complicated (see discussion in Ellis 2012, p. 10)
than the simple equal (cosmic) time hypersurfaces in the FLRW model universes. In
particular, Ellis remarks that the equal time hypersurfaces may not even necessarily
be spacelike in an inhomogeneous spacetime.

It therefore appears to be a complicated – and to our knowledge still open –
question whether the resulting concept of cosmic time exhibits the properties which
allow for a ‘backward’ extrapolation into an ‘early’ inhomogeneous universe.

3.3 The quantum problem for time

We have seen above that it may be diﬃcult to identify a global cosmic time (without
the Weyl principle), and in earlier sections also that there may not be a scale for
time (before the Higgs transition). Even if this is so, it might still be possible to
maintain a local time order, i.e to ask about the past of some particular event – for
instance, the past of the onset of inﬂation. However, as we shall indicate below, it
may well be that not even a local (and scale-free) time order is available as time is
extrapolated backwards in the very early universe.

The origin of this local (or quantum) problem for time is due to the widely as-
sumed “quantum fundamentalist” view according to which the material constituents
of the universe could be described exclusively in terms of quantum theory at some
early stage of the universe. Such a perspective is natural in quantum cosmology
(and quantum gravity), in which spacetime itself is treated quantum mechanically
(see also Hartle 1991). From the point of view of such theories, it has been argued
that a quantum problem of time appears already (in the backward extrapolation
from now) at the onset of inﬂation. Thus, Kiefer (e.g. 2003) aﬃrms that:

The Universe was essentially “quantum” at the onset of inﬂation. Mainly
due to bosonic ﬁelds, decoherence set in and led to the emergence of
many “quasi-classical branches” which are dynamically independent of
each other. Strictly speaking, the very concept of time makes only sense
after decoherence has occurred. In addition to the horizon problem etc.,
inﬂation also solves the classicality problem. [...] Looking back from our
Universe (our semiclassical branch) to the past, one would notice that
at the time of the onset of inﬂation our component would interfere with
other components to form a timeless quantum-gravitational state. The
Universe would thus cease to be transparent to earlier times (because
there was no time).

The problem here seems to be that our spacetime (and therefore time) ‘dissolves’
into a superposition of spacetimes at the onset of inﬂation, and in this sense Kiefer
acknowledges a quantum problem of time at this point. The situation, however,
might be worse (i.e. the quantum problem may appear earlier in a backward ex-
trapolation from now), since the appeal to decoherence is questionable. To see this,

14

consider what one might call the cosmic measurement problem, which addresses the
quantum mechanical measurement problem in a cosmological context:

The cosmic measurement problem:
If the universe, either its content
or in its entirety, was once (and still is) quantum, how can there be
(apparently) classical structures now?

While many aspects of the cosmic measurement problem have been addressed
in the literature, the perspective which we have tried to add is that the problem is
closely related to providing a physical basis for the (classical) FLRW model with
a (classical) cosmic time parameter. As illustrated in the Kiefer quote above, an
often attempted response to the cosmic measurement problem is to proceed via the
idea of decoherence. According to this idea, some degrees of freedom are regarded
as irrelevant (they are deemed inaccessible to measurements and are traced out),
and they are therefore taken to act as an environment for the relevant variables.
The picture is that the environment in a sense ‘observes’ the system in a continuous
measurement process and thus suppresses superpositions of the system (see e.g.
Kiefer 1989).

However, as is widely known, decoherence cannot by itself solve the measurement
problem and explain the emergence of a classical world.21 For, if both environment
and system are quantum, the total state of the system (relevant plus irrelevant de-
grees of freedom) is still a superposition. According to quantum mechanics, no deﬁ-
nite (classical) state can therefore be attributed to any of the components. As argued
by Sudarsky (2011, section 4.1), this problem is only aggravated in the cosmological
context since one cannot here appeal to the usual pragmatic considerations regard-
ing what classical observers and their measurement apparatus would register.22 In
spite of such worries, Kiefer (2003) contemplates that decoherence successively clas-
sicalizes diﬀerent constituents of the universe: At the onset of inﬂation, the inﬂaton
ﬁeld itself is classicalized and, at the end of inﬂation, decoherence converts the quan-
tum ﬂuctuations of the inﬂaton ﬁeld into classical density perturbations (seeds of
structure).23

But even if one were to bypass the strong arguments against decoherence as a
solution to the cosmic measurement problem, a potentially more serious problem is
lurking: If decoherence is to explain the emergence of classical structures, it cannot

21For a simple explanation of this, and some references to the relevant literature, see e.g. Zinker-

nagel (2011, section 2.1).

22From a pragmatic point of view, quantum mechanics may be seen as a theory of expected
outcomes of measurements, in which both apparatus and observers are kept outside the quantum
description. We have pointed out elsewhere (Rugh and Zinkernagel 2005, Zinkernagel 2016) that
Bohr went beyond this pragmatic (or instrumental) interpretation. His view was rather a contextual
one according to which any system can be treated quantum mechanically but not all systems can
be treated this way at the same time.

23In this regard, Anastopoulos (2002) mentions a worry about decoherence closely related to the
ones already noted: “. . . a suﬃciently classical behavior for the environment seems to be necessary
if it is to act as a decohering agent and we can ask what has brought the environment into such a
state ad-inﬁnitum”.

15

– as in environmentally induced decoherence – be a process in (cosmic) time, insofar
as classical structures (particle world lines) are needed from the start to deﬁne time
both locally and globally! There thus seems to be a vicious circularity if one invokes
decoherence to explain the ‘emergence’ of time, which we can formulate in slogan
form:

Decoherence takes time and cannot therefore provide time.

This implies that several of the temporal expressions in the quote by Kiefer given
above (“decoherence sets in”, “after decoherence has occurred”, etc.) are strictly
speaking without meaning.

Although the discussion above has focused on decoherence, we note that the
quantum problem of time seems to be shared by other “quantum fundamentalist”
views even when these do not rely essentially on decoherence (e.g. the spontaneous
collapse model described in Sudarsky 2011). Our point is that any interpretation of
quantum mechanics will need a time concept – which is bound up with the notion of
possible (classical) particle world lines – in order to address the early universe. The
assumption of a quantum nature of the material (or otherwise) constituents of the
universe makes it hard (or impossible) to associate these with well-deﬁned particle
trajectories. During inﬂation the only relevant constituent of the universe is taken
to be the inﬂaton ﬁeld ϕ which – in the last analysis – is a quantum ﬁeld. And just
as wave functions in non-relativistic quantum theory do not give rise to physical
motion (of a particle or wave) in space and time – without assumptions solving
the measurement problem – so quantum ﬁelds do not describe moving elementary
particles in space with well-deﬁned trajectories.

Up to this point we have discussed the quantum problem of time from a quantum
fundamentalist point of view based on quantum cosmology or quantum gravity. Let
us now proceed from the present (and more cautious) perspective, in which we start
from a classical point of view and attempt to extrapolate proper time backwards.
More speciﬁcally, consider the past of some event by extrapolating backwards the
proper time integral along a world line with 4-velocity uµ(v) = dxµ(v)/dv which
ends in the event (formula as in equation (1) in section 3.2). This approach assumes
that we know the metric and that there are well-deﬁned 4-velocities. The question
then becomes whether such 4-velocities (or, equivalently, world lines) can always be
constructed, i.e. physically realized as opposed to merely mathematically deﬁned,
from the available constituents (e.g. from a scalar ﬁeld ϕ)?24

In the inﬂationary scenario, the relevant candidate for constructing sensible no-
tions of particle world lines and classical trajectories will have to come from the ϕ
ﬁeld. And even if we were allowed to take this ﬁeld as eﬀectively classical (described
by the lowest order approximation in quantum ﬁeld theory) during inﬂation (e.g.
during a slow-roll evolution), the quantum problem of time will be faced at the on-
set of inﬂation. At this point (supposed to be the ‘birth’ of our bubble universe in

24One idea here would be to equate the energy momentum tensor of the perfect ﬂuid form with
the energy momentum tensor for the scalar ﬁeld. This results in the 4-velocity uµ = A· ∂µϕ where
A = (∂νϕ ∂ν ϕ)−1/2, see e.g. Krasinski (1997, p. 8) and Hobson et al. (2006, p. 432).

16

a multiverse setting), the inﬂaton ﬁeld is strongly quantum: Quantum ﬂuctuations
with amplitudes (within a factor of ten) of the order of the Planck scale are neces-
sary to reset or lift the scalar ﬁeld to a value where a new bubble (our universe) is
born and becomes dominated by inﬂation (see e.g. Linde 2004, section 4). Thus,
at the beginning of inﬂation (or the ‘birth’ of our universe), the ϕ ﬁeld is nowhere
close to being a classical ﬁeld on top of which we have small quantum ﬂuctuations.
Rather, it is entirely dominated by Planck scale quantum ﬂuctuations.

In summary, to use the local time concept for contemplating times before inﬂation
(or, indeed, earlier bubble-universes in the multiverse), it must be possible to identify
(or, at least, to speculate) a particle world line along which proper time can be
extrapolated backwards.25 But, as we have seen, it is unclear how one would go
about constructing any individual classical particle world line from the inﬂationary
scalar ﬁeld ϕ in a regime where its quantum behaviour is dominant (at the onset
of inﬂation). If such world lines (classical trajectories) cannot be constructed from
the underlying physics (the ϕ ﬁeld), it seems that the very conditions for speaking
about the past of an event in general relativity are not fulﬁlled. Hence, in our
assessment, a pure quantum phase in the early universe implies that proper time
(and even its order aspect, that is, its ability to distinguish before and after) is no
longer a well-deﬁned concept.

4 Summary and discussion

It is common practice to extrapolate the standard cosmological model back to at
least the Planck time. In this manuscript, we have tried to insist that this is prob-
lematic. The underlying philosophical reason is that the extrapolation of the FLRW
model and its time concept requires, in our view, that the physical basis of time in
the model and, more generally, the physical conditions needed to set up the model,
are not invalidated along this extrapolation. This situation gives rise to a number
of possible limits of time, respectively, at ∼ 10−5s, 10−11s, 10−34s, and 10−43s ‘after’
the mathematical point t = 0 in the FLRW model.
As brieﬂy hinted in section 2, we are aware that we are here making a philo-
sophical choice – at least concerning the two ﬁrst limits. For we are assuming that
the natural laws need a physical basis at all points along the extrapolation, as op-
posed to just having a basis at the present epoch (when it is easy to identify not only
length and time scales, but also physical processes with well-deﬁned durations). The
diﬀerence between the ﬁrst two limits and the Planck time (and possibly the time
of onset of inﬂation) is that the former two (phase transitions) do not mark events
where the natural laws are expected to break down. Rather, the two phase transi-
tions are predictions of the natural laws themselves (by contrast, classical gravity is
expected to break down at the Planck scale). Hence, in the case of the ﬁrst two time

25From our relationist point of view – in which time is necessarily related to physical processes –
the time-like curves can only be identiﬁed (they only have a physical basis) if the motion of objects
or test particles along these curves is at least in principle realizable given the available physics.

17

limits, the problem concerns the interpretation of the natural laws; i.e. whether we
are entitled to interpret the laws as physical laws throughout the backward extrap-
olation, if the foundation for this interpretation (like the existence of cores of rods
and clocks) disappears at some point along the extrapolation. Given our view of
the interpretation of natural laws, the time concept in the early universe becomes
speculative before the electroweak phase transition. As we have seen, before this
point (∼ 10−11 seconds), known physics becomes scale invariant and so one loses any
(non-speculative) handle on how close we are to the singularity. We believe, but it
should be further examined, that our position is a reasonable compromise between
Platonism (mathematical foundationalism) and operationalism (which requires a
method for actually measuring cosmic time).

In sections 3.1 and 3.2 we have seen that a global concept of cosmic time (with or
without a scale) may become problematic in the early universe if the Weyl principle
cannot be satisﬁed (e.g. if everything moves with the speed of light and no comoving
reference frame can be constructed). Moreover, the discussion in section 3.3 showed
that not even a local concept of time, which could be used to address the past of
some local event, may be available as time is extrapolated backwards in the very
early universe. In particular, this seems to be the case if one assumes “quantum
fundamentalism”; the idea that everything is quantum, and even if something looks
classical now, there was an early time, e.g. 10−34 seconds, when nothing did. Thus,
if all constituents are quantum at the onset of inﬂation 10−34 s, it seems diﬃcult
(or impossible) to even construct a physical notion of proper (local) time along
individual world lines which could order events in the very early universe. The
upshot of our discussion on these points was that classical systems appear to be
necessary throughout cosmic history (to have a reasonable time concept).
It is
standard to hold that quantum gravity sets in at 10−43 s, i.e. that there is no time
concept “before” this Planck time. But our discussion indicates that if one believes
that everything is quantum, then one has a problem with time in general (and not
only in quantum gravity)!

Let us ﬁnally brieﬂy consider whether the possible limits to time are a misfortune
for cosmology. We think not. Limits in science are good for at least two reasons.
First, they should not be seen as stumbling blocks for research but rather as invi-
tations to keep asking questions, e.g. as to which theories might describe what lies
beyond the present temporal limits (or how the limits might be circumvented, e.g.
by introducing speculative new physics). Such invitations can be expected to remain
open since for any postulated theory describing earlier times, it will probably always
be possible to ask: what lies beyond that theory? This leads to the second reason:
The fact, if it is a fact, that there will always be something beyond our (current?)
scientiﬁc understanding may be aesthetically attractive, if not also comforting.26
Both of these reasons for endorsing limits are connected to that feeling of wonder
which has been an important driving force throughout the history of cosmology.

26See Zinkernagel (2014) for some brief remarks on aesthetics in cosmology.

18

Acknowledgements

We are grateful for discussions on the above topics with many people over the years
(cf. acknowledgements in previous manuscripts). We also thank the organizers of
the Philosophy of Cosmology conference at Tenerife for the opportunity to present
this work. HZ thanks the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation (Project
FFI2011-29834- C03-02) for ﬁnancial support.

References

In D. Gough (ed) The

– Anastopoulos, C. 2002. Frequently asked questions about decoherence. Interna-
tional Journal of Theoretical Physics, 41, 2002, 1573–1590.
– Barrow, J.D. 2005. Worlds without end or beginning.
Scientiﬁc Legacy of Fred Hoyle, 93–101. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
– Bondi, H. 1960. Cosmology (2nd edition). Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
– Ellis, G.F.R. 1999. 83 years of general relativity and cosmology: progress and
problems. Classical and Quantum Gravity, 16, A37–A75.
– Ellis, G.F.R. 2012. Space time and the passage of time, gr-qc arXiV: 1208.2611.
– Feynman, R.P. 1995. Lectures on Gravitation (edited by B. Hatﬁeld). Addison-
Wesley.
– Hartle, J.B. 1991. The Quantum Mechanics of Cosmology. In S. Coleman et al
(eds.) Quantum Cosmology and Baby Universes. Singapore: World Scientiﬁc.
– Hobson, M. P., Efstathiou, G. P. and Lasenby, A. N. 2006. General Relativity.
Cambridge University Press.
– Kiefer, C. 1989. Continuous measurement of intrinsic time by fermions. Classical
and Quantum Gravity, 6, 561–566.
– Kiefer, C. 2003. Decoherence in Quantum Field Theory and Quantum Gravity. In
E. Joos et al (eds) Decoherence and the Appearance of a Classical World in Quantum
Theory, 181–225. Berlin: Springer.
– Krasinski, A. 1997. Inhomogeneous Cosmological Models. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
– Lacheize-Rey, M. 2014.
Philosophy of Modern Physics, 46, 38–47.
– Linde, A. 2004. Inﬂation, quantum cosmology, and the anthropic principle. In J.
D. Barrow, P. C. W. Davies and C. L. Harper, (eds) Science and Ultimate Reality,
426–458. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
– Misner, C. W., Thorne, K., and Wheeler, J. A. 1973. Gravitation. New York: W.
H. Freeman.
– Narlikar, J. V. 2002. An Introduction to Cosmology, (third edition). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
– Peacock, J. A. 1999. Cosmological Physics. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

In search of relativistic time. Studies in History and

19

– Penrose, R. 2010. Cycles of Time - An Extraordinary New view of the Universe.
London: Random House.
– Peebles, P. J. 1993. Principles of physical cosmology. Princeton: Princeton Uni-
versity Press.
– Raychaudhuri, A. K. 1979. Theoretical Cosmology. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
– Rugh, S. E. and Zinkernagel, H. 2005. Cosmology and the Meaning of Time, 76pp.
Distributed manuscript.
– Rugh, S. E. and Zinkernagel, H. 2009. On the physical basis of cosmic time.
Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 40, 1–19.
– Rugh, S. E. and Zinkernagel, H. 2011. Weyl’s principle, Cosmic Time and Quan-
tum Fundamentalism.
In D. Dieks et al (eds) Explanation, Prediction and Con-
ﬁrmation. The Philosophy of Science in a European Perspective, 411–424. Berlin:
Springer.
– Rugh, S. E. and Zinkernagel, H. 2013. A Critical Note on Time in the Multiverse,
in V. Karakostas and D. Dieks (eds) Recent Progress in Philosophy of Science:
Perspectives and Foundational Problems, 267–279. Berlin: Springer.
– Scrimgeour, M. I. et al. 2012. The WiggleZ Dark Energy Survey: The transition
to large-scale cosmic homogeneity, arXiv: 1205.6812v2.
– Sudarsky, D. 2011. Shortcomings in the Understanding of Why Cosmological
Perturbations Look Classical. International Journal of Modern Physics D, 20, 509–
552.
– ’t Hooft, G. and Vandoren, S. 2014. Time in Powers of Ten. World Scientiﬁc.
– Weinberg, S. 1972. Gravitation and Cosmology. New York: Wiley and Sons.
– Whitrow, G. J. 1980. The natural philosophy of time. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
– Zinkernagel, H. 2008. Did Time have a Beginning? International Studies in the
Philosophy of Science, 22 (3), 237–258.
– Zinkernagel, H. 2011. Some trends in the philosophy of physics. Theoria, 26 (2),
215–241.
– Zinkernagel, H. 2014. Introduction: Philosophical aspects of modern cosmology.
Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 46, 1–4.
– Zinkernagel, H. 2016. Niels Bohr on the wave function and the classical/quantum
divide. Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 53, 9–19.

20

