On the role of secondary pions in spallation targets

Davide Mancusi,1, ∗ Sergio Lo Meo,2, 3 Nicola Colonna,4 Alain Boudard,5 Miguel

Antonio Cortés-Giraldo,6 Joseph Cugnon,7 Jean-Christophe David,5 Sylvie

Leray,5 Jorge Lerendegui-Marco,6 Cristian Massimi,3, 8 and Vasilis Vlachoudis9

1Den-Service d’étude des réacteurs et de mathématiques appliquées (SERMA),

CEA, Université Paris-Saclay, F-91191, Gif-sur-Yvette, France

2ENEA, Research Centre “Ezio Clementel”, I-40129 Bologna, Italy

3INFN, Section of Bologna, I-40127 Bologna, Italy

4INFN, Section of Bari, I-70125 Bari, Italy

5IRFU, CEA, Université Paris-Saclay, F-91191, Gif-sur-Yvette, France

6Universidad de Sevilla, Facultad de Fisica, 41012 Sevilla, Spain

7AGO department, University of Liège, allée du 6 août 17, bât. B5, B-4000 Liège 1, Belgium

8Physics and Astronomy Dept. “Alma Mater Studiorum” - University of Bologna, I-40126 Bologna, Italy

9European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN), CH-1211 Geneva, Switzerland

(Dated: March 18, 2016)

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
7
1

 
 
]
h
t
-
l
c
u
n
[
 
 

1
v
3
5
4
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

We use particle-transport simulations to show that secondary pions play a crucial role for the
development of the hadronic cascade and therefore for the production of neutrons and photons from
thick spallation targets. In particular, for the n_TOF lead spallation target, irradiated with 20-
GeV/c protons, neutral pions are involved in the production of ∼ 90% of the high-energy photons;
charged pions participate in ∼ 40% of the integral neutron yield. Nevertheless, photon and neutron
yields are shown to be relatively insensitive to large changes of the average pion multiplicity in the
individual spallation reactions. We characterize this robustness as a peculiar property of hadronic
cascades in thick targets.
Keywords: spallation, n_TOF, pions, Geant4, intranuclear cascade, simulations

I.

INTRODUCTION

In spallation reactions, a high-energy ( > 150 MeV)
light projectile collides with a nucleus and on average
leads to the emission of a large number of particles,
mostly neutrons. The spectrum of spallation neutrons
extends to large energies, up to the energy of the incom-
ing projectile. For this reason, spallation reactions are
often used for the purpose of generating intense high-
energy neutron ﬂuxes [1], as it is the case for instance
in Accelerator-Driven Systems (ADS), subcritical reac-
tor cores that are kept in a steady state by neutrons
produced by a spallation source [2].

Neutrons are not the only particles that are emitted
during spallation reactions. Protons and light charged
particles (LCPs, A ≤ 4) are also present, as are pions if
the projectile energy is high enough. Spallation is actu-
ally capable of producing (with varying yields) all nuclei
lighter than the target nucleus and close to the stabil-
ity valley, as well as a handful of nuclei heavier than
the target nucleus (as amply demonstrated by several
experimental campaigns [see e.g. 3, Fig. 12]). All these
particles, especially the lightest ones (neutrons, protons,
pions and LCPs), are capable of inducing secondary nu-
clear reactions in a thick spallation target, and may thus
contribute to the development of the hadronic cascade, to
particle emission and to the production of residual nuclei
[see e.g. 4].

∗ corresponding author. E-mail address: davide.mancusi@cea.fr

The standard theoretical tool for the description of
spallation reactions is a hybrid nuclear-reaction model
where an intranuclear-cascade (INC) stage is followed
by a statistical de-excitation stage [1]. For the reasons
evoked in the previous paragraph, these models must be
validated not only for the primary reactions (typically
reaction between fast protons and heavy nuclei such as
tungsten, lead or bismuth), but also for all secondary
reactions that may sizably contribute to the production
of neutrons or to any other observable one may be in-
terested in. It is generally acknowledged that secondary
proton- and neutron-nucleus reactions are important, as
suggested by the selection of validation data for inter-
national nuclear-reaction-model intercomparisons [5–7];
however, little attention has been so far devoted to the
production of secondary pions and to the validation of
models on pion-induced reactions. This is at least partly
due to the fact that inclusive data for pion-nucleus re-
actions are scarce, and partly to the fact that ADSs are
expected to operate at energies of the order of 1 GeV [2],
where pion multiplicities are relatively low.

Several spallation neutron sources are currently oper-
ational around the world and more are under construc-
tion or planned for the near future. Predictions of the
neutron-source characteristics can typically be obtained
by means of Monte Carlo (MC) simulations. Reliable
results require detailed and accurate knowledge of the
physical processes at the basis of the spallation reac-
tions. Among the currently operating spallation neutron
sources, the n_TOF (neutron Time-Of-Flight) facility
[8] is an intense pulsed neutrons source located at CERN.
Neutrons are produced by spallation of lead nuclei caused

by an incident 20-GeV/c proton beam, and subsequently
moderated and collimated towards two experimental ar-
eas, where their energy can be measured using the time-
of-ﬂight technique. One of the foremost advantages of
n_TOF is that the produced neutrons extend over more
than twelve orders of magnitude, from thermal energies
to the GeV range, allowing highly accurate measurements
for a wide range of applications. Precise characterization
of the neutron source is crucial for these purposes, and
some features of the neutron beam must be inevitably
determined via numerical simulations [9]. In recent pub-
lications [10, 11], the Geant4 toolkit for particle transport
[12, 13] was used to characterize the neutron and photon
ﬂuxes directed towards the n_TOF experimental areas.
Calculations of neutron and photon ﬂuences performed
with diﬀerent Geant4 physics lists exhibited large rela-
tive diﬀerences. The authors suggested at the time that
this diﬀerence could be related to diﬀerent treatments of
pion production and pion-induced reactions.

In this work, we study the role of pion production and
its inﬂuence on the spallation yields. In particular, it will
be shown that secondary pions play a crucial role for par-
ticle production in thick spallation targets, such as the
n_TOF neutron source. We shall demonstrate that the
production of high-energy prompt photons is essentially
dominated by π0 decay, while the production of neutrons
is aﬀected by both secondary π±-nucleus reactions and π0
production. These facts notwithstanding, particle yields
are less sensitive to the detail of the speciﬁc nuclear-
reaction model used for the particle-transport simulation.
This is explained in terms of an intrinsic “resilience” of
hadronic cascades in thick targets.

The paper is structured as follows. In Sec. II we pro-
vide a brief description of the salient features of the Liège
Intranuclear-Cascade model (INCL), which is pivotal for
our numerical simulations of the n_TOF spallation tar-
get. Thin-target model calculations related to the pion
sector are presented and discussed in Sec. III, along with
comparisons against experimental data. Section IV shifts
the focus towards the thick-target transport calculations
of the n_TOF spallation target. The most important
features of the MC simulations, described in detail in re-
cent papers [10, 11], are recalled in Secs. IV A and IV B.
The role played by pions in the emission of neutrons and
photons is highlighted in Secs. IV C–IV E. Section IV G
illustrates the tendency of the hadronic cascade to miti-
gate the sensitivity of the particle yields to the details of
the description of the nuclear reactions. Conclusions are
drawn in Sec. V.

II. MODEL DESCRIPTION: THE LIÈGE

INTRANUCLEAR CASCADE MODEL

The Liège Intranuclear Cascade model (INCL) [14, 15]
is one of the most reﬁned existing tools for the descrip-
tion of spallation reactions. The model is currently main-
tained and developed jointly by the University of Liège

2

(Belgium) and CEA (Saclay, France). The model as-
sumes that the ﬁrst stage of the reaction can be de-
scribed as an avalanche of independent binary collisions.
The INCL model is essentially classical, with the ad-
dition of a few suitable ingredients that mimic genuine
quantum-mechanical features of the initial conditions and
of the dynamics:
for instance, target nucleons are en-
dowed with Fermi motion, realistic space densities are
used, the output of binary collisions is random and ele-
mentary nucleon-nucleon collisions are subject to Pauli
blocking. The model can describe the emission of nu-
cleons and pions; light clusters (up to Z = 5, A = 8
by default) can also be produced through a dynamical
phase-space coalescence algorithm.

Intranuclear-cascade models in general (and INCL in
particular) only describe the fast, dynamical stage of a
spallation reaction, leading to the formation of equili-
brated, excited nuclei which subsequently de-excite by
emitting particles and/or ﬁssioning. It is therefore nec-
essary to follow the de-excitation of this cascade remnant
if one requires a complete description of the nuclear reac-
tion. Since the time scale for de-excitation is much longer
than for cascade, a diﬀerent physical description is usu-
ally employed. In nuclear-reaction codes, de-excitation is
commonly simulated by statistical de-excitation models.
Within Geant4, INCL can be coupled with two diﬀer-
ent de-excitation codes, namely: G4ExcitationHandler,
the native statistical de-excitation model of Geant4 and
the default choice [16], and ABLA V3, a de-excitation
model developed at GSI (Darmstadt, Germany) [17, 18].
We stress here that this is not the code that is usually
coupled to INCL (which is ABLA07 [19]), but rather an
older version. A detailed comparison of the capabilities
of the two versions can be found in Ref. 19.

Diﬀerent particles are produced in diﬀerent stages of
the spallation reactions.
In particular, while neutrons
and γ-rays are mostly generated in de-excitation pro-
cesses, pion production, in particular, occurs entirely in
the ﬁrst reaction stage. The pion dynamics in INCL has
been recently upgraded to push the upper energy limit of
the model up to 15-20 GeV. Older versions of INCL con-
sidered only one mechanism for pion production, namely
excitation and subsequent decay of the ∆(1232) reso-
nance. For nucleon-induced reactions, this is a good ap-
proximation up to energies of about 2–3 GeV. Above this
energy, excitation of heavier baryonic and mesonic res-
onances becomes likely. A straightforward extension of
INC would in principle entail the description of all the
energy-angle-diﬀerential cross sections for the formation,
scattering and absorption of the resonances in the nu-
clear medium, as well as their mean-ﬁeld potentials, de-
cay modes, etc. The amount of information that must
be fed into the model is ponderous; besides, most of the
time, the available experimental information on these el-
ementary processes is direly scarce, or partial at best.

It should be noted that baryonic resonances above
∆(1232) are largely overlapping. This raises the question
of whether it is meaningful to consider them as having

separate identities in the framework of INC. Additionally,
their lifetime (in vacuum) is much smaller than the typi-
cal time between subsequent collisions during INC (a few
fm/c), so that a heavy resonance is unlikely to undergo
any collision before decaying in the nucleus. This is al-
ready marginally the case for ∆(1232), whose lifetime in
vacuum is ∼ 1.6 fm/c, and indeed most of the observables
calculated in INC are rather insensitive to variations of
the ∆(1232) lifetime. It should also be considered that
the ﬁnal (on the time scale of INC) decay products of
baryonic resonances are often pions.

Strictly speaking, the arguments above do not apply
to most of the lightest unﬂavored mesonic resonances (η,
ω, η(cid:48). . . ), whose lifetimes are comparable to or longer
than the duration of the INC stage; nor do they apply
to strange baryons and mesons (Λ, Σ, K. . . ), which un-
dergo weak decay. However, the available experimental
elementary cross sections associated with the production
of these particles [20, 21] and order-of-magnitude esti-
mates suggest that their global inﬂuence on the INC dy-
namics is weak. Therefore, it should be possible to treat
them as corrections, at least in the energy range up to
10–15 GeV.

In view of the discussion above, it is appropriate to
use a more pragmatic approach to the description of high-
energy reactions. In the latest version of the INCL model,
the production and decay of individual resonances (ex-
cept for ∆(1232)) is bypassed and replaced by multipion
collisions, i.e. eﬀective two-body collisions leading to the
production of one or more pions in the ﬁnal state, of the
following form:

N + N → N + N + xπ,
π + N → N + xπ.

(1a)
(1b)
In the current model, the number x of pions in the ﬁnal
state of the collision takes all values from 1 to 4 inclusive.
The rest of the pion dynamics in the new version of
INCL is the same as in the older one. The formation,
absorption and decay of the ∆(1232) resonance is ex-
plicitly treated. Pion absorption is possible only via the
formation of ∆(1232). No mechanism for pion absorp-
tion on nucleon pairs is included. Further details on the
latest version of INCL can be found in [22, 23]. Relative
to the published version, the current implementation of
the model has slightly evolved, with the most notable
diﬀerence concerning the biasing of nucleons towards the
forward direction in the center-of-mass system [24].

The eﬀect of the multipion extension can be studied
by comparing some global quantities calculated with the
old (INCL4.6) and the new extended model (INCL++).
Figure 1 shows the average pion multiplicity (i.e. the av-
erage number of pions produced per inelastic reaction)
in p+208Pb as a function of the proton energy. While
the two models yield similar predictions at low projec-
tile energy, in the older model the multiplicity saturates
around 5 GeV, never exceeding ∼ 1 pion per reaction,
while the extended model yields an almost linear increase
up to 20 GeV. Figure 2 shows how the produced pions

3

Figure 1. Excitation function for the average neutron, proton
and pion multiplicities in the ﬁnal state of p+208Pb reac-
tions, as calculated with (INCL++) and without (INCL4.6)
multipion extension. Note that the neutron curve has been
renormalized by a factor of 0.25.

Figure 2. Excitation functions for the average fraction of pro-
duced pions for each of the three charge states, in p+208Pb,
as calculated by INCL++.

are distributed over the three charge states, according
to the calculations of the extended model. The fraction
of neutral pions is roughly energy-independent. On the
contrary, the lines for positive and negative pions cross
between 4 and 5 GeV. The suppression of negative pions
at low energy can be explained by considering that the
projectile (a proton) carries positive isospin, and that pi-
ons can only be produced in the ﬁrst few collisions. As
the energy and the number of collisions increase, pion
production becomes increasingly dominated by the total
isospin of the system, which is negative because N > Z in
lead. Therefore, negative pions are asymptotically more
abundantly produced than positive pions.

05101520protonenergy(GeV)024681012averagemultiplicityneutrons×0.25protonspionsINCL++INCL4.605101520protonenergy(GeV)0.00.10.20.30.4fractionπ+π0π−For completeness, we mention that the version of
the INCL model that was used for the present work is
INCL++ v5.2.9.2.

III. THIN TARGET: PION-PRODUCTION

CROSS SECTIONS

As discussed in Sec. I, Geant4 simulations performed
with an INCL++-based physics list yield the best overall
reproduction of the measured neutron production for the
n_TOF spallation target, contrary to the physics lists
using the Binary Cascade (BIC) [25] or Bertini models
[26], which overestimate neutron production by as much
as 70%. In Ref. [10] it was hinted that a possible explana-
tion of this diﬀerence could be related to pion production.
In particular, it was pointed out that both neutral and
charged pions could play an important role in determin-
ing the production of neutrons as well as of the so-called
prompt γ-ray component, i.e. those produced in the ﬁrst
nanoseconds of the spallation reactions (with the delayed
γ-ray component produced later on from neutron capture
reaction and de-excitation of excited residues). In the fol-
lowing, the role of secondary pions in spallation targets
is investigated, starting from a comparison of theoretical
diﬀerential cross sections with the available experimen-
tal data. We remark that the predictive capability of
the INCL model for the production of other particles (in
particular neutrons, protons and light charged particles)
has already been established in an extensive benchmark
of spallation models, organized under the auspices of the
IAEA [5–7].

In order to assess the validity of the INCL++ and
other models, it is very useful to compare with one of
the most complete and comprehensive data set on pion
production at high energy. Such data were collected by
the HARP experiment at CERN [27, 28], where exten-
sive measurements of double-diﬀerential cross sections for
charged-pion production in proton- and pion-induced re-
actions were performed. Incident momenta of 3, 5, 8 and
12 GeV/c were considered.

A.

Integral pion production

Figures 3–5 show inclusive pion-production cross sec-
tions integrated over the acceptance of the HARP exper-
iment. In addition to the INCL++ calculation, we show
the results of three other models: Bertini [26] and Bi-
nary Cascade (BIC) [25] are popular intranuclear-cascade
models available in Geant4, while INCL4.6 represents
the Liège Intranuclear Cascade model without multip-
ion extension [29]. The diﬀerence between INCL4.6 and
INCL++ clearly highlights the importance of the exten-
sion, which is already sizable at the lowest incident mo-
mentum of the HARP data-set (3 GeV/c). The INCL4.6
model is reported to illustrate certain surprising features
of the hadronic shower in Sec. IV.

4

Figure 3. Cross sections for the production of π+ (left) and
π− (right) from proton-nucleus reactions, integrated over the
HARP angle-momentum acceptance,
for diﬀerent incident
proton momenta, as functions of the target mass number.
The lines represent calculations by diﬀerent models (see text
for details). The experimental data are taken from Ref. 27.

Figure 4. Same as Fig. 3, but for π+-nucleus reactions.

101102targetmassnumber10−310−210−1100101102103crosssection(mb)3GeV/c5GeV/c(×10−1)8GeV/c(×10−2)12GeV/c(×10−3)π+INCL++INCL4.6BertiniBIC101102targetmassnumber3GeV/c5GeV/c(×10−1)8GeV/c(×10−2)12GeV/c(×10−3)π−101102targetmassnumber10−710−610−510−410−310−210−1100101102103crosssection(mb)3GeV/c5GeV/c(×10−2)8GeV/c(×10−4)12GeV/c(×10−6)π+INCL++INCL4.6BertiniBIC101102targetmassnumber3GeV/c5GeV/c(×10−2)8GeV/c(×10−4)12GeV/c(×10−6)π−5

we select two incident momenta - 3 and 12 GeV/c - and
we focus on the lead target, which is the most impor-
tant for the study of the n_TOF spallation source. For
simplicity, we limit our discussion to π+ production in
proton- and π−-induced reactions; these results exhibit
all the typical features of the general case.

For the purpose of this work, the most interesting
quantity to compare is the pion emission spectrum. The
cross sections of Figs. 3–5 are determined by integration
of the double-diﬀerential cross sections in Figs. 6 and 7
over the momentum and angle acceptance of the HARP
data-set.
It clearly appears that no model accurately
reproduces the emission spectra for all angles and mo-
menta. INCL++ and Bertini are generally more accu-
rate at forward and backward angles, respectively, while
BIC is, as already noted, rather far from the experimen-
tal data. The goodness of the model predictions for this
observable is qualitatively consistent with the results for
neutron production in Geant4 simulations of the n_TOF
spallation target, providing further evidence of the funda-
mental role of pion-induced reactions in thick spallation
targets.

An interesting observation that can be made about
Figs. 6 and 7 is that INCL++ and Bertini consistently
show a dip in the spectra at forward angles (even up to
roughly 90◦) and around 250 MeV/c, which is not seen
in the experimental data. This defect was also noticed
by the authors of Ref. 26, who tentatively attributed it
to insuﬃcient moderation by the nuclear medium. In our
opinion, however, the dip is related to the formation and
decay of the ∆(1232) resonance, which manifests itself
as a strong peak in the pion-nucleon cross section. This
intuition is triggered by the observation that the posi-
tion of the dip coincides approximately with the position
of the resonance in the π + N → ∆ cross section.
In-
deed, we have veriﬁed that the dip disappears when the
π + N → ∆ cross section is artiﬁcially reduced by about
a factor of 2. On the other hand, the dip seems insen-
sitive to reasonable modiﬁcations of the recombination
(∆ + N → N + N) cross section and of the ∆ lifetime.
The mechanism leading to the formation of the dip in
the model is rather simple, if one makes a few reason-
able assumptions. First, we assume that pion produc-
tion in INC proceeds in two stages.
In the ﬁrst stage,
early elementary collisions generate a structureless (no
dip) pion spectrum (it is reasonable to assume that pi-
ons are produced early in the reaction because the en-
ergy available for pion production quickly degrades after
a few collisions). In the second stage, the generated pi-
ons traverse the nucleus, possibly undergoing scattering
and absorption, and possibly emerging as free particles.
In this picture, the early pions are attenuated by the
nuclear medium, with the excitation of the ∆(1232) res-
onance playing a role in the distortion of the pristine pion
spectrum, due to selective pion absorption at the corre-
sponding resonance energy. Since the dip is insensitive
to the recombination cross section and to the resonance
lifetime, and since ∆ resonances (in INCL) can only be

Figure 5. Same as Fig. 3, but for π−-nucleus reactions.

The INCL++ and Bertini models provide comparably
accurate predictions. Bertini is generally closer to the
experimental data for light targets, while INCL++ per-
forms better on heavy targets, such as lead, which is most
interesting for the present work and in general for spalla-
tion neutron sources. Proton-nucleus data are generally
better reproduced than pion-nucleus data, with all cal-
culations anyway being within a factor of 2 from the ex-
perimental data, with the BIC model having greater dif-
ﬁculties in reproducing the experimental cross sections.
It is important to remark that very few inclusive ex-
perimental data exist for the production of neutral pions
in proton-nucleus and pion-nucleus reactions. This is of
course mainly due to the short lifetime of the neutral
pion, which complicates its detection. It is therefore cus-
tomary to benchmark reaction models only on charged-
pion production. We will follow the same approach in the
present work. The validity of the interpolation to neu-
tral pions can often be directly related to the goodness of
the isospin-symmetry approximation, which is commonly
used for the computation of elementary cross sections in
intranuclear cascade.

B. Double-diﬀerential pion-production cross

sections

Figures 6 and 7 show double-diﬀerential (momentum-
angle) cross sections for inclusive pion production in
proton- and pion-induced reactions. For benchmarking

101102targetmassnumber10−810−710−610−510−410−310−210−1100101102103crosssection(mb)3GeV/c5GeV/c(×10−2)8GeV/c(×10−4)12GeV/c(×10−6)π+INCL++INCL4.6BertiniBIC101102targetmassnumber3GeV/c5GeV/c(×10−2)8GeV/c(×10−4)12GeV/c(×10−6)π−6

Figure 6. Double-diﬀerential cross sections for the production of π+ at 25◦ (a, e), 48◦ (b, f), 71◦ (c, g) and 105◦ (d, h), from
3-GeV/c (a–d) and 12-GeV/c (e–h) p+Pb. The lines represent calculations by diﬀerent models (see text for details). The
experimental data are taken from Ref. 27.

absorbed by recombination, we conclude that the inter-
mediate ∆ resonances mostly decay back to pion-nucleon
pairs. In principle, the momentum of the pion should fall
back in the dip region. However, while the formation and
decay of the intermediate ∆ resonances does not modify
the pion momentum distribution, it does act on the an-
gular distribution. If one makes the reasonable assump-
tion that the pristine pion spectrum is sensibly forward-
peaked, then the decay of the intermediate ∆ resonances
will redistribute pions from the forward angles to all an-
gles. This manifests itself as a dip at forward angles in
the double-diﬀerential spectra.

While this explanation holds valid for the dip observed
in the model calculations, it is not clear whether it also
applies to the data. A hint of a dip may be seen in the
very forward angles, but in general data seems to indi-
cate that in reality the dip could be less pronounced than
what predicted by the models. We note that a simultane-

ous rescaling of the cross section and of the width of the
∆ resonance, keeping the product of the two constant,
would at least partly wash out the dip. A narrower reso-
nance width should be interpreted as a nuclear-medium
eﬀect on the resonance lifetime. As a matter of fact, INC
already generates part of this medium eﬀect (on the reso-
nance lifetime) through the application of Pauli blocking
on the resonance decay. For consistency one should also
modify the cross section of the formation process to re-
ﬂect this; in practice, to the best of our knowledge, this
is never done in INC codes. It is anyway unclear at this
point if a realistic modiﬁcation of the resonance width
would be suﬃcient to reconcile the calculations with the
experimental data.

For the sake of completeness, we mention that there
is disagreement about the scientiﬁc adequateness of the
HARP data analysis. A group of former HARP col-
laborators (the HARP-CDP group) have published a

10−210−1dσ/dΩdp[mb/(srMeV/c)](a)INCL++BertiniBinary(b)(c)(d)0200400600p[MeV/c]10−210−1100dσ/dΩdp[mb/(srMeV/c)](e)0200400600p[MeV/c](f)0200400600p[MeV/c](g)0200400600p[MeV/c](h)7

Figure 7. Same as Fig. 6, but for 3-GeV/c (a–d) and 12-GeV/c (e–h) π−+Pb reactions.

revisited analysis of the raw HARP data [30]. They
present double-diﬀerential cross sections with respect to
transverse momentum and laboratory angle, which are
not directly comparable to the HARP analysis; how-
ever, Ref. 30 contains direct comparisons of the double-
diﬀerential momentum-angle cross sections, but only for
the forward-most angle (25◦) and for 3- and 8-GeV/c
beam momenta (Figs. 12 and 13 in their paper). On this
limited basis, it is diﬃcult to decide whether the HARP-
CDP cross sections are compatible with the dip in the
calculations, although the fact that the HARP-CDP data
seem to be consistently smaller than the HARP data at
low momentum is encouraging. In this respect, new data
focusing on the pion production in high-energy proton-
induced reaction would be highly desirable. Together
with charged pions, data on π0 production would provide
fundamental information that could contribute consider-
ably to the optimization of the INC models.

IV. THICK TARGET: PIONS IN THE N_TOF

SPALLATION TARGET

While thin-target double-diﬀerential cross section can
provide some indications on the ability of the models to
correctly predict pion production, the structure of the
hadronic showers that take place in the spallation tar-
get, and in particular the role played by secondary pions
in the production of neutrons and photons, can only be
studied by means of dedicated MC simulations of the
spallation process and comparison with available exper-
imental data.
In this respect, we have chosen in this
work to perform further simulations of the n_TOF spal-
lation target with the Geant4 toolkit. Before analysing
the results of the simulations, it is convenient to brieﬂy
describe the toolkit and the implementation of the MC
simulations for the n_TOF case.

10−210−1dσ/dΩdp[mb/(srMeV/c)](a)INCL++BertiniBinary(b)(c)(d)0200400600p[MeV/c]10−1100dσ/dΩdp[mb/(srMeV/c)](e)0200400600p[MeV/c](f)0200400600p[MeV/c](g)0200400600p[MeV/c](h)INCL++ model within Geant4 was manually upgraded
to v5.2.9.4, which is the version that has been distributed
with Geant4 v10.2 (December 2015).

8

B. The n_TOF simulation

The n_TOF spallation target is a water-cooled lead
cylinder surrounded by an aluminum container and by a
neutron moderator. Its structure is described in detail in
Refs. [8, 10, 11]. A 20-GeV/c proton beam impinges on
the base of the lead cylinder at an angle of approximately
10◦. The lead target cylinder can be considered as thick,
in the sense that its size (radius 30 cm, length 40 cm) is
large compared to the proton mean free path for inelas-
tic collisions at the beam energy (∼ 15 cm). Therefore,
the primary proton often triggers a nuclear reaction in-
side the Pb target and initiates a hadronic shower which
eventually leads to the production of a large number of
particles. A note about our nomenclature: we refer to all
“non-primary” particles as secondaries, regardless of the
reaction generation they appear in, in opposition to the
“primary” particle incident on the spallation target.

lists.

reactions,

For proton-nucleus

Among the particles escaping from the spallation tar-
get, we are particularly interested in neutrons, which are
moderated in water, that can be either normal or bo-
rated, and collimated towards the experimental areas.
Simulations of the n_TOF spallation target have focused
on the reproduction of the measured energy dependence,
resolution function, and spatial distribution of the neu-
trons entering the ﬁrst experimental area (EAR1) [8, 10].
The expected ﬂux in the direction of the second, new
experimental area (EAR2) was also studied in a recent
paper [11]. As shown in Refs. 10 and 11, these measured
quantities are best reproduced by the simulations using
the FTFP_INCLXX_HP and QGSP_INCLXX_HP
physics
these
physics lists use the Liège Intranuclear Cascade model
(INCL++) from 1 MeV to 20 GeV incident energy,
and either the Fritiof+pre-equilibrium model (FTFP)
or the Quark-Gluon-String+pre-equilibrium model from
15 GeV upwards.
In the region where the two model
overlap (15–20 GeV), the choice of the model is randomly
sampled, with linearly-interpolated probabilities between
the interval endpoints (a standard procedure in Geant4).
Since the primary proton beam energy is ∼ 19 GeV
(20 GeV/c), it is clear that the FTFP or QGSP will typi-
cally be used at most for the simulation of the ﬁrst inelas-
tic proton-nucleus reaction [32]; the rest of the hadronic
shower is dominated by the INCL++ model. For this rea-
son, we limit our analysis on the FTFP_INCLXX_HP
physics list. The following section introduces a global de-
scription of INCL++, with particular focus on its pion
dynamics.

Figure 8.
Incident-energy distribution of nuclear reactions
induced within the hadronic cascade by protons, neutrons
and pions, normalized to one primary proton, as calculated
by the INCL model with (INCL++, solid lines) and with-
out (INCL4.6, dashed lines) multipion extension, within the
Geant4 simulation of the n_TOF spallation target (beam mo-
mentum of 20 GeV/c).

A. The Geant4 toolkit

Geant4 (GEometry ANd Transport) is a toolkit for the
simulation of particle transport and detector response
[12, 13]. The Geant family of codes was originally de-
veloped for the needs of the high-energy-physics commu-
nity. However, since the beginning the array of physics
models has been constantly expanding to encompass ap-
plications at lower energy.
In particular, Geant4 has
been successfully used, since several years, to describe
the transport of neutrons down to thermal energy, us-
ing point-wise cross-section from evaluated libraries [31].
These developments recently triggered new work on the
use of Geant4 for the simulation of spallation neutron
sources. Recently, Geant4 simulations performed for the
n_TOF source were benchmarked against experimental
results [10], such as the neutron ﬂuence and resolution
function, and yielded interesting results which will be
shortly described in the following subsection.

Physics models in Geant4 are organized and collected
in “physics lists”, which are speciﬁcations of the phys-
ical processes (and the associated models) that should
be used in the simulation. The names of the available
Geant4 physics lists are often obtained by concatenat-
ing the names of the models used in the hadronic sec-
tor, in decreasing order of incident energy. Thus, for
instance, the FTFP_INCLXX_HP physics list, around
which much of the present work revolves, relies on the
Fritiof+pre-equilibrium model (FTFP) at high energy,
the INCL++ model at intermediate energies, and the
NeutronHP model at low energy.

This work is based on Geant4 v10.1; however, the

100101102103104energy[MeV]10−510−410−310−210−1100101dNreac/dE[MeV−1source−1]neutronsprotonspionsINCL++INCL4.6C. Analysis of secondary reactions

We start by illustrating how nuclear reactions in the
target are distributed with respect to the type of the
incident particle and its energy. Figure 8 shows the dis-
tribution of the projectile energy for nuclear reactions
induced by protons, neutrons and pions. Each distribu-
tion is normalized to the total number of reactions per
primary proton induced by the indicated particle. Note
that Fig. 8 includes the reactions induced by the primary
protons, which appear as a small peak close to the beam
energy, whose integral roughly amounts to 0.91 reactions
per incident proton; this is consistent with the thickness
of the spallation target, which is of the order of 2.5 nu-
clear mean free paths at the beam energy. Note also
that this plot does not include elastic collisions. This
choice mainly follows from the consideration that elas-
tic scattering on lead nuclei does not sensibly modify the
projectile energy for nucleons and pions; in addition, at
high energy, the elastic angular distribution is sensibly
forward-peaked and is unlikely to aﬀect the global ﬂow
of energy and momentum within the spallation target.

Table I presents the integral reaction rates over se-
lected ranges of incident energy, as calculated by Geant4
simulations using the INCL model with (INCL++) and
without (INCL4.6) multipion extension. The most im-
portant feature of Table I and Fig. 8 is that most of the
reactions are actually neutron-induced reactions at rel-
atively low energy. This is essentially due to two facts:
ﬁrst, as Fig. 1 shows, neutrons are by far the particles
that are most abundantly produced in spallation reac-
tions (note that the neutron curve has been rescaled by
a factor 0.25). Second, unlike protons and charged pions,
neutrons are not stopped by continuous energy loss, so
their ﬂight through the target is always terminated either
by leakage or by a collision. An additional remark that
can be made about the neutron distribution in Fig. 8 re-
gards the structures around 1 MeV, which correspond to
the opening of (n, n(cid:48)) reactions on the four lead isotopes,
while reactions below the thresholds are dominated by
radiative capture on lead isotopes, on the moderating
water, as well as on (n, α) reactions on boron. All these
features of neutron transport in thick spallation targets
are well known.

It is instead surprising that secondary reactions in-
duced by pions are twice as many as those induced by
protons. Table I shows a contribution to pion-induced
reactions even in the range 0–1 MeV; this actually cor-
responds to the absorption of stopped negative pions,
whose fate is to quickly form pionic atoms, decay towards
the inner atomic shells and eventually disappear in a re-
action with the nucleus. The lifetime for the whole pro-
cess (i.e. formation of the pionic atom, atomic decay and
pion absorption) is of the order of 10−10 s [33], which is
much smaller than the pion intrinsic lifetime (2.6·10−8 s).
Hence, the decay of stopped negative pions is actually a
rare process.
In some sense this actually makes nega-
tive pions akin to neutrons, insofar as they are bound to

9

induce a nuclear reaction, or escape from the spallation
volume.

Even if one neglects π− absorption at rest, pion-
induced reactions are still more common than proton-
induced reactions. This ﬁnding clashes with the typ-
ical validation strategy applied to spallation-reaction
modeling at lower energies [5–7], which emphasizes the
role of proton-induced reactions.
In particular, while
this approach is appropriate at ADS energies (∼ 500–
1000 MeV), it is clearly insuﬃcient at higher energies,
such as those involved in the n_TOF spallation source.
Of course the choice of the validation endpoints is also
conditioned by the wide availability of comprehensive
data-sets for proton-induced reactions and the relative
scarceness of neutron- and pion-induced data.

There is one further interesting remark that can be
made about Fig. 8, and especially Table I. By comparing
the numbers for the two models, one notices that pions
induce about 35% more secondary reactions in INCL++
than in INCL4.6. This is of course a consequence of
the fact that the average pion multiplicity is higher in
INCL++ than in INCL4.6. It is however instructive to
contrast this 35% diﬀerence with the much larger dif-
ference in average multiplicity (Fig. 1), which can be as
large as a factor of 8 or 9.
If we take the number of
pion-induced reactions as a measure of the number of pi-
ons that participate in the hadronic cascade, this result
suggests that the structure of the cascade is relatively
insensitive to the average pion multiplicity predicted by
the nuclear-reaction model for the individual reactions.
As we shall see in Sec. IV G, this has important con-
sequences for the sensitivity of secondary-particle yields
(neutrons and photons in particular) to the details of the
nuclear-reaction models.

D. The role of neutral pions

In Ref. 10, Geant4 simulations of neutron production
at the n_TOF spallation target, performed with sev-
eral physics lists, were compared between each other and
to the energy-diﬀerential neutron ﬂuence measured at
n_TOF in various experimental campaigns. As previ-
ously mentioned, it was shown that the lists based on
the INCL++ model closely reproduce the energy depen-
dence of the neutron spectrum and, within a 15-20% dif-
ference, the integrated yield. All other models are able
to reproduce the shape, but overestimate the yield by a
larger factor, of up to 70%. A diﬀerent behavior was in-
stead observed for the production of prompt high-energy
photons, i.e. those reaching the experimental area within
1 µs of the beam pulse, and with an energy larger than
10 MeV. In particular, the most and least intense pho-
ton yields are respectively predicted by the INCL++ and
Bertini models. In general, an anti-correlation was ob-
served between neutron and prompt-photon production,
with models predicting larger neutron yields predicting
smaller photon yields. Following this observation, sev-

10

energy
(MeV) neutrons

0–1
1–20
20–20
> 200
total

14.4
157.5
28.3
3.51
203.7

INCL++
protons

0

pions neutrons
1.88
0.03
1.59
2.60 (1.67) 3.70
4.01 (3.07) 7.20

13.3
144.5
25.9
4.20
187.9

0.08
1.33

INCL4.6
protons

0

diﬀerence (%)

protons

pions neutrons
1.40
0.02
1.26

pions
33.7
33.0
25.6
3.07 (2.14) 2.57 −16.5 −15.6 (−22.1) 44.1
−11.0 (−13.9) 36.8
4.51 (3.56) 5.26

0
4.3
−1.5

8.7
9.0
9.2

0.08
1.35

8.4

Table I. Average number of reactions per incident proton induced by the indicated particles within the speciﬁed energy ranges,
as calculated by our Geant4 simulation with (INCL++) and without (INCL4.6) multipion extension. The last three columns
show the relative diﬀerence between the INCL++ and INCL4.6 calculations. The numbers within brackets in the proton
columns refer to reactions induced by secondary protons alone.

eral tests were performed with Geant4 simulations in or-
der to understand the origin of the diﬀerences among
the available intranuclear cascade models for neutron and
prompt-photon production.

In order to shed some light on the mechanisms that
leads to the production of photons, we have performed
simulations by inhibiting π0 decay; this allows to estab-
lish how often prompt photons originate, either directly
or through secondary electromagnetic cascade, from π0
decay. A few low-statistics test runs were performed with
diﬀerent physics lists. The results are shown in Table II,
which reports the number of produced π0s (line (a1)),
along with the number of photons and neutrons produced
in the target, with and without π0 decay (lines (b1–b2)
and (c1–c2)). All numbers are normalized to the num-
ber of incident protons. The same results are reported in
graphical form in Fig. 9.

A note of warning: the particles are counted when they
are produced, i.e. at the reaction site; therefore, in a sense
the same particle can contribute more than once if the re-
action cascade it initiates spans several collisions within
the target. Nevertheless, for the sake of conciseness, we
shall make use of expressions such as “the average num-
ber of photons originating from π0 decay”; this is a slight
abuse of terminology. However, for the purpose of as-
certaining the inﬂuence of pions on photon and neutron
production, this is inconsequential.

Several considerations can be made on the basis of the
results in Table II and Fig. 9. First, at least 90% of
the prompt photons descend in some way from π0 decay.
This is clearly indicated by the eﬀect of the suppression
of π0 decay in all the physics lists, but also by the ob-
servation that physics lists predicting large π0 produc-
tion rates typically also predict larger numbers of pho-
tons. The average π0-to-γ conversion factor (line (d1))
amounts to about 17 photons per π0 decay. Second, the
inﬂuence of π0 decay on neutron production (line (c2))
is sensibly smaller and of the order of a few percent only.
This is easily understood because the coupling from pho-
ton transport to neutron transport is weaker; the γ → n
photonuclear conversion is in general quite ineﬃcient at
producing neutrons, compared to pion-induced reactions.
It is then quite clear that photon yields are posi-
tively correlated with (and actually dominated by) π0

production. However, note also that, in the reference
calculations, large π0 production rates (line (a1)) cor-
relate well with small neutron yields (line (c1)), with
FTFP_INCLXX_HP (the physics list that best repro-
duces the n_TOF neutron spectrum) predicting in par-
ticular the highest π0 production rate and the lowest
neutron yield. This behavior clashes with the intrinsic
pion-to-neutron balance of spallation reactions.
In the
framework of INC models, larger values of the pion mul-
tiplicity entail more eﬃcient dissipation of the projectile
energy; thus, larger excitation energies are produced at
the end of INC, which results in larger evaporation yields.
Therefore, pion and neutron multiplicities are in principle
positively correlated. The INCL++ model can be seen to
exhibit this behavior in Fig. 1: the multipion extension
has indeed the eﬀect of increasing all particle multiplici-
ties. However, while Fig. 1 refers to a thin target case, for
a thick target other eﬀects come into play. As discussed
later on in this paper, due to the resilience of the hadronic
cascade, neutron production in large-volume spallation
targets is rather insensitive to the pion multiplicity in in-
dividual N +N or π+N collisions, but depends mostly on
the total number of pions produced in the full hadronic
cascade. In particular, for a larger number of pions pro-
duced, 40% of which are π0, a larger fraction of energy
will be diverted from the hadronic cascade to the electro-
magnetic one, and become unavailable for neutron pro-
duction. In this sense, the results in Table II and Fig. 9
clearly hint to a fundamental role of pion production in
general, and π0 production in particular, in determining
the ﬁnal neutron and photon ﬂuences in spallation neu-
tron sources based on high-energy protons impinging on
large spallation volumes.

In summary, it is quite clear that neutral pions dom-
inate the production of prompt, high-energy photons.
At the same time, the observed anti-correlation of neu-
tron and prompt-photon yields can be explained consid-
ering that neutral pions essentially divert energy from
the hadronic cascade towards the electromagnetic one.

11

FTFP_

QGSP_ QGSP_
INCL46_HP INCLXX_HP INCLXX_HP BERT_HP BERT_HP BIC_HP

QGSP_

FTFP_

FTFP_

(a1)
(a2)
(b1)
(b2)
(b3)
(b4)
(c1)
(c2)
(c3)
(c4)
(d1)
(d2)
(d3)
(d4)

number π0
number π±
reference
no π0 (%)
no π± (%)
π0 → π± (%)

s
n
o
t
o
h
p

s reference
no π0 (%)
no π± (%)
π0 → π± (%)

n
o
r
t
u
e
n

n π0 → γ
π± → γ
π0 → n
π± → n

o
i
s
r
e
v
n
o
c

4.2
7.5
80.7
6.1
98.8
7.5
454.6
97.4
60.1
125.5
17.9
0.1
2.8
24.1

6.3
11.0
119.0
4.7
83.7
4.7
513.0
94.5
56.2
128.0
18.0
1.8
4.5
20.4

6.7
11.5
138.0
7.5
83.3
7.7
420.9
95.2
42.9
138.3
19.0
2.0
3.0
21.0

5.4
10.2
93.0
6.5
94.2
7.0
658.9
97.1
58.1
112.6
16.1
0.5
3.5
27.1

5.5
10.0
104.4
9.6
95.3
10.5
575.9
100.4
54.1
133.2
17.3
0.5
-0.5
26.4

6.1
11.5
115.4
11.6
84.9
11.7
531.7
100.8
45.3
132.4
16.7
1.5
-0.7
25.4

Table II. Results of test calculations with suppressed π0 decay, suppressed π± transport, and π0 → π± conversion. Columns
represent diﬀerent physics lists (FTFP_INCL46_HP being short for FTFP_INCLXX_HP with INCL4.6). The meaning of
the rows is the following: (a1) number of π0 produced in the reference calculation; (a2) the same, for π±; (b1–b4) number of
produced photons above 10 MeV (b1) in the reference calculation, (b2) without π0 decay, (b3) without π± transport, and (b4)
with π0 converted to π±; (c1–c4) same four lines for produced neutrons; (d1–d4) conversion ratios from π0 or π± to photons
or neutrons. Rows (a1–a2), (b1), (c1) and (d1–d4) are averages per incident proton; rows (b2–b4) and (c2–c4) are expressed
as percentages of the respective reference result. See text for the exact deﬁnition of these quantities. The same results are also
reported in graphical form in Fig. 9.

E.

Inﬂuence of charged pions on neutron

production

As we have shown in Fig. 8 and Table I above, charged
pions are responsible for a large number of secondary re-
actions. Since spallation reactions often lead to the pro-
duction of neutrons, one expects that secondary charged
pions have a large inﬂuence on neutron production.

In order to prove this, we have performed test calcula-
tions in which we suppress the transport of charged pions
by killing their tracks at the reaction site. This prevents
them from inducing further secondary reactions. Table II
and Fig. 9 show the number of produced π± tracks (line
(a2)), along with the average photon (line (b3)) and neu-
tron yields (line (c3)) recorded when charged pions are
not transported. Pion-induced reactions are seen to ac-
count for about 40–45% of the neutron yield. Depending
on the physics list, the suppression of one charged pion
entails a reduction of 20–25 neutrons per incident proton
(line (d4)), with INCL-based and Bertini-based physics
lists respectively yielding the lowest (20.4) and highest
(27.1) pion-to-neutron conversion ratios. There is also
an eﬀect on the photon yields (line (b3)), which also
decrease by 5–20% when charged pions are suppressed.
This is probably due to the disappearance of the neutral
pions that would have been produced in the suppressed
π±-induced reactions.

To further substantiate our claims about the impor-
tance of secondary pions, we have performed test calcu-
lations where π0 production is randomly replaced with

the production of a π+ or a π− (with equal probability)
with the same kinetic energy and momentum direction
as the suppressed π0. In this test, energy is essentially
conserved (up to the small π0/π± mass diﬀerence), and
charge is conserved on average. The eﬀect on photon
yields (line (b4)) is essentially the same as in the cal-
culation without π0 decay, which is reasonable; neutron
yields (line (c4)), on the other hand, are increased by
about 10–30%, depending on the physics lists. Note that
the increased neutron yields are consistent with the con-
version eﬃciency that can be estimated from the π0 → n
and π±
→ n conversion coeﬃcients (lines (d3–d4)) and
the number of transformed π0 (line (a1)).

F.

Inﬂuence of the physics list

In particular,

It is worth spending a few words about the depen-
dence of the numbers in Table II on the choice of the
physics list.
it is instructive to com-
pare results obtained with the same INC/de-excitation
component, but diﬀerent high-energy reaction mod-
els. When doing so, care must be exercised because
the switching energy between parton-string models and
INC depends on the physics list.
in
the case of neutron-nucleus reactions, the INC stage
is used up to 9.9 GeV in QGSP_BERT_HP, up to
5 GeV in FTFP_BERT_HP and up to 20 GeV in
QGSP_INCLXX_HP and FTFP_INCLXX_HP.

For instance,

Therefore, we focus on the most straightforward com-

12

energy INCL++ INCL4.6 diﬀerence
(GeV) (×10−3) (×10−3)
0–1
1–20
total

(%)
+7.7
−31.4
+5.8

72.1
2.4
74.5

66.9
3.5
70.4

Table III. Average number of neutrons per incident proton
emitted in a 2◦ cone directed towards the ﬁrst experimental
area, in the indicated energy ranges, as calculated by our
Geant4 simulation. Results are shown for the INCL model
with (INCL++) and without (INCL4.6) multipion extension.

ﬂuence of the INC/de-excitation stage is of comparable
magnitude.

G.

Inﬂuence of pion multiplicity

The tests involving the suppression of pion emission
might be considered as unrealistic because they grossly
violate several conservation laws. Indeed, each pion car-
ries several hundreds MeV of mass and kinetic energy,
which can be (partially) converted into neutrons (through
nuclear reactions) or photons (through nuclear reactions
or π0 decay) if the pion is not suppressed. Charge con-
servation is also violated when charged pions are killed.
The π0 → π± transformation test, on the other hand,
approximately conserves energy (up to the π0/π± mass
diﬀerence), respects charge conservation on average, and
provides insight to the sensitivity of the simulation to the
pion charge distribution.

It is also instructive to study the dependence of the
calculation results on the mean pion multiplicity in indi-
vidual nuclear reactions. One way to test the inﬂuence
of multiplicity without abandoning energy conservation
is to compare the results of calculations performed with
nuclear-reaction models that yield diﬀerent average pion
multiplicities. It is however diﬃcult to isolate the eﬀect
of the change in pion multiplicity from all the other dif-
ferences between the models. Ideally, one would like to
change the average pion multiplicity and nothing else.
The closest approach to an ideal setting for a sensitivity
study is to modify the nuclear-reaction physics within
the same model. By acting on some internal model pa-
rameter, one could modify the average pion multiplic-
ity while keeping the overall coherence of the model.
For this purpose, we shall discuss calculations performed
with INCL++ with and without multipion extension (see
Sec. II). We remind the reader that pion multiplicities are
much smaller in the model without multipion extension,
starting from about 1 GeV incident energy (Fig. 1).

Figure 10 shows the calculated neutron ﬂuence per unit
lethargy and per incident proton emitted from the spalla-
tion source in the direction of the ﬁrst experimental area.
This spectrum is scored at the exit of our geometry and
we only consider neutrons within a 2◦ cone around the
direction towards EAR1. This spectrum actually repre-

Figure 9. Number of photons (a) and neutrons (b) in the test
calculations reported in Table II (rows (b1–b4) and (c1–c4),
respectively), as a function of the physics list used. Panel (c)
represents the pion-to-particle conversion ratios (lines (d1–d4)
of Table II).

II

(15–20 GeV). Table

parison, namely the one between QGSP_INCLXX_HP
and FTFP_INCLXX_HP, which use the same fade-
out energy interval between INCL++ and the parton-
string model
that
QGSP_INCLXX_HP produces 16% larger photon yields
and 18% smaller neutron yields. This is qualitatively
consistent with the observation by Lerendegui et al. [11]
that QGSP_INCLXX_HP yields smaller neutron ﬂu-
ences; however, the numbers in Table II are not directly
comparable with Lerendegui et al.’s integrated neutron
ﬂuences, because our results include counts of unobserved
in-target tracks.

shows

The comparison between QGSP_BERT_HP and
FTFP_BERT_HP leads to the same kind of conclusions,
albeit quantitative comparisons are diﬃcult.
Inspec-
tion of the diﬀerences between FTFP_INCLXX_HP and
FTFP_BERT_HP, for instance, suggests that the in-

020406080100120140numberofphotons(a)referencenoπ0noπ±π0→π±0100200300400500600700numberofneutrons(b)FTFPINCL46HPFTFPINCLXXHPQGSPINCLXXHPFTFPBERTHPQGSPBERTHPQGSPBICHP010203040conversionratio(c)π0→γπ±→γπ0→nπ±→n13

sents the input for the resampling procedure that leads
to the estimation of the ﬂuence at EAR1, which is 185 m
away [10].

It is immediately obvious that the diﬀerence between
the two models is much smaller than the diﬀerences seen
in the previous section. Table III shows the average num-
bers of neutrons produced in selected energy ranges. The
global eﬀect of the multipion extension on the neutron
yield is of the order of a few percent. This should be
compared to the reduction of ∼ 40% that was induced
by the suppression of the charged-pion tracks.
The neutron spectra are essentially identical in shape
up to about ∼ 1 GeV. As expected, the shape of the
low-energy (E (cid:46) 20 MeV) end of the spectrum, which
is treated using evaluated cross-section databases, is in-
dependent of the high-energy model chain that feeds
it. This remark has already been made in connection
with the comparison of the spectra predicted by diﬀer-
ent physics lists [10]. In the case of the comparison be-
tween INCL4.6 and INCL++, the similarity stretches up
to 1 GeV because the two models indeed yield very sim-
ilar predictions up to this energy (cfr. Fig. 1). Neutrons
above 1 GeV are seen to be more abundantly produced
by INCL4.6. This is coherent with the aforementioned
observation (Sec. IV D) that higher pion multiplicities
lead to more eﬃcient dissipation of the projectile energy;
clearly, it is easier to produce high-energy neutrons if
less energy is channeled into pion production.
In this
respect, the validity of the multipion extension could be
veriﬁed by examining the neutron ﬂuence produced at
the n_TOF spallation source in the energy region above
1 GeV. However, as of now there is no experimental in-
formation available, and in any case the measurement of
the neutron ﬂuence at such high energy is not straight-
forward.

Figure 11 and Table IV compare the results of
INCL4.6- and INCL++-based calculations on prompt-
photon production. We apply the same 2◦ angular cut
on the angle of the emitted photon; in addition, we only
select photons that are emitted within 100 ns from the
beam pulse. This roughly corresponds to the prompt
photons that are detected before 1 µs at the EAR1 ex-
perimental area [10].

The diﬀerence between the calculations is much larger
than for neutrons, especially for the production of high-
energy photons. This is not surprising, given the crucial
role that neutral pions are seen to play in the production
of prompt high-energy photons. However, compared to
the results of Sec. IV D above, the magnitude of the eﬀect
is somewhat mitigated.

The results shown above indicate that the pion multi-
plicity in a single nucleon-nucleon or pion-nucleon colli-
sion does not play a crucial role in neutron and photon
production in thick spallation targets, contrary to the
large eﬀect predicted in the thin target case and shown
in Fig. 1. This property has already been observed at
lower energies [34]; our work conﬁrms that it still holds
at n_TOF energies. The fact that photon and neutron

Figure 10. Neutron spectrum per unit lethargy emitted from
the n_TOF spallation source in a 2◦ cone directed towards the
ﬁrst experimental area, as calculated by our Geant4 simula-
tion. Results are shown for the INCL model with (INCL++)
and without (INCL4.6) multipion extension.

Figure 11. Photon spectrum emitted from the spallation
source within 100 ns of the beam pulse, in a 2◦ cone di-
rected towards the ﬁrst experimental area, as calculated by
our Geant4 simulation. Results are shown for the INCL model
with (INCL++) and without (INCL4.6) multipion extension.

energy INCL++ INCL4.6 diﬀerence
(MeV) (×10−3) (×10−3)
0–10
> 10
total

(%)
+34.7
+45.0
+36.5

50.9
11.6
62.5

37.8
8.0
45.8

Table IV. Same as Table III, for the emission of photons
within 100 ns of the beam pulse.

10−610−510−410−310−210−1100101energy[GeV]10−410−310−2EdN/dE[source−1]INCL++INCL4.610−510−410−310−210−1energy[GeV]10−610−510−410−310−2dN/dE[GeV−1source−1]INCL++INCL4.614

inelastic collisions which is short with respect to the size
of the geometry and, in the case of charged particles, to
the range. If this assumption holds, as it may often be the
case for thick spallation targets, particles leaving the ﬁrst
reaction vertex are likely to induce secondary reactions
nearby, leading to further degradation of the projectile
energy. Therefore, for a less dissipative model (such as
INCL4.6) it will take a greater number of soft reactions
to degrade the projectile energy into low-energy parti-
cles. On the contrary, a more dissipative model (such
as INCL++) will require fewer hard reactions. However,
on a geometric scale larger than the reaction mean free
path, the overall structure of the resulting hadronic cas-
cade will be relatively independent of the details of the
model. In other words, the number of neutrons and pho-
tons produced in the full hadronic cascade (and therefore
the ﬂuence of particles emerging from the spallation tar-
get) will mostly depend on the total number of pions
(and other intermediate particles) produced in the cas-
cade, rather than on their multiplicity in each reaction.
It remains to be seen if the conditions for a short mean
free path are met in the case of the n_TOF spallation
target. The reaction cross sections for high-energy pro-
tons, neutrons and pions in lead are weakly dependent on
energy and all of the order of 1.8 b, which results in mean
free paths of the order of 15 cm. This is sensibly smaller
than the thickness of the spallation target (40 cm). A
15-cm range in lead corresponds to a proton energy of
about 400 MeV, or a pion energy of 250 MeV. Therefore,
for particle energies above roughly 600 MeV (and for neu-
trons of all energies), the aforementioned conditions are
approximately met and the target may be considered as
thick.

V. CONCLUSIONS

Triggered from recent works on Geant4 simulations of
the n_TOF spallation target, which indicated some siz-
able diﬀerences in neutron production between various
INC models, we have here investigated the role of sec-
ondary pions in high-energy proton-induced reactions,
both for thin and thick targets. A comparison with the
available experimental data points to a large underes-
timation of pion production by the previous version of
the Liège intranuclear-cascade model. Some shortcom-
ing is also observed for the Binary and Bertini code in
reproducing measured double-diﬀerential cross sections
for charged pion production in p+Pb reactions at high
energy (12 GeV/c). On the contrary, the recent version
of the Liège Intranuclear Cascade Model, INCL++, with
multipion extension, reproduce measured cross sections
reasonably well at all energies, except for the presence
of a dip in the momentum distribution at forward an-
gles (predicted also by the Bertini code). The presence
of this dip seems to be related to formation and decay of
the ∆(1232) resonance. However, the scarce data avail-
able do not allow at present to draw a conclusion on this

Figure 12. Excitation function for the average fraction of
outgoing energy in p+208Pb reactions, as calculated with
(INCL++) and without (INCL4.6) multipion extension. The
masses of escaping π± are counted as outgoing energy. Neu-
tral pions and photons are not counted.

production are not aﬀected by the reduced pion multi-
plicity of INCL4.6 (Sec. IV G) can be partly ascribed
to the fact that in this model pions are still produced,
albeit not as abundantly as in INCL++. However, a
more general argument to explain the relative insensi-
tivity of the photon and neutron yields to the details of
the INC model involves a rather peculiar feature of thick
spallation targets, which can actually be inferred from
most thick spallation-target benchmarks [see e.g. 35]. In
thick spallation targets, in fact, it is the structure of the
hadronic cascade that plays a compensatory role.

To better describe the eﬀect, it is also useful to look at
the outgoing energy of a reaction (in this case p+208Pb),
deﬁned as the sum of all the kinetic energies of all the
reaction products, except photons and π0s. For outgoing
π±, their mass is also counted as outgoing energy. The
outgoing energy represents the maximum energy which is
liable to be injected in further nuclear reactions (neglect-
ing photonuclear reactions). Figure 12 shows the ratio
between the outgoing energy and the incident projectile
energy, as a function of the projectile energy, in p+208Pb,
as calculated with INCL4.6 and INCL++. The two mod-
els yield very similar predictions, even at 20 GeV, with
the diﬀerence never exceeding 5% of the incident energy.
This similarity should be contrasted with Fig. 1, which
demonstrates that the events generated by the two mod-
els are radically diﬀerent.

Of course, the insensitivity of the outgoing energy to
the details of the model is partly a trivial consequence
of the fact that energy and momentum are conserved in
both cases. Yet, the curves in Figure 12 have important
consequences for the development of the hadronic cas-
cade in a thick target. For the sake of clarity we assume
here that secondary particles have a mean free path for

05101520protonenergy(GeV)0.600.650.700.750.800.850.900.951.00fractionofoutgoingenergyINCL++INCL4.6eﬀect. Fresh new data in this respect would be highly
desirable, together with measurements of neutral pion
production, which are essentially missing up to date.

The role of pion production in spallation reactions
has been further investigated by performing dedicated
Geant4 simulations of the n_TOF spallation target. As
suggested in Ref. [10], models producing overall more pi-
ons per incident proton also produce fewer neutrons, with
a clear anti-correlation eﬀect. On the contrary, prompt γ-
rays, which are mostly produced by electromagnetic cas-
cade following π0 decay, correlate with the total number
of pions in the hadronic cascade. This observation points
out to a fundamental role of π0 production in determin-
ing both the ﬁnal neutron and γ-ray ﬂuence produced
by a spallation source based on high-energy protons on a
heavy target.

It has been further observed that, contrary to the thin-
target case, the previous INCL version leads to thick-
target neutron and photon productions that are not sen-
sibly diﬀerent from the new version, except for very high-
energy neutrons (above a few GeV). This ﬁnding has
been related to the structure of the whole hadronic cas-
cade that develops in a thick spallation target; the emit-
ted particles are shown to be sensitive only to the total
number of pions produced along the hadronic cascade,
in particular neutral pions. The mitigated dependence
of thick-target yields on the underlying elementary cross
sections is a direct consequence of conservation laws, and
applies only for dimensions of the spallation target sen-

15

sibly larger than the mean free path of secondary parti-
cles, as in the case of the n_TOF target considered in
this work. This is valuable insight about the remarkable
resilience of hadronic cascades and their manifest insen-
sitivity to the details of the underlying physical models.
It remains to discuss to which extent secondary pions
can be held responsible for the diﬀerences in neutron and
photon yields predicted by the diﬀerent Geant4 physics
lists [10]. While our work shows that pion-induced reac-
tions can be relatively important, it should be borne in
mind that other secondary particles are also at play. Sec-
ondary proton-nucleus reactions are seen to be less abun-
dant than pion-nucleus reactions at these energies (see
Fig. 8 and Table I) and are probably better constrained
in the models, due to the wide availability of elemen-
tary experimental data. This is much less the case for
secondary neutron-nucleus reactions, which are sparsely
represented in the elementary benchmarks of spallation
models [e.g. 5–7], despite the fact that they are very com-
mon (Fig. 8 and Table I). We believe that diﬀerences in
the treatment of secondary neutrons and pions can ac-
count for most of the variation among the Geant4 physics
lists.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was partially ﬁnanced by the CHANDA EU

FP7 project (grant agreement 605203).

[1] D. Filges and F. Goldenbaum, Handbook of spallation
research. Theory, experiments and applications (Wiley-
VCH, Berlin, 2009).

[2] H. Aït Abderrahim, P. Baeten, D. D. Bruyn, J. Heyse,
P. Schuurmans, and J. Wagemans, Nucl. Phys. News 20,
24 (2010).

[3] T. Enqvist, W. Wlazło, P. Armbruster, et al., Nucl. Phys.

A 686, 481 (2001).

[4] J.-C. David, A. Boudard, J. Cugnon, S. Ghali, S. Leray,
D. Mancusi, and L. Zanini, Eur. Phys. J. A 49, 29 (2013).
[5] J.-C. David, D. Filges, F. Gallmeier, M. Khandaker,
A. Konobeyev, S. Leray, G. Mank, A. Mengoni,
R. Michel, N. Otuka, and Y. Yariv, in Shielding As-
pects of Accelerators, Targets and Irradiation Facilities
- SATIF 10 Workshop Proceedings (OECD Publishing,
Geneva, Switzerland, 2011) p. 273.

[6] S. Leray, J.-C. David, M. Khandaker, G. Mank, A. Men-
goni, N. Otsuka, D. Filges, F. Gallmeier, A. Konobeyev,
and R. Michel, J. Korean Phys. Soc. 59, 791 (2011).

[7] “IAEA benchmark of

spallation models,” http://

www-nds.iaea.org/spallations.

[8] C. Guerrero, A. Tsinganis, E. Berthoumieux, et al., Eur.

[9] Barbagallo, M., Guerrero, C., Tsinganis, A., et al., Eur.

Phys. J. A 49, 27 (2013).

Phys. J. A 49, 156 (2013).

Phys. J. A 51, 160 (2015).

[10] S. Lo Meo, M. A. Cortés-Giraldo, C. Massimi, et al., Eur.

[11] J. Lerendegui, S. Lo Meo, C. Guerrero, et al., Eur. Phys.

J. A (2016), accepted for publication.

[12] S. Agostinelli et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 506, 250

(2003), oﬃcial web site: http://geant4.cern.ch/.
[13] J. Allison et al., IEEE T. Nucl. Sci. 53, 270 (2006).
[14] A. Boudard, J. Cugnon, S. Leray, and C. Volant, Phys.

Rev. C 66, 044615 (2002).

[15] D. Mancusi, A. Boudard, J. Cugnon, J.-C. David, P. Kai-
taniemi, and S. Leray, Phys. Rev. C 90, 054602 (2014).
[16] J. M. Quesada, V. Ivanchenko, A. Ivanchenko, M. A.
Cortés-Giraldo, G. Folger, A. Howard, and D. Wright,
Prog. Nucl. Sci. Technol. 2, 936 (2011).

[17] J.-J. Gaimard and K.-H. Schmidt, Nucl. Phys. A 531,

709 (1991).

[18] A. Junghans, M. de Jong, H.-G. Clerc, A. Ignatyuk,
G. Kudyaev, and K.-H. Schmidt, Nucl. Phys. A 629,
635 (1998).

[19] A. Kelić, M. V. Ricciardi, and K.-H. Schmidt, in Joint
ICTP-IAEA Advanced Workshop on Model Codes for
Spallation Reactions (IAEA, Trieste, Italy, 2008) p. 181,
report INDC(NDC)-0530.
[20] V. Flaminio, W. G. Moorhead, D. R. O. Morrison, and
N. Rivoire, Compilation of cross-sections I: π+ and π−
induced reactions (CERN, Geneva, 1983).

[21] V. Flaminio, W. G. Moorhead, D. R. O. Morrison,
and N. Rivoire (High-Energy Reactions Analysis Group),
Compilation of cross-sections III: p and ¯p induced reac-
tions (CERN, Geneva, 1984).

[22] S. Pedoux and J. Cugnon, Nucl. Phys. A 866, 16 (2011).

[23] S. Pedoux, Extension of the Liège intranuclear cascade
model to the 2–15 GeV incident energy range, Ph.D. the-
sis, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium (2011).

[24] In the current model, the ﬁnal-state particle momenta
are generated according to a ﬂat, unbiased phase-space
sampling algorithm. Let E be the generated CM energy
of the ﬁrst nucleon; the value of E determines the mini-
mum (tmin) and maximum (tmax) values of the Mandel-
stam four-momentum transfer t. The value of t is then
sampled from a distribution of the form exp (Bt) and all
the generated momenta are rotated to match the sampled
four-momentum transfer for the ﬁrst nucleon. Clearly this
algorithm does not modify the single-particle energy dis-
tributions in the CM system, which are therefore still
given by the phase-space model. On the other hand, the
distributions in the laboratory system are diﬀerent.

[25] G. Folger, V. Ivanchenko, and J. Wellisch, Eur. Phys. J.

[26] D. Wright and M. Kelsey, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 804,

A 21, 407 (2004).

175 (2015).

[27] M. G. Catanesi, E. Radicioni, R. Edgecock, et al. (HARP

16

Collaboration), Phys. Rev. C 77, 055207 (2008).

[28] M. Apollonio, A. Artamonov, A. Bagulya, et al. (HARP

Collaboration), Phys. Rev. C 80, 065207 (2009).

[29] A. Boudard, J. Cugnon, J.-C. David, S. Leray,
and D. Mancusi, Phys. Rev. C 87, 014606 (2013),
arXiv:1210.3498 [nucl-th].

[30] A. Bolshakova, I. Boyko, G. Chelkov, et al., Eur. Phys.

J. C 66, 57 (2010).

[31] J. Apostolakis, G. Folger, V. Grichine, et al., J. Phys.:

Conf. Ser. 160, 012073 (2009).

[32] Except of course for events of speciﬁc classes, involving

small energy losses, like e.g. quasi-elastic scattering.

[33] H. Schneuwly, in Proc. of the 1st Course of the Int. School
of Physics of Exotic Atoms, edited by G. Fiorentini and
G. Torelli (Erice, Italy, 1977).

[34] T. Aoust and J. Cugnon, Phys. Rev. C 74, 064607 (2006).
[35] T. Koi, in Proceedings of the Twelfth Workshop on Shield-
ing Aspects of Accelerators, Targets and Irradiation Fa-
cilities — SATIF 12 (Nuclear Energy Agency, Batavia,
IL, U.S.A., 2014) pp. 269–275.

