Allosteric control in icosahedral capsid assembly

Guillermo R. Lazaro and Michael F. Hagan∗

Martin Fisher School of Physics, Brandeis University, Waltham, MA, 02454

(Dated: March 18, 2016)

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
7
1

 
 
]

.

C
S
o
i
b
-
q
[
 
 

1
v
7
9
4
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

During the lifecycle of a virus, viral proteins and other components self-assemble to form a symmetric protein
shell called a capsid. This assembly process is subject to multiple competing constraints, including the need to
form a thermostable shell while avoiding kinetic traps. It has been proposed that viral assembly satisﬁes these
constraints through allosteric regulation, including the interconversion of capsid proteins among conformations
with different propensities for assembly. In this article we use computational and theoretical modeling to explore
how such allostery affects the assembly of icosahedral shells. We simulate assembly under a wide range of
protein concentrations, protein binding afﬁnities, and two different mechanisms of allosteric control. We ﬁnd
that, above a threshold strength of allosteric control, assembly becomes robust over a broad range of subunit
binding afﬁnities and concentrations, allowing the formation of highly thermostable capsids. Our results suggest
that allostery can signiﬁcantly shift the range of protein binding afﬁnities that lead to successful assembly, and
thus should be accounted for in models that are used to estimate interaction parameters from experimental data.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The assembly of a virus outer protein shell (capsid) requires
a delicate balance among thermodynamic and kinetic con-
straints. The proteins must assemble quickly to evade proteol-
ysis and detection by the host, and their capsid must be sufﬁ-
ciently thermostable to survive intact under potentially harsh
conditions while searching for a new infection target. Yet,
self-assembly of ordered structures usually requires weak, re-
versible interactions among the components, since strong in-
teractions lead to kinetic traps [1–3]. Many viruses must also
control the time and place of assembly, so that the capsid can
select speciﬁc components from amidst a crowded cellular en-
vironment. A number of strategies have been proposed by
which viruses control their assembly process to ensure pro-
ductive and timely capsid formation (e.g. [4–8]). One such
strategy is allosteric regulation [8, 9], in which capsid pro-
teins sample an ensemble of conformational states with dif-
ferent propensities for assembly, with the relative populations
of different states inﬂuenced by binding of proteins or other
molecules. In this article, we theoretically and computation-
ally examine how allostery at the level of protein-protein in-
teractions can lead to self-regulation of assembly kinetics.

Learning mechanistic information such as allosteric regula-
tion from experiments alone is challenging because most as-
sembly intermediates are transient, and thus not readily ob-
served. For example, a wealth of information has been ob-
tained from in vitro experiments in which capsid assembly ki-
netics are monitored by size exclusion chromatography (SEC)
or x-ray or light scattering (e.g.)
[10–17]. However, since
intermediates are usually undetectable, these bulk techniques
primarily report on the concentrations of assembled capsids
and unassembled subunits. Recently, techniques which mon-
itor individual capsids or can detect transient intermediates
have begun to address this limitation [18–27]. However, even
these techniques provide structural data at limited resolution
and cannot characterize the full ensemble of intermediates.

∗ hagan@brandeis.edu

Therefore, theoretical models are needed to obtain a com-
plete understanding of capsid assembly from such experimen-
tal data.

Theoretical models have already played an important role
in relating experimental data to assembly pathways and the
driving forces that control them. For example, binding afﬁni-
ties have been estimated by ﬁtting the ratio of assembled cap-
sids to unassembled subunits measured at long times to the
equilibrium law of mass action [28, 29]. Assembly kinetics
have been analyzed using models in which capsid formation
is viewed as the assembly of rigid subunits (lacking internal
degrees of freedom) into polyhedral shells. These models can
be formulated as a master equation and solved numerically
(e.g.
[11, 30–32]) or analyzed by stochastically generating
trajectories consistent with the master equation (e.g. [33–39]).
Despite simpliﬁcations used to make these methods tractable,
they capture many features of experimental assembly kinetics.
Fitting their results against light scattering data has enabled
estimates of physical parameters such as subunit-subunit bind-
ing afﬁnities and rate constants [11, 14, 40–42]. These re-
sults suggest that capsid subunit-subunit binding afﬁnities are
generically weak, on the order of 4 kcal/mol [3, 28]. When
binding afﬁnities exceed this limit, assembly is limited by ki-
netic traps, in which the formation of long-lived disordered or
partially assembled structures inhibit capsid formation.

Despite these important insights, current models do not
capture all aspects of experimental data. Typically, mod-
els cannot quantitatively reproduce kinetics at all timescales
across a range of concentrations [40]. Similarly, capsid disas-
sembly exhibits a surprising degree of hysteresis considering
the measured weakness of subunit binding afﬁnities [43, 44].
For example, assembled capsids are highly stable in inﬁnite
dilution; e.g. hepatitis B virus (HBV) capsids exhibit virtu-
ally no subunit dissociation even on a timescale of months
[45]. While this observation could be accounted for by a post-
assembly maturation process that increases capsid stability, as
yet there is no evidence for this in HBV.

One feature which has not yet been incorporated in most as-
sembly models is that capsid proteins sample multiple confor-
mational states, with different propensities for assembly. For
example, structural studies on HBV [9], brome mosaic virus

(BMV) and HIV [46] ﬁnd that their capsid proteins adopt
conformations in solution that are incompatible with insertion
into a capsid, suggesting that the proteins primary conforma-
tion in solution is inactive for assembly (assembly-inactive),
and that capsid formation requires a transition to an assembly-
active conformation. These observations have led to the hy-
pothesis that assembly of icosahedral viruses may be subject
to allosteric regulation [9, 28, 40, 46–49].

It has long been appreciated that protein conformational
switching can play a key role in the kinetics of assembling
ﬁlamentous structures. Asakura [50] showed that the elon-
gation rate of the bacterial ﬂagellum is limited by the rate of
ﬂagellin monomer undergoing a conformational transition to
its bound form. From this observation, he deduced that in-
teraction with the ﬂagellum triggers the conformational tran-
sition in the monomer by an ‘induced ﬁt’. Similar observa-
tions were made for other ﬁlamentous assemblies, including
the bacteriophage T4 tail [51] and tobacco mosaic virus [52–
55]. Caspar coined the term ‘autostery’ [8, 56] to describe
such an induced ﬁt process, in which a protein that exists
in an assembly-inactive conformation in solution is driven to
switch to an assembly-active conformation by interacting with
other copies of itself within an assemblage. By controlling
the rate of nucleation in comparison to elongation, autostery
could provide mechanism for self-regulation of assembly.

The role of an assembly-active/inactive transition in the as-
sembly kinetics of icosahedral viruses has received less atten-
tion; more work has focused on the roles of conformational
switching in overcoming the geometrical constraints imposed
by an icosahedral geometry [57–60] and structural polymor-
phism [19, 61–64]. Although Packianathan et al.
[9] was
primarily an experimental study, they also used a rate equa-
tion approach to compare the behaviors of assembly with no
allosteric regulation, with induced ﬁt (autostery), or allostery
without induced ﬁt. They concluded that the induced ﬁt mech-
anism leads to productive assembly and could increase hys-
teresis associated with disassembly, but that allostery without
induced ﬁt did not lead to productive assembly, because such
strong subunit afﬁnities were required that kinetic trapping re-
sulted.

In this article we perform a more extensive theoretical and
computational investigation of the effects of allostery on as-
sembly kinetics and their sensitivity to kinetic trapping.
In
contrast to Ref. [9], we ﬁnd that both mechanisms of allosteric
regulation (with or without induced ﬁt) can drive productive
assembly, although induced ﬁt allows for productive assem-
bly over a wider parameter range. Under moderate param-
eter values, allostery does not enhance assembly robustness
— the width of the range of subunit concentrations or bind-
ing afﬁnities leading to productive assembly is not increased.
However, under sufﬁciently strong allosteric control (mean-
ing that the population of unassembled subunits is strongly
shifted toward the assembly-inactive conformation), high as-
sembly yields are achieved over a broad range of parameters,
including high binding afﬁnities. Our results highlight the im-
portance of accounting for allostery in models used to estimate
parameters from experimental data.

This paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we

2

incorporate allostery into a computational model and a mas-
ter equation description of assembly.
In section III we de-
velop scaling estimates for the effects of allostery on assembly
timescales and assembly robustness. Then, in section IV we
test these scaling estimates against numerical results from the
computational and master equation models. In section V, we
summarize the key observations, identify potential further ex-
tensions to the models, and discuss implications for estimat-
ing parameters by ﬁtting against experimental data. Finally,
the appendix provides further details about the models.

II. MODELS

A. Allostery models

To represent allostery in our models, unassembled sub-
units interconvert between assembly-inactive and active con-
formations, with equilibrium constant KA = exp(−gA/kBT )
and gA > 0 the unfavorable free energy associated with a
monomer adopting the active state. The case of no allostery
corresponds to the limit KA → ∞. For simplicity, here and
throughout, we focus on the limit where the the active/inactive
interconversion rate is fast relative to assembly timescales. We
discuss effects of a slow conformational interconversion step
in section V.

The two allostery behaviors that we consider throughout the
paper are illustrated by the schematics in Fig. 1. In the ﬁrst,
there is allostery but no induced ﬁt, meaning that only subunits
in the active conformation can associate with any size interme-
diate. In the second, subunits in the inactive conformation can
associate with intermediates equal to or larger than a nucleus
comprising nnuc subunits. For notational consistency, we refer
to these cases respectively as ‘No Induced Fit’ and ‘Induced
Fit’, and the case without allostery (all subunits are active) as
‘No Allostery’.

Structural evidence suggests that the active-inactive transi-
tion in the HBV protein is closely linked to formation of a
stable critical nucleus [9]. The latter is associated with the
geometry of an icosahedral shell. Since smaller intermediates
have fewer interactions per subunit than large ones, stability
increases with intermediate size. The critical nucleus refers to
the smallest intermediate (or ensemble of intermediates) from
which assembly into a complete capsid is more probable than
complete dissociation. In vitro experiments on several viruses
have determined critical nucleus sizes corresponding to small
polygons (e.g. a pentamer or trimer of dimers) [2]. Similarly,
in the computational model described below we ﬁnd that un-
der certain conditions the critical nucleus corresponds to the
smallest polygon that can form (a pentagon, Fig. 2C). There-
fore, we consider the critical nucleus as the minimum seed
capable of driving a conformation change. I.e., inactive sub-
units can bind to an intermediate at or above the critical nu-
cleus size, but only active subunits can associate to pre-critical
intermediates (Fig. 1).

We now describe the two modeling approaches we use to

study the effects of allostery on assembly.

3

FIG. 1. The two mechanisms of allostery that we consider in this article. The irreducible assembly unit (a protein dimer in this schematic) inter-
converts between assembly-inactive and assembly-active conformations, with equilibrium constant KA. In both mechanisms, only assembly-
active subunits can combine to form intermediates smaller than a critical nucleus. In the ‘Induced Fit’ mechanism, both assembly-active and
assembly-inactive subunits can bind to larger intermediates, whereas in the ‘No Induced Fit’ mechanism, only assembly-active subunits can
bind throughout the assembly process.

B. Computational model

FIG. 2. Computational model geometry. (A) Geometry of two at-
tracting subunits with the bond vectors depicted as arrows and at-
tractors colored teal. The angle between each of the subunit bond
vectors is 108o, and the interactions are described in the Appendix
ij is not shown. (B) The complete
(Eqs. (B1)). The dihedral angle φb
capsid, which contains 20 subunits arranged with icosahedral sym-
metry. (C) Critical nucleus for binding of assembly-inactive subunits
in the ‘Induced Fit’ model.

We consider a model for the assembly of icosahedral shells
used in Ref. [65], in which subunits are modeled as rigid bod-
ies, with excluded volume interactions represented by spher-
ically symmetric repulsive forces, and the complementary
subunit-subunit interactions that drive assembly represented
by directional attractions. The lowest energy states in the
model correspond to ‘capsids’, which consist of N = 20 sub-
units (each of which could represent a protein trimer) in a shell
with icosahedral symmetry. Because the spatial positions and
orientations of all subunits are explicitly tracked, there are no

assumptions about assembly pathways or the structures that
emerge from assembly.

Following the approach developed by Schwartz et al. [59],
the subunit excluded volume is spherically symmetric and
three attractive patches (bond vectors) are rigidly ﬁxed to
the subunit, with each pair of bond vectors forming an an-
gle of 108◦ (see Fig. 2 and Eq. (B1)). There is a favor-
able interaction between subunits when (1) the ends of bond
vectors nearly overlap, (2) the bond vectors are nearly anti-
parallel, and (3) the secondary bond vectors are nearly copla-
nar. Twenty subunits realizing these conditions results in the
minimum energy target structure (a complete capsid) shown
in Fig. 2. The interaction strength is tuned by the parameter
b.

We use models corresponding to each of the three confor-
mation situations discussed above. For ‘No Allostery’, all
pairs of subunits meeting the interaction criteria listed above
experience attractive interactions. For ‘No Induced Fit’, sub-
units stochastically switch between inactive and active confor-
mations. Only pairs of active subunits satisfying the binding
criteria experience attractive interactions. For ‘Induced Fit’,
we deﬁne the threshold for autostery activity to be the for-
mation of at least one polygon (any closed cycle of subunit-
subunit interactions, such as a pentamer). Thus, in this case
interactions are possible for any pair of active subunits, and
also between inactive subunits and subunits within a partial
capsid which has at least one complete polygon. Full details
of the model are given in appendix B.

Simulation parameters. The parameters of the model are
the energy associated with the attractive potential, b, and the

Assembly subunitInduced FitKAInactiveActive25Critical nucleusElongationNucleation25...No Induced Fit...(A)(B)(C)speciﬁcity of the directional attractions, which is controlled
by the angular parameters θc and φc. Subunit positions and
orientations are propagated using overdamped Brownian dy-
namics according to a second order predictor-corrector algo-
rithm [66, 67], with the unit of time t0 = σ2/D, where D
is the subunit diffusion coefﬁcient and σ is the subunit diam-
eter. We simulated systems with 500 subunits in a periodic
box with side length 17, where all distances are measured
in units of the subunit diameter σ. For each parameter set,
results were averaged over 20 or more independent simula-
tions. The orientational speciﬁty parameters were θc = 0.5
and φc = π. These parameters tend to disfavor the forma-
tion of incorrect subunit-subunit interaction geometries and
thus inhibit formation of malformed capsids, allowing us to
study the high afﬁnity limit. However, such conﬁgurations do
arise at higher binding energies as discussed below. To obtain
dimensionless units, we rescale energies by kBT and times
by t0. The subunit conformational switching rate was 2.5/t0.
Simulations were initialized by generating random positions
and orientations for subunits, with subunit positions that led
to subunit-subunit overlap (positive potential energies in ex-
cess of 1 kBT ) rejected.

C. Master equation model for capsid assembly

We also consider a master equation description of poly-
hedral shell assembly, which is sufﬁciently computationally
tractable to allow modeling assembly over broad parameter
ranges. Speciﬁcally, we extend the ‘nucleation and growth’
model described in Ref.[68] to include multiple subunit con-
formations. This model was based on the work of Zlotnick
and coworkers [11, 30, 31], and consists of a system of cou-
pled rate equations that describe the time evolution of concen-
trations of empty capsid intermediates:

N(cid:88)

dc1
dt

dcn
dt

= −k1c2

1 + 2¯k2c2 +

−kncnc1 + ¯kncn

n=2

= kn−1c1cn−1 − knc1cn

−¯kncn + ¯kn+1cn+1

n = 2 . . . N

(1)

where cn is the concentration of intermediates with n sub-
units, and kn and ¯kn are respectively association and dissoci-
ation rate constants for intermediate n. The initial condition
is c1(0) = c0, cn(0) = 0 for n > 1. The extensions of Eq. (1)
to describe allostery are given in Appendix A.

There are several important assumptions underlying the
master equation: malformed capsids are not considered [59,
61–63, 69–72], assembly proceeds along a single pathway
[33, 39, 73], only single subunits can bind or unbind, and only
one kn and ¯kn are considered for each size n (averaged over
all intermediates of that size). However, these assumptions
are not present in the BD simulations described above, and
we ﬁnd qualitative agreement between the two approaches.
Moreover, Ref. [68] showed that extending Eqs. (1) to relax
these simpliﬁcations does not qualitatively change their pre-
dictions. Most importantly, rate equations of this form capture

4

many features of experimental assembly kinetics data (e.g.
[11, 74]).

The association and dissociation rate constants are re-
lated by detailed balance ¯kn = kn exp(∆gn/kBT )/v0, with
∆gn = Gn − Gn−1 the change in free energy due to asso-
ciation of a subunit. Association free energies ∆gn, which
can be ﬁt to experimental data using the law of mass ac-
tion [28, 75, 76], include hydrophobic and electrostatic inter-
actions [77] and depend on pH and salt concentration [28].
Specifying the assembly model requires deﬁning the set of in-
termediates n and the transition rates {kn, ¯kn}.

The model we use here is based on those of Zlotnick and
coworkers [11, 30, 31], in which the subunit-subunit associa-
tion free energy for intermediate n is proportional to the num-
ber of new subunit-subunit contacts nc,n formed by addition
of a subunit to that intermediate [78]. Specifying {∆gn} thus
requires deﬁning the geometry of each intermediate. This usu-
ally begins with specifying the geometry of a capsid and its
subunits in terms of a polyhedron (for example, see Fig. 6 in
the SI or Fig. 1 in Ref. [31]), and assuming that assembly pro-
ceeds along a single path. The path can be comprised of the
lowest energy intermediate for each size n [30] or correspond
to an ‘average’ pathway [31] in which all subunits, except dur-
ing the initial and ﬁnal stages of assembly, make the same
average number of contacts. We choose the latter deﬁnition,
since it is simpler and both deﬁnitions lead to a qualitatively
similar behavior. Speciﬁcally, the association rate constant k
is independent of intermediate size and association free ener-
gies are given by ∆gn = gnuc before nucleation (n < nnuc)
and ∆gn = gelong during elongation (nnuc ≤ n < N − 1),
where nnuc is the critical nucleus size. Finally, inserting the
last subunit makes the maximum number of possible contacts
and thus enjoys the most favorable association free energy gN.
Because this model was previously explored extensively in
the absence of conformation changes [68], we focus on one
set of interaction parameters (except where noted otherwise):
capsid size N = 120 corresponding to 120 dimer subunits in
hepatitis B virus [28], critical nucleus size nnuc = 5 (a pen-
tamer of dimers), association rate constant k = 105 M−1s−1
[74], and free energy parameters gnuc = 7kBT (≈ 4 kcal/mol)
[28], gelong = 2gnuc and gN = 2gelong, which imply that adding
a subunit becomes on average twice as favorable after nucle-
ation and four times as favorable for the ﬁnal subunit.

III. SCALING ESTIMATES FOR THE EFFECT OF

ALLOSTERY ON ASSEMBLY TIMESCALES

To gain an intuitive understanding of how allostery can af-
fect assembly, in this section we derive simple scaling esti-
mates for the timescales associated with the two assembly
mechanisms shown in Fig. 1, based on the master equation
model (section II C). Although we introduce a number of sim-
pliﬁcations, in the next section we show that the resulting scal-
ing estimates apply at least qualitatively when these simpliﬁ-
cations are relaxed in the computational and theoretical mod-
els. We closely follow Ref. [68], except that we extend the
analysis to include allostery.

We consider a system of capsid protein subunits with to-
tal concentration c0 that assemble into capsids with N sub-
units. The word subunit refers to the basic assembly unit,
which could be a protein dimer or larger oligomer [2]. As
in section II C, we break the assembly of a capsid into ‘nucle-
ation’ and ‘elongation’ phases. For simplicity we assume that
the association rate constant k is independent of intermediate
size, so that for the ‘No Allostery’ reaction rates of associ-
ation to each intermediate are kc1 with c1 the concentration
of free subunits. We assume the limit of fast conformational
interconversion, so for the ‘No Induced Fit’ case, association
rates are given by kfAc1 with fA = KA/ (1 + KA). For ‘In-
duced Fit’, association rates are kfAc1 for intermediate size
n < nnuc and kc1 for n ≥ nnuc.

We now write the time required for an individual capsid to
assemble as τ = τnuc + τelong with τnuc and τelong the average
times for nucleation and growth, respectively. The elongation
timescale can be estimated by the mean ﬁrst passage time for
a biased random walk with a reﬂecting boundary conditions
at nnuc and absorbing boundary conditions at N, with forward
and reverse hopping rates given by the subunit association and
dissociation rates respectively [68]. For early in the reaction,
when c1 ≈ c0, this results in

τelong ∼= N/kc0f mA

A

(2)

where mA = 1 for ‘No Induced Fit’ and mA = 0 for ‘Induced
Fit’. We see that the elongation time is equal for ‘No Al-
lostery’ and ‘Induced Fit’ since in the latter case all subunits
can bind to post-nucleated intermediates. Ref. [68] showed
that the duration of the lag phase in light scattering is propor-
tional to τelong, thus predicting that the lag time should scale
inversely with subunit concentration. This prediction was re-
cently conﬁrmed by experiments on HBV assembly [79].

−nnuc
0

f

nuc ≈ k−1 exp (Gˆn/kBT ) c

The mean nucleation time at the beginning of the reaction
can be estimated from the statistics of a random walk biased
Including conformation dynam-
toward disassembly [68].
ics results in τ min
, where
ˆn = nnuc − 1 so that Gˆn is the interaction free energy of the
structure just below the critical nucleus. This estimate can be
understood by noting that the pre-critical nucleus is present
A , and the rate of ac-
with concentration cˆn
tive subunits associating to the precritical nucleus is given by
kc0fA.

∼= exp(Gˆn)cˆn

−nnuc
A

However, because free subunits are depleted by assembly,
the nucleation rate never reaches this value, and net nucle-
ation asymptotically approaches zero as the concentration of
completed capsids approaches its equilibrium value. Thus, we
estimate the the median assembly time τ1/2 (the time at which
the reaction is 50% complete) by treating the system as a two-
state reaction with nnuc-th order kinetics, which yields [68]

0 f ˆn

τ1/2 ∼=

A1/2PN

N k

exp (Gˆn/kBT ) c−ˆn

0 f−ˆn−1

A

(3)

with A1/2 = 2 ˆn−1
ˆn , and PN is the equilibrium fraction of sub-
units in complete capsids. The factor of N−1 in Eq. 3 ac-
counts for the fact that N subunits are depleted by each as-
sembled capsid.

5

When capsid growth is fast compared to nucleation, the ex-
pressions Eq. 2 and Eq. 3 respectively predict the duration of
the lag phase and the median assembly time. However, these
relations begin to fail as intermediate concentrations build up
above a crossover concentration cc at which the initial elonga-
tion and nucleation times are equal

cc ∼= N− 2

ˆn e

G ˆn
ˆnkBT f

− ˆn−mA+1
A

ˆn

(4)

Signiﬁcant kinetic trapping then sets in above a threshold con-
centration set by τelong = τ1/2:

ckt ∼=(cid:0)A1/2N−2(cid:1) 1

ˆn−1 e

G ˆn

(ˆn−1)kB T f

− ˆn−mA+1
A

ˆn−1

.

(5)

While the above analysis identiﬁes a maximum concentra-
tion above which the reaction will become kinetically trapped,
we can also identify a minimum concentration below which
the median assembly time becomes longer than the maximum
timescale of the experiment or simulation τmax

cmin ∼=(cid:0)A1/2/τmaxN k(cid:1)− 1

ˆn eβG ˆn/ˆnf

− ˆn+1
A

ˆn

(6)

which applies to both ‘No Induced Fit’ and ‘Induced Fit’.

A similar analysis can be performed for ﬁxed subunit con-
centration and varying gb, corresponding to changing pH or
salt concentration. For example, if we assume that pre-critical
intermediates with ˆn subunits have ˆn − 1 subunit-subunit in-
teractions (Fig. 1), the minimum afﬁnity for assembly in ﬁnite
time τmax is shifted according to

geff
b = gb +

ˆn + 1
ˆn − 1

log fA.

(7)

A. The inﬂuence of conformation dynamics on assembly

robustness

Based on the above scaling estimates, we now examine
whether introducing allostery makes assembly more robust —
i.e., at a ﬁnite timescale τmax relevant to an experiment or a
cell, does allostery increase the range of concentrations over
which productive assembly occurs? Speciﬁcally, we assume
that kinetic trapping precludes productive assembly within
τmax, and consider the ratio between the minimum concentra-
tion leading to signiﬁcant nucleation, and the maximum con-
centration leading to kinetic trapping, δc = ckt/cmin. Since
nucleation with allostery must occur within τmax, we increase
the binding afﬁnity according to Eq. (7), resulting in

δc ∼= exp(βgeff

mA
ˆn−1
b /ˆn)f
A

.

(8)

Since mA = 0 for ‘Induced Fit’, allostery with induced ﬁt has
no effect on the range of concentrations over which assembly
occurs (for moderate interaction strengths), while in the ab-
sence of induced ﬁt, allostery renders assembly kinetics more
sensitive to concentration (since fA < 1). However, either
allostery mechanism can signiﬁcantly increase the maximum
thermostability of a capsid that can be achieved without ki-
netic trapping. For a ﬁxed concentration c0, equating Eqs. (2)

and (3) shows that the minimum binding free energy gkt
b be-
low which kinetic trapping occurs is decreased (higher bind-
ing afﬁnity) according to

gkt
b = gkt

b (fA = 1) +

ˆn + 1 − mA

ˆn − 1

log fA.

(9)

The maximum kinetically accessible thermostability of a
complete capsid is then controlled by the free energy per sub-
unit, gsub = nB/2gkt
b with nB the number of contacts each
subunit makes with its neighbors. For the case we consider
below with nnuc = 5 and nB = 4, gsub increases by a fac-
tor nBmc/gA/2 ≈ 3.33gA. Thus, even a modest activation
energy could substantially increase the caspid stability. This
effect, together with the asymptotic approach to equilibrium
an assembly reaction discussed below, could contribute to ob-
servations of unexpectedly large hysteresis between capsid as-
sembly and disassembly.

Strong allostery drives robust assembly in the high-
afﬁnity limit. While the above analysis shows that allostery
does not lead to more robust assembly for moderate inter-
action strengths, we observe dramatically different behavior
with strong interactions, gb (cid:29) kBT . It is well-known that un-
regulated assembly fails due to kinetic trapping in this limit.
Since subunit-subunit interactions are effectively irreversible,
the effective critical nucleus size is reduced to a dimer regard-
less of the capsid geometry, and elongation becomes slower
than nucleation for any feasible parameters. However, equat-
ing Eqs. (2) and (3) shows that this trap can be avoided by a
sufﬁciently high gA. We expect trapping to be avoided when
the parameter ptrap (cid:46) 1, with

ptrap ∼=f 2−mA

A

N 2.

(10)

This result holds independent of subunit concentration and
capsid geometry, provided the capsid terminates at a ﬁnite size
and the subunit-subunit afﬁnity is strong enough to stabilize
the capsid. It is important to note that assembly would be sen-
sitive to formation of defective capsids in this limit, which we
neglect in this scaling analysis. However, as shown below we
do observe this limit in Brownian dynamics simulations where
defective assembly is allowed.

IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS

A. Effect of allostery on assembly robustness

In this section, we test the scaling predictions against results
from the Brownian dynamics (BD) simulations and master
equation model. For the BD simulations, we focus on quan-
tities involving variation of the subunit binding energy pa-
rameter b, as varying this parameter is more computationally
tractable than varying subunit concentrations over the range
needed to test scaling. Speciﬁcally, we test how the assem-
bly yield and median assembly time depend on b and gA, and
we test the prediction that a sufﬁciently large value of gA en-
ables assembly even in the limit of high subunit-subunit bind-
ing afﬁnity. The latter test is particularly important since the

6

BD simulations allow for the formation of defective capsids.
We then vary concentration using the master equation model.
We begin by examining the time dependence of the frac-
tion of subunits in complete capsids (PN) as the binding en-
ergy is varied. A capsid is deﬁned as a structure containing
20 subunits, each with strong interactions with three neigh-
bors. This deﬁnition counts only conﬁgurations which cor-
respond to small ﬂuctuations around the icosahedral ground
state. We note that experimental measurements of assem-
bly kinetics commonly employ SEC, which monitors PN, or
light scattering, which under certain conditions monitors the
mass-averaged molecular weight of assemblies [11]. Ref. [68]
showed that PN and assembly molecular weight closely track
each other below the crossover concentration cc (Eq. (4)), and
quantities such as the lag phase and nucleation time follow
the same scaling laws when calculated from either observable.
Therefore, here we present only PN.

(cid:80)N−1

Fig. 3A shows PN as a function of time for several values
of b with the ‘No Allostery’ model. We see that initially as b
increases the lag phase shortens, PN rises in time more rapidly,
and asymptotes at a higher value. However, at the highest
b shown, b = 30, the fraction capsid quickly saturates at
a low value, indicative of kinetic trapping. To illustrate this
point, Fig. 3B shows PN(t) for two values of b, overlaid with
a plot of the fraction of subunits in intermediates, Pint(t) =
n=2 ncn(t)/c0. We see that for b = 14 the intermediates
peak near the end of the lag phase, and then rapidly fall as
capsids are produced.
In contrast, for b = 30, nearly all
subunits are trapped in intermediates. Thus capsids are only
slowly produced when larger intermediates scavenge subunits
from smaller ones. Since we ﬁnd that it correlates well with
other measures of kinetic trapping, we use Pint to characterize
trapping as a function of parameter values.

For comparison, Figs. 3C,D show the time-dependence of
PN and Pint calculated from the master equation with varying
subunit concentration [80]. We see that the kinetics and the
relationship between Pint and the onset of kinetic trapping are
consistent with the BD results.

Next, we consider how assembly robustness changes when
allostery is introduced. Fig. 4A shows PN measured at long
but ﬁnite times as a function of b for the three conformation
cases with gA = 4. We see that in both cases, the introduction
of allostery shifts the onset of assembly to dramatically higher
binding afﬁnity. More signiﬁcantly, assembly stays remark-
ably productive up to extremely high values of b for both al-
lostery mechanisms. This observation corresponds to the high
afﬁnity limit discussed in section III. Analysis of simulation
trajectories shows that the eventual decline in PN at high b
arises due to the formation of defective capsids.

To show how assembly robustness depends on the strength
of allostery, we compare PN calculated for the ‘No Allostery’
with ‘Induced Fit’ at two values of gA Fig. 4B. To aid in com-
paring these cases, we have shifted the binding energies as
suggested in Eq. (7): eff
ˆn−1 log fA, so that the on-
set of productive assembly occurs roughly at the same value
of eff
for each case. We note that the curves do not line up
b
perfectly because this mapping is only approximate, since the
free energy includes binding entropy factors whose magnitude

b = b − ˆn+1

7

FIG. 3. The dependence of assembly kinetics on parameter values for ‘No Allostery’. (A) The fraction of subunits in complete capsids PN
observed in Brownian dynamic simulations (BD) is shown as a function of time for indicated values of the binding energy parameter b. (B)
The fraction capsid (solid lines) is compared to the fraction of subunits in intermediates Pint (dashed lines) for small and large values of b.
For (A) and (B), each simulation is run until 1.5 × 107t0, and each data point corresponds to an average over 20 independent simulations. (C)
The fraction capsid as a function of time measured for the master equation is shown at indicated total subunit concentrations c0, with binding
afﬁnity gb = −7 (all energies are in units of kBT ). (D) The fraction capsid is compared to the intermediate fraction for the master equation,
for concentrations below and above the trapping point ckt = 60µM (Eq. 5).

depend logarithmically on b and the degeneracy of available
binding sites on a given structure [69, 78, 81, 82]. We see that
the smaller activation energy gA = 2 leads to assembly over
approximately the same range of eff
b as for the ‘No Allostery’
case, supporting our earlier conclusion that, below the high
afﬁnity limit, allostery does not signiﬁcantly increase assem-
bly robustness.

To further understand the onset of the high afﬁnity limit and
robust assembly, we examine the dependence of kinetic trap-
ping on parameter values. First, to support the earlier state-
ment that Pint is a good metric for the extent of kinetic trap-
ping, Fig. 5 compares PN and the intermediate fraction Pint
measured at long times for ‘No Allostery’; we see that a rise
in Pint correlates with the decline in PN.

Next we focus on high binding afﬁnity, b = 30, and show
Pint in Fig. 6A for different values of gA, plotted against the
trapping parameter ptrap (Eq. (10)). We see that for ‘No In-
duced Fit’ the onset of trapping occurs when ptrap is of order
one as expected, but trapping for ‘Induced Fit’ is shifted to
lower values of ptrap. Analysis of simulation trajectories sug-
gests that this difference arises due to the formation of mal-
formed capsids, which are are more prevalent in the ‘Induced
Fit’ trajectories. We can understand this observation by not-
ing that the probability of a defective capsid increases with
the rate of subunit addition, which is larger for ‘Induced Fit’
(since inactive subunits can bind to growing capsids, and be-
cause a given value of ptrap corresponds to higher fA for ‘In-
duced Fit’ in comparison to ‘No Induced Fit’). As further ev-

idence for the importance of defective capsids, Fig. 6B shows
the equivalent plot from the rate equation model, which does
not allow for malformed capsids.
In that case, we see that
datasets from both allostery mechanisms fall approximately
on the same curve. We have also tested the predicted scaling
against capsid size N in that ﬁgure by including results from
rate equation calculations with N varying from 20 to 240.

Finally, we consider the effect of allostery on assembly
timescales. Fig. 7A shows τ1/2 (deﬁned by PN(τ1/2) = 1/2)
calculated from the master equation as a function of initial
subunit concentration for each conformation case, with mod-
est interaction parameter values (gb = −7, gA = 2). This
plot allows testing of several scaling predictions. Firstly, we
see that both in the presence and absence of allostery, the me-
dian assembly time at low concentrations scales as cnnuc−1
as
predicted by Eq. (3). As expected, median times are equal
for ‘No Induced Fit’ and ‘Induced Fit’ at low concentrations
where the reaction is nucleation-limited, since the autostery
does not affect nucleation in our model. Secondly, the dashed
vertical lines show the point of kinetic trapping ckt predicted
by Eq. (5) for each case. We see that the median assembly
time takes off above these threshold concentrations, indicat-
ing the presence of trapping.

0

Notice that even a modest conformation energy gA = 2
shifts the region of productive assembly to unrealistically high
subunit concentrations, due to the scaling of nucleation times
with fA. However, this effect can be counteracted by increas-
ing the subunit binding afﬁnity. To illustrate this point, and to

t/106t001234PN00.20.40.60.81(A)b=16b=14b=30t/106t001234PN, Pint00.20.40.60.81b=30b=14(B) 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 0 100 200 300 400 500 600PNt [sec]100 μM20 μM40 μM60 μM(C) 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 0 100 200 300 400 500 600PN, Pintt [sec](D)100 μM40 μM8

FIG. 4. (top) Capsid fraction PN as a function of the binding energy
parameter b in Brownian dynamics (BD) simulations for the three
conformation cases, with gA = 4kBT . (bottom) The capsid fraction
is shown as a function of the shifted binding energy eff
(Eq. 7) for
b
‘No Allostery’ and ‘Induced Fit’ with two activation energy values.
For both panels, other parameters are as in Fig. 3.

FIG. 6. (top) Kinetic trapping in BD simulations. The magnitude
of trapping Pint measured in BD simulations is shown in the limit of
very high subunit binding strength (b = 40). Results are shown as a
function of the high afﬁnity trapping parameter ptrap = f m
A N 2, with
m = 1 or 2 respectively for the ‘No Induced Fit’ and ‘Induced Fit’
cases (see Eq. (10)) and N = 20. The parameter fA was tuned by
varying gA/kBT from 1 to 6. Other parameters are as in Fig. 3. (bot-
tom) Relationship between capsid size and sensitivity to trapping in
the high-afﬁnity limit from the master equation. The magnitude of
trapping Pint calculated for gb = −25 is shown for the three confor-
mation cases and capsid sizes N ∈ [20, 240]. The parameter fA was
tuned by varying gA/kBT from 0 to 10.

by an exponential decrease in τ1/2 with increasing eff
b , roughly
overlaps for the three cases, suggesting that the mapping is ap-
proximately correct. Notice that with allostery, τ1/2 becomes
constant at large eff
b ; this corresponds to the high afﬁnity limit.

FIG. 5. Capsid fraction PN and intermediate fraction Pint as a func-
tion of the binding energy b in Brownian dynamics (BD) simulations
for ‘No Allostery’.

B.

Implications of allostery for parameter estimations from

experimental data

test the predicted effect of conformation speciﬁcity on assem-
bly robustness (Eq. (8)), we also calculated median assembly
times with the binding afﬁnity for the allostery cases increased
according to Eq. (7) (Fig. 7B). As anticipated, the nucleation
times become equal at low concentrations, and the ‘Induced
Fit’ and ‘No Allostery’ cases enjoy the same range of produc-
tive assembly, while the ‘No Induced Fit’ case becomes ki-
netically trapped at a lower concentration due to its increased
elongation time relative to nucleation. To further test the ex-
pected scaling with activation energy, we show the trapping
measure Pint as a function of subunit concentration normal-
ized by ckt for all three cases over a range of gA in Fig. 7C.
We see that in all cases trapping takes off as the threshold
concentration is crossed.

Fig. 8 shows the variation of τ1/2 with the shifted binding
energy for the three allostery cases calculated from BD simu-
lations. We see that the nucleation-dominated regime, marked

In this section we compare assembly kinetics with and with-
out allostery, and consider ramiﬁcations for parameter esti-
mations made using models that do not account for allostery.
Fig. 9 compares the time-dependence of PN at several con-
centrations for the ‘No Allostery’ and ‘Induced Fit’ cases
calculated from the master equation, with the subunit bind-
ing afﬁnity in the ‘Induced Fit’ case adjusted according to
Eq. (7). In particular, with gb = −7 for ‘No Allostery’, we
obtain gb = −10.54 for ‘Induced Fit’ with gA = 2. We see
that this relationship, derived to relate assembly kinetics in
the nucleation-dominated regime, leads to assembly kinetics
which also closely match throughout early times.

The most signiﬁcant difference between the kinetics with
and without allostery appears at a very early times. As the
kinetics transition from the lag phase to the rapid production
of capsids, the takeoff is more rapid for the ‘Induced Fit’ case.
A similar observation was made by Chen et al. [14] and shown

/ kBT102030405060PN00.20.40.60.81bInduced FitNo AllosteryNo Induced Fit/kBT1015202530PN00.20.40.60.81beffbNo AllosteryInduced Fit gA=2Induced Fit gA=4b/ kBT102030405060P, Pint00.20.40.60.81NbPintPNfAmN10-610-410-2100Pint00.20.40.60.81Induced FitNo Induced FitpAm N210-210-1100101102Pint00.20.40.60.81NC, N=20NC, N=30NC, N=60NC, N=120NC, N=240NIF, N=20NIF, N=30NIF, N=60NIF, N=120NIF, N=240IF, N=20IF, N=30IF, N=60IF, N=120IF, N=2409

FIG. 8. The median assembly time τ1/2 measured in BD simulations
is shown for the three conformation cases as a function of eff
b , with
gA = 4. Other parameters are as in Fig. 3 except simulations were
run until 2.6 × 107t0.

FIG. 7. The effect of allostery on assembly timescales calculated
(A) The median assembly time τ1/2 is
from the master equation.
shown as a function of initial subunit concentration for the three al-
lostery cases, with the subunit binding afﬁnity gb = −7 and the
activation energy gA = −2. For each case, the vertical dashed line
indicates the point of kinetic trapping ckt calculated by Eq. (5). (B)
The median assembly time is shown as a function of concentration
for the three cases, but with the subunit binding afﬁnity shifted ac-
cording to Eq. (7), gb = −7 for NC and gb = −10.54 for NA and
A, with gA = 2. The vertical lines indicate the predicted location
of ckt for these modiﬁed subunit afﬁnities. (C) The maximum frac-
tion of subunits found in intermediates, Pint, is shown as a function
of initial subunit concentration normalized by the trapping threshold
ckt (Eq. 5), for indicated allostery cases and values of the activation
energy gA.

to be consistent with light scattering from assembling BMV
viruses. This observation can be understood by noting that,
due to the stronger binding afﬁnity in the ‘Induced Fit’ case,
kinetics in the elongation phase are closer to irreversible and
thus the distribution of lag times is more sharply peaked.

Despite its modest impact on the form of kinetics, allostery
can dramatically skew quantitative parameter values estimated
from experimental data. Fig. 9 demonstrates that a ﬁt against
assembly kinetics not accounting for allostery would underes-
timate gb, by an amount proportional to gA (see Eq. (7)). We
emphasize that the shift factor in geff
is independent of subunit
b
concentration. Thus, testing data ﬁts against multiple subunit
concentrations does not necessarily identify the presence of
allostery. A binding afﬁnity underestimated at one subunit

FIG. 9. The time-dependence of assembly is compared between the
‘No Allostery’ (solid lines) and ‘Induced Fit’ (dashed lines) cases for
c0 = 20µM. (A) The fraction capsid is shown for indicated initial
(B) The early time course of assembly is
subunit concentrations.
shown for both cases at c0 = 20µM, showing that ‘Induced Fit’
exhibits a sharper take off at the end of the lag phase in comparison
to ‘No Allostery’.

concentration (due to not accounting for allostery) would be
consistent with data at other subunit concentrations.

A second approach to estimate subunit binding afﬁnities is
to measuring the ratio of capsid to free subunit at very long
times, and ﬁt the results to the equilibrium law of mass ac-
tion [28]. As has been pointed out previously [2, 44, 68],
PN only asymptotically approaches its equilibrium value, and
thus ﬁts assuming equilibrium will tend to underestimate gb.
We ﬁnd that unlooked for allostery can dramatically enhance
underestimation, since the lack of distinguishability seen in
Fig. 9 persists for very long times. In Fig. 10 we show the
fraction capsid PN as a function of subunit concentration pre-

c0[7M]100101102103104/PNeq100105(A)1/2Induced FitNo AllosteryNo Induced Fitc0[7M]100101102103/PNeq100105(B)1/2No AllosteryInduced FitNo Induced Fitc0/ckt10-2100102Pint00.20.40.60.81NANIFgA=0NIFgA=2NIFgA=4NIFgA=6NIFgA=6IFgA=0IFgA=1IFgA=1.5IFgA=2(C)b/ kBT203040501/2/PNeq106107No AllosteryNo Induced FitInduced Fitb 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 0 200 400 600 800 1000PNt [sec]20 μM40 μM60 μM(A)-0.01 0 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0 20 40 60 80 100PNt [sec]Induced FitNo Allostery(B)10

namics simulations at very high b. The prevalence of such
defects, and hence the actual range available for productive
assembly, will depend on the orientational speciﬁcity of the
subunit-subunit interactions [69, 82], which has not yet been
evaluated for speciﬁc capsid proteins.

Given that increasing gA can qualitatively change assem-
bly robustness, it would be of interest to measure the subunit
conformational equilibrium as a function of protein sequence
and solution conditions. All-atom simulations were recently
used to estimate a free energy difference of about 3kBT be-
tween two quasi-equivalent conformations (meaning different
conformations found at positions with different local symme-
try in the capsid) of the MS2 coat protein [84]. However, we
note that the accuracy of such calculations is necessarily lim-
ited by force ﬁeld accuracy and the quality of sampling. The
simulations also found that RNA binding could signiﬁcantly
shifts the populations. While similar calculations are possible
for the active/inactive transition, they will be complicated by
the fact that the inactive ‘conformation’ can be an ensemble
with signiﬁcant structural diversity [9].

Our ﬁndings have several

implications for interpreting
mechanisms and estimating interaction parameters from ex-
perimental data. Firstly, we ﬁnd that the kinetics of an as-
sembly reaction with allostery are quite difﬁcult to distinguish
from those of a reaction with no conformation dependence at
moderate parameters (Fig. 9). One commonly used test for the
quality of a model is to ﬁt interaction parameters to kinetics
at one subunit concentration, and then test their predictions
against kinetics measured at other concentrations. However,
the binding afﬁnity adjustment Eq. (7) used to match param-
eters between the ‘No Allostery’ and ‘Induced Fit’ cases in
Fig. 9 is independent of concentration, and we ﬁnd that the
kinetics match quite closely even into the regime where ki-
netic trapping starts to set in. Thus, a binding afﬁnity under-
estimated at one subunit concentration (due to not account-
ing for allostery) would also appear consistent with data at
other subunit concentrations. While it might be argued that
such a close match arises because of the simplicity of the
rate equation model, parameter estimation from experimen-
tal data generally relies on models with similar levels of ap-
proximations to enable computational tractability. Moreover,
we observe a similar matching of kinetics in the BD simula-
tions. Thus, our results suggest that strong emphasis should
be placed on matching the very early phases of assembly ki-
netics during parameter estimation. The importance of ﬁtting
the lag phase was also suggested by Chen et al. [14], who fur-
thermore demonstrated this phase can be monitored by light
scattering with millisecond resolution. Techniques sensitive
to individual capsids (e.g. [26]) will allow further investiga-
tion of early-time kinetics.

As we note above, by shifting productive assembly to
higher binding afﬁnities, allostery increases the maximum
capsid thermostability that is kinetically accessible. Thus, al-
lostery, in the form of conformational transitions during as-
sembly, may offer an alternative strategy to post-assembly
conformational changes or covalent modiﬁcations used by
some bacteriophages to stabilize their capsids (e.g. [85, 86]).
Finally, there are several effects we did not investigate here

FIG. 10. The difﬁculties of detecting allostery from ﬁnite-time ex-
periments. The fraction of subunits in capsids calculated from the
master equation as a function of total subunit concentration is shown
for 103 and 107 seconds, for ‘No Allostery’ (o symbols) and ‘In-
duced Fit’ ((cid:5) symbols). The equilibrium values of PN are shown for
each case as dashed lines. Parameters are gb = −7 for ‘No Allostery’
and gb = −10.54 and gA = 2 for ‘No Allostery’.

dicted from the master equation with and without allostery,
for the same interaction parameters as in Fig. 9. We see that
the curves overlap perfectly at 1000 seconds, and still nearly
overlap at 107 seconds (about 4 months). By this time, the ‘No
Allostery’ system has nearly reached its equilibrium, and thus
the equilibrium subunit binding afﬁnity estimated from these
results would be reasonably accurate. However, for ‘Induced
Fit’ the binding afﬁnity is underestimated by 3.5kBT . Larger
values of gA lead to more severe underestimation with similar
lack of distinguishability between the two cases.

V. DISCUSSION AND OUTLOOK

It has been well established that the assembly of rigid sub-
units into ordered structures requires weak, reversible inter-
actions, as interactions which are strong in comparison to the
thermal energy lead to kinetic traps [1–3, 69, 72]. Here, we
have used computational and theoretical models to investigate
how this constraint changes when the subunits have internal
degrees of freedom, such as conformational states, allowing
them to change their capacity for interaction during the as-
sembly process.

We ﬁnd that a sufﬁcient bias in the free subunit population
allows toward the inactive conformation productive assem-
bly at very high subunit concentrations or binding afﬁnities.
In particular, allostery differentially regulates the rates of nu-
cleation and elongation, thus suppressing the kinetic trap that
arises when free subunits are depleted before capsid elonga-
tion is completed. To our knowledge, such robust assembly
has not observed in vitro, but this effect could be important
for reactions such as the assembly of the mature HIV cap-
sid which occurs at high concentration within the budded vi-
ral particle [83]. However, this mechanism does not provide
complete protection against kinetic traps that arise due to de-
fective capsid assembly, as we observed in the Brownian dy-

10-210010200.20.40.60.81No AllosteryInduced Fitc0 [μM]t=103 sect=107 secInduced FitequilibriumNo AllosteryequilibriumPNwhich could lead to additional control over assembly. We
have focused on the limit in which subunit conformational
transitions are fast in comparison to assembly timescales.
Our approaches are easily generalized to other conformational
timescales. A preliminary investigation showed that decreas-
ing the conformational transition rate allows higher assembly
yields in the high afﬁnity limit for the ‘Induced Fit’ case (sim-
ilar to the case of bacterial ﬂagella assembly [50]). While we
focus here on allostery at the level of protein-protein inter-
actions, there are many examples in the literature suggesting
that interaction with non-protein components, such as RNA,
lipid membranes, or small molecule assembly effectors can
exert additional allosteric control on protein conformations
(see [6]). Understanding how these multiple regulatory mech-
anisms cooperate to control the time, place, and rate of as-
sembly will lead to a more complete understanding of viral
life cycles, and also may identify new strategies for designing
human-made assembly systems.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the NIH, Award Number
R01GM108021 from the National Institute Of General Med-
ical Sciences and the Brandeis Center for Bioinspired Soft
Materials, an NSF MRSEC, DMR-1420382. Computational
resources were provided by the NSF through XSEDE com-
puting resources and the Brandeis HPCC which is partially
supported by the Brandeis MRSEC.

Appendix A: Rate equation model with conformation changes

Extension of Eqs. (1) to include interconversion of free sub-

units between inactive and active conformations results in

−kncnc1 + ¯kncn

N(cid:88)
(cid:1) cn−1 − (knc1 + k∗
(cid:1) cn+1

n−1c∗

(cid:1) cn +(cid:0)¯kn+1 + ¯k∗

n=2

1

n+1

nc∗

1) cn

1 + ¯k∗

ncn − kAc∗

1 + ¯kAc1

dc1
dt

dcn
dt

dc∗
1
dt

= − k1c2

1 + 2¯k2c2 +

+ kAc1 − ¯kAc1

=(cid:0)kn−1c1 + k∗
−(cid:0)¯kn + ¯k∗
N(cid:88)

for n = 2 . . . N
ncnc∗

−k∗

=

n

n=2

(A1)

(A2)

(A3)

where c∗
1 and c1 are respectively the concentrations of
inactive and active free subunits, kA and ¯kA are the
active/inactive interconversion rate constants related by
kA/¯kA = exp (−gA/kBT ), and k∗
n are the rate con-
stants for association and dissociation of inactive subunits to
nucleated partial capsids. For simplicity, we take the nucleus
size for inactive subunits binding equal to the energetic crit-
ical nucleus size, and the association rate constant for inac-
tive and active subunits to be equal above this size. Speciﬁ-
n = Θ(n − nnuc)fn with Θ(n) the
cally, for ‘Induced Fit’, k∗

n and ¯k∗

11

Heaviside function and fn the association rate constant for
n = 0 ∀n. Al-
active subunits, while for ‘No Induced Fit’, k∗
ternate choices for these quantities do not qualitatively affect
the results. Finally, dissociation rate constants are given by
n exp [(∆gn − gA)/kBT ] /v0, where
detailed balance, ¯k∗
the free energy change upon association of an inactive sub-
unit includes the activation energy gA. The initial condition is
c∗(0) = (1 − fA)c0, c1(0) = fAc0, cn(0) = 0 for n > 1.

n = k∗

Appendix B: Brownian dynamics model details

We use the patchy-sphere model presented in Ref. [65];
our description here closely follows that reference. The min-
imum energy structure is a complete capsid of 20 subunits,
which have a spherical excluded volume with three attractive
patches, or bond vectors, that are separated by 108◦ and rotate
rigidly with the subunit. The attractive interaction between
two complementary bond vectors on respective subunits i and
j is maximized when (1) the distance between the attractors
ij between bond vectors is
ij is minimized, (2) the angle θb
rb
minimized, and (3) the dihedral angle φb
ij calculated from two
secondary bond vectors, which are not involved in the primary
interaction, is minimized. A schematic of the subunit interac-
ij creates an interaction
tions is shown in Fig. 2. Minimizing φb
that resists torsion and enforces angular speciﬁcity commen-
surate with a complete capsid. The potentials are given by Eqs
(B1) [65, 87]

(cid:88)

Uatt(rb

ij)S(θb

ij, φb

ij)

b

U = Urep(Rij) +
Urep(Rij) = L12(Rij, 2
Uatt(rij) = bL12((rij + 2
S(θ, φ) =

1
6 σ, σ)
1
6 σ), 2

1

6 σ, rc)

Θ(θ − θc)Θ(φ − φc)

1
4
(cos(πθ/θc) + 1) (cos(πφ/φc) + 1) (B1)
with Lp a generalized truncated and shifted Lennard-Jones
function:
Lp(x, xc, σ) ≡4

(cid:17)−p −(cid:16) x
(cid:17)−p/2
(cid:17)−p/2(cid:19)
(cid:16) xc
(cid:17)−p

(cid:18)(cid:16) x
−(cid:16) xc

Θ(x − xc) (B2)

+

σ

σ

σ

σ

In Eq. (B1) the index b sums over pairs of complementary
bond vectors, Θ(x) is the Heaviside step function and Rij is
the subunit center-to-center distance.

Conformational dynamics.

In our BD simulations with
conformational dynamics, free subunits stochastically switch
between inactive and active conformations. The only differ-
ence between the two conformations is their interaction part-
ners. For ‘No Induced Fit’, inactive subunits do not expe-
rience attractive interactions with any subunit (but they still
experience the repulsive excluded volume with all types of
subunits), while pairs of active subunits experience the attrac-
tive interactions described above. ‘Induced Fit’ has a simi-
lar matrix of interactions, except that in active subunits ex-
perience attractive interactions with any subunit in a partial

capsid which has at least one completed polygon (meaning a
closed cycle of interactions among subunits). In particular, in-
active subunits experience no attractions with other inactive
subunits, free active subunits, or subunits in partial capsids
with no completed polygon, but do experience attractions to
partial capsids with at least one completed polygon. Pairs

of active subunits experience attractions as described above.
Since we focus on the limit of fast conformational dynamics
(relative to assembly timescales), subunits underwent confor-
mational sampling with frequency 2.5t−1
0 . At this frequency,
the conformation of each free subunit was stochastically set to
inactive or active with respective probabilities 1 − fA and fA.

12

[1] S. Whitelam and R. L. Jack, Ann Rev Phys Chem 66, 143

[26] K. Zhou, L. Li, Z. Tan, A. Zlotnick, and S. C. Jacobson, J. Am.

(2015).

[2] M. F. Hagan, Adv. Chem. Phys. 155, 1 (2014).
[3] A. Zlotnick, Virology 315, 269 (2003).
[4] A. Rao, Annu. Rev. Phytopathol. 44, 61 (2006).
[5] R. F. Garmann, A. Gopal, S. S. Athavale, C. M. Knobler, W. M.

Gelbart, and S. C. Harvey, RNA 21, 877 (2015).

[6] J. D. Perlmutter and M. F. Hagan, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem.
66, 217 (2015), http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev-physchem-
040214-121637.

[7] P. G. Stockley, N. A. Ranson, and R. Twarock, Future Virology

Chem. Soc. 133, 1618 (2011).

[27] Law-Hine, D. and Sahoo, A. K. and Bailleux, V. and Zeghal,
M. and Prevost, S. and Maiti, P. K. and Bressanelli, S. and Con-
stantin, D. and Tresset, G., J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 6, 3471 (2015).

[28] P. Ceres and A. Zlotnick, Biochemistry 41, 11525 (2002).
[29] A. Zlotnick, J. Z. Porterﬁeld, and J. C.-Y. Wang, Biophys. J.

104, 1595 (2013).

[30] A. Zlotnick, J. Mol. Biol. 241, 59 (1994).
[31] D. Endres and A. Zlotnick, Biophys. J. 83, 1217 (2002).
[32] P. Moisant, H. Neeman, and A. Zlotnick, Biophys. J. 99, 1350

[8] D. L. D. Caspar, T. Rosenstiel, and B. Medical, Biophys. J. 32,

[33] Q. Zhang, S. Gupta, T. Emrick, and T. Russell, J. Am. Chem.

[9] C. Packianathan, S. P. Katen, C. E. Dann, and A. Zlotnick, J.

[34] T. Keef, C. Micheletti, and R. Twarock, J. Theor. Biol. 242,

8, 531 (2013).

103 (1980).

Virol. 84, 1607 (2010).

(1993).

(2010).

Soc. 128, 3898 (2006).

713 (2006).

3029 (2006).

87, 022717 (2013).

310 (2014).

204, 100 (2005).

[10] P. E. Prevelige, D. Thomas, and J. King, Biophys. J. 64, 824

[35] M. Hemberg, S. Yaliraki, and M. Barahona, Biophys. J. 90,

[11] A. Zlotnick, J. M. Johnson, P. W. Wingﬁeld, S. J. Stahl, and

[36] E. C. Dykeman, P. G. Stockley, and R. Twarock, Phys Rev E

[12] A. Zlotnick, R. Aldrich, J. M. Johnson, P. Ceres, and M. J.

[37] G. R. Smith, L. Xie, B. Lee, and R. Schwartz, Biophys. J. 106,

[13] G. L. Casini, D. Graham, D. Heine, R. L. Garcea, and D. T.

[38] F. Jamalyaria, R. Rohlfs, and R. Schwartz, J. Comput. Phys.

[14] C. Chen, C. C. Kao, and B. Dragnea, J. Phys. Chem. A 112,

[39] B. Sweeney, T. Zhang, and R. Schwartz, Biophys. J. 94, 772

D. Endres, Biochemistry 38, 14644 (1999).

Young, Virology 277, 450 (2000).

Wu, Virology 325, 320 (2004).

9405 (2008).

[15] C. Berthet-Colominas, M. Cuillel, M. H. J. Koch, P. Vachette,
and B. Jacrot, Eur. Biophys. J. with Biophys. Lett. 15, 159
(1987).

[16] S. Kler, R. Asor, C. Li, A. Ginsburg, D. Harries, A. Oppen-
heim, A. Zlotnick, and U. Raviv, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 134, 8823
(2012).

[17] S. Kler, J. C.-Y. Wang, M. Dhason, A. Oppenheim, and A. Zlot-

nick, ACS Chem. Biol. 8, 2753 (2013).

[18] P. G. Stockley, O. Rolfsson, G. S. Thompson, G. Basnak,
and A. E.

S. Francese, N. J. Stonehouse, S. W. Homans,
Ashcroft, J. Mol. Biol. 369, 541 (2007).

[19] G. Basnak, V. L. Morton, O. Rolfsson, N. J. Stonehouse, A. E.

Ashcroft, and P. G. Stockley, J. Mol. Biol. 395, 924 (2010).

[20] C. Uetrecht, I. M. Barbu, G. K. Shoemaker, E. van Duijn, and

J. R. Heck Albert, Nat Chem 3, 126 (2011).

[21] V. Baumgaertel, B. Mueller, and D. C. Lamb, Viruses 4, 777

[22] N. Jouvenet, S. M. Simon, and P. D. Bieniasz, J. Mol. Biol.

(2012).

410, 501 (2011).

[40] A. Zlotnick and S. Mukhopadhyay, Trends Microbiol. 19, 14

[41] M. S. Kumar and R. Schwartz, Phys. Biol. 7, 045005 (2010).
[42] L. Xie, G. Smith, X. Feng, and R. Schwartz, Biophys. J. 103,

[43] S. Singh and A. Zlotnick, J. Biol. Chem. 278, 18249 (2003).
[44] W. H. Roos, R. Bruinsma, and G. J. L. Wuite, Nat. Phys. 6, 733

(2008).

(2011).

1545 (2012).

(2010).

[45] C. Uetrecht, N. R. Watts, S. J. Stahl, P. T. Wingﬁeld, A. C.
Steven, and A. J. R. Heck, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 12, 13368
(2010).

[46] L. Deshmukh, C. D. Schwieters, A. Grishaev, R. Ghirlando,
J. L. Baber, and G. M. Clore, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 135, 16133
(2013), pMID: 24066695, http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/ja406246z.

[47] F. Birnbaum and M. Nassal, J. Virol. 64, 3319 (1990).
[48] S. J. Stray, C. R. Bourne, S. Punna, W. G. Lewis, M. G. Finn,
and A. Zlotnick, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 102, 8138
(2005).

[49] P. T. Wingﬁeld, S. J. Stahl, R. W. Williams, and A. C. Steven,

[23] A. Borodavka, R. Tuma, and P. G. Stockley, Proc. Natl. Acad.

Biochemistry 34, 4919 (1995).

Sci. U. S. A. 109, 15769 (2012).

[24] G. Tresset, C. Le Coeur, J.-F. Bryche, M. Tatou, M. Zeghal,
A. Charpilienne, D. Poncet, D. Constantin, and S. Bressanelli,
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 135, 15373 (2013).

[25] E. E. Pierson, D. Z. Keifer, L. Selzer, L. S. Lee, N. C. Contino,
J. C. Y. Wang, A. Zlotnick, and M. F. Jarrold, J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 136, 3536 (2014).

[50] S. Asakura, J. Mol. Biol. 35, 237 (1968).
[51] Y. Kikuchi and J. King, J. Mol. Biol. 99, 695 (1975).
[52] P. J. G. Butler, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society

of London Series B-Biological Sciences 354, 537 (1999).

[53] A. Klug, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B. Biol. Sci. 354, 531

(1999).

[54] D. L. Caspar and K. Namba, Adv. Biophys. 26, 157 (1990).

[55] D. J. Kraft, W. K. Kegel, and P. van der Schoot, Biophys. J.

[56] D. L. Caspar, Curr. Biol. 1, 30 (1991).
[57] D. L. D. Caspar and A. Klug, Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant.

Sci. 14, 1518 (2005).

102, 2845 (2012).

Biol. 27, 1 (1962).

[58] B. Berger, P. W. Shor, L. Tuckerkellogg, and J. King, Proc.

Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 91, 7732 (1994).

[59] R. Schwartz, P. W. Shor, P. E. Prevelige, and B. Berger, Bio-

phys. J. 75, 2626 (1998).

[60] R. Schwartz, R. L. Garcea, and B. Berger, Virology 268, 461

[61] O. M. Elrad and M. F. Hagan, Nano Lett. 8, 3850 (2008).
[62] H. D. Nguyen, V. S. Reddy, and C. L. Brooks, Nano Lett. 7,

(2000).

338 (2007).

[63] H. D. Nguyen, V. S. Reddy, and C. L. Brooks, J. Am. Chem.

Soc. 131, 2606 (2009).

[64] V. L. Morton, E. C. Dykeman, N. J. Stonehouse, A. E. Ashcroft,
R. Twarock, and P. G. Stockley, J. Mol. Biol. 401, 298 (2010).
[65] M. R. Perkett and M. F. Hagan, J. Chem. Phys. 140, 214101

(2014).

[66] A. Branka and D. Heyes, Phys. Rev. E 60, 2381 (1999).
[67] D. Heyes and A. Branka, Mol. Phys. 98, 1949 (2000).
[68] M. F. Hagan, Biophys. J. 98, 1065 (2010).
[69] M. F. Hagan and D. Chandler, Biophys. J. 91, 42 (2006).
[70] A. W. Wilber, J. P. K. Doye, A. A. Louis, E. G. Noya, M. A.

Miller, and P. Wong, J. Chem. Phys. 127, 085106 (2007).

[71] S. D. Hicks and C. L. Henley, Phys. Rev. E 74, 031912 (2006).

13

[72] D. Rapaport, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 186101 (2008).
[73] D. Endres, M. Miyahara, P. Moisant, and A. Zlotnick, Protein

[74] J. M. Johnson, J. H. Tang, Y. Nyame, D. Willits, M. J. Young,

and A. Zlotnick, Nano Lett. 5, 765 (2005).

[75] P. Ceres, S. J. Stray, and A. Zlotnick, J. Virol. 78, 9538 (2004).
[76] A. Zlotnick, J. Mol. Biol. 366, 14 (2007).
[77] W. K. Kegel and P. van der Schoot, Biophys. J. 86, 3905 (2004).
[78] This assumption neglects the fact that rotational entropy penal-
ties are most likely not proportional to the number of contacts
(see Ref. [81] for further discussion).

[79] L. Selzer, S. P. Katen, and A. Zlotnick, Biochemistry 53, 5496

(2014), selzer, Lisa Katen, Sarah P. Zlotnick, Adam.

[80] Since the master equations can be integrated to arbitrarily long
times, we report the maximum value of Pint observed at any
time for a given parameter set.

[81] M. F. Hagan, J. Chem. Phys. 130, 114902 (2009).
[82] M. F. Hagan, O. M. Elrad, and R. L. Jack, J. Chem. Phys. 135,

104115 (2011).

[83] W. I. Sundquist and H.-G. Krausslich, Cold Spring Harbor per-

spectives in medicine 2, a006924 (2012).

[84] M. R. Perkett and M. F. Hagan, arXiv:1503.01204 (2015).
[85] E. R. May, J. Feng, and C. L. Brooks, Biophys. J. 102, 606

(2012).

[86] D. Veesler and J. E. Johnson, Annual Review of Bio-
physics 41, 473 (2012), http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev-
biophys-042910-155407.

[87] M. F. Hagan, Phys. Rev. E 77, 051904 (2008).

