TOWARDS A CLASSIFICATION OF COMPACT QUANTUM GROUPS OF

LIE TYPE

SERGEY NESHVEYEV AND MAKOTO YAMASHITA

Abstract. This is a survey of recent results on classiﬁcation of compact quantum groups
of Lie type, by which we mean quantum groups with the same fusion rules and dimensions
of representations as for a compact connected Lie group G. The classiﬁcation is based on
a categorical duality for quantum group actions recently developed by De Commer and the
authors in the spirit of Woronowicz’s Tannaka–Krein duality theorem. The duality establishes
a correspondence between the actions of a compact quantum group H on unital C∗-algebras
and the module categories over its representation category Rep H. This is further reﬁned to a
correspondence between the braided-commutative Yetter–Drinfeld H-algebras and the tensor
functors from Rep H. Combined with the more analytical theory of Poisson boundaries, this
leads to a classiﬁcation of dimension-preserving ﬁber functors on the representation category
of any coamenable compact quantum group in terms of its maximal Kac quantum subgroup,
which is the maximal torus for the q-deformation of G if q 6= 1. Together with earlier results on
autoequivalences of the categories Rep Gq, this allows us to classify up to isomorphism a large
class of quantum groups of G-type for compact connected simple Lie groups G. In the case of
G = SU(n) this class exhausts all non-Kac quantum groups.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
6
1

 
 
]

.

A
Q
h
t
a
m

[
 
 

1
v
9
1
5
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

1. Introduction

The theory of quantum groups has two origins. One is the algebraic approach motivated by
the quantum inverse scattering method and initiated by the discovery of quantized universal
enveloping algebras by Drinfeld [Dri85] and Jimbo [Jim85]. The other is the operator alge-
braic approach developed by Woronowicz [Wor87a], which stands on the philosophy of treating
noncommutative C∗-algebras as functions on ‘noncommutative spaces’, or ‘pseudospaces’ in
Woronowicz’s terminology. In both frameworks, deformations of SU(2) and, more generally, of
the compact simple Lie groups appear as the most fundamental and motivating examples.

A natural question is to classify all such deformations within a reasonable system of axioms.
At the inﬁnitesimal level, this was already settled in a series of papers by Drinfeld and his
collaborators during the 1980s. If one assumes compatibility with the compact form, the clas-
siﬁcation takes a particularly elegant form [BD83, Dri89, So˘ı89]: if g is a complex simple Lie
algebra and G is the simply connected compact Lie group corresponding to g, any inﬁnitesi-
mal deformation of the universal enveloping algebra U (g) as a quasitriangular ∗-Hopf algebra
corresponds to a Poisson–Lie group structure on G, and those are parametrized, up to isomor-
phisms and rescalings, by invariant Poisson structures on a maximal torus. Moreover, these
deformations make perfect sense in Woronowicz’s framework and give rise to strict deformation
quantization of the corresponding Poisson structures in the sense of Rieﬀel [Rie94].

Extending this classiﬁcation from inﬁnitesimal to analytical level, or in other words, going
from formal to strict deformation quantization, is a nontrivial task. Since there is no analogue
of Kontsevich’s classiﬁcation theorem in the analytic setting, we cannot expect such a clean
result as in the formal case without imposing ﬁrst an additional symmetry. One possible idea is

Date: March 16, 2015.
S.N. was supported by the European Research Council under the European Union’s Seventh Framework

Programme (FP/2007-2013)/ERC Grant Agreement no. 307663.

M.Y. was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 25800058, and partially by the Danish National

Research Foundation through the Centre for Symmetry and Deformation (DNRF92).

This survey is to appear in the volume “The Abel Symposium 2015 – Operator Algebras and Applications”,

the ﬁnal publication will be available at http://link.springer.com.

1

to require the deformations to have the same combinatorial structure of representation theory,
meaning the fusion rules and dimensions of representations, as in the classical case. This
implies that we can take the coalgebra of matrix coeﬃcients independent of the deformation
parameter, and then try to ﬁnd a suitable algebra structure on it. Moreover, if we want to
preserve quasitriangularity, the Faddeev–Reshetikhin–Takhtadzhyan method [RTF89] reduces
the problem to ﬁnding R-matrices with certain algebraic symmetry. Still, carrying out such a
classiﬁcation directly is not an easy task, and this has been only worked out for the quantum
groups with representation theory of SU(2) [Wor87b] and of SU(3) [Ohn99, Ohn05].

Our approach to this problem consists of a combination of cohomological and analytical
methods for tensor categories and related constructions for quantum groups. Suppose we want to
classify all quantum groups which have the same fusion rules and dimensions of representations
as a compact group G. In view of Woronowicz’s Tannaka–Krein duality theorem, the problem
can be divided into three parts:

– classiﬁcation of rigid C∗-tensor categories C with fusion rules of G;
– classiﬁcation of monoidal autoequivalences of C;
– classiﬁcation of unitary ﬁber functors C → Hilbf inducing the classical dimension func-

tion on the representation ring of G.

We will mainly concentrate on the third problem, where the most recent advances are. Let us
explain the strategy in more detail, in roughly the same order as we proceed from Section 4 to
Section 6.

The ﬁrst step is to establish a duality between the category of unital H-C∗-algebras and
that of (Rep H)-module categories for compact quantum groups H [DCY13, Nes14]. Given
an H-C∗-algebra B, which represents a noncommutative H-space X, we take the category
of H-equivariant Hermitian vector bundles on X, that is, of ﬁnitely generated projective H-
equivariant Hilbert B-modules. We can consider the tensor product of such modules and ﬁnite
dimensional unitary representations of H, which leads to the structure of a (Rep H)-module
category. An analogue of the reconstruction procedure in Woronowicz’s Tannaka–Krein theorem
implies that B can be recovered from this module category and the distinguished object in it
represented by B itself.

Further pursuing this duality, we have the following correspondence for subclasses of H-
C∗-algebras and (Rep H)-module categories [NY14a]. Among the H-C∗-algebras we consider
the braided-commutative Yetter–Drinfeld algebras, while among the module categories we take
the C∗-tensor categories with module structure induced by a tensor functor from Rep H. A
motivating example for this duality is the coideal of the function algebra coming from a quantum
subgroup K of H, on one side, and the forgetful functor Rep H → Rep K, on the other.
In this formulation the quantum subgroup coideals precisely correspond to the factorizations
Rep H → C → Hilbf of the canonical ﬁber functor on Rep H through some C∗-tensor category C.
One of our discoveries is that the noncommutative Poisson boundary of the discrete dual
of H, and its counterpart on the categorical side, ﬁts very well into this scheme [NY14b]. The
noncommutative Poisson boundary, modeled on the classical theory for discrete groups initiated
by Furstenberg [Fur73], was introduced by Izumi [Izu02] to understand the lack of minimality for
inﬁnite tensor product actions of non-Kac quantum groups. This theory requires the operator
algebraic framework in an essential way, and that is why we need to work with compact quantum
groups instead of, for example, cosemisimple Hopf algebras. We ﬁnd that the categorical Poisson
boundary has a universality property for what we call amenable tensor functors. A concrete
implication is that if Gq is the Drinfeld–Jimbo q-deformation of a compact connected semisimple
Lie group G with a maximal torus T , then for q 6= 1 the forgetful functor Rep Gq → Rep T is a
universal tensor functor deﬁning the classical dimension function on Rep G. This shows that the
undeformed classical torus T < Gq can be detected already at the categorical level. This also
implies that the dimension-preserving ﬁber functors on Rep G are parametrized by the invariant
Poisson structures on the torus, or the Poisson–Lie group structures of G, as expected from the
case of inﬁnitesimal deformations.

2

Returning to the ﬁrst problem of classifying rigid C∗-tensor categories with fusion rules of G,
there is a simple class of examples of such categories in addition to Rep Gq. We have a natural
grading of Rep Gq by the Pontryagin dual of the center of G, or more intrinsically, by the
chain group of Rep Gq. Then any T-valued 3-cocycle on the chain group deﬁnes an associator,
and we obtain a twisted tensor category, which has the same fusion rules as G. Note that
this is analogous to, but much easier than, the famous Knizhnik–Zamolodchikov associator
constructed by Drinfeld, which relates Rep G and Rep Gq. What we wrote in the previous
paragraph about the categories Rep Gq applies equally well to these twisted categories and allows
us to classify dimension-preserving ﬁber functors on them. In the case of SU(n), up to monoidal
equivalence, these exhaust the tensor categories with fusion rules of SU(n) [KW93, Jor14]. It
seems reasonable to expect that a similar result it true, or at least close to be true, for other
simple Lie groups. Finally, the second problem of classifying autoequivalences of such categories
has been essentially solved in [NT11b, NT12].

To summarize our results, for any compact connected simple Lie group G, we classify up
to isomorphism all compact quantum groups with the same fusion rules and dimensions of
representations as for G which, moreover, have representation categories Rep Gq for q 6= 1 or
twists of such categories by 3-cocycles on the dual of the center of G, see Theorems 6.3 and 6.8.
Whether such categories exhaust all categories with fusion rules of G beyond the case of SU(n),
as well as whether one can say something precise for q = 1, are the main remaining open
questions.

2. Monoidal categories

Throughout the exposition we ﬁx a universe and assume that all categories are small [ML98].

See [NT13] for the details on the following notions.

2.1. C∗-categories. A C∗-category is a category C with morphism sets C(U, V ) that are com-
plex Banach spaces, endowed with a complex conjugate involution C(U, V ) → C(V, U ), T 7→ T ∗,
satisfying the C∗-identity

kT ∗T k = kT k2 = kT T ∗k ,

and such that the composition of morphisms is bilinear and kST k ≤ kSk kT k. Unless said
otherwise, we always assume that C is closed under ﬁnite direct sums and subobjects. The
latter means that any idempotent in the endomorphism ring C(X) = C(X, X) comes from a
direct summand of X. The existence of ﬁnite direct sums guarantees that, for any T : X → Y ,
the morphism T ∗T is positive as an element in the C∗-algebra C(X), which otherwise we would
have to add as an additional axiom.

An object is called simple if its endomorphism ring is isomorphic to C, and a C∗-category is
said to be semisimple if any object is isomorphic to a ﬁnite direct sum of simple ones. We then
denote the isomorphism classes of simple objects by Irr C and assume that this is an at most
countable set. Many results admit formulations which do not require this assumption, and can
be proved by considering subcategories generated by countable sets of simple objects, but we
leave this matter to the interested reader.

A unitary functor, or a C∗-functor, is a linear functor of C∗-categories F : C → C′ satisfying

F(T ∗) = F(T )∗.

A few times we will need to perform the following operation: starting from a C∗-category C,
we replace the morphisms sets by some larger multiplicative system D(X, Y ) naturally con-
taining the original C(X, Y ). Then we perform the idempotent completion to construct a new
category D. That is, we regard the projections p ∈ D(X) as objects in the new category, and
take qD(X, Y )p as the morphism set from the object represented by p ∈ D(X) to the one by
q ∈ D(Y ). Then the embeddings C(X, Y ) → D(X, Y ) can be considered as a C∗-functor C → D.

2.2. C∗-tensor categories. A C∗-tensor category is a C∗-category endowed with a unitary
bifunctor

⊗ : C × C → C,

3

a distinguished object 1 ∈ C, and natural unitary isomorphisms

1 ⊗ U ∼= U ∼= U ⊗ 1,

Φ(U, V, W ) : (U ⊗ V ) ⊗ W → U ⊗ (V ⊗ W )

satisfying certain compatibility conditions. If these isomorphisms can be taken to be the identity
morphisms, then C is said to be strict.

We denote by Hilbf a category of ﬁnite dimensional Hilbert spaces with a strict model of

tensor product (see, for example, [Sch01] or [NT13, p. 37] for concrete realizations).

A unitary tensor functor, or a C∗-tensor functor, between two C∗-tensor categories C and C′
is given by a triple (F0, F, F2), where F is a C∗-functor C → C′, F0 is a unitary isomorphism
1C ′ → F(1C), and F2 is a collection of natural unitary isomorphisms F(U ) ⊗ F(V ) → F(U ⊗ V )
compatible with the structure morphisms of C and C′.

As a rule, we denote tensor functors by just one symbol F. A tensor functor between strict C∗-
tensor categories is said to be strict if F0 and F2 are the identity morphisms. The composition
of tensor functors F and F ′ is deﬁned by taking the usual composition of C∗-functors and
setting (FF ′)2 = F(F ′
0)F0. A natural transformation of tensor functors
is a natural transformation in the usual sense which is also compatible with the isomorphisms
F2 and F0.

2)F2 and FF ′ = F(F ′

When the C∗-functor part of F is an equivalence of categories, F is said to be a unitary
monoidal equivalence. Analogously to the case of ordinary functors, unitary monoidal equiv-
alences can be inverted (up to a natural unitary monoidal isomorphism) as unitary tensor
functors, so for any F as above there is another unitary monoidal equivalence F ′ : C′ → C such
that FF ′ and F ′F are naturally unitarily monoidally isomorphic to the identity functors of the
respective categories. If the target and source categories are the same, such a tensor functor F
is called an autoequivalence, and we denote by Aut⊗(C) the group of autoequivalences of C con-
sidered up to natural unitary monoidal isomorphisms. Let us also note that a version of Mac
Lane’s coherence theorem [ML98, Chapter XI] says that any C∗-tensor category is unitarily
monoidally equivalent to a strict one.

When C is a C∗-tensor category and U ∈ C, an object V is said to be a dual object of U if
there are morphisms R ∈ C(1, V ⊗ U ) and ¯R ∈ C(1, U ⊗ V ) satisfying the conjugate equations

(ιV ⊗ ¯R∗)Φ(R ⊗ ιV ) = ιV ,

(ιU ⊗ R∗)Φ( ¯R ⊗ ιU ) = ιU ,

where we assumed for simplicity that the unit is strict, so that 1 ⊗ U = U ⊗ 1 = U . If any
object in C admits a dual, C is said to be rigid and we denote a choice of a dual of U ∈ C by ¯U .
Any rigid C∗-tensor category with simple unit has ﬁnite dimensional morphism spaces and

hence is automatically semisimple. The quantity

dC(U ) = min
(R, ¯R)

kRk(cid:13)(cid:13)

¯R(cid:13)(cid:13) ,

where (R, ¯R) runs through the set of solutions of conjugate equations as above, is called the
intrinsic dimension of U . We omit the superscript C when there is no danger of confusion. A
solution (R, ¯R) of the conjugate equations for U is called standard if

kRk = k ¯Rk = d(U )1/2.

Solutions of the conjugate equations for U are unique up to the transformations

(R, ¯R) 7→ ((T ∗ ⊗ ι)R, (ι ⊗ T −1) ¯R).

Furthermore, if (R, ¯R) is standard, then such a transformation deﬁnes a standard solution if
and only if T is unitary.

In a rigid C∗-tensor category C we often ﬁx standard solutions (RU , ¯RU ) of the conjugate
equations for every object U . Then C becomes spherical in the sense that one has the equality
R∗

U (T ⊗ ι) ¯RU for any T ∈ C(U ). The normalized linear functional

U (ι ⊗ T )RU = ¯R∗

trU (T ) =

1

d(U )

R∗

U (ι ⊗ T )RU =

1

d(U )

¯R∗

U (T ⊗ ι) ¯RU

4

is a tracial state on the ﬁnite dimensional C∗-algebra C(U ), called the normalized categorical
trace. It is independent of the choice of a standard solution.

For any semisimple C∗-tensor category we denote by K +(C) the Grothendieck semiring of C.
As an additive semigroup it is generated by the isomorphism classes [U ] of objects in C and
satisﬁes the relations [U ⊕V ] = [U ]+[V ], so it is the free commutative semigroup with generators
[U ] ∈ Irr C. The product is deﬁned by [U ] [V ] = [U ⊗ V ].

Let us ﬁx representatives {Us}s∈Irr C of the isomorphism classes of simple objects of C. We
will often use the subindex s to denote various construction related to Us. For every object
X ∈ C, denote by ΓX = (aX

st )s,t∈Irr C the matrix describing the multiplication by [X],

[X] [Ut] = Xs

aX
st [Us],

so aX
st = dim C(Us, X ⊗ Ut). It is not diﬃcult to see that kΓX k ≤ dC(X). Moreover, the same
is true for any dimension function d in place of dC, by which one means a unital semiring
homomorphism d : K +(C) → [0, +∞) such that d([X]) = d([ ¯X]) for all X.

Another algebraic structure naturally associated with a semisimple C∗-tensor category C is
the chain group Ch(C). It is the group with generators gs, s ∈ Irr C, satisfying the relations
gr = gsgt whenever Ur embeds into Us ⊗ Ut. It is closely related to the notion of grading on a
category. For a discrete group Γ, we say that C is graded over Γ if we are given full subcategories
(Cg)g∈Γ such that 1 ∈ Ce, any object of C is isomorphic in an essentially unique way to a ﬁnite
direct sum ⊕gXg, with Xg ∈ Cg, and X ⊗ Y is isomorphic to an object in Cgh if X ∈ Cg and
Y ∈ Ch. The chain group Ch(C) deﬁnes a grading on C: for every g ∈ Ch(C), the subcategory Cg
consists of direct sums of simple objects Us such that gs = g. Any other grading over a group Γ
deﬁnes a canonical homomorphism Ch(C) → Γ, so the chain group is a universal group over
which C is graded.

3. Compact quantum groups

Compact quantum groups, or compact matrix pseudogroups as introduced by Woronow-

icz [Wor87a], are our main object of interest. We again follow the presentation of [NT13].

3.1. Tannaka–Krein duality. A compact quantum group G is represented by a unital C∗-
algebra C(G) equipped with a unital ∗-homomorphism ∆ : C(G) → C(G) ⊗ C(G) satisfying

• coassociativity: (∆ ⊗ ι)∆ = (ι ⊗ ∆)∆,
• cancellation properties: the linear spans of

(C(G) ⊗ 1)∆(C(G)) and (1 ⊗ C(G))∆(C(G))

are dense in C(G) ⊗ C(G).

There is a unique state h on C(G) satisfying (h ⊗ ι)∆ = h (and/or (ι ⊗ h)∆ = h) called the
Haar state. If h is faithful, C(G) is called the reduced function algebra of G, or G is called a
reduced compact quantum group, and we are mainly interested in such cases. By taking the
image of C(G) in the GNS representation of h, we can always work with a reduced model.

A ﬁnite dimensional unitary representation of G is a unitary element U ∈ B(HU ) ⊗ C(G)
such that (ι⊗∆)(U ) = U12U13, where HU is a ﬁnite dimensional Hilbert space. The intertwiners
between two representations U and V are the linear maps T from HU to HV satisfying V (T ⊗1) =
(T ⊗ 1)U . The tensor product of two representations U and V is deﬁned by U13V23 and denoted
by U #⊤ V . This way, the category Rep G of ﬁnite dimensional unitary representations with
intertwiners as morphisms and with tensor product #⊤ becomes a semisimple C∗-tensor category.
When ω is in the (pre)dual B(HU )∗ ∼= ¯HU ⊗ HU , the element (ω ⊗ ι)(U ) ∈ C(G) is called the
matrix coeﬃcient associated with ω. The dense ∗-subalgebra of C(G) spanned by the matrix
coeﬃcients of ﬁnite dimensional representations is called the regular algebra of G, and is denoted
by C[G]. This space is closed under the coproduct, and becomes a Hopf ∗-algebra. Its antipode
is characterized by

(ι ⊗ S)(U ) = U ∗ for U ∈ Rep G.

5

Let us put U (G) = C[G]∗. This space has the structure of a ∗-algebra, deﬁned by duality from
the Hopf ∗-algebra (C[G], ∆). Every ﬁnite dimensional unitary representation U of G deﬁnes a
∗-representation πU of U (G) on HU by πU (ω) = (ι ⊗ ω)(U ). When convenient, we omit πU and
write ωξ instead of πU (ω)ξ for ξ ∈ HU .

An important ingredient of the duality for unitary representations of G is the Woronowicz
character f1 ∈ U (G), which we denote by ρ. Namely, the element ρ ∈ U (G) is uniquely
determined by the properties that it is positive, invertible, Tr(πU (ρ)) = Tr(πU (ρ−1)), and

¯U = (j(ρ)1/2 ⊗ 1)(j ⊗ ι)(U ∗)(j(ρ)−1/2 ⊗ 1) ∈ B( ¯HU ) ⊗ C[G],

is unitary, where U is any ﬁnite dimensional unitary representation and j denotes the canonical
∗-anti-isomorphism B(HU ) ∼= B( ¯HU ) deﬁned by j(T )¯ξ = T ∗ξ. This element ¯U , which is again
a unitary representation, is called the conjugate representation of U . The representation ¯U is
dual to U in the sense of Section 2.2, and a convenient choice of solutions of the conjugate
equations for U is given by

RU (1) = Xi

¯ξi ⊗ ρ−1/2ξi and ¯RU (1) = Xi

ρ1/2ξi ⊗ ¯ξi,

where {ξi}i is an orthonormal basis in HU . This solution is standard. In particular, the intrinsic
dimension function on Rep G coincides with the quantum dimension

dimq U = Tr(πU (ρ)).

Therefore Rep G is a rigid C∗-tensor category. The forgetful functor U 7→ HU deﬁnes a
strict unitary tensor functor into Hilbf called the canonical ﬁber functor of G. Woronowicz’s
Tannaka–Krein duality theorem recovers the ∗-Hopf algebra C[G] from these categorical data.
Theorem 3.1 ([Wor88]). Let C be a rigid C∗-tensor category with simple unit, and F : C → Hilbf
be a unitary tensor functor. Then there exist a compact quantum group G, a unitary monoidal
equivalence E : Rep G → C, and a natural unitary monoidal isomorphism from the canonical
ﬁber functor of G to FE. Moreover, the Hopf ∗-algebra C[G] is determined uniquely up to
isomorphism.

The key idea is that if C ⊂ Hilbf and F is the embedding functor, then, with representa-

tives {Us}s of Irr C and Hs = F(Us), the coalgebra

Ms∈Irr C

B(Hs)∗ ∼= Ms∈Irr C

¯Hs ⊗ Hs

admits an associative product induced by irreducible decompositions of tensor products, which
makes it into a bialgebra, analogously to the description of the product of matrix coeﬃcients
for usual compact groups. Moreover, standard solutions of the conjugate equations determine
the involution by the formula

¯Hs ⊗ Hs ∋ ¯ξ ⊗ η 7→ (ι ⊗ ξ∗)Rs ⊗ (η∗ ⊗ ι) ¯Rs ∈ ¯H¯s ⊗ H¯s.

(3.1)

This way one obtains the ∗-bialgebra C[G].

The representation semiring of G is deﬁned as R+(G) = K +(Rep G). A possible way of

saying when a compact quantum group is a deformation of a genuine group is as follows.

Deﬁnition 3.2. Given a compact group H, we say that a compact quantum group G is of
H-type if there exists a semiring isomorphism R+(G) ∼= R+(H) preserving the (classical) di-
mensions of representations.

This deﬁnition is essentially due to Woronowicz [Wor88]. In [Ban99] the Hopf ∗-algebras C[G]
for compact quantum groups G of H-type are called dimension-preserving R+-deformations
of C[H].

Problem 3.3 (cf. [Wor88]). Given a compact connected Lie group H, classify the compact
quantum groups of H-type.

Our aim is to develop a general method to attack this problem, as outlined in Section 1.

6

3.2. Cohomology of the discrete dual. Deformation problems for compact quantum groups
are controlled by a cohomology theory of the dual discrete quantum groups, which plays a central
role in our considerations. We again refer the reader to [NT13] for a more thorough discussion.

The ∗-algebra U (G) can be identiﬁed with Qs∈Irr G B(Hs) (the algebraic direct product) using

the correspondence

C[G]∗ ∋ ω ↔ (πUs(ω))s ∈ Ys∈Irr G

B(Hs).

More generally, we can consider the algebra

U (Gk) = (C[G]⊗k)∗ ∼= Ys1,··· ,sk∈Irr G

B(Hs1) ⊗ · · · ⊗ B(Hsk),

and interpret it as the space of (possibly unbounded) k-point functions on the “discrete dual”
quantum group ˆG. This is, for example, how the discrete quantum groups are deﬁned in [VD96].
If G is a genuine commutative compact group, this agrees with the usual notion of functions on
the k-th power of the Pontryagin dual group ˆG.

The spaces U (Gk) can be regarded as the components of the standard complex for the group
cohomology with multiplicative scalar coeﬃcients as follows. We call the invertible elements
of U (Gk) the k-cochains on ˆG. Given a k-cochain ω, we put

∂0(ω) = 1 ⊗ ω,

∂k+1(ω) = ω ⊗ 1,

∂j(ω) = ˆ∆j(ω)
(which are all in U (Gk+1)), and call

( ˆ∆ applied to the j-th position),

∂(ω) = ∂0(ω)∂2(ω) · · · ∂2⌊ k+1

2 ⌋(ω)∂1(ω−1)∂3(ω−1) · · · ∂2⌊ k

2 ⌋+1(ω−1)

the coboundary of ω. When ∂(ω) = 1, ω is said to be a k-cocycle. We denote the set of k-cocycles
by Z k( ˆG; C×). Two k-cocycles χ and χ′ are said to be cohomologous if
2 ⌋(ω)χ∂1(ω−1)∂3(ω−1) · · · ∂2⌊ k−1

χ′ = ∂0(ω)∂2(ω) · · · ∂2⌊ k

2 ⌋+1(ω−1)

holds for some (k − 1)-cochain ω.

In general the relation of being cohomologous is not even symmetric. But if it happens to
be an equivalence relation, the set of equivalence classes of k-cocycles is denoted by H k( ˆG; C×)
and called the k-cohomology of ˆG. When one requires all the ingredients to be unitary instead
of invertible, the corresponding set is denoted by H k( ˆG; T). If a k-cochain ω commutes with
the image of ˆ∆k−1 (deﬁned inductively as ( ˆ∆k−2 ⊗ ι) ˆ∆), we say that ω is invariant. Invariant
cocycles are also called lazy in the algebraic literature. If we consider only invariant cocycles
G( ˆG; C×), and
(with coboundaries deﬁned also using only invariant cochains), we get sets H k
H k

G( ˆG; T) for the unitary case, whenever these sets are well-deﬁned.
When G is a commutative group, H k

G( ˆG; T) = H k( ˆG; T) agrees with the usual group coho-
mology of the Pontryagin dual. We also note that, in general, if H is a quantum subgroup of G,
the natural inclusion U (H k) → U (Gk) induces maps from the cohomologies of ˆH to those of ˆG.

We are mainly interested in the cohomology in low degrees (k ≤ 3), which have direct

connections with various aspects of Rep G. Let us brieﬂy summarize these connections.

The set H 1( ˆG; T) = Z 1( ˆG; T) consists of unitary group-like elements in U (G).

If G is a
genuine compact group, then any such group-like element arises from an element of G, so we
have canonical isomorphisms

H 1( ˆG; T) ∼= G and H 1

G( ˆG; T) ∼= Z(G).

For arbitrary G, a categorical interpretation of H 1( ˆG; T) is that this is the group of unitary
monoidal automorphisms of the canonical ﬁber functor F : Rep G → Hilbf , while the group
H 1

G( ˆG; T) is the group of unitary monoidal automorphisms of the identity functor on Rep G.

7

Next, a unitary 2-cochain x ∈ U (G2) is a 2-cocycle if and only if it satisﬁes

(x ⊗ 1)( ˆ∆ ⊗ ι)(x) = (1 ⊗ x)(ι ⊗ ˆ∆)(x).

If c is a unitary element in the center of U (G) (an invariant unitary 1-cochain), then its cobound-
ary is (c ⊗ c) ˆ∆(c−1). The set of invariant unitary 2-cocycles forms a group under multiplication,
G( ˆG; T) becomes a group, called the invariant
and the coboundaries form a subgroup. Thus, H 2
2-cohomology group of ˆG.

If x is an invariant unitary 2-cocycle, the multiplication by x−1 on HU ⊗HV can be considered
as a unitary endomorphism of U #⊤ V in Rep G. Such endomorphisms form a natural unitary
transformation of the bifunctor #⊤ into itself. The cocycle condition corresponds to the fact that
this transformation is a monoidal autoequivalence of Rep G. Up to natural unitary monoidal
isomorphisms, any autoequivalence of Rep G ﬁxing the irreducible classes can be obtained in
this way. Moreover, the cohomology relation of cocycles corresponds to the natural unitary
G( ˆG; T) can be considered as the normal
monoidal isomorphism of autoequivalences. Thus H 2
subgroup of Aut⊗(Rep G) consisting of (isomorphism classes of) autoequivalences that preserve
G( ˆG; C×) corresponds to a subgroup
the isomorphism classes of objects. Without the unitarity, H 2
of monoidal autoequivalences of Rep G as a tensor category over C.

Let x be an arbitrary unitary 2-cocycle on ˆG, invariant or not. Then the triple Fx =
(idC, U 7→ HU , x−1) deﬁnes a new unitary tensor functor Rep G → Hilbf . By Theorem 3.1, Fx
can be considered as the canonical ﬁber functor of another compact quantum group Gx satisfying
Rep G = Rep Gx. Concretely, U (Gx) coincides with U (G) as a ∗-algebra, but is endowed with
the modiﬁed coproduct ˆ∆x(T ) = x ˆ∆(T )x−1. By duality, C[Gx] is the same coalgebra as C[G],
but has a modiﬁed ∗-algebra structure (pre)dual to (U (G), ˆ∆x).

Up to natural unitary monoidal isomorphisms, the functors Fx exhaust all unitary tensor
functors F ′ : Rep G → Hilbf satisfying dim F ′(U ) = dim HU . Moreover, if T is a unitary element
in U (G), then xT = (T ⊗ T )x ˆ∆(T −1) deﬁnes another unitary ﬁber functor which is naturally
unitarily monoidally isomorphic to Fx. Therefore the set H 2( ˆG; T) gives a parametrization of
the set of isomorphism classes of dimension-preserving unitary ﬁber functors Rep G → Hilbf .

The group H 2

G( ˆG; T) acts on the set H 2( ˆG; T) by multiplication on the right. This corresponds
to the restriction of the obvious right action of Aut⊗(Rep G) on the natural unitary monoidal
isomorphism classes of unitary ﬁber functors Rep G → Hilbf . Note that by Theorem 3.1, the
orbits of this action by Aut⊗(Rep G) precisely correspond to the isomorphism classes of compact
quantum groups with representation category Rep G.

Let us move on to 3-cohomology. An invertible element Φ ∈ U (G3) is a 3-cocycle if and only

if it satisﬁes

(1 ⊗ Φ)(ι ⊗ ˆ∆ ⊗ ι)(Φ)(Φ ⊗ 1) = (ι ⊗ ι ⊗ ˆ∆)(Φ)( ˆ∆ ⊗ ι ⊗ ι)(Φ).

Invariant 3-cocycles are also called associators. If Φ is such a cocycle, its action on HU ⊗HV ⊗HW
can be considered as a new associativity morphism on the C∗-category Rep G with bifunctor #⊤ .
If Φ is unitary, this gives a new C∗-tensor category (Rep G, Φ), which has the same data as Rep G
except for the new associativity morphisms deﬁned by the action of Φ. If C is a semisimple
C∗-tensor category with the same fusion rules as Rep G, that is, with the same Grothendieck
semiring, then by transporting the monoidal structure of C along any choice of a C∗-functor
C → Rep G deﬁning the isomorphism K +(C) ∼= R+(G), we see that C is monoidally equivalent to
some (Rep G, Φ) as above. We remark that in general it is not clear whether any such category
is automatically rigid.

If x is an invariant unitary 2-cochain, the categories (Rep G, Φ) and (Rep G, Φx) are naturally

unitarily monoidally equivalent, by means of the unitary tensor functor
(id1, IdRep G, x−1) : (Rep G, Φ) → (Rep G, Φx).

G( ˆG; T) gives a parametrization of the categories of the form (Rep G, Φ)
This way the set H 3
considered up to unitary monoidal equivalences that preserve the isomorphism classes of objects.

8

A simple way of constructing elements of H 3

G( ˆG; T) is by considering the chain group of
Rep G, which we denote by Ch(G). Namely, any cocycle φ ∈ Z 3(Ch(C); T) can be considered as
a 3-cocycle on ˆG such that its component in B(Hr) ⊗ B(Hs) ⊗ B(Ht) is the scalar φ(gr, gs, gt).
We denote the category Rep G with the associator given by this cocycle by (Rep G)φ. Therefore
in (Rep G)φ the associativity morphism (U #⊤ V ) #⊤ W → U #⊤ (V #⊤ W ) is the scalar operator
φ(g, h, k) if U , V and W have the degrees g, h and k ∈ Ch(G), respectively. The category
(Rep G)φ is always rigid.

Let us note in passing that the Pontryagin dual of the abelianization Ch(G)ab of the chain

group is naturally isomorphic to H 1

G( ˆG; T), cf. [M¨ug04, BNY15]. Namely, any character

χ : Ch(G) → T

deﬁnes a 1-cocycle (χ(gs))s∈Irr C ∈ U (G), or equivalently, a monoidal automorphism ηχ of the
identity functor on Rep G such that ηχ

U = χ(g)ιU if U has degree g ∈ Ch(G).

In particular, if G is a genuine group, then Ch(G) is abelian and we get an isomorphism
[Z(G). More concretely, if U is an irreducible representation of G, then the group Z(G)
Ch(G) ∼=
must be acting by scalars, that is, by some character χU ∈ [Z(G), and the isomorphism Ch(G) ∼=
[Z(G) maps gs into χUs.

3.3. q-Deformation. Let G be a simply connected compact Lie group with a maximal torus T ,
g be the corresponding semisimple complex Lie algebra. Fix a system of simple roots and denote
the Cartan matrix by (aij)i,j. We ﬁx a scalar product deﬁning the root system of G. When G
is simple, such a scalar product is unique up to a scalar factor and we normalize it so that for
every short root αi we have (αi, αi) = 2.

For a ﬁxed positive real number q 6= 1, the quantized universal enveloping algebra Uq(g) is

the ∗-Hopf algebra (over C) generated by elements Ei, Fi, K ±1

satisfying

i

[Ki, Kj] = 0, KiEjK −1

i = qaij

i Ej, KiFjK −1

i = q

−aij
i

Fj,

[Ei, Fj] = δij

Ki − K −1
i
qi − q−1

i

,

1−aij

Xk=0

1−aij

Xk=0

(−1)k (cid:20) 1 − aij

k

(−1)k(cid:20) 1 − aij

k

(cid:21)qi
(cid:21)qi

Ek

1−aij −k
i EjE
i

= 0,

F k

1−aij −k
i FjF
i

= 0.

where qi = qdi and di = (αi, αi)/2. The coproduct is

ˆ∆q(Ei) = Ei ⊗ 1 + Ki ⊗ Ei,

ˆ∆q(Fi) = Fi ⊗ K −1

i + 1 ⊗ Fi,

ˆ∆q(Ki) = Ki ⊗ Ki,

and the involution is characterized by

E∗

i = FiKi, F ∗

i = K −1

i Ei, K ∗

i = Ki.

A ﬁnite dimensional representation of Uq(g) is said to be admissible if it deﬁnes a repre-
sentation of the maximal torus T of G, so that the elements Ki act as the elements qHi
in
i
the complexiﬁcation of T , where Hi is the element of the Cartan subalgebra of g deﬁned by
αj(Hi) = aij. The ﬁnite dimensional admissible unitary representations form a rigid C∗-tensor
category. Since it is given as a subcategory of Hilbf , Woronowicz’s Tannaka–Krein theorem
gives a compact quantum group, which is called the q-deformation of Gq. The application of
Woronowicz’s theorem is a bit of an overkill here, and concretely, the Hopf ∗-algebra C[Gq] is
deﬁned as the subalgebra of Uq(g)∗ generated by the matrix coeﬃcients of admissible represen-
tations. It is known that the quantum group Gq is of G-type according to Deﬁnition 3.2.

The algebra of the discrete dual U (Gq) can be regarded as a completion of Uq(g) (although one
should note that the latter has non-admissible representations which do not extend to U (Gq)).
The quantum group Gq contains T as a closed subgroup, with the corresponding embedding

9

U (T ) ֒→ U (Gq) given by identifying qHi
i with Ki. Intrinsically the torus T can be characterized
as the maximal quantum Kac subgroup of Gq, that is, the largest quantum subgroup of Gq on
which the antipode is involutive [Tom07].

The center Z(G) ⊂ T of G is contained in the center of U (Gq). It follows that for any subgroup
Γ ⊂ Z(G) the quantum group Gq/Γ makes sense. This allows one to deform compact connected
semisimple Lie groups that are not necessarily simply connected by letting (G/Γ)q = Gq/Γ. In
other words, (G/Γ)q is obtained from Uq(g) by considering only the admissible representations
such that their restrictions to T factor through T /Γ, i.e., that have weights annihilating Γ.

( ˆGq; T) ∼= H 3

G( ˆG; T). For the same reason there is a unique element in H 3

It is known that for q 6= 1 we have H 1( ˆGq; T) = T and H 1
Gq

( ˆGq; T) = Z(G), which is a
simple consequence of So˘ıbelman’s classiﬁcation of irreducible representations of C[Gq] [So˘ı90].
The second cohomology will be described in Sections 5.2 and 6.1. As for the third cohomol-
ogy, since Gq and G are known to have the same fusion rules, there is a canonical bijection
G( ˆG; T) corre-
H 3
Gq
sponding to Rep Gq. An associator ΦKZ,q representing this element was constructed by Drin-
feld [Dri89] using the Knizhnik–Zamolodchikov equations (see also [KL94, NT11a]). Since the
categories Rep Gq are mutually inequivalent for diﬀerent q ∈ (0, 1], we thus get a family of
G( ˆG; T) indexed by q ∈ (0, 1]. By our discussion in Section 3.2,
diﬀerent classes [ΦKZ,q] ∈ H 3
G( ˆG; T) coming from 3-cocycles on Ch(G) ∼= [Z(G), as well as from
there also are classes in H 3
their products with ΦKZ,q. What else is contained in H 3

G( ˆG; T), is a major open problem.

4. Categorical duality for actions of quantum groups

In this section we describe several extensions of the Tannaka–Krein duality to actions of com-
pact quantum groups. These extensions are not strictly speaking needed for the classiﬁcation
problem for compact quantum groups, but they provide motivation for some of the subsequent
constructions.

4.1. G-algebras and (Rep G)-module categories. Given a compact quantum group G, a
unital G-C∗-algebra is a unital C∗-algebra B equipped with a continuous left action α : B →
C(G) ⊗ B of G. This means that α is an injective unital ∗-homomorphism such that (∆ ⊗ ι)α =
(ι ⊗ α)α and such that the space (C(G) ⊗ 1)α(B) is dense in C(G) ⊗ B. The linear span of
spectral subspaces,

B = {x ∈ B | α(x) ∈ C[G] ⊗alg B},

which is a dense ∗-subalgebra of B, is called the regular subalgebra of B, and the elements
of B are called regular. More concretely, the algebra B is spanned by the elements of the form
(h ⊗ ι)((x ⊗ 1)α(a)) for x ∈ C[G] and a ∈ B. This algebra is of central importance for the
categorical reconstruction of B.

Next let us explain the categorical counterpart of the G-algebras. We also note that a

particular type of this structure plays a central role in the subfactor theory.

Deﬁnition 4.1. Let C be a C∗-tensor category. We say that D is a right C-module category if

• D is a C∗-category,
• we are given a unitary bifunctor D × C → D, denoted by (X, U ) 7→ X × U , and
• natural unitary isomorphisms

X × 1 → X,

(X × U ) × V → X × (U ⊗ V )

(4.1)

satisfying the obvious compatibility conditions analogous to those for monoidal cate-
gories.

When D and D′ are C-module categories, a C-module functor D → D′ is a pair (F, θ), where F
is a C∗-functor from D to D′, and θ is a unitary natural transformation F(X) × U → F(X × U ),
again satisfying a standard set of compatibility conditions. When θ is obvious from context, we
simply write F instead of (F, θ). The C-module functors can be composed in a way similar to
the monoidal functors.

10

We say that two C-module functors (F, θ), (F ′, θ′) : D → D′ are equivalent if there is a natural
unitary transformation η : F → F ′ which is compatible with θ and θ′. Note that this equivalence
relation is compatible with composition of module functors.

Our starting point is the following categorical duality theorem for G-algebras, which could
be called the Tannaka–Krein duality theorem for quantum group actions. Results leading
to this theorem have a long history, starting from the work of Wassermann [Was88a] and
Landstad [Lan92] in the early 1980s on full multiplicity ergodic actions of compact groups, and
continuing in [Ulb89, Ost03, BDRV06, PR08].

Theorem 4.2 ([DCY13, Nes14]). Let G be a reduced compact quantum group. Then the fol-
lowing two categories are equivalent:

(1) The category of unital G-C∗-algebras, with unital G-equivariant ∗-homomorphisms as

morphisms.

(2) The category of pairs (D, M ), where D is a right (Rep G)-module C∗-category and M
is a generating object in D, with equivalence classes of unitary (Rep G)-module functors
respecting the prescribed generating objects as morphisms.

The condition that D is generated by M means that any object in D is isomorphic to a

subobject of M × U for some U ∈ Rep G.

Remark 4.3. Let End(D) be the C∗-tensor category of C∗-endofunctors on D, with uniformly
bounded natural transformations as morphisms. Then, having a C-module structure on D is
the same as giving a unitary tensor functor F : C⊗op → End(D), where F0 and F2 correspond
to the morphisms in (4.1). For G = SUq(2) and, more generally, for free orthogonal quantum
groups this point of view leads to a combinatorial classiﬁcation of ergodic actions [DCY15].

To describe the above equivalence, given a G-C∗-algebra (B, α), we consider the category DB
of G-equivariant ﬁnitely generated right Hilbert B-modules.
In other words, objects of DB
are ﬁnitely generated right Hilbert B-modules X equipped with a linear map δ = δX : X →
C(G) ⊗ X which satisﬁes the comultiplicativity property (∆ ⊗ ι)δ = (ι ⊗ δ)δ together with the
following conditions:

• (C(G) ⊗ 1)δ(X) is dense in C(G) ⊗ X,
• δ is compatible with the Hilbert B-module structure, in the sense that

δ(ξa) = δ(ξ)α(a),

hδ(ξ), δ(ζ)i = α(hξ, ζi),

(ξ, ζ ∈ X, a ∈ B).

Here, C(G) ⊗ X is considered as a right Hilbert (C(G) ⊗ B)-module.

For X ∈ DB and U ∈ Rep G, we obtain a new object X × U in DB given by the linear space

HU ⊗ X, which is a right Hilbert B-module such that

(ξ ⊗ x)a = ξ ⊗ xa,

hξ ⊗ x, η ⊗ yiB = (η, ξ)hx, yiB for ξ, η ∈ HU , x, y ∈ X, a ∈ B,

together with the compatible C(G)-coaction map

δ = δHU ⊗X : HU ⊗ X → C(G) ⊗ HU ⊗ X,

δ(ξ ⊗ x) = U ∗

21(ξ ⊗ δX (x))213.

This construction gives the structure of a right (Rep G)-module category on DB, together with
a distinguished object B ∈ DB.

In the other direction, we construct what would be the regular subalgebra of a G-algebra
starting from a pair (D, M ) as in Theorem 4.2. The generating condition on M implies that, by
replacing D by an equivalent category, we may assume that D is the idempotent completion of
the category Rep G with larger morphism sets D(U, V ) than in Rep G, such that M is the unit
object 1 in Rep G and the functor ι × U on D is an extension of the functor ι #⊤ U on Rep G.
Namely, we simply deﬁne the new set of morphisms between U and V as D(M × U, M × V ).

Consider the linear space

B = Ms∈Irr G

¯Hs ⊗ D(1, Us).

11

Note that this gives C[G] if D is Hilbf with the action of Rep G induced by the canonical ﬁber
functor. Using this observation, the associative product on B is deﬁned by

(¯ξ ⊗ T ) · (¯ζ ⊗ S) = Xr∈Irr G

ts (ξ ⊗ ζ) ⊗ urα∗
urα∗

ts (T ⊗ S),

where (urα
∗-structure on B is given by the following analogue of (3.1):

ts )α is an orthonormal basis in the space of morphisms Ur → Ut #⊤ Us. Similarly, the

(¯ξ ⊗ T )∗ = ρ−1/2ξ ⊗ (T ∗ ⊗ ι) ¯Rt

(¯ξ ⊗ T ∈ ¯Ht ⊗ D(1, Ut)).

The ∗-algebra B has a natural left C[G]-comodule structure, deﬁned by the map α : B →
C[G] ⊗ B such that if {ξi}i is an orthonormal basis in Ht and uij are the matrix coeﬃcients
of Ut in this basis, then

α(¯ξi ⊗ T ) = Xj

uij ⊗ ¯ξj ⊗ T.

It is shown then that the action α is algebraic in the sense of [DCY13, Deﬁnition 4.2], meaning
that the ﬁxed point algebra A = BG ∼= D(1) is a unital C∗-algebra and the conditional expec-
tation (h ⊗ ι)α : B → A is positive and faithful. It follows that there is a unique completion
of B to a C∗-algebra B such that α extends to an action of the reduced form of G on B. This
ﬁnishes the construction of an action from a module category.

4.2. Yetter–Drinfeld algebras and tensor functors. An important class of G-C∗-algebras
is the quantum homogeneous spaces deﬁned by quantum subgroups. Namely, when f : C[G] →
C[H] is a surjective homomorphism of Hopf ∗-algebras, the subalgebra

C[G/H] = {x ∈ C[G] : (ι ⊗ f )∆(x) = x ⊗ 1}

completes to a C(G)-comodule subalgebra of C(G). As the notation suggests, this should be
regarded as the space of functions on the quotient G/H. The categorical counterpart to this
structure is the (Rep G)-module category Rep H, where Rep G acts through the unitary tensor
functor Rep G → Rep H induced by f .

In general, we could ask when a (Rep G)-module category structure comes from a tensor
functor, or in other words, when the G-equivariant Hilbert B-modules admit a tensor product
operation. The answer is that the G-algebra structure of B should be extended to that of a
braided-commutative Yetter–Drinfeld G-algebra. Let us brieﬂy recall the relevant deﬁnitions.

Assume we have a continuous left action of α : B → C(G)⊗B of a compact quantum group G
on a unital C∗-algebra B, as well as a continuous right action β : B → M(B ⊗ c0( ˆG)) of the
dual discrete quantum group ˆG. The action β deﬁnes a left C[G]-module algebra structure
⊲ : C[G] ⊗ B → B on B by

x ⊲ a = (ι ⊗ x)β(x) for x ∈ C[G] and a ∈ B.

Here we view c0( ˆG) as a subalgebra of U (G) = C[G]∗. This structure is compatible with
involution, in the sense that

x ⊲ a∗ = (S(x)∗

⊲ a)∗.

Deﬁnition 4.4. We say that B is a Yetter–Drinfeld G-C∗-algebra if the following identity holds
for all x ∈ C[G] and a ∈ B:

α(x ⊲ a) = x(1)a(1)S(x(3)) ⊗ (x(2) ⊲ a(2)),

where we use Sweedler’s sumless notation, so we write the eﬀect of ∆ and α as x(1) ⊗ x(2), etc.
A Yetter–Drinfeld G-C∗-algebra B is said to be braided-commutative if for all a, b ∈ B we have

ab = b(2)(S−1(b(1)) ⊲ a).

(4.2)

Note that when b is in the ﬁxed point algebra A = BG, the right hand side of the above

identity reduces to ba, and we see that A is contained in the center of B.

12

Remark 4.5. Yetter–Drinfeld G-C∗-algebras can be regarded as D(G)-C∗-algebras for the Drin-
feld double D(G) of G, and they are studied in the more general setting of locally compact
quantum groups by Nest and Voigt [NV10].

The categorical counterpart of a braided-commutative Yetter–Drinfeld G-C∗-algebra is a pair
(C, E), where C is a C∗-tensor category and E : Rep G → C is a unitary tensor functor such that C
is generated by the image of E. The condition that C is generated by the image of E means that
any object in C is isomorphic to a subobject of E(U ) for some U ∈ Rep G. We stress that we do
not assume that the unit in C is simple. In fact, the C∗-algebra C(1) is exactly the ﬁxed point
algebra BG in the C∗-algebra B corresponding to (C, E) in the next theorem.

Deﬁne the morphisms (C, E) → (C′, E ′) as the equivalence classes of pairs (F, η), where F is a
unitary tensor functor F : C → C′ and η is a natural unitary monoidal isomorphism η : FE → E ′.
We say that (F, η) and (F ′, η′) are equivalent if there is a natural unitary monoidal transfor-
mation of the unitary tensor functors ξ : F → F ′ which is compatible with η and η′ in the sense
that ηU = η′
U ξE(U ) : F(E(U )) → E ′(U ) for all U ∈ C. Again, this relation is compatible with
the composition of morphisms, and we denote by Tens(Rep G) the category of pairs (C, E) with
morphisms given by the equivalence classes of this relation.

Theorem 4.6 ([NY14a]). Let G be a reduced compact quantum group. Then the following two
categories are equivalent:

(1) The category YDbrc(G) of unital braided-commutative Yetter–Drinfeld G-C∗-algebras,

with unital G- and ˆG-equivariant ∗-homomorphisms as morphisms.

(2) The category Tens(Rep G).

Moreover, given a morphism [(F, η)] : (C, E) → (C′, E ′), the corresponding homomorphism of
Yetter–Drinfeld C∗-algebras is injective if and only if F is faithful, and it is surjective if and
only if F is full.

To prove this theorem we have to enhance the ingredients of Theorem 4.2. Suppose that B is a
Yetter–Drinfeld G-C∗-algebra. Then any G-equivariant right Hilbert B-module X automatically
admits a left action of B, given by
aξ = ξ(2)(S−1(ξ(1)) ⊲ a)

(a ∈ B, ξ ∈ X such that δX (ξ) ∈ C[G] ⊗alg X),

that is, we interpret (4.2) as a formula for the left action on X. When B is braided-commutative,
(4.2) guarantees that X is a B-bimodule, and DB becomes a C∗-tensor category with tensor
product given by X ⊗ Y = Y ⊗B X. Moreover, then U 7→ B × U becomes a unitary tensor
functor Rep G → DB.

In the opposite direction, suppose E : Rep G → C is a unitary tensor functor. Similarly to the
previous subsection, we may assume that it is simply an embedding and construct a G-algebra
B = ⊕s( ¯Hs ⊗ C(1, Us)). We then have to deﬁne a C[G]-module structure ⊲ : C[G] ⊗ B → B. It
is deﬁned using the map

˜⊲ : ( ¯Hs ⊗ Hs) ⊗ ( ¯Ht ⊗ C(1, Ut)) → (Hs ⊗ Ht ⊗ ¯Hs) ⊗ C(1, Us #⊤ Ut #⊤ ¯Us),

by decomposing Us #⊤ Ut #⊤ ¯Us into irreducibles.

(¯ξ ⊗ ζ) ˜⊲ (¯η ⊗ T ) = (ξ ⊗ η ⊗ ρ−1/2ζ) ⊗ (ι ⊗ T ⊗ ι) ¯Rs,

Let us now consider the case when the target category C is Hilbf . Then it can be shown that
Theorem 4.6 establishes a bijection between the isomorphism classes of unitary ﬁber functors
Rep G → Hilbf and the isomorphism classes of unital Yetter–Drinfeld G-C∗-algebras B such
that

• the G-algebra B is a Hopf–Galois extension of C over C[G], meaning that BG = C1 and

the Galois map

is bijective,

Γ : B ⊗ B → C[G] ⊗ B,

x ⊗ y 7→ x(1) ⊗ x(2)y,

(4.3)

13

• the C[G]-module structure ⊲ : C[G] ⊗ B → B is completely determined by the action of

G and coincides with the Miyashita–Ulbrich action, deﬁned by

x ⊲ a = Γ−1(x ⊗ 1)1aΓ−1(x ⊗ 1)2.

In the purely algebraic setting the correspondence between ﬁber functors and Hopf–Galois
extensions of C over C[G] was established in [Ulb89].
In the operator algebraic setting this
was done in [BDRV06]. Note that in the last paper instead of bijectivity of the Galois map an
equivalent condition of full quantum multiplicity is considered.

4.3. Dual category. Two most natural braided-commutative Yetter–Drinfeld algebras associ-
ated with any compact quantum group G are the algebras of functions on G and on its discrete
dual ˆG. Let us consider the latter in more detail.

In the Hopf–von Neumann algebraic framework, the discrete dual is deﬁned by

ℓ∞( ˆG) = ℓ∞- Ms∈Irr G

B(Hs) ⊂ U (G).

We have a left adjoint action α of G on ℓ∞( ˆG) deﬁned by

B(Hs) ∋ T 7→ (Us)∗

21(1 ⊗ T )(Us)21.

(4.4)

This action is continuous only in the von Neumann algebraic sense, so in order to stay within
the class of G-C∗-algebras, instead of ℓ∞( ˆG) we consider the norm closure B( ˆG) of the regular
alg( ˆG) ⊂ ℓ∞( ˆG). The right action ˆ∆ of ˆG on ℓ∞( ˆG) makes this algebra into a
subalgebra ℓ∞
unital braided-commutative Yetter–Drinfeld C∗-algebra. In other words, the left C[G]-module
structure on ℓ∞

alg( ˆG) is deﬁned by

x ⊲ a = (ι ⊗ x) ˆ∆(a).

We want to describe the corresponding C∗-tensor category ˆC = CB( ˆG) and the unitary tensor
functor F = FB( ˆG) : Rep G → ˆC. The category ˆC is the idempotent completion of the category
alg( ˆG). In
with the same objects as in Rep G, but with morphism sets ˆC(U, V ) ⊂ B(HU , HV ) ⊗ ℓ∞
this picture F is the obvious embedding functor. For the reasons that will become apparent in
alg( ˆG) ⊗ B(HU , HV ). Then
a moment, it is more convenient to consider ˆC(U, V ) as a subset of ℓ∞
ˆC(U, V ) is the set of elements T ∈ ℓ∞

alg( ˆG) ⊗ B(HU , HV ) such that
V ∗
31(α ⊗ ι)(T )U31 = 1 ⊗ T.

alg( ˆG) ⊗ B(HU , HV ) lies
From the deﬁnition of the adjoint action α we see that an element T ∈ ℓ∞
in ˆC(U, V ) if and only if it deﬁnes a G-equivariant map Hs ⊗ HU → Hs ⊗ HV for all s. It follows
that ˆC(U, V ) can be identiﬁed with the space of bounded natural transformations between the
functors ι #⊤ U and ι #⊤ V on Rep G,

Natb(ι #⊤ U, ι #⊤ V ) ∼= ℓ∞- Ms∈Irr G

HomG(Hs ⊗ HU , Hs ⊗ HW ).

The composition of morphisms is deﬁned in the obvious way as the composition of natural
transformations. The tensor product of morphisms is determined by the tensor products ιW ⊗ ξ
and ξ ⊗ ιW for ξ = (ξX )X ∈ Natb(ι #⊤ U, ι #⊤ V ). These are deﬁned by

(ξ ⊗ ιW )X = ξX ⊗ ιW ,

(ιW ⊗ ξ)X = ξX#⊤ W .

(4.5)

5. Poisson boundary

An essential ingredient in the classiﬁcation of ﬁber functors is the notion of noncommutative
Poisson boundary and its categorical counterpart, and the universality of the latter with respect
to amenable tensor functors.

14

5.1. Noncommutative Poisson boundary. For a ﬁnite dimensional unitary representation
U of G, consider the state φU on B(HU ) deﬁned by
Tr(T πU (ρ)−1)

for T ∈ B(H).

φU (T ) =

dimq U

If U is irreducible, it can be characterized as the unique state satisfying

(ι ⊗ φU )(U ∗

21(1 ⊗ T )U21) = φU (T ).

For our ﬁxed representatives of irreducible representations {Us}s of G, we write φs instead
of φUs.

When φ is a normal state on ℓ∞( ˆG), we deﬁne a completely positive map Pφ on ℓ∞( ˆG) by

Pφ(a) = (φ ⊗ ι) ˆ∆(a).

If µ is a probability measure on Irr G, we then deﬁne a normal unital completely positive map Pµ

on ℓ∞( ˆG) by Pµ = Ps µ(s)Pφs. The space
of Pµ-harmonic elements is called the noncommutative Poisson boundary [Izu02] of ˆG with
respect to µ. This is an operator subspace of ℓ∞( ˆG) closed under the left adjoint action α of G
deﬁned by (4.4) and the right action ˆ∆ of ˆG on itself by translations. It has a new product
structure

H ∞( ˆG; µ) = {x ∈ ℓ∞( ˆG) | x = Pµ(x)}

x · y = lim
n→∞

P n

µ (xy),

(5.1)

where the limit is taken in the strong∗ operator topology. With this product H ∞( ˆG; µ) becomes
a von Neumann algebra (with the original operator space structure) [CE77], which can be
regarded as a generalization of the classical Poisson boundary [KV83]. Moreover, the actions
of G and ˆG on ℓ∞( ˆG) deﬁne continuous actions on H ∞( ˆG; µ) in the von Neumann algebraic
sense.

5.2. Categorical Poisson boundary. Using the categorical description of the discrete duals
of compact quantum groups given in Section 4.3, we have a straightforward translation of
noncommutative Poisson boundaries to its categorical counterpart [NY14b].

Let C be a strict rigid C∗-tensor category with simple unit. Consider the category ˆC deﬁned

as in Section 4.3 for C = Rep G. We have “partial trace” maps

trU ⊗ι : C(U ⊗ X, U ⊗ Y ) → C(X, Y ), T 7→

1

d(U )

(R∗

U ⊗ ι)(ι ⊗ T )(RU ⊗ ι).

Using them we can deﬁne an operator PU on ˆC(V, W ) by

(PU (η))X = (trU ⊗ι)(ηU ⊗X) ∈ C(X ⊗ V, X ⊗ W ).

As before, ﬁx representatives Us of isomorphism classes of simple objects and write Ps for PUs.
Let µ be a probability measure on Irr C. Deﬁne an operator Pµ acting on Natb(ι ⊗ V, ι ⊗ W )

by Pµ = Ps µ(s)Ps. It is called the Markov operator associated with µ. A bounded natural

transformation η : ι ⊗ V → ι ⊗ W is called Pµ-harmonic if Pµ(η) = η. We denote the set of
Pµ-harmonic natural transformations ι ⊗ V → ι ⊗ W by P(C; µ)(V, W ), or just by P(V, W ).

As is the case for usual harmonic functions, the naive product of harmonic transformation is
not guaranteed to be harmonic. However, the formula (5.1) still makes sense, and P(C; µ)(V, W )
can be considered as a morphism set of a new C∗-category. We denote the subobject completion
of this category by P(C; µ), or simply by P.

The category P has the natural structure of a C∗-tensor category deﬁned similarly to ˆC.
Namely, at the level of objects (before the subobject completion), the monoidal product ⊗ is
the same as in C, while the tensor product of morphisms is given by

ξ ⊗ η = (ξ ⊗ ι) · (ι ⊗ η),

15

where ξ ⊗ ι and ι ⊗ η are deﬁned in the same way (4.5) as in ˆC.

Any morphism T : V → W in C deﬁnes a bounded natural transformation (ιX ⊗ T )X from
ι ⊗ V into ι ⊗ W , which is obviously Pµ-harmonic for every µ. This embedding of C-morphisms
into P-morphisms deﬁnes a strict unitary tensor functor Π : C → P.

Deﬁnition 5.1 ([NY14b]). The pair (P, Π) is called the Poisson boundary of (C, µ).

Note that ˆC(1) = ℓ∞(Irr C). A probability measure µ on Irr C is called ergodic, if the only
Pµ-harmonic bounded functions on Irr C are the constant functions. This means that P(C; µ)
still has a simple unit. It can be shown that such a µ exists if and only if the intrinsic dimension
function on C is weakly amenable in the terminology of [HI98], meaning that there exists a state
on ℓ∞(Irr C) which is Ps-invariant for all s. In this case we say that C is weakly amenable. For
weakly amenable categories, the Poisson boundary has the following universal property.

Theorem 5.2 ([NY14b]). Let C be a rigid C∗-tensor category with simple unit, and µ be an
ergodic probability measure on Irr C. Then the equality

dP(C;µ)(Π(X)) = kΓXk

holds for all X ∈ C. Moreover, if C′ is another C∗-tensor category with simple unit, and
F : C → C′ is a unitary tensor functor such that dC ′
(F(X)) = kΓXk holds for all X, then
there exists a unitary tensor functor E : P(C; µ) → C′, unique up to a natural unitary monoidal
isomorphism, such that EΠ is naturally unitarily monoidally isomorphic to F.

Note that the subcategory generated by the image of F is rigid, although the standard

solutions for F(U ) might not be in the image of F.

The proof of the above theorem consists of two parts, which rely on very diﬀerent techniques.
One part establishes a universal property of the Poisson boundary among the functors deﬁning
the smallest dimension function on C. It relies on a study of certain completely positive maps
and their multiplicative domains, which can be thought of as analogues of the classical Poisson
integral. The second part shows that the smallest dimension function must be X 7→ kΓXk. The
proof relies on subfactor theory and is inspired by the works of Pimsner and Popa [PP91, Pop94].
It is clear that the second part is not needed once we have at least one functor F : C → C′ such
that dC ′

(F(X)) = kΓXk, as is the case in the applications we describe below.

Let us draw some implications of Theorem 5.2 for C = Rep G for a compact quantum group G.
Recall that G is called coamenable if ˆG is amenable. By a Kesten-type criterion this is equivalent
to requiring kΓU k = dim U for all U ∈ Rep G. Furthermore, coamenability of G implies weak
amenability of Rep G, so the above theorem can be applied. In our current setting the theorem
says that there exists a universal unitary tensor functor Π : Rep G → P such that dP (Π(U )) =
dim U for all U . By universality and Woronowicz’s Tannaka–Krein duality this functor must
correspond to a quantum subgroup of G. Since the classical and quantum dimension functions
coincide only in the Kac case, it is not diﬃcult to ﬁgure out what this quantum subgroup must
be and obtain the following result.

Theorem 5.3 ([NY15a]). Let G be a coamenable compact quantum group, K < G its maximal
quantum subgroup of Kac type. Then the forgetful functor Rep G → Rep K is a universal unitary
tensor functor deﬁning the classical dimension function on Rep G.

Using the correspondence between the noncommutative and categorical boundaries, this
implies that if G is a coamenable compact quantum group and µ is an ergodic probability
measure on Irr G, then the Poisson boundary H ∞( ˆG; µ) is G- and ˆG-equivariantly isomorphic
to L∞(G/K). This result was originally proved by Tomatsu [Tom07] (he states the result in a
more restricted form, but in fact his proof works in the generality we formulated).

What is more important for our deformation problems, Theorem 5.3 sometimes allows us to

reduce the classiﬁcation of dimension-preserving ﬁber functors to an easier task.

16

Corollary 5.4 ([NY15a]). With G and K as in Theorem 5.3, there is a bijective correspondence
between the (natural unitary monoidal) isomorphism classes of dimension-preserving unitary
ﬁber functors Rep G → Hilbf and those of Rep K. Namely, the correspondence maps a functor
Rep K → Hilbf into its composition with the forgetful functor Rep G → Rep K.

In other words, the natural map H 2( ˆK; T) → H 2( ˆG; T) induced by the inclusion U (K) ֒→

U (G) is a bijection.

This corollary is of course void of any content when G is already of Kac type, e.g., when G
is a genuine compact group. In the latter case it is, however, still possible to say something
interesting about H 2( ˆG; T) by the theory developed by Wassermann [Was88a, Was89] and
Landstad [Lan92]. We will say a few words about it later.

Now, let us return to abstract C∗-tensor categories and give another example of a computation

of the categorical Poisson boundary.

Recall that in Section 3.2 we introduced twistings (Rep G)φ of Rep G by cocycles φ ∈
Z 3(Ch(G); T). The same construction makes sense for arbitrary C: given a cocycle φ ∈
Z 3(Ch(C); T), we deﬁne new associativity morphisms (U ⊗ V ) ⊗ W → U ⊗ (V ⊗ W ) as those
of C multiplied by the factor φ(g, h, k) if U , V and W have the degrees g, h and k ∈ Ch(C),
respectively, and denote the C∗-tensor category we thus obtain by Cφ.

The category ˆC is graded over Ch(C), since if X and Y are objects in C of diﬀerent degrees,
then there are no nonzero morphisms X → Y in ˆC. It follows that for any probability measure µ
on Irr C the Poisson boundary P(C; µ) is still graded over Ch(C). Therefore Ch(C) is a quotient
of Ch(P(C; µ)), so any cocycle φ ∈ Z 3(Ch(C); T) can be viewed as a cocycle on Ch(P(C; µ)) and
we can consider the twisted category P(C; µ)φ. The functor Π : C → P(C; µ) deﬁnes a tensor
functor Cφ → P(C; µ)φ, which we denote by Πφ. A natural question is how (P(C; µ)φ, Πφ) is
related to the Poisson boundary of (Cφ, µ). We have the following result.

Theorem 5.5 ([BNY15]). Let C be a rigid C∗-tensor category with simple unit, φ ∈ Z 3(Ch(C); T),
and µ be an ergodic probability measure on Irr C. Then Πφ : Cφ → P(C; µ)φ is a universal uni-
tary tensor functor such that dP(C;µ)φ
(Πφ(X)) = kΓX k for all X ∈ Cφ, hence it is isomorphic
to the Poisson boundary of (Cφ, µ).

This theorem is proved in [BNY15] for C = Rep G, but the general case is essentially the

same. See also [BNY16] for a related result.

From this we obtain the following useful extension of Theorem 5.3.

Theorem 5.6 ([BNY15]). Let G be a coamenable compact quantum group with maximal closed
quantum subgroup K of Kac type. Then

• Ch(G) is a quotient of Ch(K);
• for any 3-cocycle φ ∈ Z 3(Ch(G); T), the forgetful functor (Rep G)φ → (Rep K)φ is a
universal unitary tensor functor deﬁning the classical dimension function on (Rep G)φ.

6. Quantum groups of Lie type

6.1. Fiber functors on twisted representation categories. Let G be a compact connected
semisimple Lie group and T ⊂ G be a maximal torus. We denote the weight and root lattices
of g by P and Q, respectively, and denote by X ∗(T ) ⊂ P the weight lattice of T . We also
denote by Ψ = (X ∗(T ), Π, X∗(T ), Π∨) a ﬁxed based root datum of (G, T ).

For any q > 0 we have canonical isomorphisms

Ch(Gq) ∼= Ch(G) ∼= [Z(G) ∼= X ∗(T )/Q.

As described in Section 3.2, for every φ ∈ Z 3( [Z(G); T) we can therefore consider a new category
(Rep Gq)φ with associativity morphisms deﬁned by the action of φ.

Example 6.1. Let us give concrete examples of such cocycles φ. Assume Z(G) is isomorphic
to a cyclic group Z/nZ (which happens, for example, when G is simple and G 6∼= Spin(4n)).

17

Then any 3-cocycle on Ch(Gq) ∼= Z/nZ is cohomologous to the cocycle

φ(a, b, c) = ω(⌊ a+b

n ⌋−⌊ a

n ⌋−⌊ b

n ⌋)c

(a, b, c ∈ Z/nZ)

for some n-th root of unity ω.

The ﬁrst natural question is whether the categories (Rep Gq)φ admit any ﬁber functors.
Suppose that c ∈ U (T ×T ) is a T-valued 2-cochain on the dual group ˆT = X ∗(T ) such that its
coboundary ∂c is invariant under Q in each variable. Then ∂c can be considered a 3-cocycle Φc
on [Z(G) and we obtain the twisted category (Rep Gq)Φc
= (Rep Gq, Φc) as above. Since Φc is
the coboundary of c over ˆT , we have a unitary ﬁber functor Fc : (Rep Gq, Φc) → Hilbf which is
identical to the canonical ﬁber functor on Rep Gq, except that the tensor structure is given by

(Fc)2 : HU ⊗ HV → HU #⊤ V , ξ ⊗ η 7→ c∗(ξ ⊗ η).

This functor deﬁnes a new compact quantum group Gc

q is unitarily mono-
idally equivalent to (Rep Gq, Φc). Explicitly, similarly to the case of twisting by 2-cocycles,
C[Gc
q] = C[G] as coalgebras, while the new ∗-algebra structure is deﬁned by duality from
(U (Gq), c ˆ∆q(·)c∗). Because c is deﬁned on ˆT , the coproduct of any element a ∈ U (T ) computed
in U (Gc

q) is the same as ˆ∆q(a) = ˆ∆(a). In particular, T is still a closed subgroup of Gc
q.

q such that Rep Gc

Example 6.2. A concrete example of c can be given as follows [NY15b]. Let r be the rank of
G, and let τ = (τ1, . . . , τr) ∈ Z(G)r. Take any function cτ : X ∗(T ) × X ∗(T ) → T satisfying

cτ (λ, µ + Q) = f (λ, µ),

cτ (λ + αi, µ) = hτi, µicτ (λ, µ).

Then Φcτ = ∂(cτ ) is Q-invariant in each variable and hence can be considered as a 3-cocycle
on [Z(G). Moreover, any other choice of cτ only diﬀers by a function on (X ∗(T )/Q)2 and deﬁnes
exactly the same quantum group Gcτ
q .

Let Tτ be the subgroup of Z(G) generated by the components of τ . Then the algebra C[Gcτ
q ]
can be presented as a subalgebra of C[Gq] ⋊ ˆTτ , which can be used to understand irreducible
representations and K-theory of C(Gcτ

q ) [NY15b].

The construction of Gcτ
q

is a particular example of twisting by almost adjoint invariant

cocentral actions developed in [BNY15].

As was already mentioned in Section 3.3, for q 6= 1, the torus T is a maximal quantum
subgroup of Gq of Kac type. By Theorem 5.6 it follows that for any φ ∈ Z 3( [Z(G); T) the for-
getful functor (Rep Gq)φ → (Rep T )φ is a universal unitary tensor functor deﬁning the classical
dimension function on (Rep Gq)φ. This can be used in two ways. On the one hand, applying
this to φ = Φc we conclude that

H 2( ˆGc

q; T) ∼= H 2( ˆT , T).
In particular, the dimension-preserving ﬁber functors of Gc
q produce only quantum groups of
q with c′c−1 ∈ Z 2( ˆT ; T). On the other hand, since it is easy to understand when
the form Gc′
(Rep T )φ admits a ﬁber functor, we conclude that (Rep Gq)φ admits a dimension-preserving
unitary tensor functor if and only if φ lifts to a coboundary on ˆT = X ∗(T ). This leads to the
following result.

(6.1)

Theorem 6.3 ([NY15b, BNY15]). Let G be a compact connected semisimple Lie group with a
maximal torus T , and H be a compact quantum group of G-type with representation category
(Rep Gq)φ for some q > 0, q 6= 1, and φ ∈ Z 3( [Z(G); T). Then

• the cocycle φ is cohomologous to a cocycle of the form Φcτ constructed in Example 6.2;
• the quantum group H is isomorphic to Gθcτ

for a cocycle θ ∈ Z 2( ˆT ; T).

q

In particular, although the construction in Example 6.2 may seem somewhat ad hoc, the the-
orem shows that the only other way of constructing dimension-preserving unitary ﬁber functors
on (Rep Gq)φ is by multiplying the cochains cτ in that example by 2-cocycles on ˆT .

18

Remark 6.4.
1. Since the classical and quantum dimension functions on (Rep Gq)φ coincide if and only if
q = 1, instead of requiring q 6= 1 we could say that H is not of Kac type.
2. Another way of formulating the above theorem is by saying that for q 6= 1 the quantum
groups Gθcτ
exhaust all quantum groups of G-type corresponding to the classes [φΦKZ,q] ∈
H 3
3. The cocycles φ cohomologous to the cocycles of the form Φcτ can be abstractly characterized
as those that vanish on ∧3(X ∗(T )/Q) ⊂ H3(X ∗(T )/Q; Z) [NY15b]. In particular, when G is
simple, then ∧3(X ∗(T )/Q) = 0 and all cocycles satisfy this property.

G( ˆG; T).

q

Isomorphism (6.1) and Theorem 6.3 fail miserably for q = 1. First of all, the map H 2( ˆT ; T) →
H 2( ˆG; T) maps the orbits under the action of the Weyl group into single points. Therefore as
soon as the rank of some simple factor of G is at least 2, the map H 2( ˆT ; T) → H 2( ˆG; T) is not
injective. More importantly, when the rank is large enough, the map is very far from being
surjective. In order to formulate the precise result, let us introduce some terminology.

Let G be for a moment an arbitrary compact group. A cocycle x ∈ Z 2( ˆG; T) is called
nondegenerate if its cohomology class does not arise from a proper closed subgroup of G. Denote
by H 2( ˆG; T)× the (possibly empty) subset of H 2( ˆG; T) consisting of classes represented by
nondegenerate cocycles. The following result is essentially due to Wassermann [Was88a, Was89],
although the formulation is rather taken from [NT11b]. For ﬁnite groups and without the
unitarity condition similar results were also obtained in [Mov93, EG98, EG00].

Theorem 6.5. For any compact group G we have a decomposition

H 2( ˆG; T) ∼= G[K]

H 2( ˆK; T)×/NG(K),

where the union is taken over the conjugacy classes of closed subgroups K of G and NG(K)
denotes the normalizer of K in G, which acts through the adjoint action on H 2( ˆK; T).

It can further be shown that a cocycle x ∈ Z 2( ˆK; T) is nondegenerate if and only if the
corresponding K-C∗-algebra B, as described in Section 4, is simple (as a C∗-algebra) [Was88a,
Lan92]. When K is ﬁnite, the structure of such K-C∗-algebras is easy to understand: B must
be a full matrix algebra End(H), and by bijectivity of the Galois map (4.3) its dimension
has to be |K|, so the action of K must be given by an irreducible projective representation
K → P U (H) of dimension dim H = |K|1/2.

Now, given a compact connected Lie group G with a maximal torus T , if G contains a non-
abelian ﬁnite subgroup K admitting such a projective representation, the corresponding class
in H 2( ˆG; T) does not lie in the image of H 2( ˆT ; T). Furthermore, as there can be a lot of such
nonconjugate subgroups K, the above theorem suggests that we should not expect a simple
parametrization of Kac quantum groups of G-type similar to Theorem 6.3, in particular, those
that have representation category Rep G.

6.2. Isomorphism problem for twisted q-deformations. In this last section we consider
the problem of classifying the quantum groups Gc
q up to isomorphism. Since we have already
classiﬁed the dimension-preserving unitary ﬁber functors on Rep Gc
q (for q 6= 1), for this we have
to understand unitary monoidal equivalences between these categories, and in particular, their
autoequivalences.

We start with autoequivalences that preserve the isomorphism classes of objects. It is not dif-
ﬁcult to see that the group of such autoequivalences of (Rep Gq)φ does not depend on φ [NY15a].
Therefore these autoequivalences are described by the following result.

Theorem 6.6 ([NT11b, NT12]). For any q > 0 and any compact connected semisimple Lie
group G, we have a group isomorphism

H 2( [Z(G); T) ∼= H 2

Gq ( ˆGq; T)

19

induced by the inclusion U (Z(G)) ֒→ U (Gq).

In view of (6.1) the result is not surprising, at least for q 6= 1. The proof, however, relies
on diﬀerent ideas and is more constructive than that of (6.1). The main part of it shows
( ˆGq; T) is an invariant cocycle with the property that for any highest weight
that if x ∈ Z 2
Gq
representations Uλ and Uη it acts trivially via the representation Uλ #⊤ Uη on the vectors of
weights λ + η and λ + η − αi for all simple roots αi, then x = 1.

Assume now that we have a unitary monoidal equivalence between (Rep Gq)φ1 and (Rep Gq)φ2.
It deﬁnes an automorphism of the representation semiring R+(G). Such an automorphism must
arise from an automorphism σ of the based root datum Ψ of G [McM84]. The automorphism σ
( ˆGq; T)
can then be lifted to an automorphism of Gq, which has to map the class of φ1 in H 3
Gq
into that of φ2. At least for simple Lie groups it is not diﬃcult to understand when this happens.
Proposition 6.7 ([KW93, NY15a]). For any q > 0 and any compact connected simple Lie
group G, the canonical map H 3( [Z(G); T) → H 3
Gq ( ˆGq; T) is injective , or equivalently, the map

H 3( [Z(G); T) → H 3

G( ˆG; T),

[φ] 7→ [φΦKZ,q],

is injective. Furthermore, unless G ∼= Spin(4n), the group Aut(Ψ) acts trivially on H 3( [Z(G); T).
The result is proved in [KW93] for G = SU(n). The proof for other simple groups is similar.
The idea is that if U is an irreducible representation of Gq and f : 1 → U #⊤ k is an isometric
morphism which up to a phase factor can be described entirely in terms of the fusion rules, then
the composition

f ⊗ι

U

/ (U #⊤ U #⊤ (k−1)) #⊤ U

φ

/ U #⊤ (U #⊤ (k−1) #⊤ U )

ι⊗f ∗

/ U

( ˆGq; T)
in (Rep Gq)φ is a scalar which, on the one hand, depends only on the class of φ in H 3
Gq
and, on the other hand, can be explicitly computed in terms of φ. It should be remarked that
the proposition, as well as several other results in this section, is formulated in [NY15a] for
simply connected groups. But the proofs for their quotients are only easier. For example, the
center of Spin(4n) is Z/2Z⊕Z/2Z and in the above argument several diﬀerent representations U
are needed to recover the class of φ. But the center of any proper quotient of Spin(4n) is cyclic
and it suﬃces to take only one U , namely, either the standard representation of SOq(4n) or one
of the spin representations.

Returning to classiﬁcation of the quantum groups Gc

q, we see that, at least for simple G,
unitary monoidal equivalences between their representation categories arise only from automor-
phisms of the root datum and from 2-cocycles on the dual of the center. Together with the
classiﬁcation of dimension-preserving ﬁber functors on Rep Gc
q given by (6.1), this leads to the
following result.

Theorem 6.8 ([NY15a]). Let G be a compact connected simple Lie group with a maximal
torus T , q1, q2 ∈ (0, 1), and c1, c2 be T-valued 2-cochains on X ∗(T ) such that ∂c1, ∂c2 descend
to X ∗(T )/Q. Then the quantum groups Gc1
q2 are isomorphic if and only if q1 = q2
and there exist an element σ ∈ Aut(Ψ) and a T-valued 2-cochain b on X ∗(T )/Q such that
c1σ(c2)−1b−1 is a coboundary on X ∗(T ).

q1 and Gc2

If we knew that the categories (Rep Gq)φ exhausted all rigid C∗-tensor categories with fusion
rules of G, then the above theorem together with Theorem 6.3 would give a classiﬁcation of
all non-Kac compact quantum groups of G-type, giving a partial solution of Problem 3.3. For
G = SU(n) this is known to be the case [KW93, Jor14] (see also [Pin07, PR11] for related
slightly weaker results). Furthermore, in this case the algebras C[SUc
q(n)] can be explicitly
described in terms of generators and relations [NY15a].

Remark 6.9. There are indications that a complete classiﬁcation of non-Kac compact quantum
groups of G-type should be possible beyond the case of G = SU(n). Speciﬁcally, in the frame-
work of rigid semisimple C-linear tensor categories, there are several recent classiﬁcation results

20

/
/
/
showing that such tensor categories with fusion rules of G are exhausted by Rep Gq, with q ∈ C×
not a nontrivial root of unity. For example, the case of G = PSp(4) is known by [BJL14], and
the case of the smallest exceptional group G = G2 has been recently settled in [MPS15]. For
these cases it only remains to show the uniqueness of the compatible C∗-structures when q is a
positive real number.

References

[Ban99]

[BD83]

T. Banica, Fusion rules for representations of compact quantum groups, Exposition. Math. 17 (1999),
no. 4, 313–337. MR 1734250 (2001g:46155)
A. A. Belavin and V. G. Drinfel′d, The classical Yang-Baxter equation for simple Lie algebras, Funk-
tsional. Anal. i Prilozhen. 17 (1983), no. 3, 69–70. MR 714225 (85e:58059)

[BDRV06] J. Bichon, A. De Rijdt, and S. Vaes, Ergodic coactions with large multiplicity and monoidal equivalence

[BNY15]

[BNY16]

of quantum groups, Comm. Math. Phys. 262 (2006), no. 3, 703–728. MR 2202309 (2007a:46072)
J. Bichon, S. Neshveyev, and M. Yamashita, Graded twisting of categories and quantum groups by
group actions, preprint (2015), arXiv:1506.09194 [math.QA].
J. Bichon, S. Neshveyev, and M. Yamashita, Graded twisting of comodule algebras and module cate-
gories, in preparation.

[BJL14] D. Bisch, V. F. R. Jones, and Z. Liu, Singly generated planar algebras of small dimension, part III,

[CE77]

preprint (2014), arXiv:1410.2876 [math.OA], to appear in Trans. Amer. Math. Soc.
M. D. Choi and E. G. Eﬀros, Injectivity and operator spaces, J. Functional Analysis 24 (1977), no. 2,
156–209. MR 0430809 (55 #3814)

[DCY13] K. De Commer and M. Yamashita, Tannaka-Kre˘ın duality for compact quantum homogeneous spaces.

[DCY15]

[Dri85]

[Dri89]

[EG98]

[EG00]

[Fur73]

[HI98]

[Izu02]

I. General theory, Theory Appl. Categ. 28 (2013), No. 31, 1099–1138. MR 3121622

, Tannaka–Kre˘ın duality for compact quantum homogeneous spaces II. Classiﬁcation of
quantum homogeneous spaces for quantum SU(2), J. Reine Angew. Math. 708 (2015), 143–171.
MR 3420332
V. G. Drinfel′d, Hopf algebras and the quantum Yang-Baxter equation, Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR 283
(1985), no. 5, 1060–1064, translation in Soviet Math. Dokl. 32 (1985), no. 1, 254–258. MR 802128
(87h:58080)

, Quasi-Hopf algebras, Algebra i Analiz 1 (1989), no. 6, 114–148, translation in Leningrad

Math. J. 1 (1990), no. 6, 1419–1457. MR 1047964 (91b:17016)
P. Etingof and S. Gelaki, Some properties of ﬁnite-dimensional semisimple Hopf algebras, Math. Res.
Lett. 5 (1998), no. 1-2, 191–197. MR 1617921 (99e:16050)

, The classiﬁcation of triangular semisimple and cosemisimple Hopf algebras over an alge-
braically closed ﬁeld, Internat. Math. Res. Notices 2000, no. 5, 223–234. MR 1747109 (2001h:16039)
H. Furstenberg, Boundary theory and stochastic processes on homogeneous spaces, Harmonic analysis
on homogeneous spaces (Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., Vol. XXVI, Williams Coll., Williamstown, Mass.,
1972), Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, R.I., 1973, pp. 193–229. MR 0352328 (50 #4815)
F. Hiai and M. Izumi, Amenability and strong amenability for fusion algebras with applications to
subfactor theory, Internat. J. Math. 9 (1998), no. 6, 669–722. MR 1644299 (99h:46116)
M. Izumi, Non-commutative Poisson boundaries and compact quantum group actions, Adv. Math. 169
(2002), no. 1, 1–57. MR 1916370 (2003j:46105)

[Jim85] M. Jimbo, A q-diﬀerence analogue of U (g) and the Yang-Baxter equation, Lett. Math. Phys. 10 (1985),

[Jor14]

[KV83]

[KL94]

[KW93]

no. 1, 63–69. MR 797001 (86k:17008)
B. P. A. Jordans, A classiﬁcation of SU (d)-type C∗-tensor categories, Internat. J. Math. 25 (2014),
no. 9, 1450081, 40. MR 3266525
V. A. Ka˘ımanovich and A. M. Vershik, Random walks on discrete groups: boundary and entropy, Ann.
Probab. 11 (1983), no. 3, 457–490. MR 704539 (85d:60024)
D. Kazhdan and G. Lusztig, Tensor structures arising from aﬃne Lie algebras. IV, J. Amer. Math.
Soc. 7 (1994), no. 2, 383–453. MR 1239507 (94g:17049)
D. Kazhdan and H. Wenzl, Reconstructing monoidal categories, I. M. Gel′fand Seminar, Adv. Soviet
Math., vol. 16, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1993, pp. 111–136. MR 1237835 (95e:18007)

[Lan92] M. B. Landstad, Ergodic actions of nonabelian compact groups, in: Ideas and methods in mathematical
analysis, stochastics, and applications (Oslo, 1988), 365–388, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge,
1992. MR 1190512 (93j:46072)
S. Mac Lane, Categories for the working mathematician, second ed., Graduate Texts in Mathematics,
vol. 5, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1998. MR 1712872 (2001j:18001)
J. R. McMullen, On the dual object of a compact connected group, Math. Z. 185 (1984), no. 4, 539–552.
MR 733774 (85e:22010)
S. Morrison, E. Peters, and N. Snyder, Categories generated by a trivalent vertex, preprint (2015),
arXiv:1501.06869 [math.QA].

[McM84]

[ML98]

[MPS15]

21

[Mov93] M. V. Movshev, Twisting in group algebras of ﬁnite groups, Funktsional. Anal. i Prilozhen. 27 (1993),
no. 4, 17–23, 95; translation in Funct. Anal. Appl. 27 (1993), no. 4, 240–244 (1994). MR 1264314
(95a:16036)

[M¨ug04] M. M¨uger, On the center of a compact group, Int. Math. Res. Not. (2004), no. 51, 2751–2756.

[Nes14]
[NT11a]

MR 2130607 (2005m:22003)
S. Neshveyev, Duality theory for nonergodic actions, M¨unster J. Math. 7 (2014), no. 2, 413–437.
S. Neshveyev and L. Tuset, Notes on the Kazhdan-Lusztig theorem on equivalence of the Drinfeld
category and the category of Uq g-modules, Algebr. Represent. Theory 14 (2011), no. 5, 897–948.
MR 2832264 (2012j:17022)

[NT11b]

, On second cohomology of duals of compact groups, Internat. J. Math. 22 (2011), no. 9, 1231–

1260. MR 2844801 (2012k:22010)

[NT12]

[NT13]

[NY14a]

[NY14b]
[NY15a]

, Autoequivalences of the tensor category of Uq g-modules, Int. Math. Res. Not. IMRN (2012),

no. 15, 3498–3508. MR 2959039

, Compact quantum groups and their representation categories, Cours Sp´ecialis´es [Specialized

Courses], vol. 20, Soci´et´e Math´ematique de France, Paris, 2013. MR 3204665
S. Neshveyev and M. Yamashita, Categorical duality for Yetter-Drinfeld algebras, Doc. Math. 19
(2014), 1105–1139. MR 3291643

, Poisson boundaries of monoidal categories, preprint (2014), arXiv:1405.6572 [math.OA].
, Classiﬁcation of non-Kac compact quantum groups of SU(n) type, Int. Math. Res. Not. (2015),

pp. 36.

[NY15b]

, Twisting the q-deformations of compact semisimple Lie groups, J. Math. Soc. Japan 67 (2015),

[NV10]

[Ohn99]

[Ohn05]

[Ost03]

[PP91]

[Pin07]

[PR08]

[PR11]

no. 2, 637–662. MR 3340190
R. Nest and C. Voigt, Equivariant Poincar´e duality for quantum group actions, J. Funct. Anal. 258
(2010), no. 5, 1466–1503. MR 2566309
C. Ohn, Quantum SL(3, C)’s with classical representation theory, J. Algebra 213 (1999), no. 2, 721–
756. MR 1673475 (2000c:17028)

, Quantum SL(3, C)’s:

the missing case, Hopf algebras in noncommutative geometry and
physics, Lecture Notes in Pure and Appl. Math., vol. 239, Dekker, New York, 2005, pp. 245–255.
MR 2106933 (2005h:20110)
V. Ostrik, Module categories, weak Hopf algebras and modular invariants, Transform. Groups 8 (2003),
no. 2, 177–206. MR 1976459 (2004h:18006)
M. Pimsner and S. Popa, Finite-dimensional approximation of pairs of algebras and obstructions for
the index, J. Funct. Anal. 98 (1991), no. 2, 270–291. MR 1111570 (92g:46076)
C. Pinzari, The representation category of the Woronowicz quantum group SµU(d) as a braided tensor
C ∗-category, Internat. J. Math. 18 (2007), no. 2, 113–136. MR 2307417 (2008k:46212)
C. Pinzari and J. E. Roberts, A duality theorem for ergodic actions of compact quantum groups on
C ∗-algebras, Comm. Math. Phys. 277 (2008), no. 2, 385–421. MR 2358289 (2008k:46203)

, A rigidity result for extensions of braided tensor C ∗-categories derived from compact matrix

[Rie94]

[Pop94]

quantum groups, Comm. Math. Phys. 306 (2011), no. 3, 647–662. MR 2825504 (2012h:46125)
S. Popa, C lassiﬁcation of amenable subfactors of type II, Acta Math. 172 (1994), no. 2, 163–255.
MR 1278111 (95f:46105)
M. A. Rieﬀel, Quantization and C ∗-algebras, C ∗-algebras: 1943–1993 (San Antonio, TX, 1993), Con-
temp. Math., vol. 167, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1994, pp. 66–97. MR 1292010 (95h:46108)
[RTF89] N. Yu. Reshetikhin, L. A. Takhtadzhyan, and L. D. Faddeev, Quantization of Lie groups and Lie
algebras, Algebra i Analiz 1 (1989), no. 1, 178–206, translation in Leningrad Math. J. 1 (1990), no.
1, 193—225. MR 1015339 (90j:17039)
P. Schauenburg, Turning monoidal categories into strict ones, New York J. Math. 7 (2001), 257–265
(electronic). MR 1870871 (2003d:18013)
Ya. S. So˘ıbel′man, Irreducible representations of the algebra of functions on the quantum group SU(n)
and Schubert cells, Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR 307 (1989), no. 1, 41–45, translation in Soviet Math.
Dokl. 40 (1990), no. 1, 34–38. MR 1017083 (91d:17019)

[Sch01]

[So˘ı89]

[So˘ı90]

, Algebra of functions on a compact quantum group and its representations, Algebra i Analiz
2 (1990), no. 1, 190–212; translation in Leningrad Math. J. 2 (1991), no. 1, 161–178. MR 1049910
(91i:58053a)

[Tom07] R. Tomatsu, A characterization of right coideals of quotient type and its application to classiﬁcation

[Ulb89]

[VD96]

of Poisson boundaries, Comm. Math. Phys. 275 (2007), no. 1, 271–296. MR 2335776 (2008j:46058)
K.-H. Ulbrich, Fibre functors of ﬁnite-dimensional comodules, Manuscripta Math. 65 (1989), no. 1,
39–46. MR 1006625 (90e:16014)
A. Van Daele, Discrete quantum groups, J. Algebra 180 (1996), no. 2, 431–444. MR 1378538
(97a:16076)

[Was88a] A. Wassermann, Ergodic actions of compact groups on operator algebras. II. Classiﬁcation of full
multiplicity ergodic actions, Canad. J. Math. 40 (1988), no. 6, 1482–1527. MR 0990110 (92d:46168)

22

[Was89]

, Ergodic actions of compact groups on operator algebras. I. General theory, Ann. of Math. (2)

130 (1989), no. 2, 273–319. MR 1014926 (91e:46092)

[Wor87a] S. L. Woronowicz, Compact matrix pseudogroups, Comm. Math. Phys. 111 (1987), no. 4, 613–665.

MR 901157 (88m:46079)

[Wor87b]

, Twisted SU(2) group. An example of a noncommutative diﬀerential calculus, Publ. Res. Inst.

Math. Sci. 23 (1987), no. 1, 117–181. MR 890482 (88h:46130)

[Wor88]

, Tannaka-Kre˘ın duality for compact matrix pseudogroups. Twisted SU(N ) groups, Invent.

Math. 93 (1988), no. 1, 35–76. MR 943923 (90e:22033)

E-mail address: sergeyn@math.uio.no

Department of Mathematics, University of Oslo, P.O. Box 1053 Blindern, NO-0316 Oslo, Nor-

way

E-mail address: yamashita.makoto@ocha.ac.jp

Department of Mathematics, Ochanomizu University, Otsuka 2-1-1, Bunkyo, 112-8610 Tokyo,

Japan

23

