6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
7
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
p
m
o
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
9
4
5
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Quantiﬁcation of Uncertainties in Turbulence Modeling: A
Comparison of Physics-Based and Random Matrix Theoretic

Approaches

Jian-Xun Wang, Rui Sun, Heng Xiao∗

Department of Aerospace and Ocean Engineering, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24060, United States

Abstract

Numerical models based on Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) equations are widely

used in engineering turbulence modeling. However, the RANS predictions have large model-

form uncertainties for many complex ﬂows, e.g., those with non-parallel shear layer or strong

mean ﬂow curvature. Quantiﬁcation of these large uncertainties originating from the mod-

eled Reynolds stresses has attracted attention in turbulence modeling community. Recently,

a physics-based Bayesian framework for quantifying model-form uncertainties has been pro-

posed with successful applications to several ﬂows. Nonetheless, how to specify proper priors

without introducing unwarranted, artiﬁcial information remains challenging to the current

form of the physics-based approach. Another recently proposed method based on random

matrix theory provides the prior distributions with the maximum entropy, which is an al-

ternative for model-form uncertainty quantiﬁcation in RANS simulations. This method has

better mathematical rigorousness and provides the most non-committal prior distributions

without introducing artiﬁcial constraints. On the other hand, the physics-based approach has

the advantages of being more ﬂexible to incorporate available physical insights. In this work,

we utilize the random matrix theoretic approach to assess and possibly improve the speciﬁ-

cation of priors used in the physics-based approach. A comparison of the two approaches is

then conducted through a test case using a canonical ﬂow, the ﬂow past periodic hills. The

numerical results show that, to achieve maximum entropy in the prior of Reynolds stresses,

∗Corresponding author. Tel: +1 540 231 0926
Email address: hengxiao@vt.edu (Heng Xiao)

Preprint submitted to XXX

March 18, 2016

the perturbations of shape parameters in Barycentric coordinates are normally distributed.

Moreover, the perturbations of the turbulence kinetic energy should conform to log-normal

distributions. Finally, it sheds light on how large the variance of each physical variable

should be compared with each other to achieve the approximate maximum entropy prior.

The conclusion can be used as a guidance for specifying proper priors in the physics-based,

Bayesian uncertainty quantiﬁcation framework.

Keywords: model-form uncertainty quantiﬁcation, turbulence modeling,

Reynolds-Averaged Navier–Stokes equations, random matrix theory, maximum entropy

principle

Highlights

1. Compared physics-based and random matrix methods to quantify RANS model uncer-

tainty

2. Demonstrated applications of both methods in channel ﬂow over periodic hills

3. Examined the amount of information introduced in the physics-based approach

4. Discussed implications to modeling turbulence in both near-wall and separated regions

Notations

We summarize the convention of notations below because of the large number of symbols

used in this paper. The general conventions are as follows:

1. Upper case letters with brackets (e.g., [R]) indicate matrices or tensors; lower case

letters with arrows (e.g., (cid:126)v) indicate vectors; undecorated letters in either upper or

lower cases indicate scalars. An exception is the spatial coordinate, which is denoted
as x for simplicity but is in fact a 3× 1 vector. Tensors (matrices) and vectors are also
indicated with index notations, e.g., Rij and vi with i, j = 1, 2, 3.

2

2. Bold letters (e.g., [R]) indicate random variables (including scalars, vectors, and ma-

trices), the non-bold letters (e.g., [R]) indicate the corresponding realizations, and

underlined letters (e.g., [R]) indicate the mean.

3. Symbols M +

d , and M+0

indicate the sets of symmetric positive deﬁnite and symmetric
positive semi-deﬁnite matrices, respectively, of dimension d × d with the following
relation: Ms

d

d ⊂ M +

d ⊂ M+0
d .

This work deals with Reynolds stresses, which are rank two tensors. Therefore, it is implied
throughout the paper that all random or deterministic matrices have sizes 3 × 3 with real
entries unless noted otherwise. Finally, a list of nomenclature is presented in Appendix C.

1. Introduction

Despite the increasing availability of computational resources in the past decades, high-

ﬁdelity simulations (e.g., large eddy simulation, direct numerical simulation) are still not

aﬀordable for most practical problems. Numerical models based on Reynolds-Averaged

Navier–Stokes (RANS) equations are still the dominant tools for the prediction of turbulent

ﬂows in industrial and natural processes. However, for many practical ﬂows, e.g., those

with strong adverse pressure gradient, non-parallel shear layer, or strong mean ﬂow cur-

vature, the predictions of RANS models have large uncertainties. The uncertainties are

mostly attributed to the phenomenological closure models for the Reynolds stresses [1, 2].

Previous eﬀorts in quantifying and reducing model-form uncertainties in RANS simulations

have mostly followed parametric approaches, e.g., by perturbing, tuning, or inferring the

parameters of the closure models of the Reynolds stress [3–5].

Recently, the turbulence modeling community has recognized the limitations of the para-

metric approaches and started investigating non-parametric approaches where uncertainties

are directly injected into the Reynolds stresses [2, 6–10]. In their pioneering work, Iaccarino

et al. [6, 8, 9] proposed a physics-based approach, where the Reynolds stress is projected onto

six physically meaningful dimensions (its shape, magnitude, and orientation). They further

perturbed the Reynolds stresses towards the limiting states in the physically realizable range,

3

based on which the RANS prediction uncertainties are estimated. Building on the work of

Iaccarino et al. [6, 8, 9], Xiao et al. [10] modeled the Reynolds stress discrepancy as a zero-

mean random ﬁeld and used a physical-based parameterization to systematically explore the

uncertainty space. They further used Bayesian inferences to incorporate observation data to

reduce the model-form uncertainty in RANS simulation. While the physics-based method

has achieved signiﬁcant successes, the method in its current form has two major limitations.

First, uncertainties are only injected to the shape and magnitude of the Reynolds stresses

but not to the orientations, and thus they do not fully explore the uncertainty space. Second,

it is challenging to specify prior distributions over these physical variables without introduc-

ing artiﬁcial constraints. The priors are critical for uncertainty propagation and Bayesian

inference, particularly when the amount of data is limited [11]. Xiao et al. [10] speciﬁed

Gaussian distribution for the perturbations of shape parameters in natural coordinates and

log-normal distribution for the turbulence kinetic energy discrepancy. The perturbations in

all physical parameters share the same variance ﬁeld. However, it is not clear if or how much

artiﬁcial constraints are introduced into the prior with this choice. Moreover, without suﬃ-

cient physical insight, it is not clear how large the variance of perturbation for each physical

variable should be relative to each other.

In information theory, Shannon entropy is an important measure of the information con-

tained in each probability distribution. The distribution best representing the current state

is the one with the largest information entropy, which is known as principle of maximum

entropy [12]. This principle has been used as a guideline to specify prior distributions in

Bayesian framework [13]. Although this theory has been extensively used in information

processing problems such as communications and image processing, the application in con-

junction with random matrix theory applied to physical systems is only a recent development,

which was ﬁrst proposed and developed by Soize et al. [14, 15]. Built on the theories devel-

oped by Soize et al., Xiao et al. [16] proposed a random matrix theoretic (RMT) approach

with maximum entropy principle to quantify model-form uncertainties in RANS simula-

tions. The RMT approach is an alternative to the physics-based approach in quantifying

4

model-form uncertainties in RANS simulations. It can provide objective priors for Bayesian

inferences that satisﬁes the given constraints without introducing artiﬁcial information.

While the RMT approach has better mathematical rigorousness and provides a proper

prior of the Reynolds stress tensors with maximum entropy, it has its own limitations. In

particular, since the perturbations are directly introduced to the Reynolds stress itself, it

is not straightforward to incorporate physical insights that are available for speciﬁc ﬂows

into the RMT approach. For example, for the ﬂow in a channel with square cross section,

the discrepancies of RANS-predicted Reynolds stress mainly come from the shape of the

Reynolds stress tensor, while the predicted turbulence kinetic energy is rather accurate [17].

In this case, the perturbation variances of shape parameters should be speciﬁed much larger

than that of the turbulence kinetic energy. Nonetheless, this piece of information is diﬃ-

cult to incorporate into the RMT approach. In comparison, the physics-based approach is

more ﬂexible and thus may be preferred in engineering applications for both uncertainty

quantiﬁcation and Bayesian inferences. Therefore, the objective of this work is to utilize the

RMT approach to assess and improve the speciﬁcation of priors used in the physics-based

approach. To this end, the Reynolds stress samples with maximum entropy distribution

obtained in the RMT approach are ﬁrst projected onto the physically meaningful dimen-

sions. Then, the distributions in the six physical dimensions are used to gauge the priors

speciﬁed in the physics-based approach. The comparison between the two approaches allows

for quantiﬁcation of the amount of information introduced in the physics-based priors. It

also sheds light on the speciﬁcation of appropriate prior for each physical variable when no

further physical knowledge is available.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the physics-based and

RMT approaches for RANS model-form uncertainty quantiﬁcation. Section 3 uses the ﬂow

over periodic hills as an example to perform the comparison between the two approaches.

The results are then presented and discussed. Finally, Section 4 concludes the paper.

5

2. Comparison of Physics Based Approach and RMT Approach

This work examines and compares two approaches, the physics-based approach and the

random matrix theoretic approach, for quantifying RANS model-form uncertainties. We

ﬁrst brieﬂy introduce the general background of RANS-based turbulence modeling and the

common assumptions of the two approaches before presenting the technical details of the

two approaches.

Reynolds averaged Navier–Stokes equations describe the mean quantities (e.g., velocity

and pressure) of the turbulent ﬂows. They are obtained by performing time- or ensemble-

averaging on the Navier–Stokes equations, which describes the instantaneous ﬂow quantities.

The averaging process leads to a covariance term of the instantaneous velocities, which is

referred to as Reynolds stresses and needs model closure in RANS simulations.

It is the

consensus of the turbulence modeling community that the modeling of the Reynolds stresses

accounts for majority of the model-form uncertainty in RANS simulations [1]. In the physics

based approach proposed by Iaccarino et al.[6, 8] and further extended by Xiao et al. [10, 11],

perturbations are directly injected to the RANS-predicted Reynolds stresses. Speciﬁcally,

the physically meaningful projections of the Reynolds stress, i.e., its magnitude, shape,

and orientation are jointly perturbed around their respective mean values obtained in the

RANS simulation, and the perturbations are then propagated through RANS solvers to

the Quantities of Interests (QoI, e.g., velocities). The obtained ensemble is then used to

assess the uncertainties in the RANS predictions. The speciﬁc form of perturbation for each

variable is a modeling choice made by the user. The scheme ensures realizability (positive

semi-deﬁniteness) of the Reynolds stresses. Similar to the physics-based approach, zero-

mean perturbations are also injected to the RANS-predicted Reynolds stresses in the RMT

approach with realizability guaranteed. In contrast to the physics-based approach, however,

in the RMT approach the true Reynolds stress is modeled as random matrices, for which

a maximum entropy probabilistic distribution is constructed under the constraint that the

mean is the RANS-predicted value. The maximum entropy distribution is then sampled to

be obtain the perturbed Reynolds stress ﬁelds.

6

In summary, both the physics-based and the RMT approaches introduce zero-mean per-

turbations to the RANS predicted Reynolds stresses, which are then propagated to the QoIs

to assess RANS prediction uncertainties. They diﬀer in how the perturbations are intro-

duced. The RMT approach introduces perturbations directly in the Reynolds stress tensor

and the perturbations conform to a maximum entropy distribution, while the physics-based

approach introduces perturbations to the physically meaningful projections of the Reynolds

stresses. The details of the two schemes are presented below.

2.1. Physics-Based Approach

Here, we brieﬂy summarize the physics-based model-form uncertainty quantiﬁcation

framework proposed by Xiao et al. [10] and its extension to account for uncertainties in

tensor orientation. In the framework, the true Reynolds stress [R(x)] is modeled as a ran-

dom tensorial ﬁeld with the RANS-predicted Reynolds stress [R(x)]rans as prior mean, in

which x denotes the spatial coordinate. To inject uncertainties into the physically meaning-

ful projections of Reynolds stress tensor, the following eigen-decomposition is performed for

its each realization at any given location x:

(cid:18)1

3

(cid:19)

(cid:18)1

3

(cid:19)

[R] = 2k

[I] + [A]

= 2k

[I] + [E][Λ][E]T

(1)

where k is the turbulent kinetic energy indicating the magnitude of [R]; [I] is the second order
identity tensor; [A] is the anisotropy tensor; [E] = [(cid:126)e1, (cid:126)e2, (cid:126)e3] and [Λ] = diag[˜λ1, ˜λ2, ˜λ3] ,where
˜λ1 + ˜λ2 + ˜λ3 = 0, are the orthonormal eigenvectors and the corresponding eigenvalues of [A],

respectively, indicating the orientation and shape of [R]. In order to physically interpret the

shape of the Reynolds stress and easily impose the realizability constraint, the eigenvalues
˜λ1, ˜λ2, and ˜λ3 are mapped to the Barycentric coordinates (C1, C2, C3) with C1 + C2 + C3 = 1.

The Barycentric coordinates are deﬁned as,

C1 = ˜λ1 − ˜λ2
C2 = 2(˜λ2 − ˜λ3)
C3 = 3˜λ3 + 1 .

7

(2a)

(2b)

(2c)

As shown in Fig. 1a, the Barycentric coordinates (C1, C2, C3) of a point indicate the portion

of areas of three sub-triangles formed by the point and with edge labeled as C1, C2, and

C3, in the Barycentric triangle. For example, the ratio of the sub-triangle labeled with

C3 to the entire triangle is C3. A point located on the top vertex corresponds to C3 = 1

while a point located on the bottom edge has C3 = 0. The Barycentric coordinates have

Figure 1: Mapping between the Barycentric coordinate to the natural coordinate, trans-

forming the Barycentric triangle enclosing all physically realizable states [8, 18] to a square

through standard ﬁnite element shape functions. Details of the mapping can be found in

the appendix of ref. [10]. Corresponding edges in the two coordinates are indicated with

matching colors.

clear physical interpretation, i.e., the dimensionality of the turbulence. All the edges and

vertices indicate limiting states of turbulence, which are shown in Fig 1a. The projections

of all Reynolds stresses should fall inside the Barycentric triangle to ensure the realizability.

To facilitate parameterization, the Barycentric coordinates are further transformed to the

natural coordinates (ξ, η) with the triangle mapped to the square, as shown in Fig. 1b. Details

of the mapping can be found in ref. [10]. Although the tensor orientation ([E] = [(cid:126)e1, (cid:126)e2, (cid:126)e3])

has not been perturbed in ref. [10], it can be done with an appropriate parameterization
scheme. The Euler angle with z-x(cid:48)-z(cid:48)(cid:48) convention [19] is used to parameterize the orientation

8

3(4)12Three-componentisotropic (3C)XX'One-component (1C)Two-componentaxisymmetric(2C)Realizableturbulence4321ΔξΔηc1c3c2(a) Barycentric coordinate(b) Natural coordinateXX'of the Reynolds stress tensor. That is, ﬁrst, the local coordinate system x-y-z of eigenvectors

of [R] initially aligned with the global coordinate system X-Y -Z rotates about the z axis by

angle ϕ1. Then, it rotates about the x axis by angle ϕ2, and ﬁnally rotates about its new z

axis by angle ϕ3.

In summary, the Reynolds stress tensor ﬁeld is transformed to six physically meaningful

component ﬁelds denoted as ξ, η, k, ϕ1, ϕ2, and ϕ3, which are all scalar ﬁelds. After the

mapping, uncertainties are introduced to these quantities by adding discrepancy terms to

the corresponding RANS predictions, i.e.,

ξ(x) =

˜ξrans(x) + ∆ξ(x)

η(x) =

˜ηrans(x) + ∆η(x)

log k(x) = log ˜krans(x) + ∆ log k(x)

ϕi(x) =

˜ϕi

rans(x) + ∆ϕi(x),

i = 1, 2, 3

(3a)

(3b)

(3c)

(3d)

where ∆ξ(x) and ∆η(x) are discrepancies of the Reynolds stress shape parameters ξ and η,

respectively; ∆ log k(x) is the log-discrepancy of the turbulent kinetic energy; ∆ϕi(x) (i =

1, 2, 3) are the discrepancies of three Euler angles. To model the prior of these discrepancy

ﬁelds with spatial smoothness, we assume that each discrepancy ﬁeld is normally distributed
at any location x and use a Gaussian kernel K(x, x(cid:48)) to describe the correlation between any
two diﬀerent locations x and x(cid:48). That is,

(cid:18)

−|x − x(cid:48)|2

l2

(cid:19)

K(x, x(cid:48)) = σ(x)σ(x(cid:48)) exp

where x, x(cid:48) ∈ Σ,

(4)

where Σ is the spatial domain of the ﬂow ﬁeld. The variance σ(x) is a spatially varying

ﬁeld representing the magnitude of injected uncertainties. The correlation length l also

varies spatially based on the local length scale of the mean ﬂow. It can be seen from Eq. 3

that the discrepancy ﬁelds for shape parameters (ξ, η) and Euler angles (ϕi) are Gaussian

random ﬁelds, and the discrepancy ﬁeld for magnitude parameter k is a log-normal random

ﬁeld. To reduce dimensions of the random ﬁelds, Karhunen–Loeve expansions of the random

ﬁelds are adopted with chosen basis that are eigenfunctions of the kernel [20]. That is, the

9

discrepancies can be represented as follows:

∞(cid:88)

∆(x) =

ωα φα(x),

(5)

j=1

where the coeﬃcients ωα (denoting ωξ

α, ωη

α, ωk

α, ωϕi

α for discrepancy ﬁelds ∆ξ, ∆η, ∆ log k

and ∆ϕi, respectively) are independent standard Gaussian random variables. In practice,

the inﬁnite series are truncated to Nkl terms with Nkl depending on the smoothness of the

kernel K. Therefore, the discrepancy ﬁelds in Reynolds stress are parameterized by the
α with α = 1, 2,··· , Nkl. These Reynolds stress discrepancies are

coeﬃcients ωξ

α, ωη

α, ωk

α, ωϕi

then propagated to the QoI (e.g., velocity) as the model-form uncertainties.

In summary, the uncertainties are injected into the six physically meaningful dimensions

of Reynolds stress separately in the physics-based approach. For each dimension, the un-

certainties are represented by the Gaussian random ﬁelds to ensure the smoothness of the

Reynolds stress perturbations (for incompressible ﬂow). The perturbed Reynolds stresses

are reconstructed with these six random ﬁelds, which are then propagated to the QoI as the

quantiﬁed model-form uncertainties. Detailed algorithm of the physics-based approach is

presented in Appendix A.

2.2. Random Matrix Theoretic Approach with Maximum Entropy Principle

Since Reynolds stresses belong to the set M+0

d

of symmetric positive deﬁnite tensors,

where d = 3, it is natural to describe them directly as random matrices in set M+0

d . In the
following, we summarize the uncertainty quantiﬁcation approach based on random matrix

theory and maximum entropy principle proposed by Xiao et al. [16].

In this framework,

a probabilistic model in matrix set is built to satisfy all the constraints in the context of

turbulence modeling. Based on the principle of maximum entropy, the target probability
(cid:55)→ R+ is the most non-committal probability density function (PDF)
measure p[R] : M+0
satisfying all available constraints (e.g., realizability) but without introducing any other
unwarranted constraints, where R+ is the set of positive real number.

d

A two-step approach is used to ﬁnd such maximum entropy distribution for random

Reynolds stress tensors. First, the PDF for a normalized, positive deﬁnite random matrix [G]

10

is obtained, whose mean is the identity matrix, i.e., E{[G]} = [I]. The distribution of [G]
should have the maximum entropy. Second, the distribution of Reynolds stress tensor [R] is

obtained with its mean [R] and normalized random matrix [G] as follows:

[R] = [LR]T [G][LR],

(6)

where [LR] is an upper triangular matrix with non-negative diagonal entries obtained from

the following factorization of the speciﬁed mean [R], i.e.,

[R] = [LR]T [LR].

(7)

It is assumed that the RANS predicated Reynolds stress [R]rans is the best estimate of [R].

Therefore, to determine the maximum entropy distribution of [R], one only needs to focus

on the normalized random matrix [G]. It is ﬁrst represented by its Chelosky factorization:

[G] = [L]T [L],

(8)

where [L] are upper triangle matrices with six independent elements. To achieve the matrix

entropy, the distributions for each element Lij can be speciﬁed following the procedures in

Ref. [16]. Note that each of the six elements of [L] is a random scalar ﬁeld independent of

each other. The oﬀ-diagonal element ﬁelds Lij(x) with i < j are obtained from

Lij(x) = σd(x) wij(x),

(9)

in which wij(x) (i.e., w12(x), w13(x), and w23(x)) represents an independent Gaussian ran-

dom ﬁeld with zero mean and unit variance. The uncertainty magnitude ﬁeld σd(x) can be

calculated as

σd(x) = δ(x) × (d + 1)−1/2,

(10)

in which d = 3 denotes the dimension of tensor, and δ(x) denotes dispersion parameter ﬁeld.

The dispersion parameter at location x indicates the uncertainty of the random matrix at x

(cid:20) 1

d

(cid:21) 1

2

F}
E{(cid:107)[G](x) − [I](cid:107)2

11

and is deﬁned as

δ(x) =

,

(11)

where (cid:107) · (cid:107)F is Frobenius norm, e.g., (cid:107)G(cid:107)F = (cid:112)tr([G]T [G]).

It can be seen that δ(x) is

analogous to the variance ﬁeld σ(x) of a scalar random ﬁeld shown in the physics-based

√

approach. It has been shown in [14] that 0 < δ(x) <

2/2 for d = 3. For the three diagonal

element ﬁelds, each one of them is generated as follows:

Lii(x) = σd(x)(cid:112)2ui(x) with i = 1, 2, 3,

(12)

where ui(x) is a positive valued gamma random ﬁeld and σd(x) is deﬁned above in Eq. 10.

Since Reynolds stresses are correlated at diﬀerent spatial locations, one needs to model

the correlation structures in the six ﬁelds of elements. It is assumed here that both the oﬀ-

diagonal and the square root of diagonal terms have the same spatial correlation structures.

With Gaussian kernel used in this work, the correlation between two spatial locations x and
x(cid:48) can be shown as

ρL{Lij(x), Lij(x(cid:48))} = exp
ii(x(cid:48))} = exp

ρL{L2

ii(x), L2

(cid:21)
(cid:21)

(cid:20)
(cid:20)

−|x − x(cid:48)|2
−|x − x(cid:48)|2

l2

l2

for

i < j

,

(13a)

(13b)

where l is the correlation length scale. Note that repeated index does not imply summation

here. With the deﬁned correlation model, the three independent Gaussian random ﬁelds for

the oﬀ-diagonal terms can be generated by using Monte Carlo sampling. Similar to that

in the physics-based approach, the Karhunen–Loeve expansions are used here for reducing

the dimension. To express the non-Gaussian random ﬁelds used to obtain the diagonal

terms (see Eq. 12), the Gamma random variable ui at any spatial location x is expanded by

polynomial chaos expansion with Gaussian random variables [21] (see Appendix B). Finally,

the constructed distribution of Reynolds stresses can be propagated by RANS equation to

the QoI to quantify the model-form uncertainties.

In summary, the uncertainties are directly injected into the Reynolds stress tensors in

the set M+0

d

of positive deﬁnite matrices in the RMT approach. The principle of maxi-

mum entropy is applied to avoid introducing artiﬁcial constraints. The perturbed Reynolds

stresses are then propagated to the QoI as the quantiﬁed model-form uncertainties. Detailed

algorithm of the RMT approach can be found in Appendix B.

12

3. Numerical Results

3.1. Cases Setup

A canonical ﬂow, the ﬂow in a channel with periodic hills, is studied to compare the prior

distributions of Reynolds stresses perturbed by the physics-based approach and the random

matrix theoretic (RMT) approach. The computational domain is shown in Fig. 2. Periodic

boundary conditions are imposed in the streamwise (x-) direction and non-slip boundary

conditions are applied at the walls.

Figure 2: Domain shape for the ﬂow in the channel with periodic hills. The x-, y- and

z-coordinates are aligned with the streamwise, wall-normal, and spanwise directions, respec-

tively. All dimensions are normalized by H with Lx/H = 9 and Ly/H = 3.036. Two typical

locations A (x/H = 2.0, y/H = 0.5) and B (x/H = 2.0, y/H = 0.01) are marked in the

ﬁgure.

In the physics-based approach the variance ﬁelds σ(x) for generating random perturbation

ﬁelds ∆ξ(x), ∆η(x), ∆ log k(x), and ∆ϕi(x) (i = 1, 2, 3) represent the magnitude of injected

uncertainties. In the RMT approach the dispersion parameter δ(x) determines the variance
of perturbations directly in the set M+

3 of positive deﬁnite matrices. To ensure that the

distributions of perturbed Reynolds stresses from the two approaches are comparable, the

amount of perturbation needs to be consistent with each other. Therefore, we estimate the

dispersion parameter ﬁeld δ(x) based on the samples of Reynolds stresses obtained in the

physics-based approach with the given variance σ(x). Although the physics-based approach

is more ﬂexible to specify diﬀerent variances for the six discrepancy ﬁelds, it is diﬃcult to

13

general flow directionrecirculation zoneABdetermine how large the variance of each variable should be relative to each other. To be

consistent with Xiao et al. [10], the Gaussian random ﬁelds for ∆ξ, ∆η, ∆ log k, and ∆ϕi

(i = 1, 2, 3) share the same variance ﬁeld σ(x). Since the aim of this work is to compare

the two approaches, we choose a constant variance ﬁeld to avoid the complexity caused by

spatial variations of the perturbation variances. We investigate two groups of cases with

diﬀerent magnitudes of perturbation. For cases Phy1 and RM1, a relatively small constant

variance ﬁeld σ = 0.2 is used in the physics-based approach, and the corresponding dispersion

parameter ﬁeld δ(x) is estimated in the RMT approach. For cases Phy2 and RM2, a larger

constant variance ﬁeld σ = 0.6 is applied. Since all results below are presented in degrees,

we note that the variances σ = 0.2 and σ = 0.6 here for the Euler angles are in radian, which
correspond to 12◦ and 34◦, respectively. For all cases, 30 modes are used in Karhunen–Loeve

expansion to capture more than 90% of the variance of the Gaussian random ﬁeld. To reﬂect

the anisotropy of the ﬂow, an anisotropic yet spatially uniform length scale (lx/H = 2 and

ly/H = 1) is used in the correlation kernel. To adequately represent the prior distribution of

Reynolds stresses, 10,000 samples are drawn. The computational parameters are summarized

in Table 1.

3.2. Results and Discussions

Two groups of comparisons between the physics-based approach and the RMT approach

are conducted with the samples drawn by the Monte Carlo method. In each case, the sam-

ples of Reynolds stress ﬁeld [R(x)] are obtained by using both the physics-based algorithm

described in Section 2.1 and the RMT approach in Section 2.2. The objective of this study

is to gauge the prior speciﬁed in the physics-based approach by using the results of the

RMT approach. Therefore, all the sampled Reynolds stresses are mapped to their physical

dimensions, i.e., shape parameter (in Barycentric coordinates C1, C2, C3 and natural coordi-

nates ξ, η), magnitude k, and the Euler angles (ϕ1, ϕ2, and ϕ3), to facilitate the comparison.

Moreover, the decomposition into physical components also allows visualization of the distri-

bution of random tensor ﬁelds. The marginal distributions of all components are investigated

at two typical points: (1) point A located at x/H = 2.0 and y/H = 0.5 and (2) point B

14

Table 1: Mesh and computational parameters used in the ﬂow over periodic hills.

Parameters

Phy 1

RM 1

Phy 2

RM 2

variance/dispersion(a)

σ = 0.2

see note (a)

σ = 0.6

see note (a)

Karhunen–Loeve mesh

RANS mesh

number of modes NKL

correlation length scales(b)

number of samples

50 × 30
50 × 30

30

lx/H = 2, ly/H = 1

10,000

(a) the dispersion parameter ﬁeld δ(x) is estimated with the corresponding variance

ﬁeld σ(x) of the companion physics-based case.

(b) see Eq. 4.

located at x/H = 2.0 and y/H = 0.01, indicated in Fig. 2. Point A is a generic point in

the recirculation region, and point B is a near-wall point with two-dimensional turbulence

representing limiting states.

We ﬁrst investigate the distributions of shape parameters of the Reynolds stress ten-

sors in Barycentric coordinates, which have clear physical interpretations (see Fig. 1). The

perturbed Reynolds stresses at the generic point A are sampled and projected onto the

Barycentric triangle. The scatter plots of these samples for all cases are shown in Fig. 3. We

can see that the baseline RANS-predicted Reynolds stress at this generic point is located in

the interior of the triangle, while the benchmark result is located to the upper right of the

baseline result. For all cases considered here, all samples fall inside the Barycentric triangle,

demonstrating that the realizability is guaranteed in both approaches. The scatterings of

samples in Figs. 3a and 3b are comparable, and this is also the case for Figs. 3c and 3d,

indicating that the dispersion parameters δ estimated with the corresponding variances σ

are acceptable. The samples are still scattered around the baseline state, especially when

the perturbation variance is small (σ = 0.2). It shows that the sample mean overlaps with

15

(a) Case Phy1, σ = 0.2

(b) Case RM1, σ = 0.2

(c) Case Phy2, σ = 0.6

(d) Case RM2, σ = 0.6

Figure 3: Scatter plots of the Reynolds stress samples projected to the Barycentric coordi-

nates for point A (x/H = 2.0, y/H = 0.5) located in the recirculation region. Panels (a) and

(b) compare the two approaches with small perturbation (σ = 0.2), while panels (c) and (d)

show the comparison with large perturbation (σ = 0.6). The benchmark state is plotted as

blue square, which is located to the upper right of the baseline result.

16

BenchmarkBaseline2-Comp1-Comp3-CompC1C2C3SamplesSample Mean2-Comp1-Comp3-CompC1C2C32-Comp1-Comp3-CompC1C2C32-Comp1-Comp3-CompC1C2C3the baseline state in Fig. 3a. When the variance increases (σ = 0.6), the mean value slightly

deviates from the baseline state (comparing Figs. 3a and 3c). This deviation is markedly

ampliﬁed in the RMT approach (Fig. 3d), suggesting that although the mean of perturbed

Reynolds stresses is assumed to be the baseline result in the RMT approach, the mean is not

preserved during the projection to the Barycentric coordinates. As the perturbation becomes

large, the constraint of realizability leads to this signiﬁcant deviation. Another notable dif-

ference between the results of two approaches lies in the shape of sample scattering. The

scattering in case Phy1 is more elliptical-like with a large amount of samples spreading along

the plain strain line (Fig. 3a), while in case RM1 the samples are scattered more circularly

(Fig. 3b). When the perturbation is large (σ = 0.6), we can see that in both cases Phy2

and RM2 the scatterings of samples show signiﬁcant inﬂuence from the boundaries. In the

results of the physics-based approach, a number of samples fall on the edges of the triangle,

and a large number of samples are clustered near the top vertex (Fig. 3c). In contrast, in

the RMT approach the samples are dispersed within the triangle without such clustering,

and the frequency of occurrences decreases near the edges (Fig. 3d).

Detailed comparison can be conducted by examining the marginal distributions of shape

parameters in Barycentric coordinates C1, C2, and C3. In Fig. 4 we present the probability

density function (PDF) of C1 for cases Phy1 and RM1 and cases Phy2 and RM2. Since C2

and C3 are correlated and have the similar characteristics as C1, thus are omited for brevity.

When the variance σ is 0.2, the distributions obtained in both approaches are Gaussian, and

the sample means are close to the baseline result. As the variance σ increases to 0.6, both

distributions deviate from Gaussian. In the physics-based approach the mode of samples (at

peak of PDF) moves towards C1 = 0 and the sample mean increases slightly compared to the

baseline results. This is caused by the scheme used to impose the realizability constraint in

the physics-based approach, where the samples falling outside the triangle are capped to the

boundaries of natural coordinates (the four edges shown in Fig. 1b). Moreover, the samples

spreading within the upper area of the natural coordinate square are squeezed in Barycen-

tric triangle because of the mapping between the two coordinates. However, in the RMT

17

(a) cases Phy1 and RM1, σ = 0.2

(b) cases Phy2 and RM2, σ = 0.6

Figure 4: Probability distributions of the perturbed Barycentric coordinate C1 for point A

(x/H = 2.0, y/H = 0.5) located in the recirculation region. The results from the physics-

based approach and the RMT approach are compared in the same plot. Panels (a) and

(b) show the comparison at perturbation variances of σ = 0.2 (cases Phy1 and RM1) and

σ = 0.6 (cases Phy2 and RM2), respectively.

18

0.00.20.40.60.81.0C101234567PDFRMTPhy0.00.20.40.60.81.0C10.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.5PDFMean, RMTMean, PhyBaselineapproach the realizability of the Reynolds stress tensor [R] is guaranteed mathematically

and no additional constraints are imposed due to the coordinates mapping. More precisely,

the positive semi-deﬁniteness of the normalized random matrix [G] is guaranteed by con-

structing from its Cholesky factor [L] (see Eq. 8). As a result, the distribution of C1 is close

to Gamma distribution with the sample mean increased compared to the baseline result.

Based on the observations and discussions above, we ﬁnd the bounding method used and

the mapping between natural coordinate and Barycentric coordinate used in physics-based

approach introduce some artiﬁcial constraints into the prior of Reynolds stresses. Therefore,

it is better to specify Gaussian distributed perturbations of shape parameters in Barycentric

coordinate to achieve maximum entropy for a generic location away from the wall.

It is also interesting to study the a point located close to the wall. Similarly, the compar-

isons of scatter plots of Reynolds stress samples at point B are presented in Fig. 5. It shows

that the benchmark truth is located on the bottom edge of the triangle, indicating the two-

component limiting state. This is because the velocity ﬂuctuations in wall-normal direction

are suppressed by the blocking of bottom wall of the channel. In contrast, RANS-predicted

Reynolds stress is close to the three-component isotropic state, located near the top vertex

of the triangle. For the point B at the near wall location, the sample scatterings in all four

cases are markedly aﬀected by the boundaries of the triangle, and the sample means move

downwards. This is due to the fact that the distances from the baseline state to the bound-

aries are relatively small compared to the perturbations, and thus the perturbed states are

signiﬁcantly aﬀected by these constraints. However, the inﬂuences caused by the constraints

imposed in the two approaches are diﬀerent. In the case with a small variance σ = 0.2 (case

Phy1, Fig. 5a), the samples are largely clustered near the top vertex and the scattering is

squeezed artiﬁcially in the physics-based approach. Although enough samples are drawn,

very few of them fall in the areas near the two side edges. In contrast, the samples in the

RMT approach are dispersed within the entire upper area of the triangle and better explored

the spanned uncertainty space (case RM1, Fig. 5b). When the variance is large (σ = 0.6,

case Phy2, Fig. 5c), the capping scheme used to ensure realizability in the physics-based

19

(a) Case Phy1, σ = 0.2

(b) Case RM1, σ = 0.2

(c) Case Phy2, σ = 0.6

(d) Case RM2, σ = 0.6

Figure 5: Scatter plots of the Reynolds stress samples projected to the Barycentric coor-

dinates for point B (x/H = 2.0, y/H = 0.01) located in the recirculation region. Panels

(a) and (b) compare the two approaches with small perturbation (σ = 0.2), while panels

(c) and (d) show the comparison with large perturbation (σ = 0.6). The benchmark state

is plotted as blue square, which is located on the bottom edge of the triangle, indicating

two-component turbulence.

20

BenchmarkBaseline2-Comp1-Comp3-CompC1C2C3SamplesSample Mean2-Comp1-Comp3-CompC1C2C32-Comp1-Comp3-CompC1C2C32-Comp1-Comp3-CompC1C2C3approach has a more pronounced eﬀect on the obtained sample distribution. Speciﬁcally,

about one half of the samples are capped to the edges or the vertices of the Barycentric

triangle, leading to deteriorated sample eﬀectiveness.

The diﬀerences of perturbations in shape parameters between the two approaches are

discussed above for two typical points A and B of the channel. In order to quantitatively

explore the spatial variation of the diﬀerence between the two approaches, we calculate

the Kullbck-Leibler divergence of the distribution obtained by the physics-based approach

from the distribution obtained by the RMT approach. The Kullbck-Leibler divergence (also

known as relative entropy) of q from p is a measure of the diﬀerence between two probability

densities p and q, which is deﬁned as [22]

DKL(p||q) =

(cid:90)

log

p(ϑ)
q(ϑ)

dϑ,

(14)

I

where ϑ denotes the parameter, and I is the parameter space. The Kullbck-Leibler divergence

is analogous to a “distance” between two distributions, but it is not a distance measure

since it does not preserve the symmetry in p and q. More intuitively, the Kullbck-Leibler

divergence of q from p can be interpreted as the measure of the information gained from

the distribution p to distribution q. The Kullbck-Leibler divergence is calculated to reﬂect

the additional information introduced in the physics-based approach based on the maximum

entropy distribution obtained with the RMT approach. Figure 6 shows the spatial proﬁles

of Kullbck-Leibler divergence for the shape parameter C1. The proﬁles are shown at eight
streamwise locations, x/H = 1,··· , 8, and the dashed black lines are plotted to indicate
the axis of DKL = 0. The geometry of the physical domain is also plotted to facilitate

visualization. To clearly show the characteristics of the proﬁles, a larger scale factor of 0.9

is used in Fig. 6a, while a smaller scale factor of 0.3 is used in Fig. 6b. When the variance

is small (σ = 0.2), the Kullbck-Leibler divergence is also small over the entire domain

(Fig. 6a), suggesting that the distributions of shape parameters obtained from the physics-

based approach are similar to those obtained from the RMT approach. When we increase

the perturbation variance (σ = 0.6), the Kullbck-Leibler divergence becomes larger over the

entire domain (Fig. 6b), indicating that the additional, artiﬁcial constraints introduced in

21

the physics-based approach are signiﬁcant with large perturbation. Moreover, both Figs. 6a

and 6b show that the Kullbck-Leibler divergences for the locations near the wall are slightly

larger than those at generic locations. As has been discussed above, the baseline RANS-

predicted Reynolds stress near the wall is close to three-component isotropic limiting state.

This results in the fact that the perturbation is large compared to the distance from baseline

state to the boundary of the triangle, and thus more artiﬁcial information is introduced in

the physics-based approach at the near-wall regions. It is noted that the DKL is also large

at y/H = 2.5, which is because the baseline state is closer to the top vertex of triangle

at y/H = 2.5. All these observations are consistent with the discussion above for the two

typical points A and B.

The analysis above suggests that imposing Gaussian perturbation directly in Barycentric

coordinates (as oppose to the natural coordinates) leads to a distribution closer to maxi-

mum entropy. However, the perturbations were imposed in natural coordinates by Xiao et

al. [10] due to practical considerations. Since the Barycentric coordinates C1, C2, and C3

are correlated, and the triangle boundary edges pose diﬃculties on the capping scheme, the

natural coordinates ξ and η are preferred for implementation purposes. In order to determine

proper perturbations in ξ and η to obtain prior with maximum entropy in the physics-based

approach, we also need to map the Barycentric coordinates to the natural coordinates in the

RMT approach. With the samples of natural coordinates ξ and η, their joint density can

be estimated with Gaussian kernels. Figures 7a and 7b show the comparison of joint PDF

contours obtained by the two approaches with variances σ = 0.2 and σ = 0.6, respectively.

Moreover, the comparisons of marginal distributions of ξ and η are also plotted in Fig. 8.

When the perturbation is small (σ = 0.2), the contours in both cases Phy1 and RM1 are

elliptical, indicating the joint distributions are approximately Gaussian (Fig. 8a). However,

a notable diﬀerence between the results of the two approaches lies on the shapes of the con-

tours. The elliptical contour in the RMT approach is anisotropic with larger variance for ξ

but smaller for η. In the physics-based approach the contour is circular due to the artiﬁcial

choice of the same perturbation variance for both ξ and η. Therefore, to achieve the prior

22

(a) σ = 0.2

(b) σ = 0.6

Figure 6: Kullbck-Leibler divergence proﬁles with (a) σ = 0.2 and (b) σ = 0.6. The
proﬁles are shown at eight streamwise locations x/H = 1,··· , 8, and the reference lines,
DKL = 0 + x/H, are also plotted. Note that in panel (a), since the scale of DKL is quite

smaller than that of panel (b), a larger scale factor of 0.9 is used in (a), while a smaller scale

factor of 0.3 is used in (b).

23

0246810x/H;0.9DKL+x/H0.00.51.01.52.02.53.0y/HZeroKL Divergence0246810x/H;0.3DKL+x/H0.00.51.01.52.02.53.0y/HZeroKL Divergence(a) Phy1 and RM1 (σ = 0.2)

(b) Phy2 and RM2 (σ = 0.6)

Figure 7: Comparisons of probability density contours of natural coordinates (ξ and η)

obtained from the physics-based approach and the RMT approach at point A (x/H =

2.0, y/H = 0.01. Panel (a) and (b) are with the perturbations σ = 0.2, and σ = 0.6,

respectively.)

with approximate maximum entropy, the perturbation in ξ should be larger than that in η

for this ﬂow of concern. More details can be found in their marginal distributions (Figs. 8a

and 8c). For both approaches with small perturbation (σ = 0.2) in Reynolds stress, the

marginal distributions for ξ and η are Gaussian. With the RMT approach, the perturbation

variance of ξ is approximately twice as large as that with the physics-based approach, while

the perturbation of η is slightly smaller than that with the physics-based approach. How-

ever, when the perturbation is large (σ = 0.6), the joint distribution of ξ and η obtained

by both approaches are no longer Gaussian, and the density contours are inﬂuenced by the

boundaries (Fig. 7b). Especially in case Phy2 the shape of the contour clearly follows the

rectangular edges. Unlike the physics-based approach, the shape of the contour obtained

with the RMT approach is less aﬀected by the boundaries. Detailed comparisons are shown

by the corresponding marginal distributions. All the distributions are distorted compared

to the Gaussian PDF (Gaussian density with the sample mean and variance). The distor-

tions in the physics-based approach are due to the fact that large number of unrealizable

24

1.00.50.00.51.0ξ1.00.50.00.51.0ηRandom MatrixPhyiscs1.00.50.00.51.0ξ1.00.50.00.51.0η(a) PDF of ξ, σ = 0.2

(b) PDF of ξ, σ = 0.6

(c) PDF of η, σ = 0.2

(d) PDF of η, σ = 0.6

Figure 8: Distributions of the perturbed natural coordinates ξ and η for point A (x/H =

2.0, y/H = 0.5) located in recirculation region. The results from the physics-based approach

and the RMT approach are compared in the same plot. Panels (a) and (b) show the com-

parison of ξ at perturbation variances of σ = 0.2 and σ = 0.6, respectively. Panels (c) and

(d) show the comparison of η at perturbation variances of σ = 0.2 and σ = 0.6, respectively.

25

1.00.80.60.40.20.00.20.40.60.81.0ξ0.00.51.01.52.0PDFRMTPhy1.00.80.60.40.20.00.20.40.60.81.0ξ0.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9PDFMean, PhyMean, RMTBaseline1.00.80.60.40.20.00.20.40.60.81.0η0.00.51.01.52.02.53.0PDF1.00.80.60.40.20.00.20.40.60.81.0η0.00.20.40.60.81.01.21.4PDFsamples are capped onto the edges. However, in the RMT approach the sample means of

ξ and η signiﬁcantly deviate from the baseline results. The mean of ξ moves towards the

middle point (ξ = 0) of ξ range, while the mean of η moves towards approximate one third
(η = −0.4) of the η range [−1, 1]. This sample mean point (ξ = 0.0, η = −0.4) is close to the
centroid of the triangle when mapped back to the Barycentric coordinates. Moreover, the

distributions are approximately bounded Gaussian that satisﬁes the realizability constraint

mathematically. The deviation of sample mean from the baseline when the perturbation is

large can be interpreted intuitively. Since the large perturbation of Reynolds stress implies

less conﬁdence on the baseline prediction, it is reasonable to adjust the sample mean to the

centroid of triangle to have a better sample scattering over the entire triangle. The results

shown in Figs. 7a, 8a, and 8c suggest that, for a generic point away from the wall, imposing

small perturbations on ξ and η with Gaussian distributions lead to Reynolds stresses that

are very close to the maximum entropy distribution. This observation lends partial support

to the choice of prior distributions made in [10]. However, to achieve the maximum entropy

prior, the perturbation variance of ξ should be approximately twice as large as that of η.

When the perturbation of Reynolds stress is large, to achieve maximum entropy we should

ﬁrst shift the baseline ξ and η to the centroid of the Barycentric triangle, and then perturb

the shifted baseline results with bounded Gaussian distribution.

In addition to the shape of Reynolds stress, its magnitude i.e., the turbulence kinetic

energy (TKE), is also diﬃcult to predict in RANS models. In the physics-based approach,

the perturbations in turbulence kinetic energy are speciﬁed to be log-normally distributed.

To evaluate if this speciﬁcation is justiﬁed, we compared the TKE perturbations in logarith-

mic scale ∆ log k obtained from the two approaches. The marginal distributions of ∆ log k

with diﬀerent perturbation levels (σ = 0.2 and σ = 0.6) at points A and B are presented

in Fig. 9. In both the physics-based and RMT approaches, the perturbations in TKE obey

the log-normal distribution, since all the PDFs of ∆ log k shown in Fig. 9 are close to the

Gaussian distributions. This conclusion is also true for the cases with larger perturbations

(cases Phy2 and RM2, σ = 0.6) as well. Therefore, introducing a log-normally distributed

26

(a) σ = 0.2, location A

(b) σ = 0.6, location A

(c) σ = 0.2, location B

(d) σ = 0.6, location B

Figure 9: Distributions of the perturbations (∆ log k) in turbulence kinetic energy in loga-

rithmical scale. The upper two panels show the results at point A (x/H = 2.0, y/H = 0.5),

while the lower two panels show the results at point B (x/H = 2.0, y/H = 0.01). The results

from physics-based approach and random matrix theoretic approach are compared in the

same plot. The sample mean of the physics-based approach overlaps with that of the RMT

approach (denoted as blue (dark) dashed line and pink (grey) dashed line, respectively)

27

2.01.51.00.50.00.51.01.52.0∆lnk0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.5PDFRMTPhy2.01.51.00.50.00.51.01.52.0∆lnk0.00.20.40.60.81.01.21.4PDF2.01.51.00.50.00.51.01.52.0∆lnk0123456PDF2.01.51.00.50.00.51.01.52.0∆lnk0.00.20.40.60.81.01.21.41.61.8PDFprior for TKE discrepancies leads to a distribution of Reynolds stresses that is close to the

one with maximum entropy. This lends support to the choice of prior in the physics-based

approach [10]. Another interesting observation in Fig. 9 is that the spreading of ∆ log k sam-

ples with the RMT approach is slightly smaller than that with physics-based approach. As

mentioned above, in the physics-based approach the same variance ﬁeld σ(x) is shared by the

perturbations of six variables (ξ, η, k, ϕ1, ϕ2, ϕ3) due to the lack of prior knowledge. How-

ever, this assumption is another constraint imposed in the physics-based approach. Based

on the comparisons in Fig. 9, we ﬁnd that to achieve the maximum entropy, the perturbation

variance for each parameter should be diﬀerent. It suggests that a relatively smaller variance

(approximate 50% of that for shape parameter) is proper for the perturbation of TKE in

logarithmic scale for this ﬂow of concern.

While the orientations of the Reynolds stresses have not been perturbed in [10], in this

study they are perturbed with the same variance σ as that of other variables. However,

if or how large the orientation should be perturbed are model choices in the physics-based

approach. Without further physical information, it is diﬃcult to determine the variance of

perturbations in angles. To examine this issue, the marginal distributions of angle discrep-

ancies obtained from both approaches are compared. Fig. 10 shows the comparison of PDF

of ∆ϕ1 with diﬀerent perturbation magnitudes at the points A and B. The perturbations in

ϕ2 and ϕ3 have similar characteristics as that of ϕ1, and thus they are omitted for brevity.

We can see that to achieve the maximum entropy the orientation of the tensor should also

be perturbed. Similarly to the perturbations in TKE, the sample mean of ∆ϕ1 is zero for

all cases. This indicates that the sample means in tensor magnitude and orientation are

the same as those of baseline RANS prediction, since there are no physical constraints on
TKE and Euler angles (except for the range [−π, π] speciﬁed in the deﬁnition).
physics-based approach, the PDFs are Gaussian for all cases, since Gaussian random ﬁelds

In the

are employed to model the discrepancies in angles. For the generic point A, the distribution

of ∆ϕ1 obtained from the RMT approach is also close to Gaussian when the perturbation

is small (Fig. 10a). However, the scattering of samples is smaller than what we speciﬁed in

28

(a) σ = 0.2, at location A

(b) σ = 0.6, at location A

(c) σ = 0.2, at location B

(d) σ = 0.6, at location B

Figure 10: Distributions of the perturbations (∆ϕ1) in orientation. The upper two panels

show the results at point A (x/H = 2.0, y/H = 0.5), while the lower two panels show the

results at point B (x/H = 2.0, y/H = 0.01). The results from Physics-based approach and

random matrix theoretic approach are compared in the same plot. The sample mean of the

physics-based approach overlaps with that of the RMT approach (denoted as blue (dark)

dashed line and pink (grey) dashed line, respectively)

29

9060300306090∆ϕ1 (degree)0.000.010.020.030.040.050.060.070.08PDFRMTPhy9060300306090∆ϕ1 (degree)0.0000.0050.0100.0150.020PDF9060300306090∆ϕ1 (degree)0.0000.0050.0100.0150.0200.0250.0300.035PDF9060300306090∆ϕ1 (degree)0.0000.0020.0040.0060.0080.0100.012PDFthe physics-based approach, and most of the perturbations are within ±20 degrees. As the
perturbation magnitude is enlarged, the PDF obtained in the RMT approach is peaked com-

pared to the Gaussian distribution (Fig. 10b). Consequently, most samples are with small

perturbations (smaller than 30 degrees). However, for the point B located close to the wall,

the variances of ∆ϕ1 in cases RM1 and RM2 are much larger, even though the perturbation

of tensor is small (Fig. 10c). In the RMT approach the distribution of ∆ϕ1 is ﬂatter than

the corresponding Gaussian distribution, and most of the perturbations ∆ϕ1 are larger than

60 degrees. Especially when the dispersion parameter is large (i.e., δ(x) corresponding to

σ = 0.6), the PDF of ∆ϕ1 signiﬁcantly deviates from the Gaussian distribution (Fig. 10d).

The observations above imply that, to obtain a maximum entropy prior, the perturbations

variance in orientation should be spatially non-stationary. For this speciﬁc ﬂow, smaller

perturbations (with 30 degrees) should be used for a generic point away from the way, while

larger perturbations are appropriate for the near wall locations.

The results shown above suggest that, when the RANS predictions are relatively reliable

with small perturbations needed, using normally distributed perturbations for each of the

six physical variables is a good choice to obtain the Reynolds stress prior that is close to the

one with maximum entropy. This observation can be related to the case of a scalar random

variable. With the constraints of a speciﬁed mean and variance, the maximum entropy dis-

tribution of a scalar random variable is the Gaussian distribution [23]. That is, by choosing

Gaussian distributions for the discrepancies of Reynolds stresses in the physics-based ap-

proach, the maximum entropy distribution is achieved for each individual physical variables

(magnitude, shape, orientation). The variance of each variable is, however, chosen by the

user and is thus a modeling choice. In contrast, in the RMT approach the maximum entropy

is achieved for the distribution of the Reynolds tensor. Consequently, the relative magnitude

of the variance for each variable is implied based on the maximum entropy principle and

is not a modeling choice of the user. However, it is worth pointing out that, although we

use the results of the RMT approach as the golden standard for gauge the physics-based

approach, the correlation structure (see Eq. 13) and corresponding Karhunen-Loeve modes

30

used to represent the random ﬁeld are still modeling choices, which also may introduce ar-

tiﬁcial constraints.

In summary, one can consider that in the RMT approach, maximum

entropy is achieved for the pointwise distribution of the Reynolds stresses at each location

x, but not necessarily for the random ﬁeld [R(x)]. In the physics based approach, maximum

entropy is achieved for the pointwise distribution for individual physical variables (k, ξ, η

etc.) but not necessarily for the Reynolds stress tensor [R] or the ﬁeld [R(x)].

4. Conclusion

Quantiﬁcation of the uncertainties originating from the modeled Reynolds stresses is

crucial when the RANS simulations are applied in the decision-making process. One of

the challenges in current form of the physics-based model-form uncertainty quantiﬁcation

framework is to specify proper priors for the physical variables (shape, magnitude, and

orientation). It is diﬃcult to determine if or how much additional information is introduced

into the priors speciﬁed in the physics-based approach. To evaluate the priors and gain

insights on proper speciﬁcation of the priors, the random matrix theoretic approach with the

maximum entropy principle is used in this work. By comparing the distributions of shape,

magnitude, and orientation variables obtained from the two approaches, we ﬁnd some useful

guidelines of prior speciﬁcation for these wall-bounded ﬂows with separations. For the shape

parameters, the Gaussian distributed perturbations in Barycentric coordinate is better to

achieve maximum entropy. The mapping between the Barycentric coordinate to the natural

coordinate may introduces some artiﬁcial constraints, especially when the RANS prediction

is less reliable (large perturbation needed). For the turbulence kinetic energy, introducing

log-normally distributed perturbations leads to a distribution of Reynolds stresses that is

close to the one with the maximum entropy. This observation lends support to the choice

of prior in [10]. Moreover, diﬀerent variance ﬁelds for the perturbations of the Reynolds

stress shape parameters ξ, η, and the magnitude (turbulence kinetic energy) k are required

to achieve maximum entropy. Speciﬁcally, for the ﬂow over periodic hills examined in this

study the variance of ξ should be larger than that of η, and the perturbation of log k should

be relatively small. Finally, it suggests that the uncertainties should be also injected in the

31

orientation of Reynolds stresses represented by Euler angles. For a generic location away

from the wall, the perturbations of Euler angles should be small, while larger perturbations

should be added for the near wall locations. The conclusion can be used as a guidance for

the objective prior speciﬁcation in the physics-based, Bayesian uncertainty quantiﬁcation

framework.

References

[1] S. B. Pope, Turbulent ﬂows, Cambridge university press, 2000.

[2] T. Oliver, R. Moser, Uncertainty quantiﬁcation for RANS turbulence model predictions,

in: APS Division of Fluid Dynamics Meeting Abstracts, 2009.

[3] L. Margheri, M. Meldi, M. Salvetti, P. Sagaut, Epistemic uncertainties in RANS model

free coeﬃcients, Computers & Fluids 102 (2014) 315–335.

[4] W. Edeling, P. Cinnella, R. P. Dwight, H. Bijl, Bayesian estimates of parameter variabil-

ity in the k–ε turbulence model, Journal of Computational Physics 258 (2014) 73–94.

[5] W. Edeling, P. Cinnella, R. P. Dwight, Predictive RANS simulations via Bayesian

model-scenario averaging, Journal of Computational Physics 275 (2014) 65–91.

[6] M. Emory, R. Pecnik, G. Iaccarino, Modeling structural uncertainties in Reynolds-

averaged computations of shock/boundary layer interactions, in: 49th AIAA Aerospace

Sciences Meeting, 2011.

[7] E. Dow, Q. Wang, Quantiﬁcation of structural uncertainties in the k–ω turbulence

model, AIAA Paper 1762 (2011) 2011.

[8] M. Emory, J. Larsson, G. Iaccarino, Modeling of structural uncertainties in Reynolds-

averaged Navier-Stokes closures, Physics of Fluids 25 (11) (2013) 110822.

[9] C. Gorl´e, G. Iaccarino, A framework for epistemic uncertainty quantiﬁcation of turbulent

scalar ﬂux models for Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes simulations, Physics of Fluids

(1994-present) 25 (5) (2013) 055105.

32

[10] H. Xiao, J.-L. Wu, J.-X. Wang, R. Sun, C. J. Roy, Quantifying and reducing model-form

uncertainties in Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes simulations: An open-box, physics-

based, bayesian approach, submitted. Available at http://arxiv.org/abs/1508.06315

(2015).

[11] J.-X. Wang, J.-L. Wu, H. Xiao,

Incorporating prior knowledge for quantifying

and reducing model-form uncertainty in RANS simulations, submitted. Available at

http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.01750 (2015).

[12] S. Guiasu, A. Shenitzer, The principle of maximum entropy, The mathematical intelli-

gencer 7 (1) (1985) 42–48.

[13] E. T. Jaynes, Information theory and statistical mechanics, Physical review 106 (4)

(1957) 620.

[14] C. Soize, A nonparametric model of random uncertainties for reduced matrix models in

structural dynamics, Probabilistic engineering mechanics 15 (3) (2000) 277–294.

[15] S. Das, R. Ghanem, A bounded random matrix approach for stochastic upscaling, Mul-

tiscale Modeling & Simulation 8 (1) (2009) 296–325.

[16] H. Xiao, J.-X. Wang, R. G. Ghanem, A random matrix approach for quantify-

ing model-form uncertainties in turbulence modeling, to be submitted. Available at

https://sites.google.com/a/vt.edu/hengxiao/papers (2016).

[17] J.-L. Wu, J.-X. Wang, H. Xiao, A Bayesian calibration-prediction method for reducing

model-form uncertainties with application in RANS simulations, submitted. Available

at http://arxiv.org/abs/1510.06040 (2015).

[18] S. Banerjee, R. Krahl, F. Durst, C. Zenger, Presentation of anisotropy properties of

turbulence, invariants versus eigenvalue approaches, Journal of Turbulence 8 (32) (2007)

1–27.

33

[19] H. Goldstein, Classical Mechanics, 2nd Edition, Addison-Wesley, 1980, see “The Euler

Angles and Euler Angles in Alternate Conventions” in Chapter 4.4.

[20] O. P. Le Maˆıtre, O. M. Knio, Spectral methods for uncertainty quantiﬁcation: with

applications to computational ﬂuid dynamics, Springer, 2010.

[21] S. Sakamoto, R. Ghanem, Polynomial chaos decomposition for the simulation of non-

Gaussian nonstationary stochastic processes, Journal of engineering mechanics 128 (2)

(2002) 190–201.

[22] S. Kullback, Information theory and statistics, Courier Corporation, 1968.

[23] S. Y. Park, A. K. Bera, Maximum entropy autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity

model, Journal of Econometrics 150 (2) (2009) 219–230.

Appendix A. Summary of Algorithms of The Physics-Based Approach

1. Decomposition to physically meaningful dimension and expansion of given marginal

distributions

1.1. Perform the baseline RANS simulation to obtain the baseline (mean) Reynolds

stress [R].

1.2. Perform the transformation [R] (cid:55)→ ( ˜ξrans, ˜ηrans, ˜krans, ˜ϕrans
1.3. Compute Karhunen–Loeve expansion to obtain basis set {φα(x)}Nkl

, ˜ϕrans

1

2

, ˜ϕrans

).

3

α=1, where Nkl

is the number of modes retained.

2. Sampling and reconstruction of physical variable ﬁelds for Reynolds stresses:

2.1. Sample six independent coeﬃcient vectors {ωβ}N

β=1 for the six discrepancy ﬁelds

(i.e., ∆ξ, ∆η, ∆ log k, ∆ϕ1, ∆ϕ2, and ∆ϕ3 ), where N is the sample size.

2.2. Reconstruct the six discrepancy ﬁelds with the six independent coeﬃcient sam-

ples {ωβ}N
the same for the six random ﬁelds.

β=1 and Karhunen–Loeve modes. Note that the variance ﬁeld σ(x) is

34

2.3. Obtained samples of Reynolds stress ﬁeld [R] via mapping (ξ, η, k, ϕ1, ϕ2, ϕ3) (cid:55)→

[R]

3. Propagation the Reynolds stress to QoIs via RANS equations

3.1 Use the obtained sampled Reynolds stress to velocity and other QoIs by solving

the RANS equations.

3.2 Post-process the obtained velocity and QoI samples to obtain statistical moments.

Appendix B. Summary of Algorithms of The RMT Approach

Given the mean Reynolds stress ﬁeld [R(x)] (e.g., from RANS-predicted results) along

with the correlation function structure of the random upper triangle matrix ﬁeld [L](x), the

following procedure is performed:

1. Expansion of given marginal distributions and covariances kernels:

1.1. Perform the Cholesky factorization of the mean Reynolds stresses [R] at each cell

as [R] = [LR]T [LR], which yields ﬁeld LR(x) of upper triangular matrices.

1.2. Perform Karhunen–Loeve expansion for the kernel function by solving the Fred-

holm equation to obtain eigenmodes.

1.3. For oﬀ-diagonal terms of matrix [L], perform polynomial expansion (PCE) of the

Gamma marginal PDF at each cell. PCE Coeﬃcients Uβ are obtained from

(cid:90)

Ω

Uβ =

(cid:104)uΨβ(cid:105)
(cid:104)Ψ2

β(cid:105) =

1
(cid:104)Ψ2
β(cid:105)

F −1
u [Fw(w)] Ψβ(w) pw(w)dw,

(B.1)

where (cid:104)Ψ2
β(cid:105) is the variance of ith order polynomial of standard Gaussian random
variable w; Fw(w) and pw are the cumulative distribution function (CFD) and
PDF, respectively, of w; Ω is the sample space of w; Fu and F −1
and its inverse, respectively, of random variable u. The index β is from 1 to Np,

are the CDF

u

and Np is the number of polynomials retained in the expansion.

2. Sampling and reconstruction of random matrix ﬁelds for Reynolds stresses:

35

2.1. For each element Lij of the random matrix ﬁeld [L], independently draw Nkl
sample from the standard Gaussian distribution ωij,α where α = 1,··· , Nkl, e.g.,
with random sampling or Latin hypercube sampling method.

2.2. Synthesize realizations of the oﬀ-diagonal terms based on Karhunen–Loeve ex-

pansion:

NKL(cid:88)

α=1

wij(x) =

φα(x) ωα with i < j

Lij(x) = σdwij(x)

2.3. Synthesize the realizations of the diagonal terms based on Karhunen–Loeve and

PCE expansions:

ui(x) =

Np(cid:88)

Uβ(x)Ψβ(wii(x))

where the Gaussian random ﬁeld sample wii(x) obtained in the previous step is

β=0

used.

2.4. Synthesize the diagonal terms of matrix [L] from Lii(x) = σd

1, 2, 3.

√

2ui, where i =

2.5. Reconstruct random normalized matrix [G] from [G] = [L]T [L] and then recon-

struct the Reynolds stress tensor [R] from [R] = [LR]T [G][LR].

3. Propagation the Reynolds stress ﬁeld through the RANS solver to obtain velocities

and other QoIs:

3.1 Use the obtained sampled Reynolds stress to velocity and other QoIs by solving

the RANS equations.

3.2 Post-process the obtained velocity and QoI samples to obtain statistical moments.

Appendix C. Nomenclature

Subscripts/Superscripts

36

i, j

α, β

l

tensor indices (i, j = 1, 2, 3); repeated indices does not imply summation

indices for terms in Karhunen–Loeve and polynomial chaos expansions

general index (modes etc.)

the set of all real positive number

Sets, operators, and decorative symbols
R+
E{·}
Ms
M+
M+0

expectation of a random variable
the set of all d × d symmetric matrices
the set of all d × d symmetric, positive deﬁnite matrices
the set of all d × d symmetric, positive semi-deﬁnite matrices
trace of a matrix

d

d

d

tr

det
[·]
(cid:3)
•
(cid:104)·(cid:105)
(cid:107) · (cid:107)F

(cid:80)
(cid:81)

determinant of a matrix

matrix
mean value of variable (cid:3)
inner product of two (determistic) vectors

ensemble average/expectation of a random variable

Frobenius norm

summation

product

Roman letters

[A]

C

d

anisotropy tensor of the Reynolds stress

Barycentric coordinates

dimension of matrices (d = 3 implied unless noted otherwise)

DKL

Kullbck-Leibler divergence

(cid:126)e1, (cid:126)e2, (cid:126)e3 orthonormal eigenvectors of Reynolds stress anisotropy [A]

[E]

F

orthonormal eigenvectors of Reynolds stress anisotropy [A]

cumulative distribution function

37

[G], [G]

a positive deﬁnite matrix with identity matrix [I] as its mean

[I]

k

K

identity matrix

turbulence kinetic energy

covariance kernel

[L], [L]

an upper triangle matrix (e.g., obtained from Cholesky factorization)

l

N

Np

Nkl

p, q

[R], [R]
v(cid:48)

i

u

U

w

x

length scale of Gaussian process

Gaussian normal distribution

order of polynomial in the PCE expansion

number of modes in KL expansion

probability density function
j(cid:105)
(negative of) Reynolds stress tensor with Rij = (cid:104)v(cid:48)
iv(cid:48)
the ith component of the ﬂuctuation velocity (random variable)

Gamma random variable used to deﬁne the diagonal terms of the Reynolds stress Lαα

coeﬃcients for the polynomial

standard Gaussian random variable

spatial coordinate index

Greek letters

δ

σ

ϑ

ρ

ξ, η

Λ, λ

ϕ

˜ω, φ

Ψj

dispersion parameter (uncertainty of the random matrix)

variance of Gaussian process

parameter

correlation

natural coordinates

eigenvalues of anisotropy [A]

Euler angle of Reynolds stress tensor

eigenvalues and basis functions obtained from Karhunen-Loeve expansion

jth order Hermite polynomial of standard Gaussian random variable w

38

