6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
7
1

 
 
]

.

G
A
h
t
a
m

[
 
 

1
v
0
5
5
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

TCD-MATH-16-03

On spectral cover equations

in

Simpson integrable systems

Anton A. Gerasimov and Samson L. Shatashvili

Abstract

Abstract. Following Simpson we consider the integrable system structure on the
moduli spaces of Higgs bundles on a compact K¨ahler manifold X. We propose a
description of the corresponding spectral cover of X as the ﬁberwise projective dual to
a hypersurface in the projectivization P(TX ⊕ OX ) of the tangent bundle TX to X. The
deﬁning equation of the hypersurface dual to the Simpson spectral cover is explicitly
constructed in terms of the Higgs ﬁelds.

1

Introduction

The notion of a spectral curve, or, more precisely, a family of spectral curves plays an
important role in the theory of integrable systems. Thus the phase space of an integrable
system is interpreted as a total space of a family of the Lagrangian abelian varieties identiﬁed
with the Jacobian varieties of the corresponding spectral curves. This provides eﬀective
means to explicitly solve the integrable system via geometry of divisors on spectral curves.
The standard construction of the families of spectral curves is via characteristic polynomials
of the Lax operators depending on the spectral parameter.

In original constructions the spectral parameter is a coordinate function on an underlying
elliptic curve or its degeneration, and the spectral curve is a ﬁnite cover of the underlying
curve realized as a subvariety of its cotangent bundle. More general construction was pro-
posed by Hitchin [H]. The phase space of the integrable system is identiﬁed with the moduli
space of Higgs bundles, a certain degeneration of the moduli space of complex G-bundles over
an arbitrary algebraic curve Σ. The corresponding spectral curve is given by a ﬁnite cover
of Σ realised as a hypersurface in the cotangent bundle T ∗Σ, deﬁned by the characteristic
polynomial of the Higgs ﬁeld on Σ.

1

One of the important applications of the spectral curve construction is to the method of
the quantum separation of variables [Sk1], [Sk2]. In this approach the equation deﬁning spec-
tral curve as a hypersurface in T ∗Σ transforms into the deﬁning equation for corresponding
quantum integrable system eigenfunctions in the separated variables. The Hitchin integrable
systems, both classical and quantum, are much studied and have found many applications
in representation theory, quantum ﬁeld theory and string theory.

A higher-dimensional generalisation of the integrable systems was proposed by Simpson
[S1]. The phase space of the corresponding integrable system is the moduli space of Higgs
bundles on a K¨ahelr manifold X and the role of the spectral curve is played by a spectral
cover of X realized as a subvariety of the total space of some vector bundle over X. A
particularly interesting choice of the vector bundle is given by the cotangent bundle T ∗X
to X. By the analogy with the Hitchin description of the spectral curves, it is possible to
provide a set of polynomial equations describing the spectral cover of X as a subvariety
of T ∗X. However, in the higher-dimensional case the corresponding set of equations turns
out to be highly overdetermined. This might potentially be a problem in the constructive
approach to ﬁnding explicit solutions of the corresponding integrable system.

X ⊕ O) of the holomorphic cotangent bundle T ∗

In this note we point out a curious property of the Simpson spectral cover. It is projec-
tively dual to a hypersurface deﬁned by a single explicit equation. More precisely - consider
the projective compactiﬁcation P(T ∗
X . We
propose a description of the Simpson spectral cover in P(T ∗
X ⊕ O) via ﬁberwise projective
dual to a hypersurface in the projective compactiﬁcation P(TX ⊕ O) of the tangent bundle
TX . This hypersurface is deﬁned by a single ﬁberwise polynomial function on P(TX ⊕ O) (see
equation (4.8)). In the case of X being an algebraic curve this equation essentially coincides
with the Hitchin equation of the spectral curve. The formulation in terms of the tangent
bundle instead of cotangent bundle bears a resemblance with the Legendre transform be-
tween the Hamiltonian and the Lagrangian formulations of classical mechanics. One might
hope that the proposed description of the Simpson spectral cover via projective duality will
be useful in various applications of the theory of integrable systems associated with higher
dimensional algebraic varieties.

The theory of the Simpson integrable systems is an exciting area of research expanding
the traditional horizons of the theory of integrable systems. For instance, the Simpson
integrable systems, similar to the Hitchin systems, allow a non-commutative deformation
akin to the Knizhnik-Zamolodchikov connection leading to quantum versions of the spectral
covers. The corresponding higher-dimensional analog of the quantum spectral curve shall be
an important part of the higher-dimensional holomorphic/chiral quantum ﬁeld theory, which
is an interesting direction to pursue. Note in this regard that the phase spaces of the Simpson
integrable systems appear naturally in the description of D-brane string backgrounds and
thus via dualities appear in various related problems. One might also expect applications of
the Simpson integrable systems to some kind of higher dimensional version of the geometric
Langlands correspondence.

Acknowledgments: We are grateful to L. Katzarkov, A. Rosly and L. Takhtajan for

enjoyable discussions.

2

2 Hitchin integrable systems

We start by brieﬂy recalling the construction of the integrable systems associated with the
holomorphic vector bundles over algebraic curves due to Hitchin [H].

Σ (E) → Ω0,1

Σ (E) = Ωp,q

Σ (E) such that ∂E (f s) = (∂f )s + f ∂E s, for s ∈ Ω0,0

Let E be a rank n complex C ∞ vector bundle over a Riemann surface Σ. Let Ωp,q

Σ be
complex vector bundles of diﬀerential forms of the type (p, q) and Ωp,q
Σ ⊗ E. To
deﬁne a holomorphic vector bundle E associated with E it is enough to pick a diﬀerential
operator ∂ E : Ω0,0
Σ (E) and
f ∈ C ∞(Σ). Then the holomorphic sections of E satisfy the equation ∂ Es = 0. The space of
complex structures on the C ∞-bundle E is an inﬁnite-dimensional aﬃne space modeled on
Ω0,1
Σ (End(E)). The group G of automorphisms of the vector bundle E acts on the operator
∂ E via conjugation ∂ E → g−1∂ Eg. The moduli space N of the stable complex structures on
a complex C ∞ vector bundle E is obtained by taking the quotient of the space As of the
stable complex structures on E by the action of the automorphism group G. Recall that
the holomorphic vector bundle E is stable iﬀ for every proper subbundle F ⊂ E one has
deg(E)
rank(E) > deg(F )
rank(F ). In general the quotient space N = As/G is a smooth non-compact space,
but for the rank n and the ﬁrst Chern class c1(E) being mutually prime the space N is
compact.

The cotangent bundle T ∗N to the moduli space N can be succinctly described via Hamil-
tonian reduction of the space of the Higgs bundles with respect to the action of the group of
automorphisms G. For a rank n complex vector bundle E let us consider the cotangent space
T ∗As naturally identiﬁed with the space of pairs (∂ E, Φ) of complex structures on E deﬁned
by ∂ E and Φ ∈ Ω1,0
Σ ⊗ End(E). This space has a canonical holomorphic symplectic structure
of the cotangent bundle. The Hamiltonian reduction over zero set of moment map with
respect to the action of the automorphism group G provides a realization of the cotangent
bundle T ∗N . Points of T ∗N parametrize the Higgs bundles, i.e. the pairs (∂ E, Φ) satisfying
the equation

∂ EΦ = 0.

(2.1)

There exists a more relaxed stability condition of the Higgs bundles (only Φ-stable subbun-
dles are considered) leading to the Hitchin moduli space M of stable Higgs bundles such
that T ∗N ⊂ M [H].

The total space of the cotangent bundle T ∗N is naturally a holomorphic symplectic mani-
fold with the holomorphic symplectic structure descending from the G-invariant holomorphic
symplectic structure

Ω =ZΣ0

Tr δ ¯A ∧ δΦ,

(2.2)

on T ∗As. Here ¯A ∈ Ω0,1
Σ (End(E)) are aﬃne coordinates on the space of complex structures
(1)
E + ¯A(2) − ¯A(1) and thus the two-
on E, i.e.
form (2.2) is well-deﬁned. The holomorphic symplectic structure allows an extension on the
moduli space M of stable Higgs bundles.

for two complex structures we have ∂

(2)
E = ∂

3

According to Hitchin [H], the symplectic space M is an algebraically completely inte-
grable system. The corresponding set of mutually commuting algebraic functions is provided
by the Hitchin map

M −→ ⊕n

i=1H 0(Σ, Symi(Ω1,0

Σ )),

(2.3)

sending the pair (∂ E, Φ) to the vector (Tr Φ, Tr Φ2, · · · , Tr Φn). To construct the explicit basis
of the algebraic Hamiltonian functions one shall ﬁx a bases {µi,j}, i = 1, . . . , n, j = 1, . . . , ni,
ni = dim H 1(Σ, Symi−1T ) in the space ⊕n
i=1H 1(Σ, Symi−1T ) where T is the holomorphic
tangent bundle to Σ. Then the ring of integrable Hamiltonians is generated by the elements

Hi,j =ZΣ

µi,jTr Φi,

i = 1, . . . , n, ,

j = 1, . . . , ni.

(2.4)

Mutual commutativity of the Hamiltonians (2.4) follows from their invariance under the ac-
tion of the automorphism group G and obvious mutual commutativity considered as functions
on the space T ∗As.

Generic ﬁbers of the Hitchin map (2.3) are compact Lagrangian abelian varieties identiﬁed
with the Jacobi varieties of the algebraic curves parametrized by the target space of the map
(2.4). This family of curves, known as a family of spectral curves of the integrable system,
allows the following construction. One constructs a coherent sheaf ˆE on the total space of
T ∗Σ of the cotangent bundle to Σ so that the spectral curve is given by the support of ˆE.
To deﬁne a coherent sheaf on T ∗Σ is the same as to deﬁne a sheaf of π∗OT ∗Σ-module on Σ.
Here the direct image π∗OT ∗Σ is the sheaf of the polynomial algebras in one variable over OΣ
with the stalk over a point z ∈ Σ given by the algebra of the polynomial functions over the
ﬁber T ∗
z Σ. Using the Higgs ﬁeld Φ we can supply E with the structure of π∗OT ∗Σ-module.
For this it is enough to allow the generator of the polynomial algebra to act as multiplication
by the matrix Φz(z) where we locally have Φ = Φz(z)dz. Now the spectral curve associated
with (∂E , Φ) is given by the support of the coherent sheaf ˆE on T ∗Σ. Let U ⊂ Σ be an
open subset over which the Higgs ﬁeld can be diagonalised with non-coincident eigenvalues.
Then the construction above realises an open part of the spectral curve as a non-ramiﬁed
n-sheet cover of U. The spectral curve then provides the n-sheet cover of Σ but, in general,
ramiﬁed over some points. It is clear that the spectral curve, constructed this way, can be
conveniently deﬁned as the space of solutions of the characteristic equation of the Higgs ﬁeld

det(w − Φ(z)) = 0,

(2.5)

where w is a linear coordinate on the ﬁbers of the line bundle T ∗Σ. The coeﬃcients of the
spectral cover equation

det(w − Φ(z)) =

nXm=0

(−1)mwn−mTr ∧mΦ,

provide another set of generators of the ring of integrable Hamiltonians

˜Hm,j =ZΣ

µm,jTr ∧mΦ.

4

(2.6)

(2.7)

Here we denote Tr ∧mΦ the trace of Φ in the m-th fundamental representation of GLn realised
in the space of m-th exterior powers of the standard representation Cn.

At the end of this short review of the Hitchin construction let us note that the explicit
description (2.5) of the spectral curve via the characteristic equation is widely used in the
theory of integrable systems and its applications.

3

Simpson integrable systems

A generalization of the Hitchin integrable systems for higher-dimensional base was introduced
by Simpson [S1] using the notion of the Higgs bundles in arbitrary dimensions.
In the
following we consider a particular case of the Simpson’s construction based on Higgs pairs
associated with the cotangent bundle of the underlying manifold.

Let X be a d-dimensional K¨ahler manifold X with the K¨ahelr form ω. Let E be a rank
n complex vector bundle over X. The integrable complex structure on E can be deﬁned via
diﬀerential operator ∂ E : Ω0,0
X (E)
2
and f ∈ C ∞(X) and the integrability condition ∂
E = 0 holds. Let E be the corresponding
holomorphic vector bundle over X. The moduli space of stable integrable complex structures
modulo action of the automorphism group G of the vector bundle is a non-singular and in
general a non-compact K¨ahelr manifold.

X (E) such that ∂ E(f s) = (∂f )s+f ∂Es, for s ∈ Ω0,0

X (E) → Ω0,1

The generalized Higgs pair (∂ E, Φ) is a pair of: 1. an operator ∂ E deﬁning integrable
X ⊗ End(E) which is squared

complex structure on E, and 2. a holomorphic section Φ of Ω1,0
to zero. Thus we have the following deﬁning equations for the Higgs pair (∂ ¯E, Φ)

2
E = 0,

∂

∂ EΦ = 0,

Φ ∧ Φ = 0.

(3.1)

Note that the last equation can be written in components as the commutativity conditions

[Φi, Φj] = 0,

Φ =

dXi=1

Φi(z)dzi.

(3.2)

In the following we consider the case of E having trivial rational Chern classes. In this case to
there is one-to-one correspondence between isomorphism classes of the Higgs bundles deﬁned
above and the rank n complex local systems on X [S1].

Let M be the moduli space of stable Higgs bundles considered modulo action of the
automorphism group G. The stability condition on the Higgs bundles is given by the standard
stability condition for vector bundles with the exception that only Φ-stable subbundles are
considered [S1]. The space M is a non-singular holomorphic symplectic manifold with the
holomorphic symplectic structure obtained by the reduction from the holomorphic symplectic
structure

Ω =ZX

ωd−1 Tr δ ¯A ∧ δΦ,

(3.3)

on the space of pairs (∂E , Φ) consisting of not necessary integrable complex structures ∂E
X ⊗ End(E). Here ω is the K¨ahler structure on X and ¯A is the aﬃne coordinate
and Φ ∈ Ω1,0

5

on the space of not necessary integrable complex structures. The reason for the existence of
the holomorphic symplectic structure (and moreover the hyperk¨ahelr structure) is the non-
linear version of the Hodge decomposition on the ﬁrst non-abelian complex cohomology of X
(see [S2] and references therein). The precise construction is analogous to the construction
of the holomorphic symplectic structure (and more generally hyperk¨ahler structure) on the
moduli space of rank n complex local systems on X (see [F] and references in [S2]); moreover,
the holomorphic symplectic structure on the moduli space of Higgs bundles can be obtained
from the holomorphic structure on the moduli space of complex local systems by degeneration
using the identiﬁcation of two moduli space [S1], [S2]. For a diﬀerent approach see also [DM].

The moduli space M is an algebraically completely integrable system. The analog of the

Hitchin map (2.3)

M −→ ⊕n

i=1H 0(X, Symi(Ω1,0

X )),

(3.4)

sends the Higgs ﬁeld Φ to the array (Tr Φ, Tr Φ2, · · · , Tr Φn) of symmetric GLn-invariant
polynomial functions. Precisely, let us contract the matrix valued one form Φ with a vector
ﬁeld v on X and consider traces Tr (ιvΦ)i of its power. This gives degree i symmetric function
of v and thus an element of H 0(X, Symi(Ω1,0
X )). The explicit set of Hamiltonians can be
described using basis {µi,j}, i = 1, . . . , n, j = 1, . . . , ni in each vector space H d(X, Symi−1T ⊗
Ωd,0
X ) where T is the tangent bundle to X (this is similar to Hitchin case, see Section 2). The
generators of the ring of integrable Hamiltonians are then given by

Hi,j =ZX

µi,jTr Φi.

(3.5)

The ﬁbers of the projection (3.4) are Lagrangian abelian varieties that are Lagrangian with
respect to the symplectic structure on M. Simpson in [S1] deﬁned an analog of the Hitchin
spectral curve given by a covering space ˜X → X. In good cases these spectral covers are
non-singular, and the abelian varieties in the ﬁbration (3.4) are identiﬁed with moduli spaces
of line bundles on ˜X.

These spectral covers can be represented as subvarieties of the cotangent space T ∗X.
Precisely they can be realized via supports of coherent sheaf ˆE on the total space of T ∗X
associated with the holomorphic vector bundle E corresponding to the holomorphic struc-
ture on E deﬁned by ∂ E. This construction straightforwardly generalises the corresponding
construction of the spectral curve for the Hitchin integrable system described in the previous
Section. To provide a description of ˆE we shall construct a sheaf of π∗OT ∗X-modules over
X. Note that π∗OT ∗X is a sheaf of polynomial algebras of d-variables over OX . Using the
Higgs ﬁeld Φ we supply E with the structure of π∗OT ∗X-module by allowing the generators
of the polynomial algebra act as multiplications by the matrices Φk(z) where we locally
k=1 Φk(z)dzk. Now the spectral cover ˜X associated with (∂ E, Φ) is given by the
support of the coherent sheaf ˆE on T ∗X. An open part of the spectral cover is realised as
a non-ramiﬁed n-sheet cover of an open subset of X over which at least one component Φk
of the the Higgs ﬁeld can be diagonalised with non-coincident eigenvalues. Let us give an
explicit local construction of the spectral covering locally over X. Let (z1, . . . , zd) be local
coordinates over a small open subset U of X and (w1, . . . , wd) be local linear coordinates in

have Φ =Pd

6

the ﬁber of the cotangent bundle T ∗U. Suppose that over U the Higgs ﬁeld can be chosen
in the diagonal form

Φ =

dXk=1

nXa=1

EaaΦa

k dzk,

(3.6)

where Eab are elementary (n × n)-matrices (Eab)αβ = δaαδbβ. Then the support of ˆE is locally
a collection of n copies of U0 deﬁned by union of n embeddings of U into T ∗U

(z1, . . . , zd) −→ (z1, . . . , zd, Φa

1(z), . . . Φa

d(z)),

a = 1, . . . , n.

(3.7)

This provides a structure of degree n non-ramiﬁed covering of U.

The above construction of the spectral cover can be easily reformulated in terms of a set of
deﬁning characteristic equations (see e.g. [KOP]) generalizing the spectral curve description
via characteristic equation (2.5) for the Hitchin integrable systems. Let (z1, . . . , zd, w1, . . . , wd)
be local holomorphic coordinates on T ∗X and let v be a section of the holomorphic tangent
bundle T . Then by construction the linear operator (ιvΦ − ιvw) has non-trivial kernel when
(z, w) ∈ ˜X and thus det(ιvΦ − ιvw) = 0 on ˜X. This shall hold for any vector ﬁeld v. Thus
points of the spectral cover shall satisfy the following equation

det(Φ − w) = 0,

(3.8)

as an element of n-th symmetric power of the cotangent bundle. This is a direct analog of
(2.5).

The set of equation is overdetermined as the spectral cover is a codimension d subspace

in T ∗X while the condition (3.8) provides dim(SnCd) = (cid:0)n+d−1

n (cid:1)-equations on T ∗X. This

renders the description (3.8) of the Simpson spectral cover less explicit then the analogous
equation (2.5) of the Hitchin spectral cover. In the following we demonstrate that there is
a convenient description of the Simpson spectral cover by a single equation but in another
space. This construction uses ﬁberwise projective duality.

4 Spectral cover via projective duality

Let us start by recalling the standard projective duality relation between linear subspaces
in complex projective spaces. Let P(V ), dim V = d + 1 be a projective space and P(V ∗)
be its dual. We ﬁx dual homogeneous coordinates (ξ0, . . . , ξd) and (η0, . . . , ηd) in V and
V ∗ correspondingly. A linear k-dimensional subspace Wk ⊂ P(V ) can be represented by a
(k +1)-dimensional subspace of V and thus be described by a set of d−k linear homogeneous
equations

dXj=0

Ai

jξj = 0,

i = 1, . . . , d − k .

(4.1)

7

For instance the hyperplane in P(V ) is a space of solutions of a linear homogeneous equation

dXj=0

αjξj = 0.

(4.2)

Linear subspaces generically intersect according to their dimensions, i.e. a linear k-dimensional
subspace Wk in P(V ) intersects a linear m-dimensional subspace Wm over a linear subspace
of the dimension k + m − d for k + m ≥ d.

The projective duality interchanges dimension k linear space in P(V ), V = Cd+1, and di-
mension (d−k −1) linear subspaces in P(V ∗). Let us parametrize points of the k-dimensional
space Wk ⊂ P(V ) by (k + 1)-tuple (s0, . . . , sk) ∈ Ck+1 of variables as follows

ξi =

kXj=0

Ai

jsj,

i = 0, . . . , d.

(4.3)

The corresponding dual (d − k − 1)-linear subspace in P(V ∗) is deﬁned by the set of linear
homogeneous equations

dXi=0

ηiAi

j = 0,

j = 0, . . . , k.

(4.4)

In particular to the hyperplanes H in Pd(V ), deﬁned by the linear equation (4.2), corresponds
the dual point in P(V ∗) given by the line in V ∗

LH = {(λα0, . . . , λαd)|λ ∈ C∗}.

(4.5)

This line can be also characterized as a solution of a system of linear homogeneous equations

dXj=0

βj
i ηj = 0,

i = 1, . . . , d,

and (4.2) and (4.6) are related by the consistency condition

dXj=0

βj
i αj = 0,

i = 1, . . . , d.

(4.6)

(4.7)

The projective duality respects incidence relations between various linear subspaces. For
instance two points belong to the same hyperplane in P(V ) are dual to two hyperplanes in
P(V ∗) intersecting at the point dual to the hyperplane in P(V ).

This classical projective duality picture allows various generalisations (see e.g.

[GKZ]).
In particular, one can deﬁne projective duals for non-linear subvarieties in P(V ). Precisely,
the projective dual to a subvariety Z ∈ P(V ) is a subvariety Z ∗ in P(V ∗) given by the union
of duals to all tangent planes to X. More generally given a non-linear bundle of projective
spaces over X e.g. the projectivisation P(EX ⊕ O) of a vector bundle EX over the base X one

8

can consider the bundle of the dual projective spaces P(E ∗
projective duality holds ﬁberwise.

X ⊕ O). In this case the classical

The main point of this note is the following statement:

Let P(TX ⊕ OX ) be the projectivization of the tangent bundle TX to a compact complex
manifold X, dim X = d, (z1, . . . , zd) be local coordinates on X and (ξ0, . . . , ξd) be homoge-
neous coordinates in the ﬁbers of the projective bundle P(TX ⊕ OX ). Let (∂ E, Φ) be a Higgs
pair associated with a rank n holomorphic vector bundle E on X and let the Higgs ﬁeld be

locally written as Φ =Pd

by the equation

j=1 Φj(z)dzj . Consider the hypersurface bX in P(TX ⊕ OX) deﬁned

det(

dXj=1

ξjΦj(z) + ξ0) = 0.

(4.8)

Then the ﬁberwise projective dual to this hypersurface is the projective compactiﬁcation of
the Simpson spectral cover ˜X associated with the Higgs pair (∂ E, Φ).

Assume that a subset U ⊂ X is such that the Higgs ﬁeld can be diagonalized

Φ =

nXa=1

dXj=1

EaaΦa

j (z)dzj,

(4.9)

where Eab are elementary (n × n)-matrices (Eab)αβ = δaαδbβ. Due to (3.2) this is equivalent
to the condition that at least one of the Higgs ﬁeld component is diagonalizable. Then the
corresponding hypersurface (4.8) in P(TX ⊕ OX ) is given by the equation

nYa=1

(

dXj=1

Φa

j (z)ξj + ξ0) = 0,

and thus is a family of unions of n hyperplanes

dXj=1

Φa

j (z)ξj + ξ0 = 0,

a = 1, . . . , n,

(4.10)

(4.11)

in the projective ﬁbers of P(TX ⊕ OX ) parametrized by U ⊂ X. Applying the projective
duality correspondence (4.2), (4.5) between hyperplanes and points we obtain the family of
n points a = 1, . . . , n

(η0, η1, . . . , ηd) = (λ, λΦa

1(z), . . . , λΦa

d(z)),

λ ∈ C∗,

(4.12)

in the ﬁbers of the dual projective family P(T ∗
X ⊕ OX ). This indeed deﬁnes the spectral cover
of U ⊂ X as a subset of P(T ∗
X ⊕OX ). We expect that this description can be compactiﬁed by
adding components where the Higgs ﬁeld is not diagonalizable. This then provides a concise
projective dual description (4.8) of the Simpson spectral cover.

Let us stress that the proposed construction (4.8) is trivially connected with the Hitchin

spectral cover equation (2.5). Following (4.8) the spectral cover eΣ of the algebraic curve Σ

9

associated with the Higgs pair (∂ E, Φ) is deﬁned by the ﬁberwise homogeneous equation in
P(TΣ ⊕ OΣ)

det(ξ1Φz(z) + ξ0) = 0,

Φ = Φz(z)dz,

(4.13)

and let us consider the diagonalized Higgs ﬁeld (4.9) over a subspace U ⊂ Σ. The dimension
of the projective ﬁber is equal to one and thus the projective duality maps points in the ﬁbers
of the projective bundle P(TΣ ⊕ OΣ) into the points of the projective ﬁbers of P(T ∗
Σ ⊕ OΣ)
according to the incidence relation (4.7). The incidence relation (4.6) is easily solved so that
the equation for the dual curve in P(T ∗

Σ0 ⊕ OΣ0) is given by

which is indeed the projective compactiﬁcation of the Hitchin curve

det(η1 − η0Φz(z)) = 0,

det(w − Φz(z)) = 0.

The Hitchin description (2.5) is recovered in the chart η0 = 1, η1 = w.

(4.14)

(4.15)

References

[DM] D. Donagi, E. Markman, Spectral covers, algebraically completely integrable, hamilto-

nian systems, and moduli of bundles, Springer L.N.M 1620 (1996), 1–119.

[F] A. Fujiki, Hyper-K¨ahler structure on the moduli space of ﬂat bundles, Prospects in

complex geometry (Katata and Kyoto, 1989), Springer L.N.M. 1468 (1991), 1–83.

[GKZ] I. M. Gelfand, M. M. Kapranov, and A.V. Zelevinsky, Discriminants, Resultants, and

Multidimensional Determinants, Birkh¨auser Boston, 1994, 523 pp.

[H] N. Hitchin, Stable bundles and integrable systems, Duke Math. J. 54 (1987), no. 1,

91–114.

[KOP] L. Katzarkov, D. Orlov, T. Pantev Notes on Higgs bundles and D-branes, see web-
page of CIMPA-CIMAT-SWAGP Workshop Moduli Spaces and Mathematical Physics,
21.01.2013-02.02.2013;

[S1] C. Simpson, Moduli of representations of the fundamental group of a smooth projective
variety., I: Publ. Math. I.H.E.S. 79 (1994), 47–129; II: Publ. Math. I.H.E.S. 80 (1994),
5–79.

[S2] C. Simpson, Non-abelian Hodge theory. Proceedings, ICM-90, Kyoto Springer, Tokyo

(1991), 198–230.

[Sk1] E.K. Sklyanin, Separation of Variables in the Gaudin model, Zapiski Nauchnykh Sem-
inarov LOMI 164 (1987), 151169, (in Russian); J. Sov. Math. 47 (1989), 24732488,
(English transl.).

10

[Sk2] E.K. Sklyanin, Separation of variables. New trends in Quantum ﬁeld theory, integrable

models and beyond (Kyoto, 1994). Progr. Theoret. Phys. Suppl. 118 (1995), 3560.

A.G.: Institute for Theoretical and Experimental Physics, 117259, Moscow, Russia;

S.Sh.: School of Mathematics, Trinity College Dublin, Ireland;

Hamilton Mathematics Institute, TCD, Dublin 2, Ireland;
Chair Israel Gelfand, Institut des Hautes Etudes Scientiﬁques, France;
Simons Center for Geometry and Physics, Stony Brook, USA;

On leave of absence from:

Euler International Mathematics Institute, St. Petersburg, Russia
Institute for Information Transmission Problems, Lab. 5, Moscow, Russia;

E-mail address: samson@maths.tcd.ie

11

