6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
1

 
 
]

H
O
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
3
8
5
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Analyzing In-Game Movements of Soccer Players at

Scale

L´aszl´o Gyarmati, Mohamed Hefeeda

Qatar Computing Research Institute, HBKU

{lgyarmati,mhefeeda}@qf.org.qa

Abstract

It is challenging to get access to datasets related to the physical performance of soccer play-
ers. The teams consider such information highly conﬁdential, especially if it covers in-game
performance.Hence, most of the analysis and evaluation of the players’ performance do not con-
tain much information on the physical aspect of the game, creating a blindspot in performance
analysis. We propose a novel method to solve this issue by deriving movement characteristics of
soccer players. We use event-based datasets from data provider companies covering 50+ soccer
leagues allowing us to analyze the movement proﬁles of potentially tens of thousands of players
without any major investment. Our methodology does not require expensive, dedicated player
tracking system deployed in the stadium. We also compute the similarity of the players based
on their movement characteristics and as such identify potential candidates who may be able to
replace a given player. Finally, we quantify the uniqueness and consistency of players in terms
of their in-game movements. Our study is the ﬁrst of its kind that focuses on the movements
of soccer players at scale, while it derives novel, actionable insights for the soccer industry from
event-based datasets.

1

Introduction

Quantitative performance analysis in sports has become mainstream in the last decade. The focus
of the analyses is shifting towards more sport-speciﬁc metrics due to novel technologies. These
systems measure the movements of the players and the events happening during trainings and
games. This allows for a more detailed evaluation of professional athletes with implications on
areas such as opponent scouting, planning of training sessions, or player scouting.

Previous works that analyze soccer-related logs focus on the game-related performance of the
players and teams. Vast majority of these methodologies concentrate on descriptive statistics that
capture some part of the players’ strategy. For example, in case of soccer, the average number of
shots, goals, fouls, passes are derived both for the teams and for the players [1, 5]. Other works
identify and analyze the outcome of the strategies that teams apply [18, 16, 13, 11, 9, 24, 14].
However, the physical performance and in particular the movements of players has not received
detailed attention yet.

It is challenging to get access to datasets related to the physical performance of soccer players.
The teams consider such information highly conﬁdential, especially if it covers in-game performance.
Despite the fact that numerous teams deployed player tracking systems in their stadiums, datasets
of this nature are not available for research or for public usage. It is nearly impossible to have
quantitative information on the physical performance of all the teams of a competition. Hence,

1

most of the analysis and evaluation of the players’ performance do not contain much information
on the physical aspect of the game, creating a blindspot in performance analysis.

We propose a novel method to solve this issue by deriving movement characteristics of soccer
players. We use event-based datasets from data provider companies covering 50+ soccer leagues
allowing us to analyze the movement proﬁles of potentially tens of thousands of players without any
major investment. Our methodology does not require expensive, dedicated player tracking system
deployed in the stadium. Instead, if the game is broadcasted, our methodology can be used. As a
consequence, our technique does not require the consent of the involved teams yet it can provide
insights on the physical performance of many players in diﬀerent teams.

The main contribution of our work is threefold:

1. we propose a methodology to extract the movement characteristics of the players,

2. we compute the similarity of the players and as such identify potential candidates who may

be able to replace a given player,

3. we quantify the uniqueness and consistency of players in terms of their in-game movements.

To the best of our knowledge, our study is the ﬁrst of its kind that focuses on the movements
of soccer players at scale, while it derives novel, actionable insights for the soccer industry from
event-based datasets.

2 The Challenge of Proﬁling Movements

As we noted already, it is not straightforward how to quantify the movements of soccer players at
scale. The core of this problem lies in the properties of the potential datasets that may be used for
the process. There exist three main data acquisition methodologies applied in the soccer industry:
event-based, tracking, and wearable sensors. We brieﬂy describe each of them focusing on their
properties relevant to the analysis of the players’ movements.

First, event-based datasets annotate the most important, ball related events of a game. The
method involves human operators who code the games based on a corresponding video feed of
the game. Although data providers apply quality assurance techniques1, this technique is prone
to human errors. Despite of this, the datasets are widely used in the media to enhance the fan
experience during the game. On the other hand, the data feed is near real-time and the data
production does not need any dedicated system to be deployed at the stadiums.

Second, tracking datasets contain ﬁne-grain details on the movement of players and of the ball
throughout the game. This data is generated based on video feeds of dedicated, precisely positioned
cameras. Optical tracking algorithms extract the trajectories from the video; however, there are
scenarios (e.g., collision of players) where the supervision of human operators are needed. A recent
study revealed that discrepancies exist among diﬀerent tracking systems, e.g., the trajectories of a
player may be of within several meters [12]. A major drawback of this technique is that it involves
the deployment of a system in the stadium. As such, the consent of the home team is mandatory for
such data collection. Anyone who intends to analyze the movements of the players of a competition
should get the consent of all teams (and usually of the league too). This is a major obstacle for
physical performance analysis at scale.

1

e.g., multiple operators annotate the game and the ﬁnal data feed is a result of majority voting.

2

Third, wearable sensor devices collect detailed datasets on the movement of the players [8, 20, 4].
The sensors of these devices capture the movement, accelerations, and rotation of the players, among
others. The in-game application of this technique was authorized by a recent decision of FIFA, the
governing body of international soccer [7]. As of July 2015, players are allowed to wear sensors
during oﬃcial games. However, recent research studies report discrepancies related to the precision
and consistency of these devices and such data should be used with precaution [3]. There is a
more crucial practical issue with this technique: the dataset holds information only on the players
of a single team, details on the ball and the opponent players are missing. This prevents any
comparisons of players from multiple teams, and tactical analysis of players.

The review on the available data acquisition techniques reveals the diﬃculty of any study
focusing on the quantitative evaluation of the players’ movements on scale. As we show in this
paper, event-based datasets can be used to address this problem and provide insights on player
movements. We introduce our methodology in the next section.

3 Methodology

In this section, we introduce our methodology used to extract the movements of players and then
to create their movement characteristics. Our ﬁnal goal is to quantify the similarities of players
based on their movement characteristics, i.e., the movements they apply during a season. We use
an event-based dataset throughout our analyses that we describe next.

3.1 Dataset

We use an event-based dataset generated by Opta [17] covering the 2012/13 season of La Liga (i.e.,
the ﬁrst division soccer league of Spain). The dataset contains all major events of a soccer game
including passes, shots, dribbles, and tackles. For example, the dataset has more than 300,000
passes and nearly 10,000 shots. The dataset contains the time and location of these events along
with the identity of the involved players. Hence, it is possible to derive a coarse grain time-series of
the movements of the players [10]. We note that the precision of the time annotation of the dataset
is one second.

3.2 Movement vector extraction

We describe each movement as a vector of seven: (x1, y1, x2, y2, T, s, b), where the movement starts
at time T at location (x1, y1), ends at location (x2, y2), with speed s, while b denotes ball possession
(i.e., whether the player had the ball or not). In total, we derive 660,848 movement vectors of 542
players for the analyzed season. The players have diverse movements over the season—both in
terms of their numbers and properties: the mean number of movements per player is 1,219 (could
be as high as 4,998), while the mean length of the movements is 19.4 meters (up to 100 meters). We
illustrate the derived movements of three players in Figure 1 given a single game. The ﬁgures show
the area where the players tend to move and also reveal their role in the team. For example, Xavi
was active mainly in the middle of the ﬁeld and had some high intensity movements (arrows with
red color). Messi leaned towards the right side of the ﬁeld and penetrated the box of the opponent
ﬁve times (arrows pointing into the box). Cristiano Ronaldo on the other hand was moving on
the left side, his movements covered larger distances. This is the ﬁrst step of our methodology:
extracting the movement vectors of the players. We note that the event-based dataset we use is

3

(a) Xavi

(b) Messi

(c) Ronaldo

Figure 1: Players’ movement vectors in a game derived from an event-based dataset. The color
of the arrows correspond to the speed of the movements (green—slow, red—fast). The teams are
attacking from left to right.

sparse in terms of the position of the players, i.e., the physical location of a player is only recorded
when the player was involved in some ball-related event2. As such, the elapsed time between two
events of a player can be as low as couple of seconds but it can reach several minutes too.

During the creation of the movement vectors, we take into account that the size of the soccer
ﬁelds are not necessarily identical. An interesting property of the rules of soccer is that the sizes
of the ﬁeld are not ﬁxed, there is some room to design a soccer pitch even in case of international
matches. According to the ﬁrst law of the game, the length of the pitch shall be between 100 and
110 meters, while the width between 64 and 75 meters [6]. There is an ongoing standardization
eﬀort, most of the newly constructed stadiums have a pitch with a size of 105x68m[22]. Spain is
not an exception to this extent, where the dimensions of Elche’s stadium are 108x70m while the
ﬁeld is 100x65m in case of Rayo Vallecano [15].

Another data preparation technique we use is related to handling the passes in the dataset. For
passes, we have a complete datapoint for the initiator of the pass (i.e., timestamp and location),
however, at the receiving end, the dataset does not contain a timestamp. To overcome this issues,
and to increase the wealth of the extracted time-series, we use the timestamp of the previous event,
i.e., the initiation of the pass. This is the best method for estimation as described in [10].

3.3 Movement characteristics construction

Our goal is to derive movement characteristics that enable us comparing the players performance
and analyzing the stability of a players role and ﬁtness across a season. Players have diverse number
of vectors, to handle this, we apply the following methodology. First, we derive the most relevant
K movement vectors of the competition using all the vectors of all the players. We determine
these features using the mini-batch K-means clustering algorithm [19]: the centroid movement
represents the vectors belonging to a speciﬁc cluster. We apply this method instead of creating
a grid for the locations, to have smooth, balanced clusters (instead of having high skew among
the number of members in the clusters in case of the grid scheme). Throughout this paper, we
use K = 200. Second, in case of each movement of a player, we determine the cluster it belongs
to, i.e., we compute the most similar feature vector. In the Appendix, we show examples of the

2This is a consequence of the data acquisition process: the games are annotated based on the television broadcast

that focuses on the ball all the time.

4

Lionel Messi - Barcelona

Lionel Messi - Barcelona

Lionel Messi - Barcelona

(a) All movements

(b) Movements with ball

(c) High
(≥ 14km/h)

speed

movements

Figure 2: The most important 50 movement directions of Messi throughout the season. The
boldness of the arrows correspond to the frequency the movement was used. Depending on the
set of movements we consider, the methodology reveals diverse insights on the player’s physical
performance.

coverage of some of the feature vectors, i.e., which movement vectors are belonging to a given
feature vector (Figure 8). Third, we aggregate the number of times a player applied each feature
vector, which creates a frequency vector of the features. Finally, we normalize the frequencies
with the total number of movements a player has. As a result of the normalization, we have the
movement characteristic of a player. As an example, we present the top 50 movement directions
of Messi in Figure 2(a). The ﬁgure reveals that Messi tends to have short movements in the ﬁnal
third of the pitch, while his mid/long range movements are starting from the right side of the ﬁeld.
We are able to focus on speciﬁc movements of the players by applying ﬁlters on the initial set
of movement vectors. One such ﬁlter is ball possession. It is a crucial insight how a player moves
while having the ball. To focus on this, we determine all the combinations of the events where
a player has the ball (i.e., both the starting and ending events of the movement should involve
ball possession). Events like recovering the ball, intercepting the ball, and pass reception mark
the beginning of movements where the player has possession of the ball, i.e., the player is moving
together with the ball. On the contrary, if the ﬁrst event of a movement is making a pass, the
player does not have the ball for the given movement vector. After the ﬁltering, we construct the
feature vectors and the characteristic vectors of the players. We present the most important with
ball movement traits of Messi in Figure 2(b). There are six major routes Messi takes when he has
the ball (shown with thick arrows). All of these movements are located centrally at the beginning
of the ﬁnal third.

Another aspect is the speed of the movements: fast movements are generally collocated with
important events of the game. We apply a threshold on the speed of the movements, i.e., the
movements ought to be at least 14km/h. This is inline with the categories widely used in the
soccer industry [23, 2]. Figure 2(c) presents the high-speed movements of Messi: not only his
favorite traits on the midﬁeld are revealed but also the tendencies how he approaches and enters
the box of the opponent.

3.4 Uniqueness and consistency

One of the main applications of the movement characteristics is ﬁnding similar players who may be
able to replace a given player. We identify candidates to replace some players later on this paper,

5

some similarities may be surprising on ﬁrst sight. However, this is not the only insight we can gain
from the proﬁles. The movement characteristics of the players enable us to quantify two additional
decisive qualities of the players: uniqueness and consistency. For this, we use the cosine similarity
to measure the distance between two players. Uniqueness measures how hard it is to ﬁnd a player
that has similar movements. We use the movement characteristics derived over the entire season,
and for each player we determine the M most similar ones (M = 5 in our evaluations). This is
done by identifying the players with the smallest distance from the particular player (i.e., players
with minimal cosine distances). Let dij = D(ci, cj) denote the cosine distance between player i and
j, where ci denotes the movement characteristic of player i. We compute the uniqueness of player
i as:

M

Ui =

dij

X
j=1

(1)

The range of this metric is (0, M ), the higher this value is the more unique a player is. The
uniqueness metric can be generalized for game speciﬁc movements: in this case the distances are
measured between the movement characteristics of individual games, not the entire season.

It is preferable if a player applies movements that are hard to reproduce. However, it is equally
important to have consistent performance throughout the season. We evaluate this using the
game-wise movement characteristics of the players. Let t = 1, . . . , N denote the games a player was
involved in, while ck
i denote the movement characteristic of player i for game k. The consistency
of player i for game k is deﬁned as the average pairwise distance of its movement characteristics:

C k

i =

1
N

N

X
t=1

D(ck

i , ct
i)

(2)

If the consistency metric C is small, the player applies sim-
The range of consistency is (0, 1).
ilar movements across the whole season, i.e., it is expected to see the same kind of movements
throughout the season.

4 Empirical Results and Insights

We next apply the proposed methodology on the presented dataset covering the events of the
2012/13 season of the Spanish ﬁrst division soccer league. We ﬁrst focus on identifying similar
players, afterwards we study the uniqueness and consistency of the players. Finally, we highlight
an additional area in which the methodology is able to derive new insights: movements related to
creating chances.

4.1 Similarity

We determine the similarity of the players based on their movement characteristics derived using
all the movements the players had during the season.
In Table 1 we focus on Messi, Cristiano
Ronaldo, and Xavi by presenting their ﬁve most similar counterparts. The list of similar players
may be considered as a shortlist of candidates who are potentially able to replace the given player—
at least based on their in-game movements. The table contains the distance of the players from
each other. We show the market value of the players in the table as well as a reference. The market
values of the players are as of the end of the season (i.e., June 2013) based on the estimations of

6

# similar

player

distance market value (e)

Lionel Messi - FC Barcelona

Javier Saviola - Mlaga
Radamel Falcao - Atltico Madrid
Diego Buonanotte - Granada CF
Obafemi Martins - Levante
Enrique De Lucas - Celta de Vigo

Cristiano Ronaldo - Real Madrid

Rubn Castro - Real Betis
Antoine Griezmann - Real Sociedad
Helder Postiga - Real Zaragoza
Jorge Molina - Real Betis
Jonathan Viera Ramos - Valencia

Xavi Hernndez - FC Barcelona

Thiago Alcntara - FC Barcelona
Sami Khedira - Real Madrid
Luka Modric - Real Madrid
Ignacio Insa - Celta de Vigo
Daniel Parejo - Valencia

0.155
0.158
0.174
0.180
0.193

0.079
0.089
0.125
0.127
0.132

0.069
0.109
0.113
0.116
0.122

1
2
3
4
5

1
2
3
4
5

1
2
3
4
5

120M

3M
60M
2M
3.5M
0.5M

100M

4.5M
15M
5M
3.5M
3M

15M

22M
22M
35M
0.9M
10M

Table 1: The top ﬁve most similar players and their market values in case of Messi, Cristiano
Ronaldo, and Xavi.

Tranfermarkt [21]. Some of the results are straightforward like the case of Messi and Saviola, or
Xavi and Thiago. However, it is interesting to see the list of Cristiano Ronaldo. Our methodology
reveals that the most similar player of Cristiano Ronaldo was Ruben Castro (of Real Betis). We
illustrate the similarity of the movements of Ronaldo and Castro in Figure 3. The ﬁgure shows
the feature vectors the players used and to what extent. There is a remarkable similarity between
the players despite the fact that Castro is not as highly rated as Ronaldo, and there is a huge
discrepancy in their market values: 100M compared to 4.5M. This example highlights the most
important beneﬁt of our scheme: we are able to identify players who are having the same kind of
movements as their more famous reference, however, for only a fraction of the price.

4.2 Uniqueness

We next focus on the uniqueness of the players, i.e., how hard it is to ﬁnd a player who is able to
execute the same in-game movements throughout a season. In case of uniqueness, we only consider
players who had at least 500 movements across the season to avoid discrepancies due to players
with small participation in the season. We show the ten most unique players of the competition in
Table 2. As a reference, we also include the number of movements the players had in the season.
The majority of these players are defenders who were playing signiﬁcant portions of the season on
diﬀerent sides of the ﬁeld. For example, Adriano of FC Barcelona was playing as left and right
back in the season. Messi is considered to be a unique player; this is reﬂected in our results too
with his eighth place in the uniqueness list. We illustrate the most signiﬁcant feature vectors of
these players in the Appendix (Figure 9).

7

Cristiano Ronaldo - Real Madrid

Rubén Castro

(a) Cristiano Ronaldo (Real Madrid)

(b) Ruben Castro (Real Betis)

Figure 3: Top-50 movement features of Cristiano Ronaldo and his most similar counterpart, Ruben
Castro. There is a remarkable similarity between the two players, while having two orders of
magnitude diﬀerence in their market values.

4.3 Consistency

We take one step further and next focus on the consistency of the movements. The managers of
the teams prefer players who are consistent. If the performance is consistent, the player will deliver
the expected movements. On the other hand, it is hard to count on a player whose movements
have high ﬂuctuation. Before analyzing the trends in the league, we ﬁrst present an example in
Figure 4, where we show the consistency of Xavi’s movements across the season. The horizontal
axis denotes the identiﬁer of the game he was involved in, while the vertical axis represents the
game-wise consistency. It is remarkable how consistent Xavi is across the majority of the season.
The two outliers at the beginning and at the end of the season are games where he was partially
on the bench. We show the movement vectors of game 10, 12, and 23 in Figure 5. The detailed
ﬁgures highlight similar trajectories. Xavi had numerous lateral movement in the middle of the
ﬁeld, some high intensity movements towards the box of the opponent, and he was responsible for
taking the corner kicks of his team. This was Xavi’s role in the game against Real Madrid as well,
as shown earlier in Figure 1(a). In the third game (i.e., game 23), Xavi moved similarly, however,
he was not on the pitch for the entire game, resulting in a slightly elevated consistency value.

Player

Uniqueness #movements

Adriano Correia
Martin Montoya
Franco Vazquez
Daniel Larsson
Oier Sanjurjo Mate
Juan Torres Ruiz
Sergio Ramos
Lionel Messi
Ruben Garcia Santos
Enrique De Lucas

1.246
1.021
0.978
0.974
0.921
0.892
0.876
0.860
0.848
0.842

2067
1485
659
738
2209
743
2957
3809
1148
611

Table 2: The ten most unique players of the competition. The results reveal that it is hard to
replace players who are able to play in multiple positions (e.g., diﬀerent sides of the ﬁeld).

8

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

y
c
n
e

i

t
s
s
n
o
C

 
 
 
 

0

10

20

30

#game

Figure 4: The consistency of Xavi throughout the season. His movements were similar and consis-
tent for the majority of the season, the two outliers are games where he was a substitute.

(a) Game 10

(b) Game 12

(c) Game 23

Figure 5: All the movement vectors of Xavi in case of three distinct games. The trends of the
movements are similar regardless of the game.

Finally, we analyze the players of the league in terms of their uniqueness and consistency (Fig-
ure 6). Defenders are consistent in general, but they are not having too much distinctness. There
is no clear diﬀerence between midﬁelders and attackers. There is a clear relation between the two
properties: higher uniqueness comes at a price of consistency. The dataset contains three outliers,
oddly all of them are players of FC Barcelona. In terms of the defenders, Adriano has a extremely
unique behavior, i.e., high distance from the most similar players, however, his performance is
not consistent (consistency of 0.75). Iniesta does movements with high consistency (i.e., value of
0.40) and his movements are fairly unique (0.78). Messi is the outlier of the attackers, with high
uniqueness and high consistency (0.86 and 0.30, respectively). Messi’s movement proﬁle is in a
shocking contrast with Cristiano Ronaldo, who seems to be just an average player in terms of the
uniqueness and the consistency of his movements (0.55 and 0.51, respectively).

4.4 Creating chances

We are able to extract all in-game movements of the players using our methodology. Hence, we
may focus on the movements of the players related to speciﬁc events of the game. Potentially, this
opens up a new line of research related to the analysis of movements creating scoring opportunities

9

0.8

0.6

0.4

y
c
n
e
t
s
s
n
o
C

i

Adriano

C. Ronaldo

Position

defender
midfielder
attacker

Iniesta

Messi

0.25

0.50

0.75

Uniqueness

1.00

1.25

Figure 6: The uniqueness and the consistency of the players in the league. The color of the dots
denote the position of the players. The outliers of the positions are Adriano, Iniesta, and Messi,
respectively.

at scale. Here we only highlight the potential of this area by showing two examples.

Figure 7(a) reveals a player’s movements before taking a shot. These are the areas from where
this player—namely Messi—is able to create chances. There are three main routes to arrive into the
ﬁnal third of the pitch and shoot: running straight on the left side of the box, moving diagonally
towards the edge of the box from the middle of the ﬁeld, and starting from the right side taking
a diagonal route towards the box. We note that a notable portion of these movements are high
intensity runs.

Most of the time chances are not created by a single player, rather are a result of a series of
carefully orchestrated movements of the whole team. We are able to capture this as well with our
method as shown in Figure 7(b). The example presents the movements of a team up to 20 seconds
earlier than taking a shot. The diﬀerent colors represent diﬀerent players of the team. The ﬁgure
shows intense movements of ﬁve players, all of them moving straight towards the opponent’s box.
This case the goal of the players was pressing the defensive line of the opponent rather than opening
up spaces.

These insights are just preliminary steps for a complete, on scale understanding of the relation
of player movements and scoring opportunities. A thorough analysis of these phenomena is a future
work.

5 Conclusion

We analyzed quantitatively the in-game movements of soccer players throughout an entire season.
Our methodology reveals detailed insights on the in-game strategy of the teams and on the role
and performance of the players within a team. We identify similarities among players and potential

10

(a) Messi’s movements before taking a shot (colors
denote the speed of the movements)

(b) Movement of a team precluding a shot (colors
denote diﬀerent players of the team)

Figure 7: Additional application of the methodology: insights on creating chances

candidates for replacing a given player. The results provide valuable inputs for player and opponent
scouting by revealing and quantifying the movements of the players to an extent never seen before:
both in terms of the number of covered teams and players.

References

[1] Chris Anderson and David Sally. The Numbers Game: Why Everything You Know about

Football is Wrong. 2013.

[2] Jens Bangsbo, Lene Nørregaard, and F Thorsoe. Activity proﬁle of competition soccer. Cana-
dian journal of sport sciences= Journal canadien des sciences du sport, 16(2):110–116, 1991.

[3] Martin Buchheit, Adam Allen, Tsz Kit Poon, Mattia Modonutti, Warren Gregson, and Valter
Di Salvo. Integrating diﬀerent tracking systems in football: multiple camera semi-automatic
system, local position measurement and gps technologies. Journal of sports sciences, 32(20):
1844–1857, 2014.

[4] Catapult. http: // www. catapultsports. com/ benefits/ performance-analysis/ . 2014.

[5] Jordi Duch, Joshua S Waitzman, and Lu´ıs A Nunes Amaral. Quantifying the performance of

individual players in a team activity. PloS one, 5(6):e10937, 2010.

[6] FIFA. Laws of the Game. 2014.

[7] FIFA. Approval of Electronic Performance and Tracking System (EPTS) devices. 2015. URL

http://resources.fifa.com/mm/document/affederation/administration/02/66/27/59/circularno.1494

[8] GPSports. http: // home. gpsports. com . 2014.

[9] Laszlo Gyarmati and Xavier Anguera. Automatic extraction of the passing strategies of soccer

teams. Proc. ACM KDD Workshop on Large-Scale Sports Analytics, 2015.

11

[10] Laszlo Gyarmati and Mohamed Hefeeda. Estimating the maximal speed of soccer players on

scale. In Proc. Machine Learning and Data Mining for Sports Analytics Workshop, 2015.

[11] Laszlo Gyarmati, Haewoon Kwak, and Pablo Rodriguez. Searching for a unique style in soccer.

In Proc. 2014 KDD Workshop on Large-Scale Sports Analytics, 2014.

[12] Ian Graham. Data Analysis at Liverpool FC. FC Barcelona Sports Technology Symposium,

2015.

[13] Patrick Lucey, Dean Oliver, Peter Carr, Joe Roth, and Iain Matthews. Assessing team strategy

using spatiotemporal data. In Proc. 19th ACM SIGKDD. ACM, 2013.

[14] Patrick Lucey, Alina Bialkowski, Mathew Monfort, Peter Carr, and Iain Matthews. quality
vs quantity: Improved shot prediction in soccer using strategic features from spatiotemporal
data. MIT Sloan Sport Analytics Conference, 2015.

[15] Marca. Cual es el campo mas grande de la Liga? 2014.

[16] Takuma Narizuka, Ken Yamamoto, and Yoshihiro Yamazaki. Statistical properties of position-

dependent ball-passing networks in football games. arXiv:1311.0641, 2013.

[17] OptaPro. http: // optasportspro. com . 2014.

[18] Javier L´opez Pe˜na and Hugo Touchette. A network theory analysis of football strategies. arXiv

preprint arXiv:1206.6904, 2012.

[19] David Sculley. Web-scale k-means clustering. In Proceedings of the 19th international confer-

ence on World wide web, pages 1177–1178. ACM, 2010.

[20] STATSports. http: // www. statsports. ie . 2014.

[21] Transfermarkt. Market values. 2013. URL http://www.transfermarkt.com.

[22] UEFA. Guide to Quality Stadiums. 2014.

[23] Di Salvo Valter, Collins Adam, McNeill Barry, and Cardinale Marco. Validation of prozone R(cid:13):
A new video-based performance analysis system. International Journal of Performance Anal-
ysis in Sport, 6(1):108–119, 2006.

[24] Qing Wang, Hengshu Zhu, Wei Hu, Zhiyong Shen, and Yuan Yao. Discerning tactical patterns
for professional soccer teams: An enhanced topic model with applications. In Proceedings of
the 21th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining,
KDD ’15, pages 2197–2206, New York, NY, USA, 2015. ACM.

12

Appendix

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 8: The coverage of some of the feature vectors (out of 200). The area of the clusters are not
identical, as such, most important parts of the ﬁeld are handled with more ﬁne-grain details.

13

ya - Barcelona

Franco Vázquez - Rayo Vallecano

(a) Adriano Correia
olid

(b) Martin Montoya

Oier Sanjurjo Maté - Osasuna

(c) Franco Vazquez

uiz - Sevilla

(d) Daniel Larsson

(e) Oier Sanjurjo Mate

Lionel Messi - Barcelona

(f) Juan Torres Ruiz

Rubén García

(g) Sergio Ramos

(h) Lionel Messi

(i) Ruben Garcia Santos

(j) Enrique De Lucas

Figure 9: The movement characteristics of the ten most unique players

14

