6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
7
1

.

 
 
]
P
E
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
2
1
7
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Draft version March 21, 2016
Preprint typeset using LATEX style emulateapj v. 5/2/11

OBSERVATIONAL CONSTRAINTS ON THE ORBIT AND LOCATION OF PLANET NINE IN THE OUTER

SOLAR SYSTEM

Michael E. Brown & Konstantin Batygin

Division of Geological and Planetary Sciences, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125

Draft version March 21, 2016

ABSTRACT

We use an extensive suite of numerical simulations to constrain the mass and orbit of Planet Nine,
the recently proposed perturber in a distant eccentric orbit in the outer solar system. We compare our
simulations to the observed population of aligned eccentric high semimajor axis Kuiper belt objects
and determine which simulation parameters are statistically compatible with the observations. We
ﬁnd that only a narrow range of orbital elements can reproduce the observations. In particular, the
combination of semimajor axis, eccentricity, and mass of Planet Nine strongly dictates the semimajor
axis range of the orbital conﬁnement of the distant eccentric Kuiper belt objects. Allowed orbits, which
conﬁne Kuiper belt objects with semimajor axis beyond 230 AU, have perihelia roughly between 200
and 350 AU, semimajor axes between 300 and 900 AU, and masses of approximately 10 Earth masses.
Orbitally conﬁned objects also generally have orbital planes similar to that of the planet, suggesting
that the planet is inclined approximately 30 degrees to the ecliptic. We compare the allowed orbital
positions and estimated brightness of Planet Nine to previous and ongoing surveys which would be
sensitive to the planet’s detection and use these surveys to rule out approximately two-thirds of the
planet’s orbit. Planet Nine is likely near aphelion with an approximate brightness of 22 < V < 25.
At opposition, its motion, mainly due to parallax, can easily be detected within 24 hours.

1. INTRODUCTION

Since the time of the discovery of Sedna,

it has
been clear that a large perturbing mass either is or
was present in the outer solar system at some time
(Brown et al. 2004). With a perihelion distance of
76 AU, Sedna is essentially immune to direct interac-
tions with the known planets, thus, unlike all other
Kuiper belt object orbits, it cannot have been placed
onto its orbit by perturbation from any of the known
planets. Proposals for the perturber required to have
created Sedna’s orbit have included sibling stars in
the sun’s birth cluster (Brown et al. 2004; Brasser et al.
2006; Dukes & Krumholz 2012), a single passing star
(Morbidelli & Levison 2004; Kenyon & Bromley 2004;
Rickman et al. 2004) as well as a small former or ex-
tant planet in the outer solar system (Brown et al. 2004;
Gladman & Chan 2006; Gomes et al. 2006). Progress on
understanding the cause of Sedna’s perturbed orbit, how-
ever, was not possible because of a lack of additional high
perihelion objects.

With the discovery of 2010 GB174 (Chen et al. 2013)
and 2012 VP113 (Trujillo & Sheppard 2014) – the sec-
ond and third high perihelion Sedna-like objects –
additional patterns began to emerge. Most impor-
tantly, Batygin & Brown (2016) point out that all well-
determined orbits of Kuiper belt objects (KBOs) beyond
Neptune with semimajor axis, a, larger than 230 AU ap-
proach perihelion within 94 degrees of longitude of each
other. Moreover, these objects also share very nearly the
same orbital plane, which is tilted an average of 22 de-
grees to the ecliptic. The combined probability of these
two occurrences happening simply due to chance is less
than 0.01%. Importantly, of all KBOs with a > 100 AU,
the ﬁve with the largest perihelion distances are likewise

mbrown@caltech.edu, kbatygin@gps.caltech.edu

conﬁned to the same perihelion region and orbital plane.
Batygin & Brown (2016) show that a distant massive
eccentric planet will cause clustering of the perihelion
and orbital planes of distant Kuiper belt objects in the
manner observed, and, additionally, will naturally lead
to the creation of objects with high perihelion orbits like
Sedna. Surprisingly, these clustered and high perihelion
objects have orbits that are anti-aligned with the giant
planet. That is, the clustered Kuiper belt objects come
to perihelion 180 degrees away from the perihelion posi-
tion of the planet. Despite chaotic evolution, the cross-
ing orbits maintain long term stability by residing on a
interconnected web of phase-protected mean motion res-
onances.

The

distant

eccentric

studied

perturber

in
Batygin & Brown (2016) – which we refer
to as
Planet Nine – modulates the perihelia of objects in the
anti-aligned cluster and naturally creates objects like
Sedna, in addition to the other high perihelion KBOs.
Additionally, the existence of Planet Nine predicts a
collection of high semimajor axis eccentric objects with
inclinations essentially perpendicular to the rest of the
solar system. Unexpectedly, this prediction is strongly
supported by the collection of low perihelion Centaurs
with perpendicular orbits whose origin had previously
been mysterious (Gomes et al. 2015).

Here we make detailed comparisons between dynamical
simulations that include the eﬀects of Planet Nine, and
solar system observations, to place constraints on the
orbit and mass of the distant planetary perturber. We
then discuss observational constraints on the detection
of this distant giant planet and future prospects for its
discovery.

2. CONSTRAINTS ON MASS, SEMIMAJOR AXIS, AND

ECCENTRICITY

2

The inclined orbits of the aligned KBOs (and thus, pre-
sumably, of the distant planet) render ecliptic-referenced
orbital angles awkward to work in (particularly when we
consider the Centaurs with perpendicular orbits later).
Accordingly, we re-cast the three ecliptic-referenced pa-
rameters – argument of perihelion, longitude of ascending
node, and inclination – into simple descriptions of orbit
in absolute position on the sky: the ecliptic longitude
of the point in the sky where the object is at perihelion
(which we call the “perihelion longitude”, not to be con-
fused with the standard orbital parameter called “longi-
tude of perihelion” which, confusingly, does not actually
measure the longitude of the perihelion except for zero
inclination orbits), the latitude of the perihelion (“peri-
helion latitude”), and an angle which measures the pro-
jection of the orbit pole onto the plane of the sky (“pole
angle” perhaps more easily pictured as the direction per-
pendicular to the motion of the object at perihelion).

Figure 1a shows the perihelion longitude and latitude
as well as the pole angle for all objects with q > 30
and a > 60 AU and well-determined orbits. The six
objects with a > 230 AU are highlighted in red. The
clustering in perihelion location as well as pole angle
is clearly visible.
In Figure 1b we plot the perihelion
longitude of all well constrained orbits in the Kuiper
belt which have perihelia beyond the orbit of Neptune
as a function of semimajor axis. The 6 objects with
a > 230 AU cluster within 94 degrees of perihelion lon-
gitude. Batygin & Brown (2016) showed that this clus-
tering, when combined with the clustering in pole angle,
was unexpected at the 99.993% conﬁdence level. The
clustering is consistent with that expected from a giant
planet whose perihelion is located 180 degrees in longi-
tude away from the cluster, or an ecliptic longitude of
241 ± 15 degrees. A closer examination of Figure 1b
makes clear a possible additional unlikely phenomenon.
While KBOs with semimajor axes out to 100 AU appear
randomly distributed in longitude, from 100 to 200 AU,
13 objects are loosely clustered within 223 degrees of each
other. While this clustering is not as visually striking,
the probability of such a loose clustering of 13 objects
occurring in randomly distributed data is smaller than
5%. As will be seen, such a loose clustering of smaller
semimajor axis objects can indeed be explained as a con-
sequence of some orbital conﬁgurations of a Planet Nine.
To understand how these observations constrain the
mass and orbit of Planet Nine, we performed a suite
of evolutionary numerical integrations. Speciﬁcally, we
initialized a planar, axisymmetric disk consisting of 400
eccentric planetesimals, that uniformly spanned semi-
major axis and perihelion, q, distance ranges of a =
150 − 550 AU and q = 30 − 50 AU, respectively. The
planetesimal population (treated as test particles) was
evolved for 4 Gyr under the gravitational inﬂuence of
the known giant planets, as well as Planet Nine.

Perturbations due to Planet Nine and Neptune were
accounted for in a direct N-body fashion, while the sec-
ular eﬀects of the remaining giant planets were mod-
eled as a suitably enhanced quadrupolar ﬁeld of the Sun.
As shown in Batygin & Brown (2016), such a numerical
setup successfully captures the relevant dynamical phe-
nomena, at a substantially reduced computational cost.
In these integrations we varied the semimajor axis and
eccentricity of Planet Nine from a9 = 200 − 1000 AU and

e
d
u

t
i
t

a

l
 

n
o

i
l

e
h
i
r
e
p

60
40

20

0

-20

-40
-60

360

270

180

perihelion longitude

90

0

360

270

180

90

e
d
u
t
i
g
n
o
l
 
n
o

i
l

e
h
i
r
e
p

0
0

100

200
400
semimajor axis (AU)

300

500

600

Fig. 1.— Orbital parameters of distant Kuiper belt objects. (a)
The standard orbital parameters argument of perihelion, longitude
of ascending node, and inclination can be transformed into non-
standard, but more readily interpretable ecliptic longitude and lat-
itude of the point where the object comes to perihelion and an
angle which is a projection of the orbits pole position on the sky.
In this representation, the collection of all objects with q > 30 and
a > 60 AU is shown. The six objects with the highest semimajor
axis are highlighted in red. The KBO 2000 CR105, which has the
seventh largest semimajor axis and has an elevated perihelion of
44 AU, is shown in green. The blue points are all of the object
with a > 230 AU and i > 50 degrees. All of these objects are
Centaurs with perihelia inside of 15 AU. (b) A plot of the semi-
major axis versus the ecliptic longitude at which the object comes
to perihelion for all KBOs with well determined orbits and with
q > 30 AU shows that the six KBOs with the largest semimajor
axes are clustered within 94 degrees of each other. The green points
additionally highlight all objects with a > 100 AU and q > 42 AU,
showing that these objects, too, are similarly clustered. The weaker
potential clustering of objects ∼180 degrees away is also evident
between 100 and 200 AU.

e9 = 0.1 − 0.9 in increments of ∆a9 = 100 AU and ∆e9 =
0.1 (here, and subsequently, the 9 subscript refers to the
orbital parameters of Planet Nine, while unsubscripted
orbital parameters refer to the test particles). The a9 −e9
grids of synthetic scattered disks were constructed for
Planet Nine masses of m9 = 0.1, 1, and 10 Me (earth
masses), totaling a suite of 192 simulated systems. All
calculations were performed using the mercury6 N-body
integration software package (Chambers 1999), employ-
ing the hybrid symplectic-Bulirsch-Stoer algorithm with
a timestep equal to a tenth of Neptune’s orbital period.
We assess the success of each simulation with a sim-
ple metric. We collect the orbital elements of all rem-
nant objects at each 0.1 Myr output time step from 3 to
4 Gyr after the start of the simulation (in order to as-
sure that the objects we are considering are stable over
at least most of the age of the solar system), and we
restrict ourselves to objects with instantaneous perihe-

lion q < 80 AU (to restrict ourselves to objects which
are most likely to be observable). In this fashion we are
examining stream functions of orbital elements which ﬁt
into an observable range of parameter space, rather than
examining individual objects at a single time step. This
approach is used in all subsequent discussions of simu-
lations below. We then select 13 objects at random in
the a = [100, 200] AU range and 6 objects at random in
the a = [230, 600] AU range and calculate the smallest
angles that can be used to conﬁne the two populations.
We perform this random selection 1000 times and cal-
culate the joint probability that, like the real data, the
13 objects in a = [100, 200]AU range are conﬁned within
223 degrees and the 6 objects a = [230 − 600] AU range
are conﬁned within 94 degrees. Additionally, we examine
whether any objects exist in the range a = [200, 300] AU,
as many simulations remove all objects in this range. We
assign these simulations a probability of zero. This prob-
ability calculation has the advantage that it is agnostic as
to whether or not our observations of clustering are sig-
niﬁcant or even physically relevant. It simply calculates
the probability that a given simulation could reproduce
some of the apparent features of the real data, even if
by chance. A small number of simulations which do well
in our simplistic metric nonetheless give results so unlike
the solar system observations that we manually assign
them zero probability.

Figures 2 and 3 show grids of probabilities for the 10
and 1 Me simulations (the 0.1 Me simulations had no ap-
preciable eﬀect on the objects). The probabilities should
be taken as more qualitative than quantitative, as these
simulations are exploratory and attempt to cover large
ranges of phase space by including a limited number of
particles per simulation and excluding three dimensional
eﬀects. Nonetheless, the overall trends are clear. All
of the 1 Me cases can be ruled out at greater than the
98% conﬁdence level. The only simulation which ﬁts the
outer part of the Kuiper belt even slightly well, with
Planet Nine at a9 = 200 AU and e9 = 0.7 would have a
perihelion of q9 = 60 AU, which would be likely to do sig-
niﬁcant damage to the largely undisturbed cold classical
Kuiper belt which we did not include in our simulations.
We thus conclude that a mass as low as 1 Me is infeasible.
The 10 Me simulations produce a wide range of ac-
ceptable results (Figure 2).
In general, all simula-
tions which cannot be excluded at at the 99% conﬁ-
dence level fall with a range of a9 = [300, 900] AU and
q9 ∼ [200, 350] AU. The acceptable q9 range is greater at
smaller semimajor axis. The acceptable simulations can
be roughly described as ﬁtting within a triangular region
of phase space deﬁned by [a9, e9] corners of [300 AU, 0.5],
[300 AU, 0.1], and [900 AU, 0.8]. The best ﬁt simulations
are along the q9 ∼ 200 AU line with the middle range of
semimajor axis.

In Figure 4 we show, as an example, the Planet Nine-
centered perihelion longitudes as a function of a of all
objects that have q < 80 AU and which have survived at
least 3 Gyr, for the case of a9 = 500 AU and e9 = 0.6,
one of the highest probability simulations. Objects anti-
aligned with the planet have a longitude of 180 degrees in
this simulation, while those aligned will be at 0 degrees
longitude. This simulation shows the major eﬀects that
we have previously identiﬁed in the real data. Inside of
100 AU little perturbation is visible. From 200 to 600 AU

3

Fig. 2.— Only a limited set of simulated 10 Me Planet Nine
orbits provide an adequate ﬁt to the known orbits of the distant
KBOs. For each semimajor axis - eccentricity combination, we
calculate the probability that 6 objects selected at random with
230 < a < 600, q < 80 AU and at times t > 3 Gyr are clustered
within 94 degrees of each other combined with the probability that
13 objects randomly selected with 100 < a < 200 and q < 80 AU.
Acceptable simulations (with a probability of greater than 1%)
occupy a roughly triangular region of a-e space (show in dashed
lines) with perihelion distances between 200 and 350 AU (shown
in solid lines).

Fig. 3.— For a 1 Me Planet Nine with a9 = 200 AU and e9 = 0.7
a marginal ﬁt appears acceptable, but detailed examination of the
simulation shows that the results diverge greatly from the solar
system. Most other combinations of orbital parameters show little
eﬀect on the Kuiper belt.

the longitudes are conﬁned around 180 degrees, that is,
they are anti-aligned with Planet Nine. And from 100
to 200 AU there is a slight tendency for a broad cluster
centered on the longitude of the planet.

As a counter example, Figure 5 shows a simulation
with a9 = 700 AU and e9 = 0.3 which depicts many of
the same general phenomena, but these phenomena do
not develop until larger semimajor axes. For example,
the anti-alignment does not begin until 400 AU, while
a broad aligned cluster can be seen from about 300 to
400 AU. Even with the crudeness of these simulations
these basic eﬀects are clear. The semimajor axis at which
anti-alignment begins and the range where broad conﬁne-
ment is evident are strong indicators of the combination
of semimajor axis and the eccentricity of Planet Nine.

We have not yet performed simulations with higher
mass planets, so the upper limit to the mass is not yet
known. Further simulations are required to constrain
the mass of Planet Nine to a greater degree of accuracy,

4

Fig. 4.— One of the successful simulations showing the orbital
evolution of all objects with q < 80 AU at times t > 3 Gyr. A col-
lection of resonant stable high semimajor axis objects anti-aligned
with Planet Nine (centered at ∆ longitude of 180 degrees) appears
beyond 200 AU, while from 100-200 AU there is a slight preference
for aligned orbits.

Fig. 5.— A low probability simulation. Clear anti-alignment does
not develop until beyond 400 AU, while aligned orbits appear only
from approximately 300 to 400 AU.

though, as we show below, current imaging survey con-
straints rule out masses higher than about 20 Me.

3. CONSTRAINTS ON INCLINATION AND ARGUMENT OF

PERIHELION

The planar simulations provide no constraints on incli-
nation, i9, argument of perihelion ω9, or longitude of as-
cending node, Ω9, of Planet Nine. To examine the eﬀects
of these orbital elements on the Kuiper belt, we perform
a second, fully three dimensional suite of simulations. In
these simulations we ﬁx the semimajor axis and eccen-
tricity to be 700 AU and 0.6, respectively, values which
are within our acceptable range of parameter space. The
inclination dynamics are unlikely to be unique to the spe-
ciﬁc values of a9 and e9, so we deem these simulations
to be representative. We allow the inclination of Planet
Nine to take values of i9 = 1, 10, 20, 30, 60, 90, 120, and
150 degrees.

Unlike the planar suite of calculations, here we ini-
tialize the planetesimals in a state characterized by an
anti-aligned longitude of perihelion with respect to that
of the planet. The starting values of planetesimals’ lon-
gitudes of ascending node, on the other hand, are taken
to be random. As demonstrated by Batygin & Brown
(2016), dynamical sculpting of such a planetesimal pop-
ulation yields a conﬁguration where long-term stable ob-

t

n
e
m
e
n

i
f

n
o
c
 
f

o

 
y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
p

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0
0

50

inclination

100

150

Fig. 6.— For simulations with a9 = 700AU and e9 = .6, the
probability of conﬁnement of 6 randomly selected objects with
300 < a < 700 and q < 80 AU varies strongly with inclination
of the planet.

jects have longitudes of ascending node roughly equal to
that of Planet Nine. In turn, this ties together ω9 and
Ω9 through a ﬁxed longitude of perihelion (which is the
sum of these parameters).

Upon examination of these simulations, we ﬁnd that
eﬃciency of conﬁnement of the distant population drops
dramatically with increased inclination of Planet Nine.
To quantify this eﬃciency, we sample each simulation
1000 times, picking 6 random objects from the sample
of all objects in the range a = [300, 700] AU (as pre-
viously shown, these a9 = 700 AU simulations do not
begin strong perihelion conﬁnement until a ∼300 AU; as
we are more interested in understanding the cluster than
in speciﬁcally simulating our data at this point we in-
crease our semimajor axis range of interest). As before
we restrict ourselves to time steps after 3 Gyr in which
an object’s orbit elements have q < 80 AU, and we add
the constraint that i < 50 degrees, to again account for
observability biases. We calculate the fraction of times
that the 6 randomly selected objects are clustered within
94 degrees (Figure 6). The conﬁnement eﬃciency drops
smoothly until, at an inclination of 60 degrees and higher,
it scatters around 20%. These results suggest, but do not
demand, that Planet Nine has only a modest inclination.
One of the striking characteristics of the 6 aligned dis-
tant Kuiper belt objects is the large value of and tight
conﬁnement in the pole angle (22 ± 6 degrees; Figure
1). In examining the simulations that exhibit good con-
ﬁnement in longitude, we note that the polar angles
of the simulated orbits are approximately perpendicu-
lar to the plane of Planet Nine, particularly for objects
which come to perihelion in the plane of the planet. The
implication of this phenomenon is that a pole angle of
22 degrees suggests a minimum planet inclination of ap-
proximately 22 degrees, and an orbital plane (which is
controlled by Ω9) similar to the plane of the observed
objects. To quantify this observation, we plot the me-
dian pole angle of our simulation objects which meet the
criteria described above and which have perihelion lat-
itudes between -25 and 0 degrees like the real distant
objects. We restrict ourselves to objects with perihelia
south of the ecliptic both because the observed objects
all have perihelia south of the ecliptic and also because
we want to avoid any bias that would occur by a loss of
observed objects north of the ecliptic due to the proxim-

l

)
g
e
d
(
 
e
g
n
a
 
r
a
o
p

l

40

20

0

-20

-40
0

90

argument of perihelion

180

270

5

360

Fig. 7.— For the inclined simulations, the average polar angle of
anti-aligned orbits varies systematically with ω9. The average polar
angle of the six most distant objects is 22 degrees, shown as the
dashed line. For simulations with high probability of conﬁnement
(i9 < 60 degrees), the average polar angle only reaches values as
high as 22 degrees for ı9 = 30 degrees and ω9=150 degrees. The
black, red, green, and blue points correspond to the i9=1, 10, 20,
and 30 degree simulations, respectively.

ity of the galactic plane close to the perihelion positions.
It is currently unclear whether the lack of clustered ob-
jects with perihelia north of the ecliptic is a dynamical
eﬀect or an observational bias. Figure 7 shows this mean
polar angle as a function of argument of perihelion of
Planet Nine. The maximum median polar angle occurs
for ω9 ∼ 150 degrees, a conﬁguration where the plane of
the planet passes through the perihelion positions of the
objects, and that maximum is approximately equal to
the inclination of the orbit, conﬁrming our observation
that the clustered objects are along the same orbit plane
as the planet.

Based on the conﬁnement probability and the large
average pole angle of the real objects, we can infer that
the inclination of Planet Nine is greater than ∼22 de-
grees and less than the inclination at which conﬁnement
becomes improbable, which, based on an interpolation
of the data from Figure 5, occurs approximately around
40 degrees. For inclinations of ∼22 degrees, ω must be
quite close to 150 degrees. For inclinations of 30 degrees,
the allowable range for the argument of perihelion ap-
pears to be ω9 ∼ 120 − 160 degrees.

While this analysis yields useful constraints, we quan-
tify these results further by again sampling each of the
simulations 1000 times and determining the probability
of 6 randomly selected objects (300 AU < a < 700 AU,
q < 80 AU, i < 50 degrees, survival time greater than
3 Gyr, and perihelion latitude between -25 and 0 degrees)
having perihelion longitudes clustered with 94 degrees
and having an average polar angle greater than 20 de-
grees with an RMS spread of less than 6.2 degrees. Al-
most all simulations can be ruled out at greater than the
99% conﬁdence level. The only simulations which cannot
are, unsurprisingly, those with inclination of 30 degrees
and argument of perihelion of 150 – which is the single
best ﬁt – and 120 degrees and, additionally, a few other
seemingly random combinations of [i9, ω9]: [90, 60], [150,
0], [150, 210], and [150, 330], all in units of degrees. We
examine all of these cases in detail below.

One strong prediction of the existence of a giant planet
in the outer solar system is that it will cause Kozai-Lidov
oscillations which will drive modest inclination objects

Fig. 8.— For simulations with a9 = 700 AU, e9 = 0.6, and i9 =
30 deg, examination of all objects with 300 < a < 700 AU and q <
80 Au shows a low inclination population anti-aligned with Planet
Nine and a high inclination population on either side of the anti-
aligned population. The colored points are the same as in Figure
1a, with the blue points showing that the highly inclined large
semimajor axis Centaurs are closely aligned with the predicted
high inclination locations.

onto high inclination perpendicular and even retrograde
orbits and then back again. This eﬀect can be seen, for
example, in Figure 8, where we plot the evolution of per-
ihelion longitude versus inclination for the simulations
with 30 degree inclination (again, restricting ourselves
to 300> a >700 AU, q < 80 and t > 3 Gyr; note that ar-
gument of perihelion of Planet Nine has no substantive
eﬀect on this plot, so we plot all arguments together).
The ﬁve known objects in the outer solar system with
a > 200 AU and i > 50 deg are also shown. The sim-
ulations reproduce their perihelion longitudes and incli-
nations well, although they are all on the outer edge of
the predicted clustering regions. An important caveat to
note, however, is that the ﬁve high inclination objects
are all Centaurs with 8 < q < 15 AU. The high inclina-
tions of these objects mean that they penetrate the gi-
ant planet region much more easily and so can maintain
their alignments much more easily than lower inclina-
tion Centaurs. Our simulations remove all objects inside
20 AU, so we have not explored the dynamics interior to
Uranus, but we note a systematic trend where objects
with smaller perihelion distances move to the outer edge
of the clustering regions, just like the real low perihelion
objects appear to be. Clearly, simulations including all
of the giant planets which allow us to study these high
semimajor axis Centaurs are critical.

The perihelion locations of the perpendicular high
semimajor axis Centaurs eﬀectively rule out the possible
higher inclination orbits for Planet Nine. The i9 = 90
and i9 = 150 degrees cases do create high inclination
objects, but their perihelia are sporadically distributed
across the sky (Figure 9). We conclude that, of our sim-
ulated parameters, only the i9 = 30, ω9 = 150 degrees
and i9 = 30, ω9 = 120 degrees are viable.

In order to complete our analysis in a tractable amount
of time, each of the simulations used to explore parameter
space above was limited in either dimensionality, num-
ber of particles, or in the range of starting parameter of
the particles.
In order to check that these limitations
did not inﬂuence the overall results, we perform a ﬁnal
fully three dimensional simulation with a large number

6

Fig. 9.— The simulations with i9 = 150 degrees produce little

conﬁnement of either the low or high inclination population.

of particles with randomly chosen starting angles. We
choose to simulate Planet Nine with a mass of 10 Me,
a9 = 700, e9 = 0.6, i9 = 30 degrees, ω9 = 0 degrees, and
Ω9 = 0 degrees (note that the planet processes over the
4 billion years of the integrations, but at this large semi-
major axis the precession in ω9 is only about 30 degrees
during the entire period, so we ignore this eﬀect). These
full simulations reproduce all of the relevant eﬀects of
the more limited simulations, giving conﬁdence to our
simulation results.

4. SKY POSITION

Based on comparison to our suite of simulations, we
estimate that the orbital elements of Planet Nine are as
follows. The semimajor axis and eccentricity are within
a triangle bounded by the [a9,e9] sides of [300 AU, 0.5],
[300 AU, 0.1], and [900 AU, 0.8]; the inclination is be-
tween approximately 22 < i9 < 40 degrees, and the ar-
gument of perihelion is between 120 < ω9 < 160 degrees.
We ﬁx the perihelion longitude at 241±15 degrees. While
these choices of parameter ranges have been justiﬁed in
the analysis of the simulations above, they cannot be
considered a statistically rigorous exploration of param-
eter space. Indeed, any attempt at such statistical rigor
is not yet warranted: substantial uncertainty comes not
from the statistics of the objects themselves, but from
the currently small number of simulations in the best ﬁt
region of parameter space. Clearly, signiﬁcantly more
simulation is critical for a better assessment of the path
of Planet Nine across the sky.

The last parameter we consider is the mass of Planet
Nine, which we assume is in the range of 5 to 20 Me.
To transform this mass into an expected brightness re-
quires assumptions of both radius (and thus composi-
tion) and albedo (and thus surface composition), nei-
ther of which is constrained by any of our observa-
tions. Nonetheless, we note that many known exoplan-
ets exist in this mass range, and they are thought to
contain substantial gaseous atmospheres (Rogers 2015).
Weiss & Marcy (2014) ﬁnd a best-ﬁt mass-radius rela-
tionship of (R/Re) = 0.34 (M/Me)1.08, which yields a
radius of approximately 4 Re for our nominal mass esti-
mate and a range of 2 to 9 Re for our full range. We note
however, that compositional diﬀerences, as well as vari-
able irradiation levels can introduce substantial scatter
into the data (Batygin & Stevenson 2013). For albedo,
we make the plausible assumption that Planet Nine will

Fig. 10.— Using all constraints on the orbital and physical pa-
rameters of Planet Nine, we can predict the location, distance,
brightness, and speed of the planet throughout its orbit. Regions
within 10 degrees of the galactic plane are outlined in red, and the
ecliptic plane is sown in blue. The colored portions show regions
where Planet Nine would have been or should be detected by previ-
ous or ongoing surveys. Pink shows WISE limits. Light blue shows
limits from the CRTS reanalysis, yellow shows Dark Energy Sur-
vey limits and covered, dark blue shows Pan-STARRS transient
analysis limits, green shows Pan-STARRS moving object analy-
sis current limits, and red shows Pan-STARRS expected limits.
Orange shows the region exclusively ruled out by lack of observed
perturbation to Saturn (Fienga et al. 2016) The black regions show
regions of phase space where Planet Nine could not have been or
will not be detected in previous or currently planned surveys.
be an ice giant like Uranus or Neptune, with a similar
atmospheric composition and structure, and albedo of
∼0.3.

We now use our estimated orbital parameters to pre-
dict the orbital path of Planet Nine across the sky. We
carry out a simple Monte Carlo analysis selecting uni-
formly across all of the parameter ranges. Figure 10
shows the sky location, heliocentric distance, magnitude,
and sky motion at opposition for our suite of predicted
orbits. For the calculated V magnitude, we only consider
planets as large as 4 Re. As will be seen, a much larger
planet can be ruled out over nearly its entire range.

5. CURRENT OBSERVATIONAL CONSTRAINTS

While most wide ﬁeld surveys of the Kuiper belt have
not been sensitive to sky motions smaller than about
1 arcsecond per hour (Millis et al. 2002; Brown 2008;
Petit et al. 2011, i.e.), a few surveys have had the sen-
sitivity and cadence to have potentially detected Planet
Nine at some point in its orbit. We discuss all such sur-
veys below.

5.1. WISE

The WISE spacecraft surveyed the entire sky twice
in its 3.4 and 4.6 µm (W1 and W2) bands, allowing
Luhman (2014) to rule out Saturn-sized planets – which

have substantial enhanced short wavelength emission ow-
ing to emission from internal heat – out to a distance of
∼30,000 AU. A 10 Me planet, however, would not be ex-
pected to have this enhanced short wavelength emission.
For example, ISO detected nothing but reﬂected sunlight
from Neptune from 2.5 to 5 µm (Burgdorf et al. 2003),
with an average ﬂux of about 5 mJy. The Luhman (2014)
W1 limit corresponds to approximately 0.2 mJy, which
suggests that Neptune itself could only be detected to
∼70 AU. As a conﬁrmation, we examined the catalog of
WISE single-source detections of Neptune itself. Nep-
tune is detected 16 times with a signal-to-noise (S/N) of
approximately 50 in the W1 band. Assuming that all
of those images are coadded, Neptune could be detected
with a S/N of 10 only to ∼63 AU, consistent with our
estimate above. The Luhman (2014) results thus pro-
vide no constraints on the position or existence of Planet
Nine.

5.2. Catalina real time transient survey

While near earth object searches are performed at ca-
dences poorly matched to the detection of objects in the
outer solar system, they cover the sky multiple times in
a year, allowing the possibility of detecting objects by
their weekly or monthly motion. In Brown et al. (2015),
we performed such an analysis from the Catalina real
time transient survey (CRTS)(Drake et al. 2009), which
itself repurposed the Catalina Sky Survey near earth as-
teroid search into a transient survey. We collected all
one-time transients over an 8 year period, that is, all
instances in which an object was detected at a spot in
the sky only once, and attempted to ﬁt all combinations
of 4 or more detections to Keplerian orbits. The Keple-
rian ﬁlter is strong. From ∼ 1019 potential combinations,
we narrowed the detections down to eight known Kuiper
belt objects and zero false positives. Every bright Kuiper
belt object in the survey ﬁelds was detected, often dozens
of times. The survey was determined to be essentially
100% complete to V ∼ 19.1 in the north and V ∼ 18.6
in the south. For some of the smaller potential values
for semimajor axis and larger values of planetary radius,
for example, Planet Nine would have been visible to this
survey over a substantial portion of its orbit, though it
was not detected.

5.3. The Pan-STARRS 1 Survey

The Pan-STARRS 1 telescope has surveyed large
amounts of sky multiple times to moderate depths at
declinations greater than -30 degrees. We consider the
analysis of the data in two stages.

The Pan-STARRS Survey for Transients.

Like the
earlier, CRTS, the Pan-STARRS Survey for Transients
(PST) (Smartt et al. 2014) quickly disseminates detec-
tions of transients sources detected in the sky. We have
performed a similar analysis on the reported PST data,
searching for viable Keplerian orbits. No series of tran-
sients can be found which ﬁt an outer solar system body
on any bound Keplerian orbit. Typical transient depths
reached are g = 21.0, and based on the collection of re-
ported transients, the survey appears to eﬃciently cover
the sky north of -30 declination and at galactic latitudes
greater than about 10 degrees. This survey rules out
much of the sky within about 45 degrees of the predicted

7

perihelion point, with the exception of the region near
the galactic plane.

The Pan-STARRS Outer Solar System Key Project.
A survey for objects in the outer solar system was
one of the initial goals of the Pan-STARRS survey.
Holman et al. (2015) have now completed a preliminary
analysis of the survey data and report no detections out
to 600 AU. While detailed sensitivity studies have yet to
be completed, it is estimated that the survey is complete
to approximately r ∼ 22.5, though limits in the galactic
plane are worse. An extended analysis is currently un-
derway which will have the same brightness limits, but
will remove the artiﬁcial restriction to objects closer than
600 AU (Holman, private communication). If these sen-
sitivity estimates are correct, the Pan-STARRS 1 moving
object survey has or will rule out a substantial fraction
of the non-aphelion sky.

5.4. The Dark Energy Survey

The Dark Energy Survey (DES) is performing the
largest deep southern hemisphere survey to date. Some
of the DES region covers the orbital path of Planet Nine
(indeed one of the 6 cluster objects, 2013 RF98, was de-
tected in the DES). While cadences are not designed for
ease of outer solar system detection, it is clear that the
data will be sensitive to Planet Nine if it is in the survey
area. The DES team estimates a Planet Nine detection
limit of r ∼ 23.8. (Gerdes, private communication).

5.5. Additional surveys

Additional surveys covering wide areas of the sky have
been performed, but in all cases they are insensitive to
the slow expected speeds of Planet Nine, they have too
low of a survey eﬃciency to consider the region eﬀectively
surveyed, or they cover little or none of the region of the
predicted orbital path. The large community surveys
which are concentrating on speciﬁc areas of the sky, such
as the VISTA surveys in the southern hemisphere and
the Subaru Hyper-SuprimeCam survey along the celestial
equator unfortunately do not overlap with the required
search region.

In the future, the Large-Scale Synoptic Telescope is
expected to survey much of the sky observable from
its Chilean site to a single-visit depth of approximately
r ∼ 24.5 magnitude. The current survey strategy does
not include visits to ﬁelds as far north as those at the
extremes of the predicted Planet Nine orbital path, but
if Planet Nine has not yet been found by the expected
start of the LSST survey operations in 2023, a simple ex-
tension could quickly rule out nearly all but the faintest
and most distant Planet Nine predictions.

At its most distant predicted locations, Planet Nine
is faint and in the northern hemisphere. Subaru Hyper-
Suprime Cam will be the instrument of choice for detect-
ing the planet at these locations. We began a survey of
these regions in the fall of 2015 and will attempt to cover
all of the predicted orbital path.

5.6. Additional constraints:

Fienga et al. (2016) perform full ﬁts to the locations
of all planets and nearly 300 asteroids observed from an-
cient times to the present with and without a 10 Me
Planet Nine at various positions along an orbit with

8

a9 = 700 AU and e9=0.6, consistent with the nominal
orbit suggested in Batygin & Brown (2016). They ﬁnd
that the strongest constraint on the existence of Planet
Nine comes from the very precise measurements of the
distance to Saturn as measured by the Cassini space-
craft over the past decade. They strongly rule out a
10 Me Planet Nine closer than ∼400 AU over the range
of Right Ascension of RA9 > 266, RA9 < 2 deg. When
Planet Nine is beyond 600 AU, RA9=[31,160] deg for
this orbit, they can detect no diﬀerence between Sat-
urn’s position with and without Planet Nine. At inter-
mediate distances, the signal from Planet Nine is diﬃ-
cult to disentangle from systematic eﬀects. At two loca-
tions, RA9=197 and RA9=33 deg, the position of Saturn
is slightly better explained with the addition of Planet
Nine, but with two such minima, we conservatively take
this ﬁt to be indicative of the level of the systematic er-
rors in the analysis. While Fienga et al. (2016) only ﬁt
the single nominal orbit, we estimate the range of orbits
that they could have ruled out by noting that the ratio of
the expected Planet Nine signal compared to the approx-
imate level of the systematic noise is > 5 over most of
the ruled out region, so we consider any planet with 20%
of the tidal eﬀect of the nominal Planet Nine to be ruled
out. This constraint eﬀectively rules out a small other-
wise unobserved region in the southern hemisphere.

A recent paper (Malhotra et al. 2016) makes no at-
tempt to explain spatial alignments, but instead at-
tempts to simplistically look for mean-motion commen-
surabilities in the distant KBOs, in hopes of being able
to constrain both a9 and the location of Planet Nine
within its orbit. Speciﬁcally they assume that the four
most distant KBOs are in N:1 and N:2 resonances, and
examine the implications for Planet Nine. Such an ap-
proach could, in principle, work in the circular restricted
three-body problem, but, as shown in (Batygin & Brown
2016), highly elliptical orbits are required to explain the
spatial conﬁnement of the orbits, and no speciﬁc reso-
nances dominate the disturbing function in this elliptical
problem.
Indeed, no particular preference for type of
critical angle or even resonance order can be identiﬁed
in the dynamical simulations shown here. Rather, the
crossing orbits evolve chaotically but maintain long term
stability by residing on a interconnected web of phase-
protected mean motion resonances. The assumption of
simple low order resonance is thus unlikely to be justi-
ﬁed. Not surprisingly, the Planet Nine orbits produced
by these assumptions do not produce the spatial conﬁne-
ments of the KBOs that are observed. Thus, it appears
that no useful constraint on the orbit or position can be
drawn from this method.

5.7. Joint constraints

In Figure 10 we show the regions of the potential orbits
of Planet Nine that have been ruled out by the above
constraints (or, in the case of the ongoing DES, where the
planet might still be found by the survey). The existence
of Planet Nine can be ruled out over about two thirds
of its orbit. One tiny region in the southern hemisphere

galactic plane remains uncovered by any existing surveys,
but the probability of ﬁnding Planet Nine in such a small
location right at perihelion is small. The vast majority of
the orbital region in which Planet Nine could be located
is beyond about 600 AU and within about 60 degrees of
its aphelion position. For the eccentric orbits considered
here, Planet Nine spends greater than half of its time at
these distances, so ﬁnding it currently at these locations
near aphelion would be expected.

At its most distant possible location, a 2 Re Planet
Nine is approximately V = 25. A 9 Re Planet Nine,
which is our estimated size for a 20 Me object, would be
3.3 magnitudes brighter, for a faintest magnitude of V =
21.7. Such a bright object can already be ruled out at all
points in its orbit, including the northern galactic plane.
We thus consider 9 Re an upper limit to the size and thus
approximately 20 Me an upper limit to the mass of Planet
Nine (with the caveat that the mass-radius relationship
remains uncertain).

6. CONCLUSIONS

The existence of a distant massive perturber in the
outer solar system – Planet Nine – explains several hith-
erto unconnected observations about the outer solar sys-
tem, including the orbital alignment of the most distant
Kuiper belt objects, the existence of high perihelion ob-
jects like Sedna, and the presence of perpendicular high
semimajor axis Centaurs. These speciﬁc observations
have been compared to suites of numerical integrations
in order to constrain possible parameters of Planet Nine.
The current constraints must be considered preliminary:
our orbital simulations needed to cover substantial re-
gions of potential phase space, and so were, of necessity,
sparsely populated. At present, the statistical reliability
of our constraints are limited as much by the limited sur-
vey nature of the simulations as by the small number of
observed objects themselves. Continued simulation could
substantial narrow the potential search area required.

As important as continued simulation, continued de-
tection of distant solar system objects is the key to reﬁn-
ing the orbital parameters of Planet Nine. Each addition
Kuiper belt object with a > 230 AU tightens the obser-
vational constraints on the location of Planet Nine (or,
alternatively, if signiﬁcant numbers of objects are found
outside of the expected cluster location, the objects can
refute the presence of a Planet Nine).

Interestingly, the detection of more high semimajor
axis perpendicular objects (whether Centaurs or Kuiper
belt objects) has the possibility of placing the strongest
constraints in the near term. While we have currently
only used the existence of these objects as a constraint,
their perihelion locations and values of ω change strongly
with ω9 and i9 and so can be used to better reﬁne these
estimates. Though there are only currently 5 known of
these objects, they are being discovered at a faster rate
than the distant Kuiper belt objects, so we have hope of
more discoveries soon. As with the distant Kuiper belt
objects, of course, detection of these objects also has the
strong possibility of entirely ruling out the existence of
Planet Nine if they are not found with perihelia in the
locations predicted by the hypothesis.

Batygin, K. & Brown, M. E. 2016, AJ, 151, 22

Batygin, K. & Stevenson, D. J. 2013, ApJ, 769, L9

REFERENCES

Brasser, R., Duncan, M. J., & Levison, H. F. 2006, Icarus, 184, 59
Brown, M. E. 2008, in The Solar System Beyond Neptune, ed.

M. A. Barucci, H. Boehnhardt, D. P. Cruikshank, &
A. Morbidelli, 335–344

Brown, M. E., Bannister, M. T., Schmidt, B. P., Drake, A. J.,

Djorgovski, S. G., Graham, M. J., Mahabal, A., Donalek, C.,
Larson, S., Christensen, E., Beshore, E., & McNaught, R. 2015,
AJ, 149, 69

Brown, M. E., Trujillo, C., & Rabinowitz, D. 2004, ApJ, 617, 645
Burgdorf, M., Orton, G. S., Davis, G. R., Sidher, S. D.,

Feuchtgruber, H., Griﬃn, M. J., & Swinyard, B. M. 2003,
Icarus, 164, 244

Chambers, J. E. 1999, MNRAS, 304, 793
Chen, Y.-T., Kavelaars, J. J., Gwyn, S., Ferrarese, L., Cˆot´e, P.,

Jord´an, A., Suc, V., Cuillandre, J.-C., & Ip, W.-H. 2013, ApJ,
775, L8

Drake, A. J., Djorgovski, S. G., Mahabal, A., Beshore, E., Larson,
S., Graham, M. J., Williams, R., Christensen, E., Catelan, M.,
Boattini, A., Gibbs, A., Hill, R., & Kowalski, R. 2009, ApJ,
696, 870

Dukes, D. & Krumholz, M. R. 2012, ApJ, 754, 56
Fienga, A., Laskar, J., Manche, H., & Gastineau, M. 2016, ArXiv

e-prints

Gladman, B. & Chan, C. 2006, ApJ, 643, L135
Gomes, R. S., Matese, J. J., & Lissauer, J. J. 2006, Icarus, 184,

589

Gomes, R. S., Soares, J. S., & Brasser, R. 2015, Icarus, 258, 37
Holman, M. J., Chen, Y.-T., Lin, H.-W., Lackner, M., Payne,

M. J., & Alcock, C. 2015, in AAS/Division for Planetary
Sciences Meeting Abstracts, Vol. 47, AAS/Division for
Planetary Sciences Meeting Abstracts, 211.12

9

Kenyon, S. J. & Bromley, B. C. 2004, Nature, 432, 598
Linder, E. F. & Mordasini, C. 2016, ArXiv e-prints
Luhman, K. L. 2014, ApJ, 781, 4
Malhotra, R., Volk, K., & Wang, X. 2016, ArXiv e-prints
Millis, R. L., Buie, M. W., Wasserman, L. H., Elliot, J. L., Kern,

S. D., & Wagner, R. M. 2002, AJ, 123, 2083

Morbidelli, A. & Levison, H. F. 2004, AJ, 128, 2564
Petit, J.-M., Kavelaars, J. J., Gladman, B. J., Jones, R. L.,

Parker, J. W., Van Laerhoven, C., Nicholson, P., Mars, G.,
Rousselot, P., Mousis, O., Marsden, B., Bieryla, A., Taylor, M.,
Ashby, M. L. N., Benavidez, P., Campo Bagatin, A., &
Bernabeu, G. 2011, AJ, 142, 131

Rickman, H., Froeschl´e, C., Froeschl´e, C., & Valsecchi, G. B.

2004, A&A, 428, 673

Rogers, L. A. 2015, ApJ, 801, 41
Smartt, S. J., Smith, K. W., Wright, D., Young, D. R., Kotak, R.,

Nicholl, M., Polshaw, J., Inserra, C., Chen, T.-W., Terreran,
G., Gall, E., Fraser, M., McCrum, M., Valenti, S., Foley, R.,
Lawrence, A., Gezari, S., Burgett, W., Chambers, K., Huber,
M., Kudritzki, R. P., Magnier, E., Morgan, J., Tonry, J.,
Sweeney, W., Stubbs, C. W. C., Kirshner, R., Metcalfe, N., &
Rest, P. D. A. 2014, The Astronomer’s Telegram, 5850
Trujillo, C. A. & Sheppard, S. S. 2014, Nature, 507, 471
Weiss, L. M. & Marcy, G. W. 2014, ApJ, 783, L6

