6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
7
1

 
 
]

.

R
G
h
t
a
m

[
 
 

1
v
5
2
7
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

ACYLINDRICAL HYPERBOLICITY OF CUBICAL

SMALL-CANCELLATION GROUPS

GOULNARA N. ARZHANTSEVA AND MARK F. HAGEN

Abstract. We provide an analogue of Strebel’s classiﬁcation of geodesic triangles in classical
C(cid:48)( 1
6 ) groups for groups given by Wise’s cubical presentations satisfying suﬃciently strong
metric cubical small-cancellation conditions. Using our classiﬁcation, we prove that, except in
speciﬁc degenerate cases, such groups are acylindrically hyperbolic.

Contents

Introduction
1. Acylindrical hyperbolicity and WPD elements
2. Triangles in cubical small-cancellation groups
3. Detecting WPD elements using the classiﬁcation of triangles
4. The hyperbolic space H and the coarse projection
5. Proof of Theorem B
References

Introduction

1
6
7
16
19
20
25

A cubical presentation of a group is a natural high-dimensional generalization of both a
“classical” and a “graphical” presentation of a group in terms of generators and relators. The
theory of cubical presentations, and especially the cubical small-cancellation theory developed
by Wise [Wis, Section 3], has begun to play a signiﬁcant role in geometric group theory following
spectacular solutions of the virtual Haken conjecture by Agol and of Baumslag’s conjecture on
one-relator groups with torsion by Wise. Topologically, a classical presentation of a group
G consists of a wedge X of circles and a collection of combinatorial immersions Yi → X of
circles so that the presentation complex X∗ formed from X by coning oﬀ the various Yi satisﬁes

π1X∗ ∼= G. The 1–skeleton Cay(X∗) of the universal cover (cid:101)X∗ of X∗ is a Cayley graph of G

with respect to the generating set implicit in the choice of X. A graphical presentation is a
natural generalization of this: X is allowed to be an arbitrary graph, and each Yi → X becomes
an immersion of graphs.

In [Wis], it is observed that allowing even more ﬂexibility in the choice of X can lead to more
tractable “presentations” for a given group. This leads to the notion of a cubical presentation:
X is now a nonpositively-curved cube complex and each Yi is a connected nonpositively-curved
cube complex equipped with a local isometry Yi → X. The presentation complex X∗ is deﬁned
analogously, and there is a generalized Cayley graph Cay(X∗) which is the cubical part of the
universal cover of X∗, i.e. the cover of X corresponding to ker(π1X → π1X∗). The analogy with
classical presentations is clear: the cube complex X is a kind of “high-dimensional generating

2010 Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation. 20F06, 20F65, 20F67.
Key words and phrases. Cubical small-cancellation, acylindrically hyperbolic group.
G.N. Arzhantseva was partially supported by her ERC grant ANALYTIC no. 259527.
M.F. Hagen was supported by the EPSRC grant of Henry Wilton.

1

2

G.N. ARZHANTSEVA AND M.F. HAGEN

set”, the CAT(0) cube complex (cid:101)X is the “high-dimensional tree” taking the place of the free

group on the generating set in the classical case, and Cay(X∗) corresponds to a Cayley graph.
The advantage is that some of the complication of the group has been “stored” in the organized,
tractable cubical structure of X, leaving us to worry only about the interactions between the
various Yi, and between each Yi and the cubical structure of X.

The latter problem is handled by cubical small-cancellation theory, in which “generalized
overlaps” between the various Yi (i.e. shadows of Yi on Yj, as propagated through the intervening
cubes) are small in the appropriate metric sense.
In this setting, there are powerful tools –
speciﬁcally, the ladder theorem and the cubical Greendlinger lemma (see Section 2) – that allow
one to extract considerable geometric and algebraic information about a group from a small-
cancellation cubical presentation. The small-cancellation conditions of interest in this paper are
the cubical C(cid:48)(α) conditions, for α > 0. These say that |P| < α(cid:107)Yi(cid:107) for all P, i, where (cid:107)Yi(cid:107)
denotes the length of a shortest essential closed combinatorial path in Yi and |P| is the length of
the geodesic piece P . A piece is a path in the “generalized overlap” between distinct elevations

to (cid:101)X of the various Yi, or between such elevations and hyperplane-carriers in (cid:101)X.

One advantage of passing to cubical presentations is that many groups that do not admit clas-
sical presentations satisfying strong small-cancellation conditions nonetheless admit cubical pre-
sentations with these properties. For example, if G is the fundamental group of a nonpositively-
curved cube complex X, then G admits a cubical presentation with no relators, and therefore
satisﬁes arbitrarily strong cubical small-cancellation conditions; on the other hand, G does not
in general satisfy strong classical small-cancellation conditions, as can be seen by considering,
for instance, right-angled Artin groups. Later in this introduction, we list more examples of
cubical small-cancellation groups.

Our ﬁrst result is geometric. We classify geodesic triangles in the generalized Cayley graph
of a cubical small-cancellation group in terms of the disc diagrams that they bound in the
presentation complex. This is a cubical analogue of Strebel’s classiﬁcation of geodesic triangles
in C(cid:48)( 1
6 ) groups (Theorem 43 of [Str90]), which says that any geodesic triangle bounds a disc
diagram of one of a small number of very speciﬁc combinatorial types:
Theorem A (Classiﬁcation of triangles). There exists α > 0 so that the following holds. Let
X be a nonpositively-curved cube complex, let I be a (possibly inﬁnite) index set and let {Yi →
X : i ∈ I} be a set of local isometries. Suppose that the cubical presentation (cid:104)X | {Yi}i∈I(cid:105)
satisﬁes the cubical C(cid:48)(α) condition. Let X∗ be the presentation complex and x, y, z be 0–cells
so that ∆ is the boundary path of a disc diagram D → X∗ of one of 9 types; in particular, D
is the union of 3 padded ladders. Moreover, any other geodesic triangle with corners x, y, z is
square-homotopic to ∆.

of the universal cover (cid:101)X∗. Then there exists a geodesic triangle ∆ in (cid:101)X∗, with corners x, y, z,

1

The precise (longer) statement is Theorem 2.16, which explains exactly what the “9 types” of
disc diagram are; a padded ladder is a disc diagram of the type in Figure 2. The α required in our
144. Conceptually, our theorem says that any geodesic triangle bounds a disc diagram
proof is
which is square-homotopic (ﬁxing corners) to a disc diagram which is a “thickened tripod”.
conditions on X or I.

Theorem A can be used to recover existing results of a similar character by imposing various
• If I = ∅, then Theorem A says that any three vertices in a CAT(0) cube complex
determine a geodesic tripod, which is a consequence of the fact that CAT(0) cube com-
plexes are exactly the simply-connected cube complexes whose 1–skeleta are median
graphs [Che00].
• If X is a wedge of circles and each Yi is an immersed circle, then (cid:104)X | {Yi}(cid:105) is a classical
C(cid:48)( 1
6 ) groups
applies, and follows from Theorem A.

144 ) presentation, and the original Strebel classiﬁcation for classical C(cid:48)( 1

ACYLINDRICAL HYPERBOLICITY OF CUBICAL SMALL-CANCELLATION GROUPS

3
• If dim X = 1 (i.e. X is a graph) and each Yi → X is an immersion of graphs, then
we have graphical presentations, which are the setting for graphical small-cancellation
theory. In this setting, there is a classiﬁcation of triangles that holds under weaker small-
cancellation conditions than are required in the cubical setting. Indeed, the classiﬁcation
of triangles is completely combinatorial, and Strebel’s proof actually applies in the setting
of the (3, 7)–diagrams used by Gruber-Sisto in their proof of acylindrical hyperbolicity
for graphical small-cancellation groups [GS14]; this combinatorial observation was made
by Gruber [Gru15, Remark 3.11]. While the result about (3, 7)–diagrams suﬃces for
graphical small-cancellation groups, one cannot extend it directly to disk diagrams over
cubical presentations since the presence of squares means that such diagrams need not
satisfy the (3, 7) condition.

We foresee several applications of Theorem A to the thorough investigation of cubical small-
cancellation groups (cf.
in classical small-cancellation theory, the classiﬁcation of triangles
is crucial in calculating the conformal dimension of the boundary [Mac], in proving growth
tightness [Sam], the rapid decay property [AD12], SQ-universality [Gru], etc.).

In this paper, we focus on acylindrical hyperbolicity, inspired by the corresponding result for
graphical small-cancellation groups [GS14]. A group G is acylindrically hyperbolic if it admits
a nonelementary acylindrical action on a hyperbolic space (acylindricity generalizes uniform
properness in a natural way). The notion of acylindrical hyperbolicity, due to Osin [Osi15a],
uniﬁes several generalizations of relative hyperbolicity [BF02, DGO11, Ham08, Sis] and provides
a class of groups with many strong properties: if G is acylindrically hyperbolic, then G is SQ-
universal, contains normal free subgroups, and is C∗–simple if and only if it has no ﬁnite normal
subgroup [DGO11]; G contains Morse elements and thus all asymptotic cones of G contain cut-
points [Sis14]; the bounded cohomology of G has inﬁnite dimension in dimensions 2 [HO13] and
3 [FPS15]; every commensurating endomorphism of G is an inner automorphism [AMS], etc.

The class of acylindrically hyperbolic groups is now known to be vast, see e.g. [Bow08, Osi15a,
DGO11, MO15, Osi15b, BF08, GS14, BHS14, PS15]. Our second result adds Wise’s cubical
small-cancellation groups to this notable list:
Theorem B (Acylindrical hyperbolicity from cubical small-cancellation). Let X be a compact
nonpositively-curved cube complex and let (cid:104)X | {Yi}i∈I(cid:105) be a (possibly inﬁnite) C(cid:48)( 1
144 ) cubical
presentation with each Yi compact. Let X∗ denote the presentation complex. Then one of the
following holds:

(1) π1X∗ is ﬁnite;
(2) π1X∗ is two-ended;

(3) each Yi is contractible, π1X∗ = π1X, and the universal cover (cid:101)X of X contains a convex

π1X–invariant subcomplex splitting as the product of unbounded cube complexes;

(4) π1X∗ is acylindrically hyperbolic.
In the case where X is a compact cube complex and I = ∅ (i.e. in the purely cubical case),
the failure of π1X to be hyperbolic corresponds to large complete bipartite subgraphs of the

contact graph – the intersection graph of the hyperplane-carriers – of (cid:101)X, as shown independently
in [Hag14] and [Che00]; the space H obtained from (cid:101)X by coning oﬀ the hyperplane-carriers is al-

ways hyperbolic [Hag14]. In [BHS14], it is shown that under natural extra hypotheses, the action
of π1X on H is acylindrical, while in any case any g ∈ π1X acting loxodromically on H actually
acts as a WPD element in the sense of [BF02] (see also Deﬁnition 1.2 below); together with
results in [Hag13] characterizing the loxodromic isometries of H, and a result of Osin connecting
WPD elements to acylindricity [Osi15a], this implies the virtually cyclic/product/acylindrically
hyperbolic trichotomy of Theorem B in the case where I = ∅. This trichotomy (in the purely
cubical case) also follows from the Caprace-Sageev rank-rigidity theorem [CS11] and general
results about groups acting on CAT(0) spaces and containing rank-one elements [Osi15a, Sis],

4

G.N. ARZHANTSEVA AND M.F. HAGEN

although the ﬁrst argument seems more amenable to generalization along the lines of Theorem B
(since that is what we do in the present paper).

6 ) and the graphical Gr(7) conditions, respectively).

The comparison with the acylindrical hyperbolicity result of Gruber-Sisto, for graphical small-
cancellation groups, is interesting; our results about cubical small-cancellation groups do not
follow from corresponding results about graphical small-cancellation presentations, since the
latter viewpoint does not account for high-dimensional cubes. On the other hand, restricting
Theorems A and B to the case where dim X = 1 and each Yi is a graph, one does not reprove
the results of [GS14] or [Str90] in full generality, since the cubical C(cid:48)( 1
144 ) condition is a priori
more restrictive than the small-cancellation conditions needed in the classical and graphical
cases (which are the classical C(cid:48)( 1
Theorem B is proved roughly as follows. First, we create a hyperbolic π1X∗–space H by
coning oﬀ each hyperplane-carrier N (H) and each relator Yi in the generalized Cayley graph
Cay(X∗). This procedure is a common generalization of the constructions used in the purely
cubical case (where the space obtained from coning oﬀ the hyperplane-carriers is quasi-isometric
to the contact graph) [Hag14] and in the graphical case (where the space is obtained from coning
oﬀ each relator graph Yi by attaching the complete graph on its vertices) [GS14]. Next, we apply
Theorem A to show that if g ∈ π1X∗ acts loxodromically on H, then g is a WPD isometry of H,
and therefore Osin’s theorem tells us that π1X∗ is acylindrically hyperbolic or virtually cyclic.
It remains to ﬁnd loxodromic isometries of H. This is done in Section 5 over a series of lemmas.
there are such ˜g is well-understood [Hag13]), and ˜g survives in the quotient π1X → π1X∗, then
the image g of ˜g has the desired properties. It is then a matter of using the small-cancellation
Yi → X is π1–surjective, or there is some WPD element g ∈ π1X∗.
Remark 1 (Compactness). It is in the parts of the proof dealing with product decompositions
that compactness of X plays a role, since we need to invoke tools from [CS11] that require
either a proper cocompact action on a cube complex, or some more exotic hypotheses about
the boundary. Accordingly, one could modify the hypotheses about X and obtain a similar
conclusion to that of Theorem B in various ways, mainly by weakening the statement about
product decompositions. The natural conclusion if conclusions (2) − (4) of the theorem fail is

Roughly, we show that if ˜g ∈ π1X acts loxodromically on the contact graph of (cid:101)X (and whether
assumptions to show that either no such ˜g was available (so, roughly, (cid:101)X was a product), or some

that there is some Yi → X so that (cid:101)Yi ⊆ (cid:101)X is a π1X–invariant subcomplex; to get from here to

conclusion (1) is the unique place where compactness of Yi plays a role.
Remark 2 (No proof by cubulation). Cubical small-cancellation theory is partly motivated
by the fact that groups satisfying strong classical small-cancellation conditions act nicely on
CAT(0) cube complexes [Wis04, Theorem 1.2]. This generalizes in various ways to cubical
presentations: if (cid:104)X | {Yi}(cid:105) satisﬁes the generalized B(6) condition, one can often cubulate the
corresponding group; see, for instance, [Wis, Theorem 5.50].

It is tempting to try to prove Theorem B using this approach, together with the above-
mentioned results about acylindrical hyperbolicity of groups acting on cube complexes. However,
there are various problems with this approach. First, the cubulations one can obtain via the
generalized B(6) condition may not be nice enough to invoke the results from [CS11] needed to
ﬁnd rank-one elements in the absence of a product decomposition. Second, the generalized B(6)
condition requires each Yi to have a wallspace structure, compatible with the local isometry
Yi → X, generalizing the wallspace structure on a circle in which each wall is a pair of antipodal
points. (Compare with the lacunary walling condition on graphical presentations from [AO14].)
At the same time, no cubical C(cid:48)(α) small-cancellation condition implies the generalized B(6)
condition, and indeed there are groups that are covered by Theorem B but which do not admit
an action on a CAT(0) cube complex with no global ﬁxed point. This can already be seen in the
1–dimensional case: Proposition 7.1 of [OW07] yields, for any α > 0, a graphical presentation

ACYLINDRICAL HYPERBOLICITY OF CUBICAL SMALL-CANCELLATION GROUPS

5
(cid:104)X | Y (cid:105), where X is a graph and Y → X an immersed graph, satisfying the graphical (hence
1–dimensional cubical) C(cid:48)(α) condition, with the additional property that the group thus pre-
sented has Kazhdan’s property (T ), and thus cannot act ﬁxed-point-freely on a CAT(0) cube
complex [NR98].
Remark 3 (Acylindrical action on a quasi-tree). Combining Theorem B with a very recent
result of Balasubramanya [Bal16] shows that any cubical small-cancellation group G covered
by Theorem B either satisﬁes one of the conclusions (1) − (3) or acts acylindrically and non-
elementarily on a quasi-tree.
Examples of cubical small-cancellation groups. We list here fundamental examples and
recipes for building examples, of cubical small-cancellation groups to which Theorem A and
Theorem B apply. It is inspired by the list in Section 3.p of [Wis]:
144 ) small-cancellation groups: if F is a free group and {(cid:104)zi(cid:105)}i∈I a malnor-
i }i∈I(cid:105)(cid:105)

mal collection of cyclic subgroups, then there are n(cid:48)
satisﬁes the appropriate small-cancellation condition whenever ni (cid:62) n(cid:48)

(cid:62) 1 so that the group F/(cid:104)(cid:104){zni
i for all i.

(1) Classical C(cid:48)( 1

i

144 ) small-cancellation groups.

of which is supported on a proper join in G (i.e. each gi is a rank-one isometry of (cid:101)X).
of which has a convex cocompact core (cid:101)Yi in (cid:101)X. Then for each i there exists ni > 0 so

(2) Graphical C(cid:48)( 1
(3) Classical/RAAG hybrid: let X be the Salvetti complex of a right-angled Artin group A,
with presentation graph G, and let {gi}i∈I be a collection of independent elements, none
More generally, choose {(cid:104)gi(cid:105)}i∈I to be a malnormal collection of cyclic subgroups, each
that, letting Yi = (cid:104)gni
144 ) presentation.
(4) More generally, let X be a special cube complex, in the sense of [HW08]. Let {Yi →
X} be a collection of local isometries of cube complexes so that the resulting cubical
presentation (cid:104)X | {Yi}(cid:105) satisﬁes the cubical C(cid:48)(α) condition for some α > 0. Each Yi has
residually ﬁnite fundamental group since it is special, and thus, for any n ∈ N, there is a
satisﬁes the cubical C(cid:48)( α

ﬁnite cover (cid:98)Yi → Yi with (cid:107)(cid:98)Yi(cid:107) (cid:62) n(cid:107)Yi(cid:107); thus the related cubical presentation (cid:104)X | {(cid:98)Yi}(cid:105)

i (cid:105)\(cid:101)Yi, the cubical presentation (cid:104)X | {Yi}(cid:105) is a C(cid:48)( 1

(5) Given letters x, y and m (cid:62) 1, let (x, y)m denote the ﬁrst half of the word (xy)m. Consider

n ) condition. See [Wis, Section 3.q].

the Artin group

when mij

A = (cid:104)a1, a2, . . . , an | (ai, aj)mij = (aj, ai)mij whenever i (cid:54)= j(cid:105).

(Note that we follow the convention of letting mij = ∞ to indicate that there is no

underlying right-angled Artin group, X be its Salvetti complex, and Γ be its presentation
graph (a graph with a vertex for each ai and with an edge from ai to aj when mij = 2).

relation between ai, aj.) Let (cid:98)A = (cid:104)a1, a2, . . . , an | [ai, aj] whenever mij = 2(cid:105) be the
That is, A is a quotient of (cid:98)A obtained by adding the relations (ai, aj)mij = (aj, ai)mij
(cid:54)= 2. Observe that each element gij = (ai, aj)mij (aj, ai)−mij of (cid:98)A, with
mij (cid:54)= 2, is a rank-one isometry of (cid:101)X, since, if it is supported in a join in the presentation
graph Γ of (cid:98)A, then it is supported in a factor of that join. Hence there is a convex
subcomplex (cid:101)Yij of (cid:101)X that is cocompactly stabilized by (cid:104)gij(cid:105), and which is just the
convex hull of a combinatorial gij–axis. Let Yij be the quotient of (cid:101)Yij by the (cid:104)gij(cid:105)–

action, so that (cid:104)X | Yij whenever 2 < mij < ∞(cid:105) is a cubical presentation for the Artin
group A. Clearly, Yij has systole 2mij, so in order to impose a condition on mij ensuring
that this presentation satisﬁes the cubical C(cid:48)( 1
144 ) condition, we need only investigate
the cone-pieces and wall-pieces.

If ˜P is a cone-piece between (cid:101)Yij and (cid:101)Yk(cid:96), then | ˜P| = 1. On the other hand, if ai, aj
lie in the link of some ak in Γ, then any geodesic in (cid:101)Yij is a wall-piece, but otherwise

wall-pieces have length (cid:54) 1. Hence suppose that A satisﬁes the following:

6

G.N. ARZHANTSEVA AND M.F. HAGEN
• for all i (cid:54)= j, either mij = 2 or mij = ∞ or mij > 72;
• for all i (cid:54)= j such that there exists k with mik = mjk = 2, we have either mij = 2

or mij = ∞.

Then the above cubical presentation for A is C(cid:48)( 1
144 ) and our acylindricity theorem
applies to A. There is a related recipe in Section 20 of [Wis] for building C(6) cubical
presentations of Artin groups (cf. [AS83]) but it is harder to see when these are C(cid:48)( 1
144 ).
In a similar manner, up to some limited worries about torsion, one should be able to
produce many examples of Coxeter groups that virtually admit cubical C(cid:48)( 1
144 ) presenta-
tions; the base cube complex should be the Davis complex of the underlying right-angled
Coxeter group.

Outline of the paper. In Section 1, we recall the deﬁnitions of acylindrical hyperbolicity
and WPD elements, and a result of Osin connecting them. Section 2 begins with a discussion
of cubical presentations, disc diagrams, and the features of cubical small-cancellation theory
needed in the proof of the classiﬁcation of triangles, Theorem A, which also occurs in this
section. In Section 3, we give a list of conditions on a cubical small-cancellation group G acting
on a hyperbolic space H suﬃcient to ensure that G contains an element acting on g as a WPD
element. In Section 4, we produce such a space H, formed from a generalized Cayley graph
Cay(X∗) by coning oﬀ both the relators and the hyperplane-carriers. Finally, in Section 5, we
explain when one can ﬁnd elements of G acting loxodromically on H; in concert with the results
of the preceding two sections, this completes the proof of Theorem B.

We assume basic knowledge of CAT(0) and nonpositively-curved cube complexes and cubical

presentations; familiarity with the background material in [Wis12] is suﬃcient.
Acknowledgments. MFH thanks the Fakultät für Mathematik of Universität Wien for hos-
pitality during a visit in which much of the work on this project was completed, and is also
grateful to Dani Wise for numerous discussions about cubical small-cancellation theory over the
years. Both authors thank Kasia Jankiewicz for answering a question about short inner paths.

1. Acylindrical hyperbolicity and WPD elements

The notion of an acylindrically hyperbolic group was deﬁned in [Osi15a], as follows:

Deﬁnition 1.1 (Acylindrical action, acylindrical hyperbolicity). Let (X, d) be a metric space
and let G act on X by isometries. Then the action is acylindrical if for each  (cid:62) 0, there exists
R (cid:62) 0 and N ∈ N so that for all x, y ∈ X for which d(x, y) (cid:62) R, we have

|{g ∈ G : d(x, gx) (cid:54) , d(y, gy) (cid:54) }| (cid:54) N.

Let X be Gromov-hyperbolic and let G act by isometries on X. The action of G is elementary
if the limit set of G on ∂X has at most two points. If G acts non-elementarily and acylindrically
on a hyperbolic space, then G is said to be acylindrically hyperbolic.

When G is a cubical small-cancellation group, we will construct an explicit action of G on
a hyperbolic space H, but this will not necessarily be the action that witnesses acylindrical
hyperbolicity. Instead, the action will be nice enough that G contains a WPD isometry of H,
which will in turn yield an acylindrical action on some other hyperbolic space. More precisely:
Deﬁnition 1.2 (WPD element [BF02]). Let G act by isometries on the space X. Then h ∈ G
is a WPD element if for each  > 0 and each x ∈ X, there exists M ∈ N so that

|{g ∈ G : d(x, gx) (cid:54) , d(hM x, ghM x) (cid:54) }| < ∞.

In [Osi15a], Osin showed that if G is not virtually cyclic and acts on a hyperbolic space H,
and some g ∈ G acts on H as a loxodromic WPD element, then G is acylindrically hyperbolic.
This fact is instrumental in the proof of Theorem 4.3 below, and thus in the proof of Theorem B.

ACYLINDRICAL HYPERBOLICITY OF CUBICAL SMALL-CANCELLATION GROUPS

7

2. Triangles in cubical small-cancellation groups

In this section, X denotes a connected nonpositively-curved cube complex with universal

cover (cid:101)X. When doing geometry in (cid:101)X, we never use the CAT(0) metric and instead only use
the usual graph metric on (cid:101)X (1) in which each 1–cube has length 1 and a combinatorial path is
geodesic if and only if it contains at most one edge intersecting each hyperplane of (cid:101)X. We ﬁx a

(possibly inﬁnite) index set I, and for each i ∈ I, let Yi → X be a local isometry of connected
cube complexes. Each Yi is necessarily nonpositively-curved. Following [Wis], the associated
cubical presentation is (cid:104)X | {Yi}i∈I(cid:105) and the corresponding cubical presentation complex X∗ is
formed as follows. For each i ∈ I, let C(Yi) be the relator on Yi, i.e. the space formed from
Yi × [0, 1] by collapsing Yi × {1} to a point. This space has an obvious cell-structure so that
∼→ Yi × {0} (cid:44)→ C(Yi) is a combinatorial embedding. For each i ∈ I, we attach C(Yi) to X
Yi
along Yi × {0} using the above local isometry. The resulting complex is X∗. The group of our
The universal cover (cid:101)X∗ of X∗ is a nonpositively-curved cube complex with cones attached.
interest is deﬁned by G = π1X∗. We say that (cid:104)X | {Yi}i∈I(cid:105) is a cubical presentation for G.
Let Cay(X∗) be the part of (cid:101)X∗ consisting only of cubes (i.e. the complement of the open cones).
are covering maps (cid:101)X → Cay(X∗) → X; the generalized Cayley graph is the nonpositively-curved

This is the generalized Cayley graph of G with the given cubical presentation. Note that there
cube complex obtained by taking the cover of X corresponding to the kernel of π1X → π1X∗.
Remark 2.1. (Classical and graphical presentations) When X is a wedge of circles and each
Yi is an immersed combinatorial circle, then (cid:104)X | {Yi}i∈I(cid:105) is a group presentation in the usual
sense (each C(Yi) is a disc) and Cay(X∗) is the associated Cayley graph of G. When X is a
graph and each Yi is an immersed graph, then the above cubical presentation is a graphical
presentation in the sense of [RS87, Gro03, Oll06].
Remark 2.2 (Elevations). Note that the local isometries Yi → X lift to local isometries Yi →
Cay(X∗) (in fact, under the small-cancellation conditions we shall soon be assuming, the latter

maps are embeddings [Wis, Section 4]). We use the term elevation to refer to a lift (cid:101)Yi → (cid:101)X of
the map (cid:101)Yi → Yi → X, where (cid:101)Yi → Yi is the universal covering map. Since Yi → X is a local
isometry, it is π1–injective and (cid:101)Yi → (cid:101)X is a combinatorial embedding with convex image.

We now review some background about cubical small-cancellation theory, details of which

can be found in [Wis].

Deﬁnition 2.3 (Abstract cone-piece, abstract wall-piece, cone-piece, wall-piece, piece). Given a
of V deﬁned as follows. First, a closed 1–cube e of V is in Proj(U → V ) if e is dual to a
hyperplane intersecting U. Then add any cube of V whose 1–skeleton appears.
Let (cid:104)X | {Yi}i∈I(cid:105) be a cubical presentation. Let A, B ∈ {Yi}i∈I. An abstract cone-piece

CAT(0) cube complex (cid:101)X, and convex subcomplexes U, V , let Proj(U → V ) be the subcomplex
of B in A is a component of Proj((cid:101)B → (cid:101)A), where (cid:101)B, (cid:101)A are components of the preimages of
B, A respectively, under the covering map (cid:101)X → X, satisfying (cid:101)B (cid:54)= (cid:101)A. If H is a hyperplane
Proj(N ((cid:101)H) → (cid:101)B), where N ((cid:101)H) denotes the carrier of (cid:101)H. A cone-piece is a path in an abstract

of X not intersecting B, then, likewise, an abstract wall-piece of H in B is a component of

cone-piece, and a wall-piece is a path in an abstract wall-piece, and a piece is a path which is
either a cone-piece or a wall-piece.
Deﬁnition 2.4 (C(cid:48)(α) condition). The cubical presentation (cid:104)X | {Yi}i∈I(cid:105) satisﬁes the cubical
C(cid:48)(α) small-cancellation condition if diam(P) < α(cid:107)Yi(cid:107) for all abstract pieces P and all i ∈ I,
where (cid:107)Yi(cid:107) denotes the inﬁmum of the lengths of essential closed paths in Yi. In this case, we
say that (cid:104)X | {Yi}i∈I(cid:105) is a C(cid:48)(α) presentation and G = π1X∗ is a C(cid:48)(α) group.

8

G.N. ARZHANTSEVA AND M.F. HAGEN

2 , 1

Given a cubical presentation (cid:104)X | {Yi}i∈I(cid:105) and a closed path P → X that is nullhomotopic in
X∗, van Kampen’s lemma provides a disc diagram (D, ∂pD) → (X∗, X) whose boundary path
∂pD = P . (We always use the operator ∂p, applied to a disc diagram, to denote the boundary
path.) The 2–cells of such a diagram are either squares (mapping to 2–cubes of X ⊆ X∗) or
2–simplices mapping to cones over the various Yi. Since P avoids cone-points, the 2–simplices of
D are partitioned into classes: for each vertex of D mapping to a cone-point in X∗, the incident
2–simplices are arranged cyclically around the vertex to form a subspace C of D which is equal
to the cone on its boundary path (a path in D mapping to X). The subspace C is a cone-cell.
In practice, we ignore the subdivision of C into 2–simplices and regard C as a 2–cell of D.

The complexity of D is the pair (c, s), where c is the number of cone-cells and s is the
number of squares. Taking the complexity in lexicographic order, we always consider diagrams
(D, ∂pD) → (X∗, X) which are minimal in the sense that the complexity of D is lexicographically
minimal among diagrams with boundary path ∂pD. This implies that for each cone-cell C, the
path ∂pC → D → Y → X is essential.
Remark 2.5 (Dual curves and hexagon moves). Let D → X be a square diagram. A dual curve
in D is a path which is the concatenation of midcubes of squares of D that starts and ends on
∂pD, where a midcube of a square [− 1
2 ]2 is obtained by restricting exactly one coordinate to
0 and a midcube of a 1–cube is its midpoint. If X is a nonpositively-curved cube complex, then
each dual curve maps to a hyperplane. If K is a dual curve in D, then the union of all closed
cubes intersecting K is its carrier.
More generally, if D → X∗ is a disc diagram, then one can deﬁne dual curves as above, but
any dual curve has its two ends either on ∂pD or on the boundary path of a cone-cell of X∗.
A hexagon move is a homotopy of the diagram D → X∗ that ﬁxes the boundary path and
the cone-cells and their boundary paths, while modifying the square part of D. Speciﬁcally, if
s1, s2, s3 are squares in D arranged cyclically around a central vertex v, forming a hexagonal
subdiagram E of D, then X must contain a 3–cube c with a corner at the image of v formed by
the images of s1, s2, s3. The (hexagonal) boundary path of E maps to a combinatorial path in
c, and we can replace E by a diagram E(cid:48) formed from the other 3 squares on the boundary of c;
this yields a new diagram D(cid:48) → X∗, with the same boundary path as D, formed by replacing E
by E(cid:48). This modiﬁcation is a hexagon move. Hexagon moves are used to reduce area in various
ways; detailed accounts can be found in e.g. [Wis, Wis12].
Deﬁnition 2.6 (External cone-cell, internal cone-cell, internal path). The cone-cell C of the
disc diagram D is external if ∂pC = QS, where Q is a non-trivial subpath of ∂pD (i.e. containing
at least one 1–cell) and S is an internal path in the sense that no 1–cell of S lies on ∂pD. The
cone-cell C is internal if ∂pC and ∂pD have no common non-trivial subpath.
Remark 2.7 (Rectiﬁcation, angling, and curvature). Given a disc diagram (D, ∂pD) → (X∗, X),
one can rectify D, to produce a rectiﬁed diagram ¯D, by removing some internal open 1–cells, so
that D is subdivided into cone-cells, rectangles which are obtained from square ladders by delet-
ing the internal open 1–cells, and complementary regions called shards. The speciﬁc procedure
for doing so is discussed in [Wis, Section 3.f], but we will not require the details here. After
rectifying D, each corner in each of the resulting 2–cells is assigned an angle according to one
of several possible schemes. Although we need not get into the details of the angle-assignments,
we will need to assume that they follow the split-angling deﬁned in [Wis]. As explained in [Wis,
Section 3.g], this yields a notion of curvature in D concentrated at 0–cells and 2–cells.
Deﬁnition 2.8 (Generalized corner, spur, shell). A (positively-curved) shell C in the disc
diagram D is an external cone-cell whose curvature is positive; the boundary path of a shell has
the form QS, where the outer path Q is a subpath of the boundary path of D, and the inner
path S has no open 1–cell on ∂pD. A spur in D is a vertex v in ∂pD so that the incoming and

ACYLINDRICAL HYPERBOLICITY OF CUBICAL SMALL-CANCELLATION GROUPS

9

outgoing 1–cells of ∂pD map to the same 1–cell of X, i.e. v is the second vertex in a subpath of
∂pD of the form ee−1, where e → X is a 1–cell. A generalized corner is a path ef in D, where
each of e, f is an edge, so that the dual curves emanating from e, f cross inside a square s of D,
as shown in Figure 1.

Figure 1. ef and ab are generalized corners of the shaded squares. ef lies on
the boundary of D, while ab lies on the boundary of a cone-cell.

Remark 2.9 (Defects and curvature). We now brieﬂy review some notions related to curvature,
from [Wis], that we will require below. Given a rectiﬁed disc diagram ¯D, we can assign an angle
∠(c) – a real number – to each corner c of each 2–cell (i.e. to each 1–cell of each vertex-link).
The defect d(c) at the corner c is d(c) = 2π − ∠(c). The curvature κ(v) at a vertex v of ¯D is

κ(v) = 2π −(cid:80) ∠(c) − πχ(Lk(v)), where Lk(v) is the link of v and the sum is taken over the
1–cells c of Lk(v). The curvature κ(f ) at a 2–cell f of ¯D is κ(f ) = 2π −(cid:80) d(c), where c varies

over the corners of f.

We will need the following theorem, which follows immediately from the “combinatorial Gauss-
Bonnet Theorem”, i.e. Theorem 4.6 in [MW02]; this theorem dates, in one form or another,
to [Bri48, Ger87, BB96].
Theorem 2.10 (Gauss-Bonnet for diagrams). Let ¯D → X∗ be a rectiﬁed disc diagram. Then

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

κ(f ) +

κ(v) = 2π,

f

v

where f varies over the 2–cells of ¯D and v varies over the 0–cells of ¯D.
Remark 2.11 (Pushing generalized corners to the boundary). If ef is a generalized corner of
a square s, and ef lies along ∂pD, and the subdiagram bounded by the carriers of the dual
curves emanating from e, f is a square diagram, then we can perform a series of hexagon moves
(see [Wis, Section 2]) to homotop D, ﬁxing its boundary path, so that there is a square with
boundary path ef e(cid:48)f(cid:48), i.e. we can move squares to the boundary. If, on the other hand, the
same situation occurs except ef lies on the boundary of some cone-cell C mapping to a relator
Y , then convexity of Y allows us to “absorb” the square s into C, lowering complexity of D.

Deﬁnition 2.12 (Padded ladder, ladder). A padded ladder is a disc diagram D → X∗ (or (cid:101)X∗)

with the following structure. First, there is a sequence C1, . . . , Cn, where each Ci is a cone-cell
or vertex of D, so that Ci, Ck lie in distinct components of D − Cj whenever i < j < k. The
diagram D is an alternating union of these vertices and cone-cells with a sequence of subdiagrams
R0, . . . , Rn called pseudorectangles, so that:

(1) ∂pD is a concatenation P1P −1

2

, where each of P1, P2 starts on R0 and ends on Rn.

10

G.N. ARZHANTSEVA AND M.F. HAGEN

(2) P1 = ν0ρ0α1ρ1 ··· αnρn and P2 = 0γ11 ··· γnnµn+1.
(3) ∂pCi = µiαiν−1
(4) ∂pRi = νiρiµ−1
(5) Each Ri is a square diagram, i.e. contains no cone-cells.
(6) For each i, any dual curve in Ri emanating from ρi ends on i and vice versa. Hence

i γ−1
.
i+1−1
.

i

i

any dual curve emanating from νi ends on µi+1 and vice versa.

(7) For each i, no two dual curves emanating from µi cross.

See Figure 2 for a picture illustrating the notation. We say that Ri is horizontally degenerate if
|µi+1| = |νi| = 0 and vertically degenerate if |ρi| = |i| = 0. If R0, Rn are vertically degenerate,

Figure 2. A padded ladder.

then D is a ladder. (A padded ladder is thus a special case of what Jankiewicz calls a generalized
ladder in [Jan14], while the deﬁnition of ladder given here is equivalent to that in [Wis]).

We require the following three crucial facts, due to Wise [Wis]. These are tailored to our
speciﬁc situation; the statements in [Wis] are more general. (That the cubical C(cid:48)( 1
12 ) condition
suﬃces to make a cubical presentation “small-cancellation” in the sense required in the following
theorems can be seen by tracing through various computations in [Wis, Section 3] or consulting
the list of examples in Section 3.p of [Wis].)
Theorem 2.13 (Ladder theorem). Let (cid:104)X | {Yi}(cid:105) be a cubical C(cid:48)( 1
12 ) presentation. Let D →
X∗ be a minimal disc diagram such that the corresponding rectiﬁed diagram has exactly two
positively-curved cells along ∂pD. Then D is a ladder.
Theorem 2.14 (Greendlinger’s lemma). Under the hypotheses of Theorem 2.13, if D → X∗ is
a minimal disc diagram, then either D consists of a single vertex or cone-cell, or D is a ladder,
or D contains at least three shells or spurs or generalized corners along ∂pD.

8 ) replaced by C(cid:48)( 1

The following, with C(cid:48)( 1

12 ), is Lemma 3.46 of [Wis]; the improved constant
follows from a result of Jankiewicz [Jan14].
Theorem 2.15 (Short inner paths). Let (cid:104)X | {Yi}(cid:105) be a cubical C(cid:48)( 1
8 ) presentation. Let D → X∗
be a disc diagram and let C be a shell in D with boundary path QS, with Q a maximal common
subpath of ∂pC and ∂pD, and S an internal path. Suppose that QS is essential in the relator Y
to which C maps, and that S is of minimal length among all paths S(cid:48) → Y that are homotopic
rel endpoints in Y to S. Finally, suppose that the total curvature contribution from C is < π.
Then |S| < |Q|.
2.1. The classiﬁcation theorem. Using the above fundamental results, we produce a cubical
small-cancellation version of Strebel’s classiﬁcation of triangles in classical small-cancellation
groups [Str90]. An exposed square in a disc diagram D is a square with two consecutive edges

ACYLINDRICAL HYPERBOLICITY OF CUBICAL SMALL-CANCELLATION GROUPS

11

on ∂pD. A tripod is a triangle diagram with no cone-cells or squares. We can now state our
classiﬁcation of triangles:
144 ) groups). Let (cid:104)X | {Yi}i∈I(cid:105) be a
Theorem 2.16 (Classiﬁcation of triangles in cubical C(cid:48)( 1
144 ) condition. Let α, β, γ → Cay(X∗) be combinatorial
cubical presentation satisfying the C(cid:48)( 1
geodesics so that αβγ is a geodesic triangle. Then there exists a disc diagram (D, ∂pD) →
(X∗, X) with boundary path α(cid:48)β(cid:48)γ(cid:48) → Cay(X∗) → X∗ lying in X, so that the following hold.
First, α → X and α(cid:48) → X co-bound a bigon B → X (i.e. they are square-homotopic) and the
same is true of β, β(cid:48) and γ, γ(cid:48). Second, D is of one of the following types.

(1) (3–shell generic:) D has exactly three external cone-cells, C1, C2, C3, respectively con-
taining the points α ∩ β, β ∩ γ, γ ∩ α. There is exactly one cone-cell M that intersects
α, β, γ. Moreover, D is the union of three ladders, L1, L2, L3 so that Li ∩ Lj = M for
all i, j. In particular, every cone-cell except M intersects exactly two of the geodesics
α, β, γ.
(2) (3–shell tripod:) D has exactly three external cone-cells, C1, C2, C3, respectively con-
taining the points α ∩ β, β ∩ γ, γ ∩ α. Every other cone-cell intersects exactly two of the
geodesics α, β, γ. In this case, D is the union of 3 (possibly padded) ladders L1, L2, L3
and a tripod triangle P1P2P3 → X so that Li intersects the other two ladders in the path
Pi.

(3) (2–shell generic:) Same as 3–shell generic, except exactly one of C1, C2, C3 is a spur

(4) (2–shell tripod:) Same as 3-shell tripod, except exactly one of C1, C2, C3 is a spur or

or exposed square instead of a cone-cell.

exposed square instead of a cone-cell.

(8) (No-shell tripod:) Same as 3–shell tripod except C1, C2, C3 are all spurs or exposed
squares. This includes the case where αβγ is nullhomotopic in X, in which case D is a
tripod.

(9) (Degenerate triangle:) D is a single vertex or cone-cell, or D is a ladder. In this

case, at least one of α, β, γ is trivial.

The diagram D → X∗ is a standard diagram for the triangle αβγ. The eight non-degenerate
cases are shown in Figure 3.

Remark 2.17 (Media and small-cancellation parameters). Note that the standard diagram
depends only on the endpoints of the geodesics α, β, γ. Just as it is usual in CAT(0) cube com-
plexes to homotop geodesics, ﬁxing their endpoints, in order to minimize the area of diagrams,
here we are not married to particular geodesics, just to square-homotopy classes rel endpoints.
In particular, if αβγ bounds a disc diagram in X, then D is a tripod. When I = ∅, Theorem 2.16
just says: any three 0–cubes in a CAT(0) cube complex determine a geodesic tripod.

More generally, as illustrated by Figure 3, Theorem 2.16 should be interpreted as saying that
the vertices of the triangle have a “median” which is either a vertex or a cone-cell, and there
is a geodesic triangle connecting the given three points, each of whose sides passes within a
wall-piece of the “median”. In other words, given 0-cells a, b, c ∈ Cay(X∗), the “convex hulls” of
the three possible pairs mutually coarsely intersect.

At the other extreme, when X is a graph and each Yi is an immersed circle, Theorem 2.16
generalizes a weak version of Strebel’s classiﬁcation of triangles [Str90, Theorem 43]; speciﬁcally,

(5) (1–shell generic:) Same as 2–shell generic, except exactly two of C1, C2, C3 are spurs

(6) (1–shell tripod:) Same as 2–shell tripod, except exactly two of C1, C2, C3 are spurs or

(7) (No-shell generic:) Same as 3–shell generic, except C1, C2, C3 are all spurs or exposed

or exposed squares.

exposed squares.

squares.

12

G.N. ARZHANTSEVA AND M.F. HAGEN

Figure 3. Clockwise from top left: cases (1),(3),(5),(7),(8),(6),(4),(2) from The-
orem 2.16. The features of positive curvature are labelled, and the constituent
ladders in some cases are labelled. Any of the spurs may instead be exposed
squares and vice versa. The ladder case is not shown.

Our need for

1

144 rather than 1

6 comes from our invocation of:

Theorem 2.16 provides the same classiﬁcation as Strebel’s result, but, because the proof must
work in the more general context of cubical presentations, we require stronger metric small-
cancellation conditions than Strebel needs in the classical setting.
the ladder theorem and
Greendlinger lemma from [Wis], which require C(cid:48)( 1
12 ) condition (although Jankiewicz has im-
proved this to C(cid:48)( 1
8 ) condition in the case of the Greendlinger lemma [Jan14]); the short inner
paths condition, which requires C(cid:48)( 1
It
appears that in the classical case, when there are no squares, each of these statements holds
under the C(cid:48)( 1
144 ) to do appropriate curvature computations
analogous to those in the proof of Theorem 3.20 of [Wis], to rule out internal cone-cells in dia-
grams. It seems as though one must make small modiﬁcations in order to have this part of the
curvature-based proof work under C(cid:48)( 1

8 ); and Lemma 3.46 of [Wis], which requires C(cid:48)( 1
12 ).

6 ) condition. However, we use C(cid:48)( 1

6 ) condition whenever there are no squares.

Proof of Theorem 2.16. This is essentially a meticulous application of Theorem 2.14, Theo-
rem 2.13, and Theorem 2.15, following and followed by appropriately chosen square homotopies;
the main point is a curvature computation to eliminate the possibility of internal cone-cells (in
the Strebel classiﬁcation in the case of classical C(cid:48)( 1
6 ) condition, one of the primary features is
that the disc diagrams do not have internal cells). This computation, using a slightly modiﬁed
version of the proof of Theorem 3.20 of [Wis], is why we need the C(cid:48)( 1
Choosing α(cid:48), β(cid:48), γ(cid:48) and constructing D: Given a geodesic P → Cay(X∗), let [P ] be the
set of geodesics Q that have the same endpoints as P and the additional property that P Q−1
bounds a disc diagram containing no cone-cells, i.e. there is a disc diagram E → X whose
boundary path is P Q−1 → Cay(X∗) → X∗.

Choose a disc diagram D → (cid:101)X∗ so that ∂pD = α(cid:48)β(cid:48)γ(cid:48), where α(cid:48) ∈ [α], β(cid:48) ∈ [β], γ(cid:48) ∈ [γ].

144 ) condition.

Choose D so that the complexity is minimal among all disc diagrams with the given properties.
Abusing notation slightly, we now temporarily regard D as the rectiﬁed diagram constructed
in [Wis, Section 3]. This means that certain square ladders are regarded as single (rectangular)
2–cells, cone-cells are regarded as single cells, and the remaining parts of the diagram are 2–cells
(formed by ignoring non-boundary 1–cells in certain square subdiagrams) called shards. Angles
are assigned to corners according to the split-angling of [Wis, Section 3].

Applying the ladder theorem: By Theorem 2.13, either D is a ladder, so assertion (9)
holds, and we are done, or D has at least 3 “features of positive curvature” – spurs, generalized
corners, or shells – along ∂pD. We assume the latter.

ACYLINDRICAL HYPERBOLICITY OF CUBICAL SMALL-CANCELLATION GROUPS

13

Applying the Greendlinger lemma: By Theorem 2.14, D has at least 3 features of
positive curvature along the boundary, each of which is a shell, a spur, or a generalized corner.
We may assume that all generalized corners along ∂pD are actually squares with corners on
∂pD. Indeed, let s be a square in D with a generalized corner on ∂pD, i.e. the two dual curves
K1, K2 intersecting s end at consecutive 1–cubes e1, e2 on ∂pD. By a sequence of hexagon
moves, we can modify D – without changing its boundary path or complexity – so that s lies
along the boundary, i.e. e1, e2 are consecutive 1–cubes of s.
No positive curvature along geodesics (after square homotopy): Let s be a square
of D so that ∂ps and ∂pD have a common subpath e1e2. For i ∈ {1, 2}, let e(cid:48)
i be the 1–cube
of s opposite ei. If e1e2 is a subpath of one of the three constituent geodesics of ∂pD (say, α(cid:48)),
then we can modify α(cid:48) in its square-homotopy class by replacing e1e2 by e(cid:48)
2e(cid:48)
1, resulting in a new
diagram with the same number of cones and fewer squares. This contradicts our minimality
assumption. Hence any square s with a corner on the boundary lies at the transition from α to
β, or β to γ, or γ to α.

one of the named geodesics bounding D, say α. Now, κ(C) = 2π −(cid:80)

Now suppose that C is a positively-curved shell in D whose outer path P is a subpath of one
of the named geodesics, say α and whose inner path we denote S. Suppose P is a subpath of
c d(c), where c varies over
the corners of C. The deﬁnition of the split-angling (see [Wis, Section 3]) says that d(c) = 0
at each corner c formed by a pair of 1–cells on ∂pC both lying on ∂pD. Since α is a geodesic,
it cannot be the case that |S| = 0, since otherwise we could replace P by S to shorten α.
Thus, C has two corners, c1, c2, at the 0–cells where P, S meet. Each of these has angle π/2
by deﬁnition of the split-angling (see Figure 64 of [Wis]) and thus d(c1) = d(c2) = π/2. Thus,
c d(c), where c varies over the corners at non-endpoint vertices of S. Hence,
c d(c) > 0, the short inner paths condition, Theorem 2.15, shows that replacing P by S
yields a strictly shorter path joining the endpoints of α, a contradiction. On the other hand, if
c d(c) = 0, then Lemma 3.46 of [Wis] implies that S can be written as the concatenation of at
most 7 pieces, and the small-cancellation assumption then implies that |S| < |P|, contradicting
that α is a geodesic. Hence any such shell C has outer path P = AB, where A is a nontrivial
terminal subpath of α, β, or γ and B is a nontrivial initial subpath of β, γ, or α.
Finally, since α, β, γ are geodesic, a spur of the form ee−1 cannot occur along each of α, β, γ

κ(C) = π −(cid:80)
if (cid:80)
(cid:80)

so the only spurs consist of overlaps between α, β or β, γ or γ, α.

Hence, D has exactly three features of positive curvature along the boundary, which are
subdiagrams C1, C2, C3. For each i, ∂pCi = OI, where O is a subpath of ∂pD and I is an
internal path, and O has at least one 1-cube on each of two distinct subpaths α, β, γ of the
boundary.

No internal cone-cells: Let C be a cone-cell of D. Recall that C is internal if its boundary
24” part
path intersects ∂pD in a set containing no 1–cube. By slightly modifying the “quick 1
of the proof of Theorem 3.20 of [Wis], we see that our small-cancellation condition is strictly
stronger than the C(cid:48)( 1
72 ) condition required to ensure that each internal cone-cell contributes
< −4π of curvature, and all remaining internal features of the diagram contribute nonpositive
curvature. Suppose that there are n (cid:62) 0 internal cone-cells.

Let v be a 0–cube of D. Then the curvature contribution from v is:

(1) (cid:54) 0 if v is internal or not contained in a 2–cell and not a spur;
(2) π if v is a spur;
(3) π

2 if v is the corner of a square along ∂pD.

(Because we are in the rectiﬁed diagram, natural candidates for internal features of positive
curvature, i.e. 0–cubes with three incident cyclically-arranged squares – have been relegated to
the insides of shards, and do not actually contribute any positive curvature in the split-angling.)

14

G.N. ARZHANTSEVA AND M.F. HAGEN

Let f be a 2–cell of D (a cone-cell, rectangle, or a shard of the corresponding rectiﬁed dia-

gram [Wis]). Then the curvature contribution is:

(1) (cid:54) 0 if f is a rectangle or shard;
(2) < −4π if f is an internal cone-cell;
(3) at most 2π if f is a shell.

Hence, our three features of positive curvature contribute a total of at most 6π of curvature,
while the sum of the remaining curvatures is < −4nπ. This contradicts Theorem 2.10 unless
n = 0. Hence there are no internal cone-cells.
No shortly-external cone-cells: A cone-cell C in D is shortly external if its boundary path
has the form QI, where I is internal and Q is a subpath of α, β, or γ. Note that |Q| (cid:54) |I| since
144 ), the path I contains more than 72 = 3 · 24 transitions
α, β, γ are geodesics. Hence, by C(cid:48)( 1
between pieces and thus the total angle-defect along I is more than 6π, so that the curvature
contribution from C is less than −4π, so, as above, the Gauss-Bonnet theorem ensures that
there are no shortly external cells in D.

At this point, we have completed the curvature computations in the proof, and now regard D
as an ordinary (not rectiﬁed) diagram. This amounts to ﬁlling in the shards and rectangles with
their constituent squares as in the original diagram.
Analysis of the cone-cells: Let C be a cone-cell in D. Suppose that for some δ ∈ {α, β, γ},
there is a subpath δ(cid:48) = P QR of δ, where P, R are subpaths of the boundary path of C, and
the terminal vertex of P and initial vertex of R subtend a subpath Q(cid:48) of ∂pC, so that QQ(cid:48)
is a subdiagram E of D between C and ∂pD. If E contains no cone-cell, then E is a square
diagram between the relator Yi to which C maps and the geodesic Q, so by local convexity of
Yi in X, we have that E → X factors through Yi → X. Hence E could have been absorbed
into the cone-cell C, whence minimality of the complexity of D ensures that E is trivial, i.e.
Q = (Q(cid:48))−1. Moreover, we may assume that Q, Q(cid:48) have no common 1–cell, by considering a
minimal example.

Thus, assume C is innermost, so that any cone-cell C0 in E embeds and has connected
intersection with Q, and assume that E contains such a cone-cell C0. Then C0 is not internal
in E, for then it would be internal in D. Moreover, C0 cannot be a shell with outer path on Q,
because then it would either be an already considered illegal feature of positive curvature or a
shortly-external cone-cell in D. If C0 is a shell, it must therefore have outer path (within E) of
the form T U, where T is a terminal subpath of Q and U an initial subpath of Q(cid:48). But then C0
is shortly-external in D, which is impossible. Hence any cone-cell C0 in E has boundary path
of the form T I1U1I2U2 ··· IkUkIk+1, where each Ii is internal to E, each Ui is a subpath of Q(cid:48),
and T is a subpath of Q. But then C0 is either a positively-curved shell in D or shortly-external
in D, neither of which is possible. Thus E is a square diagram, which was dealt with above.

We conclude that for each cone-cell C of D, the path ∂pC has connected intersection with

each of α, β, and γ. Moreover, ∂pC intersects at least two of the paths α, β, γ.

Dividing into cases: We are now in the following situation: D is not a ladder, and has pre-
cisely 3 features of positive curvature along its boundary path, which are subdiagrams C1, C2, C3.
The subdiagram C1 has boundary path ABI, where A is a nontrivial terminal subpath of α, B
is a nontrivial initial subpath of β, and I is a (possibly trivial) path. Moreover, either C1 is a
single cone-cell (a shell) or C1 is a spur, |I| = 0, and A is an edge and B = A−1, or C1 is a
square, |A|,|B| (cid:62) 1, and |I| (cid:54) 2. The same description holds for C2 (with β, γ replacing α, β)
and C3 (with γ, α replacing α, β).
Moreover, every cone-cell C of D not in {C1, C2, C3} has connected intersection with each of
α, β, γ and intersects at least 2 of these paths. We call C a median-cell if C actually intersects
all three of these paths, and a tail-cell otherwise. We emphasise that if C is a median cell,
then it has nonempty, connected intersection with each of α, β, γ. Hence, if C is a median-cell,

ACYLINDRICAL HYPERBOLICITY OF CUBICAL SMALL-CANCELLATION GROUPS

15

then C separates D into three complementary components, each disjoint from one of the paths
α, β, γ. Hence C is the unique cone-cell of D intersecting each of α, β, γ. (We note that there
may be other disc diagrams with the same boundary path, containing a diﬀerent median-cell.)
We now divide into cases. First, if D contains a median-cell, then we are in one of the generic
cases, i.e. we will show that one of (7),(5),(3),(1) holds, according to how many of {C1, C2, C3}
are spurs or shells. Otherwise, we will show that one of (8),(6),(4),(2) holds. This will complete
the proof.
The generic cases: Suppose that D has a (unique) median-cell M and let i ∈ {1, 2, 3}.
Let δ, δ(cid:48) ∈ {α, β, γ} be the parts of the boundary path of D that intersect Ci. Let ∂pM =
AP1BP2CP3, where A, B, C are respectively subpaths of α, β, γ and P1, P2, P3 are internal paths.
Write α = ¯αAˇα, β = ¯βB ˇβ, γ = ¯γC ˇγ. Consider the subdiagram L1 bounded by Aˇα ¯βBP2CP3.
The ladder theorem (Theorem 2.13) and our above analysis of the possible features of positive
curvature in (the rectiﬁcation of) D shows that L1 is a ladder. The ladders L2, L3 are constructed
analogously.

The tripod cases: Suppose there is no median. Then we have a subdiagram T of D with
boundary path AP1BP2CP3, where A is a subpath of α, B a subpath of β, C a subpath of γ,
and P1, P2, P3 internal subpaths that lie on innermost cone-cells in D or, if they do not exist,
spurs or exposed squares in {C1, C2, C3}. By construction, T is a possibly degenerate square
diagram, and by convexity of relators and minimality, for each path Q ∈ {A, B, C, P1, P2, P3},
no two dual curves in T emanating from Q can cross. Moreover, no dual curve travels from Q to
Q or to the next named subpath, for otherwise we could reduce complexity. Some possibilities
are shown in Figure 4.

Figure 4. Some possibilities for the internal square subdiagram in the tripod cases.

For convenience, we lift T to a diagram T → (cid:101)X (the CAT(0) cube complex (cid:101)X, not the

generalized Cayley graph). Here, analysis of the dual curves shows that T decomposes as
required; the analysis is indicated in Figure 5. First, consider dual curves in T traveling from A

Figure 5. The ﬁnal square diagram analysis in the tripod cases.

16

G.N. ARZHANTSEVA AND M.F. HAGEN

to B, B to C, or C to A. Taking the union of all carriers of such dual curves yields rectangles
attached to P1, P2, P3. Now consider the subdiagram that remains. It is a hexagon bounded by
subpaths of A, B, C and parts of carriers of dual curves. Dual curves in the subdiagram must
travel from a subpath of A, B, or C to the antipodal dual-curve carrier. Dual curves emanating
from the same “syllable” of the boundary path do not cross, and we conclude, as at right in
Figure 5, that this subdiagram is a “corner of a subdivided cube”. It is now easy to deduce
the padded ladder decomposition of D. (Various parts of the picture may be degenerate, as
(cid:3)
suggested in Figure 4.)

3. Detecting WPD elements using the classification of triangles

are not cone-points.

In this section, we make the following assumptions and conventions:
(1) (cid:104)X | {Yi}i∈I(cid:105) is a cubical presentation satisfying the C(cid:48)( 1

sentation complex, and (cid:101)X∗ is the universal cover. We assume that X is locally ﬁnite,
144 ) condition, X∗ is the pre-
(2) Denote by d the graph metric on Cay(X∗)(1), and by d(cid:101)X the graph metric on (cid:101)X (1).

although we do not assume X is uniformly locally ﬁnite. For example, X can contain
ﬁnite cubes of arbitrarily large dimension.

(3) Let there be a δ–hyperbolic space H and a map Π : Cay(X∗) → 2H so that:

(a) There exists e (cid:62) 0 so that diam(Π(x)) (cid:54) e for all x ∈ Cay(X∗).
(b) There exists f (cid:62) 0 so that dH(Π(x), Π(y)) (cid:54) fd(x, y) + f whenever x, y ∈ Cay(X∗)(0)
(c) If Yi ⊂ Cay(X∗) is any relator, then diam(Π(Yi)) (cid:54) e.
(d) π1X∗ acts by isometries on H in such a way that Π is π1X∗–equivariant.
(e) Let {Ij} be a set of combinatorial intervals, each of positive length, so that there
j Ij → X, lifting to a cubical isometric embedding ι :
Under these conditions, we will prove a lemma showing that π1X∗ contains a WPD isometry

is a cubical immersion (cid:81)
(cid:81)

j Ij → Cay(X∗). Then diam(im(Π ◦ ι)) (cid:54) e.

of H. Later, we choose speciﬁc H and Π allowing the lemma to be invoked.

Lemma 3.1 (Ladders are thin between cone-cells). Let L → (cid:101)X be a padded ladder with boundary

path αβγ, where α, β : [0, n] → Cay(X∗) are geodesics and γ is a piece. Then there exists a
uniform constant κ0 so that for all t (cid:54) n, either d(α(t), β(t)) (cid:54) κ0 or α(t), β(t) lie on the
boundary path of a common cone-cell in L.
Proof. Write α = α0η1α1 ··· ηnαn and β = β0η(cid:48)
nβn, where each αi, βi lies on the top or
bottom boundary path of one of the constituent pseudorectangles of L and each ηi, η(cid:48)
i lies on
the boundary path of a cone-cell or cut-vertex. Denote by pi the maximal piece in L between
the ith cone-cell or cut-vertex and the ith pseudorectangle, so that the ith pseudorectangle is
bounded by αip−1

1 ··· η(cid:48)

i+1β−1

i pi. See Figure 6, at left.

Figure 6. Ladders are thin relative to cone-cells.

ACYLINDRICAL HYPERBOLICITY OF CUBICAL SMALL-CANCELLATION GROUPS

lies in an isometrically embedded Euclidean half-plane.

α, β are geodesics, we have ||ηi|−|η(cid:48)
as shown at right in Figure 6. The lemma now follows easily.

17
By the small-cancellation conditions, there is a uniform M so that |pi| (cid:54) M for all i. Since
i|| (cid:54) 2M for all i, for otherwise we could construct shortcuts,
As usual (see e.g. [CS11]), ˜g ∈ π1X is rank-one if it is hyperbolic on (cid:101)X and none of its axes
(cid:3)
Lemma 3.2. Let ˜g ∈ π1X act hyperbolically on (cid:101)X, and suppose that ˜g is rank-one. Then for
each ˜x ∈ (cid:101)X (0), there exists κ1 so that the following holds: if n (cid:62) 0 and P, Q : [0, d] → (cid:101)X are
combinatorial geodesics joining ˜x, gn ˜x, then d(cid:101)X (P (t), Q(t)) (cid:54) κ1 for 0 (cid:54) t (cid:54) d.
Proof. Let α → (cid:101)X be a combinatorial geodesic axis for ˜g and let ˜a ∈ α be a 0–cube. Given
n (cid:62) 0, let P, Q : [0, dn] → (cid:101)X (1) (where dn = d(cid:101)X (˜x, gn ˜x)) be combinatorial geodesics joining
˜x, gn ˜x and let D → (cid:101)X be a minimal-area disc diagram with boundary path P Q−1. Note that
D → (cid:101)X is actually an isometric embedding on the 1–skeleton.
Indeed, every dual curve in
D travels from P to Q since P, Q are geodesics. Hence each dual curve maps to a distinct
is equal to the number of hyperplanes in (cid:101)X separating their images.
hyperplane, so that for any vertices v, v(cid:48) ∈ D, the number of dual curves of D separating v, v(cid:48)
Fix t ∈ {0, 1, . . . , dn}. The above discussion shows that d(cid:101)X (P (t), Q(t)) is bounded by the
the latter type. If no κ1 with the claimed property exists, then since all but at most 2d(cid:101)X (˜a, ˜x)
hyperplanes that cross any given Pn cross α, we have that for all N, there are two sets H, V of
hyperplanes, each of cardinality N, so that H ∩α (cid:54)= ∅ for all H ∈ H∪V and such that H ∩V (cid:54)= ∅
whenever H ∈ H, V ∈ V. This contradicts that ˜g is rank-one, since it implies that the convex
(cid:3)
hull of α contains 0–cubes arbitrarily far from α.
Lemma 3.3 (Loxodromic implies WPD). Suppose g ∈ π1X∗ acts loxodromically on H. Then
for all  > 0, x ∈ H, there exists R ∈ N so that

number of dual curves in D that travel from P ([0, t)) to Q((t, dn]), plus the number of dual
curves from Q([0, t)) to P ((t, dn]). Each dual curve of the former type crosses each dual curve of

|{h ∈ G | dH(hx, x) (cid:54) , dH(hgRx, gRx) (cid:54) }| < ∞,

i.e. g is a WPD element.
Proof. Fix  > 0 and let x ∈ H; since H is Hausdorﬀ-close to Cay(X∗) ⊂ H, we can assume x
is a vertex of Cay(X∗). Fix R (cid:62) 10( + δ + e)/τ, where τ (cid:62) 1 is the translation length of g on
H, and let y = gRx. Let h ∈ π1X∗ satisfy dH(Π(x), Π(hx)) < , dH(Π(y), Π(hy)) < .
Let α be a combinatorial Cay(X∗)–geodesic from y to x, let β be a Cay(X∗)–geodesic from
x to hx, let η be a geodesic from hy to y, and let γ be a geodesic from hx to y, so that we have
geodesic triangles αβγ and η(hα)−1γ with common side γ.

Applying the classiﬁcation of triangles: By Theorem 2.16, we have a minimal disc

• D1 has boundary path αβγ and D2 has boundary path η(hα)−1γ.
• For i ∈ {1, 2}, the diagram Di decomposes as B1

diagram D = D1 ∪γ D2 → (cid:101)X∗, with boundary path αβ(hα)−1η, with the following structure:
i ∪ B2
i ∪ Si, where Si is a standard
i ∪ B3
diagram in the sense of Theorem 2.16 and each Bj
is a bigon diagram in X (i.e., no
i
cone cells). The boundary path of Si is a geodesic triangle AiBiCi, where A1α−1,
1 respectively, and A2(hα), B2η−1,
B1β−1, C1γ−1 are the boundary paths of B1
• Si contains a constituent padded ladder Li whose image in (cid:101)X∗ projects under Π to a set
and C2γ−1 are the boundary paths of B1
2, B2
of diameter at least R−2(+δ +e), along with two ladders projecting to sets of diameter
(cid:54) 10( + δ + e) (which will play no role in the remainder of the proof). Speciﬁcally, the
padded ladder L1 is the subdiagram of D1 obtained as follows: either D1 is a ladder, in
which case L1 = D1, or there is a cone-cell or tripod with 3 complementary components,

1, B3
2 respectively.

1, B2
2, B3

18

G.N. ARZHANTSEVA AND M.F. HAGEN

all of whose closures are padded ladders; L1 is the padded ladder among these that
contains y. The padded ladder L2 is deﬁned analogously.

The above notation is summarized in Figure 7.

Figure 7. The two triangles in the proof of Lemma 3.3. The padded ladder
L1 is the subdiagram of S1 between the red subdiagram (cone-cell or union of
3 square grids) intersecting A1, B1, C1 and the point y. The ladder L2 is the
subdiagram of S2 between the analogous red subdiagram (at right) and hx.

Consequences of axiality of g: Since g acts loxodromically on H and since Π(A1), Π(α)
fellow-travel in H (so Π◦ A1 is a quasi-isometric embedding with constants independent of R, ),
the following hold, where A(cid:48)

1 is the part of A1 on the boundary path of the ladder L1:

• A(cid:48)
1 = ρ0σ1ρ1 ··· σsρs, where each ρi lies on a pseudorectangle and each σi lies on the
boundary path of a cone-cell;
• |σi|,|ρi| (cid:54) ∆, where ∆ depends only on g and x, with the following exception: we may
have |ρi| > ∆ if the pseudorectangle carrying ρi is horizontally degenerate.

2 of A2 lying on the ladder L2 decomposes as 0ς1 ··· ς(cid:96)(cid:96),
Similarly, the maximal subpath A(cid:48)
where each i lies on a pseudorectangle, each ςi lies on a cone-cell, and each |ςi|,|i| (cid:54) ∆, except
that we may have |i| > ∆ if i is carried on a horizontally degenerate pseudorectangle. See
Figure 8.

1 ··· σ(cid:48)
sρ(cid:48)
1ρ(cid:48)
0σ(cid:48)
s be the part of C1 formed by concatenating these paths. Deﬁne ς(cid:48)

i be the part of the boundary
crossing the same dual curves as) ρi. Let Ki be the cone-cell
i, as shown in Figure 8. Let
i, and

For each i, let Ri be the pseudorectangle carrying ρi and let ρ(cid:48)
i−1 and ρ(cid:48)

path of Ri parallel to (i.e.
carrying σi and let σ(cid:48)
1 = ρ(cid:48)
C(cid:48)
the resulting subpath C(cid:48)
Conclusion: Arguing as in the proof of Lemma 3.2 shows that C(cid:48)

i be the part of ∂pKi between ρ(cid:48)
2 of C2 analogously.

i, (cid:48)

i and between i, (cid:48)

2 synchronously fellow-
travel at distance ξ1 depending on ∆. Lemma 3.1, which shows that the pseudorectangles
i are uniformly thin, shows that if t2 − t1 > 2∆, then there
between ρi, ρ(cid:48)
exists t ∈ [t1, t2] so that d(A(cid:48)
1(t)) (cid:54) ξ2, where ξ2 is a uniform constant coming from the
small-cancellation condition, and the same holds for A(cid:48)
2. A reparameterization computation
then shows that there exists ξ3 = ξ3(κ0, κ1, , ∆), independent of x, y, so d(A1(t), A2(t)) (cid:54) ξ3
for some t. Lemma 3.2 then produces a uniform ξ so that d(z, hz) (cid:54) ξ, where z = α(t). Since
Cay(X∗) is locally ﬁnite and π1X∗ acts freely on Cay(X∗), the action of π1X∗ on Cay(X∗) is
(cid:3)
metrically proper and hence there are only ﬁnitely many such h, as claimed.

1(t), C(cid:48)

2, C(cid:48)

1, C(cid:48)

ACYLINDRICAL HYPERBOLICITY OF CUBICAL SMALL-CANCELLATION GROUPS

19

Figure 8. The ladder L1.

4. The hyperbolic space H and the coarse projection

Let (cid:104)X | {Yi}(cid:105) be a cubical C(cid:48)( 1

common endpoints, and suppose that αβ bounds a disc diagram D → (cid:101)X∗ that does not contain

let H(cid:48) be the 1–skeleton of (cid:101)X∗. This consists of the 1–skeleton of Cay(X∗), together with a
144 ) presentation and deﬁne a space H as follows. First,
combinatorial cone on each lift of each Yi. We form H from H(cid:48) by adding a combinatorial cone
on the carrier of each hyperplane.
We also have a projection Π : Cay(X∗) → H, deﬁned as follows. On the 1–skeleton of
Cay(X∗), we declare Π to be the inclusion. If c is a cube of Cay(X∗) with dim(c) (cid:62) 2, we
send c arbitrarily to a point in the image of its 1–skeleton. However, we require this choice to
be made π1X∗–equivariantly, so that Π is π1X∗–equivariant. Obviously Π is 1–Lipschitz on the
1–skeleton of Cay(X∗). By construction, Π sends each cone to a set of diameter (cid:54) 2, while
cubical product subcomplexes of Cay(X∗) are sent to subsets of H with diameter at most 4.
Hence, to see that H and Π satisfy the conditions required in Section 3, we need only to prove
that H is hyperbolic.
Lemma 4.1 (Square bigons have thin projection). Let α, β → Cay(X∗) be geodesics with
any cone-cells. Then Π(α), Π(β) lie at uniformly bounded Hausdorﬀ distance in H.
Proof. Let e be a 1–cube of α and let K be the dual curve in D emanating from e and mapping
to a hyperplane H of Cay(X∗). Since α is a geodesic, K terminates at a 1–cube f of β, whence
dH(Π(e), Π(f )) (cid:54) 2. Hence Π(α) ⊆ N2(Π(β)), the closed 2-neighborhood of Π(β), and the proof
(cid:3)
is complete by symmetry.
Proposition 4.2. There exists δ (cid:62) 0 so that the graph H is δ–hyperbolic.
Proof. It suﬃces to prove that the 0–skeleton of Cay(X∗), with the subspace metric inherited
from H, is hyperbolic. First, suppose that αβγ is a geodesic triangle in Cay(X∗). Then
Lemma 4.1 combines with Theorem 2.16 and the fact that Π sends cones to uniformly bounded
sets to show that each of Π(α), Π(β), Π(γ) is contained in the δ(cid:48)–neighborhood in H of the
union of the other two, for some uniform δ(cid:48). The Guessing Geodesics Lemma (see e.g. [Ham07,
Proposition 3.5][Bow14, Proposition 3.1]) now implies that H is δ–hyperbolic for some δ.
(cid:3)

G.N. ARZHANTSEVA AND M.F. HAGEN

20
Theorem 4.3. Let (cid:104)X | {Yi}i∈I(cid:105) be a C(cid:48)( 1
144 ) presentation with X locally ﬁnite, and let G =
π1X∗. Then any g ∈ G acting loxodromically on the space H constructed above acts on H as a
WPD element, whence either G is virtually cyclic or acylindrically hyperbolic.
Proof. The assertion that g is a WPD element follows from Lemma 3.3; hyperbolicity of H comes
from Proposition 4.2. Applying [Osi15a, Theorem 1.2.(AH3 ⇒ AH2)] completes the proof. (cid:3)

5. Proof of Theorem B

Remark 5.1. It is not hard to adapt the proof of Proposition 3.1 of [BHS14] to show that

i

Proof. This is proved in [Hag14, Section 5] in the case where I = ∅, so that Γ is the contact

5.1. Preservation of loxodromics. In this section, we study the question of when G contains
a loxodromic isometry of H, using knowledge of which elements of π1X act loxodromically on

the contact graph C(cid:101)X of (cid:101)X, which is the intersection graph of the set of hyperplane-carriers in
(cid:101)X. Let p : (cid:101)X → Cay(X∗) be the obvious covering map (regarding Cay(X∗) as the cover of X
corresponding to the subgroup K = (cid:104)(cid:104){π1Yi}i∈I(cid:105)(cid:105) of π1X). Let (cid:101)H be the graph obtained from
(cid:101)X (1) by coning oﬀ the 1–skeleton of each hyperplane-carrier.
Form a new graph (cid:98)H from (cid:101)H by coning oﬀ every subgraph of (cid:101)X (1) ⊂ (cid:101)H which is the 1–skeleton
of an elevation (cid:101)Yi (cid:44)→ (cid:101)X of some Yi → X. Observe that p induces a quotient map ˆp : (cid:98)H → H,
which restricts to p on (cid:101)X (1) and which sends the cone-point vH over the hyperplane-carrier
cone over each (cid:101)Yi to the cone over the corresponding lift Yi → (cid:101)X∗ of Yi → X.
N (H) to the cone-point vp(H) over the hyperplane-carrier p(N (H)). The map p also sends the
is (uniformly) quasiconvex in the hyperbolic graph (cid:101)H. In conjunction with the small-
each (cid:101)Y (1)
cancellation assumption, this shows that (cid:98)H is again hyperbolic. We will not require this fact.
Lemma 5.2. Let Γ be the graph with a vertex for each hyperplane-carrier in (cid:101)X, and a vertex
for each lift of each (cid:101)Yi to (cid:101)X, with adjacency corresponding to intersection. Then Γ is π1X–
equivariantly quasi-isometric to (cid:98)H and (cid:101)H is π1X–equivariantly quasi-isometric to C(cid:101)X.
graph of (cid:101)X and (cid:101)H the space formed from (cid:101)X by coning oﬀ hyperplane-carriers; here we imitate
that proof. Deﬁne a map f : Γ(0) → (cid:98)H(0) as follows: if v is a vertex of Γ, corresponding to a
subcomplex (cid:101)C (either a lift of some (cid:101)Yi or a hyperplane-carrier), then let f (v) ∈ (cid:98)H(0) be the cone-
point over the corresponding subcomplex. Since each point of (cid:101)X lies in a hyperplane-carrier,
the map f is quasi-surjective, i.e. (cid:98)H(0) lies in a uniform neighborhood of the image of f. To see
Lemma 5.3 (Loxodromics persist I). Let ˜g ∈ π1X act loxodromically on (cid:101)H. Then either ˜g acts
loxodromically on (cid:98)H or ˜g stabilizes some elevation (cid:101)Yi ⊂ (cid:101)X of some Yi → X.
Proof. By Lemma 5.2, (cid:98)H is quasi-isometric to the intersection graph Γ of the set of hyperplane-
carriers and lifts of the various (cid:101)Yi in (cid:101)X, and this graph is connected. Hence it suﬃces to show
Let (cid:101)A ⊆ (cid:101)X be a combinatorial geodesic axis for ˜g (by replacing (cid:101)X by its ﬁrst cubical subdi-
vision, we may assume that such an axis exists [Hag]). Fix a 0–cube ˜a ∈ (cid:101)A and ﬁx n > 0. Let
P be the subpath of (cid:101)A joining ˜a to gn˜a.
Let (cid:98)Q be a geodesic of Γ joining vertices corresponding to subcomplexes containing ˜a and
gn˜a. Let the vertex-sequence of (cid:98)Q be C0, . . . , CN, where each Ci is either a hyperplane-carrier
in (cid:101)X or a lift of some (cid:101)Yi to (cid:101)X. Then we have a combinatorial path Q = α0 ··· αN joining ˜a to
gn˜a, where each αi is a geodesic in Ci. The closed path QP −1 bounds a disc diagram D → (cid:101)X.
Suppose that we have chosen (cid:98)Q, and then chosen Q, and then chosen D, so that the area of

that f is a quasi-isometric embedding, one argues exactly as in [Hag14, Section 5].

(cid:3)

that (cid:104)˜g(cid:105) acts loxodromically on Γ provided ˜g (cid:54)∈ K.

D is minimal among all possible such choices. Let K be a dual curve in D emanating from P .

ACYLINDRICAL HYPERBOLICITY OF CUBICAL SMALL-CANCELLATION GROUPS

21

Ci is a hyperplane-carrier, at most κ0 dual curves in D travel from P to αi.

the fact that they don’t contain two 1–cubes dual to the same hyperplane. If K is a dual curve
emanating from Q, then it emanates from some αi. Suppose that K ends on αj. Then j (cid:54)= i
since αi is a geodesic. If |i − j| > 2, then since the hyperplane to which K maps has carrier

leading to a lower-area choice of D. Finally, if j = i ± 1, then we can apply hexagon moves to
show that αi has a terminal segment coinciding with an initial segment of αi+1 (say); we can
remove the resulting spur. We conclude that D can be chosen so that all dual curves travel from

Then K ends on Q, since P is a geodesic of (cid:101)X and combinatorial geodesics are characterized by
Γ–adjacent to Ci, Cj, we have contradicted that (cid:98)Q is a Γ–geodesic. If j = i ± 2, then we can
replace Ci±1 with the carrier of the hyperplane to which K maps, providing a new choice of (cid:98)Q
Q to P . In other words, (cid:98)Q is a geodesic of (cid:101)X.
Since ˜g acts loxodromically on (cid:101)H, Lemma 5.2 shows that there is a constant κ0 (cid:62) 1 so that
for all hyperplanes H of (cid:101)X, there are at most κ0 hyperplanes that intersect (cid:101)A and also intersect
H (i.e. (cid:101)A has uniformly bounded projection to each hyperplane). Hence, for each i for which
We now claim that there exists κ1 so that, for all i ∈ I and all elevations (cid:101)Yi ⊆ (cid:101)X of Yi → X,
there are at most κ1 hyperplanes intersecting (cid:101)Yi and (cid:101)A. First, since g is loxodromic on (cid:101)H,
Lemma 5.2 and Theorem 2.3 of [Hag13] imply that there exists κ(cid:48) such that if d(cid:101)X (H∩(cid:101)A, H(cid:48)∩(cid:101)A) >
κ(cid:48), for hyperplanes H, H(cid:48), then H ∩ H(cid:48) = ∅. It follows that the cubical convex hull (cid:101)B of (cid:101)A lies
at ﬁnite Hausdorﬀ distance from (cid:101)A. Suppose that no κ1 with the desired property exists. Then
for any L > 0, there exists (cid:101)Yi so that diam(g(cid:101)B((cid:101)Yi)) > L, where g(cid:101)B : (cid:101)X → (cid:101)B is the combinatorial
144 ) condition now shows that there exists a unique (cid:101)Yi so that (cid:101)A lies in Nr((cid:101)Yi)
closest-point projection, or gate map; see e.g. [BHS14]. Translating by elements of (cid:104)˜g(cid:105) and
for some r (cid:62) 0. Since the same is true of ˜g(cid:101)A = (cid:101)A and ˜g(cid:101)Yi, we have ˜g ∈ Stab((cid:101)Yi).
applying the C(cid:48)( 1
We have shown that if ˜g does not stabilize some elevation of some Yi, then d(cid:101)X (˜a, gn˜a) (cid:54)
(κ0 + κ1)N (cid:54) (κ0 + κ1)(λd(cid:98)H(˜a, gn˜a) + µ), where λ, µ are constants for the quasi-isometry
Γ → (cid:98)H. Since the left-hand side grows linearly in n, it follows that ˜g is loxodromic on (cid:98)H.
Lemma 5.4 (Loxodromics persist II). Let ˜g ∈ π1X act loxodromically on (cid:101)H and let g = ˜gK ∈
(cid:3)
π1X∗. Then either g acts loxodromically on H or ˜g stabilizes an elevation to (cid:101)X of some Yi → X.
Proof. Each lift Yi → (cid:101)X∗ is an embedding, by the small-cancellation conditions and [Wis,
(cid:101)X∗ of some Yi. Note that for each i, the elevations (cid:101)Yi to (cid:101)X of Yi → X correspond to the lifts
to (cid:101)X∗ of Yi → X.
Let (cid:101)A be a combinatorial axis for ˜g in (cid:101)X and let ˜a ∈ (cid:101)A be a 0–cube. Recall that p : (cid:101)X →
• for each j (cid:54) N, either Cj is the carrier of a hyperplane in (cid:101)X∗ or Cj → (cid:101)X∗ is a lift of

Cay(X∗) is the universal covering map. Let a = p(˜a), so that gna = p(˜gn˜a) for each n > 0.
Fixing n > 0, choose a sequence C0, . . . , CN satisfying:

Theorem 4.1]. It suﬃces to show that if g is not loxodromic on H, then g stabilizes some lift to

some Yi → X (abusing notation, we use the same name for Cj as for its image);

• a ∈ C0 and gna ∈ CN;
• Cj ∩ Cj+1 (cid:54)= ∅ for all j (cid:54) N;
• N is minimal with the above properties.

Let P be a combinatorial geodesic of Cay(X∗) joining a to gna. For each j, let αi be a
combinatorial geodesic of Cj so that Q = α0α2 ··· αN is a piecewise-geodesic from a to gna with

no backtracks. Let D → (cid:101)X∗ be a minimal disc diagram with boundary path P Q−1. Moreover,

choose the Cj, P, and Q subject to the above constraints so that D has minimal area among all
diagrams constructed in the preceding manner.

By Theorem 2.15 and the fact that P is a geodesic, D does not contain a positively-curved
shell whose outer path is a subpath of P . Likewise, suppose that K is a positively-curved shell

22

G.N. ARZHANTSEVA AND M.F. HAGEN

with boundary path OI, where the out path O is a subpath of Q. Then the relator Y to which
K maps intersects Ci, Cj for some i, j, and we can replace O by I in Q to obtain a new collection
of data of the above type leading to a disc diagram which is a subdiagram of D with one fewer
cone-cells, contradicting minimality. Hence, if there is a positively-curved shell in D, its outer
path lies at the transition from P to Q. The same holds for spurs by construction.
By performing square homotopies, we see that D decomposes as D = D0∪P (cid:48) L∪P (cid:48)(cid:48) D1, where
bigons ∂pD0 = P P (cid:48) and ∂pD1 = P (cid:48)(cid:48)Q, and no generalized corners in L lie along P (cid:48), P (cid:48)(cid:48). The
subdiagram L is bounded by P (cid:48)P (cid:48)(cid:48). Theorem 2.13 shows that L is a ladder; let {Rk} and {Kk}
respectively denote the constituent pseudorectangles and cone-cells of L. See Figure 9.

D0, D1 → (cid:101)X∗ are square diagrams (i.e.
factor as D0, D1 → (cid:101)X → (cid:101)X∗) bounded by geodesic
Since ˜g is rank-one (because it is loxodromic on (cid:101)H, while half-ﬂats project to diameter–(cid:54) 3
sets in the contact graph), and since D0, D1 lift to (cid:101)X, there exists κ0, independent of n, so that

P, P (cid:48) lie at Hausdorﬀ distance at most κ0, and the same is true of P (cid:48)(cid:48), Q. In other words, the
square bigons D0, D1 are κ0–thin.

Figure 9. The diagram D and its environs, in the proof of Lemma 5.4.

Let r = |{Rk}| denote the number of constituent pseudorectangles of L. Then there exists
K1, independent of n, so that r (cid:62) K1n. Indeed, this can be seen by considering a lift of D0 or

D1 to (cid:101)X and applying Lemma 5.3.

Lemma 3.1 and the fact that g does not stabilize a lift of a relator combine to show that
there is a uniform bound (independent of n) on the number of pseudorectangles of L whose
boundary paths can come κ0–close to a given Cj. Otherwise, we would ﬁnd (analogously to the
proof of Lemma 5.3) some Yi → Cay(X∗) with (cid:104)g(cid:105)a lying in a ﬁxed neighborhood of Yi. The
small-cancellation assumptions would then show that gYi = Yi.
Combining the above two conclusions shows that N grows linearly in n, whence g is loxodromic
on H, as required, unless g stabilizes some Yi.
(cid:3)
5.2. Building loxodromics in practice. In this section, we discuss how to ﬁnd ˜g ∈ π1X so

that ˜g acts loxodromically on (cid:101)H without stabilizing any of the (cid:101)Yi.
the set of relators Yi → X). We also assume, for the moment, that π1X acts essentially on (cid:101)X,
in the sense that (cid:101)X does not contain a π1X–invariant proper convex subcomplex. This is not

We now introduce the assumption that X is compact (although we still put no restriction on

a real restriction: in our application, we will be able to reduce to this case. These assumptions
are imposed in order to use the double-skewering lemma of Caprace-Sageev [CS11], of which we
use the following form from [Hag13]:

ACYLINDRICAL HYPERBOLICITY OF CUBICAL SMALL-CANCELLATION GROUPS

23

Lemma 5.5 (Strong double-skewering). Let G act properly, essentially, and cocompactly on a

CAT(0) cube complex (cid:101)X. Suppose H, V are hyperplanes with dC(cid:101)X (H, V ) (cid:62) 3. Then there exists
g ∈ G so that V separates H, gH, and g acts loxodromically on C(cid:101)X.
Let (cid:101)Yi (cid:44)→ (cid:101)X be an elevation of some Yi → X, and let C(cid:101)Yi be the subgraph of the contact
graph C = C(cid:101)X of (cid:101)X spanned by the vertices corresponding to the hyperplanes intersecting the
convex subcomplex (cid:101)Yi (so C(cid:101)Yi is a copy of the contact graph of (cid:101)Yi). For convenience, we now
denote by R the collection of all subcomplexes (cid:101)Yi of (cid:101)X which are elevations of relators Yi → X.
denote by Nr(C(cid:101)Y ) the closed r-neighborhood of C(cid:101)Y .
Lemma 5.6 (Quasiconvex malnormal collection). Let (cid:101)S denote the set of all elevations (cid:101)Yi to
(cid:101)X of relators. Then there exists ∆ : [0,∞) → [0,∞) so that:
(1) C(cid:101)Y is ∆(0)–quasiconvex in C for all (cid:101)Y ∈ R.
(2) If (cid:101)Y ,(cid:101)Y (cid:48) ∈ R are distinct, then for all r (cid:62) 0,
diam(Nr(C(cid:101)Y ) ∩ C(cid:101)Y (cid:48)) (cid:54) ∆(r).

The following result reﬂects a general small-cancellation intuition. It is of independent interest
and might be useful even in classical and certain graphical small-cancellation presentations. We

Remark 5.7. The above lemma does not use compactness of X.

sition 3.1 of [BHS14], there exists a geodesic H = H0, H1, . . . , Hn = V of C and a geodesic

Proof of Lemma 5.6. We ﬁrst prove assertion (1). Let H, V ∈ C(cid:101)Y be vertices (i.e. hyperplanes
crossing (cid:101)Y ) and let x, y ∈ (cid:101)Y be 0–cubes in the carriers of H, V respectively. Then by Propo-
γ = γ0γ1 ··· γn of (cid:101)X that joins x to y and has the property that γi lies in the carrier of Hi for
each i. Now, since (cid:101)Y is convex in (cid:101)X, each hyperplane crossing γ corresponds to a vertex of C(cid:101)Y ,
and hence dC(Hi,C(cid:101)Yi) (cid:54) 1 for each i, i.e. C contains a geodesic joining H, V and lying 1–close
to C(cid:101)Y ; the claim now follows since C is hyperbolic.
We now prove (2). Let (cid:101)Y ,(cid:101)Y (cid:48) be distinct and ﬁx r (cid:62) 0. Choose hyperplanes H(cid:48), V (cid:48) that cross
(cid:101)Y (cid:48) and correspond to vertices in C(cid:101)Y (cid:48) whose closest vertices in CY , denoted H, V respectively,
to our eventual bound, we may assume that none of the Hi or Vj, with i < s, j < t, crosses (cid:101)Y (cid:48).
Let P, P (cid:48) → (cid:101)Y ,(cid:101)Y (cid:48) be combinatorial geodesics joining N (V ),N (H) and N (H(cid:48)),N (V (cid:48)) re-
S = P(cid:81)
j Rj is a closed path in (cid:101)X. Let D → (cid:101)X be a minimal-area disc diagram

satisfy dC(H, H(cid:48)) (cid:54) r, dC(V, V (cid:48)) (cid:54) r.
Choose C–geodesic sequences of hyperplanes H = H0, . . . , Hs = H(cid:48), V = V0, . . . , Vt = V (cid:48) with
s, t (cid:54) r. We must show that dC(H(cid:48), V (cid:48)) is bounded in terms of r. At the expense of adding 2r

spectively. For each i, let Qi → N (Hi) be a geodesic, and Ri → N (Vi) be a geodesic, so that

i QiP (cid:48)(cid:81)

bounded by S, and suppose that all of the above paths and hyperplanes were chosen (ﬁxing
H, H(cid:48), V, V (cid:48)) so as to minimize the area of the resulting diagram D.
Note that dC(H(cid:48), V (cid:48)) is bounded by the number of dual curves in D emanating from P (cid:48). Let
K be such a dual curve. By minimality of the area of D (allowing P (cid:48) and the Qi, Ri to vary), we
can assume that K does not end on Qs or Rt. Hence K ends either on P , on Qi for 0 (cid:54) i < s,
or on Rj for 0 (cid:54) j < t. Let M (cid:62) 0 bound the lengths of geodesic cone-pieces and wall-pieces;
such a bound exists by our small-cancellation assumptions. Then the number of dual curves
traveling from P (cid:48) to P is at most M, since P, P (cid:48) are geodesics and thus any two such curves map
to distinct hyperplanes. Next, since Hi (respectively Vj) has the property that Hi (respectively
Rj). This completes the proof, with ∆(r) (cid:54) 2M r + 2r.

Vj) does not cross (cid:101)Y (cid:48), then there are at most M dual curves traveling from P (cid:48) to Qi (respectively

(cid:3)

G.N. ARZHANTSEVA AND M.F. HAGEN

24
Lemma 5.8. There exists R (cid:62) 0 so that the following holds. Suppose that there exist distinct
acting loxodromically on C and not stabilizing any element of R.

(cid:101)Y ,(cid:101)Y (cid:48) ∈ R with C(cid:101)Y ,C(cid:101)Y (cid:48) subgraphs of C of diameter at least 10R. Then there exists ˜g ∈ π1X
Proof. Let π : C → C(cid:101)Y be the coarse closest-point projection, which exists since C(cid:101)Y is uniformly
quasiconvex by Lemma 5.6. Let π(cid:48) be the corresponding projection to C(cid:101)Y (cid:48). Lemma 5.6 implies
that π(C(cid:101)Y (cid:48)) has diameter bounded by some ∆ depending on the hyperbolicity constant of C
and the quasiconvexity constant ∆(0), and the same is true of π(cid:48)(C(cid:101)Y ).
Let R be a constant to be determined, and choose vertices H, H(cid:48) ∈ C(cid:101)Y ,C(cid:101)Y (cid:48), respectively, so
that dC(H, π(C(cid:101)Y (cid:48))) (cid:62) R and dC(H(cid:48), π(cid:48)(C((cid:101)Y ))) (cid:62) R. Let γ → C be a geodesic joining H, H(cid:48).
Then thin quadrilateral considerations show that γ passes uniformly close to π(C(cid:101)Y (cid:48)) and to
π(cid:48)(C(cid:101)Y ), so that dC(H, H(cid:48)) > 2 provided R is suﬃciently large.
Now, since dC(H, H(cid:48)) > 2, the hyperplanes H, H(cid:48) of (cid:101)X satisfy the hypotheses of Lemma 5.5,
so that π1X contains an element ˜g whose axis (cid:101)A in (cid:101)X passes through both hyperplanes H, H(cid:48),
the desired property, or ˜g stabilizes some (cid:101)Y (cid:48)(cid:48) ∈ R − {(cid:101)Y ,(cid:101)Y (cid:48)}.
In the latter case, every hyperplane crossing (cid:101)A crosses (cid:101)Y (cid:48)(cid:48). Let α be the subpath of (cid:101)A between
of N (H(cid:48)) ∩ (cid:101)Y (cid:48), let the geodesic γ → (cid:101)Y (cid:48) join the endpoint of β to a point y(cid:48) ∈ (cid:101)Y (cid:48) as close as
possible to (cid:101)Y , let the geodesic ζ join y(cid:48) to a closest point y ∈ (cid:101)Y , let η → (cid:101)Y (cid:48) join y to a closest
point of N (H), let θ → N (H) join the endpoint of η to the initial point of α, and let D → (cid:101)X be

and projects to a quasigeodesic axis A in C containing the vertices H, H(cid:48). Hence either ˜g has

the 1–cubes dual to H, H(cid:48), let the geodesic β → N (H(cid:48)) join the endpoint of α to a closest vertex

least R

a disc diagram with boundary path αβγζηθ, with minimal area for its boundary path and with
each of the named geodesics chosen in its path-homotopy class so that the resulting diagram
is minimal. Observe that |η|,|γ| (cid:62) R since these paths must project to paths in C of length
at least R. Now, no dual curve in D travels from η ∪ γ to ζ because such dual curves map

3 dual curves emanating from η travel to α, or to γ, or to β. In either of the former cases,
3 , provided R > 3M, where M is the bound on geodesic

to hyperplanes crossing (cid:101)Y ∪ (cid:101)Y (cid:48), while the hyperplanes crossing ζ are exactly those separating
(cid:101)Y ,(cid:101)Y (cid:48), by our choice of y, y(cid:48). Similarly, no dual curve travels from η to θ or γ to β. Hence at
(cid:101)Y contains a cone-piece of length R
pieces coming from the small-cancellation conditions. Otherwise, since H(cid:48) cannot cross (cid:101)Y – it
was chosen to be very C–distant from C(cid:101)Y – β provides a wall-piece in (cid:101)Y of length R
Lemma 5.9. Let ˜g act loxodromically on C and suppose that there exists B such that diam(C(cid:101)Y ) (cid:54)
B for all (cid:101)Y ∈ R. Then ˜g does not stabilize any element of R.

again impossible if R > 3M. This completes the proof.

3 , which is
(cid:3)

(cid:3)
Proof. This is obvious.
Deﬁnition 5.10 (Normalized). The cubical presentation (cid:104)X | {Yi}i∈I(cid:105) is normalized if the
nonpositively-curved cube complex Yi is not contractible for each i ∈ I.
Lemma 5.11 (Building loxodromics). Suppose that (cid:104)X | {Yi}i∈I(cid:105) is a normalized C(cid:48)( 1
144 )
cubical presentation with X compact and each Yi compact. Then one of the following holds:
(A) π1X∗ is ﬁnite;

(B) I = ∅, and π1X∗ = π1X, and (cid:101)X contains a π1X–invariant convex subcomplex decomposing
(C) there exists ˜g ∈ π1X acting loxodromically on (cid:101)H and not stabilizing any (cid:101)Yi.
Proof. We ﬁrst reduce to the case where π1X acts essentially on (cid:101)X, i.e. there is no convex,
π1X–invariant proper subcomplex in (cid:101)X. Indeed, by Proposition 3.5 of [CS11], there is a π1X–
invariant, π1X–essential convex subcomplex (cid:101)Z ⊆ (cid:101)X. Let Z denote the quotient of (cid:101)Z by π1X, so

as the product of two unbounded subcomplexes;

ACYLINDRICAL HYPERBOLICITY OF CUBICAL SMALL-CANCELLATION GROUPS

25

H, H(cid:48) at C–distance at least 3, whence Lemma 5.5 and Lemma 5.2 show that (C) holds.
Lemma 5.8 provides ˜g ∈ π1X so that ˜g does not stabilize an element of R and acts loxodromically

that (cid:101)Z (cid:44)→ (cid:101)X descends to a local isometry Z → X. We form a new cubical presentation for π1X∗
by attaching to Z all of the components of each ﬁber product Yi⊗X Z → Z and then normalizing
pieces in (cid:101)X with (cid:101)Z, so C(cid:48)( 1
144 ) condition persists. Thus, assume π1X acts essentially on (cid:101)X.
(discarding contractible relators). Pieces in the new cubical presentation arise by intersecting
If I = ∅, then either (B) holds, or the Irreducibility Criterion of [CS11] provides hyperplanes
If there exist distinct (cid:101)Y ,(cid:101)Y (cid:48) ∈ R with C(cid:101)Y ,C(cid:101)Y (cid:48) subgraphs of C of diameter at least 10R, then
on C, and therefore, by Lemma 5.2, on (cid:101)H. Thus conclusion (C) holds in this case. If (cid:101)Y ∈ R has
the property that C(cid:101)Y has diameter (cid:62) 10R, and (cid:101)Y is unique with this property, then g(cid:101)Y = (cid:101)Y
for all g ∈ π1X, and conclusion (A) holds. Indeed, since Y is compact and (cid:101)Y is π1X–invariant,
π1Y has ﬁnite index in π1X. (In fact, essentiality shows (cid:101)X = (cid:101)Y .)
It remains to consider the case in which C(cid:101)Y is uniformly bounded for all (cid:101)Y . Lemma 5.9 and
not hold, then (cid:101)X decomposes as a product A × B of unbounded subcomplexes. In particular,
In this case, we claim that either conclusion (B) or (A) holds. Indeed, suppose (cid:101)Y ∈ R. Then
(cid:101)Y = A(cid:48) × B(cid:48), where A(cid:48), B(cid:48) ⊂ A, B are convex subcomplexes.
If A(cid:48) = A, B(cid:48) = B, then (A) holds. Hence let V × B be a hyperplane of (cid:101)X that does not
cross (cid:101)Y , where V is a hyperplane of A not crossing A(cid:48). Then any geodesic in B(cid:48) is a wall-piece,
can conclude that diam(A(cid:48)) (cid:54) M, whence diam((cid:101)Y ) (cid:54) 2M. In particular, since we can take M
th of the length of any geodesic in (cid:101)Y projecting to an essential closed path in X,
are inﬁnite wall-pieces, and inﬁnite cone-pieces between (cid:101)Y and its translates, so such (cid:101)Y cannot

Lemma 5.2 show that conclusion (C) holds exactly if there exists ˜g acting loxodromically on C.
Applying the Irreducibility Criterion and Lemma 5.5 as above show that if conclusion (C) does
hyperplanes have the form A × H or V × B, where H, V are respectively hyperplanes of B, A.

to be (cid:54) 1
there is no essential closed path in Y , so Y is contractible; since our cubical presentation was
normalized, Y cannot exist. Otherwise, diam(B(cid:48)) (cid:54) M and A = A(cid:48), which means that there

144

so diam(B(cid:48)) (cid:54) M. If there is also a hyperplane A × H so that H does not cross B(cid:48), then we

exist. Thus (B) holds. This completes the proof.

(cid:3)

5.3. The proof. We conclude with:
Proof of Theorem B. We are interested in a statement about π1X∗, and discarding relators does
not weaken small-cancellation conditions, so we assume that (cid:104)X | {Yi}i∈I(cid:105) is normalized. The
(cid:3)
theorem now follows from Lemma 5.11, Lemma 5.4, and Theorem 4.3.

References

[AD12] Goulnara Arzhantseva and Cornelia Drutu. Geometry of inﬁnitely presented small cancellation groups,

Rapid Decay and quasi-homomorphisms. arXiv:1212.5280, 2012.

[AMS] Yago Antolin, Ashot Minasyan, and Alessandro Sisto. Commensurating endomorphisms of acylindrically
hyperbolic groups and applications. Groups, Geometry, and Dynamics, to appear. arXiv:1310.8605, 2013.
[AO14] Goulnara Arzhantseva and Damian Osajda. Graphical small cancellation groups with the Haagerup

[AS83] Kenneth I. Appel and Paul E. Schupp. Artin groups and inﬁnite Coxeter groups. Invent. Math.,

[Bal16] Sahana Balasubramanya. Acylindrical group actions on quasi-trees. arXiv:1602.03941, 2016.
[BB96] Werner Ballmann and Serguei Buyalo. Nonpositively curved metrics on 2-polyhedra. Mathematische

property. arXiv:1404.6807, 2014.

72(2):201–220, 1983.

Zeitschrift, 222(1):97–134, 1996.

ometry & Topology, 6(1):69–89, 2002.

[BF02] Mladen Bestvina and Koji Fujiwara. Bounded cohomology of subgroups of mapping class groups. Ge-

[BF08] Mladen Bestvina and Mark Feighn. A hyperbolic Out(Fn)-complex. arXiv:0808.3730, 2008.

26

G.N. ARZHANTSEVA AND M.F. HAGEN

[BHS14] Jason Behrstock, Mark F. Hagen, and Alessandro Sisto. Hierarchically hyperbolic spaces I: curve com-

plexes for cubical groups. arXiv:1412.2171, 2014.

[Bow08] Brian H Bowditch. Tight geodesics in the curve complex. Inventiones mathematicae, 171(2):281–300,

[Bow14] Brian H Bowditch. Uniform hyperbolicity of the curve graphs. Paciﬁc J. Math, 269(2):269–280, 2014.
[Bri48]
[Che00] Victor Chepoi. Graphs of some CAT(0) complexes. Advances in Applied Mathematics, 24(2):125–179,

I.A. Brin. Gauss-Bonnet theorems for polyhedra. Uspekhi Mat. Nauk, 3:226–227, 1948.

[CS11] Pierre-Emmanuel Caprace and Michah Sageev. Rank rigidity for CAT(0) cube complexes. Geom. Funct.

Anal., 21:851–891, 2011.

[DGO11] François Dahmani, Vincent Guirardel, and Denis Osin. Hyperbolically embedded subgroups and ro-

tating families in groups acting on hyperbolic spaces. arXiv:1111.7048, 2011.

[FPS15] Roberto Frigerio, Beatrice M Pozzetti, and Alessandro Sisto. Extending higher-dimensional quasi-

cocycles. Journal of Topology, 8(4):1123–1155, 2015.

[Ger87] Steve M Gersten. Reducible diagrams and equations over groups. Springer, 1987.
[Gro03] Mikhail Gromov. Random walk in random groups. Geometric and Functional Analysis, 13(1):73–146,

[Gru] Dominik Gruber. Inﬁnitely presented C(6)-groups are SQ-universal. J. Lond. Math. Soc. (2), 92(1):178–

2008.

2000.

2003.

201.

2015.

[Gru15] Dominik Gruber. Inﬁnitely presented graphical small-cancellation groups. PhD thesis, Universität Wien,

[GS14] Dominik Gruber and Alessandro Sisto. Inﬁnitely presented graphical small cancellation groups are acylin-

drically hyperbolic. arXiv:1408.4488, 2014.
Frédéric Haglund. Isometries of CAT(0) cube complexes are semi-simple. arXiv:0705.3386, 2007.

[Hag]
[Hag13] Mark F Hagen. The simplicial boundary of a CAT(0) cube complex. Alg. Geom. Topol., 13:1299–1367,

[Hag14] Mark F Hagen. Weak hyperbolicity of cube complexes and quasi-arboreal groups. J. Topol., 7(2):385–

2013.

418, 2014.

[Ham07] Ursula Hamenstadt. Geometry of the complex of curves and of Teichmüller space. Handbook of Teich-

müller theory, 1:447–467, 2007.

[Ham08] Ursula Hamenstädt. Bounded cohomology and isometry groups of hyperbolic spaces. Journal of the

European Mathematical Society, 10(2):315–349, 2008.

[HO13] Michael Hull and Denis Osin. Induced quasicocycles on groups with hyperbolically embedded subgroups.

Algebraic & Geometric Topology, 13(5):2635–2665, 2013.

[HW08] Frédéric Haglund and Daniel T Wise. Special cube complexes. Geometric and Functional Analysis,

17(5):1551–1620, 2008.

[Jan14] Kasia Jankiewicz. Greendlinger’s lemma in cubical small-cancellation theory. arXiv:1401.4995, 2014.
[Mac]
[MO15] Ashot Minasyan and Denis Osin. Acylindrical hyperbolicity of groups acting on trees. Mathematische

John M. Mackay. Conformal dimension and random groups. Geom. Funct. Anal., 22(1):213–239.

Annalen, 362(3-4):1055–1105, 2015.

[MW02] Jonathan P McCammond and Daniel T Wise. Fans and ladders in small cancellation theory. Proceedings

of the London Mathematical Society, 84(3):599–644, 2002.

[NR98] Graham Niblo and Martin Roller. Groups acting on cubes and Kazhdan’s property (T). Proceedings of

the American Mathematical Society, 126(3):693–699, 1998.

[Oll06] Yann Ollivier. On a small cancellation theorem of Gromov. Bulletin of the Belgian Mathematical Society

Simon Stevin, 13(1):75–90, 2006.

[Osi15a] Denis Osin. Acylindrically hyperbolic groups. Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 2015.
[Osi15b] Denis Osin. On acylindrical hyperbolicity of groups with positive ﬁrst
(cid:96)2-Betti number.

arXiv:1501.03066, 2015.

arXiv:1502.02176, 2015.

108(1):116–126, 1987.

[OW07] Yann Ollivier and Daniel Wise. Kazhdan groups with inﬁnite outer automorphism group. Transactions

of the American Mathematical Society, 359(5):1959–1976, 2007.

[PS15] Piotr Przytycki and Alessandro Sisto. A note on acylindrical hyperbolicity of mapping class groups.

[RS87] Eliyahu Rips and Yoav Segev. Torsion-free group without unique product property. Journal of Algebra,

[Sam] Andrea Sambusetti. Growth tightness of surface groups. Expo. Math., 20(4):345–363.
[Sis]

Alessandro Sisto. Contracting elements and random walks. Journal für die reine und angewandte Math-
ematik, to appear. arXiv:1112.2666, 2011.

ACYLINDRICAL HYPERBOLICITY OF CUBICAL SMALL-CANCELLATION GROUPS

27

[Sis14] Alessandro Sisto. Quasi-convexity of hyperbolically embedded subgroups. Mathematische Zeitschrift,

[Str90] Ralph Strebel. Appendix. Small cancellation groups. In Sur les groupes hyperboliques d’après Mikhael
Gromov (Bern, 1988), volume 83 of Progr. Math., pages 227–273. Birkhäuser Boston, Boston, MA, 1990.

[Wis] Daniel T. Wise. The structure of groups with a quasiconvex hierarchy. 205 pp., preprint 2011.
[Wis04] Daniel T Wise. Cubulating small cancellation groups. Geometric & Functional Analysis, 14(1):150–214,

pages 1–10, 2014.

2004.

[Wis12] Daniel Wise. From Riches to Raags: 3-manifolds, right-angled Artin Groups, and Cubical Geometry,

volume 117. American Mathematical Society, 2012.

University of Vienna, Faculty of Mathematics, Oskar-Morgenstern-Platz 1, 1090 Wien, Aus-

tria

E-mail address: goulnara.arzhantseva@univie.ac.at

Department of Pure Maths. and Math. Stats., University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
E-mail address: markfhagen@gmail.com

