6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
8
1

 
 
]

V
C
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
3
6
7
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

From line segments to more organized Gestalts

Boshra Rajaei1,2, Rafael Grompone von Gioi 1, Jean-Michel Morel1

1CMLA, ENS Cachan, France

2 Sadjad University of Technology, Mashhad, Iran

In this paper, we reconsider the early computer vision bottom-up program, according to which
higher level features (geometric structures) in an image could be built up recursively from elementary
features by simple grouping principles coming from Gestalt theory. Taking advantage of the (recent)
advances in reliable line segment detectors, we propose three feature detectors that constitute one
step up in this bottom up pyramid. For any digital image, our unsupervised algorithm computes
three classic Gestalts from the set of predetected line segments: good continuations, nonlocal align-
ments, and bars. The methodology is based on a common stochastic a contrario model yielding three
simple detection formulas, characterized by their number of false alarms. This detection algorithm
is illustrated on several digital images.

INTRODUCTION

A basic task of the visual system is to group fragments
of a scene into objects and to separate one object from
others and from background. Perceptual grouping has
inspired many researches in psychology in the past cen-
tury.
In 1920’s, a systematic approach for investigat-
ing human perception was introduced under the name of
Gestalt theory [1]. The Gestalt school proposed the ex-
istence of a short list of grouping laws governing visual
perception. The Gestalt laws include, but are not limited
to, similarity, proximity, connectedness and good contin-
uation. Gestaltists argue that partial grouping laws re-
cursively group image elements to form more organized
Gestalts. But the grouping laws were qualitative and
lacked a quantitative formalization.

Since its origins, computer vision has been interested
in Gestalt laws and there have been several attempts to
formalize aspects of the Gestalt program [2, 3]. We will
concentrate on a particular approach [4, 5] which has led
to the conception of several Gestalt detectors to orga-
nize meaningful geometric structures in a digital image.
Based on the non-accidentalness principle [2, 6], an ob-
served structure is considered meaningful when the re-
lation between its parts is too regular to be the result
of an accidental arrangement of independent parts. This
is the rationale behind the a contrario model for deter-
mining potential Gestalts which is formulated in the next
section.

The a contrario methodology was used in [7], inspired
by the good continuation Gestalt principle, to propose
an algorithm to detect alignments of points in a point
pattern. The detected point alignments are further em-
ployed toward a nonparametric vanishing point estimat-
ing algorithm again based on the non-accidentalness prin-
ciple [8]. Based on the same principle, an automatic line
segment detector (LSD) is provided in [9, 10] with linear
time complexity. The same approach is used in the ED-
Lines straight line calculator [11] but with the diﬀerence
that the latter algorithm starts from an edge drawing out-

put while the former is based on image level lines. Simi-
lar ideas were also proposed to detect circles and ellipses
[12, 13]. Level lines are employed to detect good con-
tinuations and image corners in [14]. Using edge pieces
(edgelets) the authors of [15] adopt a featured a contrario
scheme to extract the strong edges and eliminate irrele-
vant and textural ones. Extracting an object of interest
from textural background or from outlier points is stud-
ied in [16, 17] where, for instance, ﬁxed contrast spots
are detected in mammographical images.

The a contrario framework was used for image seg-
mentation in [18]. To obtain robust segments, the au-
thors suggest a combination of the a contrario approach
and of Monte-Carlo simulation. Also, to solve the hier-
archical segmentation issue, the authors of [19] suggest
two a contrario criteria for measuring region and merg-
ing meaningfulness based on homogeneity and boundary
contrast.

In this paper, we start from the “partial Gestalts” con-
stituted by all LSD detected segments, and explore if
they can be used as basic elements for more elaborate
Gestalt groups such as long straight lines, good continu-
ations and parallel segments. Toward this aim, the a con-
trario model is adopted on the line segment distribution.
It is used repeatedly for detecting the mentioned struc-
tures as non-accidental. We shall observe in most im-
ages that, with the exception of a few isolated segments,
all line segments are classiﬁed precisely and hence the
algorithm forms another level of segmentation pyramid
toward a complete analysis and understanding of each
image’s structure. The main advantage of this approach
is its low time complexity due to the exploitation of line
segments as input structures which are far less numerous
than the unstructured set of all image pixels.

THEORETICAL MODELING

The a contrario detection approach has a probabilistic
basis. Consider an event of interest e. According to
the non-accidentalness principle, e is meaningful if its

2

Theorem 1. Under the a contrario model that all
segment tips are uniform i.i.d. spatial variables in the
image domain, the number of false alarms (NFA) of a
good continuation event ℘k,d,θ according to Deﬁnition 1
is equal to

(cid:18)

(cid:19)k−1

NFA(℘k,d,θ) = 2N · 3k−1 ·

(N − 1)

θd2
mn

· θ
π

(2)

where N indicates the total number of line segments.

Proof. According to (1), the computation of the NFA
consists of two parts: the number of tests and the prob-
ability of the geometric event under H0. Here, we have
2N diﬀerent choices for the ﬁrst tip of ℘k,d,θ (2 tips per
line segment). Assuming that at each of the k − 1 line
segment extremities we test the 3 closest tips at most, we
have 3 choices per joint and, therefore, Ntest = 2N 3k−1.
For the probability term of PH0(℘k,d,θ), let us ﬁrst
compute the probability that only two line segments be
in good continuation as speciﬁed in Figure 1 and with
parameters (d, θ). We shall then extend the computation
to k segments. This probability consists of two terms:
mn is the probability that one tip falls into S d,θ,λ
Πs (cid:39) θd2
around the other tip[20] and Πa (cid:39) θ
π is the probabil-
ity that a maximum angle of θ occurs between the two
line segments. Therefore, having one endpoint in this
area is the complement of the event where none of the
(N − 1) other endpoints is there. Thus PH0 (℘2,d,θ) =
1 − (1 − ΠsΠa)N−1. Consequently, for k − 1 junctions
in a sequence of k segments we have PH0 (℘k,d,θ) =
(1 − (1 − ΠsΠa)N−1)k−1 (cid:39) ((N − 1)ΠsΠa)k−1.
Theorem 2. Under the same a contrario assumption as
in Theorem 1, the number of false alarms of a non-local
alignment event, ζ k,d,θ, according to Deﬁnition 2 is equal
to

(cid:18)

(cid:19)k−1

NFA(ζ k,d,θ) = 2N · 3k−1

(N − 1)

2λd
mn

· θ
π

,

(3)

and the number of false alarms of parallel
event, (cid:61)d,θ, according to Deﬁnition 3 is equal to

line (bar)

NFA((cid:61)d,θ) = 3N · (N − 1)

.

(4)

(cid:18) πd2

mn

(cid:19)2 · θ

π

FIG. 1. Given the endpoint p of a line segment, this ﬁgure
deﬁnes the domain S around p, in which the presence of suc-
cessive segment endpoints is searched by the algorithm. This
search space depends on three parameters, ρ, θs and λ.

expectation is low under the stochastic model H0. The
stochastic expectation of an event is called its number of
false alarms (NFA) and is deﬁned as

NFA(e) = NtestPH0(e)

(1)

where Ntest indicates the number of possible occurrences
of e and PH0(e) is the probability of e happening under
H0. A relatively small NFA implies a rare event e under
the a contrario model and therefore, a meaningful one.
An event e is called -meaningful if NFA(e) < .
In
this paper, three types of events are under focus: non-
local alignments, good continuations and parallelism. For
each of them, the a contrario model H0 is adopted of
stochastic line segments, with independent and uniformly
distributed tips on the image domain. Here, we provide
a formal deﬁnition of each event.

li, li+1, . . . , lj

1. A sequence

Deﬁnition
seg-
ments
potential
good
if
only
d = D(li, li+1, . . . , lj) < ρ and θ = ∠(li, li+1, . . . , lj) < θs
for predeﬁned constant ρ and θs thresholds.

continuation

k
a
and

form
if

℘k,d,θ

of

line

In the above deﬁnition D(·) and ∠(·) denote respec-
tively the maximum of the distances and the maximum
of the angles between successive line segments in a se-
quence. The two threshold values ρ and θs limit the
search space around each line tip for ﬁnding close line
segments as represented in Figure 1. A small margin λ is
allowed to deal with possible misalignments in LSD out-
puts. This special adopted sector is denoted by S in the
sequel.
Deﬁnition 2. A good continuation satisfying θs < 3◦ is
called a non-local alignment event ζ k,d,θ.

Deﬁnition 3. Two line segments or non-local align-
ments li and lj are said to form a bar (cid:61)d,θ if and only if
d = Dm(li, lj) < ρ and θ = ∠(li, lj) ≈ π for a predeﬁned
constant ρ threshold.

Here, Dm(·) stands for the mutual distance operator
which is calculated as the average distance between the
respective tips of both segments.

Proof. The proof of the above theorem is similar to that
of Theorem 1. Since non-local alignments are special
types of good continuation, their NFA calculation is
straightforward. The only point is that for small θ < 3◦,
Indeed, for small angles
λ is not negligible anymore.
S d,θ,λ turns into a rectangle with dimensions 2λ by d.
Accordingly, by replacing Πs = 2λd
mn in the derivation of
Theorem 1, we obtain (3).

Using similar reasoning for the case of parallel lines,
since we only have two segments or straight lines, the
Ntest term reduces to 3N . By substituting θ = π ac-
cording to Deﬁnition 3, the overall NFA is formulated as
(4).

GESTALT DETECTOR

As mentioned earlier, by employing line segments as
initial groups it is possible to detect more organized and
sophisticated Gestalts.
In this paper, we exploit the
LSD algorithm [9] to produce l1, l2, . . . , lN initial line seg-
ments. The next step is ﬁnding all possible instances of
our three Gestalts of interest in the form of sequences of
line segments or chains[21].

Deﬁnition 4. A good continuation (Deﬁnition 1) chain
℘k,d,θ is meaningful if and only if NFA(℘k,d,θ) <  and
there exists no subchain of ℘ with smaller NFA.

Meaningful non-local alignments and bars follow the
same deﬁnition. We assume  = 1 as a simple way to al-
low less than one false alarm on average for each Gestalt
type per image [10]. Finally, by merging all meaningful
Gestalts we obtain a drawing of the input image. The
next section addresses the eﬃciency of the proposed ap-
proach applied on real-world images.

EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

Man-made structures like buildings, furniture and nat-
ural essences present many good continuations in the
form of line segments and curves or basic geometrical
shapes like rectangles and parallelograms. To organize
these structures using the proposed algorithm in this pa-
per, we ﬁrst applied LSD algorithm [10]. Afterwards,
the two initial thresholds θs and ρ in Deﬁnitions 1 to
3 must be determined. These two parameters limit the
number of chains that later are considered by the a con-
trario model. The parameter θs controls the smooth-
ness of output Gestalts while ρ is a parameter propor-
tional to the image size restricting the maximum accept-
able distance between line segments of a candidate chain.
In the sequel and to detect all kinds of parallelogram
shapes, θs is set to 150◦ and ρ is experimentally ﬁxed at
min(10,(cid:100)0.1 × max(m, n)(cid:101)) pixels by default.

Figure 2 shows the result of the joint application of
all feature detectors on an image.
In each output im-
age, organized Gestalts are depicted with diﬀerent colors
and ﬁnally the residual line segments are shown in the
last image. Note that the detected Gestalts might be
grouped again into longer continuations using another
level of a contrario model. What is remained from the
image mostly only consists of isolated line segments that
are not expected to belong to any organized structure.

More results on more real-world or synthetic images are
provided in Figure 3.

3

CONCLUSION

The three detectors proposed in this paper represent
one step up in the Gestalt grouping pyramid. The good
experimental point is that few line segments are left out
unorganized, a requirement that was called “articulation
without rest” in the Gestalt literature [22]. Clearly this
step up must be completed by further bottom up group-
ing. For example, good continuation curves present gaps
that must be completed with irregular contours. Other
gaps in good continuations or alignments must be ex-
plained by T-junctions; bars and non-local alignments
may be grouped again with the same good continuation
and parallelism principles. These further steps are re-
quired to solve the ﬁgure-background problem by unsu-
pervised algorithms.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

Work partly founded by the European Research Coun-

cil (advanced grant Twelve Labours n◦246961).

[1] M. Wertheimer, Psychologische Forschung 4, 301 (1923).
[2] D. Lowe, Perceptual Organization and Visual Recognition

(Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1985).

[3] S. Sarkar and K. L. Boyer, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cy-

bern. 23, 382 (1993).

[4] A. Desolneux, L. Moisan, and J.-M. Morel, Int. J. Com-

put. Vision 40, 7 (2000).

[5] A. Desolneux, L. Moisan, and J.-M. Morel, From Gestalt

Theory to Image Analysis (Springer, 2008).

[6] I. Rock, The Logic of Perception (The MIT Press, 1983).
[7] J. Lezama,
and

J.-M. Morel, G. Randall,
R. Grompone von Gioi, TPAMI 37, 499 (2015).

[8] J. Lezama, R. Grompone von Gioi, G. Randall, and J.-

M. Morel, in CVPR (2014) pp. 509–515.

[9] R. Grompone von Gioi, J. Jakubowicz, J.-M. Morel, and
G. Randall, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 32,
722 (2010).

[10] R. Grompone von Gioi, J. Jakubowicz, J. M. Morel, and

G. Randall, IPOL (2012).

[11] C. Akinlar and C. Topal, Pattern Recognit. Lett. 32,

1633 (2011).

[12] V. P˘atr˘aucean, P. Gurdjos, and R. Grompone von Gioi,

in ECCV (2012).

[13] C. Akinlar and C. Topal, Pattern Recognit. 46, 725

(2013).

[14] F. Cao, Computing and Visualization in Science 7, 3

(2004).

[15] N. Widynski and M. Mignotte, in Proceedings of ICSIPA

(2011) pp. 421–426.

4

FIG. 2. Gestalt detector performance over Whale image – each color indicates one detected structure. Left to right and top
to bottom:
initial image, LSD line segments, all good continuations, non-local alignments, pairs of parallel segments (bars),
and ﬁnally all segments that do not belong to any of the former structures. A segment can belong simultaneously to several of
these higher order partial Gestalts. Zoom-in by a factor of 400% is recommended.

[16] B. Grosjean and L. Moisan, J. Math. Imaging Vision 33,

313 (2009).

[17] D. Gerogiannis, C. Nikou, and A. Likas, IEEE Signal

Processing Lett. 22, 1638 (2015).

[18] N. Burrus, T. Bernard, and J.-M. Jolion, Pattern Recog-

nit. 42, 1520 (2009).

[19] J. Cardelino, V. Caselles, M. Bertalm´ıo, and G. Randall,

in Proceedings of ICIP (IEEE, 2009) pp. 4041–4044.

[20] Since λ is relatively small, we use this simple tight upper
bound for Πs. We also neglect the fact that the angular
sector may sometimes fall outside the image domain, with
area mn.

[21] A time eﬃcient algorithm to prune the detection space
can be tested in the online facility http://gestalt-
detector.webs.com .

[22] G. Kanizsa, Organization in vision: Essays on Gestalt

perception (Praeger New York:, 1979).

FIG. 3. Good continuation grouping – each color indicates
one structure. First and second lines show LSD segments
and good continuation segments, respectively, for (from left to
right) Peppers, Lena and Random-Lines. In the Random-Line
image as it is expected, no continuation is detected except
over fragments of the same line. Zoom-in by a factor of 400%
is recommended.

