6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
8
1

 
 
]

.

G
S
h
t
a
m

[
 
 

1
v
3
9
7
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

FINITENESS OF π1-SENSITIVE HOFER-ZEHNDER CAPACITY

AND EQUIVARIANT LOOP SPACE HOMOLOGY

URS FRAUENFELDER AND ANDREI PAJITNOV

ABSTRACT. We prove that if M is a closed, connected, oriented,
rationally inessential manifold, then the Hofer-Zehnder capacity of
the unit disk bundle of the cotangent bundle of M is ﬁnite.

In this note we prove the following theorem.

1. INTRODUCTION

Theorem A: Assume that M is a closed, connected, oriented, ra-
tionally inessential manifold. Then the Hofer-Zehnder capacity of the
unit disk bundle of its cotangent bundle is ﬁnite

Actually we prove more. Namely under the assumptions of the the-
orem we ﬁnd a contractible periodic orbit whose period bounds the
Hofer-Zehnder capacity which implies the stronger result that the
π1-sensitive Hofer-Zehnder capacity becomes ﬁnite. Here we recall
that a manifold is called rationally inessential if the image of its fun-
damental class under the classifying map to the classifying space
of its fundamental group vanishes in homology with rational coefﬁ-
cients.

To prove our main result we use a theorem of Irie. This theorem
tells us that if the fundamental class of M vanishes in equivariant
loop space homology, then the π1-sensitive Hofer-Zehnder capacity
is ﬁnite. What goes on here is that the period of the killer of the
fundamental class of M in equivariant symplectic homology which
by a famous result of Viterbo coincides with equivariant loop space
homology bounds the π1-sensitive Hofer-Zehnder capacity. We then
show taking advantage of a deep result of Goodwillie that for a ratio-
nally inessential manifold the fundamental class of M vanishes in
equivariant homology.

Iries theorem holds as well in the nonequivariant set-up. It can-
not directly be applied to the nonequivariant homology of the free
loop space, since the fundamental class of M never vanishes in

1

2

URS FRAUENFELDER AND ANDREI PAJITNOV

nonequivariant loop space homology. However, it can well happen
that it vanishes when one twists the coefﬁcients. This has been ex-
amined in [2]. In particular, it is shown there that if there exists a
nontrivial invariant homomorphism from π2pM q to any ﬁnite cyclic
group, then the π1-sensitive Hofer-Zehnder capacity of the unit disk
bundle of its cotangent bundle is ﬁnite. Here invariant refers to the
action of the fundamental group of M on π2pM q.
It is interesting
to note that equivariant and nonequivariant methods lead to quite
different topological conditions which guarantee ﬁniteness.

2. THE HOFER-ZEHNDER CAPACITY

We brieﬂy recall the deﬁnition and general properties of the Hofer-
Zehnder capacity. A comprehensive reference is the book by Hofer
and Zehnder [11].

Assume that pW, ωq is a symplectic manifold. A smooth function
H : W Ñ R gives rise to a vector ﬁeld XH P ΓpT W q implicitly deﬁned
by

dH “ ωp¨, XHq

which is referred to as the Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld of H.

Deﬁnition 2.1. A compactly supported, smooth function H : W Ñ
r0, 8q is called simple, if it meets the following conditions

(i): There exists an open nonempty subset U Ă W , such that

H|U “ max H.

(ii): The only critical values of H are 0 and max H.

Pictorially a simple function looks like a reverted pot.

Deﬁnition 2.2. A simple function H is called admissible, if its Hamil-
tonian vector ﬁeld XH has no nonconstant orbit of period less than
or equal to one.

We are now in position to deﬁne the Hofer-Zehnder capacity of the

symplectic manifold pW, ωq

cHZpW, ωq :“ sup  max H| H : W Ñ r0, 8q admissible(.

The Hofer-Zehnder capacity has the following properties

(i): Assume there exists a symplectic embedding pW1, ω1q ãÑ pW2, ω2q

between symplectic manifolds pW1, ω1q and pW2, ω2q, then

cHZpW1, ω1q 6 cHZpW2, ω2q.

(ii): If a ‰ 0, then

cHZpW, aωq “ |a|cHZpW, ωq.

FINITENESS OF HOFER-ZEHNDER CAPACITY AND LOOP SPACE HOMOLOGY

3

(iii): For r ą 0 let

Br :“ tz P Cn : |z| ă ru

be the r-ball, and

Zr :“ tz P Cn : |z1| ă ru

be the r-cylinder, where Cn is endowed with its standard sym-
plectic structure, then

cHZpBrq “ r2π “ cHZpZrq.

Properties (i) and (ii) are straightforward, where property (iii) is highly
nontrivial. It implies Gromov’s nonsqueezing result [9]

Theorem 2.3. Assume that r ă r1, then there exists no symplectic
embedding Br1 ãÑ Zr.
(cid:3)

Another application of the Hofer-Zehnder capacity is Struwes al-

most sure existence theorem.

Theorem 2.4. Assume that pW, ωq is a compact symplectic manifold
with connected boundary such that

cHZpW, ωq ă 8.

If H : W Ñ R is a smooth function satisfying H|BW ą ǫ for some ǫ ą 0
such that the interval p´ǫ, ǫq consists of regular values of H, then for
almost every c P p´ǫ, ǫq there exists a periodic orbit on the energy level
set H ´1pcq.
(cid:3)

There is the following variant of the Hofer-Zehnder capacity. In-
stead of asking just for nonconstant periodic orbits in the deﬁni-
tion of admissible Hamiltonian one can ask more generally for con-
tractible periodic orbits. The variant of the Hofer-Zehnder capacity
is denoted by c0
HZpW, ωq and referred to as the π1-sensitive Hofer-
Zehnder capacity. There is the following obvious inequality

cHZpW, ωq 6 c0

HZpW, ωq.

Moreover, one has the following variant of Struwe’s theorem, which
guarantees not just periodic orbits on almost every energy level but
more excitingly contractible periodic orbits, namely

Theorem 2.5. Under the assumptions of Theorem 2.4, assume that

c0
HZpW, ωq ă 8.

Then for almost every c P p´ǫ, ǫq there exists a contractible periodic
orbit on the energy level H ´1pcq.
(cid:3)

4

URS FRAUENFELDER AND ANDREI PAJITNOV

In view of Theorem 2.5 a challenging question is to ﬁnd conditions
which guarantee the ﬁniteness of the π1-sensitive Hofer-Zehnder ca-
pacity. A ﬁrst tool to do that is the displacement energy.

In order to explain the displacement energy we ﬁrst need to in-
troduce the Hofer norm of a maybe time dependent Hamiltonian.
Suppose that H P C 8
c pW ˆ r0, 1s, Rq is a compactly supported Hamil-
tonian depending in addition on a time parameter t P r0, 1s. For
each t P r0, 1s we then obtain a compactly supported function Ht “
Hp¨, tq P C 8

c pW, Rq. The Hofer norm of H is deﬁned as

||H|| :“ ż 1

0

pmax Ht ´ min Htqdt.

If H is time independent this is just the oscillation of H.

A time dependent Hamiltonian gives rise to a time dependent Hamil-

tonian vector ﬁeld and we denote by φH the time one map of its ﬂow.
Suppose that U Ă W is an open subset of a symplectic manifold and
therefore itself a symplectic manifold. Then the displacement energy
of U in W is deﬁned as

epU q :“ inft||H|| : φHpU q X U “ Hu.

Note that this quantity depends as well on W , i.e.,

epU q “ epU, W q.

We use the convention that the inﬁmum of the empty set is 8. With
this convention U is displaceable in W if and only if epU, W q ă 8.
The following Theorem is proved in [11, Chapter 5].

Theorem 2.6. Suppose that U Ă W is an open subset and the inclu-
sion homomorphism i˚ : π1pU q Ñ π1pW q is injective. Then

c0
HZpU q 6 epU q,

i.e., if U is displaceable, its π1-sensitive Hofer-Zehnder capacity is
ﬁnite.
(cid:3)

3. IRIE’S THEOREM

We ﬁrst explain the notion of a Liouville domain. Suppose that
pW, λq is a connected exact symplectic manifold, i.e., λ is a one-form
on W with the property that ω “ dλ is a symplectic form. Then one
can deﬁne a vector ﬁeld Y on W uniquely determined by λ which is
implicitly deﬁned by the condition

λ “ ωpY, ¨q.

FINITENESS OF HOFER-ZEHNDER CAPACITY AND LOOP SPACE HOMOLOGY

5

Assume that W is compact. Because W admits an exact symplectic
form it necesarily has a boundary. We say that pW, λq is a Liou-
ville domain if Y points outside at the boundary. This implies that
pBW, λ|BW q is a contact manifold. In particular, one can deﬁne the
Reeb vector ﬁeld R P ΓpT BW q implicitly by the conditions

λpRq “ 1, dλ|BW pR, ¨q “ 0.

To a Liouville domain one can associate its symplectic homology
SH˚pW q as well as its equivariant symplectic homology SH S1
˚ pW q.
Moreover, there are inclusion homomorphisms

i˚ : H˚pW, BW q Ñ SH˚pW q,

˚ : H˚pW, BW qbH˚pCP8q Ñ SH S1
iS1

˚ pW q.

The following theorem is due to Irie [12].

Theorem 3.1. Suppose that i˚prW sq “ 0 P SH˚pW q or iS1
rptsq “ 0 P SH S1
then c0
HZpW q ă 8.

˚ prW s ˆ
˚ pW q where rpts is the class of a point in H˚pCP 8q,
(cid:3)

Proof. For a ą 0 which does not lie in the spectrum of the Reeb
ﬂow on BW we denote by HF a
˚ pW q the Floer homology of the Liou-
ville domain associated to a Hamiltonian which grows with slope a
If a ă b the two Floer
on the completion of the Liouville domain.
homologies are related by the inclusion homomorphism

HF a

˚ pW q Ñ HF b

˚ pW q

and the symplectic homology is deﬁned as the direct limit of this
directed system. Analogously equivariant symplectic homology is
deﬁned as the direct limit of the equivariant Floer homologies of the
Liouville domain for Hamiltonians of increasing slope on the com-
pletion. Moreover, the inclusion homomorphism i˚ factors through

H˚pW, BW q Ñ HF a

˚ pW q Ñ SH˚pW q.

If i˚prW sq “ 0, then because the symplectic homology is the direct
limit of the Floer homologie HF a
˚ pW q there exists a ą 0 such the fun-
damental class of the Liouville domain already vanishes in HF a
˚ pW q.
However, Irie proved in [12, Corollary 3.5] that this implies that the
π1-sensitive Hofer-Zehnder capacity is bounded from above by a. (cid:3)

4. ESSENTIAL AND INESSENTIAL MANIFOLDS

In [8] M. Gromov introduced the notion of essential manifold. To

recall the deﬁnition we will need some terminological conventions.

In Sections 4 – 6 the term manifold will mean closed connected ori-
ented C 8 manifold. For a connected topological space X we denote

6

URS FRAUENFELDER AND ANDREI PAJITNOV

by λX : X Ñ Bπ1pXq the (homotopy unique) map inducing identity
isomorphism in π1. Let R be one of the rings Z, Q.

For a manifold M we denote by rM sR its fundamental class in
H˚pM, Rq and by JM KR the element pλXq˚prM sq P H˚pBπ1pXq, Rq
(the index R will be omitted if the value of R will be clear from the
context).

Deﬁnition 4.1. A manifold M is called R-essential if JM KR ­“ 0. It
is called R-inessential if JM KR “ 0. We abbreviate Z-inessential to
inessential; a Q-inessential manifold is called also rationally inessen-
tial. Similar convention will be used for Z-essential and Q-essential
manifolds.

The property of being essential is closely related to the geometry
of the manifold. The main theorem of [8] establishes the following
inequality for any essential manifold of dimension n:

(1)

sys1pM q 6 Cn`V olM˘ 1

n

where sys1pM q is the systolic constant, that is, the lower bound of
the lengths of closed non contractible curves in M .

Later on it turned out that the property of being inessential is also
closely related to the geometry of the underlying manifold, namely
to its macroscopic dimension and to the existence of a riemannian
metric of positive scalar curvature.

Deﬁnition 4.2. A manifold M has macroscopic dimension less than

dimensional polyhedron X such that the inverse images of points of

k if its universal covering ĂM admits a map φ : ĂM Ñ X to a k-
x are uniformly bounded. (Here ĂM is endowed with a Riemannian

metric, induced from M .) The least number k such that M has
macroscopic dimension 6 k is called macroscopic dimension of M ,
and denoted by dimmd M . If dimmd M “ dim M the manifold M is
called macroscopically large, if not, it is called macroscopically small.

Gromov conjectured [10] that a compact manifold M n with a Rie-
mannian metric of positive scalar curvature satisﬁes the inequality
dimmd M 6 dim M ´ 2.

This conjecture is still open (as well as its weaker version afﬁrming
that a manifold with a Riemannian metric of positive scalar curva-
ture is macroscopically small). Inessential manifolds provide a large
source of examples (and counterexamples) to questions related to
the Gromov conjecture above.

FINITENESS OF HOFER-ZEHNDER CAPACITY AND LOOP SPACE HOMOLOGY

7

It is proved in [4] that a rationally inessential manifold M is macro-
scopically small if the fundamental group of M is a duality group of
cohomological dimension not equal to n`1. Dranishnikov [5] conjec-
tured that every rationally inessential manifold M n is macroscopi-
cally small. This conjecture was disproved by M. Marcinkowski, who
constructed a rationally inessential macroscopically large manifold.
The fundamental group of this manifold is a ﬁnite index subgroup
of a Coxeter group.
It would be interesting to have more informa-
tion about the class of groups G for which any rationally inessential
manifold M with π1pM q « G is macroscopically small.

In the two next sections we establish a relation between the inessen-

tiality property and Hofer-Zehnder capacity for symplectic mani-
folds.

5. SOME PROPER TIES OF INESSENTIAL MANIFOLDS

Let us begin with some examples of inessential manifolds.
1.

If G is an R-acyclic group (that is, H˚pG, Rq “ 0) then any
manifold M with π1pM q « G is obviously R-inessential. The class of
Q-acyclic groups is rather large, it includes for example all Coxeter
groups (by a theorem of M. Davis, see [6], p. 302). There are also
many Z-acyclic groups, for example the famous Higman group [13]
given by the following presentation

xxi | xi`1 “ rxi, xi`1sy,

i P Z{4Z.

By a theorem of Baumslag, Dyer, and Miller [3] any group can be
embedded into a Z-acyclic group.

2.

Let cdG denote the cohomological dimension of G. If dim M ą
cdπ1pM q, then M is clearly inessential.
In particular, this is the
case if π1pM q is free, and dim M ą 1. Same for manifolds M with
dim M > 3, if π1pM q is a knot group.

Here are some general properties of inessential manifolds. (Recall

that R stands for Z or Q.)

Proposition 5.1. Let M be an R-inessential manifold, and N be any
manifold of dimension ą 1. Then M ˆ N is inessential.

Proof. Let m “ dim M, n “ dim N , put G “ π1pM q, H “ π1pN q.

We have

JM ˆ N K “ JM K b JN K

(using the K ¨unneth identiﬁcation of HmpBGq b
R

HnpBHq with a sub-

module of Hm`npBpG ˆ Hqq). The proposition follows.

(cid:3)

8

URS FRAUENFELDER AND ANDREI PAJITNOV

Proposition 5.2. Let M, N be manifolds of same dimension > 3.

Then M N is R-inessential if and only if both M and N are R-
inessential.

Proof. Let m “ dim M . Observe that Bπ1pM N q „ BpG ˚ Hq „
BG _ BH so HmpBπ1pM N qq « HmpBGq ‘ HM pBHq. The class
JM N K equals JM K ‘ JN K with respect to this decomposition. The
proposition follows.
(cid:3)

Proposition 5.3. Let M, N be manifolds of same dimension; assume
that M is Q-inessential. Assume that there is a map M Ñ N of
non-zero degree. Then N is Q-inessential.

Proof. Obvious.

(cid:3)

Proposition 5.4. Let p : M Ñ N be a ﬁnite covering of manifolds.
Then N is Q-inessential if and only if M is Q-inessential.

Proof. The if part follows from the previous proposition. To prove
the only if part, let H “ π1pM q, G “ π1pN q. The homomorphism H Ñ
G induced by P is injective, and we have a commutative diagram,
where both vertical arrows are ﬁnite coverings:

(2)

M

p

N

λM

/ BH

p1

λN

/ BG

Recall the transfer homomorphism T : H˚pN q Ñ H˚pM q deﬁned on

the chain level by the formula T pσq “ ř γ where the sum ranges over

all lifts γ of the singular simplex σ to M . The homomorphism p˚ ˝ T
equals identity in H˚pN q. We have also rN s “ k ¨ p˚prM sq, where K
is the degree of the covering, and rM s “ T prN sq. The commutativ-
ity of the diagram (2) together with the functoriality of the transfer
homomorphism implies that

JM K “ T pJN Kq.

The result follows.

(cid:3)

6. APPLICATIONS TO SYMPLECTIC HOMOLOGY THEORY

Our application of the theory of inessential manifolds to sympectic
homology theory uses Viterbo’s theorem (see [14] and [16], and also
[1] and [15]), which identiﬁes symplectic homology of the cotangent
bundle with homology of the loop space of the underlying manifold.



/


/
FINITENESS OF HOFER-ZEHNDER CAPACITY AND LOOP SPACE HOMOLOGY

9

Let M be a manifold; in the rest of this section all homology and
cohomology groups are with rational coefﬁcients, the free loop space
ΛM is endowed with the canonical rotation action, and we endow
M with the trivial S 1-action. Denote by α the composition

(3)

H˚pM q

γ

/ H S1

˚ pM q

i˚

/ H S1

˚ pΛM q.

Proposition 6.1. If M is Q-inessential, then αprM sq “ 0.

Proof. Denote by pα the composition of the homomorphisms in
cohomology dual to (3). It sufﬁces to prove that pαn : H n

H npM q is equal to 0. To this end observe that H ˚
module over H ˚pBS 1q « Qrus, therefore the map H n
is isomorphic to the projection

S1pΛM q Ñ
S1pM q is a free
S1pM q Ñ H npM q

àiPN

H n´2ipM q Ñ H npM q

and factors through the inclusion

H n

S1pM q 

/ S´1H n

S1pM q

(where the localization is with respect to the multiplicative subset
S “ tuk | k P Nu). Thus it sufﬁces to prove that the following compo-
sition vanishes in degree n
S1pΛM q Ñ S´1H ˚

S1pΛM q Ñ S´1H ˚

S1pM q Ñ H ˚pM q.

H ˚

(4)

The sequence (4) is obviously functorial in M so the classifying map
Φ : M Ñ BG induces a commutative diagram
/ S´1H ˚

/ S´1H ˚

/ H ˚pM q

H ˚

S1pΛM q

S1pΛM q

S1pM q

/ S´1H ˚

S1pΛBGq

S1pΛBGq

H ˚
The second vertical arrow is an isomorphism by T. Goodwillie’s
theorem [7], Corollary V.3.3, therefore the vanishing of the upper
horizontal composition follows from vanishing of the homomorphism
H npBGq Ñ H npM q.
(cid:3)

/ H ˚pBGq

S1pBGq

/ S´1H ˚

Corollary 6.2. Let M be a Q-inessential manifold. Denote by DM
and SM the disk bundle (respectively the sphere bundle) associated
with the tangent bundle of M . Then

iS1
˚ prDM s ˆ rptsq “ 0 P SH S1

pDM q.

Proof. The following diagram is commutative

/
/

/
/
/
/
O
O
/
O
O
/
O
O
/
O
O
10

URS FRAUENFELDER AND ANDREI PAJITNOV

H˚pDM, SM q

/ SH S1

˚ pDM q

T «

V «

H˚pM q

/ H S1

˚ pΛM q

(Here T is the Thom isomorphism, and V is the Viterbo’s isomor-
phism [14].) The bottom arrow sends the fundamental class of M
to zero by Proposition 6.1 therefore the fundamental class of DM is
sent to zero by the top arrow.
(cid:3)
Combining Irie’s theorem with Corollary 6.2 we deduce a result

about the ﬁniteness of HZ-capacity for tangent bundles.

Theorem 6.3. Let M be a Q-inessential manifold. Then the π1-sensitive
HZ capacity of DM is ﬁnite.

(cid:3)

In the next Corollary we gathered some immediate consequences

of Theorem 6.3.

Corollary 6.4. Let M be a manifold. the π1-sensitive HZ capacity of
DM is ﬁnite, if one of the conditions below holds.

1) π1pM q is ﬁnite.
2) π1pM q is Q-acyclic.
3) π1pM q is free and dim M ą 1.
4) M « N1 ˆ N2, where N1, N2 are oriented manifolds, N1 is Q-
(cid:3)

inessential and dim N2 ą 0.

7. ON THE NON-ORIENTED CASE

Our results can be generalized to the case of non-oriented mani-
folds. In this section all manifolds are assumed to be closed and con-
nected, but not necessarily oriented. For such a manifold M there
is a twisted fundamental class rM s P HnpM, w1q, where n “ dim M
and w1 is the local system of groups Q determined by the ﬁrst Stiefel-
Whitney class. Let M Ñ M be the two-fold orientation covering
of M . The transfer homomorphism sends the twisted homology
H˚pM, w1q to the usual homology of M , and we have

(5)

T prM sq “ rM s.

Deﬁnition 7.1. A non-oriented closed connected manifold M is called
Q-inessential, if the image JM K P H˚pBG, w1q of its twisted funda-
mental class rM s equals 0.

Proposition 7.2. Let M be a non-oriented Q-inessential manifold.
Then M is Q-inessential.

/
O
O
/
O
O
FINITENESS OF HOFER-ZEHNDER CAPACITY AND LOOP SPACE HOMOLOGY 11

Proof. Let G “ π1pM q, and H “ Ker pw1 : G Ñ Z{2Zq. We have a

commutative diagram

(6)

M

p

M

λM

/ BH

p1

λM

/ BG

and applying the functoriality of the transfer homomorphism we de-
duce the proposition.
(cid:3)
In order to deduce the ﬁniteness of the HZ-capacities for non-

oriented essential manifolds we will need the following lemma.

Lemma 7.3. Let p : W Ñ V be a ﬁnite covering of symplectic mani-
folds. Then

cHZpW q > cHZpV q, c0

HZpW q > c0

HZpV q.

Proof. Let f be an HZ-admissible function on V . Then f ˝ p is
an HZ-admissible function on W , and the ﬁrst inequality follows.
Similarly, if g is an HZ 0-admissible function on V , the function
g ˝ p is an HZ-admissible function on W (indeed, if the Hamiltonian
vector ﬁeld Xg˝p has a contractible periodic orbit γ of period 6 1 on
W , then p ˝ γ is a contractible periodic orbit for the Hamiltonian
vector ﬁeld Xg). The result follows.
(cid:3)

Corollary 7.4. Let M be a non-oriented Q-inessential manifold. Then
c0
HZpDM q is ﬁnite.
(cid:3)

8. ON SYMPLECTIC INVARIANTS OF UNIT DISC BUNDLES

Let M be a compact closed Riemannian manifold. The tangent
bundle T M has a natural symplectic structure, and the symplectic
invariants of the unit disc bundle DM are therefore invariants of the
Riemannian manifold M . The next proposition follows immediately
from the deﬁnition of the HZ capacity.

Proposition 8.1. Let γpM q denote the minimal length of a non-constant
closed geodesic on M . Then γpM q 6 CHZpDM q.
In particular we
have the following lower bound for the HZ capacity of DM : ρpM q 6
CHZpM q where ρpM q is the injectivity radius of M .
(cid:3)

For a non-simply connected manifold W there is a natural re-
ﬁnement of the deﬁnition of the Hofer-Zehnder capacities (see for
example [12]).



/


/
12

URS FRAUENFELDER AND ANDREI PAJITNOV

Deﬁnition 8.2. Let W be a symplectic manifold. Denote by xπ1pW qy
the set of conjugacy classes of π1pW q. Let Γ Ă xπ1pW qy be any non-
empty subset of π1pW q. A simple function H is called HZ-admissible
with respect to Γ if the Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld XH of H has no
non-constant periodic orbits γ of period 6 1 with rγs P Γ. Denote by
C Γ

HZpW q the upper bound of the set

tmax H | H is HZ ´ admissible with respect to Γu

We have obviously

C Γ

HZpW q > CHZpW q

for any Γ. The π1-sensitive capacity considered above equals by
deﬁnition C t1u

HZpW q.

Conjecture 8.3. Let M be an inessential closed compact manifold.
For any Γ Ă xπ1pM qy the capacity C Γ

HZpDM q is ﬁnite.

The case of essential manifolds is not covered by the methods of
the present paper. However there is an obvious relation between the
HZ capacities and systolic constants of M . Namely, let xπ1pM qy1
denote the set of all non-trivial conjugacy classes of the fundamen-
tal group. Recall that the lower bound of lengths of closed non-
contractible curves in M is denoted by sys1pM q. We have obviously

sys1pM q 6 CHZ`DM, xπ1pM qy1˘.

In view of Gromov’s inequality (1) it is natural to suggest the follow-
ing conjecture

Conjecture 8.4. Let M n be an essential closed Riemannian manifold
of dimension n. Then

`V olM˘ 1

n 6 Dn ¨ CHZ`DM, xπ1pM qy1˘,

where Dn depend only on n.

9. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The ﬁrst author would like to thank the City University of Hong
Kong and the Universit´e de Nantes for the excellent research at-
mosphere during the visits March 2015 and November 2015. The
second author is grateful to the City University of Hong Kong and to
the University of Augsburg for the warm hospitality during the visits
(March 2015 and May 2015) that allowed us to start and helped to
continue our work.

FINITENESS OF HOFER-ZEHNDER CAPACITY AND LOOP SPACE HOMOLOGY 13

REFERENCES

[1] A. Abbondandolo, M. Schwarz On the Floer homology of cotangent bundles,

Comm. Pure Appl. Math. 59 (2006), 254316.

[2] P. Albers, U. Frauenfelder, A. Oancea, Local systems on the free loop space and

ﬁniteness of the Hofer-Zehnder capacity, arXiv:1509.02455.

[3] G. Baumslag, E. Dyer, C. Miller, On the integral homology of ﬁnitely-presented

groups, Topology, v. 22(1983), 27–46.

[4] A. Dranishnikov, On the macroscopic dimension of rationally inessential man-

ifolds, Funct. Anal. Appl. 45 (2011), no. 3, 187–191.

[5] A. Dranishnikov, On Gromovs positive scalar curvature conjecture for duality

groups, J. Topol. Anal. 6, 3 (2014), 397419.

[6] M. Davis, The geometry and topology of Coxeter groups, Princeton University

Press, 2008.

[7] G. Goodwillie, Cyclic homology, derivations, and the free loop space, Topology

24 (1985), no. 2, 187215.

[8] M. Gromov, Filling Riemannian manifolds, J. Differential Geom. v. 18 (1983),

no. 1, 1-147.

[9] M. Gromov, Pseudoholomorphic curves in symplectic manifolds, Invent. Math.

82, (1985), 307–347.

[10] M. Gromov, Positive curvature, macroscopic dimension, spectral gaps and
higher signatures, Functional analysis on the eve of the 21st century, Vol.
II (New Brunswick, NJ, 1993), 1213, Progr. Math., 132, Birkh¨auser Boston,
Boston, MA, 1996.

[11] H. Hofer, E. Zehnder, Symplectic Invariants and Hamiltonian Dynamics,

Birkh¨auser (1994).

[12] K. Irie, K. Irie, Hofer-Zehnder capacity of unit disk cotangent bundles and the

loop product, J. Eur. Math. Soc. (JEMS), 16(11), 2477 – 2497 (2014).

[13] G. Higman, A ﬁnitely generated inﬁnite simple group, Journal of the London

Mathematical Society. Second Series 26 (1), 1951, 6164.

[14] C. Viterbo, Functors and Computations in Floer homology with Applications, II
[15] D. Salamon and J. Weber, Floer homology and the heat ﬂow, GAFA 16 no.5

(2006), 10501138.

[16] C. Viterbo, Generating functions in symplectic topology and applications, Pro-

ceedings ICM 94, Z ¨urich (Basel), vol. 1, Birkh¨auser, 1995, pp. 537547.

URS FRAUENFELDER, UNIVERSIT ¨AT AUGSBURG, INSTITUT F ¨UR MATHEMATIK, UNI-

VERSIT ¨ATSSTRASSE 14, 86159 AUGSBURG, GERMANY

E-mail address: urs.frauenfelder@math.uni-augsburg.de

ANDREI PAJITNOV, LABORATOIRE MATH ´EMATIQUES JEAN LERAY UMR 6629, UNI-
VERSIT ´E DE NANTES, FACULT ´E DES SCIENCES, 2, RUE DE LA HOUSSINI `ERE, 44072,
NANTES, CEDEX

E-mail address: andrei.pajitnov@univ-nantes.fr

