Leidenfrost drops on a heated liquid pool

L. Maquet,∗ B. Darbois-Texier, A. Duchesne, M. Brandenbourger, and S. Dorbolo

GRASP, CESAM, Universit´e de Li`ege, Li`ege, Belgium

B. Sobac,† A. Rednikov, and P. Colinet

TIPs, Universit´e libre de Bruxelles, C.P. 165/67, Brussels, Belgium

(Dated: March 22, 2016)

Abstract

We show that a volatile liquid drop placed at the surface of a non-volatile liquid pool warmer

than the boiling point of the drop can experience a Leidenfrost eﬀect even for vanishingly small

superheats. Such an observation points to the importance of the substrate roughness, negligible

in the case considered here, in determining the threshold Leidenfrost temperature. A theoretical

model based on the one proposed by Sobac et al. [Phys. Rev. E 90, 053011 (2014)] is developed

in order to rationalize the experimental data. The shapes of the drop and of the substrate are

analyzed. The model notably provides scalings for the vapor ﬁlm thickness. For small drops, these

scalings appear to be identical to the case of a Leidenfrost drop on a solid substrate. For large

drops, in contrast, they are diﬀerent and no evidence of chimney formation has been observed either

experimentally or theoretically in the range of drop sizes considered in this study. Concerning the

evaporation dynamics, the radius is shown to decrease linearly with time whatever the drop size,

which diﬀers from the case of a Leidenfrost drop on a solid substrate. For high superheats, the

characteristic lifetime of the drops versus the superheat follows a scaling law that is derived from

the model but, at low superheats, it deviates from this scaling by rather saturating.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
2
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

2
v
1
2
8
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗ lmaquet@doct.ulg.ac.be
† bsobac@ulb.ac.be

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

The intense evaporation of a drop close to a hot surface can generate an insulating vapor

layer which prevents boiling and over which the drop levitates, thereby featuring a high

mobility [1, 2]. This so-called Leidenfrost eﬀect was studied extensively in the middle of

19th century by the pharmacist Boutigny who considered Leidenfrost drops as a new state

of matter called the spheroidal state and deemed it essential to describe the birth of the

universe [3]. Far from being crucial in this regard, there is a renewal of interest nowadays for

the Leidenfrost eﬀect because of self-propelling behaviors [4], nanofabrication possibilities [5]

and chemical reactor capabilities [6]. Moreover, the Leidenfrost eﬀect still leaves several

important questions open such as that of the friction force experienced by these drops [7].

The levitation occurs when the temperature of the substrate exceeds a given temperature.

The prediction of this critical Leidenfrost temperature is still an open question too, and

even its deﬁnition is still subject to debate. Indeed, it is sometimes deﬁned as the minimal

temperature of the substrate for the Leidenfrost eﬀect to occur [8], or as the temperature

for which the lifetime of the drops is the largest [2]. Recently, it has been proved that the

texturation of solid surfaces strongly impacts the value of the Leidenfrost temperature [9].

Vakarelski et al. showed that when a hot textured and superhydrophobic sphere is immersed
in a water pool at 22◦C, a vapour ﬁlm is maintained until the sphere reaches the pool
temperature without transition to nucleate boiling [10]. Kwon et al. reported that sparse

surface textures increase the Leidenfrost point because they promote droplet wetting via

capillary wicking [11]. Finally, Kruse and coworkers found that the Leidenfrost point can be
increased by 175◦C thanks to a femtosecond laser surface processing [12]. Thus, should one
want to favor the Leidenfrost eﬀect, the ideal substrate that one could imagine is molecularly

smooth. Accordingly, a liquid substrate appears to be a good candidate. Few studies already

considered the problem of a drop levitating in a Leidenfrost state above a hot liquid pool.

However, these studies were restricted to liquid nitrogen drops [13, 14] and none of them

were focused on the question of the critical Leidenfrost temperature under these conditions.

In this paper, we are concerned with a Leidenfrost drop placed above a hot liquid pool.

Our goal is to broadly tackle this problem by addressing the question of the critical Leiden-

frost temperature in this situation and providing a better understanding as for the interaction

between the drop and its liquid substrate. In parallel, the diﬀerences between liquid and

2

Figure 1. An ethanol drop with red dye levitates in the Leidenfrost state over a pool of silicone
oil V20. The drop radius is R = 1.2 mm and the pool is at Tp = 80◦C while the boiling point of
ethanol is Tsat = 78◦C. (Image credit: Florence Cavagnon)

solid substrates will be highlighted as far as the Leidenfrost eﬀect is concerned.

First, we describe the experimental setup and the developed model in section II. In sec-

tion III, the main results obtained are presented, the experimental ﬁndings being confronted

with the model. Then, in section IV, some details about the limitations of our analysis as

well as the associated perspectives are discussed. Finally, conclusions are summarized in

section V.

II. METHODS: EXPERIMENTAL AND THEORETICAL

A. Experimental

The experimental setup is the following: a drop of a radius R (as viewed from above) is

released above a hot pool of another liquid (see Fig. 2 and supplementary material). The

pool is maintained at a temperature Tp thanks to a heating plate, a PID controller and a

thermocouple that is immersed in the pool close to its surface. The temperature uncertainty

is ±2◦C coming from the precision of the device and small variations that can occur during

the evaporation of one drop. The boiling point of the drop is denoted as Tsat. The diﬀerence

between the temperature of the pool and the boiling temperature of the liquid of the drop
is denoted as ∆T = Tp − Tsat and will always be positive throughout this paper. Thus, ∆T
will be called the superheat. Experiments were carried out with drops released at ambient

temperature and at Tsat, showing no diﬀerence of behavior except a better stability at low

3

superheats.

capillary length of the drop as (cid:96)cd =

g is the gravity acceleration.

The density, surface tension and dynamic viscosity are denoted respectively by ρd, γd and

µd for the drop liquid and ρp, γp and µp for the liquid of the pool. Thus, we introduce the

(cid:112)

γd/ρdg and that of the pool as (cid:96)cp =(cid:112)γp/ρpg, where

The study focuses on ethanol drops over silicone oil pools. Indeed, silicone oil enables
heating the pool up to roughly 200◦C and is practically non-volatile as compared to other
liquids at these temperatures. The boiling temperature of ethanol is Tsat = 78◦C. That
allows us to work with superheats ranging from 0◦C to about 100◦C. The depth, length and
width of the liquid pool are more than ten times larger than the drop radius and can be

thus considered as practically inﬁnite. Indeed, no diﬀerence in behavior has been observed

for diﬀerent sizes of the container as soon as the depth remains larger than the deformation

of the pool surface.

Two types of measurements were taken. First, we captured the deformations of the

surface of the pool from the side with a telecentric lens. These experiments validate the

model developped hereafter. Second, we recorded the maximum radius of the drop from the

top as a function of time in order to quantify the evaporation rate of the drops.

Figure 2. Schematic illustration of a Leidenfrost drop levitating on a liquid pool. Figure (a) gives
a large view while ﬁgure (b) shows a zoom on the region of the vapor ﬁlm.

4

rzliquid	  dropbottom	  of	  the	  droptop	  of	  the	  dropliquid	  poolRh(r)e(r)Uvrz(cid:142)(cid:151)(cid:132)(cid:148)(cid:139)(cid:133)(cid:131)(cid:150)(cid:139)(cid:145)(cid:144)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:426)(cid:145)(cid:153)TppatchingJTi	  =	  Tsatstatic	  shapeliquid	  poolliquid	  dropsee	  below(h*	  ,	  R*)(e*	  ,	  R*)(a)(b)vaporB. Theoretical

In order to model the experimental phenomena, we consider an axisymmetric drop lev-

itating above a hot liquid pool (see Fig. 2). The liquid pool is assumed to be non-volatile

and isothermally maintained at a temperature Tp larger than the boiling point of the drop

Tsat. The size of the drop is measured by its maximum radius R, as seen from above. The

vertical position z of the drop bottom and pool interfaces, which are functions of the radial

coordinate r, are denoted as h(r) and e(r), respectively. The diﬀerence of these two quanti-
ties, namely the thickness of the vapor ﬁlm, is denoted hf (r) = h(r) − e(r). The level z = 0
is chosen at the unperturbed liquid pool surface, expected to be attained far away from
the drop, and hence e → 0 as r → ∞. Notationwise, note that here and throughout this
paper, the presence or the absence of a tilde is meant to distinguish between dimensionless

and dimensional quantities, respectively. Lengths are made dimensionless by the capillary

length of the drop liquid (cid:96)cd, whereas the excess pressure quantities to be introduced below

are adimensionalized with the scale γd/(cid:96)cd = ρdg(cid:96)cd. As the evaporation of Leidenfrost drops

is typically long compared to thermal and viscous relaxation times, we are looking for steady

shapes only (quasi-steady approximation).

Concerning the shape of the drop, the model proposed is based on the one presented in

Sobac et al. [15]. Two diﬀerent regions are distinguished. The upper part of the drop, above

the vapor ﬁlm (beyond the patching point shown in Fig. 2), is assumed to be an equilibrium

shape, for which the Laplace pressure γdκ (with κ the curvature of the drop surface) locally
balances (up to a constant) the hydrostatic pressure −ρdgz.
simply reads

In dimensionless form, this

˜κ + (˜z − ˜ztop) = ˜κtop ,

(1)

where ˜κtop is the dimensionless curvature at the top of the drop (˜z = ˜ztop), which is here

used as a free parameter controlling the drop size. For a given ˜κtop, numerically integrating

this diﬀerential equation (˜κ being a function of the drop shape and its derivatives) from the

symmetry axis yields the corresponding equilibrium shape and in particular the value of the
maximum radius ˜R = ˜R(˜κtop). Note that the choice of ˜ztop aﬀects only the vertical position
of the resulting equilibrium shape, but not the shape itself or the value of ˜R (which depends

only upon ˜κtop). This is important since the value of ˜ztop remains unspeciﬁed at this stage

5

and is eventually determined only together with the overall shape of the Leidenfrost drop.

This “upper equilibrium drop” solution is assumed to be valid up to a point located at ˜r =
˜R∗, where non-equilibrium eﬀects of evaporation and viscous pressure losses in the vapor ﬂow
start to progressively come into play. In this “vapor layer region” 0 < ˜r < ˜R∗, the thickness

of the vapor ﬁlm and its slopes are small enough so as to use the lubrication approximation.

Furthermore, the slopes of the drop bottom and pool interfaces are here both considered to

be small. The gas itself is assumed to be composed of pure vapor (no air), incompressible

and its properties are taken as constant. Then, ignoring possible motions inside the drop

(following [16]), the excess pressure (over the ambient one) in the vapor ﬁlm is found from
the balance of forces normal to the drop surface as Pv = γdκtop + ρdg(ztop − h) − γdκ. This
excess pressure drives a Stokes ﬂow with a volumetric ﬂux (cid:126)qv = − (cid:126)∇Pv
(h − e)3, where µv is
the vapor dynamic viscosity. Note the coeﬃcient 1/12 in the mobility factor, reﬂecting of

12µv

no-slip conditions imposed at both the drop and liquid pool interfaces. Assuming that heat

is only transferred by conduction across the ﬁlm, the local evaporation ﬂux at the interface
−1λv∆T /(h − e), where λv is the vapor thermal conductivity, L is
is expressed as J = L
the latent heat of vaporization, and ∆T = Tp − Tsat is as before the superheat. Finally, the
vapor mass conservation under the lubrication hypothesis reads (cid:126)∇· (cid:126)qv −J /ρv = 0 (assuming
quasisteadiness), where ρv is the vapor density. Combining these results, scaling all lengths

with (cid:96)cd and assuming the axial symmetry yields the following equation :

(cid:18)
˜r(˜h − ˜e)3 ∂
∂˜r
with an evaporation number ˜E deﬁned by

∂
∂˜r

1
12

1
˜r

(cid:17)(cid:19)
(cid:16)˜h + ˜κ

−

˜E

(˜h − ˜e)

= 0 ,

As for the curvature ˜κ, it is here left as a full-form expression

˜E =

λvµv∆T
γdρv(cid:96)cdL

.

(cid:18)

(cid:17)2(cid:19)
(cid:16) ∂˜h
(cid:17)2(cid:19)3/2

∂ ˜r

∂˜h
∂ ˜r

,

∂2˜h
∂ ˜r2 + 1

˜r

(cid:18)

˜κ =

1 +

(cid:16) ∂˜h

∂ ˜r

1 +

(2)

(3)

(4)

with no small-slope simpliﬁcations applied. The reason is that such a full expression proves

to eventually provide for a smoother numerical matching with the upper part of the drop.

6

Appart from the size ˜R of the drop, ˜E is an other parameter of the dimensionless problem
and depends on the ﬂuid properties and on the superheat ∆T = Tp − Tsat. While the liquid
properties are taken at Tsat, the vapor properties are here evaluated at the mean temperature

of the vapor ﬁlm, (Tp + Tsat)/2. Four boundary conditions are needed to supplement Eqs (2)
and (4): symmetry conditions at ˜r = 0, i.e. ˜h(cid:48)(0) = 0 and ˜κ(cid:48)(0) = 0, while at ˜r = ˜R∗ the
solution must match with the earlier obtained upper equilibrium shape of the drop, i.e. we
require the continuity of ˜h(cid:48)(r) and of ˜κ(r). The continuity of ˜h(r) itself here merely amounts
to ﬁnding the appropriate vertical shift of the upper equilibrium shape, i.e. to determining

the value of ˜ztop (cf. above).

The liquid pool surface shape is assumed to be predominantly governed by a balance

between hydrostatic and capillary pressures, as well as by the pressure exerted by the vapor

ﬁlm. In dimensionless form, this reads

∂2˜e
∂˜r2 +

1
˜r

∂˜e
∂˜r −

(cid:96)2
cd
(cid:96)2
cp

˜e =

γd
γp

˜Pv ,

(5)

where the curvature expression is here written assuming small slopes. The dimensionless
excess pressure in the vapor ﬁlm is given by ˜Pv = ˜κtop + ˜ztop− ˜h− ˜κ at ˜r < ˜R∗. On the other
hand, we expect ˜Pv = 0 at ˜r (cid:62) ˜R∗. Note that ˜Pv thereby deﬁned is actually continuous at
˜r = ˜R∗. Indeed, ˜h and ˜κ are continuous at ˜r = ˜R∗ (see the boundary conditions above), and
˜κtop + ˜ztop − ˜h− ˜κ must vanish where the equilibrium shape is attached, quite in accordance
with Eq.(1). For ˜r > ˜R∗, Eq.(5) can thus be simpliﬁed to
cp)˜e = 0,
with an analytical solution ˜e = ˜CK0
satisfying the condition at inﬁnity. Here K0
is the modiﬁed Bessel function of the second kind and ˜C is an unknown coeﬃcient to be
determined. In the interval 0 < ˜r < ˜R∗, the following boundary conditions are used to solve
Eq.(5) : the symmetry condition at ˜r = 0, i.e. ˜e(cid:48)(0) = 0, while at ˜r = ˜R∗ the solution must
match with the above analytical solution, i.e. we require the continuity of ˜e(r) and of ˜e(cid:48)(r).
Note that it is indeed three boundary conditions that are needed here for the second-order
diﬀerential equation, for ˜C is also an unknown.

(cid:16) ∂2 ˜e

(cid:16) (cid:96)cd

− ((cid:96)2

∂ ˜r2 + 1

˜r

∂˜e
∂ ˜r

cd/(cid:96)2

(cid:17)

(cid:17)

˜r

(cid:96)cp

The problem given in the interval 0 < ˜r < ˜R∗ by Eqs (2), (4), (5) with the formulated

boundary conditions is discretized in a standard way by second-order ﬁnite diﬀerences on
a uniform grid. The resulting nonlinear algebraic system of equations for the values ˜h, ˜κ,
˜e at the grid points as well as the values of ˜ztop and ˜C is solved by the Newton-Raphson

7

method. It is checked a posteriori that the choice of the patching point ˜R∗ has no signiﬁcant

inﬂuence on the results.

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

A. First observations

If we release a drop of ethanol (boiling point Tsat = 78◦C) on an oil pool at Tp < Tsat,
it contacts the surface of the pool and form a liquid lens. However, if the temperature of

the pool is above Tsat, a drop like the one shown in Fig. 1 can be observed. This ﬁgure

shows an ethanol drop of 1.2 mm in radius levitating over a pool of silicone oil V20 at
Tp = 79◦C. Erythrosine has been added to the ethanol for a better visualisation. We clearly
distinguish that the drop stands above the deformed surface of a liquid pool and keeps an

almost spherical shape. For larger drops, the deformation of the pool surface is observed

to be more signiﬁcant. Drop radii up to 5 mm could be experimentally reached. However,

for such large drops, even a small perturbation induces their contact with the pool. On

the other hand, the large drops become more stable when larger superheats are used in the

experiments. Over time, the radius of the levitating drop decreases for about a minute.
When the drop becomes very small (∼ 0.3 mm), the drop contacts the liquid pool forming
a liquid lens which quickly evaporates. Thus, the end of life of the drop is diﬀerent between

the cases of a liquid substrate and of a solid substrate for which a take-oﬀ behavior is

observed [17].

Observing the Leidenfrost eﬀect for a superheat as low as ∆T = 1◦C is a feat that is
never seen on a solid substrate but turns out to be possible on a liquid pool. Thus, in this

sense, a liquid seems to oﬀer an ideal substrate to study the Leidenfrost eﬀect.

As in the case of a solid substrate, the drops are highly mobile due to the presence of the

vapor ﬁlm, at least for small-sized drops when the pool deformation is not too strong. Many

parameters seem to inﬂuence such mobility, including the temperature of the pool and the

radius of the drops. We also observe that the drops are repelled by positive menisci that

emerge from the pool, e.g. those induced by the walls of the container. On the contrary,

they are attracted by objects that dig the surface of the pool as cereals do at the surface of

8

a bowl of milk [18]. Thus, when two drops are on the same pool, they attract each other

until coalescing. Sometimes, it happens that such coalescence is delayed for a few seconds.

(a)

(b)

Figure 3.
(a) Side view of the surface of the pool and (b) analysis of the deformations of the
pool surface caused by the levitating drop. This experiment corresponds to an ethanol drop
((cid:96)cd = 1.5 mm) on a silicone oil pool ((cid:96)cp = 1.2 mm) at a temperature Tp = 118◦C. The liquid
density ratio is ρd/ρp = 0.86 and the drop radius R = 1.2 mm.

B. Drop shapes and pool deformation

Figure 3(a) shows a direct experimental observation from the side of the deformation of

the interface of the liquid pool below a drop of a radius R = 1.2 mm. From this type of

images, the proﬁle of the liquid pool interface can be extracted as illustrated in Fig. 3(b) for

the same case (black dashed line). In this same ﬁgure, the proﬁle of the liquid pool surface

predicted by the model is also plotted for comparison. A rather good agreement is observed

between the experiment and the ﬁtting-parameter-free model.

The maximum deformation ecenter of the liquid pool at the symmetry axis is investigated

as a function of the drop radius R. Figure 4 shows that the depth of the pool deformation

monotonically increases with the drop size. Moreover, it highlights a reasonable agreement

between the predictions of the model and the measurements. The measurements shown in

Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 thus validate the model, which then allows obtaining data that are not

accessible through our experiments such as the shape of the vapor layer (necessary to predict

the evaporation rate of the drops).

Figure 5(a) shows typical shapes of ethanol Leidenfrost drops over a silicone oil pool

9

modelexperiment0-0.20.51.01.52.02.53.0˜r˜z-0.1-0.30.0Figure 4. Computed maximum depth of the silicone oil V20 pool deformation as a function of the

ethanol drop size for ˜E = 2.23× 10−7 (Tp = 118◦C for ethanol). The crosses represent experimental

measurements.

Numerically determined shapes of

Figure 5.
(a) ethanol Leidenfrost drops on a liq-
uid pool of silicone oil V20 and (b) their corresponding underlying vapor ﬁlms for ˜R =
0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, 3, 3.5, 4, and ˜E = 2.23 × 10−7 (which corresponds to Tp = 118◦C for

ethanol).

computed by our model for various drop sizes.

It is seen that smaller drops are quasi-

spherical, whereas larger ones are ﬂattened at the top by gravity. This transition between

spheres and puddles occurs when gravity overcomes the capillary forces. Typically, the eﬀect
of gravity on the drop shape can be disregarded when the dimensionless drop radius ˜R is

well smaller than one. At the same time, under the drop, the liquid pool adopts a concave

shape which becomes increasingly marked with the drop size. The larger is the drop size,

the deeper it is immersed in the pool (see also Fig. 4).

(cid:113)
Next, we numerically investigate the shape of the vapor ﬁlm by considering the radial
variation of its thickness ˜hf in Fig. 5(b). ˜hf is deﬁned as the thickness of the vapor ﬁlm
projected perpendicularly to the pool surface as ˜hf = (˜h− ˜e)/
thickness proﬁle forms a pronounced depression near the outer edge, referred to as the neck.

. It is seen that the

2
1 + ( ∂˜e
∂ ˜r )

The vapor layer can thus be view as composed of a vapor pocket at its center, surrounded

10

01234-3-2.5-2-1.5-10 theoryexperimentsR(mm)ecenter(mm)(mm)-0.501234567-7-6-5-4-3-2-10.01.00.5-0.5-1.0-1.5-2.0012340.000.020.040.060.080.100.12˜z˜r˜r˜hfby an annular neck region. The ﬁlm thickness at the neck location appears to increase with
the drop size. For ˜R (cid:46) 1, the pictured proﬁle of the vapor ﬁlm thickness is similar to the
one obtained in the situation of a Leidenfrost drop over a ﬂat substrate [15], which is not

astonishing given the fact that the substrate is only weakly deformed in this case. For these

small drop sizes, the depth of the vapor pocket increases with the drop size. However, for
˜R (cid:38) 1, the depth of the vapor pocket gets slightly lower and then reincreases. For these
large drop sizes, the shape of the vapor pocket proves to become more complex, somewhat

ﬂattened and wavy .

It is important to notice that calculations have been performed until ˜R = 10 and no sign

of chimney formation has been observed until then. In contrast, for Leidenfrost drops over a
ﬂat substrate, the vapor pocket depth is found to increase sharply as ˜R ∼ 4 is approached,
and no meaningful solution is obtained for larger ˜R [15], which must actually correspond

to a chimney formation by a Rayleigh-Taylor-like mechanism [2, 16]. Experimentally, the
maximum drop radius that we could observe on a liquid pool is ˜R = 3.5, which was achieved

by injecting liquid in a drop already stable on the pool. Above that radius, even though

no sign of chimney is observed, the drops tend to contact the surface of the pool due to

perturbations such as capillary waves at their surfaces.

Figure 6. Dimensionless vapor ﬁlm thickness (a) at the neck and (b) at the center as a function of
the evaporation number for various drop sizes. [(c) and (d)] The same versus the drop size for an

evaporation number ˜E = 2.23 × 10−7 (Tp = 118◦C). Dimensional thickness values can be restored

by multiplying by the ethanol capillary length (cid:96)c = 1.56 mm.

11

10−110010110−310−210−11/23/210−1010−910−810−710−610−510−310−210−11/51/41/31/610−1010−910−810−710−610−510−410−310−210−10.20.83.01/310−110010110−310−210−11/4(a)(b)(d)(c)˜R˜R˜E˜E˜R:˜hf,neck˜hf,neck˜hf,center˜hf,centerFigure 6 presents characteristic dimensions of the vapor ﬁlm between the Leidenfrost
drop and the pool surface. It shows the vapor ﬁlm thicknesses at the neck ˜hf,neck and at the
center ˜hf,center as a function of the evaporation number and the drop size. One observes in
Fig. 6(a) that the thickness of the vapor ﬁlm at the neck follows the scaling law ˜hf,neck ∼ ˜E 1/3
whatever the drop size. The same trend and exponent have been found for a Leidenfrost

drop on a solid substrate [15]. The variation of the thickness of the vapor ﬁlm at the neck

with the drop radius shows diﬀerent trends for small and large drops (see Fig. 6(c)). This

observation is also similar to the solid-substrate case. Hence, the nature of the substrate

does not seem to be crucial for the behavior of the thickness of the vapor ﬁlm at the neck.

However, this observation does not hold for its thickness at the center. On the one hand, for
moderately small drop sizes ˜R (cid:46) 1, we notice that the tendencies shown in Fig. 6(b,d) for
the liquid substrate are still roughly the same as those found in [15] for a solid substrate. In
particular, we recover the typical scaling ˜hf,center ∼ ˜E 1/6 and even its drift to larger values
of the exponent (eventually approaching 1/3, the neck exponent) as ˜R is decreased and/or
˜E is increased. For both substrate types, such a scaling variation goes together with the
corresponding one in the vapor ﬁlm shape: the vapor ﬁlm uniformizes throughout, with

its pronounced neck-pocket structure ceasing to exist. On the other hand, for larger sizes,
˜R (cid:38) 1, we have here predicted a drastic change of the geometry of the vapor pocket (see
Fig. 5) between the cases of liquid and solid substrates. Quite correspondingly, for ˜R (cid:38) 1,
the scalings of ˜hf,center in Fig.6(b,d) have nothing to do with those obtained in [15].

To provide some typical dimensional values, for a drop of ethanol of radius R = 1.2 mm

( ˜R = 0.8) over a pool of silicone oil V20 at Tp = 118◦C ( ˜E = 2.23 × 10−7), the thicknesses

of the vapor layer at the center and at the neck are respectively hf,center = 57 µm and

hf,neck = 18 µm.

C. Evaporation dynamics

In order to characterize the drop evaporation process, we experimentally measure the

time evolution of the drop radius over time (as viewed from above), which is illustrated

in Fig. 7. Whereas for small drops data are provided for a wide range of superheats, for

large drops data can only be provided for a narrower range of superheats since they are

rather fragile at low superheats as explained in Sec. III A. Assuming a purely conductive

12

(a)

(b)

Figure 7. Radius of an ethanol drop as a function of time on a pool of silicone oil V20 at diﬀerent
superheats (see legends). Plots (a) and (b) diﬀer by the initial drop radius (small and large,
respectively). The points are experimental data while the continuous lines are the ﬁts by Eq.(6)
with α = 1 (linear trend).

heat transport across the vapor ﬁlm and a lubrication ﬂow in the ﬁlm, previous studies [2]

have reported that the radius of Leidenfrost drop evaporating on a solid substrate follows

the power law

(cid:18)

t
τ

1 −

(cid:19)α

,

R(t) = R0

(6)

Figure 8. Evaporation rate as a function of (a) the superheat for diﬀerent drop sizes and (b) the

drop volume for ˜E = 2.23 × 10−7. (c) Link between the drop radius (as viewed from above) and
the drop volume. Case considered: ethanol Leidenfrost drops over a silicone oil pool (Tp = 118◦C).

where R0 is the initial radius of the drop, τ is the drop characteristic lifetime and α is an

exponent depending on the shape of the drop. For a drop with a radius larger than the

capillary length (cid:96)cd (puddle shape), α = 2, and for drop with a radius smaller than (cid:96)cd

(quasi-spherical shape), α = 0.5.

In our case of a Leidenfrost drop evaporating above a

deformable substrate, the data still appear to be well ﬁtted by Eq.(6). However, α = 1

13

0.00.20.40.60.81.001020304050R(mm)t(s)∆T=3◦C13◦C30◦C42◦C74◦C92◦C012345604080120160200R(mm)t(s)∆T=41◦C61◦C81◦C10-110010110210310-1110-1010-910-810-710-610-5−˙M(kg/s)∆T(◦C)4/5˜R:0.20.83.010-1210-1010-810-610-410-910-810-710-610-52/3V(m3)−˙M(kg/s)(a)(b)10-1210-1010-810-610-410-410-310-210-11/3V(m3)R(m)(c)here whatever the value of the drop radius. Indeed, one sees in Fig. 7 that the drop radius

appears to decrease linearly over time.

(cid:82) R∗

Such a linear behavior is also predicted from our model. An integration of the local

0

evaporation ﬂux J over the vapor ﬁlm (from r = 0 to r = R∗) yields − ˙M = 2πλv∆TL
r dr
h−e ,
M being the mass of the drop and the dot representing the time derivative, and where the
equality to (− ˙M ) implies neglecting contributions from the rest of the drop surface. As it is
seen in this expression and shown in Fig. 8, the evaporation rate depends on the superheat
and on the size of the drop. Figure 8 reveals that − ˙M ∼ ∆T 4/5 whatever the drop size and
− ˙M ∼ V 2/3 where V is the volume of the drop. Since − ˙M = −ρ(cid:96) dV /dt ∼ V 2/3 ∆T 4/5,
we deduce that V (t) (cid:39) V0(1 − t/τ )3 with τ ∼ V 1/3
0 /∆T 4/5. From the relationship R ∼
V 1/3 between the apparent drop radius and the drop volume (see Fig. 8(c)), one therefore
approximately obtains that R (cid:39) R0(1−t/τ )α with α = 1. Indeed, this linear evolution of the
drop radius during the drop evaporation appears to correctly match the experimental results

presented in Fig. 7. One notices that the relation between the drop radius R and its volume

V diﬀers from the case of a solid substrate when the drop radius is larger than (cid:96)cd. Indeed,
in the case of a ﬂat substrate, large drops adopt a puddle shape which veriﬁes V ∝ R2. Such
a diﬀerence results from the fact that large drops over a liquid do not experience saturation

in thickness, but continue to penetrate into the pool as observed in Fig. 5(a).

The ﬁts of the curves R(t), such as shown in Fig. 7, by Eq.(6) allow to estimate the reduced

lifetime of the drops τ /R0, which can serve as an indicator of the evaporation rate of the

drops. The larger is τ /R0, the smaller is the evaporation rate. The variation of this quantity

with the superheat ∆T is shown in Fig. 9. One observes that the larger is the superheat, the

smaller is the reduced drop lifetime, as expected. The relative uncertainties estimated from

the combination of the errors on the initial radius and on the drop characteristic lifetime

are below 1 percent. A continuous line shows the law τ /R0 ∝ ∆T −4/5 which is explained
above. However, the data clearly deviates from this law below ∆T = 30◦C, and saturates
below ∆T = 10◦C.

The reason for the discrepancy at smaller superheats is not completely clear. However,

it may be due to the fact that the evaporation from the upper part of the drop, neglected

in the present analysis against the evaporation through the vapor ﬁlm, becomes nonetheless

relatively signiﬁcant at smaller superheats. This evaporation, on the ﬁrst order, depends

on the gradient of temperature between the temperature of the drop Tsat and the room

14

Figure 9. Reduced drop lifetime τ /R0 as a function of the superheat ∆T for drops of ethanol and

a pool of silicone oil V20. The solid line indicates the scaling law τ /R0 ∼ ∆T −4/5.

temperature, which does not depend on the temperature of the pool and thus explains the

saturation at low superheats. This evaporation can be neglected when the superheat is large

as the evaporation below the drop becomes signiﬁcant, but not when the superheat is low.

In the case of a solid substrate, this saturation cannot be observed because the Leidenfrost

temperature is much higher than the crossover between the two regimes.

The death of a Leidenfrost drop on a hot liquid pool is diﬀerent of the one on a solid

substrate.

Indeed, on a solid substrate, Celestini et al. showed that a Leidenfrost drop

experiences a take-oﬀ at the end of its lifetime [17].

In our case, for a suﬃciently small

radius, the drop is rather observed to contact the pool, as already mentionned. Such a

critical drop radius depends on the superheat and even on the initial radius. For instance,
one observes in Fig. 7(a) that for ∆T = 3◦C, the levitated state exists up to a radius of about
0.4 mm whereas for ∆T = 92◦C, the drop survives in a levitated state up to a really small
radius. However, the data is rather scattered and no quantitative tendency can be found

(see supplementary material). One can notice that for a drop radius around 0.3 mm, and a

superheat of 1◦C ( ˜E (cid:39) 5× 10−9), the thickness of the vapor layer at the neck becomes of the

order of one micron (see Fig. 6) which becomes close to the case where van der Waals forces

comes into play. Finally, the contact leads to a liquid lens that is very quickly evaporated.

15

10100110100τ/R0(s/mm)∆T(◦C)-4/5IV. FURTHER CONSIDERATIONS

The presented model actually treats the substrate as an ideal deformable substrate, i.e.

the pool is assumed to be isothermal and no ﬂow develops inside. As a consequence, the

inﬂuence of the pool viscosity and thermal properties is not considered in the model. There-

fore, even if our model appears to rather correctly capture the main mechanisms of the

phenomenon, it has inherent limitations which will be discused in this section. The only

properties of the pool accounted for in the model are its density and surface tension, whose

inﬂuence will also be investigated.

A. Eﬀects of density and surface tension ratios

Figures 10 present the results of a parametric study highlighting the role of the ratios of

the densities and of the surface tensions of the liquids of the pool and of the drop on the

geometry of the pool and drop surfaces. One notices (Fig. 10) that an increase of ρp/ρd

or γp/γd naturally makes the situation closer to a Leidenfrost drop on a ﬂat surface. Of

course, these changes also alter the evaporation, and, for very high values of ρp/ρd or γp/γd,

the evaporation ﬂux also gets closer to that of a Leidenfrost drop on a ﬂat solid substrate.

However, practically, ﬂuids densities and surface tensions are never suﬃciently diﬀerent to

reach this extreme case. On the contrary, a decrease of these ratios leads to an increase of

the pool deformation and thus a deeper immersion of the drop inside the pool.

Interestingly, large drops deeply immersed with a virtually ﬂat surface at their top are

also encountered in the case of delayed coalesce of large ﬂoating oil drop over a pool of the

same liquid [19]. In our study, for the case of the drops that are deeply immersed, we do not

observe drops with their upper part fully below z = 0, either experimentally or numerically.

As an example of drops with a deeper immersion, we released drops of HFE–7100 over the
same silicone oil pool as previously ( γd
= 0.65). The largest drops we were
γp
able to observe experimentally had a radius ˜R (cid:39) 2, and they were always emerging above
the pool base level.

= 0.7 and ρp
ρd

16

Figure 10. Inﬂuence of the ratios of the liquid densities (a) and surface tensions (b) on Leidenfrost

shapes for a drop of a size ˜R = 3 with ˜E = 2.23 × 10−7 (corresponding to a drop of ethanol over a
pool of silicone oil V20 at Tp = 118◦C).

B.

Inﬂuence of the pool viscosity

We performed experiments similar to the case presented above with drops of ethanol on

hot pools of silicone oils of various viscosities. A Leidenfrost eﬀect has been observed for
a dynamic viscosity of the pool µp up to 50 mPa · s. In contrast, we could never observe a
Leidenfrost eﬀect for drops on a hot pool of silicone oil with a dynamic viscosity µp larger
than 150 mPa · s unless the liquid of the drop is heated at its boiling temperature before
being deposited on the surface. This absence of Leidenfrost eﬀect for highly viscous liquid

substrates and the fact that the preheating helps the drops to stay in the Leidenfrost state

strongly suggest that the convection in the pool is somehow important for the Leidenfrost

state to be maintained. Supposedly, the convection in the pool may not be suﬃcient to

17

121/10001/1001/10γd/γp:5011/1.95ρp/ρd:(a)(b)˜z˜r˜z˜rρp/ρd=1.20γd/γp=0.87prevent the cooling of its surface under the drop for highly viscous oils. In Fig. 11(a), we
plot the maximum lifetime τm observed for ethanol drops (initial radius R0 (cid:39) 0.9 mm),
i.e.
the maximum of the lifetimes of three diﬀerent drops in the same conditions, as a

function of the superheat ∆T for diﬀerents types of oil. This maximum lifetime decreases

monotonically as the superheat increases. We also see that the curves are quite similar

except for the substrate made of silicone oil V1.5.

(a)

(b)

Figure 11. (a) Maximum lifetime of ethanol Leidenfrost drops (R0 = 0.9 mm) on several silicone oil
pools as a function of the temperature of these substrates. (b) Associated Leidenfrost temperature
TL of these drops as a function of the dynamic viscosity µp of the oil of the pool at the Leidenfrost
temperature. The continuous and dashed lines represent the boiling temperature of the ethanol
and its Leidenfrost point on an aluminum substrate respectively [20]. The hatched blue zone is the
zone where it is hard to ﬁnd any liquid and the hatched pink zone is the zone where we did not
observe stable Leidenfrost drops.

In Fig. 11(b), we plot the associated Leidenfrost temperature TL for each of the pool

liquids used as a function of their dynamic viscosity µp. We also indicate the boiling temper-

ature (solid line) as well as the Leidenfrost temperature for an ethanol drop on an aluminum
substrate (dashed line), i.e. 158◦C [20]. One observes that the Leidenfrost temperature is
very low and practically does not vary in the range of the pool viscosities used. The hatched
blue zone is the zone where very few liquids exist (e.g. liquid nitrogen, µ = 0.018 mPa · s).
In addition, most of these liquids have a low boiling point and cannot be used as a heated

substrate for a Leidenfrost drop. The hatched zone in pink is the zone where we hardly

observe any Leidenfrost drop. Therefore, we see that the Leidenfrost temperature is very

stable for ethanol in large range of substrates viscosities.

18

10.0110100τm(s)∆T(◦C)550SiliconoilV1.5SiliconoilV10SiliconoilV20SiliconoilV50SiliconoilV100040801201602000.11101001000TL(◦C)µp(mPa·s)C. Marangoni eﬀect

Depositing a Leidenfrost drop over the surface of the pool leads to a local alteration of

the heat transfer, which may result in a Marangoni ﬂow in the pool. A similar phenomenon

has been extensively studied by Savino et al. in the case of a drop deposited on a slightly
hotter pool (about 10◦C) [21]. They proved that the Marangoni ﬂow can delay the drop
coalescence for a few seconds.

However, in the case studied by Savino et al., the levitation never persists when the
superheat reaches less than 3◦C. Furthermore, the coalescence can be delayed in the best
case for 30 s, while our large drops can levitate up to 200 s.

Moreover, experiments that are not shown here show that there exists ﬂows in the pool

under the drop. However, depending on the liquid (ethanol or HFE–7100), the ﬂow at the

surface of the pool is directed either towards the drop or away from it (resp.). Thus, there

exist cases in which the Marangoni eﬀect in the pool is not suﬃcient to increase the pressure

under the drop (e.g. HFE–7100) and cannot be responsible for the levitation. However, as

there exists some ﬂows in the pool, further study is needed to fully clarify their impact on

the phenomenon.

Considering these facts and the satisfying agreement between our model and the exper-

imental data, the full consideration of the impacts of the Marangoni eﬀect is beyond the

scope of this paper, but should be consider in further studies.

V. CONCLUSION

We have experimentally and theoretically studied Leidenfrost drops placed over a hot

liquid pool and stressed the importance of the nature of the substrate on the Leidenfrost

eﬀect. We showed experimentally that over a pool, a Leidenfrost state is possible as soon as

the liquid of the pool is just hotter than the drop boiling point, with no apparent Leidenfrost

threshold. This is at least partly due to the fact that a liquid substrate has no roughness

unlike the solid ones. The early apparition of a Leidenfrost eﬀect on a liquid pool is a

phenomenon which is of primary importance regarding the extinction of pool ﬁres and the

spray cooling of hot baths. Experiments have also revealed that the ﬁnal stage of the drop

life is quite diﬀerent over the liquid pool and solid substrates:

instead of a take-oﬀ over

19

the latter, a suﬃciently small drop simply contacts onto the former. The maximum depth

of the pool surface deformation predicted by the lubrication-type model is in agreement

with measurements. Scaling laws concerning the shape of the vapor ﬁlm are also predicted.

Another diﬀerence between liquid and solid substrates, established theoretically, is that over

the former no chimney formation is predicted for relatively large Leidenfrost drops of the

size for which it is deﬁnitely expected over the latter, i.e. above 4 times the drop capillary-

length. The dynamics of evaporation of these drops has been studied and the developed

model yields a reasonable agreement with experiments except for small superheats for which

we show that the evaporation through the vapor ﬁlm ceases to be the predominant one. The

nature of the substrate also changes the shape of large drops, saturating in height over a

solid substrate (puddles) but not over a liquid one, which is due to deformation of the pool

surface itself under the weight of the drop. The eﬀect of the ratios of the surface tensions

and of the densities of the liquids involved is also tackled and these ratios are seen to lead

to a more solid-like case at some extremes or to a more liquid-like case. This study leaves

several questions open such as the nature of the death of Leidenfrost droplets over a liquid

substrate and the inﬂuence of the viscosity of the pool and of the Marangoni ﬂows therein.

Finally, we hope that this work also opens the way to further studies such as the impact of

volatile drops on a hot pool or the particular mobility of these drops and ways to control or

exploit it.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research has been funded by the Interuniversity Attraction Pole Programme (IAP

7/38 MicroMAST) initiated by the Belgian Science Policy Oﬃce. MB, SD and PC gratefully

acknowledge ﬁnancial support of Fonds de la Recherche Scientiﬁque–FNRS (the ﬁrst for his

FRIA grant, the last two for their Senior Research Associate Positions), and ESA-BELSPO

(PRODEX projects). AD thanks University of Li`ege through the ARC Supercool grant for

the ﬁnancial support of this work. This research was also carried out under COST Action

MP1106’s umbrella.

[1] J. Leidenfrost, De aquae communis nonnullis qualitatibus tractatus (Ovenius, 1756).

20

[2] A.-L. Biance, C. Clanet, and D. Qu´er´e, Phys. Fluids 15, 1632 (2003).

[3] P. Boutigny, Nouvelle branche de physique: ou, ´Etudes sur les corps `a l’´etat sph´ero¨ıdal (Li-

brairie Scientiﬁque-Industrielle de L. Mathias, 1847).

[4] G. Dupeux, M. Le Merrer, G. Lagubeau, C. Clanet, S. Hardt, and D. Qu´er´e, Europhys. Lett.

96, 58001 (2011).

[5] R. Abdelaziz, D. Disci-Zayed, M. Hedayati, J.-H. P¨ohls, A. Zillohu, B. Erkartal, V. Chakravad-

hanula, V. Duppel, L. Kienle, and M. Elbahri, Nat. Commun. 4 (2013).

[6] B. Schwenzer, MRS Bull. 39, 7 (2014).

[7] D. Qu´er´e, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 45, 197 (2013).

[8] J. D. Bernardin and I. Mudawar, J. Heat Transfer 121, 894 (1999).

[9] H. Kim, B. Truong, J. Buongiorno, and L.-W. Hu, Appl. Phys. Lett. 98, 083121 (2012).

[10] I. Vakarelski, N. Patankar, J. Marston, D. Chan, and S. Thoroddsen, Nature 489, 274 (2012).

[11] H. Kwon, J. Bird, and K. Varanasi, Appl. Phys. Lett. 103, 201601 (2013).

[12] C. Kruse, T. Anderson, C. Wilson, C. Zuhlke, D. Alexander, G. Gogos, and S. Ndao, Langmuir

29, 9798 (2013).

[13] H. Kim, J. Korean Phys. Soc. 49 (2006).

[14] A. Snezhko, E. Jacob, and I. Aranson, New J. Phys. 10, 043034 (2008).

[15] B. Sobac, A. Rednikov, S. Dorbolo, and P. Colinet, Phys. Rev. E 90, 053011 (2014).

[16] J. H. Snoeijer, P. Brunet, and J. Eggers, Phys. Rev. E 79, 036307 (2009).

[17] F. Celestini, T. Frisch, and Y. Pomeau, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 034501 (2012).

[18] D. Vella and L. Mahadevan, Am. J. Phys. 73, 817 (2005).

[19] Y. Couder, E. Fort, C.-H. Gautier, and A. Boudaoud, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 177801 (2005).

[20] A.-B. Wang, C.-H. Lin, and C.-C. Chen, Phys. Fluids 12, 1622 (2000).

[21] R. Savino, D. Paterna, and M. Lappa, J. Fluid Mech. 479, 307 (2003).

21

