CERN-TH-2016-053

The string-junction picture of
multiquark states: an update

G.C. Rossia) and G. Venezianob)

a)Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit`a di Roma Tor Vergata

INFN, Sezione di Roma 2

Via della Ricerca Scientiﬁca, 00133 Roma, Italy

Centro Fermi - Museo Storico della Fisica
Piazza del Viminale 1 - 00184 Roma, Italy

b)Coll`ege de France, 11 place M. Berthelot, 75005 Paris, France

Theory Division, CERN, CH-1211 Geneva 23, Switzerland

Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit`a di Roma La Sapienza, 00185 Rome, Italy

Abstract

We recall and update, both theoretically and phenomenologically,
our (nearly) forty-years-old proposal of a string-junction as a neces-
sary complement to the conventional classiﬁcation of hadrons based
just on their quark-antiquark constituents.
In that proposal single
(though in general metastable) hadronic states are associated with
“irreducible” gauge-invariant operators consisting of Wilson lines (vi-
sualized as strings of color ﬂux tubes) that may either end on a quark
or an antiquark, or annihilate in triplets at a junction J or an anti-
junction ¯J. For the junction-free sector (ordinary q ¯q mesons and
glueballs) the picture is supported by large-N (number of colors) con-
siderations as well as by a lattice strong-coupling expansion. Both
imply the famous OZI rule suppressing quark-antiquark annihilation
diagrams. For hadrons with J and/or ¯J constituents the same ex-
pansions support our proposal, including its generalization of the OZI
rule to the suppression of J − ¯J annihilation diagrams. Such a rule
implies that hadrons with junctions are “mesophobic” and thus un-
usually narrow if they are below threshold for decaying into as many
baryons as their total number of junctions (two for a tetraquark, three
for a pentaquark). Experimental support for our claim, based on the
observation that narrow multiquark states typically lie below (well
above) the relevant baryonic (mesonic) thresholds, will be presented.

1

6
1
0
2

 
r
p
A
5

 

 
 
]
h
t
-
p
e
h
[
 
 

2
v
0
3
8
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Introduction

The prediction of multiquark states predates the QCD era. Soon after the
Dolen–Horn–Schmidt (DHS) proposal [1] of a duality between Regge poles
in the t channel and resonances in the s and u channels, Rosner [2] pointed
out that a straightforward application of that concept to baryon-antibaryon
scattering implied the existence of tetraquark (exotic) states dual to the ex-
change of ordinary quark-antiquark mesons. Early claims of their actual
existence, however, turned out to be either unfounded or inconclusive. Con-
vincing evidence in favor of their existence is relatively recent: what seems
to have put the whole ﬁeld on solid grounds is the discovery of multiquark
states containing heavy (c or b) quarks. This has brought renewed interest in
the subject and, in particular, on the question of how to interpret this new
class of hadrons within QCD.

For processes involving just mesons the connection between DHS-duality
related arguments and QCD was put on solid grounds through the introduc-
tion of large-N expansions of generalizations of QCD to an arbitrary number
N of colors and Nf of ﬂavors. In particular, ’t Hooft’s expansion [3] makes
a precise connection between the leading QCD diagrams and the duality
diagrams of DHS. Those considerations can be extended [4] to the glueball
sector of QCD conﬁrming, in particular, the duality connection between glue-
ball (Pomeron) exchange and a non-resonant two-meson background [5, 6].
Apparently, these two-particle states had nothing to do with Rosner’s original
tetraquarks, but how does QCD make the distinction?

Some 40 years ago [7] (see also the review paper [8] covering as well the
experimental situation at the time) we did try to reinterpret Rosner’s origi-
nal observation within QCD. Rosner’s states were dubbed “baryonium” (for
hidden-baryon-number states) for reasons that will be clariﬁed below. The
starting point of the analysis of ref. [7] was the association of single (stable
or metastable) hadrons with irreducible gauge invariant operators in QCD 1.
These were taken to be in one-to-one correspondence with connected graphs
made of lines which could either end at a quark (q) or an antiquark (¯q), or
join in triplets at a junction (J) or an antijunction ( ¯J). The lines were noth-
ing but the Wilson lines (path-ordered exponentials of the gauge connection)
needed for gauge invariance. Examples will be given in the corresponding
appropriate sections.

The main novelty of our proposal was the necessity of introducing J and ¯J
as new essential constituents for a complete and unambiguous classiﬁcation of

1(Irr)reducibility will thus distinguish tetraquarks from the above two-meson states of

refs. [5, 6].

1

single hadron states as well as of processes involving baryons. Of course, the
possibility of having gauge-invariant operators with junctions is related to the
fact that the QCD gauge group is SU (3), rather than U (3) = SU (3)⊗ U (1).
A couple of years later Witten [9] went further by discussing the systematics
of the large-N expansion for baryons reaching the interesting conclusion that
baryons behave like solitons since their mass is proportional to N ∼ 1/g2. He
also discussed several other features of baryons at large-N (with and without
use of the string-junction picture) that we shall refer to where appropriate
in the rest of the paper.

We would like to stress immediately that our approach to multiquark
states diﬀers in a substantial way from other schemes independently pro-
posed at about the same time [10]-[14], as well as from later constructions
like [15]-[19] or [20]-[30] (see also the review [31] and references therein). We
concentrate on the big family of multiquark states endowed with junctions of
which the ordinary baryons (states with one junction) represent the simplest
sector.

Members of this family strongly interact with each other: they should
be better called baryonia. Likewise, hadrons without junctions (ordinary
mesons as well as other possible multiquark states) strongly couple among
themselves, while the mutual interactions between the two sectors (more
generally between sectors with a diﬀerent total number of junctions) are
suppressed. Thus, in our picture, any large-N extrapolation of multiquark
states has to follow the “baryonic route” of keeping the number of junctions
ﬁxed.

In this paper we would like to (recall and) update, both theoretically and
phenomenologically, the proposals of [7] and [9] according to the following
outline. In Section 2 we brieﬂy review the standard description of q ¯q mesons
and glueballs and of their properties both in the large-N limit [3] and in
the strong-coupling expansion [32] of lattice QCD (LQCD). The latter is
argued to become, at large-N , a large λ ≡ g2N (’t Hooft’s coupling) expan-
sion valid even at small g2. Particular attention is paid to the famous OZI
rule [33, 34, 35] that suppresses mixing of these two classes of states and is
responsible for the narrow width of several quarkonium states. In Section 3
we turn our attention to baryons and to baryon-(anti)baryon scattering am-
plitudes arguing that, in QCD, single tetraquark states should exist although
they can mix via J − ¯J annihilation with ordinary (single or multi)-meson
states. After a short reminder of Witten’s large-N expansion for baryons [9]
we turn to the strong-coupling and large-λ expansions. We will argue that
all these approaches neatly show the emergence of a junction in a “bary-
onic Wilson loop” (simulating a baryon propagator for large quark masses)
and imply the distinction between scattering and annihilation channels in

2

baryon-antibaryon collisions. In Section 4 we recall the so-called junction-
OZI (JOZI) rule proposed in [7], by which, for instance, tetraquarks prefer
to decay into baryon-antibaryon channels whenever this is allowed by phase
space, and should otherwise be unusually narrow. After oﬀering some theo-
retical justiﬁcation for the JOZI rule from the large-N and large-λ expansions
we brieﬂy review experimental evidence for its validity both for tetraquarks
and pentaquarks. In Section 5 we summarize our conclusions. Some techni-
cal details concerning Witten’s large-N expansion for baryons are relegated
to an appendix.

2 The junction-free sector

2.1 Ordinary q ¯q mesons and glueballs

In our approach ordinary q ¯q mesons are associated with the irreducible (sin-
gle trace) gauge-invariant operator

where the Wilson-line operator U is deﬁned by

M(Ct) =

jqj((cid:126)s, t)

1
¯qi((cid:126)r, t)U [Ct]i
√N
(cid:90) (cid:126)s
(cid:104)

(cid:105)i

j

U [Ct]i

j = P exp

ig

(cid:126)r

d(cid:126)x (cid:126)A((cid:126)x, t)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

with Ct a line joining the point (cid:126)r, t with (cid:126)s, t. More generally, we may consider
as an interpolating operator one in which the path joins two arbitrary space-
time points. But the above class of paths is suﬃcient for our purposes and
is easier to consider in the strong-coupling limit.

Ordinary q ¯q mesons will appear as intermediate states in the gauge in-
variant correlator (after subtracting a disconnected contribution in the ﬂavor-
singlet channel)

Similarly, glueballs are associated with the irreducible (single trace) gauge-
invariant operator

GM(Ct(cid:48),Ct) = (cid:104)M(Ct(cid:48))M

†

(Ct)(cid:105) .
(cid:73)
(cid:105)
C d(cid:126)x (cid:126)A((cid:126)x, t)

(cid:104)

G(Ct) = TrP exp

ig

and will appear as intermediate states in the (connected part of the) corre-
lator

†

GG(Ct(cid:48),Ct) = (cid:104)G(Ct(cid:48))G

3

(Ct)(cid:105) ,

(5)

where Ct is now a closed spatial loop at time t.
However, there is no strict selection rule preventing single-trace operators
from mixing with multi-trace operators and for ﬂavor-singlet q ¯q mesons to
mix with the glueballs. In full QCD the above correlators will have singular-
ities in correspondence with the exact spectrum of QCD (including widths,
branch points etc.).

Fortunately, the situation simpliﬁes enormously by considering two limits:
’t Hooft’s large-N limit with ﬁxed λ ≡ g2N and, on the lattice, the strong-
coupling limit, g2 → ∞ with ﬁxed N as well as a large-λ limit in which N is
large but g2 can be small.

2.2 Two simplifying limits and the OZI rule

2.2.1 The large-N limit

The simpliﬁcations occurring in ’t Hooft’s large-N limit [3] (with ﬁxed g2N
and Nf , see also [4] [9]) are well known.

• Color irreducible operators do not mix with reducible ones. Conse-
quently the states we have introduced above are stable (zero-width)
hadrons in the large-N limit.

• This is conﬁrmed by the fact that the coupling among n – q ¯q mesons
goes to zero like N 1−n/2. This result can be easily generalized [4] to
multi-glueball couplings (that scale like N 2−n) and to mixed ones (that
scale like N 1−nq ¯q/2−ngl).

• As a consequence of the previous properties there is no mixing between
q ¯q mesons and glueballs. They represent two decoupled sectors of
stable mesons. Also, there is no mixing among quarkonia of diﬀerent
ﬂavor, a property that can induce, in principle, large isospin mixing in
some multiquark states [36, 37].

• The absence of mixing with glueballs reﬂects the validity of the OZI
rule at large-N : q ¯q pairs do not annihilate in the ’t Hooft limit! As an
example of the implications of the OZI rule an s¯s meson prefers to decay
into a strange pair, a c¯c meson prefers to decay into a charmed pair,
etc. If such decays are kinematically forbidden the state is unusually
narrow.

• The validity of the OZI rule at leading order in N also implies the ab-
sence, at the same order, of the U (1)A anomaly. Thus, at this order,
the ﬂavor-singlet pseudo scalar is a true (pseudo)-Nambu–Goldstone

4

boson. At next to leading order one instead derives a successful for-
mula [38] [39] for the mass of the η(cid:48) meson.

• The leading (planar) diagrams for the scattering of q ¯q mesons will ex-
hibit (under mild assumptions about their large-s, ﬁxed-t Regge limit)
the usual planar duality between s, t and u channels and their general-
izations to higher-point functions. At next to leading order, there are
also non-planar diagrams contributing to q ¯q meson scattering. They
will exhibit duality [5, 6] between glueball states in the t channel and
states consisting of two q ¯q mesons (thus corresponding to reducible
color singlet operators) in the s and u channels (see also the discussion
at the end of Section 2.2.2).

2.2.2 The strong coupling and large-λ limits on the lattice

An interesting alternative to the large-N expansion can be deﬁned and nicely
implemented on the lattice. This is the so-called strong coupling expan-
sion [32, 40, 41]: it bears some interesting analogies with the large-N expan-
sion and, as we shall discuss, can be combined with it in a large-λ expansion.
Its advantage is that, in many cases, the leading term can be explicitly com-
puted analytically and is exactly gauge invariant.

On the negative side we know that such an expansion can only give some
qualitative information about the true continuum theory which, because of
asymptotic freedom, corresponds to a vanishing bare (’t Hooft) coupling (to
be identiﬁed with the coupling at the lattice cutoﬀ scale). Even getting
correct qualitative information is not guaranteed. A well-known example is
a U (1) gauge theory (e.g. QED [42, 43]) which conﬁnes at strong coupling
while it is in the Coulomb phase in the continuum, because of the existence
of a ﬁrst-order phase transition at a ﬁnite value of the coupling constant.

In the strong coupling limit it is more convenient to talk about Wilson
loops. They naturally emerge as soon as quark propagators are replaced (in
the large mass limit) by a Wilson line in the time direction (i.e. at a ﬁxed
spatial position).

1) As a ﬁrst example consider the connected meson propagator (3) on the

lattice. Contracting the quark ﬁelds one ﬁnds

(cid:16)

(cid:17)
U†[Ct]SF ((cid:126)r, t; (cid:126)r, t(cid:48))U [Ct(cid:48)]SF ((cid:126)s, t(cid:48); (cid:126)s, t)

(cid:82) (cid:81)

− 1

g2 SLY M (U )

i dUie

(cid:82) (cid:81)

GM(Ct(cid:48),Ct) =
idUiTr
=

1
N

− 1
e

g2 SLY M (U )

.

(6)

Since in the limit of a very massive quark (static limit) we can replace the
quark propagator with the product of the links in the time direction from t

5

to t(cid:48), we end up with the correlator

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)large mass
(cid:16)

=

i dUi Tr

(cid:82) (cid:81)
GM(Ct(cid:48),Ct)
(cid:16)

1
N

=

1
N (cid:104)Tr

=

U

†

†

[Ct]U

where SLY M (U ) is the lattice pure gauge action and

(cid:17)

− t]

− 1
e

g2 SLY M (U )

=

− 1

g2 SLY M (U )

U†[Ct]U†[(cid:126)r, t − t(cid:48)]U [Ct(cid:48)]U [(cid:126)s, t(cid:48)
(cid:17)

(cid:82) (cid:81)
i dUie
(cid:48)
]U [Ct(cid:48)]U [(cid:126)s, t
[(cid:126)r, t − t
(cid:89)

− t]

(cid:48)

(cid:48)
U [(cid:126)s, t

U [(cid:126)s, τ ] .

− t] =

τ∈[t,t(cid:48)]

(cid:105) ≡ WM ,

(7)

(8)

Looking at ﬁg. 1, one recognizes in GM (Ct(cid:48),Ct) the expectation value of a
Wilson loop with sides |(cid:126)s − (cid:126)r| × |t(cid:48)

− t|.

Figure 1: Meson propagator in the strong coupling limit. The Wilson line con-
necting q with ¯q is in red. The quark propagators are in light blue.

For a generic N the strong coupling expansion is deﬁned as the one in
which N is kept ﬁxed while β ≡ 2N/g2 → 0. Carrying out the actual
calculation for the rectangular Wilson loop of ﬁg. 1 and using the standard
group integration rules [44], one ﬁnds from (7)

lim

WM ∝ exp[−A/a2 log(g2N )]

Strong Coupling

(cid:48)
A = |(cid:126)s − (cid:126)r| × |t

− t| .

(9)

(10)

The result (9) is obtained by bringing down from the action the minimal
number of plaquettes allowing to have a non-vanishing group integral. This
amounts to tiling with plaquettes the rectangular Wilson loop of ﬁg. 1.

6

~r,t~s,t~r,t′~s,t′U†[Ct]U[Ct′]U[~s,t′−t]U†[~r,t′−t]We thus see that in the case of a q ¯q meson the area is just |(cid:126)s−(cid:126)r|×|t(cid:48)

−t| ≡
LT . Therefore, interpreting the coeﬃcient of T as the energy and the energy
as the tension, κ, times the distance L, we ﬁnd

κ =

1
a2 log g2N .

(11)

An important observation here is that, actually, the leading strong coupling
term does not depend on g2 and N separately but only on their combination
λ = g2N where, in the naive continuum limit, λ is nothing but the ’t Hooft
coupling. This conclusion can be extended to the subleading terms [45] (after
removing disconnected diagrams) and the whole strong coupling expansion
can be rearranged in the ’t Hooft form [41]

(cid:88)

h=0

WM =

Wh(λ)

1

(N 2)h ,

(12)

where the sum is over the number of handles, h, of the diagram. The ex-
pansion (12) tells us that the strong coupling expansion is actually a large-λ
(’t-Hooft-coupling) expansion, i.e. the corrections to the leading term scale
like powers of λ−1 = 1
g2N and 1/N 2, and not of 1/g2. Therefore such an
expansion is also valid at small g2 provided λ and thus N (cid:29) 1 2. This ob-
servation will be relevant for the extension of our considerations to baryons
and multiquark states.

2) As a next step we can similarly compute the glueball-glueball correlator
in the strong coupling limit. Starting from the deﬁnition (4) with the integral
extended over the closed curve, C, that for simplicity we have assumed to lie
in a plane at time t, one ﬁnds that in the β → 0, ﬁxed N -limit the dominant
topology is that of a cylinder (actually a parallelepiped) whose bases are the
two parallel closed curves Ct and Ct(cid:48), and the height is |t − t(cid:48)
|. One thus gets
WG ∝ exp[−A/a2 log(g2N )] , (13)

Strong Coupling

Strong Coupling

lim

lim

GG(Ct(cid:48),Ct) ≡
(cid:48)

A = 2(L + d)|t − t

| ∼ 2LT ,

d (cid:28) L ,

(14)

where the condition d (cid:28) L means that we are looking at states with large
angular momentum. We thus ﬁnd that the eﬀective “glueball string tension”,

2This limit is like the much used large AdS-radius limit of the AdS/CFT correspon-
In ref. [48] the possibility of establishing a bridge between the stringy
dence [46, 47].
description of QCD resulting from the AdS/CFT correspondence and the strong coupling
limit of lattice QCD in the study of the potential among the quarks of a triply heavy
baryon is explored.

7

deﬁned as the inverse of the Regge slope, is twice as large as the mesonic one,
in full agreement with the string picture (naturally the energy per unit string
length is always the same and does not depend on whether one is dealing
with mesonic or gluonic states).

Figure 2: Glueball propagator in the strong coupling limit. The curves Ct and Ct(cid:48)
are in red. The gray horizontal lines are only drawn to guide the eye.

We now argue that, like in the large-N expansion, also the strong cou-
pling expansion implies the validity of the OZI rule. We will concentrate
on an important consequence of it, namely the absence of mixing between
two quarkonium states carrying diﬀerent hidden ﬂavor (which we already
mentioned as a property of the large-N expansion).

Let us compare the (OZI-conserving) two-point function of ﬁg. 1 with the
OZI-violating one depicted in ﬁg. 3. While the former behaves as exp[−κA]
(see eq. (10) ), where A is the area of the rectangle, in the latter case we
have to insert, somewhere in the strong coupling diagram, a complicated non-
planar feature of the kind shown in ﬁg. 3. It is then clear that, for a ﬁxed L
and T , this feature can only increase the minimal area needed to properly tile
the diagram. Basically, during a certain time-interval, we will be dealing with
a glueball propagator and thus pay the price of a larger tension. Consequently
the OZI-violating contribution will contain extra inverse powers of λ.

Before moving on to baryons we wish to make a point that will be relevant
later. Consider the two contributions to meson-meson scattering depicted in
ﬁg. 4. The non-planar diagram in the panel (b) is obviously subleading at
large N . It is also subleading at high energy for the channel in which the OZI
rule is violated. This is because the leading Regge singularity in its t channel

8

LdFigure 3: Meson-to-meson mixing. As in ﬁg. 1 the Wilson lines connecting q with
¯q is in red and the quark propagators in blight blue.

is a two-Reggeon cut, which is certainly lower than the single q ¯q Regge pole
exchanged in ﬁg. 4a. Let us now look at the diagram of ﬁg. 4b from the
crossed channel viewpoint, in which all four quark lines go through. Since
the diagram is always the same it is still down, at large N , with respect to the
planar diagram of ﬁg. 4a. However, the diagram of ﬁg. 4b is now dominant
at high energy, since it allows for the exchange of the leading (vacuum)
Pomeron trajectory in its own t channel. This shows that there is sometimes
competition between large N and high-energy approximations. We shall see
something analogous to this when discussing the JOZI rule in Section 4.

3 Baryons, junctions and tetraquarks

3.1 Single baryon states

In SU(N ) QCD the (normalized) irreducible gauge invariant operator of a
baryon takes the Y-shaped (for N = 3) form (see ﬁg. 5)

1
√N !

B(C1,C2, . . . ,CN ) =
i1i2...iN U [C1]i1
=
(cid:104)

U [Ck]ik

jk = P exp

ig

where

j1q(x1)j1 U [C2]i2
(cid:90)

C(xJ ,xk)

9

j2q(x2)j2 . . . U [CN ]iN

jN q(xN )jN ,

(15)

(cid:105)ik

jk

dyµAµ(y)

,

k = 1, 2, . . . , N

(16)

Figure 4: Two contributions to meson-meson scattering in the large-N limit.
Panel (a) is the leading OZI-preserving term; panel (b) is a non-planar OZI-
violating subleading correction. But at suﬃciently high energy in the crossed
channel, (b) dominates over (a) because of the higher intercept of the ﬂavor sin-
glet Regge pole.

and C(xJ , xk) is a curve joining the point xJ to xk. As in the mesonic case,
we have taken for simplicity very special space-time locations for the q ﬁelds.
The description of baryons as a triplet of ﬂux tubes joining at a point dates
back to the work of ref. [49], where the word “junction” was ﬁrst introduced
(see also [50]).

Single baryon intermediate states appear in the correlator

(cid:48)
− t) =
GB({(cid:126)rk, k = 1, 2, . . . , N}, (cid:126)rJ ; t
(cid:48)
(cid:48)
(cid:48)
N )(cid:105) .
2, . . . ,C
1,C
= (cid:104)B(C1,C2, . . . ,CN )B

(C

†

(17)

We will now discuss how the treatment of this correlator simpliﬁes in the
large-N and strong coupling limit of LQCD, starting with the latter.

Figure 5: The Y-shaped form of the baryon for N = 3.

10

(a)(b)C3C1C2xJx1x2x33.2 Strong coupling, large-λ considerations
Putting xk = ((cid:126)rk, t), k = 1, 2, . . . , N ; xJ = ((cid:126)rJ , t) and similarly x(cid:48)
k = ((cid:126)rk, t(cid:48)),
k = 1, 2, . . . , N ; x(cid:48)
J = ((cid:126)rJ , t(cid:48)), we want to evaluate GB in the strong coupling
limit. Following the strategy outlined in sect. 2.2.2 in the case of the meson
propagator leads to a new kind of Wilson loop, the baryonic Wilson loop
depicted in ﬁg. 6, characterized by the presence of the Levi-Civita symbol.
It reads [51, 52]

1...i(cid:48)

(18)

N ·
j(cid:48)
(cid:48)
N (cid:105) ≡ WJ .
N ]
i(cid:48)

N

[C

(cid:48)
GB({(cid:126)rk, k = 1, 2, . . . , N}, (cid:126)rJ ; t
j(cid:48)
(cid:48)
·(cid:104) U [C1]i1
1]
i(cid:48)

(cid:48)
j1U [(cid:126)r1, t − t

[C

]j1
j(cid:48)

U

†

− t)
. . . U [CN ]iN

=

1
i1...iN i(cid:48)
N !
†
(cid:48)
jN U [(cid:126)rN , t − t

]jN
j(cid:48)

U

N

1

1

1

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)large mass

Figure 6: The N = 3 baryonic Wilson loop. The green dotted line does not
explicitly appear in the correlator (18) but it will come out from the calculation
outlined below.

We want to evaluate WJ in the lattice strong coupling limit 3. As a guide
for the general situation, let us consider the result of the partial calculation
in which in each sheet only two plaquettes from the action are inserted (see
ﬁg. 7). In each sheet 4 the ﬁve (in general (2nt + 1)ns, with nt and ns the
number of plaquettes in the time and space direction, respectively, on each
sheet) group integrations, marked with a cross in the ﬁgure, give the following
product of Kronecker δ-functions

δi1b1δk1a1

δk1a1δk2d1

δc1b2δd1a2

δd2k3δa2k2

δd2k3δc2j1 .

(19)

3There has been quite a number of studies of the three-quark potential in the continuum
and on the lattice, starting with the seminal work of ref. [53]. Without pretending to be
complete, we may mention for the study of the ¯q q and qqq potential in the continuum the
work of ref. [51] and the review [54]. For the study of the qqq potential on the lattice see,
for instance [55, 56, 57, 58].

4We ignore the fact that we cannot have N orthogonal planes for N > 3. This problem

will be solved when rotation invariance is recovered in the continuum limit.

11

U[C3]U[C1]U[C2]U†[C′3]U†[C′2]U†[C′1]U[~r1,t′−t]U[~r2,t′−t]U[~r3,t′−t]Each product of δ’s that closes in a loop gives a factor N .
In the case
of the ﬁgure this means a factor N 3, but in general it will give a factor
N V −nt−1 (where V is the total number of vertices), and not just V because
the nt links along the dotted line shown in ﬁg. 6 (the junction) have not
yet been integrated. The remaining δ’s, δi1b1δc1b2δc2j1, yield the product of
links Ui1(cid:96)1U(cid:96)1j1. This product will have to be put together with the similar
products, Ui2(cid:96)2U(cid:96)2j2 . . . UiN (cid:96)N U(cid:96)N jN , coming from the other baryon sheets and
integrated over. The result is (remember we are considering the insertion of
only two plaquettes per sheet)

dU Ui1(cid:96)1Ui2(cid:96)2 . . . UiN (cid:96)N

dU Uj1(cid:96)1Uj2(cid:96)2 . . . UjN (cid:96)N =

(cid:96)1(cid:96)2...(cid:96)N (cid:96)1(cid:96)2...(cid:96)N j1j2...jN =

1
N !

i1i2...iN j1j2...jN .

(20)

(cid:90)

(cid:88)

(cid:90)

(cid:96)k

=

1
N !2 i1i2...iN

(cid:88)

(cid:96)k

Figure 7: Paving three sheets of the baryon propagator.

It is clear that, in order not to get a vanishing result a new line is dy-
namically created along which N parallel links appear. We thus see how the
junction is an inevitable ingredient in the strong coupling limit of LQCD.
It is also obvious that such a line can only propagate between two baryonic
sources and represents the ﬂow of the N antisymmetrized colors.

To get the ﬁnal result we must saturate the above tensor with the similar
tensor in the deﬁnition of the baryon wave function. We thus have to put
together the following factors

12

Ui1k1Uk1k2Uk2k3U†k3j1U†d1a1U†a1b1Ub1c1Uc1d1U†a2b2Uc2d2U†d2a2Ub2c2×××××N !

1√
N !

1√
N !(N !)2 = 1 from eq. (20) and the normalization in eq. (15)

• 1
• N−L+Nt from the normalization factor of the link integration

(cid:90)

dU UabU (cid:63)

cd =

1
N

δacδbd ,

(21)

• N V −Nt−1 from the closed loops formed around vertices with the exclu-
(cid:16) 1

sion of the vertices sitting along the junction

(cid:17)P

from the plaquettes

•

g2

Taking into account the presence of the N sheets in the baryon expression
and the Euler relation P − L + V = 2 − 2h − b, we get for a surface of genus
h = 0 and b = 1

(cid:104)

(cid:105)

1 + . . .

−κAN

= e

1 + . . .

,

(22)

(cid:17)(cid:80)N

k=1

Pk(cid:104)

(cid:16) 1

g2N

WJ =

(cid:105)

N(cid:88)

k=1

where κ is the previously found string tension (see eq. (11)) and

(cid:48)
AN = |t

− t| ×

(cid:96)k

(23)

the continuum we also expect the minimal value of the quantity (cid:80)N

with (cid:96)k = |(cid:126)rk − (cid:126)rJ| the length of the curve Ck in eq. (16). We have left
unspeciﬁed the dots in eq. (22). Actually, we believe that in the large-λ
limit corrections to the leading behavior are again O(1/λ) or O(1/N ). In
k=1 (cid:96)k,
hence of AN , to be proportional to N , since, in that limit, the length of each
−1
QCD). This means that self-energy eﬀects
string, (cid:96)k, will be at least of O(Λ
are expected to be of O(N ) consistently with Witten’s interpretation [9] of
baryons as solitons in large-N QCD.

We thus see that the baryonic Wilson loop has in the large-λ limit exactly
the same expression as the usual Wilson loop (see eqs. (13) and (14)) in
terms of the ’t Hooft coupling and the total area of the pages of our N -page
“book”. This is in agreement with the fact that each Wilson line (ﬂux tube)
is assumed to be in the fundamental representation of SU (N ). Furthermore,
the baryon states of highest angular momentum for a given mass (the so-
called leading Regge trajectory) correspond to keeping the area of two (for
N = 3) pages ﬁxed and small and to increasing the size of the third. This
is how we understand the universality of the Regge slope for q ¯q mesons and
baryons.

13

One ﬁnal remark is in order. Suppose that we ﬁx the spatial position
of our three (or N ) quarks but not that of the junction. In the strong (or
large ’t Hooft) coupling limit the position of the junction will be dynamically
determined by the condition of minimizing the sum of the areas of the pages
of the book. Let us show that this corresponds precisely to the condition
that the junction is in equilibrium as a result of the N forces exerted on it
by the strings coming from each quark.

In order to minimize the area we need to minimize the sum of the distances

between the junction and each quark

(24)

N(cid:88)

1

(cid:113)
((cid:126)xi − (cid:126)xJ )2 .

D ≡

N(cid:88)

1

(cid:113)
i − (cid:126)xk
(cid:126)xk
((cid:126)xi − (cid:126)xJ )2

J

Setting to zero its derivatives with respect to xk
get

J , k = 1, 2, . . . , N , we simply

= 0 ,

(25)

which is the stated equilibrium condition since the strengths of the N forces
are independent of their lengths for a linear potential 5. Furthermore, as
argued in [9], in the heavy quark limit the junction is not moving in space.

3.3 Large-N considerations

In a classic paper [9] Witten argued that baryons should be regarded as
solitons in the large-N limit of QCD. His claim was based on the rather con-
vincing argument that the baryon mass spectrum should be proportional to
N ∼ 1/g2, 1/g2 being a typical soliton mass. Witten also pointed out that
getting this result from the N -dependence of baryonic correlators in pertur-
bation theory is somewhat subtle, since such a correlator actually contains
arbitrarily high powers of N . We have just seen an example of this in the
strong coupling expansion of the baryonic Wilson loop which goes like the
exponential of a sum of N areas. The correct interpretation is that the Wil-
son loop is related to a ﬁnite (Euclidean) time propagator exp(−Eτ ) with
E ∼ N . This is, basically, the same as Witten’s argument in large-N pertur-
bation theory. For the interested reader we brieﬂy sketch (our understanding
of) Witten’s argument in Appendix A.

The interesting outcome of that analysis, relevant for the present inves-
tigation, is that the large-N limit of QCD can also be used for the baryonic
(and more generally for the multiquark) sector. The fact that the mass of

5A similar argument can be found in ref. [52].

14

such states goes to inﬁnity with N does not imply that large-N results can-
not be used at N = 3. Let us give an example: suppose that one can prove
that, at large N , mB = mM N/2 for a certain baryon B and meson M . We
would then argue that, to the extent that N = 3 can be considered to be
suﬃciently large, it is possible to predict a ratio 3 : 2 between, say, the proton
and the ρ meson. More generally, certain baryonic quantities may diverge
with N in a precise way, so that, once such a dependence is factored out and
properly taken into account, the rest is just a function of ΛQCD. Since, by
deﬁnition of the large-N limit, ΛQCD is N independent, one would obtain
interesting estimates of those quantities at N = 3, possibly in terms of other
(e.g. mesonic) quantities.

3.4 Baryon-(anti)baryon scattering: tetraquarks as bary-

onia

It is relatively straightforward to extend the considerations of the previous
subsection to baryon-(anti)baryon scattering. Since, as already mentioned,
each junction necessarily connects two baryonic sources (more precisely: ei-
ther an incoming and outgoing baryon or antibaryon, or an incoming or
outgoing baryon-antibaryon pair) we will have two distinct strong coupling
diagrams for a given ﬂow of the quark lines. For each one of them the strong
coupling limit selects a minimal-area surface with the correct topology for
the quark lines and the junction. These are shown for N = 3 in ﬁgs. 8 and 9
for a particular choice of the ﬂavor (quark line) ﬂow.

The ﬂow of the junction lines determines which channel has also purely
mesonic intermediate states (i.e. annihilation) and which does not (a third
channel has total baryon number two and no intermediate states in this ap-
proximation). This classiﬁcation of strong coupling contributions to baryon-
(anti)baryon scattering makes precise, within QCD, Rosner’s original obser-
vation of the necessity of tetraquarks as the intermediate states in the s
channel of ﬁg. 8 which are characterized by the fact of containing a junction-
antijunction pair. These states are necessary in order to reproduce the imag-
inary part of the Regge amplitude corresponding to ordinary q ¯q mesons in
the t channel 6.

By contrast the intermediate states in the s channel of ﬁg. 9 include two
q ¯q meson annihilation states. In the language of DHS duality, tetraquarks
are dual to q ¯q mesons, while baryon-antibaryon annihilation into two mesons
is dual to a new kind of state: a q ¯q state with two junctions (denoted by M J
2

6Exchange degeneracy of the corresponding positive and negative signature trajectories

is forced by the absence of a u(baryon number two)-channel discontinuity.

15

in [7]). To the extent that such states lie on lower Regge trajectories, the
annihilation channel is suppressed (at least at high energy) with respect to
the scattering channel that proceeds via tetraquark (baryonium) intermediate
states.

Figure 8: Baryon-antibaryon scattering at large λ, showing an s channel M J
4
baryonium (tetraquark) state dual to a t channel q ¯q meson.

Naturally, more that one q ¯q pair can annihilate, if ﬂavor allows it. We
do not repeat here the detailed discussion of all these other cases as it can
be found in refs. [7, 8], together with the complete classiﬁcation of the large
s, ﬁxed t behavior of all scattering and annihilation amplitudes at N = 3.
The latter is summarized in Tables 3a and 3b of ref. [8].

We refer the reader to the specialized literature [59, 60, 61, 62] for investi-
gations aimed at proving the existence of tetraquarks, as diquark-antidiquark
states or as a molecule made of two q ¯q singlets, in lattice simulations.

3.5 States with more than 2 junctions

Arguments very similar to those of the previous section can be used to argue
that also states with more than four quarks and more than two junctions
should exist. The simplest ones are pentaquarks with 2 junctions and one
antijunction and baryon number one. As we shall see in the next section,
the JOZI rule implies that these states are mostly coupled to BB ¯B channels
and that, when such channels are not kinematically open, they will decay
into a baryon plus mesons with small widths. Other states with more than

16

qqqqqq¯q¯q¯q¯q¯q¯qFigure 9: Baryon-antibaryon annihilation at large λ, showing a pair of two s
channel q ¯q mesons dual to a t channel M J

2 baryonium state.

two junctions can be constructed. Some of them are depicted, for N = 3, in
ﬁg. 10 (corresponding to ﬁg. 10 of ref. [8]).

4 The JOZI rule

4.1 Need for a selection rule on top of OZI’s

Let us start by recalling that the usual OZI rule has two important conse-
quences for q ¯q mesons:

• it suppresses decays which need an initial q ¯q pair to annihilate and a

new pair to be created;

• it suppresses ﬂavor mixing in the mass matrix.

The second property is responsible, for instance, for the “ideal mixing” of
the vector meson nonet. Hence the φ meson is (almost) a pure s¯s state.
Then, by the ﬁrst property, it prefers to decay into K ¯K rather than into
pions, an experimental fact. Of course this decay is allowed because K-
mesons are light enough, which, in turn, is the case because of the pseudo
Nambu-Goldstone (PNG) boson nature of the pseudoscalar nonet. There is
a further twist, though, to this story: the pseudoscalar sector appears to
be anomalous. Its “onia” are not ideally mixed because the U (1)A-anomaly
gives large OZI-violating contribution (compared to the small mass diﬀerence

17

qqqqqq¯q¯q¯q¯q¯q¯qFigure 10: States of the baryonium family for N = 3 with more than two junc-
tions.

of PNG bosons). Hence we do not see any sign of the OZI rule in the quark
composition and decay of the η(cid:48).

Obviously, as we move to q ¯q mesons containing heavier quarks (c and b,
essentially) the OZI rule comes back in all the channels. Furthermore, since
charmed or beauty mesons are by no means light PNG bosons, the preferred
decay of heavy quarkonia is often not allowed kinematically and therefore
the lightest ones, (J/Ψ, Υ, . . .) are narrow. The usual OZI rule applies also,
of course, to tetraquarks. However, we claim that, by itself, it cannot ex-
plain the phenomenology of tetraquark states. Take for instance a candidate
tetraquark state containing a c¯c pair (besides, say, up and down quarks).
The usual OZI rule would suppress decays in which there is no c quark in
the ﬁnal state, but would certainly allow decay into two charmed mesons if
this is allowed by phase space. And indeed, if we look at ﬁg. 12, we see that,
for instance, the X(3872) putative tetraquark decays into mesons containing
the charmed pair. But then, if such a decay were unsuppressed, how can
we explain a width of less than 2 MeV? It looks that another selection rule
should be there on top of OZI. This could be the JOZI rule that we intro-
duced long ago and that we shall now discuss, although other explanations
have been proposed [10, 11, 16, 17, 27, 29].

In analogy with the ordinary OZI rule the new rule recognizes the ex-
istence of a hidden baryon number inside tetraquarks with a J − ¯J pair.
Thus, like with hidden charm or beauty, the claim is that decay into a pair

18

166Baryoniumphysics(a)(b)(c)(d)M~M~B~D~Fig.10.Othermultiquarkstates:(a),(b)mesons,(c)baryon,(d)dibaryon.4.Baryonium:spectrum,productionanddecayproperties4.1.SpectrumAfirstestimateofthebaryoniumspectrumwasobtainedafewyearsagobyChew[34],whostartedfromthediquark—antidiquark(qq)—(44)pictureofbaryonium,stressedearlierinref.[35].Assigning(qq)and/or(44)tospinandisospinsingletortripletstates(accordingtostatistics)anddrawingonanalogieswithq4-mesons,Chewwasabletogetarichspectrumofstateswithbothexoticandnonexoticquantumnumbers(I=0,1,2)andwithbothnaturalandunnaturalparities.Hisresultsareessentiallyconfirmed,atleastattheleadingtrajectorylevel,bythefollowinganalysiswhichisbasedonanestimateofinterceptsandslopesofbaryoniumtrajectoriescomingfromtheirdualrelationshiptoBB-annihilation.Indeedasexplainedinref.[5],thefactthatannihilationintoasingle,doubleortriplemulti-peripheralchainbuildsupM~,M~orM~trajectoriesrespectivelygivesviastandardarguments[36,37],thefollowingestimatesforintercepts:a(M~)=2aB(0)—1+~(4.la)a(M~)2aB(0)—1+2~(4.lb)a(M~)=2aB(0)—1+3~(4.lc)where8canbeestimated,fromtheanalogousmesonicproblem,tobe8l—a~(0)~*~0.5.(4.2)Itisinterestingtonotethattheseresultssaturatethegeneralboundsfoundinref.[38].WithaB(O)=0theoutcomeisa(M~)—0.5,a(M~)0,a(M~)’0.5,(4.3)butonecouldimaginethatasomewhatlowerbaryoninterceptshouldbeusedifnucleonexchangeeffectivelydominates.of baryons is strongly favored whenever kinematically accessible. Similarly, a
pentaquark containing two junctions and an antijunction will preferentially
decay into two baryons and an antibaryon. A certain number of tetra- and
pentaquark states, however, may lie below threshold for their JOZI-allowed
decays. In that case, the state is expected to be narrow even if it has plenty of
phase space for decaying into mesons or a baryon plus mesons, respectively.
Again this is similar to the heavy quarkonium situation. Note that the JOZI
rule also implies that production of narrow tetra and pentaquark states from
JOZI-violating processes is suppressed. This may explain why some earlier
attempts to ﬁnd narrow baryonium states through direct baryon-antibaryon
annihilation failed to give convincing results. Forming such states from the
weak decay of heavy quarks appears to be a much better strategy.

We will now discuss, successively, some theoretical and phenomenological

arguments in support of the JOZI rule.

4.2 Supporting theoretical arguments

Theoretical arguments supporting the JOZI rule follow closely those used in
Section 2.2 to argue that the strong coupling (or large-λ) expansion justiﬁes
the ordinary OZI rule. We should indeed compare, for a given ﬂow of the
quark lines, diagrams with or without junction annihilation like those in
Figs. 8 and 9. Let us ﬁrst look into this question from the large-N expansion
viewpoint.

Consider, in general, a duality diagram in which n quark lines annihilate
in the s channel while the remaining (N −n) go through and then distinguish
the case in which also the junctions go through or annihilate. One can tile the
analog of the diagrams of ﬁgs. 8 and 9 with a minimal-genus set of plaquettes
and, using the usual integration rules, evaluate the large-N behavior for the
two diagrams. A straightforward counting gives:

Ascattering
(n,N−n) ∼ N
Aannihilation
(n,N−n) ∼ N

−n ,
−(N−n) ,

(26)

(27)

which is consistent with the fact that the same diagram (rotated by 90 de-
grees) describes both scattering and annihilation provided we also change n
into (N − n).
The above equation shows consistency with the usual OZI rule for the
scattering case (each annihilation costs an extra factor 1/N ). However, for
annihilation, the equation seems to favor a large number of annihilating
q ¯q pairs. Also, comparison between the two processes (for the same n)
shows that scattering dominates at n < N/2 while annihilation dominates

19

at n > N/2. However, before jumping to premature conclusions, we should
note that extra combinatorial factors related to the number of possible ways
in which a given diagram can be built, may have to be taken into account.
Such a number involves also the ﬂavor structure of the process and is, in
general, quite complicated.

If we take a large-λ limit we have to compare minimal area surfaces for

the two processes. The following large-λ behaviors appear

Ascattering
(n,N−n) ∼ λ
Aannihilation
(n,N−n) ∼ λ

−2N A+n(2A−B) ,
−2N C+(N−n)(2C−D) ,

(28)

(29)

where the areas A, B, C, D are those indicated in ﬁg. 11. In that ﬁgure we
schematically indicate the s channel intermediate states of scattering (top
panel) and annihilation diagrams (bottom panel) as well as the leading λ
behavior of each of them.

Again, a large n implies many extra sheets in the scattering diagram while
a large (N − n) calls for many sheets in the annihilation diagram (i.e. for for
the (N − n) mesons). This ﬁts well with the large-N result but falls short of
justifying the JOZI rule in general. At this point we can combine the above
arguments with the one already given in [7] where it was pointed out that,
at high energy, the diagram in ﬁg. 8 dominates over the one in ﬁg. 9 owing to
the exchange of a higher Regge trajectory (ordinary meson vs. a baryonium
state). Such an argument can be repeated in the general case discussed above
and supports both the ordinary and the junction OZI rule independently of
n. We see here an analogy with what we found already in Section 2 for the
validity of the ordinary OZI rule. Sometimes the large-N and high-energy
arguments go hand in hand whereas in other cases they appear to push in
opposite directions.

Another theoretical support for the JOZI rule can be based on a judicious
extrapolation from N = 3 to large N . Here our approach can be contrasted to
Weinberg’s recent one [25]. His large-N considerations are based on keeping
the quark-gluon content of the tetraquark unchanged as N is increased. In
our framework, instead, one should decide ﬁrst on how to extrapolate the
N = 3 tetraquark state to arbitrary N . Obviously, the state should contain
two junctions but then how many quarks? One possible extrapolation would
consist in keeping the number of quarks ﬁxed at four and simply increase
to (N − 2) the number of strings connecting the two junctions. At the
opposite extreme one might prefer to keep a single string stretched between
the junctions and have 2(N − 1) quarks. Or, ﬁnally, one may like to increase
both the number of quarks and the number of intermediate strings keeping
their ratio ﬁxed while N → ∞.
In all cases the mass of such a state is

20

Figure 11: The s channel intermediate states of scattering (top panels) and anni-
hilation diagrams (bottom panel) and the corresponding λ behavior.

21

     λ-[2(N-1)A+B]																								λ-[2(N-2)A+2B]											…																B	A	D	C						MJ2(N-1)																													MJ2(N-2)																					…																								 λ-[2(N-1)C+D]																							λ-[2(N-2)C+2D]													…															1	meson																							2	mesons														…														…									…		expected to grow linearly with N .

One can then estimate for each case the N -dependence of the decay am-
plitudes into diﬀerent channels with and without junctions and compute the
N dependence of the relative branching ratios. Without going into the details
of a straightforward though tedious calculation, one ﬁnds that the dominant
transitions (of O(N−1/2)) are cascades in which a single quark-antiquark pair
is created or annihilated while preserving the junction structure. Further-
more, the decay amplitude into a baryon-antibaryon pair goes like N−n/2 if
there are n intermediate strings that have to be broken. Annihilation ampli-
tudes decrease for increasing N − n (and thus decreasing n), but are always
exponentially suppressed in agreement with [9]. Therefore, quite generically,
the ratio between the JOZI-violating and JOZI-conserving partial widths
goes quickly to zero at large N . Assuming N = 3 to be large enough, the
tetraquark state should also be mesophobic (and narrow) in real QCD.

In conclusion, in spite of several arguments in favor, a general justiﬁca-
tion of the JOZI selection rule from either large-N , large-λ, or high-energy
considerations is still lacking. In the end, one has to appeal to the data in
order to check its validity or usefulness. This is indeed the point we wish to
address now.

4.3 Supporting phenomenological arguments

The overall pattern of masses and widths of candidate multiquark states is
phenomenologically quite puzzling as, generally speaking, they look anoma-
lously long-lived. This, by the way, is precisely the reason that makes them
visible as resonances over the strong-interaction continuum.

In order to discuss the situation, we found convenient to collect in ﬁgs. 12
and 13, respectively, the masses and widths of today’s available (and more or
less conﬁrmed) hidden charm and hidden bottom mesonic (putative tetraquark)
states. A similar compilation for baryonic (putative pentaquark) states is
presented in ﬁg. 14.

4.3.1 Mesonic states: candidate tetraquarks

The data displayed in the plots of ﬁgs. 12 and 13 are taken from the nice
compilation of ref. [63]. For each state, together with the mass (horizontal-
axis) and width (vertical-axis), we indicate with arrows the thresholds of
the corresponding decay channels. The vertical line gives the location of the
baryon-antibaryon threshold, i.e. of the Λc ¯Λc and Λb ¯Λb total mass, respec-
tively.

22

In the case of hidden charm candidate tetraquarks (ﬁg. 12) we note that,
in all but one case, the allowed decay channels are purely mesonic and that
there is often generous phase space allowed for the decay. The exception is
the X(4630) meson whose mass is a mere 60 MeV above the Λc ¯Λc threshold.
Yet the state is pretty large and likes to decay into charmed baryons. There
is a possibility that this state is not distinct from the nearby Y (4660). That
case has been discussed in detail in ref. [64] with the conclusion that the
branching ratio into charmed baryons is two orders of magnitude larger than
the one in Ψ(2S) + π+π− in spite of the huge phase space unbalance 7.

Many of the states below the baryonic Λc ¯Λc threshold (like X(3872),
Z +
c (3900), G(3900), X(3915), χc2(2P ), X(3940)) are very narrow, in spite of
the large available bosonic phase space. Three others (Z∗
1 (4050), Y (4260),
Y (4360)), though below the Λc ¯Λc threshold, are somewhat larger than the
six mentioned before.

Here one should also mention the molecular interpretation of some of
In particular the states X(3872), X(3915),
the states reported in ﬁg. 12.
X(3940) are narrow and very near to the DD∗ threshold as predicted by the
molecular picture [10, 11, 16, 17, 27, 29].

The situation of hidden bottom candidate tetraquarks (ﬁg. 13) is even
more striking. All the known states are below the Λb ¯Λb threshold, but have
plenty of phase space to decay into bosonic channels, yet their width to mass
ratio is extremely small.

This being said, we should make a disclaimer: we do not pretend that all
narrow tetraquark states are baryonia. A more complete phenomenological
study is certainly necessary before such a suggestion can be made. The above-
mentioned X(4630), Y (4660) tetraquark(s) do smell like baryonia. Instead,
states such as Zb(10610), Zb(10650), although narrow and below baryonic
decay channels, appear to have very surprising branching ratios into open
and hidden beauty channels [65] particularly after the diﬀerence in available
phase space is taken into account 8. As we shall discuss later, the junction
picture would rather predict a democratic decay into the two categories of
mesonic ﬁnal states. An interpretation of those states as molecules made of
two heavy B-mesons appears to be possible according to present data.

4.3.2 Baryonic states: candidate pentaquarks

In ﬁg. 14 we show masses and widths of candidate pentaquark states. We put
in the ﬁgure not only the narrow state recently discovered at LHCb [66], but

7We thank A. Polosa for bringing ref. [64] to our attention.
8We are grateful to M. Karliner for bringing this important point and ref. [65] to our

attention.

23

Figure 12: Masses and widths of narrow hidden charm candidate tetraquarks,
taken from the compilation of ref. [63]. We have excluded just a couple of states of
that compilation whose width exceeds 100 MeV. In the upper part of the diagram
we show the thresholds for the channels into which each one of the particle is
known to decay. The vertical line indicates the position of the Λc ¯Λc threshold.

24

Figure 13: Masses and widths of narrow candidate hidden bottom tetraquarks,
taken from the compilation of ref. [63]. We have excluded just a couple of states of
that compilation whose width exceeds 100 MeV. In the upper part of the diagrams
we show the thresholds for the channels into which each one of the particle is known
to decay. The vertical line indicates the position of the Λb ¯Λb threshold.

25

also the less recent (and not fully conﬁrmed) states of refs. [67] and [68], as
well as the old state discovered in 1979 again at CERN [69] whose existence
was actually never disproved.

We remark that all these states have masses below the corresponding
baryon-antibaryon-baryon threshold, namely Λ ¯N N for Θ+(1540), Λ¯ΛN for
Ξ−−(1860), Ξ¯ΛN for R+(3170) and Λc ¯ΛcN for P +
c (4450). Despite the fact
that they have large phase space for decaying into a baryon plus bosons, they
are very long-lived.

Figure 14: Masses and widths of narrow candidate pentaquarks. In the upper
part of the diagrams we show the thresholds for the channels into which each one
of them is known to decay. The vertical lines indicate the position of the various
baryon-antibaryon-baryon thresholds. Data are taken from refs. [69] [67] [68] [66].

26

4.3.3 Scattering amplitudes with exotic intermediate states

If we neglect the baryon-baryonium sector of QCD (which we can at N =
∞), scattering amplitudes with exotic quantum numbers should exhibit no
baryonium-like resonances (they may have instead molecular bound states,
but these are not our concern here). However, at N = 3 nothing forbids exotic
baryonium resonances to be formed. According to our previous discussion
they are expected to be narrow whenever their JOZI-conserving decays are
kinematically forbidden. We shall now illustrate this point in two examples.

Meson-meson scattering

Consider meson-meson scattering for the case in which the ﬂavor content
of the incoming mesons is such that q ¯q annihilation is impossible or strongly
suppressed. In the absence of baryons and J − ¯J mesons, such a scattering
amplitude should have no resonances in the direct channel with its duality
diagram only showing resonances in the t and u channels (see discussion at
the end of Section 2). However, although with a JOZI-suppressed amplitude,
a J− ¯J pair can be created and a tetraquark can be produced. If formed, such
a tetraquark will decay into a precise linear combination of two-meson states
corresponding to the two ways in which the two q ¯q pairs can be reconstructed.
A particularly interesting case, already considered in refs. [20, 21] 9, has
a c ¯c as well as a ¯u d pair. Thus an intermediate tetraquark state with a
J − ¯J will be coupled, at the quark-level, to a particular combination of
two states, the ﬁrst consisting of a c ¯c (e.g. J/ψ) and a ¯u d (e.g. π−) meson,
the second of a c ¯u (e.g. D0) and a ¯c d (e.g. D−) meson. Two processes,
with the same initial state, are represented in the top and bottom panels of
ﬁg. 15. The amplitudes (and thus also the rates) for the two kinds of ﬁnal
states (J/ψ π− or D0D−) should be simply related if the reaction proceeds
via a single tetraquark intermediate state (each ellipse encircles three totally
antisymmetrized color indices showing that a junction-antijunction pair is
created and then annihilated).

Meson-baryon scattering
Problems with DHS duality of the kind pointed out by Rosner [2] for B ¯B
scattering amplitudes, also arise in the case of M B → M B processes. In the
B ¯B case, the exchange of baryonium states in the s channel is necessary in
order to account for the full t channel meson trajectory (a JOZI conserving
process). Looking at ﬁg. 16 (taken from ref. [8]), one recognizes that in the
M B → M B amplitude intermediate states with junctions (pentaquarks in
the upper panel and tetraquarks in the lower panel) are required if one wants

9We wish to thank L. Maiani and A. Polosa for discussions on this issue.

27

→ J/ψ π− (top panel) and
→ D0D− (bottom panel) with an intermediate tetraquark/baryonium

Figure 15: Diagrams describing the reactions J/ψ π−
J/ψ π−
state. Besides the quark lines also some intermediate gluons are shown (in double-
line notation) in order to evidentiate the two sets of totally antisymmetrized colors
(each one encircled by an ellipse) identifying the intermediate tetraquark state.

to have a non-vanishing discontinuity in the u and t channel. respectively
(JOZI violating exchange). Absence of these discontinuities (at least if other
unitarity corrections due to more complicated, non planar, topologies are
negligible) would imply exchange degeneracy for the strange baryonic Regge
trajectories, Λ and Σ, something which is phenomenologically problematic.

5 Conclusions

In this paper we have tried to update, both theoretically and phenomeno-
logically, our old proposal [7] for interpreting narrow multiquark states as
having hidden baryon number (“baryonia”). These states were predicted
to be ”mesophobic” i.e. with a preference for baryonic rather than mesonic
decay channels (in analogy with heavy quarkonia). This idea can be made
more precise, in QCD, by introducing the concept of a junction (resp. anti-
junction) as a sink (resp. source) of triplets of Wilson lines, each seen as a
string-like color ﬂux tube. Single hadron states are then associated with irre-
ducible color singlet operators containing quarks, antiquarks, junctions and
antijunctions connected by Wilson lines. Besides the baryons themselves
(one junction states) the simplest new states in this sector are tetraquarks
and pentaquarks with two and three junctions (and baryon number zero and

28

c¯c¯ccc¯c¯ccd¯ud¯ud¯ud¯uFigure 16: In the upper and lower panel we provide examples of M B → M B
processes where intermediate pentaquark and tetraquark states are required in
order not to have a vanishing discontinuity in the u and t channel, respectively.

29

190BarvoniumphysicsIs++X,x~~(a)~~(b)Fig.24.DualityrelationbetweenbaryonReggetrajectoriesandmultiquarkstates.(a)InKp—*KponehasBins-channel.Minf-channelandB~inu-channel.(b)Ina~p—oK~~onehasBins-channel,M~inf-channelandBinu-channel.canrelate[116,117]themagnitudeofEXDbreakingforbaryonstothevaluesoftheJOZIviolatingcouplingsof(exotic)multiquarkstatestoordinarymesonsandbaryons(likegB~BMinfig.24aandgM~MMinfig.24b).Thisisdonebystartingfromsomespecificsolution[114,115]ofthedualityconstraintsinabsenceofexotics.Afterthat,nonplanarunitaritycorrectionscanbeintroducedperturbatively.Anotherapproachhasbeenrecentlyproposed[118]inwhicha“planar”exchangedegeneratelimitforMB-~MBamplitudesisidentifiedastheoneinwhichoneofthethreequarksinthebaryonactsasspectatorattheBBMvertexandthepatternofEXDforbaryonsis[10+8]~[8+1]ofSU(3)1forbothnaturalities[32,113].EXDbreakingisattributedto“non-planar”correctionstothebaryonwavefunctions,leadingtooctet—decupletandoctet—singletsplittings.Ithastobenoted[33]that,forconsistency,inanymodelinwhichEXDbreakingforbaryonsis(evenpartly)attributedtothepresenceofmultiquarkintermediatestates,B~mustappearonthesamefootingasM~inordertohaveEXDbreakingeffectsonbaryontrajectoriesindependentofthereactiontakentocomputethem(figs.24).6.4.AnnihilationFromwhatwesaidintheprevioussectionsitshouldbeclearthatabetterexperimentalunderstand-ingofBB-annihilationwouldbeextremelyimportant.*InparticularthestructureinimpactparameterandtheenergybehaviourofNNcross-sectionsandtheaveragemultiplicityinNN-annihilationarecrucialtestsofthedualtopologicalmodelforbaryons.*Foracomprehensivereviewoftheexperimentalandphenomenologicalsituation,seeref.[9].one), respectively.
In our picture, however, other two and three-junction
states with fewer quarks should also be present in the spectrum, although
they might be hard to distinguish from ordinary states with the same ﬂavor.
On the theoretical side we have discussed this picture in two distinct
limits: the ’t Hooft large-N limit (at ﬁxed number of ﬂavors and ﬁxed λ ≡
g2N ) and a lattice strong coupling limit that we argued to be actually a large-
λ limit similar to the one often discussed in the AdS/CFT correspondence [46,
47]. Both limits have been successfully used for the study of the mesonic
sector of QCD but, as ﬁrst pointed out by Witten [9], a suitably deﬁned
large-N limit can also be deﬁned for baryons and baryonia in spite of the
fact that certain quantities diverge in that limit. We have brieﬂy reviewed
Witten’s approach and then argued that also the large-λ limit can be usefully
applied to the baryonic sector.

We are of course aware of the fact that both the large-N and the large-λ
limits could give misleading information about real QCD: the former because
N = 3 may not be large enough, the second because the continuum limit
corresponds to the λ → 0 limit as a result of asymptotic freedom. In ﬁg. 17
we show how these diﬀerent limits are deﬁned in a two-dimensional parameter
space. It is somewhat reassuring that the strong coupling limit can be turned
into a large-λ one, but this is still not suﬃcient even to reach the continuum
limit of large-N QCD.

This theoretical analysis provides us with some qualitative understanding
of the spectrum of multiquark states and of their interactions including the
possible validity of a junction-OZI (JOZI) rule generalizing the ordinary OZI
rule to the baryonic/baryonium sectors. In spite of these considerations the
validity of the JOZI rule appears to depend on a number of extrapolations
that may be satisﬁed for some states and not for others.

We think that only a detailed study of the relevant experimental data
can tell whether the string-junction picture for multiquark states is useful.
In this paper we have undertaken a ﬁrst and modest step in this direction
by collecting present data about multiquark states, their masses, widths and
decay channels. The gross features that strikes the eye is that many of
these states are unusually narrow even when they have considerable phase
space for decaying into channels that violate the JOZI. All of them are below
threshold for decaying into JOZI-allowed channels with one exception, the
X(4630) state, which is just above the Λ¯Λ threshold and yet is pretty broad.
We believe that, all in all, our forty years old proposal appears to hold
water, but a more detailed study of the existing experimental situation data,
as well as the acquisition of new data, is necessary before discriminating
our approach from several others that are presently on the market.
It is
quite likely that there is no single explanation for the existence of narrow

30

Figure 17: Diﬀerent regimes in (lattice) QCD. One may try to extract information
about the real world (Nc = 3 in the continuum limit) by going clockwise around a
large semicircle in this diagram.

31

Ng2QCD @ strong  couplingcontinuum QCD continuum large-N QCD weak coupling large-lambda QCD strong coupling large-N QCD lambda = 10 lambda = 1 3log	g2	AdS/CFT	QCD	@	strong		coupling	Nc=3	Nc					 λ =	10	λ =	1	strong	coupling		large-Nc	QCD	weak	coupling		large-λ	QCD	con@nuum		QCD	W0(λ)					λ-Amin	0OK	O(1/Nc)	multiquark states. We have argued that the ﬁfty year old DHS duality, as
well as several QCD approximations (large-N , large-λ), predict the existence
of tightly bound “irreducible” multiquark states. But, of course, QCD should
better not exclude that in proton-neutron scattering a narrow “molecule”,
usually called deuteron, will appear. It is perfectly possible that, similarly,
some tetra and pentaquark states are narrow, not because of the OZI or JOZI
rules, but simply because they are “molecules” whose mass is close to the
dissociation threshold into their constituent “atoms”.

Acknowledgements

We wish to thank P. Dimopoulos for helping us with some of the ﬁgures
and G. Ricciardi for bringing some recent experimental data to our atten-
tion. One of us (GV) has enjoyed a number of interesting discussions about
the strong coupling and large-N limits with J.-B. Zuber as well as enlight-
ening correspondence on the molecular picture with M. Karliner. We also
acknowledge useful exchanges with M. Bochicchio, L. Maiani, A. Polosa, E.
Querchigh and C. Sonnenschein.

A Sketch of Witten’s large-N argument

In principle, to study the large-N limit of baryon dynamics one should set up
a relativistic and gauge-invariant N -particle bound state equation, a highly
not trivial task. In practice, being only interested in some qualitative con-
clusion, one can employ the following reasoning: one starts by separating
the N quark interaction potential V (N ) from the free N quark propagator.
This is done, technically, by associating the former with N -quark-irreducible
(NQI) diagrams (diagrams that do not have an intermediate state consisting
of just N dressed quark propagators). Next, one decomposes V (N ) into con-
tributions from two-body, three-body, etc. interactions all the way up to an
N -body term (a set of fully connected diagrams). In formulae we write

N(cid:88)

V (N ) =

V (N )
n

.

(30)

n=2

Finally, one uses the large-N limit to analyze each term in the above sum.
Eventually, the energy levels of the system will be given by the eigenvalues
V (N ).

32

n

By its deﬁnition V (N )

consists of diagrams that have a connected (ampu-
tated) 2n-point function accompanied by N−n non-interacting (but dressed)
propagators. Our claim is that, at leading order in 1/N , the above mentioned
connected 2n-point function can be constructed out of an n-meson planar am-
plitude by the following procedure. Take all the planar diagrams giving the
leading contribution to the correlation function of n gauge-invariant quark-
antiquark bilinears. Then, open up the quark bilinears, and, instead, simply
join the n quark and n antiquark lines with the remaining (N − n) “spec-
tator” quarks and antiquarks at two vertices inserting at each of them an
overall N -dimensional Levi-Civita  factor. This is illustrated in ﬁg. 18 for
n = N = 4, where one can easily visualize the above mentioned 4-meson
amplitude by joining together the q − ¯q pairs sharing the same color label
(i.e. the same number since the diﬀerent colors actually denote the quark’s
ﬂavor).

(cid:16)N

(cid:17)

In order to determine the N -dependence of V (N )

one will have to sum
over all possible inequivalent ways of applying the above procedure. This will
produce an
binomial coeﬃcient (and not its square since the n quark
colors have to match those of the n antiquarks) as well as a factor (n − 1)!
from the number of inequivalent cyclic + anticyclic orderings of the pairs in
the n-meson diagram. Finally, there will be a factor g2(n−1) ∼ N−(n−1) from

the n-meson amplitude itself. Summing up we ﬁnd

n

n

−(n−1)F (n, λ) = N F (n, λ) ,
N(cid:88)
n ∼ N nN
V (N )
V (N ) = N

F (n, λ) ,

n=2

(31)

(32)

where F (n, λ) includes some of the above-mentioned combinatorial factors
as well as the dynamical n-dependence of the n-boson correlator. Note,
however, that the F (n, λ) coeﬃcients do not depend upon N . As a result,
provided their n dependence is not too singular (i.e. that the sum over n
in (31) converges fast enough), V (N ) will be simply proportional to N with
an overall universal coeﬃcient. The above considerations make somewhat
more precise the conditions under which Witten’s “soliton claim” follows. It
also conﬁrms his point that the problem of determining the relevant quark
interaction inside a baryon at large-N is of the same level of diﬃculty as that
of ﬁnding the large-N mesonic scattering amplitudes.

33

Figure 18: Typical leading (“planar”) diagram contributing to the baryon wave
function for n = N = 4. Unlike in the rest of the paper diﬀerent colors represent
diﬀerent ﬂavors. The numbers indicate how the 4 colors ﬂow in the diagram.

References

[1] R. Dolen, D. Horn and C. Schmidt, Phys. Rev. 166 (1968) 1768.

[2] J. L. Rosner, Phys. Rev. Lett. 21 (1968) 950 and Phys. Rep. 11 C (1974)

189.

[3] G. ’t Hooft, Nucl. Phys. B 72 (1974) 461.

[4] G. Veneziano, Nucl. Phys. B 117 (1976) 519.

[5] H. Harari, Phys. Rev. Lett. 20 (1968) 1395.

[6] P. G. O. Freund, Phys. Rev. Lett. 20 (1968) 235.

[7] G. C. Rossi and G. Veneziano, Nucl. Phys. B 123 (1977) 507.

[8] L. Montanet, G. C. Rossi and G. Veneziano, Phys. Rep. C 63 (1980)

149.

[9] E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B 160 (1979) 57.

[10] M. B. Voloshin and L. B. Okun, JETP Lett. 23 (1976) 333.

[11] A. De Rujula, H. Georgi, and S. L. Glashow, Phys. Rev. Lett. 38 (1977)

317.

[12] R. L. Jaﬀe, Phys. Rev. D 15 (1977) 267.

34

ǫǫ213433442211[13] H. H¨ogaasen and P. Sorba, Nucl. Phys. B 145 (1978) 119.

[14] D. Strottman, Phys. Rev. D 20 (1979) 748.

[15] H. J. Lipkin, Phys. Lett. B 195 (1987) 484.

[16] N. A. T¨ornqvist, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67 (1991) 556.

[17] N. A. T¨ornqvist, Z. Phys. C 61 (1994) 525.

[18] M. Karliner and H. J. Lipkin, Phys. Lett. B 575 (2003) 249.

[19] R. L. Jaﬀe and F. Wilczek, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91 (2003) 232003.

[20] L. Maiani, F. Piccinini, A. D. Polosa and V. Riquer, Phys. Rev. Lett.

93 (2004) 212002.

[21] L. Maiani, F. Piccinini, A. D. Polosa, and V. Riquer, Phys. Rev. D 71

(2005) 014028.

[22] F. Buccella, H. H¨ogaasen, J.-M. Richard, and P. Sorba, Eur. Phys. J. C

49 (2007) 743.

[23] N. Brambilla, S. Eidelman, B.K. Heltsley, R. Vogt, G. T. Bodwin, E.
Eichten, A. D. Frawley, A. B. Meyer et al., Eur. Phys. J. C 71 (2011)
1534.

[24] A. Chandra, A. Bhattacharya, and B. Chakrabarti, Mod. Phys. Lett. A

27 (2012) 1250006.

[25] S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110 (2013) 261601.

[26] S. J. Brodsky, D. S. Hwang and R. F. Lebed, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113

(2014) 112001.

[27] Z. C. Yang, Z. F. Sun, J. He, X. Liu and S. L. Zhu, Chin. Phys. C 36

(2012) 6.

[28] W. L. Wang, F. Huang, Z. Y. Zhang, and B. S. Zou, Phys. Rev. C 84

(2011) 015203.

[29] M. Karliner and J. L. Rosner, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115 (2015) 122001.

[30] L. Maiani, A. D. Polosa and V. Riquer, Phys. Lett. B 749 (2015) 289.

[31] A. Esposito, A. L. Guerrieri, F. Piccinini, A. Pilloni and A. D. Polosa,

Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 30 (2015) 1530002.

35

[32] I. Montvay and G. M¨unster “Quantum Fields on a Lattice”, Cambridge
Monographs on Mathematical Physics (Cambridge University Press,
1994).

[33] S. Okubo, Phys. Lett. 5 (1963)165.

[34] G. Zweig, CERN Report S419/TH412 (1964) unpublished.

[35] I. lizuka, K. Okada and O. Shito, Progr. Theor. Phys. 35 (1966) 1061.

[36] G. C. Rossi and G. Veneziano, Phys. Lett. B 70 (1977) 255.

[37] G. C. Rossi and G. Veneziano, Phys. Lett. B 597 (2004) 338.

[38] E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B 156 (1979) 269.

[39] G. Veneziano, Nucl. Phys. B 159 (1979) 213.

[40] J. M. Drouﬀe and J. B. Zuber, Phys. Rep. 102 (1983) 1.

[41] K. H. O’Brien and J.-B. Zuber, Nucl. Phys. B 253 (1985) 621.

[42] J. Jersak, T. Neuhaus and P. M. Zerwas, Phys. Lett. B 133 (1983) 103.

[43] E. Dagotto, A. Kocic, and J. Kogut, Phys. Rev. Lett. 60 (1988) 772.

[44] M. Creutz, J. Math. Phys. 19 (1978) 2043.

[45] J. B. Zuber, private communication.

[46] J. M. Maldacena, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 38 (1999) 1113 [Adv. Theor.

Math. Phys. 2 (1998) 231].

[47] E. Witten, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2 (1998) 253.

[48] O. Andreev,

“Some Aspects

of Three-Quark

Potentials”,

arXiv:1511.03484 [hep-ph].

[49] X. Artru, Nucl. Phys. B 85 (1975) 442.

[50] N. Isgur and J. E. Paton, Phys. Rev. D 31 (1985) 2910.

[51] N. Brambilla, P. Consoli and G. M. Prosperi, Phys. Rev. D 50 (1994)

5878.

[52] Y. S. Kalashnikova and A. V. Nefediev, Phys. Atom. Nucl. 60 (1997)

1333 [Yad. Fiz. 60N8 (1997) 1470].

36

[53] H. G. Dosch and V. F. Muller, Nucl. Phys. B 116 (1976) 470.

[54] G. S. Bali, Phys. Rept. 343 (2001) 1.

[55] C. Alexandrou, P. De Forcrand and A. Tsapalis, Phys. Rev. D 65 (2002)

054503.

[56] T. T. Takahashi, H. Suganuma, Y. Nemoto and H. Matsufuru, Phys.

Rev. D 65 (2002) 114509.

[57] C. Alexandrou, P. de Forcrand and O. Jahn, Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl.

119 (2003) 667.

[58] N. Sakumichi and H. Suganuma, Phys. Rev. D 92 (2015) 034511.

[59] S. Prelovsek and D. Mohler, Phys. Rev. D 79 (2009) 014503.

[60] S. Prelovsek, Acta Phys. Polon. Supp. 3 (2010) 975.

[61] M. Wagner, C. Alexandrou, M. Gravina, J. O. Daldrop, C. Urbach,
M. Dalla Brida, L. Scorzato and C. Wiese, PoS Conﬁnement X (2012)
108 [arXiv:1212.1648 [hep-lat]].

[62] Y. Ikeda et al., Phys. Lett. B 729 (2014) 85.

[63] G. T. Bodwin, E. Braaten, E. Eichten, S. L. Olsen, T. K. Pedlar and
J. Russ, “Quarkonium at the Frontiers of High Energy Physics: A Snow-
mass White Paper”, arXiv:1307.7425.

[64] G. Cotugno, R. Faccini, A. D. Polosa and C. Sabelli, Phys. Rev. Lett.

104 (2010) 132005.

[65] A. Bondar et al. [Belle Collaboration], PoS ConﬁnementX (2012) 156

[arXiv:1303.0101 [hep-ex]].

[66] R. Aaij et al. [LHCb Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 115 (2015) 072001.

[67] T. Nakano et al. [LEPS Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 91 (2003)

012002.

[68] C. Alt et al. [NA49 Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 92 (2004) 042003.

[69] T. Amirzadeh et al. [Birmingham-CERN-Glasgow-Michigan State-Paris
and Cambridge-Michigan State Collaborations], Phys. Lett. B 89 (1979)
125. See also J. Kinson et al., Baryon 1980, proceedings of the 4th
International Conference on Baryon Resonances, Toronto, edited by N.
Isgur (University of Toronto, Toronto, 1981), p. 272.

37

