1

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
8
1
 
 
]
i
c
s
-
l
r
t

m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
7
4
8
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Microscopic plasticity and damage in multi-phase steels: on the

competing role of crystallography and phase contrast

T.W.J. de Geus1,2, F. Maresca1,2, R.H.J. Peerlings2, M.G.D. Geers2

2Department of Mechanical Engineering, Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands

1Materials innovation institute (M2i), Delft, The Netherlands

∗Corresponding author: t.w.j.d.geus@tue.nl

Abstract

This paper unravels micromechanical aspects of multi-phase metals whose microstructure comprises grains
of two or more phases. The local plastic response is determined by (i) the relative misorientation of the
slip systems of individual grains, and (ii) the diﬀerent mechanical properties of the phases. The relative
importance of these two mechanisms is unclear: is the plastic response dominated by the grain’s anisotropy,
or is this eﬀect overwhelmed by the mechanical incompatibility between the two phases? The answer impacts
the modeling of such a material, but also gives insights in the resulting fracture mechanisms. Until now, this
question has been addressed only for particular crystallographies and mechanical properties. In contrast,
this paper presents a systematic study including a large set of distributions, crystallographies, and material
parameters. It is found that the global and the plastic local response of the two extreme modeling choices (full
crystal plasticity on one end and full isotropic plasticity on the other end) converge with increasing phase
contrast. The eﬀect of the crystallography is completely overwhelmed by the mechanical incompatibility
when the yield stress of the hard phase is a factor of four higher compared to the soft phase. When this
ratio is lower than two, its inﬂuence may not be neglected. However, even in this regime, fracture initiation
is controlled by the local arrangement of phases. The latter is quantiﬁed in this paper through the average
arrangement of phases around fracture initiation sites.

Keywords: crystal plasticity; multi-phase materials; micromechanics; ductile damage

1 Introduction

This paper studies the plastic response of multi-phase metals that macroscopically combine good strength
and ductility. The microstructure typically comprises several phases that can be roughly classiﬁed in a soft
phase and a hard phase, which have a signiﬁcantly diﬀerent yield stress. We study the competition between
plasticity due to the misalignment of the slip systems of the grains, and that due to the contrast in mechanical
properties between the two phases. We aim to determine their relative inﬂuence on the plastic response and
the ductile damage of the matrix, at the level of an aggregate of grains, whereby we investigate of a – much
simpler and less expensive – isotropic plasticity model provides suﬃciently accurate predictions. Earlier works
in this direction mainly focused on a single set of parameters or microstructures. In contrast, we consider
a statistically relevant set of random microstructures for a wide range of parameters, thereby conciliating
apparently contradictory conclusions in diﬀerent regimes. The outcome of this analysis oﬀers perspective to
the required level of constitutive detail at this level of observation, for which a wide variety of models have
been applied by diﬀerent authors.

Materials that belong to the category of interest are metal-matrix composites and advanced high strength
steels. The former has an aluminum matrix reinforced by silicon-carbide. It was recognized that the response
is dominated mostly by the strong contrast in properties of the two constituents. The crystallography of the
matrix was found to matter only at the ﬁnal stages of deformation where fracture initiates [1–3]. Advanced
high strength steels have a considerably more complicated, fully metallic, microstructure, whereby the main

2

mechanical contributions originate from the (soft) ferrite and the (hard) martensite phase. These steels
display many phenomena which cannot be trivially explained by the theory and models that have been
proposed for the, more simple, metal-matrix composites. Existing models were extended with more realistic
microstructures [e.g. 4–6] but also with more realistic constitutive models, often involving crystal plasticity
[e.g. 7–9].

For single phase materials, the eﬀects of crystallography are signiﬁcant on the plastic and damage re-
sponse, as the misalignment of grains introduces mechanical contrast [10]. The natural question that arises
is to what extent the phase contrast in multi-phase materials dominates this ‘misalignment contrast’. It is
known that for the case of rigid particles embedded in an elasto-plastic matrix the micromechanical response
is mostly controlled by the interaction of the particles and the matrix phase, whereas the crystallography
is less important [1, 2, 11]. Experimentally, this has been considered only using a rigid ﬁber in an analog
matrix material (silver chloride) [11], whereby transmission electron microscopy measurements were com-
pared to isotropic elasto-plastic simulations. A satisfactory accuracy of the model predictions compared to
the experiments was found except on the sub-grain level.
If also the hard phase deforms plastically, the
crystallography appears to play an important role that may not be neglected [7, 12].

These studies were based on a speciﬁc set of crystallographies, with parameters (mechanical and crystal-
lographic / morphological) reﬂecting extreme cases. This paper considers a much wider range of parameters
to identify where the two extreme regimes break down. The analysis is extended to the initiation of fracture
for which the outcome of the competition between crystallography and phase contrast is yet undetermined.
For this case in particular it is imperative to consider a large set of microstructures.

This paper is structured as follows. The microstructural model and the crystal and isotropic plasticity
models are introduced in Sections 2 and 3. The macroscopic and microscopic elasto-plastic responses for
these two models are compared in Section 4 for a wide range of hard phase volume fractions and phase
contrasts. This comparison is extended to the initiation of ductile fracture in Section 5. The paper ends with
concluding remarks in Section 6.

Nomenclature
(cid:104)a(cid:105)
¯a
A
A
C = A ⊗ B
C = A · B
c = A : B = AijBji

ensemble average
volume average
second order tensor
fourth order tensor
dyadic tensor product
single tensor contraction
double tensor contraction

2 Microstructural model

2.1 Microstructure and spatial discretization
The microstructure is represented by an idealized periodic unit cell consisting of 32×32 equi-sized “grains”, of
which an example is shown in Figure 1(a). Each grain is randomly assigned the properties of the hard or the
soft phase, by comparing a random number in the range [0, 1] to a target volume fraction of the hard phase,
ϕhard. The crystallography of the grains is discussed in the next section. To obtain statistically representative
results, an ensemble of 256 of these random unit cells is considered for each set of parameters. A reference
value ϕhard = 0.25 is considered, resulting in an ensemble average volume fraction (cid:104)ϕhard(cid:105) = 0.25 ± 0.04.

Consistent with the adopted idealization, only grain averaged (tensorial) quantities are considered. A
ﬁnite element based solution scheme is used, whereby the spatial discretization is chosen such that these
quantities are converged to within 1% error. Each grain is discretized using 2 × 2 eight node bi-quadratic
quadrilateral elements (see Figure 1(b)), each of which is numerically integrated using four Gauss points.

3

Figure 1. (a) A typical microstructure from the ensemble with a hard phase volume fraction ϕhard = 0.25, whereby
the grains of the two phases are shown in blue and red. (b) The numerical discretization within a single grain.

2.2 Macroscopic deformation and periodicity

The periodicity of the unit cell is applied using standard periodic boundary conditions. The displacement
ﬂuctuations are constrained such that the average deformation gradient tensor equals the prescribed macro-
scopic deformation gradient ¯F . Plane strain is assumed for the out-of-plane direction.

To concentrate on the local eﬀects in the microstructure, an isochoric macroscopic deformation is applied.
This way, any local volumetric deformation – resulting in a non-zero hydrostatic stress – can be directly
linked to the local microstructural features. Pure shear is used for this purpose, which corresponds to the
following logarithmic strain tensor

¯ε(cid:0)(cid:126)ex(cid:126)ex − (cid:126)ey(cid:126)ey

(cid:1)

√

3
2

¯ε =

(1)

where ¯ε represents the equivalent logarithmic strain. To introduce suﬃcient plastic deformation, ¯ε = 0.2 is
used (applied in 2000 steps for an accurate time integration, see below).

3 Constitutive models

3.1

Introduction

The response of a standard crystal plasticity model is compared to an isotropic plasticity model. For both
models, a rate-dependent formulation is adopted. This choice is classical for crystal plasticity, since it
regularizes the slip system activation, while the choice for the isotropic plasticity model is made here for
consistency. The parameters are chosen such that the resulting response is close to the rate-independent
limit and such that both models coincide in the isotropic limit (i.e. an aggregate of grains with identical
material properties). The actual values of the yield stress and hardening are therefore diﬀerent for both
constitutive models, even though the same symbols are used below.

Both models are formulated in a ﬁnite deformation setting, by assuming the multiplicative split of the

deformation gradient, F , into an elastic part, Fe, and plastic part, Fp:

F = Fe · Fp

(2)

This split introduces an intermediate conﬁguration distorted by the plastic deformation only. The elastic
deformation, as well as rotations, are included in Fe.

The plastic part of the velocity gradient is introduced as Lp := ˙Fp · F −1

p . Diﬀerent expressions for Lp are

chosen for the crystal and the isotropic plasticity model, see below.

It is furthermore useful to introduce the pull-back of the Kirchhoﬀ stress tensor τ to the intermediate

conﬁguration:
Si = F −1

e

· τ · F −T

e

(3)

softhard(b) finite element discretization of one grain(a) volume element4

The elastic constitutive relation for Si reads:

Si = C : Ee

(4)
for both crystal and isotropic plasticity. Herein, C is the usual (isotropic) fourth-order elasticity tensor
2 (Ce − I) is the elastic Green-Lagrange
characterized by Young’s modulus E and Poisson’s ratio ν. Ee := 1
strain, where Ce := F T

e · Fe is the elastic Cauchy-Green tensor.

3.2 Crystal plasticity

Within a standard crystal plasticity formulation [13], the plastic part of the velocity gradient, Lp, is the sum
of the plastic slip rates, ˙γα, along the individual slip planes, α:

Lp =

˙γα P α
0

(5)

ns(cid:88)

α=1

0 ⊗ nα

0 where sα

where ns is the number of slip systems; the Schmid tensor P α
0 deﬁnes the slip system’s orientation through
P α
0 := sα
0 is the normal to the slip plane in the intermediate
conﬁguration. For both the soft and the hard phase, the number of active slip systems ns = 12, all belonging to
the {110} slip system family for body centered cubic crystals [see 14]. Non-Schmid eﬀects are not considered.
Throughout this paper, the grain orientations – i.e. the Euler angles – are selected randomly, such that the
aggregate of grains is isotropic [e.g. 15].

0 is the slip direction and nα

The plastic slip rate along each slip system, ˙γα, is determined via a visco-plastic slip law [16]

sign(τα)

(6)

where ˙γ0 is a reference slip rate, m is the strain rate sensitivity, and τα is the resolved shear stress along the
αth slip system:

(cid:18)|τα|

(cid:19)1/m

(cid:1) : P α

0

˙γα = ˙γ0

sα

τα =(cid:0)Si · Ce
ns(cid:88)

˙sα =

β=1

hαβ | ˙γβ|

(cid:113) 2

˙εp =

3 Dp : Dp

The current slip resistance sα is calculated via the following evolution law

which has an initial value of s0. The hardening is a combination of self-hardening and latent hardening
deﬁned through the hardening matrix

(cid:18)

(cid:19)a(cid:0)δαβ + qn(1 − δαβ)(cid:1)

hαβ = h0

1 − sα
s∞

where qn is the latent hardening over self-hardening ratio for non-coplanar slip systems and δαβ is the
Kronecker delta; h0, s∞ and a are material parameters.

An equivalent plastic strain, εp, is deﬁned for comparison purposes. Its evolution reads

Its initial value is naturally zero. This deﬁnition is similar to that of [7], where Lp is instead.

Isotropic plasticity

3.3
For the case of isotropic plasticity, it is assumed that Lp ≡ Dp. The following expression of Dp is employed
[e.g. 17, 18]:

Dp =

3
2

˙εp
seq

i · Ce
Sd

(11)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Table 1. Used materials parameters for the crystal plasticity and the isotropic plasticity model.

Model
Isotropic plasticity
Crystal plasticity

s0/E s∞/E h0/E
70
170
800
450

8000
8000

˙γ0
0.01
0.01

a
1.5
1.5

m qn
0.1
1.4
-
0.1

ν
0.3
0.3

where ˙εp is the equivalent plastic strain rate, and the equivalent stress seq is deﬁned as follows

where the stress deviator Sd

3 (Si : Ce) C−1

e

5

(12)

seq =

(Sd

(cid:114) 3
(cid:18) seq

2

i · Ce)
i = Si − 1

i · Ce) : (Sd
(cid:19)1/m

˙εp = ˙γ0

sy

where the yield stress is given by

sy = s0 + h εp

and ﬁnally the hardening

(cid:18)

(cid:19)a

h = h0

1 − sy
s∞

[cf. 18, 19]. The evolution of the plastic strain reads

(13)

(14)

(15)

3.4 Material parameters and phase contrast

The focus in this paper is on the plastic response, and hence the same (isotropic) elastic behavior is assumed
for both models. To render the plastic response comparable, the parameters of the isotropic model are
chosen representative for the considered class of materials [e.g. 20]. The soft phase is taken as a reference and
the parameters of the hard phase are obtained by scaling them relative to the soft phase (see below). The
constitutive response of the soft phase is plotted in Figure 2 using a solid red line, in terms of the equivalent
Kirchhoﬀ stress ¯τeq, as a function of the equivalent logarithmic strain ¯ε. Next, the parameters of the crystal
plasticity model are ﬁtted such that the response coincides with that of the isotropic model in an average
sense (for a unit cell of many randomly oriented grains of the soft phase). The resulting average response is
plotted in Figure 2 using a solid green line. Note that crystal plasticity predicts a more gradual transition
from the elastic to the plastic regime, as the slip planes of the diﬀerent grains become active at various stages
of deformation. After yielding, the predicted response of the two models is comparable. All parameters are
listed in Table 1.

Most parameters of the hard phase are the same as those of the soft phase, except for the yield stresses
and hardening moduli – s0, s∞, and h0 – which are scaled by a factor χ = 3
2 , 2, 4, and 8. As an example,
the behavior for χ = 2 is shown in Figure 2 using dashed lines for both models. Note again that the plastic
responses of both models closely resemble each other, except during initial yielding. A reference stress τ0,
which coincides with the reference initial yield stress, is also introduced in Figure 2.

4 Elasto-plastic response

4.1 Macroscopic response

The model in which both phases are modeled using crystal plasticity and for which the hard phase volume
fraction equals 0.25 is taken as the reference case. For this model, the scatter in the macroscopic response
of the diﬀerent unit cells in the ensemble is shown in Figure 3, whereby the lower- and upper-bound are
highlighted.
In this ﬁgure, the macroscopic equivalent Kirchhoﬀ stress, ¯τeq, normalized by the reference
stress, τ0, is plotted as a function of the applied average strain, ¯ε, using diﬀerent colors for diﬀerent values

6

Figure 2. (Average) constitutive response of crystal plasticity (Section 3.2) and isotropic plasticity (Section 3.3), for
two diﬀerent hardening ratios: χ = 1 and χ = 2. NB no new parameter identiﬁcation is performed for χ (cid:54)= 1.

of phase contrast, χ. The yield stress is approximately constant while the hardening strongly increases with
increasing χ. Also the scatter between diﬀerent microstructures increases with χ. This behavior results from
the sequence of plastic events activating in the microstructure. First, the soft phase starts yielding, while the
hard phase remains elastic. Macroscopically this is observed as the onset of yielding. As a consequence of the
hardening of the soft phase, the hard phase also starts to yield resulting in a higher macroscopic hardening
than due to the soft phase only. Since the yield stress (including hardening) of the hard phase increases
by increasing χ, more stress is required for the hard phase to yield, explaining the increased macroscopic
hardening. Whether the hard phase yields is determined by local compatibility within the microstructure.
Since the hard phase yields at a higher stress, the microstructural conﬁguration becomes more important,
which induces the observed increased scatter between the diﬀerent microstructures.

Figure 3. Normalized macroscopic equivalent stress, τeq, as a function of the applied equivalent strain, ¯ε, of the
individual unit cells wherein both phases are modeled with crystal plasticity (with scatter bands); for diﬀerent phase
contrast, χ.

The eﬀect of using an isotropic model is shown in Figure 4 for an applied strain of ¯ε = 0.2. In Figure 4(a)
the microstructural model is simpliﬁed by applying the isotropic model for either one or both phases for a

isotropic plasticitycrystal plasticity0.00.51.01.52.02.50.000.050.100.150.207

phase contrast χ = 3/2. The scatter between the diﬀerent microstructures is shown using a box-plot. (i) The
reference crystal plasticity model is shown in black. From left to right: (ii) the soft phase is assumed isotropic
while the hard phase remains plastically anisotropic; (iii) the hard phase is assumed isotropic while the soft
phase remains plastically anisotropic, and ﬁnally, (iv) both phases are assumed isotropic. In the extreme case
with both phases isotropic, the macroscopic response is harder with respect to the reference case where both
phases are plastically anisotropic. Assuming the soft phase isotropic has a much bigger eﬀect than assuming
the hard phase isotropic (3% instead of 1% increase of ¯τeq). This is logical, as the soft phase takes most of
the plastic deformation.

Figure 4(b) shows the reference, crystal plasticity, model together with the strongest assumption where
both phases are isotropic, as a function of phase contrast, χ. For both cases the scatter between the diﬀerent
microstructures increases with χ (as was observed for Figure 3). A more important observation is that both
models approach the same values. In terms of the ensemble average, the isotropic model predicts a 4% higher
stress for χ = 3/2 while this is reduced to 2% for χ = 8. In terms of the scatter however, for χ = 3/2 all unit
cells predict a higher stress while for χ = 8 only 7% of the unit cells predict a higher stress. This implies
that if the contrast between the phases is large enough, assuming both phases isotropic is less relevant than
the phase contrast in terms of mechanical properties. In term of the statistics of Figure 4(b) it is found that
if χ ≥ 4 the stress predicted by the isotropic model is accurate for 80% of the unit cells.

Figure 4. Eﬀect of diﬀerent constitutive assumptions for each of the phases on the macroscopic response, at an
applied strain ¯ε = 0.2, for: (a) all combinations of constitutive assumptions for a phase contrast χ = 3/2; (b) both
phases modeled with either crystal plasticity or isotropic plasticity, as a function of increasing phase contrast, χ.

4.2 Microscopic response

The local plastic response is shown in Figure 5 for a typical microstructure; all snapshots are taken at the
same applied strain ¯ε = 0.2. The phase contrast, χ, increases from left to right. For the two extremes,
χ = 3/2 and χ = 8, a magniﬁed region is shown in Figure 6. The reference model, where both phases are
modeled with crystal plasticity, is shown in the top row, and the simplest approximation where both phases
are isotropic is shown in the bottom row. In all cases, the plastic strain, εp, is higher in the soft phase than in
the hard phase. This partitioning is most pronounced for the highest phase contrast (χ = 8, Figures 5(d,h))
where almost no plastic strain is observed in the hard phase. The highest values of εp are found within
bands in the soft phase oriented under ±45 degrees, coinciding with the shear directions; this deformation
localization increases with χ.

In comparing the two models (crystal vs. isotropic plasticity) only minor diﬀerences are observed for
the highest phase contrast χ = 8 (cf. Figures 5,6(d,h)) both in the plastic strain, εp, and the (periodic)

soft: crystal plasticitysoft: crystal plasticityhard: crystal plasticitysoft: isotropic plasticityhard: isotropic plasticitysoft: isotropic plasticityhard: isotropic plasticityhard: crystal plasticityhard: isotropic plasticity / soft: isotropic plasticity0.0(a)hard: crystal plasticity / soft: crystal plasticity(b)8

displacements. Clear diﬀerences appear for lower χ. In particular at the lowest phase contrast (χ = 3/2),
the displacements and the local plasticity are noticeably more homogeneous for the isotropic model (cf.
Figures 5,6(a,e)). For the crystal plasticity model, ﬂuctuations of εp are observed from grain to grain within
the soft phase, indicating that one grain is more favorably oriented than the other. The local orientation
diﬀerences introduce an incompatibility which competes with the incompatibility due to the phase contrast.

Figure 5. The local equivalent plastic strain, εp, for increasing phase contrast χ (left to right) and diﬀerent consti-
tutive models: both phases modeled with crystal plasticity (top) and both with isotropic plasticity (bottom); all at
an applied strain of ¯ε = 0.2 and the same microstructure (include crystallography) of Figure 1. Grains of the hard
phase are highlighted using a black outline.

Figure 6. Zoom of Figure 5: (a,e) for χ = 3/2 and (d,h) for χ = 8.

To address the above observations systematically, the local responses of the entire ensemble is considered.
In Figure 7 the probability density Φ of the plastic strain εp (top) and hydrostatic stress τm (bottom) are
shown for increasing phase contrast χ (left to right). The plots include Φ of the ensemble of grains (thick
solid line), as well as that of only the hard phase (thin solid line) and of only the soft phase (thin dashed
line) – for the reference crystal plasticity model (black) and the isotropic model (blue).

(a)(b)(c)(d)crystal plasticity(e)(f)(g)(h)isotropic plasticitycrystal plasticityisotropic plasticity(a)(d)(e)(h)9

For the plastic strain (top) it is observed that the partitioning between the hard and the soft phase
increases with increasing χ: the soft phase accumulates more deformation. At the same time the scatter
increases, implying that the plasticity is more localized. When the isotropic approximation (blue) is compared
to the reference model (black), it is observed that the two tend to overlap with increasing χ. This also holds
for the plastic strain distribution within each phase.

For the hydrostatic stress (bottom), the amplitude is similar in the hard and the soft phase. Note that both
phases have the same elastic response, justifying the comparable amplitudes. As the macroscopic deformation
introduces no global hydrostatic stress, any non-zero hydrostatic stress is related to the inhomogeneity of the
microstructure only. Similarly as for the hard phase, the hydrostatic stress in the isotropic approximation
approaches that of the reference crystal plasticity model for increasing χ.

Figure 7. The ensemble probability density Φ of the local plastic strain εp (top) and the local hydrostatic stress τm
(bottom) at an applied strain ¯ε = 0.2. The phase contrast χ increases from left to right. The isolated hard phase
(thin solid line) and soft phase (thin dashed line) are normalized with respect to their respective volume fractions.
The diﬀerent constitutive assumptions are plotted using a diﬀerent color: black for crystal plasticity and blue for
isotropic plasticity.

4.3

Inﬂuence of the hard phase volume fraction

The analysis is next extended to diﬀerent ranges of hard phase volume fraction, i.e. ϕhard = 0.50 and 0.75.
For the reference (crystal plasticity) model, the macroscopic response is shown in Figure 8(a) using diﬀerent
colors for the diﬀerent hard phase volume fractions; all ensembles have the same phase contrast χ = 3/2.
The initial yield stress and the hardening increase with the hard phase volume fraction, as to be expected
from the rule of mixtures. The response at an applied strain ¯ε = 0.2 is shown for the full range of considered
parameters in Figure 8(b), where the macroscopic stress, τeq, is plotted as a function of the hard phase volume
fraction, ϕhard, using a marker for each individual unit cell. The ﬁgure shows the strong combined inﬂuence
of the hard phase volume fraction and phase contrast. The dependence on the volume fraction is clearly
more pronounced for a larger phase contrast. For χ = 8, ¯τeq scales approximately with a factor χ ϕhard.
For χ = 3/2, it only scales with 50% thereof. An emperical power-law scaling relation of the macroscopic
stress relative to the volume fraction (with an exponent of approximately 1.3) can thus be extracted from
the responses.

The microstructural response is studied in a more coherent way by considering the distribution of the
plastic strain and hydrostatic stress response of all grains in the ensembles, as a function of phase contrast

10

Figure 8. (a) The range of the normalized macroscopic equivalent stress, τeq, as a function of the applied equivalent
strain, ¯ε, of the individual unit cells, for diﬀerent hard volume fractions, ϕhard; all for a phase contrast χ = 3/2. (b)
The response of the individual unit cells at ¯ε = 0.2 for all parameter variations. The two phases are modeled with
crystal plasticity.

χ. Figure 9 shows the distribution (conﬁdence intervals) per phase: soft (blue) and hard (red). The solid
lines correspond to the crystal plasticity model while the dashed lines correspond to the isotropic model.
Figures 9(a–c) show the equivalent plastic strain, εp, and Figures 9(d–f) show the hydrostatic stress, τm.
From left to right the volume fraction increases. From the results it is observed that in each case the
diﬀerence between the two models reduces with increasing phase contrast χ. For ϕhard = 0.25, the range of
plastic strain is a factor of 2.2 (soft phase) and 2.4 (hard phase) more narrow for the isotropic model than for
the crystal plasticity model for the lowest phase contrast, χ = 3/2. In the other extreme, χ = 8, these ratios
reduce to 1.1 and 1.3, respectively. This is consistently observed also for the hydrostatic stress where for
χ = 3/2 the ratio is 2.0 for the soft phase and 1.9 for the hard phase, while they are reduced to 1.1 and 1.05
for χ = 8. This trend is conﬁrmed for ϕhard = 0.5. For the highest hard phase volume fraction, ϕhard = 0.75,
however the range of plastic strains in the soft phase appears to be overestimated by the isotropic model for
χ = 8 (see Figure 9(c)) with a factor 1.1 for the soft phase and 1.01 for the hard phase, whereas the range of
hydrostatic stress is underestimated by the isotropic model in both phases (with a factor of 1.2 for the soft
phase and 1.3 for the hard phase, see Figure 9(f)). The mismatch originates from the fact that at this high
hard phase volume fraction the hard phase starts to form a network across the unit cell. In that case, the
hard phase is forced to signiﬁcantly deform plastically also at the highest χ. The soft phase follows the hard
phase, through the strong constraint acting on it.

4.4 Eﬀect of planar assumption

So far, plane strain conditions have been assumed, thereby artiﬁcially constraining the crystals. To assess
the consequences thereof, the microstructure is extended to a quasi-three-dimensional setting, whereby the
ﬁnite element discretization is three-dimensional but the microstructure stays two-dimensional. In this case,
periodicity is used in all three spatial directions, whereby the average deformation gradient tensor ¯ε is given by
equation (1). The deformation is thus constrained to be planar only on average, allowing for local out-of-plane
deformations. The analysis is performed using a hard phase volume fraction ϕhard = 0.25.

For the reference, crystal plasticity, model the scatter of the 3-D macroscopic responses is shown in
Figure 10, along with the two-dimensional results. As expected, the response is more compliant now that the
system is less constrained. In the local response, depicted in Figure 11, the out-of-plane displacements are
clearly visible. However, the equivalent plastic strain distribution remains comparable to the two-dimensional
case (cf. Figures 11 and 5).

The local response of the ensembles with either a two- and three-dimensional discretization is systemati-

11

Figure 9. The distribution (average ± standard deviation) of the equivalent plastic strains εp (top) and hydrostatic
stresses τm (bottom) in the ensemble, as a function of the phase contrast χ. From left to right the volume fraction
increases. Colors are used to discriminate between the hard phase (red) and soft phase (blue). The line-style corre-
sponds to the constitutive model: both phases modeled with crystal plasticity (solid) and both phases with isotropic
plasticity (dashed). All ﬁgures are at ¯ε = 0.2.

Figure 10. Macroscopic equivalent stress ¯τeq as a function of applied equivalent strain ¯ε for the two-dimensional
spatial discretization and the three-dimensional (fully periodic) spatial discretization. Both phases are modeled with
crystal plasticity, a hard phase volume fraction ϕhard = 0.25 and a phase contrast χ = 3/2.

12

Figure 11. Local plastic strain εp for diﬀerent values of the phase contrast χ. Both phases are modeled with crystal
plasticity, all ﬁgures are at an applied strain ¯ε = 0.2.

cally compared in Figure 12, for the plastic strain (top) and hydrostatic stress (bottom). The diﬀerences are
minor, independent of the phase contrast χ. The relative local diﬀerence in the response of the individual
grains is at most 8%, which is slightly higher than what is observed macroscopically (6%).

4.5 Discussion

The results of the present study are consistent with earlier results in the literature. Both Needleman and
Tvergaard [1] and McHugh et al. [2] using rigid reinforcement particles observed minor diﬀerences for an
isotropic plasticity compared with a crystal plasticity model. This was experimentally conﬁrmed by Nugent
et al. [11]. This case corresponds best to a phase contrast of χ = 8 in the present study, for which the
same observations are revealed. If the reinforcement phase is no longer rigid, Choi et al. [7] observed distinct
diﬀerences between the isotropic and the reference crystal plasticity model. Their parameters compare with
a phase contrast of χ = 3/2 in the present study for which indeed clear diﬀerences appeared. Based on the
results presented here, the apparently contradictory observations in the literature stem from the fact that
each considers a clearly diﬀerent regime for the phase contrast.

It may thus be concluded that if the mechanical contrast χ between the two phases is suﬃciently high, the
eﬀect of the orientation discontinuity of the slip systems between individual grains is smaller or even negligible
– both in the volumetric and the deviatoric response. If the phase contrast is low, the incompatibility between
the phases competes with the incompatibility introduced by the orientation mismatch of the diﬀerent crystals.
Consequently, using isotropic plasticity is particularly meaningful for high phase contrasts. It can be used
with an adequate quantitative approximation for χ ≥ 4. This conclusion also holds for diﬀerent hard phase
volume fractions, where the hard phase may no longer be considered as a reinforcement phase. Furthermore,
relaxing the out-of-plane constraint has a negligible inﬂuence on these observations.

For the phase contrast χ = 3/2, where the crystallography plays an important role, it remains questionable
whether the anisotropy of both phases has equal inﬂuence on the mechanical response. To this end, the
reference ensemble is compared with two approximations in which only one of the two phases is assumed
isotropic. The result is shown in Figure 13 in terms of the ensemble probability density Φ of the equivalent
plastic strain εp (top) and the hydrostatic stress τm (bottom). When the hard phase is assumed isotropic
(left), the plastic strain in the hard phase becomes more homogeneous; the plastic strain in the soft phase and
the hydrostatic stress in both phases are not aﬀected. On the other hand, if the soft phase is assumed isotropic
only the plastic strain in the hard phase is unaﬀected. Both the plastic strain in the soft phase as well as the
hydrostatic stress in both phases are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent. This observation is particularly interesting in the
context of advanced high strength steels (the properties of which are in this range) as diﬀerent researchers
have conﬁrmed that martensite, which acts as reinforcement phase, may be highly anisotropic in the plastic
domain [21–23].

13

Figure 12. Eﬀect of out-of-plane constraints on the local response. Both phases modeled with crystal plasticity,
ϕhard = 0.25.

Figure 13. The probability density Φ of the plastic strain εp and hydrostatic stress τm for the case where only one
of the phases is isotropic: (a,c) the hard phase and (b,d) the soft phase. The phase contrast χ = 3/2, the hard phase
volume fraction ϕhard = 0.25, and the applied strain ¯ε = 0.2.

3-D2-D(a)(b)(c)(d)(e)(f)(g)(h)plastic strainhydrostatic stressplastic strainhydrostatic stress(a)(b)(c)(d)hard:    crystal pl. / soft: crystal pl.hard: isotropic pl. / soft: crystal pl.hard: crystal pl. / soft:    crystal pl.hard: crystal pl. / soft: isotropic pl.14

5 Ductile damage

5.1

Introduction

The analysis is ﬁnally extended to ductile fracture whereby emphasis is placed on two-phase steels where the
hard phase acts as a reinforcement of the softer ductile matrix. Consequently, the hard phase volume fraction
is ﬁxed to ϕhard = 0.25. The soft matrix is assumed to fail by ductile fracture while the hard phase is assumed
not to fracture. Many diﬀerent criteria exist for ductile fracture initiation, but they are all dependent on
a non-linear combination of the plastic strain and hydrostatic stress [e.g. 24–26]. For this reason it may
be expected that subtle inaccuracies of these quantities due to the constitutive choice (isotropic instead of
crystal plasticity) may be more inﬂuential for ductile fracture initiation.

5.2 Damage indicator

The Johnson-Cook damage indicator [26] is used to indicate the onset of ductile fracture in the soft phase.
This indicator, D, signals fracture initiation once D ≥ 1, but does not weaken the material response. It is
deﬁned as follows:

(cid:90) t

˙εp

εc(η)

0

D =

dτ

(16)

where ˙εp is the equivalent plastic strain rate and εc is a critical strain which depends on the local stress
triaxiality η in the following way

εc = A exp(−Bη) + εpc

(17)

wherein A, B, and the critical plastic strain εpc are material parameters. The stress triaxiality is the ratio
of hydrostatic and equivalent (shear) Kirchhoﬀ stress in the grain:

η =

τm
τeq

(18)

The parameters are chosen representative for the considered class of materials, based on the literature [20]:

A = 0.2

B = 1.7

εpc = 0.1

(19)

Note that the exact choice of parameters is not essential for the purpose of this study, however choosing them
in a correct range leads to a more comprehensive interpretation of the value of D.

5.3 Microscopic response

For the microstructure presented earlier in Figures 1 and 5, the damage indicator D is shown in Figure 14
for diﬀerent values of the phase contrast χ (at the same applied strain ¯ε = 0.2). Due to the increasing phase
contrast χ, the damage indicator also increases, indicating that a higher phase contrast promotes damage.
Furthermore, the damage is more localized for higher χ. It is particularly high near the interfaces of the hard
and the soft phase (discussed in more detail in [27]). In a large part of the shear bands that are observed in
Figure 5, D is signiﬁcantly lower than one.

The importance of the plastic anisotropy is assessed by comparing the assumption of plastic isotropy to
the reference crystal plasticity model. Figure 15 shows the probability density function Φ of the damage D
for diﬀerent levels of phase contrast χ. The reference model is shown in black, while the isotropic model is
shown in blue. For the lowest phase contrast, χ = 3/2, there is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the damage
predicted by the two models, whereby the damage is considerably higher in the crystal plasticity model in
12% of the grains. The value of D predicted by the two models converges with increasing χ (it is wrongly
predicted in only 1% of the grains for χ = 8). Based on these results, it may be concluded that for χ ≥ 4
there is no pronounced diﬀerence between isotropic and crystal plasticity, while for χ ≤ 2 the diﬀerence is
signiﬁcant.

15

Figure 14. The local damage indicator D in the soft phase for diﬀerent phase contrasts χ. The microstructure and
applied deformation is the same as in Figure 1, both phases are modeled with crystal plasticity.

Figure 15. The probability density Φ as a function of the damage indicator D in the soft phase, for diﬀerent values
of the phase contrast χ. The applied strain ¯ε = 0.2.

5.4 Eﬀect of the morphology: damage hot-spot

Since the damage is dominated by the presence of the two phases, the question arises how their spatial
distribution contributes to this, and whether this contribution is diﬀerent when also the crystallography
signiﬁcantly contributes to damage. To quantify this, the average phase arrangement is characterized as a
function of the position relative to the fracture initiation sites. Following De Geus et al. [27], the probability
of ﬁnding the hard phase is calculated as a function of the position relative to the fracture initiation site.
As only two phases are considered, the probability of ﬁnding the soft phase is implicitly contained in this
result. If at a certain relative position the probability of hard phase is higher than the hard phase volume
fraction, ϕhard, having hard phase at this relative position thus promotes fracture initiation. Likewise, if the
probability is lower than ϕhard, having soft phase at that relative position promotes fracture initiation.
phase indicator I is introduced that describes the phase distribution as follows:

This method is discussed based on a single unit cell. The extension to the ensemble average is trivial. A

I(i, j) =

1 for (i, j) ∈ hard
for (i, j) ∈ soft
0

(20)

(cid:40)

where (i, j) is the position, here coinciding with the matrix-index of each grain. Similarly, fracture initiation
is indicated by D(i, j) which is one if the damage indicator D(i, j) ≥ 1 and zero elsewhere. To correlate the
arrangement of phases to the fracture initiation, the average value of I is calculated at a certain position
(∆i, ∆j) relative to the fracture initiation sites, where D = 1, as follows:

(cid:80)
(cid:80)
ij D(i, j) I(i + ∆i, j + ∆j)
ij D(i, j)

ID(∆i, ∆j) =

(21)

where (i, j) loops over all grains, taking the cell’s periodicity into account. The resulting damage hot-spot ID

(a)(b)(c)(d)16

thus characterizes the probability of ﬁnding the hard phase at diﬀerent positions (∆i, ∆j) relative to fracture
initiation. The ensemble average (cid:104)ID(cid:105) trivially follows by looping over all grains in the ensemble.

The result is shown in Figure 16 for diﬀerent phase contrasts χ, whereby the response to the crystal
plasticity model is shown on the top row and the response to the isotropic plasticity model on the bottom row.
The colormap has been chosen to enhance the interpretation, whereby red indicates an elevated probability
of the hard phase and blue to that of the soft phase, the neutral color (white) coincides with the hard phase
volume fraction ϕhard indicating no preferential phase at that position relative to damage. The results show
that fracture initiates where regions of the hard phase are aligned with the tensile axis and interrupted by
regions of the soft phase aligned with the shear direction at ±45 degree angles (see [27], and reference therein,
for a detailed mechanical analysis). Qualitatively the arrangement of phases around fracture initiation sites
appears to be independent of the phase contrast and of the plastic (an)isotropy. Even though the inﬂuence
of crystallography on the value of the damage, D, may not be neglected for a low phase contrast; the spatial
locations where fracture initiates are not aﬀected by it.

Figure 16. The average phase indicator around fracture initiation, ID, for diﬀerent phase contrasts χ, for a hard
phase volume fraction ϕhard = 0.25 and applied strain ¯ε = 0.2. The rows correspond to diﬀerent constitutive choices:
both phases modeled with crystal plasticity (top) or isotropic plasticity (bottom). The colormap is chosen such that
the neutral color (white) coincides with the hard phase volume fraction. The color may be interpreted as: hard phase
(red) and soft phase (blue).

6 Conclusions

The role that the plastic anisotropy, as introduced by the crystallography, plays on the micromechanical
response of a two-phase material is carefully studied by comparing the response predicted by a crystal
plasticity to that predicted using an isotropic formulation. The following observations have been made.

• The plastic anisotropy is less important than the mechanical incompatibility when the ratio of the yield
stresses between the phases is larger than four. Below a ratio of two the inﬂuence of the orientation
mismatch of the grains is signiﬁcant. This has been assessed through the plastic strain and the hydro-
static stress. This conﬁrms observations in the literature where only one of the regimes was analyzed
independently [1, 2, 7].

(a)(b)(c)(d)crystal plasticity(e)(f)(g)(h)isotropic plasticity17

• These observations also hold for the initiation of ductile fracture of the comparatively soft phase.
• The spatial arrangement of the phases plays a crucial role for the initiation of ductile fracture in
the soft matrix phases [e.g. 2, 28]. The analysis showed that this eﬀect dominates over the role of
crystallography, even in the regime where its quantitative inﬂuence on the mechanical response may
not be neglected.

Acknowledgments

This research was carried out under project number M22.2.11424 in the framework of the research program
of the Materials innovation institute M2i (www.m2i.nl).

References

References

[1] A. Needleman and V. Tvergaard. Comparison of Crystal Plasticity and Isotropic Hardening Predictions for Metal-Matrix Com-

posites. J. Appl. Mech., 60(1):70–76, 1993. doi: 10.1115/1.2900781.

[2] P. E. McHugh, R. J. Asaro, and C. F. Shih. Computational modeling of metal matrix composite materials - I. Isothermal deformation

patterns in ideal microstructures. Acta Metall. Mater., 41(5):1461–1476, 1993. doi: 10.1016/0956-7151(93)90255-Q.

[3] R. Aghababaei and S. P. Joshi. Grain size-inclusion size interaction in metal matrix composites using mechanism-based gradient

crystal plasticity. Int. J. Solids Struct., 48(18):2585–2594, 2011. doi: 10.1016/j.ijsolstr.2011.05.012.

[4] K. S. Choi, W. N. Liu, X. Sun, and M. A. Khaleel. Inﬂuence of Martensite Mechanical Properties on Failure Mode and Ductility

of Dual-Phase Steels. Metall. Mater. Trans. A, 40(4):796–809, 2009. doi: 10.1007/s11661-009-9792-6.

[5] X. Sun, K. S. Choi, A. Soulami, W. N. Liu, and M. A. Khaleel. On key factors inﬂuencing ductile fractures of dual phase (DP)

steels. Mater. Sci. Eng. A, 526(1-2):140–149, 2009. doi: 10.1016/j.msea.2009.08.010.

[6] H. Kumar, C. L. Briant, and W. A. Curtin. Using microstructure reconstruction to model mechanical behavior in complex

microstructures. Mech. Mater., 38(8-10):818–832, 2006. doi: 10.1016/j.mechmat.2005.06.030.

[7] S. H. Choi, E. Y. Kim, W. Woo, S. H. Han, and J. H. Kwak. The eﬀect of crystallographic orientation on the mi-
Int. J. Plast., 45:85–102, 2013.

cromechanical deformation and failure behaviors of DP980 steel during uniaxial tension.
doi: 10.1016/j.ijplas.2012.11.013.

[8] D. D. Tjahjanto, S. Turteltaub, A. S. J. Suiker, and S. van der Zwaag. Modelling of the eﬀects of grain orientation on transformation-
induced plasticity in multiphase carbon steels. Model. Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng., 14(4):617–636, 2006. doi: 10.1088/0965-
0393/14/4/006.

[9] F. Roters, P. Eisenlohr, L. Hantcherli, D. D. Tjahjanto, T. R. Bieler, and D. Raabe. Overview of constitutive laws, kinematics,
homogenization and multiscale methods in crystal plasticity ﬁnite-element modeling: Theory, experiments, applications. Acta
Mater., 58(4):1152–1211, 2010. doi: 10.1016/j.actamat.2009.10.058.

[10] R. Asaro and A. Needleman. Overview no. 42 Texture development and strain hardening in rate dependent polycrystals. Acta

Metall., 33(6):923–953, 1985. doi: 10.1016/0001-6160(85)90188-9.

[11] E. E. Nugent, R. B. Calhoun, and A. Mortensen. Experimental investigation of stress and strain ﬁelds in a ductile matrix

surrounding an elastic inclusion. Acta Mater., 48(7):1451–1467, 2000. doi: 10.1016/S1359-6454(99)00444-9.

[12] M. Diehl, P. Shanthraj, P. Eisenlohr, and F. Roters. Neighborhood inﬂuences on stress and strain partitioning in dual-phase

microstructures. Meccanica, 51(2):429–441, 2016. doi: 10.1007/s11012-015-0281-2.

[13] C. A. Bronkhorst, S. R. Kalidindi, and L. Anand. Polycrystalline Plasticity and the Evolution of Crystallographic Texture in FCC

Metals. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A Math. Phys. Eng. Sci., 341(1662):443–477, 1992. doi: 10.1098/rsta.1992.0111.

[14] P. Franciosi. Glide mechanisms in b.c.c. crystals: An investigation of the case of α-iron through multislip and latent hardening

tests. Acta Metall., 31(9):1331–1342, 1983. doi: 10.1016/0001-6160(83)90004-4.

[15] S. Yadegari, S. Turteltaub, A. S. J. Suiker, and P. J. J. Kok. Analysis of banded microstructures in multiphase steels assisted by

transformation-induced plasticity. Comput. Mater. Sci., 84:339–349, 2014. doi: 10.1016/j.commatsci.2013.12.002.

[16] J. W. Hutchinson. Bounds and Self-Consistent Estimates for Creep of Polycrystalline Materials. Proc. R. Soc. A Math. Phys.

Eng. Sci., 348(1652):101–127, 1976. doi: 10.1098/rspa.1976.0027.

[17] J. C. Simo. Numerical analysis and simulation of plasticity. In P. G. Ciarlet and J. L. Lions, editors, Handb. Numer. Analyis, vol.

IV. 1998.

[18] T. Belytschko, W. K. Liu, and B. Moran. Nonlinear ﬁnite elements for continua and structures. 2009.

[19] J. C. Simo. On a fully three-dimensional ﬁnite-strain viscoelastic damage model: Formulation and computational aspects. Comput.

Methods Appl. Mech. Eng., 60(2):153–173, 1987. doi: 10.1016/0045-7825(87)90107-1.

[20] N. Vajragupta, V. Uthaisangsuk, B. Schmaling, S. M¨unstermann, A. Hartmaier, and W. Bleck. A micromechanical damage

simulation of dual phase steels using XFEM. Comput. Mater. Sci., 54:271–279, 2012. doi: 10.1016/j.commatsci.2011.10.035.

[21] F. Maresca, V. G. Kouznetsova, and M. G. D. Geers. Subgrain lath martensite mechanics: A numerical-experimental analysis. J.

Mech. Phys. Solids, 73:69–83, 2014. doi: 10.1016/j.jmps.2014.09.002.

[22] Y. Mine, K. Hirashita, H. Takashima, M. Matsuda, and K. Takashima. Micro-tension behaviour of lath martensite structures of

carbon steel. Mater. Sci. Eng. A, 560:535–544, 2013. doi: 10.1016/j.msea.2012.09.099.

18

[23] D. L. Steinbrunner, D. K. Matlock, and G. Krauss. Void formation during tensile testing of dual phase steels. Metall. Trans. A,

19(3):579–589, 1988. doi: 10.1007/BF02649272.

[24] F. A. McClintock. A Criterion for Ductile Fracture by the Growth of Holes.

J. Appl. Mech., 35(2):363–371, 1968.

doi: 10.1115/1.3601204.

[25] J. R. Rice and D. M. Tracey. On the ductile enlargement of voids in triaxial stress ﬁelds. J. Mech. Phys. Solids, 17(3):201–217,

1969. doi: 10.1016/0022-5096(69)90033-7.

[26] G. R. Johnson and W. H. Cook. Fracture characteristics of three metals subjected to various strains, strain rates, temperatures

and pressures. Eng. Fract. Mech., 21(1):31–48, 1985. doi: 10.1016/0013-7944(85)90052-9.

[27] T. W. J. de Geus, R. H. J. Peerlings, and M. G. D. Geers. Microstructural topology eﬀects on the onset of duc-
Int. J. Solids Struct., 67-68:326–339, 2015.

tile failure in multi-phase materials A systematic computational approach.
doi: 10.1016/j.ijsolstr.2015.04.035.

[28] J. R. Brockenbrough, S. Suresh, and H. A. Wienecke. Deformation of metal-matrix composites with continuous ﬁbers: geometrical

eﬀects of ﬁber distribution and shape. Acta Metall. Mater., 39(5):735–752, 1991. doi: 10.1016/0956-7151(91)90274-5.

