6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
 
8
1

 
 
]
h
t
-
l
c
u
n
[
 
 

1
v
4
5
8
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Formation of deuterons by coalescence:

Consequences on the deuteron number ﬂuctuations

Zuzana Feckov´aa,b, Jan Steinheimerc, Boris Tom´aˇsikb,d, and Marcus Bleicherc,e

aUniverzita Pavla Jozefa ˇSaf´arika, ˇSrob´arova 2, 04001 Koˇsice, Slovakia
bUniverzita Mateja Bela, Tajovsk´eho 40, 97401 Bansk´a Bystrica, Slovakia

cFrankfurt Institude for Advanced Studies, Johann Wolfgang Goethe-Universit¨at,

d ˇCesk´e vysok´e uˇcen´ı technick´e v Praze, FJFI, Bˇrehov´a 7, 11519 Praha 1, Czech Republic and

Ruth-Moufang-Strasse 1, 60438 Frankfurt am Main

eInstitut f¨ur Theoretische Physik, Johann Wolfgang Goethe-Universit¨at,

Max-von-Laue-Strasse 1, 60438 Frankfurt am Main

Two scenarios for cluster production have since long been discussed in the literature:

i) direct
emission of the clusters from a (grand canonical) thermal source or ii) subsequent formation of the
clusters by coalescence of single nucleons. While both approaches have been successfully applied in
the past it has not yet been clariﬁed which of the two mechanisms dominates the cluster produc-
tion. We propose to use recently developed event-by-event techniques to study particle multiplicity
ﬂuctuations on nuclear clusters and employ this analysis to the deuteron number ﬂuctuations to
disentangle the two production mechanisms. We argue that for a grand canonical cluster formation,
the cluster ﬂuctuations will follow Poisson distribution, while for the coalescence scenario, the ﬂuc-
tuations will strongly deviate from the Poisson expectation. We estimate the eﬀect to be 10% for
the variance and up to a factor of 5 for the kurtosis of the deuteron number multiplicity distribution.
Our prediction can be tested in the beam energy scan program at RHIC as well as experiments at
the FAIR and NICA facilities.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The formation of bound states in nuclear collisions has
been investigated experimentally and theoretically for
many decades. On the experimental side the fragmenta-
tion of the source has been studied extensively at very
low energies to extract information about the nuclear
liquid-gas phase transition [1, 2], while on the theoret-
ical side those observations were studied in detail by [3–
6]. Already very early it was pointed out that deuteron
production can be used to infer thermodynamic proper-
ties of the system, e.g. the entropy per baryon [7]. At

higher energies around √sN N = 3 − 20 GeV, the data

become more scarce. Here, the AGS experiments have
provided data on the formation of clusters up to Helium
[8], while the SPS experiments have measured data on
clusters up to mass three [9, 10] even for the anti-particle
sector [11]. Currently the RHIC and LHC experiments
have also shown data on light (anti-)nuclei production at
the highest energies, see e.g. [12, 13]. Theoretically, the
mechanism for cluster production at intermediate and
high energies is not well understood. It is clear that clus-
ters do not stem from a break-up of the initial target and
projectile nuclei but have to be formed newly towards the
end of the ﬁreball evolution. However, it is not a priori
clear, if the clusters are directly formed at the chemical
freeze-out, e.g.
from a grand canonical thermal ensem-
ble [14], or if the formation of the clusters happens at
the kinetic surface by coalescence of individual nucleons
[15]. While one may argue that lightly bound clusters
(e.g deuteron has a binding energy of only a few MeV)
may either not be formed at the chemical freeze-out due
to the large temperature and may be easily destroyed
(if formed earlier) in the kinetic stage, the predictions

of clusters multiplicities within the statistical approach
provide a good description of the measured data. On
the other hand coalescence of neutrons and protons to
deuterons after the kinetic freeze-out is certainly another
possible process and allows to describe the experimental
data equally well [15].

In this paper we propose to use the ﬂuctuations of the
deuteron number to distinguish between the two produc-
tion/formation mechanisms. These studies have become
possible due to the increased experimental possibilities
available at RHIC BES.

II. SET UP

To elucidate the idea we compare three scenarios:

i)
Direct deuteron production from a grand canonical ther-
mal ensemble at the chemical freeze-out. Here, all ﬂuc-
tuations are Poissonian and the scaled moments of the
deuteron distribution σ2/λ, Sσ, and κσ2 are all unity. In
addition, there is no correlation between the proton and
the deuteron number.
ii) Only production of nucleons
from the grand canonical thermal ensemble at the chem-
ical freeze-out is assumed, while deuterons are formed by
coalescence after the kinetic freeze-out. In this case we
consider two variations of the coalescence prescription:
ii.a) The initial number of protons ﬂuctuates according
to a Poisson distribution, while the number of deuterons
depends on the squared proton density. ii.b) Both proton
and neutron ﬂuctuations are Poissonian and the number
of deuterons is proportional to their product. As a result
in both coalescence scenarios the deuteron number will
not ﬂuctuate according to a Poisson distribution and all
higher moments will show strong deviations from their

Poisson values.

Next we closer explain both used coalescence models.

and the deuteron formation probability is proportional
to the product of nucleon multiplicities, i.e.

2

A. Model A: Correlated proton and neutron

number

To quantify the ﬂuctuations in scenario ii.a) we follow
the standard coalescence approach, i.e. deuterons are
formed after the kinetic freeze-out in each event with
a probability proportional to the squared number of all
initially produced protons [15, 16], i.e.

λd = Bn2
i ,

(1)

where B denotes the coalescence parameter, which may
depend on the center-of-mass energy.
In this model
we actually make the (standard) assumption that neu-
tron yield is directly correlated with the proton yield
in that event. (This assumption will be relaxed in the
other model.) The strength of the event-by-event proton-
neutron correlation can be extracted from experimental
measurements, see also Appendix. We emphasize that
the predicted ﬂuctuation signal should be studied in a
ﬁxed volume, e.g. using tight centrality cuts to avoid
volume ﬂuctuations.

The number of deuterons nd in a given reaction with
ﬁxed initial proton number ni is then given by a Poisson
distribution

Pd(nd|ni) = λnd

d

e−λd
nd!

= (cid:0)Bn2

i(cid:1)nd e−Bn2

nd!

i

.

(2)

Summing over the initial proton numbers distributed ac-
cording to Pi(ni) then leads to the ﬁnal deuteron number
ﬂuctuations based on the initial proton number ﬂuctua-
tions as

Pd(nd) = Xni≥nd

Pd(nd|ni)Pi(ni).

(3)

Recall that Pi(ni) is Poissonian and the initial proton
number can be obtained as

ni = np + nd

(4)

where np is the mean observed proton number.

B. Model B: Independent proton and neutron

ﬂuctuations

The coalescence model presented in previous subsec-
tion is extreme in its assumption that neutron and proton
ﬂuctuations are strongly correlated. In order to make ro-
bust predictions for the moments of the deuteron number
distribution we will relax the assumption completely and
consider the model with independent proton and neu-
tron ﬂuctuations. The initial proton (neutron) number
ni(nj ) ﬂuctuates again according to Poisson distribution

λd = Bninj.

(5)

The coalescence parameter B depends again only on the
collision energy. The initial neutron number nj ﬂuctuates
according to a Poisson distribution with the same mean
number as the initial proton number.

The number of deuterons in events with given number

of nucleons is given by the Poisson distribution

Pd(nd|ni, nj) = λnd

d

e−λd
nd!

= (Bninj)nd e−Bninj

nd!

.

(6)

The deuteron number distribution is then obtained by
summing up over the initial proton and neutron number
distributions

Pd(nd) = Xni,nj ≥nd

Pd(nd|ni, nj)Pi(ni)Pj(nj).

(7)

It has been shown recently that if deuteron production
scales with the squared proton number (Model A) then
higher scaled moments of the observed proton number
ﬂuctuations agree qualitatively with the data from RHIC
beam energy scan program [17, 18]. Unfortunetely, this
feature does not survive in Model B. Nevertheless, we
also use it in our calculation. The real situation is per-
haps somewhere in between the two used models and by
showing that our signal is clearly visible in both cases we
will prove its robustness.

III. MOMENTS OF THE DEUTERON

DISTRIBUTION

The essential model parameter is the coalescence pa-
rameter B which we ﬁx to obtain the correct mean
deuteron multiplicity at midrapidity for each energy.
While the data on proton multiplicities at midrapidity
are abundant, the data on deuterons are not available for
all the examined energies. The available data are how-
ever well reproduced by the thermal model. Deuteron to
proton ratio d/p can be thus parametrized as:

= 0.8(cid:20)√sN N

1 GeV(cid:21)−1.55

d
p

+ 0.0036 .

(8)

The observed proton and parametrized deuteron multi-
plicites are well reproduced in our model. We summarize
the model parameter B and results for the mean values
of proton and deuteron multiplicities for various collision
energies in Fig. 1. Plotted are values for Model A. The
diﬀerence to Model B is so small that if it was also plotted
the data points would practically overlap.

For illustration, Fig. 2 shows the distributions of
deuteron number for Au+Au collisions at 2.6 GeV beam
energy in comparison to the Poisson distribution. Here

 100

 10

 1

 0.1

<np>
<nd>
4·104 B

 10

√sNN

 100

s
t
n
e
m
o
m
d
e
a
c
S

 

l

 7
 6
 5
 4
 3
 2
 1
 0

3

σ2/<nd>
Sσ
Kσ2

 10

√sNN

 100

FIG. 1. Model parameter B for Model A (black squares) and
resulting proton (in blue) and deuteron (in red) multiplicities
as function of energy. The resulting deuteron multiplicity is
compared to the thermal ﬁt (red line) input to our model.

FIG. 3. The energy dependence of the moments σ2/hndi, sσ,
and kσ2 of the deuteron distribution obtained from Model A
compared to the Poisson expectation

)

d
n
(
P

100
10-1
10-2
10-3
10-4
10-5
10-6
10-7
10-8
10-9

model A
model B
Poisson

 0

 15

 30
nd

 45

 60

s
t
n
e
m
o
m
 
d
e
a
c
S

l

 4.5
 4
 3.5
 3
 2.5
 2
 1.5
 1
 0.5
 0

σ2/<nd>
Sσ
Kσ2

 10

√sNN

 100

FIG. 2. Fluctuation of the deuteron number for Au+Au col-
lisions at 2.6 GeV beam energy in comparison to the Pois-
son distribution. The parameters of the distributions are for
Model A: σ2/hndi = 1.609, Sσ = 2.218, κσ2 = 6.915; Model
B: σ2/hndi = 1.308, Sσ = 1.616, κσ2 = 3.422.

one clearly observes that coalescence leads to skewed dis-
tributions with a shift to higher values, as expected from
the non-linear formation probability. The scaled higher
moments: the variance σ2/hndi, the skewness Sσ and
the kurtosis κσ2 all diﬀer signiﬁcantly from the Poisson
expectation of unity. The departure from Poissonian dis-
tribution is larger if proton and neutron number ﬂuc-
tuate together (Model A), but also independent proton
and neutron ﬂuctuations (Model B) lead to clearly non-
Poissonian shape.

Next we explore the energy dependence of the moments
of the deuteron distribution and compare to the Poisson
expectations. Figures 3 and 4 show the scaled mo-
ments σ2/hndi, Sσ, and κσ2 as functions of collision en-

FIG. 4. The energy dependence of the moments σ2/hndi,
sσ, and kσ2 of the deuteron distribution in the coalescence
model assuming indepenedent proton and neutron ﬂuctua-
tions (Model B) compared to the Poisson expectation.

ergy for Models A and B, respectively. We observe a
clear deviation from the Poisson expectation for all the
higher moments. The deviation is very strong at low
energies, where both coalescence parameter B and the
mean proton and neutron numbers are large, which re-
sults in sizeable ﬂuctuations of the mean of Poissonian
deuteron number distribution given by eq. (1) or eq. (5).
This leads to even larger ﬂuctuations of the deuteron
number. The eﬀect could be possibly observed for ener-
gies up to about 5 GeV in all the moments and even up
to higher energies in kurtosis only.

Removing the correlation between initial proton and
neutron ﬂuctuations clearly weakens the eﬀect, as can
be seen in Fig. 4. The scaled moments attain approxi-
mately one half of the values obtained for neutron num-

ber coupled to the proton number. We can still conclude,
however, that we should be able to observe the deviation
of the moments of the deuteron multiplicity distribution
in case of coalescence regardless of the strength of the
correlation of nucleon ﬂuctuations. Additional informa-
tion about the degree of this correlation can be provided
by proton-deuteron multiplicity correlations, as shown in
the Appendix.

)

d
n

,

p
n
(
ρ

IV. SUMMARY

In the light of the ongoing debate about the origin of
the deuterons we propose to measure data on ﬂuctua-
tions of deuterons. Employing standard approach and
using the deuteron formation probability as proportional
to the square of the nucleon yield we obtain strongly
non-Poissionian distribution of the deuteron yield. Exact
shape of deuteron distribution depends on whether pro-
ton and neutron yield are correlated or not. We tested
both extremes—i.e., strongly correlated and completely
independent—and the departure from Poissonian is al-
ways large. This allows to disentangle the direct grand
canonical production of deuterons (and other clusters)
from the formation of deuterons by coalescence.

For simplicity, we have assumed that the initial proton
number follows a Poisson distribution. This is ﬁne for
measurements with small acceptance. If baryon number
is exactly conserved within the acceptance window, then
the initial proton number should follow binomial distri-
bution. Nevertheless, all our results should not change
qualitatively. Note also, that direct comparison with ex-
perimental data will also have to include the ﬂuctuations
of volume.

Our predictions are testable by the current experi-

ments at the RHIC-BES and later by FAIR.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Igor Mishustin for enlightening discus-
sions. The computational resources were provided by
the LOEWE Center for Scientiﬁc Computing (LOEWE-
CSC) of the University of Frankfurt, Germany. This
work was ﬁnancially supported by the Helmholtz Inter-
national Center for FAIR (HIC for FAIR) within the Hes-
sian LOEWE initiative. ZF and BT acknowledge partial
support by grant No’s APVV-0050-11, VEGA 1/0469/15
(Slovakia) and BT acknowledges MˇSMT grants LG13031
(Czech Republic). ZF thanks the DAAD for the support
during the stay at the Frankfurt Institute for Advanced
Studies.

Appendix: Correlations

Another observable which distinguishes thermal grand-
canonical production and cluster production via coales-

 0.2
 0.15
 0.1
 0.05
 0
-0.05
-0.1
-0.15
-0.2

4

model A
model B

 10

√sNN

 100

FIG. 5. Energy dependence of the correlation coeﬃcients be-
tween proton number and deuteron number in the case of
coalescence with strongly correlated proton and neutron ﬂuc-
tuations (Model A) and in the case of coalescence with inde-
pendent proton and neutron ﬂuctuations (Model B).

cence is the correlation of proton and deuteron multiplic-
ities. In the grand-canonical statistical approach the pro-
ton and deuteron multiplicities both ﬂuctuate indepen-
dently according to the Poisson distribution. However,
in the coalescence scenario the deuteron ﬂuctuations are
connected to the initial proton and/or neutron number
and thus to the observed nucleon number ﬂuctuations, as
well. This leads to positive correlation between proton
and deuteron multiplicities. On the other hand at a ﬁxed
initial proton number ni a larger deuteron multiplicity
nd results in a smaller ﬁnal proton number np = ni − nd,
which introduces anticorrelation between np and nd.
To explore to what degree the proton and deuteron
multiplicities are correlated we evaluate the correlation
coeﬃcient ρ deﬁned as

ρ(np, nd) = Pk

(npk − λp)(ndk − λd)

σpσd

,

(A.1)

where λp(λd) and σp(σd) are the mean value and width
of proton (deuteron) multiplicity distribution. The mean
value and the width for both protons and deuterons are
calculated using the distributions we derived earlier.

Now we have to distinguish between the two coales-
cence models we introduced. First, we explore Model
A with strongly correlated initial proton and neutron
ﬂuctuations. To calculate the correlation coeﬃcient con-
sistenly within this approach we sum over all possible
(ni, nd) states:

ρ(np, nd) = Pni,nd

P (ni)P (nd|ni)(ni − nd − λp)(nd − λd)

σpσd

.

(A.2)
In Fig. 5 the correlation paramater ρ(np, nd) is shown as
function of energy. The proton and deuteron multiplicity

5

are positively correlated. The correlation is stronger for
lower energies, where the coalescence parameter is larger.
An interesting feature of the results is the decrease of the
correlation for the lowest energies. This eﬀect is caused
by the wide deuteron distribution which emphasizes the
extreme low and high values of deuteron number leading
to stronger anticorrelation. Overall correlation is thus
reduced.

Next we will investigate the correlations in the coales-
cence model with independent initial nucleon ﬂuctuations
(Model B). In this case, we calcute the correlation coef-
ﬁcient by summing over all possible (ni, nd, nj) states:

Fig. 5 as function of energy and compared with the re-
sult of Model A. There is a marked diﬀerence between the
two models. The proton and deuteron multiplicities are
now anticorrelated. The anticorrelation is caused by an
interplay of two eﬀects. Firstly, the number of deuterons
now depends only linearly on the number of protons, as
compared to the squared proton yield in Model A. Thus,
the correlation is weaker. On the other hand, the anti-
correlation is reinforced by the neutrons ﬂuctuating in-
dependently, that cause an increase of higher deuteron
production when the proton yield is lower, but neutron
yield is high and vice-versa.

ρ(np, nd) =

1

σpσd

× Xni,nd,nj

P (ni)P (nj)P (nd|ni, nj)

× (ni − nd − λp)(nd − λd).

(A.3)

The correlation parameter ρ(np, nd) calculated assuming
independent proton and neutron ﬂuctuations is shown in

The proton-deuteron multiplicity correlation measure-
ment yields very diﬀerent results for the two coalescence
scenarios. However, in both scenarios we see a clear de-
viation from a Poisson-like uncorrelated thermal proton
and deuteron production. We propose this measurement
as complementary to the moments of the deuteron dis-
tribution that could possibly help to shed some light on
the degree of correlation in the nucleon production.

[1] A. D. Panagiotou, M. W. Curtin, H. Toki, D. K. Scott

[11] M. Weber et al. [NA52 Collaboration], J. Phys. G28,

and P. J. Siemens, Phys. Rev. Lett. 52, 496 (1984).

1921 (2002).

[2] J. Pochodzalla [ALADIN Collaboration], in Proceedings
of Hot and dense nuclear matter, Bodrum, 1993, pp. 39-
51.

[3] L. P. Csernai, in Proceedings of High Energy Heavy Ion
Collisions and Quark Degrees of Freedom in Nuclei, Puri,
1987, pp. 69-131.

[4] S. Pratt and M. B. Tsang, Phys. Rev. C 36, 2390 (1987).
[5] J. Aichelin, A. Bohnet, G. Peilert, H. Stoecker,
W. Greiner and A. Rosenhauer, Phys. Rev. C 37, 2451
(1988).

[6] J. Aichelin, Phys. Rept. 202, 233 (1991).
[7] J. I. Kapusta, Phys. Rev. C 29, 1735 (1984).
[8] S. Wang et al. [EOS Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 74,

2646 (1995).

[9] I. G. Bearden et al. [NA44 Collaboration], Nucl. Phys. A

661, 387 (1999).

[10] B. Baatar et al. [NA49 Collaboration], Eur. Phys. J. C
73, no. 4, 2364 (2013) doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-013-2364-
3 [arXiv:1207.6520 [hep-ex]].

[12] C. Adler et al. [STAR Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett.
87, 262301 (2001) [Erratum-ibid. 87, 279902 (2001)]
[arXiv:nucl-ex/0108022].

[13] J. Adam et al. [ALICE Collaboration], arXiv:1506.08951

[nucl-ex].

[14] A. Andronic,

J.

Stachel
and H. Stocker, Phys. Lett. B 697, 203 (2011)
[arXiv:1010.2995 [nucl-th]].

P. Braun-Munzinger,

[15] J. L. Nagle, B. S. Kumar, D. Kusnezov, H. Sorge and

R. Mattiello, Phys. Rev. C 53, 367 (1996).

[16] S. T. Butler and C. A. Pearson, Phys. Rev. 129, 836

(1963).

[17] M. M. Aggarwal et al. [STAR Collaboration], Phys. Rev.

Lett. 105, 022302 (2010)

[18] Z. Feckov´a, J. Steinheimer, B. Tom´aˇsik and M. Ble-
064908 (2015)
[arXiv:1510.05519

icher, Phys. Rev. C 92, no. 6,
doi:10.1103/PhysRevC.92.064908
[nucl-th]].

