6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
8
1

 
 
]
P
A

.
t
a
t
s
[
 
 

1
v
2
8
8
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

BAYESIAN CONSTRAINED-MODEL SELECTION

FOR FACTOR ANALYTIC MODELING

CAREL F.W. PEETERS

My dissertation (Peeters, 2012a) revolves around Bayesian approaches towards
constrained statistical inference in the factor analysis (FA) model. Two intercon-
nected types of restricted-model selection are considered. These types have a natu-
ral connection to selection problems in the exploratory FA (EFA) and conﬁrmatory
FA (CFA) model and are termed Type I and Type II model selection. Type I
constrained-model selection is taken to mean the determination of the appropri-
ate dimensionality of a model. This type of constrained-model selection connects
with EFA in the sense of selecting the optimal dimensionality of the latent vec-
tor. Type II model selection is taken to mean the determination of appropri-
ate inequality, order or shape restrictions on the parameter space. The disser-
tation connects Type II constrained-model selection to CFA by focusing on the
determination of linear inequality constraints as expressions of the direction and
(relative) strength of factor loadings. The ﬁgures accompanying this article are
taken from the slides of my Division 5 Awards Symposium Invited address at the
APA 2015 Annual Convention in Toronto. These slides can be retrieved from
https://github.com/CFWP/ConventionTalk.

Summary of Research

Three research aims guide the dissertation. These research aims are motivated
by the potential of the connection between Bayesian model selection (by the Bayes
factor) and constrained statistical inference for factor analytic modeling. Classical
approaches towards analyzing constrained hypotheses are restricted to a limited
class of constraints and models. The Bayesian approach is more ﬂexible. To utilize
this ﬂexibility, certain problems need to be overcome.

The main problem of the Bayes factor (Kass & Raftery, 1995) for Type I model
selection is that both the use of improper noninformative and proper but vague
priors will yield indeterminate answers when the models to be compared are of
diﬀering dimension (Jeﬀreys, 1961). This is undesirable as especially under default
prior choices the interpretation of the Bayes factor as a weighted likelihood ratio is
warranted (Berger & Pericchi, 2004). This problem reﬂects on Bayesian approaches
towards EFA and the selection of the dimensionality of the latent vector. Most ap-
proaches use conjugate priors, usually in conjunction with a triangularity condition
for rotational determination. Even when the conjugate priors are relatively un-
informative (vague), the triangularity conditions induce strong prior information,
calling into question the exploratory nature of Bayesian EFA. Research Aim 1 then
intends to allow for the use of improper priors in Bayes factor computation for Type
I constrained-model selection, allowing for formal dimensionality selection in EFA
with all the beneﬁts of the Bayesian machinery but without inducing strong prior
information.

1

2

C.F.W. PEETERS

Research Aim 1. To construct a conceptually and computationally simple Bayes
factor for Type I constrained-model selection that is determinate under usage of
improper priors. Subsequently, this Bayes factor is to be embedded within a strategy
towards a truly Bayesian EFA concerned with the selection of an optimal dimen-
sionality for the latent vector.

CFA seeks to incorporate theory into the factor model by imposing certain re-
strictions. These restrictions are meant to emulate sparse structure and are usually
of the ﬁxed-value equality kind with a focus on exclusion restrictions. Such rigidity
in parameter speciﬁcation may pose several problems. First, it implies a loss of
information in the sense that more exclusion restrictions are usually applied than
is necessary for identiﬁcation of the FA model. Also, exclusion restrictions may
amount to errors of omission, may make the unrealistic assumption that items are
factorially pure, and may induce bias in estimates of the free parameters (Ferrando
& Lorenzo-Seva, 2000; van Prooijen & van der Kloot, 2001). These issues are
intricately connected to the well-known and widespread situation of exploratively
obtained factor structures not being conﬁrmed by CFA. Moreover, researchers in
substantive ﬁelds usually have informed ideas regarding direction and magnitude
of parameter eﬀects that cannot be expressed using exclusion restrictions. What is
wished for then, is expressions of factor structure, not through usage of exclusion
restrictions in the matrix of factor loadings, but by the imposition of inequality
constraints. This desire is formulated in the second guiding research aim.

Research Aim 2. To construct a conceptually and computationally simple Bayes
factor for Type II constrained-model selection that is geared towards inequalities on
regression-type parameters. Subsequently, this Bayes factor is to be embedded within
a strategy that speciﬁes factor analytic structure using inequality constraints rather
than through exclusion restrictions.

A gap in FA practice is that there is no unequivocal strategy for integrating EFA
and CFA. While the modi operandi are often viewed as distinct, it might be fruitful
to view EFA and CFA as complementary techniques. For example, in the CFA
model all attention regarding misspeciﬁcation is geared towards the pre-speciﬁed
pattern of factor loadings. The evaluation of model ﬁt in CFA is then essentially
the evaluation of a diﬀuse hypothesis (Hoyle & Duvall, 2004), as it is unclear in
case of misspeciﬁcation if the pattern of loadings or the factor dimensionality is
to blame. The third research aim proposes a factor analytic strategy seeking to
integrate EFA and CFA in order to avoid embarking on the evaluation of diﬀuse
hypotheses.

Research Aim 3. To let the provisions from Aims 1 and 2 conjoin in order to
develop an integrative factor analytic strategy that articulates the complimentary
nature of EFA and CFA.

Part I of the dissertation covers Research Aims 1 and 2. The focus is on sta-
tistical and computational issues regarding formulation, prior selection, parameter
estimation and model selection for the constrained Bayesian factor model. Part
II comprises Research Aim 3 and purports that researchers often have competing
theories that can be translated into inequality-constrained factor analytic models.

BAYESIAN MODEL SELECTION & FACTOR ANALYSIS

3

Part I: Statistical & Computational Modeling

Part I starts by reviewing Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) computation of
the marginal likelihood. The Bayes factor consists of a ratio of marginal likelihoods.
The candidate estimator method for marginal likelihood computation (Besag, 1989;
Chib, 1995) is adapted to deal with (i) improper noninformative priors and (ii) the
existence of (well-separated) symmetric posterior modes due to permutative invari-
ance over the parameter indices, such that the ensuing Bayes factor is still determi-
nate. Pending certain conditions, the provisions provide for what can be seen as a
simulation consistent MCMC implementation of well-known default Bayes factors
(Berger & Pericchi, 1996). This automated candidate estimator is subsequently
applied to latent factor dimensionality selection in EFA. It is shown that a failure
to abide certain regularity conditions on the FA model may result in violation of a
crucial regularity condition for simulation consistency of estimates stemming from
MCMC sampling. This implies that Bayesian approaches towards factor analytic
dimensionality selection may be aﬄicted by some of the same regularity conditions
that hamper classical approaches (see Figure 1). The dissertation proposes an as-
sessment strategy that ensures abidance of the regularity condition for simulation
consistency such that the automated candidate estimator provides an appropriate
stopping rule for factor analytic data compression.
In passing, a truly Bayesian
EFA is proposed.

Part I subsequently deals with a set of conditions for rotational identiﬁcation of
the oblique factor solution under usage of ﬁxed zero elements in the factor loadings
matrix (see also Peeters, 2012).
It is shown that the well-known conditions for
the oblique factor correlation structure (J¨oreskog, 1979) need to be amended in
order to obtain global rotational uniqueness. The amended condition set provides
a way to design an unrestricted solution to the (Bayesian) CFA model. Unrestricted
solutions correspond to EFA: An unrestricted conﬁrmatory factor model (UCFM)
is a FA model that places only minimal restrictions on the model parameters for
achieving global rotational uniqueness of the factor solution. The restrictions are
(in contrast to EFA) chosen so that they convey preconceived theoretical meaning
and thus eliminate the need for post-hoc rotation of the solution for interpretation
purposes.

The UCFM is pivotal in designing a Bayesian framework that takes parame-
ter restrictions in the context of CFA beyond exclusion restrictions, by allowing
inequality and approximate equality constraints to express substantive theoretical
ideas regarding direction and magnitude of eﬀect of factor loadings. This frame-
work ﬁrst requires the development of a Bayes factor for Type II constrained-
model selection. Second, a strategy is developed for the demarcation of competing
inequality-constrained formulations of factor analytic correlation structure. The
strategy consists of choosing as a base model a UCFM. Substantive theory is then
not represented by structural exclusions to express a pre-speciﬁed loading pattern,
but by imposing inequalities on and between the free parameters in the loadings
matrix (see Figure 2). It is shown that when (i) proper but noninformative priors
are chosen that are ﬂat on the parameter space of the parameters on which inequal-
ities are placed; and (ii) all competing inequality-constrained models are subsets
of the UCFM; then the ensuing Bayes factor is determinate, its complexity is well-
deﬁned, and its computation is greatly simpliﬁed. Under this framework model ﬁt
and model complexity are explicitly connected to, respectively, the posterior and

4

C.F.W. PEETERS

Figure 1. A geometric explanation of the implications of rank
deﬁciency in the loadings matrix. The ﬁgure shows, represented
by the bivariate densities on two factor loadings, what happens
when one ﬁts a 5-factor model to data generated under a 3-factor
model: The (posterior) density falls apart in multiple separated
regions of non-negligible posterior probability for which transition
probabilities are low (or nil). This problem of rank deﬁciency
accounts for the oft-observed fact that the likelihood-ratio test
and information criteria have a tendency to overestimate model
size in EFA,
See
https://github.com/CFWP/ConventionTalk or Peeters (2012a)
for additional explanation.

i.e., they tend to retain too many factors.

prior probability mass satisfying the constraints that deﬁne the constrained model
(see Figure 3).

Part II: Applications

Part II conjoins the developments from Part I in an alternative factor ana-
lytic strategy merging EFA and CFA. This strategy lets EFA precede inequality-
constrained CFA eﬀorts by making it part of a total inferential procedure involving
the selection of an optimal factor dimension before competing conﬁrmatory struc-
tures are assessed. The strategy consists of the following steps:

i. Embark on evaluating a series of unrestricted (EFA) models with respect to

their factor dimensionality;

ii. Once the latent factor dimensionality is settled, specify a UCFM;
iii. Formulate, using the UCFM as a base model, competing inequality-constrained
factor structures making use of a system of inequality constraints on and be-
tween the free parameters in the loadings matrix;

iv. Compute for each constrained model the Type II constrained-model selection
Bayes factor and determine the constrained model best supported by the data.




Λ1 =

Λ2 =

BAYESIAN MODEL SELECTION & FACTOR ANALYSIS

5

λ11
λ21 > 0
λ31 < −.3
λ41
λ51
λ61 = 0

> |λ12|

λ22 = 0
λ32 > .3

> |λ42|
> |λ52|

λ62 > 0

vs.
< −λ12

λ22 = 0
<
λ32
< −λ42
> −λ52

λ62 > 0

|λ11|
λ21 > 0
|λ31|
|λ41|
λ51
λ61 = 0




item 1
item 2
item 3
item 4
item 5
item 6

,

item 1
item 2
item 3
item 4
item 5
item 6

.

Figure 2. The dissertation develops methodology to select, from
a batch of competing inequality-constrained factor structures, the
one structure most supported by the data in terms of a balanc-
ing of model ﬁt and model complexity. Substantive factor ana-
lytic theory is then not represented by exclusions restrictions, but
by imposing (competing) systems of inequality constraints on and
between the free parameters in the loadings matrix. This ﬁgure
then gives a simple example of the possibilities. A situation is
considered with 6 items and 2 latent factors and two competing
inequality-constrained structures are given. It should be clear that
the ability to directly compare these models against each other
allows for higher speciﬁcity in the testing of factor structure.

This alternative strategy is brought to bear on research regarding the metabolic
syndrome (see Chapter 5 of the dissertation and Peeters, Dziura, & van Wesel,
2014). The conception metabolic syndrome (MBS) refers to a clustering of inter-
related risk factors of metabolic origin (Unwin, 2006). MBS is thought to be a
precursor for the development of type 2 diabetes mellitus and atherosclerotic car-
diovascular disease. The syndrome has social, behavioral, educational and psycho-
logical components, as MBS might result from maladaptive human metabolism in
the face of food energy abundance in combination with a sedentary lifestyle (Wilkin
& Voss, 2004). A high-proﬁle MBS data set with anthropometric measurements on
overweight and obese children and adolescents is reanalyzed using the alternative
strategy. The alternative strategy is able to extract information with higher speci-
ﬁcity. The ﬁndings may give inroads for behavioral and educational approaches
towards MBS prevention.

Contributions and Relevance

The contributions of the dissertation are connected to the research aims stated
earlier. With the fulﬁllment of Aim 1 a generic computational procedure for Type
I Bayes factors is available that is determinate under usage of default priors. This

6

C.F.W. PEETERS

Figure 3. This ﬁgure contains some geometric intuition on how
Bayesian inequality-constrained-model selection would work for
the factor analytic model. The schematic considers a unit circle,
representing the two-dimensional prior space on 2 factor loadings
bound by the communality of the standardized FA solution. The
concentric circles represent the (location of the) posterior probabil-
ity mass. Two competing inequality-constrained models are then
considered. The feasible space of Model 1 is represented in grey.
The feasible space of Model 2 is represented in blue. The Bayes
factor for an inequality-constrained model to the unconstrained
model boils down to the ratio of the posterior probability mass
over the prior probability mass satisfying the constraints that de-
ﬁne the model.
It is then clear that Model 1 is more likely for
the data at hand: Both models are of the same complexity (the
feasible space comprises 1/4 of the prior space) but the poste-
rior mass, however, is mostly located in the feasible region deﬁned
by Model 1. See https://github.com/CFWP/ConventionTalk or
Peeters (2012a) for additional explanation.

subsequently allows for improper prior usage in Bayesian EFA, thus respecting its
exploratory nature. The developments under Aim 1 also spur learning on some
lesser known indeterminacies in the factor model and their interrelationships with
computational approaches towards dimensionality selection. These results also hold
importance for non-Bayesian approaches towards factor analytic dimensionality se-
lection. They imply that for informed decisions regarding factor dimensionality,
likelihood ratio and information theoretic approaches beneﬁt from a complete ex-
ploration of the likelihood, which can be achieved by objective Bayesian methods.
Fulﬁlling Aim 2 extends Bayesian model selection eﬀorts regarding Type II
model selection (e.g., Klugkist & Hoijtink, 2007; Mulder, Hoijtink, & Klugkist,
2010) and adds to the body of literature regarding inequality-constrained inference

BAYESIAN MODEL SELECTION & FACTOR ANALYSIS

7

on regression-type parameters. More speciﬁcally, this research aim holds impor-
tance for the theory and technique of CFA. The formulation and development of
inequality-constrained models allows for theoretically meaningful constrained co-
eﬃcients beyond those needed simply to identify a model. This allows for higher
speciﬁcity in model formulation as the direction and (relative) strength of factor
loadings can be included in a formal model selection procedure. This may lead
one to extract more information from a single analysis. The developments empha-
size a break with simple structure models and may be viewed as constituting an
alternative take on CFA.

Aim 3 answers the call for the integration of EFA and CFA (Steiger, 1994). The
integrative strategy that is proposed connects EFA and CFA as complementary
techniques that may be part of a total inferential procedure that aims to avoid
evaluating diﬀuse model hypotheses. While Aims 1 and 2 are mostly of theoretical
relevance, Aim 3 is thus of practical importance. The usefulness of the technical
developments as merged in the integrative strategy is exempliﬁed by bringing this
strategy to bear on a published data set concerning risk factors for MBS. With
the integrative strategy, it is shown that more and unexpected information can be
extracted from these data.

Acknowledgements

I would like to thank the APA Division 5 Award Committee for bestowing me
with the 2015 Anne Anastasi Distinguished Dissertation Award. I express my grat-
itude towards my supervisors, Peter G.M. van der Heijden and Herbert Hoijtink. I
am also indebted to the people who provided data for the applications in the disser-
tation: Bill Hopkins, Karin Lasthuizen, Peter Esaiasson, and James Dziura. Lastly,
I acknowledge Floryt van Wesel who was, among many things, a collaborator on
the application-oriented chapters of the dissertation.

This research was supported by grant NWO-VICI-453-05-002 of the Nether-
lands Organization for Scientiﬁc Research (NWO). It is based on the ﬁrst chapter
of my unpublished PhD dissertation (2012a). This version is a preprint of: Peeters,
C.F.W. (2016). Bayesian Constrained-Model Selection for Factor Analytic Mod-
eling, to appear in The Score. David Herzberg’s editorial help in improving this
manuscript is gratefully acknowledged.

References

1. Berger, J.O., & Pericchi, L.R. (1996). The intrinsic Bayes factor for model selection and

prediction. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 91: 109-122.

2. Berger, J.O., & Pericchi, L.R. (2004). Training samples in objective Bayesian model selection.

The Annals of Statistics, 32: 841-869.

3. Besag, J. (1989). A candidate’s formula: A curious result in Bayesian prediction. Biometrika,

76: 183.

4. Chib, S. (1995). Marginal likelihood from the Gibbs output. Journal of the American Statis-

tical Association, 90: 1313-1321.

5. Ferrando, P.J., & Lorenzo-Seva, U. (2000). Unrestricted versus restricted factor analysis of
multidimensional test items: Some aspects of the problem and some suggestions. Psicol´ogica,
21: 301-323.

6. Hoyle, R.H., & Duvall, J.L. (2004). Determining the number of factors in exploratory and con-
ﬁrmatory factor analysis. In D. Kaplan (Ed.), The SAGE handbook of quantitative method-
ology for the social sciences (pp. 301-315). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.

7. Jeﬀreys, H. (1961). Theory of probability (3rd ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

8

C.F.W. PEETERS

8. J¨oreskog, K.G. (1979). Author’s addendum. In J. Magidson (Ed.), Advances in factor analysis

and structural equation models (pp. 40-43). Cambridge, Massachusetts: Abt Books.

9. Kass, R.E., & Raftery, A.E. (1995). Bayes factors. Journal of the American Statistical Asso-

ciation, 90: 773-795.

10. Klugkist, I., & Hoijtink, H. (2007). The Bayes factor for inequality and about equality con-

strained models. Computational Statistics & Data Analysis, 51: 6367-6379.

11. Mulder, J., Hoijtink, H., & Klugkist, I. (2010). Equality and inequality constrained multi-
variate linear models: Objective model selection using constrained posterior priors. Journal
of Statistical Planning and Inference, 140: 887-906.

12. Peeters, C.F.W. (2012a). Bayesian Exploratory and Conﬁrmatory Factor Analysis: Perspec-
tives on Constrained-Model Selection. (Unpublished PhD thesis) Dept. of Methodology &
Statistics, Utrecht University. Available from: http://dspace.library.uu.nl/handle/1874/
240966.

13. Peeters, C.F.W. (2012b). Rotational Uniqueness Conditions under Oblique Factor Correlation

Metric. Psychometrika, 77: 288-292.

14. Peeters, C.F.W., Dziura, J. & van Wesel, F. (2014). Pathophysiological Domains Underlying
the Metabolic Syndrome: An Alternative Factor Analytic Strategy. Annals of Epidemiology,
24: 762-770.

15. Steiger, J.H. (1994). Factor analysis in the 1980’s and the 1990’s: Some old debates and some
new developments. In I. Borg & P.P. Mohler (Eds.), Trends and perspectives in empirical
social research (pp. 201-223). Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.

16. Unwin, N. (2006). The metabolic syndrome. Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine, 99:

457-462.

17. van Prooijen, J.W., & van der Kloot, W.A. (2001). Conﬁrmatory analysis of exploratively

obtained factor structures. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 61: 777-792.

18. Wilkin, T.J., & Voss, L.D. (2004). Metabolic syndrome: Maladaptation to a modern world.

Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine, 97: 511-520.

(Carel F.W. Peeters) Dept. of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, VU University medical

center Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

E-mail address: cf.peeters@vumc.nl

