Ultraﬁltration of charge-stabilized dispersions at low salinity

Rafael Roa,1, 2, ∗ Daniel Menne,3 Jonas Riest,1, 4 Pompilia Buzatu,3, 5 Emiliy K.

Zholkovskiy,6 Jan K. G. Dhont,1, 7, 4 Matthias Wessling,3, 5, 4 and Gerhard N¨agele1, 7, 4, †

1Forschungszentrum J¨ulich, Institute of Complex Systems (ICS-3), 52425 J¨ulich, Germany

2Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin, Soft Matter and Functional Materials, 14109 Berlin, Germany

3RWTH Aachen University, Chemical Process Engineering, 52064 Aachen, Germany

4J¨ulich-Aachen Research Alliance, JARA-Soft Matter

5DWI Leibniz Institute for Interactive Materials, 52074 Aachen, Germany

6Ukrainian Academy of Sciences, Institute of Bio-Colloid Chemistry, 03142 Kiev, Ukraine

7Physics Department, Heinrich-Heine Universit¨at D¨usseldorf, 40225 D¨usseldorf, Germany

(Dated: March 21, 2016)

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
8
1

 
 
]
t
f
o
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
6
9
8
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Abstract

We present a comprehensive study of cross-ﬂow ultraﬁltration (UF) of charge-stabilized suspen-

sions, under low-salinity conditions of electrostatically strongly repelling colloidal particles. The

axially varying permeate ﬂux, near-membrane concentration-polarization (CP) layer and osmotic

pressure proﬁles are calculated using a macroscopic diﬀusion-advection boundary layer method,

and are compared with ﬁltration experiments on aqueous suspensions of charge-stabilized silica

particles. The theoretical description based on the one-component macroion ﬂuid model (OCM)

accounts for the strong inﬂuence of surface-released counterions on the renormalized colloid charge

and suspension osmotic compressibility, and for the inﬂuence of the colloidal hydrodynamic in-

teractions and electric double layer repulsion on the concentration-dependent suspension viscosity

η, and collective diﬀusion coeﬃcient Dc. A strong electro-hydrodynamic enhancement of Dc and

η, and likewise of the osmotic pressure is predicted theoretically, as compared with their values

for a hard-sphere suspension. We also point to the failure of generalized Stokes-Einstein relations

describing reciprocal relations between Dc and η. According to our ﬁltration model, Dc is of

dominant inﬂuence, giving rise to an only weakly developed CP layer having practically no eﬀect

on the permeate ﬂux. This prediction is quantitatively conﬁrmed by our UF measurements of

the permeate ﬂux using an aqueous suspension of charged silica spheres as the feed system. The

experimentally detected fouling for the largest considered transmembrane pressure values is shown

not to be due to ﬁlter cake formation by crystallization or vitriﬁcation.

∗ rafael.roa@helmholtz-berlin.de
† g.naegele@fz-juelich.de

2

I.

INTRODUCTION

The concentration and puriﬁcation of dispersions of charged particles is required in many

industrial, pharmaceutical and biological applications. For the concentration of particles

strongly aﬀected by Brownian motion, ultraﬁltration (UF) has become a standard method

whose major advantage is its low energy requirement.

It is extensively used for the pu-

riﬁcation and concentration of a large variety of proteins [1–9], food stuﬀ [10], industrial

enzymes and antibody fragments [11, 12], and waste water treatment [13]. UF takes place

also in Bowman’s capsule of the human kidneys where water and other small molecules are

separated from blood [14].

The term UF refers to the membrane ﬁltration of smaller, submicron-sized particles using

larger trans-membrane pressure (TMP) values. It should be distinguished from the so-called

microﬁltration (MF) of suspensions of larger, micron-sized particles, operated at relatively

low TMP values and high permeation ﬂuxes [15]. While the eﬀect of thermal Brownian

motion is strong in UF, causing the dispersion to remain basically in local thermodynamic

equilibrium during the ﬁltration process, the dominant particle-dynamics mechanism in

MF is shear-induced hydrodynamic migration and non-isotropic collective hydrodynamic

diﬀusion. The important role of the thermodynamic osmotic pressure in UF is taken over

in MF by an eﬀective osmotic pressure of hydrodynamic origin which can be characterized

by an eﬀective temperature [16, 17].

A standard way of operating UF is the inside-out cross-ﬂow mode where a feed dispersion

is steadily pumped through a bundle of hollow ﬁber membranes with inlet and outlet ports.

The particle-enriched dispersion is collected at the outlet ports. Given a fully particle

retentive membrane, a small fraction of the in-ﬂowing solvent permeates the membrane to

the outside of the ﬁber into the permeate bath. The particle advection towards the inner

membrane wall by the permeating solvent, driven by the TMP, is balanced by the diﬀusive

back transport of particles away from the inner (lumen-side) membrane wall. This leads

to the formation of a steady-state concentration-polarization (CP) layer, i.e. a particles-

enriched boundary layer of rejected mobile particles near the membrane surface which grows

in concentration and thickness with increasing axial distance from the ﬁber inlet. Owing to

the resulting osmotic pressure buildup in the CP layer counteracting the TMP, the permeate

ﬂux is decreased and the UF performance is consequently reduced. The increased viscosity

3

in the CP layer causes the ﬂow near the membrane to slow down which in turn further

enhances polarization. The ﬂux value above which the ﬂux-TMP curve starts to deviate

from the linear pure solvent line is referred to as the critical ﬂux. It hallmarks a detectable

inﬂuence by the CP layer, or the onset of (irreversible and reversible) membrane fouling

mechanisms [18].

For a realistic macroscopic-level calculation of the axially varying CP and permeate ve-

locity proﬁles, accurate expressions / results are needed for the collective (gradient) diﬀusion

coeﬃcient, Dc, and the low-shear dispersion viscosity, η, in their dependence on the particle

volume fraction φ and the dispersion ionic strength. In addition, accurate expressions for

the particle osmotic pressure, Π, and the related osmotic compressibility, χosm, are required.

There exists a larger number of theoretical works on the UF of charge-stabilized disper-

sions, both for non-steady dead-end (frontal) [2, 19–21] and steady cross-ﬂow [3, 22, 23]

setups. In most of these works, the concentration and salt content (salinity) dependence

of Π and Dc has been described using approximate expressions and numerical results. For

solutions of proteins such as BSA and lysozyme, virial-expansion type phenomenological

expressions for Π are frequently used (see, e.g., [9, 24]), while for charge-stabilized colloids

Π is approximated by a superposition of hard-sphere, van der Waals and cell model electric

pressure contributions [2, 25]. The concentration and ionic strength dependence of η is of-

ten disregarded in these studies [3, 23], or it is related to that of Dc by taking for granted

(unjustiﬁed as we are going to show) the validity of a generalized Stokes-Einstein relation

(cf. [26]). Moreover, the phenomenological Krieger-Dougherty expression for η is often used,

with the maximum eﬀective particle packing fraction in this expression related to an eﬀec-

tive particle diameter quantifying the range of the electric double layer repulsion [6]. To

describe Dc and its associated sedimentation coeﬃcient K, cell model expressions are often

used [23] which do not account for particle correlations. These correlations are signiﬁcantly

diﬀerent in dispersions of charged and neutral particles [27, 28]. Only to a small extent have

statistical mechanics approaches been used for calculating K and Dc, based on an eﬀective

particle pair potential combined with an Ornstein-Zernike integral equation method. Re-

sults obtained in this way are mainly for high-salinity systems where the simplifying concept

of an eﬀective hard-sphere diameter can be applied [6], and for the solvent-mediated parti-

cle hydrodynamic interactions (HIs) being neglected or treated highly approximatively (see,

e.g., [3]). The inaccuracy of these transport coeﬃcient results is reﬂected in the respective

4

UF model predictions.

Low-salinity dispersions require special considerations also regarding the osmotic pres-

sure, since the inﬂuence of the small counterions dissociated from the particle (i.e., colloid

or protein) surfaces and of added salt ions, termed microions for short, is here crucial. For

these systems, the eﬀective particle pair potential with integrated-out microion degrees of

freedom is state-dependent, and a simplifying mapping on an eﬀective hard-sphere system

is inadequate for the calculation of static and dynamic properties.

In this paper, we present and evaluate accurate semi-analytic expressions for thermody-

namic, static and dynamic dispersions properties constituting the input to our cross-ﬂow

UF model of charge-stabilized globular particle systems under low-salinity conditions. Our

calculations of Dc and η are based on the one-component macroion-ﬂuid model (OCM)

describing microion-dressed particles interacting by an eﬀective pair potential of Derjaguin-

Landau-Verwey-Overbeek (DLVO) type. The potential is characterized by a concentration

and ionic strength dependent renormalized particle charge number, Zeﬀ, and an electrostatic

interaction screening parameter κeﬀ. To account for the strong eﬀect of surface-released coun-

terions on the OCM potential and osmotic pressure, we use the Poisson-Boltzmann (PB)

cell model in a form convenient for applications as obtained by Trizac et al. [29]. The cell

model is combined with the hypernetted chain (HNC) integral equation method of calculat-

ing the particle radial distribution function and static structure factor that in turn are used

in our calculation of Dc and the high-frequency, η∞, and shear relaxation, ∆η, contributions

to the low-shear viscosity η. The semi-analytical methods used here in calculating these

transport coeﬃcients have been well assessed in their good accuracy by the comparison with

dynamic simulation results where HIs are fully included [27, 30], and with experimental

data for charge-stabilized colloidal particles [31] and protein solutions [32, 33]. The osmotic

pressure and transport coeﬃcient results constitute the input to the here employed cross-

ﬂow UF boundary layer model previously applied by Roa et al. [34] to solvent-permeable

hard-sphere suspensions. Results are generated and discussed for the two-dimensional CP

layer distribution, and for the axially resolved permeate ﬂux.

Additionally to our theoretical work, we have performed high-precision measurements of

the ﬁber-length averaged permeate velocity and TMP, and the membrane hydraulic resis-

tance, using a well-characterized aqueous suspension of charged silica spheres as the feed.

The measurements were made using a specially designed cross-ﬂow ﬁltration device. As

5

shown in the paper, the theoretical predictions for the permeate ﬂux are in good agreement

with those obtained from the ﬁltration experiment.

The essentials of the employed UF boundary layer model are given in Subsec. II A, with

the attention turned on the speciﬁcs originating from the particle and membrane charges.

The cell model calculations of the concentration-dependent eﬀective particle charge and

screening parameter are discussed in Subsec.

II B. The osmotic pressure calculations are

explained in Subsec.II C, and the transport coeﬃcients calculations relevant to UF are de-

scribed in Subsec. II D. The details of the cross-ﬂow UF experiments on low-salinity aqueous

silica particle suspensions are included in Sec. III. In Sec. IV, we present the theoretical

predictions for the CP layer and permeate ﬂux proﬁles, and the experimental-theoretical

comparison regarding the TMP dependence of the permeate. The summary with conclu-

sions is given in Sec. V.

II. THEORETICAL ULTRAFILTRATION MODELING

We describe in this section our macroscopic cross-ﬂow UF modeling for a feed suspension

of charge-stabilized colloidal particles, and explain our methods of calculating Dc, η, and

the osmotic pressure Π, based on the OCM with renormalized particle charge and screening

parameter. The suspension is steadily pumped through a hollow cylindrical ﬁber membrane
of inner radius R, length L (cid:29) R, and clean-membrane hydraulic permeability, L0
p, triggered
by the applied pressure diﬀerence, ∆pL = pin − pout, between the inlet and outlet of the
ﬁber. We assume the membrane to be fully retentive to the colloidal particles. A small

fraction of the axially in-ﬂowing solvent permeates the membrane to the outside of the ﬁber

into the permeate bath. In this inside-out cross-ﬂow setup, the particle advection towards

the membrane by the permeating solvent, driven by the diﬀerence between the transmem-

brane pressure, ∆pTMP, and transmembrane osmotic particle pressure, Π, is balanced by the

diﬀusive back transport of particles away from the inner membrane surface. This leads to

the formation of a particle-enriched CP region of mobile particles close to the inner mem-

brane surface. A detailed discussion of the physical principles and assumptions underlying

diﬀusion-advection transport in cross-ﬂow UF has been given in [34], for suspensions of

uncharged, solvent-permeable particles such as non-ionic microgels. Therefore, only the es-

sentials of the diﬀusion-advection transport are summarized here, with the focus set instead

6

on salient features speciﬁc to charged-stabilized particles.

A. Stationary cross-ﬂow transport

In UF, the transport of Brownian particle suspensions is considered under laminar ﬂow

conditions where the system is only slightly perturbed from thermal equilibrium. Under

continuous cross-ﬂow operation, a steady-state is quickly reached, with fully developed sus-

pension ﬂow in the lumen side of the ﬁber, and a particles-enriched stationary CP layer

formed at the inner membrane wall. Owing to the very large Schmidt number of colloidal

suspensions, given by the ratio of the characteristic single-particle diﬀusion and hydrody-

namic vorticity diﬀusion times across a distance equal to the colloidal particle radius a, the

steady suspension ﬂow is much faster developed than the CP layer proﬁle [35]. The CP

layer is more pronounced, and more extended, with axial increasing distance from the ﬁber

inlet. On a coarse-grained length scale where the size of the particles is not resolved, the

stationary transport is governed by continuum mechanics equations. There is ﬁrst the mass

balance (particle conservation) described by the continuity equation,

∇ · J(r) = 0 ,

where

J(r) = −Dc(φ(r))∇φ(r) + φ(r)v(r)

(1)

(2)

is the particle ﬂux, and φ(r) is the local particle volume fraction at position vector r inside the

suspension. The total ﬂux J(r) has a diﬀusion ﬂux contribution related to Brownian motion

whose strength at a given local concentration gradient is quantiﬁed by the so-called collec-

tive or gradient diﬀusion coeﬃcient Dc(φ), and an advection ﬂux contribution proportional

to the suspension-averaged ﬂuid velocity v. The momentum balance for the suspension-

averaged ﬂuid ﬂow is governed, under local low-Reynolds number conditions met in UF, by

the eﬀective Stokes equation in conjunction with the incompressibility constraint

Here,

∇ · σ(r) = 0 ,

∇ · v = 0 .

σ = −p1 + η(φ)(cid:2)∇v + (∇v)T(cid:3)

7

(3)

(4)

is the suspension-averaged hydrodynamic stress tensor, and 1 is the unit tensor. The su-

perscript T denotes matrix transposition. Moreover, p(r) is the suspensions-averaged local

pressure, and η(φ) the eﬀective suspension viscosity for steady low-shear ﬂow. According to

Eq. (3), in inhomogeneous suspension regions such as the CP layer, there is an additional
hydrodynamic force density proportional to ∇η.

The governing Eqs. (1) - (4) are subjected to boundary conditions imposing the inlet

ﬂow, and specifying the ﬂow conditions at the lumen side of the membrane. We assume a

fully developed Poiseuille inlet ﬂow,

v(r, x = 0) = um

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

1 − r2
R2

ex,

(5)

of a homogeneous feed solution of (small) volume fraction φ0. The axis of the cylindrical

ﬁber extends from x = 0 to L into the direction of the unit vector ex, with r denoting the

radial distance from this axis. The inﬂow velocity, um, at the ﬁber axis is related to the

characteristic shear rate, ˙γ, by [36]

˙γ =

2um
R

=

4Qfeed
ρπR2 ,

(6)

where Qfeed is the integral suspension mass ﬂow through the inlet cross section, and ρ is the

constant suspension mass density. The mass density diﬀerence between particles and ﬂuid

is neglected here.

Furthermore, we impose Darcy’s law in the integral form [36]

vw(x) ≡ v(R, x) · er = L0

p

∆ pTMP(x) − Π (φw(x))

(cid:104)

(cid:105)

,

(7)

for the (reverse-osmosis) inside-out permeate velocity, vw(x), at the membrane surface at

axial position x. Here, φw(x) = φ(r = R, x) is the particle concentration, ∆ pTMP(x) is the

transmembrane pressure (TMP), and Π(φw) is the osmotic pressure at the inner membrane

wall, while er is the radial unit vector of the cylindrical coordinate system. Moreover,

L0

p = 1/(η0Rmem) is the solvent permeability of the clean membrane and η0 the clean ﬂuid
viscosity. We use furthermore the zero-tangential ﬂuid velocity condition at the membrane-

suspension interface,

er × v(R, x) × er = 0 ,

and the reﬂecting boundary condition,

J(R, x) · er = 0 ,

8

(8)

(9)

describing the particle-impermeability of the membrane.

Strictly speaking, the boundary conditions in Eqs. (5) - (9) should be taken not right

at the membrane-suspension interface, but at the external boundary of a transition layer
adjacent to the inner membrane surface of thickness δ∗, which is required to be large com-
pared to the particle size and mean pore size of the membrane, but small compared with

the membrane thickness and ﬁber radius R. Furthermore, for charged particles and /or a
charged membrane, the transition layer thickness δ∗ should be large compared to the Debye
screening length, but small compared to the extension of the CP layer. Provided such a thin

transition layer can be introduced, and the convective ﬂow driven by the transmembrane

pressure does not signiﬁcantly perturb the thermodynamic equilibrium within the layer, Eqs.

(5) - (9) can be used which implicitly imply an inﬁnitely thin transition layer. In particular,

the ﬁltration behavior is then not aﬀected by the membrane surface charge.

A more detailed discussion of the transition layer picture, and of near-membrane ion

concentration and electric ﬁeld re-distributions occurring at high ﬁltration rates, will be

given in a forthcoming article describing a systematic theoretical analysis of the ﬁltration

of charge-stabilized suspensions for varying salt content and ﬁltration rates conditions. In

the present UF study, the requirements for an unperturbed transition layer are met for the
encountered lower ﬁltration rates. Moreover, since um (cid:29) v0
p ∆ pTMP is the
maximal permeate velocity reached for a clean membrane and pure solvent as the feed, also

w where v0

w = L0

the CP layer is thin compared to R. Thus, a boundary layer analysis of Eqs. (1) - (4) can be

made, resulting in a similarity solution for the CP layer concentration proﬁle φ(x, y), where
y = R − r (cid:28) R is the transversal distance from the membrane wall. From this proﬁle, and
for known concentration dependence of the osmotic pressure, the permeate velocity vw(x) is

obtained using Darcy’s law in Eq. (7).

The coupled set of non-linear ordinary diﬀerential equations from which the similarity

solution φ(x, y) is obtained using the boundary conditions noted before, is described in

detail in [34] and will thus not be repeated here. For given inlet feed ﬂow and ∆pL, the

only input required for the numerical solution are Π(φ), η(φ), and Dc(φ) characterizing bulk

properties of the charge-stabilized suspension, and ∆pTMP. Like in Ref.

[34], φ(x, y) has

been calculated using the MATLAB routine bvp4c [37].

9

B. Eﬀective colloid potential

As pointed out above, for the theoretical determination of the CP proﬁle and perme-

ate ﬂux the knowledge of the collective diﬀusion coeﬃcient, Dc(φ), and steady low-shear

viscosity, η(φ), of the suspension are required as functions of the colloidal volume fraction

φ = (4π/3)na3, with n denoting the colloid number concentration, in addition to the sus-

pension osmotic pressure Π(φ) and the related osmotic compressibility χosm(φ). In principle,

these properties can be obtained on basis of a so-called Primitive Model (PM) treatment

[38–40] where the large multi-valent colloidal particles (termed macroions for short), and

the small surface-released counterions and electrolyte ions (microions), are treated on equal

footing as diﬀerent species of uniformly charged hard spheres immersed in a dielectric struc-

tureless Newtonian ﬂuid of dielectric constant  and viscosity η0. PM-based theoretical

calculations and computer simulations are in general quite elaborate, owing to the involved

diﬀerent length and time scales characteristic of the spatio-temporal coupling of the diﬀerent

macroion and microion species.

In taking advantage of the strong size asymmetry of microions and monodisperse assumed

colloidal macroions, the one-component macroion ﬂuid model (OCM) is frequently used. In

the OCM, the eﬀective pair interaction potential, ueﬀ(r), between two microion-dressed

charged colloid spheres of radius a at centre-to-centre distance r is modeled, to decent

accuracy in general, by the sum of a hard-sphere and screened Coulomb potential of the

form [38, 39, 41, 42]

(cid:18)exp{κeﬀa}

(cid:19)2 exp{−κeﬀr}

1 + κeﬀa

r

,

βueﬀ(r) = lBZ 2
eﬀ

(10)

valid for r > σ with σ = 2a denoting the particle diameter. Here, β = 1/(kBT ) is the
inverse thermal energy, lB = e2/(kBT ) is the Bjerrum length of the suspending ﬂuid, and e

is the proton charge, while Zeﬀ and κeﬀ are the, in general, concentration and temperature

dependent eﬀective colloid charge number and screening parameter, respectively. The OCM

potential is state dependent as a consequence of having traced out the microion degrees of

freedom by starting, e.g., from the multi-component PM description. In using the OCM, it

is assumed that van der Waals attraction and other non-electric short-range colloid-colloid

interactions are negligible. This assumption is justiﬁed for charged colloids if the salt con-

centration is small enough that near-contact conﬁgurations are unlikely, or if the solvent

10

dielectric constant nearly matches that of the particles, or if the charged particles are ad-

ditionally sterically stabilized by surface-grafted short polymers [43]. Systems describable

by the OCM model range from charge-stabilized suspensions of rigid colloidal spheres [31]

to ionic microgels [44] and globular protein solutions [32, 33]. We use here the OCM for

calculating the colloid radial distribution function (RDF), g(r), and associated colloid static

structure factor, S(q), that in turn are needed for the calculation of η, K and Dc.

For monovalent microions that can be treated as pointlike in comparison with the colloidal

macroions, and with small microion correlation eﬀects disregarded, Zeﬀ and κeﬀ can be

obtained using the mean-ﬁeld Poisson-Boltzmann (PB) spherical cell model description of

Alexander et al.

[45] (see also Trizac et al.

[29, 41]).

In the PB cell model, the bulk

suspension is represented by a single spherical macroion with uniformly distributed bare

surface charge Zbaree, placed at the centre of a spherical cell whose radius R = a/φ1/3 is

set by the colloid volume fraction. The ﬂuid and microions, with the latter described in

the mean-ﬁeld treatment by radially smeared out concentration proﬁles, are conﬁned to the
outer shell of thickness R − a. For a system with monovalent counterions dissociated from
the colloid surfaces such as for the considered silica suspension in osmotic equilibrium with

a strong 1-1 electrolyte reservoir with concentration cres of salt ion pairs, the mean-ﬁeld

electrostatic potential, Φ(r), in units of kBT /e is the solution of the non-linear PB equation

[29]

Φ(cid:48)(cid:48)(r) + 2

Φ(cid:48)(r)

r

= κ2

res sinh{Φ(r)} .

(11)

Here, κ2

res = 8πlBcres is the square of the reservoir electrostatic sceening constant, and the
prime denotes diﬀerentiation with respect to the radial distance r. The appropriate inner
and outer boundary conditions rendering the solution Φ(r) unique are Φ(cid:48)(a) = −lBZbare/a2
and Φ(cid:48)(R) = 0, respectively. They express, respectively, that right at the colloid surface
there is no electrostatic screening, and that the cell is overall electroneutral.

Following Alexander et al. [45], the eﬀective colloid charge number, Zeﬀ, is then obtained

from the solution, Φl(r), of the PB equation linearized at the cell boundary by using Φ(cid:48)
−lBZeﬀ/a2. This leads to [29]

l(a) =

Zeﬀ = γR F (κeﬀa, φ−1/3) ,

lB
a

and

κ2
eﬀ = 4πlB

(cid:2)n+(R) + n−(R)(cid:3) = κ2

res cosh{Φ(R)} ,

11

(12)

(13)

with

F (x, y) =

1
x

(cid:2)(cid:0)x2y − 1(cid:1) sinh{x (y − 1)}
+x (y − 1) cosh{x (y − 1)}(cid:3) ,

(14)
and γR = tanh{Φ(R)}. Here, n±(R) are the co- and counterion concentrations at the cell
boundary, and Φ(R) is denoted as the Donnan potential. Note that the constant value of

the reservoir electrostatic potential is taken here to be zero. The concentration ns = Ns/VR
(with VR = (4π/3)R3) of co-ions (salt-ion pairs) in the suspension is in general smaller than

the reservoir concentration cres. It is obtained from solving ﬁrst numerically the non-linear

PB boundary value problem for the total reduced potential proﬁle Φ(r), for which we use

the MATLAB routine bvp4c. Using this proﬁle, ns follows then from the volume average of
the co-ion proﬁle, n−(r) = cs exp{Φ(r)}, according to (with x = r/a)

dx x2 exp{Φ(x)} ,

(15)

(cid:90) R/a

ns
cres

= 3 φ

1

where Zbare < 0 and thus Φ(x) < 0 have been used. In using the PB cell model to obtain

Zeﬀ and κeﬀ as functions of (lB/a)Zbare, κresa and φ, we ignore chemical charge regulation

eﬀects arising from an incomplete dissociation of colloidal surface ion groups.

In our silica ﬁltration experiments, the role of the microion reservoir is played by the

permeate. On assuming that the membrane is fully retentive to the silica spheres, the ion

concentration in the aqueous reservoir is practically set by the water-adsorbed atmospheric

CO2, resulting in κresa = 0.15. The Donnan equilibrium corresponds to a semi-grand canon-

ical ensemble description where microions can be exchanged between suspension and reser-

voir. A closed suspension of given salt concentration ns is treated most easily by mapping it

on a corresponding semi-open system. The reservoir concentration cres, for which cres > ns, is

then uniquely determined from solving Eq. (15), for given ns, using a root-ﬁnding procedure.

The PB cell model predictions for the concentration dependence of the eﬀective charge

number and screening parameter of the low-salinity aqueous silica suspension in Donnan

equilibrium are depicted in Fig. 1 and its inset, respectively, for a concentration independent
bare charge number Zbare ≈ 106, in units of the elementary charge. Owing to the quasi-
condensation of counterions at the colloid spheres surfaces, the eﬀective charge number Zeﬀ

is in general smaller than Zbare. For very small φ, the salt ions contribute dominantly to the

electrostatic screening (salt-dominated regime), and Zeﬀ and κeﬀ are nearly concentration

12

FIG. 1. Charge number ratio, Zeﬀ/Zbare, (main ﬁgure part) and screening parameter ratio, κeﬀ/κres,

(inset) as functions of colloid volume fraction φ, calculated using the Alexander PB cell model.

The employed systems parameters (lB/a)Zbare = 5, κresa = 0.15, a = 15 nm, and lB = 0.71 nm

are those of the experimentally studied low-salinity aqueous silica particles suspension in osmotic

equilibrium with an aqueous 1-1 electrolyte reservoir. The vertical dotted line marks the threshold
concentration value φ∗. See the text for details.

independent. This is the regime where the OCM eﬀective potential ueﬀ(r) is practically

state-independent, with values of κeﬀ close to the reservoir value κres constituting a lower

bound. At suﬃciently large φ, screening is mainly due to the non-condensed part of the

surface-released counterions (counterion-dominated regime).

In this higher concentration

regime, both Zeﬀ and κeﬀ change signiﬁcantly with increasing φ, giving rise to a distinctly

state-dependent OCM potential, and values of κeﬀ signiﬁcantly larger than κres. According

13

10-410-310-210-1φ0.850.90.951Zeff /Zbare10-410-310-210-1φ051015κeff/κresto Dobnikar et al. [41], the crossover region connecting the two regimes in the PB cell model

is roughly characterized by the threshold concentration value,

φ∗ = 0.2 × (κresa)2
(lB/a)Zbare

,

(16)

which for our low-salinity silica system amounts to φ∗ = 0.9× 10−3, indicated by the dotted
vertical lines in Fig. 1. This value is one order in magnitude smaller than the concentration
φ ≈ 0.02 where the minimal (i.e., maximally charge-renormalized) value of Zeﬀ(φ) occurs
which is 14 % smaller in magnitude than Zbare. In our ﬁltration experiments using silica

suspensions, the feed concentration is set to φ0 = 0.001, giving silica concentration values,
φw(x), at the inner membrane wall that are larger than φ∗. It is noticed from Fig. 1 that the
concentration values encountered in the UF experiment are part of the counterion-dominated

region where Zeﬀ, and hence ueﬀ(r), change signiﬁcantly when n is varied.

The OCM potential with its parameters Zeﬀ and κeﬀ determined by the PB cell model,

is used in our calculation of the colloid-colloid radial distribution function g(r), where r is

the center-to-center inter-particle distance, and of the related static structure factor,

(cid:90) ∞

0

S(q) = 1 + 4πn

dr r2 [g(r) − 1]

sin(qr)

qr

,

(17)

determined in a scattering experiment, with q denoting the scattering wavenumber. For

numerical simplicity, we have calculated g(r) and S(q) using the hypernetted-chain (HNC)

integral equation scheme [40]. While the HNC lacks thermodynamic self-consistency diﬀer-

ent, e.g., from the more elaborate Rogers-Young scheme (RY) [46], it is decently accurate

for the here considered lower-salinity systems (cf. Heinen et al. in [30]).

C. Osmotic pressure calculation

The total suspension pressure, P , caused by the microions and macroions can be formally

split [41, 47],

P = Pmicro + Pcorr ,

(18)

into a microion pressure part, Pmicro, deriving from the so-called free volume contribution

to the total PM free energy and originating from the non-condensed microions, and the

correlation pressure part, Pcorr, due to correlations among the microion-dressed colloids. In

14

the considered Donnan equilibrium with a low-concentrated monovalent ions reservoir, the

osmotic pressure Π, i.e. the diﬀerence between suspension pressure and reservoir pressure,

Pres, is given by

Π = P − 2 cres kBT .

(19)

Consistent with the PB mean-ﬁeld level of description, Pres is approximated here by its

ideal gas form. This simpliﬁcation is justiﬁed, since the leading non-ideal (limiting-law)
contribution, −kBT κ3
magnitude smaller than the ideal gas part .

res/(24π), to the reservoir pressure is, for κresa = 0.15, three orders of

For lower-salinity systems of colloids having many surface charges, the microion (coun-
terion) pressure contribution is dominant so that P ≈ Pmicro [41]. This holds in particular
in our ﬁltration experiments where φ > φ∗ as discussed below. In the cell model, Pmicro is
determined by the microion densities at the cell boundary,

βPmicro = n+(R) + n−(R) = 2 cres

,

(20)

(cid:18) κeﬀ

(cid:19)2

κres

where the second equality holds in PB approximation.

The correlation pressure part, Pcorr,

is in general quite diﬀerent from the pressure,

POCM, obtained from treating the suspension as an eﬀective one-component ﬂuid of dressed

macroions with the concentration-dependence of the OCM potential disregarded. Under

isothermal conditions, and without signiﬁcant eﬀective three-body correlation contributions

coming into play for very low salinity only, the total suspension pressure can be determined

from the generalized virial pressure equation [40],

n2(cid:110)

(cid:90) ∞

σ+

(cid:20)

(cid:21)

(cid:111)

βP − n2 ∂βA0
∂n

= n +

2π
3

σ3g(σ+) −

dr r2 g(r)

r

∂
∂r

− 3 n

∂
∂n

βueﬀ(r)

, (21)

for a one-component ﬂuid system with concentration-dependent eﬀective pair potential.

Additionally to the colloidal ideal gas contribution, and contributions associated with the

macroion g(r) of contact value g(σ+) on the right-hand-side of Eq. (21), there is a pressure

contribution deriving from the volume free energy, A0(n), whose colloid concentration de-

pendence is basically due to non-condensed counterions owing to the total electroneutrallity

constraint. While A0 has no inﬂuence on g(r) which is determined solely by ueﬀ(r), it must

be accounted for at smaller salinity in order to properly deduce thermodynamic properties

using an eﬀective one-component treatment.

15

The general applicability of Eq.

(21) has been questioned in the literature [38, 48].

However, at least in the linear screening case of weakly charged colloids where Zeﬀ = Zbare,

it exactly reproduces the PM pressure, provided a consistent expression for the free volume

pressure contribution on the left-hand-side of Eq. (21) is used which includes the ideal gas
pressure contribution, n|Zbare|kBT , of surface-released counterions (see [49–53]). The bare
OCM pressure, POCM, in units of kBT is given by the right-hand-side of Eq. (21), however

with the negative-valued pressure contribution from the concentration derivative of ueﬀ(r)

being omitted. It is a good approximation of the total suspension pressure P for very large

salinity values only, when the eﬀect of the surface-released counterions is negligible so that

A0 and ueﬀ(r) become n-independent.

The various pressure contributions are shown in Fig. 2, for concentrations extending up to
φ = 0.3, and for the same low-salinity silica system parameters as in Fig. 1. Since g(σ+) ≈ 0
according to the inset in Fig. 3 even for φ = 0.3, the contact-value pressure contribution

in Eq. (21) is negligibly small. Moreover, since the HNC principal structure factor peak
height, S(qm; φ), at wavenumber qm is smaller than 3.1 for φ ≤ 0.3, the suspension is
liquid-like structured. We have used here the semi-empirical Hansen-Verlet rule stating that
if S(qm) ≈ 3.1 is observed in a charge-stabilized systems with g(σ+) ≈ 0, it is about to
crystallize [28].

According to Fig. 2, the main contribution to the suspension pressure arises from the
microions. That P ≈ Pmicro is valid for the silica suspension is an expected feature of systems
being part of the counter-ion dominated concentration regime, and has been scrutinized

in numerous Monte-Carlo simulation studies of strongly charge- and size asymmetric PM
systems (see, e.g., [41, 42]). Note further from the ﬁgure that Pmicro (cid:29) Pid. As a reference,
also the pressure curve of a hard-sphere suspension is shown in the ﬁgure, obtained using

the accurate Carnahan-Starling equation of state [40]. The pressure POCM in Fig. 2 is about

one half of Pmicro, illustrating that it strongly overestimates Pcorr in the low-salinity regime

[41, 47].

The key point of the present discussion is that we can use

(cid:0)κ2

(cid:1)

βΠ ≈ 1
4πlB

eﬀ − κ2

res

as a good approximation for the osmotic pressure of the low-salinity silica suspension.

In addition to Π, the long-wavelength limit, S(0) = S(q → 0), of the macroion structure

16

(22)

FIG. 2. Colloid concentration dependence of various reduced pressure contributions listed in the

legend, for system parameters as in Fig. 1. Pres: ideal gas reservoir pressure; Pmicro: PB cell model

microionic pressure part according to Eq. (20); POCM: OCM pressure part in Eq. (21), calculated

using the HNC colloid g(r). PHS: hard-sphere pressure according to Carnahan-Starling equation

of state. Pid = nkBT : colloidal ideal gas pressure. The inset depicts Pmicro, POCM and PHS on a

linear scale.

factor is required as another thermodynamic input to the UF model contributing to the

calculation of Dc. According to an exact relation by Kirkwood and Buﬀ, the isothermal

compressibility factor in Donnan equilibrium, χosm, can be expressed solely in terms of S(0)

as [54]

osm ≡
χ−1

(cid:18) ∂βΠ

(cid:19)

=

1

S(0)

,

(23)

∂n

T,res

without an explicit invocation of colloid-microion and microion-microion static correlation

17

10-410-310-210-1φ10-510-410-310-210-11001014πlBa2βPPresPmicroPOCMPHSPid00.10.20.3φ0244πlBa2βPFIG. 3. Colloid structure factor principal peak height, S(qm), as function of φ, calculated in

HNC approximation using the OCM potential with PB cell model values for Zeﬀ and κeﬀ. System

parameters are as in Fig. 1. Inset: Contact value, g(σ+), of the HNC colloid g(r).

functions. The concentration derivative of Π is taken here for ﬁxed reservoir properties,
namely ﬁxed electrolyte ion chemical potential and concentration cres. Since P ≈ Pmicro
holds for our slow-salinity system, the compressibility factor follows straightforwardly from

(cid:18) ∂κeﬀ

(cid:19)

osm ≈ κeﬀ
χ−1
2πlB

∂n

T,res

,

(24)

and the PM cell model result for κeﬀ. At low salinity, χosm ∼ 1/Zeﬀ is valid approximately,
rendering explicit the low osmotic compressibility of the strongly repelling macroions. The

Kirkwood-Buﬀ relation is useful also for testing the degree of self-consistency of the ap-

proximations, namely here the PB cell model and HNC approximations used in calculation

of χosm and S(0), respectively. In the concentration range of our UF study, the diﬀerence

18

00.10.20.3φ11.522.53S(qm)00.10.20.3φ00.0020.004g(σ+)between both calculated quantities is less than 20 %.

While the cell-model based Pmicro is a good approximation for the suspension pressure of

our silica system, with compressibility factor determined using Eq. (24), for completeness

and future applications we shortly address how Π can be calculated for conditions where P

is not well approximated any more by Pmicro. First, a so-called extrapolated-point-charge

method of calculating P has been developed recently by Boon et al.

[55]. This method

invokes likewise the Alexander cell model input for Zeﬀ and κeﬀ, however now in a modiﬁed

OCM potential. Second, in two closely related approaches put forward by Casta˜neda-Priego

et al.

[56, 57], and Colla et al.

[58] (see also [59]), the exact validity of the Kirkwood-

Buﬀ relation is enforced by a self-consistent combination of the PB-based renormalized

jellium model for calculating Zeﬀ and κeﬀ, and the Rogers-Young integral equation scheme

for S(q) with adjusted mixing parameter. Which of the above noted methods of calculating

Π is more accurate in comparison with benchmark PM simulations is a matter of future

assessment. Finally, we point to the variational method (free energy minimalization) by

Denton [51, 60, 61]. It employs yet another deﬁnition of the eﬀective colloid charge and

screening parameter, and it accounts for all the concentration-dependent contributions to

the osmotic pressure in Eq. (21), including the volume free energy contribution. The Denton

method is applicable for arbitrary salinity, and its predictions for the osmotic pressure and

radial distribution function agree well with PM based Monte-Carlo simulation results by

Linse [62].

D. Colloidal transport coeﬃcients

The concentration-dependent collective diﬀusion coeﬃcient, Dc(φ), in the constitutive

equation invoking the coarse-grained silica particles ﬂux J(r, t), can be expressed in Donnan

equilibrium as [27]

Dc(φ) = D0

K(φ)
χosm

,

(25)

where D0 = kBT /(6πη0a) is the single-particle diﬀusion coeﬃcient, and χosm = S(0) is the

osmotic compressibility coeﬃcient calculated using Eq. (24). Here, K(φ) = Vsed(φ)/V0 is

the long-time sedimentation coeﬃcient, with Vsed(φ) denoting the mean particle sedimenta-

tion velocity in a uniform weak force ﬁeld that reduces to the single-particle sedimentation

velocity, V0, at inﬁnite dilution. As discussed in [27], Vsed is in principle smaller than the

19

corresponding short-time sedimentation coeﬃcient. However, for low-salinity system where

two-body hydrodynamic interactions (HIs) are prevailing, the diﬀerence between the two

coeﬃcients is minuscule and can be ignored. Consequently, we can identify K according to

[30] with

K = H(q → 0; φ) ,

(26)

i.e. with the zero-wavenumber limit of the so-called colloidal hydrodynamic function H(q; φ).

The latter is routinely determined for colloidal suspensions using short-time dynamic light

scattering experiments [63, 64]. The function H(q; φ) contains information about short-time
diﬀusion processes on length scales ∼ 1/q, and for correlation times t (cid:28) a2/D0 [39]. For the
hypothetical case of hydrodynamically non-interacting particles, H(q; φ) = 1 independent

of q and φ. Values of K smaller than one are thus a hallmark of the slowing inﬂuence of the

HIs.

The short-time function H(q) can be expressed by an equilibrium average invoking a spe-

ciﬁc combination of hydrodynamic mobility tensors characterizing HIs under low-Reynolds-

number ﬂow conditions [39]. To calculate H(q) from this average, we use the well-established

analytic BM-PA method [30, 64–66]. This method is a hybrid of the Beenakker-Mazur

method (BM), used here for the wavenumber-dependent distinct part of H(q), and the hy-

drodynamic pairwise-additivity method (PA) used for the q-independent self-diﬀusion part.

The BM-PA scheme requires the colloidal S(q) and g(r) as its only input, for which the HNC

results based on Eq. (10) for ueﬀ(r) are used. For a charge-stabilized suspension whose col-

loidal interactions are described by an OCM-type potential, the BM-PA method predicts

H(q) in good overall agreement with simulation and experimental result [27, 30, 31, 64].

Fig. 4 depicts the concentration dependence of Dc for the silica system, calculated using

the BM-PA method. This result is compared with the corresponding result in which the long-

ranged colloidal HIs are disregarded, and with the Dc calculation for neutral hard spheres.

Both the sedimentation coeﬃcient and the osmotic compressibility factor are monotonically

decreasing with increasing φ. At small φ, the decline of χosm outbalances that of K, owing to

the strong electrostatic inter-particle repulsion, with the consequence that Dc rises steeply

initially (see inset). At larger φ, the slowing inﬂuence of the HIs becomes stronger, having the
eﬀect that Dc passes through a maximum at φ ≈ 0.004, followed by a subsequent moderate
decline for larger φ values. When HIs are neglected so that K = 1, a monotonically increasing

Dc is obtained instead in the considered concentration range. The key fact to notice from

20

FIG. 4. Reduced collective diﬀusion coeﬃcient, Dc(φ)/D0, as a function of φ, for system parameters

as in Fig. 1. Solid line: Charged silica (CS) suspension, with K = H(0) calculated by the BM-PA

method using the HNC input for S(q) and g(r), and χosm calculated using Eq. (24). Dashed line:

Hypothetical silica suspension without HIs for which K = 1. Dashed-dotted line: Second-order

virial expansion result for neutral hard spheres (HS).

Fig. 4 is that owing to the strong electrostatic repulsion between the silica particles, Dc is

strongly enhanced by one order in magnitude relative to the collective diﬀusion coeﬃcient of

neutral hard spheres. The hard-sphere result for Dc with HIs included shown in the ﬁgure

has been generated using the second-order virial expansion expression [27, 67, 68],

Dc(φ)/D0 = 1 + 1.454φ − 0.45φ2 ,

(27)

which is in good agreement with simulation data up to φ = 0.494 where a non-sheared

hard-sphere suspension starts to solidify (see, eg., [34]).

21

10-410-310-210-1φ110100Dc /D0CS: K/χosm1/χosmHS: 2nd virial00.10.2φ0100Dc /D0Note that an electrokinetic reduction of Dc arising from the non-instantaneous relax-

ation of the microion clouds surrounding each colloidal macroion, is not accounted for in

the BM-PA method based on the OCM. This reduction can be estimated using the PM-

based coupled-mode theory [32] predicting it to be negligibly small owing to the large silica-

microion size asymmetry.

The second important transport property input to our ﬁltration model is the concentration-

dependent eﬀective suspension viscosity η(φ). Just like Dc(φ), it depends on the suspension

salinity and colloid surface charge. The steady-shear viscosity, η, is the sum [69],

η(φ) = η∞(φ) + ∆η(φ) ,

(28)

of the high-frequency viscosity contribution, η∞(φ), of purely hydrodynamic origin, and the

shear relaxation viscosity contribution, ∆η(φ), due to dissipation originating from the re-

laxation of the shear-perturbed particle cages formed around each colloidal particle. The

viscosity part ∆η is inﬂuenced both by direct and hydrodynamic interactions, with the con-

sequence that in suspensions of strongly correlated particles such as the present one, the

long-time viscosity η is signiﬁcantly larger than its short-time cousin η∞. This distinguishes

the viscosity from the collective diﬀusion coeﬃcient, since for the latter the diﬀerence be-

tween its short- and long-time forms stays small.

Shear-thinning eﬀects can be neglected under UF conditions where the shear Peclet-

number is small. Moreover, since for moderate salinity near-contact conﬁgurations of three

or more silica spheres are unlikely, we can use the PA method for calculating the low-

shear η∞. In this method, two-particle HIs are fully accounted for including near-contact
lubrication terms [64]. We have checked that for φ ≤ 0.3, the PA result for the η∞ of the
silica system is quantitatively described by the polynomial

η∞
η0

= 1 +

5
2

φ (1 + φ) + 7.9φ3 .

(29)

We emphasize that this polynomial is not a truncated virial expansion expression. It has

been derived in [27] on basis of the PA method and additional simpliﬁcations justiﬁable

for low-salinity systems, and it was shown therein to be in good agreement with elaborate

hydrodynamic simulation results for η∞. Note that η∞ of charged silica particle suspensions

is somewhat smaller than that of uncharged hard spheres for the same concentration, owing

to the smaller likelihood of near-contact conﬁgurations in the former case.

22

While well-tested analytic tools such as the PA method are available for η∞, the calcula-

tion of ∆η is distinctly more demanding since caging (memory) eﬀects need to be considered

for the latter. There are only few simulation studies on the steady-shear viscosity of charge-

stabilized suspensions, and in most of them HIs have been neglected. For calculating ∆η, we

employ here the mode-coupling theory (MCT) approximation applied to Brownian particle

systems. A version of MCT where the for charged particles most important far-ﬁeld HIs

contributions are included has been developed by one of the present authors [70], in conjunc-

tion with a generalization to the multicomponent PM successfully applied to concentrated

electrolytes [71]. For analytic simplicity, we start here from the standard one-component

MCT expression,

∆ηMCT =

kBT
60π2

(cid:90) ∞

0

(cid:18) S(cid:48)(q)

(cid:19)2(cid:90) ∞

(cid:18) S(q, t)

(cid:19)2

S(q)

0

S(q)

dq q4

dt

,

(30)

derived, e.g., in [70], in which HIs contributions to the static MCT vertex function are

neglected. The prime denotes here diﬀerentiation with respect to the wavenumber.

In

principle, ∆η can be calculated self-consistently using a numerically expensive algorithm in

combination with the corresponding MCT equation for the dynamic structure factor S(q, t),

where S(q, 0) = S(q) [39]. In restricting ourselves to concentration values φ < 0.2 where

S(qm) is distinctly smaller than the Hansen-Verlet freezing criterion value of 3.1, we can

obtain ∆η more simply in form of a ﬁrst iteration solution by replacing S(q, t) in Eq. (30)
by its exponential short-time form S(q, t)/S(q) = exp{−q2D0H(q)t/S(q)}. This gives,

∆ηMCT ≈ 1
40π

dy y2 S(cid:48)(y)2

S(y)

1

H(y)

,

(31)

(cid:90) ∞

0

where y = qσ. The inﬂuence of HIs is incorporated here by means of the hydrodynamic

function H(y) which aﬀects the short-time decay of S(y, t). As shown in [70], HIs modify also

the static vertex function part in the MCT expression of ∆η. This modiﬁcation is disregarded

here since its eﬀect can be expected to be small in the range of smaller concentration values

encountered inside the CP layers of our UF experiments (see below).

The result for the steady-shear viscosity of the silica system as a function of φ is included

in Fig. 5. The high-frequency viscosity part, η∞, is calculated using Eq. (29), and the

shear-relaxation part is obtained using Eq. (31). We employ here the BM-PA input for

H(y), and the HNC S(y) based on the OCM potential with PB cell model values for Zeﬀ

and κeﬀ. As it is noticed from the comparison of ∆η and η, the major viscosity contribution

23

FIG. 5. Theoretical predictions of the concentration-dependent steady-shear viscosity, η(φ), of

charged silica spheres (CS, solid black line), in comparison with the viscosity of neutral hard

spheres (HS, solid blue line). Additionally shown are the shear-relaxation viscosity contribution,

∆η, of silica spheres, and the steady-shear viscosity without HIs. System parameters of the silica

system are as in Fig. 1.

is due to the shear-relaxation part. For φ = 0.2, η is strongly raised compared to the solvent

viscosity η0 by the factor of 19, while the high-frequency viscosity is only weakly enlarged

by the factor of 1.9. Notice here that ∆η(φ = 0) = 0. To quantify the inﬂuence of the

HIs, in Fig. 5 we have included the steady-shear viscosity without HIs, for which η∞ is

given by the Einstein expression η∞/η = 1 + 2.5φ valid for no-slip spheres, and for which

H(y) in Eq. (31) is taken to be equal to one. HIs signiﬁcantly enhance the steady-shear

viscosity of the silica suspension for φ > 0.1. This enlargement stems mainly from the shear

24

00.050.10.150.2φ05101520η/η0CS: η/η0CS: ∆η/η0CS: ηno-HI /η0HS: η/η0relaxation part. For comparison, additionally shown in the ﬁgure is the viscosity of hard

spheres, which we have obtained using a precise generalized Saito formula for η∞, and the

hard-sphere contact-value approximation for ∆η. We refer to [34, 64] for the details of this

analytic calculation, where in addition the good accuracy of the generalized Saito formula

has been established by the comparison with computer simulation data. Diﬀerent from the

charged silica particles, for φ < 0.2 the ∆η of neutral hard spheres is small compared to η∞.

Note that we are dealing here with the demanding case of low-salinity systems with

extended electric double layers and long-ranged electric repulsion. Electrokinetic viscosity

eﬀects are not considered here for these are secondary eﬀects that become smaller with

increasing concentration. In case of higher-salinity systems with thin electric double layers,

a simple thermodynamic perturbation approach is useful where the viscosity calculation can

be mapped to that for an eﬀective hard-sphere system (see, e.g., [72]).

In closing our discussion of transport coeﬃcient calculations, we emphasize that the PB

cell model has been used only for deriving the eﬀective charge and screening length in

ueﬀ(r) but not in the calculation of the transport coeﬃcients. Thus, diﬀerent from pure cell

model approaches such as that by J¨onsson and J¨onsson [26], colloidal particle correlations

are accounted for.

In [26], the collective friction coeﬃcient fc = kBT /Dc and thus Dc

was estimated on assuming the validity of the generalized Stokes-Einstein (GSE) relation,
Dc/D0 ≈ η0/η, between Dc and η, and by using the spherical cell model viscosity expression.
This GSE approach is ﬂawed for the following reasons. First, it has been shown using

theory and simulations, and in experimental work on BSA protein solutions [33] that the

aforementioned GSE between Dc and η is invalid unless the concentration is very small.

In fact, according to Fig. 4, the Dc of a lower-salinity system has a non-monotonic φ

dependence, whereas η and η∞ are monotonically increasing with increasing φ. Another

so-called Kholodenko-Douglas GSE relation between Dc and η which in addition invokes

the osmotic compressibility factor S(0), has been likewise shown to be invalid for low-

salinity systems, although this relation applies decently well to hard spheres (see [30, 33]

for details). Second, the comparison with simulation results for η and K revealed that cell

model predictions for these quantities are generally not reliable in particular for smaller

concentrations [34]. Moreover, owing to neglected inter-particle correlations, the viscosity

result obtained from the standard PB cell model scheme is more adequately identiﬁed with

η∞ rather than with η. As seen in Fig. 5, for a low-salinity system η is substantially larger

25

than η∞.

III. SILICA PARTICLES ULTRAFILTRATION EXPERIMENT

We explain here our cross-ﬂow UF measurements using aqueous suspensions of charge-

stabilized silica particles. The suspensions consist of Ludox silica particles dispersed in

puriﬁed water without added electrolyte. The mean hydrodynamic particle radius which

we obtained from dynamic light scattering is a = 15 nm. The volume fraction of the feed
suspension is φ0 = 1 × 10−3. Additionally to monovalent counterions dissociated from the
silica particles surfaces that neutralize the negative particle charges, the suspension includes

ions originating from the self-dissociation of water molecules, and from atmospheric CO2

contamination. These contributions sum up to the value pH = 5.5 that we have measured

using a pH meter.

The number of bare elementary charges on a silica particle surface is estimated as Zbare ≈
106, i.e. as (lB/a)Zbare = 5 in reduced units. We have obtained this value using Fig. 4.10 in
[73] from which for pH = 5 the surface charge density 0.0375 e/nm2 of SiO− ions is deduced.
The Debye screening parameter, κres, of the permeate reservoir is estimated by assuming

the pH of the permeate to be the same as that of the dilute feed suspension. The screening

parameter follows then from

(32)
where [H+] = 10−pH is the molar hydronium concentration, and NA denotes Avogadro’s
number. This leads to κresa = 0.15. The values for Zbare and κres given above are used in

κ2
res = 8πlBNA[H+] ,

our cell model calculations of Zeﬀ and κeﬀ going into the OCM potential.

We have performed inside-out cross-ﬂow UF measurements using an OSMO Inspector

device built by Convergence Industry B.V. (The Netherlands). The setup is equipped with

a corioli ﬂow mass ﬂow meter from Bronkhorst Cori-Tech B.V. (The Netherlands) with an

accuracy of about 0.2 %, and the system is based on work by van de Ven et al.

[74]. In

the OSMO inspector device, the silica suspension is steadily pumped, at ﬁxed temperature

T = 303 K, through a membrane module containing 10 hollow cylindrical ﬁber membranes in

parallel mode. The employed hollow ﬁber membrane is a negatively charged polyethersulfon

membrane, provided by Pentair X-Flow (The Netherlands), with a nominal pore size of 10

nm and a molecular weight cut-oﬀ of 10 kDa. The ﬁbers have a mean length L = 40 cm,

26

and an inner mean diameter 2R = 0.8 mm, with total area Amem = 2πRL = 0.01m2 of the

membrane module.

The OSMO Inspector allows to set the feed and retentate (outlet) mass ﬂuxes Qfeed and
Qret, respectively. The permeate ﬂux follows from mass conservation as Qperm = Qfeed−Qret.
Moreover, the mechanical (i.e. non-osmotic) pressure values at the feed, retentate and per-

meate positions are measured. From these values, the ﬁber-length-averaged transmembrane

pressure, ∆pTMP, is calculated using

∆pTMP =

Pfeed + Pret

2

− Pperm ,

(33)

where a linear axial pressure drop from inlet to outlet is assumed, for a constant perme-

ate pressure. Using a linear pressure proﬁle is an approximation suﬃcient for the present

analysis. The form of the lumen-side axial pressure decline is actually more complicated,

as discussed by Mondor and Moresoli on basis of the momentum and continuity equations

combined with Darcy’s law [75, 76].

In our UF experiments, the feed ﬂux was held constant at Qfeed = 600 g/h, while the

retentate ﬂux was stepwise decreased. Accordingly, the permeate ﬂux increased stepwise
from Qperm = 100 − 500 g/h. The ﬁber-length-averaged permeate velocity is obtained using

(cid:104)vw(cid:105) = Qperm/ρ Amem ,

(34)

with the suspension mass density ρ = 1000 g/L taken to be constant. The selected process
parameters give rise to measured permeate velocities in the range (cid:104)vw(cid:105) = 10 − 50 LMH
(liters/m2/h), i.e. 2.8 − 13.9 µm/s.
The clean water permeability, L0

silica UF experiment. The measurement was done in constant ﬂux mode, with v0

p, of the membrane was measured before and after the
w = 50
LMH = 13.9 µm/s, and ∆pTMP obtained from inserting the associated measured pressure

values into Eq. (33). The permeability follows then from Darcy’s law,

L0

p =

v0
w

∆pTMP

,

(35)

value L0

without osmotic pressure contribution since pure water is used as feed.

In this way, the
p ≈ 155 LMH/bar= 4.3× 10−10 m/Pa·s was obtained which is used in our UF model
calculations of the permeate ﬂux and CP layer proﬁles discussed in the following section.

27

IV. FILTRATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

A. Theoretical results for CP layer proﬁles and permeate ﬂux

We present here our theoretical results for cross-ﬂow UF of low-salinity suspensions based

on the boundary layer ﬁltration model, and the input for the osmotic pressure and com-

pressibility, and Dc(φ) and η(φ) as described in Sec. II. The system parameters are those

characterizing the OSMO Inspector cross-ﬂow UF setup, and the low-salinity aqueous silica

suspensions for T = 303 K. The setup parameters are explicitly: membrane length L = 0.4
p = 4.3× 10−10 mPa−1s−1,
m, inner radius R = 0.4 mm, hydraulic membrane permeability L0
and characteristic shear rate ˙γ = 332 s−1 corresponding to the feed ﬂux Qfeed = 600 g/h
(6). For simplicity, in our calculations the TMP is taken as constant
according to Eq.

along the ﬁber, and with value according to Eq. (33). The silica system parameters used

in the ﬁltration calculations are: particle radius a = 15 nm, lB = 0.7 nm, Zbare = 106, and
κresa = 0.15. The feed volume fraction φ0 = 1.0 × 10−3 is large enough for Eqs. (22) and
(24) describing the osmotic pressure and compressibility in the counterion-dominated regime
˙γ (cid:28) 1 so that shear-induced hydrodynamic diﬀusion is negligible in
to apply. Moreover, P ea
comparison to thermal diﬀusion [15]. Since R (cid:28) L, the boundary-layer description condition
w is met, and since ReR ∼ 10 also the Rayleigh number condition of laminar pipe
um (cid:29) v0
ﬂow is fulﬁlled. We have checked that the (eﬀective) Debye length is much smaller than the

(typical) thickness of the CP layer. Furthermore, the UF condition of local thermodynamic

equilibrium is fulﬁlled.

The CP layer and permeate velocity proﬁles are calculated using the boundary layer

method described in Sec. II, and with Dc(φ), η(φ) and Π(φw) used as the input. We show

in the following that for the present operating conditions, membrane fouling due to a cake

layer formed by jammed particles is avoided.

Figs. 6(a) and (b) depict the calculated CP concentration proﬁle, φw(x), and the permeate

velocity proﬁle, vw(x), at the membrane surface in their dependence on the reduced axial

distance, x/L, from the ﬁber inlet. The solid curves are the results for the low-salinity silica

suspension, while the dashed curves in the inset describe neutral hard spheres. Note that

for the electrostatically repelling silica particles, φw(x) increases only slightly above the feed

concentration φ0 with increasing distance x. This can be attributed to the large values of the

28

FIG. 6. (a) Calculated membrane surface concentration proﬁle, φw(x), scaled by the feed volume

fraction φ0, and (b) permeate velocity proﬁle, vw(x), scaled by the pure solvent velocity, v0

w, for

the explored low-salinity silica suspension (solid lines). Insets: as in main ﬁgures, but for neutral
˙γ = 332 s−1, a = 15 nm,

hard spheres (dashed lines). System parameters: ∆pTMP = 0.08 bar,
φ0 = 10−3, L0

p = 4.3 × 10−10 m/Pa·s.

collective diﬀusion coeﬃcient, Dc(φ), of charge-stabilized particles even for small φ (see Fig.

4), causing particles which are ﬂow-advected towards the membrane surface to be strongly

driven away from it by collective diﬀusion. In Fig. 6(b), the permeate velocity, vw(x), of

29

00.20.40.60.81x/L0.9960.9970.9980.9991vw(x)/vw011.522.5φw(x)/φ000.20.40.60.81x/L0100200300400φw(x)/φ000.20.40.60.81x/L0.90.951vw(x)/vw0(a)(b)the silica system decreases only slightly with increasing x for the following reason: With
increasing axial distance from the inlet, φw and hence Π(φw) ≈ Pmicro − Pres (see Fig. 2)
are only mildly enlarged so that vw(x) according to Eq. (7) is only slightly lowered below

its clear solvent value v0

p ∆pTMP for given TMP. This should be contrasted with the
theoretical UF result for hard spheres and for unchanged operating conditions (see insets of

w = L0

Figs. 6(a) and (b)) where φw is enhanced and vw lowered by two orders of magnitude. This

marked diﬀerence can be attributed to the signiﬁcantly smaller collective diﬀusion coeﬃcient

for hard spheres, giving rise to a signiﬁcant enrichment of particles at the membrane wall,

with osmotic pressure and viscosity values inside the CP layer that are consequently much

larger than those of the silica system.

It is instructive to quantify the changes in the CP layer and permeate ﬂux induced by

individually replacing Π(φ), Dc(φ), and η of the charged silica particles (CS) by those of

neutral hard spheres (HS). This quantiﬁcation is made in Figs. 7(a) and (b). The black
curves marked by ◦ are the results for the φw(x) and vw(x) proﬁles of the silica system shown
in Fig. 6. If in the UF calculation, the Carnahan-Starling osmotic pressure for hard spheres
is used instead of the charged-particles pressure, the red curves marked by (cid:52) are obtained.
While the CP proﬁle at the membrane remains nearly the same, the permeate velocity is
w, owing to ΠHS(φ) (cid:28) ΠCS(φ) (see Fig. 2 and Eq.
7). If the osmotic pressure and eﬀective viscosity remain those of the silica system but the

now larger and practically equal to v0

collective diﬀusion coeﬃcient of hard spheres is used instead, the orange curves marked by

3 are obtained for φw(x) and vw(x). The CP proﬁle (permeate velocity) is now much larger

(smaller) than that of the silica system, and of values comparatively close to those for a
hard-sphere system. This behavior is explained by noting that DHS(φ) (cid:28) DCS(φ) (see Fig.
4) which gives rise to a strongly reduced transverse diﬀusion ﬂux of particles away from the

membrane surface and hence to a more pronounced CP layer. Finally, if the osmotic pressure

and collective diﬀusion coeﬃcient of the silica spheres system is used in combination with

the viscosity of hard spheres (blue curve marked by 2), φw(x) is moderately lowered and

vw(x) moderately enhanced relative to the proﬁles for the original silica system. The reason

for these only moderate changes is that ηHS(φ) < ηCS(φ) (cf. Fig. 5), causing a smaller axial

shear stress inside the CP layer [34].

In Fig. 8, the calculated transverse concentration proﬁle, φ(x, y), inside the CP layer is

shown as function of distance y from the membrane surface, for three diﬀerent axial positions

30

FIG. 7. (a) Calculated scaled surface concentration proﬁle, φw(x)/φ0, and (b) scaled permeate
w. Solid black lines marked by ◦ are the results for low-salinity silica
velocity proﬁle vw(x)/v0
suspensions. Red lines marked by (cid:52) are results using the osmotic pressure, ΠHS, for hard spheres,
, and viscosity, ηCS, for charged spheres. Orange lines
and the collective diﬀusion coeﬃcient, DCS

c

marked by 3 are obtained using the collective diﬀusion coeﬃcient, DHS

c

, for hard spheres, and the

osmotic pressure, ΠCS, and viscosity, ηCS, for charged spheres. Blue lines marked by 2 are obtained

using the viscosity of hard spheres, and the osmotic pressure and collective diﬀusion coeﬃcient of

charged spheres. System parameters are as in Fig. 5.

31

00.20.40.60.81x/L0.9960.9970.9980.9991vw(x)/vw011.522.5φw(x)/φ0ΠCS, DcCS, ηCSΠHS, DcCS, ηCSΠCS, DcHS, ηCSΠCS, DcCS, ηHS(a)(b)FIG. 8. Calculated transverse CP layer proﬁle, φ(x, y), at three diﬀerent axial positions, x, as

indicated (diﬀerently colored curves), for the low-salinity silica suspension (solid curves). The

transverse distance, y, from the membrane surface is scaled by the CP layer thickness, δ(L) =

(3Dc(φ0)L/ ˙γ)1/3, at the ﬁber outlet. Inset: as in main ﬁgure, but for neutral hard spheres (dashed

curves). System parameters as in Fig. 5.

x/L. For a comparison, the transverse CP proﬁles of the hard-sphere system (dashed curves)

are displayed in the inset. The transverse proﬁles decay strictly monotonically from the

membrane surface value, φw(x), at y = 0 down to the feed value, φ0 that is reached for
y (cid:29) δ(x). Owing to the gradually strengthening CP layer along the membrane surface,
φ(x, y) at a given y is larger for a larger axial distance x from the inlet. Consistent with the

axial surface proﬁles shown in Fig. 6, the transverse proﬁles of hard spheres depicted in the

inset (dashed curves) are two orders of magnitude larger than those of the silica system.

32

0246810y/δ(L)11.522.5φ(x,y)/φ0x/L=1x/L=0.5x/L=0.2500.20.40.60.81y/δ(L)0100200300400φ(x,y)/φ0FIG. 9. Open circles: Our experimental UF results for the ﬁber-length-averaged permeate velocity,
(cid:104)vw(cid:105), as function of the transmembrane pressure ∆pTMP. The dotted curve is the result for pure
water as feed where v0

p ∆pTMP. System parameters are as in Fig. 5.

w = L0

B. Comparison with UF measurements

The UF model results are compared here with the outcome of our silica suspension cross-

ﬂow UF measurements described in Sec. III.

In Fig. 9, the ﬁber-length-averaged permeate velocity, (cid:104)vw(cid:105), is plotted as function of
∆pTMP, with the TMP determined using Eq. (33) from the measured pressure values at the

feed, retentate and permeate positions. The dotted black curve is the pure water ﬁltration
result, (cid:104)vw(cid:105) = L0
p = 155 LMH/bar (cf. Sec. III). The open circles are the
experimental ﬁndings obtained using Eq. (34). From our theoretical predictions for vw(x),

p ∆pTMP, where L0

33

00.10.20.30.4∆pTMP(bar)051015<vw> (µm/s)Pure solventSilica UF experimentHSCS(cid:104)vw(cid:105) is calculated using

(cid:90) L

0

(cid:104)vw(cid:105) =

1
L

vw(x)dx .

(36)

The dashed blue curve in Fig. 9 is the theoretical result for no-slip hard spheres. The

inﬂuence of the, for hard spheres, well developed CP layer becomes visible for ∆pTMP >
0.1 bar where (cid:104)vw(cid:105) is reduced below the straight line characteristic of a pure water feed.
The hard-sphere curve of (cid:104)vw(cid:105) is truncated at ∆pTMP ≈ 0.17 where the random closed
packing membrane surface concentration φw = 0.64 is reached, and an amorphous cake

layer of jammed particles is formed. In the present work, cake layer formation and other

membrane fouling mechanisms are not considered in the theoretical model. For charge-

stabilized particles and charged membranes, this requires an elaborate modeling outside the

scope of the present work. The solid red curve is the theoretical prediction for charged silica

particles, obtained by the theoretical methods described in Sec. II.

Full agreement is observed in Fig. 9 between the experimental and theoretical (cid:104)vw(cid:105)
predictions for the silica system, except for the experimental data point for the largest

experimental TMP value. The experimental and theoretical data points are close to the

pure solvent curve, showing that the osmotic pressure inﬂuence is insigniﬁcant for the UF

of low-salinity suspensions. While this ﬁnding is surprising on ﬁrst sight, it was shown in

Subsec.

IV A that the strong transverse diﬀusion ﬂux away from the membrane surface

renders the CP layer to be only weakly developed. The reason why the experimental data

point for the largest TMP value is below the theoretical straight line is deﬁnitely not cake

formation by crystallization or vitriﬁcation. This fouling mechanism is ruled out since the

particle concentration values at the membrane surface (cf. Fig. 6) are way too small for the

structure factor peak height, S(qm; φw), to reach the Hansen-Verlet criterion value of 3.1 for

low-salinity charge-stabilized systems where the suspension begins to crystallize (see again

Fig. 3 and [28]). The deviation of the experimental data point at the largest considered TMP

can be attributed instead to a preferential adsorption of silica particles at the membrane

surface. This fouling mechanism is mechanically reversible here, since the same value for L0
p

is measured after the silica ﬁltration experiment and a backwashing cycle. The largest-TMP

data point can be accounted for in Eq. (7) by adding a fouling layer resistance, Rfoul, to the

membrane resistance according to

Lp =

1

η0(Rmem + Rfoul)

.

34

(37)

Note again that diﬀerent from the silica system, the osmotic pressure ΠHS(φw) of the ref-

erence hard-sphere system contributes signiﬁcantly in Darcy’s law in Eq.

(7), lowering

consequently the permeate velocity well below its pure solvent value.

V. CONCLUSIONS

We have undertaken a comprehensive theoretical-experimental study of cross-ﬂow UF of

suspensions of charge-stabilized colloidal spheres, for the theoretically most challenging case

of low-salinity systems.

The ﬁltration measurements of the integral permeate ﬂux were made using well-characterized

aqueous suspensions of charged silica spheres, and a specially designed ﬁltration device. The

calculations of the axially resolved CP proﬁle, φ(x, y), and permeate velocity, vw(x), are

based on a boundary layer analysis of the coupled diﬀusion-advection and Stokes equations,

Darcy’s law incorporating the inﬂuence of the membrane by means of its hydraulic resis-

tance, and the one-component macroion ﬂuid model (OCM) of eﬀective colloid interactions.

In the OCM description, we account for the strong inﬂuence at lower salinity of surface-

released counterions on the renormalized particle charge and electric screening length, and

most importantly on the osmotic pressure Π. We showed that if ΠOCM alone is used as an

approximation of Π, as done e.g.

in [3], the osmotic pressure is severely underestimated.

The static pair functions g(r) and S(q), and Π were calculated by employing the PB com-

bined with the HNC integral equation scheme, and used in our calculation of the collective

diﬀusion coeﬃcient and steady-shear suspension viscosity with HIs included.

We showed that there is a strong electro-hydrodynamic enhancement both of Dc and η

relative to their values for neutral hard spheres, and we have pointed to the invalidity for

lower salinity systems of two generalized Stokes-Einstein relations invoking the proportion-

ality of Dc and 1/η. The good accuracy of the BM-PA and simpliﬁed MCT methods of

calculating Dc and η for charge-stabilized dispersions was assessed already in earlier works

by the comparison with Stokesian dynamics simulation and experimental results for colloidal

particle suspensions [30, 31].

Electrokinetic eﬀects due to the non-instantaneous dynamic response of microion clouds

are stronger for small proteins than for the here considered larger colloids, owing to the

smaller protein-microion size ratio (see, e.g. [32]). Particle-speciﬁc chemical surface charge

35

regulation does not alter the generic behavior of the UF permeate ﬂow for low-salinity feed

dispersions since its eﬀect is to only moderately increase the already quite large renormalized

particle charge [77]. Considering the less sophisticated and less accurate transport coeﬃcient

approximations used in earlier UF calculations for charge-stabilized dispersions and protein

solutions (see, e.g., [3, 6]), the present study is a signiﬁcant advancement.

Additionally to the osmotic pressure, the transport coeﬃcients Dc and η are salient

input to the macroscopic UF calculations. Our calculations predict collective diﬀusion to

be of dominant inﬂuence. The CP layer is consequently only weakly developed, and it

has practically no eﬀect on the (ﬁber-length-averaged) permeate ﬂux. On ﬁrst sight this

is an unexpected result, given the large values both of η and Π in comparison to those for

uncharged particle systems. While a larger viscosity adds to the CP layer buildup, a larger

Π(φw) has two antagonistic eﬀects: On the one hand, it lowers vw according to Darcy’s law.

On the other hand, it lowers φw by indirectly promoting collective back diﬀusion by means of

the accordingly lowered osmotic compressibility. We have assessed the individual CP layer

and permeate ﬂux contributions triggered by Dc(φ), Π(φ), and η(φ), respectively, ﬁnding the

viscosity to be the least inﬂuential one. The theoretical results are quantitatively conﬁrmed
by our UF experiments showing a linear (cid:104)vw(cid:105) versus ∆pTMP dependence that coincides
practically with that for clean water as the feed. This is consistent with an earlier related

observation by Cohen and Probstein [78] made in the context of reverse osmosis that there is

a threshold permeate ﬂux below which no ﬂux decline caused by CP or cake layer formation

occurs (see also [18]).

In face of the calculated small φw values at the membrane surface, the experimentally

observed sub-linearly increasing permeate ﬂux for the largest TMP is not explainable by cake

formation due to surface crystallization or vitriﬁcation. Instead, it is likely due to preferential

adsorption of silica particles on the membrane surface that according to our measurements

is mechanically reversible. The study of membrane fouling mechanisms which in general are

membrane, colloid and microion speciﬁc is outside the scope of the present work focused on

realistic calculations for Π, Dc and η in low-salinity systems, and the assessment of their

inﬂuence on the axially resolved CP layer and permeate ﬂux in UF. In future work, we

will extend the present study to charge-stabilized dispersions with arbitrary salt content,

including globular protein solutions. Furthermore, we intend to reﬁne our macroscopic UF

model by the inclusion of fouling models where the bulk phase behavior, particle adsorption

36

on the membrane, and membrane pores clogging is accounted for. This will enable us to

establish contact, in particukar, with a recent experimental study of fouling processes in a

microﬂuidic ﬁltration setup [79].

Our method of calculating CP and permeate ﬂux proﬁles of charge-stabilized systems can

be used for optimizing the UF process based on quantitative eﬃciency criteria for ﬁltration

output and energy consumption. Suitable criteria have been introduced in [34], and dis-

cussed in the context of the cross-ﬂow UF of non-ionic microgel suspensions. Note that the

silica suspensions analyzed in this work have salient features in common with more complex

ionic microgel supensions. Below the overlap concentration, the direct interactions of ionic

microgels are likewise describable in terms of an Yukawa-type eﬀective pair potential such

as in Eq. (10), however with eﬀective charge and screening parameters depending on the

microion penetrability of the microgel polymer backbone [53, 80]. In a realistic modeling of

ionic microgels ﬁltration, one needs further to account for the microgel shape changes under

applied strong pressure gradients and shear ﬂow, and for the concentration, salinity, pH, and

temperature dependence of the microgel size. Experimental-theoretical work by the present

authors on microgel ﬁltration is in progress.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank J. Buitenhuis (Forschungszentrum J¨ulich), R. Casta˜neda-Priego (University

of Guanajuato, Mexico), M. Heinen (CalTech, California and University of Guanajuato,

Mexico) and N. Boon (Utrecht University, The Netherlands) for helpful discussions. Finan-

cial support by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (SFB-985, Project B6) is gratefully

acknowledged.

[1] J. J. S. Shen and R. F. Probstein, Ind. Eng. Chem. Fundam. 16, 459 (1977).

[2] W. R. Bowen and F. Jenner, Chem. Eng. Sci. 50, 1707 (1995).

[3] S. Bhattacharjee, A. S. Kim, and M. Elimelech, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 212, 81 (1999).

[4] W. R. Bowen and P. M. Williams, Chem. Eng. Sci. 56, 3083 (2001).

[5] S. Kim, M. Marion, B.-H. Jeong, and E. M. V. Hoek, J. Membr. Sci. 284, 361 (2006).

[6] W. R. Bowen and P. M. Williams, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 134-135, 3 (2007).

37

[7] M. M. Rohani and A. L. Zydney, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 160, 40 (2010).

[8] S. De and S. Bhattacharjee, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 353, 530 (2011).

[9] B. Sarkar and S. De, Sep. Purif. Technol. 74, 73 (2010).

[10] G. Jonsson, Desalination 51, 61 (1984).

[11] R. Dayal and T. Godjevargova, Macromol BioSci. 15, 222 (2005).

[12] B. Lebreton, A. Brown, and R. van Reis, Biotechnol. Bioeng. 100, 964 (2008).

[13] M. A. Shannon, P. W. Bohn, M. Elimelech, J. G. Georgiadis, B. J. Mari˜nas, and A. M. Mayes,

Nature 452, 301 (2008).

[14] C. Grimellec, P. Poujeol, C. Rouﬃgnac, P. Phillipe, and P. Malorey, Pﬂuegers Arch. 354,

117 (1975).

[15] G. Belfort, R. H. Davis, and A. L. Zydney, J. Membr. Sci. 96, 1 (1994).

[16] Y. Yurkovetsky and J. F. Morris, J. Rheol. 52, 141 (2008).

[17] H. M. Vollebregt, R. G. M. van der Sman, and R. M. Boom, Soft Matter 6, 6052 (2010).

[18] P. Bacchin, P. Aimar, and R. W. Field, J. Membr Sci. 281, 42 (2006).

[19] M.-S. Chun, G.-Y. Chung, and J.-J. Kim, J Membr Sci. 193, 97 (2001).

[20] J. L. Trompette, M. J. Clifton, and P. Bacchin, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 290, 455 (2005).

[21] A. Bouchoux, P. Qu, P. Bacchin, and G. G´esan-Guiziou, Langmuir 30, 22 (2014).

[22] M. Elimelech and S. Bhattacharjee, J. Membr Sci. 145, 223 (1998).

[23] P. Bacchin, D. Si-Hassan, V. Starov, M. J. Clifton, and P. Aimar, Chem. Eng. Sci. 57, 77

(2002).

[24] B. Sarkar, S. DasGupta, and S. De, J. Membr Sci. 341, 11 (2009).

[25] W. J. C. Holt, S. L. Carnie, and D. Y. C. Chan, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 173, 304 (1995).

[26] A. S. J¨onsson and B. J¨onsson, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 180, 504 (1996).

[27] A. J. Banchio and G. N¨agele, J. Chem. Phys. 128, 104903 (2008).

[28] J. Gapinski, G. N¨agele, and A. Patkowski, J. Chem. Phys. 141, 124505 (2014).

[29] E. Trizac, L. Bocquet, M. Aubouy, and H. H. von Gr¨unberg, Langmuir 19, 4027 (2003).

[30] M. Heinen, A. J. Banchio, and G. N¨agele, J. Chem. Phys. 135, 154504 (2011).

[31] F. Westermeier, B. Fischer, W. Roseker, G. Gr¨ubel, G. N¨agele, and M. Heinen, J. Chem.

Phys. 137, 114504 (2012).

[32] J. Gapinski, A. Wilk, A. Patkowski, W. H¨außler, A. J. Banchio, R. Pecora, and G. N¨agele,

J. Chem. Phys. 123, 054708 (2005).

38

[33] M. Heinen, F. Zanini, F. Roosen-Runge, D. Fedunov´a, F. Zhang, M. Hennig, T. Seydel,

R. Schweins, M. Sztucki, M. Antal´ık, F. Schreiber, and G. N¨agele, Soft Matter 8, 1404

(2012).

[34] R. Roa, E. K. Zholkovskiy, and G. N¨agele, Soft Matter 11, 4106 (2015).

[35] C. A. Romero and R. H. Davis, Chem. Eng. Sci. 45, 13 (1990).

[36] R. F. Probstein, Physicochemical Hydrodynamics (Butterworths, London, 1989).

[37] J. Kierzenka and L. F. Shampine, ACM Trans. Math. Softw. 27, 299 (2001).

[38] L. Belloni, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 12, R549 (2000).

[39] G. N¨agele, Phys. Rep. 272, 216 (1996).

[40] J.-P. Hansen and I. R. McDonald, Theory of Simple Liquids (Academic Press, Amsterdam,

2006).

[41] J. Dobnikar, R. Casta˜neda-Priego, H. H. v. Gr¨unberg, and E. Trizac, New J. Phys. 8, 277

(2006).

[42] J. Dobnikar, in Electrostatics of Soft and Disordered Matter, edited by D. Dean, J. Dobnikar,

A. Naji, and R. Podgornik (Pan Stanford Publishing, 2014) pp. 221–237.

[43] K. van Gruijthuijsen, M. Obiols-Rabasa, M. Heinen, G. N¨agele, and A. Stradner, Langmuir

29, 11199 (2013).

[44] P. Holmqvist, P. S. Mohanty, G. N¨agele, P. Schurtenberger, and M. Heinen, Phys. Rev. Lett.

109, 048302 (2012).

[45] S. Alexander, P. M. Chaikin, P. Grant, G. J. Morales, P. Pincus, and D. Hone, J. Chem.

Phys. 80, 5776 (1984).

[46] F. J. Rogers and D. A. Young, Phys. Rev., A 30, 999 (1984).

[47] E. Trizac, L. Belloni, J. Dobnikar, H. von Gr¨unberg, and R. Casta˜neda-Priego, Phys. Rev. E

75, 011401 (2007).

[48] A. A. Louis, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 14, 9187 (2002).

[49] D. Y. C. Chan, Phys. Rev. E 63, 061806 (2001).

[50] D. Y. C. Chan, P. Linse, and S. N. Petris, Langmuir 17, 4202 (2001).

[51] A. R. Denton, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 22, 364108 (2010).

[52] A. R. Denton, Phys. Rev. E 76, 051401 (2007).

[53] A. R. Denton, in Electrostatics of Soft and Disordered Matter, edited by D. Dean, J. Dobnikar,

and A. Naji (Pan Stanford Publishing, 2014) pp. 201–220.

39

[54] J. G. Kirkwood and F. P. Buﬀ, J. Chem. Phys. 19, 774 (1951).

[55] N. Boon, G. I. Guerrero-Garc´ıa, R. van Roij, and M. Olvera de la Cruz, Proc. Natl. Acad.

Sci. U.S.A. 112, 9242 (2015).

[56] R. Casta˜neda-Priego, V. Lobaskin, J. C. Mixteco-S´anchez, L. F. Rojas-Ochoa, and P. Linse,

J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 24, 065102 (2012).

[57] R. Casta˜neda-Priego, L. F. Rojas-Ochoa, V. Lobaskin, and J. C. Mixteco-S´anchez, Phys.

Rev. E 74, 051408 (2006).

[58] T. E. Colla, Y. Levin, and E. Trizac, J. Chem. Phys. 131, 074115 (2009).

[59] T. E. Colla, A. P. dos Santos, and Y. Levin, J. Chem. Phys. 136, 194103 (2012).

[60] A. R. Denton, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 20, 494230 (2008).

[61] B. Lu and A. R. Denton, Communications in Computational Physics 7, 235 (2009).

[62] P. Linse, The Journal of Chemical Physics 113, 4359 (2000).

[63] P. Holmqvist and G. N¨agele, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 058301 (2010).

[64] J. Riest, T. Eckert, W. Richtering, and G. N¨agele, Soft Matter 11, 2821 (2015).

[65] C. Beenakker and P. Mazur, Physica A 120, 388 (1983).

[66] C. Beenakker, Physica A 128, 48 (1984).

[67] B. Cichocki, M. L. Ekiel-Je˙zewska, P. Szymczak, and E. Wajnryb, J. Chem. Phys. 117, 1231

(2002).

[68] B. Cichocki, M. L. Ekiel-Je˙zewska, and E. Wajnryb, J. Chem. Phys. 111, 3265 (1999).

[69] W. B. Russel, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 2 80, 31 (1984).

[70] G. N¨agele and J. Bergenholtz, J. Chem. Phys. 108, 9893 (1998).

[71] C. Contreras-Aburto, C. C. Aburto, and G. N¨agele, J. Chem. Phys. 139, 134110 (2013).

[72] C. Berli, J. A. Deiber, and D. Quemada, Lat. Am. Appl. Res. 35, 15 (2005).

[73] R. K. Iler, The Chemistry of Silica, Solubility, Polymerization, Colloid and Surface Properties

and Biochemistry of Silica (Wiley-Interscience, 1979).

[74] W. J. C. van de Ven, K. vant Sant, I. G. M. P¨unt, A. Zwijnenburg, A. J. B. Kemperman,

W. G. J. van der Meer, and M. Wessling, J. Membr Sci. 314, 112 (2008).

[75] M. Mondor and C. Moresoli, J. Membr. Sci. 152, 71 (1999).

[76] M. Mondor and C. Moresoli, Desalination 191, 365 (2006).

[77] R. Roa, F. Carrique, and E. Ruiz-Reina, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 13, 9644 (2011).

[78] R. D. Cohen and R. F. Probstein, J. Coll. Interface Sci. 114, 1986 (1986).

40

[79] J. Linkhorst, T. Beckmann, D. Go, A. J. C. Kuehne, and M. Wessling, Scientiﬁc Reports ,

DOI: 10.1038/srep22376 (2016).

[80] T. Colla and C. N. Likos, Mol. Phys. 113, 2496 (2015).

41

