Assessing reliable human mobility patterns from higher-order memory in

mobile communications

Manlio De Domenico, Joan T. Matamalas, and Alex Arenas

Departament d’Enginyeria Inform`atica i Matem`atiques,

Universitat Rovira i Virgili, 43007 Tarragona, Spain

Understanding how people move within a geographic area, e.g. a city, a country or the

whole world, is fundamental in several applications, from predicting the spatio-temporal

evolution of an epidemics to inferring migration patterns. Mobile phone records provide an

excellent proxy of human mobility, showing that movements exhibit a high level of memory.

However, the precise role of memory in widely adopted proxies of mobility, as mobile phone

records, is unknown. Here we use 560 millions of call detail records from Senegal to show that

standard Markovian approaches, including higher-order ones, fail in capturing real mobility

patterns and introduce spurious movements never observed in reality. We introduce an

adaptive memory-driven approach to overcome such issues. At variance with Markovian

models, it is able to realistically model conditional waiting times, i.e. the probability to stay

in a speciﬁc area depending on individual’s historical movements. Our results demonstrate

that in standard mobility models the individuals tend to diﬀuse faster than what observed

in reality, whereas the predictions of the adaptive memory approach signiﬁcantly agree with

observations. We show that, as a consequence, the incidence and the geographic spread of

a disease could be inadequately estimated when standard approaches are used, with crucial

implications on resources deployment and policy making during an epidemic outbreak.

Keywords: Human Mobility, Non-Markovian Model, Epidemics Spreading, Complex Net-

works, Diﬀusion

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
8
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
3
0
9
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

I.

INTRODUCTION

2

People move following complex dynamical patterns at diﬀerent geographical scales, e.g. among

areas of the same city, among cities and regions of the same country or among diﬀerent countries.

Such patterns have been recently revealed by using human mobility proxies [1–5] and, intriguingly,

some speciﬁc patterns tend to repeat more than others, with evidences [6, 7] of memory of mean-

ingful locations playing a fundamental role in our understanding of human mobility. In fact, human

dynamics might signiﬁcantly aﬀect how epidemics spread [2, 6, 8–10] or how people migrate from

one country to another [4].

The collaboration between researchers and mobile operators recently opened new promising di-

rections to gather information about human movements, country demographics and health, faster

and cheaper than before [1, 10–18]. In fact, mobile phones heterogeneously penetrated both rural

and urban communities, regardless of richness, age or gender, providing evidences that mobile

technologies can be used to obtain real-time information about individual’s location and social

activity, in order to build realistic demographics and socio-economics maps of a whole country [19].

Mobile data have been successfully used in a wide variety of applications, e.g., to estimate popu-

lation densities and their evolution at national scales [13], to conﬁrm social theories of behavioral

adaptation [20] and to capture anomalous behavioral patterns associated to religious, catastrophic

or massive social events [21]. Even more recently, the public availability of mobile phone data sets

further revolutionized the ﬁeld, e.g., by allowing ubiquitous sensing to map poverty, to monitor

social segregation and to optimize information campaigns to reduce epidemics spreading [14, 22],

to cite just some of them [18].

Although some limitations, mobile phone data still provide one the most powerful tools for

sensing complex social systems and represent a valuable proxy for studies where human mobility

plays a crucial role [1–4, 6, 8–10, 15, 22–24]. Milestone works in this direction have shown that

human trajectories exhibit more temporal and spatial regularity than previously thought. Individ-

uals tend to return to a few highly frequented locations and to follow simple reproducible patterns

[1, 5], allowing a higher accuracy in predicting their movements [3] and signiﬁcantly aﬀecting the

spreading of transmittable diseases [6]. However, the increasing interest for using mobile phone

data in applications should be accompanied by a wise usage of the information they carry on. In

fact, an inadequate model accompanied by incomplete data and scarce knowledge of other funda-

mental factors inﬂuencing the model itself, might lead, for instance, to a wrong estimation of the

incidence of an epidemics and its evolution [25].

3

Here, we used high-quality mobile phone data, consisting of more than 560 millions of call de-

tail records, to show that standard approaches might signiﬁcantly overestimate mobility transitions

between distinct geographical areas, making diﬃcult to build a realistic model of human mobility.

To overcome this issue, we developed an adaptive memory-driven model based on empirical ob-

servations that better captures existing correlations in human dynamics, showing that it is more

suitable than classical memoryless or higher-order models to understand how individuals move and,

for instance, might spread a disease.

II. MATERIALS AND METHODS

A. Markovian model of human mobility

Let us consider a physical mobility network composed by nodes, representing geographic areas,

connected by weighted edges, representing the fraction of individual movements among them.

Usually, the weights are inferred from geolocated activities of individuals, e.g.

the consecutive

airports where a plane departs and lands or, as in this work, the cell towers where a person makes

consecutive calls.

A standard approach to deal with mobility models of dynamics [3, 4, 6, 10, 15, 16, 26] is to

consider each node as a state of a Markov process, obtaining the ﬂux between any pair of nodes from

consecutive calls, and to build a mobility matrix Fij encoding the probability that an individual

in node i will move to node j (i, j = 1, 2, ..., n). Here, we use a similar approach to build the
mobility matrix for each individual (cid:96) = 1, 2, ...,L separately and we then average over the whole
set of mobility matrices, to obtain the transition probability of an individual, on average:

L(cid:80)
L(cid:80)
n(cid:80)

(cid:96)=1

(cid:96)=1

k=1

f ((cid:96))
ij

Fij =

,

f ((cid:96))
ik

(1)

where f ((cid:96))
ij

is the number of times the individual (cid:96) makes at least one call in node j after making

at least one call in node i.

We did not impose a speciﬁc time window to calculate transitions, to avoid introducing biases

and undesired eﬀects due to the choice of the temporal range and it is worth remarking that

other normalizations can be considered depending on data and metadata availability [15]. Where

not otherwise speciﬁed, we considered the mobility matrix obtained from the whole period of

observation. This model is known as “ﬁrst-order” (or 1-memory) because the present state is the

4

only information required to choose the next state. Although very useful, this has the fundamental

disadvantage that it does not account for mobility memory.

In fact, it is very likely that an

individual moves to a neighboring area (by means of a car or public transportation) to work and

after a few hours he or she will go back to the original position. This eﬀect has been shown to be

relevant, for instance, at country level, where individuals ﬂy from one city to another and often

go back to their origin instead of moving towards a diﬀerent city [7]. This memory is an intrinsic

property of human mobility and must be taken into account for a realistic modeling of people

movements between diﬀerent geographic areas. When memory is taken into account, each physical
node (e.g., i ∈ A) is replaced by the corresponding state-nodes (e.g., i  j ∈ ˜A if memory is of order
2) encoding the information that an individual is in node i when he or she comes from j. While

F encodes information about the network of n physical nodes, we need to introduce a new matrix

H to encode information about the network of n2 state-nodes, accounting for the allowed binary

combinations (e.g. k  j, j, k = 1, 2, ..., n) between physical nodes. Similarly, higher-order memory

can be taken into account by building appropriate matrices.

We use diﬀerent mobility matrices to build diﬀerent mobility models. Let Ni(t) indicate the
population of the physical node i ∈ A at time t, then the n mobility equations describing how the
ﬂux of people diﬀuses through the network are given by

Ni(t + 1) =

FjiNj(t).

(2)

n(cid:88)

j=1

nτ(cid:88)

In the case of τ−memory, we indicate by ˜Nα(t) the population of the state-node α ∈ ˜A at time t
and the nτ mobility equations required to describe the same process are given by

˜Nα(t + 1) =

Hρα ˜Nρ(t).

(3)

ρ=1

The population in each physical node at time t is given by the sum of the population in the

corresponding state-nodes. It is worth remarking that, in general, the matrix H can be a function

of time as well and the equations would keep their structural form.

B. Adaptive memory model of human mobility

However, spatial human mobility is quite complex and (higher-order) Markovian dynamics

might no be suitable to model peculiar patterns such as returning visits and conditional waiting

times, i.e. the probability to stay in a location depending on the origin of the travel.

5

We will discuss better this point in the following. Let us consider, for instance, the call sequence

BBBBCCCSSS made by an individual traveling between three American cities: Chicago, Boston

and San Antonio. The main drawbacks of Markovian models – of order lower than three – become

evident in a scenario like this one, because the number of consecutive calls in the same city exceeds

the memory of the model and the spatial information about previously visited locations is lost.

Clearly, in presence of more complicated patterns, increasing the order of the model will not solve

the issue and some information will be inevitably lost. Alternatively, we could aggregate consecutive

calls in the same place to a single identiﬁer, e.g. the previous sequence would be reduced to BCS.

In this case, a Markovian model would preserve the spatial information and correctly identify the

transitions between the three cities, at the price of losing information about how many calls have

been made in each place.

In absence of detailed temporal information about calling activity, the number of consecutive

calls in a speciﬁc location can be used as a proxy: higher the number of calls larger the waiting

time. The temporal information about the amount of time spent in each location is critical for

many dynamical processes like spreading or congestion. We assert that this time, like the next

visited location, is conditioned by previous movements of the individuals. To illustrate this, we

use the example shown in Fig. 1, where people from three diﬀerent places (nodes blue, green and

orange) go to the same destination (node red), stay some time in there, and come back to the

origin of their trip. The self-loops in the central (red) node represent the time spent there, the

color encoding individuals coming from diﬀerent origins and the size encoding the amount of time

spent. For instance, individuals coming from the blue node wait more than individuals coming

from the green node. This type of dependence is what we call conditional waiting time.

To better appreciate this fact, let us consider holiday trips.

Individuals making expensive

intercontinental trips tend to spend more time visiting the destination than individuals making

cheaper trips, achieving a good trade-oﬀ between the travel cost and the time spent. Another

emblematic case is urban mobility. For instance, the red node might be an expensive commercial

area, the green node a wealthy neighborhood and the blue node a less wealthy area.

In this

scenario, individuals coming from the less wealthy area are more likely to be qualiﬁed workers

in the commercial one, with long visits that in turn are not frequent. Conversely, individuals

coming from the wealthy neighborhood are more likely to make frequent, although shorter, visits

for shopping, for instance.

The importance of accounting for conditional waiting times will be evident later, when we will

consider the spreading of an epidemics in a country.

6

FIG. 1. Conditional waiting times. An example of human mobility between four diﬀerent places.

Individuals from green, blue and orange nodes move to the red central node and, after some time, go back

to their previous location. The amount of time spent in the red node by individuals coming from the other

nodes depends on their previous location, and it is represented by self-loops of diﬀerent size.

Here, we propose a mobility model, that we name adaptive memory, able to account for condi-

tional waiting times. At ﬁrst order, the method is equivalent to a classical ﬁrst-order Markovian

model, whereas signiﬁcant diﬀerences emerge for increasing memory with respect to standard ap-

proaches. For instance, at second order, the 2-memory mobility matrix is built between all possible

pairs of nodes (2-states), as in a standard second-order Markovian model. However, instead of con-

sidering transitions between areas in the sequence of calls, as a second-order Markovian model does,

transitions in the sequence of distinct geographical areas are considered. This point is crucial, and

we better clarify it with the example shown in Fig. 2, where the diﬀerences between adaptive mem-

ory and Markovian models, in terms of probability assigned to diﬀerent mobility patterns, are

reported.

The importance of such diﬀerences is reﬂected in the ability of each model to predict succes-

sive individual movements. In fact, the presence of spurious or under-represented patterns might

signiﬁcantly aﬀect the results, as shown in Fig. 3. In this example, two sequences of phone calls

generated by two diﬀerent users moving between three cities – B, C and S – are considered. Marko-

vian models generate spurious patterns that are never observed in the data, issue not aﬀecting the

adaptive memory model by construction. Morover, our approach predicts the next movement with

Higher waiting time7

FIG. 2. Comparing diﬀerent mobility models. Mobility models built from a representative sequence

of mobile phone calls (BBBBCCCSSS) made, for instance, by an individual during travels between three
American cities, namely Chicago (C), San Antonio (S) and Boston (B). Let us focus on the pattern S ←
C ← B, that is the real sequence of movements in the geographical space. The ﬁrst-order model predicts a
probability of 1
49 , whereas the adaptive 2-memory estimates a

probability of 1

64 , the second-order model a probability of 1
7 , closer to observation.

more accuracy than Markovian ones, because it correctly takes into account conditional waiting

times.

The diﬀerence between the adaptive memory and Markovian models becomes more evident

when the corresponding transition matrices are compared. There is no diﬀerence at the ﬁrst order,
thus we will focus on the comparison between τ -order Markovian and adaptive τ−memory models,
in the following.

In both models, the number of possible transitions between state nodes is the same and equals
n2·(τ−1), where n is the number of physical nodes. For instance, in second-order models, there
are n2 × n2 transition matrices with n3 possible transitions between state nodes, as shown in
Fig. 4. However, the way how each model stores repeating calls in the same physical node is

very diﬀerent. While adaptive memory stores this information into the nτ diagonal elements of

the matrix, encoding the conditional waiting times discussed in the previous section, Markovian

models redistribute this information among oﬀ-diagonal entries, because they do not allow this

type of self-loops by construction.

More speciﬁcally, the information is redistributed among transitions between state nodes of the

same physical node. The entries of oﬀ-diagonal blocks – corresponding to transitions between state

nodes of diﬀerent physical nodes – are the same in both models. Therefore, while the stationary

probability of ﬁnding a random walker in a physical node is not diﬀerent in the two models, it

is diﬀerent at the level of state nodes and, as we will see later, this signiﬁcantly aﬀects diﬀusion

FromToBBBBCCCSSSFirst-OrderBBBBCCSSCSBBBCCCSSBBBCCCCSSSPatternsFreq.3/81/82/81/82/8BBBBCCCSSSMemoryFromToSecond-OrderBBBBCCCSBBBCCCSSBBCCCSSSBBBBBCBCCCCCCCSCSSSSSFreq.Patterns2/71/71/71/71/71/71/7SCCCBBBBCCCSSSMemoryFromToAdaptive MemoryBBBBBBCCBBBCCCSSBBCCCSSSBBBBBCBCCBCSCSSFreq.Patterns2/71/72/71/71/78

FIG. 3. Predicting individual mobility. Using the sequence of calls made by two diﬀerent users (1 and

2) – starting from two diﬀerent locations (B and C) and visiting a new location S – we build ﬁrst-order

and second-order Markov models, as well as the adaptive memory one. We use each mobility model to

generate the possible mobility sequences. Given that there are two empirical starting points, we originated

the sampled sequences in B and C, respectively. In the ﬁgure, for each sample, we report the fraction of

times it is reproducing observation (“Correct”), it is a non-observed mobility pattern (“Spurious Pattern”)

and it is underestimating or overestimating waiting times (“Longer/Shorter Conditional Waiting Time”).

processes such as epidemics spreading.

CCSBBSSSCSSUser 2:SSSSSample:BBUser 1:SSpurious Pattern (CSSB)Shorter conditionalwaiting time25%75%0%CorrectSecond-OrderAdaptive memoryCSBUser 2:User 1:Transition probabilitiesCC1/4SSBB1/3SBS2/3C3/4SSAdaptive MemorySSSCS1/5S3/5S1/5BSS1S1SSCBSecond-Order1/72/7SB1S1/71SSBSCCSFirst-OrderToFromMemoryCCSBBSSSCSSUser 2:SSSSSample:BBUser 1:SSpurious Pattern (CSSB)Shorter conditionalwaiting time14%72%14%CorrectCCSBBSSSCSSUser 2:SSSSSample:BBUser 1:SCorrectSpurious Pattern (BSSC)14%72%14%Longer conditionalwaiting timeCCSBBSSSCSSUser 2:SSSSSample:BBUser 1:SSpurious Pattern (CSSB)Shorter conditionalwaiting time20%60%20%CorrectCCSBBSSSCSSUser 2:SSSSSample:BBUser 1:SCorrectSpurious Pattern (BSSC)20%60%20%Longer conditionalwaiting timeCCSBBSSSCSSUser 2:SSSSSample:BBUser 1:SCorrectSpurious Pattern (BSSC)0%67%33%Longer conditionalwaiting timeFirst-Order9

FIG. 4. Mobility Matrix Second-order transition matrix for three physical nodes A, B and C. The state

nodes are represented with the notation x  y meaning that walkers in this node have traveled from node

y to node x. The cells in red are not used by either second-order markovian model or adaptive memory

model. The cells in bluish are used only in adaptive memory model, while, the cells in orange are used only

in the second-order markovian model. The cells in white are used by both models.

C. Overview of the dataset

In the next section, we will quantify the impact of adaptive memory on human mobility mod-

eling by using data sets provided by the Data for Development Challenge 2014 [27] and some

supplementary data sets provided by partners of the challenge. Mobile phone data consist of com-

munications among 1666 towers distributed across Senegal. We exploit this information to map

communication patterns between diﬀerent areas of the country (i.e. the arrondissements). Another

subset consists of 560 millions call records of about 150,000 users along one year at at the spatial

resolution of arrondissements. We use this information to map individuals’ movements among

diﬀerent arrondissements. Demographics information has been obtained from the Senegal data

portal [28], an oﬃcial resource. It is worth noting that information has been manually checked

against inconsistencies and data about population for the arrondissements of Bambilor, Thies Sud,

Thies Nord, Ndiob and Ngothie were not available. We reconstructed the missing information by

combining mobile phone activity and available demographics data, Fig. 5. We have used the data

to infer more realistic contact rates to be used in viral spreading simulations. The contacts among

individuals are generally quite diﬃcult to track at country level. Their rate varies depending on

Physical NodeCC◁AB◁CAB◁AC◁CB◁BB◁CA◁BA◁CB◁BA◁BBB◁AA◁AAA◁CC◁CCBC◁BC◁AC◁BA◁AState NodePhysical NodeState NodeNot allowed in second orderNot allowed in AMNot allowed10

several social and demographical factors such as age, gender, location, urban development, etc.

[29, 30]. Nevertheless, there are evidences from European and African countries that, on average,

the number of daily physical contacts among individuals range from 11 to 22 [29, 30]. In this work

we consider the same contact rate for all arrondissements belonging to the same region. Our choice

is justiﬁed by the lack of detailed data about the population density per arrondissement. Moreover,

we assign 25 contacts per day to the region with highest density (i.e. Dakar) and we rescale the

contact rate of all other regions proportionally to the ratio between their density and the density

of Dakar, assuming that the minimum contact rate can not be smaller than 10 contacts per day.

We obtain a contact rate between 10 and 11 for all regions, except Dakar.

FIG. 5. Inferring men and women populations. Second-order polynomial model (solid line) ﬁtting the

log-log relationships between the observed mobile phone data and demographics data (points). Men (A)

and women (B) population were ﬁtted separately, thanks to data availability, and have been used to infer

the populations in the arrondissements of Bambilor, Thies Sud, Thies Nord, Ndiob and Ngothie.

III. RESULTS

A. Understanding human mobility ﬂow

We show in Fig. 6 the signiﬁcant diﬀerences in modeling the mobility ﬂow using ﬁrst-order

(FO), second-order (SO) and adaptive memory (AM) models. Markovian models provide very

similar transition patterns, whereas adaptive memory provides very diﬀerent results. The adaptive

memory model exhibits signiﬁcantly less returning transitions than Markovian models, but – on

average – with much higher probability of observing them. In fact, 47.4% of patterns captured

by the ﬁrst-order approach and 43.4% captured using second-order are spurious because they are

not observed in reality. Remarkably, the probability that an individual comes back to her origin is

on average six times higher using adaptive memory models than using ﬁrst-order, and ﬁve times

higher using second-order.

11

FIG. 6. Mobility ﬂow among a sub-set of Senegal’s arrondissements. The ﬁgure represents, in

logarithmic scale, the modeled mobility ﬂow among a sub-set of arrondissements with the constrain that

individuals must pass through Kael (arrondissement in the department of Mbacke, region of Diourbel) after

departing from their origin and before reaching their destination. The ﬁgure shows the mobility modeled

by means of ﬁrst-order (A), second-order (B) and adaptive 2-memory (C), putting in evidence the diﬀerent

mobility patterns between Markovian models and adaptive memory. For instance, the adaptive memory
module captures returning patterns (i.e. movements like X → Kael → X) better than the ﬁrst-order model.

To compare the accuracy of both models against the mobility behavior observed in data, we

use the coverage, deﬁned as the fraction of nodes visited by an individual within a given amount

of time. We calculate the coverage for each individual in the data, over a period of one months,

and then we average over all arrondissements to obtain a measure at country level. For the same

period of time, we generate three transition matrices F, H and A encoding the mobility dynamics

for ﬁrst-order, second-order and adaptive memory models, respectively. To better replicate the

calling behavior of the individuals in the data set, we extract information about the distribution

of time between calls and we use this information in our simulations (see Appendix A).

In Fig. 7A and B we show that people diﬀuse in the country too fast using Markovian models,

whereas signiﬁcantly slower diﬀusion is found with adaptive memory, in agreement with empir-

ical observation. These results have deep implications, for instance, in short-term or long-term

predictions of epidemic spreading or national infrastructure planning.

AlmadiesColobaneDarou Miname IiDjilorGnibyKeur MbouckiMbedieneMeouaneNdameRufisqueSindiaTaifThiaroyeAlmadiesColobaneDarou Miname IiDjilorGnibyKeur MbouckiMbedieneMeouaneNdameRufisqueSindiaTaifThiaroyeAlmadiesColobaneDarou Miname IiDjilorGnibyKeur MbouckiMbedieneMeouaneNdameRufisqueSindiaTaifThiaroye(a) First-Order(b) Second-Order(c) Adaptive Memory12

FIG. 7. Observed human mobility and theoretical predictions. (A) Temporal evolution of the global

mean coverage calculated from real data and from simulations using ﬁrst-order (FO), second-order (SO)

and adaptive memory (AM) models. (B) Relative diﬀerence between the coverage observed in real human

mobility and the one obtained from simulations.

B.

Impact of human mobility models on the spreading of epidemics

Here, we focus on epidemic spreading. How infectious individuals move among diﬀerent locations

has a strong inﬂuence in how diseases diﬀuse in a population. We considered each arrondissement as

a meta-population where any individual can interact with a limited number of other individuals.

We use a SEIR compartmental model [31] to characterize the epidemics evolution within each

arrondissement and mobility models to simulate people traveling in the country.

The discrete time step of the following models is ∆t ≈ 1 hour, approximately the observed
median between two successive calls from the same individual. The parameters are demographical
and epidemiological. Demographics parameters include the birth B = ˜B∆t and death δ = ˜δ∆t

probability, whereas epidemiological parameters correspond to the latent period τE of the infection,

from which the probability  = ∆t/τE to pass to the infectious state is calculated, and the infectious

period τI , from which the probability γ = ∆t/τI to recover from or die because of the infection is

calculated. The last parameter is the eﬀective transmission probability

(cid:18)

(cid:19)ci∆t

βi(t) = 1 −

1 − ˜β∆t

Ii(t)
Ni(t)

,

(4)

an arrondissement-dependent parameter that depends on the average number of contacts per unit

of time ci experienced by an individual in node i, the fraction of infected individuals in that
node and the transmission risk ˜β∆t in case of contact with an infectious individual. In fact, the

lllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll0.020.040.0651525Time [days]Global Mean CoverageModellFOSOAMReallllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll05010015051525Time [days]Relative difference [%]ModellFOSOAMdeﬁnition of βi(t) induces a type-II reaction-diﬀusion dynamics [9] accounting for the fact that each

individual does not interact with all the other individuals in the meta-population, but only with
a limited sample. If the number of infected agents is small (i.e. Ii(t) ≈ 0) the Taylor expansion
of βi(t) truncated at the ﬁrst order gives the classical factor ˜β∆tci∆t Ii(t)
It follows that

Ni(t) [31].

the equations describing the average spreading of a disease according to a SEIR model coupled to

13

ﬁrst-order mobility are given by

Si(t + 1) =

Ei(t + 1) =

Ii(t + 1) =

Ri(t + 1) =

j=1

n(cid:88)
n(cid:88)
n(cid:88)
n(cid:88)

j=1

j=1

j=1

Fji [(1 − δ − βj(t))Sj(t) + BNj(t)]

Fji [(1 −  − δ)Ej(t) + βj(t)Sj(t)]

Fji [(1 − γ − δ)Ij(t) + Ej(t)]

Fji [(1 − δ)Rj(t) + γIj(t)]

whereas the coupling to the second-order model is given by

(5)

(6)

ψ=1

n2(cid:88)
n2(cid:88)
n2(cid:88)
n2(cid:88)

ψ=1

ψ=1

Hψα

Hψα

Hψα

(cid:104)
(cid:104)
(cid:104)
(cid:104)

˜Sα(t + 1) =

˜Eα(t + 1) =

˜Iα(t + 1) =

˜Rα(t + 1) =

ψ=1

ψ (t) = 1 −
˜β(α)

(cid:105)
(cid:105)

(1 − δ − ˜β(α)

ψ (t)) ˜Sψ(t) + B ˜Nψ(t)

(1 −  − δ) ˜Eψ(t) + ˜β(α)

ψ (t) ˜Sψ(t)

(1 − γ − δ) ˜Iψ(t) +  ˜Eψ(t)

(cid:105)

(cid:105)



ci∆t

(1 − δ) ˜Rψ(t) + γ ˜Iψ(t)

Hψα

1 − ˜β∆t

(cid:98) α

n(cid:99)n+n(cid:80)
n(cid:99)n+n(cid:80)

n(cid:99)n+1

ρ=(cid:98) α
(cid:98) α

ρ=(cid:98) α

n(cid:99)n+1

˜Iρ(t)

˜Nρ(t)

nτ(cid:80)

where N (t) =

˜Nψ(t) is the total population in the country at time t, (cid:98)·(cid:99) indicates the ﬂoor
function and is used to identify the sub-set of state-nodes corresponding to the same physical node
the population ˜Sα belongs to. The equations for the adaptive memory model are the same, except

ψ=1

that the transition matrix A is used instead of H.

We initiate the simulation by infecting ﬁve individuals in Barkedji, at the center of Senegal.

The diﬀerences between the diﬀusion of the infective process using each mobility model are quite

14

FIG. 8. Spreading of an inﬂuenza-like outbreak in Senegal. We show the incidence of an inﬂuenza-like

virus over Senegal arrondissements a week after the infection onset, using ﬁrst-order (A), second-order (B)

and adaptive 2-memory (C) mobility models. The infection started in Barkedji (center of Senegal), where

three individuals are initially infected. A SEIR compartmental dynamics with parameters β = 0.05,  =

0.2, γ = 0.5 is used to simulate the spreading of the disease within each arrondissement. We found that the

number of arrondissements with infected individuals is higher using Markovian dynamics. Conversely, the

adaptive memory favors a higher concentration of infected individuals in the arrondissements around the

initial location of the infection. In fact, the location of the onset of the epidemic can be better identiﬁed

using adaptive memory rather than Markovian models. (D) Relation between the incidence in a region and

the distance from the hotspot of the infection using the three models. Adaptive memory models spread the

incidence on regions closer to the hotspot and this eﬀect is even more evident when higher memory is used.

visible in Fig. 8. The spreading is faster for Markovian models, with some arrondissement populated

by more infected individuals than adaptive memory. The incidence, i.e. the fraction of infected

individuals in an arrondissement, follows diﬀerent spatial patterns in the three models (see Fig. 8A–

C), with a higher incidence observed in the origin of the infection that decreases as we move far from

there. This eﬀect is signiﬁcantly stronger using adaptive memory because it tends to concentrate

more infectious individuals close to the origin (see Fig. 8D).

1e−051e−04250500750Distance from the hotspot [Km]log10(Incidence)ModelFOSOAM1x10-31x10-41x10-51x10-6ABCDFirst-OrderSecond-OrderAdaptive MemoryDISCUSSION

15

Modeling how people move among diﬀerent locations is crucial for several applications. Given

the scarcity of information about individuals’ movements, often human mobility proxies such as call

detail records, GPS, etc, are used instead. Here, we have shown that dynamical models built from

human mobility proxies can be signiﬁcantly wrong, underestimating (or overestimating) real mobil-

ity patterns or predicting spurious movements that are not observed in reality. We have proposed

a general solution to this issue, by introducing an adaptive memory modeling of human mobility

that better captures observed human dynamics and dramatically reduces spurious patterns with

respect to memoryless or higher-order Markovian models. We have validated our model on a data

set consisting of 560 millions of call detail records from Senegal. We have found that individuals

tend to diﬀuse faster with standard mobility models than what observed in reality, whereas the

adaptive memory approach reconciles empirical observations and theoretical expectations. Our

ﬁndings have, for instance, a deep impact on predicting how diseases spread in a country. While

standard approaches tending to overestimate the geographical incidence of the infection, the more

realistic modeling obtained by means of adaptive memory can improve the inference of the hotspot

of the infection, helping to design better countermeasures, e.g. more eﬀectives quarantine zones,

improved resources deployment or targeted information campaigns.

COMPETING INTERESTS

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

DATA ACCESSIBILITY

The data used in this manuscript were made publicly available during the D4D Senegal Chal-

lenge organized by Orange. More information about data can be found here: http://www.d4d.

orange.com/en/presentation/data

AUTHOR’S CONTRIBUTIONS

JTM and MDD developed the theoretical model and carried out the statistical analyses; MDD

and AA conceived of the study, designed the study and coordinated the study. All authors wrote

the manuscript and gave ﬁnal approval for publication.

FUNDING

16

M.D.D. acknowledges ﬁnancial support from the Spanish program Juan de la Cierva (IJCI-

2014-20225). JTM was supported by Generalitat de Catalunya (FI-DGR 2015). A.A. acknowl-

edges ﬁnancial support from ICREA Academia and James S. McDonnell Foundation and Spanish

MINECO FIS2015-71582.

[1] M. C. Gonzalez, C. A. Hidalgo, and A.-L. Barabasi, Nature 453, 779 (2008).

[2] D. Balcan, V. Colizza, B. Gon¸calves, H. Hu, J. J. Ramasco, and A. Vespignani, PNAS 106, 21484

(2009).

[3] C. Song, Z. Qu, N. Blumm, and A.-L. Barab´asi, Science 327, 1018 (2010).

[4] F. Simini, M. C. Gonz´alez, A. Maritan, and A.-L. Barab´asi, Nature 484, 96 (2012).

[5] A. Lima, R. Stanojevic, D. Papagiannaki, P. Rodriguez, and M. C. Gonz´alez, Journal of The Royal

Society Interface 13 (2016).

[6] D. Balcan and A. Vespignani, Nature Phys. 7, 581 (2011).

[7] M. Rosvall, A. V. Esquivel, A. Lancichinetti, J. D. West, and R. Lambiotte, Nature Communications

5, 4630 (2014).

[8] N. M. Ferguson, D. A. Cummings, S. Cauchemez, C. Fraser, S. Riley, A. Meeyai, S. Iamsirithaworn,

and D. S. Burke, Nature 437, 209 (2005).

[9] V. Colizza, R. Pastor-Satorras, and A. Vespignani, Nature Phys. 3, 276 (2007).

[10] A. Wesolowski, N. Eagle, A. J. Tatem, D. L. Smith, A. M. Noor, R. W. Snow, and C. O. Buckee,

Science 338, 267 (2012).

[11] N. Eagle and A. Pentland, Personal and ubiquitous computing 10, 255 (2006).

[12] N. Eagle, A. S. Pentland, and D. Lazer, PNAS 106, 15274 (2009).

[13] P. Deville, C. Linard, S. Martin, M. Gilbert, F. R. Stevens, A. E. Gaughan, V. D. Blondel, and A. J.

Tatem, PNAS 111, 15888 (2014).

[14] A. Amini, K. Kung, C. Kang, S. Sobolevsky, and C. Ratti, EPJ Data Science 3, 6 (2014).

[15] M. Tizzoni, P. Bajardi, A. Decuyper, G. Kon Kam King, C. Schneider, and et al., PLoS Comput. Biol.

10, e1003716 (2014).

[16] A. Wesolowski, C. Buckee, L. Bengtsson, E. Wetter, X. Lu, and A. Tatem, PLoS Curr. Outbr. (2014).

[17] F. Calabrese, L. Ferrari, and V. D. Blondel, ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 47, 25 (2014).

[18] V. D. Blondel, A. Decuyper, and G. Krings, To appear in EPJ Data Science (2015).

[19] A. Wesolowski, N. Eagle, A. M. Noor, R. W. Snow, and C. O. Buckee, PLoS ONE 7, e35319 (2012).

[20] N. Eagle, Y. de Montjoye, and L. M. Bettencourt, in Computational Science and Engineering, 2009.

CSE’09. International Conference on (IEEE, 2009), vol. 4, pp. 144–150.

17

[21] A. Dobra, N. E. Williams, and N. Eagle, PLoS ONE p. DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0120449 (2014).

[22] A. Lima, M. De Domenico, V. Pejovic, and M. Musolesi, Scientiﬁc Reports 5, 10650 (2015).

[23] V. Colizza and A. Vespignani, J. Theor. Bio. 251, 450 (2008).

[24] A. J. Tatem, S. Adamo, N. Bharti, C. R. Burgert, M. Castro, A. Dorelien, G. Fink, C. Linard, J. Mendel-

sohn, L. Montana, et al., Popul. Health. Metr. 10 (2012).

[25] A. Pandey, K. E. Atkins, J. Medlock, N. Wenzel, J. P. Townsend, J. E. Childs, T. G. Nyenswah, M. L.

Ndeﬀo-Mbah, and A. P. Galvani, Science 346, 991 (2014).

[26] A. Wesolowski, C. O. Buckee, D. K. Pindolia, N. Eagle, D. L. Smith, A. J. Garcia, and A. J. Tatem,

PLoS ONE 8, e52971 (2013).

[27] Y.-A. de Montjoye, Z. Smoreda, R. Trinquart, C. Ziemlicki, and V. D. Blondel, arXiv:1407.4885 (2014).

[28] Note1, http://donnees.ansd.sn/en/.

[29] P. Rohani, X. Zhong, and A. A. King, Science 330, 982 (2010).

[30] M. C. Kiti, T. M. Kinyanjui, D. C. Koech, P. K. Munywoki, G. F. Medley, and D. J. Nokes, PloS one

9, e104786 (2014).

[31] M. J. Keeling and P. Rohani, Modeling infectious diseases in humans and animals (Princeton University

Press, 2008).

18

Appendix A: Accounting for bursty behavior in the calculation of the coverage

We found that human communications are bursty, with bunches of intense activities concen-

trated in a short period that are separated by longer periods of inactivity, Fig. 9. This pattern

is evident when two consecutive calls are made in the same arrondissement. However, in the case

of two consecutive calls made from diﬀerent arrondissements, the probability is lower because of

the time required to move from one place to another. The arrondissement where the individual

lives inﬂuences these activities: e.g. the Dakar region consists of several small arrondissements

that are close together and the time required for movements is smaller when compared with the

time observed for people living in Louga, a more sparse region. We considered these empirical

facts in our simulations, by extracting two call distributions for each arrondissement, P (Tintra)

and P (Tinter), to model the dynamics within the same arrondissement and among diﬀerent ar-

rondissements, respectively. An independent simulation is performed using each arrondissement as

the starting point of a traveller’s journey. At each time step, the traveller moves according to the

transition probabilities of a speciﬁc mobility model. If the traveller decides to stay in the same

arrondissement, the elapsed time within the simulation is increased by a random number drawn

from the distribution P (Tin). Otherwise, if the traveller decides to change her location, the elapsed

time is increased by a random number drawn from distribution P (Tout). The traveller stops her

journey when the elapsed time reaches 30 days. The coverage for each arrondissement is computed

as the average of ﬁve thousand independent realizations of this process.

19

FIG. 9. Complementary cumulative density function of time between calls at country level and in Almadies

and Barkedji arrondissements. For each of them we consider three diﬀerent actions: time between sequential

calls in the same arrondissement (Pintra), time between consecutive calls performed in diﬀerent arrondisse-

ments (Pinter), and time between any calls (Ptotal). We observe how using information at country level is

not a good proxy for modeling the dynamics because the behaviour is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent depending on

the arrondissement. The time between calls performed in Almadies is lower than in Barkedji due the high

density of arrondissements in the region of Almadies, reducing the traveling time between diﬀerent locations.
Note that scale is logarithmic on the x−axis.

