Plasma observations during the Mars atmospheric “plume” event

of March-April 2012

D. J. Andrews,1 S. Barabash,2 N. J. T. Edberg,1 D. A. Gurnett,3 B. E. S. Hall,4
M. Holmstr¨om,2 M. Lester,4 D. D. Morgan,3 H. J. Opgenoorth,1 R. Ramstad,2

B. Sanchez-Cano,4 M. Way,5,6 and O. Witasse.7

Corresponding author: David J. Andrews, Swedish Institute of Space Physics

(Uppsala), Box 537, Uppsala 75121, Sweden.

david.andrews@irfu.se

March 2016. Preprint accepted for publication in

J. Geophys. Res. (Space Physics).

Abstract

We present initial analysis and conclusions from plasma observations made during the reported
“Mars plume event” of March - April 2012. During this period, multiple independent amateur observers
detected a localized, high-altitude “plume” over the Martian dawn terminator [Sanchez-Lavega et al.,
Nature, 2015, doi:10.1038/nature14162], the cause of which remains to be explained. The estimated
brightness of the plume exceeds that expected for auroral emissions, and its projected altitude greatly
exceeds that at which clouds are expected to form. We report on in-situ measurements of ionospheric
plasma density and solar wind parameters throughout this interval made by Mars Express, obtained
over the same surface region, but at the opposing terminator. Measurements in the ionosphere at the
corresponding location frequently show a disturbed structure, though this is not atypical for such regions
with intense crustal magnetic ﬁelds. We tentatively conclude that the formation and/or transport of this
plume to the altitudes where it was observed could be due in part to the result of a large interplanetary
coronal mass ejection (ICME) encountering the Martian system. Interestingly, we note that the only
similar plume detection in May 1997 may also have been associated with a large ICME impact at Mars.

Key points:
• Data from ASPERA-3 and MARSIS were obtained during the unusual atmospheric plume event.
• Plume observations likely follow the impact of large interplanetary coronal mass ejections.
• Ionospheric plasma structures associated with the plume are not conclusively observed.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
8
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
e
c
a
p
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
6
0
9
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

1

Introduction

Mars, including speciﬁcally its surface, atmosphere,
and induced magnetosphere, has been the subject
of continuous in-situ study for nearly two decades.
Recent reports of remote observations of an ex-
tremely high-altitude ‘plume’ were therefore some-
thing of a surprise [S´anchez-Lavega et al., 2015,
hereafter SL15 ]. Over the interval of 12 March - 17
April 2012 following apparent opposition, observa-
tions made of Mars in the optical band by amateur
astronomers from several distinct geographical lo-
cations showed the presence of a detached, bright
feature above the Martian surface. The feature was
centered near 43◦ South latitude, 197◦ West longi-
tude. While projection eﬀects make the determi-
nation of a ‘true’ altitude almost impossible, con-
servative estimates indicate that the feature was
present at altitudes up to ∼280 km, and extended
over ∼11◦ of latitude. Its longitudinal extent was
inferred to be ∼11◦, and in several cases it was
clearly observed to be rotating with the planet. Im-
portantly, in each instance the plume was found at
the same location over the planet’s surface within
the uncertainties of the observations, and was only
visible as that region traversed the dawn termina-
tor. Possible observations of the plume while it lay
over the sun-lit disc of the planet were likely pre-
vented by the bright surface below, and it was not
observed as it crossed the dusk limb (the dusk ter-
minator not being visible from Earth at this time).
Therefore, any diurnal variation of the plume is not
constrained by the available observations [SL15 ].

SL15 explored several possible physical explana-
tions for the observed plume, speciﬁcally the lo-
cal condensation of water or CO2 ice, atmospher-
ically suspended dust, and auroral emissions. De-
tailed observations of clouds at Mars have been
extensively reported in the literature [see e.g.
Montmessin et al., 2007; M¨a¨att¨anen et al., 2010;
Gonz´alez-Galindo et al., 2011; M¨a¨att¨anen et al.,
2013] The events of March-April 2012 appear to
be of a very diﬀerent class as the observed altitude
of the plume is signiﬁcantly higher than those at
which CO2 and/or H2O are expected to be able to
condense within the Martian atmosphere [SL15 ].
Measurements by Mars Climate Sounder on Mars
Reconnaissance Orbiter have shown that water ice
clouds may be present at higher altitudes than pre-
viously expected, i.e. up to ∼50 km [Heavens et al.,

2010] and have been shown to vary seasonally, diur-
nally, and in response to orographic forcing. How-
ever, these observations are still made well below
the altitudes we concern ourselves with in this pa-
per.

Meanwhile, dust plays an important role in
the dynamics of the Martian atmosphere, both
at low and middle altitudes [e.g. McCleese et al.,
2010]. The eﬀects of global dust storms have been
shown to be measurable up to ionospheric alti-
tudes [e.g. Lillis et al., 2008; England and Lillis,
2012; Liemohn et al., 2012]. Furthermore, the
increased thermospheric mass densities and cor-
respondingly increased photoelectron ﬂuxes at a
given altitude may persist even after the lower-
altitude dust storm has subsided [Xu et al., 2014].
Distinct layers of dust may be present in the Mar-
tian atmosphere up to altitudes of ∼70 km, perhaps
as the result of vertical transport due to thermal
updrafts generated in regions of topographical vari-
ations [e.g. Guzewich et al., 2013; Heavens et al.,
2015]. However, lofted dusty material has not hith-
erto been reported at the altitudes corresponding to
the feature observed by SL15, and Kleinb¨ohl et al.
[2015] have recently shown a lack of a long-lived
dust layer in the middle atmosphere. A clear body
of evidence therefore exists for complex coupling
between the behavior of dust and aerosols through-
out the Martian atmosphere from the surface to the
thermosphere, though the precise details of much of
this coupling remain to be understood.

SL15 also brieﬂy explored the possibility that
the observed features were the manifestation in
the optical band of a localized auroral emission.
The surface location of these observations is con-
sistent with that reported previously for Martian
aurora [Bertaux et al., 2005; G´erard et al., 2015],
being over a region of intense and highly struc-
tured crustal magnetic ﬁelds [Acu˜na et al., 1999].
However, if the plume was in fact an auroral emis-
sion, its brightness would vastly exceed the spec-
tral observations made by the UV spectrometer on
Mars Express (MEX), by at least 3 orders of mag-
nitude, making it signiﬁcantly brighter than any
auroral emission observed at Earth or indeed any
other planet.

A further possibility, not discussed by SL15, is
the formation of this layer by ablation of material
from a meteor [e.g. Molina-Cuberos et al., 2003].
Ionized material from such impacts has a long life-

2

time at ionospheric altitudes, and has recently been
observed by NASA’s MAVEN mission following the
close approach of comet Siding-Spring [Schneider
et al., 2015]. The inﬂux of material from Sid-
ing Spring was clearly associated with the forma-
tion of a layer of ionized magnesium in the Mar-
tian atmosphere, with peak densities at altitudes
of ∼ 120 km.

In summary, our current understanding of the
Martian atmosphere does not include processes
that can act to form the observed high altitude
plume reported by SL15.
In this paper we con-
centrate on coincident in-situ and remote plasma
observations made during this period by MEX. The
main layer of the Martian ionosphere is formed
through photoionization of CO2, and has its peak
in density at altitudes of ∼135 km at the sub-solar
point, rising to ∼180 km at the terminator [e.g.
Morgan et al., 2008]. The high projected altitude
of the plume would therefore place it well above the
main peak of the ionosphere, in the region where
draped heliospheric ﬁelds typically dominate the
magnetic ﬁeld conﬁguration. During the interval
the plume was observed, the second of three mea-
surement campaigns organized in part by the Mars
Upper Atmosphere Network (MUAN) was under-
way, spanning the March - April period (see de-
tails given by Opgenoorth et al. [2013]). The coin-
cidence in time is not surprising, since the MUAN
campaign was conducted following apparent op-
position, when solar wind measurements made by
dedicated spacecraft at Earth could be most reli-
ably extrapolated to the orbit of Mars, yielding the
best-possible measurements of the upstream solar
wind at Mars. During this interval, MEX made sev-
eral passages over the surface region of Mars where
this plume was observed in observations made from
Earth. However, the phasing of the MEX orbit was
such that this surface region was crossed at the op-
posite terminator: the plume was observed from
Earth over the dawn terminator, while the MEX
data studied here were obtained at dusk. This lo-
cal time oﬀset prevents our ability to study the
plume directly, as we have no information about
the persistence of the plume over a full rotation of
Mars. The observations presented here neverthe-
less provide relevant information about the state of
the ionosphere in this region, and any diurnal vari-
ation present. Additionally, we also report on the
state of the solar wind during this interval, and

ﬁnd at least a tentative correlation between the
plume observations and the preceding impact of
solar wind shocks at Mars, associated with inter-
planetary coronal mass ejections (ICMEs).

The response of the Mars ionosphere and in-
duced magnetosphere to ICME events has long
been studied [e.g. Crider et al., 2005; Edberg et al.,
2010; Opgenoorth et al., 2013; Morgan et al., 2014;
Jakosky et al., 2015]. The general consensus is the
enhanced dynamic pressure associated with these
events leads to short-term increases in the rate of
atmospheric escape, along with a compression of
the plasma boundaries that separate the ionosphere
from the upstream solar wind. The precise mecha-
nisms by which momentum is transferred from the
solar wind to the escaping planetary ions remain
the subject of detailed study, as does their relative
importance. Similarly, solar ﬂares and the associ-
ated increase in ionizing UV light has been shown
to enhance the Martian ionosphere [e.g. Mendillo
et al., 2006; Mahajan and Mayr , 1990], as has the
precipitation of shock-accelerated solar energetic
particles (SEPs) into the atmosphere [e.g. Lillis
et al., 2012; Ulu¸sen et al., 2012; Nˇemec et al., 2014].
It must be noted, however, that these three sources
of short-term variations in the ionosphere and in-
duced magnetosphere, while themselves often hav-
ing a common root cause on the solar surface, often
are incident at Mars at markedly diﬀerent times, as
the ﬂare naturally travels at the speed of light, solar
energetic particles some signiﬁcant fraction thereof,
but following heliospheric magnetic ﬁeld lines, and
the bulk of the ICME ∼1-4 days later, depending
on the shape and propagation speed of the ejecta.
The presence of a ﬂare, SEP ﬂux increase, or an
ICME is not a priori a reliable predictor of the
others, either concurrently or shortly afterwards.
Distributed multi-point measurements and/or ad-
vanced modeling schemes are required to fully un-
derstand the causal relationships between these ob-
servations [e.g. Falkenberg et al., 2011].

2

Instrumentation and Mod-
els

The periapsis altitude of MEX during the period
in which the plume was observed was ∼335 km, i.e.
somewhat above the uppermost altitudes at which

3

evolves to Mars’s orbital location. During the pe-
riod of the Martian plume observations, this prop-
agation is expected to be most reliable, as both the
radial distance and the angular separation between
Earth and Mars have their smallest values.

MARSIS comprises a 40 m tip-to-tip dipole and
associated electronics required to send and receive
radio pulses. The instrument is operated at periap-
sis, at altitudes typically below ∼1200 km. One of
the key aspects of the MUAN campaign run during
the period studied here is the generally enhanced
volume of data taken with MARSIS in Active Iono-
spheric Sounding (AIS) mode. When operated in
AIS mode, the instrument transmits a short pulse
of ∼100 µs duration at a given frequency f , before
“listening” for reﬂections of the pulse from the Mar-
tian ionosphere below at the same frequency. The
time delay between the transmission of the pulse
and any detected reﬂection gives the distance to the
reﬂection site. The process is repeated at 160 log-
arithmically spaced pulse frequencies from ∼0.1 to
5.5 MHz, forming a so-called “ionogram”, with time
delay and frequency as its two axes. The variation
in the curve of the time delay to the ionospheric
reﬂection with frequency can be numerically in-
verted to yield a proﬁle of ionospheric plasma den-
sity with altitude, from the spacecraft down to the
ionospheric peak density (below which, all pulses
instead propagate through the ionosphere and re-
ﬂect from the surface of the planet). Full details of
this inversion process as applied to MARSIS data
are given by Morgan et al. [2013]. Finally, we also
note that the relatively high-power of the transmit-
ted pulse is suﬃcient to disturb the plasma around
the antenna in a complex fashion, giving rise to
distortions in the data at the local plasma fre-
quency, as well as “pseudo-echoes” at the local elec-
tron gyroperiod in regions where the magnetic ﬁeld
is strong, typically above ∼20 nT [Gurnett et al.,
2005].

In the following section, we brieﬂy report on the
content of these plasma observations, the state of
the solar wind, and the tentative conclusions we
draw from comparisons with the timings of the re-
ported optical observations.

the phenomenon was observed. Extended series of
measurements were taken both with the Analyzer
for Space Plasmas and Energetic Atoms (ASPERA-
3) plasma instrument suite [Barabash et al., 2006]
and the Mars Advanced Radar for Sub-Surface and
Ionospheric Sounding (MARSIS) [Picardi et al.,
2004; Gurnett et al., 2005], which we discuss in de-
tail in this paper.

ASPERA-3 comprises a suite of sensors dedi-
cated to the measurement of ions, electrons and
energetic neutral atoms. In this paper we use data
from the Ion Mass Analyzer (IMA) sensor, which
determines the energy and mass per charge of in-
cident ions, and has a ﬁeld of view of ±45×360◦
(elevation × azimuth), using electrostatic deﬂec-
tors to cover the elevation angle. The instrument
is capable of separately resolving H+, He++, O+,
O+
2 in the energy range 0.01-36 keV per
charge. A full scan of mass, energy, azimuth and
elevation is completed every 192 s. From this, the
bulk moments of the plasma may be numerically
computed yielding density, velocity and tempera-
ture (under ideal conditions). In practice, part of
the instrument’s ﬁeld of view can be obscured by
the spacecraft bus and solar arrays, and spacecraft
potential variations can limit its ability to measure
cold ionospheric plasma ﬂows.

2 and CO+

We note that ASPERA-3 is not a dedicated so-
lar wind monitor and owing to the orbit of MEX
cannot continuously sample the solar wind. The
fraction of each ∼7 h orbit for which MEX is in
the undisturbed solar wind varies signiﬁcantly, but
is typically not more than ∼75%, and often signif-
icantly less than this (occasionally falling to near
zero, when apoapsis is located in the Martian in-
duced magnetotail). During the period speciﬁcally
studied here, MEX spends ∼4 h per orbit in the so-
lar wind. We therefore supplement these discontin-
uous in-situ solar wind measurements with higher-
precision and continuous measurements made by
dedicated spacecraft at Earth orbit, speciﬁcally
the Advanced Composition Explorer (ACE). These
measurements are extrapolated to Mars orbit us-
ing the 1-D MHD Michigan Solar Wind Model
(MSWIM). Full details of this approach, along with
an evaluation of its eﬀectiveness are given by Zieger
and Hansen [2008]. Brieﬂy, plasma moments mea-
sured by ACE are transformed into an inertial
frame, and used as time-dependent boundary con-
ditions in simulating the solar wind stream as it

4

3

2012 March - April Obser-
vations with MEX

Figure 1 summarizes the various plasma observa-
tions made during the interval identiﬁed by SL15,
along with the periapsis locations of MEX, and the
timing of individual plume observations. Through-
out this period, the azimuthal separation between
Mars and Earth varied from ∼ 5◦ (Mars leading)
to ∼ 30◦ (Earth leading), with radial alignment
occurring on 5 March 2012. Throughout all pan-
els in Figure 1, we highlight in light blue those
MEX orbits for which we will later show individ-
ual measurements made with MARSIS. Panels a
to c of Figure 1 show respectively measured solar
wind density nsw, speed vsw and dynamic pressure
Pdyn, obtained from ASPERA-3 ion measurements
while MEX was in the solar wind (black circles).
From ∼12:00 (UTC) on 9 to ∼00:00 on 18 March
the quality of these ASPERA-3 data are signiﬁ-
cantly reduced, almost certainly due to the impact
of at least one very large interplanetary coronal
mass ejection (ICME) on the Martian induced mag-
netosphere. The associated penetrating radiation
and enhanced particle ﬂuxes overloaded an inter-
nal buﬀer in the instrument, and large volumes of
data were irretrievably lost. Furthermore, extreme
rarefactions in solar wind density in the wake of
the ICME pose further instrumental problems for
the measurements of these bulk parameters. This
interval in which the instrument performance is
degraded is marked by the horizontal blue bars.
However, we are able to supplement these measure-
ments through the use of the results of the MSWIM
propagation, as shown by the red traces in panels
a-c of Figure 1. These ACE-derived estimates of
the solar wind at Mars corroborate the impact on
Mars of a major ICME with peak velocities exceed-
ing ∼ 700 km s−1 on ∼9 March. In addition, one or
possibly two subsequent smaller ICMEs, launched
on 9 March, are predicted to impact Mars beteen 12
and 14 March. Large density depletions are found
in the wakes of this chain of ICMEs, with densities
falling below values that can be meaningfully inter-
preted either in ASPERA measurements or MHD
simulation results. Overall, the ICME that was
launched from the Sun on 7 March 2012 and im-
pacted Earth on 9 March was a signiﬁcant event,
and likely one of the most intense to hit Mars dur-

ing the ascending phase of solar cycle 24.

Outside of this disturbed interval, the agreement
between the ASPERA-3 measured solar wind pa-
rameters and those propagated from Earth using
MSWIM is in general reasonable, particularly in
terms of expected velocities. A further signiﬁcant
shock appears to arrive on April 13 with a large rise
in solar wind density, followed by a doubling of the
solar wind velocity. This perturbation is more char-
acteristic of a corotating stream interaction region
(SIR), and is well accounted for in the MSWIM es-
timates, albeit with a small delay of ∼1 day. Such
SIR fronts, which have a distinct “sawtooth” den-
sity proﬁle are found at the interfaces between slow
and fast solar wind streams, and can often persist
throughout several solar rotations.

Panel d of Figure 1 shows the timings of the
ground-based telescope observations made from
Earth in which the Mars plume was detected.
The longitude of the sub-Earth point on Mars
at the time of each observation is plotted, com-
monly referred to as the “central meridian longi-
tude” (CML) [Sanchez-Lavega, private communica-
tion]. Precise calculation of this quantity requires
reliable information regarding the timing of each
observation, which is available for almost all the
observations noted by SL15. Small, medium and
larger red ‘×’ symbols signify “tentative”, “clear”,
and “excellent” quality positive detections of the
plume. Equivalently sized black ‘+’ symbols repre-
sent corresponding quality non-detections, i.e. suc-
cessful observations of Mars which did not show a
plume, but had the required resolution to be able to
resolve one were it present at the terminator. We
ascribe more weight to those observations in which
the plume was ﬁrst noted, on 20 and 21 March, in
contrast to those which were retrospectively found
in re-examined data. We also add weight to the ob-
servations where the image quality was particularly
clear, or multiple detections were made on a single
night, or an image sequence was obtained showing
the motion of the plume over the limb. Conclu-
sive statements regarding the presence or absence
of the plume can be made only intermittently with
the available observations. We note that the clear-
est and most frequent plume sightings (large red
‘×’ symbols indicating positive detections) all oc-
cur within the ﬁrst event, around 20 March, while
the event may begin as early as March 13 follow-
ing the ﬁrst clear detection. A localized feature

5

Figure 1: Summary plot of plasma data obtained during the two plume events. a) Solar wind proton
density nsw as measured by ASPERA-3/IMA when outside the Martian bow shock (black circles), and
simulated values from MSWIM(red line). The horizontal blue line indicates the interval in which IMA
measurements are degraded by disturbed solar wind. b, c) As (a), but showing solar wind bulk velocity
vsw and dynamic pressure Pdyn. d) Timeline of the optical observations of the plume, showing the central
meridian longitude (CML) of each observation. Positive detections of the plume are plotted as red ‘×’
symbols, with size from small to large indicating the assessed quality of the observation. None-detections
of the plume are shown as similarly coded black ‘+’ symbols. e) MEX latitude at periapsis, highlighted
red when periapsis occurs at longitudes close to the plume location.
f) Approximate closest surface
distance of each orbit to the plume nominal center, only recorded when AIS is operating. g) Number of
MARSIS/AIS soundings performed per orbit of MEX (grey bars). Red smaller bars indicate the number
of soundings performed over the plume location. The alternate black and white blocks on the upper
edge of the ﬁgure show the orbits of MEX (numbered every 20). Light blue vertical bars indicate those
orbits from which we report MEX data in subsequent ﬁgures.

6

rotating over Mars’ surface will only be visible in
a narrow range of CML. For the initial observa-
tions in March, positive detections only occur with
CML less than ∼ 160◦, while the non detections are
all made at larger values. Hence, the interspersed
non-detections of the plume are likely not indica-
tive of its absence, and instead may only be the
result of unfavorable viewing geometry. Little can
be safely concluded regarding the plume activity, or
lack thereof in the interval March 23 to April 10,
before it is once again observed for a period of ∼7
days until April 17. In our assessment, only clear
non-detections in the same CML range where the
plume was initially seen can yield ﬁrm constraints
on its duration. Since these are lacking from the
available observations, the extent in time for which
the plume was present in the Martian atmosphere
cannot be properly constrained.

In the ﬁnal three panels of Figure 1 we show pa-
rameters regarding the orbit and operation of MEX
during this interval. Again, we note that the local
time (LT) of periapsis of MEX during these ob-
servations varied steadily between 17:20 - 17:50 h
LT throughout this period, and therefore provide
a dusk counterpart to the optical observations at
the dawn terminator. Panel e of Figure 1 shows
the latitude of periapsis of MEX, slowly decreas-
ing through the southern hemisphere with time.
Red markers highlight those periapses at longitudes
close to the plume nominal center, speciﬁcally 175◦
- 220◦ West (or 140◦ - 185◦ East, for commonality
with other MEX publications). Panel f of Figure 1
shows the minimum surface distance between the
spacecraft and the plume nominal center on each
orbit. The closest approach to the average plume
surface location is within 20 km, occurring on orbit
10498 on 28 March. This likely places MEX (at
dusk) directly above the region where the plume
was seen to be active (at dawn) at this time, given
the extended horizontal size of the plume. Finally,
in panel g of Figure 1 the grey bars show the num-
ber of MARSIS AIS soundings performed at peri-
apsis of each orbit, with those shown in red indicat-
ing the number of soundings made over the plume
region. Speciﬁcally we deﬁne “over the plume re-
gion” as being latitude -43.1±10.8◦ and longitude
197.1±22.2◦ (West), where we note that we have
taken the ‘extreme’ range given by SL15, and fur-
ther doubled the longitudinal extent. Line of sight
projection eﬀects can introduce signiﬁcant ambi-

guities in both spatial location and altitude, and
modestly increasing the longitudinal extent of the
region of interest, making it of approximately equal
spatial extent in both the zonal and meridional di-
rections seems reasonable to us.

Summarizing the data shown in Figure 1, we see
that the clearest plume detections on 20 and 21
March follow the impact of a major ICME, along
with one or two smaller trailing ICMEs and the
disturbed solar wind in their wakes. The impact
of at least the ﬁrst large ICME, and associated
energetic particles is conﬁrmed in in-situ measure-
ments from ASPERA-3. A smaller solar wind en-
hancement is also present in the second cluster of
plume observations around April 14, though this
likely to be a SIR rather than an ICME. The appar-
ent positive plume detection occurring on 9 April
2012 does not show any immediately preceding so-
lar wind enhancement according to in-situ measure-
ments made with ASPERA-3 (Figure 1, panels a-c).
The lack of recorded non-detections in the period
March 24 to April 9 is unfortunate, as it prevents
us making ﬁrm statements about the duration of
the major plume event following the large March 9
ICME. We conclude that it is at least possible that
the second series of plume observations is simply a
direct continuation of the ﬁrst.

The lack of a magnetometer onboard MEX pre-
vents measurements of solar wind convection elec-
tric ﬁeld direction, which exerts signiﬁcant inﬂu-
ence over the conﬁguration of the Martian iono-
sphere and induced magnetosphere [e.g. Dubinin
et al., 2006; Brain, 2006]. While estimating the
orientation of the upstream magnetic ﬁeld from the
MSWIM propagations is possible, signiﬁcant devia-
tions can be expected due to evolution of the solar
wind, particularly in response to the ICMEs em-
bedded within it. We therefore do not show these
data, but instead only brieﬂy comment that there
is very weak evidence to suggest that more of the
individual plume observations are associated with
a “toward” conﬁguration of the Parker spiral than
the opposite “away” conﬁguration.

Figure 2 shows the trajectory of MEX projected
onto the surface of Mars, where the surface is shown
color-coded according to the crustal magnetic ﬁeld
intensity |BCrustal| using the model of Lillis et al.
[2010] evaluated at an altitude of 150 km. Colored
trajectories indicate those orbits highlighted in Fig-
ure 1, from which data are later shown, according

7

at higher frequencies as the peak density is ap-
proached. Finally the surface reﬂection of radio
waves is visible at the highest frequencies, which
pass completely through the ionosphere. Interpre-
tation of these ionograms is not without its sub-
tleties, and we refer the reader in particular to re-
lated papers by Gurnett et al. [2005]; Duru et al.
[2006]; Morgan et al. [2008] and Morgan et al. [2013]
for further details.

Firstly, we report those MARSIS/AIS observa-
tions shown in Figure 3a-c, made during inter-
vals when the plume was not visible according to
the amateur observations from Earth. Figure 3a
shows the ionogram obtained on 2012 March 07
over the dusk terminator, closest to the site where
the plume would later be detected from March 13
onwards at the dawn terminator. The characteris-
tics of this ionogram are essentially unremarkable -
a very restricted reﬂection at ∼1 MHz is observed
at ∼2.4 ms delays, likely ionospheric in origin. The
solar zenith angle (SZA, 0◦ at the sub-solar point,
90◦ at the terminator at the surface) of this ob-
servation puts the spacecraft behind the geomet-
ric terminator. However, the vertically extended
ionosphere remains sun-lit to an SZA of ∼110◦,
and hence the presence of ionospheric plasma sub-
spacecraft in this location is not unusual. Figure 3b
and 3c meanwhile show observations obtained on
March 28, following the ﬁrst series of conﬁrmed
plume detections ending on March 23. Figure 3b
shows the ionogram obtained closest to the planeto-
graphic location of the plume nominal center, which
again shows a fairly unremarkable ionospheric trace
indicating a stratiﬁed ionosphere, along with cy-
clotron lines that are more closely spaced, indicat-
ing a more intense magnetic ﬁeld at the spacecraft
than shown in Figure 3a. We also note that the ob-
servation shown in Figure 3b is the closest obtained
to the plume nominal center throughout the pe-
riod studied. Figure 3c was obtained ∼10◦ further
south of Figure 3b on the same orbit, closer to the
terminator, and shows a reﬂection at higher peak
frequency (and therefore density). The ionospheric
trace is also “thicker”, extending over a larger range
of delay bins within the instrument, possibly indi-
cating a more disturbed ionosphere, with more hor-
izontal irregularities giving rise to multiple reﬂec-
tion sites. Furthermore, the ionospheric trace now
overlaps with that of the ground, an eﬀect which is
only possible when the ionospheric reﬂection is at

8

Figure 2: Projected ground tracks of MEX over
the plume location (black and white dashed box).
Grey lines indicate all those orbits entering the re-
gion of interest during the interval shown in Figure
1. Colored and labelled lines indicate those orbits
discussed in the paper. The surface of the planet
is colored according to the strength of the crustal
magnetic ﬁeld according to the model of Lillis et al.
[2010] at 150 km altitude.

to the label on the right. Other orbits which pass
through the plume region of interest bounded by
the black and white dashed line during March and
April 2012 are shown grey. In each case, only the
periapsis segments are shown, corresponding to the
periods when MARSIS is operating in AIS mode.
In Figure 3 we show ionograms obtained with
MARSIS/AIS at several instances both before, dur-
ing, and after individual plume observations were
made by SL15. Each of the 9 panels shows an in-
dividual ionogram, obtained at the orbit and time
indicated in the upper left of the panel. The pro-
jected locations of these ionograms are shown by
the appropriately colored circles on the mapped
trajectories in Figure 2. Each ionogram shows
the color-coded signal intensity measured on the
antenna versus delay time (y-axis) and transmit-
ted frequency (x-axis, with equivalent plasma den-
sity also indicated). Characteristic features are la-
belled in Figure 3a and b. These are namely the
vertical plasma lines occurring at integer multi-
ples of the local electron plasma frequency fpe =

(cid:112)nee2/0me4π2 surrounding the spacecraft, hor-

izontal cyclotron lines occurring at multiples at
the electron gyroperiod τce = qB/2πme, the iono-
spheric reﬂection trace extending to larger delays

Figure 3: A selection of 9 ionograms obtained with MARSIS during the interval shown in Figure 1.
Received signal on the antenna is color-coded versus delay time and sounding frequency (equivalent
densities are also indicated on the x-axes). The orbit number, description, and UTC time are indicated
in the upper left of each sub-panel, along with the position of MEX in the upper right. For presentation
purposes, these plots are not shown in time-order.

9

least in part being received from an oﬀ-nadir direc-
tion, i.e. at oblique incidence [Duru et al., 2010].
This provides further evidence for a large degree of
structuring of the ionosphere at this location.

We note that it is in principal possible to invert
these reﬂections, accounting for the dispersion of
the radio waves during their passage to and from
the reﬂection point at each frequency and yielding
a proﬁle of electron density versus altitude above
the surface [see e.g. Morgan et al., 2013]. How-
ever, we do not perform this operation on these
data, for several reasons. Firstly, owing to the lo-
cation of these soundings near the terminator, the
horizontal structuring of the ionosphere makes it
highly likely that distortions will be present in the
ﬁnal results of such an inversion. Principally, this
will lead to underestimations of the true altitude
of particular features, but also can cause further
distortions, smearing out any real extra layers that
may be present. Secondly, the lower density of the
ionosphere at this location as compared e.g. to the
sub-solar ionosphere, means that the interpolation
from the spacecraft to the lowest frequency iono-
spheric reﬂection represents a large fraction of the
total trace.

Moving now to Figure 3d-f, we show a sequence
of 3 successive orbits 10469-10471 (all taking place
on March 20). The central ionogram Figure 3e
shows the observation made closest to the plume
center, a matter of hours before it would then be ob-
served as the same region of Mars surface traverse
the dusk limb. Figure 3d and 3f then show the ob-
servation made at the same latitude and SZA on the
preceding and following orbits, but at spacecraft
longitudes rotated ∼100◦ eastward and westward
of the plume center, respectively. The trace ob-
served closest to the plume in Figure 3e displays a
much thicker reﬂection, than those before (3d) and
after (3f), again indicating small-scale structuring
of the ionosphere in this location. The ionospheric
reﬂection in Figure 3d comprises multiple individ-
ual traces, indicating oblique reﬂections from more
distant points in the ionosphere, away from the
nadir direction, while that in Figure 3f is fainter,
but otherwise rather unremarkable. The identi-
cal illumination conditions of the ionosphere during
these three ionograms is at odds with their varied
presentation. However, we cannot conﬁdently as-
cribe any of this variation to the presence of the
plume in Figure 3e, or the lack thereof in Figure 3d

and 3f. All of the variations seen in these three
ionograms could easily be ascribed instead to the
diﬀerent crustal ﬁeld conditions present between
these locations. Stronger crustal ﬁelds are clearly
detected in Figure 3e, owing to the closer-spacing
of the cyclotron lines relative to Figure 3d and 3f.
Speciﬁcally, the modeled crustal ﬁeld strength at
150 km altitude at the location of the ionogram
shown in Figure 3e is ∼100 nT, its orientation is
radially outward from the planet’s surface [Lillis
et al., 2010]. In contrast, modeled crustal ﬁelds at
the locations of Figure 3d and 3f are much weaker
∼10 nT or less, and therefore negligible compared
with typical draped magnetic ﬁeld intensities. The
ionosphere in regions of intense near-radial crustal
ﬁelds is well known to be elevated with respect to
other regions [e.g. Gurnett et al., 2005], and often
displays such a “thick” reﬂection trace.

Finally, Figure 3g-i show observations made on
March 13, 22 and April 13, respectively, all made
when the plume was reported to be active by SL15,
on the closest approach to the plume location on
each orbit. Clear, and varied, ionospheric reﬂec-
tions are present in each case. Multiple reﬂections
are present in both Figure 3g and i, while h shows
a single trace. A broader range is seen in the peak
frequency of the ionosphere, and therefore its den-
sity in these three examples than the 6 discussed
previously. A third example of a thicker reﬂection
can be seen in Figure 3i, the only plot we show
from the second run of plume observations, made
during April 2012. No surface reﬂection is evident
in Figure 3g,
likely indicating the presence of a
plasma layer at altitudes below the nominal iono-
spheric peak density, in which collisional absorption
of the sounding pulse occurs before the surface is
reached. Such eﬀects have been studied previously
by Morgan et al. [2010] and Witasse et al. [2001],
and have been related to the precipitation of high
energy particles into the atmosphere, causing low-
altitude ionization.

In Figure 4 we plot spectra obtained by the ion
and electron spectrometers of ASPERA-3 during
orbit 10551 on 13 April 2012. The duration of the
passage of MEX through the plume location de-
picted in Figure 2 is marked by the vertical dashed
black lines, and the closest approach to the plume
center occurred at 03:10, coincident with the iono-
gram shown in Figure 3i. Very shortly after this,
accelerated planetary ions were observed at un-

10

usually high energies, up to ∼7 keV, indicated in
the spectra by the white arrow. While the mass-
resolving capabilities of IMA are not suﬃcient at
these high energies to resolve the species, these are
most likely O+ or O+
2 . No associated signature
is present in the electron spectra obtained at the
same time. Their high energy indicates a substan-
tial acceleration of these ions has taken place, pre-
sumably from much lower energies characteristic of
thermal ions in the Martian ionosphere.
Indeed,
ionospheric heavy ions are simultaneously observed
in the same time period as the energetic ions, in-
dicating a mixed population. Consideration of the
look-direction of the IMA sensor during these ob-
servations suggests that these accelerated ions are
traveling anti-sunward. Taking the distance to the
sub-solar bow shock point as an upper limit for
the length scale over which the acceleration pro-
cess could have acted, this would suggest a mini-
mum accelerating (uniform, steady) electric ﬁeld of
∼1 mV/m, directed anti-sunward. Such an elec-
tric ﬁeld would be required to accelerate a singly-
charged planetary ion from rest to the observed en-
ergy.

4 Discussion

4.1 Summary

We have presented observations of the Martian
ionosphere and induced magnetosphere obtained
during the period March - April 2012, during which
an anomalously high-altitude atmospheric ‘plume’
was reported by SL15. In situ solar wind measure-
ments were regularly obtained by MEX during this
period, and several large ICMEs were observed to
impact the Martian system, the largest of which ar-
rived on ∼9 March, with a modest density enhance-
ment and speeds exceeding ∼700 km s−1. Further
conﬁrmation of the arrival of the associated shocks,
and following rarefaction regions was obtained us-
ing the MSWIM data-driven MHD simulation. The
ﬁrst conﬁrmed observations of the plume were then
made on 13 March, with the clearest examples oc-
curring later on 20 and 21 March, following this
ICME impact and the wake-like structures in the
solar wind that followed. The 3-4 days that elapsed
between the closest solar wind shock arrival and
these clear observations do not support necessar-

ily a direct connection between these phenomena.
However, the reported nondetections of the plume
are essentially all consistent with observational re-
strictions arising from the CML at the time of ob-
servation, with the plume not being reliably ob-
served during this March event for CMLs greater
than ∼160◦. Higher cadence and more continual
observations would therefore have been required to
reliably constrain the duration for which the plume
was active, by ensuring that a broader range of
CML was surveyed. Making ﬁrm statements about
both the start and end time of this plume event is
not possible with the available optical observations.
While the majority of the plume observations made
in April follow the impact of a reasonably strong
SIR, the distinct possibility remains that the sec-
ond set of observations may be a continuation of
the ﬁrst event.

We remind the reader that the MEX ionospheric
observations presented here were obtained at local
times close to the dusk terminator in each case,
and therefore are almost exactly opposite to the
dawn terminator region in which the plume was vis-
ible. The lack of a clear signature in MARSIS/AIS
soundings associated with the plume could there-
fore be construed as being consistent with at least
some level of diurnal variation in the plume, either
in altitude, horizontal extent, or its formation and
dissipation on diurnal timescales. In this context,
we note that ionospheric density structures regu-
larly seen by MARSIS in regions of intense crustal
ﬁelds have been postulated to undergo systematic
diurnal variation, forming and growing throughout
their passage through the sunlit ionosphere, be-
fore dissipating on the nightside due to rapid ion-
electron recombination [Duru et al., 2006; Andrews
et al., 2014; Di´eval et al., 2015]. However, despite
the common altitude range of these phenomena, the
rarity of observations of high-altitude atmospheric
plumes contrasted with the very regular ionospheric
oblique echo detections does not immediately sug-
gest a causal relationship between these phenom-
ena.

In summary, the events reported by SL15 are
clearly interesting, and remain without explana-
tion. Both the plume’s location in a region of in-
tense crustal magnetic ﬁelds, and it’s potentially in-
teresting timing following a period of relatively ex-
treme solar wind disturbances, and the ionospheric
altitudes at which it was detected, collectively sug-

11

Figure 4: ASPERA-3 IMA (upper panel) and ELS (lower panel) data obtained on MEX orbit 10551,
13 April 2012, coincident with the second series of individual plume observations. Count rates for
ions and electrons are shown color-coded, summed over all anodes and scan directions for each sensor,
respectively. Vertical dashed lines bound the interval for which MEX was above the plume location, i.e.
within the highlighted box shown in Figure 2. The white arrow indicates the accelerated ion feature
discussed in the text.

gest that a direct connection is perhaps possible.
However, the available data during this event, and
the wide separation in local time between obser-
vations made at Mars by MEX and the reported
plume locations clearly limit the strength of the
conclusions we may draw. The ionospheric plasma
density observations made by MARSIS over the
plume region are best described as ‘typical’ for that
region of the Martian ionosphere, i.e. containing
both elevated densities compared to other longi-
tudes,
localized density enhancements producing
oblique echoes, and possible irregularities giving a
dispersed reﬂection.

As was noted in the introduction, these MEX
data were obtained during the second of three
observation campaigns organized by the MUAN
group,
in each case at and following the appar-
ent opposition of Mars, as this period provides the
most reliable opportunity to extrapolate solar wind
measurements made at Earth to Mars orbit. No
similar plume detections were reported during the
other two campaigns, which took place during the
spring of 2010 and 2014. However, during neither
of these intervals was a similarly extreme solar wind
encountered as during the March 2012, as will be
discussed later.

4.2 Hubble Observations

in May

1997

In addition to the amateur ground-based obser-
vations reported by SL15, they also conducted a
search of Hubble Space Telescope (HST) observa-
tions of Mars, and noted a qualitatively similar
plume-like feature in an observation made on 17
May 1997, from 17:27-17:41 UTC. No relevant in-
situ plasma measurements were available at Mars
during this event (MGS would arrive later the same
year, with only a very limited ability to resolve
such disturbances in the solar wind). However, our
tentative conclusions that the formation of these
plumes may in some way be related to the pas-
sage of strong solar wind disturbances is somewhat
strengthened, as we note that a signiﬁcant ICME
was launched from the Sun on 12 May 1997 and
impacted Earth on 15 May 1997.

Observed from Earth, this was a classic example
of a so-called “halo” ICME, and was widely studied
and modeled by several groups [Arge et al., 2004;
Odstrcil et al., 2004, 2005; Wu et al., 2007; Zhou
et al., 2008; Cohen et al., 2010]. It was estimated
as having an angular diameter of ∼ 50◦, with the
direction of propagation located within 1◦ of the

12

matter of hours before the HST observations of the
same day. The MSWIM solar wind propagation
was also inspected for this period, which yielded
a somewhat earlier arrival time for the shock than
that expected from the studies of the halo ICME at
Earth by Odstrcil et al. [2005] and others. This ear-
lier predicted arrival time from MSWIM is consis-
tent with the limitations of the propagation method
itself, which will generally yield an earlier arrival
time for an ICME-like structure for the relative
positioning of Mars and Earth shown in Figure 5.
Speciﬁcally, MSWIM predicted the arrival of the
shock at around 12 h UTC on 16 May, i.e. still in
advance of the HST observation and approximately
a half-day earlier than depicted in Figure 5.

Measurements of the angular extent of the ICME
front cannot be further constrained with available
data, but we note that a shift of the propagation
direction of the ICME, or increase of its azimuthal
extent by only a few degrees would likely increase
the magnitude of the disturbance expected at Mars.
We note that while this particular ICME propa-
gated into a relatively undisturbed preceding so-
lar wind, the potentially complex evolution of the
magnetic ﬁelds during its early expansion has been
studied in detail [Cohen et al., 2010], which may
be relevant to its parameters once it emerges into
the heliosphere which are not captured by the sim-
ple ‘cone’ approximation depicted in Figure 5. The
bulk parameters of the ICME may also vary signif-
icantly along its azimuthal extent. In conclusion,
while this further tentative association of a Mars
atmospheric plume with a preceding ICME impact
proves nothing outright, it does lend further weight
to a possible direct connection between these two
phenomena.

4.3 Comparison with other observ-

ing intervals

The obvious question remains - if these plumes are
in some way the result of the impact of large ICMEs
upon the Martian system, why have they not been
observed more frequently? In Figure 6 we compare
a catalogue of ICMEs observed at Earth, the view-
ing geometry of Mars, and the progression of the
solar cycle throughout this century. The grey trace
in panel a of Figure 6 shows the angle  between
Mars and Earth in the heliosphere, with  = 0◦
when the planets are radially aligned. The black

Figure 5: Position of Mars (red) and Earth (Green)
between 12 and 17 May 1997, in ecliptic J2000 coor-
dinates. Thin colored lines depict the orbit of each
planet, while the thicker portions indicate their mo-
tion during this interval, from their starting posi-
tions indicated by the colored circles. The solid
black line marks the propagation direction of the
ICME launched on 12 May, and the dashed lines
its expected azimuthal boundaries.

Sun-Earth line [Odstrcil et al., 2004]. At this time,
the azimuthal separation between Earth and Mars
was ∼30◦, as depicted in Figure 5 where the or-
bits of Earth and Mars are shown by the green and
red lines, respectively, in the ecliptic J2000 coordi-
nate system. Colored circles indicate the position
of each planet at the time the ICME was launched
on 12 May 1997, while the thicker lines indicate
their respective orbital motion to 17 May 1997. The
propagation direction of the ICME is shown by the
black solid line, only slightly displaced from the
Sun-Earth line, and the expected azimuthal extent
of the ICME is indicated by the gray shaded region.
The progression of the ICME front is approximately
indicated by the dotted arcs and the adjacent day
numbers, based on the results of [Odstrcil et al.,
2005].

On the basis of these studies we conclude that
it is likely that Mars would have also experienced
a signiﬁcant solar wind disturbance due to the im-
pact of the ﬂank of this ICME, which we antici-
pate to have occurred within a few hours of mid-
night (00 UTC) on 17 May 1997, based on the
∼500 km s−1 velocity of the ICME front measured
as it reached Earth. This would place the impact a

13

lines highlight those periods for which  < 30◦, i.e.
a condition similar to or better than the conﬁgua-
tion during the HST observations discussed above.
Panel b then show the angular diameter θ of Mars
as viewed from Earth and the phase angle α (the
Sun–Mars–Earth angle, shown grey and referenced
to the right axis). Blue shaded regions throughout
the ﬁgure then indicate periods with quantitively
similar viewing conditions to those aﬀorded during
the plume observations reported by SL15. Specif-
ically, these are periods with both θ > 0.003◦ and
α < 30◦ and increasing with time, corresponding
to visibility of the dawn terminator from Earth.

In panel c of Figure 6 we plot the average veloc-
ity of ICMEs in the list published by [Cane and
Richardson, 2003; Richardson and Cane, 2010]1,
detected at Earth by various spacecraft. Each
recorded CME is shown by a vertical line, colored
black for those intervals when Mars and Earth are
closely aligned with  < 30◦. Finally, panel d of
Figure 6 shows the monthly averaged sun spot num-
ber. For reference, the colored and labelled lines in
this panel show the intervals spanned by the MEX,
MGS and MAVEN missions. In each panel, the red
dashed lines indicates the ﬁrst and last detections
of the plume reported by SL15, while the red dotted
line indicates the timing of the plume observation
made using HST.

The rate of occurrence of fast ICMEs varies with
the solar cycle. While that which arrived at Mars in
March 2012 was one of the most signiﬁcant events
to occur during the MEX mission, is was also far
from unique in its intensity. For example, events
with similar speeds occurred frequently during the
ﬁrst years of the MEX mission, 2004-2005, along
with a single similar event during 2006. The vast
majority of these recorded events at Earth are not
expected to impact Mars, as tentatively indicated
by their grey colors in panel c of Figure 6. However,
those observed at Earth around apparent opposi-
tion are signiﬁcantly more likely to impact Mars,
i.e. periods for which  is small and Mars appears
larger in the sky as shown in panels a and b of
Figure 6. Outside of these intervals, even very az-
imuthally extended ICMEs seen at Earth will likely
not impact Mars. We show this particular cata-
logue of Earth-impacting ICMEs here because it
is derived from continuous, dedicated solar wind

1Obtained via the ACE Science Center.

measurements with a consistent data set over more
than a decade, something unfortunately not pos-
sible with current solar wind measurements made
intermittently at Mars.

The ICME that struck Mars immediately before
the plume observations in 2012 was the strongest to
have impacted Mars under similar viewing condi-
tions from Earth, apart from the extreme ICME
associated with the 2003 “Halloween storm” at
Earth. The eﬀects of the Halloween storm event
upon the Martian plasma environment were studied
by Crider et al. [2005], with the extreme compres-
sion of the induced magnetosphere clearly visible
in measurements made by MGS. However, MGS
lacked much of the plasma instrumentation avail-
able on MEX, and in particular had no ability to
determine ion plasma density and composition, nor
the state of the sub-spacecraft ionosphere. While
Mars was somewhat larger in the sky at this stage
in 2003, the phase angle was signiﬁcantly larger
than for the event in 2012 (∼35◦ versus ∼5◦ at
onset), which may signiﬁcantly alter the visibility
from Earth of any features at high altitudes beyond
the terminator. No plume was observed associated
with this extreme event, either by orbiting space-
craft or in the set of ∼3500 amateur optical images
surveyed by SL15 obtained during the observing
seasons of 2001 - 2014. It must be noted, however,
that both the quality and quantity of such amateur
observations are much improved in more recent ob-
servations. The lack of an observed plume for this
event may simply reﬂect this fact. We also note
that the Earth-impacting Halo ICME we suggest
may be related to the HST observed plume event in
1997 is, at least in terms of its average velocity, not
an extreme event in comparison to other ICMEs
present in this catalogue. This may also suggest
that the average velocity may not be a controlling
factor in the formation of a plume. Additionally,
both this and the plume of 2012 were detected dur-
ing northern summer conditions on Mars, while the
more extreme ICME of 2003 impacted Mars during
northern winter, and thus the typical plasma condi-
tions over the intense southern hemisphere crustal
ﬁelds may well be signiﬁcantly diﬀerent, leading to
a potentially diﬀerent response.
Similarly, an ICME of moderate intensity may
have been expected at Mars on ∼21-22 April 2014,
with average velocity of ∼500 km s−1, yet no plume
was reported. For the majority of the MEX mis-

14

Figure 6: Comparison of timings and rates of Earth-impacting ICMEs and Mars viewing geometry. a)
Angular separation  between Mars and Earth (grey line). Black segments indicate those intervals with
 < 30◦. b) Angular diameter θ of Mars as seen from Earth (black line, left axis), and Sun - Mars - Earth
phase angle α (grey line, right axis). c) Average velocity measured in ICMEs observed at Earth, as given
by Cane and Richardson [2003] and [Richardson and Cane, 2010] (grey lines). Individual ICMEs are
highlighted black for those events occurring during periods with  < 30◦. d) Monthly-averaged sun spot
number SN, recorded by the Royal Observatory of Belgium. Overplotted horizontal colored bars indicate
the durations of scientiﬁc measurements made by the labelled missions at Mars. Vertical red dashed
lines bound the period for which the plume was observed by SL15. Vertical shaded blue regions indicate
all periods for which the viewing conditions of Mars were identical, or better, than in this interval. The
vertical red dotted line marks the timing of the 1997 plume observation made by Hubble, as discussed
by SL15.

15

sion at Mars, the intervals with similar viewing con-
ditions to those of March - April 2012 have been
marked by the absence of ICMEs entirely (e.g.,
2008), or by only relative weak events (2005/6,
2010, 2014). SL15 do report “occasional” observa-
tions of near-terminator clouds seen at the limb, at
altitudes that are more comparable to those seen
by dedicated in-orbit observations by spacecraft.
However, speciﬁc times of such observations are
not given, and there may be no relationship be-
tween these lower-altitude clouds and the extreme
altitude occurrences studied here.

The potential signiﬁcance of these atmospheric
plumes remains to be quantiﬁed. Any process act-
ing to loft large amounts of material to altitudes
where it is more able to escape the atmosphere, in
response to extreme solar wind driving could poten-
tially be a major contributor to the evolution of the
planet’s atmosphere. The typically elevated plasma
densities seen in these regions of crustal ﬁelds, at
all altitudes studied may be further inﬂuenced by
the passage of a ICME. For example, the iono-
spheric upwellings studied by Gurnett et al. [2005]
and Duru et al. [2006], while having been shown to
be stable features of the ionosphere [Andrews et al.,
2014], may be enhanced during extreme events due
to increased ionospheric Joule heating. However,
quite how such heating and elevation of the iono-
sphere may lead to such a signiﬁcant vertical trans-
port of relatively massive dust or ice particles from
much lower altitudes remains to be investigated.
Similarly, electrostatic forces may become signiﬁ-
cant in this region, but whether they can ever reach
suﬃcient strength to strongly inﬂuence the dynam-
ics of water ice grains remains to be studied. While
micro-meter sized grains posited by SL15 as one
possible explanation for the optical observations
will become negatively charged in the ionosphere
at these altitudes, electrostatic ﬁelds many orders
of magnitude larger than those typically expected
in the Martian ionosphere would still be required to
balance these grains against gravity. Strong elec-
tric ﬁelds may be present in localised regions of the
Martian ionosphere, as a result of steep gradients
in the ionospheric conductivity around regions of
intense crustal ﬁelds. These ﬁelds may be partic-
ularly strong during and following the impact of a
fast ICME, as ionospheric plasma ﬂows may be sig-
niﬁcantly enhanced in response to the disturbance,
and consequently act to loft a localized dust-loaded

16

region of the atmosphere to the observed high alti-
tudes.

Finally, we note that NASA’s MAVEN mission is
now sampling this range of altitudes in-situ, with
a comprehensive suite of science instruments, and
should hopefully be able to make more conclusive
statements about this phenomenon should it occur
again. In particular, valuable information can be
gained from in-situ measurements of magnetic ﬁeld
gradients, bulk parameters of the thermal plasma,
and even potentially dust particle impacts recorded
by the Langmuir probe antennas [Andersson et al.,
2015]. MEX remains in excellent health, and data
from the instruments studied here continues to be
taken. Recently, the catalogue of apoapsis images
obtained with the Visual Monitoring Camera on-
board MEX was publicly released, and eﬀorts are
on-going to search this new data set for similar
plume observations.

5 Conclusions

We now brieﬂy recap only those relatively ﬁrm con-
clusions drawn from our analyses of this interesting
event.

1. Multiple,

independent observations of

the
Mars atmospheric plume were made by SL15
at the dawn terminator, along with several
nondetections. However, the lack of contin-
uous observations of Mars prevents conclusive
statements of the timing of the start, end and
duration of this plume.

2. The ground-based observations are consistent
with a) the continuous presence of a plume
with its visibility controlled purely by geomet-
ric factors (only a single observation made in
the second series in April is inconsistent with
this conclusion), and b) a time-variable plume
intermittently appearing and disappearing.

3. No signatures are seen in the MARSIS iono-
spheric sounding observations over the plume
location as it traverses the dusk terminator
which can be ﬁrmly associated with the pres-
ence of a plume (anomalous, or unusual fea-
tures in these ionograms can be understood
as being purely due to the presence of strong
crustal ﬁelds at this location, as extensively
studied previously).

4. Observations of highly accelerated planetary
ions in ASPERA-3 data at the same location
on several orbits are themselves unusual, and
require further investigation and explanation.

5. For all the observations (except one) reported
by SL15, including the plume observed by HST
in May 1997, a signiﬁcant ICME can be shown
to have impacted Mars in the preceding days.

participation in NASA’s Nexus for Exoplanet Sys-
tem Science (NExSS) research coordination net-
work sponsored by NASA’s Science Mission Direc-
torate. We thank A. Sanchez-Lavega for the pro-
vision of summaries of raw data. We thank K.C.
Hansen and B. Zieger for providing solar wind prop-
agations from their Michigan Solar Wind Model.
Finally, we thank both referees for their helpful
comments.

6. All observations reported by SL15, with the
exception of the 1997 event, were shown to
have occurred over a region of intense crustal
magnetic ﬁelds, although the nature of the ob-
servations does not allow us to be more precise
about the exact magnetic topology (closed ar-
cades or open cusps).

7. With the notable exception of the large ICME
that was shown to impact Mars during the
2003 observation season, the lack of other
plume detections since 2000 could be the re-
sult of the general absence of other ICME im-
pacts during these periods of favorable viewing
geometry.

8. If, with the caveats above, these plumes were
in fact driven by space-weather disturbances at
Mars, this would be a truly unique discovery,
without physical explanation, and potentially
of great signiﬁcance in the debate regarding
the loss to space of the Martian atmosphere.

9. A signiﬁcant argument now exists for future
monitoring of the Martian atmosphere during
extreme space weather events, using available
remote Earth-based observations along side in-
situ optical and plasma measurements.

Acknowledgments

Work at IRF was supported by grants from the
Swedish National Space Board (DNR 162/14) and
the Swedish Research Council (DNR 621-2014-
5526) Work at Iowa was supported by NASA
through contract 1224107 from the Jet Propulsion
Laboratory. Work at Leicester was supported by
STFC grants ST/K001000/1 and ST/K502121/1.
MJW: the results reported herein beneﬁtted from

References

Acu˜na, M., J. Connerney, R. Lin, D. Mitchell,
C. Carlson, J. McFadden, K. Anderson, H. R`eme,
C. Mazelle, D. Vignes, et al. (1999), Global dis-
tribution of crustal magnetization discovered by
the Mars Global Surveyor MAG/ER experiment,
Science, 284 (5415), 790–793.

Andersson, L., T. D. Weber, D. Malaspina,
F. Crary, R. E. Ergun, G. T. Delory, C. M.
Fowler, M. W. Morooka, T. McEnulty, A. I.
Eriksson, D. J. Andrews, M. Horanyi, A. Col-
lette, R. Yelle, and B. M. Jakosky (2015), Dust
observations at orbital altitudes surrounding
mars, Science, 350 (6261), doi:10.1126/science.
aad0398.

Andrews, D. J., M. Andr´e, H. J. Opgenoorth,
N. J. T. Edberg, C. Di´eval, F. Duru, D. A.
Gurnett, D. Morgan, and O. Witasse (2014),
Oblique reﬂections in the Mars Express MAR-
SIS data set: Stable density structures in the
Martian ionosphere, J. Geophys. Res., 119, doi:
10.1002/2013JA019697.

Arge, C. N., J. G. Luhmann, D. Odstrcil, C. J.
Schrijver, and Y. Li (2004), Stream structure
and coronal sources of the solar wind during
the May 12th, 1997 CME, Journal of Atmo-
spheric and Solar-Terrestrial Physics, 66, 1295–
1309, doi:10.1016/j.jastp.2004.03.018.

Barabash, S., R. Lundin, H. Andersson, K. Brink-
feldt, A. Grigoriev, H. Gunell, M. Holmstr¨om,
M. Yamauchi, K. Asamura, P. Bochsler, P. Wurz,
R. Cerulli-Irelli, A. Mura, A. Milillo, M. Maggi,
S. Orsini, A. J. Coates, D. R. Linder, D. O.
Kataria, C. C. Curtis, K. C. Hsieh, B. R. Sandel,
R. A. Frahm, J. R. Sharber, J. D. Winningham,
M. Grande, E. Kallio, H. Koskinen, P. Riihel¨a,

17

W. Schmidt, T. S¨ales, J. U. Kozyra, N. Krupp,
J. Woch, S. Livi, J. G. Luhmann, S. McKenna-
Lawlor, E. C. Roelof, D. J. Williams, J.-A.
Sauvaud, A. Fedorov, and J.-J. Thocaven (2006),
The Analyzer of Space Plasmas and Energetic
Atoms (ASPERA-3) for the Mars Express Mis-
sion, Space Sci. Rev., 126, 113–164, doi:10.1007/
s11214-006-9124-8.

Bertaux, J.-L., F. Leblanc, O. Witasse, E. Que-
merais, J. Lilensten, S. A. Stern, B. Sandel, and
O. Korablev (2005), Discovery of an aurora on
mars, Nature, 435 (7043), 790–794.

Brain, D. A. (2006), Mars Global Surveyor Mea-
surements of the Martian Solar Wind Interac-
tion, Space Sci. Rev., 126, 77–112, doi:10.1007/
s11214-006-9122-x.

Cane, H. V., and I. G. Richardson (2003), In-
terplanetary coronal mass ejections in the near-
Earth solar wind during 1996-2002, J. Geophys.
Res., 108, 1156, doi:10.1029/2002JA009817.

Cohen, O., G. D. R. Attrill, N. A. Schwadron,
N. U. Crooker, M. J. Owens, C. Downs, and T. I.
Gombosi (2010), Numerical simulation of the 12
May 1997 CME Event: The role of magnetic re-
connection, J. Geophys. Res., 115, A10104, doi:
10.1029/2010JA015464.

Crider, D. H., J. Espley, D. A. Brain, D. L.
Mitchell, J. E. P. Connerney, and M. H. Acu˜na
(2005), Mars Global Surveyor observations of
the Halloween 2003 solar superstorm’s encounter
with Mars, J. Geophys. Res., 110, A09S21, doi:
10.1029/2004JA010881.

Di´eval, C., D. J. Andrews, D. D. Morgan, D. A.
Brain, and D. A. Gurnett (2015), Marsis remote
sounding of localized density structures in the
dayside martian ionosphere: A study of con-
trolling parameters, J. Geophys. Res., 120, doi:
10.1002/2015JA021486.

Dubinin, E., M. Fr¨anz, J. Woch, E. Roussos,
S. Barabash, R. Lundin, J. D. Winningham,
R. A. Frahm, and M. Acu˜na (2006), Plasma
Morphology at Mars. Aspera-3 Observations,
Space Sci. Rev., 126, 209–238, doi:10.1007/
s11214-006-9039-4.

Duru, F., D. A. Gurnett, T. F. Averkamp, D. L.
Kirchner, R. L. Huﬀ, A. M. Persoon, J. J. Plaut,
and G. Picardi (2006), Magnetically controlled
structures in the ionosphere of Mars, J. Geophys.
Res., 111, A12204, doi:10.1029/2006JA011975.

Duru, F., D. D. Morgan, and D. A. Gurnett (2010),
Overlapping ionospheric and surface echoes ob-
served by the Mars Express radar sounder near
the Martian terminator, Geophys. Res. Lett., 37,
L23102, doi:10.1029/2010GL045859.

Edberg, N. J. T., H. Nilsson, A. O. Williams,
M. Lester, S. E. Milan, S. W. H. Cowley,
M. Fr¨anz, S. Barabash, and Y. Futaana (2010),
Pumping out the atmosphere of Mars through
solar wind pressure pulses, Geophys. Res. Lett.,
370, L03,107, doi:10.1029/2009GL041814.

England, S. L., and R. J. Lillis (2012), On the
nature of the variability of the Martian ther-
mospheric mass density: Results from elec-
tron reﬂectometry with Mars Global Surveyor,
J. Geophys. Res., 117, E02008, doi:10.1029/
2011JE003998.

Falkenberg, T. V., S. Vennerstrom, D. A. Brain,
G. Delory, and A. Taktakishvili (2011), Multi-
point observations of coronal mass ejection and
solar energetic particle events on Mars and Earth
during November 2001, J. Geophys. Res., 116,
A06,104, doi:10.1029/2010JA016279.

G´erard, J.-C., L. Soret, L. Libert, R. Lundin,
A. Stiepen, A. Radioti, and J.-L. Bertaux (2015),
Concurrent observations of ultraviolet aurora
and energetic electron precipitation with Mars
Express, J. Geophys. Res., 120, 6749–6765, doi:
10.1002/2015JA021150.

Gonz´alez-Galindo, F., A. M¨a¨att¨anen, F. Forget,
and A. Spiga (2011), The martian mesosphere as
revealed by CO 2 cloud observations and Gen-
eral Circulation Modeling, Icarus, 216, 10–22,
doi:10.1016/j.icarus.2011.08.006.

Gurnett, D. A., D. L. Kirchner, R. L. Huﬀ,
D. D. Morgan, A. M. Persoon, T. F. Averkamp,
F. Duru, E. Nielsen, A. Safaeinili, J. J. Plaut, and
G. Picardi (2005), Radar Soundings of the Iono-
sphere of Mars, Science, 310, 1929–1933, doi:
10.1126/science.1121868.

18

Guzewich, S. D., E. R. Talaat, A. D. Toigo, D. W.
Waugh, and T. H. McConnochie (2013), High-
altitude dust layers on Mars: Observations with
the Thermal Emission Spectrometer, J. Geophys.
Res., 118, 1177–1194, doi:10.1002/jgre.20076.

Heavens, N. G., J. L. Benson, D. M. Kass,
A. Kleinb¨ohl, W. A. Abdou, D. J. McCleese,
M. I. Richardson, J. T. Schoﬁeld, J. H. Shirley,
and P. M. Wolkenberg (2010), Water ice clouds
over the Martian tropics during northern sum-
mer, Geophys. Res. Lett., 37, L18202, doi:10.
1029/2010GL044610.

Heavens, N. G., B. A. Cantor, P. O. Hayne, D. M.
Kass, A. Kleinb¨ohl, D. J. McCleese, S. Piqueux,
J. T. Schoﬁeld, and J. H. Shirley (2015), Ex-
treme detached dust layers near Martian volca-
noes: Evidence for dust transport by mesoscale
circulations forced by high topography, Geo-
phys. Res. Lett., 42, 3730–3738, doi:10.1002/
2015GL064004.

Jakosky, B. M., J. M. Grebowsky, J. G. Luhmann,
J. Connerney, F. Eparvier, R. Ergun, J. Halekas,
D. Larson, P. Mahaﬀy, J. McFadden, D. F.
Mitchell, N. Schneider, R. Zurek, S. Bougher,
D. Brain, Y. J. Ma, C. Mazelle, L. Andersson,
D. Andrews, D. Baird, D. Baker, J. M. Bell,
M. Benna, M. Chaﬃn, P. Chamberlin, Y.-Y.
Chaufray, J. Clarke, G. Collinson, M. Combi,
F. Crary, T. Cravens, M. Crismani, S. Curry,
D. Curtis, J. Deighan, G. Delory, R. Dewey,
G. DiBraccio, C. Dong, Y. Dong, P. Dunn, M. El-
rod, S. England, A. Eriksson, J. Espley, S. Evans,
X. Fang, M. Fillingim, K. Fortier, C. M. Fowler,
J. Fox, H. Gr¨oller, S. Guzewich, T. Hara,
Y. Harada, G. Holsclaw, S. K. Jain, R. Jolitz,
F. Leblanc, C. O. Lee, Y. Lee, F. Lefevre, R. Lil-
lis, R. Livi, D. Lo, M. Mayyasi, W. McClin-
tock, T. McEnulty, R. Modolo, F. Montmessin,
M. Morooka, A. Nagy, K. Olsen, W. Peter-
son, A. Rahmati, S. Ruhunusiri, C. T. Rus-
sell, S. Sakai, J.-A. Sauvaud, K. Seki, M. Steck-
iewicz, M. Stevens, A. I. F. Stewart, A. Stiepen,
S. Stone, V. Tenishev, E. Thiemann, R. Tolson,
D. Toublanc, M. Vogt, T. Weber, P. Withers,
T. Woods, and R. Yelle (2015), MAVEN obser-
vations of the response of Mars to an interplan-
etary coronal mass ejection, Science, 350, 0210,
doi:10.1126/science.aad0210.

Kleinb¨ohl, A., J. T. Schoﬁeld, D. M. Kass,
W. A. Abdou, and D. J. McCleese (2015), No
widespread dust in the middle atmosphere of
Mars from Mars Climate Sounder observations,
Icarus, 261, 118–121, doi:10.1016/j.icarus.2015.
08.010.

Liemohn, M. W., A. Dupre, S. W. Bougher,
M. Trantham, D. L. Mitchell, and M. D.
Smith (2012), Time-history inﬂuence of global
dust storms on the upper atmosphere at Mars,
Geophys. Res. Lett., 39, L11201, doi:10.1029/
2012GL051994.

Lillis, R. J., S. W. Bougher, D. L. Mitchell, D. A.
Brain, R. P. Lin, and M. H. Acu˜na (2008),
Continuous monitoring of nightside upper ther-
mospheric mass densities in the martian south-
ern hemisphere over 4 martian years using elec-
tron reﬂectometry, Icarus, 194, 562–574, doi:
10.1016/j.icarus.2007.09.031.

Lillis, R. J., M. E. Purucker, J. S. Halekas,
K. L. Louzada, S. T. Stewart-Mukhopadhyay,
M. Manga, and H. V. Frey (2010), Study of im-
pact demagnetization at Mars using Monte Carlo
modeling and multiple altitude data, J. Geophys.
Res., 115, E07007, doi:10.1029/2009JE003556.

Lillis, R. J., D. A. Brain, G. T. Delory, D. L.
Mitchell, J. G. Luhmann, and R. P. Lin (2012),
Evidence for superthermal secondary electrons
produced by SEP ionization in the Martian at-
mosphere, J. Geophys. Res., 117, E03004, doi:
10.1029/2011JE003932.

M¨a¨att¨anen, A., F. Montmessin, B. Gondet,
F. Scholten, H. Hoﬀmann, F. Gonz´alez-Galindo,
A. Spiga, F. Forget, E. Hauber, G. Neukum,
J.-P. Bibring, and J.-L. Bertaux (2010), Map-
ping the mesospheric CO 2 clouds on Mars:
MEx/OMEGA and MEx/HRSC observations
and challenges for atmospheric models, Icarus,
209, 452–469, doi:10.1016/j.icarus.2010.05.017.

M¨a¨att¨anen, A., C. Listowski, F. Montmessin,
L. Maltagliati, A. Reberac, L. Joly, and J.-
L. Bertaux (2013), A complete climatology of
the aerosol vertical distribution on Mars from
MEx/SPICAM UV solar occultations, Icarus,
223, 892–941, doi:10.1016/j.icarus.2012.12.001.

19

Mahajan, K. K., and H. G. Mayr (1990), Mars
ionopause during solar minimum - A lesson from
Venus, J. Geophys. Res., 95, 8265–8269, doi:
10.1029/JA095iA06p08265.

McCleese, D. J., N. G. Heavens, J. T. Schoﬁeld,
W. A. Abdou, J. L. Bandﬁeld, S. B. Calcutt,
P. G. J. Irwin, D. M. Kass, A. Kleinb¨ohl, S. R.
Lewis, D. A. Paige, P. L. Read, M. I. Richard-
son, J. H. Shirley, F. W. Taylor, N. Teanby,
and R. W. Zurek (2010), Structure and dy-
namics of the Martian lower and middle atmo-
sphere as observed by the Mars Climate Sounder:
Seasonal variations in zonal mean temperature,
dust, and water ice aerosols, J. Geophys. Res.,
115, E12016, doi:10.1029/2010JE003677.

Mendillo, M., P. Withers, D. Hinson, H. Rishbeth,
and B. Reinisch (2006), Eﬀects of Solar Flares on
the Ionosphere of Mars, Science, 311, 1135–1138,
doi:10.1126/science.1122099.

Molina-Cuberos, G. J., O. Witasse, J.-P. Le-
breton, R. Rodrigo, and J. J. L´opez-Moreno
(2003), Meteoric ions in the atmosphere of Mars,
Planet. Space. Sci., 51, 239–249, doi:10.1016/
S0032-0633(02)00197-6.

Montmessin, F., B. Gondet,

J.-P. Bibring,
Y. Langevin, P. Drossart, F. Forget, and
T. Fouchet (2007), Hyperspectral imaging of con-
vective CO2 ice clouds in the equatorial meso-
sphere of Mars, J. Geophys. Res., 112, E11S90,
doi:10.1029/2007JE002944.

Morgan, D., O. Witasse, E. Nielsen, D. Gurnett,
F. Duru, and D. Kirchner (2013), The processing
of electron density proﬁles from the Mars Express
MARSIS topside sounder, Radio Science, 48 (3),
197–207, doi:10.1002/rds.20023.

Morgan, D. D., D. A. Gurnett, D. L. Kirchner, J. L.
Fox, E. Nielsen, and J. J. Plaut (2008), Variation
of the Martian ionospheric electron density from
Mars Express radar soundings, J. Geophys. Res.,
113, A09303, doi:10.1029/2008JA013313.

Morgan, D. D., D. A. Gurnett, D. L. Kirchner,
J. David Winningham, R. A. Frahm, D. A. Brain,
D. L. Mitchell, J. G. Luhmann, E. Nielsen, J. R.
Espley, M. H. Acu˜na, and J. J. Plaut (2010),
Radar absorption due to a corotating interaction

region encounter with Mars detected by MAR-
SIS, Icarus, 206, 95–103, doi:10.1016/j.icarus.
2009.03.008.

Morgan, D. D., C. Di´eval, , D. A. Gurnett, F. Duru,
E. M. Dubinin, M. Fr¨anz, D. J. Andrews, H. J.
Opgenoorth, D. Ulu¸sen, I. Mitrofanov, and J. J.
Plaut (2014), Eﬀects of a strong ICME on the
Martian ionosphere as detected by Mars Express
and Mars Odyssey, J. Geophys. Res., (119), doi:
10.1002/2013JA019522.

Nˇemec, F., D. D. Morgan, C. Di´eval, D. A. Gurnett,
and Y. Futaana (2014), Enhanced ionization of
the martian nightside ionosphere during solar en-
ergetic particle events, Geophys. Res. Lett., pp.
n/a–n/a, doi:10.1002/2013GL058895.

Odstrcil, D., P. Riley, and X. P. Zhao (2004), Nu-
merical simulation of the 12 May 1997 interplan-
etary CME event, J. Geophys. Res., 109, A02116,
doi:10.1029/2003JA010135.

Odstrcil, D., V. J. Pizzo, and C. N. Arge (2005),
Propagation of the 12 May 1997 interplanetary
coronal mass ejection in evolving solar wind
structures, J. Geophys. Res., 110, A02106, doi:
10.1029/2004JA010745.

Opgenoorth, H. J., D. J. Andrews, M. Fr¨anz,
M. Lester, N. J. T. Edberg, D. D. Morgan,
F. Duru, O. Witasse, and A. O. Williams (2013),
Mars ionospheric response to solar wind vari-
ability, J. Geophys. Res., 118, doi:10.1002/jgra.
50537.

Picardi, G., D. Biccari, R. Seu, J. Plaut, W. T. K.
Johnson, R. L. Jordan, A. Safaeinili, D. A. Gur-
nett, R. Huﬀ, R. Orosei, O. Bombaci, D. Cal-
abrese, and E. Zampolini (2004), MARSIS: Mars
Advanced Radar for Subsurface and Ionosphere
Sounding, in Mars Express: the Scientiﬁc Pay-
load, ESA Special Publication, vol. 1240, edited
by A. Wilson & A. Chicarro, pp. 51–69.

Richardson, I. G., and H. V. Cane (2010), Near-
Earth Interplanetary Coronal Mass Ejections
During Solar Cycle 23 (1996 - 2009): Catalog and
Summary of Properties, Sol. Phys., 264, 189–
237, doi:10.1007/s11207-010-9568-6.

20

1 to 10 AU, J. Geophys. Res., 113, A08107, doi:
10.1029/2008JA013046.

S. P´erez-Hoyos,

S´anchez-Lavega, A., A. Garc´ıa Mu˜noz, E. Garc´ıa-
Melendo,
J. M. G´omez-
Forrellad, C. Pellier, M. Delcroix, M. A. L´opez-
Valverde, F. Gonz´alez-Galindo, W. Jaeschke,
D. Parker, J. Phillips, and D. Peach (2015),
An extremely high-altitude plume seen at Mars’
morning terminator, Nature, 518, 525–528, doi:
10.1038/nature14162.

Schneider, N. M., J. I. Deighan, A. I. F. Stewart,
W. E. McClintock, S. K. Jain, M. S. Chaﬃn,
A. Stiepen, M. Crismani, J. M. C. Plane, J. D.
Carrillo-S´anchez, J. S. Evans, M. H. Stevens,
R. V. Yelle, J. T. Clarke, G. M. Holsclaw,
F. Montmessin, and B. M. Jakosky (2015),
MAVEN IUVS observations of the aftermath
of the Comet Siding Spring meteor shower on
Mars, Geophys. Res. Lett., 42, 4755–4761, doi:
10.1002/2015GL063863.

Ulu¸sen, D., D. A. Brain, J. G. Luhmann, and
D. L. Mitchell (2012), Investigation of Mars’
ionospheric response to solar energetic parti-
cle events, J. Geophys. Res., 117, A12306, doi:
10.1029/2012JA017671.

Witasse, O., J.-F. Nouvel, J.-P. Lebreton, and
W. Kofman (2001), HF radio wave attenuation
due to a meteoric layer in the atmosphere of
Mars, Geophys. Res. Lett., 28, 3039–3042, doi:
10.1029/2001GL013164.

Wu, C.-C., C. D. Fry, S. T. Wu, M. Dryer, and
K. Liou (2007), Three-dimensional global sim-
ulation of interplanetary coronal mass ejection
propagation from the Sun to the heliosphere: So-
lar event of 12 May 1997, J. Geophys. Res., 112,
A09104, doi:10.1029/2006JA012211.

Xu, S., M. W. Liemohn, D. L. Mitchell, and M. D.
Smith (2014), Mars photoelectron energy and
pitch angle dependence on intense lower atmo-
spheric dust storms, J. Geophys. Res., 119, 1689–
1706, doi:10.1002/2013JE004594.

Zhou, Y.-F., X.-S. Feng, and S. Wu T. (2008),
Numerical Simulation of the 12 May 1997 CME
Event, Chinese Physics Letters, 25, 790–793, doi:
10.1088/0256-307X/25/2/119.

Zieger, B., and K. C. Hansen (2008), Statistical val-
idation of a solar wind propagation model from

21

