ON THE SET OF WILD POINTS OF ATTRACTING SURFACES IN R3

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
8
1

J. J. S ´ANCHEZ-GABITES

Abstract. Suppose that a closed surface S ⊆ R3 is an attractor, not necessarily global, for
a discrete dynamical system. Assuming that its set of wild points W is totally disconnected,
we prove that (up to an ambient homeomorphism) it has to be contained in a straight line.
Using this result and a modiﬁcation of the classical construction of a wild sphere due to
Antoine we show that there exist uncountably many diﬀerent 2–spheres in R3 none of which
can be realized as an attractor for a homeomorphism.

 
 
]
S
D
h
t
a
m

.

[
 
 

1
v
7
1
9
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Introduction

It is well known that attractors of dynamical systems usually have a very intricate structure
as subsets of the phase space, and this prompts naturally the somewhat vague problem of
trying to understand how complicated they can be. More speciﬁcally, one can consider the
following realizability problem: given a compact set K, can it be realized as an attractor for
a dynamical system on some Rn? The answer depends on the dimension n of the ambient
space, on whether K is given in the abstract or already as a subset of Rn, on whether one
considers global or local attractors, continuous or discrete dynamics, etc. There are numerous
papers in the literature that deal with this question in some variant or another, among which
we may cite [5], [7], [9], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [22] or [23]. Here we shall concentrate on
the realizability problem for closed surfaces S ⊆ R3 as attractors for homeomorphisms. This
case appears naturally in dynamics; for instance, one may think of the invariant tori that
may arise in an action-angle description of a Hamiltonian system.

In previous papers we were able to prove that the horned sphere of Alexander cannot be
realized as an attractor [20] and, jointly with R. Ortega [18], that the same holds true for the
sphere of Antoine. Building on this it was possible to construct surfaces of any genus that
cannot be attractors either. All these examples are wild surfaces in the sense of geometric
topology; roughly speaking, this means that they cannot be smoothed out within R3 (the
formal deﬁnition will be given in the next section). This is no accident, since a surface that
is not wild can always be realized as an attractor (Proposition 1), and it leads one to wonder
what the precise relation between the wildness of a surface and the possibility of realizing
it as an attractor could be. In this paper we obtain a result in this direction showing that,
if the set W of wild points of an attracting surface S is totally disconnected, then it must
be rectiﬁable; that is, it must be possible to perform an ambient homeomorphism of R3 that
sends W into a straight line (Theorem 2).

2010 Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation. 54H20, 37B25, 37E99.
Key words and phrases. Attractor, wild surface, discrete dynamical system.
The author is partially supported by the Spanish Ministerio de Econom´ıa y Competitividad (grant MTM

2012-30719).

1

2

J. J. S ´ANCHEZ-GABITES

In the particular case of the sphere of Antoine mentioned earlier, the set of wild points
is a rather peculiar Cantor set called “Antoine’s necklace” which is not rectiﬁable, so this
sphere cannot be an attractor. This result was originally proved in [18] by a careful analysis
of the fundamental group of the complement of Antoine’s necklace which depended crucially
on the hierarchical nature of the construction of the necklace and therefore was very speciﬁc
to that particular example. The approach of the present paper is more general, in that it only
involves the rectiﬁability of the set of wild points rather than any of its ﬁner details. This
generality will allow us to prove, in particular, that there are uncountably many diﬀerent ways
to embed any given surface in R3 in such a way that it cannot be realized as an attractor.

1. Statement of results

Let f be a homeomorphism of R3. By an attractor K for f we mean a compact invariant
set (that is, f (K) = K) which attracts all compact subsets of some neighbourhood U of K.
This means that for every compact set P ⊆ U and every neighbourhood V of K in R3 there
exists n0 ∈ N such that f n(P ) ⊆ V for every n ≥ n0. In the language of dynamics, K is stable
in the sense of Lyapunov and attracts all points in U. Notice that no particular assumption
is made about the size of U, so K is a local but not necessarily global attractor.

By a closed surface we mean a compact, boundariless 2–manifold. A closed surface S ⊆ R3
is locally ﬂat at a point p if p has a neighbourhood U in R3 such that the pair (U, U ∩ S) is
homeomorphic to (R3, R2 × {0}). This deﬁnition is standard; see for instance the book by
Daverman and Venema [6, p. xvi]. Intuitively it means that, near p, the surface lies in R3
like a plane. For instance, every piecewise linear surface S ⊆ R3 is locally ﬂat at every point,
and the same holds true when S is a diﬀerentiable submanifold of R3 because of the existence
of adapted charts.

Our ﬁrst result is very simple:

Proposition 1. Let S ⊆ R3 be a closed surface that is locally ﬂat at every point. Then S is
an attractor for a homeomorphism (and actually, also for a ﬂow) of R3.

The only purpose of the above proposition is to show that, since we are interested in ﬁnding
surfaces that cannot be attractors, we need to turn our attention to surfaces that contain
points at which the surface is not locally ﬂat. These points, and the surface itself, we call
wild, although this is a slight abuse of terminology1. The set of wild points is clearly closed
so, when nonempty, it is compact. It might be diﬃcult at ﬁrst to imagine how a surface could
fail to be locally ﬂat, but we shall see an example after stating our main theorem below.

We need a ﬁnal deﬁnition:

let us say that a totally disconnected compact set T ⊆ R3 is
rectiﬁable if there exists a homeomorphism of R3 that sends T into a straight line. Again,
it might be diﬃcult to imagine how a totally disconnected compact set T ⊆ R3 may not be
rectiﬁable. Rather than presenting an example now, we postpone this to Section 4 where we
recall the deﬁnition of “Antoine’s necklace”, which is a Cantor set that is not rectiﬁable. As
the reader will see, the construction is very ﬂexible and can be modiﬁed to produce a great
variety of Cantor sets that are not rectiﬁable.

The main result of the paper is the following:

1Formally, a wild point is one where the surface is not locally tame rather than not locally ﬂat. However,

in the case that concerns us now, both notions are equivalent. More on this in Section 2.

ON THE SET OF WILD POINTS OF ATTRACTING SURFACES IN R3

3

Theorem 2. Let S ⊆ R3 be a closed, connected surface that bounds a 3–manifold. Suppose
that S contains a compact, totally disconnected set T such that:

(i) S is locally ﬂat at each p 6∈ T .
(ii) T is not rectiﬁable.

Then S cannot be realized as an attractor for a homeomorphism of R3.

Theorem 2 is stated in the form most convenient for the construction of nonattracting
surfaces that follows below. However, it can also be presented (as we did in the abstract and
the Introduction) as an assertion about the set of wild points of an attracting surface, as
follows:

Theorem 2′. Let S ⊆ R3 be a closed surface that bounds a 3–manifold and is an attractor
for a homeomorphism. Suppose that its set of wild points W is totally disconnected. Then W
must be rectiﬁable.

The condition that S bounds a 3–manifold means the following. Recall that any closed,
connected surface S separates R3 into two connected components Ui whose closures are ¯Ui =
Ui ∪ S. This follows from Alexander duality and the fact that S is a surface (see for instance
the argument in [17, Theorem 36.3, p. 205]). We say that S bounds a 3–manifold if at least
one of the ¯Ui is a 3–manifold (possibly noncompact) with boundary. The deﬁnition for a non
connected S is similar. Although this condition is fulﬁlled in many of the classical examples
of wild surfaces, it is added for technical reasons and it would be nice if it could be removed
from the theorem.

Constructing nonattracting surfaces. We now explain how to construct examples of surfaces
that cannot be attractors. The procedure we describe is essentially the same as the one used
by Antoine to construct a wild sphere. Let T ⊆ R3 be a totally disconnected, compact set
of R3. Eventually we shall take T to be non rectiﬁable, but this is not necessary for the
moment. As with any compact subset of R3, we can ﬁnd a sequence of compact 3–manifolds
with boundary (Nk)∞
k=1 such that Nk+1 is contained in the interior of Nk for each k and T is
the intersection of the Nk. Since T is totally disconnected, in addition we may require that
(i) the diameters of the connected components of the Nk converge to zero as k → ∞ and
(ii) every connected component of each Nk meets T , since those that do not can be removed.
Figure 1 shows a totally disconnected set T (suggested by the cloud of dots, presumably
inﬁnite) and the two ﬁrst neighbourhoods of a possible sequence (Nk). The ﬁrst one is a
single cell. The second one N2 already consists of three connected components N2,1, N2,2,
N2,3 (a cell, a solid torus, and a solid double torus).

Let S0 ⊆ R3 be a closed, locally ﬂat surface such that T lies in its exterior. For simplicity
we shall take S0 to be the boundary of a closed, round ball B0 disjoint from T . We are
going to modify B0, without changing its topological type, so that the resulting 3–manifold
B contains T in its boundary.
In order to do this we take the Nk as a guide. First, we
extract a solid “feeler” from B0 that connects it to the boundary of N1, meeting it in a
disk D1. See Figure 2.(a), where B0 and the feeler are shown in a thicker outline and D1 is
shaded gray. Then, within N1, we branch the feeler into “subfeelers”, each one connected to
a diﬀerent component N2,j of N2. Again, these subfeelers should meet the boundary of their

4

J. J. S ´ANCHEZ-GABITES

T

N2

N1

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. A totally disconnected set T and a couple of its neighbourhoods Nk

corresponding N2,j in a disk D2,j. See Figure 2.(b). Although Figure 2 does not show this
for simplicity, the feelers may be knotted or entangled.

B0

D1

B0

N1

D2,j

N2,1

N2,3

(a)

(b)

Figure 2. Modifying B0 so that its boundary contains T

We work in the same fashion within each component N2,j of N2, splitting the subfeelers
into even thinner subfeelers connected to those components of N3 contained in N2,j; then at
an even smaller scale within the components N3,j of N3, and so on. This gives rise to a nested
sequence of compact 3–manifolds, each larger but homeomorphic to the previous one. Let B
be the union of this sequence and the set T , which is the limit set of the feelers. It is not
diﬃcult to check that B is a compact 3–manifold homeomorphic to B0 (see for instance the
arguments in [6, Chapter 2, pp. 46 ﬀ.]). It may be convenient to mention that B may well
not be ambient homeomorphic to B0; that is, there may not exist a homeomorphism of all of
R3 that sends B onto B0.

Let the surface S be the boundary of B. Then S is homeomorphic to the original S0 and
bounds a 3–manifold (the manifold B itself). Also, by construction it contains T and, if the
feelers are drawn in a locally ﬂat fashion as in Figure 2, clearly S is locally ﬂat at each point
except for, possibly, at those belonging to T . Therefore, choosing T to be non rectiﬁable

ON THE SET OF WILD POINTS OF ATTRACTING SURFACES IN R3

5

(for instance, letting T be Antoine’s necklace, which is described in Section 4), Theorem 2
guarantees that S cannot be realized as an attractor.

We will show in Section 6 how to reﬁne the above construction to prove that every closed
(orientable) surface can be embedded in R3 in uncountably many diﬀerent ways {Si : i ∈ I}
none of which can be realized as an attractor. By “diﬀerent” we mean that for any two
diﬀerent i 6= j there does not exist a homeomorphism of R3 that sends Si onto Sj. This is
true even if one considers only the simplest possible surface, a 2–sphere:
Corollary 3. There exist uncountably many diﬀerent 2–spheres in R3 that cannot be realized
as attractors.

We ﬁnish this section with some remarks about Theorem 2:

Remark 4. (1) The construction just described illustrates why Theorem 2 is more convenient
than Theorem 2′ to establish the nonattracting nature of a given surface. To apply Theorem
2 we only needed to check that the surface in question was locally ﬂat outside T , and that
was straightforward. Had we tried to apply Theorem 2′, we would have needed to identify the
set W of wild points precisely, which is not easy to do (in fact, W depends on the particular
details of how the construction is performed).

(2) The conditions laid out in Theorem 2 are suﬃcient, but not necessary, to guarantee
that a surface (even a surface with a totally disconnected set of wild points) cannot be an
attractor. A suitable example is the horned sphere S of Alexander, which cannot be realized
as an attractor (this is proved in [20]) but whose set of wild points is a rectiﬁable Cantor set
because it is contained in a straight line by construction. The Alexander sphere is shown in
Figure 3 and described carefully in [6, Chapter 2]. One may think of S as the round sphere
S2 from which inﬁnitely many feelers have been extracted which, as their diameters tend to
zero, converge to the Cantor set of wild points at the bottom of the ﬁgure. In contrast to
the construction “`a la Antoine” described earlier, where the feelers could or could not be
entangled, here they must be entangled, for this is what ultimately lends the sphere its wild
nature.

S

Figure 3. The sphere of Alexander

This example begs the question of whether it is possible to generalize Theorem 2 so that
it covers both the examples of Antoine and Alexander. Heuristically, such a generalization
would somehow capture simultaneously the “contributions to the wildness” of S due to both
the non rectiﬁability of W itself and the entanglement of the surface as it approaches W .

6

J. J. S ´ANCHEZ-GABITES

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Proposition 1 is proved in the very brief
Section 2, where we also discuss succintly the relation between wildness and tameness. In
Section 3 we recall from [20] the deﬁnition and properties of certain number r(K) that can be
associated to any compact set K ⊆ R3 and somehow measures its “crookedness” as a subset
of Euclidean space. This r(K) is ﬁnite in the case of attractors, and it is because of this
property that it allows us to uncouple the topological and dynamical arguments underlying
the proof of Theorem 2: dynamics will enter the picture only through the condition that r of
an attractor is ﬁnite whereas the hard work is on the topological side, in Sections 4 and 5.
The ﬁrst one is devoted to the study of r(T ) for totally disconnected compact sets T . The
main result there is Theorem 14, which shows that r(T ) is either zero or inﬁnity and relates
this to the rectiﬁability of T . In Section 5 we essentially prove the inequality r(B) ≥ r(W )
(Theorem 17), where B ⊆ R3 is a compact 3–manifold and W is the set of wild points of
its boundary ∂B. This inequality is at the heart of the proof of the main theorem, which is
ﬁnally established in Section 6 together with Corollary 3.

2. Proof of Proposition 1

In Section 1 we deﬁned a wild surface S as one having at least a wild point; that is, a point
at which the surface is not locally ﬂat. Formally, wildness is not related to local ﬂatness but
to local tameness, so we shall devote a few lines to clarify the relation between these concepts.
Let us begin by deﬁning a polyhedron P as the geometric realization of a ﬁnite simplicial
complex in R3 (although very restrictive, this deﬁnition is enough for our purposes). A
compact set K ⊆ R3 is tame if there exists an ambient homeomorphism h : R3 −→ R3
such that h(K) is a polyhedron. And it is locally tame at a point p ∈ K if there exist a
(closed) neighbourhood V of p in R3 and an embedding e : V −→ R3 such that e(V ∩ K) is a
polyhedron. These two deﬁnitions are classic; see for instance [16, p. 145]. Evidently a tame
set is locally tame at each point. A deep theorem of Bing, proved independently by Moise,
states that the converse is also true: a locally tame subset of R3 is tame [16, Theorem 4, p.
254].

The above deﬁnitions are set up for any compact subset of R3, but we are interested in the

case of closed surfaces S. The following holds true for them:

Remark 5. For a closed surface S ⊆ R3, being locally ﬂat at a point p is equivalent to being
locally tame at that same point p.

Proof. In this paper we shall only make use of implication (⇒), whose simple proof we give
in detail. The converse, although conceptually easy, is rather technical and we only give an
intuitive idea.

(⇒) By local ﬂatness there exist a neighbourhood U of p in R3 and a homeomorphism h
between (U, U ∩ S) and (R3, R2 × {0}). Without loss of generality we can assume that h(p) is
the origin. Let W := [−1, 1] × [−1, 1] × [−1, 1]. Clearly V := h−1(W ) is a neighbourhood of
p in R3, and the restriction e := h|V is an embedding such that e(V ∩ S) = W ∩ (R2 × {0}),
which is a square (hence a polyhedron). Therefore S is locally tame at p.

(⇐) Since S is locally tame at p, we may think of it (via the embedding e of the deﬁnition
of local tameness) as a polyhedral surface around p. Thus p has a neighbourhood in S that is
a polyhedral disk. Such a disk can be ﬂattened out. Therefore S is locally ﬂat around p. (cid:3)

ON THE SET OF WILD POINTS OF ATTRACTING SURFACES IN R3

7

Thus for a surface S one may equivalently deﬁne a point p ∈ S to be wild whenever S is not
locally ﬂat or not locally tame at p. The former characterization is self contained (it makes
no reference to polyhedra), which is why we used it in the previous section. It is also the
most convenient deﬁnition for later sections. In this section, however, the characterization in
terms of polyhedra is more useful.

In order to prove Proposition 1 we need an auxiliary result whose proof we omit:

Lemma 6. Let P ⊆ R3 be a polyhedron. Then there exists a ﬂow in R3 having P as an
attractor.

Proof. See [12, Corollary 4, p. 327] or [22, Proposition 12, p. 6169].

(cid:3)

Proof of Proposition 1. Suppose that S has no wild points, so that by deﬁnition it is locally
ﬂat at each p ∈ S. By Remark 5 this implies that S is locally tame at each p ∈ S and by the
theorem of Bing and Moise mentioned earlier, S is tame. Thus, there exists a homeomorphism
h : R3 −→ R3 such that h(S) is a polyhedron. In turn, by Lemma 6 there exists a ﬂow having
h(S) as an attractor. Let f be the time-one map of this ﬂow, so that h(S) is an attractor for
the homeomorphism f of R3. Then S is an attractor for h−1f h.
(cid:3)

3. The number r(K)

In [20] we described how to associate, to each compact subset K ⊆ R3, a number r(K)
that provides a measure of how wildly K sits in R3. We used it to show that certain arcs,
balls and spheres (for instance, the horned sphere of Alexander in Figure 3.(b)) cannot be
attractors. Since this number r(K) will also be the fundamental tool in the proof of Theorem
2, we devote this section to review its deﬁnition and some of its properties. We refer the
reader to [20] for more details and proofs.

Let K ⊆ R3 be an arbitrary compact subset of R3. It is easy to see that any neighbourhood
of K contains a smaller one N which is a compact, polyhedral 3–manifold. For instance, cover
K with the interiors of closed cubes contained in U; discard all of them but ﬁnitely many using
the compactness of K, thus obtaining a polyhedral P neighbourhood of K, and ﬁnally let N
be a regular neighbourhood of P (in the sense of piecewise linear topology [19, Chapter 3, pp.
31 ﬀ. and particularly Proposition 3.10, p. 34]). We call such an N a pm–neighbourhood of
K (pm standing for polyhedral manifold). For r a nonnegative integer, consider the following
property that K may or may not have:

(Pr) : K has arbitrarily small pm–neighbourhoods N with rk H1(N) ≤ r.

Here H1(N) denotes the ﬁrst homology group of N with Z2 coeﬃcients and rk denotes its
rank as an Abelian group or, equivalently, its dimension as a vector space over Z2.

Deﬁnition 7. r(K) is the smallest nonnegative integer r for which (Pr) holds, or ∞ if (Pr)
does not hold for any r.

Although the deﬁnition of r(K) does not make any reference to dynamics,

it has the

following property which justiﬁes our interest in it:

(P1) Finiteness. If K is a local attractor for a homeomorphism then r(K) < ∞.

Proof. See [20, Theorem 13].

(cid:3)

8

J. J. S ´ANCHEZ-GABITES

Essentially, the proof of Theorem 2 will consist in showing that r(S) = ∞ and applying the
ﬁniteness property. However, computing r(K) from ﬁrst principles is in general very diﬃcult
and we will need to do it indirectly, making use of several additional properties of r(K) that
are, this time, geometric in nature: invariance, semicontinuity, nullity and subadditivity. We
state them now.

(P2) Invariance. If K and K ′ are ambient homeomorphic, then r(K) = r(K ′).

Proof. See [20, Theorem 14].

(cid:3)

(P3) Semicontinuity. Suppose (Kn)n≥1 is a decreasing sequence (that is, Kn+1 ⊆ Kn for

every n) of compact sets and denote K its intersection. Then

r(K) ≤ lim inf
n→∞

r(Kn).

Proof. Denote r := lim inf n→∞ r(Kn). If r = ∞ there is nothing to prove, so assume that
r < ∞. Passing to a subsequence of the Kn we may assume that r(Kn) = r for every n ∈ N, so
that each Kn has property (Pr). Let U be a neighbourhood of K. The Kn form a decreasing

sequence and K =T Kn, so there exists n0 such that Kn ⊆ U for every n ≥ n0. Since Kn0

has property (Pr), it has a pm–neighbourhood N ⊆ U such that rk H1(N) ≤ r. But N is
also a neighbourhood of K, so K has property (Pr) too.
(cid:3)

(P4) Nullity. Suppose K has ˇH 2(K) = 0. Then r(K) = 0 if, and only if, K has arbitrarily
small pm–neighbourhoods N such that each component of N is a 3–cell. By a 3–cell
we mean a set homeomorphic to the closed unit 3–ball B3 ⊆ R3.

Proof. This is proved in [20, Theorem 16] for K connected (in that case N can be taken to
be connected too and it is itself a 3–cell). The same argument given there covers this slightly
more general situation where K is not assumed to be connected.
(cid:3)

Finally, to state the subadditivity property we need to introduce some notation and a

deﬁnition:

Notation 8. Consider the following subsets of R3, shown in Figure 4:

Q0 is the parallelepiped [−1, 0] × [−1, 1] × [−1, 1],
Q1 is the parallelepiped [0, 1] × [−1, 1] × [−1, 1],
Q is the cube Q0 ∪ Q1,
S is the square Q0 ∩ Q1 = {0} × [−1, 1] × [−1, 1],
˙S denotes the square S minus its edges.

Suppose K is expressed as the union of two compact sets K0 and K1. We call this a

decomposition of K and introduce the following deﬁnition:

Deﬁnition 9. A decomposition K = K0 ∪ K1 is tame if

(i ) K ∩ S = K0 ∩ K1 ⊆ ˙S,
(ii ) K0 ∩ Q ⊆ Q0 and K1 ∩ Q ⊆ Q1.

Deﬁnition 9 conveys the intuitive idea that S realises geometrically the purely set-theoretical
decomposition K = K0 ∪ K1. The part of K that lies in Q is structured in two “halves”,
K ∩ Q0 and K ∩ Q1. The ﬁrst one sits in Q0 and, because of condition (ii ), is comprised

ON THE SET OF WILD POINTS OF ATTRACTING SURFACES IN R3

9

S

z

Q0

Q1

x

y

Figure 4. The setup for Deﬁnition 9

exclusively of points from K0. The second one sits in Q1 and is comprised exclusively of
points from K1.

Remark 10. It is convenient to widen Deﬁnition 9 slightly and say that a decomposition
K = K0 ∪ K1 is tame if there exists an ambient homeomorphism h : R3 −→ R3 that takes K,
K0 and K1 onto sets that satisfy (i ) and (ii ) above. This convenient generalization has no
consequences as far as r(K) is concerned since r is invariant under ambient homeomorphisms
by (P2).

A prototypical example of a tame decomposition (in the wider sense just mentioned) of a

set K would be as follows:

Example 11. Take a plane H ⊆ R3 (having a nonempty intersection with K) and, denoting
H0 and H1 the two closed halfspaces determined by H, let K0 := K ∩ H0 and K1 := K ∩ H1.
Then K = K0 ∪ K1 is a tame decomposition.

Now we can state the subadditivity property of r:
(P5) Subadditivity. Let K = K0 ∪ K1 be a tame decomposition of K and assume that

ˇH 1(K0 ∩ K1) = 0. Then the inequality r(K) ≥ r(K0) + r(K1) holds.

Proof. See [20, Theorem 22].

(cid:3)

If one thinks of r as some sort of Betti number and writes the Mayer-Vietoris sequence
for K = K0 ∪ K1, the necessity of requiring that ˇH 1(K0 ∩ K1) be zero is clear. The role
of the tameness condition is more delicate. Roughly, it guarantees that certain geometrical
constructions leading to the inequality r(K) ≥ r(K0) + r(K1) can be performed. Without
this assumption the subadditivity property may be false (see an example in [20]).

For our purposes in this paper it is convenient to have a more ﬂexible way of checking

whether a decomposition is tame. The following proposition provides this:

Proposition 12. Let K = K0 ∪ K1 be a decomposition of a compact set K ⊆ R3. Suppose
that there exists an embedding e : Q −→ R3 such that:

(1) K ∩ e(S) = K0 ∩ K1 ⊆ e( ˙S),
(2) K0 ∩ e(Q) ⊆ e(Q0) and K1 ∩ e(Q) ⊆ e(Q1).

10

J. J. S ´ANCHEZ-GABITES

Then the decomposition is tame.

In the proof we will make use of the Sch¨onﬂies conjecture, so we devote a few lines to
explain it. A 2–sphere Σ ⊆ R2 is simply an embedded copy of the unit two dimensional
sphere S2 ⊆ R3. The Sch¨onﬂies conjecture states that any two 2–spheres Σ1 and Σ2 in R3
are equivalently embedded; that is, there exists an ambient homeomorphism that sends one
of them onto the other. As stated, this result is false due to the existence of wild spheres, so
some additional hypothesis needs to be added. Brown gave a beautiful version for bicollared
spheres. A 2–sphere Σ ⊆ R3 is bicollared if there exists an embedding b : Σ × [−1, 1] −→ R3
such that b(p, 0) = p for every p ∈ Σ. Brown proved [3, Theorem 5, p. 76] that the Sch¨onﬂies
conjecture is true for bicollared spheres; that is, if Σ1, Σ2 ⊆ R3 are two bicollared spheres,
there exists an ambient homeomorphism that sends one of them onto the other.

Now let B1, B2 ⊆ R3 be two 3–cells and e : B1 −→ B2 a homeomorphism. Assume that
both ∂B1 and ∂B2 are bicollared. Then e admits an extension to a homeomorphism ˆe of all
R3. The reason is that the Sch¨onﬂies conjecture (in Brown’s version) allows one to reduce this
problem to the case where B1 = B2 = B3, where B3 denotes the closed unit ball in Euclidean
space R3, and then extending e is a simple matter (do it radially).

Proof. We need to construct a homeomorphism h of R3 that sends K0 and K1 onto sets sat-
isfying the conditions in Deﬁnition 9. Let B1 and B2 be the 3–cells Q and e(Q), respectively,
and consider the 2–spheres ∂B1 and ∂B2. Clearly ∂B1 is bicollared, since B1 is a polyhedral
cube. As for ∂B2, the following claim shows that we can assume it to be bicollared too:

Claim. Maybe after a suitable improvement of e, we may assume that the boundary of

e(Q) is bicollared.

Proof of claim. For any number 0 < s < 1 denote by sQ the image of Q under the mapping
(x, y, z) 7→ (sx, sy, sz), and similarly for sQ0, sQ1 and sS. It is easy to check that if s is very
close to 1, conditions (1) and (2) in the statement of this proposition are still satisﬁed when
we replace Q, Q0, Q1 and S by their scaled down versions sQ, sQ0, sQ1 and sS. That is,

(1′) K ∩ e(sS) = K0 ∩ K1 ⊆ e(s ˙S),
(2′) K0 ∩ e(sQ) ⊆ e(sQ0) and K1 ∩ e(sQ) ⊆ e(sQ1).
The boundary of sQ is just a polyhedral sphere slightly smaller than the boundary of Q,
and it is clearly bicollared in the interior of Q. Thus e(sQ) is bicollared in e(int Q), which
is an open subset of R3, and so e(sQ) is actually bicollared in R3. Replacing the embedding
e : Q −→ R3 by (x, y, z) 7−→ e(sx, sy, sz) the result follows. (cid:4)

Now using the Sch¨onﬂies’ theorem we see that e extends to a homeomorphism ˆe : R3 −→ R3
as explained earlier. Let h := ˆe−1. Applying h throughout to (1) and (2) in the statement of
this proposition and cancelling any appearance of he (which is the identity by construction)
it follows that the decomposition h(K) = h(K0) ∪ h(K1) satisﬁes (1) and (2) of Deﬁnition 9,
as was to be proved.
(cid:3)

4. r(T ) when T is a totally disconnected, compact set

Throughout this section T will always denote a compact, totally disconnected subset of
R3. Recall that a set is totally disconnected if its connected components are just singletons.

ON THE SET OF WILD POINTS OF ATTRACTING SURFACES IN R3

11

As mentioned earlier, we shall say that T is rectiﬁable if there exists a homeomorphism of R3
that sends T into a straight line L. The following remark follows easily from this deﬁnition:

Remark 13. Let T be a compact, totally disconnected set. If T is rectiﬁable, then it has
arbitrarily close neighbourhoods N which are unions of disjoint polyhedral 3–cells. As a
consequence, R3 − T is simply connected and also r(T ) = 0.

Proof. Up to an ambient homeomorphism we may assume that T lies in a straight line L;
say the x–axis for deﬁniteness. Notice that this does not alter the fundamental group of
R3 − T or the value of r(T ), since both are invariant under ambient homeomorphisms. Let
U be a neighbourhood of T in R3, so that U ∩ L is a neighbourhood of T in L. Since T is
totally disconnected, it has a compact neighbourhood J in L which is a union of ﬁnitely many
disjoint intervals J1, . . . , Jn and satisﬁes J ⊆ U ∩ L. This J can be thickened to obtain a
pm–neighbourhood N of T in R3 simply choosing ε > 0 so small that N := J ×[−ε, ε]×[−ε, ε]
is still contained in U. Clearly each component of N is, by construction, a polyhedral 3–cell.
Letting U vary we see that T has arbitrarily close neighbourhoods N with this property. In
particular, since these satisfy H1(N) = 0, it follows that r(T ) = 0. Also, the complement
in R3 of any of these neighbourhoods N is simply connected, and so the same is true of the
complement of T .
(cid:3)

The main theorem in this section strengthens the previous remark as follows:

Theorem 14. Let T ⊆ R3 be a compact, totally disconnected set. Then the following alter-
native holds:

(i ) if T is rectiﬁable, then r(T ) = 0,
(ii ) if T is not rectiﬁable, then r(T ) = ∞.

Thus r(T ) cannot take any intermediate values between 0 and ∞.

Before proving the theorem it may be instructive to examine the particular example of
Antoine’s necklace C, already mentioned in Section 1, because we can easily check that it
is not rectiﬁable and also show, exploiting its self similarity properties, that r(C) = ∞. A
detailed exposition can be found in the original paper by Antoine [1, §78, p. 311 ﬀ.] or more
modern references such as [6, pp. 42 ﬀ.] or [16, §18, pp. 127 ﬀ.].

Antoine’s necklace is obtained as the intersection of a decreasing sequence of compact
manifolds Nk each of which is a “necklace” comprised of several linked tori Tk,j. The ﬁrst
one, N0, consists of a single unknotted solid torus T0 ⊆ R3. The next one, N1, is the union of
n of solid tori T1,1, T1,2, . . . , T1,n contained in the interior of T0 and linked as shown in Figure 5
for n = 5 (the drawing shows only one T1,j in full and just the cores of remaining tori). Place a
similar (but scaled down) arrangement of n linked solid tori T2,j inside each of the T1,j. Then
N2 is the union of all these second generation tori, of which there are n2 in total. Repeating
the construction inductively yields the decreasing sequence of sets Nk and their intersection

C =Tk Nk is Antoine’s necklace. Notice that the diameter of the connected components of

the Nk approaches zero as k −→ +∞. This implies that C is totally disconnected (in fact, it
is a Cantor set).

The crucial property of C is that its complement in R3 is not simply connected. A formal
proof can be found in the book by Moise [16, Theorem 4, p. 131], but it is easy to convince

12

J. J. S ´ANCHEZ-GABITES

T1,j

Figure 5.

T0

oneself intuitively as follows. Consider a meridian µ of T0 (contained in the surface of T0). If
we tried to contract it to a point we would surely run into some of the T1,j because of how
they are linked to form a closed chain. On a ﬁner scale, and for the same reason, we would
also run into some of the T2,j, and so on. Thus µ is not contractible in the complement of
any of the Nk, and so it cannot be contractible in the complement of C either.

It follows from the previous paragraph and Remark 13 that C is not rectiﬁable. Let us
check also that r(C) = ∞, as it should be according to Theorem 14. By the very nature
of the construction of C each T1,j contains a Cantor set Cj that is ambient homeomorphic
to all of C; namely Cj = C ∩ T1,j. Hence r(C) = r(Cj) for every 1 ≤ j ≤ n. Moreover C
j=1 r(Cj) = nr(C). Thus
either r(C) = 0 or r(C) = ∞. Suppose r(C) = 0 were true. Then, by the nullity property
(P4), C would have arbitrarily small pm–neighbourhoods N that are unions of 3–balls. The
complement in R3 of any such neighbourhood is clearly simply connected, and therefore the
same would be true of C; that is, R3 − C would be simply connected. Since this is not the
case, we conclude that r(C) ≥ 1 and so r(C) = ∞.

is the disjoint union of the closed sets C1, C2, . . . , Cn so r(C) =Pn

In proving Theorem 14 we shall make use of two auxiliary lemmas which we state below as
Lemmas 15 and 16. Both of them can be found in a paper by Bing [2]. Although he proves
them for Cantor sets, the argument applies to any compact, totally disconnected set T . Also,
we warn the reader that Bing uses the more standard terminology “tame” for what we call
“rectiﬁable” (we ﬁnd the latter more expressive and, in this paper, less prone to confusion
with other usages of “tame”).

Lemma 15. Let T ⊆ R3 be a compact, totally disconnected set. Then T is rectiﬁable if, and
only if, it has arbitrarily small pm–neighbourhoods N such that every component of N is a
3–cell.

Proof. See the steps outlined in the proof of [2, Theorem 1.1, p. 435 ﬀ.].

(cid:3)

Let us say that T is locally rectiﬁable at a point p ∈ T if there exist a neighbourhood U of

p in R3 and a homeomorphism of R3 that sends U ∩ T into a straight line.

Lemma 16. Let T ⊆ R3 be a compact, totally disconnected set. If T is locally rectiﬁable at
every point except for, possibly, a ﬁnite set of points F ⊆ T , then T is rectiﬁable.

Proof. See [2, Theorem 4.1, p. 440] and the remark following it.

(cid:3)

ON THE SET OF WILD POINTS OF ATTRACTING SURFACES IN R3

13

Now we can prove the main result of this section.

Proof of Theorem 14. Part (i ) is already contained in Remark 13; we only need to prove part
(ii ), and we are going to establish its contrapositive. Therefore, assume that r(T ) = r < ∞.
Choose a pm–neighbourhood basis {Nk} of T such that the following properties are satisﬁed:

(N1) Nk+1 ⊆ int Nk for each k,
(N2) each component of every Nk meets T ,
(N3) rk H1(Nk) = r for every k,
(N4) for every pm–neighbourhood N of T contained in N1, rk H1(N) ≥ r.
That such a pm–neighbourhood basis {Nk} exists follows easily from the deﬁnition of r(T ).
It suﬃces to show that T is locally rectiﬁable at every point p ∈ T except for, possibly, a ﬁnite
number of them; then Lemma 16 entails that T is actually rectiﬁable, proving the theorem.
We begin with two auxiliary claims:

Claim 1. Let ℓ ≥ k. Denote C1, . . . , Cn the components of Nk, and for each 1 ≤ i ≤ n
denote Dij (for 1 ≤ j ≤ mi) the components of Nℓ that lie in Ci. Then, for every 1 ≤ i ≤ n,

rk H1(Ci) =

rk H1(Dij).

mi

Xj=1

Proof. First we prove the inequality rk H1(Ci) ≤ Pj rk H1(Dij). Fix some i0. Consider

the pm–neighbourhood N of T obtained from Nk by deleting Ci0 and replacing it with the
Di0j. That is, let

N := C1 ∪ . . . ∪ Ci0−1 ∪ Di01 ∪ . . . ∪ Di0mi0

∪Ci0+1 ∪ . . . ∪ Cn.

Then clearly

|

in place of Ci0

{z

rk H1(N) = rk H1(Nk) − rk H1(Ci0) +

rk H1(Di0j).

}
Xj=1

mi0

By (N3) we have rk H1(Nk) = r, and by (N4) we also have rk H1(N) ≥ r. Replacing these
above,

r ≤ rk H1(N) = r − rk H1(Ci0) +

rk H1(Di0j),

mi0

Xj=1

which implies

(1)

rk H1(Ci0) ≤

rk H1(Di0j).

mi0

Xj=1

Now observe that Nk is the disjoint union of the Ci and Nℓ is the disjoint union of the Dij,

so

rk H1(Nk) =

n

Xi=1

rk H1(Ci) and rk H1(Nℓ) =

n

Xi=1

mi

Xj=1

rk H1(Dij).

14

J. J. S ´ANCHEZ-GABITES

Since rk H1(Nk) = rk H1(Nℓ) = r by (N3), it follows that

or

n

rk H1(Ci) =

Xi=1
Xi=1 rk H1(Ci) −

n

mi

rk H1(Dij),

Xj=1
rk H1(Dij)! = 0.

n

Xi=1
Xj=1

mi

The inequality (1) established above implies that each of the terms in this sum is nonpositive,
so it follows that they must all be zero. This proves the claim. (cid:4)

Claim 2. Let C be a component of some Nk0 and assume that rk H1(C) = 0. Then C ∩ T ,

Proof. Denote N ′

which is a compact and totally disconnected set, is rectiﬁable.
k := Nk ∩ C for every k ≥ k0. Clearly {N ′

k} is a neighbourhood basis of
C ∩ T . Moreover, since each N ′
k is nothing but the union of those components of Nk that lie
in C, they are all polyhedral manifolds and so {N ′
k} is actually a pm–neighbourhood basis of
C ∩ T . Also, from Claim 1 and the hypothesis rk H1(C) = 0 it follows that rk H1(N ′
k) = 0
for every k. Therefore r(C ∩ T ) = 0 and, by the nullity property (P4), C ∩ T has arbitrarily
small pm–neighbourhoods N such that every component of N is a 3–ball. Thus by Lemma
15, C ∩ T is rectiﬁable. (cid:4)

Now we can complete the proof of the theorem. For each point p in T let C(Nk; p) be the
connected component of Nk that contains p. By Claim 1 above the sequence rk H1(C(Nk; p))
decreases as k increases, so we can deﬁne

s(p) := lim
k→∞

rk H1(C(Nk; p)).

Observe that at most r diﬀerent points p ∈ T have s(p) 6= 0.

Indeed, suppose that at
least p1, . . . , pr+1 ∈ T had s(pj) ≥ 1. Choose k big enough so that all the pj lie in diﬀerent
components C(Nk; pj) of Nk. Evidently

rk H1(Nk) ≥

rk H1(C(Nk; pj)).

r+1

Xj=1

However rk H1(C(Nk; pj)) ≥ s(pj) ≥ 1 for each 1 ≤ j ≤ r (by deﬁnition of s), so we conclude
that rk H1(Nk) ≥ r + 1, contradicting condition (N4) in the choice of {Nk}.

Now let p ∈ T be a point for which s(p) = 0. We have just seen that this happens for all
but ﬁnitely points in T . Since s(p) is the limit of a sequence of integers, for some k0 we have
rk H1(C(Nk; p)) = s(p) = 0 for k ≥ k0. By Claim 2 we see that C(Nk0; p) ∩ T , which is a
neighbourhood of p in T , is rectiﬁable. Otherwise stated, T is locally rectiﬁable at p. Thus
T is locally rectiﬁable at every point except for, possibly, a ﬁnite number of them, as was to
be shown.
(cid:3)

5. A topological theorem

This section is devoted to the proof of the following result, whose notation and hypotheses

will be tacitly assumed to hold throughout:

ON THE SET OF WILD POINTS OF ATTRACTING SURFACES IN R3

15

Theorem 17. Let B ⊆ R3 be a compact 3–manifold with a connected boundary ∂B. Notice
that ∂B is a closed surface. Suppose that ∂B contains a compact, totally disconnected set T
such that ∂B is locally ﬂat at each p 6∈ T . Then r(B) ≥ r(T ).

The proof involves a somewhat delicate geometric construction. In an attempt to convey
the intuitive ideas as clearly as possible we have divided the explanation into three stages
which we ﬁrst outline and later on expand in detail.

Stage 1 Suppose E ⊆ ∂B is a closed disk whose boundary ∂E does not meet T , so that

∂B is locally tame at each p ∈ ∂E. We shall show how to:

(1) Push E slightly into B while keeping its boundary ﬁxed, obtaining a disk ˆE properly
embedded in B. This means that the interior of E is contained in the interior of B
and the boundary of E is contained in the boundary of B.

(2) The disk ˆE separates B into two connected components V0 and V1 such that B =
¯V0 ∪ ¯V1 and ¯V0 ∩ ¯V1 = ˆE. We choose the labeling in such a way that V1 is the
component bounded by E and ˆE.

(3) The decomposition B = ¯V0 ∪ ¯V1 is tame and the condition ˇH 1( ¯V0 ∩ ¯V1) = 0 needed to

apply the subadditivity property (P5) of r is met. Hence r(B) ≥ r( ¯V0) + r( ¯V1).

Part (1) relies heavily on the fact that ∂B is the boundary of B and this provides a natural
way of pushing E into B. It is the ultimate reason why in Theorem 2 we need to require that
S bounds a 3–manifold on one side (that would be B, and then S = ∂B). The assumption
that ∂E is disjoint from T guarantees that ∂B is locally ﬂat at each p ∈ ∂E and is used
crucially in (3) to prove that the decomposition B = ¯V0 ∪ ¯V1 is tame.

Stage 2 This is essentially the same as before, but now instead of a single disk E ⊆ ∂B
we consider a ﬁnite number of disjoint closed disks E1, . . . , En ⊆ ∂B such that none of their
boundaries ∂Ej meets T . In Figure 6.(a) the set T is schematically shown as a collection of
thick points in ∂B and the disks Ej as three disjoint intervals. In our actual application T
will be contained in the union of the disks Ej, and that is how it is shown in Figure 6. As
before, one can:

(1) Push the disks Ej slightly into B while keeping their boundaries ﬁxed. This yields
a family of disjoint closed disks ˆEj properly embedded in B. The ˆEj are shown in
Figure 6.(b).

(2) The (union of the) family of disks ˆEj separates B into (n + 1) connected components:
a “big” one V0 and “smaller” ones V1, V2, . . . , Vn. The latter are the ones bounded by
each Ej and its corresponding ˆEj (see Figure 6.(c)). As before, B is the union of the
closures ¯Vj of the Vj. Also, ¯V1, . . . , ¯Vn are pairwise disjoint and each of them intersects
¯V0 in its corresponding disk ˆEj.

(3) An argument involving the subadditivity property of r proves that the inequality

r(B) ≥

r( ¯Vj)

n

Xj=0

holds.

16

J. J. S ´ANCHEZ-GABITES

∂B

B

E3

E1

V1

(a) The disks Ej

E2

V0

V2

ˆE1

ˆE3

ˆE2

(b) The disks ˆEj

V3

E(2)
1

ˆE(1)
1

ˆE(2)
1 ˆE(2)

2

E(2)
2

(c) The components Vj

(d) Two stages (k = 1, 2) of the construction

Figure 6.

Stage 3 Finally, instead of performing the above construction just once, we perform it for
each k = 1, 2, . . . as follows. At each step k, we cover T with (the interiors of) a ﬁnite family
of disks E(k)
nk which now depend on k. These disks should be chosen in such a
way that each E(k+1)
j ′ and their diameters tend to zero as k increases.
This is always possible because T is a totally disconnected set. Then, paralleling the previous
stages:

is contained in an E(k)

2 , . . . , E(k)

1 , E(k)

j

(1) Push each disk E(k)

j

slightly into B while keeping its boundary ﬁxed, taking the

precaution to push it only to “depth” 1/k. See Figure 6.(d).

(2) For each k the family of disks E(k)

1 , E(k)
components, of which we denote V (k)
maining ones.

0

1

2

2 , . . . , E(k)

nk separates B into (nk + 1) connected
the re-

the “big” one and V (k)

, . . . , V (k)

, V (k)

nk

ON THE SET OF WILD POINTS OF ATTRACTING SURFACES IN R3

17

(3) Consider the closures ¯Vj of the Vj. As before, the inequality

r(B) ≥

r( ¯V (k)

j

)

nk

Xj=0

holds for each k. For the sake of brevity, set

B(k)

0

:= ¯V (k)

0

and B(k)

1

:= ¯V (k)

1 ∪ . . . ∪ ¯V (k)
nk .

nk are mutually disjoint, clearly r(B(k)

, . . . , ¯V (k)
) and therefore the above inequality can be written more compactly as

1 ) coincides with the sum

Since ¯V (k)
j=1 r( ¯V (k)

1

j

Pnk

r(B) ≥ r(B(k)

0 ) + r(B(k)
1 ).
(4) From the above inequality we have r(B) ≥ r(B(k)
1 ) for every k. Since each E(k+1)
j ′ and we have pushed E(k+1)
j ′ , it follows that V (k+1)

is
into B to depth 1/(k + 1), which is
is contained in V (k)

contained in some E(k)
less than we did with E(k)
Figure 6.(d). As a consequence, B(k+1)
k=1 B(k)
E(k)
to the semicontinuity property (P3) of r and using r(B) ≥ r(B(k)

1
and the depths 1/k of the ˆE(k)

as suggested by
j
1 . Moreover, since the diameters of the
1 . Then, appealing

converge to zero, T =T∞

1 ), we get

j ′

j

⊆ B(k)

j

j

j

r(B) ≥ lim inf
k→∞

r(B(k)

1 ) ≥ r(T )

which proves Theorem 17.

In the remaining of this section we shall ﬁll in the details of the proof of Theorem 17 along
the lines just described. We shall begin with a “Stage 0” in order to introduce some notation
and constructions that will be useful later on. Also, we shall use without explanation some
facts that follow from the 2–dimensional Sch¨onﬂies conjecture.
It was mentioned in page
10 that in three dimensions the Sch¨onﬂies conjecture is false in general. However, in two
dimensions it is true: given any two 1–spheres in R2 (that is, any two simple closed curves
in the plane) there is an ambient homeomorphism that takes one onto the other (see [16,
Chapter 10, pp. 71 ﬀ.]). As a consequence, given any two closed disks in the plane there is
always an ambient homeomorphism that sends one onto the other. In this form, the Sch¨onﬂies
theorem generalizes to any connected surface: given any two closed disks E and E ′ in a closed
connected surface S, there is a homeomorphism of the surface that sends one onto the other.
In particular, let E ′ := ϕ−1(D2) where ϕ : U ⊆ S −→ R2 is some chart of S and D2 is the
closed unit disk in R2. By the Sch¨onﬂies theorem, there is a homeomorphism g of S that
sends E onto E ′. The composition ϕ ◦ g is deﬁned on the neighbourhood g−1(U) of E and
sends E onto D2 ⊆ R2, allowing us to pull back any construction performed with D2 to a
construction performed with E. For instance: (i) one can clearly ﬁnd arbitrarily thin annuli
along ∂D2; pulling back via ϕ ◦ g, the same is true of ∂E; (ii) one can clearly ﬁnd arbitrarily
small neighbourhoods of D2 that are homeomorphic to R2 (for instance, open disks with
radius slightly bigger than 1 but arbitrarily close to it), so the same is true of E.

18

J. J. S ´ANCHEZ-GABITES

5.1. Stage 0. Consider the plane {z = 0} in R3 and a closed disk D ⊆ {z = 0}. Denote
P := R2 × [−2, 2] and P + := R2 × [0, 2]. Set

(2)

ˆD := ∂D × [0, 1] ∪ D × 1.

(To avoid ambiguities in interpreting this and subsequent expressions we adhere to the con-
vention that ∂ has precedence over ×, which in turn has precedence over ∪ and −). See
Figure 7. Clearly ˆD is a 2–disk whose boundary coincides with ∂D and whose interior is
entirely contained in the upper halfspace z > 0; that is, ˆD is properly embedded in P +. We
say that ˆD has been obtained by pushing D into P + to depth one. Notice that ˆD separates
P + into two connected components

U0 := R2 × (1, 2] ∪ (R2 − D) × [0, 2] and U1 := ˙D × [0, 1)

(3)
whose intersection is precisely the disk ˆD. Here (and in the sequel) a dot over a manifold
will denote the interior of the manifold (that is, the manifold minus its boundary). That ˆD
separates P + as described should be clear intuitively and can be conﬁrmed by Figure 7.

z = 2

z = 0

ˆD

U0

P +

U1

D

Figure 7. The construction of ˆD

Although it does not really make sense to say that the decomposition P + = U0 ∪ U1 is
tame because P + is not compact, the way in which the sets U0 and U1 intersect along ˆD is
certainly characteristic of tame decompositions. This is the motivation behind the following
proposition, where we make use again of the sets Q, S, Q0 and Q1 introduced when discussing
the subadditivity property, just before Figure 4.

Proposition 18. There exists an embedding e : Q −→ R3 such that:

(1) ˆD ⊆ e( ˙S),
(2) U0 ∩ e(Q) ⊆ e(Q0) and U1 ∩ e(Q) ⊆ e(Q1).

Figure 8 below illustrates the content of Proposition 18 in a two dimensional (very schematic)
picture. We have denoted S ′ = e(S) and Q′ = e(Q). S ′ separates Q′ into two connected com-
ponents whose closures are precisely e(Q0) and e(Q1).

Proof. Let A be a closed annulus along the boundary of D. Consider the sets

S ′ := ∂D × [−1, 1] ∪ D × 1

and Q′ := A × [−1, 3/2] ∪ D × [1/2, 3/2].

ON THE SET OF WILD POINTS OF ATTRACTING SURFACES IN R3

19

z = 2

z = 0

z = −2

U0

U1

P

S ′

Q′

Figure 8. Scheme for Proposition 18

Q′ resembles a “thick bucket” turned upside down. Its intersection with the plane {z = 0}
is precisely the annulus A. S ′ is a 2–disk properly embedded in Q′. The intersection of S ′
with the plane {z = 0} is precisely the boundary of the disk D. The disk ˆD is the part of S ′
that lies above the {z = 0} plane; that is, the intersection S ′ ∩ {z ≥ 0}. In particular ˆD is
contained in the interior of S ′.

Simple case. First consider the particular case when D is a square and A is the annulus
comprised between two homothetic copies of D, one slightly bigger and the other slightly
smaller than D itself. Figure 9 shows how Q′ and S ′ would look like in this case. S ′ separates
Q′ into two connected components, the closures of which we denote Q′
1. Speciﬁcally,
we denote Q′

0 the closure of the “outer” component and Q′

1 the closure of the “inner” one.

0 and Q′

It is easy to see that there exists a homeomorphism e from Q onto Q′ that sends S onto
S ′. A partial description of e will hopefully be enough. Label the vertices of the bottom,
annular face of Q′ with the letters A1, . . . , A4 and B1, . . . , B4 as suggested in Figure 9.(a)
(not all the labels are shown in the drawing to avoid cluttering). Then, referring to Figures
4 and 9.(a), the homeomorphism e may be described by saying that it is piecewise linear and
has the following properties:

(i ) The vertices of the left face of Q are mapped onto the Ai while the face itself is mapped
onto the outer surface of Q′; that is, onto the lateral outer walls and the top outer
face.

(ii ) The vertices of the right face of Q are mapped onto the Bi; the face itself is mapped

onto the inner surface of Q′.

(iii ) A thin annular neighbourhood along ∂S in ∂Q is mapped onto the bottom annular

face of Q′.

Evidently e sends Q0 onto Q′

1. Hence U0 ∩ e(Q) = U0 ∩ Q′ ⊆ e(Q0) and
similarly U1 ∩ e(Q) = U1 ∩ Q′ ⊆ e(Q1) (the Ui were deﬁned in Equation (3)), showing that e
satisﬁes condition (2). Also, e( ˙S) is the interior of e(S) = S ′, so condition (1) is also satisﬁed
because ˆD ⊆ ˙S ′ by construction.

0 and Q1 onto Q′

20

J. J. S ´ANCHEZ-GABITES

Q′

S ′

A3

Bi

A1

A2
(a) The polyhedron Q′

(b) The disk S ′ contained in Q′

Figure 9.

General case. When D is an arbitrary disk we can appeal to the 2–dimensional Sch¨onﬂies
theorem to reduce the problem to the previous case. Indeed, the Sch¨onﬂies theorem guar-
antees that there exists a homeomorphism s : {z = 0} −→ {z = 0} that sends D onto a
square D0 for which we already know an embedding e0 exists with the required properties, as
constructed in the previous case. Clearly s extends to a homeomorphism ˆs of all R3 simply
letting ˆs(x, y, z) := (s(x, y), z), and it is then easy to check that the embedding e := ˆs ◦ e0
satisﬁes all the required conditions.
(cid:3)

Remark 19. Later on we shall need the explicit form of Q′ = e(Q) used in the proof of the
proposition. Hence, for future reference, we record it here:

(4)

Q′ := A × [−1, 3/2] ∪ D × [1/2, 3/2],

where A is a closed annulus along the boundary of D.

5.2. Stage 1. W need to recall some standard deﬁnitions (see for instance [4]). Suppose Y
is a subspace of X. We say that Y is collared in X if there exists a homeomorphism c from
Y × [0, 1] onto a neighbourhood of Y in X and such that c(p, 0) = p for every p ∈ Y , and
locally collared at some point p ∈ Y if p has a neighbourhood in Y which is collared in X.
We shall make use of two important theorems of Brown:

(B1) If Y is locally collared in X at each p ∈ Y , then Y is collared in X [4, Theorem 1, p.

337].

(B2) As a consequence, the boundary ∂X of a manifold with boundary X is collared in the

manifold [4, Theorem 2, p. 339].

Suppose S is a closed surface contained in R3. A bicollar of S is a homeomorphism b from
S × [−1, 1] onto a neighbourhood of S in R3 such that b(p, 0) = p for every p ∈ S (this is
a trivial extension of the deﬁnition given earlier for 2–spheres). The existence of a bicollar

ON THE SET OF WILD POINTS OF ATTRACTING SURFACES IN R3

21

is equivalent to the existence of a collar of S both in ¯U and ¯V , where U and V are the two
connected components into which S separates R3. When S bounds a 3–manifold, as with ∂B
in our context, then at least one of the complementary domains of S (say ¯U ) is a 3–manifold
whose boundary is precisely S, so S is already collared “on the U-side” and consequently it
is bicollared if and only if it is collared also “on the V -side”.

Given a point p ∈ S on deﬁnes the notion of S being locally bicollared at p mimicking the
deﬁnition of locally collared given earlier. It is not diﬃcult to check that if S is locally ﬂat at
some point p, then it is locally bicollared at that same point (the converse is also true, but
we shall not need it).

Let E be a closed disk contained in the boundary of B and such that ∂E is disjoint from

T so, in particular, ∂B is locally ﬂat at each point of ∂E.

First let us show how to push E into B, essentially mimicking the model laid out in Section
5.1. Since ∂B is collared in B by (B2), there exists an embedding c+ of ∂B ×[0, 2] into B such
that c+(p, 0) = p for every p ∈ ∂B. (Notice that we take ∂B × [0, 2] rather than ∂B × [0, 1]
as the domain of the collar c+; this is just for notational convenience.) Denote C the image
of c+, which is a closed neighbourhood of ∂B in B. Set

(5)

ˆE := c+(∂E × [0, 1] ∪ E × 1).

By construction ˆE is a 2–disk properly embedded in B; also, ∂ ˆE = ∂E. At this point it
may be convenient to refer back to Figure 6.(b), which shows a two dimensional sketch of the
situation. The disk E appears as an interval contained in the boundary of B, and ˆE can be
thought of as the result of pushing E into B along the lines of the collar c+.

Proposition 20. Suppose B is connected. Then ˆE separates B into two connected compo-
nents V0 and V1 such that E ∩ V0 = ∅,

˙E ⊆ V1 and ¯V0 ∩ ¯V1 = ˆE.

Proof. Let C/2 denote “half the collar C”; that is, C/2 := c+(∂B × [0, 1]). Consider the sets

V0 := (B − C/2) ∪ c+((∂B − E) × [0, 2]) and V1 := c+( ˙E × [0, 1)).

Both are open in B, and both are connected: V1 clearly so, and V0 because it is the union of
two connected sets having a nonempty intersection. Indeed, B − C/2 is homeomorphic to the
interior of B, which is connected because B is connected (in R3, the assumption that ∂B is
connected entails that B is connected too), and ∂B − E is connected because removing a disk
from a (by assumption) connected surface does not disconnect the surface. Also, V0 and V1
are disjoint and their union is B − ˆE, so they are actually the two connected components into
which ˆE separates B. A straightforward computation shows that ¯V0 = V0∪ ˆE and ¯V1 = V1∪ ˆE,
so ¯V0 ∩ ¯V1 = ˆE. By construction clearly V0 does not meet E whereas ˙E ⊆ V1.
(cid:3)

Now we want to show that the decomposition B = ¯V0 ∪ ¯V1 is tame. To this end we need

to construct some sort of “partial bicollar” of E in R3 as described below.

The “inner half” of the bicollar (that is, the part contained in B) presents no diﬃculty since
∂B itself (hence E) is collared in B. In fact, we already made use of it when constructing
the disk ˆE. We therefore keep our previous notation: c+ : ∂B × [0, 2] −→ B is an embedding
such that c+(p, 0) = p for every p ∈ ∂B.

22

J. J. S ´ANCHEZ-GABITES

Denote B′ the complement (in R3) of the interior of B; that is, B′ := R3 − ˙B. The “outer
half” of the bicollar (the part contained in B′) can be constructed along ∂E, since it contains
no wild points of ∂B by assumption. More precisely, we proceed as follows. At each p ∈ ∂E
the surface ∂B is locally ﬂat, hence locally bicollared and in particular locally collared in B′.
Thus, every p ∈ ∂E has a neighbourhood Wp in ∂B over which it is possible to ﬁnd a local
collar c−
p : Wp × [−1, 0] −→ B′. Since ∂E is compact, we may cover it with a ﬁnite family
of these Wp and paste all the collars together using the result of Brown cited above (B1) to
obtain a collar c− : W × [−1, 0] −→ B′, where W is a neighbourhood of ∂E in ∂B.

Notice that ∂E is a simple closed curve and so it has arbitrarily close neighbourhoods A
that are closed annuli along the curve ∂E. Finding such an A so thin that it is contained
in W we can assume that the collar c− is deﬁned on all of A. The union b := c+ ∪ c− thus
provides an embedding

b : A × [−1, 2] ∪ E × [0, 2] −→ R3.

Proposition 21. The decomposition B = ¯V0 ∪ ¯V1 is tame. Thus, the inequality r(B) ≥
r( ¯V0) + r( ¯V1) holds.

Proof. We are going to use the criterion of Proposition 12 (thus Q, S, Q0 and Q1 have the
meaning given there).

By the two dimensional Sch¨onﬂies theorem, there exists a homeomorphism g0 of the plane
{z = 0} onto an open neighbourhood of E ∪ A in ∂B. Let D and A0 be the pullbacks of E
and A via g0; that is, D := g−1
0 (A). These are a closed disk in {z = 0} and
an annulus along its boundary, respectively.

0 (E) and A0 := g−1

As in Stage 0, push D into P + to depth 1 obtaining ˆD := ∂D × [0, 1] ∪ D × 1. Also,
consider the cube Q′ := A0 × [−1, 2] ∪ D × [0, 2] (compare with Equation (4)). The map g0
can be extended to an embedding g of all of Q′ into R3 using the partial bicollar b, letting
g(x, y, z) := b(g0(x, y), z). Notice that, by construction:

(i ) g takes ˆD onto ˆE,
(ii ) g(U0 ∩ Q′) ⊆ V0 and g(U1 ∩ Q′) = V1, where V0 and V1 are the connected components

of B − ˆE.

According to Proposition 18 (see also Remark 19) there exists a homeomorphism e : Q −→

Q′ such that:

(1) ˆD ⊆ e( ˙S),
(2) U0 ∩ e(Q) ⊆ e(Q0) and U1 ∩ e(Q) ⊆ e(Q1).
Consider the embedding e′ := g ◦ e : Q −→ R3. Applying g to both sides of (1) and using
(i ) we see that ˆE ⊆ e′( ˙S). Doing the same with (2) and (ii ) it follows that V0 ∩e′(Q) ⊆ e′(Q0)
and V1 ∩ e′(Q) ⊆ e′(Q1). This establishes (1) and (2) of Proposition 12, proving that the
decomposition B = ¯V0 ∪ ¯V1 is tame.

(cid:3)

Remark 22. Notice that in constructing ˆE there is nothing special in pushing E into B to
“depth 1”; that is, we could set

ˆE := c+(∂D × [0, ǫ] ∪ E × ǫ)

ON THE SET OF WILD POINTS OF ATTRACTING SURFACES IN R3

23

for any 0 < ǫ < 1 and everything would work just as well (with the appropriate modiﬁcations
to the deﬁnitions of D, S ′ and Q′). For later reference we shall call this “pushing E into B
down to depth ǫ”. Also, observe that the collar c+ can be ﬁxed once and for all; it does not
depend on the disk E being considered. The same is not true of c−, since it was constructed
pasting local collars along ∂E.

5.3. Stage 2. Let now E1, E2, . . . , En be disjoint closed disks in ∂B whose boundaries do not
meet T . Push each Ej into B while leaving its boundary untouched. This is done exactly as
described in 5.2 for a single disk: having chosen a collar c+ : ∂B × [0, 2] −→ B, we consider
the family of disjoint disks

ˆEj := c+(∂Ej × [0, 1] ∪ Ej × 1);

all of them properly embedded in B. Arguing as in Proposition 20 one sees that the (union
of the) disks ˆE1, ˆE2, . . . , ˆEn separate B into n + 1 connected components V0, V1, . . . , Vn. We
label them in such a way that V0 does not meet any of the Ej whereas ˙Ej ⊆ Vj for each
1 ≤ j ≤ n. More explicitly
V0 := (B − C/2) ∪ c+((∂B − ∪jEj) × [0, 2]) and Vj := c+( ˙Ej × [0, 1))
here C/2 is the “half collar” introduced in the proof of Proposition 20. The Vj satisfy the
following properties:

for j = 1, 2, . . . , n;

(V1) ˙Ej ⊆ Vj for each j = 1, . . . , n
(V2) ¯Vi ∩ ¯Vj = ∅ for 1 ≤ i 6= j ≤ n
(V3) ¯V0 ∩ ¯Vj = ˆEj for each j = 1, . . . , n

Proposition 23. The inequality r(B) ≥Pn

Proof. Consider the ascending sequence of compact sets

j=0 r( ¯Vj) holds.

Kj := ¯V0 ∪ ¯V1 ∪ . . . ∪ ¯Vj

for 0 ≤ j ≤ n. Notice that Kj+1 := Kj ∪ ¯Vj+1 and Kj ∩ ¯Vj+1 = ¯V0 ∩ ¯Vj+1 = ˆEj+1 by (V2) and
(V3). The same argument of Proposition 21 (enlarging the disk ˆEj+1 using the fact that its
boundary does not contain any wild points) shows that the decomposition Kj+1 = Kj ∪ ¯Vj+1
is tame, and so entails that r(Kj+1) ≥ r(Kj) + r( ¯Vj+1). Inductively, this gives

r(Kn) ≥ r(K0) +

r( ¯Vj).

n

Xj=1

It only remains to observe that K0 = ¯V0 (this is clear) and Kn = ¯V0 ∪ ¯V1 ∪ . . . ∪ ¯Vn is the
whole B: indeed, by deﬁnition the union of the Vj is B − ∪ ˆEj; since (V3) guarantees that ¯V0
contains all the ˆEj, it follows that the union of the ¯Vj is all of B.
(cid:3)

5.4. Stage 3. We are ﬁnally ready to put all the pieces together and prove Theorem 17:

Proof of Theorem 17. From the fact that T is totally disconnected it is easy to prove (or see
[16, Theorem 6, p. 72 and Theorem 5, p. 93]) that it has arbitrarily small neighbourhoods
in ∂B that are unions of a ﬁnite number of disjoint disks. Thus for k = 0, 1, 2, . . . we may
construct a sequence of neighbourhoods E(k) of T in ∂B such that

24

J. J. S ´ANCHEZ-GABITES

(E1) each E(k) is a union of disjoint disks E(k)
(E2) E(k+1) is contained in the interior of E(k) for every k,

1 , E(k)

2 , . . . , E(k)
nk ,

(E3) the intersection Tk E(k) is precisely T .

For each k apply the construction described in 5.3 to the family of disks E(k)

2 , . . . , E(k)
nk .
This involved a choice of a collar c+ of ∂B in B; this is to be made once and used for every
k as mentioned in Remark 22. Also (again, refer to Remark 22 we can push the disks E(k)
into B only to depth ǫ = 1/k. The resulting disks ˆE(k)
nk separate B into nk + 1
connected components V (k)
0
V (k)
j = c+( ˙E(k)

nk of which the ones of interest to us are

2 , . . . , ˆE(k)

j = 1, 2, . . . , nk.

j × [0, 1/k))

, . . . , V (k)

1 , E(k)

1 , ˆE(k)

, V (k)

1

j

Condition (E2) on the E(k) implies that each disk E(k+1)
c+ is independent of k, this entails that each V (k+1)

j

j

is contained in some disk E(k)

j ′ . Since

is contained in some V (k)

. Set

j ′

B(k)

0

:= ¯V (k)

0

and B(k)

1

:=

¯V (k)

j

.

nk

[j=1

From what we just said, B(k+1)
disks ˆE(k)
Proposition 23 shows that

⊆ B(k)
1
are obtained by pushing E(k)

1

j

j

for each k. Also, (E3) and the condition that the
1 = T . Finally,

only to depth 1/k implies thatTk B(k)

r(B) ≥

r( ¯V (k)

j

) ≥

r( ¯V (k)

j

) = r(B(k)
1 )

nk

Xj=0

nk

Xj=1

where in the last step we have used the trivial fact that r of a disjoint union of ﬁnitely many
compact sets is the sum of their r numbers. Now from the semicontinuity of r and the fact
that the B(k)

1 decrease and have T as their intersection it follows that

r(B) ≥ lim inf
k→∞

r(B(k)

1 ) ≥ r(T ).

This concludes the proof of Theorem 17.

(cid:3)

6. The proof of Theorem 2 and Corollary 3

All the work done so far makes the proof of the following result very short:

Theorem 24. Let B ⊆ R3 be a compact 3–manifold with a connected boundary ∂B. Notice
that ∂B is a closed surface. Suppose that ∂B contains a compact, totally disconnected set T
such that:

(i) T is not rectiﬁable.
(ii) ∂B is locally ﬂat at each p 6∈ T .

Then B cannot be realized as an attractor for a homeomorphism of R3.

Proof. By Theorems 17 and 14 we have r(B) ≥ r(T ) = ∞, so r(B) = ∞. Then the ﬁniteness
property (P1) of r (see p. 7) shows that B cannot be an attractor for a homeomorphism. (cid:3)

From this,

ON THE SET OF WILD POINTS OF ATTRACTING SURFACES IN R3

25

Proof of Theorem 2. Suppose that the closed and connected surface S were an attractor for a
homeomorphism f of R3. Think of S3 as R3 together with the point at inﬁnity ∞ and extend
f to all of S3 letting f (∞) := ∞. Viewing S as a subset of S3, it is still an attractor for f
with the same basin of attraction.

Let U1 and U2 be the connected components of S3 − S. Since S bounds a 3–manifold by
hypothesis, the closure (in R3 and also in S3) of at least one of the ¯Ui is a 3–manifold. Call it
B. Since S is invariant under f , so is S3 − S and therefore f either leaves each Ui invariant
or interchanges them. However, only one of the Ui contains ∞, which is ﬁxed by f , so it
must be the case that f (Ui) = Ui. As a consequence f (B) = B, so that B is also invariant
under f . It is straightforward to check that B is an attractor for f . Also, by deﬁnition B is
a compact 3–manifold whose boundary is precisely ∂B = S. Applying Theorem 24 to B we
see that T has to be rectiﬁable, and so Theorem 2 follows.
(cid:3)

The alternative form of Theorem 2′ is an immediate consequence of this:

Proof of Theorem 2′. Being a compact manifold, S has ﬁnitely many connected components
Si each of which is a closed surface. Also, all the Si bound a 3–manifold on one side because
S does. Since each Si is open in S, the surface S is locally ﬂat at some p ∈ Si if and only if Si
is locally ﬂat at p. Therefore the set of wild points W of S is the union of the sets Wi of wild
points of the Si. Finally, it is proved in [21] that each component of an attractor in Rn is an
attractor itself. Thus all the Si are attractors, and applying the contrapositive of Theorem 2
to them (with T = Wi in each case) it follows that each Wi must be rectiﬁable. Since the Wi
are open in W and cover it, W is locally rectiﬁable and, by Lemma 16, rectiﬁable.
(cid:3)

We saw in Remark 13 that a rectiﬁable totally disconnected set has a simply connected
complement in R3. Thus we may state the following, more computational consequence of
Theorem 2:

Corollary 25. Let S ⊆ R3 be a closed surface that bounds a 3–manifold. Suppose that S
contains a closed, totally disconnected set T such that (i) S is locally ﬂat at each p 6∈ T and
(ii) the complement of T in R3 is not simply connected. Then S cannot be an attractor.

We ﬁnish by proving that there are uncountably many non equivalent ways of embedding
a 2–sphere in R3 in such a way that it cannot be an attractor (Corollary 3). It will be evident
from the proof that the corollary is true for (orientable) surfaces of any genus. However, for
surfaces of higher genus (think, for instance, of a torus) one can obtain trivially nonequivalent
embeddings by knotting the surface diﬀerently in R3. Concentrating on spheres we avoid this
degree of freedom, which is not interesting in the present context.

Let us review the construction of nonattracting surfaces described in Section 1. We start
with a compact 3–manifold B0, which in our present case is going to be the unit closed 3–ball,
and extract feelers that branch in such a way as to (in the limit) reach a prescribed non rec-
tiﬁable, compact, totally disconnected set T . The branching process is guided by a sequence
of neighbourhoods Nk of T chosen in advance. The resulting compact 3–manifold B is still
homeomorphic to the original B0, and its boundary S (which is, accordingly, homeomorphic
to S0) is locally ﬂat at each p 6∈ T . Then Theorem 2 immediately implies that S cannot be
an attractor.

26

J. J. S ´ANCHEZ-GABITES

Although for our purposes in Section 1 we did not need to fully identify the set W of wild
points of S (it was enough to know that W ⊆ T ), now we need to be a little more precise
and guarantee that W = T . In general this equality does not need to hold: for instance, if T
has an isolated point p and its corresponding feeler converges “straight” towards p (think of
a cone having p at its tip) then p is not a wild point.

There are several ways to reﬁne the above construction in order to guarantee that W = T .
One of them is to require that T be homogeneous; that is, for any two p, q ∈ T there exists a
homeomorphism of R3 that sends p onto q. It is not diﬃcult to prove that: (i) if S is locally
ﬂat at some p ∈ T , then T is locally rectiﬁable at p (essentially because every compact,
totally disconnected set in the plane is rectiﬁable; see Chapter 13 in [16]); (ii) due to the
homogeneity of T , if it is locally rectiﬁable at a single point then it is locally rectiﬁable at
every point. Since T is non rectiﬁable, (i), (ii) and Lemma 16 entail that W = T .

A less simple but maybe more illustrative way of achieving the equality W = T consists
in patterning the feelers that are used to enlarge B0 after the wild arc α shown in Figure
10.(a), due to Fox and Artin. By “patterning the feeler along α” we mean that the feeler is
obtained by thickening α to a solid tube whose diameter tapers towards zero as it approaches
p, as shown in Figure 10.(b). An arc is tame if it can be sent into a straight line segment by
an ambient homeomorphism, or wild otherwise. That α is wild was established by Fox and
Artin [8, Example 1.2, pp. 983 ﬀ.] performing a local analysis of the fundamental group of
R3 − α near p. More speciﬁcally, they showed that α is not 1–LCC at p, which it would be
if it were tame (see [6, Section 2.8, pp. 75 ﬀ.] for more details). We remark, because it will
play a role later on, that an arc β ⊆ R3 that is actually contained in a plane within R3 is
1–LCC at each of its points because there are no wild arcs in two dimensions ([16, Chapter
10, pp. 59 ﬀ.]).

α

p

p

(a) A Fox–Artin arc

(b) A Fox–Artin feeler

Figure 10.

In the actual construction of S we need to branch feelers into smaller subfeelers, of course,
but we want to preserve their “Fox–Artin nature”. Figure 11 suggests how this is done. As
illustrated in Figure 11.(a) suppose that, just after crossing the boundary of some Nk (recall
that these are the neighbourhoods of T that are used to guide the branching process), we
need to split the incoming feeler into, say (for simplicity), two subfeelers that will eventually
converge to two diﬀerent points p and p′ of T . We continue as in Figure 11.(b), simply
patterning each subfeeler after the Fox–Artin arc α. However, this is not all: we insist that
the subfeelers are tangled with the original feeler in the characteristic fashion of α, as shown
for the lower subfeeler in Figure 11.(c). The upper subfeeler (the one leading to p′) should
also be tangled with its parent feeler in the same way, although this is not shown in the
drawing to avoid cluttering it.

ON THE SET OF WILD POINTS OF ATTRACTING SURFACES IN R3

27

p′

p

p′

p

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 11. Branching a Fox–Artin feeler

This last step guarantees that, for each p ∈ T , there is a Fox–Artin arc αp which looks
exactly like α (in particular, it is also a wild arc) that starts at any prescribed point in B0
and ends at p, running along the boundary of B (that is, along the surface S) and choosing at
each branching point the appropriate subfeeler to reach p. In turn, this entails that S cannot
be locally ﬂat at p. For, suppose it were. Then locally near p the surface S would look like
a plane in R3, and αp (again, near p) would be contained in that plane. But we mentioned
earlier that there are no wild curves in two dimensions and, in particular, αp would be 1–LCC
at p, which it is not. Thus, summing up, we have proved the following:

Remark 26. If the construction of Section 1 is performed using Fox–Artin feelers as just
described, the set of wild points of the resulting surface is all of T .

(Incidentally, maybe after seeing this argument Remark 4.(1) becomes more convincing).

With Remark 26 and a result of Sher the proof of Corollary 3 is now very easy:

Proof of Corollary 3. Sher proved [24, Corollary 1, p. 1199] that there exists an uncountable
family {Ti}i∈I of Cantor sets in R3 that are all inequivalently embedded; that is, for any
two diﬀerent i, j ∈ I there is no ambient homeomorphism sending Ti onto Tj. Notice that,
since any two rectiﬁable Cantor sets in R3 are equivalently embedded (because both can be
sent into a straight line, and they are certainly equivalently embedded there by a homeo-
morphism that can evidently be extended to all of R3), all the Ti but at most one are non
rectiﬁable. Discarding the latter we may assume without loss of generality that all the Ti are
non rectiﬁable.

For each Ti let Si be the attracting 2–sphere obtained by applying the construction of
Section 1, but using Fox–Artin feelers as just described. This guarantees that the set Wi
of wild points of Si is precisely Ti. Also, since the Ti are not rectiﬁable, an application of
Theorem 2 shows that no Si can be an attractor.

Now suppose that there exists an ambient homeomorphism h that sends Si onto Sj, with
i 6= j. It follows immediately from the deﬁnition of local ﬂatness that if Si is locally ﬂat
at p then Sj is locally ﬂat at h(p) and conversely or, equivalently stated in terms of wild
points, h(Wi) = Wj. However, the surfaces were constructed in such a way that Wi = Ti and
Wj = Tj, so we would have a homeomorphism of R3 that sends Ti onto Tj, thus contradicting
the fact that the Ti are all inequivalently embedded.
(cid:3)
Remark 27. Garity, Repovˇs and ˇZeljko [10, Theorem 2, p. 294] strenghtened the result of
Sher by showing that there exists an uncountable family of Cantor sets {Ti : i ∈ I} that, in
addition to being inequivalently embedded, are all homogeneous. Using this and the argument

28

J. J. S ´ANCHEZ-GABITES

sketched earlier that the homogeneity of Ti is enough to guarantee that Wi = Ti it is possible
to give an alternative, shorter proof of Corollary 3. We prefer the approach taken above
because it avoids the homogeneity condition which, as we have seen, is not essential for the
validity of Corollary 3.

References

[1] L. Antoine. Sur l’homomorphie de ﬁgures et de leurs voisinages. J. Math. Pures Appl., 86:211–325, 1921.
[2] R. H. Bing. Tame Cantor sets in E 3. Paciﬁc J. Math, 11:435–446, 1961.
[3] M. Brown. A proof of the generalized Schoenﬂies theorem. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., 66:74–76, 1960.
[4] M. Brown. Locally ﬂat imbeddings of topological manifolds. Ann. Math., 75(2):331–341, 1962.
[5] S. Crovisier and M. Rams. IFS attractors and Cantor sets. Topology Appl., 153:1849–1859, 2006.
[6] R. J. Daverman and G. A. Venema. Embeddings in manifolds. American Mathematical Society, 2009.
[7] P. F. Duvall and L. S. Husch. Attractors of iterated function systems. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., 116:279–

284, 1992.

[8] R. H. Fox and E. Artin. Some wild cells and spheres in three-dimensional space. Ann. Math. (2),

49(4):979–990, 1948.

[9] B. M. Garay. Strong cellularity and global asymptotic stability. Fund. Math., 138:147–154, 1991.
[10] D. Garity, D. Repovˇs, and M. ˇZeljko. Uncountably many inequivalent Lipschitz homogeneous Cantor

sets in R3. Paciﬁc J. Math., 222(2):287–299, 2005.

[11] B. G¨unther. A compactum that cannot be an attractor of a self-map on a manifold. Proc. Amer. Math.

Soc., 120(2):653–655, 1994.

[12] B. G¨unther and J. Segal. Every attractor of a ﬂow on a manifold has the shape of a ﬁnite polyhedron.

Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., 119(1):321–329, 1993.

[13] V. Jim´enez and J. Llibre. A topological characterization of the ω–limit sets for analytic ﬂows on the

plane, the sphere and the projective plane. Adv. Math., 216:677–710, 2007.

[14] V. Jim´enez and D. Peralta-Salas. Global attractors of analytic plane ﬂows. Ergodic Theory Dynam.

Systems, 29:967–981, 2009.

[15] H. Kato. Attractors in Euclidean spaces and shift maps on polyhedra. Houston J. Math., 24:671–680,

1998.

[16] E. E. Moise. Geometric topology in dimensions 2 and 3. Springer-Verlag, 1977.
[17] J. Munkres. Elements of algebraic topology. Addison–Wesley Publishing Company, Inc., 1984.
[18] R. Ortega and J. J. S´anchez-Gabites. A homotopical property of attractors. Topol. Methods Nonlinear

Anal., 46:1089–1106, 2015.

[19] C. P. Rourke and B. J. Sanderson. Introduction to piecewise-linear topology. Ergebnisse der Mathematik

und ihrer Grenzgebiete, Band 69. Springer-Verlag, 1972.

[20] J. J. S´anchez-Gabites. Arcs, balls and spheres that cannot be attractors in R3. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc.

To appear. Provisionally available at http://arxiv.org/abs/1406.5482.

[21] J. J. S´anchez-Gabites. On the shape of attractors for discrete dynamical systems. Submitted. Provision-

ally available at http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.06549.

[22] J. J. S´anchez-Gabites. How strange can an attractor for a dynamical system in a 3–manifold look?

Nonlinear Anal., 74:6162–6185, 2011.

[23] J. M. R. Sanjurjo. Multihomotopy, ˇCech spaces of loops and shape groups. Proc. London Math. Soc. (3),

69(2):330–344, 1994.

[24] R. B. Sher. Concerning wild Cantor sets in E 3. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., 19:11951200, 1968.

Facultad de Ciencias Econ´omicas y Empresariales. Universidad Aut´onoma de Madrid,

Campus Universitario de Cantoblanco. 28049 Madrid (Espa˜na)

E-mail address: JaimeJ.Sanchez@uam.es

