6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
8
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
3
2
9
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Uncertainty Estimates for Theoretical Atomic and Molecular

Data

H.-K. Chung∗

Nuclear Data Section, International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna, A-1400, Austria

Nuclear Data Section, International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna, A-1400,Austria

B. J. Braams†

K. Bartschat‡

Department of Physics and Astronomy,

Drake University, Des Moines, Iowa, 50311, USA

A. G. Cs´asz´ar§

MTA-ELTE Complex Chemical Systems Research Group,

H-1118 Budapest, P´azm´any s´et´any 1/A, Hungary

G. W. F. Drake¶

Department of Physics, University of Windsor,

Windsor, Ontario N9B 3P4, Canada

T. Kirchner∗∗

Department of Physics and Astronomy,

York University, Toronto, Ontario M3J 1P3, Canada

Department of Physics, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL 32816, USA

V. Kokoouline††

J. Tennyson‡‡

Department of Physics and Astronomy,

University College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK

(Dated: March 21, 2016)

1

Abstract

Sources of uncertainty are reviewed for calculated atomic and molecular data that are impor-

tant for plasma modeling: atomic and molecular structure and cross sections for electron-atom,

electron-molecule, and heavy particle collisions. We concentrate on model uncertainties due to

approximations to the fundamental many-body quantum mechanical equations and we aim to pro-

vide guidelines to estimate uncertainties as a routine part of computations of data for structure

and scattering.

∗ Electronic address: H.Chung@iaea.org
† Electronic address: B.J.Braams@iaea.org
‡ Electronic address: klaus.bartschat@drake.edu
§ Electronic address: csaszar@chem.elte.hu
¶ Electronic address: gdrake@uwindsor.ca
∗∗ Electronic address: tomk@yorku.ca
†† Electronic address: slavako@mail.ucf.edu
‡‡ Electronic address: j.tennyson@ucl.ac.uk

2

I.

INTRODUCTION

There is growing acceptance that benchmark atomic and molecular (A+M) calculations

should follow accepted experimental practice and include an uncertainty estimate alongside

any numerical values presented [1]. Increasingly, A+M computations are also being used as

the primary source of data for input into modeling codes. It is our assertion that these data

should, if at all possible, also be accompanied by estimated uncertainties. However, it is not

at all straightforward to assess the uncertainties associated with A+M computations. The

aim of this work is to provide guidelines for A+M theorists to acquire uncertainty estimates

as a routine part of their work. We concentrate on data that are most important for high-

temperature plasma modeling: data for A+M structure, electron-atom (or ion) collisions,

electron collisions with small molecules, and charge transfer in ion-atom collisions.

Uncertainty Quantiﬁcation (UQ) is a very active research area in connection with simu-

lations of complex systems arising in weather and climate modeling, simulations of nuclear

reactors, radiation hydrodynamics, materials science, and many other applications in science

and engineering. A report from the USA National Research Council [2] provides a valuable

survey. The current state of the ﬁeld is reﬂected in the biennial meeting of the SIAM Ac-

tivity Group on Uncertainty Quantiﬁcation [3]. This ﬁeld of UQ for complex systems has

a mathematical core in the description of uncertainty propagation for chaotic deterministic

and stochastic evolution equations in many dimensions (“polynomial chaos”). In many cases

the interest is then focused on systems for which the basic equations are not well established

and involve poorly known parameters and functional dependencies.

The present article is concerned with quantiﬁcation of uncertainties in elaborate compu-

tations, but the nature of computational A+M science for application to high temperature

plasmas is rather diﬀerent from the focus areas of present UQ science. This A+M science

is concerned with simple physical systems and their interactions. The underlying equations

governing the processes of interest and the ensuing dynamics are essentially known [4], but

except for a few special cases a true ﬁrst-principles treatment is numerically intractable: the

complexity scales exponentially with the number of electrons while for a ﬁxed number of

electrons the complexity of the ﬁrst-principles equations using a basis tends to scale poly-

nomially in the basis size with the number of electrons in the exponent. A+M theory is,

therefore, about development of models that aim to approximate the exact problem with nu-

3

merically tractable procedures. The uncertainties in these procedures, referred to as “model

uncertainties” in the following, are strongly model-dependent and are often poorly under-

stood. The solution of any given model is itself subject to uncertainties due to convergence

and other numerical issues associated with a grid or a basis set. These will be referred to as

“numerical uncertainties”. Finally, closer to established UQ science, uncertainties propagate

through the various stages of a calculation, e.g., from structure to collisions, in ways that

are hard to quantify.

Plasma conditions in, for example, astrophysics and nuclear fusion applications span

many orders of magnitude variation in energy and in spatial and temporal scales, and sys-

tems can be far from thermodynamic equilibrium. Basic data may be required for quite

strange-looking A+M systems; e.g., for collision processes between neutral atoms and highly

charged ions (relevant for neutral beam heating in fusion plasma and for processes involving

the solar wind) or for neutral and low charge states of atoms in high temperature plasma

(relevant for laser-produced plasma and for plasma-wall interaction). Very often the model-

ing requires data that are not accessible to direct experiments; for example, data for atomic

processes from excited initial states, data for molecular processes resolved with respect to

the rovibrational state of the molecule, data for processes involving electronically excited

molecules, data for molecular radicals, and to some extent data involving hazardous species

such as tritium or beryllium.

To develop an eﬀective and objective science of uncertainty assessment for A+M applica-

tions one has to bring together physics, chemistry, computer science, and applied mathemat-

ics communities. The A+M and plasma modeling communities are making the ﬁrst steps in

this direction, for example by meetings such as [5] and [6]. Our ultimate goal is to develop

guidelines for self-validation of computational theory for A+M processes; i.e. computational

procedures by which an uncertainty estimate is obtained along with the primary quantity of

interest. We recognize that experimental benchmark data are sometimes available and can

be used for additional validation. In general, this is more readily possible for structural stud-

ies (where spectroscopic data often provide benchmark accuracy) than for studies of collision

processes. Similarly, procedures for uncertainty estimates are currently better developed for

structure calculations than for scattering. This will be further elaborated below.

Energies and state-resolved cross sections are the primary data from A+M science, but

these data are normally processed further before being used in plasma modeling codes, which

4

tend to use eﬀective rate coeﬃcients for processes in thermal plasma with explicit account

of long-lived electronic states only. The processed data may be tabulated for interpolation

or ﬁt functions may be used, or a combination of interpolation and function ﬁtting. At that

stage completeness of the data (relative to processes covered and range of collision energy)

and qualitative correctness of behavior at extreme conditions is essential; more important

than pointwise accuracy. These processed, tabulated and ﬁtted data are incorporated into

integrated modeling codes, and a key challenge for theory and simulation is the consistent

integration of all processes and scales together with a well-founded assessment of uncer-

tainties as they are generated and propagated in the simulations. For the propagation of

uncertainties in A+M data through a simple plasma model (no spatial dependence) we note

the HydKin toolkit [7], which has been developed to support fusion plasma modeling and

other applications.

The focus of the present work is on calculations based on quantum mechanics for A+M

properties and processes that are important in plasmas: atomic and molecular structure,

electron collisions with atoms and molecules (and their ions), and charge transfer in ion-

atom and ion-molecule collisions. Processes governed by time-dependent ﬁelds and photon-

induced processes are not considered. Section II contains general remarks about the need

for uncertainty estimates and about approaches for uncertainty assessment. In section III

we discuss uncertainty assessment for atomic and molecular electronic structure. Section IV

is concerned with uncertainty assessment for electron-atom and electron-molecule collisions.

In section V we consider charge transfer in heavy particle collisions. Section VI is concerned

with uncertainty assessment in practice, with examples from atomic and molecular structure,

electron collisions and heavy particle collisions. In section VII we provide conclusions and

an outlook for future work.

II. GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS

Uncertainties should be provided for observable and other physically important interme-

diate quantities, such as molecular electronic excitation energies. Quantities in structural

studies for which uncertainties should routinely be provided include:

• energy level diﬀerences, such as excitation and ionization energies and for molecules

also dissociation energies and barrier heights;

5

• conﬁgurational parameters of molecules such as bond lengths and bond angles at local

minima and transition states;

• properties, such as dipole moments, oscillator strengths, lifetimes, and polarizabilities;
• numerical issues such as analytical representations (ﬁts) yielding potential energy and

dipole moment surfaces.

Quantities in collisional studies for which uncertainties should routinely be provided in-

clude:

• threshold energies;
• cross sections and/or appropriate rates;
• positions and widths of key resonances;
• other observables, such as the polarization of the emitted radiation, branching ratios,

etc..

It may also be desirable to provide uncertainties for other key computed quantities, such as

eigenphase sums or scattering lengths, which are important for the theoretical analysis of

given processes. These quantities, however, do not generally form input of modeling codes

and therefore the provision of uncertainties can be regarded as having lower signiﬁcance. It

must be recognized that there are diﬃculties in estimating uncertainties in some cases, for

example if a resonance comes out on the wrong side of a threshold. This observation means

that a computational model must have reached a suﬃcient level of stability and accuracy

before an uncertainty estimate is appropriate. However it is exactly such computations that

provide benchmarks and inputs to modeling codes.

For structural studies, including computations of relative energies and properties, the

focal point analysis (FPA) technique [8] provides an excellent procedure to assign uncertain-

ties for key quantities. Studies building on an FPA approach can also include uncertainty

estimates for eﬀects not explicitly computed:

for example it is much easier to estimate

the magnitude of higher order electron correlation or nonadiabatic corrections to the Born-

Oppenheimer approximation than it is to compute them in speciﬁc cases; see [9] for example.

In clear contrast, at present there is no well-deﬁned general procedure for uncertainty

propagation in scattering calculations. Notable exceptions are the way uncertainties in dipole

moments and oscillator strengths propagate from structure to certain collisional observables.

6

III. UNCERTAINTY ESTIMATES FOR STRUCTURE COMPUTATIONS

A. Atoms

The discussion of uncertainties in atomic structure computations begins with one- and

two-electron atoms and ions since these provide the traditional testing grounds for theory

in comparison with experiment. Theoretical uncertainties here limit the accuracy that can

be achieved for more complex atomic systems.

The highest accuracy can of course be achieved for hydrogen and other two-body prob-

lems since the Schr¨odinger equation can be solved exactly to ﬁnd the exact nonrelativistic

wave function and energy [10]. Uncertainties then come from relativistic and quantum elec-

trodynamic (QED) corrections, and the eﬀects of ﬁnite nuclear size and structure (for a

general review, see ref. [11]). The sizes of the relativistic and QED corrections are deter-

mined by the dual expansion parameters α and αZ, where α = 1/137.035999139(31) is

the ﬁne structure constant and Z is the nuclear charge [12]. Beginning with the lowest

order nonrelativistic energy, the relativistic corrections can generally be represented as an

expansion in powers of (αZ)2. For the case of one-electron atoms and inﬁnite nuclear mass,

the series can be summed to inﬁnity by solving instead the Dirac equation to obtain the

exact relativistic energies [10]. However, QED corrections (Lamb shifts) cannot be similarly

summed to all orders, and so represent a dominant source of uncertainty. The lowest order

one-loop terms from vacuum polarization and electron self-energy are of order α3Z 4 Ry.

These can be calculated essentially exactly. Higher order terms come from both binding

energy corrections as additional powers of αZ, and multi-loop Feynman diagrams as addi-

tional powers of α. The higher order terms are known in their entirety up to α6Z 6 Ry, but

the uncertainty in the numerical coeﬃcients gives an uncertainty of order α6Z 7 Ry, or a few

kHz for the ground state of hydrogen [13]. The uncertainty from ﬁnite nuclear size eﬀects

is about an order of magnitude larger, and hence dominates.

For heavy hydrogenic ions up to U91+ and beyond, considerable progress has been made

in summing the binding energy corrections (i.e. powers of αZ) to all orders for certain classes

of diagrams [14], coupled with experiments for comparison (see Gumberidze et al. [15], and

earlier references therein). For the ground state of U91+, the theoretical Lamb shift is
464.26 ± 0.5 eV, in good agreement with the measured value 460.2 ± 4.6 eV. For excited

7

s-states, the Lamb shifts and uncertainties scale approximately as 1/n3 with n and Z 6

with Z. These uncertainties place a fundamental limit on the accuracy of atomic structure

computations.

For atoms or ions containing two or more electrons, the Schr¨odinger equation is not sepa-

rable, and hence cannot be solved exactly. Electron correlation then enters as an important

new source of uncertainty. The correlation energy represents the diﬀerence between the

exact energy, and the Hartree-Fock (HF) approximation arising from the use of spherically

averaged potentials to obtain an independent particle approximation. Methods for few-

electron atoms are divided into two broad categories, depending on the relative importance

of correlation eﬀects and relativistic corrections. As a function of Z for an isoelectronic

sequence, correlation eﬀects are proportional to Z 0 = 1 (i.e. a constant) while the lowest

order relativistic corrections are proportional to α2Z 3. There is therefore a crossover point
when α2Z 3 = 1, or Z = 1/α2/3 (cid:39) 27. For Z ≤ 27, correlation eﬀects dominate relativistic
eﬀects. Consequently, one should start with the best possible solutions to the nonrelativistic

Schr¨odinger equation and treat relativistic corrections as a perturbation. Conversely, when

Z > 27, one should start with exact one-electron solutions to the Dirac equation, and treat

electron correlation as a perturbation. We will call these two regions the low-Z and high-Z

regions respectively. There is a broad region around Z = 27 where both methods yield

useful results, and provide interesting comparisons to assess the accuracy.

Atoms with two or three electrons provide a unique case because specialized techniques are

available that yield essentially exact solutions to the Schr¨odinger equation. This is achieved

by expanding the wave function in a Hylleraas basis set of functions involving explicitly
powers of the interelectron coordinate r12 = |r1 − r2|, where r1 and r2 are the position
vectors of the individual electrons. Since a Hylleraas basis set is provably complete [16, 17],

a variational calculation in Hylleraas coordinates is guaranteed to converge from above to

the exact nonrelativistic energy. The accuracy can be readily determined from the rate of

convergence as more functions are added to the basis set. In this way, the nonrelativistic

energy of the ground state of helium has been determined to 35 or more signiﬁcant ﬁgures [18,

19], and results accurate to 20 or more signiﬁcant ﬁgures can be readily obtained for the

entire singly excited spectrum of helium [20]. At this level of accuracy, calculations must be

done in at least quadruple precision (32 decimal digits). Results for lithium-like atoms with

three electrons are not as accurate because the basis sets become considerably larger (i.e.

8

30,000 terms instead of 3,000 terms), but energies accurate to 16 ﬁgures can still readily be

obtained.

At these levels of accuracy for two- and three-electron atoms, the dominant sources of

uncertainty in the low-Z region are the relativistic and QED corrections, as discussed above

for hydrogen. The Breit interaction accounts for relativistic corrections of order α2Z 4 Ry,

and a full many-electron theory accounts completely for QED corrections of order α3Z 4

(including the Araki-Sucher terms for QED corrections to the electron-electron interaction)

[21–23]. Theory has also recently been completed for all terms of order α4Z 5 Ry [24],

although the nonrelativistic operators become complicated and diﬃcult to evaluate. The

resulting uncertainty from higher order terms is estimated to be 36 MHz for the ionization

energy of the ground state of helium, and this scales as Z 5 with nuclear charge and roughly

1/n3 with n. For a comprehensive review, and tabulation for all states up to n = 10 and

angular momentum L = 7, see ref. [25].

In the high-Z region, the all-orders methods described above for hydrogenic ions can be

extended to helium-like ions and combined with 1/Z expansion calculations from the low-

Z region (the so-called uniﬁed method) to obtain results that are accurate over the entire

range from Z = 2 to Z = 100 [26, 27]. In most cases, the theoretical accuracy is better

than the experimental. The uncertainty from omitted terms of order α4Z 4 is estimated to
be ±1.2(Z/10)4 cm−1 for the n = 2 states.

Calculations of similar accuracy can also be carried out in Hylleraas coordinates for three-

electron atoms, but that is the limit to what has been achieved to date. Further progress is

hindered by the technical diﬃculties of calculating integrals involving nonseparable products
of factors containing all the interelectron coordinate of the form r12r23r34 ··· .

For many-electron atoms, one must resort instead to generally applicable methods of

atomic structure based on the HF approximation, or its generalizations to the multi-

conﬁguration Hartree-Fock (MCHF) or conﬁguration interaction (CI) methods. The MCHF

method is usually called MCSCF in quantum chemistry as the HF approximation is called the

self-consistent ﬁeld (SCF) method. The relativistic versions of these methods are based on

the Dirac equation instead of the Schr¨odinger equation, and are called the Dirac-Fock (DF)

approximation, with generalizations to the corresponding multi-conﬁguration Dirac-Fock

(MCDF) or relativistic conﬁguration interaction (RCI) methods. The basic approximation

of the HF and DF methods is to assume that the many-electron wave function can be

9

written as an antisymmetrized product of one-electron orbitals (a Slater determinant). The

HF (or DF) solution is the one that minimizes the energy over all wave functions that

can be expressed in this Slater determinant form. The diﬀerence between the HF (or DF)

energy and the exact energy is called the electron correlation energy. The correlation energy

can be systematically taken into account by solving a larger problem in which the mixing

with other electronic conﬁgurations is included. The conﬁguration mixing is induced by the

diﬀerence between the eﬀective HF potential and the exact electrostatic potential contain-

ing all the interelectronic repulsion terms. The diﬀerence between CI and MCHF revolves

around whether or not the electron orbitals are frozen (CI) or allowed to vary (MCHF) to

obtain a self-consistent solution. The correlation energy is of key importance in chemical

physics, because it is typically the same order of magnitude (about 1 eV) as chemical binding

energies. One might say that much of chemistry is buried in the correlation energy. Full
spectroscopic accuracy can require correlation energies as accurate as ±10−9 eV or better
for neutral atoms.

The coupled cluster (CC) method is a variation of CI, which also starts from the HF

orbitals, but then uses Brueckner-Goldstone perturbation theory to describe excitations from

the HF reference state, organized as singles (S), doubles (D), triples (T) etc. The advantage

is that it guarantees the size-extensivity of the solution, but it lacks the variational character

of the CI method.

Both the CI and MCHF methods are exact in principle (within their respective nonrela-

tivistic or relativistic approximations) and generally applicable to many-electron atoms and

ions, but they are much more slowly convergent than the methods based on Hylleraas basis

sets for two- or three-electron atoms. It can be shown that a CI calculation is equivalent to

a Hylleraas calculation that includes only the even powers of r12 in the basis set, but it is

the odd powers that are most eﬀective in reproducing the cusp at r12 = 0 in the correlated

electronic wave function. For this reason, a CI calculation requires much larger numbers

of conﬁgurations in the variational wave function in order to achieve even modest levels of

accuracy, and so careful convergence studies must be carried out to assess the uncertainty
in the calculation. Convergence uncertainties better than ±10−6 eV are seldom achieved,
even for few-electron atoms, and the convergence is typically much worse for many-electron

atoms. For example, Chantler et al [28] carried out a detailed convergence study for satellite

spectra of the copper K-alpha photo-emission spectrum, and found that uncertainties were

10

of the order of ±0.01 − 0.1 eV using the MCDF method. Their work includes a detailed
consideration of valence-valence and valence-core contributions to the correlation energy.

They also make use of comparisons between the length and velocity forms of dipole transi-

tion integrals to assess the accuracy. Many other similar studies have been carried out. A

great deal of work has now been done by many authors to develop systematic procedures

to assess the theoretical/computational uncertainties, and to assign reasonable uncertainty

estimates [29–36]. Uncertainties of transition parameters can be evaluated by investigating

diﬀerences between results calculated in the length and the velocity gauges for LS-allowed

transitions [37], and the analysis can be also extended for LS intercombination lines for

certain cases [32]. Perturbative analysis by performing smaller calculations with neglected

correlation eﬀects is also useful to estimate uncertainties [29].

Furthermore, it is necessary to include uncertainties due to physical eﬀects not included

in the calculation, such as additional classes of excitations, or quantum electrodynamic

corrections.

In recent work authors such as Safronova et al. [34] and K´allay et al. [36]

have made progress towards a comprehensive programme for the assessment of uncertainties

that goes beyond the simple assessment of convergence uncertainties. The objective is to

estimate an uncertainty that is independent of the actual diﬀerence between theory and

experiment. For uncertainties of this type, the central value is not necessarily the most

probable. For example, if QED corrections of order α3 have been omitted, then one can
expect further corrections of order ±cα3, where c is a nonzero coeﬃcient whose value can
often be estimated from other similar calculations, or from general scaling rules with n and

Z. It is often possible to establish similar “reference ions” where experimental data exist for

comparison with theoretical estimates of the uncertainties. The aim is to obtain reasonable

estimates of the uncertainties, not rigorous bounds on the actual diﬀerence between theory

and experiment (i.e. the error).

It is also important to estimate all major corrections separately, rather than as a sum

that may contain accidental cancellations, and to compare the estimates with known values

for reference ions. Whenever possible, calculations should be done by more than one method

(such as CI and MCHF), and the results compared for consistency. Once all of this is done,

the ﬁnal step is to check that the uncertainty estimates are in accord with the actual diﬀer-

ences between theory and experiment for known cases. In this way, theoretical uncertainty

estimates can be extended to cases where there are no experimental data for comparison.

11

B. Molecular electronic ground state properties

Without the so-called Born-Oppenheimer (BO) separation [38, 39] of nuclear and elec-

tronic motions the traditional concept of a molecular structure would basically be lost, as

only a murky quantum soup of delocalized particles would exist. As a consequence of the

BO approximation, electronic structure theory and nuclear motion theory emerge as the

two main subﬁelds of molecular quantum chemistry. These two ﬁelds are linked by potential

energy surfaces (PESs), plus any beyond-BO corrections that may deemed appropriate for a

given problem [40–43]. Given that for all but a few simple problems the converged absolute

energy of a molecular system cannot be obtained, it is important to note that molecular

structure computations are always concerned with relative rather than total energies, and

the same must be the case for the uncertainty estimates.

Much of modern applied molecular quantum chemistry is aimed at mapping out, locally

or globally, PESs of molecular species or reaction complexes (scattering systems) by means

of sophisticated numerical techniques [44, 45]. For studies of molecular structures the PES

is needed mostly in the vicinity of a minimum. The widespread availability of analytic

gradients and higher derivatives in standard electronic structure codes [46] has substantially

increased the utility of quantum chemistry for the exploration of PESs. For studies of

scattering systems it is important to have a full-dimensional representation of the surface

throughout the accessible region. Fundamental work in this area was done by Murrell and

coworkers [47]; see ref. [48] for more recent developments.

For all systems of chemical interest, the exact solution to the (nonrelativistic, time-

independent) electronic Schr¨odinger equation cannot be obtained; thus, a hierarchy of in-

creasingly accurate wave function approximation methods is needed beyond the BO sepa-

ration of nuclear and electronic motions [44]. Basic to the understanding of this hierarchy

and of the uncertainty at any given level is the computational cube depicted in ﬁgure 1.

It demonstrates that there are three fundamental approximations in polyatomic electronic

structure theory:

• choice of the electronic Hamiltonian;
• truncation of the one-particle basis (often referred to as the atomic orbitals);
• the extent of the electron correlation treatment, the n-particle basis.

12

The target result corresponding to the three simultaneous limits is approached as closely as

possible by choosing an appropriate Hamiltonian and extending both the one-particle ba-

sis set and the many-electron correlation method (n-particle basis) to technical limits. For

lighter elements, perhaps up to Ar(Z=18), the eﬀects of special relativity will not be con-

sequential (see the previous section), except in electronic structure studies seeking ultimate

accuracy.

The ab initio limit can be approached by composite schemes that employ multiple elec-

tronic structure computations at diﬀerent levels of theory to arrive at a single energy for a

given molecular geometry. A general composite scheme that is highly successful is the FPA

approach [8]. A fundamental characteristic of this approach is the dual extrapolation to the

one- and n-particle limits of electronic structure theory. The process leading to these limits

can be characterized as follows:

• use of a family of basis sets, such as (aug)-cc-pVXZ [50], which systematically ap-
proaches completeness through an increase in the cardinal number X, as a key aspect

of FPA is the assumption that the higher order correlation increments show diminish-

ing basis set dependence;

• application of lower levels of theory (typically, HF and MP2 computations) with very

extensive basis sets;

• execution of a sequence of higher order correlation treatments with the largest possible

FIG. 1. The three axes of the computational cube of wavefunction-based electronic structure theory

represents three important approximations. The ﬁgure was ﬁrst published in [49].

13

Electron correlation treatmentHamiltonianOne-particle basis set ExactanswerDZHFTZHFQZHF5ZHFZ(CBS)HFDZCCSDDZCCSD(T)DZFull-CIDZCCSDT(MP2, CISD)(MP4, CISDTQ)CBSFull-CIbasis sets;

• layout of a two-dimensional extrapolation grid based on the assumed additivity of
correlation increments, that is, the diﬀerences between correlation energies given by

successive levels of theory in the adopted hierarchy.

Within the FPA approach one considers the consequences of several “small” physical

eﬀects:

• core electron correlation;
• special relativity;
• adiabatic and nonadiabatic corrections to the BO approximation;
• quantum electrodynamics (QED).

In diatomic molecules containing ﬁrst-row atoms several eﬀects due to core correlation

have been established [51]. Equilibrium bond lengths experience a contraction of about
0.001 ˚A for single bonds and 0.002 ˚A or more for multiple bonds. The direct eﬀect of core

correlation is a correction function to the valence diatomic potential energy curve that has

negative curvature at all bond lengths around the equilibrium position. Core correlation

decreases all higher order force constants.

For extremely accurate structural studies the corrections to the BO approximation cannot

be neglected, especially if light atoms are present in the system.

QED also provides electronic radiative corrections (or Lamb shifts) arising from the in-

teraction of the electron with the ﬂuctuation of the electromagnetic ﬁeld in vacuum. Studies

of atoms, see above, and simple molecules [52] have indicated that QED eﬀects are generally

orders of magnitude smaller than scalar relativistic corrections.

Molecular properties are also an important result of electronic structure calculations,

not least because they provide input into subsequent scattering calculations. FPA-type

approaches are now being used to provide uncertainty estimates for permanent dipole mo-

ments [53, 54]. There are two viable methods of calculating dipole moments associated with

a given electronic wave function. The most straightforward method, implemented directly

in standard quantum chemistry codes, is to compute the dipole moment as an expectation

value (EV). An alternative method is to compute the dipole moment studying the response

14

to the application of a (small) electric ﬁeld placed in appropriate directions by ﬁnite diﬀer-

ences (FD) of the perturbed energies. The methods are related by the Hellmann-Feynman

theorem [55], but in general this theorem only holds when exact wave functions are used.

In practice, diﬀerences between the two methods can be large [56]. EV dipoles are cheaper

to compute, indeed they are essentially free once a wave function is available, whereas FD

dipoles require the computation of extra points with a ﬁnite ﬁeld. However, minor contribu-

tions to the dipoles, e.g., non-BO or relativistic eﬀects, can be evaluated in the FD approach

using energy diﬀerences even when their contribution to the electronic wave function is un-

known. Furthermore, there is a general acceptance [57–59] that the FD approach converges

more quickly to the true answer for a given (approximate) wave function. We therefore rec-

ommend the adoption of this approach to the uncertainty assessment for dipole moments.

We note that, unlike the situation with the use of diﬀerent gauges for photoionization calcu-

lations [60, 61], thus far comparison of EV and FD approaches have provided little insight

into the uncertainty in a given calculation.

Even less eﬀort has been dedicated to the computation of transition dipole moments,

despite their importance for electronic spectra and as inputs to scattering calculations.

However, FD methods for evaluating transition dipoles are available [62] if not extensively

used. Studies [63, 64] suggest that while the FD approach for transition dipoles shows

improved convergence behavior compared to the EV approach, perhaps more so than for

the diagonal dipole moments, there are technical issues with their use that still need to be

overcome [64, 65].

Target polarization is an important property for scattering calculations. However, the

target polarizability rarely enters directly into the scattering model. Even when it does, it

usually enters only in the long range part of the potential [66]. How well a given scattering

model represents the target polarizability can be used as a proxy for how converged the

polarization potential is as a whole. If the model gives a poor representation of the target

polarizability, then the representation of the overall polarization eﬀect is likely to be poor.

The components of the dipole polarizability tensor can be computed using the formula

(cid:88)

n>0

αrs = 2

< 0|µr|n >< n|µs|0 >

En − E0

,

(1)

where the µ are dipole operators, and r and s represent Cartesian components. Here En
and |n > represent the electronic energy and associated electronic wave function for the n-th

15

FIG. 2. Spherically averaged polarizability of water in its equilibrium geometry computed using

sum-over-states formula (1) [67]; the experimental value is corrected for vibrational eﬀects [69].

electronic state of the system; the state for which the polarizability is being calculated is
labeled |0 >, but it does not have to be the ground state. For the ground state this series
converges from below, provided enough states are included in the expansion. Experience [67,

68] shows that (a) convergence to the correct value requires consideration of the continuum;

and (b) sums running over only bound states show apparent convergence to a value that is

too low. These issues are illustrated in ﬁgure 2.

Use of Eq. (1) can therefore demonstrate the adequacy of a chosen close-coupling ex-

pansion. However, when doing this one also should note that approximate wave functions,

such as those given by the HF approximation, are usually more polarizable than accurate

wave functions. A cancellation of errors can therefore arise, whereby an inaccurate target

representation is combined with an incomplete sum over states yielding a polarizability in

apparent agreement with experiment or better computations.

C. Molecular electronic excited state properties

Excited electronic states are of interest in their own right and form an important compo-

nent of scattering calculations, where their representation is important both for electronic

excitation studies and as part of close-coupling expansions. There are far fewer systematic

studies of the convergence of excited state calculations with respect to the various compo-

nents discussed above. FPA has been used for the study of properties of excited electronic

states only to a limited extent [70–72]. Indeed an issue for many scattering studies, both

16

050100Number of states345678910Mean polarisability (au)Observed valueIncluding pseudostatesPhysical states onlytheoretical and experimental, is that generally there are far fewer studies of excited states

of diﬀerent spin symmetry than the ground state, since excitation of such states is optically

forbidden. However, the lowest excited state is usually in this class.

Molecular excited electronic states can be classiﬁed as valence, roughly corresponding to

rearrangement of the electrons within the valence orbitals, and Rydberg, corresponding to a

loosely bound electron orbiting a parent ion. Diﬀerent techniques are required to give good

representations of these two types of states [73], even though many molecular states are

either a mixture of the two or change their character as a function of bond length. We note

that Rydberg states form regular series, which are often well represented by quantum defect

theory [74]. Experience shows that uncertainties in these states can also often be better

represented in terms of quantum defects rather than absolute energies [75, 76], although

other methods can be used for calculations including assessment of uncertainties [77].

IV. UNCERTAINTY ESTIMATES FOR ELECTRON SCATTERING CALCULA-

TIONS

Before going into uncertainty assessment for collision processes, it is advisable to rec-

ognize that there are a number of energy ranges for which particular methods have been

developed and are believed to be particularly suitable. The conﬁdence in a given method is

usually based on general scattering theory, some numerical examples, and – last but not least

– comparison with experimental benchmark results. There is, however, never a guarantee in

collision physics, although some variational principles exist (e.g., for the eigenphase sum).

In general, the energy ranges of interest are:

• low energy collisions, with incident projectile energies well below the ﬁrst electronic

inelastic threshold;

• low energy, near-threshold collisions, with projectile energies well below the ﬁrst ion-

ization threshold;

• intermediate energy collisions, with incident projectile energies from about the ﬁrst

ionization threshold to a few times that value;

• high energy collisions, with projectile energies exceeding several times the ﬁrst ioniza-

tion threshold;

17

• collisions with relativistic energies, in which the kinetic energy of the incident projectile

should no longer be described by the nonrelativistic formula.

There is a wealth of literature available on methods for electron scattering calculations;

hence we refer to recent reviews [78–81]. However, we emphasize again that there is no un-

ambiguous rule regarding the reliability of a particular method. As will be further discussed

below, there are simply too many parameters other than the collision energy that may come

into play. Nevertheless, it seems useful to provide some general guidelines based on this one

parameter.

For low energy collisions a one-state close-coupling expansion may provide a good start.

In contrast to potential scattering (which is a further simpliﬁcation if the potential is chosen

as local, i.e. only depending on the position of the scattering projectile), the approach can

properly contain exchange eﬀects. On the other hand, even the closed channels can have

a major inﬂuence by polarizing the target. This eﬀect is often accounted for by some real-

valued “optical” potential (local or nonlocal). In fact, the method can be pushed toward

higher energies by including an imaginary “absorption” potential to account for loss of ﬂux

into inelastic channels.

Moving on to the near-threshold regime, the close-coupling expansion containing a num-

ber of n discrete states (to be referred to as “CCn” below) has been the method of choice

for many years.

It is often highly successful in the description of resonances associated

with low-lying inelastic thresholds. However, the method may have problems in the low en-

ergy regime if signiﬁcant polarization eﬀects originate from coupling to higher-lying discrete

states and, in particular, the ionization continuum.

For intermediate energy collisions, the above-mentioned eﬀect of coupling to discrete

states omitted in the CCn expansion, and even more importantly to the ionization contin-

uum, should be accounted for in some way. One way to do this is to extend the CC expansion

by including a number of so-called “pseudo-states”, which are essentially ﬁnite-range states

that are forced to ﬁt into a box. For the general idea, details of the box are not impor-

tant; it only matters that the states are square-integrable and provide a way to discretize

the (countable) inﬁnite Rydberg and the continuous ionization spectra. This is the basic

idea behind the “convergent close-coupling” (CCC) [82] and “R-matrix with Pseudo-States”

(RMPS) [83, 84] approaches. While the implementations may vary greatly, the critical idea

is exactly the same in both methods. Hence, if the same states (physical and pseudo) are

18

included in the expansion, the ﬁnal results should be the same – except for numerical issues

that may remain in practice.

Other ways to account for the possibility that two electrons may leave the target after the

collision (but only one of the electron wave function fulﬁlls the correct boundary conditions

in the CC approach) include “time-dependent close-coupling” (TDCC) [85] and “exterior

complex scaling” (ECS) [86]. In the former, a wavepacket is used for the projectile and the

formalism is expressed as an initial value rather than a boundary value problem. In the

latter, the coordinate system is changed from a real to a complex radial grid in order to

transform the oscillatory character of the positive-energy continuum wave function to an

exponentially decreasing character that, once again, allows for proper evaluation of certain

integrals. CCC, RMPS, TDCC, and ECS have been highly successful in handling ionization

processes in particular, although the extraction of the relevant information is by no means

trivial. For details we refer to some of the references given, which however should only be

considered as a starting point. Regarding actual applications to date, ECS has not really

been used for production calculations of atomic data relevant for plasma modeling, TDCC

has been used mostly to check other approaches for quasi-one and quasi-two electron targets,

CCC has been applied over a wide range of the latter targets, while RMPS has been applied

also to targets with more complex structure, in particular the noble gases beyond helium as

well as other open-shell systems.

Moving on to the high energy regime, perturbative methods based on some form of the

Born series are generally the method of choice. In this case, the projectile is either described

by a plane or a distorted wave, and then the transition matrix elements are obtained by

relatively straightforward integrations. The ﬁrst-order Distorted-Wave Born Approximation

(DWBA) [87–90] has the advantage over the corresponding plane-wave (PWBA) version [91]

in that it accounts for some higher order terms of the plane-wave series. In practice, pro-

duction calculations of atomic data in the high energy regime are mostly being performed

in the DWBA approach [92–95]. If possible, a good check of the applicability of the method

involves pushing it toward the intermediate energy regime and then comparing the predic-

tions to those from more sophisticated methods. The present implementation of the CCC

approach in momentum space is particularly useful in this respect, since the limiting case of

the CCC T-matrix elements for high energies is actually the DWBA or PWBA result.

Regarding the high energy range, full-relativistic implementations of RMPS [96], CCC [97],

19

and DWBA [98] exist and are frequently used, especially for heavy targets and when the

description of explicitly spin-dependent eﬀects (beyond exchange) is desirable. This may,

indeed, be necessary since (in a classical picture) the kinetic energy of the projectile may be

relativistic near the nucleus even if it is nonrelativistic in the asymptotic regime far away

from the target. In this paper we will not consider collisions for which the initial energy is

already relativistic.

Finally, we mention the existence of semi-empirical methods, such as the “Binary En-

counter f-scaling” (BEf) [99] and “Binary Encounter Bethe” (BEB) [100] approaches to

electron impact excitation and ionization. While these methods are highly useful in prac-

tice, they are somewhat limited in scope. For example, BEf can only be used for optically

allowed transitions and also requires experimental or reliable theoretical data for rescaling.

We do not feel comfortable to suggest a method for an uncertainty assessment for these

approaches.

As mentioned above, there are many issues that contribute to the problem of uncertainty

assessment in scattering calculations. These include:

• Target properties (energy levels, polarizability, dipole and higher moments), which are

ultimately associated with the quality of the wave functions used.

• Model contributions, including:

– The need for a consistent treatment of the N -electron target vs. the (N + 1)-

electron collision problem, which is a critical issue in obtaining accurate resonance

positions;

– accounting for the nuclear motion in electron-molecule collisions.

• Numerical uncertainty.
Some of these issues will be elaborated further below. Not surprisingly, the major chal-

lenge is to propagate the uncertainty associated with the above lists to give a ﬁnal uncertainty

on the quantities of interest (see below). We suggest that:

• Calculations be performed for a range of target models, thereby reﬂecting the under-

lying uncertainty in the target properties.

• Attempts be made to quantify uncertainties associated with the choice of the scattering

model; this will need to be done on a case-by-case basis (see below).

20

• Numerical uncertainties be quantiﬁed similarly to the FPA procedure described above.

A. Electron – atom/ion scattering

There is a wealth of experimental observables in the ﬁeld of electron collisions with

atoms, ions, and molecules. For a ﬁxed incident projectile energy and direction (even those

could, of course, be represented by some distributions), the most general (and hence least

speciﬁc) observable is the grand total cross section, obtained by integrating over all processes,

energies, angles, angular momenta, spins, their components, etc.. Such a cross section is

certainly relevant and can sometimes (but not always) be measured with high accuracy in

transmission cells or via the loss of the target species in traps. The grand total cross section

is made up of sums or integrals over unobserved quantities, where the lack of observation

is not a requirement of quantum mechanics, but rather a choice of the experimenter. This

choice may be voluntary or involuntary. In the former case, one might only be interested in

a rather global set of parameters to model a system, while the latter case might be forced if

the signal rate is simply inadequate to measure what one would really like to know.

It is clearly unrealistic to discuss all possible cases, including also those not even speciﬁed

above, where the initial projectile and target beams might have been prepared beyond an

unpolarized ensemble. We therefore restrict our discussion to angle-integrated state-to-state

cross sections and in some cases the rate coeﬃcients that can be derived from them by

performing an integral over the incident projectile energy.

For electron collisions with atoms and ions, the processes of interest for the present paper,

including initially excited states, are:

• elastic + momentum transfer;
• inelastic (excitation);
• inelastic (ionization);
• dielectronic recombination.

A few illustrative examples about how one might attempt to quantify uncertainties in the-

oretical predictions for these processes will be given in section VI.

21

B. Electron – molecule scattering

Many of the issues involved in uncertainties for electron-molecule scattering are similar

to those for atoms so below we concentrate on those that diﬀer.

Processes of interest, including those starting from initially excited states, are

• elastic and momentum transfer collisions;
• inelastic, rotational excitation;
• inelastic, vibrational excitation;
• dissociative electron attachment or recombination;
• inelastic, electronic excitation;
• impact dissociation, which normally goes via electronic excitation;
• ionization.

These processes (listed in approximate order of increasing collision energy) involve a mixture

of electronic excitation (either directly or via impact dissociation or ionization) and excita-

tion of the (rotational or vibrational) nuclear motion. There is no current, general method

that solves for all these processes simultaneously in a uniﬁed self-consistent manner. For

example, most treatments of electronic excitation or ionization are performed at the ﬁxed

nuclei level whereas treatments of dissociative attachment or recombination use specially

adapted nuclear motion techniques employing resonance (potential energy) curves which are

computed in electron collision calculations. See refs. [101, 102] for example.

In practice nuclear motion is often introduced in a somewhat ad hoc fashion deemed

appropriate for the process of interest. For example, resonances greatly enhance vibrational

excitation cross sections and these can be computed in a relatively straightforward fashion

using resonance curves, see ref. [102]. Conversely, nonresonant vibrational excitation can be

treated by vibrationally averaging T-matrices as a function of geometry [103, 104].

The vibrational averaging of the geometry-ﬁxed scattering (or T-) matrices is a part of

the frame transformation approach [103, 105, 106], developed in the 1970s and 1980s to

account for non-BO couplings of the incident electron with the vibrational and rotational

motion of the target molecule. For collisions with molecular ions, the frame transformation

can be combined with multi-channel quantum defect theory (MQDT) [107, 108] to give an

22

approach that uniﬁes nonresonant and resonant processes in electron-molecule scattering

[105, 106, 109–111] including rovibrational and electronic resonances, and that accounts for

non-BO couplings and vibrational excitation of the target by the incident electron. Full

vibrational close-coupling also provides a means of treating resonant and nonresonant pro-

cesses simultaneously for electron collisions with neutral molecules, but it is rarely used [112].

Rotational motion and excitation of the target molecule are often treated by means of

a transformation from the body-ﬁxed frame to the laboratory frame by simple angular

momentum recoupling [113], which can be viewed as a part of the general frame transfor-

mation approach discussed above [114–116]. If one uses the rigid-rotor approximation, the

purely rotational frame transformation is analytical for linear, spherical, or symmetric top

molecules and, therefore, is easy to implement [114, 115]. The rotational frame transforma-

tion approach has been demonstrated to work very well when compared to full close-coupling

treatments [114]. For molecules with permanent dipole moments, however, rotational ex-

citation requires special treatment because the long-range interaction of the electron with

the target dipole moment means that a large number of partial waves should be taken into

account. Special hybrid treatments are used to provide the contribution of the higher partial

waves [117, 118].

Along with rotational and vibrational excitation, dissociative electron attachment and

dissociative recombination (DR) are the dominant low energy processes. The cross sections

for these dissociative processes are very sensitive to the locations of curve crossings between

the dissociative resonance state(s) and the target curve; the resulting cross sections are

known to be highly sensitive to this aspect of the calculation [76, 119–122]. The static

exchange plus polarization (SEP) model is often found to give reliable parameters for low-

lying shape resonances. Conversely Feshbach resonances, which dominate the DR process,

are best represented by models that contain their parent state as part of a close-coupling

expansion.

For collisions with a molecular ion having a closed electronic shell, the energy surface of

the neutral dissociative potential usually crosses the ionic surface far from the geometry of

the equilibrium of the target ion. In this case, the actual geometry at which the ionic and

dissociative potential surfaces cross is irrelevant, because the DR cross section is determined

by the probability of electron capture into a state diﬀerent than the dissociative state. Dur-

ing such a process the target ionic core is excited rovibrationally and the electron is captured

23

into a weakly-bound Rydberg state. This is the so-called indirect DR mechanism [120, 123],

which is dominant for many closed-shell molecular ions [124–127]. The accuracy of the the-

oretical DR cross section in the indirect process, via intermediate molecular Rydberg states

and rovibronic resonances, is mainly determined by the accuracy of representing the non-BO

coupling responsible for the incident electron capture. Expressed in terms of the electron-
molecule scattering matrix Si(cid:48)v(cid:48);iv the DR cross section is σ ∼ |Si(cid:48)v(cid:48);iv|2/E, where indices v(cid:48)
and v represent ﬁnal and initial vibrational states of the ion during the capturing process,

and i(cid:48) and i describe electronic states. The matrix element Si(cid:48)v(cid:48);iv is obtained by integrating
the geometry-ﬁxed scattering matrix over vibrational states v(cid:48) and v. For small molecules,

the numerical accuracy of vibrational wave functions is usually relatively good, and the

uncertainty of the ﬁnal cross section is mainly determined by the quality of the geometry-

ﬁxed scattering matrix. For larger polyatomic ions, the inaccuracy of wave functions, which

are usually calculated using the normal-mode approximation [124–127], may contribute sig-

niﬁcantly to the uncertainty of the ﬁnal DR cross section. Therefore, assuming that the

accuracy of the vibrational wave functions is good, the uncertainty of the ﬁnal DR cross sec-
tion for the indirect mechanism (for most closed-shell molecular ions) is ∆σ/σ ∼ 2|∆S|/|S|,
where S and ∆S are the geometry-ﬁxed scattering matrix and its uncertainty. The scat-

tering matrix for DR calculations can be computed using electron scattering codes, such as

R-matrix, complex Kohn, or variational Schwinger methods. Recent examples, include Fon-

seca dos Santos et al. [127] who obtained their geometry-ﬁxed scattering matrix using the

complex Kohn calculations, and Little et al. [128] who performed similar calculations based

on R-matrix computations. Comparisons have shown that these two methodologies yield

very similar results for a given scattering model [129]. A second method, used extensively

in earlier studies [124–126, 130, 131], is based on quantum defects extracted from energies

of Rydberg states of the corresponding neutral molecule. The Rydberg-state energies are

usually obtained ab initio, but experimental energies have also been used [132–134].

At collision energies near threshold electronic excitation provides an important new chan-

nel. For this situation CCn-type models are usually employed. Such calculations face all

the diﬃculties described above for atoms plus complications introduced by loss of symmetry

and nuclear motion encountered in molecules.

The intermediate energy region is beginning to be explored with fully ab initio methods

but only for rather simple systems [135–138]. Conversely, extensive studies for the high

24

energy region were performed using various perturbative approximations such as the Born

or DWBA approximations [92, 139, 140].

V. UNCERTAINTY ASSESSMENT FOR CHARGE TRANSFER COLLISIONS

When the incident electron in a collision with an atomic or a molecular target is replaced

by a positively charged ion a new channel appears: electron transfer. Since this channel is

the most important one for plasma and related applications we will concentrate on such

charge transfer collisions in this section.

It goes without saying that an accurate solution of the full Schr¨odinger equation is not

feasible, except maybe for the simplest charge transfer collision systems involving just two

nuclei and one electron. Accordingly, and similarly to what has been discussed for electron

scattering in section IV, diﬀerent approximation methods have been developed, which are

deemed suitable in diﬀerent energy ranges.

The situations of interest for charge transfer collisions are:

• very low energy collisions, in which the de Broglie wavelength associated with the
projectile motion is comparable with the length scale that is characteristic for electronic

processes;

• low energy collisions, in which the projectile de Broglie wavelength is too small to
resolve electronic processes, but the projectile-target interaction time is still long com-

pared to the characteristic electronic time scale;

• intermediate energy collisions, in which the relative projectile-target speed is compa-

rable with the orbital speeds of the active electrons;

• nonrelativistic high energy collisions, in which the previous condition is no longer

fulﬁlled;

• relativistic energy collisions.

Note that we are using a similar nomenclature as in section IV, although the actual magni-

tudes of the collision energies are very diﬀerent for electron vs. heavy particle projectiles.

An authoritative overview of the entire spectrum of theoretical charge transfer methods

available by the early 1990s was given by Bransden and McDowell [141]. For more recent,

25

but somewhat more specialized accounts we refer the reader to [142, 143] and references

therein. The following paragraphs are meant to provide a (necessarily incomplete) mini-

survey of what is discussed in those works and what else is of relevance in the context of

this article.

The gold standard for the calculation of charge transfer cross sections from very low up to

intermediate projectile energies has long been one or another variant of the CC expansion.

Accordingly, limitations in basis-set convergence are the main source of numerical uncer-

tainties. Most of these CC calculations are also aﬄicted by model uncertainties, because it

is normally not the full Schr¨odinger equation that is cast into matrix-vector form.

One gets closest to the ideal of a calculation free of model uncertainty in the very low

energy regime in which a fully quantum mechanical description of the scattering system is

required. In this region, electron transfer usually dominates the dynamics and can be under-

stood by considering the real and avoided crossings of a small number of potential energy

curves of the quasimolecular system of projectile and target. Accordingly, an expansion

in terms of products of molecular electronic states and nuclear wave functions is the stan-

dard method of attack. In its original form this so-called perturbed stationary state (PSS)

approach has inherent defects, because individual terms in the expansion do not satisfy

the boundary conditions of the scattering problem, thereby introducing spurious origin-

dependent couplings in a ﬁnite matrix representation of the Schr¨odinger equation [144].

These defects can be remedied by including electron translation factors (ETFs) or by using

reaction coordinate techniques [144, 145]. An alternative method is the hyperspherical close

coupling (HSCC) approach, in which a rescaled Schr¨odinger equation written in terms of

hyperspherical coordinates is solved (see ref. [146] and references therein).

In modern applications to few-electron systems the molecular states and couplings are

calculated with sophisticated quantum chemistry methods, which implies that electron cor-

relations are taken into account and the general approach can be called ab initio [147].

It has become customary, albeit somewhat inaccurate, to refer to these modern versions

of the PSS approach as quantum mechanical molecular-orbital close-coupling (QMOCC)

calculations [148], and we follow this convention.

Moving up in collision energy to, say, 1 keV/amu and higher, fully quantum mechanical

methods become challenging because they normally involve partial-wave or other expansions

of the scattering amplitude that become very large in the low energy region. Very recently,

26

the three-body problem of proton-hydrogen scattering has been addressed in a fully quantum

mechanical CCC approach that solves the Lippmann-Schwinger integral equations for the

scattering amplitudes [149]. The more traditional approach is to make use of the smallness of

the projectile de Broglie wavelength by adopting a semiclassical approximation. As long as

one is interested in total (i.e.

integrated over projectile scattering angle) cross sections only,

the semiclassical approximation amounts to reducing the full scattering problem to a time-

dependent Schr¨odinger equation (TDSE) for the electronic motion in the ﬁeld of classically

moving nuclei. The classical trajectories can be determined by considering the nonadiabatic

coupling of the electronic and the nuclear motion as is done in the electron nuclear dynamics

(END) method [150, 151], or by using Coulomb or model scattering potentials [152–155].

At collision energies of a few keV/amu and higher, simple straight-line trajectories are just

as good, i.e. the numerical error introduced by replacing a curved trajectory by a rectilinear

one is negligibly small compared to errors associated with basis-set convergence issues or

other numerical uncertainties. The same can be said about the semiclassical approximation

itself: at least for total cross section calculations it is essentially exact in and above the low

energy regime.

In the low energy regime electron transfer still is the strongest electronic process and

molecular state expansions (including ETFs) still are the most widely used methods [156].

Within the semiclassical framework they are often referred to as MOCC methods (without

the ’Q’).

Once direct target ionization, i.e. transitions into the continuum, become important other

CC techniques or fully numerical methods for the solution of the semiclassical TDSE gain

importance. A common feature of the former is that, similar to what has been discussed

for electron scattering, positive energy pseudo-states are included to discretize the contin-

uum. Even if one is not interested in direct target ionization one cannot simply close the

ionization channel in a calculation without running the risk of degrading the results for tar-

get excitation and electron transfer. It is characteristic of the intermediate energy regime

that all channels are coupled and have to be taken into account simultaneously. Exam-

ples of suitable intermediate energy CC methods are the two-center atomic-orbital, AOCC,

method [156] and the two-center basis generator method (TC-BGM) [157], both of which

include bound (atomic) target and bound (atomic) projectile states, endowed with ETFs,

and sets of pseudo-states whose explicit forms vary.

27

Notwithstanding considerable success in applications to charge transfer collisions these

methods can be criticized for being built on formally overcomplete basis sets. Indeed, there

are known cases in which too large basis sets on both centers (perhaps combined with in-

suﬃcient numerical accuracy in the calculation of matrix elements) have led to spurious

couplings and unphysical results [158], meaning that the bigger (the basis), the better (the

convergence) is not necessarily true for these two-center methods. The insight that complete-

ness of a basis is not necessary, in principle, for following the evolution of the time-dependent

state vector exactly [159] does not help in practice, since there is no other practical crite-

rion available than checking for changes in the results when more basis states are added.

One-center expansions are not aﬄicted by the overcompleteness problem, but are in practice

inferior to two-center methods when it comes to separating electron transfer from ionization

to the continuum.

As indicated above, direct numerical approaches to the solution of the semiclassical TDSE

oﬀer an interesting alternative to CC expansions. The basic idea is straightforward: repre-

sent the electron wave function on a grid (usually in coordinate space) and propagate it in

time by application of the time-evolution operator over a large number of small time steps.

This can be done in diﬀerent ways, e.g., by using the split-operator Fast Fourier transform

method. Whichever technique is used, most time-dependent lattice (TDL) methods share

the following features: (i) the Coulomb potentials of the nuclei are replaced by soft-core

potentials; (ii) absorbers are introduced to avoid unphysical reﬂections of the wave function

at the boundaries of the numerical box; (iii) numerical accuracy mostly depends on the

spatial grid parameters (provided a suﬃciently small time step size is used for the propaga-

tion). One attractive feature of TDL approaches is that they provide a view on the electron

density distribution in the continuum, i.e. insight into electron emission characteristics, but

they have also been applied successfully to charge transfer problems [160, 161].

As in the case of electron scattering, perturbative methods and distorted-wave approaches

are the principal methods of choice in the nonrelativistic high energy regime. They can be

formulated on the level of the semiclassical approximation or for the full quantum mechanical

problem, and at least for some of the methods put forward over the years both options

can be shown to be (essentially) equivalent [141]. Numerical uncertainties are usually well

controlled, at least in ﬁrst-order models, but model uncertainties can only be estimated

by extensive comparisons with other (preferably nonperturbative) calculations and with

28

experimental data.

Most of the approaches discussed in this section have been generalized to deal with

collisions at relativistic energy. The principal motivation for studying this regime is the fun-

damental interest in relativistic dynamics and phenomena such as radiative charge transfer

and electron-positron pair production. While the former process can also be of importance

at very low collision energies [141, 148], the latter is, of course, a truly relativistic eﬀect.

Since relativistic collisions are less relevant for applications, we will not discuss them further

in this article.

We end this brief survey of charge transfer methods with a few general comments. First,

the majority of methods touched upon in this section deal with true or eﬀective one-electron

problems. The two-electron problem has been addressed in a number of perturbative mod-

els [162], and also in the framework of the semiclassical CC approach [156]. As mentioned

above, modern (Q)MOCC methods can deal with many-electron systems in an ab initio

fashion, but they have mostly been applied to one-electron transitions, i.e. single electron

transfer [147, 148]. For truly many-electron problems, such as multiple electron transfer to

a highly charged ion, simpliﬁcations are unavoidable, which implies that further modeling,

usually on the level of the semiclassical TDSE, is necessary. An obvious idea is to replace

the many-electron Hamiltonian by a sum of eﬀective one-electron Hamiltonians, i.e. to solve

the problem on the level of the independent electron model (IEM). This has worked quite

well in several instances, but it is not obvious how to carry out a reliable uncertainty as-

sessment of an IEM calculation. One way to go about this is to consider several variants

of IEM calculations, e.g., by varying the eﬀective potentials used within reasonable bounds,

and monitor the spread of results obtained. It will be illustrated in section VI D that this is

a useful procedure, although it can give at most qualitative information on the uncertainty

of a given IEM calculation.

Second, echoing a comment made in section IV for electron scattering, we mention that

simpler, sometimes semi-empirical and/or classical methods for calculating charge transfer

cross sections have been widely used over many years. Among them are two-state quantum

mechanical models (see ref. [141]), variants of the classical over-barrier model [163], and

the classical trajectory Monte Carlo method [164]. The latter in particular has been highly

successful in many applications, even in the low energy regime [165] in which quantum

eﬀects are deemed important. An implication of this somewhat surprising observation is that

29

uncertainty estimates have to rely on extensive comparisons with more rigorous quantum

mechanical methods and with experimental data.

Third, in many cases the observables of interest are not electron transfer cross sections,

but cross sections associated with post-collisional events such as radiative de-excitation of

excited projectile states or the fragmentation of the target in ion-molecule collisions. This

requires further modeling, and hence it introduces further uncertainties and also the problem

of uncertainty propagation. Again, it seems that the only known and practical way of dealing

with these issues is to perform computations for a range of models and monitor the spread

of results. An example for this will be given in section VI D.

VI.

ILLUSTRATIONS

A. Structure

The best examples of uncertainty estimates in high-precision theory are provided by few-

electron atoms. Hydrogen is a special case because there the Schr¨odinger (or Dirac) equation

can be solved exactly, and so the uncertainty comes entirely from higher-order QED terms

or nuclear structure eﬀects not included in the calculation (see section III A). For the

two- and three-electron cases of helium-like and lithium-like atoms complete calculations in

Hylleraas coordinates have been performed. Recent high-precision measurements [169, 170]
and theory [166–168] for the 1s22s 2S − 1s23s 2S two-photon transition in lithium provide
an excellent example of what can be achieved. Table I lists the various contributions to

the transition frequency, expressed as a double power series in powers of µ/M and α, where

µ/M is the ratio of the reduced electron mass to the nuclear mass, and α is the ﬁne structure

constant (see table caption for numerical values). The sum of the ﬁrst three entries gives

the total nonrelativistic transition energy, including ﬁrst- and second-order ﬁnite nuclear

mass corrections of order µ/M and (µ/M )2. These account for the nonrelativistic part of

the isotope shift, but at this level of accuracy, the usual normal and speciﬁc isotope shifts

of order µ/M are not suﬃcient, and therefore the second-order (µ/M )2 term must also be

included. The associated uncertainties shown in Table I were reliably estimated from the

rate of convergence of the calculation with the size of the Hylleraas basis set. Next comes

the leading relativistic correction of order α2 relative to the nonrelativistic energy from the

30

TABLE I. Theoretical contributions to the 1s22s 2S−1s23s 2S transition energy (cm−1) of 7Li [166–
168], and comparison with experiment [169]. The entries on the left indicate the powers of µ/M and

α that give rise to each contribution relative to the nonrelativistic energy for inﬁnite nuclear mass,
where µ/M = 7.820 202 988(6)× 10−5 is the ratio of the reduced electron mass to the nuclear mass
for an atomic mass of 7.016 003 4256(45) u, and α = 1/137.035 999 139(31) is the ﬁne structure

constant. The contributions of order α4 and α5 are estimates. Nucl. size is the ﬁnite nuclear-size

correction for an assumed nuclear charge radius of 2.390(30) fm.

Contribution Transition Energy (cm−1)

Inﬁnite mass

27 206.492 847 9(5)

µ/M

(µ/M )2

α2

α2µ/M

α3

α3µ/M

α4 (Est.)

α5 (Est.)

–2.295 854 362(2)

0.000 165 9774

2.089 120(23)

–0.000 003 457(9)

–0.187 03(26)

0.000 009 74(13)

–0.005 7(6)

0.000 52(13)

Nucl. size

–0.000 390(10)

Total

27 206.093 7(6)

Expt. [169]

27 206.094 082(6)

Breit interaction, and the relativistic recoil term of order α2µ/M . The uncertainties from

all these terms can be accurately estimated from the rate of convergence with the size of the

Hylleraas basis set. At the next level are the QED corrections of order α3, corresponding

to the Lamb shift in hydrogen. The theory for these terms is complete in terms of known

expectation values of operators, including both the electron-nucleus and electron-electron

QED contributions (the Araki-Sucher terms). The dominant source of uncertainty are the

Bethe logarithms for the states of lithium [171]. The terms of order α3µ/M are radiative

recoil corrections due to the ﬁnite nuclear mass. These can be calculated to more than

suﬃcient accuracy in terms of known operators [171]. The dominant source of uncertainty in

the theoretical transition frequency comes from the higher-order QED corrections of order

31

α4 and α5, since the basic theory for these terms has not yet been developed. However,

estimates can be obtained from the corresponding QED shifts in hydrogen with appropriate

scaling with the nuclear charge and electron screening, as shown in the table, with 10% and

25% uncertainties assigned respectively for these two terms. Finally, the correction due to

the ﬁnite nuclear charge radius is included.

The ﬁnal theoretical value 27 206.093 7(6)cm−1 is in good agreement with the substan-

tially more accurate (2 parts in 1010) measurement 27 206.094 082(6) cm−1 (see Table I.)

However, the important lesson to be learned from the comparison is that, since the theoreti-

cal uncertainties in the lower order terms are well controlled, the comparison between theory

and experiment provides an experimental value for the higher order QED terms of order α4

and α5 that cannot yet be calculated directly. This same principle has been applied with

great eﬀectiveness to determine the nuclear charge radius for a range of halo nuclei from 6He

to 11Be from the measured isotope shifts [172, 173]. Here, the otherwise dominant uncer-

tainties from the mass-independent QED terms in Table I cancel when taking the diﬀerence

between isotopes with diﬀerent µ/M , and so the residual diﬀerence between experiment and

theory with much smaller uncertainties provides an accurate determination of the relative

nuclear charge radii.

The pair of articles by Safronova et al. [34, 35] describes high accuracy computations

with uncertainty estimates for energies of low-lying excited states in Ag-like, Cd-like, In-like

and Sn-like ions. The electronic structure for all these states is characterized by a [Kr]4d10

core and 1, 2, 3, or 4 valence electrons, respectively. A 5s2 component in the structure of

an In-like or Sn-like ion can optionally be viewed as part of the core, leaving one or two

valence electrons. Three models are used in refs. [34, 35]: the linearized coupled-cluster

method including all single, double, as well as partial triple excitations (All-order SDpT),

the conﬁguration-interaction plus all-order model (CI+All-order) and the conﬁguration-

interaction plus many-body perturbation theory model (CI-MBPT). All three models start

from a frozen-core DF potential. The All-order SDpT model is the most computationally

intensive, and it is used only for the monovalent systems, i.e. the Ag-like ions and the In-like

ions with the 5s2 electrons included in the core. The CI+All-order and CI-MBPT models are

used for monovalent and multivalent systems. Within each model the principal convergence

issue arises from the truncation in the partial wave expansion, particularly for the 4f shell.

Second order perturbation theory is used to evaluate the contribution of partial waves with

32

TABLE II. Calculations and their uncertainties of the excited state energies of Ce9+ and Ba7+ [34].

All values are in cm−1.

Ion

Level

Ce9+

Ba7+

5p3/2 4f5/2 5p3/2

4f5/2

Experiment

33427 54947 23592 137385

All-order SDpT

33406 55419 23564 137770

Diﬀ (Exp – SDpT)

21 –472

28

–385

CI + all

33450 54683 23605 137256

Diﬀ (Exp – CI+all)

–23

264

–13

129

CI+MBPT

33986 54601 24020 137086

High-order correlations –147 2687 –134

2224

Higher partial waves

14 –1011

12

–858

Breit interaction

–403 –1595 –293 –1197

Uncertainties

130

220

l > 6. It is found that this contribution is approximately equal to the contribution from

the l = 6 term, which is then used as an approximation. The Breit term and the QED

corrections are evaluated separately. Finally, a 25% uncertainty is assigned to each of the

four corrections (i.e. higher order correlations, higher partial wave contributions, Breit

interactions, and QED corrections), and the results are combined via sum of squares to

obtain the total uncertainty.

The above considerations yield an uncertainty estimate based strictly on theory.

It

was applied by Safronova et al. [34] to the In-like Ce9+, Pr10+, and Nd11+ “monovalent”

ions where the CI+All-order and the CI-MBPT approach are both applicable. However,

Safronova et al. also rely on comparisons with reference ions for which experimental data

are available. In ref. [34] the isoelectronic Ba7+ ion was used as a reference ion. Results from

the monovalent All-order (coupled cluster) SDpT model and the CI+All-order model with

three valence electrons were compared, and it was found that CI+All-order gave the better

agreement with measurement. Table II (extracted from Table V of [34]) shows the ﬁnal com-

puted energies for two levels in In-like Ce9+ and Ba7+ together with estimated contributions

from high order correlations, higher partial waves, and Breit interaction, and along with un-

33

certainty estimates for the states in Ce9+. QED corrections were considered to be negligible

for this system. The uncertainty estimate for the calculated Ce9+ energies was obtained as

the sum of two contributions: the error (relative to experiment) in the calculation for the

Ba7+ reference ion and the absolute change between the reference ion and the actual ion in

the sum of the identiﬁed small terms. Finally, these calculated uncertainties were compared

with the actual deviation from the experimental energies (which are available for Ce9+), and

it was found that the estimate of uncertainties of calculated energies is reasonable for 4f

states but signiﬁcantly larger for 5p states.

UQ is being routinely used to determine structural parameters of small molecules within

tight uncertainty bounds. This is done, at least in part, to aid the predictions of the rota-

tional spectrum of these species and hence their detection in the laboratory and space [174,

175].

Table III illustrates an application of the FPA method to uncertainty assessment of the

calculated dissociation energy (D0) of H2

16O. Full details are given by Boyarkine et al. [9]

who provide similar results for water isotopologues. Subsequent measurement of D0 for

18O yielded results within the uncertainties of the predicted value [176]. The uncertainties

H2
listed in Table III include a contribution of 1 cm−1 due to nonadiabatic eﬀects, even though

these eﬀects were assumed to give a negligible direct contribution to the value of D0 and

actual calculation of nonadiabatic eﬀects did not form part of the study. An estimate of

the magnitude of contributions due to eﬀects neglected in a given model is a part of the

uncertainty assessment.

One area where uncertainty assessment is beginning to have signiﬁcant impact is the

computation of dipole-moment surfaces [53, 54] and hence rotation-vibration transition in-

tensities [177]. The methodology used here is based on adapting the FPA method for

computing the dipole moment surface (DMS) and then performing multiple computations

using diﬀerent PESs and DMSs to establish stability of the results [178, 179]. These compu-

tations are important as it is often diﬃcult to measure absolute transition intensities with

the accuracy demanded for the interpretation of modern remote sensing experiments.

34

TABLE III. Ab initio contributions to the ﬁrst dissociation energy of H2

16O. All values are in

cm−1. Uncertainties are given in the last column. Signed contributions are incremental values.

Contributions (A) to (H) only concern the electronic motion with ﬁxed nuclei. CBS means com-

plete basis set, FCI is full conﬁguration-interaction, DBOC means the diagonal Born-Oppenheimer

correction and ZPE is the vibrational zero-point energy. Contributions (I) to (N) involve solving

the nuclear motion problem for water and for the OH diatomic and are therefore nuclear mass

dependent (MD). Full details about the components considered in the focal point analysis can be

found in Boyarkine et al. [9].

Value Uncertainty

A CBS CCSD(T) frozen core

B Core correlation CCSD(T)

43956

+81

C All-electron CBS CCSD(T) [=A+B] 44037

D Higher order electron correlation

–52

E CBS FCI [=C+D]

F Scalar relativistic correction

G QED (Lamb shift) correction

H Spin-orbit eﬀect

43985

–53

+3

–69.4

I Angular momenta coupling, OH

+31.5

J Sum spin eﬀects, OH [=H+I]

K DBOC, H2O

L ZPE H2O

M ZPE OH

N Net ZPE, H2O [=L+M]

U Nonadiabatic contributions

V Total MD, H2O [=I+K+N+U]

D0(H2O) Calc. [=E+V]

(Obs – Calc) D0(H2O)

–37.9

+35.3

4638.1

1850.7

2787.4

0

–2721

41145

+1

6

2

6

3

7

3

1

1

0

1

0.5

0

0.5

0.5

1

1

8

35

FIG. 3. Momentum transfer cross section for electron scattering from argon atoms in their ground

state. Results from various polarized orbital calculations (see text) are compared with a recom-

mended set of experimental data [180] (solid circles). The curve labeled “rel-pol+DD” is a fully

relativistic model including dynamic distortion. (Figure taken from [78].)

B. Electron - atom/ion collisions

As the ﬁrst example we consider the momentum transfer cross section for low energy

electron collisions with Ar atoms; an important parameter for many laboratory plasmas.

Figure 3 shows a comparison between experiment and theory. While the agreement with

experiment is nearly perfect for the presumably best model (fully relativistic including dy-

namic distortion (DD) of the target charge distribution by the projectile), the important

issue for the present paper is the fact that i) a number of calculations were performed, and

ii) that even a nonrelativistic approach with a less sophisticated way of accounting for the

above eﬀect yields rather similar results. Because of this, together with the general conﬁ-

dence in the polarized-orbital method as an enhanced one-state close-coupling approach that

contains the most important physical eﬀects, one can make reasonable estimates about the
position of the minimum (we suggest 0.15 eV ± 0.05 eV) and the value of the cross section
away from the resonance (10% or better at 0.01 eV and 1.0 eV).

Figure 4 shows predictions from both CCC and RMPS for electron impact excitation of

the n = 2 states of helium. Once again, it seems possible to make a reasonable estimate of

the uncertainty in the theoretical predictions. Even though these computations are nearly

20 years old, they have indeed withstood the test of time. This is ultimately not surprising,

36

 0.1 1 10 0.01 0.1 1 10momentum transfer cross section (10-16cm2)energy (eV)e-Arnonrel-polnonrel-pol+DDrel-pol+DDrecommended expt.FIG. 4. Cross section for electron-impact excitation of the n = 2 states in helium from the

(1s2)1S ground state. Three sets of experimental data [181–183] are compared with predictions

from nonrelativistic CCC [184] and RMPS [185] models. (Figure adapted from [185].)

since the scattering models contain what we believe is the essential physics, namely an

accurate target description (the relevant energy levels and oscillator strengths agree with

experiment and much more sophisticated structure-only computations at the 10% or better

level) as well as channel coupling within the discrete spectrum as well as to the ionization

continuum. Signiﬁcant diﬀerences occur only in the resonance regime near the low-lying

excitation thresholds, with the principal reason being that the CCC calculations had only

been performed at a few energies. Looking at the comparison, one might conclude that the

average of the two sets of theoretical predictions is accurate at least at the 20% level (most

likely better). This is something that cannot be said even today for most of the experimental

data points, of which there are only very few anyway.

Figure 5 is an example of a systematic study regarding the convergence of the close-

coupling expansion [186].

In this particular implementation, the resulting equations are

solved using the so-called “B-Spline R-matrix with Pseudo-States” (BSRMPS) approach.

Once again, however, we emphasize that it is not the implementation of a particular model

that determines the overall uncertainty of its predictions. If the close-coupling expansion

could literally be driven to an inﬁnite number of states on an inﬁnitely ﬁne spatial grid,

then it should yield the correct solution of the underlying many-particle Schr¨odinger or

Dirac equation.

In practice, of course, this is not possible.

In the above example, the

structure description for the states of interest, the initial (3p6)1S0 state and the four ﬁnal
3p54s states of argon, was carried out as well as the authors believed was necessary for most

37

CrossSectionforElectron-ImpactExcitationofHe(1s2)K.Bartschat,J.Phys.B31(1998)L469n=2n=321Pprojectileenergy(eV)40353025208642021S4321023Pcrosssection(10−18cm2)403530252043210RMPSCCC(75)DonaldsonHallTrajmar23S654321031D40353025200.30.20.10.031P1.51.00.50.031S1.00.80.60.40.20.033Dprojectileenergy(eV)40353025200.30.20.10.033Pcrosssection(10−18cm2)1.00.80.60.40.20.0RMPSCCC(75)experiment33S2.01.51.00.50.0In1998,deHeerrecommends(CCC+RMPS)/2foruncertaintyof10%orbetter!(independentofexperiment)FIG. 5. Angle-integrated cross sections for electron impact excitation of the 3p54s states in argon

from the ground state (3p6)1S0. The results of a number of BSR calculations shows the convergence

of the predictions from a close-coupling model. (Figure taken from [186]).

of the uncertainty to come from the ﬁnite size of the close-coupling expansion. This also

means that purely numerical errors in solving the equation with a ﬁxed number of states

are believed to be negligible.

Looking at the ﬁgure, one can see a very strong eﬀect of adding more and more states

to the close-coupling expansion. However, going from a 500-state (BSR-500) to a 600-

state (BSR-600) model ultimately indicates some convergence. As mentioned several times

already, there is no guarantee for the correctness of the ﬁnal results. Nevertheless, the results

change in a systematic way, and it seems as if at the very least the BSR-600 predictions can

be taken as a likely upper limit of the “true” solution of the underlying equations, at least

outside of the resonance regime.

Moving on to the intermediate energy and high energy regimes, ﬁgure 6 shows the angle-

integrated cross section for excitation of the (3p54p)3D3 (2p9) state in argon from the initial
metastable (3p54s)3P2 (1s5) state [78]. This is a very strong optically allowed transition

with a threshold energy of less than 2 eV. Hence it is not the absolute projectile energy

that matters in the classiﬁcation of the energy regime. For all practical purposes, this is

a high energy collision, and hence one might assume that perturbative methods should be

appropriate. Indeed, the top panel shows that results from PWBA, DWBA, and a 15-state

R-matrix (close-coupling) model quickly converge towards each other – provided a very sim-

ilar target description is being used. In fact, the principal reason for the deviation between

38

the various sets of results in this panel is the lack of unitarization of the DWBA scattering

matrix rather than a fundamental problem with a perturbative approach. On the other

hand, we see a signiﬁcant (about 30% in this case) dependence of the DWBA predictions

when the relevant one-electron orbitals (4s and 4p) were generated with diﬀerent atomic

structure codes (CIV3) [188] or SUPERSTRUCTURE [189], respectively) and slightly dif-

ferent optimization criteria. This is an instructive example where the reliability of a collision

calculation is eﬀectively determined by the quality of the structure description rather than

the collision model itself. While the results obtained with the CIV3 orbitals appear to pro-

vide better agreement with experiment in this particular case, this is by no means the rule.

Furthermore, the uncertainties associated with the absolute experimental normalization are

often substantial. Clearly, the availability of a reliable oscillator strength for this transition

can be used to rescale the predictions [99] and hence reduce the likely uncertainty of the

predictions.

Next we present a few examples for electron-ion collisions. The ﬁrst one is for electron

scattering from Fe+, which is a very complex target. Due to this complexity and the ionic

character of the target, there is a wealth of resonance structure as function of the incident

projectile energy. An example is shown in ﬁgure 7 for just one partial-wave symmetry.

Comparing results from individual calculations makes little sense in this case. Instead,

one should concentrate on an observable that is more stable regarding small changes in

the individual predictions, but which is still meaningful in modeling applications. Such an

observable is the eﬀective collision strength, where an integral over the incident energies

FIG. 6. Cross section for electron impact excitation of the (3p54s)3P2 → (3p54p)3D3 (1s5 → 2p9)
(in Paschen notation) transition in argon. A number of theoretical predictions are compared with

the experimental data of Boﬀard et al. [187]. (Figure taken from [78].)

39

 0 10 20 30 40 0 10 20 30 40cross section (10-16cm2)energy (eV)e-Ar:  1s5 --> 2p9RM-15DWBAPWBAexpt. 1 10 100 0 50 100 150 200cross section (10-16cm2)energy (eV)e-Ar:  1s5 --> 2p9RM-15DWBA (CIV3)DWBA (SS)expt.weighted over a Maxwellian (or possibly other) speed distribution is performed for a range

of temperatures. An example is shown in ﬁgure 8. Comparing the results from diﬀerent

models should give some indication about the uncertainty of the predictions, especially if

some additional criteria regarding the likely quality of the target description and the collision

model are used to give increasing weight to a particular set of results. In the example shown,

however, the latter may not even be necessary if an uncertainty of about 20% is deemed

suﬃcient.

For highly charged ions, as electron correlation eﬀects are less important, perturbative

methods such as PWBA, DWBA produce comparable results to nonperturbative methods

as long as the structure description is reliable. As seen from ﬁgure 9, even for a singly-

ionized system such as Be+, there is much better agreement between predictions from a

number of diﬀerent distorted-wave models and highly sophisticated close-coupling theories

than between any of these predictions with the only available set of experimental data [194].

Given the importance of beryllium and its ions for fusion devices, additional calculations

were recently performed, all of which essentially conﬁrmed the results published in [195]. The

principal reason for this good agreement is the generally fast convergence of pseudo-state

models with the number of pseudo-states included in the close-coupling expansion [196]. It

is hence very likely that the theoretical results are more reliable than the experimental data

in this case.

We ﬁnish this section by noting that cross sections, which are dominated by resonant

processes, can be very sensitive to the details of the calculation. This has been explored, for

example, for the e-C+ collision system [197], where a single low-lying resonance dominates

the low energy behavior.

FIG. 7. Predictions from two calculations [190, 191] for the 5De partial-wave collision strength of
the electron-induced transition (3d64s)6D − (3d7)4F in Fe+.

40

RM-E2BSR+BSRFe+:(3d64s)a6D−(3d7)a4F:5Deelectronenergy(Ry)collisionstrength0.300.250.200.150.100.050.0086420FIG. 8. Predictions from a number of calculations for eﬀective collision strengths as a function

of temperature for electron collisions with Fe+. BSR results [190] are compared with those of

Nussbaumer and Storey (NS80) [192], Pradhan and Berrington (PB93) [193], and Ramsbottom

et al. [191].

FIG. 9. Electron impact ionization cross sections for Be+ from the (2s) ground state and the (2p)

excited statesThe predictions from several distorted-wave and close-coupling models are compared

with the experimental data of Falk and Dunn [194]. (Figure adapted from [195].)

C. Electron-molecule collisions

Up until now, uncertainty assessment has been rare in electron-molecule collision calcula-

tions. An exception is the recent study of electron collisions with H+

2 by Zammit et al. [198].
This system has the advantage that it is possible to use (near) exact wave functions for

the one-electron target. Zammit et al. use a convergent close-coupling technique and the

adiabatic nuclei approximation to compute vibrationally resolved dissociative excitation and

41

NS80PB93RM-E2BSR(3d64s)a6D−(3d7)a4P(3d64s)a6D−(3d7)a4F(3d64s)a6D−(3d64s)a4DFe+electrontemperature(K)eﬀectivecollisionstrength80000600004000020000050403020100ionization cross sections for the system; they obtain results accurate to better than 10% and

5%, respectively. These uncertainty estimates were derived from considering (a) the behav-

ior as function of the size of the CC expansion and (b) a smaller contribution due to their

approximate treatment of nuclear motion. It would seem that the use of extended close-

coupling expansions is the most promising approach for obtaining uncertainty quantiﬁed

results for electron-molecule collisions.

The ﬁrst example of the uncertainty assessment in electron-molecule collisions is the

calculation of cross section for photodetachment of the C2H− anion. The analytical model

used in the theoretical treatment of the process is described in ref. [199].

It should be

stressed here that the model does not account for possible rovibrational resonances that

could be present in the photodetachment spectrum. Such a model would correspond to

a low-resolution experiment, similar to the one of ref. [200], where rovibrational structure

is unresolved. Figure 10 shows results of the theoretical calculations using the UK R-

matrix code [81, 201, 202] with diﬀerent values of several parameters, which control the

accuracy of the electron scattering matrix obtained in the R-matrix code. The ﬁgure also

shows the results of the complex Kohn method (see details in ref. [199]) and the available

experimental data [200]. Although a systematic uncertainty analysis of the calculation has

not been performed, the R-matrix results shown in the ﬁgure suggest that the accuracy of

the computation model is of the order of 15% for the cross section far from the electronic
resonance at 4 eV. The uncertainty in the position of the resonance is about ±0.15 eV. The
present uncertainty analysis does not address the uncertainty of the analytical model itself

that neglects the mentioned rovibrational resonances. However, in an ideal theoretical study

of this or a similar process, the uncertainty of the analytical model should also be discussed.

The second example is the cross section for dissociative recombination of the H3O+ ion

with low energy electrons. The analytical and computational model for the process is de-

scribed in ref. [125]. Although the DR process also involves electron scattering, the employed

model is very diﬀerent from the one discussed above: the scattering matrix for collisions be-

tween an electron and a molecular ion in this approach is obtained from ab initio calculations

of excited Rydberg states of the neutral H3O molecule. Energies of the lowest electronic
state of H3O+ and several excited electronic states En of H3O are obtained using the Colum-
bus code [207] (see details in [125]). As a second step, eﬀective quantum numbers νn(Q)
of the excited states are computed from energy diﬀerence ∆En(Q) between H3O+ and H3O

42

FIG. 10. Theoretical (curves) [203] and experimental (symbols) [200] cross sections for C2H− photo-

detachment. One of the shown theoretical curves is obtained using the complex Kohn method [199],

all other curves are from the UK R-matrix [81, 201] calculations. The R-matrix results are obtained

for diﬀerent values of key parameters controlling accuracy of electron scattering calculations at a

ﬁxed molecular geometry. Uncertainty of R-matrix and complex Kohn results is about 20% for the

cross section far from the electronic resonance at 4 eV.

FIG. 11. Theoretical (curves) and experimental (symbols) [204–206] cross section of dissociative

recombination of the H3O+ ion with electrons. There are three theoretical curves on the ﬁgure

that are almost indistinguishable in the main graph. The inset zooms a part of the presented

data such that three curves are distinguishable. Uncertainty of calculation within the employed

analytical model (discussed in detail in ref. [125]) is about 8%. Uncertainty of the analytical model

itself is much larger because the model neglects some important physics, such as autoionization

and rovibrational resonances present in the DR spectrum.

43

energies, where Q refers to a particular molecular geometry. Functions νn(Q) are ﬁt with a
simple linear (or quadratic) function along Q and coeﬃcients of the linear (or quadratic) ﬁt
are used to obtain the electron-molecule scattering matrix electron energies and, therefore,

determine the ﬁnal DR cross section. The electron-molecule scattering matrix for positive

(relative to the ionization threshold) electronic energies is therefore computed from negative

energies of Rydberg states in the spirit of quantum defect theory. In principle, Rydberg

states with diﬀerent principal quantum numbers n could be used to perform the ﬁt, to con-

struct the scattering matrix, and to calculate the DR cross section.
In theory, quantum
defects µn = n − νn are slightly diﬀerent for diﬀerent n, i.e. they are energy-dependent.
Additional uncertainty of µn comes from the accuracy of the ab initio calculation. These are

the two major sources of uncertainty in the calculation of the DR cross section within the

discussed analytical model. The eﬀect of these uncertainties on the ﬁnal DR cross section

is demonstrated in ﬁgure 11, where the cross section is calculated for three diﬀerent sets

of parameters obtained from three diﬀerent manifolds of Rydberg states of H3O. The dif-

ference in the results on the ﬁgure is attributed to accuracy of ab initio energies of excited

electronic states of H3O and to the energy dependence of the quantum defects. As in the

ﬁrst example, there is an additional source of uncertainty due to the employed analytical

model, which neglects several possible processes during a DR event, such as the possibility

of autoionization once the electron is captured by the ion or the inﬂuence of rovibrational

resonances. This uncertainty is not addressed here.

D. Charge transfer collisions

We begin the discussion of examples for uncertainty estimates in charge transfer collisions
with the one-electron C6+ − H(1s) system. This and similar fully stripped ion - neutral
hydrogen atom collision systems have been the subject of a large number of theoretical

investigations over many years. In part, this is due to their relevance for applications such as

charge exchange recombination spectroscopy, which is an important tool for the diagnostics

of fusion plasmas (see, for example, refs. [208, 209] and references therein). Another reason

for the great interest in these systems is their benchmark character. Being true one-electron

problems, model uncertainties can be kept to a minimum and convergence properties of

diﬀerent approaches, i.e. numerical uncertainties can be studied.

44

Figure 12 displays cross sections for charge transfer from hydrogen into individual n-

shells of the hydrogenlike C5+ ion in the low to intermediate energy regimes, in which the

semiclassical approximation with straight-line trajectories is essentially exact. Based on a

large set of cross section calculations carried out in the 1980s and 1990s, Suno and Kato

constructed recommended data sets that can be ﬁt by simple analytical functions [210]. The

recommended data are shown in ﬁgure 12 as solid lines. In addition, one recent represen-

tative is included for each of the following theoretical methods: MOCC [211], AOCC [208],

TDL [161], and CTMC [212]. Experimental data on the n-shell resolved level are not avail-

FIG. 12. Cross sections for n-shell selective charge transfer in C6+-H(1s) collisions as functions

of impact energy. Full lines: ﬁts according to [210], MOCC: [211], AOCC: [208], TDL: [161],

CTMC: [212].

45

ﬁtMOCCAOCCTDLCTMCn=3n=4n=5n=6n=7n=8able for this collision system.

It can be observed that predictions from the three semiclassical methods, MOCC, AOCC

and TDL, are in excellent agreement with each other and with the recommended data for

the dominant n = 4 and the subdominant n = 5 channels. From this comparison one can

conclude that the cross section predictions are accurate to within a few percent. For the

less important n = 3 and n = 6 channels the discrepancies are slightly larger. Except for

the n = 6 MOCC data point at 2 keV, however, the overall agreement is still very good.

The CTMC results included in ﬁgure 12 agree very well with the semiclassical calculations

at 50 and 100 keV impact energy. At lower energies the discrepancies are larger and diﬀerent

variants of CTMC models give diﬀerent results [209, 212]. This suggests that an uncertainty

assessment solely based on CTMC calculations would be diﬃcult in this regime. However,

at higher energies and for high n quantum numbers the diﬀerent CTMC variants seem to

converge and probably yield the best results currently available.

Figure 13 shows n-shell speciﬁc charge transfer cross sections for C6+−H(n = 2) collisions.
Due to the weaker binding of the electron in an excited initial state, higher projectile n-

shells are favored, and overall the cross sections are larger when compared to the ground-

state case. The CTMC calculations of Jorge et al. (top panel) and Cariatore et al. (bottom

panel) appear to be in good agreement with each other, while the AOCC cross sections

from ref. [208] tend to overestimate the CTMC data as the impact energy and the principal

quantum number of the ﬁnal states increase. Even though the two-center basis used includes

a total of 340 states, which is a very large number for a semiclassical CC calculation, the

overestimation is deemed to be a ﬁnite-basis eﬀect, i.e. a convergence problem of the AOCC

method in this energy range [209, 212].

Figure 14 explores the very low energy regime in which straight-line trajectories, and

perhaps the semiclassical approximation itself, become questionable. For the dominant

n = 4 channel in the C6+-H(1s) collision system this does not appear to be an issue and

semiclassical CC calculations based on curved and straight-line trajectories agree with each

other and with a fully quantum mechanical HSCC calculation on the few-percent level.

However, for n = 5 qualitative discrepancies are observed. They have been traced to both

basis-size limitations of the earlier CC calculations and to trajectory eﬀects [214]. Regarding

the latter it was found that (i) straight-line trajectories lead to a strong overestimation of the

cross section when the calculation is reasonably well converged with respect to basis size, and

46

FIG. 13. Cross sections for n-shell selective charge transfer in C6+− H(n = 2) collisions as functions
of impact energy. Top panel: full lines: hydrogenic CTMC, dashed lines: AOCC. (Figure taken

from [209].) Bottom panel:

full lines: hydrogenic-Z-CTMC, dash-dotted lines: microcanonical

CTMC (both sets of curves are essentially on top of each other), dashed lines: AOCC. (Figure

taken from [212].) The AOCC cross sections in both panels are from [208].

47

Page6of11Eur.Phys.J.D(2014)68:2270102030b (au)02468bP(b) (au)0102030405060b (au)50 keV/amu20 keV/amu50 keV/amu20 keV/amu20 keV/amu(a)(b)Fig.7.Classicalchargeexchange(a)andionization(b)opacityfunctionsbP(b),asfunctionsoftheimpactparameterbforC6++H(n=2)collisionsatE=20keV/amuand50keV/amu,obtainedusinghydrogenic(—–)andmicrocanonical(---)initialdistributions.100300E (keV/amu)0.01110010000σn (10-16 cm2)100300E (keV/amu)0.01110010000σn (10-16 cm2)n = 6 (x10)n = 7n = 8 (x0.1)n = 7 (x10)n = 8n = 9 (x0.1)n=5 (x100)n=6 (x100)n=5 (x1000)n=4 (x1000)(a)(b)Fig.8.Partialn-resolvedCXcrosssectionsforC6++H(1s)(a)andN7++H(1s)collisions(b):(—)hydrogenic-CTMC;(−·−)microcanonical-CTMC;(−−−)AOCC[21];(•−•)MOCC[19].10100E (keV/amu)0.010.11101001000σn (10-16 cm 2)101000.010.1110100100010100E (keV/amu)0.010.111010010000.010.11101001000n = 9 (x10)n = 8n = 8 (x10)n = 7n = 6 (x0.1)n = 7 (x0.1)(a)(b)Fig.9.Partialn-resolvedCXcrosssectionsforC6++H(n=2)(a)andN7++H(n=2)collisions(b):(—)hydrogenic-CTMCand(−−)AOCCresults[21].almostthreeordersofmagnitudefrom10to100keV/amu.AOCCresultsfrom[21]arealsoplottedandweﬁndaverygoodagreementthroughouttheenergyrangeofFigure9,onlyatE>100keV/amuAOCCdatashowanoveresti-mationcomparedtotheclassicalcrosssections,thiseﬀectismoreprominentatthehighestnlevel,andwebelievethat,attheseenergies,theCTMCcalculationprovidesabetterdescriptionoftheelectroncaptureintohighn,sincetheAOCCcalculationbeginstoundergobasislimitations,whicharemoresevereinthecaseofC6+projectiles,seeFigure9.ThiseﬀectwasalsonoticeableinthetotalcrosssectionsofFigures5and6.WeobserveinFigures8and9apopulationdistri-butionoftheexitchannelsthatdependsontheinitialstateofthetarget.Inordertostudythispointinmoredetail,weshowinTable1themostpopulatednlevel,nmax,aftertheelectroncaptureforawiderangeofimpactenergies.InthecaseofcollisionswithH(1s),nmax=4,CLASSICALDESCRIPTIONOFH(1s)ANDH∗(...PHYSICALREVIEWA91,042709(2015)ProvidedthatanelectronboundintheH∗(n=2)orbital(Vion=3.4eV)couldbeeitherfoundinthe2sstateorthe2pstate,thecrosssectionforτprocessisdeﬁnedasστ(n=2)=14στ(2s)+34στ(2p).(7)InFig.4weshowtheelectron-capturecrosssectionstolevelsn=3to9,n=4to10,andn=5to12forC6+,N7+,andO8+,respectively.Thesearerepresentedasafunctionofimpactenergyinthe10–150keV/amurange.Accordingtothe√13.6/Vionq3/4scalinglaw,maximainthendistributionsareexpectedatn=8,9,and10,respectively.Intheﬁrstplace,wenotethat,incontrastwithwhatwasshownintheprevioussectionforH(1s),themicrocanonicalCTMCandthehydrogenic-Z-CTMCmodelsprovideresultswhichareinverygoodagreementwitheachotheralongthewholeenergyrangeexplored,aswellaswiththeAOCCdata.Wehavecheckedthattheagreementbetweenbothclassicalresultsstandsfortheseparatecontributionsofthe2sand2pstates.ItshouldbenoticedthattheAOCCdataoverestimatetheclassicalmodelsastheimpactenergyincreases.Thissituationismoreevidentforthehighernlevelsconsidered.Weagainascribethisfeaturetotheﬁnite-basis-sizeeffectwhichmasksafractionoftheionizationprobabilityintoelectroncapturetothehighestnlevelsconsidered[26],asalreadystatedintheprevioussection.InTableIII,wepresentthehydrogenic-Z-CTMCn-state-selectiveelectron-capturecrosssectionstolevelsn=2to15forthethreeprojectilesconsideredatimpactenergiesof10,50,and100keV/amu.Finally,inFig.5,weexaminethepopulationofthelsubstatesforelectroncaptureton=3to9,n=4to10,andn=5to12inC6+,N7+,andO8+,respectively,atanimpactenergyof10keV/amu.Weﬁndnearlynodifferencebetweenthetwoclassicalmodelsandgoodagreementwiththequantalmodel.Asexpected,largelvaluesaremainlypopulatedatthisimpactenergyand,asageneraltrend,theclassicalmodelsseemtounderestimatethepopulationofthel=0substatesgivenbytheAOCCasthenvaluesincrease.C.LineemissioncrosssectionsinC6+,N7+,andO8+collisionsonH(1s)andH∗(n=2)Inthissection,wesanalyzethelineemissioncrosssectionsthatprovideinformationonthephotonemissionthatfollowstheelectroncaptureprocessesstudiedintheprevioussections.Resultsobtainedwiththehydrogenic-Z-CTMCmodelaredisplayedsincetheyhavebeenproventobereliableandcoverallsystemsandenergies.Photoncascadesfromlevelsupton=30areincludedinalllineemissioncross-sectioncalculations.InFig.6weshowtheLy-α,Ly-βandLy-γlinesasafunctionofimpactenergy.Fortheprojectilesunderstudy,theenergyoftheselinescorrespondstothex-rayregion.InordertohighlighttherelativeroleoftheH(1s)andH∗(n=2)targetsinthefusionreactorenvironment,crosssectionscorrespondingtotheH∗(n=2)targetaremultipliedbyafactorof0.01.Bysodoing,theestimatedrelativeabundanceofH∗(n=2)istakenintoaccountsinceitisfoundtobeontheorderof1%duringneutralbeamheatingandfuelingoffusionreactors[20–23].10−810−610−410−2100102104 10 100σn (10−16 cm2)Energy (keV/amu)n=9 (x102)n=8 (x10)n=7n=6 (x10−1)n=5 (x10−2)n=4 (x10−3)C6+ + H(n=2)n=3 (x10−4)10−410−2100102104 10 100σn (10−16 cm2)Energy (keV/amu)n=10 (x103)n=9 (x102)n=8 (x10)n=7n=6 (x10−1)n=5 (x10−2)n=4 (x10−3)N7+ + H(n=2)10−410−2100102104106108 10 100σn (10−16 cm2)Energy (keV/amu)n=12 (x106)n=11 (x104)n=10 (x102)n=9 (x10)n=8n=7 (x10−1)n=6 (x10−2)O8+ + H(n=2)n=5 (x10−3)FIG.4.(Coloronline)n-state-selectivecapturecrosssectionasafunctionoftheprojectileenergyfollowingC6+,N7+,andO8+collisionsonH∗(n=2).Theoriesareshownbyred-solidlineforhydrogenic-Z-CTMC,bluedashed-dottedlineformicrocanonical-CTMC,andblackdashedlineforAOCCmodel[26,27].ItcanbeseenthattheLy-αforH(1s)providesthedominantcontributionthroughouttheimpact-energyrangeconsidereddespitethefactthatthephotonicemissionarisingfromH∗(n=2)gainsintensityastheimpactenergydecreases.ThisissimplybecausetheLyman-αcrosssectionisapproximately90%oftheoveralltotalelectron-capturecrosssectionforeach042709-7(ii) choosing the optimal curved trajectory involves a certain level of arbitrariness [146, 214].

The HSCC method is free of this ambiguity and probably gives the best answer. Interestingly,

it is in close agreement with an early MOCC calculation, which used a relatively small

number of states and curved trajectories based on an average molecular potential [152, 153].

By contrast, a larger MOCC calculation based on straight-line trajectories yields signiﬁcantly

higher cross sections [211]. Given the absence of other fully quantum mechanical calculations

and experimental data a quantitative uncertainty assessment appears to be diﬃcult in this

region.

We now turn to single-electron transfer in the few-electron C3+ − H(1s) collision sys-
tem. Figure 15 displays the total charge transfer cross section over a wide range of impact

energies, spanning the very low energy, low energy, and intermediate energy regimes. A

FIG. 14. Cross sections for n-shell selective charge transfer in C6+-H(1s) collisions as functions of

impact energy. Full lines (“Present”): HSCC [146]; Fritsch and Lin: AOCC with curved trajec-

tories [154]; Kimura and Lin: (modiﬁed) AOCC with straight-line trajectories [213]; Harel et al.:

MOCC with straight-line trajectories [211]; Green et al.: MOCC with curved trajectories [152, 153];

Caillat et al.: AOCC with straight-line trajectories [214]. (Figure taken from [146].)

48

channelsarealreadyadequate.Thesepotentialcurvesandthenumerousavoidedcrossingsareinstrumentalinunder-standinghowtransitions,chargetransferinthiscase,occur.Thesepotentialcurvesshowthreeregionswherepro-nouncedavoidedcrossingscanbeobserved.Theoutermostavoidedcrossingsbetweentheincomingchannelandthen=5manifoldareverynarrowandarelocatedataroundR=22a.u.Thesecrossingscanbetreateddiabaticallyexceptatverylowcollisionenergies.ThenextregionofavoidedcrossingsoccursnearR=8a.u.,wheretheentrancechannelinteractsstronglywiththeC5+共n=4兲manifold.Thethirdre-gionofavoidedcrossingsoccuratmuchsmallerR,nearaboutR=1.5a.u.共seeFig.3兲,wherethechannelsconverg-ingtotheC5+共n=5兲threshold,aswellastheentrancechan-nel,interactefﬁciently.Wewillpointoutthatthisinnermostavoidedcrossingregion,whichisdifﬁculttobeaccountedforaccuratelybyexpansionsusingatomicbasisfunctions,isresponsibleforthediscrepancyofthen=5crosssectionsamongthedifferenttheories.InFig.2,weﬁrstpresentthechargetransfercrosssec-tionsforC6++H共1s兲collisionsatenergiesfrom1eV/amuupto1keV/amuobtainedfromthepresentHSCCcalcula-tion.Asexpected,then=4channelsaredominantforener-giesabove4eV/amu.Whilethen=4crosssectionincreasessmoothlyasthecollisionenergyincreases,then=5crosssectionexhibitsinterestingenergydependence,includingasharpdropbelow70eV/amuandasteadyincreasebelow30eV/amu.SuchenergydependencecanbeunderstoodintermsoftheavoidedcrossingsofpotentialcurvesinFig.1.WeﬁrsttakeacloserlookoftheavoidedcrossingsnearR=8a.u.Usingthediabatizationproceduredescribedear-lier,thecomplicatedadiabaticpotentialcurvesofFig.1be-lowR=10a.u.areshownasdiabaticcurvesinFig.3.Hereweplotthe“electronic”partofthediabaticcurves,obtainedbysubtractingtheinternuclearCoulombpotentialenergy6/RateachR;againonlytheI=0curvesareshown.关RecallthatforRⲏ1a.u.thehyperradiusandtheinternucleardis-tanceareessentiallyidenticalsincewechoose␮=␮1,seeEq.共1兲兴.Withthissetofdiabaticcurves,wenotethattheentrancechannelstillshowsstrongavoidedcrossingwiththelowestn=4channel.Theentrancechannelalsointeractscon-spicuouslywiththen=5channelsnearR=1.5a.u.WewilluseFig.3,togetherwithFig.1,toexplainthecalculatedenergydependenceofthen=4andn=5chargetransfercrosssectionsshowninFig.2.Tobeginwith,letusexaminetheenergyregionfrom100eV/amuto1000eV/amu.Atsuchhighenergies,theavoidedcrossingsbetweentheentrancechannelandthen=5statesnearR=22a.u.canbetreateddiabatically.ThustheentrancechanneldirectlyenterstheregionnearR=8a.u.共seeFig.3兲whereitcaninteractefﬁcientlywiththelowestn=4channel.Thisstrongavoidedcrossingisrespon-siblemostlyforpopulatingthen=4channels.InFig.4wecompareourcalculationswithpreviousthe-oreticalresultsforthissystem.Itisclearthatallthetheoret-icalcalculationsagreeonthen=4crosssections,whetherthecalculationswerecarriedoutusingAOorMObasisfunc-tions.Howaboutthen=5crosssections?InthiscasetheearliercalculationsbasedontheAO’s关5,7兴aredistinctlymuchlowerthanthosebasedontheMO’s,althoughthenewerAOcalculationsbyCaillatetal.关6兴,byusingamuchlargerAObasis,wereabletoobtainn=5crosssectionsinbetteragree-FIG.2.共Coloronline兲PresentresultsforthechargetransfercrosssectionsfortheprocessesC6++H共1s兲→C5+共n=4,5兲+H+.FIG.3.共Coloronline兲“Electronic”partofthehypersphericalpotentialcurvesforCH6+.Notethatthecurveshavebeendiaba-tized.Seetextformoredetails.FIG.4.共Coloronline兲ComparisonofcalculatedtotalchargetransfercrosssectionsforC6++H共1s兲→C5+共n=4,5兲+H+.Presentresultsareshowninsolidlines.Othertheoreticalpredictionsareshowninsymbols.BoththeresultsofCaillatetal.关6兴andthoseofKimuraandLin关7兴areobtainedfromAOcalculationswithstraight-linetrajectories.ResultsofHareletal.关4兴arecalculatedusingMObasisandstraight-linetrajectories.ResultsofGreenetal.关3兴areobtainedfromMOcalculationsusingcurvedtrajectories.ThedottedlineconnectingtheresultsofCaillatetal.indicatesanenergydependencedifferentfromothers.CHARGETRANSFERINSLOWCOLLISIONSOFC6+…PHYSICALREVIEWA72,012717共2005兲012717-3FIG. 15. Total cross section for charge transfer in C3+-H(1s) collisions as function of impact

energy. “Present calculation (CH)”: QMOCC [215]; “Present calculation, eikonal”: MOCC [215];

Guevara et al.: END [216]; Herrero (CH): QMOCC [217]; Tseng and Lin: AOCC [218]; Heil et al.:

QMOCC [219]; Errea et al.: MOCC [220]; Bienstock et al.: QMOCC [221]. Experimental data for

atomic hydrogen [Havener (CH)] and deuterium [Havener (CD)]: [222]. (Figure taken from [215].)

systematic trend can be observed at energies below 100 eV, which is where the cross section

reaches a minimum. Of the four QMOCC calculations included the one that uses the most

accurate correlated wave functions and the largest basis set (a total of ten many-electron

molecular functions) gives the smallest cross section values and the best agreement with

the experimental data. Except for the data point at the lowest energy of 0.3 eV/amu the

calculated cross section curve lies within the experimental uncertainty. In the low energy

region, in which the cross section increases with increasing impact energy, the convergence

of molecular expansions slows down and above 2 keV/amu AOCC expansions are deemed

to be more accurate [215]. This is supported by the close agreement of the calculations of

refs. [216, 218] with each other and, where available, with experimental data as well. Overall,

49

10-1100101102103104105Energy (eV/u)101102Cross section (10-16 cm2)Present calculation (CH)Present calculation, eikonalHavener (CH)Havener (CD)Guevara et al.Herrero (CH)Tseng and LinHeil et alErrea et al.Bienstock et al.Figure3.TotalcrosssectionforelectroncaptureinC3++H(1s)collisionsasfunctionoftheimpactenergy.Fulllines:presentquantal(thinline)andeikonal(thickline)results.Previouscalculationsofreferences[42,43,41,44,45,46]andexperiments[40]arealsoincluded,asindicatedintheﬁgure.molecularfunctions(15singletsand18triplets)intheeikonalcalculationand10functions(5singletsand5triplets)inthequantalone.OurquantaltotalcrosssectionislowerthanthatofHerreroetal[44]andtheeikonaloneissomewhatlowerthanthatofErreaetal[41];thediﬀerencesareduetothechangesinthepotentialenergycurvesandcouplingswithrespecttothoseofthevalencebondcalculation[47]usedinpreviousMFCCcalculations.Thenewresultsshowverygoodagreementwiththemerged-beamsexperiment[40].AtenergiesaboveE≈2keVthemolecularexpansionconvergesslowly,andtheAOCCresultsofTsengandLin[45]areprobablymoreaccurate.Moreover,theAOCCcalculationagreeswiththeexperimentaldataandthecrosssectioncomputedbyGuevaraetal[46].Atlowvelocities,theECcrosssection(seeﬁgure4)increasesrapidlyasEdecreases,followingapproximatelytheLangevinmodel[4],wherethecrosssectionisproportionaltoE−1/2.AsalreadypointedoutbyHerreroetal[44],theisotopicdependenceissmallinthetripletsubsystem,whichleadstoasmallbutnoticeableisotopicdependenceofthetotalcrosssectionforv<2×10−3a.u.(E<0.1eV/u).Onecanalsonotethespikesinthecrosssectionsduetothepresenceofquasi-stationaryvibrationalstatesintheeﬀectivepotentialoftheinitialmolecularstate.Thiseﬀectivepotentialisobtainedbyaddingthecentrifugaltermandtheelectronicenergy,whoseasymptoticbehavior:∼−q2α2R4,(14)correspondstotheion-induced-dipoleinteraction,withαtheatompolarizability.OnecanalsonotetheoscillationsoftheECcrosssectionfor0.1<E<0.3eV/u,causedbytheinterferencesLightelementatom,moleculeandradicalbehaviourinthedivertorandedgeplasmaregionsIOPPublishingJournalofPhysics:ConferenceSeries576(2015)012002doi:10.1088/1742-6596/576/1/0120028FIG. 16. Relative cross sections for nl-subshell selective charge transfer in Ne10+-Ne collisions at

4.54 keV/amu. Liu et al.: AOCC [223], all other results are from TC-BGM calculations [224].

“BGM-net” and “BGM-SEC” refer to diﬀerent statistical analyses of single transfer, while “resp”

and “no-resp” calculations do or do not include a time-dependent response potential in the single-

particle Hamiltonian. (Figure taken from [224].)

ﬁgure 15 illustrates nicely that an uncertainty estimate for a complicated collision problem

should use the input from several calculations based on diﬀerent theoretical methods.

In ﬁgure 16 we show an example for single-electron transfer from a many-electron target.

The system is 4.54 keV/amu Ne10+-Ne and plotted are relative cross sections for transfer

into speciﬁc nl-subshells. Results from one AOCC and various TC-BGM calculations are

50

01020304050snl[%]n=4n=5n=6010203040snl[%]n=4n=5n=6010203040012345lsnl[%]n=4n=5n=6Liuetal.BGM-netBGM-SECno-resp.resp.included. All of them are on the level of the IEM, but they use diﬀerent variants of eﬀective

target atom potentials and statistical methods for the calculation of the cross sections. It

can be argued that what is referred to as BGM-SEC in the ﬁgure represents the most

consistent calculation of single transfer within the IEM [224]. However, this is no guarantee

for success, since the IEM represents a model whose accuracy is diﬃcult to determine. In

lieu of correlated cross section calculations, comparing diﬀerent IEM variants is the best

one can do to assess the uncertainty of the theoretical results. A somewhat conservative

estimate would then consist in taking the spread of the shown relative cross sections as their

uncertainty.

An important motivation for studying these nl-distributions is that they form the start-

ing point for the calculation of x-ray spectra, which in turn are of interest, e.g., for the

understanding of cometary x-ray emission. In ﬁgure 17 we show the modeled n-state selec-

tive spectra for the hydrogenlike Ne9+ ion produced in the charge transfer collision. Results

from all calculations shown in ﬁgure 16 as well as experimental data from ref. [225] are

included. Overall, the spread in the theoretical x-ray spectra appears to be similar or even

smaller than the spread in the relative cross sections, implying that error propagation is not

problematic and the x-ray spectra are rather forgiving quantities. However, this is partly due

to a mutual normalization process used in all of the calculations, and, perhaps to a lesser

extent, to spectral-line convolutions to Gaussian proﬁles that were applied as well [224].

The “widths” resulting from the various curves shown in ﬁgure 17 can again be taken as

theoretical error bars.

The last example of this section concerns a true many-electron problem: x-ray production

after charge transfer in 7 keV/amu Ar17+-Ar collisions. In this case the available measure-

ments [226] cannot discern single vs. multiple transfer. Given that the latter should be a

strong channel for such a highly charged projectile ion, it has to be taken into account in the

theoretical modeling of the measured x-ray spectra. In ref. [227] this was done on the level

of the IEM, and again, diﬀerent variants of eﬀective potentials (response and no-response

models) and statistical analyses were used in order to get a qualitative idea of the theoretical

error bars. Further modeling is required in this problem to obtain x-ray emission spectra, be-

cause Auger processes compete with radiative de-excitation when multiple electron transfer

occurs. Once again, diﬀerent model variants were used for this (assuming ﬂat vs. statistical

l-subshell distributions after Auger electron emission) and the calculations were assessed by

51

FIG. 17. X-ray spectra from single electron transfer to the n-th shell in Ne10+-Ne collisions at 4.54

keV/amu. Experimental data: [225]; Liu et al.: AOCC [223], all other results are from TC-BGM

calculations (cf. ﬁgure 16) [224].

varying the models within reasonable bounds.

Figure 18 compares results obtained in this way with the experimental x-ray intensities
for 1snp → 1s2 transitions in the post-collision Ar16+ ion. One can probably take the shaded
area as the theoretical error bar that results from the comparison of the diﬀerent calculations.

Except for n = 8 and n = 10 the experimental data are within these error bars. There

is one calculation, however, that is clearly oﬀ.

It represents an x-ray spectrum obtained

52

024681012141618n=4X-rayenergy[eV]CountsLy-αLy-β+0100200300400500n=5X-rayenergy[eV]CountsLy-αLy-β+05101520253035800100012001400n=6X-rayenergy[eV]CountsLy-αLy-β+8001000120014000100200300400500600AllnX-rayenergy[eV]CountsLy-αLy-β+expt.Liuetal.BGM-netBGM-SECno-resp.resp.FIG. 18. X-ray intensities after charge transfer in Ar17+-Ar collisions at 7 keV/amu. Experimental

data: [226]. All theoretical results are from TC-BGM calculations (see text) [227].

from neglecting all multiple-transfer contributions in the calculation. This suggests that,

despite considerable model uncertainties, some deﬁnite conclusions can be drawn from such

calculations and comparisons; in this case, regarding the important role of multi-electron

transfer events [227].

VII. SUMMARY, CONCLUSIONS, AND OUTLOOK

We have reviewed approaches to uncertainty estimates for atomic and molecular data

of the kind that occur in plasma modeling. Model uncertainty is introduced through the

treatment of small terms in the Hamiltonian and (more importantly in general) through the

reduction of a many-body Schr¨odinger equation to a tractable model. Numerical uncertainty

53

Experimentaldatano-responsestatresponsestatno-responseﬂatresponseﬂatCumulativesingle+doubleActualsingleis due to the representation of the model on a ﬁnite mesh or basis. Uncertainties propagate

from structure calculations to predictions of scattering cross sections. We have summarized

the main tools for uncertainty assessment of calculations for atomic and (small molecule)

molecular electronic structure, electron scattering, and charge transfer in heavy particle

collisions.

The ultimate aim for a constructive theory of uncertainty quantiﬁcation for atomic and

molecular data is to develop numerical procedures for structure and scattering calculations

by which reasonable uncertainty estimates are obtained along with the primary calculated

quantities of interest. The ﬁnal quantities of interest are cross sections (diﬀerential cross

sections in general) as a function of collision energy and perhaps other collision parameters.

The associated uncertainties are structured quantities, not just point values, and they must

be presented in a way that makes it possible to propagate them through further atomic data

processing (e.g., to obtain eﬀective rate coeﬃcients) and through a plasma simulation.

In fact, we have seen that many ingredients for uncertainty assessment in atomic and

molecular calculations are available, for example the method of focal point analysis in con-

nection with electronic structure models and standard methods of convergence analysis for

the numerical uncertainties. We note the need to go beyond pointwise uncertainties and

consider functional uncertainties, which may be represented, depending on the application,

by a Gaussian Process, a polynomial chaos expansion, or a Monte Carlo sample. It remains

a major challenge for future work to develop, for each of the various classes of collision

processes, an eﬀective integrated approach in which uncertainties are estimated, as they are

introduced and are propagated to yield ﬁnally an eﬀective representation of the uncertainty

in a scattering cross section as a function of parameters of the collision process.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors are grateful to the COST Action MOLIM (CM1405) for support. This work

was also supported, in part, by the United States National Science Foundation under grants

No. PHY-1068140 (KB), No. PHY-1212450 (KB), No. PHY-15-06391 (VK), and the XSEDE

allocation No. PHY-090031 (KB). The work of AGC received support from the Scientiﬁc

Research Fund of Hungary (Grant No. OTKA NK83583), and TK acknowledges support of

the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, Grant No. RGPIN-2014-

54

03611. The authors acknowledge helpful correspondence received from Mariana Safronova

and Bijaya Sahoo concerning uncertainty calculations for many-electron atoms. Finally,

the authors acknowledge helpful discussions with all the participants in the Joint ITAMP

Workshop with IAEA on Uncertainty Assessment for Atomic and Molecular Data.

[1] The Editors, Phys. Rev. A 83, 040001 (2011).

[2] National Research Council Committee on Mathematical Foundations of Veriﬁcation, Vali-

dation, and Uncertainty Quantiﬁcation, Assessing the reliability of complex models: mathe-

matical and statistical foundations of veriﬁcation, validation and uncertainty quantiﬁcation

(National Academies Press, 2012).

[3] http://www.siam.org/activity/uq/.

[4] P. A. M. Dirac, Proc. R. Soc. A 123, 714 (1929).

[5] (2014), https://www-amdis.iaea.org/meetings/ITAMP/.

[6] (2015), http://www.iacs.stonybrook.edu/uq/pages/workshop.

[7] D. Reiter and R. K. Janev, Contrib. Plasma Phys. 50, 986 (2010).

[8] A. G. Cs´asz´ar, W. D. Allen, and H. F. Schaefer III, J. Chem. Phys. 108, 9751 (1998).

[9] O. V. Boyarkin, M. A. Koshelev, O. Aseev, P. Maksyutenko, T. R. Rizzo, N. F. Zobov,

L. Lodi, J. Tennyson, and O. L. Polyansky, Chem. Phys. Lett. 568-569, 14 (2013).

[10] H. A. Bethe and E. E. Salpeter, Quantum Mechanics Of One- And Two-Electron Atoms

(Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1957) pp. 4 – 46.

[11] M. I. Eides, H. Grotch, and V. A. Shelyuto, Phys. Rep. 342, 63 (2001).

[12] U. D. Jentschura, S. Kotochigova, E.-O. Le Bigot, P. J. Mohr, and B. N. Taylor, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 95, 163003 (2005).

[13] K. Pachucki and U. D. Jentschura, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 113005 (2003).

[14] V. A. Yerokhin and V. M. Shabaev, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data 44, 033103 (2015).

[15] A. Gumberidze, T. St¨ohlker, D. Bana´s, H. Beyer, C. Brandau, H. Br¨auning, S. Geyer, S. Hag-

mann, S. Hess, P. Indelicato, et al., Hyperﬁne Interact. 199, 59 (2011).

[16] B. Klahn and W. Bingel, Theor. Chim. Acta 44, 27 (1977).

[17] B. Klahn and W. Bingel, Int. J. Quantum Chem. 11, 943 (1978).

[18] C. Schwartz, Int. J. Mod. Phys. E–Nucl. Phys. 15, 877 (2006).

55

[19] H. Nakashima and H. Nakatsuji, J. Chem. Phys. 127, 224104 (2007).

[20] G. W. F. Drake and Z.-C. Yan, Phys. Rev. A 46, 2378 (1992).

[21] G. W. F. Drake and W. C. Martin, Can. J. Phys. 76, 679 (1998).

[22] D. C. Morton, Q.-X. Wu, and G. W. F. Drake, Can. J. Phys. 84, 83 (2006).

[23] Z. C. Yan, W. Noertershaeuser, and G. W. F. Drake, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 243002 (2008).

[24] V. A. Yerokhin and K. Pachucki, Phys. Rev. A 81, 022507 (2010).

[25] G. W. F. Drake, in Handbook of Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics, edited by G. W. F.

Drake (Springer-Verlag, New York, 2006) Chap. 11.

[26] G. W. F. Drake, Can. J. Phys. 66, 586 (1988).

[27] A. N. Artemyev, V. M. Shabaev, V. A. Yerokhin, G. Plunien, and G. Soﬀ, Phys. Rev. A

71, 062104 (2005).

[28] C. T. Chantler, J. Lowe, and I. Grant, Phys. Rev. A 82, 052505 (2010).

[29] C. F. Fischer, Atoms 2, 1 (2014).

[30] E. Tr¨abert, Atoms 2, 15 (2014).

[31] A. Kramida, Atoms 2, 86 (2014).

[32] J. Ekman, M. R. Godefroid, and H. Hartman, Atoms 2, 215 (2014).

[33] D. E. Kelleher, Atoms 2, 382 (2014).

[34] M. S. Safronova, V. A. Dzuba, V. V. Flambaum, U. I. Safronova, S. G. Porsev, and M. G.

Kozlov, Phys. Rev. A 90, 042513 (2014).

[35] M. S. Safronova, V. A. Dzuba, V. V. Flambaum, U. I. Safronova, S. G. Porsev, and M. G.

Kozlov, Phys. Rev. A 90, 052509 (2014).

[36] M. K´allay, H. S. Nataraj, B. K. Sahoo, B. P. Das, and L. Visscher, Phys. Rev. A 83, 030503

(2011).

[37] C. F. Fischer, Phys. Scr. 2009, 014019 (2009).

[38] M. Born and J. R. Oppenheimer, Ann. Phys. 84, 457 (1927).

[39] M. Born and K. Huang, Dynamical Theory of Crystal Lattice (Clarendon Press, 1954).

[40] N. F. Zobov, O. L. Polyansky, C. R. Le Sueur, and J. Tennyson, Chem. Phys. Lett. 260,

381 (1996).

[41] O. L. Polyansky and J. Tennyson, J. Chem. Phys. 110, 5056 (1999).

[42] L. G. Diniz, J. R. Mohallem, A. Alijah, M. Pavanello, L. Adamowicz, O. L. Polyansky, and

J. Tennyson, Phys. Rev. A 88, 032506 (2013).

56

[43] T. S. E. M´tyus and A. G. Cs´asz´ar, The Journal of Chemical Physics 141, 154111 (2014).

[44] A. G. Cs´asz´ar, W. D. Allen, Y. Yamaguchi,

and H. F. Schaefer III, in Computational

Molecular Spectroscopy (Wiley, New York, 2000) pp. 15–68.

[45] A. G. Cs´asz´ar, G. Tarczay, M. L. Leininger, O. L. Polyansky, J. Tennyson, and W. D. Allen,

in In: Spectroscopy from space (Kluwer, Dordrecht, 2001) pp. 17–339.

[46] Y. Yamaguchi, Y. Osamura, J. D. Goddard, and H. F. Schaefer, A New Dimension to

Quantum Chemistry: Analytic Derivative Methods in Ab Initio Molecular Electronic Struc-

ture Theory (International Series of Monographs on Chemistry) (Oxford University Press,

1994).

[47] J. N. Murrell, S. Carter, S. C. Farantos, P. Huxley, and A. J. C. Varandas, Molecular

Potential Energy Surfaces (Wiley, New York, 1984).

[48] B. J. Braams and J. M. Bowman, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem. 28, 577 (2009).

[49] G. Tarczay, A. G. Cs´asz´ar, W. Klopper, and H. M. Quiney, Mol. Phys. 99, 1769 (2001).

[50] T. H. Dunning, Jr., J. Chem. Phys. 90, 1007 (1989).

[51] A. G. Cs´asz´ar and W. D. Allen, J. Chem. Phys. 104, 2746 (1996).

[52] P. Pyykk¨o, K. G. Dyall, A. G. Cs´asz´ar, G. Tarczay, O. L. Polyansky, and J. Tennyson, Phys.

Rev. A 63, 024502 (2001).

[53] L. Lodi, R. N. Tolchenov, J. Tennyson, A. E. Lynas-Gray, S. V. Shirin, N. F. Zobov, O. L.

Polyansky, A. G. Cs´asz´ar, J. van Stralen, and L. Visscher, J. Chem. Phys. 128, 044304

(2008).

[54] L. Lodi, J. Tennyson, and O. L. Polyansky, J. Chem. Phys. 135, 034113 (2011).

[55] F. Jensen, Introduction to Computational Chemistry (Wiley, New York, 2006).

[56] J. Lipi´nski, Chem. Phys. Lett. 363, 313 (2002).

[57] H. J. Werner, P. Rosmus, and E. A. Reinsch, J. Chem. Phys. 79, 905 (1983).

[58] M. Ernzerhof, C. M. Marian, and S. D. Peyerimhoﬀ, Intern. J. Quantum Chem. 43, 659

(1992).

[59] L. Lodi and J. Tennyson, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 43, 133001 (2010).

[60] M. S. Pindzola and H. P. Kelly, Phys. Rev. A 12, 1419 (1975).

[61] D. C. Griﬃn, C. P. Ballance, and M. S. Pindzola, Phys. Rev. A 80, 023420 (2009).

[62] S. O. Adamson, A. Zaitsevskii, and N. F. Stepanov, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 31,

5275 (1998).

57

[63] L. Lodi, S. N. Yurchenko, and J. Tennyson, Mol. Phys. 113, 1559 (2015).

[64] L. K. McKemmish, S. N. Yurchenko, and J. Tennyson, J. Chem. Theory Comput. (2016).

[65] J. Tennyson, L. Lodi, L. K. McKemmish, and S. N. Yurchenko, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt.

Phys. (2016), topical Review.

[66] A. Jain and F. Gianturco, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 24, 2387 (1991).

[67] M. Jones and J. Tennyson, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 43, 045101 (2010).

[68] W. J. Brigg, J. Tennyson, and M. Plummer, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 47, 185203

(2014).

[69] D. Jonsson, P. Norman, and H. Agren, Chem. Phys. 224, 201 (1997).

[70] N. DeYonker, D. Halfen, W. Allen, and L. Ziurys, J. Chem. Phys. 141, 204302 (2014).

[71] E. Valeev, W. Allen, H. Schaefer, A. Cs´asz´ar, and A. East, Journal of Physical Chemistry

A 105, 2716 (2001).

[72] O. Bokareva, V. Bataev, V. Pupyshev, and I. Godunov, Spectrochim. Acta Mol. Biomol.

Spectrosc. 73, 654 (2009).

[73] D. A. Little and J. Tennyson, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 46, 145102 (2013).

[74] C. Jungen, ed., Molecular Applications of Quantum Defect Theory (Taylor and Francis, 1996).

[75] J. Tennyson, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 29, 6185 (1996).

[76] I. F. Schneider, I. Rabad´an, L. Carata, J. Tennyson, L. H. Andersen, and A. Suzor-Weiner,

J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 33, 4849 (2000).

[77] D. G. Cocks, I. B. Whittingham, and G. Peach, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 43, 135102

(2010).

[78] K. Bartschat, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 46, 334004 (2013).

[79] K. Bartschat and O. Zatsarinny, Phys. Scr. 90, 054006 (2015).

[80] P. G. Burke, R-Matrix Theory of Atomic Collisions: Application to Atomic, Molecular and

Optical Processes (Springer, 2011).

[81] J. Tennyson, Phys. Rep. 491, 29 (2010).

[82] I. Bray, D. Fursa, A. Kadyrov, A. Stelbovics, A. Kheifets, and A. Mukhamedzhanov, Phys.

Rep. 520, 135 (2012), electron- and photon-impact atomic ionisation.

[83] K. Bartschat, E. T. Hudson, M. P. Scott, P. G. Burke, and V. M. Burke, J. Phys. B: At.,

Mol. Opt. Phys. 29, 115 (1996).

[84] J. D. Gorﬁnkiel and J. Tennyson, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 37, L343 (2004).

58

[85] J. Colgan, M. S. Pindzola, F. J. Robicheaux, D. C. Griﬃn, and M. Baertschy, Phys. Rev. A

65, 042721 (2002).

[86] T. N. Rescigno, M. Baertschy, W. A. Isaacs, and C. W. McCurdy, Science 286, 2474 (1999).

[87] J. R. Taylor, Scattering theory (Wiley, 1972).

[88] C. J. Joachain, Quantum collision theory (Elsevier Science Ltd, 1984).

[89] D. Madison and W. Shelton, Phys. Rev. A 7, 499 (1973).

[90] Y. Itikawa, Phys. Rep. 143, 69 (1986).

[91] D. Bote and F. Salvat, Phys. Rev. A 77, 042701 (2008).

[92] J. F. Gao, D. H. Madison, and J. L. Peacher, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 39, 1275

(2006).

[93] O. Al-Hagan, C. Kaiser, D. Madison, and A. J. Murray, Nature Phys. 5, 59 (2009).

[94] I. Toth and L. Nagy, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 44, 195205 (2011).

[95] S. B. Zhang, X. Y. Li, J. G. Wang, Y. Z. Qu, and X. Chen, Phys. Rev. A 89, 052711 (2014).

[96] N. Badnell, J. Phys. B: At., Mol. Opt. Phys. 41, 175202 (2008).

[97] D. V. Fursa and I. Bray, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 113201 (2008).

[98] T. Zuo, R. McEachran, and A. Stauﬀer, J. Phys. B: At., Mol. Opt. Phys. 24, 2853 (1991).

[99] Y.-K. Kim, Phys. Rev. A 64, 032713 (2001).

[100] Y.-K. Kim and M. E. Rudd, Phys. Rev. A 50, 3954 (1994).

[101] V. Laporta, C. M. Cassidy, J. Tennyson, and R. Celiberto, Plasma Sources Sci. Technol. 21,

045005 (2012).

[102] V. Laporta, R. Celiberto, and J. Tennyson, Phys. Rev. A 91, 012701 (2015).

[103] E. Chang and U. Fano, Phys. Rev. A 6, 173 (1972).

[104] M. A. Morrison, A. N. Feldt, and B. C. Saha, Phys. Rev. A 30, 2811 (1984).

[105] O. Atabek, D. Dill, and C. Jungen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 33, 123 (1974).

[106] C. H. Greene and Ch.Jungen, Adv. At. Mol. Phys. 21, 51 (1985).

[107] M. J. Seaton, Proc. Phys. Soc. London 88, 801 (1966).

[108] M. Aymar, C. H. Greene, and E. Luc-Koenig, Rev. Mod. Phys. 68, 1015 (1996).

[109] C. Greene, U. Fano, and G. Strinati, Phys. Rev. A 19, 1485 (1979).

[110] H. Gao and C. H. Greene, J. Chem. Phys. 91, 3988 (1989).

[111] H. Gao and C. H. Greene, Phys. Rev. A 42, 6946 (1990).

59

[112] W. Sun, M. A. Morrison, W. A. Isaacs, W. K. Trail, D. T. Alle, R. Gulley, M. J. Brennan,

and S. J. Buckman, Phys. Rev. A 52, 1229 (1995).

[113] D. M. Chase, Phys. Rev. 104, 838 (1956).

[114] A. Faure, V. Kokoouline, C. H. Greene, and J. Tennyson, J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 192, 012016

(2009).

[115] A. Faure, J. Tennyson, V. Kokoouline, and C. H. Greene, J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 192, 012016

(2009).

[116] V. Kokoouline, A. Faure, J. Tennyson, and C. H. Greene, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 405,

1195 (2010).

[117] D. W. Norcross and N. T. Padial, Phys. Rev. A 25, 226 (1982).

[118] N. Sanna and F. A. Gianturco, Comp. Phys. Comm. 114, 142 (1998).

[119] T. F. O’Malley, Phys. Rev. 150, 14 (1966).

[120] D. R. Bates, J. Phys. B: At., Mol. Opt. Phys. 24, 695 (1991).

[121] S. L. Guberman and A. Giusti-Suzor, J. Chem. Phys. 95, 2602 (1991).

[122] L. A. Morgan and C. J. Noble, J. Phys.B: At. Mol. Phys. 17, L369 (1984).

[123] J. Bardsley, Chem. Phys. Lett. 1, 229 (1967).

[124] V. Kokoouline, N. Douguet, and C. H. Greene, Chem. Phys. Lett. 507, 1 (2011).

[125] N. Douguet, A. E. Orel, C. H. Greene, and V. Kokoouline, Phys. Phys. Lett. 108 (2012).

[126] N. Douguet, V. Kokoouline, and A. E. Orel, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 45, 051001

(2012).

[127] S. Fonseca dos Santos, N. Douguet, V. Kokoouline, and A. Orel, J. Chem. Phys. 140, 164308

(2014).

[128] D. A. Little, K. Chakrabarti, I. F. Schneider, and J. Tennyson, Phys. Rev. A 90, 052705

(2014).

[129] A. Faure and J. Tennyson, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 35, 1865 (2002).

[130] V. Kokoouline and C. H. Greene, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 133201 (2003).

[131] V. Kokoouline and C. H. Greene, Phys. Rev. A 68, 012703 (2003).

[132] C. Jungen and S. T. Pratt, J. Chem. Phys. 129, 164310 (2008).

[133] C. Jungen and S. T. Pratt, J. Chem. Phys. 129, 164311 (2008).

[134] C. Jungen and S. T. Pratt, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 023201 (2009).

[135] J. D. Gorﬁnkiel and J. Tennyson, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 38, 1607 (2005).

60

[136] G. Halmov´a and J. Tennyson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 213202 (2008).

[137] M. S. Pindzola, S. A. Abdel-Naby, J. A. Ludlow, F. Robicheaux, and J. Colgan, Phys. Rev.

A 85 (2012).

[138] J. Colgan and M. S. Pindzola, Eur. Phys. J. D 66, 284 (2012).

[139] J. F. Gao, D. H. Madison, and J. L. Peacher, J. Chem. Phys. 123, 204314 (2005).

[140] C. Kaiser, D. Spieker, J. Gao, M. Hussey, A. Murray, and D. H. Madison, J. Phys. B: At.

Mol. Opt. Phys. 40, 2563 (2007).

[141] B. H. Bransden and M. R. C. McDowell, Charge Exchange and the Theory of Ion-Atom

Collisions (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1992).

[142] D. Belki´c, Quantum Theory of High-Energy Ion-Atom Collisions (CRC Press, Boca Raton,

2008).

[143] J. Loreau, S. Ryabchenko, and N. Vaeck, J. Phys. B 47, 135204 (2014).

[144] J. B. Delos, Rev. Mod. Phys. 53, 287 (1981).

[145] L. F. Errea, C. Harel, H. Jouin, L. M´endez, B. Pons, and A. R´ıera, J. Phys. B 27, 3603

(1994).

[146] C.-N. Liu, S.-C. Cheng, A.-T. Le, and C. D. Lin, Phys. Rev. A 72, 012717 (2005).

[147] B. Zygelman, P. C. Stancil, N. J. Clarke, and D. L. Cooper, Phys. Rev. A 56, 457 (1997).

[148] T. C. Li, Y. Z. Qu, Y. Wu, L. Liu, J. G. Wang, H.-P. Liebermann, and R. J. Buenker, Phys.

Rev. A 91, 052702 (2015).

[149] I. B. Abdurakhmanov, A. S. Kadyrov, and I. Bray, J. Phys. B 49, 03LT01 (2016).

[150] E. Deumens, A. Diz, R. Longo, and Y. ¨Ohrn, Rev. Mod. Phys. 66, 917 (1994).

[151] R. Cabrera-Trujillo, Plasma Sources Sci. Technol. 19, 034006 (2010).

[152] T. A. Green, E. J. Shipsey, and J. C. Browne, Phys. Rev. A 25, 1364 (1982).

[153] T. A. Green, M. E. Riley, E. J. Shipsey, and J. C. Browne, Phys. Rev. A 26, 3668 (1982).

[154] W. Fritsch and C. D. Lin, Phys. Rev. A 29, 3039 (1984).

[155] M. C. van Hemert, E. F. van Dishoeck, J. A. van der Hart, and F. Koike, Phys. Rev. A 31,

2227 (1985).

[156] W. Fritsch and C. D. Lin, Phys. Rep. 202, 1 (1991).

[157] M. Zapukhlyak, T. Kirchner, H. J. L¨udde, S. Knoop, R. Morgenstern, and R. Hoekstra, J.

Phys. B 38, 2353 (2005).

[158] J. Kuang and C. D. Lin, J. Phys. B 30, 101 (1997).

61

[159] O. J. Kroneisen, H. J. L¨udde, T. Kirchner, and R. M. Dreizler, J. Phys. A 32, 2141 (1999).

[160] T. Minami, M. S. Pindzola, T.-G. Lee, and D. R. Schultz, J. Phys. B 39, 2877 (2006).

[161] M. S. Pindzola and M. Fogle, J. Phys. B 48, 205203 (2015).

[162] D. Belki´c, I. Man˘cev, and J. Hanssen, Rev. Mod. Phys. 80, 249 (2008).

[163] A. Niehaus, J. Phys. B 19, 2925 (1986).

[164] R. E. Olson and A. Salop, Phys. Rev. A 16, 531 (1977).

[165] S. Otranto, N. D. Cariatore, and R. E. Olson, Phys. Rev. A 90, 062708 (2014).

[166] Z.-C. Yan, W. N¨ortersh¨auser, and G. W. F. Drake, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 243002 (2008),

erratum: Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 249903 (2009).

[167] Z.-C. Yan, W. N¨ortersh¨auser, and G. W. F. Drake, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 249903 (2009).

[168] M. Puchalski, D. Kedziera, and K. Pachucki, Phys. Rev. A 82, 062509 (2010).

[169] R. S´anchez, W. N¨ortersh¨auser, G. Ewald, D. Albers, J. Behr, P. Bricault, B. A. Bushaw,

A. Dax, J. Dilling, M. Dombsky, G. W. F. Drake, S. G¨otte, R. Kirchner, H.-J. Kluge, T. K¨uhl,

J. Lassen, C. D. P. Levy, M. R. Pearson, E. J. Prime, V. Ryjkov, A. Wojtaszek, Z.-C. Yan,

and C. Zimmermann, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 033002 (2006).

[170] R. Sanchez, M. Zakova, Z. Andjelkovic, B. A. Bushaw, K. Dasgupta, G. Ewald, C. Geppert,

H.-J. Kluge, J. Kraemer, M. Nothhelfer, D. Tiedemann, D. F. A. Winters, and W. Noerter-

shaeuser, New J. Phys. 11 (2009).

[171] Z.-C. Yan and G. W. F. Drake, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 113004 (2003).

[172] W. N¨ortersh¨auser, R. S´anchez, G. Ewald, A. Dax, J. Behr, P. Bricault, B. A. Bushaw,

J. Dilling, M. Dombsky, G. W. F. Drake, S. G¨otte, H.-J. Kluge, T. K¨uhl, J. Lassen, C. D. P.

Levy, K. Pachucki, M. Pearson, M. Puchalski, A. Wojtaszek, Z.-C. Yan, and C. Zimmermann,

Phys. Rev. A 83, 012516 (2011).

[173] Z.-T. Lu, P. Mueller, G. W. F. Drake, W. N¨ortersh¨auser, S. C. Pieper, and Z.-C. Yan, Rev.

Mod. Phys. 85, 1383 (2013).

[174] C. Puzzarini, M. Heckert, and J. Gauss, J. Chem. Phys. 128, 194108 (2008).

[175] J. Demaison, J. E. Boggs, and A. G. Csaszar, Equilibrium Molecular Structures: From

Spectroscopy to Quantum Chemistry (CRC Press, Boca Raton, 2010).

[176] D. S. Makarov, M. A. Koshelev, N. F. Zobov, and O. V. Boyarkin, Chem. Phys. Lett. 627,

73 (2015).

62

[177] O. L. Polyansky, K. Bielska, M. Ghysels, L. Lodi, N. F. Zobov, J. T. Hodges, and J. Tennyson,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 243001 (2015).

[178] L. Lodi and J. Tennyson, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer 113, 850 (2012).

[179] E. Zak, J. Tennyson, O. L. Polyansky, L. Lodi, S. A. Tashkun, and V. I. Perevalov, J. Quant.

Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer (2016).

[180] M. T. Elford, “Photon and Electron Interactions with Atoms, Molecules, and Ions (Landolt-

Brnstein: Numerical Data and Functional Relationships in Science and Technology / Ele-

mentary Particles, Nuclei and Atoms),” (Springer, New York, 2000).

[181] S. Trajmar, Phys. Rev. A 8, 191 (1973).

[182] R. I. Hall, G. Joyez, Y. Mazeau, J. Reinhard, and C. Schermann, J. Physique 34, 827 (1972).

[183] F. G. Donaldson, M. A. Hender, and J. W. McConkey, J. Phys. B: At., Mol. Phys. 5, 1192

(1972).

[184] D. V. Fursa and I. Bray, Phys. Rev. A 52, 1279 (1995).

[185] K. Bartschat, J. Phys. B: At., Mol. Opt. Phys. 31, L469 (1998).

[186] O. Zatsarinny, Y. Wang, and K. Bartschat, Phys. Rev. A 89, 022706 (2014).

[187] J. B. Boﬀard, G. A. Piech, M. F. Gehrke, L. W. Anderson, and C. C. Lin, Phys. Rev. A 59,

2749 (1999).

[188] A. Hibbert, Comp. Phys. Commun. 9, 141 (1975).

[189] W. Eissner, M. Jones, and H. Nussbaumer, Comp. Phys. Commun. 8, 270 (1974).

[190] O. Zatsarinny and K. Bartschat, Phys. Rev. A 72, 020702 (2005).

[191] C. A. Ramsbottom, M. P. Scott, K. L. Bell, F. P. Keenan, B. M. McLaughlin, A. G. Sun-

derland, V. M. Burke, C. J. Noble, and P. G. Burke, J. Phys. B: At., Mol. Opt. Phys. 35,

3451 (2002).

[192] H. Nussbaumer and P. J. Storey, Astron. Astrophys. 89, 308 (1980).

[193] A. K. Pradhan and K. A. Berrington, J. Phys. B 26, 157 (1993).

[194] R. A. Falk and G. H. Dunn, Phys. Rev. A 27, 754 (1983).

[195] J. Colgan, S. D. Loch, M. S. Pindzola, C. P. Ballance, and D. C. Griﬃn, Phys. Rev. A 68,

032712 (2003).

[196] D. M. Mitnik, M. S. Pindzol, , D. C. Griﬃn, and N. R. Badnell, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt.

Phys. 32, L479 (1999).

[197] A. R. Davey, P. J. Storey, and R. Kisielius, Astron. Astrophys. Suppl. Ser. 142, 85 (2000).

63

[198] M. C. Zammit, D. V. Fursa, and I. Bray, Phys. Rev. A 90, 022711 (2014).

[199] N. Douguet, V. Kokoouline, and A. E. Orel, Phys. Rev. A 90, 063410 (2014).

[200] T. Best, R. Otto, S. Trippel, P. Hlavenka, A. von Zastrow, S. Eisenbach, S. Jezouin,

R. Wester, E. Vigren, M. Hamberg, and W. D. Geppert, Astrophys. J. 742, 63 (2011).

[201] J. Tennyson, D. B. Brown, J. J. Munro, I. Rozum, H. N. Varambhia, and N. Vinci, J. Phys.

Conf. Ser. 86, 012001 (2007).

[202] J. M. Carr, P. G. Galiatsatos, J. D. Gorﬁnkiel, A. G. Harvey, M. A. Lysaght, D. Madden,

Z. Masin, M. Plummer, and J. Tennyson, Eur. Phys. J. D 66, 58 (2012).

[203] M. Khamesian, N. Douguet, S. Fonseca dos Santos, O. Dulieu, M. Raoult, and V. Kokoouline,

Eur. Phys. J. D , Submitted (2016).

[204] L. Vejby-Christensen, L. Andersen, O. Heber, D. Kella, H. Pedersen, H. Schmidt,

and

D. Zajfman, Astrophys. J. 483, 531 (1997).

[205] A. Neau, A. A. Khalili, S. Ros´en, A. L. Padellec, A. M. Derkatch, W. Shi, L. Vikor, M. Lars-

son, J. Semaniak, R. Thomas, M. B. N˚ag˚ard, K. Andersson, H. Danared, and M. af Ugglas,

J. Chem. Phys. 113, 1762 (2000).

[206] M. J. Jensen, R. C. Bilodeau, C. P. Safvan, K. Seiersen, L. H. Andersen, H. B. Pedersen,

and O. Heber, Astrophys. J. 543, 764 (2000).

[207] R. Shepard, I. Shavitt, R. M. Pitzer, M. Dallos, T. M¨uller, P. G. Szalay, F. B. Brown,

R. Ahlrichs, H. J. B¨ohm, A. Chang, D. C. Comeau, R. Gdanitz, H. Dachsel, C. Ehrhardt,

M. Ernzerhof, P. H¨ochtl, S. Irle, G. Kedziora, T. Kovar, V. Parasuk, M. J. M. Pepper,

P. Scharf, H. Schiﬀer, M. Schindler, M. Sch¨uler, M. Seth, E. A. Stahlberg, J.-G. Zhao,

S. Yabushita, Z. Zhang, M. Barbatti, S. Matsika, M. Schuurmann, D. R. Y. S. R. Brozell,

E. V. Beck, H. Lischka, M. Ruckenbauer, B. Sellner, F. Plasser, J.-P. Blaudeau, and J. J.

Szymczak, “Columbus,” (2008), columbus, an ab initio electronic structure program, release

5.9.2 (2008).

[208] K. Igenbergs, J. Schweinzer, A. Veiter, L. Perneczky, E. Fr¨uhwirth, M. Wallerberger, R. E.

Olson, and F. Aumayr, J. Phys. B 45, 065203 (2012).

[209] A. Jorge, L. F. Errea, C. Illescas, and L. M´endez, Eur. Phys. J. D 68, 227 (2014).

[210] H. Suno and T. Kato, At. Data Nucl. Data Tables 92, 407 (2006).

[211] C. Harel, H. Jouin, and B. Pons, At. Data Nucl. Data Tables 68, 279 (1998).

[212] N. D. Cariatore, S. Otranto, and R. E. Olson, Phys. Rev. A 91, 042709 (2015).

64

[213] M. Kimura and C. D. Lin, Phys. Rev. A 32, 1357 (1985).

[214] J. Caillat, A. Dubois, and J. P. Hansen, J. Phys. B 33, L715 (2000).

[215] L. F. Errea, C. Illescas, A. Jorge, L. M´endez, I. Rabad´an, and J. Su´arez, J. Phys.: Conf.

Ser. 576, 012002 (2015).

[216] N. L. Guevara, E. Teixeira, B. Hall, Y. ¨Ohrn, E. Deumens, and J. R. Sabin, Phys. Rev. A

83, 052709 (2011).

[217] B. Herrero, I. L. Cooper, A. S. Dickinson, and D. R. Flower, J. Phys. B 28, 711 (1995).

[218] H. C. Tseng and C. D. Lin, J. Phys. B 32, 5271 (1999).

[219] T. G. Heil, S. E. Butler, and A. Dalgarno, Phys. Rev. A 23, 1100 (1981).

[220] L. F. Errea, B. Herrero, L. M´endez, and A. R´ıera, J. Phys. B 24, 4061 (1991).

[221] S. Bienstock, T. G. Heil, C. Bottcher, and A. Dalgarno, Phys. Rev. A 25, 2850 (1982).

[222] C. C. Havener, A. M¨uller, P. A. Zeijlmans van Emmichoven, and R. A. Phaneuf, Phys. Rev.

A 51, 2982 (1995).

[223] L. Liu, J. G. Wang, and R. K. Janev, Phys. Rev. A 89, 012710 (2014).

[224] A. C. K. Leung and T. Kirchner, Phys. Rev. A 92, 032712 (2015).

[225] R. Ali, P. A. Neill, P. Beiersd¨orfer, C. L. Harris, D. R. Schultz, and P. C. Stancil, Astrophys.

J. Lett. 716, L95 (2010).

[226] M. Trassinelli, C. Prigent, E. Lamour, F. Mezdari, J. M´erot, R. Reuschl, J.-P. Rozet, S. Stey-

dli, and D. Vernhet, J. Phys. B 45, 085202 (2012).

[227] A. Salehzadeh and T. Kirchner, J. Phys. B 46, 025201 (2013).

65

